(<  0 3 0$ 


T 


INDIA 


AS  i»Ksi.'i{Tr.i:ii  in' 


K'fDSFAS  THE  KMDIAN  ; 

nmN'f'r 

A THANSLATION  OF  THE  ABRIDGEMENT  OF  HIS  " INDIKA” 
BY  PHOTIOS,  AND  OF  THE  FRAGMENTS  (IF  THAT 
WORK  PRESERVED  IN  OTHER  WRITERS. 

BY 

J.  W.  ArnCRlNDriP],  M.A.,  Af  R.A.S., 

I.^rr.  l»RTSriT'\I,  OK  TITT:  aOVKUNMr.N T rOl.I.KGK, 

LATi:  ri;LLow  or  Tin:  i-.nivkhmtv  or  cxi.i't  n\, 

w KVlltUU  OK  Tfl  K Oli.N  liKAI.  Vt*l  N»  l L OK  TM  K L MVliHSITV 
OK  LOIN  III' Roll. 


WITH  INTRODUCTION,  NOTES,  AND  INDEX. 


Rrpritih'ff 

from  I ho  //n/iaii  Atilif]nar\j^'*  1881. 


(T  a l r u 1 1 :i : 


,?!  0 in  b H I) : 


riJACKiJR.  srrNK  a co. 


B.  K.  S.  rUK.SS. 


0 n i>  0 u : 

TRVBNRR  & Co. 


1882. 


^ AO  \ Ln  iv  \ 


? ClasN  No. 


v<r«i 


!sr.  (On 

u.. 

I / 


izio.(oi 


M.rard. 


I *'  [ILA'Io  -m’ 

i-A-y  I ru  u ' 


I’KIN  I l'  D A'l  I HK  t»)l  ('A'l  I(  iX  SOOll-.  lv’s  T'KI  ^Sn,  liV(  I’l.IA. 


KFA(  K 


'Inis  lild,;  |,„(,k  r, .fills  Mid  tliinl  voiliino 
of  thd  sei-ids  ,,r  Aiinotaic.l  Traiislal im.s  „r 
tliiisd  wdfks  of  Mid  C'lassidal  wrifdrs  wliidh 
rola,to  (o  Ani-ioiif,  I mlia..  Tin-  Vdliiiiics  already 
issued  doiif  aiii  TraiisiaM, ,iis  of  ( lu'  I'Vaoan, ail's 
or’..MeyaslIie,ies--or  (lie  Indika,  ..f  Arria,„_ 
luid  or  Mid  l>dfi|.liis  i.rtlie  Mryllira'aii  Sea; 
••tnd  ill  Miosd  wdiieli  are  to  follow  will  he 
r<Mid('red  the  G('ogra|)liy  of  India,  as  oiveii 
l.y  Stralio  and  by  Ptolemy,  and  the  aeeoiints 
ed  tlid  Arakddoiiia.n  lnva.sion  as  o’iv'en  by 
Arrian  and  by  Curtins — a.nd  tliesi'  works 
will  conipldtd  llio  sorie.s. 


Upper  Nontutod  : Deeemher.  IRSJ. 


CONTKNTS. 


, PAGE 

Iiitroiloction  1 

Tiik  Inuika  up  Ktksias:- 


PV.I-.  I. 

Kclogu  iu  Fliotii,  lUM. 

UKXW,  ]).  I WstMj.i.  ... 

7 

Frii.ir.  11. 

From  Arrian,  A »<(!/.  JJoolc 

V.  4,  2 

34 

Fnig.  Hi. 

Slrjibo,  (iliUHj.  J{ook  XV. 
From  tlio  Iniliha  of 

Arrian,  iiO  

35 

IV. 

ilillian,  Nat.  Anim. 

Book  XVIJ,  21)  

35 

V. 

(A)  Arlstotlo,  Jh  tii-iKir.  Aiiliii. 

il,  2 

(Bj  From  the  same,  lowanis 

3(J 

the  eml  of  tla;  Ih'd  Hook 

of  his  lUAanj  aj.  1 uhinils 

3i) 

(())  iElian,  l)e  Animal.  XV 1, 2. 

36 

Fi’ii'j.  VI.  (A.)  iElian,  l)e  AitiinaL  Nat. 

XVI,  31  

(Bj  yJ'jlian,  Ue  Animal.  Nat. 

36 

I V,  32  

38 

Frag.  Vll. 

Tzot/.es,  aiiil.  VII,  V.  73!), 
from  till!  3i’(l  Book  of 

the  'Apafitmv  of  Urauius 

38 

VI 

COX  TK  NTS. 

P.\C  K 

Frag. 

VITl.  Aristollo,  J)i'  Hint.  Auim. 

11,1  

38 

Frag. 

IX.  Pansnnins  ( TX.  \xi. 

4),  ijuoliiio*  Ktisias  ... 

80 

Frag. 

X.  Pliny,  11.  /V.  Yin,  ,21 

(ill.  80)  

4.0 

Frag. 

XI.  From  yKJin-n,  iJe  AninutL 

IV,  2i ; rt.\s|H‘ctinLf  tluj 

liHliaii  Miirtikhoia  ... 

40 

Frag. 

Xlf.  (A)  Antij^cmos,  ilirah.  Nar, 

^^oo/.  UihL  e.  IH2 

42 

(11)  Pliny,  //(V-/.  Nat.  II,  100. 

42 

(C)  y^Eliaii,  7>t> /la/m.  XVI,  87 

48 

I’ raj'.  XIII.  irEli:iii,A’<f/.j’l IV,  20.  48 
Frag.  XIV.  yEliaii,  IV.2r  41, 

Frag.  XV.  (A)  yElinn,  ,\(rf.  XV'J, 

117  40 

(1>)  yEliaii,  Nnf.Auim.  Ilf,  4.  40 

(C^  Ari.sl.,  ■ !h'  Jlitif.  Auini. 

VIII,  28 40 

(D)  l*sill:uliiis,  l)i'  IS  nil'll  hum, 

]).  r> 40 

(E)  Palla.l.,  !>,'  Jlnwh.,  ji.  4. . 47 

(K)  Aiih’g.  Mirnh.  V^r.  100...  1.7 

((I)  From  Ilio  vorkof  Sotion  47 

(H)  riiiiy,  XXXI,  2 47 

(I)  Miolia(4. Ajioslol.  JV,)iv?rfc 

XX,  0 47 

Frag.  XVI.  Pliny,  TTw/.  Au/.XVII. 2.  47 


COMKNlrf. 


Vil 


Frag. 

XVII. 

yKlian,  Ant.  Anim.  IV, 

:ii;  

■|.s 

F rng. 

XVII  I. 

yKlinn,  Ant.  Anlnt,  IV, 

41  

50 

Fnig. 

XIX. 

A jH>l  loiiins  ( 1 bsk(t|i.<s), 

Hhl.MImh.  XVII.. 

51 

Frag. 

XX. 

Pliny,  Hist.  Ant. 

XXXVII. -2  

51 

Frag. 

XXI. 

Tzel/.y.s.  VII,  V. 

/I4 

;>2 

Frag. 

XX  If. 

I’lhiy,  ///.s/.JV.r/.  Vll,2 

52 

Frag. 

xxm. 

.ilOliaii,  IV,  m 

52 

Frag. 

xxiv. 

Sorvius  tin-  Comnu'H- 

« ^ 

lnf*)r  on  Viigil, 

.■E twill  1,  V.  ... 

5.‘1 

Frag. 

XXV. 

(A)  yKlian,  ///.«••/.  .1//.  IV,  52 

54 

(Bj  yFlian,  111,  41  

5(1 

Frag. 

XXVI. 

yKliaii,  \'iit.  Aiiihi. 

V, :{  

50 

Frag. 

XXVII. 

(A)  From  A ntigiMio:?,  Mi- 

nth. Nnr.  (.'tntff.  ///.s/. 

H55  

50 

riJ)  From  Sotinii  in  sr:if- 
tiT(*d  ]>:issj*g«'s  wJmto 
lio  rchiWw  nuirv(/ls 
ulnint  rivors,  IVxin- 
tainS;  and  Likoj^  ...  ,59 

(C)  Strabo,  (irotj.  XV 1/4*.  ,59 

Frag.  XXVITI.  Pliny,  Hist.  Ant, 

XXX  f,  2 59 


VIII 


f'OXTK.NTS. 


PAdF. 


K rag. 

XXIX. 

w 

Antigonos,  Minih. 

Nar.  Cuiifj,  Uhl. 

e.  182  

1)0 

(B) 

Pliny,  Hist.  Nat. 

XXXT,2...^.... 

no 

Fnig: 

XXX. 

(A) 

Tzotzes,  (Jhil.  VII, 

V.  ()8H  

00 

(B) 

Pliny,  Hist.  Nat. 

VII,  2 

01 

(C) 

From  tlie  same 

01 

Frag^ 

XXXI. 

Ocilius,  Nvrti  Attic. 

IX,  c.  4 

02 

Frag. 

XXXII. 

Frag.  IV,  from 

Alhenaios,  HI).  X, 

[•=•!']  

04 

Frag. 

xxxin. 

Tzolzw,  GMl.  VUI, 

V.  987  

04 

Frag. 

XXXV. 

Lucian,  Vcr.  llisl. 

1,3  

04 

Frag. 

XXXVF. 

Strabo,  Gcoij.  I,  2... 

04 

Lassen 

I’s  Review 

of  llio  Reports  of  Kte- 

sias 

concerninji 

; India. 

0.) 

Appendix,  on  eertain 

Indian  Animals, 

92 

ANCIENT  INDIA, 

AS  DESCRIHED  1!Y  KTESIAS. 

t 

IXTIIODUCTION. 

TI1.1:  Life  (oul  Wriliiuju  of  Kiesias. 

To  Iv  1 0 s i ji « the  diKtinctiou  ol'  having 

been  tlic  first  writer  who  gave  to  the  tli'iicks  a 
speeial  trcMitise  on  India — a region  concerning 
which  they  had,  belbrc  his  time,  no  further  know- 
ledge than  wliat  ^vas  supplied  by  the  few  and 
meagre  notices  of  it  which  had  ajipoared  in  tlio 
(jeoffntphy  of  i 1 0 k a t ai  o « of  M i 1 e t o s,  and  in 
the  History  of  Ilerodotos.  'I’his  Ktesias  was 
a native  of  Knidos,  an  important  Lakedomo- 
nian  colony  situate  on  the  sea  coast  of  Karia,  and 
was  the  son  of  K t d s i o k h o s (or  Ktesiarkhos).^ 
llis  liunily,  as  we  learn  from  Clalen,®  was  a branch 
of  the  Asklepiadai,  a caste  of  priests  settled 
princijially  in  Kos  and  Knidos,  with  whom  medicine 
was  an  horeditaiy  profession,  lie  was  contem- 
])orary  with  II  i [>  j)  o kr  a t d s,  who  like  himself 
was  an  Askldpiad ; but  he  was  very  much  younger 
than  his  illustrious  kinsman,  though  by  how 
many  years  we  know  not,  as  the  date  of  liis  birth 
cannot  be  ascertained.  W e nuiy  conchule,  however, 

’ V.  Tzutz.  C/u'f.  T.  1;  Saidas,  Kotlor.  p.  20b;  Idu- 
tarcli.  Aflif.wi-xcs  ; ljueiau.  Fee.  /ft.W.  1.  Ij.  *' 

- Tom.  V.  p.  Oy'J,  1.  51  ud.  Jlasil. 

1 


2 


that  ho  must  have  rison  to  eminence  by  the 
]>ractJco  of  his  art  before  the  year  41G  for 
about  that  time  he  repaired  to  Persia,  probably  on 
the  invitation  of  the  king  who  appointed  him 
physician  to  the  royal  court.  Hero  he  remained 
for  17  years,  of  which  tlic  first  eleven  were  spent 
under  Darius  II,  and  the  remaining ^ix  under 
his  successor  Artaxerxes  Mnumon.^  Ho 
accompanied  the  latter  when  he  took  the  field 
against  Cyrus,  and,  as  we  learn  from  Xenophon, 
cured  the  wound  which  his  royal  master  received 
in  the  battle  of  Kunaxa.’*'  Soon  after  this  he 
appears  to  have  left  Porsia  and  returned  to  his 
own  country.  This  was  in  the  year  398,  after 
which  wo  know  nothing  of  his  career. 

Kt  e s i a s diversified  his  pi’ofossional  with  liter- 
ary pursuits  and  was  the  author  of  several  works, 
of  which  the  most  important  was  his  history  of 
Persia.  This  was  written  in  23  books,  of  which 
the  first  six  contained  the  history  of  the  Assyrian 
monarchy  down  to  the  foundation  of  the  kingdom 
of  Ponsia.  The  next  seven  contained  the  history  of 
Persia  down  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Xerxes, 
and  the  remaining  ten  carried  the  history  down 
to  the  time  when  tlio  author  left  the  Persian 
Court.  This  great  work,  whatever  may  have  been 
its  other  merits,  possessed  this  especial  value,  that 
the  facts  which  it  recorded  were  derived  principally 

* DiotldroH  (1.,  1)  fnllowotl  hy  Tzetzes  {Chil.  I.  i,  82), 

writes  tlwit  KtiViiis  with  liis  cotmtryiiinn  on  bo- 

liair  of  Cyms  wiw  tiikni  prisoner  at  tins  battle  of 
Knnaxa,  anil  was  thereafter  on  acuoniit  of  liis  skill  in 
nieilieiuo  taken  into  tlu^  kinif's  service,  in  which  ho 
rcinaiuoil  for  17  years.  A coiuparisim  however  of  well 
iiscerttiincd  fiuits  discredits  this  statoincut. 

* V.  Amh,  I.  viii,  27. 


3' 


from  the  Persian  state-records’  which  Ktdsiaswas 
permitted  by  tho  king  to  consult.  His  state* 
noents,  as  might  be  expected,  are  freriucntly  at 
variance  with  those  of  Hcrodotos  whoso  sources  of 
information  were  dilTcrcnt.  lie  is  also  in  a few 
instances  at  variance  with  his  contemporary  Xeno- 
phon. Tl^  work  unfortunately  no  longer  exists, 
bnt  we  possess  a brief  abstract  of  its  contents 
made  by  .Piiutios,  and  some  fragments  which 
have  been  preserved  by  Diodoros  and  other  writers. 

Ilcsidcs  tho  History  and  the  Treatise  on  India, 
Htesias  appears  to  have  composed  several  minor 
works.  These  consisted,  so  far  as  is  known,  of 
treatise  on  tho  llcvonucs  of  tho  Persian  Em- 
pire, two  treatises  of  a geographical  nature — ono 
being  on  Mountains,  and  the  other  on  Eivers,  and 
some  books  of  voyages  entitled  Fcriyloi. 

Tho  Lidika  of  Ktdsijis,  like  his  other  works, 
has  been  lost,  but,  like  his  great  work  on  the 
History  of  Persia,  it  has  been  abridged  by  P h 6- 
t i o s,  while  several  fragments  of  it  have  been  pre- 
served in  the  pages  of  other  writers,  as  for  instanoo 
iBIian.  It  was  comprised  in  a single  book,  and  em- 
bodied the  information  which  Ktesias  had  gathered 
about  India,  partly  from  tho  reports  of  Persian 
officials  who  had  visited  that  country  on  tho  king’s 
service,  and  partly  also  perhaps  from  the  reports 
of  Indians  themselves,  who  in  those  days  wero 
occasionally  to  be  seen  at.  tho  Persian  Court, 
whither  they  resorted,  either  as  merchants,  or  as 
envoys  bringing  presents  and  tribute  from  the 

^ CK  T&v  ^aa-ikiK&v  8i(/>dep»v  tv  air  oi  Ilcpo-ai  t&s 
iraXaiar  irpa^tis  kotU  riva  v6fu>v  tixov  ovyreraypear. 
Died.  TI.  32. 


4 


priiiofis  ol'NorLhcrii  Trulin.  which  was  then  snb- 
jccL  tu  I’crsitiii  vale.  Ktd.sias  an  rortunately  was 
not  only  a fjrcat  lover  of  the  marvellous,  but  also 
sitignlarly  «le(ieiont,  for  one  of  his  profession,  in 
critical  acumen.  He  took,  therefore,  no  pains  to 
sift  the  accounts  which  were  coiniuunicatccl  to 
him,  and  tlie  book  which  he  gave  to  ^hc  world, 
instead  of  being,  what  a cjtrefiil  on(]uivcr  with  his 
iwlvaiitagcs  might  liavo  made  it — a valuable  rc])er- 
toi'y  of  Diets  concerning  India  and  its  people, 
seemed  to  he  little  else  than  a tissue  of  ftibles  and 
of  absurd  pcu’versions  or  exaggerations  of  the 
truth,  and  was  condcmnctl  ns  such,  not  only  by 
the  coiisonticut  voice  of  antifjuity,  hut  also  by  the 
generality  of  the  learned  in  modern  times,  'rho 
Avork  Avas  nevertheless  i>opular,  and  in  spite  of  its 
inlirm  credit,  Avas  frccpieiitly  cited  by  snhseipicnt 
Avriters.  Its  ‘talcs  of  wonder’  fascinated  the 
crodidous,  while  its  stylo,  which  Avas  remarkable 
alike  for  its  case,  sAveetuess,  and  perspicuity, 
recommended  it  to  readers  of  OA’ory  stain]).®  It 
Avas  the  only  systematic  account  of  India  the 
(creeks  possessed  till  the  time  of  the  Makedoiiian 
invasion. 

Wo  must  notice  in  conclusion  the  fact,  that,  as 
tho  knoAvlcdgo  of  India,  and  especially  of  Indian 
anti<]uity,  has  increased,  scholars  have  been  led 
to  question  tho  justice  of  the  traditional  verdict 
Avhicli  condemns  K t c s i a s as  a Avritor  of  uiiscru- 

” KttVias,  tlionj'li  a.  Dorian,  used  many  Tonic  forms  and 
modes  of  exi»ri“ssinii,  and  Mieso  more  in  tho  Iiulikn  than  in 
tlie  His  stylo  is  praised  for  the  qualities  men- 

tioiKsl  in  the  text  by  Pholiiw,  Dion,  iriiliearn,  and  Demet. 
Phaler,  Avlio  does  not  besitnto  to  si>ealf  of  him  as  a poet, 
the  A-ery  dciniurgc  of  porspicnity  {ivapytias  fiij/novpyos). 


pul  on  s mendacity.  They  do  not  indeed  wholly 
exculpate  him,  but  they  have  shown  that  nniiiy 
of  his  statements,  which  were  once  tuken  to  bo 
pure  falsehoods,  have  either  certain  elements  of 
ti'uth  underlying  them,  or  that  they  originated  in 
miscoiice})tions  which  were  perhaps  less  Tvilfiil 
than  unavoidable.  The  fabulous  races  for  instance 
wliicli  lic^has  described  are  found,  so  far  from 
being  fictions  of  liis  own  invention,  to  have  their 
exact  analogues  in  monstrous  races  which  are 
mentioned  in  the  two  great  national  epics  and 
otlicr  Brail niauical  writings,  and  whielj,  though 
therein  dciincted  with  every  attribute  of  deformity, 
were  ncjverthclcss,  not  purely  fictitious,  but  mis- 
representations of  such  aboriginal  tribes  as 
olUu’cd  a stout  resistance  to  their  Aryan  invaders 
while  still  engaged  in  the  task  of  concpicring 
Tndia. 

• These  moderate  views,  which  have  been  advo- 
cated by  such  authorities  as  Hccron,  Biihr,  0. 
Mull(?r,  Lassen,  and  others,  will  no  doubt  come 
eventually  to  ho  very  goncrally  accepted. 

Notice  of  Vliutiofs- 

P li  6 1 i o s,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the 
abridgments  of  Ktesias,  was  the  Patriarch  of  Cou- 
stautiuo])le,  an  office  to  which  he  was  elected, 
though  previously  a layman,  in  the  year  a.  d.  858. 
Sof)n  after  the  accession  of  Leo  VI.  as  emperor 
(886)  he  was  accused  of  having  conspii’cd  against 
his  life,  and  was  in  consequence  banished  to  a 
monastery  in  Armenia,  where  lie  ended  his  days. 
He  was  not  only  a scholar  of  wduderful  erudition 
and  sound  judgment,  but  was  tlie  author  of  many 


6 

works,  the  most  important  of  which  was  that  en- 
titled Myriohihlion  or  BUfliotMM — which  was  a 
review  on  an  extensive  scale  of  ancient  Greek 
literature.  It  contained  abstracts  of  the  contents  of 
280  volumes,  many  of  which  are  now  known  only 
from  the  account  which  ho  has  given  of  them, 
nis  abridgment  of  the  Persian  history  of  our 
author  is  much  more  concise  than  ttfat  of  his 
LiiUka.  The  latter  is  however  a careless  and  un- 
satisfactory perforiimnco,  for  the  passages  summar- 
ized are  chiefly  those  for  which  Ktesias  was 
stigmatized  as  a fabulist  and  a liar. 

As  Lassen  has  devoted  one  of  the  leading 
sections^  of  his  great  work  on  Indian  Antiquity 
to  an  examination  of  the  reports  which  are  yet 
extant  of  K t c 3 i a s upon  India,  and  as  his  review 
is  all  but  exhaustive,  and  reflects  nearly  all  the 
light  that  learned  research  has  yet  been  able  to 
throw  upon  the  subject,  I have  for  this  reason,  as 
well  as  with  a view  to  obviate  the  need  which 
would  otherwise  occiu*,  of  having  constant  re- 
course to  long  foot-notes,  thought  it  advisable  to 
append  to  the  translation  of  the  Greek  text  a 
translation  of  this  review.  I have  appended  also 
a translation  of  some  passages  from  Indiko- 
plcustos,  which  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  descrip- 
tions given  by  Ktosias  of  certain  Indian  animals 
and  plants. 


' In  vol.  II.,  pp.  641 S,  2ud  cd.  1874. 


THE  INDIKA  OF  KTfiSIAS. 

Fkaoment  1.  • 

Ecloga  in  Photii,  Bill.  LXXII,  p.  144  soqip 

1.  Another  work  was  read — the  Indlka.  of 

Ktdsias,  obtained  in  a single  book  wherein  tho 
author  has  made  more  frequent  use  of  lonio 
forms.  Ho  reports  of  the  river  Indus  that, 
where  narrowest,  it  has  a breadth  of  forty  stadia, 
and  where  widest  of  two  hundred  and'hif  tho 
Indians  themselves  that  they  almost  outnumber 
all  other  men  taken  together.®  Ho  mentions 
tho  a kind  of  worm  bred  in  tho  river, 

this  being  indeed  tho  only  living  creature  which 
is  found  in  it.  He  states  that  there  are  no  men 
who  Uve  beyond  the  Indians,*  and  that  no  rain 
falls  in  India*  but  that  the  country  is  watered 
by  its  river. 

2.  He  notices  the  pantarha,^  a kind  of 

^ This  diflurs  from  what  Arrian  status  on  the  anthority 
of  Ktusias,  (see  Frag,  ii,)  Probably  Arrian  has  quoted 
tho  sentence  more  corrootly  than  Photios.  And  100 
stadia  is  far  enough  from  the  truth.  With  Ktesias  Conf . 
Philostratus,  ViL  ApolL  II,  18 : rov  fiiif  8^  *Ii/8oif 
infffoicoBria’aVf  erraSiavs  fiaXifTTa  rca’frapuKOVTa  tA 
yiip  TT^mpov  avrov  roa-ovroy,  Sco  Manuert,  Qeotjr^  d. 
Or,  24.  Ilom.  Bd.  V,  i,  p.  74. 

“ Conf.  Herodot.  Ill,  04  j Strabo  II,  v.  32. 

® Conf,  § 37,  and  Frag.  xxvi.  • 

* Conf.  Jlorodot.  Ill,  98,  105 ; Strabo  II,  v,  1,  82. 

® But  conf.  Strabo  XV,  i,  1,  13.  Ir,  18;  Arrian,  Indihg>', 
VI,  4;  Philost.  Vit.  Apoll.  II,  19  ; Diodor.  II,  30. 

® Count  Woltheim  {Sammlmig  von  Av.fniiizenj  &c.  Bd. 
II,  p.  lOSfr.)  regards  this  as  tho  Jfydrophanes  or  tho 
clianging  stone,  sou  agate,  a kind  of  ojial,  reinarkahlo  for 
the  variety  of  colours  it  displays  when  thrown  into  water. 


8 


soalstonc,  and  rclatus  that  when  soalstoncs  and 
other  costly  jfcms  to  the  uiunbcr  01*477’  wliicli 
belonged  to  the  Baktriaii  mcrcliant,  had  been 
ilung  into  the  liver,  this  jjmitarha  drew  them 
up  to  itself,  all  adhering  together. 

3.  Ho  notices  also  the  clephan^'*  that  de- 
molish walls;  the  kind  of  small  apes*^  that  have 
tails  four  cubits  long;  the  cocks  that  arc  of 
extraordinary  size  the  kind  of  bird  called  the 
parrot^^  and  which  lie  thus  describes:  it  has  a 
tongue  and  voice  like  the  hniiian,  is  of  the  size 
of  a hawk,  has  a red  bill,  is  adorned  with  a 
beard  of  a black  colour,  while  the  nock  is  red 
like  cinnabar,  it  talks  like  a man  in  Indian,  but 
if  taught  Greek  can  talk  in  Greek  also. 

4.  He  notices  the  fountain^®  which  is  filled 
every  year  with  lupiid  gold,  out  of  which  are 

’ So  ALiilk'r’s  to  .t,  tin'  common  rcailiiig  is  77- 

**  Witli  this  (.•om])iU’o  ¥vii;r,  iv.  below. 

Tills  is  roconcihiblo  with  lln*  jiccoiints  ol'  otlicrs  if  for 
fxiKpoiv  wi*  r(’jul  fJLtXKpuju,  For  ^Mcirastliciii  s siko  s]i*itlcs  of 
liuliiiii  apes  not  smaller  tlian  hirivo  doj^s  anil  wliirh  luivo 
tails  ot\/(  y»'  eubits  leji.u:tli  wliirli  answer  to  Uio  Mtituli  apo 
or  tW/UM/s,  with  llie  hair  ou  the  forehead  projeetin*; 

over  tbo  eyes,  and  Ihe  lieard  wliite,  lh^^  body  beinjj:  dark. 
Vid.  ^.Vlliaid,  Nat,  XVIJ,  jjy ; eoiif.  XVI,  10,  and  Strabo 
XV,  i,  37: — The  monkeys  are  larger  Ihap  the  larirest  doga 
. . . .their  tails  arc  more  ibaii  two  cubits  in  length.’’ 

Conf.  Frag.  v.c. 

''  UiTT-fiKih:  Ucland  iJe  Ophir,  j).  181,  ooJiiparos  this 
■with  the  Fersiau ' ^edc/i.  lu  Arrian,  Tnd,  XV,  ‘'i 
and  iEliau,  Nat,  XVT,  2 and  15,  the  bird  is  called 
iriTTaKOs,  yKliaii  however  elsovvboro  calls  it  ^j/irraxoS' 
and  so  also  Diodoros  aud  FuuHnnias.  A feminiho  form 
yj/^irraKtj  occurs  in  Arist.  II,  An,  VllI,  12.  The  form  iu 
IMiny  is 

*"  Cuut*.  i’hilustrui.  rit.  Ill,  15. 


9 


annually  drawn  a hundred  earthen  pitchers 
filled  with  the  metal.  The  pitchers  must  be 
earthen  since  the  gold  when  drawn  becomes 
solid,  and  to  get  it  out  the  containing  vessel 
must  needs  be  broken  in  pieces.  The  fountain 
is. of  a sqnai'c  sliape,  eleven  cubits  in  circumfor- 
cuce,  and  a fathom  in  depth.  Each  pitcherful 
of  gold  weighs  a talent.  Ho  notices**  also  the 
iron  found  at  the  bottom  of  this  fountain,  adding 
that  ho  had  in  his  own  possession  two  swords 
made  from  this  iron,  one  given  to  him  by  the  king 
of  Persia,**  and  the  other  by  Parysatis,  the 
mother  oi*  that  same  king.  This  iron,  ho  says, 
if  fixed  in  the  earth,  averts  clouds  and  hail  and 
thunderstorms,  and  ho  avers  that  ho  had  himself 
twice  seen  tho  iron  do  this,  the  king  on  both 
occasions  performing  the  experiment.** 

6.  Wo  learn  farther  that  tho  dogs  of  India** 
are  of  very  great  size,  so  that  they  fight  even 
with  tho  lion  ;**  that  there  are  certain  high, 
mountains  having  mines  which  yield  tho  sai‘> 

The  Munich  MS.  287,  makes  this  a separate  fountain : 
€<rrt  Se  irepa  Kpivr^  (read  vibr}pov. 

Conf.  Philost.  Vit.  A%yoll,  III,  45. 

Artaxerxes  Mnemon. 

“ Jiaohr  thinks  that  Ktesias  hero  refers  to  tho  magnet, 
the  properties  of  which  wore  not  at  that  time  so  well 
known  as  now. 

Conf.  iEliau.  A^at.  An.  IVi  19;  VIII,  1,  9;  and 
Frag-  vi,  below. 

Compare  what  ^Sliau  (Frag,  vi.)  says  of  tho  dogs  of 
the  Kynamolgoi ; compare  also  Strabo,  i]uoting  Moirasthenes 
XV,  p.  1029,  and  the  account  in  Curtins  (de  Re&.  Ale^, 
IX,  i,  31)  of  an  Indian  dog  attacking  a lion. 

2 


10 


dine-stone,  and  onyxes,  and  other  seal  stones 
that  the  heat  is  excessive,  and  that  the  sun 
appears  in  India  to  bo  ten  times  larger^**  than  in 
other  countries ; and  that  many  of  the  inhabi- 
tants arc  suflbcated  to  death  by  the  heat.  Of 
the  sea  in  India,  liosay.s,  that  it  is  not  less  than 
the  sea  in  Jlcllas  ; its  surface  however  for  four 
finfjor-breadths  downward  is  hot,  bo  tliat  fish 
cannot  live  that  go  near  the  heated  snri'ace,  but 
must  coniine  thcuj.selvcs  always  to  the  depths 
below. 

6.  He  states  that  the  river  I n d u s flows 
through  the  level  country,  and  through  between 
the  mountains,  and  that  what  is  called  the  Indian 
reed®“  grows  along  its  course,  this  being  so  thick 
that  two  men  could  scarcely  encompass  its  stem 
■with  their  arms,  and  of  a height  to  equal  tho 
mast  of  a merchant  ship  of  the  heaviest  burden.®^ 
Some  are  ofa  gi’oatersize  even  than  this,  though 
some  are  of  less,  as  "might  be  expected  when  the 
mountain  it  grows  on  is  of  vast  range.  Tho 
reeds  are  distinguished  by  sex,  some  being  male, 

*•  These  mountains  have  hecn  variously  identified  with 
Taurus,  with  Iinuns,  with  J’aropamieus,  and  with  the  monn- 
fciins  of  Great  and  Little  Bnkliaria,  which  stretch  through 
Tibet,  and  Ka^rnir,  butCouiitWelthcim  taIccR  them  to  be  the 
Bala  Ght'.ts  near  Bharoch.  The  Poriplfis  states  that  onyxes 
and  other  precious  stones  were  found  in  Ozene  (now  Ujjain) 
and  thence  sent  to  Bary^za  (Bharfich)  for  export.  The 
well  known  Khambay  'stones  come  from  a neighbouring 
district. 

**  Strabo  III,  p.  202,  contests  this. 

*“  Conf.  Frag,  vii,  below. 

Lit.  of  10,000  talents : or  nvpun».(p6pov  (Lobeck,  od. 
Phym.  p.  662)  60,000  amphorto.  Conf.  Frag.  vii. 


11 


others  female.  The  male  reed  has  no  pith,  and 
is  exceedingly  strong,  bat  the  female  has  a 
pitli.*® 

7.  Ho  describes  an  animal  called  the  Miarfi- 
fc/tom,®*  found  in  India.  Its  face  is  like  a man’s — 
it  is  about  as  big  as  a lion,  and  in  colour  red  like 
cinnabar.  * It  has  three  rows  of  teeth — ears  like 
the  human — eyes  of  a palo-bluo  like  the  human 
and  a tail  like  that  of  the  land  scorpion,  armed 
with  a sting  and  more  than  a cubit  long.®*  It  has 
be  ides  slings  on  each  side  of  its  tail,  and,  like 
the  scorpion,  is  armed  with  an  additional  sting 
on  the  crown  of  its  head,  wherewith  it  stings 
any  one  who  goes  near  it,  the  wound  in  all  cases 
proving  moi’tal.  If  attacked  from  a distance 
it  defends  itself  both  in  front  and  in  rear — in 
front  with  its  tail,  by  up-lifting  it  and  darting  out 
the  stings,  like  shafts  .shot  from  a bow,  and  in 
roar  by  straightening  it  out.  It  can  strike  to 
the  distance  of  a hundred  feet,  and  no  creature 
can  survive  the  wound  it  inflicts  savo  only  the 
elephant.  The  stings  are  about  a foot  in  length, 
and  not  thicker  than  the  finest  thread.  The 

*®  Cf.  Tlieoplirastos,  PUivt.  Ilistor.  IV,  ii,  where  be 
etiitcii  that,  the  male  reed  is  solid,  and  the  female,  hollow. 
(If.  also  I’liny,  Hist.  Nat.  XVI,  S6.  SpronKcl  identifies 
this  raed  of  Kteaias  with  the  Dambnsa  and  Calamus 
Rot.ri)uj  of  Tjin.'uoua.  The  same  roud  .is  meutioned  by 
Herodotus  ill  I,  98). 

See  h’rags.  viii — xi,  below. 

**  virdpxovo'av  i!r\x*os.  Baehr  rifcbtly  amends 

the  roiiding  boro  to  imdpxov  &v,  which  refers  the 

measure  to  the  stiuK  instead  of  to  the  tail. 


12 


name  marlikliora**  means  in  Greek  avSpamtafiayos 
(i.e.  man-eater),  and  it  is  so  called  because  it 
carries  off  men  and  devours  them,  though  it  no 
doubt  preys  upon  other  animals  as  well.  In 
fighting  it  uses  not  only  its  stings  but  also  its 
claws.  Ere.sh  slings  grow  up  to  replace  those 
shot  away  in  fight  ing.  Tlie.soaninial'f arc  numer- 
ous in  India,  and  are  killed  by  the  natives 
who  hunt  them  with  clophaiiis,  ft’om  the  backs 
of  which  they  attack  them  witli  darts. 

8.  Ho  de.scribes  tlie  Ijidiana  as  extremely 
just,  and  gives  an  account  of  their  manners  and 
customs.  lie  mentions  the  sacred  spot  in  the 
midst  of  an  uninhabited  region  wdiicli  tboy 
venerate  in  tbe  name  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.** 
It  takes  one  a fifteen  days’  journey  to  reach  this 
place  from  Monnt  Sardous.  Here  for  the 
space  of  five  ami  thirty  days  the  Sun  every  year 
cools  down  to  allow  his  worshippers  to  celebrate 
Lis  rite.s,  and  return  home  nn.scoi’ched  by  his 

Tyclisen  says — This  is  the  Persian  J from 

wnrJ,  a ninn  nnd  1 harden  to  oat:  A7if>r,  tbe  ealor,  is  an 
abbreviated  form  of  tho  participle /;/< tin? ^7/,  which  is  still 
on  nsp  . . . if  the  tinalbo  viewed  as  a component  part 

of  the  Persian  word,  we  have  only  to  substitiito  tbe  )tartici- 
pial  form  nzanhVi/mrt?,  (abbreviated  from 

mnrdihhori'tn)  as  Ilehmd  has  already  done  (p.  223),  and  we 
obtain  precisely  tho  same  sismificaiinn.  Conf.  Frags,  viii — 
xi : al'^o  Pbilostratus,  Vit,  Ai'tdL  IV,  .15. 

20  Welthoim,  rejecting  the  opinion  of  some  tba.t  this  un- 
inhabited region  was  the  desert  of  Gobi,  takes  it  to  bo  rather 
the  groat  desert  east  of  the  Indus  where  the  worship  of 
the  sun  flourished  in  early  times.  This  desert  also  was  in 
reality  about  a iiftoeu  days’  journey  distant  from  the  monn- 
taius  which  produced  the  onyx  and  sardine  stones.  Lassen 
has  however  assigned  the  locality  to  the  Vindhyas. 


13 


barning  rays.*^  Ife  observes  that  in  India 
there  is  neither  thnnder  nor  liglitning  nor  rain, 
but  that  stoiins  of  wind  and  violent  Imriicanes 
which  sweep  everything  before  them,  arc  of 
freqnent  occiirroTice.  The  morning  sun  pi-o- 
duc'cs  coolness  for  one  half  of  tho  day,  but  an 
excessive  Beat  during  the  other  half,  and  this 
holds  good  for  most  parts  of  Intlia.®* 

9.  It  is  not,  however,  by  exposure  to  the 
sun  that  the  people  are  swartlij',***  bat  hy 
nature,  for  auiung  the  Indians  there  are  both 
men  and  women  who  are  as  fair  as  any  in 
tho  world,  thongli  such  are  no  doubt  in  a 
minority.  Ho  adds  that  he  had  himself  soon 
two  Indian  women  and  five  men  of  such  a fair 
complexion.®® 

10.  Wishing  to  assure  us  of  the  truth  of  his 
statement  that  the  sun  makes  the  ternperatnro 
cool  for  five  and  thirty  days,  he  mentions  several 
facts  that  are  equally  strange — that  tho  streams 
of  fire  which  issue  from  /?tltna®^  leave  unscathed 
amidst  tho  surrounding  havoc  those  lands  which 

lua  nff  u^iXfKToi  avTTiv  rfXfVfc'cri,  lit.  tJuft  they  may 
not  celebrate  his  rites  vuscorcheU.  As  tbo  writtir  must 
have  meant  Iho  opposite  of  this,  must  bo  read 

instead  of  «</>XeKToi, 

« Conf.  H<irodot.  Ill,  104- 

Conf.  llenidot.  Ill,  101 ; Arrian.  ?Jxp.  Alex.  V,  4,  8; 
bnt  on  the  contrary,  Aristot.  Mist.  Anfm.  Ill,  22 ; Gener, 
Ani.n,  II,  2 ; Strabo,  XV,  i,  13,  24. 

* Possibly  from  Kfismir. — J.  B. 

Conf.  Pansan.  X,  28,  2 ; Strabo,  VI,  2 ; Valer.  Xlax. 

V,4. 


14 


belong  to  just  men** — that  in  Znkynthos  there 
are  fountains  with  fish  whence  pitch  is  taken 
out"* — that  in  Naxos  is  a fountain  which  at  times 
discharges  a wine  of  great  sweetness,®*  and  that 
tlio  water  of  the  river  Phasis  likewise,  if  kept  in 
a vessel  for  a nig  lit  ami  a day,  changes  into  a 
wine  which  is  also  of  great  sweetiJcss®® — that 
near  Pliasclis  iu  Lykia  there  is  a perpetual 
volcano,®*  always  flaming  on  the  summit  of  tlio 
rock  both  by  night  and  by  day,  and  tins  is  not 
qucjiclied  by  water,  which  rather  augments  the 


Tlio  rofciTiico  i:H  to  Uuj  fiphl  nf  iJie  pionf!^  €V(r(^&v 
Ti(‘nr  (.■nhiiin,  t1if‘ aoriio  of  tho  .^^tory  ri'^'^n.nlinir  tlio  two 
brclhiTs  Anipliinotiios  uiul  AnsifxK,  who  siivi  d tlicii*  ] iiniids 
clurinir  an  oniption  hy  ('uvryiii;^  Hkmu  oiron  tlieir  shonldcra, 
Vid.  PiUisaii.  X.  xxviii,  2;  Struho,  V'J,  2^  aud  Valcr. 
Max.  V,  4. 

IldvxTotns  (IV.  lari)  stntrs  that  he  had  hiniFclf  seen 
this  IjitiJiniMona  hajiihiin.  ft  is  mcritlnand  hy  Aid  ironf  8 j 
J[ist.  Mirahii.  KiU:  liy  Dio'^kor.  i,  ?M);  hy  Vilruv.  VIII,  3; 
and  I’iiiiy,  XXXV,  15.  Their  accounts  havu  buen  \evitied 
by  modovu  travellers. 

This  fonutaiu  is  luentionod  by  Stephan.  Byz.  8.  v- 
Naxos,  and  a similar  ouo  hy  Pliny  (///sf,  Nat.  Jl,  ciii, 
1UI>)  -in  tlio  island  of  Andros;  Cf.  idem.  XXXT,  ii;  and 
also  Fhilostrat.  Icon.  I,  25. 

'Pho  waters  of  tho  Phasis,  oecordiuf:  to  modern  ac- 
counts, are  lead-colonrcd,  puFM’S'-i  il  of  a In  nlinir  virtue  and 
held  as  sacred,  perhaps  herniiM- they  w(  n*  thought  by  tho 
aucionts  to  have  apruriEC  from  the  fxates  of  the  tnorning 
51U1,  and  theivt'nro  to  have  formed  the  dividing?  lino  be- 
tween day  and  ni^ht.  Arrian  in  the  Pont.  no 

doubt  with  an  eye  to  this  passage  of  Ktcsiiis,  says  that 
the  w'liter  of  tho  Phasi.s  if  kept  in  certain  vessels  acquired 
a pleasant  viiums  iaste.  V.  Bitter,  EVdfr.  ll.pp.  817 andUlS. 
OonF.  Pliny  (7/.  II.  eiii,  100)  who  says  that  tlie  water  of 
tho  Lyncestis  in  is  somewhat  acid,  and  intoxLcabea 

like  wine  those  who  drink  it. 

^ See  Frag.  *xii,  below. 


15 


blaze,  but  by  casting  rubbish  into  it*'--and  in 
like  manner,  the  volcanoes  of  ^tna  and  of 
Prusa  keep  ahvays  burning.®® 

11.  lie  writes  that  in  the  middle  of  India 
are  found  the  swarthy  men  called  P y g m i e s,®® 
who  speak  the  same  language  as  the  other 
Indians.  fTlioy  are  very  diminutive,  the  tallest 
of  them  being  but  two  cubits  in  height,  while 
the  majority  are  only  one  and  a half.  They  let 
their  hair  grow  very  long — down  to  their  knees, 
and  even  lower.  They  have  the  largest  beards 
anywhere  to  bo  seen,  and  wheii  these  have 
grown  sufficiently  long  and  copious,  they  no 
longer  wear  clothing,  but,  instead,  let  the  hair  of 
the  head  fall  down  their  backs  far  below  the 
knee,  whilo  in  front  are  their  beards  trailing 
down  to  their  very  feet.  When  their  hair  has 
thus  thickly  enveloped  their  whole  body,  they 
bind  it  round  them  Avith  a zone,  and  so  make  it 
servo  for  a garment.  Their  privsites  are  thick, 

CoTif.  Fra",  xii,  A.  and  H.  Unauforf,  an  Eti};H.sli  travel- 
ler, coulirms  this  statement.  Kurejierts  that  wliilc  travelling 
in  tlio  rejnons  noarest  the  country  of  the  Phiiselitae  he* 
came  upon  a plaeo  where  there  was  ti>  he  sinm  an  evor-hiirn- 
ing  flame  which  like  the  fire  of  a volcano  was  iuc&tin- 
guiahahle.  V.  Beaufort’s  Caranian}'’,  p.  -U. 

There  is  a Prusa  in  Bithynia  nnd  another  in  Mysia; 
each  near  a mountain.  Strabo,  (XIJ,  p.  fJ-tt  seqq.)  men* 
tioua  both ; hiit  as  lie  says  nothing  of  a volcanic  mountain  in 
connexion  with  either,  Baehr  inclini?.s  to  thiuk  that  the 
reference  is  to  Prusa  in  the  vicinity  of  Mount  Olympus,  for- 
merly called  Cios,  famous  for  mirannlons  fonutains  and 
things  of  that  sort. 

**  Conf.  llomer,  II.  Ill,  6;  Aristot.  Hist,  Afi.  VIIT,  IS 
and  14;  Philostrat.  Vit.  Apollon.  Ill,  47;  Plin.  Hist. 
Nat.  VII,  2 ; Sbrabo,  Oeog.  XV,  i,  57 ; Aulus  Gcllins,  Noet.. 
AU.  IX,  4. 


and  so  larg^e  that  they  depend  even  to  their 
ancles.  They  are  moreover  snabnosod,  and 
otherwise  ill-favoured.  Their  sheep  are  of  the 
size  of  our  lambs,  and  their  oxen  and  assea 
rather  smaller  than  our  rams,  which  again  are 

as  bi"  as  their  horses  and  mules  and  other 

. . * 

cattle.*'*  Of  the  I’ygmies  three  thousand  men 
attend  the  king  of  the  Indians,  on  account  of 
their  great  skill  in  archery.  They  ai’e  eminently 
just,  and  have  the  same  laws  as  the  Indians. 
They  hunt  haves  and  foxes  not  with  dogs  but 
with  ravens  and  kites  and  crows  and  vultures. *‘ 
In  their  country  is  a lake  eight  hundred  stadia 
in  circumference,  whicj[i  produces  an  oil  like 
our  own.  If  the  wind  be  not  blowing,  this  oil 
floats  upon  the  surface,  and  the  Pygmies  going 
upon  the  lake  in  little  boats  collect  it  from 
arnidstthowators  in  small  tubs  'iorhousehold  use.** 
They  use  also  oil  of  sdsamum*®  and  nut  oil,  but 
the  lake-oil**  is  the  best".  The  lake  has  also  fish. 

12.  There  is  much  silver  in  their  part  of 
the  country,  and  the  silver-mines  though  not 
deep  are  deeper  than  those  in  Baktria.  Gold 
also  is  a product  of  India.*®  It  is  not  found 


See  Frag,  xii,  c. 

**  Sec  Frag,  xiii  below. 

**  Conf.  Frag,  xxvii. 

Sco  Salmas,  F.i'cre.  Plin.  p.  10?3 ; Sprengel,  Tlistor. 
Botan.  vol.  I,  p.  71) ; llevnicr,  de  V Economie.i'Siiublique  de$ 
Verses,  p.  283. 

**  Antigon,  c,  IGTt,  in  Frag,  xxvii,  below.  *• 

On  metals  in  India,  seo  Ileeren,  Asiai.  Nat.  vol.  Tl, 
a.  268. 


17 

in  rivers  and  washed  frovf  the  sands  the  like 

''w  ■ - 

gold  of  the  river  Paktolos,  T>ut  is  found  on 
those  many  high-towering  monntains  which 
aro  inhabited  by  the  Griffin  s,*®  a race  of  four- 
footed  birds,  about  as  largo  as  wolves,  having 
legs  and  claws  like  those  of  the  lion,  , and  cover- 
ed all  oveif  the  body  with  black  feathers  except 
only  on  the  breast  whore  they  aro  red.  On 
account  of  those  birds  tho  gold  with  which  tho 
mountains  abound  is  difficult  to  be  got. 

13.  The  sheep  and  tho  goats  of  tho  Thdians®^ 
arc  bigger  than  asses,  and  generally  produce 
young  by  four  and  by  six  at  a timo.  The  tails 
grow  to  such  a size  that^thosc  of  tho  dams  must 
bo  cut  otTbeforo  tho  rams  can  got  at  them.  India 
does  not  however  produce  tho  pig,  either  the 
tame  sort  or  tho  wild.®®  Palm-trees  and  their 
dates  aro  in  India*®  thrice  the  size  of  those  in 
Babylon,®®  and  we  learn  that  there  is  a certain 
river  flowing  with  hone^  out  of  a rock,  like  the 
one  wo  have  in  our  own  country. 

14.  Tho  justice  of  the  Indians,  their  devo- 
tion to  their  king  and  their  contempt  of  death 

*«  in  Pereian  tyW  gitiften,  means  to  gripe  or 

seize  and  O ^ girif  corresponds  well  enough  with  ypv^> 
See  Frag,  xiv,  below,  where  a fuller  account  of  tho  gryphons 
is  given. 

See  Fmg.  xii,  below. 

**  See  Fnfgl'xv,  below ; also  Frag.^  xxix,  D.  Swine,  wild 
and  tamo,  are  common  enough  now  in  India. 

^ Conf.  Falladius  Brachman,  p.  4. 

Begarding  tho  Babylonian  peums,  vid.  Herodot.  T, 
193 ; and  Diodor.  II,  53. 

8 


18 


are  themes  on  which  he  loves  to  expatiate.  He 
notices  a fountain  having  this  peculiarity,  that 
when  any  one  draws  water  from  it,  the  water 
coagulates  like  cheese,  and  should  you  then 
detach  from  the  solid  lump  a piece  weighing 
about  three  obols,  and  having  triturated  this, 
put  the  powder  into  common  water,  ho  to  whom 
you  give  this  potion  blabs  out  whatever  he  has 
done,  for  he  becomes  delirious,  and  raves  like  a 
madman  all  that  day  The  king  avails  himself 
of  this  property  when  he  wishes  to  discover  the 
guilt  or  innocence  of  accused  persons.  Who- 
ever incriminates  himself  when  undergoing  the 
ordeal  is  sentenced  to  starve  himself  to  death, 
while  he  who  does  nut  confess  to  any  crime  is 
acquitted.** 

15.  The  Indians  are  not  afflicted  with  head- 
ache, or  toothache,  or  ophtlialmia,  nor  have  they 
mouthsores  or  ulcers  in  any  part  of  thoir  body. 
The  age  to  which  they  live  is  120,  IflO,  and 
160  years,  though  the  very  old  live  to  200.** 

16.  In  their  country  is  a serpent  a span  long, 
in  appearance  like  the  most  beautiful  purple  with 
a head  perfectly  white  but  without  any  teeth.** 
The  creature  is  caught  on  those  very  hot  moun- 
tains whoso  mines  yield  tho  sardine-stone.  It 
does  not  sting,  but  on  whatever  part  of  the  body 
it  casts  its  vomit,  that  place  invariably  putrifies. 

**  Antigonua  Garyat.  Histor.  Mirab.  C.  160 ; Sotion,  C. 
17 ; Strabo,  XVI,  iv,  20.  **  Conf.  Frag,  xv,  G.  - . 

**  Arrian,  Ind.  15,  12,  and  Frag,  jodi,  C. 

**  See  Fng.  zvii. 


19 


If  suspended  by  the  tai],  it  omits  two  kinds  of 
poison,  one  like  amber  which  oozes  from  it 
while  living,  and  the  other  black,  which  oozes 
from  its  carcase.  Should  about  a sesame>seod’s 
bulk  of  the  former  bo  administered  to  any  one, 
ho  dies  the^instant  ho  swallows  it,  for  his  brain 
runs  out  through  his  nostrils.  If  the  black  sort 
bo  given  it  induces  consumption,  but  operates 
so  slowly  that  death  scarcely  ensues  in  less  than 
a year’s  time.** 

17.  Ho  mentions  an  Indian  bird  called 
tho  Dikairon,^^  a name  equivalent  in  Greek  to 
hiKMov  (i.e.  just).  It  is  about  tho  size  of  a 
partridge’s  egg.  It  buries  its  dung  under  tho 
earth  to  prevent  its  being  found.  Should  it  be 
found  notwithstanding,  and  should  a person  at 
morning  tide  swallow  so  much  of  it  as  would 
about  equal  a grain  of  st^samum,  he  falls  into  a 
deep  unconscious  sleep  from  which  ho  never 
awakes,  but  dies  at  tho  going  down  of  the 
Bun.®^ 

18.  In  the  same  country  grows  what  is  called 


®*  Conf.  Frag.  xTii,  also  Strabo,  XV,  i,  37,  where,  qoot- 
inpr  Mesasthcaos,  he  speaks  of  flying  serponta  that  let 
fall  drops  which  raise  putrid  soroa  oa  the  skin. 

••  AtKatpos : Tychson  compares  tho  word  with  iS  ^ 

di,  good,  the  good  principle,  and  J (f  kar,  doing,  a participlo 

of  the  Torb'  Icerden ; tho  whole  then  means  bene* 

factor j and  might  be  snpponed  to  allude  to  the  custom  of 
the  .bird  here  mentioned,  Bokkor  reads  here.  See 

Frag,  xviii. 

For  fuller  particulars  ride  Frag,  iviii. 


20 


tho  Ptireiow,®*  a plant  about  thosize  of  the  olive, 
found  only  in  the  royal  gardens,  producing 
neither  flower  nor  fruit,  but  having  merely  fifteen 
roots,  which  grow  down  into  tho  earth,  and  are 
of  considerable  thickness,  the  very  slenderest 
being  about  as  thick  as  one’s  arm.  ^If  a span’s 
length  of  this  root  be  taken,  it  attracts  to  itself 
all  objects  brought  near  it — gold,  silver,  copper, 
stones  and  all  things  else  except  amber.  If 
however  a cubit’s  length  of  it  bo  taken,  it 
attracts  lambs  and  birds,  and  it  is  in  fact  with 
this  root  that  most  kinds  of  birds  are  caught. 
Should  you  wish  to  turn  water  solid,  oven  a 
whole  gallon  of  it,  yon  have  but  to  throw  into 
tho  water  not  more  than  an  obol’s  weight  of 
this  root,  and  the  thing  is  done.  Its  elfoct  is  tho 
same  upon  wine  which,  when  condensed  by  it, 
can  bo  held  in  your  hand  like  a piece  of  wax, 
though  it  melts  tho  iiext  day.  It  is  found  bene- 
ficial in  the  cure  of  bowel  disorders. 

ID.  Tlirough  India  there  flows  a certain  river, 
not  of  any  great  size,  but  only  about  two  stadia 
in  breadth,  called  in  tho  Indian  tonguo  Ily- 
p a r k h o s,*®  which  means  in  Greek  efitpav  irdvra 


®*  ndprj^ov  (in  .Apollonius  frapv^os,)  raay  bo  compared 
■with  tlie  Poraian  J ^ hCi,r,  weight,  burtben,  andJjT  dvey\ 
beariii^^,  clrawin<?.  Tlii«  ooinparison  liowovor  is  rather 
duFoctivc. — Tychseii.  Soo  Frag.  x:x. 

»»  Ynapx^^  • TycUsen  adduces  the  Persian  duer,  bring- 

^ • 

ing,  carrying,  and  kho^hj  good  : cons^equently  dver* 

khosli,  bringing  good,  which  exactly  corresponds  with  the 


21 


raayada  (i-e.  the  bearer  of  all  things  good). 
This  river  for  thirty  days  in  every  year  floats 
down  amber,  for  in  the  upper  part  of  its  course 
where  it  flows  among  the  mountains  there  are 
s^id  to  bo  trees  overhanging  its  current  which 
for  thirty  ^ays  at  a particular  season  in  every 
year  continue  dropping  tears  like  tlic  almond-tree 
and  the  pine-tree  and  other  trees.  These  tears  on 
dropping  into  the  water  harden  into  gum.  The 
Indian  name  for  the  tree  is  siptakhora,®®  which 
means  when  rendered  into  Greek  yXvKv,  fjSv  {i.e. 
sweet).  These  trees  then  supply  tlie  Indians 
with  their  amber.®’'  And  not  on  ly  so  but  they  arc 
said  to  yield  also  berries,  which  grow  in  clusters 
like  the  grapes  of  the  vino,  and  have  stones  as 
large  as  the  filbert- nuts  of  Pontos,®* 

20.  lie  writes  that  on  the  inountiiins  just 
spoken  of  there  live  men  having  heads  like 


signification  pointed  out  by  Ktesias.  Wo  might  also  com- 
pare herlihoshy  good,  so  that  the  initial  letter  in 

V7tap)(os  would  bo  merely  euphonic,  but  then  tlio  participle 
would  not  bo  expresstnl.  The  river  is  called  by 
Pliny  the  J lyptibarus,  vide  Frag,  xx.  , ^ 

StTTTaxo/^tt  : Compare  this  with  the  Persian 
shijtelihhor,  ‘ agreeable  to  eat/  The  Persians  call  an 
apricot  shifloh-reng,  ‘ agreeable  colour/ 

Pliny  {Uist,  N<iL  xxxvii.  2)  has  ‘arhores  eas  Aphytacoraa 
vocare/  wliore  tlie  word  is  disfigured. — Tychson, 

India  however  docs  not  produce  amber,  aud  the  tree  of 
which  it  is  hero  said  to  be  the  gum,  cannot  bo  satisfactorily 
identified.  13a<ilir  quotes  IMiny  XII,  .ix,  19,  jls  a passage  of 
no  small  importance  for  settling  the  question. 

• Pliny  (Hist  Nat  XV,  xxii,  24),  explains  why  I'otific 
nuts  were  so  called. 


22 


those  of  dogs,  who  wear  the  skins  of  wild 
beasts,  and  do  not  uso  articulate  speech,  but 
bark  like  dogs,  and  thus  converse  so  as  to  be 
understood  by  each  other.®®  They  have  larger 
teeth  than  dogs,  and  claws  like  those  of  dogs, 
only  larger  and  more  rounded.  They  inhabit 
the  monntains,  and  extend  as  far  as  the  river 
Indus.  They  are  swarthy,  and  like  all  the  other 
Indians  extremely  just  men.  With  the  Indians 
they  can  hold  intercourse,  for  they  understand 
wliat  they  say,  though  they  cannot,  it  is  true, 
reply  to  them  in  words,  still  by  barking  and 
by  making  signs  with  their  liands  and  their 
lingers  like  the  deaf  and  the  dumb,  they  can 
make  themselves  understood.  They  are  called 
by  the  Indians  Kahjstrloiy  which  means  in 
Greek  Ku»>oK€</)aXot°*  (*’.  c.,  dog-headed).  Their 
food  is  raw  llcsh.  The  whole  tribe  numbers 
not  less  than  120,000  men. 

21.  Near  the  sources  of  this  river®*  there 
grows  a certaiu  purple  flower,  which  is  used  for 
dying  purple,  and  is  not  inferior  to  tho  Greek 
sort,  but  even  imparts  a far  more  florid  hue. 

See  Frsii^a.  xxi  and  xx 

**  TychscQ  compares  tlio  word  with  the  Tersian 

Itelelc  or  a woJf,  and-^  ser^  the  head,  i,e.  kclu 

hser^  ‘ wolf -1  loaded.’  Another  word  mnn^  exactly  answering 
the  sound  of  tho  Creek  would  bo  Kolusterin^  tho  super- 
lativo  of  kahiSy  stupid,  which  would  convert  the  doghead- 
od  people  into  ‘ blockheads,’  but  this  is  not  consonant  with 
the  transln  tion  of  the  name.  -Ueeren,  Asiat,  NaU  vol.  II, 
p.  a64.  Vide  Frags,  xxi,  xxii,  xxxi.*  • 

The  Hyparkhos. 


23 


In  the  same  parts  there  is  a wild  insect  about 
the  size  of  a beetle,  red  like  cinnabar,  with  legs 
excessively  long.  It  is  as  soft  as  the  worm  called 
sJcdlex  and  is  found  on  the  trees  which  produce 
amber,  eating  the  fruits  of  those  trees  and 
destroying  j/hem,  as  in  Graeco  the  wood-louse 
ravages  the  vino-trees.  The  Indians  grind 
these  insects  to  a powder  and  therewith  dye  such 
robes,  tunics,  and  other  vestments  as  tlioy  want 
to  bo  of  a purple  hue.®®  Their  dye-stuffs  aro 
superior  to  thoso  used  by  the  Persians. 

22.  The  Kynokephaloi  living  on  the 
mountains  do  not  practise  any  of  the  arts  but 
subsist  by  the  produce  of  the  chase.  They 
slaughter  the  prey,  and  roast  the  flesh  in  tho 
sun.  They  rear  however  great  numbers  of  sheep 
and  goats  and  asses.  They  drink  the  milk  of  the 
sheep  and  tho  whey  which  is  made  therefrom. 
They  eat  moreover  tho  fruit  of  the  Sq/tahhora — 
the  tree  which  produces  amber,  for  it  is  sweet. 
They  also  dry  this  fruit,  and  pack  it  in  hampers 
as  the  Greeks  do  raisins.  Tho  same  people 
construct  rafts,  and  freight  them  with  the* 
hampers  as  well  as  with  tho  flowers  of  the  purplo 
plant,  after  cleansing  it,  and  with  260  talents 
weight  of  amber,  and  a like  weight  of  the 
pigment  which  dyes  purple,  and  1000  talents 
more  of  amber.  All  this  cargo,  which  is  the 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  tho  cochineal  insect  is  that 
to  which  Ktf'sias  refers,  though  his  description  of  it  is  not 
quite  accurate.  For  f idler  particulars  vide  Frag,  xziii. 


24 


season’s  produce,  they  convoy  annually  as  tribute 
to  the  King  of  the  Indians.  They  take  also  addi- 
tional quantities  of  the  same  commodities  for  sale 
to  the  Indians,  from  whom  they  receive  in  ex- 
change loaves  of  broad  and’flonrand  cloth  which 
is  made  fi\)m  a troe-gro  wn  stuff  (cotton) . **  They 
sell  also  swords  such  as  they  use  in  hunting  wild 
beasts,  and  bows  and  javelins,  for  they  are  fell 
marksmen  both  in  shooting  with  the  bow  and 
in  hurling  the  javelin.  As  they  inhabit  steep 
and  pathless  mountains  they  cannot  possibly 
bo  conquered  in  war,  and  the  king  moredver 
once  every  live  ycur-s  scuds  them  as  presents 
JlOOjOOO  arrows  and  as  many  javelins,  120,000 
shields  and  50,000  swords. 

2!}.  These  Kynokephaloi  have  no 
houses  but  live  in  caves.  They  hunt  wild  beasts 
with  the  bow  and  the  spear,  aiidi’un  so  fast  that 
they  can  overtake  them  in  tho  chase.  Their 
women  bathe  once  a month  at  the  time  of  men- 
struation, and  then  only.  The  men  do  not  bathe 
at  all,  but  merely  wash  their  hands.  Thrice  a 
month,  however,  they  anoint  themselves  with  an 
oil  made  from  milk,'®  and  wipe  tliemsclves  with 
skins.  Skins  denuded  of  the  hair,  and  made 
thin  and  soft,  constitute  the  dress  both  of 
tho  men  and  their  wives.  Their  richest  men 

Seo  Larchcr’s  Noto  on  TTerodot.  Ill,  47 ; Plin,  Nat, 
NisL  XTX,  1 ; and  Prag.  xxiv. 

Butter;  conf.  Polysnn.  Straieg.  IV,  3,  32;  cf . also 
PeripU  § 41,  where  the  same  exprossion 

occurs. 


25 


however  use  cotton  raiment,**  but  the  number  of 
such  men  is  small.  They  have  no  bed  but  sleep  on 
alitter  of  straw  or  leaves.  That  man  is  considered 
the  richest  who  possesses  most  sheep,  and  in 
property  of  this  sorb  consists  all  their  wealth. 
Both  men  |ind  women  have,  like  dogs,  tails 
above  their  buttocks  but  larger  and  more 
hairy.  They  copulate  like  Quadrupeds  in  dog- 
fashion,  and  to  copulate  otherwise  is  thought 
shameful.  They  are  just,  and  of  all  men  are  the 
longest-lived,  attaining  the  age  of  170,  and  some 
even  of  200  years. 

24.  Beyond  these  again  are  other  men  who 
inhabit  the  country  above  tho  sources  of  the 
river,  who  are  swarthy  like  tho  other  Indians, 
do  no  work,  and  neither  eat  grain  nor  drink 
water,  but  rear  a good  many  cows  and  goats 
and  sheep,  and  drink  their  milk  as  their  sole 
snstenanco.  Children  are  born  among  them 
with  tho  anus  closed  up,  and  the  contents  of  the 
bowels  are  therefore  voided,  it  is  said,  as  urine, 
this  being  something  like  curds,  though  not 
at  all  thick  but  feculent.  When  they  drink  milk 
in  the  morning  and  take  another  draught  at 
noon,  and  then  immediately  after  cat  a certain 
sweet-tasted  root  of  indigenous  growth  which  is 
said  to  prevent  milk  from  coagulating  in  the 

*•  Gnrtias,  VUI,  9,  21. 

***  Conf.  Fraj;.  i,  section  appended  to  § 33.  Malte-Bran 
considered  tbat  this  statement  had  reference  to  the  Onraog- 
Ontang  of  the  Island  of  Borneo,  or  perhaps  of  the  And^ 
man  islands. 


26 


■tomach,  tbis  root  towards  evening  acts  as  an 
emetic,  and  they  vomit  up  everything  quite 
readily. 

25.  Among  the  Indians,  he  proceeds,  there 
are  wild  asses  as  large  as  horses,  some  being 
even  larger.*^  Their  head  is  of  ^ dark  red 
colour,  their  eyes  blue,  and  the  rest  of  their 
body  white.  They  have  a horn  on  their  fore- 
head, a cubit  in  length  [the  filings  of  this  horn, 
if  given  in  a potion,  are  an  antidote  to  poison- 
ous drugs].  This  horn  for  about  two  palm- 
breadths  upwards  from  the  base  is  of  the  purest 
white,  where  it  tapers  to  a sharp  point  of  a 
flaming  crimson,  and,  in  the  middle,  is  black.** 
These  horns  are  made  into  drinking  cups,  and 
such  as  drink  from  them  are  attacked  neither 
by  convulsions  nor  by  the  sacred  disease 
(epilepsy).  Nay,  they  are  not  even  afTected  by 
poisons,  if  either  before  or  after  swallowing 
them  they  drink  from  these  cups  wine,  water,  or 
anything  else.  While  other  asses  moreover, 
whether  wild  or  tame,  and  indeed  all  other 
solid-hoofed  animals  have  neither  huckle-bones,** 
nor  gall  in  the  liver,  these  one-homed  asses** 
have  bothi  Their  huckle-bone  is  the  most 
beautiful  of  allT  have  ever  seen,  and  is,  in  ap- 

” See  Frag.  xxv. 

’*  Conf.  Brace’s  account  (Travels,  vol.  V,  p.  93)  who 
dcseribes  its  surface  as  of  a reddish-brown. 

'AtrrpaydXovs,  oonf.  Aristot.  Hist.  An.  II,  2,  9. 

Tychsen  tbinks  the  rhinoceros  is  here  meant,  bnt  the 
eoloar  and  other  details  do  not  quite  agree  with  that 
animal.  Heeren,  As.  Hat.  rol,  II,  pp.  861  ff. 


27 


pearance  and  size,  like  that  of  the  ox.  It  is  as 
heavy  as  lead,  and  of  the  colour  of  cinnabar^* 
both  on  the  surface,  and  all  throughout;  It  is 
exceedingly  fleet  and  strong,  and  no  creatare  that 
pursues  it,  not  even  the  horse,  can  overtake  it. 

26.  Oi^flrst  starting  it  scampers  oiT  some- 
what leisurely,  but  the  longer  it  runs,  it  gallops 
faster  and  faster  till  tho  pace  becomes  most 
furious.**  These  animals  therefore  can  only  be 
caught  at  one  particular  time — that  is  when 
they  lead  out  their  little  foals  to  the  pastures 
in  which  they  roam.  They  are  then  hemmed 
in  on  all  sides  by  a vast  number  of  hunters 
mounted  on  horseback,  and  being  unwilling 
to  escape  while  leaving  their  young  to  perish, 
stand  their  ground  and  fight,  and  by  butting 
with  their  horns  and  kicking  and  biting  kill 
many  horses  and  men.  But  they  are  in  tho 
end  taken,  pierced  to  death  with  arrows  and 
spears,  for  to  take  them  alive  is  in  no  way 
possible.  Their  flesh  being  bitter**  is  unfit  for 
food,  and  they  are  hunted  merely  for  the  sake 
of  their  horns  and  their  huckle-bones.** 

27.  He  states  that  there  is  bred  in  the 


*•  Thnt,  is,  vermilion. 

**  This  is  what  Brnce  relates  of  the  rhinoceros. — Travelt, 
Tol.  y,  pp.  97  and  105. 

Bruce  says  it  has  a disavree;ible  mnsky  flavonr. 

**  Of.  Fra;;,  xxv,  and  the  account  .of  tho  unicorn 
in  Kosmas  IndikopL  ; conf.  also  Aristotle,  do  Part.  An. 
Ill,  2,  and  Hist.  Amm.  IT,  1;  and  also  Pliilostrat. 
Vit.  Apoll.  Ill,  2 and  3.  ABIIan’s  account  in  the  shove 
Fn^r.  of  tho  wild  ass  may  be  compared  with  his  account 
of  the  ITartasilit, — Ind.  Ant.,.vcl.  VI,  p.  128. 


28 


Indian  river  a worm’®  like  iti  appearance  to  that 
which  is  found  in  the  6g,  but  seven  cubits  more 
or  less  in  leiig’th,  while  its  thickness  is  such 
that  a boy  ten  years  old  could  hardly  clasp  it 
within  the  circuit  of  his  arms.  These  worms 
have  two  teeth — an  upper  and  a lower,  with 
which  they  seize  and  devour  their  prey.  In 
the  daytime  they  remain  in  the  mud  at  the 
bottom  of  the  river,  but  at  nif^lit  they  come 
ashore,  and  should  they  fall  in  with  any  prey 
as  a cow  or  a camel,  they  seize  it  with  their 
teeth,  and  havinss*  drag’gcd  it  to  the  river,  there 
devour  it.  K or  catching  this  womi  a largo  hook  is 
employed,  to  which  a kid  or  a lamb  is  fastened 
by  chains  of  iron.  The  worm  being  landed,  the 
captors  hang  up  its  carcase,  and  plaoing  vessels 
underneath  it  leave  it  thus  for  thirty  days.  All 
this  time  oil  drops  from  it,  as  much  being  got 
as  would  fill  ton  Attic  kolijlai.  At  tho  end  of 
the  thirty  days  they  throw  fiway  tho  worm,  and 
preserving  the  oil  they  take  it  to  tho  king  of 
the  Indians,  and  to  him  alone,  for  no  subject  is 
allowed  to  get  a drop  of  it.  This  oil  [like  fire] 
sets  everything  ablaze  over  which  it  is  poured 
and  it  consumes  not  alone  wood  but  even  animals. 
The  flames  can  bo  quenched  only  by  thi'owing 
over  them  a great  quantity  of  clay,  and  that  of  a 
thick  consistency.®^ 

See  § 1,  and  Vra*?.  xxri.  Cf.  Vrfifx.  xwi,  %vhero 

j^ivcB  fuller  iiariioiilam.  A Romewlint  niniilar  froa- 
ture  is  inontioTied  by  Palladius  (de  Rnir/twow-  10)  as 
belong^nif  to  the  Ganges,  lie  calls  it  the  Odo^itotyrranos. 


29 

28.  But  again  there  ar^uwrtain  trees  in 
India  aa  tall  as  the  cedar’  or  the  cyprees,  having 
leaves  like  thoHC  of  the  date  palm,  only  some- 
vrhat  broader,  but  having  no  alioota  sprouting 
from  the  stems.  They  produce  a ilovrer  like  the 
male  laui'ei,Jbut  no  fruit.  In  the  Jndiun  language 
they  oi'o  called  karpion^  but  in  Greek  fivpop^ta 
(unguent-roses*^).  These  trees  ore  scarce. 

Badir  thinks  tliiu  may  be  tho  Clictak  (Pa?i<Zcinu 
odoratimtta)t  or  Kyura.  Bei^ardixig  the  word  Aar- 

pion  Dvm  Caldwell  in  the  Introduction  to  bis  Dravtdian 
Qramniar  thus  writes : Tbe  earliest  Dravidiau  wovd  in 
Greek  of  which  we  know  tho  date  is  rapircov,  Ktcsxas'a  namo 
fnr  ciiiuaiiion.  . llerCidf.tiiB  descriliOB  GJiinatnon  as  the 
Kdp(b€a,  whioli  w^o,  after  the  PliconiciaiJSr  call  Kiyya/m/AOV. 
Liddell  and  8r.nft2tay  **tliiH  word  beara  a curious  likcMioss 
to  its  Arabic  name  7;sr/nt , kity'cfJi This  rosemblaiico  must, 
I tliiuka  bo  ficcidoriial.  scoiiig  that  Herodotus  consiilercd 
* rinnainoii*  alone  as  a fundi^n  word,  'fho  word  iiieiitioned 
by  Ktf-siu.s  Hcoms  however  to  have  u real  reseriibbuire  to  the 
Arabic  word  and  also  to  a Dravidmn  one.  Kterias  di'scribes 
an  odorous  oil  ^iniducGd  from  an  Indiau  treo  liuving  flowers 
like  the  laurel,  which  tbe  Grc(*ks  called  fivpopaSaj  but 
which  in  India  was  called  Kapiriov.  From  KlMiui*s  de- 
Boription(mukin.Gr  nllowsuieo  for  its  exaggerations)  it  U evident 
that  cinimni(m  oil  was  meant,  and  in  this  opinion  Wahl  agrees. 
Uraiiiufl,  a writer,  quoted  by  Stephen  of  ilyzantiniii}  mentions 
Kepnadav  as  ono  of  the  pn^inctiuns  of  tbe  Abaseni,  the 
Arabian  Abyasiaians,  by  which  we  are  donlitloss  to  under* 
stand,  not  so  ninch  t'ln  pmdiicts  of  their  c^mutry  us  the 
articlcMi  in  which  they  traded.  From  the  connexion  in 
which  it  is  found  KtpTra^ov  wcmld  appear  to  bo  einnanion, 
and  we  can  scarcity  err  in  identifying  it  with  or 

more  pmperl^  iirfah,  one  of  tho  imines  xvhich  cinuiimon 
has  received  iu  Arabia.  Rome  Arabian  scholars  derive 
hirfah  from  Iterfijra  ' deoortax’it,*  but  Hr.  irassoun  does 
not  admit  this  dcrivatioxs  and  considers  kirfah  a foreign 
word.  We  are  thus  brongbt  back  to  Kt-Mos’s  tcapmov,  or  tlio 
Indian  word  which  Kapinop  represented.  As  this  is  a word 
of  which  wo  know  the  antiquity,  the  snppositiou  that  tho 
Greeks  or  the  Indians  borrowed  it  from  the  AtoIm  is  qnite 
inadmiasible.  W^fc  then  is  tbe  Indian  word  Ktesias  referred 
to  ? Not,  as  has  been  supposed,  kurundhu,  the  Singhalese 


30 


There  oozes  from  them  an  oil  in  drops,  which  are 
wiped  off  from  the  stem  with  wool,  from  which 
they  are  afterwards  wrung  out  and  received  into 
alabaster  boxes  of  stone.  The  oil  is  in  colour  of 
a &int  red,  and  of  a somewhat  thick  consistency. 
Its  smell  is  the  sweetest  in  all  the  v||Orld,  and  is 
said  to  diffuse  itself  to  a distance  of  five  stadia 
around.  The  privilege  of  possessing  this  per- 
fume belongs  only  to  the  king  and  the  members 
of  the  royal  family.  A present  of  it  was  sent 
by  the  king  of  the  Indians  to  the  king  of  the  Per- 
sians, and  Ktesias  alleges  that  he  saw  it  himself, 
and  that  it  was  of  such  an  exquisite  fragranco 
as  he  could  not  describe,  and  he  know  nothing 
whercunto  he  could  liken  it. 

29.  Ho  states  that  the  cheese  and  the 
wines  of  the  Indians  are  the  sweetest  in  the 


world,  adding  that  he  knew  this  from  his  own 


experience,  since  he  had  tasted  both. 


name  for  cinnamon  derived  from  the  Sanskrit  htrunta, 
but  the  Tamil- Malayillam  word  fcar i/yjpn  or  1:6r2>pii,  e.  g. 
]carappa-{t)tailamf  Mai.  oil  of  cinnamon.  Giber  forms  of 
this  word  are  iarapp^i,  ianiva  and  the  last  of 

which  is  tho  most  common  form  in  modern  Tamil.  Kheedo 
refers  to  this  form  of  the  word  when  ho  says  that  “in  his 
time  in  Malabar  oils  in  high  medical  estimation  were  made 
from  both  the  root  and  the  leaves  of  the  Icarim  or  wild 
cinnamon  of  that  country.”  There  are  two  meanings  of 
Icaru  in  Tamil- MalayMam,  ‘black,’  and  ‘pungent’,  and  the 
latter  doubtless  supplies  ns  with  tho  explanation  of  karuppu 

‘cinnamon’ I have  little  doubt  that  the  Sanskrit 

karpfirOf  ‘camphor,’  is  substantially  the  same  as  the  Tamil- 
MalayAlam  karuppu,  and  KWsias’s  Kapniov,  soeing  that  it 
does  not  seem  to  have  any  root  in  Sanskrit  and  that 
camphor  and  cinnamon  aroi  nearly  related.  The  camphor 
of  commerce  is  from  a cinnamon  tree,  the  camphora 
eJHeinarum. 


31 


30.  There  is  a fountain**  among  the  Indians 
of  a square  shape  and  of  about  fire  ells  in 
circumference.  The  water  lodges  in  a rock. 
The  depth  downward  till  you  reach  the  water  is 
three  cubits  and  the  depth  of  the  water  itself 
three  orgui^.  Heroin  the  Indians  of  highest 
distinction  bathe  [both  for  purification  and  the 
averting  of  diseases]  along  with  their  wives  and 
children  ; they  throw  themselves  into  the  well 
foot  foremost,  and  when  they  leap  in  the  water 
casts  them  up  again,  and  not  only  does  it  throw 
up  human  beings  to  the  surface,  but  it  casts 
out  upon  dry  land  any  kind  of  animal,  whether 
living  or  dead,  and  in  fact  anything  else  that 
is  cast  into  it  except  iron  and  silver  and  gold 
and  copper,  which  all  sink  to  the  bottom.  The 
water  is  intensely  cold  and  sweet  to  drink.  It 
makes  a loud  bubbling  noise  like  water  boiling 
in  a caldron.  Its  waters  are  a cure  for 
leprosy,  and  scab.**  In  the  Indian  tongue  it 
is  called  Jiallad^*  and  in  Greek  &<j>€\ifu]  (i.  e. 
useful). 

31.  On  those  Indian  mountains  where  the 
Indian  reed  grows,  there  is  a race  of  men  whose 
number  is  not  less  than  30,000,  and  whose  wives 
bear  offspring  only  once  in  their  whole  life* 
time.  Their  children  have  teeth  of  perfect 


Conf.  frag,  xxxvii. 

Conf.  Frag,  xxvii. 

**  Baloda  in  Sank,  means  * gi^rag  strength’ ; and  is  ap- 
lied  to  a bnllock,  and  a medical  plant : baladA  ia  Uia 
^hyiaUt  — En. 


32 


whiteness,  both  the  upper  set  and  the  under, 
and  the  hair  both  of  their  head  and  of  their 
eyebrows  is  from  their  very  infancy  quite  hoary, 
and  this  whether  they  be  boys  or  girls.  Indeed 
every  man  among  them  till  he  reaches  his 
thirtieth  year  has  all  the  hair  on  hisjjody  white, 
but  from  that  time  forward  it  begins  to  turn 
black,  and  by  the  time  they  are  sixty,  there  is 
not  a hair  to  be  seen  upon  them  but  what  is 
black.  These  people,  both  men  and  women  alike, 
have  eight  fingers  on  each  hand,  and  eight  toes 
on  each  foot.  They  are  a very  warlike  people, 
and  five  thousand  of  them  armed  with  bows 
and  spears  follow  the  banners  of  the  King  of 
the  Indians.  Their  cars,  ho  says,  are  so  large 
that  they  cover  their  arms  as  far  as  tlie  elbows 
while  at  the  same  time  they  cover  all  the  back 
and  the  one  ear  touches  the  other.®* 

32.  There  is  in  Ihhiopia  an  animal  called 
properly  the  Krohotins^  but  vulgaidy  the  Kyno* 
lylcos.  It  is  of  prodigious  strength,  and  is  said 
to  imitate  the  human  voice,  and  by  night  to 
call  out  men  by  their  names,  and  when  they 
come  forth  at  their  call,  to  fall  vpnn  them  and 
devour  them.  This  animal  has  the  courage  of 
the  lion,  the  speed  of  the  horse,  and  the  strength 
of  the  bull,  and  cannot  be  encountered  success- 

For  an  account  of  the  various  fabulous  Indis.n  races 
mentioned  by  the  classical  writers,  and  for  their  identifi- 
cation with  tne  races  menfioned  in  Sanskrit  writings,  see 
Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  YI,  pp.  133-135,  and  footnotes. 


33 


fully  with  weapons  of  steel.®®  In  Kuboea  about 
Khalkis  the  sheep  have  no  gall,*^'  and  their  flesh 
is  so  extremely  bitter  that  dogs  oven  will  not 
eat  it.  They  say  also  that  in  the  parts  beyond 
the  Maurusian  Straits®®  rain  falls  in  tho  sum- 
mer-time, while  the  same  regions  arc  in  winter- 
time scorched  with  heat.  In  tho  country  of  tho 
Kyoiiians®®  there  is,  according  to  his  account,  a 
certain  fountain,  which  instead  of  water  has 
springs  of  oil — this  oil  being  used  by  the  people 
in  tlio  neighbourhood  lor  all  kinds  of  food.  In 
the  region  also  calloil  JMctadrida  there  is 
anotlier  fountain,  lliis  being  at  no  great  distance 
from  tho  sea.  At  midnight  it  s\vclls  with  tho 
utmost  violence,  and  in  receding  casts  forth  15sh 
upon  dry  laud  in  such  fpiaulities  that  the  peoplo 
of  the  place  cannot  gather  them,  and  are  obliged 
to  leave  them  lying  rotting  ou  the  grouud.*^*^ 

33.  Ivtesias  thus  writing  and  romancing 
professes  that  his  narrative  is  all  perfect  truth, 

Ifo^rjtV'liuLr ilit'  ■ it  uriix.-i  j.:i,  vido  J^indor. 

in,  :m.;  ///w.  a -/,  vn,  I’lii'y-  f/.  jV.  vtrr, 

iU  ; em  phyr.  Ahsiut.  Ifl,  p.  ±2-;.  ITcsyc.-h,  s.  h. 

VO**. ; nnu*<»V  Tivrels,  vul.  V , p.  ll.», 

<\.nr.  Tlicopbr.  JI.  ri-nt.  IX,  IS,  and  Arist.  Hist. 
/111.  1, 27- 

Muvpovcrloyv  TTiA'-oy — iridcr.^inrul  r.f  tbo  rillars  of 
Jlfiviilorf.  Wc  liavo  Mmirusuis  in  PHay,  ILisL  Xat.  V,  3; 
Str;d)0,  (ii'nn.  XVII,  iii,  3. 

ro}v  Krwricc?'  apponrs  to  bo  eormpt.  Wo 
iniiJfUt  su.'jrj;o;it  Ci!"*  in  Mysia,.  Tlio  sanies  lliin/r  is  tuld  of 
tlic*  fimiiiiiiii  tV  ^iKavav  x®/H*  tbo  city  KuTicrr/mrov 
thus  coiimioidy  for  MurtWpaToi/  (Autlgon,  Mirdb.  154). 
Ccnif.  also  Aristot.  Mir.  ansr.  c-  13Ii. 

I'his  section  is  found  only  in  the  IMS.  of  Milniali  and 
perhaps  «loes  not  belong  to  Ktosias. 

5 


84 


and,  to  assure  ns  of  ihis,  asseverates  that  he 
has  recorded  nothing  but  what  he  either  saw 
with  his  own  eyes,  or  learned  from  the  testi- 
mony of  credible  eye-witnesses.  He  adds  more- 
over that  ho  has  left  unnoticed  many  things  far 
more  maiwellons  than  any  ho  has  related,  lest  any 
onewho  had  not  a previous  knowledge  of  the  facts 
might  look  upon  him  as  an  ai*rant  story-teller. 

The®^  S6rcs®®  and  the  natives  of  Uj^per 
India  are  said  to  be  men  of  huge  stature,  so 
that  among  them  ai*e  found  some  who  sue  18 
cubits  in  height  and  wlio  also  live  till  they  are 
above  200  years  old.  There  are  besides  somc- 
Avlicrc  in  the  river  csillcd  the  Gaites®®  men  of  a 
bruto-like  appearance  who  have  a hide  like  that 
of  a rhinoceros  being  quite  iiupei'vicjnstojhirls,®* 
while  in  India  itself  in  the  central  parts  of  an 
island  of  the  oecaii  the  iuhahitauts  are  said  to 
have  tails  of  (?xtraonlinary  length  such  as 
satyrs  are  representeil  with  in  pictures.®* 

Fuao.  II. 

From  Arrian,  Andb.  Book  V.  4, 2. 

And  Ktesias  (if  any  one  considers  him  a 
competent  authority)  asserts  that  the  distance 
fKun  the  one  bank  of  the  Indus  to  the  other 
where  the  stream  is  narrowest  is  40  stadia,  and 

This  fragfment  in  theMiminliMS.  forma  a part  of  the 
15th  Section  of  the  text  of  Photios. 

•*  Cf.  Lucian  Macroh.  e.  5. 

Var.  loot. — Oaitroa. 

•*  Cf.  Ptolemy,  Qeog.  VII,  iii,  where  the  eame  worda 
are  naod. 

**  Cf.  aame  chapter  of  aamo  Book  p.  178. 


35 


where  it  is  widest,  so  much  even  as  100  stadia, 
though  its  breadth  in  general  is  the  mean  be- 
tween these  two  extremes. 

Frag.  111. 

Strabo,  Geog,  Book  XV. 

From  thjs  wo  can  see  how  greatly  the 
opinions  of  the  others  differ,  Ktesias  asserting 
that  India  is  not  les.s  tlian  all  the  rest  of  Asia, 
and  Onesikntos  tliat,  &c. 

From  tho  Jniika  of  Arrian,  30. 

Ktesias  tho  Knidian  states  that  India  is 
equal  to  the  rest  of  Asia,  bat  he  is  wrong. 

Frag.  IV. 

iElian,  De  Nat.  Anint.  Book  XVII,  29. 

When  Uio  King  of  the  Indians  goes  on  a 
campaign,  one  hundred  thousand  war-olophants 
go  on  before  him,  while  three  thousand  moiv, 
that  are  of  superior  size  and  strcugtli,  march, 
I am  tohl,  hchinrl  him,  these  being  trained  to 
demolish  tho  walls  of  the  enemy.  Tliis  they 
effect  by  rushing  against  them  at  the  King’s 
signal,  and  throwing  them  down  by  tho  over- 
Avhelming  force  witli  wliieli  they  press  their 
breasts  again.st  them.  Kte.sias  reports  this 
from  hearsay,  but  adds  that  with  his  own  eyes 
ho  had  seen  elephants  tear  up  palm  troes,  roots 
andall,  Avith  like  furious  violence  ; and  this  they 
do  whenever  they  are  instigated  to  the  act 
by  their  dn'vers.®* 

**  Conf.  Piodor.  II.,  17  ; Strabo,  XV,  I,  41  ff. ; Ourtias, 
VIII,  9, 17 ; Eoamos  Indikoplcustea,  XI,  p.  339. 


36 


Peag.  V. 

(A)  Aristotle,  Ve  Gener,  Anim,  IT,  2. 

AVhat  Kt^sias  has  said  regarding  the  seed  of 
the  elephant  is  plainly  false,  for  he  asserts  that 
when  dry  it  turns  hai’d  so  as  to  become  like 
amber;  and  this  it  does  not.®^ 

(B)  From  tho  towarJ.-i  iho  end  of  tlic  3v(l  Book 

of  hirf  llifilonj  of  An! inula. 

What  Ktcsins  lias  wriftcji  the  seed 

of  the  eleidiant  is  false. 

(C)  /Kliaii.  Dfl  A/i/ma;.  XVI,  2. 

Cocks  [ill  India]  are  of  immense  size,  and 
their  crests  are  net  red  like  tiis  eix'sts  of  onr 
own  cocks,  but  miiny-hued,  like  a thnnl  garland ; 
their  riitrip  fcatlici’s  are  neither  curved  nor 
wreathed,  hnt  broad,  and  tiicse  they  (mil  after 
them  in  tho  way  tlie  peacock  drags  his  tail  wlien 
he  does  not  make  it  stuiul  erect.  'The  feathers 
of  the  Indian  cocks  aio  partly  golden,  and 
partly  of  a gloaming  azure  like  the  smaragdus 
stone.®® 

Pl?AG.  VI. 

(A)  iEHiin,  Tte  Am’iiuil.  Nut.  XVI,  31. 

Ktosias  in  his  account  of  India  says  that  the 
people  called  the  Kynamolgoi  rear  many 
dogs  as  big  as  the  Hyrkanian  breed,  and  this 
Knidian  Avriter  tells  ns  also  why  they  keep  so 
many  dogs,  and  this  is  the  reason  : Pnnn  tlio 
time  of  the  stimmer  solstic;e  on  to  mid-winter 

KtcfliaH,  however,  probably  referred  to  the  matter 
which  iRsned  from  the  orifieo  in  the  temples. 

A kind  of  phcayimt  iw  meant — tho  Impetjanum  Lophop, 


37 


they  are  incessantly  attacked  by  herds  of  wild 
oxen,  coiniiiif  like  a svvaria  of  bees  or  a flijjht 
of  angry  wasps,  only  that  the  oxen  art?  more 
luiiuerous  by  far.  Tlioy  ai’o  ferocious  witlial 
and  j^roiull}’^  dcliant,  and  Ijnlfc  most  viciously 
with  1 heir  l^orns.  The  I\  y na  in  o 1 goi,  unable 
to  wil [island  them  otlunwiso,  let  loose?  their 
dogs  upon  them,  which  are  bicd  for  tliis  exjness 
purpose,  and  Uiese  dogs  easily  ovcr]!0\vej-  the 
o\ou  and  W(?riy  llit'in  to  tkatli.  I'Iicjl  come 
the  nuistms,  and  aj^propriate  to  tlieirowunse 
such  ])ai*(s  of  (lu»  carcases  as  they  (h‘eni  lit  for 
food,  but  they  std.  aparl  tor  Ihcn'r  dogs  all  llio 
rest,  and  gralitiido  [n'onipis  them  to  give  this 
share  chem'l'iilly.  Daring  the  season  wlum 
they  are  hd't  nnnu)Us!t‘d  by  fhe  oxen,  tluy 
coii2)loy  their  ilogs  in  Jinnling*  olher  animals. 
Tliey  milk  the  bitches,  and  Ihis  is  why  Huy 
arc  called  Jvynauiolgoi  (dog-milkers).  They 
drink  (liis  milk  just  as  wo  drink  that  of  the 
sheep  or  the  goat.  ^ 

(B)  Polydoukcs  (Pollux),  Onomfu-Hc,  V,  5,  41,  ]>.  497. 

The  Kyiiamolgoi  are  dogs  living  about 
the  lakes  in  the  sonlli  of  India  ami  subsist ine: 
niTOii  t’ows’  milk.  Tlmy  are  attneked  in  tlie 
hf)t  poa.sou  by  tlie  o.koii  of  [ndia,  bat  lliey  fij^Iit 
tlioso  assailants  and  overcome  ilioui,  as  Ktesias 
relates.”® 

Conf.  Diod.  Ill,  ill ; McjjaRtheaos  in  Strabo,  XV, 
37 Plin.  Hist,  Ishtt,  VII,  2;  Cnrtiu5i,  IX,  i.  31. 


38 


(B)  Mian,  t)e  Ammal.  Nat.  IV,  32. 

It  is  worth  while  learning  what  like  are  the 
cattle  of  the  Indians.  Their  goats  and  their 
sheep  are,  fi’om  what  I hear,  bigger  than  the 
biggest  asses,  and  they  pi*oducc  four  young  ones 
at  a time,  and  never  fewer  than  three.  Tlie  tails 
of  the  sheep  reach  down  to  tlieir  fe^t,  and  the 
tails  of  the  goals  are  so  long  Unit  they  almost 
touch  the  ground.  'I'hc  sliepherds  cut  off  the 
tails  of  those  ewes  that  are  good  for  breeding 
to  let  tlicm  bo  mounted  by  the  lurns,  and  these 
tails  yield  an  oil  which  is  squeezed  out  frem 
their  fat.  They  cut  also  the  tails  of  the  rams, 
and  having  cxtrectcd  the  fat,  sew  them  up 
again- so  carefully  that  no  trace  of  the  incision 
is  afterwards  seen. 

Fi?ao.  VII. 

Tzctzfs,  Chil.  VII,  V.  739,  from  tlie  Third  Book  of  the 
'Apa^iKiov  of  UrauiuH. 

If  any  one  thinks  lhat  the  .size  of  the  Arabian 
reeds  has  been  exaggemted,  who,  asks  Tzetzes, 
would  believe  what  Kte,sias  says  of  the  Indian 
reeds — ^that  they  are  two  orguiai  in  breadth,  and 
that  a couple  of  cargo-boatscould  be  made  from 
a single  joint  of  one  of  these  recds.^“° 

FRAtt.  VIII. 

Aristotle,  Be  Hint.  Aiiim.  II,  1. 

No  animals  of  the.se  species  have  a double 
row  of  teeth,  though,  if  we  arc  to  believe 

*•“  Conf.  Pliny,  Hint.  Nat.  XVI,  3(5  ; VII,  2;  Thco- 
phrast.  Plant.  Hist.  IX.  Jl;  Hcrodot.  III.  98;  Strabo, 
XV,  21. 


39 


Ktusias,  there  is  one  exception  to  the  ruloi  for 
he  asserts  tliat  the  Indian  beast  called  the 
Martikhora  has  a triple  row  of  teeth  in  each  of 
its  jaws.  He  describes  the  animal  as  being 
equal  in  sine  to  the  lion,  whicli  it  also  resembles 
in  its  claws  and  in  liaving  shaggy  hair,  thongh 
its  face  an3  its  cars  are  like  those  of  a Inirnan 
being.  Its  eyes  are  blue  and  its  hair  is  of  the 
colour  of  cinneabar.^®^  Its  tail,  which  resembles 
that  of  the  laud  scorpion,  contains  the  sting,  and 
is  furnished  with  a gi’owtli  of  prickles  which  it 
has  I ho  i)ower  of  discharging  lilcu  shufis  shot  from 
a how.  Its  voice  is  like  the  sound  of  the  pipe 
and  the  trumpet  bleudcfl  together.  It  runs  fast, 
being  as  nimble  as  a deer.  It  is  very  feweious 
and  has  a great  avidity  for  human  flesh. 

Fiuti.  IX. 

Pausanias  {TioiV,  IX.  xxi.  4)  qnotiii"  KtCaios,  thus 
deacu'ibcH  tho  samo  animal. 

The  animal  mentioned  by  Ktesias  in  his 
Indiha,  called  by  tho  Indians  tho  MartiMiora, 
but  by  tho  Clrcok.s,  it  is  sai<l,  avUpo^dyav  (man- 
eater)  is,  I am  convinced,  the  tiger.  It  is  de- 
scribed as  liaviug  throe  rows  of  teeth  in  each  of 
its  jaws  and  as  Imving  stings  at  tho  end  of  its 
tail,  wherewith  it  defends  itself  agjiinst  its 
assailants  whether  tighting  at  close  quarters  or 
at  a distance.  In  tho  latter  case  it  shoots  its 
stings  clean  away  from  its  tail  like  shafts  shot 
from  a bow-string. 


i.  e.  vermilion. 


40 


[/I'lic  Indians  appear  to  me  to  have  accepted 
this  account,  witicli  is  not  true,  through  their 
excessiv'c  dread  of  tliia  creature.] 

Frao.  X. 

Plir.y,  H.  N.  VH!,  21  (al.  .30.) 

Ktesias  states  that  the  animal  Avlfj^h  he  calls 
the  Marlil.'Jiora.  is  found  among  these  i)0oi)lo 
[the  Indians  or  rather  the  Aelhlopiaius]. 
According  to  liis  (.lescai])(ion,  it  has  a triple  row 
of  teeth,  ranged  tog(‘ther  like  the  l('cth  of  a 
comb;  its  Ok'O  and  its  cm's  are  like  those  of  a 
hiiiiuin  being,  while  its  eyes  are  blue  and  it. s 
hair  of  a blood-i-ed  eoloiii’.  It  has  the  body  of 
a lion  iuid  its  (ail  i.s  a?‘inod  witli  stings,  witli 
wliieli  it  .sinite.s  like  the  .s<-orpion.  Its  voie(5 
i.s  like  tho  commingled  .sound  ol'  tlio  pipe  and 
tlio  trumpet.  It  jaims  vei'y  fn.st,  and  i.s  vcjy 
foml  of  human  fle.sli. 

I’l.'.U!.  XI. 

From  /Eliuu,  A-  A nnual . fV.  2t ; I’espoctinr'  tho  Indian 

MartiklioKi. 

Til  India  is  fouinl  a.  ivild  aniiual  called  in  tho 
native  toiignc  tlie  Ahtflil.liorii,  Jt  is  of  great 
strength  un,d  ferocity,  being  about  as  bigas  a 
lion,  of  a red  cohmr  like  cinnabar,  and  covered 
nltli.sIi:ig’gT  hair  like  .a  d.>g.  If.s face,  however, 
is  not  bestial,  but  ivsi'inlilos  that  of  a linmaii 
hciiig.  It  liij.s  both  in  the  upper  and  the  lower 
jaw  a.  double  row  of  teeth  which  are  extremely 
shuT-p  at  the  point.s  and  larger  tlian  tho  canine. 


41 


Its  ears  in  their  conformation  are  like  the 
human,  but  they  are  larger  and  covered  with 
shaggy  hair.  Its  eyes  also  are  like  the  human, 
and  of  a blue  colour.  Ithas  the  feet  and  the  claws 
of  a lion,  but  its  tail,  which  may  bo  more  tlian 
a cubit  lor^  is  not  only  furnished  at  the  tip 
with  a scorpion’s  sting  but  is  armed  on  both 
sides  with  a row  of  stings.  With  tho  sting  at 
the  tip  it  smites  any  one  who  comes  near  it,  and 
kills  him  therewith  instantaneously,  but  if  it  is 
pursued  it  uses  tlio  side  stings,  discharging 
them  like  arrows  against  the  pursuer,  whom  it 
can  hit  even  though  he  be  at  a good  distance 
ofF.  When  it  fights,  having  the  enemy  in  front, 
it  bends  the  tail  upward,  but  when,  like  tho 
Sakians,  it  fights  while  retreating,  it  straightens 
it  out  to  the  fullest  length.  The  stings,  which 
are  a foot  long  and  as  slender  as  a rush  (or  a 
fine  thread),  kill  every  animal  they  hit,  with 
the  exception  of  the  elephant  only.  Ktesias 
says  that  he  had  been  assured  by  the  Indians 
tliat  those  stings  that  are  expended  in  fighting 
are  replaced  by  a growth  of  new  ones  as  if  to 
perpetuate  tliis  accursed  plague.  Its  favourito 
food,  according  to  the  same  author,  is  human 
flesh,  and  to  satisfy  this  lust,  it  kills  a great  many 
men,  caring  not  to  spring  from  its  ambush 
upon  a solitary  traveller,  but  rather  upon  a band 
of  two  or  three  for  which  it  is  singly  more  than 
a match.  All  the  beasts  of  the  forest  yield  to 
its  prowess,  save  only  the  lion,  which  it  is  im- 
6 


42 


potent  to  subdue.  That  it  loves  above  all 
things  to  gorge  itself  with  human  flesh,  is 
clearly  shown  by  its  name — ^for  the  Indian 
word  Marliklwra  means  man-eater — and  it  has 
its  name  from  this  particular  habit.  It  runs 
with  all  thenimblencssof  a deer.  Tte  Indians 
hunt  the  young  ones  before  the  stings  appear 
on  their  tails,  and  break  the  tails  themselves 
in  pieces  on  the  rocks  to  prevent  stings  grow- 
ing upon  them.  Its  voice  has  a most  striking 
resemblance  to  the  so  and  of  a trumpet.  Ktesias 
says  tliat  he  had  seen  in  Persia  one  of  these 
animals,  which  had  been  sent  from  India  as  a 
gift  to  the  Persian  king.  Such  arc  the  pecu- 
liarities of  the  Martikhora  as  described  by 
Ktesias,  and  if  any  one  thinks  this  Knidian 
writer  a competent  authority  on  such  subjects, 
he  must  bo  content  with  the  account  which  he 
lias  given. 

. Feao.  XII. 

(A)  Antigronos,  Mirah.  Nar.  Cong.  Hist.  o.  182. 

He  says  that  KtSsias  gives  an  account  of  an 
undying  fire  burning  on  Mount  Chimaera 
in  the  country  of  the  Phaselitai.  Should 
the  flame  be  cast  into  water,  this  but  sets  it 
into  a greater  blaze,  and  so  if  you  wish  to  put 
it  out  you  must  cast  some  solid  substaime 
into  it. 

(B)  PUny,  Hist.  Nat.  H,  106. 

Mount  Chimaera  in  Phasdlis  is  vol- 
canic, and  bums  night  and  day  with  a perpetual 


43 


flamc.^°*  According  to  Kt^sias  the  Knidian,  the 
fire  is  augmented  by  water,  but  extinguished 
by  earth  or  hay.'®* 

C.  .ffiliaTi,  De  Anim.  XVI.  S7. 

Among  the  Indian  Psylloi  (who  are  so 
called  to  ^sting^ish  them  from  the  Libyan 
Psylloi)  the  horses  are  no  bigger  than  rams, 
while  the  sheep  look  as  small  as  lambs.  The 
asses  are  likewise  correspondingly  small  and 
so  are  the  mules  and  the  oxen,  and  in  short  all 
cattlo  of  whatever  kind.'®* 

Peag.  XIII. 

Allian,  Nat.  Ah.  1Y,  26. 

Hares  and  foxes  are  hunted  by  the  Indians 
in  the  manner  following.  They  do  not  require 
dogs  for  the  purpose,  but  taking  the  young  of 
eagles,  of  ravens  and  of  kites,  they  rear  and 
train  them  to  pursue  these  animals  by  subject- 
ing them  to  this  course  of  instimction.  Taking 
a pot  hare  and  a tamo  fox,  they  fasten  on  to 
each  a gobbet  of  flesh,  and  then  making  them 
run  away,  at  the  same  time  dismiss  the  birds  to 
give  them  instant  chase,  and  catch  the  alluring 
bait.  The  birds  eagerly  pursue,  and  catching 
up  either  the  hare  or  the  fox,  pounce  upon  the 
flesh,  with  which  they  ai'e  allowed  to  glut  their 
maw  in  recompense  for  their  activity  in  having 

Conf.  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  IX,  p.  109,  and  Boaufort’a 
Travels. 

*03  Foeno,  for  wMoh  perhaps  ^mo  should  he  read. 

*0*  See  Frag.  xt.  From  this  it  appears  that  Kteeiae 
calls  the  same  race  both  Psylli  and  Pygmies. 


44 


captured  it.  When  they  have  thus  become 
adepts  in  hunting,  they  are  taken  out  to  pur- 
sue mountain  hares  and  wild  foxes,  when,  on 
sighting  the  quarry,  they  at  once  give  it  chase 
in  hope  of  earning  the  customary  dainty,  and 
haying  quickly  caught  it  bring  it  to  their  masters, 
as  Ktesias  acquaints  us.  From  the  same 
source  we  further  learn  that  the  entrails  of 
tlie  quarry  are  given  them  instead  of  the  gob- 
bets of  flesh  to  wliich  they  had  been  formerly 
treated. 

Frao.  XIV. 

(A)  ^ian  Nai.  Anim.  lY,  27. 

The  grypJion,  an  Indian  animal,  is,  so  far  as  I 
can  learn,  four-footed  like  the  lion  and  has 
claws  of  enormous  strength  closely  resembling 
his.  It  is  described  as  having  feathers  on  its 
back,  and  these  black,  while  the  breast  feathers 
are  red  and  those  of  the  wing  white.  Accoid- 
ing  to  Ktesias  its  neck  is  variegated  with 
feathers  of  a bright  blue ; its  beak  is  like  an 
eagle’s ; and  its  head  like  the  representations 
which  ai'tists  give  of  it  in  paintings  and  sculj)- 
tures.  Its  eyes  are  said  to  be  fiery  red,  and  it 
builds  its  nest  upon  the  mountains,  and,  as  it 
is  impossible  to  catch  these  birds  when  full 
grown,  they  arc  caught  when  quite  young.  The 
Baktrians  who  are  next  neighbours  to  the 
Indians  give  out  that  these  birds  guard  the  gold 
found  in  the  regions  which  they  haunt,  and 
that  they  dig  it  out  of  the  ground  and  build 


45 


their  nests  with  it,  and  that  the  Indians  carry 
o£E  as  much  of  it  as  falls  to  the  ground.  The 
Indians  however  deny  that  the  gryphons  guard 
the  gold,  alleging,  what  I think  is  highly 
probable,  that  gold  is  a thing  gryphons  have  no 
use  for;  buj  they  admit  that  when  these  birds 
see  them  coming  to  gather  the  gold,  they  become 
alarmed  for  their  young  and  attack  the  in- 
truders. Nor  do  they  resist  man  only,  but  beasts 
of  whatever  kind,  gaining  an  easy  victory  over 
all  except  only  the  elephant  and  the  lion,  for 
which  they  are  no  match.  The  gryphons,  then, 
being  so  foimidablo,  the  natives  of  these 
countries  go  not  to  gather  gold  in  the  day  time, 
but  set  out  under  cover  of  night  when  they  are 
least  likely  to  be  detected.  Now  the  auriferous 
region  which  the  gryphons  inhabit  is  a fright- 
ful desert,^®*  and  those  who  make  a raid  upon 
the  gold,  select  a moonless  night,  and  set  out 
armedj  tlio  expedition  being  a thousand  or  even 
two  thousand  strong.  They  take  with  them 
mattocks  for  digging  the  gold  and  sacks  in 
which  to  carry  it  away.  If  they  are  unobserved  by 
the  gryphons  they  have  a double  share  of  good 
luck,  for  they  not  only  escape  with  their  lives 
but  bear  a freight  of  gold  in  triumph  home,  where, 
the  metal  having  been  purified  by  those  who 
are  skilful  in  smelting  ores,  they  are  recom^ 
pensed  with  overflowing  wealth  for  all  the 


Perhaps  the  Doaert  of  Gobi. 


46 


hazards  of  the  enterprise.  Should  they  on 
the  other  hand  be  detected-  in  the  act  of 
theft,  certain  death  would  bo  their  fate.  I 
have  learned  by  enquiry  that  they  do  not 
return  home  till  after  an  absence  of  three  or 
four  years.  ^ 

Fhaq.  XV. 

(A)  Nat.  An.  XYI,  37. 

It  is  said  that  neither  the  wild  nor  the  tame 
swine  is  found  in  India,  and  that  the  Indians  so 
much  abhor  the  flesh  of  this  animal  tliat  they 
would  as  soon  taste  human  flesh  as  taste  pork. 

(B)  ADlian,  Be  Nat.  Anim.  Ill,  4. 

The  following  also  arc  peculiarities  in  the 
nature  of  animals.  The  swine,  according  to 
KtSsias,  whether  wild  or  tame,  is  not  found  in 
India,  and  he  somewhere  states  that  Indian 
sheep  have  tails  a cubit  in  brcsidth. 

(C)  Ariat.,  Be  Hist.  Anim.  VIII,  28. 

In  India,  as  Ktesias,  a writer  not  to  be  de- 
pended on,  tells  lis,  tlio  swine  is  not  found  cither 
wild  or  tame. 

[The  animals  of  that  country  however  which  are 
bloodless  and  those  tliat  lie  in  holes  are  all  large.] 

(D)  Falladiua,  Be  Brachman,  p.  5. 

For  the  swine  of  the  Theb^id,  on  account  of 
the  excessive  heat,  is  no  longer  found  either  in 
the  parts  of  India  or  of  ^Ethiopia. 

The  aome  is  related  from  ^ian  by  Philo,  Be  animall. 
propriett.  2,  pp.  15  seq. ; ooidL^erodot.  III.  116;  IV. 
13,  27.  Boehr  has  a very  long  note  on  the  Gryphons. 


47 


(E)  Fallad.,  De  Braeh.,  p,  4. 

It  (India)  lias  also  palms  and  the  largest  of 
nuts,  the  Indian  as  well  as  the  small  nnt  which 
is  aromatic. 

(F)  Antig.  Mirah.  Nar.  IGO. 

Kt^sias,  he  says,  informs  ns  that  in  Ethiopia 
there  is  a lAuntain  whose  waters  are  red  like 
cinnabar,  and  make  those  who  drink  them  mad. 

(G)  From  tlie  work  of  Sdtidn. 

Ktesias  relates  that  in  .^Ithiopia  there  is  a 

fountain  of  water  resembling  cinnabar  in  colour 
which  deprives  those  who  drink  it  of  their 
reason,  so  tluit  they  confess  all  the  misdeeds 
which  they  have  secretly  comnutted. 

(H)  PUny,XXXI,2. 

In  drinking  this  water  due  moderation  must 
be  observed  lest  it  make  you  mad  like  those 
persons  who  drink  of  tliat  red  fountain  in 
.Ethiopia  whereof  Kt6sias  writes. 

(I)  Micliool.  Apostol.  Proverb,  XX,  6.*®’ 

A swine  among  the  roses,  a proverb  applied 
by  Knitds  to  the  iutriictable  and  uneducated. 
Kt6sias  asserts  that  the  swine  is  not.  bred  in 
India,  either  the  wild  or  the  tame  kind,  and  he 
somewhere  mentions  that  the  sheep  have  tails 
a cubit  in  breadth. 

Fkaq.  XVI. 

Pliny,  Hist.  HaJt.  XVH,  2. 

Onesikritus  says  that  in  those  parts  of  India 

where  no  shadows  are  cost  there  are  men  who 

are  5 cubits  and  2 palms  in  stature  and  who 
zjt 

><u  This  is  given  as  frag.  2D  by  Lion,  bat  not  by  Muller. 


48 


live  130  years  without  bocoxning  old,  for  if 
they  die  then  they  are  cut  ofE  as  it  were  in 
mid-life.  Krates  of  Pergamus  calls  the  Indians 
who  live  over  a hundred  years  Gymnotae,  but 
many  writers  call  them  Makrobii.  KtSsias 
asserts  that  a tribe  of  them  call/ad  Fandarao 
inhabiting  the  valleys  live  for  200  years,  and 
have  in  their  youth  white  hair,  which  turns 
black  when  they  grow  old. 

Frag.  XVII. 
iGlian,  Nat.  An.  IV,  36. 

Writers  on  India  inform  us  that  that  country 
produces  many  drugs,  and  is  astonishingly  pro- 
lific of  those  plants  that  yield  them.  Many  of 
these  drugs  are  medicinal  and  cure  snake-bites, 
which  are  so  dangerous  to  life,  but  others  aro 
deleterious  and  quickly  destroy  life.  Among 
these  may  be  reckoned  the  poison  of  a parti- 
cular kind  of  serpent,  ono  which  to  appearance 
is  about  a span  long.  Its  colour  is  purple  of 
the  deepest  dye,  but  not  on  the  head,  which 
so  far  from  being  puqde,  is  extraordinarily  white, 
whiter  even  than  snow  or  than  milk.  It  is 
found  in  those  parts  of  India  which  aro  most 
scorched  by  the  sun.  It  lias  no  teeth,  and  does 
not  at  all  incline  to  bite,  and  hence  ono  would 
think  it  to  be  of  a tame  and  gentle  nature,  but 
nevertheless,  wherever  it  casts  its  vomit,  bo  it 
upon  the  limb  of  a man  or  of  a beast,  nothing 
can  prevent  the  whole  of  that  limb  from  morti- 
fying. It  is  sought  after  for  the  sake  of  this 


49 


poison,  and  is,  when  caught,  suspended  from  a 
tree  by  the  tail,  so  that  the  head  may  look  down- 
ward to  the  ground.  Below  its  mouth  they 
place  a casket  made  of  brass,  to  receive  the 
drops  of  poison  as  they  fall.  The  matter  thus 


discharged  ^ondenses  and  becomes  a solid  mass 
which  might*  be  mistaken  for  the  gum  which 


oozes  from  the  almond^tree.  When  the  snake  is 


dead  the  vessel  is  replaced  by  another,  which 
is  also  of  brass,  for  the  carcase  then  discharges 
a serous  humour  like  water,  which,  after  being 
allowed  to  stand  for  tliree  days,  takes  also  a solid 
form.  The  two  masses  differ  from  each  other 


in  colour,  the  one  being  jet-black  and  the  other 
the  colour  of  amber.  If  you  take  of  the  latter 
no  more  than  what  would  equal  the  bulk  of  a 
sesame  seed,  and  administer  this  to  one  either 
in  his  food  or  his  drink,  he  is  firat  of  all  seized 
with  violent  spasms,  and  Ids  eyes  in  the  next 
place  become  distorted,  and  his  brain,  forcing  its 
way  through  his  nostrils,  runs  out,  when  death 
ensues  after  a short  but  sharp  agony.  If  a 
smaller  dose  is  taken,  death  does  not  imme- 
diately ensue,  but  does  so  eventually.  The 
black  poison,  again,  which  has  oozed  from  the 
snake  when  dead,  operates  but  slowly,  for  if  one 
swallows  the  same  bulk  of  it  as  of  the  other,  it 
corrupts  his  blood  and  ho  falls  into  a consump- 
tion, of  which  he  dies  in  a year’s  time.  Many, 
however,  survive  for  two  years,  dying  inch 
by  inch.  n 


7 


60 


Fbao.  XVIII. 

iESliaii,  De  Nat.  An.  IV,  41. 

There  is  a species  of  Indian  bird  of  yerj 
diminutive  size  which  may  be  thus  described. 
It  builds  its  nests  on  high  and  precipitous  moun- 
tains, and  is  about  as  big  as  a p^ridge  egg, 
and  of  a bright  red  colour  like  realgar.  The 
Indians  call  it  in  their  tongue  dikatron,  and  the 
Greeks  in  theirs,  as  1 am.  informed,  dihaion  (i.  o. 
just).  Its  dung  has  a peculiar  property,  for  if 
a quantity  of  it  no  bigger  than  a grain  of  millet 
be  dissolved  into  a potion,  it  would  be  enough  to 
kill  a man  by  the  fall  of  evening.  But  the 
death  tliat  comes  thereby  resembles  a sleep, 
and  is  most  pleasant  withal  and  pangless,  being 
like  that  death  which  the  poets  are  wont  to  call 
IvMtneles  (limb-rela.xing)  and  ahUkhros  (easy), 
for  such  a death  is  painless,  and  is  therefore  to 
those  who  wish  to  be  rid  of  life,  the  sweetest 
of  all  deaths.  The  Indians  accordingly  spare 
no  pains  to  procure  this  substance,  which  they 
regard  as  a genuine  anodyne  for  all  human 
ills.  Hence  it  is  included  among  the  costly 
presents  sent  by  the  king  of  the  Indians  to 
the  Persian  king,  by  whom  it  is  prized  more 
than  aught  else,  and  who  treasures  it  up  as  a 
sure  defence  in  case  of  necessity  against  ills 
that  are  past  all  other  remedy.  No  one  in  all 
Persia  possesses  it  save  only  the  king  himself 
and  the  king’s  mother.  Let  us  here  then 
compare  this  Indian  drug  with  the  Egyptian 


51 


so  OH  to  determine  wlncli  is  superior.  The 
Egyptian  we  saw,  had  the  effect  throughout 
the  day  it  was  taken  of  restraining  and  chock- 
ing tears,  whereas  the  Indian  induced  an 
unending  oblivion  of  all  ills.  The  former  was 
the  gift  of  woman,  and  the  latter  the  gift  of 
a bird,  or  rattier  of  Nature,  which,  through  the 
agency  of  this  bii'd,  unfetters  man  from  the 
sternest  bondage.  And  the  Indians,  they  say, 
are  happy  in  the  possession  of  tliis,  since  they 
can  by  its  means  whenever  they  please,  escape 
from  their  prison-house  here  below. 

Fra«.  XIX. 

ApoUonios  (Dyskolos),  Hiitt,  Mirab,  XVII. 

Ktesias  says  that  in  India  is  found  a tree 
called  the  parybon.  This  draws  to  itself  every- 
thing that  comes  near,  as  gold,  silver,  tin,  copper 
and  all  other  metals.  Nay,  it  even  attracts 
sparrows  when  they  alight  in  its  neighbourhood. 
Should  it  bo  of  large  size,  it  would  attract  even 
goats  and  sheep  and  similar  animals. 

Fkag.  XX. 

PKny,  Hist.  Kal.  XXXVII,  2. 

KtSsias  says  that  in  India  is  a river,  the 
Hypobaiois,  and  tliat  the  meaning  of  its  name 
is  the  bearer  of  all  good  things.  It  flows  from  the 
north  into  the  Eastern  Ocean  near  a mountain 
well- wooded  with  trees  tliat  produce  amber. 
These  trees  are  called  aphytaeorae,  a name  which 
means  Imeiotis  sweetness. 


52 


Thao.  XXI. 

TzotaSs,  Chil.  VII,  v,  714. 

Ktdsias  says  that  in  India  are  the  trees  that 
produce  amber,  and  tiie  men  called  the  Kyno* 
kephaloi,  who,  according  to  his  account,  are 
very  just  men  living  by  produce  of  ^the  chase. 
Fbao.  XXTI.  ” 

Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.  VII,  2. 

On  many  mountains  (of  India)  is  found  a 
race  of  men  with  heads  like  those  of  dogs,  who 
are  dressed  with  the  skins  of  wild  beasts,  who 
bark  instead  of  speaking,  and  who,  being  armed 
with  claws,  live  by  hunting  and  fowling.  Ktesias 
says  that  in  his  time  the  number  of  these  men 
was  120,000. 

Fbao.  XXIII. 

.?Elian,  IV,  46. 

Among  the  Indians  arc  found  certain  insects 
about  the  size  of  beetles  and  of  a colour  so  red 
tlmt  at  first  sight  one  might  mistake  them  for 
cinnabar.  Their  legs  are  of  extraordinary 
length  and  soft  to  the  touch.  They  grow 
upon  the  trees  which  produce  amber,  and  sub- 
sist upon  their  fruit.  The  Indians  collect  them 
for  the  sake  of  the  purple  dye,  which  they 
yield  when  crushed.  This  dye  is  used  for 
tinting  with  purple  not  only  their  outer  and 
their  under-garments,  but  also  any  other  sub- 
stance where  a purple  hue  is  required.  Rohes 
tinted  with  this  purple  are  sent  to  the  Persian 
king,  for  the  Indian  purple  is  thought  by  the 
Persians  to  be  marvellously  beautiful  and  far 


53 


superior  to  tlieir  own.  This  we  learn  from 
Ktusias,  who  says  well,  for  this  dye  is  in  fact 
deeper  and  more  brilliant  than  the  renowned 
Lydian  purple. 

In  tliat  part  of  India  where  the  beetles 
(xav^apot)  fro  mot  with,  live  the  Kynokephaloi, 
who  are  so  called  from  their  being  like  dogs  in 
the  shape  of  their  head  and  in  their  general 
appearance.  In  other  respects,  however,  they 
resemble  mankind,  and  go  about  clad  in  the 
skins  of  wild  beasts.  They  are  moreover  very 
just,  and  do  no  sort  of  injury  to  any  man. 
They  cannot  speak,  but  utter  a kind  of  howl. 
Notwithstanding  this  they  comprehend  the 
language  of  the  Ind  ians . They  subsist  upon  wild 
animals,  which  their  great  fleetness  of  foot  en- 
ables them  to  capture  with  the  utmost  ease. 
Having  killed  the  prey  they  cut  it  into  pieces,  and 
roast  it  by  tho  heat  of  the  sun  and  not  by  fire. 
They  keep  goats  however  and  sheep,  whoso  milk 
supplies  them  with  drink,  as  the  chase  with  food. 
I have  mentioned  them  among  the  brutes,  and 
with  good  reason,  for  they  do  not  possess  arti- 
culate and  intelligible  speech  like  mankind.^^’ 
Fbao.  XXIV. 

Servius  the  Commentator  on  Yirgil ; JEneid,  I,  v,  658. 

AcantJio — t.  e.  with  a flexible  twig  in  imita- 
tion of  which  a robe  is  artificially  adorned 

***  Herodotna  mentions  Kynokophaloi  in  Africa  (lY, 
192) ; conf.  Diodor.  Ill,  34 ; Angnstine,  0.  D.  XVI,  8 ; 
Aristot.  Hint.  Anim.  11,  8 ; Strabo,  XYI,  iv,  15 ; Philoat. 
Vit.  Apollon.  VI,  1. 


54 


and  wrought.  Vanns  makes  this  statement. 
Ki6sias  says  that  there  are  trees  in  India  which 
grow  wool. 

Fkag.  XXV. 

(A)  .ffilian,  Hist  An,  IV,  52. 

I have  ascertained  by  enquiiy  ^that  wild 
asses  arc  found  in  India  as  big  as  horses.  The 
animal  is  entirely  wliite,  except  about  the  head, 
which  is  of  a reddish  colour,  while  the  eye 
gleams  with  azure.  It  has  a horn  upon  its 
forehead  about  a cubit  and  a half  long.  This 
horn  is  white  at  the  base,  crimson  at  the  tip,  and 
jet  black  in  the  middle.  These  particoloured 
horns  are  used,  I understand,  as  drinking  cups 
by  the  Indians,  not  indeed  by  people  of  all 
ranks,  but  only  by  the  magnates,  who  rim 
them  at  intervals  with  circlets  of  gold  just 
as  they  would  adorn  wdth  bracelets  the  arm  of 
some  beautiful  statue.  They  say  that  whoever 
drinks  out  of  this  horn  is  protected  against  all 
incurable  diseases,  for  he  can  neither  be  seized 
by  convulsions  nor  by  what  is  called  the  sacred 
disease  (epilepsy),^®®  and  neither  can  he  be  cut 
off  by  poison ; nay  if  before  drinking  from  it  he 
should  have  swallowed  anything  deleterious,  he 
vomits  this,  and  escapes  scatheless  from  all  ill 
effects,  and  while,  as  lias  been  believed,  a\l 
other  asses,  wherever  found,  and  whether  wild 
or  tame,  and  even  all  solid-hoofed  animals,  liave 
neither  a huckle-bone  (dtrrpayaXos)  nor  a gall  in 


'A- 


Cf.  Herod.  Ill,  33. 


55 


the  liver,  the  Indian  homed  asses  have  according 
to  KtSsias  both  a htLckle*bone  and  a gall  in 
the  Uver.  The  huckle-bones  are  said  to  be  black, 
not  only  on  tlie  sni'face  but  all  throughout  as 
may  be  proved  by  breaking  one  to  pieces.  They 
are  fleeter|not  only  tlian  other  asses  but  even 
than  horses  and  deer.  On  first  stai-ting  they  run 
leisurely,  but  they  gradually  strengthen  their 
pace,  and  then  to  overtake  them,  is,  to  use  a 
poetic  expression,  the  unattainable  (ra  'aKix^Ta).^'^ 
When  the  dams  have  brought  forth  and  begin  to 
lead  out  their  young  ones  to  the  pastures,  the 
males  are  in  close  attendance,  and  guard  their 
offspring  with  devoted  care.  They  roam  about 
in  the  must  desolate  tiauts  of  the  Indian  plain, 
and  when  the  hunters  come  to  attack  them,  they 
relegate  their  foals,  being  as  yet  but  young  and 
tender,  to  graze  in  the  rear,  while  in  front  they 
fight  to  defend  them.  Their  mode  of  attack  is 
to  charge  the  horsemen,  using  the  horn  as  the 
weapon  of  assault,  and  this  is  so  powerful,  that 
nothing  can  withstand  the  blow  it  gives,  but 
yields  and  snaps  in  two,  or  is  perhaps  shivered 
to  pieces  and  spoiled  for  further  use.  They 
sometimes  even  fall  upon  the  horses,  and  so 
cruelly  rip  up  their  sides  with  the  horn  that 
ijieir  very  entrails  gush  out.  The  riders,  it 
may  well  be  imagined,  dread  to  encounter  them 
at  close  quarters,  since  the  }K)nalty  of  appro'ach- 


Used  by  Homer. 


56 


ing  them  is  a miserable  death  both  to  man  and 
horse.  And  not  only  do  they  butt,  but  they 
also  kick  most  viciously  and  bite ; and  their  bite 
is  much  to  be  dreaded,  for  they  tear  away  all 
the  flesh  they  g^rasp  wiUi  their  teeth.  It  is 
accordingly  impossible  to  take  th^  alive  if 
they  be  full-grown ; and  hence  they  must  bo 
despatched  with  such  missiles  as  the  spear  or 
the  arrow.  This  done,  the  Indians  despoil  them 
of  their  horns,  which  they  ornament  in  the 
manner  already  described.  . The  flesh  is  so  very 
bitter  that  the  Indians  cannot  use  it  forfood.^^’^ 
(B)  jElian,  III,  41. 

India,  he  says,  produces  unicorn  horses  and 
breeds  likewise  unicorn  asses.  Drinking  cups 
are  made  from  these  horns.  Should  one  who 
plots  against  another’s  life  put  a deadly  poison 
into  these  cups  no  harm  is  done  to  the  man 
who  drinks  therefrom.  The  horn  of  the  horse 
and  the  ass,  it  would  appear,  is  an  antidote 
against  evil. 

Frag.  XXVI. 

JQlian,  Nat.  An.  V,  3. 

The  river  Indus  has  no  living  creature  in 
it  except,  they  say,  the  Skoldx,  a kind  of  worm 
which  to  appearance  is  very  like  the  worms  that 
are  generated  and  nurtured  in  trees.  It  differs 
however  in  size,  being  in  general  seven  cubits  in 
length  and  of  such  a thickness  that  a child  of 

«*  Conf.  Mian.  Ill,  41 ; XVI,  20 ; Ariutot.  De  partt. 
Anim.  Ill,  2 ; FbUoatiat.  Vit.  ApoU.  Ill,  2. 


67 


ten  could  scarcely  clasp  it  round  in  his  anns. 
It  has  a single  tooth  in  each  of  its  jaws^  Quadran- 
gular in  shape  and  above  four  feet  long.  These 
teeth  are  so  strong  that  they  tear  in  pieces  with 
ease  whatever  they  clutch,  be  it  a stone  or  bo 
it  a beast,  whether  wild  or  tame.  In  the  day- 
time these  wbrms  remain  hidden  at  the  bottom 
of  the  river,  wallowing  with  delight  in  its  mud 
and  sediment,  but  by  night  they  come  ashore 
in  search  of  prey,  and  whatever  animal  they 
pounce  upon — horse,  cow,  or  ass,  they  drag  down 
to  tho  bottom  of  the  river,  where  they  devour  it 
limb  by  limb,  all  except  the  entrails.  Should  they 
be  pressed  by  hunger  they  come  ashore  even  in 
the  daytime,  and  should  a camel  then  or  a cow 
come  to  the  brink  of  the  river  to  quench  its 
thirst,  they  creep  stealthily  up  to  it,  and  liaving 
with  a violent  spring  secured  their  victim  by 
fastening  their  fangs  in  its  upper  lip,  they  drag 
it  by  sheer  force  into  the  water,  whore  they  make 
a sumptuous  repast  of  it.  The  hide  of  the  slcolex 
is  two  iinger-breadths  thick.  The  natives  have 
devised  tho  following  method  for  catching  it.  To 
a hook  of  great  strength  and  thickness  they 
attach  an  iron  chain,  which  they  - bind  with  a 
rope  made  of  a broad  piece  of  white  cotton. 
Then  they  wrap  wool  round  the  hook  and  the 
rope,  to  prevent  them  being  gnawed  through  by 
the  worm,  and  havii^  baited  the  hook  with  a 
kid,  the  line  is  thereupon  lowered  into  the 
stream.  As  many  as  thirty  men,  each  of  whom 
8 


68 


is  equipped  with  a sword  and  a spear  fitted 
with  a thong,  hold  on  to  the  rope,  having  also 
stout  cudgels  of  cornel  lying  ready  to  hand,  in 
case  it  should  be  necessary  to  fell  the  monster 
with  blows.  As  soon  as  it  is  hooked  and  swallows 
the  bait,  it  is  hauled  ashore  and  despatched  by 
the  fishermen,  who  suspend  its  carcase  till  it  has 
been  exposed  for  30  days  to  the  heat  of  the 
sun.  An  oil  all  this  time  oozes  out  from  it,  and 
falls  by  drops  into  earthen  vessels.  A single 
worm  yields  ten  kotulai  (about  five  pints).  The 
vessels  having  been  sealed  up,  tlie  oil  is  des- 
patched to  the  king  of  the  Indians,  for  no  one 
else  is  alloAved  to  have  so  much  as  one  drop  of 
it.  The  rest  of  the  carcase  is  useless.  Now  this 
oil  possesses  this  singular  virtue,  that  if  you 
Wish  to  burn  to  ashes  a pile  of  any  kind  of  wood, 
you  have  only  to  pour  upon  it  half  a pint  of  the 
oil,  and  it  ignites  without  your  applying  a 
spark  of  fire  to  kindle  it,  while  if  it  is  a man  or  a 
beast  you  want  to  bum,  you  pour  out  the  oil,  and 
in  an  instant  the  victim  is  consumed.  By  means 
of  this  oil  also  the  king  of  the  Indians,  it  is 
said,  captures  hostile  .cities  without  the  help  of 
rams  or  testudos  or  other  siege  apparatus,  for 
he  has  merely  to  set  them  on  fire  with  the  oil, 
and  they  fall  into  his  hands.  How  he  proceeds 
is  this.  Having  filled  with  the  oil  a certain 
number  of  earthen  vessels  which  hold  each 
about  half  a pint,  he  closes  up  their  mouths,  and 
aims  them  at  the  uppermost  parts  of  the  gates ; 


59 


and  if  they  strike  there  and  break,  the  oil  runs 
down  the  woodwork,  wrapping  it  in  flames 
which  cannot  be  put  out,  but  with  insatiable 
fury  bum  the  enemy,  arms  and  all.  The  only 
way  to  smother  and  extinguish  this  ili'c  is  to 
cast  rubbish  ii^tu  it.  Tliis  account  is  given  by 
Ktdsias  the  l^nidian. 

Feag.  XXVTI. 

(A)  From  Antigonos,  Mirah.  Nar.  Cong.  Hist.  165. 

It  is  said  that  Ktdsias  mentions  certain  lakes  in 
India,  one  of  which,  like  the  lakes  in  Sicily  and 
Media  made  everytliing  that  was  cast  into  it 
sink  down  [float]  except  gold,  copper,  and  iron. 
Moreover,  should  anything  fall  into  it  aslant,  it  is 
thrown  up  standing  erect.  It  is  said  to  cure  the 
disease  called  the  white  leprosy.  Another  lake 
at  certain  seasons  yields  an  oil  which  is  found 
floating  on  the  surface. 

(B)  From  S5tidn  in  scattered  passages  where  he  relates 
marvels  about  rivers,  fountains  and  lakes. 

There  is  a fountain  in  India  which  throws 
out  upon  its  banks  as  if  shot  from  an  engine  those 
who  dive  into  its  waters,  as  Ktraias  relates.^** 

(C)  Strabo,  Geo!/.  XVI,  4. 

KtSsias  the  Xnidian  mentions  a fountain 
which  discharges  into  the  sea  water  of  a I’ed 
colour  and  full  of  minium  (red-lead). 

Fbag.  XXVIII. 

Pliny,  Hint,  Nat.  XXXI.  2. 

KtSsias  records  that  in  India  is  a pool  of 

«»  Conf.  Aristot.  Mir.  Ause.  o.  122 ; Plin.  Hist.  Nat. 
II.  103. 


60 


water  called  S i d in  which  nothing  will  float, 
but  everything  sinks  to  the  bottom. 

Fbao.  XXIX. 

(A)  Antigonoa,  Mirab.  Nar.  Cong.  Hiet.  o.  182. 

KtSsias  mentions  the  water  which  falls  from 
a rock  in  Armenia,  and  which  casi^  out  black 
fish  which  cause  the  death  of  the  eater. 

(B)  Pliny,  HM.  Nat.  XXXI,  2. 

KtSsias  writes  that  in  Armenia  tlierc  is  a 
fountain  with  black  fish  which,  if  taken  as  food, 
produce  instantaneous  death,  and  I heard  the 
same  said  of  the  Danube,  that  where  it  rises, 
the  same  kind  of  black  fish  is  found  in  it  till 
yon  come  to  a fountain  adjoining  its  channel, 
and  that  this  fountain  is  therefore  commonly 
believed  to  be  the  head  of  the  river.  They 
tell  the  same  thing  of  the  Nymph’s  pool  in 
Lydia. 

Frag.  XXX. 

(A)  Tzeta^B,  Chil.  VH,  v,  638. 

■ This  Skylax  (of  Karyanda)  writes  other  such 
stories  by  the  myriads,  stories  of  one-eyed  men, 
and  of  men  that  sleep  in  their  ears,  and 
thousands  of  other  wonderful  creatures,  all  which 
he  speaks  of  as  really  existing,  and  not  fictitious ; 
but  for  my  part,  as  I have  never  met  with  any 
of  them,  I do  not  believe  in  them,  although  there 
are  multitudes,  such  as  KtSsias,  lamboulos, 

Isidor.  Origg.  xiii,  13 ; Conf.  Antigon.  o.  161 ; 
Diodorus,  U,  86,  7 ; Arrian,  Ind.  c.  6 ; Strabo,  XY,  i, 
38 ; imd  Ind,  Ant.  vol.  V , pp.  333,  2SA,  and  Tol.  VI, 
pp.  121, 130. 


$1 


Hdsigonos,  Rlidginos,  who  not  only  believe 
that  these,  but  that  still  greater  monstrosities, 
are  to  be  found  in  the  world. 

(B)  Pliny,  Hid.  Nat.  VH,  2. 

And  ho  affirms  tliat  there  is  a tribe  of  Indians 
whoso  wo]|ion  bear  ofFspiing  once  only  in  their 
lifetime,  anS.  whoso  Invir  turns  white  in  the 
very  childhood.  He  mentions  also  a race  of 
men  called  MonosccH  (one-legged),  who,  though 
they  had  but  a single  log,  could  hop  upon  it 
with  wonderful  agility,  and  that  they  were 
also  called  Sciopodae,  because  that  when  they 
lay  on  their  back  in  very  hot  weather,  they 
shaded  themselves  from  the  sun  with  their  feet. 
They  lived  not  very  far  from  the  Troglodytes 
(cave-dwellers).  To  the  west  of  these,  he  adds, 
lived  men  without  a neck,  and  who  had  their 
eyes  placed  in  their  shoulders. 

(C)  From  the  same. 

According  to  Kiesias  the  I ndian  people  which 
is  called  Pandore  and  occupies  the  valleyis, 
live  for  200  years,  and  liave  in  early  youth 
hoary  hair  which  turas  black  as  they  become 
old.  There  is  a people  on  the  other  hand 
whose  life-time  does  not  exceed  forty  years. 
They  are  next  neighbours  to  the  Makrobii,  and 
their  women  produce  offspring  once  only.  Aga- 
tharchidSs  asserts  the  same,  and  adds  that  they 
live  upon  locusts  and  arc  fleet  of  foot.  [To 
these  Klitarchus  gave  the  name  of  Mandi, 
and  MegaathenSs  reckons  the  number  of  their 


62 


villages  at  300.  Their  women  bear  childi*en 
when  the^  ore  seven  years  old.  and  they  ai'a 
in  their  old  age  at  forty.] 

Frag.  XXXI. 

Gclliua,  Nod.  Attic.  IX.  c,  4. 

When  we  were  returning  from  Qreece  into 
Italy,  and  had  made  our  way  to  ijnindusium, 
and  having  disembarked,  wore  walking  about 
in  that  famous  seaport  which  Fnnius,  using  a 
somewhat  far-fetched  but  sufficiently  well- 
known  word,  called  the  fortunate  (praejpes), 
we  saw  a number  of  bundles  of  books  lying 
exposed  for  sale.  I lost  not  a moment,  but 
pounced  with  the  utmost  avidity  upon  these 
books.  Now,  they  were  all  in  Greek  and  full 
of  wonders  and  fables— containing  rehitions  of 
things  unheard  of  and  incredible,  but  written 
by  authors  of  no  small  anthority — Aristea.s  of 
Proconnosos  and  Isigonos  of  Nicaoa,  and  Ktd- 
sias,  and  Onesikritos  and  Polystophanos  and 
Hegesias.  The  volumes  themselves  however 
were  musty  with  accumulated  mould,  and  their 
whole  condition  and  appearance  showed  that 
they  were  going  fast  ti>  decay.  I went  up  to 
the  stall  however,  and  enquired  the  prices,  and 
being  induced  by  the  wonderful  and  unexpect-, 
ed  cheapness,  I bought  a great  lot  of  the  books 
for  a few  coppers ; and  occupied  myself  for  the 
next  two  days  in  glancing  over  the  contents. 
As  I read  I made  some  extracts,  noting  the 
wonderful  stories  which’  none  of  our  writers 


63 


have  as  yet  aimed  at  composing,  and  inter- 
spersing them  with  these  comment^  of  my 
own,  so  that  whoever  reads  these  books  may 
not  be  found  quite  a novice  in  stories  of  the 
sort  like  one  who  has  never  even  heard  of 
them  befo:^.  [Gellius  now  goes  on  to  record 
many  particulars  regarding  the  Skythiaus,  Ari- 
maspians,  Sauromatae  and  others  of  whom 
Pliny  has  written  at  length  in  his  Natural 
History.  These  paHiculars  have  been  evident- 
ly extracted  from  the  Indika  of  Ktfisias  and 
are  here  subjoined]  : — “ On  the  mountains  of 
India  are  men  Avho  liavo  the  heads  of  dogs,  and 
bark,  and  who  live  by  hunting  and  fowling. 
There  are  besides  in  the  remotest  regions  of 
the  East  other  stmnge  ci’eatui'cs — men  who  are 
called  Monocoli  (one-legged),  who  run  liopping 
upon  their  one  leg  with  wonderful  agility ; 
others  who  have  no  necks  but  have  eyes  in  their 
shoulders.”  All  unbounded  however  is  his  as- 
tonishment on  his  learning  fiom  these  writers 
about  a race  of  men  in  the  uttermost  parts  of 
India  liaving  shaggj’’  bodies  and  plumage  like 
that  of  birds,  who  live  not  upon  food,  but  on 
the  perfume  of  flowei^  inhaled  tluough  the  nos- 
trils. Not  far  from  these  live  the  Pygmies,  the 
tallest  of  whom  do  not  exceed  2 ^ feet.  The  books 
contained  these  and  many  similar  absurd  stories, 
and  as  we  perused  them  we  felt  how  wearisome 
a task  it  is  to  read  worthless  books  which 
conduce  neither  to  adorn  nor  to  improve  life. 


64 


Fbaq.  XXXII. 

Fra^  IV.  From  Ath^naios,  lib.  X.  [c.  9.]’** 
Ktesias  says  that  in  India  the  king  is  not  allow- 
ed to  make  himself  drunk,  but  that  the  Persian 
king  is  allowed  to  do  so  on  one  particular  day 
—that  on  which  sacrifice  is  offered  to  Mithras. 
Fbaq.  XXXIII.  e® 

Tzetz^B,  Chil.  7III,  v,  987.‘« 

Herodotus,  DLoddros,  KtSsias  and  all  others 
agree  that  the  Happy  Arabia',  like  the  Indian 
land,  is  most  odoriferous,  exhales  a spicy  fra- 
grance, so  that  the  very  soil  of  the  former,  and 
the  stones  of  the  latter,  if  cut,  emit  a delicious 
perfume,  while  the  people  there,  when  made 
langfuid  and  faint  by  the  rich  odours,  recover 
from  the  stupor  by  inhaling  the  smoke  of  certain 
bones  and  horns  and  strong-smelling  substances. 
Fuag.  XXXV. 

Ltician,  Ver.  Higf.  I,  3.“* 

XtSsias  the  son  of  Ktesiokhos,  the  Xnidian, 
wrote  about  India  and  its  inliabitants  what  he 
neither  himself  saw  nor  heard  from  the  report 
of  others. 

Frag.  XXXVI. 

Strabo,  Geog.  I.  2.“’ 

Theopompos  professes  in  express  terms  that  in 
his  history  he  will  tell  fables  better  than  such  as 
have  been  related  by  Herodotus,  and  Ktdsias  and 
Hellanikos  and  those  who  wrote  about  India. 

Miiller  places  this  as  frag.  55  of  the  Pernca. 

Mhllor  places  this  among  the  fragments  of  the  Peri' 
plus  or  Periegeeis. 

This  belongs  to  the  life  of  Kt#sias ; conf . MQller,  p.  8. 

This  is  Lion’s  49th  frag., but  can  hardly  be  regarded 


65 


LASSEN’S  EEVIBW 
OF  THE  REPORTS  OF  KTjfiSIAS 
CONCERNING  INDIA  » 

In  proceeding  to  examine  the  reports  con> 
oerning  Inciian  matters  which  yet  survive  from 
the  work  of  E^tesias,  1 call  to  mind  what  1 previously 
remarked,' that  on  account  of  the  unsatisfactory 
state  in  which  we  possess  tlio  fragments,  as  well 
as  on  account  of  the  predilection  of  the  author 
for  the  marvellous,  it  is  difficult  to  sepai'ate  what 
is  exaggerated  from  what  is  true,  and  to  give  a 
satisfactory  explanation  of  his  statements,  while 
farther,  I have  shown  in  several  examples  that  his 
descriptions,  as  far  as  they  have  been  examined, 
have  been  found  to  be  trnein  material  points,  though 
they  cannot  be  absolved  from  the  reproach  that  the 
facts  have  been  purposely  disfigured  by  being 
magnified.  In  judging  of  his  work,  two  especial 
points  are  to  be  taken  into  account.  The  first  is, 
that  he  resided  at  the  Court  of  Artaxerxes 
M n e m 6 n us  his  physician,  and  thereby  enjoyed 
the  best  opportunity  of  questioning  the  Persians 
about  all  the  information  they  had  actpiircd  re- 
garding India,  lie  could  question  even  Indians 
themselves  about  their  native  country,  because  he 
testifies  that  he  had  seen  such  men,  these  being 
white,  i.e.  Aryans.*  The  second  is  that  the 
extract  from  his  work  was  made  by  a Uyxantine 
of  far  later  date,  the  Patriarch  P h o t i u s,  who 

^ Translated  from  his  Ind.  Alterthum.  vol.  II,  pp.  611  ff. 
2ni  effition,  1871. 

* Ctesiac,  J'hragm.  ed.  C.  Muller,  p.  81a. 


66 


lived  about  the  middle  of  the  uiuth  century  of  our 
mra,  andF  who  had  such  a predilection  for  the 
wonderful  and  did  the  work  so  negligently,  that  it 
can  offer  no  suitable  scale  whereby  to  measure  the 
true  value  of  the  original.  Most  of  the  quotations, 
besides,  concern  the  fabulous  Indian  races  and  the 
wonderful  products  of  the  countiy^c  Ecgarding 
several  of  his  statements  the  advancing  knowledge 
of  Indian  arcbajology  has  sufficed  to  show  that 
they  had  not  been  invented  by  the  author,  but  that 
they  originated  in  iictions.  current  among  the 
Indians.  Accordingly,  the  accusations  of  menda- 
city heai)ed  upon  him  by  the  ancients,  with  refer- 
ence to  his  book  on  India,  have  been  generally 
withdrawn;  but  it  would  bo  going  too  far  to 
absolve  him  eritircly  from  lying,  althotigh  in  most 
^ cases  his  corruptions  of  the  truth  originate  in  his 
-'desire  to  tell  unheard  of  stories. 

He  composed  his  work,  which  consisted  of  one 
book,  after  his  return  to  his  own  country  in  the 
year  1198  B.C.,'’  but  how  long  afterwards  cannot  be 
determined.  • Ho  did  not  consult  Herodotus  or  any 
other  of  his  predecessors.  Whether  his  coin- 
cidence with  Skyla.\  about  the  fabulous  peoples  is  a 
plagiarism  is  dubious.*  Besides  what  I shall  pre- 
sently have  to  say  about  his  Indian  reports,  it 
will  suffice  to  mention  only  what  is  of  essential 
importance,  as  it  would  bo  unsuitable  in  this  place 
to  enter  into  detailed  researches  on  as  yet  un- 
explainable reports,  while,  as  regards  the  fabulous 
nations,  it  will  suffice  to  point  out  their  Indian 
origin. 

* Milllor,  p.  16. 

* Schwanbock’s  Megasth.  hud.,  p.  8. 


67 


According  to  KtSsias,  India  was  not  STsaller  than  y 
all  the  rest  of  Asia* — which  is  a palpable  Exaggera- 
tion. Like  Herodotus  be  considered  the  Indians 
to  be  the  greatest  of  nations  and  the  ontoi’mosti 
beyond  whom  there  lived  no  other.**  Of  the  Indian 
rivers  ho  knows  strictly  speaking  only  the  Indus, 
for  it  must  f^main  undecided  whether  the  Hypar- 
khos  bo  the  Ganges.'  As  the  Persians  had  ob- 
tained exact  information  otily  of  the  Indus  regioiii 
we  must  expect  to  find  that  his  more  accurate 
communications  have  reference  to  that  region 
exclusively.  Of  the  former  river  ho  assumed  the 
breadth  where  it  was  smallest  at  forty,  and  where 
it  was  widest  at  one  hundred  stadia,  while  in 
most  parts  it  was  a mean  between  these  two 
extremes.*  Those  figures  arc,  however,  without 
doubt  excessive,  but  one  need  not  bo  sni'priscd 
thereat,  since  at  that  time  no  measurement  had 
been  made.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  correctly 
stated  that  it  fiows  throngh  the  mountains  as 
well  as  throngh  the  plains.”'  Of  the  Indian  sea 
KtSsias  had  learned  that  it  is  larger  than  the 
Grecian,  but  it  must  bo  considered  as  an  invention 
that  to  the  depth  of  four  finger  breadths,  the  sur- 
face is  BO  hot  that  fish  on  that  account  do  not 
approach  it,  but  live  in  the  deep  below. 

It  must  also  be  ascribed  to  fiction  that  in  India 
the  sun  appears  ten  times  larger  than  in  other 
countries,  and  that  the  heat  there  is  so  powerful 
that  it  suffocates  many  persons  ; that  there  are 
neither  storms  nor  rain  in  India,  but  that  the 

* Frag.  iii.  * Frag,  i,  1, 2. 

' LfusBon,  Ind.  AH.  vol.  II,  p.  563. 

* Flag,  it  and.!,  1.  * Frag.  i.  6, 


68 


country  is  watered  by  the  river ; there  are  on  the 
other  hanU  violent  hurricanes  which  can’y  away 
everything  that  stands  in  their  course.**  The 
last  remark  may  be  considered  as  correct,  but 
the  assertion  that  India  has  no  rain  is  on  the 
contrary  false,  for  it  is  known  to  possess  regular 
rainy  seasons,  whereby  the  soil  is  weltered.  The' 
Indus  region  is  inundated  by  the  river  only  in  the- 
Delta  and,  to  a slight  extent,  in  the  upper  country, 
while  in  the  north  under  the  mountains  it  has 
heavy  rains,  and  lower  down  is  not  unA'isited  by 
slight  showers.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  correctly 
remarked  that  in  most  parts  of  India  the  sun 
at  his  vising  briiigs  coolness,  while  during  the  rest 
of  the  day  ho  causes  veheineiAt  heat.** 

His  statements  about  the  precious  stones  have 
already  been  elucidated.**  Concerniug  the  iron 
taken  from  the  bottom  of  a well,  of  which  iron 
swords  were  inanufimtuml  possessing  tlie  pro[)erty 
of  tin’uing  off  luiil,  clouds  and  lightning,  I have 
al really  remarked  that  they  Avere  probably  lightning 
conductors.  As  to  the  method  of  obtaining  itthere 
is  no  information,  but  there  is  somehow  gold  was 
obtained.*"''  Every  year  a spring  filled  itself  with 
fluid  gold  which  was  drawn  from  it  in  one  hundred 
earthen  pitchers.  It  was  necessary  that  they 
should  be  of  clay,  because  the  gold  afterwards 
congealed,  and  the  pitchers  bad  to  be  broken 
in  order  to  got  it  out.  The  spring  was  qua<lran- 
gular,  eleven  oils  in  circumference,  and  about  two 
yards  deep.  Each  pitcher  contained  one  talent  of 
gold.  The  sense  of  this  passage  can  only  bo  that 

» JVag.  i,  8. 

“ Frag,  i,  4. 


“ Frag,  i,  2,  5,  8. 
Frag,  i,  5 and  2. 


auriferous  ores  were  melted,  aud  that  the  gold 
.obtained  from  them  was  drawn  out  in  a fluid  state. 
That  there  was  a spring,  must  be  a misapprehen- 
sion, and  wc  must  imagine  instead  that  there  was 
a cistern  prepared  to  receive  the  gold.  As  a 
pitcher  need  not  be  very  large  to  contain  one 
-talent  (wlifl^Ji  is  only  somewhat  more  than  fifty- 
three  pounds)  of  gold,  this  particular  may  be  con- 
sidered as  correct,  but  no  stress  need  be  placed 
on  the  statement  that  this  operation  was  repeated 
every  year.  If  this  supposition  is  right,  it  follows 
that  the  Indians  knew  how  to  c.\tract  gold  from 
the  ore  by  melting. 

Of  tho  gold  it  is  said  also,  that  it  is  not  obtained 
from  rivers  by  washing,  (which,  however,  is  a mis- 
take), but  that  it  was  met  with  on  mountains  that 
stretched  far  away,  and  was  there  guarded  by 
grilHns.^*  This,  as  has  already  been  remarked,  is 
the  fiction  which  had  reached  the  oars  of  Ktosias, 
whereas  according  to  the  account  given  by  others 
it  was  dug  out  of  tho  ground  by  the  ants.  Of 
silver-mines,  it  is  said  that  there  are  many  of 
them,  although  nut  as  deep  as  those  in  Baktriana. 
This  agrees  with  the  reality,  because  iu  India 
silver  mines  seem  to  ocenr  only  in  U d a y a p d r a 
in  Ajmir : on  the  other  hand  Badakshan,  in  the 
upper  Oxus  valley,  is  rich  in  silver. His  report 
would  accordingly  refer  to  a more  eastern  country 
than  the  Indus  region. 

On  the  seal-ring,  Pantarha,  which  is  said  to  have 
had  tho  property  when  thrown  into  tho  water  of 
attracting  other  seal-rings  and  precious  stonos,  so 

FraR.  i.  12. 

**  Tale’s  Marco  Polo,  vol.  I,  p.  Id6 ; Cathay,  p.  595. 


70 


that  they  became  connected  with  each  other,  the 
remark  n&y  suffice  that  an  altogether  satisfactory 
solution  of  this  story  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
found.^^  It  must  also  be  left  undecided  what  we 
are  to  understand  by  the  eUktron  (amber)  which 
daring  thirty  days  of  the  year  exuded  like  sweat 
from  the  trees  on  the  monutalns  into  the  river 
Hyparkhos,  and  which  turned  hard  in  its 
waters.^^  Of  this  much  only  can  we  be  certain, 
that  it  was  a gum  exuding  from  ti’ces,  of  which 
there  are  several  kinds  in  India,  especially  towards 
the  cast — the  likeliest  quai’tcr  wherein  to  seek  for 
this  river. 

The  mention  of  this  tree  leads  us  to  the  reports 
concerning  Indian  plants,  and  the  ])roducts  of  the 
vegetable  kingdom.  The  trees  producing  the  oil 
called  Karpion  have  been  already  treated  of.“ 
Of  the  Indian  palms  it  is  said  that  tboir  frnits, 
which  are  called  nuts,  arc  three  times  as  largo  as 
the  Babylonian.^**  It  is  evident  that  it  was  some 
other  than  the  date-palm,  and  was  no  donbt  the 
oocoa-palm,  which  has  a nut  of  the  size  indicated. 

Of  the  Indian  reed  Ktesias  has  repoi’ted  that  it 
grows  in  the  mountain  regions  on  the  Indus,  and 
is  so  thick  that  two  men  with  ontstretched  hands 
cannot  span  it  round,  and  that  it  is  as  high  as  the 
mast  of  a large  ship.*®  This  report  agrees  with 
that  of  Horodotns,  only  that  it  gives  a more  exact 
description,  which  may  be  considered  as  true,  since 
the  bamboo  can  grow  to  the  height  of  sixty  feet, 

“ Frag.  ii.  and  note. 

Frag.  i.  15,  and  note. 

>■  Lassen,  Ind.  Alt.,  vol.  II,  p.  504. 

“ Frag,  i,  13,  and  xv. 

*®  Frag,  i,  6,  and  vii. 


71 


and  may  be  two  feet  in  diameter.  KtSsias  was 
the  first  who  brought  to  notice  that  thei%  are  male 
and  female  reeds  ; that  the  latter  only  had  a pith> 
and  the  former  none ; and  that  the  former  were 
more  strong  and  compact,  and  the  latter  broader. 
He  mentions  also  the  fact  that  small  boats  were 
made  of  thdl:p,  which  could  hold  not  more  than  three 
men,  provided,  as  is  probable,  this  statement  really 
does  belong  to  hira.*^ 

The  expression,  garnienta  prodnced  by  trees,  can 
only  moan  cotton  garments.*®  Ktesias  has  without 
doubt  stated  that  the  Indians  from  preference  use 
oil  of  sesame,  and  it  can  only  be  the  fault  of  the 
author  of  the  extract  if  the  use  of  this  oil,  together 
with  that  of  the  oil  expressed  From  nuts,  is  ascribed 
to  the  pygmies.*®  His  other  statements  with  re- 
gal'd to  the  obtaining  of  oils  are  evidently  fictions.** 
Among  these  products  of  the  exuberant  fancy  of  the 
Indians,  there  may  hero  bo  appropriately  mentioned 
the  story  that  those  living  near  the  Indus  obtained  a 
kind  of  oil  from  the  worms  living  in  that  river,  said 
to  have  possessed  the  property  of  setting  everything 
on  fire.  Some  have  supposed  from  this  that  the 
ancient  Indians  were  acquainted  with  fire-arms,** 
but  the  report  must  on  the  contrary  bo  usal  to  show 
that  poetical  ideas  peculiar  to  the  Indians  had 
already  iu  the  time  of  Ktesias  become  known  to  the 
Persians.  There  can  scarcely  be  a doubt  that  the 
report  of  Ktfisius  now  in  question  is  the  corruption 
of  the  ancient  Indian  idea  that  the  possession  of 

**  Plin.  HisU  Nat.  XVII,  3. 

••  Frag,  i,  22,  and  xxiv. 

Frag,  i,  11. 

**  Frag,  i,  11,  and  xxvii,  &c. 

**  F.  von  Bohlen,  Altes  Indten,  vol.  II,  p.  64. 


72 


supernatural  arms,  which  they  might  at  times 
entrust  tcA  mortals,  was  one  of  the  special  preroga- 
tives of  the  gods.*®  The  worship  of  snakes  was 
particularly  current  in  the  north-western  frontier 
countries,*^  to  which  the  report  of  Ktesias  regard- 
ing the  oil  specially  relates.  It  will  accordingly 
be  a fire- weapon  lent  to  man  by  one  o£thc  sorpent- 
gbds  then  worshipped,  but  which  was  represented 
to  Ktesias  as  one  that  really  existed. 

For  the  sake  of  continuity  of  subject,  I have 
anticipated  what  is  to  be  remarked  about  the  reports 
of  Ktesias  concerning  Indian  ajiinials.  01  the 
products  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  he  had  men- 
tioned a VP-V]!  sweet  by  which  expression 

probably  must  bo  understood  only  an  intoxicating 
liquor  prepared  from  sugar  and  palm-juice,  since  wo 
know  that  grapes  do  not  grow  in  India.  Lastly, 
according  to  our  author,  tliere  existed  also  a tree 
Par6bo8,  or  Parijbos,  which  was  found  otily  in  tbe 
gardens  of  the  king,  the  root  whereof  atti’acted 
everything  to  itself,  such  as  metals,  and  birds 
also,  and  sheep ; birds  for  the  most  part  being 
caught  by  it.  The  root  served  also  as  a medicine 
against  bowel  disorders.*®  With  thi.s  conception 
may  be  suitably  compared  that  of  divining-rods,  by 
the  aid  whereof  metals  were  sought  to  bo  discover- 
ed. What  Indian  tree  is  meant  is  not  certain. 

Whoever  is  aware  of  the  great  vegetable  riches 
of  India  cannot  fail  to  remark  that  the  reports  of 
Ktesias  concerning  them  are  extremely  scanty. 


**  Lassen,  Ind.  AH.  vol.  I,  p.  G7'l,  n.  1. 
” Lassen,  vol.  1.1,  p.  468. 

**  Frag,  i,  29. 

Frag,  i,  18,  and  xix. 


73 


Possibly  the  reason  for  this  defeat  may  be  partly 
that  the  regions  best  known  to  the  PerJians,  and 
consequently  to  him,  are  loss  rich  in  vegetable 
products  than  those  of  inner  India,  but  the  prin- 
cipal reason  is  to  be  sought  in  the  negligence 
and  incompleteness  of  the  whole  extract,  wherein 
the  various*^ubjects  follow  each  other  witliont  a 
proper  connexion,  as  well  as  in  the  circumstance 
that  quotations  from  his  book  are  by  accidoiib 
pretty  copious  on  some  subjects  and  not  on  others. 
Thus  the  extracts  are  meagre  which  describe 
ordinary  things,  whereas  about  the  extraordinary, 
much  richer  extracts  have  come  down  to  us. 
Accordingly  we  cannot  absolve  the  classic  writers 
who  have  preserved  for  ns  passages  from  the 
work  of  KtSsias  from  the  reproach  of  having 
selected  precisely  those  that  relate  what  is  extra- 
ordinary and  wonderful. 

This  reproach  attaches  also  to  his  statements 
‘abqnt  Indian,  animals — some  of  those  most  valued 
and  piaiscd  by  the  Indians,  as  cows  and  lions,  are 
not  even  mentioned  in  the  extracts,  bnt  on  the 
contrary  those  only  that  aro  extraordinary  and 
fictitious.  It  can  scarcely  be  denied  that  ICtesiaa 
treated  of  the  former.  About  other  animals  he  had 
boon  misinformed.  The  knowledge  of  the  Indian 
animal  kingdom  which  was  communicated  by  him 
to  his  countrymen  is  doubly  significant  for  the 
history  of  zoology,  f’irstly,  it  is  certnin  that 
Aristotle,  the  founder  of  this  science,  had  made  use 
of  his  reports  about  Indian  animals,  and  his  book 
thereforo  contributed,  though  but  slightly,  to  the 
materials  whereon  that  eminent  genius  founded 
his  observations.  Secondly,  through  him  several 
10 


74 


Indian  animals  first  became  known  to  the  Gfreeks, 
and  hc«-  has  therefore  co-operated  so  far  to  pro- 
pagate zoological  knowledge  among  his  country- 
men. To  represent  this  addition  to  science  is  the 
business  of  zoology ; for  a history  of  Greek  know- 
ledge abont  India  it  is  sufficient  to  enumerate  the 
animals  which  lie  has  mentioned-fThn  exception 
being  allowable  only  when  an  animal  through  some 
real  or  imaginary  jiccnliaritj  appears  pre-eminent 
over  others,  or  when  the  form  of  the  representa- 
tion is  characteristic  of  the  way  the  author  views- 
things. 

Concerning  tho  animal  most  romarkablo  to 
foreigners  on  account  of  its  size,  docility  and 
multifarious  uses,  the  elephant  I mean,  he  had  been 
misled  by  the  Persians  into  making  the  exaggerat- 
ed statement  that  in  war  tho  king  of  the  Indians 
was  preceded  by  one  hundred  thousand  of  them, 
whilst  throe  thousand  of  the  strongest  ami  most 
valiant  followed  him.®°  It  can  just  as  little  h& 
true  that  these  animals  wore  used  to  demolish 
walls  of  hostile  towns.  On  tho  other  hand,  ho 
truthfully  reports  what  ho  hud  seen  with  his  own 
eyes,  that  in  Babylon,  elephants  pulled  up  palm- 
trees,  I’oots  and  all.  He  is  the  first  Greek  who 
mentioned  the  peculiarity  of  the  female  elephants 
that  when  they  were  in  heat  a strongly  smelling 
fluid  issued  out  from  an  oz’ifico  in  their  temples.®^ 
Of  the  parrots  ho  remarked  with  charming  sim- 
plicity that  they  spoke  Indian,  but  also  spoko 
Greek  if  they  had  been  taught  to  do  so.  Tho 


Frag,  i,  3,  iv,  and  v. 
Frag,  i,  3,  and  v. 


76 


Indian  name  of  the  jackal  ho  was  the  first  to  com- 
manicate  to  the  Greeks  under  the  form,  Krokoitos, 
and  it  follows  from  what  he  says,  ns  well  as  from 
the  fables  current  about  this  auimivl,  that  tho 
iEthiopian  kind  cannot  be  meant.”*  Tho  qualities' 
attributed  to  it,  such  as  that  it  imitates  the 
human  ToicJ,,has  the  strength  of  tho  lion,  and  tho 
swiftness  of  the  horse,  show  that  the  jackal  already 
at  that  time  played  a prominent  part  iii  animal 
fables,  and  that  such  were  generally  current  in 
India,  if  there  were  any  need  of  such  an  argument. 

Of  tho  four  yet  remaining  aniraaks,  two  must  be 
considered  as  real,  though  it  is  not  easy  to  identify 
them.  The  other  two  have  on  tho  contrary  been 
invented  but  not  by  the  Indians  themselves,  'i’hc 
wild  ass  was  specially  distinguished  by  his  horn, 
because,  of  tho  hoims  cups  were  manufactured 
which  protected  those  who  drank  out  of  them 
from  certain  kinds  of  diseases  and  from  poison.®* 
Ho  was  further  distinguished  from  solid-hoofed 
animals  by  tho  gall  on  his  liver  and  by  his  ankle- 
bone.  Tho  first  mark  suits  tho  rhiiioceros,  as  it 
possesses  a largo  gall  bladder,  but  not  the  second, 
because  all  quadnipods  have  anklc-boncs.  This, 
however,  may  only  bo  an  error  of  tho  author, 
though  one  that  is  suq>rising  since  he  was  a 
physician  and  had  himself  seen  such  aukle-hones. 
According  to  him,  they  were  red,  which  is  likewise 
false.  Tho  great  strength  attributed  to  the  animal 
points  to  the  rhinoceros,  hat  not  the  great  swift- 
ness. At  the  same  time  the  name,  kartuzotwn,  docs 

®*  Schwanbeok,  ilegnsth.  Ind.  p.  3.  Tbo  Greek  is  a form 
of  kotth&rakn  from  hroiihfuka,  a jackal. 

®®  Frag,  i,  23,  26,  aod  zxv. 


76 


not  famish  us  with  any  certain  means  of  identi- 
fication. * Tho  explanation  of  this  word  from  new 
Persian  is  not  tenablo — we  might  rather  think 
that  Ktusias  had  altered  the  Indian  name  of  the 
rhinoceros,  Katli/a  (which  can  be  easily  changed  to 
Kharga)  to  Kuda,  in  order  to  assimilate  tho  sound 
to  that  of  Greek  words  whoso  sigiplications  are 
very  suitable  to  the  animal.®* 

By  piecing  these  remarks  together  it  would 
appear  ino.st  jirobnble  that  by  the  w’ild  as.s  is  to 
be  understood  the  rliinoccros,  because  there  is 
no  other  Indian  .animal  which  tho  description 
snits  better.  If  Ktusias  attributes  to  it  a red  head 
and  a white  body,  whilst  its  colour  is  really  grey- 
brown,  he  had  pei'haps  been  so  informed.  With 
reference  to  this  so-callcd  Indian  unicorn,  and 
also  to  the  two  fabulous  animals,  the  griffin  and 
tho  martikhoms,  I have  already  remarked  that 
it  is  incorrect  either  to  redognize  them  in  tlio 
wonderful  animals  of  Pereepolis,  or  to  attribute 
to  them  a Baktro-Iiulian  origin.  In  opposing  this 
view,  £ have  shown  that  tho  similarity  of  the  sculp- 
tured animals  to  those  described  by  Ktosias  is  only 
general — that  in  both  cases  tho  animals  have  been 
composed  from  parts  of  such  as  were  real,  and  fur- 
ther that  an  ethicjo-rcligious  symbolism  through 
miraculons  animals  was  unknown  to  tlie  Indians. 
The  conjecture  there  thrown  out  that  tho  old 
Persian  miraculous  animals  are  of  Babylonic- 
Assyriau  origin,  have  been  confirmed  by  the  recent 
discoveries  at  Nineveh. 

About  the  bird,  Dikairos,  which  was  not  larger 
xapra  strong,  and  (mov  animal. 


77 


than  the  egg  of  a partridge,  the  dung  of  which 
was  dug  up,  and  first  produced  sleep  and%,flberward8 
death,**  I can  say  nothing  more  satisfactory  than 
others.  That  it  is  not  fictitious  appears  from  the 
fact  that  the  King  of  India  had  sent  some  of  it  to 
the  King  ^ Persia,  who  preserved  it  as  something 
very  precioas,  because  it  was  a remedy  against  in- 
curable discn.ses.  That  opium,  as  has  been  sug- 
gested, cannot  be  meant  by  it,  is  certain,  since 
the  cultivation  of  that  drug  was  introduced  much 
later  into  India.  It  would  be  futile  to  ti*y  to 
explain  the  namo  bccauso  it  is  explained  by  the 
word  just,  and  has  been  altered  to  assimilate  its 
sound  to  that  of  a Greek  word. 

If  the  have  been  indicated  as  Indian 

animals,**  there  is  no  confirmation  of  this  discover- 
able in  the  Indian  writings — and  so  the  griffins 
must  be  classed  along  with  the  issedonians,*'  the 
Arimaspians,  and  other  fictions  of  the  more 
northern  peoples,  which  had  found  admission 
also  among  tho  Por.sians,  whore  they  survived 
till  later.  Just  as  foreign  to  tho  Indians  is  the 
Marlikhoras,  whoso  name  is  correctly  explained  as 
ike  man-eatd',^  but  in  old  Iranian,  because  Marlija- 
qdra  has  this  meaning,  but  the  second  part  is 
foreign  to  the  Indian  language.  If  Ktdsias  has 
reported  that  ho  had  seen  such  an  animal  with  the 
Persian  King  to  whom  it  had  been  presented  by 
the  Indian  king,  he  cannot  in  this  instance  be 
acquitted  of  mendacity. 

>•  Frag,  i,  17,  and  xviii ; the  name  is  also  written  Dikeros. 

Frag,  i,  12,  and  xiv. 

**  Lassen,  Ind.  Alt.,  vol.  II,  p.  609. 

*•  Vng.  i,  7,  and  viii-xi ; Herodot.  HI,  116 ; IV,  18,  27. 


78 


Since  he  has  specified  a pretty  largo  number  of 
Indian  animals  without  exhausting  the  list,  and 
has  also  described  some  of  them  minutely,  if  we 
may  judge  from  the  details  which  have  been  pre- 
served, we  may  conclude  that  he  had  also  treated 
at  large  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the 
Indians.  From  this  portion  of  the  which, 

had  it  been  preserved,  would  have  interested  us 
most  of  aU,  we  cannot  expect  to  have  learned  any- 
thing about  those  subjects  which  wo  do  not  already 
know,  but  light  would  have  been  thrown  upon 
the  communications  which  had  at  that  time  reach- 
ed the  Persians  from  India,  and  upon  tho 
nature  of  the  ideas  they  had  conceived  regarding 
the  inhabitants  of  India.  But  unfortunately  we 
possess  only  very  scanty  extracts  on  such  topics, 
while,  on  tho  other  hand,  there  are  tolerably  com- 
plete repetitions  of  his  reports  of  fabulous  peoples. 

Of  tlie  Indians  he  correctly  asserted  tliat  they 
had  their  black  colour  not  from  the  sun,  but  from 
nature.^^  As  a proof  he  adduced  the  fact  that  he 
had  with  his  own.  eyes  seen  white  Indians,  viz. 
two  women  and  live  men.  Ho  mentioned  their 
great  justice,  their  laws  and  customs,  their  love 
for  their  sovereigns,  and  their  scorn  of  death. 
Nothing  shows  so  plainly  how  little  the  way  in 
which  the  extracts  have  been  made  is  to  be  relied 
on,  as  the  omission  of  those  very  subjects,  with  the 
exception  of  four  of  the  less  important  usages. 
Tho  first  is  that  the  Indians  went  on  pilgrimage  to 
a holy  place  distant  fifteen  days  from  the  Sard 
moontains,  situated  in  an  uninhabited  region  where 


Frag,  i,  9. 


79 


they  worshipped  the  snn  and  the  moon.  During 
the  festival  the  snn  is  said  to  have  afiSrded  them 
coolness  for  thirty-fivo  days,  so  that  they  might 
be  able  to  perform  all  the  rites  and  return  to  their 
homes  unscorched  by  his  heat.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  as  to  where  this  place  lay.  It  was  among 
the  Vin^h  y a s,  one  of  whose  off-shoots  are  the 
Sardian  mountains.  It  is  solf-ovidcnt  that 
this  can  only  have  been  an  isolated  worship  of 
the  two  luminaries,'*®  probably  by  a barbarous  tribe, 
to  which  also  the  legend  of  the  cooling  down  of 
the  temperature  may  have  belonged. 

The  second  custom  mentioned  is  connected 
with  the  idea  formed  by  Ktesias  of  the  bodily 
constitution  of  tho  Indians.  They  attained  an 
age  of  130  or  140  years,  and  tho  oldest  of  200. 
None  of  them  suffered  from  headache,  eye  diseases, 
toothache,  sore  mouths,  or  putrid  ulcers.  In 
India  there  was  a quadrangular  well,  enclosed  by 
rocks,  wherein  the  Indians  of  high  rank  bathed 
along  with  their  wives  and  children.  It  had  tho 
property  of  throwing  out  again  upon  tho  bank 
not  only  the  bathers,  but  everything  else,  except 
gold,  silver,  iron  and  copper.  It  is  called  in 
India  haUad6,  which  meant  useful.  This  word  is 
reallyIndian,for  in  Sanskrit  halada  means  strength’ 
giving.  From  this  report  we  learn  the  unimpor- 
tant fact  that  the  Indians  had  discovered  the 
healing  power  of  mineral  wells. 

Another  well  had  tho  peculiarity  that  the  water 
drawn  from  it  congealed  to  tho  thickness  of 
cheese.**^  If  three  obols  weight  of  this  was  tri- 


« Frag.  i.  8. 


Frag,  i,  14. 


80 


tarated  to  a powder  and  being  put  in  water  was  giren 
as  a dose  fb  an  inculpated  person,  he  confessed  all 
his  transgressions.  The  king  used  this  as  a means 
to  bring  the  accused  to  a confession.  Those  found 
gnilty  under  the  ordeal  were  condemned  to  die 
of  starvation,  and  the  innocent  were  dismissed. 
This  particular  is  remarkable,  because  (he  Chinese 
pilgrim,  Fah*hian,  relates  something  similar  re- 
garding Udy&u  a,  a country  west  of  the  Indus 
and  to  the  north  of  Peshawar.  He  says  it  was  the 
custom  there,  if  a doubt  existed  about  the  guilt  of 
an  accused  person,  to  remove  the  doubt  by  admi- 
nistering to  him  a medicinal  drink;  those  guilty 
of  a capital  oifcnce  were  banished.  Pliny  had  much 
earlier  reported  something  similar  of  an  Indian 
plant.**  Guilty  persons  who  had  swallowed  pills 
prepared  from  its  roots  and  administered  in  wine, 
were  during  the  night  tormented  by  visions,  and 
confessed  all  their  transgressions.  Although  the 
origin  of  the  drink  mentioned  by  Ktesias  maybe  in- 
correct, there  can  bo  no  doubt  but  that  it  was  used 
for  judicial  purposes,  as  it  is  confirmed  by  the  other 
two  witnesses.  Of  such  ordeals,  called  divya  and 
parikaluz,  several  are  adduced  in  the  codes  of  law.** 
Among  these,  poison  also  occurs.  If  the  accused, 
after  swallowing  the  dose,  felt  no  hurtful  effects 
ensuing, he  was  declared  innocent, so  that  the  report 
of  Ktosiasis  justified  by  the  Indians  themselves.** 

This,  however,  cannot  be  said  of  the  fourth  cus- 
tom mentioned  in  the  fragments  of  the  work ; that  in 

*•  Hist,  Not,  xxiv,  102. 

Mann,  Dharmai.  VII,  114*11 6 ; Yfljn.  DharmaS.  II,  95ff. 

**  See  Stenzler,  SSsitiehrift  d.  D.  Morg.  Oss,  vol.  IX,  p. 
«61. 


81 


hunting  hares  and  foxes,  the  Indians  did  not  use 
dogs,  but  eagles,  crows,  and  vultures,  which  they 
trained  for  that  purpose.'*’  For  this  practice  the 
Indian  writings  afford  no  confirmation,  though  it 
by  no  means  follows  that  the  report  is  untrue.  It 
is  only  doijjbtful  whether  eagles  can  be  so  tamed. 
It  would  beiimportant  to  know  whether  from  an 
oversight  on  the  part  of  Aeliaii,  who  alone  has 
preserved  this  report,  vultures  have  not  been 
substituted  for  falcons ; in  that  case  this  custom 
would  be  one  which  the  Indians  had  in  common 
with  the  Thrakians  and  the  ancient  Germans. 

With  regard  to  the  Aryan  Indians  wo  loam 
nothing  from  the  extracts  from  the  work  of 
Kt^sias,  but  the  fact  already  noticed,  that  they 
were  white.  He  invariably  speaks  of  but  one  king 
of  India*’ ; but  from  tbis  wo  must  not  conclude 
that  at  that  time  Western  India  formed  a single 
state,  it  would  rather  appear  that  Ktdsias  did 
not  care  to  treat  of  the  separate  kingdoms. 

The  fabulons  peoples  arc  divided  into  two  classes, 
ono  purely  fictitious,  and  the  other  embmciiig  the 
aboriginal  tribes  lliat  Iiavo  obtained  their  name 
from  !5ome  one  poouliiii'ity,  and  in  one  particular 
instance  this  name  is  Greek.  Of  tbo  first  class 
Skylax  had  already  mentioned  several.  There 
is  but  this  one  fact  with  reference  to  these  tribes 
which  is  significant,  that  since  tbo  fictions  regard- 
ing them  had  been  propagated  to  foreign  nations 
so  early  as  the  time  of  Skylax,  they  must  have 
been  still  earlier  widely  curi'cnt  among  the 
Indians.  It  will  therefore  be  sufficient,  if,  without 


Frag.  xiii. 
11 


*’  Frag,  i,  14,  28,  31,  Ac. 


82 


treating  of  them  specially,  I content  myself  with 
merely  csiSkblishing  their  claim  to  be  of  Indian 
origin*^  When  Ktesias,  following  no  doubt  the 
precedent  of  the  Persians,  reported  of  one  of.  these 
tribes  that  it  was  a very  brave  nation,  andthat  five 
thousand  men  of  them  followed  the  king  of  the 
Indians  as  archers  and  lancers,  so  far  from  seeing 
in  this  circumstance  a reason  to  consider  them  a 
real  nation,  as  in  the  great  epic  the  onc-footed 
men  brought  gifts  to  a king,  we  shall  only  find  a 

The  ^Y^voTiKTovT^r — ^tlie  oHce-beari?if;“SooTzetzes,  Chih 
vii.  Fra^r.  i.  and  jcxx,  are  called  in  Sanskrit  Ekctgarhha-t 
and  inhabit  tlic  eight  varshas  or  divisions  of  the  terrestrial 
heavens : BMg,  Purdna  v,  17,  12.  According  to  an  earlier 
opinion  the  varslitis  were  parts  of  the  Avorld.  Whether 
Ktesias  also  mentioned  the  one-eyed  Ekulochfinai  who 
appear  in  the  great  epic,  is  doubtful.  Conf.  Tzetzes,  Ckil. 
ibid,  and  Mahdb.  Ill,  297j  v,  10137.  But  both  do  Tnention 
the  Indian  Kamaprdvatvna.,  or  those  who  used  their  ears 
as  a covering,  and  who  dwelt  in  the  Bouthem  region.  By 
Bkylax  they  are  called  QrdXiKvoiy  i.e.  having  shovol-sized 
cars,  Tzetzes,  OkiL  vii,  ffll,  038.  Ktesias  (frag,  i,  31)  does 
not  seem  to  have  known  their  name,  but  he  says  they  had 
eight  fingers  on  oaeli  hand,  and  eight  toes  on  each  foot,  a 
feature  wanting  in  the  Indian  accounts,  but  which  is  cer- 
tainly an  Indian  idea.  Megasthenes  had  tra.nslatcd  the 
Indian  name  by  ^EvtoroKoirtn^  i.e.  snob  as  slept  in  their 
cars:  (see  lud,  Ant.  vol.  VI,  pp.  133-4).  The SAfmnroSer 
are  mouiioned  by  Skylax,  Hckabiios,  and  Ktesias, — by  the 
second  as  in  Ethiopia,  with  th(5  frequent  allribution  of 
Indian  fictions  to  Ethiopia : 'rzetzes,  CliiL  vii,  62S)  f. ; 
^Phil«^trat.  Vit-  Apj>olon.  vii,  14;  Ktes.  fmg.  xxvii,  or 
, Muller,  Ctes.  Frag,  89,  p.  100,  They  have  not  yet  been 
. identified  in  Indian  writings : thciir  name  must  have  been 
CLhdyS^Ma,  Possibly  they  wens  considered  to  have  feet 
largo  enough  to  overshadow  them.  The  predecessors  of 
Ktesi^tS  had  not  mentioned  the  one-footed  race  called  A'fca- 
pdda,  who  were  able  nevertheless  to  run  fast— frag.  xxx. 
The  passage  relating  to  them  in  the  Mahdbhdrata,  accord- 
ing to  which  they  lived  in  the  north,  is  cited  by  Lassen, 
hid.  Alt.  vol.  I,  p.  1026n.,  and  that  from  the  Rdmdyana 
in  the  Zeitsrhrift  f.  d.  k.  d.  Morg.  vol.  TI.  p.  40.  Pliny 
(Hist.  Nat.  VII,  2.)  incorrectly  considers  them  to  have  been 
the  same  as  the  Scinpodes.  . 


83 


new  proof  of  the  wide  dissemination  of  such  fic* 
tions  at  that  early  period.  * 

It  will  be  suitable  here  to  mention  that  Ktosias 
was  the  first  Greek  who  had  received  intelligence 
of  the  Tioly  country  of  the  TJttara  Kurn, 
although  considering  tho  incomplete  state  in  which 
his  work  lie*  before  us,  this  can  only  bo  shown  by 
the  help  of  tho  native  writings.  Ho  hod,  to  wit, 
stated  that  there  existed  a fountain  called  Silas, 
in  whose  waters  even  tho  lightest  substances 
that  were  thrown  in  sank  to  the  bottom.**  Now, 
this  is  the  river  ^il£  or  iSailoda  which  one 
must  cross  before  he  can  reach  that  country.  It 
was  believed  that  nothing  would  float  or  swim  in 
its  waters  because  by  contact  with  them  every- 
thing was  transmuted  into  stone.  It  was  only 
possible  to  effect  a passage  by  menus  of  the 
Kichaka-reed  which  grew  there.  Tho  Greek 
representation  offers  itself  as  an  inversion  of  the 
Indian  fiction ; if  anything  that  came  into  con* 
tact  with  the  water  was  changed  into  stone,  it 
must  havo  become  as  heavy  as  stone  and  sunk  to 
the  bottom.  The  Greeks  accordingly  supposed  that 
the  lightness  of  the  water  was  tho  causo  of  its 
being  innavigable. 

In  the  e.Ktant  excerpts  there  is  no  mention  of  th^,  ‘ 
Hyperboreans,  who,  as  wo  shall  afterwards  show,- 
answer  to  the  Indian  Uttara  kurn.  Accord-  *' 
ing  to  Mcgasthencs,  they  lived  one  thousand  years, 
but  according  to  the  Indian  view  one  thousand 

**  Frag,  xxviii.  Megastbonfe  also  mentions  a rifer  Silas 
flowing  from  a source  of  the  same  name  through  tho  country 
of  the  Sileoi,  and  so  light  that  ovorything  sank  in  it.  The 
dilft  is  mentioned  also  in  the  MaMbh.  VI,  6,  v.  219,  bat 
north  of  Morn. 


84 


and  even  ten  thousand  years.**  Accoi'dingly  it  is  not 
at  all  iinpo&sible  but  that  Ktesiaa  has  mentioned 
them  under  the  name  ofMakrobioi,  who  lived 
four  hundred  years.  These  are  attributed  also  to 
Ethiopia  by  Hei'odotus*”  and  other  winterS  oi  later 
date,  but  aro  probably  of  Indian  or'^in.^ 

The  accounts  given  of  the  real  tribes  deserve 
more  consideration,  because  from  them  several 
particulars  appear  which  shed  over  the  aborigines 
and  their  contact  with  the  Arian  Indians  a light 
all  the  more  unexpected,  as  it  has  been  Lbe  common 
practice  to  deny  all  value  to  tho  statements 
advanced  by  Ktesias  in  this  connection. 

Among  the  real  tribes  was  one  that  was  black, 
and  dwelt  above  the  river  H y p a r k U o s,  probably 
the  Ganges.®^  They  spent  their  days  iu  idleness, 
ate  no  corn,  but  lived  only  on  the  milk  of  kiue, 
goats  and  sheep  which  they  maintained  in  great 
numbers.  This  notice  is  interesting,  in  so  far  as 
it  shows  that  on  the  upper  Gauges,  or  more  correct- 
ly in  the  Himalaya,  there  still  existed  in  those 
^ys  black  aborigines,  as  the  great  Epos  also  knows 
them  there.  It  must  be  considered  as  an  exag- 
geration that  they  drank  no  water,  and  that  though 
not  agricnltnrists,  they  subsisted  also  upon 
■fruits.  The  fullest  repoi'tsaro  those  relating  to 
• the  Kynamolgoi  or  Kynokophaloi,  the 
dog-headed,®*  who  must  on  account  of  this  pecu- 
liarity being  attributed  to  them  have  particularly 


« Frag,  xjx ; Pliny,  H.  N.  VII.  2,  has  confounded  the 
Fandore  with  tho  Mandi  of  Kleitarkhos  and  Ktesios.  See 
Schwanbeck^s  Megasth.  Ind*  p.  71 ; Alter,  vol. 

**’*^erodot.  HI,  17.  ^ " .?."«■  24. 

••  Flag,  i,  20,  22,  28^  and  m,  xxu,  xxui. 


85 


attracted  the  attention  of  tlic  classical  authors. 
They  were  widely  propagated,  because  they  dwelt 
near  the  sources  of  the  Hyparklios,  as  well  as  in 
Southei^n  India;  their  number  is  stated  to  have 
amounti^d  to  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand. 
They  wer(^blac,k,  and  tho  teeth,  tails  and  voices  of 
dogs,  as  weV  as  their  heads,  arc  attributed  to  them . 
They  understood,  however,  tho  language  of  the 
Indians.  Tlio  reason  for  their  name  and  their 
fictitious  properties  is  evident  from  the  circum- 
stance that  they  kept  big  dogs  for  htinting  wild 
oxen  and  other  wild  animals.  If  the  nse  of  dog- 
milk  is  attributed  to  them,  this  may  li.ave  also  been 
merely  an  invention,  becauso  it  is  said  elsewhere 
that  they  used  also  the  milk  «)f  goats  and  of  sheep. 
Tho  other  things  I’olatod  of  them  show  that  they 
were  a real  nation,  a tribe  of  the  black  aborigines. 

They  were  acquainted  with  but  few  of  tho  tech- 
nical arts,  had  no  houses  or  beds,  but  dwelt  in 
caves  and  slept  oh  couches  of  stmw,  leaves,  or 
grass,  'fhey  knew  how  to  tan  hides,  and  the  men 
as  well  as  the  women  wore  very  fine  garments 
manufactured  from  them.  The  richest  only  pos- 
sessed linen.  They  kept  a multitude  of  asses, 
goats  and  sheep,  and  the  greatest  number  of  the 
latter  constituted  their  wealth.  Besides  milk' 
they  used  also  as  food  the  fruit  of  tho  Siptakhora 
tree,  which  they  dried  and  packed  up  in  plaited 
baskets  and  exported  to  the  other  Indians.  They 
were  very  fast  runners,  good  hunters,  archers 
and  hurlers  of  the  javelin.  They  lived  especially 
on  the  produce  of  the  chase.  The  flesh  of  the 
animal  a which  they  killed,  they  roasted  in  the 
ran.  Protected  by  their  inacceseible  mountains. 


86 


they  irere  not  attacked  in  war  by  their  neigh- 
bours; tbfiy  are  represented  as  just  men  and 
harmless.  They  aro  said  to  have  reached  the  ago 
of  one  hundred  and  seventy  yeai's,  and  some  even 
of  two  hundred.  They  carried  on  trade  with  the 
civilized  Indians  in  their  ncighbourhooc^  mid  stood 
in  a free  relationship  with  the  IiidiaK  king.  To 
him  they  brought  annually  two  hundred  and  sixty 
talents  of  dried  fruits  of  the  Siptakhora  tree  on 
rafts,  and  as  many  talents  of  a red  dye-stuff  and 
one  thousand  of  clekfcron  or  the  gum  exuding  from 
the  Siptakhora  tree.  To  the  Indians  they  sold 
these  wares,  and  obtained  from  them  in  exchange 
bread,  oatmeal,  cotton-clothes,  bows,  and  lances, 
which  they  required  in  hunting  and  killing  wild 
animals.  Every  fifth  year  the  king  presented 
them  with  three  hundred  bows,  three  thousand 
lances,  one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  small 
shields,  and  fifty  thousand  swords. 

This  description  throws  a clear  light  upon  the 
position  held  by  the  Indian  aborigines  towards 
the  kings  of  the  Aryan  Indians,  on  their  mutual 
relations,  on  the  intcrcourso  of  the  civilized 
Indians  with  their  barbarous  countrymen,  and  the 
civilizing  influence  which  they  exercised  upon  them. 
Secured  from  subjugation  in  their  inaccessible 
mountains,  the  latter  must  nevertheless  have  been 
glad  to  live  in  peace  with  the  neighbouring  kings, 
and  to  propitiate  them  by  presents,  and  the  former 
to  make  them  feel  the  superiority  of  their  power. 
On  account  of  the  need  for  the  means  of  subsist- 
ence, and  for  the  means  for  pursuing  their  occu- 
pations, which  they  procured  from  their  civilized 
neighbours,  the  aborigines  were  obliged  to  accustom 


87 


themselves  to  have  intercourse  with  them,  and  to 
afford  them  also  an  opportunity,  and  to  open  a 
door  for  the  admission  of  their  doctrines  and  law» 
among  them. 

The  Ifidian  name  of  this  people  Sunamukha, 
dog-faced,  has  been  discovered  in  a MS.  which  has 
■ not  yet  beey  published.®®  This  tribe,  according  to 
it, “dwelt  on  the  Indus.  The  KaXworptoi  considered 
by  KtSsias  to  bo  synonymous  with  it  cannot  bo 
satisfactorily  explained  from  the  Sanskrit;  but 
it  may  have  reached  us  in  a corrupted  form.  To 
deny  that  the  Aryan  Indians  may  have  given  to  a 
nation  which  they  despised  a name  taken  from  the 
dog  would  be  uni’easouablc,  because  the  dug  was 
a despised  animal,  and  the  name  Svapaka  or 
Svapaka,  i.  v.,  feeder  of  dogs,  designates  one 
of  the  lowest  castes.  Nor  is  thei'o  anything  to 
object  to  the  view  that  one  of  the  aboriginal  tribes 
was  specially  addicted  to  the  rearing  of  dogs,  which 
were  needed  for  hunting,  seeing  that  the  wild 
dog  is  widely  propagated  throughout  India  and 
occurs  in  the  Deccan,  and  probably  also  in  Nqjaul 
^s  well  as  in  the  south  and  in  the  north,  where  the 
Kyuamolgoi  dwelt.  This  tribe  also  has  been 
transferred  to  Ethiopia  and  Libya.®® 

The  third  of  these  tribes  are  the  I*  y g m i o s, 
whoso  name  is  Greek,  and  means  ‘ a fist  long.’ 
They  are  mentioned  by  Homer,  and  as  fighting 


Wilford,  As.  Res.  vol.  VIII,  p.  331,  from  the  Prabhi- 

saikhninAa.  , . ■ , , , , . . 

•*  Vans  Kennedy  csplaincd  this  by  K&iavastra,  clothed 
black,  but  the  meanina  docs  not  suit. 

“ llcrodot.  IV,  191,  and  Agatharkhides,  p.  44,  ed.  Ilud- 
Bon,  who  has  drawn  his  account  from  Ktesias. 


88 


with  the  cranes.'*  It  hence  appears  that  the  name 
has  been  transferred  to  an  Indian  people.  The 
Indian  Pygmies  are  described  as  very  small,  the 
tallest  of  them  being  two  ells  in  height,  but  most  of 
them  only  one  and  a half.  They  dwelt  ‘ in  the  in- 
terior of  India,  were  block  and  deformed,  had  snub 
noses,  long  hair  aud  extraordinarily  lof^e  beards. 
They  were  excellent  archers,  and  three  thousand  of 
them  were  in  the  retinue  of  tho  king.  Their 
sheep,  oxen,  asses  and  mules  were  unusually  small. 
They  hunted  hares  aud  foxes,  nut  with  dugs,  but 
with  eagles,  ravens,  crows  and  vultures,  like  the 
Indiana,  followed  tho  Indian  laws,  and  were  just. 
They  agreed  farther  with  the  Indians  in  using 
both  sesame  oil  and  nut  oil,  as  already  mentioned. 
This  is  all  that  is  stated  regarding  them  iu  the 
fragments  of  Ktc*sias.  To  determine  what  Indian 
people  is  meant  by  this  mime,  it  must  further  be 
mentioned  that  Megasthenos  a.scribos  the  battle 
with  the  cranes  to  the  T r i s p i t h a m o i,  t.  e.  men 
three  spans  long,*'  a name  by  which  ho  could  only 
designate  the  Pygmies,  and  which  he  had  probably 
selected  because  it  was  an  old  word.  Ktesias  may 
therefore  be  considered  as  one  of  those  writers  who 
mentioned  the  battle  of  the  Indian  Pygmies  with 
the  cranes.  Now  the  Indians  ascribe  to  the  Garu- 
d a,  tho  bird  of  Vishnn,  enmity  tow.ards  the  people 
of  the  Kir&ta,  which  for  this  reason  is  called 
K i r ft  t & s i n,  L e.  the  devourers  of  the  K i r ft  t a, 
and  tho  name  of  this  peoplo  has  also  tho  meaning 
of  a dwarf.  It  hence  appears  that  the  Kirfttas 
were  small  men  in  comparison  with  the  Arian 

»“  Tlvtd,  III,  3fr. 

*’  /nd.  Ani.  toI.  YI,  p.  133,  note  t,  P-  133. 


89 


Indians,  and  may  consequently  have  been  easily 
contounded  with  the  Pyginies.  The  form  if  the  bird 
of  Vishnu,  as  described  by  the  poets,  does  not 
exactly  correspond  with  a real  bird ; in  the  pic- 
tures the  form  of  a bird  almost  entirely  yields  to 
that  of  a m?jn,  Jlherc  is  nevertheless  some  simi- 
larity to  an  fagle  and  to  a vulture  as  well  as  to  a 
crane.  If  in  inybliology  a sim[ilo  bird  of  this 
kind  usually  only  occurs,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that 
it  passes  at  the  same  time  for  tlio  father  and  king  of 
the  divine  birds,  and  tlierc  is  nothing  to  hinder  us 
from  believing  that,  ;iccordiiig  to  the  ideas  of  tho 
people  a battle  of  this  bird  with  the  Kira  t a was 
thought  to  have  occurred.  If  tho  remark  that 
they  lived  in  the  interior  of  India  does  not  agreo 
with  their  actual  position,  which  is  assigned  to  tho 
east  of  Jjeiigal,  in  tho  .Himalaya,  and  further  to 
the  uortli,  it  must  be  understood  that  forcignera 
laid  attributed  a wider  extension  to  the  namo  so 
that  it  dosignat<Ml  even  a people  in  Orissa.®^  From 
this  further  application  of  the  names  several  char- 
acteristics attributed  to  tlio  Pygmies  explain 
themselves,  which  partly  suit  the  true  K ir/i  t as, 
who  like  the  l}huta]K5oplearobcai’dlcss,  but  on  tho 
other  hand  wear  long  hair.  Among  them  occur 
also  tho  Hat  noses,*'’'®  but  nob  tho  black  complexion 
by  wliich  the  0-  o n d a and  other  Vindhya  tribes 
arc  on  the  contrary  distinguished,  so  that  here 
also  a commingling  of  characteristics  must  be 
assumed.  Both  those  p(*oplu,  however,  arc  distin- 
guished by  their  sliurtncs^  of  stature.  If  the 

PcHpL  Mir.  c.  62;  Ind.  .lut.  vol.  VTIl,  p.  150. 

Wilford.  u.  meutioifs  the  ctdpitcbiuxsika.  ‘snub- 
nosed.’ 


12 


90 


smallness  of  tlic  Pygmies  has  been  ascribed  to 
their  cattllb  also,  it  must  simply  be  considered  as 
an  enlargement  to  the  account  made  by  foreigners. 
As  wc  have  seen  above  that  the  Arian  kings 
kept  female  Kirata  slaves  and  hunters,  the 

Pygmies  are  described  as  very  brave  a^^d  hunters 
of  wild  animals,  and  even  in  later  tim^s,  the  people 
of  that  race  appear  in  the  I'oj'al  retinue,  the  Greek 
report  is  confirmed  in  this  point  also,  while  it  must 
further  be  correct  in  stating  that,  though  not  all, 
yet  at  least  one  tribe  of  this  people  had  adopted 
the  laws  of  the  Arian  Indians. 

The  Pygmies  with  their  battle  against  the 
cranes  haveal^o  boontransfci’nHlto  i^thii)pia^^lroin 
their  original  hotrie  in  Tiidia.  V/Iielher  the  legend 
concerning  them  had  already  r(.*;u»hed  the  Greeks 
at  the  time  wIkmi  the  poems  of  Homer  were  com- 
posed, maybe  left  undecided. 

The  preceding  oxaiuiiiatioii  of  the  narrative  of 
ICtusias(wbich  has  reached  p(>st(‘ri(y  in  so  abridged 
and  iiicompicto  a form,  aiid  tlie  author  whereof 
had  been  accusofl  by  bis  own  couiitiynuai  of 
mendacity)  abuiidauLly  sliow.s  tliat  Ivte^jias  has  in 
most  cases  only  repeated  statements  as  bo  heard 
them  from  tlie  mouths  of  tijo  l\M-sians,  avIio  tlumi- 
selvcs  had  received  them  from  Tiidimis  who 
Bojouriied  in  tlmir  coiiutiy,  ami  so  we  liave  Iho 
reports,  not  directly  IVoiii  the  Indians  tliemsglvcs, 
but  from  the  Persians.  Prom  this  circumstance, 
it  is  evident  wliy  the  names,  as  i*ar  as  they  havo 
boon  explained,  arc,  with  a single  exception, 
Persian,  and  why  some  names  attributed  to 
the  Indians  are  foreign.  If  we  consider  the  cir- 

~~  ‘»n[£ckat.  Frjij,  20G,  Muller’s  ed.  p.  18. 


91 


cuits  these  accounts  have  made  in  reaching  Greece 
from  India,  wo  cannot  but  be  surprised  that  in. 
genorjil  they  still  bear  the  stamp  oi‘  their  Indian 
origin.  As  lias  l^eoii  showUj  Ktesias  cannot  bo 
absolvcc?  from  tho  charge  of  having  in  some  in- 
stances adorned  the  statcnjciits  luj  received  and  of 
■having  cvc'i  allowed  liiinself  to  tell  untruths.  IIo 
has  also  transIeiTcd  Greek  notions  to  Indian  sub- 
jects, at  least  in  the  luattcr  of  tho  ryginies.  If 
we  howovor  consider  his  book  in  its  original  and 
complete  form,  thou  wo  see  that  ho  must  have 
given  a tolerably  complete  representation  of  tho 
products  of  Western  Imliii,  and  of  the  customs 
and  usages  of  tho  inhabitants,  as  well  us  several 
notices  of  tlio  interior  of  tlio  country.  A few 
iletails  servo  ()von  to  elucidate  Indian  alfairs,  and 
there  wore  no  doubt  iua.ny  such,  which  have  been 
lost,  luicauso  after  tho  Greeks  had  boconie  more 
closely  ac(jnaintcd  with  India  in  tho  time  of 
Alexander  tlio  Great,  liis  work  had  boon  neghnited 
by  his  countrymen.  But  tho  special  signilicanco 
of  his  narrative  does  not  consist  in  these  isolated 
elucidations  of  Indian  autujuity,  but  in  tho  fact 
that  he  had  communicated  to  his  countrymen  tho 
mass  of  tlie  knowledge  on  Imliaii  matters  and  tho 
formwdiich  theyliad  assumed  among  the  Piu'sians, 
and  had  ma.rked  tlunvby  the  extent  of  the  know- 
ledget.  gained  reganling  India  before  tho  time  of 
Aloxaiider.  liis  work  may  have  contriliutod  to 
increase  tho  desire  of  the  Greeks  to  invostigato 
foreign  countries,  bub  it  exerted  no  inlluence  on 
tho  dovelopmcut  of  geographical  science,  and  just 
as  little  on  tho  expedition  of  Alexander,  as  ha& 
already  been  remarked. 


92 


ArPENDIX. 

On  Certain  Indian  Animalj^ 

t 

From  Kosmas  Indikoplcustos'^^  Da  Mnndo^  XL 
1.  The  R1un(^noro8. 

This  aniiDjil  is  called  the  rlunocoros  from  having 
horns  giwviiig  upon  its  nose.  AVhen  it  walks 
about  tlic  horns  shake,  but  when  it  looks  enraged 
it  tightens  them,  and  they  becoino'  tinn  and 
unshaken  so  that  they  are  a])lc  to  tear  np  oven 
trees  by  the  roots,  sucli  especially  as  stand  right 
in  their  way.  Tho  eyes  are  jdiioed  as  low  down  as 
the  jaw'S.  It  is  alLogcLlicr  a most  terrible  auiinal, 
and  is  especially  hostile  to  the  olepluiut.  Its  feet 
and  its  skin  closely  resemble  those  of  the  elephant. 
Ics  skin,  which  is  dry  and  hard,  is  lour  lingers 
thick — and  from  this  instead  of  Ironi  iron  some 
make  plouglisharos  wherewith  they  jiloiigh  their 
lands.  Tho  MLhio|)ians  in  their  language  call  the 
rhinoceros  nroa  or  liarhi,  prefixing  tho  rough 
breathing  to  the  ali}lia  of  the  latter  w'ord,  and 
adding  rhi  to  it,  so  that  tho  word  onm  is  tho 
namo  of  tho  animal,  while  hart  si  is  an  epithet 
which  indicates  its  connexion  with  lilovfjhlng 
arising  from  the  configuration  of  its  nose  and  the 
use  made  of  its  hide,  i have  seen  a living  rhino- 
ceros, but  I was  standing  some  distance  off  at 


A monkish  traveller  of  the  7th  century. 


93 


the  time.  I have  also  seen  the  skin  of  one, 
which  was  stuffed  with  straw  and  ^stood  in  the 
king's  palace,  and  I have  thus  been  enabled  t»;i 
delineate  the  animal  accurately.®* 

» 2.  Thi^  Titnreltiiihos  ov  0>j&-depr, 

This  is  an  animal  found  in  India  and  in  Ethio- 
pia. ]3ut^ those  in  India  arc  tnme  and  gentle,  and 
are  there  used  for  carrying  ])epi;)cr  and  other 
stuffs  packed  in  bngs;  these  Ijelng  slung  ov'or  the 
back  one  on  each  side.  Their  milk  is  made  into 
butter.  Wo  cat  also  their  flesh,  the  Christians 
killing  them  by  cutting  their  throat,  and  the 
Greeks  by  beating  th(?in  with  cudgels.  The 
Ethiopian  ox-dcor,  uidiko  the  Indian,  are  wild  and 
untamcablo. 

o.  Thp  CavivhporihiUs  or  Girffjfp, 

This  aiiiinal  is  found  only  in  Ethiopia,  and  is, 
like  the  hog-deer  of  that  country,  wild  and  ini- 
tamoablo.  In  the  royal  palace,  however,  they  bring 
up  one  or  two  from  the  time  when  tlioy  are  quite 
young,  andinako  tlionitame  tliat  the  siglifc  of  them 
may  aimiso  the  king.  In  his  j)roscucc  they  place 
before  them  milk  or  water  to  drink  contained  in 
a pan,  but,  then,  ONving  to  the  great  length  of  their 
feet,  breast,  and  neek  they  cannot  possibly  stoop 
to  tbo  earth  and  drink  unless  by  making  their  two 
foi'clegs  straddle.  When  they  make  them  strad- 
dle they  cun  of  course  drink.  I have  written  this 
from  my  own  personal  knowledge. 

4.  The  Afjriobons  nr  Wild  Ox. 

This  is  an  animal  of  groat  size  and  belongs  to 

^ Eoferring  to  the  picture  of  tlic  animal  in  his 
book. 


94 


India,  and  from  it  is  got  what  is  called  the  toupha, 
wherewith  Uhe  captains  of  armies  decorate  their 
horses  and  tlieir  standards  when  taking  the  field. 
They  say  of  it  that  if  its  tail  bo  canglit  by  a tree 
it  no  longer  stoops,  but  remains  standing  through 
its  niiwillingncss  to  lose  even  a single  l^air.  On 
seeing  ibis  the  people  of  the  ncigftboyrhood  ap- 
proach and  cut  oil*  the  tail,  and  tlien  the  creaturo 
flies  oir  when  docked  entirely  of  its  tail. 

6.  Thti  or  J\[nitJ:~(lrcr. 

Tins  is  a snv.dl  animal,  and  is  called  in  the 
native  dialect  the  KifrionrlS'^  Those  wlio  liiinb  it 
pierce  it  with  arrows,  and  having  eonlincMl  the 
blood  W'liich  (?r>llocts  at  the  navel,  they  cut  the 
navel  olf,  that  being  the  part  wbicli  has  the 
pleasant  IVagraiico  known  to  ns  under  the  name 
of  musk. 

G.  77/4  Monoherus  or  Uoicorn. 

This  animal  is  called  the  unicorn,  but  T bavo 
never  set  (^yes  upon  it.  I bav(5  however  sf?en 
four  hrny.cii  statnos  of  it  in  Ethiopia,  wdiero  they 
were  set  up  in  Ujc  royal  palace — an  edifice  adorned 
with  four  towers.  Eroin  these  statues  T have  thus 
delineated  tlio  iininial.  '.riiey  say  of  it  that  it  is  a 
terrible  beast  and  invincible,  having  its  power  all 
lodged  ill  its  horn.  When  ib  perceives  that  its 
pursuci’s  are  many  and  that  they  are  on  the  point 
of  catching  it,  ib  sjnangs  down  from  tlie  top  of 
some  precipice,  a.nd  during  tfio  descent  tliroiigh 
the  air  turns  itsedf  iu  such  u way  that  the  whole 
shock  of  the  fall  is  snstuined  by  the  liorn  which 


This  is  still  its  Indian  naino. 


95 


receives  no  damage  thereby.®*  The  scripture  refers 
to  this  peculiarity,  whicli  says  : save,  mti  from  the 
moiiili  of  lions  and  rntj  hnmUifi/  from  the  horns  of 
unicorns ; and  again,  tJir  one  beloved  as  the  son  of 
unicorns ; and  again  in  the  bl(?ssings  of  Balaam 
wlierewitk  hoiWes-sed  Israel,  he  says  twice  over  : 
God  led  /iijfc  out  of  J^gifid  even  as  iho  glory  of  the 
unlcorUi  thus  ])caring  witness  to  the  streiigth  and 
boldness  and  glory  of  the  animal. 

7.  The  Kho! relftphos  or  1 fog-deer ^ 
and  the  Iflppopotamiis. 

The  ling-dcer  T liavt3  l)r)tli  seen  and  eaten.  The 
hippopotaiijus  however  J li:ivo  not  seen,  l}iit  1 
have  Iiad  in  my  ])()ssossion  tocLh  of  it  so  large 
that  they  wcigljcd  about  thirteen  ])ounds.  Tlieso 
teeth  T sold  hero.  I saw  many  botli  in  Ethiopia 
and  in  Egypt. 

8.  Plpcri — re^iper. 

This  is  a picture  of  the  pepper  tree.  Kach 
ficpaiatc  j)lant  clings  for  support  to  some  tall  tree 
wliich  docs  not  yield  fruit,  Ijeiug  very  weak  and 
slender  like  the  delicate  tendrils  of  the  vino,  l^aeli 
cluster  is  ciivelojjed  within  a conpIt5  of  leaves, 
it  is  perfectly  green  like  the  colour  of  rue. 

9.  ArgrUot^*'*  or  the  riieoitnuf-lree. 

There  is  another  tree  of  this  sort  called  a rgelVia-^ 
that  is — the  tali  nnt-trees  of  India,  ft  dillVrs  in 
no  rospoert  from  the  date-palm  e.\coj)t  in  being 
taller  and  thicker  and  luivhig  larger  leaves.  It  pro- 

***  Tlio  ihox  is  sai<l  to  fall  in  siicli  a way  that  its  horns 
sustain  the  forcti  of  tho  impacjt. 

I'ho  iiiitisil  )T  must  have  (Iropi)cd  out  as  the  word  no 
doubt  transliterates  the  native  teriu  for  the  cocoa,  narikel. 


96 


duces  no  other  fruit  than  two  or  three  and  as  many 
nuts.  The  taste  is  extremely  sweet  and  pleasantf 
being  like  that  of  the  kernels  of  green  nuts. 
The  nut  is  at  first  full  of  a deliciously  sweet  water 
wliicli  the  Indians  therefore  drink  instead  of  wine. 
This  very  sweet  bovevugo  is  cii\\drhQf)gky-080ii2>1ui- 
If  the  fruit  is  gathered  at  maturity,  tlion.  so  long 
as  it  keeps  its  cpiality,  the  water  in  the  course  of 
time  hardens  upon  tlic  shell,  while  the  water  in  tho 
centre  retains  its  fiuidity  till  it  finally  disappears. 
If  however  it  he  kept  too  long  irtlhont  loivg  opo.ncd^ 
the  coucrctiun  on  the  shell  becomes  rancid  and 
unfit  for  human  food. 

10.  PUU,  DrJiihls,  KhvUiit>—Tha  Seal,  Ihe 
Dolithhi  amlihe  Tortohe, 

When  at  sea  wo  use  tho  seal,  dolydiin  and 
tortoise  for  food  should  they  chance  to  be  caught.®® 
Tho  dolphin  and  tortoise  wo  kill  by  cutting  tlieir 
tlirojit,  blit  wo  cut  not  iJic  throat  of  the  seal, 
but  despatch  him  with  blows  as  we  do  large 
fish.  The  fh?sh  of  the  tortoise,  like  that  of  tho 
sheep,  is  dark-colonred ; that  of  tho  dolphin  like 
the  pig’s  is  dark  coloured  and  ruTik;  that  of  tho 
seal  like  the  pig’s  is  white,  but  not  rank. 

^ According  to  tlwj  recipe  for  making  haro-soup — 
“ First  catch  your  hare.*’ 


IPOMBAY  : PRINTED  AT  THE  KDXJCATION  SOCIETY’S  PRESS. 


97 


. ADDITIONAL  NOTE. 

In  frt^.  Xm  p.  43  it  is  stated  that  eagles  were 
trained  Uy  th<^  Tiidiana  to  hunt  hares  and  foxes, 
and  Lasses  (p.  81)  expresses  doubt  as  to  whether 
«aglcs  could  be  so  far  tamed..  Here  however 
KtSsias  must  be  judged  to  have  written  according 
to  fact,  for  in  Upper  India  eagles  are  trained  to 
this  very  day  for  the  purpose  mentioned.  Sir 
Joseph  Fayrer  informs  us  that  when  the  Prince 
of  Wales  visited  Lahore,  there  were  among  the 
people  collected  about  Government  House  some 
Afghans  with  large  eagles  trained  to  puU  down 
deer  and  hares.  They  were  perched,  he  adds,  on 
their  wrists  like  hawks. 


18 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

A 

AhWchros,  daath  50 

Acanthus ^ 53 

Jithiopia 46, 47,  &c. 

Ailtna 13, 15 

Afjriobms  (wild-ox) . 93 
Alexander  the  Great  91 
Amber.*,  ;20, 2 1, 23, 51, 52, 


70,86 

Amphinomos 

...14n* 

Anapos 

14n 

Andros  Is 

•••  I'lll 

Apes 

...  8 

Ajjhytakoroe  trees 

producing  amber..  51 

AiUibia  the  .Happy 

64 

Argellia  (cocoa) 

...  95 

Arimaspiim^ 

.63, 77 

Aristeas 

...  62 

.Aji'istot/lc  (14 •••••fits 

73,74 

Armenia 

...  60 

Artaxerxes  Mnomun.  2, 

9,14,30,42,50,^ 

Asklcpiadai 

1 

PAGE 


Asses,  wild 26,27,43, 

5-4-66 

B 

*. 

Biibylon  

■•••  17 

Badakshan 

....  69 

Baktria 16, 44, 69 

Balaam 

....  95 

Bala  6h5ts 

....  lOn 

BaUade,  a fountain.  31n, 

79 

Bambu 

, 10, 70 

Bambusa 

....  lln 

Beetle  (cochineal  in- 

sect) 

...  53 

Bharoch 

....  lOn 

Bhutans  

,...  89 

Bird-dung  poison 

...  60 

Bittakos  (parrot).. 

,.8n,  74 

Borneo  Is 

...  26n 

Bruudusium  

...  62 

* n mcaua  nole. 


100 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

c 

r 

Calaitmt  Boiang lln 

Camelopardalis  93 

Camels 57 

Cheese 30 

Chh&Tftp&da  82n 

ChJmacra  Mount...  42, 43 
Chipitan&sika  people.  89 

Cio  in  Mysia  33 

Cohi,  desert  of  ...  12n,  45 

Cochineal  Insect 23n 

Cocks 36 

Cocoannt  tree 95 

Cotton 24,  25,  54 

Cows 73 

Cranes  88,  90 

Cups  (for  drinking 
from)  26 


E 

PAGt; 

Eagles* 

43, 81 

Egypt  

EJeaga/rbha  

Ekapfida  

82n 

Elephants  ...» 

.8, 11, 12, 

36-36, 74 

Ennius 

62 

EvoTiKTovres^  ehagar- 

bhas,  people.. 

82n 

Enotokoitai  .... 

Fah-hian,  Chinese 

Filgiim  80 

Field  of  the  Pions  ...  14n 
Fountain  called  Bal- 


D 

Danube  B 60 

Darius  II 2 

Death  from  poisons  48-50 
Dikairon  (a  bird)  ...  19, 
50-51,  76, 77 

Dioddros 3, 64 

Bivya  (an  ordeal)  ...  80 
Dogs  ...9,36,37,67,87 

Dolphins 96 

Drugs 48-49 


lade... 31,  59,  79 

„ called  Sil&.  83 

„ casting  out 

fish 33 

„ causing  de- 

lii'ium.  18,  47 

„ of  gold.  8,  68-69 

„ of  pitch  ...  14 

„ ofredcolonr  59 

„ of  wine  ...  14 

Fowling,  mode  of... 43, 44 
Foxes 43, 44 


* Soo  ulditional  note  on  y.  97. 


INDlb'X. 


101 


PAGE 

G 

GiiVtes,  Gaitrcs  Bivor  <‘)4 

Ganges  River 

Qarada^  88 

GclUus C3 

Gcrtnajis,  ancient  ...  81 

Giraffe 93 

Goats 17,  38  &e. 

Gold 16,44,46,68 

Gonda  people ...! 89 

Griffins  or  Gryphons.  17, 


44,76 

Gymnctiic  48 

H 

Hares 43,  44 

Heat  in  India... 10, 13,  68 

Hegesias 62 

Hekataios 1, 82n 

Hellantkos  64 

Hcrodotos  1, 3,  64 

Hosigouos  61 

Hippokratos  1 

Hippopotamus  95 

Hog-deer 95 

Homer  87, 90 

Honey 17 

Homed  ass  in  India.  54 
Huckle-bone  of  the 

Indian  ass  55 

'Yirapxos  River 20-22, 


67,  70, 84 


PAGE 


Hunting  IG 

Humcanes 68 

Jlydrophanes  (sun- 

agate)  7n 

Hypei'boreans 83 

Hypobaras  River  ...  51 


I 


lambouloB  60 

Ibex 95n 


Indians,  age  attained 

by  ...18,  25,  62, 
79, 83,  84 
„ character  of.  12 

17,  78,  81,  84 
„ oomplcxioii  of.  13 

78,81,84 
„ customs  of. ..18, 

78 

„ health  of  ...  18 

„ number  of. . 7 


Indikopleustes  60 

Indus  River 7, 10,  34 


Insect  yielding  purple  52 
Isigonos  of  Nikaea...  62 


Jackal 75 

K 

Kalysirioi 22,  87 


102 


INDEX. 


PAOE 


KavBapoi  inscc^  53 

Kamapi'&varaiia 82n 


KapTTiov  (cinnaTnon).  29n, 
70 

Karprirn  (camplior)..  30n 
Kartazonon  ,..27n,  75-76 

Kartiva 30u 

Kastmiri 04 

Klteloue,  tlifi  toi'toise  96 
Khoirdcplias  or  hog- 

door  95 

Kicliaka  reed 83 

Kirdta  88 

Knidos 1 

KosiTiiis  Tndicoplcus- 
tcs,  extract  from ..  92 

Kratos  47,  48 

Krokottaa  (Jackal  or 

Hyiona)  32-33 

Ktcaiurkhoa  1,  64 

KvvoKt<f)a\oi 22 

Kynamolgoi.  9n,  36, 84-87 
Kynokephaloi  ...21-25, 
36-37,  52, 53,  63,  84-87 
Kynolykos,  e.  g.  l^o- 

kottas 32-33 

Eyonian,  countiy ...  33 

L 

Lakes,  raarrellons.  59.  60 
Leprosy,  the  white...  59 
Lions  73 


PAGE 

Locusts  

...  61 

Lnsimiloft  death . . . 

...  50 

Lyncestis 

...  14n 

Magnet... ' 

...  9n 

Makrohioi  ..^...48,  61,  81 

Maiidi  

...  61 

Martihhora.  11-12,  38-42, 

4 

76,77 

M.aumsian  Straits 

..  33n 

Medicinal  root  ••• 

..  25 

Me^asilicnCs 

61,  88 

Motadiada  

a3 

Minenil  wells 

79 

Mines  

..  9 

Minium  (red  lead) 

..  59 

Mithras,  a god  ... 

..  04 

Mouocoli 

63 

Monosceli 

..  61 

Musk-deer 

..  Oi 

N 

Nnrikcl  (cocoa) .... 

...  95n 

Naxos  

...  14 

Nepaul 

...  87 

0 

Odontotyrannos. . . < 

...  28n 

Oil  of  cinnamon.  29n,  30 

„ lake  of  16 

„ ofthcsk61ex28,58-69 
,,  spring  of  33 


INDEX. 


103 


PAGE 

Onesikritos 

Onyx  9,  lOn,  12n 

Ordeiils 18, 47,  80 

Orissa* 

89 



Ourang-o^tang . 

....  82n 

25n 

Ox-deer  

i.f  93 

Ox,  the  wild  .... 

93 

Ozone  (Ujjain)... 

...  lOn 

P 

Paktolos  River  .. 

...,  17 

Palm-trees.  17,  47,  70,  95 
Pandarae  or  Pandorc.  48, 

61, 84n 

Fantnrba 

7,  69-70 

Parebov,  or  Parybon.  20, 

51,  72 

Fariksha  (anoi’dcal).  81 

Fanv)ts  

• *••8,  71? 

Parysatis  

....9, 50 

Pcpp^'i* 

..  93, 95 

Periploi  

....  3 

Pei’sepolis  

76 

PhjuseUs  14, 15n,42 

Pliasis  Rivor  

....  14n 

Phukc — the  seal,, 

96 

Photios 5-6,  65-66 

Polystephanos  .. 

62 

Precious  stones .. 

....  lOn 

Prusa* 

• ••• 

Psittacus  (parrot) 

1 8n 

Psylloi  

PAGE 

Purple  22,  23,  52 

Pygmies  15, 63, 71, 87-90, 
91 

B 

Baccs,  fabulous  25, 31 -32, 
34, 47-48, 60-61,  63 

Rainfall 7,  81,  83 

Reeds 10,  38,  70-71 

„ Kichaka  83 

Rliegiuos 01 

Rhinoceros 26n,  27n, 

75,  92 

Rhonkosouplia  06 

S 


Sardino.  stone. 

9, 12u 

Sardous,  Sardian  ' 

mountains 

...12,  78.  79 

Saiu'omatae... 

Seioi)odiie  61,  82n 

Sea  in  India  . 

10,  67 

Seal  (Phoke)  . 

Seal-stones..., 

Sci\» 34 

Serpents  18-19,  48-49,  72 

Sheep  17  &c. 

„ of  Khalkis...  33 
Side  River  and  Lake  60 
. Silas  or  l^ilod&River  83 

Silver  16 

Simia  Faunus  8n 

Sijptakhora  (a  tree).  21, 
85,  86 


104 


INDEX. 


PAOK 

Skins  used  as  diess . 24 
Skolex  (worm  of'^  tlio 

Indus) 7,  23,  27-28, 

56-59 

Skylaz  ...60,  66,  81,  82n 

Snakes 48 

Sun,  size  of 10,  68 

„ worship  of 12 

Sunamukha,  people ..  ^7 

Svap&ka  87 

Swine 17,  46,  47 

T 

Taurclaphos  (ox-deer)  93 

Thebaid  46 

Theopompos  62 

Thrakians  81 

Tortoise  96 

Touplia  94 

Trec-atti'acting  me-  *' 
tals  and  animals...  51 

Trispithamoi  88 

Troglodytes 61 


PAQB 

u 

Udayapura 69 

Udy&na,  country  ...  80 
Unicom  ■•„.26, 56,  75-76, 
94,95 

Uttarakum 83 

V 

Yindhya  Moimtains.  12n, 
89 

Vishnu 88,  89 

*'Yb^^o  14 

W 

Wines  30,  72 

Wool-growing  trees . 54 

X 

Xenophon  .3 

Z 

Zakynthos  14 


934/K:IE/k/( 


60308
