Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


t


r.



w


i^



\0


yj 8)0


-<^.A


^^' ^N.^



J


V


ANCIENT INDIA

A3 DESCRIBED BY

PTOLEMY;

BEING

A TRANSLATION OF THE CHAPTERS WHICH D^SCRlBt INDIA

AND CENTRAL AND EASTERN ASIA IN THE TREATISE ON

GEOGRAPHY WRITTEN BY KLAUDIOS PTDLEMAIOS,

THE CELEBRATED ASTRONOMER,

WITH

INTRODUCTION, COMMENTARY, MAP OF

INDIA ACCORDING TO I>tOLEMY, AND

A VERY COPIOUS INDEX,

BY

J. W. McCRINDLE, M.A., M.R.A.S*,

TOBICBBLT PKHrCIFAL OF THB GOtXRlfMSirT COLLBOB, PATNl)

AKTD FBLLOW OP IHB XJiriYBBSITT OP CALCUTTA ;

MEXBSB OP THB QEKEBAL COUNCIL OP THB URITBBSXTT

OP BSIiTBUBaH.



Reprinted from the ** Indian Antiquary ^** 1884.

Cttltttttat §0ntbag:

THACKER, SPINK & Co. ^^ B. E. S. PRESS.

|t n h a it :
TRUBN ER & Co.

1885.


^'" f .'' :. /',



yK



^r-rr.^



1



BOMBAY :

PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS.



PREFACE.



Ptolemy's *^ Treatise on Greography," likeliis
famous work on astronomy to which it formed
the seqael, was destined to govern the world's
opinion on the subject of which it treated, from,
the time of its publication until the dawn of
the modern era, a period of about 1,300 years^
This treatise must have been composed in the
interests of chartography rather than of geo»
graphy, for the author's aim is not so much
to describe the earth's surface as to lay down
the principles on which maps should be con-
structed, and to determine the latitude and
longitude of places with a view to their
being mapped in their proper positions. The
principles he here laid down have proved of
permanent validity, and are still practically
applied in the art of map-construction, but his
determinations of the position of places, owing
to the paucity and imperfection of the astro-
nomical observations on which, in combination
with the existing measurements of terrestrial
distances his conclusions were based, are all,
with very few exceptions, incorrect. The work
lost, of course, much of its old authority as soon
as the discoveries of modern times had brought
its grave and manifold errors to light. It did



tV PREFACE.

not, however, on this account cease to be of
high interest and value as an antiquarian re-
cord, if we may judge from the multiplicity of
the learned disquisitions which have from time
to time been published in elucidation of many
points of Ptolemaic Geography.

There is perhaps no part of the contents
which has received more attention from scholars
than the chapters relating to India, where the
tables abound to a surprising extent with
names which are found nowhere else in classi-
cal literature, and which were doubtless ob-
tained directly from Indian sources, rather than
from reports of travellers or traders who had
visited the country. On glancing over these
names one cannot fail to remark how very few
of them have any but the most distant resem-
blance to the indigenous names which they
must have been intended to represent. Philo-
logists, however, have made persistent efforts
to penetrate the disguise which conceals the
original forms of the names so much dis-
torted by Ptolemy, and have succeeded in
establishing a great number of satisfactory
identifications, as well as in hitting upon others
which have a balance of probability in their
favour — a similar service has been rendered by
the archseological investigations which have
now for many years been systematically prose-
cuted under the auspices of the Indian
Government.



PREFACE. V

THe present work has for its main object to
show concisely wliat has been accomplished
np to this time in this department of enquiry.
It has been compiled from multifarious sources
which are not easily accessible, as for instance
from foreign publications not yet translated
into our own language, and from the Journals
and Transactions of various societies at home
and abroad which concern themselves with
Oriental literature.

I venture therefore to hope that my com-
pendium, which it has taken much time and
laborious research to prepare, may meet with
recognition and acceptance as a useful contri-
bution to general literature, while proving
also serviceable to scholars as a work of re-
ference.

I proceed now to indicate the method which
I have followed in the treatment of my subject,
and to specify the authorities on which I have
principally relied. I have then, in an intro-
ductory chapter, attempted to give a succinct
account of the general nature of Ptolemy's
geographical system, and this is followed by
a translation of several chapters of his First
Book which serve to exhibit his general mode
of procedure in dealing with questions of Geo-
graphy, and at the same time convey his views
of the configuration of the coasts of India, both
on this side the Ganges and beyond. In
translating the text I have taken it in detach-



Vi PREFACE.

ments of convenient length, to each of which
I have subjoined a commentary, the main
object of which is — Ist, to show, as far as has
been ascertained, how each place, named by
Ptolemy in his Indian Tables has been identi-
fied ; 2nd, to trace the origin or etymology of
each name, so far as it is possible to do so ; and
' 3rd, to notice very concisely the most promi-
nent facts in the ancient history of the places
of importance mentioned. I have, as a rule?
quoted the sources from which my information
has been derived, but may here state that I
have generally adopted the views of M. Vivien
de Saint-Martin and those of Colonel Yule,
whose map of ancient India in Smith's well-
known historical Atlas of Ancient Geography is
allowed on all hands to be the best that has yet
been produced. These authors have examined
the greater part of the Ptolemaic Greography
of India, and their conclusions are for the most
part coincident. The w^orks of Saint- Martin,
which I have consulted, are these : mude sur
la Geographie Grecque et Latine de Vlnde, et eii
jparticulier sur Vlnde de Ftolemee^ dans ses
rapports avec la Geographie Sanshrite j Memoire
Analytique sur la Carte de VAsie Centrale et de
Vlnde ; et ^tiide sur la Geographie et les popula-
tions primitives du Nord-Ouest de Vlnde. d'apres
les hymnes vediq_ues. Colonel Yule has expressed
his views chiefly in the notes upon the map
referred to, but also occasionally in the notes



PREFACE. vii

to kis edition of Marco Polo and in other works
from his pen. Frequent reference will be
found in my notes to that work of vast erudi-
tion, Prof. Lassen's Indisclie Alter tlimmlcunde.
Unfortunately the section which he has devoted
to a full examination of Ptolemy's India is the
least satisfactory portion of his work. His
system of identification is based on a wrong
principle, and many of the conclusions to
which it has led are such as cannot be accepted.
His work is notwithstanding, as Yule says,
" a precious mine of material for the study of
the amcient grography of India." For elucida-
tions of the Ptolemaic geography of particular
portions of India I have consulted with great
advantage such works as the folloAving ,—
Wilson's ArianaJntiqtm, General Cunningham's
Geography of Ancient India, Vol. I. (all yet
published), and his Eeports on the Archcwlogical
Survey of India ; Bishop Caldwell's Introduc-
tion to his Bravidian Grammar, valuable for
identification of places in the south of the
Peninsula; the Bombay Gazetteer, edited by
. Mr. J. M. Campbell, who has carefully investi-
gated the antiquities of that Presidency • the
volumes of Asiatic Researches-, the Journals of
the Boyal Asiatic Society and of the kindred
Societies in India ; the Journals of the Boyal
Geographical Society ; the articles on India and
places m India in Smith's Dictionary of Cla^si^
cal Geography, ^viiien almost all by Mr



Viii PreMCBi

Vaux ; articles in the Indian Antiquary ; Ben*
fej*s Indien in the Encyclopddie of Ersch
and Gruber; the Abbe Halma's Traits de Geo*^
graphie de Claude PtoUmee, Paris, 1828 ; the
Chapters on Marinus and Ptolemy's System
of Geography in Bunbury's History of Ancient
Geography j Prianlx's Indian Travels of ApoU
lonius of Tyana^ &c. ; Stephanos of Byzantium
On Cities ; Sir Emerson Tennent's Ceylon ; Sir
H. Rawlinson*s articles on Central Asia which
have appeared in various publications^ and
other works which need not here be specified »

There has recently been issued from the
press of Firmin-Didot, Paris, the first volume of
a new and most elaborate edition of Ptolemy's
Geography, prepared by C. Miiller, the learned
editor of the Geographi Graeoi Minor es^ but
the work unfortunately has not advanced so
far as to include the chapters which contain
the geography of India*

I would here take the opportunity of ex-
pressing my obligations to Dr. Burgess, the
late editor of the Indian Antiquary ^ for his
careful revision of the proofs, and for sundry
valuable suggestions.

Having thought it advisable to extend the
scope of the work beyond the limits originally
contemplated, I have included in it those
chapters of the geography in which China,
Central Asia, and all the provinces adjacent
to India are described. The reader is thus



PBBFACE^ IX

presented with the Ptolemaic Geography of
the whole of Asia, with the exception only of
those countries which from propinquity and
frequency of intercourse were well known to
the nations of the West.

In a short Appendix will be found some
additional notes.

The present volume forms the fourth of the
Series of Annotated Translations of the Works
of the Classical Writers which relate to India.
Another volume, containing Strabo's Indian
Geography and the Accounts given by Arrian
and Gurtius of the Makedonian Invasion of
India, will complete the series.

3, Abbotsford Pabk, Edinburgh,
Juncy 1885.



CONTENTS.



PAQB

Introduction 1

Description of India within the Ganges.. 33

„ of India beyond the Ganges

(including Indo- China) ... 189

„ of the Sinai (Southern China). 244»

„ of the Island of Taprobane

(Ceylon) 247

„ of Hyrkania 260

„ of Margiane 262

„ of Baktriane 267

„ of Sogdiana 274

„ oftheSakai 283

„ of Skythia within Imaos 285

„ of Skythia beyond Imaos 292



>9



of strike (Northern China)... 297

of Areia ,.,.•. 305

of the Par opanisadai 310

of Drangiane 313

of Arakh6sia , 315

of Gedrosia 319



• •



;X11 CONTENTS,

PIGE

Appendix of Additional Notes 331

1. On the La|}itude of Byzantium and

that of Tash-Knrghan (p. 14) ... 331

2. On Kouronla (pp. 22, 63-4) 331

3. On the Argaric Gulf and Argeirou

(pp. 22, 59 and 60) 331

4. On Thelkheir (pp. 63 and 64) 332

5. On Orthoura (pp. 64 and 184) ... 332

6. On Arkatos (p. 64) 332

7. On the River Adamas (p.. 71) 333

8. On Mount Sardonyx (p. 77) 334

9. On Talara (p. 90) 334

10. On Pounnata (p. 180) 334

11. On Arembour (pp. 180, 182) ...... 334

12. On Abour (p. 184) 334

13. OnArgyra(p. 196) 334

14. On the Golden Khersonese (p. 197). 335

15. On the Loadstone rocks (p. 242). . 335

16. On the sandy deserts of Baktria

(p. 270) 335

17. On the River Ochos (p. 273) 335

18. On the Avestic names of rivers,

&c., in Afghanistan 336

19. On the Griffins or Gryphons (p.295). 338



PTOLEMY'S GEOGRAPHY OF INDIA
AND SOUTHERN ASIA.



Introdttction.
Ptolemy and his System of Geography.

Klaudios Ptolemaios, or as he is commonly
caUed, Ptolemy, was distinguished alike as a
Mathematician, a Musician, an Astronomer and a
Geographer, and was altogether one of the most
accomplished men of science that antiquity
produced. His works were considered as of para-
mount authority from the time of their
publication until the discoveries of modem times
had begun to show their imperfections and errors.
It is surprising that with all his fame, which had
even in his own lifetime become pre-eminent,
that the particulars of his personal history should
be shrouded in all but total darkness. Nothing
in fact is known for certain regarding him further
than that he flourished in Alexandria about the
middle of the 2nd century of our sera, in the reign
of Antoninus Pius, whom he appears to have
survived.

His work on Geography formed a sequel to his
great work on Astronomy, commonly called the
Almagest. From its title rfayypaftuKr} 'Y<l>qyr}a-iSy
an Outline of Geography, we might be led to infer

1 G



that it was a general treatise on the subject, like
the comprehensive work of Strabo, but in reality
it treats almost exclusively of Mathematical, or
what may be called Cosmical, Geography. Ptole-
my's object in composing it was not like that of
the ordinary Geographer to describe places, but
to correct and reform the map of the world in
accordance with the increased knowledge which
had been acquired of distant countries and
with the improved state of science. He there-
fore limits his argument to an exposition of
the geometrical principles on which Geography
should be based, and to a determination of the
position of places on the surface of the earth by
their latitudes and longitudes. What he consi-
dered to be the proper method of determining
geographical positions he states very clearly in the
following passage : " The proper course," he says,
**in drawing up a map of the world is to lay
down as the basis of it those points that were
determined by the most correct (astronomical)
observations, and to fit into it those derived from
other sources, so that their positions may suit as
well as possible with the principal points thus laid
down in the first instance."^

Unfortunately, as Bimbury remarks, it was
impossible for him to carry out in practice — even
approximately — the scheme that he had so well
laid down in theory. The astronomical obser-
vations to which he could refer were but few —
and they were withal either so defective or so
inaccurate that he could not use them with con-

^ Book I. cap. 4. The translation is Bunbury's.



fidence. At the same time his information con-
cerning many parts of the earth, whether owing
to their remoteness or the conflicting accounts of
travellers regarding them, was imperfect in the
extreme. The extent, however, of his geo^aphical
knowledge was far' greater than that possessed by
any of his predecessors, and he had access to
sources of information which enabled him to
correct many of the errors into which they had ,
fallen.

He was induced to undertake the composition
of his Geography through his being dissatisfied
more or less with all the existing systems. There
was however one work — that of his immediate
• precursor, Marinos of Tyre — ^which approximated
somewhat closely to his ideal, and which he there-
fore made the basis of his own treatise. Mari-
nes, he tell us, had collected his materials with
the most praiseworthy diligence, and had more-
over sifted them both with care and judgment.
He points out, however, that his system required
correction both as to the method of delineating
the sphere on a plane surface, and as to the com-
putation of distances, which he generally exag-
gerated. He censures him likewise for having
assigned to the known world too great a length
from west to east, and too great a breadth from
north to south.

Of Ptolemy's own system, the more prominent
characteristics may now be noted : He assumed
the earth to be a sphere, and adopting the estimate
of Poseidonios fixed its circumference at 180,000
stadia, thus making the length of a degree at the
equator to be only 500 stadia, instead of 60O, which



is its real length." To this fundamental mis-
calculation may be ref en'ed not a few of the most
serious errors to be found in his work. With regard
to the question of the length and the breadth of the
inhabited part of the earth, a question of first
impoi'tance in those days, he estimated its length
as measured along the parallel of Rhodes* which
divided the then known world into two nearly
equal portions at 72,000 stadia, and its breadth
at 40,000. The meridian in the west from which
he calculated his longitudes was that which passed
through the Islands of the Blest {MaKaptov N^o-oi)
probably the Canary Islands,* and his most

* The Olympic stadium^ which was in general use
throughout Greece, contained 600 Greek feet, which were
equal to 625 Boman feet, or 606f English feet. The Boman
mile contained 8 stadia, or about half a stadium less
than an English mile. A stadium of 600 Greek feet was
very nearly the 600th part of a degree, and 10 stadia are
therefore just about equal to a Nautical or Geographical
mile. According to Eratosthenes, a degree at the Equator
was equal to 700 stadia, but according to Posoidonios
it was equal to only 500. The truth Lay between, but
Ptolemy unfortunately followed Poseidonios in his
error.

' '* The equinoctial line was of course perfectly fixed
and definite in Ptolemy's mind, as an astronomical line ;
but ho had no means of assigning its position on the Map
of the World, except with reference to other parallels,
such as the tropic at Syene, or the parallels of Alexandria
and Bhodes, which had been determined by direct
observation." — Bunbury, Hist, of Anc. Oeog., vol. II,
p. 560, n. 2.

* The Island of Ferro — ^the westernmost of the Group
of the Canaries, which was long taken as the prime
meridian, and is still so taken in Germany — is really
situated 18^ 20' west of Greenwich, while Capo St.
Vincent (called anciently the Sacred Ca%ye) is just about 9°,
so that the real difference between the two amounted to
9^ 20' instead of only 21'. Two corrections must there-
fore be applied to Ptolemy's longitudes — one-sixth must
be deducted because of his under-cstimate of the length



eastern meridian was that which passed through
the Metropolis of the Sinai, which he calls Sinai
or Thinai, and places in 180° 4(y E. Long, and
3° S. Lat. The distance of this meridian from
that of Alexandria he estimated at 119^ degrees,
and the distance of the first meridian from the
same at 60i degrees, making together 180 de-
grees, or exactly one-half of the circumference
of the earth. His estimate of the breadth he
obtained by fixing the southern limit of the
inhabited parts in the parallel of 16i degrees
of South Latitude, which passes through a point
as far south of the Equator as Meroe is north
of it. And by fixing the northern limit in the
parallel of 63 degrees North Latitude, which passes
through Thoule (probably the Shetland Islands),
a space of nearly 80 degrees was thus included
between the two parallels, and this was equivalent
in Ptolemy's mode of reckoning to 40,000 stadia.
Having made these determinations he had next
to consider in what mode the sui-face of the earth
with its meridians of longitude and parallels of
latitude should be represented on a sphere and
on a plane surface — of the two modes of delinea-
tion that on the sphere is the much easier to
make, as it involves no method of projection, but
a map drawn on a plane is far more convenient for
use, as it presents simultaneously to the eye a far
greater extent of surface. Marinos had drawn
his map of the world on a plane, but his method

of a degree along the Equator, and 6° 60' must be added bo-
cauBO Ferro was so much further west than ho supposed.
Subject to these corrections his longitudes would bo
fairly accurate, provided his calculations of distances
were otherwise free from error.



of projection was altogether unsatisfactory. It
is thus described by Ptolemy : Marinos, lie says,
on account of the importance of the countries
around the Mediterranean, kept as his base the
line fixed on of old by Eratpsthenes, tn«.» the
parallel through Bhodes in the 36th degree of
north latitude. He then calcidated' the length
of a degree along this parallel, and found it to
contain 400 stadia, the equatorial degree being
taken at 500. Havuig divided this parallel
into degrees he drew perpendiculars through the
points of division for the meridians, and his
parallels of latitude were straight lines parallel to
that which passed through Bhodes. The imper-
fections of such a projection are obvious. It
represented the parts of the earth north of the
parallel of Rhodes much beyond, and those south
of it much below, their proper length. Places
again to the north of the line stood too far apart
from each other, and those to the south of it too
close together. The projection, moreover, is an
erroneous representation, since the parallels of
latitude ought to be circular arcs and not straight
lines.

Ptolemy having pointed out these objections
to the system of Marinos proceeds to explain the
methods which he himself employed. We need
say nothing more regarding them than that they
were such as presented a near approximation to
some of those which are still in use among
modem Geographers.

Ptolemy's treatise is divided into 8 books. In
the 1st or introductory book he treats first
of Geography generally — ^he then explains and



criticizes the system of Marines, and concludes by
describing themethods of projection which may
be employed in the construction of maps. The
next 6 books and the first 4 chapters of the 7th
book consist of tables which give distinctly in
degrees and parts of a degree the latitudes and
longitudes of all the places in his map. These
places are arranged together in sections accoi'd-
ing to the country or tribe to which they belong,
and each section has prefixed to it a brief de-
scription of the boundaries and divisions of the
part about to be noticed. Descriptive notices are
also occasionally interspersed among the lists, but
the number of such is by no means considerable.
The remainder of the 7th book and the whole of
the 8th are occupied with a description of a series
of maps which, it would appear, had been prepared
to accompany the publication of the work, and
which are still extant. The number of the maps is
twenty-six, viz. 10 for Europe, 4 for Libya, and 12
for Asia. They are drawn to different scales, lai^er
or smaller, according as the division represented
was more or less known. He gives for each
map the latitudes and longitudes of a certain
number of the most important cities contained
in it, but these positions were not given in the
same manner as in the tables, for the latitudes
are now denoted by the length of the longest day
and the longitudes according to the difference of
time from Alexandria. It might be supposed
that the positions in question were such as had
been determined by actual astronomical observa-
tions, as distinguished from those in the Tables,
' which were for the most part derived from itine-



8



raries, or from records of voyages and travels.
This supposition is however untenable, for we
find that while the statements as to the length of
the longest days at the selected places are always
correct for the latitudes assigned them, they are
often glaringly wrong for their real positions.
Ptolemy, it is evident, first mapped out in the best
way he could the places, and then calculated
for the more impoi-tant of these places the
astronomical phenomena incident to them as so
situated. I conclude by presenting the reader
with a translation of some chapters of the In-
troductory Book,* where Ptolemy in reviewing the
estimate made by Marinos of the length of the
known world from west to east, has frequent
occasion to mention India and the Provinces
beyond the Ganges, which together constitute
what is now called Indo- China.

Book L, Cap. 11.

§ 1 . What has now been stated will suffice
to show us what extent in breadth it would
be fair to assign to the inhabited world.
Its length is given by Marinos at 15 hours,
this being the distance comprised between his
two extreme meridians — but in our opinion ho
has unduly extended the distance towards the
east. In fact, if the estimate be properly
reduced in this direction the entire length
must be fixed at less than 12 hours, the Islands
of the Blest being taken as the limit towards

* The edition used is that of C. F. A. Noble, Leipsic,
1843.



the west, and the remotest parts of Sdra and
the Sinai* and Kattigara' as the limit towards

' " Ohifta for nearly 1,000 years has been known to the
nations of Inner Asia, and to those whose aoqoaintanoe
with it was got by that channel, under the name of
Khitai, Khata, or Cathay, e.g., the Russians still call it
Khitai. The pair of names, Khitai and Machin, or
Cathay and China, is analogous to the other pair Seres
and Sinai. Seres was the name of the great nation in
the far east as known by land, Sinai as known by sea ;
and they were often supposed to be diverse, just as
Cathay and China were afterwards." Tule's Marco
Folo, 2nd ed., Introd., p. 11 and note.

' The locality of Kattigara has been fixed very
variously. Bichthofen identified it witii Kian-chi in
Tong-king, and Colonel Yule has adopted this view.
"To myself," he says, ''the arguments adduced by
Bichthofen in favour of the location of Kattip^a in the
Gulf of Tong-king, are absolutely convincing. This
position seems to satisfy evei^ condition. For 1st,
Tong-king was for some centuries at that period (B. C
111 to A.D. 263), only incorporated as part of the Chinese
Empire. 2nd, the onlv part mentioned in the Chinese
annals as at* that period open to foreign traffic was Kian-
ohi, substantially identical with the modem capital of
Tong-king, Kesho or Hanoi. Whilst there are no
notices of foreign arrivals by an^ other approach, there
are repeated notices of such arrivals by this province,
including that famous embassy from Antun, King of
Ta-t'sin, i.e., M. Aurelius Antoninus (A.D. 161-180) in
A.D. 166. The province in question was then known
as Ji-nan (or Zhi-nto, French) ; whence possiblv the
name Sinai, whioh has travelled so far and spread over
such libraries of literature. The Chinese Annalist who
mentions the Boman Embassy adds : ' The people of
that kingdom (Ta-t'sin or the Boman Empire) came in
numbers for trading purposes to Fu-nan, Ji-nan, and
Kian-chi.' Fu-nan we have seen, was Champa, or Zabai.
In Ji-nan with its chief port Kian-ohi, we may recognize
with assurance Kattigara, Portus Sinarum. Bichthofen's
solution has the advantages of preserving the true mean-
ing of Sinai as the Chinese, and of locating the Portus
Sinarum in what was then politically a part of China,
whilst the remote Metropolis Thinae remains unequivo-
cally the capital of the Empire, whether Si-gnan-fu in
Chen-si, or Lo-yang in Ho-nan be meant. I will only
add that though we find Katighora in Edrisi*s Geography ^
I apprehend this to be a mere adoption from the Chogra^

2 G



to



ihe ea6t. § 2. Now the entire distance frofil
tlie Islsmds of the Blest to the passage of

phy of Ptolemy, founded on no recent authority. It
nust hare kept its place also on the later medi8BYal<
maps ; for Pigaf etta, in that part of the oircumnayiga'
tion where the crew of the Victoria began to look out
for the Asiatic coast, says that Magellan ' changed the
course . . . until in 13* of N. Lat, in order to approach
tifcie land of Cape Gaticara, which Cape (under correction
f>f those who have made cosmography their study, for they
have never seen it), is not placed where they think, but
is towards the noith in 12° or thereabouts.* [The Cape
looked for was evidently the extreme Si* E. point of Asia,
actually represented by Cape Varela or Cape St. James
on the coast of Coohin-China.] It is probable that, a»
Bichthofen points out, Kattigara, or at any rate Kian-
chi, was the Lnkin or Al-Wflkin of the early Arab Geo-
graphers. But the terminus of the Arab voyagers of the
ith century was no longer in Tong-Kingy it was Khfin-f Ay
apparently the Kan-pu of the Clmiese,the haven of the
great city which we know as Hang-chow, and which then
^y on or near a delta-arm of the great Yang-tse."
These arguments may be accepted as conclusively settling'
the vexed question as to the position of Kat'tigara. In
a paper, however, recently read before the B. Asiatio
Society, Mr.^ Holt, an eminent Chinese scholar, expressed
a different view. He '*" showed that there was good
evidence of a very early communication from some port
on the Chinese coast to near Martabauy or along tho
valley of the Ir&wadS to the northrwest capital of China,,
then at Si-gnan-f u or Ho-nan-'f u. He then showed that the
name of China had been derived from the Indians, who
first knew China, and was not due to the Tsin Dynasty ,
but more probably came from the name of the Compass,
specimens of which were supplied to the early envoys,
the Chinese being thus known in India as the * Compass*
people,' just as the Seresy another Chinese population^
derived their western name from * Silk.' That the
knowledge of this fact was lost to both Indians and
Chinese is clear from the use by Hiuen-Tsiang and
later writers of two symbols (see Morrison's Dic^
tionary^ syllabic part, !Ko. &,033) to designate th»
counti^, as tl^se, while giving the so«nd * Che-ha,'
indicate that they are substitutes for original words 6£
like sounds, the true sense of which cannot now be re-
eoyered. Having shown that M. Eeinaud's view of an
intercourse between China and £gypt in the first
century A.D. has no real foundation, Mr. Holt



11



tliB Enplirates at Hierapolis, as measured along
the parallel of Bhodes, is accurately determined
by summing together the several intervening
distances as estimated in stadia by Marines,
for not only were the distances well ascertained
from being frequently traversed, but Marines
seems moreover in his computation of the
greater distances, to have taken into account
the necessary corrections for irregularities and
deviations." He understood, besides, that while
the length of a single degree of the 360
degrees into which the equatorial circle is
divided measures, as in the commonly accepted
estimate, 500 stadia, the parallel circle which
passes through Rhodes in 36 degrees of N.
latitude, measures about 400 stadia, § 3. It
measures, in fact, a little over that number if
we go by the exact proportion of tho parallels,
but the excess is so trifling as in the case of the
equatorial degree, that it may be neglected. Bnt

further stated tkat there was no eyiden<se of an embassy
from M. Amrelius having gone by sea to China in A.D.
166. In conclusion, he urged, that in his judgment,
there was no proof whatever of any knowledge of a
maritime way to China before the 4th century A.D., the
voyige even of Fa-hian, at that period being open to
serious criticism. He believes therefore with M. Gos-
eelin that the Kattigara of Ptolemy was probably not far
from the present Martaban, and that India for a consi-
derable period up to the 7th century A.D. dominated
over Cambodia."

* Deviations from the straight line by which the route
would be represented in the map. The irregularities
refer to the occasional shortening of the daily march by
obstacles of various kinds, bad roads, hostile attacks,
fatigue, &o.



12



his estimates of the distances beyond Hierapolia
require correction. § 4. He computes the
distance from the passage of the Euphrates
abeady mentioned to the Stone Tower^ at 876



' " One of the oircmnstanoes of the route that Pto-
lemy has reproduced from Marinos is that on learing
Baktra the traveller directed his course for a long
enough time towards the North. Assuredly the oaravans
touched at Samarkand (the Marakanda of Greek authors)
which was then, as now, one of the important centres of
the region beyond the Oxus. For passing from Sogdia-
na to the east of the snowy range, which covers the
sources of the Jazartes and the Ozus, three main routes
have existed at all times : that of the south, which ascends
tiie high valleys of the Oxus through Badakshdn ; that
in the centre, which goes directly to Kfishgar by the
high valleys of the Syr-Darya or Jaxartes ; and lastly
that of the north, which goes down a part of the middle
valley of the Jaxartes before turning to the east towards
Chinese Tartary. Of these three routes, the itinerary of the
Greek merchants could only apply to the 2nd or the 3rd ;
and if, as has been for a long time supposed with much
probability, the Stone Tower of the Itinerary is found in
an important place belonging to the valley of the
Jaxartes, of which the name Tfishkand has precisely the
same meaning in the language of the Turkomans, it
would be the northern route that the caravan of Maes
would have followed. The march of seven months in
advancing constantly towards the east leads necessarily

towards the north of China (Saint-Martin, Etude, pp.
428-9.) Sir H. Bawlinson however assigns it a more
southern position, placing it at Tash-kurghan, an ancient
city which was of old the capital of the Sarik-kul
territory, a district lying between Yarkand and Badak-
shan, and known to the Chinese as Ko-panto. The walls
of Tash-kurghan are built of unusually large blocks of
stone. It was no doubt, Sir Henry remarks, owing to
the massive materials of which it was built, that it
received the name of Tash-kurghan or the * Stone Fort,'
and it seems to have every claim to represent the
\idivos irvpyos of Ptolemy, where the caravans rendez-
voused before entering China, in preference to Tashkand
or Ush, which have been selected as the site of the Stone
Tower by other geographers." — J<mr, iJ, Chog, 8oc,
vol. XLII, p. 327.



13



aehoani^^ or 26,280 stadia, and from the Stone
Tower to S^ra, the metropolis of the Sdres, at a
7 months'" journey or 36»200 stadia as reckoned
along the same parallel. Now in neither
case has he made the proper deductions for the
excess caused by deviations ; and for the second
route he falls into the same absurdity as when
he estimated the distance from the Garamantes
to Agisymba/* § 5. Where he had to deduct
above half of the stadia in the march of the 3
months and 14 days, since such a march could not
possibly have been accomplished without halting.



*® According to Herodotos (lib. II, o. vi), the achoinoa
was equal to two Persian para«an$r8 or 60 stadia, bat it
was a very vague and uncertain measure, varying as
Strabo informs us (lib. XVII, c. i, 24) from 30 to 120
stadia. In the case before us, it was taken as equivalent
to theparaeang of 30 stadia and afforded with correction
some approximation to the truth.

^^ ** The Soman arms had been carried during the
reign of Augustus (B. C. 19) as far as the land of the
(Garamantes, the modem Fezzan, and though the
Boman Emperors never attempted to establish their
dominion over the country, they appear to have per-
manently maintained friendly relations with its rulers,
which enabled their officers to make use of the oasis of the
Qaramantes as their point of departure from which to
penetrate further into the interior. Setting out from
thence, a (General named Septimius Plancus 'arrived at
the land of the Ethiopians, after a march of 3 months
towards the south.' Another (I!ommander named Julius
Maternus, apparently at a later date, setting out from
Leptis Magna, proceeded from thence to Garama, where
he united his forces with those of the king of the
Garamantes, who was himself undertaking a hostile
expedition against the Ethiopians, and their combined
armies 'after marching for four months towards the
south,' arrived at a country inhabited by Ethiopians,
called Agisymba, in which rhinoceroses abounded.*' —
Bunbury, Hiat, of Anc, Oeog., vol. II, pp. 622-3.



u



The necessity for halting would be still more
urgent when* the march was one which occupied
7 months. § 6. But the former march was ac-
complished even by the king of the country him-
self, who would naturally use every precaution,
and the weather besides was all throughout
most propitious. But the route from the Stone
Tower to Sera is exposed to violent storms, for
as he himself assumes, it lies under the parallels
of the Hellespont and Byzantium,*' so that
the progress of travellers would be frequently
interrupted. § 7. Now it was by means of
commerce this became known, for Marines tells
us that one Maes, a Makedonian, called also
Titian as, who was a merchant by hereditary
profession, had written a book giving the
measurement in question, which he had obtained
not by visiting the Seres in person, but from
the agents whom he had sent to them. But
Marines seems to have distrusted accounts
borrowed from traders. § 8. In giving, for
instance, on the authority of Philemon, the
'length of Ivemia (Ireland) at a 20 days* journey,
he refuses to accept this estimate, which was
got, he tells us, from merchants, whom he
reprobates as a class of men too much engrossed
with their own proper business to care about
ascertaining the truth, and who also from mere
vanity frequently exaggerated distances. So



IS



Lat. 40* 1'— Lat. of Tfish-kupghfin.



15



toO) in the case before ns, it is manifest that
nothing in the course of the 7 months' journey
was thought worthy either of recoi'd or remem-
brance by the travellers except the prodigious
time taken to perform it.

Cap. 12.

§ 1. Taking all this into consideration, to-
gether with the fact that the route does not lie
along one and the same parallel (the Stone Tower
being situated near the parallel of Byzantium,
and Sera lying farther south than the parallel
through the Hellespont) it would appear but
reasonable in this case also to diminish by not
less than a half the distance altogether traver-
sed in the 7 months' journey, computed at 36,200
stadia, and so let us reduce the number of
stadia which these represent at the equator
by one-haK only, and we thus obtain (22,625)
stadia or 45 J degrees.^* § 2. For it would
be absurd, and show a want of proper judg-
ment, if, when reason enjoins us to cur-
tail the length of both routes, we should
follow the injunction with respect to the
African route, to the length of which there
is the obvious objection, viz.y the species of
animals in the neighbourhood of Agisymba,



^' 36,200 stadia along the parallel of Bhodes are equi-
valent, according to Ptolemy's system, to 45,250 stadia
along the equator, and this sum reduced "by a half gives
the figures in the text.



Id



which cannot bear to be transplanted from
their own climate to another, while we refuse
to follow the injunction with regard to the
route from the Stone Tower, because there is
not a similar objection to its length, seeing that
the temperature all along this route is uniform,
quite independently of its being longer or
shorter. Just as if one who reasons according
to the principles of philosophy, could not,
unless the case were otherwise clear, arrive at
a sound conclusion.^^

§ 3. With regard again to the first of the two
Asiatic routes, that, I mean which leads from
the Euphrates to the Stone Tower, the estimate
of 870 schceni must be reduced to 800 only, or
24,000stadia, on account of deviations. § 4. We



^* Marinos was aware that Aeisymba lay in a hot
climate, from the fact that its neighboiirhood was report-
ed to be a fayonrite resort for rhinoceroses, and he was
thns compelled to reduce his first estimate of its distance,
which would have placed it in far too cold a latitude
for these animals, which are found only in hot regions.
But no such palpable necessity compelled him to reduce
his estimate of tne distance from the Stone Tower to the
Melaropolis of the S^es, for here the route had an equa-
ble temperature, as it did not recede from the equator
but lay almost uniformly along the same parallel of
latitude A little reflexion, however, might have shown
Marinos that his enormous estimate of the distance to
the Seric Metropolis required reduction as much as the
distance to Agisymba, though such a cogent argument as
that which was based on the habitat of the rhinoceros
was not in this instance available. It is on the very
face of it absurd to suppose that a caravan could have
marched through a difficult and unknown country for
7 months consecutively at an average progress of 170
stadia (about 20 miles) daily.



17



may accept as correct his figures for the entire
distance as the several stages had been fre-
quently traversed and had therefore been
measured with accuracy. But that there
were numerous deviations is evident from
what Marines himself tells us. § 5. For the
route from the passage of the Euphrates at
Hierapolis through Mesopotamia to the
Tigris, and the route thence through the
Garamaioi of Assyria, and through
Media to Ekbatana and the K a s p i a n
Gates, and through Parthia to Heka'tom-
pylos Marinos considers to lie along the
parallel which passes through Rhodes, for he
traces {in his map) this parallel as passing
through these regions. § 6. But the route from
Hekatompylos to the capital city of
Hyrkania must, of necessity, diverge to the
north, because that city lies somewhere between
the parallel of Smyrna and that of the Helles-
pont, since the parallel of Smyrna is traced as
passing below Hyrkania and that of the Helles-
pont through the southern parts of the Hyrka-
nian Sea from the city bearing the same name,
which lies a little farther north. § 7. But;,
again, the route herefrom to Antiokheia
(Merv) of Margiana through Areia, afc first
bends towards the south, since Areia lies
under the same parallel as the Kaspian Gates,
and then afterwards turns towards the north,
Antiokheia being situated under the parallel of
3 a



18



the Hellespont.^' The route after this rami
in an eastward direction to B a k t r a whence
it turns towards the north in ascending the
mountains of the Komddoit and then in
passing through these mountains it pursues
a southern course as far as the ravine that
opens into the plain country. § 8. For the
northern parts of the mountain region and
those furthest to the west where the ascent
begins, are placed by him under the parallel of
Byzantium, and those in the south and the
east under the parallel of the Hellespont.
For this reason, he says, that this route makes
a detour of equal length in opposite directions,
that in advancing to the east it bends towards
the south, and thereafter probably runs up
towards the north for 50 schoent, till it reaches
the Stone Tower. § 9. For to quote his own

^' The aotnal latitudes of the places here mentioned
may be compared with those of Ptolemy : —

Beal Lat. Ptolemy's Lat*

Byzantium 41* 43° 5'

HeUespont 4/0^ 41° 15'

Smyrna 88° 28' 88° 35'

Issus 37° 36° 85'

Ehodes S&> 24' 36° 25'

Hierapolis 86° 28' 36° 15'

Ekbatana 34« 60' 37° 45'

Kaspian Gates 35«> 30' 87°

Hekatompylos 35° 40' 37° SC

Antiokheia (Merv) 37° 35' 40° 20'

Baktra (Balkh) 36° 40' 41°

Stone Tower (TAshkand) 42° 58' 43°

Sera Metropolis (Ho-nan) 38° 35' 83° 68^


19



words, " When the traveller has ascended the
ravine he arrives at the Stone Tower, after
which the mountains that trend to the east
nnite with Imaus, the range that runs up to the
north from Palimbothra." § 10. If, then, to
the 60 degrees made up of the 24,000 stadia, we
add the 45J degrees which represent the dis-
tance from the Stone Tower to Sera, we get
105 J degrees as the distance between the
Euphrates and S^ra as measured along the
parallel of Rhodes.^* § 11. But, further, we

^* Saint-Martin identifies S^ra,tlie Metropolis of the
Sdres, with a site near Ho-nan-fu. He says, {Etudes^ p.
432) " At the time when the caravan journey reported by
Maes was made (in the first half of the first century of
our era), the Han surnamed Eastern held the reins of
gOYomment, and their residence was at Lo-yang near
the present City of Ho-nan-fou, not far from the southern
Isank of the lower Hoang-ho. It is there then we should
look to find the place which in their ignorance of the
language of the country, and in their disdain for barbar-
ous names, the Greek traders designated merely as the
Metropolis of the Seres." The road these traders took
appears to have been the same by which Hiuen-Tsiang
travelled towards India.

We may here insert for comparison with Ptolemy's dis-
tances two itineraries, one by Strabo and the other by
Pliny. Strabo (lib. XI, c viii, 9) sajrs : " These are the
distances which he (Eratosthenes) gives : —

Stadia.

From the Kaspian Sea to the Eyros about ... 1,800

Thence to the Kaspian Gates 5,600

Thence to Alexandreia of the Areioi (Herat).. 6,400

Thence to Baktra, called also Zariaspa (Balkh) 3,870
Thence to the Jaxartes, which Alexander

reached, about 5,000

Making a total of 22,670."

He also assigns the following distances from the
Kaspian Gates to India : — Stadia.

*' To Hekatompylos , 1,960

To Alexandreia of the Areioi (Her&t) 4,530



20



can infer from the number of stadia which he
gives as the distance between successive places
lying along the same parallel, that the distance
from the Islands of the Blest to the sacred
Promontory in Spain (jOape St. Vincent), is
2^ degrees, and the distance thence to the
month of the Beetis (Guadalquimr), the same.

Stadia.

Thence to Prophthasia in Dranga (a little

north of lake Zarah 1,600

Thence to the City Arakhotos (Ulan EobAt) . . . 4,120

Then to Ortospana (K^bul) on the 3 roads

fromBaktra 2,000

Thence to the confines of India 1,000

Which together amount to 15,300.**

The sum total however is only 16,210 "

Pliny (lib. VI, c. xii) says : *' Diognetus and Baeton,hi8
(Alexander's) measurers, have recorded that from the Kas-
pian Gates to Hekatompylos of the Parthians there were
as many miles as we have stated, thence to Alexandria
Arion a city built by that king, 575 miles, to Prophthasia
of the Drangae 198 miles, to the town of the Arakhosii
665 miles, to Hortospanum 175 miles, thence to Alexan-
der's town (Opiane) 60 miles. In some copies numbers
differing from these are found. Thoy state that the last-
named city lay at the foot of Caucasus ; from that the
distance to the Cophes and Peucolatis, a town of the
Indians, was 237 miles, and thence to the river Indus and
town of Taxila 60 miles, to the Hydaspes, a famous river,
120 miles, to the Hypasis, no mean river [iXXXIXI] 390 —
which was .the limit of Alexander's progress, although
he crossed the river and dedicated altars on the far-off
bank, as the letters of the king himself agree in stat-
ing. ' ' The Kaspian Gates formed a point of great import-
ance in ancient Geography, and many of the meridians
were measured from it. The pass has been clearly
identified with that now known as the Sirdar Pass between
Veramin and Kishlak in Khowar. Arrian states that the
distance from the city of Rhagai to the entrance of the
Gates was a one day's march. This was, however, a
forced march, as the ruins of Bhagai (now Rai, about 5
miles from Tehran) are somewhere about 30 miles distant
from the Pass.



21



From the Bsetis to KalpS, and the entrance of
the Straits, 2^ degrees. From the Straits to
Karallis in Sardinia, 25 degrees. From Karallis
to Lilybaion, in Sicily, 4^ degrees. From this
Cape to Pakhynos, 3 degrees. Then again,
from Pakhynos to Tainaros, in Lakonia, 10
degrees. Thence to Rhodes, 8J degrees. From
Rhodes to Issus, 11 J degrees, and finally from
Issos to the Enphrates, 2^ degrees.^' § 12. The

" I may present here the tabular form in which Mr.
Bunbury (vol. II, p. 638) exhibits the longitudes of the
principal points in the Mediterranean as given by
Ptolemy, and the actual longitudes of the same points
computed from Ferro :

Longitude in Beal longitude
Ptolemy. E. of Ferro.

Sacred Promontory 2^ 30' 9° 20'

Mouth of Bsetis 6** 20' 12°

Calpe (at mouth of Straits). T 30* 13°

Caralis in Sardinia 32° 30' 27° 30'

Lilybfieum in Sicily 37° 30° 45'

Pachynus (Prom.) in Sicily. 40° 33° 25'

TsBnarus (Prom.) 60° 40° 50'

Rhodes 58° 20' 46° 45'

Issus 69° 20' 54° 30'

The same authority observes (vol. II, p. 664) '* Pto-
lemy thus made the whole interval from the Sacred
Cape to Issus, which really comprises only about 45° 16'
to extend over not less than 67 degrees of longitude, and
the length of the Mediterranean itself from Calpe to
Issus, to amount to 62 degrees : rather more than 20
degrees beyond the truth. It is easy to detect one
principal source of this enormous error. Though the
distances above given are reported by Ptolemy in de-
grees of longitude, they were computed by Marines
himself from what he calls stadiasmif that is from dis-
tances given in maritime itineraries and reported in
stadia. In other words, he took the statements and esti-
mates of preceding authorities and converted them into
degrees of longitude, according to his own calculatioi^
that a degree on the equator was equal to 500 stadia, and



22



sum of these particular distances gives a total
of 72 degrees, consequently the entire length of
the known world between the meridian of the
Islands of the Blest and that of the Sdres is
177} degrees, as has been already shown.*'

Cap. 13.
§ 1. That such is the length of the inhabited
world may also be inferred from his estimate
of the distances in a voyage from India to the
Gulf of the Sinai and Kattigara, if the
sinuosities of the coast and irregularity of the
navigation be taken into account, together
with the positions as drawn into nearer
proximity in the projections ; for, he says, that
beyond the Cape called Kory where the
K o 1 k h i c Gulf terminates, the Argaric Gulf
begins, and that the distance thence to the
City of Kouroula, which is situated to the
north-eaflt of K or y is 3,400 stadia. § 2. The

consequently a degree of longitude in latitude 36** would
be equal (approximately) to 400 stadia.** The total
length of the Mediterranean computed from the stadias-
moi must have been 24,800. This was an improvement
on the estimate of Eratostiienes, but was still excessive.
In the ancient mode of reckoning sea distances the
tendency was almost uniformly towards exaggeration.

" The different corrections to be applied to Ptolemy's
eastern longitudes have been calculated by Sir Henry
fiawlinson to amount to three-tenths, which is within
one-seventieth part of the empirical correction used by
M. Gossellin. [If we take one-fifth from Ptolemy*8
longitude of a place, and deduct 17** 43' for the W. longi-
tude of Ferro, we obtain very approximately the modem
English longitude. Thus, for Barygaza, Ptolemy*8
longitude is 113^5' and 113°15'— 22°39'— 17°43'=72°B3',
or only 5' less than the true longitude W. of Ghreenwich.
—J. B.l



23



distance right across may, therefore, be esti-
mated at about 2,030 stadia, since we have to
deduct a third because of the navigation
having followed the curvature of the Gulf, and
have also to make allowances for irregularities
in the length of the courses run. § 3. If now we
further reduce this amount by a third, because
the sailing, tJiough suhject to interruption, was
taken as continuous, there remain 1,850 stadia,
determining the position of Kouroula as situ-
ated north-east from Kory. § 4. If now this
distance be referred to a line running parallel
to the equator and towards the East, and we
reduce its length by half in accordance with
the intercepted angle, we shall have as the dis-
tance between the meridian of Kouroula
and that of K6ry, 675 stadia, or 1^ degree,
since the parallels of these places do not differ
materially from the great circle.^®

§ 6. But to proceed : the course of the voyage
from Kouroura lies, he says, to the south-
east as far as P a 1 o u r a, the distance being
9,450 stadia. Here, if we deduct as before one-
third for the irregularities in the length of the
courses, we shall have the distance on account
of the navigation having been continuous to

^' By the intercepted angle is meant the angle con-
tained by two straight lines drawn from Kdry, one
running north-east to Kouroula and the other parallel
to the Equator. In Ptolemy's map Kouroula is so placed
that its distanoe in a straight line from Kory is about
double the distance between the meridians of those two
places.



24



the south-east about 6,300 stadia. § 6. And
if we deduct from this in like manner as before
one-sixth, in order to find the distance parallel
to the equator, we shall make the interval
between the meridians of these two places 5,250
stadia, or 10^ degrees.

§ 7. At this place the Gangetic Gulf begins,
which he estimates to be in circuit 19,000
stadia. The passage across it from P a 1 o u r a
to S a d a in a direct line from west to east
is 1,300 stadia. Here, then, we have but
one deduction to make, viz., one-third on ac-
count of the irregularity of the navigation,
leaving as the distance between the meridians
of Paloura and Sada 8,670 stadia, or 17J de-
grees. § 8. The voyage is continued onward
from Sada to the City of Tamala, a dis-
tance of 3,500 stadia, in a south-eastward
direction. If a third be here again deducted on
account of irregularities, we find the length of
the continuous passage to be 2,330 stadia, but we
must further take into account the divergence
towards the south-east, and deduct one-sixth, so
we find the distance between the meridians in
question to be 1,940 stadia, or 3° 50' nearly.
§ 9. He next sets down the passage from
Tamala to the Golden Khersonese at 1,600
stadia, the direction being still towards the
south-east, so that after making the usual de-
ductions there remain as the distance between
the two meridians 900 stadia, or 1° 48'. The



25



stlin of these particulars makes the distance
from Cape K 6 r y to the Golden Khersoneso
to be 34° 48'.

Cap. 14.
§ 1. Marinos does not state the number of
stadia in the passage from the Golden Kherso-
nese to Kattigara, but says that one Alexander
had written that the land thereafter faced the
south, and that those sailing along this coast
reached the city of Z a b a in 20 days, and by
continuing the voyage from Zaba southward,
but keeping more to the left, they arrived after
some days at Kattigara. § 2. He then makes
this distance very great by taking the expres-
sion ** some days" to mean " many days,'*
assigning as his reason that the days occupied
by the voyage were too many to be counted, — a
most absurd reason, it strikes me. § 3. For
would even the number of days it takes to go
round the whole world be past counting ? And
was there anything to prevent Alexander writing
" many" instead of '* some,** especially when
we find him saying that Dioskoros had reported
that the voyage from Bhapta to Cape
Prasum took **many days.'* One might in
fact with far more reason take " some " to mean
" a few,*' for we have been wont to censuro
this stjle {of expression).*^ § 4. So now lest we



90



• To aocoant for the seeming caprice which led
Marinos to take the expression some days as equivalent
to ever so many days it has boon supposed that he had



4 G



26



should appear to fall ourselves into the same errorr,
that of adapting conjectures about distances
to some number already fixed on, let us compare
the voyage from the Golden Khersonese to

adopted the theory that Katti^ra, the farthest point
eastward that had been reached by sea, was situated
nearly under the same meridian as Sdra, the furthest
point in the same direction that had been reached by
land. Unfortunately the expression used by Alexander
some days did not square with this theory, and it was
all the worse in consequence for that expression. ''The
result," says Mr. Bunbury (vol. II, p. SSf), " derived by
Marines from these calculations was to place Kattigara
at a distance of not less than 100 degrees of longitude,
or nearly 50,000 stadia, east of Cape Kory ; and as he
placed that promontory in 125^° of longitude east of the
Fortunate Islands, he arrived at the conclusion that the
total length of the inhabited world was, in round num-
bers, 225"*, equivalent, according to his calculation to
112,500 stsbdia. As he adopted the system of Poseidonios,
which gave only 180,000 stadia for the circumference of
the globe, he thus made the portion of it which he sup-
posed to be known, to extend over nearly two-thirds
of the whole circumference. This position of Cape
Kdrv, which was adopted by Ptolemy as a position well
established, was already nearly 34° too far to the east ;
but it was by giving the enormous extension we have
pointed out to the coast of Asia beyond that promon-
tory, that he fell into this stupendous error, which though
partly corrected by Ptolemy, was destined to exercise so
great an influence upon the future progress of geogra-
phy.** Columbus by accepting Ptolemy's estimate
of the circumference of the globe greatly under-esti-
mated the distance between the western shores of the
Atlantic and the eastern shores of Asia, and hence was
led to undertake his memorable enterprise with all the
greater hope and courage.

With reference to the position of Cape Kory as given
by Ptolemy, Bunbury says (Vol. II, p. 537, note) : " Cape
Kdry is placed by Ptolemy, who on this point apparently
follows Marinos, in 125** E. Longitude. It is really situ-
ated 80° E. of Greenwich and 98° E. of Ferro ; but as
Ptolemy made a fundamental error in the position of his
primary meridian of nearly 7^ this must be added to the
amount of his eiTor in this instance. He himself states
that Cape Kory was 120° E. of the mouth of the Bactis,
the real difference of longitude being only 86°20'."



27



Kattigara, consisting of the 20 days to Zaba
and the *^ some days" thence to Kattigara with
the voyage from Ar6mata to Cape Prasnm, and
we find that the voyage from Aromata to
Rhapta took also 20 days as reported by
Theophilos, and the voyage from Rhapta to
Prasum "many more days" as reported by
Dioskoros, so that we may set side by side* the
" some days " with the ** many days " and like
Marinos take them to be equivalent. §6. Since
then, we have shown both by reasoning and by
stating ascertained facts, that Brasum is under
the parallel of 16^ 25' in South latitude, while
the parallel through Cape Aromata is 4° 15'
in North latitude, making the distance between
the two capes 20° 40', we might with good reason
make the distance from the Golden Khersonese
to Zaba and thence to Kattigara just about the
same, § 6. It is not necessary to curtail the
distance from the Golden Khersonese to Zaba,
since as the coast faces the south it must run
parallel with the equator. We must reduce,
however, the distance from Zaba to Kattigara,
since the course of the navigation is towards the
south and the east, in order that we may find
the position parallel to the equator. § 7. If
again, in our uncertainty as to the real excess of
the distances, we allot say one -half of the degrees
to each of these distances, and from the 13° 20'
between Zaba and Kattigara we deduct a third
on account of the divergence, we shall have the



28



distance from the Golden Khersonese to Katti-
gara along a line parallel to the equator of about
17° 10'. § 8. Bat it has been shown that the
distance from Cape Kory to the Grolden Kher-
sonese is 34° 48', and so the entire distance from
Kory to Kattigara will be about 52°.

§ 9. But again, the meridian which passes
through the source of the River Indus is a little
further west than the Northern Promontory of
Taprobane, which according to Marines is
opposite to Kory, from which the meridian
which passes through the mouths of the River
Baetis is a distance of 8 hours or 120°. Now as
this meridian is 5° from that of the Islands of
the Blest, the meridian of Cape Kory is more
than 125° from the meridian of the Islands of
the Blest. But the meridian through Kattigara
is distant from that through the Islands of the
J31est a little more than 177° in the latitude of
Kory, each of which contains about the same
number of stadia as a degree reckoned along
the parallel of Rhodes. § 10. The entire length
then of the world to the Metropolis of the Sinai
may be taken at 180 degrees or an interval of 12
hours, since it is agreed on all hands that this
Metropolis lies further east than Kattigara, so
that the length along the parallel of Rhodes
will be 72,000 stadia.

Cap. 17, (part).
§ 3. For all who have crossed the seas to those
places agree in assuring me that the district of



29



Sakhalites in Arabia, and tlie Gulf of the same
name, lie to the east of S y a g r o s, and not to
the west of it as stated by Marinos, who also
makes S i m y 1 1 a, the emporium in India, to be
further west not only than Cape K o m a r i, but
also than the Indus. § 4. But according to the
unanimous testimony both of those who have
sailed from us to those places and have for a
long time frequented them, and also of those
who have come from thence to us, S i m y 1 1 a,
which by the people of the country is called
Timoula, lies only to the south of the
mouths of the river, and not also to west of
them. § 5. From the same informants we have
also learned other particulars regarding India
and its different provinces, and its remote parts
as far as the Golden Khersonese and onward
thence to Kattigara. In sailing thither, the
voyage, they said, was towards the east, and in
returning towards the west, but at the same
time they acknowledged that the period which
was'occupied in making the voyages was neither
fixed nor regular. The country of the Seres and
their Metropolis was situated to the north of
the Sinai, but the regions to the eastward of
both those people were unknown, abounding
it would appear, in swamps, wherein grew
reeds that were of a large size and so close to-
gether that the inhabitants by means of them
could go right across from one end of a swamp
to the other. In travelling from these parts there



30



was not only the road that led to Baktriand
by way of the Stone Tower, but also a road
that led into India through Palimbothra. The
road again that led from the Metropolis of
the Sinai to the Haven at Kattigara ruus in a
south-west direction, and hence this road does
not coincide with the meridian which passes
through Sera and Kattigara, but, from what
Marines tell us, with some one or other of those
meridians that are further east.

I may conclude this prefatory matter by quoting
from Mr. Bunbury his general estimate of the
value of Ptolemy's Indian Geogi-aphy as set forth
in his criticism of Ptolemy's Map of India.

His strictures, though well grounded, may per-
haps be considered to incline to the side of severity.
He says (vol. II, pp. 642-3), " Some excellent re-
marks on the portion of Ptolemy's work devoted
to India, the nature of the different materials of
which he made use, and the manner in which he
employed them, will be found in Colonel Yule's
introduction to his Map of India, in Dr. Smith's
Atlas of Ancient Geography (pp. 22-24). These
remarks are indeed in great measure applicable
to the mode of proceeding of the Alexandrian
Geographer in many other cases also, though the
result is particularly conspicuous in India from the
fulness of the information — crude and undigested
as it was — which he had managed to bidng to-
gether. The result, as presented to us in the tables
of Ptolemy, is a map of utter confusion, out of
which it is very difficult to extract in a few
instances any definite conclusions." The attempt



31



of Lassen to identify the various places mentioned
by Ptolemy, is based throughout upon the funda*"
mental error of supposing that the geographer
possessed a Map of India similar to our own, and
that we have only to compare the ancient and
modem names in order to connect the two. As
Col. Yule justly observes: " Practically, he
(Lassen) deals with Ptolemy's compilation as if
that Geographer had possessed a collection of real
Indian surveys, with the data systematically
co-ordinated. The fact is, that if we should take one
of the rude maps of India that appeared in the
16th century {e.g. in Mercator or in Lindschoten),
draw lines of latitude and longitude, and then more
Ptolemaico construct tables registering the co-
ordinates of cities, sources and confluences as they
appeared in that map, this would be the sort of
material we have to deal with in Ptolemy's India."
But, in fact, the case is much stronger than Col.
Tule puts it. For such a map as he refers to, of the
16th centnry, however rude, would give a generally
correct idea of the form and configuration of the
Indian Peninsula. But this, as we have seen,
was utterly misconceived by Ptolemy. Hence
he had to fit his data, derived from various sources,
such as maritime and land itineraries, based upon
real experience, into a framework to which they
were wholly unsuited, and this could only be
effected by some Procrustean process, or rather
by a repetition of such processes, concerning which
we are left wholly in the dark.

Col. Yule's map of Ancient India is undoubtedly
by far the best that has yet been produced : it
is indeed the only attempt to intei'pret Ptolemy



^



32



data, npon which such a map must mainly be
founded upon anything like sound 'critical prin-
ciples. But it must be confessed that the result
is fai* from encouraging. So small a proportion
of Ptolemy's names can find a place at all, and
so many of those even that appear on the map are
admitted by its author to rest upon very dubious
authority ; that we remain almost wholly in the
dark as to the greater part of his voluminous
catalogues ; and are equally unable to identify the
localities which he meant to designate, and to
pronounce an opinion upon the real value of his
materialB."

Book VII.

Contents,
D^cription of the furthest parts of Greater
Asia, according to the existing provinces and
Satrapies.

1. [Tenth Map']

of India within the River Ganges.

2. [Eleventh Map] '

of India beyond the Ganges,
of the Sinai.

3. [Twelfth Map]

of the Island of Taprohan6 and the
islands surrounding it.

4. Outline Sketch of the Map of the Inha-

hited World.
Delineation of the Armillary Sphere with

the Inhabited World.
Sketch of the World in Projection.
[5. There arc 4:00 Provinces and 30 Maps.]



i



33



Cap. I.

Description of India within the Ganges,

§ 1. India within the river Gunges is bounded
on the west by the Paropanisadai and Ara-
khosia and Gedrosia along their eastern sides
already indicated ; on the north by Mount
Imaos along the Sogdiaioi and the Sakai lying
above it ; on the east by thB river Gaoages ;
and on the south and again on the west by a
portion of the Indian Ocean. The circuit of
the coast of this ocean is i^us described : —

2. In S y r a s t r e n 6, on the Gulf called Kan-
thi, a roadstead and harbour..l09° 3(y 20°
The most western mouth of

the River Indus called

Sagapa IIO^ 20' 19^50'

The next mouth called Sin-

thon 110° 4y 19° 50^

The 3rd mouth called Khry-

soun (the Golden) 111° 20^ 19° 50'

The 4th called Kariphron ... 1 1 1° 40' 19° 50^

The 5th called Sapara 112° 30^ 19° 50'

The 6th called Sabalaessa ...113° 20° 15'

The 7th called Lonibare 113° 30' 20° 15'

3. Bardaxema, a town ...113° 40^ 19^" 40'

Syrastra, a village 114° 19° 30'

Monoglosson, a mart 114^ 10' 18° 40'

Comment. — Strabo, following Eratosthenes, re-
garded the Indus as the boundary of India on the
west, and this is the view which has been generally
prevalent. Ptolemy,ho wever,included within India
5 Q



34



the regions which lay immediately to the west of
that river, comprehending considerable portions
of the countries now known as Bal(!ichistS.n and
Afghanistsln. He was fully justified in this de-
termination, since many places beyond the Indus,
as the sequel will show, bore names of Sanskrit
origin, and such parts were ruled from the earliest
times down to the Muhammadan conquests
by princes of Indian descent. The western
boundary as given by Ptolemy would be roughly
represented by a line drawn from the mouth of
the Indus and passing through the parts adjacent
to Kandahar, Ghazni, Kabul, Balkh, and even
places beyond. The Fkropanisadai inhabit-
ed the regions lying south of the mountain range
called Faropanisos, now known as the Central
HindA-Ktish. One of these towns was Ortospana,
which has been identified with the city of
K&bul, the Karoura of our author. He gives
as the eastern boundary of the Paropanisadai
a line drawn south from the sources of the river
Oxus through the Kaukasian Mountains (the
eastern portion of the Hind(i-Ktish) to a point
lying in long. 119° 30' and lat. 39°. Arakho-
sia lay to the south of the Paropanisadai — its
chief city was Arakhotos, whose name, according
to Rennell, is preserved in Arokhaj. There is a
river of the same name which has been iden-
tified with the Helmand (the Etymander or
Erymanthos of the ancients) but also and more
probably with the Urghand-&b or Arkand-ab,
which passes by K!andahar. Gedrosia, the
modem Baldchist^n, had for its eastern boundary
the River Indus. The boundary of India on the



35



north was formed by Mount Imaos (Sansk. hima,
cold), a name which was at first applied by the
Greeks to the Hindti-Ki^h and the chain of the
Himalayas running parallel to the equator, but
which was gradually in the course of time trans-
ferred to the Bolor range which runs from north
to south and intersects them. Ptolemy, however,
places Imaos further east than the Bolor, and
in the maps which accompany his Geography, this
meridian chain, as he calls it, is prolonged up to
the most northemly plains of the Irtish and Obi.

Sogdiana lay to the north of Baktria and
abutted on Skythia, both towards the north
and towards the west. The name has been
preserved in that of Soghd, by which the country
along the Kohik from Bokhara to Samarkand has
always been known . Our author places the Sogdian
Mountains (the Pamir range) at the sources of the
Oxus, and the mountains of the K 6 m e d a i be-
tween the sources of that river and the Jaxartes.

The Sakai were located to the east of the
Sogdians — Ptolemy describes them as nomadic,
as without towns and as living in woods and caves.
He specifies as their tribes, the £! a r a t a i (proba-
bly connected with the Elir&tai of India), the
Komaroi, the Komedai, the Massage-
tai, the Grynaioi Skythai, the Toor-
nai and the Byltai. The Sakai it would
appear therefore were the Mountaineers of Kafi-
ristan, Badakshan, Shign&n, Roshan, Baltistan
or Little Tibet, &c.

SyraaMnS and LariM.

Syrastr^ne : — The name is formed from the
Sanskrit Surashtra (now Sorath) the ancient



36



name of the Peninsula of Gujar&t. It is men-*
tioned in the PeripMs of the Erythraean Sea as
the sea-board of Aberia, and is there praised for
the great fertility of its soil, for its eotton fabrics,
and for the superior stature of its inhabitants.

K a n t h i : — The Gulf of this name is now called
the Gulf of Kachh. It separates Kachh, the
south coast of which is still called K a n t h a,
from the Peninsula of Gujaiut. In the PeriplUs
the gulf is called Barake and is described as of
very dangerous navigation. In Ptolemy, Barake
is the name of an island in the Gulf.

Two mouths only of the Indus are mentioned
by the followers of Alexander and by Strabo.
The PeripMs gives the same number (7) as
Ptolemy. There are now 11, but changes are
continually taking place. Sagapa, the western
mouth, was explored by Alexander. It separates
from the main stream below Thatha. In the
chronicles of Sindh it is called S&g^ra, from which
perhaps its present name Gli&ra, may be derived.
It has long ceased to be navigable.

S i n t h 6 n : — This has been identified with the
Piti branch of the Indus, one of the mouths of
the Baghar River, This branch is otherwise
called the Sindhi Khrysoun. This is the Kediwart
mouth.

Khariphron: — Cunningham identifies this
with the Kyar river of the present day which, he
says, leads right up to the point where the southern
branch of the Gh&ra joins the main river near
Lari-bandar.

S a p a r a : — ^this is the W&ri mouth.

Sabalaessais now the Sir mouth.



3



1^



Lonibarein Sanskrit is L6navfi.ri (or Lonava-
d&, or Lavanay&ri or L&vanav&tft.*^ It is now the
Kori, but is called also the Launi which preserves
the old name.

Bardaxema : — This, according to Tnle, is now
Pur-bandar, but Dr. Burgess prefers Srinagar, a
much older place in the same district, having
near it a small village called Bai*diy&, which, as he
thinks, may possibly be a reminiscence of the
Greek name.

Syrastra : — This in the Prakritized form is
Sorath. It has been identified by Lassen with
Jun&gadh, a place of great antiquity and historical
interest in the interior of the Peninsula, about 40
miles eastward from the coast at Navi-bandar.
The meaning of the name is the old fort. The
place was anciently called Gimagara, from its
vicinity to the sacred mountain of Gim&r, near
which is the famous rock inscribed with the edicts
of Asoka, Skandagupta and Budra D&ma. Yule
identifies Syrastra with Navi-bandar, a port at the
mouth of the Bh&dar, the largest river of the
Peninsula, said to be fed by 99 tributaries. Ju-
n&gadh was visited by Hiuen Tsiang, who states
that after leaving the kingdom of Valabhl (near
Bhaunagar) he went about 100 miles to the west
and reached the country of Su-la-ch'a (Saur&sh-
tra) that was subject to the kingdom of Valabhi
See Tar(kh'i-8orath, edited by Dr. Burgess, pp. 33-
199.

Monoglosson : — This is now represented by
Mangrol, a port on the S. W. coast of the Penin-

** Lavana is the Saiiskfit word for salt.



n



38



sula below Navi-bandar. It is a veiy poptdous
place, with a considerable traffic, and is tributary
to Jun&gadh.

4. InLarik8.

Mouth of the River Mophis. . .1 14° 18° 20'

Pakidare, a village 113° 17° 51/

CapeMale6 111° 17° 30'

5. In the Gulf ofBarygaza.

KamanS 112° 17°

Mouth of the River Namados 1 12° 17° 45'

Nausaripa 112° 30' 16° 30'

Poulipoula 112° 30' 16°

Larike, according to Lassen, represents the
Sansk. RS.shtrikainits Prakrit form L a t i k a.
Lar-desa, however, the country of L S« r (Sansk.
Lata) was the ancient name of the territory
of Gujarat, and the northern parts of Konkan,
and L a r 1 k S may therefore be a formation from
L&r with the Greek termination iM appended. The
two great cities of Barygaza (Bharoch) and Ozen^
(Uj jain) were in Larike, which appears to have been
a political rather than a geographical division.

Male 6 must have been a projection of the
land somewhere between the mouth of the Mahi
and that of Narmada — ^but nearer to the former
if Ptolemy's indication be correct.

The Gulf of Barygaza, now the Gulf of
Eliambhat, was so called from the great com-
mercial emporium of the same name (now Bha-
roch) on the estuary of the Narmadft at a distance
of about 300 stadia from the Gulf. This river is
called the Namados or Namades by Ptolemy and
the Namnadios by the Author of the Periplus,



39



who gives a vivid account of the difficulties attend-
ing the navigation of the gulf and of the estuary
which was subject to bores of great frequency
and violence.

K am an 6 is mentioned as Kammone in the
Periplus, where it is located to the south of the
Narmada estuary. Ptolemy probably errs in
placing it to northward of it.

Nausaripa has been identified with Nau-
s^ri, a place near the coast, about 18 miles south
from SGrat.

Poulipoula is in Yule's map located at
Sanjan, which is on the coast south from Nausari.
It was perhaps nearer Bals&r.

6. Ariake Sadinon.

Soupara 112° 30' 15° 3(y

Mouth of the River Goaris ...112° 15' 15° 10^

Dounga 111° 30' 15°

Mouth of the River B^nda ... 110° 30' 15°

Simylla, a mart and a cape... 110° 14° 45'

Hippokoura 111° 45' 14° 10^

Baltipatna 110° 30' 14° 20'

A r i ak e corre gpon dsn early to Ma haraghtra —
the country of the M!arabh4s. It may have been
so called, because its inhabitants being chiefly
Aryans and ruled by Indian princes were there-
by distinguished from their neighbours, who
were either of different descent or subject to
foreign domination. The territory was in Pto-
lemy's time divided among three potentates, one
of whom belonged to the dynasty of the S a d i-
n e i s and ruled the prosperous trading commu-
nities that occupied the seaboard. This dynasty



40



is mentioned in the Periplus (cap. 52) whence
we learn that Sandanes after having made
himself master of Kalliena (now Kaly&na), which
had formerly belonged to the house of S a r a-
g a ne s the elder, subjected its trade to the severest
restrictions, so that if Greek vessels entered its
port even accidentally, they were seized and sent
under guard to Barygaza, the seat evidently of
the paramount authority. Sadanes, according to
Lassen, corresponds to the Sanskrit word S & d-
h a n a, which means completion or a perfecter,
and also an agent or representative. By Saraganes
is probably indicated one of the great ^atakarni or
Andhra dynasty. The PeriplUs makes Ari&k^ to
be the beginning of the kingdom of Mambares
and of all India.

Soupara has been satisfactorily identified
by Dr. Burgess with Sup&r^, a place about 6
miles to the north of Yasai (Bassein). It appears
to have been from very early times an important
centre of trade, and it was perhaps the capital of
the district that lay around it. Among its ruins
have been preserved some monuments, which are
of historical interest, and which also attest its
high antiquity. These are a fragment of a block
of basalt like the rocks of Gim&r, inscribed with
edicts of As6ka, and an old Buddhist St(!lpa.
The name of Sup&ra figures conspicuously in the
many learned and elaborate treatises which were
evoked in the course of the famous controversy
regarding the situation of Ophir to which Solomon
despatched the ships he had hired from the
Tyrians. There can now be little doubt that if
Ophir did not mean India itself it designated



41



some place in India, and probably Supara, which
lay on that part of the coast to which the traders
of the west, who took advantage of the monsoon
to cross the ocean, would naturally direct their
course. The name moreover of Supar^ is almost
identical with that of Ophir when it assumes, as
it often does, an initial S, becoming Sophara as in
the Septuagint form of the name, and Sofir which
is the Coptic name for India, not to mention
other similar forms, (See Benfey's Indien,
pp. 30-32).

The mouths of the G o a r i s and B e n d a
Yule takes to be the mouths of the Strait that
isolates Salsette and Bombay. The names repre-
sent, as he thinks, those of the Godavari and
Bhima respectively, though these rivers flow
in a direction different from that which Ptolemy
.assigns to them, the former discharging into the
Bay of Bengal and the latter into the Krishna,
of which it is the most considerable tributary,
Ptolemy's rivers, especially those of th^j Peninsula,
are in many instances so dislocated, that it is
difficult to identify them satisfactorily. It
appears to have been his practice to connect the
river-mouths which he found mentioned in re-
cords of coasting voyages with rivers in the
interior concerning which he had information
from other sources, and whose courses he had
only partially traced. But, as Yule remarks,
with his erroneous outline of the Peninsula this
process was too hazardous and the result often
wrong. Mr. J. M. Campbell, Bo.C.S., would
identify the Goaris with the Vaitama River,
as Gore is situated upon it and was probably the

C a



42



highest point reached by ships sailing up its
stream. The sources of the Yaitama and the
Oodavari are in close propinquity. The Benda
he would identify with the Bhiwandl River, and
the close similarity of the names favours this
view.

D o u n g a is placed in Tule's map to the
S. E. of SupsLrtl on the Strait which separates
Salsette from the mainland. Ptolemy, however,
through his misconception of the configuration
of this part of the coast, places it a whole degree
^to the west of Supara. Mr. Campbell, from some
similarity in the names, suggests its identity
with Dug&d — a place about 10 miles N. of Bht-
wan<^ and near the Vajrab&i hot springs. Dug&d,
however, is too far inland to have been here
mentioned by Ptolemy, and moreover, it lies to
the north of Sup&ra, whereas in Ptolemy's enu^
meration, which is from north to south, it is
placed after it.

Sim y 11 a: — Yule identifies this with Ohaul
and remarks : " Chaul was still a chief port of
"Western India when the Portuguese arrived. Its
position seems to correspond precisely both with
Simylla and with the Saimth* or Jaimih* {i.e.
Chaimur, the Arabs having no ch) of the Arabian
geographers. In Al-Bfriini the coast cities
run : Kambayat, Bahruj, Sind&n (Sanj&n), Suf&i<a
(SupS,rll), Tana (near Bombay). ** There you enter
the country of Laran, where is Jaim(ir." Istakhri
inverts the position of Sindan and Sufara, but
Saimdr is still fui-thest south." In a note he adds :
" Ptolemy mentions that Simylla was called
by the natives Timula (probably Tiamula) ; and



43



putting together all these forms, Timula, Simylla,
Saimur, Ohaimtb", the real name must have been
something like Ohaimul or Ch&mul, which would
modernize into Ghaul, as Chamari and Pr&mara
into Ohauri and Paw&r." Ohaul or Ohenwal lies
23 miles S. of Bombay. Pandit Bhagv&nlal In-
draji, Ph.D., suggested as a better identification
Ghimdla in Trombay Island, this being supported
by one of the Kanhori inscriptions in which
GhimtUa is mentioned, apparently as a large city,
like Supara and Kalyana in the neighbourhood.
Mr. Campbell thus discusses the merits of these
competing identifications : — ** Simylla has a special
interest, as Ptolemy states that he learned some of
his Geography of Western India from people who
traded to Simylla and had been familiar with it for
many years, and had come from there to him —
Ptolemy speaks of Simylla as a point and emporium,
and the author of the PeriplUs speaks of it as
one of the Kohkan local marts. Simylla till
lately was identified with Ghaul. But the dis-
covery of a village Ghembur on Trombay Island
in Bombay Harbour, has made it doubtful whether
the old ti*ade centre was there or ^t Ghaul. In
spite ct the closer resemblance of the names, the
following reasons seem to favour the view that
* Chaul, not Ghimllla, was the Greek Simylla,
First, it is somewhat unlikely that two places so
close, and so completely on the same line of trafiic
as Kalyan (the Kalliena of the PeripMa) and
Chimiila should have flourished at the same time.
Second, the expression in the Periplm * below
(fi€Ta) Kalliena other local marts are SemuUa '
points to some place down the coast rather than



44



to a town in the same Harbour as Kalliena, whicli
according to the Author's order north to south
should have been named before it. Third,
Ptolemy's point (promontorium) of SimjUa
has no meaning if the town was Chembur in
Trombay. But it fits well with Chaul, as the
headland would then be the south shore of Bom-
bay Harbour, one of the chief capes in this part
of the coast, the south head of the gulf or bay
whose north head is at Bassein. This explana-
tion of the SimyUa point is borne out by Fryer
(1675) New Account (pp. 77-82), who talked of
Bombay ' facing Chaul' and notices the gulf or
hollow in the shore stretching from Bassein to
Chaul Point. The old (1540) Portuguese name
Chaul Island' for the isle of Kennery of the south
point of Bombay, further supports this view."
Ptolemy's map gives great prominence to the
projection of land at SimyUa, which (through a
strange misconception on his part, for which it is
impossible to account) is therein represented as
the great south-west point of India, whence the
coast bends at once sharply to the east instead of
pursuing its course continuously to the south.

Hippokoura : — This word may be a Greek
translation (in whole or in part) of the native
name of the place. Hence Pandit Bhagvanl&l
Indraji was led to identify it with Ghodabandar
(Horse-poiii) a town on the Thana Strait, whose
position however is not in accordance with
Ptolemy's data. Mr. Campbell again has sug-
gested an identification free from this objection.
Ghoregaon (Horse-village) in Kolaba, a place at
the head of a navigable river, which was once a



45

seat of trade. Yule takes it, though doubtingly,
as being now represented by Knda near R&japur.
Hippokourios was one of the Greek epithets of
Poseidon. Ptolemy mentions another Hippo-
k o u r a, which also belonged to Ariake and was the
Capital of Baleokoui'os. Its situation was inland.
Baltipatna : — This place is mentioned in the
PeripMs under the somewhat altered form P a 1 a i- viJ^a. • fe^jXJl* T^,
patmai. Tule locates it, but doubtingly, at ^^'J^-^tL

Daibal. Pra Paolino identified it with Balaer-
patam (the Baleopatam of Bennell) where the
king of Gananor resided, but it lies much too
far south to make the identification probable.
Mr. Campbell has suggested PaK, which he de-
scribes as " a very old holy town at the top of
the Nagotna river." Its position, however, being %
too far north and too far from the sea, does not -^
seem to suit the requirements.

7. (Ariake) of the Pirates.

Mandagara 113° 14°

Byzanteion :113° 40^ 14° 40'

Khersonesos 114° 20' 14° 30'

Armagara 114° 20' 14° 20"

Mouth of the River Nanagounall4° 30' 13° 50'

Kitra, amart 115° 30' 14° 40'

AriaM,

Piracy, which from very early times seems to
have infested, like a pernicious parasite, the
commerce of the Eastern Seas, flourished nowhere
so vigorously as on the Konkan Coast, along
which richly freighted merchantmen were con-
tinually plying. Here bands of pirates, formed
into regularly organized communities like those



46



of the ThsLgB in the interior of the country, had
established themselres in strongholds contiguous
to the creeks and bays, which were numerous on
the coast, and which afforded secure harbourage
to their cruisers. The part of the coast which
was subject to their domination and which was
in consequence called the Pirate Coast, extended
from the neighbourhood of Simylla to an empo-
rium called Nitra, the Mangaruth of Kosmas and
the Mangaltir of the present day. Whether the
native traders took any precautions to protect
their ships from these highwaymen of the ocean
is not known, but we learn from Pliny, that the
merchantmen which left the Egyptian ports
heading for India carried troops on board well-
armed for their defence. Mr. Campbell has
ingeniously suggested that by *AubpS>v UeipaT&v
Ptolemy did not mean pirates, but the powerful
dynasty of the Andhi-abhritya that ruled over
the Konkan and some other parts of the Dekhan.
He says (Bombay Gazetteer, Thana, vol. II.,
p. 415 n. 2nd), "Perhaps because of Pliny's
account of the Konkan pirates, Ptolemy's phrase
AridM Andron Peiraton has been taken to mean
Pirate Aridke. But Ptolemy has no mention of
pii*ates on the Konkan Coast, and, though this
does not carry much weight in the case of
Ptolemy, the phrase Andron Peiraton is not
connect Greek for pirates. This and the close
resemblance of the words suggest that Andron
Peiraton may originally have been Andhra-
bhrityon." On this it may be remarked, that
though Ptolemy has no mention of pii'ates on
the Konkan Coast this is not in the least sur-



47



prising, since his work is almost exclusively geo-
graphical, apd whatever information on points of
history we obtain from it is more from inference
than direct statement. Further, I do not see why
the expression dv8pS)v n^ipar&v if taken to mean
pirates should be called incorrect Greek, since
in later Attic it was quite a common usage to
join dvr}p with titles, professions and the like.

Mandagara : — This may be a transliteration,
somewhat inexact, of Madangarh (House of Love)
the name of a fort about 12 miles inland from
Banktlt. More likely the place is M^ndla on the
north bank of the Sautri river, opposite Banket,
and now known as Kolmandla, and Bd>g and
Bagmandldi. MangaKlr, to which as far as the
name goes it might be referred, is too far south
for the identification.

Byzanteion : — The close correspondence of
this name with that of the famous capital on the
Bosporos has led to the surmise that a colony of
Greeks had established themselves on this coast
for commercial purposes, notwithstanding the
danger to be apprehended from attacks by the
pirates in their neighbourhood. It appears how-
ever quite unlikely that Greeks should have
formed a settlement where few, if any, of the
advantages could be enjoyed which generally de-
termined their choice of a locality in which to plant
a colony. The name may perhaps be a translitera-
tion of Yijayanta, now Yijayadurga, the south
entrance of the Yaghotan river in Ratnagiri,
The word means the Fort of Yictory.

Khersonesos : — ^This seems to be the penin-
sula which is in the neighbourhood of Goa. It is



48



mentioned in the PeripMs as one of the haunts
of the pirates, and as being neai* the island of the
Kaineitai, that is, St. George's Island.

Armagara : — This is placed near the month
of the Nanagouna river, which may be taken
to mean here the river on which Sad&sivagarh
stands. The Nanagouna however must be identi-
fied with the T&pti, whose embouchure is about 6°
farther north. Its name is Sanskrit, meaning
' possessed of many virtues.* To account for this
extraordinary dislocation. Yule supposes that
Ptolemy, having got from his Indian lists a river
N&n&guna rising in the Yindhyas, assigns to it
three discharges into the sea by what he took for
so many delta branches, which he calls respec-
tively Goaris, Benda, and Nanaguna. This, he
adds, looked possible to Ptolemy on his map,
with its excessive distortion of the western coast,
and his entire displacement of the Western Ghats.
Mr. Campbell suggests that Ptolemy may have
mistaken the Nan4 Pass for a river.

Nitra is the most southern of the pirate
ports, and is mentioned by Pliny in a passage
where he remarks that ships frequenting the great
emporium of Mouziris ran the risk of being
attacked by pirates who infested the neighbour-
hood, and possessed a place called Nitra. Yule
refers it as has been already stated to Mangalur.

8. Limyrike.

Tyndis, acity 116° 14° 30'

Bramagara 116° 45' 14° 2(/

Kalaikarias 116° 40' 14°

Mouziris, an emporium 117° 14°



49

Mouth of tlie River PbuucIos- '

tomos 117° 20' 14*

Podoi)€roura 117^ 40' 14° 15^

Semne 118° 14° 20^

Koreoura 118° 40' 14° 20'

Bakarei 119° 30' 14*^ 30'

Mouth of the River Baris...l20° 14° 20' -7-

Limyrike : — Lassen was unable to trace this Zh a > > : . ^ *^ ^ "^ *

name to any Indian source, but Caldwell has satis-
factorily explained its origin. In the introduction
to his Dravidian Grammar he states (page 14), that
in the Indian segment of the Roman maps called
the Feutinger Tables the portion of India to
which this name is applied is called Damirike,
and that we can scarcely err in identifying this
name with the Tamil country, since Damirike
evidently means Damir-ike. In the map referred
to there is moreover a disti-ict called Scytia
Dymii-ice, and it appears to have been this word
which by a mistake of A for A Ptolemy wrote
Lymirike. The D, he adds, retains its place in
the Cosmography of the Geogi-apher of Ravenna,
who repeatedly mentions Dimirica as one of the
3 divisions of India. Ptolemy and the author of
the Periplus are at one in making Tyndis one of
the first or most northern ports in Limyrike.
The latter gives its distance from Bai*ygaza at
7,000 stadia, or nearly 12 degrees of latitude, if we
reckon 600 stadia to the degree. Notwithstand-
ing this authoritative indication, which makes
Limyrike begin somewhere near Kalikat (11° 15'
N. lat.) its frontier has generally been placed
nearly 3 degrees further north, Tyndis having
7 G



50



been located at Bai'celor. This error has been
rectified by Yule, whose adherence to the data
of the Peripliis has been completely justified
by the satisfactory identification of Mouziris (the
southern rival in commercial prosperity of Bary-
gaza) with Kranganur, instead of with Mangalur
as previously accepted. The capital of Limyiike
was Karilr, on the K&veri, where resided Kero-
bothros, i.e., Keralaputra, the Chera king.

Tyndis is described in the PeripMs as a
place of great note pertaining to the kingdom
of Keprobotras, and situate near, the sea at
a distance of 500 stadia from Mouziris. This
distance north from Kranganur with which, as
has been stated, Mouziris has been identified,
brings us to Taniir. " Tantir itself, " says Yule,
" may be Tyndis ; it was an ancient city, the seat
of a principality, and in the beginning of the 16th
century had still much shipping and trade. Perhaps,
however, a more probable site is a few miles further
north, Kadalundi, i. e. Kadal-tundi, * the raised
ground by the sea,' standing on an inlet 3 or 4
miles south of Bepur. It is not now a port, but
persons on the spot seem to think that it must
formerly have been one, and in communication
with the Backwater." He adds in a note supplied
by Dr. Bumell, " The composition of Kadal and
Tundi makes Kadalundi by TamiJ rules." The
pepper country called Kottonarike was imme-
diately adjacent to Tyndis, which no doubt
exported great quantities of that spice.

Bramagara is placed in the table half a
degree to the east of Tyndis, i.e., really to the
south of it, since Ptolemy makes the Malabar



51



Coast run east instead of south. The name may
be a transliteration of the Sanskrit B rahnid(jdra,
which means * t he abode of the Brahmans/ The
Br&hmans of the south of India appear in those
days to have consisted of a number of isolated
communities that were settled in separate parts
of the country, and that were independent each of
the other. This, as Lessen remai'ks (Ind.Alt.f vol.
Ill, p. 193) is in harmony with the tradition
according to which the ^XI2— ^''"'^ ^ ^^^ wf>r <^
r epresented as hav ing been settled by Parasuraina I
in 61 vil lages, a nd as liavirig at first lived under a I
republican constitution. In section 74 Ptolemy i
mentions a town called Bi^hlll^ belonging to the /
Br^hmanoi Magoi, i.e., * sons of the Br&hmaiis.' '

Kalaikarias : — ^The last half of this word
(Karias) is doubtless the TamiJ word for '* coast,"
harei, which appears also in another of Ptolemy's
names, Peringkarei, mentioned as one of the
inland towns Kandionoi (sec. 89). I find in
An'owsmith's large Map of India a place called
*Chalacoory' to the N. E. of Kranganur, and at
about the same distance from it as our author
makes Kalaikarias distant from Mouziris.

Mouziris may unhesitatingly be taken to,
represent the Muyiri of Muyiri-Kodu, which
says Yule^ appears in one of the most ancient of
Malabar inscriptions as the residence of the
King of Kodangalur or Kranganur, and is
admitted to be practically identical with that
now extinct city. It is to Kranganur he adds
that all the Malabar traditions point as their
oldest seaport of renown ; to the Chiistians it
was the landing-place of St. Thomas the Apostle.



52

Mouth of the river P a c n d o s t o m o s, or
* false-mouth.' According to the table the river
enters the sea at the distance of i of a degree
below Mouziris. It must have been one of the
streams that discharge into the Backwater. .

Podoperoura must be the Poudopatana of lAjh^^^'^M^
Indikopleustes — a word which means * new town,' "^^

and is a more con*eot form than Ptolemy's Podo-
peroura.

Semne: — The Sanskrit name for Buddhist
Ascetics was Sramana, in Tamil Samana, and aa
we find that this is rendered as Seinnoi by
Clemens Alexandi'inus, we may infer that Sem-
ne was a town inhabited by Buddhists, having
perhaps a Buddhist temple of noted sanctity.
For a different explanation see Lassen's Ind. Alt.
vol III, p. 194.

B a k a r e i is mentioned by Pliny as Recare,
and as Bakare by the Author of the Periplus^
who places it at the mouth of the river on
which, at a distance of 120 stadia from the sea
was situated the great maiii called Nelkynda, or
Melkynda as Ptolemy writes it. The river is
described as difficult of navigation on account
of shallows and sunken reefs, so that ships de-
spatched from Nelkynda were obliged to sail down
empty to Bakare and there take in their cargoes.
The distance of Nelkynda from Mouziris is given
at about 500 stadia, and this whether the journey
was made by sea or by river or by land. Upon
this Yule thus remarks : ** At this distance south
from Kranganui* we are not able to point to a
quite satisfactory Nelkynda. The site which has
been selected as the most probable is nearly 800



63



stadia south of Mouziris. This is Kallada. on a
river of the same name entenng the Backwater,
the only navigable i-iver on this south-west coast
except the Perri-dr near Kranganm'. The Kallada
river is believed to be the KanHti mentioned in
the Keralotatti legendary history of Malabar,
and the town of Kallada to be the town of
Kanofcti. It is now a great entrepot of Travankor
pepper, which is sent from this to ports on the
coast for shipment. That Nelkynda cannot have
been far from this is clear from the vicinity of the
Ilvppov opos or Red-Hill of the Periplus (sec. 58).
There can be little doubt that this is the bar of
red laterite which, a short distance south of
Quilon, cuts short the Backwater navigation, and
is thence called the Warkallo barrier. It forms
abinipt cliffs on the sea, without beach, and these
cliffs are still known to seamen as the Red
Cliffs. This is the only thing like a sea cliff
from Mount d'Ely to Cape Comorin." The word
Bakarei may represent the Sanskrit dvdraka,
* a door.'

Mouth of the river B a r i s : — The Bans must
be a stream that enters the Backwater in the
neighbourhood of Quilon.

9. Country of the Aio i.

Melkynda 120° 20' 14° 20'

Elangkon (or Elangkor), a

mart 120^40' 14"*

Kotiiara, the metro jx)lis 121° 14°

Bammala 121° 20' li"* 15'

Komaria, a cape and town ...121° 45 13° 30'


54



Limirike and country of the A'ioi.
The A i o i : — This people occupied the southern
parts of Travankor. Their name is perhaps a
transliteration of the Saflgkr it ahi, * a snake/ and
if so, this would indicate the prevalence among
them of serpent worship. Cunningham, in his
Geography of Ancient India (p. 552), states that
in the Chino-Japanese Map of India the alter-
native name of Malyakflfca is Hai-an-men, which
suggests a connection with Ptolemy's A'ioi. I note
that the entrance to the Backwater at Kalikoulan
is called the Great Ayibi cca B ar, and an entrance
farther south the Little Ayibicca Bar. The first part
of this name may also be similarly connected.

Melkynda, as already stated is the Nel-
k y n d a of the PeripMSf which places it, however,
in Limyrike. Pliny speaks of it as portus gentis
Neacyndon (v. 11. Neacrindon, Neachjrndon,
Nelcyndon.) The name, according to Caldwell,
probably means West Kynda, that is Kannetri,
the south boundary of Kerala Proper. When
Mangalur was taken as the representative of
Mouziris, Nelkynda was generally identified with
Nelisuram, which besides the partial resemblance
of its name, answered closely in other respects
to the description of Nelkynda in the Periplus —
Cff. C. Miiller, not. ad Peripl., Sec. 54. Lassen,
Ind. Alt, vol. Ill, p. 190. Bunbury, Hist, of Anc.
Geog. vol. I, pp. 467-8.

Elangkon or Elangkor is now Quilon,
otherwise written Kulam.

**Kottiar a," says Caldwell, ** is the name of
a place in the country of the Aioi of Ptolemy in
the Paralia of the Author of the Periplus, identical



56



in part with Sontli Travankor. Apparently it is
the Cottara of Pliny, and I have no doubt it is the
Cottara of the Peutinger Tables. It is called by
Ptolemy the Metropolis, and must have been a
place of considerable importance. The town re-
ferred to is probably Kott&ra, or as it is ordinari-
ly written by Europeans * Kotaur/ the principal
town in South Travankor, and now as in the time
of the Greeks distinguished for its commerce."
Dravid. Gram., Introd. p. 98. The name is deriv-
ed from k6(} * a foot,' and dr-ti * a river.'

Bam mala: — Mannert would identify this
with Bulita, a place a Kttle to the north of An-
jenga, but this is too far north. It may perhaps
be the Balita of the PeripMs. ,

Komaria, a cape and a town : — We have no
difficulty in recognizing here Cape Oomorin, which
is called in the PeriplH^ Komar and Komarei.
The name is derived from the Sanskrit kumdri, * a
virgin,' one of the names of the Goddess D<irg4
who presided over the place, which was one of
peculiar sanctity. The Author of the Periplus
has made the mistake of extending the Peninsula
southward beyond Comoiin.

We may here compare Ptolemy's enumeration
of places on the west coast with that of the
Feriplus from Barygaza to Cape Oomorin.

Ptolem/y. PeripMs,

Barygaza Barygaza

Nousaripa Akabarou

Poulipoula

Soupara Souppara

Dounga Kalliena



50



Ptoleviy.



PerijMs.



Riiriylla


Semylla


Island of Milizogyris


Mandagora


Hippokonra


Baltipatna


Palaipatmai


Maudagora


Melizeigara


Is. of Heptanesia


Byzanteion


Byzantion


Toparon


Tyrannosboas


3 separate groups of


islands


Khersonesos


Kh«»rsonesos

•


Armagara


Is. of Lenke


Is. of Peperine


Nitra


Naoura


Tyndis


Tyndis


Trinesia Islands


Braniagara


Kalaikarias


Mouziiis


Mouziris


Podoperoura


Scmne


Is. Leuke


Koreoiira


Melkynda


Nelkynda


Bakarei


Bakare


Elangkon


Mons Pyrrhos


ICottiara


Bammola


Balita


Komaria


Komar.


There is a striking agreement between tlie two


lists, especially with


respect to the order in



57



which the places enumerated succeed each other.
There are but three exceptions to the coincidence
and these are unimportant. They are, Milize-
gyris, Mandagora and the Island Leuke, i.e.
* white island,' if the name be Greek. The
Melizeigara of the Periplus, Vincent identifies
with Jayagadh or Sidi, perhaps the Sigerus of Pliny
(lib. VI, c. XX vi, 100). Ptolemy makes Milizegyris
to be an island about 20 miles south of Simylla.
There is one important place which he has
failed to notice, Kalliena now Kalyana, a weU-
known town not far from Bombay.

10. Country of the K a r e o i.

In the Itolkhic Gulf, where there is the
Pearl Fishery : —

Sosikourai 122° 14° 30'

Kolkhoi, an emporium 123° 15°

Mouth of the river Solen 124° 14° 40'

The country of the K a r e o i corresponds to
South Tinneveli. The word hareif as already
stated is TamiJ, and means ' coast.' • The Kolkhic
Gulf is now known as the Gulf of Manar. The
pearl fishery is noticed in the Periplus,

Sosikourai : — By the change of S into T we
find the modem representative of this place to be
Tutikoiin (Tuttukudi) a harbour in Tinneveli,
where there are peai'l banks, about 10 miles south
of Kolkhoi. This mart lay on the Solen or
Tamraparni river. Tutikorin in the Pcutinger
Tables is called Colcis Indorufrt. The Tamil
name is Kolkei, almost the same as the Greek.
Yule in his work on Marco Polo (vol. II,
pp. 360-fil) gives the followinpj accoimt of this

8 G



m



place, baeted on informatian supplied by Dr.
Caldwell : —

"Kolkhoi, described by Ptolemy and the
Author of the Peripl^s as an emporium of the pearl
trade, as situated on the sea-coast to the east of
Cape Oomorin, and as giving its name to the
Kolkhic Gulf or Gulf of Man&r has been iden-
tified with Korkai, the mother-city of Kayal
(the Coel of Marco Polo). Kcrkaii properly
Kolkai (the I being changed into r by a modem
refinement, it is still called Kolka in Malayalam),
holds an important place in Tamil traditions,
being regarded as the birth-place of the P&ndya
dynasty, the place where the princes of that race
ruled previously to their removal to Madura-
One of the titles of the Pftn(Jya kings is • Ruler
of Korkai.' Korkai is situated two or three miles
inland from Kayal, higher up the river. It is
not marked in the G. Trig. Surv. map, but a
village in the immediate neighbourhood of it,
called Mltramangalam 'the good fortune of the
Pandyas ' will be found in the map. This place,
together with several others in the neighbourhood,
on both sides of the river, is proved by inscrip-
tions and relics to have been formerly included in
Korkai, and the whole intervening space between
Korkai and Kayal exhibits traces of ancient
dwellings. The people of Kayal maintain that
their city was originally so large as to include
Korkai, but there is much more probability in
the tradition of the people of Korkai, which is to
the effect that Korkai itself was originally a sea-
port ; that as the sea retii*ed it became less and
less suitable for trade, that Kayal rose as Korkai



I



59



fell, and tliat at length, as the sea continued to
retire, Kayal also was abandoned. They add that
the trade for which the place was famous in
ancient times was the trade in pearls."

Mouth of the River S 6 1 en : — This river is iden-
tified by Lassen with the Sylaur, which he says
is the largest northern tributary of the T&mra-
parni. On this identification Yule remarks: —
" The * SyUar ' of the maps, which Lassen identifies
with Solen, originates, as Dr. Caldwell tells me,
in a mistake. The true name is *Sitt-ar,'

* Little River,' and it is insignificant." The
T&mraparni is the chief river of Tinneveli. It
entered the sea south of Kolkhoi. Li Tamil poetry
it is called Porunei. Its Pali form is Tambapanni.
How it came to be called the Solen remains as yet
unexplained, ^ola is an element in several South
Indian geographical names, meaning Chola. The
word Tamraparni itself means * red-leaved ' or

* copper-coloured sand.' Taprobane, the classical
name for Ceylon, is this word in an altered form.

11. Land of P a n d i o n.
In the Orgalic Gulf, Cape
Kory, called also Kalligikon..l25° 40^ 12° 20'

Argeirou, a town 125° 15' 14° 30'

Salour,amart 125° 20' 15° 30'

The land of Pandion included the greater
portion of the Province of Tinneveli, and extended
as far north as to the highlands in the neighbour-
hood of the Koimbatur gap. Its western boundary
was formed by the southern range of the Gh&ts,
called by Ptolemy Mount Bettigo, and it had a
sea-board on the east, which extended for some



I



60

distance along the Sinus Oi'galious, or what is
now called Palk*s Passage.

The Author of the PeripMs however, assigns
it wider limits, as he mentions that Nelkynda,
which lay on the Malabar Coast, as well as the
pearl-fishery at Kolkhoi, both belonged to the
Kingdom of Pandion. The kingdom was so called
from the heroic family of the Pandya, which
obtained sovereign power in many different parts
of India. The Capital, called Madura, both by
Pliny and by our author, was situated in the
\ interior. Madui*& is but the TamiJ manner of
pronouncing the Sanskrit Mathurd, which also de-
signated the sacred city on the Jamna famous as
the birthplace and the scene 6f the exploits of
Krishna, who assisted the Pantlus in their war
with the Kurus. The city to this day retains its
ancient name, and thus bears, so to speak, living
testimony to the fact that the Aryans of Northern
Y *. ' I India had in early times under Paridya leaders

established their power in the most southern
parts of the Peninsula.

The Orgalic Gulf lay beyond the Kolkhic
Gulf, from which it was separated by the Island
of Ramesvaram and the string of shoals and small
islands which almost connect Ceylon with the
mainland. It derived its name from Argalou,
a place mentioned in the Periplus as lying inland
and celebrated for a manufacture of muslin
adorned with small pearls. The northern tenni-
nation of the gulf was formed by Cape Kalimir.

CapeKory : — Ptolemy makes Kory and Kalli-
gikon to be one and the same cape. They are



61



however distinct, Kory being the headland which
bounded the Orgalic Gulf on the south, and Kal-
ligikon being Point Kalimir, which bounded it on
the north. The curvature of this Gulf was called
by the Hindfts Ramadhanuh, or ' Bdma's howy and
each end of the bow Dhanuh-koti or simply Koti.
The Sanskrit word hUi (which means * end, tip or
coi^ner*) becomes in Tamil .hodi, and this natu-
rally takes the form of Kori or Kory. The
southern Koti, which was very famous in Indian
story, was formed by the long spit of land in
which the Island of Bamesvaram terminates. It
is remarkable, as Caldwell remarks, that the
Portuguese, without knowing anything of the KApu
of the Greeks, called the same spit of land Cape
Ramancoru. Ptolemy's identification of Cape
Kory with Kalligikon or Point Kalimir is readily
explained by the fact just stated that each of
these projections was called Koti.

This word Koti takes another form in Greek
and Latin besides that of Kory, viz., Kolis, the
name by which Pomponius Mela and Dionysios
Periegetes (v. 1148) designate Southern India.
The promontory is called Coliacum by Pliny,
who describes it as the projection of India near-
est Ceylon, from which it was separated by a
narrow coral sea. Strabo (lib. XV, c. i, 14) quoting
Onesikritos, speaks of Taprobane as distant from
the most southern parts of India, which are
opposite the Koniakoi, 7 days' sail towards the
south. For Koniakoi the reading Koliakoi has
been with reason suggested.

Ptolemy, like the author of the PeripMs and
other writers, regarded Cape Kory as the most



62



important projection of India towards the south,
and as a well-established point from which the
distances of other places might conveniently be
calculated. He placed it in 125 degrees of £.
longitude from Ferro, and at 120 degrees east of
the mouth of the Biver BsBtis in Spain from which,
however, its distance is only 86i degrees. Its
latitude is 9° 2(y N. and that of Cape Comorin
S° h't but Ptolemy makes the difference in latitude
to be only IC.

The identity of Kalligikon with Point Kalimir
has already been pointed out. Calimere is a
corrupt form of the TamiJ compoimd Kallimedu,
Euphorbia eminence, and so the first part of the
Greek name exactly coincides with the Tamil
Kalli, which means the Euphorbia plant, or
perhaps a kind of cactus. Pliny mentions a
projection on the side of India we are now con-
sidering which he calls Calingon, and which the
similarity of name has led some to identify with
Kalligikon, and therefore with Point KaJimir.
It seems better, however, taking into account
other considerations which we need not here
specify, to identify this projection with Point
God&vart.

Before concluding this notice we may point
out how Ptolemy has represented the general
configuration of the eastern coast beyond the
Orgalic Gulf. His views here are almost as
erroneous as those he entertained concerning the
west coast, which, it will be remembered, he did
not carry southward to Cape Comorin, but made
to terminate at the point of Simylla, thus effacing
from the Map of India the whole of the Peninsula.



63



The actual direction of the east coast from point
Kalimir is first due north as far as the mouths
of the Kfishna, and thereafter north-east up to
the very head of the Bay of Bengal. Ptolemy,
however, makes this coast run first towards the
south-east, and this for a distance of upwards of
600 miles as far as Paloura^ a place of which the
site has been fixed with certainty as lying near
the southern border of Katak, about 5 or 6 miles
above Ganj&m. Ptolemy places it at the extrem-
ity of a vast peninsula, having for one of its sides
the long stretch of coast just mentioned, and he
regards it also as marking the point from which
the Gangetic Gulf begins. The coast of this gulf
is made to run at first with an inclination to
westward, so that it forms at its outlet the other
side of the peninsula. Its curvatm*e is then to
the north-east, as far as to the most eastern mouth
of the Ganges, and thence its dii*ection is to the
south-east till it terminates at the cape near
Temala, now called Cape Negi-ais, the south-west
projection of Pegu.

12. Country of the B a t o i.

Nikama, the Metropolia 126° 1 6*"

Thelkheir 127° 16° 10'

Kouroula, a town 128° 16°

13. In P a r a 1 i a . specially so called : tho
country of the Toringoi.

Mouth of the River Khab^ros 129° 15° 15'

Khaberis, an emporium 1 28° 30^ 1 5° 40'

SabouraS) an emporium 130° 14° 30'

The Batoi occupied the district extending
from the neighbourhood of Point Kalimir to the



64

southern mouth of the River Kaveri and coitos-
ponding roughly with the Province of Tanjore.

N i k a m a, the capital, has been identified with
Nagapatam (Nagapattanam) by Yule, who also
identifies (but doubtingly) Thelkyr with Nagor
and Kouroula with Karikal.

Paralia, asa Greek word, designated generally
any maritime district, but as applied in India it
designated exclusively (i5t«s) the seaboard of the
Toringoi. Our author is here at variance with
the PeripMs, which has a Paralia extending from
the Red Cliffs near Quilon to the Pearl -Fishery
at the Kolkhoi, and comprising therefrom the
coast-lines of the Aioi and the Kareoi. " This
Paralia," says Yule, " is no doubt Purali, an old
name of Travankor, from which the Raja has
a title Puralisany * Lord of Purali.' But the
** instinctive striving after meaning " which so
often modifies the form of words, converted
this into the Greek JLapakia^ * the coast.' Dr.
Caldwell however inclines rather to think that
Paralia may possibly have corresponded to the

iv native word meaning coast, viz. hareu

^ - ' In sec. 91, where Ptolemy gives the list of the

^ '^ inland towns of the Toringoi, he calls them the

Sorotai, mentioning that their capital was Orthoura,

t where the king, whose name was^Somagos, resid-

f ■ ed. In sec. 68 again he mentions the Sorai as a

race of nomads whose capital was Sora where
theii' king, called Arkatos, resided. Caldwell
has pointed out the identity of the different names
^ "^ used to designate this people. Scopa, he says,

" which we meet alone and in various combina-
tions in these (Ptolemy's) notices represents the



\


65

name of the northem portion of the Tamilian

nation. This name is Chola in Sanskrit, Chola

in Telugu, but in Tamijl Sora or Choya. The

accuracy with regard to the name of the people

is remarkable, for in TamiJ they appear not only

as Soras, but also as Soragas and Soriyas, and

even as Soringas. Their country also is called

Soragam. The r of the Tamil word Sora is a

peculiar sound not contained in Telugu, in which

it is generally represented by ^ or Z. The trans- /"/ „ , • >» a^^

literation of this letter as r seems to show that

then, as now, the use of this peculiar y was a

dialectic peculiarity of TamiJ."

The River K h a b 6 r o s is the OveH. Kdvh-a
is the Sanskrit word for saffron. Kaveri, according
to a legend in the HarivanSay was changed by
her father's curse from one-half of the Ganga
into the river which bears her name, and which
was therefore also called Ardha-ganga, i.e., half-
gahga. Karoura, the residence of the Chera
king, was upon this river.

Dr. Bumell identified Kh a b e r i s with Kave-
ripattam {Ind. Ant., vol. VII, p. 40) which
lies a little to the north of Tranquebar (Tal-
langambadi) at the mouth of the Pudu-Kaveri

(New Kaveri).

Sabouras : — This mart Yule refers doubtingly
to Gudalur (Cuddalore) near the mouth of the
S. Penn-ar River.

14. The Arouarnoi (Arvarnoi).

Podouke, an emporium 130° 15' 14° 30^

Melang^, an emporium 131° 1 4° 20^

Mouth of the River Tyna 131° 40' 1 2° 45'



ir



66



Kottis 132'* 20' 12° 10'

Manarpha (or Manaliarpha,

a mart) 133° IV 12°

15. Maisolia.
Mouth of the River Mais61osl34° 11° 40'

Kontakossyla, a mart 134° 30' 11° 40'

Koddoura 135° 11° 30'

Allosygne, a mart 135° 40^ 11^^ 20'

The point of departure (aphe-

terion) for ships bound for

Khryse 136** 20'-ll°

The territory of the Arouarnoi ( Arvamoi)
was permeated by the River Tyna, and extended
northward to Maisolia, the region watered by
the River Maisolos in the lower parts of its course.
Opinions differ with regard to the identification
of these two rivers, and consequently also of
the places mentioned in connection with them.
Some of the older commentators, followed by
Yule, take the Tyna to be the PinS,ka or Penn-ar
River, and the Maisolos the KrishnS.. Lassen
again, and recent writers generally, identify the
Tyna with the Krishna and the Maisolos with the
Godavari. To the former theory there is the
objection that if the G6d4vai*i be not the Maisolos,
that most important of all the rivers on this
coast is left unnoticed, and Lassen accordingly
asks why should the small Penn-ar appear and
the great God&vari be omitted. To this Yule
rejoins, "We cannot say why; but it is a
curious fact that in many maps of the 16th and
17th and even of the 18th century the Godavari
continues to be omitted altogether. A beautiful



67

map in Valentijn (vol. V), shows God&vari
only as a river of small moment, nnder a local
name." He argues further that the name Tynna
if applied to the Krishri& is unaccounted for. As
identified with the Penn-&r or Pin&ka, TYNNA is
an easy error for TTYNNA.

P 6 d o u k e : — This mart is mentioned in the
PeriplUs along with Kamara and Sopatma as ports
to which merbhants from Limyrike and the north
were wont to resort. According to Bohlen, Ritter
and Benfey, it is Puduchcheri (Pondicherry).
Lassen and Yule agree, however, in placing it at
Pulikat, which is nearly two degrees further
north.

In Yule's map Melange is placed at
Krishiiapatam, a little to the south of the North
Penn-ar River, which as we have seen, he identifies
with the Tyna. Its name closely approximates
to that of the capital Malanga, and hence Cun-
ningham, who takes the Maisolos to be the God&vari,
and who locates Malanga in the neighbourhood
of EMr, identifies Melange with Bandar Malanka
(near one of the Gddavari mouths) which he
assumes to have been so called from its being
the port (bandar) with which the capital that lay
in the interior communicated with the sea. See
Oeog. of Anc. Ind., pp. 539-40.

Manarpha(or Manaliarpha) : — This mart lay .
at the mouth of a river which still preserves \,\o^fiM*^
traces of its name, being called the Manara. '

Kottis lay not very far to the north of it.

Maisoliais the name of the coast between the
Krishn^ and the Godavari, and onward thence to
the neighbourhood of Paloura. It is the Masalia



68



of the PeripMs wliich describes it as the sea-board
of a country extending far inland, and noted for
the manufacture, in immense quantities, of the
finer kinds of cotton fabrics. The name is pre-
served in Masulipattam, which has been corrupted
for the sake of a meaning into Machhlipatam,
which means fish-town. The Metropolis called
Pityndra was seated in the interior.

Kontakossyla transliterates, though not
quite correctly, the Sanskrit E^antakasthala, 'place
of thorns' In Yule's map it is placed inland
near the Krishnft, in the neighbourhood of Konda-
palle, in which its name seems to be pai'tly
preserved.

Koddoura has been identified with Gtldru,
a town near Masulipatam.

Allosygne may perhaps be now represented
by Koiinga (Koran ja) a port situated a little beyond
Point God&vari. Its distance from the point
next mentioned in the Tables may be roughly
estimated at about 2S0 miles, but Ptolemy makes
it to be only | of a degree, and thus leaves un-
described an extensive section of the coast com-
prising the greater part of the sea-board of the
Kalingai. A clue to the explanation of this
error and omission is supplied by a passage in
the Periplus, which runs to the effect that ships
proceeding beyond Maisolia stood out from the
shore and sailing right- across a bay made a direct
passage to the ports of Desarene, i.e. Orissa.
It may hence be inferred that navigatora who
came from a distance to trade in those seas would
know little or nothing of a coast which they wei*e



69



careful to avoid, and that Ptolemy in consequence
was not even so mucli as aware of its existence.

The point whence ships took their departure
for Khryse Yule places at the mouth of a
little river called the Baroua (the Puacotta of
Lindschoten) lying under Mt. Mahendra in lat.
18° 64' N. This aphetirion, he points out, was
not a harbour as Lassen supposed, from which
voyages to IChrys^ were made, but the point of de-
parture from which vessels bound thither struck
off from the coast of India, while those bound
for the marts of the Ganges renewed their coast-
ing. The course of navigation here described
continued to be followed till modern times, as
Yule shows by a quotation from Valentijn's book
on the Dutch East Indies (1727) raider a notice
of Bimlipatam : — ** In the beginning of February,
there used to ply ... to Pegu, a little ship with
such goods as were in demand, and which were
taken on board at Masulipatam. . . . From that
place it used to run along the coast up to
18° N. Lat., and then crossed sea-wards, so as
to hit the land on the other side about 16°, and
then, on an offshore wind, sailed very easily to
the Peguan River of Syriang." (Syriam below
Rangun).

16, In the Gangetic Gulf.

Paloura or Pakoura, a town. .136° 40' 11° 20'

Nanigaina 136° 20' 12°

Katikardama 136° 20' 12° 40'

Kannagara 136° 30' 13° 30'

Mouth of the River Manada. .137° 14°

Kottobara 137° 15' 14° 40'



70



Sippara 137° 4(y 15° 3(7

Mouth of the River Tyndis...l38° 30' 16°

17. Maponra 139° 16° 30^

Minagara UO"* 17° 15'

Mouth of the Dosaron 141° 17^ 40^

Kokala 142° 18°

Mouth of the River Adamasl42° 40' 18°

Kosamba or Kosaba 143° 30' 18° 15'

P a 1 o u r a : — Ptolemy, as we have seen, placed
this town at the extremity of a great peninsula
projecting to the south-east, which had no
existence however, except in his own imagination.
The following passage, quoted by Yule from
Lindschoten, shows that the name of Paloura
survived till modem times, and indicates at the
same time where its site is to be looked for : —
" From the river of Puacota to another called
Paluor or Palura, a distance of 12 leagues, you
run along the coast with a course from S. W. to E.
Above this last river is a high mountain called
Serra de Palura, the highest mountain on the
coast. This river is in 19^°." The Palura River
must be the river of Ganjam, the latitude of
which is at its mouth 19° 23'. Ptolemy fixes at
Paloura the beginning of the Gangetic GuK.

Nanigaina may perhaps be placed at Puri,
famous for the temple of JagannathaKatikardama.

The first part of the name points to the identifi-
cation of this place with Katak, the capital of
Orissa.

Kannagara : — There can be little doubt that
we have here the Kanarak of modem times, called
also the Black Pagoda.



71



Mouth of the M a n a d a : — Ptolemy enumerates
four rivers which enter the Gulf between Kanna-
gara and the western mouth of the Ganges, the
Manada, the Tyndis, the Dosaron and the
Adamas. These would seem to be identical
respectively with the four great rivers belonging
to this part of the coast which succeed each other
in the following order: — The MahS^nadi, the
Brahmani, the Vaitarani and the SuvarnarekhA,
and this is the mode of identification which Lassen
has adopted. With regard to the Manada there
can be no doubt that it is the Mahdnadi, the great
river of Orissa at the bifurcation of which
Katak the capital is situated. The name is a
Sanskrit compound, meaning * great river.' Yule
differs from Lassen with regard to the other
identifications, making the Tyndis one of the
branches of the Mahdnadi, the Dosaron, — the
Brahmani, the Adamas, — the Vaitarani, and the
Kambyson (which is Ptolemy's western mouth of
the Ganges) — the Suvarnarekha.

The Dosaron is the river of the region in-
habited by the Dasamas, a people mentioned in the
Vishnu Purdna as belonging to the south-east of
Madhya-desa in juxta-position to the Sabaras,
or Suars. The word is supposed to be from
damn * ten,' and fina * a fort,' and so to mean
* the ten^orts.'

Adaiiias is a Greek word meaning diamond.
The true Adamas, Yule observes, was in all
probability the Sank branch of the Brahmani, from
which diamonds were got in the days of Mogul
splendour.

Sip para: — The name is taken by Yule as



72



representing the Sanskrit Siirpdraka. Pdra in
Sanskrit means * the further shore or opposite
bank of a river.'

Mi n agar a: — The same authority identifies
this with JajhpQr. In Arrowsmith's map I find,
however, a small place marked, having a name
almost identical with the Greek, MungrapOr,
situated at some distance from JajhpQr and nearer
the sea.

Kosambais placed by Yule at Balasor, but by
Lassen at the mouth of the Subanrekh^ which, as
we have seen, he identifies with the Adamas.
There was a famous city of the same name,
Kaus&mbt, in the north-west of India, on the River
Jamna, which became the P4nclii capital after.
Hastinapura had been swept away by the Ganges,
and which was noted as the shiine of the most
sacred of all the statues of Buddha. It is men-
tioned in the Rdmdyahaf the Mahdvahm, and
the Mi^ghad'Cbta of KMid^sa. It may thus be
reasonably concluded that the Kosamba of
Ptolemy was a seat of Buddhism established by
propagandists of that faith who came from
Kausambi.

18. Mouths of the Ganges.

The Kambyson mouth, the

most western 144° 30' 18° 15'^

Poloura, a town 145° 18° 30

The second mouth, called

Mega 145° 45' 18° 30'

The third called Kamberi-

khon 146^30' 18° 40'

Tilogrammon, a town 147° 20' 18°



73



The fourth mouth, Pseudosto-

mon 147° 40' 18° 30'

The fifth mouth, Antibole ...148° 30' 18° 15'

Ptolemy appears to hare been the first writer
who gave to the western world any definite infor-
mation concerning that part of the Bengal Coast
which receives the waters of the Ganges. His
predecessors had indeed excelled him in the ful-
ness and accuracy with which they had described
the general course of the river, but they did not
know, except in the very vaguest way, either where
or how it entered the sea. Strabo, for instance, was
not even aware that it had more than a single
mouth. Ptolemy, on the other hand, mentions by
name five of its mouths, and his estimate of the
distance between the most western and the most
eastern of these (4 degrees of latitude) is not very
wide of the mark. Some traces also of his no-
menclature are still to be found. It is difficult,
however, to identify the mouths he has named
with those now existing, as the Ganges, like the
Indus, has shifted some of its channels, and other-
wise altered the hydrography of its delta. Opi-
nions dijffer regarding the western mouth, called
the Kambyson. One would naturally take it
to be the Hughli river, on which Calcutta stands,
and V. de Saint-Martin accordingly adopts this
identification. It is impossible to doubt, he says,
that the Kambysum is the Hughli river, which
must have been at all times one of the principal
outlets, as is proved historically by the mention of
T&mraliptSi, 600 years before our sera, as one of
the most frequented ports of Eastern India. It
would be possible enough, he continues, that
10 G



74



below Diamond Point, the principal channel, in-
stead of passing as now in front of Kalpi re-
mounted to the west in front of Tamluk (the
ancient T&mralipt4) bj the month of Tingorcally,
and came thus to touch at a locality of which the
actual name Nungabusan recalls that of Eambj-
sum or Kambusum. Wilford and Yule, on the
other hand, agree in identifying the Eambjson
with the Subanrekh& river, whiqh was formerly
but erroneously supposed to be a branch of the
Granges, and they are thus free to take the Hughlt
river as representing the second mouth called
by Ptolemy the Mega, the Greek word for * great.*
Saint-Martin identifies this estuary with the Biver
Matl& to which in recent years an attempt was
made to divert the commerce of Calcutta, in con-
sequence of the dangers attending the navigation
of the Hughlt. With regard to the E a m b e r i-
khon, or third mouth, there is no difference
of opinion. '* It answers," says Saint-Martin,
"to the Barabang&, a still important estuary,
which receives the river of Kobbadak (or rather
Kobbarak), which traverses the whole extent of
the delta. The KsMtra Samdaa, a modem treatise
of Sanskrit Geography, which Wilford has often
quoted in his Memoir on the Ancient Geography
of the Gfiugetic basin, calls this river Koum&raka.
Here the Eamberikhon of the Greek navigators
is easily recognized." The fourth mouth was
called Pseudostomon, that is, ' false mouth,*
because it lay concealed behind numerous islands,
and was often mistaken for the easternmost mouth
of the Ganges. This Ptolemy calls AntibolS,
a name which has not yet been explained. It



75



IB the phakka or old Granges river, and seems to
have been the limit of India and the point from
which measurements and distances relating to
countries in India were frequently made.

In connexion with the river-mouths Ptolemy
mentions two towns, Foloura and Tilogram-
m o n. The former is placed in Yule's map at
Jelasur, near the SubanrekhS, and the latter at
Jesor. Its name seems to be compounded of the
two Sanskrit words tUa, *^8e8anhy/mf,* and grdma,
* a village or township.'

Ptolemy having thtLS described the whole sea-
coast of India, from the mouths of the Indus to
those of the Ganges, gives next a list of its mountain
ranges, together with figures of Latitude and Longi-
tude, showing the limits of the length of each range
as well as the direction,

19. The mountains belonging to Intra-
gangetic India are named as follows : —

The Apokopa, called Poinai Theon, which ex-
tend from long. 116° to 124° and from lat. 2a°
at their western limit to 26° at the eastern.

20. Mount Sardonyx, in which is found the
precious stone of the same name, and whose
middle point is in long. 117" and lat. 21°.

21. Mount Ou'indion (Vindion) which ex-
tends from 126° to 135°, and preserves from its
western to its eastern limit a uniform latitude
of 27°.

Ptolemy enumerates seven of these, probably

following some native list framed in accordance

with the native idea that seven principal mountains

existed in each division of a continent. A



76



Faur&iiik list gives us the names of the seven which
pertained to India, Mahendra, Mahija, Sahja,
ouktimat, Riksha, Yindhja and P&ripfttra or
P&rij&tra. This can hardly be the list which
Ptolemy used, as only two of his names appeaa: in it,
Ouxenton ( — ) Biksha, and Ouindion ( — ] Yindhya.
As his views of the configuration of India were so
wide of the mark, his mountain ranges are of
course hopelessly out of position, and the latitudes
and longitudes assigned to them in the tables
afford no clue to their identification. Some help
however towards this, as Yule points out, lies in
the river-sources ascribed to each, which were
almost certainly copied from native lists, in which
notices of that particular are often to be found.

The A p o k o p a, or ' punishment * of the
* gods * : — There is a consensus of the authorities in
referring the range thus named to the Aravali
mountains. Mount Arbuda (Abu) which is by far
the most conspicuous summit, is one of the sacred
hills of India. It was mentioned by Megasthenes
in a passage which has been preserved by Pliny
(N.H.lib.YI,c. xii)who calls it Mons Capitalia,t.e.
the ' Mount of Capital Punishment,' a name which
has an obvious relation to the by-name which
Ptolemy gives it, * the punishment of- the gods.'
The word apohopa is of Greek origin, and means
pidmarily * what has been cut off,' and is therefore
used to denote * a cleft,' * a cliff,' * a steep hill.' It
occurs in the Periplus (sec. 15) where it designates
a range of precipitous hills running along the
coast of Azania, i.e. of Ajan in Africa. Its
Sanskrit equivalent may have been given as a
name to Mount Arbuda because of its having



77



been at some time rent by an earthquake. In
point of fact the Mahdhhdrata has preserved a
tradition to the effect that a cleft {chhidra) had
here been made in the earth. Such an alarming
phenomenon as the cleaving of a mountain by an
earthquake would naturally in superstitious times
be ascribed to the anger of the gods» bent on
punishing thereby some heinous crime. (See
Lassen's Ind. Alt. voL III, pp. 121-2).

Mount Sardonyx is a short range, a branch
of the Vindhya, now called S&tpura, lying be-
tween the Narmada and the Tapti : it is mentioned
by Ktesias (frag. 8) under the name of Mount
Sardous. It has mines of the camelian stone, of
which the sardian is a species. The Periplus
(sec. 49) notices that onyx-stones were imported
into Barygaza from the interior of the country,
and that they were also among the articles which
it exported.

Mount Ouindion : — This is a correct transli-
teration of Vindhya,ihQ native name of the exten*
sive range which connects the northern extremities
of the Western and Eastei<n Gh&ts, and which
separates Hindtlst&n proper — the Madhya-desa or
middle region, regarded as the sacred land of the
Hindtls — ^from the Dekhan. Ptolemy, as Lassen
remarks {^Ind. Alt. vol. Ill, p. 120), is the only
geographer of classical antiquity in whose writings
the indigenous name of this far-spread range is
to be found. His Vindion however does not
embrace the whole of the Vindhya system, but
only the portion which lies to the west of the
sources of the Son. Sanskrit writers speak of the
Vindhyas as a family of mountains. They



78



Extended from Baroda to Mirzapur, and were
eontinned thence to Clmnar.

22. B^ttig6, which extends from 123° to
130**, and whose western limit is in lat. 21°
and its eastern in 20°.

23. Adeisathron, whose middle point is in
long. 132° and in lat. 23°.

24. Ouxenton, which extends from 136° to
143°, and whose western limit is in lat. 22°
and its eastern in 24^.

25. The Oroudian Mountains, which ex-
tend from 138*^ to 133°, and whose eastern
limit is in 18° lat. and its western 16°.

Mount B St tig 6: — ^As the rivers which have
their sources in this range — the Pseudostomos,
the Baris, and the Solen or T4mraparni, all belong
to South. Malabar, there can be no doubt that
Bettigo denotes the southern portion of the
Western GhAts extending from the Koimbatur
gap to Oape Gomorin — called Malaya in the
Faurd^ik list already quoted. One of the sum-
mits of this range, famous in Indian mythology
as the abode of the Bishi Agastya, bears the
name in Tamil of Fodigei, or as it is pronounc-
ed Fothigei. It is visible from the mouth of
the T&mraparnt, which has its sources in it, and
from Kolkhoi, and the Greeks who visited those
parts, and had the mountain pointed out to them
would no doubt apply the name by which they
heard it called to the whole range connected
with it. (See Caldwell's Dravid. Gram, Introd.
p. 101.)



79



Adeisathron : — If we take Ptolemy's figures
as our guide here, we must identify this range with
the chain of hills which Lassen describes in the
following passage : — " Of the mountain system of
the Dekhan Ptolemy had formed an erroneous
conception, since he represented the chain of the
Western Gh&ts as protruded into the interior
of the country, instead of lying near to the
western coast with which it runs parallel, and he
was misled thereby into shortening the courses of
the rivers which rise in the Western Gh&ts. The
chain which he calls Adeisathron begins in the
neighbourhood of Ndgpur and stretches southward
to the east of the rivers Wain + Gang4 and Pranit4,
separates the G^davari from the Ejishn&, and
comes to an end at the sources of the K&vSri.
This view of his meaning is confirmed by the
fact that he locates the two cities Baithana or
Pratishth&na which lies to the east of the West-
em GhSits, on the Godavart, and Tagara both to
the west of Adeisathron. He was led into this mis-
representation partly through the incompleteness
and insufficiency of the accounts which he used,
and partly through the circumstance that the
Eastern Gh&t does not consist of a single chain,
but of several parallel chains, and that to the
south of the sources of the K&vert the Eastern
Gh&t is connected with the Western Ghat through
the Nilgiri Mountains. The name Adeisathron,
one sees, can only refer to the West Gh&t in which
the K&veri rises." {Ind. Alt vol. Ill, pp. 162-3).
Yule explains the source of Ptolemy's error thus :
" No doubt his Indian lists showed him K&vSrt
rising in Sahy&dri (as does Wilford's list from the



80



Brahmanda Pdrdna, As. Bes. vol. VIII, p. 335f.).
He had no real clue to tlie locality of the Sahy&dri,
but found what he took for the same name {Adi-
sathra) applied to a city in the heart of India,
and there he located the range." Adeisathron
must therefore be taken to denote properly that
section of the Western Gh&ts which is imme-
diately to the north of the Koimbatur gap, as it
is there the K&v^ri rises. The origin of the
name Adeisathron will be afterwards pointed out.

Ouxenton designates the Eastern continuation
of the Vindhyas. All the authorities are at one
in referring it to the mountainous regions south
of the Son, included in Chhutia Nagpiir, Eamgarh,
Sirgujfi, &c. Ptolemy places its western extre-
mity at the distance of one degree from the
eastern extremity of the Yindhyas. The rivers
which have their sources in the range are the
Tyndis, the Dosaron, the Adamas and an un-
named tributary of the Ganges. The name
itself represents the Sanskrit Eikshavant, which
however did not designate the Eastern Yindhyas,
but a large district of the central. This differ-
ence in the application of the names need not
invalidate the supposition of their identity. The
authors whom Ptolemy consulted may have
misled him by some inaccuracy in their state-
ments, or the Hindtls themselves may have
intended the name of Rikshavant to include locali-
ties further eastward than those which it pri-
marily denoted. Biksha means * a bear,' and
is no doubt connected with the Greek word
of the same meaning, arhtos.

The Oroudian Mountains : — " This we take,"



81



says Yule, " to be the Vaidftrya just men-
tioned, as the northern section of the Western
Gh§.ts, though Ptolemy has entirely misconceived
its position. We conceive that he found in the
Indian lists that the great rivers of the eastern
or Maesolian Coast rose in the Vaiddrya, and
having no other clue he places the OrAdia (which
seems to be a mere metathesis of Odtirya for
Vaid(irya) near and parallel to that coast. Hence
Lassen and others (all, as far as is known) identify
these Oroudian Mountains with those that actually
exist above Kalinga. This corresponds better, no
doubt, with the position which Ptolemy has as-
signed. But it is not our business to map Ptole-
my's errors ; he has done that for himself ; we have
to show the real meaning and application of the
names which he used, whatever false views he
may have had about them."

26. The rivers which flow from Mount
Imaos into the Indus are arranged as follows : —
Sources of the River Koa ...120° 37°

Sources of the River Souastos..l22° 30' 36«^
Sources of the River Indus ..125° 37°

Sources of the River Bi-

daspes 127° 30' 36° 40'

Sources of the River Sandabal 129° 36°

Sources of the River Adris

or Rouadis 130° 37°

Sources of the River Bidasis..l31° 35° 30^

Regarding the origin and meaning of the name
Indus, Max Miiller {India^ what it can teach us) says:
" In the V4da8 we have a number of names of the
rivers of India as they were known to one single

11 Q


82



poet, say about 1000 B.C. We tlien bear notbing
of India till we come to tbe days of Alexander,
and wben we look at tbe names of tbe Tndian
rivers represented by Alexander's companions in
India, we recognize without mucb diflBiculty nearly
all of tbe old Vedic names. In tbis respect tbe
names of rivers bave a great advantage over tbe
names of towns in India. I do not wonder so
mucb at tbe names of tbe Indus and tbe Ganges
being tbe same. Tbe Indus was known to early
traders, whetber by sea or land. Skylax sailed
from the country of tbe Paktys, i.e. tbe Pusbtus,
as tbe Afghans still call themselves, down to tbe
mouth of tbe Indus. That was xmder Darius Hy-
staspes (B.C. 521-486). Even before that time India
and tbe Indians were known by their name, which
was derived from Siudhu, the name of their
frontier river. Tbe neighbouring tribes who
spoke Iranic languages all pronounced, like the
Persian, the s as an /i (PHny, lib. VI, c.xx, 7) * Indus
incolis 8 Indus appellatusj Thus Sindhu became
Hindhu {Hidhu) and as h's were dropped, even
at that early time, Hindhu became Indu. Thus
the river was called Indus, tbe people Indoi by
the Greeks, who first beard of India from tbe
Persians. Sindhu probably meant originally the
divider f keeper and defender , from sidh to Iceep
off. No more telling name could have been given
to a broad river, which guarded peaceful settlers
both against the inroads of hostile tribes and the
attacks of wild animals. . . . Though Sindhu
was used as an appellative noun for river in
general, it remained throughout the whole history
of India, tbe name of its powerful guai'dian river.



88



the Indus.** For a full discussion of the origin
of the name I may refer the reader to Benfey's
Indien, pp. 1 — 2, in the Encyclopcedia of Ersch
and Griiber.

The Indus being subject to periodic inundations,
more or less violent, has from time to time under-
gone considerable changes. As has been already
indicated it not unf requently shifts the channels
by which it enters the sea, and in the upper part
of its course it would seem to be scarcely less
capricious. Thus while at the time of the Make-
donian invasion it bifurcated above Ar6r, the
capital of the Sogdi, to run for about the distance
of 2 degrees in two beds which enclosed between
them the large island called by PUny (lib. VI, c xx,
23) Prasiake, thePr&rjuna of the inscription on the
AMhabdrd column, it now runs at that part in a
single stream, having forsaken the eastern bed,
and left thereby the once flourishing country
through which it flowed a complete desert.

In his description of the Indus, Ptolemy has
fallen into error on some important points. In
the first place, he represents it as rising among
the mountains of the country of the Daradrae to
the east of the Paropanisos, and as flowing from its
sources in a southward direction. Its true birth-
place is, however, in a much more southern latitude,
viz., in Tibet, near the sources of the Satlaj, on
the north side of Mount Kailasa, famous in Indian
mythology as the dwelling-place of Kuvera and
as the paradise of Siva, and its initial direction is
towards the north-west, till it approaches the fron-
tiers of Badakshan, where it turns sharply south-
ward. Ptolemy does not stand alone in making



84



this mistake, for Arrian plaoes the sources in the
Jower spurs of the Paropanisos, and he is here at one
withMela(Ub.III,c. vii, 6), Strabo (lib.XV,c.u,8),
Curtius (lib. YIII, c. ix, 3) and other ancient writers..
In fact, it was not ascertained until modem times
whence the Indus actually came. His next error
has reference to the length of the Indus rallej aa;
measured from the mouth of the Indus to its
point of junction with the IC^bul river. This he
makes to be II degrees, while in point of fact it is
somewhat less than 10. This error is, however,
trivial as compao'ed with the next hy which the
junction of the Indus with the united atream of
the Fanjab rivers is made to take place at the
distance of only die degree below its junction
with the K&bul river, instead of at the distance
of six degrees or halfway between the upper junc-
tion and the sea. This egregious error not only
vitiates, the whole of his delineation of the river
system of the Fanjab, but as it exaggerates by
more than 300 miles the distance between the
lower junction and the sea, it obscui'es and con-
fuses all hia geography of the Indus valley, and
so dislocates the positions named in his tables,
that they can only in a few exceptional eases be
identified.**



*' " It is hard enough," says Major- (general Haig, " %f>
have to contend with the vagueness, inconsistencies and
eontradiotionsiof the old writers ; but these are as nothing
compared with the obstacles which iihe physical charao^
teristics of the country itself oppose to. the enquirer.
For ages the Indus has been pushing its bed across the
valley from east to west, generally by the gradual
process of erosion, which effectually wipes out every
trace of town and village on its banks ; but at times also
by a. more or less sudden shifting of its waters into



go



All the large tributaries of the Indus, with the
exception of the Kabul river, join it on its left or
eastern side. Their number is stated by Strabo
(lib. XV, c. i, 33) and by Arrian (lib. Y, c. vi) to
be 15, but by Pliny (lib. VI, c. xz, 23) to be 19.
The most of them are mentioned in one of the
hymns .of the Big Veda (X, 75) of which the
following passages are the most pertinent to our
subject :— '

1. " Each set of seven {^streams] has followed
a threefold course. The Sindhu sui-passes the
other rivers in impetuosity.

2. Varuna hoUowed out the channels of thy
course, Sindhu, when thou didst rush to thy
contests. Thou flowest from [the heights o/] the
earth, over a downward slope, when thou leadest
the van of those streams.

4. To thee, O Sindhu, the [other streams] rush
, . . Like a wairior king [in the centre of his
army] thou leadest the two wings of thy host when
thou strugglest forward to the van of these tor-
rents.

5. Receive favourably this my hymn, Gangd,
Yamuna, Sarasvati, Sutudri, Parashni; hear, O ^
Harudvridha, with the Asikni, and Vitastd, and ,
thou Arjikiy& with the Sushomd,

entirely new channels, leaving large tracts of country
to go to waste, and forcing the inhabitants of many a
populous place to abandon their old homes, and follow
the river in search of new settlements. . . . Perhaps
the retiring stream will leave behind it vast quantities
of drift-sand which is swept by the high winds over the
surrounding country . . . where the explorer may search
in Tain for any record of the past. T have had, as an
enquirer, experience of the difficulties here described "
(J. R. A. S, N. S. vol. XVI, p. 281).



86



6. Unite fii'st in thy course with the Trishta-
ma, the Sasart(!i, the Ba8& and the ^veti; thou
meetest the Gomati, and the Knimu, with the
Kubha, and the Mehatnd, and with them are
borne onward as on the same car." (See Journ.
B. A. 8., N. S., Vol. XV, pp. 359-60).

As Ptolemy makes the Koa join the Indus,
it must be identified with the Kabul river,
the only large affluent which the Indus receives
from the west. Other classical writers call it
the KophSn or Kophes, in accordance with its
Sanskrit name the Kubha. Ptolemy's name, it
must however be noted, is not applicable to the
K&bul river throughout its whole course, but only
after it has been joined by the River Kamah,
otherwise called the Kundr. This river, which is
inferior neither in size nor in length to the arm
which comes from Kabul, is regarded as the main
stream by the natives of the country, who call the
course of the united streams either the Kamah
or the Kunar indijfferently, as far as the entrance
into the plain of Peshawar. The Kamah has its
Boui'ces high up in the north at the foot of the
plateau of Pamir, not far from the sources of the
Oxus, and this suits Ptolemy's description of the
Koa as a river which has its sources in the
eastern extremity of Paropanisos, and which joins
the Indus after receiving the Souastos or the river
of Swat. Koa is very probably a curtailed form of
the name. The Persians appear to have called it
the Khoaspes, that being the name of the river
on which Susa, their capital city, stood. Under
this name it is mentioned by Aristotle {Meteorolog.
lib. I, c. xiii) who lived long enough to enter in his



87



later writings some of the new knowledge which the
expedition of his illustrious pupil had opened up
regarding Eastern Countries. It is mentioned also
by Strabo (lib. XV, c. i, 26) who followed here the
authority of Aristoboulos, one of the companions
and one of the historians of the expedition of
Alexander, and by Ourtius (lib. VIII, c. x), Strabo
I. c. states that it joins the Koph^s neai* Plemyrion,
after passing by another city, Gorys, in its course
through Bandobene and Gandaritis. The Koa of
Ptolemy is not to be confounded with the Echoes of
Arrian (lib. IV, c. xxiii, 2), whith must be identified
with a river joining the K6phes higher up its
course, viz. that which is formed by the junction
of the Alishang and the Alingar. The Euaspla of
the latter writer (lib. IV, c. xxiv, 1) is probably
only an altered form of Khoaspes.

The identification of the KophSs and its nu-
merous affluents has been a subject that has
much exercised the pens of the learned. They are
now unanimous in taking the Kophes to be the
Kabul river'* but there are still some important
points on which they differ. In the foregoing
notice I have ^ adopted as preferable the views of
Saint-Martin (^^ude, pp. 26 — 34): Conf. Lassen,
Ind. Alt. vol. Ill, pp. 127-8; Wilson, Ariana
Antiqua, pp. 138 — 188. Benfey's Indien, pp. 4f4r—
46, Cunningham, Geog. of Anc, India, pp. 37, 38.

Souastos : — All the authorities are at one in
identifying the Souastos with the Sw&t river — the
principal tributary of the Landai or river of
Panjkora (the Gauri of Sanskrit), which is the

*^ Bennell identified it with the Gomul and D'Anville
with the Argand^b.



88



klidt of the great affluents that the K4bul river re-
ceives from the east before it falls into the Indus.
The Souastos, though a small stream, is jet of old
renown, being the Sveti of the Vedic hymn al-
ready quoted, and the Suv&stu of the Mahdbhd-
rata (YI, ix, 333), where it is mentioned in con-
junction with the Gaurf. Its name figures also
in the list of Indian rivers which Arrian {Indika,
sec. 4) has preserved from the lost work of Mega-
sthenes. Here it is mentioned in conjunction with
the Malamantos and the Garoia, which latter is
of course the Galiri. Arrian thus makes the
Souastos and the Gouraios to be different rivers,
but in another passage of his works {Anah. lib. TV,
c. xxv) he seems to have fallen into the mistake
of making them identical. It is surprising, as
Lassen has remarked, that Ptolemy should notice
the Souastos, and yet say nothing about the
Garoia, especially as he mentions the district of
Goryaia, which is called after it, and as he must
have known of its existence from the histoiians
of Alexander. He has also, it may be noted,
placed the sources of the Souastos too far north.

The five great rivers which watered the region of
the Panjab bear the following names in Ptolemy :
Bidaspes, Sandabal, Adris or Rhonadis, Bibasis and
Zaradros. This region in early times was called
the country of the seven rivers — Sapta Sindhu,
a name which, as Sir H. Rawlinson has pointed
out, belonged primarily to the seven head streams
of the Oxus. As there were only five large streams
in the locality in India to which the name was
applied, the number was made up to seven by add-
ing smaller affluents or lower branches of combined



89

streams, to which new names were given. The
Vedic Aryans, however, as Mr. Thomas remarks,
could never satisfactorily make up the sacred seven
without the aid of the comparatively insignificant
Sarasvati, a river which no longer exists. These
rivers are notahly erratic, having more than once
changed their bed since Yedic times.

Bidaspes : — This is now the Jhelam or river of
Behatjthe most western of the five rivers. It drains
the whole of the valley of Kasmir, and empties
into the Akesines or Chen^b. Ptolemy, however,
calls their united stream the Bidaspes. By the
natives of Kasmir it is called the Bedasta, which
is but a slightly altered form of its Sanskrit name
the VitastS., meaning * wide -spread.' The classical
writers, with the sole exception of our author,
call it the Hydaspes, which is not so close to the
original as his Bidaspes. It was on the left bank
of this river that Alexander defeated Poros and
buUt (on the battle-field) the city of !N'ikaia in
commemoration of his victory.

Sandabal is an evident mistake of the
copyist for Sandabaga. The word in this
corrected form is a close transliteration of

Ohandrabhag^ (Zwwae^or^io), one of the Sanskrit . '/ .fi

names of the River Chenlb. In the Vedic hymn
which has been quoted it is called the Asikni,
* dark-coloured,' whence the name given to it
by the Greeks in Alexander's time, the Akesines.
It is said that the followers of the great con-
queror discerned an evil omen in the name of
ChandrabliagS. on account of its near similarity
to their own word Androphagos or Alexan-
drophagoSf * devourer of Alexander ' and hence
12 G



tc



U ^) ' '^



1



90



preferred calling it by the more ancient of its
two names. It is the largest of all the streams
of the PaSchanada. Vigne says that Chandra-
bh&g& is the name of a small lake from which the
river issues. Pliny has distorted the form Chan-
dabaga into Cantabra or Cantaba flib. YI, c. xx).
According to the historians of Alexander the
confluence of this river with the Hydaspes produc-
ed dangerous rapids, with prodigious eddies and
loud roaring waves, but according to Bumes
their accounts are greatly exaggerated. In
Alexander's time the Akesines joined the Indus
near Uchh, but the point of junction is now much
lower down.

The Adris or Bhouadis is the Ravi, a
confluent of the Akesines, but according to Ptolemy
of the Bidaapes. The name Eavi is an abridged
form of the Sanskrit Air&vati. It is called by
Arrian {Anab. lib. YI, c. viii), the Hydraotes, and
by Strabo (lib. XY, c. i, 21) the Hyarotis. Arrian
(Indik. sec. 4) assigns to it three tributaries — the
Hyphasis, the Saranges and Neudros. This is
not quite correct, as the Hyphasis joins the
Akesines below the junction of the Hydraotes.

The Bibasis is the river now called the Beias,
the Yipasa of Sanskrit. This word "YipasA"
means * uncorded,' and the river is said to have
been so called because it destroyed the cord with
which the sage Yasishtha had intended to hang
himself. It is called the Hyphasis by Arrian
{Anah. lib. YI, c. viii), and Diodoros (lib. XYII,
c. xciii), the Hypasis by Pliny (lib. YII, c. xvii,
20) and Curtius (lib. IX, c. i), and the Hypanis by
Strabo (lib. XY, c. i, 17) and some other writers.



91



It falls into the Satadni. It was the river which
marked the limit of Alexander's advance into India.

27. Sources of the River

Zaradros 132° 36°

Confluence of the Koa and

Indus 124° 31°

Confluence of the Koa and

Souastos 122° 30' 31° 40'

Confluence of the Zaradros

and Indus 124° 30°

Confluence of the Zaradros

and Bidaspes 125° 30°

Confluence of the Zaradros

andBibasis 131° 34°

Confluence of the Bidaspes

and Adris 126° 30' 31° 30'

Confluence of the Bidaspes

andSandabal 126° 40^ 32° 40'

The Zaradros is the Satlaj^ the most
easterly of the five rivers. It is called in Sanskrit
the Satadru^ i.e., flowing, in a hundred {branches),
Pliny (lib. VI, c. xm) calls it the Hesydrus, Zadrades
is another reading of the name in Ptolemy. The
Satlaj, before joining the Indus, receives thj& Che-
n&b, and so all the waters of the Panchanada.

With regard to the nomenclature and relative
importance of the rivers of the Panj&b the
following remarks of Y. de Saint-Martin may be
cited : —

" As regards the Hyphasis, or more correctly
the Hypasis, the extended application of this
name till the stream approaches the Indus, ia



92



contrary to the notions which we draw from
Sanskrit sources, according to which the Vip&8&
loses its name in the Satadru (Satlaj), a river
which is otherwise of greater importance than the
Vipds4. Nevertheless the assertion of onr author
by itself points to a local notion which is confirm-
ed by a passage in the chronicles of Sindh, where
the name of the Beiah which is the form of the
Sanskrit Yipaea in Musalman authors and in
actual use, is equally applied to the lower course
of the Satlaj till it unites with the Chen&b not
far from the Indus. Arrian, more exact here, or
at least more circumstantial than Strabo and the
other geographers, informs us that of all the group
of the Indus affluents the Akesines was the most
considerable. It was the Akesines which carried
to the Indus the combined waters of the Hydas-
pes of the Hydraotes and of the Hyphasis, and
each of these streams lost its name in uniting
with the Akesines (An*. Anah. lib. YI, c. v). This
view of the general hydrography of the Panjfib
is in entire agreement with facts, and with the
actual nomenclature. It is correctly recognized
that the Chen&b is in effect the most considerable
stream of the Panjab, and its name successively
absorbs the names of the Jhelam, the Ravi, and
the Ghan-a or lower Satlaj, before its junction
with the Indus opposite Mittankot. Ptolemy
here differs from Airian and the current ideas on
the subject. With him it is not the Akesines
(or, as he calls it, the Sandabala for Sandabaga)
which carries to the Indus the waters of the
Pan jab. It is the Bidaspes (Yitasta). Ptolemy
departs again in another point from the nomen-



93



clature of the historians who preceded h\m m
applying to the Gharra or lower Satlaj the name
of Zaradros, and not, as did Arrian that of Hy-
pasis. Zadadros is the Sutudri or Satadru of
the Sanskrit nomenclature, a name which com-
mon usage since the Musalman ascendancy has
strangely disfigured into Satlaj. No mention is
made of this river in the memoirs relating to the
expedition of Alexander, and Megasthenes, it
would appear, was the first who made its existence
known. The application moreover of the two
names of Zadadros and Bibasis to the united
current of the ^atadru and the YipasS is justified
by the usage equally variable of the natives along
the banks, while in the ancient Sanskrit writings
the Satadru goes, as in Ptolemy, to join the Indus.
It may be added that certain particularities in the
texts of Arrian and Ptolemy suggest the idea that
formerly several arms of the Hyphasis existed
which went to join, it may be, the Hydraotes, or,
it may be, the lower Akesines above the principal
confluent of the Hyphasis, an idea which the
actual examination of th^ locality appears to con-
firm. This point merits attention because the
obscurities or apparent contradictions in the text
of the two authors would here find an easy ex-
planation" (pp. 129-131, also pp. 396-402).

Junction of the K 6 a and Indus — Ptolemy
fixes the poiut of junction in latitude 31°, but
the real latitude is 33° 54/. Here the Indus is
872 miles distant from its source, and 942 miles
from the sea. The confluence takes place amidst
numerous rocks and is therefore tm'bulent and
attended with great noise.



94



Junction of the Zaradros and I n d u s :^-
Ptolemy fixes this great junction in latitude 30°,
the real latitude being however 28° 55'. It takes
place about 3 miles below Mitankot, at a distance
of about 490 miles below the jimction with the
K&bul River.

Divarication of the Indus towards Mt.
V i n d i o n : — ^The Indus belf)w its junction with
the K&bul river frequently throws out branches
{e.g. the Nara) which join it again before reaching
the sea, and to such branchesPtolemy gives the name
of €KTpo7raL " It is doubtful," Saint-Martin observes,
" whether Ptolemy had formed quite a clear idea
of this configuration of the valley, and had always
distinguished properly the affluents from the
branches. Thus one does not quite precisely see
what he means by the expression which he
frequently employs ^ Tri/y^ rrjs iKrpoTrrjs. What
he designates thereby must be undoubtedly
the streams or currents which descend from the
lateral region, and which come to lose themselves
in the branches of the river. But the expression,
which is familiar to him, is not the less ambiguous
and altogether improper " — (p. 235 n.) The branch
here mentioned, Lassen {Ind. Alt vol. Ill, pp. 121,
129) takes to be the Lavani river. ** Ptolemy,"
he says, " in contradiction to fact makes a tribu-
tary flow to it from the Vindhya Mountains.
His error is without doubt occasioned by this,
that the Lavani river, which has its source in
the Ar&vali chain falls into the salt lake, the
Rin or Irina, into which also the eastern ann of
the Indus discharges."

Divarication of the Indus into Arakhosia:—



96



Lassen (vol. Ill, p. 128), takes this to be the
Gomal rather than the Korum river. These
rivers are both mentioned in the Vedic hymn,
where the former appears as the Gomati and the
latter as the Kriimu.

Branch of the K 6 a towards the Paropani-
sadai: — This is probably the upper Kdphen,
which joins the Koa (Knn^r river) from Kabnl.

Divarication of the Indus towards the A r b i t a
mountains : — Between the Lower Indus and the
river called anciently the Arabis or Arbis, was
located a tribe of Indian origin called variously
the Arabii, the Arbies, the Arabitae, the Ambritae
and the Arbiti. There can be no doubt therefore
that by the Arbita Mountains Ptolemy designates
the range of hills in the territory of that tribe,
now called the H41a Mountains. Towards the
northern extremity of this range the Indus
receives a tributary called the Gandava, and this
we may take to be what Ptolemy calls the di-
varication of the Indus towards the range. It
may perhaps, however, be the Western Nara that
is indicated.

Divarication of the Indus into the Paro-
panisadai : — To judge from the figures in the
table this would appear to be a tributary of the
Indus joining it from the west a little above its
junction with the Koa or £[S>bul river. There is,
however, no stream, even of the least note, answer-
ing to the description.

28, Divarication (eVrpoTrij) from the Indus
running towards Mt. Ouindionl23° 29° 30'
The source of (tributary join-
ing) the Divarication 127° 27*



96



Divarication of the Indus

towards Arakhosia 1 21° 30' 27° 30'

Divarication of the Koa to-
wards the Paropanisadai ... 121° 30' 33°

The source of (tributary join-
ing) the Divarication 115° 24° 30'

Divarication of the Indus to-
wards the Arbita Mountainsll7° 26° 10'

Divarication of the Indus

towards the Paropanisadai. 124° 30^ 31° 20'

Divarication of the Indus into

the Sagapa mouth 1 13° 40' 23° 15'

From the Sagapa into the

Indus 111° 21° 30'

Divarication of the Indus into
the Khrysoun (or Golden)
mouth 112° 30' 22°

Divarication of the Indus into

the Khariphon mouth 113° 3^ 22° 20'

From the Khariphon to the

Sapai-a 112° 30' 21° 45'

Divarication of the same
River Khariphon into the
Sabalaessa mouth 113° 21° 20'

Divarication from the River
Khariphon into the Loni*

bare mouth 113° 20' 21° 40'

29. Of the strea^ns which join the Ganges
the order is this : —
Sources of the River Dia-
mouna 134^30' 36°



,



97

Sources of the Ganges itself... 136° 37**

Sources of the River Sarabosl40<^ 36°

Junction of the Diamouna

and Ganges 136° d4P

Junction of the Sarabos and ^J

Ganges 13G<> 30' 32° 30'

Ptolemy's description of the Ganges is very
meagre as compared with- his description of the
Indas. He mentions by name only 3 of its
affluents, although Arrian (quoting from Megas-
thencs) enumerates no fewer than 17, and Pliny
19. The latitude of its source, Gangotri, which
is in the territory of Garhwal, is 30° 64', or more
than 6 degrees f ui'ther south than its position as
given in the table. The name of the river, the
G a n g &, is supposed to be from a root gam, * to
go,' reduplicated, and therefore to mean the
* Go — ^go.' The tributaries mentioned by Arrian
are these : the Kainas, Erannoboas, Kossoanos,
Sonos, Sittokatis, Solomatis, Kondokhates Sambos,
Magon, Agoranis, Omalis, Kommonases, Ka-
kouthis, Andomatis, Amystis, Oxymagis and the
Errhenysis. The two added by Pliny are the Pri-
nas and Jomanes. Regarding these names the
following remarks may be quoted from Yule : —
" Among rivers, some of the most difficult names
are in the list which Pliny and Arrian have taken
from Megasthenes, of affluents of the Ganges.
This list was got apparently at Palibothra (Patna),
and if streams in the vicinity of that city occupy an
undue space in the list, this is natural. Thus
Magona and Errhenysis, — Mohana and Niranjana,
join to form the river flowing past Gaya, famous
13 6



98



in Buddhist legend under the second name. The
navigable Prinas or Pinnas is perhaps Puny&,
now Piinptin, one of the same cluster. Sonus
instead of being a duplicate of Erannoboas, may
be a branch of the Gaya river, still called Sona.
Andomatis flowing from the Madiandini, i.e.,
'* Meridionales" is perhaps the Andhela, one of
the names of the Chandan river of BhagalpAr.
Kainas, navigable, is not likely to be the Ken of
Bundelkhand, the old form of which is Karziavati,
but more probably the Kay&na or Koh&na of
GorakhpAr. It is now a tributary of the lower
Gh&gr&, but the lower course of that river has
shifted much, and the map suggests that both the
Rapti (Solomatis of Lassen) and Kayana may have
entered the Ganges directly." For the identifica-
tion of the other rivers in the list see my article
in the Indian Antiquary, vol. V, p. 331.

Diamouna ; — In this it is easy to recognize
the Yamun&, the river which after passing
Dehli, Mathura, Agra, and other places, joins the
Ganges, of which it is the largest affluent at
Allahabad. It rises from hot springs amid
Himalayan snows, not far westward from the
sources of the Ganges. Arrian singularly enough
has omitted it from his list of the Ganges affluents,
but it is no doubt the river which he subsequently
mentions as the J o b a r e s and which flows, he says,
through the country of the Sourasenoi, an Indian
tribe possessing two large cities, Methora and
Kleisobara (Krishnapura ?) Pliny (lib. yi, c. xix)
calls it the Jomanes, and states that it flows into the
Ganges through the Palibothri, between the towns
of Methora and Chrysobara (Krishnapura ?) The



99



Ganges at its junction with the JamnS, and a
third but imaginary river called the Sarasvati,
which is supposed to join it underground is called
the T r i V e n i, i.e., * triple plait ' from the inter-
mingling of the three streams.

S a r a b o s : — This is the great river of Kosala,
that is now called the Sarayu or Sai*ju, and also the
Gharghara or Ghogra. It rises in the Himalayas,
a little to the north-east of the sources of the
Ganges, and joins that river on its left side in
latitude 25° 46', a little above the junction of
the Son with their united stream. Cunningham
regards the Solomatis mentioned in Arrian's list
of the tributaries of the Ganges as being the Sarayu
under a different name, but Lassen takes it to be
the Rapti, a large affluent of the same river from
Goi'akhpur. The name, he thinks, is a translitera-
tion or rather abbreviation of Saravati, the name
of a city of Kosala mentioned by Kalid&sa. The
river on which the city stood is nowhere mention-
ed, but its name was in all probability the same as
that of the city {Ind. AIL, vol. II, p. 671).

Mouth of the River S 6 a : — This river can be no
other than the Son (the S6no8 of Arrian's list)
which falls into the Ganges about 16 miles above
Patna in lat. 25° 37'. It rises in Gondwana in
the territory of Nagpur, on the elevated table-
land of Amarakantaka, about 4 or 5 miles east of
the source of the Narmadd. It would appear that
in former times it joined the Ganges in the
immediate neighbourhood of Patna, the modem
representative of the Palibothra or Palimbothra
of the classical writers. The lat. of the source is
22^1'; in Ptolemy 28°.



100



30. Divarication from tlie Ganges towards
the Ouindion itinge to the moutli of the River

S5a 136° W 3P 30'

The sources of the river ...131° 28°

Divarication of the Ganges

towards the Ouxenton range 142° 28°

The sources of the divarication 137° 23°

Divarication from the Ganges

into the Kambyson Mouth 146° 22°

Divarication from the Ganges

into the Pseudostomos 146° 30' 20°

Divarication from the Gan-
ges into the Antibole Mouthl4C° 30' 21°
Divarication from the Kamby-
son River into the Mega

Mouth 145° 20°

Divarication from the Mega
Mouth into the Kamberi-

khon Mouth 145° 30' 19° 30'

The divarication towards the Ouxenton
range: — By this unnamed river, as Lassen has
pointed out {Ind. Alt, vol. Ill, pp. 130, 131)
Ptolemy must have meant the Dharmodaya of the
Hindus, although he has assigned far too high a
latitude for its junction with the Ganges, 28°
instead of only 22° 13'. It is, however, the only
considerable stream which flows to the Ganges
from the Bear Mountains. It passes Ramgarh
and Bardhwan, and joins the Bughli not far from
the sea, a little to the cast of Tamluk. It is
commonly called the Damuda River.
The mouths of the Ganges : — In addition to



101



the remarks already made regarding these mouths
I may here quote a passage from Wilford on this
topic : " Ptolemy's description," he says (Asiat.
Researches, vol. XIV, pp. 464-6) " of the Delta of
the Ganges is by no means a bad one, if we reject
the latitudes and longitudes, which I always do,
and adhere solely to his narrative, which is plain
enough. He begins with the western branch of
the Ganges or Bh^girathi, and says that it sends
one branch to the right or towards the west,
and another towards the east, or to the left.
This takes place at Triveni, so called from three
rivers parting, in three different directions, and it
is a most sacred place. The branch which goes
towards the right is the famous Sarasvati; and
Ptolemy says that it flows into the Kambyson
mouth, or the mouth of the Jelasor river, called
in Sanskrit Saktimati, synonymous with Kambu
or Kambuj, or the river of shells. This commu-
nication does not exist, but it was believed to
exist, tni the coimtry was surveyed. This branch
sends another arm, says our author, which affords
a passage into the great mouth, or that of the
Bhagirathi or Ganges. This supposed branch is
the Rtipanardyana, which, if the Sarasvati ever
flowed into the Kambyson mouth, must of course
have sprung from it, and it was then natural
to suppose that it did so. M. D'Anville has
brought the Sarasvati into the Jelasor river in
his maps, and supposed that the communication
took place a little above a village called Danton,
and if we look into the Bengal Atlas, we shall
perceive that during the rains, at least, it is
possible to go by water, from Hughli, through



102



the Sarasvati, and many other rivers, to within
a few miles of Danton, and the Jelasor river.
The river, which according to Ptolemy branches
out towards the east, or to the left, and goes
into the Kambaiikan mouth is the Jumn&, called
in Bengal Jubuna. For the Ganges, the Jumn4
and the Sarasvati unite at the Northern Triveiit
or Allah&bad, and part afterwards at this Trivent
near Hughli . . . called in the spoken dialects
Terboni. Though the Jumnft falls into the Kam-
barikan mouth, it does by no means form it ; for
it obviously derives its name from the Kambadar&
or Kambaraka river, as I observed before.
Ptolemy says that the Ganges sends an arm
towards the east or to the left, directly to the
false mouth or HarinaghattS.. From this springs
another branch to Antibol^, which of course
is the Dh&kk^ branch called the Padm& or
Puddagangft. This is a mistake, but of no great
consequence, as the outlines remain the same.
It is the Padd& or DhakkS. branch, which sends an
arm into the HarinaghattA. The branching out is
near Kasti and Komarkalli, and under various
appellations it goes into the Harinaghatt&
mouth."

Besides the tributaries of the Ganges already
mentioned, Ptolemy refers to two others which it
receives from the range of Bepyrrhos. These are
not named, but one is certainly the Kausiki and the
other ought to be either the Gandaki or the Tista.

31. And of the other rivers the positions

are thus :

The sources of the River Na-

mados in the Ouindion rangel 27° 26° 30'



22°


18°


30'


26°


3V


16°


21°


17°


15'



103



The bend of the river at

Seripala 116^ 30'

Its confluence with the River
Moghis 115°

32. Sources of the River
Nanagoune. from the Onindion

range 132°

Where it bifurcates into the

Goaris and Binda 114°

33. Sources of the Pseudos-
tomos from the Bettigo range. 123°
The point where it turns 118° 30^

34. Sources of the River

Baris in the Bettigo range ...127° 26° 30'

Sources of the River S61en

in the Bettig6 range 127° 20° 30'

The point where it turns 124° 18°

35. Sources of the River
Khaberos in the Adeisathros

range 132° 22°

36. Sources of the River
Tyna in the Oroudian (or
Arouedan) Mountains 133° 17°

37. Sources of the River
Maisolos in the same moun-
tains 134° 30' 17° 3y

38. Sources of the River
Manda in the same moun-

tp,ins 136° 30' 16° 30'

39. Sources of the River

Toundis in the Ouxenton range.137^ 22° 30'



104

40. Sources of the River

Dosaron in the same range ...140° 24^

41. Sources of the River



io



Adamas in the same range ...142° 24^

These rivers have been all already noticed,
with the exception of the Mo phis. This is
now the Mahi, a considerable river which flows
into the Gulf of Khambat at its northern extre-
mity at a distance of about 35 miles north from
the estuary of the Narmdda. Ptolemy is in error
in making the two rivers join each other. The
Mophis is mentioned in the Periplus as the Mais.
In this list the spelling of the names of two of
the rivers of Orissa has been slightly changed, the
Manada into Manda and Tyndis into Toundis.

Ptolemy proceeds now (following as tnuch as
possible the order already observed) to give a list
of the different territories and peoples of India
elassified according to the river-basins, together
with the towns belonging to each territory and
each people {%%^2—^Z), and closes the chapter
hy mentioning the small islands that lay adjacent
to the coast. He begins with the basin of the
KSphes, part of which he had already described
in the 6th Book.

42. The order of the territories in this divi-
sion (India intra Gangem) and of their cities
or villages is as follows : —

Below the sources of the Koa are located the
Lambatai, and their mountain region extends
upwards to that of the Komedai.



105



Below the sources of the Souastos is Souast6nS.

Below those of the Indus are the Daradrai,
in whose country the mountains are of surpass-
ing height.

Below the sources of the Bidasp^s and of the
Sandabal and of the Adris is Kaspeiria.

Below the sources of the Bibasis and of the
Zaradros and of the Diamouna and of the
Oanges is Kylindrine, and below the Lambatai
and SouastenS is Goryaia.

Ptolemy's description of the regions watered
by the K 6 p h e n and its tributaries given here and
in the preceding book may well strike us with
surprise, whether we consider the great copious-
ness of its details, or the way in which its parts
have been connected and arranged. It is evident
that he was indebted for his materials here chiefly
to native sources of information and itineraries of
merchants or caravans, and that he did not much
consult the records, whether historical or geogra-
phical, of Alexander's expedition, else he would not
have failed to mention such places as Alexandria,
under Kaukasos, Massaga, Nysa, Bazira, the rock
Aomos, and other localities made memorable by
that expedition.

In describing the basin of the Kophen he
divides it into two distinct regions — the high region
and the lower, a distinction which had been made
by the contemporaries of Alexander. The high
region formed the country of the Paropani-
8 a d a i, and this Ptolemy has described in the 18th
chapter of the 6th Book, He now describes the
14 G



106



lower region wliich^he regards as a part of India.
(V. Saint-Martin, Etude, pp. 62-3).

The Lambatai were the inhabitants of the
district now called Lamghan, a small territory
lying along the northern bank of the EAbul river
bounded on the west by the AHng&r and Knn&r
rivers, and on the north by the snowy mountains.
Lamgh&n was visited in the middle of the 7th
century by Hiuen Tsiang, who calls it Lan-po,
and notes that its distance eastward from Kapi-
sene, to which before his time it had become
subject, was 600 li (equal to 100 miles). The
name of the people is met with in the Mahd-
hhdrata and in the Paurdnik lists under the form
Lamp&ka. Cunningham would therefore correct
Ptolemy's Lambatai to Lambagai by the slight
change of r for T. A minute account of this
little district is given in the Memoirs of the Em-
peror Baber, who states that it was called after
Lamech, the father of Noah. The Dictionary of
Hemachandra, which mentions the Lamp&ka,
gives as another name of the people that of the
Muranda. Their language is Pushtu in its basis.
(See Cunningham's Geog, of Anc, India, pp. 42-3;
Saint-Martin, Etude, pp. 74-5; also his L'Asie
Central, p. 48 ; Lassen, Ind. Alt., vol. I, p. 422.

Souastene designates the basin of the
Souastos, which, as has already been noticed, is
the river now called the river of Sw&t. The full
form of the name is 6ubhavastu, which by the
usual mode of contraction becomes Subhastu
or Suvastu. SouastenS is not the indigenous
name of the district, but one evidently formed for
it by the Greeks. It is the country now inhabited



107



by the warlike tribes of the Tuzofzai's which
appears to have been called in ancient times with
reference to the rich verdure and fertility of its
valleys Udy&na, that is, * a garden' or * park.' It
was visited by Hiuen Tsiang, who calls it the
kingdom of U-chang-na.

The Daradrai : — Ptolemy has somewhat dis-
figured the name of these mountaineers, who are
mentioned in the Mahdbhdrata and in the Chro-
nicle ofKaimir as the Darada. They inhabited
the mountain-region which lay to the east of the
Lambatai and of Souastend, and to -the north
of the uppermost part of the course of the Indus
along the north-west frontier of Kalmir. This
was the region made so famous by the story of
the gold-digging ants first published to the west
by Herodotos (lib. Ill, c. cii), and afterwards
repeated by Megasthen^s, whose version of it is
to be found in Strabo (lib. XV, c. i, 44) and
in Arrian's Indika (sec. 15) and also in Pliny
(lib. YI, c. xxi and lib. XI, c. xxxvi). The name
of the people in Strabo is Derdai, in Pliny
Dardae, and in Dionys. Peri^g. (v. 1138) Dardanoi.
Their country still bears their name, being called
Dardistdn. The Sanskrit word darad among other
meanings has that of ' mountain.' As the regions
along the banks of the Upper Indus produced gold
of a good quality, which found its way to India
and Persia, and other countries farther west, it has ,

been supposed that the Indus was one of the four u rk *^
rivers of Paradise mentioned in the book of Genesis,
viz. , the Pishon, * * which compasseth the whole land
of Havilah, where there is gold; and the gold of that
land is good." This opinion has been advocated by



r.*- '



108

flcliolars of high name and authority. Havilah
they take to be in a much altered form, the Sans-
krit sardvara, *a lake/ with reference perhaps
^y^ to the lake in Tibet called Manasarovara.

^ ^r\ Boscawen, however, has pointed out that there

Kjf^ }^\^ was a river called the Pisanu, belonging to the

J» ( ^ ^ I I *^ region between Nineveh and Babjlon, where he


locates paradise.
^^ ^ t' Kaspeiria: — The name and the position

X concur in indicating this to be the valley of

Kasmir, a name which, according to Bumouf ,
is a contraction of Kahjapamira, which is
thought with good reason to be the original
whence came the Kaspap3rros of the old Geographer
Hekataios and the ILaspatyros of Herodotos (lib.
Ill, c. cii), who tells us (lib. lY, c. xliv) that it was
from the city of that name and from the Paktyikan
land that Skylax the Karyandian started on his
voyage of discovery down the Indus in order to
ascertain for Darius where that river entered the
sea. It cannot be determined with certainty
where that city should be located, but there can
be no good reason, as Wilson has shown (in opposi-
tion to the views of Wilf ord, Heeren, Mannert,
and Wahl) for fixing it on any other river than
the Indus. " We have no traces," he says, " of
any such place as Kaspatyrus west of the Ic^dus.
Alexander and his generals met with no such city,
nor is there any other notice of it in this direction.
On the east of the river we have some vestige of
it in oriental appellations, and Kaspatjrrus is con-
nected apparently with Kasmir. The preferable
reading of the name is Kaspa-pyrus. It was so
styled by Hecataeus, and the alteration is probably



109



an error. Now Kasjapa-pur, the city of Kasjapa,
is, according to Sanskrit writers, the original
designation of Kasmir; not of the province of
the present day, but of the kingdom in its palmy
state, when it comprehended great part of the
Fanj&b, and extended no doubt as far as, if not
beyond, the Indus." — Ar. Antiq., p. 137.

In the time of Ptolemy the kingdom of Kasmtr
was the most powerful state in all India. The
dominions subject to its sceptre reached as far
south as the range of the Yindhyas and embraced,,
together with the extensive mountain region
wherein the great rivers of the Panj&b had their
sources, a great part of the Fanj&b itself, and the
countries which lay along the courses of the
Jamn& and the Upper Granges. So much we
learn from Ptolemy's description which is quite
in harmony with what is to be found recor-
ded in the Rdjatarangini, regarding the period
which a little preceded that in which Ptolemy
wrote — that the throne of Kasmlr was then
occupied by a warlike monarch called Megh4va-
hana who carried his conquests to a great distance
southward (Bdjatar. vol. Ill, pp. 27 sqq.) The valley
proper of Kasmir was the region watered by the
BidaspSs ( Jhelam) in the upper part of its course.
Ptolemy assigns to it also the sources of the
Sandabal (Chen§,b) and of the Ehouadis (R&vi)
and thus includes within it the provinces of the
lower Him&layan range that lay between Kasmir
and the Satlaj.

Kylindrine designated the region of lofty
mountains wherein the Vip&sa, the ^atadru, the
Jamn& and the Ganges had their sources. The



11



110

inhabitantB called K n 1 i n d a are mentioned in
the Mahdbhdrata in a long list there given of tribes
dwelling between MSm and Mandara and upon
the SaQodA river, nnder the shadow of the
Bambu forests, whose kings presented lumps of
ant-gold at the solemnity of the inauguration of
Yudhishthira as universal emperor. Cunningham
would identify KylindrinS with '* the ancient
kingdom of J&landhara which since the occupa-
tion of the plains by the Muhammadans has been
confined almost entirely to its hill territories,
which were generally known by the name of
f ^ Kangra, after its most celebrated fortress." Saint-

'•i*-^ i,^^ Martin, however, is unable to accept this identifica-

Ition. A territory of the name of K u 1 u t a, which
was formed by the upper part of the basin of the
Vip&s&, and which may be included in the Kylin-
'^ 4.** drin^ of Ptolemy, is mentioned in a list of the

}r.»^ » \ ^ Vardha Samhitd. Kuluta was visited by the

^ l^t*'' Chinese pilgrim, Hiuen Tsiang, who transcribes

' ' ' N ^ " \ the name Klu-iu-to, a name which still exists

t^*^ *^ under the slightly modified form of Koluta. (See

^ : • Lassen, Ind. AU, vol. I, p. ^ 547 ; Wilson, Ar. Antiq,

,, ^\^' " p. 135 n. ; Saint-Martin, Etude, 217; Cunningham,

U' "^^ GeoflT. pp. 136—138.

Goryaia designates the territory traversed
by the Gouraios or river of Ghor, which, as
has already been noticed, is the affluent of the
K&bul liver now called the 'Landai', formed
by the junction of the river of PaSjkora and
the river of Sw&t. Alexander on his march to
India passed through Goryaia, and having crossed
the River Gouraios entered the territory of the
Assakenoi. The passage of the river is thus de-



\t



t ♦



Ill



Bcribedby Arria2i(il»a&. lib. IV, c. xxv): "Alexander
now advanced with a yiew to attack the Assake-
noi, and led his army through the territory of the
Gk>uraioi. He had great difficulty in crossing
the Grouraios, the eponymous river of the country,
on account of the depth and impetuosity of the
stream, and also because the bottom was so strewn
with pebbles that the men when wading through
could hardly keep their feet." It can scarcely be
doubted that the Gk)uraios is the Gauri mentioned
in the 6th Book of the Makdhhdrata along with the
Suv&stu and the Kampan&. Arrian's notion that
it gave its name to the country by which it flowed
has been assented to by Lassen but has been contro-
verted by Saint-Martin, who says (p. 33), "the
name of the Gouraioi did not come, as one would
be inclined to believe, and as without doubt the
Greeks thought, from the river of Gur which
watered their territory ; the numerous and once
powerful tribe of Ghori, of which a portion occu-
pies still to this day the same district, to the west
of the Landai', can advance a better claim to the
attribution of the ancient classical name." In a
note to this passage he says : " Kur, with thi&
signification of 'river,' courant, is a primitive
term common to most of the dialects of the Indo-
Germanic family. Hence the name of Kur
(Greek, Kvpos, Kvppos, Lat. Cyrus) common to
different rivers of Asia. . . . This name (of
Ghoris or Gl!b*s) ought to have originally the
signification of ' mountaineers.' It is at least a
remarkable fact that all the mountain region
adjacent to the south of the Western Hindi!l-k6h
and its prolongation in the direction of Her&t



112



have borne or still bear the names of Gfir, Ghor,
x)r Ghaor, Gurk&n, Gorjistfbi, &c. Let us add
that garayo in Zend signifies ' mountains*' "

43. And the cities are these : —

Kaisana , 120^ 34° 20'

Barborana '. 120° 15' 33° 40'

Gorya 122° 34° 45'

Nagara or Dionysopolis 121° 45' 33°

Drastoka 120° 30^ 32° 30^

Kaisana, Barborana and Drastoka
are places unknown, but as the same names occur
in the list of the towns of the Faropanisadai (lib.
YI, c. zviii, 4) it is not improbable, as Saint-Martin
conjectures, that the repetition was not made by
Ptolemy himself, but through a careless error on
the part of some copyist of his works. Cunningham
thinks that Drastoka may have designated a town,
in one of the dards or ' valleys ' of the Koh-D&man,
and that Baborana may be FarwS«n, a place of some
consequence on the left bank of the Ghorband
river in the neighbourhood of Opifin or Alexan-
dria Opiane. Kaisana he takes to be the Cartana
of Pliny (lib. VI, c. xxiii) according to whom it
was situated at the foot of the Caucasus and not
far from Alexandria, whilst according to Pto-
lemy it was on the right bank of the P&njshir
river. These data, he says, point to BSgr&m, which
is situated on the right bank of the P&njshir and
Ghorband rivers immediately at the foot of the
Kohist&n hills, and within 6 miles of Opi&n.
Begrfim also answers the description which Pliny
gives of Cartana as TetragonU, or the ' square ;'
for Masson, in his account of the ruins especially



113



notices ** some moimds of great magnitude, and
accurately describing a square of considerable
dimensions." A coin of Eukratides has on it the
legend Karisiye Nagara or city of Karisi (Geog,
of Anc, Ind,, pp. 26 — 29).

G 6 r y a : — Saint-Martin thinks that the position
of this ancient city may be indicated by the situa-
tion of Mola-gouri, a place on the right or western
bank of the River Landa^i, as marked in one of
Court's maps in the Jour. Beng. As. Soc, vol. VIII,
p. 34).

Nagara or Dionysopolis : — Lassen has
identified this with Nanghenhar, the Nagara-
hS.ra of Sanskrit, a place mentioned under this
name in the Paurdnik Geography, and also in a
Buddhistic inscription thought to belong to the
9th century which was found in Behar. The city
was visited by Hiuen Tsiang, who calls it Na-
kie-lo-ho. It was the capital of a kingdom
of the same name, which before the time of the
pilgrim had become subject to Kapisa, a state
which adjoined it on the west. Its territory
consisted of a narrow strip of land which
stretched along the southern bank of the K&bul
river from about Jagdalak as far westward as the
Khaibar Pass. The city was called also Udy&na-
pura, that is, * the city of gardens,' and this name
the Greeks, from some resemblance in the sound
translated into Dionysopolis (a purely Greek
compound, signifying * the city of Dionysos,' the
god of wine), with some reference no doubt to
legends which had been brought from the regions
of Paropanisos by the companions of Alexander.
This name in a mutilated form is found in-
15 G



114



Bcribed on a medal of Dionysios, one of the
Greek kings, who possessed the province of what
is now called Afghanistan in the 2nd century B.C.
Some traces of the name of Udy&napura still
exist, for, as we learn from Masson, "tradition
affirms that the city on the plain of Jal&l&bad was
called A j tl n a," and the Emperor Baber men-
tions in his Memoirs a place called Adinapnr,
which, as the same author has pointed out, is
now Bala-b&gh, a village distant about 13 miles
westward from Jalalabad near the banks of the
Surkhrud, a small tributary of the K&bul river.

As regards the site ofNagarah&ra, this was
first indicated by Masson, and afterwards fixed
with greater precision by Mr. Simpson, who having
been quartered for four months at Jalal&bad
during the late Af gh&n war took the opportunity of
investigating the antiquities of the neighbourhood,
which are chiefly of a Buddhist character. He
has given an account of his researches in a paper
read before the Royal Asiatic Society, and pub-
lished in the Society's Journal (Vol. XIII, pp. 183
— 207). He there states that he found at a
distance of 4 or 5 miles west from JaJ&labad
numerous remains of what must have been an
ancient city, while there was no other place in
all the vicinity where he could discover such
marked evidences of a city having existed. The
ruins in question lay along the right bank of a
stream called the Surkh&b, that rushed down
from the lofty heights of the Sufaid-koh, and
reached to its point of junction with the Kabul
river. The correctness of the identification he
could not doubt, since the word 'Nagrak/



115



* Nagarat,' or * Nagara' was still applied to
the ruins by the natives on the spot, and since
the site also fulfilled all the conditions which
were required to make it answer to the descrip-
tion of the position of the old city as given by
Hiuen Tsiang. (See Lassen, Ind. Alt., vol. II, p.
335; Saint-Martin's -4sie0en^raZe, pp. 52 — 56; Cun-
ningham, Geog. of Anc. Ind., pp. 44 — 46 ; Masson,
Various Journeys, vol. Ill, p. 164).

44. Between the Souastos and the Indus
tlie Gandarai and these cities : —

Proklais 123° 32°

Naulibi 124° 20' 33° 20'

The Gandarai : — Gandhara is a name of high
antiqtiity, as it occurs in one of the 7edic hymns
where a wife is represented as saying with re-
ference to her husband, ** I shall always be for
him a Grandhara ewe." It is mentioned frequently
in the Mahdbhdrata and other post-Yedic works,
and from these we learn that it contained the two
royal cities of Takshasila (Taxila) and P u s h-
kar^vati (Peukelaotis) the former situated to
the east and the latter to the west of the Indus.
It would therefore appear that in early times the
Gandharic territory lay on both sides of that river,
though in subsequent times it was confined to the
western side. According to Strabo the country
of the Gandarai, which he calls Gandaritis, lay
between the Khoaspes and the Indus, and along
the River Kophes. The name is not mentioned
by any of the historians of Alexander, but it
must nevertheless have been known to the Greeks
as early as the times of Hekataios, who, as we



116

learn from Stephanos of Byzantion, calls Kaspa-
pyros a Gandaric city. Herodotos mentions the
Gandarioi (Book III, c. xci) who includes them
in the 7th Satrapy of Darius, along with the
Sattagydai, the Dadikai and the Aparytai. In
the days of As6ka and some of his immediate
successors Gandhara was one of the most
flourishing seats of Buddhism. It was accordingly
visited both by Fa-hian and Hiuen Tsiang, wto
found it to contain in a state of ruin many mo-
numents of the past ascendancy of their faith.
From data supplied by the narratives of these
pilgrims Cunningham has deduced as the boun-
daries of Gandhara, which they call Kien-to-lo,
on the west Lamghan and Jalal&bad, on the north
the hills of Sw&t and Bimir, on the east the
Indus, and on the south the hills of K&labagh.
" Within these limits," he observes, " stood
several of the most renowned places of ancient
India, some celebrated in the stirring history of
Alexander's exploits, and others famous in the
miraculous legends of Buddha, and in the sub-
sequent history of Buddhism under the Indo-
Scythian prince Kanishka." {Geog. of Ind.,
p. 48.) Opinions have varied much with regard
to the position of the Gandarioi. Rennell placed
them on the west of Baktria in the province after-
wards called Margiana, while Wilson {Ar, Antiq.,
p. 131) took them to be the people south of the
Hindtl-ki^sh, from about the modem Kandah&r
. , V ' ■ * • to the Indus, and extending into the Panj&b and
^ ' • , to Kasmir. There is, however, no connexion be-

\' ^' ^ ' > I tween the names of Gandaria and Kandah&r.
'' z-^'" P r ok la'is is the ancient capital of Gandhara^



•\



I



117



situated to the west of the Indus, which was men-
tioned in the preceding remarks under its Sanskrit
name Pushkal&vati, which means ' abounding
in the lotus.' Its name is given variously by the
Greek writers asPeukelaotis, Peukolaitis, Peukelas,
and Prokla'is, the last form being common to Pto-
lemy with the author of the PeripMs. The first
form is a transliteration of the P&li Pukhalaoti ;
the form Peukelas which is used by Arrian is taken
by Cunningham to be a close transcript of the
P&li Pukkala, and the P r o k 1 a i s of Ptolemy to
be perhaps an attempt to give the Hindi name of
Pokhar instead of the Sanskrit Pushkara. Arrian
describes Peukelas as a very large and populous
city l3ring near the Indus, and the capital of a
prince called Astes. Ptolemy defines its position
with more accuracy, as being on the eastern bank
of the river of Souasten^. The PeriplUa informs
us that it traded in spikenard of various kinds,
and in kostus and bdellium, which it received
from different adjacent countries for transmis-
sion to the coast of India. It has been identified
with Hasht-nagar {i.e., eight cities) which lies at
a distance of about 17 miles from Parash&war
(Pesh&war). Perhaps, as Cunningham has suggest-
ed, Hasht-nagar may mean not * eight cities ' but
* the city of Ast^s,'

Na u 1 i b i :— " It is probable," says Cunningham,
" that Naulibi is Nil&b, an important town which
gave its name to the Indus ; but if so it is wrongly
placed by Ptolemy, as Nil&b is to the South of the
Kophes" (Geog. of Anc. Ind., p. 48).

45. Between the Indus and the Bidasp^



118



towards the Indus the A r s a territory and
these cities : —

Ithagouros 125° 40' 33° 20'

Taxiala 125° 32° 15'

A r s a represents the Sanskrit IT r a s a, the
name of a district which, according to Cunning-
ham, is to be identified with the modem district
of Rash in Dhanfcawar to the west of Muzafara-
bad, and which included all the hilly country
between the Indus and Kasmir as far south as
the boundary of Atak. It was visited by Hiuen
Tsiang, who caUs it U-la-shi and places it between
Taxila and Kasmir. Pliny, borrowing from Me-
gasthen^s, mentions a people belonging to these
parts called the Arsagalitae. The first part
of the name answers letter for letter to the name
in Ptolemy, and the latter part may point to the
tribe Ghilet or Ghilghit, the Gahalata of Sanskrit.

(V. Saint-Martin, Etude , pp. 59-60). Urasa is
mentioned in the Mahdbhdrata and once and
again in the Rdjatarangini.

Ithagouros : — The Ithagouroi are mentioned
by Ptolemy (lib. YI, c. xvi) as a people of Serika,
neighbouring on the Issedones and Throanoi.
Saint-Martin takes them to be the Dagors or
Dangers, one of the tribes of the Daradas.

Taxiala is generally written as Taxila by
the classical authors. Its name in Sanskrit is
Taksha-sila, a compound which means * hewn rock*
or * hewn stone.' Wilson, thinks it may have been
so called from its having been built of that ma-
terial instead of brick or mud, like most other
cities in India, but Cunningham prefers to ascribe



119

to the name a legendary origin. The Pali form of
the name as found in a copper -plate inscription
is Takhasila, which sufficiently accounts for
the Taxila of the Greeks. The city is described by
Arrian {Anah. lib. V, c. viii) as great and wealthy,
and as the most populous that lay between the
Indus and the Hydaspes. Both Strabo and Hiuen
Tsiang praise the fertility of its soil, and the
latter specially notices the number of its springs
and watercourses. Pliny calls it a famous city,
and states that it was situated on a level where
the hills sunk down into the plains. It was
beyond doubt one of the most ancient cities in
all India, and is mentioned in both of the great
national Epics.* At the time of the Makedonian
invasion it was ruled by a prince called Taxiles,
who tendered a voluntary submission of himself
and his kingdom to the great conqueror. About
80 years afterwards it was taken by Asoka, the son
of Yindusara, who subsequently succeeded his ■ ;f

father on the throne of Magadha and established
Buddhism as the state religion throughout his <1 ^ ' ' ^ . ^
wide dominions. In the early part of the 2nd
. century B.C. it had become a province of the / w U »



t <



' Jl



masters however, for in 126 B.C. the Indo-Sky-



II



GrsBCO-Baktrian monarchy. It soon changed ^^.^v*, ^. v *'
thian Sus or Abars acquired it by conquest, and 7^ » ^ ^



retained it in their hands till it was wrested from
them by a different tribe of the same nationality,
under the celebrated Kanishka. Near the middle
of the first century A.D. ApoUonius of Tyana
and his companion Damis are said to have
visited it, and described it as being about the
size of Nineveh, walled like a Greek city, and as



■If



I



120



the residence of a soYereign who ruled over what
of old was the kingdom of Foros. Its streets
were narrow, but well arranged, and such alto-
gether as reminded the travellers of Athens.
Outside the walls was a beautiful temple of
porphyry, wherein was a shrine, round which were
hung pictures on copper tablets representing the
feats of Alexander and Poros. (Priaulx's ApoU
Ion., pp. 13 sqq.) The next visitors we hear of
were the Chinese pilgrims Ea-hian in 400 and
Hiuen Tsiang, first in 630, and afterwards in 643.
To them, as to all Buddhists, the place was especi-
ally interesting, as it was the scene of one of
Buddha's most meritorious acts of alms-giving,
when he bestowed his very head in charity. After
this we lose sight altogether of Taxila, and do
not even know how or when its ruin was accom-
plished. Its fate is one of the most striking
instances of a peculiarity observable in Indian
history, that of the rapidity with which some of
its greatest capitals have perished, and the
completeness with which even their very names
have been obliterated from living memory. That
it was destroyed long before the Muhammadan
invasion may be inferred from the fact that its
name has not been found to occur in any Muham-
madan author who has written upon India, even
though his account of it begins from the middle
of the tenth century. Even Albiriini, who was
bom in the valley of the Indus, and wrote so
early as the time of MahmM of Ghazni, makes
no mention of the place, though his work abounds
with valuable information on points of geogra-
phy. The site of Taxila has been identified by



121



Gnimingliam, who has ^ven an account of his
explorations in his Ancient Geography of India
(pp. 104 — 124). The ruins, he says, cover an area
of six square miles, and are more extensive, more
interesting, and in much better preservation than
those of any other ancient place in the Panj^b.
These ruins are at a place called SMh-dheri,
which is just one mile from Kala-ka-serai, a town
lying to the eastward of the Indus, from whicAi it
is distant a three days' journey. Pliny says only a
two days' journey, but he under-estimated the
distance between Peukelaotis and Taxila, whence
his error.

46. Around the BidaspSs, the country of
the Pandoouoi, in which are these cities : —

Labaka 127^30' 34^15'

Sagala, otherwise called Euthy-

media 126^20' 32°

Boukephala 125° 3(y 30° 20'

lomousa 124° 15' 30°

The Country of the Pandoouoi: — The
Pandya country here indicated is that which
formed the original seat of the P&ndavas or
Lunar race, whose war with the Kauravas or
Solar race is the subject of the Mahdbhdrata,
The P^ndavas figure not only in the heroic
legends of India, but' also in its real history, —
princes of their line having obtained for them-
selves sovereignties in various parts of the coun-
try, in R&jputana, in the Panjab, on the banks of
the Ganges, and the very south of the Peninsula.
From a passage in the Lalitavistara we learn that
at the time of the birth of ^akyamuni a Pandava
16 G



122



dynasty reigned at Hastinapura, a city on the
Upper Ganges, about sixty miles to the north-east
of Dehli. Megasthenes, as cited by Pliny, men-
tions a great PS.ndaya kingdom in the region of
the Jamn&, of which Mathnr& was probably the
capital. According to Bajput tradition the cele-
brated Vikram&ditya, who reigned at Ujjain (the
O z e n e of theOreeks) about half a century B. C,
and" whose name designates an epoch in use
among the EUnd^s, was a P&ndava prince. From
the 8th to the 12th century of our gera P&ndavas
iniled in Indraprastha, a city which stood on
or near the site of Dehli. When all this is con-
sidered it certainly seems surprising, as Saint-
Martin has observed (^Etvde, 206 n.) that the
name of the Pandus is not met with up to the
present time on any historic monument of the
north of India except in two votive inscriptions of
Buddhist stiijpas at Bhilsa. See also Mude,
pp. 205, 206.

L a b ak a : — ** This is, perhaps," says the same
author (p. 222), "the same place as a town of
Lohkot (Lavakota in Sanskrit) which makes a
great figure in the R&jput annals among the cities
^ of th fi_PaDJ^ b, but its position is not known for
* certain. Wilford, we know not on what authority,
identified it with Labor, and Tod admits his
opinion without examining it."

S a g a 1 a, called also Euthymedia : — Sagala
or Sangala (as Arrian less correctly gives the
name) is the Sanskrit Sakala or Sakala, which in
its Prakiit form corresponds exactly to the name in
Ptolemy. This city is mentioned frequently in the
Mahdbhdraia, from which we learn that it was the



123

capital of the M a d r a nation, and lay to tlie west
of the Ravi. Arrian {Anah. lib. V, cc. xxi, xxii)
placed it to the east of the river, and this error
on his part has led to a variety of erroneous identi-
fications. Alexander, he tells us, after crossing
the Hydraotes (R&vi) at once pressed forward to
Sangala on learning that the K athaia ns and other
warlike tribes had occupied that stronghold for the
purpose of opposing his advance to the Ganges.
In reality, however, Alexander on this occasion
had to deal with an enemy that threatened his rear,
and not with an enemy in front. He was in con-
sequence compelled, instead of advancing eastward,
to retrace his steps and recross the Hydraotes.
The error here made by Anian was detected by
General Cunningham, who, with the help of data
supplied by Hiuen Tsiang discovered the exact
site which Sagala had occupied. This is as nearly
as possible where Sangla-wala-tiha or * Sanglala
hill' now stands. This Sangala is a hill with
traces of buildings and with a sheet of water
on one side of it. It thus answers closely to the
description of the ancient Sangala in Arrian and
Curtius, both of whom represent it as built on a
hill and as protected on one side from attacks by
a lake or marsh of considerable depth. The hill-
is about 60 miles distant from Labor, where
Alexander probably was when the news about the
Kathaians reached him. This distance is such as
an army by rapid marching could accomplish in
• 3 days, and, as we learn that Alexander reached
Sangala on the evening of the third after he had
left the Hydraotes, we have here a strongly con-
firmative proof of the correctness of the identi-



," '



kl'^^'



[



124



fication. The Makedanians destroyed SagaJa, bat
it was rebuilt by Demetrios, one of the Grseco*
Baktrian kings, who in hononr of his father
EuthydSmos called it Euthydemia. From
this it would appear that the reading Euth/ymidia
as given in Nobbe's and other texts, is erroneous—*
(see Cunningham's Oeog, of Anc. Ind., pp. ISO-
IS?) cf. Saint-Martin, pp. 103—108).

47. The regions extending thence towards
the east are possessed by the Kaspeiraioi,
and to them belong these cities : —

48. Salagissa 129° SO^ 34^ 3V

Astrassos 131° 15' 34^15'

Labokla 128° 33° 20^

Batanagra 130° 33° 30^

Arispara 130° 32° 50^

Amakatis 128^15' 32° 20'

Ostobalasara 129° 32°

49. Kaspeira 127° 31° 15'

Pasikana 1?8° 30' 31° 15'

Daidala 128° 30° 30^

Ardon^ -.126° 15' 30° 10'

Indabara 127° 15' 30°

Liganeira 125° 30' 29°

Khonnamagara 128° 29° 20'

50. Modonra, the city of

the gods 125° 27° 30'

Gagasmira 126° 40' 27° 30'

iferarasa, a Metropolis 123° 26*

Kognandaua 124° 26'

Boukephala : — ^Alexander, after the battle



;°

JO



J



125



on the western bank of the HydaspSs in which
he defeated Foros, ordered two cities to be built,
one N i k a i a, so called in honour of his victoiy
{niMj, and the other Boukephala, so called in
honour of his favourite horse, Boukephalos, that
died here either of old age and fatigue, or from
wounds received in the battle. From the conflict-
ing accounts given by the Greek writers it is
difficult to determine where the latter city stood.
If we follow Plutarch we must place it on the
eastern bank of the HydaspSs, for he states
(Vita Alexandre) that Boukephalos was killed in
the battle, and that the city was built on the place
where he fell and was buried. If again we follow
Strabo (lib. XY, c. i, 29) we must place it on the
west bank at the point where Alexander crossed
the river which in all probability was at Dil&war.
If finally we follow Arrian we must place it on
the same bank, but some miles farther down the
river at Jal&lptir, where Alexander had pitched
his camp, and this was probably the real site.
Boukephala seems to have retained its historical
importance much longer than its sister city, for
besides being mentioned here by Ptolemy it is
noticed also in Pliny (lib. YI, c. xx) who says that it
was the chief of three cities that belonged to the
Asini, and in the PeriplUs (sec. 47) and elsewhere.
N ik a i a, on the other hand, is not mentioned by
any author of the Roman period except Strabo,
and that only when he is referring to the times of
Alexander. The name is variously written
Boukephala, Boukephalos, Boukephalia, and
Boukephaleia. Some authors added to it the
surname of Alexandria, and in the Peutinger



126



Tables it appears as Alexandria Bucefalos. The
horse Boukephalos was so named from his * broV
being very broad, like that of an * ox.' For a dis-
cussion on the site of Boukephala see Ounmng-
ham's Geog. of Anc. Ind., pp. 159 sqq.

lomousa is probably Jamma, a place of
great antiquity, whose chiefs were reckoned at
one time among the five great rajas of the north.
It doubtless lay on the great highway that led
from the Indus to Palibothra.

List of cities of the Kaspeiraioi : — This long
list contains but very few names that can be
recognized with certainty. It was perhaps care-
lessly transcribed by the copyists, or Ptolemy
himself may have taken it from some work the
text of which had been already corrupted. Be
that as it may, we may safely infer from the
constancy with which the figures of latitude in
the list decrease, that the towns enumerated were
so many successive stages on some line of road
that traversed the country from the Indus to
Mathura on the Jamna. Salagissa, Aris-
para, Fasikana, Liganeira, Khonna-
m a gar a and Kognandaua are past all
recognition; no plausible conjecture has been
made as to how they are to be identified.

Astrassos : — This name resembles the Atrasa
of Idrisi, who mentions it as a great city of the

Kanauj Empire {Etude, p. 226).

L ab o k 1 a : — Lassen identified this with Labor,
the capital of the Pan jab {Ind. Alt., vol. Ill, p. 152).
Thornton and Cunningham confirm this identi-
fication. The city is said to have been founded
by Lava or Lo, the son of Rama, after whom it was



127



named LoMwar. The Laho in Labo-kla must be
taken to represent the name of Lava. As for the
terminal hla, Cunningham (Geog. of Anc. Ind.y
p. 198) would alter it to laka thus, making the
whole name Labolaka for Lav&laka or ' the abode
of Lava.'

Batanagra : — Ptolemy places this 2 degrees
to the east of Labokla, but Saint-Martin (p. 226)
does not hesitate to identify it with Bhatnair (for
Bhattanagara) * the town of the Bhatis' though
it lies nearly three degrees south of Labor. Yule
accepts this identification. A different reading
isKatanagara.

Amakatis(v. 1. Amakastis). — According to
the table this place lay to the S.E. of Labokla
but its place in the map is to the S.W. of it
. Cunningham (pp. 195 — 197) locates it near She-
kohpur to the south of which are two ruined
mounds which are apparently the remains of
ancient cities. These are called Amba and Kapi
respectively, and are said to have been called
after a brother and a sister, whose names are
combined in the following couplet : —
Amba-Kapa pai larai
Kalpi bahin chhurawan ai.

When strife arose 'tween Amb and Kap
Their sister Kalpi made it up.
** The junction of the two names," Cunningham
remarks, "is probably as old as the time of
Ptolemy, who places a town named Amakatis or
Amakapis to the west of the Ravi, and in the im-
mediate neighbourhood of Labokla or Labor."
The distance of the mounds refeiTcd to from
Labor is about 25 miles.



/jIaAl



128



08tobala8ara(v.l. Siobolasara) Saint-Martin
has identified this with Thanesar (Sth&nesYara in
Sanskrit) a very ancient city, celebrated in the
heroic legends of the P&ndayas. Cunningham
however thinks that Thanesar is Ptolemy's B a-
tangkaisara and suggests that we should read
Satan-aisara to make the name approach nearer
to the Sanskrit Sth^^vara — ^the Sa-ta-ni-shi-
fa-lo of Hiuen Tsiang (p. 331).

Kaspeira : — '' If this name," says Saint-Martin
(p. 226) *' is to be applied, as seems natural, to the
capital of Kasmtr, it has been badly placed in
the series, having been inserted probably by the
ancient Latin copyists."

Daidala: — ^An Indian city of this name is
mentioned by Stephanos of Byzantion, but he
locates it in the west. Curtius also has a Daedala
(lib. VIII, c. x), a region which according to his
account was traversed by Alexander before he
crossed the Khoaspes and laid siege to Mazaga.
Yule in his map places it doubtfully at Dudhal on
the yhf<ghn.r river to the east of Bhatneer, near
the edge of the great desert.

A r d o n e : — ^Ahroni, according to Yule, a place
destroyed by Timttr on his march, situated be-
tween the Khaghar and Chitang rivers, both of
which lose themselves in the great desert.

Indabara is undoubtedly the ancient In-
dra prastha, a name which in the common
dialects is changed into Indabatta (Indopat), and
which becomes almost Indabara in the cerebral
pronunciation of the last syllable. The site of
this city was in the neighbourhood of Dehli. It
was the capital city of the Pandavas. The Prakfit



329



form of the name is Indrabattba. (Lassen, vol.
Ill, p. 151).

M o d o u r^, the city of tbe gods : — ^Tbere is no
difficulty in identifying tbis witb Mathur^ (Muttra)
one of tbe most sacred cities in all India, and re-
nowned as tbe birtbplace of Krisbna. Its temples
struck MabmAd of Gbazni witb sucb admiration
tbat be resolved to adorn bis own capital in a
similar style. Tbe name is written by tbe Greeks
Methora as well as Modoura. It is situated on
tbe banks of tbe Jamna, bigber up tban Agra,
from wbicb it is 35 miles distant. It is said to
have been founded by S'atrugbna, tbe younger
brotber of Rama. As already mentioned it was
a city of tbe Pandavas wbose power extended far
to westward.

Gagasmira: —Lassen and Saint-Martin agi-ee
in recognizing tbis as Ajmir. Yule, bowever, ob-
jects to tbis identification on tbe ground tbat tbe
first syllable is left unaccounted for, and proposes
Jajbar as a substitute. Gegasius, be argues, I'epre-
sents in Plutarcb YayS.ti, tbe great ancestor of
tbe Lunar race, wbile Jajbpfir in Orissa was
properly Tayatiptira. Hence probably in Jajbar,
wbicb is near Debli, we bave tbe representative
of Gagasmira.

E r a r a s a : — Ptolemy calls tbis a metropolis. It
appears, says Yule, to be Giriraja, ' royal bill/ and
may be Goverdban wbicb was so called, and was
a capital in legendary times [Ind. Antlq., vol. I,
p. 23). Saint-Martin suggests Varanasi, now
Banaras, wbicb was also a capital. He tbinks
tbat tbis name and tbe next, wbicb onds tbe list,
were additions of tbe Roman copyists.

17 G



130



61. Still further to the east than the Kas-
peiraioi are the Gjmnosophistai, and
after these around the Gtrnges further north
are the Daitikhai with these towns : —

Konta 133° 30^ 34° 40'

Margara 135° 34°

Batangkaissara and east of

the river 132° 40' 33° 20'

Passala 137° 34° 15'

Orza 136° 33° 20'

Gymnosophistai : — This Greek word means
' Naked philosophers, ' and did not designate any
ethnic or political section of the population, but
a community of religious ascetics or hermits
located along the Ganges probably, as Yule thinks
in the neighbourhood of Hardw&r and also accord-
ing to Benfey, of Dehli, Indien, p. 95. For an
account of the Gymnosophists see Ind, Aniiq.,
vol. VI, pp. 242—244.

Daitikhai : — This name is supposed to repre-
sent the Sanskrit jatika, which means ' wearing
twisted or plaited hair.' The name does not occur
in the lists in this form but Kern, as Yule states,
has among tribes in the north-east " Demons
with elf locks " which is represented in Wilford
by Jati'dhara.

Konta, says Saint-Maitin (Etude, p. 321) is
probably Kunda on the left bank of the Jamna
to the south-east of Saharanpflr.

Margara : — Perhaps, according to the same
authority, Marhara near the Kalindi River to the
north-east of Agra.



131



Batangkaissara : — Yule objecting to
Saint-Martin's identification of this place with
Bhatkashanr in Saharanpur pargana, on the
ground of its being a modem combination, locates
it, but doubtingly, at Kesarwa east of the Jamn&,
where the position suits fairly.

Pas sal a: — PHny mentions a people called
Fassalae, who may be recognized as the inhabi-
tants of Panch&la or the region that lay between
the Ganges and the JamnI;, and whose power, ac-
cording to the Mahdbhdratay extended from the
Him&layas to the Ghambal Biver. Passala we
may assume was the capital of this important
state, and may now, as Saint-Martin thinks, be
represented by Bisauli. This was formerly a
considerable town of Bohilkhand, 30 miles from
Sambhal towards the south-east, and at a like
distance from the eastern bank of the Ganges.

Orza is perhaps Sarsi situated on the Bftm-
gar^ river in the lower part of its course.

52. Below these are the Anikhai with
these towns : —

Persakra 134° 32° 40'

Sannaba 135° 32° 30'

Toana to the east of the river . . .136° 30' 32°

53. Below these Prasiak^ with these
towns : —

Sambalaka ..; 132° 15' 31° 50'

Adisdara 136° 31° 30'

Kanagora 135° 30° 40'

Kindia ...' 137° 30° 20'

Sagala, and east of the river. . .139° 30° 20'



132



Aninakha 137° 20' 31° 40'

Koangka 138° 20' 31° 30'

Aiiikliai(v. 11. Nanikhai, Manikhai): —
This name cannot be traced to its source. The
people it designated must have been a petty tribe,
as they had only 3 towns, and their territory
must have lain principally on the south bank of
the Jamn&. Their towns cannot be identified.
The correct reading of their name is probably
Manikhai, as there is a town on the Ganges in the
district which they must have occupied called
Manikpur. There is further a tribe belonging
to the Central Himalaya region having a name
slightly similar. Manga or Hangars, and the Ain-i-
Akhari mentions a tribe of Manneyeh which had
once been powerful in the neighbourhood of Dehli
{Etude, p. 322). The form Nanikha would suggest
a people named in the Mahdbhdrata and the
Purdnas, the Naimishas who Eved in the
region of the Jamna.

P r a s i a k e. — This word , transliterates the
Sanskrit Frdchyaka which means ' eastern ' and
denoted generally the country along the Ganges.
It was the country of the Prasii, whose capital
was Palibothra, now Patn^, and who in the
times immediately subsequent to the Makedonian
invasion had spread their empire from the mouths,
of the Ganges to the regions beyond tiie Indus.
The Prasiake of Ptolemy however was a territory
of very limited dimensions, and of uncertain boun-
daries. Though seven of its towns are enumerated
Palibothra is not among them, but is mentioned
afterwards as the capital of the Mandalai and
placed more than 3 degrees farther south than



]38



the most southern of them all. Yule remarks upon
this : " Where the tables detail cities that are in
Prasiake, cities among the Poruari, &c., we n^ust
not assume that the cities ndmed were reallj in
the territories named ; whilst we see as a sure
fact in various instances that they were riot.
Thus the Mandalae, displaced as we have men-
tioned, embrace Palibothra, which was notoriously
the city of the Prasii ; while Prasiake is shoved
up stream to make room for them. Lassen has
so much faith in the uncorrected Ptolemy that
he accepts this, and finds some reason why
Prasiake is not the land of the Prasii but some-
thing else."

Sambalaka is Sambhal, already mentioned
as a town of Rohilkhand. Sambalaka or Sam-
bhala is the name of several countries in India,
but there is-only this one town of the name that
is met with in the Eastern parts. It ia. a very
ancient town and on the same parallel as Dehli.

Adisdara : — This has been satisfactorily iden-
tified with Ahichhatra, a city of great anti- 7
quity, which figures in history s o early a s the 14tli
century B.C. At this timelt wss the capital of
Northern PanchSla. The form of the name in
Ptolemy by a slight alteration becomes Adisadra,
and this approximates closely to the original form.
Another city so called belonged to Central India,
and this appears in Ptolemy as Adeisathra,
which he places in the country of the Bettigoi.
The meaning of the name Ahi-chhattra is ' ser-
pent umbrella ' and is explained by a local legend
concerning Adi-Raja and the serpent demon,
that while the Baja was asleep a serpent formed



\



134



a canopy over him with its expanded hood. The
fort is sometimes called Adikot, though the com-
moner name is Ahi-chhatar, sometimes written
Ahikshetra. The place was visited by Hiuen
Tsiang. In modem times it was first visited by
Captain Hodgson, who describes it as the ruins of
an ancient fortress several miles in circumference,
which appears to have had 34 bastions, and is
known in the neighbourhood by the name of the
P&adu's Port. It was visited afterwards by Cun-
ningham {Anc. Geog. of Ind., pp. 359 — 363).

Kan agora: — This, as Saint-Martin points
out, may be a corruption for Kanagoza, a form of
Kanydikubja or Kanauj. This city of old re-
nown was situated on the banks of the K^linadi,
a bi*anch of the Ganges, in the modem district of
Farrukh&b&d. The name applies not only to the
city itself but also to its dependencies and to the
surrounding district. The etymology {kanyd, ' a
girl,' and huhja, 'round-shouldered' or 'crooked')
refers to a legend concerning the hundred daughters
of Kusan&bha, the king of the city, who were all
rendered crooked by Y&yu for non-compliance
with his licentious desires (see also Beal, Bud-
dhist Records, vol. I, p. 209). The ruins of the
ancient city are said to occupy a site larger than
that of London. The name recurs in another list
of towns under the form Kanogiza, and is there
far displaced.

Kindia may be identified with Kant, an
ancient city of Rohilkhand, the Sh&hjahanpur of
the present day. Yule hesitates whether to identify
it thus or with Mirzapur on the Ganges.

S a g a 1 a : — *' Sagala/' says Saint-Martin {Etude,



135



p. 326) " would carry us to a town of Sakula or
Saghela, of which mention is made in the Bud-
dhist Chronicles of Ceylon among the royal cities
of the North of India, and which Tumour be-
lieves to be the same town as Kusinagara,
celebrated as the place where Buddha S&kyamuni
obtained Nirvdna, Such an identification would
carry us to the eastern extremity of K6sala, not
far from the River Gandaki.

K o a n g k a ought to represent the Sanskrit
handka, * gold.' Mention is made of a town
called in the Buddhistic legends Eanaka-
vatt (abounding in gold), but no indication is
given as to where its locality was (Etvde, p. 326).

54. South of this Saurabatis with these
towns : —

EmpMathra 130° 30°

Nadoubandagar 138° 40' 29°

Tamasis 133° 29°

Kouraporeina 130° 29°

Saurabatis : — ^This division is placed below
Prasiakd. The ordinary reading is Sandra-
bat i s, which is a transliteration of the Sanskrit
Chandravati. The original, Saint-Martin suggests,
may have been Chhattravatt, which is used as a
synonym of AhikshStra, and applies to that part
of the territory of PaSch&la, which lies to the
east of the Ganges. He thinks it more than
probable that Sandrabatis, placed as it is just
after a group of towns, two of which belong to
Ahikshetra, does not differ from this Chhattravati,
the only country of the name known to Sanskrit
Geography in the Gangetic region. None of the



136



four towns can be identified. (See Lassen, Ind.
Alt. vol. I, p. 602 ; Etude J p. 326). Yule, however,
points out that this territory is one of those
which the endeavour to make Ptolemy's names
cover the whole of India has greatly dislocated,
transporting it from the S. W. of B^jputana to
the vicinity of Bah&r. His map locates Sandra-
bitis (Chandrabati) between the River Mahi and
the Ar&vali mountains.

55. And further, all the country along the
rest of the course of the Indus is called by the
general name of I n d o-S k y t h i a. Of this the
insular portion formed by the bifurcation of the
river towards its mouth is Patalen^, and the
region above this is A b i r i a, and the region
about the mouths of the Indus and Gulf of
Kanthi is Syrastr^n^. The towns 'of
Indo-Skythia are these : to the west of the river
at some distance therefrom : —

56. Artoarta 121° 30' 31° 15'

Andrapana 121° 15' 30° 40'

Sabana 122° 20' 32°

Banagara 122° 16' 30° 40'

Kodrana 121° 15' 29° 20'

Ptolemy from his excursion to the Upper Ganges
now reverts to the Indus and completes its geogra-
phy by describing Indo-Skythia, a va.st region
which comprised all the countries traversed by the
Indus, from where it is joined by the river of K&bul
onward to the ocean. We haye already pointed
out how Ptolemy's description is here vitiated
by his making the combined stream of the Paujab



137



riverB join the Indus only one degree below
its junction with the £[li.bul, instead of six
degrees, or half way between that point and
the ocean. The egregious error he has here
committed seems altogether inexcusable, for what-
ever may have been the sources from which he
drew his information, he evidently neglected the
most accurate and the most valuable of all — the
records, namely, of the Makedonian invasion as
transmitted in writings of unimpeachable credit.
At best, however, it must be allowed the determi-
nation of sites in the Indus vaUey is beset with pecu-
liar uncertainty. The towns being but very slightly
built are sejdom of more than ephemeral duration,
and if, as often happens they are destroyed by
inundations, every trace is lost of their ever
having existed. The river besides frequently
changes its course and leaves the towns which it
abandons to sink into decay and utter oblivion.**
Such places again as still exist after escaping
these and other casualties, are now known under
names either altogether different from the an-
cient, or so much changed as to be hardly recog-
nizable. This instability of the nomenclature is
due to the frequency with which the valley has
been conquered by foreigners. The period at

** Ariatoboulos as we learn from Strabo (lib. XV, c. i. 19)
when sent into this part of India saw a tract of land
deserted which contained 1,000 cities with their depen-
dent villages, the Indus having left its proper channel,
was diverted into another, on the left hand much deeper,
and precipitated itseK into it like a cataract so that it
no longer watered the country by the usual inundation
on the right hand, from which it had receded, and this
was elevated above the level, not only of the new chan-
nel of the river, but above that of the (new) inun-
dation.

18 G



138



which the Skythians first appeared in the valley
which was destined to bear their name for several
centuries has been ascertained with precision
from Chinese sources. We thence gather that
a wandering horde of Tibetan extraction called
Yuei-chi or Ye-tha in the 2nd century B. 0.
left Tangut, their native country, and, advancing
westward found for themselves' a new home amid
the pasture-lands of Zungaria. Here they had
been settled for about thirty years when the in-
vasion of a new horde compelled them to migrate
to the Steppes which lay to the north of the
Jazartes. In these new seats they halted for only
two years, and in the year 128 B. C. they crossed
over to the southern bank of the Jaxartes where
they made themselves masters of the rich pro-
vinces between that river and the Orus, which had
lately before belonged to the Grecian kings of
Baktriana. This new conquest did not long
satisfy their ambition, and they continued to
advance southwards till they had overrun in suc-
cession Eastern Baktriana, the basin of the
Kophes, the basin of the Etymander with Ara-
khosia, and finally the valley of the Indus and
Syrastrene. This great horde of the Yetha was
divided into several tribes, whereof the most
powerful was that called in the Chinese annals
Kwei-shwang. It acquired the supremacy over
the other tribes, and gave its name to the king-
dom of the Yetha. They are identical with the
K u s h a n s. The great King Kanishka, who
was converted to Buddhism and protected that faith
was a Kushan. He reigned in the first century of
the Christian sera and ruled from Baktriana to



139



Kaimir, and from the Oxus to Sur&shtra. These
Kushans of the Pan jab and the Indas are no
others than the Indo-Skythians of the Greeks.
In the Bdjatarangini they are called S&ka and
Turushka (Turks). Their prosperity could not
have been of very long duration, for the
author of the PeriplUs, who wrote about half a
century after Kanishka's time mentions that
•* Minnagar, the metropolis of Skythia, was gov-
erned by Parthian princes " and this statement
is confirmed by Parthian coins being found
everywhere in this part of the country. Max
Miiller, in noticing that the presence of Turanian
tribes in India as recorded by Chinese historians
is fully confirmed by coins and inscriptions and
the traditional .history of the country such as it
is, adds that nothing attests the presence of
these tribes more clearly than the blank in the
Brahmanical literature of India from the first
century before to the 3rd after our sera. He
proposes therefore to divide Sanskrit literature
into two — the one (which he would call the
ancient and natural) before, and the other (which
he would call the modem and artificial) after the
Turanian invasion. In his Indo- Skythia Ptolemy
includes Patalene, Abiria and Syras-
trene. The name does not occur in Roman
authors.

Patalene, so called from its capital Patala,
was the delta at the mouth of the Indus. It was
not quite so large as the Egyptian delta with which
th e classical writers frequently compare it. Before
its conquest by the Skythians it had been subject
to the GrsBco-Baktrian kings. Its reduction to



140



their authority is attributed by Strabo (lib. XI, c.
xii, 1) to Menander or to Demetrios, the son of
Euthy demos.

Ab i r ia : — The country of the Ab h i r a s (the
Ahirs of common speech) lay to the east of the
Indus, above where it bifurcates to form the delta.
In Sanskrit works their name is employed to de-
signate generally the pastoral tribes that inhabit
the lower districts of the North -West as far as
Sindh. That Abiria is the O p h i r of Scripture
is an opinion that has been maintained by scho-
lars of eminence.

Syrastrene represents the Sanskrit Surashtra
(the modem Sorath) which is the name in the
Mahdbhdrata and the Pur anas for the Peninsula
of Gujarat. In after times it was called Valabhi.
Pliny (lib. YI, c. xx) in his enumeration of
the tribes of this part of India mentions the
Horatae, who have, he says, a fine city, defend-
ed by marshes, wherein are kept man-eating
crocodiles that prevent all entrance except by
a single bridge. The name of this people is
no doubt a corruption of Sorath. They have an
inveterate propensity to sound the letter 8 as
an H.

Ptolemy distributes into six groups the names
of the 41 places which he specifies as belonging to
the Indus valley and its neighbourhood. The
towns of the second group indicate by their relative
positions that they were successive stages on the
great caravan route which ran parallel with the
western bank of the river all the way from the
Kophes junction downward to the coast. The
towns of the fourth group were in like manner



141

successive stages on another caravan route, that

which on the eastern side of the river traversed

the country from the great confluence with the

combined rivers of the Panjab downward to the

Delta. The towns of the first group (5 in number)

belonged to the upper part of the valley, and were

situated near the Kophes junction. They are

mentioned in a list by themselves, as they did not

lie on the great line of communication above

mentioned. The third group consists of the two

towns which were the chief marts of commerce

in the Delta. The towns of the fifth group (7 in

number) lay at distances more or less considerable

from the eastern side of the Delta. The towns

of the sixth group were included in the territory of

the Khatriaioi, which extended on both sides /> , • '

of the river from its confluence with the Panj&b

rivers as far as the Delta. None of them can

now be identified (See Etude j pp. 234 sqq.)

and of the first group — Artoarta, Sabana,

K o d r a n a cannot be identified.

Andrapana : — Cunningham (p. 86) thinks
this is probably Draband, or Deraband, near Dera-
Ismail-Khan.

Banagara (for Bana-nagara) : — Banna or
Banu is often cited as the name of a town and
a district that lay on the line of communica-
tion between Kabul and the Indus. It was visited
both by Fa-hian and Hiuen Tsiang. The former
calls the country Po-na, i.e., Bana. , The latter
calls it Fa-la-na, whence Cunningham conjec-
tures that the original name was Yaranit or Bama.
It consisted of the lower haK of the valley of the
Kuram river, and was distant from Lamghan a



/■



-> /K



142



15 days' journey southward. It is one of the
largest, richest and most populous districts to the
west of the Indus. — (See Geog. of Anc. Ind.^ pp.
84-86).

57. And along the river : —

Embolima 124° 31°

Pentagramma * 124° 30° 20^

Asigramma 123° 29° 30^

Tiausa 121° 30' 28° 60'

Aristobathra 120° 27° 30'

Azika 119° 20' 27°

58. Pardabathra 117° 23° 30"

Piska 116° 30' 25°

Pasipeda 114° 30" 24°

Sousikana 112° 22° 20'

Bonis 111° 21° 30'

Kdlaka 110^30' 20° 40'

Embolima was situated on the Indus at a
point about 60 miles above Attak, where the river
escapes with great impetuosity from a long and
narrow gorge, which the ancients mistook for its
source. Here, on the western bank, rises the fort
of Amb, now in ruins, crowning a position of
remarkable strength, and facing the smaU town
of Derbend, which lies on the opposite side of
the river. The name of Amb suggested that
it might represent the first part of the name of
Emb-olima, and this supposition was raised to
certitude when it was discovered that another
ruin- not far off, crowning a pinnacle of the same
hill on which Amb is seated, preserves to this
day in the tradition of the inhabitants the



143



name of Balimah. Embolima is mentioned by
Arrian (lib. IV, c. xxvii) who represents it as
situated at no great distance from the rock of
A o r no s — which as Abbott has shown, was Mount
Mah&ban, a hill abutting on the western bank of
the Indus, about eight miles west from Embolima.
It is called by Ourtius Ecbolima {Anab. lib.
YIII, 0. xii) but he gives its position wrongly — at
sixteen days' march from the Indus. Ptolemy
assigns to it the same latitude and longitude
which he assigns to the point where the KS.bul
river and Indus unite. It was erroneously sup-
posed that Embolima was a word of Greek origin
from eK^okrj, *the mouth of a river' conf. Cun-
ningham, Oeog. of Anc, Ind., pp. 52 fp.)*

Pentagramma : — ^To the north of the K6-
phes at a distance of about forty miles S.W. from
Embolima is a place called Panjptllr, which agrees
closely both in its position and the signification
of its name (5 towns) with the Pentagramma of
Ptolemy.

Asigrammaand the five towns that come
after it cannot be identified.

Pasipeda : — Saint-Martin thinks this may be
the Besmeid of the Arab Geographers, which, as
they tell us was a town of considerable importance,
lying east of the Indus on the route from Man-
sCora, to Multan. Its name is not to be found
in any existing map ; bat as the Arab itineraries
all concur in placing it between Rond (now Koda)
and Multan, at a three days' journey from the
former, and a two days' journey from the latter,
we may determine its situation to have been as far
down the river as Mithankot, where the great con-



144



fluence now takes place. If the fact that Bes-
meid was on the eastern side of the river staggers
our faith in this identification, Saint-Martin would
remind us that this pai't of the tables is far from
presenting us with a complete or systematic treat-
ment of the subject, and that the only way open
to us of restoring some part at least of these lists
is to have recourse to synonyms. He contends
that when we find in the Arab itineraries (which
are documents of the same nature precisely as those
which Ptolemy made use of) names resembling
each other placed in corresponding directions, we
ought to attach more weight to such coincidences
than to the contradictions real, or apparent, which
present themselves in the text of our author.
Analogous transpositions occur in other lists, as,
for instance, in the list of places in the NarmadA
basin. Cunningham, thinking it strange that a
notable place of great antiquity like Sehw&n,
which he identifies with Sindomana, should not
be mentioned by Ptolemy under any recognizable
name, hazards the conjecture that it may be either
his Piska or Pasipeda. " If we take," he says,
**Haidar&bad as the most probable head of the
Delta in ancient times, then Ptolemy's S y d r o s,
which is on the eastern bank of the Indus, may
perhaps be identified with the old site of Mattali,
12 miles above Haidarabad and his Pasipeda
with Sehwan. The identification of Ptolemy's
Oskana with the Oxykanus or Portikanus of
Alexander and with the great mound of Mahorta
of the present day is I think almost certain. If
so, either Piska or Pasipeda must be Sehwan."
Sousikana : — It is generally agreed that this



145



18 a coi^i^pt i^eading for Mnsikana) the ro^al
city of Musikanos, who figures so conspicuously in
the records of the Makedonian Invasion, and whose
kingdom was described to Alexander as being
the richest and most populous in all India. Cun-
ningham (p. 257) identifies this place with
Alor, which was for many ages the capital of the
powerful kingdom of Upper Sindh. Its ruins, ad
he informs Us, are situated to the south of a gap in
the low range of limestone hills which stretches
southwards from Bakhar for about 20 miles until
it "is lost in the broad belt of sand-hills which
bound the NAra or old bed of the Indus on the
west. Through this gap a branch of the Indus
once flowed which protected the city on the north-
west. To the north-east it was covered by a
second branch of the river which flowed nearly
at right angles to the other at a distance of three
miles.. When Alor wa3 deserted by the river,
it was supplanted by the strong fort of Bakhar
(p. 258). The same author thinks it probable that
.^lor may be the Binagara of Ptolemy, as it is
placed on the Indus to the eastward of Oskana^
which appears to be the OxykanUs of Arrian and
Curtius.

Bonis :— The table places this at the point of
bifurcation of the western mouth of the river
and an interior arm of it. Arab geographers
mention a town called Bania in Lower Sindh,
situated at the distance of a single journey below
Mansur^. This double indication would ap-
pear to suit very well with Banna, which stands
at the point where the Piniari separates from the
principal arm about 25 miles above Thatfcha. Its
19 G



146



position is however on the eastern bank of ther
river. {Etude, pp. 238, 239.)

Kolaka or Kolala is probably identical
with the Krokala of Arrian's Indika (sec. 21 )y
which mentions it as a small sandy island where
the fleet of Nearkhos remained at anchor for
one day. It lay in the bay of Karachi, which i»
situated in a district called Karkalla even now.

59. And in the islands formed by the river
are these towns :—

Patala 112^30' 2P ,

Barbarei 113° 15^ 22° 30'

60. And east of the river at some distance
therefrom are these towns : —

Xodrake 116° 24°

Sarbana 116° 22° 50'

Auxoamis 115° 30' 22° 20'

Asinda 114° 15' 22°

Orbadarou or Ordabari 115° 22°

Theophila 114° 15' 21° 10^

Astakapra 114° 40' 20° 15'

Patala as we learn from Arrian was the
greatest city in the parts of the country about
the mouths of the Indus. It was situated, he
expressly states, at the head of the Delta wherd
the two great arms of the Indus dispart. This
indication would of itself have sufficed for its
identification, had the river continued to flow in
its ancient channels. It has, however, frequently
changed its course, and from time to time shifted
the point of bifurcation. Hence the question
regarding the site of Patala has occasioned much



147



controversy. Rennell and Vincent, followed by
Burnes and Ritter, placed it at That t ha ; Droysen,
Benfey, Saint-Martinand Cunningham, at Haidarfir-
b&d (the Nii'ankot of Arab writers), and McMurdo,
followed by Wilson and Lassen, at a place about 90
miles to the north-east of HaidarabS.d. The last
supposition is quite untenable, while the arguments
in favour of Haidarabad, which at one time was
called Patalapur" appear to be quite conclusive. (See
Saint-Martin, pp. 180 ff., Cunningham, pp. 279 —
287). Fatala figures conspicuously in the history
of the Makedonian invasion. In its spacious
docks Alexander found suitable accommodation
for his fleet which had descended the Indus, and
here he remained with it for a considerable time.
Seeing how advantageously it was situated for
strategy as well as commerce, he strengthened it
with a citadel, and made it a military centre for
controlling the warlike tribes in its neighbour-
hood. Before finally leaving India he made two
excursions from it to the ocean, sailing first down
the western and then down the eastern arm of
the river. Patala in Sanskrit mythology was
the name of the lowest of the seven regions in
the interior of the earth, and hence may have
been applied to denote generally the parts where
the sun descends into the under world, the land
of the west, as in contrast to Pr&chayaka, the
land of the east. Pdtala in Sanskrit means * the

•* ** The Brahmans of SehvSn have stated to us that
aooording to local legends recorded in their Sanskrit
books Kaboul is the ancient Chichapolapoura ; Mult&n,
Prahl^dpnr; Tattah, D§val, Haidarfibftd, N#ran, and
more anciently P&talpuri." Dr. J. Wilson, Joum.
Bombay Asiat, /8<?c,, vol. Ill, 1850, p. 77-



148



trumpet-flower/ and Cunttii^ham thinks that
the Delta may have been so called from some
resemblance in its shape to that of this flower.
The classic writers generally spell the name as
Fattala.

Barbarei : — The position of Barbarei, like that
of Patala, has been the subject of much discussion.
The table of Ptolemy places it to the north of that
city, but erroneously, since Barbarei was a mari-
time port. It is mentioned in the Periplus under
Jihe name ofBarbarikon, as situated on the
middle mouth of the Indus. D'Anville in opposi-
tion to all the data placed it at Debal Sindhi, the
great emporium of the Indus during the middle
ages, or at Kar&chi, while EUiot, followed by
Cunningham,, placed it at an ancient city,, of
which some ruins are still to be found, called
Bambhara, and situated almost midway between
Kai*achi and Thattha on the old western branch of
the river which Alexander reconnoitred. Bumes
again, followed by Bitter, placed it at RicheU
and Saint-Martin a little further still to the
east at Bandar Vikkar on the Hajamari mouth,
which has at several periods been the main
channel of the river.

Xodrak^andSarbana orSardana: — As
the towns in this list are given in their order from
north to south, and as Astakapra, the most south-
em^ was situated on the coast of the peninsula of
Gujarat, right opposite the mouth of the river
Narmada, the position of Xodrake and the other
places in the list must be sought for in the neigh-
bourhood of the Ean of ICachh. Xodrake and
Sarbana have not been identified, but Yule doubtc-



149



ingly places the latter on the Sambhar Lake.
Lassen takes Xodrake to be the capital of the
Xudraka, and locates it in the comer of land
between the Yitasta and Chandrabh^g& (Ind, Alt. y
vol. in, p. 145).

A si n d a, according to Saint-Martin, may per-
haps be Sidhpur (Siddhapura), a town on the
river Sarasvati, which rising in the Aravalia
empties into the Gulf of Kachh (pp. 246-247).

Auxoamisco'Axamis : — The same authority
would identify this with Stlmi, a place of import-
ance and seat of a Muhammadan chief, lying a
little to the east of the Sarasvati and distant
about twenty-five miles from the sea. Tule how-
ever suggests that Ajmir may be its modem
representation.

Orbadarou orOrdabari : — Yule doubtful-
ly identifies this with Arbuda or Mount Ab(i, the
principal summit of the Ara valis . Pliny mentions
alongside of the Horatae (in Gujarat) the O d-
omboerae whieh may perhaps be a different
form of the same word. The name Udumbara is.
one well-known in Sanskrit antiquity, and desig-
nated a royal race mentioned in the HarivanSa.

Theophila : — ^This is a Greek compound mean-
ing * dear to God,' and is no doubt a translation
of some indigenous name. Lassen has suggested
that of Sardhur, in its Sanskiit form Suradara>
which means * adoration of ihe gods.* Sardhur is.
situated in a valley of the R^vata mountains
so celebrated in the legends of Krishna. Yule
suggests Dewaliya, a place on the isthmus,
which connects the peninsula with the mainland.
Dr. Burgess, Than, the chief town of a district



150



traditionally known as Deva-Pa&cli&l, lying a
little further west than Dewaliya. Col. Watson
writes : — " The only places I can think of for
Theophila are — 1. GCbidi, the ancient Gundigadh,
one and a half or two miles further up the Hathap
river, of which city Hastakavapra was the port.
This city was one of the halting-places of the
Bhaunagar Br&hmans ere they came to Gogha. It
was no doubt by them considered dear to the gods.
It was connected with Hastakavapra and was a
city of renown and ancient. 2. Pardwa or Priya-
deva, an old village, about four or five miles west
of Hathap. It is said to have been contemporary
with Yalabhi, and there is an ancient Jain temple
there, and it is said that the Jains of Gundigadh
had their chief temple there. 3. Devagana, an
ancient village at the foot of the west slopes of
the Khokras about 18 miles from Hdthap to the
westward."

Astakapra : — This is mentioned in the Peri-
pZ^« (sec. 41), as being near a promontory on the
eastern side of the peninsula which directly
confronted the mouth of the Narmada on the
opposite side of the giilf . It has been satisfactorily
identified with Hastakavapra, a name which occurs
in a copper-plate grant of Dhruvasena I, of
Valabhi, and which is now represented by Hathab
near Bhavnagar. Biihler thinks that the Greek
form is not derived immediately from the Sans-
krit, but from an intermediate old Prakrit word
Hastakampra. {Seelnd. Ant.t vol. V, pp. 204, 314.

61. Along the river are these towns : —

Panasa 122^30' 29°

Boudaia 121° 15' 28° 15'



151



ro



Naagramina 120** 2T

Kamigara 119° 26° 20'

Binagara 118° 25° 20'

Parabali 116° 30' 24° 30'

Sydros 114° 21° 20'

Epitausa 113* 45' 22° 30'

Xoana 113° 30' 21° 30'

F a n a 8 a : — The table places Panasa one degree
farther south than the confluence of the Zara-
dros and the Indus. Ptolemy, as we have seen,
egregiously misplaced this confluence, and we
cannot therefore from this indication learn more
than that Panasa must have been situated lower
down the Indus than Pasipeda (Besmaid) and
Alexandria of the Malli which lay near the con-
fluence. A trace of its name Saint-Martin thinks
is preserved in that of Osanpur, a town on the
left of the river, 21 miles below Mittank6t.

B o u d a i a : — According to Saint- Martin this is
Very probably the same place as a fort of Budhya
Or Bodhpur, mentioned in the Arab chronicles of
the conquest of Upper Sindh and situated proba-
bly between Alor and Mittankot. Yule identifies
it with Budhia, a place to the west of the Indus
and south from the Bolan Pass.

Naagramma : — This Yule identifies with
Naoshera, a place about 20 miles to the south of
Besmaid. Both words mean the same, *new
town.'

Kamigara : — The ruins of Aror which are
visible at a distance of four miles to the south-east
of Kori, are still known in the neighbourhood under
the name of Kaman. If to this word we add



152



ike comiAoii Indian affix nagar — ' city,' we have a
Hear approaoh to the Kamigara of Ptolemy.

Binagara: — This some take to be a less
tJorrect form than Minnagar given in the Peri-
pMsf where it is mentioned as the metropolis of
Skythia, but under the government of Parthian
prince6> who were constantly at feud with each
other for the supremacy. Its position is very
uncertain. Cunninghajn would identify it with
AloF. Yule, following McMurdo, places it much
fni^her south near Bi^hmand.b&d> which is some
distance north from Haidardbad. The PeripMs
states that it lay in the interior above Bai^barikon
(sec. 38).

X o a n a :— *Yule suggests that this may be
Sewana^aplace in the country of the Bhauliogas,
between the desert, and the Ardvalis.

62. The parts east of Indo- Skythia along
the coast belong to the country of L a r i k e, and
here in the interior to the West of the river
Namados is a mart of commerce, the city of
Barygaza 113° 15' 17° 20'

63. To the east of the river : —

Agrinagara 118^15' 22° 30'

Siripalla 118° 30' 21° 30'

Bammogoura 116° 20° 45'

Sazantion 115° 30' 20° 30'

Z^rogerei 116° 20' 19° 50'

Oz^n^, the capital of Tias-

tanes 117^ 20°

Minagara 115° 10' 19° 30'

Tiatoura 115° 50' 18° 50'

Nasika 114° 17°



J



153

L&rikS: — lArddsawas an early name for the
territory of Gujar&t and the Northern Konkan.
The name long survived, for the sea to the west
of that coast was in the early Muhammadan
time called the sea of lAr, and the language spoken ^ ^«

on its shores was called by Mas'ddi, L&ri (Yide's
Marco Polo, vol. II, p. 353, n.). Ptolemy's Larike was
a political rather than a geographical division and
as such comprehended in addition to the part of
the sea-board to which the name was strictly
applicable, an extensive inland territory, rich in
agricultural and commercial products, and possess-
ing large and flourishing towns, acquired no doubt
by military conquest.

Barygaza, now Bharoch, which is still a
large city, situated about 30 miles from the sea
on the north side of the river Naimad^, and on an
elevated mound supposed to be artificial, raised
about 80 feet above the level of the sea. The
place is repeatedly mentioned in the PeriplUs,
At the time when that work was written, it
was the greatest seat of commerce in Western
India, and the capital of a powerful and flourish-
ing state. The etymology of the name is thus
explained by Dr. John Wilson {Indian Castes,
vol. II, p. 113): "The Bhirgavas derive their
designation from Bh&rgava, the adjective form of
Bhrigu, the name of one of the ancient Rishis.
Their chief habitat is the district of Bharoch,
which must have got its name from a colony of
the school of Bhrigu having been early established
in this Kshetra, probably granted to them by
some conqueror of the district. In the name
Barugaza given to it by Ptolemy, we have a
20 G



154



Greek comiption of Bhrigukslietra (the territory
of Bhrigu) or Bhrigukachha, * the tongue-land' of
Bhrigu." The illiterate Gujar&tia pronotmce
Bhrigukehetra as Bargacha, and hence the Greek
form of the name.

Agrinagara : — ^This means * the town of the
Agri.' Ynle places it at Agar, about 30 miles to
the N. E. of Uj jain.

Si rip alia: — ^A place of this name (spelt
Seripala) has already been mentioned as sitnatecE
where the Namados (Narmada;) changes the direc-
tion of its course. Lassen therefore locates it in
the neighbourhood of Haump, where the river
turns to southward.

B a m m o g on r a : — In Yule's map this is iden-
tified with Pavai^arh, a hill to the north of the
Narmad4.

Sazantion : — This may perhaps be identical
with Sajintra, a small place some distance north
from the upper extremity of the Bay of Khambat.

Zerogerei : — ^This is referred by Tide to
Dh&r, a place S^ W. of Ozene, about one degree.

O z e n e : — This is a transliteration of U j j a-
y i n i, the Sanskrit name of the old and famous
eity of Avanti, still called Ujjain. It was the
capital of the celebrated Yikramaditya, who
having expelled the Skythians and thereafter
established his power over the greater part of
India, restored the HindA monarchy to its ancient
aplendouip. It was one of the seven sacred cities
€>f the HindASy and the first meridian of their
astronomers. We learn from the Mahdvahsa
■(fliat As&ka, the grandson of Chandragupta (Sand*
rakottos) was sent by his father the- king o£



IBS



Pataliputra (Patna) to be the viceroy of Ujjain,
and also that about two centuries later (B.C. 95)
a certain Buddhist high priest took with him
40,000 disciples from the Dakkhinagiri temple
at Ujjain to Ceylon to assist there in laying
the foundation stone of the great D&gaba at
Anuradhapura. Half a century later than this is
the date of the expulsion of the Skythians by
Vikramdditya, which forms the sera in Indian
Chronology called Samvat (57 B.C.) The next
notice of Ujjain is to be found in the PeripMa
where we read {Sec. 48) " Eastward from Barygaza
is a city called Ozene, formerly the capital where
the king resided . From this place is brought down
to Barygaza every commodity for local consump-
tion or export to other parts of India, onyx-sfeones,
porcelain, fine muslins, mallow-tinted cottons and
the ordinary kinds in great quantities. It imports
from the upper country through Proklais for trans-
port to the coast, spikenard, kostos and bdellium."
From this we see that about a century and a
half after Vikramaditya's sera ♦Ujjain was still a
flourishing city, though it had lost something of
its former importance and dignity from being no
longer the residence of the sovereign. The ancient
city no longer exists, but its ruins can be traced
at the distance of a mile from its modem successor.
Ptolemy tells us that in his time Ozene was the
capital of Tiastanes. This name transliterates
Chashtana, one which is found on coins and the
cave temple inscriptions of Western India. This
j)idnce appears probably to have been the founder
of the Ksliatrapa dynasty of Western India
(see Ind. Alt, vol. III,p^ 174).



156



Minagara is mentioned in the PeripUU,
where its name is more correctly given as M i n-
n ag a r, i.e., ' the city of the M i n' or Skythians.
This Minagara appears to have been the residence
of the sovereign of Barygaza. Ptolemy places
it about 2 degrees to the S. W. of Oz^nd. Yule
remarks that it is probably the Manekir of Mas'A-
di, who describes it as a city lying far inland
and among mountains. Benfey doubts whether
there were in reality two cities of this name, and
thinks that the double mention of Minnagar in the
PeriplUs is quite compatible with the supposition
that there was but one city so called. {Indien, p. 91).

Tiatoura: — This would transliterate with
Chittur, which, however, lies too far north for the
position assigned to Tiatoura. Tule suggests,
but doubtingly,it8 identity with Chandur. This
however lies much too far south.

N a 6 i k a has preserved its name unaltered to
the present day, distant 116 miles N. E. from
Bombay. Its latitude is 20° N., but in Ptolemy
only 17°. It was one of the most sacred seats
of Br&hmanism. It has alsoimpoi'tant Buddhistic
remains, being noted for a group of rock-temples.
The word nd$ikd means in Sanskrit * nose.'

64. Tb^ parts farther inland are possessed
by the Poulindai Agriophagoi, and
beyond them are the K h a t r i a i o i, to whom
belong these cities, lying some east and some
west of the Indus : —

Nigranigramma 124° 28° 15'

Antakhara 122° 27° 20'

Soudaflanna 123° 26° 50'



157

Sjmisika 12r 26^30'

Patistama 12P 25**

Tisapatinga 123° 24^20'

The 'Poulindai' Agriophagoi are
described as occupying the parts northward of
those just mentioned. Pulindais a name
applied in Hindft works to a variety of aboriginal
races. Agriophagoi is a Greek epithet, and indi-
cates that the Pnlinda was a tribe that subsisted on
raw flesh and roots or wild fruits. In Yule's map
they are located to the N. E. of the Ran of Kachh
lying between the Khatriaioi in the north and
Larike in the south. Another tribe of this name
lived about the central parts of the Vindhyas.

Khatriaioi: — According to Greek writers /,
the people that held the territory comprised
between the Hydraotes (R&vi) and the Hyphasis
(Biyas) were the Kathaioi, whose capital was
Sangala. The Mahdbhdrata, and the Pali Bud-
dhist works speak of Sangala as the capital of
the Madras, a powerful people often called also
the B&hlkas. Lassen, in order to explain the
substitution of name, supposes that the mixture
of the Madras with the inferior castes had led
them to assume the name of Khattrias (Ksha-
triya, the warrior caste), in token of their
degradation, but this is by no means probable.
The name is still found spread over un
immense area in the N. W. of India, from
the HindA-koh as far as Bengal, and from
Nepfil to Gujarat, under forms slightly variant,
Kathis, Kattis, Kathias, Kattris, Khatris, Khe-
"taws, Kattaour, Kattair, Kattaks, and others. '



158



fVjT , , ^ I One of these tribes, the K&this, issuing from the

. *^ ** , I lower parts of the Panjab, established themselves

•^ ' |v^" in Surashtra, and gave the name of KSithiS,vad to

, ^P the great peninsula of Gujarat. (Etude, p. 104).

The six towns mentioned in section 64 can
none of them be identified.

65. But again, the country between Mount
Sardonyx and Mount Bettigo belongs to the
Tabasoi, a great race, while the country
beyond them as far as the Vindhya range, along
the eastern bank of the Namados, belongs to
the Prapiotai, who include the R h a m n a i,
and whose towns are these : —

Kognabanda 120° 15' 23°

Ozoabis 120° 30' 23° 40'

Ostha 122° 30' 23° 30'

Kosa, where are diamonds . ..121° 20' 22° 30'

Tabasoi is not an ethnic name, biit desig-
nates a community of religious ascetics, and
represents the Sanskrit Tdpasds, from tapas
' heat' or * religious austerity.' The haunts of
these devotees may be assigned to the valley of
the Tapti or Tapi (the Nanagouna of Ptolemy)
to the south of the more western portion of the
Vindhyas that produced the sardonyx.

Prapiotai : — Lassen locates this people, in-
cluding the subject race called the Bhamnai, in
the upper half of the NarmadS. valley. From the
circumstance that diamonds were found near
Kosa, one of their towns, he infers that their
territory extended as far as the Upper Varada,
where diamond mines were known to have
existed. Kosa was probably situated in the



159



neighbourliood of Baital, north of the sources of
the T&pti and the Yarad&.

• B h a m n a i : — The name of this people is one
of the oldest in Indian ethnography. Their
early seat was in the land of the Oreltai and
Arabitai beyond the Indus, where they had a
capital called Rhambakia. As they were con-
nected by race with the Brahui, whose speech
must be considered as belonging to the Dekhan
group of languages, we have here, says Lassen
{Ind, Alt, vol. Ill, p. 174), a fresh proof confirm-
ing the view that before the arrival of the Aryans
all India, together with Gedrosia, was inhabited by
the tribes of the same widely dilEused aboriginal
race, and that the Bhamnai, who had at one time
been settled in Gedrosia, had wandered thence
as far as the Yindhya mountains. Yule conjec-
tures that the Bhamnai may perhaps be associated
with Rdmagiri, now EAmtek, a famous holy place
near N&gpftr. The towns of the Prapidtai, four
in number, cannot with certainty be identified.

66. About the Nanagouna are the P h y 1-
1 i t a i and the Bettigoi, including the
Kandaloi along the country of the Phyl-
litai and the river, and the Ambastai along
the country of the Bettigoi and the , mountain
range, and the following towns : —

6?. Agara 129^20^ 25^

Adeisathra 128^30' 24^30'

Soara 124^20' 24°

Nygdosora 125° 23°

Anara 122° 30' 22° 20'



160



The Phyllitai occupied the banks of
the T&pti lower down than the Rhamnai, and
extended northward to the Sfttpnra range.
Lassen considers their name as a transliteration
of B hi 1 1 a, with an appended Greek termination.
The Bhtlls are a well-known wild tribe spread to
this daj not only on the Upper Narmadll and
the parts of the Yindhya chain adjoining, but
wider still towards the south and west. In
Ptolemy's time their seats appear to haye been
further to the east than at present. Yule thinks it
not impossible that the Phyllitai and the Dnlo-
phyllitai may represent thePulinda, a name
which, as has already been stated, is given in
HindiH works to a variety of aboriginal races.
According to Caldwell {Drav, Gram., p. 464) the
name Bhilla (vil, hil) means * a bow.'

Bettigoi is the correct reading, and if the
name denotes, as it is natural to suppose, the
people living near Mount Bettigo, then Ptolemy
has altogether displaced them, for their real
seats were in the country between the Koim-
batur Gap and the southern extremity of the
Peninsula.

Kandaloi : — Lassen suspects that the reading
here should be Gondaloi, as the Gonds (who are
nearly identical with the IQiands) are an ancient
race that belonged to the parts here indicated.
Yule, however, points out that Kuntaladesa and
the Eantalas appear frequently in lists and in
inscriptions. The country was that, he adds, of
which Kaly&n- was in after days the capital
(Elliot, Jovr. B. As. 8. vol. IV, p. 3).

Ambastai : — These represent the Ambashtha



161



of Sanskrit, a people mentioned in the Epios,
where it is said that they fought with the club for
a weapon. In the Laws of Manu the name is
appKed to one of the mixed castes which practised
the healing art. A people called Ambautai are
mentioned by our author as settled in the east of
the country of the Faropanisadai. Lassen thinks
these may have been connected in some way with
theAmbastai. Their locality is quite uncertain.
In Yule's map they are placed doubtfully to the
south of the sources of the Mah&nadi of Orissa.

Of the four towns, Agara, Soara, Nygdosora
and Anara, in section 67, nothing is known.

Adeisathra: — It would appear that there
were two places in Ancient India which bore the
name of Ahichhattra, the one called by Ptolemy
Adisdara (for Adisadra), and the other as here,
Adeisathra. Adisdara, as has been already shown,
was a city of Bohilkhand. Adeisathra, on the
other hand, lay near to the centre of India. Yule
quotes authorities which seem to place it, he says,
near the Yindhyas or the Narmad&. He refers
also to an inscription which mentions it as on
the Sindhu River, which he takes to be either
the KaU-sindh of M&lw&, or the Little Kali-
sindh further west, which seems to be the Sindhu
of the M^ghadHta. Ptolemy, singularly enough,
disjoins Adeisathra from the temtory of the
Adeisathroi, where we would naturally expect him
to place it. Probably, as Yule remarks, he took
the name of the people from some Pauranik
ethnic list and the name of the city from a
—traveller's route, and thus failed to make them fall
into proper relation to each other.

21 G



162



68. Between Mount B S 1 1 i g 6 and A d e i-
s a t h r o s are the S 6 r a i nomads, with these
towns : —

Sangamarta 133** 21°

S6ra, the capital of Arkatos 130° 21°

69. Again to the east of the Vindhya
range is the territory of the (Biolingai or)
Bolingai, with these towns : —

Stagabaza or Bastagaz^ 133° 28° 30'

Barda6tis 137° 30' 28° 30'

S 6 r a designates the northern portion of
the Tamil country. The name in Sanskrit is
Chola, in Telugu Ohola, but ia Tamil Sora
or Chora. Sora is called the capital of Ar-
katos. This must be an error, for there can be
little doubt that Arkatos was not the name of a
prince, but of a city, the Ark&d of the present day.
This is so suitably situated, Caldwell remarks, as
to suggest at once this identification, apart even
from the close agreement as far as the sound is
concerned. The name is properly Ar-k4d, and
means ' the six forests.' The Hindtis of the place
regard it as an ancient city, although it is not
mentioned by name in the Purdnaa (Drav. Gram,,
Introd. pp.*95, 96). There is a tradition that the
inhabitants of that part of the country between
Madras and the Ghats including Arkdd as its
centre were Kurumbars, or wandering shepherds,
for several centuries after the Christian SBra*
Cunningham takes Arkatos to be the name of
a prince, and inclines to identify Sora with
Zora or Jora (the Jorampur of the maps) an
old town lying immediately under the walls of



163



Kamul. The S6rai he takes to be the Stiari
(Geog. p. 647).

Biolingai or Bolingai : — Ptolemy has
transplanted this people from their proper seats,
which lay where the Ar&vali range slopes west-
ward towards the Indus, and placed them to the
east of the Yindhyas. He has left us however
the means of correcting his error, for he makes
them next neighbours to the Porvaroi, whose
position can be fixed with some certainty. Pliny
(lib. VI, c. ix) mentions the Bolingae and locates
them properly. According to P&nini, Bhaulingi
was the seat of one of the branches of the great
tribe of the 6alvas or 6&lvas.

Stag^abaza : — Yule conjectures this may be
.Bh63apAr, which he says was a site of extreme
antiquity, on the upper stream of the Betwd, where
are remains of vast hydraulic works ascribed to
a king Bhoja (/. A. 8. Bang, vol. XVI, p. 740).
To account for the first part of the name staga he
suggests the query : Tataka-Bhoja, the ' tank ' or
' lake ' of Bhoja ?

Bardaotis : — This may be taken to represent
the Sanskrit Bhadrftvati^ a name, says Tule, famed
in the Epic legends, and claimed by many cities.
Cunningham, he adds, is disposed to identify it
with the remarkable remains (pre-Ptolemaic)
discovered at Bhar&od, west of R^wA.

70. Beyond these is the country of the
Porouaroi with these towns : —

Bridama 134° 30' 27^30'

Tholoubana 136° 20' 27°

Malaita 136° 30' 25° 50'



164



71. Beyond these as far a& the Onxentos
range are the Adeisathroi with these
towns : —

Maleiba 140^ 27^ 20^

Aspathis 138° 30' 25° 20'

Panassa 137° 40' "24° 30'

Sag^da, the Metropolis 133° 23° 30'

Balantipyrgon 136° 30' 23° 30'

Porouaroi (Porvaroi): — This is the fa-
mous race of the Pauravas, which after the
time of Alexander was all predominant in R&jas-
th&na nnder the name of the Pramaras. The
race figures conspicuously both in the legendary
and real history of the North of India. It is
mentioned in the hymns of the Veda, and fre-
quently in the Mahdbhdrata, where the first kings
of the Lunar race are represented as being
Pauravas that reigned over the realms included
bebween the Upper Ganges and the Yamun&. The
later legends are silent concerning them, but
they appear again in real history and with fresh
distinction, for the gallant Poros, who so intre-
pidly contended against Alexander on the banks
of the HydaspSs, was the chief of a branch of
the Paurava whose dominions lay to the west
of that river, and that other Poros who went on
an embassy to Augustus and boasted himself to
be the lord paramount of 600 vassal kings was also
of the same exalted lineage. Jjven at the present
day some of the noblest houses reigning in
different parts of B&jasthan claim to be descended
from the Pauravas, while the songs of the national
bards still extol the vanished grandeur and the



165



power and glory of this ancient race . Saint- Martin
locates the Porouaroi of the text in the west of
Upper India,, in the very heart of the B&jp(lt
country, though the table would lead us to place
them much farther to the east. In. the position
indicated the name even of the P6rouaroi is
found almost without alteration in the Furvar
of the inscriptions, in the Poravars of the Jain
clans, as much as in the designation spread every-
where of Povars and of Pouars, forms variously
altered, but still closely approaching the classic
Paurava {Etude, pp. 357 sqq.)

The names of the three towns assigned to
the Porvaroi, — B ridama, Tholoubana and
M a 1 a i t a designate obscure localities, and their
position can but be conjectured. Saint-Martin
suggests that the first may be Dildana, the second
Doblana, and the third Plaita, all being places in
Ei&jput&na. Yule, however, for Bridama proposes
BardAwad, a place in a straight line from Indor
to Nimach, and for Mai ait a, — Maltaun; this
place is in the British territory of Sag&r and
Narmada, on the south declivity of the Naral Pass.

Adeisathroi : — It has already been pointed
out that as Ptolemy has assigned the sources of
the Khaberis (the Kaveri) to his Mount Adeisa-
thros, we must identify that range with the section
of the Western Gh&ts which extends immediately
northward from the Koimbatur Gap. He places
Adeisathros however in the central parts of India,
and here accordingly we must look for the cities
of the eponymous people. Five are mentioned,
but S a g e d a only, which was the metropolis,
can be identified with some certainty. The name



166



represents the S&kSta of Sansknt. S&keta was
another name for AyodhyA on the Sarayti, a
city of vast extent and famous as the capital of
the kings of the Solar race and as the residence
for some years of S^kyamuni, the founder of
Buddhism. The Sageda of our text was however
a different city, identified by Dr. F. Hall with
Tewar, near Jabalptir, the capital of the Chedi,
a people of Bandelakhand renowned in Epic
poetry. Cunningham thinks it highly probable
that the old form of the name of this people was
ChangMi and may be preserved in the Sageda of
Ptolemy and in the Ohi-ki-tho of Hiuen Tsiang in
Central India, near the NarmadA. He says: —
** The identification which I have proposed
of Ptolemy's Sageda Metropolis with Chedi
appears to me to be almost certain. In the
first place, Sageda is the capital of the Adeisa-
throi which I take to be a Greek rendering
of Hayakshetra or the country of the Hayas or
Haihayas. It adjoins the country of the Bettigoi,
whom I would identify with the people of Vak&-
taka, whose capital was Bhandak. One of the
towns in their country, situated near the upper
course of the Son, is named Balantipjrrgon, or
Balampyrgon. This I take to be the famous Fort
of Bandogarh, which we know formed part of the
Chldi dominions. To the north-east was Panassa,
which most probably preserves the name of some
town on the Parnasfi. or Banas River, a tributary
which joins the Son to the north-east of B&ndo-
garh. To the north of the Adeisathroi, Ptolemy
places the Porouaroi or Parihars, in their towns
named Tholoubana, Bridama, and Malaita. The



167



first I would identify with Boriban (Bahuriband)
by reading Oolonbana or Voloubana. The second
must be BilhS^ri ; and the last may be Lameta,
which gives its name to the Gh&t on the Narmad&,
opposite Tewar, and may thus stand for Tripura
itself. All these identifications hold so well to-
gether, and mutually support each other, that I
have little doubt of their correctness." ArchcBolog,
8urv. of Ind, vol. IX, pp. 55^57.

Panassa: — This in Yule's map is doubtfully
placed at Fanna, a decaying town in Bandelakhand
with diamond mines in the neighbourhood. In
the same map Baland is suggested as the re-
presentative of Balantipyrgon.

72. Farther east than the Adeisathroi towards •
the Ganges are the Mandalai withthiscity : —
Asthagoura 142° 25°

73. And on the river itself these towns : —

Sambalaka 141° 29° 30'

Sigalla 142° 28°

Palimbothra, the Royal resi-
dence 143° 27°

Tamalit^s 144° 30' 26° 30'

Oreophanta 146° 30' 24° 30'

74. In like manner the parts under Mount .
Be fctig6 are occupied by the Brakhmanai j
M a g o i as far as the Batai with this city : — *
Brakhme 128° 19°

76. The partfl under the range of Adeisa-
thros as far as the Arouraioi are occupied by
the Badiamaioi with this city : —
Tathilba 134° 18° 50'



168



76. The parts under the Ouxentos range
are occupied by the Drilophyllitai, with
these cities : —

Sibrion 139° 22'' 20'

Opotoura 137° 30' 21° 40'

Ozoana 138° 16' 20° 30'

Mandalai: — The territory of the Mandalai
lay in that upland region where the Son and
the NarmadA have their sources. Here a town
situated on the latter river still bears the name
Mandal&. It is about 50 miles distant from
Jabalptir to the south-east, and is of some historic
note. Ptolemy has, however, assigned to the
Mandalai dominions far beyond their proper
limits, for to judge from the towns which
he gives them they must have occupied all the
right bank of the Ganges from its confluence
with the Jamn& downwards to the Bay of Bengal.
But that this is improbable may be inferred from
the fact that Palimbothra (F&tna) which the
table makes to be one of their cities, did not
belong to them, but was the capital of Prasiake,
which, as has already been remarked, is pushed
far too high up the river. Tamalites, moreover,
which has been satisfactorily identified with
Tamluk, a river port about 35 miles S. W.
from Calcutta possessed, according to Wilford,
a large territory of its own. The table also
places it only hajf a degree more to the south-
ward than Palimbothra, while in reality it is more
than 3 or 4 deg. Cunningham inclines to identify
with the Mandalai the Mundas of Chutia Nfigpur,
whose language and country, he says, are called



169

Mttndala, and also with the MalH of Plinj (lib.
VI. c. xxi.)— -inc. Qeog, of Ind., pp. 608, 609.

Sambalaka: — ^A city of the same name
attributed to Prasia.k6 (sec. 63) has been ahready
identified trith iSambhal in Bohilkhand. The
Sambalaka of the Mandalai may perhaps be
Sambhalpnr on the Upper Mah&nadi, the capital
of a district which produces the finest diamonds
in the world.

Sigalla: — This name has a suspicions like-
ness to Sagala, the name of the city to the west
of L&hor, which was besieged and taken by
Alexander, and which Ptolemy has erroneously
placed in PrasiakS (sec. 68).

Palimbothra: — ^The more usual form of
the name is Palibothra, a transcription of
P&liputra, the spoken form of P&(aliputra, the
ancient capital of Hagadha, and a name still
frequently applied to the city of P&tn& which
is its modem representative. In the tunes of
Ohandragupta (the Sandrokottos of the Greeks)
and the kings of his dynasty, Palibothra was the ^
capital of a great empire which extended from ./«^t^ / < > '^ ^
the mouths of the Ganges to the regions beyond ^ ^ ^ ' , ^ /\^'%
the Indus. Remains of the wooden wall by ^ '

which the city, as we leani from Strabo, was ^w<r>^*^ .^ f.
defended, were discovered a few years ago in k/,\( c\ \*
P&tn& (by workmen engaged in digging a tank)
at a depth of from 12 to 16 feet beJow the sur- ^ ' ^ ' '
face of the ground. Palimbothra, as we have } t ' e« » . .

noticed, did not belong to the Mandalai but to / <

the Prasioi.

Tamalites represents the Sanskrit T&mra- ^ • ' ' ^

liptt, the modem Tamluk, a town lying in a low
22 o



170



/



and damp sitnation on a broad reach or bay of the
Btipn&r&yan River, 12 miles above its junction
with the Hughli mouth of the Ganges. The Pali
form of the name was T&malitti, and this accounts
for the form in Greek. Pliny mentions a people
called Taluctae belonging to this part of India, and
the similarity of the name leaves little doubt of
their identity with the people whose capital wa»
Tamluk. This place, in ancient times, was the great
emporium of the trade between the Ganges and
Ceylon. We have already pointed out how wide
Ptolemy was of the mark in fixing its situation
r^tively to Palimbothra.

Brakhmanai Magoi: — ^Mr. J. Campbell has
suggested to me that by Brakhmanai Magoi
may be meant * sons of the Br&hmans,' that is,
Canarese BrS.hmans, whose forefathers married
women of the country, the word mcbgoi represent-
ing the Canarese maga, 'a son.' The term, he
says, is still in common use, added to the name of
castes, as Haiga-Makala {mahalu — ^plural of maga)
i.e. Haiga Br&hmans. Lassen supposed that
Ptolemy, by adding Magoi to the name of these
Br&hmans, meant to imply either that they were
a colony of Persian priests settled in Ijodia, or that
they were Br&hmans who had adopted the tenets
of the Magi, and expresses his surprise that
I^olemy should have been led into making such
an unwarrantable supposition. The country oc-
cupied by these Brahmans was about the upper
K&veri, and extended from Mount Bettigo east-
ward as far as the Batai.

Brakhme:— "Can this," asks Caldwell, "be
Brahmadesam, an ancient town on the T&mra-



171



parai, not far from the foot of the Podigei Mount
(Mt. Bettigo) which I have found referred to in
several ancient inscriptions P"

Badiamaioi: — There is in the district of
Belgaum a town and hill-fort on the route from
Kal&dgi to BalSri, not fai* from the MalprabhS,
a tributary of the Krishn^, called Bad&mi, and
here we may locate the B&diamaioi. Tathilba,
their capital, cannot be recognized.

Drilophyllitai: — ^These are placed by
Ptolemy at the foot of the Onxentos, and probably
had their seats to the south-west of that range-
Their name indicates them to have been a branch
of the Phyllitai, the Bhills, or perhaps Pulindas.
Lassen would explain the first part of their name
from the Sanskrit dridha (strong) by the change
of the dh into the liquid. O z o an a, one of their
three towns is, perhaps, Seoni, a place about 60
miles N. E. from Nagpur.

'77. Further east than these towards the
Ganges are the Kokkonagai with this
city :—
Dosara 142° 30' 22° 30'

78. And on the river farther west : —

Kartinaga 146° 23°

Kartasina 146° 21° 40'

79. Under the Maisoloi the Salakenoi
towards the Oroudian (or Arouraian) Moun-
tains with these cities : —

Benagouron 140° 20° 15'

Kastra 138° 19° 30'

Ma^aris 137° 30' 18° 20'



172



80. Towards the Ganges Biver the Saba-
ra4, in whose country the diamond is found in
great abundance, their towns are : —

Tasopion 140^30' 22^

Karikardama 141^ 20^ 15'

81. All the country about the mouths of
^e Ganges is occupied by the G angari d ai
with this city : —

Gangfi, the Royal residence... 146° 19° 15'

Kokkonagai: — ^Lassen locates this tribe in
Ghutia N&gpur, identifying Dosara with BoesA in
the hill country, between the upper courses of the
Yaitarant and Suvarnarekha. He explains their
name to mean the people of the mountains where
the h6ha grows, — h6ha being the name of a kind
of palm-tree. Yule suggests that the name may
represent the Sanskrit K&kamukha, which means
'crow-faced,' and was the name of a mythical
race. He places them on the Upper Mah&nadi
and farther west than Lassen. The table gives
them two towns near the Ganges.

Kartinaga andKartasina: — The former.
Yule thinks, may be Karnagarh near BhAgal-
pur, perhaps an ancient site, regarding which he
i^ers to the Jour. B, As, 8oe. vol. XYIII,
p. 395 ; Kartasina he takes to be E^arnasonagarh,
another ancient site near Berhampur (/. R, A. 8.
N. S., vol. YI, p. 248 and /. As. 8. Beng,,
vol. XXII, p. 281).

SalakSnoi : — ^This people may be located to
the west of the Godavari, inland on the north-
western borders of Maisolia. Their name, Lassen



173



tlionght {Ind, Alt., vol. Ill, p. 176) might be
connected with the Sanskrit word Sdla, the S&l
tree. Yule suggcBts that it may represent the
Sanskrit Saurikirna. None of their towns can
be recognized.

Sabarai: — The Sabarai of Ptolemy Cun-
ningham takes to be the Suari of Pliny, and he
would identify both with the aboriginal ^avaras
or Suars, a wild race who live in the woods
and Jungles without any fixed habitations, and
whose country extended as far southward as
the Penn&r River. These Savaras or Suars are
only a single branch of a widely spread race
found in large numbers to the S. W. of Gwalior
and Narwar and S. Bajputana, where they are
known as Surrius. Yule places them farther
north in DosarSnd, towards the tenitory of
Sambhalpur, which, as we have already remarked,
produced the finest diamonds in the world Their
towns have not been identified.

Gangaridai: — This great people occupied
all the country about the mouths of the Ganges.
Xheir capital was Gauge, described in the PertpZ4«
as an important seat of commerce on the Ganges.
They are mentioned by Yirgil (Oeorg, III, 1. 27),
by Valerius Flaccus {Argon, lib. VI, 1. 66), and by
Curtius (lib. IX, c. ii) who places them along with
the Pharrasii (Frasii) on the eastern bank of the
Ganges. They are called by Pliny (lib. VI, c. Ixv)
the Gangaridae Galingae, and placed by him at the
furthest extremity of the Ganges region, as is
indicated by the expression gen8 novissima, which
he applies to them. They must have been a
powerful people J to judge from the military force



174



vrHch Pliny reports them to have maintamed,
and their territory coiild scarcely have been
restricted to the marshy jungles at the mouth of
the river now known as the Sundarbans, but
must have comprised a considerable portion of
the province of Bengal. This is the view taken
by Saint-Martin. Bengal, he says, represents^ at
least in a general way, the country of the Ganga-
ridae, and the city which Pliny speaks of as their
capital, Parthalis can only be Yardhana, a place
which flourished in ancient times, and is now
known as BardhwAn. The name of the Gangaii-
dai has nothing in Sanskrit to correspond with it,
nor can it be a word, as Lassen supposed, of purely
Greek formation, for the people were mentioned
under this name to Alexander by one of the prin-
ces in the North-west of India. The synonymous
term which Sanskrit fails to supply is found among
the aboriginal tribes belonging to the region
occupied by the Gangaridai, the name being pre-
served almost identically in that of the Gonghns
of S. Bah&r, with whom were connected the
Gangayis of North-western, and the Gtingrar of
Eastern Bengal, these designations being but
variations of the name which was originally
common to them all.

Gauge : — Various sites have been proposed for
Gauge. Heeren placed it near DuHapur, a village
about 40 miles S. E. of Calcutta on a branch
of the Isamati River ; WiH ord at the confluence
of the Ganges and Brahmaputra, where, he says,
there was a town called in Sanskrit Hastimalla,
and [in the spoken dialect Hathimalla, from
elephants being picquetted there; Murray at



175



Chittagong; Taylor on tlie site of the ancient
Hindu Capital of Banga (Bengal) which lies in
the neighbourhood of Sonarg&on (SuvarnagrlUna),
a place 12 miles to the S. E. of Dhakka;
Cunningham at Jesor ; and others further west,
near Calcutta, or about 30 miles higher up
the Hughli, somewhere near Chinsura. Another
G a n g e is mentioned by Artemidoros above or
to the N. W. of Palibothra, and this Wilford
identifies with Prayag, i.e., AllahAb&d, but Gros-
kurd with Anupshahr.

Ptolemy now leaves the Gangetic regions and
describes the inland parts of the territories along
the Western Coast of the Peninsula.

82. In the parts of A r i a k d which still re-
main to be described are the following inland
cities and villages : to the west of the Benda
these cities : —

MaUppala 119° 30' 20^15'

Sarisabis 119° 30' 20°

Tagara 118° 19° 20'

Baithana (the royal seat of [Siro]

Ptolemaios or Polemaios)...117° 18° 30'

Deopali or Deopala 115° 40' 17° 50'

Gamaliba 115° 15' 17° 20'

Omenogara 114° 16° 20'

83. Between the Benda and Pseudostomos :

Nagaronris (or Nagarouraris)120° 20° 15'

Tabas6 121° 30' 20° 40'

Inde 123° 20° 45'

Tiripangalida 121° 15' 19° 40'



176



Hippokoara, the royal seat of

Baleokouros 119*^45^ 19' 10'

Soubouttou 120^ 15' 19° 1(/

Sirimalaga 119° 20' 18° 30'

KaUigeris 118° 18^

ModogorQla 119° 18°'

Petirgala 117° 46' 17° 15'

Banaouasei 116° 16° 45'

Seven cities are enumerated inAriakS, as lying
to the west of the B S n d a, and regarding f onr of
these, Malippala, Sarisabis, Gamaliba
and OmSnogara, nothing is known. The
FerijpMs (sec. 51) notices T a g a r a and B a i t h a«
n a in a passage which may be quoted : " In
Dakhinabades itself there are two very im-
portant seats of commerce, Paithana towards
the south of Barygaza, from which it is distant a
twenty days' journey, and eastward from this about
a ten days' journey is another very large city,
T a g a r a. From these marts goods are transporteclr
on waggons to Barygaza through difficult regions
that have no road worth calling such. Erom Pai-
thana great quantities of onyx- stones and from^
Tagara large supplies of common cotton-cloth,
muslins of all kinds, mallow-tinted cottons and
various other articles of local production im-
ported into it from the maritime districts."

Baithana is the Paithana of the above
extract, and the Paith&n of the present day, a town
of Haidar&bftd, or the territory of the Nizam, on
the left bank of the river G6d&var!, in latitude
19^ 29' or about a degree further north than it i»
placed by Ptolemy. Paithana is the Prftkrit fona



177



of the Sanskrit Pratishth&na, the name of
the capital of ^ftlivaliana. Ptolemy calls it the
eapital of Siroptolemaios or Siropolemaios, a name
which represents the Sanskrit Sri-Pnlom&vit,
the Pulum&yi of the Nasik Cave and AmarAvati
St(!ipa Inscriptions, a king of the great Andhra
dynasty.

T agar a: — The name is found in inscriptions
under the form Tagarapura (/. B. A. 8. vol. IV, p.
34). Ptolemy places it to the north-east of Baithana
and the PeripluSy as we see from the extract, to the
east of it at the distance of a ten days' journey.
Wilford, Vincent, Mannert, Ritter and others take
it to be Devagadh, now DanlataMd, which was the
«eat of a sovereign even in 1293, and is situated not
far from Elura, so famous for its excavated temples.
But if Baithana be Paifehan, Tagara cannot be
Devagadh, unless the distance is wrongly given.
There is, moreover, nothing to show that Deva-
gadh was connected with the Tagarapura of the
inscriptions. Pandit BhagvanUl identified Tagara
with Junnar, a place of considerable importance,
situated to the north of PAna. He pointed out
that the Sanskrit name of Tagara was Trigiri
.a compound meaning * three hills,' and that as
Junnar stood on a high site between three hills
this identification was probably correct. Junnar
however lies to the westward of Paifchan. Yule
places Tagara at Kulburga, which lies to the south-
east of Paithan, at a distance of about 150 miles,
which would fairly represent a ten days' journey,
the distance given in the Periplus. Grant Duff
would identify it with a place near Bhir on the
God&vari, and Fleet mth Kolhapur. Tlie SilahAra
23 Q



178



pidnces or chiefs who formed three distinct
branches of a dynasty that ruled over two parts -
of the Konkan and the country about Kolh&pur
style themselves, * The Lords of the excellent city
of Tagara.' If, says Prof. Bhandd>rkar, the name of
Tagarahas undergone corruption, it would take the
form, according to the laws of Prakrit speech, of
Tarur or Terur, and he therefore asks * can it be
the modem Darur or Dharur in the Nizam's
dominions, 25 miles east of Grant Duff's Bhir, and
70 miles S.E. of Paithan ?' (see Muller's Geog. Grcec.
Minor, vol. I, p. 294, n. ; Elphinstone's History
of India, p. 223; EurgeES, Arch. Suiv. W. Ind,
vol. Ill, p. 54; and Bcmhay Gazetteer, vol. XIII,
pt ii, p. 423, n.). Mr. Campbell is of opinion that
the maritime districts from which local products
were brought to Tagara and thence exported to
Bai'ygaza, lay on the coast of Bengal, and not on
the Konkan coast, from which there was easy
transit by sea to the great northern emporium in
the Gulf of Khambat, while the transit by land
through Tagara could not be accomplished

without encountering the most formidable

obstacles.

D e o p a 1 i : — This name means * the city of

God,' and Deopali may therefore perhaps be

Devagadh, the two names having the same

meaning.

T a b a s 6 : — This would seem to be a city of the

Tabasoi, already mentioned as a large community,

of Brahman ascetics.

Hippokoura : — A town of this name . has

already been mentioned as a seaport to the south

of Simylla. This Hippokoura lay inland, and was



179



the capital of the southern parts of AriakSs^
as Paithana was the capital of the northern, It&
position is uncertain. Yule places it doubtfully
at Kalyan, a place about half a degree to the
west of Bidar, and at some distance south from
the river Maiijirfi. Ptolemy calls it the capital
of Baleokouros. Bh&nd&rkar conjectures this to
have been the Viliv^ayakura, a name found upon
two other Andhra coins discovered at Kolh&pur.
There is no other clue to its identification, but
see Lassen, Ind, Alt. vol. Ill, pp. 179, 185.

Sirimalaga may perhaps be M&lkhed, »
town in Haidarabad, situated on a tributary of
the Bhima, in lat. 17° 8' and long. 77° 12'. The
first part of the word Siri probably represents the
Sanskrit honorific prefix 6ri.

Kalligeris : — Perhaps Kanhagiri, a place
about J a degree to the south of MOdgal.

Modogoulla: — There can be little doubt
that this is MAdgal, a town in the Haidai-fibAd
districts,--lat. 16° 2', long. 76° 26',— N. W.
from Bal&ri. Petirgala cannot be identified.

Banaouasei : — This place is mentioned in
the MahdvansOy in the Pali foi-m Wanawasi,
by which a city or district is designated. Bana-
ouasei must beyond doubt have been the capital
of this country, and is identical with the modern
Banavasi, situated on the upper Varada, a tributary
of the Tungabhadra. Saint-Martin thinks that it
was the city visited by Hiuen Tsiang, and called
by him Kon-kin-na-pu-lo, i.e., Konkaiapura^
Cimningham is of opinion that both the bearing
and the distance point to Anagundi, but Dr.
Burgess suggests Kokanth* for K6n-kin-na-pu-lo.



180



r 84. The inland cities of tLe Pirates are
tliese : —

Olokhoira 114*^ 15®

Mousopalle, the metropolis . . .115^ 30' 15*^ 45'

85. Inland cities of L i m y r i k e, to the
west of the Pseudostomos are these : —

Naroulla 117^45' 15*^ 5(K

Kouba..... 117° 15°

Paloura 117° '51 14° 40'

8^, Between the Pseudostomos and the
Baris, these cities ; —

Pasag^..... 124° 50' 19° 50'

Mastanour 121° 30' 18° 40^

Kourellour 119° 17° 30'

Pounnata, where is beryl ... 121° 20' 17° 30^

Aloe 120° 20' 17°

Karoura, the royal seat of

Kerobothros 119° 16° 20^

Arembour 121° 16° 20^

Bideris 119° 15° 50'

Pantipolis.. 118° 15° 20^

Adarima 119° 30' 15° 40'

Koreour 120° 15°

87. Inland town of the A i o i r —
Morounda 121° 20' 14° 20'

The dominion of the sea appears to have sa-
tisfied the ambition of the pirates, as they possessed
on shore only a narrow strip of territory enclosed
between the line of coast and the western decliyi-
ties of the Gh&ts. Their capital, Mousopalle^
Yule places at Miraj, a town near the KrishnS,
but doubtfully. Their other town, Olokhoira^



181



is probably Khedft, a town in the district of
Ratnagiri in lat. 17° 4A' loHg. 73° 30". As
Elh^dd is the name of several other places in this
part of the country, Olo, whatever it may mean,
may have been in old times prefixed to this
particolar Kh^a for the sake of distinction.

Kouba: — This is generally taken to be
Groa or Gov&, the capital of the Portuguese
possessions in India, and there can be little doubt
of the correctness of the identification. . The two
towns Naroullaand P a loura, which Ptolemy
places with Elouba to the west of the Pseudos-
tomos, cannot be identified. To judge from his
figures of longitude, Paloura lay 15' farther east
than Kouba, but as he makes the coast run east-
ward instead of southward, it must be considered
to have lain south of Kouba. The najue is Tamil,
and means, according to Caldwell {Introd, p. 104)
* Milk town.' It is remarkable, he observes, how
many names of places in Southern India mention-
ed by Ptolemy end in ovp or ovpa = *a town.' There
are 23 such places in all.

P a 8 a g e : — According to Yule's map this repre-
sents Palsagi, the old name of a place now
called Halsi, south-east of Goa, from which it is
distant somewhat under a degree.

Mastanour and Kourellour cannot be
identified.

Pounnata has not yet been identified,
though Ptolemy gives a sort of clue in stating that
it produced the beryl. Yule places it in his map
near Seringapatam. (See Ind. Ant. vol. XII, p. 13).

Aloe : — This may be Yellapur, a small town in
North Oanara, in lat. 14° 56' long. 74° 43'.



182



K a r o u r a : — " Karoura," says Caldwell, ** is
mentioned in Tamil traditions as the ancient
capital of the Ch^ra, Kera, or Kerala kings, and is
generally identified with Kartb:, an important town
in the Koimbatar district, originally included in
the Chera kingdom. It is situated on the left
bank of the river Amaravati, a tributary of
the Kaveri, near a large fort now in ruinff.
Ptolemy notes that Karoura was the capital of
Kerobothros,i.e., Keralaputra(Cherapati?) KarCira
means * the l;>lack town,' and I consider it identi-
cal with KSragam, and Kadaram, names of places
which I have frequently found in the Tamil
country, and which are evidently the poetical
equivalents of Kartir. The meaning of each of
the names is the same. Ptolemy's word Karoura
represents the Tamil name of the place vrith
perfect accuracy " {Introd. pp. 96, 97).

Arembour : — Lassen compares this name
with Oorumparum, but the situation of the place so
caUed (lat. 11° 12' long. 76° 16') does not suit well
the position of Arembour as given by Ptolemy.

B i d e r i s : — Perhaps Erod or Yirodu in the
district of Koimbatur (lat. 11° 20' long. 77° 46')
near the K&veri.

Pantipolis, according to Yulfe, represents
the obsolete name Pantiyapura, which he places
at Hangal, in the Dharwad district.

Morounda : — This is the only inland city of
the A'ioi named by Ptolemy. It has not been
identified.

The concluding tables enumerate the inland
towns belonging to the districts lying along the
Eastern Goast of the Peninsula,



183



88. Inland cities of the K a r e o i : —

Mend^a 123° 17° 40'

S^lour 121° 45' 16° 30'

Tittoua 122° 16° 20^

Maatittoar 123° 15° 10'

89. Inland cities of the Pandionoi : —

Tainour , 124° 45' 18° 40'

Peringkarei 123° 20' 18°

Korindiour 125° 17° 40'

Tangala or Taga 123° 30' 16° 50'

Modoura, the royal city of

Pandion ..125^ 16° 20'

Akour 124° 45' 15° 2 C

90. Inland cities of the B a t o i : —

Kalindoia 127° 40' 17° 30

Bata 126° 30' 17°

Talara 128° . 16° 45'



Inland cities of the K a r e o i : — none of the four
named in the table can be identified.

Peringkarei : — This town has preserved its
name almost without change, being now known as
Peiningari, on the river Vaigai, about 40 miles
lower down its course than MadurS.. With regard
to this name, Caldwell remarks that if it had been
wiitten Perungkarei it would have been perfectly
accurate Tamil, letter for letter. The meaning is
* great shore,' and perum * great ' becomes perung
before fc, by rule. Ptolemy places a town called
Tainour at the distance of less than a degree to
the north-east of Peringkarei. The direction would
suit Tan j or, but the distance is more than a



184



degree. Ptolemy has howerer placed his Pering*
karei quite in a wrong position with regard to
Madurd.

TangalaorTaga : — ^There can be little doubt
that this is now represented by Dindugal, an im-
portant and flourishing town lying at a distance
of 32 miles north by west from Madura.

M o d o u r a : — This is now called Madur& or
Madurai — on the banks of the River Vaigai. It
was the second capital of the Southern Pandyas ;
we have already noticed it in the description of
the territory of this people.

Bata: — This may perhaps be Pattukotta, a
small town, not very far inland from the northern
end of the Argolic Gulf (Palk's Passage). The
other two towns of the Batoi cannot be recog-
nized. As Pudukotta is the capital of the
Tondiman R&ja, Lassen has suggested its identity
with Bata. It is upwards of 20 miles farther
inland than Pattukotta.

• • • •

91. Inland cities of the Paralia of the
Soretai: —

Kaliour 129'' * 17° 20'

Tennaofora 132° 17



o



"O



Eikour 129° 16° 40'

Orthoura, the royal city of

S6rnagos 130° 16° 20'

Bere 130° 20' 16° 15'

Abour 129° 16°

Karmara 130° 20' 15° 40'

Magour 130° 15° 15'



185



52. The inland cities of the Arvarnoi
iftre these : —

Kerauge 133° 16^15'

Phrourion 132° 15°

Karige 132° 40' 15°

Poleour.......^ ,. 131° 30' 14° 40'

Pikendaka !...; 331° 30^ 14°

latcur 132° 30' 14°

Skopoloura 134° 15' 14° 35'

Ikarta 133° 30' 13° 40'

Malanga, the royal city of

Basaronagos 133° 13°

Kandipatna 133° 30° 12° 20'

93. The inland cities of the Maisoloi: —

Kalliga 138° 17°

Bardamana 136° 15' 15° 15'

Koroiingkala , •. 135° 15°

Pharytra or Pharetra 134° 20' 13° 20'

Pityndra, the metropolis ... 135° 20' 12° 30'

Orthoura : — Of the eight inland cities named
as belonging to the maritime territory of the
S 6 r e t a i, only two — Abour and the capital, have
been identified. Abour is AmbOrdurg in N. Arkat,
lat. 32° 47', long. 78° 42'. Regarding Orthoura
Cunningham says : " Chola is noticed by Ptolemy,
whose Orthura regia Sornati must be Uriiir, the
capital of Soiranatha, or the king of the Soringae,
that is the Soi^as, Choras or Cholas. Uraiyiir is a
few miles south-south-east of Tinichhin&palli. The
Soringae ai'e most probably the Syrieni of Pliny,
with their 300 cities, as they occupied the coast

24 o



186



betureeli the Pandae and the Derangae or Dta-
vidians." — Anc, Geog. of Ind., p. 551.

PL r our ion : — This is a Greek word signify*
ing * a ganisoned fort,' and may perhaps be
meant as a translation of an indigenous name
having that signification, as Duiga, ' a hill -fort/
a common affix to names of places in the Penin-
sula.

K a r i g ^ : — This should no doubt be read
Karipe under which form it can be at once iden-
tified with Kadapd, a place lying 5 miles from the
light bank of the Noi*them Pennar on a small
tributary of that river.

Pikendaka : — Konda is a. frequent termina-
tion in the names of towns in this part of India.
The letters of Pikendaka may have been trans-
posed in copying, and its proper form may have
been Pennakonda, the name of a town in the
district of Bal&ri (lat. 14^5' long. 77° 39').

I at our: — Fi'om Yule's map it would appear
there is a place lying a degree westward from
Kadapa which still bears this name, YetQr.

M ala n g a : — In our notice of Melange it was
pointed out that Cunningham had fixed the
locality of Malanga near Elur, a place some
distance inland about half way between the Krish-
na and the God&vari towards their embouchures,
and in the neighbourhood of which are the re-
mains of an old capital named Vengi. With regard
to the king's name Bassaronaga, he thinks that
this may be identified with the Pali Majcrika-naga
of the Mahdwanso and thus Ptoletny's Malanga
would become the capital of the Niigas of Majeri-
ka, Anc. Geo. of Ltd., (pp. 531), 540). In Yule's



187



map Malangi is placed conjee turally about two
degrees farther south at Velur, near the mouth
of the Pennar.

Of the five cities attributed to the Maisoloi,
only Koroungkala can be recognized. It
appears to be the place now known as Worankal,
the mediaeval capital of Telingana. It has but few
tokens remaining to attest its former grandeur.

Pityndra, the capital of Maisolia, was pro-
bably Dhanakataka now Dharanikota, about 20
miles above Bejwada on the Krishn^.

94. Islands lying near the part of India
which projects into the ocean in the Gulf of
Kanthi : —

Baraks IIP 18°

95. And along the line of coast as far as
the Kolkhic Gulf :—

Miliz^gyris (or Milizigeris).. 110° 12° 30'

Heptanesia 113° 13°

Trikadiba 113° 30' 11°

Peperine , 115° 12° 40'

Trinesia 116° 20^ 12°

Leuke : 118° 12°

Nanigeris 122° 12°

96. And in the Argaric Gulf : —

Kory 126° 30'— 13°

-B a r a k e : — This is the name given in the PerU
pMs to the Gulf of Kachh, called by our author
the Gulf of Kanthi, a name which to this day is
applied to the south coast of Kachh The Peri-
plus does not mention Barake as an island, but
says that the Gulf had 7 islands. Regarding



188



Barak^, Dr. Burgess says : " Yule places Barake
at Jaggat or Dw&raka ; Lassen also identifies
it with Dwftrakfi, whicli he places on the coast
between Purbandar and Miy^ni, near Srinagar.
Mula-Dw&raka, the original site, was further
east than this, but is variously placed near
M&dhupur, thirty-six miles north-west from
Soman&th-Pattran, or three miles south-west
from Kodinar, and nineteen miles east of Soma-
nfith. This last spot is called Mula-Dw&rak&
to this day." {Tdr^h^i-Sdrath, Introd. p. 7).

MilizegyriR occm*8 in the PeripMs as
Melizeigara, which may be identified with Jayagad
or Sidi -Jayagad, which would appear to be the
Sigerus of Pliny (lib. vi, c. 26).

Heptanesia {or gi'oup of 7 inlands) pro^
bably corresponded to the Sesikrienai of the
PeripMSf which may be the Burnt Islands of the
present day, among which the Vingorla rocks are
conspicuous.

Trikadiba or* the island Trika,' — diba being
the Sanskrit word dvfpa, * an island.'

Peperine : — ^This, to judge from the name,
should be an island somewhere off the coast of
Cottonara, the great pepper disti-ict, as stated by
Pliny (lib. VI, c. xxvi).

Trin^sia [or group of 3 islands) : — Ptole-
my places it off the coast of Limyrike between
Tyndis and Mouziris, but nearer the former.

Leuke: — This is a Greek word meaning-
* white.' The island is placed in the Teriplus off"
the coast where Limyrike begins and in Ptolemy
near where it ends.

Nanig^ris: — To judge from Ptolemy's.



189



figui'es he has taken this to be an island lyin^
between Cape Kumari (Comorin) and Taprobane
(Ceylon).

K 6 r y : — It has already been noticed that Kory
was both the name of the Island of Ramesvaram
and of the promontory in which it terminated.

Cap. 2.

Position of India beyond the Ganges.

1. India beyond the Ganges is bounded on
the wist by the river Ganges ; on the north
by the parts of Skythia and S^rik6 already
described', on the east by the Sinai along the
Meridian, which extends from the furthest
limits of S6rik^ to the Great Gulf, and also by
this gulf itself, on the south by the Indian
Ocean and part of the Green Sea which stretches
from the island of Menouthias in a line
parallel to the equator, as far as the regions
which lie opposite to the Great Gulf.

India beyond the Ganges comprised with Ptole-
my not only the great plain between that river
and the Him&layas, but also all south-eastern
Asia, as far as the country of the Sinai (China).
Concerning these vast regions Ptolemy is our
only ancient authority. Strabo's knowledge of
the east was limited in this direction by the
Ganges, and the author of the PeripMs, who was
a later and intermediate writer, though he was
aware that inhabited countries stretched far
beyond that limit even onwards to the eastern end
of the world, appears to have learned little more



190



about tliem than the mere fact of their existence.
Ptolemy, on the other hand, supplies us with much
information regarding them. He traces the line
of coast as far as the Gulf of Siam (his Great Gulf)
enumerating the tribes, the trading marts, the
river mouths and the islands that would be passed
on the way. He has also a copious nomenclature
for the interior, which embraces its inhabitants,
its towns, its rivers, and its mountain ranges.
His conceptions were no doubt extremely confused
and erroneous, and his data, in many instances,
as inconsistent with each other as with the
reality. Still, his description contains important,
elements of truth, and must have been- based
upon authentic information. At the same time
an attentive study of his nomenclature and
the accompanying indications has led to the
satisfactory identification of a few of his towns,
and a more considerable number of the rivers and
mountains and tribes which he has specified.

His most notable error consisted in the supposi-
tion that the eastern parts of Asia were connected
by continuous land with the east coast of Africa,
so that, like Hipparkhos, he conceived the Indian
Ocean to resemble the Mediten^anean in being
surrounded on all sides by land. He makes
accordingly the coast of the Sinai, beyond the
Gulf of Siam, turn toward the south instead of
curving up towards the north . Again he repre-
sents the Malay Peninsula (his Golden Khersonese)
which does not project so far as to reach the
equator, extend to 4 degrees southward from it,
and he mentions neither the Straits of Malacca
nor the great island of Sumatra, unless indeed



191



his labadios be this island, and not Java, as is
generally supposed. By the Green Sea (llpaerwSi/y
6aka<raa) which formed a part of the southern
boundary is meant the southern part of the Indian
Ocean which stretched eastwai'd from Cape
Prasum (Cape Delgado) the most southern point
on the east coast of Africa known to Ptolemy.
The island of Menouthias was either Zanzibar or
one of the islands adjacent to it. It is mentioned
by the author of the PeripMs.

In his description of India beyond the Ganges
Ptolemy adheres to the method which he had
followed in his account of India within the Ganges.
He therefore begins with the coast, which he des*
cribesfrom, the Eastern Month of the Ganges to the
Great Promontory where India becomes conter-
minous with the country of the Sinai. The moun-
tains follow, then the rivers, then the towns in the
interior, and last of all the islands.

2. The seacoast of this division is thus de-
scribed. In the Gauge tic Gulf beyond the
Mouth of the Ganges called Antibolei ; —

The coast of the Airrhadoi : —

PentapoHs 150° 18°

Mouth of River Katabeda... 151° 20' 17°

Barakoura, a mart 152° 30' 16°

Mouth of the River Toko-

sanna 153° 14° 30'

Wilford, probably misled by a comipt reading,
took the name of the Airrhadoi to be another
form of Antibole. He says {Asiat. Research. ^
Yol. XIV, p. 444) " Ptolemy says that the eastern-
most branch of the Ganges was called Antibole



192



Of AiiThadon. This lost is from the Sanskrit
Hi*ad&na ; and is the name of the Brahmaputra.
Antibole was the name of a town situated at the
confluence of several large rivers to the S. E. of
Dhakka and now called Feringibazar." Bj the
Airrhadoi, however, are undoubtedly meant the
KirS>ta. With regard to the position here assigned
to them Lassen' thus writes {Ind, Alt,, vol. Ill, pp.
235-237) :— " By thename K i r r a d i a Ptolemy de-
signates the land on the coast of further India from
the city of Pentapolis, perhaps the present Mirkan-
serai in the north, as far as the mouth of the
Tokosanna or Ai^akan river. The name of this
land indicates that it was inhabited by the Kirata,
a people which we find in the great Epic settled in
the neighbourhood of the Lauhitya, or Brahma-
putra, consequently somewhat further to the north
than where Ptolemy locates them. Hence arises
the question whether the Kii-ata who, as we know,
belong to the Bhota, and are still found in Nepal
had spread themselves to such a distance in earlier
times, or whether their name has been erroneously
applied to a different people. The last assump-
tion is favoured by the account in the Peri-
pMs, according to which ships sailing northward
from Dosarene, or the country on both sides of
the Yaitarani, arrived at the land of the wild flat-
nosed Kirradai, who like the other savage tribes
were men-eaters. Since the author of that work
did not proceed beyond Gape Oomorin, and applied
the name of Kirdta to a people which lived on the
coast to the S. W. of the Ganges, it is certain that
he had erroneously used this name to denote the
wild and fabulous races. Ptolemy must have f ol-


193



lowed liim or other writers of tlie kind, and to tlie
name Kirata has given a signification wMcli did
not originate with himself. Although the Kir&ta,
long before the time in which he lived, had wander-
ed from their northern Fatherland to the Hima-
laya and thence spread themselr^s to the regions
on the Brahmapntra, still it is not to be believed
that thej should have possessed themselves of
territory so far south «ib Cbatnrgi&ma(Chittagong)
and a part of Arakan, We can therefore scarcely
be mistaken if we consider the inhabitants of this
territory at that time as a. people belonging to
further India, and in fact as tribal relatives of the
Tamerai, who possessed the mountain region that
lay back in the interior, as I shall hereafter show.
I here remark that between the name of the city
Pentapolis, i.e. five cities^ and the name of the
most northern part of Kirradia, Chaturgr3.ma,
i,e. four cities^ there is a connexion that can
scarcely be mistaken, since Chaturgr&ma could
not originally have denoted a country, but only a
place which later on became the capital, though it
was originally only the capital of four village
communities over which a common headship was
possessed, while Pentapolis was the seat of a
headship over five towns or rather villages, as it
can scarcely be believed that the rude tribes of
Kirradia were civilised enough to possess towns,
A confirmation of this view is offered by the
circumstance that the Bunzu, who must have been
descendants of a branch of the Tamerai, live in
villages under headships. We must further state
that according to the treatises used by Ptolemy
the best Malabathrum was got from Kirradia. I
25 G



194



^ I



see no reason to doubt the correctness of this state-
ment, although the trees from which this precious
oil and spice were prepared and which are different
kinds of the laurel, do not appear at the present
day to be found in this country, since, according
to the testimony of the most recent writers the
botanical productions of Arakan at least have
not as yet been sufficiently investigated. It can,
however, be asserted that in Silhet, which is not
very remote from Ghaturgr&ma, Malahathrum is
produced at this very day." Saint- Martin Ex-
presses similar views. He writes {Etudey pp. 343,
344). " The Kirrhadia of Ptolemy, a country men-
tioned also in the PeHplUs as lying west from
the mouths of the Ganges and the Skyritai of
Megasthenes are cantons of Kir&ta, one of the
branches of the aboriginal race the widest spread
in Gangetic India, and the most anciently known.
In different passages of the Purdnas and of the
epics their name is applied in a general manner
to the barbarous tribes of the eastern frontiers
of Aryavarta, and it has preserved itself in several
quarters, notably in the eastern districts of Nep&l.
There is a still surviving tradition in Tripurt
(Tipperah), precisely where Ptolemy places his
Kirrhadia, that the first name of the country was
Kir&t (/. A. S. Beng., Vol. XIX., Long, Chronicles
of Tripurd^, p. 536.) The Tamerai were a tribe
of the same family."

Mouth of the River Katabeda : — ^This may
be the river of Chittagong called the Karma-
phuli. The northern point of land at its mouth
is, according to Wilford {Asiut. Research, vol.
XIY, p. 445) called Pattana, and hence he thinks



195



Ihafc Chatgi^m or Chatiirgram (Chittagong) it
the Pentapolid of Ptolemy for Pattanphulli,
which means ' flourishing seat.' The same au-
thor has proposed a different identification for
the Katabeda River. '' In the district of San-
do wS/' he says, " is a river and a town called in
modem maps Sedoa for Saiudwa (for Sandwtpa)"
and in Ptolemy S a d u s and S a d a. Between this
river and Arakan there is another large one
concealed behind the island of Cheduba, and the
name of which is KatabaidS. or Katdbaiza. This
is the river Kat&beda of Ptolemy, which, it is true,
he has placed erroneously to the north of x^akan,
but as it retains its name to this day among the
natives, and as it is an uncommon one in that
country, we can hardly be mistaken. As that part of
the country is very little frequented by seafaring
people the £[att^baidd is not noticed in any
map or sea chart whatever. It was first brought
to light by the late Mr. Burrows, an able astro-
nomer, who visited that part of the coast by order
of Government. In the language of that country
Jcdta is a fort and Byeitzft or Baidzd is the name
of a tribe in that country." {Asiat. Bes,, vol. XIY,
pp. 462, 453).

Barakoura : — This mart is placed in Yule's
map at Bamfti, called otherwise Rftmu, a town
lying 68 miles S.S.E. of Chittagong,

Mouth of the Tokos anna:— This river
Wilford and Lassen {Ind. Alt,, vol. II T,
p. 237) identified with the Arakan river. Yule
prefers the Naf , which is generally called the
Teke-n&f, from the name of a tribe inhabiting
its banks.



196



3^. 'tliat of tie Silver country (A r g y ra)^

Sambra, acity 153° 30' 13° 45'

Sada, a city 154° 20° 11° 2(/

Mouth of the River Sados... 153° 30^ V2° 30^

Berabonsa, a roscrt 155° 30^ 10' 20'

The mouth of the River

Temala... 157^^30'' 10°

Temala, a city 157° 30^ 9°

The Cape l?eyond it 157° 20' 8°

4. That of the Besyngeitai Cannibals-
on the Sarabakic Gulf where are—

Sahara, acity 159** 30' 8° 30'

Mouth of the River Besynga 162° 20' 8° 25'

Besyuga, a mart... 102^ 9°

Berabai, a city 162° 20' 6°

The Cape beyond it 1 59° 4° 40'

Arakan is no doubt ihe Silver Ooimtry, but the
reason why it should have been so designated is
not apparent, since silver has never so far as is
known, been one of its products. It appears to
have included part of the province of Pegu,
which lies immediately to the, south of it.

Sada : — This towB is mentioned in that part of
Ptolemy's introductory book (eh. xiii, § 7) of which
a translation has been given, as the first port on
the eastern side of the Gangetic Gulf at which
ships from Paloura on the opposite coast touched
before proceeding to the more distant ports of
the Golden Khersonese and the Great Gulf. li
cannot be with certainty identified.. " It may
perhaps have been Ezata, which appears in Pegu
legend as the name of a port between Pegw



197



and Bengal."— Yule, quoting J. A. 8. Beng., vol.
XXVIII, p. 476.

Berabonna : — The same authority suggests
that this may be Sandow^, which Wilf ord proposed
to identify with Sada.

T e m a 1 a is the name of a town, a river, and a
cape. In the introductory book (c. xiii, § 8) it is
called Tamala, and said to lie to the south-east of
Sada, at a distance of 3500 stadia. Yule would
identify it, though doubtfully, with Gwa. Lassen
again places it at Cape Negrais, which is without '
doubt the promontory which Ptolemy says comes
after TSmala.

The S arabakic Gulf is now called the Gulf
of Martaban : — The name (Bdsyngytai) of the can-
nibals is partly preserved in that of Bassein, which
designates both a town and the river which is the
western arm of the Irdwadi. Ptolemy calls this
river the B ^ s y n g a. The emporium of the same
name Lassen takes to be Rang£ln, but the simi-
larity of name points to its identification with
Bassein, an important place as a military position,
from its commanding the river.

Berabai: — Beyond this Ptolemy has a pro-
montory of the same name, which may be Barago
Point. The names at least are somewhat simi-
lar and the position answers fairly to the require-
ments. Lassen took Berabai, the town, to be
Martaban.

5. That of the Golden Khersones©

Takola, amart 160^ 4° 15'

The Cape beyond it 158° 40' 2° 40'



198

Mouth of the River Khrysoa-

nas 159^ 1^

Sabana, a mart 160'' 3^S.L.

Mouth of the River Palandos 1 6 1 ** 2^S . L.

Cape Maleou Kolon 163^ 'i'^S.L.

Mouth of the River A^ttaba 164° l^S.L.

K61i, a town , 164° 2(y on the

equator

Perimoula 163^15' 2"=^ 20'

Perimoulik Gulf.... 168° 30" 4° 15'

The Golden Khersonese denotes gene-
rally the Malay Peninsula, but more specially the
Delta of the Ir&wadi, which forms the province
of Pegu, the Suvamabhumi (Pali form, — 8ovan-
nalihumi) of ancient times. The Golden Region
which lies beyond this, in the interior, is Burmft,
the oldest province of which, above Ava, is still, as
Tule informs us, formally styled in State documents
Sonapar4nta, i. e. * Gk)lden Frontier.'*'

Takola: — RangOn, as Yule points out, or a
port in that vicinity^ best suits Ptolemy's position
with respect to rivers, &c.,'' while at the same



■' Thornton notices in his Oazetteer of India (s. v. Bur-
mah) that when Colonel Burney was the resident in Ava,
official commnnications were addressed to him nnder the
authority of the " Founder of the great golden city of
precious stones ; the possessor of mines of gold, silver,
rubies, amber and noble serpentine."

*' Dr. Forchammer in his paper on the First Buddhist
Mission to SuvannahMmi^ pp. 7, 16, identifies Takola
with the Burman Kola or Kula-taik and the Talaing
TaikkulA, the ruins of which are still extant between
the present Ayetthima and Kinyua, now 12 miles from
the sea-shore, though it was an important seaport till
the 16th century. — J. B.



199



time Thakalai is the legendary name of tha
founder of Bangil^n Pagoda. There waa, how-
ever, he says, down to late mediaeval times, a
place of note in this quarter called Takkhala,
Takola, or Tagala, the exact site of which he
cannot trace, though it was apparently on the
Martaban side of the Sitang estuary.

Mouth of the Khrysoana River : — This must
be the Eastern or Rangun mouth of the Irdwadt,
for, as Tule states on the authority of Dr. F.
Mason, Hm4bi immediately north of RangCA
was anciently called Suvarnanadt, i. e. * Golden
River,' and this is the meaning of Khrysoana.

S a b a n a : — This may be a somewhat distorted
form of Suvarna, * golden-coloured,' and the mart
so called may have been situated near the mouth of
the Saluen River. Tule therefore identifies it
with Satung or Thatung. Lassen assigns it quite
a different position, placing it in one of the
jsmall islands lying off the southern extremity
of the Peninsula.

Cape MaleouKolon : — Regarding this Tule
says, "Probably the Cape at Amherst. Mr.
Crawford has noticed the singular circumstance
that this name is pure Javanese, signifying
'* Western Malays." Whether the name Malay
can be so old is a question ; but I observe that in
Bastian's Siamese Extracts, the foimdation of
Takkhala is ascribed to the Malays." Lassen
places it much further south and on the east-
em coast of the Peninsula, identifying it with
Cape Romania {Ind, Alt,, vol. Ill, p. 232).

K 6 1 i : — In the Proceedings of the Royal
Geographical Society, vol. IV, p. 639 ff, Colonel



200



Yule lias thrown mucli liglit on Ptolemy's
description of the coa^t from this place to Kat-
tigara by comparing the glimpse which it gives
us of the navigation to China in the 1st or 2n(l
century of our era with the accounts of the same
navigation as made by the Arabs seven or eight
centuries later. While allowing that it would
be rash to dogmatize on the details of the trans-
gangetic geography, he at the same time points
out that the safest guide to the true interpreta-
tion of Ptolemy's data here lies in the probability
that the nautical tradition was never lost. He
calls attention also to the fact that the names on
the route to the Sinae are many of them Indian,
apecifying as instances Sabana, Pagrasa, Er.
Sobanos, Tiponobaste, Zaba, Tagora, Balonga,
Sinda, Aganagara, Brama, Ambastas, Babana,
B/iver Kottlaris, Kokkonagara, &c. At Koli the
Greek and Arab routes first coincide, for, to
quote his. words, ** I take this Koli to be the Kalah
of the Arabs, which was a month's sail from
Kaulam (Quilon) in Malabar, and was a place
dependent on the Mahar&ja of Z&baj (Java or
the Great Islands) and near which were the moun-
tains producing tin. Ko-lo is also mentioned in
the Chinese history of the T'ang dynasty in terms'
indicating its position somewhere in the region of
Malakan Kalah lay on the sea of Shalahit
(which we call Straits of Malaka), but was not
very far from the entrance to the sea of Ka-
dranj, a sea which embraced the Gulf of Siam,
therefore I presume that Kalah was pretty far
down the Malay Peninsula. It may, however,
have been Kadah, or Quedda as we write it,



201



for it was 10 days' voyage from Kalah to
Tiyflmah (Battimah, Koyftmah). Now the Sea
of Kadranj was entered, »the Perimulic Gulf of
Ptolemy."

Perimulic Gulf : — Pliny mentions an Indian
promontory called Perimula where there were
very productive pearl fisheries (lib. VI, c. 64),
and where also was a very busy mart of com-
merce distant from Patala, 620 Roman miles
(lib. YI, c. 20). Lassen, in utter disregard of
Pliny's figures indicating its position to be
somewhere near Bombay, placed it on the coasti
of the Island of Man&r. In a note to mj
translation of the Indika of Megasthenes I sug-
gested that Perimula may have been in the
Island of Salsette. Mr. Campbell's subsequent
identification of it however with Simylla (Tia-
mula) where there was both a cape and a gi*eat
mart of trade I think preferable, and indeed quite
satisfactory. But, it may be asked, how came it
to pass that a place on the west coast of India
should have the same name as another on the far
distant Malay coast. It has been supposed by way
of explanation that in very remote times a stream
of emigration from the south-eastern shores of
Asia flowed onward to India and other western
countries, and that the names of places familiar
to the emigrants in the homes they had left were
given to their new settlements. There is evidence
to show that such an emigration actually took
place. Yule places the Malay Perimula at Pahang .
The Perimulic Gulf is the Gulf of Siam, called by
the Arabs, as already stated, the Sea of Kadranj.
Lassen takes it to be only an indentation of the
26 Q



202



Peninsular coast by the waters of this Galf, which
in common with most other writers ho identifies
with Ptolemy's Great Galf .

6. That of the L e s t a i (Robber's country) .

Samarade 163° 4^50'

Pagrasa 165^ 4° 50^

Mouth of ihe River Sobanos 165° 40' 4° 45^

<Fontes Fluvii)" 162° 30' 13°

Pithonobast^, a mart 166° 20' 4^ 45'

Akadra 167° 4° 45'

Zabai, the city 168° 40' 40°^45'

7. Thatof the Great Gulf.
The Great Cape where the

Gulf begins .' 169° 30' 4° 15'

Thagora 168° 6'

Balonga, a Metropolis 167° 30' T

Throana 167° 8° 30'

Mouth of the River Doanas. 167° 10°

(Sources of a river)" 163° 27°

Kortatha, a metropolis 167° 12° 30'

Sinda, a town 167° 15' 16° 40'

Pagrasa 167** 30' 14° 30'

Mouth of the River Dorias. 168° 15° 30'

(Sources of a river)" 163° 27°

or (Tab. Geog.) 162^ 20° 28'

Aganagara 169° 16° 20'

Month of the River S^ros ... 171° 30' 17° 20'
(Sources of a river)". . .1 70° (J add. Tab.) 32°
(Another source)" ...173° l\ add. Tab.) 30°
(The confluence)" 171° 27°

^ Additions of the Latin Translator.



)°

70



203'

Tte end of tBe Great Gnlf

towards the Sinai 173** 17^20'

Samarade : — This coincides with Samarat,
the Buddhistic classical name of the place com-
monly called Ligor {i.e, Nagara, *the city'),
situated on the eastern coast of the Malay Penin-
sula and subject to Siam.

Mouth of the Eiver S oban o s : — Sobanos is the
Sanskrit Suvarna, in its Pali form Sobanna, which
means 'golden.' One of the old cities of Siam,
in the Meinam basin was called Sobanapuri, i.e.
* Gold-town.'

Pithonabast^, Yule thinks, may correspond
to the Bungpasoi of our maps^ at the mouth of
the large navigable river Bangpa-Kong. It is at
the head of the Gulf of Siam eastward of Bankok.

A k a d r a : — Yule would identify this with the
KadranJ of the Arabs, which he places at Chantibon
on the eastern coast of the gulf.

Z a b a i : — This city, according to Ptolemy, lay
to the west of the Hoanas, or Mekong river, and
Yule therefore identifies it with the seaport called
Sanf or Chanf by the Arab navigators. Sanf or
Chanf under the limitations of the Arabic alpha-
bet represents G h a m p ft, by which the southern
extremity of Cochin-China is designated. But
Champ& lies to the south of the Mekong river, and
this circumstance would seem to vitiate the iden-
tification. Yule shows, however, that in former
times Ohamp& was a powerful state, possessed of a
territory that extended far beyond its present limits.
In the travels of Hiuen Tsiang (about A. D. 629)
it is called Mah&champ&. The locality of the



ao4



ancient port of Zabai or CbampS is probably
therefore to be sought on the west coast of Kam-
boja, near the Kampot, or the Kang-kao of our
maps. (See Ind. Ant., vol. VI, pp. 228-230).

By the Great Gulf is meant the Gulf of Siam,
together with the sea that stretches beyond it
towards China. The great promontory where this
sea begins is that now called Cape Kamboja.

Sin da was situated on the coast near Pulo
Condor, a group of islands called by the Arabs
Sandar^Fulat and by Marco Polo Sondur and
Condur. Yule suggests that these may be the
Satyrs' Islands of Ptolemy, or that they may be
his Sin da.

8. The mountains in this division are thus
named : —
Bepyrrhos, whose extremities lie in 148° 34**

and 154^ 26°

and MaiandroB, whose extremities lie

in 162° 24°

and 160° 16°

and Damassa (or Dobassa), whose

extremities lie in 162° 23°

and 166° 33°

and the western part of Semanthinos,

whose extremities lie in 1 70° 33°

and 180° 26°

Bepyrrhos : — -The authorities are pretty well
agreed as to the identification of this range. ** Be-
pyrrhos," says Lassen {lad. Alt, vol I., pp. 549-50)
" answers certainly to the Himalaya from the
sources of the Sarayii to those ^of the Tlsta.**
"Ptolemy," says Saint-Martin {Ettide, p. 337)



205



'' applies to a portion of the Him&Iayan chain the
name of Bdpyrrhos, but with a direction to the
south -east which does not exist in the axis of this
grand system of mountains. In general, his notions
about the Eastern Himalayas are vague and
confused. It is the rivers which he indicates as
flowing from each group, and not the position
which he assigns to the group itself that can serve
us for the purpose of identification. He makes
two descend from Bepyrrhos and run to join
the Ganges. These rivers are not named, but
one is certainly the Kausiki and the other ought
to be either the Gandak! or the Ttsta." Yule
remarks, " Ptolemy shows no conception of the
great Brahmaputra valley. His BSpyrrhos shuts
in Bengal down to Maeandrus. The latter is the
spinal range of Arakan (Yuma), Bepyrrhos, so far
as it corresponds to facts, must include the Sikkim
Him&laya and the G&ro Hills. The name is
perhaps Vipula — * vast,* the name of one qf the
mythical cosmic ranges but also a specific title
of the Him&laya."

Mount Maiandros : — From this range de-
scend all the rivers beyond the Ganges as far as the
Besynga or Bassein river, the western branch of
the Ir&wadi. It must therefore be the Yuma
chain which forms the eastern boundary of Arakan,
of which the three principal rivers are the Mayu,
the Kula-dan and the Le-myo. According to Lassen
Maiandros is the graecized form of Mandara, a
sacred mountain in Indian mythology.

Dobassa or Damassa range : — This range
contributes one of the streams which form the
great river Doanas, Bepyrrhos which is further to



206



the we^tf contributing the other confluent. A
single glance at the map, Saint-Martin remarks
{Etude^ p. 808), clearly shows that the reference
here is to the Brahmaputra river, whose indigenous
name, the Dihong, accounts readily for the word
Doanas. It would be idle, he adds, to explain
where errors so abound, what made Ptolemy
commit the particular error of making his Doanas
run into the Great Gulf instead of joining the
eastern estuary of the Ganges. The Dobassa
Mountains, I therefore conclude, can only be the
eastern extremity of the Himalaya, which goes
to force itself like an immense promontory into
the grand elbow which the Dihong or Brah-
maputra forms, when it bends to the south-east to
enter As&m. If the word Dobassa is of Sanskrit
origin, like other geographical appellations applied
to these eastern regions, it ought to signify the
* mountains that are obscure,''^T&masa Paryata.
Yule (quoting J. A. S. Beng. vol. XXXVII, pt. ii,
p. 192) points out that the Dimasas are mentioned
in a modern paper on Asftm, as a race driven down
into that valley by the immigration of the Bhotiyas.
This also points to the Bhotan Himftlayas as being
the Damassa range, and shows that of the two
readings, Dobassa and Damassa, the latter is pre-
ferable.

Mount SSmanthinos is placed 10 degrees
further to the east than Maiandros, and was re-
garded as the limit of the world in that direc-
tion. Regarding these two Sanskrit designations,
Saint-Martin, after remarking that they are
more mythic than real, proceeds to observe:
" These Oriental countries formed one of the



207



horiEons of the Hindu world, one of the extreme
regions, where positive notions transform them-
selves gradually into the creations of mere fancy.
This disposition was common to all the peoples
of old. It is found among the nations of the
east no less than in the country of Homer^
Udayagiri, — the mountain of the east where the
sun rises, was also placed by the Brahmanik
poets very far beyond the mouths of the Ganges,
The Semanthinos is a mountain of the same family.
It is the extreme limit of the world, it is its very
girdle {Samanta in Sanskrit). In fine, Pur&nik
legends without number are connected with Man-
dara, a great mountain of the East. The fabulous
character of some of these designations possesses
this interest with respect to our subject, that they
indicate even better than notions of a more posi-
tive kind the primary source of the information
which Ptolemy employed. The Maiandros, how-
ever, it must be observed, has a definite locality
assigned it, and designates in Ptolemy the chain of
heights which cover Arakan on the east."

9. From B^pyrrhos two rivers discharge
into the Ganges, of which the more northern has

its sources in 148° 33°

and its point of junction with

the Ganges in 140° 15' 30° 20^

The sources of the other

river are in 142° 27°

and its point of junction with

the Ganges in 144° 26°

10. From Maiandros descend the rivers
beyond the Ganges as far as the Besynga River,



208



but the river 8^roB flowB from the range of
SSmanthinos from two sources, of which the

most western lies in 170° SCK 32*

and the most eastern in 173° 30' 30°

and their confluence is in ... 171° 27°

11. From the Damassa range flow the
Daonas and Dorias (the Doanas runs as far ba
to Bepyrrhos)

and the Ddrias rises in 164° 30' 28°

Of the two streams which unite to form the
Doanas that from the Damassa range rises

in 162° 27° 30'

that from Bepyrrhos rises in 163° 27° 30'

The two streams unite in ... 160° 20' 19°

The river Sobanas which flows from Maiandros
rises in 163° 30' 13°

12. The rivers which having previously
united flow through the Golden Khersonese
from the mountain ridges, without name, which
overhang the Khersonese — the one flowing
into the Khersonese first detaches from it

the Attabas in about 161° 2° 20'

and then the Khrysoanas in about 161° 1° 20'
and the other river is the Palandas.

Nearly all the rivers in the foregoing table have
already been noticed, aud we need here do little
more than remind the reader how they have been
identified. The two which flow from Bepyrrhos
into the Ganges are the Kausikt and the Tista.
The B^synga is the Bassein River or Western
branch of the Ir&wadi. The S I r o s enters the



209



sea further eastward than any of the other rivers,
probably in Ohamp&, the Zaba of Ptolemy, while
Lassen identifies it with the Mekong. TheD a o n a a
is no doabt the Brahmapatra, though Ptolemy,
taking the estuary of the Mekong or Kamboja
river to be its mouth, represents it as falling into
the Great Gulf. It was very probably also, to
judge from the close resemblance of the names
when the first two letters are transposed, the
Oidanes of Artemidoros, who, according to Strabo
(lib. XV, c. i, 72), describes it as a river that bred
crocodiles and dolphins, and that flowed into the
Ganges. Ourtius (lib. VIII, c. 9) mentions a river
called the Dyardanes that bred the same creatures,
and that was not so often heard of as the Ganges,
because of its flowing through the remotest parts of
India. This must have been the same river as the
Oidanes or Doanas, and therefore the Brahma-
putra. TheDorias is a river that entered the
Chinese Sea between the Mekong Estnary and
the S^ros. The Sobanas is perhaps the river
Meinam on which Bangkok, the Siamese capital,
stands. 'The Attabasis Very probably the Tavoy
river which, though its course is comparatively
very short, is more than a mile wide at its mouth,
and would therefore be reckoned a stream of im-
portance. The similarity of the names favours
this identification. The Ithrysoana is the
eastern or Rang An arm of the Ir&wadi. The
Palandasis probably the Salyuen River.

Ptolemy now proceeds to describe the interior
of Transgangetic India, and begins with the tribes
or nations that were located along the banks of
the Ganges on its eastern side,
27 G



210



13. The regions of this Division lying along
the course of the Ganges on its eastern side and
furthest to the north are inhabited by the
Ganganoi, through whose dominions flows
the river Sarabos, and who have the following
towns : —

Sapolos 139° 20' 35°

Stoma 138° 40' 34° 40'

Heorta 138° 30' 34°

Rhappha 137° 40' 33° 40'

For Ganganoi should undoubtedly bo read
Tanganoi, as Tangana was the name given in
the heroic ages to one of the great races who
occupied the regions along the eastern banks
of the upper Ganges. Their territory probably
stretched from the Kamgang4 river to the
upper SarayA, which is the Sarabos of Ptolemy.
Their situation cannot be more precisely defined,
as none of their towns named in the table can with
certainty be recognized. " Concerning tiie people
themselves," says Sa,mt-'M.iiviin {Mude, pp. 327, 328)
" we are better informed. They are reprcseuled
in the Mahdbhdrata as placed between the Kirata
and the Kulinda in the highlands which protected
the plains of Kosala on the north. They were
one of the barbarous tribes, which the Brahmanic
Aryans, in pushing their conquests to the east of
the Ganges and Jamna, drove back into the Hima-
layas or towards the Vindhyas. It is principally
in the Vindhya regions that the descendants of
the Tangana of classic times are now to be found.
One of the Rajput tribes, well-known in the
present day under the name of Tank Or Tonk is



211



settled in Rohilkliand, the very district where
the Mahdhhdrata locates the Tarigana and Ptolemy
his Tanganoi. These Tank Rajputs extend west-
ward to a part of the Doab, and even as far as
Gujamt, but it is in the race of the Dangayas,
spread over the entire length of the Vindhya
Mountains and the adjacent territory from the
southern borders of the ancient Magadha to the
heart of M&Iwa to the north of the lower Narraad&,
it is in this numerous race» subdivided into clans
without number, and which ia called according to
the districts inhabited Dhangis, Dhangars, Donga,
&c. that we must search for the point of departure
of the family and its primordial type. Thia type,
which the mixture of Aryan blood has modified
and ennobled in the tribes called BSjput, preserves
its aboriginal type in the mass of mountain tribes,
and this type is purely Mongolian, a living
commentary on the appellation of Mlechha, of
Barbarian, which the ancient Brahmanic books
apply to the Tangana." (Conf. Brih, Bamk. ix,
^7; X, 12; XIV, 12, 29; XVI, 6 ; XVII, 25; xxxi, IS
Bdmdyana iv, 44, 20).

The towns, we have said, cannot be identified
with certainty, but we may quote Wilford's views
as to what places now represent themw He says
(Asiat. Research, vol. XIV, p. 457) : "The B&n or
Saraban river was formerly the bed of the Ganges
and the present bed to the eastward was also once
the Ban or Saraban river. This Ptolemy mistook
for the B&magang&, called also the B&n, Saraban
and Sar&vati river, for the four towns which he
places on its banks, are either on the old or the
new bed of the Ganges. Stoma and S a p o 1 o s



212



are Hastnanra, or Hastina-nagara on the old bed,
and Sabal, now in rains, on the eastern bank of
the new bed, and is commonly called Sabalgarh.
Hastinapur is 24 miles S. W. of Dar&nagar, and
11 to the west of the present Ganges ; and it is
called Hastnawer in the Ay in Akbari. Heorta
is Awartta or Hardw&r. It is called Arate in
the Peutinger tables, and by the ADonymous of
Ravenna."

14. To the south of these are the M a r o n n-
dai who reach the Gangaridai, and have
the following towns on the east of' the
Ganges : —

Boraita 142^20' 29°

Korygaza 143° 30' 27° 15'

Kond6ta 145° 26°

Kelydna 146° 25° 30'

Aganagora 146° 30' '22° 30'

Talarga 146° 40' 21° 40'

The Maroundai occupied an extensive
territory, which comprised Tirhut and the country
southward on the east of the Ganges, as far sea
the head of its delta, where they bordered with the
Gangaridai. Their name is preserved to this day
in that of the MAndas, a race which originally
belonged to the Hill-men of the North, and is now
under various tribal designations diffused through
Western Bengal and Central India, ** the nucleus
of the nation being the Ho or Hor tribe of Singh-
bham.*® They are probably the M o n e d e s of

" J. A. 8. B., vol. XXXV, p. 168. The Mihida tribes as
enumerated by Dalton, id. p. 158, are the Knars of Ilich-
pnr, the Eorewas of Sirgnja and Jaspnr, the Kherias of
Chntia Nfigpnr, the Hor of Singhbhnm, the Bhumij of

7



213

wliom Pliny speaks, in conjunction with tbe Snari.
That they were connected originally with the
Muranda, a people of Lamp&ka (Lamghan) at
the foot of the Hindu-Koh mentioned in the
inscription on the AUah&b&d pillar, along with the
Saka, as one of the nations that brought tributary
gifts to the sovereign of India, is sufficiently pro-
bable*°; but the theory that these Muranda on
being expelled from the valleys of the Kophes by
the invasion of the Yetha, had crossed the Indus
and advanced southwards into India till they
established themseWes on the Ganges, in the king-
dom mentioned ^by Ptolemy, is, as Saint-Martin has
clearly proved (JS?^iw2e, pp. 329,330) utterly untenable,
since the sovereign to whom the Muranda of tbe .^ . }

north sent their gifts was Samndragupta, who C^xf- -
reigned subsequently to the time of Ptolemy, and A < ' •' ' ' >

they could not therefore have left their ancestral
seats before he wrote. Saint- Martin further observes ^ • ^ ■ '
that not only in the case before us but in a host of
analogous instances, it is certain that tribes of
like name with tribes in India are met with
throughout the whole extent of the region north of
the Indus, from the eastern' extremity of the
HimSrIaya as far as the Indus and the Hindu-Koh,
but this he points out is attributable to causes
more general than the partial migration of certain
tribes. The Fat/w Turdna mentions the Muranda
among the Mlechha tribes which gave kings to

MAnbhAm DhalbhAm, and the Santala of MAnbh^m
Singhbhum, Katak, HazfiribAgh and the BhAgalrpnr
hills. The western branches are the Bhills of MAlwa and
KAnhdos and tbe Kolis of Gujarat.

30 MaMhh. vii, 4847 ; Reinand, MCm. sur VJnda,
p. 353 Lassen, Jnd, Alt.^ vol. II, p. 877.— Ed.


.1



214



,^'



.r



v/.



1



\


^C^*' India during the period of subversion which

,/ ^ . followed the extinction of the two great Aryan

^ dynasties. See Cunningham, Anc, Geoff, of Ind,,

J pp. 605-509, also Lassen, bid. AIL, vol. Ill,
pp. 136f. 165—157, and vol. II, p. 877n.

Regarding the towns of the Maroundai, we may
quote the ^following general observations of Saint-
Martin {Etude, pp. 331, 332). " The list of towns
nV*" " J, ^ ' ^ attributed to the Maroundai would, it might be

A**' 1 S ^ expected, enable us to determine precisely what

J^ - 1 extent of country acknowledged in Ptolemy's time

.^J^^ the authority of the Muranda dynasty, but the

corruption of many of the names in the Greek
text, the inexactitude or insufi5.ciency of the indi-
cations and, in fine, the disappearance or change of
name of old localities, render recognition often
doubtful, and at times impossible." He then goes
on to say : ** The figures indicating the position of
these towns form a series almost without any devia-
tion of importance, and betoken therefore that we
have an itinerary route which cuts obliquely all the
lower half of the Grangetic region. From B o r a i t a
toKelydna this line follows with sufficient regu-
larity an inclination to S. E. to the extent of about
6 degrees of a great circle. On leaving Kelydna
it turns sharply to the south and continues in
this direction to Talarga, the last place on the
list, over a distance a little under four degrees. This
sudden change of direction is striking, and when
we consider that the Ganges near Bijmahal alters
its course just as sharply, we have here a coin-
cidence which suggests the enquiry whether near
the point where the Ganges so suddenly bends,
there is a place having a name something like



215



Kelydua, which it may be safely assumed is a bad
transcription into Greek of the Sanskrit Kalinadt
(' black river*) of which the vulgar form is Kalindi.
Well then, Kalindi is found to be a name applied
to an arm of the Ganges which communicates
with the Mahanand^, and which surrounds on the
north the large island formed by the Mahananda
and Ganges, where once stood the famous city of
Gauda or Gaur, now in ruins. Gauda was not in
existence in Ptolemy's time, but there may have
been there a station with which if not with the
river itself the indication of the table would
agree. At all events, considering the double
accordance of the name and the position, it seems to
me there is little room to doubt that we have there
the locality of Kelydna. The existing town of
Malda, built quite near the site of Gaur, stands at
the very confluence of the Kalindi and Mahananda.
This place appears to have preserved the name of
the ancient M a I a d a of the Puranik lists, very
probably the M o li n d a i of Megasthenes. This
point being settled, we are able to refer thereto the
towns in the list, both those which precede and
those which follow after. Wo shall commence with
the last, the determination of which rests on data
that arc less vague. These are Aganagara and
T a 1 a r g a. The table, as we have seen, places them
on a line which descends towards the sea exactly
to the south of Kelydna. If, as seems quite likely,
these indications have been furnished to Ptolemy
by the designating of a route of commerce
towards the interior, it is natural to think that this
route parted from the great emporium of the
Ganges (the Gauge Regia of Ptolemy, the



216



Ganges emporiam of the Peripliis) which should be
found, as we have already said, near where HQghli
now stands. From Kelydna to this point the route
descends in fact exactly to the south, following
the branch of the Ganges which forms the western
side of the delta. The position of Aghadip
Agadvipa) on the eastern bank of the river a
little below Katw4, can represent quite suitably
Aganagora (Aganagara); while Talarga may be
taken to be a place some leagues distant from Cal-
cutta, in the neighbourhood of Hiighli The

towns which precede Kelydna are far from having
the same degree of probability. We have nothing
more here to serve for our guidance than the
distances taken from the geographical nota-
tions, and we know how uncertain this indication
is when it has no check to control it* The first
position above Kelydna is Kondota or Ton-
do t a ; the distance represented by an arc of two
degrees of a great circle would conduct us to the
lower Bagamatt (BhagaVati). Korygaza or
Sorygaaa (distant J degree) would come to be
placed perhaps on the Gandakt, perhaps between
the Gandaki and the lower Sarayii ; last of all
B o r a i t a, at tv^o degrees from Korygaaa, would
conduct us to the very heart of ancient Kosala,
towards the position of the existing town of Bar*
d^. We need scarcely add, in spite of the con*
nexion of the last two names, that we attach but a
faint value to determinations which rest on data
so vague." Boraita may be, however, Bhar^ch
in Audh, as Yule has suggested, and with regard
to Korygaza, it may be observed that the last part
of the name may represent the Sanskrit kachha.



217



which means a marsh or place near a marsh, and
hence KorygaKa may he Gorakhpur, the situation
of which is notably marshy.

15. Between the Imaos and Bepyrrhos
ranges the Takoraioi are farthest north, and
below them are the Korangkaloi, then the
P a s s a 1 a i, after whom to the north of Maian-
dros are the T i 1 a d a i, such being the name
apph'ed to the Beseidai, for they are short of
stature and broad and shaggy and broad-
faced, but of a fair complexion.

Takoraioi: — This tribe occupied the valleys
at the foot of the mountains above Eastern Kosala
and adjoined the Tanganoi. The Tanganas are
mentioned among the tribes of the north in the
lists of the Brihat Sanhitd (IX, 17 ; X, 12 ; XIV,
29). They have left numerous descendants in
different parts of Gangetic India. A particular
clan in Rohilkhand not far from the seats of the
Takoraioi preserves still the name under the form
DakhskuraiiYiWiot's Supplementary Glossary of Indian
terms, p. 360), and other branches are met with
near the Jamna and in Kajputana. Towards the
east again the Dekra form a considerable part of
the population of Western Asam (J. A. 8. Beng.,
vol. XVIII, p. 712).

Korangkaloi; — These are probably of the
same stock, it* not actually the same people, as
Korankara of the Purdnas {Asiat. Research.,
vol. VIII), and the Kyankdanis of Shekavati.
Their position is near the sources of the Gandak.

P a s s a 1 a i : — The Passalai here mentioned are
not to be confounded with the Passalai of the Do&b.
28 6



218



In tlie name is easily to be recognized the Yaisdli
of Hiuen Tsiang, which was a small kingdom
stretching northward from the Ganges along the
banks of t^e river Gandak. The capital had the
same name as the kingdom, and was sitnated in the
immediate neighbourhood of Hajipnr, a station
near the junction of the Gandak and Ganges, where
a great fair is annually held, distant from F&tna
about 20 miles. *• Here we find the village of
Bes&rh, with an old ruined fort, which is still
called Raja 6isal-ka-garh, or the fort of Baja
Visala, who was the reputed founder of the
ancient Vaissili." (Cunningham, Anc, Geoff, of
Ind^f p. 443).

T i I a d a i : — We here leave the regions adjoin-
ing the Ganges, and enter the valleys of the Brah-
maputra. The Tiladai are called also Besadai or
Basadai . Ptolemy places them above the Maiandros,
and from this as well as his other indications, we
must take them to be the hill-people in the vicinity
t)f Silhet, where, as Tule remarks, the plains break
into an infinity of hillocks, which are specially
known as tila. It is possible, he thinks, that the
Tiladai occupied these tUas, and also that the
Tiladri hills (mentioned in the Kshetra Samdea)
were the same Tilas. The same people is men-
tioned in the Periplusj but under the corrupt
form of S^satai. The picture drawn of them by
the author of that work corresponds so closely with
Ptolemy's, that both authors may be supposed
to have drawn their information from the same
source. We may quote (in the original) what
each says of them : —

Periplus : iBpos rt, r© /iff cra>fiaTi KoXo/Sot Ka\



219



fr(f>6bpa 9rXarvTrpo<r6i7ro(, cvvoiais be X^trroi avTovs
f dc] XfyarBai [^00*1] S7(raraf, vapofiolovs di^rjfifpois,

Ptolemy : U(ri yap KoXofioi^ koi nXarcls, Koi
iao'etSf Kat 9rXarv7r/>d(rcD9rot, Xcu/coi p^vrot ras XP^^^-

Description of the regions which extend from
the Brahmaputra to the Great Gulf,

16, Beyond Kirrhadia, in which they
say the best Malahathrum is produced, the
Zamirai, a race of cannibals, are located near
Mount Maiandros.

17. Beyond the Silver Country, in which
there are said to be very many silver mines,
{p€Ta\\a da-r^pov), is situated in juxtaposition to
the Besyngeitai, the Gold Country {Xpva-rj
\^pa\ in which are very many gold mines, and
whose inhabitants resemble the Zamirai, in
being f air- complexioned, shaggy, of squat figure,
and flat-nosed.

Kirrhadia : — This has been already noticed.
With reference to its product Malahathrum^ which
is not betel, but consists of the leaves of one or
more kinds of the cinnamon or cassia-tree. I may
quote the following passage from the /. A. S. Beng.,
vol. XVI, pp. 38-9 : — " Cmnamomum albiflorum is
designated taj, tejpat in Hindustani, the former
name being generally applied to the leaf and the
latter to the bark of the tree ; taj, tejpata, or tejapa-
tra, by all which nances this leaf is known, is used
as a condiment in all parts of India. It is indigen-
ous in Silhet, Asam, Rungpur (the Kirrhadia of
Ptolemy), and in the valleys of the mountain-range
as far as Masari. The dry branches and leaves



220



are brought annnally in large quantities from tlie

former place, and sold at a faix, wliich is held &t

VikiaiDapura. Tn/, however, is a name thai.is also

given in the eastern part of Bengal to the bark

of a variety of Cinnamoviu7n Zeijlanicum or Cassia

lignea, which abounds in the valleys of Kach&r,

Jyntiya and Asam." The word Malabaihrnm is a

compound of tamala (the Sans^krit name of Cinyia-

momnm albiflmum) and pdiroj • a leaf/ Another

derivation has been suggested wa/tf, * a garland/

and pdtra *a leaf.' (Lassen, Ijid. Alt.,'To}. I, p. 283

Beq.,andconf. Dymock's Vfget, Mat. Med., p. 553).

The following interesting passage describes

the mode in which the Besadai trade in this article

with the Chinese. I translate from the Pejiplug,

cap. 65:— **0n the confines of lliina is held an

aiinnal fair attended by a race of men called the

Sesatai, who are of a squat fignre, broad-faced, and

in appearance like wild beasts, though all the same

they are quite mild and gentle in their disposition.

They resort to this fair with their wives and

children, taking greiit loads of produce packed in

mats like the young leaves of the vine. The fair

is held where their country borders on that of the

Thinai. Here, spreading out the mats they use

4hem for lying on, and devote several days to

festivity. This being over, they withdraw into

their own country and the Thinai, when they see

they have gone, come forward and collecting the

mats, which had been purposely left behind, extract

first from the Calami (called Petroi), of which they

were woven, the sinews and fibres, and then taking •

the leaves fold them double and roll them up into

balls through which they pass the fibres of the



221



Calami* The balls are of three kinds, and are
designated according to the size of the leaf from
which they are made, hadro, meso and mikro*
sphaiton. Hence there are tliree kinds of Mnlaha*
thnintj and these are then carried into India by the
manufacturers.

Z a m t r a i :^A various reading is Zamerai. Ili
has been already stated that this Was a tribe of
the same family as the Kir^ta, beaido whom they
are named in the great geographical catalogue of
the Mahdbhdrat(.u Ramifications of the Zamirai
Btill exist under the names of 2amarina, Tomara,
&c., in the midst of the savage districts which
extend to the S. and S.E. of Magadha, and to the
west of the Son.

The silver country, it has already been noticed,
is Arakan, and the gold country and copper
country, Yule remarks, correspond curiously evert
in approximate position with the Sonapar&nta
(golden frontier land), and 2arapadipa of Burmese
fitate-documents. The Malay peninsula, taken
generally, has still many mines both of the
precious and the useful metals.

18, And, again, between the ranges of
B^pyrrhos and D a m a s s a, the country
furthest north is inhabited by the Aninakhai
(or Aminakhai), south of these the Inda-
prathai, after these the Ib^ringai, then
the Dabasai (or Damassai ?), and up to
Maiandros the Nangalogai, which means
** the World of the Naked'* {yvfivav koo-hos),

19. BetAveen the D a m a s s a range and the
frontiers of the Sinai are located furthest



222



north the K a k o b a i ; and below them the
Basanarai.

20. Next comes the country ofKhalkitis,
in which are very many copper mines.
South of this, extending to the Great Gulf
the Koudoutai, and the B a r r h a i, and,
after them the I n d o i, then the D o a n a i,
along the river of the same name.

21. To these succeeds a mountainous coun-
try adjoining the country of Robbers (At/o-tcoi/)
wherein are found elephants and tigers. The
inhabitants of the Robber country are re-
ported to be savages {drjpMeis)^ dwelling in
caves, and that have skins like the hide of
the hippopotamus, which darts cannot pierce
through.

Aninakhai: — The position Ptolemy assigns to
them is the mountain region to the north of the
Brahmaputra, corresponding to a portion of Lower
Asdm.

Indaprathai : — This is a purely Hindu
name. In Sanskrit documents and in inscrip-
tions mention is made of several towns in
the provinces of the Ganges, which had taken the
name of the old and famous Indraprastha (the
modern Dehli), and we may* conclude that fhe
Indaprathai of the East were a Brahmanic
settlement. In subsequent times Sanskrit desig-
nations spread further down into the Dekhan
with the cultus, either of the Brahmans or the
Buddhists. Instances in point are Modura and
Kosamba, which have been already noticed. The



223



Indaprathai appear to have established them-
selves in the districts S. of the Brahmaputra, and
of the Aninakhai.

Iberingai and Dabasai or Damas-
s a i : — The D a m a s s a i (now the Dimasas as
already noticed), occupied the region extending
from, their homonymous mountains to the Brahma-
putra, but further to the east than the Aninakhai
and Iberingai.

Nangalogai : — Many tribes still existing on
the hills, east and north-east of Silhet, are called
Nagas. This name, which is given correctly in
Ptolemy as Nanga, is the Indian word for naked,
and according to Yule it is written Nanga in
the Musalman History of Asam. The absolute
nakedness of both sexes, he says, continues in
these parts to the present day. The latter half of
the name I6g (Sanskrit I6k)y is the Indian term for
people, mankindt or the world, as Ptolemy has it.

With regard to the other tribes enumerated,
Saint Martin remarks {Etude, pp. 345-6) :—
"The Iberingai are still a tribe of the north
just as the Dabassae, perhaps on the mountains of
the same name. There is still a tribe of Dhobas
in Dinajpur, one of the districts of the north-east
of Bengal, on the confines of the ancient K^mart^pa.
To the east of the Dobassa mountains, towards the
frontiers of the Sinai, the tribe of the Kakobai is
found to a surety in that of the Khokus, who
occupy the same districts. The Basannarae, in a
locality more southern, are very probably the
Bhanzas, a tribe of the mountains to the south of
Tippera, east of the mouth of the Brahmaputra.
In the Koudoutai and the Barrhai, it is easy to



224



recognize, though Ptolemy carries them too far
into the south, the Kolitas and the Bhars or Bhors,
two of the most notable parts of the population of
Western As^m, and of the districts of Bengal that
belong to KamarApa. The Dodn^ii or Daonai are
perpetuated in the Za^ri of Eastern Asam ; and
the name of the Lestae, the last of the list, corre-
sponds to all appearance to that of the Lepchhas, a
well-known mountain race on the confines of
Sikkim to the west of the TistA." For notices of
the tribes vfhicli he has thus identified with those
of Ptolemy, he refers to the Journal of the Asiatic
Soiitity of Bengali vols. TI, IX, XIV, and XVIII.
His identification of the Lestai with the Lepchhas
is in every way unfortunate. That the name Aiyora t
is not a transcript of any indigenous name, but
the Greek name for robbers or pirates, is apparent
from the fact alone that the r] has the iota
subscribed. The Lepchhas, moreover, live among
mountains, far in the interior, vrhile Ptolemy
locates his Ldstai along the shores of the Gulf of
Siam.

Ptoleitny gives next a list of 33 towns in the
interior by Way of supplement to those already
mentioned as situated along the course of the
Ganges, followed by a list of the towns irk the
Golden Khersonese : —

22, The inland towns and villages of this
division (Transgangetic India), in addition
to those mentioned along the Ganges are
called : —

Selamponra.. 148° 30' 33^20'

Kanogiza 143"^ 32"*



r



225

Kassida 146° 3P 10'

Eldana 152° 31°

Asanabara 155° 31° 3(/

Arkhinara 163° 31°

Oarath^nai 170° 31° 20'

Souanagoura 145° 30' 29° 30' .

Sagoda or Sadoga 155° 20' 29° 20'

Anina 162° 29°

Salatha 165° 40' 28° 20'

23. Rhadamarkotta,

in jw^liicli is much nard ... 1 72° 28'

Ath^nagouron 146° 20' 27°

Maniaiiia(orManiataia) 147° 15' 24° 40'

T6salei, a metropolis ... 150° 23° 20'

Alosanga 152° 24° 15'

Adeisaga 159° 30' 23°

Kimara 170° 23° 15'

Parisara 179° 21° 30'

Tougma, a metropolis... 152° 30' 22° 15'

Ariaabion 158° 30' 22° 30'

Posinara 162° 15' 22° 50'

Pandasa 165° . 21° 20'

Sipiberis (orSitteb^ris). 170° 23° 15'
Triglypton, called also Trilingon, capital

of the kingdom 154° 18°

In this part the cocks are ^ said to be
bearded, and the crows and parrots white.

24. Lariagara 162° 30' 18° 15'

Rhingiberi 166° 18°

Agimoitha 170° 40' 18° 40'

Tomara 172° 18°

29 Q



226



Daeana or Doana 165^ 15° 2(y

Mareoura, a metropolip^

called also Malthoura 158^ 12*^30'

Laaippa (or Lasyppa)... IGF 12° SC^

Bareukora (or Bareua-
.thra 164° 30' 12° 50'

25. In the Golden Khersonese —

Balongka 162° 4° 40'

Kokkonagara 160° 2°

Tharrha 162° 1° 20' S.

Palanda 161° 1° 20' S,

Regarding the foregoing long list of inland towns ,
the following general observations by Sainfc- Martin
are instructive : " With Ptolemy, unfortunately,"
he says {Mude, pp. 348-9) " the correspondence
of names of towns in many instances, is less easy
to discover than in the case of the names of
peoples or tribes. This is shown once again in
the long-enough list which he adds to the names
of places already mentioned under the names of
the people to which they respectively belonged.
To judge from the repetitions in it and the want of
connexion, this list appears to have been supplied
to him by a document different from the docu-
ments he had previously used, and it is precisely
because he has not known how to combine its
contents with the previous details that he has thus
given it separately and as an appendix, although
thereby obliged to go again over the same ground
he had already, traversed. For a country where
Ptolemy had not the knowledge of it as a whole to
guide him, it would he unjust to reproach him with
this want of connexion in his materials, and the con-



227



fusian therefram resulting; but this absence, almoirt
absolute, of connexion does only render the task
of the critic all the more laborious and unwelcome
and there results from it strange mistakes for
those who without sufficiently taking into account
the composition of this part of the Tables, have
believed they could find in the relative positions
which the places have there taken a sufficient means
of identification. It would only throw one into the
risk of error to seek for correspondences to these
obscure names^ (of which there is nothing to
guarantee the correctness, and where there is not
a single name that is assigned to a definite terri-
tory,) in the resemblances, more or less close, which
oould be furnished by a topographical dictionary
of India."

Selampoura : — This suggests Selenrpur, m
place situated at some distance north of the D^vat
or lower S'arayA. The identity of the names i»
our only warrant for taking them as applying to
one and the same town ; but as the two places
which follow belong to the same part of th«
country, the identification is in some measura
supported. Selempur is situated on a tributary
of the SarayA, the little Gandak.

K a n o g i z a : — ^Tbis is beyond doubt the famous
city of Kanyakubja or Kanauj, which has already
been noticed under the list of towns attributed to
PrasiakS, where the name is given as Kanagors.
Ptolemy, while giving here the name more correct-
ly has put the city hopelessly out of its position
with reference to the Ganges, from which he has
removed it several degrees, though it stood upon
its banks. Among Indian cities it ranks next in



228



point of antiquity to Ayodhyft in Audb, and it ipfftd
for many centuries tbe Capital of North- Western
India. It Tras then a stately city, full ci incre-
dible wealth, and its king, who was sometimes
styled tbe Emperor of India, kept a very splendid
court. Its remains are 65 miles W.N.W. from
Lakbnau. The place was yisited hy Hinen Tsiang
in 634 A.D. Pliny (S, N, lib. YI, c. 21) has Oalini-
paxa. Oonf. Lassen, Ind. AU, toL I, p^ 158;
MaMhh. Ill, 8313; Bdmdyana, I, 34, S7.

K a s s i d a : — Here we have another case of n
recurrence of tbe same name in an altered form.
In' Sanskrit and in inscriptions K&s^ is the ordi-
nary name of B&nftras. How Ptolemy came to
lengthen the name by affixing da to it has not been
explained. Pfcolemy has mutilated V&ranftsf into
Erarasa, which be calls a metropolis, and assigns
to the Kaspeiraioi. &ucb is tbe view taken hj
Sflint-Martin, but Yule, as we have seen, identifies
Erarasa with Govardban (Giriraja). fie also
points out, on the authority of Dr. F. Hall
that Yftran&si was never used as a name for
Ban&ras.

Souanagoura : — 'M[. Saint-Martin ( Mude, p.
351)thinks this is a transcript of the vulgar form of
Snlvarnanagara, and in this name recognizes that
of one of the ancient capitals of Eastern Bengal,
SuvarDagrSrma (now Sociargdon, about 12 miles
from Bhakka), near the right bank of the Lower
Brahmaputra.

S a g 6 d a : — There can be no doubt of the iden-
tity of this place with Ayodhya, the capital of
Kosala, under the name of Saketa or Sageda.
Sd.kyamuni spent the last days of his life in this



229



cifcy, and daring his sojourn the ancient name
of Ayodhyft gave place to that of S^keta, the
only one current* Hindu lexicographers give
SAketa and Kdsala (or Kosala) as synonyms of
Ayodhyft. The place is now called Audh, and is
on the right bank of the SarayO or Gbaghrft, near
Faiz&b&d, a modern town, built from its ruins.
At some distance north from Audh is the site of
Sr&vasti, one of the most celebrated cities in the
annals of Buddhism. For the identity of SSk^ta
with Ayodhya and also Yisakha see Cunningham,
Geog, of Anc. Ind., pp. 401 sqq.

Bhadamarkotta (v. 1. Ehandamarkotta).
Saint-Martin has identified this with KangAmati,
an ancient capital situated on the western bank
of the lower Brahmaputra, and now called Ude-
pur (TJdayapura, — city of Bwiriae), Yule, who
agrees with this identification, gives as the Sans-
krit form of the name of the place, Ra6ga-
mritika. The passage about Nard which follows
the mention of Bhadamarkotta in the majority
of editions is, according to Saint *Mart in {Mude,
p. 352 and note), manifestly corrupt. Some editors,
correct ttoXX^, much, into TroXety, cities, and thus
Nardos becomes the name of a town, and Bha-
damarkotta the name of a district, to which
Nardos and the towns that come after it in the
Table belong. On this point we may quote a
passage from Wilford, whose views regarding
Bhadamarkotta were different. He says {Asiat.
Besearch. vol. XIV, p. 441), Ptolemy has delineated
tolerably well the two branches of the river of
Ava and the relative situation of two towns upon
them, which still retain their ancient name, only



1



280



th«y are tmns posed. These two towns are tTrathlnai
and Nardos or Nardon; XJrathena is Bhftdana«
the ancient name of Amarapnr, and Nardon is
Nartenh on the Kayn-dween. ..." He says that
"Nartenh was situated in the country of Rhanda-
markota, literally^ the !E^ort of Bandamar, after
which the whole country was designated."

Tosalei, called a Metropolis, has become of
great importance since recent archasological dis-
coveries have led to the finding of the namo
In the Alioka Inscriptions on the Dhauli rock.
The inscription begins thus : *' By the orders of
DSvanampiya (beloved of the gods) it is enjoined
to the public officers charged with the administra*
iion of the city of Tosalij" &c. Vestiges of a
larger city have been discovered not far from thv
site of this monument, and there can be no
doubt that the Tosali of the inscription was the
capital in Asoka's time of the province of Orissa»
and continued to be so till at least the time of
Ptolemy. The city was situated on the margin
of a pool called K6sal&-Gahga, which was an object
of great religious veneration throoghout all the
country. It is pretty certain that relative to this
circumstance is the name of Tosala-Kos&lakas,
which is found in the Brahmdnda Purdna, which
Wilford had already connected with the Tosale of
Ptolemy. He had however been misled by the
2nd part of the word to locate the city in N,
K6sal4, that is Audh. An obvious objection to
the locating of Tosale in Orissa is that Ptolemy
assigns its position to the eastern side of the
Ganges, and Lassen and Burnouf have thus been
led to conclude that there must have been twO



231



eities of the name. Lassen accordingly finds for
Ptolemy's Tosald a place somewhere in the Province
j}f Pb&kkft. Bat there is no necessity for this. If
we take into account that the name of T6sal4 iji
among those that are marked as having been
added to our actual Greek texts by the old Latin
translators (on what authority we know not) we
shall be the less surprised to find it out of its real
place. (Saint-Martin, Etude, pp. 353-4, citing J. A,
S. Beng,, vol. YII, pp. 435 and 442; Lassen, Ind.
Alt., vol. II, p. 256, and vol. Ill, p. 158; and
Asiat Research, vol. YIII, p. 344).

Alosanga: — The geographical position of
A 1 o 8 a n g a places it a quarter degree to the north
of the upper extremity of Mount Maiandros. " By
a*8trange fatality," says Wilford {Asiat, Rea.
«< «., p. 390) "the northern extremity of Mount
Maindros in Ptolemy*8 maps is brought close to
the town of Alosanga, now Ellasing on the Lojung
river, to the north-west of Dhakka. This mistake
is entirely owing to his tables of longitude and
latitude."

T o u g m a : — In Yule*s map this is identified,
but doubtfully, with Tagaung, a place in KhrysS
(Burma) east from the Ir&wadi and near the
tropics.

Triglypton or Trilingon: — Opinions
vary much as to where this capital was situated.
Wilford says {Asiat. Research, vol. XIV, p. 450-2) :
" Ptolemy places on the Tokosanna, the Metropolis
of the country, and calls it Trilingon, a true
Sanskrit appellation. Another name for it, saya
our author, was Triglypton, which is an attempt*
to render into Greek the meaning of Trilinga or



282



Trai-lifiga, the three 'lingas' of Mah&deva; and
this iu Arakau is part of an extensive district
in the Pnrdnas, called Tri-pura, or the three
tovvns and townships first inhabited by three
Daityas. These three districts were Kamila,
Ghattala and Burmftnaka, or Basang^ to be pro-
nounced Ba-sh&nh, or nearly so ; it is now
Ardkan. Kamilla alone retains the name of Tri-
pura, the two other districts having been wrested
from the head Raja. Ptolemy says that in the
country of the Trilinga, there were white ravens,
white parrots, and bearded cocks. The white
parrot is the kdkdttod; white ravens are to be
seen occasionally in India . • . Some say that
this white colour might have been artificial ....
The bearded cocks have, as it were, a collar *of
reversed feathers round the neck and throat,
and there only, which gives it the appearance of a
beard. These are found only in the houses of
native princes, from whom I procured three or
four; and am told that they came originally
from the hills in the N. W. of India." Lassen
has adopted a somewhat similar view. He
says (Ind. Alt., vol. Ill, p. 238-9): "Trigly-
phon was probably the capital of the Silver
country, Ar&kan of the present day. It lies,
according to Ptolemy's determination, one degree
further east and 3^ degrees further north than
the mouths of the Ar&kan river. The mouths
are placed in the right direction, only the numbers
are too great. It may be added that the founda-
tion of this city, which was originally called
YaiS&lt, belongs to earlier times than those of
Ptolemy, and no other capital is known to as in



233



this country. The Greek name which means
' thrice cloven,' i,fi., * three-forked' or * a trident*
suits likewise with Arakan, because it lies at the
projections of the delta, and the Arakan river, in
the lower part of its course, splits into several
arms, three of which are of superior importance.
Ptolemy's remark that the cocks there are bearded
and the ravens and parrots white, favours this
view, for according to Blyth (J. A, S. Beng., vol. XV,
p. 26] there is found in Ar&kan a species of the
Bucconidae, which on account of their beards are
called by the English * bar bets,' and on the same
authority we learn that what is said of the ravens
and parrots is likewise correct." Cunningham
again, says (Anc. Geog. of Ind., pp. 518-9): '* In
the inscriptions of the Kalachuri, or Haihaya
dynasty of Chedi, the Eajas assume the titles
of " Lords of Kalinjarapura, and of Trikalinga."
Trikalinga, or the three Kalingas, must be the
three kingdoms Dhanakataka, or Amar&vati, on
the Krishnsl, Andhra or Warangol, and Kalinga, or
BAjamahendri. " The name of Trikalinga is pro-
bably old, as Pliny mentions the Macco-Calingsa
and the Gangarides-Calingae as separate peoples
from the Calingae, while the Mahdbhdrata names
the Kalingas three separate times, and each time
in conjunction with different peoples. As Tri-
kalinga thus corresponds with the great province
of Telingana, it seems probable that the name of
Telingana may be only a slightly contracted form
of Trikalingana, or the three Kalingas. I am
aware that the name is usually derived from
Tri-linga, or the three phalli of MahMeva. Bat
the mention of Macco- Calingae and Gangarides-
80 G



234



Caliiigae by Pliny would seem to show that the
three Kalingas were known as early as the time
of Megasthen^s, from whom Pliuy has chiefly
copied his Indian Geography. The name must
therefore be older than the Phallic worship of
Mah^ddva in Southern India." Caldwell observes
{Dravid, Oram., Introd., p. 32) that though
Trilihgon is said to be on the Ganges, it may
have been considerably to the south of it, and on
the God&vart, which was always regarded by
the Hindus as a branch of the Ganges, and is
mythologically identical with it. The Andhras
and Kalingas, the two ancient divisions of the
Telugu people are represented by the Greeks as
Gangetic nations. It may be taken as certain that
Triglyphon, Trilinga or Modogalibga was identical
with Telingftna or Trilingam, which signifies the
country of the three Imgas. The Telugu name and
language are fixed by Pliny and Ptolemy as near
the mouths of the Ganges or between the Ganges
and the God&vari. Modo or Modoga is equivalent
to w/Adu of modem Telugu. It ** means three.**
Y ule again places Trilingon on the left bank of
the Brahmaputra, identifying it with Tripura
(Tippera), a town in the district of the same
name, 48 miles E.S.E. of Dhakka.

Bhingib^ri : — Saint-Martin and Yule, as we
have seen, place Rang&mati on the Brahmaputrd
at Udipur. Wilfords however, had placed it near
Chitagaon, and' identified it with Ptolemy's Bhing-
giberi. ** Ptolemy," he says (i4»a^. 2Je#.,~vol. XIV,
p 439) ; " has placed the source of the Dorias"
(which in Wilford's opinion is the DumurS* or
Dumriya, called in the lower part of its course the



235



Karmaphnli) " in some country to the south of
Salhata or Silhet, and he mentions two towns on
its banks : Paudassa in the upper part of its course*
but unknown ; in the lower part Rhingib^ri, now
Rang&mati near Oh&tgd7 (Ghitagaon), and Beang
is the name of the country on its banks. On
the lesser DumurS, the river Chingri. of the
Bengal Atlas, and near its source, is a town called
there Beang. Bangamati and Bang&-b&ti, to be
pronounced Rangabari, imply nearly the same
thing."

Tomara was no doubt a place belonging to
the Zamirai or Tamarai, who were located inland
from Kirrhadia, and inhabited the Garo Hills.

Mareoura or Malthoura : — In Yule's map this
metropolis is located, but doubtfully, to the west
of ToUgma (Tagaun) near the western bank of
the Khyendwen, the largest confluent of the
Ii-^wadi.

Bareukora (or Bareuathra) is in Yule's map
identified with BamO, a place in the district of
Chitagaon, from which it is 68 miles distant to
the S.S.E. Wilford identified it with Phalgun,
another name for which, according to the Kshetra
Samaia was Pharu'igara, and this he took to be
Ptolemy's Bareukora. Phalgun he explains to be
the Palong of the maps.

Kokkonagar a : — Yule suggests for this Pegu.
•*It appears," he says, "from T^ran&tha's his-
tory of Buddhism (ch. xxxix.) that the Indo-
Chinese countries were in old times known
collectively as Koki. In a Ceylonese account of
an expedition against B&maniy^, supposed to be
Pegu, the army captures the city of Ukkaka, and



286



in ifc the Lord of R&maniy&. Kokkonagara
again, is perhaps the K^kula of Ibn Batuta,
which was certainly a city on the Gulf of Siam,
and probably an ancient foundation from Kalinga,
called after Sri-k&kola there."

T h a r r a : — The same authority identifies this
with Thar&wati at the head of the delta of the
Ir&wadi. It is one of the divisions of the Pro-
vince of Pegu.

"Ptolemy* 8 description of Transgangetic India now
closes with the Islands.

26. The islands of the division of India
we have been describing are said to be these :

Bazakata 149° 30' 9° 30'

[Khalin^ 146° 9° 20']

In this island some say there is found in
abundance the murex shell-fish (kox^os) and
that the inhabitants go naked, and are called
Aginnatai.

27. There are three islands called S i n d a i,
inhabited by Cannibals, of which the centre

lies in 152° 6° 40' S.

Agathou daimonos ... 145° 15' on the equator.

28. A group of five islands, theB a r o u s a i,
whose inhabitants are said to be cannibals, and
the centre of which lies in 152° 20' 5° 20' S

•

A group of three islands, the Sabadeibai,
inhabited by cannibals, of which the centre lies
in 160° 8° 30' S.

Bazakata may perhaps be the island of
Cheduba, as Wilford has suggested. Lassen



237



takes it to be an island at . the mouth of the
Bassein river, near Cape Negrais, called Diamond
Island. Its inhabitants are called by Ptolemy
the Aginnatai, and represented as going naked.
Lassen, for Aginnatai would therefore read Apin-
natai, '* because apinaddha in Sanskrit means
unclothed ;" but apinaddha means * tied on,'
clothed. Yule thinks it may perhaps be the greater
of the two Andaman islands. He says {Proc,
Roy. Geog. Soo. vol. IV, 1882, p. 654) ; " Pro-
ceeding further the (Greek) navigator reaches
the city of Koli or Kolis, leaving behind him the
island of Bazakota, ' Good Fortune' {'AyaOov
Aaifiovos) and the group of the Barusae. Here, at
Koli, which I take to be a part of the Malay
peninsula, the course of the first century Greek,
and of the ninth century Arab, come together."
Bazakota and the Island of Good Fortune may be
taken as the Great and the Little Andam&n re-
spectively. The Arab relation mentions in an
unconnected notice an island called MalhSiu
between Serendib aad Kalah, i.e., between Ceylon
and the Malay Peninsula, which was inhabited
by black and naked cannibals. ** This may be
another indication of the Andd*md*n group, and
the name may have been taken from Ptolemy's
Maniolae, which in his map occupy the position
in question." And again : ** Still further out of
the way (than the Anddm&ns) and difficult of access
was a region of mountains containing mines of
silver. The landmarks (of the Arab navigator)
to reach these was a mountain called Alkhushn&mi
(* the Auspicious'). " This land of silver mines is
both by position and by this description identified



238



with the Argyre of Ptolemy. As no silver is
known to exist in that region (Arakan) it seems
probable that the Arab indications to that effect
were adopted from the Ptolemaic charts. And
this leads me to suggest that the Jibal Khush-
n4mi also was bat a translation of the Aya6ov
dalfiovo£ vTJ<ros, or isle of Good Fortune, in those
maps, whilst 1 have thought also that the name
Andd»man might have been adopted from a tran-
script of the same name in Greek as Ay. bai/iov"

KhalinS in Yale*s map is read as Saline,
and identified with the Island of Salang, close to
the coast in the latitude of the Nikobar Islands.

The Sindai Islands are placed by Ptolemy
about as far south as his island of labadios (Java)
but many degrees west of them. Lassen says {Ind.
Alt., vol. Ill, pp. 250-1) that the northmost of the
three islands must be Pulo-Bapat, on the coast of
Sumatra, the middle one the more southern, Pulo
Pangor, and the island of Agatho-Daimon, one of
the Salat Mankala group. The name of Sindai
might imply, he thinks, that Indian traders had
formed a settlement there.^ He seems to have
regarded the Island of Agatho-Daimon as belonging
to the Sindai group, but this does not appear to me
to be sanctioned by the text. Yule says : " Possibly
Sundar-Ful&t, in which the latter word seems to
be an Arabized plural of the Malay Pulo * island* is
also to be traced inSindaelnsulae, but I have
not adopted this in the map."

The Barousai Islands : — " The (Arab) na-
vigators," says Yule in his notes already referred
to, " crossing the sea of Horkand with the west
monsoon, made land at the islands of Lanja- Lanka,



239



br Lika-Balds, where tlie naked iuhabitants camo
off in their canoes bringing ambergris and cocoa-
nuts for barter, a description which with the posi-
tion identifies these islands with the Nikobars,
Nekaveram of Marco Polo, L&ka-V&ram of
Rashidu'd-din, and, I can hardly hesitate to say,
with the Barnsae Islands of Ptolemy."

Sabadeibai Islands : — The latter part of
this name represents the Sanskrit dwipa, * an
island.' The three islands of this name are pro-
bably those lying east from the more southern
parts of Sumatra.

29. The island oflabadios (or Sabadios)
which means the island of Barley. It is said
to be of extraordinary fertility, and to produce
very much gold, and to have its capital called
A r g y r e (Silver- town) in the extreme west of it.

It lies in 167° 8° 30' S.

and the eastern limit lies in ...169° 8° 10' S.

30. The Islands of the Satyrs, three in num-
ber, of which i\ie centre is in 171° 2° 30' S.
The inhabitants are said to have tails like
those with which Satyrs are depicted.

31. There are said to be also ten other
islands forming a continuous group called
Maniolai, from which ships fastened with
iron nails are said to be unable to move away,
(perhaps on account of the magnetic iron in
the islands) and hence they are built with
wooden bolts. ' The inhabitants are called
Maniolai, and are reputed to be cannibals.

The island of labadios : — Yava, the first part


240



of this name, is the Sanskrit word for ' barley,' and
the second part like deiba^ diba, diva, and div or
diuj represents dvipa, * an island.' We have here
therefore the Island of Java, which answers in
most respects to Ptolemy's description of it. The
following note regarding it I take from Banbury's
History of Ancient Geography (pp. 643-4): "The
name of Java has certainly some resemblance ^with
labadius, supposing that to be the correct form
of the name, and, what is of more consequence,
Ptolemy adds that it signifies * the island of
barley,' which is really the meaning of the name of
Java. The position in latitude assigned by him
to the island in question (8^ degrees of south
latitude) also agrees very well with that of Java :
but his geographical notions of these countries
are in general so vague and erroneous that little
or no value can be attached to this coincidence.
On the other hand, the abundance of gold
would suit well with Sumatra, which has
always been noted on that account, while there is
little or no gold found in Java. The metropolis
at its western extremity would thus correspond
with Achin, a place that must always have been
one of the principal cities of the island. In
either case he had a very imperfect idea of its
size, assigning it a length of only about 100 Geog.
miles, while Java is 9° or 540 G. miles in length,
and Sumatra more than 900 G. miles. It seems
not improbable that in this case, as in several
others, he mixed up particulars which really refer-
red to the two different islands, and applied them
to one only : but it is strange that if he had any
information concerning such islands as Sumatra



241



and Java, he should have no notion that they
were of very large size, at the same time that
he had such greatly exaggerated ideas of the
dimensions of Ceylon." Mannert took labadios
to be the small island of Banka on the S.E.
of Sumatra. For the application of the name of
Java to the Island of Sumatra, see Yule's Marco
Polo, vol. II, p. 266, note 1.

' Regarding the Islands of the Satyrs, Lassen says
(Ind, Alt, vol. Ill, p. 252) : The three islands, called
after the Satyrs, mark the extreme limits of the
knowledge attained by Ptolemy of the Indian Archi-
pelago. The inhabitants were called Satyrs becau se,
according to the fabulous accounts of mariners, they
had tails like the demi-gods of that name in Greek
mythology. Two of these must bo Madura and
Bali, the largest islands on the north and east coasts
of Java, and of which the first figures prominently
in the oldest legends of Java ; the second, on the
contrary, not till later times. The third island is
probably Lombok, lying near Bali in the east. A
writer in Smith's Dictionary of Classical Geography
thinks these islands were perhaps the A n a m b a
group, and the Satyrs who inhabited them apes
resembling men. Yule says in the notes : — '* San-
dar-Fulat we cannot hesitate to identify withPulo
Condor, Marco Polo's Sondur and Condur. These
may also be the Satyrs' islands of Ptolemy, but
they may be his Sindai, for he has a Sinda city
on the coast close to this position, though his
Sindai islands are dropped far way. But it
would not be difficult to show that Ptolemy's
islands have been located almost at random, or as
from a pepper-castor." ^

31 G



242



Ptolemy locates the Maniolai Islands, of
which he reckons ten, about 10 degrees citstward
from Ceylon. There is no such group however
to be found in that position, or near it, and we
may safely conclude that the Maniolai isles are
as mythical as the magnetic rocks they were
said to contain. In an account of India, written
at the close of the 4th or beginning of the 5th
century, at the request either of Palladius or
of Lausius, to whom Palladius inscribed his
Historia Lausiaca, mention is made of these
rocks : "At Muziris," says Priaulx, in his notice
of this account*^ "our traveller stayed some time,
and occupied himself in studying the soil and
climate of the place and the customs and manners
of its inhabitants. He also made enquiries about
Ceylon, and the best mode of getting there, but
did not care to undertake the voyage when he
heard of the dangers of the Sinhalese channel,
of the thousand isles, the Maniolai which impede
its navigation, and the loadstone rocks which
bring disaster and wreck on all iron-bound ships."
And Masu'di, who had traversed this sea, says that
ships sailing on it were not fastened with iron
nails, its waters so wasted them. {The Indian
Travels of Apolloniue of Tyana, Sfc., p. 197).
After Ptolemy's time a different position was
now and again assigned to these rocks, the direc-
tion in which they were moved being more and
more to westward. Priaulx (p. 247), uses this

^ Wilf ord {As. Res. vol. XIV, pp. 429-30), gives the fable
regarding these rocks from the Chaturvarga Chmtdmani,
and identifies thejn with those near PArindra or the lion'a
place in i^e lion's mouth or Straits of Singapnr.



._j



243



as an argument iu support of his contention that
the Roman traffic in the eastern seas gradually
declined after 273 A.D., and finally disappeared.
How, otherwise, he asks, can we account for the
fact that the loadstone rocks, those myths of
Roman geography, which, in Ptolemy's time, the
flourishing days of Roman commerce, lay some
degrees eastward of Ceylon, appear A.D. 400
barring its western approach, and A.D. 560 have
advanced up to the very mouth of the Arabian Gulf.
But on the Terrestrial Globe of Martin Behem,
Nuremberg A.D. 1492, they are called Manillas,
and are placed immediately to the north of Java
Major. Aristotle speaks of a magnetic mountain
on the coast of India, and Pliny repeats the story.
Klaproth states that the ancient Chinese authors
also speak of magnetic mountains in the southern
sea on the coasts of Tonquin and Cochin-China,
and allege regarding them that if foreign ships
which are bound with plates of iron approach
them, such ships are there detained, and can in no
case pass these places. (Tennant's Ceylon, vol. I,
p. 444 n.) The origin of the fable, which represents
the magnetic rocks as fatal to vessels fastened with
iron nails, is to be traced to the peculiar mode in
which the Ceylonese and Malays have at all times
construcbed their boats and canoes, these being
put together without the use of iron nails ; the
planks instead being secured by wooden bolts,
and stitched together with cords spun from the
fibre of the cocoanut. " The Third Calender,'
in the Arabian Nights Entertainment , gives a lively
account of his shipwreck upon the Loadstone
Mountain, which he tells us was entirely covered



244



towards the sea with the nails that belonged
to the immense number of ships which it had
destroyed.

Cap. 3.

Position op the Sinai.

[11th Map of AsiaJ]

1. The Sinai are bounded on the north by
the part of S e r i k e already indicated, on the
east and south by the unknown land, pn the
west by India beyond the G.anges, along the line
defined as far as the Great Gulf and by the Great
Gulf itself, and the parts immediately adjacent
thereto, and by the Wild Beast Gulf, and by
that frontier of the Sinai around which are
placed the Ikhthyophagoi Aithiopes,
according to the following outline : —

2. After the boundary of the Gulf on the
side of India the mouth of

the river Aspithra 1 70° 16°

Sources of the river on the

eastern side of the Seman-

thinos range ... 180° 26°

Bramma, a town 177° 12° 30'

The mouth of the river

Ambastes 176° 10°

The sources of the river 179° 30' 15°

Rhabana, a town 177° 8° 30'

Mouth of the river Sainos ... 176° 20' 6° 30'

The Southern Cape 175° 15' , 4°

The head of Wild Beast Gulf 176° 2°



245



The Cape of Satyrs 175° on the line

Gulf of the Sinai" 178° 2° 20^

3. Aronnd the Gulf of the Sinai dwell the
fish-eating Aithiopians.

Mouth of the river Kot-

tiaris 177° 20' 7° S.

Sources of the river 180° 40' 2° S.

Where it falls into the

river Sainos 180° on the line.

Kattigara, the port of the

Sinai 177° 8°30'S.

4. The most northern parts are possessed
by the S^manthinoi, who are situated above
the range that bears their name. Below them,
and below the range are the A k a d r a i, after
whom are the Aspithrai, then along the Great
Gulf the Ambastai, and around the gulfs
immediately adjoining the Ikhthyophagoi
Sinai.

5. The interior towns of the Sinai are
named thus : —

Akadra 178° 20' 21° 15'

Aspithra 175° 1G°

Kokkonagara 179° 50' 2° S.

Sarata 180° 30' 4° S.

6. And the Metropolis

Sinai orThinai 180° 40' 3° S.

which thoy say has neither brazen walls nor
anything else worthy of note. It is encompas-
sed on the side of Kattigara towards the west by

^* Latin Translator.



246



the unknown land, which encircles the Green
Sea as far as Cape Prason, from which begins,
as has been said, the Gulf of the Batrakheian
Sea, connecting the land with Cape Rhapton,
and the sonthem parts of Azania.

It has been pointed out how egregiously Ptolemy
misconceived the configuration of the coast of Asia
beyond the Great Gulf, making it run southward
and then turn westward, and proceed in that direc-
tion till it reached the coast of Africa below the
latitude of Zanzibar. The position, therefore of
the places he names, cannot be determined with
any certainty. By the Wild Beast Gulf may per-
haps be meant the Gulf of Tonquin, and by the Gulf
of the Sinai that part of the Chinese Sea which is
beyond Hai-nan Island. The river Kottiaris
may perhaps be the river of Canton. T h i n a i,
or Sinai, may have been Nankin, or better perhaps
Si-gnan-fu, in the province of Shen-si, called by
Marco Polo, by whom it was visited, Ken-janfu.
" It was probably," says Yule (Marco Polo, vol. II,
p. 21) " the most celebrated city in Chinese history
and the capital of several of the most potent dynas-
ties. In the days of its greatest fame it was called
Chaggan." It appears to have been an ancient
tradition that the city was surrounded by brazen
walls, but this Ptolemy regarded as a mere fable.
The author of the PeripMs (c. 64), has the following
notice of the place : — " There lies somewhere in the
interior of Thina, a very great city, from which
silk, either raw or spun or woven into cloth is
carried overland to Barygaza through Baktria or
by the Ganges to Limyrike . . . Its situation is



247



under the Lesser Bear.*' Ptolemy has placed it 3
degrees south of the equator ! !

Cap. 4.
Position of the Island op Taprobane.
[Map of Asia 12.]

1. Opposite Cape K6iy, which is in India,
is the projecting point of the Island of T a p r o-
ban^, which was called formerly Simou-
ndou, and now Sal ike. The inhabitants
are commonly called Salai. Their heads are
quite encircled with long luxuriant locks, like
those of women. The country produces rice,
honey, ginger, beryl, hyacinth"* and has mines
of every sort — of gold and of silver and other
metals. It breeds at the same time elephants
and tigers.

2. The point already referred to as lying
opposite to Kory is called North Cape
(Boreion Akron) and lies 126° 1 2*^ 30'

3. The descriptive outline of the rest of the
island is as follows : —

After the North Cape which

is situated in 126° 12° 30'

comes Cape Galiba 124° 11° 30'

Margana, a town 123° 30' 10° 20'



^ In one of the temples, says Kosmos, is the great
hyacinth, as larg^e as a pine-cone, the colour of fire and
flashing from a distance, especially when catching the
beams of the sun, a matchless sight.



248



logana, atown 123° 20" 8° 50'

Anarismoundon, a cape 122° 7° 45'

Mouth of the River Soana... 122° 20" 6"' 15'

Sources of the river 124° 30" 3°

Sindokanda, a town 122° 5°

Haven of Priapis 122° 3° 40'

4. Anoubingara 121° 2° 40'

Headland of Zeus 120° 30' 1°

Prasodes Bay ,. 121° 2°

Noubartha, a town 121°40' on the Line.

Mouth of the river Azanos... 123° 20" 1° S.

The sources of the river 126° 1° N.

Odoka, atown 123° 2° S.

Orneon, (Birds' Point) a

headland 125° 2° 30" S.

5. Dagana, a town

sacred to the Moon 126° 2° S.

Korkobara, a town 127° 20" 2° 20" S.

Cape of Dionysos 130° 1° 30' S.

Ketaion Cape 132° 30" 2° 20" S.

Mouth of the river

Barak^s 131° 30" 1° N.

Sources of the river 128° 2° N.

B6kana, a town 131° 1° 20' N.

The haven of Mardos

or Mardoulamue 131° 2° 20" N.

6. Abaratha, a town ... 131° 3° 15" N.
Haven of the Sun (Heliou

limen) 130° 4°

Great Coast (Aigialos
Megas) 130° 4° 20"



J



249



Prokouri, a town ..131° 6^20'

The haven of Rizala 130° 20' 6° 30'

Oxeia, a headland 130° . 7° 30'

Mouth of the river Ganges 1 29° ?° 20'

The sources of the river. . . 127° 7° 15'

Spatana Haven 129° 8°

7. Nagadiba or Naga-

dina,'atown ....,, 129° 8° Sy

PatiBay 128° 30' 9° 30'

Anoubingara, a town 1 28° 20' 9° 40'

Modouttou, a mart 128° . 11° 20'

Mouth of the river Phasis 127° 1 1° 20'

The sources of the river. . . 126° 8°

Talakory (or Aakote,) a

mart 126° 20' 11° 20'

After which the North Cape,

8. The notable mountains of the island are
those called Q a lib a, from which flow the
Phasis and the Ganges, and that called M a 1 a i a,
from which flow the Soanas and the Azanos
and the Barakes, and at the base of this range,
towards the sea, are the feeding grounds of the
elephants.

9. The most northern parts of the Island are
possessed by the G a 1 i b o i and the M o u d o u t-
t o i, and below these the Anourogrammoi
and the Nagadiboi, and below the Anouro-
grammoi the S o a n o i, and below the Nagadiboi
the Sennoi, and below these the Sando-
k a n d a i, towards the west, and below these
towards the feeding grounds of the elephants

32 G



2W



ihe Bonmasanoi, and tke T a r a k & o i, w&9
are towards the east, below whom are the
Bokanoi and Diordouloi, and furthest
south the Bhogandanoi, aad the Kagei*
sor*

10. The inland towns in the island are
these : —

Anonrogrammon, the

royal residence 124® la' S"" W

Maagrammon^ the* me-
tropolis 127^ 7®2(K

Adeisamon ^ 129*^ 5*^

PodoukS 124® 3«40'

Oulispada 126^20' 40'

Nakadonba 128® 30' on the Line.

11. In front of TaproBand Kes a gronp o€
islands which they say nnmber 1378. Those
whose names are mentioned are the following: —
Ouangalia (or Onangana) 120® 15' 11® 20'

Kanathra : 121® 40' 11® 15'

Aigidi6n 118® 8® 30'

Omeon 119® 8® 30'

Monakh^ 116® 4® 15'

Ammind 117® 4® 30^

12. Karkos.. ,. 118® 40' S,

Phil^kos 116® 30' 2® 40' S.

Eir^n^, 120® 2®30'S.

^alandadrona 121® 5° 30' S;.

Abrana 125® 4® 20' S.

Bassa 126® 6® 30' Sv

Balaka... ..^ 129® 5® 30' S.



251



AlaTaa ,... 131* 4^ S,

Goumara 133° 1° 40' S,

13. Zal»a....^,.« .^... 135® on the Line,

Zibala .«..«..«.^-..r«..-^ -. 135® 4 15^^ N«

Nagadiba....* 135^ 8° 30'

Sousoimra 135*^ 11° 15'

14. Let such then be the mode of describing
in detail the complete clrctdt of all the pro-
-rinces and satrajpies of the known world, and
49ince we indicated in the outset of this com-
pendium how the known portion of the earth
should be delineated both on ihe sphere Jind in
a projection on & plane suz^-aoe -exactly in the
same manner and proportion as wha.t is traced
en the solid sphere, and since it is convenient
to accompany such descriptions of the world
with u summary sTcetcii, exhibiting the whole
in one comprehensive view, let me now. there-
fore give such a sketch with due observance of
the proper proportion.

This island of Tsa proband has changed its
name with notable frequency. In the Bdmdyana
and other Sanskrit werksit is called Lank^, but
this was An appellation imknown to the Greeks.
They called it at first Antichthonos, being under
the belief that it was a region iDelcooiging to the
opposite poition of the werld (PHny, lib. "71,0. xxii).
In the time of Alexander, when its situation was
l>etter understood, it was called TaprobanS. Me-
gasthenes mentions it under this name, and. re-
marks that it was divided (into two) by a river, that
its inhabitants were called Falaeogoni .and that it



252



produced more gold and pearls of large size t^an
India. From our author we learn Uiat ihe old name
of the island was Simoundou, and that Taprobane,
its next name, was obsolete in his time, being re-
placed by Salike. The author of the P.eripl4s states,
on the other hand, tiiat Taprobane was the old name
of the island, and that in his time it was caUed
Palai Simoundou. The section of his work however
in which this statement occurs (§61) is allowed
to be hopelessly corrupt. According to Pliny,
Palaesimundus was the name of the cs^ital town,
and also of the river on whose banks it stood. How
long the island continued to be called Salike does
not appear, but it was subsequently known under
such names as Serendivus, Sirlediba, Serendib,
Zeilan, and Sailan, frotn which the transition is
easy to the name which it now bears, Ceylon.

With regard to the origin or derivation of the
majority of these names the most competent
scholars have been divided in their opinions. Ac-
cording to Lassen the term Palaiogonoi was select-
ed by Megasthenes to designate the inhabitants
of the island, as it ccmveyed the idea entertained
of them by the Indians that they were R^kshasas,
or giants, *the sons of the progenitors of the
world.' To this it may be objected that Megas-
thenes did not intend by the term to describe the
inhabitants, but merely to give the name by which
they were known, which was different from that
of the island. Schwanbeck again suggested that
the term might be a transliteration of Pali-jan&s,
a Sanskrit compound, which he took to mean
" men of the sacred doctrine " {Ind. Ant., vol. VI,
p. 129, n.) But, as Piiaulxhas pointed out {Apollon^



253



of Tyana, p. 110), this is an appellation which
could scarcely have been given to others than
learned votaries of Buddhism, and which could
scarcely be applicable to a people who were not
even Buddhist till the reign of Aiioka, who was
subsequent to Ohandragupta, at whose court
Megasthen^s acquired his knowledge of India.
Besides, it has been pointed out by Goldstiicker {he.
n. 59) that Pali has not the meaning here attri-
buted to it. He adds that the nearest approach
he could find to Palaiogonoi ia—pdra ' on the other
side of the river' and janda ' a people '; P&rajanas,
therefore, * a people on the other side of the river.'
Tennent, in conclusion, takes the word to be a
Hellenized form of Pali-putra, *the sons of the
P&H,' the first Prasian colonists of the island. A
satisfactory explanation of P a 1 a i-S imoundou
has not yet been hit on. That given by Lassen,
Pali-Simanta, or Head of the Sacred Law, has been
discredited. We come now to Taprobane.
This is generally regarded as a transliteration of
T&mraparni, the name which Vijaya, who,
according to tradition, led the first Indian colony
into Ceylon, gave to the place where he first landed,
and which name was afterwards extended to the
whole island. It is also the name of a river in
Tinneveli, and it has, in consequence, been sup-
posed that the colonists, already referred to, had
been, for some time, settled on its banks before
they removed to Ceylon. The word means * Copper-
coloured leaf.' Its P&li form is Tambapanni (see
Ind. Ant., Vol. XIII, pp. 33f.) and is found, as
has been before noticed, in the inscription of
Asoka on the Gim&r rock. Another name, applied


254



to it by Brahmanical writers, is Dwipa-B&vana,
i.e., ' tlie island of B4vana, whence perhaps Tapro-
bane.' Salik4, Serendivas, and other sub-
sequent names, are all considered to be connected
etjmologicaUy with Simhala (colloquially Silam),
the F&li form of Sthala, a derivative from aimha,
*a lion/ i.e. * a hero' — the hero Vijaya. According
to a different view these names are to be referred
to the Javanese eela, * a precious stone/ but this
explanation is rejected by Yule (Marco Polo, vol. II,
p. 296, n. 6). For Salik^, Tennent suggests an
Egyptian origin, Siela-keh, i.e., ' the land of Siela.'
Little more was known in the west respecting the
island beyond what Megasthenes had communicat-
ed until the reign of the Emperor Claudius, when
an embassy was sent to Rome by the Sinhalese
monarch, who had received such astonishing
accounts of the power and justice of the Roman
people that he became desirous of enteiing into
alliance with them. He had derived his knowledge
of them from a castaway upon his island, the f reed-
man of a Boman called Annius Flocamus. The
embassy consisted of 4 members, of whom the
chief was called Bachia, an appellation from which
we may infer that he held the rank of a B4ja«
They gave an interesting, if not a very accurate,
account of their country, which has been preserved
by Pliny (Nat Hist Hb. TI). Their friendly visit,
operating conjointly with the discovery of the
quick passage to and from the East by means of
^e monsoon, gave a great impetus to commercial
enterprise, and the rich marts, to which access had
thus been opened, soon began to be frequented by
the galleys of the West. Ptolemy, living in Alexan-



255



dria, the great entrepot in those days of the Eastertt
traffic, very probably acqmred from traders arriv-
ing from Ceylon, his knowledge coneeming it,
which is both wonderfully copious, and at the
same time, fairly accurate, if we except his views
of its magnitude, which like all his predecessors he
vastly over-estimated. On the other hand, he has
the merit of having determined properly its gene-
ral form and outline, as well as its actual. position
with reference to the adjoining continent, points on
which the most vague and erroneous notions had
prevailed up to his time, the author of the PeriplikB
for instancedescribing the island as extendingso far
westward that it almost adjoined Azandain Africa*
The actual position of Ceylon is between 5° 55'
and 9^ SV N. lat., and 79° 42f and 8P 55' B. long.
Its extreme length from north to soui^ is 271^
miles, its gi*eatest width 137) miles, and its area
about one-sixth smaller than that of Ireland.
Ptolemy however made it extend i^rough no less
than 15 degrees of latitude and 12 oi longitude.
He thus brought it down more than two degrees
BOTiih of the equator, while he carried its north-
em extremity up to 12 J° N. lat. , nearly 3 degrees
north of its true position. He has thus represented
it as being 20 times larger than it really is.
This extravagant over-estimate, which had its
origin in the Mytiiological Geography of the Indian
BrShmans, and which was adopted by the islanders
themselves, as well as by the Greeks, was shared
also by the Arab geographers Masil'di, Idrisi, and
Abu'1-fida, and by such writers as Marco Polo. In
consequence of these misrepresentations it came
to be questioned at one time whether Ceylon or



256



Sumatra was the Taprojbane of the Greeks, and
Kant tLndertook to prove that it was Madagascar
(Tennent's Ceylon, vol. I, p. 10 and n.). Ptolemy
has so far departed from his usual practice that
he gives some particulars respecting it, which
lie out of the sphere of Geography, strictly so
called. He is mistaken in stating that the tiger
is found in Ceylon, but he has not fallen into
error on any other point which he has noticed.
It 'may be remarked that the natives still wear
their hair in the effeminate manner which he has
noticed. In describing the island geographically
he begins at its northern extremity, proceeds
southward down the western coast, and returns
along the east coast to Point Pedro. " In his map
he has laid down the position of eight promon-
tories, the mouths of five rivers and four bays and
harbours, and in the interior he had ascertained
that there were thirteen provincial divisions, and
nineteen towns, besides two emporia on the coast,
five great estuaries, which he terms . lakes, two
bays and two chains of mountains, one of them
surrounding Adam's Peak, which he designates
as Malaia^ the name by which the hills that
environ it are known in the Mahawdmo." Ten-
nent, from whom the foregoing summary has been
quoted, observes in a foot-note (vol. I, p. 535) that
Ptolemy distinguishes those indentations in the
coast which he describes as hays {K6kfros) from the
estuaries, to which he gives the epithet of lakes,
(Xi/i^p) ;** of the former he particularises two, Pati

^* Tennent here seems to have confonnded Xi/m^i^, a
haven or oreek, with \ifivrj, a lake. The wordjs are,
however, etymologioally oonnected.



257



and Frasodes, ike position of which would nearly
correspond with the Bay of Trinkonamalai and the
harbour of Colombo — of the latter he enumerates
five, and from their position thej seem *to repre-
sent the peculiar estuaries formed by the con-
joint influence of the rivers and the current^ and
known to the Arabs by the name of *' gobbs."

Ceylon is watered by numerous streams, some
of which are of considerable size. The most
important is the Mah&weligang&, which has its
sources in the vicinity of Adam's Peak, and which,
after separating into several branches, enters the
ocean near Trinkonamalai. Ptolemy calls it the
Ganges. He mentions four other rivers, the Soana,
Azanos, Barakes and Phasis, which Tennent
identifies with the Dedera-Oya, the Bentote, the
Kambukgam and the Kangarayen respectively.
Lassen, however [Ind. Alt., vol. Ill, p. 21),
identifies the Azanos with the K&laganga which
enters the sea a little farther north than the
river of Bentote, and is a larger stream.

The mountains named by Ptolemy are the
Galiba in the north-west of the island, and the
Malaia, by which he designates the mountain
groups which occupy the interior of the island
towards the south. He has correctly located the
plains or feeding grounds of the elephants to the
south-east of these mountains; malcki is the
Tamil word for ** mountain."

The places which he has named along the coast
and in the interior have been identified, though
in most cases doubtfully, by Tennent in his map
of TaprobanS according to Ptolemy and Pliny,
in vol. I. of his work, as follows :—
3d a



258



On the West Coast beginning from the north :—

Margana with Mantote.

logana with Aripo.

Anaidsmoondou Cape with Kudramali Point,
but Mannert with Kalpantjn (further south).

Sindo Elanda with Chilau (ChUau from Salft-
bhana — ^the Diving, i. e. Pearl Fishery.)

Port of Priapis** with Negombo. .

Cape of Zeus at Colombo.,

Prasodes Bay, with Colombo Bay.

Noubartha with Barberyn.

Odoka with Hikkodd.

Cape Omeon (of Birds) with Point de Galle.
On the South Coast : —

Dagana with Dondra Head.

Korkobaj'a with Tangalle.
On the East Coast :

Cape oi Dionysos, with Hambangtote.

Cape Ketaion (Whale cape) with Elephant Bock^
(Bokana Yule identifies with Kambugam).

Haven of Mardos with Arukgam Bay.

Abaratha with Karativoe (but Yule with Apar-
atote, which is better).

Haven of the Sun with Batticalao.

Bizala Haven with Yendeloos Bay.

Oxeia Cape (Sharp point) with Foul Point.

Spatana Haven with an indentation in Trin-
konamalai Bay.

Nagadiba or Nagadina with a site near the Bay.

Pati Bay with Trinkonamalai Bay.

Anoubingara with Kuchiavelli.

Modouttou with Kokelay.



as



This was no doubt a name ^ven by the Greeks.



259



On the North Coast :—

Mouth of the Fhasis.

Talakory or Aakotd, with Tondi Manaar. Yulo
places both Nagadiba and Modouttou on the
north-west coast, identifying the hitter with
Mantote.

With respect to places in the interior of the
island Tennent says (vol. I, p. 5S6, n. 2) : ** His
(Ptolemy's) Maagrammon would appear on a
first glance to be Mahftgftm, but as he calls it the
metropolis, and places it beside the great river, it
is evidently Bintenne, whose ancient name was
" Mahayangana " or " Mahftwelligdm." His A n u-
rogrammum, which he calls /Sao-iXctop "the
royal residence," is obviously Anurftdhapura, the
city founded by Anurftdha 500 years before
Ptolemy {Mahawdnso, pp. 50-65). The province
of the Moudouttoiin Ptolemy's list has a close
resemblance in name, though not in position, to
Mantote ; the people of Beyagamkorle still
occupy the country assigned by him to the
Bhogandanoi — his Nagadiboiare identical
with the N&gadiva of the Mahawdnao ; and the
islet to which he has given the name of 6 a s s a,
occupies nearly the position of the Basses, which it
has been the custom to believe were so-called by
the Portuguese, — ** Baxos" or ** Baixos" ** Sunken
Rocks." The Bhogandanoi Were located in
the south-west of the island. The sea, which
stretched thence towards Malaka, appears to have
at one time borne their name, as it was called by
the Arab navigators " the sea of Horkand." The
group of islands lying before Ceylon is no doubt
that of the Maldives.



260



KLAt/DIOS PTOLEMY'S GEOGRAPHY
OF CENTRAL ASIA.

ifiaving How examined m detail tlie whole of
Ptolemy's Indian Geogi'aphy, I annex as a suitable
Appendix his description of the countries adjacent
to India. The reader will thus be presented with
his Geography in its entirety of Central and
South-Eastem Asia. In the notes I have adverted
only to the more salient points*

BaoK VI, Cap. 9.
Position of Hyreania.

[Mfli2> of AsiSf 7.]

1. Hyrtaniais botinded on the nortt hy
that part of the Hyrtanian sea which extends
from tde extreme point of the boundfafy line
with Media as far as the uK)atIi of the river
0x08 which lies iD....^ 100* 43° ^'

2. In which dmanon occttP these town* : —

Saramann^,. a town 94° 15' 40° 30^

Mouth of the Maxei-a 97* 20^

The Sotfrces of this riVer ... 98*

Mouth of the Sokanda 97° 20^

Mouth of the river Oxos .^. I00°

3. On the west by tie part of M S d i a al-
ready mentioned as far as Mount !£or&nos [in
which part of Media isi

Saramann^.. 94° 15' 40° 30'}

4. QH the south by Parthia, along the
side of it described as passing through the range
of Koronos, and on the east by M ar g i a a e>



41° 30^
38° 20^
42°
43° 5'



,w



J



261



tbrongli the tnoUntainotts regioli which conil6cti
the extremitieEl l^eferred to.

6i The maritime ports of Ilyrkania arO
inhabited by the M a x e r a i, and the A s t a
b ^ n o i and below the Maxerai by the It h r 4 n
d o i, after whom corned the country adjacent to
the Koronod range^ A r s i t i s^ and below the
AstabSnoi is the coHntiy called S i r a^
kSne.

6. The cities in the interior are said to be
these i —

BarangS 99^ 42^

Adrapsa 98*^30' 41^30'

Kasapd 99^30' 40° 30^

Abarbina 97^ 40° 10"

Sorba 98'^ 40^30'

7. Sinaka 100° 39° 40'

Amaroasa 96^ 39° 55"

Hyrkania, the metropolis.... 98° 50' 40°

SakS (or Sale) 94° 15' 39° 30'

Asmouma ,.... 97° 30' 39° 30'

Maisoka (or Mausoka) 99° 39° 30'

8. And an island in the

sea near it called Talka . , . . . . 95° 42°

The name of Hyrkania is preserred to this
day in that of Giirkan or Jorjan, a town lying to
the east of AsterAbad. Its boundaries have
varied at different periods of history. Speaking
generally, it corresponds with the modem Mazan*
deran and Aster&b&d. Its northern frontier waa
formed by the Kaspian, which was sometimes called
after it-^the Hyrkanian Sea. The river 6xos,



262



wliicli is called by tHe natires an its banks the
Amu-daryft, and by Persian writers the Jihtm,
falls now into the Sea of Aral, bnt as we learn
from onr anthor as well as from other ancient
Writers it was in former times an affluent of the
Kaspian, a fact confirmed by modem explora-
tions. Motlnt Koronos was the eastern portion
of the lofty mountain chain called the Elburz,
which runs along the southern shores of the
Kaspian. The Biver M a x d r a is mentioned by
Pliny (lib. VI, C. xlv, sec. 18) who calls it the
Maxeras. It has been rariously identified, as with
the Tejin, the Gurgan, the Atrek and others.
The metropolis of Hyrkania is called by Ammia-
nus Marcellinus (c. xxiii, sec. 6) Hyrkana,
which IB probably the Gurkan already mentioned.

Cap. 10.

Position op Margiane.

[Afop oj Asia 7.]

Margian^ is bounded on the west by
Byrkania) along the side which has been al-
ready traced, and on the north by a part of
S k y t h i a extending from the mouths of the
river Oxos as far as the division towards
Baktriane, which lies in 103®— 43^ and on
the south by part of A r e i a along the parallel
of latitude running from the boundary towards
Hyrkania and Partliia through the S a r i p h i
range, as far as the extreme point lying 109° —
39°, and on the east by Baktriane along
the mountainous region which connects the



263



said extremities. A considei'able stream, the
M a rg OS, flows through the country, and its

sources lie in 105^ 39°

while it falls into the 6xos in 102° 43° 30'.

2. The parts of it towards the river Ozos
are possessed by the Derbikkai, called also
the Derkeboi, and below them the M a s s a-
g e t a i, after whom the P a r n o i and the
Daai, below whom occurs the desert of
M a r g i a n a, and more to the east than are
the Tapouroi.

3. The cities of it are —

Ai-iaka 103° 43°

Sina (or S^na) 102° 30' 42° 20'

Aratha 103° 30' 42° 30'

Argadina 101° 20' 41° 40'

lasonion 103° 30' 41° 30'

"4. There unites with the River Margos,
another stream flowing from the Sariphi range

of which the sources lie 103° 39°

Rh6a 102° 40° 50'

Antiokheia MargianS 100° 40° 20'

Gouriane 104° 40°

Nisaia or Nigaia 105° 39° 10'

* * In early periods," says Wilson {Ariana Antiqua,
p. 148), ''Margiana seems to have been unknown
as a distinct province, and was, no doubt, in
part at least, comprised within the limits of Parthia.
In the days of the later geographers, it had
undergone the very reverse relation, and had, to
all appearance^ extended its boundaries so as to



264



include great part of the original Parthia. It is
evident from Strabo's notice of the latter (lib. XI,
c. ix) that there was left little of it except the
name ; and in Ptolemy no part of Parthia appears
above the mountains." Strabo says of it (lib. XI,
c. x) " Antiokhos Sot^r admired its fertility, he
enclosed a circle of 1,500 stadia with a wall, and
founded a city, Antiokheia. The soil is well adapt-
ed to vines. They say that a vine stem has been
frequently seen there which would require two
men to girth it, and bunches of grapes two cubits
in size." Pliny writes somewhat to the same
effect. He says (Ub. VI, c. xvi) : " Next comes
Maiigiane, noted for its sunny skies; it is the
only vine-bearing district in all these parts, and
it is shut in on all sides by pleasant hiUs. It
has a circuit of 1,500 stadia, and is difficult of
approach on account of sandy deserts, which
extend for 120 miles. It lies confronting a
tract of country in Parthia, in which Alexander
had built Alexandria, a city, which after its
destruction by the barbarians, Antiokhos, the son
of Seleucus, rebuilt on the same site. The river
Margus which amalgamates with the Zothale,
flows through its midst. It was named Syriana,
but Antiokhos preferred to have it called Antio-
kheia. It is 80 stadia in circumference. To this
place Orodes conducted the Romans who were
taken prisoners when Crassus was defeated."
This ancient city is represented now by Merv.
The river Margus is that now called the Murgh-Ab
or Meru-rftd. It rises in the mountains of the
Haz&ras (which are a spur of the Paropanisos and
the Sariphi montes of our author), and loses itself



265



in the s^ds about 50 miles noirtli-west of the
city, though in ancient times it appears to have
poured its waters into the Oxos.

The tribes that peopled Hyrkania and Margiana
and the other regions that lay to the eastward
of the Kaspian were for the most part of Skythian
origin, and some of them were nomadic. They
are described by the ancient writers as brave and
hardy warriors, but of repulsive aspect and man-
ners, and addicted to inhuman practices. Ptolemy
names five as belonging to Margiana — the
Derbikkai, Massagetai, Pamoi, Daai and Ta-
pouroi.

The Derbikes are mentioned by Strabo (lib.
XI, c, xi, sec. ?), who gives this account of them.
" The Derbikes worship the eai*th. They neither
sacrifice nor eat the female of any animal. Pei*-
sons who attain the age of above 70 years are
put to death by them, and their neai^est relations
eat their flesh. Old women are strangled and then
buried. Those who die under 70 years of age
are not eateiij biit are only buried."

The Massagetai are referred to afterwards
(c. xiii, sec. 3) as a tribe of nomadic Sakai,
belonging to the neighbourhood of the river
Askatangkas* They are mentioned by Herodotos
(lib. I, c. cciv.) who says that they inhabited a great
portion of the vast plain that extended eastward
from the Kaspian. He then relates how Cyrus
lost his life in a bloody fight against them and
their queen Tomyiis. Alexander came into colli-
sion with their wandering hordes during the
campaign of Sogdiana as Arrian relates {Anab,
lib. IV, cc. xvi, xvii).

34 o



266



As regards the cnigin of their name it is referred
by Beal (/. B. A, 8., N.S., vol. XVI, pp. 257, 279) to
maiza — * greater* (in Moeso- Gothic) and Yue-ti (or
chi). He thus reverts to the old theory of Ilemusat
and Klaproth, that the Yue-ti were Getae, and this
notwithstanding the objection of Saint- Martin
stated in Les Huns Blancs, p. 37, n. 1. The old
sound of Yue he observes was Get, correspondent
with the Greek fonn GetaL In calling atten-
tion to the Moeso- Gothic words maiza (greater)
and minniza (less) he suggests that " we have
here the origin of the names Massagetae, and the
Mins, the Ta Yue-chi (gi'eat Yue-chi) and the Sian
Yue-chi (Uttle Yue-chi)."

The Parnoi, according to Strabo, were a
branch of the Dahai (lib. XI, c. vii, sec. 1) called
by Herodotos (lib. I, c. lii) the Daoi, and by our
author and Stephanos of Byzantium the Daai.
Strabo (lib. XI, c. viii, 2) says of them : " Most of
the Skythians beginning from the Kaspian Sea, are
called DahaiSkythai, and those situated more
towards the east, Massagetai and Sakai, the rest
have the common appellation of Skythians, but
each separate tribe has its peculiar name. All, or
the greatei" part of them, are nomadic." Virgil
{Aen, lib. VIII, 1. 728) applies to the Dahae
the epithet indomiti. It is all but certain that
they have left traces of their name in the
province of Dahest^n, adjoining to Aster4bad, as
this position was within the limits of their migra-
tory range. In the name Daae, Bahae or Ta-hia
(the Chinese form) it is commonly inferred that
we have the term Tajik, that is Persian, for there
is good reason to place Persians even in Trans-



267



oxiana long hetor6 the barbarous tribes of the
Kaspian plains were heard *of (See Wilson's
Avian. Antiq., p. 141).

The Tapouroi appear to be the same as
the Tapyroi mentioned by Strabo as occupying
the country between the Hyrkanoi and the
Areioi. Their position, however, varied at various
times.

N i s a i a or Nigaia (the Nesaia of Strabo) has
been identified by Wilson (Avian, Antiq., pp. 142,
148) with the modem Nissa, a small town or
village on the north of the Elburz mountains,
between Aster&b&d and Meshd.

Cap. 11.

Position op Baktriane.

1. Baktriane is bounded on the west by
Margiand along the side already described, on
the north and east by Sogdiane, along the rest
of the course of the River Ozos, and on the
south by the rest of Areia, extending from the
extreme point towards Margian^ —

the position of which is 109° 39°

and by the Paropanisadai along the parallel
thence prolonged, through where the range of
Paropanisos diverges towards the sources of the
6x08 which lie in 119° 30' 39°

2. The following rivers which fall into the
Oxos flow through Baktriane :—

The river Okhos, whose
sources lie 110° 39°



208



and the Dargamanes, whose

sources lie 116° aO' 36° 2(/

and the Zariaspis, whose

sources lie 113° 39°

and the Artamis, whose

sources lie ,. 114° ^9"

and the Dargoidos, whose

sources lie , 116° 39°

and the point where this

jaine the 6xos lies in... ,,. H7° 30' 44°

3. Of the other tributaries the Artamis and

the Zariaspis unite in 113° ^ 40° 40'

before falling into the Oxos

in ,,... 112° 30' 44°

4. The Dargamanfe and the Okhos also

unite in 109° 40° 30'

before falling into the 6xos

in 109° 44°

5. Of the Paropanisos range, the western

part is situated in 111° 30' 39'

and [the Eastern] in 119° 30' 39^

6. The parts ofBaktrian^ in the north

A

and towards the River Oxos are inhabited by
the Salaterai and the Zariaspai, and to
the south of these up towards the Salaterai the
Khomaroi, and below these the K 6 m o i,
then the Akinakai, then the Tambyzoi,
and below the Zariaspai the Tokharoi, a
great people, and below them the Marykaioi,
and the S k o r d a i, and the O u a r n o i



)°



269



(Varnoi), and still below those the Sabadioi,
and the Oreisitoi, and the A m a r e i s.

7. The towns of Baktrian6 towards the
river Oxos are the following : —

Khai^kharta- '. 111° 44°

Zari(a)spa or Kharispa 115° 44°

Khoana 117° 42°

Sourogana 117° 30' 40° aC

Phratou 119° 39° 20'

8. And near the other rivers these : —

Alikhorda 107° 43° SC

Khomara 106° 30' 43° 30'

Konriandra 109° 30' 42° 10'

Kauaris 111° 20° 43°

Astakana 112° 42° 20'

Ebonsmouanassa or Tosmou-

anassa 108° 30' 41° 20'

Menapia 113° 41° 20'

Enkratidia 115° 42°

9. Baktra, the king's re-
sidence (Balkh) 116° 41°

Estobara 109° 30' 45° 20'

Marakanda (Samarkand) ... 112° 39° 15'

Marakodra 115° 20^ 39° 20'

The boundaries of Baktra orBaktriana
varied at different periods of history, and were
never perhaps at any time fixed with much preci-
sion. According to Strabo it was the principal part
of Ariana, and was separated from Sogdiana on the
east and north-east by the Oxos, from Areia on
the south by the chain of Paropanisos, and on



270



the west from Margiana by a desert region. A
description of Baktnana, wliich Bumes, in his
work on Bokhara, corroborates as very accurate, is
given by Curtius (lib. VII, o. iv) and is to this
effect : " The nature of the Baktrian territory is
varied, and presents striking contrasts. In one
place it is well- wooded, and bears vines which
yield grapes of great size and sweetness. The soil
is rich and well- watered — ^and where such a genial
soil is found com is grown, while lands with an
inferior soil are used for the pasturage of cattle.
To this fertile tract succeeds another much more
extensive, which is nothing but a wild waste of
sand parched with drought, alike without in-
habitant and without herbage. The winds, more-
over, which blow hither from the Pontic Sea,
sweep before them the sand that covers the plain,
»nd this, when it gathers into heaps, looks, when
seen from a distance, like a collection of great
hills ; whereby aU traces of the road that for-
merly existed are completely obliterated. Those,
therefore, who cross these plains, watch the stars
by night as sailors do at sea, and direct their
course by their guidance. In fact they almost
see better under the shadow of night than in the
glare of sunshine. They are, consequently, unable
to find their way in the day-time, since there is
110 track visible which they can follow, for the
brightness of the luminaries above is shrouded in
darkness. Should now the wind which rises
from the sea overtake them, the Sjauds with
which it is laden would completely overwhelm
them. Nevertheless in all the more favoured loca-
lities the number of men and of horses that are



271



there generated is exceedingly great. Baktra
itself, the capital city of that region, is situated
under mount Faropauiao8< The river Bactrus
passes by its walls: and gave the city and the
region their name*" This description is in agree-
ment with the general character of the country
from Balkh to -Bokhara, in which oases of the
most productive soil alternate with wastes of
sand.

Baktra figures very early in history. Its capital
indeed, Baktra (now Balkh) is one of the oldest
cities in the woiid. The Baktrian Walls is one
of the places which Euripides {Bakkhai, 1. 15)
represents Dionysos to have visited in the course
of his eastern peregrinations. I^inUs, as We leartl
through Ktesias, marched into Baktriana with a
vast army and, with the assistance of Semiramis«
took its capital. In the time of Darius it was a
satrapy of the Persian empire and paid a tribute
of 360 talents. Alexander the Great, when
marching in pursuit of Bessus, passed through
Baktria and, crossing the Oxos, proceeded as far
as Marakanda (Samarkand). Having subjugated
the regions lying in that direction, he returned to
Baktra and there spent the winter before starting
to invade India. Some years after the conqueror's
death Seleukos reduced Baktria, and annexed it
to his other dominions. It was wrested, however,
from the hands of the third prince of his line about
the year 256 B.C. oi* perhaps later, by Antiokhoa
Theos or Theodotas, who made Baktria an inde-
pendent kingdom. His successors were ambitious
and enterprising, and appear to have extended
their authority along the downward course of the



272



Indus even to the ocean, and southward along tii&
coast as fai* as the mouth of the Narmadft. The
names of these kings have been recovered from
their coins found in great numbers both in
India and in Afghanistan. This Graeko-Baktriah
empire, after having subsisted for about two
centuries and a half) was finally overthrown by
the invasion of different* hordes of the Sakai,
named, as Strabo informs us, the Asioi, Pasianoi,
Tokharoi and Sakarauloi.'* These Sakai yielded
in their turn to barbarians of their own kindred
or at least of theii* own type, the Skythians, who
gave their name to the Indus valley and the
regions adjoining the Gulf of Khambhat. Among
the most notable Indo-Skythian kings were
Kadphises and Kanerkes who reigned at the end
of the first and the beginning of the second
century of our sera and, therefore, not very long
before the time of Ptolemy. Between the Indo-
Skythian and Muhammadan peiiods was inker-
posed the predominancy of Persia in the regions
of which we have been speaking.

Ptolemy mentions five rivers which fall into the
xos: the Okhos, Dargamanes, Zariaspis, Arta-
mis, and Dargoidos, of which the Zaria^is and
Artamis unite before reaching the Oxos. Ptole-
my's account cannot he reconciled with the existing
hydrography of the country . The Dargamanes
is called by AmmianUs (lib. XXIII, c. vi) the Orga-

^ The Wu-8un (of Chinese history) are apparently to be
identified with the Asii or Asiani, who, according to
Strabo occupied the npper waters of the laxartes, and
who are classed as nomadcs with the Tokh^ri and
Sakarauli (? Sara-Kauli, i.e., Sarikulis). — Kingsmill, in
J. R. A. S., N. S., vol. XIV, p. 79.



273



iftenes. The A r t a m i s, Wilson thinks, may be
the river now^ called the Dakash {Ariana Antiqua,
p. 162) and the Dargamanes, the present riv^er
of Ghori or Kunduz which is a tributary of the
Okhos and not of the Oxos as in Ptolemy. The
O k h o 8 itself has not been identified with cer-
tainty. According to Kinneir it is the Tezen or
Tejend which, rising in Sarakhs, and receiving
many confluents, falls into the Kaspian in N. L.
33° 41'. According to Elphinstone it is the river
of Herat, either now lost in the sand or going to
the Oxos {Ariana Antiqtia, p. 146). Bunbury
(vol. II, p. 28i!) points out that in Strabo the
Okhos is an independent river, emptying into the
Kaspian. The Okhos of Artemidoros, he says, may
be certainly identified with the Attrek, whose course,
till lately, was very imperfectly known.

Ptolemy gives a list of thirteen tribes which
inhabited Baktriane. Their names are obscure,
and are scarcely mentioned elsewhere.*'

In the list of towns few known names occur. The
most notable are Baktra, Marakanda, Eukratidia
and Zariaspa. B a k t r a, as has been already stated,
is the modern Balkh. Heeren {Asiatic Nations,
2nd edit., vol. I, p. 424), writes of it in these terms :
"The city of Baktra must be regarded as the
commercial entrepot of Eastern Asia: its name
belongs to a people who never cease to afford



»' Prof. Beal (/. R, A. 8., N. S., Vol. XVI, p. 253),
connects the name of the Tokharoi^ with Tu-ho-lo the
name of a country or kingdom Tukhara, frequently men-
tioned by Hiuen Tsiang. The middle symbol ho, he
says, represents the rough aspirate, and we should thus
get Tahi'a or Tuxra, from which would come the Greek
Tokharoi.

35 6



274



matter for historical details, from the time they
are first mentioned. Not only does Baktra con-
stantly appear as a city of wealth and importance
in every age of the Persian empire, but it
is continually interwoven in the traditions of
the East with the accounts of Semiramis and
other conquerors. It stood on the borders of the
gold country, * in the road of the confluence of
nations,' according to an expression of the Zend-
avesta ; and the conjecture that in this part of
the world the human race made its first advance
in civilisation, seems highly probable." The name
of Balkh is from the Sanskrit name of the
people of Baktra, the Bahlikas. Marakanda
is Samarkand. It was the capital of Sogdiana,
but Ptolemy places it in Baktriane, and consider-
ably to the south of Baktra, although its actual
latitude is almost 3 degrees to the north. It was
one of the cities of Sogdiana which Alexander
destroyed. Its circumference was estimated at
64 stadia, or about 7 miles. The name has been
interpreted to mean " warlike province." E u k r a-
t i d i a received its name from the Graeko-Baktrian
king, Eukratid^s, by whom it was founded. Its
site cannot be identified. Pliny makes Zariaspa
the same as Baktra, but this must be a mistake.
No satisfactory site has been as yet assigned to it.

Cap. 12.

Position op the Sogdianoi.

The Sogdianoi are bounded on the west

by that part of Sky thia which extends from the

section of the Oxos which is towards BaktrianA

and Margian^ through the Oxeian mountains



275



as far as the section of the river laxartes, which
lies in 110° E. 49° N. ; on the north likewise bj a
part of Skjthia along the section of the laxartes
extended thenoe as far as the limit where its
course bends, which lies in 120° E. 48° 30' N.
On the east by the Sakai along the (bending)
of the laxartes as far as the sources of the
bending which lie in 125° E. 43° N., and*by the
line prolonged from the Sakai to an extremd
point which lies in 125° E. 38° 30' N., and on
the east and the south and again on the west by
Baktrian^ along the section of the Oxos already
mentioned and by the Kaukasian mountains
especially so-called, and the adjoining line
and the limits as stated, and the sources of th»
Oxos.

2. The mountains called the Sogdian
extend between the two rivers, and have their

extremities lying in 111° 47°

and 122° 46° 30'

3. From these mountains a good many
nameless rivers flow in contrary directions to
meet these two rivers, and. of these nameless
rivers one forms the Oxeian Lake, the middle
of which lies in 111° E. 45° N., and other two
streams descend from the same hilly regions as
the laxartes — the regions in question are called
the Highlands of the K6m^dai. Each of these
streams falls into the laxartes ; one of them
is called D d m o s and

its sources lie in 124° 43°



276



Its junction with the river

Iaxarte& occnrsF in 123^ 47**

The other is the Ba »k a t i s

whose sorrrces lie in 123? 4&*

Its junction with the river

laxartes occurs in 121^ 47^3(K

4. The country towards the Oxeian inouff-
tains is possessed b^r the Paskai^ smd the
parts towards the most northern scetion of the-
laxartes by the I a t i ai, and the Tokharof,^
below wltoBi are the Angaloif th«n alon^
the Sogdian mountains the Ox y d rA rtg^k a i
and the Drybaktai, and the Kandarof,
and below the mountains the Mardy^noi,
and along the Oxos the Oxeianoi and the
Khorasmioi, and farther east than these
the Drepsianoi, and adjoining both the
rivers, and still further east than the above
the Anieseis along the laxartes, and the
Kirrhadai (or Kirrhodeeis) along the Oxos,
and between the Kaukasos Range and Imaos
the country called Ouandabanda,

5. Towns of the Sogdianoi in the high-
lands along the laxartes are these : —

Kyreskhata... 124^ 43° 40'

Along the Oxos : —

Oxeiana 117° 30' 44° 20'

Marouka 117° 15' 43° 40'

Kholbesina 121° 43°

6. Between the rivers and higher up —



277



Trybaktm 112^ 15'

Alexandreia Oxerian^ 113° 44'' 2V

Indikomordana \ 115° 44° 20'

Drepsa (or Rhepsa) the

Metropolis 120° 45°

Alexandreia Eskhat^ (i.e.

Ultima) ..,. 122° 41°

S o g d i a n a w^as divided from Baktriana by
the rirer Oxos and extended northward from
thence bo the river laxarbes. The Sakai lay along
the eastern frontier and Sky t bier tribe* aVwig the
western. The name exists to this day, being
preserved in Soghd which designates the country
lying along the river Kohik from Bokhara east-
ward to Samarkand. The records of Alexander's
expedition give much information regarding this
country, for the Makedoaian troops were engaged
for the better part of three years in effecting its
subjugation.

In connexion with Sogdiana, Ptolemy mentions
four mountain ranges — the Kaukasian, the
Sogdian, the mountain district of the K 6 m d-
d a i, and I m a o s. Kaukasos was the general name
applied by the Makedonians to the great chain
which extended along the northern frontiers of
Afghanistan, and which was regarded as a pro-
longation of the real Kaukasos. Ptolemy uses it
hero in a specific sense to designate that part
of the chain which formed the eastern continua"
tion of the Paropanisos towards Imaos. Imaos
is the meridian chain which intersects the Kait-
kasos, and is now called Bolor T&gh. Ptolemy
places it about 8 degrees too far eastward. The



278



Sogdian Mountains, placed by Ptolemy between
the lazartes and Oxoa, towards their sources,
are the Thian Shan. The K 6 m S d a i, who gave
their name to the third range, were, according to
Ptolemy, the inhabitants of the hill-country which
lay to the east of Baktriana and up whose
valley lay the route of the caravans from Baktra,
bound for Serika across Imaus or the Thsuhg'
lung. Cunningham has identified them with the-
Kiu-mi-tho (Kumidha) of Hiuen Tsiang. Their
mountain district is that called Muz-t&gh.

The rivers mentioned in connexion with
Sogdiana are the 6xos, and the laxartes, with its
two tributaries, the Baskatis and the DSmos.
The Oxos takes its rise in the Pamir*' Lake,
called the Sari-Kul (or Yellow Lake), at a distance
of fully 300 miles to the south of the lazartes.
It is fed on its north bank by many smaller
streams which run due south from the Pamfr
uplands, breaking the S.W. face of that region
into a series of valleys, which, though rugged, are
of exuberant fertility. Its course then lies for

>" The Pamir plateau between Badakshan and Yarkand
connects several chains of mountains, viz. the Hindu
Kush in the S.W. the Kuen-luen in the E., the Karar
Korum in the Bolor, the Thian-sh&n chain in the north,
which runs from Tirak Dawan and Ming-yol to the
Western Farghana Pass. This plateau is called BAm-i'
dvmMA or Roof of the World. With regard to the name
Pamir Sir H. Bawlinson says : *' My own conjecture is that
the name of Pamtr, or F&mir, as it is always written hy
the Arabs, is derived from the Fani {(bavvoi), who, accor-
ding to Strabo bounded the Greek kingdom of Baktria
to the E. (XI. 14) and whose name is also preserved in
F&n-tfiii, the F&n-Lake, &c. Fdmir for F&n-m!r would
then be a compound like Kashmir, Aj-mir, Jessel-mir, &o.
signifying *the lake country of the F&-ni.'* (J. R. 0. flL
XLII.p 189, n.).*



279



hundreds of miles through arid and saline stepp^a
till before reaching the sea of Aral it is dissipated
into a network of canals, both natural and artifi-
cial. Its delta, which would otherwise have re-
mained a desert, has thus been converted into a
fruitful garden, capable of supporting a teeming
population, and it was one of the very earliest
seats of civilization,'* The deflexion of the waters
of the Oxos into the Aral, as Sir H. Rawlinson
points out, has been caused in modem times not
by any upheaval of the surface of the Turcoman
desert, but by the simple accidents of fluvial
action in an alluvial soil. The name of the river,
is in Sanskrit Vahshu, Mongolian, Bakshu, Tibe-
tan Pahshu Chinese Po-thsu, Arabic and Persian
Vahhsh-an or dh — ^fi^om Persian vah = * pure,' or
Sanskrit Vah = * to flow.' The region embracing the
head- waters of the Oxos appears to have been the
scene of the primaeval Aryan Paradise. The four
rivers thereof, as named by the Brahmans, were the
Sita, the Alakananda, the Yakshu, and the Bhadro
= respectively, according to Wilson to the Hoang-
ho, the Ganges, the Oxos, and the Oby. Accord-
ing to the Buddhists the rivers were the Gangep,
the Indus, the Oxos, and the Sita, all of which
they derived from a great central lake in the
plateau of Pamir, called A-neou-ta = Kara-kul or
Sarik-kul Lake.
The laxartes is now called the Syr-darya or

^' '^AbuBihan says that the Solar Calendar of Khwd-
rasm was the most perfect scheme for the measurement
of time with which he was acquainted. Also that the
KhwArasmians dated originally from an epoch anterior
by 980 years to the aera of the Seleucidae=134 B.C."
(See Quarterly Review , No. 240, Art. on Central Asia).



280



Yellow River. T?he ancients sometimes called it
the Araxes, but, according to D* Anville, this is but
an appellative common to it with the Amil or Oxo8>
the Armenian Aras and the Rha or Volga. The
Yjiame laxartes was not properly a Greek word but
was borrowed from the barbarians by whom> as
Arrian states {Awib. lib. lit. c. ixx), it was called
theOrxantes. It was probably derived from the
Sanskrit root hshaVf ** to flow*' with a Semitic
feminine ending, and this etymology would explain
the modem form of 8irr. See /. B. O. 8. XLII.
p. 492, n. The laxartes rises in the high plateau
Bouth of Lake Issyk-kul in the Thian Shan. Its
course is first to westward through the valley of
Khokan, where it receives numerous tributaries.
It then bifurcates, the more northern branch re-
taining the name of Syr-darya. This flows towards
the north-west, and after a course of 1150 miles
from its source enters the Sea of Aral. Ptolemy
however, like all the other classical writers, makes
it enter the Kaspian sea. Humboldt accounts
for this apparent error by adducing fa<its which
go to show that the tract between the Aral and
the Kaspian was once the bed of an united aud con-
tinuous sea, and that the Kaspian of the present
day is the small residue of a once mighty Aralo-
Kaspian Sea. Ammiauus Marcellinus (lib. XXIII,
c. vi), describing Central Asia in the upper course of
the laxartes which falls into the Kaspian, speaks
of two rivers, the Araxates and Dymas (probably
the Demos of Ptolemy) which, rushing impetuously
down- from the mountains aud passing into a level
plaiu, form therein what is called the Oxian lake,
which is spread over a vast area. This is the



281



earliest intimation of the Sea of Aral. (See Smitli^s
Diet of Anc. Geog. s. v.). Bunbury, however, says
{TOl. II, pp. 641-2) : " Nothing but the unwilling-
ness of modern writers to admit that the ancientA
were unacquainted with so important a feature in
the geography of Central Asia as the Sea of
Aral could have led them to suppose it repre-
sented by the Oxiana Palus of Ptolemy. While
that author distinctly describes both the Jaxartea
and the Oxus as flowing into the Caspian Sea, he
speaks of a range of mountains called the Sog-
dian Mountains, which extend between the two
rivers, from which flow several nameless streams
into those two, one of which forms the Oxian lake.
This statement exactly tallies with the fact that
the Polytimetos or river of Soghd, which rises
in the mountains in question, does not flow into
the Oxus, but forms a small stagnant lake
called Kara-kul or Denghiz ; and there seems no
doubt this was the lake meanl} by Ptolemy. It is
true that Ammianus Marcellinus, in his descrip»
tion of these regions, which is very vague and
inaccurate, but is based for the most part upon
Ptolemy, terras it a large and widespread lake,
but this is probably nothing more than a rhetorical
flourish." The laxartes was regarded as the
boundary towards the east of the Persian Empire,
which it separated from the nomadic Skythians.
The soldiers of Alexander believed it to be the
same as the Tanais or Don.

In the list of the tribes of Sogdiana some

names occur which are very like Indian, the £[an-

daroi,who may be the Gandh&ras, the Mardy^noi,

the Madras, the Takhoroi, the Takurs, and th«

36 Q



282



Kirrhadai (or Eirrhodeeis) the Eir&ta. The nanio
of the Khorasmioi has been preserved to the
present day in that of Khwl^razm, one of the
designations of the Khanate of Khiva. The
position of the Khorasmioi may be therefore
assigned to the regions south of the Sea of Aral,
which is sometimes called after them the Sea of
Khw&razm. The Drepsianoi had their seats
on the borders of Baktria, as Brepsa, one of
their cities and the capital of the country, may
be identified with Andar&b, which was a Baktrian
town. It is called by Strabo Adrapsa and Darapsa—
(lib. XI, c. xi, 2» and lib. XY, c. ii, 10) and Drapsaka
by Arrian — {Andb. lib. Ill, c. 89). Bunbury
(vol. I, p. 427, n. 3) remarks : " The Drepsa of
Ptolemy, though doubtless the same namie, can-
not be the same place (as the Drapsaka of Arrian,
Athah, lib. Ill, c. zxix.) as that author places it in
Sogdiana, considerably to the north of Marakanda."
Ptolemy, however, as I have already pointed out,
places Marakanda to the south of Baktra.
Kingsmill (J. B, A, 8., N. S., vol. XIV, p. 82)
identifies Darapsa with the Lam-shi-ch'eng of the
Chinese historians. It was the capital of their Ta-
hia (Tokh&ra — Baktria) which was situated about
2000 li south-west of Ta-wan (Yarkand), to the
south of the Kwai-shui (Oxos). The original form
of the name was probably, he says, Darampsa.
In Ta-wan he finds the Phrynoi of Strabo. The
region between Kaukasos and Imaos, Ptolemy calls
Yandabanda, a name of which, as Wilson
conjectures, traces are to be found in the name
of Badakshan.
With regard to the towns Mr. Yaux- remarks.



283



(Smith's Diet. s. v. Sogdiana) : " The historians
of Alexander's maroh leave us to suppose that
Sogdiana abounded with large towns, but many
of these, as Prof. Wilson has remarked, were pro-
bably little more than forts erected along the
lines of the great rivers to defend the country
from the incursions of the barbarous tribes to its
N. and E. Yet these writers must have had good
opportunity of estimating the force of these
places, as Alexander appears to h>ve been the best
part of three years in this and the adjoining province
of Baktriana. The principal towns, of which the
names have been handed down to us, were K y r e s-
khataorKyropolis on the laxartes (Steph.
Byz. 9, v.; Curt. lib. YI, c. vi) Gaza (Ghaz or
Ghazni, Ibn Haukal, p. 270); Alexandreia
Ultima (Arrian, lib. Ill, c. xxx ; Curt. I. c; Am.
Marc, lib. XXIII, c. vi) doubtless in the neighbour-
hood, if not on the site of the present Khojend ;
Alexandreia Oxiana (Steph. Byz. s, v,);
Nautaka (Arrian, An, lib. Ill, c. xxviii; lib. lY*
c. xviii) in the neighbourhood of Karshi orNaksheb.
Brankhidae, a place traditionally said to have
been colonized by a Greek population ; and M a r-
ginia (Curt., lib. YII, c. x, 15) probably the
present Marghinan."

Cap. 13.

Position of the Sakai.

[Map of Asia 7.]

1. The Sakai are bounded on the west by
the Sogdianoi along their eastern side already
described, on the north by Skythia along tho



284



line parallel to the river laxartes as far as the
limit of the country which lies in 130° E. 49° N,
on the east in like manner bj Skythia along*
the meridian lines prolonged from thence and
through the adjacent range of mountains called
Askatangkas as far as the station at Mount
Imaos, whence traders start on their journey to
S6ra which lies in 140° E. 43° N., and through
Mount Imaos as it ascends to the north as far as
the limit of the country which lies in 143° E. 3 5° N".,
and on the south by Imaos itself along the
line adjoining the limits that have been
stated.

2. The country of the S a k a i is inhabited
by nomads. They have no towns, but dwell in
woods and caves. Among the Sakai is the
mountain district, already mentioned, of the
Kom^dai, of which the ascent from the

Sogdianoi lies in 125° 43°

And the parts towards the val-

fey of the KomMai lie in 130° 39^

And the so-called Stone Tower
lies in 135° 43°

3 . * The tribes of the Sakai, along the laxartes,
are the K a r a t a i and the K o m a r o i, and the
people who have all the mountain region are
the K 6 m 6 d a i, and the people along the rang©
of Askatangka the Massagetai; and the
people between are the Grynaioi Skythai
and the T o 6 r n a i, below whom, along Mount
Imaos, are the B y 1 1 a ir



285



In the name of the mountain range on the
east of the Sakai, A s k a-t a n g k-a S| the middle
syllable represents the Turkish word tdgh^^
* mountain.' The tribe of the K a r a t a i, which was
seated along the banks of the laxartes, bears a
name of common application, chie6y to members
of the Mongol family — that of Karait. The name
of the Massagetai, Latham has suggested, may
have arisen out of the common name Mioaidgh, but
Beal, as already stated, refers it to the Moeso-gothic
" maiza " and *' Yue-chi — Getes." The B y 1 1 a i are
the people of what is now called Little Tibet and
also Baltist&n.

Cap. 14.

Position of Skythia within Imaos.

[Map of Asia 7.]

1. Skythia within Imaos is bounded on
the west by Sarmatia in Asia along the side
already traced, on the north by an unknown
land, on the east by Mount Imaos ascending to
the north pretty nearly along the meridian of
the starting-place already mentioned as far as

the unknown land l^O"" 63°,

on the south and also on the east by the Sakai
and the Sogdianoi and by Margin^ along their
meridians already mentioned as far as the
Hyrkanian Sea at tlie mouth of the Oxos, and
also by the part of the Hyrkanian Sea lying
between the north of the Oxos and the river
Rha according to such an outline.



286



2. The bend of the River Rha which marks
the boundary of Sarmatia and

Skythia 85° 54°

with the mouth of the river

Rha which lies in 87° 30' 48° 5(y

Mouth of the river Rhym-

mos 91° 48° 46'

Mouth of the river Daix ... 94° 48° 45,'

Mouth of the river laxartes 97° 48°

Mouth of the river lastos ... 100° 47° 20'

Mouth of the river Polyti-

m^tos 103° 45° 30'

Aspabota, a town 102° 44°

after which comes the mouth of the Oxos.

3. The mountains of Skythia within Imaos
are the more eastern parts of the Hyperborean
hills and the mountains called

Alana^ whose extremities

lie 105° 69°

and 118° 69° 30'

4. And the Rymmik mountains whose ex-
tremities lie.. 90° 64°

and 99° 47° 30'

from which flow the Rymmos and some other
streams that discharge into the River Rhjl,
uniting with the Da'ix river.

6. And the Norosson range, of which the

extremities lie * 97° 63° 30'

and 106° 62° 30'

and from this range flow the Daix and some
other tributaries of the laxartes.



287



G. And the range of mountains called
Aspiaia whose extremities lie 111° 55° 30'

and 117° 52° 30'

and from these some streams flow into the
Biver laxartes.

7. And the mountains called Tapoura whose

extremities lie 120° 56°

and. 125° 49°

from which also some streams flow into the
laxartes.

8. In addition to these in the depth of the
region of the streams are the Syeba mountains

whose extremities lie 121° 58°

and 132° 62°

and the mountains called the Anarea whose

extremities lie 130° 56°

and 137° 50°

after which is the bend in the direction of
Imaos continuing it towards the north.

9. All the territory of this Skythia in the
north, adjoining the unknown regions, is in-
habited by the people commonly called the
Alanoi Skythai and the SouobSnoi
and the Alanorsoi, and the country below
these by the Saitianoi and the Massaioi
and the S y 6 b o i, and along Imaos on the
outer side the Tektosakes, and near the
most eastern sources of the river Rha the
Rhoboskoi below whom the A s m a n o i.

10. Then the Paniardoi, below whom,
more towards the river, the country of K a n o-



288



d i p B a» and below it the K o r a x o i, then
the O r g a s o i, after whom as far as the sea
the E r y m m o i, to east of yrhom are the
A s i o t a i, then the A o r s o i, after whom are
the laxartai, a great race seated along their
homonymous river as far as to where it bends
towards the Tapoara Mountains, and again
below the Saitanioi are the Mologenoi, below
whom, as far as the Rymmik range, are the
Samnitai.

11. And below the Massaioi and the Alana
Mountains are the Z a r a t a i and the S a s o n e s,
and further east than the Rymmik Mountains
are the Tybiatai, after whom, below the
Zaratai, are the Tabienoi and the 1 a s t a i
and the Makhait^goi along the range of
Norosson, after whom are the Norosbeis
and the Norossoi, and below these the
Kakhagai Skythai along the country of
the laxartai.

12. Further west than the Aspisia range
are the Aspisioi Skythai, and further
east the Galaktophagoi Skythai, and
in like manner the parts farther east than the
Tapoura and Syeba ranges are inhabited by the
Tap o ure oi.

13. The slopes and summits of the Anarea
Mountains and Mount Askatangkas are inhabit-
ed by the homonymous Anareoi Skythai
below the Alanorsoi, and the Askatangkai



289



S k y t h a i furtlier east than the Taponreoi) and
as far as Monnt Imaos.

14. But the parts between the Taponra
Mountains and the slope towards the mouth of
the lazartes and the seacoast between the two
rivers are possessed by the Ariakai, along
the laxartes and below these the N a mo s t a i,
then the Sagaraukai, and along the river
Oxos the B h i b i i, who have a town
Dauaba 104° 46^

The country of the Skyths is spread over a
vast area in the east of Europe and in Western
and Central Asia. The knowledge of the Skyths
by the Greeks dates from the earliest period
of their literature, for in Homer {Iliad, lib,
XIII, 1. 4) we find mention made of the Galakto-
phagoi (milk- eaters) and the Hippemologoi (mare-
milkers) which must have been Skythic tribes,
since the milking of mares is a practice distinctive
of the Skyths. Ptolemy's division of Skythia into
within and beyond Imaos is peculiar to himself,
and may have been suggested by his division of
India into within and beyond the Granges. Imaos,
as has already been pointed out is the Bolor chain,
which has been for ages the boundary between
Turkist&n and China. Ptolemy, however, placed
Imaos too far to the east, 8^ further than the
meridian of the piincipal source of the Ganges.
The cause of this mistake, as a writer in Smith's
Dictionary points out, arose from the circumstance
that the data upon which Ptolemy came to his con-
clusion were selected from two different sources.
The Greeks first became acquainted with the
37 Q



290



Komedorum Monies when they passed the Indian
Kaukasos between Kabul and Balkh, and advanced
over the plateau of BSimij&n along the west slopes
of Bolor, where Alexander found in the tribe of
the Sibae the descendants of Herakles, just as
Marco Polo and Bumes met with people who
boasted that they had sprung from the Make-
donian conquerors. The north of Bolor was
known from the route of the traffic of the Seres.
The combination of notations obtained from such
different sources wacs imperfectly made, and hence
the error in longitude. This section of Skythia
comprised Elhiva, the country of the Kosaks,
Ferghina, Tashkend, and the parts about the
Balkash.

The rivers mentioned in connexion with Skjrthia
within Imaos are the Oxos, laxartes, BhsL, Bhym-
mos, Daix, lastos and Polytimetos. The B h a is
the Yolga, which is sometimes called the Bhau
by the Bussians who live in its neighbourhood.
Ptolemy appears to be the first Greek writer who
mentions it. The Bhymmos isa small stream
between the Bh& and the Ural river called the Naryn-
chara. The D ai'x is the Isik or Ural river. The
lastos was identified by Humboldt with the
Eazil-darya, which disappeared in the course of last
century, but the dry bed of which can be traced in
the barren wastes of Kizil-koum in W. Turkest&n.
With regard to the Polytimetos, Wilson says
{Avian. Antiq. p. 168); "There can be no hesita-
tion in recognizing the identity of the Polytimetes
and the Zaraf shM, or river of Samarkand, called
also the Kohik, or more correctly the river of
the Kohak ; being so termed from its passing by



291



a rising ground, a Koli-ak, a 'little liill' or
* hillock/ which lies to the east of the city. Accord-
ing to Strabo, this river traversed Sogdiana
and was lost in the sands. Gurtius describes it aa
entering a cavern and continuing its course under-
ground. The river actually terminates in a small
lake to the south of Bokhara, the Dangiz, but in
the dry weather the supply of water is too scanty
to force its way to the lake, and it is dis-
persed and evaporated in the sands. What the
original appellation may have been does not ap-
pear, but the denominations given by the Greeka
and Persians ' the much-honoured ' or * the gold-
shedding' staream convey the same idea, and inti-
mate the benefits it confers upon the region
which it waters," Ptolemy is wide astray in
making it enter the Kaspian.

The mountains enumerated are the Alana^
lUiymmika, Norosson, Aspisia^TapourarSyeba, and
Anarea. By the A 1 a n a Mountains, which lay to
the east of the Hyperboreans, it has been supposed
that Ptolemy designated the northern part of the
Ural Chain. If so, he has aroneously given their
directi(»i as from west to east. The B h y m m i k
mountains were probably another branch of that
great meridian chain which consists of several
ranges which run nearly parall^. The Noros-
son maybe taken as Ptolemy's designation for
the southern portion of this chain. The As-
pi s i a and T ap o ur a mountains lay to the north
of the laxartes. The latter, which are placed
three degrees further east than the Aspisia, may be
•the western part of the Altai. The S y ^ b a
stretched still farther eastward with an inclina-



292



tion northward. To the southward of them were
the An area, which may be placed near the
sources of the Obi and the Irtish, forming one of
the western branches of the Altai. Ptolemy errone-
ously prolongs the chain of Imaos to these high
latitudes.

Ptolemy has named no fewer than 38 tribes be-
longing to this division of Skythia. Of these the
best known ate the A 1 a n i, who belonged alsQ to
Europe, where they occupied a great portion of
Southern Russia. At the time when Arrian the
historian was Governor of Elappadokia under
Hadrian, the Asiatic Alani attacked his province,
but were repeUed. He subsequently wrote a
work on the tactics to be observed against the
Alani {cKra^is kot 'AXavS>v) of which some fragments
remain. The seats of the Alani were in the north
of Skythia and adjacent to the unknown land,
which may be taken to mean the regions stretch-
ing northward beyond Lake Balkash. The posi-
tion of the different tribes is fixed with sufficient
clearness in the text. These tribes were essenti-
ally nomadic, pastoral and migratory — whence in
Ptolemy's description of their country towns are
singularly conspicuous by theii* absence.

Cap. 15.
The position of Skythia betond Imaos.

[Map of Asia, 8.]

1. Skythia beyond Mount Imaos is
bounded on the west by Skythia within Imaos,
and the Sakai along the whole curvature of the



293



monntains towards the north, and on the north
by the unknown land, and on the east by Serika
in a straight line whereof the extremities

lie in , 150° 63°

and 160° 35°

and on the south by a part of India beyond the
Ganges along the parallel of latitude which
cuts the southern extremity of the line jast
mentioned.

2. In this division is situated the western
part of the Auxakian Mountains, of which the

extremities lie 149° 49°

and 165° 54°

and the western part of the mountains

called Kasia, whose extremities lie in 152° 41°

and 162° 44°

and also the western portion of Emodos,

whose extremities lie in 1 53° 36°

and... 165° 36°

and towards the Auxakians, the source

of the River Oikhard^ lying in 1 53° 5 1°

3. The northern parts of this Skythia are
possessed by the Abioi Skythai, and the
parts below them by the Hippophagoi
Skythai, after whom the territory of A u x a-
k i t i s extends onward, and below this again,
at the starting place already mentioned, the
K a s i a n land, below which are the K h a t a i
Skythai, and then succeeds the A k h a s a
land, and below it along the Emoda the K h a-
raunaioi Skythai.



294



4. The towns in this division are these : — •

Auxakia 143° 49^40'

Issedon Skythike 150'' 49° 30'

Khaurana 150° 37° 15'

Soita 145° 35° 20'

Skythia beyond Imaos embraced Ladakh, Tibet,
Chinese Tartary and Mongolia. Its mountains
were the Auxakian and Kasian chains, both
of which extended into Serike, and £ m 6 d o s.
The Auxakians may have formed a part of the
Altai, and the Kasians, which Ptolemy places five
degrees further south, are certainly the mountains
of K^shgar. The E m 6 d o » are the Himalayas.

The only river named in this division is the
Oikhardes, which has its sources in three
different ranges, the Auxakian, the Asmiraean
and the Kasian. According to a writer in Smith's
Dictionary the Oikhardes "may be considered
to represent the river formed by the union of the
streams of Elhotan, Yarkand, Elashgar and Ushi,
and which flows close to the hills at the base
of the Thian-shan. Saint-Martin again inclines
to think CEchardes may be a designation of
the Indus, while still flowing northward from its
sources among the Himalayas. " Skardo," he says,
{Etude, p. 420) " the capital of the Balti, bears
to the name of the Oikhardes (Chardi in Amm.
Marc. 2) a resemblance with which one is struck.
If the identification is well founded, the river
Oichardes will be the portion of the Indus which
traverses Balti and washes the walls of Skardo."

In the north of the division Ptolemy places the
AbioiSkythai. Homer, along with the Galak-


295



topbagoi and Hippemolgoi, mentions the Abioi.
Some think that the term in the passage designates
a distinct tribe of Skythians, but others take it to be
a common adjective, characterizing the Skythians
in general as very scantily supplied with the
means of subsistence. On the latter supposition
the general term must in the course of time have
become a specific appellation. Of the four towns
which Ptolemy assigns to the division, one bears
a well-known name, IssSdon, which he calls
SkythikS, to distinguish it from Issedon in
Serike. The name of the Issedones occurs very
early in Greek literature, as they are referred to by
the Spartan poet Alkman, who flourished between
671 and 631 B. 0. He calls them Assedo nes
Frag, 94, ed. Welcker). They are mentioned also
by Hekataios of Miletos. In very remote times
they were driven from the steppes over which
they wandered by the Arimaspians. They then
drove out the Skythians, who in turn drove out
the Kimmerians. Traces of these migrations are
found in the poem of Aristeas of Prokonnesos,
who is fabled to have made a pilgrimage to the
land of the Issedones. Their position has been
assigned to the east of Ichin, in the steppe of the
<;entral horde of the Kirghiz, and that of the
Arimaspi on the northern declivity of the Altai.
(Smith's Diet, s. v.) This position is not in
accordance with Ptolemy's indications. Herodotos,
while rejecting the story of the Arimaspians
and the gnffins that guarded their gold, admits
at the same time that by far the greatest quantity
of gold came from the north of Europe, in which
he included the tracts along the Ural, and Altai



296



ranges. The abundance of gold among the
Skjthians on the Enxine is attested by the
contents of their tombs, which have been opened
in modem times. (See Bunbury, vol. I, p. 200.)

Regarding Ptolemy's Skythian geography,
Bnnbury says (voL II. p. 597) : ** It must be admit-
ted that Ptolemy's knowledge of the regions
on either side of the Imaos was of the vaguest
possible character. Eastward of the Bh& (Volga),
which he regarded as the limit between Asiatic
Sarmatia and Skythia, and norfch of the laxartes,
which he describes like all previous writers as
falling into the Kaspian-^he had, properly
speaking, no geographical knowledge whatever.
Nothing had reached him beyond the names of
tribes reported at second-hand, and frequently
derived from different authorities, who would
apply different appellations to the same tribe, or
extend the same name to one or more of the
wandering hordes, who were thinly dispersed over
this vast extent of territory. Among the names
thus accumulated, a compilation that is probably
as worthless as that of Pliny, notwithstanding its
greater pretensions to geographical accuracy, we
find some that undoubtedly represent populations
really existing in Ptolemy's time, such as the
Alani, the Aorsi, &c., associated with others that
were merely poetical or traditional, such as the
Abii, Galaktophagi and Hippophagi, while the
Issedones, who were placed by Herodofcos imme-
diately east of the Tanais, are strangely transferred
by Ptolemy to the far East, on the very borders
of Serika ; and he has even the name of a toivn
which he calls Issedon Serika, and to which he



297



assigns a position in longitude 22° east of Mount
tmaos, and not less than 46° east of Baktra. In
one essential point, as kas been already pointed
Otkt, Ptolenly's conception of Skythia differed from
tkat of all preceding geographers, that instead of
regarding it as bounded on the north and east by
the sea, and consequently of comparatively limited
extent, he considered it as extending without
limit in both directions, and bounded only by * the
unknown land,' or^ in other words, limited only by
his own knowledge."

Cap. 16.

Position of Sebike".
[Map of Asia, 8].
S erike is bounded on the west by S ky t h i a,
beyond Mount Imaos, along the line already
mentioned, on the north by the unknown land
along the same pai*allel as that through Thule,
and on the east, likewise by the unknown land
along the meridian of which the extremities

lie 180° 63°

and 180° 55°

and on the south by the rest of India beyond
the Ganges through the same parallel as far as

the extremity lying 173° 55

and also by the Sinai, through the line prolonged
till it reaches the already mentioned extremity
towards the unknown land.

2. Serik^ is girdled by the mountains called
Anniba, whose extremities lie ...153° 60°

ana 171° 56°

38 o



o



298



and by the eastern part of the Auxakians,

of which the extremity lies 165° 54®

and by the mountains called the Asmiraia

whose extremities lie 167° 47° 30'

and 174° 47° 30'

and by the eastern part of the Kasia range,

whose extremities lie 162° 44°

and 171° 40°

and by Mount Thagouron whose

centre lies 170° 43°

and also by the eastern portion of the moun-
tains called Emoda and Serika, whose extremity

lies 165° 36°

and by the range called Ottorokorrhas, whose

extremities lie 169° 36°

and 176° 38°

3. There flow througb the far greatest por-
tion of Serik^ two rivers, the Oikhardes, one of
whose sources is placed with the Auxakioi, and
tbe other which is placed in the Asmiraian

mountains lies in 174° 47° 30'

and where it bends towards the Kasia

range 160° 48° 30'

but the source in them lies. ........ 161° 44° 15'

and tbe other river is called the Bautisos, and
this has one of its sources in the Kasia range

in 160° 43°

another in O ttorokorrha 1 76° 39°

and it bends towards the Emoda inl 68° 39°
and its source in these lies. 160° S7°.

4. The most northern parts of Serike are



299



inhabited by tribes of cannibals, below whom
is the nation of the A n n i b o i, who occupy the
slopes and sammits of the homonymous moun-
tains. Between these and the Auxakioi
is the nation of the S y z y g e s, below whom
are the D a m n a i, then as far as the river
Oikhardes the P i a 1 a i (or Piaddai), and below
the river the homonymous Oikhardai.

5. And again farther east than the Anniboi
are the Gar^inaioi and the Rhabannai
or Rhabbanaioi, and below the country of
Asmiraia, above th© ho-monymous moun-
tains. Beyond these mountains as far as the
Kasia range the Issedcnes, a great race,
and further east than these the Throanoi,
and below these the It h a g o u r o i, to the
east of the homonymous mountains, below the
Issedones, the Aspakarai, and still below
those the B a t a i, and furthest south along
the Emoda and Serika ranges the O 1 1 o r o-
k o r r h a i.

6. The cities in S er i k e are thus named : —

Damna 156^ 51° 20'

Piala (or Piadda) 160'=' 49° 40'

Asmiraia 170° 48°

Throana 174° 40' 47° 40'

7. Issedon Serike 162^ 45°

Aspakara (or Aspakaia) 162° 30' 41° 40'

Drosakhe (or Rhosakla) 167° 40' 42° 30'

Paliana ,162° 30' 41°

Abragana 163° 30' 39° 30'



300



8. Thogara 171^20' 39^40'

Daxata 174^ 39° 30'

Orosana 162'' 37° 30'

Ottorokorrha * 16*5° 37^ 15'

Solana 169° 37° 30'

Sera metropolis 177^ 38° 35'

The chapter which Ptolemy has devoted to
S e r i k ^ has giveii rise to more abortive theories
and unprofitable controversies than any other part
of his woik on Geography. The position of
Serikd itself has been very variously determined,
having been found by different writers in one or
other of the many countries that intervene be-
tween Easte]*n Turkistan in the north and the
province of Pegu in the south. It is now how-
ever generally admitted that by Serik^ was meant
the more northern parts of China, or those which
travellers and tradera reached by land. At the
same time it is not to be supposed that the names
which Ptolemy in his map h-as spread over that
vHst region wfere in reality names of places whose
real positions were to be found so very f ai* east-
ward. On the contrary, most of the names are
traceable to Sanskrit sources and applicable to
places either in £!asmir or in the regions imme-
diately adjoining. This view was first advanced
by Saint-Martin, in his dissertation on the Serike
of Ptolemy {Etude, pp. 411 ff.) where he has
discussed the subject with all his wonted acute-
ness and fulness of learning, 1 may translate here
his remarks on the points that are most promi-
nent : " Air the nomenclature," he says (p. 414!),
" except sonre names at the extreme points north



801



and easpt, Is crertainly of Saiiskiit di^igiil. ..... To

the south of the moitntauls, in the Panj4b,
Ptolemy indicates under the general name of
Kaspiraei an esLtension genuinely histoiioal of the
Kasmiriau empire, with a detailed nomenclature
which ought to rest Upon informations of the 1st
century of oui* sera; whilst to the north of the
great chain we have nothing more than names
thrown at hazard in an immense space where our
means of actual comparison show us prodigious
displacements. This difference is explained by
the very nature of the case. The Br^hmans, who
had alone been able to furnish the greater part
of the information carried from India, by the
Greeks regarding this remotest of all countries,
had not themselves, as one can see from their
books, anything but the most imperfect notions.
Some names of tribes, of rivers, and of mountains,
without details or relative positions — ^this is all the
Sanskrit poems contain respecting these high
valleys of the North. It is also all that the tables
of Ptolemy give, with the exception of the purely
arbitrary addition of graduations. It is but
recently that we ourselves have become a little
better acquainted with these countries which are
so difficult of access. We must not require from
the ancients information which they could not
have had, and it is of importance also that we
should guard against a natural propensity which
disposes us to attribute to all that antiquity has
transmitted to us an authority that we do not
accord without check to our best explorers. If
the meagre nomenclature inscnbed by Ptolemy
on his map, of the countries situated beyond



302



(tliat is to the east) of Iinaos, cannot lead to a
regular correspondence with our existing notions,
that which one can recognize, suffices nevertheless
to determine and circumscribe Its general position.
Without wishing to ciarry into this more pre-
cision than is consistent with the nature of the
indications, we may say, that the indications,
taken collectively, place us«in the midst of the
Alpine region, whence radiate in different direc-
tions the Himalaya, the Hindu-Koh and the
Bolor chain— enormous elevations enveloped in
an immense girdle of eternal snows, and whose
cold valleys belong to different families of
pastoral tribes. Kasmir, a privileged oasis amidst
these rugged mountains, appertains itself to
this region which traverses more to the north
the Tibetan portion of the Indus (above the point
where the ancients placed the sources of the In-
dus) and whence run to the west the Oxos and
laxartes. With Ptolemy the name of Imaos
(the Greek transcription of the usual form of
the name of Himalaya) is applied to the central
chain from the region of the sources of the
Ganges (where lise also the Indus and its
greatest affluent, the oatadru or Satlaj) to beyond
the sources of the laxartes. The general direc-
tion of this gi'eat axis is from south to north,
saving a bend to the south-east from Elasmir
to the sources of the Ganges ; it is only on paint-
ing from this last point that the Himalaya runs
directly to the east, and it is there also that with
Ptolemy the name of Emodos begins, which
designates the Eastern Himalaya. Now it is
on Imaos itself or in the vicinity of this grand



303



Bystem of motmtaiiis to the north of ottr Paiij4b
and to the east of the ralleys of the SUndu-Koh
and of the upper Oxos that there come to be placed,
in a space from- 6 to 7 degrees at most from south
to north, and less perhaps than that in the matter
of the longitudes, all the names which can be
identified on the map where Ptolemy has wished
to represent, in giving them an extension of nearly
40 degrees from west to east, the region which
he calls Skythia beyond Imaos and Serika. One
designation is there immediately recognizable
among all the others — that of K a s i a. Ptolemy
indicates the situation of the couutry of Kasia
towards the bending of Imaos to the east above
the sources of the Oxos, although he carries
his Montes Kasii very far away from that towards
the east ; but we are sufficiently aware before-
hand that here, more than in any other part of
the Tables, we have only to attend to the no-
menclature, and to leave the notations altogether
out of account. The name of the Ehasa has
been from time immemorial one of the appella-
tions the most spread through all the Him&layan
range. To keep to the western parts of the chain,
where the indication of Ptolemy places us, we
thei*e find Eliasa mentioned from the heroic ages
of India, not only in the Itihdsas or legendary
stories of the Mahdhhdrata, .hut also in the law
book of Manu, where their name is read by the side
of that of the D a r a d a, another people well known,
which borders in fact on the Khasa of the north.
The Ehasa figure also in the Buddhist Chronicles
of Ceylon, among the people subdued by Asoka
in the upper Pan jab, and we find them mentioned



304



I in more than 40 places of the Kasmir Chronicle
I among the chief mountain tribes that border on
I Kaimtr. Baber knows also that a people of the
\ name of Khas is indigenous to the high valleys
>in the neighbourhood of the Eastern Hindti-Koh ;
md, with every reason, we attach to this indigen-
»UB people the oiigin of the name of K&shgar, which
twice I'eproduced in the geo^^phy of these
liigh regions. Khasagiri in Sanskrit, or, ac-
cording to a form more approaching the Zend,
Khasaghalri, signifies properly the mountains of
the Khasa. The Akhasa Khora, near the Kasia
regio, is surely connected with the same
nationality. The Aspakarai, with a place of
the same name ( Aspakara ) near the Kasii Montes,
have no correspondence actually known in these
high valleys, but the form of the name connects
it with the Sanskrit or Iranian nomenclature.
Beside the Aspakarai, the B a t a i are found in the

Bautta of the Bdjatarangini In the

10th century of our sera, the Chief of Ghilghit took
the title of Bh&tsh&h or Shah of the Bh&t. The
Balti, that we next name, recall a people, men-
tioned by Ptolemy in this high region, the Byltai.
The accounts possessed by Ptolemy had made him
well acquainted with the general situation of the
Byltai in the neighbourhood of the Imaos, but he
is either ill informed or has ill applied his
information as to their exact position, which he
indicates as being to the west of the great chain
of Bolor and not to the east of it, where they were
really to be found. The B a m a n a and the
Dasamana, two people of the north, which the
Mahdbhdrata and the Pauranik lists mention



305



along with the China, appear to us not to differ
from the Bhabannae and the Damnai of Ptolemy's
table." Saint' Martin gives in the sequel a few
other identifications — that of the Throanoi
(whose name should be read Phrounoi, or rather
Phaunoi as in Strabo) with the Phuna of the
Lalitavistara (p. 122) — of the Kharaunaioi
with the Kajana, whose language proves them to
be Daradas, and of the Ithagouroi with the
Dangors, Dhagars or Dakhars, who must at one time
have been the predominant tribe of the Daradas.
The country called Asmiraia he takes, without
hesitation, to be Kasmir itself. As regards the
name Ottorokorrha, applied by Ptolemy to a
town and a people and a range of mountains, it is
traced without difficulty to the Sanskrit — Uttara-
kuru, i.e., the Kuru of the north which figures in
Indian mythology as an earthly paradise sheltered
on every side by an encircling rampart of lofty
mountains, and remarkable for the longevity of
its inhabitants, who lived to be 1000 and 10,000
years old. Ptolemy was not aware that this
was but an imaginary region, and so gave it a
place within the domain of real geography. The
land of the Hyperboreans is a western repetition
of the Uttarakuru of Kasmtr.

Cap. 17.

Position of Areia.

[Majp of Asia 9.]

Areia is bounded on the north by Margiane
and by a part of Baktriane along its southern
side, as already exhibited. On the west by
39 o



306



Parthia and by the Karmanian desert along
their eastern meridians that have been defined,
on the south by Drangian^ along the line which,
beginning from the said extremity towards
Karmania, and enrving towards the north, tnrns
through Mount Bagoos towards the east on to

the extreme point which lies ; . 1 1 1° 34°

the position where the mountain curves

is 105° 32°

The boundary on the east is formed by the
Paropanisadai along the line adjoining the
extremities already mentioned through the
western parts of Paropanisos; the position
may be indicated at three different points, the

southern 111° 36°

the northern 111° 3(y 39°

and the most eastern 119° 30^ 39°

2 , A notable river flo ws through this country
called the Areias, of which the sources that

are in Paropanisos, lie 111° 38° 15'

and those that are in the Sariphoi..ll8° 33° 20'
The part along the lake called Areia, which is
below these mountains, lies in ...108° 40' 36°

3. The northern parts of Areia are possessed
by the N i s a i o i and the Astauenoi or
Astabenoi, but those along the frontier of
Parthia and the Karmanian desert by the
Masdoranoior Mazoranoi, and those along
the frontier of Drangiane by the K a s e i r 6-
t a i, and those along the Paropanisadai by the
Parautoi, below whom are the Ob a r e i s



307



and intermediately the Drakhamai, below
whom the Aitymandroi, then the B o r-
goi, below whom is the country called
Skorpiophoros.

4. The towns and villages in A r fe i a are
these : —

Dista 102° 30' 38° 15'

Nabaris 105° 4C' 38° 20'

Taua 109° 38° 45^

Angara 102° 38°

Bitaxa 103° 40' 38°

Sarmagana 105° 20' 38° 10'

Siphare ......107° 15' 38° 15'

Rhaugara ....109° 30' 38° 10'

5. Zamoukhana ! 102° 37°

Ambrodax 103° 30' 37° 30'

Bogadia 104° 15' 37° 40'

Ouarpna (Varpna) 105° 30' 37°

Godana 110° 30' 37° 30'

Phoraua 110° 37°

Khatriskb^ 103° 36° 20'

Khaurina 104° 36° 20'

6. Orthiana 105° 15' 36' 20'

Taukiana 106° 10' 36^

Astanda 107° 40' 36^

Artikandna 109° 20' 36° 10'

Alexandreia of the Areians...llO° 36°

Babarsana or Kabarsana 103° 20' 35° 20

Kapoutana 104° 30' 35° 30'



;°

JO



308



7. Areia, a city 105^ 35^

Kaske...., 107° 20' 35^20'

Soteira ...., 108*^ 40' 35° 30'

Ortikand 109° 20' 35° 30'

Nisibis IIP 35° 20'

Parakanake , 105° 30' 34° 20'

Sariga 106*40' 34° 40'

8. Darkama 111° 34° 20'

Kotake 107° 30' 33° 40'

Tribazina 106° 33°

Astasana 105° 33°

Zimyra rl02° 30' 33° 15'

Areia was a smal]*pi^nce included in A liana,
a district of wide extent^ which comprehended
nearly the whole o£ ancient Persia. The smaller
district has sometimes been confounded with the
larger, of which it formed a part« The names of
both are connected with the well-known . Indian
word drya, * noble' or ' excellent.' According to
Sti*abo, Aria was 2,000 stadia in length and only
300 stadia in breadth. " If," says Wilson {Ariana
Antiq,, p. 150) ** these measurements be correct,
we must contract the limits of Alia much more
than has been usually done; and Aria will be
restricted to. the tract from about Meshd to the
neighbourhood of Herat, a position well enough
reconcilable with much that Strabo relates of
Aria, its similarity to Margiana in character and
productions, its mountains and well- watered valleys
in which the vine flourished, its position as much to
the north as to the south of the chain of Tam-us
or Alburz, and its being bounded by Hyrkania,



309



Margialid, anj Bttktmifflk an the 1101^11, aOfdDfatl'
giana on the south."

Mount Bagoos, on its south-east •hotiet,
has been identified with the Gh4r moibitain^,
TheMontesSariphiareibeHazdras. The rirer
A r e i a B, hy which Aria is traversed^ is the JBari
R A d or rirer of Herat which, rising at Oba
in the Paropanisaft luottntaifiS/ and hairing rtttt
westerly past Herat, is at ilo great distance
lost in the sands. That it was so lost is stated
both by Strabo and Arrian< Ptolemy makes
it terminate kk a taker; afid hence, Bennell
carried it soitth into the Lake of Seist^, called
by Ptolemy the Areian lake. It receives the Ferrah*
BQd, a stream which pasee^ Terteth or Farah,
a town which has been identified with much pro-
bability with the Fhra mentioned by Isidoros in
his Mans. Parth., sec. 16< It receives also the
Etymander(now theHelmand) which gave its name
to one of the Areian tribes named by Ptolemy.

He has enumerated no fewer than 35 towns be-
longing to this small province, a long list which it
is not possible to verify, but a number of small
towns, as Wilson paints out, occur on the road from
Meshd t<j Herat and thence towards Qaitdah^r or
IQbul, and some of these may be represented ia
the Table under forms moi-e or less altered. The
capital of Areia,accorduig to Strabo and Arrian,wafiF
Artakoana (v. 11. Artakakna, Artakana) and this i»
no doubt the Artikaudnaof Ptolemy, which he
places on the banks of the Areian lake about two-
thirds of a degree north -west of his Alexandreia of
the Areians. The identification of this Alexandreia
is uncertain; most probably it was Herat, or some



310



place in its nedghboui^liood. Herat is called by
oriental writers Hera, a form under which the
Areia <rf the ancients is readily to be recognized.
Ptolemy has a city of this name, and Wilson
(Ariana Antiqna^ p. 152), is of opinion that " Arta-
koana, Alexandria and Aria are aggregated in
Herat." With reference to Alexai^dria he quotes
a memorial verse current among the inhabitants
of Herat : " It is said that Hari was founded by
Lohrasp, extended by Gushtasp, improved by
Bahman and completed by Alexander." The
name of Soteira indicates that its founder was
Antiokhos Soter.

Cap. 18.

Position of the Paeopanisadai.
[Map of Asia 9.]

1. The Paropanisadai are bounded on
the west by Areia along the aforesaid side, on the
north by the part of Baktriand as described, on
the east by a part of India along the meridian
line prolonged from the sources of the river
Oxos, through the Kaukasian mountains as far
as a terminating point which

lies in 119° 30' 39°

and on the south by Arakhosia along the line
connecting the extreme points already deter-
mined*

2. The following rivers enter the country—
the D a r g a m a n e s, which belongs to Bak-
triane, the position of the sources of which has



311



been already stated ; and the river which falls

into the K 6 a, of which the

sources lie 115° 34° 30'.

3. The northern parts are possessed by the
B 6 1 i t a i, and the western by the A r i s t o-
p h y 1 o i, and below them the P a r s i o i, and
the southern parts by the Parsyetai, and
the eastern by the Ambautai.

4. The towns and villages of the P a r o-
panisadai are these : —

Parsiana 118° 30' 38° 45'

Barzaura 114° 37° 30'

Artoarta 116° 30' 37° 30'

Baborana 118° 37° 10'

Katisa 118° 40' 37° 30'

Niphanda 119° 37°

Drastoka ... 116° 36° 30'

Gazaka or Gaudzaka 118° 30' 36° 15'

5. Naulibis 117° 35° 30'

Parsia 113° 30' 35°

Lokhama 118° 34^

Daroakana 118° 30' 34° 20'

Karoura, called also Ortospana.l 18° 35°

Tarbakana 114° 20' 33° 40/

Bagarda 116° 40' 33° 40'

Argouda 118° 45' 33° 30'

The tribes for which Paropanisadai was a
collective name were located along the southern and
eastern sides of the Hindu -Kush, which Ptolemy
calls the Kaukasos, and of which his Paropanisos
formed a part. In the tribe which he calls the



312



B^litaiwc may perhaps kave tlie Kabolitae, or
people of Kabul, and in the Ambaiitai the Am-
bashtha of Sanskrit. The Parsjetai have also
a Sanskrit name — * mountaineers/ from parvata,
* a mountain,' so also the Parautoi of Areia.
The principal cities of the Paropanisadai were
Naulibis and Karoura or Ortospana.
Karoura is also written asKaboura and in this form
makes a near approach to Kabul, with which it has
been identified. With regard to the other name of
this place, Ortospana, Cunningham {Aric. Geog. of
Ind., p. 35) says ; " I would identify it with Kabul
itself, with its Bala Hisar, or * high fort,' which
I take to be a Persian translation of Ortospana or
Urddhasthfilna, that is, high place or lofty city."
Ptolemy mentions two rivers that crossed the
country of the Paropanisadai — the Dargamanes
from Baktriana that flowed northward to join the
Ozos, which Wilson {Ariana Antiqua, p. 160) takes
to be either the Dehas or the Goii river. 11 it
was the Dehas, then the other river which
Ptolemydoes not name, but which he makes to be
a tributary of the K 6 a, may be the Sarkh&b or
Gori river, which, however, does not join the Koa
but flows northward to join the Oxos. Panini
mentions Parsusthina, the country of the Parsus,
a warlike tribe in this reign, which may corres-
pond to Ptolemy's Parsioi or Parsyetai.*'' The
following places have been identified : —

Parsiana with Panjshir ; Barzaura with
Baz&rak; Baborana with Parw&n; Dras-
t o k a with Istargarh ; P a r s i a (capital of the

*• See BeaPa Bud. Rec. of Wn. Count, vol. II, p. 285n.



J



313

Parsii) with Farzali, and Lokharna with Logajh
south of Kdbul.

Cap. 19.

Position of.Drangianb.

[Map of Asia 9.]

Drangiane is bounded, on the west
and north by Areia along the line already
described as passing through Mount Bagoos, and
on the east by Arakhosia along the meridian
line drawn from an extreme point lying in the
country of the Areioi and that of the Paropa-
nisadai to another extreme point, of which the

position is in 111° 30' 28'

and on the south by a part of Gedrosia along
the line joining the extreme points already
determined, passing through the Baitian
mountains.

2. There flows through the country a river
which branches off from the A r a b i s of which
the sources lie 109° 32^30'

3. The parts towards Areia are possessed by
the D a r a n d a i, and those towards Arakhosia
by the Baktrioi, the country intermediate
is called Tataken6.

4. The towns and villages of Drangiand
are said to be these : —

Prophthasia 110° 32° 20'

Rhouda 106° 30' 31° 30'

40 a



314



Inna 109° 31° 30'

Arikada 110° 20' 31° 20'

6. Asta 117°, 30' 30° 40'

Xarxiar^ 106° 20' 29° 15'

Nostana ,..,.108° 29° 40'

Pharazana 110° 30°

Bigis 111° 29°40'

Ariaspe 108° 40' 28° 40'

Arana 111° 28° 15'

Drangiane corresponds in general position
and extent with the province now called Seistan.
The inhabitants were called Drangai, Zarangae,
Zarangoi, Zarangaioi and Sarangai. The name,
according to Bumouf, was derired from the
Zend word, zara/yo, * a lake,' a word which is
retained in the name by which Ptolemy's Areian
lake is now known — Lake Zarah. The district was
mountainous towards Arakhosia, which formed
its eastern frontier, but in the west, towards
Karmania, it consisted chiefly of sandy wastes.
On the south it was separated from Gedrosia by the
Haitian mountains, iixoae now called the Washati.
Ptolemy says it was watered by a river derived
from the Arabis, but this is a gross error, for the
Arabis, which is now called the Purali, flows from
the Haitian mountains in an opposite direction from
Drangiana. Ptolemy has probably confounded the
Arabis with the Etymander or Helmand rivei* which,
as has already been noticed, falls into Lake Zarah.

Ptolemy has portioned out the province among
three tribes, the Darandai (Drangai?) on the
north, the Haktrioi to the south-east, and the
people of Tataken^ between them.



315



The capital was PropLtHaBia whicli was
distant, according to Eratosthenes, 1500 or 1600
stadia from Alexandria Areion (Herat). Wilson
therefore fixes its site at a place called Feshawa-
run, which is distant from Herat 183 miles, and
where theixj were relics found of a very large city.
This place lies between Dtcshak and Phra, i.e,
Farah, a little to the north of the lake. These
ruins are not, however, of ancient date, and it i*
better therefore to identify Prophthasia with
Farah which represents Phra or Phrada, and
Phrada, according to Stephanos of Byzantium, was
the name of the city which was called by
Alexander Prophthasia (Bunbury, vol. I, pr 488).
Dashak, the actual capital of Seist&n, is probably
the Zarang of the early Muhammadan writers
which was evidently by its name connected with
Drangiana. In the Persian cuneiform inscription
at Behistun the country is called Zasaka, as
Rawlinson has pointed out (see Smith's DiC'
tionary, s. v. IJrangiana). . The place of next
importance to the capital was A r i a s p e, which
An'ian places on the Etymander (^wa&., lib.IVr
c. vii). The people were called Ariaspai at first,
or Agriaspai, but afterwards Euergetai, — a title
which they had earned by assisting Cyrus at a
time when he had been reduced to great straits.

Cap. 20.

Position op Arakh6sia.

Arakhdsia is bounded on the west by

Drangian^, on the north by the Paropanisadai,

along the sides already determined, on the east

by the part of India lying along the meridian



316



line extended from the boundary towards the
Paropanisadai as far as an extreme point

lying 119^ 28°

and on the south by the rest of Gedrosia
along the line joining the extreme points
already determined through the Baitian range.

2. A river enters this country which branch-
es off from the Indus of which the sources

lie in 114° 32° 30'

and the divarication (eVrpoTr^)

in 121° 30' 27° 30'

and the part at the lake formed by it which

is called Arakhotos KrdaS (fountain) —

lies in 115° 28° 40'

3. The people possessing the north parts of
the country are the Parsy^tai, and those
below them the S y d r o i, after whom are the
Bhoploutai and the E 6 r 1 1 a i.

4 The towns and villages ofArakh6sia
are said to be these : —

07.ola (or Axola) 114° 15' 32° 15'

Phoklis 118° 15' 32° 10'

Arikaka 113° 31° 20'

Alexandreia 114° 31° 20'

Rhizana 115° 31° 30'

Arbaka 118° 31° 20'

Sigara 113° 15' 30°

Khoaspa 115° 15' 30° 10'

5. Arakhdtos 118° 30° 20-^

Asiake 112° 20' 29° 20'

GammaW 116° 20' 29° 20'



317



Malian^ 118^ 29*20'

Dammana 113° 28° 20'

Arakhosia comprised a considerable portion
of Eastern Afghanistan. It extended westward
beyond tbe meridian of Qandahdr and its eastern
frontier was skii-ted by the Indus. On the north
it stretched to the mountains of Ghfir, the
western section of the Hindu -Knsh, and on
the south to Gedrosia from which it was sepa-
rated by the Baitian mountains, a branch of the
Brahui range. The name has been derived from
Haraqiati, the Persian form of the Sanskrit
Saras vati, a name frequently given to rivers (being
a compound of ear as, * flowing water,' and the
affix vati) and applied among others to the river
of Arakhosia. The province was rich and popu-
lous, and what added greatly to its importance,
it was traversed by one of the main routes by
which Persia communicated with India. The
principal river was that now called the Helmand
which, rising near the Koh-i-b^b^ range west of
K&bul, pursues a course with a general direction to
the south-west, and which, after receiving from
the neighbourhood of Qandahdr the Argand-S,b
with its affluents, the Tamak and the Arghasan,
flows into the lake of Zarah. Ptolemy mentions
only one river of Arakhosia and this, in his map, is
' represented as rising in the Paryetai mountains
(the Hazaras) and flowing into a lake from which
it issues to fall into the Indus about 3J degrees
below its junction with the combined rivers of the
Panjab. This lake, which, he says, is called Ara-
khotos Krene, he places at a distance of not less
than 7 degrees from his Areian lake. In the text



318



he says tHat the river is an arm of the Indus, a
statement for which it is difficult to find a reason.
The capital of Arakhosia was Arakhotos,
said by Stephanos of Byzantium to have been
founded by Semiramis. Regarding its identifi-
cation Mr. Vaux (Smith's Dictionary, s. v.) says :
*' Some difference of opinion has existed as to the
exact position of this town, and what modeini city
or ruins can be identified with the ancient capital ?
M. Court has identified some ruins on the Arghasan
river, 4 parasangs from Qandah^r, on the road to
Shikarpur, with those of Arakhofcos, but these Prof.
Wilson considers to be too much to the S.E.
Rawlinson (Jour, Geog, fifoc, vol. XII, p. 113)
thinks that he has found them at a place now
called Ulin Bobat. He states that the most
ancient name of the city, Kophen, mentioned by
Stephanos and Pliny, has given rise to the territo-
rial designation of Kipin, applied by the Chinese
to the surrounding country. The ruins are of a
very remarkable character, and the measurements
of Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolemy are, he considers,
decisive as to the identity of the site. Stephanos
has apparently contrasted two cities — Arakhosia,
which he says is not far from the Massagetae, and
Arakh6tas, which he calls a town of India. Sir
H. BawKnson believes the contiguity of the
Massagetae and Arakhosia, may be explained by
the supposition that by Massagetae, Stephanos
meant the Sakai, who colonized the Haz&ra
mountains on their way from the Hindu-Kush to
Sakastan or Seist4n." Another account of the
origin of the name Seist&n is that it is a corrup-
tion of the word Saghistan, i. e., the country of



319



the saghis, a kind of wood which abounds in the
province and is used as fuel. Arakhosia, according
to Isidoros of Kharax, was called by the Farthians
" White India."

Cap. 21.

Position of Gedrosia.

Gedr6sia is bounded on the west by
Karmania along the meridian line, already de-
termined as far as the sea, and on the north by
Di^ngiane and Arakhosia along the separate
meridian lines passing through these countries,
and on the east by part of India along the river
Indus following the line prolonged from the
boundary towards Arakhosia to its termination

at the sea in 109° 20°

and on the south by a part of the Indian Ocean.
It is thus described through its circuit.

% After the extremity towards Karmania
the mouth of the River Arabis 105° 20° 15'

the sources of the river 110° 2 7° 30'

the divarication of the river

entering Drangian^ 107° 30' 25°

Rhagiraua, a city 100° 20°

Women's Haven (Gynaikon

lim^n) 107° 20° 15'

Koiamba 108° 20°

Rhizana.... 108° 20' 20° 15'

After which the extreme point
at the sea already men-
tioned 109° 20°



320



3. Through Gedrosia run the mountains
called the Arbita, whose extreme points

lie in 160^ (107 ?) 22°

and 113° 26° 30'

from these mountains some rivers join the
Indus and the source of one of these

lies 111° 25° 30'

and also there are some streams flowing through
Gedrosia, that descend from the Baitian range.

4. The maritime parts are possessed by the
villages of the A r b i t a i, and the parts along
Karamania by the Parsidai (or Parsirai),
and the parts along Arakhosia by the M a u s a r-
n a i o i, all the interior of the country is called
Paraden^, and below it Parisiene, after
which the i>arts towards the Indus river are
possessed by the R h a m n a i.

5. The towns and villages of Gedrosia
are accounted to be these : —

Kouni 110° 27°

Badara 113° 27°

Mousarna 115° 27° 30'

Kottobara 118° 27° 30'

Soxestra or Sokstra 118° 30' 25° 45'

Oskana 115° 26°

Parsis, the Metropolis 106° 30' 23° 30'

Omiza 110° 23° 30'

Arbis, acity 105° 22° 30'

6. The islands adjacent to Gedrosia are —

Asthaia 105° 18°

Kodan^ (107?) 160° 30' 17^



TO



321



Gedrosia corresponds to the modem Baludi-
ist&n. Its coast line extended from the mouth of
the Indus to Cape Jask near the Straits, which
open into the Persian Gulf. Ptolemy however
assigned the greater portion of this coast to
Xarmania which according to his view must
liave begun somewhere near Cape Passence.
Arrian restricted the name of Gedrosia to the
interior of the country, and assigned the maritime
districts beginning from the Indus to the Arabics,
*he Oreitai and the Ikhthyophagoi in succession.
The ancient and the modem names of the pr6 vince.
Major Mockler tries to identify in his paper in the
Jour. B. As. Soc, N. S., vol. XI. pp. 129-154.

The people that possessed the maritime region
immediately adjoining the Indus were called the
A r b i ta i or A r a b i e s. In one of their harbours
the fleet of Nearkhos at the outset of his memor-
able voyage was detained for 24 days waiting till
the monsoon should subside. This harbour was
found to be both safe and commodious, and was
•called by Nearkhos the Port of Alexander, It is
now Karachi, the great emporium for the commerce
of the Indus. The name of the people was applied
also to a chain of mountains and to a river, the
Arabis, now called the Purali, which falls into
the Bay of Sonmiyani. Ptolemy's Arabis, how-
ever, lay nearer Karmania, and may be taken
to be the Bhasul, which demarcated the western
frontier of the Oreitai, and to the east of which
the district is stiU known by the name of Arbu^
Ptolemy does not mention the Oreitai, but seems
to have included their territory in that of the
Arbitai.
41 a



322



The B h a m n a i are pla<^ed in Ptolemy's map in
the northern part of the province and towards the
river Indus. This race appears to have been one
that was widely diffused, and one of its branches,
as has been stated, was loeated among the
Vindhyas.

The Farsidai, who bordered on Karmania,
are mentioned in the Peripl'&s (c. xxxvii) and also
in Arrian's Indika. (c. xxvi) where they are called
Pasirees. They gave their names to a range of
mountains which Ptolemy makes the boundary
between G^droeia and Karmania, and also to a
town, Parsisr which formed the capital of the
whole province.

Of the other towns enumerated only one is men-
tioned in Arrian's Indika, Gynaikon LimSn^
or women's haven, the port of Morontobara, near
Cape Monze, the last point of the Pab range of
mountains* The haven was so named because
the district aronnd had, like Carthage, a woman
for its first sovereign*

The names of the two towns Badara and
Mousarna occur twice in Ptolemy, here as
inland towns of Gedrosia, and elsewhere as seaport
towns of Karmania. Major Mockler, who personally
examined the Makran coast from Gwadar to Cape
Jask, and has thereby been enabled to correct some
of the current identifications, has shown that
Gwadar and Badara are identical. Badara appears
in the Indika of Arrian as Bama.

I here subjoin, for comparison, a passage from
Ammianus Marcellinus which traverses the ground
covered by Ptolemy's description of Central and
Eaatern Asia. Ammianus wrote about the middle



323



of the fourth century of our aara, and was a well in-
formed writer, and careful in his statement of fact^<
The extract is from the 23rd Book of his History : —

Ammianus Marcelmnus — Book XXIII.

•* If you advance from Karmania into the interior
(of Asia) you reach the Hyrkanians, who border
on the sea which bears their name. Here, as the
poorness o£ the soil kills the seeds committed to
it, the inhabitants care but little for agriculture.
They live by hunting game,, which is beyond
measure varied and abundant. Tigers show them-
selves here in thousands, and many other wild
beasts besides. I bear in mind that I have already
described the nature of the contrivances by which
these animals are caught. It must not be sup-
posed, however, that the people never put hands
to the plough, for where the soil is found richer
than usual the fields are covered with crops. In
places, moreover, that are adapted for being plant-
ed-out, gardens of- fruit-trees are not wanting,
and the sea also supplies many with the means of
livelihood. Two rivers flow through the country
whose names are familiar to all, the O x u s and
M a X e r a. Tigers at times, when pressed by hun-
ger on their own side of these rivers, swim over to
the opposite side and, before the alarm can be raised,
ravage all the neighbourhood where they land.
Amidst the smaller townships there exist also cities
of great power, two on the sea-board, S o c u n d a
and Saramanna, and the others inland —
Azmorna and Solen, andHyrkana, which
rank above the others. The country next to this
people on the north is said to be inhabited by the



S24



Abii, a most pions race of men, accnstotned t»
despise all things mortal, and whom Jupiter (a»
Homer with his over- fondness for fabl& singi) looks-
down upon from the summits of Mount Ida. The
seats immediately beyond the Hyrkanians form the
dominions of the Margiani, who are nearly on
all sides round hemmed in by high hills, and conse-
quently shut out from the sea. Thc»>gh their
territory is for the most part sterile,, from; the
deficiency of water,, they have nevertheless some
towns, and of these the more notable are Jasonion
and Antiochia and Nisasa. The adpining region
belongs to the Baktriani, a nation hitherto
addicted to war and very powerful, and always
troublesome to their neighbours, the PerBians,^
before that people had reduced all the sorrounding
states to submission, and absorbed them into their
own name and nationality. In old times, however,
even Ar^akes himself found the kings who ruled
in Baktriana formidable foes to contend with.
Most parts of the country are» like Margiana, far
distant from the sea, but the soil is productive,
and the cattle that are pastured on the plains and
hill-sides, are compact of structure, with limbs
both stout and strong, as may be judged from
the camels which were brought from thence by
Mithridates and seen by the Romans during the
siege of Cyzicus, when they saw this species of
animal for the first time. A great many tribes,
among which the Tochari are the most dis^
tinguished, obey the Baktrians^ Their country ia
watered, like Italy, by numerous rivers, and of
these the Artemis and Zariaspes after their
union, and In like manner th combined Q c h u a



825



and Orchomanes, swell wibh their confluent
waters the vast stream of the Oxos. Here also
cities arc to he found, and these are laved hy dif-*
ferent rivers. The more important of them are
Ohatra and Charte and Alicodra and Astacia and
Menapila, and B a k t r a itself, which is hoth the
capital and the name of the nation. The people, who
live at the very foot of the mountains, are called
the Sogdii, through whose country flow two
rivers of great navigable capacity, the Araxates
and Dymas, which rushing impetuously down
from the mountains and passing into a level plain >
form a lake of vast extent, called the O xi a n. Here,
among other towns, Alexandria, and Kyreschata,
and Drepsa the Metropolis, are well known to fame.
Contiguous to the Sogdians are the S a c a e, an un^
civilized people, inhabiting rugged tracts that yield
nothing beyond pasture for cattle, and that are,
therefore, unadorned with cities. They lie under
Mounts A s k a n i m ia and K o m e d u s. Beyond
the valleys at the foot of these mountains and the
village which they call Lithinon Pyrgon
(Stone Tower) lies the very long road by which
traders pursue their jonrney who start from this
point to reach the Seres. In the parts around
are the declivities by which the mountains called
Imaus and the Tapourian range, sink down to the
level of the plains. The Skythians are located
within the Persian territories, being conterminous
with the Asiatic Sarmatians, and touching
the furthest frontier of the A I a n i. They live, as
it were, a sort of secluded life, and are reared in
solitude, being scattered over districts that lie far
apart» and that yield for the sustenance of life a



826



mean and scanty fare. The tribes which inhabit
these tracts are various, bat it would be superfluous
for me to enumerate them, hastening as I am to
a different subject. One fact must, however, be
stated, that there are in these communities which
are almost shut oat from the rest of mankind by
the inhospitable nature of their country, some men
gentle and pious, as for instance, the Jaxartes
and the Galaktophagi, mentioned by the poet
Homer in this verse :

T\aKTo<lmy<jiv afil(aPT€ diKaiOTdratv avBpaytnav.

" Among the many rivers of Skythia which either
fall naturally into larger ones, or glide onward to
reach at last the sea, the Roemnusisof renown,
and the Jaxartes and the T a 1 i c u s, but of cities
they are not known to have more than but three,
Aspabota and Chauriana and Saga.

'^ Beyond these places in the two Skythias and
on their eastern side lie the Seres, who are girt
in by a continuous circle of lofty mountain-peaks,
and whose territory is noted for its vast extent
and fertility. On the west they have the Sky-
thians for their next neighbours, and on the
north and east they adjoin solitudes covered
Over with snow, and on the south extend as far
as India and the Ganges. The mountains refer-
red to are called Anuiva and Nazavicium and
Asmira and Emodon and Opurocara. Through
this plain which, as we have said, is cinctured
on all sides by steep declivities, and through
regions of vast extent, flow two famous rivers, the
CEchardes and the Bautisus, with a slower
current. The country is diversified in its character,
here expanding into open plains, and there rising



327



in gentle undulations. Hence it is marvelloasly
fruitful and well- wooded, and teeming with cattle.
Various tribes inhabit the most fertile districts, and
of these the Alitrophagi and A n n i b i and
S i z y g e s and C h a r d i are exposed to blasts from
the north and to frosts, while the Rabannaeand
A s m i r a e and Essedones, who outshine all the
other tribes, look towards the rising sun. Next to
these, on their western side, are the Athagorae
and the Aspacarae. The B e t a e, again, are
situated towards the lofty mountains fringing the
south, and are famed for their cities which, though
few in number are distinguished for their size and
wealth ; the largest of them being A s m i r a, and
Essedon and Asparata and Sera, which are
beautiful cities and of great celebrity. The Seres
themselves lead tranquil lives, and are averse to
arms and war, and since people whose temper is
thus sedate and peaceful relish their ease, they
give no trouble to any of their neighbours. They
enjoy a climate at once agreeable and salubrious ;
the sky is clear and the prevailing winds are
wonderfully mild and genial. The country is
well-shaded with woods, and from the trees the
inhabitants gather a product which they make
into what may be called fleeces by repeatedly
besprinkling it with water. The material thus
formed by saturating the soft down with moisture
is exquisitely fine, and when combed out and spun
into woof is woven into silk, an article of dress
formerly worn only by the great, but now
without any distinction even by the very poorest.**

*^ It was a notion long prevalent that silk was combed
from the leaves of trees. Thus Virgil {Qeorg. II, 121)



L.



828



The Seres themselves Kve in the most frugal
maimer, more so indeed than any other people in
the world. They seek after a life as free aa
possible from all disquiet, and shun intercourse
with the rest of mankind. So when strangers
cross the river into their country to buy their
silks or other commodities, they exchange no
words with them, but merely intimate by their looks
the value of the goods offered for sale; and so
abstemious are they that they buy not any foreign
products. Beyond the Seres live the A r i a n i, ex-
posed to the blasts of the north wind. Through
their country flows a navigable river called the
Arias, which forms a vast lake bearing the same
name. This same Aria has numerous towns,
among which Bitana Sarmatina, and Sotera and
Nisibis and Alexandria are the most notable. If
you sail from Alexandria down the river to the
Caspian Sea the distance is 1,500 stadia.

Immediately adjoining these places are the P a-
ropanisatae, who look on the east towards the
Indians and on the west towards Caucasus, lying
themselves towards the slopes of the mountains.
The River Ortogordomaris, which is larger than
any of the others, and rises among the Baktriani,
flows through their territory. They too, have some
towns, of which the more celebrated are Agazaca
and Naulibus and Ortopana, from which the navi-



*' Velleraque ut foliia depectant tenuia Sere?.'* 'Strabo
(XV, i, 20) describes silk as carded off the bark of certain
trees. Pausanias, who wrote about 180 A.D. is the first
classical author who writes with some degree of correct-
ness about silk and the silk-worm, Conf , P. Mela, i, 2,
3 ; iii, 7, 1 ; Pliny, VI, 17, 20 ; Prop, i, 14, 22 ; SoL 50 ;
Isid. Orig. xix, 17, 6 ; ib. 27. 5.



320



gation along the coast to the borders of Media in
the immediate neighbourhood of the Caspian
Oates extends to 2,200 stadia. Contiguous to the
Paropanisatae just named are the Drangiani,
seated quite close to the hills and watered by a
river called the Arabian, because it rises in
Arabia. Among their other to^ms they have two
to boast of in particular, Prophthasia and Ariaspe,
which are both opulent and famous. After these,
and directly confronting them, Arachosia
comes into view, which on its right side faces the
Indians. It is watered by a stream of copious
volume derived from the Indus, that greatest of
rivers, after which the adjacent regions have been
named. This stream, which is less than the
Indus, forms the lake called Arachotoscrene.
The province, among other important cities, has
Alexandria and Arbaca and Choaspa. In the very
interior of Persia is Gedrosia, which on the
right touches the Indian frontier. It is watered
by several streams, of which the Artabius is the
most considerable. Where it is inhabited by the
Barbitani the mountains sink down to the
plains. A number of rivers issue from their very
base to join the Indus, and these all lose their
names when absorbed into that mightier stream.
Here too, besides the islands there are cities, of
which Sedratyra and Gunaikon Limen (Women's
haven) are considered to be superior to the others.
But we must bring this description here to an
end, lest in entering into a minute account of tho
seaboard on the extremities of Persia we should
stray too far from the proper argument,"

42 a



APPENDIX OP ADDITIONAL NOTES.

1. On the latitude of Byzantium and of
Tasli-Kurgli4n— (p. 14).

Ptolemy, like Hipparkhos and all the ancients
except Strabo, erroneously took the latitude of
Byzantium (41° 1') to be the same as that of
Marseilles (43° 180- The latitude of T&sh-
kurghan in the Pamtr is 37° 46' and its longi-
tude 75° 10' B.; the latitude of Tashkend is
42° 58', and that of Och or Ush (near which
there is a monument called at this day the Takht-
i-Suleiman, * Throne of Soliman,' which Heeren
took to be the veritable stone tower of Ptolemy)
is 40° ly.

2. On Kouroula — (pp. 22, 63, and 64).
Lieut.-Oolonel Branfill (Names of Places in

Tanjore, p. 8), thinks this may be represented
by Kurla or Koralai-gorla on the East Coast .
" There is," he points out, " (rorZap&lem near
Nizfimpattanam. (Qf, Vingorla, South Concan,
Malabar Coast)."

3. Argaric Gulf and Argeiron (pp. 22, 59, and
60).

Branfill in the work cited (pp. 8 and 9) says :— •
** Arrankarai (pronounced nowadays Atrankarai),
at the mouth of the Vagai looks very like the
ancient 'Argari/ and * Sinus Argalicus ' (Tule),
the Argaric Gulf . . Ayx<tpov looks like Anaikarai,
the ancient name of Adam's Bridge, so called by
the Tamils as being the bridge or causeway par

excellence In the middle ages, before

PSmban was separated from the mainland by the



3S2

storm that breached the famous causeway, there
is said to have be^i a great city, remams of
which are still to be seen on the spit of sand
opposite to P&mban. " Ay xeipov in Nobbe's editiost
appears aa Apyetpov.

4. On Thelkheir— '(pp. 63 and 64).

BranfiU (p. 12), would identify this with ChicU
ambaram— " the town between the VeUar and Kol*

• • •

ladam {Coleroon) rivers, .... from chit = wis-
dom, and ambara, horizon, sky; = Heaven of
Wisdom. Tillai, or Tillaivanam is the former
name of this place, and it is familiarly known a»
Tillai even now amongst the natives. May not
this be the ancient Thellyr and ©^Xxeip of Pto>-
lemy and the ancient geographers P But perhaps
Telltir (near Vandavasi) may be it." Tillai, he
points out (p. 30), is a tree with milky sap.

5. On Orthoura — (pp. 64 and 184).

Bran fill (pp. 7 and 8), identifying this, says :—
** Orattiftr (pronounced OratthAru)is found repeat-
edly in this (Kaveri Delta) and the adjacent
districts, and may represent the * Orthura ' of
J ancient geographers, for which Colonel Yule's Map
^^j O/^'i^^^.' > ^^ Ancient India gives Ureiyour, and Professor
: ,^ 1 ■ . ' Lassen's Wadiur."
^ *-'- '' ' ' \. 6. On Arkatos— (p. 64),

^ '• . ' / BranfiU, who takes this to designate a place

and not a king, says (p. 11) : — " Arkad or Aru-
kadu = six forests ; the abode of six Rishis in old
times. There are several places of this name in
Tanjore and S. Arcot, besides the town of * Arcot'
neai* * Vellore' (ApKarov jSao-iXctop Scopa). One of
these would correspond better than that with
Harkatu of Ibn Batuta^ who reached it the first



833



evening of his march inland after landing from
Ceylon, apparently on the shalloTV coast of Madura
or Tanjore (fourteenth century)."

7. On the River Adamas — (p. 71).

Professor Y. Ball, in his Presidential Address
to the Royal Geological Society of Ireland (read
March 19, 1883), says :— " The Adamas River of
Ptolemy, according to Lassen's analysis of the
data, was not identical with the Mahanadi, as I
have suggested in my * Economic (xeology ' (p. 30),
but with the Subanrikha, which is, however, so
far as we know, not a diamond-bearing river,
nor does it at any part of its course traverse rocks
of the age of those which contain the matrix in
other parts of India. This Adamas River was
separated from the Mahanadi by the Tyndis and
Dosaron ; the latter, according to Lassen, taking
its rise in the country of Kokkonaga (i.e. Chutia
Nagpur), and to which the chief town Dosara
(the modem Doesa) gave its name. But, according
to this view, the Dosaron must have been identical
with the modem Brahmini, which in that poiHiion
of its course called the Sunk (or Koel), included a
diamond locality. I cannot regard this identifica-
tion as satisfactory, as it does not account for
the Tyndis intervening between the Dosaron and
Mahanadi, since, as a matter of fact, the Brahmini
and Mahanadi are confluent at their mouths.
Lasften, however, identifies the Dosaron with the
Baituraee, and the Tyndis with the Brahmini.
This destroys the force of his remark, as to the
origin of the name of the former, since at its
nearest point it is many miles distant from
Doesa."



«



334



8. On Mount Sardonyx — (p. 77).
Professor Ball in the address above cited, says :—
The sardonyx mines of Ptolemy are probably

identical with the famous camelian and agate
mines of Bajpipla, or, rather, afi it should be
called, Batanpur."

9. On Talara— <p. 90).

Branfill suggests the identification of this with
TeMr or Till&rampattu (p. 8).

10. On Pounnata— (p. 180).

" PunMu, Punnadu, or Punn&ta, as it is variously
written, seems also to be indicated by the Pan-
nuta in Lassen's Map of Ancient India according
to Ptolemy, and by the Paunata of Colonel Yule's
Map of Ancient India, nhi beryllus" This place is
about 70 miles to the south-east of Seringapa-
tam.

11. On Arembour— (pp. 180, 182).

BranfiU — (p. 8), identifies this with Arambailkr.

12. On Abour— (p. 184).

Branfill (p. 11), identifies this with " AvAr,
cow-villa, a decayed town, Smiles S.W. of Kamba-
konam, with a temple and a long legend about a
cow (a). May not this be the ancient Abur of
the Map of Ancient India in Smith's Classical
Atlas ? Colonel Yule suggests Amboor, but this
Avtir seems nearer, and if not this there are several
places in S. Arcot named Amtir."

13. On Argyre— (p. 196).

Professor Ball says: — "There are no silver
mines in Arakan, and considering the geological
structure* of the country, it is almost certain
there never were any. I have been recently in-
formed by General Sir A. Phayre that Argyre is



335



probably a transliteration of an ancient Burmese
name for Arakan. It seems likely therefore tbat
it was from putting a Greek interpretation to this
name that the story of the silver-mines owed its
origin.

14. On the Golden Khersonese — (p. 197).
"Gold," says Mr. Colqnhoun {Amongst the

ShanSf p. 2), " has been for centuries washed from
the beds of the Irrawadi, Sitang, Salween, Mekong,
and Yang-tsi-kiang rivers." The gold-reefs of
Southern India which have of late attracted so
much notice, are, he .points out, but outcrops of
the formation which extends on the surface
for thousands of square miles in the Golden
Peninsula. ^

15. On the Loadstone rocks ^. 242).
Professor Ball thinks these rocks may possibly

be identified with certain hiU-ranges in Southern
India which mainly consist of magnetic iron
{JSconomic Geology of India, p. 37).

16. On the sandy deserts of Baktria (p. 270).
In the Proceedings of the Royal Geographical

Society for April last will be found a description
of the Kara-kum sands, by M. Paul Lessar, who
divides them into three classes. The burhans which
form his 3rd class are of the nature described by
Curtius. "The dand is wholly of a diifting
nature; the slightest puff of wind effaces the
fresh track of a caravan." He notices a place in
the Khanate of Bokhara where whole caravans
have been buried.

17. On the river 6chos (p. 273).

** What hitherto has been taken for the dry bed
of the Ochus is not the bed of a river, but merely



336



a natural furrow between sand-hills . Thus the bed
<rf the Ochus has still to be discorered." Proceed-
ings of the Royal Geog. Socy. for April 1885.

18. On the Avestic names of rivers, &c. in
Afghanistan — (pp. 305-19).

In the Ist chapter of the Vendidad the names
are given of the sixteen lands said to have been
created by Ahura Mazda. Of these the following
nine have been thus identified by Darmesteter in
his translation of the Zend-Avesta, Sacred Books
of the East, Yol. IV. p. 2) :—
Zend name. Old P^sian. Qxeek. Modem.

Sughdha Suguda Sogdiane (Samarkand)
Mouru Margu Margiane Merv

B&khdhi Bakhtri Baktra Balkh

Haroyu Haraiva Areia Hari-Rdd

Vehrkana Yarkana Hyrkania Jorjan
Harahvaiti Harauvati Arakhotos Hardt
HaetumaTit Etymandros Helmend

Ragha Raga Rhagai Rai

Haptahitidu Hindavas Indoi (Pafijab)

Some of these and other names are examined in
an article in The Academy (May 16, 1885, No.
680), signed by Auriel Stein, from which the
following particulars are gathered : " We recog-
nize the 'powerful, faithful Mourva' as the
modem Merv, the * beautiful Bdkhdhi ' as Balkh,
Hara^a as Her&t, the mountain Vditigaesa as the
Badhges of recent notoriety. The river Harah-
vaiti (Sansk. Sarasvatl) has been known in sue-
cessive ages as Arakhotos and Arghand-&b ; but
more important for Avestic geography is the
large stream of which it is a tributary, the
•bountiful, glorious HaUumant; the Etyman-



337



dros and Hermandns of classic authors, the
modem HelmancL' " A passage is quoted from the
Avesta where eight additional rivers seem to be
named. " At its foot (the mountain Ushidao's, i.e.
the Koh-i-Baba and Siah-ICoh's) gushes and flows
forth the Hvdstra and the Hvaspa, the Fradatha
and the beautiful JSvarevanhaiti and Ustavaiti the
mighty, and TJrisadha^ rich of pastures, and the
Erexi and ZarenwniaitV* The HvaHra Stein
thinks may be the KhSish-Rtld, and the Hvaspa
the Khusp&s-Riid, both of which come from
the south slope of the SiSih-Xoh and reach the
eastern basin of the lagune where the lower
course of the Helmand is lost. " In B^usp&s,*'
he adds, **a place on the upper course of the
Khusp&s-RM, we may recognize the town Khoaspa
mentioned by Ptolemy in Arakhosia. The name
hvaSpa means ** haying good horses," and seems
to have been a favourite designation for rivers in
Iran. Besides the famous Khoaspes near Susa,
we hear of another Khoaspes, a tributary of the
Kab(il River." In K&sh, a town on the Khash-
fiftd may be recognized the station called Oosata
by the Anonymous Ravennas. The Fradatha is
Pliny's Ophradus {i.e, 6 ^pddos of the Greek
original) and now the Far&h-E(id. The Proph-
thasia of Ptolemy and Stephanos of Byzantium
is a literal rendeMg of fradathay which in com-
mon use as neuter means (literally " proficiency"),
"progress," "increase." The Havrenanihaiti is
the Pharnacutis of Pliny and now the HarrAt-
RM, which like the Farah-Riid enters the lake
of Seist&n. Farnahvati has been suggested aa
the original and native form of Phamacotis.
43 a



838



19. On the Griffins or Gryphons — (p. 295).

Professor Ball in a paper published in the
Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, 2nd Ser.,
Vol. II. No. 6, pp. 312-13 (Pol. Lit. and Antiq.)
says : *• In the account which Photios gives of
the Griffins, if we exclude from it the word birds,
and for feathers read hair, we have a tolei*ably
accurate description of the hairy black-and-tan
coloured Thibetan mastiffs, which are now, as they
were doubtless formerly, the custodians of the
dwellings of the Thibetans, those of gold-miners,
as well as of others. They attracted the special
attention of Marco Polo» as well as of many other
travellers in Thibet, and for a recent account of
them reference may be made to Capt. Gill's
* Miver of Golden Sand.' "



339



ERRATA.



Page 8, n. 5, for Nolle read Nobhe.

y, 14i, n. 12, after T&sb-Kargh&n insert its
Lat. 37° 46' (long. 75° 4').
20, n. for [IXXXIXl] read [IXXlXJ].

25, for censure in last line but one read
use,

51, 1. 20, for Kandionoi read Pandionoi.

63, 1. 16, for outlet read outset

64, 1. 13, omit the before Kolkboi.

68, 1. 15, for GHldHi read Gftdflr.

70, 1. 27, Katikardama sbonld begin the
line after.

71, 1. 18, after Dosaron instead of tbe
dasb insert the sign of equality (=?)
and so after " Adamas" in tbe next
line, and after *' Ganges" in line 21.

75, Section 21 sbould bave been immedi-
ately followed by tbe next 4 sections
wbicb appear on p. 78.

76, 1. 16, for * punishment' ot the 'gods'
read ' punishment of the gbds'

80, 1. 21, for ]^iksbavant read Biksbavat.

81, 1. 29, for Bidasis read Bibasis.

87, 1. 7, for tbe comma after tbe bracket
put periodr,

,, 88, 1. 26, for Bbonadis read Bbouadis.



9>



»



99



Page 124, The sections 47-60 should have heeo
placed after the motice of lomousa oo
p. 126.

„ 140, 1. 29, after * second group' iaseTt(8ection&
* 57 and 58).

„ 140, last line, after * fourth group/ insert
(section 61).

fy 141, 1. 15, after ' sixth group' insert {sectiovk
64.)



INDEX.



PAGE



Abaratha 24^, 258

Abarbina 261

Abhlras (Ahirs) \40

Abioi Skythai..293-6,323

Abiria 36, 136, 140

Abour 184-5

Abragana 299

Abranals 250

Achin 240

Adamas, R.70, 71, 80, 104

Adam's Peak 256

Adarima 180

Adeisamon 250

Adeisathra...80, 133, 161

Adeisathroi 164-6

Adeisatliron.78,79, 80, 159
Adisdara ... 131, 133, 161

Adrapsa 261

Adris or Bbonadis E. 81,

90

Aganagara 202,215

Aganagora m.... 212

Ag^ , 154



PAGE

Agara 15^

Agathou daimonos

Is 236, 238

Aghadip 216

Agimoitha , 225

Aginnatai 236-7

Agisymba 13 nil, 15

Agrmagara 154

Abichhatra 133, 161

Abi-om 128

Aigidion, Is 250

Mm 53,54,180

AirrbadcH 191

Aibhiopians 245

Aitymandroi 307.

Ajmir 129, 149

Aj<!ijia 114

Akadra 202-3

Akadrai 245

Akesines, B 89

Akhasa 293

Akinakai 268

Akour 183

Alaba, Is 251

Alana, Mts 286, 291



342



INDEX.



PAGE

Alanorsoi 287

Alanoi Skythai 287, 292,

325
Alexandreia in Ara-

khosia 316

Alexandreia Areion.. 307,

309-10, 328
Alexandreia Eskhate 277,

283,326
Alexandria Opiane... 112
Alexandreia Oxeiane 277

Alikhorda 269,325

Alingar, R 87, 106

Alishang, B 87

AUosygnS 66, 68

Alo^ 180

Alor 145, 152

Alosanga 225, 231

Altai, Mts 292, 295

Al-w&kin or Lnkin. lOn
Amakatis or Ama-

kastis 124, 127

Amarakanbaka ...... 99

Amarapur 230

Amareis •••• 269

Amarousa • • 261

Ambaslitlia 312

Ambastai ...159, 161, 245

Ambastes, B 244

Ambautai ..311-312

Ambrodax 307

Ammine, Is. .••• 250

Anamba, Is 241



Anara 159

Anarea, Mts....287-8, 292
Anarismonndon, 0. 248,

258

And&m&n, Is 237

Andarab 282

Andhela, R 98

Andomatis, R 98

Andrapana 136, 141

Anniba, Mts... .297-8, 326

Anieseis 276

Anikhai 131

Anina 225

Aninakha 132, 221-2

Anoubingara ...249, 258
Anourogrammoi. 249-5 0»

259

Antakbara 156

Antibole, R. 73-5, 191-2
AntiokheiaMargiane
(Merv) ...17,263-4,324

Anupsbahr 175

Annrftdhapura ...155, 259

Aomos .•••• 105, 143

Aorsoi ••• 288

Aparatote • 258

Aparjtai 116

Apokopa, Mts 75-6

Arabis,R.313-14,319,321,

329

Arabitai 159

Arakan 196,205

Arakhosia. 34, 315-19, 329



INDEX.



343



PAGE

Arakhotos, 20n, 34, 316-18
ArakbotoB Krdne. 316-17*

329

Aral, sea of 279-82

Arana 314

Aratha 263

Aravali, Mts 76,94

Araxates, B 325

Arazes, B 280

Arbaka 316,329

Arbis 320

Arbita, Mts 95,320

Arbitai or Arables ... 32 1
Arbuda or Abu, Mt. 76,

149

Ardba-gang^, B 65

Ardone 124,128

Areia 305-10, 328

Areian Lake. 306, 314,328

Areias, R 306,328

Arembour 180, 182

Argadina 263

Argalou 60

Argand&b, R 317

ArgaricGulf 22

Argeiroa 59

Argouda 311

Argyra 196

Ariaka 263

Ariakai 289

Ariak^ 175,179

Ariake Sadinon 39

Ariasp^ 314-15,329



I



PAGE

Arikada 314

Arikaka 316

Arimaspians 295

Aripo 258

Arisabion • 225

Arispara 124, 126

Aristobatbra 142

Aristopbylai 311

Arjikiya, R 85

Arkad 162

Arkand-db, R 34

Arkatos 64, 162

Arkbinara 225

Ai'magara 45, 48

Aromata (Cape Giiar-

dafui) 27

Aror 83, 151

Arouamoi (Arvar-

noi) 65-6, 185

Area 118

Arsagalitae 118

Arsitis 261

Artakoana 309

Artamis, R. 268, 273, 324

Artikaudna 307, 309

Artoarta ...136,141,311

Arukgam Bay 258

Asanabara 225

Asiake 316

Asigramma 142, 143

Asikni, R 85, 89

Asinda 149

Aaiy^ ••••••••• 125



344



INDEX.



PAaE

Asioi 272

Asiotai 288

Askatangkas, B. 265,

284-5, 288

Asmanoi 287

Asmiraia, Mts. 298, 305,

326

Asmouma 261

Aspathis 164

Aspak&rai...299, 304, 327

Aspabota 286, 326

Aspisia, Mts.... 287-8, 291

Aspithra 244-5

AssakSnoi Ill

Asta 314

Astab^noi 306

Astakana 269, 325

Astakapra ....148, 150

Astasana 308

Asthagoura 167

Astauda 307

AstauSnoi or AstabS-

noi 306

Asthaia, Is 320

Astrassos 124, 126

Atak 118, 142

Atbenogonron ...... 225

Athens , 120

Atrasa 126

Atrek, R 262, 273

Attaba,R 198, 208-9

Audb •• 229

Augaloi 276



PAGE

Augara 307

Auxakia 294

Auxakian, Mts. 293-4, 298
Auzoamis or Azumis 149

Avanti 154

Ayodbya 166,228-9

Azania (Ajan) 76

Azanos, R. ... 248-9, 257

Azika 142

Azmoma 323



Babarsana or Kabar-

sana 307

Baborana 311-12

Badaksb&n 12 n9, 83

B&dami 171

Badara 320, 322

Badiamaioi 167, 171

Baeti8(Guadalquivir,

R.) 20

B&g or Bagm^ndlS 47

Bagarda 311

Bagoos 306, 309

Bahruj 42

Baital 159

Baithana 79, 175-6

Baitian, Mts. ... 314, 317,

320

Bakarei 49,52

Baktra 18, 271-2, 278, 325



INDEX.



345



PAGE

BaktrianS ...267.74,324-5

Baktrioi 313

Balaka, Is 250

Balantipjrgon ...164, 166

Balasor 72

Baleopatam 45

Bali, Is 241

Balima 142

Balita 55

Balkh 269, 274

Balonga 202

Balongka 226

Baltipatna 39,45

Bambhara 148

Bammala 53, 55

Bammogoura 154

Banagara ......... 136, 141

Banaouasei 176, 179

B&n&ras 129, 228

Bandobene 87

B&ndogarli 166

Bania 145

Banna or Banu 141

Barabanga, B 74

Barago, 197

Barake 36, 187-8

Barakes, B. ...248-9, 257

Barakoura 191, 195

Barange 261

Barbarei 148

Barbarikon 148

Barborana •• 112

Barcelor 50

44 a



PAGE

Bardamana 185

Bardaotis... 163

Bard&wad 165

Bardaxema 33, 37

BardhwAn 174

Bardia •• 37

Barenkora(or Baren-

athra) 226

Bans, B49, 53, 78, 103,180

Barna 322

Barona, B 69

Barousai, Is.... 236, 238-9

Barrhai 222-4

Barjgaza. 38, 40, 49, 77,

152-3

Barzaura 311-12

Basan&rai 222-3

Baskatis, B 275

Bassa, Is 250, 259

Bassein 44, 197

Batai 299, 304, 327

Batoi 63, 183-4

Batanagara 124, 127

Bataiigkai8ara...l28, 130
Batrakheian Sea ... 246

Batticalao 258

Bautisos, B. ... 298, 326

Bazakata, Is 236-7

Bear, Mt. (Ouxenton). 100

Becare 52

Bedasta, B 89

Begram 112

Beias, B 90



346



ZKPSX.



PAGE

Benagonron 171

Benda or Binda. 89, 41,

103, 175

Bentote, R 257

B^pur '50

B^pyrrhos, Mts..l02, 204,

208, 221
B^rabai 196-7

Bettig6,Mt 59, 78

Beseidai 217

Besmeid r,.... 148

Besynga, R 196, 205

Besyngeitai 196, 219

Bettigoi 159,160, 166

Bhadar, R 37

Bhadr&vati 163

BMndak 166

Bhanzas 223

Bliar4od 163

Bharech 216

Bharocli 38, 153

BHars orBliors • 224

Bliatnair 127

Bhanlingi •••.... 168

Bhatmagar 87, 150

Bhils 160

Bhilsa. 122

Bhima, R 41

Bhiwandi, R 42

Bhojapto 163

Bhota 192, 206

Bibasis, R 190



Bidaspes,R....81, 89, 109

Biderifl 180

Bigis 314

BilMri.'. 167

Binagara 145, 151

Binteime 259

Biolingai orBolingai. 163

Bisauli 131

Bitaxa ..,. 307

Bogadia 807

Bodhptlr 151

Bokana 248, 258

Bokanoi 250

Bokh.d»i4 .•.•••.^•••.... 85

BoHtai i81M2

Bolor, Mts 35, 802

Bombay •^ 43-4

Bonis 142,145

Boraita 212, 214, 216

Borgoi r. 807

BoreioiiAkron(Nortli

Cape) 247-9

Boriban 167

Boudaia 150,151

Boukepbala 124

Bonmasauoi 250

Bx^hmanab&d 152

Brakhmanai Magoi. 167,

169
Brahmaputra, R. 192,

206, 209
Brakbm«...51, 167, 170-1
Brahmini, R 71



INDEX.



347



PAGE

Bramagara 48, 50

Bramma r» 244

Bridama 163-4

Budhia 151

Bungpasoi •• 203

Burma 198

Byltai.35, 284-5, 294, 304
B jzanteioa • # ^. . * ^45, 47



0.

Calcutta >. 73

Oalingon, *• 62

Oalinipaxa r.^.... 228

C anarj Islands 4 ii4

Cantabra or Cantaba,

R 90

Oapitalia, Mt 76

Cartana »..»•... 113

Obalacoory 61

Cbampft ...9 n7, 203, 209

Gbandan, B ....• 98

Chandrabati 136

Chandrabliaga, B..89, 90

Chandur 155

Cbantibon 203

Ohaturgr&ma {Cbit-

tagong) ,...193-5

Obaul 42-3

Chedi 166

Cheduba, Is 236



PAGB

Cbenab, R 69

CHchalapoura 147n

Chilan 258

Cliimi;aai 43

Ohma 9n6

Ohola or Cli6ra ...65, 162

Ohutia N&gyur 168

Ooel 58

Colois Indorum 57

Colombo 257-8

Caliaeum, C 61

Oomorin,C. ...55,62, 78

Cottara 55

Cuddalore 65

Cyrus, E Ill



D

D&ai 263, 266

Dabasai(Damassai P).221,

223

Dagana 248, 258

Daibal 45

Daidala 124

Daitikhai 130

Daix, R 286, 290

Dakhaura 217

Damassa or Dobassa,

Mt 204-6,208, 221

Damirike 49

Dammana 317



348



INDSX.



PAGE

DAnmsfl 299, 305

Pamuda, E 100

Pangajas 211

Dangors or Dagors.. 118,

306
Daradrae...83, 105-7, 306

Darandai 313

Dargamenes, R..268, 272,

310-12

Bargoidos, R 268

Darkama 308

Daroakana 311

Dai^amana ..*.... 304

Dasana or Doana ... 226

Dasamas 71

Pashak. 316

Pauaoa... ..r<cr.r«i.4rr. 2o9

PaulataMd 177

Paxata 300

Pedera-Oya, R 267

Peldi...l22, 128, 130, 222

Pekra 217

Pemos, R 276, 325

Peopali 176

Perbikkai 263, 266

P^vagana 150

P^vagadh • 177

Pewaliya 149

Phangars 211

Phar 154

Pliaranikofca 187

Pharmodaya, R ...... . 100

PMmrorPdrur ... 177



PAGE

Piamond Point 74

Piamouna, R 96, 98

Pilawar 126

Pildana 165

Pindugal 184

Pionysopolis 112-13

Pionysos, C 248, 258

Piordouloi 260

Pista 307

Poanai 222-4

Poanas, R.... 202-3, 208-9

Poblana 165

PondraHead 258

PoriaB, R..202, 209, 234-5

Posarene 171-3

Poesa 172

Posaron, R...70-1, 80, 104

Pounga 39, 42

Praband or Pera-

band 141

Prakhamai 307

Prangiane ...313-15, 329

Prastoka 311-12

Prepsa (or Rbepsa). 277,

282, 326

Prepsianoi 276, 282

PrilophyUitai 160, 168,

171
Pr6saklie(or Rhosakla)

299

Prybaktai 276

Pudbal 128

Pugad 42



INDEX,



349



PAGE

Dumura, B 234-5

Dw&rak& 188

Dyardanes, H 209



E



Eboasmouanassa ... 269

Eikour 184

Eiren^,Is 250

Ekbatana '. 17

Elangkou or Elang-

kor 53, 54

Elburg,Mts 262

Eldana 225

EUasing 231

Elura 177

Embolima 142

Emodos, Mt. ...293-4, 302,

326

Empelathra 135

Eoritai 316

Epitatisa 151

Erarasa 124,129, 228

Erod or Yirodu 182

Erranoboas, "R 98

ErrbenyBis, R 97

Erymmoi 288

Estobara 269

Etymander, R.34, 309, 315

Enaspla, R 87

Eiiergetai 315

Eukratidia 269, 274



PAOS

Eufchymedia 122-4

Ezata 196



F

Paizabfid f 229

Farzah 313

Ferro, Ib 4n4

Foul Point 258

Fu-nan 9 n6



Gagafimira 124, 129

Gabalata 118

Galaktophagoi Sky-
tbai... 228-9, 295-6, 326

GaUba 247

Galiba,Mts 249, 257

Galle, Point de 258

Gumaliba 175-6

GammakS 316

Gandaki, R.102, 135, 206,

218

Gandarai 115, 116

Gandaritis 87

Gandava, B 95

Gandbara 115

Ganganoi 210

Gangaridai ...172-4, 233
Gang^ Regia, 172-3, 215-6
Ganges, R. (of Cey-
lon) 249, 258



350



INDEX.



PAGE

Ganges, coarse of ... 79
Gauges, moutlis of .72, 73,

100-2
GangeSttribntaries of .97-8

Gangetic Golf 24, 63

Ganj4m 70

Garamaioi 17

Garamantes 13 nil

Gaiinaioi (or Khara-

unaioi) 299, 305

Garo Hills 235

Guroia, B 88

Gaticara, G lOn

GaurorG4ara 215

Gauri, R 87

Gazakaor Gandzaka. 811
Gedrosia. 34, 319-22, 329
GMghra or Ghogra,

R. 98,99

Gh&ra, B 86

Ghats, Eastern 79

GMts, Western ...78-81

Ghilghit 118

Giiir&ja 129

Ghoda-bandar 44

Ghorband, B 112

Ghoreg&on 44

GhorisorGur Ill

GbAr, Mts 309

Gim&r, Mt 37

Goa or Gova 181

Goaris, B. ... 39, 41, 103
Godana 307



PAGE

God&vari, 62,68

Godarari, B....41, 66, 234

Gomal, B 95

Gomati, B 86

Gonds 160

GbngHris 174

Gorakhpto 99

G6rya 112-13

Goryaia\".....88, 105, 110

Gorys 87

Gonmara, Is 251

Grouraios, B 110-11

GonrianS 263

GoTerdhan 129

Great Cape 202,204

Great Gulf ..202, 204, 244
Green Sea... 189, 191,246
Grynaioi Skythai. 35, 284

Gudalur 65

Gudur 68

Gujarat. 36,38

Giindi 150

Gurkan (or Jorjan). 112,

261

Gwa 197

Gwadar 322

Gynaikon Lim^n.319,322,

329

H

Haidardibad 144, 152

Hajipdr 218

Hala, Mts 95



INDEX.



351



PAGE

Halsi 181

Hambangtote, 258

Hang-chow lOn

Hangol 182

Hanoi 9n6

Hardw&r or. Awartta. 130,

212

Hari-RAd, R 309

Haslitna^ar >,. 117

Hastakayapra 150

Hastinapura. 72, 122, 212

Hastimalla 174

Haump 154

Havila 107

Hayakshetra 166

Haz&ras, Mt 309

Hekatompjlos ••.17, 18n
Helioulimen ...248,258
Hellespont, parallel of .14,

15, 18 nl5
Helmtmd, R. .34, 309, 317

Heorta 210

HeptanSsia 187-8

Herat (Areia) 19n, 111,
308-10, 315

Hesydms, R 91

Hierapolis 11, 17

Hindu-kosli 35

Hippokoura. 39, 44, 176,

178-9

HippSmolgoi 295

Hippophagoi, Sky-
thai 293,296



PAGE

HmAbi ..199

H6nan-fu (SSra) 19n

Horatae 140, 149

Horkand, sea of 259

HnghH, R 73

Hydasp^s, R. ... 89, 125
Hydraotes, R. ... 90, 123

Hypanis, R 90

Hyperborean, Mts.... 286
Hyphasis or Hypasis, R.

90, 91-2
Hyrkania.l7, 260-2, 323-4



I

labadios. Is. . 191, 239-41

lasonion 263,324

Bstai 288

latioi 276

lastos, R 286, 290

latour ', 185

laxartai 288, 326

laxartes, R. 275, 279-81,

286

Iberingai 221, 223

Ikarta 185

Imaos, Mt.l9, 35, 289-90,

30a

Indabara 124, 128

IndS 175

Indikomordana 277

Indoi 222



352



INDEX.



PAQB

Indoskjtliia ... 136, 140

Indoprathai 221-2

Indrapratha ... 122, 128
Indus, changes of

coarse of 84n

Indus, mouths of. 33, 37,

96
Indus, origin of name

of 81, 82

Indus, sources of. 81, 83,

142
Indus, tributaries of. 81,

85, 86
Indus, valley of the 137

Inna •• 314

lobares, R 98

logana 248, 268

lomusa 126

Ir^wadi, R 198-9

Islands of the Blest 4 n4,

10, 28
Issedon Skythike. . 294-6

Issedones 299, 327

Istargarh 312

Ithagouros 118,299, 305
Ivemia (Ireland) ... 14



J

Jagdalak 113

Jajhar 129

Jajhpur 72



PAGE

JalAl&Ud 114

JalalpOr 125

J&landhara 110

Jamma 126

Jd.mnak ...... 60, 72, 99

Java, Is 239-41

Jayagadh 57

Jelasor, R 101

Jhelam, R 89,109

Jibal KhushnAmi, Is. 238

Ji-nan 6 n9

Jorampur 162

Jubunak, R 102

Juna-gadh 37

Junnar 177



E

Kabul 147n, 311

Kabul, R 84,86

Kachh, Gulf of 36

Kadalundi 50

• • •

Kadap& 186

Kadranj, sea of 200

KailAsa, Mt 83

Kai'nas, R 98

Kaineitai, Is 48

Kaisana 112

Kakobai 222-3

K&kamukha 172

K&kula 236



INDEX.



353



PAGE

K&la^angft, B 257

Xalah 200

JTa^laikarias ,.48, 51

£Ialaka-serai 121

Kalandradona, Is. ... 250

Kalikat 49

Kalimir, C-..-^^....., 60-2

Kalinadi 215

Kalinadi, R 134

E!alinga 233

Kalingai 68,81

KaliouT 184

jvaiiacLa ...««..*..••••• Xoo

KalHena 40, 57

Kalliga 185

KaUjgerifl 176, 179

KaUigikon, C. ...59,60-2

Kalpe 21

Kaly&n 160,179

Kaly&na ...43,57

Kamah, B 86

KamanS 38, 39

Kamara 67

Kamb&yat 42

Kamberikhon, B. ... 72

Kamboja, 204

Kambukgam, B 257

Kambyson, B...71, 72, 73

Kamigara 151-2

Kamilla 232

Kampana, B Ill

Kaiiagara..^31, 134, 227

Kanarak 70

45 o



PAGE

Kanaris .,.., ,., 269

Kanathra, Is. ., 250

Kandaloi 159

Kandaroi 276, 281

Kandipatna 185

Kanatti 63

Kangarayen, B , 257

'Kangra 110

Kanhagiri , 179

Kannagara .,., 69, 70

Kannetri 64

Kanogiza...l34, 224, 227-8

Kanodipsa 287-8

Kanouj 134,227-8

Kant 134

Kantala , 160

Kanthi, Gulf of 33,36,186,

187
Kanyakubja ... 134, 227

KapiflenS 106, 113

Kapoutana 307

Kar&cbi .146, 321

Karagam 182

KaraUis 21

Karatai 35, 284-5

Kareoi 57,64, 183

Karig^ 185-6

Karikal 64

Karikardama 172

Karkalla 146

Karkos. Is 250

Karmaphuli, B. .194, 235
Ajai*ixiai*a *.* »*•>••• ••«.«• xcMi



354



IKDfiX.



PAGE

Karnagarh 172

Kamasonagarli 172

Kamul 163

Karoura (Kabul), 34, 180>

182, 311-12

Kartasina 171-2

Kartiiiaga 171-2

Karur ....50,65

KasapS 261

Kaseirotai 306

K&shgar 304

K&fit 228

Kasia 803

Kasia, Mts. ...293-4, 298

Kb&U 308

KaSmtr 89, 108-9, 302

Kaspapyros 116

Kaspatyros 108

Kaspeira 124, 128

Kaspeiria 105-8, 124-6,

301
Kaspian Gates, 17, 18, 20n

Eassida 225-8

Kastra 171

KatabSda,B 191, 194

Katak 70-1

Kathaians 123, 157

K&thi4vad 167

Kathis 157-8

Eatikardama 69-70

Katisa 311

Kattaks 157

Eattaour 157



PAOB

Ejittigara ... 9 n7, 11 n7,

25,245
Kaiika808,Mt8...277, 311

Kans&mbt 72

Kan[Sikl,B 102, 205

K&T&i, R 60,65,79

Kayeripattam 65

Kayal 58

Ka7&iiaorKoliAna,B. 98

Kelydna 212, 214

Kennery, Is 44

KerangS 185

Kesarwa > „ 131

Eesho 9n7

Ketaion,C 248,258

Khaberis 63, 65

KbabSros, B 63, 65

Kbaibar Pass 113

KhalinS, Is 236, 238

Kbalkitis 222

Kban-fa lOn

Xharakbarta 269

Eliaraunaioi Skythai

293

Kbariphron 33, 36

Kbaia 303

Kbatai Skythai 293

Khatriaioi 141, 156-7

Khatris 159

Kbatriskbe..., 307

Eliatirana 394, 326

Xhanrina... ««.••••••••• 307

Khedft 181



INDEX.



365



PAGB

Khetars 157

Khersonese, The Golden

24, '27, 190, 197-8, 208,

226
Khersonesns of the

Pirates 45,47-8

Khitai or Eathay. 9 n 6

Khiva 282, 290

Khoana 269

Khoaspa 316, 329

Khoaspes, K.86, 115, 128

Kho^s, R 87

Khojend 282

Kholbesina 276

Khomara 269

Khomaroi •• 268

Khonnamagara 124, 126

Khorasmioi 276, 282

Khrendoi 261

Khryse • 69

Khrysoanas, B. 198-9,

208-9
Khwarasm... 279 n, 282

Khyendwen, R 235

Kianchi 9n7

Kimara 225

Kindia 131, 134

Kipin or Kophen ... 318

Kir&ta 192, 282

Kirrh&dai 276, 282

Kirrhadia 219-221

Kizibdarya, R 290

Kleisobara 9



FAGK

Koa, R. 81, 86, 87, 93, 96,

312

Koangka 132, 13&

KodanS, Is 320

Koddura 66,68

Kodrana 136,141

Kognabanda 158

Kognandoua ...124, 126
Kohik, R. ...35, 277, 291

Koiamba 319

Koimbatur Gap. . « . . . 78

Kokala 70

KokanAr 179

Kokelay 258

Kokkonagara. 226, 235-^.

245

Kokkonagai 171-2

Kola or Kula-taik 198 n

Kolaka 142, 146

Kolhapur 177

K6H 198,200

Kolindoia 183

Kolis 61

KolkhicGulf 57

Kolkhoi 57-8, 78

Kolmandia 47

Komari, 29,53

Komaroi 36,284

Komedai. 18, 35, 104, 275,

278, 284

Komoi 268

Kondopalle 68

Kondota »••#••• 212



356



INDEX.



PAGE

Konkan r 45

Xonta 130

KontakoBsyla 66, 68

Ko-panto 12 n 9

Koph^ or Eopli^, B. 86,

105

Korangkaloi 217

Korank&ra 217

^Korazoi ....r r«... 288

Korcour ..••• 180

Koreoura .r....r,.... 49

Korindiour 188

Koringa 68

Korkobajra ......248,258

Koronos, Mt 260-2

Kortatha 202

Korotingkala ...185» 187

Kory, Is 187

Kory, 0. 22. 26 n, 69, 60,

189,247

Korygaza 212, 216-7

Kosa 158

Kosala ..99,135

Kosamba 70,72

Kotake 308

Kotaur • 55

Kottiara ...53, 54, 55

KottiariB, B 245-6

Kottis 66,67

Kottobara 69

Kottobari. (in Gkdro-

sia) 320

Eottonarike 50,188



PAGS

Konba 180

Koudoutai 222

Koumaraka, B 74

KoTtni 320

Kourellotir 180-1

Kouriandra 269

KoTiraporeina...t.»... 135

KouroTda 22,63,64

Krangantlr 50-58

Krislma, B.... ...41, 63, 66

Krishnapatam 67

Krokaia^Is 146

KubM, B 86

Kuchiavelli 258

Knda 46

Kudraniali, Pt 258

Kulburga * 177

Kiilinda 110

Ktiluta 110

Kim&r or E&mah, B. 86,

106

Kirram, B. 141

Kurumbars .^....... 162

Kunda 130

Kusbans • 138

Kusinagara 135

Kylindrine 105,109

Eyreskbata 276, 283, 325



Labokla ... 122, 124, 126
Lahore 122,123,126



INDEX.



367



PAGE

Lambatai 104, 106

Lameta 167

LamgMn 106, 141, 213

Landai, R: 87,110

Lankd. (Ceylon) 251

L&rdSsa « 153

Lariagara 225

Larik^ 38, 152-3, 157

Lasyppa 226

Latini or Lavant, B. 37,

94

Lepcbhas 224

Lestai or Bobbers'

Cotmtry 202

LeTike,Is 57,187-8

Liganeira .*....... 124, 126

Ingor 203

limyrikS 49,180

Logarh 313

Lob&war 127

Lokhama 311,313

Lobkot 122

Lombard 33,37

Lo-yang 19n

Maagrammon ...250, 259

Macco-Oalingae 233

Macbin 9n 7

Madagascar, Is , 256

Madang-arb 47

Madby-a-desa ..• 77

Mbdra 123,157



FAGB

Madur& or Matbura 60,
122, 126, 129, 184

Madura, Is 241

Magaris 171

Magbada ..119, 169

Magnetic Bocks ...242-4

Magona, B 97

Magonr 184

Mababan, Mt 143

Mab&nadi, B. 71, 161, 169,

333

Mabdnanda 215

Mabarasbtra 39

Mab&weliganga, B... 257

Mabendra, Mt 69, 76

Mabt..... 136

Maiandros,Mt. 204-5, 208

Mais, R 104

Maisolia ...66, 67, 68, 185

Maisolos, B 66, 103

Maisoka or Mausoka. 261

Malaia, Mt 249,256

Malaita 163-4

Malaka, straits of ... 200
Malamantus, B. ..... . 88

Malanga 67, 185-6

Malaya, Mt 75, 78

MltldA 216

Maleiba ^„ 164

Maleo, C 38

MaleonKolon, 0. ...198-9

Maliane 317

Malipalla 175-6



358



INDEX.



FAas

M&lkh^ ; 179

MaUi 169

Maltonn 165

Manada, R. ...69, 71, 103

Man&rGxilf 57

Manarat, B 67

Manarppa or Manali-

arpha 66, 67

Mandagara 45, 47, 57

Mandalai ...132-3,167-8
Mandara, Mt. ...110,205

Manekir 156

Mangalin ...46, 48, 50, 54

Mangaruth 46 .

Mangrol •• 37

Maniaiiia or Mania-

taia 225

MnTii' lrliai 132

Maniolai, Is. 237, 239,

242.4
Hanneyeh ••.........• 132

Maatittour 183

Mantote 258-9

Maponra ..•.;..«• 70

Maraikanda (Samar-

kaQd) 269, 274

Marakodra 269

Mardos or Mardou-

lamn^ 248, 268

Mardyenoi 276

Mareoura or Mat-

thoura 226, 235

Margana 247, 258



PAas

Margara 130

Marghinan 283

Margiane 262-7, 324

Marges, R. ....-.*... 263-4

Marhara 130

Marouka 276

Maronndai 212.-4

Martaban lOn

Martaban, gnlf of ... 197

MaradvridM,E 85

Marykaioi 268

Masdoranoi or Mazo-

ranoi 306

Massagetai 35, 263, 265-6,

284
Massaioi •••..».•••••••• 287

MaBtanonr 180-1

Masulipattam ...... 68

Matlak 74"

Mausamaioi 320

Maxera, B,„ 260, 262

Maxerai 261

Mega,R., 72, 74

Mehatnu, B 68

Mekong, R 203, 209

Melange 65, 67

Melizeigara ..••• 57, 187

Melkynda 52-4

Menapia 269, 325

Mendela ••••• 183

Menonthias, Is 189

Meru, Mti 110

Metliora • 98



INDEX,



359



PAGE

Milizegyris 57

Minagara 70,72,159

Minnagar 139, 152

Mine 266

Miraj ..• 180

Mirzaptir 78,134

Mithankot ...94, 143, 144

ModogoiiUa 176, 179

Modoura. 124, 128, 183-4
Modouttou ... 249, 258-9

Mohana, R •••• 97

MologSnoi w 288

MonakliS, Is 260

Monedes • 212

Monoglosson 33, 37

M6pliis,R 38, 103-4

Morounda 180-82

Mousama 320, 322

MoiisopallS 180

Mouziris . 48, 51, 54, 242

MAdgal 179

Mimd&s 212

Muranda 106

Miirgli-&b or Meru-

rAd, R 264

Muyiri-kodu 51

N

Naagramma 151

Nabaris 307

Nadnbandagar 135

N&forTeken&f,R.... 195
Nagadiba, Is 251



PAGB

Naga diba orNagadiiia249i

258-9

Nagapatam 64

Nagara 112-13

Nagarouris 175

Nageiroi 250

Nagor 64

Nakadouba 250

Namados or -es, R. 38, 102

Namostai 289

Nanagoima, B. 45, 48,

103, 159

Nangalogai 221,223

Nangbenhar (Naga-

ra-bara) 113-14

Nanigaina 69, 70

Nanigeris 187-8

Naosbera 151

N&ra, R 94,145

NarmadA or Narbadft, B.

99

Naroulla 180-1

Nartenb 230

Nasika 152,156

NaiiHbi 117

Naulibis 311,328

Nausari 39

Nausaripa....r 33, 39

Navi-bandar 37

Negombo 258

Negrais, 63,197

iSfelisiiram 54

Nelkynda 52, 60



n



360



IKDSX.



PAGE

Neudros, R 90

Nigranigramma 156

Nikaia 89,126

Nikama 63,64

Nikobar,Is 239

NilAb 117

Nilgiri, Mt8 79

Niphanda 311

Niranjana, B.,... 97

Nisaia or Nigaia. 263, 267,

324

Nisaioi 306,309

Nisibia 308,328

Nissa 267

Nitra 45,48

NoroBSon, Mts. ...286, 291

Nostana 314

Noubartha 248, 258

^ygdosora • 159

Nysa 105

O

Obareis 306

Odoka 248,258

Odombarae 149

Oidanes, R 209

Oikhardes, B. 293-4, 298-

9,326
6kbo8, R...267, 272-3, 324

Olokhoira 180-1

Omenogara 175-6

Omiza 320



PAOS

Opbir 40,140

Opian^ 20n, 112

Opotoura 168

Orbadar-i or -on 149

Orcbomanes, R 324

Oreiflitoi 269

Oreitai 159

Oreopbanta 167

OrgaJioGuIf 69,60

Orgasoi 288

Omeon, 248,268

Omeon, Is 250

Orosana 300

Oroudiaii,Mts...78, 80, 81

Ortbiana 307

Ortboura 64, 184-5

Ortikane 308

OrtoBpana (Kabtil) 20n,
34, 311-2, 328

Orza 130, 131

Osanpllr 151

Oskana.'. 144,320

OBtba 158

OBtobalasara 124

Ottorokorrbas, Mta. 298-
300, 305, 326

Ouangalia, Is 250

Ouindion (Yindhya),

Mts 77

Oulispada 250

Ouratbenai ....^.225, 230
Oiixentoii,Mt8. 76, 78, 80,

100



J



INDEX.



361



PAGE

Oxeia, 249, 258 '

Oxeian Lake 275, 281, 325
Oieian, Mts. ... 274, 276

Oxeiana 276

Oxeianoi 276

Oxus, R. 88, 260, 267-8,

276-9, 286

Oxydr&ngkai- 276

Ozene 38,152, 154-5

Ozoabia 158

Ozoana.... 168. 171

Ozola(or Axola)...... 316



Pagrasa 202

Pakidare 38

Palaiogonoi 252-3

Palaipatmai 45

Palai-Simonndou ...252-3

Palk's Passage 60

Palanda 226

Palandos, R. ...198, 208-9

PaU 45

Paliana 299

Palibothra (Patna) 19, 30,
99. 132, 167, 168-9

PaUbothri 98

Paloura23, 63, 67-70, 180

Pamir Plateau 278n

46 G



PAGE
jr auasa ••. ... ... ••...• xov/ - l

Panassa 164, 166-7

Panch&la 131, 133

Pandasa 226.235

Pandionoi 51. 18?

Pandion's Land 59

Pandouoi 121

Pandu'sFort 133

Paniardoi 287

Panj&b, Rivers of ... 88
Panj&b rivers, conflu-
ence of ....91,94

Pajijkora.. 87

Panjpiir 143

PaSjshir 312

Panjshir.R 112

Pantipolis 180

Parabali 151

Paradene 320

Parakanake 308

Paralia ...64, 63, 64, 184

Parasbni, R 85

Parautoi 306, 312

Pardabathra 142

Pardwa or Priya-

deva 150

Paripdtra or Pariya-

tra 76

Parri&s&,R 166

Pamoi 263, 266

Paropanisadai,34, 310- 13,

328
Paropanisos, Mt. ... 268



362



INDEX.



PAGE

Parisara 225

Parisi^^ 320

Parsta 311-13

Parsiana 311-12

Parsidai or Parsirai. 320

Parsis 320,322

Parsyetai 311-12,316

Parthalis 174

Parw&n 112,312

Pasage 180-1

Pasianoi • 272

Pasikana 124, 126

PaaipUda 142-3, 151

Paskai 276

Passala 130-1

Passalai 217-18

Patala 146-7

Patalene 136,139

PatiBay 249,256-8

Patistama 157

P&tna 132, 168

Pauravas 164

Pavangarh 154

Pegu 69,235

Penn-ar, R 65, 67

Pentagramma 142-3

Pentapolis ...'. 191

Peperin^,l8 187-8

Perimoula ......198, 201

Perimoulic, Gidf 198, 200

Peringkarei 61, 183

Persakra 131

PesMwar 86, 117



PAGE

Peshawamn 315

Patirgala 176,179

Peukelaotis.. 20 n, 115-17

Pharazana 314

Pharetra or Pharytra 186

Pliasis,R 249,257

Phaunoi, 278 n, 282, 305

Philekos, II 250

PhokHa 316

Pharana 307

Phra 309,315

Phratou 269

Phrourion 185-6

PhyUitai 159,160

Pialai(orPxaddai)... 299

Pirate Coast 45

Pishon orPisanu, R. 107

Piska 142

Pithonabasta 202-3

Piti, R 36

Pityndra 68, 185

Plaita 165

Podigei or Pothigei,

Mt 78

Podoperoura 49, 52

Podoukfi 66,66,260

Poinai Tliedn, Mts. ... 75

Poleour 185

Poloura 72, 76

Polytimetos, R. 281, 286,

290-1
Port of Alexander ... 321
P&rvaroi 163-5



IHDEX.



863



PAGE

Pofiinara 225

Poudopatana 52

Poulindai Agriophagoi

156-7, 160

Poulipoula 38,39

Pounnata 180

Pramaras 164

Prapiotai 158

Prarjuna, Ib 83

Prasiake, Is 83

Prasiake 131-3

Prasii 133,263

Prafiodes Bay.. .248, 257-8
Prasum, 0... 25, 191,246

Pratishthana 79, 177

Pray&g (AUah&bdd). 175
Priapis Haven ...248, 258
Prinas or Pinnas, R. 98

Proklais 116-17,155

Prokouri 249

Prophthasia 20n, 313,

315, 329
Pseudostomon, R. 49, 52,
78, 103. 180
Pseudostomon (a

Ganges mouth) 73-4
Puduchcheri (Pon-

dicherry) 67

Pulicat 67

Pulo Condor, Is. 204, 241
Punya or Pdnpftn, R. 98

Purali, R 314,321

Pur-bandar ••.... 37



PAGE

Purt , 70

Puslikar&vati 116

Purrhon Oros (Red
Hill) 53,64



Qandahar ...34, 116, 317
Quilon 53-4



Ramagiri (Bamtek).. 159

Ramana 304

Ramancoru, C ...... • 61

Ramesvaram, Is... 60, 189

Mmu : 195,235

RangAn 1^7-8

Rapti,R 98-9

Rasing 232

j^gj^alx 118

Ravi, R 90,109,123

RM, R. ...285-6, 290, 296

Rhabana 244

Rbabannai ......299,305

Rbadamarkotta 225,228-9

Rhagirana ^^^

Rbambakia 1^9

Rhamnai...l58-9,320, 322

Rhappha 210

Rhapta 26



364



INDEi:.



PAGE

Bhatigara.. 307

Ehea 263

Rhibioi 289

Rhingib^ 225, 234-5

Rhizana 316,319

Rhoboskoi 287'

Rhodes, parallel of 4 n3,

6, 11,17. 18nl5

Rhogandanoi ...250, 259

Rhoplautai 316

Rhonadia, R 90

Rhonda 313

Riksha (Bear) Mts. .. 76

Rikshavat 80

Rin or Irina 94, 157

Rizala Haven .. 249, 258
Robber Country ... 222
Rupanai-ayana, R. 101,

170
Rymmik, Mts. 286-8, 291
Rhymmos, R. 286, 290,

326



S



Sabadeibai^Is....236, 239

Sabadioi 269

Sabana ...136,141, 198-9

Sabalaessa, R 33, 36

Sahara 196

Sabaiai 172-3

Sabouras 63, 65

Sada 24, 195-6



PAGE

Sador, R 196

Sagala 122, 131, lSt-5, 169
Sagaraukai ... 289, 326
Saghela or Sakula ... 135
Sagapa (Gkara) R. 33, 36

Sageda 164-6

Sagoda or Sadoga 225,

228-9

Sahya, Mt 76

Sahyftdiii, Mt 79, 80

Sailoda, R 110

Saimur or Jaimur... 42

Sainos, R 244-5

Saitianoi 287

Sajintra 154

Sakai 283-5, b25

Sakarauloi 272

Sake or Sale 261

Saketa 166, 228

Salagissa 124, 126

Salakenoi 171-3

Salang, Is 238

Salaterai 268

Salatha 225

SaHke (Ceylon).. 247, 252

JSalour 59

Salyuen, R 209

Samarkand 12 n9, 35, 271,

274

Samarade 202-3

Sambalaka.131, 133, 167,

169
Sambra 196



J



IXDBX.



365



PAGE

Samnitai 288

JSandabaga, R. ...*.. 89

Sandabal, R ..81; 89

Sandokandai 240

Sandowe (Saiidwipa).194,

197

Sanf or Chanf 203

Sangala 122, 167

Sangamarta 162

Sanjan 39

Sank, R 71

Sannaba 131

Sapara 33, 36

Sapolos 210

Sarabakic Gulf ... 196-7

Sarabos, R 99, 210

Saramanne 260, 323

Saranges, R 90

Sarasvati, R. 85, 89, 99,

101

Sarata 245

Sarayu or Sarju, R.... 99
Sai-bana or Sardana. 148
Sardonyx, Mts. ......76-6

Sariga 308

Sariphi, Mts. 262, 264, 30S>

Sai-isabis 175-6

Sarmagana ..r.. 307

Sarmatia 286,296

Sarsi 131

Sasartu, R. 86

Sasones 288

Satadi*u,R 92



1»AGB

Satlai, R *..... .91, 93

Sfttpura, Mts...., 77

Satyrs, cape of the... 245
Satungor Tbatnng. 199

SatyiV 1» 239, 241

Saiirabatis ,.,„, 135

Sazantion 162

Seliwan 144,

Seist^n, lake of 309

S elampura 224, 2 2 7

Selour 183

Semantliinos, Mt. 204,

206-7

Semanthinoi 245

Semne 49,62

Sennoi «..,.,.„. 24^

Seoni 171

Sera 9, 13, 14, 19 nl6, 300,.

327
Serendib (Ceylon) ... 262

Seres ., J^ bi6, 326-8

Serik© 297-30&

Seripala 103, 152

Sero8,R 202,208-9

Sesatai 218

Sibae 290

Sibrion 168

Sidhpfii* r.r„... 149

Sidi-jayagad 188

Sigalla ...„! 167, 16i>

Sigerus ».. 57

Simylla (Chaul) 29, 39,
42-3, §7, 201



366



INDES.



PAGE

Sina (or Sena) 263

Sinai or Thinai ...5, 9 n6
Sinai, Gulf of the ... 245
Sinai, land of the ...244-7

Sfnaka 261

Sinda 202,204

Sindai, Is.... 236, 238, 241

Sindhu 82,86

Sindhu, R 161

Sindokanda 248,268

Sindomana 144

Singapur, Straits of.. 242

Sign-an-fu 10 n

Sinthon (Piti), R 33

Sipiberis (or Sitt^-

biris) 226

Sippai-a 70-2

Sippare 307

Siraklne 261

Sirimalaga 176, 179

Siripalla 164

Sh&hderi 121

Sh&hjah&npar 134

Shakohpnr 127

Skordai 268

Skardo. R 294

Skorpiophoros kh&re 307

Skopoloui'a 186

Sky thiabeyond Imaos

292-7
Skythia within Imaos

286-92, 326
Soana, R 248-9,257



Soara 169

SobanOs, R.... 202-3, 209

Socimda 323

Sogdiana 36, 274-83, 325
Sogdian, Mts. 36, 276-6,

278

Sogh4 277

Sokanda, R 260

Solana 300

Solen 323

S61en, R....67, 5.9, 78, 103

Solomatis, R 98,99

S6n, R 77,98-9

SonaparSnta 198, 221

Sonargfton 175

Sdpatma 67

S6phaia 41

Sora 64, 65, 162, 185

Sorba 261

S6retai 64, 184

Sdteira 308,310,328

Souanagoura ...226, 228

Souast^ne 105-6

SonboTittou 176

Soudasanna 166

Souobenoi 287

Soupara 39, 40

Sotu*asSnoi 98

Sourogana 269

Sousikana ...142, 144-46

Sousouara, Is 251

Southern Cape 244

Sozestra or Sdkstra. 320



INDEX.



367



PAGE

Spatana Haven 249, 258

Stagabaza 163

StMnesvara 128

Stone Tower 12-19, 30,

284, 326

Stoma » 210-12

Suari 173

Subanrekha, B 74

iduktimat, Mt 75

Sumatra, Is. 190,238-40,

256

SAmt 149

Sup&r&,(see Soupara).

Sdrparaka 72

Sushoma, B 85

Suvarna-rekM, R. . . . 71

Suzantion 154

Sveti, R 86-8

Sydroi 316

Sjdros •• 151

Sy^ba,Mts.... 287-8, 292

Syeboi 287

Syrastra 33-37, 140, 158

Syrastr^ne 33, 186

Syrieni * 185

Symisika 157

Syzyges 299



Tabasoi 158, 175, 178

Tabi^noi 288



PAGE

Tagara 79,176-8

Tagaung 231,235

Taikkula 198

Tainour 183

Takdla 193-9

Tak61a, 197

Takoraioi 217

TakshasM (Taxila). 115,

118

Talara 183

Talakory or Aakote... 249

Talarga ai2, 214-6

Talka, Is 261

TaluctfiB 170

Tamala 24

Tamalit^ 167-8

Tamasis 135

Tambyzoi 26^

Tamerai 193

Tamluk 74, 168-9

Tdmralipta 73, 169

T&mraparni, R. 57,59, 78,

252

Tana 42

Tanais or Don, B. ... 281
Tangola or Taga ...183-4

Tangalle 258

Tanganoi 210-11

Tanjore 64, 183

TankorTonk 210-11

Tantir 50

Tapoura,Mts... 287-9, 291
Tapoureioi 288



I



368



INDEX.



PAGE

Tapouroi 263, 267

Taprobane, Is. 61, 247,

259

T&pti, R 48,158,160

Tafbakana 811

Tarakhoi 250

Tatakene 313-14

Tathilba 167

Taua 307

Taukiana 307

Tavoy, R, 209

Taxila.. 20ii, 115, 118-121

T&shkand 12 ii9

Tashkurgan 12 n9

Tasopion • 172

Tejin, R 262

Tektosakes 287

Temala, R 196

TOmala, 196

Tennagora 184

Tewar 166

Thagora 202

Thagouron, Mt 298

Th&n 149

Thanesar 128

Tharawati 236

Tharrha 226, 236

Thelkheir 63

Theophila 149

Thina 220

Thinai (Si-gnan-fn or

Loyang) ... 9ii6, 245-6
Thogara 300



PAGE

Tholonbana 163-4

Thoule (^Shetland Is.). 5,

297

Throana 202

Throanoi 299,306

Taitoura (Chittore). 152,

166

Tiausa 142

Tiladai 217-8

Tilogrammon 72

Timoula 29,42

TinneyeH 67, 59

Tiripangolida 175

Tisapatinga 167

Ti8t&, R 10a,205

Tittoua 183

Toana 131

Tokharoi 268,' 272, 276,

282, 324
Tokosaima, R....191, 196

Tomara 226, 235

Tong-king 9 ii6, 243

Tong-king, Gulf of... 246

Tooraai 36,284.

Toringoi 63,64

Tosalei 225,230-1

Tougma ...226, 231, 265

Tribazina 308

Triglypton or Trilingon

226, 231-4

Trikadiba, Is 187-8

Trinesia, Is 187-8

Trinkonamalai 267


INDEX.



36d



PAGE

Tripuri (Tipperah) 194,

232-4

Trisht&ma, R 86

Triveni, R 99, 101

Trybaktra 277

Tuticorin 57

Tybiakai 288

Tyndis 48-50

Tyndis,R....70-l, 80, J04
Tyna, R 65, 103



Uchh 80

Ud^pur(Udayapura) 229,

234

Udumbara 149

Udjrana 107

Udyslnapura 113

Ujiain 38, 102, 154

Uriur 185

Ural, Mts :. 291

Ural, R 290

Urasa 118

Uttarrakuru 305, 326

V

Vagal, R... 184

Vaitarani, R 71

Vaidurya, Mts 81

Vais&li 218

47 d



PAGIS

Vaitarna, R 41, 192

Vak&taka 166

Valabbi ..37, 140

Vandabanda 276, 282

Varad&, R 158-9, 179

Yar&nasi 129, 248

Vareia, C lOn

Vamoi 269

Vai-pna 307

Vasai (Bassein) 40

Vasishtha ............ 90

Velur 187

Vendeloos Bay 268

Yengi 186

Viliv&yakura 179

Yindion (Yindhya),

Mts 76-77,80

Yingorla Rocks 188

Yip&s&, R 90

Yipula, Mt 205

YitastA, R 85

Yolga, R 290

W

Washati, Mts. , 314

Wildbeast Gulf 244, 246
Worahkal 187,233

X

Xarxiare 314

Xoana 151-2

Xodrake 148



370



INDiSX.



PAC^B

Y

J^^muna (Jamna), R. 85,

98

Tarkand 12 n 8

YeUapur 181

Yetflr 186

Yuma, Mt 205



Zaba 25, 27, 209

Zaba, Is 251

Zabai 9 n 6, 202-3

Zaen 224



PAGB

Zamirai 219, 221

Zanzibar, Is 191

Zaradros, B 91

ZarafsMn, R 290

Zarab Lake ... 314, 317
Zarangoi or Sarangai 314

Zaratai 288

Zariaspa ... 19n, 269, 274

Zariaspai 268

Zariaspis, R. ... 268, 324

Zerogerei 152, 154

Zeus, 248, 258

Zibala, Is 251

Zimyra 308



GENERAL INDEX.



PAGE



Agastya Rishi 78

Albirflnt 120

Alk;tnaA 295

Ammianus Marcel-
linns 323

Andhrabritya dy-
nasty 46

Antiokhos Theos ... 271
Ants, gold-digging. 107,

110
ApoUonins of Tyana. 119
Aristeas of Prokon-

nesos 295

Arrian 292

Arsakes 324

Asoka, 116, 119, 154, 300
Ast^s 117



Baleokonros ... 176, 177

Basarcnagos 185-6

Bdellinm II7

Beryl... 180-1, 247

Bhrigu 153

Boukephalos ... 125, 126
Brankhidae 283



PAGB



Camels 324

Cannibals 299

Carnelian stone » 77

Chandragupta 169

Cocks 225,232-3

Copper 222

Cottons 68



Darius Hystaspes... 82

Diamonds 71, 158, 167,

169, 172
Dionysios 114

Elephants 247, 249

Q

Cinger 247

Gold. 107, 219, 239, 241,

247, 295
Griffins 295

Gymnosophistai...... 130



372



GENERAL INDEl.



PAGE



Honey 247

Hyacinths 247



Kadphises 272

Kanerkea 272

Kanishka ...116, 119, 138

Kauravas 121

K^ralapntra 182

Kostus 117

Krishna 60,128

Kerobothros 52, 180



Lunar Race. 121, 129, 164
M

Maes or Titianus ... 14
Malabathrum (Cin-
namon)... 193,219,220

Mambares 40

Marinos of Tyre. ..... 3

Megh}lyahai*a 109

Murex, shell-fish ... 236

Musikanos 144

Muslin 60



N

Nard 117, 225,229

Ninus 271



PAGE



Onyx-stones. 77, 155, 176



P&ndavas 12S

Pandya Dynasty ... 58

Paradise 107-8

Paradise (Aryan) ... 279

Parasang 13 n 10

Pearl Fishery. 57, 64, 201,

258

Pepper 50,53

Pirates 180

Poros 89,125, 164

Ptolemy, Geogl. sys-
tem of 1-32



Rachia(Ra3&) 254

Ravens, white 232-3

Rhinoceros ...13 n 11, 16

n 14
Rice 247



S

Sakyamuni 135, 166,228-9

Saliv&hana 176

Samudragupta 213

Sandanes 40

Sandrakottos 169



GENERAL INDBX.



373



PAGE

Saraganes 40

B^takariii Dynasty...

Schoinos 13 n 10

Semiramis 271,274

Silver...219, 221, 237,247

Siroptolemaios 177

Skylax 82, 108

Solar Race 166

Somagos 64, 184

Sramana 52



PAGE

Tiastanes (Chastdna) 152,

156
Tigers 247,323



Yijaya 253.4

Yikramaditya ...122, 154
Vine-trees 264, 271, 308



Yayati 129

Taxiles 119 ; Yetha 138


BOMB\T'. TRINTKU AT THR KDUCVllON SOCIF.TYV PKE83, BYCUi:.I.A..



Works by J. W. McGRINDLE, MA, M.RA8.,
Late Principal of the Government College.
Patna, ana Fellow of the University of
Calcutta.



ANCIENT INDIA

AS DESCRIBED BY THE CLASSICAL AUTHOES;

Being a series of copiously annotated Translations of all extant
works relating to India, written by The Ancient Greek and Roman
Authors. The following volumes of the series have appeared : —

I.— A:NCIENT INDIA AS DESCRIBED BY MEGASTHENJfeS
AND ARRIAN : Being a translation of the fragments of the
Indika of Megasthen^s, and of the first part of the Indika
of Arrian : with Introduction, Notes, and Map of Ancient
India • I^s. 2-8

II.— THE COMMERCE AND NAVIGATION OP THE
ERYTHR^AN SEA: Being a translation of the Periplus
Maris Erythraei (Circumnavigation of the Red Sea and Indian
Ocean), and of Arrian's account of the Voyage of Nearkhos :
with Introduction, Commentary and Index Rs. 3-0

III.— ANCIENT INDIA AS DESCRIBED BY KTlfeSIAS THE
EINIDIAN : Being a translation of the fragments of his
Indika, with Introduction, Notes and Index Rs. 3

IV.— ANCIENT INDIA AS DESCRIBED BY PTOLEMY:
Being a translation of the Chapters on India and on Central
and Eastern Asia in the Treatise on Geography by Klaudios
Ptolemaios, the celebrated Astronomer : with Introduction,
Commentary, Map of India according to Ptolemy, and a very
copious Index Rs. 4-4

The 5tb and last volume will contain Strabo*s Geography of
India and the accounts of the Makedonian Invasion of India given
by Arrian and Curtius.



BOMBAY: EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS.
CALCUTTA : THACKER, SPINK & Co.
LONDON : TRUBNER & Co.



OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.



In rendering the results of Dr. Schwanbeck's industry accessible to
English readera by this translation of the collected fragments of the
lost Indika of Megasthenes, perhaps the most trustworthy of the
Greek writers on India, Mr. McCrindle would have performed a most
valuable service even had he not enriched the original by the addition
of copious critical notes, and a translation of Arrian's work on the
same subject. — Calcutta Review.

Mr. McCrindle's translations of the accounts of Ancient India by
Megasthenes and Arrian is a most valuable contribution to our know-
ledge of the subject in the days when Greeks and Romans were ruling

the world Mr. McCrindle has conferred agreat boon on society

by translating Dr. Schwanbeck's learned work into English, illustrat-
ing it by a valuable map of Ancient India, and publishing it at a small
price. There is more bond fide information regarding Ancient India in
this unpretending volume than is to be found in the great bulk of
Sanskrit Puranas ; whilst it forms a most valuable adjunct to the mass
of traditions and myths which have been preserved in the Hindu epics
of the Mahabharata and Ramayana, &c. — Pioneer.

Mr. J. W. McCrindle, of Patna, has given us a readable translation
both of Schwanbeck's Megasthenes, and of the fii-st part of Arrian's
Indiha, Mr. McCrindle deserves the thanks of all who take an
interest in Ancient India, and, should he be able to fulfil his promise
to translate " the entire series of classical works relating to India," he
will give an impetus to the study of the eai'ly civilization of this country
among native as well as European scholai's. His work is well printed,
and, as far as we have been able to judge, carefully edited. ^2%e
Madras Times,

Mr. McCrindle, who has already published a portion of the transla-
tion of AiTian, reprints these valuable contributions to our scanty

knowledge of Ancient India An introduction and notes add

value to the translation, a value which happens to be very great in this
case, and to centre in one long note on the identification of the old
Palibothra or Pataliputra with the modem Patna. — The Daily Review,

Mr. McCrindle, who holds a very high position in the Education
Department of the Indian Government, has collected into a volume
some translations which he has lately contributed to the "Indian

Antiquary" from Megasthenes and Arrian Strabo and Pliny

thought fit to condemn the writings of Megasthenes as absolutely false



and incredible, although they were glad to copy into their own works
much that he had written. We modems, however, with our longer
experience of travellers' tales, and of the vitality of fabulous state-
ments, and practised in comparing accounts that vary, find much in
these fragments that agrees with what we can reasonably conjecture of
the past of India We may observe that many of the sin-
gularities of the human race, which are depicted on the famous
Mappemonde, at Hereford, are described by Megasthenes. Mr.
McCrindle's volume ends with an excellent translation of the first part
of Arrian's Indika. He is to be congratulated on having made a
very useful contribution to the popular study of Indian antiquities, —
Westminster Review.

A good notion of the extent of the knowledge respecting India
possessed by the old Greeks and Romans may be formed from the
translation of the wi-itings on the subject of Megasthenes and Arrian,
presented by Mr. McCrindle, under the title of Ancient India. Many
of the statements made by the old writers are unmixed fable, although
Megasthenes, there can be no doubt, travelled as far as Bengal, but on
the whole, as much accurate knowledge was possessed by the Romans
in the first century after Christ, as by the European nations in the 16th
century. An introduction, notes, and map of India add to the prac-
tical utility of Mr. McCrindle's work. — Scotsman'

Both of these ancient works are very interesting as illustrating
the knowledge possessed by the later Greeks and the Romans
respecting the geography of India and the neighbouring regions.
Mr. McCrindle's prefaces, each with an informatory introduction,
embody the results of the most recent investigations of modem scholar-
ship on the subjects to which they relate. — Scotsman,

Mr. J. W. McCrindle, Principal of the Government College, Patna,
has set himself the task of publishing, from time to time, translations
of the Greek and Latin works which relate to Ancient India, and in
pursuance of this intention, some time since he published a work
entitled Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian. A
second instalment has now appeared under the title of The Commerce
and Navigation of the Erythraean Sea ; being a translation of the
Periplus Maris Erythraei, by an anonymous writer, and of Arrian s
account of the Voyage of Nearkhos, from the mouth of the Indus to the
head of the Persian Gulf, with introduction, commentary, notes, and
index. The introduction and commentary embody the main substance
of Miiller's prolegomena and notes to the Periplus and of Vincent's
Commerce and Navigation of the Ancients, so far as it relates specially
to that work. The identification of places on the Malabar and
Coromandel Coasts is derived from Bishop Caldwell's Dravidian
Grammar, Other recent works have been resorted to for verification



and connection of the contents of the narrative. To those stndents
who have neither the learned work of Dr. Vincent, nor the Geographi
Graeci Minores of C. Miiller, within reach, this handy volume will
prove very serviceable. — The Academy.

The careful and scholarly translations of ancient texts relating to
India, which Mr. McCrindle is prepajnng in serial order, promises to be
of great value. The method which he follows is in accordance with

the best traditions of English scholarship As to the historical

importance of these texts there can be only one opinion. History in
Sanskrit literatui'e is conspicuous by its absence, so that external
authorities are at once the only ones available, and at least redeem
by theii' unbiassed chai-aeter their relatively deficient opportunities of
information. Those who are best acquainted with the difficulties of
English rule in India, are best aware that the problems of Indian
administi*ation are, in fact, problems of Indian history. ... It is thus
of vital importance that every possible hint and clue as to the course
of the legal, social, and economical history of the country should be made
available. It is the special value of Mr. McCrindle's work that it
will form a solid, positive basis for the earliest period of authentic
Indian history, &c. — The Civil and Military Gazette, Lahore.

The fragments of the Indiha of Megasthenes, collected by Dr.
Schwanbeck, with the first part of the Indika of Anian, the Periphts
Maris Erythraei, and Arrian's account of the voyage of Nearkhos have
been translated, in two most useful volumes, by Mr. J. W. McCrindle,
M.A. The Indika of Ktesias with the fifteenth book of Strabo is also
promised, and the sections referring to India in Ptolemy's Geography
would complete a collection of the highest value to Indian history.—
Note under the article India, in the new edition of the Encyclopcediok
.Britannica.

We are glad to learn that the papers by Mr. J. W. McCrindle (on
Ptolemy's Geography of India) which have recently been appearing in
tlie Indian Antiquary are to be published separately. The amount of
patient and scholarly work which they indicate is of the kind that we
are rather accustomed to look for from a German savant, and can
hardly be properly appreciated by one who does not know by expe-
rience the difficulties of such investigations. — The Scottish Geographical
Magazine.
