================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: Selections from Medieval Philosophers, Vol. II: Roger Bacon to William of Ockham
Creator: Richard McKeon (ed. and trans.)
Translator: Richard McKeon (selections translated/edited)
Edition: New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1930 (Modern Student's Library)
Source: Internet Archive (selectionsfromme0002roge), scan of the 1930 Scribner's edition
Public domain: Published 1930; public domain.
Artifact ID: mckeon-selections-medieval-philosophers-vol-2-1930
================================================================================

THE MODERN STUDENT’S LIBRARY


SELECTIONS FROM
MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHERS


II
ROGER BACON TO WILLIAM OF OCKHAM


- Oe
—, ‘2
ak
a
{
‘ * ‘
. 4 ay cEecy “44 A6iurs
4 é vad ®
ys ,¥ FES Cet Pe
aA z ?
he .
a ROTEL 3 bbe ‘. re EYé ;
aS \ 2a 452 2
‘
a . 4
cue ,
‘
s 1
.
- * 7
3 eV OF] , i
\
\ vy 5
- i? i \ ;
™


ain ounce pers Rice purciad a


ei HAG L, ; ya 2, seks ee ae air
vor .


nr AAR RA YH Ts


vi “ity Si14yF


PAA ES


3 - SE,
re) OLLEGTI iis F ROM
MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHERS


II


ROGER BACON TO WILLIAM
OF OCKHAM


EDITED AND TRANSLATED, WITH INTRODUCTORY
NOTES AND GLOSSARY BY


RICHARD McKEON


PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY AND GREEK
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO


CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS


NEW YORK®@ CHICAGO BOSTON


CopyricHT, 1930, Br
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS


¥


Printed in the United States of America


CONTENTS


GENERAL INTRODUCTION...................


I. Roger Bacon
aeRO Me tYOMes eo 4 als ed se ee tes


II. Sarnt Bonaventura
Hiiiroditetion .t.-484 5 Bhss ane ae
Commentary on the Four Books of Sen-
tences of Peter Lombard (Book I,
Distmetion Tily Part Diary. oo a


TI. Sarnt THomas AQeINas
j HintrodictiOnes be. oat hea ee eee


Gar Bide tick re lisa inde naared Loe


IV. Marruew or AQUASPARTA
PWReUMeLIOn sate ls. Ses oy ea
Ten Disputed Questions on Knowledge
(uestions Land LD) s.20h. chase oS


V. Joun Duns Scotus
PRE ROMUCUIOIE 2.5 a So sis cect oa ot ae
The Oxford Commentary on the Four
Books of the Master of the Sentences
(Book I, Distinction ITI, Question IV)


VI. Witu1am or OckHam
Pit VOGUCUIOU <2 hice 6 ins dose uan eo ni sees
The Seven Quodlibeta (Fifteen Selected
Quodlibetal Questions) .............


Glossaries
Wea Eine ITY os «eee oar 9 = Va ea) 00) y Boas ins
Pirie SUI. one tc eet hc ae He Te ee es 8


o-oo


303


’ i hi dy
# a i >
eyo
; <(en
‘
bd ‘
has
; Vryrvs
} ‘ f ;
‘<
ie
Tis .
‘oe \ i a .
4 ane
‘| ‘
. 7 A :
3 T HH { BY!
i. ‘ ;
<i ht i i” " pyeve :
i iraeray. 1: ; y SP pa 7]
» be es, $
a. \ Mm hiy yer ite! ¥ ens | it
ay Mil) } =


: : ins Me 2
; 4 \ r rs . my 4
2 Byaat ee att fon. wat - yee ce
cs “4 PRP ANO IE, certs, prpeetSrey, et} an verry rte WE bKE ae (gan
ree
at ! ; ; j hy na | 7 - iad - b
iy Aart pyar) et dees PA yest ee a * Hibeaenth hey “wm


f


SBR eke ora Bid od Moy? feels HAT, ead
thes Wore: eevee) Ne MOAR elt Mok Sree tence:
“peal TH Vie ishyaroil ¥ an bE, eee Veg hae "et Ge

i wet zprancoy ware hoodies at J) reptoreenkligd

bi eae as; upib-tbhont boi lssal cult nsiag) elt ate Wy

ry eae) i! tet oft badeittiany Bayh seats shy hacla isis (si

- ike Slot tt irs baa of} Sidi thh pot Aor ba oat

ie Kasi slersninaerh ta eal We:

a tee iy “erlage it dos ea —


Apert init g oy Cre aay Loney ert


i sr Pla Waris tH het “aps B Hf, solve “ie re


Worn sewinbec dagayse ys Re ne nisi is bith: uk _
dsoin vtoily Cae ated t oa | 2-nahio Lyf area endls of Hen
. eth etalk haga tat bee) ia) mir dowiai! au > ai
Benin iw Se ata ;
Y: cers ai Csnicstn at eg ‘ae gy laa. ;
idee aK Gt, Hani, bps dessert


‘yl. Ake ehOd tee nReks 9
eolenenie porto. aulh we


tiige a. aye to


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


The study of philosophy has as end, Thomas Aquinas
said, not the knowledge of what others have thought,
but objective truth. The method and practice of
medieval philosophers, working upon the writings of past
philosophers, are adapted to the determination of truth
from their statements. There is little in the scholastic
method that conforms to the outlook and approach of
modern philosophy. It is historical, but the history in-
volved has been shown to be bad history: works as
patently neoplatonic as the Book of Causes and the
Theology of Aristotle were long thought to have been
written by Aristotle. It is authoritarian, whereas the
way to truth, the scientific method, according to the
dicta which positivistic science has insinuated into philos-
ophy, is by facts, not by what men have said.

By these circumstances the middle ages were for a
long time closed and kept from influencing openly the
_ progress of modern thought. Philosophers continued to
read their predecessors, not only as historians, but to
find hints for the discovery of truth. Only occasionally,
however, did a logician or a metaphysician go for sug-
gestions to the middle ages. To be sure, many doctrines
and many lines of influence have continued uninterrupted
though constantly modified from the middle ages to the
present, and our language and ideology is strewn with
vestiges confusing and difficult to explain in their mod-
ern guise alone. In part, in the beginnings of the
middle ages, a difference separates philosophers from
those of the present in the spirit and the enterprise,
common then but unfamiliar to philosophic concerns to-

1x


x GENERAL INTRODUCTION


day, of faith engaged in understanding itself; in part,
in the height of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
there is a difference less in spirit than in terminology.
When philosophy became the handmaiden of science in-
stead of theology, when Aristotle fell into disrepute, the
philosophic labors of the middle ages were locked tight
in a double prejudice, grown from its purpose and its
language. This prejudice did not prevent vast borrow-
ings of what was condemned in other terms, but with the
passing centuries the discredit of medieval thought was
fortified by a growing ignorance of what had been dis-
credited and why.

None the less, translation is not impossible of medieval
discussions into terms that are at the very center of the
problems of the new metaphysics and method, which have
lately been constructed for science. True, much of the
discussion comes to conclusions other than those cur-
rently held, but then, it was the conviction of medieval
philosophers that conclusions are safe only if they
have been fortified by examination of conclusions dialec-
tically opposed to them. In the evolution of philosophy
from Augustine through the debates of the fourteenth
century it was important always to consider what op-
ponents had said or might say in opposition to the doc-
trine: for that reason philosophers had grown learned
in authorities and adept in the manipulation of argu-
ments. But seldom, save where philosophic arguments
require it, are authorities to be followed unsupported by
reason. The method encounters dangers: to one un-
familiar with the terms it has the sound of a logomachy;
to one concerned with the practical it is tenuously specu-
lative. But the opposed method encounters evils even
worse: if one forgets the old distinctions, one is very
apt to repeat the old sophisms; what was supposed to be
practical is found on examination to be threaded and


GENERAL INTRODUCTION xi


bolstered with fragments and wisps of the speculative,
dangerous now, not because they are speculative, but be-
cause they are unexamined.

The citation of authorities for the discovery of truth
may go on without great concern for historical niceties
of doctrine. Men were learned in the history of philoso-
phy during the middle ages, and there were among them
many notable scholars even by the standards of a later
age. Philosophy was studied, however, not in the fashion
of the innumerable Lives of the Philosophers of the
hellenistic times and the late Roman Empire, with an
emphasis on the idiosyncracies and careers of philoso-
phers and schools, nor in the modern fashion of determin-
ing precisely who first said what and by what circum-
stances he was determined (and though texts showed
more philological variations then, they were more apt tc
be intelligible philosophically), but the history of philo-
sophy is used in the works of Thomas Aquinas and
Roger Bacon as Plato and, more systematically, Ari-
stotle had been adept in it, stating doctrines of preceding
philosophers and criticising them before going to a state-
ment of the position they were themselves to advance.
Criticism was employed, but most usually it was criticism
of a single doctrine, by which to interpret it, often away
from its original intent, or refute it. It is not important
that platonic doctrines are quoted against platonic doc-
trines, aristotelian doctrines against aristotelian. ‘There
have been and still are unnumbered platonisms and many
fragmentary doctrines of a persisting aristotelianism,
and even with our improved methods of critical scholar-
ship and our surer texts, it is difficult to decide, for ex-
ample, whether the aristotelianism of Averroes is closer
to Aristotle than the aristotelianism of Thomas Aquinas.
Rather more interesting is the difference in the fate of the
two philosophies, that which stemmed from Plato and that


xii GENERAL INTRODUCTION


which stemmed from Aristotle, during the middle ages.
In Augustine’s writings christian philosophy had already
taken the neoplatonic ordering which it was to continue,
one God, three persons, eternal ideas and numbers, con-
tingent things, among the latter of which rational souls
were uppermost and turned to the contemplation of eter-
nal things. The philosophy of Aristotle, progressively
rediscovered, contributed first a logic, then a meta-
physics, a physics, a psychology, an ethics, a politics, but
without altering the outlines of the philosophy. In the
case of Aristotle it is frequently a matter of dispute
whether or not he held that the world is eternal, that the
soul is immortal, that the active intellect is a faculty of
the human soul. Chiefly he was the source of doctrines
and distinctions. Plato, however, entered the middle
ages by way of neoplatonisms that had taken some of
his analyses literally and had found a religion in his
myths. An ordering hierarchy, so derived, early became
part of christian dogma, and the analogical method
proper to the philosophy was free to play within that
framework. As some point in the analogy becomes literal
doctrine, a new platonism emerges, so that it might be
said that there are many platonisms in the middle ages
but only one aristotelianism, often incomplete, often sub-
ject to dispute on a given question, but for the most part
a body of terms, distinctions, doctrines, used almost uni- ~
versally and precisely understood.

It was easy therefore for the two to merge, and the
spectacle of the middle ages reconciling Plato and Aris-
totle is not.so fantastic as a later age, thinking only of
its critical editions, has imagined. The order of the
world, the structure of eternal things is the dogma drawn
from Plato; the language, logic, and order of sciences is
the doctrine drawn from Aristotle. Plato spoke the lan-
guage of wisdom; Aristotle the language of science;


GENERAL INTRODUCTION xiii


Augustine, illumined by the Holy Ghost and lighting in
turn the whole line of christian philosophers, the lan-
guage of both. There are, therefore, as many augustin-
isms in the thirteenth century, as there were platonisms
before; and as Augustine had constructed a platonism,
little related to the Dialogues, for all the doctrinal con-
tinuities that might be pointed out, so each of the writers
of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries (and therefore
each of the six who appear in translation in this volume),
since each quotes Augustine and finds in his works “au-
thorities” for doctrines, constructs an augustinism, one
differing from the other, each differently related to the
doctrine Augustine himself expounded. Matthew of
Aquasparta finds, quoting Augustine for authority, that
divine illumination is necessary for the explanation of
knowledge; Duns Scotus finds, with the same authority,
that the natural power of the intellect suffices. Accord-
ing to Matthew the principles of philosophy can not alone
explain knowledge, but must be supplemented by the ©
principles of theology; according to Thomas, that au-
thority of Augustine holds for the knowledge of God,
but for the knowledge of things, the activity of the active
intellect is sufficient. Bonaventura finds authority in
Augustine for the doctrine that intellectual excellence
presupposes moral excellence; Duns Scotus can find no
statement in him that the good have greater wisdom, but
only that they have greater love of God. Aristotle enters
similarly with Augustine into the interplay of authorities.
Roger Bacon can (thus) quote him for support of the
augustinian position that virtue is needed for knowledge.'
For the argument proceeds by reason even when authori-
ties are quoted: what Augustine said is like the theory
according to which the scientist works; it is proper that
1 See below, p. 76.


xiv . GENERAL INTRODUCTION


his saying should have some additional or some other
meaning after the discussion.

The evolution of thought down, the middle ages might
be described in terms of a shift of interest or in terms of
a change of method. In Augustine the preoccupation had
been the discovery of God as the basis of all things and
the inspiration of all activities; philosophy had been
turned to the conversion of all knowledge and energy to
the knowledge and love of God and to human salvation.
The source of being, the object of love, the ground of
truth were the same, and, therefore the way to God by
love and understanding was undifferentiated: one can
not know the good without loving it, one can not love
God without knowing him, at least partially and to the
extent of one’s powers. For later discussions the one,
the true, and the good are still (by the authority of
Aristotle as well as Augustine) convertible, that is to say,
whatever is true is good, whatever is good is true. But
though all truths are from the first truth, it is possible to
differentiate truths from each other as well as to see in
them their common truth. Short of the recognition of
God behind truths, there are the practises of logic to ex-
amine consequences and oppositions, truths and falsities; _
short of the recognition of God behind goods, there are
the distinctions of the virtues and the habits, the specula-
tive and the practical. From the consideration of truth as
the reflection of divine things, philosophy passed to the
consideration of the truth of things situated between God
and man, deriving their truth still from God, but causing
truth in the human mind. Such a step between the works
of Augustine and Thomas does not make it necessary
that the former be contradicted in the works of the latter.
but it does explain why the augustinism of Thomas dif-
fers from that found in Augustine himself or in (say)
Bonaventura, In that step philosophy had become some-


}


GENERAL INTRODUCTION XV


what other than faith knowing itself, and thereafter it
can play another role than that set by the inspiration of
the theology: theology can concern itself with the domain
of things as they are related to God, and there remains
for philosophy the domain of things in their relations to
things and to man. The next step, that taken by the
scotists and the ockhamites, is in the enlarging and ex-
ploring of the subjects so revealed, of logic, physics, and
metaphysics.

Corresponding to the steps of this transition of inter-
est, the methods employed underwent shifts and alter-
ations. For the exploration of the variety of things to
discover an identical Truth and Good at their basis, the
medieval philosophers found the analogical method of
Plato to their hands. To be sure, the method could not
be carried to its extreme, as Plato might have been
tempted to carry it, for the data on which it was em-
ployed are accepted by faith; the triune God, omnipotent
creator of the world, may be submitted to dialectical
examination; but in his case one must guard against
literal statements, save those made in the dogmas of reli-
gion. Within the dogmas the translation from the doc-
trine of the philosophers to the philosophic truth is
made easy. For as Bacon observed,” using the method,
the temple of God was constructed by the servants of
Solomon and the servants of Hiram, that is, by the wis-
dom of the apostles and the wisdom of the philosophers
and wise men of the gentiles. When the problem is to
show forth a doctrine perspicuously or to lead the mind
to the contemplation of a truth too lofty for statement
and beyond demonstration, on which, however, demonstra-
tions depend and by which the meanings of things are
possible, the method of analogy is peculiarly effective.
‘The aristotelian method, on the other hand, is a method


~ 2See below, p. 27.


xvi GENERAL INTRODUCTION


of demonstration, proceeding by syllogism from prin-
ciples stated. The one is a method for the presentation
of a truth immediately and perspicuously; the other a
method for guaranteeing a truth by showing its depend-
ence on stated principles. The difficulty of the one is that
it can only lead to and present; if the truth in question
is seen, that must be sufficient, for there are no reasons
why it is so, and one who does not see may easily question
it. The difficulty of the other is that the truth of a doc-
trine is richer and fuller than the principles on which it
is based; to state only the principles is to impoverish it
save in the eyes of a trained philosopher who (as a
mathematician can see the system of a mathematical dis-
cipline in its postulates) can see the deductive conse-
quences which follow from the principles. The scholastic
method is in one sense a device for remedying this defect
of a body of philosophic truth stated in propositions: by
setting down in each of a variety of questions, besides the
conclusions, the diversity of opinions which might be
opposed to the conclusion, it places the doctrine in its
intellectual setting. But the usual device of the medieval
philosopher was to supplement one of the methods with
the other: to present the doctrine and lay its broad out-
lines by analogy, and to analyze its consequences and
search out the principles on which it depends by means
of the aristotelian syllogism. There remains room for
wide diversity in the use of the methods, as wide as the
difference between the analogical method of Bonaventura
which is designed to present the way that leads back to
God that he may be known and loved, and the demonstra-
tive method of Thomas which is concerned to prove by
natural reason whatever falls properly within the domain
of philosophy, so that even the existence of God, who
exceeds reason, is demonstrated a posteriori since it can
not be demonstrated a priori.


: GENERAL INTRODUCTION xvii


The criticism that the middle ages were lost in wordy
contentions and in irrational invocations of authority is
based only on the surface of the medieval disputes: the
distinctions were precise, but they were subtle to a nicety,
and therefore since they have grown unfamiliar, they
seem often too meticulous and sharp; the erudition re-
quired to enter into the rational dispute of authorities
grew finally too massive, and since we have forgotten the
ancient authorities (while constituting new authorities of
our own) we lose the illumination that may come from
the expert use of citations and see only the heavy weight
of unfamiliar texts. We use authorities and distinctions
much as the medieval philosophers did, yet on one point
there may still seem an important difference: we appeal
more frequently to facts and experience, whereas they
may seem lost in the unfounded inferences of rationalism
or the unexamined preferences of voluntarism. Certainly
augustinism, turned to eternal things, and even aristotel-
ianism, finding the bases of truths in first principles, for
all the origin of knowledge in experience, are faced in the
opposite direction to empiricism and positivism. But it was
not ignorance of “facts”, but a precise estimation of their
place in the scheme of knowledge, which determined the
orientation of these philosophies, in the direction that
Plato and Aristotle had faced, toward eternal things and
eternal truths in terms of which contingent things may be
known. It is the recognition that any proposition may
be false, though established carefully on experience and
though the senses are unerring, and the recognition on the
other hand that absolute truth would be possible, though
all the senses were erring. It is recognition that the
bases of truth must be in principles of knowledge and
that any appeal beyond them must use them. What those
principles are is discussed variously and the doctrinal
differences are important. It is worth going to the philos-


xviii GENERAL INTRODUCTION


ophers themselves for those discourses, but they can be
read sympathetically and understood, only if it is seen
that the cause they are arguing is far from lost. Even if
it could be decided however that they are in error, the
distinctions they made ought not to be forgotten. They
constructed a powerful, precise language, the remnants
of which, blunted, dulled, and broadened by long and
varied usage, are still the center of the philosophic idiom.
That language has been reproduced as carefully as pos-
sible in the present translations, and the glossary ap-
pended should make clear the precise sense in which
words grown vague are used. For if the terminology is
made clear, and with it the distinctions it was designed to
express, the discussions of the middle ages have much
that is relevant to problems still current, and in time the
outstanding philosophers of that period may be studied,
not only for the historical end of knowing the work of an
important period of thinkers, but for the philosophic end
of knowing the truth.


Ricuarp McKeon.


SELECTIONS FROM
MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHERS


II


ROGER BACON TO WILLIAM OF OCKHAM


ae
n
» 4 of ‘
ri
‘ an
rm
¢
}
' x Tis ‘
' vit x
A ,
i
' Dhan + ; i
a
~~
‘, . ie
~ sy tt yestsake obeys
~~ 3.
coc Soe J ih OE wis!
~
Ali‘ s 5
pe “J
' . ~* , A
», Ate af ee Lisl o
oe r 4
, | we the C28 bev
“J ’ ma
Py i
4 pro Pecthvi ee ko bette tat boii r


ih Laer ice nie b. pant i onan


Bee Sa tnlity pene Fier beast a
Reyes «es ery ti gseiedr RUHL (OATES eriis “afl


ae F Se


ae

shy Anitt Dewngt tie sie Mie’

Rie out 3 (wrk, pena SOO
ht oy ets ete

och rene : Baltes oe a 9p a TAG ae


 dereFuerorst). Louk PAisaaD odd arloes oe,
- ¥


, tn wWOTG Criy wre ett md, sne
‘ {

vie Gib ee i iv2ecrre Die Fa Bas Sal Mi Ai Ahaha

$34 aa ig

si ; ’ ido borty mint: Ly std at{ Oto ;


apg he | pechindl Se it a au Sd 9 FROU
dbvegacriné 190 sel tee tud “ast ody ts vd bas «re
bd hy “oe aa


rl) ae), kode susan’) femit oensy ind, ieee ee

“J Eeyitiaitriog. dor th Amini, eal? th oe
Que erate. fe Bey senility at, opiates we

» tet’ *) xt ton enn & kp mi ee ane “


&
-


— » <-_ ee ae
Mh i ochs a: 1 A
=
E
>
z


> 4


ce, a: ree
oe x a

Fr ® . ~ a4
—— i) 7
i . ¥ Saris wits, >


7 rena wis Dip: os :
ate baad (leh al


ROGER BACON (1210 or 1215 — 1294)


The philosophic attitude of Roger Bacon is in agree-
ment in most respects with the augustinian movements
of the thirteenth century. On the questions of seminal
reasons, of spiritual matter, of the plurality of substan-
tial forms, and other doctrines which had come to be
the mark of augustinian thought, he had nothing to say
distinct from what Bonaventura and other franciscans
had held. Moreover, the enthusiasm for experimental
science which marked him apart from his contempo-
raries, far from standing in contradiction with this con-
servative attitude, flowed naturally from it. For if on
the one hand he could insist that the whole intention
of philosophy is to evolve the natures and properties of
things, that insistence can be understood properly only
if it is balanced by his repeated statement that there is
but one wisdom, found in the divine scriptures, which
philosophy develops in doctrine and action.

Knowledge may be had in three manners, by author-
ity, by reason, and by experience; but authority is insuff-
cient without reason, and reason is not tranquil in the
possession of truth if its data are not confirmed by
experience. Experience is therefore the one source of
certitude. But experience is of two sorts, external and
internal; the former the work of the exterior senses,
aided by instruments, formulating its conclusions with
the precision of mathematics; the latter the interior
<nowledge consequent to divine inspirations and consum-
nated in seven stages. Significantly, the mystical knowl]-

3


4 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


edge of these internal experiences is of the same type
and efficacy as experimental knowledge, for the doctrine
of the unity of knowledge is a fundamental doctrine in
his philosophy, and consequently no science will pur-
sue only an end of its own, but all will unite their utili-
ties in the service of theology. Science for Bacon is a
neglected and more efficacious instrument by which to
attain, by acquiring a knowledge of his handiwork, to
the augustinian ideal of knowledge of God. The ecstatic
or mystic way will rise to a knowledge of all human
sciences, not only of spiritual, but of corporeal things,
and of the various sciences of philosophy.

Bacon, it must be remembered, was an unusually able
and well informed scientist. He wrote with distinction |
on the natural sciences, mathematics, perspective, optics,
geography, astronomy, alchemy, and philology. In
many of these he conducted inquiries and formulated
theories at variance with those commonly pursued or
held in his times: there is evidence that he may have had
a telescope and a microscope; we have his cipher for-
mula for gunpowder and a few chemical processes and
medical remedies as well as unciphered statements scdt-
tered through his major writings; his work on the calen-
dar prepared for the gregorian reform; his work in
geography influenced the men who furnished the geo--
graphic notions by which the explorations of two and a
half centuries later were guided; and it is impossible to
say whether or not there are further items of practical
discovery and research hidden in the libraries of Europe,
since Bacon’s sage counsel was to encipher all such bits
of information. His doctrine of knowledge, therefore, is
not formulated in ignorance of the possibilities of experi-
mental science, for experience enjoys all prerogatives
over other ways of knowledge—it can discover the secrets
of nature; it alone can reach complete certitude. Even


ROGER BACON 5


more, Bacon rose not infrequently to a prophetic fury:
through. ignorance of this method the age was coming to
desuetude; abstract superfluous questions abounded to
the neglect of useful, necessary, and fruitful knowledge;
philosophy was dying and the world was filled with
books of futilities and puerilities.

Much of Bacon’s work was conceived and planned as
outline for the reform of learning, and therefore super-
ficially there is much in his attitude and manner that
reminds one of his later namesake and in general of the
seventeenth century. It is in fulfillment rather than in
contradiction of these plans that experimental knowledge
of the world is crowned by an experimental knowledge
that turns inward. For all knowledge is a species, that
is, an action of the thing known upon the knower, and
ultimately it must be clear that the action of no partic-
ular thing can stop in itself; knowledge leads back
definitely from any information to God. The light pour-
ing through a window is attributed to the sun, and the
knowledge present in the mind similarly is due to the
action of God. The great discoveries of the sciences
-and the arts would have been impossible to man without
the revelation of God; in effect, God revealed all philos-
ophy to man in the beginning, and the history of thought
since has been the cyclical rediscovery, after periods of
sin, of a wisdom the patriarchs received. Of course, the
primitive revelation had to be filled by the details of
science (that was why the patriarchs lived three hun-
dred years), and Bacon therefore strikes the double
posture of the prophet who heralds the return to the
ancient truths and of the scientist who possesses new
and strange truths with which to revivify the ancient
doctrine. Wisdom is one, but items of information may
be added to build it out and substantiate it without
altering its outlines. Experimental knowledge is to


6 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


accomplish this, and its procedure will be to work either
with the things without the mind or the things within;
God is present in both; indeed, God is the active intellect.
The study of Bacon is chiefly the study of this theory
of knowledge and of the details of reform to which
knowledge of languages and of the various sciences is
to be subjected.


ROGER BACON
THE OPUS MAJUS!


Tue First Parr?
oF Tuis DEMONSTRATION


THE CAUSES OF ERROR


In which the four universal causes of all human igno-
rance are removed. There are four distinctions in
this part, and in the first distinction there are four chap-
ters. In the first chapter, after the intention of the
whole demonstration has been stated, these four causes
are criticized in general.


CuaprTer I.


The perfect consideration of wisdom consists in two
things, namely, in perceiving what is required for wis-
dom that it may be known best, and then, in perceiving
how wisdom should be related to all things that they
may be directed by it in proper ways. For by the light
of wisdom (1) the Church of God is directed; (2) the
commonwealth of the faithful is disposed; (3) the con-
version of unbelievers is procured; and (4) by the excel-
lence of wisdom those who are obstinate in evil can be
curbed that they may be thrust far from the bounds of


1The Opus Majus of Roger Bacon, ed. by J. H. Bridges.
London: Williams and Norgate, 1900, 3 vols.
2Vol. I, pp. 1-8, and vol. III, pp. 1-8.
7


8 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the Church more effectively than by the shedding of
christian blood. All matters, in fact, which need the
guidance of wisdom are reduced to the above four,
nor can wisdom be related to more. Wherefore, that this
wisdom be known not only relatively but absolutely, I
shall try here to present to Your Holiness, following the
tenor of your recent letter, whatever I can at the present
time in a probable demonstration, until a more certain
and fuller writing is completed. But, since the subjects
under consideration are weighty and uncommon, they
demand for human frailty, grace and favor. For ac-
cording to the Philosopher in the seventh book of the
Metaphysics, those things which are of greatest under-
standing in themselves are of least apprehension to us.
Indeed, enveloped truth is concealed in the depths and
deposited in the abyss, as Seneca says in the seventh
book on Favors and in the fourth of Natural questions;
and Cicero says in the Hortensius that all our under-
standing is obstructed by many difficulties, since our un-
derstanding is related to what is most manifest in its
own nature, as the eye of the owl and the eye of the
bat are to the light of the sun (as the Philosopher says
in the second book of the Metaphysics*) and as one deaf
from birth is related to harmonic delights, as Avicenna
says in the ninth book of the Metaphysics. Wherefore
we are sufficiently impressed with the weakness of our
own intellect in the investigation of truth, to want to
remove, as much as possible, extraneous causes and oc-
casions of error from the imperfection of our perception.

There are, indeed, four chief hindrances to the under-
standing of truth, which stand in the way of every man,
however wise, and permit hardly any to arrive at the
true title of wisdom; to wit, (1) the example of frail
and unsuited authority, (2) the long duration of custom,

3’ Aristorte, Met. II, 1, 993°9-11.


ROGER BACON 9


(3) the opinion of the unlearned crowd, and (4) the
concealment of one’s own ignorance in the display of
apparent wisdom. Every man is involved in these diffi-
culties, every condition of man is held by them. For
every one in all the acts of life and study and every
occupation uses three of the worst arguments to the same
conclusion; namely, (1) this has been exemplified by our
ancestors, (2) this is the custom, (3) this is the common
belief: therefore, it must be held. But the opposite to
the conclusion follows far better from the premises, as
I shall prove in many instances by authority and experi-
ence and reason. But if these three arguments are
sometimes refuted by the splendid power of reason, the ©
fourth is always before the eyes or on the lips of every
one to excuse his own ignorance; and although he knows
nothing worth knowing, nevertheless what he knows he
magnifies shamelessly so that he overwhelms and shat-
ters the truth in the consolation of his unhappy stupidity.
Moreover, all the evils of the human race come from
these deadly plagues; for the most useful and the great-
est and most beautiful instances of wisdom and the
secrets of all the sciences and arts are ignored; but
what is even worse, men blinded by the ‘mist of these
four arguments do not perceive their own ignorance, but
cover and conceal it with all caution so that they find
no remedy for it; and finally, what is worst of all, they
think they are in the full light of truth when they are in
the densest shadows of error; because of this they hold
the most true to bein the bounds of falsity, the best ta
be of no value, the greatest to possess neither weight
nor worth; and on the contrary they honor the most false,
praise the worst, extol the most vile, blind to the truth
that all the brightness of wisdom is other than these, dis-
dainful of what they can attain with great ease; and
because of the greatness of their stupidity they spend


10 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


most considerable labors, consume much time, pour out
vast expenditures on things which are of no utility or
little and of no merit in the judgment of the wise man.
Hence it is necessary that the violence and harm of these
four causes of all evils be known in the beginning and
be condemned and put off far from the consideration of
wisdom. For where the first three of these causes domi-
nate, no reason moves; no right judges; no law binds;
the injunctions of religion have no place; the dictates
of nature perish; the face of things is changed; order
is confounded; vice prevails; virtue is extinguished;
falsity reigns; truth is puffed away. And therefore noth-
ing is more necessary to this consideration than the sure
condemnation of these four causes of error by chosen
arguments of wise men which shall not possibly be con-
tradicted.

Since moreover the wise bring the first three together
and condemn them at the same time and since the fourth
requires a separate investigation becaust of its special
stupidity, therefore, I shall try first to disclose the harm
of the three. But although authority is one of them,
I speak in no wise of the solid and true authority which
is bestowed by the judgment of God on the Church or
which arises from the merit and dignity of some one
among the saints and perfect philosophers and other
wise men who are expert to the full measure of human
possibility in the cultivation of wisdom; but I speak of
that authority which many men seize upon violently in
this world without the help of God, not from the merit
of their wisdom, but because of their own presumption
and their desire for fame; and I speak of the authority
which the unlearned multitude grants (to its own destruc-
tion in the just judgment of God) to many. For accord-
ing to the Scripture the hypocrite often rules because
of the sins of the people; I speak, in fact, of those


ROGER BACON 1


sophistical authorities of the insensate multituue which
are authorities in an equivocal sense, as a stone eye or a
painted eye has the name of eye but not its power.


Cuaprter II.


The sacred Scripture, moreover, reproves these three
causes of error; the holy doctors condemn them; canon
law forbids them; philosophy reprehends them. But
for reasons touched upon before with reference to phil-
osophic treatments and because the opinions of philos-
ophers concerning these three are very little known,
I shall treat principally of the philosophic opinions.
Seneca, of course, in the second book of his Letters
(mear the end) condemns all three of these banes in a
single phrase. He says, Among the causes of our ills
is that we live according to model; we are not regulated
by reason but are carried along by custom; that which
we would not care to imitate if few were to do it, we
do when many begin to do it rather because it is more
frequent than because it is more honorable: and error
holds the place of right among us when it has been
made general.* The Philosopher moreover, attacking
throughout his philosophy unworthy authority, asserts
in the second book of the Metaphysics that the princi-
pal causes of human error are custom and the influ-
ence of the masses.° And again Seneca in the book
on the Happy Life says, No man errs for himself alone,
but he is the cause and author of another’s error, and
error transmitted from one to another turns us aside and
throws us down and we perish by the examples of other
men.® And in the second book on Anger, Because of


4Srneca, lib. XX, Hp. 8, ed. Haase.
—* Meta. II, 3, 995a 3-6.
6 Seneca, Dialog. VII, 1.


12 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the evil of custom, he says, vices which have grown with
us are removed with difficulty.’ And in the book on the
Happiness of Life he contends against the opinion of
the crowd,


Nothing implicates us in greater evils than that
we adapt ourselves to rumor and think those
things best which have been received with great
approval; nor do we live according to reason
but according to likeness and precedent. “
Thence is that great heaping together of men
rushing upon other men. For this befalls man
in a great massacre, since people so press upon
one another that no one falls without drawing
another with him, and the first are the cause
of destruction to those who follow. You may
see this happen in every life.


And again he says in the same book, The people, de-
fenders of their own evil, stand against reason; and
further on, Human affairs are not so well ordered that
the better pleases most; and then follows, The crowd
is the worst argument.8 And Cicero in the third of the
Tusculan questions says, When we have been handed
over to school masters, we are so filled with a variety
of errors, that truth yields to vanity, and nature itself
yields to established opinion.® And he says in the Lucul-
lus, Some, having accommodated themselves to a friend
or having been captivated by only the speech of some
one whom they have heard, judge of unknown things,
and into whatever art or discipline they are borne as by
a tempest, they hold fast to that judgment as to a rock;
most would rather err and defend the opinion which
™Seneca, Dial. IV, 18.


§ Seneca, Dial. VII, 1 and 2.
° Cicero, Tus. Disput. III, 1, 2.


ROGER BACON 13


they had liked, than investigate without obstinacy what
they say most surely.'° And because of the depravity
of custom he asks in the first book on Divine Nature,
Does it not shame him who speculates on nature to seek
from minds steeped in custom the testimony of truth?"
And against the opinion of the mob, he says in the intro-
duction to the second book of Disputations, Philosophy
is content with few judges, fleeing the multitude delib-
erately, and suspected and detested by it,!* and in the
same second book he says, All things which are done
without publicity seem to me the more praiseworthy.
But other authors take up these three errors separately.
For in the book of Natural Questions of Adalardus
| Adelard of Bath], the question is raised concerning frail
authority: What else is authority of this sort than a
halter? For surely as brute animals are led by any
halter, and see neither whither nor why they are led, so
this very authority leads not a few into danger, taken
and bound in bestial credulity. And in the book on the
Eternity of the World it is said, He who has chosen one
side of a question because of love of custom can not
rightly distinguish true opinion. And Averroes at the
end of the second book of the Physics says,


Custom is the greatest cause in keeping us from
many manifest things. Just as certain actions,
although they are harmful, will be easy to the
man accustomed to them and as, for that reason,
he believes that they are useful, so when one
_has been accustomed to believe certain false

statements from boyhood, that custom will be
the cause of denying the truth, as some people

10Cicrro, Academ. Prior. II, 3.

1 De Deorum Natura I, 30.

e Tusc. Disp. II, 1, 4.
% Ibid. II, 26, 64.


14 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


have been so accustomed to eating poison that
it has become a food for them.


And Averroes likewise holds in the second book of the
Metaphysics, When the opposites to principles have be-
come well-known, they are more readily received by the
multitude and by those following the testimony of the
many than the principles themselves. And Jerome in the
Prologue to the fifth book on Jeremiah asserts that truth
is content with few, and it is not terrified by a multitude
of enemies. John Chrysostom says likewise in his com-
mentary on Matthew, that they have professed them-
selves stripped of truth who have armed themselves with
multitude.


Cuaprer III.


Whatever has been proved by authorities is de-
termined even more certainly from the experience of
any man. For we find in ourselves and in others that
these three practices, embracing evils as they do in most
instances, adhere very frequently to what is false. But,
if occasionally they are found in connection with good
and true things, they are almost always imperfect, and
they contain but a weak degree of wisdom. As normally
the daughter follows the deeds of the mother, the son
those of the father, the slave those of the master, the
subject those of the king, the subordinate those of the
prelate, the disciple those of the master. Because it
is customary for the sons of Adam to claim authority
and to scatter their examples in the light. For all men,
according to Aristotle in the fourth book of the Ethies,.
love their own deeds, as parents love their children, poets:
their measures, and so with the others. And for this
reason many have used too much freedom in writing,
and have not hesitated even to insinuate to depraved’


ROGER BACON 15


and bestial men the thought, Why do you not fill up
pages of paper? Amd why do you not write on the
back of the sheet? These men are like a lame and
purblind shepherd with many sheep which they are
neither able nor know how to recall from wandering
in the byways of falsity to the healthier pasturage of
wisdom, and they are like birds who wish to fly without
wings, presuming to the master’s place before they are
proficient in the grade of good disciple. They fall
necessarily into so many errors that idlers comparing
themselves to them [these bad workers] deem themselves
happy, as, when many run a race, he whom hopelessness
will not permit to run notwithstanding that the prize
seems precious to him, nevertheless counts himself
happy in comparison to him who while racing falls into
an unseen pit. And for that reason we see with en-
lightened faith that for one example of truth, in knowl-
edge as in life, there are more than a thousand examples
of falsity. The world indeed is full of examples of this
sort, and one example of true perfection easily finds
ten thousand imperfect. Nature, in fact, has formed
for us in numbers the fitting illustration of perfection
and imperfection. For a number is said to be perfect?*
the sum of whose divisors, added, equal the number
itself, and there is only one such number beneath ten,
namely six, and one between 10 and 100, namely 28,
and one between 100 and 1000, namely 496, and one
between 1,000 and 10,000, namely 8,128, and so on;
and would that it were thus with men and that this
was accorded to the human race! But this never was
the case, neither in life nor in knowledge, nor will it
ever be, even to the final destruction of sin, since not
only is there the scarcity of those who are perfect in

uf 291 is a prime number, then (2"—1) (2"—*) is a
perfect number, as 6, 28, 496, 8,128, etc.


16 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


all virtue and knowledge, but of those who have arrived
at the perfection of one virtue or knowledge. The first
are and will be and have always been very rare. For
they are the truly perfect, but of 10,000 men not one
is found so perfect in either condition of life or pro- |
fession of wisdom; would that there were of the second
class of perfect men one in the first ten and so on, that
the perfection of numbers might be preserved in men!
But it is not thus, indeed it is found to be far other-
wise. In the same way with respect to custom we prove
by experience in our acts what has now been stated in
examples of individuals. Let any one go over his life
from his infancy, and he will find that in a great many
of his acts he very easily transformed evils and false-
nesses into custom. For in goods and in truths identity
is mother of satiety for human frailty, and unfortunate
man is delighted in the variety of useful things, ac-
cording to the opinion of the authorities whom I brought
forward in the beginning. But the contrary is true in
the case of evils and falsenesses and things harmful to
himself and others, for in most actions, except where
special grace and divine privilege intervene in some
perfect men, human corruption preserves carefully the
things which are contrary to truth and salvation; nor
is it affected with weariness in the continuance of sin,
nor does it easily find loathing in things that are vain.
But if one be devoted from youth to the truth of life
and of knowledge, such an one retains imperfection in
a great many of his actions and he is pleased in im-
perfection; perfection indeed saddens him more fre-
quently, for it delights extremely few and most of all
in the plenitude of virtues and science, and so it happens.
that youth seldom guards against error, and old age
with the greatest difficulty ascends to perfection in any
thing. Of the crowd moreover the judgment is the


ROGER BACON 17


same. For the multitude of the human race has always
erred in the truth of God, and only the small group of
ebristians has received it; and we know that the great
mass of christians is imperfect, for the paucity of the
saints shows that. Similarly in the case of philosophical
doctrine, for the crowd has always lacked the wisdom
of philosophy. The slight number of> philosophers, in
fact, declares that. And the ordinary run of those who
philosophize has always remained imperfect. For of
famous philosophers only Aristotle, together with his
followers, has been called philosopher in the judgment
of all wise men, since he ordered all the parts of phi-
losophy so far as it was possible in his times, but still
he did not come to the limit of wisdom, as will be made
sufficiently manifest below. .. .


Tue Seconp Part


or Tuts Demonstration!”


THE AFFINITY OF PHILOSOPHY WITH
THEOLOGY


CuaprTer I.


Having banished to infernal regions, then, the four
general causes of all human ignorance and having re-
moved them completely from this demonstration, I want
in this second distinction to show that one wisdom is
perfect and that it is contained in sacred letters; all
truth has grown from the roots of this wisdom. I say,
then, that either there is one science the mistress of
the others, namely theology (to which the rest are en-
tirely necessary; and without the others it can not attain
to its effect; their excellence it claims as its right; the

®O. c., vol. I, pp. 33-44, and yol. III, pp. 36-53.


18 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


rest of the sciences obey its nod and authority), or bet-
ter, there is only one perfect wisdom which is contained
wholly in the sacred Scriptures, to be explained by
canon law and philosophy. Indeed, the exposition of
the divine truth is had through these sciences. For,
although it is spread out by sciences as if in the palm
of the hand, yet of itself it brings all wisdom together
in the grasp of the fist, for all wisdom was given by one
God and to one world and for one end. Wherefore this
wisdom divides unity by its triple comparison. The
way of salvation is one, although there may be many
steps; but wisdom is the way to salvation. Indeed,
every consideration of man which is not of salvation is —
full of blindness and leads to the final gloom of hell;
for which reason many wise men, famous in this world,
have been damned, because they did not have the true
wisdom but an apparent and false one, whence holding
themselves wise they were made fools according to the
Scri>'ure. Augustine speaking of the sacred Scripture
says in the second book on Christian Doctrine, If there
is iruth elsewhere, it is found here; if there is evil, it is
condemned here. And he wishes the christian, whereso-
ever he may have found the truth, to understand it to,
be of his Lord, as was said in the beginning. The truth —
of Jesus Christ is the wisdom of the sacred Scriptures.
Therefore there is no truth elsewhere except the truth
contained in that knowledge. Ambrose on the Epistle
to the Colossians says, All reason of celestial knowledge
and of terrestrial creature is in him who is the head and
author, so that he who knows him should seek nothing
beyond, because he is perfect virtue and wisdom. What-
ever is sought elsewhere, is found here perfectly. Since,
therefore, the sacred Scriptures give us this wisdom,
which is of Christ, it is manifest that all truth is in-
cluded here. But if wisdom is so called elsewhere and


ROGER BACON 19


if it is contrary to this, it will: be erroneous, nor will
it have anything save the name of wisdom; or if it is not
said to be contrary, it is nevertheless diverse. But
diversity, although it does not induce contrariety else-
where, does here, as is evident from evangelical author-
ity, He who is not with me, is against me. So it is true
of this wisdom that what is not bound to it, is proved
tu be against it, and therefore to be avoided by the
christian.


Cuaprer II.


This moreover appears more clearly to one consider-
ing the division of the sciences. For if we attempt to
separate the sciences one from the other we can not
say that theology is not both the science of canon law
and philosophy. For under one division of philosophy,
namely moral science, which Aristotle called civil, is con-
tained civil law, as will be noted below. Canon law,
moreover, is named from the canonical Scriptures, not
from others, as the name itself reveals. The books of
the Old Testament are referred to as these canonical
books, as is done many times in the ninth distinction
of the first part of the Decreta and elsewhere. Or else
eanon law is called canonical, from that same word,
namely canon; for canon in greek is translated by
regula in latin, and canon law as well as divine law
is acknowledged to transmit the mode of living accord-
ing to rule. But canon law is founded wholly on the
authority of Scripture and on its expositors, as is clearly
evident throughout the whole body of the Decretum and
the Decretals: for either the authorities of the exposi-
tors of sacred Scriptures, such as Augustine, Jerome,
Gregory, Ambrose, Isidore, Cyprian, Hilary and others
are cited in support of the ordinances of the canons, or


*


20 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the holy and supreme pontiffs bring forward authorities
and examples of the New and Old Testaments in sup-
port of their decrees; and therefore this law is only
the explication of the will of God in the Scriptures.
Again, canon law is called ecclesiastical law, by which
the church of God is ruled in spiritual matters, as well
in its head as in its members. But Scripture gives ut-
terance to nothing other than this guidance of the
Church. Furthermore, the natural law is contained in
the sacred Scripture, as is taught in the beginning of
the Decretum; but whatever has been accepted in cus-
toms or comprehended in writings, if it should be con-
trary to natural law, must be held to be vain and invalid,
as is stated in the first part, eighth section. Canon laws
can not be different from divine law; indeed, they must
be derived from the fountains of divine law; and com-
mon law is either divine or human. It is divine if it was
proclaimed to the world by the understanding and spirit
of God in his Scripture; human if it was devised by
the understanding of man. But it is clear that the
church is ruled by the divine understanding and spirit
and therefore by the divine law which is included in the
sacred writings, and it is certain that the church is
ruled by canon law. Wherefore this law is divine and
must be drawn from the treasury of the sacred Scrip-
tures. And this is manifest to one considering the divi-
sions of canon law. For it orders the degrees of
ecclesiastical offices, or it determines the sacraments of
God, or it discusses the questions of conscience, or it
decides ecclesiastical cases. But the roots of all these
matters and the upright trunk itself are to be found in
the sacred Scriptures; the branches moreover are in
the expositors of the Scriptures; but the leaves. flowers,
and salvation-bringing fruit are to be found in the body
of the canon. For the delightful embellishment of ca-


/


ROGER BACON 21


_nonic discourse is likened to leaves according to the
Scriptures, but the utility of flowers and fruit compre-
hends in its own metaphor the four above-stated parts.
And therefore the canons are only the golden shoots
of corn, and the sprigs, and the ripeness of grapes by
virtue of their presentation of the Scripture. Since,
therefore, things are so, canon law is contained in one
body under the authority of the Scripture, as the body
of a single tree is composed of roots and trunk, branches,
flowers, and fruits.


Cuapter III.


It must be shown, however, both in general and in
particular that the power of philosophy is not foreign
to the wisdom of God, but is included in it. After this
has been shown by authorities and examples and com-
mon reasons, it will then be explained more fully by
taking up the four or-five parts of philosophy within
the range of each of the sciences and arts. For if
christians ought to seize from the philosophers as from
unlawful possessors the useful things which are con-
tained in their books, as. I showed in the beginning by
the opinion of Augustine, it is obvious that philosophy
is wholly worthy of and proper to sacred truth. Augus-
tine says again in the same book [namely in the eighth
book on Christian Doctrine] that the philosophers did
‘not themselves originate the gold and silver of phi-
losophers, but that it was drawn, as it were, from certain
metals of divine providence which are spread out every-
where; which he shows to have been prefigured, saying,


As the egyptians had vessels and ornaments
of gold and silver and clothing which that peo-
ple departing from Egypt appropriated to it-


22 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


self as to a better use, so the doctrines of the
gentiles contain liberal disciplines better suited
to the use of truth and contain more useful
moral precepts; and some points are found in
these philosophers concerning even the worship
of God himself; which gold, as it were, and
silver of theirs, the christian should take from
them for good use in preaching the gospel.


And he explains this in all things subject to human
treatment, which are moral, or historical, or artificial,
or natural, or logical and grammatical. For as regards
morals he says, The clothing likewise of those men
(that is certain institutions of men), if accommodated
to human society which we can not dispense with in
this life, properly have to be converted to christian use.
He says of the historical,


The history of the gentiles helps us greatly in
the understanding of the sacred books. For
many things are sought by us, and frequently,
by means both of the Olympiads and the names
of the consuls; and ignorance of the consulship
under which our Lord suffered causes many to
err in thinking that our Lord suffered in the
forty-sixth year of his life, because it was said
by the jews that the temple was built in that
number of years and because it was symbol-
ically representative of the Lord’s body.


And this is manifest in almost innumerable places in
the New and Old Testament. Moreover, of other human
considerations, as well of the arts as of nature he says,
Of the other arts, however, by which something is manu-
factured or remains after the operation, as for example,
a house, bench, vessel, and other objects of this sort, or


ROGER BACON 23


medicine, or agriculture, and navigation, or of those arts
whose only effect is the action, as of jumping, running,
_ wrestling: knowledge of these must be used in judgment
lest we be wholly ignorant of what the Scripture
would teach when it uses some figures from these arts,
and we may take the natural sciences broadly that
medical matters may be included under them and what
belongs to agriculture. For these latter sciences are
based on natural things and are two of the eight princi-
pal natural sciences, as will be explained below. But
in general he says of all the natural sciences, That
man would indeed perform a worthy task for the sacred
Scripture who would bring together the characteristics
of times and of places, of stones and other inanimate
things, of plants and animals. And in regard to the °
logical sciences he says, in the first book, that dis-
cipline of disputation is most valuable for all kinds of
questions which must be examined and solved in the
sacred writings. And elsewhere in the same book he
says that there is a difference in the case of logic from
that of the other sciences. For certain things which
are necessary and very important for theology, can be
found in these latter sciences, but I do not see, he
says, whether this can be done in the case of logic,
since it is to be found, like nerves, throughout the whole
text of the Scriptures. And in the third book, on the
order of discipline, he says that no one should approach
the sacred science without knowledge of the power of
logic. Almost all of the second, third, and fourth books
exhort us concerning the application of grammatical
sciences to sacred things. And Jerome in his com-
mentary on the Epistle to Titus, speaking of the utility
of grammatical science in respect to theology, which
is beyond that of many other sciences, says, The doc-
. trine of the grammarians can benefit life provided it be


24 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


applied to better uses, concerning which many and im-
portant things must be said in what follows. But of
mathematics Cassiodorus says in his book on that
science,


When we turn over these four sciences, geome-
try, arithmetic, astronomy, music, with a care-
ful mind, they whet perception, they cleanse
away the filth of ignorance, and they lead, God
granting, to that speculative contemplation;
the holy fathers rightly urge that these four
be read, since by them the appetite is in large
part withdrawn from carnal things, and they
make us desire that which we can contemplate
with heart alone, the understanding aiding.


. But these things will be shown abundantly in their
proper place. And if such is the.case in these sciences,
much more forcefully are the metaphysical sciences in
accord with divine utterances. For metaphysics oc-
cupies the place of one part of theology for philoso-
phers, and it is called by them, together with moral]
philosophy, the divine science and physical theology, as
is clear from the first and eleventh books of the Meta-
physics of Aristotle and from the ninth and tenth books
of the Metaphysics of Avicenna. For metaphysics takes
up many things concerning God and the angels and
divine subjects of this sort, and thus it is clear that
the sacred Scripture claims the power of all wisdom.
But not only does Augustine teach the above doctrines
but he brings to mind that many saints have done this
when he asks, Do we not see with how much gold Cy-
prian, most delectable doctor and most blessed martyr,
went enriched out of Egypt, and Lactantius and Vic-
torinus, Optatus, Hilary (to say nothing of those still
living) and innumerable greeks, as indeed Moses him-


ROGER BACON 25


self, the most faithful servant of God had done before,
of whom it was written that he was learned in all the
wisdom of the egyptians?


Cuapter IV.


Not only the blessed Augustine but also other saints
assert the same thing, and they show likewise that it
was expressed figuratively, and they testify that the
saints acted accordingly. For I think that Jerome
should be called to be our great spokesman in the pres-
ent instance, for he says,


But do you ask the reason that we sometimes
place in our works examples drawn from secu-
lar literature and pollute the purity of the
Church with the filth of the pagans? You are
easily answered. You would never ask this if
Cicero did not possess you wholly; you would
never ask it if you read the sacred Scriptures,
or if you pondered the commentators on them,
with the exception of Vulcatius. For who
does not know that in Moses and in the books
of the prophets certain things are taken over
from the books of the gentiles, and that Solo-
mon proposed some questions to the philoso-
phers of Tyre and answered some? Wherefore
he admonishes us at the beginning of the Prov-
erbs to understand the discourses of wisdom
and the subtleties of words, parables and ob-
scure speech, the sayings of wise men, and
the enigmas which belong properly to dialec-
ticians and philosophers. But even the Apostle
Paul used a verse of the poet Epimenides when
he wrote to Titus. Cretans are always liars, evil


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


beasts, idle bellies.1® In another letter likewise
he sets down the verse of Menander, Evil
companionships corrupt good morals.’ More-
over, disputing before the Athenians on the
hill of Mars, he calls Aratus to witness, For
we too are his offspring;'® which is the close
in greek of an heroic verse. And lest that
should be too little, the leader of the christian
army, and invincible orator advancing the cause
for Christ, turns even a chance inscription
artfully into an argument of the faith. He
had, indeed, learned from the true David to
wrench the sword from the hands of the foe
and to cut off the head of the very haughty
Goliath with his own sword. He had read
moreover in Deuteronomy a precept given in
the speech of the Lord, that the head of the
woman captive must be shaved, the eyebrows,
all the hair and nails of her body must be cut
off, and thus must she be taken in marriage.
Why then is it strange if I too wish to make
secular wisdom, because of its charm of speech
and beauty of words, an israelite, from a hand-
maiden and slave? And if I cut and shave off
whatever there is dead in her of idolatry,
pleasure, error, lusts, and if united to her most
pure body I beget of her servants to the Lord
of Sabaoth, my labor is profitable in the house-
hold of Christ. Julian Augustus vomited forth
on his parthian expedition seven books against
Christ; if I shall attempt to write against him,


' am I to think that you will forbid me to beat


* Epistle of Paul to Titus 1:11.
“ T Corinthians 15:33.
1% Acts 17:28.


ROGER BACON 27


back the mad dog with the doctrines of the
philosophers and of the stoics, that is to say,
with the club of Hercules?


And he [ Jerome] brings to the proof of this the prophets
themselves and all the famous doctors from the be-
ginning of the Church who by the doctrines of the
philosophers have urged on the princes and unbelievers
the faith of Christ and have strengthened the faith
in many ways. And Bede, in his commentary on the
book of Kings, says that it is proper for christians to
take over to divine science as their own whatever is
useful in the liberal sciences. Otherwise Moses and
Daniel would not have suffered themselves to be in-
structed in the wisdom and letters of the egyptians
and the chaldeans. Again he says in his book on the
building of the temple that Solomon with his servants
symbolize Christ, and Hiram with his servants sym-
bolize the philosophers and wise men of the gentiles,
so that the temple of God, that is the Church, was con-
structed not only by the apostolic wisdom but by the
wisdom of the philosophers. And the Scripture says,
The servants of Hiram were more skillful in hewing
wood than the servants of Solomon. Because, as Bede
says in reference to this, the gentiles, when they had
been converted from error and transformed to the truth
of the Gospels, knew the errors of the gentiles better,
and the more certainly they knew them, the more skill-
fully they learned to refute and dislodge them. Paul
knew the Gospel, which he had learned by revelation,
better; but Dionysius was better able to refute the false
dogmas of Athens, the arguments of which, as well as
similar errors, he had known from boyhood; and
therefore Solomon says, For you know that there is
no man in my people who knows how to hew wood like


28 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the sidonians. These and many statements of this sort —
the Venerable Bede recounts and many other writers
too, but let these suffice now.


Cuapter V.


The causes can be given why the saints state thus the
point which we seek, and why they declare that it was
prefigured, and why they announce that it was seized
upon in effect by the saints. First, because the truth,
wheresoever it be found, is judged to be of Christ, ac-
cording to the opinions and authorities of Augustine
mentioned above. In the second place, although the
truth of philosophy is said in one manner to belong to
philosophers, nevertheless that they might have this
[the philosophic] truth, the divine light first poured
into their minds and illumined them with additional
light. For it lighteth every man that cometh into this
world, as the Scripture says; with which opinions the
philosophers themselves agree. For they maintain that
there is an active and possible intellect. The human
soul is called possible by them, because of itself it is
in potentiality with respect to the sciences and virtues,
and receives them from another source. That which
flows into our minds, illuminating them to knowledge
and virtue, is called the active intellect, because although
the possible intellect may be called active from the act
of understanding, still if the active intellect be taken
as they take it, it is the intellect which flows upon and
illumines the possible intellect to knowledge of truth
that is called the active intellect. And thus the active
intellect, according to the ancient philosophers, is not
a part of the soul, but is an intellective substance other
than and separated in essence from the possible in-


ROGER BACON 29


tellect. And since this point is necessary to the demon-
stration of my proposition, which is that philosophy
exists through the influence of divine illumination, I
wish to prove it conclusively; particularly since a great
error has taken possession of the general run of philoso-
phers in this matter, and likewise of the great mass of
theologians, since what a man is in philosophy, that he
is proved to be in theology. Alfarabi in fact says in
his book on the Understanding and the Understood that
the active intellect, which Aristotle spoke of in his third
treatise on the soul, is not matter, but is a separated
substance. And Avicenna teaches the same doctrine in
the fifth book on the Soul and the ninth of the Meta-
physics. Likewise the Philosopher himself says that.
the active intellect is separate from the possible, and
unmixed. Again he holds that the active intellect is
incorruptible with respect to being and substance, since
he says that it differs from the possible in the posses-
sion of incorruption; but the possible is incorruptible
with respect to substance and corruptible with respect
to being, because of its separation. Therefore the active
intellect will be incorruptible with respect to being and
substance; wherefore it will not be part of the soul,
since then it would be corrupted in respect to its being
in body, when it was separated from the body; and
he says that it is related to the possible as the artisan
‘to his material and as the light of the sun to colors.
The artisan, however, is outside the material in which he
works and is separated from it in essence; in the same
way the light of the sun expelling shadows from colors
and other things, is separated from them in essence and
comes from without. He says also that the active in~
_tellect knows all things, and is always in actuality,
“which is true neither of the rational soul nor of the


30 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


angel, but of God alone. Again if it were part of the
soul, the soul would then know the same thing through
something active [agens] and be ignorant of it through
something possible because the active is in actuality
what the possible is in potentiality, as Aristotle main-
tains. Again a thing should be denominated rather
from its more worthy part, therefore the soul should
be spoken of rather as knowing by the active intellect
than as ignoring by the possible intellect before dis-
covery and learning. If it be said that the active in-
tellect, although it is part of the soul, is still not the
actuality and form of the body as the possible intellect
is, and that therefore man has the functions of the possi-
ble and not of the active intellect, this is contrary to
the definition of the soul, in which it is stated that the
soul is the actuality of the physical body. For if one
part of the soul only is actuality because it is the form
of the body, then it is wrongly made to differ from the
whole soul both absolutely and simply through the ac-
tuality of the body, and therefore that part which is
the actuality of the body should then be excluded, as
Aristotle himself (when, in the beginning of the second
book, he states that some parts of the soul are not only
the actuality of the whole body, but of its parts, such
as the sensitive and vegetative parts of the soul) ex-
cludes the intellect which he says is not the actuality and
perfection of a part of the body, because it is not at-
tached to an organ like the other parts of the soul.
Again, to state this more expressly, Aristotle says that
the intellect is in the body as a sailor is in a ship, since
it is not bound to any part any more than the sailor is
bound to the ship, although it is the actuality and per-
fection of the whole. The sailor however is not the
perfection of the ship but only the mover. Moreover,


ROGER BACON 31


the soul would then be composed of a separated sub-
stance and of a conjunct substance; but this is impossi-
ble. For the Intelligence or angel and the soul differ
in species as unible or not unible, and therefore the
soul is not composed of something which is the ac-
tuality of the body and of something which is not. For
one species is not composed of something of another
opposite species. Since therefore the opinion stated here
is in agreement with truth, and since the text of the
Philosopher indicates it clearly, and since his greatest
expositors state it in this form, and since these words
active and possible have been taken from the Philoso-
pher, not from the saints, it is far better, in accordance
with the opinion of the Philosopher, to speak of the
active intellect as a substance separated from the soul
in essence. No one learned in philosophy, to be sure,
is doubtful that this is his opinion; and in this, all the
wise and learned men of the past are in agreement.
For I twice saw and heard, at convocations of the Uni-
versity of Paris, the venerable priest, Master William,
bishop of Paris, of blessed memory, declare in the
presence of all, that the active intellect can not be part
of the soul; and Master Robert, bishop of Lincoln,
and brother Adam of the Marsh and elders of this sort
supported this same opinion. How possible objections
to this may be refuted will be made clear in the princi-
pal work, when natural questions are taken up. But lest
some caviller arise on the side, alleging the doctrine
by which the mass is deceived, I reply that although
the following words are attributed to Aristotle, But
since in every nature there is something which acts and
something else which suffers, so it is in the soul,!® this
has been translated falsely many times and even more

1 De An. III, c. 5, 4802 10-15. .


32 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


often obscurely. For although it is said in the third
book on the Heavens and the World that the circle and
the orbicular figure fill space, the statement is false,
as those expert in the natural and geometrical sciences
know, as Averroes demonstrates in the same place. And
the statement made in the third book of the Meteor-
ologics that the rainbow of the moon occurs only twice
in fifty years, is false too. For experience teaches that
whenever the moon is full, and there is rain, and the
moon is not covered with clouds, the rainbow appears.
And so many other things have been translated falsely,
the cause of which will appear in the third part of this
work when the question of faults of translators will be
taken up; but a great many more passages have been
translated obscurely and unintelligibly, so that any one
of them might contradict some other. And in this place
both faults occur or at least the ‘second one, which I
shall prove by Aristotle himself. For he says in the
second book of the Physics, that matter does not coexist
with the other causes in any single thing [i.e. a thing
which is the same in number]: therefore in no nature
are there at the same time active cause and matter;
therefore not in the soul. If, therefore, the badly trans-
lated text be held to the letter, then it is wholly false
and contrary to Aristotle elsewhere, and so great an
author does not contradict himself. And however that
may be, his statement in the second book of the Physics
is true and conceded by all; therefore his statement
in the third book on the Soul is falsely translated or
is in need of exposition. For he intends nothing other
than that two things, to wit, agent and matter, are
required in the soul and in the operation of the soul,
as in all nature. That is, in every operation of nature
two things are needed, namely, an ‘efficient cause and


ROGER BACON 33


matter, and this is true, but the agent is always dif-
ferent than matter and outside it as regards substance,
although it operates in it. Moreover, we can relieve
this passage in still another way. For Aristotle in the
fourth book of the Physics says that there are eight
modes of being in anything, one of which is as the mover
is in the moved, because the moving principle or the
agent is in the matter moved with respect to its power,
although not with respect to substance. And thus the
agent is in every nature in which it operates and so it
is in the soul. And thus in no manner does it follow
that the active intellect is part of the soul as the run
of people imagines; and this opinion is completely in
accordance with the faith and confirmed by the saints,
for all theologians know that Augustine says in the
Soliloquies and elsewhere that the rational soul is sub-
ject to God alone in illuminations and in all important
influences. And, although the angels may purify our
minds and illumine them and stir them in many ways,
and although they may be to our souls as stars are to
the corporeal eye, nevertheless Augustine ascribes to
God the principal influence, just as the flow of light
falling through the window is ascribed to the sun, and”
the angel is compared to one opening a window, accord-
ing to Augustine in his gloss on the Psalm, Give me
understanding.*° And what is more he holds in many
places that we know no truth except in the uncreated
truth and in the eternal laws, and this must be under-
stood to mean at least effectively and by influence, al-
though Augustine not only maintains this but intimates
something else in his words, for which reason some
have believed that he is thinking here of greater things,
as is commonly known. All these things are evidence
~ © Psalms 119:34, 73, 125, 144, 169.


34 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


that the active principle illuminating and influencing
the possible intellect is a separated substance, that is,
God himself. Since, therefore, God has illumined the
souls of those men in perceiving the truths of philoso-
phy, it is manifest that their labor is not unrelated to
divine wisdom.


Cuapter VI.


The third cause by which the wisdom of philosophy is
reduced to divine wisdom, is not only that God en-
lightened their minds to acquire a knowledge of wisdom,
but that they had. wisdom from him and he has revealed,
presented, and given it to them. For all wisdom is from
the Lord God, as the authority of the Scripture holds,
because, as the apostle says, That which is known of
God is manifest in them, for God manifested it unto
them.24, And Augustine says in the commentary on
John, that God is warrant to them for wisdom, and
the greatest philosopher, Aristotle, in the Book of
Secrets, asserts that all philosophy was manifestly given
and revealed by God; and one of the greatest of philos-
‘ophers, namely Cicero, asks in the first book of the
Tusculan questions, What is philosophy except, as Plato
says, a gift and, as I believe, a discovery of God?
Whence he says also that even the poet does not pour
forth a grave and full song without some heavenly in-
stinct of mind. And Augustine in the eighth book of
the City of God teaches and approves of what Socrates,
the father of great philosophers, affirmed, that man can
not know the causes of things except in the divine light
and by the divine gift; and any one can prove for him-


self that nothing which is of the power of philosophy
** Romans 1:19.


ROGER BACON | 35


is discovered by man first. And I set down a very minor
example: that although Porphyry’s universals are ex-
plained almost sufficiently by him and are expounded
elsewhere sufficiently in’ logic, and metaphysics, and
natural philosophy, and perspective, nevertheless there
is not a man so well prepared that it is not essential
that he have teachers of many sorts, and that he listen
and study for a long time before he knows the whole
truth about universals. And almost no one learns suf-
ficiently about them before death howsoever many doc-
tors he have, which is evident by the discord of all in
this subject, since some hold that universals are only
in the soul, others only outside, others that they are
in things with respect to being, but that in their status
as universal they are in the soul. Avicenna shows in
his commentary on Porphyry that Porphyry lacked the
sixth universal [i.e. a sixth predicable] and that he made
many false statements. If therefore every man is ig-
norant of these things, even though he study throughout
his whole life in the books of the philosophers, and
though he have illustrious teachers, he will much the
more be ignorant of them and never discover the truth
about them for himself without books and _ teachers.
Wherefore it is necessary that the truth of philosophers
was revealed to man from the beginning. If moreover
any one, knowing howsoever much concerning universals,
had delivered the book of Porphyry to oblivion as well
as all things that are necessary for knowing universals,
and if he were not able to have either books or teachers,
it would be impossible for him ever to explain the truth
of universals. I speak of universals with respect to
their true being, as a metaphysician must consider them,
not merely with respect to the childish doctrine of
Porphyry and the considerations of logic. Wherefore


36 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


any one can judge for himself that revelation is neces-
sary in this part; and since these are childish and very
slight matters, it will be much more evident in the whole
wisdom of philosophy. But what is from God and
what was revealed, set forth, and given, must be wholly
in conformity with his wisdom.


Cuaprer VII.


For the rest, the whole aim of philosophy consists in
this, that through the knowledge of his creature, the
creator be known, who is served on account of the
reverence due his majesty and the benefits of creation
and conservation and future felicity, in honorific worship
and in beauty of morals and in honor of useful laws,
that men may live in peace and justice in this life.
For speculative philosophy rises to the knowledge of the
creator from his creatures, and moral philosophy sets
up the honor of morals, just laws, and the cult of God,
and is usefully and magnificently persuasive concerning
the future felicity so far as that is possible to philoso-
phy. These things are certain to any one who runs
through all the principal parts of philosophy, as that
which follows will show. Since, therefore, these are all
absolutely necessary to christians and are wholly con-
sonant with the wisdom of God, it is manifest that


philosophy is necessary to the divine law and to the
faithful who glory in it.


Cuaptrer VIII.
Again, all the saints and all the ancient wise men in


their expositions take a literal sense from the natures
of things and from their properties, that they may


ROGER BACON 37


bring forth spiritual senses by appropriate adaptations
and likenesses. Augustine declares this in the second
book on Christian Doctrine, adducing an example from
the word of the Lord speaking to his Apostles, Be ye
wise as serpents and harmless as doves.??_ For the Lord
intended by this, that the apostles and the apostolic
men, like the serpent exposing its whole body in defense
of its head, give themselves and theirs for Christ, who
is their head, and for his faith. And for this reason
every creature is placed in the Scripture either in itself
or in its like, either in universal or in particular, from
the heights of the heavens to their very ends, for, as
God made creatures and Scripture, so he wished to place
in the Scripture the things themselves ‘which he had
made for the understanding of its literal as well as its
spiritual sense. But the whole intention of philosophy
is only to work out the natures and properties of things.
Wherefore the power of all philosophy is contained in
the sacred writings; and this is especially apparent in
that the Scripture deals with creatures far more surely
and far better and more truly than philosophic labor
is able to work out. This may be shown, out of infinite
examples, for the present in the rainbow. The Philoso-
pher Aristotle disturbs us with his obscurities, nor are
we able to understand through him anything that is
proper; nor is that surprising since Avicenna, his chief
imitator, the prince and leader of philosophy after
him, confesses (as the Commentator says in connection
with Aristotle's chapter on the rainbow in the third
book of the Meteors) that he does not understand the
_ nature of the rainbow very well. The cause of this is
that the philosophers did not know the final cause of
_ the rainbow; and having ignored the end, they do not
2 Matthew 10:16.


38 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


know the things which lead to the end, because the end
imposes a necessity on those things which are ordered
to the end, as Aristotle holds in the second book of the
Physics. But the final cause of the rainbow is the dis-
sipation of aqueous vapor, as is manifest in the book
of Genesis, whence in the apparition of the rainbow
there is always a resolution of clouds into an infinity
of drops. And the aqueous vapors are consumed in
the air and in the sea and in the land, for one part of
the rainbow falls into the spheres of water and earth.
Moreover, the consumption of the aqueous vapor can not
be through the rainbow except as the rays of the sun
accomplish it, for by various reflections and refractions
an infinity of rays are congregated, and the congregation
of rays is the cause of the resolution and consumption
of the waters, and for that reason the rainbow is gen-
erated by multiple reflections. For the rays can not be
congregated except by fraction and reflection, as will be
shown later in its proper place. From the Scripture,
then, when it is said in Genesis, I shall set my bow in
the clouds of heaven, that there may no more be a del-
uge over the earth,” the final cause of the rainbow itself
is given, from which can be investigated the efficient
cause and the mode of generating the rainbow. This
mode was not known sufficiently to philosophers, as their —
books make manifest to us. And so it is with every
creature. In fact, it is impossible for man to know
the ultimate truth of the creature as it is employed in
the Scripture, unless he shall have been especially il-
luminated by God. For creatures are employed there
to bring forth the truths of grace and of glory, con-
cerning which philosophers were ignorant, and there-_


fore they did not attain to the most exalted power of
* Genesis 9:13-15.


ROGER BACON 39


the wisdom of creatures, such as the sacred Scripture
contains in its bowels. Whence all the excellence of
philosophy reposes in the literal sense ornamented with
the sacred mysteries of grace and of glory, as if
wreathed in a manner of paintings and of most noble
colors. .


[Tue Turrp Part,
THE KNOWLEDGE OF LANGUAGES—


takes up the study of grammar which is the first of the
five divisions of philosophy. The study of grammar, not
only of latin but of the languages from which latin is
derived, is important for eight reasons which Bacon
discusses in detail—

1. The quality of one lariguage can never be repro-
duced perfectly in translation in another.

2. Latin lacks many of the necessary words for things
described by foreign authors.

3. The translator must be perfectly acquainted not
only with his subject but with the two languages with
which he deals.

4. There are vast omissions, as well as confused and
corrupt passages, in the texts now possessed.

5. Allusions to foreign languages in writings of an-
tiquity are not otherwise to be understood.

6. The latin text of the Scriptures is extremely cor-
rupt and is becoming more so.

7. When the text is correct there is often obscurity
in its interpretation.

8. Confusion arises from the circumstances that latin
grammar is formed on the model of greek and hebrew
grammar. |


40 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Tue Fourtn Part


Or Turis DemonstraTION”4


THE UTILITY OF MATHEMATICS


In which the power of mathematics in the sciences and
in things and in the occupations of this world is shown.


First DistiIncTion


The utility of mathematics in the physical arts and sci-
ences; having three chapters.


Cuarprter I.


Now that it has been shown that many very famous
roots of wisdom are dependent on the power of lan-
guages and that through them there is entry into the
wisdom of the latins, I wish to examine the foundations
of that same wisdom as found in the great sciences in
which there is special power with respect to other
sciences and the things of this world. There are four
great sciences, without which the other sciences can not
be known nor a knowledge of things be had: if they
are known, any one can advance in power of wisdom
gloriously, without difficulty and labor, not only in hu-
man sciences but in divine. And the virtue of each one
of them will be touched on, not only because of wisdom
absolutely, but in respect to the other sciences men- ~
tioned above. The door and key of these sciences is
mathematics, which the saints discovered at the begin-
ning of the world as I shall show, and which has always


*Q. c., vol. I, pp. 97-111, and vol. III, p. 129.


ROGER BACON 41


been in the use of all the saints and wise men before
all the other sciences. The neglect of it now for thirty
or forty years has wiped out all learning among the
latins. Since he who ignores it can not know the other
sciences nor the things of this world, as I shall prove.
And what is worse, men who are ignorant of it do not
perceive their own ignorance, and therefore seek no
remedy for it. And on the contrary, knowledge of this
science prepares the mind and elevates it to a certified
knowledge of all things, so that if one learns the roots
of wisdom given in relation to it, and if one applies
those roots rightly to the notions of the other sciences
and of things, then one will be able to know all things
which follow without error and without doubt and easily
and powerfully. Without these roots of wisdom, on the
other hand, neither the precedents nor the consequences
ean be known; whence they perfect and regulate things
prior, as the end perfects and regulates the things which
are related to the end, and they dispose and open the
way to things that follow. To this I plan now to refer
by authority and reason; and first in respect to human
sciences and the things of this world, then in respect
to divine science, and finally as they are related to the
Church and the other three sciences.


Cuaprer II.


In which it is proved by authority that every science re-
quires mathematics.


As regards authority I proceed thus. Boethius says

in the second prologue to the Arithmetic that, If the
inquirer lacks the four parts of mathematics, he can in
“no wise discover truth. And again, Without this specula-


42 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


tion of truth no one is rightly trained. And even more
he says, Who spurns these paths of wisdom, I declare
to him he does not rightly philosophize. And once again,
It is known that whosoever has neglected these, has lost
the doctrine of all wisdom. He likewise confirms this
by the opinion of all men of importance, saying, Among
all the men of early authority, who have flourished, with
Pythagoras as leader, in the purer reason of the mind,
it is held to be manifest that almost no one comes to
the height of perfection in the disciplines of philosophy
except only him to whom such nobility of knowledge is
discovered by something like the quadrivium. And this
is shown in particular by Ptolemy and by Boethius him-
self. Since, in fact, there are three essential modes of
philosophy, as Aristotle says in the sixth book of the
Metaphysics, mathematical, natural, and divine, the
mathematical is of no little value for the understanding
of the other two modes of knowledge, as Ptolemy teaches
in the first chapter of the Almagest and which he him-
self shows there. And since the divine science is two-
fold, as is evident from the first book of the Meta-
physics, namely, the first philosophy, which shows that
God is, whose high properties it investigates, and civil
science, which sets up the divine cult and expounds
many things concerning God to the extent of the possi-
bility of man, the same Ptolemy asserts and declares
that mathematics is of great value to both of these.
Whence Boethius at the end of the Arithmetic insists
that mathematical means are to be found in civil affairs.
He says, in fact, that


the arithmetical mean is to be compared to a
commonwealth which is ruled by a few, for this
reason, that its greater proportion is in its


ROGER BACON 43


lesser terms, and he says that the musical mean
is a commonwealth of aristocrats, in that the
greater proportionality is found in the
greater terms. The geometrical mean is in a
certain sense of the equalized democratic state:
for its people are compounded in equal pro-
portionality of all, whether in the lesser or in
the greater terms. For there is among all a
certain parity of mean conserving a propor-
tional right of equality.


And Aristotle and his expositors teach in several places
in morals that without proportional evaluations the
commonwealth can not be ruled. But these means will
be expounded when they are to be applied to the divine
truths. Since, moreover, all the essential modes of
philosophy, which make up more than forty sciences
distinct one from the other, are reduced to these three;
the authorities already cited are sufficient to be con-
vincing of the worth of mathematics in respect to the
essential modes of philosophy.

Further, the accidental modes of philosophy are gram-
mar and logic. And that these sciences can not be
known without mathematics is evident from Alfarabi in
the book on the Sciences. For although grammar sup-
plies to children that which pertains to speech and its
properties in prose and meter and rhythm, none the
less it does it childishly, and by the way of narration,
not by causes nor by reasons. For it is the function
of another science to give the causes for these things,
namely, of that science which has to consider fully the
nature of speech and that is music alone, of which the
species and parts are many. For one deals with prose,
and a second with meter, and a third is rhythmical,


44 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


and a fourth is lyrical in singing. And there are more
parts besides thesé. The prosaic part teaches the
causes of all the elevations of speech in prose, with
reference to differences of accents, and with reference
to colons and commas and periods»and others of this
sort. The metrical part teaches all the reasons and
causes of feet and meters. The rhythmical treats of
every modulation and pleasing proportion of rhythms,
because all these are certain kinds of song, although
they are not as in the ordinary song. For accentus is
spoken of as if accantus, derived from accino, accinis.
Whence they pertain to music as Cassiodorus teaches
in his Music, and Censorinus in his book on Accent, and
so too with the other topics. Moreover, authors of
music and books on that science testify to this. And
Alfarabi agrees with them in the book on the Division
of the Sciences. Therefore grammar depends causally
on music.

In the same way logic. For the end of logic is the
composition of arguments which move the practical in-
tellect to belief and to love of virtue and of future
felicity, as has been shown before; and these are treated
in the books of Aristotle on these arguments, as has —
been stated. But these arguments should have to do
with the end of beauty, that the mind of man may be
pulled to salubrious truths suddenly and without previ-
sion, as is taught in those books. And Alfarabi teaches —
this most of all in relation to poetic argument, the words
of which should be sublime and beautiful, and therefore ©
with prose and metric and unusual rhythmic adornments,
such as are suitable to the place and time and persons
and material with which the demonstration is con-
cerned. And thus Aristotle taught in his book on poetic
argument [i.e. the Poetics] which the translator Her-_


ROGER BACON 45


mann did not dare to turn into latin because of the
difficulty of the meters, which he did not understand,
as he himself says in the prologue to the commentary
of Averroes on that book. And, therefore, the end of
logic depends on music. But the end is the most noble
aspect in the thing, and it imposes necessity on what-
ever is related to the end, as Aristotle says in the
second book of the Physics; nor do things which are
ordered naturally to their end have their utility, except
when they are related to their end, as is evident in each
individual thing. And consequently the whole utility
of logic arises from the relation of all logical arguments
to arguments of this sort, and therefore since they de-
pend on musical arguments, it is necessary that logic
depend on the power of music. All these things are
according to the opinion of Alfarabi in the book on the
Sciences, and they are made clear similarly by Aristotle
and Averroes in their books, although the latins do not
have the use of them. But the knowledge of logic de-
pends on mathematics not only because of its end but
because of its middle and heart, which is the book of
the Posterior [ Analytics], for that book teaches the art
of demonstration. But the principles of demonstration
can not be learned nor the conclusions nor the demon-
stration as a whole, nor can they be shown except in
mathematical things, because there alone is demonstra-
tion true and forceful, as all know and as will be ex-
pounded later. Wherefore it is necessary that logic
depend on mathematics.

Likewise because of its beginning as well as because
of its middle and its end. For the book of the Cate-
gories is the first book of logic according to Aristotle.
But it is obvious that the category of quantity can not
be known without mathematics. For only mathematics


46 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


is constituted for the understanding of quantity. The
categories of when and where, moreover, are related to
quantity. For when pertains to time and where arises
from place. The category of condition [habitus] can
not be known without the category of where, as Averroes
teaches in the fifth book of the Metaphysics. The
greater part, moreover, of the category of quality con-
tains affections and properties of quantities, because all
things that are in the fourth class of quality are called
qualities in quantities. And all the affections of these
[ quantities] which are due absolutely to them are the
qualities from which the great part of geometry and
arithmetic is constituted, such as right and curved and
others which are due to line and triangulation and every
other figuration, which are assigned to surface and body;
and the prime and unfactorable in numbers, as Aristotle
teaches in the fifth book of the Metaphysics, and other
essential affections of numbers. Whatever, moreover, is
worthy of consideration in the category of relation is the
property of quantity, such as proportions and propor-
tionalities, and geometrical, arithmetical, and musical
means, and the kinds of greater and lesser inequality.
Spiritual substances, moreover, are not known by philos-
ophy except by means of corporeal substances and, most
of all, supercelestial substances, according to what Aris-
totle teaches in the eleventh book of the Metaphysics.
Inferior things are not known except through superior
things, because the celestial substances are the causes of
inferior substances. But the celestial substances are not
known except through quantity, as is evident from as-
tronomy. And thence all categories depend on a knowl-
edge of quantity, concerning which mathematics treats,
and therefore the whole excellence of logic depends on
mathematics.


ROGER BACON 47


Cuarprter III.


In which it is proved by reason that every science re-
quires mathematics.


Moreover, what has been shown by authority concern-
ing mathematics as a whole, can now be shown likewise
by reason. And in the first place because the other sci-
ences use mathematical examples; but examples are
given to clarify the things of which the sciences treat:
wherefore, if the examples are not understood, the things
for the understanding of which they were adduced are
not understood. Since, for example, alteration [i.e.
change of quality] is not found without augmentation
and diminution [i.e. change of quantity] in any natural
phenomena whatsoever, and since augmentation and di-
minution are not found without alteration, Aristotle
could not show by any natural example the difference
between augmentation and alteration in their purity, be-
‘cause they always accompanied each other in some way;
for which reason he gave the mathematical example of
the quadrilateral which, when a gnomon is added, in-
creases and is not altered. This example can not be
understood before the twenty-second proposition of the
sixth book of the Elements. For in that proposition of
the sixth book, it is proved that the smaller quadrilateral
is similar in every particular to the larger one. And
therefore the smaller is not altered, although the larger
is made of the lesser by the addition of the gnomon.

In the second place because the knowledge of mathe-
matical things is, as it were, innate in us. For when
Socrates questioned a little boy concerning geometry, as
Cicero mentions in the first of the Tusculan questions,
the boy replied as if he had learned geometry. And


|


48 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


this is often found to be the case in many instances,
which does not happen in other sciences, as will be more
manifest in what follows. Wherefore, since this knowl-
edge is as if innate, and as if preceding discovery and in-
struction, or at least requiring them less than other
sciences, it will be first among the sciences and will
precede the others, disposing us to them, since things
which are innate or almost innate dispose to what are
acquired.

In the third place because this science was found first
of all the parts of philosophy. For at the beginning of
the human race this was first found. Since it was known
before the flood and then later by the sons of Adam and
by Noah and his sons, as is evident from the prologue
to the Construction of the Astrolabe according to Ptol-
emy and from Albumazar in the larger Introduction to.
Astronomy, and from the first book of Antiquities; and
this is true as regards all the parts of mathematics, to
wit, geometry, arithmetic, music, astronomy. That, how-
ever, would not have been the case except that this sci-
ence is prior to the others and naturally precedes them.
Wherefore it is manifest that it should be known first
that we may be advanced by it to all the later sciences.

In the fourth place because the natural way for us is
from the easier to the more difficult. But this science is
the easiest. This is manifest in that mathematics is not
beyond the understanding pf any one. In fact, the lay
and the wholly illiterate know how to figure and compute
and to sing, and these are mathematical operations. But
one must begin first with things which are common to
lay and learned; and not only is it most hurtful to the
clergy, but absolutely disgraceful and abominable, that
they are ignorant of what the laity knows profitably and
beautifully. In the fifth place we see that the clergy,
even the most unlettered, are able to understand things


ROGER BACON 49


mathematical, even though they are not able to attain
to the other sciences. Besides, a man can learn more
about mathematics certainly and truly without error by
listening once or twice than he can by listening ten times
about other parts of philosophy, as is evident to one who
tries. In the sixth place because the natural way for us
is from the things which are proper to the state and
ability of the child, for children begin by learning the
things which are better known to us and to be acquired
first. But mathematics is of this sort since children are
taught first to sing, and in that same manner they can
grasp the method of figuring and counting, and it would
be far easier, and it would even be necessary, for them
to know about numbers before singing; because in the
proportions of numbers the whole rationality of number
is explained in examples, as authors of music teach, as
well in ecclesiastical music as in philosophical. But the
rationality of numbers depends on figures, because linear
numbers and superficial and corporeal and square and
eubic and pentagonal and hexagonal and the others are
known from lines and figures and angles. It has been
found, indeed, that children learn mathematical truths
better and more quickly, as is manifest in singing, and
besides we know from experience that children learn
and grasp mathematical truths better than the other
parts of philosophy. For Aristotle says in the sixth
book of the Ethics that youths can comprehend mathe-
matical truths quickly, but not so with natural nor meta-
physical nor moral truths. Wherefore the mind must
be trained by this science before it is trained by the
others.

In the seventh place when the things known to us and
the things intelligible by nature are not the same, the
natural way for us is from the things better known to
us to those better known in nature or absolutely. And


b


50 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


we know the things which are better known to us very
easily, and we arrive with great difficulty at those which
are better known in nature. And those known in nature
are poorly and imperfectly known to us, because our
understanding is disposed to things which are so mani-
fest in nature as the eye of the bat to the light of the
sun, as Aristotle maintains in the second book of the
Metaphysics; among these particularly are God and the
angels and the future life and heavenly things and crea-
tures more noble than the others, because the more noble
they are the less they are known to us. And these are
called things known in nature and absolutely. There-
fore, on the contrary when the same things are known
to us and in nature, we advance a great deal in regard to
things known in nature and in regard to all things which
are there included, and we can attain to a perfect knowl-
edge of them. But in mathematics only, as Averroes
says in the first book of the Physics and in the seventh
of the Metaphysics and in his commentary on the third
book of the Heavens and the World, things known to us
and in nature or absolutely are the same. Therefore as
we attain completely in mathematics to those things
which are known to us, so we attain to those which
are known in nature and absolutely. Wherefore
we can arrive absolutely at the innermost parts of that
science. Since, therefore, we are not able to do this in
the other sciences, it is manifest that mathematics is
better known. Wherefore the beginning of our knowl-
edge is from the acquisition of it.

Again in the eighth place because all doubt is made
clear by that which is certain, and every error is wiped
out by unshaken truth. But in mathematics we can come
to the full truth without error and to a certitude of all
points involved without doubt, since in mathematics dem-
onstration must be made through proper and necessary


ROGER BACON 51


cause. And demonstration makes truth to be known.
And in the same way in mathematics a sensible example
may be had for all things, and a sensible test in figuring
and counting, so that all may be made clear to the sense;
because of this there can be no doubt in mathematics.
But in the other sciences, once the aid of mathematics
has been excluded there are so many doubts, so many
opinions, so many errors on the part of man, that the
sciences can not be developed, as is manifest, since the
demonstration by a proper and necessary cause does not
exist in them by their own power, because there is no
necessity in natural things because of generation and
corruption of proper causes as also of effects. In meta-
physics a demonstration can not be made except by ef-
fect [i.e. a posteriori], because spiritual things are
discovered by corporeal effects and the creator by his
creature, as is made evident in that science. In morals,
demonstrations can not be from proper causes, as Aris-
totle teaches. And in the same way there can not be
very cogent demonstrations in logical and grammatical
subjects, as is plain, because of the weakness of the
matter of which these sciences treat. And therefore, in
mathematics alone are there most cogent demonstrations
by a necessary cause. And, therefore, there alone can
man come to truth by the power of that science. Simi-
larly in the other sciences there are doubts and opinions
and contrarieties on our part, so that there is hardly
agreement in even one most insignificant question or in
a single sophism; for the experiments of figurations and
pumerations are not in these sciences from their own
nature, by which all must be certified. And therefore
in mathematics alone is there certitude without doubt.

Wherefore it is evident that if we ought to come to
certitude without doubt and to truth without error in the
other sciences, it is necessary that we place the founda-


52 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


tions of knowledge in mathematics, in so far as, disposed
by it, we can attain to certitude in other sciences and to
truth by the exclusion of error. And this reason can
be made clearer by comparison, and the principal propo-
sition, in fact, is in the ninth book of Euclid. Just as,
indeed, the knowledge of the conclusion is so related to
the knowledge of the premisses that if there be error and
doubt in the premisses, truth can not be had through them
in the conclusion, nor certitude, for doubt is not made
certain through doubt, nor is truth proved by falsity,
although truth can be syllogized from false premisses
(the syllogism in that case inferring but not proving) ;
so it is with all the sciences, that those in which there
are violent and numerous doubts and opinions and errors
(I speak at least from our part) should have doubts of
this sort and falsities removed by some science certain
to us and in which we neither doubt nor err. Since in-
deed conclusions and principles proper to them are parts
of the whole of the sciences, therefore just as part is
related to part, as conclusion is related to premisses, so
science is related to science, so that, obviously, the sci-
ence which is full of doubts and bestrewn with opinions
and obscurities, can not be made certain or clear nor
be verified except by some other science known and
verified and certain to us and plain, as is the case with a
conclusion from premisses. But only mathematics, as
has been advanced before, remains certain to us and
verified with the utmost certitude and _ verification.
Wherefore it is necessary that all the other sciences be
known and certified by it.

And since it has been shown already by the property
of that science, that mathematics is prior to the other
sciences and is useful and necessary to them, the same
thing may be shown now by reasons taken from its sub-
ject matter. And first this, that the natural way for


ROGER BACON 53


us is from sense to understanding, because if a sense is
lacking, the science which is related to that sense is
lacking also, as is pointed out in the first book of the
Posterior [Analytics], since in the degree that sense
advances, human understanding advances. But quantity
is in the highest degree sensible, because it pertains to
the common sense and is perceived by the other senses,
and nothing can be perceived without quantity, for which
reason the understanding is able to advance most of all
in what relates to quantity. Secondly, because the very
act of understanding is not accomplished in itself with-
out continuous quantity, since Aristotle says in the book
on Memory and Reminiscence that all our understanding
is concerned with the continuous and with time. Whence
we understand quantities and bodies by the consideration
of the understanding, because their species are present
in the understanding. But the species of incorporeal
things are not received thus in our understanding; or if
they are produced in it, according to what Avicenna says
in the third book of the Metaphysics, we still do not
perceive that, because of the more vigorous occupation
of our understanding with bodies and quantities. And,
therefore, we investigate the notion of incorporeal things
by way of argumentation and concern with corporeal
things and quantities, as Aristotle does in the eleventh
book of the Metaphysics. For which reason the under-
standing will make most progress with quantity itself, in
that quantities and bodies, so far as they are such, are
appropriated to the human understanding according to
the common status of understanding. Each and every


‘thing is because of some thing, and that thing is in a


higher degree.
However the final reason for complete confirmation
can be drawn from the experience of the wise men; for


54 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


all the wise men of antiquity worked in mathematics
that they might know all things, as we have seen in the
case of some of our own times and as we have heard in
the case of others who learned all knowledge through
mathematics, which they knew well. For very famous
men have been found, like Bishop Robert of Lincoln and
Brother Adam of the Marsh, and many others, who
knew how to explain the causes of all things through
the power of mathematics and to explain sufficiently
things human and divine. The certainty of this thing,
moreover, is evident in the writings of these men, as on
impressions, such as on the rainbow and on comets, and
on the generation of heat, and the investigation of the
places of the world, and on celestial things and others,
of which theology as well as philosophy make use. ~
Wherefore it is manifest that mathematics is absolutely
necessary and useful to the other sciences.

These reasons are universal, but it can be shown in
particular, by going through all parts of philosophy,
how all things are known by the application of mathe-
matics. And this is nothing other than to show that the
other sciences should not be known by means of the
dialectical and sophistical arguments which are intro-
duced commonly, but by mathematical demonstrations
descending to the truths and the works of the other
sciences and regulating them, without which they can not
be understood, nor manifested, nor taught, nor learned.
If any one, moreover, should descend to the particular
by applying the power of mathematics to the separate
sciences, he would see that nothing magnificent in the
sciences can be known without mathematics. This how-
ever would be nothing other than to establish sure meth-
ods of all the sciences and to verify all things which are
necessary to the other sciences by the ways of mathe-


ROGER BACON 55


matics. But that does not fall within the present
speculation.


Sreconp DistincrTion


In which it is shown that the things of this world require
mathematics; in three chapters.


Cuapter I.


In the first chapter is taught in general that heavenly
things and things below require mathematics.


What has just been shown in regard to the sciences
can be made clear in regard to things. For the things
of this world can not be known unless mathematics is
known. Of heavenly objects, to be sure, that is certain
to all, seeing that two great mathematical sciences treat
of them, namely, speculative astrology and practical as-
trology. The first considers the quantities.of all.things
that are included among the celestial and_all_ things.
which are reduced to quantity, as well discrete as_con-
tinuous “quantity. For it ‘certifies | the number of the
heavens and of the stars, whose quantity can be meas-
ured by instruments, and the shapes of all and the mag-
nitudes and altitudes from the earth and the thicknesses
and the number and magnitude and smallness, the rising
and setting of the constellations, and the motion as well
of the heavens as of the stars, and the quantities and
varieties of eclipses. Again, it takes up the quantity and
shape of the habitable world and of all the great divi-
sions of it which are called climates, and it shows the
diversity of the horizons and of the days and nights in
every climate. These things, then, are determined in


56 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


speculative astrology and many others connected with
them. Practical astrology on the other hand treats of
this, that we know at every. hour the positions-of the
planets and the stars and their combinations and all
things which occur_in celestial things; and it treats of
those things which happen in the air, such as comets
and rainbows and other things that occur there, that we
may know their positions and altitudes and magnitudes
and shapes and many things which must be considered in
them. And all these things are done by instruments
suitable to them and by tables and canons, that is, rules
invented to certify these things so that a way may be
prepared for the judgments [i.e. horoscopes] that can
be formed within the power of philosophy, not only in
natural things, but in those which take their tendency
from nature and follow freely the heavenly disposition ;
and not only for judgments [ horoscopes] of things pres-
ent, past, and future, but for wondrous works that all
the fortunate circumstances of this world may be ad-
vanced and the adverse be held in check, usefully and
magnificently. Nor are these matters doubtful. For the
patriarchs and prophets from the beginning of the world
have certified these as they have other matters. And
Aristotle renewed the certification of the ancients and
brought it out into the light. And all who are wise in
great things agree in this, and experience teaches it.
But exposition will be made of these matters in the
proper place.

It is plain, therefore, that heavenly things are known
by means of mathematics and that the way is prepared
by it to things below. That, moreover, those things
below can not be learned without mathematics is evident
first by this, that we know things only through causes,
if science be taken properly, as Aristotle says. But


ROGER BACON 57


heavenly things are the causes of the things below.
Therefore, these inferior things will not be known unless
the heavenly things are known, and they can not be
known without mathematics. Therefore, the knowledge
of these inferior things depends on the same science.
In the second place, we can see from their properties
that no one of these lower or higher things can be known
without the power of mathematics. For every natural
thing is produced in being by an efficient cause and by
the matter in which it operates, for these two concur
first. The agent, indeed, by its force moves and trans-
mutes the matter that the thing may be made. But the
force of the efficient cause and of the matter can not be
known without the great power of mathematics, as is
the case with the force of the effect produced. There
are therefore these three, the efficient cause, the matter,
and the effect. And in celestial things there is set up
a mutual influence of forces as of light and of other
agents, and there is alteration in them, but not toward
corruption. And so, too, it can be shown that nothing
can be known in things without the power of geometry.
We hold by this argument that the other parts of mathe-
matics are necessary in the same way: for what applies
to geometry applies likewise to them, except that it ap-
plies much more because they are nobler. If, therefore,
what was proposed is shown in geometrical things, it. is
not necessary to speak in this demonstration of the .
others.

In the first place, I show therefore what was proposed
concerning geometry from the point of the efficient
cause. For every efficient cause acts by its own force
which it produces in the subject matter, as the light of
the sun produces its own force in the air, which force is
illumination [lumen] diffused through all the world by


58 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the solar light [lux]. And this force is called a likeness
and image and species, and by many names; and it is
produced by substance as well as accident and by spir-
itual as well as corporeal substance. And by substance
more than by accident, and by spiritual more than by
corporeal. And this species produces every operation
in this world, for it operates on sense, on understanding,
and on all the matter of the world for the generation of
things, because one and the same thing is done by a
natural agent on whatsoever it operates, seeing that it
does not have freedom of choice; and therefore it pro-
duces the same thing, whatever may occur to it. But if
it acts on the sense and the understanding, a species is
formed, as all know. Therefore, it acts in the same way
on that which is contrary to these, and a species is made
in matter. And in beings that have reason and under-
standing, although they do many things by deliberation
and freedom of the will, still this operation which is the
generation of species, is natural in them as in other
things. Whence the substance of the soul multiplies
its own force in the body and outside the body, and
every body produces its own force outside itself, and
angels move the world by forces of this sort. But God
produces forces out of nothing, which he multiplies in
things; created agents do not act so, but in another
manner, of which there need be no concern at the present
time. Forces of agents of this sort, therefore, produce
every operation in this world. But now two things need
be considered concerning them: one is the multiplica-
tion itself of species and of force in the place of their
generation; and the other is the varied operation in this
world due to the generation and corruption of things.
The second can not be known without the first. And
therefore it is necessary that the multiplication itself be
described first. . . .


ROGER BACON 59


Tue Firrs Parr
or Tuts DemMonstTRATION~®


ON THE SCIENCE OF PERSPECTIVE; HAVING
THREE PARTS:


The first part is concerning matters common to the other
two parts; the second descends to special matters, prin-
cipally to direct vision; the third to reflected and re-
fracted vision. The first part has twelve distinctions.


First Distinction


This distinction is concerned with the properties of this
science and with the parts of the mind and the brain and
with the organs of seeing; having five chapters.


Cuaprer I.
On the properties of this science.


Having propounded the roots of wisdom, as well di-
yine as human, which are found in the languages from
which the sciences of the latins have been translated and
likewise the roots of wisdom which are in the power of

mathematics, I wish now to discuss some roots which
arise from the power of perspective. And, if the con-
sideration which has already been stated is noble and
delectable, the present one is by far more noble and
more delectable, since our peculiar delight is in vision;
and light and color have a special beauty beyond any
which are brought to our senses; and not only beauty
shines forth, but utility and a greater necessity arise.
-%Q. c., vol. II, pp. 1-12, and vol. III, p. 186.


60 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


For Aristotle says in the first book of the Metaphysics
that vision alone shows us the differences of things: by
it, in fact, we seek out the sure experiences of all things
which are in the heavens and on earth. For those
things which are in the heavens are considered by visual
instruments, as Ptolemy and other astronomers teach.
And similarly too, those which are generated in the air,
as comets, and rainbows, and others of this sort. For
their altitude above the horizon, and their magnitude,
and shape and number, and all qualities which are in
them, are made certain by methods of seeing with in-
struments. Moreover, the things which are here on the
earth we find by vision, in that the blind man is able
to discover nothing of this world that is worthwhile.
Hearing makes us believe because we believe what we
have learned, but we can not discover what we learn
except by sight. If, moreover, we should adduce taste
and touch and smell, then we assume a bestial wisdom.
For the brutes are conversant with gustibles and tangi-
bles, and they exercise their sense of smell for taste and
touch, but the things which these senses certify are of
trifling value and few in number and common to us and
to brutes and, therefore, they do not rise to the dignity
of human wisdom. But sciences are constituted in view
of necessity and utility and difficulty, because art is of
the difficult and the good, as Aristotle says in the second
book of the Ethics. For if what is sought is easy, there
is no need that a science be constituted. In the same
way, even though something is difficult and still not use-
ful no science is made of it, because the labor would be
stupid and inane. Furthermore, if it were not exceed-
ingly useful and had not many and outstanding truths, it
should not have a separate science set up, but it suffices
that it be marked out in some part of a book or chapter
together with other subjects in the common science. But


ROGER BACON 61


of vision alone is a separate science formed among
philosophers, namely perspective, and not of any other
sense. Wherefore, through vision there must be a spe-
cial utility to wisdom, which is. not found in the other
senses. And what I have already touched on in general,
I wish to show in particular by going over the roots of
this most beautiful science. To be sure some other sci-
ence may be more useful, but no other science has such
delightfulness and beauty of utility. And therefore it is
the flower of all philosophy and that by which the other
sciences can be learned and without which they can not
be acquired. It should be known, moreover, that. Aris-
totle first found this science, of which he ‘speaks in the
second book of the Physics, because the matter is a sub-
topic of that book, and in the book on Sense and the
Sensed, and he confuted Democritus because he did not
mention the reflections and the refractions of vision of
the optic nerves and the concave visual nerves; this has
been translated into latin. After him Alhazen expounds
the subject fully in a book which is also to be had.
Likewise Alkindi composed some things more fully and
also authors of books on vision and mirrors.


Cuaprer II.


On the internal faculties of the sensitive soul, which are
imagination and the common sense.


Since the optic nerves, that is, the concave nerves
causing sight, have their origin in the brain and since
writers on perspective ascribe the formation of judg-
ments on twenty species of visible things to a distin-
guishing faculty with vision mediating, which twenty
will be touched on later, and since it is not known
whether that distinguishing faculty is among the facul-


62 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ties of the soul, the organs of which are distinct in the
brain, and since many other things, which will be treated
below, underlie the determination of the faculties of the
sensitive soul, therefore, it is necessary to begin with
the parts of the brain and the faculties of the soul that
we may discover those things which are necessary to
sight. And writers on perspective furnish us the way to
this, showing how the visual nerves descend from the
membranes of the brain and from the lining of the
cranium; but no one explains all the details that are
necessary to this part. I say therefore, that, as all
natural and medical and perspective philosophers agree,
the brain is wrapped in a double membrane of which
one is called the pia mater, which is the one containing
the brain immediately; and the other is called the dura
mater, which adheres to the concavity of the bone of
the head, which is called the cranium. For the latter is
harder that it may resist the bone, and the former is
softer and smoother because of the pliability of the
brain, the substance of which is medullar and unctuous,
and phlegm is the chief constituent, and it has three
distinctions which are called chambers, and cellules, and
parts, and divisions. In the first cell there are two
faculties: and one is the common sense located in the
anterior part, as Avicenna says in the first book on the
Soul, which is like a fountain with respect to the par-
ticular senses and like a center with respect to the lines
extending from the same point to the circumference, ac-
cording to Aristotle in the second book on the Soul;?®
the common sense judges of individual sensible particu-
lars. For judgment concerning the visible is not com-
pleted before the species comes to the common sense;
and it is so too with the audible and the others, as is
evident from the end of the work on Sense and the
** The reference should be to the third book.


ROGER BACON 63


Sensed and from the second book on the Soul, and the
common sense judges of the diversity of sensibles, as
that in milk the whiteness is other than the sweetness,
which sight could not do, nor taste, in that they do not
distinguish extremes, as Aristotle holds in the second
book on the Soul. And it judges of the operations of
the particular senses, for sight does not perceive itself
see, nor does hearing perceive itself hear, but another
faculty which is the common sense does, as Aristotle
holds in the second book on Sleep and Waking. The
final operation of the common sense, however, is to re-
ceive the species coming from the particular senses and
to complete judgment on them. But it does not retain
them, owing to the excessive slipperiness of its organ,
according to what Avicenna holds in the first book on the
Soul. And therefore it is: necessary that there be an-
other faculty of the soul in the back part of the first
cellule, the function of which is to retain the species
coming from the particular senses because of its tem-
perate moistness and dryness, which is called the imagi-
nation and is the treasury and repository of the common
sense, according to Avicenna who uses the example of
a seal, the image of which water receives well but does
not retain because of its superfluous moistness: but wax
retains the image well because of its moistness tempered
with dryness. Whence he says that it is one thing to
receive and another to retain, as appears in these exam-
ples. So it is in the case of the organ of the common
sense and of the imagination. Nevertheless, the whole
faculty compounded of these faculties, that is, that
which occupies the whole first cellule, is called phantasy
or the phantastical faculty. For it is evident from the
second book on the Soul and from the book on Sleep
and Waking and from the book on Sense and the Sensed
that phantasy and common sense are the same in respect


*


64 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


to subject and different in respect to being, as Aristotle
says, and that phantasy and imagination are the same
in respect to subject and different in respect to being.
_ Wherefore phantasy comprehends both faculties and
does not differ from them except as the whole from the
part. And, therefore, when the common sense receives
the species and the imagination retains it, there follows
a complete judgment of the thing, which judgment phan-
tasy forms.


Cuapter III.


Concerning sensibles which are perceived by the senses
proper and by the common sense and by imagination.


It must be noted that imagination and common sense
and the particular sense judge by themselves only of
twenty-nine sensibles; as sight of light and color; touch
of heat and cold, moist and dry; hearing of sound; smell
of odor; taste of savor. These are the nine proper sen-
sibles which are appropriated, as I have named them,
to their senses; of which no other particular sense can
form a judgment. There are, however, twenty other
sensibles, namely, distance, situation, corporeity, figure,
magnitude, continuity, discreteness or separation, num-
ber, motion, rest, roughness, smoothness, transparency,
thickness, shadow, obscurity, beauty, ugliness, and also
likeness and difference in all these sensibles and in all
things compounded from them. And besides these there
are others which are placed under some one or
more of them, as ordination under situation, and writing
and painting under ordination and figure; and as
straightness and curvedness, and concavity and convex-
ity, which are placed under figure; and multitude and


.


ROGER BACON 65


paucity, which are placed under number; and as equality
und augmentation and diminution which are placed under
ikeness and diversity; and as liveliness and laughter
und sadness, which are comprehended from the figure
und form of the face; and as weeping which is compre-
1ended from the figure of the face with the motion of
ears; and as moistness and dryness which are placed
inder motion and rest, since moistness is not compre-
1ended by the sense of sight except from the liquidity of
he moist body and from the motion of one part of it
efore another, and since dryness is comprehended from
he retention of the part of the dry thing and from the
yrivation of liquidity. This, however, must be consid-
red, which Aristotle maintains in the second book on
xeneration, that moist and dry are, in one manner,
yrimary qualities inherent naturally in the elements,
nd because of them moistness and dryness in the things
ompounded of the elements?’ are reduced to the first
nd are caused by them, Concerning the primary qual-
ties, therefore, it has been said that they are proper
ensibles and perceptible by touch alone. Of the others
he following statement is made. The primary moist-
ess is, in fact, that which passes easily into all figures
yhich are terminable of themselves with difficulty and
eadily terminable by the limit of something else, as in
he case of air in the highest degree and then in the case
f water. Dryness is the contrary and dryness is most
f all in earth and secondarily in fire. Moreover, moist-
ess is here used in the sense of liquid and slippery, and
ry in the sense of arid and coagulated. And it is thus
90 with many others which are reduced to the species
nd principal modes of the visible objects enumerated
bove. And all these things are apparent from the first
The text reads inelementales; it is interpreted here as
, elementatis.


66 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


book of Ptolemy on Optics and from the second book of
Alhazen on Appearances and from other authors on per-
spective. There are also the common sensibles, some
of which Aristotle exemplifies in the second book on the
Soul and in the beginning of his work on Sense and the
Sensed, as of magnitude and figure, motion, rest, and
number; but not only these are common sensibles but
all those mentioned above, although the run of natural
philosophers do not take that up because they are not
expert in the science of perspective. For the common
sensibles are not so called because they are perceived
by the common sense, but because they are determined
in common by all the particular senses or by several,
and most of all by sight and touch, since Ptolemy says
in the second book on Perspective that touch and sight
share in all the above twenty. And these twenty-nine,
together with those which are reduced to them, are per-
ceived by the particular senses and by common sense and
imagination; and these faculties of the soul can not
judge by themselves of other sensibles except by
accident.


Cuaprer LY.


On the investigation of the estimative faculty and the
memorative and the cogitative faculties.


There are however other sensibles per se, for brute
animals use only sense because they do not have under-
standing. The sheep, even if he has never seen a wolf,
flees from it at once, and every animal is terrified at the
roar of a lion, even though it may never have heard or
seen a lion before, and the same is true in the case of
many things which are hurtful and contrary to the con-
stitution of animals. And in the same way in the case


ROGER BACON 67


of the useful and agreeable. For even if a lamb has
never seen another lamb, it runs to one and stays will-
ingly with it and so with other animals. Brutes, there-
fore, perceive something in advantageous and in hurtful
things. Therefore, there is something there sensibly
besides the twenty-nine sensibles enumerated above and
besides those which are reduced to them. For there
must be something more active and alterative of the
sentient body than light and color, because it leads not
only to comprehension but to the affection of fear or
love or flight or tarrying. And this thing is the quality
of the constitution of each thing in which the natural
kinship of different individuals of the same species or
genus is grounded and in consequence of which they are
drawn together and strengthened and fortified by each
other, or by which they differ and are opposed and made
hurtful to each other. Whence not only do light and
color make their species and powers, but even more the
qualities of the constitutions make them, and indeed the
substantial natures themselves of things, agreeing with
each other or contrary, make strong species which mod-
ify the sensitive soul strongly, that it is moved by the
affections of fear and of horror and of flight or the
sontraries. And these species or virtues coming from
the things, although they modify and alter the particular
senses and the common sense and the imagination, just
us they do the air through which they pass, nevertheless,
20ne of these faculties of the soul judge of them, but it
s necessary that there be a faculty of the sensitive soul
‘ar nobler and more powerful, and this is called estima-
ion or the estimative faculty, as Avicenna says in the
irst book on the Soul, which he says perceives the un-
yerceived forms connected with sensible matter. That
s called sensible matter here which is known by the
yarticular senses and the common sense, such as the


68 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


twenty-nine enumerated above. And that is called the
unperceived form which is not perceived by those senses
of themselves, since they are commonly called ‘senses,
although other faculties of the sensitive soul could be
called senses equally well, should we wish to call them
so, since they are parts of the sensitive soul. For each
part of the sensitive soul can be called a sense because
it is in truth a sense and a sensitive faculty. When it
is said, therefore, that the constitutional qualities are
not perceived by the sense, it must be understood that
they are not perceived by the particular sense and the
common sense and the imagination; but they can very
well be perceived by estimation, which although it is not
called a sense, is nevertheless a part of the sensitive soul.

But estimation does not retain a species although it
receives it, as does the common sense, and therefore
there is needed another faculty in the last part of the
posterior cellule to retain the species of the estimative
faculty and to be the treasury and repository of it, as
imagination is the treasury of the common sense, and
this is the memorative faculty, and Avicenna says this
in the first book on the Soul. But judgment, or the
cogitative faculty, is in the middle cellule; it is the mis-
tress of the sensitive faculty and takes the place of
reason in brutes, and therefore it is called logistic, that
is, rational, not because it uses reason, but because it is
the ultimate perfection of brutes, as reason is of man,
and because the rational soul in men is united directly
to it. By virtue of it the spider weaves its geometrical
web and the bee its hexagonal house, choosing one from
the figures which fill space, and the swallow its nest and
so with all the works of brutes which are similar to
human art. Man sees wonders in dreams by that fac-
ulty, and all the faculties of the sensitive soul serve
cand obey it, as well the posterior as the anterior, since


ROGER BACON 69


all of them are because of it. For the species
which are in the imagination multiply themselves in
cogitation, although in the imagination they are accord-
ing to their first being because of phantasy which makes.
use of those species; but the cogitative faculty contains.
these species in a more noble way, and the species of
the estimative and the memorative faculties acquire in
the cogitative faculty a being which is nobler than the
one it has in them, and therefore the cogitative faculty
uses all the other faculties as its instruments. In man
the rational soul comes above these from without and
by creation, and it is united first and immediately to
the cogitative faculty, and it uses that principally as its
special instrument, and species are formed in the ra-
tional soul by it. Whence, when this faculty is injured,
the judgment of reason is perverted to the highest de-
gree, and when it is sound, then the understanding
operates well and rationally.


CuaprTemr V.


On the exposition of opposed authorities concerning the
aforesaid faculties.


But the latin text of Aristotle does not disclose to us
this division, for no mention is made expressly except
of the common sense and imagination and memory.
However, since the text of Aristotle can not be under-
stood in these places, as elsewhere, because of perversity
of the translation, and since Avicenna was almost every-
where the perfect imitator and expositor of Aristotle
and the leader and prince of philosophy after him, as
the Commentator says in the commentary on the chapter
on the Rainbow, for this reason the opinion of Avicenna
which is clear and perfect, must be followed. And, al-


4


°


70 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


though the translators of the books of Avicenna, as in
that book on the Soul and in the book on Animals and
in the books on medicine, have translated them differ-
ently and have changed words, so that the intention of
Avicenna is not everywhere translated in the same way,
since in the book on Animals of Avicenna it is found that
the estimation is in the place of reason in brutes, and so
sometimes there is found elsewhere a contrariety in
respect of the things said above, still it is not important
that different interpreters make differences in words and
sometimes have even some difference on the part of the
thing; but his opinion in the book on the Soul must be
held to because he there discusses the faculties of the
soul as his principal intention, whereas elsewhere he
rather makes mention of them incidentally. Further-
more, that book is better translated by far than the
others; which is evident in that it has few or no words
of other languages, while his other books have an infinite
number of them. If, moreover, any one should consider
what has been said above, he must assume three alto-
gether diverse faculties distributed in three cellules. —
For a diversity of objects shows us a diversity of
faculties. There are, in fact, two kinds of sensibles, to
wit one exterior, such as the twenty-nine stated above,
another internal unknown to the exterior sense, as the
quality of a hurtful or useful constitution, or rather the
useful or the hurtful substantial nature itself. There-
fore it follows necessarily that there be, as a conse-
quence of this cause, two kinds of senses: namely, one
which contains the particular senses and the common
sense and the imagination, which are moved by the
first kind of sensibles; and the other which contains esti-
mation and memory, which are referred to the second
class of sensibles. But because of the nobility of the
operations which the cogitative faculty has, compared


f
ROGER BACON 71


with the other faculties, the cogitative faculty is dis-
tinguished from the others. In the generally accepted
translation of Aristotle, therefore, every faculty is called
memory which has the power of retaining species and,
therefore, as well the storehouse of common sense as
the storehouse of estimation, is called memory. And,
therefore, what is here called imagination is compre-
hended under memory in the translation of Aristotle
which is in common use. But it is necessary without
doubt, then, that memory is double and of very different
parts, so that one will be the storehouse of common sense
and the other of estimation; and they will differ accord-
ing to species and according to subject and organ and
operation. Moreover, although these faculties have now
been located in the brain, it must be understood that the
medullar substance of the brain does not perceive as
Avicenna teaches in the tenth book on Animals; and in
this he corrects Aristotle with pious and reverent
interpretation.22—-

For the marrow in other places of the body does not
have sense, and therefore it does not here. But it is
a receptacle and treasury of sensitive faculties contain-
ing subtle nerves in which sense and sensible species are
located. But that all doubt may be removed, it must be
considered that the sensitive soul has a twofold instru-
ment or subject: one is basic and original like a well-
spring, and this is the heart according to Aristotle and
Avicenna in their books on animals; the other is that
which is first modified by the species of the sensibles
and in which the operations of the senses are made more


23 Bridges points out that a passage in De Animalibus, III,
e. 19, makes it clear that Aristotle was aware that the sub-
stance of the brain was not sensitive; the reference is doubt-
less to the discussion of marrow in the Historia Animalium


III, 20, 521” 4-17.


72 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


manifest and are distinguished, and this is the brain.
For if the head be injured we clearly see that a lesion
of the sensitive faculties follows, and head lesions are
more easily discerned by us and they occur more fre-
quently than heart lesions, and therefore, because of
[these more frequent and] more obvious manifestations
[of connections as revealed by lesions] we locate the
sensitive faculties in the head; and this is the opinion
of physicians who do not think that the wellspring and
origin of faculties is in the heart. But Avicenna says
in the first book of the Art of Medicine, that although
the opinion of the physicians is the more manifest to
the sense, nevertheless, the opinion of the Philosopher is
the truer, since all the nerves and veins and all the
faculties of the soul arise from the heart first and prin-
cipally, as Aristotle demonstrates in the twelfth book on
Animals, and Avicenna in the third book on Animals... .


Tue Sixty Part
or THis DEMoNSTRATION2?


AND THE SIXTH PART OF THE OPUS MAJUS
IS ON EXPERIMENTAL SCIENCE


Cuapter I.


Having laid down the roots of the wisdom of the
latins so far as they are found in languages and mathe-
matics and perspective, I wish now to take up the roots
of experimental science, because without experience
nothing can be known sufficiently. There are, in fact,
two ways of knowing, namely, by argumentation and
experience. Argumentation concludes and makes us
grant the conclusion, but does not make certain nor

*O. c., vol. II, pp. 167-174, and vol. III, p. 141.


ROGER BACON 73


remove doubt that the mind may be quiet in the contem-
plation of truth, unless it finds truth by the way of ex-
perience; many, because they have arguments for the
knowable but do not have experience, neglect the argu-
ments and neither avoid the hurtful nor follow the good.
For if a man who has never seen fire should prove by
sufficient argument. that fire burns and that it injures
things and destroys them, the mind of one hearing it
would never be satisfied by that nor would a hearer
avoid fire until he had put a hand or a combustible
object into the fire that he might prove by experience
what argument had taught. But once he has had ex-
perience of combustion, his mind is made sure and rests
in the brightness of truth. Therefore, argumentation
does not suffice but experience does.

This is evident too in mathematics, where demonstra-
tion is most convincing. But the mind of one who has
a most convincing demonstration of the equilateral tri-
angle will never adhere to the conclusion without ex-
perience nor will such an one trouble about it, but will
neglect it until experience is offered him by the inter-
section of two circles, from the intersection of which are
drawn two lines to the extremities of the given line; but
then the man accepts the conclusion with full repose.
What Aristotle says therefore to the effect that the
demonstration is a syllogism that makes us know, is to
be understood if the experience of it accompanies the
demonstration, and it is not to be understood of the
bare demonstration. What he says, likewise, in the first
»o0k of the Metaphysics, that those who have the reason
and the cause are wiser than those who are experienced,
s said of experienced men who know only the bare
ruth without the cause. _But I speak here of the man
yf experience who knows the reason and cause by ex-
serience. These men are perfect in wisdom, as Aristotle


74 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


holds in the sixth book of the Ethies,3 and their simple
statements must be believed as if they offered demon-
stration, as he states in the same place.

He, therefore, who wishes to enjoy without doubt®°”
the truths of things, should know how to devote his
time to experiment; this is evident in examples. For
authors writs of and the people maintain many doctrines
by arguments which they fashion without experiment
‘and which are, wholly false. ~ For it is commonly be-
lieved that the diamond can not be broken except by
goat’s blood, and philosophers and theologians misuse
this opinion. But no certainty has been arrived at yet
concerning fraction by blood of this sort although an
attempt has been made at it; and without goat’s blood
the diamond can be broken easily. For I have seen it
with my own eyes; and it is necessary, because gems
can not be carved except with fragments of this stone.
In the same way, it is held generally that the follicles
[of beavers], which physicians use, are the testicles of
the male animal. But that is not true because the beaver
has them under its breast, and both the male and the
female produce testicles of this sort. And besides these
follicles the male has his proper testicles in their natural
place; and therefore, what is added to this is a horrible
lie, namely, that when hunters are tracking the beaver,
he, knowing what they seek, tears off the follicles with
his teeth. Moreover, it has come to be held generally
that hot water congeals in vessels more quickly than
cold, and it is argued as basis for this that contrary is”
excited by contrary, as enemies resist each other. But
it is certain that cold water congeals more quickly, to.
any one who makes the experiment. People read this

0 Bth, Nie. V1, 2, 6.

“> The text reads sine demonstratione; it is interpreted as an
error for sine dubitatione,


ROGER BACON 75


into Aristotle in the second book of the Meteorologics®!
but he certainly does not say that, but he does affirm
something like it, by which they have been deceived,
namely, that if cold and hot water be poured into a
cold place, as upon ice, the hot water is congealed more
quickly, and this is true. But if cold and hot water be
placed in two vessels, the cold will be congealed more
quickly. It is necessary, therefore, that all things be
certified by the way of experience.

But experience is double: one is by means of the ex-
terior senses, and such are ire those experiences v which show
things that are in the heavens through instruments made
for these experiments and those things that we find
below by visual ascertainments. We know things which
are not present in the places in which we are, through
other wise men who have experienced them. Just as
Aristotle sent, by the authority of Alexander, two thou-
sand men to various places of the world to learn of all
things which are on the surface of the earth, as Pliny
testifies in the Natural History. This experience is
human and philosophical, as much as man can do in
accordance with the grace given him; but this experience
does not suffice man, in that it does not certify fully con-
cerning corporeal things because of its difficulty, and it
touches on nothing at all of spiritual things. Therefore,
it is necessary that the understanding of man be aided
otherwise, and therefore the holy patriarchs and proph-
ets, who first gave the sciences to the world, received
interior illuminations and were not dependent only on
sense. In the same way in the case of many of the
faithful since the time of Christ. For the grace of
faith illumines greatly and divine inspirations likewise,
not only in spiritual but in corporeal things and in the
sciences of philosophy, according to what Ptolemy says

31 Reference probably to Meteor. I, 13, 18.


ae iC


16 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


in the Centilogium, that the way to come to a knowledge
of things is twofold, one by the experience of philosophy,
the other by divine inspiration, which is far the better,
as he says.

There are seven grades of this interior knowledge.
‘The first by purely scientific illuminations. The second
grade consists in the virtues. For the evil man is ig-
norant, as Aristotle says in the ‘second book of the
Ethics. And Algazeli says in his Logic that the soul
which is cast down by sins is like a rusty mirror, in
which the species of things can not be seen well; but
‘the soul adorned with virtues is like a well-polished
mirror, in which the forms of things are clearly seen.
For this reason true philosophers have labored the more
in morals for the integrity of virtue, concluding among
themselves that they can not see the causes of things
unless they have souls free from sins. Saint Augustine
recounts this of Socrates in the eighth book of the City
of God in the third chapter. For this reason the Scrip-
ture says, Wisdom will not enter into an ill-disposed
soul.8* For it is impossible that the soul repose in the
light of truth while it is stained with sins, but it will
recite like a parrot or a magpie the words of another
which it learned by long practice. And the test of this
is that beauty of a cognized truth attracts men by its
refulgence to love it, but the proof of love is the exhibi-
tion of work. And, therefore, he who acts contrary to
the truth, must necessarily be ignorant of it, although
he may know how to put together very elegant phrases
and to quote the opinions of others, like a brute animal
that imitates human voices or like a monkey who at-
tempts to perform the actions of men, although it does
not understand the reason of them. Virtue, therefore,
-clarifies the mind that man may understand more easily

® Book of Wisdom 1:4.


ROGER BACON 77


not only moral things, but scientific things. And I have
tested this carefully in many fine youths, who because
of innocence of soul advanced to greater knowledge. than
can be stated when they have had sound counsel on
heir study. Of this number is the bearer of the present
writings, whose foundations very few of the latins ac-
juire. Since, indeed, he is very young, that is, about
wenty years of age, and extremely poor, he could not
1zave masters, nor has he devoted the time of one year to
earning the great things which he knows, nor is he of
reat genius or of great memory, so that there can be
10 other cause than the grace of God which gave him,
yecause of the purity of his soul, that which it has
‘efused to give to almost all students. For he has gone
rom me an uncorrupted virgin nor have I been able to
ind in him any kind of mortal sin although I have
earched out carefully, and therefore he has a soul so
lear and perspicuous that he learned with little instruc- ©
ion more than can be judged. And I have done what I
ould to bring about that these two youths should be
iseful vessels in the Church of God to the end that they
nay rectify by the grace of God all the studies of the
atins.

The third step consists in the ‘seven gifts of the Holy
ypirit which Isaiah enumerates. The fourth consists
n the beatitudes, which the Lord defines in the Gos-
els.22 The fifth consists in the spiritual senses. The
ixth is in fruits among which is the peace of the Lord
rhich exceeds all understanding. The seventh consists
1 raptures [raptus] and the modes of them, according
) which different men are seized “differently.to-see-many
hings ‘of which it is not given to man to speak. And
e who is carefully disciplined in these experiences or
1 several of them, can assure himself and others not
® See Matthew 5:3-11; Luke 6:20-22.


2


re earerreneenn ners ssp Bicnentenn rts


78 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY

only as regards spiritual things but as regards all
human sciences. Therefore, since all parts of specula-
tive philosophy proceed by arguments which are based
either on grounds of authority or on other grounds of
argumentation, except this part which I am now inves-
tigating, that science is necessary to us which is called
experimental. And I want to explain it, as it is useful
not only to philosophy but to the wisdom of God and
to the guidance of the whole world, as I have shown in
the case of languages and sciences above in relation to
their end, which is divine wisdom by which all things
are disposed.


Cuapter II.


And because this Experimental Science is wholly ig-
nored by the general run of students, for that reason
I can not convince people of its utility unless I show at
the same time its excellence and its property. This
science alone, then, knows how to test perfectly by ex-
perience what can be done by nature, what by the indus-
try of art, what by imposture; what the incantations,
conjurations, invocations, deprecations, sacrifices (which
are magical devices) seek and dream of; and what is
done in them, so that all falsity may be removed and
that only the truth of art and nature be retained. This
science alone teaches one to consider all the insanities
of magicians, not that they may be confirmed but that
they may be avoided, just as logic considers sophistical
argument.

This experimental science has three great preroga-
tives with respect to the other sciences. The first is
that it investigates by experiment the noble conclusions
of all of the sciences. For the other sciences know
how to discover their principles by experiments, but


Leh PE Z GS ae #2 page £s —
ROGER: BACON , Cet DS


their conclusions are reached by a cease “based. on
the discovered principles. But if they must have par-
ticular and complete experience of their conclusions,
then it is necessary that they have it by the aid of this
noble science. It is true, indeed, that mathematics has
universal experiences concerning its conclusions in figur-
ing and numbering, which are applied likewise to all the
sciences and to this experimental science, because no
science can be known without mathematics. But if we
turn our attention to the experiences which are particu-
lar and complete and certified wholly in their own dis-
cipline, it is necessary to go by way of the considerations
of this science which is called experimental autonymi-
cally. I use the example of the rainbow and of the
phenomena connected with it, of which sort are the
circle around the sun and the stars, likewise the rod
[ vtrga] lying at the side of the sun or of a star which
appears to the eye in a straight line and is called by
Aristotle, in the third book of. the Meteorologics, the
perpendicular, but is called the rod by Seneca, and the
circle is called the corona, which often has the colors
of the rainbow. The natural philosopher, to be sure,
holds discussions concerning these things and the per-
spectivist has many things to add which pertain to the
mode of seeing, which is very necessary in this case. But
neither Aristotle nor Avicenna, in their Natural His-
tories, has given us knowledge of things of this sort, nor
has Seneca, who composed a special book on them. But
Experimental Science makes certain of them.

The experimenter, then, should first examine visible
things to discover colors ordered as in the above men-
tioned things and in the same figure. Let him, indeed,
take the hexagonal stones of Ireland or India, which
are called iris stones in Solinus on the Wonders of the
World, and let him hold them in the solar ray falling


&0 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


through a window so that he may find in the shadow
near the ray all the colors of the rainbow and ordered
as in it’ And further let the same experimenter betake
himself to any shady place, and let him place the stone
to his eye, almost closed, and he will see the colors of
the rainbow clearly ordered as in the rainbow. And
since many who use these stones think that it is because
of a special virtue of the stones and because of their
hexagonal figure, for that reason let the same experi-
menter proceed further and he will find this property in
crystalline stones which are properly shaped and in
other clear stones. Moreover not only in white stones
like the irish, but in black stones, as is evident in the
dark crystal and in all stones of similar transparency.
He will find it, too, in another figure than the hexagonal,
provided the surfaces are corrugated like the irish stone
and neither altogether polished nor more rough than
they are, and provided they are such property of sur-
face as nature produces in the irish. For the diversity
of wrinkles produces a diversity of colors. And after
that, [the experimenter] considers rowers and he finds
the same colors in the falling drops dripping from the
raised oars when the solar rays penetrate drops of this
sort. It is the same with waters falling from the wheels
of a mill; and when a man sees the drops of dew in
summer of a morning lying on the grass in the meadow
or the field, he will see the colors. And in the same
way when it rains, if he stands in a shady place and if
the rays beyond it pass through dripping moisture, then
the colors will appear in the shadow nearby; and very
frequently of a night colors appear around the wax-
candle. Moreover, if a man in summer, when he rises
from sleep and while his eyes are yet only partly
opened, looks suddenly toward an aperture through
which a ray of the sun enters, he will see colors. And


ROGER BACON * Bi


if, while seated beyond the sun, he extend his hat before
his eyes, he will see colors; and in the same way if he
closes his eye, the same thing happens under the shade
of the eyebrow; and again, the same phenomenon occurs
through a glass vessel filled with water, placed in the
rays of the sun. Or similarly if any one holding water
in his mouth sprinkles it vigorously into the rays and
stands to the side of the rays; and if rays in the proper
position pass through an oil lamp hanging in the air, so
that the light falls on the surface of the oil, colors will
be produced. And so in an infinite number of ways, as
well natural as artificial, colors of this sort appear, as
the careful experimenter is able to discover. ...


Tuer SeventuH Part
or Tuis Demonstration®*


MORAL PHILOSOPHY
First Part


I have shown in the preceding parts that the knowl-
edge of languages, and mathematics, and perspective as
well as experimental science are extremely useful and
particularly necessary in the pursuit of wisdom. With-
out them no one can advance as he should in wisdom,
taken not only absolutely but relatively to the Church
of God and to the other three sciences described above.
Now I wish likewise to go over the roots of the fourth
science which is better and more noble than all those
previously mentioned; and it is the practical one among
them all, that is, the operative one, and it consists of
our actions in this life and in the other life. In fact, all
other sciences are called speculative. For although cer-

#QO, c., vol. Il, pp. 223-232, and vol. III, p. 144.


‘


82 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


tain of them are active and operative, nevertheless, they
are concerned with artificial and natural actions, not
with moral actions, and they consider the truths of
things and of scientific activities which have reference
to the speculative intellect, and they. are not related to
things pertaining to the practical intellect; and it is
called practical because it directs praxis, that is, the
operation of good and evil. Whence the term practical
is taken here in a restricted sense as applying to the
activities of morality in accordance with which we are
good or evil; although if practical is taken in a broad
sense for all operative science, many other things are
practical; but this is called practical autonymically be-
cause of the chief operations of man which are related
to virtues and vices, and to the felicity and misery of
the other life.

This practical science, then, is called moral and civil
science, which places man in his proper order to God
and to his neighbor and to himself, and tests these orders
and invites and moves us to them efficaciously. For this
science is concerned with the salvation of man in fulfill-
ment of virtue and felicity; and this science aspires to
that salvation so far as philosophy can. From these
things, it appears in general that this science is more
noble than all the other parts of philosophy. For since
it is the inward end of human wisdom and since the end
is the most noble aspect in anything, this science must
of necessity be the most noble. In the same way, this
science alone or in the highest degree treats of the
same questions as theology, because theology considers
nothing except the five subjects mentioned above, al-
though in another manner, namely, in the faith of
Christ. This science contains many outstanding testi-
monies for the same faith; and it scents from afar the
principal articles for the great aid of the christian


ROGER BACON 83


faith, as what follows will declare. But theology is the
most noble of the sciences; therefore, this which agrees
in the highest degree with it, is more noble than
the others. But that the very great utility of this sci-
ence may be apparent, its parts must be investigated to
the end that what we wish may be drawn from the parts
and from the whole.

Moreover, since moral philosophy is the end of all
the parts of philosophy, the conclusions of the other sci-.
ences must be the principles in it in accordance with
the relation of preceding sciences to those that follow,
because the conclusions of the preceding are naturally
assumed in those that follow. And therefore, it is
fitting that they be carefully proved and certified in the
preceding sciences, that they may be worthy of accept-
ance in the sciences which follow, as is evident from
metaphysics. Therefore, the principles of moral philos-
ophy are certified in the preceding sciences; and for
that reason these principles should be drawn from other
sciences, not because they belong to those sciences, but
because these sciences have prepared them for their
mistress. Whence, wheresoever they may be found they
must be ascribed to moral philosophy, since in substance
they are moral. And, although they may be repeated
in other sciences, it is by the grace of moral philosophy.
Wherefore, all things of this sort must be reckoned as
moral philosophy and ascribed to it. Therefore, if we
wish to use them according to their natural right, they
must be brought together in moral science from all the
other sciences. Nor is it strange if philosophers have
spread moral philosophy through all speculative philos-
ophy: because they knew that it is of the salvation of
man; and therefore, they have mixed beautiful doctrines
in all the sciences that men might always be directed to
the good of salvation, and that all might know that the


84 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


other sciences are to be sought after only for this one
science which is the mistress of human wisdom. There-
fore, if I adduce authorities from other places than those
which are contained in the books on morals, it must be
considered that they should properly be placed in this
science; nor can we say that they have not been written
in the books of this science, since we do not have except
in part in latin the philosophy of Aristotle, Avicenna,
and Averroes, who are the principal authors in moral
science. For just as theology understands that salva-
tion-bringing truths belong to it, wheresoever they be
found, as was stated in the beginning and touched on
later, so too moral philosophy vindicates as its own
whatever it finds written elsewhere on things of this sort.
Moreover, this moral science is called by Aristotle and
by others civil science, because it shows the rights of
citizens and of states. And since it was ordinary that
states dominate regions as Rome ruled the world, for
that reason this science is called civil from the state
[ civitas |, although it is formed to construct the laws of
the Kingdom and the Empire.

This science, moreover, teaches in the first place to
draw up the laws and the rights of living; secondly, it
teaches that these rights are to be believed and approved
and that men are to be urged to act and live according
to these laws. The first part is divided into three sec-
tions; for first comes naturally the relation of man to
God and in respect to the angelic substance; secondly,
his relation to his neighbor; thirdly, to himself, as the
Scripture states. For in the first place in the books of
Moses are the commands and laws concerning God and
divine worship. In the second place concerning the
relation of man to his neighbor in the same books and
those that follow. In the third place there are instruc-
tions concerning customs, as in the books of Solomon.


ROGER BACON 85


In the same way in the New Testament, these three -
alone are contained. For man can not assume other
relations.

Not only because of the first but because of all those
which follow, it is necessary that the principles of this
science, by which the others are verified, be set forth in
the beginning. Of these principles, however, there are
some which are purely principles and are capable of
being stated only metaphysically. Others, although they
are principles with respect to the sciences which follow,
are nevertheless either first conclusions of this science
[i.e. morals], or else, although they enjoy some of the
privilege of a principle, still because of their extreme
difficulty, and that they may meet with less contradic-
tion, and because of their excellent utility in respect
to the sciences which follow, they should be demon-
strated sufficiently: as Aristotle in the beginning of
his natural philosophy proves the first principle of that
science, namely, that there is motion, against those who
suppose only the one immovable being.®° It should be
noted, however, that metaphysics and moral philosophy
agree with each other to the highest degree; for both
have to do with God and angels and eternal life and
with many subjects of this sort although in different
ways. For metaphysics investigates metaphysically by
means of the common properties of all the sciences: and
it investigates spiritual things by way of the corporeal:
and through created things it finds the Creator: and
through the present life it treats of the future: and it
sets forth many preambles to moral philosophy. Meta-
physics investigates these subjects because of civil sci-
ence, so that. it is right to join this science with
metaphysics, lest (since principles are assumed in this
science, which have to be proved in metaphysics) I

8 The reference is to the Physics I, 2, 184” 27 ff.


86 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


should confuse different sciences with each other, by
trying to prove in this science principles which are
proper to metaphysics.

I state therefore, that God must be, just as he must be
shown to be in metaphysics: second, that all men know
naturally that God is: and third, that God is of infinite
power and of infinite goodness, and together with that,
that he is of infinite substance and essence, so that it
follows thus that he is best, wisest, and most powerful.
In the fourth place, that God is one in essence and not
many. Fifth, that not only is he one in essence but
three in another manner, which has to be explained in
general by metaphysicians, but here it must be explained
in the discipline itself. Sixth, that he has created all
things and governs them in the being of Nature. Sev-
enth, that besides corporeal things he has formed spirit-
ual substances which we call Intelligences and Angels;
for intelligence is the name of a nature, and angel is the
name of a function; and how many they are and what
their activities are, as it pertains to metaphysics, as far
as it is possible for them to be known by human reason.
Eighth, that besides angels he made other spiritual sub-
stances which are the rational souls in men. Ninth, that
he made them immortal. Tenth, that the felicity of the
other life is the highest good. Eleventh, that man is
capable of this felicity. Twelfth, that God governs the
human race in the way of morals just as he governs
other things in the being of nature. Thirteenth, that
God promises future felicity to those who live rightly in
accordance with the governance of God, as Avicenna.
teaches in the tenth book of the Metaphysies, and that)
a horrible future infelicity is due those who live evilly..
Fourteenth, that worship is due God with all reverence:
and devotion. Fifteenth, that as man is ordered natur-:
ally to God through the reverence due him, so he is:


ROGER BACON 87


ordered to his neighbor by justice and peace, and to
himself by honorableness of life. Sixteenth, that man
can not know by his own effort how to please God with
the worship due him, nor how he should stand in rela-
tion to his neighbor nor to himself, but he needs the
revelation of truth in these things. Seventeenth, that
the revelation must be made to one only; that he must
be the mediator of God and men and the vicar of God
on earth, to whom is subjected the whole human race,
and in whom one must believe without contradiction
when it has been proved with certitude that he is such
as I have just described him; and he is the lawgiver and
the high priest who has the plentitude of power as if
God on earth in temporal and in spiritual things, as
Avicenna says in the tenth book of the Metaphysics,
whom it is proper to adore after God.

By these principles metaphysics is continuous with
moral philosophy and approaches it as its end; thus
Avicenna joins them beautifully at the end of his Meta-
physics. The other principles, however, are peculiar
to this science and are not to be explained in- meta-
physics, although Avicenna adds a number of them.
But in the beginning of his volume he gives the reason
for this, that he had not constructed a moral philosophy _
and he did not know whether he would complete one;
and therefore he mixed with these metaphysical princi-
ples many which are nevertheless proper to moral
philosophy, as is evident to the inquirer. And once
these have been considered, the legislator should then
at the beginning take up the properties of God in par-
ticular, and of angels, and the felicity and the misery
of the other life, and the immortality of bodies after
the resurrection, and things of this sort to which the
metaphysician could not aspire. For the metaphysician
treats in all these principally of the question of whether


88 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the thing is; because it is proper for him to take up
that question in regard to all things, in that he con-
siders that which is and being in their common proper-
ties. But the other sciences take up other questions
involved in things: namely, what each one is, and of
what kind, and how much, and other questions of this
sort, in accordance with the ten categories. The moral
philosopher, however, does not have to explain all the
secrets of God and of the angels and of others; but he
must explain those which are necessary to the multitude,
in which all men should agree, lest they fall into ques-
tions and heresies, as Avicenna teaches in the pel
ples of Moral Philosophy.

I say, therefore, that moral philosophy explains first
the trinity in relation to God, which truth the legisla-
tor has by revelation rather than by reason. The rea-
son, indeed, why philosophers have said a great deal
concerning divine things in particular which exceed hu-
man reason and fall under revelation, was touched on
before in mathematics. For there it was shown how
they could have many noble truths concerning God
which were had through revelation made to them, as
the Apostle says, for God revealed these things. But
rather to the patriarchs and the prophets who, it is
known, had revelation and from whom the philosophers
learned all things, as was proved clearly above. For
the patriarchs and the prophets not only treated divine
things theologically or prophetically but also philosoph-
ically, because they devised all philosophy as was
proved in the second part of this work. The meta-
physician, however, was able to teach sufficiently that
God is, and that he is known naturally, and that he is
of infinite power, and that he is one, and that he is
three. But how the Trinity is, he could not there ex-


ROGER BACON 89


plain to the full; and, therefore, that must be shown
here. :

There is, then, the blessed Trinity, the Father and
the Son and the Holy Ghost. For Claudius, one of the
expositors of the sacred Scripture, in the book in which
he combats the following heresy, that God feels noth-
ing with a sense of passion but with an affect of com-
passion, brings forward this argument, Plato with
praiseworthy daring, admirable skill, unchangeable pur-
pose, sought, found, and proclaimed three persons in the
Divinity: God the Father, also;the paternal mind, art,
or counsel, and the love of the two for each other. He
taught thus not only that we must believe in one su-
preme equitrinal undivided Divinity, but he demon-
strated that he must be thus. These things are clear
from his book on Divine Things. Porphyry, as Augus-
tine says in the tenth book of the City of God, chapter
twenty-nine, spoke of the Father and his Son whom he
called the paternal intellect and mind, and the medium
of them whom, as Augustine says, we think he called
the Holy Spirit; and following his manner he calls them
three Gods, where although he uses words loosely, he
sees nevertheless what should be maintained. Augus-
tine, in the same book in the thirty-second chapter,*° |
recounts that a certain platonic philosopher, whose name
he does not give, stated the beginning of the Gospel
according to John as far as the incarnation of Christ, in
which the distinction of the divine persons is stated
clearly. Augustine, also in the tenth book of the City
of God in the thirty-sixth and the thirty-seventh®’ chap-
ters, insists that Porphyry says in the first book on the
Return of the Soul that sins can not be purged except
by the Son of God. And Aristotle says in the begin-
ning of the Heavens and the World that in divine wor-

% De Civit. Dei, X, 29. 37 De Cwit. Dei, X, 32.


90 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ship we exercise ourselves to magnify the one God by
the number three, which is prominent in the’ properties
of the things which are created. And therefore, since
every creature, as is evident from the Metaphysics, is
a trace and imprint of the Trinity, there must be the
Trinity in the Creator. And since Aristotle completed
the philosophy of his predecessors to the limit of the
possibility of his times, he had to feel far more certainly
concerning the blessed Trinity of persons that he might
confess’ the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.
For this reason there were three sacrifices in the law
of Aristotle and three prayers, as Averroes says in his
commentary on the beginning of the Heavens and the
World: and this is manifest from the politics of Aristotle,
which is the Book of Laws. Avicenna, moreover, the
most outstanding expositor of Aristotle, assumes the
Holy Spirit in the principles of moral philosophy.

But he [ie. Aristotle] could perceive the truth of
the Father and the Son far better, because it is more
difficult to understand the procession of the Holy Spirit
from two distinct persons than the generation of one
of them from the other. For this reason philosophers
failed more in the comprehension of the Holy Spirit
than in the knowledge of the Father and the Son. And
therefore they who were able to have a knowledge of
the Holy Spirit, had far more knowledge of the other
persons. The philosopher Ethicus in his book on divine
and human and natural things, which he wrote in the
hebrew, the greek, and the latin languages, because of
the greatness of the secrets, places in God, the Father,
and the Word of the Father, and the Holy Spirit, and
maintains that there are three persons, namely, the
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit... This must
also be held by reason. This reasoning, nevertheless,
could not have been given before the things which have


ROGER BACON 91


to be expressed of God in particular nor before the
authorities of the great philosophers, which are intro-
duced to this same end in this science as in the place
appropriate to them.

I say, therefore, that God is of infinite power; and
infinite power is powerful of infinite operation; there-
fore, something infinite can be made by God, but not
something infinite in essence, because then there could
be several Gods; the contrary of which has been shown
in the section on mathematics. Therefore, that which
is begotten of God must be God since it has the essence
of its progenitor; but it is different in person. And
since this which is begotten has infinite power, and since
it is infinite good, it can bring forth something infinite:
therefore it is able to bring forth another person.
Hither, then, the Father brings forth the same person,
and then the Holy Spirit will proceed from both of
them; or he will be brought forth from the Son only,
and in that case he will not pertain to the Father and
the relationship will not be full and there will not be
complete agreement in the divine persons, which is ‘con-
trary to reason. Further, there can not be parity of love
according to this view, because the Father would love
the Son more than the Holy Spirit, because he begets
the Son and does not bring forth the Holy Spirit. But
since the Holy Spirit is God, because he has the divine
essence, an infinite love must be due him; and therefore,
the Father will love him with an infinite love as he does
the Son. And likewise because the love of the Father
ean not be other than infinite, because his love is in
accordance with his power, it remains, therefore, that
the love of the Father for the Holy Spirit will be as
great as the love of the Son for the Holy Spirit. Where-
fore, the Holy Spirit as well as the Son must be brought
forth from the Father. That, however, there are not


92 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


and can not be more persons, can not and should not
be explained here, but must be assumed until it is proved
in the fourth part of this science [of morals], to which
the full measure of the demonstration will be assigned.
But it was necessary that the trinity of persons, namely,
of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit be
proved and expounded here because it is the radical
foundation of this science for establishing divine wor-
ship and for many other things, Nor should it be al-
leged in opposition that no science has to prove its
principles. For how that is to be understood has been
shown above. But other things which can be inquired
concerning God and in which there should be probable
doubt, are conclusions of the fourth part and, therefore,
will be determined there. .


Tue Seconp Part or Morar Puitosopny®®
CuaPprter I.


On observance of the laws of matrimony and of the
commonwealth.

The second part treats of the laws and statutes of
the relations of men to each other. In the first place,
the welfare of the human species is considered in the
line of propagation, to bind people by laws in their in-
crease. Therefore laws of marriage are given and how
marriages must be made is determined and how impedi-_
ments are to be removed; and most of-all, that fornica-—
tors and sodomites be excluded from states, who are
inimical to the construction of the state, since they
draw men away from that which is better in states,
namely, from marriage, as Avicenna and others main-
tain.

QO. ¢c., vol. Il, pp. 250-255, and vol. III, p. 145.


ROGER BACON 93


Next, laws are given in accordance with which sub-
jects are ordered in respect to prelates and princes,
and contrariwise, and servants to masters according to
every type of servitude and mastership; and laws are
given in accordance with which the fathers of families
must live in guiding their offspring and family, and
the master is ordered in respect to his disciples. Next,
the doctors and the skilled in each of the sciences and
arts are appointed; and those best suited to engage in
studies and duties of this sort are chosen according to
the advice of the wise men from the youths who are
to be instructed ; and the rest are deputed to the military
service to execute justice and to check malefactors.
And it is necessary, as Avicenna says, that this be the
first intention in instituting the law, namely, to order
the state in three parts, that is, into disposers, ministers,
and those learned in the law, and that in each of them
some one in charge be appointed. After him, other
officials inferior to him should be appointed, and after
these still others, until few remain; to the end that no
one be useless in the state and not have some praise-
worthy function, and that some utility to the state may
be derived from each one. Whence, in Plato, that state
is held to be most justly ordered in which each one
knows his own condition. Therefore, as Avicenna says,
the prince of the state should prohibit idleness and
disoccupation. Those, moreover, who can not be curbed
should be expelled from the state, unless the cause is
infirmity or old age; and then a place should be set
apart in which people of that sort should remain and
have a procurator allotted to them. It is necessary,
moreover, that there be in the state a certain place for
the moneys of the commonwealth, which should be de-
rived partly from the Jaw governing contracts, partly
from fines which are inflicted for punishment, partly


94 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


from the estates and spoil of rebels, partly from other
sources; and to the end that this public fund be avail-
able partly for those who can not. acquire money for
themselves because of infirmity and old age and partly
for teachers of law and medicine, and partly for public
uses.

And then, the legislator instructs men to make patri-
monies and inheritances and testaments, because Avi-
cenna says that the substance necessary for life is partly
the branch and is partly the root. But the root is the
patrimony and anything bequeathed and given by testa-
ment, of which three roots the most secure is patrimony.
The branch of substance, however, comes from gains
derived from kinds of business. Then laws should be
published concerning contracts in all sorts of business,
in buying, selling, leasing, hiring, borrowing, lending,
paying, saving-and the like, that whatever can do harm
in contracts may be removed, as Avicenna says.

Then, laws must be framed in accordance with which
it may be shown in all lawsuits and in all cases what
rights and wrongs are, and according to which legal
processes may be terminated that peace and justice may
be fostered among the citizens. Later, as Avicenna
says, activities by which inheritances and fortunes are
lost and by which the peace and concord of citizens are
disturbed, must be prohibited; and those who set up
and practise these pursuits are people who wish to win
for the sake of some gain, such as the wrestler, the dice
player, and others of this sort. In the same way, ac-
tivities should be prohibited which lead to things con-
trary to the utilities, such as he exemplified in his
teaching concerning stealing and plundering and other —
acts of this sort.

And further ordinances should be made, as Avicenna
says, that men aid and defend each other, and that they


ROGER BACON 95


be unanimous against the enemies of the law even to
subduing them by violence. If; however, there be an-
other commonwealth and another regimen of good con-
stitutions and laws, this is not opposed to the first unless
the time should come when there must be no other law
than this one, the establishment of which, since it is
the best, must then be extended throughout the whole
world. And in this statement the christian law is sig-
nified, as will be explained below. If, however, there
should be some among those who are at variance with
the law, they should first be corrected that they may
return to their senses; but if they do not wish to do that,
they should be put to death.


Cuaprer II.


‘The last point that is required here is that the legisla-
tor set up a successor to himself. This is done, accord-
ing to Avicenna, in the following manner. For he
should do it with the consensus of the nobles and of the
people; and he should choose such an one as can rule
well and be prudent and be of good morals, brave, kind,
skilled in governing and learned in the law, than whom
none is more learned, and this should be manifest to all.
But if thereafter they should so disagree that they
wish to choose another, they have in that denied God,
and therefore the legislator should interpose in his law
enactments to the effect that the entire state should fall
unanimously upon any one who should wish to intrude
himself by power or money and should kill him. But
if they shall be able to do this and shall not have done
it, they have in that contradicted God, and he is not
guilty of blood who has killed one of this sort pro-
vided, however, it is previously known to the people.
If, on the other hand, he who should be made successor


96 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


is not worthy and has been so proved, another should
be appointed.

And so in a summary way the intention and aims.
of the fundamental parts [the roots] of this second sec-
tion [of moral philosophy] and of. those matters that
proceed from such fundamentals have been brought to
a close. In this part is comprehended the civil law,
which is now in use among the latins, as is manifest
from the roots of this part. Moreover it is certain that
the latins have derived their rights and laws from the
greeks; that is, from the books of Aristotle and Theo-
phrastus, his successor, as well as the laws of the twelve
tables which were taken first from the laws of Solon
the athenian.


Tur Tuiep Parr or Morar Puitosopny
Cuaprer I.


On the guidance of man rélative to himself.

The third part of moral and civil science is concerned
with the practices of each person relative to himself,
that everyone may have honorableness of life and, may
pass over the foulness of vices because of future felicity
and the horror of eternal punishment. That this should
be the third part appears evidently, since it is plain
that that part which contains the worship of God is
first, as has been declared. The common good, more-
over, is set before the private good, as Aristotle says
in the first book of the Metaphysics. But the preceding
part has to do with the common good; whereas this part
advances the private good. For charity is the greatest
virtue, and it is ordered with reference to the common
good, and peace and justice attend it, which virtues go
beyond the morals of individual persons. For man is


ROGER BACON. | 97


a social animal and it is one of his properties, as Avi-
cenna says in the fifth book on the Soul, that he should
not live alone like the brute animal which in its life
suffices to itself alone. Therefore the laws which order
men to their neighbor are the more important.
According to Aristotle and Averroes, in the tenth
book of the Metaphysics, the hermit man who is not
part of the state, but is concerned with himself alone,
is not good nor is he evil. And Cicero, in the book on
Duties, quoting the words of Plato says that Plato wrote
very truly that we are not born for ourselves alone.
Our native land claims part of our origin; our friends
part; and as the stoics are pleased to believe that all
things are created for the use of men, men are generated
for the sake of men, that they may be able to aid
one another. As Cicero himself, in the fifth book of the
Academics, says, Nothing is so noble as the communica-
tion of benefits. It is, in fact, innate in man that he
have something of the civil and the popular, which
something the greeks call politicon. Whence, in the
book on the Happy Life, Seneca says, This word is
required of man that he aid all, if he ts able to, or many;
if he is less able, a few; if still less, his neighbors; af
less, himself. Wherefore, the second principal part of
moral philosophy must be concerned with public laws,
as has been stated; and the third will be on the life
and the honor which each one should pursue. This,
moreover, is true according to the order of the dignity
of nature and absolutely speaking, although Aristotle
does not adopt this manner in his books, for he proceeds
according to the way of investigation and therefore
goes’ from the things which are better known to us and
not from those better known to nature. But since we
have already made certain through him and others what
the power of this science requires, therefore, we can


98 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


arrange its parts according to the order which the dig-
nity of nature demands.

And here the philosophers have said wondrous things
concerning virtues and vices; so that every christian
may be confounded when we conceive that unbelieving
men had such sublimities of virtues and we seem to fall —
ignominiously from the glory of virtues. For the rest,
we should be greatly encouraged to aspire to the apex
of virtue, and stirred by noble examples we should give
forth more noble fruits of the virtues, since we have
greater aid in life than those philosophers, and since
we are assured we shall receive greater aids beyond
comparison by the grace of God. I shall first quote
certain phrases relating to virtues and vices in general:
secondly, I shall pass on to particulars. .. .


Tur Fourrn Part or Morar Purtosopuy®®
Cuaprer I.


I have dwelt on this third part of Moral Philosophy
at length because of the beauty and utility of moral
sentiments and because the books from which I have
gathered these roots, flowers, and fruits of morals, are
rarely found. Now, however, I wish to go on to the
fourth part of this science [of morals] which, although
it is not so copious and so pregnant as the third, is
nevertheless more wonderful and more worthy, not only
than that part, but than all the parts of the science,
since it consists in the elucidation of the belief, and the
love, and the proof by works, of the religion of the
faithful which the human race should accept. Nor is
there anything of philosophy more necessary for man or
of so great utility or dignity. For it is especially on

*O. ¢., vol. Il, pp. 366-68, and vol. III, pp. 149-150.


ROGER BACON 2 hee


account of this part [of morals] that all the sciences are
subordinate to moral philosophy. In fact, all wisdom is
ordered with a view to knowing the salvation of the
human race; and this salvation consists in the perception
of the things which lead man to the felicity of the other
life. Avicenna says of this felicity that it is such as eye
has not seen nor ear heard, as has been touched on
above. And since this fourth part of philosophy pur-
poses to investigate this salvation and to attract men
to it, therefore, all the sciences, arts, and functions, an/
whatever falls under the consideration of man, are bound
to this most noble part of civil science; and this is the
goal of human consideration.

For this reason it is most useful to consider the in-
tention of this part; and it is fitting that every christian
do so for the confirmation of his profession and that
he may have wherewith to correct those who have wan-
dered astray. Assuredly, God can never deny to the
human race a knowledge of the way of salvation, since
he wishes all men to be saved according to the Apostle.
And his goodness is infinite, wherefore he has always
left men means by which they may be enlightened to
know the ways of truth. Aristotle indeed in his Politics
takes up the different kinds of religions, and says that
he wishes to consider the religions and the laws of four
or five simple commonwealths and to see what laws cor-
rupt commonwealths and kingdoms, and what laws do
not. He says, moreover, that there are four or five
simple corrupt religions, intending that the religion or
law be called simple because of a simple end and com-
posite because of a composite end, since every religion
varies according to the condition of the end, as Alfarabi
teaches in the book on the Sciences, expounding the view
of Aristotle concerning religions. And these simple ends,
according to Alfarabi, but more clearly according to


100 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Boethius in the third book of the Consolation of Philos-
ophy, are: pleasure, riches, honor, power, fame or glory
of name.

And now I shall tell of the principal nations among
which are varied throughout the world, the religions
which still continue, and they are, saracens, tartars,
pagans, idolaters, jews, christians. For there are no
more principal religions, nor can there be until the re-
ligion of the Anti-Christ. But religions are compounded
from all these, or‘from some four, or three, or two, ac-
cording to various combinations.

But besides the ends enumerated, there is another,
namely, the felicity of the other life, which different
religions seek and strain toward in different ways, be-
cause some place it in the delights of the body, some in
the delights of the soul, some in the delights of both. In
addition there are religions compounded of this felicity
and all the other ends, or from several, and this in
diverse manners. For although they seek after a future
felicity, nevertheless many men give themselves up to
pleasures, and others strive eagerly after riches, and
some aspire after honors, and some after the power of
dominion, and some after the glory of fame. I shall
touch, however, on the three divisions of the religions
first, that the end to which they tend may be clear.
Then I shall deal with the choice of the religion of the
faithful, which alone should be spread throughout the
world. ...


Cuapter I (continued)?


Having set forth these principal religions in respect
to the use of peoples as well as in respect to the ways of
astronomy and in respect to the diversities of their ends,

0. c., vol. II, pp. 372-79, and vol. III, p. 150.


ROGER BACON 101


the consideration proceeds to the means of persuading
men of the truth of religion. It was said above in the
section on mathematics, in relation to the conversion
of unbelievers, that the persuasion of the religious truth
which is contained in the christian religion alone, is
brought about in a twofold manner, since it is either by
miracles which are beyond us and beyond unbelievers,
and concerning this way no man can presume; or else
it is by a way, common to unbelievers and to us, which
is in our power and which they can not deny, because
it proceeds along the ways of human reason and by the
ways of philosophy. Philosophy belongs especially to
unbelievers, since we have derived the whole of philoso-
phy from them, and not without the greatest reason,
that we may have confirmation of our faith for our-
selves, and that we may pray efficaciously for the sal-
vation of unbelievers. Nor should the statement of
Gregory be urged in objection, that faith has no place
where human reason lends proof. For this statement
must be understood of the christian man who would
lean only or principally on human reason. But this
should not be done: on the contrary, he must believe
in the Church and the Scripture and the Saints and
the Catholic doctors, and that he should do principally.

But for the solace of human frailty, that it may avoid
the attacks of error, it is useful for the christian to
have effective reasons for the things which he believes,
and he should have a reason for his faith for any oc-
easion that requires it, as the blessed Peter teaches in
his first Epistle, saying,*! But sanctify in your hearts
Christ as Lord; being ready always to give answer to
every man that asketh you a reason concerning the faith


“and hope that is in you. But we can not argue this by


quoting our law, nor the authorities of the saints, be-
4 First Epistle of Peter 3:15.


102 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


cause unbelievers deny the Lord Christ and his law
and saints. Wherefore it is necessary to seek reasons
in another way, and this way is common to us and to
unbelievers, namely, philosophy. But the power of
philosophy in this part accords in the highest degree
with the wisdom of God; indeed, it is the trace and
imprint. of the divine wisdom given by God to man, —
that by this trace man may be moved to divine truths.
Nor are these things proper to philosophy, but are
common to theology and philosophy, to believers and
unbelievers, given by God and revealed to philosophers,
to the end that the human race might be prepared for
special divine truths. And the reasons of which I speak
are not unrelated to faith nor outside the principles of
faith, but are dug from its roots, as will be manifest
from only stating them.

I could, of course, set forth the simple and crude
methods suited to the mass of unbelievers, but that is
-not worth while. For the crowd is too imperfect, and
therefore the conviction of faith which the crowd must
have is crude and confused and unworthy of wise men.
I wish, therefore, to go higher and give a demonstration
of which wise men must judge. For in every nation
there are some men who are assiduous and apt to wis-
dom, who are open to rational conviction; so that once
they have been informed, persuasion through them of
the crowd is made easier.

.I assume in the beginning, of course, that there are
three kinds of knowledge; one is in the effort of per-
sonal discovery through experience. Another is by the
learning of others. The third precedes these, and is
the way to them, called natural knowledge; and it is
so named because it is common to all. That, in fact, is
natural which is common to all members of the same
species, as burning is natural to fire, according to the


ROGER BACON 103


example of Aristotle in the fifth book of the Ethics;
and Cicero says this same thing in the first of the Tuscu-
lan Questions, and we see it in an infinite number of
examples. For we say the cries of brutes have a natural
significance, because they are common to the individuals
of their species; and things are known naturally by us
of the sort in which we all agree, as that every whole
is greater than its part, and others of this sort, as well
simple as complex. We know likewise that the rational
soul is formed to learn the truth and to love it, and the
proof of this love is the exhibition of action, according
to Gregory and all the saints and philosophers. There
are some, however, who think that there are two distinct
parts in the soul, or two faculties, so that there is one
by which the soul knows the truth, another by which
it wishes to seize on** the truth when learned. On the
other hand some believe that there is one substance of
the soul which performs both functions, because its acts
are coordinated to each other, in that the knowledge of
truth exists on account of the love for it; for it is one °
and the same faculty. According to them the soul first
apprebends the truth and then loves it when known and
completes it in action. Whence Aristotle holds in the
third book on the Soul,** that the speculative intellect
is made practical by the extension of knowledge of truth
to the love of it. Nor does he ever make a specific dif-
ference between the speculative intellect and the practi-
cal as he does between the intellect and the sense and
the vegetative soul. For he argues, in the secend book
on the Soul that these three are diverse in species,
because their operations are diverse in species, that is,
understanding, perceiving and vegetating; nor are they


42 4udire in the text has been interpreted as erroneous,
probably, for adpetere.
4 De An. III, 7, 4314 10-20.


104 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ordered in relation to each other. But the knowledge of
truth is ordered toward the love of it, and it is formed
because of it; and therefore there is one faculty, or
nature, or substance of the rational soul which knows |
truth and loves it. Whence in the third book en the
Soul,*# Aristotle begins thus: However, concerning the
part of the soul with which it knows and judges, I must
now speak; meaning that it is the same part which has
both functions; just as it is in the sensitive part; be-
cause it is the same faculty which perceives and desires,
as is evident in every sense. For the sense of touch
knows the hot and desires it; and the sense of taste
knows flavors and desires them, and so with others.

But it is not of great moment how we may speak of
these matters. For we know that the rational soul is
formed to know and to love the truth. But the truth
of religion is perceived only so far as the knowledge
of God overflows in one, for every religion is referred
to God; and therefore he who wishes to come to a cer-
tain knowledge of religion must begin with God. But
the knowledge of God, so far as concerns the question
of whether he is, is known to all naturally, as Cicero
teaches in his book on the Immortality of the Soul.
And he proves it saying, No nation is so savage and
monstrous that its mind has not been imbued with an
opinion of God nor is there a people that does not show
some form of divine worship.** But if Avicenna says
in the first book of the Metaphysics*® that this sclexies
seeks to prove the being of God, it must be said that
this is true as regards full certitude. For the natural
knowledge which every one has of God is weak, and
it is weakened by the sins which are numerous in every

“De An. III, 4, 429a 10.


* Probably from De Nat. Deorum I, 16 and 23,
** Met. I, 1.


ROGER BACON 105


one. For sin obscures the soul and most of all in what
concerns the divine.

Therefore, it is necessary that this knowledge be
aided by argument and faith. But the knowledge of
the unity of God, and of what God is, and how, and of
what sort, is not known naturally. For in these matters
men are always in disaccord, some maintaining several
gods, others considering that the stars are gods, others,
things here below, as, for example, the pure pagans
and the idolaters. And so they must err in religion.
All others who say that there is one God do not under-
stand other points which are true of God. And there-
fore one who advances a religion must know in the
beginning how to present the attributes which are re-
quired in general of God. However, it is not necessary
that he go into all the particular truths in the be-
ginning; but he should proceed little by little and he
should begin with the easier questions in this way. For
as the geometer sets down his definitions that the things
he deals with may be known in respect to what they
are and what they are called, so one must proceed here:
because unless one knows what it is that is meant by
a name, there will be no demonstration.

God, therefore, is the first cause antecedent to which
there is no other, and which did not emerge into being,
nor will it be possible for it not to be, of infinite power,
wisdom, and goodness, Creator of everything and di-
rector of everything, according to the susceptibility of
the nature of individual things. And in this definition
tartars, saracens, jews, and christians agree. The wise
men also of the idolaters and the pagans, when they have
been given the reason for this, can not contradict it;
nor consequently can the multitude over whom the wise
men stand as directors and leaders. For two ways of
arguing to this end will be presented for them: one by .


106 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the consensus of all other nations and religions and of
all the rest of the human race. But the lesser should
conform itself to the greater part; and that part is
disgraceful which does not accord with its whole. It is
well known that there are wiser men in the other re-
ligions; and the pagans and the idolaters are not ignorant
of this. For when a meeting is arranged with them
they are convinced easily, and they perceive their own
ignorance clearly; as appeared in the case of the em-
peror of the Tartars who summoned before him chris-
tians, saracens, and idolaters to confer on the truth of
religion; and forthwith the idolaters were confounded
and convinced. This fact appears in the book on the
Practices of the Tartars addressed to our Lord the
present King of France. And when christians confer
with pagans, like the Prusceni and the other adjoining
nations, they yield easily and see that they are held
by errors. The proof of this is that they wished most
willingly to be made christians if the Church were will-
ing to permit them to retain their freedom and to enjoy
their goods in peace. But the christian princes who
labor for their conversion, and most of all the brothers |
of the Teutonic house, wish to reduce them to servitude, ,
as is known to the dominicans and franciscans and other °
good men throughout Germany and Poland. And, there- -
fore, they offer opposition; whence, they stand against |
oppression, not against the arguments of a better re--
ligion.

Further, one who advocates the religion of the faithful |
has from the part of Metaphysics and of this moral,
science another manner by which he may proceed in;
arguing. This I wish only to indicate until such a time:
as the treatise which Your Highness demands will bes
completed. And, indeed, it can be set down as a postu-'
late for the man who is assiduous and amenable to thei


ROGER BACON 107


efficacy of reason, that causes do not go back in infinitum,


since an infinite number of causes can not be nor be
understood. For all things which are and which are
understood are comprehended in some number, as Aris-
totle says in the third book of the Physics. There is
not therefore cause preceding cause in infinitum. There-
fore we must stop at some first cause which does not
have a cause before it, and all the multitude is reduced
to unity. And in every genus there is one first to which
the others are reduced. But if this be the first cause,
with no other cause antecedent to it, it is manifest that
it did not come forth into being through a cause; nor
is anything else the cause of its being; nor does it make
itself to be after not being, because then it would have to
be when it was not, that it might make itself be. For
everything which causes something else to be after not
being, has being while it does this: therefore, nothing
is cause of its own being. Wherefore, this first cause
never had non-being: therefore, it always was. But it
that is the case, then it will always be, since there are
many things which will always be, and nevertheless
have not always been, as angels and souls and the
heavens and the earth and others of this sort. And,
therefore, that which never had non-being will conserve
its being far more easily in eternity. Furthermore, that
which never had non-being is removed infinitely from
non-being; and therefore it is impossible that it fall
into non-being. Some things, in fact, which have come
forth into being are able not to be, because they are
not infinitely removed from non-being, for at one time
they were not: therefore, since non-being is removed
in infinitum from that which always was, there is no
proportion between it and this other. And therefore
such a thing will not be able not to be: and this is more
acceptable than any of the doctrines which have been


108 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


spoken of here, and therefore it is rather conceivable
than in need of proof.

It is evident, however, that the thing which always
was and will be is of infinite power. Because if it is
of finite power, then its power is imperfect, since some-
thing can be added to all finite things, and every im-
perfect thing is naturally subject to change; but it is
not possible to assume any change unless the first be
assumed. For the first is naturally prior to the pos-
terior. And therefore since the first change is in respect
to being and non-being, it must be possible in that which
has finite power. But this change does not occur in
that which always was and always will be: wherefore,
neither does finitude in power pertain to it.

Further, Philosophy argues in the third book of the
Consolation*’ in this fashion. In every genus in which
the imperfect is found, it is natural that the perfect be
found. And therefore in the genus of power a perfect
power must be found after we find an imperfect one.
But the perfect is that from which nothing is lacking,
nor can anything be added, according to Aristotle in
the third book of the Physics and the fifth of the Meta-
physics. And that to which nothing can be added is
infinite; because an addition can be made to every finite
thing in so far as it is such, and something else can
be understood beyond it. It is necessary, therefore,
that the perfect power be infinite. But there is no
perfect and infinite power in things other than this
cause which we seek: therefore, in this cause there will
be such power. But if its power is infinite, then its
essence is infinite; because power does not exceed es-
sence. For essence is either equal to power or greater.
And demonstrations have already been given for this
in the observations which were made concerning mat-

“ Consol. Phil. III, prosa 10.


ROGER BACON 109


ter. It is manifest, therefore, that the essence of the |
first cause is infinite.

And certainly if its essence and power are infinite,
its goodness must be infinite, since a thing whose essence
is finite has finite goodness. Therefore the infinite will |
have infinite goodness; and otherwise there is no pro-
portion of goodness to essence in this cause; which can
not be in so great majesty. And if its goodness were
finite, it would be imperfect, and something could be
added to it and taken from it, and thus it could be sub-
jected to transmutation; and therefore it would be
natural for it to have non-being, as was argued previously
of power. Nor is it possible that that which has infinite
majesty in essence and power and goodness, should lack
knowledge, because a thing which is of this sort [i.e.
deficient] has a lowliness*® and can not be related to
the infinity of majesty, as is the case with elements and
stones and vegetables.

Moreover, we see that things lacking infinite power,
as animals and men and angels, have knowledge because
of the nobility of their nature: therefore, since the na-
ture of the cause which is now sought is infinitely more
noble than anything of this sort, it will have the power
of knowing. But since all other things which are in
it are found to be infinite, this cause has infinite wisdom.
Again, if it were finite, it would be imperfect and sub-
ject naturally to transmutation into greater and lesser,
as is clear in the case of-other things that know, as in
every imperfect thing. And therefore the first mutation
which is in respect to being and non-being could be dis-
covered here, as was shown above. It is necessary,
therefore, that there be infinite wisdom in this cause;


4The text reads utilitatem; this has been interpreted as
an error for vilitatem; an interpretation which is reinforced
by the contrast below to nobilitas, i.e. nobilis=non vilis.


110 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


but if its power is infinite it is able to produce this
world, and its infinite wisdom knows how to order it
best, and its goodness requires that that be done, be-
cause it is the property of the best to do the best and
to communicate its goodness to others, so far as goodness
is adaptable to them. Therefore this canse has neces-
sarily produced the world... .


EN


SAINT BONAVENTURA (1221-1274)


Whether platonism and aristotelianism are expres-
sions of an identical philosophical attitude, or whether
they are different but reconcilable positions, or finally
whether they are totally contradictory, is a question,
which notwithstanding that it was long agitated in the
middle ages, submits to no simple answer. Modern
historians of philosophy have not been much concerned
with such questions, though the reiteration of changes
on the aphorism that one is born either a platonist or
an aristotelian, might be supposed to indicate that one
answer to the question is currently assumed. Yet ac-
cording as it is decided that Plato and Aristotle can
or can not be reconciled, the philosophers of the thir-
teenth century will appear devoted to the placable de-
velopment of a single philosophy or engaged in
acrimonious debate concerning the fundamentals of
philosophy.

It is not easy to state even the manner in which the
thirteenth century worked out its affiliations to the two
philosophies, for legend and evidence are at crucial
variance. There is, for example, the inescapable tradi-
tion (though its history does not bear examination)
that Bonaventura and Thomas Aquinas were. close
friends; it is equally certain that a bitter debate is to
be read between the lines of their works wherever they
wrote on the doctrines of the possible eternity of the
world or the unity of substantial forms. There is the


‘notion, too, that christianity in the thirteenth century


developed a single christian philosophy. It has been
111


112 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


questioned, therefore, whether any differences can be
found to indicate a departure from the fundamental
principles of augustinism. If the augustinian tradition
can harbor such diverse philosophers as Alexander of
Hales, John of la Rochelle, Saint Bonaventura, Roger
Bacon, Matthew of Aquasparta, Duns Scotus in the
thirteenth century, the addition of the names of Albert
the Great and Thomas Aquinas does not seem to stretch
the limits of the philosophy much further. Albert the
Great and Thomas seem to have treated the tradition of
Smee ee teed
augustinism, which in their time had been for centuries
the philosophy of christendom, as their own; where they
could not follow it, they ignored it or modified it; they
seldom refuted it in any point; and the modifications
they introduced into the aristotelian philosophy, the
doctrines of exemplarism, of creation, of providence, of
immortality, were augustinian doctrines. Viewed point
by point, platonism and aristotelianism are too inter-
mingled in the thirteenth century to permit facile gen-
eralization concerning them: Bonaventura could make
the aristotelian doctrine of abstraction fit the augustin-
ian doctrine of illumination; and Thomas Aquinas could
make use of the same elements: divine illumination
caps and actuates the process of abstraction by which
the mind knows things. None the less, in the total
doctrines composed of these elements and the debates
they engendered, are to be found nice specifications of
the problems of philosophy. And, apart from the dif-
ficulties which attended the introduction of Aristotle
into the west and apart from the consequent debates
concerning averroism, the differences are those between
platonism and aristotelianism. In the century in which
Albert and Thomas labored to free the aristotelian phi-
losophy from the averroistic interpretation which
rendered it dangerous to orthodoxy, Bonaventura saw in


SAINT BONAVENTURA 113


aristotelianism a fundamental opposition to christianity ;
where Albert and Thomas were concerned. with the
superiority of the aristotelian physics and natural
philosophy to any previous science, acknowledging none
the less that the metaphysics lacked proper doctrines
of creation and immortality, Bonaventura turned his
attention to finding eternal reasons behind the processes
of knowledge which he was content to describe in aris-
totelian terms.

The source of Aristotle’s error, then, was to have re-
jected the platonic doctrine of ideas, but’ Bonaventura
saw no difficulty in making the aristotelian analysis of
knowledge serve as the groundwork to the platonic.
The augustinian doctrine of illumination, which has by
even Augustine’s admission important affiliations with
the platonic doctrine of ideas, was once more in the
history of thought to be pitted against and reconciled
with the aristotelian dactrine of abstraction. Knowledge
is to be explained by the presence in us of a weakened
ray of divine light. The source of our knowledge is
the eternal ideas; not only by them but in them we see
truth. We do not, however, attain to the eternal rea-
sons or ideas as they are in the divine mind; rather we
know confused reflections of them. But except by the
created principles placed in us by God, we can have no
certain and clear knowledge of things. Such statement
is insufficient, however, if it is supposed that the mind
knows only the influence of eternal truths and not the
eternal truths: the mind in its sure knowledge must be
regulated by immutable and eternal rules, nat as if by
the conditions of the mind itself, but as if through the
things to which it is turned and which are above it in
the eternal truth. Our intellect is conjoined to the
eternal truth, and for certain knowledge an eternal rea-
son which is regulative and motive, must be granted to


114 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


be present, not only in its own status and transcendent
clarity, but in its conformity to the lower human status
and as perceived by created reason. Before the original
sin, man enjoyed full knowledge in the contemplation
of God, but in his present state there is a defect in
man’s understanding: God is supremely knowable in
himself, but he is not supremely knowable to man. ‘The
consequence is that man may approach the principles
by which he may have a knowledge of things without
veils, but his knowledge will never be complete, for
the eternal reasons on which the principles are based
wiJl escape him. In this life and in time he can know
nothing with full knowledge.

The true way of knowledge, therefore, was expressed
by neither Plato nor Aristotle, but by Augustine; Aris-
totle spoke the language of science; Plato, the language
of wisdom; Augustine, illumined by the Holy Spirit, the

_language of both. To follow either Plato or Aristotle
_is to neglect the double aspect of knowledge which Au-
gustine stated; it is to forget that man is situated be-
tween God and. things, nearer to things than to God;
that he can consider truth in things or in himself or
in God; that when he contemplates things by sensation
and the inferior part of his soul he receives a relative
certitude from below, whereas when his soul is turned
from things to God, he receives an absolute certitude
from above. Man’s ways of knowing, moreover, are
diversified according to the objects of knowledge to
which he turns himself. Corporeal things he perceives
by the senses; the active intellect abstracts intelligibles
from the data amassed in sensation and stored in mem-
ory. The arts and the sciences are composed of uni-
versals so abstracted from particulars, for the senses are
necessary if the intellect is to understand anything
other than itself. Without sensation the mechanical


SAINT BONAVENTURA ES


arts and. knowledge of natural objects would be im-
possible. It is not difficult to recognize the aristotelian
elements in this description of the growth of science
from sensation, memory, and experience; and Bonaven-
tura does not hesitate to employ the entire aristotelian
apparatus of the active intellect abstracting species
from the phantasms of sensation, which in turn convert
the possible intellect and are judged by it. The ex-
terior senses, of course, are insufficient when the soul
passes from natural objects to a knowledge of itself and
of God; an interior light is needed; by it man perceives
the principles of science and the natural truths innate
in him. This is not to say that man is born with in-
nate ideas; like Aristotle, like Thomas, like most of
the medievals, Bonaventura held that the mind of man
prior to experience contains no ideas. But he further
held that all ideas are not abstracted from the experi-
ence of external objects, but certain ideas are infused
in the mind; the latter are perceived in the mind by no
exterior light but by a light present to the mind alone.
The first principles of knowledge are known in virtue
of no experience save the mind’s experience of itself,
of its nature, and constitution, and of the things that
are in it.

The direction philosophy must take in its development
is determined by this orientation of man among the
things and truths present to him. He possesses an
imperfect but very certain knowledge of the supreme
object toward which he tends, for he is made to perceive
an infinite Good. No other knowledge is so certain as
the knowledge of the supreme Good which is known
by the light within us and since that knowledge carries
to a faith in revealed truth, it is not improper, Bonaven-
tura argues, to make faith the source of philosophic
speculation. For some ohjects are too high for reason,


116 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


but by love, an act of faith may be made, and there-
after he who believes by love, may seek also to have
reasons for his belief; thence philosophy follows after
faith. Historically, moreover, this is proper, since prior
to the fall, man contemplated God, but now, to an in-
telligence blinded by sin, the universe and things can not
be made intelligible by the effort of natural reason un-
aided. The way to the rehabilitation of the senses is
illuminative. God is the supreme good and the supreme
transcendent truth, in relation to whom all things are
true: the things of the universe are to God like signs
to their significations.

The philosophy of St. Bonaventura is properly, there-
fore, the detailed working out of the journey projected
in the title of one of his works, the Itinerary of the
Mind to God, and his interest in other knowledge than
that of God is properly temporary and such as is
implicated in the title of another of his works, the
Reduction of the Arts to Theology. By knowledge and
by things man may be led back to God whom things
and ideas express; but to remain in the contemplation
of creatures is to be condemned to error. From the
nature of the problem, the exposition which Bonaven-
tura undertakes must follow a peculiar turn: God is not
to be demonstrated by the things of the world, but rather
men are to be recalled from things of the world to
the love of the author. The steps of the ascension to
God are worked out in detail repeatedly in the works of
Bonaventura, and the contour of the ascent is present
behind each of the particular doctrines he expounds.
First the shadow of God is found in the sensible world,
for the splendors of things reveal God so insistently
that they would wake us even if we were deaf. There
is no technical elaboration of the traditional proofs of
God, but God is to be perceived directly in the order,


SAINT BONAVENTURA 117


movement, measure, beauty, and disposition of things.
The contemplation of the shadows of God in things,
however, is only preliminary to the second step, the
contemplation of the traces of God in the soul; the unity,
truth, and goodness of the traces in the soul require an
efficient, a formal, and a final cause (there is no material
cause) in God; the trinity of properties in the soul can
be explained only by the Trinity in God. The third
and final step consists in turning to God and contem-
plating him not only as cause but as object. For the
intellect is joined naturally to God; he is most present
to the soul and knowable to the soul by a certain likeness
not abstracted but impressed, inferior to God, because
it is in an inferior nature, yet superior to the soul be-
cause it makes the soul better. Without that knowledge
of God, knowledge of things and of truths would be
impossible since the principle of things and knowledge
would be lacking; he in turn is known directly without
exterior senses, as the soul knows itself and its own
operations. The knowledge of him is in the interior of
ourselves, and if he seems to need demonstration, it is
not because of his nature but because of our nature,
since the veils of concupiscence sometimes blind us and
since we sometimes fail to reflect. Philosophy becomes
an aid to the attainment of the end to life recognized
by faith and love. The love of God is the end, and the
science which works the accomplishment of that end,
theology, must perforce be an affective science: the end
of the itinerary of life is given by faith, the route is
illuminative, and the pilgrimage is adhered to by love of
the end; philosophy is to be engaged in the understand-
ing of the stages by which progress may be made along
the route. Bae.


SAINT BONAVENTURA


COMMENTARY ON THE FOUR BOOKS. OF
SENTENCES OF PETER LOMBARD!


Commentary oN Boox I. Distinction III?
Parr I
On tHE KNow.epGe or Gop sy Disranr LikeNnesses
For the Apostle says that the invisible things of God* ete.
Division or THE Text


The Master treated above of the sacred Trinity and
Unity in so far as it is a matter of belief. In this


1Docroris SerapHict S. BoNnaveNTuRAE, Commentaria in
Quatuor, Libros Sententiarum Magistri Petri Lombardi. Ad
Aquas Claras (Quaracchi): Ex Typographia Collegii S. Bon-
aventurae, 1882, tom. I, pp. 66-80.

2The scholastic method, since it is primarily a method for
the orderly and effective presentation of arguments, is not
likely to prove sympathetic to the modern reader in his first
encounter with it. The interest of the reader and the thinker
has changed since the middle ages: philosophy and science
are read primarily for conclusions, and a mechanism, there-
fore, for presenting the arguments on which the conclusions
are based and for considering meticulously the variety of
arguments that might be advanced against ‘these, must im-
press the reader today, engrossed in practical concerns, as
sophistical, hairsplitting, impertinent. He will, however, find
the questions more easily intelligible, if he reads the exposi-

, 118


SAINT BONAVENTURA 119


second part he treats of it, in so far as it is a matter of
understanding. And this part is divided into three parts.
In the first of these he adduces appropriate likenesses
and reasons for the understanding of the Trinity. In
the second he resolves the doubts which arise at the be-
ginning of the fourth distinction: Here arises a question
which is necessary enough. For it is known* ete. In
the third, having resolved these doubts, he determines
the properties and conditions of the Trinity and Unity
in the eighth distinction: Now the question of the truth
or the property and immutability and simplicity of the
divine nature or substance or essence must be taken
up” etc.

The first part again has two parts. In the first he
brings forward distant likenesses; in the second, close
or express likenesses, which are considered in the image,
in the following place: Now, however, let us proceed to
the consideration.®

Again the first part has two parts. In the first he
shows the Unity, in the second he shows the Trinity, in


tion in a slightly different order: first looking through the
division of the text, proceeding from the statement of the
question directly to the conclusion, then reading the argu-
ments numbered at the beginning of the article together
with the replies to them which follow the conclusion, argu-
ment 1 then reply 1, argument 2 then reply 2, (these argu-
ments are always those contrary to the position the writer
will himself take, and therefore in the order of presentation
the reader would come first an the positions contrary to that
of the writer); finally there will remain the arguments to
the contrary which, since they usually supplement and con-
firm the author’s position, seldom require refutation.

3 The Book of Sentences 1, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. I,
p. 189.

4 The Book of Sentences I, d. 4, ch. 1.

5 The Book of Sentences I, d. 8, ch. 1.

® The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 2; see above vol. I, p. 193.


120 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the following place: It remains now to show whether
any vestige or slight trace of the Trinity could be had
through things which have been made" etc. The first
part has four subdivisions. In the first he proves by the
authority of the Apostle in the first chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans,® that God is knowable through
the creature. In the second he takes up the various
modes and reasons of knowing, in the following place:
For as Ambrose says.® In the third he says that these
modes are involved in the statement of the Apostle, in
the following place: Therefore, the truth of God could
be known in a great many ways.'° In the fourth he
touches on what can be proved by the aforesaid reasons,
namely, the unity of essence, not the trinity, in the
following place: But all these relate to revealing the
unity of Deity.”

It remains now to show whether!® etc. The Master
showed above the unity or entity of the divine essence
by reasons. In this second part he shows the Trinity
by the distant likeness which is considered in its trace,
and this chapter has four subdivisions. In the first the
Master shows the nature [ratio] of the trace in the
creature. In the second he shows what corresponds to
the trace in the creator, since there is a trinity of appro-
priated aspects, that is, of origin, of beauty, and of love,
so that each of them corresponds to each, in the follow-
ing place: For in that Trinity is the supreme origin.

7 The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. I, p. 191.

8 Vers. 20.

Bae Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. I,
i The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. I,

a ROW.
“ “The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. I,
p. 191.

12 See above, note 7.

_ The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. I,
p. 192.


SAINT BONAVENTURA 121


In the third he teaches that the trinity is to be contem-
plated in God through the consideration of the trace in
the creature, in the following place: From the considera-
tion of creatures therefore,* etc. where he shows a trin-
ity of things appropriated in God both with respect to
the act of creation and with respect to the act of re-
formation. In the fourth subdivision he shows that
the consideration of the Trinity by its trace is not
sufficient, but distant, in the following place: It has
been shown, then, how in creatures.1>

Now, however, let us proceed to the consideration..®
This fs the second part of this distinction, in which the
Master proves the Trinity and Unity by close and ex-
press likeness; image is of this sort. And this part is
divided into two parts; in the first he shows the trinity
and unity in the creator by the trinity and unity con-
sidered in the powers of the soul; in the second in the
habits or conditions [habitus], in the following place:
Furthermore the Trinity can be distinguished in another
way and by other names.\"

The first part of this part again has four subdivisions.
In the first of these he shows where the image is to be
sought in the soul, that is, in the higher part of it and
in its three powers, namely, memory, understanding, and

“will. In the second he touches the conditions [ conditio]
of the image, which are trinity, unity, and equality, in
the following place: “These three, therefore,” as Augus-
tine says.1® In the third he takes up and resolves the


144 The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. I,
p- 193.

% The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 13; see above vol. I,
p- 193.

16 See above, note 6.

u The Book of Sentences I, d, 3, ch. 3; see above vol. I, .

Sp. 199. ,

F The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 23; see above vol. I,
p- 194.


122 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


doubt which arises from the aforesaid contentions,
namely, whether the soul is its own powers, in the fol-
lowing place: In what sense that which has been stated
above should be taken, must be considered very ear-
nestly here.1® In the fourth place he teaches one to avoid
the error which could be caused by or could arise from
the exhibition of the created trinity, that it should be a
likeness in all detail to the uncreated; he shows there
that there is the greatest unlikeness of the image to God,
in the following place: “Nevertheless he should take
care.”*° Furthermore the trinity can be distinguished in
another way and by other names”! etc. This ‘is the
second part of the second part of this distinction, in
which the Master purposes to investigate the image in
the habits’ or conditions [habitus] of the soul, so far as
that is possible, and this part is divided into four sub-
divisions. For in the first he takes up those things in
which the image of the Trinity is considered, which are
mind, knowledge, and love. In the second, having
treated of those things, he shows that the image is con-
sidered in them because of consubstantiality, order, and
equality, in the following place: These three, however,
although they are” etc. In the third he shows how the
rational mind advances in the contemplation of the
created trinity to seeing and knowing the uncreated Trin-
ity in Unity, in the following place: Consequently, the
rational mind considering these three.*> In the fourth


1 The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 2; see above vol. I,
p- 196.


2” The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 2; see above vol. Is
p. 197.

2 The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 3; see above vol. i
p- 199.

2 The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 8; see above vol. aK
p- 199.

* The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 3; see above vol. ii


p. 200.


a


SAINT BONAVENTURA 123


he brings together briefly the things which have been
demonstrated above, in the following place: Wherefore,,
in accordance with that consideration.**


TREATMENT OF THE QuESTIONS


Four inquiries are made for the understanding of the
points which are touched on in this first part of the
present distinction.

The first is, whether God is knowable by the creature.

The second is, whether he is knowable through the -
creature. :

The third is, whether the mode of knowing through
the creature is proper to man in respect to every state,
namely, the state of innocence, the state of fallen nature,
the state of glorified nature.

The fourth is, what is knowable concerning God
through the creature.


One ARTICLE
On tHE Knowasitiry or Gop


Question I.
Wuerner Gop is KNowaBLe BY THE CREATURE


As regards the first, that God is not knowable by
the creature is shown,

1, By the authority of Dionysius on Divine Names:?
It is possible neither to speak of nor to understand God.

2. Again it is shown by reason by means of the four-
fold supposition which is necessarily in knowledge,
“The Book of Sentences I, d. 8, ch. 4; see above vol. I,


p- 200.
* Ch. 1, about the middle.


5


124 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


namely, proportion, union or reception, judgment, and
information [i.e. endowment of form]. For the under-
standing understands only that which is proportional to
it, and that which is united to it in some way, and that
of which it judges, and that by which the vision of its
understanding is informed [i.e. is endowed with form].

From the first supposition it is argued thus: it is
necessary that there be a proportion of knower to know-
‘able: but there is no proportion of God to the under-
standing, because God is infinite and the understanding
finite: therefore etc. Moreover, if there is some propor-
tion, it is seen that it is not sufficient, for the uncreated
truth is further removed from the human understanding
than any created intelligible is from the sense. But
sense, which is perceptive of the sensible, is never
elevated to knowledge of the created intelligible: there-
fore, neither will the understanding ever be elevated to
knowledge of the uncreated intelligible. ,

3. Again, from the second supposition, thus: it is
necessary that there be a union of the knowable to the
knower, so that the one be in the other; however, the
knower is not in the knowable, but conversely; but it is
impossible that the infinite be grasped by the finite :
therefore, it is impossible that the infinite be in the finite:
therefore, it is impossible for God to be in the sega
standing, since he is infinite.

4, Again, from the third supposition, thus: it is neces-
sary for knowledge that there be in the knower a judg-
ment of the known; but every one who judges must have
power over the judged; but a finite being does not have
power over an infinite: therefore, a finite being does not
judge an infinite; but judgment was required for knowl-
edge: therefore, the finite understanding does not know
the infinite God over whom it has no power.

5. Again, from the fourth, thus: it is necessary that


SAINT BONAVENTURA 425


the understanding be informed, when it knows, by that
which is known; but everything which tnforms another,
informs it either by essence or by likeness; but God does
not inform by essence, for he is united to nothing as
form, nor by abstracted likeness, for an abstracted like-
ness is more spiritual than that from which it is ab-
stracted; nothing, however, is nor can be more spiritual
than God: therefore etc.


To THE conTRaRY: 1. The rational soul is formed
to the image of God. But as Augustine says in the book
on the Trinity, and as is stated in the text of the present
distinction: The mind is the image of God in that by
which it is capable [i.e. receptive] of God and by which
it can be partaker of him.2° However, to be capable is
not according to substance or essence, because he is thus
in all creatures: therefore, by knowledge and love: there-
fore, God can be known by the creature.

2. Again, it is shown by reason, thus: all spiritual
knowledge is made by reason of light and by reason of
uncreated light, as Augustine says in the Soliloquies ;?"
but light is in the highest degree knowable, and God is
the greatest light: and therefore he is in the highest
degree knowable to the soul itself: therefore ete.

3. Again, since knowledge of some things is by their
presence, and knowledge of some by their likeness, those
are known more truly which are known by presence, as
Augustine says;7° but God is united to the soul itself by
presence: therefore, God is known more truly than other
things which are known by likeness.

4. Again, as the supreme goodness is related to love,


% Aucustinus, De Trinit. XTV, c. 8, n. 11. Cp. The Book
of Sentences, I, d. 3, ch. 2; see above vol. I, p. 194.

2 Aucustinus, Solilog. I, c. 8.

2 Aucustinus, De Trinit. X, c. 8-11.


126 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


so the supreme truth is related to knowledge; but the
supreme goodness is supremely lovable by the affect:
therefore, the supreme truth is supremely knowable by
the understanding.

5. Again, each thing has power more efficaciously
toward that to which it is ordered naturally; but our
understanding is ordered naturally to the knowledge of
the supreme light: therefore, the supreme light is know-
able to it in the highest degree.


ConcLusIon


God, knowable in the highest degree in himself, would
be in the highest degree knowable to us too, if there
were no defect on the part of our understanding.


I repLy: it must be said that God in himself as su-
preme light is in the highest degree knowable; and that,
as light fulfilling our understanding in the highest degree
and as far as he is of himself, he would be supremely
knowable to us too, if there were not some defect on the
part of the power knowing, which is not removed per-
fectly except through the deiformity of glory. There-
fore, the reasons must be granted, which prove that God
is knowable by the creature and likewise most clearly
knowable as far as he is of himself, if there were not


something impeding or something deficient on the part
of the understanding, as will be clear later.29


1. To the objections to the contrary it must be said
that there is knowledge by comprehension and knowledge
by apprehension. Knowledge by apprehension consists
in the manifestation of the truth of the thing known; but

3


*In the two questions which follow, also Book II, a. 23
Pe ta fee? VOT eS:


SAINT BONAVENTURA 127


knowledge by comprehension consists in the inclusion
of the totality. To the first knowledge a proportion of
agreement is required; and there ‘is such knowledge in
the soul in respect to God, because the soul is in a cer-
tain manner all things,®° by assimilation to all, for it is
formed naturally to know all things, and it is in the
‘highest degree capable of God by assimilation, for it is
the image and likeness of God. As regards knowledge
by comprehension, a proportion of equality and equiva-
lence is required; and there is no such proportion in the
soul in respect to God, because the soul is finite, but
God is infinite; and therefore it does not have this knowl-
edge; and Dionysius meant this knowledge, and the
objection holds concerning it, but not concerning the
other.

2. To the objection which is raised concerning the
distance of the intelligible and the sensible, it must be
said that there is distance according to the relation
[ratio] of being and according to the relation of know-
able [i.e. there is a distance in so far as you consider
them as beings and another in so far as you consider
them as objects of knowledge]. In the first manner the
distance is greater; in the second manner it is not, be-
cause both are intelligible, namely, God and the soul.
It is not thus in the case of the understanding and sense,
because sense is a determined power, but the understand-
ing is not.

3. To the objection that the infinite is not grasped
by the finite, some say that grasping the infinite is to be
taken in two ways, namely, with respect to essence, and
thus it is grasped; and with respect to power, and thus
it is not grasped, just as a point is wholly determined by
the line with respect to substance, but not totally with
respect to power. But this solution does not seem to

%» ArisroTLtE, on the Soul III, 8, 431” 21.


128 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


solve, because in God essence is the same as power, and
both are infinite.

Therefore, it must be said that infinity is to be taken
in two senses: one, which is constituted by opposition
to the simple; and such an infinite is not grasped by the
finite, such as infinite mass; there is another which has
infinity together with simplicity, such as God; and such -
an infinite, because it is simple, is everywhere whole;
because ii is infinite, it is in nothing in such wise that it
is not outside it. It is to be understood thus in the case
of the knowledge of God. And therefore it. does not
follow, although he is known whole, that he is compre-
hended, because the understanding does not include the
totality of him, as the creature does not include his
immensity.

4. To the objection which was raised: the one judg-
ing has power, etc., it must be said that judging of
anything is in two ways: in the first way by distinguish-
ing, whether it is or is not; and in this way judgment is
proper to every understanding, when it knows, in re-
spect to every object; in another way by approving or
reproving, that it should be thus; and thus it does not
judge of truth, but it judges according to it of other
things, as Augustine says on True Religion®! that the
judge does not judge of the law, but he judges of other
things according to the law. And in this way what
Augustine says is true, that no one judges of that truth,
yet no one judges without it. And in this second way
that which is stated-in opposition is true, that the one
who judges has power over that which is judged; but in
the first way it is not true, that he has power over it;
still he can be guided as toward the object by the help
of it [i.e. the truth].

5. To the objection which was raised last concerning

Ch. 31, n. 58.


SAINT BONAVENTURA 129


information [endowing with form], it must be said that
God is present to the soul itself and to every under-
standing by way of truth: therefore, it is not necessary
that a likeness be abstracted from him, by which he may
be known; yet none the less, when he is known by the
understanding, the understanding is informed by a cer-
tain idea, which is, as it were, a certain likeness, not
abstracted but impressed, inferior to God, because it is
in an inferior nature, yet superior to the soul, because
it makes the soul better. And Augustine says this in
book IX on the Trinity, chapter eleven:*? As, when we
learn bodies by the senses of bodies, some likeness of
them is made in our mind: so when we know God, some
likeness of God is made; that idea, however, is inferior,
because it is in an inferior nature.


a! a Question IT.


Wuetuer Gop Is Knowas_Le THrRovucH CREATURES
+


Ifthe second place it is inquired whether God is know-
able through creatures. And it seems that he is not.

1. For the way to error is not the way to knowledge;
but knowledge through the creature is the way of error:
therefore etc. The proof of the minor premiss: in the
Book of Wisdom, chapter fourteen:°? The creatures of
God are for deception and hatred and as a trap to the
feet of fools. Moreover, Augustine, on the Free Will,3*
speaks of those who are occupied with creatures: turn-
ing their back to you, they are fastened firmly in corpo-
real work as in their own shadows.

2. Again, the way to know the luminous or the light
is not darkness or the dark; but the creature is darkness,

Sire LG. ssiVersy ut:

# Book II, ch. 16, n. 43; see above vol. I, p. 62


130 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


whereas God is light: therefore, God is not knowable
through the creature.

3. Again, the medium by which something is known
or proved of an end term, must have something in
common with that for which it must be known; but the
Creator and the creature have nothing in common: there-
fore, Ged is not known through creatures.

4. Again, every medium by which one ascends to an
end term is distant from it by finite steps; but every
creature, howsoever noble, is distant from God by infi-
nite steps, because however so many times it may be
doubled, the creature will never attain to the nobility
of God: therefore, by the creature one does not ascend
to the knowledge of God.

Bonaventura OgGrtes

To THE conTrary: 1. In the thirteenth chapter of
_the Book of Wisdom* it is said: From the greatness of
the species and the creation it will be possible that the
Creator of them be seen in knowledge. Wherefore
Isidore on the Highest Good*® says: From the beauty of
the circumscribed creature God makes his beauty, which
can not be circumscribed, to be understood.

2. Again, it is shown by reason, thus: mot only may
the effect be known by the cause, but also the cause by
the effect: therefore, if God is the cause operating ae
cording to his nobility, and the creature the effect, it
will be possible that God be known through the creature.

3. Again, the sensible is the way of knowing the in-
telligible; but the creature is sensible, God intelligible:
therefore, the way to come to the knowledge of the
Creator is through the creature.

4. Again, like may be known through like; but every
creature is like God, either as trace or as image: there-

% Vers. 5. * Or Sentences L ce. 4.


SAINT BONAVENTURA 131


fore, it comes about that through every creature God is
known.

It is inquired, then, what difference there is between
a trace and an image; and since there is in every crea-
ture a trace, it is inquired, why not in like manner
an image, and in accordance with what the trace is
so considered.


CoNncLUSION


God can be known through creatures in the natural light
of reason.


I rEpty: it must be said that as the cause shines forth
in the effect, and as the wisdom of the artificer is mani-
fested in his work, so God, who is the artificer and cause
of the creature, is known through it.

And the reason for this is double, one is because of
agreement, the other because of need: because of agree-
ment, for every creature leads to God more than to any-
thing else; because of need, for, since God as the
supremely spiritual light could not be known in his
spirituality by the understanding, which is almost ma-
terial, the soul needs to know him through the creature.

NGwe. :

1. To the objection which is raised that knowledge of
the creature is the way to error, it must be said that
the creature may be known in two ways: either with
respect to special properties, which are of imperfection,
or with respect to general conditions, which are of com-
pletion; but if with respect to special conditions and
of imperfection: either by attributing them to God or by
denying them. In the first fashion is the way of error,
in the second the way of knowledge; and thus God is
known by denial.


132 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


But if he be known with respect to the conditions of
perfection, this can be in two ways, as a picture is known
in two ways: either as picture or as image: whence,
either one rests in the beauty of the creature or by that ©
one tends to something else. If in the first way, then it
is the way which leads astray; wherefore Augustine in
the book on the Free Will:3" Alas, for those who love,
instead of you, your beckonings, and who stray among
your traces [instead of rising from them to you], and
who abandon you as leader. If in the second way, as
it is the way to something else, so it is the reason of
knowing by superexcellence, for every noble quality in
the creature must be attributed to God in the highest
degree; and thus that is clear.

2. To the objection which is raised, that the dark
medium is not the way for knowing light, it must be
said that there is the well-disposed eye and the bleared
eye. Of the well-disposed eye this is true, but not of the
bleared eye, to which the overcasting cloud or the land
receiving the clarity of the light is the medium for see-
ing the sun; thus for our understanding, which is like
the eye of the owl to the things most manifest of nature,
[the dark or the creature is the medium for knowing the
light or God].

3. To the objection which is taised concerning the
lack of community, it must be said that it is not common
by univocation, but it is common by analogy, which
names the relation of two to two, as in the sailor and
the doctor, or of one to one as of the exemplar to the
exemplified.

4. To the objection which is raised that there are
always infinite steps, it must be said that the ascent to
God can be in two ways: either with respect to the eight


of the presence; and in that way every creature is formed
* Rook II, ch. 16, n. 43; see above vol. I, p. 60.


SAINT BONAVENTURA 133


naturally to lead to God, nor are there infinite steps that
way; or with respect to equality of equivalence; and in
_ that way it is true that there are infinite steps, for the
- ereated good, howsoever much it be doubled, is never
equal to the uncreated.

The first step, however, in respect to the ascent to
_the sight of the presence is in the consideration of visible
things, the second in the consideration of invisible things,
as of the soul or of another spiritual substance; the third
is from the soul to God, because the image is formed+
by truth itself and is joined immediately to God.3®

To the inquiry which was made last concerning the
difference of trace and image, some make this difference,
that the trace is in sensible things, the image in spiritual.
But this distinction and position does not hold, because
the trace is also in spiritual things. For unity, truth,
goodness, in which there is a trace. are conditions in the
highest degree universal and intelligible.

Others say that the trace is so called because it repre-
sents in respect to the part, but the image in respect to
the whole. But this difference again does not hold
because, as God is simple, he has no representative in
respect to part; again since he is infinite, he can be
represented with respect to the whole by absolutely no
creature, not even by the whole world.

And therefore it must be understood that since the
creature leads to the knowledge of God by the mode of
shadow, by the mode of trace, and by the mode of image,
the better known difference of these modes by which like-
wise they are named, is taken from the mode of repre-
senting. For shadow is spoken of in so far as it repre-
sents in a certain removal and confusion; trace in so far
as it represents in removal but distinction; but image in
so far as it represents in nearness and distinction. x
* Cp. Accustinus, LXXXIII Quacstiones, quaestio 51, n. 2.


134 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


From this difference is gathered a second which is
in the conditions in which the three are found. For
creatures are called a shadow with reference to prop-
erties which look to God in some kind of cause accord-
ing to an undetermined relation [ratio]; a trace with
reference to a property which looks to God under the
relation of the triple cause, efficient, formal, and final,
as one, true, and good; an image with reference to con-
ditions which look to God not only in the relation of
cause, but also of object; these are memory, understand-
ing, and will.

From these, two other differences are concluded: with
respect to the things to which they lead; for the creature
as shadow leads to the knowledge of common things as
common; as trace to knowledge of common things as
appropriated; as image to knowledge of properties as
proper.

Another difference is in the things in which these
[three modes] are discovered. For as every creature is
compared to God both in the relation of cause and in the
relation of triple cause, so every creature is shadow or
trace. But as only the rational creature is related to
God as to its object, because he alone is capable of God
by knowledge and love: so he alone is image.


Question III.


Wuernuer Man 1n Every Strate Knows Gop *
Turoveu CrEeaturEs


* In the third place it is inquired whether the knowl-
edge of God through creatures is proper to man in
respect to every state. That it is proper to man in
respect to his first state is shown thus:

1. Man in the state of innocence did not know God


SAINT BONAVENTURA 135


face to face: therefore, if he knew God, he knew him
through an effect, therefore through a trace, therefore
through a creature.

2, Again, in man in the state of innocence sensible
knowledge was not an impediment but an aid to intellec-
tive knowledge; but the intellective knowledge, for which
man was made, is knowledge of God: therefore, all sens-
ible knowledge in the first man was ordered to that end;
but knowledge of God through the aid of sensibles is
knowledge through the creature: therefore etc.

Again, that it is proper to man with respect to the
state of blessedness is seen:

1. Because the Blessed know the creature, but do not
remain in the creature, but return to God: therefore, they
know God through the creature.

2. Again, the blessed souls praise God through crea-
tures; but to praise God through creatures is to know
through creatures: therefore etc.


But To THE conTRARY: that it is not Soddey to man
as he was created is shown thus.

1. Knowledge by trace is pe eneaee bs a medium;
but the mind as Augustine says,®® is formed by truth

itself immediately: therefore, such knowledge is not
suited to human nature with respect to that state, nor
likewise with respect to any other.

2. Again, that is not the right order which goes to
the end which is nearer, by a medium which is more dis-
tant; but man in his first state was nearer to God than
to any other creatures: therefore, it was not fitting that
he come to the knowledge of God by way of other
creatures.

Again, that such knowledge is not proper to man with

respect to the state of blessedness is seen.
49 See above note 37.


136 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


1. Because knowledge by way of a trace is knowledge
by manuduction: therefore, it is not perfect knowledge:
therefore, it is from the part: therefore, it does not re-
main in the Blessed, because in them, that which is from
the part will be laid aside.

2. Again, the trace or creature is like a ladder for
ascending to, or like a road for arriving at, God; but
when one has arrived at the end, there is no further use
for the way: therefore similarly, when man is high up,
he does not need a ladder; but the knowledge of the
Blessed is immediately in God: therefore, it is not
through creatures.


CoNncLUSION


God is known in creatures perfectly by those who com-
prehend, half-fully by those on their way, but through
creatures he is known properly by those on their way, in
one way, however, before, and in another after the fall.


I repiy: for the understanding of the aforesaid ques-
tions it must be noted that it is one thing to know God
im the creature, another to know him through the crea-
ture. To know God in the creature is to know his
presence and influence in the creature. And this is
proper half-fully to those on their way, but perfectly
to those who comprehend; whence Augustine says at the
end of the book on the City of God*, that God will
then be seen expressly, when God will be all in all. To
know God through the creature, however, is to be ele-
vated from knowledge of the creature to knowledge of
God as by the means of an intermediate ladder. And
this is properly the possession of those on their way, as
Bernard says to Eugenius.*!

Book XXII, c. 30, n. 4.

“De Consideratione V, ¢e. 1.


SAINT BONAVENTURA  - 137


Yet it is suited to man in different ways in the state
of nature as created and in the state of fallen nature:
because in the first state man knew God through the
creature as through a clear mirror; but after the fall
he knew him as through a mirror and enigma, as the
Apostle says in the thirteenth chapter‘? of the First
Epistle to the Corinthians, because of the overclouding
of the understanding and ‘the deterioration of things.


To the objection which is raised, therefore, concerning
the state of blessedness, it must be said that, as has been
said, it is not proper to the Blessed to know through
creatures, but rather in creatures. And the reasons
which seem to prove the contrary do not prove it, but
rather that he is known by them in creatures.

1. To the objection which is raised concerning the
state of innocence, that the mind is formed immediately,
etc., it must be said that the medium is double, namely,
efficient and disposing. What Augustine said should be
understood of the first medium, but not of the second,
since God is the efficient medium and the object of the
mind itself. That argument, however, Augustine directs
against the philosophers whose opinion was that the
mind was not joined to the first principle immediately,
but with some intelligence mediating. .

2. To the objection which is raised that that is not
the right order, it must be said that man can be consid-
ered in two ways: either as that which is in himself or
as that which is outside himself. In the first manner he
does not attain through creatures from himself to God,
but that which is outside himself is gathered through
knowledge of creatures into himself and is raised up
above himself.

Or it must be said that other creatures can be con-

“2 \Viers..12.


138 - MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


sidered as things or as signs. In the first way they are
inferior to man, in the second manner they are media
in becoming or on the way, not at the end, because they
do not reach to the end, but through them man reaches
God, having left them behind him.


Question IV.


Wuetruer tur Triniry or Persons ToGETHER WITH
yur Uniry or Essence Can Be Known
NatruraLty THRouGH CREATURES


In the fourth and last place it is inquired what is
knowable of God through creatures. And the Apostle
says*® the everlasting power and divinity. And it is,
inquired whether the plurality of persons can be known
through creatures. And it seems that it can.

1. Because philosophers had no knowledge of God
except through creatures, and they knew the Trinity:
therefore etc. The minor premiss is clear by Augustine
on the City of God:** Philosophers say that philosophy
is tripartite, in which there is knowledge of the Trinity.

2. Again, the magicians failed in the third sign, ac-
cording to the eighth book of Ewzodus;*° and it is ex-
pounded that they failed in knowledge of the third per-
son; either therefore with respect to properties or with
respect to appropriated qualities. Not with respect to
appropriated qualities, because goodness shines forth to
us in the creature: therefore, with respect to properties:
therefore, they knew at least two persons.

3. Again, this same conclusion appears through rea-
son: for the trace, since it names a distinction, is a reason
of knowing God distinctively or in distinction; but there
is in God only a distinction of persons: therefore,

4“ Rom. 1:20. BoB OOK ale Ce eo. 4 Vers. 18.


SAINT BONAVENTURA 139


through the trace they could know the distinction of
persons.

4, Again, there is knowledge of the Trinity by image
with respect to order, distinction, and equality; but
knowledge by image is knowledge through creature:
therefore, they could know the Trinity through the
creature.

5. Again, knowledge of the hidden properties of a
creature is more difficult than knowledge of the plurality
of persons, because the former is grasped only by great
and subtle minds, whereas the latter is grasped even by
the untutored and by fools: therefore, if they have been
able to arrive by way of the visible properties of crea-
tures at invisible things, all the more are they able to
arrive at the knowledge that the persons are many. And
it is this that is said in the thirteenth chapter*® of the
Book of Wisdom: For if they have been able to know
so much that they are able to estimate the world, how
have they not more easily found the Lord of it?


To THE conTRARY: 1. Knowledge of the Trinity is
knowledge of faith; but knowledge of faith is of those
things which are above reason; and the things which
are above reason can not be known through creatures:
therefore etc.

2. Again, knowledge of God through creatures is had
in only two ways, either by affirming what is in the crea-
ture or the like, or else by denying it; but the Trinity is
not known through denial, but by affirmation; but in no
creature is there found a plurality of supposita together
with a unity of essence: therefore etc.

3. Again, the written law is above the law of nature,
or the book of the sacred Scripture above the book of the
‘mundane creation; but no one lacking faith comes to


46 Vers. 9.


140 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


knowledge of the plurality of persons through the sacred
Scripture: therefore, much the less through the book of
mundane creation.


CoNCLUSION


The Trinity of persons is not knowable through crea-
tures, but only the trinity of qualities appropriated,
namely, unity, truth, goodness. “


I repty: that it must be said that the plurality of per-
sons together with a unity of essence is the property of
the divine nature alone, the like of which is not found
in the creature nor can be found nor can be thought
rationally: therefore, in no wise is the trinity of persons
knowable through the creature by ascending rationally
from the creature to God. But although it has absolutely
no like, it has nevertheless in some way that which is
believed to be like in the creature. Whence I say that
the philosophers never knew the trinity of persons by
reason, nor even the plurality of persons, unless they
had some condition of faith, such as some heretics have;
whence the things which they said, either were spoken
without their understanding them, or else they were
illumined by the ray of faith.

There is another trinity of qualities appropriated,


namely, of unity, truth, and goodness, and they knew
this trinity, because it has a like.


1. To that objection which is raised, therefore, that
the philosophers knew the Trinity by way of tripartite
philosophy, it must be saidithat it is true that by this and
by other means they came to a knowledge of appro-
priated qualities, but those who believe come to a knowl-
edge of both trinities.


ws


f


SAINT BONAVENTURA 141


2. To the objection which is raised concerning the
third sign, it is said and well said, that the wise men
are said to have failed thus in the third sign, because
they failed in knowledge of the most potent effect of
goodness, namely, of redemption.

3. To another it must be said that a trace indicates
a distinction of essential properties, and to this corre-
sponds the trinity of appropriated qualities, not the trin-
ity of properties or of persons.

4. To the objection which is raised concerning image,
it must be said that knowing the soul is either according
to that which it ts; and this knowledge is of reason; or
_ else it is according to that of which it is mage; and that
knowledge is of faith alone. °

5. To the objection which is raised finally, that it is
more difficult to know the world, it must be said
that this is to be understood, when divine aid has been
added; but speaking absolutely it is false. For man
would be disposed to faith more quickly than he would
acquire a knowledge of philosophy. Our understanding,
nevertheless, has more power in the knowledge of mun-
dane things than of the Trinity, for the Trinity is above
reason, and our intellect sees the contrary of the trinity
in sense; and therefore it needs new elevation, such as
knowledge by infusion.


Dovustrs ConcrerRNING THE TEXT oF THE MASTER
Dovst I


In this part there are the doubts concerning the text
relative to those arguments which the Master states with
respect to the purpose [ratio] of proving and the
strength of inferring, because they all seem either not
to hold or to rest on doubtful grotinds.


142 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


For the first argument is the following. He who can
do what no creature can do, is above every creature; but
he who made this world, made that which no creature
could make: therefore, he is not a creature, but above
every creature. And this reason begins at this point:
For as Ambrose says, “That God’’*" etc. In this argu-
ment two doubtful points seem to be assumed, namely,
that this world has been made, and that the creature
could not make it, both of which are extremely doubtful.

The second argument is the following: He who made
corporeal things and mutable spirits, is above all cor-
poreal and mutable things: therefore, he is spiritual and
immutable. Here in the same way a doubtful point
seems to be supposed, that God made spirits. And
again, it does not follow from this, even if he made
mutable things, that he is immutable, but rather the
opposite seems to follow, namely, that he is mutable.

The third argument is the following. He who made
the good and the better is the best; but God made cor-
poreal things which are good, and spiritual things which.
are better: therefore, God is the best. This argument
similarly seems to have no cogency, because then in the
same way every craftsman who makes good and better,
would be best, which is false.

The fourth argument is the following. He who made
beautiful and more beautiful things, is beauty itself or
the species and that is most handsome [ speciosissimus | ;
but we see that corporeal things are handsome, and
spiritual things are more handsome: therefore, he who
made them is most handsome. It is seen in the same way
that the argument stated does hold because of the in-
stance stated above.

Again inquiry is made concerning the difference of


“The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. T.
p. 190.


SAINT BONAVENTURA 143


.these arguments and how they are distinguished. If you
say, as some say, that the arguments are four according,
to the four genera of causes, this is nothing, because
the genus of material cause does not fall in God. If you
say that the arguments are according to the modes of
knowing, on the contrary: there are only three, that is,
in the relation of cause, denial, and excellence.


I repuy: it must be said that all these arguments for
the purpose of proving and inferring suppose something
certain. For the first argument supposes that the pro-
duction of a thing out of nothing can be only by an
infinite power. If this is supposed, since it is certain
that no creature has infinite power, it follows that the
act of the production of things out of nothing is his who
is above every creature. And thus from this act, as from
a property, God is known omnipotent, immense.—In
the other three arguments a state is supposed, just as in
all philosophy a state is supposed in causes; and there-
fore everything mutable is reduced to the immutable,
because in the mutable there is no state [i.e., one can
pause at no point in the regress] in the class of the
éficient except among movers, not among the moved: for
everything which is moved is moved by something else.
In the same way, the good and better are reduced to
the best, because there is no state in the genus of end
except in the best. In the same way, the beautiful and
the more beautiful in relation to the most beautiful, be-
cause there is no state in the genus of species and form,
except in that which is itself species by essence.


To the objection which is raised concerning the dis-
tinction of the arguments, the answer is now clear from
what has been said. For they can not be distinguished
according to the genus of causes only, nor according to
the modes of knowing only, but according to both. For


3)


144 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the first argument is taken according to the relation of
cause; the others are taken according to the relation of
cause and of excellence, because they consider order,
and they are distinguished according to order into a
triple class of causes, efficient or moving, ending, and
exemplar.


Dovusr IT


Again, inquiry is made concerning that which the
Master says later, that the eternal Author is understood
from the perpetuity of creatures’® For the following
argument does not hold: the effect is perpetual, therefore
the efficient is eternal.

Again, it is inquired similarly concerning this which
he says: the omnipotent Author from the magnitude of
creatures.*® For the following does not hold: he made


great things, therefore he is omnipotent or could make
all things.


I repiy: to this some say that it is only a kind of
persuasion by sign, not a necessary argument. For they
say that omnipotence and eternity, since they are infinite,
can not be proved sufficiently by creatures which are
finite.°°—In another way, however, it can be said that
although it does not follow in any efficient whatsoever,
still it follows necessarily in the first efficient and per-
petuating cause. For it is impossible that the creature
have being and great being and have this whole from
some one who does not have power in the whole; and
for this reason it is in this whole and in each thing. In


‘8 The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. al
p. 191.


4 Thid.
* Cp. Duns Scorus Sent. I, d. 2, q. 3, n. 6, and d. 42, q. unic,


SAINT BONAVENTURA 145


the same way, if there is a first perpetuating cause, it
is absolutely in actuality and not at all in potentiality;
and if this is so, since it could make something else
endure infinitely, it is itself actually infinite in duration:
therefore eternal.


Dover III


Again, inquiry is made concerning the following state-
ment which he makes: All things which have been made
by the divine art, show in themselves a certain unity and
species and order.°! For he seems first to state that
which is false, because if this is so, since these three
qualities have been made, then they have unity, species,
and order, and so with the others: therefore, if it is to
stand, then some things are fashioned, which do not
have these.

Again he seems to enumerate badly, because Augustine
stated the following three: mode, species, and order, and
the following three others: unity, truth, and goodness.
It is inquired therefore, concerning the different modes
of enumerating, whence they come.


I repty: to this some say that it is understood of per-
fect creatures, or if it is understood of all, then those
three are not called conditions in the created thing, but
in the uncreated exemplar.—Nevertheless it can _ be
said that in the first and general intentions there is the
reflection and therefore the state, nor need one proceed
further.

To the inquiry which is made concerning the enumer-
ation of those three, which does not seem proper, it
must be said that the created thing has to be considered

51 The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. I,
p. 192.


146 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


in three ways: in itself, or in comparison to other crea-
tures, or in comparison to the first cause. And according
to all these modes the trinity may be found in two ways.

For if the thing were considered in so far as it is in
itself or as it is in respect to itself, that is, either with
respect to the substance of the principles, there is
thus that trinity: matter, form, composition, which is
stated in the book on the Rule of the Faith;°* or with
respect to the conditions [habitudo] there is thus that
trinity in the eleventh chapter of the Book of Wisdom:°*
You have disposed all things in number, weight, and
measure. For in number is understood the distinction of
principles, in weight the proper inclination of principles,
in measure the proportion of principles to each other.

Again, if one creature were considered in. comparison
to other creatures, this could be either in so far as it
performs a natural action; and thus that trinity of
Dionysius is taken, substance, power, and operation;
or in so far as it performs a spiritual action; and thus
that trinity of Augustine, on LXXXIII Questions, of
what it determines, with what it agrees, by what it dis-
tinguishes, and the last is referred to the soul.

If, however, creatures were considered in comparison
to God, this can be in two ways: in so far as they are
referred only; and thus there is the former trinity, mode,
species, and order; or in so far as they are referred and
assimilated; and thus there is the latter trinity, unity,
truth, and goodness.

Since therefore a trace is considered in comparison to
God properly, therefore the trace is taken properly in
these last conditions. And because there is a great agree-
ment among these comparisons, therefore the Master
mixes them with each other because of the great agree-


52 Aranus AB Insuuis, De arte seu articules catholicas fidet
2 os 2 :
art. 24. VETS el. ™ Quaest. 18.


SAINT BONAVENTURA 147


ment and correspondence; because unity corresponds to
mode, which considers God as efficient cause; truth to
species, which considers him as exemplar; goodness
to order, which considers God as end.


Dovusr IV


Again, inquiry is made concerning the fact that he ap-
propriates truth to the Son saying: The most perfect
beauty is understood as the Son, that is, the truth of the
Father.®> But on the contrary Augustine says in the
Soliloquies :°° Truth is that which is; but being is appro-
priated to no person: therefore, neither is truth.

Again, he seems to appropriate order to the holy
Spirit incorrectly, because he says in the preceding
chapter that from order the wise man understands; but
wisdom is appropriated to the Son: therefore order too.


I reEPLy: it must be said that truth can be considered
in two ways, just as color can. For in one way color is
considered according to that in which it is; and thus it is
defined in the book on Sense and the Sensed:** Color is
the extremity of the perspicuous, terminated in body.
In another manner in comparison to sight which it
moves; and thus it is defined in the book on the Soul:°§
Color is the motive of sight according to the act of the
lucid body.

In the same way truth can be considered in com-
parison to that in which it is; and thus the true is that
which is; in another manner by comparison to the un-
derstanding which it moves; and thus truth, as the
philosopher says in the second book of the Metaphys-

®& The Book of Sentences I, d. 3, ch. 1; see above vol. I,


pe 192: *% Book II, c. 5. 57 Chapter 3.
8 Book II, 7, 418" 31-4182.


148 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ics,°® is the end of speculative understanding. Accord-
ing to the first manner Anselm says: The truth of the
Father is the essence of the Father. With respect to
the second manner Hilary says® that truth is declar-
ative being. And since the Son proceeds as the Word,
to which is appropriated the reason of declaring, there-
fore, the reason of exemplar is appropriated to him, and
consequently the reason of truth, with respect to the
second mode of truth; the Master himself, however,
takes the first mode.

To the objection which is raised concerning order,
it must be said that there is an order of things in the
universe; and this is appropriated to wisdom; and there ~
is an order of things to an end; and this is appropriated
to goodness; and thus it is clear that there is no con-
trariety.


Met. Il, 1, 993” 20.
© Cp. on the Trinity V, n. 3 fi.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS (1225-1274)


Following after the philosophic projects of his master,
Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas devoted himself to
the detailed statement of a christian aristotelianism.
The project won him, during his own lifetime, deter-
mined opposition both within and outside the Dominican
Order; after his death many of his doctrines were pro-
scribed at Paris, despite the efforts of the aged Albert,
who traveled from Cologne to defend his dead disciple,
and the same doctrines were condemned again a short
time later at Oxford, notwithstanding that Bishop Rob-
ert Kilwardby was a dominican. For half a century,
even the reading of his works was prohibited in the
Franciscan Order, and the correctoria and refutations
with which the franciscans notably assailed the philos-
ophy are indication that philosophers who came after
Thomas continued to read what his contemporaries had
considered doctrinal novelties as departures from the
true philosophy.

The condemnations and the attempted condemnations
of thomism were usually worked into pronouncements
that purported to be directed against averroism; there
is, moreover, direct evidence that some points of the
aristotelianism of Thomas seemed as suspect as the
aristotelianism of the averroists. Two doctrines were
particularly object of criticism: the doctrine of the pos-
sible eternity of the world and the doctrine of the
unity of substantial forms. In the one, Thomas had held,
not that the world was eternal, but that it could not be
shown by reason to be eternal or created in time; since

149


150 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the question transcended the powers of reason, the
revelation of faith that the world was created should be
followed. In the other, Thomas argued that there was
no need of intermediate forms between the soul and mat-
ter, that the soul could be joined directly to the matter
of its body without the preliminary preparation of
matter by inferior forms. Significantly, both these doc- ,
trincs are combatted most strenuously by franciscan
philosophers: Bonaventura gives beautifully detailed
arguments to show by reason that the eternity of the
world is impossible (most of them restated among the
arguments Thomas undertakes to refute in his resolu-
tion of the question), and Bonaventura too, among many
franciscans, urges that the denial of the plurality of
substantial forms endangers the immortality of the soul
(for the soul will be without matter between death and
resurrection) and the identity of angels (for since angels
have no matter, there will be nothing to distinguish two
angels of the same species from each other). There can
be no mistaking the debate, therefore, nor the parties
to the debate; when Thomas wrote his treatises on Sep-
arated Substances and on the Eternity of the World
Against Those Who Murmur Against It, the adversaries,
those who murmured against him, are the continuators of
the augustinism which the Franciscan Order professed.

In the problems of knowledge and truth the traces
of this debate are not always easily revealed. Yet if
the detail of the difference is not detected, the problems
and the interests among which Thomas and, say, Bona-
ventura work in their treatments of the question of
truth are starkly and totally different; it is a difference
of temper, not only in two philosophers, but in two
philosophies. For Bonaventura (impressed by the shad-
ows and traces of God in things and the images of God
in thought) the divine illumination and the way to return


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 151


from things illumined to the source of light are objects
of constant preoccupation. The idea of God implies the
existence of God; and by its omnipresence in all cre-
ation, the most intelligible thing is also best known, to
such extent, even, that if our physical forces were like
our intellectual powers, we should more easily move the
largest mountain than the smallest pebble. Thomas con-
cedes that the proposition, God is, is in itself self-
evident, for its predicate is contained in its subject; but
it is not self-evident to us. We begin with sense-experi-
ence; from it we derive data least evident in nature but
most evident to us; from that data we work to that
which is most evident in nature. That which is most
intelligible is least known to us; God who is supremely
intelligible is inconceivable to deficient creatures; in the
presence of intelligibles our minds are like the eyes of
bats or owls; we are blinded by the full light of truth,
and we can perceive only in partial light.

There is radical opposition between the two doc-
trines in that one is turned to the contemplation of
the infinite intelligibility from which all knowledge pro-
ceeds, while the other is turned to the problems of a
finite intellect working among the finite effects of a cause
that exceeds its understanding. The treatment which
the doctrines of Augustine and Anselm receive in Aqui-
nas’s resolution of the problems of knowledge is the
symptom of the place of oo doctrine in the
thomist philosophy: what ‘Augustine and Anselm said
of the eternal truth is often listed among the doctrines
to be refuted or réstatedgand it turns out in each case
that what Augustine or Anselm said is true of one part
or of one manner of the objects of the question.y For
Thomas Aquinas carried perhaps further than any phil-
osopher the medieval conyiction that the opinions of past
philosophers were not held withont reason; his refuta-


152 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


tions of philosophic doctrines are usually prefaced by an
examination of what in the nature of things the doctrine
attempted to express, and doubtless for this reason his
philosophy is more than usually full of distinctions:
before truth or being or substance can be considered
it must be noted that truth or being or substance can
be understood in two, three, four, or more ways; if
preceding philosophers have erred, their error can usu-
ally be accounted for by accommodating their doctrine
to one of the possible senses, and their solution is cen-
sured, if at all, for supposing that that meaning is the
only possible.

The philosophy of Thomas Aquinas, then, considers in
turn the relativity of our truths and the changeless eter-
nal truth of which the discovery of even a tentative truth
is indicative. We proceed by definitions in which we at-
tempt to express the quiddities of things; then we make
judgments by compounding and dividing concepts. Our*
definitions by genus and difference seek to state the
real, yet the real is not constituted of genus and species.
From the very beginning of knowledge, therefore, we
are doomed to fall short of absolute truth. The hunt for
definitions expressing essence (venare quod quid est)
is never at end. There are many differences of things
which are unknown to us; we are often obliged to clas-
sify and name things according to their accidents; our
schemae, therefore, of knowledge are relative. More-
over, even when difference is known, one does not pene-
trate the essence of things. The definition of man as
a rational animal does not exhaust the reality of man nor
even express it; if an accident is added to the description
say, biped, the accidental difference will reinforce ie
essential. Sometimes, as in the case of the immaterial
substances, we do not know accidents, and therefore our
knowledge of the immaterial substances is very limited.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 153


Truth properly speaking, however, does not enter in
the activities of the understanding seeking the quiddities
of things. A definition is false only in two senses:
either the definition is applied to the wrong thing or
the definition states an impossible combination of con-
cepts, such as immortal animal, for no animal can be
immortal. §fruth is first in the human understanding =
when the understanding adds something which is proper
to itself and not in the thing it understands, but which
none the less corresponds to the thing. The quiddities
of things are only likenesses of things, similar in this
to the images of sensation. But the-understanding adds i
judgment, and judgments are true or false dependent \
on whether or not that which is understood is ade-
quated to that which is. } Judgment is the activity of the
understanding compounding and dividing concepts; in
judgment we consider that which is (ens). Strictly
speaking we do not perceive the thing which is; we
perceive its accidents; but we can nevertheless conceive
that which is, and notwithstanding that it does not enter
in sensation, it is that which the intellect seizes as best
known. The universality of the entity of things in being
and in understanding, indeed, convinced Aristotle of the
impossibility of making being or that which is a genus.

The metaphysics of the relation of what a thing is and
what a thing is known as, is worked explicitly and subtly
into. the basis of the theory of knowledge in the thomist
philosophy. That which is (ens) is known first, and
all conceptions of the mind are resolved into it, since all
other conceptions are arrived at by addition to it. Tak-
ing that which is (ens) in its essential meaning, it can
be distinguished from its affirmative and negative con-
sequences, that is, from thing (res) which is the affirma-
tive consequence expressing the quiddity or essence of
that which is and from one (wnum) which is the negative


154 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


consequence expressing the indivision of each thing that
is. Relative to other things, that which is may be con-
sidered divided from other things: then it is called some-.
thing (aliquid); or it may be considered in its conform-
ity to some other thing—that last consideration would
be impossible if there were not something which can be
conformed to all things; this is the soul which is the
measure of all things. But there are two faculties to be
considered in the soul: cognitive and appetitive. Good
expresses the conformity of that which is to appetite;
true the conformity of that which is to understanding.
The true and that which is, are, therefore, convertible;
the true adds over and above that which is an adequation
of it to the understanding; the true is that which is in
the fashion in which it enters understandimg; it is the
intention of that which isf If the true is to be defined,
therefore, it is possible to define it in three ways: it may
be considered as that which is; it may be considered as
perfective of the adequation of thing and understanding;
it may be considered as the effect which results in the
mind from that adequation. Much of the discussion con-
cerning the nature of truth has followed from the failure
to realize that all three are compossible; indeed, all
three are necessarily implied in any one of the defi-
nitions.

Truth in created things, therefore, includes ‘the entity
of the thing and the adequation of the thing to the under-
standing. Truth is in creatures in two ways: in the
things themselves and in the understanding. Natural
things have their peculiar status in knowledge as con-
sequence of the fact that they stand between two under-
standings, the divine understanding and the human
understanding. If our relative genera can be applied
even approximately to things, it is because things are
constituted on a scheme of intelligibility; the truth of


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 155


things constituted in the adequation of things to the
divine understanding is guarantee of our truths even
though we can not penetrate to it. The ideas of God are
creative of all that is; our ideas are effective from that
which is; fundamentally the laws of thought and the
laws of nature are the same. Moreover, by this relation
of divine and human understandings to things, what
Augustine and Anselm had said concerning the relation
of all truths to one eternal truth is reconcilable with
what Aristotle said concerning the activity of the active
‘intellect abstracting forms. The eternal ideas of God
and the changing ideas of man meet in the forms of
things by virtue of which they are and are known. uw


By ideas are understood the forms of some
things, existing outside the things themselves.
The form of anything, however, existing out-
side the thing itself, can serve a double pur-
pose: either to be exemplar of that of which it
is called the form, or to be the principle of
knowledge according to which the forms of
knowable things are said to be in the knower.
—And with respect to either purpose it is
necessary to posit ideas. For in all things
which are not generated by chance, it is neces-
sary that the form be the end of any gen-
eration whatsoever. The agent, however, can
not act in view of a form except in so far as
the likeness of the form is in it. That however
can happen in two ways. For in certain agents
the form of the thing to be made preexists ac-
cording to its natural being [secundum esse
naturale], as in those things which act by na-
ture, as man generates man, and fire fire. But
in certain agents the form of the thing to be


156 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


made preexists according to its intelligible
being [ secundum esse intelligibile], as in those
things which act by understanding, as the like-
ness of a house preexists in the mind of the
builder. And this can be called the idea of
the house, because the artificer intends the
house to assimilate the form which he con-
ceived in his mind. Because, therefore, the
world was not made by chance but was made
by God acting by understanding, it is neces-
sary that there be in the divine mind a form
to the likeness of which the world was made.
And in that consists the reason of idea.!


When therefore the question is raised whether there is
one truth by which all things are true, with the authority
of Anselm heavily on the affirmative side of the question,
the answer may be governed by the consideration that
truth in the divine understanding is one; but truths in
things are many ;§the truth in the divine understanding
is necessary; but truth in the human understanding, ac-
cidental. # The divine understanding is a measure, but
it is not measured, things are measured by the divine
understanding, and things in turn measure the human
understanding; our understanding, however, is measured
by things, but it measures no natural things, only arti-
ficial things projected and made by it. Finally, the mo-
tions of changeable things among truths and falsities
may be understood if it is remembered that things are
denominated true according to an intrinsic truth in them
and an extrinsic truth in God. ]

The questions whether or not things can be true or
false, whether or not sensation can be true or false,
whether or not understanding can be true or false, are

Summa Theologica I, q. 15, a. 1 conel. t


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 157


solved once these distinctions have been made; that
truth or falsity is not in things nor in sense properly,
but only in some certain respect (secundum quid) has
consequences in the question, how the understanding
knows truth. For the understanding knows truth as it
reflects on itself. Truth is in the understanding in two
ways, as a consequence to its activity and as known by
the understanding. Therein lies the difference between
understanding and sensation; for truth is in sensation
only as a consequence to its activity; sense does not know
the truth by which it judges truly, and so it does not
know the nature of its act or the relation of its act to
the thing; therefore, it does not know truth. The un-
derstanding, being among the most perfect of the things
which are, returns to its essence with a complete return.
It proceeds outside itself when it knows that which is,
and begins to return to itself, because the act of cogni-
tion is medium between knower and known; the return
is completed when the understanding knows its own es-
sence; knowing its own essence it returns with a com-
plete return. The senses can not make such a return, for
although the interior sense perceives sense perceiving,
still sense does not know its own nature, but its action
is like that of fire which does not know its own heating.

The search for truth by this analysis may turn from
metaphysics to the contemplation of the source of truth;
that is the injuncture of religion; but there is besides
that pious inference the suggestion that the examination
of that which is, be conducted with the aid of logic. For
the metaphysics is excellent statement of the proposition
that the ways in which that which is can determine it-
self are as many as the ways in which a thing can be
declared to be. Our knowledge is of things that are
and as they are: the categories of logic are the categories
of things, but without the needless supposition, -vhich


f


158 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


is usually insinuated into the doctrine for purposes of
refutation, that things as they are and things as they
are in the mind are in any sense identical, or that the
classifications of things in the mind must represent ex-
ternally constituted groupings. The true and that which
is are convertible, but for that very reason they can not
be identical. The impossible test of a comparison of
idea to thing known is not necessary for the perception
of truth. Truth is based in the principles of the under-
standing itself. These principles the understanding per-
ceives in perceiving itself; they are known of and
through themselves, not by comparison to any experi-
ence, for they did not originate in experience, nor on
the other hand as innate in the mind; rather the under-
standing from its observation of its own operations
knows at once that they are true. The concept of being,
thus, is included in everything that man thinks; from
that alone the first principle is known that the same
thing can not be affirmed and denied at the same time.
This first principle is the condition of all other princi-
ples, yet it is itself indemonstrable; all truths depend
in demonstration on the principles which the mind knows
in knowing itself. The thomist doctrine of knowledge
is comfortable in the conviction that truth may be rela-
tive in human minds, without rendering certainties im-
possible, and that truths which are neither exhaustive
of all possible statements concerning the thing, nor ex-
elusive of all possible alternatives, may nevertheless be
adequate in judgment of that which is.


THOMAS AQUINAS
THE DISPUTED QUESTIONS ON TRUTH?
Quzstion I.
On Truru


(Divided into twelve articles)


It is inquired, 1st, what is truth; 2nd, whether truth
is found principally in the understanding or in things;
3rd, whether truth is only in the understanding com-
pounding and dividing; 4th, whether there is only one.
truth by which all things are true; 5th, whether some
other truth beside the first truth is eternal; 6th, whether
created truth is immutable; 7th, whether truth is predi-
cated of divine things essentially or personally; 8th,
whether all truth is from the first truth; 9th, whether
truth is in sense; 10th, whether any thing is false;
11th, whether falsity is in sense; 12th, whether falsity
is in the understanding.


ArTIcLE J,


What is truth??


The question is concerning truth and it is inquired
first what truth is. Now it seems that truth is abso-


1Sanctt Tuomart Aaguinatis, Quaestiones Disputatae, in
Opera Omnia, ed. S. KE. Fretté. Paris: Vives, 1875, vol. XIV,
pp. 315-341. 2Cp. Summa Theologica I, q. 16, a. 3.


159


160 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


lutely the same as the thing which is [ens], for Au-
gustine says in the book of Soliloquies, chapter V, that
the true is that which is. But that which is, is nothing
but the thing which is. Therefore the true signifies
absolutely the same as the thing which is.

2. Replying to this, it was said that the true and
that which is are the same with respect to subjects
[suppositum] but that they differ with respect to reason
{ratio]—But on the other hand, the reason of any-
thing is that which is signified by its definition. But
that which is, is given by Augustine as the definition
of the true after he had rejected certain other defini-
tions. Since, therefore, the true and the thing which
is agree with respect to that which is, it seems that
they are the same in reason.

3. Moreover, things which differ in reason are so
constituted that one of them can be understood with-
out the other, wherefore Boethius says in his book
De hebdomadibus*® that the divine being [Deus esse]
can be understood if God’s goodness be abstracted
for a time by the understanding. The thing which is,
however, can in no wise be understood if the true be
taken away: for it is understood by the fact that it is
true. Therefore, the true and the thing which is do
not differ in reason.

4. Moreover, if the true is not the same as that
which is, it must be a disposition of that which is.
But it can not be a disposition of that which is. For


2 The reference is to the sevenfold division in which Boethius
is supposed to have classified his shorter works, as well as to
the philosophic group, which met weekly, before which they
were probably read. The work in which the difficulties in the
Hebdomads are expounded (cited here) is How substances,
in that they are, are.good, although they are not substantial


goods; for the passage quoted, see p. 44, 92-93 (Loeb Classical
Library).


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 161


it is not a totally corrupting disposition, otherwise it
would follow: this is true, therefore it is that which
is not, just as it follows: the man is dead, therefore
he is not man. Similarly, the true is not a diminishing
disposition, otherwise it would not follow: this is true,
therefore it is, just as it does not follow: this person
is white with respect to teeth, therefore he is white,
Similarly, the true does not constrain or specify the
thing that is, since it would not then be converted
with that which is. Therefore, the true and that
which is are wholly the same.

5. Moreover, things whose disposition is the same
are the same. But the disposition of the true and
of that which is is the same. Therefore, they are the
same. For it is said in the IInd book of the Meta-
physics: The disposition of a thing in being is the same
as its disposition in truth. Therefore, the true and the
thing that is are entirely the same. ef

6. Moreover, things which are not the same, differ
in some manner. But the true and the thing that is
[ens] differ in no manner, for they do not differ in
essence [essentia] since the thing that is is true by its
essence, nor on the other hand do they differ by other
differences, for it would be necessary that they should
agree in some genus. Therefore, they are wholly the
same. :

7. Moreover, if they are not absolutely the same,
the true must add something to the thing that is. But
the true adds nothing to the thing that is, since it would
then be more than that which is. This is stated clearly
by the Philosopher when he says in the IVth book
of the Metaphysics: Defining the true we say that that
which is is or that that which is not is not, and so the
true includes that which is and that which is not.


162 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Therefore, the true does not add to that which is and so
it seems to be entirely the same as that which is.

1. Bur ro THE CoNTRARY, nonsense is useless repeti-
tion. If, therefore, the true were the same as the thing
that is, it would be nonsense to say true being; this is
false: therefore, they are not the same.

2. Moreover, that which is and that which is good are
convertible. But the true is not convertible with the
good, for a thing may be true which is not good, as
that this man commits fornication. Therefore, that
which is true is not converted with that which is.

3. Moreover, Boethius says in the book De hebdomadi-
bus: In all creatures being [esse] and that which is
[quod est] are diverse. But the true follows from
the being of things. Therefore, the true is diverse
from that which is in creatures. But that which is
[quod est] is the same as the thing that is [ensj.
Therefore, the true in creatures is diverse from the
thing that is.

4. Moreover, things which bear the relation to each
other of prior and posterior must be diverse. But
that which is true and the thing that is are of such sort
that, as is said in the book on Causes, the first of
created things is being; and the Commentator says,
commenting on that book, all other things are predi-
cated as informing the thing that is, and thus they are
posterior to that which is. Therefore, the true and
that which is are diverse.

5. Moreover, those things which are predicated in
common of a cause and of things which are caused,
are one in the cause rather than in the things caused;
and particularly in God rather than in creatures. But
in God the following four, being, one, truth, and good,
are so appropriated that being [ens] pertains to es-
sence [essentia], one to the person of the Father,


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 163


truth to the person of the Son, good to the person
of the holy Spirit. But the divine persons are dis-
tinguished not only according to reason but according
to fact: therefore, they are not predicated of each other.
Consequently, in creatures these must all the more
surely differ more than in reason.


I repiy that it must be said that, just as in demon-
strables there must be a reduction to some principles
known through themselves to the understanding, so
too in investigating what anything is; otherwise one
would in either case go on in infinitum; and thus science
and the knowledge of things would perish utterly. That,
however, which the understanding conceives first as
best known, and in which it resolves all conceptions,
is that which is, as Avicenna says in the beginning of
his Metaphysics, book I, chapter 9. Therefore, all
other conceptions of the understanding must be arrived
at by an addition to that which is. But something can
not be added to that which is as an extraneous nature,
in the fashion that a difference is added to a genus or
an accident to a subject, for every nature is essentially
that which is, and therefore the Philosopher in the IIIrd
book of the Metaphysics proves likewise that that which
is cannot be a genus. But some things are said to be
added over and above that which is so far as they express
a mode of it which is not expressed by the name of
that itself which is. This is possible in two ways:
in one way so that the mode expressed be some special
mode of that which is. For there are diverse grades
of entity according to which diverse modes of being
are taken on, and in accordance with these modes,
diverse genera of things are taken on. For substance
does not add over and above that which is, any difference
which signifies some nature superadded to that which


164 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


is, but rather a certain special mode of being is ex-
pressed by the word substance, namely, that which is
through itself [per se ens]; and so it is in the other
genéra. In a second way, so that the mode expressed
is a mode generally consequent to each thing that is,
and this mode can be taken in two ways, in one way
as that which follows each thing that is, in itself; in
anether way as that which follows each thing that is,
in its relation to some other thing. If in the first way,
it is said to express something affirmative or negative
in the thing that is. But nothing affirmative is found
predicated absolutely which can be taken in each thing
that is except its essence according to which it is said
to be; and thus the word thing [res] is imposed, which
according to Avicenna in the beginning of his Meta-
physics differs from the thing which is [ens] in this,
that the thing which is is derived from the act of
being, but the name thing expresses the quiddity or
essence of the thing which is. The negation, more-
over, which is the consequent absolutely to each thing
that is, is indivision, and the word one expresses this,
for one is nothing else than an undivided thing which
is. If, however, the mode of being is taken in the
second way, that is, according to the order of one
thing to another, this can be in two ways. In one
according to the division of one thing from the other,
and this is expressed by the word something, for it is
called something as if some other thing;* and there-
fore as that which is is called one in so far as it is
undivided in itself, so it is called something in so far
as it is divided from others. In a second way, ac-
cording to the conformity of one thing that is to any-
thing else, and this can not be unless there is given
something which is formed to accord with all things
‘That is, aliquid = aliud quid.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 165


that are. But this is the soul, which is in a measure
all things, as is said in the IIIrd book on the Soul.
There is in the soul, however, a cognitive power and
an appetitive power. Consequently, the word good
expresses the conformity of the thing which is to ap-
petite, as is stated in the beginning of the Ethics: the
good is what all desire. Clearly the word true ex-
presses the conformity of the thing which is to under-
standing. But all knowledge is perfected by the
assimilation of the knower to the thing known, so that
that assimilation is said to be the cause of the knowl-
edge, just as sight knows color through the fact that
it is disposed by the species of color. Consequently,
the first comparison of the thing which is to understand-
ing is that the thing which is correspond to the un-
derstanding, which correspondence is called _ the
adequation of the thing and the understanding; and
the principle [ratio] of truth is perfected formally in
this. It is this, consequently, which the true adds over
and above that which is: namely, conformity or adequa-
tion of thing and understanding, and to this conformity,
as has been said, the knowledge of the thing follows.
Thus, therefore, the entity of the thing precedes the
reason of truth, but knowledge is a certain effect of
trath. According to this, therefore, it is found that
truth and the true are to be defined in three ways. In
one way, according to that which precedes the princi-
ple of truth and in which the true is founded, and
thus Augustine defines it in the book of Soliloquies,
chapter V, The true is that which is, and Avicenna in
the IInd book of the Metaphysics, chapter XII, The
truth of any thing is the property of its being which
is the stabilition of the thing, and a certain other phi-
losopher, Truth, is the indivision of being and that of
it which is [eius quod est]. And in another way truth


166 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


is defined according to that which perfects formally
the principle of the true, and thus Isaac says that
Truth is the adequation of thing and understanding;
and Anselm in the book on Truth, chapter XI,° Truth
is rightness perceptible to the mind alone. For this
rightness is so called from a certain adequation ac-
cording to which the Philosopher in the IVth book
of the Metaphysics says, that defining the true we
say that that which is is or that that which is not is
not. And in a third way, the true is defined according
to the effect which results; and Hilary defines it thus,
that Truth is manifestive and declarative ‘being, and
Augustine in the book on True Religion, chapter
XXXVI, Truth is that by which that which is is shown,
and in the same book, chapter XXXI: Truth is that
according to which we judge concerning inferior things.


To the first, therefore, it is replied that this defini-
tion of Augustine is given of the true according to that»
which it has as foundation in the thing and not ac-
cording to that which the reason of the true fulfills
in the adequation of thing to understanding. Or it
must be added that, when it is said, the true is that
which is, it is not taken there as it signifies the act
of being but rather as it is the name of the composite
understanding, that is, as it signifies the affirmation
of a proposition, so that the sense is: the true is that
which is, that is, when it is said of anything which
is that it is; so that the definition of Augustine comes
to the same as the definition of the Philosopher intro-
duced above.

The answer to the second is obvious from what has
just been said.

To the third it must be replied that for something

5 See above, vol. I, page 172.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 167


to be understood without something else, can be taken
in two ways. In one way as follows, that something
is understood when the other thing is not understood;
and thus those things which differ in reason are so
constituted that one can be understood without the
other. For something to be understood without some-
thing else can be taken in another way, in which the
one is understood when the other does hot exist, and
thus that which is can not be understood without the
true, because that which is can not be understood with-
_ out that which corresponds or is adequated to the under-
standing. But it is not necessary that whosoever
understands the reason of the thing which is, under-
stand the reason of the true, just as not any one at
all understands the active intellect, and yet without
the active intellect man can understand nothing.

To the fourth it must be said that the true is a dis-
position of the thing that is, not as adding some nature
nor as expressing some special mode of that which is,
but something which is generally found in that which
is but which is not expressed by the expression, the
thing which is. Therefore, it is not necessary that
it be a disposition corrupting or diminishing or con-
tracting into part.

To the fifth it must be said that disposition is not
taken there in the respect that it is in the genus of
quality, but in the respect that it imports a certain
order. For since those things which are the cause of
the being of others, are in the highest degree things
that are, and those which are the cause of the truth
of others are in the highest degree true, the Philosopher
concludes that the order of any thing is the same in
being and in truth, in such wise that where that is
found which is in the highest degree a thing which is,
that is found which is in the highest degree true. Nor


168 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


is this so because that which is and the true are the
same in their reason, but because a thing is naturally
equated to the understanding by the circumstance that
it has something of entity; and thus the reason of the
true follows the reason of that which is.

To the sixth it must be said that the true and that
which is differ in reason by the fact that there is
something in the reason of the true which is not in the
reason of that which is. But they do not so differ
that there is something in the reason of that which
is, which is not in the reason of the true. Nor do
they differ in essence, nor are they distinguished from
each other by opposed differences.

To the seventh it must be said that the true is not
something more than the thing which is. For the thing
which is, taken in a certain way, is predicated of that
which is not, according as that which is not is appre-
hended by the understanding. Therefore, in the IVth
book of the Metaphysics, the Philosopher says that
negation or privation of being is in one sense: called
being. So, too, Avicenna says in the beginning of his
Metaphysics, that discourse can not be formed except
of that which is, because that concerning which the
proposition is formed must be apprehended by the
understanding; from this it is obvious that each true
thing is in a certain sense a thing that is.

To the first of the objections to the contrary it must
be said that it is not nonsense to speak of tke being,
because something is expressed by the word true which
is not expressed by the word being; not because they
differ in fact.

To the second it must be said that although he who
commits fornication is evil, nevertheless, according as
he has something of entity, he is made to be conformed
to the understanding, and the reason of the true follows


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 169


according to that, and thus it is evident that the true
_ does not exceed nor is it exceeded by that which is.

To the third it must be replied that when it is said,
being and that which is are diverse, the act of being
is distinguished from that to which the act of being
conforms. The reason of that which is, however, is
derived from the act of being, not from that to which the
act of being conforms, and therefore the reasoning does
not follow.

To the fourth it must be said that the true is pos-
terior to that which is, in this respect, that the reason
of the true differs from the reason of that which is in
the manner stated above.

To the fifth it must be said that this reasoning is
defective in three respects. First, that although the
three divine persons are distinguished in fact, never-
theless, the persons do not differ by their appropriated
fact, but by reason. Second, that although the persons
are distinguished from each other really, still they are
not distinguished really from being, and therefore neither
is the true which is appropriated to the person of the
Son distinguished from being which is maintained on
the part of essence. Third, that although that which is,
the true, the one, and the good are united more in God
than in created things, nevertheless, it does not follow
necessarily from the fact that they are distinguished
in God by reason that they are distinguished really in
created things. For this happens in the case of those
things which do not have unity in fact from their
nature, such as wisdom and power, which although
they are one in God, are really distinguished in crea-
tures. But that which is, the true, the one, and the
good have unity according to their nature; wherefore,
wheresoever they are found, they are really one, al-
though the unity of the thing by which they are united


170 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


in God is more perfect than the unity of that by which
they are united in creatures.


Arric.e II.


Whether truth is found principally in the understand-
ing rather than in things


Second, it is inquired whether truth is found princi-
pally in the understanding rather than in things. And
it seems that it is not. For the true, as has been said,
is convertible with the thing that is. But that which
is, is found principally outside the mind. Therefore
the true also.

2. Moreover, things are not in the mind by their
essence but by their species, as is pointed out in the
IiIrd book on the Soul. If, therefore, truth is found
principally in the mind, truth will not be the essence
of the thing, but the likeness or species of it; and the
true will be the species of a thing existing outside the
mind. But the species of a thing existing within
the mind is not predicated of the thing which is outside
the mind, as likewise it is not convertible with it.
Therefore, neither is the true convertible with the thing
that is; which is false.

3. Moreover, all that which is in anything follows
that in which it is. If, therefore, truth is principally
in the mind, the judgment of truth is according to
the estimation of the mind; and thus will return the
error of the philosophers of antiquity, who said that
all that which any one believes, is true, and that two
contradictories are true at the same time; which is
absurd.

4. Moreover, if truth is principally in the under-
standing, it is necessary that something which pertains


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 171


to the understanding of truth be posited in the defini-
tion of truth. But Augustine in his book of Soliloquies,
book II, chapters 4 and 5, condemns definitions of
such sort as the following, That is true which is as it is
seen, because according to this, that would not be true
which is not seen, which is obviously false in the case of
the deeply hidden stones which are in the bowels of the
earth. Similarly he rejects the following, That is
true which is as it appears to a knower who is willing
and able to know, because according to this, a thing
would not be true unless a knower wished to and could
know it. And therefore, there would be the same rea-
son against any other definitions in which something
pertaining to the understanding was placed.  There-
fore, truth is not principally in the understanding.

But To THE conTRARY, the Philosopher says in the
VIth book of the Metaphysics, There is no true or
false except in the mind.

Moreover, truth is the adequation of thing and un-
derstanding. But this adequation can not be save in
the understanding. Therefore, neither is truth save
in the understanding.


I repty that it must be said that in those things
which are predicated of many things by priority and
posteriority, it is not always necessary that that receive
by priority the predication of common which is as the
cause of the others, but rather that in which the princi-
ple of that which is common is first found completed.
Thus, healthy is predicated by priority of animal in
which the principle of health is first found perfected,
although medicine is called healthy as effective of
health. And therefore, when true is predicated of
many things by priority and posteriority, it is neces-
sary that it be predicated as prior of that in which is


172 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


found the perfect principle of truth. The complement,
however, of every motion or operation is in its end.
But the motion of the cognitive faculty is terminated
in the soul. For a thing must be known in the knower
according to the mode of the knower. . But the motion
of the appetitive faculty is terminated in the thing,
and thence it is that the Philosopher, in the IIIrd book
on the Soul, places a kind of circle in the actions of
the mind, that is, according to which a thing which is
outside the mind moves the understanding, and the thing,
understood moves the appetite, and the appetite, then,
brings it about that it attain to the thing from which
the motion started. And because, as was pointed out
in the preceding article, the order to the appetite is
called good, but the order to the understanding true,
thence it is that the Philosopher says in the VIth book
of the Metaphysics that good and evil are in things,
and true and false are in the mind. But a thing is
not called true except as it is adequated to the under-
standing, and therefore true is found posterior in
things and prior in the understanding. But it must be
borne in mind that a thing is compared in one fashion
to the practical intellect and in another to the specula-
tive. For the practical intellect causes things, and
therefore, it is the measure of things which are made
by it; but the speculative intellect, since it is receptive
of things, is in a certain measure a motion from things
themselves; and so things measure it. From this it is
obvious that natural things from which our under-
standing receives its knowledge, measure our under-
standing, as is said in the Xth book of the Metaphysics;
but they are measured by the divine understanding in
which all created things are, as all artificial things
are in the understanding of the artisan. Thus there-
fore, the divine understanding measures but is not meas-


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 173


ured; natural things measure and are measured; but
our understanding is measured, and it does not measure
natural things but only artificial things. A natural
thing, therefore, set up between two understandings,
is said to be true by an adequation to both; for ac-
cording to the adequation to the divine understanding
it is said to be true in so far as it fulfills that to which
it is ordered by the divine understanding, as is made
evident by Anselm in the book on Truth, chapter VII,®
and in Augustine in the book on True Religion, chapter
XXXI, and in Avicenna in the definition quoted above, :
namely, the truth of any thing is the property of its
being which is the stabilition of the thing. On the other
hand, according to the adequation to the human under-
standing, a thing is said to be true in so far as it is
constituted to form a true estimation of itself, just as,
on the contrary, things are said to be false which are
constituted to seem what they are not or as they are not,
as is said in the Vth book of the Metaphysics. However,
the first principle of truth is present in the thing prior
to the second, because the comparison to the divine
understanding is prior to the human, so that even if
the human understanding were not, things would still
thus far be said to be true in their order to the divine
understanding. But if both understandings were un-
derstood to be removed, which is impossible, the princi-
ple of truth would in no wise remain.


To the first it must be said, therefore, that as is
obvious from what has been said, true is predicated
of the understanding as prior and of the thing which
is adequated to it as posterior; and in both ways it is
convertible with the thing which is but in diverse man-

*See above, vol. I, page 163.


174 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ners, for as it is predicated of things it is converted
by predication with the thing which is. For every thing
that is, is adequated to the divine understanding and is
able to adequate the human understanding to it, and
conversely. But if true is taken as predicated of the
understanding, it is converted with the thing which is
outside the mind, not by predication but by conformity,
in that it is necessary that some thing which is, respond
to every understanding, and conversely.

And from this the solution to the second is clear.

To the third it must be said that that which is in
something, does not follow that in which it is, except
when it is caused by the principles of that thing; whence
the light which is caused in the air by something ex-
trinsic, namely, by the sun, follows the motion of the
sun rather than the air. Similarly, truth which is
caused in the mind by things, does not follow the esti-
mation of the mind, but the existence of the things.
For from the fact that the thing is or is not, speech
is said to be true or false, and understanding likewise.

To the fourth it must be said that Augustine speaks
of the vision of the human understanding on which the
truth of the thing does not depend. For there are
many things which are not known to our understanding;
but there is no thing which the divine understanding
does not know in actuality and the human understand-
ing does not know in potentiality, since the active in-
tellect is described as that whose function it is to make
all things, and the possible intellect as that whose
function it is to be made all things. And therefore,
vision in the actuality of the divine understanding can
be posited in the definition of the true thing, but not
the vision of the human understanding except in po-
tentiality, as appears from what has been said.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 175


/ Articie III.


Whether truth is in the understanding compounding and
dividing®


In the third place, it is inquired whether truth is
only in the understanding compounding and dividing.
And it seems that it is not. For truth is said to be
according to the comparison of the thing that is to
the understanding. But the operation by which the
understanding is first compared to the thing is that by
which the understanding forms the quiddities of things
by conceiving their definitions. Therefore, truth is
found principally and more properly in that operation
of the understanding.

2. Moreover, truth is the adequation of thing and
understanding. But just as the understanding com-
pounding and dividing can be adequated to things, so
too the understanding when it understands the quiddities
of things. Therefore, truth is not only in the under-
standing compounding and dividing.

To THE CONTRARY, in the VIth book of the Meta-
physics it is said, True and false are not in things but
in the mind.

Moreover, in the IIIrd book on the Soul it is said


that the understanding of indivisibles is in those things


in which there is no true and false.


I repiy that it must be said that just as the true is
found prior in understanding than in things, so too ae
is found prior in the act of the understanding com-~
pounding and dividing than in the act of the under-
standing forming the quiddities of things. For the

™Cp. Summa Theologica 1, q. 16, a. 2.


176 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


principle of truth consists in the adequation of thing
and understanding; the same thing, however, is not
adequated to itself, but equality is of diverse things;
and therefore, the principle of truth is found first in
the understanding when the understanding first begins
to have something proper to itself which the thing out-
side the mind does not have, but something correspond-
ing to the thing. Adequation can be looked for between
these. But the understanding forming quiddities has
only the likeness of the thing existing ontside the mind,
as sense has in so far as it receives the species of the
sensible thing. When, however, it begins to judge con-
cerning the thing apprehended, then the very judgment
of the understanding is something proper to it which
is not found outside in the thing. But when it is ade-
quated to that which is outside in the thing, the judg-


ment is said to be true. The understanding, then, |


judges of the thing apprehended, when it says that
something is or is not, which is the result of the un-
derstanding compounding and dividing; and therefore
the Philosopher says in the VIth book of the Meta-
physics, that composition and division are in the un-
derstanding and not in things. And thence it is that
truth is found prior in the composition and division
of the understanding; and it is said to be secondarily
and posterior in the understanding forming definitions.
Consequently, a definition is said to be true or false
by reason of a true or false composition, as when a
definition is said to be of that of which it is not,
as if, for example, the definition of a circle be assigned
to a triangle; or again when the parts of a definition
~ can not be compounded with each other, as if the defini-


tion of some thing were given as an insensible animal, |


for this composition which is implied, namely, that ~


some animal is insensible, is false. And so a definition


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 177


is not said to be true or false except in relation to
composition, just as a thing is said to be true in
relation to the understanding. It is evident, therefore,
from what has been said, that truth is predicated of
the composition or division of the understanding as
prior; secondly, of the definitions of things so far as
true or false composition is implicated in them; thirdly,
of things as they are adequated to the divine under-
standing or are constituted apt to be adequated to the
human understanding; fourthly, of man who is selective
of his words, true or false, or who makes a true or false
estimation of himself or of others by that which he says
or does. Words in this same way receive the predica-
tion of truth, as do the meanings which they signify.


To the first, therefore, it must be said that although
the formation of the quiddity is the first operation of
the understanding, nevertheless, through it the under-
standing does not have something else proper to itself
which could be adequated to the thing; and therefore
truth is not properly there.

And by this the solution to the second is evident.


Articie LV.


Whether there is only one truth by which all things are
true®


In the fourth place it is inquired whether there is
only one truth by which all things are true. And it
seems that there is. For Anselm in his book on Truth,
chapter XIII toward the end,® says that as time is


8Cp. Summa Theologica I, q. 16, a. 6.
® See above, vol. I, p. 184.


178 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


related to all temporal things, so truth is related to all
true things. But time is so related to all temporal
things that there is only one time. Therefore, truth
will be so related to all true things that there will be
only one truth.

2. But it must be said that truth is spoken of in
two ways. In one way as it is the same as the entity
of the thing, as Augustine defines it in his book of
Soliloquies, chapter V, The true is that which is; and
so there must be many truths according as there are
many essences of things. In another way it is spoken
of as it expresses itself in the understanding, as Hilary
defines it, The true is declarative being; and in this way,
since nothing can manifest anything to the understand-
ing except according to the power of the first divine
truth, all truths are in a certain manner one in moving
the understanding, just as all colors are one in moving
the sight, in so far as they move it in the relation of
one thing, namely, of light—-On the other hand, the
time of all temporal things is one in number. If, there-
fore, truth is related to true things as time to temporal
things, the truth of all true things ought to be one in
number; nor does it suffice that all truths are one in
moving or are one in exemplar.

3. Moreover, Anselm in the book on Truth, chapter .
XIII,’° argues thus: if there are many truths of many
true things, truths ought to vary according to the varia-
tion of true things. But truths do not vary through
the variations of true things, since if true and right
things are destroyed, there still remains the truth and
rightness according to which they are true and right.
Therefore, there is only one truth. He proves the
minor premiss from the fact that, if that which is sig-
nified is destroyed, there still remains the rightness of

See above, vol. 1, pp. 180-182.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 179


the signification, since it is right that that be signified
which that sign signified; and for the same reason, if
anything whatsoever which is true or right be destroyed,
its rightness and truth remains.

4. Moreover, in created things, no truth is that of
which it is the truth; just as the truth of man is not
man, and the truth of flesh is not flesh. But every
created thing is true. Therefore, no created thing is
truth: therefore, all truth is something uncreated, and
there is only one truth.

5: Moreover, in creatures there is nothing greater
than the human mind except God, as Augustine says.
But truth, as Augustine proves in the book of Solilo-
quies, chapters II and III, is greater than the human
mind, since it can not be said that it is less, for then
the human mind would have to judge to truth, which
is false; for it does not judge of it but according to it,
just as a judge does not judge of the law but according
to the law, as he himself says in the book on True
Religion, chapter XXXI. In the same way it can not
be said that the human mind is equal to truth, because
the soul judges all things according to truth, but it
does not judge all things according to itself. There-
fore, there is no truth except God, and thus there is
only one truth.

6. Moreover, Augustine in the book of LXXXIII
Questions, question 9 toward the beginning, proves in
the following fashion that truth is not perceived by the
sense of the body: nothing except the mutable is per-
ceived by the sense of the body; but truth is immutable.
Therefore, it is not perceived by sense. In the same
way it can be argued: every created thing is mutable.
“Truth is not mutable. Therefore, it is not a creature:
therefore, it is an uncreated thing: therefore, there is


only one truth.


180 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


7. Moreover, Augustine argues in the same place
for the same conclusion in this fashion: there is no
sensible thing which does not have something like tc
the false, so that it can not be distinguished, for, to
pass over other points, in sleep or in madness, we
suffer the images of all things which we perceive
through the body, even when they are not present to
the senses, as if they were directly present. But truth
does not have anything like to the false. Therefore,
it is not perceived by sense. It can be argued in the
same way: every created thing has something liké te
the false, in so far as it has something of defect. There-
fore, no created thing is truth, and thus there is only
one truth.

1. To THE contrary, Augustine in the book on True
Religion, chapter XXXVI, about the middle, says: Just
as likeness is the form of like things, so truth is the
form of true things. But there are many likenesses of
many like things. Therefore, there are many truths
of many true things.

2. Moreover, just as every created truth is derived
from the uncreated truth and has its power from it;
so all intelligible illumination is derived from the first
light as from an exemplar and has its strength of mani-
festing from it. But there are said to be many intelligi-
ble lights, as is manifest in Dionysius on Mystic
Theology, chapter I, paragraph 3. Therefore it must
be conceded in the same way that there are many truths.

3. Moreover, colors, although they move the ‘sight by
virtue of light, are nevertheless said to be many and
different absolutely, and they can not be said to be one
except in some one respect [secundum quid]. There-
fore, although all created truths express themselves in
the understanding by virtue of a first truth, still they
could not because of that be called one truth, except in
some one respect [secundum quid].


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 181


4. Moreover, just as created truth can manifest it-
self in the understanding only by virtue of an uncreated
truth, so no created power can do anything except by
virtue of an uncreated power. But we can in no way
say that there is one power of all things which have
power. Therefore, it must in no way be said that there
is one truth of all true things.

5. Moreover, God is compared to things in the con-
dition [habitudo] of a triple cause, namely, efficient,
exemplary, and final; and the entity of things according
to a certain appropriation is referred to God as to the
efficient cause, the truth as to the exemplary cause, and
the goodness as to the final cause, although each can
be referred to each of the others according to the prop-
erty of speech. But in no fashion of speech do we say
that there is one goodness of all good things or one
entity of all things that are. Therefore, neither should
we say there is one truth of all true things.

6. Moreover, although there is one uncreated truth
from which all created truths are extracted, still they
are not extracted from it in the same way, for although
it is related to all things in the same way, still all
things are not related to it in the same way, as it is
said in the book on Causes, proposition 22: therefore,
the truth of necessary and of contingent things is ex-
tracted from it in different manners. But the different
manner of imitating the divine exemplar makes the
diversification in created things. Therefore, in the
same way there are many created truths.

7%. Moreover, truth is the adequation of thing and
understanding. But of things diverse in species there
can not be one adequation of thing to understanding.
Therefore, since true things are diverse in species, there
can not be one truth of all true things. |

8. Moreover, Augustine says in book XI on the Trin-


182 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ity, chapter XV toward the beginning: It must be be-
lieved that the nature of the human mind is so joined to
intelligible things that it perceives all things which it
knows in a certain light of its own genus [sui generis].
But the light according to which the mind knows all
things is truth. Therefore, truth is of the genus of
the soul itself; and therefore, truth must be a created
thing; and therefore, there will be diverse truths in
diverse creatures.


I repty that it must be said that, as is evident from
what has been said above in article 2, truth is found
properly in the human or in the divine understanding,
just as health is found properly in animal. Truth,
however, is found in other things through their relation
to the understanding, just as health is predicated of
certain other things in so far as they are effective or
conservative of the health of the animal. Therefore,
truth is properly and first in the divine “understand-
ing; it is properly and secondarily in the human under-
standing; but in things it is improperly and secondarily,
since it is only in respect to one or the other of the
two truths. Therefore, the truth of the divine under-
standing is only one, from which many truths are
derived in the human understanding, just as many
likenesses result from the face of one man in a mirror,
as the Gloss [of Augustine] says concerning that state-
ment of the Psalmist:'! Truths fail from among the
children iof men. The truths, however, which are in
things are as many as there are entities of things. But
the truth which is predicated of things in comparison
with the human understanding, is in a certain manner
accidental to the things; since if it were supposed that


u Psal. 11 (or 12): 1. Some translations render veritates,
the faithful or faithfulness.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 183


the human understanding was not and could not be, the
things would still continue in their essence. But the
truth which is predicated of them in comparison to the
divine understanding, is communicated to them insepa-
rably; for they can not subsist except by the divine
understanding producing them in being. Truth, there-
fore, is in the thing by comparison to the divine un-
derstanding prior to comparison to the human: since
it is compared to the divine understanding as to its
cause, but to the human understanding it is compared
as if to its effect in a certain fashion, in so far as
the understanding takes its knowledge from things.
Thus, therefore, something is said to be true principally
in its order to the truth of the divine understanding
rather than in its order to the truth of the human un-
derstanding. If, therefore, truth properly speaking is
taken in the sense according to which principally all
things are true, then all things are true by one truth,
that is, by the truth of the divine understanding; and
Anselm speaks thus of truth in the book on Truth,
chapters VII and X.!? If, however, truth properly
speaking is taken in the sense according to which things
are said to be true secondarily, then there are many
truths of many true things in different minds. If,
however, truth is taken improperly in the sense accord-
ing to which all things are said to be true, then there
are many truths of many true things; but there is only
one truth of one thing. Things, however, are denomi-
nated true from the truth which is in the divine under-
standiig or in the human understanding, as food is
denominated healthy from the health which is in the ani-
mal, and not as by an inherent form; but [they are
denominated true] by the truth which is in the thing it-
self (which is nothing other than the entity adequated


22 See above, vol. I, pp, 163, 170.


184 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


to the understanding or adequating the understanding to
itself) as by an inherent form, as food is denominated
healthy by its quality by which it is called healthy.


To the first it must be said, therefore, that time is
compared to temporal things as a measure to that which
is measured, and consequently, it is evident that Anselm
speaks of that truth which is only a measure of all true
things and that truth is only one, as time is one, as
is concluded in the second argument. But the truth
which is in the human understanding or in things them-
selves is not compared to things as an extrinsic measure
and common to things which are measured; but either
it is compared as that which is measured to its measure,
as is the case of the truth of the human understanding,
and so it must be varied according to the variation of
things, or else as an intrinsic measure, as is the case of
the truth which is in things themselves, and these meas-
ures must be increased according to the number of things
measured, just as the dimensions of diverse bodies are
diverse.

The second we concede.

To the third it must be said that the truth which
remains when things have been destroyed is the truth
of the divine understanding; and this is one in number
absolutely. The truth, however, which is in things or
in, the soul is varied according to the variety of things.

To the fourth it must be said that when the state-
ment is made: no thing is its own truth, it is understood
of things which have their being complete in nature;
just as, when the statement is made: no thing is its
own being; and nevertheless, the being of a thing is
something created [and in the same way the truth of
a thing is something created].


To the fifth it must be said that the truth according


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 185


to which the soul judges of all things, is the first truth.
For just as from the truth of the divine understanding,
the innate species of things flow into the angelic under-
standing, according to which the angelic understanding
knows all things, so too from the truth of the divine
understanding, the truth of the first principles pro-
ceeds, in the manner of an exemplar, into our under-
standing, and according to that truth we judge of all
things. And since we can not judge by means of it
except as it is the likeness of the first truth, therefore,
we are said to judge of all things according to the first
truth.

To the sixth it must be said that that immutable
truth is the first truth; and it is neither perceived by
the sense nor is it something created.

To the seventh it must be said that the created truth
does not itself have something like to the false, even
though some creature or other may have something like
to the false. For in so far as a creature has some-
thing like to the false, to that degree it is deficient.
But truth does not follow from a creature in that part
in which it is deficient, but according as, having been
conformed to the first truth, it recedes from defect.

To the first of the objections which are raised to
the contrary it must be said that likeness is found prop-
erly in both of the like things, but truth, since it is a cer-
tain agreement of the understanding and the thing, is
not found properly in both, but in the understanding:
Consequently, since there is one understanding, namely
the divine understanding, according to conformity with
which all things are said to be true, all things ought
to be. true according to one truth, although there are
many different likenesses in many like things. —

To the second it must be said that although the in-
telligible light is patterned from the divine light, never-


!


186 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


theless, that light is spoken of properly, too, in regard
to created intelligible lights. The truth, however, is
not properly predicated of things properly patterned
from.the divine understanding; and therefore we do
not say one light as we say one truth.

And in the same way it must be said to the third
in regard to colors, since colors are properly called
visible, although they are not seen except by means of
light.

And in the same way it must be said to the fourth in
regard to power and to the fifth in regard to entity.

To the sixth it must be said that although things are
patterned in deformation [difformiter| from the divine
truth, nevertheless, it is not impossible because of this,
that things be true by one truth and not by many, prop-
erly speaking, since that which is received in diverse
fashion in the patterned things is not properly called
truth, as truth is spoken of properly in the pattern.

To the seventh it must be said that although those
things which are diverse in species from the stand-
point of things, are not adequated in one adequation
to the divine understanding, nevertheless, the divine
anderstanding to which all things are adequated is one;
and from the standpoint of it there is one adequation
to all things, although all things are not adequated in
the same manner; and therefore, in the manner spoken
of above there is one truth of all things.

* To the eighth it must be said that Augustine speaks
of truth patterned in our mind from the divine mind
itself, just as the likeness of a face results in a mirror,
and truths of this sort resulting in our souls from the
first truth, are many, as has been said. Either it must
be said that the first truth is in a certain manner of
the genus of the soul, taking genus in a broad sense
as all intelligibles, or else incorporeal things are said


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 187


to be of one genus, in the fashion in which it is said in
Acts 18: 28, For we are his genus.®


ARTICLE V.
Whether any other truth besides the first truth is eternal


In the fifth place it is inquired whether any other
truth besides the first truth is eternal. And it seems
that there is another. For Anselm says in the Mon-
ologium, chapter XVIII toward the end,'* speaking of
the truth of things subject to statement in propositions
[enuntiabilia]: Whether truth be said to have, or
whether it be understood not to have, beginning or end,
truth can be limited by no beginning or end. But all
truth is understood either to have a beginning or an
end or not to have a beginning or an end. Therefore,
no truth is limited by a beginning or an end. But
everything which is of this sort is eternal. Therefore,
all truth is eternal.

2. Moreover, all that of which the being follows on
the destruction of its being, is eternal, since, whether
it is predicated to be or whether it is predicated not
to be, it follows that it will be, and it is necessary to
predicate of each thing in reference to each time that
it is or that it is not. But on the destruction of truth
it follows that truth is, since if truth is not, it is true
that truth is not, and nothing can be true except by
truth. Therefore, truth is eternal.

3. Moreover, if the truth of propositions is not eternal,
d then it will be possible to assign a time when there
will not be a truth of propositions. But then, the


®% English translations of the Acts usually render genus,


offspring.
w@p, above, vol. Lap22-<


188 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


following proposition is true, that there is no truth of
propositions. Therefore, the truth of propositions is;
which is contrary to that which was granted. There-
fore, it can not be said that the truth of propositions is
not eternal.

4. Moreover, the Philosopher proves in book I of the
Physics that matter is eternal (although this is false) by
the fact that it remains after its own corruption and
that it is prior to its own generation, since if it is cor-
rupted, it is corrupted in something, and if it is gener-
ated, it is generated out of something; that, however, out
of which something is generated and that into which it
is corrupted is matter. But if, similarly, truth is sup-
posed to be corrupted or generated, it follows that it is
prior to its generation and after its corruption, since if
it is generated, it has been changed from non-being to
being, and if it is corrupted, it has been changed from
being to non-being. However, when there is no truth,
it is true to say that truth is not, which surely can not
be unless truth is. Therefore, truth is eternal.

5. Moreover, whatever can not be understood not to
be is eternal, since whatsoever is able not to be, can be
understood not to be. But the truth of propositions can
not be understood not to be, since the understanding can
not understand anything unless it understand that it is
true. Therefore, the truth of propositions is eternal.

6. Moreover, Anselm argues thus in the Monologium,
chapter XVIII toward the middle: Let him who can,
think of a time when it began to be true and when it was
not true.’

7. Moreover, that which is future always has been
future and that which is past always will be past. But
the proposition concerning the future is true for this
reason, that there is something future, and the proposi-

4 Cp. above, vol. I, p. 151.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 189


tion concerning the past is true for this reason, that
there is something past. Therefore, the truth of the
proposition concerning the future always has been, as
the truth of the proposition concerning the past always
will be, and so not only the first truth is eternal, but
many others.

8. Moreover, Augustine says in the book on Free
Will'® that nothing is more eternal than the reason of a
circle and that two plus three equals five. But the
truth of these is a created truth. Therefore, another
truth besides the first truth is eternal.

9. Moreover, it is not required for the truth of dis-
course that anything be said actually, but it suffices that
there be that concerning which discourse can be formed.
But before the world was, there was something concern-
ing which discourse was possible even besides God.
Therefore, before the world was made, there was a
truth of discourse. But whatsoever was before the
world is eternal. Therefore, the truth of discourse is
eternal, and so it is the same as above. Proof of the
middle premiss: the world was made of nothing, that
is, after nothing. Therefore, before the world was,
there was non-being. But a true statement is formed,
not only concerning that which is, but also concerning
that which is not, for just as it is possible for that
which is to be stated truly to be, so it is possible for
that which is not to be stated truly not to be, as it is held
in book I of the on Interpretation. Therefore, before the
world was, there was that whence a true statement could
be formed.

10. Moreover, all that is known is true while it is
known. But God knows from eternity all things pos-
sible in discourse. Therefore, the truth of all discourse
is from eternity, and so, many truths are eternal.

16 Cp. above, vol. I, p. 35.


190 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


11. But it must be said that it does not follow from
this that those things are true in themselves but in the
divine understanding.—But to the contrary, they must
be true according as they are known. But all things are
known by God from eternity, not only as they are in
his mind, but existing in their proper nature. All things
were known to our Lord God before they were created
just as he knows all things after their perfection;*" and
so he knows things after they were made not otherwise
than he knew them before. Therefore, there were many
truths from eternity not only in the divine understanding
but also in themselves.

12. Moreover, something is said to be absolutely, ac-
cording to what is in its complement. But the principle
[ratio] of truth is fulfilled in the understanding. If,
therefore, there were in the divine understanding from
eternity many truths absolutely, it must be conceded that
there are many eternal truths.

13. Moreover, it is said in the Book of Wisdom 1:15,
Justice is perpetual and immortal. But truth is part of
justice, as Cicero says in the Rhetoric, book II, on In-
vention. Therefore, truth is perpetual and immortal.

14. Moreover, universals are perpetual and _ incor-
ruptible. But the true is in the highest degree uni-
yersal, because it is converted with that which is.
Therefore, truth is perpetual and incorruptible.

15. But it must be said that the universal is not cor-
rupted through itself [per se] but it is accidentally [ per
accidens|.—But on the contrary, a thing must be de-
nominated more by that which agrees with it through
itself than by that which agrees with it by accident. If,
therefore, speaking of truth through itself, truth is


perpetual and incorruptible, and if it is not corrupted or ”
™ Heclesiasticus 23:29,


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 191


generated except by accident, it must be conceded abso-
lutely that truth spoken of universally is eternal.

16. Moreover, God was from eternity prior to the
world. Therefore, the relation of priority in God was
from eternity. But having posited one of the relatives,
it is necessary to posit the other also. Therefore, the
posterity of the world to God was from eternity. There-
fore, in some manner there was something besides God
from eternity, with which truth coincides, and so it is
the same as above.

17. But it must be said that that relation of priority
and posteriority is not something in the nature of things
but in reason only.—To the contrary, as Boethius says
in the end of the Consolation of Philosophy, book V,
last prose section, God is prior in nature to the world,
even if the world always was. Therefore, that relation
of priority is a relation of nature and not of reason only.

18. Moreover, truth of signification is rightness of
signification. But from eternity it has been right that
something be signified. ‘Therefore, truth of signification
has been from eternity.

19. Moreover, it was true from eternity that the
Father begat the Son and that the Holy Spirit pro-
ceeded from both. But these are many. Therefore,
there have been many truths from eternity.

20. But it must be said that these are true by one
truth; whence it does not follow that there are many
truths from eternity.—But to the contrary, in one way
the Father is the Father and he begets the Son; in an-
other the Son is the Son and inspires the Holy Spirit.
But by that by which the Father is the Father, it is
_ true that the Father begets the Son or that the Father
- is the Father; and on the other hand, by that by which
the Son is the Son, it is true that the Son was begotten


192 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


of the Father. Therefore, propositions of this sort are
not true by one truth.

21. Moreover, although man and risible are convert-
ible, nevertheless, the truth of these two propositions is
not the same, Man is man, and Man is risible, because
the property which the word, man, predicates and the
property which the word, risible, predicates are not the
same. In the same way, the property which the word,
Father, and the property which the word, Son, convey,
are not the same. Therefore, there is not one same truth
of the propositions quoted.

22. But it must be said that these propositions were
not from eternity.—But on the other hand, whensoever
there is an understanding which can state discursively,
there can be discourse. But there was from eternity the
divine understanding which was the understanding that
the Father is the Father and the Son is the Son, and so
there was the stating or the saying, since, according to
Anselm, in the Monologium, chapter XXXII toward the
middle, it is the same for the supreme spirit to say and
to understand. Therefore, the above mentioned state-
ments were from eternity.

Bur To THE CONTRARY, no created thing is eternal. All
truth except the first truth is created. Therefore, the
first truth alone is eternal.

Moreover, the thing that is and the true are converted.


But only one being is eternal. Therefore, only one
truth is eternal.


I repry that it must be said that, as was said above
in article 3 of this question, truth conveys a certain
adequation and commensuration: therefore, a thing is
denominated true in the same way as a thing is denomi-
nated of a common measure [commensuratum]. How-
ever, body is measured by an intrinsic measure, as by


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 193


_ line or surface or depth, and by an extrinsic measure,
as a stationary object [locatum] by place, and motion
by time, and cloth by an ell. Whence, too, a thing can
be denominated true in two ways: in one way by an
inherent truth; in another way by an extrinsic truth;
and in the latter way all true things are denominated
true by the first truth, and since the truth which is in the
understanding is measured by the things themselves, it
follows that not only the truth of the thing but also the
truth of the understanding or of discourse, which signi-
fies the understanding, is denominated by the first truth.
In this adequation or commensuration of understanding
and thing, however, it is not required that both of the
extremes be in actuality. For our understanding can
be adequated now to things which will be in the future,
but which are not now; otherwise the following state-
ment would not be true: the Antichrist will arise.
Whence this is denominated true by a truth which is in
the understanding only, even when the thing itself is not.
Similarly, too, the divine understanding could be ade-
quated from eternity with things which were not from
eternity but were made in time; and thus, those things
which are in time can be denominated true from eternity
by an eternal truth. If, however, we take truth for the
truth of created truths which inhere in these and which
we find in things and in created understanding, then
truth is not eternal, neither the truth of things nor of
statements, since the things themselves or the under-
standing in which truths inhere are not from eternity.
If, however, the truth of created truths is taken in the
sense by which all things are denominated true as by an
extrinsic measure which is the first truth, then the truth
of all, of things and of statements and of understand-
ings, is eternal, and Augustine sought after the eternity
of truth of this sort in the book of Soliloquies, book II1


194 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


chapters 3 and 4, and Anselm in the Monologium ;
whence Anselm says in the book on Truth, chapter Katt
You can understand how I proved by the truth of dis-
course in my Monologium that the supreme truth has no
beginning or end. This first truth, however, can not be
of all things unless it is one. For in our understanding,
truth is diversified in only two ways: in one way because
of a diversity of knowers, from whom it has diverse con-
ceptions which lead to diverse truths in the soul; in
another way from a diverse manner of understanding.
So the running of Socrates is one thing, but the mind
which, by compounding and dividing, understands time
with it, as is pointed out in book III on the Soul, under-
stands the running of Socrates in diverse manners, as
past, present, and future; and in accordance with that
it forms diverse conceptions in which diverse truths are
found. However, neither of these modes of diversity
can be found in the divine cognition. For God does not
have diverse cognitions of diverse things, but by one
cognition he knows all, since he knows through one
thing, namely through his own essence, not introducing
his cognition in single things, as Dionysius says in the
book on Divine Names, chapter VII toward the middle.
In the same way his cognition does not concern any
time because it is measured by eternity, which is ab-
stracted from all time since it contains all time. Whence


it remains that there are not many truths from eternity
but only one.


To the first, therefore, it must be said, that, as Anselm |
expounds himself in the book on Truth, he said that the
truth of discourse is not confined by a beginning and an
end, not because speech was without a beginning, but


because no time can be conceived when that speech
18 See above, vol. I, p. 170.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 195


was and truth was absent from it; that speech, namely,
of which it was a question, by which is signified truly
that something will be. Whence it is apparent by this
that he did not wish to add that the truth inhering in
the created thing or that speech is without beginning or
end, but the first truth, by which as by an extrinsic
measure, discourse is said to be true.

To the second it must be said that outside the soul we
find two things, namely, the thing itself and the priva-
tions and negations of the thing; which two are not
related in the same way to truth, since they are not
related in the same way to the understanding. For, by
the species which it has, the thing itself is adequated to
the divine understanding, as the artificial is to the art;
and by virtue of that same species it is brought about
that the thing adequates itself to our understanding, to
the extent that, by the likeness of itself received in the
soul, it forms a notion of itself. But when that which
is not, outside the soul, is considered, it has not anything

‘by which it may be adequated to the divine understand-
ing nor anything by which it may form a notion of itself
in our understanding. Whence that which is equated to
any understanding whatsoever, is not of that which itself
is not, but [it is] of the understanding itself which does
not receive in itself the reason [of that which is not].
The thing, however, which is something positive outside
the soul, has something in itself by which it can be called
true. It is not thus, however, with the non-being of the
thing, but whatsoever is attributed to it is from the part
of the understanding. When he says, therefore, it is
true that truth is not, since the truth which is signified
here is a truth concerning that which is not, it has
nothing save in the understanding. Whence nothing fol-
lows from the destruction of the truth which is in the
thing, except the being of the truth which is in the


196 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


understanding. And so it is evident that nothing can
be concluded from this except the truth which is in the
understanding and which is eternal; and it must certainly
be in the eternal understanding; and this is the eternal
truth. Whence for the abovementioned reason, it is
shown that only the first truth is eternal.

And by this the solution to the third and to the fourth
is evident.

To the fifth it must be said that it can not be con-
ceived that truth absolutely is not; but it can be con-
ceived that no created truth be, just as it can be
conceived that there be no creature. For the under-
standing can understand itself not to be and not to
understand, even though it does not understand without
being or understanding. For it is not necessary that
the understanding understand by understanding whatso-
ever it has by understanding, since it does not always
reflect upon itself, and therefore, there is no contradic-
tion if it understand that the created truth, without
which it can not understand, is not.

To the sixth and the seventh it must be said that that
which is future, in so far as it is future, is not; and
similarly the past in so far as it is of this sort. There-
fore, the principle is the same in respect to the truth of
the past and of the future, and the same too in respect
to the truth of that which is not. From which fact the
eternity of no truth except the first truth can be con-
cluded, as has been said in the body of the article.

To the eighth it must be said that the word of Augus-
tine must either be understood that they are eternal
according as they are in the divine mind or else the word
eternal must be taken for perpetual.

To the ninth it must be said that although true dis-
course is formed concerning the thing which is and the
thing which is not, nevertheless, the thing which is and


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 197


the thing which is not are not related in the same way to
truth, as is evident from what has been said in the solu-
tion to the second argument; from which is evident,
further, the solution of the objection which is raised.

To the tenth it must be said that God knew from
eternity many things capable of statement [ enuntiabilia],
but still he knew those many things by one cognition.
Whence from eternity there was only one truth by which
the divine cognition was true concerning many things
future in time.

To the eleventh it must be said that, as is evident
from what has been said above in the body of the ar-
ticle, the understanding is not adequated only to those
things which are actually, but also to those which are not
actually; particularly the divine understanding to which
past and future are the same. Whence, although things
were not from eternity in their own nature, nevertheless,
the divine understanding was adequated to things, in
their own nature, future in time, and for that reason it
had true knowledge from eternity of things even in their
own nature although the truths of the things were not
from eternity.

To the twelfth it must be said that although the prin-
ciple of truth is fulfilled in the understanding, still the
principle of the thing is not fulfilled in the understand-
ing. Whence, although it is conceded absolutely that
the truth of all things was from eternity by the fact that
it was in the divine understanding, still it can not be
conceded absolutely that true things were from eternity
by the fact that they were in the divine understanding.

To the thirteenth it must be said that that is under-
stood of divine justice; or if it is understood of human
justice, then it is said to be perpetual, as natural things
are said to be perpetual, as we say that fire is always
moved upward because of an inclination of nature unless


198 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


it is impeded: and since, as Cicero says, in book II on
Rhetorical Invention, virtue is a condition or habit
[habitus] in a mode of nature, agreeing with reason: so
far as it is of the nature of virtue, it has an unfailing
inclination to its act although it is sometimes impeded ;
and therefore in the beginning of the Digests’® too it is
said that justice is a constant and perpetual will to
yield to each one his right. And yet the truth concern-
ing which we speak now is not a part of justice; but the
truth which is in confessions to be made in judicial in-
vestigation is a part of justice.

To the fourteenth it must be said that Avicenna ex-
pounds in two ways that which is said, that the universal
is perpetual and incorruptible: in one way to say that
it is perpetual and incorruptible by reason of particular
things which never began and will never cease according
to those who believe in the eternity of the world; for
generation is to the following end according to the
Philosopher, that that which in the individual can not
be preserved, be preserved perpetual in the species. In
another way, to say that the universal is perpetual be-
cause it is not corrupted through itself but accidentally
on the corruption of the individual.

To the fifteenth it must be said that something is
attributed to anything through itself in two ways. In
one way positively, as it is attributed to fire to be
borne upward: and a thing is denominated more by
such an attribution through itself than by that which it
is accidentally; for, we say that fire is borne upward
and that it is of those things which are borne upward
rather than of those which are borne downward, al-
though accidentally fire is sometimes borne downward, as
is evident in heated iron. Sometimes an attribution is
made through itself by reason of removal or denial,

In the old Digest, book I, title I, law 10.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 199


that is, by the fact that those things are removed from
it which are formed to induce the contrary disposition.
Whence, if some one of them should advene accidentally,
that contrary disposition will be stated absolutely; as
unity is attributed to first matter through itself, not
through the imposition of some form of unity, but through
the removal of diversifying forms. Therefore, when the
forms distinguishing matter advene, we say absolutely
that there are many matters rather than one. And so
it is in what was stated above; for the universal is not
said to be incorruptible as if it possesses some form of
incorruption, but because the material dispositions which
are the causes of corruption in individuals do not accord
with it according to itself, and therefore the universal
existing in things is said absolutely to be corrupted in
this and in that.

To the sixteenth it must be said that although all other
genera, in so far as they are of this sort, posit something
in the nature of things, for quantity, from the very fact
that it is quantity, states that something is; relation
alone does not have, from the fact that it is a genus of
this sort, the property of positing something in the
nature of things, because it does not predicate some-
thing, but is relative to something. Whence, certain
relations are found which posit nothing in the nature
of things but only in reason; and this happens in four
different ways as can be gathered from the sayings of
the Philosopher and of Avicenna. In one way when
something is referred to itself, as when we relate the
same to the same. For if this relation were to posit in
the nature of things something added to that which is
called the same, there would be a regress in infinitum
in relations, since that very relation through which any
thing was said to be the same, would be the same with
itself through another relation and thus in infinitum. In


200 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


a second way, in the case when the relation itself is
referred to something. For it can not be said that
paternity is referred to its subject through another
intermediate relation, since that intermediate relation too
would need another intermediate relation and so im in-
finitum. Whence that relation which is signified in the
comparison of paternity to its subject is not said to be
in the nature of things but in reason only. In a third
way, in the case when one of the relatives depends on
the other and not conversely, as knowledge depends on
the knowable and net conversely; whence the relation of
knowledge to the knowable is something in the nature of
things: the relation of the knowable to knowledge is not,
but only in reason. In a fourth way, in the case when
a thing which is, is compared with a thing which is not,
as when we say that we are prior to things which will
be after us; otherwise, it would follow that there could
be infinite relations in the same thing, if the generation
in infinitum should proceed into the future. From these
two last, therefore, it appears that that relation of prior-
ity posits nothing in the nature of things but only in
the understanding, as much because God does not de-
pend on creatures as because such priority affirms a
comparison of the thing which is to the thing which is
not. Whence it would not follow from this that there
is any other eternal truth besides that in the divine
understanding which alone is eternal; and that is the
first truth.

To the seventeenth it must be said that although God
is prior in nature to all creatures, still it does not follow
that that is a relation of nature, but that it is understood
from a consideration of the nature of that which is
called prior and of that which is called posterior; and
so also the knowable is said to be prior in nature to


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 201


knowledge, although the relation of knowable to knowl-
edge is not in the nature of things.

To the eighteenth it must be said that when the state-
ment is made: it is right that something be signified by
a non-existent signification, it is true according to the
ordination of things existing in the divine understanding,
just as even while a chest does not exist, it is right for
the chest to have a cover according to the ordination of
the art in the artificer. Whence it can not be held from
this fact that another truth besides the first truth is
eternal.

To the nineteenth it must be said that the reason of
the true is founded on that which is. Although, there-
fore, many persons or properties are posited in the di-
vine, nevertheless, there is only one being posited there,
because being is said to be in divine things only essen-
tially: and there is of all the following statements, that
the Father is or begets, that the Son is or was begotten,
one truth in so far as they are referred to the thing,
which is the first truth and eternal.

To the twentieth it must be said that although it is
by one thing that the Father is the Father and the Son
is the Son, because the former is by paternity and the
latter by filiation, nevertheless, that by which the Father
is and that by which the Son is, is the same, for each
is by the divine essence which is one. The principle of
truth, however, is not founded on the principle of
paternity and filiation is so far as they are of this sort,
but on the principle of entity; but paternity and filiation
are one essence, and therefore, there is one truth of both.

To the twenty-first it must be said that the properties
which this word, man, and this word, risible, predicate,
are not the same by essence nor do they have one being,
as is the case with paternity and filiation; and therefore
it is not similar.


ere rr ero rS


202 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


To the twenty-second it must be said that the divine
understanding does not know, except by one cognition,
things howsoever diverse, which nevertheless have in
themselves diverse truths. Whence, all the more it does
not know except by one cognition all things of this sort
which are understood of persons. Whence, likewise,
there is only one truth of all of them.


ArticLe VI.
Whether created truth is immutable?°


In the sixth place it is inquired whether created truth
is immutable. And it seems that it is immutable. For
Anselm, in the book on Truth, chapter XIV, says: I
see that it has been proved by this argument that truth
remains immobile. But the reason advanced was concern-
ing truth of signification, as is apparent from what has
been said above in article 5. Therefore the truth of
discourse is immutable and, for the same reason, the
truth of the thing.

2. Moreover, if the truth of discourse is changed it is
changed most of all with the change of the thing. But
after the thing has been changed, the truth of the
proposition remains. Therefore, the truth of discourse
is immutable. Proof of the middle premiss. Truth ac-
cording to Anselm, in the book on Truth, chapter VII,??
is a certain rightness in so far as it fulfills that for which
it was formed in the divine mind. But this proposition,
Socrates sits, was formed in the divine mind to signify
the sitting of Socrates, which it signifies even when
Socrates is not sitting. Therefore, too, even while

™Cp. Summa Theologica I, q. 16, a. 1.


1 See above, vol. I, p. 182.
= Cp- above, vol. I, p. 164


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 203


Socrates is not sitting the truth remains in it, and thus
the truth of the said proposition is not changed even if
the thing is changed.

3. Moreover, if truth is changed, it can not be unless
those things in which truth is, have changed, just as
forms are not said to be changed unless their subjects
have changed. But truth is not changed with the muta-
tion of true things, since truth still remains after true
things have been destroyed, as Augustine and Anselm, in
the book on Truth, chapter X,?° prove. Therefore,
truth is absolutely immutable.

4. Moreover, the truth of the thing is the cause of the
truth of the proposition; for from the fact that a thing
is or is not, speech is said to be true or false. But the
truth of the thing is immutable. Therefore, the truth
of the proposition, too. Proof of the middle premiss.
Anselm in the book on Truth, chapter XIII,?* proves
that the truth of discourse remains immobile as it fulfills
that for which it was formed in the divine mind. But
singly every thing fulfills that which it was formed in
the divine mind to have. Therefore, the truth of every
thing is immutable.

5. Moreover, that which remains after every mutation
has been made, never changes; for in the alteration of
colors we do not say that the surface is changed, be-
cause that remains in the thing whatever mutation of
the colors is made. But truth remains in the thing
whatever mutation of the thing is made, because that
which is and the true are convertible. Therefore, truth
is immutable.

6. Moreover, when the cause is the same, the effect
also is the same. But the cause of the truth of the
following three propositions, Socrates sits, Socrates will


2 See above, vol. I, pp. 170-171.
4 Cp. above, vol. I, p. 183.


204 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


sit, Socrates sat, is the same, namely, the sitting of
Socrates. Therefore, the truth is the same. But if one
of the three aforesaid propositions is true, one of the
other two must in the same way be true; in fact, if it
is ever true that Socrates sits, it always was true and
always will be true either that Socrates sat or that he
will sit. Therefore, the truth of one of the three propo-
sitions always maintains itself in one manner, and so it
is immutable and the same reason applies to every other
truth,

Bur TO THE CONTRARY, when causes have been,
changed the effects are changed. But the things which
are the cause of the truth of a proposition are changed.
Therefore, the truth of propositions is changed too.


I repry that it must be said that something is said to
be changed in two ways. In one way because it is the
subject of mutation, as we say that body is rautable;
and no form is mutable in this way, and so it is said
that form is the remaining in invariable essence; where-
fore, since truth is signified by the way of form, the
present question is not whether truth is immutable in
this manner. A thing is said to be changed in another
way in that the mutation is made according to it, as we
say that whiteness is changed because the body is altered
according to whiteness, and in this sense it is inquired
concerning truth whether it is mutable.

As evidence of this, it must be known that that ac-
cording to which mutation takes place is sometimes said
to be changed and sometimes not. For when it is in-
herent in that which is changed according to it, then it
too is said to be changed, as whiteness or quantity are
said to be changed when something is changed accord-
ing to them, in that they themselves succeed to them-
selves in the subject according to this mutation. When,


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 205 -


however, that according to which something is said to
be changed is extrinsic, then it is not changed in that
mutation, [ but perseveres immobile, just as place is not
said to be moved] when something is moved with respect
to place. Wherefore in the IVth book of the Physics it
is said that place is the immutable bound [terminus] of
that containing, in that, by local motion it is not meant
that there is a succession of places in one thing which
is in place, but rather a succession of things placed in
one place. There is, however, a double mode of muta-
tion of inherent forms which are said to change with the
change of the subject: for in one way general forms
are said to be changed and in another, special forms.
For the special form does not remain the same after
mutation either according to being or according to rea-
son, as whiteness, once the alteration is made, remains
in no manner. But the general form remains the same
according to reason after the mutation has been made,
but not according to being, as when the mutation has
been made from white to black the color remains the
same according to the common reason of color, but it is
not the same species of color. It has been said above,
however, in the preceding article, that some thing is
denominated true by the first truth as by an extrinsic
measure, but by the inhering truth as by an intrinsic
measure. Wherefore, created things are varied in the
participation of the first truth, but the first truth itself
according to which they are called true, is changed in
no manner, and this is what Augustine says in the book
on the Free Will, part II, chapter VIII not far from
the beginning:?> Our minds sometimes see more, some-
times less of the truth itself, but it, enduring in itself,
neither advances nor declines. If, however, we take


* Cp. above vol. I, p. 35.


206 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


truth as inhering in things, then, truth is said to be
changed as some things are changed in respect to truth.
Therefore, as was said above in article 2 of this ques-
tion, truth is found in creatures in two ways: in the
things themselves and in the understanding; for truth
of action is comprehended under the truth of the thing,
as truth of discourse is comprehended under the truth
of understanding which it signifies. But a thing is said
to be true by comparison to the divine and the humen
understanding.

If, therefore, the truth-of a thing is taken in its order
to the divine understanding, then the truth of a mutable
thing is changed into another truth, not into falsity. For
truth is most of all a general form, since the true and
the thing which is are converted: therefore, just as the
thing remains that which is, after any mutation whatso-
ever has been made, even though it be according to some
other form by which it has being, so it always remains
true, but by another truth, because whatsoever form or
even privation it acquires by mutation, it is conformed
according to it to the divine understanding, which knows
it as it is according to any disposition whatsoever. If,
however, the truth of a thing were considered in its
order to the human understanding or conversely, then
mutation is sometimes made from truth to falsity, and
sometimes from one truth to another. For, since truth
is the adequation of thing and understanding, if equals
be removed from equals, equals still remain, although -
not in the same quantity. In the same way it is neces-
sary that when the understanding and the thing are
changed, truth remain, though another truth, as, if Soc-
rates be understood to be seated when Socrates is sitting, ©
and then later when he is not sitting he be understood —
not to sit. But since, if something be removed from one


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 207


of the equals and nothing from the other or if unequals
be removed from both, it is necessary that inequality
appear which is related to falsity as equality is to
truth, therefore it is that, if the thing is changed while
the understanding still exists, but understanding is not
changed, or conversely, or both are changed but not
similarly, falsity appears; and so there will be a muta-
tion from truth to falsity, as, if Socrates is understood
to be white while he exists white, the understanding is
true; but if later Socrates is understood to be black,
while he remains white, or if conversely when Socrates
is changed to blackness, he is still understood to be
white, or when he has been changed to pallor he is under-
stood to be ruddy, there will be falsity in the under-
standing. And thus appears how truth is changed and
how it is not changed.


To the first, therefore, it must be said that Anselm
speaks of truth as all things are said to be true according
to it as by an extrinsic measure.

To the second it must be said that since the under-
standing is bent inward upon itself and understands
itself as it understands other things, as is said in the
IlIrd book on the Soul, therefore, those things which
pertain to, the understanding according as it regards the
reason of truth, can be considered in two ways. In one
way as they are certain things and thus truth is predi-
cated of them in the same way as of other things, so that,
just as a thing is said to be true because it fulfills that
for which it was formed in the divine understanding by
retaining its nature, so discourse is said to be true by
retaining its own nature which was dispensed to it in the
divine mind; nor can that be removed from it, while the
discourse itself remains. In another manner, as they


208 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


are compared to the things understood, and so a state-
ment is called true when it is adequated to the thing, and
such a truth of thing is changed, as has been said in
the body of the article.

To the third it must be said that the truth which re-
mains after the true things have been destroyed is the
first truth, which is not changed even when the things
have been changed.

To the fourth it must be said that, while the thing
continues, no change can be made about it in regard to
those things which belong to it essentially, just as it is
essential to a statement that it signify that which it was
instituted to signify. Wherefore, it does not follow that
the truth of the thing is in no way mutable, but that it is
immutable as regards things essential to the thing, so
long as the thing continues. In those things, however,
in which mutation of the thing occurs through corruption
with respect to accidents, mutation can occur while the
thing still remains, and so with respect to the accidentals,
mutation of the truth of the thing can be made.

To the fifth it must be said that after all mutation
has been made, truth remains, but not the same truth,
as is evident from what has been said above in the body
of the article. ;

To the sixth it must be said that the identity of truth
depends not only on the identity of the thing but also on
the identity of the understanding, as the identity of the
effect depends on the identity of agent and patient.
Although that which is signified in these three proposi-
tions is the same thing, nevertheless the understanding
of the propositions is not the same, because time is
added in the composition of the understanding: there-
fore, aécording to the variation of time there are differ-
ent understandings.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 209


Articte VII.


Whether truth is predicated in divine things personally
or essentially


In the seventh place it is inquired whether truth in
divine things is predicated essentially or personally.
And it seems that it is predicated personally. For
whatever introduces in divine things the relation of prin-
ciple, is spoken of personally. But truth is of this sort,
as is evident in Augustine in the book on True Religion,
chapter 36, where he says that divine truth is. the
supreme likeness of the principle without any unlikeness
from which falsity arises. Therefore, truth is spoken
of personally in divine things.

2. Moreover, as nothing is like to itself, so nothing is
equal to itself. But likeness in divine things imports a
distinction of persons, according to Hilary, on Synods,
paragraph 72, from the fact that nothing is like to
itself. Therefore, for the same reason the same is true
of equality. But truth is a certain equality. Therefore,
it imports a personal distinction in divine things.

3. Moreover, all that which in divine things imports
an emanation is spoken of personally. But truth imports
a certain emanation because it signifies a conception of
the understanding, as does the Word. Therefore, just
as the Word is spoken of personally, so too truth.

Bur To THE CONTRARY there is one truth of the three
persons, as Augustine says in book VIII on the Trinity,
chapter 1. Therefore, it is essential and not personal.


I repty that it must be said that truth in divine things
can be taken in two ways: in one way properly, in the
other way as if metaphorically. For if truth be taken


210 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


properly, then it will import an equality of the divine
understanding and the thing. And since the divine un-
derstanding hihttesistaivdld first the thing which is_ its
essence, through which it understands all other things, so
too truth in God imports principally the equality of the
divine understanding and the thing which is its essence,
and consequently the equality of the divine understand-
ing to created things. However, the divine understand-
ing and its essence are not adequated as that which
measures to that which is measured, since one is not the
principle [ principium] of the other, but they are abso-
lutely the same: therefore, the truth resulting from such
an equality introduces no relation of principle, whether
it be taken from the part of the essence or from the part
of the understanding, which are one and the same there;
for as that which understands and the thing understood
are there the same, so too, the truth of the thing and of
the understanding are there the same, without any con-
notation of principle. But if the truth of the divine
understanding be taken as it is adequated to created
things, truth will remain the same to the extent that
God understands himself and others through the same
thing, but still in the understanding of the truth there
is added the relation of principle to creatures to which
the divine understanding is compared as measure and
~eause. But every name, which does not import in di-
vine things the relation of principle or what is from
a principle, or else imports also the relation of principle
to creatures, is spoken of essentially. Wherefore, if
in divine things truth be taken properly, it is spoken of
essentially; nevertheless truth is appropriated to the
person of the Son, just as art and the rest which pertain
to the understanding. Truth, however, is taken meta-
phorically or by likeness in divine things, when we take
it there according to that relation in which it is found in


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 211


created things, in which truth is spoken of in that the
created thing imitates its principle, namely, the [ divine]
understanding. Wherefore, similarly, truth is predicated
in divine things in this way as the supreme imitation
of the principle which is proper to the Son, and ac-
cording to this acceptance of truth, truth is properly
referred to the Son and referred to him personally, and
Augustine speaks thus in the book on True Religion, as
quoted above.


And thus the reply to the first is evident.

To the second it must be said that equality in divine
things sometimes imports the relation which designates
a personal distinction, as when we say that the Father
and the Son are equal, and according to that a real dis-
tinction is understood in the word equality. Sometimes,
however, a real distinction is not understood in the
word equality but only a distinction of reason, as when
we say that the divine wisdom and goodness are equal.
Whence, it is not necessary that it import a personal
distinction; and such is the distinction imported by the
word truth, since it is an equality of understanding and
essence.

To the third it must be said that although truth is
conceived by the understanding, nevertheless, the prin-
ciple of conception is not expressed by the name of
truth as it is by the name of the Word: therefore, they
are not similar.


Articte VIII.
Whether all truth is from the first truth


In the eighth place it is inquired whether all truth
is from the first truth. And it seems that that is not


‘


212 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the case. For it is true that this person committed forni-
cation, but that is not, nevertheless, from the first truth.
Therefore, not all truth is from the first truth.

2. But it was said that the truth of sign or of under-
standing according to which this true is said to be true is
from God, but not the truth of sign or of understanding
according to which this is referred to the thing.—But to
the contrary, besides the first truth there is not only the
truth of sign or of understanding, but also the truth of

thing. If, therefore, this true is not from God in so
far as it is referred to the thing, this truth of the thing
will not be from God, and thus the proposition is ad-
vanced that not every other truth is from God.

3. Moreover, in order that the descent be made from
the truth of proposition to the truth of the saying which
expresses the truth of the thing, it follows: this person
committed fornication, therefore it is true that he com-
mitted fornication. Therefore, the truth aforesaid con-
sists in the fact that that act is joined to this subject.
But the truth of the saying would not be from the com-
position of such an act with that subject, if the composi-
tion of the act were not understood under the deformity
of the existing thing. Therefore, the truth of the thing
is not only to the measure of the very essence of the act
but to the measure of the deformity. But the act
considered under its deformity is in no way from God..-
Therefore, not all truth of the thing is from God.

4. Moreover, Anselm, in the book on Truth, chapter
8,7° says that a thing is said to be true when it is as it
should be; and among the manners in which it can be
said that a thing should be, he posits one manner accord-
ing to which it is said that a thing should be, because.
God permitting, it takes place. But the permission of
God is extended even to the deformity of actuality.

* See above, vol. I, pp. 164-165.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 213


Therefore, the truth of the thing pertains to that de-
formity. But that deformity is in no manner from God.
Therefore, not all truth is from God.

5. But it was said that just as deformity or any
privation whatsoever is said to be a thing which is. not
absolutely but in some one respect [secundum quid], so
too it is said that truth holds not absolutely but in some
‘one respect, and such truth in some one respect is not
from God.—But, to the contrary, the true adds, over
the thing that is, an order to the understanding. But
although privation or deformity in itself is not absolutely
the thing that is, nevertheless it is apprehended abso-
lutely by the understanding. Therefore, although it does
not have entity absolutely, it nevertheless has truth
absolutely.

6. Moreover, everything relative to something [ secun-
dum quid] is reduced to that which is absolutely, as this
statement, The ethiopian is white with respect to tooth,
is reduced to this statement, The tooth of the ethiopian
is white. If, therefore, some truth relative to something
is not from God, then all truth absolutely will not be
from God; which is absurd.

7. Moreover, that which is not the cause of the cause
is not the cause of the effect, as God is not the cause of
the deformity of sin, because he is not the cause of the
defect in the free will from which the deformity of sin
arises. But, as being is the cause of the truth of
affirmative propositions, so non-being is the cause of the
truth of negative propositions. Since, therefore, God is
not the cause of that which is non-being, as Augustine
says in the book of LXXXIII Questions, question 21
toward the middle, it remains that God is not the cause
of negative propositions, and so not all truth is from
God.
8. Moreover, Augustine says in the book of Solilo-


214 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


quies, part II, chapter 5, that the true is that which is
constituted as it seems. But some evil is constituted as
it seems. Therefore some evil is true. But no evil is
from God. Therefore, not all that is true is from God.

9. But it was said that evil is not seen through the
species of evil but through the species of good. But on
the contrary, the species of good never makes apparent
anything but the good. Therefore, if evil is not seen
save through the species of good, then evil never appears
save as good; which is false.

Bur To THE CONTRARY concerning the statement in
T Corinthians 1277 on this question, No man can say that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Spirit, Ambrose says,
Every truth by whomsoever pronounced is from the Holy
Spirit.

Moreover, all created goodness is from the uncreated
goodness, which is God. Therefore, for the same reason,
all truth is from the first truth, which is God.

Moreover, the reason of truth is completed in the un-
derstanding. But all understanding is from God.
Therefore, all truth is from God.

Moreover, Augustine in the book of Soliloquies part
II, chapter 5, says that the true is that which is. But
all being is from God. Therefore, all truth.

Moreover, as one is converted with that which is, so
too is true. But all unity is from the first unity. There-
fore, all truth too is from the first truth.


I repty that it must be said that in created things
truth is found in things and in understanding, as is
evident from what has been said: in the understanding
as it is adequated to the things of which it has knowl-
edge; but in things as they imitate the divine under-
standing which is their measure, as art is the measure

7 Vers. 3.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 215


of all things made by art; and in another way as they
are formed to make a true apprehension of themselves
in the human understanding, which is measured by
things, as is pointed out in book X of the Metaphysics.
The thing, however, existing without the soul, imitates
by its form the art of the divine understanding, and it
is formed to make a true apprehension of itself in the
human understanding by that same form by which, like-
wise, each thing has its being; wherefore, the truth of
existing things includes in its principle [ratio] their
entity and superadds the relation [ habitudo] of adequa-
tion to the human or divine understanding. But nega-
tions or privations existing outside the soul do not have
any form by which they might either imitate the ex-
emplar of the divine art or bring forth a notion of
themselves in the human understanding; but that they
are adequated to the understanding is from the part of
the understanding which apprehends their reasons. Thus,
therefore, it is evident that when one speaks of a true
stone and true blindness, truth is not related to the
two in the same manner. For truth predicated of the
stone includes in its principle the entity of the stone
and superadds the relation to the understanding which is
caused, likewise, from the part of the thing itself, since
it has something according to which it can be referred;
but the truth predicated of blindness does not include in
itself the privation which is blindness, but only the
relation of blindness to the understanding, which does
not have something likewise from the part of blindness
itself in which it is sustained, since blindness is not
adequated to the understanding from the part of any-
thing which it has in itself.

It is evident, therefore, that the truth found in created
things can comprehend nothing other than the entity of
the thing and the adequation to the understanding, or


216 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the adequation of the understanding to things or the.
privations of things; each of which is from God, because
both the form itself of the thing by which it is adequated
is from God and the true thing itself as well as the good
of the understanding, as is pointed out in the VIth book
of the Ethics, chapter 6, and book X, chapter 4 about
the middle, that the good of each thing consists in its
own perfect operation. The perfect operation of the
understanding, however, is only as it knows the true;
wherefore, its good consists in this, in so far as it knows
in this manner. Wherefore, since all good is from God
and all form, it is also absolutely necessary to say that
all truth is from God.


To the first, therefore, it must be said, that when it is
argued thus: Every true thing is from God; it is true
that this person has fornicated; the fallacy of accident
occurs, as can be seen from what has already been said
in the body of the article. For when we say that to
fornicate is true, we do not say it as if the defect impli-
cated in the act of fornication were included in the
reason of truth; but true predicates only the adequation
of it to the understanding. Wherefore, it must not be
concluded: That this person commits fornication is from
God; but that the truth of it is from God.

To the second it must be said that deformities and
other defects do not have truth as other things do, as is
evident from what has been said, and therefore, al-
though the truth of defects is from God, it can not be
concluded from that that the defects are from God.

To the third: it must be said that according to the
Philosopher in the VIth book of the Metaphysics, truth
does not consist in the composition which is in things
but in the composition which the soul makes; and there-
fore truth does not consist in the fact that this act with


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 217


its deformity inheres in the subject; for that pertains
to the principle [ratio] of good and evil; but in the
fact that the act adhering thus in the subject is ade-
quated to the apprehension of the soul.

To the fourth it must be said that good, due, right, ,
and all notions of this sort are in one way related to the
divine permission and in another way to other signs of
the divine will. For in the other signs of the divine will
good is referred both to that which falls under the act
of the will and to the very act of the will, as when God
enjoins honor of parents, and that very honor of parents
is itself something good. But in permission it is re-
ferred only to the act of the one permitting and not to
that which falls under the permission: therefore, it is
good that God permit a deformity to occur, but it does
not follow from that, that the deformity itself has any
other rightness. —

And the solution to the fifth is apparent from this.

To the sixth it must be said that truth which corre-
sponds to negations and defects is reduced to truth
absolutely, which is in the understanding, which is
from God; and therefore the truth of defects is from
God, although the defects themselves are not from God.

To the seventh it must be said that non-being is not
the cause of the truth of negative propositions, in the
sense of making them in the understanding; but the soul
itself does this, conforming itself to non-being which is
outside the soul: therefore, non-being existing outside
the soul is not the efficient cause of truth, but, as it were,
the exemplary cause. The objection, however, proceeded
from the efficient cause.

To the eighth it must be said that although evil is
not from God, nevertheless, the fact that evil is judged
as it is, is from God: wherefore, the truth by which it is
true that evil is, is from God.


218 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


To the ninth it must be said that although evil does
not act upon the soul except by the species of the good;
nevertheless, because it lacks good, the soul seizes in it
upon the principle of the defect, and in that it conceives
the principle of evil; and thus evil seems evil.


Articte IX.
Whether truth is in sense?®


In the ninth place it is inquired whether truth is in
sense, and it seems that it is not. For Anselm says in
the book on Truth, chapter 11,?° that truth is rightness
perceptible to the mind alone. But sense is not of the
nature of the mind. Therefore, truth is not in the sense.

2. Moreover, Augustine in the book of LXXXIII
Questions, question 5, proves that the truth of the body
is not known by the senses; and the reasons for it are
stated above. Therefore, truth is not in sense.

To tHE conrrary, Augustine, on True Religion,
chapter 36, says that truth is that by which that which
is, is shown. But that which is, is shown not only to the
understanding but also to the sense. Therefore, truth is
not only in the understanding, but also in sense.


I repry that it must be said that truth is in under-
standing and in sense, although not in the same way.
For in the understanding, it is as consequent to the act
of the understanding and as known by the understand-
ing; for it is consequent to the operation of the under-
standing, as the judgment of the understanding is of the
thing according to which it is; but it is known by the
understanding as the understanding reflects upon its


2 Cp. Summa Theologica II, q. 16, a. 2.
* See above, vol. I, p. 172.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 219


act, not only as it knows its act, but as it knows the
relation of it to the thing. This it can not know except
by knowing the nature of the act itself, which cannot be
known unless the nature of the active principle, which.
is the understanding itself, in whose nature it is to be
conformed to things, is known; wherefore, the under-
standing knows truth according to this, that it reflects
upon itself. But truth is in sense as a consequent to its
act; namely, when the judgment of sense is concerning
the thing as it is; but nevertheless it is not in sense as
known by sense: for if the sense judges truly concerning
things, it still does not know the truth by which it judges
truly; for although sense knows that it perceives, it still
does not know its nature and, consequently, does not
know the nature of its act nor the relation of it to the
thing and, therefore, does not know its truth. The rea-
son for this is that those things which are most perfect
in the things which are, such as intellectual substances,
return to their essence with a complete return: for in
the fact that they know something placed outside them-
selves, they proceed in a certain fashion outside them-
selves, but as they know that they know, they begin,
then, to return to themselves, because the act of cogni-
tion is medium between the knower and the known. But
this return is completed as they know their own essences ;
wherefore, it is said in the book on Causes, proposition
XV, that each thing knowing its essence returns to its
essence with a complete return. But sense, which of all
other things is the nearest to intellectual substance, be-
gins to return to its essence not only because it knows
the sensible but also because it knows itself perceiving.
However, its return is not completed, because the sense
does not know its own essence. Avicenna assigns this
reason for it, that sense knows nothing except by 2
corporeal organ. But it is not possible that an orgay


220 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


fall medium between a sensitive power and itself. But
the natural insensible powers in no way return upon
themselves because they do not know themselves, as fire
does not know itself heating.

From these things, therefore, the solution to the ob-
jections is evident.


ArTICLE X.
Whether any thing is false®®


In the tenth place it. is inquired whether any thing
is false, and it seems that no thing is. Because according
to Augustine in the book of Soliloquies, part II, chapter
5, the true is that which is. Therefore, the false is that
which is not. But that which is not, is not any thing.
Therefore, no thing is ‘false.

2. But it was said that the true is the differentia of
the thing which is, and therefore, as the true is that
which is, so also is the false.—But, on the contrary, no
differentia which is divisive is converted with that of
which it is the differentia. But the true is converted
with that which is, as has been said. Therefore, the true
is not a differentia divisive of the thing which is, so that
some false thing can be spoken of.

3. Moreover, truth is the adequation of thing and
understanding. But every thing is adequated to the
divine understanding, because nothing can be in itself
otherwise than the divine understanding knows _ it.
Therefore, every thing is true: therefore, no thing is
false.

4. Moreover, every thing has truth from its form;
for a man is called true by the fact that he has the true
form of man. But no thing is, which does not have

“Cp. Summa Theologica I, q. 17, a..1.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 221


some form, because all being is by form. Therefore,
every thing whatsoever is true: therefore, no thing is
false.

5. Moreover, as good and evil are constituted, so too
are true and false. But because evil is found in things,
evil is not substantified except in good, as Dionysius*!
and Augustine say. Therefore, if falsity is found in
things, falsity is not substantified except in the true;
this does not seem to be possible since in that case true
and false would be the same, which is impossible, just
as man and white are the same, because whiteness is
substantified in man. .

6. Moreover, Augustine in the book of Soliloquies,
book II, chapter 1, raises the following objection: If
some thing is called false, it is either by that which is
like or by that which is unlike. If by that which is
unlike, there is nothing which can not be called false,
for there is nothing which is not unlike something. If
by that which is like, all things protest that they are true
by that to which they are like. Therefore, in no manner
can falsity be found in things.

1. Bur to THE conTRaRy, Augustine, in the Solilo-
quies, book II, chapter 15, toward the middle, defines
the false thus: the false is that which is accommodated
to the likeness of any thing and does not pertain to that
whose likeness it bears. But every creature bears the
likeness of God. Since, therefore, no creature pertains
to God himself by the mode of identity, it- seems that
every creature is false.

2. Moreover, Augustine says on True Religion, chap-
ter 34, a little after the beginning: Every body is true
body and false unity. But this is said so far as it imitates
unity and is, nevertheless, not unity. Since, therefore,
every creature whatsoever, by each of his perfections,

On Divine Names, chapter 6.


222 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY :


imitates the divine perfection and is none the less in-
finitely removed from it, it seems that every creature
is false.

3. Moreover, just as true is converted with that which
is, so too is good. But from the fact that good is con-
verted with that which is, there is nothing to prevent
some thing being found evil. Therefore, from the fact
that true is converted with that which is there is nothing |
to prevent some thing being found false.

4. Again, Anselm, on T'ruth, chapter 2,°* says that the
truth of a proposition is of two sorts: one, when |
signifies what it has undertaken to signify, as this
proposition, Socrates sits, signifies that Socrates sits
whether Socrates sits or does not sit; the other; when it
signifies that for which it was made, for it was made in
order to signify a thing is, when it is; and according to
this, a statement is properly called true. Therefore, for
the same reason, any thing will be called true when it
fulfills that for which it is, and false when it does not
fulfill it. But each thing which falls short of its end,
does not fulfill that because of which it is. Since, there-
fore, there are many such things, it seems that many
things are false.


I repxy it must be said that, as truth consists in the
adequation of thing and understanding, so falsity con-
sists in their inequality. The thing, however, is com-
pared to the divine and to the human understanding, as
_was said above in articles 5 and 8 of this question; but
it is compared to the divine understanding as a thing
measured to its measure, in respect to those things which
are spoken of or found in things positively, because all -
things of this sort arise from the art of the divine under- -
standing; in another way, as the known to the knower,

#2 See above, vol. I, pp. 153-156.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 223


and so negations and defects are adequated to the divine
understanding, because God knows all things of this sort
although he does not cause them. It is evident, there-
fore, that the thing existing by either privation or defect,
so far as it is constituted under any form whatever, is
adequated to the divine understanding. And so, it is
evident that any thing whatever, in comparison to the
divine understanding, is true, as Anselm says in the book
on Truth, chapter 7:°° Therefore, truth is in all things —
which are beings, because they are in that respect, what
they are in the supreme truth. Wherefore, by compari-
son to the divine understanding, no thing can be false
but, by comparison to the human understanding, an in-
equality of the thing to the understanding is now and
then found which is caused in a measure by the thing
itself; for the thing causes a notion of itself in the soul
by those things which appear concerning it outside the
soul, because our knowledge takes its beginning from
sense, of which the sensible qualities are themselves the
object, wherefore, too, in the Ist book on the Soul it is
said that accidents contribute a large part to learning
essence [quod quid est], and therefore, when sensible
qualities appear in any thing, indicating a nature which
does not underlie them, that thing is said to be false;
wherefore, the philosopher says in the VIth book of the
Metaphysics that those things are said to be false which
are formed to seem either such as they are not or what
they are not, as false gold, in which the color of gold
appears on the outside and other accidents of that sort,
when nevertheless the nature of gold does not underlie
the accidents within. However, a thing is not in such
wise the cause of falsity in the soul that it causes falsity
necessarily, because truth and falsity clearly exist in the
judgment of the soul, but the soul, in so far as it judges
% Cp. above, vol. I, p. 164.


224 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


of things, does not suffer from things, but in a certain
wise acts. Wherefore, a thing is not said to be false
because it always causes a false apprehension of itself,
but because it was formed to cause the apprehension
through those things which appear concerning it. But
since, as has been said in this article and in articles 5
and 8, the comparison of the thing to the divine under-
standing is essential, it is said to be true in itself
according to that; but the comparison to the human un-
derstanding is accidental, and according to it, it is not
called true absolutely: therefore, speaking absolutely,
every thing is true and no thing is false; but in some
one respect [secundum quid], namely, in their order to
our understanding, some things are called false; and
therefore, it is necessary to reply according to the
principles of both parts.


To the first, therefore, it must be said that the follow-
ing definition, the true is that which is, does not express
the principle [ratio] of truth perfectly, but only, as it
were, materially, except as it signifies that the affirma-
tion of the proposition is; namely, that it be said that
that is true which is said or understood to be as it is
in the thing; and so likewise, that is said to be false
which is not, namely, that which is not as it is said or
understood to be; and this can be found in things.

To the second it must be said that the true, properly
speaking, can not be the differentia of that which is; for
that which is does not have any differentia, as is proved
in the IIIrd book of the Metaphysics; but anything true
is related to that which is by the mode of differentia, as
is also any good, in so far, that is, as it expresses some-
thing concerning that which is, which is not expressed
by the name of that which is; and, according to this,
the intention of that which is is undetermined with


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 225


respect to the intention of the true; and so, the intention
of the true is related to the intention of that which is, in
a certain way, as differentia to genus.

To the third it must be said that that reasoning must
be conceded, for it proceeds from the thing in its order
to the divine understanding.

To the fourth it must be said that although any thing
whatsoever has some form, nevertheless, not every thing
has that form the judgments of which are shown ex-
ternally by sensible qualities; and it is called false for
that reason, in so far as it is found apt to cause a false
estimation of itself.

To the fifth it must be said that something existing
outside the soul is to that extent called false, as is
evident from what was said in the body of the article,
because it is formed to cause a false estimation of itself,
when it moves the cognitive power; wherefore it is
necessary that that which is said to be false, be some-
thing that is. Wherefore, since each thing which is is
true, in so far as it is a thing which is, it is necessary
that falsity existing in things be founded on truth; for
this reason Augustine says in the book of Soliloquies,
chapter 10 a little from the beginning, that the tragedian
who represents true persons in the theatre would not be
false if he were not a true tragedian; in the same way, a
painted horse would not be a false horse, if it were not
pure picture. It does not follow, however, that the
contradictory is true, because the affirmation and nega-
tion, in the respect in which they assert the true and
the false, are not referred to the same thing.

To the sixth it must be said that a thing is said to be
false according as it is formed to deceive; when I say
deceive, however, I mean a certain action inducing de-
fect. Nothing, however, is formed to act except as it is


bo


26 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


being; but all defect is non- being. Yet each thing so far
as it is that which is, has a likeness ‘to the true; so far
as it is not, however, it recedes from likeness to it. And
accordingly, that which I say deceives, in the respect
that it derives from action, has its origin from likeness;
but with respect to the fact that it imports a defect (in
which the principle of falsity consists formally)
arises from unlikeness; and, therefore, Augustine says
in the book on True Religion and book II of the Solilo-
quies, chapter 15 toward the middle, that falsity arises
from unlikeness.

To the first, therefore, of the objections which are
raised to the contrary, it must be said that the mind is
not formed tc be deceived by any likeness whatsoever,
but by a great likeness in which an unlikeness can not
easily be found; and therefore, the mind is deceived by
a greater or a lesser likeness as it has greater or lesser
perspicacity for finding the principle of likeness and un-
likeness. Nevertheless, it should not be stated absolutely
that some thing is false by the fact that it leads into
error, howsoever great the error may be, but by the fact
that it is formed to deceive many men or wise men. But
although creatures bear in themselves some likeness to
God, nevertheless, an extremely great unlikeness under-
lies that, so that it happens only from great stupidity
that the mind is deceived by such likeness. Where-
fore, from the aforesaid likeness and unlikeness of crea-
tures to God, it does not follow that all creatures should
be said to be false.

To the second it must be said that certain persons
have judged God to be body; and since God is the unity
by which all things are one, they have, consequently,
reckoned body to be that very unity because of that
likeness of unity. Body is called a false unity, then,


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 227


in so far as it has led or could lead some into the error
that it be thought unity.

To the third it must be said that perfection is of two
sorts, namely, first and second. First perfection is the
form of each thing through which it has being; there-
fore, no thing is without that perfection while it still
endures; the second perfection is the operation which is
the end of the thing or that because of which it arrives
at the end; and now and again, a thing may lack this
perfection. The principle of the true in things results
from the first perfection; for from the fact that a thing'
has form, it imitates the art of the divine understanding
and it produces a notion of itself in the soul. But there
results from the second, in the thing itself, the principle
of goodness, which arises from the end; and therefore,
evil absolutely is found in things, but false is not.

To the fourth it must be said that according to the
Philosopher in the IIIrd book of the Ethics and the
VIth book of the Metaphysics, the first truth is the good
of the understanding; for the operation of the under-
standing is perfect in so far as its conception is true;
and since discourse is the sign of the understanding,
therefore, truth is its end. However, it is not thus in
other things, and because of this it is not similar.


ARTICLE XI.


Whether falsity is in sense*4


In the eleventh place it is inquired whether falsity is

in sense, and it seems that it is not. For the under-

standing is always right, as is pointed out in the IIIrd

book on the Soul. But the understanding is the superior

part in man. Therefore, other parts of man too fol-
* Cp. Summa Theologica I, a. 1%. a. 2.


228 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


low rightness, as in the larger world too the inferior
motions are disposed according to the superior motion.
Therefore, sense too which is the inferior part of the
soul, will always be right: therefore, falsity will not
be in it. Be

2, Moreover, Augustine says in the book on True Re-
ligion, chapter 36 in a digression toward the end, and
chapter 33 about the middle: The eyes themselves do
not deceive us, for they are able to report to us abso-
lutely nothing except their own affection. But if the
senses of the body report all things as they have been
affected, I do not know what more we should require of
them. Therefore, falsity is not in the senses.

8. Moreover, Anselm, in the book on Truth, chapter
6,°° says: It seems to me that truth or falsity is not in
sense but in opinion; and so you have what was stated.

Bur To THE conTRARY, there is what Anselm says in
the book on Truth, chapter 6:°° T'ruth is in our senses,
but not absolutely, for things sometimes deceive.

Moreover, according to Augustine in the book of
Soliloquies, chapter 15 in the middle, that is ordinarily
called false which is removed far from verisimilitude, but
has still some imitation of the truth. But the senses
have a certain likeness of some things which are not
thus in the nature of things, as sometimes one seems two,
as when the eye is pressed. Therefore, falsity is in
sense.

But it was said that sense is not deceived in proper
sensibles but only concerning common sensibles—But
to the contrary, whenever something is apprehended of
a thing otherwise than it is, the apprehension is false.
But when a white body is seen through the medium of a
green glass, the sense apprehends it otherwise than it


% See above, vol. I, p. 161.
* See above, vol. I, p. 160.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 229


is, because it apprehends it as green and judges it so,
unless a prior judgment be present by which the falsity
is revealed. Therefore, sense is deceived even in proper
sensibles.

I repry that it must be said that our knowledge, which
takes its beginning from things, proceeds in the follow-
ing order, first it begins in sense, second it is perfected


in understanding; so_that_sense is found in a certain
manner medium hetween understanding and thing; for


it is compared to things, as the understanding is, and
it is compared to the understanding, as some things are;
and therefore, truth or falsity may be said to be in sense
in two ways. In one way according to the order of
sense to the understanding, and in that way sense is
said to be false or true as things are, in so far, namely,
as they make a true or false estimation in the under-
standing. In another manner, according to the order of
sense to the thing, and so truth or falsity is said.to be
in sense, as in the understanding, in so far, namely, as it
judges that that which is, is, or that that which is not,
is not. If, therefore, we speak of sense according to
the first way, then, in a certain manner, falsity is in
‘sense and in a certain manner falsity is not in it: for
sense is both a certain thing in itself and it is also indica-
tive of some other thing. If, therefore, it is compared
to understanding as any thing is, then falsity is in no ©
wise in sense compared to the understanding, because as
sense is disposed, so it shows its disposition to the under-
standing; wherefore Augustine says, in the authority
quoted in argument 2 of this question, that it is able to
report absolutely nothing except its own affection. If,
however, it is compared to the understanding as it is
representative of another thing; since it sometimes repre-
sents the thing to the understanding otherwise than it is,


230 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


sense is called false in so far as it is formed to make
a false judgment in the understanding, although it does
not do it necessarily, as has been said also of things;
because as the understanding judges of things, so too it
judges of these presentations which are offered by the
senses. So, therefore, sense compared to understanding
always makes a true estimation of its own disposition in
the understanding, but not of the disposition of things.
If, however, sense be considered as it is compared to
things, then there are truth and falsity in sense in the
manner in which they are in the understanding. How-
ever, truth and falsity are found in the understanding
first and principally in the judgment of one who com-
pounds and divides; but it is found in the formation of
the quiddities only by their order to the judgment which
follows from the above mentioned formation. Wherefore,
truth and falsity are spoken of properly in sense in the
respect that it judges of sensible things; but there is
no truth or falsity properly there in the respect that it
apprehends the sensible, but only according to the order
to the judgment which follows from the aforementioned
formation, as, namely, such a judgment is formed to
follow from such an apprehension. The judgment of
the sense, however, concerning certain things is natural,
as, concerning proper sensibles; concerning other things,
_ however, it is, as it were, by a kind of comparison
which the cogitative faculty in man (which is a power
of the sensitive part) makes, in the place of which
there is in other animals a natural estimation, and
so the sensitive faculty judges of common sensibles
and of accidental sensibles. The natural act of any
thing, however, is always in one mode, unless it is |
impeded by accident, whether because of an intrinsic ”
defect or because of an extrinsic impediment; wherefore —


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 231


the judgment of sense concerning proper sensibles is
always true, unless there be an impediment in the organ
or in the medium; but in common sensibles and acci-
dental sensibles the judgment of the sense is now and
again deceived. And thus it is evident how there can
be falsity in the judgment of sense.

But concerning the apprehension of sense it must be
known that there is a certain apprehensive faculty which
apprehends the sensible species when the sensible thing
is present, as sense proper; and there is a certain faculty
which apprehends it when the thing is absent, as the
imagination; and therefore, sense always apprehends
the thing as it is, unless there is an impediment in the
organ or in the medium; but imagination apprehends the
thing mostly as it is not, because it apprehends it as
present when it is absent; and therefore the Philosopher
says in the IVth book of the Metaphysics that sense is
not the master of falsity, but fantasy is.


To the first, therefore, it must be said that in the
larger world superior motions take nothing from in-
ferior but contrariwise. But in man understanding
which is superior receives something from sense, and
therefore it is not similar.

To the others the solution appears easily from what
has been said in: the body of the article.


ArricLe XII.
Whether falsity is in the understanding**
In the twelfth place it is inquired whether falsity is


in the understanding; and it seems that it is not. Be-
* Cp. Summa Theologica I, q. 17, a. 3. .


232 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


cause the understanding has two operations: namely,
one by which it forms quiddities in which there is no
false, as the Philosopher says in the IIIrd book om the
Soul; another by which it compounds and divides, and
in that there is likewise no false, as is shown by Augus-
tine in the book on True Religion, chapter 36 not far
from the end, who says this: Nor does. any one under-
stand false things. Therefore, falsity is not in the
understanding.

2. Moreover, Augustine says in the book of LXXXIII
Questions, in question 31 and question 22 in the begin-
ning: Every one who is mistaken does not understand
that in which he is mistaken. Therefore, the under-
standing is always true: therefore, falsity can not be in
the understanding.

3. Again Algazeli says: Either we understand some-
thing as it is or we do not understand. But whoever
understands a thing as it is, understands truly. There-
fore, the understanding is always true: therefore, falsity
is not in it.

But there is, ro THE conTRaRy, what the Philosopher
says in the IIIrd book on the Soul that where there is
composition of understandings there too are the true and
the false. Therefore, falsity is found in the understand-
ing.


I repry that it must be said that the word under-
standing is taken for that which knows the inmost depths
of the thing; for to understand is, as it were, to read
within,*® for sense and imagination know only the ex-
terior accidents; but understanding alone pertains to
the essence of the thing. But, further, the understand-


*® That is, it is suggested that the etymology of intelligere
is intus legere.


.


SAINT THOMAS AQUINAS 233


ing engages in diverse manners in reasoning and in-
quiring from the comprehended essences of things.
Therefore, the word understanding can be taken in two
ways. In one way, as it is related only to that for
which the name was first imposed, and thus we are said
properly to understand when we apprehend the quiddity”
of things or when we understand those things which are
known to the understanding as soon as the quiddities of
things are known, such as the first principles which we
know when we understand the terms; wherefore, the
understanding is called the state or having [habitus] of
principles. The quiddity of the thing, however, is
properly the object of the understanding; wherefore,
just as sense is always true concerning proper sensibles,
so too understanding is always true in learning essence
[quod quid est], as is said in the IIIrd book on the
Soul. But nevertheless, by accident falsity can arise
there, in so far, namely, as the understanding com-
pounds and divides falsely, which happens in two ways;
either in so far as it attributes the definition of one thing
to another, as if it should conceive r&tional mortal
animal as the definition of an ass; or in so far as it
joins parts of the definition together which can not be
joined, as if it should conceive the definition of ass to
be irrational immortal animal; for the following propo-
sition is false: Some irrational animal is immortal. And
thus, it is evident that a definition can not be false except
in so far as it implicates a false affirmation. This double
mode, however, is touched on in the Vth book of the
Metaphysics. Similarly, the understanding is not de

ceived in any way in first principles. Wherefore, it is

evident that if the understanding be taken according to
the action by which the name understanding is imposed,
falsity is not in the understanding. Understanding can
be taken commonly in another manner, as it is extended


.


234 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


to all operations; and thus it comprehends opinion and
reasoning, and in that sense, falsity is in the under-
standing, but never if the resolution into first principles
is made correctly.

And by this the reply to the objection is evident.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA (1234/40-1302)


The work of Matthew of Aquasparta is indication of
the status of the discussion of the problem of knowledge
after the debates and condemnations of the 13th century
and after the aristotelian labors of Albert the Great and
Thomas Aquinas. Pupil and follower of Bonaventura,
Matthew worked out a profound interpretation of
Augustine, but he had at his command, too, the corpus
of aristotelian learning. If, therefore, Thomas had de-
parted from the ways of augustinism to make a place
for the logic and science of Aristotle, Matthew turns the
emphasis again from data, origins, and arguments to
the eternal reasons behind arguments. Often his phi-
losophy is explicit defense of the position of Bonaventura
against the thomist aristotelianism, particularly at the
points at which Thomas had found only a posteriori or
only accidental knowledge possible. To safeguard the
eternal reasons which were the mark of the presence of
God and the end therefore of Matthew’s philosophical
inquiry, his attack is constantly against skepticism, and
his argument is dotted illustratively with truths that are
indubitably certain. His doctrines are transitional be-
tween the opposition of Bonaventura (who defended the
ontological proof as an a priori argument) to Thomas
(who refuted it and substituted in its place @ posteriori
demonstrations) and the doctrine of Duns Scotus (who
defends the ontological argument but colors it to make
it a posteriori), for Matthew defends the argument
without the coloring which Duns Scotus was to give it.

235


236 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


With Duns he shares a philosophical distaste for skepti-
cism and a corresponding flare for certainties; unlike
Duns he makes his certainties the mark of divine illumi-
nation, with reservations to be sure, for the divine light
is not the whole and only reason of knowing, but the
emphasis is still on that highest part of the soul, by
which Augustine taught that sure truths are known, and
on the eternal reasons, by which they can be known.
The adversaries, inherited from Augustine and trans-
mitted to Duns Scotus, against whom Matthew pro-
ceeds from time to time with full array of logic, are the
academics; against them he shows the mounting absurd-
ity of the position which holds that the human mind can
attain to no truth. He uses in refutation a device, fre-
quent in his works though somewhat strange in the
middle ages, of prefacing his attack on opponents with
an account of the historical development of their doc-
trine; in the first of the disputed questions on Faith, he
traces (with materials borrowed from Augustine) the
departure of the new Academics from the doctrine of
the old Academics, of Plato and his followers. With
Bonaventura he finds the solution of skepticism and of
the problems of knowledge in a combination of Plato
and Aristotle: Plato had supposed the entire explana-
tion of knowledge was in the archetypal intelligible
world of ideal reasons, that the world of sensible things
could yield only opinion; Aristotle had supposed that
knowledge could be explained by its origin in sense,
memory, and experience, and by the activity of the active
intellect abstracting species from phantasms. Plato
could therefore account for wisdom, but his doctrines
had no place for knowledge; whereas Aristotle dealt
entirely in knowledge, for his philosophy had nothing —
to say of the eternal light of wisdom. Augustine held |
to the middle way, and considered our knowledge of


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 237 |


higher and of lower things, of things exterior and of
ideal reasons. .

The philosophizers who followed Aristotle, therefore,
whom Matthew criticizes and among whose number must ’
doubtless be included Thomas Aquinas, fall into an
error less only in degree than that of the academics.
They hold that the active intellect of man, working on
the data of sensation, is sufficient to explain understand-
ing, and though they acknowledge the presence of the
divine light, it is not as a special cause of knowledge,
but only as a general cause, and therefore not necessary
for the explanation of knowledge in particular. It is
this doctrine which commits them to the error of.suppos-
ing that there is no knowledge which proceeds from the
eternal causes to things, that demonstration a@ priori is
impossible, that only demonstration based on experience
is cogent to man, in that he knows no eternal essence.
Many precious selfevident truths, besides the ontological
argument, are rendered invalid if this is so. For Thomas,
the basis of philosophic certainty had to be the com-
plete and perfect return.of the soul on itself. In the
circle of that return the mind knew things, not as they
are in themselves, but by a certain reflection; it knew
itself, not intuitively, but by its acts. For Matthew the
mind had only to understand the signification of the
name of God, that he is that than which a greater can
not be conceived, to realize that he can not be conceived
not to be; the mind knows individual things through
themselves and properly, not accidentally, but by singu-
lar species; it knows itself and its conditions, too, not
only by arranging universals in arguments, but intui-
tively by perceiving the essence itself and its habits
objectively. The mind’s basic certainties of things, of
its self-perception, of God and eternal reasons are the


238 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


rediscovered and reiterated principles and the chief body
of Matthew’s philosophy.

None the less the eternal reasons are not the only
reasons of knowledge, but knowledge is begotten in us,
as Aristotle held, by sense, memory, and experience,
from which are derived the universals which are the
principles of the arts and the sciences. The mind
attains to the eternal divine reasons, not as the object
at which its inquiry terminates; rather they are the
object which moves the understanding and they move
it to other things which it knows properly; they are
the motive object and the reason of seeing, not the object
seen. They are necessary to explain the nature of the
mind, the things which the mind knows, the medium of
knowledge (in virtue of which, for example, I can know
all equals by the same principle of equality, and in
virtue of which likewise all who know equals know them
by the same principle), and finally the nature of judg-
ment (by which things are pronounced good and true
and beautiful). ;

For all the differences which might be found, some-
times with the considerable labor of Matthew and
pointed by his pertinacious criticisms, between the aris-
totelianism of Thomas and the augustinism of Matthew,
truth is defined in the disputed questions on Knowledge
by distinctions which strongly recall Thomas. There
are three kinds of truth: first, the truth which is the’
very form or nature of the thing; second, the truth
which is the comparison of the thing to the created under-.
standing; third, the truth which is the comparison of the
thing to the divine light. But the foundation which
Thomas gave to truths did not seem to Matthew to
establish them firmly enough in the eternal truths on:
which thinking and things depend. Matthew would ‘
revise the more cautious statement of Thomas to recog-


: é Vy \
MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 239


nize not only that truth, whatever its origin, involves —


certitude, but that human certitude further involves the


perception of necessary, immutable, eternal truths, in


such wise that whatever is known certainly by intellec-
tual knowledge is known in the eternal reasons and in


the light of the first truth. This has been the conviction


throughout the history of philosophy of those who re-
mark that even the denial of truth involves the assertion
of truth, that doubt about one’s thinking or one’s exist-
ence involves the recognition at least of the doubting
mind, that, finally, any inquiry concerning beings so
recognized must lead with little difficulty to the nature
of a necessary being at the basis of all being. Opposi-
tion to them has recruited the party of philosophers who
have hesitated, in varying ways, to make the truths
which the mind discovers the literal and essential char-
acterization of the things known in such truths. Within
the ranks of those who oppose skepticism there is the


opposition between those who with Matthew- are im-


pressed with the circumstance that necessary proposi-
tions can be found to encompass all the variety of things,
and those who with Thomas would weaken the generality
of that argument by further speculation, since the truths
known thus certainly, are the truths of no individual


Essence.


\


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA


TEN DISPUTED QUESTIONS ON
KNOWLEDGE!


Question I.


The question is, whether for the knowledge of a thing.
the existence of the thing itself is required, or whether
that which is not can be the object of the understanding.


But that the existence of the thing is required for
knowledge, and that that which is not can not be under-
stood, is shown thus:

1. Anselm in his book gn Truth” says that there is
one truth which is only efficient, another truth which is
only effected, and another which is efficient and effected.
The truth which is only efficient is the first truth; the
effected truth is truth in understanding or in proposi-
tion; the efficient and effected is the truth of the thing,
which is effected by the first truth and effects truth in
understanding or in proposition. The truth of knowl-
edge or the truth of proposition however is cause of no
truth. But if the first truth were not, there would be
no truth in the thing, for it is the cause of the latter:
therefore, if there were no truth in the thing, there:


1Fr. Marruarr ap Aquasparta O. F. M., S. R. BE. Carpr
NALIS, Quaestiones Disputatae Selectae, Tom. I, Quaestiones dé
Fide et de Cognitione. Quaracchi: Typographia Collegii S$:
Bonaventurae, 1903, pp. 219-269.
*Chy Xs yseekabove, vokulapp, 10371:


240


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 241


would be no truth in the understanding, since the truth
of the thing is the cause of that.

2. Again, it was said that truth is not in the thing,
but in the understanding, as the Philosopher says in
book VI of the Metaphysics,? that good and evil are in
things, but true and false are in the understanding; and
this is so for the following reason, that truth states an
adequation which is formally in the understanding, for
that which adequates is. Against this it was objected,
that an adequation is a certain relation; for nothing is
said to be adequated to itself, but it is necessary that it
be adequated to something else. If, therefore, truth is
an adequation of thing to understanding and conversely,
then necessarily it requires the existence of the thing.
And if it is thus, since nothing is understood except the
true; and the true is not in the understanding, except
because it is in the thing, then the existence of the thing
is required necessarily for knowledge.

3. Again, Avicenna in book I of the Metaphysics*
says that that which is, is the first impression of the
understanding; for the first thing that is impressed in
the understanding is that which is: therefore, the under-
standing understands only that which is: therefore, that
which is not can not be understood.

4. Again, the Philosopher, in the Metaphysics book
II,° says, As each thing is related to being, so it is re-
lated to the true; but the true is the object of the
understanding: therefore, as it is related to being, so it
is related to knowledge: therefore, that which is not is
not knowable.

5. Again, Augustine in book XII of the Literal Com-
mentary on Genesis® says, The understanding either
understands and is true; or if it is not true, it does not


®That is, book VI, ch. 4, 1027” 26-28.
“Ch. 6. O(elin It 6Ch. 25, n. 52.


242 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


understand. But that which is not is not ‘true: there-
fore, that which is not is not understood. The proof of
the minor premiss: Augustine in book II of the Solilo-
oe after the beginning’ says, The true is that which is.
. Again, three things are required necessarily for
EurtielBe namely a cognoscitive power, which is the
understanding, a medium or reason [ratio] of knowing,
which is the species of the thing, and the object itself.
In the case of a non-existent thing, therefore, there can
be the cognoscitive power, there can be the reason of
knowing; but, I ask, what is the object? If it is a
thing existing outside, I have the proposition, that that
which is not is not known. If it is the species or reason
of knowing, to the contrary: the medium or reason of
knowing can in no way be the object in so far as it is
the medium, since it is not that which is known, but the
reason of knowing; it is not understood, but the reason
of understanding: therefore, it is necessary to posit
some being which is the object of the understanding.

7. It was said that the understanding of a quiddity
abstracts from being, for in every created thing quiddity
and being differ, and therefore, it is not necessary that
there be an actually existent thing, but that it be appre-
hended by the understanding and that it be represented
to the understanding. Against this it may be objected
that, when the thing does not exist, nothing remains
except in the understanding; but whatever is in the
understanding, is constituted in the reason of medium
in the reason of species, and it is not that which is
understood itself or the object, but it is the reason of
understanding representing the object. Therefore, it is
necessary to hold that the thing is which is the objec
of the understanding: therefore, that which is not i:
not understood.

ACh bs The Ge


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 243.


8. iteees it was said that, although the thing een
is not in itself or in actuality, it is nevertheless in cause
or in potentiality. It was objected: if every created
cause has been circumscribed, the understanding still
understands the quiddity of man: therefore, if the
quiddity of man is the object of the understanding, not
as it is in the thing, for we suppose this, nor as it is in
the created cause, then as it is in the first and uncreated
cause. But that can not be the object, except the bea-
tific object, which can not be in this life: or it would
follow that the understanding by its natural forces could
attain to knowledge of the first cause cf being, which
is erroneous and one of the articles reproved and ex-—
eommunicated: therefore, there must be present also
some object outside in fact: therefore ete.

9. Again, if it knows that which is not, it does not
know it except by that species which the understanding '
has in itself. Then I inquire: either it knows the thing
according to the being which it has in its proper genus


‘or not. If not: then it does not know according to its


true being, since it has its true being in its proper genus,
not in the understanding; and it follows then, that it does


-not know truly. If according to the being which it has


in its proper genus, then it does not know or understand
that which is not, but some actual thing.

10. Again, according to the Philosopher [in the Meta-
physics book VI1,° there is no knowledge, neither specu-
lative nor practical, of that which is accidentally. And
the cause or reason of this is because of a defect of being
or because of a defect of entity; but it is certain that
that whichis not recedes further from the reason of that
which is than does that which is accidentally: there-
fore, there can much the less be speculative or practical
knowledge of that which is not.

“* That is book VI, ch. 2, 1026” 2-8.


244, MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


11. Again, each thing is more in its cause than in its
effect; but the truth of knowledge is caused by the
truth of things in their proper genus: therefore, truth is
more in things than in the understanding or knowledge:
therefore, without the truth of things there remains no
truth in knowledge.

12. Again, Augustine in book XI on the City of
God® says, To some it seems wonderful, but nevertheless
true, that this world could not be known to us, if it
were not; but unless it were known to God, it could not
be. From which it is gathered that the knowledge of
God is the cause of things and does not depend on
things; but our knowledge is caused by things, and there-
fore depends on things. But because things depend on
- divine knowledge as a cause, it is impossible that things
be without divine knowledge. Therefore, in the same |
manner because our knowledge depends on things as a
cause, our knowledge can not be unless things exist.

13. Again, as sense is related to the sensible, so is
understanding to the intelligible,’° but sense can in no
way perceive the thing, unless a sensible thing exist:
therefore, the understanding in the same way can not
understand unless the intelligible thing has being actu-
ally.

14. Again, I make two suppositions: one is that knowl-
edge or science is not without assimilation, and Augustine
says this in book IX on the Trinity: All knowledge
according to species is like the thing which it knows.
The second is that the like is not like itself, but like
the like. It is necessary however to assert in any assim-
ilation, four things: two like extremes and two reasons
of assimilation. On the part of the understanding, there- .


Chat0; ase.


1” ArisroTLE, on the Soul, book II], ch. 4, 429* 16-18.
TE Ch LO eee LO.


f es 2 :
MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 245,


fore, there are the understanding itself and the species
by which it is assimilated; on the part of the thing
known, the quiddity is the reason of assimilation; but
the term or the extreme can not be unless there be a like
thing: therefore, science or knowledge of a thing can
not be without the existence of the thing.

15. Again, the argument was confirmed since the acci-
dent can not be without subject: therefore, the accident
needs and requires that the thing be; but that likeness
is an accident: therefore, not without subject. If, there-
fore, there is true assimilation or true likeness of the
understanding to the thing and of the thing to the
understanding, then it is necessary to posit a thing
assimilated, in which the assimilation is as in a subject.

16. Again, the agreement is greater and the distance
less of an existing thing to a superexistent than of a
non-existent thing to an existent; but since God is abso-
lutely superexistent, he is not knowable or intelligible.
according to Dionysius on Divine Names:'* therefore,
much less will the non-existent or that which is not, be
knowable.

17. Again, God knows non-existent things, because he
has their reasons; but the human understanding does not
have the reasons of non-existent things: therefore, in no
manner can it know or understand non-existents.

18. Again, knowledge and knowable are spoken of
relatively, so that, notwithstanding, there is a real rela-
tion on the part of knowledge, which depends on the
knowable; but a real relation can not be unless to a
thing really existent: therefore, there can be no knowl-
edge, unless there be a knowable or thing known, real
and in actuality. The proof,of the minor premiss is

” Arisrortr, Metaphysics, book VII, ch. 1, 1028* 20-25.

13 Ch. I, paragraph 1.


246 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


apparent by the Philosopher in the Categories,!* where
he says that the being of relatives is thus to be consti-
tuted with reference to something else that the relation
depends not less, but rather much the more, so far as it
is relation, on the object than on the subject: there-
fore etc.

19. Again, according to the Philosopher in book III
on the Soul!” to understand is to suffer something, and
it is certain that what the soul suffers is only from the
thing understood. I ask therefore: either from the like-
ness or from the thing. If from the likeness, then it is
not knowledge except of concepts; if from the thing or
object, it is necessary that the object be really, since
as the Philosopher says,'® it is impossible that a real
property be, unless it be in that which really is: there-
fore ete.

20. Again, according to the Philosopher! words are
signs of these passions, that is, of conceptions, which
are in the soul: the understandings or the conceptions,
however, are the signs of the things. It is certain, how-
ever, that the concepts depend on things more than the
words [ vox], for they are related to them more immedi-
ately. But there are no true propositions if things do
~ not exist: therefore, by much the more there will be no
true understandings or concepts if things do not exist.
The proof of the minor premiss is by Boethius in book
V of the Consolation of Philosophy,'® by the Philosopher
on the Categories, by Anselm on Truth,!® who say that
from the fact that a thing is or is not, a statement is said
to be true or false.


144 Ch. 7, on Relations, 6* 36-6” 7.

1% Ch, 4, 429” 24-25.

1 Cp. Metaphysics, book VII, ch. 1, 1028* 20-25.
% On Interpretation, ch. 1, 16* 4,

78 Prose passage 3.

1 See above, vol. I, p. 153.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 24:7


21. Again, Augustine in book XV on the Trinity?
_Says: Two things are required for verbal truth, that is,
that it be thus in fact as it is in knowledge, otherwise, :
if one. or the other is deficient, the word is not true.
But in all knowledge the word is required neces-
sarily: therefore, the existence of the thing is required
necessarily.

22. Again, the knowable is the measure of knowl-
edge:*! therefore, things are the measure of our under-
standing. It is certain, however, that the measure is
more perfect than the thing measured; but the’ thing
does not measure except by adequation: therefore, the
reason of adequation or adequation itself is more perfect
in the thing than in the understanding: therefore, also
truth, since truth is adequation. If, therefore, the
measured thing is not without the measure: then there
is no truth in the understanding without the truth of the
thing: therefore, it is not understood without the exist-
ence of the thing.

To THE conTRARY: 1. Avicenna says in the first book
of the Metaphysics” that it is manifest that that which
is stated concerning something, must have being in some
fashion in the soul. For propositions are not concern-
ing a true thing, except by that which has being in the
soul, and they are accidentally by that which is in
exterior things: therefore, in like manner, conceptions,
on which propositions are founded, are accidentally
through those things which are in exterior things. But
those things which are by accident, are not necessary
to the being of anything: therefore, there are true con-
ceptions and true propositions, when things do not exist.

. Again, the Commentator says on book VI of the


™ Ch. 13, n. 24.
2 Cp. Anisrotte, Metaphysics, book X, ch. 15, 1057* 11-12.


| 22Ch. 6.


Md


248 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Ethics :23 As an inferior art is related to a superior, as
for example the art of hewing to the art of building, so-
sense is related to understanding. But the inferior art
is so related to the superior art that after it has prepared
the material, the superior art, although the inferior be
lacking, proceeds and completes the work in the pre-
pared material: therefore, in the same manner, although
sense and the sensible species are lacking, once the
intelligible species have been prepared, the understand-
ing will be able to operate concerning these latter and
to understand by them.

3. Again, Anselm says in the Monologium:** The
work which is done in connection with any art, not only
when it is done, but likewise before it is done and after
it will be destroyed, is always no other in that art than
the art itself, but it is known that the artificer foresees
and foreknows the work to be done according to that
art, which nevertheless is not yet: therefore, he knows
that which is not: therefore etc.

4. Again, the intellective power is more efficacious
than the imaginative; but the imaginative power can
truly imagine, by means of the image of the thing left in
it, that which is not: therefore, by much the more the
understanding can understand a non-existent thing
through the species which it has in itself. The proof of
the minor premiss is clear experimentally, since by the
image which I have in me of men who are not, I imagine
them truly and I remember them.

5. Again, in our understanding there are impressed
the eternal and immutable reasons of things, as, every
whole is greater than its: part and of anything whatever
either an affirmation or a negation; but these reasons
do not depend on things: therefore, by these reasons


Ch. 7, on Wisdom.
“Ch. 84.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 249


the understanding can understand, when the things do
not exist. )

6. Again, every proposition is necessary which is
necessarily asserted in being denied; and in this way
Augustine proves that truth is necessarily because the
denial of truth asserts truth, thus in book II of. the
Soliloquies,” If truth is not, it is true that truth is not;
and every truth is true by truth: therefore, if truth is
not, truth is, and therefore it is necessary that truth be.
Thus I argue in what was stated: if that which is not
is not intelligible, it is intelligible that that which is
not is not intelligible; for that is true, and all truth is
intelligible: therefore, the proposition is necessary that
that which is not is intelligible.

7. Again, according to the Philosopher?® the true is
extended to that which is and to that which is not. For
just as it is true that that which is is, so, also it is true
that that which is not is not; but everything which is
true is intelligible and can be the object of the under-
standing: therefore etc.

8. Again, the existence or non-existence of a thing is
not necessary nor required for knowledge, except because
by the existence of a thing the understanding is in one
or another disposition; but the understanding is not
changed from one disposition to another and is not in
different dispositions because of the existence or the
non-existence of a thing: therefore, existence or non-
existence is not required for the knowledge of a thing. —

9. Again, the object of the understanding is essence
[quod quid est], according to the Philosopher;*" but
error occurs in no manner concerning essence—for it is


CL Nn eee al, 2

°° Categories, On substance, ch. 5, 4° 25 ff; Met. IV, 7, 1011”
26-29.
7 On the Soul, book III, chs. 4 and ‘6, 429 16-18, 430° 27-31.


o<« wee) jae


250 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


abstracted from space and time, being and non-being— —
therefore the understanding, whether the thing exists or ©
not, can understand essence without error: therefore, —
the existence of the thing is not required for the knowl-
edge of the thing, but that which is not can be the ©
object of the understanding.


I repty, the present question is not of the signification
of names or words; for whether words signify the same,
when the things are existent or non-existent, and whether
names are imposed on things or concepts, that is a logical
question and does not in the least pertain to us. For
that same question, that same difficulty of the question
remains for every word, for every name, for every cir-
eumscribed proposition.

Therefore it seems to me that in the proposed ques-
tion distinctions must be made with respect to that
which is not or that which is and with respect to the
understanding which knows.

With respect to that which is not I make the distine-
tion that that which is not can be taken in two ways,
namely, that which is not absolutely, that is, that which
is in no way, neither in itself nor in cause. neither in~
potentiality nor in actuality, which neither was nor
will be, neither is nor is it possible for it to be: and then
I say absolutely that that which is not can in no way
be the object of the understanding. For as Avicenna
says,"* the first thing which occurs to the understanding,
and the first which is apprehensible by the understand-
ing, is that which is: therefore, as nothing is not intelli-
gible, so that which is not is not intelligible.

In another manner that which is not can be under-
stood, not as that which is not absolutely, but that which


is not in some manner, as that which is not in actuality,
= Metaphysics book I, ch. &


:
}


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 251


but is in potentiality; as that which is not in itself, but is
in its efficient cause or exemplar. And I say in this
sense that that which is not can be the object of the
understanding and is intelligible:

This, moreover, is clear in the first place from
prophetic illumination and prevision of future things.
For if there is no certain knowledge of that which is
not, since the future thing is a thing which is not, then


no future thing can be known or foreknown, which is


contrary to the sacred Scripture and the catholic faith. —


It is clear in the second place from the disposition
of things that are to be done. For if there were no
certain knowledge of things which are not, then, since
no one does a thing willingly unless also knowingly,
no one would be disposed to do anything, and then all
‘disposition would perish and all artificial operation.
Augustine shows this best in book IX on the Trinity :?°
We do nothing by the members of the body in our say-
ings and actions, which the morals of men either approve


of or condemn, which we have not come upon previously .


within ourselves by a word uttered interiorly. For no
one wishing something does what he has not previously
said in his heart; and in book XV on the Trinity®® he
Says:


As it has been said of the Word of God: All
things are done through it, in which God is said
to have made the universe through his one be-
gotten Word; so there are no works of man
which are not first spoken in the heart. And in
this is the likeness of our word to the Word of
God, that our word can be, even if it is not
followed by operation; but operation can not
be, unless the word precedes it: just. as the
Word of God could be, if no creature existed,


NGL Wf en bee Ch. 11, n. 20.


“


252 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


but no creature could be, except through him,
by whom all were made.


If therefore nothing which is not, or is not actually


' ! s . oy?
existing, can be known, there would be no disposition


of things to be done, and all things would be done by
chance by man; which is absolutely absurd. Therefore
it is necessary that something which is not, be under-
stood; nor is the existence of the thing required for its
knowledge, but knowledge necessarily precedes in some
things.

In the third place it is clear from the recollection
of past things. For it is certain that things which have


passed are not. Therefore, if that which is not is in


no manner known nor understood, then there is no mem-
ory of past things nor recollection of past things, which
is absolutely false; for we recall yesterday and what
transpired in it.—Again, if there were no recollection,
there would be no continuation either in words or in
deeds, nor any order or connection. For he who does
not recollect past things can not know where a thing
ceased and where it must begin, as Augustine shows
in book X of the Confessions,*! book XII of the Literal
Commentary on Genesis," and in book II on Christian
Doctrine.**

In the fourth place it is clear from the power and
operation of the understanding. For the understanding
by its active power can abstract by the light of the
active intellect universals from particulars, intelligible
species from sensible species, quiddities from things
actually existing. It is certain, however, that the uni-
versals as well as the intelligible species, as well as the
quiddities of things concern no thing actually existent,
but are related indifferently to existent and non-existent


Gh Sits = Ch. 16, n. 88. ® Ch. 9, n. 14.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 253


things, and do not concern space or time, and therefore
the existence or non-existence of the thing has nothing
to do with understanding of this sort; and therefore, as
the intellect can understand the quiddity of a thing by
the intelligible species, when the thing is existent, so it
can also when the thing is non-existent.

Secondly, distinctions must be made with respect to
the understanding which knows.

For the understanding is spoken of in two ways, just
as there is a double operation of the understanding. For
there is a certain simple and absolute understanding,
which apprehends and conceives the simple quiddities of
things; another is the concretive and compositive under-
standing, which understands and apprehends that the
thing is present in and under the determined circum-
stances of time.

If, therefore, it is asked whether the existence of the
thing is required necessarily for the knowledge of the
thing, I reply that if we speak of that operation, or of
that manner of understanding, by which the thing is
understood to be under the determined circumstances of,
time, the existence of the thing according to the require-
ments of time is required necessarily, that it be under-
stood that it is when it is, and that it be understood
that it will be when it will be, and that it has been
when it has been; otherwise the understanding would
be false, and by that fact would not be understanding.
For either it understands and it is true, or if it is not
true it does not understand, as Augustine says in book
XII of the Literal Commentary on Genesis** and as has
been touched on in the opposition to the argument.
But truth of the future is founded on.the cause, as
Augustine says in book XI of the Confessions,®° where
he says that nothing is seen except as present.

%4 Ch. 25, n. 52. 3% Ch. 18, n. 24.


254 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Although, therefore, future things are said to
be seen, the things themselves which are not
yet, that is, which are future, are not seen,
but their causes or signs perhaps, which are
now; therefore, not future but present things
are now perceptible to those seeing, from which
things future are predicted as conceived by the
mind; for example, I see the dawn, I foretell
“the sun will rise; what I see is present, what
I foretell future.


The truth of the present thing, however, is founded on
a thing actually existent; the truth of a past thing on
the image or species of the thing, which remains in the
understanding, together with the comparison to the
thing which was but is not now, just as Augustine says
in the same book:°° My boyhood, which is not now, is
in past time which is not now, but when I recall it and
tell of it, I perceive the image of it, which is still in
my memory in the present time. But whether images
of future things are presented likewise, as causes now
existing, he says he does not know. 7

If, however, we speak of the understanding with
respect to that simple, absolute, and pure operation by
which it apprehends and conceives the absolute quid-
dities of things, I say this: that the existence of the thing
is not needed for knowledge of this sort, nay, the exist-
ence or non-existence of the thing has nothing to do
with it. The reason for this has been touched upon
in part, as well with respect to the quiddity itself, as
with respect to the understanding, and with respeet to
the intelligible species.

With respect to the quiddity, since as Avicenna says
in book V of the Metaphysics** and in many places: In


* Confessions, Book TX, ch. 18, n, 28, SuChieat


/


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 255


every created thing the quiddity and being differ, and
being is not part of the understanding of the quiddity,
but quiddity is related indifferently to being and non-
being; and therefore nothing pertains to understanding
the quiddity of a thing except this, that the thing be in
actuality. For the statement which I make: man is an
animal, which is the essence or quiddity of man expli-
cated by word, does not regard the existence or non-
existence of man, but even if no man existed the
statement is true: man is an animal.

_ With respect to the intelligible species, since not only
the intelligible species but the imaginable species do
not represent the thing to be or not to be, but represent
the thing simply, as the image carved in the wall repre-
sents Socrates or Hercules to me, but not as existent or
non-existent. For if existent only, then it would not
represent him when he is dead; if non-existent only,
then it would not represent him when he is living. As
it is. however, it represents him indifferently living
-or dead.

With respect to the understanding, since as has been
said®® the understanding has a certain abstractive power,
and therefore it has a certain, as has been said, absolute
operation, which is not concerned with whether the thing
is or is not, but apprehends the thing only or the quiddity
of the thing, as it understands man, not this or that
man, here or there, yesterday or today, but only man.
Whence, as it understands man, when man exists, in
such wise that. existent man is not its object, for it
abstracts from that, so it understands, when man does
not exist. Nor is the difficulty greater in the one case
than in the other, as is seen; and by the same power it
divides the conjoined and conjoins things which are
separated but which are not nevertheless incompossible.

8 See above p. 252.


256 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


But then the difficulty remains, what is the object.
of the understanding, since it can not be terminated at
that which is not? And it could be said then that, as
has been said, that which absolutely is not is not the
object of the understanding and can not be; but that
which is not in actuality or that which is not something
(since its actual being is not concerned as part in its
reason, but its intelligible being, apprehensible, repre-
sentable to the understanding) is and can be the object
of the understanding. When the understanding, there-
fore, has in itself the species of the human quiddity or
of any quiddity, that species represents to it that quid-
dity, not as the thing which is or is not actually, but
represents it absolutely, as has been said; and from it
the understanding forms for itself a certain concept and
understands the quiddity of man or of anything abso-
lutely, not by perceiving it to be or not to be; and this
suffices for the reason of the object. For, when the
thing does not exist, the quiddity as it is in things is
the object of understanding.

This manner is philosophical and proper; yet I do
not think that it suffices, and perhaps the principles of
philosophy are defective here, and the principles of
theology must be resorted to. And this is clear as
follows.

For if nothing is presented to the understanding
except that which is not, or species, or some concept,
then to understand would be completely vain, as is seen.

Further, when I understand the definitive reason of
man or of any thing whatever having a quiddity, I do
not understand nothing, nor do I understand a thing
which is in potentiality, nor do I understand only some-
thing apprehensible, but I understand a necessary truth,.
an immutable truth, an eternal truth. For as Augustine


MATTHEW. OF AQUASPARTA 257


says on the Immortality of the Soul,?®\nothing is so
eternal as the reason of ascircle; and in book II on the
Free Will*° That seven and three are ten never was
not, never will not be, but always was, always will be.
And the Philosopher in book VI of the Ethics*' says,
that knowledge is only of things which are of necessity,
and not contingent to be constituted otherwise than they
are, and eternal. Knowledge must be established there-
fore in something: not in things, since if all things pass
away, these truths remain, and if no thing exists, these
truths are—for when no man exists, it is true that man
is a rational, mortal animal—nor in the created under-
standing, for every understanding is mutable, and when
no created understanding exists, these true things still
are: therefore only in the eternal exemplar, where the
origins of mutable things remain immutable and the
reasons of transient things do not pass away, as
Augustine says in book I of the Confession.*”

Further, the created truth is not other than a cer-
tain expression of the uncreated truth; and each created
truth is true in so far as it imitates that exemplar.
If therefore these immutable truths can not be under-
stood, except where they are, and they are not immutable
except in art: then it is necessary that they be under-
stood in art.

Moreover, if the truth of the thing is only a certain
expression and imitation of the eternal art, and if the
likeness of that truth expressing the first exemplar is in
our understanding, it is impossible that I understand
struly and with certitude any thing, except by application
in a certain manner and by relation to the external ex-
- emplar. Since therefore we understand the quiddity of


89 Ch. I.
# Cp. above book II, ch. 8, n. 21, vol. I, p. 36.
ee @he 73: ' “Ch. 6, n. 9.


58 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


.


bo


something and its definitive reason, the object of the
understanding is not only the concept itself of the mind,
nor only the quiddity itself, which is not in the nature of
things; nor is the eternal exemplar the reposing and
terminating object because it is the sole and blessing
object of the blessed understanding; but it is the quid-
dity itself conceived by our understanding, yet related
to the art or the eternal exemplar in so far as, touching
our mind, it is constituted in the reason of the thing
which moves our mind; and thence we conceive a true
notion of things, and once the materials have been fur-
nished from below by the senses, the principles of all
the arts flow thence. Wherefore Augustine in book I
of the Retractations*? contends against Plato who said
that the arts are brought forth within souls, because the
ignorant and unlearned return true answers concerning
them, that, Jt is more credible that they return true
answers, when they are questioned well concerning cer-
tain disciplines although unlearned in them, because
there is present to them, when they can seize it, the light
of eternal reason, in which they see these immutable
truths. And in chapter 8 of the same book touching on
the same error and the error that to learn is to remem-
ber, because any one makes true replies when questioned
in good order, he says: It can happen that one may be
able to do this, because there is an intelligible nature
and it is connected not only with intelligible but also
with immutable things, and it is done in such order that
when one moves oneself to these things, to which one is
connected, or to oneself in so far as one sees them, to’
that extent one replies truly concerning them. And in
book X of the Confessions: The beautiful things caused —
through souls in artist hands, come from that beauty
which is above souls.
48°C) 4, na “ Ch. 34, n. 53.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 259


I have touched on these few things examining them
in advance, because the way in which the mind sees all
things in art or in the eternal reasons will be seen more |
clearly in the following questions. i


_ To the first argument to the contrary of the position
stated it must be said that truth first and principally,
both in things and in understandings, is from the first
truth. None the less it is originally from things and in
things in respect of the understanding in natural knowl-
edge; but formally it is in the understanding itself,
according as it conceives the thing as it is, for then
there is an adequation of thing and understanding.
However, although truth is caused in the understanding
by things with respect to origin, still it is not so caused
with respect to conservation and continuation; nay, when
things perish, truth remains in understandings, but with
the irradiations of the uncreated light. Nor does the
objection hold which contends that if the first truth were
to cease to be (to suppose the impossible) truth would
not remain in things, therefore etc.; since the first
cause is the effective and conservative cause, so that,
if its influence were removed, nothing would remain; but
things outside, although they are the effective cause of
truth in understandings, are not nevertheless the con-
servative cause. For when the influence of second causes
is removed, there still remains the influence of the first
cause. In what way, however. truth is caused in the
anderstanding by things outside, will be seen elsewhere.
To the second it must be said that adequation is a
relation and involves another thing. But since between
knowledge and the knowable the relation is according —
to. being on the part of knowledge, because it depends
yn the knowable; but in the knowable the relation is
mnly according to reason, because the knowable does


-


260 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


not depend on knowledge nor does it posit any thing:
therefore, it need not be according to fact but only
according to reason, as understood or appreliended by
the understanding, with nevertheless a relation to the
first exemplar, in which there is the reason of immutable
quiddity.—I say, moreover, that it is adequation, because
the understanding apprehends or understands the quid-
dity in the manner in which it is; because it does not
understand it by perceiving being or non-being, spate
or time, as likewise it is not concerned with its own
reason: therefore, the understanding is adequated to
itself.

To the third it must be said that as Avicenna says,
that which is, is the first thing that occurs to the under-
standing concerning the true thing, and therefore that
which absolutely is not, as has been said, is not under-
stood. But that thing which is, is not something deter-
mined, neither in actuality nor potentiality, neither
present nor future, not man nor horse nor any thing of
this sort, but that which is, which is superior to all
these; and I say that that quiddity is the thing which
is in the understanding and in the eternal exemplar,
although it is not that which is actually in things, for
that is not part of its meaning.

To the fourth the reply is clear, since the Philosopher
means to say nothing more than that in the manner in
which the thing is, in that manner it is knowable. If it
is in actuality, it is known in actuality; if it is in potenti-
ality, it is known in potentiality; if it is abstracted from
actuality and potentiality and from all difference of
being, it is knowable in that manner; and universally,
as many times as that which is is spoken of, so many
times the true is spoken of, and as often or in as many
ways as it can be called true, in so many ways is it,
knowable, as has been seen.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 261


To the fifth the reply is clear in the same way, for
the intellect, in understanding the quiddity of the thing,
which is its proper object, understands the true. But
the true is not nothing, but is that which is something
[quod quid est = essence] or it is that which the thing
is; and therefore it is properly the true, and the reason
of Augustine is properly suited to it. For since I under-
stand what man is, I understand rational man, and this
is that which man is immutably. Nor does Augustine
mean that which is actual being, since that being is
corrupted; but truth in itself is not corrupted when
things are corrupted; for the reason of the thing remains
always.

To the sixth the reply is clear through the things
which have been said in the principal solution. For I
say that something is the object there; it is not necessary
that it be something actually existing, nor is that part of
the reason of the object of the understanding; but. it
suffices that it be represented to the understanding and
apprehended by the understanding.—Or, as has been
said, the object is the quiddity itself, conceived by the
understanding, but according as it is related to the
eternal exemplar, which is related to the understanding
in the reason of the thing which moves it.

To the seventh argument that, if every thing is cir-
cumscribed, nothing remains except in the understand-
ing, I say that it is false, but that the immutable reason
remains. For it is immutably true that man is animal
etc.; but it is in the eternal exemplar which is consti-
tuted in the reason of the thing moving our understand-
ing. Whence the quiddity conceived and related to that
exemplar is the object of the understanding.—But that
which the argument adds, that whatever is in the under- °
_ standing, is constituted in the reason of medium and in
- the reason of the knower, could be said to be false. For


\


262 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the understanding forms a certain concept for itself
from the species representing something to it, whether
it be or not be in fact,—which thing it presents to
itself; but that thing does not conduct to understanding,
but leads to something else; and it is not necessary that
that be in fact, nor is it in the reason of object, but it
suffices that it can be in the concent of the mind.

To the eighth it must be said that, if every created
cause is removed, there remains still the immutable
reason of the quiddity of the thing, and likewise there
remains the species in the understanding, by which it
can form for itself the concept of the thing. Although
therefore the quiddity itself can not through itself be
the object of the understanding, nor can the concept
itself alone, for then the understanding would be vain,
nor would it understand the thing, but its concept;
nevertheless I do not say that the exemplar itself is the
terminating or reposing object of the understanding; for
the argument would proceed in that way; but all these
_ concur in the making of one perfect reason of the object,
as has been explained, and that is the quiddity itself
conceived or apprehended by the understanding, but
according as it is referred to the eternal exemplar, which
is related to the understanding in the reason of that
which moves.

To the ninth it must be said that it knows [that which
is not] through species, not according to the being which
it has in its proper genus, for [the thing] is not in its
proper genus and still [the understanding] knows the
thing truly; for it knows the quiddity which differs from
being, nor is the being [of the thing] from the under-
standing of it, but the understanding abstracts absolutely
from being, as has been said frequently. Yet it knows
by referring to the first cause and exemplar, which
moves it in this knowledge.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 263


To the tenth it must be said that it is not eine of
a defect of entity that there is no knowledge of that
which is accidentally, but rather because of a defect of
determination, in that they neither have a determined
cause nor any one mode of being, but it is possible that
they occur as if by infinite causes and in infinite modes;
and therefore they can not be known by natural knowl-
edge either in themselves nor in their causes. However,
the quiddities of things, although they do not have actual
being, because that is not in their reason, have still
immutable truth according to Augustine and the
Philosopher.*°

To the eleventh it must be said that truth is not in
things and in the understanding in the same manner. In
things it is originally and causally in respect to the
understanding, but in the understanding it is formally,
as has been said above.*® And because it is not in the
same manner, therefore, there is no uniform comparison ;
for causally it is more in things, formally it is more in
the understanding.

To the twelfth it must be said that God is cause of
things, and things the cause of our knowledge in differ-
ent manners. For God is the whole cause of things and
cause of the whole of things: therefore, things depend
on his providence. But things are not the necessary
cause of our knowledge; for God could imprint on our
understanding species of things through which we should
know, as he imparts them to angels. Moreover, things
are not the whole and only cause, but together with the
light of our active intellect and the divine light; and
therefore, if they are in some manner the original cause,
still they are not the conservative cause, nor with re-


® ArisrorLte, Metaphysics, book XI, ch. 8, 1065” 1-4,
“6 To the first; see above p. 259.


264 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


spect to its conservation does our knowledge depend on
things.

To the thirteenth it must be said that there is no
similarity there, since sense does not have a power for
the conservation of sensible species, as the understanding
has of intelligible species; and therefore sense does not
perceive unless the sensible thing is present, but the
understanding understands even when the thing is de-
stroyed. And because we have intelligible species in
the understanding, but no sensible species in sense, there-
fore the Philosopher says in book II on the Soul that
we understand when we wish, but we do not perceive.

To the fourteenth it.must be said that, as has been
said above,*’ there is no relation of the knowable to
knowledge except according to reason: therefore, assimi-
lation also is only according to reason; and because of
this it is necessary to grant that something according
to fact exists on the part of the intelligible, but only in
apprehension; nor is it inconsistent that something be
referred according to reason to that which is not.. For
I see that between some things there is a relation accord-
ing to being with respect to either extreme, namely,
when the extremes depend on each other, and the rela-
tion posits something in either extreme, as between
father and son.—Between other things there is a relation
with respect to one of the extremes according to being, but
with respect to the other according to reason; and there-
fore with respect to the latter extreme [the relation |
posits nothing; of this sort is the relation between knowl-
edge and the knowable.—Between still other things there
is a relation with respect to both extremes according
to reason, as between God and creatures from eternity.
For there were in God from eternity ideas of things
that were to be made, which they call a relation to

* To the second; see above pp. 259-260.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 265


things according to reason, for the relation posits nothing
on the part of the divine essence nor on the part of
things which were not. Therefore, where there is a
relation or an assimilation according to reason, it is not
necessary to posit extremes except according to reason.

To the fifteenth the reply is clear. For it has been
said that that likeness posits nothing on the part of the
knowable according to fact, but only according to rea-
son; and therefore it is not necessary because of this to
posit the thing. Likewise, that likeness is a true accident
with respect to one thing [the knower], and therefore it
is necessary to posit the subject according to the truth
of the thing; but since in another respect [i.e., to the
known] it is only an accident according to reason, there-
fore it is not necessary to posit a subject except accord-
ing to reason.—If the question be urged, as it was urged
in connection with quiddity above, whether it is some-
thing or nothing: if it is something, it is either accident,
or substance, or creator, or creature: I say that it is not
nothing but something. But because it is not something
actually, it is not substance, nor accident, nor this, nor
that, for that is the division of things actually existent.
Finally, the understanding of the quiddity abstracts from
all being.

To the sixteenth it must be said that the superexistent
is knowable and intelligible. However, that which
Dionysius says, that God is not knowable or intelligible,
must be understood: fully, as he is knowable and by a
comprehensive knowledge, for he is comprehensible to
himself alone; nevertheless, he is knowable by an appre- |
hensive knowledge both that he is and what he is, al-
though not fully and perfectly.

To the seventeenth it must be said that God knows
the things about to be made, for he has their practical
and exemplar reasons; but the human understanding can


266 7 ‘\ MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


not know future things, which do not have causes in
nature except by revelation of God in whom are the
reasons of things about to be made. Nevertheless, be-
cause when things exist, the understanding acquires for
itself the species of things, therefore when things cease
to exist, it knows things through those species, for al-
though it does not have reasons which make, still it has
reasons that have been made.

To the eighteenth the reply can be made from those
given above. For there is relation according to saying
or according to reason on the part of the knowable,
according to being on the part of knowledge: therefore,
it is not necessary to posit the knowable in being, but
in reason.—But with respect to what the argument says,
that a real relation is only in reference to the thing,
and that it depends more on the object than on the
subject, because the being of relatives consists in consti-
tuting themselves in relation to something else, I say
that, according as a relation states an accident, it de-
pends more upon the subject in which it is; according
as it is a relation to something or a condition [habitudo],
it depends more on the object, because it is in relation
to it; and I add that a real relation is in reference to
the thing; to the thing as it is, but to the thing accord-
ing to the mode. and requirement of the thing. And
because it does not belong to the reason of it that it be
actually nor that it have being, but that it be only
apprehensible and conceived by the understanding and
related to the first exemplar: therefore, to such a thing
the real relation is such.

To the nineteenth I say that to understand, so far as
the beginning of understanding is concerned, is to suffer
something, but so far as its complement is concerned,
understanding is in action. For to receive is to suffer,
but to judge and distinguish are actions. First there-


—


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 267


fore it suffers—in the manner in which to receive is to
suffer—from things, from which it receives, or from
phantasms, but later it acts; and therefore it is not
necessary that it be active always, unless perchance we |
wanted to say,.as has been said, that it suffers in that
it is moved by the eternal reasons.

To the twentieth it must be said that the cases are not
at all alike as regards knowledge or conception and
statement, for statement always states that something is
or is not; and therefore, it is not true except when it
states that that which is is, or that that which is not
is not. And in like manner, our understanding, accord-
ing to an operation related to the existence of things
under determined circumstances of time, is not true ex-
cept when it conceives or apprehends that that which is
is or that that which is not is not. Nevertheless, as has
been said, the understanding has another absolute and
simple operation which abstracts completely from these: |
therefore, it does not depend on the being or non-being
of things.

To the twenty-first it must be said that it is true of
the operation of the understanding which is concerned
with thé existences of things; but it is not true of that
operation which abstracts from these.—Or it can be
said that when the understanding apprehends the simple
quiddity of the thing, it conceives the true word, for it
is in the thing as it is in knowledge. For the quiddity
names a certain thing, of which the reason or intention
is concerned neither with being nor non-being, and thus
the understanding understands it: therefore, it under-
stands as the thing is, and for this reason the word
is true.

To the twenty-second it must be said that the know-
able is the measure of knowledge, and things are the
measure of our understanding; this is according to the


268 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


saying that science and knowledge are then true when
they are adequated to the thing; and this is when knowl-
edge knows the thing as it is and according to its mode.
And therefore the reason of adequation or the truth
originally is from things, but formaily it is in the under-
standing, and exemplarily it is in God. And because
there are different modes of being, there is no uniform
comparison, but there is always the fallacy of proceed-
ing from the statement in some certain respect to the
statement absolutely; still it is certain that in God
absolutely it is more perfectly—As regards what is
objected, that the measured depends on the measure,
it can be said that the knowable thing is; ts, I say, not
in actuality, but in the conception of the mind and in
the eternal exemplar, and this suffices, for the reason of
the measure.


Question II.


In the second place it is inquired whether whatever is
known certainly in intellectual knowledge, is known in
the eternal reasons or in the light of the first truth.


That the natural light suffices, however, for sure
knowledge without the influence of those eternal rea-
sons, is shown thus.

1. The Philosopher in book III on the Soul*® says:
As there is in every nature something by which it is to
be made all things and something by which it is to make
all things, so it is in the understanding or in the soul;
for there is in the understanding that by which it is to
make all things, and that is the active intellect; and
that by which it is to be made all things and that is the
possible intellect. But wherever there is a sufficient

#8 Ch. 5, 430° 10-14.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 269


active principle and a sufficient passive principle for all
things, no further agent is required. Therefore, the
soul by its active and its passive principles suffices for
sure knowledge without special irradiation or the influ-
ence of the eternal reasons.

2. Again, Anselm on the Virginal Conception* dis-
tinguishes a triple course of things, namely natural,
voluntary, and wonderful. According to the natural
course, natural things are made; according to the volun-
tary course, voluntary things, which depend on the
created will; according to the wonderful course, those
things which are made above nature by the divine power.
But it is certain that the act of knowledge pertains to
the natural course, not to the wonderful, for knowledge
is not miraculous: therefore, it is able to be by the natu-
ral intellective power without a supernatural agent or
influence from it.

3. Again, Hugo in book I on the Sacraments®® says
toward the end, that some things are above reason, some
below reason, some beyond reason, some according to
reason. But to all those things which lie under the
power of some agent, the power of that agent suffices
without any other higher aid: therefore, to the natural
knowledge of those things which lie under reason and
do not exceed its faculty, the natural light suffices, if
the common influence which conserves every creature is
supposed.

4. Again, as the divine power is' related to the oper-
able, so the divine wisdom is related to the knowable or
intelligible. But as regards those operables which do
not exceed the faculty of a nature, the power of the
nature, together with the common influence, suffices:
therefore, to the knowables which do not exceed the
faculty of that nature, the natural light suffices together

ech, 11. 50 Part III, ch. 30.


270. ‘| .. MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


with the general influence which is not withdrawn from
any creature.

5. Again, I posit a species abstracted from phantasms,
I posit an intellective power disposed, I posit a conver-
sion of the force of the understanding upon it, and I
posit the common influence; but more things do not
seem to be required for knowledge: therefore, the soul
can know with certainty without any special influence
from above, since all these are in the power of the
nature.

6. Again, whenever any one sees some thing in light
or in some art, he must necessarily see that light or art
or rule in which he sees it. But it is certain that the
understanding of the wayfarer does not see that eternal _
art, light, and rule, for that sight makes the blessed:
therefore, neither does he see in it.

7. Again, if all things are seen in that light and by
special influence of that light, then they who are nearer
to that light see more than those who are turned away
from that light. But it is certain that many who are
turned more from that light see more and know more
than those turned to it: therefore, that light is not the
reason of seeing, nor does one see in that light whatever
is seen.

8. Again, the Philosopher in book II of the Meta-
physics”! says: As things are in respect of being, so they
are in respect of knowledge; but the created form, to-
gether with the general influence of the Creator, suffices
for being: therefore, similarly for knowledge: therefore, |
some special influence of an eternal light is not
necessary.

9. Again, Augustine in book IX on the Trinity” says:
Just as the mind gathers knowledge of corporeal things
through the senses of the body, so it gathers knowledge

51 Ch, I, 993” 30-31. =.Chi 3,in..8,


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 271


of incorporeal things through itself, since it is incor-
poreal; but if it should need another and superior aid,
it would not know through itself: therefore, it does not
need a higher aid.

10. Again, Augustine in book XII on the Trinity®®
says that the soul sees these immutable truths or signs
of the sciences in a certain incorporeal light of its own
kind, just as the eye of the flesh sees things which lie
in the corporeal light; but it is certain that no light is
of the same kind [ genus] as our soul except the created
light, for the uncreated light is not in any genus: there-
fore, it does not know in the uncreated light, but in the
created.

11. Again, according to the Philosopher,** Nature does
nothing in vain nor is it lacking in necessary things; but ©
it is certain that the rational creature was created by
God because of some operation, and this is the intellec-
tual operation: therefore, nature is not lacking to it:
therefore, the soul has from its nature and in its nature
these things which are needed for intellectual operation,
without any influence from above, supposing always the
general influence.

12. Again, the Philosopher in book III on the Soul?®
compares the possible intellect to the eye, color to the
phantasm, the active intellect to light; for it is a certain
condition [habitus] like light; but the presence of the
visible object suffices for sensual vision, when the power
of sight of the one seeing and when the light of the sun
are disposed: therefore, in the same way the presence
of the phantasm and the receptive power of the possible
intellect and the light of the active intellect making

oe Ch, 15,°n. 24.


** On the Soul, III, c. 9, 432° 21-24.
% Ch. 5, 430* 14-17.


272 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


species, which are understood potentially, to be under-
stood actually, suffice for intellectual vision.

13. Again, it is certain that the act of knowledge is a
certain natural act; but something supernatural is not
required for natural operations: therefore, either the
operation of the understanding in those things which do
not exceed the faculty of the nature, is not natural, or
if it is natural, nothing supernatural is required. But
that influence, whatever it is, is supernatural: therefore
etc.

14. Again, if we see in that light whatever we see, it
is only in two modes: either as in a mirror, and this is
impossible, for whoever sees something in a mirror, sees
the mirror itself; or as in a medium or reason of know-
ing, and then either the divine light itself is by essence
the reason of knowing (but that can not be, for whatever
it is, it is something of the soul or inhering in the under-
standing, but the divine essence can inhere in nothing)
or else it is something which flows from the divine light
into the mind knowing. But whatever it is, it is crea-
ture; but every creature is mutable: therefore; it does
not suffice for sure knowledge; or else it is necessary to
go on in infinitum, which is inconsistent.

15. Again, it is certain that the divine light is con-
cerning the invisible things of God, for the divine light
is only God himself; but as the Apostle says®® the in-
visible things of God are clearly perceived from the
creation of the world, being perceived through the things
that are made: therefore, if the divine light is the reason
of knowing the creature, and the creature is the medium
and reason of knowing the divine light, then knowledge
is circular, which seems to be inconsistent.

16. Again, since it was said that knowledge is by a
certain divine influence; to the contrary: where the thing

°° Rom, 1:20.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 273


itself is, the species of that thing is not necessary; but
God or the divine light is most present to our under-
standing: therefore, there is no need of any influence.

17. Again, that influence either is creator or it is
creature. Not creator, because it flows and is poured
forth from God: therefore, it is not God. Not creature,
since it is like a certain light flowing from the sun; but
the light is not from nothing nor is it from anything
materially: therefore, neither is that influence: therefore,
it is not a creature: therefore, it is nothing, since it is
neither creator nor creature.

18. Again, every agent of infinite power has power
over its own operation through itself without the aid of
another; but our understanding is of infinite power:
therefore, it has power in its own intellectual operation
without the aid of another. The major premiss is clear:
the minor is proved by the Commentator on book XII of
the Metaphysics*’ in which he says, that the movers of
the celestial orbs are of infinite power and can per-
petuate motion, because they are a power which is not
in matter; but our understanding is a power not in
matter: therefore etc.

19. Again, since it had been said that that light is
seen in a certain manner in every thing seen and is
known in every thing known, it was argued that what
we see, we do not know by faith; but of that eternal good
we have no knowledge except by faith: therefore, we do
not see it. The minor premiss is proved by Augustine
in book VIII on the Trinity,°® who says: So long as
we walk by faith, not by the species [i.e. by sight],°? w
assuredly do not yet see God.

20. Again, according to the Philosopher in book II
on the Heavens and the World,® the superior a nature is,


57. Ch. 7. ‘Tl Corinth. 6:7.
Ch. 4, n. 6. Ch. 12,


274 + MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the fewer things it needs for its perfection; but the
rational creature is a very perfect creature in the order
of the universe: therefore, it needs fewer things for its
perfection. But inferior creatures do not need some
special divine influence to accomplish their perfections:
therefore, much less the rational creature.

21. Again, if the influence of the divine light or if
the divine light itself is necessary to knowledge, it is
not necessary only as the medium which elevates, but as
the reason of assimilation. But since the understanding
is formed by nature to know all things, it is necessary
that through that influence it be assimilated to that light
with respect to all knowable things. But no influence
suffices for representing all knowable things, nor does
any attribute that is known assimilate or represent ex-
cept according to that reason, as goodness the good:
therefore, it is necessary that either God himself by his
essence is the reason of assimilation, which is false; or
nothin else suffices: therefore, one does not know in
God or in any special influence.

22. Again, certitude of knowledge is from the part
of the medium; but that medium is related equally to
all: therefore, all would know equally. But this is
false: therefore, they do not know in that light.

23. Again, according to Augustine in book X on the
Trinity, the act of will necessarily supposes the act of
knowledge; but there is not required any superior in-
fluence for the act of will, for the natural act I say,
since it is inclined naturally to choosing the good: there-
fore, neither is it required for the act of knowledge.

24. Again, the argument is confirmed thus: that every
thing which moves or tends to something, necessarily
has something of that to which it is moved: but the will
is moved naturally to God: therefore, it has by nature

6 Chs. 1 and 2.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 275


something of God: therefore, further influence is not
required.

25. Again, the reason of knowing must be propor-
tional to the knower and the object; but any light is
more proportional than the divine light, nor is that
divine light proportional: therefore, it is not the reason
of knowing. Moreover, that another light is more pro-
portional is seen, for there is the light of the blessed
angel which is as it were of the same parentage as our
understanding. That that divine light is not propor-
tional is clear, since it exceeds infinitely both our
understanding and the knowable object; and besides, if
it were proportional, the understanding could see it.

26. Again, every power® which is reflexive on itself
judges of itself and of all things which are in it; but
[our mind] does not judge of the divine light nor of any
influence of light, since by it and according to it, it
judges of all things: therefore, there is no such light or
influence in our mind.

27. Again, if that light is the reason of knowing in
all knowledge, since that light represents all things
equally, all things would be known equally, present
things and future, hidden and manifest, necessary and
contingent; but this is false: therefore etc.

28. Again, I ask: when I see some immutable truth,
as, every whole is greater than its part, and seven and
three are ten, what do I see? Either something created,
or something uncreated; not something created, since
nothing created is immutable or eternal; not something
uncreated, because I see this perspicuously; but to see
God perspicuously is to be blessed; but we are not
blessed here on earth, nor is anyone who sees some
immutable truth blessed: therefore etc.

8 Cp. Bonaventura, Sentences, bock I, d. 3, p. 1, q. 1, to
the fourth; see above, p. 128.


276 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


29. Again, if God or the divine light necessarily
pours forth something in any certain knowledge, since
to know, according to the Philosopher, is in our power,°?
then that light or the influence of that light would be in
our power; but this is false: therefore, neither the divine
light nor any special influence of it is required neces-
sarily for certain knowledge.

On THE conTRARY: 1. Augustine in book XI on the
City of God® says: Although in certain animals the sense
of the eyes is much more keen for looking into the light
than it is in us, yet they can not grasp the incorporeal
light, by which our mind is in a@ certain manner ir-
radiated, that we may be able to judge concerning all
these things. For in so far as we grasp it, to that extent
we have it in our power. Therefore by the illumination
of that light and by attaining it, we know whatever we
know certainly.

2. Again, Augustine in book XII on the Literal Com-
mentary on Genesis® says:


The light by which the soul is illumined that it
may see clearly all things ‘understood truly
either in itself or in that light, is God himself.
But when the soul attempts to perceive that
light, it palpitates and has no more power;
nevertheless whatever it understands is thence;
as it is able to, it sees what is above it. and
aided by that light it sees likewise whatever it
sees in itself by understanding.

Therefore etc.


3. Again, in book XII of the Confessions:** If we
both see that what you say is true, and if we both see
that what I say is true, I do not see in you nor you in


88 On the Soul, II, ch. 5, 417° 23-24.
SOo(Chs 2iveuae. SOhwols n. 59) ® Ch. 25, n. 35.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 277


me, but both in that which is above our minds in im-
mutable truth.

4. Again, in book VIII on the Trinity® Augustine
says: When the mind so pleases us, when we understand
well, that we prefer it to every corporeal light, it does
not please us in itself, but in that art by which it is
made. For something which is made is approved when
it is seen that it should have been made; this is truth
and the simple good.

5. Again, Augustine says in book IX on the Trinity :®*
For we do not gather.a general or special notion of the
human mind through likeness by seeing many minds by
the corporeal senses, but we perceive the immobile truth,
from which we define [| perfectly], so far as we are able,
not of what sort is the mind of man, but how it must be
in the sempiternal reasons. And in the same chapter®®
he says: And accordingly we judge of these senses ac-
cording to this [form of eternal truth], and we perceive
it by the perception of the rational mind. And in the
beginning of chapter 77° he says: In that eternal truth
through which all things are made, we perceive with a
glance of the mind the form according to which we are,
and according to which either in ourselves or in bodies
we are occupied with any thing according to true and
right reason. Therefore not only do we see and know
in it, but we see it.


6. Again in book I on the Christian Doctrine :™


The wise, man, having acquired wisdom, is
wise; before he acquired it, he was not wise;
but still the wisdom itself neither was ever
unwise nor could ever be. If they did not see
it, in no manner would the wise set an im-~-


°° Ch; 3; nis5; SON bk ™ Ch. 8, n. 8 and 9.
Ch. 6, n. 9. 7 N, 12


278 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


mutably wise life before a mutable life with
full faith. For they see the [immutable] rule
itself of truth by which they declare the former
to be better, nor do they see it anywhere except
above their own nature, since they see them-
selves as mutable. Whence it is common to all
for contemplating commonly and immutably.
And he who does not see this, is as one blind in
the sun, to whom the refulgence of the so clear
and present light, poured into the very places of
[his] eyes, is of no profit.


Therefore the same as before.

7. Again, Dionysius in the book on the Angelic Hier-
archy*” says: Supermundane things are divided into
three kinds by the reason of the divine understanding:
into substance, power, and operation; but the rational
soul is produced only by some special influence of
God: therefore, it operates only by some special influence.
But the proper operation of it is intellectual knowledge:
therefore etc.

8. Again, everything which has been made, has been
made according to some reason. However, that which
has been made rationally, must be known through some
reason: either, therefore, through that by which it was
made or through some other. If through another: it is
not known truly; if through the same: but all things
are made by eternal reasons: therefore, they are known
only by eternal reasons.

9. Again, such is the order in the powers of the soul,
that the lower power always consults the higher.
Whence the particular sense consults the common sense,
the common sense imagination, imagination inferior
reason, the inferior portion of reason the superior, ac-

BG. pi


|


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 279
cording to Augustine in book XII of the Literal Com-.


“mentary on Genesis," since all visions are referred to -


judgment by intellectual vision. Therefore, the superior
portion either judges according to itself or through
something which is above it. If through something
which is above it, there is nothing above the soul except
the immutable truth: therefore etc. If according’ to
itself: then nothing is superior to it, as Augustine says
on True Religion."* If therefore something is above the
mind: then it judges according to that and through that;
but that, as has been said, is the immutable truth; there-
fore etc.


I repty: since the rational soul is constituted as in a
medium between creator and creatures, and is ordered
to the creator according to its superior part, but to
creatures according to its inferior part, as Augustine
says in many places, therefore there have been from
antiquity many opinions concerning knowledge and the
reason of knowing.

For Plato together with his romseeds considered that
the whole reason of knowing comes from an arehetypal
or intelligible world and from ideal reasons, and con-
sidered that that eternal light concurs to sure [certi-
tudinalis] knowledge in its evidence and as the whole
and only reason of knowing, as Augustine states in many
places, and particularly in book VIII on the City of
God: God himself, who made all things, is the light of
minds for knowing all things.

But this position is utterly erroneous. For although
it seems to establish the way of wisdom [ sapientia] none
the less it destroys the way of knowledge [scientia].—
Moreover, if that light were the whole and only reason
of knowing, the knowledge of things in the Word would

™Ch. 11, n. 24. *Chs. 30 and 31.  ™Ch. 7.


i


>


280 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


not differ from the knowledge of things in their own
genus, nor would the. knowledge of reason differ from
the knowledge of revelation, nor philosophic knowledge
from prophetic, nor knowledge by nature from knowl-
edge by grace. :

Another position was that of Aristotle, as it seems,
who said that the whole reason of knowing is caused and
comes from the inferior way of sense, memory, and ex-
perience, together with the natural light of our active
intellect abstracting species from phantasms and making
them to be understood in actuality. And thence he
considered that the eternal light is not necessary to sure
knowledge, nor did he ever speak of it. And _ this
opinion of his is clear in book II of the Posterior
Analytics."®

Certain philosophizers follow this position, although
not completely, none the less asserting that that light is
the general cause of sure knowledge, but in no wise do
we attain to it, nor is any special influence of it neces-
sary in natural knowledge: but that the light of the
active intellect, together with the species and likenesses
of things received and abstracted from things, suffices;
otherwise the operation of the nature would be voided,
and our understanding would understand only acci-
dentally, and our knowledge would not be natural but
supernatural, That which Augustine says, that all things
are seen through that light and in it, is not to be under-
stood that the understanding attains to that light in some
way, nor that that light is something poured in specially,
but that eternal God imparts naturally the intellectual
light to us, in which we know and see naturally all know-
ables, which lie under reason.

But this position seems likewise to be defective in a
number of respects. For although it furnishes the way

7 Ch. 19, 99°19—100°18.


°


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 281


of knowledge, it wholly destroys the way of wisdom. It
seems to diminish a great deal the reason and nature of
the image. For the rational creature by the very fact
that he is in the image of God," inheres according to the
highest part of him in the eternal rules, as Augustine
says in book XII on the Trinity."® It seems none the
less to overturn and subvert all the foundations of St.
Augustine, whose authorities can in no manner be
expounded otherwise. But this seems improper, since
he is the doctor extraordinary, and the one whom
catholic doctors and especially theologians ought to
follow.

And therefore I think that a medium way is to be
held to without prejudice, by saying that our knowledge
is caused both by lower and by higher things, by ex-
terior things and by ideal reasons.

For the understanding of this it must be noted that
nothing is known or understood except the true. Truth,
however, is triple or is triply, according as each thing
has being triply, namely, in its own genus, in the created
understanding, and in the eternal exemplar, as Augus-
tine says in book V of the Literal Commentary on the
Genesis’? and Anselm in the book on Truth in chapter
X.8° Therefore we can speak of truth in three ways:
by comparison to the matter which it informs, since (in
that every created nature represents according to its
grade the art by which it was made) the form itself or
nature or essence, through which it imitates the very
art or exemplar, is its truth; and it is true only in so
far as it expresses that exemplar. In the second place
we can consider truth by comparison to the understand-
ing which it excites; and this is the created under-
standing and most of all the human understanding, since


— 7% Gen. 1:27. 7 Ch. 12; n. 28:
7’ Chs. 1 ff. 80 See above, vol. I, p. 170.


a


282 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


we are speaking of that mode. For there is no nature
which does not manifest and declare itself to the
understanding as it is able. In the third place we can
consider truth by comparison to the exemplar from
which it emanates; this is the divine light and art, by
which all things have been made.

Truth, however, according to its own reason is the
reason of knowing and manifesting, as Hilary says that
truth is declarative being. This reason, as it is the im-
pressed reason of the creature, that is, the form itself
or quiddity, is not sufficient itself to manifest or declare
or move the understanding. Therefore God provided a
certain intellectual light for our mind, by which it
abstracts from sensibles the species of things exposed to
it, purifying them and receiving their quiddities, which
are in themselves the object of the understanding.
Nevertheless, he imparted a natural faculty of judg-
ment, by which our mind discerns the goods from the
evil and the trues from the false. But this light is not


_ sufficient, for it is defective and mixed with opacity, |


unless it is brought under and connected with that eter-
nal light, which is the perfect and sufficient reason of
knowing, and the understanding according to its highest
part attains to and in a certain manner takes hold of
that.

It attains, however, to that light or those eternal
reasons as the reason of knowing, but not the only rea-
son, for then knowledge in the Word would not differ,
as has been said, from knowledge in the proper genus
of the thing, nor knowledge of wisdom, from knowledge
of science; nor does it attain to that light as the whole
reason, for then we would not need the species and
likenesses of things; which is false, since the Philosopher
says,*! and experience teaches, that they who lose one —
§1 Posterior Analytics I, ch. 18, 81* 37-40.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 283


sense necessarily lose the scientific knowledge which is
derived according to that sense; therefore; although ac-
cording to Augustine the’ mind according to its highest
part attains to those rules, nevertheless that is un-
doubtedly true which the Philosopher says, that knowl-
edge is begotten in us by way of sense, memory, and
experience, from which the universal is gathered, which
is the principle of art and science; nor does it attain to
that light as naked, for then knowledge of the source
would not differ from knowledge of the way; nor as
proper, but in a certain way general. And therefore
together with these it needs necessarily the likenesses of
things abstracted from things as the proper, determined,
and distinct reasons of knowing. And this Augustine
shows in book IX on the Trinity, saying that the
illumination [lumen], truth, is from the higher, that is,
from light [lwa]; but shadows are from the lower, that
is from phantasms. He says,


The judgment of truth is strong and bright
from above, and is firm in the most uncorrupted
rules of its right; and if it is joined as it were
to a kind of cloud of corporeal images, it still
is not involved nor confounded. But there is
this difference between the two: either I am to
be led away as if from a clear sky by any cloud
or by no cloud, or else I am accustomed to
ascend as to the highest mountains, enjoying
the free air in varying ways and I look upon
the very serene light above and the very dense
shadows beneath.


The mind or the understanding, however, knowing
that light and the ideal reasons attains to and in a
certain manner perceives them, not as an Gish setting

#2 Ch. 6, n. 10 and 11.


284 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


at rest, terminating, and leading to itself, but as an
object moving and leading to something else; not as an
object of vision, in which the glance of reasoning is
fixed, but as a motive object and reason of seeing; not
fully, but in part; not in its clarity, but in a certain
obscurity, because it is not yet fully deiform. And
therefore we see so through it that we do not see it; we
see so that we do not perceive ourselves seeing, except
when we have turned about, by ascending step by step
from the senses of the body, until we come to the
nature of the rational mind, and at length by transcend-
ing the mind itself we come to the immutable rules, as
Augustine teaches in book VII of the Confessions.
Whence he says in book XV on the Trinity :5> We see so
through it that we do not see it except through a mirror
and in an enigma. And Anselm in the Proslogium,
chapter 14:


Why, O Lord, does my soul not perceive you,
if it finds you? Or does it not find you when it
finds the light and the truth? Or could it un-
derstand anything of you except by your light
and truth? If, therefore, it has seen the light
and truth, it has seen you; if it has not seen
you, it has not seen the light and truth, or it
is the light and the truth which it has seen and
none the less has not yet seen you, because it
has seen you only in some respect, but it has
not seen you as you are.


That illumination, therefore, by moving our understand-

ing insinuates a certain illumination in our mind, so

that it sees as it were objectively and effectively by the

_ divine light, but it sees formally by and in that illumina-

tion, which is continued and preserved in our minds by
83 Ch. 6, n. 10; or ch. 9, n. 16,


.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 285


the divine presence. Nor is it withdrawn from any
knower, but aids all the good and evil indifferently
according to the ordination and immutable disposition of
its wisdom by which it cooperates in the intellectual
operation.

Many reasons moreover can be adduced to the con-
firmation of this.

And the first reason can be taken from the part of the
nature of the knowing mind, that is, the intellectual
mind. For since our mind, according to Augustine
through the whole length of book XII on the Trinity,
has a double portion, one lower, deputed to admini-
strating temporal things, another superior, assigned to
contemplating eternal things; as the lower portion does
not suffice without the higher for full judgment in the
administration of these things, so neither does the higher
portion suffice without eternal light. This portion, how-
ever, is that in which the image of God is; and this
portion inheres in eternal rules, through which it defines
and judges whatever it knows with certitude. More-
over, since there is found in the creature a triple mode
or grade of conformity to God, namely as trace, as
image, as likeness; trace. means the comparison to God
as to a causative principle, likeness means the com-
parison to God as to an infused gift: therefore, image,
which is medium between them, means the comparison
to God as to a motive object. Therefore, in the opera-
tions of the creature, which are his in so far as the
creature is a trace, God cooperates as principle and
cause; of this sort are natural operations. In those
operations, further, which are his, in so far as the
creature is a likeness, God cooperates as infused gift;
of this sort are meritorious operations and those pleasing
to God. In those operations, finally, which are his as
image, he cooperates as motive object and reason; of


286 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


this sort are intellectual operations, in which the under-
standing perceives immutable truth. Whence Augustine
in book VIII on the City of God says, that God is the
cause of subsisting, and the order of living, and the
reason of understanding ;** the effector of natures, and
the good of actions, and the light of things known;**
our principle, our good, our light;°° cause of the consti-
tuted universe, fountain for the drinking of felicity, and
light for the perceiving of truth.®*

The second reason is taken from the part of the
knowable thing. For everything which is known cer-
tainly, is necessarily immutable; and this is true not only
as regards the act of the understanding, which is in the
perception of terms, but also of first propositions and
inferences.—For our understanding seizes the signifi-
eances of terms when it apprehends each of them by
definition. Definition, however, has to be made by su-
periors, and those superiors by other superiors,. until
one arrives at the most general, which being ignored,
the inferiors could not be known definitively. For un-
less it is known what that which is through itself [ens
per se] is, the definition of substance can not be known;
nor can that which is through itself be known, unless
it is known with its conditions, which are the one, the
true, and the good. Since, however, that which is [ens]
could be thought of as diminished, as completed, as in
potentiality, as in actuality, as that which is in some
one respect only, as that which is absolutely, and thus
with the other conditions which are of that which is as
that which is—privations, however, can not be known
except by affirmations according to Augustine and the
Philosopher**—the understanding could not come, as


84Ch. 4. ** Ibid: chi-L0; nade


8 Tbid., ch. 9. Ibid. ‘ch. 10 ne a
53 On the Soul III, ch. 6, 480” 22-23.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 287


resolving fully, into the understanding of anything of
created things that are, unless it is aided by the under-
standing of the purest, most actual, and most complete
thing that is. Therefore, it can not know an imperfect,
defective and incomplete thing which is, nor can it know
that such a thing differs very greatly from another, un-
less that which is absolutely perfect, be seen by the
mind, as Augustine says on True Religion.®®

As regards the perception of propositions, it then
comprehends and understands truly, when it knows such
true propositions, and can not be deceived concerning
them, as, every whole is greater than its part. For it
knows that this can not be constituted otherwise; it
knows, therefore, that this truth is immutable.—As re-
gards the perception of inferences, it sees, comprehends,
and understands, when it sees that the conclusion follows
necessarily from the premisses; and this not only in
necessary terms, but in contingent terms, not only in
things that are, but in things that are not. Therefore
it does not see this necessity in a matter, no more in
propositions than in inferences and relations, for every
part and every whole can cease to be; nor in the soul,
since the soul is mutable and can suffer the mutability of
error, as Augustine says on True Religion®® and in book
XIV on the Trinity. Therefore it sees in the exemplar
of the eternal art and in the ideal reason, in which things
have an immutable relation according to the representa-
tion of that art. Therefore, all light of reasoning truly is
kindled from that truth and in the attempt to reach it, as
Augustine says on True Religion.9}

Again, as was touched on in the preceding question,”?
truth is nothing other in the creature than a certain
expression of the eternal art and exemplar, according


* Ch. 30, n. 55. Ch. 39, n. 72. .
#Ch; 30; mn. 156: ® See above, pp. 256-257.


288 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


to which it has been made; and every creature is so far
true, as he imitates that exemplar according to his grade.
Therefore, it is impossible that it be known truly, except
by a certain application and relation to that rule and
reason, by which it was made. Whence Augustine in
book I of the Soliloquies? says:


God is intelligible, likewise those signs of the
disciplines are intelligible, yet they differ a
great deal. For both earth and light are visi-
ble, but the earth can not be seen unless illum-
ined by light. Therefore likewise those things
which are treated of in the disciplines, which
everyone concedes [to be] very true with no
hesitation, it must nevertheless be believed,
could not be understood, unless they were
lighted by God as by their sun. Therefore,
just as in that sun three observations may be
made: that it is, that it shines, that it illum-
ines, so in that most secret God there are a
certain three [observations to be made]: that
he is, that he wnderstands, and that he makes
others to be understood.


The third reason is taken from the part of the medium
of knowing. The medium, however, in certain knowl-
edge is necessarily certain. It would not however be
certain, if it were not common in all, immutable, and
infallible.

This is clear since I know all equals according to
the same reason of equality, and according to the same
[reason of truth] every one knows them truly and with
certitude; according to the same reason of beauty all
know all beautiful things; according to the same reason
of unity, all single things. It must be immutable because

® Ch. 8, n. 15.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 289


nothing can be known immutably except by an im-
mutable reason. It must be infallible, otherwise it would
not be a sure reason of knowing, because it could not
give infallibility.

If therefore every creature and every created light
is contracted and limited and terminable and mutable,
but certain reason is uncontractible, immutable, inter-
minable, then no created light or created reason can be
the medium in certain knowledge. Therefore, it is
necessary that all things which are known certainly
be known in the light of eternal truth and in immutable
rules. This is the argument of Augustine on True Re-
ligion®* where he says that the reason of beauty is
neither protuberant in space nor unstable in time. For
it can not rightly be said that the round vessel is judged
according to it and the round denarius is not judged
according to it; or that equal years are judged accord-
ing to it and equal months are not judged according
to it. None the less it is neither greater nor less in
space of time or place, for if it were greater we would
not judge the lesser according to it, nor if it were less,
would we judge the greater according to it. As it is
however we know all squares according to the same law
of quadrature, and we know all equals according to the
same law of equality: therefore, the interval of spaces
and of times is neither greater nor lesser, but its power
is above all——The same Augustine in book II on the
Free Will®® where he shows that the laws of justice and
the laws of. numbers are common to all, concludes:


But that beauty of truth and wisdom does not
shut off those who come in a crowded multitude
of hearers, nor does it move along in time, nor
does it migrate in space, nor is. it interrupted


% Ch. 30, n. 56.
%® Ch. 14, n. 38; see above, vol. I, p. 55.


290 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


by night, nor is it blocked off by shadows, nor
does it fall under the senses of the body; of all
the world it is nearest to those turned toward
it, it is present to all, eternal to all, it is
absent from no place, it admonishes abroad, it
teaches ahwsieie


it is present to all who contemplate.

The fourth reason is taken from the part of the
judgment, since in all certain knowledge right judgment
is necessary. The mind judges rightly however of all
sensibles; it judges of all beautiful things, as reason
of which we say, that this thing delights, and this thing
makes an agreement, this makes an equality; it judges
of all natures, what must be attributed to each by the
law of nature; it judges of the morals of men, what
must be praised, and what must be damned. Every
judgment, however, must be right according to some
rule and law which is absolutely beyond judgment.
Therefore this law is either below the soul, or in the
soul itself, or the soul itself, or above it. It is not
below it, because the soul judges of all things which
are below it; nor is it the soul itself nor in the soul
itself, for the soul is mutable and every condition or
habit which is in it is mutable, and likewise it judges
of itself and of everything which is in it: therefore
it is above the soul. No law, however, is above the soul
except the law of immutable truth. Therefore, it judges
whatever it judges rightly by the law of immutable
truth. And this is what Augustine says on True Re-
ligion:°® If the mind ‘judges according to itself, there is
no more eminent nature. Therefore, sinee it is itself
mutable, another law which is more excellent must be
sought.


% Ch. 80, n. 54 and 56.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 291


But since this law of all.arts is [absolutely]
immutable, and since the human mind to which
it is granted to see such law, can suffer the
mutability of error, it is [ sufficiently] clear that
there is above our mind the law which is called
truth. Nor must it be doubted, moreover, that
the immutable nature which is above the soul is
God; and the first life, the first essence, the
first beauty and equality are there, where the |
first wisdom is. For this is that immutable
truth which is rightly called the law of all arts
and the law of the omnipotent artifex.


He says the same in book II on the Free Will,®? and in
book VI on Music,®® but best of all in book XIV on the
Trinity.°®


Hence it is (he-says) that the impious think
on eternity, and condemn many things rightly
and praise many rightly in the morals of men.
Yet in what rules do they judge these things,
unless in those in which they see how each one
should live, even though they do not them-
selves live in that same manner? [Where do
they see them?] For they do not see them
in their own nature, since without doubt these
things are seen by the mind, and it is known
that their minds are mutable, and whoever sees
this in these immutable rules sees the immut-
able rules. Nor in the condition or habit of
their mind, since these rules are of justice, and
their minds are known to be unjust. Where
then are these rules [written], where does the
unjust know what just is, where does he per-


Ch. 12, n. 34; see above, vol. I, pp. 50 and 51.
#8 Ch.212, n. 34. PCh lo. nak


292 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ceive that. that must be had which he himself
does not have? Where are they written then
except in the book of that light which is called
truth, whence all just light is marked off and
whence it is transferred into the mind of the
man who does justice, not by passing into it,
but by being imprinted on it, just as a figure
passes into the wax and does not leave the
seal? But he who does not do it, and yet sees
what should be done, he is one who is turned
from that light, by which he is nevertheless
touched.


The authorities alleged in the preceding question hold
for the present question too. I say this, therefore, that
whatever is known certainly in intellectual knowledge,
is known in eternal reasons and in the light of the first
truth in the way in which it has been explained, by
concluding it from the knowing nature and the knowable
thing and the certain medium and also from right judg-
ment, so that the material reason of knowing is from
exterior things whence the species of the things to be
known are furnished, but the formal reason is partly
from within, that is, from the light of reason, partly
from above, but completively and consummatively from
eternal rules and reasons.


The arguments, which prove this, must be conceded.

To the arguments to the contrary it must be said:

To the first that the philosophy of Aristotle did not
attain to this point; nor is this surprising. For this
_reason I say that although there is in the soul an active
intellect, whose property it is to make all things, and a
possible intellect, whose property it is to be made all
things, nevertheless that does not suffice. For to say.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 293


all and to say the whole are different.‘ It suffices for
all things, but still not totally, for with it is required
necessarily a further and higher light.

To the second it must be said that the intellectual
operation concerning natural things is natural. God,
however, works and cooperates in the operations of crea-
tures according to the mode and requirement of their
nature, as has been seen. And because the rational
creature is the image of God or formed to his image,
the very nature [ratio] of the image requires that he
cooperate in its operations according to the mode of
object moving, in that the mind is formed naturally to
be moved and illumined by that light. Nor must the
operation, because of this, be called supernatural or
miraculous, because he cooperates with a nature operat-
ing naturally according to the grade and mode of its
nature, which operation he takes away from none.

To the third it must be said that, in truth, as Hugo
says, some things are above reason, and some below
reason; and although they may lie under the power
of a nature, still that nature has no power in them except
by a higher light, because this follows from the reason
and requirement of the nature and from its nobility, just
as the eye has power in those things which fall under
its visual power, but not without the light of the sun
or some other extrinsic light, because such a power and
such an operation require it.

To the fourth it must be said that in all action of
the rational nature, as it is rational, God cooperates in
a certain more special way and by a certain more special
influence than in the actions of other creatures. If,
however, the argument runs from a comparison with
other natures, in which he does not cooperate in power
by some special influence, that therefore he does not

100 Arisrotir, Metaphysics V, ¢. 26, 1023” 26-1024 11.


294 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


cooperate in wisdom in intellectual operations: it is
clear that they are not alike, since by the very fact that
it is the image of God, the rational nature is ordered
to God as to its object, and therefore God cooperates
in its operations as motive object.

To the fifth it must be said that the light of the active
intellect does not suffice to abstract intelligible species,
nor does the natural judgment suffice to judge nor does
the intelligible species which is made, suffice to manifest
the thing perfectly, even if a common and a general
influence be supposed, unless the divine light itself aids,
touching and moving our mind and illumining it to this
end, that it may be able to know certainly and indubit-
ably, for the reasons above mentioned.

To the sixth the reply is clear. For it has been said
that the understanding necessarily attains that light, that
it sees that light; but not as the object which sets it
at rest, on which it fastens its glance, for such sight
makes one blessed, but as the object moving, not leading
to itself, but leading to something else; just as the eye
seeing in the light of the sun sees the light of the sun,
not as object, but as it is the reason and medium of
seeing.

To the seventh the reply is clear, since if those reasons
were the whole and only reason of knowing, it would
be true that he who is nearer them would sée more in
them and would see more things in them; but since they
are neither the whole nor only reason, but together with
created reasons, therefore not he who is nearer, but he
who acquires more reasons, sees more things in those
reasons.—Or it must be said that they see more who are
moved more to them. But if some are nearer to that
light considered as it moves [in ratione moventis] the
affect, but not considered as it moves the understanding,
because they do not move themselves to those reasons


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 295


as to a light, but rather as to a fire, and therefore they
receive more heat, in such wise that none the less they
do not receive more splendor; but others contrarily.

To the eighth it must be said that that statement must
be understood to mean that the more anything has of
being, the more it is knowable by its own reason. - Other-
wise they are not similar, since the being of the thing is
something absolute; and therefore the principles proper
to it, together with the general maintenance of the crea-
tor, suffice for it. But knowing means the comparison
to the understanding, which the thing moves; therefore,
more is required for knowledge than for being, as well
from the part of the knowable thing as from the part of
the knowing understanding.

To the ninth it must be said that Augustine does not
mean to exclude the aid of the light or of those reasons,
but the aid of the senses. Therefore he wishes to say
no more than that he knows corporeal things with the
senses mediating, but he knows incorporeal things with-
out the aid of the senses; just as, if we were to say that
the eye through itself sees color, the benefit of light
would not be excluded because of that.

To the tenth it must be said that that statement
[ auctoritas] of Augustine is absolutely to the contrary,
as is clear to one considering it diligently. For he means
there, in the entire context, that to that eternal light ©
something of our own is subjoined in the natural order,
and in that one sees whatever one sees. Nor does
Augustine speak of kind because of some community of
nature, as it is common to speak of kind or genus, but
he calls it kind because of a certain conformity, because
that light is intelligible and our soul is intellectual; that
light is spiritual and our soul spiritual, in the manner
in which it said in Acts 17:1°! we are the kind of God.

101-Ver, 28; genus is usually rendered offspring, instead of
kind, in translation.


296 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


To the eleventh it must be said that, in truth, nature
is not lacking in things necessary to the rational creature
but it provides for it in a more sublime way than for
other natures. ‘And although without the influence of
that light it could not go forth into the actuality of
certain knowledge, nevertheless it is not said to be lack-
ing or deficient, because that light always assists it and
is always present to it. Nor does this derogate from its
nobility, but rather it attests to its great dignity.

To the twelfth it must be said that, as the Philosopher
holds, the active intellect is like light, the possible, like
an eye, the phantasm, like color. But then the likeness
does not hold, since, just as for corporeal vision color
itself and the visual organ and the power, together with
the natural and complanted light, do not suffice without
the benefit of the superior light, so too for intellectual
vision the phantasm does not suffice for moving, nor the
possible intellect for receiving, nor the light for abstract-
ing and making species to be understood actually, with-
out the aid and benefit of the divine light. For the light
of the active intellect is like the light connatural to the
eye, but the divine light is like the light of the sun.

To the thirteenth it must be said that without doubt
knowledge is a certain operation natural to the intel-
- lectual nature, and this influence or cooperation can in
a certain manner be called natural. Because of this,
the distinction must be made that natural can be used
in two ways: either what is caused from the principles
of nature, and in this way that influence is not natural
but supernatural; or in another way, what is never absent
from nature and accompanies nature inseparably, and
in this way that influence can be called natural.

To the fourteenth it must be said that one does not
see in that light as in a mirror, because then one would


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 297


see that light openly, but as in a reason, so that the
divine light is by its essence an effective and motive
reason, but that influence which we assert is a formal
reason. And as regards the objection that is made, that
that creature is mutable, I say that although the creature
is and is mutable of itself, still it is not inconsistent that
sure knowledge be from it formally, since it is from God
effectively. Just as what we say of grace, that it
elevates the soul above itself and moves it, is not to be
understood effectively, but formally, for God does. it
through grace. It is thus in the question stated.

To the fifteenth it must be said that it is not incon-
sistent that by different modes the creator be the reason
of knowing the creature and the creature the reason of
knowing the creator. For the creator is the motive and
effective reason of knowing, but the creature is the
manuductive reason of knowing the creator and therefore
knowledge is not circular, because it is not according
to the same mode.

To the sixteenth it must be said that on the contrary
where the thing itself is, its species is necessary, for
even though God be most interior to the mind, still con-
sidered as [in ratione] that which moves his influence
is necessary, or his species by which mediating he moves,
for the mind could not be moved unless something were
done in it. It is likewise necessary considered as that
which informs, for God can not be the form of the under-
standing; but the reason of knowing is the form inhering
to the understanding.

To the seventeenth it must be said that that influence
is a creature and created from nothing. As to that which

the argument says of the corporeal light, I say that the
corporeal light is something made and a creature. For
not only is something called a creature because it is


298 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


made immediately from nothing, but because it is made
from something or from something which has been made
from nothing. Whence is it then? I say that it is from
the luminous, not materially but originally, as the species
of the thing is from the thing itself.

To the eighteenth it must be said that something can
be called infinite in two ways, namely, by actuality or by
duration. Therefore neither the movers of the orbs nor
the understandings are infinite by an infinity of actuality ;
and if the Commentator said that, he erred; but they
are infinite in duration, and therefore they can per-
petuate motion. The argument, however, proceeded
from the infinity of actuality, and therefore it does not
hold.

To the nineteenth it must be said that not every sight
removes a knowledge which is by faith, but the vision
of that light as the object which brings to rest and
terminates and in its clarity [does]; in which mode it is
not seen along the way; it is seen as object moving and
as reason of seeing, as has often been said.

To the twentieth it must be said that according to the
Philosopher in the same place, some things are whole
in goodness; and these acquire their perfection with no
movement, such as God. Others are very close to in-
tegral goodness; and these acquire their perfection with
very few movements, There are others which are or-
dered to great goodness, but are none the less removed
from that perfection; therefore, they acquire their per-
fection with many movements. There are some, which
are ordered to slight perfection; and those of this sort
arrive at it with few movements. Some to no perfection;
and they are immobile, because motion is for the ac-
quiring of some perfection. The first is God; the second
is the order of Angels; the third is the order of rational


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA _299


creatures, such as men; the fourth is the order of brute
animals; the fifth is the order of higher elements; in the
last and lowest place is earth. Nor is there a likeness
of man and lower creatures, because he is ordered to
some noble operation, that the divine light may be to him
as an object moving and a reason of operating; and this
is the mark of great nobility, just as it is a mark of
nobility in sight (which although it is more excellent
than the other senses, still needs the aid of light, which
is the reason of seeing for it) that light is not necessary
in the operations of other senses.

To the twenty-first it must be said that God himself
through his essence is the effective reason of assimilat-
ing; but that influence is the fornial reason of assimi-
lating. In God, however, all things shine forth; but he
does not lead to knowing by natural knowledge except
only those things the species of which are received from
things, whether corporeal or spiritual. And I think that
there are different influences and different species ac-
cording to the diversity of knowers, according to the
plurality of reasons of different things.

To the twenty-second the reply is clear thus: that that
light is not the whole or only reason of seeing, but to-
gether with reasons and species received from things.
And therefore all do not see equally, because all do not
receive species from things equally.— Moreover, although
it is constituted equally, so far as it is from its own
part, all do not move themselves or turn to it equally,
and because of this they do not see equally.

To the twenty-third it must be said the minor premiss
of the argument is false, since, just as the understanding
would never know anything certainly without the
illumination of that truth, so the affect would never
love anything in good order without the affection of
that goodness; but clearly Augustine means that in sins


300 MEDIEVAL. PHILOSOPHY ‘


only blessedness is desired. And although it be moved
naturally, still this is from its nature, and just as truth
illuminating aids the understanding, so goodness affect-
ing in a certain manner aids the affect.

To the twenty-fourth I say that it has something; and
this is that influence affecting our affect, which it does
not have naturally from its principles, nor from itself,
but because this is never absent from it. It has likewise
a conformity according to image.—If it|be asked,
whether the nature left to itself could be moved, I say
no. And is it not the image of God? It is by all means.
But still it is the property of the reason of the image,
that it be borne in it as in the motive object, because of
which they can not be separated.

To the twenty-fifth it must be said that the divine
light is proportional both to the cognoscitive power and
the cognoscible object, not by a proportion of commen-
suration, but of a certain order, because the rational
nature, by the very fact that it is an image, is ordered
to that object; likewise the cognoscible is formed
naturally to be illuminated by that light as by a certain
sun of its own, according to Augustine. The illumina-
tion of the angelic understanding, on the other hand, in
so far as blessed, is not proportional to it by a proportion
of order, although it is by a proportion of comparison |
and commensuration. Nor is it superior in this to the
rational soul. For as Augustine says on True Religion’
and in the LXXXIII Questions: In that it is the
image of God, it is formed immediately by truth itself,
with no creature interposed; and in book X of the City
of God:!%* The angelic and the rational spirit are—
illumined by the same light. It is, however, a natural


ane (he Adgem S25 19) SEO Eee
18 Quest. 51, n. 2 and 4.


MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA 301


proportion, as it is borne by the nature into itself as into
an object moving, but not bringing to rest.

To the twenty-sixth it must be said that judgment of
the thing is double. For there is judgment of discern-
ment, whether the thing is, and that this is not that; and
judgment of authority and as it were of definition, as
what a thing should be. The mind judges of the divine
light in the first manner, otherwise it would not know
it; it does mot judge of it in the second way. The
argument proceeded in this second way, therefore it does
not hold.

To the twenty-seventh it must be said that when those
reasons are observed and seen in their clarity and as
the whole and only reason of knowing, future things
will be seen equally with present, contingent things with
necessary. But since they are not seen thus here on
earth, therefore neither are they all seen equally. Yet
t must be understood that, although God is absolutely
simple and uniform, still that eternal light, as it is an
sxemplar, represents certain things as if outwardly and
ypenly, certain as if profoundly and in hiding. The
irst are those which are made according to the necessary
yrdination of the divine art, and the second those which
ire made according to the dispensation of the concealed
will; and therefore natural things are known in that
vatural light by the judgment of reason, but super-
iatural things and future things only by the gift of
ieavenly revelation.

To the twenty-eighth it must be said that when I see
hese immutable truths as the object terminating, I see
omething created; when I see them as the object moy-
ng, I see something uncreated. This created thing,
1owever, is not immutable absolutely, but by supposi-
ion [i.e. by something which may stand for it immu-
ably]; therefore, certitude does not come from these


302 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


truths absolutely but only in some one respect. I see
therefore a certain true concept in my soul objectively
from the presence of knowable species, yet related to”
immutable reasons.

To the twenty-ninth it must be said that the influence
of the light is not in our power, in the sense that we
either make or produce it, or we should constrain God
to pour it forth; but the influence is always present in
accordance with the immutable ordination of, divine liber-
ality, nor is it ever withdrawn from any knower, but
always aids him; and to that extent it could be said to
be in our power.


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS (1266/1274~1808)


Notwithstanding a growing interest in Duns Scotus,
and notwithstanding an increasing number of studies of
his philosophy, the statement of his thought and the
estimation of its importance are hazardous undertakings.
A variety of reasons explain why this should be so.
There is no critical edition of his works; examination of
the authenticity of writings attributed to him has cut
off one by one half a dozen important philosophical
works which went under his name a century ago; the
highly technical terminology which he evolved for the
statement of his subtle philosophy can be worked with
apparent cogency into a variety of interpretations; the
content of Duns’s philosophy, finally, is dependent on
the emphasis the interpreter wishes to make, and de-
pendent also on which of the works of doubtful authen-
ticity he chooses to admit into the canon of Duns’s
writings. It would seem now that only five major works
continue of undoubted authenticity—the treatise en-
titled on the First Principle (but not the treatise
entitled on the First Principle of All Things), the Ques-
tions on the Metaphysics (but not the Exposition on the
XII Books of the Metaphysics), the two Commentaries
yn the Sentences of Lombard, entitled the Oxford Work
ind the Parisian Reportata, and some Quodlibetal Ques-
tons. One effect of this limitation of authentic works
1as been the happy elimination of the contradictions.
which it had been customary to find in the doctrines of

uns Scotus. But the subtlety and the technical detail
f his philosophical analyses leave contradictions enough
/ 303


\ \
304 _ MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


in any restatement of his doctrine: no modern language
is constructed to carry the force of his distinctions, and
in restatement therefore either distinctions must be
blunted by approximate translation, or new expressions
must be invented as strange and as difficult as the latin
terms of Duns.

_ The intellectual heritage of Duns Scotus has been
subject of frequent discussion, but the polemical char-
acter of the discussions has not infrequently disguised
rather than disclosed his philosophical ancestors. The
selection which follows is not an unfair sampling of the
apologetic force he finds in the aristotelian system for
the defense of the doctrines of Augustine. Coming after
the departure of Thomas from pure augustinism, the
defense can be considered a restatement of the older
philosophy; but like the philosophy of Thomas it is a
restatement with a modification. Thomas had considered
the one Truth which Augustine discussed limited: to the
truth which is involved in the adequation of things to
the divine understanding, but he had imported besides
the discussions of Aristotle for-the statement of the
rich and shifting variety of truths which are adequations
of things to the human understanding; the one truth of
God is basic, but the statement of its being alone is
inadequate to characterize the truths of things and of
intellect. Duns Scotus reversed the thomist procedure:
he seeks the formal ground of certainty in the many
truths in which the mind is engaged; he finds infallible
truths and formalities which lead him back to the dis-
covery, with Augustine, of eternal truths above the mind
to which the mind is directed. Broadly it may be said
that, whereas Thomas was led, impressed with the fact
that individuals of the same species differ only in
number and not in kind, to state a metaphysics built
upon substances unknown in their individuality, so em- -


_ JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 805


phasizing the fundamental unintelligibility of the thing
which is, as it is, unadequated to the understanding;
Duns Scotus, in his persistent search for the bases of
certitude, recognized that the individual is handled. in
knowledge by distinctions (there is a real distinction, a
distinction of reason only, and a formal distinction from
the part of the thing), and expressed a theory of
knowledge which emphasizes the status of the distine-
’ tions which the intellect discovers. The much agitated
question of whether Duns refuted Thomas to state a
greater synthesis of medieval thought, or whether he
refined Thomas of questionable doctrines and reconciled
him with Augustine, resolves itself into the question,
simpler historically but more difficult of philosophical
determination, of how a metaphysical inquiry with an
aristotelian augustinian background will differ from an
inquiry into formally verifiable certainties conducted on
much the same background.

Here, as elsewhere, therefore, the inquiry into inten-
tions and backgrounds may be abandoned for the ex-
amination of philosophical differences that appear in
the doctrines themselves. If the difference is as it has
been stated to be, it should appear particularly clearly
in the status of the individual in each system. For
Thomas, matter is the principle of individuation; that
individuals of the same species differ, not in kind, but
only in number, is the consequence of that principle.
For Scotus, the principle of individuation is in the form,
not merely in the matter; the essence of each individual
contains the principle of contraction and limitation
which restrains the universality of the species: the
ultimate reality of the thing which is (ens) contracts
the specific form. This is the doctrine of hecceity, ac-
~ cording to which the characteristics of individuation ‘are
not to be found in quantity or,in any other attribute of


306 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


body, as Thomas’s doctrine seems to state, but in a
formal distinction derived from the thing. This is the
significance of the much misinterpreted doctrine that
being (esse) is no different from essence (essentia) : the
characteristics of individual ‘things are intelligibly


different; it is the possibility of formal differentiation ©


and description which the hecceity preserves for the
individual. Where Thomas was concerned to emphasize
the specific and generic identity of different individuals,
Duns was concerned with the notion, not necessarily
contradictory, that each thing that is (ens) has some
being (esse) of its own. Thomas followed Avicenna in
holding that the mind conceived that which is (ens) in
conceiving anything: whatever else is conceived must
be as superadded to that first conception; Duns Scotus,
on the other hand, considered that which is as particular,
and as known in each case by the hecceity peculiar to
the particular thing. Whereas Thomas, therefore, can
express the relation of the true and the good by saying
that they are convertible with that which is, for the one
superadds to that which is an order to the understand-
ing, the other an order to the appetite; Duns Scotus
explains the relation by pointing out that the good and
‘ the true are different formally but identical in the thing.

The alterations that occur in the demonstrations of the
existence of God are similar symptoms of the alteration
of outlook toward a problem, analyzed in very similar
fashion but with emphases diametrically ‘opposed.
Thomas is again concerned with the reality of first
substances, individual things (of which properties,
differences, genera, species can be predicated and in
which accidents are present, but which can not, in
turn, be predicated of anything). His refutation of the
a priori demonstrations of God, his substitution of five
a posteriori demonstrations for them are recognition of


*


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 307


the fact that nothing is known save knowledge derived
from experience of individual things, but that on the
other hand the changes of individual things and the
instabilities of sensible knowledge can not be explained
save by a first mover, a first cause, a source of goodness;
but that first cause is not itself known. Duns Scotus,
too, holds that an a priori proof of the existence of God
is impossible, but unlike Thomas he does not refute the
ontological argument of Anselm, but “colors” it so that
it is a posteriori rather than a priori. If the notion of
God can be shown to be possible, it can be shown by
that to be necessary; if a first efficient cause, if a final
end, if a supreme perfection are possible, analysis of
that possibility will show that they are necessary. Duns’s
proofs of the existence of God, therefore, begin like
those of St. Thomas from knowledge occasioned by ex-
perience, but where Thomas seeks in experience some
contingent thing which requires for its existence the
existence of God, Duns Scotus consistently seeks out
necessary truths and relations of thought implicated in
the propositions which are necessarily true, independent
of the experience that occasioned them. For this reason
too the infinity of God plays a very important role in
the analysis; an infinite first efficient cause, an infinite
supreme intelligence, an infinite supreme good are con-
cepts which can be analyzed as necessary formal back-
ground to the effects, the knowledge, the desires of this
world.

The origin of all sciences in experience, the abstrac-
tion of universals, the activity of the mind compounding
and dividing are familiar aristotelian steps in the analy-
sis Scotus makes of knowledge. But that the concepts.
of genera and species are univocal realities; that neces-
sary and infallible truths are involved in the statement

of the conjuncture of terms. concerns him more than the


f


308 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


peculiar properties and accidents of that which is. His
polemic is directed most frequently against the skeptics
who would deny that man can know naturally, without
divine illumination, any sure truths. His search, there-
fore, is often for infallible and certain truths, and he
finds three orders of them, the truths of first. principles
and conclusions derived logically from them, the truths
of experience, and the truths of selfconsciousness. Fol-
lowing Aristotle and Augustine he holds that the
principles of the sciences are very certain, that even the
possibility of truth in science is indication of the in-
fallible truth of scientific principles, notwithstanding
that all the truths of science may be themselves sub-
jected to doubt; the doors are concealed from no one
though the contents of the house may be unknown. For
the truth of the principles no appeal need be made
beyond understanding and the terms of the principle
understood; knowing the terms, the understanding
knows one term as including the other. The truth of a
first principle is in the conformity of the composition of
the terms to the terms so compounded; the understanding
apprehending terms has in itself the necessary cause
of the conformity of the act of composition to the terms
it compounds. There is a subtle and very modern turn
to this analysis: the truth of a first principle is not
made to consist in some character of the terms or cate-
gories in isolation but rather in the relation perceived
between them in the apprehension by the mind of the
proposition which relates them. So, too, whiteness and
whiteness stand related not by some disparate peculiar-
ity of the two terms but in the formal relation likeness.
The whole is greater than its parts, because the per-
ception of the composition of the terms stated in the
proposition and the perception of the terms themselves
is impossible without the perception of the conformity


"JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 309


of the composition to the terms; the perception of that
conformity is the perception of the truth of first prin-
ciples. The truth of conclusions depends on the truths
so perceived of principles and on the further truths of
syllogistic deduction similarly established and similarly
perceived.

It does not escape Duns Scotus that the objection may
be raised, that if all knowledge is derived from experi-
ence, and if experience yields no certain data, the
understanding must have its infallible truth of principles
and conclusions concerning terms in which the senses
are consistently deceived.. He points out, however, that
the truth of such principles does not depend on’ the
‘data of the senses, but only on the understanding and
the terms; the senses are not'the causes but the occasion
of such knowledge; and even if all the senses were
deceived, or (which would be worse) if some of the
senses, were sometimes accurate and some sometimes
illusory, the formal relation of the terms would still be
known: it is true that black is not white, however un-
reliable the perception of white and black might be.
Duns Scotus does not, however, concede that knowledge
by experience is necessarily fallible. He engages, on
the contrary, in an inquiry for necessary truths among
the things of experience. The truth discovered reduces
to a formal statement of a principle of natural causation:
whatever the difficulties in discovering causes, it is none
the less known infallibly that an effect occurring in
many things from a cause which is not free is the
natural effect of that cause. The discovery of causes
must be through experience, by which the causal se-
quence must be traced in natures which remain the
same under a diversity of accidents. When a particular
causal connection is discovered it can sometimes be
reduced to a principle which is known in itself. as the


/


310 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


frequent eclipse of the moon can be reduced to the
principle of interference by opaque bodies in the propa-
gation of light; sometimes the causal connection per-
ceived can not be reduced to a principle better known
than the terms themselves of the perceived connection.
In the last case the effect which is undergone by the
subject is known as the natural effect of the cause only
by repeated examination of the phenomena and not by
any other principle; this is the lowest grade of scientific
knowledge, and Duns recognizes the possibility that no
necessary knowledge is possible there of the actual
union of the extremes—as in the statement that a given
herb has such or such characteristics—but only a
knowledge that the union can occur; some effects, in
other words, are not connected essentially with the
subject.

Apart from the certainties of principles and conclu-
sions, and of experience, there is a third class of
certainties which are concerned with our knowledge of
our own actions. These certainties are those familiar -
perceptions found in Aristotle, Augustine, and Descartes,
that I know that I think, that I understand, that I hear,
however much I may be deceived in that which I think,
or understand, or hear. The illusions of the sense, Duns
recognized and treats in detail, but the certainty that
I am and perform the acts which.I perceive in doubting
is untouched by such uncertainties. Moreover, the in-
quiry into the formal bases of certainties permits Duns
a very illuminating discussion of the illusions which
were to continue to distress philosophers centuries later:
the stick half-immersed in water which appears to be
bent and the perception of distant objects which appear
to be smaller than they are. When the senses concur
in their information concerning a thing, certitude is had
of the data of sensation by the principle of natural


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 311


causation. When the senses differ, recourse must be
_ had to some other principle. Thus in the case of the
stick which appears to be bent, sight reports it bent,
touch reports it straight; the solution is not by balancing
one sense against the other, for the senses .are the oc-
casion, not the cause of knowledge, but by the principle
that a harder thing is not broken by contact with a
softer thing which recedes from it. Similarly the sight
of a distant object as smaller is known to be illusory,
because of the principle that when a quantity is added
to a quantity the original quantity is still identical with
itself: the addition of distance does not alter the size
of a thing perceived at a distance. In each case the
illusion involved in perception is corrected not by posi-
tive knowledge acquired from perception, but from
knowledge, occasioned to be sure by sensation, but in
which the mind would not be deceived even if it were’
deceived in all its senses.

Contemporary logical and phenomenological inquiries
are returning to a formulation of these problems in many
ways similar to the statement of them made by Duns
Scotus. It is unfortunate that the remarkable subtlety
of his analysis of formally certifiable truths has been
forgotten in large part; it is equally unfortunate that his
contribution to the history of thought is stated most
usually as refutation of the metaphysical doctrines of
Thomas Aquinas, or else as reconciliation and intellec-
tual permutation of the thomist doctrine with older
doctrines. The philosophical perception of Duns Scotus
is nicer than would be indicated by either such project.
It is not safe to state the project of his philosophy in
any single form, but it might be ventured that he was
concerned to discover the necessary truths in the
philosophical discussions he encountered in the writings .
and debates of his times. ' Possibly he may be said to


*


312 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


be responsible for the turn of philosophic interest to the
evidence of propositions and of truths. Certainly the
word evidence and the search for it assumes for the
first time in his works the dominant place which Ockham
and the ockhamites continued to give it. Duns Scotus
contributed, in any case, even if he did not initiate the
inquiry, to making explicit what is required for the
formal truth of propositions. It is not a little ironical,
therefore, that his determined attack on skepticism and
his statement of the bases of truth should have fur-
nished the instruments and the terms by which later
analyses, particularly by the ockhamites, discovered
necessary truths, to be sure, but found them so inap-
plicable rigorously and so unfruitful of consequences
that the body of human science had to be reduced to the
status of probable knowledge. In Duns Scotus there is,
however, the momentary pause in which the necessary
truths involved in a subject matter of shifting terms and
altering doctrines was revealed with great lucidity and
technical elaboration.


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS


THE OXFORD COMMENTARY ON
THE FOUR BOOKS OF THE MASTER OF THE
SENTENCES


Boox I. Distinction III, Question IV.1


THE QUESTION Is PROPOSED.—Finally, with reference
to this matter of knowability, I ask:

Whether any sure and pure truth can be known
naturally by the understanding of the wayfarer without
the special illumination of the uncreated light?


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENTs.—And I argue that it can not.
—Augustine says on the Trinity, book IX, chapter 6:
But we perceive the inviolable truth, from which we
may determine perfectly, so far as we are able, not how
the mind of each man is, but how it must be in the
sempiternal reasons. And again in chapter 6 of the
same work: When we approve or disprove something
rightly, we are inwardly convinced in approving and
disproving, all other criteria remaining unchangeably
above our mind. And again in the same work, chapter 6:
Grasping the ineffably beautiful art of such figures above
the perception of the mind by simple intelligence. And
in chapter 7 of the same work: Therefore in that eternal


1B. Ioannis Duns Scor1, Commentaria Oxoniensia ad IV.
Libros Magistri Sententiarum, ed. P. Marianus Fernandez
Garcia. Ad Aquas Claras (Quaracchi): Ex Typographia
Collegii S. Bonaventurae, 1912, vol. I, pp. 357-383.


313


”


314 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


truth, from which all temporal things are made, we
perceive by the vision of the mind the form according
to which we are and according to which we perform
anything with true or right reason, whether in ourselves
or in bodies, and thence we have the true knowledge of
things conceived as if a word within us. Again in book
XII, chapter 2 of the same work: But it is of more
sublime reason to judge concerning these corporeal
things according to* incorporeal and eternal reasons.
Again in the same book chapter 14: However not only
do the intelligible and incorporeal reasons of sensible
things located in places persist without local spaces, but
also the reasons of motions extended in time exist simul-
taneously without temporal duration as intelligible and
not sensible reasons.

And that Augustine is speaking there of eternal rea-
sons truly in God and not of first principles, is seen by
the fact that he has said in the same place, that it is
the privilege of few to attain to them; but if he were
speaking of first principles, it would not be the privilege
of few to attain to them but of many, because they are
known to all. Again, in book XIV chapter 15, speaking
of the unjust man who rightly praises and vituperates
many things in the customs of men, he says: By what
rules do they judge these things except by those in
which they see in some fashion how every one should
lwe? And at the end he adds: Where then are they
written unless in that book of that light which is called
truth? That book of light is the divine understanding.
Therefore, he means that in that light the unjust man
sees what actions are to be done justly. And this is to
be seen by means of something which is stamped or im-
pressed by it [the light], for he says in the same place:
Whence all just law is marked off, and it is transferred


to the heart of man who does justice, not by migrating,
‘


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 315


but as if by being impressed, as the image passes from
_@ ring to wax and yet does not leave the ring. There-
fore, we see in that light by which justice is imprinted
in the heart of man; but that is the uncreated “light.
Again, in the XIIth book of the Confessions, chapter 25:
If both of us see the true, you do not see it in me, nor
I in you, but both of us in that which is above the mind
in immutable truth.

There are moreover in many places many other au-
thorities of Augustine to prove this conclusion.

To THE conTRARY: the Epistle to the Romans 1:20:
The invisible things of God, understood by means of
those things that have been made, are clearly compre-
hended from the creation of the world;? but these reasons
are the invisible things of God: therefore, they are
known from creatures: therefore, before the vision of —
them sure knowledge of creatures is had.


THE OPINION IS EXPOUNDED WHICH HOLDS THAT NO
SURE AND PURE TRUTH CAN BE KNOWN BY US NATURALLY
WITHOUT SPECIAL ILLUMINATION OF THE UNCREATED
ticHT. In this question there is one opinion® that there
is a natural order per se among general intentions.—We
speak of the two intentions which are relevant to the
question propounded, namely, of the intention of that
which is [ens] and of the true.

a) The first intention is of that which is. This is
proved by the statement of the book on Causes in the
fourth proposition: the first of created things is being,
and in the commentary on the first proposition: being is
-of more wehement adherence.

b) This is proved likewise by reason: because entity


24 creatura mundi is usually interpreted in english trans-_
lations, since the creation of the world.
2 Attributed to Henry of Ghent.


316 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


is absolute: whereas truth indicates a reference to an
exemplar.—From this it follows that that which is can
be known under the relation of entity, but not under the
relation of truth.

c) This conclusion furthermore is proved from the
part of the intellect: because that which is can be con-
ceived by simple understanding, and hence that which is
true is conceived; but the relation of truth is conceived
only by the understanding compounding and dividing;
simple understanding however precedes composition and
division.

If therefore it is. inquired, in the question proposed,
concerning knowledge of that which is, or concerning
that which is true of that which is, the reply is that the
intellect can know the true thus by pure natural causes.
—This is proved: because it is contradictory that a
nature be untrained in its own operation, according to
Damascenus, and that is more contradictory in a more
perfect and superior nature according to the Philosopher
in the second book on the Heavens and the World,
where he speaks of stars, because it would be extremely
contradictory for the stars to have a progressive power
and not have the natural instruments for progression:
therefore, since the proper operation of the intellect is
to understand the true, it seems improper that nature
should not concede to the intellect that which suffices for
that operation.

d) But if we speak of the knowledge of truth, it is
replied that as there is a double exemplar, created and
uncreated, according to Plato in the first part of the
Timaeus, that is, a made and an unmade or a created
and an uncreated exemplar: the created exemplar is the
universal species caused by the thing: the wnereated is
the idea in the divine mind; thus there is a double con-
formity to the exemplar and a double truth: one is the


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS | 317


conformity to the created exemplar, and in this fashion
Aristotle stated that the truths of things are known by
their conformity to the intelligible species; and Augus-
tine seems to say this in the [Xth book on the Trinity,
chapter 7, where he holds that we have a special and a
general knowledge of things, each of which is collected
from sensibles, according to which we judge the truth
of anything that turns up, that the thing itself is such
or such.

But that we should have an absolutely certain and in-
fallible knowledge of the truth of a thing through the
acquired exemplar in us, this is said to be utterly im-
_possible——And it is proved by a threefold reason, ac-
cording to those holding this doctrine: the first reason
is taken from the part of the thing from which the ex-
emplar is drawn: the second from the part of the subject
in which it is: the third from the part of the exemplar
in itself. é

e) The first reason is this: that object from which the
exemplar is abstracted is mutable: therefore, it can not
be the cause of anything immutable; but sure knowledge
of any truth concerning anything is had of it under an
immutable relation: therefore, it is not had by such an
exemplar.

This is said to be the reason of Augustine in the.
LXXXITII Questions, question 9, where he holds that
pure truth is not to be sought from sensible things, be-
cause sensible things change without intermission.

f) The second reason is this: the soul in itself is
mutable and passive to error: therefore, it can be recti-
fied by nothing more mutable than itself that it err not;
but such an exemplar in it is more mutable than the soul
itself: therefore, that exemplar does not regulate the
soul perfectly that it err not. |

This is said to be the reason of Augustine in the book


318 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


on True Religion: Since the law of all arts is absolutely
immutable, and since the human mind, to which it has
been conceded to see such a law, can suffer the mutability
of error, it is sufficiently apparent that there is above
our mind a law which is called truth.

g) The third reason is: no one has certain and in-
fallible knowledge of truth, unless he has that by which
he can distinguish truth from verisimilitude; for if he
can not distinguish truth from falsity or verisimilitude,
he can doubt whether he is deceived: but truth can not
be distinguished by means of the aforesaid created
exemplar from verisimilitude, therefore etc.—Proof of
the minor premiss: such a species can represent itself
as itself, or in another fashion it can represent itself as
object, as is the case in dreams. If it represents itself
as object, it is falsity: if as itself, it is truth: therefore,
through such a species it is not known sufficiently dis-
tinctively when it represents itself as itself, and when it
represents itself as object; and thus it is not sufficiently
distinctive of truth from falsity.

h) From these considerations it is concluded that if it
happen that man knows a sure knowledge and infallible
truth, that does not happen to him by looking at an
exemplar derived from the thing by sensation, howso-
ever much it be purified and made universal, but it is
necessary that he look upon the uncreated exemplar.

And therefore this mode is stated: God, not as that
which is known, has the significance of an exemplar
looking to which pure truth is: for the known is in
general attribute, but he is 'the reason of knowing as
naked’ exemplar, and the proper reason of the created
essence. The fashion, however, in which he may be the
reason of knowing and not the known is shown in an
example: for just as the ray of the sun is sometimes pro-
jected from its source in an oblique line, sometimes in a


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS <b 9


}


direct line: and although the sun is the reason of seeing
of that which is seen in the ray projected in the first
manner, nevertheless it is not seen as it is in itself; but
the sun is the reason of knowing of that which is seen
in the ray in the second manner, in such wise that it too
is known; thus, therefore, the uncreated light illumines
the angelic intellect as in direct view, and then as seen,
it is the reason of seeing other things in itself; but it
illumines our understanding, while we are on the way,
as in an oblique view; and therefore it is the reason of
seeing to our intellect and not the seen.

i) It is held, moreover, that the uncreated exemplar
has a triple relation in respect to the act of seeing,
namely, that of the kindling light, and that of the chang-
ing species and that of the configuring character or
exemplar.

And from this it is concluded finally that a special
influence is required, because just as that essence is not
seen by us naturally in itself, so likewise, as that essence
is the exemplar in respect to any creature, it is not seen
naturally, according to Augustine when he. writes on
seeing God: for it is in his power to be seen: if he
wishes, he is seen, if he does not wish, he is not seen.

j) Finally it is added that there is a perfect knowl-
edge of truth when two exemplar species concur in the
mind, one inhering, that is, caused, the other having
penetrated from without, that is, not caused, in illumin-
ating the mind. The mind conceives the word of truth
perfectly when out of these two species of the thing
it has compounded one reason or criterion for under-
standing the thing of which it is the criterion.


Division or THE Question.—Against this opinion I
show first, that these reasons are not the fundamental
reasons of any true opinion, nor, are they according to


0 \


320 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the intention of Augustine, but lead to the opinion of the
academics.—In the second place, I show how that opin-
ion of the academics, which seems to follow from these
reasons, is false-——In the third place, I reply to those
reasons, in so far as they do not hold.—In the fourth
place I argue against the conclusion of this opinion.—In
the fifth place, I resolve the question—In the sixth
place, I show how these reasons (in so far as they are
Augustine’s) lead to that intention of Augustine, but not
that intention to which they were drawn here.


Articuer I,


Ir Is SHOWN THAT THE PROPOSED REASONS ARE NOT THE
FUNDAMENTAL REASONS OF ANY TRUE OPINION, NOR ARE
THEY ACCORDING TO THE INTENTION OF AUGUSTINE, BUT
LEAD TO THE OPINION OF THE ACADEMICS,


Ir Is DEMONSTRATED THAT THE ABOVE MENTIONED
REASONS LEAD TO ALL INCERTITUDE.—In the first place,
these reasons seem to lead to the impossibility of sure
natural knowledge.

a) In the first place this is so,* because if an object
is changed continually, no certitude of it can be had
under an immutable reason, nor indeed could certitude
be had in any light, because there is no certitude when
the object is known in another way than it is itself:
therefore, there is no certitude in knowing a mutable
thing as immutable.—It is evident likewise that the
antecedent of this reason, namely, that sensible things
are changed continually, is false; this is, indeed, the
opinion attributed to Heraclitus in the IVth book of the
Metaphysics.


b) In the same way, if there could not be certitude
4See above. e) p. 317.


(


]


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 321


- because of the mutability of the exemplar which is in
our soul, since whatsoever is placed in the soul sub-
jectively is mutable, so too the very act of understanding
will be mutable, and therefore it follows that the soul
is rectified by nothing in the soul that it err not.—It
would follow likewise that the very act of understanding,
since it is more mutable than the soul in which it is,
will never be true, nor will it contain truth; which is
false.

c) In the same way, according to this opinion, the
caused inhering species concurs with that penetrating
species; but when something which is incompatible with
certitude concurs, no certitude can be had: for just as
from a necessary and a contingent proposition only a
contingent conclusion may be drawn, so from certainty

_and uncertainty concurring for some point of knowledge,
no certain conclusion follows.

d) The same conclusion is likewise evident from the
third reason,® because if that species abstracted from the
thing concurs for all knowledge, and if it can not judge
distinctly, because sometimes it represents itself as itself
and sometimes it represents itself as object: therefore,
whatever else concurs, no certitude can be had by which.
truth may be distinguished from verisimilitude.

e) Therefore these reasons are seen to lead to all
incertitude and thus to the opinion of the academics.


It is PROVED THAT THE AFORESTATED CONCLUSION IS
NOT ACCORDING TO THE MIND oF AvucusTINE.—I prove
however that this conclusion is not according to the mind
of Augustine: ; ‘

a) Augustine in the IInd book of the Soliloquies:
Every one concedes without hesitation that the proofs of

5 See above, f) pp. 317-318. ® See above, 2) p. 318.


322 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the sciences are very true. And Boethius De hebdomadi-
bus:" A common conception of the mind is that which
when heard anyone proves. And the Philosopher in the
IInd book of the Metaphysics: First principles are
known to all, like the door in a house, because the door
is concealed to no one, although things within the house
may be concealed—From these three authorities it is
argued as follows: that which is proper to all members
of any species follows from the specific nature: there-
fore, since everyone has infallible certitude of first prin-
ciples, and further since the form of the perfect syllo-
gism is naturally evident to every one, according to the
Ist book of the Prior Analytics, but knowledge of the
conclusion depends only on the evidence of the prin-
ciples and on the evidence of the syllogistic inference;
therefore any demonstrable conclusion can be known
naturally to every one from premisses known through
themselves.

b) In the second place, it is clear likewise that Augus-
tine concedes the certitude of those things which are
known through the experience of the senses; wherefore
he says in the XVth book on the Trinity, chapter 12:
May we be spared from doubting that those things which
we learn through the senses of the body are true, for
through them we learn the heaven, the earth, and the
things which are known to us in these, so far as he who
made us and them wished us to know. If therefore we
do not doubt their truth and we are not deceived, as is
clear, then we are certain of things known by way of
sense, for certitude is had when doubt and deception
‘are excluded.

c) In’ the third place it is evident that Augustine
concedes in the same work book XV, the same chapter,
certitude concerning our actions: He lives whether he be

7 See above, p. 160, note 3.


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 323


asleep or awake, for it is part of living also to sleep and
see in dreams.

d) But if you say: to live is not a second act but a
first act; he continues in the same place: If any one
should say, I know that I know, he can not be mistaken,
even by reflecting as many times as you wish on the
first known. And in the same work: If any one should
say, I wish to be happy, how would the reply be made
not impudently, perhaps you are mistaken? And if he
says I know that I wish this, and I know that I know
this, then he can add a third to these two that he knows
these two, and a fourth that he knows that he knows
these two, and so he can proceed to an infinite number.
And in the same work: If any one should say, I do not
wish to err, will it not be true, whether he errs or does
not err, that he nevertheless does not wish to err? And-
other arguments, he says, are found which hold against
the academics who contend that nothing can be known
by man. And there follows in the same work, There are
then our three books® written in the first period of our
conversion; the many arguments which have been
found by the academics against the perception of truth
will not in the least prevail on him who had been able
to and has wished to read them and having read them has
understood them. Again in the same book XV, chapter
15: Those things too which are known in such wise that
they can not slip from the mind, since they are present
and pertain to the nature of the mind itself, of which
sort is the following, that we know we live; for this
remains as long as the mind remains, and because the
mind always remains, this also remains always.

And thus the first article is evident, that the reasons
of that opinion are not conclusive, and that this first
opinion is false and against Augustine.

8 The Three Books against the Academics.


324 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Articie II.


It Is SHOWN IN WHAT THAT OPINION OF THE ACADEMICS
IS FALSE,


Division oF THE ArTIcLE.—With respect to the
second article, that the error of the academics has no
place in any knowable things, it must be seen how in-
fallible certitude can be had naturally of the three kinds
of knowables mentioned above, namely, of principles
known through themselves and of conclusions, secondly
of things known by experience, thirdly, of our actions.

THE CERTITUDE OF FIRST PRINCIPLES IS SHOowN.—With
reference to certitude of principles I say this: that the
terms of principles known through themselves have such
an identity, that one term known evidently includes the
other necessarily; and therefore the understanding com-
pounding those terms, from the fact that it apprehends
them, has in itself the necessary cause of the conformity
of that act of compounding to the terms themselves of
which the composition is and likewise the evident cause
of that conformity; and therefore, that conformity is
evident to it necessarily. The necessary and evident
cause of that conformity it apprehends in the terms:
therefore, the apprehension of terms and their composi-
tion can not be in the understanding, unless the con-
formity of that composition to the terms stands, just as
whiteness and whiteness can not stand unless likeness
stands. But this conformity of composition to terms is
the truth of composition: therefore, the composition of
such terms can not stand unless there is truth, and thus
the perception of that composition and the perception
of terms can not stand, unless the perception of con-
formity of composition to terms stands and thus the


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 325


perception of truth, for the first percepts obviously
include the perception of that truth.

The Philosopher confirms this reasoning by likeness
in book IV of the Metaphysics, where he insists that the
opposite of a first principle, such as, it is impossible that
the same thing be and not be, can not come into the
understanding of any one, because then there would be
contrary opinions in the mind at the same time. This is
undoubtedly true of contrary opinions, that is of opin-
ions formally contradictory, for the opinion attributing
being to something and the opinion attributing non-
being to the same thing are formally contradictory.—
Thus I may state in the question proposed that there is
some contradiction to the intellections in the mind, al-
though not a formal contradiction; for if there exists
in the understanding a knowledge of the whole and the
part and a composition of them, since they include as a
necessary cause the conformity of the composition to the
terms, and if there exists in the understanding this
opinion, that this composition is false, contradictory
ideas will be present: not formally, but the one notion
will stand with the other, and nevertheless one will be
the necessary cause of an idea opposed to the other;
which is impossible. For just as it is impossible for
white and black to be at the same time, because they are
contrary formally, so it is impossible that white and
that which is the precise cause of blackness stand, so it
is necéssary that it can not be without the other Ranaut

contradiction.

THE CERTITUDE OF CONCLUSIONS IS SHOWN.—When the
evidence or the certitude of first principles has been had,
it is evident how certitude may be had of conclusions
inferred from them, because of the evidence of the
perfect form of the syllogism, since the certitude of the


326 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


conclusion depends only on the certitude of the prin-
ciples and on the evidence of the inference.

THE UNDERSTANDING DOES NOT ERR, ALTHOUGH THE
SENSES ERR.—But will not the understanding err in this
knowledge of principles and conclusions, if the senses
are deceived concerning all the terms?—I reply, that
with respect to this knowledge the understanding does
not have the senses for cause, but only for occasion, for
the understanding can not have knowledge of simples
unless it has received that knowledge from the senses;
still, having received it, it can compound simples with
each other by its own power; and if from the relation
of such simples there is a combination which is evidently
true, the understanding will assent to that combination
by its own power and by the power of the terms, not by
power of the sense by which it receives the terms from
without—Example: if the reason of whole and the
reason of greater are received from sense, and the under-
standing compounds the following: every whole is
greater than its part, the understanding by its own
power and that of these terms assents indubitably to
this combination, and not only because it sees the terms
conjoined in the thing, as it assents to the following,
Socrates is white, because it saw that the terms are
united in the thing—Moreover, I say that if all the
senses were false, from which such terms are received,
or, what would lead even more to deception, if some
senses were false, and some true, the understanding
would not be mistaken concerning such principles, be-
cause it would always have in itself terms which were
the cause of truth: just as, if the species of whiteness
and blackness had been impressed miraculously in
dreams on one blind from birth, and if they remained
subsequently in waking, the understanding abstracting
from them would compound the following proposition,


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 327


white is not black; and the understanding would not be
deceived concerning this, even though the terms be
received from erring sense; for the formal relation of
the terms, to which it has reached, is the necessary
cause of this negative truth.

THE CERTITUDE CONCERNING THINGS KNOWN BY EX-
PERIENCE Is sHowN.—Concerning the second type of
knowables, namely concerning things known: through
experience, I say that although experience is not had
of all singulars, but of a large number, and that although
it is not always had, but in a great many cases, still one
who knows by experience knows infallibly that it is
thus, and that it is always thus, and that it is thus in
all, and he knows this by the following proposition re-
posing in the soul, whatever occurs as in a great many
things from some cause which is not free, is the natural
effect of that cause, which proposition is known to the
understanding, even though it had accepted the terms of
it from erring senses; for a cause which is not free can
not produce as in a great many things an effect to the
opposite of which it is ordered, or to which it is not
ordered by its form: but a casual cause is ordered to the
producing of the opposite of the casual effect or to not
producing it; therefore, nothing is the casual cause in
respect to an effect produced frequently by it, and if
it is not free, it is a natural cause.

That, however, this effect occurs by such a cause pro-
ducing as in a great many cases, this must be learned
through experience; for to discover such a nature at one
time with such an accident, at another with such another
accident, it must be discovered that, howsoever great
might be the diversity of such accidents, such an effect
always followed that nature; therefore, such an effect
follows not through some accident accidentally of that
nature, but through the very nature in itself.


328 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


But it must be noted further that sometimes experience
is had of a conclusion, as for example, that the moon is
frequently eclipsed; and then having supposed the con-
clusion because it is so, the cause of such a, conclusion
is inquired by the method of division, and sometimes one
proceeds from the conclusion experienced to principles
known from the terms, and then from such a principle
known from the terms, the conclusion, previously known
only by experience, can be known more certainly, namely,
by the first kind of knowledge, for it can be known as
deduced from a principle known in itself: just as the
following’ is known through itself, that, namely, an
opaque object interposed between a luminous and a
transparent object impedes the multiplication of light
to such a transparent object; and if it were found by
division that the earth is such a body interposed between
the sun and the moon, it will be known most certainly
by demonstration based on the essence [propter quid ]
and through causes, and not only through experience as
that conclusion was known before the discovery of the
principle.

Sometimes, however, there is experience of the prin-
ciple in such a manner that it is not possible to discover
further by division the principle known through the
terms, but one must stop at some truth which holds as in
many cases, of which the extremes are frequently ex-
perienced united, as for example, that a herb of such a
species is hot, nor is any other middle term discovered
‘prior by means of which the passion is demonstrated of
the subject because of its nature [i.e. a priori], but one
must stop at this as at the first thing known by ex-
perience. Then although incertitude and fallibility may
be removed by the following proposition, the effect
as in a great many cases of any cause which is not free
is the natural effect of it, nevertheless this is the last


\


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS | 329


grade of scientific knowledge; and perhaps necessary
knowledge is not had there of the actual union of ex-
tremes, but only of an aptitudinal union; for if the
passion is another thing separated from the subject, it
could without contradiction be separated from the sub-
ject, and the person who knows by experience would not
have knowledge that it is so, but that it is formed apt io
be so.

CERTITUDE CONCERNING OUR ACTIONS IS SHOWN.—Con-
cerning the third type of knowable things, namely,
concerning our actions, I say there is certitude concern-
ing many of them just as of principles known through
themselves, as is obvious from book IV of the Meta-
physics, where the Philosopher says of the reasons of
those who say that all appearances are true, that these
reasons inquire whether we are now dreaming or awake:
All these doubts, however, amount to the same, for they
all think that there is a reason for all things. And he
adds, They seek the reason for things of which there is
no reason, for there is no demonstration of a principle
of demonstration. Therefore, according to the same
Philosopher in the same place, that we are awake is
known through itself as is a principle of demonstration.

Nor does it matter that it is contingent, for as has
been said elsewhere, there is an order in contingent
things, because something is first and immediate; other-
wise there would either be a regress in infinitum in
contingent things, or else something contingent would
follow from a necessary cause: both of which are
impossible.

And as there is certitude concerning waking as con-
cerning something known through itsélf, so likewise of
many other actions which are in our power, as that I
understand, that I hear, and thus of others which are
perfect acts; for although there is no certitude that I


co


30 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


see white which is located without, either in such a
subject or at such a distance, because an illusion can
be caused in the medium or in the organ and in many
other ways, nevertheless there is certitude that I see,
even though an illusion be caused in the organ, which
illusion in the organ seems to be the greatest of illusions,
as for example, when an act is caused in the organ
itself, not by a present object, but such as is made natu-
rally by a present object. And thus the faculty would
have its act, if such an illusion or passion were supposed,
and that would truly be what is called vision there,
whether it be action, or passion, or both. But if the
illusion were not caused in the organ itself, but in some-
thing proximate to it, which seems to be the organ, as,
if the illusion were not caused in the concourse of
nerves, but if the impression of the species such as is
naturally made by the object were caused in the eye
itself, still sight would see; because such a species, or
what is naturally seen in it, would be seen, for it would
have sufficient distance with respect to the organ of
sight, which is in the concourse of those nerves, as is
evident from Augustine in book VI on the Trinity,
chapter 2, because the remains of things seen, remaining
in the eye when the eyes are closed, are seen; and
according to the Philosopher on Sense and the Sensed,
because the fire which is generated by the violent eleva-
tion of the eye and which is multiplied as far as the
closed eyelid, is seen; these are true visions, although
they are not the most perfect visions, because there are
here sufficient distances of the species to the principal
organ of sight.

ON THE CERTITUDE OF THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE
UNDER THE ACTIONS OF THE SENSEs.—But how is certi-
tude had of those things which are under the actions of
the senses, as for example, that something outside is


_ JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 331


white or hot as it appears to be?—I reply: either oppo-
sites appear to the diverse senses concerning sorhething
known thus, or else not, but all the senses knowing it,
have the same judgment concerning it.—If in the second
manner, then certitude is had of the truth of such a
thing known by the senses, and by that proposition which
precedes, namely, what occurs as in a great many cases
from something, is the natural effect of it, if it is not a
free cause; therefore, since the same alteration [ or im-
mutation] of sense occurs in a great many cases when
this thing is present, it follows that this sensitive altera-
tion or the generated species [i.e. impression] is. the
natural effect of such a cause, and thus such a thing’
outside will be white or hot or such as is naturally
represented by the species generated by it as in a great
many cases.—If, however, the diverse senses have di-
verse judgments concerning something seen outside, as,
for example, sight says that the staff is broken of which
part is in water and part in air, and touch can discover
the contrary: as sight likewise always says that the sun
is of a quantity less than it is, and everything seen
from a distance is less than it is; in such judgments
there is certitude of what is true and of what sense
errs, by a proposition reposing in the soul more certain
than any judgment of sense and by the concurrent
actions of many senses, so that some proposition always
rectifies the understanding of actions of sense, as to
which is true and which is false, in which proposition
the understanding does not depend on the sense as on a
cause, but as on an occasion Example: the understand-
ing has this proposition reposing in it, nothing which is
harder is broken on the contact of something soft reced-
ing from it; this is so known through itself from its
terms, that even if it were received from erring senses,
the understanding could not doubt that proposition, for


332 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


the opposite involves a contradiction: but that the staff
is harder than water, and that the water withdraws
from it, both senses testify this, as well sight as touch.
It follows therefore that the staff is not broken as the
sense of sight judges it broken; and thus the understand-
ing judges, by something more certain than any act of
sense, which sense errs:and which does not with respect
to the fracture of the staff.

In the same way from another part, that the same
quantity added to a quantity is absolutely equal to itself,
this is known to the understanding, howsoever much the
knowledge of terms may be received from erring senses;
but that the same quantity can be added to an object of
sight nearby or distant, this the sense of sight as well
as touch testifies: therefore, a quantity seen, whether
nearby or at a distance, is equal: therefore, when sight
testifies that it is less, it errs——This conclusion is con-
cluded from principles known through themselves and
from the actions of two senses knowing it is thus in a
great many cases; and thus wherever reason judges that
the sense errs, it does this not by some knowledge
acquired positively from the senses as from a cause, but
through some knowledge occasioned from sense, in which
it is not deceived even if all the senses are deceived,
and through some other knowledge acquired from sense
or from the senses as in-a great many cases, which are
known to be true by the often quoted proposition,
namely, that which occurs in a great many cases, ete.


Articuie III.


A REPLY IS GIVEN TO THE REASONS IN sO FAR AS THEY DO
NOT HOLD.


THE FIRST REASON OF THE CONTRARY OPINION IS
‘SOLVED AND IT IS DEMONSTRATED THAT THE MUTABILITY >


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 333


OF THE OBJECT IN ITSELF DOES NOT STAND IN THE WAY
OF CERTITUDE OF KNOWLEDGE.—With respect to the third |
article, replies to the three reasons stated above must be
derived from these points——To- THe First,® that is, to
the objection concerning the change of the object, the
antecedent is false; for sensible things are not in con-
tinual motion, but they remain the same in another
duration. Nor is it the opinion of Augustine, but that
of Heraclitus and of his disciple, Trachilus, who did not
wish to speak but to move his finger, as is related in
the IVth book of the Metaphysics.1°’—And likewise the
consequence does not hold, even if it were granted that
the antecedent was true, because then according to Aris-
totle, certain knowledge could still be had of this truth,
that all things are moved continually.—Again it does
not follow: if the object is mutable: therefore, what is
produced from it is not representative of anything under
the aspect [ratio] of immutability; because mutability
in the object is not the reason for producing; but the
nature of the object itself, which is mutable, is that
reason; that which is produced by it, therefore, repre-
sents the nature essentially, because the nature is essen-
tially the reason for producing it; therefore, if there
is a nature, from which a nature has some immutable
relation to something else, that something else and that
nature, each through its own exemplar, are represented
as immutably united. And thus, knowledge of the im-
mutable union of them can be had through two exemplars
produced from two mutable things, not in so far as
they are mutable, but in so far as they are natures.

It is evident also that something can be represented
under the aspect of the immutable by a representative
which is mutable in itself; for the essence of God is


® See above, e) p. 317.
toa The reference is to Cratylus; see Arisrorte, Met. IV, 5,


1010°13.


334 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


represented to the understanding under the aspect of
the immutable by something entirely mutable, whether
it be a species or an act.—This is evident by a like case,
for something under the aspect of the infinite can be
represented by a finite.

Tur seCOND REASON Is soLvED.—To the second?” I
say that two kinds of mutability can be understood in
the soul: one from affirmation to negation, and con-
versely: as for example, from ignorance to knowledge,
or from not understanding to understanding. Another
is as from contrary to contrary: as for example, from
rectitude to deception, and conversely.—The soul, how-
ever, is mutable by the first mutability with reference
to any object, and such mutability is removed from it by
nothing existing formally in it; but it is not mutable
according to the second mutability, except concerning
those complexes which are not evident from their terms;
concerning those however which are evident from their
terms, it can not be changed according to the second
mutability, because the apprehended terms themselves
are the necessary cause of the conformity of the composi-
tion to those terms.—Therefore if the soul is mutable
from rectitude to error absolutely, it does not follow
that it can be rectified by nothing other than itself, for
it can at least be rectified by those objects concerning
which the understanding can not err, once it has appre-
hended the terms.

THE THIRD REASON Is sotvep. To the third! I say:
if it had some cogency, it would hold rather against
that opinion which denies the intelligible species, for
that species which can represent itself as object in
dreams is a phantasm, not an intelligible species: there-
fore, if the understanding uses only a phantasm. through
which the object is present to it, and not any other

‘? See above, f) pp. 317-318. See above. g) p. 318.


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 335


intelligible species, it does not seem that it can discern,
through something in which the object lights up itself.
truth from verisimilitude. But the reason does not hold
when the intelligible species is posited in the understand-
ing, for the understanding can not use that as the object
in itself, for it is not possible to use the intelligible
species in dreaming.

OBJECTIONS AND DOUBTS ARE SOLVED.!?

a) If you object, that the phantasm can represent
itself or the object; that therefore the understanding
ean err because of that error of the faculty of phantasy
or it can be bound so that it can not operate, as. is
evident in dreams and in frenzies, it can be said that if
it be bound when there is such error in the faculty of
phantasy, the understanding nevertheless does not err,
because it does not then have any act.

b) But how will the understanding know or how will
it be certain when the faculty of phantasy does not err,
which however must not err in order that understand-
ing may not err?—I reply: the following truth reposes
in the understanding, that a power [i.e. a faculty] does
not err concerning the object proper and proportioned
to it unless it is indisposed; and it is known to the
understanding that the faculty of phantasy is not indis-
posed in waking by such an indisposition which makes
the phantasm represent itself as object, for it is known
self-evidently [i.e. through itself] to the understanding,
that when it understands it is awake, and thus it is that
the faculty of phantasy is not bound in waking as it is
in dreams.

c) But a further argument against the stated certi-
tude concerning actions is the following: it seems to me
that I see or I hear when I nevertheless do not see

® See above, g) Proof of the minor premiss, p. 318.


336 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


or hear: therefore, there is no certitude concerning this.
—lI reply, that it is one thing to show, against some one
denying a given proposition, that it is true, and it is
another to show, to some one admitting it, how it is
true-——For example: in book IV of the Metaphysics,
when the Philosopher does not bring forward against
those denying the first principle the following incon-
sistency, that contrary opinions would be in the soul at
the same time, [since] they would concede this as a
premiss; but he shows them other inconsistencies mani-
fest to them, although not manifest in themselves. But
to those who accept the first principle he shows how the
first principle is known, for it is known thus, that the
opposite of it can not occur in the mind; he proves this,
because otherwise contrary opinions could be present at
the same time: such a conclusion is more inconsistent
with itself than the hypothesis.

Thus at this point, if you contend against me that no
proposition is known through itself, I do not wish to
dispute with you: for it is shown that you are shameless,
because you are not persuaded, as is evident in your
actions, as the Philosopher argues in book IV of the
Metaphysics: for dreaming of obtaining something as if
hard by and later awaking, one does not pursue it, as
one would to attain it in waking if it were thus close by.
—But if you admit that some proposition is known
through itself, it is necessary that it can be known; and
concerning anything an indisposed power [i.e. faculty]
can err, as is evident in dreams: therefore, from the
fact that some things are known to be known through
themselves, it can necessarily be known when a power
is indisposed and when not; and consequently knowledge
can be had of our actions, because a power is disposed
so that those things are known through themselves which
appear to it to be known through themselves.


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 337


d) I say then to the form of that bit of sophistry,
that just as it appears to one dreaming that he sees, so
the opposite of any speculative principle known through
itself may possibly appear to one; and still it does not
follow that that principle is known through itself. Thus
it does not follow that that which one hears is known
through itself to one who hears it, for the indisposéd
power can err concerning either, but not the disposed
power. And when it is disposed and when not, is known
through itself; otherwise it could not be known that
anything else is known through itself for it could not
be known what was known through itself to the under-
standing, [that is,] whether it was that to which the
understanding thus or thus disposed would assent.


ARTICLE IV.


Iv Is ARGUED AGAINST THE CONCLUSION OF THE AFORE:
STATED OPINION.


THE AFORESTATED CONCLUSION IS IMPUGNED BY FIVE
REASONS.—With respect to the fourth article against the
conclusion of the opinion, I argue thus:

a) I ask, what is understood by sure and pure
truth?!3 Hither the infallible truth, that is, truth with-
out doubt or deception; and it has been proved above
and it has been declared in the second and third articles
that such truth can be had from pure natural things.—
Or else the question is understood of the truth which
is a passion of that which is; and then since that which
is can be understood naturally, therefore also the true,
since it is a passion of it. And if the true, then also
truth by abstraction, because whatever form can be

18 See above, h) p. 318-319.


338 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


understood as in the subject, can also be understood as
in the abstract in itself and in the abstract from the sub-
ject.—Or in the third place, by truth is understood a
conformity to an exemplar; and if it is to the created
exemplar, the proposition is proved; but if to the un-
created exemplar, the conformity to that can not be
understood except if that exemplar is known; for the
relation is not knowable unless the extreme is known:
therefore, what is assumed in the opinion is false,
namely, that the eternal exemplar is the reason of know-
ing, not the known.

b) Moreover, in the second “lee thus: the simple
understanding can know definitively that which it under-
stands confusedly, by seeking by the method of division
the definition of that which is known. This definitive
knowledge seems the most perfect knowledge pertaining
to the simple understanding. From such preliminary
knowledge of terms the understanding can know the
principle most perfectly, and from the principle, the
conclusion: and in this, intellectual knowledge seems
to be completed, so that necessary knowledge of truth
does not seem to be had beyond the aforesaid truths.

ce) Again in the third place: either the eternal light
causes something prior naturally in actuality or not.—
If it does, it does it either in the object or in the under-
standing.—Not in the object; for the object in so far as
it has being in the understanding, does not have real
being, but intentional being: therefore, it is not capable
of any real accident.—If in the understanding, then
the uncreated light does not change for the understand-
ing of the pure truth, except through the mediation of
its effect: and thus the common opinion seems to posit
knowledge in the uncreated light as perfectly as this
opinion for it posits that it is seen in the active intel-


. JOHN DUNS SCOTUS - 339


lect, which is the effect of the uncreated light, and more
perfect than would be the accidental, caused light.

If, however, it causes nothing actual prior, either
therefore the light alone causes the actuality, or the
light together with the understanding and the object.—
If the light alone, then the active intellect has no opera-
tion in the knowledge of the pure truth: which seems
inconsistent because this operation is the most noble
operation of our understanding: therefore, the active
intellect which is the most noble faculty in the soul,
concurs in some way in that action.

d) In the same way likewise according to the Philos-
opher, in book III on the Soul, the active intellect
corresponds to the active reason, the possible intellect
to the passive reason: therefore, the active intellect is
related in some manner actively to whatever the possible
intellect receives.

e) The following contradiction likewise which is
brought forward at that point is derived from the afore-
said opinion by another method, for according to those
holding this opinion, the agent using the instrument can
not have an action exceeding the action of the instru-
ment: therefore, since the power of the active intellect
has no application in the knowledge of the pure truth,
the eternal light using the active intellect will have no
application in the knowledge or in the action of this
knowledge of pure truth, so that the active intellect has
there the relation of instrument.

f) If you say that the uncreated light together with
the understanding and the object causes this pure truth,.
this is the common opinion, which considers that the
eternal light, as the remote cause, causes all certain
knowledge and truth.—Either therefore this opinion
[which is being examined] will be contradictory, or it
is not at variance with common opinion.


340 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ARTICLE V.
THE QUESTION IS SOLVED.


THE FOURFOLD WAY IN WHICH NECESSARY TRUTHS CAN
BE SEEN IN ETERNAL RULES.—Therefore I say in answer
to the question, that it is necessary, because of the
statement of Augustine, to concede that infallible truths
are seen or understood or known in eternal rules.—N ote
here in the first place that the in can be taken objec-
tively, and this can be done in four ways: as in a proai-
mate object, or as in that which contains the proximate
object, or as in that by virtue of which the proximate
object moves, or as in the remote object.

THE FIRST WAY OF SEEING NECESSARY TRUTHS IN
ETERNAL RULES IS EXPOUNDED.—For the understanding
of the first way I say that all actual intelligibles of the
divine understanding have intelligible being, and in them
all truths concerning them shine forth, so that the intel-
lect, understanding them, and by virtue of them under-
standing the necessary truths concerning them, sees in —
them, as in objects, those necessary truths—The latter,
however, in so far as they are secondary objects of the
divine understanding, are truths (because they are in
conformity with their exemplar, namely, with the divine
understanding) and quiddities; they are light, because
they are manifestive, and they are immutable there and
necessary; but they are eternal in some one respect
‘[secundum quid], because eternity is a condition of an
existing thing, and they do not have existence except in
some one respect only.—Thus, therefore, we can in the
first place be said to see in the eternal light, that is, in
the secondary object of the divine understanding, which
is truth or the eternal light in the manner set forth.


{


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 341


THE SECOND WAY Is EXPOUNDED.—The second way is
clear similarly, for the divine understanding contains
these truths like a book, as that authority of Augustine
states on the Trinity, book XIV, chapter 15,'* that
these rules are written in the book of eternal light, that
is, in the divine understanding, in so far as it contains
these truths. And although that book is not seen, still
those quiddities or truths which are written in that book
are seen. And to that extent our understanding can be
said to see truths in the eternal light, that is, in that
book, as in that which contains the object, and this is
done according to the second way; or even in those truths
which are the eternal light in some one respect only,
just as we see in objects, and that is done according to
the first way.—And either of these ways seems to be
dependent on the understanding, for Augustine in
book XII on the Trinity, chapter 14, says that the rela-
tion or reason of the square body remains incorruptible
and immutable, etc.: but it does not remain thus except
as it is the secondary object of the divine understanding.

A DOUBT CONCERNING THE FIRST WAY IS SOLVED AND
THE THIRD IS EXPOUNDED.

a) There is, however, a doubt directed against the first
way: for if we do not see these truths as they are in
the divine understanding, because we do not see the
divine understanding, how are we said to see in the un-
created light from the fact that we see in such light
eternal in some one respect only, which has being in the
uncreated light, as in the understanding which knows?

b) To this the third way affords answer, that those
things, as they are a secondary object of the divine
understanding, do not have being, except in some one
respect only; however, a truly real operation does not

14 See above, Principal Arguments, p. 314.


342 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


belong absolutely to any being in some one respect by
virtue of itself; but if it belongs to it in some manner, it
must be by virtue of something to which being absolutely
[esse simpliciter] belongs. Therefore, it is not the
property of these secondary objects to move the under-
standing absolutely except by virtue of the divine under-
standing, which is being absolutely, and. through which
these objects have being in some one respect. Thus,
therefore, we see in the light which is eternal in some
one respect as in a proximate object; but we see in the
uncreated light according to a third manner, namely, as
in a proximate cause, by virtue of which the proximate
object moves. §

c) In relation to this, likewise, it can be said that as
regards the third way, we see in the uncreated light as
in the proximate cause of the object in itself; for the
divine understanding produces objects by its own actu-
ality in intelligible being, and by its own actuality it
gives to this object such being, and to that object such,
and consequently it gives them such a reason of object,
by which reason they first move the understanding to
such certain knowledge.

And that it can properly be said that our understand-
ing sees in an uncreated light, because the eternal light
is the cause of the object, appears from a comparison,
for we are said properly to understand in the light of
the active intellect, although none the less that light is
only the active cause, namely, either making the object
in actuality, or by virtue of which the object moves,
or both.

d) This double causality of the divine understanding,
therefore, which is the true uncreated light, namely, that
it produces secondary objects in intelligible being, and
that it is that by virtue of which secondary objects


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 343


already produced move the understanding actually, can,
as it were, integrate a third member as the cause by
which we are said truly to see in an eternal light.

THE OBJECTION Is soLveD.—And if you object against
these two modes integrating a third member as cause,
because then it seems that we should be said to see in
God willing, or in God as he is will, rather than in
God as he is light, for the divine will is the immediate
principle of any action directed outward; I reply: the
divine understanding, in so far as it is prior in any
manner in the act of the divine will, produces these
objects in intelligible being; and thus in respect of them
it seems to be a purely natural cause, for God is not a
free cause in respect of anything except what presup-
poses before itself in some manner a willing according
to the act of will; and just as the understanding as prior
to the act of the will produces objects in intelligible
being, so as prior cause it seems to cooperate with those
intelligibles toward, their natural effect, namely, that
apprehended and compounded they may cause a con-
formity of apprehension to themselves. It seems there-
fore to involve a contradiction, that any understanding
form such a composition, and the composition not be in
conformity with the terms, although it is possible that it
may not conceive those terms; for although God volun-
tarily constrains to the end that the understanding com-
pound the terms or not, nevertheless, when it has
compounded them, that that composition be in conform-
ity with the terms seems to follow necessarily from the
relation of the terms, which relation they have from
the understanding of God causing those terms naturally
in intelligible being.

Corotuary.—It is apparent from this why special

illumination is*not necessary for seeing in eternal rules;


344 “MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


for Augustine does not hold that anything is seen in
them except truths which are necessary by the strength
of the terms, and there is the greatest necessity in such
things as well of remote cause as of proximate cause in
respect to the effect: for example, as well of the divine
understanding with reference to moving objects as of
those objects with reference to the truth of combination
of them. And although likewise there is not so great a
necessity to the perception of that truth, that the oppo-
site involves a contradiction, nevertheless the necessity
is from the part of the proximate cause, with the remote
cause coassisting it, for the terms apprehended and
compounded are formed naturally to cause the evidence
of conformity of the composition to the terms, even
though it is held that God constrains terms to this effect
by a general influence, but not by a natural necessity.

But whether there is a general influence, or what is
more, a natural necessity of influencing the terms to this
effect, it is clear that no special illumination is needed.

THE DOCTRINE OF SAINT AUGUSTINE IS EXPOUNDED.—
That which has been assumed concerning the intention
of Augustine is evident from his own statement in book
IV on the Trinity, chapter 15, in which he speaks of
infidel philosophers: Some of them were able to raise
the sight of their mind beyond any creature and to attain
to the light of immutable truth in howsoever small a de-
gree, for not yet having attained which they deride many
christians who live meanwhile from faith alone. There-—
fore, he holds that christians do not see the things they
believe in the eternal rules; but philosophers see many
necessary truths in them. In the same place, in book
IX on the Trinity, chapter 6: Not as the mind of every
man is, but as it must be in sempiternal reasons, as if to
say, contingent things are not seen there; but necessary


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 345


things.—And in the same work, book IV, chapter 16,
he argues against those philosophers,


Because they dispute most truly and because
they persuade by most certain proofs that all
temporal things are made by eternal reasons,
have they therefore been able to perceive in
those reasons themselves, or to gather from
them, how many the genera of animals are,
what the seeds of each are in the beginnings,
what the mode is in increments, what the num-
bers are by conceptions, by births, by ages, by
deaths, what motions in desiring those things
which are according to nature and of avoiding
the contraries? Have they not sought all these
things, not. by that immutable wisdom, but _by
the history of places and times, and have they
not credited the things discovered and written
by others?


Therefore he understands that those contingent things
which are known only by the senses or are believed by
stories, are not known by eternal rules; and yet special
illumination is needed more in believing contingent things
than in things known necessarily; indeed, special illumi-
nation is removed most especially in necessary —_ and
general illumination alone suffices.

THE OBJECTION AGAINST THE AFORESTATED EXPOSITION
Is SOLVED.—To the contrary: why then does Augustine
say in book XII on the Trinity, chapter 14, that it is in
the power of only few to attain by keenness of mind to
the intelligible reasons, and in the LXXXIII Questions,
question 46, that only the pure of soul attain to them ?—
I reply: that purity must not be understood as a purity

*from vices, for in book XV on the Trinity, chapter 75,


346 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


he holds that the unjust see in the eternal rules what
is to be perceived in them,!® and in book IV, in the
chapter quoted above, he holds that the philosophers saw
the truth in the eternal rules without faith; and in the
same question he holds that no one can be wise without
knowledge of ideas, in the manner in which Plato, for
example, would be conceded to be wise. But this purity
must be understood by elevating the understanding to
considering truths as they shine forth in themselves,
not only as they are revealed in the phantasm.

It must be considered here that the sensible thing out-
side causes a confused phantasm and single accidentally
in the faculty of phantasy, that is, representing the
thing according to quantity, figure, color, and other
sensible accidents; and as the phantasm represents onlv -
confusedly and accidentally, so, many men perceive only
that which is by accident. Truths, however, are purely
and absolutely such from the very nature of terms, in
so far as those terms are abstracted from all things
conjoined by accident to them; for this proposition,
every whole is greater than its part, is true in the first
place, not as the whole is in a stone or in wood, but as
the whole is abstracted from all things with which it is
conjoined by accident; and therefore the understanding
which never understands totality except in the accidental
concept, as for example in the totality of the stone or
the wood, never understands the pure truth of this prin-
ciple, for it never understands the absolute reason of
the term, by which truth is.

Therefore, it is in the power of few to attain to the
eternal reasons, because it is in the power of few to
have essential intellections, and of many to have such
accidental concepts.—But these few are not said to be

* See above, Principal Arguments, p. 314.


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS B47)


distinguished from others by a special illumination, but
by better natural powers, for they have an understand-
ing which is more abstractive and more perspicacious, or
else because of a greater searching out, through which
one person succeeds in knowing those quiddities which
another, equally ingenious, but not inquiring, does not
know.

And in this manner is to be understood that saying
of Augustine concerning one looking out on a mountain
and having below the cloudy air and above pure light,
in book IX on the Trinity, chapter 6; for he who always
understands only the accidental concept, in the manner
in which phantasms represent such objects as accidental
entities, is like one placed in a valley surrounded with
cloudy air; but he who separates quiddities by under-
standing them absolutely by an essential concept, which
quiddities notwithstanding are apparent in phantasm
with many other accidents joined to them, has the lower
phantasm, like cloudy air, and he is in the mountain,
in so far as he knows that truth, and he sees the true .
above, as that superior truth in the power of the uncre-
ated understanding, which is the eternal light.

THE FOURTH WAY OF SEEING NECESSARY TRUTHS IN
ETERNAL RULES IS EXPOUNDED.—And in this last manner
it can be conceded that pure truths are known ‘in the
eternal light as in a remote known object, for the un-
- ereated light is the first principle of speculative things
and the final end of practical things; and therefore
speculative as well as practical things are derived from
principles themselves. And therefore the knowledge of
all, of speculative as well as practicable, by principles
derived from the eternal light as known, is more perfect
and purer than knowledge derived by principles in the
class itself, as has been said in the question on the sub-


ow =


348 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ject of theology, and it is more eminent than any other
kind whatsoever. And in this manner the knowledge of
all things pertains to the theologian, for to know that a
triangle has three sides, as it is a certain participation
of God, and having such an order in the universe that
it expresses as it were the perfection of God, this is to
know that the triangle has three sides in a more noble
way than by the reason of triangle: and thus to know
that one must live temperately because the final beati-
tude is to follow, which consists in attaining to the
essence of God in himself, is to know this practical
knowable more perfectly than by any principle in the
class of morals, as for example by this, that one should
live honorably.

And in this manner Augustine speaks of the uncreated
light as known, in book XV on the Trinity, chapter 27,
where addressing himself, he says, Certainly therefore
you have seen many true things and you have drawn
them from that light in which you saw them shining
forth to you; turn your eyes up to the light itself and
fasten them on it if you can; for thus you will see what
distinguishes the nativity of the Word of God from the
procession of the Gift of God. And a little later, This
light has shown these and other things similarly certain,
to your interior eyes. What cause is there therefore why
you can not see with fixed glance that light itself, save
only weakness? etc.

THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENTS ARE SOLVED.—From the
things that have been said it is clear concerning all the
authorities of Augustine to the contrary’® and the au-
thorities of Augustine which occur concerning this mat-
ter, can be expounded according to some of the mentioned
modes of seeing.

16 See above, pp. 313-315.


JOHN DUNS SCOTUS 349


ArtTIcLE VI.


It Is SHOWN HOW THE REASONS OF THE CONTRARY OPINION
PROVE THE INTENTION OF AUGUSTINE, BUT NOT THE IN-
TENTION FOR WHICH THEY ARE BROUGHT FORTH HERE.


With respect to the sixth article it must be seen how
those three reasons stated for the first opinion prove
something of truth in so far as they are taken from
Augustine, although they do not prove that false con-
clusion for which they were adduced.

ANOTHER SOLUTION OF THE REASONS OF HENRY.

a) It must be known here that from sensible things
as from a primary and essential cause, pure truth must
not be expected, for the knowledge of the sense is truly
something by accident, as has been said,’’ although
some acts of the senses are certain and true; but by virtue
of the active intellect, which is a participation of the
uncreated light, illumining the phantasms, the quiddity
of the thing is known, and from this, true purity [of
truth] is had.—And by this the first argument of
Henry?® is solved; and it no longer holds according to
the intention of Augustine.

b) To the second reason of Henry!® I say that the
soul is mutable from one disparate act to another, ac-
cording to the diversity of objects, because of its own
unlimitedness and immateriality, for it is in respect to
any thing that is; in the same way from actuality to
non-actuality, for it is not always in actuality; but in
respect of first principles, the truth of which is known
from the terms and in respect of conclusions deduced


7 See above, p. 346, 19 See above, f) pp. 317-318.
418 See above, e) p. 317.


350 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


evidently from the terms, it is not mutable from con-
trary to contrary, from true to false. For the rules
rectify the thing understood in the light of the active
intellect; and although the intelligible species itself of
the terms is mutable in being, still in representing in the
light of the active intellect, the intelligible species repre-
sents immutably, and the terms of the first principle are
known by two intelligible species, and thus that union
is true and certain evidently.

To the third” it must be said that the conclusion is
against him, for he posits only sensible species or
phantasms [i.e. sensible impressions or images] ;7’ there
is no conclusion concerning intelligible species represent-
ing the quiddity.

It must be said, however, that if the sensitive powers
are not impeded, the sensible species represents the
thing truly; but in sleep the powers of the exterior senses
are bound: therefore, the imaginative faculty, conserving
the sensible species, in accordance with the diversity of
flux of the humors of the head, apprehends them as the
things of which they are the likenesses, for they have the
force of things, according to the Philosopher, on the
Motions of Animals—The third reason proves no more
than this.


20 See above, g) p. 318.
*1 See above, pp. 334-835.


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM (ce. 1300-1349)


William of Ockham presents the spectacle (which
has had not a few parallels) of a philosopher, generally
conceded to be of the first importance, whose reputation
would seem undiminished by the fact that none of his


logical, physical, or philosophical works have been pub- ~


lished since the seventeenth century. The present selec-
tions were translated from what is probably the last
(the second) edition of the Quodlibeta, that ef Stras-
bourg, 1491.1 There are indications, too, that some of
the manuscripts still available contain works of his, if
they are proved to be genuinely his, which have never
been published. With his political writings he has fared
better, for the interest in his political theories and the
scholarly examinations of them have been more constant
and more exacting. Yet despite the paucity of editions in
recent. centuries, the large number of manuscripts of
his philosophical works in the libraries of Europe indi-
cates that at least the beginnings of his reputation were
built on a broader circulation of his doctrines.

His reputation for nominalism, which has achieved
widest currency, grows from the interpretation he made
of the aristotelian logic. In the processes of learning

1The text of that edition has been followed in all respects
except the paragraphing and the numbering and arranging of
the arguments, in which more recent conventions have been
introduced by the present editor.. The other edition (Gui~ierMr1
Hoxan, Quodlibeta, ed. by Cornelius Oudendiick. Paris:
Petrus Rubeus, 1487) has, however, been consulted and in
some instances variant readings have been adapted, and omis-~
sions supplied, from it.

351


352 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


(or he would say, according to the primacy of genera-
tion) the individual thing is known first. No universals,
only individuals, exist outside the mind, and it is from
those extramental realities that knowledge has its first
beginnings. Even to ask whether the terms of a propo-
sition or the ideas of the mind are anything outside the
mind is to raise a question irrelevant to science; science
is science, not dependent on whether concepts are only
in the mind or not, but dependent on whether or not
concepts stand for things outside the mind. To hold
that terms and concepts are not things, but stand for
things, is not, however, an isolated answer to the prob-
lem of the universal, and the statement of only that
aspect of Ockham’s doctrine is insufficient to characterize
what is usually referred to as his nominalism, for it
misses the essential realism of the doctrine. If it is
true that the universal is nothing in things outside the
mind, no more is the individual thing which is outside
the mind suited to enter the mind. The theory of
knowledge which William of Ockham set up, was less
concerned with the construction of a metaphysics to
reduce thought to being than with the examination of
the means of which thought disposes to know the things
that are.

If, then, the origin of ‘the arts and sciences is in
experience, knowledge none the less consists in ideas;
the first object according to the primacy of generation
is the individual thing, but the first object according to
the primacy of adequation is the universal. Since ideas
are not properly parts of the things outside the mind,
but rather signs for those things, the center of the
problem of knowledge is the problem of signification.
A sign, Ockham defines, as that which causes something
to come into knowledge and which is formed to stand for
that thing. Terms stand for (supponens); individual


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 353


things are stood for (suppositum). But two intentions
are distinguishable in the mind: the first intention is the
act of the understanding signifying things themselves
which are not signs of something else; the second inten-
tion is the act of signifying first intentions. Signs, more-
over, may be divided into three kinds, written terms,
spoken terms, concepts. Since universals are concepts
or terms, the place of universals in thought depends on
the circumstance that they have only objective (that is
mental) being, and no subjective being outside the mind,
that they are predicable of many things, but are the
essence of no thing, that in short, the being of universals
is their being understood (esse eorum est eorum
cognosci). ;
The mind has two powers, the intuitive power by
which it contemplates individual things, and the abstrac-
tive power by which it separates things into their ele-
ments or forms general ideas applicable to many things.
The origin of knowledge is in sensible intuitive percep-
tion, but apprehension by sensation is insufficient to
account for knowledge, even if the judicative power of
' the understanding be added to it. The act of appre-
hending and the act of assenting are distinct, in both
the processes of understanding and the processes of
sensation. By sensation, that a thing is is perceived:
desire is the assent to that perception; but though sensi-
tive sight may suffice to cause an act of the sensitive
appetite, it does not suffice to cause intellectual assent
_to the contingent proposition that such and such a thing
is. For that there is required an intellectual, intuition,
The apprehension of such a proposition, moreover, and
.the judgment of it are distinct, for it may be shown that
the act of doubting a proposition is possible simultane-
ously with the demonstration of the proposition. Finally,
not only does sensation know things, and understanding


354, MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


know terms, intuitively, but in the same way the under-
standing knows itself intuitively, for it knows its own
states, and it is possible for it to form a contingent
proposition concerning either understanding or will to
the effect, for example, that understanding is, or will is.
Intuitive knowledge, therefore, is*not merely, as has
frequently been supposed in exposition of William of
Ockham, the perception of things which are, as they are
actually; it must be broadened by the notion of intel-
lectual intuition to include whatever can be in effect or
was at some time in the nature of things.

The processes of logic presuppose an apprehen-
sive act of some sort. Abstractive knowledge presup-
poses intuitive knowledge, and nothing can be known
in itself unless it is known intuitively. Intuitive knowl-
edge is knowledge in virtue of which it can be known
whether or not a thing is, This dependence of logic
on intuition is not, however, made the basis of an empiri-
cism, for once terms have been defined, they may be
known directly. The statement of the dependence: is
only the recognition that before terms can be combined
properly according to the laws of logic, the terms them- ~
selves must be apprehended: sometimes that apprehen-
sion is of a term which indicates the existence of a thing
outside the mind; sometimes it indicates only another
term, sometimes an idea, or a passion, or an intention of
the mind itself; sometimes, and this is the case that is
of particular interest to the logician, it is the apprehen-
sion of a complex of terms. The judgments of logic
have to do with such complexes of terms in propositions.
This prelogical apprehension introduces into Ockham’s
discussion of truth a word, somewhat strange to the
aristotelianism of his predecessors, which he probably
learned from Duns Scotus. His search is for evident
knowledge; to know a proposition evidently, recourse


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 355


can be had to no logical device, save that of tracing
back to a proposition to which assent is given because
its statement is as things are apprehended in fact to be.
The evidence of that perception, sensitive or intellectual,
is intuitive. Evidence is that quality of the proposition
in virtue of which it is seen to be true. In the body of
logic, on the other hand, assent to a proposition is
referred to a whole complex of assenting and dissenting.
Not to trace the concatenation further, assent to the
proposition, man is an animal (for example) invelves
not only the assertion that that proposition, in itself
and absolutely, is true, but assent also to the proposition,
this proposition man is an animal is a true proposition,
for the assent is to the complex of terms which consti-
tutes the original proposition. Propositions known
through themselves, however, are different from propo-
sitions in general. Propositions like, the whole is greater
than its parts, God is three and one, God is not the
devil, require for assent nothing more than the appre-
hension of their terms. The first principles of any
science would be of this latter sort. In selfevident
propositions the assent is not to the complex of terms as
object; only the apprehension of individual things is pre-
supposed, although the assent is not an assent to indi-
vidual things.

It involves no contradiction, therefore, that the same
conclusion can be known by experience and by demon-
stration; that, even more, the same conclusion can be
proved a priori, a posteriori, and by authority. To hold
this is not to forget that all intellective knowledge pre-
supposes the sensitive imagination of the interior and
exterior’senses, nor that all evident knowledge is based
on intuitive perception. Every discipline begins with
individuals and derives from experience the universal
which is the principle of the art or the science. — But


356 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


though all knowledge has its origin from the senses, and
though every discipline is based on individuals, yet no
discipline treats properly of individuals as such, and no
science is properly of individuals; but both have to do
with universals which stand for individuals. .
The science of logic is concernéd with the ways in
which terms can be manipulated to stand adequately for
things, and in this analysis of knowledge it is not sur-
prising that Ockham’s examination of the devices of
logic should be one of his principal concerns and one of
his chief claims to fame. He wrote two logical works:
a commentary on the aristotelian logic called A Golden
and Eatremely Useful Exposition of the Ancient Art
and another work called the Sum of All Logic. Both
display in the sequence of the subjects treated the
presence of the theory of knowledge they exemplify, for
they take up in turn, terms, judgments (propositions),
arguments (syllogisms). In this, as in the metaphysics
and the physics, there is no departure from Aristotle,
save in so far as this is an interpretation of Aristotle.
For the Categories of Aristotle, Ockham conceived, dealt
not with things but with words indicating intentions or
ideas, and the remaining books of the Organon devised
the ways of combining and separating words in proposi-
tions and relating propositions in syllogisms and conse-
quences. The exposition of Ockham’s contribution to
the philosophy of knowledge is more difficult, therefore,
than the exposition of the contributions of most of his
predecessors. For whereas the examination of the na-
ture of knowledge turned the augustinians for the most
part to the contemplation of God or to the investigation
of nature preliminary to the discovery of God; and
whereas for Thomas Aquinas, knowledge suggested prob-
lems concerning judgment and thought and things (for,
since such opuscula as T’he Sum of All the’ Logic of Aris-


‘ WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 357


totle are apocryphal, Aquinas prepared commentaries for
only the on Interpretation and the Posterior Analytics
out of all the books of the Organon) ; Ockham was turned
from the same problems to the consideration of the
principles and causes of physics and the mechanisms and
rules of logic. Of God he found nothing that could be
known evidently by demonstration. The three principles
of natural generation and the four causes he could ex-
pound with the thomists, but the emphasis had changed,
for his principle of economy, the famous razor, which
would not permit him more elements in explanation when
fewer would suffice, disposed of the metaphysical entities
on which the thomists grounded their confidence that
things were as they were thought to be: there ceased to be
need of the thomist intentional species, their rational im-
material soul which is the form of the body, their God
known a posteriori since he could not be known a priori.
Faith saved much of the rational psychology and all the
theology. But for the foundation of certainty Ockham
went not to intentional species or to the return of the
soul upon itself, but to the intuition of first principles,
to the classification of terms, concrete and abstract,
eategorematic and syncategorematic, of first and second
imposition, of first and second intention, to the classi-
fication of syllogisms, demonstrative and topical, cate-
gorical and hypothetical, to an illuminating, though
‘largely forgotten treatment of definition, consequences,
induction.
His was not, of course, the first instance in the middle
ages of concern with such problems, but the turn which
he gave to their resolution was a turn which the philos-
ophers of more than a century were to continue to give
to the problem of truth. The terms of the problem were
to be apprehension and judgment; and in the ways of
immediate perception and in the peculiarities of propo-


|


358 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


sitions, the solution lay. It was not long after—con-
siderably before the beginning of the eighteenth century
—that the certainties of Ockham were treated as the
certainties of Augustine and those of Thomas had suc-
cessively been treated: as the augustinian divine illumi-
nation yielded to the thomist doctrine of abstraction,
which was perhaps, as its proponents usually insisted,
not inconsistent with it, but which none the less made
the subject of philosophy not God and his nature and
acts, but the soul and things: as the ockhamite doctrine
that universals are terms which stand for things, rather
than as Thomas supposed, forms derived by the activity
of the active intellect which abstracted them from a
universe actual in being but potential in being under-
stood, again shifted the emphasis (though the attitudes
again might possibly be reconciled) from the nature of
being and the soul to the examination of natural genera-
tion and propositions; so too the men who may be con-
sidered followers of Ockham in the fourteenth century,
in physics deserted evident propositions to discuss
contingent propositions about the acceleration of freely
falling bodies, inertia, center of gravity, and in the
problem of knowledge granted the certainty of first
principles and of sense perceptions, but insisted on the
contingency of all other propositions, since the certainties
of principles could not be used to generate a system from
the stated certainties of perception. The history of aris-
totelianism will have to be written more fully before the
importance or the originality of Ockham’s contribution
can be estimated, and he will appear to better advantage
in the statement of the logician than in broader exposi-
tion. Whether or not the men who succeeded him fol-
lowed in his footsteps must remain even then an arduous
question, for when it is a problem of whether or not an
interpreter truly interpreted Ockham, each successive |


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM = Sao


interpretation must be another step in an infinite regress
such as abound in the history of philosophy. Philo-
sophically it suffices that later developments no more
superseded his thought than his thought had superseded
that of Duns Scotus; or than Duns had superseded
Thomas; or Thomas, Augustine. Doubtless the sequence
_of philosophers in this progress down through the four-
teenth century suggests the stages of what has been
called the secularisation of philosophy—such a descrip-
tion, however, intrudes the judgment of a moralizing
present, tracing the evolving past, and also approving
its outcome. The principles of the succeeding philos-
ophies of the middle ages could, of course, be applied
still to explain the mechanisms of becoming and the
nature of being. One philosophy is deserted for another
most usually because of a hope that the new philosophy
will explain more readily an aspect which the old may
seem to have left untouched, rarely because something
in experience truly dictates the change; a well formed
philosophy is demonstrably wrong only on other prin-
ciples than those on which it was developed. In that
fact doubtless is one justification of the study of the
history of philosophy, that the principles which philos-
ophers long dead had evolved are not infrequently
fertile of philosophical statement and explanation to
which the better remembered principles with which their
successors thought to refute them are inadequate.


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM
THE SEVEN QUODLIBETA?
Quovumer I,

Question XIII.


Whether that which is known by the understanding
first according to a primacy of generation is the indi-.
vidual.


Principat ARGUMENT. And it seems in the first place
that it is not. For the universal is the first and proper
object of the understanding. Therefore, in point of
primacy of generation it is known first.

To THE conTRARY, the object of sense and the object
of understanding are absolutely the same. But the
individual is the first object of sense by such a primacy:
therefore etc.

Conciusion. The meaning of the question must be
stated first here. In the second place the question is to
be answered.

1. With respect to the first part it must be known that
individual is taken here not as every thing which is
one in number, for taken thus, each and every thing
is individual. But it is taken to mean that thing which


‘Quodlibeta septem una cum tractatu de sacramento al-
taris Venerabilis inceptoris fratris Guilhelmi de Ockam an-
glici, saere theologie magistri, de ordine fratrum minorum,
Strasbourg, 1491.


360


. WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 361


is one in number and is not a sign, whether natural or
voluntary (or at good pleasure), common to many things,
for the written word, the concept, and the spoken word,
which are significative of many things, are not indi-
viduals, but only the thing which is not a common sign
is individual.

In the second place [with respect to this first part]
it must be known that this question is not understood
to be about any knowledge whatsoever of the individual,
for any universal knowledge taken thus is knowledge
of the individual. For nothing is understood by such
universal knowledge except an individual] and individuals.
However, such knowledge is common; but the question
is understood to be about knowledge which is properly
speaking simple and individual.

2. With respect to the second part, having supposed
that the question is understood to be about knowledge
properly individual, then I say first that, taking indi-
vidual in the said manner to mean knowledge which is
properly individual and simple, the individual is known
first.

This is proved by the following reason, that the thing
outside the soul which is not a sign is understood by
such knowledge first. But every thing outside the soul
is individual: therefore ete.

Moreover, the object precedes its own act and is first
in the primacy of generation. But nothing precedes
such an act except the individual: therefore etc.

In the second place [with respect to the second part]
I say that knowledge which is simple and peculiarly
individual and first by such a primacy is intuitive knowl-
edge. That this knowledge, however, is first, is evident
because of the fact that abstractive individual knowledge
presupposes intuitive knowledge in respect to the same
object, and not conversely. Moreover, that it is prop-


362 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


erly and peculiarly individual is evident from the fact
that it is caused immediately by the individual thing, or
it is its nature to be caused by it, nor is it its nature to
be caused by any other individual thing, even of the
same species.

3. In the third place, I say that the abstractive know]-
edge which is first by the primacy of generation and
simple (1) is not knowledge peculiarly individual, but
(2) on the contrary is sometimes, nay always, common
knowledge.

(1) The first is evident because one does not have
properly simple knowledge of any individual at the
moment when specific knowledge of the individual can
not be had; but now and then there is such knowledge
[ie. abstractive knowledge which is not properly indi-
vidual], as is clear in the case of something coming from
a distance which causes a sensation by virtue of which
I am able only to judge that that which is seen is a
being. It is manifest that in that case the abstractive
knowledge which I have first according to the primacy of
generation is knowledge of being and of nothing lower.
And consequently it is not a concept having to do with
the species nor is it a proper concept of the individual.

(2) The second is clear because no abstractive simple
knowledge is more the likeness of one thing than another
in respect of like things, nor is it caused by a thing, nor
is it its nature to be caused by it: therefore, no such
knowledge is properly an individual knowledge; but all
such knowledge is universal.

Dovsts. But perhaps there are some doubts at this:
point. First because it seems that intuitive knowledge:
is not proper knowledge, because whatever is given by
intuitive knowledge is assimilated equally to one indi-
vidual and to another which is like it, and it represents,


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 363


one individual equally with the rest. Therefore, it does
not seem to be knowledge of one thing more than another.

The second doubt is that if first abstractive knowledge
is occasionally a knowledge or concept of being, such
as was given in the case of something coming from a
distance, then in the same way first intuitive knowledge
in the same situation will be knowledge of all being,
because it is impossible that there be many simple proper
concepts of the same thing. But I can have one per-
ception of one thing coming from distant places, by
which I only judge it to be being, another by which I
judge it to be animal, a third by which I judge it to be
man, a fourth by which I judge it to be Socrates. But
these perceptions are not of different kinds [ratig]:
therefore, all of them can not be proper notions of the
same individual thing.

The third doubt is that it seems that first abstractive
knowledge is most of all proper, since the object is
approximated in the manner in which it should be, be-
cause we are able by the first abstractive knowledge to
recall the same thing previously seen, which could not
be done if abstractive proper knowledge were not had
concerning the same thing previously seen.

The fourth doubt is that it seems from what has been
said already, as if the concept of the genus could be
abstracted from one individual, for example the concept
of animal, as is evident in the case of one coming from
distant places, since I have a perception such that I can
judge by it that that is an animal.

Resotution or Dousts. I say, therefore, to the first
of these doubts that intuitive knowledge is proper in-
dividual knowledge, not because of the greater assimila-
tion to one thing than to another, but because it is caused
naturally by the one and not by the other, nor can it

be caused by the other. If you say that it can be caused


364 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


by God alone, that is true, but it is the nature of such
a perception to be caused by one created object and not
by another. And if it is caused, it is always caused by
one object and not by another. Whence it is no more
called intuitive proper singular knowledge because of
likeness, than it is called first abstractive knowledge, but
only because of causality; nor can any other cause be
assigned.

To the second doubt I say that sometimes those per-
ceptions are of the same species and differ only as more
and less perfect in the same species, as, if a concept were
perceived from parts of the same reason or kind [ratio],
in which there were no more accidents sensible to sight,
then by the approximation of that visible, as for exam-
ple white, perception is intensified and is made clearer.
And in this way one and another individual can be
caused, for such a perceived thing is being or body or
color or whiteness. But you say that those things differ
in species which can not cause an effect of the same
species; but clear and obscure vision are of this sort,
therefore etc.: I say that whenever causes which are
augmented and intensified can not cause an effect of the
same species, they differ in species then and not other-
wise. Now, however, this perception, when it is aug-
mented and intensified, can accomplish every effect that
a clear sight can; and consequently they are of the
same reason or of the same species. Yet clear percep-
tion and obscure perception are sometimes of different.
species, as for example when different objects are seen,
as, if something were seen colored in different colors,
according to a lesser and a greater approximation. But!
these perceptions are not of the same object but of dif-
ferent objects.


To the third doubt I say that by seeing something L


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 865


have some proper abstractive knowledge; but this is not
simple but composed from simples. And this composite
notion is the beginning of recollection, for by it I recall
Socrates, because I saw him formed thus or figured
thus, colored thus, of such a length, breadth, and in such
a place; and by that composition I recall that I have
seen Socrates. But if you circumscribe all simple con-
cepts except one, I no more recall Socrates because of
it, than I recall another man extremely like him. Whence
I can recall that I have had sight of a man; but I do
not know whether it is Plato or Socrates; and therefore
a simple abstractive notion is not proper absolutely; but
a composite notion can well be proper.

To the fourth doubt I say that the concept of genus
is never abstracted from one individual. To the other
argument [of this doubt] conterning something coming
from distant places, I say that I judge it to be animal
because I have previously the concept of animal, which
concept is the genus; and therefore by the concept I am
led to recollective knowledge. Whence if I did not
previously have the concept of the genus of animal, I
would judge only that this thing seen is something.

And if you ask what abstractive conception is first
formed by the medium of intuitive knowledge, I say
sometimes only the concept of that which is or being,
sometimes the concept of genus, sometimes the concept
of the most special species according to whether the
object is less or more removed. The concept of that
which is or being, however, is always impressed, because
when the object is approximated in the required manner,
the specific concept and the concept of being are caused
at the same time by the individual thing without.

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT I say that the universal
is the first object by the primacy of adequation, not by
the primacy of generation.


366 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


QvopuirserT I,
Question XV.


Whether our understanding by its nature [pro isto statu ]
knows sensible things intuitively.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems in the first place
that it does not, because sensitive sight suffices together
with abstractive knowledge for the knowledge of sensible
things: therefore, intuitive sight is superfluous.

To THE conTRARY, whatsoever perception sense can
accomplish, understanding also can accomplish: but this
is proper to the perception of sense: therefore etc.

Concuiusion. To this question I say that our under-
standing does know sensible things intuitively, because
our understanding knows evidently the first contingent
proposition concerning sensibles: therefore, it has an
incomplex conception sufficient to cause this complex con-
ception evidently; but abstractive knowledge of sensibles
does not suffice: therefore ete.

To THE ARGUMENTS TO THE coNTRARY,” I say that in
holding the sensitive soul to be the same form as the
intellective soul it is not necessary to say that the sensi-
tive sight is received in the intellective soul; but it is
received in the body or in the soul which is distinct from
the intellective soul in the body. For if it were received.
in the intellective soul, then a separated soul, at least by
the power of God, could have in itself all such sensation
and it could perceive; which does not seem to be true;
because if it were thus, the angel would lack some!
natural perfection, for it seems that the angel also could!

2? The statement of the arguments to the contrary, to whieb!
the following are replies, seems to be lacking.


<


ty )


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM. 867


have such forms naturally; for corporeal things would
be only the efficient causes of these forms. But if they
are diverse forms, as I believe that they are, then I say
that the sensitive seeing does not suffice to cause assent
to a contingent proposition however much it may suffice
to cause an act in the sensitive appetite; for they are
not similar in that the same form would then be subject
of the sensation and of the act of desiring. If you say
that the intellective and the sensitive are not distant
from each other in location, that does not hold, for what
sees and what assents must be the same in number [i.e.
the same individual]. The, question concerning the
understanding of the head and of the foot has been
answered above.

To another [argument to the contrary], I say that
there is a difference between sensitive seeing and intel-
Jectual seeing, which is noticed by us partly through
reason, partly through experience. By experience be-
cause the child sees by sensitive sight and not intellec-
tual; for he does not understand by reason that the
separated soul can have intellective sight, not sensitive.
_ To another [argument to the contrary], I say that the
separated soul can have such sight, otherwise the sepa-


rated soul could not have knowledge of sensibles.


Similarly, the angel can have such knowledge: therefore,
the separated soul likewise. To the proof of this I say


that the separated soul can naturally see the complex .


and incomplex secrets of hearts in the mind of the angel.
To.the Scripture I say that the statement is of a fact
and natural power suspended from actuality.

To another [argument to the contrary], I say that it
requires speech and illumination for two reasons, , The
first is that perhaps it is not permitted to understand
naturally what it could understand [super ]naturally.


H


we


368 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


The second, that many things are revealed to one angel
which are not revealed to another nor to the separated
soul, as was said in the question on the speech of angels.

To another [argument to the contrary], I say that
one can not acquire the sight of God and beatitude
naturally, because it can not be caused except by God
alone. And further it does not follow: he can see the
less visible, therefore, the more visible, just as it does
not follow that my understanding can see whiteness
which is less visible, therefore, it can see the angel which
is more visible; and this is so because the sight of the
angel can not be caused in me naturally, and thus it is
in this question.

To another [argument to the contrary], I say that
sensitive sight is the partial cause of intellectual sight,
but it is not the partial cause of the act of assenting
without the intellectual seeing, for complex knowledge
presupposes incomplex knowledge in the same subject;
just as the will can not proceed to action, unless knowl
edge precedes in the understanding, howeversomuch in-
tuitive knowledge there be in sense.

To another [ argument to the contrary], I concede that
sensitive sight is subjectively in the sensitive appetite.
for sense and appetite are the same: therefore, whatever
is subjectively in one is also subjectively in the other. |

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT, I say that sensitive
seeing does not suffice, but requires intellectual seeing
ete: ¥

Quop.iseT V.


Question V.
Whether intuitive and abstractive knowledge differ.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems that they do not
because a pluralitw must not be asserted without neces’


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 369 |


sity, but the same notion, according to substance, can be
called intuitive when the thing is present, and abstractive
when the thing is absent, in that intuitive knowledge
connotes the thing present, and abstractive, the thing
absent.

To THE CONTRARY, a contingent proposition can be
known evidently by the understanding, as for example
that this whiteness is, and not by abstractive knowledge,
for that knowledge abstracts from existence; therefore
by intuitive knowledge: therefore they differ really.

THE CONCLUSION of this question is certain and ‘can
be proved by the separateness of the acts of the two
kinds of knowledge; but how they differ is doubtful.
And I say for the present that they differ in two ways.
In one way in that by intuitive knowledge assent is given
to a contingent proposition,® and by abstractive knowl-
edge it is not. In another way through the fact that by
intuitive knowledge I not only judge that a thing is when
it is, but also that it is not when it is not; by abstractive
knowledge I judge in neither of these manners. The
second is manifest. I prove the first because although
it is contradictory that the same idea be the total cause
of one judgment and of the contrary of the judgment in
respect of the same experience of it, yet it is not contra-
dictory that it be the partial cause of one judgment
when the thing exists and that it be the partial cause
of the contrary judgment when the thing does not exist, °
and thus it is in the question proposed. Furthermore,
God sees by the same idea that the thing is when it is
and that it is not when it is not: therefore, it can be thus
without contradiction in the case proposed.

1. Bur to THE conTrary, if this is granted, it fol-
lows that God could not cause in us a single act of
knowing by which it appears to us that a thing is present
_* The 1491 edition has primo instead of propositioni,


370 MEDIEVAL. PHILOSOPHY


when it is absent; which is false, since, this does not
involve a contradiction. The assumption is proved, be-
cause that knowledge is not intuitive because of the
thing, since by intuitive knowledge the thing appears to
be when it is and not to be when it is not; nor abstractive
knowledge, since by abstractive knowledge the thing does
not appear to be present.

2. Moreover, that which agrees with an act according
to the substance of the act, if the substance of it re-
mains the same, whatsoever else is posited it can still
agree with it. But the substance of seeing remains the
same by the divine power when no thing exists: there-
fore, it is not contradictory for it to cause at least
partially such an assent as previously, now that the thing
does not exist; and consequently, that can be proper to it.

3. Moreover, if this is granted it follows that seeing
could be, and yet by it the thing would appear neither
to be nor not to be. The consequence is contrary to fact.
The assumption is proved by the following common prin-
ciple: where any one at all of certain given things is in
accord with a given thing contingently, if there is no
contradiction God can make that thing without all those
certain things at once. For thus it is proved most
cogently that matter can be without any form. But by
virtue of seeing, some one can sometimes know that a
thing is and sometimes know that it is not: therefore,
there is no contradiction that neither being or non-being
accords with it.

4. Moreover, if this is granted, God could not causé
evident assent in respect of the following contingent
proposition, this whiteness is, when whiteness is not ex-
istent, for the sight of whiteness causes the evident as-
sent in respect of the proposition, this whiteness is not;
and the understanding does not seem to assent to the
opposite.


7


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 371


|

1. To the first of these I say that God can not cause
in us knowledge such that by it a thing appears evidently
to be present when it is absent, for that involves a con-
tradiction, because such evident knowledge conveys that
it is thus in fact as is denoted by the proposition to
which assent is given. And consequently since evident
knowledge of this proposition, the thing is present, con-'
veys that the thing is present, it is necessary that it be
present’; otherwise it would not be evident knowledge.
And you posit that it is absent. And thus from that
hypothesis there follows a manifest contradiction with
evident knowledge, namely, that the thing is present and
that it is not present. And therefore God can not cause
such evident knowledge. Nevertheless, God can cause
a creditive act by which I believe that a thing which is
absent is present. And I say that that ’creditive idea
will be abstractive, not intuitive. By such an act of
faith a thing can appear to be present when it is absent;
yet not by an evident act.

2. To the other I answer by conceding that if the sight
of the thing remain by the power of God when the
thing is non-existent, it is not inconsistent for vision
to cause partial assent, if all other causes requisite con-
cur, but it is inconsistent that it cause such assent totally
and partially without other causes; and thus since the
existence of the thing is the partial cause of that evident
assent, it is impossible that it be caused naturally without
the existence of the thing.

8. To the other, I concede the principle and the con- |
clusion and the whole deduction, for it is not a contra-
diction that seeing be and still by that seeing I neither
judge the thing to be nor not to be, because God can
make sight without any such assent; but this can not be
done by nature.

4. To the last, I say that God can side make evident


372 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


assent of the following contingent proposition, this
whiteness is, when the whiteness is not, because of the
contradictions which follow, because evident assent con-
veys that it is thus in fact as is conveyed by the proposi-
tion to which assent is given; but by this proposition,
this whiteness is, is conveyed that this whiteness is, and
consequently if the assent is evident, this whiteness is,
and it has been asserted that this whiteness is not; and
thus that hypothesis involves manifestly a contradiction
with evident knowledge, namely, that whiteness is and
that it is not. And yet I concede that God can make
assent which is of the same species with that evident
assent in respect of that contingent proposition, this
whiteness is, when it is not; but that assent is not evi-
dent, because it is not in fact as is conveyed by the
proposition to which assent is given.

And if you say that God can bring about evident
assent of this contingent by way of the existence of this
thing as a mediating secondary cause: therefore, he can
do it by himself alone; I reply that this is the fallacy
of a figure of speech; as the following argument, God
can bring about a meritorious act with a created will
mediating: therefore, he can do it by himself alone. And
this is because of the different connotation herein. .

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT I say that there is a
necessity of asserting a difference between these kinds
of knowledge. |

Quopuiset VI.


Question VI.


Whether there can be intuitive knowledge of a non-
existent object.


PrincipaL ArcuMENT. And it is argued that there


can not be, because it is a contradiction that sight be anc


4


;


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 372


nothing be seen: therefore, it is a contradiction for sight
to be and for the object seen not to be.

To THE conrrary, sight is a quality absolutely dis-
tinct from the object: therefore, it can be without con-
tradiction without the object.

Conc.usion. 1. In this question I assert two con-
clusions. The first is that there can be by the power of
God intuitive knowledge concerning a non-existent ob-
ject; this I prove first by an article of faith: I believe
in God, father almighty; which I understand thus, that
everything which does not involve a manifest contradic-
tion is to be attributed to the divine power; but for this
to be done by God does not involve a contradiction:
therefore etc. Moreover, in that article is based the
following famous proposition of theologians: whatsoever
God produces with secondary causes mediating, he can
produce and conserve immediately without them. From
this proposition I argue thus: every effect which God
causes with a secondary cause mediating he can produce
immediately through himself. But he has power in in-
tuitive corporeal knowledge with the object mediating:
therefore, he is effective in it immediately through him-
self. Moreover, every absolute thing distinct in place
and subject from another thing can exist by the divine
power if the other absolute thing has been destroyed.
But the sight of the stars in the sky which I see is of
this sort: therefore etc.

And if you say that according to this opinion it fol-
lows that God can be seen beatifically and intuitively,
when his actual presence is not displayed, as [in ratione ]
an object actually present to the understanding itself:
which is false and erroneous; I reply that there is a
condition involved in arguing that because God can
make such a vision without a created object on which it
depends only as on a second cause, therefore God can
be seen intuitively and beatifically. when his actual


374 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


presence is not displayed, as [in ratione} an actuality
present to the understanding itself, on which object that
vision depends as on a first cause. For although, ac-
cording to the doctors, God can produce effects proper
to secondary causes without those secondary causes, still
he can not produce any effect without a first cause.
Whence just as it is not possible that color cause
effectively the sight of color in the eye unless it is ac-
tually present, so it is not possible that God cause sight
in the understanding unless he has displayed his actual
presence. ;

2.'The second conclusion is that intuitive knowledge,
can not be caused or conserved naturally when the object
is not existent. The reason of this is that a real effect
can not be produced from non-being to being nor con-
served by that which is nothing, and consequently,
naturally speaking, a producing cause is required for
- existing as much as a conserving cause. And if you
say that if one sees the sun and later enters a dark
place, it appears to one that one sees the sun in the -
same place and of the same magnitude: therefore, the
sight of the sun remains when it is itself absent; and
for the same reason it would remain if it were itself
non-existent; I reply that the sight of the sun does not
remain, but there remains some quality, namely, the
light impressed on the eye, and that quality is seen; and
if the understanding forms such a proposition as this,
the light is seen in the same place etc. and assents to it,
it is deceived because of that impressed quality which
is seen.

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT I say that it is a contra-
diction for sight to be and for that which is seen not
to be in effect and for it not to be able to be: therefore,
it is a contradiction that a chimera be seen intuitively.
But it is not a contradiction that that which is seen be


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM — 375


nothing in actuality outside the soul, so long as it can be

in effect or was at some time in the nature of things. It
is thus in the question proposed. Whence God saw from
eternity all makeable things and yet none were from
eternity.


Quopiiser VY.
Question II.


Whether the same conclusion in number can be known
evidently. by demonstration and experience.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. 1. And it seems that it can not,
because seeing the thing and later not seeing it, one
forms simple absolute concepts of different kinds
[ ratio]: therefore, composite conclusions from them will
be of different kinds [ ratio], of which the nature of one
is to be known by demonstration, that of another to be
known by experience. The consequence is clear of itself.
The antecedent is proved because otherwise the way-
farer and the blessed would form equally evident
propositions concerning God, because they would be
composed from concepts of the same kind; which is false.

2. Moreover, the necessary is not contingent, but the
conclusion of a demonstration is necessary; and the
proposition known by experience immediately is con-
tingent: wherefore etc.

To THE conTrRARY, the following conclusion can be
known by experience, all fire is heat-giving; and the
same conclusion in number can be known by demonstra-
tion by heat as by a middle term: therefore etc.

Conciusion. To this question I say briefly that the
same conclusion not only in species but in number can
be known evidently by demonstration and by experience


\


376 * MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


and by the same condition in number. This I prove
because some condition verificative of the conclusion is
acquired from experience and no other from knowledge.
This is clear inductively, and knowledge of the same
conclusion is acquired by demonstration: therefore ete.

Moreover, demonstration based on the nature of things
[ propter quid, i. e. a priori demonstration] and demon-
stration on the grounds of some one thing only [ quia,
i, e. a posteriori demonstration] can cause knowledge of
the same species in respect of the same conclusion:
therefore, in the same manner demonstration and ex-
perience can do it.

Moreover, a principle and a conclusion differ in this,
that a principle can be known only from its terms or by
experience without demonstration; but the same conelu-
sion can be known evidently by experience and by
demonstration.

Moreover, causes distinct in species can have effects
of the same species; this is clear above: therefore, it is
thus in the question proposed.

1. Bur To THE CoNTRARY, a single proposition is not
more evident or less evident. But a proposition which
is formed with sight mediating is compounded from
conceptions more evident than the proposition which is
formed with only demonstration mediating, because
seeing a thing one assents more evidently than having a
demonstration only without experience: therefore etc.

2. Moreover, if the condition of the conclusion caused
by demonstration and [that caused by] experience are
of the same species, then no way is apparent for proving
a distinction of species between the acts of believing, of
having an opinion, and of knowing, because the conclu-
sion is the same in itself, and thence the premisses can
cause an act of the same species: therefore etc.

3. Moreover, knowing a conclusion by demonstration


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM . ee y was


or experience, howsoever much that assent may be in-
tended, one would never assent so evidently as when
one has demonstration and experience. For otherwise
assent could be increased by frequent repetition of that
demonstration to equal evidence with that which ex-
perience caused; which is false: therefore, these kinds
of knowledge differ in species by the following principle, -
those things which have no power in effects of the same
kind [ ratio] are not of the same kind.

4. Moreover, if thus the same conclusion is in the
syllogism from true premisses and from false premisses,
the false premisses would cause assent of the same
species with the true premisses, and consequently the
sophistical, the falsigraphic, and the demonstrative syl-
logisms will cause knowledge of the same species.

5. Moreover, the same conclusion in number can be
proved from the thing philosophically from speculative
premisses and can be demonstrated by practical premis-
ses, such as the following, the act is generative of the
habit or condition. Therefore, if this assent will be the
same, then the same knowledge will be practical and
speculative; which seems absurd.

ResoLuTion oF oBJsections. 1. To the first of these
I say that the same proposition can not be more evident
and less evident at one and the same time to one and the
same person; nevertheless the same proposition can at
one and the same time be more evident to one and less
evident to another. In the same way the same proposi-
tion can be less evident to one person at one time and
more evident to the same person at another time.

For proof of this, I say that if some one knows
a conclusion at one time by demonstration only and at
another time knows the same conclusion by demonstra-
tion and experience, then to such an one that conclusion
is first less evident and later more evident.


378 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


‘2. To the other I deny the consequence, because the
act of having an opinion of and the act of knowing the |
same conclusion are formally contradictory, because one
is evident and the other is unevident and entertained
with fear. Two such, however, can not at the same time
be in the same understanding, and consequently they are
distinct in species; just as it is proved that the acts of
loving and of hating the same man differ in species
because they are contradictory formally.

For proof of this, I say that not all premisses can—
cause knowledge of a conclusion of the same species, but
some can and some can not, because it is certain that the
premisses of a sophistical syllogism and of a falsigraphic
syllogism do not cause knowledge of the same species in
respect of the same conclusion. In the same way
premisses of creditive, opinionative, and demonstrative
syllogisms in respect of the same conclusion do not cause
assent of the same species, but rather opposed assents,
as faith, opinion, knowledge are opposed. And therefore
I say that some causes of different kinds [ratio] can
sometimes cause effects of the same species, but not all
causes of different kinds can do this. Nor is any other
cause to be sought than that that is the nature of the
thing.

But there remains a doubt with reference to this:
how is a determination of species proved between these
acts? The reply is proved by reason of the contradiction
between the acts of knowing, having an opinion, and
believing in respect of the same conclusion.

3. To the other I say that if that argument were
conclusive, it would prove that heat which is caused by _
the sun and by fire, and heat which is caused by two
fires are not of the same species, because howsoever
much the power of the sun were increased it can not by
itself cause such perfect heat as it can together with


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 379


fire. And likewise howsoever much the power of one
fire be augmented, it can not by itself cause so perfect
heat as with another fire. And consequently these heats
would be of different species by this argument; which is
talse. Therefore I say that just as the power of the
sun‘ can be increased so much that it can cause as perfect
heat as fire can cause by itself without the sun, and yet
with the sun it can cause a still more perfect heat than
this, so by demonstration assent can so be increased to
a very great degree, if possible in infinitum, that it is
equally evident and equally perfect as that assent which
experience would cause by itself without demonstration.
Nevertheless, it can never be increased by demonstration |
so much that it causes assent equally perfect and equally
evident by itself without experience, as it can cause to-
gether with experience. And the principle quoted is to
be understood in this sense: those things which have no
power in any effect of the same species are of different
kinds | ratio] or species, and otherwise they are not.

4 and 5. To the last I say that the same conclusion
ean be in the syllogism from true premisses and from
false, but besides that, the consequence does not hold:
that therefore, these premisses can cause knowledge of
the same species, because I have not said universally
that all premisses cause assent of the same species, but
I have said particularly that some premisses etc. And
‘therefore I say that false premisses are not formed
naturally to cause assent of the same species with true
premisses. For false premisses cause opinion; true
evident premisses cause evident assent. However, if
they are believed, they cause faith.

1. To THE PRINCIPAL aRGUMENT I say that, seeing a
thing and later not seeing it, one can form two proposi-
tions composed from abstractive conceptions, as Paul
after the rapture. And one is composed from concep-


4


380 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


tions causing evident assent and the other not, but [the
latter] will be [ un ]evident, as that proposition which he
had of God before the rapture which was only believed
by faith; and he had another after, which was evident
to him by demonstration before the rapture, and the
same demonstration in species or in number was more
evident after the rapture, with the vision of God
mediating.

2. To the other I say that the necessary is not known
through the contingent syllogistically as through
premisses, but evident contingent knowledge can be the
efficient cause partial to causing evident knowledge in
respect of the necessary; and thus it is in the question
proposed.


Quop.uiBeET V.
Question VI.


Whether the act of apprehending and the act of judging*
differ really.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems that they do not,
because it is a contradiction that there be a demonstra-
tion in the soul if the soul does not know the conclusion;
but demonstration can be in the soul with only the com-
position of the propositions of the demonstration:
therefore, knowledge is something of demonstration.
Not the principle nor any term: therefore, the conclu-
sion.

To THE conTRARY, they can be separated: therefore,
they differ. The antecedent is clear, because some
propositions are neutral, to which our understanding
does not assent nor dissent at first, and later it assents
because of some middle term.

“The 1487 edition has (erroneously) act of seeing.


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 381


Conctusion. I reply that I shall first assert two
distinctions. Secondly I shall answer the question.

Concerning the first I say that assent is of two sorts.
One by which the understanding assents that something
is or that something is not, or that something is good
or white; another by which the understanding assents to
some complex.

The second distinction is that apprehension is of two
sorts. One is composition or division, or the formation
of a proposition; there is another, which is a knowledge
of the complex itself already formed, as knowledge of
whiteness is called apprehension.

In the third place I state two conclusions

1. The first is that the act of assenting taken in either
mode is different from the [ first] apprehension which is
the formation of the proposition. This I prove first as
follows. The same conclusion is proved a priori and a
_ posteriori and by authority as has been shown before. If
therefore the conclusion or the formation of the conclu-
sion were knowledge, which is an act of assenting, it fol-
lows that then the same knowledge would be a priori and
@ posteriori. In the same way faith and opinion; and
the same conclusion would at one and the same time be
evident and not evident to the same person, because it
is by hypothesis knowledge and faith. For the same
conclusion in number can first be believed and later be
known.

Moreover, the act of doubting is not contradictory to
the conclusion of the demonstration, because it is not
contradictory to the subject nor the predicate, nor the
copula; but the act of doubting is incompossible with
knowledge. Therefore, knowledge is not the conclusion
nor the formation of the conclusion.

Moreover, the act of believing and the act of knowing
are simple and brought forth of necessity immediately.


\


382 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


The conclusion itself however is composite, because the
composition of the conclusion is the conclusion and not
part of it.

2. The second conclusion is that assent, taken in
either mode, differs from the second apprehension which
is knowledge of the complex already formed. I prove
this first as follows: believer and unbeliever contradict
“each other concerning this article of faith, God is three
and one. Either, therefore, this article formed in the
mind is apprehended and known by both, or not. If it
is and the act of believing is not in both, then the act


of believing differs not only from this article formed in —


the mind, but also from the apprehension of it. If not,
it is apprehended in both.

To THE conTRARY, it may be argued by asserting all
things in these two to be equal, except the act of be-
lieving, and then it is manifest that one can apprehend
that article. In the same way no one assents or dissents
except concerning something known; but the unbeliever
‘dissents from this article immediately and denies it:
therefore, he knows this article.

Moreover, the apprehensive act causes the judicative
act: therefore, they differ. The consequence is manifest.
The antecedent is proved by experience, for however
frequently one apprehends a complex and does not at
first assent, if later because of some middle term ‘one
should assent to it only once, one is inclined later
promptly to assent to it, and not from the habit of assent-
ing, because as yet it is not had so perfectly that it could
incline to that assent: therefore, that promptitude is
effectively from the apprehensive habit. But no habit in-
clines to another act except with its own act mediating:


therefore, the apprehensive act immediately causes the


judicative act.


Mereover, some apprehend a neutral proposition to —


me eens


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM. 383


which they neither assent nor dissent: therefore, appre-
hension, assent, and dissent differ.

Moreover, some first deny a proposition, and later
concede it, and apprehend it always: therefore, this
apprehension differs from the assent and dissent, for it
is related successively to both when one denies and
when one concedes.

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT it is said that it is no
contradiction for a demonstration to be in the soul with- ~
out the act of knowing, because the act of doubting is
not contradictory formally to the conclusion nor to the
demonstration: although perhaps it is contradictory to
it virtually; and consequently by the power of God the
act of doubting could be caused in the soul at the same
time with the demonstration.


Quop.iiser IV.


Question XVII.B


Whether every act of assenting presupposes an act of
apprehending with respect of the same object.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems that it does, be-
cause the understanding assents only to what it con-
siders true, nor does it dissent except to what it considers
false. But the understanding considers nothing true or
false except what is known and apprehended: therefore,
ali assent necessarily presupposes apprehension.

To THE conTRARY, having formed the following
immediate proposition, every whole is greater than its
part, without any apprehension of the proposition, the
understanding straightway assents necessarily: there- >
fore, that. assent does not presuppose apprehension.

® This question is numbered XVI in the 1487 edition.


384 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Conc.iuston. Here I shall first make a distinction.
Secondly I shall answer the question.

Concerning the first I say, as has been said cidettiere.
in quodlibet III, question VI, that the act of assenting
is of two sorts: one by which I assent that something is
or is not, as I assent that God is three and one, and that
God is not the devil; and yet I do not assent to God or
to the devil, but I assent that God is not the devil.
- Whence by the power of word I assent by the latter act
to no thing, yet by the same act I apprehend God and
the devil, because every act of assenting is an act of
apprehending and not conversely. Another kind is the
act of assenting by which I assent to something so that
the act of assenting is referred to something by assent-
ing or dissenting to a complex, as by assenting to this
proposition, man is an animal, because I consider that
it is true, and I assent not only to this proposition, this
proposition man is an animal is a true proposition, in
which this proposition, man is an animal, is subject, but
I assent to this proposition, man is an animal, in itself
and absolutely; and this is so because I know that as it
is in fact, so it is conveyed by this proposition.

Concerning the second I say in general that the first
assent never presupposes necessarily the apprehension
of a complex, because this assent is not in respect of a
complex as object, but it presupposes the apprehension
of individual things, although the understanding may
not assent to the individual things. But the second
assent, naturally speaking, presupposes necessarily the
apprehension of a complex, and this indifferently,®
whether that complex is compounded of conceptions of
[individual] things or not. And the reason is that this
assent has a complex for object. Now, however, none


®°The 1491 edition has et in hoe differunt instead of et hoc
indifferenter.


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 385


of us naturally assent or dissent except concerning that
which is known and apprehended: therefore, it is im-
possible that I assent to some complex naturally unless I
apprehend it.

1. Bur ro THE conTRaRY, if the understanding form
this proposition, the whole is greater than its part, hav
ing circumscribed all other apprehension of the complex
except this composition, this evident assent is caused in-
stantly. Otherwise it would not be a proposition known
through itself. In the same way if this understanding
form the proposition, God is three and one, without any
other apprehension, it can, together with a command of
the will, cause an act of belief of that article: therefore,
such assent does not presuppose apprehension.

2. Moreover, apprehension of a complex is not a
proposition, because the understanding can form a
proposition although it does not know it or apprehend
it, just as I can know a stone although I do not know
that knowledge. Nor is the apprehension part of the
proposition, because every part of the proposition can
be knowledge of an external thing and no other knowl-
edge is necessary to the act of assenting.

3. Moreover, assent with respect to a thing is one
thing and assent with respect to a complex is another,
just as apprehension of a thing is one thing and appre-
hension of a complex another. Therefore assent at least
in respect of a thing does not presuppose apprehension
of a complex.

1. To the first of these [arguments to the contrary] I
say that the argument, as well with respect to the act
of assenting in common as with respect to the act of be-
lieving the article, proceeds from the first assent and
not from the second. ;

2. To the second I say that the apprehension of a

| complex is neither a part of the proposition compounded


386 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


from notions of external things, nor is it the proposition
itself, although it could be part of another proposition ;
but it is another kind of knowledge distinct as well from
proposition as from assent; and assent which has a


complex for object presupposes this knowledge; and


this is true not only when one assents to a complex
which is compounded from conceptions of things, as in
the following, man is an animal, man is not an ass, but
also when one assents to some proposition whose subject
and predicate are propositions; propositions concerning
the sense of a composition are commonly of this sort,
such as the following, this proposition, man is an animal,
is true, or necessary, or contingent; or this proposition,
man is an ass, is impossible, etc. because in order that I
may assent to such complexes it is necessary that I first
apprehend and know them.

3. To the third I say that there is no assent in respect
of the thing because nothing is said when I assent to a
stone or an ox. :

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT the answer is clear from
what has been said.


Quopiiser IV.
Question XIX.?
Whether first and second intentions are really distinct.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems that they are
not, for an essence of the reason is net distinet really; '
but intentions, as well first as second. ae enly entities
of the reason: therefore eto.

dif di i . *

0 THE CONTRARY, first and second intentions are

*This question is numbered XXXV in the 1487 edition.


' WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 387


things, and are not the same things but distinct things :
therefore, they are distinguished really.

Conciusion. In the first place, what first and second
intentions are must be considered here. In the second
place the question must be answered.

Concerning the first I say that both first and second
intention can be taken in two ways, broadly and strictly.
Broadly the first intention is said to be the intelligible
sign existent in the soul which does not signify an inten-
tion or a concept in the soul or any other signs precisely,
and I say this, whether sign be taken for that which can
stand [for a thing] in a proposition and be part of a
proposition, of which sort are categorematic terms, or
whether sign be taken for that which can not stand [ for
a thing] nor be the extreme terms of a proposition when
it is taken significatively, of which sort are syncate-
gorematic terms. And in this manner not only mental
categorematic terms which signify things which are not
themselves significative, but also mental syncategore-
matic terms and verbs and conjunctions and others of
this sort are called first intentions.

Examp te. For in this manner not only the concept
of man which signifies all men and can stand for them
and be part of a proposition, and the concept of white-
ness, and the concept of heat, and such concepts are
properly called [first] intentions; but such syncategore-
matic concepts as the following, if, nevertheless, not,
while, is, and, runs, reads, are called first intentions, and
this is because although they do not stand, taken in
themselves, for things, yet conjoined with others they
make the others stand [for things in diverse manners,
as every makes man stand for]® and be distributed
over all men, as in this proposition, every man runs; and

® Omitted in the 1491 edition.


388 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


yet this sign every signifies nothing through itself, be-
cause it signifies neither an external thing nor an inten-
tion of the soul.

But strictly the first intention should be a mental
name formed precisely to be the extreme term of a
proposition and to stand for a thing which is not a sign;
as the concept of man, of animal, of substance, of body.
And briefly all mental names which naturally signify
individual things which are not signs.

In the same way, taken broadly, that concept of the
soul is called a second intention, which signifies not only
the intentions of the soul which are natural signs of
things (of which sort are the first intentions taken
strictly) but also as it were mental signs signifying at
will syncategorematic mental signs. And we have per-
haps in this way only a word corresponding to the second
intention.

However, taken strictly, that concept is called a
second intention which signifies precisely intentions
naturally significative, of which sort are genus, species,
difference, and others of this sort, for as the concept of
man is predicated of all men, as in saying, this man is
a man, that man is a man, and thus of the others, so too
one common concept, which is the second intention, is
predicated of first intentions which stand for things, as in
saying, man is a species, ass is a species, whiteness is a
species, animal is a genus, body is a genus, quantity is a
genus; in the manner in which name is predicated of
different names, as in saying, whiteness is a name, man
7s a name; and this second intention thus signifies first
intentions naturally and can stand for them in a proposi-
_ tion, just as the first intention signifies’ external things
naturally and can stand for them.

Concerning the second, some say that first and second


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 389


intentions are certain fictive entities which are only
objectively in the mind and nowhere subjectively.

On THE conTRARY when a proposition is verified by
things, if two things suffice for the truth of it, it is
superfluous to assert another thing; but according to all
such propositions as, man is understood: man is subject:
man is predicate: man is a species: animal is a genus,
and similar propositions in which such fictive being is
asserted, the propositions are verified by things, and two,
things suffice for verifying all such propositions: there-
fore etc. The assumption is proved because having
posited knowledge of man in the understanding, it is
impossible that this proposition be false, man is under-
stood. In the same way, having posited the intention
of man in common and the intention of subject in com-
mon, and having formed this mental proposition, man is
subject, in which one intention is predicated of the
other, it is necessary that this proposition be true, man
is subject, without anything fictive.

Moreover, such a fictive thing hinders the knowledge
of the thing: therefore, it is not to be asserted because
of knowledge. The assumption is proved because that
fictive thing is neither the idea, nor is it the external
whiteness known, nor is it both together; but a certain
third thing, medium between knowledge and the thing:
therefore, if, that fictive thing is understood, then the
thing outside is not understood, and then when I form
the following mental proposition, God is three and one,
I do not understand God in himself but that fictive
thing; which seems absurd.

Moreover, for the same reason, in understanding
other things God would understand such fictions; and
so. from eternity there was coordinated as. many fictive
beings as there could be different intelligible beings


390 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


which were so necessarily that God could not destroy
them; which seems false.

Moreover, such a fictive being does not have to be
posited in order that a subject and predicate may be
had in a universal proposition, because the act of under-
standing suffices for this: for that fictive being is as indi-
vidual in being and in representing as the act. This is
evident from the following, that one fiction can be de-
stroyed while another remains as actual, for either that
‘fiction depends essentially on [some] act [of reason]
or not. If it does, then, when one act ceases, that fic-
tion is destroyed, and yet the fiction remains in another
act, and consequently there are two individual fictions
as there are two acts. If it does not depend on this
individual act, it does not consequently depend essen-
tially on any act of the same reason, and thus that fiction
will remain in objective being without any other act;
which is impossible.

Moreover, it is no contradiction that God form such
real knowledge without such a fiction [for knowledge
does not depend on such a fiction] essentially; but the
contradiction is that the intention be posited in the un-
derstanding lest something be understood: therefore,
the intention must not be posited because of a common
intention.

Therefore, I say that as well the first intention as
the second intention is truly an act of understanding,
for by the act can be saved whatever is saved by the
fiction. For in that the act is the likeness of the sub-
ject, it can signify and stand for external things; it can
be the subject and the predicate in a proposition; it
can be genus, species etc. just as the fiction can. Where-
fore it is clear that the first and second intention are
really distinct, for the first intention is the act of under-
standing signifying things which are not signs. The


_


~ WILLIAM. OF OCKHAM §- 391


second intention is the act signifying first intentions.
Therefore they are distinguished.

AS REGARDS THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT it is clear that
both first and second intentions are truly real entities,
and they are truly qualities subjectively existent in the
soul: therefore etc.


QuopiiBeET V.
Question XXV.°


Whether the absolute, connotative, and relative concepts
are really distinct. :


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT: And it seems that they are
not, because plurality must not be asserted without
necessity; but this is not necessary: therefore etc.

To THE conTRARY, words are distinct: therefore, con-
cepts; the consequence holds because they are ordered
signs.

Conciusion. I reply that the conclusion is certain
according to the philosophers. For the concept of man
is absolute; the concept of white is connotative; and the
eoncept of father is relative; and they do not coincide
except as inferior and superior, for every relative con-
cept is connotative, and not conversely.

But it is doubtful how they differ. And therefore I
say that they differ in this, that the absolute concept
signifies all the things it signifies equally in the first
and single mode of signifying, namely, in the direct
mode, as is clear from this name man and similar words,
for it signifies all men equally, and not first one and
secondarily another. Nor does it signify one directly
and another obliquely. And such a name is truly predi-

° This question does not appear in the 1487 edition.


392 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


cated of something without the addition of any term in
an oblique case, as Socrates is a man, although he is, not
a man of anything. And such a name, properly speak-
ing, does not have a definition expressing the essence
of the name [quid nominis].

The connotative name, however, properly signifies one
thing first and another secondarily, and one thing di-
rectly and another obliquely. And such a name properly
has a definition expressing the essence of the name, nor
can it be predicated truly of anything unless an oblique
case can be added to it. An example of this is in the
concept white and in similar concepts. For first it signi-
fies white and secondarily whiteness; it signifies the
subject directly, and whiteness obliquely. Nor can
Socrates be white unless this is true; Socrates is white
by whiteness; Socrates is so much by quantity; long
by length.

The concrete relative concept, however, has in the
highest degree the aforesaid conditions which this con-
notative concept has. But they differ in that whenever
the connotative concept is predicated truly of anything,
its abstract can properly be added to it only in an
oblique case, for nothing is white unless it is white by
whiteness, nor warm unless it is warm by warmth. But
when the relative concept is predicated truly of any-
thing, an oblique case which is not the abstract of it can
always properly be added to it. An example is in the
case of master, father, and others, for Socrates is not
master unless he is master of some servant. Nor can he
be a father unless he is father of some son. Nor can he
be like except to some one having a like quality. Nor
equal except to some one having quantity; and thus it is
with all relative nouns.

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT the conclusion is clear
from what has been said.


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 393


Quopiiser II,
Question XII.
Whether the direct and reflex act are the same act.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems in the first place
that they are, because otherwise there would be a
process in infinitum in reflex acts: therefore etc.

To THE CONTRARY, in us the understanding and its ob-
ject are not the same; but the direct act is the object of
the reflex act: therefore etc.

Concxiusion. In the first place I shall expound here
the meaning of the question. In the second place I shall
reply to the question.

Concerning the first I say that the direct and reflex
acts are not taken here in their proper sense, for that
is called reflex properly, which begins from a given thing
and terminates in the same thing. And therefore no act
is properly called reflex. But direct and reflex are taken
improperly, for that act is called direct by which the
understanding understands an object outside the soul,
and that act reflex by which this direct act is understood.

Concerning the second I say that the direct act and
the reflex act are not the same act. I prove this first as
follows. Whatever is known by a power through some
act of a kind [ratio] other than the object, can be known
through a consimilar act by another power of the same
kind. But one angel knows the act of another angel by
an act distinct from the act known: therefore, the angel
whose act is known by the other can know its own act
by a knowledge consimilar to this knowledge which an-
other angel knows. But that knowledge is distinct in
species from the object: therefore, it is other. For this


394 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


reason seems more cogent than all the others which are
relative to this part.

Again, intuitive knowledge and abstractive knowledge
are distinct; that is certain; but abstractive knowledge
can be known intuitively as is clear in the first quodlibet:
therefore ete.

Again, the direct and the reflex acts of will are not
the same: therefore, the understandings of them are not
the same. The antecedent is clear because the act of
love and of hate are not the same; but some one some-
times loves hate: therefore etc.

1. To THe conTRARY, if this is so, then infinite acts
could be at the same time, because there is a process
in infinitum in them; and the posterior always requires
that the prior exist, just as intuitive knowledge re-
quires naturally the existence of the object.

2. Moreover, there would then be some act which
could not be apprehended intuitively by the understand-
ing.

1, I repry, therefore, to the first of these by conced-
ing a process im infinitum in abstractive but not in
intuitive ideas. The first is clear because any intuitive
and abstractive knowledge can be known abstractively
when it is not itself existent. For this perception can
cease and then it can be known abstractively; and that
knowledge can cease and then be known in another
abstractive idea; and thus in infinitum. But from this
there does not follow any actual infinity nor any great
magnitude, as for example that a thousand perceptions
exist at the same time, which we do not experience:
therefore, in this process there is given an ultimate
perception which can not be seen. For of it we have
experience through its status itself [i.e. through the fact


that perception comes to rest in it]. But what the cause
is I do not know.


\


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 395


And by this the conclusion to the other argument and


to the principal argument is clear; obviously no multi-


tude follows from this necessarily.

2. The second is clear likewise, because in intuitive
ideas the posterior always requires that the prior exist;
and therefore if there were a process in infinitum, one
greatest multitude could be made; which is not true.


Quopiiser I,
Question XIV.


Whether our understanding by its nature [ pro isto statu |
knows its own acts intuitively.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems in the first place
that it does not, for nothing is known by the understand-
ing except that which previously fell under sense; but
acts of understanding were never under sense: therefore
ete. ,

To THE conrTrRARY, abstractive knowledge presup-
poses intuitive. But intellectual conceptions are known
abstractively: therefore, intuitively.

Concuiusion. Replying to this question I say that
our understanding does know its own acts intuitively.
And the reason is that a contingent proposition is formed
concerning the knowledge of the understanding and con-
cerning the will, which is known evidently by our under-


standing, namely, such a proposition as the following,


there is an understanding, there is a will: therefore,
either by means of intuitive or abstractive knowledge of
the act of understanding. If in the first manner, the
proposition is granted. The second can not be held
because abstractive knowledge is abstracted from an
actual existence.


396 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Again, experimental knowledge is not without intui-
tive knowledge; but one who lacks all intuitive sensitive
knowledge, experiences intellectual knowledge: therefore
etc.

ResoLtution or Oxssections. To the first argument
to the contrary, I say that that does not follow because
there would then be infinite perceptions in actuality.
For proof of this I say, that if it is held that direct and
reflex acts are not distinct, it can be said that the seeing
of a stone is seen by itself when the stone is seen. And
then it can be said that that proposition which is com-
posed from the seeing of the stone and the concept of
the stone can not remain when the seeing of the stone
is not, although another proposition which is composed
out of these conceptions can remain without the sight of
the stone. But if it be held that the reflex act is distinct
from the direct act, I say that the seeing of the stone will
be by another seeing, but in the end one will come to a
seeing which is not seen by a seeing naturally distinct
from it, although it could be seen if there were no im-
pediment, and I concede a regress in infinitum by the
divine power; but speaking naturally there will be a
seeing which can not be seen; and for the following
reason, that our understanding is a limited power: there-
fore, it has power only for a certain number of sights
and not for more. But in what seeing one must stop
I do not know. Perhaps one should stop in the second
seeing, because it perhaps can not be seen naturally.

To another [objection] I say that one can not ex-
perience the first and the second seeing equally and so
in infinitum, because one is stopped at some sight which
can not be seen because of the limitation of the under-
standing, which has power for so many sights and no
more. I concede, none the less, that one can naturally .


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 397


have several perceptions at once, at least two or three
of the same object.

To another [objection] I concede that I assent evi-
dently to the following proposition, I see. And I say
that the assent is caused by the seeing of that seeing;
but from this it does not follow that there will be infinite
perceptions at the same time; nor can there be a process
in infinitum naturally; but a stop must be made at some
seeing which is not naturally visible. Nor can one assent
evidently to a complex formed as the following, I see
that sight at which the seeing has come to a stop.

To another [objection] I concede that if there were
in the soul a second sight, it could be seen if there were
no impediment, and yet if it were in my soul I would
net be able to see it, because the first act impedes the
second so that it can not be seen with the first seeing.
And I say it is not impossible, by the fact that it is in
the understanding, that it could not be seen because if
it were in the understanding it could be seen through
itself; but because it is in the understanding at the
same time as another act, it comes about that it can not
be seen. And I say that I experience the vision of a
stone, but I do not experience the vision of that vision.
And by that reason the example of Augustine in book
VI on the Trinity, chapter 8 near the end, is explained,
in which he says that he often read and did not know
what he read; clearly this happened because of destruc-
tion through the act of the other power, and still there is
no contradiction between those acts, just as likewise a
man intent on seeing does not perceive himself hear,
when nevertheless he hears, and yet between sight and
hearing there is no contradiction. So it is in the question
proposed that although there is no contradiction between |
the last perceiving to which one comes naturally and the
perceiving of that or of any of the preceding perceiy-


\


!


398 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ings, yet one act can impede the other by ae fact that
it is.

To another I say that I am certain that I understand
a stone in virtue of the sight of the stone, and in virtue
of the perception of the first sight, and sometimes per-
haps in virtue of these perceptions and in virtue of some
proposition habitually known. For example, I am cer-
tain that I understand by experience because I see the
seeing of the stone. But I am certain that I understand
the stone by discourse from effect to cause as I know
fire by smoke, when I see smoke alone, and this is so
because I have on another occasion seen smoke caused
by the presence of fire. And in the same manner be-
cause on another occasion I have perceived intellectually
such a seeing caused in me by the presence of a stone.
' Again I argue, such effects are of the same species,
as has been expounded above in reference to the speech
of angels. The proposition habitually known is this, all
such effects of the same species have causes of the same —
species. I do not say in general all effects of the same —
species have a cause of the same species.

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT I say that Aristotle says
that nothing of those things which are external is under-
stood unless first it falls under sense, and they are
sensibles only according to sense, and that authority is
true concerning them, but concerning spirits it is not.


Quvuopuret II.
Question X.


Whether the sensitive soul and the intellective soul are
really distinct in man.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems in the first place
that they are not, for there is only a single being of a_


‘WILLIAM OF OCKHAM © 399


single composite thing: therefore, only a single form,
for the form gives being.

To THE CONTRARY, any animal is prior in nature to
man: therefore, man is by one form and animal by
another.

Conc.usion. I reply to this question that they are
distinct; but it is difficult to prove this, because it can
not be proved from propositions known through them-
selves. I prove, nevertheless, that they are distinct
really.

1. In the first place thus. It is impossible that there
be contraries at the same time in the same subject; but
the act of desiring something and avoiding or rejecting
the same thing are contrary in the same subject: there-
fore, if they are at the same time in the nature of
things, they are in different subjects; but it is clear that
they are at the same time in man, for this same thing
which man desires by the appetite he rejects by re
_ understanding.

And in the same way by Aristotle in book III on the
Soul, where he says that there are in the same person
contrary appetites, that is, they would be contrary if
it was their nature to be received in the same subject. If
you say that these appetites are called contrary because
they are inclinative to contrary effects, and they are thus
virtually contrary, because the one inclines to pursuing.
the other to flight, which is incompossible with the first,
and such contraries can well be in the same subject; but
they are not formally contrary; on the other hand by
that reason you would say just as easily that willing
‘and denying are not contraries formally, but only vir-
tually, for it is their nature to incline to contrary effects,
-and thus the way ue fares for proving anything to
be contrary.

Moreover, the same. substantial form can not at one


400 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


and the same time have two acts of desiring in respect —
to the same object. But in man there are frequently acts

at the same time of willing some good and of desiring

it by the sensitive appetite: therefore, these acts are

not in the same subject.

Moreover, the same form does not bring forth at one
and the same time an act of desiring something naturally
and something else freely; but man wishes something
freely, and the sensitive appetite desires it naturally:
therefore etc.

2. In the second place I argue thus principally.
Sensations are subjectively in the sensitive soul
mediately and immediately; and they are not sub-
jectively in the intellective soul: therefore, they are
distinct. The major premiss is clear because nothing
else can be assigned as the subject of sensations except
the sensitive soul or power. And if the power is an acci- >
dent of the soul, it will be subjectively in the sensitive
soul; this is proved because otherwise every appre-
hension of the sensitive soul would be an act of under-
standing, for it would be subjectively in the intellective
soul. Similarly, then, the separated soul could perceive,
for sensation is therefore subjectively in the intellective
soul, and God can conserve every accident in its sub-
ject or in any other; and consequently he could conserve
the sensitive soul in the separated soul; which is absurd.
If you say that the composite whole is the immediate
subject of sensation or of the sensitive power, and no
form; on the contrary, accident is not more simple than
its first subject, as will be shown clearly at another
time: therefore, sensation, since it is a simple accident,
can not be subjectively and immediately in the composite
and first [subject]. In the same way having granted
this, those powers would not be powers of the soul more


_WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 401


than of the body: wherefore, they are not subjectively
more in one than in another. |

3. In the third place I argue thus. The same form
in number is not extended and unextended, material and
immaterial; but the sensitive soul in man is extended and
material, and the intellective soul is not, for it is all in
all ete.

Oxzsections. But against these [arguments] there
are arguments of many sorts.

1. In the first place thus, that Augustine in his book
on Ecclesiastical Dogmas attacks two souls in man and
says that it is the error of some.

2. In the second place, that either that sensitive soul
remained three days with the body or with the soul; and
whichever be granted it follows that Christ was not dead
uniyocally with other men, or else he was corrupted and
then Christ put off one soul which he had taken on;
which is contrary to the holy doctors.

3. In the third place, that the Parisian article says
the doctrine that, when the rational soul recedes from
the body, the animal remains still alive, is an error.
But if they are distinct the sensitive soul remains after
the separation of the intellective, for nature proceeds
in the same order in generating and in corrupting. But
in generating, the sensitive is introduced prior to the
intellective if they are distinct; and the Philosopher says
this in his book on Animals.

4. Again, if the sensitive soul remains without the
intellective, that composite would be neither man nor
rational animal; and thus it would not be rational nor
irrational.

ResoLuTion or Ossections. 1. I reply and I say to
the first of these, that Augustine attacked two intel-
lective souls in man of which one is from God and the


\


402 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


other from the devil; and this is the mind of Augustine
if any one examines his book in that place.

2. To the second I say that the sensitive soul of Christ
in those three days remained where God pleased, but
thus that it was always united to deity. But whether
it remained with the body or with the intellective soul,
only God knows; yet both can well be said. And I
deny that he was not then dead univocally with other
men, because for the same reason it could be said that he |
was not univocally dead, for the body of Christ is not
corruptible as the bodies of other men are corruptible:
therefore, it does not follow that he was not univocally
dead because of the separation of the intellective soul.

3. To the third I say that after the separation of the
intellective soul the sensitive soul does not remain, nor
was the sensitive soul introduced in the generation of
man prior in time to the intellective. To the Philoso-
pher I say that the sensitive soul is prior in nature in
the body, but not prior in time, for they are introduced
and expelled at the same time.

4. To the last I say that if by the power of God the
sensitive soul remained in the body, that composite
would be alive, and still it would be neither rational
animal nor irrational, nor would it be animal truly con-
tained under animal, which is the genus. And the reason |
of this is that it would not be a being complete through
itself in the genus, but it would be its nature to be an
essential part of something existing through itself in the
genus; and no such thing would be through itself in the
genus of substance, or in any other genera essentially.
Nor would any genus be predicated of it essentially in
the first manner. Yet if all that which has this sensi-
tive soul be called animal, then this is truly animal; but
then animal would be spoken of equally of that and of
other animals.


t


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 403


To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT I say that there is only
one total being of man, but many partial beings.


Quopuiset IL.
Question XIII.
Whether the act of a more perfect object is more perfect.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems in the first place
that it is not, because if it were, then the act of an
infinite object would be infinite and consequently every
act in respect to God would be infinite.

To THE conTRaRY, if it is not, then there would be
no way of proving that any act is more perfect than any
other. '
Concuusion. I shall first set down one distinction
here. In the second place I shall reply to the question.

Concerning the first I say that for anything to be
more perfect than another thing can be taken in two
ways. In one way according to things distinct in species.
In a second way in those things which are of the same
species. In the first way the angel is more perfect than
man and man is more perfect than the ass. In the
second way one whiteness is more perfect than another,
and any form in which there are more parts of the same
quantity of mass or power than in another form of the
same species, as one whiteness is more perfect than an-
other, because it has more parts of whiteness of the same
quantity, and in the same way one love is more perfect
than another.

Concerning the second article I assert two conclusions.

1. The first is that it is not necessary that the act
_of the more perfect object always be more perfect; and
this is so whether the object be complex or incomplex.


404 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


And I prove this first as follows. A principle is a more
perfect object than the conclusion, and in respect of the
same principle there can be acts of erring and of doubt-
ing, both of which are more imperfect according to
species than the act of knowing:.therefore, an act re-
lated to a more perfect object can be more imperfect
than the act of a more imperfect object.

Moreover, let us take two incomplex objects, such as
an angel and a man. Then I argue thus: the act of
hating is more imperfect in respect of either than the
act of loving; but I can hate the angel and love the man:
therefore ete.

Moreover, a remiss act is more imperfect than an
intense act, at least speaking of perfection of the second
sort, although it may not be necessary that it be thus
always in the first sort, but [it is] when some one loves
a better and more perfect object less intensely; and this
holds as well of objects of the same species as of objects
of different species, as a man sometimes loves the
greater love with less intensity than the lesser love, and
loves the angel less than the man, which is clear be-
cause sometimes he thinks less intensely of the more
perfect object than of the more imperfect object.

2. The second conclusion is this. The act of the more
perfect object can always be more perfect than the act
of the more imperfect, so that some act in respect of
the more perfect object is more perfect than any act in
respect of the more imperfect object, as well complex
as incomplex.

Wherefore it must be known that in respect of the
same object, as well complex as incomplex, there can be
different acts, just as in respect of the same conclusion
there can be different acts, such as erring and doubt-
ing. And similarly in respect of the same thing
there can be the act of loving and of hating. And al-


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 405


though the act of erring could be more perfect than some
~ act in respect of the more perfect object, yet the most
perfect act among these is the act more perfect in
respect to the more. perfect object than any act in
respect to a more imperfect object. Just as the most
perfect act in respect of one- more perfect conclusion is
more perfect than any other act in respect of a more
imperfect conclusion. And in the same way I conclude
of incomplex objects distinct in species. However, the
most perfect act in respect of the more perfect object is
more perfect than any other act in respect of a more
imperfect object. Just as the most perfect act which
is brought forth concerning an angel is more perfect
than any other act which is brought forth concerning a
man. I prove this as follows: because those two are of
different species, and the most perfect act in respect of
the more imperfect object is not more perfect than the
most perfect act in respect of the more perfect object,
as appears manifestly: therefore, since one act is neces-
sarily more perfect than another, by the fact that they
differ in species, it follows that the most perfect act in
respect of the more perfect object is more perfect than
the most perfect act in respect of the more imperfect
object. But that these acts are distinct in species, is
proved because contrary acts in respect of the same
object differ in species, such as the act of erring and
knowing: therefore, much the more the most perfect acts
of objects distinct in species. If you say that the acts
of complex objects are of different species, but not the
acts of incomplex objects, there is not, on the contrary,
‘greater reason for the latter than for the former. More-
over, then the act of hating would be of the same species
as the act of loving, for both are in respect of incomplex
objects. In the same way the vision of a creature ac-
_eording to this could be beatific, because if it is of the


406 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


same species as the vision of God to whomsoever it
should be intended, it would arrive at an equal grade
with the beatific vision.

To THE FIRST PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT: I say that such a
mode of arguing does not hold, unless it happens to fill
in proper order the process in infinitum, that is, when
the act in respect of the infinite presupposes of necessity
infinite acts of infinite objects having an order according
to greater and less perfection. But it is not thus in the
question proposed, as is manifestly clear, because God
can be understood and loved after or before any created
object, and the act by which he is loved is necessarily
finite.

1. To THe contrary, if the act,in respect of the
infinite is finite, and the act of anyone in respect to that
which is a created subject is similarly finite, since the
act in respect of the infinite exceeds the other act in
respect of the other subject in a double proportion, as
I suppose, God can therefore make some object doubly
more perfect than A, and let that be B. Then the most
perfect act in respect to B, according to what has been
said, exceeds the most perfect act in respect to A doubly.
And again let Ged make an object excelling B doubly,
and let that be C. Then because the most perfect act in
respect of C excels the most perfect act in respect of B-
doubly, and because consequently by chance the most
perfect act in respect of B is made equal to an act which
is in respect of the infinite, it follows necessarily that
the most perfect act in respect of C exceeds the act in
respect of the infinite doubly, and thus an act in respect
of the infinite would exceed in perfection an act in
respect of the infinite.

To this answer can be made in a number of ways. In
one way by positing a status among species distinct in
respect to perfection [i.e. a species than which there


‘Obie
WILLIAM OF OCKHAM | 407


could not be one more perfect], because then the chance
is not possible, and therefore if the act in respect of the
infinite exceeds in a double perfection the act in respect
to that which is an individual of the highest species, God ~
could not make another species in double perfection of
that, and thus according to this way the argument is
made void.

1. But against that there is that difficulty of the
process in infinitum of acts of «understanding by reflex
acts, of which each posterior is more perfect than the
prior. Because of the more perfect object I say that
the more perfect act having whiteness for object is
more perfect than whiteness: therefore, the first reflex
act is more perfect than the direct act because of a more
perfect object. For the same reason the second reflex
act is more perfect than the first, and thus with all:
therefore, there can be a process in infinitum in objects
distinct in species according to greater and less perfec-
tion.

I say that it can be said in answer to this that in such
things there. is a process in infinitum, and one would
never arrive none the less at any act of perfection equal
to A. And thus it can be said in the question proposed,
notwithstanding such a process in infinitum, one never
arrives none the less at any equally perfect act, such as
an act in respect of the infinite. And this is so because
they are of different kinds’ [ratio], nor is it the nature
of the one to be equalled to the other in perfection. If
you say that the act in respect of the infinite excels the
direct act in a certain proportion of quantity, let us say,
twenty times, and the first reflex act excels the first
direct act in'as much perfection, and the second excels
the first as much or in as much, and the third excels
the second as much; but every finite amount is tran-
scended by the addition of the same qnantity: there-


|


j


\


408 " MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY.


fore, one must come to some reflex act which will be.
more perfect than the act in respect of the infinite.

I say here that properly speaking it is not to be con-
ceded with respect to proportion that the act in respect
of the infinite exceeds the direct aet in equal proportion,
because this is true only when one happens to suppose
equal or unequal parts by the composition of which some-
thing more perfect is made, as is the case with two parts
of water and fire; and thus with similar things. But in-
the question proposed there is an excess of one act over
another act according to itself whole and totally, so that
every part of one exceeds the whole of the other, not
only in species but also in perfection, just as every part
of whiteness is more perfect than any blackness.

So I say that that proposition which has been ac-
cepted, every finite etc., has truth in those things which
are of the same kind [ratio], in which one is added
truly to the other, just as a part of water is added to a
part of water, and a part of whiteness is added to the
preceding whiteness. It has truth likewise when it hap-
pens to assert an equal part and another part exceeding.
But it does not have truth in those things in which one
can proceed in infinitum according to perfection by the
addition of some things not of the same quantity, but of
some things of the same proportion, which according to
themselves as wholes are unequal, and yet one never
comes to any great perfection of quantity, for one does
not come in the least to the perfection of substance, and
thus it is in the question proposed concerning) reflex
actions.

1. But still the position advanced is proved because
when something is added to something else according to
your gloss, that if someone grieves concerning some-
thing sad, he will grieve so much more concerning some-
thing greater, as a man grieves more because he is


»


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 409


punished for two days than for one day, and so forth for
the rest. And consequently through an infinite time he
will grieve infinitely, and here a part of grief is added
to part.

2. Moreover, a remiss habit sets up a difficulty for the
will, and the more intense the habit the greater the
difficulty: therefore also, some habit sets up an impossi-
_ bility for conquering the sensitive appetite.

1. Replying to the first of these I say that it is
possible that one man be saddened as much and not more
concerning an infinite intensive pain than another man
may be, or the same man at another time, concerning
a finite pain. And if you argue in the same manner as
above concerning that man who according to right reason
sorrows so much, that he sorrows more concerning a
greater thing, etc., I say that it is possible that he sor-
row according to right reason, as much by fear of a
finite pain as another man, or the same man at another
time, concerning an infinite pain. The reason of this
is that every creature is limited, and therefore has power
for so great an effect and not a greater. And therefore
when he comes to the ultimate to which he is able to go,
then he can do no more.

To the contrary, right reason declares repeatedly to
you that you grieve more concerning an infinite pain
than concerning a finite pain. I say that that is not so,
but it would be necessary that one grieve more, if one
could. And in the same way it can be said that such a
man who is in the ultimate act can desire the vision of
God as intensively through one time as through infinite
time, because of the defect of his power.

If you say: I assert that God may cause grief concern-
ing infinite pain and desire of beatific vision to endure
in infinitum; since he is not himself limited, he can com-
municate infinite grief concerning infinite pain; this can


|


410 | MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


be said in two ways. First from any such quality caused
by God, God can make a more intense quality in infini-
tum; but one will never arrive at the infinite. It can
likewise be said in another way, that there is a state [ i.e.
a point is reached] in the augmentation of form that
must give some act so intense in respect of an infinite
object.

2. Now, therefore, I say to the second instance that
habit can not make a difficulty for the will, because if
it were thus, it would be because of some productive or
destructive action neither of which can be asserted in
the question proposed; nevertheless the will, as is com-
monly the case, follows the passion freely without any
compulsion, and the saints call this a difficulty of the
will in genus.

If you say that then it would be no more culpable for
the will to follow a small passion than a great one, I
reply and I say that it can well be said that it is no
more culpable because of the difficulty which is brought
to the will, but it is more laudable because it wills to
undergo more evil or sorrowful passions for God, and
it is more culpable because it does not will patiently to
bear fewer adversities or it is more laudable because it
flees more and greater delights, and more vituperable
because it does not flee fewer and small delights, but
aequiesces in them.

It can likewise be said in another way, namely, that —
habit brings difficulty to the will. And I concede that
habit can be so intense that it inclines the will sufficiently .
to action in conformity with the sensitive appetite, so
that it can in no manner act in the contrary, unless per-
chance there be a state [i.e. a point beyond which it can
not go] in the increase of passion, and then will can
conquer the supreme passion, and consequently any
more remiss passion. And perhaps the sensitive ap-


os :
WILLIAM OF OCKHAM , 411


petite is not capable of such habit or passion beyond
a certain grade which the will can conquer. And ac-
cording to the first way, if the habit can increase so
much that it necessitates the will, one must say that the
will in such an act could not sin. Whence it would then
have no hope of liberty; yet not absolutely, because
in respect of other objects it could sin, and likewise in
respect of that object it could sin if the habit or the
passion be relaxed.

To the other preceding argument answer can be made
in another way, that some act in respect of a finite thing
can be more perfect than some act which is in respect
of an infinite.


Quopiiser IV.
Question XVIII.?°


Whether the wayfarer has any simple and proper con-
cept of Ged before {discursive knowledge by| composi-
tion and division or after.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it seems that he ‘has,
because the concept is simple of which are sought such
composite concepts as the following: Whether God is an
infinite being: whether he is the first actuality. But
such questions are raised concerning the concept of
God: therefore etc. The major premiss is clear because
such questions are not raised concerning the proper
composite concept of God, because then the same thing |
would be asked concerning itself; which is false.

To THE CONTRARY, no creature contains a proper and
simple concept of God essentially nor virtually: there-
fore, no creature can cause it.

10This question is numbered XVII in the 1487 edition.


412 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Conciusion. 1. To this question I say that the way-
farer can not have from pure natural things any knowl-
edge of God which is absolute not connotative, affirmative
not negative, simple not composite, proper not common,
before composition and division. ‘The reason of this is:
that otherwise no one would be able to deny that God
is, because if it is supposed that no proper knowledge
of any impossible thing is caused by sensation of the |
thing before composition and division; then since sensa-
tion has no relation to the impossible that it may cause
proper knowledge of it; then since for the same reason
sensation would cause proper notions of infinite impossi-
ble things, because it has the same relation to all im-
possibles; then I argue thus, that you concede that
proper knowledge of God is caused before composition
and division, and not from faith because we agree in
faith, and yet do not affirm this: therefore, it is known
evidently that proper knowledge of God is caused by
sensation, and consequently it is evident to every unbe-
liever that God is by the fact that he sees that whiteness
is. For he could argue evidently that the concept caused
by sensation mediating is not of anything impossible,
but possible; wherefore, by the sensation of whiteness
mediating for the thing, there is proper knowledge of
God before composition; and this knowledge is not*of
anything impossible; it is possible therefore that any
unbeliever be able to know God evidently. And since
in perpetual things being does not differ from being
able, any unbeliever can know evidently that God is;
which is false. Therefore I say that before composi-
tion and division, the wayfarer has no such concept nor
ean he have it.

Moreover, it is not of the nature of complex knowl-
edge of one thing to cause first incomplex, simple, and
proper knowledge of another thing, because it is not


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 413


intuitive, for such knowledge is caused immediately by
the thing, speaking naturally. Nor again is it abstrac-
tive, because if such knowledge were simple proper
knowledge, it necessarily presupposes intuitive knowl-
edge. Since therefore the wayfarer can not see God
intuitively in this state he can have no such knowledge
of God.

2. To the second I say that the wayfarer can not
have such a simple and proper concept after composition
and definition. The reason of this is that discourse is
properly among complexes: therefore, by discourse alone
only complex knowledge can be acquired, and not incom-
plex knowledge which is presupposed in composition
and division: therefore ete.

Bur to THE conTRaRy. 1. Because if this were
granted we would then understand God by understanding
nothing else; this is proved because these common con-
cepts, being, first, three and one, follow each other in
the same order of time in mind as in word. But when
the first concept is in mind, God is no more understood
than creature, nor when the second is in mind, nor when
the third: therefore, God is never understood by a proper
concept, unless these concepts formed successively con-
tain the simple and proper concept.

2. Moreover, to understand God otherwise it is neces-
sary to begin with being and descend by composition
and definition; and thus it will be a long time before
one could again understand God.

3. Moreover, the definition of a created substance can
cause a simple concept proper to the thing defined:
therefore, the description of God can cause a simple
concept of God. The consequence holds, because other-
wise a definition and a simple concept of the thing
defined would not be distinguished in the predicamental
line, nor would there be three terms in demonstration


414 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


because there would not be in demonstration a simple
concept of the thing defined.

4. Moreover, otherwise there would not be a relative
concept in us, because neither extreme can cause a
concept of the other, nor is the extreme concept caused
before composition and division, because experience
teaches that understanding does not have a relative con-
cept before it compares one thing to another by composi-
tion and division, as when the understanding forms the
following complex: this whiteness is such as that is.

5. The concept of the likeness of a chimera is caused.
Moreover, then, we would not be able to have an act of
understanding in one instant, for the parts of the com-
posite concept follow each other in mind as in word, as
has already been said.

6. Moreover, when the understanding forms the’ fol-
lowing complex, God is distinguished from anything
else which is not he, either the subject of that proposi-
tion in the mind is a simple concept of God, and the
proposition is had; or else it is not, and then I shall
make the proposition by demonstrating the thing which
God is thus: this thing which is signified by this complex
is distinguished from every other which is not it; and
then I demonstrate God by one actuality, and the propo-
sition is had. Or else by composition from many acts,
and there will be a process in infinitum.

1. To the first of these I concede that the wayfarer
can not naturally understand God, understanding nothing
else, because although by the total concept alone I under-
stand only the being which is God, nevertheless by any
partial concept of that composite I understand something
other than God, because any such concept is common
to God and others. But further I say that the proof
is incomplete because although it is possible in some
case that common concepts follow each other in the


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 415


_ same order in mind as in word, yet it is necessary that
one can form some proposition in which many common
concepts are predicated or subjected at the same time,
and consequently in such a composite concept God can
be understood.

2. To the second I say that it is not necessary to
begin from being, because one can begin from the first
being or from the ass. Nor is such a descent or dis-
course by composition and division required for under-
standing God again, nor is a great amount of time
required, because when God is understood first by any
composite concept, he can be understood again in an
instant by an interior habit inclining to a consimilar
notion, just as in an instant a whole proposition can
be formed.

3. As regards the third I deny the assumption, that
the concept of the thing defined is presupposed by a
common law in the definition. For knowledge of the
thing defined by definition properly so called is caused
because of the mediating of intuitive knowledge of one
individual, because the concept of the species can be
abstracted from one individual. Division, however, can
not be caused with respect to every part of it except by
knowledge of many individuals. For proof of this I
say that neither of these impossibles follows, for the
concept of the thing defined is not distinguished from
definition because of the fact that it is caused by it,
because it is in no manner caused by it. But they are
distinguished from each other and causally from their
causes because they are diverse.

4. To the fourth I say that the argument is to the
contrary because the relative concept is compounded and
distinguished positively at the same time from both
extremes. I prove this because the subject and predi-
cate of a proposition precede the composition at least


416 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


in order of nature. Now the understanding however
in the very formation of the following complex, this
whiteness is similar or equal to another, asserts the rela-
tive concepts from the part of the predicate: therefore,
these concepts precede the proposition. There is this
one order, therefore, because when two whitenesses have
been seen, a specious concept [i.e. a concept of the
species] of whiteness is caused in the mind, and I say
this immediately from the whitenesses themselves or
from the ideas of them, and the proposition is formed
later, at least according to the order of nature. To the
proof of this I say that experience teaches that one
does not judge by an act of assenting that those white-
nesses are similar before the understanding compares
one to the other by composition and division; and this is
so because such assent presupposes composition and
division, as has been said above. But experience does
not teach that one does not have a relative concept
before composition and division.

5. To the fifth I say that we can understand a chimera
in one instant by a composite concept involving a contra-
diction, but in no wise by a simple proper conception.
And further I say that the proof makes a false assump-
tion, namely, that the parts of a composite concept
follow each other in the mind as in the word, because
the concepts exist together in the indivisible subject, but
in the word they do not.

- 6. To the last I say that the subject of this proposi-
tion: God is distinguished etc., is not a simple concept
but a composite one. In the same way I say that in
forming the following proposition: this thing signified by
this composite concept is distinguished etc., the subject
of this second proposition is composite of the concept of
God and the demonstrative pronoun. And further, in
forming the proposition which states the following: this


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 417
thing signified by this second composite concept is dis-
tinguished etc., the subject is still a composite concept.
And therefore I concede a process in infinitum in form-
ing such propositions distinct at least in number, and
the subject in each proposition is always a composite
and not a simple concept.

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT I say that such com-
posite concepts as infinite being, pure act, are sought
and demonstrated of the concept of being taken particu-
larly, as when it is asked whether there is in the
universe any infinite being and pure act. The subject
of this proposition, however, is a concept compounded
from the concept of being in common and of this syn-
categorematic, any, and thus it is not improper that
one composite concept be sought and proved of another |
composite concept.


Quopiiser V.
Question VII.
Whether several proper concepts can be had of God.


PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT. And it is argued that they
can not, because either absolutely the same thing corre-
sponds to these concepts or not. If it does, then the
concepts are synonymous. If not then there is some
real distinction in the divine beings besides the distine-
tion of persons.

To THE conTRARY, the supreme good, infinite being,
pure act, which are several concepts proper to God, are
_ predicated of God: therefore etc.

Conciusion. To this question I say that concerning

God there can not be had several concepts proper and
convertible with him, all of which are absolute not


418 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


connotative, affirmative not negative, simple not com-
posite. By the first are excluded such concepts as first
cause, creative, governing, glorifying. By the second
are excluded such concepts as incorporeal, immortal,
infinite. By the third are excluded such concepts as
infinite being, being intensively, supreme good, pure
act. But when these conditions are circumscribed no
one can have two proper quidditative concepts of God,
nor one quidditative and another denotative. And I
speak of the concept which is abstractive knowledge.


1. The first is proved because if it is thus, then for ©


the same reason an infinite number of quidditative con-
cepts can be had of God, because no cause can be given
wherefore they may be reduced to a certain number
if two can be had, since argument is impossible from
the simplicity of an object, for notwithstanding the
simplicity you posit two proper quidditative concepts,
and thus another for the same reason would posit an
infinite number.

Moreover, a thing is not otherwise perceptible by
abstractive concepts than by intuitive concepts; but


only intuitively is the thing which is visible by a single ~


vision, distinct and clear by a single conception which
is the proper idea: therefore, only one such proper
concept is possible of God.

Moreover, if the understanding is the same and the
object the same, and there is no diversity, then the


concept which is the effect will be the same and only —


one: otherwise every way of proving the unity of the
effect would disappear.


:


2. The second is proved because such distinct con- —
cepts of different! kinds [ratio] can not be had of the


same thing of which one concept is quidditative and |


The 1491 edition has the same kind.


¢


WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 419


. another connotative without any distinction in the thing,
and without any extrinsic connotation, and without any
grammatical and logical mode. Wherefore, if all these
are set aside, whatever is signified by the one is signified
by the rest and in the same mode of signifying, and thus
both will be quidditative or neither.

3. Moreover, of the same simple there are not two
proper abstractive likenesses of which neither is like
the other. But the concept is like that of which it is
[the concept]: therefore, there could not be two such
concepts, one quidditative, another denominative.

4. Moreover, by each concept the whole quiddity is
expressed and nothing else: therefore, each is quiddita-
tive, because it is this for a concept to be quidditative.

[1. No reply to the first argument is given in either
edition, doubtless because the argument is in acrordanice
with the conclusion. |

2. To the second I say that one such proper concept
of God can not be had naturally, neither before com-
position nor after, together with all the aforesaid condi-
tions, as has been shown in another quodlibet.

3. To the third I say that the blessed, seeing God
for the first time, has only one such proper concept
of God after such a vision, because he has one abstrac-
itive notion which is the proper concept of God, absolute,
affirmative, and simple, which can not correspond to
any other.

4. To the fourth I say that our understanding can have
no such simple, proper concept of any creature without
sight of the creature, nor can it with any sight whatever,
and this is because any such notion or concept is equally
a likeness and répresents all very similar individuals,
and thus it is no longer the concept of one more properly
than of the other.

1. Bur To THE CONTRARY, the negative concept is not


420 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


predicated affirmatively of the thing of which it is [the
_ concept]. This is proved because the affirmative and
the negative concepts of the same thing are contradic-
tory concepts, such as white and not-white, and clearly
they signify the same thing, otherwise they would not
be contradictory, and consequently-these two concepts
are not predicated affirmatively of the same thing; but
infinite is predicated affirmatively of the divine wisdom,
wherefore the following is true: the divine wisdom is
infinite: therefore ete.

2. Moreover, although’ infinite, which is part of the
complex concept, is negative, yet the whole complex
concept is affirmative, because it is equivalent to an
affirmative proposition such as the following: the divine
wisdom is infinite.

1. To the first of these I say that the negative con-
cept signifies something negatively, something affirma-
tively. For example, not-white signifies whitenesses
negatively, of which it is not verified, nor does it stand
for them. Affirmatively, however, it signifies all things
other than whiteness, and concerning these it is predi-
cated affirmatively, and it stands for them because, what-
soever else may have been demonstrated from whiteness,
this is true, this is not-whiteness.

2. And by this [distinction] I say to the argument}
that the negative concept is not predicated affirmatively
of the thing which it signifies negatively, yet it is truly
predicated affirmatively of the thing which it signifies
affirmatively; and therefore infinite is predicated affirma-
tively of no finite thing, because infinite signifies all
finite things negatively; but it signifies all infinite things
affirmatively; and therefore I say that it is predicated
truly of all these, and it stands for them truly.

To the proof I say that although affirmative and
negative concepts are contradictory, yet obviously they


' WILLIAM OF OCKHAM 421


do not signify the same thing, except this contradiction,
being and non-being, because whatever being signifies
affirmatively, non-being signifies negatively; and it signi-
fies nothing else affrmatively.1* In other contradictories
the negative concept signifies many things affirmatively,
which the affirmative concept does not signify, as not-
white signifies many things affirmatively which white
does not signify. But such concepts are said to be
contradictory, because that which one signifies affirma-
tively, the other signifies negatively.

To THE QUESTION PROPosED I say that finite and
infinite are opposed: therefore, infinite is predicated
affirmatively of nothing of which finite is predicated
affirmatively, and this is because infinite signifies all
finite things negatively, but of those things which are
-not finite, of which sort God is, infinite is predicated
affirmatively. By this the answer to the second is clear.

To THE PRINCIPAL ARGUMENT I say that several com-
posite concepts can be had of God formally and equiva-
lently, but not simple in the stated way.

2 The edition of 1491 has negatively.


GLOSSARY’
LATIN—ENGLISH


A


Asxatio, denial.
AxsotutTr, absolutely, in a variety of senses: an attribute is
predicated absolutely (as opposed to accommodatively)


1The glossary which follows does not, of course, pretend to
completeness. Its purpose is to clarify the terms and dis-
tinctions used in the preceding translations. The words dis-
cussed are, therefore, for the most part those proper to the
problems of knowledge and the distinctions of logic; terms
from the ethical and political sciences have been omitted
almost entirely; theological, metaphysical, physical terms have
in some cases been defined. The principal need for such a
glossary is in the circumstance that writers in the middle ages
had constantly in mind detailed distinctions and precise usages,
which latter-day writers in the platonic and aristotelian tradi-
tions frequently ignore. There may be some question concern-
ing whether Plato and Aristotle are correctly interpreted in
the distinctions which had become current; but usually the —
medieval commentator, if read carefully, can make a good
case for the relevance of his distinctions. In any case the
commentator himself can not be understood if the distinctions
are not kept in mind; and in many cases, whether they are
good or bad platonism and aristotelianism, they are good
philosophic distinctions and such as might well be recalled from
their oblivion into present-day usage. But the glossary is
designed to fill a second need as well. The tendency recently
in translations from greek and latin philosophers, has been to |
seek out anglo-saxon terms, and to avoid latin derivatives.
Words as clear and as definitely fixed in a long tradition of
usage as privation, accident, and even substance, have been
replaced by barbarous compound terms, which awaken no echo


422


GLOSSARY 423


when it applies to all the individuals of a given species;
it is predicated absolutely or simply (as opposed to com-
paratively) when it applies to its subject, not as compared
to something else, but as it is in itself; words differ abso-
lutely when they signify different things, connotatively
when they signify the same thing, but one involves a
relation not expressed in the other; in still different senses
absolutely is contrasted with dependently, hypothetically,
modally, totally, in space and time.

Axstracrio, abstraction, the separation of one thing from an-
other; a thing which is taken separately from those things
with which it is joined is taken abstractly; particularly the
process of deriving the universal from the species of par-


in‘the mind of one familiar with the tradition, and afford no
entrance into the tradition to one unfamiliar with it. In the
translations above an attempt has been made to return to the
terminology of the classical english tradition, not of some con- '
structed anglo-saxon model, but of the english philosophers
of the seventeenth century. Most of the latin derivatives
which are used, and the senses in which they are used, have
justification in the works of Hobbes, Kenelm Digby, Cud-
worth, Culverwell, More, even Bacon, and scores of writers
contemporary with them. It was only with the nineteenth
century that the word cause became restricted to efficient cause
and accident came to be associated only with unforeseen oc-
eurrences; there is no reason why they should not be intel-
ligible in their original broader meanings. On the contrary
two further reasons enforce the wisdom of preserving the older
usages: first, that the mass of commentary on Aristotle will
be rendered more difficult, if not impossible, of understanding
if the terms of the discussion are changed arbitrarily after
two thousand years; second, that as latin became a supple
philosophic medium only after expressions had been con-
structed in it on the model of greek distinctions, so too, english
is a richer philosophic language if the expressions which were
constructed in it on the model of the latin are preserved.
The paragraph numbers of the Taurini edition of Thomas
Aquinas’s Commentary on the Metaphysics of Aristotle (Tau-
rini: Marietti, 1915) and Commentary on Aristotle's on the
Soul (Taurini: Marietti, 1925) are given in referen~ to those


works.


42 4 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ticular things. Abstraction may be total (by which a
superior or more universal nature is considered without
the properties which are related to the individual or the
species, as a given man may be considered as rational
mortal animal) or formal (by which a nature is taken in
its essence alone, apart from the subject in which it
subsists, as humanity, square). ‘According to Thomas
(Sum. Theol. I, gq. 40, a. 3 conel.), “Abstraction by the
understanding is of two sorts: one by which the universal
is abstracted from the particular, as animal from man,
another by which form is abstracted from matter, as the
form of circle is abstracted by the understanding from
all sensible matter.”

Asstractivum, abstractive, according to the nominalists, par-
ticularly Ockham, abstractive knowledge is knowledge ‘by
which the thing is apprehended not as it is in itself, but
through the species of some other thing, as opposed to
intuitive knowledge by which the thing is known imme-
diately as it is in itself.

Accipens, accident, that which (unlike substance) is not in
itself, but inheres in some subject, as figure or any mode.
Logically accident is a quality which is understood to
advene on a subject or “happen” (accidere) to it in such
wise that it does not constitute the essence of the subject
nor flow necessarily from its essence. It is commonly
defined, therefore, as that which is present or absent
without the corruption of the subject; white and learned
are accidents of man. According to the pseudo-Grosseteste
(see above, vol. I, p. 295), it is that “the being of which
.consists only in inhering in something else.” Aristotle
describes accident (Top. 1, 5, 102” 4-14), as that which is
not definition, property, or genus, yet belongs to the thing,
or as something which may possibly either belong or not
belong to any one and same thing, as for example sitting
posture. Compare PRAEDICABILIS, SUBSTANTIA, PER SE.

AccwenrauiterR, accidentally; things differ accidentally when
they are individuals belonging to the same species, as —
Socrates and Plato. A substance advenes on another acci-
dentally when it advenes by contact, as clothing on a man,
or when it advenes as mover of a mobile, as an angel to a
body which he assumes. Contrasted with essentially, sub-_
stantially.


GLOSSARY 425


Accrperr, to happen, in the sense that accidental qualities
advene on substances without corrupting or generating
them. |

AcciprrE, to receive or undertake, particularly (as Anselm)
to receive from God; therefore, to be determined by that
from which one has one’s being.

Acrio, action, properly the actuality of a power, as being is
the actuality of a substance or essence. Contrasted there-
fore to passion. According to Thomas (Sum. Theol. I,
q. 41, a. 1 ad 2; compare also ibid. ad 3;.and I, q. 42, a. 2
concl.), “Action according to the first imposition of the
name, indicates the origin of motion. For just as motion,
according as it is in the mobile from some mover, is called
a passion, so the origin of that motion, as it begins from
something else and is terminated im that which is moved, is
called action. Therefore if the motion is taken away,
action means nothing else than the order of origin, ac-
cording to which it proceeds from some cause.or principle
into that which is from that principle.” Sometimes action
is distinguished into two sorts, one which goes forth into
an exterior matter, as heating and drying, the other which
remains in the agent, as understanding, feeling, wishing,
the difference between the two being that the former is
not the perfection of the agent which moves, but of the
thing moved, the latter is the perfection of the agent.
Properly, however, the latter variety alone, that which is
the perfection of the agent, is called acrio, the former is
Factio, and the two are kinds of oprrationrs. Compare
therefore, FACTIO, OPERATIO.

Actus, act, actuality, either an operation (in the sense of
actio), aS an act of the understanding or a creditive act
(Ockham) ; act in this sense is a second act as contrasted
to the power or faculty which is its proximate principle
and in virtue of which the operation is produced: or else
that which determines the thing or perfects it, as the
soul is the actuality, perfection, and entelechy of the
body; in this sense the formal actuality. Thence it is
sometimes taken as the entity or existence of the thing;
in this sense whatever is not nothing, but exists, is an
entitative act.

Ap auievip, relative to something, thence relativity, the fourth
of the ten categories, relation. (xpés 7). Aristotle de-
‘fines relation (Cat. 7, 6°36), “Those things are said to he


\ |


t


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


relative, which are said to be that which they are of
something else or are, said to be otherwise in any manner


‘whatever as related to something else, as the greater is


said to be greater because it is so related to something
else.” Examples of relatives are disposition, double,
slave, son. Aristotle distinguishes three kinds of relative
terms (Met. V, c. 15, 1020°25-31), “(1) as half to double
and treble to a third, and in general that which contains
something else many times to that which is contained
many times in something else, and that which exceeds to
that which is exceeded; (2) as that which can heat to
that which can be heated, and that which can cut to that
which can be cut, and in general the active to the passive;
(3) as the measurable to the measure and the knowable to
knowledge and the sensible to sense.” According to
Thomas (?) (Sum. Log. V, ¢. 1), “It must be noted that
since relation [relatio] has little of entity, therefore the
Philosopher does not treat of it but only of relatives .
[relattoum], which because of, their greater concretion can
be known to us, for he calls the relative that [relative] to
something [ad aliquid], and he defines it thus: those things
are said to be relative [ad aliquid] which are said to be
that very thing which they are of another, or are said to
be otherwise in any manner whatever to something else.
To understand this definition it must be known that.cer-
tain things are relative according to statement, certain
things according to being; certain things are real rela-
tives, but others are relatives according to reason. Those
are called relatives according to statement, which state,
as that which is signified by them principally, a thing of
one of the other categories, but state secondarily a reia-
tion or state a respect: as knowledge states, as that which
is signified by it principally, a condition of the mind, and
thus it is in the first species of quality; but secondarily
it states a relation to the knowable, and of sense to the
sensible, which is a certain power in the second species of
quality, and such relatives are relatives according to state-
ment. But relatives according to being are those which
signify, as that which is signified principally by them, a —
respect to something else. Real relatives are those which —
hold really when all act of understanding has been cir- :
cumscribed, as father and son; for having circumscribed +
all act of understanding, father is referred to son and -


yy


GLOSSARY ~~ i a


son to father because the father really gave birth to the
son and the son was born of the father.” According to
Thomas, Avicenna is responsible for a fourfold division
of relatives according to reason; see above, Thomas
Aquinas, Quaest. disp. de Ver. q. 1, a. 5 ad 16, pp. 199-200.

Apaxrauario, adequation, commensuration, the identity of two
quantities ‘or the motion and approach to identity of
quantity, as the commensuration of space and the thing
in space; thence any approach to equality, as opposed to
assimilation or approach to likeness; thus truth is the
adequation of thing and understanding.

ADAEQUABILITAS, adequability.

Aravaliras, equality; things are equal when they agree in
quantity: that can be in two ways, dimensively or virtually,
as quantity is of two sorts, modal and virtual. According
to Thomas (In lib. I Sent. d. 19, q. 1, a. 1 sol.), “Since
equality is founded on unity of quantity, it is the same
for a thing to be equal to something else, as to have its’
quantity, and it is the same for it to be like something
else, as for it to have its quality.” The equality of things
may be quantitative (as in commutative justice) or pro-
portional equality (as in distributive justice). Since pro-
portionality is equality of proportions the principle of
these two usages is the strict usage by which those things
are equal which are one in quantity; equality is a species
of proportion, since equality is the proportion of any
things which have a single quantity. Compare simitrrvupo,
QUANTITAS, ANALOGIA, PROPORTIO, AEQUIPARANTIA.

AEQUIPARANTIA, comparison, equiparance, equivalence ; includes
all symmetrical relations, that is, relations in which both
extremes are denominated in the same way, as the rela-
tions of likeness and equality; contrasted to rRELATIO pis-
“PARANTIAE, all asymmetrical relations in which the ex-
tremes are diversely denominated, as the relation of father
and son, greater and less.

AEQUALITAS AEQUIPARANTIAE, comparative equality, equality
according to absolute quantity: that which exists between
two quantities of the same measure, as the equality ‘of
two yards to two yards, as opposed to AEQUALITAS PROPOR- |
TIONIS, proportional equality, such as the equality of the
fingers of the hand, “which are not equal according to
absolute quantity, since one, when superposed on another
exceeds it, yet they are equal according to proportion,


428 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


since, as the quantity of one finger suffices to its office,
so the quantity of another suffices to its” (Thomas, In
lib. IIT Sent. d. 36, q. 1, a. 4 sol.; compare also In lib.
IV Sent. d. 32,q. 1, a. 3 sol.). /

Axgurvocum, equivocal ( dudmvuuos); “Things are said to be
named equivocally when, though they have a common
name, the definition corresponding to the name differs
for each, as a man and that which is painted in a picture
are animals, for they have only the name in common”
(Aristotle, Cat. 1, 1*); thus the bear is a constellation and
an animal. Compare uNivoca.

Arautvocatio, equivocation; “Where there is pure equivoca-
tion there is no likeness in the thing, but only a unity of
name” (Thomas, Cont. Gent. I, ¢. 33.).

Axrstimatio, estimation, the faculty of the sensitive soul which
judges of the advantageous and agreeable, the hurtful and
contrary, by perception of the constitutional qualities of
the thing, which are unperceived by the other faculties of
sense; in rational beings this function is exercised by the
cogitative faculty or particular reason.

ArTERNITAs, eternity; the principle (ratio) of eternity consists
in having its entire being altogether, and therefore lack-
ing beginning and end; proper only to God in an abso-
lute sense; “the perfect and completely simultaneous pos-
session of interminable life” (Boethius, Consol. Phil. V,
prosa 6).

AEVUM, aeon, permanent duration, immutable in its nature, —
having a beginning, but lacking an end (Simplicius, Phys.
IV, 154). According to Thomas (Quaest. Quodl. V, q.
4, a. 7 concl.), “Aeon will be nothing other than the —
participation of eternity, so that essential eternity is at-—
tributed to God himself, but aeon, as it were, participated
eternity, to spiritual substances, which are above time.”
Aeon is medium between time and eternity.. Thomas says
(Sum. Theol. I, q. 10, a. 5 concl.), “Since eternity is the
measure of permanent being, in the respect in which any-
thing recedes from permanence of being, in that respect
it recedes from eternity. Certain things recede from
permanence of being in such wise that their being is the
subject of change and consists in change, and things of
this sort are measured by time, as all motion and like-_
wise the being of all corruptible things. Certain things °
on the other hand recede less from permanence of being, *


GLOSSARY — 429


because their being neither consists in change nor is it the
subject of change, yet they have change adjoined, either
in actuality or in potentiality. This is clear in the case of
celestial bodies, the substantial being of which is im-
mutable; yet they have immutable being together with mu-
tability with respect to place. And in the same way it is
clear in the case of angels, because they have immutable
being together with mutability with respect to election,
in so far as that pertains to their nature,‘ and together
with mutability of intelligences and affections and places
in their mode. And therefore things of this sort are
measured by aeon, which is medium between eternity and
time. The being, however, which eternity measures, is
neither mutable nor adjoined to mutability. Thus, there-
fure, time has prior and posterior; aeon does not have in
itself prior and posterior, but they can be conjoined to
it; eternity, however, does not have prior and posterior,
nor is it compatible with them.”

AFFECTIO, affection (in the sense of Scoditicaanys condition,
affect; the inclination of the soul to something; arrrctio
and arrecrus are related to the final cause as xEFFEcTtO
and rerrrectus (effection and effect) to the efficient cause;
affection is, in other words, the inclination of any thing
considered in terms of its end as opposed to its antecedent
conditions.

\rrectus, affect, state of body or mind, the state tc which
affection is process or inclination, love; sometimes used
to denote specifically the emotional faculty of the soul.

Acerr, to do, to work, to act; to act is nothing other than to
do something actually; this is accomplished through form;
it is the communication of that which the agent is actually
according to that which is possible. Usually distinguished
from FAceERE in that it does not go forth into an exterior
matter; but often used synonymously with it. Compare
FACERE, ACTIO.

Acens, agent, active cause. Compare INTELLECTUS AGENS.

\riauip, something, defined by Thomas Aquinas as the division
of one thing from another. Compare res,

ALTERATIO, alteration, ( dAdoiwors ), motion or change in the

_ category of quality. Compare Morus, Passio.

AmpHinotia, amphibology, a phrase or proposition susceptible

of more than one interpretation.


430 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Anatocia, analogy, contrasted by Bonaventura to wnivoca-
tion. A name is used analogically when it is taken ac-
cording to different significations, yet not without a prin-
ciple on which what is common to them depends, as healthy
is spoken of analogically relative to animal, medicine,
pulse, because of their relation to health. Derived from
the greek, dvadoyia, proportion. Compare Arauivoca,
UNIVOCA.

ANALOGIA ATTRIBUTIONIS, attributive analogy, an analogy in
which the terms are derived from something to which
that which is signified by the name is proper and to
which the terms are referred for an identical reason, as
food, medicine, and pulse are called healthy by attributive
analogy, because the word healthy is derived from health
which is proper to animal.

ANALOGIA PROPORTIONIS, proportional analogy, an analogy in
which the terms arise from a common name, because that
which is signified by the name, although it is absolutely
different in the various terms, can none the less be in
accord through a likeness or order which obtains between
the terms, as animal and food, or animal and pulse are
called healthy by a proportional analogy, not because of
some relation to a given principal thing, but because
health (although different in the various terms) presents
in them a signification in some respect the same.

ANIMAL, animal, that is, a corporeal creature with a soul; a
sensitive animated substance; in the animal man, the
intellective soul is superadded to the sensitive. The twe
principal characteristics of animal life are sensibility and
movement. According to Albert the Great (see above.
vol. I, p. 341), “The soul is intellectual because it oper-
ates without using the body, and animal because it uses
the organic body.”

AppaRENTIA, evidence, that is, apparentness, in the logical
sense of the apparentness or evidence of a proposition
also in the sense of appearance, as phenomenal.

Appretitus, appetite, natural appetite, the power or inclina:
tion of a thing by which it tends naturally to its ow
good and end, as matter tends to form; elicited appetite
on the contrary, arises from knowledge. Compare appre
HENSIO.


GLOSSARY 431


APPREHENSIO, apprehension, the simple act of the understand-
ing conceiving a thing without affirmation or denial; all
animal activities are either apprehensive or appetitive.

APPROPRIATUM, appropriated quality or aspect, as the Trinity
of God has in creatures qualities appropriated to each of

_ the persons, thus, unity, truth, and goodness.

Arrituno, aptitude, natural inclination, ability, or order toward
something.

APTITUDINALIS, aptitudinal,

ARGUMENTUM, argument, the process of reason from the known
to making manifest the unknown; according to Boethius,
the reason of the doubtful thing making for faith; by argu-
ment the intellect is induced to adhere in a given truth;
the etymology is sometimes given from arguing the mind
(arguere mentem) to assenting to something; broadly of
any discourse of reason from principles to conclusions;
inference by which a conclusion is demonstrated from
premisses; one of the two ways of knowing according to
Bacon, experience being the other.

ARGUMENTUM A PRIORI, @ priori argument, inference from
cause to effect (Ockham). Equivalent to propter quid in
older usage.

ARGUMENTUM A POSTERIORI, a posteriori argument, inference
from effect to cause (Ockham). Equivalent to quia in
older usage.

Ars, art, defined by Thomas (Sum. Theol. Ia Ilae, q. 57, a. 3
concl.) as nothing other than the right reason of any
works to be done; the right reason of things which are to
be made (factibilis); from art proceed the things the
forms of which are in the soul of the artist.. As opposed
to the virtues or powers, the arts are factive; they are
prepared by emperience (experientia, peritia) and are
therefore possible without knowledge on the part of the
artisan, though they involve knowledge (scientia). Aris-
totle states the principles of the distinction (An. Post.
II, 19, 10073-9), “So out of sense-perception comes to be
what we call memory, and out of frequently repeated
memories of the same thing develops experience; for a
number of memories constitute a single experience. From
experience again—i.e. from the universal now stabilized
in its entirety within the soul, the one besides the many

-as if it is constituted a single identity within them all,—
originate art [réyxn=ars] and_knowledge or science


432


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


[émorhun = scientia], art in the sphere of coming to be or
generation and science in the sphere of being.” According
to Albert the Great (see above, vol. I, p. 312), “There
seems to be this difference between science and art, that
science contemplates and examines principally certain
causes of its truth, but art considers rather the manner of
operating according to the truth transmitted and pro-
posed.” According to Aristotle, the human race lives by
art and reasonings, in counterdistinction from animals
other than man who have little connected experience, but
live by appearances and memories. (Met. I, c. 1, 980°27-
98127). “From memory experience is produced in men; for
many memories of the same thing produce finally the
capacity for a single experience. And it seems almost that
experience is like science and art; but really science and
art come to me through experience; for ‘experience made
art’, as Polus says, and rightly, ‘but inexperience luck’.
And art arises, when from many notions gained by experi-
ence [that is, from many ‘experimental concepts’] one uni-
versal judgment concerning similar things is formed.”
According to Thomas (In lib. I An. Post. lect. 1) logic is
the art of arts. “For art seems to be nothing other than a
certain ordination of reason by which human acts arrive by
determined means at their proper end. But reason can
direct not only the acts of inferior parts, but is directive
also of its own acts.... And this is the art of logie,
that is, rational science. It is not only rational from the
fact that it is according to reason, but it is common to
all the arts. And therefore it seems to be the art of arts.
because it directs us in the act of reason, from which all
the arts proceed.” Compare FACTIO, NATURA, DISCIPLINA;
QUADRIVIUM, TRIVIUM.


Artiriciauis, artificial, that which is the product of art as


opposed to natural things, which are the product of
nature; the forms of artificial things are accidents, whereas
the forms of natural things are genera of substance.


Artiriciose, artificially; that is made artificially which requires


the art or industry of some one, as opposed to that whiel
is made naturally.


AssimiLart, to be assimilated; the likeness of two qualities o1


the motion of approach to such likeness. According t
Thomas. (In lib, I Sent. d. 19, q. 1, a. 2 sol.), “To be
assimilated posits, in addition to that which is involvec


GLOSSARY 43%


in being like, a certain motion and access to unity of
quality, and in like manner to be adequated is related to
quantity.” \

AvuGMENTATIO, augmentation, increase (attnots ), motion or
change in the category of quantity. Compare moruvs.


B


Beatitupo, beatitude, blessedness, happiness; defined by
Boethius as the state perfect by the aggregation of all
goods; its principle (ratio) is stability of confirmation in
the good; it consists in the most perfect operation of one
possessed of reason and intellect; considered from the
part of the object, God alone is beatitude, since one is
blessed only from understanding him, but from the part
of the act of understanding, beatitude is something created
in blessed creatures, as it is something uncreated in God;
either in the sense of the supreme good which is the ul-
timate end or the acquisition and fruition of that. good;
also in the sense of the beatitudes enumerated in the
Gospels, which according to Bacon, are the fourth of the
seven grades of inner experience.

Beartvs, blessed, particularly in the sense of those who, having
gone to their reward, see God perspicuously. Compare
VIATOR.

Bonwum, good (dé yaw), the conformity of that which is to the
appetite; according to Thomas Aquinas this is the good
relatively, that is, in its order to those whom it perfects
and by whom it is desired. That is good absolutely which
is good considered according to its nature; that which in
itself is good absolutely can be good relative to one person
and evil relative to another. God’s essential actuality is
life most good and eternal. Compare TRANSCENDENTALES.


Cc


CarTrGorREMATICE, categorematically; a thing is affirmed cate-
gorematically to be such or such because it is actually
such, as God is said categorematically to be infinite.
Compare syNCATEGOREMATICE.

CATHEGREUMA, CATEGOREMA, categorematic term, one which is
significative in itself and can therefore be subject or
predicate of a proposition without addition of any other


43.4: MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


term; one which makes perfect sense combined with the
verb is, as, Isaiah ts. Compare syYNCATHEGREUMA.

Carrcoria, category, the real order and disposition of cate-
gorematic terms. Compare PRAEDICAMENTA.

Causa, cause, reason, that from which a thing has its origin
in such wise that it is produced properly from it and
therefore depends on it in being and action. Thomas says
(Sum. Theol. I, q. 33, a. 1 ad 1.), “The word cause seems
to import a diversity of substance and a dependence of
one on the other, which the word principle does not im-
port.” Compare, therefore, princirium. In the aristo-
telian tradition, causes (airia) were classified, under four
heads, efficient, final, formal, material, and each included
a great diversity of kinds. According to Aristotle (Phys.
II, c. 3, 195°15-26), “But all the causes we have enumerated
full into four most manifest modes. For letters are the
causes of syllables, and the material is the cause of manu-
factured articles, and fire and other [elements] of this
sort are causes of bodies, and the parts are causes of the
whole, and the premisses are causes of the conclusion, in
the sense that they are the causes out of which these
things respectively are. But some of them are causes in
the sense of subject, for example the parts, and others
are causes in ‘the sense of essence, as whole, and com-
position, and species. And again fertilizing sperm, and
the physician, and the one who takes counsel, and in
general the agent is a cause in the sense of that from
which the beginning of the change is, whether of coming
to rest or of motion. And finally some are causes in the
sense of the end and the good of the others. But it is
in the sense of end of the others that cause is used in its
fullest and most important sense, and the end of the other
causes has sought to be [that is, each cause desires its
own good or end], although it is the same to say ‘
good’ as ‘what seems to be good.” Compare princirrom,
ELEMENTUM.

Causa EFFICIENS, ¢@fficient cause, that which initiates the
process of change or brings about its cessation when the
process is completed, as the action of a voluntary agent
e.g. a smith, or any agent.

Causa FINALIs, final cause, the end or purpose for the sake of
which the process is initiated, as when a man takes exer:
cise for the sake of his health.


‘


GLOSSARY 435


Causa Formauis, formal cause, the form or characteristics of
the type, which matter receives, by which it is brought
within the definition of the thing it is said to be, whether
specifically or generically, as the ratio of two notes by
which they are said to be an octave; that which determines

matter and in a sense perfects it.

Cavsa MATERIALIS, material cause, that from which the gen-
erative process starts, as the bronze or marble of a statue.

Causa ACCIDENTALIS, accidental cause, a cause considered,
not in itself but associated with irrelevant accidents, thus
Polycleitus (instead of the sculptor) is the cause acci-
dentally of the statue.

Causa PRopriIA, proper cause, the agent considered qua agent,
not according to his accidental characteristics, thus the
sculptor is the proper cause of the statue.

Causarivum, causative; the practical intellect (unlike the
speculative) is not only apprehensive, but also causative.

Crerrirupo, certitude; according to Thomas Aquinas (Quaest.
disp. de Ver. q. 6, a. 3 concl.), “Certitude of knowledge is
when knowledge does not depart in any respect from that
which is found in the thing, but estimates concerning the
thing as the thing is. And because certain estimation
concerning the thing is had most of all through the cause
of the thing, therefore the name certitude is treated in
the order of cause to effect, so that the order of cause to
effect is said to be certain, when the cause infallibly pro-
duces the effect”; the well-educated man seeks only so
much certitude as the matter into which he is inquiring
permits: certitude in contingent and variable things can
not be so great as certitude in necessary things; certitude
is the firmness of adhesion of the cognoscitive faculty in
its cognoscible, and it therefore consists in the firmness
with which the mind adheres to any given proposition.

Coarrartio, connection.

Cocirarr, to think, to judge, to cogitate; according to Thomas,
quoting Augustine (In lib. I Sent. d. 3, q. 4 sol.), “To cogi-
tate is to consider a thing according to its parts and
properties.”

Coerratio, thought, judgment, cogitation, consists properly
in the inquisition of truth.

Virtus cocrrativa, the cogitative faculty, the highest fac-
ulty of the sensitive soul, directive of all the others, tak-
ing the place of reason in brutes (according to some


436 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


philosophers, as Bacon) ; by means of it the spider weaves
its web, the swallow builds its nest, and so forth; by
means of it too man dreams. According to other philos-
ophers, as Thomas Aquinas, this highest sensitive power
is properly called cogitation only in men, in whom the
rational soul is superposed on the sensitive, whereas=in
brute animals, its functions are taken over by a natural
“estimation”; he distinguishes the two (In lib. II de An.
lect. 1, 398) : “The cogitative faculty apprehends the in-
dividual as existing under a common nature; this happens
to it, in so far as it is united to the intellective faculty in
the same subject, therefore it knows this man as he is
this man, and this wood as it is this wood. The estimative,
however, does not apprehend any individual as it is under
a common nature, but only as it is the term or the prin-
ciple of some action or passion, as a sheep knows this
lamb, not in so far as it is this lamb, but in so far as it
is milkable by it, and this grass in so far as it is its food.
Whence other individuals to which its action or passion
does not extend, it in no manner apprehends by its
natural estimative faculty. For natural estimation is
given to animals in order that they might be ordered by
it to pursuing or avoiding the proper actions or passions.”
Compare AESTIMATIO.

Coenitio, knowledge, cognition, acquaintance, consideration,
conception, notion, idea. Cognition is divided by Bona-
ventura into knowledge by apprehension and by compre-
hension.

Coenitio ansTractiva, abstractive knowledge. Compare an-
STRACTIVUM.

Coenitio intTuITIVA, intuitive knowledge; (Ockham finds it
difficult to state how intuitive and abstractive knowledge
differ, but he finds two marks of their difference (see
selection above, Quodl. V, q. 5): “In one way in that, by
intuitive knowledge assent is first given to the contingent,
and by abstractive knowledge it is not. In another way
through the fact that by intuitive knowledge I not only
judge that a thing is when it is, but also that is not when
it is not; by abstractive knowledge I judge in neither of
these manners.” Compare inrurrus.

Coenitio NaTuRALIS, natural knowledge, such as is common
to all the human species, that is, the knowledge of first


GLOSSARY 437


principles, such as that the whole is greater than its part
(Bacon).
Coenoscens, knower.
CocnoscerE, to learn, to perceive, to know.
CoGNOSCIBILE, ‘cognoscible, knowable; according to Thomas

(In lib. I Phys. lect. 1), “Those things are better known
in themselves [as contrasted to those better known to us]
which have more entity, for each thing is cognoscible in)
so far as it is that which is (ens).”

Coenoscipizitas, knowability.

CoLvectio, inference.

Coxxico, to gather, to bring together, to bring out, to infer.

Communicark, to be common.

CommuNE, common; something may be common to many things
by participation or by predication; individual things are
common by participation, in the proper sense of partici-
pation, and this involves either that the common thing
be shared by parts, or pass at different times from one
to the other of the things that share it, or be shared at
the same time, like a spectacle viewed by many; a genus
is common to its species by predication, that is, unlike
participation, it is in each of the individuals to which it
is common, wholly and at one and the same time, and its
name is predicated of all of them. Broadly participation
is used to include both predication and participation in
their proper senses. Compare PARTICIPATIO.

Comptexio, combination (of premisses in syllogism), infer-
ence, constitution (of things in virtue of which they pos-
ssess their individual peculiarities and also their kinship
to other members of their species and genus).

Compiexum, complex; Albert the Great describes the distinc-
tion between complex and incomplex (de Praedicab.,
tract. I, ¢. 5.), “The ancient peripatetics, defining the
incomplex, said that a speech significative at will is incom-
plex if its parts signify nothing concerning the intention
of the whole, as when man [homo] is said, the one part
of it, ho, and the other part, mo, signify nothing con-
cerning the intention of homo. But even if the name of a
simple thing be composite, like Adeodatus [Godgiven],
none the less in so far as it is the name of one simple
thing, the speech is incomplex, And the part adeo [by
God] and the part datus [given] signify nothing con-


438 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


cerning the intention of the whole named by the name
Adeodatus. A speech is complex, however, the parts of
which signify something concerning the intention of the
whole, as when we say, the man walks; and the speech
man and the speech walks signify something concerning
the intention of the complex, the man walks.” True and
false are not in the incomplex, but only in the complex.

Componzre, to compound; the logical process of asserting
one simple or incomplex term of another; composition
and division are affirmation and negation; the physical '
process of uniting substance and accident or even form
and matter.

Comvosrrio, composition; logical composition (as distinguished
from physical and metaphysical) is the relation between
terms when one is predicated of the other in a proposition.

Composirum, composite, a whole of parts such that the com-
posite is proper to none of the parts; a substantial com-
posite is one which arises from two incomplete substances, _
as man from form and matter; an accidental composite is
one which is formed from complete substances, as a pile
of stones.

CoMPREHENSOR, one who comprehends.

Conceprus, concept; according to Thomas (Con. Graec. 3),
“Whenever [the intellect] understands actually, it forms a
certain intelligible, which is a kind of offspring of it, and
is therefore called a concept of the mind;” the concept
may be based on properties or on common predicates.

ConcrETUM, concrete, a composite of subject and form by
which some denomination is attributed to the subject.
Thus omnipotent God is a metaphysical concrete, because
in him omnipotence is not distinguished really from the
subject, that is, God; a figured body is a physical concrete,
since figure is distinguished from body and at the same
time inheres in it; a seen tower is a logical concrete, for
vision is distinguished from the tower but does not inhere
in it.

Connirio, condition, creation; in the sense of condition Bona-
ventura speaks of the three conditions of the image in the
soul, trinity, unity, equality; Matthew of Aquasparta
speaks of the three conditions of that which is through
itself, or substance, namely, the one, the true, the good.
Compare TRANSCENDENTALES.


/ GLOSSARY 439


ContuncerE, to conjein; the logical process of asserting a rela- |
tion between two terms; the physical process of relating
things, either by likeness, as two men in that they are
men or grammarians are conjoined, or by aggregation, as
wine and water, form and matter are conjoined (see
Abailard above, vol. I, p. 247).

Contemreratio, contemplation, taken either strictly for the
act of the intellect meditating divine things, and thus
contemplation is the act of the wise man, or in another
way commonly for every act by which any one seques-
trated from exterior affairs considers God, and this can
come about in two ways, either as man hears God speak-
ing in the Scriptures (and this is done by reading), or
as he speaks to God (and this is done by prayer). By
contemplation one considers God as he is in himself, by
speculation as he is imaged in created things as in a mir-
ror (speculatio from speculum). Compare spEcuLaTio.

ContTIncEens, contingent, that which can be and not be; dis-
tinguished from the necessary by the manner in which it
is in its cause: the contingent is so in its cause that it
can be or not be from it, but the necessary can not not
be from its cause. In respect to that which each of them
is in itself, they do not differ in being, on which the
true is based, because in the contingent, in respect to that
which it is in itself, there is not being and non-being,
but only being, although in the future it is possible for it
not to be.

Continuum, continuum; according to Aristotle, continuum
(cvvexés ) is in the genus of state, a kind of coherence
(éxéuevoyv ). Coherence is defined as that which when it is in
sequence touches. Continuum is a species of coherence,
such that both terms by which it is contained are one
and the same, and, as its name signifies, they are con-
‘tained; but this can not be when there are two terms.
Commenting on this passage of Aristotle Thomas says
(In lib. V Phys. lect. 5), “It is manifest what a continuum
is; and Aristotle says that the continuum is a species of
state. For when the ends of two things which touch are

‘ made one and the same, that is said to be a continuum.
Continuum is derived from containing (continendum).
When therefore many parts are contained in one, that is,
hold together as it were at the same time, then there is a
continuum. But this can not be when there are two end


440 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


terms, but only when there is one. From this it follows
further that there can not be continuation except in those
things, from which a unity is made naturally by contact.
For any whole is one and continuous according: to itself,
for the same reason as one continuum is made from many:
either by some joining of them together, or some indwell-
ing of them within, or by some mode of conjoining, such
that one end is made of both, or even by this device, that
something is naturally born of something else, as fruit is
born to a tree and in a manner continues it.” A con-
tinuum therefore has identical terms, and only a single
motion which can not be other, as the periphery of a circle
is continuous, or a line indefinitely generated by the
movement of a point; it is infinitely divisible. Therefore
(In lib. IIT Phys. lect. 1), “A continuum is that which is
divisible in infinitum. And it is called a manifold (multo-
ties) because there is also another definition of the con-
tinuum which is stated in the Categories (c. 6, 5lff.):
a continuum is that the parts of which are joined to one
common end. These two definitions differ however. For
the continuum, since it is a certain whole, must be defined
by its parts. But the parts are compared to the whole
in two ways, namely, according to composition as the
whole is compounded out of the parts, and according to
resolution as the whole is divided into the parts. This
definition of the continuum, therefore, is made according
to the way of resolution, but it is stated in the Categories
according to the way of composition.”* The definition of
the continuum by its parts joined to one common term
is its formal definition, for the unity of the continuum is
its form. The definition according to its parts, that it is’
ever further divisible, is its material definition. According
to Albert (see above, vol. I, p. 346), the continuous is
perceived by the imagination.

Conrrapictoria, contradictories: an affirmation is the contra-
dictory of a denial when, the subject remaining the same,
the one is universal, the other not, as every man is white
is contradictory of not every man is white; and no man_
is white is contradictory of some men are white. There is
no intermediate between contradictories, but of any subject
any predicate can be affirmed or denied; yet no predicate
can be affirmed and denied of the same subject at the
same time and in the same respect: the former is the law


GLOSSARY 4A


of the excluded middle, the latter the law of contradiction.
Compare oppostrTio.

Conrranere, to contract, particularly to contract genus or
species, that is, to determine and as it were apply the
genus to some species, or the species to some individual,
aS man contracts the genus of animality, and Peter con-
tracts the species of humanity.

ConTRARIA, contraries; propositions are contraries when both
the affirmative and the denial are universal, as every man
is white, no man is white. According to. Aristotle (Cat.
6, 6° 15-19), “Things which, within the same genus, are
separated by the greatest possible distance,’ and which
expel each other from the same subject as heat and cold.
It is defined in a broader sense (Met. V, c. 10, 1018#25—
31): “Those things are said to be contraries (1) which,
differing in genus, can not be present in the same thing
at the same time; (2) the most different of the things in
the same genus; (3) the most different of the things in
the same susceptive material; (4) the most different of
the things that fall under the same faculty; (5) the things
whose difference is greatest either absolutely or in genus
or in species.” Contraries, unlike contradictories, admit of
intermediates or media. Qualities have contraries, but
quantity does not strictly admit of contraries. Motion is
from contrary to contrary; or the extremes of mutation
are contraries, as motion from black to white. Aristotle
defines contraries in space as those points which are most
distant in a straight line. Compare opposirio.

Conrurre, to behold, to see, either with the eyes (bodies or
sensibles) or with the mind (forms or intelligibles).

ConvENIENTIA, agreement, relation; as in the ratio, one to two,
the convenientia is “double”; the relation of ratios in pro-
portions is a convenientia,

Converti, to be converted; terms are said to be converted or
to be convertible, if one can be affirmed of the other and
the second in turn of the first. Definition and property
are converted with their subject, as man and rational ani-
mal, or man and capable of learning grammar. Likewise
the transcendentals are converted, as good and that which
is (bonum and ens).

Corrvurrio, corruption; change in the category of substance,
the contrary to generation; corruption occurs when a
form, which had been connected with matter, ceases to be;


442 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


corruption is of two sorts: it may remove the first per-
fection by which a thing has its first being; such corrup-
tion involves mutation of species. The other corruption
may remove a second perfection by which the thing is
perfected in complete second being; such corruption does
not vary the species but only removes a complement of
species. Compare MUTATIO, GENERATIO.

Corrurtum, the corrupted.

CreaTuRaA, creature, creation.


D


Derecrus, defect, the negation of some good. Evil, however,
is privation, that is, the defect of an entity in a thing
which should naturally possess it. Thus lack of life is a
defect in a stone; in a man death is a defect and an evil.

Derinitio, definition; according to Aristotle one of the four
essentials to logic (and particularly to the topics) which
were later called predicables; medieval philosophers sub-
stituted for it species and differentia. First in the sense
of delimitation of implication: the “definition” of a propo-
sition would be all that the proposition involves, not only —
implied meanings, but grammatical structure; it would
not, however, include external references. More particu-
larly Aristotle defines definition (Top. I, 5, 101°37), “A
definition is a phrase signifying a thing’s essense; it is
assigned either as a phrase for a name or a phrase for a
phrase.” Strictly and primarily, however, only substance
is definable (Met. VII, c. 5, 1031°1). Definition by division
is through genus and differentia. Boethius says of defini-
tion (see above, vol. I, p. 86), “Definition reveals sub-
stance, joins genus to differentia, and, reducing to one
species, which it defines, those things*which are essentially
common and of many, it makes them equal.” Definitio and
terminus [definition and term], because of their similar
etymological significances, were both used as translations
for dpos, and were used equivalently. Compare prarpica-
BILE.

Derrnitio NomMINIs, definition of name, nominal definition, a
phrase by which the significance of the name by which a
thing is called is explicated. (Compare Aristotle, An.
Post. II, ¢. 10, 93°29-37.)}


Derrinirio REI, definition of the thing, real definition, a


GLOSSARY 443


phrase by which the essence of the thing defined is stated;
according to Thomas (Quaest. disp. de Ver. q. II, a. 1 ad
9) such definition is possible “when the understanding
conceives some form of the thing which corresponds to

_ the thing itself in all respects.”

Detror Mis, deiform, like to God.

Deirormiras, deiformity; the soul in glory is deiformed or
takes on the form of God.

Dexizeratio, deliberation; deliberation imports two things, that
is and the perception of a reason together with certitude of
judgment concerning that of which the deliberation is
made, and thus deliberation can be in an instant in him
in whom there is no doubt concerning the things of which it
is question. It can likewise involve discussion or inquisi-
tion, and thus it imports a certain discourse, in which sense
it can not be instantaneously.

Demonstrartio, demonstration; demonstration is a kind of ar-
gumentation; certain knowledge or science is the effect of
demonstration: therefore, it is concerning only those things
which are present essentially in things; it is from neces-
sary things and concerning necessary things, because it is
Scientific, that is, leading to knowledge; it is therefore a
syllogism showing cause and that because of which, for it
is that to know; it is from first and proper principles.
Boethius speaks of demonstration as “a sure inference of
reason concerning anything inquired about,” and says
(see above, vol. I, p. 89) that it “is made from things
known prior naturally, from agreements, from first prin-
ciples, from causes, from necessary things, from things
subsisting through themselves.”

DEMONSTRATIO PROPTER QuID, demonstration based on the
nature of the thing investigated; it investigates the proper
cause because of which that truth must be admitted.
Demonstration propter quid gives the proximate and ade-
quate cause; demonstration quia proceeds either from ef-
fects or from causes which are not immediate and proxi-
mate, but remote, on which the demonstration of the
truth depends. Equivalent to a priori,

Drmonstratro aura, demonstration based on the effect, or on
the grounds of some one thing; it proves only that some
truth must be admitted to be. Equivalent to a posteriori.

Denominative, denominatively, that is, derivatively; a name
is predicated denominatively of a substance if it is formed


444A


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


from’ the accidents which are present in the substance, as,
if wisdom is present in Socrates, the name of wise, formed
from the word wisdom, must be proper to him. Aristotle
defined denominative words, zapdévupa (Cat. 1, 111),
“Things are said to be named denominatively which de-
rive their name from another name with only a difference
of termination, as grammarian is derived from grammar,
and strong from strength.”


Descriptio, description; names a characteristic or property


of a thing (unlike definition which names its genus and
differentia) ; description may, therefore, demarcate the
species unambiguously, but it can not state its essence.


Dererminate, determinately (or disjunctively); a word is


used disjunctively when any individual which falls under
it is separately to be taken as predicate. in respect of a
given subject, that is, in the proposition, Man is white,
man is used determinately or disjunctively, because it
signifies not this or that man in particular, but any man.


Dratectica, dialectic; contrasted by Aristotle to demonstrative


reasoning, which is based on premisses which are primary
and self-evidently true, whereas dialectic proceeds from
premisses generally accepted, and depends therefore not
on the assertion of one of two contradictory proposi-_
tions, but rather on an adversary’s choice between two
contradictories (when one proceeds by questioning) or
the assertion of that which is apparent and_ generally
accepted (when one proceeds by syllogizing); there are
according to Aristotle two sorts of dialectical reasoning,
syllogistic and inductive. Boethius, however, following
Cicero (see above, vol. I, p. 74) contrasts dialectic as the
art of judging with topic or the art of discovering; in his —
Commentary on the Topics of Cicero, on the other hand,
he treats dialectic as a single science, composed of two
parts, a science of discovery and a science of judgment.
Thomas returns to the -aristotelian usage (In lib. I An.
Post. lect. 1), “In the process of reasoning, which is not
with absolute certitude, some grade is found, according
to which one comes more or less to perfect certitude.
For through this process sometimes, although science is
not set up, faith or opinion or probability is estab-
lished because of the probability of the propositions, from
which one proceeds, for reason declines totally from one
part of the contradiction, although with fear of the other;


GLOSSARY 445


and topic or dialectic is ordered to this, for the dialectical
syllogism is from probable premisses.”

Dirrrrens, differing; things differ which have something in
common in such wise that that in common is determined in
diverse manner in the things, as man and brute are said to
differ with respect to animality, in that animality is deter-
mined by rationality in the former and irrationality in the
latter; according to the pseudo-Grosseteste (see above, vol.
I, p. 293), “things which are different differ in that they
are divided by the specific difference of some genus, and
they agree in something common which is prior by nature
to the things which are different and even to the differences
themselves.” Thomas distinguishes difference from diver-
sity, in that things which differ agree in something and |
differ in something superadded to that, whereas in things |
which are diverse, it is not absolutely necessary that they

agree in anything. (Swm. Theol. I, q. 3, a. 8 ad 3; also
q. 90, a. 1 ad 3). Compare pistiNcTruM, DIvVERsSUM.

DiFrFeRENS NUMERO, differing in number, that is, as members
of the same species differ from each other.

Dirrerentia, differentia, difference; that which. in a genus
separates one species from another; according to the mid-
die ages one of the five predicables; genus and differentia
constitute the definition of the species. Porphyry is re-
sponsible for a threefold division of differentiae:

DiIFFERENTIA COMMUNIS, common difference, one which acci-
dentally separates one thing from another (as that one
person is standing, another seated), which difference indi-
cates nothing permanent in the thing.

DiIFrFERENTIA PROPRIA, proper difference, one which makes the
distinction accidentally, but by means of something in-
separable from the thing, as a crow is distinguished from
a swan in that the former is black, the latter white.

DIFFERENTIA MAXIME PROPRIA, most proper difference, one
based on some property which indicates the essence of the
thing, as rational is the differentia’ of man.

Dirrinirio, definition. Compare DEFINITIO.

DIFFINITIO SUBSTANTIALIS, substantial definition.

DIFFINITIO QUID NOMINIS, nominal definition. Compare DEFI-
NITIO NOMINIS.

Dirrinirio quip REI, definition of the thing, real definition.
Compare DEFINITIO REI.


446 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


DrsceNsvs PER DEFINITIONEM, descent by definition, to resolve
a common word into the various significances embraced in
it (Ockham).

Ditecrio, love, choice; every appetitive act is derived fron
love or choice; election precedes love; dilectio is an act
not of the concupiscible nature, but of will and the ra-
tional nature; it is, however, unlike caritas in that caritas
adds a certain perfection of love.

Direcre, directly; a direct act is one affirmed of the thing
as it is part of the thing; thus a thing is known directly
when our knowledge is turned to the thing itself. Com-
pare REFLEXE.

DiscerneErE, to discern, to distinguish; according to Thomas,
quoting Augustine (/n lib. I Sent. d. 3, q. 4 sol.), “To
discern is to know a thing through its difference from
other things.”

Discrerina, discipline, art; the acquisition of understanding
of a science; an external aid to the acquiring of knowl-
edge; every doctrine and every discipline is formed from
preexisting knowledge. Compare prrrria.

Discierinatus, disciplined, that is, well-instructed.

Discrerio, discretion, discreteness.

DiscreTio PERSONALIS, personal discretion or distinctness.
Compare PERSONA.

Discursus, discourse, the motion or progress of the understand- ~
ing from one notion to another, as in the syllogism; op-
posed to immediate or intuitive apprehension. There are
two kinds of discourse: one according to succession only,
as when, after we understand something actually, we turn
ourselves to understanding something else; the other ac-
cording to causality, as when through principles we at-
tain to knowledge of conclusions.

DistunGers, to disjoin, the logical process of distinguishing
and separating terms or ideas _which are joined together.

Disposrrio, disposition; disposition always imports an order
of something which has parts: this occurs in three ways,
according to place, or according to power, or according
to species; all dispositions are included in these three, but
there is another triple division in. which dispositions are
frequently classified: the disposition of matter to receiy-
ing form, as heat is the disposition to the form of fire;
the disposition. by which an agent is disposed to acting,
as velocity is the disposition to running; finally the or-


GLOSSARY | AAT


dination of things to each other. An inclination such
that it is true to say that disposition is made into habit
(dispositio fit habitwm) ; both habit or condition (habitus)
and disposition (dispositio) are qualities which inhere in a
subject and bring about that it is well or ill constituted
in itself or its operations. The distinction between them
is that a habitus is a quality fixed in the thing by immobile
principles, whereas a disposition is a quality mobile by
nature, and therefore inhering lightly in its subject.

Disronens (MEDIUM), disposing medium.

Dispurario, disputation, investigation, discussion, a syllogistic
act between an opponent and a respondent to establish a
point or proposition.

Distincrio, distinction, the resolution of an equivocal. word
into its various significances; the separation of things that
are distinct, that is, such that one is not another; opposite
differences are distinguished from each other.

Distixcrum, distinct, a distinct thing; things are distinct
which are numerically not one and the same; the negation
of identity.

Diversum, diverse; things are diverse if the essence of one is
not the essence of the other, as man is diverse from brute,
in so far as man is not that which is brute, and brute is
not that which is man; two things which are diverse need
not be diverse through anything, but may be diverse
through themselves alone, whereas things which are dif-
ferent must differ in genus or species; diverse is con-
trasted to the same, as different is contrasted to like.
Diverse things are those the substance of which is not one;
unlike things, those which do not have one quality; un-
equal things, those which do not have one quantity. Com-
pare EM.

Non DIFFERENTES PROPRIE SED TANTUM DIVERSAE, not differing
in the proper sense of the word but only diverse, that is,
possessed of nothing in common; the ten categories are
diverse from each other and not properly different.

Diversiricatio, diversification.

DrvinerE, to divide, to separate, particularly the logical process
of separating genus into its species or of denying the
relation between two terms.

Drvis10, division, resolution, properly the distribution of genus
into species by opposed difference, as, of animals, some
are rational, others irrational». Boethius divides division


448 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


broadly into two kinds, substantial and: accidental, each
of which has three subdivisions (see above, vol. I, p. 87):
substantial division, (1) of genus into species (as color
into white, black, and medium), (2) of the various sig-
nifications of a word (as dog into barking, fourlegged
animal, celestial constellation, and marine beast), (3) of
whole into its preper parts (as house into foundations,
walls, and roof); accidental division (1) of accident into
subjects (as goods into goods of body and of mind),
(2) of subject into accidents (as bodies into white, black,
and medium color), (3) of, accidents into accidents (as
liquids into white, black, and medium color, or white
things into hard, soft, and medium). In substantial divi- —
sion, the division of genus into species differs from divi-
sion of a whole into parts in thatthe name of the genus
applies to every species (man and horse are both animals),
but the name of the whole does not apply to the parts
(walls and foundations are not houses). All negative
propositions are instances of division, as affirmative prop-
ositions are instances of composition. Compare pisTINcTIO0.
Donvum, gift, as contrasted to partum, the grace of God shown
to man above what is granted to other creatures. Gift
is contrasted to datum, according to Bonaventura (In lib.
I Sent., d. 18, a. 1, g. 3 resp.), in.two respects: that the
latter (datum) being the participle of a verb, time is
involved in it, and it is therefore less proper to apply
to God; and gift adds over and above it a liberality
which is the mark of great nobility.
SepreM poNA Spirirus Sancti, the seven gifts of the Holy
Spirit, as enumerated by Isaiah, according to Bacon the
third of the seven grades of interior experience.


E


Errective, effectively, in effect.

Errectus, effect; that which follows from an efficient cause;
something may be the effect of something else either es-
sentially or accidentally: it is essentially the effect -of
something when it is produced by it as ordered to that
end, as a house is the effect essentially of a builder; it is
an effect accidentally when it is joined to that which is
the effect essentially or through itself, as if the habitation
of the house were said to be the effect of the builder.


GLOSSARY é 449


Accidental effects, in turn, are of two sorts: that at which
the action of a cause can be terminated, although it was
beyond the intention of the agent, as the discovery of a
treasure chest, and such an effect although it is in this
sense the effect of an accidental cause, can be of an
essential cause; another accidental effect is one at which
no action of any agent is terminated, but because it hap-
pens to an effect, it can be called an accidental effect,
as the accident white can be said to be the accidental
effect of the builder, Effects are proportional to their
causes; every effect is convertible with the principle or
cause from which it proceeds. Compare remINENTER,
FORMALITER (for univocal and equivocal causes), causa,
AFFECTUS.

EFFICIENS (MEDIUM), efficient medium.

Evementum, element; according to Thomas (In lib. V Met.
lect. 4, 795-798), “There are four things to be considered
in the definition of element. The first of these is that it
is the cause, as it were, from which [causa sicut ex quo]
[the thing is]; wherefore it is clear that element is placed
in the genus of material cause. The second is that it is
the principle from which anything is made first, for cop-
per is that from which the statue is made, yet it is not
an element, because it has some other matter from which
jt is made. The third is that it is inexistent or intrinsic,
in which respect an element differs from all that from
which something is made as from something transeunt,
whether it be privation, or contrary, or matter to con-
trariety, or subject to privation, which is transient matter.
As when we say that the musical man is made from the
non-musical man, or the musical from the non-musical.
For elements must remain in the things of which they
are the elements. The fourth is that it have some species,
which is not divided into diverse species, by which the
element differs from first matter, which has no species,
and likewise from all matters which can be resolved into
diverse species, such as blood and others of, this sort.
Because of this it is said that an element is (with respect
to the first) that from which something is composed;
(with respect to the second) first; (with respect to the
third) inewxistent; (with respect to the fourth) indivisible
in species into another species.” Element is distinguished
from principle and cause. According to Thomas (Jn lib.


450


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


I Phys. lect. 1), “Cause is more inclusive than element.
For an element is that from which a thing is composed ~
first and the element is in it, as is stated in the Vth book
of the Metaphysics [c. 3, 1014* 26 ff], as letters are the
elements of speech, but syllables are not. Those things
are called causes on which anything depends with respect
to its being or its becoming, whence those things which
are outside the thing or those likewise which are in the
thing, from which the thing is not first compounded, can
be called causes, but not elements. Principle, however,
imports a certain order of some process, whence some-
thing can be a principle which is not a cause, as that
from which a motion begins is the principle of the mo-
tion, but not the cause, and the point is the principle
of the line, but not the cause. Thus, therefore, by princi- ;
ples, Aristotle seems to mean moving and active causes, —
in which the order of a certain process is considered.
By causes he seems to understand formal and final
causes, from which, most of all, things depend in their
being and coming to be. By elements, finally, he means —
material causes properly.” Compare causa, PRINCIPIUM.


Exencuus, elenchus, a syllogism in which the contradictory of


Emi


the conceded conclusion is inferred.

NENTER, eminently; a thing is contained eminently in some- —
thing else more excellently than in itself, as the vegetative
and sensitive souls are contained in the intellective soul,
and as the perfection of effects are found in analogical
or equivocal causes (if the cause is univocal the perfection —
of the effect is found in it formally); in this analogical
sense the perfections of creatures are to be found in God,
and God is the eminent cause of things.


Ens, that which is, the thing which is, a being ( évros ); accord- —


ing to Thomas ‘see selection above, Quaest. disp. de Ver.
q. 1, a. 1 concl.), “Ens [that which is] expresses the act
of being, but the name of thing expresses the quiddity or
essence of that which is.” That which is is of two sorts: ©
the essence of things (in which sense it is divided into —
the ten categories) and the conception formed by the
mind; in the latter sense it is not essence. According to ~
Thomas (De Ente et Ess. c. 1), “It must be known that
as the Philosopher says in book V of the Metaphysics
that that which is through itself is spoken of in two
ways: in one way as it is divided into the ten genera, in—


.


GLOSSARY 451


another way as it signifies the truth of propositions. The
difference between these, however, is that in the second
way all that concerning which an affirmative proposition
ean be formed, although it posits nothing in fact, can be
said to be that which is; in this way privations and nega-
tions are called things which are,-for we say that affirma-
tion is the opposite to negation, and that blindness is in
the eye. But in the first way something can not be said
to be that which is, unless it posits something in fact;
whence in the first way, blindness and others of this sort
are not things which are. The name of essence is not
derived from that which is (ens) in the second sense,
for some things which have no essence, are said to be
things which are, as is clear in the case of privations; but
essence is derived from that which is in the first sense.”
That which is is the first concept of the understanding;
it is therefore beyond the categories, one of the transcen-
dentals. The first division of that which is, is by poten-
tiality and actuality; the second is into the ten categories.
Compare RES, ESSENTIA, ENTITAS, ESSE, ESSENDI, TRANSCEN-
DENTALES.

Ens naruras, thing of nature, that which is in nature, nat-
ural thing, that which actually or potentially exists outside
the mind; ens in the first sense. Similarly eNs PER SsE,
that which is through itself, that which is essentially; this
expression is most usually given as the definition of sub-
stance. Or ENS IN SE PER MODUM SUBSTANTIAL, that which
is in itself according to the mode of substance.

Ens rationis, that which is in reason, a thing of reason;
according to Scotus, it is that which has being in the
understanding which considers it, and which can have no
being outside the understanding; it posits nothing in the
actual thing and it is not itself an actual thing, but it is
none the less formed or apprehended by reason. Thomas
(Sum. Theol. I, q. 16, a. 3 ad 2) speaks of the true as
founded in that which is not (non-ens), “in so far as that
which is not is a certain thing of reason, that is, appre-
hended by reason.” The same consideration holds for
the good. Again he says (In lib. IV Met. lect. 4, 574),
“Thing of reason is properly spoken of relative to those
intentions, which reason devises in the things considered,
such as the intention of genus, species, and others like
these, which are not discovered in the nature of things,


452. MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


but follow from the consideration of reason. And of
this sort, that is, a thing of reason, is the subject of logic.
Intelligible intentions of this sort, however, are equivalent
[aequiparantur] to natural things in that all natural
things fall under the consideration of reason. And there-
fore the subject of logic extends itself to all things con-
cerning which natural thing is predicated. Whence it is
concluded that the subject of logic is equivalent to the
subject of philosophy which is the thing of nature.” A
thing of reason may have a foundation in the thing (as
man, considered not in himself, but as man is a species)
or no foundation (as a chimera).

Entruymema, enthymeme, a truncated syllogism.

Enrmiras, entity, the character or property of being.

Enunt1amTi0, statement, an affirmative or negative proposition;
speech in which there is true or false; it is the sign of
composition or division in the understanding.

VERITAS ENUNTIATIONIS, truth of statement. Compare
VERITAS.

Error, error, consists in approving the false as true; it adds
over ignorance a certain act, for there can be ignorance
without the bearing of judgment concerning the things
ignored, and a person ignorant in that sense is not in
error. (Compare Thomas, Quaest. disp. de Malo q. 3,
a. 7 concl.) Compare IGNORANTIA, FALSUM.

Esse, being; according to Thomas (In lib. I Sent. d. 33, q. 1,
a. 1 ad 1), “Being is spoken of in three ways. In one
way being is said to be the very quiddity or nature of
the thing, as it is said that definition is speech signify-
ing what it is to be [i.e. essence], for definition signifies
the quiddity of the thing. In another way being is said
to be the very act of the essence, as living (which is being
to living things) is the act of the soul, not the second
act which is operation, but the first act. In a third way
being is said to be that which signifies the truth of com-
position in propositions, according to which is is called
a copula, and in this way it is in the understanding.
compounding and dividing so far as its complement is
concerned, but it is founded in the being of the thing,
which is the act of the essence.” Being is the actuality
of all things and even of forms.

Essenv1, of being, concerned with the act of being.


GLOSSARY 453


Essentia, essence, that through which the thing is constituted
in its species and distinguished from other things, and
therefore it is something primary in the thing and the
root of all its properties; that which is conceived first
in the thing without which the thing cannot be, and the
foundation and cause of whatever other things are in
that thing; the essence is conceived in the concept of
the thing and stated in its definition, as rational mortal
animal is the essence of man. Essence, therefore, is
something common to all natures by which diverse en-
tities are collocated in diverse genera and species, as
humanity is the essence of man; according to Thomas
(Sum. Theol. I, q. 3, a. 3 concl.), “Essence or nature
comprehends in itself only those things which fall in the
definition ef the species, as humanity comprehends in it-
self those things which fall in the definition of man; for by
them man is man, and humanity signifies this, namely,
that by which man is man”; and again (ibid. q. 29, a. 2
ad 3), “Essence properly is that which is signified by
definition; definition, however, embraces the principles of
the species, but not the individual principles; wherefore
in things compounded from matter and form, the essence
signifies not only the form, nor only the matter, but the
composite from matter and the common form, as they
are the principles of the species.” The greek expressions
in which the problems related to essence are discussed,
7o Th Fv elvar, 76 rh éo7t, become in latin quod quid erat
esse, and quid est. Compare QuIDDITAS, NATURA.

' Essentrariter, essentially; things differ essentially which either

are diverse in every genus and in accord in no genus

(as God and creature) or which, although they agree

in some genus, still differ in other proximate genera (as

man and tree) or at least in species (as man and horse).

A substance advenes on another substance essentially

when it forms a single complete being with it, such as

is formed by the conjunction of body and soul in man.

Evwentrr, evidently, that is, with evidence or clarity, and
consequently, certainly and self-evidently.

Evwent1, evidence, the type of certitude which is had of
first principles known immediately or of a syllogistic
inference, which according to Duns Scotus is based on
the form of the syllogism known self-evidently. Thomas
had said that evidence adds, over the firmness of adhesion


Ad 4 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


of certitude, a quietude of the understanding in the thing
known (Quaest. disp. de Ver. q. 10, a. 12 ad 6).

Exemptar, ewemplar; that according to which something else
is made in such wise that it imitates the exemplar; ac-
cording to Thomas, only the intellectual reasons in’ God,
in imitation of which things are produced in being, can
properly be called exemplars.

Exisriaatio, estimation, the highest faculty of the sensitive
soul, by which the brute distinguishes good from evil.
Compare AESTIMATIO.

FExperrentia, experience, experiment; experience is formed
from many memories, as memory is formed from sensa-
tions; it is knowledge of singulars, but the active intellect
operating on its data abstracts universals; one of the
two ways of knowing according to Bacon, argumentation
being the other, but certainty can come only from ex-
perience; according to him experience is of two sorts,
exterior and interior.

FEXPERIMENTUM, experience, experiment, Synonymous with
EXPERIENTIA, formed from the collection of many singulars
received in memory; reason is based on it. Compare
SCIENTIA EXPERIMENTALIS.


F


Facerr, to do, action, the ninth of the ten categories. Action
and passion admit of variation in degree. Compare Fac-
TIO, PASSIO,

Facrio, making; usually contrasted to action (or in particular
that action which is called intelligence, which begins with
the species of the thing to be made or the end of the
art); making is an act which goes forth to an exteridér
matter, such as building, drying, and so forth. Accord-
ing to Thomas (In lib. VII Met. lect. 6, 1394), “For al-
though we can use the name making, which in greek is
praxis, concerning natural things, as when we say that
heat and an actual thing makes such an actual being, still
we use it more properly concerning those things which
are made by the understanding, in which the understand-
ing of the agent has dominion over what it makes so that
it can make it thus or otherwise, which does not happen
in natural things, but they act to some effect in a way


GLOSSARY 455


determined by something superior set above them.” Com-
pare PRAXIS, ACTIO.

Facutras, faculty; according to Thomas (Sum. Theol. Beate
83, a. 2 ob. 2), “Faculty names a facility of power which
is through habit”; and again (ibid. ad 2), “Faculty some-
times names an expedited power for operating.” Else-
where (Jn lib. IT Sent. d. 24, q. 1, a. 1 ad 2) he defines
it, “Faculty signifies according to the common usage of
speech the power by which something is had at will, and
therefore faculties are also called possessions, because
they are in the dominion of the one possessing.”

Farsicraris, falsigraphic; a proposition or argument which is
incorrectly expressed or written is falsigraphic.

Fatsum, false; a thing is false according to Thomas (Sum. .
Theol. I, q. 17, a. 4 concl.; compare Aristotle, Met. LV, c.
7, 1011” 27) “by the fact that what is said is seen either to
be something which is not, or not to be that which is.”
Compare ERROR.

Ficura, figure; according to Thomas (Sum Theol. I, q. 7, a. 1
ad 2), “Figure, which consists in the termination of
quantity, is a certain form with respect to quantity.”
Compare ImaGo.

Finis, end; according to Thomas (Jn lib. II Met., lect. 4, 316),
“The end is that which is not because of other things, but
other things are because of it.’ Moreover (Jn lib. X Met.,
lect. 5, 2028), “The end is that which is ultimate in each
thing, and that which contains the thing, wherefore nothing
is without end.”

Finis openris, end of the operation, often distinguished from—.

Frnis operantis, end of the one who performs the operation,
since the latter, although the intention of the operator,
does not always coincide with the actual end.

Forma, form; by its form each thing is constituted in its
species; form is one of the three principles of natural
change, matter and privation being the other two; to-
gether with matter it makes up the material composite;
it is the actuality which determines matter, the latter
being potentiality, that is, indifferent to any species of
being. Thomas (?) distinguishes three kinds of forms (De
Nat. Mat. c. 3), “For there is a form which is its own
being, and is not received from anything prior, nor com-
municated to anything posterior; and such a form is God.
And therefore he alone is absolutely infinite. There are


456 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


other forms which althougn they are not received in mat-
ter, nevertheless are not their. own being, since a com-
position of essence and being falls in them; and therefore
from one part they are finite and from another infinite,
for they are limited according to their being, terminated

_ from above, but not from below, since they are not re-
ceived in anything inferior. And this is the doctrine of
the Commentator in the book on Causes. There are other
forms which are finite from all sides and which have being
otherwise than is common to every creature; nevertheless
they are received in some matter. Yet among these there
is a great difference, for the less they are immersed in
matter, the less they are limited, and therefore the human
mind is in a certain manner all.’ Compare MaTERIA,
PRIVATIO.

Forma spparara, separated form, one which is not ordered
to matter, consequently not only is it not dependent on
matter, but it can not be united to matter, as the Angel
according to Thomas.

Formasiuis, apt to be formed or fashioned, subject to form,
formable.

Formauiter, formally; a thing is formally such or such in so
far as it is so specified by its definition. One thing is
formally contained in another when it is found in it ac-
cording to its concept and definition; thus heat is formally
contained in fire and any effect in its univocal cause.
Various meanings of formally are determined by its use
in opposition to a number of concepts such as causally,
concomitantly, eminently and virtually, identically, ma-
terially, objectively, really, in reason.

Fructus, fruit; among the fruits which, according to Bacon,
constitute the sixth of the seven grades of interior ex-
perience, is the peace of the Lord.


G


GeENERATIC, generation ( y&eots); change in the category of
substance by which natural things begin to be by the
inducing anew of form in matter, as opposed to creation
which is their production ex nihilo. Generation is change
(mutatio) or sudden change (mutatio subita) not motion
(motus), since it is accomplished, not in time, but in-
stantaneously; generation and its opposite, corruption, do


GLOSSARY 457


not affect matter nor form directly, but only the com-
posite. Thomas defines generation (Oon. Gent. I, ¢. 26),
“Generation is the way to being, and corruption the way
to non-being”; Ockham defines it (Swm. Phys. III, c. 8),
“Generation is when a substantial form ‘is induced anew
into matter. Corruption is when a substantial form
ceases to be in matter.” Compare murartio,

GENUs, genus; according to Aristotle and the medieval phi-
losophers, one of the five predicables. Genus took on
a variety of meanings which are summed up by Thomas
(Met. V, lect. 22, 1119-1123), “Genus is used in four
ways. In the first way as the continwous generation of
any things have the same species (as it is said, so long
as the genus of men will be, that is, so long as the con-
tinuous generation of men will endure), This is the first
way stated in Porphyry, namely, a multitude of things
having a relation to each other and to a single principle.
In the second way genus is used as that from which as a
first mover to being, that is, a generator, any things
proceed, as some men are called Hellenes in genus [kind]
because they descend from a certain Hellen by name, and
some men are called Jonians, because they descend from
a certain Ion as first generator. Men are denominated
however rather from the father, who is the generator,
than from the mother, who supplies the matter in genera-
tion; and none the less some are denominated in genus
from the mother, as certain Pleiades are so called from a
woman by the name Pleione. And this is the second
manner of genus stated by Porphyry. In the third way
genus is used in the sense in which superfice [surface]
is said to be the genus of superficial figures, and solid,
that is, body, is said to be the genus of solid figures,
that is, of bodily figures. Genus in this sense, however,
is not that which signifies the essence of a species, as
animal is the genus of man, but that which is the proper
subject of accidents different in species; for the super-
fice is the subject of all superficial figures. oh ene Sthe
fourth way genus is used as that which is stated first in
definition and is predicated of first substance [quod quid] ;
and the differentia are qualities of it, as in the definition
of man animal is stated first, and next biped or rational
which are certain substantial qualities of man. It is clear
then that genus is used in all these ways. In one way


'


458 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


according to a continuous generation in the same species,
which pertains to the first way. In another way according
to the first mover, which pertains to the second way.
In another way as matter, which pertains to the third and
fourth ways. For in’this way genus is related to dif-
ferentia as subject to quality, and therefore it is clear
that genus as predicable and genus as subject are com-
prehended as under a single mode, and both are constituted
in the mode of matter. For although genus as predicable
is not matter, nevertheless it is derived from matter,
as differentia is from form. For any animal is so called
by the fact that he has a sensitive nature; he is called
rational by the fact that he has a rational nature, which
is related to the sensitive as form to matter.” Genus is
defined by Boethius (see above, vol. I, p. 97) as the
thought collected from the substantial likeness of species;
according to his doctrine genera subsist in sensibles, but
are understood beyond bodies.

GENERALIsSIMUM, generalissimum, most general genus. Com-
pare PRAEDICAMENTA.


H


Hasere, to have, condition, state; as shod or armed; the
eighth of the ten categories. Compare HABITUS.

Hasirupo, condition, aptitude, relation, respect, capacity for
something. A distinction is made between the possession
of a quality quoad entitatem and quoad habitudinem, with
respect to entity and with respect to aptitude.

Hastrvs, condition, habit, character ( és ), the quality which
supervenes on potentiality and adheres permanently, aid-
ing in the operation to which it is proper. More broadly
Thomas (In lib. V Met. lect. 20, 1062-1064) speaks of
two kinds of “having”: “The first of these is something
medium between that which has and that which is had.
For habit [or having], although it is not an action, signi-
fies nevertheless according to the mode of action. And
therefore habit is understood to be medium between that
having and that had and as it were a kind of action, just
as heating is understood to be medium between that
heated and that heating, whether that medium be taken
as an act, as when the heating is taken actively, or as a
motion, as when the heating is taken passively. For when


a


GLOSSARY 459


one thing makes, and another is made, the medium is
making [factio] ...In the second way habit means a
disposition according to which something is disposed well
or ill, as by health one is disposed well, by sickness ill.”
In the first sense, the eighth category is to be explained,
for medium between a man having shoes and the shoes
which are had, is the having of the shoes; shod is there-
fore a state or habit. Habit differs from disposition in
being more permanent; according to Aristotle (Cat. 8,
8” 27), “Habit differs from disposition in being more
lasting and more firmly established.” The various kinds
of knowledge and of virtue are habits. Knowledge and
virtue are conditions or habits, because of their firm
fixity, the former being established on principles neces-
sarily true, the latter on the goed and honorable which
are immutable; suspicion, doubt, opinion, and so on are
dispositions, as are illness and health. Habits may be
entitative or operative. By habit, potentiality is more
easily brought into actuality, and consequently it has
been called another nature. Compare PosTpRAEDICAMEN-
TUM.

Haecceiras, hecceity; according to Duns Scotus, the principle
of individuation is not matter but a formal distinction;
each thing is distinctive by its “thisness.”


I


Ipra, idea; according to Thomas (Sum. Theol. I, q. 15, a. 1
concl.), “Idea in greek is translated by form in latin;
wherefore by ideas are understood the forms of things
existing without the things themselves. But the form of
any thing existing without the thing itself, can be in
two ways, either as the exemplar of that of which it is
said to be the form, or as the principle of cognition of
it, according to which the forms of knowable things are
said to be in the knower.”

Iprem, the same; a thing may be the same in species with
another, or in the case of identity, the same in number,
but as Thomas says (Jn lib. V Met. lect. 17, 1022),
“Things are the same of which the substance is one”; as
things are like of which the quality is one; and things
equal of which the quantity is one. Everything which is
or is one is the same as or diverse from everything;


460 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


same and diverse do not apply to non-being, however,
for, “the same and the diverse are not opposed as con-
tradictories of which one or the other must be true of
anything that is or is not, but they are opposed as con-
traries which are verified only of that which is” (Thomas,
In lib. X Met. lect. 4, 2015).

Ipenritas, identity; Thomas says (In lib. X Met. lect. 4, 2007),
“Where there is unity of substance there is not said to be
likeness or equality but only identity.” Where there are
no differences there is identity.

Ipotum seu FANTASMA, idol or phantasm, the image which is
present to the sensitive soul by which present things are
known to the senses and absent things to the imagination.

Ip avon rst, that which is, the definition, or more properly
the description, of Ens.

TIenoRANTIA, ignorance; according to Thomas a distinction must
be made between two kinds of ignorance (In lib. I An.
Post. lect. 26): “Ignorance, as a negation, is when a
man knows absolutely nothing concerning a thing. And
this is ignorance in not attaining, as the Philosopher says
in book IX of the Metaphysics. As is clear in the case
of the rustic who knows nothing of the triangle, as to
whether it has three angles equal to two right angles.
But ignorance, as a disposition, is when one has some
disposition to knowing, but a corrupt disposition, when,
namely, one estimates that some one is running, but
falsely, or when one estimates either that that is which
is not, or that that is not which is. And this ignorance
is the same as error. The first ignorance is not made by
syllogism; the second can be made by syllogism.” Compare
ERROR.

Initumination, illumination, the interior light of God by which
the augustinians taught that knowledge is obtained.

-ILLUMINATIO SCIENTIALIS, scientific illwmination, the first of
the seven grades of interior experience according to
Bacon.

ImaGInatro, imagination, the faculty of the sensitive soul which
preserves species received from the particular senses;
called by Avicenna the treasury and repository of com-
mon sense. Compare MEMORIA.

Imacin ari, to be imaged.

Imago, image; according to Thomas image means the ex-
pressed representation of the thing; the principle of the


GLOSSARY 461


image is likeness, not any likeness, but a likeness which is
in the species or at least in some sign of the species. In
corporeal things figure is particularly the sign of the
species, for animals diverse in species are of diverse fig-
ures, not of diverse colors, and therefore if the color
of anything were painted on a wall, it would not be said
to be the image of the thing unless the figure were painted
too. But the likeness of the species and figure does not
suffice, for its origin too is required for the principle
of the image. Thomas concludes therefore (Swm. Theol.
I, q. 35, a. 1 concl.), “For anything to be truly an image,
it is required that it proceed from something else like-
to it in species or at least in the sign of the species.”
According to Bonaventura, image is one of the three
ways (compare vesticiIuM, UmBRA) in which God is repre;
sented in his creatures; a creature is an image in so far
as God is not only his cause, but the object of the opera-
tions of his faculties, in so far, that is, as the creature
is memory, understanding, will; man alone, therefore,
of temporal things is made in God’s image by virtue of
the intellectual soul (see Eriugena above, vol. I, pp. 193-_
197).

IncompLexum, incomplex. Compare COMPLEXUS.

_Inxcomposstzite, incompossible. Compare INCONTINGENS.

IncontTINGENS, incontingent; according to Thomas (in lib.
III Sent. d. 3, q. 5, a. 3 ad 3), “It is not necessary that
everything which is made be made from a contrary, but
only that which is made by way of generation and al-
teration; it is necessary, however, that everything that is
made be made from the incontingent, that is, that which
does not happen [contingit] to be at one and the same
time.”

INDIFFERENTER, indifferently; it was taken as axiom, that from

' a thing which is indifferent, in the respect in which it

is indifferent, nothing determinate can arise.

Inpirrerentia, indifference; distinguished into physical (ca-
pacity of acting or not acting) or moral (capacity of
acting well or ill).

Inpistan11A, proximity, indistance; it is of two sorts, indistance
of penetration or indistance of continuity or contiguity.

Inpiviwvari, to be individuated.

Inpivwvati0, individuation; according to Thomas (In lib. IT
de An. lect. 12, 377), “The individuation of a common


462


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


nature in corporeal and material things is by corporeal
matter contained under determined dimensions”; matter,
moreover, was the principle of individuation, not only in
singular sensibles but also in mathematical things, for
there is a sensible matter, like wood or bronze by which ~
individual sensibles are individuated, and an intelligible
matter which is in sensible things, not in so far as they
are sensible things, but as they are mathematical things; —
as the form of man is in such a sensible matter, which
is the organic body, so the form of the circle or the
triangle is in such an intelligible matter which is the
continuum or the surface or the body (see Thomas, Jn
lib. VIT Met. lect. 10, 1496); the principle of individua-
tion can not be the collection of accidents of the individual
thing. According to Duns, the principle of individuation
is always the hecceity of the thing individuated.


Invivinuum, individual; an individual is that whieh is indis-


tinct in itself, but distinct from others. An individual —
(or a singular) is a being so determined and restricted
that it can not be further divided by differences into
parts the same as itself, and therefore exists undivided ~
in itself and divided from other things which are or can
be in the same species. Individual (or singular) may
therefore be defined as that which is undivided in itself
and divided from others by an ultimate division; Aristotle
defines it as “that which is not predicated of many” (De
Interp. 6, 17* 37), and Porphyry says (see above, vol.
I, p. 223), “Individuals are defined as follows, that each
one of them consists of properties the collection of which
is not in another.’ Individual and singular are the
same in fact, but the significances of the two can be
distinguished: a thing is said to be singular in so far as
it underlies a universal and in so far as it is none the
less diverse from other things; it is said to be individual
in so far as it is undivided and is not further divisible —
into other individuals. On the other hand the material
principle enters to differentiate the particular from the
individual: according to Thomas (In lib. X Met. lect.
Il, 2132), just as the diversity of forms makes a differ-
ence of species, so a diversity of individual matter
makes a difference of individuals; therefore a particular
something, as Callias, is not only form, but form to-


GLOSSARY 463


gether with individuated matter. Compare SINGULARIS,
SPECIES INFIMA.

Innivisio, indivision; unity does not, according to Thomas,
import the principle of perfection, but only of indivision;
division causes multitude, but indivision, unity.

Iyrinirum, infinite (&repoy); infinite is that which has no
end but is unlimited or limitless; the infinite is the open
possibility, of more. Except for God there are no existent
infinite things; God alone is:actually infinite; the infinite
does not exist in sensible things, or apart from sensible
things, but only for thought—it is unlimited as potential-
ity; there is never an infinite actuality (see Aristotle,
Phys. Ill, 5-8). Bonaventura makes a distinction (In
lib. I Sent. d, 3, p. 1, a. 1, q. 1 ad 3; see selection above):
“It must be said that infinity is to be taken in two senses;
one which is constituted by opposition to the simple; and
such an infinite is not encompassed by the finite, such
as infinite mass; there is another which has infinity to-
‘gether with simplicity, such as God; and such an infinite,
beeause it is simple, is everywhere whole; because it is
infinite, it is in nothing in such wise that it is not outside
it.” Matthew of Aquasparta distinguishes (see selection
above, gq. 2 ad 18) between the infinite in actuality (as
God) and the infinite in duration (as the movers of the
orbs). Compare CATEGOREMATICE, SYNCATEGOREMATICE.

Informare, to inform, said of the form, which, when united
to matter or to any subject, constitutes it in a given de-
terminate species of things; similarly, sense is informed
by the likeness of sensible things.

Inrormartio, information, that is, endowment with form.

TyuarrenttiA, inherence; accidents inhere in subjects, whereas
second substances are predicated properly of first sub-
stances. ;

Inrevtectuate, the intellectual (thing), perceived by the in-
tellect as the sensible (thing) is perceived by sense.

Inteiiectus, intellect, wnderstanding, meaning, conception,
idea; particularly the cognoscitive faculty which is con-
cerned with that which is (ens) and which therefore
perceives the true. According to the pseudo-Grosseteste
(see above, vol. I, p. 304), “The understanding is a
spiritual mirror bringing into actuality by an innate light
the idol or the phantasm in the human imagination where
it is in potentiality, just as light brings color into ac-


464 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


tuality. The phantasm itself however, once it has been
brought into actuality, perfects the understanding by its
own property and makes of the possible intellect the ac-
quired intellect or the intellect in condition, just as the
species of color moves and perfects the sense by its own
property.” According to Albert (see above, vol. I, p.
850), “The intellect is joined to man in three ways. In
one way as a nature which gives being, and in this way
it is individual. In another way as the power by which
there is the operation of understanding, and in this way
it is a universal power. In a third way as the form ac-
quired from many intelligibles, as has been stated more
clearly with reference to the active intellect which is
not joined to contemplatives as agent only, but as it is
their beatitude when they arrive at that which is in them
as form. And the said intellect is not present in the
second and third manners, as prudence and wisdom, equally
in all men, but in some more and in others less, and in
some perhaps there is present nothing of intellect.”

INTELLECTUS ADEPTUS, acquired intellect.

INTELLECTUS AGENS, active intellect, the intellect in so far as
it itself reflects the impressed species by which it is
helped to effect the express species, thus actualizing the
possible intellect and making it the acquired intellect.
According to Bacon God is the active intellect of all man-
kind.

INTELLECTUS FoRMALIs, formal intellect; according to Albert
(see above, vol. I, pp. 373-374), “There is a third [intel-
lect, that is, besides the possible and active], moreover,
which is the formal intellect, namely when the form of that
known or operating by the light of the intellect is in the
soul; and this is divided into the practical and specula-
tive.”

INTELLECTUS PossIBILIs, possible intellect, the intellect in so
far as it is able to receive the species of all things, there-
fore called by Grosseteste the possible or material intel-
lect. According to Bacon the human soul is the possible
intellect.

INTELLECTUS PRACTICUS, practical intellect, contrasted to the
speculative in that it extends tc operation; ethics and
politics are its proper sciences. Compare screntia.

INTELLECTUS SPECULATIVUS, speculative intellect, the function


ae


GLOSSARY 465


of the intellect which comes to rest in the object of its
contemplation. ,

INTELLEGERE, to perceive, to understand, according to Thomas
(Sum. Theol. I, q. 34, a. 1 ad 3), “To understand imports
only a relation [habitudo] of the one understanding to
the thing understood, in which no principle [ratio] of
origin is imported, but only a certain information in our
understanding, as our understanding is made in actuality
by the form of the thing understood.” The etymology
is frequently given of intellegere from intus legere, to
read within. Compare rarto.

InTeiicentta, understanding, intelligence, as when first princi-
ples are assented to from the understanding of the terms
in which they are stated; or as the sense and application
of a proposition, for example, the understanding of the
meaning of these words. Used also either as intellect
or intellection.

INTELLIGENTIA SEPARATA, separated intelligence, spiritual sub-
stance without body or matter, as the angels or the in-
telligences that rule the spheres.

IntTenveERE, to intend, as the understanding or will intends,
or to intensify, as opposed to remit.

INTENSIVE, intensively, as opposed to extensively or to remissly.

Inrenti0, intention, knowledge, meaning; the cognoscitive
power never knows anything actually, unless there is some
intention present; the mind in knowledge may intend the
thing known, it may intend the thing which is, or that
which is true of the thing which is. Bonaventura says
(In lib. II Sent. d. 38, a. 2, q. 2 ad 2), “Although inten-’
tion sometimes means the very power intending, some-
times means the condition according to which it intends,
sometimes means the act of intending, sometimes the thing
intended itself, nevertheless the name of intention is im-
posed principally upon the act itself; although, notwith-
standing this, it happens that it is sometimes required in
the other acceptations. For when it is said that the in-
tention is the eye, intention is taken as power. When it
is said that the intention is light, intention is taken as the
condition directing. When it is: said that the intention is
the end itself. . . intention is taken as that which is in-
tended. But when it is said that a certain intention is
right, another oblique, intention is taken as the act.” Ac-


466 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


cording to Albert (see above, vol. I, p. 349), “In the soul,
being is rather the intention of the thing than the thing.”

Esse INTENTIONALE, intentional being, is therefore that being
which the thing has in the intellect which knows, either
as that being is in the understanding itself or as it repre-
sents the thing understood objectively. According to
Thomas (Jn lib. I Sent. d. 33, q. 1, a. 1 ad 3), “Intentions
are not in things, but only in the mind, yet there is
something corresponding to them in the thing, namely,
the nature to which the understanding attributes the in-
tentions of this sort, as the intention of genus is not
in the ass, but in the nature of animal, to which the inten-
tion is attributed by the understanding.”

InrTENTIO priMA, first intention; a thing is considered accord-
ing to the first intention when it is considered according”
to that which is proper to it as a thing; this may be by a
simple act of the understanding by which it is known
that the thing is, or by a complex act by which some truth
may be known of it, as that man is an animal. Ockham
defmes concepts of the first intention as mental names
which naturally signify individual external things (which
are not signs) and which can be the subject ar predicate
of propositions.

INTENTIO sECUNDA, second intention, when the thing is con-
sidered according to extrinsic denominations, derived not
from the thing, but from the act of understanding, as that
man is species, or animal is genus. Ockham defines con-
cepts of the second intention as mental names which
signify intentions naturally significative, that is, first
intentions.

INTENTIO GENERALIS, general intention, an intention possessed —
by all things, in virtue of the fact simply that they are;
that which is and that which is true are among the general
intentions, Compare TRANSCENDENTALES.

INTENTIONIS RES, a thing of intention, that which exists only
in mind; the same as ENS RATIONIS.

Intvirvs, intuition, mtuitive knowledge, that by which some-
thing is known immediately, without ratiocination; thus,
first principles known through themselves are known in-
tuitively, as that thé whole is greater than its part, and
so too the existence or non-existence of things is known.
More generally even ratiocination is reduced to intuitive
knowledge, as Thomas (following Augustine) points out


GLOSSARY A467


(In lib. T Sent. d. 3, q. 4, a. 5 sol.), “To understand means
nothing other than intuition, which is nothing other than
the presence of the intelligible to the understanding in
some way.” ;

INvENTIO, invention, discovery, the process of reasoning by
which something is concluded to be true in a great many
cases or in a majority of cases; it does not. therefore
have necessity, and discovery is not always with certitude;
in the aristotelian tradition it is a process properly studied
in the part of logic called dialectic or topic, in rhetoric,
and in poetic.

Ivupicum, judgment, right determination in moral or logical
sense; according to Thomas (Sum. Theol. Ila Ilae, q. 60,
a. 1 ad 1), “The name judgment, which actording to its
first imposition signifies the right determination of just
men, is broadened to signify right determination concern-
ing anything whatsoever, whether speculative or practi-
eal.” According to the thomist psychology judgment
follows upon and concludes the counseling of the mind
concerning a problem, and leads to or constitutes election
or choice of one of the parts.


L


Locus, place (+zéros); Aristotle points out (Phys. IV, c. 2,
209° 33-35) that “since there is a distinction between that
which is relative to itself and that which is relative to
something else, so too a distinction must be made between
the place which is common, in which all bodies are, and
the place which is proper in which each body is primarily.”
The proper place is the limit of the immediate envelope
or the first container of an object; that which contains
the object and nothing but the object. Place is the meas-
ure of the mobile, as time is the measure of motion (see
Thomas, In lib. IV Phys. lect. 4).

Lumen, illumination, the reflection or corporeal counterpart
of light, as the illumination issuing from a physical body
or even a celestial orb; in which illumination, things are
seen. .

Lumen compranatum, complanted light, the light which the
eye gives forth when it sees, in virtue of which owls and
bats see in the dark,


468 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Lux, light, especially the light of the divine understanding, in
the augustinian tradition, by means of which truths are
perceived; by it truth is impressed in the heart of man as
an image is impressed in wax by a seal.


M


Maxum, evil; Thomas says (Quaest. disp. de Malo, q. 16, a. 2
concl.), “A thing is said. to be evil in two ways. In one
way because it is evil in itself, as robbery or homicide, and
this is evil absolutely. In another way a thing is said to
be evil to someone, and there is nothing to prevent that
that be good absolutely, but evil in some respect, as jus-
tice, which is good in itself and absolutely, is turned to -
evil for the robber who is punished by it.” Compare
DEFECTUS, BONUM.

MANERIES, manner.

Manupucrio, manuduction; as the type of proof which exem-
plifies and leads to, but does not present perfect knowl-
edge. é

Materia, matter; matter and form are the inseparable con-
stitutive elements of all first substance; matter, form, and
privation are the three principles of change. “I mean by
matter,” Aristotle writes (Phys. I, c. 9, 192°32-34), “that
first subject of each thing, from which each thing is
generated, and it is present in the thing, not accidentally,
[but as a substantive constituent].” Matter may be either
sensible or intelligible. Compare 1npiIvipvuario.

Mareriauis, material; whatever is subject to any form is
material to it; the formal always exceeds the material;
thus the bodily transmutation is material to sensitive ap-
petite; and the sensitive nature by which man has animal-
ity is material in him to the intellective nature, from
which he has the specific differentia of man, rationality.
Compare CAUSA MATERIALIS.

Mareriarirer, materially; a predicate accords with a sub-
ject materially when it accords by reason of matter or by
reason of the subject itself; formally when it accords
by reason of form, as fire is materially heavy, formally hot.

Maruematica, mathematics, includes the subject matter of the
quadrivium, arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy; it is
a certain, not a probable, science, and its subject matter
is therefore not the shifting changing things of experience.


GLOSSARY 469


There is some difference, however, concerning what its
subject matter is actually: in the augustinian tradition
numbers are eternal entities situated above the soul,
related to wisdom, to which the soul turns in contempla-
tion; in the aristotelian tradition, there are no separate
eternal entities, but the changeless entities of mathematics
are arrived at by abstraction from the things of ex-.
perience. According to Thomas Aquinas (Swm. Theol.
I, q. 5, a. 3 ad 4), “Mathematical things do not subsist’
separated with respect to being ... but mathematical
things are separated only according to reason, as they
are abstracted from motion and matter.” They are
abstracted, however, only from sensible matter, and in

' this they differ from metaphysical things; according to
Thomas (In. lib. III de An. lect. 8, 708), “Mathematical
things are abstracted from sensible matter, but not from
intelligible matter, in so far as continuous quantity re-
mains in the understanding abstracted from sensible qual-
ity.” Compare screnTIA.

Mepium, middle, medium, mean; according to Thomas two
things are to be considered in a medium, namely, the
reason why it is called a medium, and the act of the
medium. A thing is called medium from the fact that
it is between extremes; the act of the medium is to join
the extremes. Means may be physical, as in motion and
change; or logical, as when extremes are proved of each
other syllogistically by a mean; or moral, as virtue is
mean between extremes .of vice.

Memoria, memory (MEmMoRATIVA virTUS, memorative faculty),
the faculty of the sensitive soul which is the treasury and
repository in which the species of the estimative faculty
are preserved, as the species of common sense are pre-
served in imagination; then used broadly to include all
faculties for retaining species. Man possesses not only
memory, or the sudden recollection of past things, which
all animals possess, but also reminiscence. As memory
is derived from perceptions, so from many memories
comes experience (experimentum or experientia), and
thence art (in the realm of generation or coming to be)
and science (in the realm of being).

Mopvus, mode; mode means a certain determination of meas-
ure; broadly mode is an “adjacent” determination of
the thing, which is accomplished by the “adjection” of


470 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


an adjective name which determines the substantive, as
when it is said the man is white, or by an adverb which
determines the verb, as when it is said that the man runs
well. It is taken as axiom that the mode of operating,
of knowing, and of predicating follow the mode of being.
Morus, motion, movement, (xlvnots ); the actualization of the
potentially active and the potentially passive as such; it
is of four sorts: substantial (which is not properly motion
although it is mutation or change), quantitative, qualita-
tive, local. Motion proper, in the last three senses, is
change or mutation which is discernible in sensible things;
it follows the conditions of the body; it is a continuum
and requires the passage of time. Aristotle defines mo-
tion (Phys. III, c. 1, 201°9-19), “And since each one of
these kinds [of motion] is divided into that which is in
actuality and that which is in potentiality, therefore mo-
tion will be the actuality of that which is in potentiality
in the respect in which it is in potentiality. For example, —
the actuality [or perfection] of that which is alterable
[that is, of that which can be changed in quality], in the
respect in which it is alterable is alteration; and the
actuality of that which is susceptible of augmentation and
of its contrary, that is, that which is susceptible of dimi-
nution [that is, that which can be changed in quantity], —
for we do not have a single word common to the two,
is augmentation and diminution; and the actuality of that
which is generable and corruptible [that is, that which
can be changed in substance] is generation and corrup-
tion; and the actuality of that which is susceptible of
translation [that is, that which is. mobile in place] is trans-
lation or locomotion. It is manifest that this is what mo-
tion is actually, since we say that that which is construc-
tible, in the respect in which it is constructible, is in
actuality as it is constructed, and this is construction or
building; and in the same way too with learning, healing,
rotation, jumping, adolescence, age.” When something is
moved, it has something actually and it is mobile, that is, —
it is in potentiality to having something immediately; for
that reason motion has an indefinite character. Accord-
ing to Aristotle (Phys. III, c. 2, 201°28-32), “Now the —
reason why we think that motion is indeterminate is that
it is impossible to place it either in the potentiality or in |
the actuality of any kind of thing as such; for there is.


GLOSSARY 471


no necessity that any thing change or be moved in quan-
tity, either because it is potentially or because it is actu-
ally of this or that specified quantity. And motion,
therefore, is seen to be an actuality, but an imperfect
one,” Motion is the actuality of a potentiality; the ac-
tuality can be effected only when a body which has the
potentiality of being in motion receives the impact of a
body which is in actual motion, in any of the senses of
motion; it therefore becomes active by entering into mo-
tion, and at the same time is passive to the impact that
keeps it in motion; these, however, are accidental aspects,
for primarily motion is the actuality of the thing’s poten-
tiality. In the proper sense of passion, moreover, not
every motion is a passion, but only alteration (or change

of quality). According to Thomas (Jn lib. III Sent. d.

15, gq. 2, a. 1 sol 1), “Because passion is a motion from

one thing to another, not any motion is a passion, but

only alteration properly speaking, because in that motion
alone is something cast out from the thing and something
impressed upon it, which is the definition of passion. For
local motion is according to that which is outside the
thing, that is, place; motion of augmentation, moreover, is
according to this, that from that which is already, namely,
from nutriment, that which is augmented is produced to
greater quantity. That there be alteration, however, it

is required on the part of the thing altered that it be a

thing subsisting through itself, for otherwise it could not

be the subject of motion, and. that it be body, because

only body is moved ...and moreover that it have a

nature subject to contrariety, because alteration is motion

between contrary qualities.” Compare PERFECTIO, PASSIO.
Morus narvurazis, natural motion, which proceeds from a
principle intrinsic to the thing, or extrinsic but according
to its own natural inclination, as the growth of plants or
the fall of bodies.-
Morus viotentus, violent motion, which is from an extrinsic
principle and contrary to the inclination of the thing, as
a stone thrown upward or thrown downward with greater
force than it would naturally fall.

Murario, mutation, change (weraBodry); the principle of
change is that something is constituted otherwise now
than it was previously; there are four kinds of change:
the three kinds of motion and substantial change, which is


472 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


instantaneous and therefore not properly motion although
it is sometimes called instantaneous motion. Ockham de-~
fines change (Sum. Phys. III, c. 3) in a nominal definition:
“That is changed which preexisting has some form or place
which previously it did not have, or which lacks a form
or place which previously it had.’ Compare Morus,
OPPOSITUM.


N


‘Natura, nature; derived from nasci (compare tous) it sig-
nifies primarily the generation of living things; thence the
intrinsic principle of motion of a thing; nature is defined
therefore as the principle of motion in that which is
through itself and not accidentally; the intrinsic principle
of any motion or the intrinsic principle from which the
operations of the thing derive; nature is thus contrasted
to art as the principle and cause of motion which inheres
intrinsically and primarily as opposed to extrinsically and
accidentally. Therefore Thomas (Jn lib. I Phys. lect. 1) —
defines nature as “the principle of motion and rest in that
in which it is. Natural science is concerning those things,
therefore, which have in themselves the principle of mo-
tion.” Anything consequently which has in itself such a
principle of motion (or change) and rest may be said to
possess a nature of its own. The two meanings—Nature,
the principle, and all things which have natures—are
therefore usually found together properly without differ-
entiation. Moreover all behavior, in either sense, accord --
ing to an intrinsic principle is “natural,” for example, for
fire to rise, as distinct from having a tendency to rise is
natural (although fire neither is a nature nor has a na-
ture). Aristotle’s “revised” definition of nature is “the
form or species of such things as have within themselves
a principle of motion, such form or characteristic not being
separable from) the things themselves save by reason.”
(Phys. Il, ¢. 1, 1934-6). Finally, since the essence of
a thing is perfected through change by its form, the es-_
sence itself of the thing comes to be called its. nature.
Thomas orders the various meaning according to generality
(In lib. IT Sent. d. 37, q. 1, a. 1 sol.), “The name of nature -
is used in many ways. For in the first way, nature is
used as that which is related commonly to all things that


GLOSSARY 473
are, as nature is defined as all that which can be seized in
any manner by the understanding. In the second way, it
is proper only to substances; and thus nature is said to
be that which can act or suffer. In the third way, nature
is spoken of as that which is the principle of motion or
rest in those things in which it is essentially and not acci-
dentally. In the fourth way, each thing informing with
a specific difference is called a nature.” Compare vis,

| RATIO.

Necrssarium, necessary; that is necessary whose nature is such
that it is impossible for it not to be.

Nereatio, negation, division in so far as it signifies the separa-
tion of things.

Nomen, word, significative word, noun, name (the latter in
the sense in which Hobbes and a long line of english
logicians used the term), that is, the grammatical logical
unit as opposed to the spoken word (vox). Boethius de-
fined name as a significative word, and Thomas pointed
out that five things are asserted in the.definition of name
or noun: first the genus, word (vow) as it is distinguished
from’ other sounds; second, the first differentia, significa-
tive; third, the second differentia, at will (that is the
signification of the name is by human institution at will) ;
fourth, the third differentia without time (the noun differs
from the verb in that the latter involves time); fifth, the
fourth differentia, of which no part is ae see apart
from the noun as a whole.

Nominatio, nomination, the imposition of a name.

Norto, notion, conception; according to Thomas (Sum. Theol.
I, q. 87, a. 4 ob. 3; ep. ibid. ad 3), “It does not seem
that there can be other notions of things in the soul except
‘either the essences of the things known or their likenesses.”

Norrrta, knowledge, cognition, idea; four senses of notitia are
enumerated (Thomas, Quaest. Quodl. VII, q. 1, a. 4
concl.): the cognoscitive nature itself, the’ cognoscitive
power of that nature, the cognoscitive state, and finally
the act of cognition itself. In the first sense, knowledge
is not in the substance of the mind, like an accident in a
subject, but essentially and consubstantially, as it is said
that rational is in living, and living is in being. In the
other three senses, knowledge can be considered either as
compared to the knower (and thus it is present in the
knower like an accident in a subject and it does not ex-


474: MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ceed the subject because it is never found to be present in
any thing except a mind) or as it is compared to the
knowable (and from this point of view it does not have
something in which it is but something of which it is). —

Numervs, number, number is multitude measured by one; an
aggregation of unities. Division of the continuous is ac-—
complished by number; the continuous, therefore, (such
as the line) is capable of division indefinitely and is, in
this sense, unlimited or infinite, that is, not by virtue of
that which is numbered or that which is numerable, but
by virtue of that by which it is numbered. Members of
the same species have no proper differentiae from each
other, but are distinguishable as different only in number;
properties moreover may be shown to belong not. only to
individuals the same in species, but also to a single in-
dividual, one in number. In the augustinian tradition
numbers were associated in their eternity and immutability
with the objects of wisdom (compare above, vol. I, pp.
46-49).


O


Osiectivum, objective (in the mind), formal.

Oxsiecrum, object, that concerning which any power or dis-
cipline is exercised; it is related as matter to action;
according to Thomas (Sum. Theol. I, q. 1, a. 7 concl.),
“That it is properly said to be the object of any power
or condition, under the reason of which all things are
referred to the power or the condition, as man and stone
are referred to sight in so far as they are colored, where-
fore that which is colored is the proper object of sight”;
to be distinguished into material and formal object, as in
the case above, man or stone are the material objects of
sight, but colored is its formal object, since man and stone ~
are referred to sight in so far as they are colored.

OpeERATIO, operation, any act of a thing even though it does
not proceed outside the thing, as to understand, is an
operation of the intellect. Compare acrio, Factio.

Orrnto, opinion, the assent of the understanding to any prop-
osition, whether from the terms themselves or from a
probable middle term, together with a fear of the opposed
positions. Opinion is infirm knowledge (cognitio) because
it judges that a thing can be other than it is, since it


GLOSSARY 475


knows the thing by a reason situated outside the thing
itself. y
Opposir10, opposition, contradictory, consists in the presence
and absence, or the affirmation and negation of the same
thing; Aristotle says (An. Pri. I, c. 5, 27°29-30), “By an
opposite manner I mean, if the universal statement is
negative [or privative] the particular is affirmative [or
’ predicative], or if the universai is affirmative, the par-
ticular is negative.” This, however, is properly contra-
dictory opposition. “By contradictory opposition,”
Aristotle says (dn. Pri. II, c. 8, 599-11), “I mean the
opposition of to all to not to all, and of to some to to
none; by contrary opposition the opposition of to all to
to none, and of to some to not to some.” More broadly
it is customary to distinguish (see Aristotle, Met. V, ce.
10, 1018*20-1018°19) four types of opposition: the contra-
dictory (the opposition of a being to its negation, as white
and not-white), the privative and possessive (the opposi-
tion of a being to its privation, as sight and blindness),
the contrary (the opposition of two beings as absolute, as
sweet and bitter), the relative (the opposition of two be-
ings respective to each other, as father and son). The
extremes from which generation and dissolution take place
are opposites. Aristotle states the relations between the
kinds of opposition (Met. X, c. 4, 1055°1-29), “Now if the
kinds of opposition are contradiction and privation and
contrariety and relation, and of these the first is con-
tradiction, and contradiction admits of no intermediate,
while contraries admit of one, clearly contradiction and
contrariety are not the same. But privation is a kind of
contradiction: for what suffers privation, either in general
or in some determinate way, is either that which is quite
incapable of having some attribute or that which, being
of such a nature as to have it, has it not; for we speak
of it in many senses, which have been distinguished else-
where. Privation, therefore, is a kind of contradiction,
either in a determinate power or in some power conceived
together with the receptive material. This is the reason
why, while contradiction does not admit of an intermedi-
ate, privation sometimes does; for everything is equal or
not equal, but not everything is equal or unequal, save
only in that which is receptive of equality. If, then, the
generations of matter itself start from contraries, and


476


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


proceed either from a species and the possession of a
species or from some privation of the species and form,
clearly all contrariety will be a kind of privation. But
perhaps not all privation is contrariety, the reason being
that that which suffers privation may suffer it in many
ways. For the extremes from which changes proceed are
contraries. And this is obvious also by induction. | For
every contrariety involves the privation of one of the con-
traries. But not all cases are alike; inequality is the
privation of equality, and unlikeness of likeness, and vice
of virtue. But the cases differ as has been said; for in
the one case the thing only suffers privation, in another
case it does so at a certain time or in a certain part, as


‘at a certain age or in the principal part, or throughout.


This is why in some cases there is a mean (there are men
who are neither good nor bad). and in others there is not
(a number must be either odd or even). Further, some
contraries have their subject defined, other have not.—
Therefore it is evident that one of the contraries is always
stated according to privation; but it is enough if this is
true of the first—that is, the generic—contraries, that is,
the one and the many; for the others can be reduced to
these.”


Oprrosirum, opposite; attributes which cannot be present at


the same time in that which is susceptive of both are said
to be opposed or opposite.


Oratio, discourse; the derivation is frequently given from


oris ratio, reason of mouth; signifies therefore the expres-
sion of any act of reason by any effect of speech. Since
it is the property of reason to compound and divide, and
to proceed discursively from one thing to another taking
note of their causes, discourse expresses these processes in
words; the syllogism is discourse which results Frota the
latter property of reason.


iP


Pars, part; that into which the whole is divided and which is


related to the whole as matter; distinguished into quanti-
tative parts (those into which numbers or quantity is
divided) and essential parts (as matter and form from


which the natural whole is constituted, or genus and differ-


entia from which the species of the thing exists).


ms


alee


GLOSSARY |. ATT


Parricipatio, participation; to take part in, in the various
sense of part, as, for example, that which has fire but is
not fire is fiery by participation. According to Thomas
(In lib. Boet. de Hebd. c. 2), “To participate is, as it
were, to take part, and so when something receives par-
ticularly that which pertains to something else, it is said
universally to participate in it, as man is said to par-
ticipate in animal because man does not have the reason
of animality according to its entire community; and for
the same reason Socrates participates in man; and simi-
larly too a subject participates in an accident and matter
participates in form, because the substantial or accidental
form, which is common with respect to its reason, is de-
termined to this or that subject; and similarly an effect
is said to participate in its cause, especially when it is
not adequated to the power of its cause, as if we were to
say that air participates in the light of the sun, because
it does not receive it with the clarity with which it is in
the sun.” According to Aristotle (Top. IV, c..1, 12112),
“To partake is defined as to take on the definition of that
which is partaken.” According to Anselm (see above,
vol. I, p, 153) nothing is true except by participation in
truth; Eriugena holds (see above, vol. I, p. 184) that since
man is the image of God, whatever is predicated of God
essentially can be predicated of man by participation.
Compare pivis1o.

Particu.are, particular; so called because the common nature
is “particulated” in it, since the common nature can be
in many and be the reason of each, as man is a, particular
in the species humanity. Compare rnpIvinouM.

Passio, passion; strictly the undergoing or reception of a
destructive quality, as excessive heat. As a category
(compare patr) it is the act of the patient in virtue of
which it is patient, or the receiving of the effects from
the agent, as the receiving of the form of fire in the matter
of wood, or of heat in the hand. The emotions are pas-
sions of the appetite, that is, the emotion of the sensitive
appetite caused by the apprehension of good or evil to-
gether with some mutation which is not natural to the
body, such as love and hatred. According to Thomas (Jn
lib. III Sent, d. 15, q. 2, a. 1 sol. 1), “It is required by
the nature of passion that the quality introduced be
extraneous and the quality forced out be connatural, and


A78 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


this is so because passion imports a certain victory of the
agent over the patient; but all that which is conquered is
as it were drawn beyond its proper bounds~to alien
bounds; and therefore alterations which occur beyond the
nature of the thing altered are most properly called pas-
sions, as sicknesses more properly than states of health.”
Aristotle says (de An. II, 5, 417*14-417°16), “In the first
place, then, we speak as if to be passive and to be moved
is the same as to act and to move. For motion is a cer-
tain act, though imperfect, as is stated elsewhere. But
all things are passive and are moved by an active and
actual being. Whence it is that that which is passive is
passive to that which is like it; but on the other hand it
is passive to that which is unlike it, as we have stated.
For that is passive which is unlike, but after the passion
it is like that which has acted on it.... To be passive
or to suffer, however, is not simple in significance. Some-
times it means a kind of corruption by a contrary; some-
times it is rather the preservation of that which is in
potentiality by that which is in actuality and like it, being
constituted as potentiality is constituted in relation to
actuality. For one who speculates becomes one possessed
of knowledge, which clearly either is not alteration [that
is, change in quality] (for the addition is in the one him-
self and in actuality) or else it is another sort of altera-
tion. Wherefore it is not good usage to say that the wise
man, when he is wise, is altered, just as the builder,
when he builds is not altered. It is not right, therefore,
to give that the name of teaching, which leads to actuality
from that which is in potentiality in respect to knowing
and being wise, but it should have some other name. But
he who, beginning from that which is in potentiality,
learns ‘and accepts knowledge from him who is actually
and is learned and teaches, either must not be said to
suffer or be passive, or else there are two kinds of altera-
tion, one a mutation which is into privative dispositions
and one which is into conditions (or habits) and nature.”
Compare ALTERATIO, MOTUS.

Patt, to suffer, to undergo, to receive, as opposed to facere,
to make or do; to be passive, passion, the tenth of the
categories. Compare Passio.

Patiens, patient in the sense of that which is passive to or
undergoes an action,


——— 4


4


GLOSSARY. AT9


Prrrectrio, perfection; Matthew of Aquasparta, on the au-


thority of Aristotle (see selection above, q. 2 ad 20),
states the order of perfections and of motions to perfec-
tion, “Some things are whole in goodness; and these
acquire their perfection with no movement, such as God.
Others are very close to integral goodness; and those
acquire their perfection with very few movements: There
are others which are ordered to great goodness, but are
none the less removed from that perfection: therefore,
they acquire their perfection with many movements.
There are some, which are ordered to slight perfection;
and those of this sort arrive at it with few movements.
Some to no perfection; and they are immobile, because
motion is for the acquiring of some perfection. The first
is God; the second is the order of Angels; the third is
the order of rational creatures, such as men; the fourth
is the order of brute animals; the fifth is the order of
higher elements; in the last and lowest place is earth.”


Prrrecrivum, perfective; the habit of any power is per-


fective.


_ Per sx, essentially, substantially, through itself; that exists per


sé which does not have its being in anything else as in a
subject, therefore any substance exists per se. A se, on
the other hand, means that which requires no cause that
it exist: God alone is a se. From these expressions derive
the terms perseity (denying any dependence on a subject)
and aseity (denying even dependence on any producing
cause, or abaliety). Per se is therefore contrasted to per
accidens, accidentally. According to Thomas (Quaest.
disp. de Pot. q. 10, a. 4 concl.), “Whatever is present per
se in a thing either is from its essence or follows from
essential principles, from which principles is the first root
of the distinction of things . . . Everything which is pres-
ent per accidens, since it is extraneous to its nature, must
accord with it because of some exterior cause.” Therefore
essentially refers to that which agrees with the thing from
the nature of the thing itself or from the intrinsic prin-
ciples of the thing, thus the attributes which accord essen-
tially with man are his essential predicates, as rational,
free, and those which follow necessarily from the nature
of man, as being biped. On the contrary per accidens
indicates that which accords with the thing accidentally
and not necessarily, or that which accords with the thing


480


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


as if by chance, thus man is accidentally white, noble,
pious.


Perrria, expertness, learning, experience.
Persona, person; according to Boethius (Con. Hut. c. 3), de-


/


rived from persona, mask in a theatrical performance,
and used to translate the greek txdctacis; however, since
it seems to have been used first by Tertullian, it is prob-
ably derived first from persona in its legal sense.” Boethius


defines it as “the individual substance of a rational na-


ture”; Anselm (Monol. c. 78) restates the definition re-
serving substance for contrast to person: “Person is
spoken of only in respect of an individual rational nature;
and substance is spoken of in respect of individuals, which
subsist most of all in plurality.” Person is individual
since it must be a completed substance, existing through
itself, whereas an eSsence may be common to many; it
must be rational to distinguish it from subject or sup-
positum; thus there is a divine, an angelic, and a human
person, but no person of horse or stone, persona adding
over and above suppositum a dignity and excellence de-
rived from the intellectual nature.


Persuasio, persuasion, rhetorical device, operating by enthy-


meme or example.


Puanrasia, phantasy, the internal sense perceptive of objects,


when they are absent, which have previously been per-
ceived by the external senses; made up of common sense
and imagination; thence properly imagination alone; and
finally the impressions of the internal sense as opposed to
the species or images of the external sense.


Ponere, to affirm, to posit.
Posrrio, affirmation, position, thesis, a proposition which, al-


though it is evident once the terms haye been explained,
none the less requires some explication and is proper to
some science. A positio, therefore, is taken as the opinion
or the hypothesis which is adduced as the middle to an
argument, and which is agitated in discussion; in this
sense a premiss or supposition. According to Thomas
(In lib. I An. Post. lect. 4) one of the two immediate
principles of the syllogism: a thesis “cannot be demon-
strated, and therefore is said to be immediate, nor is it
necessary that any one who is to be taught, that is, who
should be taught in demonstrative science, have it, that is,
perceive it with the mind, or assent to it.” Compare the


GLOSSARY 481.


other immediate principle of the syllogism, Proposrrio PER
SE NOTA.

Posse, to be able, that is, to have potentially as opposed to
having actually.

Possipitiras, possibility; the principle and cause of mutation
is the possibility of the thing; in God there is no ad-
mixture of possibility. Possibility and impossibility were
suggested by Eriugena as additions to the ten categories
of Aristotle. Frequently, however, possibilitas was used
instead of potentia as a translation for the aristotelian
divas. Compare POTENTIA.

PosrpRsEDICAMENTUM, postpredicament, postcategory, cate-
gories which are consequences of the ten categories prop-
erly so called; they are five: opposition, priority and
posteriority, simultaneity, motion, and condition (i.e.
habitus in the sense that all nine of the categories involve
condition or state, rather than the special meaning of the
eighth category).

Porentia, power, potency, potentiality; means primarily the
principle of an action; but secondarily is transferred so
that that too which receives the action of an agent is said
to have power. According to Aristotle (Met. IX c. 1,
1046°10-19) the various kinds of potentialities are “prin-
ciples or starting points and they can all be reduced to
one primary kind, that is, the principle of change in an-
other thing, in so far as it is other. For one kind of
potentiality is of suffering, which in the thing itself which
is passive is the principle of passive change by something
else in so far as it is something else. Another kind is the
condition of impassibility to change which is for the worse
or toward destruction by something else in so far as it is
something else, i.e. by the principle of change. “In all these
definitions there is present the principle of the first poten-
tiality. But further these potentialities are referred either
only to doing or to suffering, or to doing and suffering
well.. Wherefore in the principles of these there are
present in some manner the prior principles of potentiali-
ties.” Potency simply (potentia) signifies the non-exist-
ence of a thing and its indifference to being or non-being;
its power or faculty, (potestas or facultas) denotes that
which already has its being and has through itself an
order to action. Therefore, the potential in no manner is,
but power lacks being only by a second actuality, which


\


A82


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


signifies action, because it can be and be understood with-
out the action of which it is itself the principle, but it is
by the first actuality which signifies being (for it cannot
be understood not to be) which is the principle of the
power itself. Yet it is proper to list, as Bonaventura
does, the powers or potencies of the soul as memory,
understanding, will. Power or potentiality moreover, is
distinguished from habitus (habit or condition) in that
the latter is not naturally implanted, like potentiality,
though based on natural principles. Power, furthermore,
gives the operation (as intellect gives understanding) ;
habit gives better operation (as logic leads to better
understanding). According to Bonaventura (Jn lib. I
Sent:, d: 8, q. 2, a. 2, q. 1 ad arg.), “Habit is that by
which power’ is inf actuality.” According to Aristotle
potentiality is of two sorts (de An. II, c. 5, 417°21-417"2) :
“A distinction must be drawn with respect to potentiality
and actuality, for we are using them at present absolutely
[that is, without qualification]. For it is thus in the case
of knowing anything, as if we say that a man is learned
because he is of the number of those who know and have
knowledge. But it is also as we say that he is already
learned who knows grammar. These two men, however,
are not in potentiality in the same way: the former is in
potentiality because he is a genus of a certain sort and
because he is matter [that is, related as matter to form];
the latter, because if he wishes he is able to consider
[that which he knows], unless something external inter-
fere. He, however, who is at the present moment con-
sidering is in actuality and is learned in the proper sense
of the term, that is, learned, as of this letter A. The
first two therefore are potentially learned. But the for-
mer is altered [that is, changed qualitatively] by teach-
ing, and often he is changed from the contrary condition;
the latter, however, because he has sense or grammar,
does not act [that is, does not pass into actuality] be-
cause of the fact that he is excited’ to acting, but in
another manner and because he had not yet acquired
that which was previously a condition.”


Porestas, power. Compare PoTEeNTIA,
PraepicasBite, predicable, the five (or according to Aristotle,


four) common notions through which, when known, it is
shown how anything is predicated of anything else.


GLOSSARY 483 —


Aristotle lists the four, definition, property, genus, acci-
dent, which the middle ages expanded, following Porphyry,
to species, differentia, genus, property, accident.

PRAEDICABILIS EY SsuBLICIBILIs, predicable and subjectible; a
species is subjectible as it is considered with respect to
the higher genus under which it is contained; predicable
as it is considered with respect to the inferior individuals
of which it is predicated.

PRAEDICAMENTA, the categories, defined by Thomas (?) (Sum.
Log. 11, ec. 1) as “certain predicables ordered in the predi-
camental order”; taken in the middle ages as the ten cate-
gories of Aristotle, substance, quantity, quality, relation,
place, time, position, state (or habit), action, passion.
The ten categories indicate the most universal classes to
which all things can be reduced, and therefore show all
the attributes that can be predicated properly of a sub-
ject. There are ten because there are ten, and no more,
questions which can be raised concerning any given in-
dividual. The categories, of course, cannot be defined (al-
though they may be described by induction), since defini-
tion requires a genus, and the categories fall under no
genus.

PRAEDICAMENTALE, predicamental, categorical.

Prarpicare, to predicate; for one thing to be predicated of
another is for that thing to be affirmed of that other;
in its strict sense only second substances are predicated
of first substances, whereas the accidents inhere or are
present in substance.

Prarpicatio, predication; according to Thomas (de Ente et
Essentia c. 4), “Predication is that which is completed by
the action of the understanding compounding and dividing,
having none the less as foundation in fact the very unity
of those things which are affirmed one of the other.”

Praxis, pravis, actions or operations considered in their bear-
ing on good and evil, practical activities.

Princirium, principle (dpxf), that from which a thing pro-
ceeds and has its origin in any way whatever, whether with
devendence or not. Thomas says, contrasting cause and
principle (Sum. Theol. I, q. 33, a. 1 ad 1), “Principle is
more common than cause, as cause is more common than
element; for the first term or even the first part of a
thing is said to be a principle, but not a cause. ... The

’ word cause seems to import a diversity of substance and


484


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


a dependence of one on the other, which the word prin-
ciple does not seem to import. For in all kinds of cause
there is always found a distance between the cause and
that of which it is the cause, according to some perfection
or power; but we use the word principle also of those
things which have no difference of this sort, but only ©
according to a certain order, as when we say, the point
is the principle of the line, or even when we say the first
part of the line is the principle of the line.” Elements
differ from the principles which constitute natural bodies,
furthermore, in that principles are not given prior to the
composite and no body is constituted of them, whereas
elements flow from the principles, form and matter, and
therefore they are constituted bodies, but they are such
that they cannot be divided or resolved into other bodies,
but other bodies are resolved into them." Form, matter,
and privation are the three principles of the natural com-
posite, by which change is explained.


Privatio, privation, a determinate incapacity; absence in a


subject of that which naturally belongs ,to it then, there,
and under those conditions, as blindness in man; con-
trasted with negation, absence from a subject of that
which the subject is unable to receive, as absence of sight
in a stone. One of the three principles of the natural
composite; form and matter being the other two. Ac-
cording to Aristotle (Met. IX, c. 1, 1046*32-36), “Priva-
tion is spoken of in many ways: for it means that which ~
does not have something and that which is naturally apt —
to have it, if it does not have it, either absolutely or when
it is naturally apt to have it, and either in some par-
ticular way, e.g. perfectly, or only in some certain mode.
And in certain cases if things which are by nature apt
to have something, by violence do not have it, we say
that they suffer privation.” Compare opposirio.


Proportio, proportion (in modern usage ratio), a certain order


between two terms, as a proportion between arithmetical —
quantities is called a relation (habitudo) or order between —
equal or unequal numbers.


PRoporTIONALITAS, proportionality (in modern usage propor-


tion), a certain order or likeness between two proportions,
that is, proportionality is a proportion of proportions.


Propostri0, proposition, a proposition is the “subjective” part


of a statement (enuntiatio), in which one thing is


GLOSSARY 485


predicated of another; that is, it is called a proposition in
relation to argumentation. The proposition is the prin-
ciple of the syllogism; likewise propositions may be called
the matter of the conclusion as terms are the matter of
the proposition.

PrRoposirio PER SE NOTA, proposition known through itself,
one to which the intellect assents from an understanding
of the terms alone, first principle, axiom. Also called

' pRoposiTio imMEDIATA, immediate proposition; defined by
Aristotle as a proposition to which another is not prior.
‘The thesis and the immediate proposition are the two first
immediate principles of the syllogism,.-but whereas the
thesis cannot be demonstrated and need not be assented
to, the immediate proposition (according to Thomas, Jn
lib. I An. Post. lect. 4) “must be had in mind and must
be assented to by any one who is to be taught. And it
is manifest that there are certain principles which are of
such sort (as is proved in Book IV of the Metaphysics
with respect to the principle that an affirmation and its
negation are not true at the same time) the contrary of
which no one can believe with his mind although he may
state it with his mouth.” The certitude of other proposi-
“tions must be based on propositions of this sort. “Any
proposition the predicate of which is in the reason of the
subject, is immediate and known through itself, so far as
jt is of itself. But the terms of some propositions are
such that they are in the knowledge of all, as that which
is and one [ens et unum] and others which are of that
which is as that which is. For that which is is the first
concept of the understanding. Wherefore it is necessary
that such propositions, not only in themselves, but also
with respect to us, be held as known through themselves,
as that it is impossible that the same thing be and not
be, and that the whole is greater than its part, and like
propositions. Wherefore all principles of science of this
sort are taken from the Metaphysics the study of which
is to consider that which is absolutely and those things
which are of that which is. But certain propositions are
immediate, the terms of which are not known ‘to all.
Wherefore although the predicate is in the reason of the
subject, nevertheless since the definition of the subject is
not known to all, it is not necessary that such proposi-


486 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


tions be conceded by all. As the proposition, all right

angles are equal, as it is in itself, is known through itself

or immediate, because equality falls in the definition of
right angle. For a right angle is one which a right line

makes falling on another right Jine, so that from either

part of the angle equals are returned. And therefore

principles of this sort are accepted with some thesis or

position. And there is another manner, in which some

propositions are called suppositions. For there are cer- |
tain propositions which can be proved only by the prin-

ciple of another science, and therefore it is necessary that

they be supposed in this science, although they are proved

by the principles of another science, as geometry supposes

that the drawing of a straight line is from point to point,

and natural philosophy proves it, showing that between

any two points there is a straight line medium.” Imme-

diate propositions sometimes consist in first and common

terms, as that which is and that which is not, equal and

unequal, whole and part; these are first and immediate

propositions, as the same thing cannot both be and not be,

things equal to one and the same thing are equal to each

other. Immediate propositions which are concerning ~
posterior and less common terms, are second with respect

to these first, as that the triangle is a figure, and that

man %w an animal,

Proprieras, property, that which follows from the essence of
a thing, as heat from fire, and which is distinguished from
the essence only by mind.

Prorrium, proper to, peculiar to, property, one of the five
universal attributes or predicables. That is proper to
anything which accords with it alone, though it does not
necessarily pertain to its essence, as risible is a property
of man; a universal notion which follows necessarily from
the nature once constituted in a species, and by the nature |
is predicated of many things different in number. A
property accords with the given species alone and always,
though in a given situation and at a given time there
may be accidental properties. Property is unlike differ-
entia, in that it is not completive of substance nor a part
of substance, but only an aptitude of it, and therefore
unsuited to divide species from species in a given genus.

Provipentia, providence, foresight.


7


GLOSSARY 487


Q


Quaprivium, guadrivium, the mathematical portion of the
seven arts; the four arts or disciplines, arithmetic, geom-
etry, music, astronomy. Compare MATHEMATICA.

Quatiras, quality; broadly, quality may be described (cate-
gories cannot be defined) as that according to which we
answer the question how?; whatever perfects or determines
substance in any way, and thus any mode, such as union,
and any accident, such as paternity, can be called a
quality. The third of the ten categories, as whiteness;
it is the differentia of substance and the principle of
knowing the thing. It is customary to distinguish four
species of quality: disposition, natural power or impotence,
passion, form. Quality is based on quantity as color is
based on surface and figure on line or surface. Quality
admits of degree in having; change in quality is called
alteration; quality alone admits of likeness and unlikeness.
Compare, therefore, ALTERATIO, SIMILITUDO, ASSIMILARI.

Quanvo, when, time, the sixth of the aristotelian categories.

- Compare TEMPUS.

Quantitas, quantity; quantity is the measure of substance;
that according to which we answer the question how
much?; it consists in a certain multiplication of parts;
that by which a corporeal thing is capable of dimensions
and can be increased or diminished; it is however not
susceptible of degrees in having. Quantity may be con-
tinuous (as line or any magnitude) or discrete (as num-
ber or any multitude). Quantity alone admits of
equality and inequality; change in quantity is augmenta-
tion or diminution. The second of the aristotelian cate-
gories, that nearest to substance. Compare AEQUALITAS,
ADAEQUATIO.

Quipprras, quiddity, the very entity of the thing, considered in
relation to the definition explaining what (quid) the
thing is. As Thomas says (de Ente et Essentia c. 1),
“Since that by which a thing is constituted in its proper
genus or species is what we signify by the definition in-
dicating what the thing is, therefore it is that the name
of essence is changed by philosophers to the name of
quiddity.” e


488 / MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Quies, rest; defined by Aristotle (Phys. III, c. 2, 202" 4) as
“absence of motion in that to which motion is possible.”


R


Raprus, rapture; defined in its general sense as motion of
anything beyond its natural or voluntary inclination by
an extrinsic principle; particularly the direct vision of —

. God and of divine things, the highest of the seven grades
of interior experience according to Bacon. St. Paul
experienced raptus according to Bonaventura, and in
that was possibly (according to Bonaventura), unique
among men after the fall, Moses and St. Francis being
the only exceptions that suggest themselves. Augustine
distinguished two kinds of raptus, one in which the mind
is drawn away (rapitur) from sensible things to an
imaginary vision, another in which the mind is drawn
away from sense and imagination at the same time to an
intellectual vision, through the intellect understanding God
by some intelligible immissions or through the intellect
seeing God in essence.

Ratio, reason, nature, relation, principle, ground, argument,
definition, criterion, (dédyos). Sometimes used as identi-
cal with intellectus, then divided into speculative and
practical reason; sometimes taken for the action of the
understanding, most of all for the discursive act of
understanding. According to Thomas (Jn lib. I Sent.
d. 33, q. 1, a. 1 ad 3), “Reason is taken in two senses,
for sometimes that is called reason. which is in the rea-
soner, namely, the act itself of reason, or the power or
faculty which is reason; but sometimes reason is the
name of an intention, whether that according to which
it signifies the definition of a thing, as reason is a
definition, or as reason is called argumentation.” There
are according to Thomas (In lib. I An. Post. lect. 1)
three acts of reason; the first two are acts of reason—
in the respect that reason is a kind of understanding:
(1) the action of the intellect understanding indivisibles
or incomplexes according to which action it understands
what the thing is or its quiddity; in this there can be |
no error, truth, or falsity (this is called information of |
the understanding; this act of reason is the subject mat- —
ter of the Categories), (2) the operation of the intellect


GLOSSARY 489


| compounding and dividing, from which operation true
and false pruceed (this is the subject matter of the
on Interpretation), (3) the act of reason according to
which it is reason proper, that is, the proceeding from
one thing to another that through what is known one may
come to knowledge of the unknown (this is the subject

‘matter of the remaining books of logic). Reason, as
an intention, may therefore mean the definition of the
thing, as, for example, in the Categories (1, 1*), “Things
are said to be univocal the names of which are the same
and also the definitions of the subjects accommodated
to the name are the same.” Since it may mean definition,
reason is used also for final cause, or for formal cause,
or finally for any other kind of cause. Reason, as a
faculty of the soul, is the third power of: the soul (com-
pare Boethius, In Isag. Por., 2 ed.; see above, vol. I,
pp. 71-72); it uses the vegetative and sensitive powers
as its servants, and is “occupied in the very firm con-
ception of present things, or in the understanding of
absent things, or in the investigation of unknown things” ;
according to Boethius there are two parts to the logical
discipline or art of reasoning: dialectic or the art of
judging and topic or the art of discovering.

Ratio rut, the essence of the thing; the formal reason of
the thing consists in the definition of it or in the essential
attributes as they are conceived by us, that is, as they
are abstracted from particular conditions; the objective
reason of the thing is that being which the thing has
in the mode of object known.

Rario sEMINALIS, seminal reason; the reasons, implanted by
God in the beginning, from which the things of the
world are, at their appropriate time and under appropriate
circumstances, generated.

‘Rario AaETERNA, eternal reason; according to Augustine,
the eternal reasons are the sempiternal truths of God,
in accordance with which things are made and by which,
above our minds, we are ‘guided in thought.

RaATioNABILITER, reasonably.

RATIocINATIO, reasoning, ratiocination, knowledge mediately
by, proceeding from the understanding of one thing to
another, to the end of understanding intelligible truth;

the inquisition of reason, the investigation of cause in
the thing caused. According’ to Albert (de Intellectu


8


e


490 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


et Intelligibili I, tract. 3, c. 2; see above, vol. I, p. 372),
“The condition of the principles is said to be wnder-
standing and the condition of the conclusion knowledge,
and the process from principles to conclusion is called
reasoning.” Contrasted with intellection, which is the
immediate apprehension of intelligible truth.

Rationate, the rational; in two senses: everything intellectual
(proper to God and the angels) and knowing by dis-
course (the differentia of man). ;

Rarion arirer, rationally.

Recirere, to receive, to undergo any accident or transmuta-
tion; the term or end of receiving is having or habitus.

Recriricatum, rectified.

Rerirxn, reflexively; an act is affirmed of a thing reflexively
when affirmed of the thing as conceived by” us, as we
know reflexively when our knowledge is turned on the
knowledge of the thing already had. Thus one would
know directly that iron is heavy, reflexively that it is
true that iron is heavy. According to Ockham (see
selection above, Quodl. II, q. 12 concl.), “That act is
called direct by which the understanding understands
an object outside the soul, and that act reflex by which
this direct act is understood.”

Retatio, relation, the order of one thing to another; the
fourth of the ten categories. Compare ap aLiquip.
REMINISCENTIA, reminiscence; the inquisition of something
which has fallen from memory; in addition to memory,
which man shares with other animals (that is, the sudden
recollection of past things) reminiscence is, as it were,
the syllogistic inquiry into the memory of past things
according to their individual intentions; the faculty by
which the intentions and phantasms of hidden and re-
condite things are educed for the understanding of sensi-

ble things.

Remirri, to remit, to decrease in grades as to intensify is to
increase.

Remorio, denial.

ReEMOVERE, to remove, to deny.

Res, thing, according to Avicenna, the quiddity or essence
of that which is (ens). According to Thomas (In lib.
I Sent. d. 25, q. 1, a. 4 sol.), “There are two points
to be considered in a thing, namely, the quiddity and


GLOSSARY AQ}


reason of it and also the being of it, and the name thing
is taken from the quiddity. And since the quiddity can
have being both in the singular which is external to the
mind and as it is apprehended in the mind by the intellect,
therefore the name thing applies to both, to that which
is in the mind, as thing [res] is derived from knowing
[reor], and to that which is outside the mind, as thing
is spoken of as something known [ratum] and firm in
nature.” Again (In lib. IT Sent. d. 37, q. 1, a. 1 sol.),
“The name thing is taken in two senses. For that is
called a thing absolutely which has a known and firm
being in nature; thing is used in this way, taking the
name thing to indicate it as it has a certain quiddity
or essence; but it is called that which is [ens], as it
has being. But because a thing is cognoscible through its
essence, the name of thing is transsumed to all that
which can fall in cognition or understanding, in the sense
that thing [res] is derived from knowing [reor], and
in this manner things of reason [res rationis] are spoken
of, which do not have a known being in nature, accord-
‘ing to which mode negations and privations can be called ,
things too, as likewise they are called things of the
reason [entia rationis].”

Respectvs, in respect to, the relation of thing to the principle
from which it derives, as of creature to creator; relation.

Resoutvere, to resolve, the logical process of separating terms
previously conjoined and joining terms previously sep-
arated; the physical process of separating the elements
of a compound.


Ss


Sarrentia, wisdom, (copia) knowledge of eternal things.
According to Thomas (Sum. Theol. Ia Ilae, q. 57, a. 2
concl.), “Wisdom pertains to the understanding of eternal
things”; according to Aristotle (Met. I, c. 1, 981” 29) it
is concerned with first causes and principles. Wisdom
considers the most lofty causes, and therefore properly it
judges and orders all things, because perfect and uni-
versal judgment can not be had save by resolution to
first causes. Boethius defines it (see above, vol. I, p.

119) as “the comprehension of the truth of things which
are and which draw as by lot their immutable substance.”


492 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Scrsrtz, knowable, that which can be known or be the object
of science.
Scientia, knowledge, scientific knowledge, science, (éruorhun )
any true and certain knowledge derived from certain but
not demonstrable principles, or any certain and evident
knowledge of things through their proper causes; under-
stood broadly, all the arts may be called sciences. Strictly
it is discourse from principles to conclusions, involving
a firm inhesion and intellectual vision, for it has a certi-
tude which proceeds from the understanding of principles.
According to Aristotle and his followers, science in itself
is to be considered in the category of relation, knowledge
being a correlative of that which is known, with this
peculiarity, that one of the correlatives (the thing) can
exist without the other (knowledge), but there can be
no knowledge without the thing; this notwithstanding
that correlatives ordinarily come into existence simul-
taneously (see Aristotle Cat. 7, 7° 22-34). Strictly then
(as, for example, according to the pseudo-Grosseteste,
above, vol. I, p. 304), knowledge is a passion or a per-
fection resulting from the union of something intelligible
and an intellectual power; that is the fashion in which.
its coming into being or generation in the understanding |
is to be considered; in terms of its actuality, it is a con-.
dition (habitus) by which the true is distinguished from
the false, and one of them judged to be true. The
pseudo-Grosseteste distinguishes the manners and kinds.
of condition (see above, vol. I, 307): “Knowledge is:
either the name of the condition by which the understand-.
ing speculates easily what is true, and what false, and|
understands actually—and thus it is properly called!
knowledge—for condition is midway between potentiality.
and actuality, by which potentiality passes easily into!
actuality; or else it is that act of speculating or under-:
standing—and thus it is properly called consideration;
or it is the disposition to the act of knowing or the!
condition in learning, whether the learner begins to know!
by his own exercise, and that is called investigation, or
instructed by some one else, which is properly called!
in the Rezsen teaching, doctrine, in the person learning,!
discipline.’ According to the same writer, following im
the distinctions of Aristotle, knowledge may be simple
or complex: simple if it apprehends the unity or a |


. |
2%


GLOSSARY 498


of the thing immediately, complex if it handles the quid-
dity by definition and proceeds discursively by. proposi-
tions. There is also an apparently complex knowledge,
which is. our reconstruction of the uncreated understand-
ing or God, and which is in reality most simple. Knowl-
edge can be either through the cause (knowledge propter
quid) or through the effect (knowledge quia); thé first
proceeds from principles known first and in themselves;
the second is dialectical and concerned with joining the
particulars of experience to universals, to the end of
informing knowledge and action: it is called particular
knowledge. There are, in most of the philosophers since
Aristotle, three speculative sciences, which are capable
of absolute certainty: metaphysics (which deals with
things wholly abstracted from matter and motion) mathe-
matics (which deals with things abstracted from motion
but not abstracted from all kinds of matter) and physics
(which deals with matter and motion). The particular
sciences deal with the intentions of things (dialectic
and demonstrative science) or of speech (grammar,
rhetoric) ; these include those sciences of the particular
which are most usually called practical sciences: ethics
and politics. Compare ARs, PROPOSITIO PER 8E NOTA.

ScIENTIA EXPERIMENTALIS, experimental science; according
to Bacon the one way to certainty. Compare ExpPeERI-
MENTUM.

Scientia Practica, practical science, that is, operative;
ethics according to Bacon is the practical science; he re-
stricts practical to that having to do with moral and civil
science, (for him) concerned with the relation of man to
God and to his neighbor.

ScIENTIA SPECULATIVA, speculative science; sciences which
consider the truths of things, not operations; and relative,
therefore, to the speculative, not the practical intellect.
Compare vERUM.

Scme, to know, to understand, to perceive; a thing is said to be
known when its cause has been learned, and it is not
known unless there is the certainty that it is impossible
that it be other than it is.. Knowledge is dependent on
demonstration; according to Thomas (In I lib. An. Post.
lect. 4), “To know seems to be nothing other than to
understand the truth of any conclusion by demonstration.”


494 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Sewsipite, the sensible, that which is perceived by the senses,
as the intellectual is that which is perceived by the intel-
lect.

SENSIBILE PROPRIUM, proper sensible, that which through it-
self or through its proper species can be perceived by only
one external sense without error, as light (or color) by
the eyes, sound by the ears; Bacon enumerates nine proper
sensibles.

SENSIBILE COMMUNE, common sensible, that which is perceived
by several external senses through modified species of the
proper sensibles, as quantity, distance, motion, rest, figure;
Bacon enumerates twenty common sensibles and adds to
these, combinations of the twenty with each other.

SENSIBILE PER ACCIDENS, accidental sensible, that which falls
under the external senses neither through its own species
nor the modified species of something else, but only by
means of something else with which is conjoined, as ma-
terial substance.

Sensus, sense, the faculty of the soul cognoscitive of material
and singular objects.

SENSUS EXTERNI, external senses, those possessed of outward
bodily organs, as sight, hearing, and so forth.

SENSUS INTERNI, internal senses (or SENSUS INTERIOR, interior
sense), those whose organ is located within the head in
the substance of the brain itself, that is, fantasy or imagi-
nation, common sense, memory, estimation, cogitation.

SENSUS COMMUNIS, common sense, the internal sense which
perceives the objects of all the external senses and judges
concerning their effects and concerning their operations.

SENsuUS coRPoREUS, corporeal sense, the five external senses.

SENSUS SPIRITUALIS, spiritual sense, the fifth of the seven
grades of interior experience according to Bacon.

SENTENTIA, sentence, a definitive, distinct, and -most certain
concept of one pole of a contradiction; assent to a
sentence therefore is the determined acceptance of one —
part of a contradiction.

SIGNIFICATIO, signification, meaning.

VERITAS SIGNIFICATIONIS, truth of signification. Compare
VERITAS, 2

Sienum, sign, something manifest to us by which we are led
to a knowledge of something not manifest; that which


represents something other than itself to a cognoscitive
power.


GLOSSARY 495


Simirrvuno, likeness, similitude, the relation of two qualities of
the same species and grade (as equality is the agreement
of two quantities); the relation of cause and effect in-
volves the relation of likeness, and in this sense all things
are likenesses of God. Thomas defines likeness Cn lib. I
Sent. d. 2 q. 1 exp. text.), “Likeness signifies a relation
caused by a unity of quality, which relation requires dis-
tinct subjects, for the likeness of different things is the
same quality; wherefore the nature of that which causes
likeness reveals a unity of essence, which is: the ‘same
goodness and wisdom or whatever else is signified by the
mode of quality.” He says elsewhere (Sum. Theol. I, q.
93, a. 9 concl.), “Likeness is a certain unity, for the one
in quality causes likeness.” In the sense of likeness to
God, there are distant likenesses (similitudo longinqua)
and close likenesses (similitudo propinqua sive expressa)
according to Bonaventura; the latter are images (imago)
and are found only in the rational soul of man.

Simexicirer, simply, absolutely, (a&m\Gs); indicates that the
thing is as pronounced, and nothing of its determination is
removed. According to Thomas (Sum. Theol. III, q. 50,
a. 5 concl.), “Simply can be taken in two ways. In one
way as simply is the same as absolutely, as ‘that is spoken
of simply which is spoken of without the addition of
something else,’ as the Philosopher says (Top. II, ¢. 11,
115° 34-35) ... In another way it is the same as com-
pletely or totally.” In both senses it is contrasted to im
some respect (secundum quid). God exists simply; crea-
tures, since God’s will must be supposed, exist in some
respect. Compare ansovuTe.

Srncuuare, singular, individual; that which is not apt natu-
rally to be predicated of many, but only of one; this or
that singular can not be defined. Compare rnpivipuum.

Srrus, position, situation, disposition; the seventh of the ten
categories; as a category it imports an order of parts in
place; it may, however, be a differentia of quantity too,
in which case it imports only an order of parts in a
whole; it applies only to body; as sitting or lying.

Spatiom, space; the middle ages early mingled platonic no-
tions in its aristotelian discussion of space (xépa).
Thomas suggests the reason for departure from pure aris-
totelianism (which is in large part responsible for the
discussions leading to the confusions of the doctrines of


496


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


space and time in the seventeenth and eighteenth cen-
turies) by repeating the aristotelian dictum (Phys. IV,
c. 2, 209” 16-17), that whereas many would say that place
is something, Plato alone attempted to state what place is
(In lib. IV Phys. lect. 3). “The ancients thought that
place is space, which is that between the limits of the
containing thing, which has the dimensions of length,
breadth, and thickness; but its space does not seem to
be the same as any body of sensible things, for space
remains the same when diverse sensible bodies have re-
ceded and advened. According to this therefore it follows
that place is separated dimensions. And Plato wanted
to prove from this by syllogism that place was matter.
And this is what he says, that as place seems to some
to be a distance of magnitude of space, separated from
any sensible body, it seemed that place was matter. For
the distance itself and dimension of magnitude is other
than magnitude, for magnitude signifies something de-
termined by some species, as a line is determined from
points, and a surface by a line, and a body by a surface,
which are species of magnitude; but the dimension of
space is contained and determined under form, as body
is determined by the plane (that is, the surface) as by a
certain limit. That however which is contained under
limits, seems not to be determined in itself. But that
which is not determined in itself, but is determined by
form and limit, is matter, which has fhe nature of the
infinite, for if from any spherical body the sensible pas-
sions are removed and the limits by which the dimensions
of magnitude are figured, nothing remains but matter;
whence it follows that these dimensions, indeterminate of
themselves, which are determined by something else, are
matter itself. And this clearly followed from the roots
[ie. the fundamental principles] of Plato, who posited
that numbers and quantities are the substances of things.
Since therefore place is dimensions, and dimensions are
matter, Plato said in the Timaeus, that place and matter
are the same, for anything receptive of anything was said
to be ‘place, not distinguishing between the reception of
place and of matter; whence, since matter is receptive of
forms, it follows that matter is place.’ Thomas goes
on to repeat the aristotelian refutation of this position,
the aristotelian position being that place is a receptacle or


GLOSSARY : 497


a vessel, a vessel being a place that can itself be moved
about, and therefore place may be regarded-as an immova-
ble vessel, or vessel as a movable place (Aristotle, Phys.
IV, c. 2, 209” 28-30; and IV, c. 4, 212" 15-16). The pla-
tonic position was however revived and laid the founda-
tions of the doctrine that place is the interval, space, or
distance occupied by a thing (not ‘the limit of the con-
taining body or vessel), that there ean therefore be place
without the thing in place; the introduction of the doctrine
of the vacuum then is not improper (whereas for Aris-
totle there is no place without a body contained in place,
for no otherwise is there a surrounding equal and separate
limit, and a vacuum is therefore impossible and ineon-
ceivable) ; finally all bodies’ are in a real and existent
space, and space itself becomes boundless and infinite
(whereas for Aristotle every body in the universe is in
place, but the universe is not itself in place, since it has
no surrounding limit, and the universe is therefore finite).
Compare Locus,

SPECIES INTENTIONALIS, intentional species; a certain image of
the object, through which the object is joined with the
cognitive faculty and is attained by it. Bonaventura
says (In lib. I Sent. d. 31, p. 2, a. 1, q. 3 conel.), “Species
imports likeness, the relation of knowing, and beauty.”

SPECIES CORPOREA, corporeal species.

SPECIES INTELLIGIBILIs, intelligible species.

SPECIES EXPRESSA, express species, the idea itself which the
object causes to appear, that is, the perception and pre-
sentation of the object; that which is formed by the
possible intellect from the species which are derived by
the active intellect, that it may know the object repre-
sented by it actually. It is, as it were, the principle which
determines the understanding to knowledge and represents
the object as intelligible. It is the concept of the thing
which the mind forms when it knows the object, and it
is said to be the term of knowledge or the verb of the
mind.

Species rmpressa, impressed species, the quality sent forth

by the object as a kind of vicarious power of the object,

‘ which is impressed in the knowing faculty and aids it in
eliciting the knowledge of the object or the express
species; the intelligible species which is elaborated by the.
active intellect and received by the possible, intellect; the


498 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


image of the thing by which the mind is determined to
knowing that thing, and therefore it is said to be the
principle of knowledge.

Specims seNSIBILIS, sensible species.

Species tocrca, logical species, the notion which exhibits the
common essence of many individuals; subclass of genus;
species is defined by Boethius (see above, vol. I, p. 97)
as “the thought collected from the substantial likeness of
individuals unlike in number”; he speaks of species as
caused by genus and differentia (ibid. p. 90); according
to his doctrine species are sensible in individuals, but are
thought universals and as universals are intelligible; one
of the five universal attributes or predicables.

Species praepicasiuis, predicable species, one apt to be predi-
cated of many things differing only in number, not in
essence, as man may be predicated of Peter and Socrates.

Species suniicipi1is, subjectible species, the particular species
which is collocated immediately under the genus and of
which the genus is predicated immediately, as animal in
respect to the living.

SPECIES INFIMA, (OF SPECIES SPECIALISSIMA), the lowest species,
the most special species, a species which has under itself
only individuals, as horse has only this or that horse. Ac-
cording to Thomas (Jn lib. X Met. lect. 10, 2123), “These
(i.e. species specialissimae) are called individuals, in so far
as they are not further divisible formally. Individuals
however are called particulars in so far as they are not
further divisible neither materially nor formally.” Compare
INDIVIDUUM.

SprxeciricarE, to specify, to specificate, to collocate under this
or that species, in this or that order, as potentiality is
specificated by act.

SPECIFICATIO, specification.

SPECIFICATIVUM, specificative, that attribute or those aitri-
butes which distinguish a thing from other things and
place it in a given species, as rationality is specificative
of man.

Sprecuiatio, speculation; according to Aristotle (Met. XII, ec.
7, 1072 21-24), “The intellect, however, [as contrasted
to the intelligence of God, which in accordance with it-
self is of that which is best in itself] understands itself
by the transumption of the intelligible [ie. by taking or
the nature of the object of thought], for it becomes an


GLOSSARY 499


intelligible [i.e. an object of thought] by coming into con-
tact with and understanding [its objects], so that in-
tellect and intelligible are the same. For the intellect is
that which is susceptive of the intelligible and of essence;
but intellect is actualized when it possesses [its object].
Therefore the latter [possession] rather than the former
[receptivity] is the divine element which intellect seems
to have, and the act of speculation is what is most pleasant
and best.” Compare conTeMPLaTio.

Sprairus, spirit, as opposed to body, is simple, complete, im-
material, and intellective substance.

Susiecrivum, subjective; particularly in knowledge the aspect
to be attributed to the thing as contrasted to objective.

Susrecrum, subject, that subject to or underlying, particularly
that subject to change (thus susceptive of contraries)
and that subject to an idea or to the understanding, that
is, the things themselves without; finally, that of which
anything else is said.

SUBIICI ALIQUIBUS PRAEDICATIS, to be a subject having certain
predicates,

SuBIICIBILIs, subjectible, that which can be the subject in any é
proposition, or that which can have a certain predicate,
as water is subjectible to the predicates of heat or cold.

_ Sussrantia, substance, (otcia) the first category, that which
subsists through itself (per se ens). That however is not
to be taken as its definition, for substance (like the other
nine categories) can not be defined. According to Thomas
(Con. Gen. I, 25), “That which is through itself is not the
definition of substance. For from what has been said of
that which is [ens] it could not be a genus, for it has al-
ready been proved that that which is does not have the
nature of genus [because no proper differentia could be
found to divide it into species]. In the same way from
what has been said of through itself [per se], it could
not be a genus, for it seems to import only a-negation;
for it is called that which is through itself because it is
not in another, which is a pure negation, which can not
constitute the nature or reason of a genus, for then the
genus would not state what the thing is, but what it is
not. The nature [ratio] of substance, therefore, must be
understood in this way, that substance,is a thing to which
being is proper without being in a subject, (but the name
thing is imposed from quiddity, as the name that which


500 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


és is imposed from being) and thus it is understood in the
nature of substance, that it has a quiddity (to which being
is proper) not in something else.” It is the property of
substance that, remaining the same in number itself, it
may undergo contraries; it is not itself susceptible of a
contrary, nor of more or less, although it is the subject
of both in change or mutation. Thomas distinguishes the
meanings of substance (In lib. II Sent. d. 37, q. 1, a. 1
sol.), “Substance is spoken of in two ways. For in one
way substance is spoken of as it signifies the nature
[ratio] of the first category: and this is either form, or
matter, or the composite which is through itself in genus.
In another way, that is said to be substance which signifies
the essence in all things, as we say that definition signi-
fies the substance of a thing, and in this manner whatso-
ever is said positively in any genus whatever is substance
or has substance.” ;

SuBSTANTIA PRIMA, first substance, that which is neither in a
subject nor predicated of a subject; individual existent
things, as Socrates.

SUBSTANTIA SECUNDA, second substance, that which is in no
subject, but may be predicated of a subject, that is, genera
and species, or universals, as man may be predicated of
Peter.

SUBSTANTIA SEPARATA, separated substance, as angels or in-
telligences. '

SUBSTANTIA CONIUNCTA, conjunct substance, formed by the
union of form and matter.

Suzstirutio, determination.

Sussrare, to underlie; to underlie an act is to be the object of
it as when I perceive the moon, the moon underlies my
perception.

Supronere, to suppose, to hypothesize, to stand for; according
to Thomas (In lib. III Sent. d. 6, q. 1, a. 3 sol.), “In any
name there are two things ‘to consider, namely, that be-
cause of which the name is imposed (which is called the
quality of the name), and that on which the name is im-
posed (which is called the substance of the name). The
name properly speaking is said to signify the form or
quality because of which the name is imposed; but it is
said to stand for that on which it is imposed.” Thus the
name of animal signifies sensible animated substance;
it stands for (for example) man, because man falls under


GLOSSARY 501


the definition of animal as determinate under indetermi-
nate.

Surrosrrio, supposition, premiss, that which underlies intel-
lectually; that is, that which is prerequisite intellectually ;
thus, according to Bonaventura, there is a fourfold sup-
position of knowledge: proportion, union, judgment, and
information: Supposition is the usurpation of a word for
the things signified by the word: as numbers are used for
money in counting money, so terms are used in the place
of things signified by terms. Supposition for something
is therefore to signify it or stand for it (compare sup-
PONERE) ; therefore, there is a material supposition (when
the reference is to the term and not to the thing signified),
as when it is said Man is a word; and a formal ‘supposition
(when the thing signified is considered), as when it is
said, Man is endowed with reason.

SUPPOSITIO TERMINI, supposition of the term, embraces there-
fore that which the term stands for and its own charac-
teristics and its functions in proposition.

Surrosirum, subject, subordinate, suppositum; singular or
completed substances (which exist through themselves) are
supposita if they lack understanding; in virtue of the
same peculiarities they are persons if they possess under-
standing; supposituwm is used also in the more general
sense to include persons, as when Bonaventura holds that
in the Trinity there is a plurality of supposita and a unity
of essence. Compare PERSONA.

Suscerrio, a taking on, susception, assumption; in respect to

~ ‘extraneous accidents, a substance is susceptive only.

Suscrrrre, to assume, to take on.

Sytxioaismus, syllogism, defined by Aristotle (Top. I ,J, 100°
25-27), “The syllogism is discourse in which certain things
being posited and conceded, something else follows neces-
sarily from those things which have been posited and
conceded.” It is the concourse of three propositions,
major and minor premisses and a conclusion, in which
three terms occur: the efficient cause of the syllogism is
the rational soul forming it, the material cause is the
three terms (as remote matter) and the two propositions
(as near matter), the final cause is to'lead to faith in or
knowledge of the unknown conclusion, the formal cause is
the faculty or power of inferring the conclusion from the
premisses.


(


'


502 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


SYNCATEGOREMA, SINCATHEGREUMA, syncategoremtatic term, a
term which must be joined to another term in the nomina-
tiye case in order to enter into a proposition, as this book
ig John’s, or such words as all, each, every, all adjectives
and verbs. Compare CATEGOREMA.

SYNCATEGOREMATICE, syncategorematically, a thing is said to be
such and such syncategorematically because it is potentially
such, as mathematical quantity which can be understood
without any other term is said syncategorematically to be
infinite.


ih


“Tempus, time; according to Aristotle time (xpévos) is the num-
ber of motion according to prior and posterior; thence the
measure of duration of a variable thing; opposed to eéer-
nity, the measure of a thing invariable both according to
substance and duration; and to aeon (aevwm), a medium
measure of an invariable being, which none the less admits —
of some variation with respect to operation, as the heavenly
spheres which undergo only local motion; time is some-
times used broadly to include aeon.

Tenere, to hold, to know.

Tuerosopnia, theosophy, the science and love of God.

Towers, to deny.

Topica, topic; the places (7é7o.) of argumentation; contrasted
by Boethius (see above, vol. I, p. 74), as the art of dis-
covering arguments, to dialectic, the art of judging argu-
ments; used by Aristotle and the medieval aristotelians
as synonymous with dialectic, the distinction being made
between induction and reasoning, or inductive and syllogis-_
tic dialectic. The problems of the two are the same though
their directions are opposite: both are concerned with the
means of becoming well supplied with reasonings: the
means are four, the securing of propositions, the dis- —
tinguishing of the various senses of an expression, the dis-
covery of differences of things, the investigation of like-
ness.

"TRANSCENDENTALES, the transcendentals, terms or properties”
which accord with all things of every genus whatsoever;
they are therefore transcendentals asiopposed to the cate- .
gorials or predicamentals (compare too the PposreREDIcA- _
MENTA). The scholastics usually list three such terms: the —


GLOSSARY 503:


true, the one, the good; but more ancient writers enumer-
ated six: res, ens, verum, bonum, aliquid, wnwm, and then
taking the initial letter of each word, referred to the six
by the term Reubaw. Nothing can be found in the nature
of things of which they can not be predicated. The na-
ture of the transcendentals is well illustrated by Boethius:
(above, vol. I, p. 93), who in order to prove that genera
and species are not, demonstrates that they can not be
one, and since they are not one, they can not be. Compare
CON VERTI.

Trivium, trivium, the linguistic portion of the seven arts
(which constituted for a part of the middle ages the
major portion of primary education); the three arts or
disciplines, grammar, rhetoric, dialectic (or logic).


U


Uni, where, place, the fifth of the ten aristotelian categories.

Umesra, shadow, according to Bonaventura, one of the three
ways (compare vEsTIGIUM, ImAGo) in which God is repre-
sented in his creatures; a creature is a shadow of God’
in so far as he has any property which looks to God in
an undetermined relation.

Unto, union, the conjunction of things into one.

Uniras, unity, according to Aristotle the indivision of a thing
in itself and its division from every other thing.

Untiversate, universal, that which is one although it is extended!
to many; that which is naturally apt to be present in
many and to be predicated of many. (Compare Aristotle,
de Interp. 6, 17* 37). Therefore Albert says (de Praed.
tract II, c. 1), “A universal is that which, although it is
in one, is naturally apt to be in many; ... and therefore,
since it is in many by aptitude, it is predicable of them.
And thus the universal is that which is in many and of
many because of its aptitude.”

Universrras, whole (of things).

Univoca (or univocauis), univocal, (cuvevuyos) those things
to which the same predicate is proper in the same sense;
a name which is attributed commonly to many under
the same definition, in such wise that they are reduced to
a single superior nature, is predicated univocally of them,
as animal is predicated of lion and sheep univocally.
Eqguivocal, on the other hand, refers to those things to


504 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY |


which the same predicate is proper but in different senses,
as dog is predicated of the dog-fish, the dog-star, and the
canine animal. Anaroca, analogous is referred to those
things to one of which the predicate accords in the proper
sense, to the other in an improper sense, as man in the
case of a living man and a man painted in a portrait;
the analogous is medium between equivecal and univocal.

Univocario, univocation, denominating by the same name in
the same sense.

Unum, one, the indivision of the thing that is. Compare
TRANSCENDENTALES.

Usrapis, substantial; derived from ovcia.


vi


Veritas, truth, a relation (habitudo) between thing and under-
standing. There is (1) a truth in being, which is: the
agreement of the thing with the understanding on which it

. depends as on a cause (that is, the divine understanding),
and thus natural things are called true, and truth, in this
sense, is the essence of all things which are, because they
are that which they are in the supreme truth or God
(see Anselm, above vol. I, p. 163); there is (2) a truth
in knowing, which is the agreement of the thing with the
understanding to which things are referred accidentally
(that is, our ideas are the effects, not the causes of things),
and thus our ideas are said to be true; finally there is
(3) a truth in signifying, which is the agreement of signs
with things or with that which is in the mind; truth, in
this sense, is the saying that that which is is and that
that which is not, is not (Aristotle, Met. IV, 7, 1011” 27).
The pseudo-Grosseteste distinguishes these three kinds of
truth as incomplex, complex, and medium truths (see
above, vol. I, pp. 294-296): “the incomplex truth is the
very entity of any thing, that is, the indivision of the
thing that is and its being; . .. the complex truth .. . is
the adequation of the thing and the understanding joining
the intention of the predicate with the intention of the
subject or disjoining the latter from the former; ... the
medium truth is in signs, which the understanding uses to
express complex truth, and in things themselves, for truth
is in these as if in its material principle without the ade-
quation necessary for the understanding.” The augustin-


’


GLOSSARY 505


ian tradition is concerned with proving the eternity of
truth in its primary incomplex sense; as the pseudo-
Grosseteste says (above, vol. I, p. 294), “Truth will there-
fore be an eternal uncreated substance, wholly unique, and
whose being of necessity must be and can not but be.”
In view of these three meanings, truth is variously defined:
it was first defined as the adequation of thing and under-
standing by Isaac Israeli; according to Grosseteste (see
above vol. I, p. 269) it is being in the thing signified, as
the speech signifies; according to Anselm it is rightness
perceptible to the mind alone (see above, vol. I, p. 172);
according to Augustine it is that by which that which is,
is shown; according to Hilary it is manifestive and declara-
tive being.

Veriras composirionis, truth of composition, according to
Duns Scotus, the propriety, discoverable in terms them-
selves of the relation of the terms to each other which
makes the proposition stating such a relation selfevidently
and necessarily true.

Verum, the true, a disposition (dispositio) of the thing which
is (ens): the conformity of the thing that is to the un-
derstanding, according to Thomas Aquinas; it is defined
by Augustine as that which is. The true is the object of .
contemplation of the speculative intellect. According to
Thomas (Sum. Theol. Ia Ilae, q. 57, a. 2 concl.), “The —
intellectual speculative power is that by which the specula-
tive intellect is perfected for considering the true, for
that is its good work. The true, however, is considerable
in two ways: in one way as known through itself, in an-
other way as known through something else. That which
is known through itself, however, is constituted as princi-
ple and is perceived immediately by the understanding;
and therefore the habit perfecting the understanding for
the consideration of the true of this sort is called the
understanding which is the having (or habit) of principles.
But the true which is known through something else, is not
perceived immediately by the understanding, but through
the inquisition of reason. This can be in two ways: in
one way as it is the ultimate in any genus; in another
manner as it is ultimate in respect of the whole of human
knowledge. And because those things which are known
posterior with respect to us, are prior and more known
according to nature, as it is said [by Aristotle, as in


506 MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Phys. I, c. 1, 184° 17-22, or Met. VII, c. 3, 1029” 4],

therefore that which is ultimate with respect to the whole

of human knowledge is that which is first and most of all

cognoscible. And with the true of this sort wisdom is_
concerned, which considers the highest causes, as it is said

[by Aristotle, Met. I, c. 1, 981 28], whence properly it

judges of and orders all things, because perfect and uni-

versal judgment can be had only through resolution to

first causes.”

Vesricium, footprint, vestige, trace, according to Bonaventura
one of the three ways (compare 1maco, umBRA) in which
God is represented in his creatures; Bonaventura’s divi-
sion is a systematic statement of the traditional augustin-
ian doctrine. A creature is a trace in so far as he is one, |
true, and good, dependent thus on God as efficient, formal,
and final causes; see Lombard above, vol. I, pp. 188-193.

Viaror, wayfarer, one on the way, one who is in the present
world, whose life is a peregrination to another world.
Compare BEATUS.

Virrvatiter, virtually; one thing is contained in another vir-
tually when there is present a power to produce such an
effect; as every effect is contained virtually in its cause.

Virtus, power, virtue, a perfection or strength for performing —
something rightly; it has been called the disposition of the
perfect to the best, in that it is a disposition enabling
a potentiality to elicit an actual good. Virtue is also
taken as power, thus contrasted to essence; this is the
use that appears in the adverb virtually. In its ethical
sense, virtue was held to be a prerequisite to intellectual
as well as moral perfection; thus Bacon makes it the —
second of the grades of interior experience.

Virtus AFFECTIVA, affective power.
VirTUS APPREHENSIVA, apprehensive power.

Vis, power, faculty, strength; according to Boethius (In Tsag.
2nd ed. I; above, vol. I, p. 70), there is a threefold power
of the soul, vegetative, sensitive, and intellectual.

Vox, word, spoken word; name (nomen) is vow significativa.


ENGLISH—LATIN’


A
ABLE (TO BE), posse.
ABSOLUTELY, absolute, sim-
pliciter.


ABSTRACTIVE, abstractioum.
ABSTRACTIVE KNOWLEDGE,
cognitio abstractiva.
ABSTRACTION, abstractio.
ACCIDENT, accidens.
ACCIDENTAL CAUSE,
accidentalis.
ACCIDENTAL SENSIBLE, sensi-
bile per accidens.
ACCIWENTALLY, accidentali-
ter, per accidens.
ACQUAINTANCE, cognitio.
ACQUIRED INTELLECT, intellec-
tus adeptus.
Acr (To), agere.
Acr, actus.
Acrion, facere, actio.
Acrivr, agens.
ACTIVE INTELLECT, intellec-
tus agens.
ACTUALITY, actus.
Aprquasiiitry, adaequabilitas.
Aprevation, adaequatio.
Aron, aeoum.
Arrsct, affectio, affectus.
AFFECTION, affectio.
AFFECTIVE POWER, Virtus af-
fectwoa.


CaUsSa


AFFIRM (TO), ponere.
AFFIRMATION, positio.
AGENT, agens.
AGREEMENT, convenientia.
ALTERATION, alteratio.
AMPHIBOLOGY, amphibolia.
Awatoey, analogia.
ANIMAL, animal.
APPETITE, appetitus.
APPREHENSION, apprehensio.
APPREHENSIVE POWER, virtus
apprehensiva.
APPROPRIATED QUALITY OR AS-
PECT, appropriatum.
AptirupE, aptitudo, habitudo.
APTITUDINAL, aptitudinalis.
ARGUMENT, argumentum, ra-
tio.
Art, ars, disciplina.
ARTIFICIALLY, artificiose.
AssuME (TO), suscipere.
ASSIMILATED (TO BE), assim-
ilari.
ATTRIBUTIVE ANALOGY, analo-
gia attributionis.
AUGMENTATION, augmentatio,


B


Beatirupe, beatitudo.
Brno (TO), contuere.
Brine (A), ens.
BEING, ¢@ssé.


1The English-Latin Glossary is appended as a key, for those
who read no latin, to the Latin-English Glossary.


507


508


Berne (or), essendi.

Buessep, beatus.

Buxssepness, beatitudo.

BRING TOGETHER (TO), BRING
out (To), colligo.


C


Capaciry ror somETHING, ha-
bitudo.

CaTEGOREMATIC TERM, catego-
rema.

CATEGOREMATICALLY,. categore-
matice.

CATEGORICAL,
lis.

Carscory, praedicamentum,
categoria.

Cause, causa.

CausatTivE, causatiowm.
CrerrirupE,. certitudo.
CHANGE, mutatio.
Cuaracter, habitus.

Cuoice, dilectio.

CoerraTe (ro), cogitare.

CoeiraTion, cogitatio.

CoGIraTIVE FACULTY, virtus
cogitativa.

CoGnirion, cognitio, notitia.

ComBINATIoNn, complewio.

ComMMENSURATION, adequatio.

Common, commune.

Common DIFFERENCE, differ-

entia communis.

CoMMON SENSE, sensus com-


praedicamenta-


munis.

ComMMON SENSIBLE, sensibile
commune.

Common (TO BE), communi-
care.


CoMPARATIVE EQUALITY, aegua-
litas. aequiparantiae.
Comparison, aequiparantia.


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


ComMPLANTED LIGHT, IJumen
complanatum.

CompPpLex, complexum.
Compounp (TO), componere.
ComposirE, compositum.
Composition, composttio.
ComprREHENDS (ONE WHO),

comprehensor.
ConcEPTION, cognitio, concep-
tus, intellectus, notio.
ConcreTe, concretum.
Connvirion, affectio, conditio,
habere, habitudo, habitus.
Consorn (10), coniungere.
ConsJUNCT SUBSTANCE, sub-
stantia coniuwncta.
Connection, coaptatio.
ConsWeERATION, cognitio.
ConstTiITuTIon, complexio.
ConsuBSTANTIAL, consubstantt-
alis.
ConTEmp.ation, contemplatio.
ConTINGENT, contingens.
Continuum, continuum.
Contracr (To), contrahere.
ConTRADICTORIES, contradic-
toria.
ConTRADIcToRY, oppoasitio.
ConTRaRIgs, contrarian.
ConvERTED (TO BE), converti.
CorPOREAL SENSE, Sensu3 cor-
poreus.
CorPOREAL SPECIES, species cor-
porea,
Corrurren, corruptum.
CorrurTion, corruptio.
Creation, conditio, creatura.
CREATURE, creatura.
Crirerion, ratio.


D


Derrcr. defectus.


GLOSSAR


Derinrrion, definitio, difini-

' tio, ratio.

DEFINITION OF NAME, defini-
tio nominis, diffinitio quid
nominis.

DEFINITION OF THE THING,
definitio rei, difinitio quid
ret,

Deirorm, deiformis.
Detrormiry, deiformitas.
Deiseration, deliberatio.
Demonstration, demonstra-
tio.

DEMONSTRATION BASED ON
THE EFFECT, demonstratio
quia.

DEMONSTRATION BASED ON
THE NATURE OF THE THING
INVESTIGATED, demonstra-
tio propter quid.

Denrat, ablatio, remotio.
DENOMINATIVELY, denomina-
tive.
Deny (To), removere, tollere.
DescENT BY DEFINITION, de-
scensus per definitionem.
Descnietion, descriptio.
DeETERMINATELY, déturminate.
Determination, substitutio.
Dratectic, dialectica.
DirrekENce, differentia.
Dirrerentia, differentia.
Dirrerine, differens.
Duunvtion, diminutio.
Discreuine, disciplina.
Discourse, discursus, oratio.
Discovery, inventio.
DiscrETeness, discretio.
Discretion, discretio.
Dissoin (10), disiungere.
Disposing MEDIUM, disponens
medium.
Disposrrion, dispositio, situs.


509


Distinct, distinetum.

Distincrion, distinctio.

DisrincuisH (To), discernére.

Diverse, diversum.

DiversiFIcaTIoNn,
tio.

Divine (To), dividere.

Division, divisio.

Do (70), agere, facere.


diversifica-


a0)


Errecr, effectus.
EFFECTIVELY (IN EFFECT), ef-


fective. 3
EFFICIENT CAUSE, causa ef-
ficiens.
EFriclENT MEDIUM, ¢fficiens
medium. F


E.ement, elementum.
Erencuus, elenchus.
EMINENTLY, eminenter.
Eno, finis.

END OF THE OPERATION, finis
operis.

END OF THE ONE PERFORM-
ING THE OPERATION, /finis
operantis. at

ENTHYMEME, enthymema.
Entity, entitas.

Eavarity, aequalitas.
EQuiIPpakANCE, aequiparantia,
EQUIVALENCE, aequiparantia,
Eaurvocat, aequivoca.
Error, error.
Essence, essentia.

EsseNCE OF THE THING, ratio


ret.
EssenTIALLy, essentialiter,
per se.
Estimation, aestimatio, exis~
timatio. fo


Erernity, aeternitas.


510


Evwence, apparentia, eviden-
tia.
Evmentiy, evidenter.
Evit, malum.
Exemptar, exemplar.
EXPERIENCE, experientia, ex-
perimentum.
ExprErIMENT, ewperientia, ex-
perimentum.
EXPERIMENTAL SCIENCE, SCi-
entia experimentalis.
Express SPECIES, species ea-
pressa.
EXTERNAL SENSES, sensus ex-
terni.


\ F


Facutry, facultas, vis.
Fause, falswm.
Fazsicrarnic, falsigrafis.
Fina cause, causa finalis.


Fimsr INTENTION, intentio
prima,

First svugsTaNnce, substantia
prima.


Foorerint, vestiguum.~
Foresicut, providentia.
Form, forma.
Formas.e, formabilis.
ForMaL CAvusE, causa for-
malis.
ForMaL INTELLECT, intellec-
tus formalis.
Formatty, formaliter.
Froir, fructus.


G


Garner (70), colligo.
GENERAL INTENTION, intentio
generalis,


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


GENERALISSIMUM, MOST GEN-
ERAL GENUS, generalissi-
mum.

GENERATION, generatio.

GENUS, genus.

Grrr, donum.

Goon, bonum.

Grounp, ratio.


H


Hasrr, habitus.”

Happen (v0), accidere.
Happiness, beatitudo.

Have (10), habere.
Hecceiry, haecceitas.

Hop (ro), tenere.
HyrorHesize (ro), supponere.


I


Inga, cognito, idea, intellectus,
notitia,

Ipentiry, identitas.

Inox, idolum.

IGNORANCE, ignorantia.
ILLUMINATION, illwminatio, lu-
men. :

IMAGINATION, tmaginatio.

IMAGE, tmago.

IMPRESSED SPECIES, species tm-
pressa.

IncoMPLex, incomplexum,

INcoMPossIBLE, tncompossibile,

INCONTINGENT, incontingens.

INcREASE, augmentatio.

INDIFFERENCE, indifferentia.

INDIFFERENTLY, indifferen-

ter.

INDISTANCE, indistantia.

InpivipvaL, individuum, sin-
gulare.


GLOSSARY


InpIVIDUATED (TO BE), indi-

viduari.

InpivipuaTion, individuatio.
_Lyoprvision, indivisio.
Inrer, (To), colligo.
INFERENCE, Collectio,

plexio.

INFINITE, infinitum.
Inrorm (To); informare.
Inrormation, informatio.

INHERENCE, inhaerentia,

Intertect, intellectus.
InTELLECTUAL, intellectuale

Intevuicence, intelligentia.

INTELLIGIBLE SPECIES, species

intelligibilis.

InTEND (TO), intendere.
INTENSIVELY, intensive.
IntTENTION, intentio.
INTENTIONAL BEING, esse in-

tentionale.

INTENTIONAL SPECIES,

cies intentionalis.

INTERNAL SENSES, sensus in-

tern.

INTUITIVE KNOWLEDGE, cogni-

tio intuitiva, intuitus.

INVENTION, inventio.


com-


spe-


J


Jupce (To), cogitare.
JupGMENT, cogitatio, iudicium.


K


Know (10), cognoscere, scire,
tenere.

Kwnowasiiry, cognoscibilitas.

KnowAs_e, cognoscibile, sci-
bile.

KNoweRr, cognoscens.


511


KNow1encE, cognitio, notitia,
scientia,


L


Learn (10), cognoscere.
Licur, lux. :
LikENEss, similitudo.
Loeicat sprctss, species logica.
Love, affectus, dilectio.
Lowest sPEcIEs, species infima,
species specialissima.


M


Maxine, factio.

MANNER, maneries.
ManvupucrTion, manuductio.
Mareriat, materialis.

MarTerIaL CAUSE, causa ma-

terialis.

MatTeRtatLy, materialiter.
Maruemartics, mathematica.
Matrer, materia.

Mean, medium.

MEANING, intellectus, intentio,
significatio.

Mepium, medium.

MEMORATIVE FACULTY, Virtus
memoratioa.

Memory, memoria.

Muppre, medium.

Mopr, modus.

Morton, motus.

MovEeMENT, motus.

Moration, mutatio.


N


Name, nomen.

NATURAL KNOWLEDGE, Siigritehe
naturalis.

NaTvuRAL MOTION, motus natu-
ralis.


512
‘Narore, natura, ratio.
NEcEssARY, necessarium.
NexGaTIoNn, negatio.

Nominal DEFINITION, definitio
nominis, diffinitio quid
nominis.

NominaTIon, nominatio,

Norton, cognitio, notio.

Noun, nomen.

NuMBER, numerus.


O


Oxsect, obiectum.
Ossective, obiectivoum.
OnE, unum.
OrrraTion, operatio,
Orr1nion, opinio.
OprrosiTE, oppositum.
Orrosrrion, oppositio,


ix


Part, pars. _
Participation, participatio.
Particutar, particulare.
Passion, passio, pati.
PaTIENT, patiens.
PECULIAR TO, proprium.
Perceive (TO), cognoscere, in-
telligere, scire.
Prrrection, perfectio.
PERFECTIVE, perfectivoum.
Person, persona.
PERsONAL © DISCRETION,
cretio personalis.
Persuasion, persuasio.
Puantasm, fantasma.
Puantasy, phantasia.
Prace, locus, ubi.
Posrr (ro), ponere.
Posrrion, positio, situs,


dis-


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


PossiBLe INTELLECT, intellectus


possibilis.

PossisiLiTy, possibilitas.
Posrcarecory, postpraedica-
mentum. .
PosTPREDICAMENT, postpraée-

dicamentum.


Porency, potentia.

PorentTiaLiry, potentia.

Power, potentia, potestas, vir-
tus, vis.

PRACTICAL INTELLECT, intellec-
tus practicus.

Praxis, prawis.

PrepicaBLe, praedicabile.

PREDICABLE SPECIES, Species
praedicabilis,

PREDICAMENTAL, praedicamen-
tale.

PrepicaTe (To), praedicare.

PREDICATION, praedicatio.

PRINCIPLE, principium, ratio.

Privation, privatio.

Proper, proprium.

PROPER CAUSE, causa) prop-
ria,

PROPER DIFFERENCE, differ-
entia propria.

PROPER DIFFERENCE (MOST),
differentia maxime prop-
ria.

Property,
rium.
Proportion, proportio.
PROPORTIONAL EQUALITY, aé-
qualitas proportionis.
ProporTIONALITy, proportion-
alitas.
ProposiTion, propositio.
PROVIDENCE, providentia.
Proximity, indistantia,


proprietas, prop-


GLOSSARY


Q


QuanpRiviuM, quadrivium.
Quatity, qualitas.
‘QUANTITY, quantitas,
Quiwnity, quidditas.


R


Raprtore, raptus.
RatiocrnaTion, ratiocinatio.
RaTionat, rationale.
Ravionat.y, rationaliter.
REAL. DEFINITION, definitio
reals.
Reason, causa, ratio.
REASONABLY, rationabiliter.
REASONING, ratiocinatio.
ReceIvE (TO), accipere, reci-
pere, pati.
Recririzp, rectificatum.
REFLEXIVELY, reflexe.
Retarion, ad aliquid, habitu-
do, ratio, relatio.
Retative To, ad aliquid.
Rerativiry, ad aliquid.
REMINISCENCE, reminiscentia.
Remir (To), remitti.
Remove (To), removere.
ReEsoiution, divisio.
Resotve (to), resolvere. +
Resrect, habitudo, respectus.


Ss
Same, idem.
Scrence, scientia. .
ScIENTIFIC ILLUMINATION,
illuminatio scientialis.
ScIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE, $ci-
entia. ;


SECOND INTENTION,
secunda.


intentio


513
SEconp suBSTANCE, substantia
secunda.
Sree (To), contuere.
SEMINAL REASON, ratio semi-
nalis,
SENSE, sensus.
SENSIBLE, sensibile.
SENSIBLE SPECIES,
sensibilis.
SENTENCE, sententia.
Separatre (ro), dividere.
SEPARATED FORM, forma sep-
arata.
SEPARATED. INTELLIGENCE, in-
telligentia separata.
SEPARATED SUBSTANCE, 8&ub-
stantia separata.
Suapow, uwmbra.
SIGN, . signum.
SIGNIFICATION, significatio,
SIGNIFICATIVE WORD, nomen.
Sim1LiTupE, similitudo.
Simpty, simpliciter.
SrncuLar, singulare.
SITUATION, situs.
SomerHine, aliquid.
Space, spatium.
SPECIFICATE (TO), specificare.
SPECIFICATION, specificatio.
SPECIFICATIVE,  specificati-
coum.
Speciry (TO), specificare.
SPECULATION, speculatio.
SPECULATIVE INTELLECT, in-
tellectus speculativus.
SPECULATIVE SCIENCE, Scien-
tia speculativa.
Spiait, spiritus.
SPIRITUAL SENSE,
spiritualis.
SPOKEN WORD, Vow.
STAND FoR (TO), supponere.
Sratr, habere.


species


‘sensus


514


STATEMENT, enuntiatio.
Srrencru, Vis,
Sussect, subiectum, supposi-
tum.
Sussecrisie, subiicibilis.
SuBsECTIBLE SPECIES, species
subticibilis.
Sussective, subiectioum,
SuBorDINATE, suppositum.
Sunstance, substantia.
SuBsTanTIAL, usiadis,
SUBSTANTIAL DEFINITION,
difinitio substantialis.
SUBSTANTIALLY, per sé,
Surrer (70), pati.
Surrose (To), supponere.
Suppostrion, suppositio.
SvupposiTioN OF THE TERM,
suppositio termini.
Surrosirum, suppositum.
SuscerTion, susceptio.
Syxiiogism, syllogismus.
SYNCATEGOREMATIC TERM, SYN-
categorema, sincathegreu-
ma,
SYNCATEGOREMATICALLY,
categoremutice.


syn-


T


TAKE ON (TO), suscipere.
TAKING ON, susceptio.
THAT WHICH Is, ens, td quod

est.

THaT WHICH IS _ ESSEN-
TIALLY, ens per sé.

THatT WHICH IS IN ITSELF
ACCORDING TO THE MODE
OF SUBSTANCE, ens in sé
per modum substantiae,

THaTtT WHICH IS THROUGH
ITSELF, @ns per sé,


MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY


Tueosoruy, theosophia,
Tuesis, positio.
THING, res.
THING WHICH Is, ens.
THING OF INTENTION, in-
tentionis res.
THING OF NATURE, ens natu-
rae.
THING OF REASON, ens 1ra-
tionis.
TuinKx (To), cogitare,
TuovucuT, cogitatio.
THROUGH ITSELF, per se.
Time, quando, tempus.
Toric, topica.
Trace, vestigiwm.
TRANSCENDENTALS,
dentales.
True, verum.
Trutu, veritas.
TRUTH OF COMPOSITION, Veri-
tas compositionis.
TRUTH OF _ SIGNIFICATION,
veritas significationis.
TRUTH OF STATEMENT, Veri-
tas enuntiationis.


transcen-


U


Unperco (ro), pati.
Unverti (10), substare,
UNDERSTAND (TO), intelligere,
scire.
UNDERSTANDING,
intelligentia.
UNDERTAKE (TO), accipere. |
UNIon, unio.
Unity, unitas,
Universal, universale.
Univocat, univoealis,
voca.


intellectus,


uni-


‘GLOSSARY 515


UNIVOCATION, univocatio.
V


Vestice, vestigium.

VioLENT MOTION, motus
lentus.

VmtTvaLty, virtualiter.

Vimrvr, virtus.


vio-


WwW


Wavyrarrr, viator.
WHEN, quando.
WuHuere, ubi.
WHOLE, universitas.
Wispom, sapientia.
Worn, nomen, vox.
Work (TO), agere.
