Some Dogmas of Religion (J. M. E. McTaggart, 1906)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/somedogmasrelig02mctagoog). McTaggart's fearless examination of religious dogmas — including his famous atheism — from an idealist standpoint.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Go ogle


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library stielves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vmy country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways lo the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we me merely Iheir custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of The files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermaik" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can seaich tlirough the full text of this book on the web


at htLtp: //books . google . com/


^ ' V. Bl^ --• i*. -tW


■**


^ #


s»


»-,v


n^l'^


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


SOME
DOGMAS OP RELIGION


■T


JOHN McTAGGART ELLIS McTAGGART

DOCTOR nf LCTTKIS

rELUw «XD LCCTvmca. nr tkihitt collxbe ih cammidob

AUTHOR or
'nVDmiNTHE BEoeUAK DUI.tt.Ttc' AMD * nVDIEt IK HKOEUAN COMOMWT'


LONDON

EDWABD ARNOLD

41 A 43 MADDOX STREET, BOND STREET, W.

1906

lAU righU rtumd]

' 'i

'■'J.C.I?- ^i,.


'bl\Z(o


TO MY MOTHER
MY WIFE


PREFACE

«

The first chapter of this book is based upon an
article entitled ' The Necessity of Dogma ' wbieh
appeared in the International Journal oj Ethics (Jan.,
1895). The third and fourth chapters appeared in
the same magazine (Jan., 1903, and Oct., 1904), but
have been rewritten and considerably altered. Part
of the second chapter appeared in the Hibbert JotOTuU
for Oct., 1905, but this also has been rewritten,

I am much indebted te Mr. G. L. Dickinson of
King's College, to Mr. G. E. Moore of Trinity College,
and to my wife, for their kindness in reading this
book in MS. and suggesting many valuable altera-
tions. To Mr. Moore, in particular, I owe the deepest
gratitude for criticisms which revealed — and, I trust,
enabled me to correct— many lurking errors,

Tbimit; Collzoe, Cahbbidqe,
January, 1906.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER I

THE IMPOBTANOE OF DOGHA

A
, sgSr. PAOB

^/'l. Definition of Dogma 1

^T ThiB ia not inapplicable to those dogrnos which auert hiatorical

1/ GTents 2

r^^ Definitionaof ReligioaBDogma, and of Beligion. ... 3
'•^ 4, This definition of Religion is not too narrow .... 4

5. And even Uagic appean bj thia definition to be a fonn of

Beligion, though a rndimentar; form 5

6. This de&uition will include Baddhiam 6

7. The proposals to define Religion as identical with Morality. Its

inconvenience 6

8. The ntilitj of such a definition in the past was doe to causes

which aie ceasing to act 7

9. The proposal to define Religion as 'Morality touched by

emotion '. Ita inconvenience 8

10. Mr. Dickimon'i definition of Religion 10

11. Religion in the present stage of thought requires that the uni-

verse should be Judged to be good on the whole . . . 11

12. Religion requires Dogma 18

13. Nothing taught us by Science can take the place of Dogmas . 13

14. And, if Philosophy should convince ns that the tme Dogmas

were identical in content with the fbndamental propositions
of Science, there could be no basis for Religion a priori . . 14

15. Nor can thero be an empirical basis, either in the condition of the

present IS

16. Or in oui hopes of the fiitnre 18

17. The suggestion that Science can give some basis for Beligion,

thoogh not so good a basis as can be found elsewhere . . 19

IS. The same continued 21

19. Nor can Religion be bated on virtue 22

B
\ 2Q^>4he theory that to the Christian Religion, in particolar, nothing
ly^ is essential bat morality. But Jesus taught Dogmas . . 21


X TABLE OP CONTENTS

BBOT. Pi.01

21. And regarded them u ewentiaL And the Church hu followed

him in thu 2S

22. Chmtianity aaj be defined to exclode Dogma, bat it will not be

the Chriatianity of the paat or the present And it will not

be a Beligion 27

2S. Chriatianitj is Bometimes maintained to be nndogmatic b;
persona who define Dogma as conaiatinfT of propontions which
are false, or unproved 23

24. Or who define it aa conuBting of propooitione which are com-

plicated and difficnlt 29

25. Or who define it as consisting of propositions on which Chris-

tiani do not agree 30

C

26. However we define Religion, the importance of Dogrma for our

happineia is vet; great S2

27. Hetaphysics are in reality the least abstract branch of knowledge,

and are among the most practical 88

SSTThe dependence of Keti^on on Dogma makes leligiouH questions

1^ contro?er»ial and doubtful S8

29. But if it is elimiQat«d it takes with it the valuable element in

Religion 85

80. This is not completely satis&ctory, bnt it is nselesa to refuse to

face it 86


CHAPTER n

THE E6TABLISHUEHT OF DOSHA

81. Ii^roduotoiy 88


1^.


A


2. Dogmas are Mmetimes supported by the assertion that they do

not rest on argnmentd, and cannot be shaken by them . . 88

88. Sach an assertion can give no reason for any penon to believe

a dogma who does not believe it already .... 89

81. The analogy of a blind man, and the analogy of a man in

delirium 40

85. These analogies further considered 42

8S. It is possible that a man may be mistaken in asaeHdng that his
belief in a particular dogma does not rest on arguments and
cannot be shaken by them 43

87. All knowledge most rest on tome immediate convictions, but
this gives no raason for supposing that any religions dogmas
are immediately certain 45


TABLE OF CONTENTS xi


B

BKCr. FAQI

S18. It is tometimei luurted Hut a puticnUr dogma must be trae
bec&aie it u believed by sU people, or certain people. The
argomeut that it ii believed bj every one . . . . 46

89, The aignment that it in beliered by all nntophitticatsd people . 46

40. The argoment that it ia believed by most people . . .47

41. The argmneiit that it ii believed by worken of miracIeB. The

evidenoe for miiaclet 48

42. Uiiaclei do not prove the enstence of a God .... 50

43. Nor is it certain that God conld avoid deceiving as . .51


C

t_,_i4r Again, it ie aaserted that a paitioular dogma mnirt be trae,

becaoBB, if it were &lse, the nnivene would be intolerably bad 52

45. Bat we have no right to awume that the univerae is not in-

tolerably bad 53

46. Even if we had proved the universe to be good on the whole, we

could not safely aigue to the non>existence of a particular
evil 54

47. The reality of our aspirations and desires gives us no ground to

hope they will be gratified 56

48. Hor does their moral value, nor the fact that disbelief in them

would paralyse our activity 58

49. Nor is there any reason to suppose that disbelief in any dogma

would moke action either absurd or impossible . . ,60

50. The argument that practice is supreme over theory . . .62

51. What consequences would result &om the validity of the argu-

ment from consequences ? .63

52. The same subject continued 65


D

53. The appeal to faith in matters of dogma on account of the

limitation of oor knowledge 66

54. The objections to this 67

55. The appeal to faith in God's character. The limitations of this

appeal 69

56. But we have no reason to trust in God's goodness without

a demonstration which removes the matter from the sphere
of&ith 70

57. The same continned 72

58. Can faith in God be based on love of God ? . . . .72

59. Conclusion. The legitimate use of faith in relation to belief . 74


zu


TABLE OP CONTENTS


CHAPTER in


HDMAH IMMOETALITT

BBCT. PAQE

60. Introdaotory 77

61. ReawDs for doubting Immortality 78

A.

62. la the Self an activity of its bodj? The facta caald be explained

on a Dualiettc hypotheais 79

63. But there ie a lendenc; to adopt a Monistic explanation, and to

prefer Materialism to Idealism 80

64. Rtaaons for the preference ol MatenaKsm 81

65. These reasons on tire! J depend on theposaihilityof Mattereiiating

independent!; of Spirit 83

66. Mj belief in the independent eiist«Dce of Matter does not arita

aaan inference from mjBensatiOQB. But it requires justification 84

67. And it does not seem possible to Justify it except by an inference

from my sensationa . ........ 86

68. It may be admitted that my aensationa require part-causes which

cxidt independently of me ....... 88

69. But there is no reason to hold that the causes poaseM the Primary

Qualities, since a cauae need not resemble ita eSoct . . 89

70. And, on the theoiy that our aensationa are cauaed by indepen-

dently-existing Matter, Uie Matter is admitted not to resemble
all ita effects 89

71. The inconsistency of thia would be diminished if the Secondary
Qualities were attributed to Matter. But this would malce
the independent existence of Matter less plausible . . .91

72. And it would not entirely remove the inconsistency . . . S2

73. ThuE the independent existence of Matter is, at the best, a per-

fectlj gratuttouB hypothesis 94

74. If we reject it, we do not find ouraelres in conflict with everyday

experience 95

75. Nor with Science 96

76. Nor need our rejection of it lead us into SoHpaiam or Agnosticism 98

77. The Self, then, cannot be one of the activities of ita own body , 99

78. And we have thus disproved a theory whose truth would have

been fatal to Immortality 101

B

79. But is the Self of such a, nature that it cannot exist without

abody? Reasons for this view 103

80. But a Self which had left one body might pass to another , . 104

81. And the remons for supposing a, body to be indiipensable to

a Soul are not conclusive 104


TABLE OF CONTENTS liii

BXOT. FAOK

62. The bearing of apparitioiu of the dead on the qaeetion of

Immortalitf 106


88. Does the tranntory nature of material objecta give any ground
for doubting our Immortalitj' ? But what it tranaitorjr in thow

object! ia merely combinations 107

8^ And the Belf is not a combination 108

85, The argaments of this chapter fall fkr short of joitifying a
poutive belief in Immortality lOB


CHAPTER IV

HTJHAK PBE-EXIBTENCK

86. Introdoctoty 112

A

87. If Immortality is true, it is probable that Pr&flxiitencs is tme.

Any directly metaphysics argnment which proves one would
probably prove the other 113

88. While ugnmenta that Immortality mnst be true beoaase of ita

goodness cannot be accepted as valid 114

B

89. If Prfr«xistence ia troe, it renders the doctrine of a Plniali^ of

laves more probable 116

90. This would, indeed, be in any case the most probable form of the

doctrine of Inunortality, whether oui life after death remained
on the same level as at present, 116

91. Or whether it rose or sank 117

92. Especially when we consider the ftagmentory character of our

present lives 119

9S. But Fre-existence would increase the probability of such a

plurality 119

94. The theory of Pre^zistence would offer an explanation of certain

personal relations 120

95. And of certun innate tendencies and qualities . .121

96. These tendencies and qualities might perhaps be explained,

though scarcely as well, by Heredity 122

97. The inheritance of ancestral qu^tiea is not inconsistent with

the doctrine of Pre-ezistence 124

96. The same continued 124

99, Any difficulties which arise from thii es^anation would arise

equally if wo rejected Pre-existence 126


XIT


TABLE OF CONTENTS


SECT. TAOE

100. la Pre-extstence deBJmble ? It has been auerted that Immor-

tality cHDHot be said to exist if memoiy ceases at death . 127

101. This does not seem juHiSable 128

102. But would Immortality in this case have any value ? The loaa

of memory need not prevent other lives from being as good
aathia 130

103. But will it prevent progiess ? What is the valne of memory

forprogreM? 131

104. Memory is not essential to enaare that we should profit by the

past in the matter of iviadom . ...... 132

105. Nor in the matter of virtue 133

106. There remains love 133

107. May we expect to meet in other lives the people whom we have

loved in this? 134

108. If certain conditions are tme, we may. (And,if tho«e conditions

were not tme, we should be no better off if memory persisted) 135

109. And in that caae the effect of love in one life may be preserved

in another life 137

110. The prospect of loss of memory will always appear to be a loss

— bnt less so in proportion as we understand life better . 137

111. The prospect of a Plurality of Lives in the future offers certain

attractions 138


CHAPTER V

rREE WILL

A

112. Freedom of Self-Determination 140

113. Freedom of Self-Direction 141

114. Freedom of Self-realiiation 141

115. Freedom of Indetermination, commonly called Free Will. . 142

116. The position of the Indeterminist towards the Laws of Cansality

and of the Uniformity of Nature 143

117. The arguments used by Indeterminist*. The assertion of an

immediate conviction that the Wilt is Free .... 145

B
lis. The argument firom onr feeling of Freedom .... 146

119. This feeling can be accounted for by our poneetion of Freedom

of Self-Direction 147

120. And nothing is proved by our failure to discover all the deter-

minants in any particular case 148

121. Nor by our power of acting in a way which does not give u> the

greateit pleasure 140


■


^^^^TABLE OF CONTENTS ^^*^^^H


SECT


^1

TAGE ^^^M


122.


The argument from judgeiaents of Uoral Obligation . 149 ^^^^m


123.


TbiB is an argument from the taiidiig of these judgements to ^^^H


the ralidiri) of Indeterminism. The Talidity of judgements ^^^H


of Moral Obligation may be admitted 150 ^^^H


124. They preauppone that eomething » nicb tbat its existence is ^^^|


good or bad, and thai some person cun exercise by his will ^^^H


some influence on the existence of that thing . 152 ^^^H


125.


Determinism would not bu inconsistent with either of these ^^^H


12S.


Neither would Determinism be incoropatible with the approval ^^^H


or disapproval of the agent or his actions .... 154 ^^^H


127.


But would the approval or disapprovaJ be each as to constitute ^^^H


128.


Determinism would not prevent ne from placing right volition ^^^H


129.


130.


Is Determinism incompatible with Responsibility? . .159 ^^^|


131.


(a) Responsibility to our fellow men. Detenninism does not ^^^H


make rewards and punisbments unren&onable . 160 ^^^^|


132. And so does not destroy this reEponiibility .... 161 ^^^^


133.


The Determinist attitude towards Punishment .... 162 ^^^H


134.


(b) Responsibility to Ood. If Ood is omnipotent we should ^^^H


have no responsibility to bim on the Determinist theory . 164 ^^^H


135.


But we should also have none on tbe Indeterminist theory . 165 ^^^H


136.


If God is not omnipotent we could be responsible to him on ^^^H


the Determinist theory, and not on the Indeterminist . . 166 ^^^H


J37.


(e) Responsibility to self. This is not iscompatibte with Detet- ^^^|


L


138.


The argument that Determinism would make all choice absurd 169 ^^^H


139.


140.


Tbeargument from the disastrous consequences of Determinism. ^^^H


But Determinism does not have any tendency tci diminish ^^^H


UI.


It may make us more pitiful towards sionera, but that is not ^^^H


142. Nor is the outlook to the future more gloom; for the Deter ^^^|


143.


Nor is it tbe case that Determinism would reduce us to tbe level ^^^H


144.


And if some Determinist theotogiee have been horrible, it was ^^^H


^


not their Determinism which made them so . ■ 176 ^^^H


xvi TABLE OP CONTEafTS


K

UCT- PAGE

146. Wa BOW pui to uguMat* agkiiut Indetflmuiikai. Tlie main

upiaent hew would b» the trtablUhHiMit of » nairoiml Iaw

(if&Hi«lity 177

IML iBdetonuaiNn. if b««^ would make monlitTiBnlid . 177

147. FMv«c«nldBOtUtrakigic«U7^Mkkofpen(HUMgoodorb«d,

UMpt vImr Mtokltj doing good or bftd deeds .178

148;. Aad att^Bpte to aroid this la^ tb» iMMombkt tato btOi

MfOMtltgBciw 179

149t. 1i«t»t»fw«iwi. if ti«^ wowld wake «H predietk)— Btort towM

MtioMftbwInt«t7B*i«itifi»bIe 182

ISO. JLadwa*kcmmUM»-nadietiT*p«BiAM»taibMihdd7s^)n^iS-

»bl» 1S«

lU. Nor MB a««B nadietm pauuikatat bo jwliliil Ibr tko

hdetonuwil malem tko n a«d tho p— iihiiwt w

riwnfUiwoM 184


CHAPTER TI

SO0 AS OKSXrOTBR

138. IMiubm ftf 6od IS*

US. PwMhaatigaoQflJheSpnBwiiteMdHagriiMwwofihwwori tST

U4 DiAnak«m)«ptiaiMiifGod laS

133^ Itoaaani for twliewiiig in an Omaipotcmt God. Sarccsl naacmo

fto^nanttj gnm bkvo alnaify baan tiiLiMiil in Cbaptet II . IW
15& Tho ugWMiifc for the iinriMil? of a Snt eaaae. If *«I£d at all,

it would aoi prava a inC caoae who was God . tW

157. But doaa it prow a fint oaoae >t all ? It ia aaid that an inSnita

lapwa of aanaaa ia impMBbla 191

15& Gtatttnig Iftta^ yat wa an not antitled to aaeept tfaa tda* of «

tsa OrofatiiBalaMnBtan 194

MO. I^ tliBiafo»% aa iatotta i^fram of ran— ia tatpoawblfl »a aaat

&Mi Binw thiid aiternatiTa I9C

161. Tba aignMDt &am iaaign. aa Katad br Kant . . 19«

M& T&ia aEgasMot takea aBcfa of cfaa mimBa not to b* good a*

aa «ad, b^ oal7 aa a saMM L98

iSi, SaBt paintaimt tfaKUbaaigBBaBtcaDnot pHf*aacMati*aGod VH
ISL WaiMvaddchaLif it ia*BUdataQ,it woaidacmaUj' di^fu**

I ha nranipnTniyn if Hod 301

1& lite iinawiiai that ^ amniwiairf bang ia aaaciMrr <M«ld not

pra*«ttia4ba«»aiaB0nB9attBt SH


TABLE OF CONTENTS


xvu


B

SECT. PAOB

166. Ib Omnipotence compatible with Personality? In the first

place, the oonception of an Omnipotent will teems centra-
dictoiy 202

167. Then, we know of no person who eiistB without an Other . 204

168. Ad Omnipotent person, however, mast be capable of eiieting

without an Other, 205

169. Even an Other which woe not eiLiebeDt 200

170. This, however, does not amount to an abaolnte disproof of the

existence of an Omnipotent person 208

171. Is Omnipotence compatible with Goodness? Some eril certainly

eiislfi SOS

172. An Omtiipotent being must have permitted this evO . . . 310

173. To cauBe or permit evil is often justifiable in a being of limited

power 210

174. But the justification cannot applj to an Omnipotent being . 211

175. How, then, can he be called good ? The theory of PaecaX and

Mansel 213

176. Thb theory considered 213

ITT. The eame subject continued 215

178. The theory that God, though Omnipotent, cannot do certaia

things 216

1T9. The disadvantages of calling such a. being Omnipotent . . 218
ISO. The theory that God is the sole reality 220


CHAPTER VII

A NON-OMNIPOTENT aOD
Introductory 221

A
A Creative God. He may or may not be free to abstain from

creating 223

Can a Creative God, who has created this universe, he good ? . 224
God's Antecedent and Consequent Volition .... 225
Does the evil in theuuivene thwart God's Anteoedent Volition?

If not, he cannot be good 226

It ia possible for men to will Consequently what is repugnant

to their Antecedent Volition 227

But the impotence of a man to do any action always requires

for its explanation something beyond his own nature . . 228
Now when a creative God creates, nothing but himself exists.

If there is anything he cannot do it must be explicable

entirely from his own nature. Is it possible that his will

should be thwarted? 220

b


181.


XVUl


TABLE OF CONTENTS


SBCT. PAGE

189. Il b not legitimate to aniwer that God'e will ia thtraxted by the

law or hiij nature 231

190. Or by the limitation of hh power 232

191. Theea conaide rations do not render a creator impoaaible, but

tbej render it imposaible that be should be a God . . . 233

192. The theory that a noa-omnipotent Ood ia tbe sole reality. . 234

B

193. The theory of a non-creative God 235

194. Ub Buperioiity to tho theory of an omnipotent God or of a

creative non-omnipotent God ....... 2S5

195. But can the existence of such a God be proved? . . .237

196. The argument from design 238

197. If Matter exiate, can the traces of order in it come by Chance 9 239

198. What IB meant by Chance 240

199. The improbability of Chance producing certain reBoIts . . 241

200. Chance Ib improbable lu an explanation of traces of order in

the material world, though not bo improbable as liaB been
Buppoaed, 242

201. Especially considering the possibility of only a very small part

of tbe universe showing such traces of order , , . . 243

202. If Spirit is the only reality, we may conceive the universe (a) as

a unity in which selves are anited by laws of a mechanical

nature 245

208. In this cajse there would be stiU some difficolty in diBpensing
with the idea of a directing mind, thosgh not bo mnch as if
the existence of Matter was admitted 248

204. But if we conceive the universe (b) as a unit; which posseBses

spiritual significance and value, there is no need of a directing
mind to account for the traces of order in it . . . . 247

205. The existence of such a unity would then be a fundamental fact

of the universe 248

206. Such a unity— if it were proved to exist— would not disprove

the existence of a directing God, but would deprive the argu-
ment from design of all force 249

207. Thus Idealism does not necessarily work in favour of Theiim . 250

208. The argument for the necessity of an omniscient being . . 250

209. But this argument ia only valid as against one fona of Idealism 251

210. If tbe existence of a Director of the universe was proved, he

could not be perfectly good 858

211. And be might be vety bad, 254

212. Or, if not very bad, no better than the average man . . 256

213. Or there might be a plurality of such directors .... 257

214. And there are certain possibilities, pointed out by Hume, which

we cannot refute . 258

215. CouclusioD 259


TABLE OF CONTENTS xix


CHAPTER vni

THEISM AND HAPPINESS
BICT. PAOE

216. IntroduotoiT 261

A

217. Our intereit in God's works. We Bhonld gain nothing heie

from the esiitence of an omnipotent Qod .... 268

218. Belief* that ws shonld do so are erroneona .... 264

219. Nor from the exiitence of a non-omnipotent Director of the

nniverae 265

220. Nor from the exiatence of e, non-omnipotent Creator . . 267

221. The onlj chance lie* in determining how far the Nature of the

nnifene permits a non-omnipotent God to be auccessfnl in
his efforts 268

222. And such a determination of the nature of the nnivene might

give OS optimism withoot the belief in a God .... 269

223. It is often held that Theism bf itself is an adequate basis of

optimism, and that the folsit; of Theism would duprove
optimism. The latter proposition would be true except on an
Idealistic theotr of the nature of reality 270

224. Which is not usually held 272

225. The existence of God would not prove human immortality . 274

226. The nme continued 275

227. The existence of a Creator would render human immortality lest

probable 277

228. Nor have belief in God and belief in immortality been always

connected historically 278

B

229. Wa pan to our interest in God's penon —first as an ideal which

may gnide ni 279

280l God could not, at present, be perfect, bnt he would be better

than any other person 280

281. A penonal ideal, though not indispensahle to morality, is often

useful 280

282. But such ui ideal may be found among men .... 281

283. They will be leu exalted, hut their example will be more

t^plicoble, for they will be better known 282

284. And their circumstances will be more tike ours, . . . 284

285. Even if Qod i* conceived as incarnate 284

286l The some continued 286

287. A man may lose moral stimulus by losing the belief in God . 288

288. Or comfort in difficnltie* 289

289. And he will lose the power to wonhip, thoogh not to reverence 289
24(L Love 290


XX TABLE OF CONTENTS


CONCLUSION

8BCT, PAOX

241. The recnlt of our inqniriei Iiaa been olmort entirely Degative.

Thw is to be etpected 291

242. No religion ia justifiable nnlen it is bued on metaphTdci.

This iQTOlTet that religion in jaitified for few people . . 292

243. But this wodM not prevent the good in whicb religion believes

being true 293

244. And some resnlt* of the loss of religion wotdd not be undesirable 294

245. And tbe extent to which it would be lost ma; be exa^erated . 295

246. Still, the resolt is tragical 297

247. Bat that does not disprove it 297


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


CHAPTER I


THE IMPOBTANCE OF DOGMA


1. By metaphysics I meau the systematic study of
the ultimate nature of reality, and by dogma I mean
any proposition which has a metaphysical significance.
This may seem at first sight a paradoxical definition.
For dogmas are held, and disputed, by many people to
whom metaphysics are absolutely unknown.

But we must remember that a proposition which
has metaphysical significance may be held indepen-
dently of metaphysical considerations. If a man
asserts the existence of God because he accepts the
argument from design, then Lis belief in God's exis-
tence rests on a metaphysical basis. If he asserts the
existence of God because a priest has told him that
God does exist, then his belief does not rest on a metar
physical basis, but it nevertheless has a metaphysical
significance. For it decides, for him, a problem which
is unquestionably of a metaphysical nature — one of
those problems which must be dealt with in any
systematic study of the ultimate nature of reaUty.

I believe that my definition of dogma is the one
which accords best with the ordinary use of the word.
Not all propositions about matters of fact are called
dogmas. We do not give the name to the law of
gravitation, nor to the statement that Waterloo was
fought in 1815.' But all such statements as are

* The law of gravitation might he nccepted by a Uateriidiat or
a Dualist as an expreaaiou of the ultimate nature ol' reality. In


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


found in the Christian creeds are called dogmas. And
the name would be extended to statements of the
same nature found in other creeds, and to the denials
of these statements. ' Jesus is tho Son of God' and
' Mohammed is the Prophet of God ' are both dogmas.
And so are ' there is a God ' and ' there is no God '.

3. It may be objected that many creeds contain
statements which would be called dogmas, but wliich
are assertions of events as historical, and are not meta-
physical at all. Such are, for example, the crucifixion
and resurrection of Jesus, in the Christian creeds.
Now it is quite true that, in asserting the death of
Jesus, we are asserting a historical event, as much as
if we were asserting the death of Bruno. But if it
were regarded as merely a historical event, it would
not bo called a dogma. It has its place as a dogma in
virtue of the belief that this death had some unique
influence on the relation between God and man, and
for any person who did not believe tliis there could
be no reason for calUng the assertion of the event
a dogma. Any proposition as to the relation between
God and man is clearly of metaphysical significance,
and if it is asserted that the relation was in any way
determined by a particular death, then the occurrence
of that death has a metaphysical significance.

Again, a proposition is usually called a dogma irre-
spective of the reason for which it is beheved. The
assertion of God's existence is equally a dogma
whether the believer has arrived at it by argument, or
accepted it from tradition, or feels an instinctive and
irresistible conviction to beheve it.

that case it would be a metaphysical proposition, and might,
I thick, naturally l>e called a dogma. But the name would be
refused to the law of gravitation as it is held by science, for that
involves no metaphysical asyertion and ia accepted by Berkeleiaus
kad Hegelians as well as by Uuleriulists and Dualists.


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGfitA


8


Now, since no proposition witliout metaphysical
significance is called a dogma, and since so many
which have that significance are commonly called by
the name, it seems to me that it is desirable to give
the name to all propositions with metaphj-aical signi-
ficance. It will then, no doubt, includo many proposi-
tions which are not usually called dogmas, since the
word is generally used only in relation to religion,
and many metaphysical propositions have but little
bearing on religion. But it would be imsatisfactory
to confine the use of the word to those metaphysical
propositions which bear on religion, because the in-
fluence of metaphysical propositions on religion has
many degrees of intensity, and it would be very
difficult to draw the Une between what was dogma
and what was not.

3. I propose, therefore, to class as dogmas all pro-
positions which have any metaphysical significance,
and to define as religious dogmas those whose accept-
ance or rejection by any person would alter liis
reUgious position. Thus the existence of a personal
God is a religious dogma, for the religion of a man
who believes it cannot resemble very closely the
religion of a man who disbelieves it. One may be
as religious as the other, but it will be in a difi'erent
form. On the other hand, the existence of matter is
a dogma which does not seem to me to be rehgious.
I do not see that the acceptance or rejection of it need
involve any change in reUgious attitude.

How then shall we define rohgion? Religion is
clearly a state of mind. It is also clear that it is not
esclusively the acceptance of certain propositions as
true. It seems to me that it may best be described
as an emotion resting on a conviction of a harmony
between oui^elves and the universe at larga

B 2


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

Any definition less wide than this would be too
narrow. The word religion is habitually used of the
traditional national systems, such as those of the Hin-
doos, Greeks, and Romans ; it is used of the revealed
systems of religion ' ; and it is used of the attitude
of various people who do not accept any of them.
Plato, Spinoza, and Hegel would all, I suppose, be
called religious men.

If the word is to be used in this way, it is clear that
no one dogma can be regarded as essential to religion.
For example, the cases of Buddhism and of Spinoza
would prevent us from regarding belief in a personal
God or in personal inunortality as essential to it.

4. Our definition, on the other hand, is not too
narrow, for it covers all the cases. In the case of the
early traditional religions, indeed, the harmony is only
rudimentary. In the early stages of these religions
men had scarcely formed the conception of the uni-
verse as a whole, and did not therefore ask the question
whether they were in harmony with it as a whole.
But their religion was based on theories which enabled
them to regard with more or less approval the part of
the universe in which they were interested. The gods
were regarded as having great power. They were also
conceived as being, in the main, Uke men, as having
the same ideals, sympathie.s, and standards as men.
In so far as they differed from men they were held to
be morally their superiors. (The actions reported of
them would, indeed, have often been judged very
wicked in men, but, when attributed to gods, they
were not thought wicked. This distinction is often
required in deaUng with more developed reUgions.)


' For the sake of brevity, I sliall use the term 'revealed
religions' for all those Hystems which are held, hy those who
believe in them, to have been revealed.


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA

On the whole, then, the dogmas of these creeds led
to a belief that the world waa to a large extent good,
and better tlian it would have been judged to bo by
the same men if they had not held these dogmas.
These religions, therefore, were accompanied by a con-
viction of a certain harmony between the individual
and the universe.

We must also remember that it is just those reli-
gions in which the righteousness and power of the
gods is only rudimentary, which put most weight on
the possibility of propitiating the gods and influencing
their decisions by prayers and offerings. And it is
clear that the belief tliat we can induce the rulers of
the universe to comply with our desires will produce
a conviction of some harmony between ourselves and
the universe — though perhaps the harmony would not
be of the highest kind.

6. The position of magic, which appears to be the
historical predece.ssor of the reUgions we have men-
tioned, seems different. Magic rests on the belief that
it is possible by charms and rites both to compel men
and non-human spirits to do my will in certain ways,
and also to influence matter — either directly or through
those spirits — so as to cause it to conform to my
desires. The spirits affected by magic are not pro-
pitiated or persuaded — as in religion proper — but
compelled by the efficacy of the magic.

Here there is no recognition of the government of
the universe by beings better than ourselves — or at
least uot worse. We do not get that harmony be-
tween ourselves and the universe which comes from
moral approval of the universe. But magic does assert
a possible harmony — though of the lowest kind —
between myself and the universe. For it asserts that
the nature of the Uiiiverse is such that I can — if I


6


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


know the right trick — bend it more or less to my will.
And thus I can bring the universe more or less into
harmony with my desires."

e. It might be objected that Buddhism does not assert
any harmony between man and the muyerse, since it
teaches that all existence is evil But it teaches, also,
that the constitution of the universe provides a way by
which it is possible for each of us to escape from the
tyranny of existence. With the wise and good man
the universe is in harmony. For he strives towards
the goal of Nirvana, and the universe is such that, if
he is wise enough and good enough, he will attain it.

7. Our definition, then, is broad enough for what-
ever is usually called religion. But attempts are
sometimes made to use the word in a much wider
sense, and it will be well to examine three of the most
important of these.

In the first place, it is suggested that religion
should be defined as identical with morality. The
best-known statement of this position is to l>e found
in the Epistle of St. James (i. 27), ' Pure religion and
undefiled before our God and Father is this, to visit
the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to
keep himself unspotted from the world.'

This would, I think, be admitted not to be the most
usual meaning of religion. It is generally advocated,
indeed, as a change of meaning. It seems to me to be
a bad definition, because, with two things and two
words before us, it proposes to apply both words to
one thing, and to leave the other thing nameless.

To do what I think right is obviously something
very different from the possession of an emotion
which arises from a conviction of my harmony with

' Cp. Hegel's rhihsophij of Itcliglon (Part II, Div. 1, chap, i)
iiud Ml'. Frftzer'a GoUen Jimgh Icbap. i, p. 63, ed. ISOO).


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


the universe. Nor are they always found together,
Hume and Spinoza were both men who did what they
thought right ; but, while Spinoza was absolutely
dominated by such an emotion, Hume, so far as we
know, was absolutely devoid of it.

It 13 highly desirable that each of these separate
things should have a separate name. Now the first
has a name which is universally appUed to it —
morality. And if we take religion in the more usual
sense, which distinguishes it from morality, then the
second will also have a separate name. But if rehgion
is to be taken as identical with morality, then the
first will have two equivalent names, and the second
"will have none at all. This is surely wasteful

8. The definition of religion as nothing but morality
has had supporters worthy of much respect, but I think
we can see that its value — for it undoubtedly had
value — is due to a cause which is rapidly passing
away. This cause is the belief, which has been very
prevalent in the past, that it is a sin not to hold the
true rehgion. (The phrase ' a true reUgion ' is scarcely
accurate, since religion is not a system of propositions
but an emotion. But it is a usual and convenient
phrase for the rehgion which normally comes from
the acceptance of true dogmas, provided, of course,
that the true dogmas are such as to permit a reUgion
\ to be based on them.)

The extreme form of this behef — and it is not yet
altogether extinct — is that any one who fails to attain
the true reUgion before the death of his present body,
will be tormented through unending time. This, how-
ever, Lb not so common as formerly. But the milder
idea still lingers that it is in some degree sinful to fail
in attaining the true rehgion. If tins were true, we
should escape serious difBculties if rehgion was iden-


8


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


tical with morality. It is, of course, sinful to be
immoral. But it 13 absurd to represent as sinful all
failures to understand the nature of the universe.
Some such failures may be sinful, if they are due to
indolence or to cowardice. But others clearly are not
They are due to intellectual errors. And to fail in
matters of such difficulty — matters in which either
Berkeley or Hume, either Aquinas or Scotus, must
have failed — is little reproach to a man's intellect,
and none to his virtue.

But the idea that religion is something, the failure
to attain which is sinful, is dying out rapidly. To
attain the true religion would be regarded by most
people as good, and by many people as the highest
good. But it would now be generally recognized —
and certainly by all thinkers worthy of our serious
consideration — that it is not a duty to attain the true
religion, although, of course, it may be, and often is,
a duty to seek it. And then there is no reason why
we shoidd not define religion to mean something
different from morality, while, as I have pointed out,
there are two reasons why we should do so — that it
does less violence to the ordinary usage, and that
it finds names for two things of great importance,
instead of for only one of them.

9. The second proposed definition of rehgion which
we must consider is not so wide as the first. Arnold
speaks of religion as ' morality touched by emotion '.
And the author of Natural lieligion defines it as 'the
influence which draws men's thoughts away from their
personal interests, making them intensely aware of
other existences, t« which it binds them by strong tiea,
sometimes of admiration, sometimes of awe, sometimes
of duty, sometimes of love '.'

• Natural lieligion, Bogk n, chap, vi, p. 227 (ed. 1891).


THE IMPORTANCE OP DOGMA


This definition seems to me better tfian that which
identifies religion with morality. It does not waste
two names on one thing, since morality touched by
emotion is something ditferent from morality pure and
simple. Nor does it disturb the ordinary application
of the word bo much, since it does not compel us to
class all moral men as religious.

Still it does disturb the ordinary application of the
word more than can be considered justifiable. EeUgion
has always, I think, implied a belief in some funda-
mental harmony, some sort of reconciliation between
the claims of our own nature and the facts of the
universe. Now an enthusiasm about morality, or
an enthusiasm about duty or love, does not by itself
ensure harmony or reconciliation. Enthusiasm for
any worthy ideal, whether fiilfilled or unfulfilled, is
doubtless good. But unless the ideal is fulfilled, or
we believe it is going to be fulfilled, it does not bring
peace but a sword. The more we long for an ideal,
the less in harmony shall we be with a universe which
refuses to realize it. And therefore wo shall not be
making the usual appUcation of the word religion, if
we apply it to cases of an enthusiasm for an ideal
when belief in the realization of the ideal is absent.

This violation of usage may be productive of de-
ception. For the usage is old and poreistent, and with
the word reUgion we have come to associate that
particular happiness which comes from the behef that
we are in harmony with the imiverse. And the
association is not easUy disturbed, even when a change
in the meaning of the word has deprived it of all
justification. I think that those people who use the
word to mean nothing more than an enthusiasm for
virtue, often unconsciously deceive themselves by
transferring with the word the mystery and the rest-


10


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


fulness which only clung about it iu respect of its older
meaning, and thus believe themselves to have kept
what, in fact, they have lost.

10. A third definition of religion has been lately
proposed by Mr. Lowes Dickinson.' According to
his view, rehgion consists in the attitude of the spirit
towards the general situation in which we find our-
selves. So far I ani able to agree with him. But he
goes on to say that any attitude towards the universe
is religious ' if it be greatly and imaginatively con-
ceived' — even if it should be an attitude which
includes condenmation and defiance of a universe
recognized as evil.

For such a religion, dogma, in the sense in which
I have used the word, would be necessary. We must
know what the general situation is, before we can take
up any attitude towards it. But, on this definition,
rehgion can be based on any theory of the nature of
the universe. All that is required is that we should
take up a worthy and a dignified attitude towards the
universe. And that is always possible, however bad
or trivial the universe may be.

There is much to be said for this definition of religion,
but on the whole it seems to me to be more convenient
to keep to the common usage by which rehgion is
conceived as sometliing wliich brings with it rest and
peace and happiness.* Now an attitude of defiance to
a universe recognized as evil is worthy and dignified,
but it is not restful, or peaceful, or fehciiic. And thus it
might lead to confusion if such an attitude were called
rehgion. The question, however, is of no importance for


* Religion, a Griiidsm and a Fortcasl, by 0. Lowes Dickinson,
chap, iii, p. 60.

' I cannot consider Buddhi.sm as an exception to this, for tlie
reasons given above (Section G).


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


U


[our present object, since the adoption of Mr. Dickinson's
definition would leave dogma essential to religion —

|though not dogma of any particular nature.

11. If religion is to be defined as resting on a convic-
tion of the harmony of ourselves with the universe, the
question arises of how much harmony is necessary.
If complete harmony were necessary, no one could be
called religious except the few mystics who deny the
existence of any evil, since any evil must involve some
want of harmony. We must say, I think, that religion
is a matter of degree. The more complete the harmony

|it asserts, the more completely religious will it be. Of

pcourse the more complete religion is not necessarily
the more true, for it may assert a harmony which
does not exist.

What then, we must now ask, is the minimum of

^harmony between oui-selves and the universe that

be the basis of religion? Some minimum there

lust surely be. For the conviction that the universe

' was not quite as bad as it could possibly have been
would involve a belief in some harmony between our-
selves and the universe. But this is not sufficient for
religion. It would be an inadequate foundation for
a reUgion that every man is not always hungry. And
yet this shows some harmony between ourselves and
the universe.

It seems to me that the minimum harmony required
to give us an emotion which could now be called
religion, is tliat the universe should be judged to be
good on the whole. Tliat is to say, the harmony must
be a harmony with what is judged by us to be the
highest part of our own natures, and not with those
of our desires which, even while we have them, wo
recognize as comparatively worthless or as wrong.
And the harmony must be sufficiently complete to


12


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


admit of the universe -as a whole being approved
rather than condemned.

I have said that this is necessary for an emotion
which could tiow be called rebgion. In the more
rudimentary stages of religion, no doubt, it is different
A god is worshipped if he is believed to make things
rather better, or to abstain from making them worse,
for the worshipper and his neiglibours. No question
is raised as to the universe as a whole, or as to the
balance of good and bad. And in a still more rudi-
mentary stage the question is only as to the satisfac-
tion of the desires of the individual, regardless of their
moral quaUty.

But religion has developed into a more exacting
form. It was impossible, as the conception of an
objective good developed, to find sufficient harmony
with our nature in anything which we condemned
as evil, even if it were personally convenient to our-
selves. And when the imiverse came to be regarded
as a whole — which was inevitable for monotheists — it
was impossible to find sufficient harmony in anything
less than the universe as a whole. When once the
objective and the univei-sal had been realized, no
subjective or partial harmony could be adequate.

Thus the declaration of Mr. Kipling's dying girl,
' I bear witness that there is no God but thee, Be*
loved ', is not religion. It is rather its expUcit rejec-
tion in favour of sometliing which is not religion —
though it may well be infinitely better. But the
belief that the love of man for man is God — which we
find in some mystical philosophers, and possibly in
the First Epistle of St. John — might be the basis of
a religion, for it is an assertion about the ultimate
nature of reality which might involve the consequence
of our harmony with the universe.


THE IMPORTANCE OP DOGMA


1.3


12, If religion is to be deliDed in this way, or in any
other way which bases it on a belief in fundamental
harmony and goodness, I maintain that dogma is
necessary to religion. Dogma is not religion, any
more than the skeleton is the living body. But we
can no more be religious without dogma than our
bodies could live without their skeletons.

If we were to reject dogma, on what could we hope
to base religion ? It is said that we should still
have science, on the one hand, and, on the other,
virtue, with all the activities and pursuits the exercise
of which are considered virtuous. Will either of these
be sufficient to assure us that we are in a harmony
with the universe sufficiently fundamental to form
a basis for religion ? Lot us take science first.

13. If we assert that science is capable of assuring
us of such a harmony, we assert that science can give
us information of the ultimate nature of reahty. For
it is clear that science cannot assure us of our harmony
with the universe unless it is able to tell us what is
the nature of the universe. But if we assert this, then
we have not got rid of dogma. The fundamental pro-
positions of science have become metaphysical dogmas.
In themselves they are not so, for they make no claim
to express the ultiniiite nature of reality. This is shown
by the fact that Materialists, Dualists, Berkeleians, and
Hegelians, who differ so profoundly as to the ultimate
nature of reaUty, all accept the same system of scien-
tific propositions. But when these propositions are
taken as the ultimate truth about reality, they are
metaphysical.

'But', it may be replied, 'although these proposi-
tions may fall within the definition of dogma, they are
free from the defects which have rendered us un-
willing to declare dogma essential to religion. They


14


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


have not the obscurity or the uncertainty of meta-
physics. They are given us by science, and what
science gives us is plain and certain.'

Tliis, however, is a confusion. Science may give ub
these propositions as scientific truths, but it cannot
assure us that they express the ultimate nature of
reality, for that, as was said above, does not concern
science at alL If they are taken as expressing that
ultimate nature, then the statement that they do ex-
press it must either be proved, or simply assumed. To
prove it we must go to metaphysics, for — to mention
one point only — it is impossible to refute the alterna-
tive theories as to the nature of reahty except by
metaphysical arguments. And then our reUgion would
rest, not on scionce, but on a metaphysical system of
dogmas, which was what we liad professed to avoid.
But if we do not prove that science expresses the
ultimate nature of reaUty, we have no right to beUeve
that it does. For this is frequently denied, and it
cannot be said to be a self-evident truth.

14. It is worth while^ however, to consider another
point. If the result of our metaphysical consideration
was to convince us that the fundamental propositions
of science express the ultimate nature of reality, they
■would be dogmas, but would they be such dogmas as
would serve for a basis for religion ? I do not think
that they would be, because they would not give us any
ground for beheving that the universe was good.

A certain part of the imiverse is what is called, in
ordinary language, matter. Now about tliis part of
the universe science tells us that it is governed by
certain laws which are of the type usually called
mechanical. And there science leaves it. It does
not inquire whether these laws are manifestations of
deeper aud more fundamental laws, or whether they


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


15


due to the mil of a creative God. It does not
leny that this is so ; it does not asseit it. It has
nothing to do with the question.

But if the results of science are to be given meta-

ihysical vaUdity, then it would follow that these

mechanical laws express the ultimate nature of that

part of the universe of which science asserts them.

For we are to have no metaphysics now but the

isults of science, and this is all that science tells us
ibout them.

The behaviour of matter is of great importance for
the question of the goodness of the universe. We
may hold, indeed, tliat the only thing which can be

trinsically good or bad is conscious spirit, and that
matter, which is unconscious, can only be good or bad
as a means of producing good or bad results in
spirits. But, in that part of the universe which we
know empirically, matter is in close connexion with
spirit — so close that the good or bad state of spirit
must always largely depend on its relations with
matter. Pain, for example, may not be the only evil,
but it cannot be denied to be evil. And our relation
^Hjto matter is capable of causing us great pain — some-
^^imes almost continuous for a long period. And there
is scarcely any quality, the possession of which has
ever been held to be good for men, the development
of which may not be prevented, or at least greatly
thwarted, by the condition of the body or its environ-
ment. Science gives us no reason to suppose that
this state of things will not bo permanent.

Now have we any reason to believe that the action
of matter, guided solely by mechanical laws, would be
such as to make the universe good ? It does not seem
to me that we have, in the first place, the slightest
right to behove this a priori. For there is nothing in


16


SOME DOGMAS OF REUGION


the general nature of such mechanical laws which
would tend to make them produce good more readily
than evil, or would show that they would produce
a universe good as a whole. It is entirely indifferent
to them which they produce. It is, of course, possible
that the action of those laws would produce such
a miiverse. But it is no more probable than the
contrary alternative, and the possibihty must be at
least probable before we can base a rehgion on it.

Revealed rehgions, as a rule, escape this difficulty
by the hypothesis of a beneficent deity, who arranges
and controls matter in such a way as to render it com-
patible with, and subservient to, the realization of
goodness in the universe. Some systems of meta-
physics escape it by maintaining that matter is essen-
tially of the nature of spirit, and will be found in the
long run harmonious to the demands of spirit. But
science knows nothing of such theories as tliese, and
if wo are to make our metaphysics exclusively out of
science, such theories are not available for us.

15. Let us pass from a priori to empirical considera-
tions. There is no a priori reason why unloaded dice
should turn up double si-xes rather than any other
number. And yet in a particular case it might be
]}ossible to know empirically that they had turned up
double sixes. Is it possible to know empirically that
the universe is good as a whole ?

In the first place it does not seem possible to
know empirically anything about the universe as
a whole. All we can base such a judgement on is our
very imperfect knowledge of what has happened on
one planet for a few thousand years. To make an
empirical inference from so little to so much would be
as wild as to argue that all Chinese were e\-il because
the first one we met turned out to be so.


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


17


And then, if we could legitimately make such an
inference, would Uie inference be that the universe as
a whole is good ? Is that part of the universe which
we know empirically, taken as a whole, good or bad ?
It certainly contains a great deal that is good. It also
contains a great deal that is bad. There is much
virtue and happiness, Tliere is much sin and misery.
Which overbalances the otlier it would bo impossible
to assert witli any approach to accuracy. The judge-
ment of the wisest man would be unduly affected by
his own disposition, liia own good fortune, and the
character of that small part of the world of which he
had personal experience. And we find that the judge-
ments of wise men on this question differ aa widely
as possible.

Even if it were certain that the amount of good
experienced by different people in the world empiri-
cally known to us was greater than the evil, would it
follow that that world was to be considered as good
on the whole, and to be approved rather than con-
demned ? I do not think it would necessarily follow.
For good and evil are very uneqxially distributed,
and, whatever the aggregate of each may be, it cannot
be denied that there are some people whose lives are
much more evil than good. Now it seems to me that
we must recognize each individual as an end in him-
self, and as having claims to possess the good — claims
which cannot altogether be cancelled by any amount
of good possessed by other people. A universe in
which three people out of every five were in heaven
and two in every five in hell might have a greater
amount of virtue and happiness in it than of sin and
misery. But I do not think we should be prepared
to accept it as a good universe on that account.

If we take into account then, firstly, the great


18


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


amount of evil known to us, and, Beeondly, the great
excess of evil over good in the lives of many people,
as those hves are open to our empirical obsei'vation,
we must, I think, come to the conclusion that, if the
universe as a whole resembled what we can observe,
we should have no adequate basis for a reUgion.

Some metaphysicians cut this knot by denying the
reality of all evil, and by asserting that, in spite of
appearance, the universe is completely good. Whether
this is right or wrong, it is clear that it finds no sup-
port in science, and cannot form part of a meta-
physical system consisting of transplanted scientific
propositions.

16. There remains the view which, at any rate in
the Western world, forms the most usual basis of
religion — the view that tilings are improving, that the
evil in the future will be less than the evil of the
present, and (it is sometimes added) will eventually
vanish altogether.

Now can science offer us this comfort ? I do not
see how it can. It cannot say that the individual will
be happier in the future, for from the point of view of
science there is not the shghtest ground for supposing
that we survive the deaths of our present bodies.
And, if there were, it would be no ground for hoping
that things would improve. The mere fact that life
goes on is no reason for supposing that it improves.
Some people are no better at sixty tlian at twenty.
Some people are worse. Any confidence that the pro-
longation of life beyond death would involve improve-
ment must be baaed on independent metaphysical
consideratioug. It would remain utterly alien to
science, even if science had admitted that life was
prolonged after death at all.

So of the race. Even if science could give us


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


19


ground to believe that the human race would con-
tinue to exist indefinitely, there would be no guarantee
that it would improve — indeed, no reason for sup-
posing that it was more likely to improve than to
deteriorate. Under certain circumstances races of
living beings do degenerate, and these circumstances
are just as likely to occur as more favourable ones.

But science gives us no ground to believe that the
human race will continue to exist indefinitely. On
the contrary, I imagine that it insists that the tem-
perature compatible with human life is only a very
transitory episode in the history of a planet. Neither
of the individual nor of the race can it assert per-
manence. It reserves it for matter or for energy.
And the permanence of these is scarcely adapted to
afi'ord us consolation. It is rather cold comfort — as
Mill is reported to have replied to an enthusiastic
Positivist — to look forward to our whole civilization
being eventually transmuted into an infinitesimal
augmentation of the temperature of space.

Nor could science comfort us by pointing out that
each man may dehver himself from unhappiness by
ceasing to exist. A metaphysic of scientific proposi-
tions would find no difficulty in believing that every
man not only may, but does, cease to exist. And
this, if life is evil, would doubtless be a consolation,
for it would limit the amount of it which must be
endured by each man, and thereby make it more
tolerable. But while it would lessen the evil, the fact
would still remain that the luiiverse contains more
evil than good, and we should not have an adequate
basis for reUgion since such a universe woidd scarcely
be called good as a whole. (See note, p. 37.)

17. It has sometimes been said that science, while
it cannot give us so good a reUgion as can be given us

c 2


20


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


by metaphysics or revelation, can, nevertlieless, give
lis some sort of religion, which is better than none at
all. Tlie God revealed in science ' is also the God of
Christians. That the God of Christians is something
more does not affect this fact '.'

In the first place, science does not reveal any God
at all. It is possible that the facts discovered by
science may give us a legitimate ground for inferring
the existence of a God. But the inference is not
science. It is as much metaphysics as anything in
Kant or Hegel.

Let us pass by this objection, however, and let us
admit, for the purpose of the argument, that a God is
revealed by science. Such a God, I suppose, is to be
taken as the ultimate source of all the facts discovered
by science. It has been occasionally maintained that
God is only the parlxause of these facts, or only the
cause of some of them. But any discrimination of
this sort is obviously completely metaphysical. It
involves some knowledge of God derived from other
sources than the observations of scientific facts. If
science can be said to tell us anything about God at
all, it can only be as the being on whom all that is
studied by science depends.

Now such a God as this cannot, I think, be fairly
said to be the God of Christians. The God of
Christians is held by them — rightly or wrongly — to
embody the highest perfection which we can conceive.
But a God of whom we only know that he caused
those facts of which science tells us falls very short of
such perfection. It may be said that, since the idea
of a perfect God implies complete symmetry and
order, and since science informs us of a certain incom-


' Nalural Itdt^on, Book I, chap, i, p. 22 (ed. 1891).


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


21


plete symmetry and order, the difference is from one
point of view quantitative. But this difference may
become qualitative in its effect upon religion. The
difference between a greater and a lesser amount of
food is quantitative, but it may involve a qualitative
difference of life and death. So the difference between
a being who fulfils our ideal of good and a being who
falls short of it is from one point of view merely
quantitative ; but it may be all the difference between
a Grod and a devil, and that, from the point of view of
religion, may be considered qualitative.

18. It is clear that, so far as science can tell us, the
'good is often thwarted. In that case there are only
two alternatives aa to the God revealed in science.
He may be utterly indifferent to good and evil. lu
that case he is not good. His control of the universe
gives us no reason to suppose that the universe is
good on the whole. Neither does he deserve the
name of God — if that is to imply that he is a fit object
of worship and reverence. For what quality would
such a being have which would deserve worship ? He
would be, no doubt, stronger than we are. And if we
suppose him to possess a hvely, and not very delicate,
sense of personal vanity, it might doubtless be pru-
dent to worship him. But prudence seems the only
merit that such worship would possess.

Or, on the other hand, the God of science may have
regard for good and eviL In that case he ordained
the evil, knowing that it was evil. And such a God
as this has no Uniitations, which might have compelled
him to ordain the evil as the only means to avoid
worse evils, Ho was defined as the source of all that
is known to science, so that he cannot be limited in
any way known to science, and, as we have excluded
all means of knowledge except science, we can have


22


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


no reason to suppose him limited by anything else.
We must suppose, therefore, that he put the evil
there because he liked it. In which case the God of
science seems to bear a close resemblance to the devil
of theology.

He bears, indeed, a still closer relation to the God of
some theological systems. But, as we shall see in
Chapter VII, it is possible to construct a theology
with a better God than this, while it seems impossible
that the God of science should be better than this.
Moreover, the God of theology ia not the only altema*
tive to the God of science, smce it is quite possible to
have a reUgion without a God at all.

18. We cannot, then, base religion on science. Can
we base it on virtue ? We have already seen reasons
for deciding that neither virtue nor an enthusiasm for
virtue is religion. But it remains possible that reli-
gion may be based on virtue. If a virtuous man
could derive from his Tirtue, independently of any-
thing else, a feeUng of harmony with the universe as
a whole, then virtue would be a sufScient basis for
religion.

But can we get any such feeling from virtue alone ?
I think not. Morality, no doubt, still remains binding
on us whether the universe is good or bad. The idea
of the good is vahd for me. If it is not vahd for the
universe, so much the worse for the universe. No
doubt, too, however much wo believed that the stars
in their courses were fighting against us, we might
feel not only enthusiasm but a certain amount of plea-
sure in carrying out the demands of our own con-
sciences, and in striving to make the best of such
a very bad business as the universe would then be.
But it could not give us the sense of harmony with
the imiverse. It sounds plausible to say that the


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


23


possession of virtue ought to console us for everything,
and that, therefore, we have only to be virtuous to
feel in harmony with the universe, since with the
virtuous man no element can disturb his happiness,
or, consequently, afifect the harmony. But we must
remember that in proportion as we are devoted to
virtue we care for its success, and must therefore be
considerably affected by a world which denies success
to it A man who was so extremely virtuous that the
defect of virtue in all its endeavours was a matter of
entire indifference to him, would scarcely be con-
sistent. And, again, not only the virtuoua man him-
self, but other people also, are subject to misfortune.
A virtue which was so intense that it rendered us
indifferent to the sufferings of others might be held to
have passed into its opposite. The recognition of evil
is not, as we have seen, incompatible with rehgion, but
they can only be made compatible by convictions as to
the predominance of good which would involve dogma.

The difficulty cannot be avoided by sa3dng that
these other people would have been happy if they had
been virtuous. This, if it were true, would only
deepen the tragedy, since it asserts that wherever we
find the evil of misery we find also the evil of sin,
Nor do we avoid it by saying that their wickedness is
their own fault, even if that were true. For the diffi-
culty is that there is evil in the universe, and that is
not removed by any decision as to what being in the
universe is responsible for the want.

Again, how are we to deal ivith beings whose un-
happiness cannot be removed by virtue because they
are not capable of it — at least, not yet ? Granted — and
it is granting a good deal — that the contemplation of
the moral imperative could solace a man in the spasms
of hydrophobia, it would be unreasonable to expect


SOME DOGMAS OP KELIGION

auch devotion to the ideal from a dog or a guiaea-pig.
And then how am I to prevent their pain from
destroying the harmony?

Even if I were prepared to forgive the universe the
evil which I myself suffer, that would not alter the fact
that it was evil, and that the universe which inflicted
it was likewise ao far evil And, even if I have the
right to forgive the universe my own pain, it is clear
that I have no right to forgive it the pain of others.
Unless we have reasoi to believe that evil iis outr
weighed by good we have no right to approve the
universe. And we can have no reason for believing
this which is not a dogma.


20. To pass from the general to the particular, it
has sometimes been asserted that dogma is not essen-
tial to the Christian religion. This beUef takes two
forms. The first defines dogma in much the same
way as we have defined it, and declares that notliing
is essential to Christianity except its moral teaching.
The second form, as we shall see later, uses dogma in
a different sense.

Let us consider the first. The teachings of Jesus,
and the teachings of the Christian Church, each con-
tain precepts of morahty. Why should we not assert
that nothing else but this morality is of the essence of
Christianity ?

In the first place, we should have to assert that the
vast majority of Christians^practically all of them —
had been entirely deceived about what was essential
to the religion in which they Uved and died. We are
not here compelled to decide whether the tenets of the
founder of Christianity or of the fully developed Church
are best entitled to be considered typical ChrLstianity.
For here they are agreed.


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


25


If we put no trust at all iu the narrative of the
Gospels — a scepticism wliich would be highly un-
reasonable — we should know nothing about the
teaching of Jesus on any subject, morality included.
But if we do put any trust whatever in that narrative,
it is impossible to deny that Jesus held various dogmas
to bo true and important His disposition does not
seem to have been at all metaphysical, and the dogmas
he taught were comparatively few and simple, and
were advocated, as a rule, without any attempt at
proof. But it can scarcely be denied that he believed
in personal immortality. And it seems quite impossible
to deny that he believed in a personal God, and that
he believed that the relation of God to man could be
suitably expressed by the metaphor of fatherhood.
A man who held these dogmas, and who regarded
them as impoi-tant — and if these dogmas are true they
must be important — was certainly not living without
dogma.

It may be worth pointing out that the Sermon on
the Mount, which is sometimes referred to as the ideal
of uudogmatic rehgion, in reality contains dogma in
almost every line. ' Blessed are they that mourn : for
they shall be comforted,' is not a moral precept at all.
It commands nothing, and it forbids nothing. But it
does make a statement about eveuts, and one which
cannot be verified by empiiical experience, since many
people mourn for years, and die uncomfbrted. The
blessings on the merciful and the pure in heart may
bo held to be indirectly ethical, since they certainly
seem to imjilif an injunction to be merciful and pure.
But they also assert that the merciful shall obtain
mercy, and that the pure in heart shall see Qod. These
are not ethical injunctions, but statements asserting
events. And they ai-e not capable of empirical veri-


26


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


ficatioa — indeed, in the sphere of our empirical observa-
tion they are not always true.

If these assertions about future events are to be
verified without empirical observation, they can only
be verified by deduction from the fundamental nature
of reality, (Jesus, I suppose, derived them fi'om his
belief as to the nature of God.) In this case, they are
dogmas.

21. But, it may be answered, Jesus may have
believed dogmas, and yet not have beUeved them to be
essential. But essential to what ? There is certainly
no reason to suppose that he beUeved that a man
could not act morally, or please God, without holding
these dogmas. Indeed it seems tolerably clear that he
did not believe this. But the question is not whether
ho beheved that holding these dogmas was essential
to niorahty, or to God's favour, but whether he believed
that thoy were an essential part of his own teaching.
Will any one venture to surest that Jesus would
have regarded his teaching as not materially altered,
if the behef in the existence and providence of God
had been withdrawn from it?

And here, at least, Christianity has followed its
founder. Dogma has not been, as it might be supposed
some i)eoplo believed, the monopoly of schoolmen.
T1k» simplest Christians have always believed that
there is a God, that good is more pleasing to him than
evil, that he watches and controls events. And all
Christians have held some dogma on the subject of
life after death — the great majority that such a life
awaits every man, a few that it is conditional only.
These are not all. Every Christian has always
beheved more dogmas tlum these, though all of them
have not believed the same.

The importance of the dogma, again, has always


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


27


been at least as great as that of the moral teaching.
The love of God and the hope of heaven are both
based on dogma. And certainly morahty has not
been a more potent element in the religious lives of
the majority of Christians than the love of God and
the hope of heaven.

22. It is, of course, possible to say that Jesus and
the Church were both mistaken as to the relative
importance of their own beliefs. It is, indeed, almost
impossible that they should have been deceived as to
the relative importance of those beUefs for themselves.
At any rate they were more likely to know than any
one else can be. But it is possible to maintain that
they were wrong as to the true relative importance of
their beliefs, and that if they had seen more clearly
they would have seen that the belief in God and
immortality could not compare in importance with
the moral precepts which we owe to Christianity.

K any one held this view, he coidd doubtless say
that dogma was not essential to Christianity, provided
he realizes that the discovery was first made in the
nineteenth century, and has against it the almost
unanimous opinion of Christians. But in that case
Christianity will not be a religion. We saw reason
before to confine the name of religion to Ciises which
exhibited a conviction of harmony with the universe.
And mere moral teaching can never, as we have seen,
do this. It only tells us what the good is. It does
not teU us how far the good is realized. And it is on
this tliat our conviction of harmony with the universe
depends.

It would, indeed, be absurd to adhere to a definition
of religion which excluded Christianity, as Christianity
is commonly understood. For when people speak of
religion they most certainly mean to include Christi-


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


anity. And any change in the definition which would
alter the application of the word ao materially would
be intolerably inconvenient. But there is no reason
why we should fix on a definition to include the pro-
posed undogmatic Christianity. For this is something
quite new, quite unlike Clu-istianity as commonly
understood, and quite unlike anything to which the
name of religion has been generally given. We sin
against no canon of definition, therefore, by saying
that, if this is the true Christianity, then the true
Christianity is not religion.

23. We pass to the second sense in which the
undogmatic character of Christianity has been main-
tained. In this case a religious dogma is not defined,
as we have defined it, as any metaphysical proposition
which has influence on the chaiacter of religion.
Dogma is sometimes defined as whatever propositions
of this kind the definer dislikes. Or it is defined as
being those propositions which are compUcated, and
can only be imderstood by trained theologians. Or it
is defined as being those propositions on which Chris-
tians do not agree. And on such grounds we find the
assertion made that Christianity does not depend
upon dogma — not because a belief, for example, in
God and in immortahty are not considered necessary
for Christianity, but because they are not considered
dogmas.

The fii-st definition of dogma, by which it is merely
employed as a term of abuse for doctrines which are
regarded as false, may be dismissed without much
delay. Dogma has never meant this in the past, and
it does not mean this now with most people. To use
the word in this way creates great confusion, and has
sometimes the further disadvantiigo of creating a false
impression of impartiality. A man may bo supposed


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


29


to be asserting that certain teaching, for example, is
impartial, when his real meaning is only that he does
not consider it false.

Connected with this is the tendency to confine the
use of the word to such propositions as are asserted
without proof — a tendency probably due to the fact
that the adjective dogmatic has frequently this meaning.
But adjectives have often meanings which differ widely
from those of the corresponding substantives. And it
would be very inconvenient to call the same proposi-
tion a dogma, when no reasons are given for it, and
undogmatic, if an attempt is made to prove it.

24. Let us take the second suggestion, that dogma
should denote exclusively those propositions which are
complicated and can only be understood by theologians.
The objections to this view are two. In the first place,
it has not been the most usual definition of the word
in the past, and would exclude much that is commonly
called dogma. In the second place, the propositions
which it excludes and the propositions which it in*
eludes are like one another in such important charac-
teristics that they ought to have some common name,
and no other common name seems suitable.

On this view, the existence of God would not be
a dogma, but the doctrine of the Trinity as expounded
in the Athanasian Creed would be a collection of
dogmas. The first of these is, at any rate, apparently
simple, while the second has not even the appearance
of simplicity. And ahnost every one can attach some
meaning to the first, while the second woidd be
absolutely unintelligible to many people. But the
same differences exist between the multiplication table
and an advanced treatise on mathematics, and yet both
are said to consist of mathematical propositions. The
assertion of God's existence and tiie Athanasian


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


doctrine of the Trinity resemble one another in being
assertions of a metaphysical nature, in having influence
on the religion of those who hold them, and in being
extremely controversial statements. It seems to me
that these similarities render it desirable that they
should have a common name.

But, even if we did define dogma like this, it would
only be with important reservations that we could say
that Cliristianity was undogmatic. In one sense it
would doubtless be so. Many people who would be
called Christians have either never heai-d of the com-
plicated and technical dogmas, or have never attached
the shghtest meaning to the words they lieard. It is
clear, therefore, that these beliefs are not psycholoffically
essential to Christianity. But it would be admitted
on this theory that the behef in God's existence was
essential to Christianity. Now some people would
maintain, and some have attempted to prove, that the
existence of God would involve a contradiction, unless
the Athanasian theology were time. In this case, these
dogmas would be logically essential to Christianity.
In the same way, no one could maintain that Kant's
theory of space was psychologically essential to a belief
in the propositions of geometry, since it is notorious
that many people accept the truth of geometry who
have never heai'd of Kant's theory of space, or who
have deliberately rejected it. But, if Kant is right,
a belief in his theoiy of space would be logically es-
sential to geometry, because, as he maintains, it is
impossible that geometry should be true unless his
theory of space were true also.

25. It remains to consider the view that dogma
should be defined as that on which Chi-istians do not
agree. Here, once more, we must object that this is a
departure from usage. Bogma has not meant this, and


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


31


there is no reason why it should mean it now, unless to
gratify the feelings of people who have a vague idea
that it is hberal and tolerant to use dogma as a term of
abuse. And then, why draw this precise line ? If the
existence of God is not a dogma, because all Christians
beheve it, why should we not say that transubstantia-
tion is not a dogma, because all Romanists beheve it ?
But if transubstantiation is a dogma, because some
Anglicans do not believe it, why should we not say
that the existence of God is a dogma, because there
are Atheists who do not beheve it ?

If dogma were defined like this, would it be esaential
to Christianity ? A dogma on which all Christians do
not agree is clearly not psycholf^cally essential to
Christianity, since some Christians do not believe it.
But, as in the last ease, it may bo logically essential
to Christianity. For there may be a contradiction
between asserting some of the admittedly essential
doctrines (which on this view would not be called
dogmas) and rejecting this dogma.

Even on the psychological question we must make
a certain reservation. We often hear the argument
that, since two men can both be Christians although
they hold incompatible dogmas on a certain point,
therefore the point is quite indifferent to Christianity,
and a man may be a Christian without troubUng him-
self about it all. The conclusion may be correct — and
often is. But it does not follow from the premises,
and may bo false in cases where the premises are true.
Because A can be either B or C, it does not follow tliat
it can be neither. A human being need not be male,
for it may be female, nor need it be female, for it may
be male. But it would be a mistake to argue from this
that it could be sexless. Some Christians say that
man can be pleasing to God only by his works, some


32 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

that he can be pleasing to God only by his faith, and
some hold other views on the matter. None of these
theories, then, can lie psychologically essential to
Christianity. But it does not follow that a man could
be called a Christian, who had no beUef as to the way
in which man could please God.


26. Let us now return to the more general question.
I have endeavoured to show that if religion and dogma
are defined in a manner which accords with their
general use, we must hold that, while dogma is by no
means identical with religion, it is absolutely necessary
to religion. This conclusion could be avoided by taking
different definitions of religion and dogma. But the fact
would still remain, that our beUefs on metaphysicalsub-
jects are of supreme importance for the determination
of our attitude towards reality in general, and towards
our own lives in particular, and are therefore, for many
people, of supreme importance for their happiness.

It will depend on those beliefe, whether we shall
consider the universe as determined by forces com-
pletely out of relation with the good, or whether, on
the contrary, we may tnist that the dearest ideals and
itspirations of our own nature are realized, and far
more than realized, in the ultimate reality. It will
depend on them whether we can regard the troubles of
the present, and the uncertainties of the future, with
the feelings of a mouse towards a cat, or of a child
towards its father. It will depend on them whether
we look on our pleasures as episodes which will soon
pass, or on our sorrows as delusions which will soon be
dispelled. It will depend on them whether our lives
neem to us worth living only as desperate efforts to
make the best of an incurably bad business, or as the
passage to a happiness that it has not entered into our


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


33


, as

ft;


hearts to conceive. It will depend on them whether
we regard ourselves as temporary aggregations of
atoms, or as God incarnate. These questions are not
devoid of practical importance.

There are, indeed, people whom they do not interest,
but they are in a minority. Experience shows us that
such questions as these are of great interest to most
people, nor is there any reason to suppose that the
extent or the degree of that interest is lessening. The
world of our empirical knowledge ia no more capable
of satisfying us than it used to be. It is probably less
capable, for though it has doubtless improved, it has
not kept pace with our increasing demands for im-
provement. And while we want more than we can
find around us, questions of dogma will retain their
influence on the happiness of mankind.

27. It is common to speak of metaphysical problems
as abstract and unpractical. In reality, all other
IquflMions are abstract as compared with these, and

(iSt, as compared with these, are unpractical. Hence,
indeed, arise many of the difficulties of metaphysics.
If it progresses more slowly than science, it is often
because science, by its comparative abstraction, gains
in ease and simplicity what it loses in absolute truth.
And often, again, it is because our dearest hopes hang
on the answers to metaphysical questions, so that we
are afraid to seek those answers, or to look them in
the face when they present themselves, or to allow
other people to face them.

28. The dependence of religion on dogma condemns
religious questions to remain controversial and doubt-
ful. If reUgion could be based on science matters
would be different. In science we tind a consensus of
expert opinion, and we find progress. There is, of
courac, a margin of uncei-tainty in science. There are

D


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


always questions which have been raised and not yet
answered, or to which we find conflicting, and so
uncertain, answers. But problem after problem is
solved, and the solution becomes part of the common
and undoubted property of mankind The advance of
science and the certainty of its results are beyond all
doubt. What it all means is another matter, but we
cannot deny that it is there to mean something.

With morahty, again, the certainty, though not so
striking as with science, is still very marked. It may
be sometimes exaggerated. But if we compare the
agreement of men's opinions on any metaphysical
question — the existence of God, of matter, of immor-
tahty — with the agreement as to the general duty,
and even the details, of honesty, of truthfulness, of
courage, we shall find the balance overwhehuingly in
favour of the latter. Indeed, the possibiUty of civilized
life proves that the general agreement as to morahty
must be considerable.

Compare all this with dogma. If we take the reli-
gions which claim to be revealed, we do not find
a single proposition laid down by any of them which
is not challenged by others, nor does there api)ear any
chance of discovering a common ground upon which
it would be possible to settle the dispute. And if
metaphysics is better off, it is still devoid of the agree-
ment without which we can have no certainty. It
advances, no doubt. But it only advances by changing
the battle-ground, not by settUng any problem finally.
The questions evolve into diiFerent forms, but the
answers are still various. We may hope that the long
contest will eventually develop into a form where
opposition will cease. But such a goal must at best
be very distant, and many — though I cannot agree
with them— fail to see any hope that it can ever be


THE IMPORTANCE OF DOGMA


36


realized. For centuries to come we must resign our^
selves to the admission that where we have dogma we
fahall have division.

29. Dispute without any confident hope of recon-
ciliation is always bad — worst of all when, as must so
often be the case in subjects bearing on rehgion, it
implies a certain spiritual discord. If we could put
dogma altogether on one side, or confine it to the
studies and lecture-rooms of tlieologians and philoso-
phers ; if we could say that in spite of dogmatic
divisions and doubts we could still have religious
imity and certainty, still lack no element for a peaceful
and happy life, then the world might surely count
itself fortimate. But to do this is impossible, for it
woidd ignore something essential to religion, and, in
most cases, to a peaceful and happy hfe — the conviction
of our own harmony with the universe.

Dogma means, now at any rate, division. But it
may be doubted whether we shall get any unity wortli
preserving by the process immortalized by Mr. Saimdci-R
M'^Kaye, which stripped mankind of their clothes, and
then proclaimed them brothers 'on the one broad funda-
mental principle o' want o' breeks'.' It happens that
the tilings about which we most disagree are the things
about which we most want to know, and a unity
which is attained by ignoring them is valueless.

It is not, of course, certain that dogma will deUver
us from our troubles. We cannot set out on an
inquiry and settle the answer beforehand. If we
begin to inquire into what lies behind phenomena, the
answer may be even more depressing than the super-
ficial aspect of the phenomena themselves. But the
only line of escape which is even possible lies in this
direction. The phenomena of life, as we see them,

' Cbarlee Kingeley, Alton Locke, chap. xxii.
D2


36


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


can never give ub the assurance of harmony that
we want. To get this it is necessaiy to go behind
experience, whether we take the path of revelation or
of metaphysics.

It is here, as it seems to me, that the strength of the
revealed religions of the world lies. If true, they would
be adequate. They have arrived at the result that the
nature of the universe is something with which it is
possible that the wise and good man may find himself
in harmony — usually, of course, by means of ths
dogma that the course of the universe is controlled by
a benevolent God. They may be entirely unjustified
in their conclusions. Their couceptions of divine
benevolence may be of the most remarkable nature.
But they change the whole aspect of heaven and earth
for those who believe in them. The gifts they offer are
worth taking— or at any rate seem so to those who ai*e
able to take them. And so, for all their faults, they
possess considerable advantages over systems which
have nothing to offer except rlietorical embellishments
of ethical maxims.

30. The result is not entirely satisfactory. The
only roads by which dogma has been reached in the
past are revelation and metaphysics, and every year
fewer people appear willing to accept any system of
asserted revelation as valid without support from
metaphysics. Now every one who studies meta-
physics does not arrive at conclusions on which a reli-
gion can be baaed. And, even if they did, the study
of metaphysics ia only open to those who have a cer-
tain amount of natural and acquired fitness for it.
The number of people who will be left between the
rapidly diminisliing help of revelation and the possibly
increasing help of metaphysics seems likely to be
unpleasantly large.


THE IMPOETANCE OP DOGMA. 87

But it is useless not to face the £act8. If the supply
of bread runs short, we shall gain nothing by distri-
butii^ stones. Such a course may even produce two
positively evil results. It may persuade the ungratefiil
recipients, not only that there is a deficiency of food,
but that there is no such thing as food at alL And it
may prolong the scarcity, or even render it per-
petual, by turniog men's minds to quarries rather
than to wheat-fields, as the source &om which may
arise some satisfaction for their desires.

Note to p. 19. — Thia position is diffownt from the position of
Buddhism. I conceive th&t Buddhism regards Nirvana, in spite
of its negative natuie, as true good and the only true good. But
the view we are dow discussing does not take annihilation as
positively good, but only as the end of the series of good and bad
events. It cannot compensate for the evil which has been
Buffered, but only prevents more from coming.


CHAPTER n

THE E3TABUSHMENT OF DOGMA

31. In this chapter I shall consider, in the first place,
that belief which claims to dispense with argument
altogether, and to rest itself on the immediate convic-
tions of the believer. Secondly, I shall inquire into
the validity of the ailment that a dogma of religion
is true because it is held by all, or by most, people, or
because it is held by persons who can work miracles
or predict the future. Thirdly, I shall inquire into
the validity of the ailment that a dogma of religion
is true because its truth is of great importance for our
happiness, or for the moral character of the universe.
And finally, I shall consider the appeal which is often
made to leave questions of religion to faith. I shall
endeavour to show that none of these are valid, and
that, if dogmas are to be established at all, they must
be established by arguments, and by arguments
different fi'om those dealt with here.


32. It is not uncommon to bear the assertion that
certain religious dogmas — the personahty of God, for
example, or the immortality of man, or the freedom of
the will — do not require proof. 'I am certain of this ',
some one will say, ' without argument. My conviction
does not rest on argument, and cannot be shaken by
it. I decline to argue. 1 simply believe.' A belief
which does not rest upon argument, in the case of any
particular pei-son, may be said to be held by such
a person immediately, since argument is a process of


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA


mediation. The assertion here is, it will be noticed,
not only that the belief does not rest uj>on arguments
— i,e. that it is immediate — but also that it camiot be
shaken by arguments.

Such a position is, no doubt, impregnable from out-
side. If a man's belief does not rest on reasons, and
cannot be shaken by thorn, I may believe it to be
mistaken, but I should be wasting time in attempting
to ai^e against it.

If the person who holds a belief in this manner
mentions the fact to me as a reason why I should not
waste his time in trying to upset it, he is acting in
a perfectly reasonable manner. And it is also strictly
relevant to mention it if he is writing an autobiography
— for it may be an important fact in his life. Also it
is relevant as a contribution to statistics. It shows
that one more person has this particular conviction
in this particular way.

33. But it is not relevant if it is put forward for
any other motive. Above all, it is absolutely irrele-
vant if it is put forward as a reason to induce other
people to believe the same dogma. Tliis is sometimes
done. A man wiU assert his own immediate convic-
tion of a dogma,' not as a reason for checking discus-
sion, but a^ his contribution to the discussion. And
here it seems certain that he is wrong.

What is the good of telling B that A has an
immediate certainty of the tnith of X? If £ has
a similar immediate certainty he believes X already,
and must believe it, and, for him, ^I's certainty is quite
superfluous. If B has an immediate certainty of the
falsity of X, or of the tntth of something incompatible

' I am assuming for the present that an iiumedinte conviction
ia also one which cannot be shaken by arguments. We shall 8«9

later on that thia is not always the cose.


40


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


with X, then ho cannot believe X, and, for him, ^'s
certainty is quite useless. But supposing B has no
immediate certainty on the matter at all, how will his
knowledge of -4's immediate certainty help him? It
camiot give him an immediate certainty, for, if he
believes because A does, hia belief rests on an ai^u-
ment, ' A believes this, and therefore it is true,' and
so is not imniediate.

But can A's immediate certain^ be a valid ground
for a reasoned certainty on ^s part ? Why, because A
does believe anything, ought B to believe it ? That is
ultimate for A, but it is not ultimate for B. Why
should B accept this fact of ^'3 nature as decisive, or
even in the least relevant, as to a truth which does
not relate to A's nature, but, for example, to the
existence of a pereonal God?

34. An attempt has been made to show why B
should do this — an attempt which seems to rest
entirely on an analogy. The people who have not
this immediate certainty are compared to the blind.
A blind man has no means of perceiving a balloon
which floats above him in the air. Yet he would be
mistaken if he disbeUeved the statement of his friends
that the balloon was there. Similarly, we are told,
if another man has an immediate conviction of a propo-
sition, of whose trutli I am not convinced at all, I ought
to supply the deficiency in my nature by taking on
trust from him what he perceives immediately.'

But an analogy is good enough to meet an analogy.

' The ex&mple I have given seema to roe to do the argumc^at
more justice than the one usually taken, in which the blind man
denies the existence of colour. For moat people, whether Wind
or not, believe that cohiur does not exist except in the senaationa
of those who see. If a blind man denied the existence of colour
in this sense, he would not be analogous to a person who denied I
the truth of the Wlief of others, but to a person who denied that
the others Lud that belief.


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 41


A man in delirium frequently believes that he sees
assassins lurking in a corner, or rats leaping on his
bed. He is as firmly convinced that he sees them as
I am that I see the balloon above me. His physicians
do not see them. Would they do well to believe that
they were there, but that some Umitation of their own
faculties prevented their seeing them ? They do not
believe this. They do not send for the pohce to arrest
the assassins, or for a terrier to catch the rats. And it
would be generally admitted that they are right

Now which is the more correct analogy here ¥
When some people have an immediate conviction of
tlie truth of some particular dogma, and others have
not, are these others in the position of the blind man
or of the physician ? Such cases, it seems to me, are
settled, outside the sphere of religious dogma, in one
of two ways, Sometimes they are settled rouglily by
counting heads. The bUnd are fewer in number than
those who can see. But only one man can see the
assassins or the rata. Any one else who enters the
room cannot see them.

If we were to decide on this plan there would be
Uttle reason for any one else to beheve a dogma because
of A'b immediate certainty of it. People who have, or
believe themselves to have, the immediate certainty of
a religious dogma are always comparatively rare — much
rarer tlian the people who believe in the dogma. Let
U8 take, as an example, the existence of God. A great
majority of the inhabitants of the United Kingdom
accept this dogma. But I should say that by far the
greater number of them beheve in it for some reason,
good or bad,^ — the authority of the Church, the state-
ment of the Bible, the argument from design, or the
like. The number of those who hold it because of
an immediate certainty would be but smalL


DOGMAS OP RELIGION


Moreover, the people who have such immediate
convictions agree veiy little among themselves. Some,
for example, have immediate convictions on the
subjects of God, immortality, and fi-ee will. Others
have them on the subject of God alone, or of free will
alone, or of immortality alone. Others have them in
different combinations, and others on different subjects
altogether, K the sight^perceptions of mankind varied
as much as this, the blind would rightly decline to
put much faith in them.

35. But the test of counting heads, though some-
times the only possible test, is crude and unsatisfactory.
We have generally better reasons. A blind man has
good reasons for believjng that other people have
sources of knowledge which ho has not. They tell
him, for example, that a table is aix feet in front of
him. He cannot perceive this at the time, but by
walking forwai'd he can test it by touch, and he finds
it correct. When this has happened several times,
the hypothesis that other men have a trustworthy
sense, which lie has not, becomes far more consistent
with his own experience than the hypothesis that
they are all labouring under a delusion. When the
delirious man, on the other hand, asserts that a rat
has come up through a solid floor, or that he is
menaced by a man who has long been dead, or who
is breathing flame, the hypothesis that he sees some-
thing, to wliich other people are blind, would conflict
with the general fabric of experience far more tlian
the hypothesis that he is mistaken.

It is in this way that we ought to test the immediate
convictions on reUgious dogma which we do not happen
to share, before wo decide whether to accept them as
the basis for a reasoned, non-immediate, beUef on our
own behalf. But to do this ia to inquire whether


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 43

the existence of the object of the immediate belief
harmonizes better with our experience than the non-
existence of it. And when we make this the test, we
have really given up all reliance on A's immediate
conviction, and are endeavouring to support our belief
on the direct evidence for the truth of the proposition.
A'a conviction, at most, suggests the dognia to us, if we
had not heard of it before ; the ground of our belief in
the dogma is no longer A'a belief in it.

In the case of the blind man, the matter would be
different. The perceptions of sight of those who sur-
round him are very numerous, and when he has tested
them a certain number of times he can believe in the
rest without testing them. In these subsequent cases,
therefore, his belief is based on the perceptions of
others. But no man professes to have a very large
number of immediate convictions on rehgioua
dogmas. It would thus be impossible to argue here
that a man's immediate convictions hiid been proved
right on so many points that they might be trusted on
the rest. They can only be trusted by us in the cases
in which they can be proved. And then our belief
rests entirely on the proof, and his immediate conviction
only furnishes the suggestion for us, and not the reason
for our beliet

36. Thus, even granting that A has an immediate
conviction of the truth of some religious dogma, it is
quite irrelevant to me, though decisive for him. But
it is by no means certain that A Ixas an immediate
conviction when he thinks he lias. In many cases —
though certainly not in all — it seems very probable
that he has not. A man may make mistakes in judging
and classifying what takes place in his own mind,
just as much as he may make mistakes about other
things.


3ME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

For example, a man may be confused as to what it
is of which he is immediately certain. He may think
that his immediate certainty is of the existence of a
personal God, when, in his case, it may be only that
the ultimate reaUty is spiritual That an ultimate
spiritual reality must necessarily be a personal God
may be a proposition which he beheves on account of
reasons— or which, perhaps, when clearly stated, he is
not prepared to accept at all.

Or, again, closer analysis may convince him that
the proposition, of which he supposed himself to have
an immediate certainty, is really dependent for him
on other propositions. If it can be proved to him that
he was not justified in basing it on those other pro-
positions — either because they are false, or because it
does not properly follow from them — he will abandon
the result which he had previously thought beyond the
reach of at^meut.

So far we have assumed that a beUef which is im-
mediate — that ia, which does not rest on arguments —
cannot be shaken by them. But an immediate beUef
may rest on prejudices or tradition. (Of course, if
tradition is explicitly accepted as likely to lead to
truth, then it is a reason for belief, whether it is a
good reason or not, and the conclusion is not imme-
diate. But when a man beheves a tradition merely
because it has never occurred to him to question it,
then the tradition is not a reason for belief, though it
is a cause.) Now a belief of this sort, although it does
not rest on arguments, may be shaken by them. For
it may be shown that it is caused by prejudice or
tradition, and this demonstration — though it refutes
no ai^umenta for the belief, since there were none to
refute^may cause the behever to change his opmion.

The result at which I arrive is that the statement,


THE ESTABLISHMETJT OF DOGMA 45

that any man has an immediate conviction on a matter
of religious dogma is one which he ought not to expect
to have any relevance for others, and which he ought
only to make, even for his own guidance, after careful
tests have convinced him, in the first place, of what
his belief really is, and in the second place, that it is
not based on arguments. Even then, he ought not to
consider the matter closed, unless equally careful tests
have also convinced him that his immediate conviction
is not to be shaken by arguments. The impotency of
argimient on matters of rehgious dogma is always to be
regretted. For it is notorious that people do differ on
these subjects, and, where argument is impotent, no-
thing can be done to promote an agreement. Where
nothing can be done, the evil must, of course, be
recognized. But we are bound in each case to make
ourselves quite sure that the evil cannot be removed.

37. It is certain, no doubt, that, if we are to have
any knowledge at all, we must have some immediate
convictions, and that if we are to have any true know-
ledge at all, some of our immediate convictions must
be true. For nothing can be proved unless we start
from something already known, and, if we could know
nothing unless it were proved, we could never start
at all.

But it would not follow from this that every man
must have immediate convictions on matters of rehgious
dogma, or that he must have true immediate con-
victions on that subject For it is possible to have
knowledge without having immediate convictions as to
religious dogmas, although it is not possible to have
knowledge without immediate convictions of 8omo
sort.

Again, there is nothing to be regretted in the
immediacy of our convictions as to the vaUdity of a


46 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

syllogism in Barbara, or as to the Law of Contradic-
tion. We cannot doubt them, and we cannot prove
them. But the inability to prove them is not a disaster
here, because nobody denies them. Where we cannot
argue, we can do nothing to remove diflferences of
opinion. But there is no harm in this, where there
are no diflferences of opinion to remove. With reUgious
dogma it is different. For every religious dogma of
the truth of which any man has an immediate con-
viction, is believed by many men to be false.

38. We must now consider the second branch of our
subject— the arguments w^hich urge that a religious
dogma is to be believed by me, because it is held by
certain other people.

It has been attempted from time to time to rest the
truth of dogmas on the fact that every one believed
them. But it is clear, that, if an argument is wanted
at all, this argument cannot be true. If no one doubts
a proposition, it is superfluous to spend time in proving
it. If any one doubts it, then it cannot be truthfully
auppoi-ted by the assertion that every one believes it.
Moreover, the assertion ia notoriously false. It is
impossible to produce any religious dogma which no
one has doubted, or even any religious dogma which
no one has definitely disbelieved. The view that all
persons who profess to disbelieve in certain dogmas
are only lying for the sake of notoriety has fortunately
only historical interest, since it finds no place in the
controversies of the present time,

39. Again, we are invited to beUeve a dogma be-
cause the belief in it, though not universal, is very
general. We are sometimes told, indeed, that the
belief is universal, except in the case of those people
whose minds have become so deeply sophisticated,


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 47

either by their own action or the influenco of others,
that they are unable any longer to see the truth wliich
is normally perceptible to every one.

This argument, however, involves a vicious circle.
The fact that a position has been reached by a gradual
abandonment of primitive ideas and beliefs, effected
by a process of self-culture and education, does not
necessarily condemn it. Indeed, all advances in science
and morality ai'e made in this way. The apparent
force of the ailment lies in the word 'sophistication'.
And here the circle comes in. For how are we to
distinguish sophistication from healthy development,
except from the one leading to the false and the other
to the true? And, as the question to be proved is
just whether the conclusions to which the process leads
are true or false, to call tlie process sophistication begs
the question while professing to prove it.

It might perhaps be possible to avoid the circle by
determining a development as sophistical on account
of its 7)ioral characteristics, and inviting us, when this
has been done, to distrust the intellectual result pro-
duced by it But it would not, I think, be now
seriously maintained that any religious dogma was
certain to all men, except to those who had disquahSed
themselves by a Ufe of exceptional wickedness.

40. Or, again, the appeal to the general opinion
may not criticize the intrinsic trustworthiness of the
opinions of the minority, but may confine itself to
pointing out that they are the minority, and that the
opinion of the majority, therefore, is to be preferred.

This ground of belief does not seem very strong.
For it has often been acknowledged, by general con-
sent, that the majority has been wrong, for long
periods, and on important questions, and tliat the
minority has been right. If we take the opinion


48


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


of the majority merely because it is their opinion,
we adopt a principle ■which would have led U3
wrong in very many cases in the past, Wliy should
we trust it for the present or the future? If, on the
other hand, we endeavour to recommend this parti-
cular opinion of the majority as being from its nature
more likely to be right than the opinion of the
minority, we have passed away from the argument
from majorities, since any intrinsic reasons for the
truth of the dogma would bo of the same weight if
they had as yet only convinced a single person.

Moreover, even if the argument from the opinion of
the majority were legitimate, is there any ease where
we coidd safely apply it? If it were to have any
weight at all, it woidd surely be only in cases where
there is a decisive majority. But on what religious
dogmas is there such a majority? If we take into
account the whole world (and I do not see that we
have any right to exclude any part of it when we are
counting heads) it would probably be difficult to toll
on which side the majority was as to such questions as
the existence of God or human immortality. And if
we try (a task almost, if not quite, impossible) to weigh
opinions as well as to count them, we find that on
these subjects the opinions of wise men show no
more agreement than those of men in general. An
appearance of a decisive majority for some pjirticular
dogma may be gained, no doubt, by first excluding
certain nations on the ground of their asserted in-
feriority, and tlien insisting that the opinion of every
man within the circle of more favoured nations is
to be counted as of equal value. But such a course
seems to be indefensibly inconsistent.

41. There remains the argument that certain dogmas
should be accepted because they have been held by


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 49

men, or beings incarnate in human bodies, who have
worked miracles, including the miracle of predicting
the future.

A miracle is an event which we cannot explain by
any natural law known to us, and which ia therefore
attributed, by the beUevers in its miraculous character,
either to a special divine interference with the course
of nature, or to the action of some law, differing in its
nature from those which explain non-miraculous
events. It is then argued that the occurrence of such
events at the will of, or in connexion with, a particular
being, is evidence, either that that being is himself
divine, or that he enjoys special divine favour, and, in
either case, that his teaching on matters of reUgious
dogma is trustworthy.

The evidence for the existence of miracles is an
inquiry beyond our purpose. But we may remark in
passing that, as Hume has pointed out ', if miracles
are to be accepted as evidence of the truth of a reli-
gion, then whatever evidence there is for the miracles
of one rehgion is evidence against the truth of all in-
compatible religions. There is perhaps no reason, if
there are miracles at aU, why they should not occur in
connexion with several incompatible systems. There
might be reasons why a God should work miracles
in connexion with a false religion. Or again the
miracles of all the systems except one's own might be
ascribed, as they used to be ascribed, to devils. But
then miracles would prove notbing about the truth of
a religion. If, on the other hand, they can prove any-
thing about it. then none but a true religion can have
miracles connected with it. Of two religions with
incompatible dogmas, one, at least, must be false, and

' Enifiiiry concerning Buman Understanding, Sect, 10 (p. 99,
ed. Gi-een aod GroeeJ.


50


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


therefore only one, at most, can have miracles con-
nected with it. Thus neither religion can be proved
true, without disproving the existence of the miracles
of the other religion. And in so iar as these latter ai-e
at all probable, they render the truth of the first
religion improbable.

42. Supposing that miracles were proved to exist,
and to exist in connexion with one religion only,
should we be entitled to believe that religion to be
true ? It seems to me, to begin with, that the exis-
tence of the miracle would not prove that it was due
to the action of God — meaning by God a supreme
being. The amount of power required for any miracle,
however startling, can never be proved to be more
than finite. And in that case it is always possible
that it should have been performed by some being
whose power, while much greater than human power,
might be far below the power of a supreme being.

If then a miracle were due to the action of such
a super-human but non-divine being, would it give any
reason to suppose tlie religion to be true ? I see no
reason to believe that a being who can raise the dead,
or prophesy the future, or assist a man to do these
things, would bo a specially trustworthy guide on
matters of religious dogma. The power of influencing
the course of events, and the power of apprehending
rehgious truth, are not always closely connected.
Napoleon greatly excelled the average English clergy-
man in the first, but it would be a rash inference tliat
he excelled him in the second.

But even if it were certain that a non-divine
miracle-worker was our superior generally, as well as in
the power of working miracles, it would not follow that
we should go right if wo tmsted him on religious
dogmas. Men would often go wrong by following


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 51

the teaching of their spiritual superiors. Buddha and
St. Paul were both the spiritual superiors of the aver-
age monk, Buddhist or Romanist. But it is clear that on
certain points either a monk who followed Buddha or
a monk who followed St. Paul would liave gone wrong,
Bince either Buddha or St. Paul must be wrong where
they differ.

Waiving this difficulty, and assuming that the
miracle could prove the special interference of the
supreme being, so that the religion connected with it
could be accepted as his revelation, should we then be
safe in accepting it as true ? We should not be justi-
fied, I submit, unless we had previously proved that
the supreme being was good. For we have no reason
to suppose that he will tell us the truth except that it
would not be a good act to deceive us. If he is indif-
ferent to the good, or if he is positively malignant, he
may well tell us lies, either from caprice or in order to
gratify his malignancy.

It is obviously impossible to trust to the revelation
to tell us that he is good, since we have no reason to
trust the revelation at all unless we know that ho is
good. This goodness must be proved independently.
And thus one of the most important of dogmas cannot
be proved by a miracle-based revelation.

43. If, however, this dogma has been independently
proved, are we then entitled to accept the divine
revelation as true ? Even then I do not think that we
can do this. A God — that is, a good supreme being —
VfUl doubtless regard deceit as an evil. But there is,
beyond doubt, much evil in the universe, and, if we
are satisfied that there is a God, we must regard that
evil as in some way compatible with his goodness.
And then why not that furtliei- evil of a misleading
divine revelation ? If, for example, we attribute the

£ 2


52


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


existence of evil to God's limited power, and say that
cancer and plague exist because they are the best
that God can do for us under the circumstances, how
can wo be sure that the best thing he can do for us
under the circumstancea is not to deceive us about
religious dogma ? How can we be sure, for esaniplo,
if God tells us we are immortal, that it is not a deceit —
bad in itself, but good as the means of avoiding some
greater evil ? If it were the best thing he could do
for us, there would be nothing extraordinary in his
working miracles to do it.


44. The third branch of our subject is the attempt
to prove dogmas by what may be called a reducfh ad
korrendum. Unless a certain dogma is true, it may be
said, the universe would be intolerably bad — either
intolerably miserable or intolerably wicked — and
tlierefore the doctrine must be true.

It may be remarked, to begin with, that it is not so
easy to establish the premise of this argument as is
sometimes supposed. When we are told that the
universe would be intolerably bad unless A were
true, we must remember that all dogmas involve com-
plex ideas, and that it may be part only of A which
is essential to avoid tho evil. If it is assei^ted, for
example, that the universe would be intolerable if
himian actions were completely determined, analysis
may reveal that what is meant is only that it would
be intolerable if they were completely determined
from outside.

Again, tastes differ, and tastes change. A Viking
or a Maori warrior might well find that the prospect of
an immortality without fighting made the universe
intolerable. And he might well be supported by the
public opinion of his own society. But the life of the


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA


modem Christian — and many of these are Scandi-
naviaiis, and a few are Maoris— ia not rendered
miserable by his conviction of the peacefulness of
heaven. Examples like these should make us careful
before we assert that the universe would be proved
worthless if some dogma were proved false.

But there are eases, no doubt, where the premise
would be true. We can easily imagine dogmas — or
even recall them in history — which it would be
scarcely possible to reconcile with any judgement,
from any standpoint, except that the universe was very
bad. Of the dogmas logically contradictory to these,
therefore, we may assert, with scarcely a trace of doubt,
that unless ih^y are true the universe is very evil.

45. But what of that ? What reason have we, at
this point, to assert that the universe is not very evil?
I say ' at this point ', because, when we have investi-
gated the fundamental nature of reahty, we may find
reasons to believe that, in point of fact, the universe
is not very evil. But tiU we have investigated the
more important dogmas of religion we have not in-
vestigated the fundamental nature of reality, especially
as it relates to good and evil. It is only by the deter-
mination of such questions as the existence of God, the
immortality of man, the purposiveness of things, and
the like, that we can determine whether the universe
ia of a nature wliich, in point of fact, is not very
evil. To use the principle that it cannot be very
evil, in order to determine these very problems, would
be to beg the question, unless we are in a position to
lay down, before we know what the nature of the
universe is, that at any rate it cannot be very evil.

This is what the ailment before us does. It takes
the statement that the universe cannot be very evil as
a truth evident in itself — evident before we know


ROME DOGMAft OF RELIGION


wliitt tlm iiiittiro of tho world in other respects is — and
miikoH it tlio biwiH of further invcstigatiou. With
what risht ? If it wt-ro very ovil, the fact would be
vory niiioh to bo rof^retted. If its evil were due to
tho iinrontmllod action of any conscious being, that
lii'inff would bo very much to be blamed. But have
wo any roascin to ijoUovo that it is not very evil ?
Uonlity iuid ^oixhiotui aro, at any rate prima facie,
Mparablo. Wlionever 1 admit tliat I have faults,
I admit tliat soniotliing is real which is more or less bad.
What argiunont i-an bo brought forward — none, I think,
i>vt>r h»« bot'ii bntught forward — to aliow that reality
and rxtrvmr binhii-tw aro not ultimately compatible?

46- It may b(> sitid that, although this line of argu-
ment iH nut {wrmi^isiblo hi establisliing whatever
dogiUAi* are (tikon as fundamental, it may be used in
mrtaili <^aMv*, when the more fimdiuuental dogmas have
httn establihtuHl, to prove Airthor dogmatic propoet*
Uons. If, for oxamplo, it were first proved in somo
i»IIior mamuv that the uui\Tree is entirely dependent
ou tho will i.>f a benovolent God, might we not there-
Rmto cuuclude that tlie universe is not very bad, and
thnt Uwrefon^ for «xitmpk<» wo must be immoitU,
twcmio. if m W W not ioiuu^rlal, the universe would

I do Dol, hoin>Tf>r, think that this is valid. For it
mu»t bo n.>UK>mlvr\^ that any argument which wttuld
|W(»« Ihwk Ihtm «M DO evil in the uamtae wouJd be
«h QMtt «OBd«BUMd by tha iwioiBptrihilihr of its
QoaekQiioa vMi Botorioua beta. TWw » erjl in Hat
univwwL Tb» wK^liiHt p«« of tnntharih^ Urn
ii%4><<i> «*TiiKB thought pTOTw that bejood all
dodUL llKKtbrnian^cfawt^kt^pdMipfevfakb
i | ii » t nni»<w tiw wir>w» Aow m^ i ri i i h i>i «U tfl ft—
ilt, Awi, SMK* thb is at\ how «■ ve TCoten fe» pni


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 55


any limita to the amount of evil which it will admit
into the universe ? Desirable as it would be to do
this, I do not see how it could possibly bo done. I do
not mean that it is impossible to determine tlie nature
of the universe to such an extent as to be able to
assert that, as a matter of fact, in spite of the evil in
it, it is more good than evil. But I maintain that this
can only be done by first finding out what the nature
of the universe is, and by discovering in this m an ner
that it is, in fact, more good than evil. We cannot
argue, before we know the characteristics of the imi-
verse, that it cannot have a particular chai-acteristic,
because it would be very evil, while the universe, or
its creator, is perfectly good. For if such an argu-
ment could prove anything, it would prove that no
evil exists at all. And an argument which proves
that is reduced to an absurdity.

The objections I have put forward above depend
upon the assertion that it is beyond all doubt that
there is real evil in the universe. They would be
removed, therefore, if we accepted the view, held by
some metaphysicians, that it is impossible that any
part of reality should be evil, and that there is no real
evil in the universe at all '. But, should this view be
accepted, while it would destroy my objections, it
would destroy no less the arguments to which they
were objections. The considerations which induced
those metaphysicians to assert that there was no real
evil in what appears to us as toothache and envy,
would also — since they are always of a quite general
nature — induce them to assert that there was no real
evil in the consequences which would follow from the
falsity of the dogma to be proved. And thus the
whole argument for the truth of the dogma would

' Cp. Section 171.


56


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


vanish, since it rested exclusively on the evil resxilts
that would follow from the falsity of the dogma.

47. But, it may be said, why should we not argue
as much from our desires and aspirations as from any-
thing else ? Are they not as real as anything else in
the world ? And are not those desires and aspirations,
which are directed to the establishment of perfection,
either in om-selves or in the world at large, as good as
anything in the world ? Are we not as much entitled
to ai^e from their existence and their goodness as
from any other fact?

This is a consideration which is often urged. So
far as the frequent exhortation to trust the heart
rather than the head means anything, it appears to
mean this. But the position rests on a misunder-
standing of a nature so elementary that it could
scarcely have escaped detection if the writera who
used it had not been blinded by the supposed attrac-
tiveness of the conclusion. For the question is not
whether we can deduce anything from the existence
and goodness of our desires and aspirations. No
person in his senses ever denied that we could. The
question is what we can deduce. And, especially,
can we deduce from their existence or goodness the
conclusion that they will be eventually gratified ?

Our desires and aspirations are real. From this, of
course, we can ai^e that whatever is inconsistent
with their reaHty must be false. But in what way is
the failure of a desire to be gratified inconsistent with
its reahty ? I can see no contradiction whatever in
the statement that a desire is real, but remains un-
gratified. The statement is often true. Many people
had a real desire that the Pretender should be victorious
in 1745, but they were disappointed.

Our desires, indeed, on such subjects as the existence


THE ESTABLISHMENT OP DOGMA


of God, or of immortality, are of very different im-
portance from the desire for a political revolution.
But they are, as desires, no more real. The reality of
a desire relates to its existence as a psychical fact,
and from this point of view all desires are on a level.
If the reality of any desire is compatible with its non-
fulfilment, then we can never argue from the reality
of any desire to its fulfilment. If we wish to make
a distinction between the desire for heaven and the
desire for the restoration of the Stuarts, we can only
do so on account of the greater importance of the
object of the former. And if, on account of this greater
importance, we argue that the desire for heaven cannot
remain unfulfilled, although the other lias remained
unfulfilled, we have abandoned the argument from the
reality of the desire, and gone back to the argument —
already considered — from the amount of evil which
the falsity of the dogma would imply.

It should also be noticed that, if the reality of
a desire ensured its eventual gratification, then, even
if we hmited ourselves to those desires which bear
on religious dogmas, we should be involved in contra-
dictions. Some men desire that an omnipotent
God should exist. Others feel that, in a universe
which contains evil, the existence of an omnipotent
God would be the culminating evil. Some men
passionately desire immortality, others the loss of
their personal identity. Each desire is as real as the
desire for the contrary result. In this, of coui-se,
there is no contradiction. There is no difficulty in
beheving that A desires that there should be a God,
and B that there should not be a God. But if a desire
involves its fulfilment there would be a hopeless con-
tradiction. For it is impossible that God should both
be and not be.


58


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


This last difficulty is generally concealed from view
by a distortion of the evidence, which is certainly in
most cases unconscious, but is none the less illegiti-
mate. The man who argues from the reality of
desires to the truth of dogmas often, in the first place,
ignores the races to which he does not belong. In the
next place, he leaves out of account those people of his
own race whose desires are different from his own.
Tliis latter elimination is the more practicable since
such arguments as these are generally put forward in
favour of the orthodox ideas of a particular time and
place, and therefore there is only a minority to ignore.
And in this way he comes to assert that ' the human
heart imperatively demands ' something or the other,
when all that he is entitled to say is that he desires it
himself, and that the majority of his race agree with him.

48. Similar considerations apply to the argument
that because our desu-es and aspirations are of high
moral value we are entitled to beUeve that they will
be fulfilled. There are two different positions which
it is possible to confuse here. One is that the objects
of the desires would, if attained, have high moral
value. The other is that the desu'es themselves have
high moral value. The argument based on the first
of these we have already considered. It Is a variety
of the argument that certain things must exist, because
their non-existence would be so bad, which was dis-
cussed above.

But the other remains to be considered. And the
fact on which it is based ia no doubt often true. The
desires and aspirations of men for the truth of various
dogmas may have very high moral values. And it
must be noticed that they may have that value in
cases where the objects of the desires are devoid of it.
One man thinks that it is right that a sinner who dies


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 69


impenitent should be tormented unendingly. Another
thinks that it is not right that any one, under any
conditions, should be tormented unendingly. One of
them must be wrong as to what would be, under
certain conditions, a good state of tilings. But the
desire of each that what he thinks good may be
realized may have liigh moral value.

Again, if the highest good for man be an eternity
of conscious worship, then it must be a mistake to hold
that the highest good for man is to be merged into an
impersonal Absolute, But the desire of one man,
who holds the first to be best, to gain heaven, and the
desire of another man, who holds the second to be
best, to gain personal annihilation, may both have
high moral value, since each is a desii-o for what is
conceived to be the highest good.

But, admitting tlie goodness of theso desires, what
right have we to conclude that they will be fulfilled ?
Is there any incompatibility between the goodness of
a desire and its failure? My desire to be learned
may be good, though obstacles may keep me ignorant.
My desire to save a drowning man may be good,
though he may sink before I can reach him. That
a good desire is unfulfilled is an argument of more or
less weight against the goodness of the universe in
general, but not against the goodness of the desire.
Why should desires for the truth of dogmas be
different from the rest? And if every good desire
was necessarily to be fulfilled, an absurdity would
arise, since desires for quite incompatible things may,
as we have seen, both be morally valuable.

At any rate, it may be said, any dogma which would
paralyse our activity cannot be true. Wliat is meant
is not that the truth of the dogma would prevent any
one from acting, but that the belie/ in the truth of the


60


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


dogma would prevent the believer from acting. Now
this is no reason for doubting the truth of the belief.
It may be a great calamity that people should find
their power of action paralysed. But great calamities
sometimes happen. And besides, what would be evil
in this case would not be the truth of the dogma, but
the belief in its truth. So that, even if such an argu-
ment was legitimate at all, it could only tell us that
people would not believe the dogma. It could not
tell us that the dogma was false.

49. And is there any dogma the belief in whose
tnith would paralyse action? Is there, to begin with,
any dogma the belief in which would make action
absurd ? It is sometimes said that a belief in mate-
riahsm would make action absurd. If materialism is
true, then each man ends at the death of his body, and
the hiunan race will almost certainly be frozen out of
existence some day. No good result that we can
achieve will have any chance of permanence. And
this, it is said, will render all action — or at any rate
all moral action — absurd.

But why should it do so ? It would be absurd to
act, no doubt, if action made no difference in any
result which was of value. But neither materialism
nor any other dogma, which has ever been maintained,
could lead to this conclusion. We may not survive
the death of our bodies, and the race may be destined
to endure for only a few brief millions of years. But,
meanwhile, the race has not yet ceased to exist, and
here we are, particular individuals. And, while we
are here, whatever the future may be, it is better that
we should be full than hmigry, bett<?r that we shoidd
work than steal, better that we should read Robert
Browning tlian that we should read Robert Mont-
gomery, It is worth while to bring about these things


THE ESTABLISHMENT


iOGMA 61


for ourselves and others, and since that is so, action
is not absurd. Even if every man were destined to an
unending hell at the end of his present life, it would
still be better for that present life to be of one sort
rather than another sort.

It may be said, however, that, although there are
no dogmas belief in which would make action logically
absurd, yet there might be some dogmas belief in
which would make action psychologically impossible.
Some dogmas might represent the world as inevitably
so bad tliat we should cease, in our despondency, to
do what was in our power to make it better, or even
to care for those improvements in our own condition
for which only selfish motives would be required. It
is possible that belief in some dogmas might have this
result, though, as I pointed out above, that could not
have any bearing on the question of their truth. If
a man did firmly believe that he himself, and every
one he knew, were going to hell when they died, he
might be paralysed with despau-, Even this is not
certain. But what does seem quite certain is that
men are not paralysed in action merely because they
do not believe in the eventual and permanent triumph
of the good. If they were, it would imply that they
thought more about the far distant future, and less
about the present and near future than is reasonable.
For we have seen that such paralysis, even if it did
occur, would not be reasonable. Now it is surely
notorious that the average maJi is so far from thinking
more than is reasonable about the distant future that
he habitually thinks less than is reasonable about it.
All study of economic facts proclaims this. And in
religious matters it has been the constant theme of
preachers since preaching began. Many men who
firmly believe that death wiU be for them the begin-


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


ning of inteuae and unending happiness are profoundly
depressed at the thought that death is mevitable.
Many men have committed sins in the firm belief
that, should they die while committing them, they
would go to hell, A member of a race which discounts
such expectations at such a rate will scarcely be
deterred from action by the conviction that for him-
self and his friends it will be all the same in a Imndred
years, and for the world in general it will be all the
same in some thousands of centuries.

50. There is one more form which the ai^unient
from consequences takes. Practice, we are told, is
supreme over theory. All thought is action, and all
action is directed towards an end. And, therefore,
practical considerations are the supreme test of truth.
And, therefore, if we want a particular conclusion to be
true or false, or at least if we want it very intensely,
we are entitled, and indeed bound, to assume it to be
true or false accordingly.

To discuss the truth of the view that practice is
supreme over theory would take us too far away from
our subject. I will only remai'k that, so far as I know,
all attempts to prove this have consisted of demon-
strations tliat all theory depends upon practice.
Admitting this to bo true, from one point of view, it
seems to me no less true that from another point of
view all practice depends upon theory, and that the
true conclusion is that the two are reciprocally
necessary to each other, and tliat priority or supre-
macy can be ascribed to neither.

But it is not necessary to determine tliis point, for,
however it is determined, the argument fails. Let
us take a case of theory wliich depend.s on practice,
and let us ignore the question whether that practice
does not in its turn depetid upon theory. If a man


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 63


studios medicine, with a view to acting as a physician,
his knowledge is conditioned by practice. A know-
ledge of medicine is not acquired without strenuous
exertion. And the exertion has an end— to acquire
money, or to acquire fame, or to cure his patients.
Let us take the last. Then his possession of know-
ledge is dependent on his will to cure the patients who
consult liim. But for his resolve to be able to do this
he would not have acquired the knowledge at alL But
if he were to allow himself to make practice the
criterion of his knowledge, and, because he desired to
cure every patient, to believe that lie would succeed in
doing so, his belief would be generally admitted to be
indefensible.

Now I cannot see any difference between this eon-
duct and that to which the advocates of the supremacy
of practice invite us. No one would consider dogma
unless he had some end in view. That end may be to
know the truth for its own sake. But it may be, and
no doubt very often is, the hope of discovering that
the universe is good. But it is one thing to investigate
the nature of the universe in the hope that we may
find that it is good, and quite another to declare that
we shall find this result, because we hope to find it.

51. We have now, I think, examined the principal
forms in which the argument from consequences pre-
sents itself. It only remains to apply to it the t«at
which it is so anxious should be applied to every-
thing. What would be the consequences of the
validity of this argument?

The question has sufficient practical importance to
justify the inquiry. The good or evil consequences
which would result from the truth of a proposition,
which so many people hold to be true, can never lack
interest. But it also has some bearing on the truth of


Hii fiMffjiffi f^W Hf! mppifftmi tttnyf ot eoatm^ denj-
ff^ K fir '^'^f itii4 Ut tm^eim df»irw^ir« effects on
m^Hii^: tiiii fUia t% tit^ immiy likelj' to do. Or
bi^h ^iih H*(M Mwit th«t, if i}w ftrffumcnt ift true, it
WH^W H(ftf it *^fl«H(fi hf iniP, Hinee It belongs itaelf to
m i^ima Hf fpl^^ M tlUHjus (»f which it denies the
ffHftl: And tftlA W(4tild be fnkl to Uio truth of the

' Wlijtt WtttiW lie fpi'y ht4 ewmet bo true.' This
SH^WS ^H Htfttiy (#iiltle=tun:i iifttunUlly enough at first
^f^ll'-B^tlt>('- M\ 'm\\m\{^ M\k\ ^evatttm assertion.
Wi^Ht ii* Wytl¥ ttttttw^ltft Kt iuvmJity, whieh dwUa with
^y< m'>'Ax k\\m h.\ \m\iv »^%*i\\m^ tiw kmi of reality*

^"l ft \i^ V"\Vtt ^iV iRMrtWfcl Iv^~4ti9il what is tnie

¥:^W«W' W^WW* «>!«***» ^fwtti, we «w fciftdL S«
WtW^- ViVfA. ^ 'Mf^tWft* ** W wAwMtfaipwas fee

Slhtti 'ft 'iv 'hrtt WiH-l>*ii Jtwtt IJwwitW' «mr ^^linuint-vdji

'hiilWiN 'vIl.-HtUi i^' liit>*bMm'\WiiuUi illw iiiiiuijtluuifr
ii 'h'thH^-i 'W*i ■ ft WiHw-^t^ iti.JAW iinnws«itiij jwusuaw


THE ESTABLLSHMENT OF DOGMA 65


we should wake some day to find ourselves in that hell,
or in a heaven where the blessed were enjoying the
sight of it. Then, if the argument fi'om consequences
is valid, we should have to believe that neither the
existence of such a hell nor of such a heaven was
morally revolting. And such a reversal of oui- moral
judgements could scarcely, I think, be represented as
favourable to morality.

52, Even without any such demonstration of such
a truth, what would be the effect on morality? It
would still be true, if the argument from consequences
were correct, that if anything were real, it could not be
very bad. That is to say, our moral judgements have
no independence. There are things which cannot be
very bad, because they possess the non-moral quality
of being real.

Surely this destroys the very essence of morality.
Morality passes judgement on whatever is real. It
pronounces it to be good or bad. And it seems to me
that it is the very essence of morality to hold that in
this judgement it is independent — that it is able to say
of reality that it is bad because it has the quality x,
and because x, however fundamental to reality, is bad,
or again to say of reality that it is bad because it has
not the quaUty y, and Iiecause y, however aUen to
reality, is essential to goodness.

It is absurd to ask whether reaUty or goodness be
the more fundamental. Each is supreme in its own
sphere, and the spheres are so different that they can-
not come into conflict. ^Vhat is real is real, however
bad it is. What is not real is not real, however good
it would have been. On the other hand, what is good
is good, however unreal it is. What is h&d is bad,
however real it is. And so it is our duty to be
humble in judging of reality, and imperious in judging


66


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


of goodness. For what is real is real, however we may
oondemn it. But, on the other hand, what we con-
demn — if we condemn rightly — is bad, even if it were
the essence of all reality.

The moral evil of the argument from consequences)
seems to me to be that it makes us imperious in the
wrong place, where our imperiousness is am^ance,
and, by an inevitable consequence, makes us humble
in the wrong place, where our humility is mean and
servile. When the reaUty of a thing is uncertain, the
argument encourages us to suppose that our approval
of a thing can determine its reality. And when this
unhallowed link has once been established, retribution
overtakes us. For when the reality is independently
certain, we have to admit that the reality of a thing,
should determine our approval of that thing. I find '
it difficult to imagine a more deigraded position.


53. It remains to speak of the appeal, sometimes
made, to leave dogmatic questions to faith. In so far
as this means faith in a proposition, it presents nothing
new. If the faith is asserted to be based on reason,
then the question will arise whether the reasons are
valid, and it becomes a question of argument. If the
faith dispenses with reason, we have again the appeal
to immediate conviction.

We are sometimes invited to have faith on account
of the very limited amount of our knowledge, and the
possible errors in it. The argument is not, I think,
one which gains any importance by being advocated
by thinkers of repute, but it is sufficiently popular to
deserve some consideration.

The fact on which it is based is unquestionably true.
We know very little, compared to what there is to be
known; and what we take for knowledge is frequently


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 67


error. If this were assigned as a reason for not being
certain as to the truth of our conclusions — and especially
of our conclusions on obscure and disputed subjects —
the argument would be unquestionably legitimate,
And if it were given as a reason for complete scepticism,
the conclusion, though exaggerated, would not be very
surprising. But it is somewhat remarkable that our
want of knowledge on any subject, should be put for-
ward as a reason for coming to a particular conclusion
on that subject.

Yet this is often done. If it is suggested that there
is no evidence that the universe is working towai-ds
a good end, the doubter is reminded of the limitations
of his intellect, and on account of this is exhorted to
banish his doubts from his mind, and to believe firmly
that the universe is directed towards a good end. And
stronger instances can be found. An apologist may
admit, for example, that for our intellects the three
facts of the omnipotence of a personal God, the bene-
volence of a personal God, and the existence of
evil, are not to be reconciled. But we are once more
reminded of the feebleness of our intellects. And we
are invited to assert, not only that our conclusions
may be wrong, not only that the three elements may
possibly be reconciled, but that they are reconciled.
There is evil, and there is an omnipotent and bene-
volent God.

54. This line of argument has two weaknesses. The
first is that it will prove everything — including mutu-
ally incompatible propositions — equally well. It will
prove as easily that the universe is tending towards
a bad end as that it is tending towards a good one.
There may be as Uttle evidence for the pessimistic view
as for the optimistic. But if our intellects are so
feeble that the absence of sufficient evidence in our

F 2


08


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


minds is no objection to a conclusion in the one case,
then a similar absence can be no objection to a conclu*
sion in the other. Nor can we fall back on the asser-
tion that there is less evidence for the pessimistic view
than for the optimistic, and that, therefore, we should
adopt the latter. For if our intellects are too feeble
for their conclusions to be trusted, our distrust must
apply equally to their conclusion on the relative weight
of the evidence in the two cases.

The other objection to the argument is that it implies
that, if we cannot trust our conclusion timt A is false,
we have no alternative but to conclude that A is true.
But there is a third alternative to being confident of
the truth or confident of the falsity of A. It is to
abstain from judging about A at alL And it is this
which would seem to be the more reasonable alterna-
tive, supposing our intellects are as weak as they are
asserted to be. If I have only taken a hasty view by
twihght of my neighboui-'s garden, it would be rash of
me to place much trust in my failure to see any lilies
in it. But it would be even more rash if I proceeded
from the untrustworthiness of my negative conclu-
sion to a confident assertion that there were lilies in
it, and that there were exactly seventeen of them.

Even in this case, however, I should not have to
ignore an a priori conviction of the impossibility of
lihes. But the argument from the feebleness of our
intellects is often used aa a reason why we should
beheve a state of things to exist which our intellects
pronounce to be self-contradictory. I might as well
call on you and myself to believe that in some remote
comer of the universe the liaw of Diminishing Returns
devours purple quadratic equations. It seems to us,
certainly, that a quadratic equation cannot have colour,
or be eaten. But then, how inadequate are our


drdfiUUd


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 69'

merely human powers to limit the resources of the
infinite I

56. But there is another form of the appeal to faith
which requires more serious consideration. We are
invited to have faith, not in the truth of a proposition,
but in the goodness of a person. A man trusts hia
friends, or his political leader. He beheves them to
have good motives for actions whose motives he is
unable to detect. He often beheves them to have
good motives in cases where, but for his personal faith
in them, the circumstances would strongly suggest
that they were actuated by bad motives. Subsequent
events often — though not always — prove that he was
right. Can we not, we are asked, trust God as we
trust our friends ?

In the first place it must be remarked that this form
of faith can only have a very limited application in the
establishment of dogma. It assumes, to begin with,
that the dogma of the existence of a personal God has
been already established. For the appeal to trust
God as we trust men loses all plausibility if God is
not a person. If the ultimate reality of the universe
were an aggregate of atoms, or a chaos of sensations, or
a substance devoid of wUl, intellect, and purpose, it
woidd be futile to trust it.

Then our faith in a man does not enable us to
predict his actions — which, indeed, are often deter-
mined, as in the case of a statesman, by considerations
which are inaccessible to us. All that it does is to
render us confident that they will be wise and virtuous.
And a corresponding faith in God will not enable us
to determine whether we are immortal, whether our
wills are undetermined, or similar questions of dogma.
It will only give us light on one particular dogma —
that the world is wisely and righteously ordered.


70


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


And oven here it will not by itself enable us to saj
that tlio world a wisely and righteously ordered. For
my faith in a man only enables me to be confident
thjtt bin eudu will be well chosen and pursued. They
may not be attained, for that may be prevented by
foroew beyond hiH own control. All that such faith
then can teach us of God is that his end is the good
ordering of the universe. If we are to be certain that
hiH end will be attained, wo must, in some other
manner, have oi^tablishcd the dogma that God is either
omnipotent, or at any rate so powerful as to be free
fnjin the risk of eventual defeat.

fie. But, oven with these Umitations, should we be
untitled to trust God as we might trust a man whose
designs wo could not follow ? I do not think that we
shoiihl. Of course, if wo have convinced ourselves
by direct m-guuieut that God is working towards the
gooil mid is sti'oiig enough to realize it, then we should
be sure of his intentions and his success in cases
whore wo could not divine his purpose or directly
peroeivo liiw huccohs. But this would not be the faith
of which we spoak. It would be demonstration. If
God's nature is proved to bo such that he always
willrt the good, tliou in any particular case it is clear
that ho (Khw will it. The faith in God which we are
now discusfiing in a substitute for demonstration, not
an inst^meo of it.

Wo do not i)ut faith in all men, but only in some of
them. Why is this ? I take it that our faith is an
induction fnnn experience. If a man has always
Mtod honourably, and now acts in a way which, viewed
in itself, woidd seem to us dishonourable, we think it
more probable thai our judgement on the character of
this aotioQ ia mistaken, than that our mass of pre-
vious judgomeata on his fonner conduct should be


THE ESTABLISHMEIJT OF DOGMA 71

mistaken, or that hia character should have sufiFered
a sudden change for the worse. We say, therefore,
that we are confident that circumstances, at present
unknown to us, prevent the action from being
dishonourable.

Sometimes, indeed, we have faith in a man of whom
we know nothing. But, after all, we know that he is
a man. And our faith in this ease is based on the
experience of the past which tells us that men liave
never, or very rarely, been known to commit the
particular crime or to omit the particular duty in
respect of which we have faith in the man before us.

Faith in man, then, rests on an induction — an
induction from the previously observed conduct of the
man in question, or of men in general. Can such an
induction be legitimately made in the case of God,
supposing his existence as a person to be already
proved ? I do not tliink it can be. For consider how
enormous is the scope ofthe conclusion of the inference
as compared witli the scope of the observations on
which it can be based. What ai-e the limits of our
knowledge of what are, on this theory, God's acta?
We know a very few of those wliich have happened
on one planet for a few thousand yeara, together with
a few isolated facts about evenUi beyond this planet.
On the strength of these we are invited to beUeve in
a uniform law applying to all his actions for the whole
universe. We know that the universe is much larger
than oiu- sphere of observation. It is perhaps even
infinitely larger. Surely to conclude from so httlo to
so much would be ineflably rash. Judas, according to
the old legend, once gave a cloak to a leper. If any
man who had observed this had argued that the whole
of the life of Judas was one continuous succession of
virtuous deeds, his conclusion would be admitted to


72 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

be unfounded. Tet that action would have borne a
larger proportion to the whole life of Judas, than thoee
of God's actions which we directly know can be
supposed to bear to the whole of his actions.

67. This objection would, I tliinb, be fatal even if
every one of the divine actions which we directly
know was one which suggested a good purpose. But
it is universally admitted that this is not the case, and
that many of those facts of the universe which we
directly know do not su^iest a good design as their
most obvious explanation. I will not inquire whether
the £acts known to us show more good than evil. It is
certain that the two are so nearly balanced, that both
the evil and the good have been considered, by different
observers, to be the greater. Such a mixed experience
as this is possibly not incompatible with the existence
of a God who is working for the good and who is
strong enough to succeed. But it does not form an
adequate proof of his existence.

It is clear that we cannot put faith in God without
reference to our knowledge of his actions, although we
can, in certain cases, do this with man. We trust
them from our experience of other men. But if there
is a God, he is probably not one of a class of Gods,
and, if he were, we should know no more of them
than of him. It is true that a personal God would be
included with men in the class of persons, but the
difference between Grod and man would be far too
great to justify any inference from the conduct of the
one to the conduct of the other.

68. There are, of course, cases in which faith does
not depend on induction— or indeed on any basis of
reason at alL U A loves B, it is frequently the case,
though by no means always, that he will decline to
adopt any theory of B's action which involvea blame


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 73


I

I
I


■to B, even if the facta are such that he would have
adopted the theory without hesitation in the case of any

rson whom he did not love. It has been suggested
;hat this is the right analogy for our faith in God. If
we love him, it is said, we shall have faith in his
working for good, and that faith will be justifiable.

If this is even psychologically possible, it is clear
that it must be possible to love God before deciding
whether he is good or not — perhaps a better expression
•Would be, to love a being otheiTvise answering to the
description of God, before deciding whether he pos-
sesses the remaining divine quality of goodness. For,
if a belief in the goodness has to precede the love, it
is clear tliat the love cannot bo the ground of the
belief in goodness.

It is, fortunately, possible to love men regardless of
their wickedness. Could it be so with God ? Could
we love an otherwise divine being who was wicked?
If he were conceived as omnipotent, or as only self-
limited, I should imagine it to be impossible — though
it is difficult to be certain. But if he were conceived
as a finite being of limited power, working in a world
of which he was not the ultimate creator, then I can
no difficulty in a man loving him, irrespective of
bis goodness or wickedness, as a man might be loved.

This conception of God is not, of course, a very
common one. But for those who hold it the position
wliich we are discussing is, no doubt, psychologically
possible. They can love God, having satisfied them*
selves of his existence, with a love as ultimate and
super-moral as that of friend for friend. And tlien,
no doubt, they may be led on from this to assume
rliis goodness when there is no evidence, or insufficient
evidence, for it.

Such a position is possible, then, but is it justili-


Kla


74


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


able ? The analogy, at any rate, is not encouraging.
For, after all, the object of any belief is to gain the
truth, A belief which does not do this stands
condemned. Now it is notorious that the faith in
a person which is based on love for him frequently
does lead to a false belief, and not to a true one. If
a man's mother is convinced of his innocence when
a jury is convinced of his guilt, experience shows that
the jury is much more likely to be right than the
mother.

Nor is faith in the goodness of the beloved essentid
to love, as has sometimes been maintained. It is
fortunate that it is not. For there ai-e cases where
the blindest faith in a man's goodness must give way
before the demonstration that he is bad. And, if
faith in goodness were essential fo love, then love
would have to cease when tliis happened. But it
need not cease then, and it often does not. We are
better than Tennyson — or at least Guinevere inter-
preted by Tennyson — made us out to be. We need
not love the highest when we see it. And we can
love the lowest when we see it — when the lowest
happens to be the person we love.

59. The conclusion I submit is that on matters of
dogma we cannot dispense with proof, and we cannot
prove anything by considering the people who beUeve
it, or the disastrous consequences which woidd follow
from its falsity. We must prove oin* dogmas more
directly, if we are to continue to believe them. This
will leave all questions of dogma more or less pro-
blematic, and many quite unanswered. And this
is doubtless unpleasant. But unpleasant things are
sometimes true.

Is there then no moral element involved in beUef in
religious dogma ? I behove that to acquire true belief


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DOGMA 75

in religious dogma does require moral qualities — in
almost every case — in the seeker. But they are
required, not to show us what the truth is — for that
purpose they seem to me as useless to the metaphysician
as to the accountant — but to prevent our turning away
from the truth. In the first place, a man will scarcely
arrive at truth in these questions without courage.
For he must seek before he can find, and at the
beginning of his search he cannot tell what he will
find.

And he will also need — unless he is almost in-
credibly fortunate — a certain form of faith. He will
need the power to trust the conclusions which his
reason has deliberately adopted, even when circum-
stances make such a belief especially difficult or painful.
There are leaden days when evou the most convinced
idealist seems to fed that his body and his furniture
are as real as hims elf, and members of a far more
powerful reality. There are times when the denial
of immortality seems, to the firmest disbeliever in
immortality, a denial which he has scarcely strength
to make.

But, whatever is true, it is quite certain that truth
is not affected by incidents like these. If all reality
has been proved to be spiritual, it cannot have ceased
to be spiritual because to-day I am ill or overworked.
If I had no reason to believe in immortality yesterday,
when other people's friends were dead, I have no
greater reason to beheve in it because t<wlay my
friend has died.

If we want to know the truth, then, we must have
faith in the conclusions of our reason, even when they
seem — as they often will seem — too good or too bad
to be true. Such faith has a better claim to abide
with hope and love than the faith which consists in


76 SOME DOGMAS OF BEIIGION

belieTing without reasons for beliefl It is tiiis foith,
aurely, which is sou^t in the prayer, ' Suffer us not
for any pains of death to fall &om thee.' And for
those who do not pray, there remains the resolve that,
so far as their strength may prevail, neitlier the pains
of death nor the pains of life shall drive them to any
comfort in that which they hold to be false, or drive
them from any comfort in that which they hold to
be true.


CHAPTER m


HUMAN IMMOETALrrr


60. I DO not propose to offer here any arguments in
support of the positive assertion tliat men are immortal.
I believe that such arguments exist, and that, in spite
of the difficulty and obscurity of the subject, they are
of sufficient strength to justify a belief in our immor-
tality.' But to expound these arguments would require
elaborate and lengthy treatise of technical meta-
physics, for they could only be proved by a demon-
stration of some idealist theory of the fundamental
nature of reaUty. My present design is merely to
consider some arguments against immortality which
' have been based on certain facts of ordinary observa-
tion, and on certain results of physical science. I shall
endeavour to show that those arguments are invalid,
and that the presumption against immortality, which
they have produced in many people, should bo dis-
carded.

It is better to speak of the immortality of the self,
For of men, than of the inmaortality of the soul. The
latter phrase suggests imtenable views. For, in speak-
ing of the identity of a man during different periods
of his bodily life, we do not usually say that he is the
.same soul, but the same sel^ or the same man. And
ito use a different word when we are discussing the
[prolongation of that identity after death, calls up the

' Cp< my Studies in Hegelian Oosmology, chap. ii.


78


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


idea of an identity leas perfect than that which lasts
through a bodily life. Tlie form in which the question
is put thus implies that the answer is to be in some
degree negative — that a man is not as much himself
after death as he is before it, even if something escapes
from complete destruction.

Moreover, it is customary, unfortimately, to say that
a man has a soul, not tliat he is one. Now if our
question is put in the form ' Has man an immortal
soul?' an affirmative answer would be absurd. So
far as it would mean anytliing it would mean that the
man himself was the body, or something which died
with the body — at any rate was not immortal — and
that something, not himself, which he owned during
life, was set free at his death to continue existing on
its own accoimt. For these reasons it seems better
not to speak of the soul, and to put our question in
the form 'Are men immortal?'

61. What reasons are there for supposing that our
existence is only temporary ? I see around me bodies
which behave so like my own, that I conclude that
they are related to other conscious selves in the same
way that my body is related to myself. But from
time to time these bodies are observed to cease to
behave in this way, and to become motionless, unless
moved from outside. Shortly after this the body
dissolves into its constituent parts. Its form and
identity as a body are completely destroyed. The
experience of the past leads me to the conclusion that
the same thing will happen in the future to every
human body now existing, including my own.

How does this affect the question of my existence ?
It is clear that if I am a mere effect of my body —
a form of its activity — I shall cease when the body
ceases. And it is also clear that, if I could not exist


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


79


without this particular body, then the destruction of
the body will be a sign that I have ceased to exist,

But, besides death, there is another characteriatic
of nature which tends to make us doubt our immor-
tahty. Of all the things around us, from a pebble to
a solar system, science tells us that they are transitory.
Each of them arose out of something else, each of them
ivill pass away into something else. What is a man
that he should be exempt from this universal law ?

Thus we have three questions to consider : (1) Is
my self an activity of my body? (2) Is my present
body an essential condition of the existence of my
self? (3) Is there any reason to suppose that my
self does not share the transitory character which
I recognize in all the material objects around me?

62, With regard to the first of these questions, it is
certain, to begin with, that my body influences my
self much and continuously. A large part of my
mental hfe is made up of sensations. Sensations are
continually produced in connexion with changes in
the sense-organs of my body, and, so far as we know,
they are never produced in any other way. And the
course of my thoughts and emotions can be profoundly
aflfected by the state of my body. If my body gets no
food for twenty-four houi-s, they will be affected one
way. If I introduce whisky or opium into it, they
will be affected another way. If my body is very
fatigued, the ordinary current of my mental life will
be entirely suspended in profound sleep, or completely
broken by dreams. If any of these processes is carried
far enough, my body dies, and I cease to have any
relation to it for the future, which is certainly an
important event for me, whether I survive it or not.

It is equally certain that tlie mind acts on the body.


80


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


My limbs, on many occasions, move according to my
will. And the normal behaviour of the body can be
altered by the mind, as much as the normal behaviour
of tho mind can be altered by the body. Grief, or
fear, or anger, can produce bodily illness, and even
death.

Now each of these groups of events — the effects of
body on mind and of mind on body— could be explained
on the hypothesis that the self and the body were two
separate realities, neither of which was the mere
product of the other, though each affected the other,
and caused changes in it. And it might be thought
that this would bo the most natural conclusion to
adopt, since the action appears to be reciprocal — mind
acting on body as much as body acts on mind,

63. There is always, however, a very strong tendency
to adopt the view that the self is a mere activity of the
body — or at any rate to hold that the only escape from
this view lies in accepting some form of revealed
religion which denies it. Tlie cause of this tendency
is, in the first place, the incomplete nature of the
explanation which would be furnished by the recogni-
tion of the self and its body as independent reaUties.'
All ultimate explanation endeavoura to reduce the
universe to a unity. The self is spirit, tho body is
matter. Spirit and matter, taken as independent
realities, are very heterogeneous to one another. It is
evident that a theory which makes either spirit or
matter to be the sole reality in the universe, introduces
a greater degree of unity thou a theory which makes
them to be equally real


' By independent I do not here meui isoUted, or unconnected
rakJities, but such as stand on ui equal footing, so that though
each is connect«d with the other, Qeitfa«r is subordiiuta to tb«
other.


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


81


Monism then, whether it be materialism or idealism,
is more attractive to the majority of inquirers than
dualism is. We must now consider the various causes
vrhich tend to make a materialistic monism more
plausible than an idealistic monism, and which impel
us to the conclusion that matter is the only reality,
while human spirit is notliing more than one of the
activities which characterize matter when it is in the
special form of a human body. (It is immaterial for
our present purpose whether the adherents of this view
suppose matter to exist as a substance, to which these
activities belong, or whether they say that the activities
are the matter. The difference is insignificant, although
the second alternative is sometimes put forward as
a great improvement on the first. The essential point
is that the spiritual is in either case reduced to a
temporary form of an activity whose fundamental
nature is non-spirituaL)

64. One of these causes is the fact, so continually
pressed upon the notice of every man, that the nature
of matter is almost entirely independent of his will.
I cannot create matter, and there are narrow limits to
the extent to which I can alter it. I cannot make
into bread the stone which I see and touch. How-
ever passionately I may desire that it should be bread,
however serious the consequences to myself and
others of its remaining a stone, a stone it remains.
By a transition which is natural though illegitimate
we tend to believe that whatever is so independent
of our will must be independent of us altogether.

To some extent, indeed, the will can affect matter.
But the amount of its effects is comparatively insigni-
ficant. All the exertions of human beings can only
affect the surface of the earth, and that veiy slightly.
On the other hand, matter seems far more powei-ful

o


89 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

in its influence on spirit. The diminution of the
temperature of a single planet is an absurdly trivial
episode in astronomy. But, if the planet were our
earth, it would put an end to the only conditions
under which, as far as our observation goes, it is
possible for spirit to exist Since spirit, then, appears
BO much weaker than matter when they are taken
separately, is it strange that, when an attempt is made
to reduce the one to the other, it is spirit that is called
on to give way 7

tu matter, too, we can observe a unity and a per-
eistence which may belong to spirit but does not
obviously belong to it Spirit we only know in the
form of separate individuals, set in the midst of
matter, only by means of which they are able to
oomniunioate with one another. No human spirit has
evBT, as fiar as we know, been op&a to observation for
much more than a hundred y<ears, and the lower
animals only aligfatly ezoeed this limit Hatter forms
one vast system, which history infbnus us has existed
for thousands of yaars, while scieooe extends the
period to BuUions.

And, again, the amount cf knowledge which science
giwe ns abont matter is tax greater than the axoannt
whK^ it gives ns about sqpiiit On the one ade is the
whole vast esitent of the physical sciences. On the
<«th«r side w«< have onh* p^chology — ^and not the whole
of psyAolofiy. T&r the psyeho-phvsical side of that
Mienee deals as much with matter as it does with
spirit

AH this increases the aji^wrent importanoe of matter.
«nd serims to i<ender it more prrohahle that iiuQxer. rather
than ^nrit, is the sole raabty. ^urit, then, would be
the wi^ in which matter behavKimderoertaiz) cireom-
atwoea. And in st^pmt of this it may he said that


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


83


the activity of matter does take different forms. The
same energy, science infonns us, which sometimea
shows itself as heat, shows itself at other times as
motion, or, again, as electricity. And this same
energy, it is asseited by the materialist, is transformed
under other circumstances— when it is found in a
human body— into thought, will, and emotion. Cer-
tainly, he admits, thought, will, and emotion ai"e not
very like heat, motion, and electricity. But then
heat, motion, and electricity are not very like one
another. And, if they can all be reduced to this
common unity, why should not the forms of conscious-
ness share the same fate ?

65. Tliese conclusions depend, it will be seen, on
the proposition that matter can exist independently
of spirit. For if tliis were not so, it would obviously
be absurd to explain away the separate reahty of spirit
by making it one of the temporary forms which the
activity of matter takes. Deeper inquiry will, I think,
show us that matter cannot be independent of spirit,
that, on the contrary, matter is only an appearance to
the mind which obserrea it, and cannot, therefore,
exist independently of spirit. If this is the case we
caimot be entitled to consider the self as the activity
of its body.

Of what nature is the matter supposed to be which,
it is asserted, can exist independently of spirit? It is
not conceived as having all the qualities which, in
ordinary language, we ascribe to matter. We say of
an orange that it is soft, yeUow, sweet, and odorous.
But these quahties are not held to belong to the
orange when it is not being observed. In strictness
they are not held to be qualities of the orange at all,
but effects excited in the observer by qualities of the
orange. The orange is no more yellow when no one

O 2


84 SOME DOGMAS OF KELIGION

aeeB it than it is desired when no one knows of its
existence.

But the object is conceived as having other qualities
which reallj do belong to it, and give it that nature
which it has independently of observation, and if no
one observes ii Its size, its shape, its position in
space, its motion, and its impenetrability are of this
nature. It is these qualities, or others of the same
nature, which have the power, under certain circum-
stanoes, of exciting in the observer the sensations of
softness, yellowness, and the like.

The qualities which are held really to belong to the
matter are often called its primary qualities. The
otheta are called its secondary qualities, though, on
this theory, it is scarcely correct to call them qualities
of the object at all.

Matter, then, is held to be extended, to have position,
and to be capable of motion independently of obeerva*
tion. It is also impenetrable — that is, no two pieces
of matter can occupy the same poeiti<ai in space.
But it has no colour, it is neither haid xtor soft^ it has
no taste, no smeil, and no sound.

This is matter as it is conKived in physical science.
It mqr be said also to be the o(i£nai7 coowption. tor
althou^ we speak of an ivange as ydlow, Tet the id«a
that it is not ^dlow in the daik is generally known
and g»ienlly acc^fted.

M^ What reason ««n be giren for a bi^ief in th«
«xi£teDe« of matter? I •ramwrre that ^ueih a bt^ief «an
only be tieiended on the gnwnd that it b a kgiumate
tnliMKiK^ froia our 9eiisatwi]&

TUtt xiew ha$ be«n cuutefted. bnt I beiieTe that the
ol^ectiaa to it reets eo a mKunderstaEN&n^ It hd^
been saidr and with p«Hwi tnitivthat raTb^wf in dk*
esisteiiw of HaKbM- «k<K mit arvK k sa infecvaw firom


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


85


my sensations, I do not firat become aware of my
sensations and then infer the existence of an orange.
On the contrary, I am aware of the existence of the
orange first. If I am studying psychology or am
doubtful of the validity of my knowledge I may then
consider the sensations of sight, touch, and so on, con-
nected with my knowledge of the object But in most
cases I never do consider the sensations at all. And
there are young cliildren who are quite aware of the
existence of a material world, but who have never
realized that they have seiLsations.

These facts are sufficient to refute the view, which
has sometimes been held, that our belief in a material
world arises as an inference from our sensations. But
they are quite irrelevant to the question now before
us — whether our belief in a material world must not
be justified, if it is to be justified at all, as an inference
from our sensations. And when such facts are used, as
not infrequently happens, as bearing on this question,
involves a very seiioua confusion.

The belief in a material world requires justification.
It is natural, in the sense tliat cveiy one who has not
reflected on the subject holds the belief as a matter of
course, together with many of those who liave reflected
on it. But it is not inevitable. It is possible to dis-
believe it. Many philosophers have done so. And
there is, at any rate, nothing obviously self-contra-
dictory in its denial. Berkeley's theory on the subject
— to take only one out of many theories which deny
the existence of matter — whether true or false, is not
self-contradictory.

Since disbelief in the existence of matter is neither
impossible nor contradictory, the question becomes
inevitable — what is the justification of the beUef?
And it becomes more pressing, because in many cases


8S


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


our judgements as to the existence of matter are
admitted to be wrong. In the first place, the quite
unreflective consciousness has no more doubt that the
world of matter ia coloured than it has that the world of
matter is extended. But either this or the more reflec-
tive judgements of science and the modem world must
be wrong here, since they disagree. Again, if a man,
who sees a cloak hanging up by moonlight, believes
that he sees before him the body of a dead friend, it ia
obvious that he has completely mistaken the character
of the matter before him. And if our judgements as
to what the external object is are so often wrong, we
have little justification for assuming without inquiry
that our judgement that there is an external object is
ever right.

There ia a stronger case than this. For in dreams
we do not only make wrong judgements as to the
nature of matter, but aa to the existence of matter.
If a believer in the existence of matter dreams that he
sees a roc's egg, he no more doubt'^, during his dream,
that the roc's egg exists as independent matter, than
he doubts, during waking life, that his table exists aa
independent matter. And yet, on waking, he will
admit that in his dream he was neither observing a
roc's egg nor any other really existing matter which
he mistook for a roc's egg. Not only was his dream-
belief 'this is a roc's egg* mistaken, but his dream-
belief ' this is independently existing matter ', was also
mistaken. And if this is mistaken, it is mere creduhty
to trust his belief in the table's existence without
examination. For that belief is no stronger and no
more evident than the other had been previously.

67. On what can we base a justification of the belief
in the independent existence of matter? Nothing is
available except the senaations. They are there, and


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


87


they are certain. We never believe that we are
observing matter unless we experience sensations more
or less analogous to the qualities we believe to exist in
the matter. We may not be conscious of the sensa-
tions as such at all. Indeed, as was said above, in the
majority of cases we never are conscious of them. But
whenever we look for them, on such occasions, we find
them. And the sensations are certain. I may be
^vrong in believing that matter exists independently
of me, But the suggestion that I am wrong in believ-
ing X have a sensation is absurd. The belief is not
sufficiently separable from the sensation for the possi-
biUty of error. I may, of course, be wrong in believing
that I had a sensation in the past, for memory may
deceive me. And I may be wrong in the general
terms which I apply to a sensation, when I attempt to
classify it, and to describe it to others. But my know-
ledge that I am having the sensation whieJi I am
having is one of those ultimate certainties which it is
impossible either to prove or to deny.

And we find that although the sensations are gene-
rally ignored, as sensations, when the correctness of
the judgement about the matter is not doubted, yet,
as soon as I myself, or other people, entertain a doubt
of the correctness of the judgement, the situation is
changed. If it is suggested that what I believe to be an
experience of matter of a certain sort is really a dream
or a delusion, I fall back on the sensations which
I have experienced, and consider whether they can be
accounted for on any other hypothesis than that of the
existence of the matter in question. If they cannot,
I consider tliat I was right in my judgement that the
matter did exist.

And we must act in the same way if a doubt arises,
not merely of the correctness of our judgements that


88


SOME DOGMAS OF EELIGIOK


this or that matter exists, but of the correctness of all
judgements that matter of any sort exists. The fact
which it is impossible to deny is that we have the
sensations. Are we entitled to conclude from this
that the material world really exists, and that the
natural judgement that it does exist — which is not,
however, as we have seen, an inevitable or universal
judgement — is correct ?

68. It is evident that the sensations are not them-
selves the matter in question. A sensation is not
matter, and it cannot exist apart from the self to whom
it belongs. It can have no independent exiatenee.
But the sensations, since they begin to exist, must
have causes. ' Now it cannot be said to be obviously
impossible that all the causes of my sensations should
he within my own nature. It is certain that they do
not lie within that part of my own nature of which I
am conscious, for I am not conscious of producing my
sensations. But it might be said, as Leibniz has said,
that all my sensations arise out of the depths of my
ovra unconscious nature, and that when a self has
once come into existence it is as independent of out-
side influences in its sensations as a clock, when once
wound up, is in striking. But there are difficulties in
the way of this view into which we have no time to
enter, and I do not wish to lay any weight on the
possibihty of its truth. I am prepared to admit —
what seems to me by far the more probable view —
that all my sensatioas have causes which are not my-
self nor anything in myself. Such causes must in
each case be merely partnyiuses. I am unquestionably


' This step might not be accepted by any one who denied the
universal application of causality. A thinker who denied the
universal application of causality could not, as far as I can see,
liave the least Justiiication foe a belief in the existence of matter.


HUMAN IMMORTALITY

one of the causes of my own sensations, for, if I did
not exist, my sensations also would not exist.

It may thus be admitted that my sensations make
it, at any rate, highly probable tliat some reaUty exists,
which is not myself or anything within myself, but
exists independently of me. But we have not got to
matter. A reahty which exists independently of me
need not be matter— it might, for example, be another
spirit We do not call anything matter unless it
possesses the primary qualities of matter given above.
These qualities correspond to certain sensations, or
elements in sensations, and the presence of the sensa-
tion in me is held to prove the existence of the cor-
responding quality in the material object.

69. But is this legitimate? The independent reality
has been admitted to be the part-cause of the sensa-
tions, but that does not prove that it is Like them.
Causes do not necessarily resemble their effects.
Happiness in A does not resemble the misery which
it may cause to the envious JB. An angry man does
not resemble a slammed door. A ray of sunshine
does not resemble a faded water-colour.

70. And, on this very theory, the external causes
of all mental events do not resemble those events.
When I see a sphere of red-hot iron I have sensations
of form, sensations of colour, and (if I am near enough)
a feelmg of pain. Now the ordinary theory of matter
makes the matter the cause of the sensations of colour
and of the feeling of pain, as much as of the sensations of
form. Yet it denies that the matter is red or painful.
Here, therefore, is an external cause of mental events
which does not resemble them. It is therefore impos-
sible to fall back on the principle, that the external cause
of mental events always resembles them. And what
other principle have we to justify us in ascribing


00


SOME DOGMAS OP EELIGION


the primary qualities to the external causes of the
sensations ? '

The distinction between the primary and secondary
quahties renders the theory of the existence of matter
less tenable than it would otherwise be. In the first
place, there is the inconsistency, which we have just
noticed, of asserting that we can argue from some of
our sensations to a resemblance in their causes, and
not from others. If our perception of the secondary
qualities varies from time to time, and ftx)m individual
to individual, so also does our perception of the primary
qualities. If our perception of the primary quahties
exhibits a certain uniformity from time to time, and
from individual to individual, so also does our per-
ception of the secondary qualities.

And, in the second place, matter, while extended
and impenetrable, is destitute both of colour and of
hardness, since these are secondary qualities. Now
the sensations of extension and impenetrability only
come to us by sight and touch. When they come
by sight they are invariably conjoined with sensations
of colour, when they come by touch they are invai-iably
conjoined with sensations of hardness. We cannot
even imagine to ourselves a sensation which gives
extension without giving eitlier colour or hardness.

Thus the theory which makes the external causes of
our sensations material, reaches a climax of incon-


' It must be noticed that t)ie rea«mblance which the theory
attributes to the sensatioDs aod their external caiisea is very
liinited. The causes are not sensations, nor are their qualities
sensations. All that can be said is that, in some way not too
easy to define, certain predicates of the causes resemble the
content of some of the sensations which are the effects of those
causes. But it is not necessary for my argument to follow out
the ambiguities and diificultiea which follow from this elaborate
combination of similarity and difference between sensations and
matter.


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


91


sistency. Its one defence was the principle that the
cauaes of the sensations must resemble the sensations
they cause. But now it turns out that tHam^ what the
causes are to resemble is a mere abstraction from our
sensations — a naked extension, which is so far from
being a sensation which we experience, that we cannot
even imagine what a sensation of it would be like.

71. Is it possible to avoid this inconsistency by
dropping the distinction between primary and secondary
qualities? Shall we say that matter has not only
shape, size, position, motion, and impenetrability, but
also colour, hardness, smell, and taste? This view
certainly avoids some of the objections to the more
ordinary theory. It does not make an arbitrary and
gratuitous difference in the treatment of two sets of
qualities. And it gives matter a nature not utterly
unlike our experience, and not utterly unimaginable
by us.

But on the other hand the theory would no longer
have the support of physical science. For that science
treats matter as devoid of the secondary qualities, and
it endeavours to show that the primary quahties of
matter, under certain circumstances, excite in us the
sensations of the secondary qualities.

Of coui-se the independent existence and ultimate
nature of matter is a question for metaphysics and not
for science. And therefore a metaphysical theory that
matter possesses the secondary qualities as well as th^
primary cannot be upset by the fact that science,
working from its own more superficial pomt of view,
finds it convenient to treat matter as possessing only
the primary qualities. If science keeps to Its own
sphere, it cannot clash with any metaphysical theory.
If attempts are made to treat its results as if they were
metaphysical truths, they have no claim to validity in


92


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


this sphere, and a metaphysical theory is none the
worse for being incompatible with these misapplica-
tions.

But the theory that matter exists depended very
lai:gely for its plausibility on the illegitimate support
which it obtained by taking science as if it were
metaphysics ; and if it loses this support, as it must
in the suggested new form, it loses, indeed, no real
strength, but much of what caused people to believe
it. As has been already said, the fact that physical
science treats matter as independent of spirit, and that
physical science forms a vast system, coherent, accepted,
and, from its own standpoint, irrefutable, has done
much to strengthen the belief that matter, at least,
must be real, and that, if one of the two must be
explained away by the other, it is spirit which must
go, and matter which must stay. The inference is
quite illegitimate, since nothing in physical science
touches, or can touch, the question of the independent
existence of matter. But it is an inference which is
frequently made. And when the theory of the in-
dependent existence of matter defines the nature of
that matter in a manner completely different from the
definitions of physical science, it will no longer be able
to gain apparent support in this way.

72. Nor does the amended theory, while less incon-
siatont than the original form, altogether avoid
inconsistency. The red-hot sphere of iron is now
admitted not only to be a sphere, independent of any
observer, but to be red, independent of any observer.
But the pain still remains. It is not asserted that the
iron is painful, although it causes me pain. Now the
pain is a result produced in the observer which is
quite as real as the sensations of form and colour, and
quite as independent of the observer's will. It is like-


HUM.VN IMMORTALITY


wise just as uniform. The iron will not give me the
sensations except under certain conditions. (I shall
not see it to bo red, for example, if I am blind, or have
my eyes shut.) And, under certain conditions, quite
as definite, it will inevitably give rae the feeling of
pain. Yet nothing resembling the mental effect is
attributed to the cause in this case. Why should
a difference be made between tliia case and the
others?

And, even if we limit ourselves to sensations, the
amended theory does not escape inconsistency. For,
even if the secondary qualities are predicated of matter,
it remains imjwssible to assert that matter is like the
sensations which it causes. These sensations change for
me from moment to moment. If I look at a thing under
one set of conditions, as to light and shade, I get one
sensation of colour from it ; if I change the conditions
next minute I get quite a different sensation. And if
two men look at it simultaneously under the different
conditions of light and shade they will have, simul-
taneously, the two different sensations of colour which
I had successively. Now it is impossible to suppose
that the object lias at once two different colours. And
if it has only one, then that colour must differ, at least,
from one of the two sensations experienced by the
two observers, since these sensationa differ from one
another.

The same is the case with the other secondary
qualities. And it is also the case with the primary
qualities. Two men who look at a cube from different
positions simultaneously have two quite different sensa-
tions of its shape — not merely numerically different, but
sensations which do not resemble one another, ^et
an object cannot Iiave two shapes at once, and each of
these men would, under normal circumstances, agree


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGIOK


about the shape of the object, altliough they started
from uon-reaembUng sensationg. It is clear, therefore,
that the shape attributed to the object cannot resemble
the sensations of shape which it causes, since they do
not resemble one another.

73. Now if it is once admitted that the qualities
attributed to the external object do not resemble the
quahties of the sensations it causes, we have no reason
to attribute those qualities to it at all. The only
reason we had for supposing the causes of our sensa-
tions to have these quaUtiea was the supposed resem-
blance of the qualities to the sensations. But now it
becomes clear that the qualities attributed to the
causes, although partially resembling the sensations,
do not resemble them completely. It follows that
a cause of a sensation may lack some of the qualities
of the sensation it causes. And in that case there
seems no reason for denying the possibihty of its being
quite different, and having none of the qualities in
question.

It may be replied, no doubt, that it is nevertheless
possible that the causes of the sensations do possess
qualities partially resembling the sensatioas. The
causes exist, and must have some qualities. And it
may be tliese qualities which they have, and so tliey
may be entitled to the name of matter. But such
a possibility would bo far too vague to give any
support to the theory that matter exists. Tliey may
possess these qualities, for there is no reason why
a cause should not resemble its effect in certain
respects. But there is no reason to beUeve that they
do possess them, or that their possession of them is
in the slightest degree probable. A man who boUs
a lobster red may have a red face — there is nothing to
prevent it. But his action in causing the redness of


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


95


the lobster gives us no reason to suppose that his face
is red.'

The result is that matter is in the same position as
the Gorgons or tho Harpies. Its existence is a bare
possibility to which it would be fooUsh to attach the
least importance, since there is nothing to make it at
all preferable to any other hypothesis, however wild.

74. If we ask, then, of what reality the vast mass
of knowledge holds true which science and everyday
life give us about matter, we must reply tliat it holds
true of various sensations which occur to various
men, and of the laws according to which these sensa-
tions are connected, so that from the presence of
certain sensations in me I can infer that, under certain
conditions, I shall or shall not experience certain other
sensations, and can also infer that, under cei-tain con-
ditions, other men will or will not experience ceiiain
sensations.

It will be objected tliat tliis is not what common
experience and science profess to do. When we say
that tliis bottle contains champagne, and this vmegar,
we are not talking about our sensations. And physical
science deals with such tilings as planets, acids, and
nerves, none of which are sensations.

It is quite true that it is usual to express the conclu-
sions of conmion expenence and of science in terms
which assume the independent existence of matter.
Most people in the past have believed that matter

' The Btatement that the bare possibility of the eiternol causta
being material still remains open muBt bo taken as referring only
to the arguments in this chajit^^r, I believe that further con-
sideration nhould convince us, for roasons closely analogous to
those of Hegel and Lotze, that all substance must possess certain
characteristics which are essential to the nature of spirit, and
incompatible with the nature of matter. If this view is rigbt^ —
a question beyond the purpose of this book to investigate — the
existence of matter would be positively disproved.


'SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

does exist independently ; our language has been
moulded by this belief, and now it is easier and
shorter to express our conclusions In this way.
Besides this, most people at present do hold the meta-
physical opinion that matter exists independently, and
tend to express themselves accordingly.

But the conclusions remain just as true, if we take
the view that matter does not exist. Something has
been changed, no doubt, but what has been changed
is no part either of common experience or science, but
a theory of metaphysics which forms no part of either.
And so we sacrifice neither the experience of every-
day life nor the results of science by denying the
existence of matter. We only sacrifice a theory of
metaphysics which we have already seen cannot be
justified.

I say, in ordinary language, that this is champagne
and this is vinegar. Supposing that there is neither
champagne nor vinegar as matter existing indepen-
dently of observation, but that it remains true that
a certain group of sensations of sight and smell is
a trustworthy indication that I can secure a certain
taste by performing certain actions, and that another
group of sensations of sight and smell is a trust-
worthy indication that I can secm-e a different taste
by performing similar actions. Does not this leave
a perfectly definite and coherent meaning to the
experience of everyday life, which fits every detail of
that experience as well as the more common theory
does, and only differs from it on a question of meta-
physics ?

75. It is the same with science. Every observation
made by science, every uniformity which is estabUshed,
eveiy statement as to the past or the future which it
asserted, would still have its meaning. The observa-


HUMAN" IMMORTALITY


97


tions would inform xis of what had boen experienced,
the uniformities would tell us the connexions of
various experiences, the statements as to the past and
future would tell us what has been or will be ex-
perienced, or would be so if the necessary conditions
were present. What more does science tell us, or
what more could it desire to tell us ? If the language
in which scientific results are generally expressed does
seem to tell us more, and to imply the independent
existence of matter, that is not science, but meta^
physics — the unconscious and uncritical metaphysica
of ordinary language — and its rejection does not
involve the rejection or the distrust of a single result
of science.

Science requires, no doubt, that experience should
exhibit certain uniformities, so that a certain expe-
rience can safely be taken as an indication of what
other experiences will follow it under certain con-
ditions. But this proves notliing as to the inde-
pendent existence of matter. If the external causes
of my sensations, and I mj^elf, have a constant nature,
the sensations which are their joint result will exhibit
uniformities. And a non-material cause can have
a constant nature just as easily as a material cause
could have.

Science also requires that experience should have
a conununity of nature between different persons, so
that it shall be possible for us to infer from any
experience what the experience of another person
would be under conditions more or less similar. This,
again, can be explained as easily without matter as
with it. If my nature and that of other persons were
not more or less the same, our experience would not
be similar, whatever the nature of its external cause.
But if our natures resemble one another, then it is


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

obvious that the action on us of the same external
cause would produce results which resembled one
another.

76. The denial of matter, it must also be noticed,
does not lead us towards solipsism — that is to say, to
the denial by each individual of all reality except
himself. The arguments which prove that my sensa-
tions must have causes which are not myself, nor in
myself, but are some other reality, lose none of their
force if we decide that these causes are not of
a material nature. And the other arguments against
sohpsism — the consideration of which is apart from
our present object — are just as strong on the hj'po-
thesis that matter does not exist.

It might be supposed that the theory I have been
advocating was a form of agnosticism. Agnosticism .
holds that we can know nothing but phenomena.
Beneath these phenomena lies a reality on which they
are based, but of this reality, agnosticism declares, we
can know nothing. If we only know of the external
causes of our sensations that they do cause the sensa^
tions, have we not in effect taken up the agnostic
theory that the reality on which phenomena depend
is unknowable?

But this is not the case. Agnosticism says that we
can know nothing whatever of the reality behind the
phenomena. And, in saying this, it contradicts itselfc
For it asserts that such a reality exists, and that it
stands in certain relations to the phenomena. Thus
we do know something about it, and it is therefore
not the case that we can know nothing about it.

But the theory which I have put forward does not
say that we can know nothing about the causes of
sensations. It only says that we do not know that
they are like the sensation they cause. Even if this


HUMAX IMMORTALITT


99


should destroy all knowledge of them except of the
fact that they were causes, it would not bo a general
assertion of the impossibility of any knowledge of
them, and so there would be no inconsistency in.
saying that we knew they were causes. To know m
of anything is inconsistent with being unable to know
anything of it, but it is quite consistent with knowing
nothing about it except m.

Nor does it follow that we know nothing else about
the causes of our sensations if we cannot conclude that
they resemble the sensations. It might be possible,
as various philosophers have maintained, to determine
the qualities which must belong to every substance in
virtue of its being a substance. And it might turn
out that this could give us a considerable knowledge
of the nature of these substances. We might, for
example, be led to the conclusion that all substance
was spirit. But we cannot here do more than point
out the possibUity of such a result.

77. And we have thus, I think, proved our original
contention that the self cannot be one of the activities
of its own body. If the self were, as such a theory
would require it to be, merely a way in which matter
behaved under certain circumstances, it would be
possible to explain the self satisfactorily in terms of
matter. And it would be possible that a state of
things should exist in which those circumstances,
which determine the activity of matter to take the
form of spirit, occurred nowhere in the universe, which
would then be a universe of matter without any con-
sciousness. But 80 far is this from being the case that
we can, as we now see, only explain matter in terms
of a conscious self, and to talk of matter existing with-
out consciousness is absurd. Matter is so far from
being the sole reaUty, of which the self ia only an

E 2


too


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


activity, that, taken by itself, it is not a reality at alL
The only things which have, in any sense, the quahties
attributed to matter, are the sensations experienced by
selves. In place of an independent reality we find events
in men's minds which are real, indeed, but not an inde-
pendent reality. Matter is simply our illegitimate
inference from these events.

This may be put in another way. If my self is one
of the activities of my body, then, since my body is
only events in the life of some conscious being, my
self must also be events in the life of some conscious
being. It is clearly absurd to suppose that I am an
activity of my body, as my body is known to myself,
for then I should be events in my own life. But it is
equally impossible that my self should be one of tho
activities of its own body as perceived by some other
self. In that case the self A would be events in the
life of another self B. But how about B} By the
same rule it also will have to be events in the life of
another self If this self is A, the absurdity will recur
in an aggravated form. For then A would be the
events which happened in a self which was itself events
in A. But if we say that B is events in the life of
a third self C, the same question will arise about C,
and so on without end. If every self is only events in
the life of some other self, no self is explicable until
we have reached the end of an infinite series — that is,
no self is explicable at all. And so we are brought
back to the conclusion that the self cannot be an
activity of its body.

I may be thought to have dwelt unnecessarily on
this point. Surely, it may be said, it is obvious that
the theory that the self is an activity of the body must
fall with the theory of the independent existence of
matter. Surely no one would maintain that the body


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


101


only existed for spirit, and, at the same time, that
spirit was an activity of body. Yet this has been
done. Men of ability have maintained that what I
call matter is nothing but my thoughta and sensations,
and, at the same time, that my thoughts and sensations
are nothing but an activity of my brain — which, being
matter, will itself be thoughts and sensations !

78. The bearing of this discussion on the question
of our immortality is that it disproves a hypothesis
which would render immortality incredible. If the
self was an activity of the body, it would be impossible
that it should continue to exist when the body had
ceased to exist We might as well suppose, in that
case, that the digestion survived the body as that the
self did. But the body, as we have now seen, only
exists for the selves which observe it, and we cannot,
therefore, reduce any self to be an activity of its own
body.

It has been admitted, indeed, that there is reahty
external to myself — the reality which includes the
external part-causes of my sensations — although we
are not justified in regarding that reahty as material
And nothing that we have said excludes the possi-
bility that my self may be a product or activity of
some other reality, and one which is destined to cease
to exist when some change takes place in its cause.

But while this view has not been refuted, there is
not any reason, that I can see, why it should be held
to be true, or even probable. There is no reason why
we should regard our selves as the product or activity
of any other reahty whatever, and there is no reason
why, if we did regard them as such products or
activities, we should consider them likely to cease,'

' It IB cinnmonly held that human selves are not products of
non-divme r«alitias, but that they ar« all produced by God. I have


102


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


If the exteraal reality had been independently exist-
ing matter, it would have been difiFerent. In that case
tliere "would have been, as we saw above, a strong
tendency to regard matter as the only ultimate reality,
and the self as an activity of its body. The tendency
would not be due to a logical necessity, since the facts,
as we have seen, would not be inconsistent with the
hypothesis that spirit and matter were independent,
though connected, realities. But the tendency would
be very strong, owing to our desire to find as much
unity as possible in the universe. If the self is an
independent reality, it is a non-material reaUty. And,
granted the independent existence of matter, more
unity would be gained by denying the independent
reality of spirit. But without independently existing
matter the case is changed. No increased unity is
gained by making the self a mere activity of something
else, unless that something else is already known to
exist and to be of a non-spiritual nature. Indepen-
dently existing matter would, of course, be of a non-
spiritual nature. But, when we have rejected this,
I have no reason to beheve tliat the reality outside
myself is non-spiritual, and so I should gain no in-
creased unity for the universe by denjdng the inde-
pendent reality of my self.

And, again, if the self is an activity of its body, it
must be a temporary activity, since the body is only
a temporary combination of matter. But if the self
were an activity of some non-material reality outside
itself, there would be nothing to disprove the per-
manence of the state of tilings which produces the

given in Chapter VI tlie reasons wliy tbis view does not eeem to
nie to be necessary. But, supposing that they are produced in
this way, we should bave no ground for supposing that tbeit-
divitie production involved th^ir subsequent destruction, though
it is not, of course, incompatible with Buoh destruction.


Human immortalitt

self — though, of course, there would equally be nothing
which proves that permanence.


79. We must now pass on to our second question.
My self cannot be a form of the activity of my body.
But it is still possible that the nature of my self makes
the possession of my present body essential to it.
Granted that the body could not exist except for
knowledge, it may be that the knowledge of my body,
by myself or other selves, is a necessary condition of
the existence of my self. In that case it would be an
inevitable inference that when my body dissolves, and
ceases to be known as a body at all, my self must
have ceased also. If A, whenever it exists, is neces-
sarily accompanied by B, then the cessation of 5 is
a sure sign of the cessation of A.

What evidence is there in fevour of such a view ?
In the first place, while we have plenty of experience
of selves who possess bodies, we have no indubitable
experience of selves who exist without bodies, or after
their bodies have ceased to exist. Besides this, the
existence of a self seems to involve the experience of
sensations. Without them, the self would have no
material for thought, will, or feeling, and it is only in
tliese that the self exists. Now there seems good
reason to suppose that sensations never occur in our
minds at present without some corr^ponding modifiear
tions of the body. This is certainly the case with
normal sensations. And, even if the evidence for
clairvoyance and thought-transference were beyond
dispute, it could never prove the possibiUty of sensa-
tion witliout bodily accompaniments. For it could not
exclude — indeed, it seems rather to suggest — the
existence of bodily accompaniments of an obscure and
unusual kind.


104


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


80. But, after all, these considerations would, at the
most, go to show that some body was necessary to my
self, and not that its present body was necessary.
Have we, after the results already reaehed, any reason
to suppose that the death of the body must indicate
anything more than that the self had transferred ita
manifestations to a new body, and had, therefore,
passed from the knowledge of the survivors, who had
only known it through the old body ? The apparent
improbability of this lies, I think, simply in our
instinctive recurrence to the theory that the self is an
activity of the body. In that case, no doubt, it would
be impossible that it should be successively connected
with two bodies. But that theory we have seen to be
untenable. The most that a body can be is an essential
accompaniment of the self. And then the supposition
that the self has another body would fit the facts quite
as well as the supposition that the self has ceased to
exist.

There seems no reason why such a change should
not be instantaneous. But even if it were not so, no
additional difficulty would be created. If a body is
essential to the action of a self, the self would be in
a state of suspended animation in the interval between
its possession of its two bodies — a state which we
might almost call one of temporary non-exist«nce.
But this is nothing more than what happens, as far
as we can observe, in every case of dreamless sleep.
During such a sleep tlie self, so far as we know, is
unconscious — as unconscious as it could be without
a body. Yet this does not prevent its being the same
man who went to sleep and who woke up again.
Why should the difficult)- be greater in a change of
bodies?

81. And then, have we any reason, after all, to


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


105


suppose that a body is essential to a self? It seems to
me that the facts only support a very diiferent pro-
position—namely, that, while a self has a body, that body
is essentially conneetfid with the selfs mental life.

For example, no self can be conceived as conscious
unless it has sufficient data for its mental activity.
This material is only given, as far as our observations
can go, in the form of sensations, and sensations again,
as far as our observations can go, seem invariably
connected with changes in a body. But it does not
foUow, because a self which has a body cannot get its
data except in connexion with that body, that it would
be impossible for a self without a body to get data in
some other way. It may be just the existence of the
body which makes these otlier ways impossible at
present. If a man is shut up in a house, the trans-
parency of the windows is an essential condition of his
seeing the sky. But it would not be prudent to infer
that, if he walked out of the house, he could not see
the sky because there was no longer any glass through
which he might see it

With regard to the connesion of the brain with
thought, the chief evidence for it appears to be that
diseases or mutilations of the brain affect the course of
thought. But this does not prove that, even while
a man has a brain, his thoughts ai-e directly connected
with it. Many things are capable of disturbing thought,
which are not essential to its existence. For example,
a BuflBciently severe attack of toothache may render
all consecutive abstract thought impossible. But if
the tooth was extracted, I should still be able to think.
And, in the same way, the fact that an abnormal state
of the brain may affect our thoughts does not prove
that the normal states of the brain are necessary for
thought.


106


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


Even if tlie brain is essential to thought while we
have bodies, it would not follow that when we ceased
to have brains we could not think without them. The
same argument applies here as with the oi^ans of
sensa It might be that the present inability of the
self to think except in connexion with the body waa
a limitation which was imposed by the presence of the
body, and which vanished with it

82. We have now considered the two arguments
against the immortality of the self which spring from
the death of the body. But we have said nothing as
to the bearing on this question of stories as to the
ghosts of the dead. Such stories, however numerous
and well authenticated, could never give us any positive
evidence that the self was undying. At the most
they could prove that it survived its body for a few
centuries. But indirectly the evidence could be of
considerable importance. For it might possibly prove
that the self survived the death of its body, Now
the death of its body is by far the strongest reason
that we have for doubting the self s immortaUty. And
if the appearances of ghosts could prove that this
reason had no weight, they would have removed the
greatest difficulty in the way of the behef.

Much of the evidence offered on this subject is
doubtless utterly untrustworthy. But there is a good
deal which investigation has failed to break down.
And there is much to be said in support of the view
that, after all deductions have been made for fraud,
error, and coincidence, there is still a sufficient rasi-
duum to justify the belief that such apparitions are in
some cases due to the action of tlie dead man whose
body they represent.

But the mere proof that there was this caasal con-
nexion between the dead man and the apparition


HUMAX IMMORTALITY


107


would not suffice to prove that the dead man had
survived his death. A chain of effects may exist long
after its original cause is destroyed. Chatham may
be one of the chief causes of the pride which England
excites in an Englishman to-day, but this proves
nothing as to Chatham's present existence. And, as
far as I know, all stories of apparitions would be
equally well explained by the theory that a man
might, before his death, initiate a chain of circum-
stances which would cause his apparition to appeai",
after his death, under certain conditions, to men still
alive. In this case, nothing would be proved about
his existence after death.

This may appear improbable. But, on the other
hand, any attempt to prove empirically that man could
survive death would have to struggle with such an
enormous mass of negative evidence that its ante-
cedent improbability would also not be small. In-
vestigation may give ns more evidence, and evidence
incompatible with any theory except that of survival.
But at present it seems to me that we have much
more chance of proving our immortahty by meta-
physics than by psychical research.


83. We now come to the third question. Is there
any reason to suppose that my self does not share
the transitory character which I recognize in all the
material objects around me ?

What exactly is this transitory character? When
science says that a material object — a planet, or a
human body — ceases to exist, what does it mean ? It
does not mean that anything is anniliilated. It means
that units, which were combined in a certain way, are
now combined otherwise. The form has changed.
But everything which was there before is there now.


108


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


We need not inquire whether this distinction be*
tween an unchanging matter and a changing fomi can
have more than a rough approximate correctness. It
is sufficient to note that the analogy of science — what-
ever weight may be attached to it — does not give us
reason to suppose anything to be transitory except
combinations. '

84. la the self a combination? It certainly re-
sembles a combination in one respect, for it is dif-
ferentiated and contains a plurality. We can have
different sensations at the same moment, and sensations,
thoughts, and desires can exist simultaneously. But it
does not follow from this that a self is a combination.
For if a whole is a combination it is built up of parts
which could exist without being combined in that
way, while the combination could not exist without
them. If the bricks of a wall, for instance, were
destroyed, the wall would be destroyed too. But the
wall might be destroyed by being taken to pieces,
and the bricks would remain unchanged.

Do the parts of the self stand in this relation to it?
Could my thoughts, my volitions, my emotions, exist
isolated, or in new combinations, when my self had
ceased to exist? It seems clear to me— the point is
too ultimate for discussion — that they cannot. It is
inconceivable tliat a thought, a sensation, a volition,
or an emotion should exist outside of a self. And it
is inconceivable that the same thought, sensation,
volition, or emotion which was once part of my mind
could ever be part of somebody else's. The self, we

' I do not mean to imply that scieDce Dec«ssarily accepts any
utiitfi as indivisible and imperishable. My point is that it tells us
that whatever does perish dues su only by the sepanitiou of the
parts of which it is composed. Those parts may themselves b«
combinations. Thus it is possible that they may perish, and t>o
on ait infinitum. But uothing poilshee but combinations.


HUMAN IMMORTALITY


109


must say, is complex, but not a compound. It has
parts, but it is not built up out of them. For, while
it depends on them, they depend just as much on it.

The self, therefore, cannot cease by the separation
of its parts. For its parts only exist as united in it,
and therefore could not separate from it. If it did
cease to exist, it could only be by annihilation. It is
not only that the form would have changed, but that
the form and content alike would have perished.

Now there is no analogy in science to suggest the
probabihty of this. For science treats nothing as
perishable except combinations. This, indeed, does
not give us any safe analogy for the persistence of the
self. In the first place, there is reason to doubt the
absolute validity of the distinction between content
and form, which science finds it convenient to make.
And, in the second place, the dififereuce between a self
and matter is too great for an analogy from one to the
other to be very conclusive. But at any rate science
gives no analogy against us.

85. All this still leaves us very far from a positive
assertion of immortaUty. Even though the death of
the body is no argument for the destruction of the
self, and the self cannot be decomposed into its parts,
it is still possible that the self should not be inunortal.
And this view has been held in many systems of
idealism. It may be maintained, for example, that
finite individuals only exist to carry out some divine
purpose, and that it is possible that an indi^'idual may
cease to be necessary for such a purpose, and so cease
to exist. This was Lotze's view. Or again, it may
be maintained that there is something contradictory
in the idea of a self, which prevents us from regarding
it as an adequate expression of reahty, and that there-
fore there is no reason to suppose that any particular


^10


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


self shares the eternity which is characteristic of true
reality.

To meet such doubts as these it would be necesBary
to construct a complete metaphysical system. We
should have to determine what was the general nature
of all reality, and whether that nature involved the^
existence of finite selves. And if in this way we
reached the conclusion that the existence of finite
selves was eternally necessary, the question would
arise whether each self was eternal, or whether, on
the other hand, there was an unending succession of
transitory selves. And, if the former alternative were
accepted, we should have to consider the relation
between eternity and immortality. All that I have
endeavoured to do here has been to show that the
more obvious arguments against immortality — those
which have most weight with most people — have no
validity.

In spite of all ailments, however, the idea that the
self cannot be immortal continually returns to us.
Reflection may drive it away, but in unreflective
moments it besets us again. We seem so small, and
the transitory seems so great. It is always hard —
there are times when it seems impossible — to be-
lieve that each of us can be a permanent element
in a universe in which nations and planets are but
momentary shapes.

And the belief in immortality seems all the more
incredible when we consider many of the believers.
Many people believe in it because they wish it to be
true, their desires blinding their judgements. Many
believe in it on the authority of some rehgion claiming
to be revealed — most of which must, on any hypothesis,
be untrustworthy. It is illogical to conclude that a
behef cannot be true because it has generally been


HUMAN IMMORTALITT 111

believed for mistaken reasons, but it is difficult, in
practice, to keep our distrust from spreading from the
reasons to the belief. Yet I think that reasons for
the belief in immortality may be found of such strength
that they should prevail over all difficulties.


CHAPTER IV


HUMAN PRE-EXJSTENCE


86. In thia chapter I wish to point out some reasons
for thinking that, if men are immortal, it is more prob-
able that the beginning of the present life, in which each
of us finds himself now, was not the beginning of his
whole existence, but that he lived before it, as he will
live after it. I wish, then, to consider the explanation
which this theory, if true, would afford of some of the
facts of our experience, and to consider what would
be the practical value of such immortality as it can
offer us.

The present attitude of moat western thinkers to
the doctrine of pre-existence is curious. Of the many
who regard our life after the death of our bodies as
certain or probable, scarcely one regai-ds our hfe before
the birth of those bodies as a possibility which deserves
discussion.' And yet it was taught by Buddha and
by Plato, and it is usually associated with the belief
in immortaUty in the far east. Why should men who
are ao anxious to-day to prove that we shall live after
this life is ended regard the hypothesis that we have
already survived the end of a life as one which is
beneath consideration ?

The explanation of this, I suppase, ia that in modem
western thought the great support of the belief in
immortality has been the Christian religion. Under

' Lotze, for example, treats it as a seriouB objection to a
particular argument for immortality, that it would lead to the
' strange and improbable ' coDclueioD of pre-esiatence. Metaphysic,
Section 24S.


HUMAN PRE-EXISTENCE


113


these circumstances a form of the belief which was
never supported by that religion was not likely to be
considered of any importance. And, for some reason,
Christians have almost unanimously rejected those
theories which placed pre-esistence by the side of
inunortahty, although there seems nothing in pre-
existence incompatible with any of the dogmas
which are generally accepted as fundamental to
Christianity.


87. The most effective way of proving that the
doctrine of pre-existenee is bound up with the doctrine
of immortality would be to prove directly that the
nature of man was such that it involved a life both
before and after the present life. But, as I said at the
beginning of the last chapter, such a demonstration, if
it is possible at all, as I believe it to be, would be far
beyond the scope of this book, since it would involve
a determination of some of the most fundamental
characteristics of reality.

I must content myself with stating in a more general
manner my grounds for believing that any evidence
which will prove immortality will also prove pre-
existence. There are two ways in which a proof of
immortality may be attempted. The first is the
directly metaphysical way. We may attempt to show
that the nature of man is such that he cannot cease to
exist wlule the univeree continues to exist ; or that his
nature is eternal, and that an eternal nature cannot
have an end in time ; or pursue some similar line of
argument.

In this case it seems to me that, if we succeed in
proving immoriiality, it will be by means of considera*
tions which would also prove pre-existence. I do not
see how existence in future time could be sho^m to


114


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


be necessary in the case of any being whose existence
in past time is admitted not to be necessary. If the
universe got on without mc a hundred years ago, what
reason could be given for denying that it might get on
without me a hundred years hence ? Or if it is con*
sistent with my eternal nature that its temporal mani-
festation should begin at some point in time, could we
find any reason for supposing that the cessation of that
manifestation at some point in time would be incon-
sistent with that nature ? I do not see of wliat kind
sucli a reason could be, nor do I know of any attempt
that has been made to establish one.

88. There is another way in which attempts have
been made to prove immortality. This consists in
demonstrating that the universe is the work of a
benevolent creator, or has a purpose harmonious with
our ideals of morality, and then arguing that the
absence of immortality would be inconsistent with the
benevolence of such a creator, or with such a moral
purpose. Ai'guments of this type would prove immoi^
tality more readily than they could prove pre-existence.
Ho v^ong can be done to the non-existent, and it could
hai-dly be made a reproach to the goodness of the uni-
verse that it had waited a long time before it produced
a particular person. But, once produced, any person
has certain moral claims, and if it could be shown that
his annihilation was inconsistent with those claims,
■we could argue from the goodness of the universe to
the impossibility of his annihilation.

Can we, however, validly conclude from the good-
ness of the universe to the impossibility of a particular
evil ? It cannot be denied that some evil does exist.
The ultimate nature of reality, then, is not incompatible
■with the existence of some evil. And when this is
once admitted, can we hope for an a priori proof that


HUMAN PRE-EXISTENCE


115


any particular evil is too bad to be consistent with the
nature of the luiiverse? It seems to me that we
cannot, and that we must therefore reject all argu-
ments which attempt to prove that a tiling is unreal
because it would be evil

We may call argiunents of this sort ethical, since
they involve the conception of the good. Modem
demonstrations of immortality have almost always
been of this character, and are not purely metaphysical,
and this explains why it has often been held in modern
times that immortality was proved, although pre-
existence has almost always been disbeheved. Even
the arguments of the eighteenth century, which were
attacked by Kant, had an ethical element in them.
Their supporters endeavoured, indeed, to prove by
purely metaphysical considerations that the nature of
man's spirit was such that it could not be destroyed
in the ordinary course of nature. But they held that
each man had been created by an act of the divine
will, and they admitted that a similar act could destroy
him. In order to show that God never would will
to destroy a man whom he had once created, they
either fell back on the asserted evidence of revelation,
or contended that such destruction would be incon-
sistent with what we knew of God's moral character,
in which case their argument had passed over into the
ethical class.

If, as I have maintained, ethical ailments of this
sort are invahd, we are forced back on the purely
metaphysical arguments, and here we seem unable to
treat the past and the future differently. My conclu-
sion is, then, that any demonstration of immortality
is likely to show that each of us exists through all
time — past and future — whether time is held to be
finite or iohnite.

I 2


116


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


89. We must now inquire what consequences would
follow from the truth of pre-existenee and immortality.
Each man would have at least three lives, his present
life, one before it, and one after it It seems more
probable, however, that this would not be all, and that
his existence before and after his present life would in
each case be divided into many lives, each bounded by
birth and death. This doctrine of a plurality of future
lives and of past Hves may be conveniently referred to
as the doctrine of plurality of lives.'

90. There is much to be said for the view that a
plurality of lives would be the most probable alterna-
tive, even on a theory of immortality which did not
include pre^xistence. We do not know what is the
cause which produces the limitation of our present
lives by birth and death, but some cause there must
be, and a cause which produces so important an effect
ia one which plays a great part in our existence, as
long as it continues to act.

If we accept immortality and reject a plurality of
lives — and this is the most common opinion, though
plurahty of lives is accepted more frequently than pre-
existenee — we must hold that the causes, whatever
they are, which operate on each of us so as to cause
his death once, will never operate again on any of us
through all future time. This is, of course, not
impossible. The true nature of death may be such
that there i.s no need, and no possibility, of its repeti-
tion. But I do not see that we have any reason to
believe this to be even probable.

* In one sense, of courso, a belief in pre-existence and immor-
tality is itself a itelief in a plurality of lives, since it is a belief in
three at least. But it will, I think, be more convenient to reserve
the name for tiie belief mentioned above— that for each of us
existence on either side of the present life would be divided into
more lives than one.


HUMAN PRE-EXISTENCE


117


It is quite clear that a life wliich stretched on
unendingly without death would in many respects be
enormously different from our present lives. An
attempt to imagine how our present hves would be
transformed if neither we ourselves, nor our fellow
men, had in future any chance of death, will make
this evident. A believer in immortahty who denies,
or regards as improbable, the doctrine of the plurality
of lives, must assert, or regai'd as probable, that the
death which ends his present life for each of us will
change profoundly and permanently the conditions
of all future life. And for this there seems no
justification.

If we are immortal, the value of our existence
either remains permanently at about its present level,
or rises or falls after death. In the first case, we
should have no reason to suppose that it was so
changed that death would not rociu-. As I have said,
it is not impossible that it should be so. But when
anything has a particular characteristic, the presump-
tion is that, if that thing continues to exist, its
characteristic will not suddenly vary. The presump-
tion is certainly not strong, and it can give us no firm
belief. But it is, I think, sufficient to render it rather
more probable that the characteristic of periodic
mortality will not be left behind at the end of our
present lives.

91. I do not think that this would bo very generally
denied. Tlie denial of the plurality of lives is generally
based on the belief that our lives do not remain at the
same level after death. It is not because men have
died once that it is held that they cannot die again.
It is because it is beUeved that after death they are in
heaven or hell, the one much above the level of
earthly life, the other much below it. It is contended


118 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


that the change efFootcd in this maimer renders further
de^iths improbable. This is especially maintained with
regard to heaven.

It might be admitted that a state of absolute perfec-
tion would render further death improbable. But
even the best men are not, when they die, in such
a state of intellectual and moral perfection as would
fit them to enter heaven immediately, if heaven is
taken as a state of absolute perfection which renders
all fiirther improvement umiecessary and impossible.
This is generally recognized, and one of two alter-
natives is commonly adopted to meet it. The first is
that some tremendous improvement — an improvement
out of all proportion to any which can ever be observed
in life — takes place at the moment of death, at any
rate in the case of those who die imder certain condi-
tioas. For this, so far as I know, there are no argu-
ments. The other and more probable alternative is
that the process of gradmil improvement can go on
in each of us after the death of our present bodies.

But if our existence immediately after our present
life is imperfect, and a state of improvement and
advance, it has not yet reached that absolute perfection
which might make future deaths improbable. And it
seems to me that the natural inference from this view
— though it is not drawn by the majority of those who
hold it— is that this life will be followed by others
like it, each separated from its predecessor and
successor by death and re-birth. For otherwise we
should be limited to the hypothesis that a process of
development, begun in a single Ufe bounded by death,
should be continued as an indefinitely long life not
divided by birth and death at all. And to suppose,
\vithout any reason, such a change from the order of
our present experience seems unjustifiable.


HUMAN PKE-EXLSTENCE


119


Should any persons be destined to attain a state of
great and ponnanont degradation, there would be still
less reason for supposing that this would exclude all
death from their future existence. Death may possibly
be incompatible with absolute perfection, but it haa no
characteristic which can be suggested aa incompatible
with the extreme of human degradation. In addition
to this we may urge, as in the case of heaven, that it
is unreasonable to suppose an extreme change at the
moment of death, and that, even if the completed
degradation was likely to exclude death, there could
be no reason for supposing that the process towards
it would do HO from tlie first.

92. Again, processes begun in this life are some-
times finished in it, and sometimes left incomplete.
We continually find that death leaves a fault without
a retribution, a retribution without a repentance, a pre-
paration witliout an achievement, while in other cases,
where the life haa lasted longer, a similar process ia
complete between birth and death. If men survive
death, we must expect that these processes, when
not worked out before death, will be worked out in
a future life. And if the content of our existence after
death haa so much similarity, in essential features,
with the content of our present hves, the presumption
is increased that they have not changed so far aa to
have shaken off the necessity of periodical death.'

93. There seems, therefore, good reason for regard-
ing plurality of lives as tlie least improbable alter-
native, even if we accept immortality without accepting
pre-existence. But if pre-existence is also accepted,
the case for a plurality of lives becomes stronger. For
then the death which alters ray present life is no longer
an unique event in my existence. One hfe, if no more,

' Oa this subject we may refer to Browning's Etxli/n Hope.


120


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


came to an end for me before my present life could
begin. Thus any theory would be false which should
try to reject the plurality of lives on the ground that
it was probable that death could only occur once in
a man's existenca And the pluraUty of lives could
only be regarded as improbable, if there was reason
to suppose that an event, which happened twice in
a man's existence, would never happen a third
time. Now while it might be contended — though, as
I have said, I do not think it could be rightly con-
tended — that there were features about death which
made it probable it would onJy occur once in a man's
existence, it is difficult to see the sUghtest ground for
the su^estion that there is anything about death
which should make it improbable that it should occur
three times, although it was known that it occurred
twice. We can only accept immortaUty and pre-
existence, wliile rejecting the plurahty of lives, if we
hold that the causes which break off a life by a death,
after remaining dormant from the beginning of our
existence, act twice within an interval of from five
minutes to about a hundred years, and then never act
again through aU future time.

The result seems to be that, even granting that pre-
existence is certain, there can be no absolute demon-
stration of plurahty of lives, but that the plurality of
lives is the more probable supposition in any case,
and is still more probable on the hypothesis of pre-
existence.

94. There are various features of our present life
which can be explained more satisfactorily on the
theory of pre-existence than on any other. I do not,
however, wish to suggest that the ease of explaining
them on this hypothesis, or the difficulty of explaining
them without it, is so great as to form any proof of


HUMAN PKE-EXISTENCE


121


the doctrine of pre-existence. That doctrine, I believe,
can only be proved by metaphysical arguments of the
type mentioned at the begi nni ng of this chapter.

The most important of these features is to be found
in personal relations. Two people who have seen but
little of each other are often drawn togetiier by a force
equal to that which is generated in other cases by
years of mutual trust and mutual assistance.

The significance of this fact has been, I think, very
much underrated.' It is genei-ally explained, when
any attempt at explanation is made, by the capricious-
ness of sexual desire. This explanation is inadequate,
because the fact to be explained is found with as great
proportional frequency in friendships which have no
connexion with sexual desire.

On the theory of pre-existence such relations would
naturally be explained by the friendships of past hves.
The love which comes at first sight, and the love which
grows up through many years in this life, would be
referred to similar causes, whose similarity woidd
account for the sinnlarity of the effects. Each would
have arisen through long intimacy, and the only dif-
ference between them would be that in one case the
intimacy had been suspended by death and re-birth.

95. Again, as a man grows up certain tendencies
and qualities make themselves manifest in him. They
cannot be entirely due to his environment, for they


' The same may be said of all facte connected with the love
of one particular human boing for another. Philosophy and
theology, whein they profess to take men's love aeriously, generally
confine it either to a love for God, or to a passion for mankind as
a whole. It is rarely that the writings of a phOo9opher or a
theologian find anything in a young man's love for hia aweelheart
except a mixture of sexual desire and folly, or anything in a young
man's love for his comrade except folly pure and simple. Hegel
is, I think, to be regarded as an exception. Possibly, also, the
writer of the first epistle of St. John.


122


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


are often very different ia people whose environment
has been very similar. We call these the man's
natural character, and assume that he came into life
with it. Such tendencies and quahties, since they are
not due to anything which happens after birth may be
called innate, as far as the present life is concerned.

Now when we look at the natural characters of
men, we find that in many cases they possess quahties
strongly r€)sembling those which) as wo learn by direct
experience, can be produced in the course of a single
life. One man seems to start with an impotence to
resist some particular temptation which exactly re-
sembles the impotence which has been produced in
another man by continual yielding to the same
temptation. One man, again, has through life a calm
and serene virtue which another gains only by years
of strenuous effort. Others again have innate powers
of judging character, or of acting with decision in
emergencies, which give them, while yet inex-
perienced, advantages to which less fortunate men
attain, if they attain to them at all, only by the ex-
perience of years. Here then we have characteristics
which are bom with us, and which closely resemble
characteristics which, in other cases, we know to bo
due to the condensed results of experience. K we
hold the doctrine of pre-exiatence, we shall naturally
explain these also as being the condensed results of ex-
perience — in this case, of experience in an earher life.

96. But, it may be said, can we not explain these
features of our hfe quite as well by means of the
theory of heredity, without accepting pre-esistence ?
In the case of personal relations, I do not see that
heredity would help us at all. I have admitted that
it is not impossible to explain the facts otherwise than
by pre-existence. The attraction may be simply due


HUMAN PKE-EXISTENCE


123


to something in the character of each of the two
persons, though in many cases we cannot see what
that something could be. And then it is possible
that the element in question has been produced by
heredity. But there is nothing in heredity which
should make it likely that it should produce this result
rather than another, and so the abstract possibility that
the attraction is due to some undetected element in the
two characters is not increased by the suggestion that
the characters were produced by heredity. On the
theory of pre^xistence, however, we can regard the
efTocts as produced by a course which would be likely
to produce this result rather than another — that is, by
relations formed in an earlier life.

Heredity, however, can produce a more satisfactory
explanation of innate aptitudes. My ancestors can-
not — if pre-existence is false — have loved my friend,
and therefore there is nothing in the fact that I inherit
from them that explains my loving him at first sight.
But my ancestors may have yielded to certain sins,
or resisted them, or practised certain activities, and
then, supposing that I can inherit the results which
they have acquired,' there would be a reason why
I should have an innate strength or weakness in
certain directions, which closely resembled similar
characteristics which other men have acquired by
their own action in the course of their present lives.

We must, however, remember that such innate
dispositions often occur in eases where nothing of the
sort can be traced among the ancestors — even if, as
sometimes happens, the ancestors themselves can be
traced for many generations back. It is possible, no
doubt, that the acquirement of some more remote

' The possibility of this, however, is, to say the least, highly
tincertain.


124 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


ancestor may have remained dormant through the
intervening generations and Iiave now re-appeared,
but the explanation is naturally much less probable
than it is in the cases where the ancestral acquirement
is known to have existed.

But, as I have said, while I regard the explanation
of these facts by pre-existence as better than any
which can be offered without it, I do not regard the
superiority of the explanation as sufficient to give by
itself any appreciable probabihty to pre-existence,
which, if established at all, must be established by
more directly metaphysical arguments.

97. Whether acquired qualities cau be inherited or
not, there is no doubt that there is a certain tendency
for men — not merely their bodies, but themselves —
to rasemble their ancestors. And it may be thought
that this would be an objection to our theory of pre-
existence. If a man's character is determined by his
previous lives, how can it be also detennined by the
character of the ancestors by whose bodies his body
was generated?

There is, however, no real difficulty here. We may
have reason to believe that a man's character resembles
to some extent that of his ancestors, but it would be
impossible to demonstrate, and there is no reason to
beheve, that there are no elements in it which could
not be derived from that source. On the other hand,
the doctrine of pre-existence does not compel us to
deny all influence on a man's cliaracter of the characters
of his ancestors. The character which a man has at
any time is modified by any circumstances which
happen to liim at that time, and may well be modified
by the fact tliat his re-birth is in a body descended
from ancestors of a particular cliaracter.

88. Thus the two ways in which the character in


lN PRE-EXISTENCE


125


this life is said to be determined need not be incon-
sistent, since they can both co-operate in the deter-
mination, the tendencies inherited with the body
modifying the character as it was left at the end of
the previous life. But there is no impossibility in
supposing that the characteristics in which we resemble
the ancestors of our bodies, may be to some degree
characteristics due to our previous lives. In walking
through the streets of London, it is extremely rare to
meet a man whose liat shows no sort of adaptation to
his head. Hats in general fit their wearers with far
greater accuracy than they would if each man's hat
were assigned to him by lot. And yet there is very
seldom any causal connexion between the shape of the
head and the shape of the hat. A man's head is never
made to fit his hat, and, in the great majority of cases,
his hat is not made to fit his head. The adaptation
comes about by each man selecting, from hats made
without any special reference to his particular head,
the hat which will suit his particular head best.

Tliis may help us to see that it would be possible to
hold that a man whose nature had certain character-
istics when he was about to be re-born, would be re-
bom in a body descended from ancestoi-s of a similar
character. His character when re-bom would, in this
case, be decided, as far as the points in question went,
by his character in his previous life, and not by the
character of the ancestors of his new body. But it
would be the character of the ancestors of the new
body, and its similarity to his character, which deter-
mined the fact that he was re-born in that body rather
than another. The shape of the head — to go back to
our analogy — does not determine the shape of the hat,
but it does determine the selection of this particular
hat for this particular head.


126 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


But how, it may be asked, would each person, in
this case, be brought into connexion with the new
body that is most appropriate to him ? I do not sgg
any difficulty here. We know that various substances
wliich have chemical affinities for one another will meet
and combine, separating themselves, to do so, from
other substances with which they have been previously
in connexion. And we do not find anything so sti'ange
or paradoxical in this result as to make us unwilling
to recognize its truth. There seems to me to be
nothing more strange or paradoxical in the suggestion
that each person enters into connexion with the body
which ia most fitted to be connected with him.

90. And, if there were any difficulty in this suppo-
sition, it is a difficulty which would be just as serious
for the theory adopted by most beUevers in immortality
who reject pre-existence. If no man existed before
the formation of his present body, the question still
aiises — how did lie become connected with a body such
that his chai'acter resembles the characters of the
ancestors of that body ? The question would not aiiae
if we supposed that the whole character of the self
was simply produced by the body. But this is not
the ordinaiy view. Indeed, it would be difficult to
hold this without also holding that the self, as well as
its character, was produced by the body. And such
a view as this would be all but incompatible — if not
quite incompatible — with the beUef in immortality.

Again, the question of how the connexion is deter-
mined, might be considered to have been answered if
it were held that the parents created the new person
at the time that they generated the body. I will not
discuss the difficulties which, as it seems to me, ai-e
involved in this view, since I am dealing with the
consequences of pre-existence, and not with the


HUMAN PRE-EXISTENCE


127


thooriea which deny it It is sufficient to remai'k here
that this is not the view most generally adopted.
The common behef is that tlie person i3 created, not
by the pai-ents of his body, but directly by the supreme
power of the universe.

And then the question still remains — how does this
person get into connexion ■witli the appropriate body,
since they come into existence independently ? It
seems that there are only two alternatives. It may
be said tliat the connexion is due to a special act of
divine providence in each case. But, if it is legitimate
to invoke such a special act at all, it is surely just as
legitimate to invoke it to make a connexion for a pre-
viously existing person as for a newly created person.
Or else it may be said that the appropriate connexion
is brought about by some general law. And there can
be no greater difficulty in supposing such a law to act
on persons who liad previously existed than in sup-
posing it to act on persons newly created. The diffi-
culty, therefore, if there is one, is no greater for those
who accept pre-existeuce than for those who deny it.


100. Is the truth of pre-existence desirable ? How
much would an immortality be worth to us which
was coupled with pre-existeuce ? The most serious
objection relates to memory. We do not now re-
member anything of any previous life. If, neverthe-
less, we have lived previously, and have forgotten it,
there seems no reason to expect that we shall remember
our present life during subsequent lives. Now an
existence that is cut up into separate lives, in none of
which memory extends to a previous life, may be
thought to have no practical value. We might as
well be mortal, it has been said, as be immortal with-
out a memory beyond the present life. The question


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


becomes more serious if not only pr&«xiBtence, but
also the plurality of lives is true. For then it might
reasonably be feared that we might lose memory, not
only twice in our existence, but an indefinitely large
number of times.

Sometimes, indeed, it has been asserted that such
a state would not be immortality at all. Without
memory of my present life, it is said, my future Ufa
would not be mine. If memory ceases at the death of
my body, I cease with it, and I am not immortal.

If each life had no continuity with its successors,
and no effect on them, then indeed there would be
little meaning, if any, in calling them lives of the same
person. But we cannot suppose that this could be the
case. If the same self passes througli lives, any change
which happens to it at any time must aifoct its state in
the time immediately subsequent, and, through this, in
all future time. Death and re-biith, no doubt, are of
sufficient importance to modify a character consider-
ably, but they could only act on what was already
present, and the nature with which each individual
starts in any life would be moulded by his experiences
and actions in the past. And this is sufficient to make
the identity between the different lives real.

101. It has also been objected that the re-birth of
a person without a memory of his previous life, would
be exactly equivalent to the annihilation of that person
and the creation of a new person of exactly similar
chai"acter. (By this it is not meant that the new
person would be exactly similar te the old one at the
moment of the latter's annihilation, but that he would
be exactly similar to what tho old person would have
been if he had undei^one the process of re-birth.)
Now, it is argued, I should not regard myself as
immortal if I knew that I was to be annihilated at


HUMAN PRE-EXISTENCE


129


death, even if I knew that an exactly similar person
would then be created. And therefore, it is concluded,
re-birth without memory cannot be considered as real
immortality of the self.

But the objection supposes an impossibihty. There
could not be another self which would have a character
exactly similar to what mine would have been under
exactly similar circumstances. The self is not a ' thing
in itself ', whose nature is independent of ita quahties.
The self is a substance with attributes, and it has no
nature except to express itself in its attributes. If the
character of the new self, under certain circumstances,
were exactly similar to my character under the same
circumstances, its attributes would be exactly similar
to my attributes. Then the substance also would be
the same, and I should not be annihilated at alL'
But if there were a new self, then the difference
between the selves must be expressed by some differ-
ence in the attributes. Then the new self would not
be of exactly similar character to what I should have
been under the same circumstances, and therefore the
creation of a new self would not be exactly equivalent
to my rebirth. Thus exact similarity of attributes is
always sufficient to prove personal identity, not because
it would be sufficient if the substance were ditferent,
but because it proves that the substance is the same.

' It will be seen that I am assuming here Ihut there cannot he
two different subatances with exactly similar attributes. It does
not lie within the scope of this book to discua^i this principle,
commonly known as ihe Identity of Indiscernibles. It is
sufficient for our present purpose to remark that the principle
ia accepted by most philosophers of the present day. And those
who deny it, and assert that tilings which are exactly similar
may yet be numericaOy differfint, would not bold that the
Annihilation of one thing and the creation of another could be
exactly equivalent to the continuance of the first, even though
the second was exactly similar to Ihd tirst. For, although ezacUy
similar, they would be numericidly different.

K


180


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


102. We may say then that, in epite of the loss of


it is the


memory, It 18 tiie same person who lives in tne succes-
sive lives. But has such immortality as this any value
for the person who is immortal ?

I do not propose to discuss whether any immortahty
has any value. Some people maintain that all human
existence is evil, however favourable the conditions.
Others regard existence as of such value that they
would be prepared to choose hell rather than annihila-
tion. Among those who differ less violently, some
regard the life of the average man on earth at present
as of positive value, while others will only regard it a.'*
valuable if it is the necessary preparation for a better
life which is to follow. Such differences as to the value
of life must obviously produce great differences as to
the value of its unending prolongation. All that
I shall maintain here is that the loss of memory need
not render inmiortahty valueless if it would not have
been valueless witliout the loss of memory.

If existence beyond the present life is not expected
to improve, and yet immortaUty is regarded as valu-
able, it must be because a Kfe no better than this is
looked on as possessing value. Now it is certain that
in this life we remember no previous lives, whether
it be because we have forgotten them, or because there
have been none to remember. And if this life has
value without any memory beyond itself, why should
not future Uves have value without memory beyond
themselves ? In that case a man will be better off for
his immortality, since it will give him an unlimited
amoimt of valuable existence, instead of a limited
amount. And a man who beUeved that he had this
immortality would have a more desirable expectation
of the future than if he did not believe it. If, indeed,
a man should say that he takes no more interest in his


HUMAN PRE-EXISTENCE


131


own fate, after memory of his present life had gone,
than he would take in the fate of some miknown pei--
son, I do not see how he could be shown to be in the
wrong. But I do not beheve that most men would
agree with him, and to most men, therefore, the pros-
pect of a continuance of valuable existence, even with
the periodical loss of memory, would still seem to be
desirable.

103. But desire for inmioi'tahty is not only, or
chiefly, because it will give us more Hie like our
present life. Its attraction is chiefly for those people
who believe that the future life will be, at any rate for
many of us, a great improvement on the present.
Heaven is longed for, not merely because it vdH be
unending, but because it will be heaven.

Now it might be said that our chief ground for
hoping for a pi-ogreesive improvement after death
would be destroyed if memory periodically ceased.
Death, it might bo argued, would not only remove us
from the iield of our activity, but would deprive us of
all memory of what we had done, and therefore what-
ever was gained in one life would be lost at death.
We could no more hope for a peimanent improvement
than a man on the treadmill can hope to end higher
than he started.

We are not discussing the chance of future progress,
but only the relative chance of auch progress if memory
ceases at death. We must ask, therefore, what
elements of value are carried on by memory fi'om the
present to tho future. And tlien we must consider
whether they can be carried on without memory.

I think I shall be in agreement with most people
when I say that memory is chiefly of value in our hves
in three ways. In the first place, it may make us
wiser. The events which we have seen, and tiie

K 2


182


SOME DOGMAS OT" RELIGION


conclusions at which we have arrived, may be pre-
served in memory, and so add to our present know-
ledge. In the second place, it may make us more
virtuous. The memory of a temptation, whether it
has been resisted or auceessfiil, may under various
circumstances help us in resisting present temptation.
In the third place, it may tell us that people with
whom we are now related are the people whom we
have loved in the past, and this may enter as an
element into our present love of them.

The value of memory, then, is that by its means the
past may serve the wisdom, the virtue, and the love of
the present. If the past could help the present in
a like manner without the aid of memory, the absence
of memory need not destroy the chance of an improve-
ment spreading over many lives.

104. Let us consider wisdom first. Can we be
wiser by reason of something which we have for-
gotten ? Unquestionably we can. Wisdom is not
merely, or chiefly, amassed facts, or even recorded
judgements. It depends primarily on a mind quaUfied
to deal with facts, and to form judgements. Now the
acquisition of knowledge and experience, if wisely
conducted, may strengthen the mind. Of that we
have sufficient evidence in this life. And so a man
who dies after acquii'ing knowledge — and all men
acquire some — might enter his new hfe, deprived
indeed of his knowledge, but not deprived of the
increased strength and delicacy of mind which he had
gained m acquiring the knowledge. And, if so, he
will be wiser in the second life because of what has
luippened in the first.

Of course he loses something in losing the actual
knowledge. But it is sufficient if he does not lose alL
Most progress is like the advance of a tide, whose


HUMAN PRE-EXISTENCE


133


waves advance and retreat, but do not retreat as far as
they advanced. And is not even this loss really a gain ?
For the mere accumulation of knovrledge, if memory
never ceased, would soon become overwhelming, and
worse than useless. What better fate could we
wish for than to leave such accumulations behind
us, preserving their greatest value in the mental
faculties which have been strengthened by their
acquisition.

lOB. With virtue the point is perhaps clearer. For
the memory of moral experiences is of no value to
virtue except in so far as it helps to form the moral
character, and, if this is done, the loss of the memory
would be no loss to virtua Now we cannot doubt
that a character may remain determined by an event
which has been forgotten. I have foi^tten the
greater number of the good and evil acts which I have
done in my present Ufe. And yot each must have
left a trace on my character. And so a man may
carry over into his next life the dispositions and
tendencies which he has gained by the moral contests
of this lite, and the value of those experiences will not
have been destroyed by the death which has destroyed
the memory of them.

106. There remains love. The problem here is
more important, if, as I believe, it is in love, and in
nothing else, that we find not only the supreme value
of life, but also the supreme x'eality of life, and, indeed,
of the universe. The gain which the memory of the
past gives us here is that the memory of past love for
any person can strengthen our present love of him.
And this is what must be preserved, if the value of
past love is not to be lost. The knowledge we acquire,
and the efforts wliich wo make, are directed to ends
not themselves. But love has no end but itself. If it


134 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

has gone, it helps xis little that we keep anytliing
it has brought us.

But past hours of love are past, whether we re-
member them or not. Yet we do not count their value
to be lost, since their remembrance makes the love
of the present stronger and deeper. Now we know
that present love can be stronger and deeper because
of past love which we have forgotten. Much has been
forgotten in any friendship which has lasted for
several years within the limits of a single life — many
confidences, many services, many hours of happiness
and sorrow. But they have not passed away without
leaving their mark on the present. They contribute,
though they are forgotten, to the present love which
is not forgotten. In the same way, if the whole
memory of the love of a life is swept away at death,
its value is not lost if the same love is stronger in
a new life because of what passed before.

Thus what is won in one life may be preserved in
another, if the people who love in the first life love the
same people in the second, and if their love is greater
in the second because it was there in the first. Have
we any ground to hope that these two conditions will
be fulfilled?

107. Let us take the first. We shall, if my theory
is right, have many lives — perhaps many milhons of
lives, and perhaps an infinite number. Now if the
fact that I loved a person in this life gave me no
reason to suppose that I should love him in any
other, then the whole value of love would be as much
confined to a single life as if there were no immortality.
And in that case it might perhaps be said that the
value of life was equally confined, and that immor-
tality, though real, was worthless.

The chance of a love recurring in any futm*e life,


HUMAN PRE-EXISTENCE


185


must depend primarily on the conditions which deter-
mine where and how the lovers are born in the future
life. For if memory does not survive death, it will be
impossible for love to occur in any life iii which
people do not meet. If the conditions which deter-
mine the circumstances of our birth, and through them
our juxtapositions throughout life, were themselves
determined by chance, or by some merely mechanical
external necessity, the probabihty of meeting our friends
in another Ufe would be too small to be regarded.

108. This is a consideration of great importance,
but it does not affect the question of the comparative
value of immortality with or without loss of memory.
Let us take the more ordinary view according to which
our existence after this life will be one and unbroken,
with a possibility of remembering in it, not only the
events which occur in it, but also the events of this
life. If the course of that future hfe ia detenuined by
chance, or by mechanical necessity, there will be no
reason for hoping that we shall meet beyond death the
people whom we have loved in this life. Nor would
there be any reason for hoping that the love thus
denied fruition would be able to remain unextinguished
through unhmitod ages of separation and new activities.
Once admit events to be determined m this way, and
there is no comfort to be gathered from immortahty,
whether with or without memory, either for love or
for any of our other interests.

If immortality is to give us an assurance or a hope
of progressive improvement, it can only be if we have
reason to believe that the interests of spirit are so
predominant a force in the universe that they will
find, in the long run, satisfaction in the universe.
And, in this case, the constitution of the universe
would be such that, whether with or without memoiy,


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


love would have its way. I will not here inquire
whether the ultimate significance of spirit is anything
except love. But it will scarcely be denied — least of
aU by those who feel the difficulties which I am now
considering — that the significance of love for spirit is
very great. And, if this is so, then the emotional
relations which exist botween people must be highly
significant of their real positions towards one another
in the scheme of the universe.

In other words, people who are joined by love
cannot be dependent for their proximity to each other
— and consequently for the possibility of their love —
on some chance or mechanical arrangement whose
recurrence we could have no reason to expect. Their
love is not the effect of proximity, but its cause. For
their love is the expression of the ultimate fact that
each of them is more closely connected with the other
than he is with people in general. And pro.\imity in
a particular life, like everything else, is the effect — or,
rather, the manifestation under particular circumstances
— of those relations which make up the eternal nature
of the universe.

If, therefore, love lias joined two people in tliis life,
we have, on the assumption we have been discussing,
good reason for believing that their existences are
bound up with one another, not for one life only, but
for ever. This would not involve their meeting in
every life, any more than it would involve their
meeting every day of each life. Love can survive
occasional absences, and is often even stronger for
them. And the universe is on a large scale, which
might require long absences. What we are entitled
to believe is that, while time remains, their eternal
nearness must continually find its expression in
proximity in temporal life.


HUMAN PRE-EXISTENCE


137


109. As for the second condition ; if friends are not
to be separated, then certainly the value of love in one
life need not perish because there is no memory of it
in the next. If by means of it we make our relations
stronger and finer, then they will be stronger and finer
at the next meeting. What more do we want ? The
past is not preserved separately in memory, but it
exists, concentrated and united, in the present. Death
is thus the most perfect example of tlie ' collapse into
immediacy ' — that mysterious phrase of Hegel's — where
aU that was before a mass of hard-earned acquisitions
has been merged in the unity of a developed character.
If we still think that the past is lost, let us ask our-
selves, as I suggested before, whether we regard as
lost all those incidents in a friendship which, even
before death, are forgotten.

110. I do not deny that in each particular life the
prospect of the loss of memory at the end of it will
appear to some extent a loss and a breach of con-
tinuity. In losing memory we lose that in which we
have found great value. Arguments may convince
us — as I have said, I tiiink that they ought to con-
vince us — that we do not lose all the value, or any of
the highest value, but only the comparatively worthless
form, a form which the lapse of years would change
to a positive evil. But no doubt we shall always have
a tendency to shrink from the loss of menioiy. Yet
I beUeve that, as we come to understand life better,
we shall shrink from such a loss less and less.

We may, I think, fairly conclude that the value of
immortality would not be lessened much, if at all,
by pre-existence. For the loss of memory which pre-
existence renders probable, seems to me the only
ground on which it has been held to diminish the
value of immortality.


138


SOME DOGMAS OF EELIGION


111. Pre-existence, indeed, as we have seen, renders
more probable a plurality of future lives. And the
prospect of a great number of lives — perhaps an in-
finite number, though this is not a necessary part of
the theory^ — gives us the prospect of many dangers,
many conflicta, many griefe, in an indefinitely long
future. Death is not a haven of rest. It is a starting-
point for fresh labours. But if the trials are great, so
is the recompense. We miss much here by our own
folly, much by unfavourable circumstances. Above all
we miss much, because so many good things are in-
compatible. We cannot spend our youth both in the
study and in the saddle. We cannot gain the benefit
both of unbroken health and of bodily weakness, both
of riches and of poverty, both of comradeship and of
isolation, both of defiance and of obedience. We cannot
learn the lessons alike of Galahad and of Tristram and of
Caradoc. And yet they are all so good to learn. Would
it not be worth much to be able to hope that what we
missed in one hfe might come to us in another ? And
would it not be worth much to be able to hope that
we might have a chance to succeed hereafter in the
tasks which wo failed in here ?

It may be that the change, the struggle, and the
recurrence of death, are endless, or, again, it may be
that the process will eventually destroy itself,' and
merge in a perfection which transcends all time and
change. Such an end may come, perhaps, but at any
rate it cannot be near.

But though the way is long, and perhaps endless,
it can be no more wearisome than a single life. For
with death we leave behind us memory, and old age,
and fatigue. And surely death acquires a new and

' 'Aa a God sclf-alatn on his own atrauge altar,
Deatlt li«8 dead.'— S win burne, A Forsaken Garden.


HUMAN PKE-EXISTENCE 139

deeper significance when we r^ard it no longer as
a single and unexplained break in an unending life,
but as part of the continually recurring rhythm of
progress — as inevitable, as natural, and as benevolent
as ^eep. We have only left youth behind us, as at
noon we have left the sunrise. They will both come
back, and they do not grow old.


CHAPTER V


FREE WIIJ,


112. The question whether a man is free in his
actions is ambiguous. We may distinguish four senses
in which it may be taken. In the first place, we may
say tliat a man is free to do anything which nothing
but his own nature prevents him from doing. In this
sense I am not free to draw a triangle with two right
angles, since this would be impossible whatever my
nature might be. Nor am I, in this sense, free to
save a man's life if I am tied at a distance from him
by a chain which I cannot break. For I should be
equally unable to do it, whatever my nature might
be. It is true that I could do it, if my body was
sufficiently strong to break the chain. But a man's
body is not generally held to be part of himself in
such a sense as to make its cliaraeteristics part of his
nature. Any one who made no distinction between
a man and his body would, I suppose, hold that I was
free, in this sense of freedom, to break the chain.

But if 1 do not save a man's life because I mistake
the nature of his illness, or because it is too much
trouble, then 1 am acting ft-eely. For if my nature
were such as to give me greater discernment, or such
as to make me think more of human life and less of
my own tmuble, I should have saved him. And I
should stUl, in this sense of freedom, be hold to be
acting freely, however certain it was that my action
was absolutely determined by the character with whicii


FREE WILL


141


I was born, combined with the circumstancos of my
life, I was not determined from without to be unable
to save the Ufo, and internal determination does not,
in this sense of freedom, prevent me from acting
freely.

113. Freedom, when the word is used in this sense,
may be called freedom of self-det prTnipAtinr^^ The use
has some importance from a metaphysical point of
view, but in ordinary life it is not often employed.
Much more common is the second use of the word,
according to which a man is free to do anything which
nothing but his own will prevents him from doing.
So far as a man is free in this sense he can direct his
life as he chooses. We may call this, then, freedom
of self-direction.

When the word is used in this sense, I should not
be called free to save a man when I fail to do so
because I mistake the character of his illness. This
mistake comes from my nature, but not from my will.
I may make it in spite of willing not to make it. But
if I do not save his life because it would be too much
trouble, I am acting freely in not saving it. I abstain
from saving it because I choose to avoid trouble rather
than save a life. If my choice — that is to say, my
will — had been different, I should have saved him.

Here, as with the freedom of self-determination,
I should not be held less free because my choice was
absolutely determined by my character and my past
history. I am free because I act as I choose, whether
the choice is completely determined or not.

114. In the third place a man is said to act freely
when he acts according to the ultimate ideal of his
nature. The implication here seems to be that free-
dom is essentially the absence of such Limitation as is
felt to thwart and constrain the being who is limited,


142


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


and that no person can be completely free from such
constraint except by attaining the jjtimat© ideal of
his nature. Thus it is often said that only the wise
or the good are free, although it would be admitted
that folly or wickedness might issue from the character
of some men by the same inevitable determination
which produced in others wisdom and virtue.

This use is extended by analogy to beings which
are not believed to feel constraint. Thus we say of
a tree that it grows freely when it grows to its normal
size in the ground, and that it does not grow freely
when it is stunted by being planted in a pot. And
yet it is equally the nature of the tree to be stunted
in the one case as not to be stunted in the other.
The unstunted growth is called free because it is
looked on as the ideal.

Virtue is certainly part of the ideal of man. And
therefore virtuous action will be called free, in this
sense, when wicked action is not. So, also, will a
reasonable action as against a foolish action. For this
there is also another ground. We often regard reason
and conscience as more truly parts of our nature than
desires or pa.ssion3, which we speak of as though they
were forces acting on us from outside. When I act
according to a passion it is said to muster me. When
reason or conscience prevents me from doing so, I
am said to master my passion. Thus virtuous and
reasonable action will appear, by the su^estion of
such phrases, as more truly self-determined than other
action.

Freedom in this sense may be called freedom of
self-realization. It has considerable importance in
philosophy, but we shall not have much concern with
it in the present chapter.

115. Freedom, finally, is used in a fourth sense.


FBEK WILL


143


wliich is the one which mainly concerns us here. Id
this sense a man is free in any action, if his choice
of that action is not completely determined. The
supporters of this view do not, I conceive, maintain
that a man can ever act without a motive, nor do
they consider that the existence of a motive is in-
compatible with freedom. But if the motive com-
pletely determined the act — either because there was
no other motive, or because it was determined to be
more effective than any other — then the act would not
be freely done. It is essential fo r freedom th at th ere
should b e motives prompting to dittereiiTcou rses,
btijw cen "which the aeent chooses. And it la^ssenti ai
tliiit "this cJir nce should not be determmed . We may
call this freedom of indetermination. My object in
this chapter is to consider whether it exists.

Freedom of indetermination is commonly spoken of
as Free Will. This seems to be justified. If freedom
were defined otherwise, the proper question might be
'Am I free to act?' not 'Am I free to will ? ' But,
if freedom is to imply the absence of complete de-
termination, it can only be the will that is free. The
voluntary act is completely determined — in so far as
it is not determined by outside circumstances it is
determined by the vohtion on which it follows. No
indeterminist would deny tins. It ia only the volition
■which is undetermined, and only the volition which
is free. When an indeterminist says, for example,
that a man has freely committed a murder, he means
that he was fi'ee in willing to do it. Indeed, m so
far as the will did not completely determine the act,
as when a bullet meant for a tiger kills a man, the
indeterminist would deny that the shooter had acted
freely in kiUing the man.

116. The law of Causality asserts that every event


144


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


is determined by previous events in such a way that,
if the previous events are as they are, it is impossible
that the subsequent event should not be as it is.
If this was the only general principle valid as to
causality, however, we should not be able to accept
as valid any of the laws of science which deal with
causation. For these are all general laws, which
assert that whatever has a particular quality produces
an effect with a particular quality. Thus it is said
that all alcohol, taken in large quantities, produces
intoxication. But claret differs from whisky, and the
effects produced by drinking them are not completely
alike, nor are the effects exactly the same with all
men. In order to have any warrant for such generali*
zations we need the additional principle that for any
quality, B, in an effect, there is always a quality A
in the cause, of such a nature that every other cause
which has the quaUty A produces an effect having
the quality B. In other words, the knowledge that
exactly similar causes wiH produce exactly similar
effects has no practical utility, since we could never
know two causes to be exactly similar, even if it were
possible that they should be so. What is required
is the knowledge that partially similar causes will
produce partially similar effects.

I do not propose to consider whether Causahty and
the Uniformity of Nature are valid of events other
than volitions. To deny that they had any validity
at all would involve almost complete scepticism, since
no expectation of any future event would have the
least justification, and all arguments for the existence
of anything not perceived at the moment would be
absolutely baseless. The indeterniinist does not, as
a rule, deny that all events except vuhtious must be
completely determined by previous events. Indeed,


FKEE WILL


146


all his arguments as to the goodness or badness of
particular voUtions imply that such volitions will
result in consequences which will inevitably follow
from them, unless interfered with by fresh volitions.
He only maintains that volitions are not subject to
the law of Causality in so far as to be themselves
completely determined. It is this view which I
propose to discuss in this chapter.

Some persons, no doubt, are indeterminists as to the
will, because they reject the law of CausaUty altogether,
and are indeterminists as to everything. But this
position has not sufficient influence on rehgious thought
in general to be of importance for our present purpose.

Determinists, on the other hand, maintain that our
volitions are as completely determined as all other
©vents. From this it ia generally, and I tliink correctly,
held to follow that it would be ideally possible to de-
duce the whole of the future course of events from the
present state of reality — though, of course, a mind
enormously more powerful than ours would be required
to do it.

117. We have now to consider the arguments
advanced by indeterminists in favour of their con-
tention that vohtions are not completely determined.
These arguments may be brought under five heads.
Firstly, it may be asserted that I have an immediate
certainty of the proposition that my will is free.
Secondly, that each volition is accompanied by a feel-
ing of freedom in volition, and that this cannot be
accounted for except on the supposition that the will
is free. Thirdly, that with those vohtions which are
recognized by us as morally right or wrong is con-
nected a judgement of moral obUgation, which cannot
be accounted for except on the supposition that the will
is free. Fourthly, that the freedom of the will must be


146


SOME DOGMAS OF EELIQION


true, because its falsity would make all choice absurd.
Fifthly, that it must be true, because of the disastroua
consequences which would follow if it were not true.

With regard, first, to the persons who assert that
they have an immediate conviction that the will is
free, and that that conviction cannot be shaken by any
arguments. I have given reasons in the second
chapter for thinking that such a certainty, while of
course decisive for the people who have it, has no
force for those who do not have it. And it is beyond
doubt that many people— including many believers in
free will — have no certainty of this sort. It seems,
indeed, not improbable that some, at least, of those
who assert that they have such an immediate certainty,
have made some mistake as to what it is of which they
are immediately certain. They may have an imme-
diate certainty that they can do (in certain cases) what
they will to do— which is by no means the same as an
immediate certainty that their will is not completely
determined Or they may have an immediate cei-tainty
that moral laws are binding on them, without an
immediate certainty that this requires an undetermined
wHl for its explanation. But of course if a man has,
as some men may have, a certainty of freedom of
indetennination, which is neither based on arguments
nor capable of being shaken by them, all discussion is
at an end as far as he is concerned. No one has any
means to convince him, and he has no means to
convince anybody.


118. We come next to the argument from that feeling
of freedom which we experience in action. To prove
that we have this sense of freedom an appeal must be
made to introspection, and thus this argument is apt
to be confounded with the assertion — ^just now con-


FEEE WILL

sidered— of an immediate certainty of the proposition
that the will is not completely determined. They are,
however, quite distinct. The position which we are
now discussing does not say that we have an imme-
diate belief, but that we have a feeling. It proceeds
to argue that the existence of this feeling cannot be
explained, except on the hypothesis that freedom of
indetermination really exists. And so it aflbrds some
possibility of discussion between opponents, since
arguments can be met by arguments.

The fact to which it appeals will scarcely be denied.
When I make a false accusation or refrain from making
it, when I draw my chair nearer to the fire or leave it
where it was, I have a feeling of freedom in my deci-
sion which I do not have when I am thrown from
a horse, or when I abstain from leaping over St. Paul's.
Now, it is said, this feeUng of freedom is incompatible
■with complete determination, and the only legitimate
inference is that the decision which is accompanied by
the feehng of freedom is one in which I am not
completely determined.

119. I believe that we have tliis feeling of freedom be-
cause we are, in fact, free in these cases. But I believe
that the freedom of self-direction is quite sufficient te
explain the feeling, and that there is no necessity to
accept freedom in the sense of indetennination.

On any theory, determiniat or indeterminist, it is
clear that I shall not make the accusation or draw up
my chair unless I choose to do so. I may, in one sense
of the word, do such an act unwillingly, because all
the possible alternatives may be for some reason or
the other repugnant to me. But whatever I do in
these cases will be what I will te do in preference to
the other alternatives which I recognize as being
open to me. And my sense of freedom is just in

Zi 2


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


proportion to the extent to which my action does
depend on my will If I draw a figure on paper I feel
freodom in drawing a triangle and not a circle, but
I do not feel free in abstaining from giving my triangle
two right angles. Now I could draw either a triangle
or a circle if I willed to do so, but no volition would
enable me to draw a triangle with two right angles.

My sense of freedom, then, ia proportionate to the
extent to which my action is determined by my will.
And I maintain that it is quite accounted for by
the fact that the action is determined by the will, and
that there is no need to hold that the determining
volition is itself undetermined. The feeling of free-
dom which we experience is a feeling that constraint
is absent. And constraint is absent in all cases whore
a man only acts because he wills to do so. How can
constraint enter except in the form of a discord be-
tween the will and the fects? And when the facte
depend upon the will there can be no such discord.
If I were thrown from my horse because I had willed
to be thrown from it, where would the discord be ?

120. But, it is sometimes said, if we examine ourvoh-
tions we perceive that they are not completely deter-
mined. If this is asserted to be an immediate con-
viction, we have gone back to a contention which has
been already considered. If it is asserted on the basis
of an examination of our volitions, I do not see how
such a conclusion could ever be justified. We find,
indeed, that all our most careful examination fails to
show us the whole sum of conditious which are neces-
sary in order that a particular volition should be com-
pletely determined. But this by no means proves that
the whole sum of conditions is not tliere. For there
is another alternative — that we have not powers of
observation sufficient to discover them. And, except


FHEE WILL


149


in the case of the human will, this alternative is always
adopted. It is perfectly impossible for any one to ex-
plain why a particular drop of rain falls where it does
rather than half an inch away. Yet no one supposes
that this event is not completely determined. We all
conclude that the series of events is so comphcated,
so numerous, and so unfavourably placed for observa-
tion, that our intellects aro not able to follow it. It is
clear, therefore, that we cannot logically come to a
different conclusion with regard to our volitions unless
we have already reason to think that the case for their
complete determination is less strong than the case for
the complete determination of the falliag raindrop.
And therefore such a conclusion must rest on a proof
of free will, and cannot itself be used as such a proof.

121. It is sometimes urged, as an argument against
the complete determination of voUtions that a man
can act as he believes to be right, although he would
get, and knows that he would get, far more happiness
by acting otherwise. This, I think, cannot be denied.
And this is sufficient to disprove what is called
Psychological Hedonism — that is, the doctrine that
a man must will to do that which he believes will
produce the greatest pleasure for himsell But this is
quite distinct from determinism. We may maintain
that a man can act from other motives than his own
happiness, and yet quite logically assert that it is
completely determined both what motives will be
present to him, and which he will eventually choose.


122. We now pass to the third head. With those
volitions which are recognized by us as being morally
good or bad tliere is connected a judgement of moral
obligation, I pronounce that one thing ought to be
willbd, and that another thing ought not to be willed.


150


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


And I approve of whomever wills the first or does not
will the second, while I condemn whomever wills the
second or does not will the first.' With this judge-
ment of moral obligation the absence of complete
determination in the will is asserted to be connected.

123. But what is the precise connexion ? Is it the
existence or the validity of these judgements on which
the argument is based ? And with what is it said to
be incompatible? Is it the truth of complete determina-
tion or the belief in complete determination? It is
always, I believe, the validity of judgements of obliga-
tion which is asserted to be incompatible with the
truth of complete determination.

With regard to the other three possible combina-
tions, it would, in the first place, be inconsistent with
notorious facts to say tliat the belief in complete
determination was incompatible with the existence of
judgements of obUgation. It is well known that many
people are, and have been, deterniinists, and that the
great majority of them, if not all, have made judge-
ments of obUgation respecting their own conduct, and
that of others. This is decisive. For if it is replied
that they ought not, from their own standpoint, to have
made such judgements, the contention is changed,
since it is no longer the existence of the judgements
which is denied, but their consistency.

In the second place, it cannot be seriously main-
tained that the belief in complete determination is
incompatible with the validity of judgements of obUga-


' The judgement of moral obli^tion 18 often spoken of as if it
referred directly to actions. But h seems to me to refer only to
volitions. For I do not blame myself for failing to carry out the
most im{>erBtive duty, if my will to do so has beftn thwarted
by external forces. And if external forees have hindered the
realization of my %rill to do wrong I do not regard myself as
innocent.


FEEE WILL


151


tion. In that case, if A, being a determinist, says
that Nero ought not to have burnt Rome, the judge-
ment is false, while if B, who is an indeterminist,
makes the same statement at the same minute, it is
true. This is clearly absurd. Or if I say this morning,
being a determinist, that I ought not to have lost my
temper last Saturday, it is false. But if I am con-
verted to indeterminism this afternoon, and then repeat
the same statement about the past, it will have changed
from false to true.

In the third place, the statement that the existence
of judgements of obUgation is incompatible with the
truth of complete determination is never, so far as
I know, maintained, except on the ground that the
truth of complete determination would n;ake them
invalid, and that, somehow or other, their existence
proves tliat they are not invahd. Nor do I see how it
could be maintained on any other ground. But if it
is maintained on this ground it rests, of course, on
the proposition that the vahdity of judgements of
obhgation is incompatible with the truth of complete
determination.

And it is in this form — that the vahdity of the
judgements is incompatible with the truth of the deter-
mination — that tlie argument, as I said above, is
generally put forward, or intended to be put forward.
It is, however, often stated inaccurately, so as to pro-
duce confusion between the validity and the existence
of the judgements, and between the truth of tlie
determination and the beUef in it.

The argument from the judgement of obligation is
perhaps the most usual argument for free will. It
seems to me that it is also the strongest, though
I caiinot regard it as satisfactory. ' If the will is
completely determined, judgements of obligation


152


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


cannot be valid.' The first question ■which this
suggests is the question whether judgements of
obligation are valid.

I do not think that we need trouble to inquire how,
if at all, the validity of judgements of obligation could
be proved to any one who denied it — should such
a person be found. Determinism has always, as a
matter of fact, been defended, and, as I believe, can
be successfully defended, on the basis that judgements
of obhgation are valid.

Let us, then, admit their validity. This does not,
of course, mean that no such judgement is ever mis*
taken, but that there are possible judgements of
obligation which would be valid when made, even
if we have not as yet succeeded in our efforts to find
them. Is this compatible with the truth of complete
determination ?

124. If the truth of complete determination were
incompatible with the truth of any proposition logically
presupposed in judgements of obligation, it is clear
that it would be incompatible with the validity of
those judgements, since tliey cannot be valid unless
their presuppositions are true. Every judgement of
obligation seems to me to have two such presupposi-
tions, (a) Something is such that its existence would
be good or bad.' (&) The person as to whom the
judgement of obligation is passed can exercise, by his
will, some effect in determining the existence or non-
existence of that tiling. No one would say that a man
ought to will the existence of anything unless the
thing willed was judged to be such tliat its existence

^ When I use gooJ and bad without any qualiii cation, I do
not me&n only moral good and )>ad, but good and bod in tha
widest senae— that in which it may be said that happiness and
beauty are good. I use virtuous and wicked as synonyms of
moiat good au<] bad, whun tliu objects spoken uf are volitions.


FREE WILL


153


would be good. And, again, no man can will anytliing
(though he may desire it) if he kno\vs that he cannot
possibly have any influence on the matter. I should
not will that an eruption of Vesu\iu9 should cease,
though under certain circumstances I might desire it
most passionately. And no sane man would say that
I ought to will it, or blame me for not doing so. But
if I were a magician, with powers so groat that they
might possibly stop an eruption, I might then will to
stop it, and might possibly be morally bound to will it.

125. Would either of these presuppositions be
necessarily false if complete determination were true ?
I cannot see that either of them would. Would the
existence of anything cease to be good or bad because
it was completely determined whether I should will
its existence or not ? Would my own possession of
knowledge, or the satisfaction of my own hunger, or
the rehef of the distress of others, cease to be good
because it was absolutely certain that I should will to
bring them about, or because it was absolutely certain
that 1 should not will to bring them about ? Surely
this cannot be maintained.

Afl to the second presupposition, it is clear that
the complete determination of my will can make no
diflference to the question of the effect of my will on
the result contemplated. Whether my will is com-
pletely determined or not, it is clear that I shall not
learn classical Greek or satisfy my hunger unless I
win to do so, while it is not improbable that I shall do
both if I will to do them. Again, if I will to relieve
the distress of others, it is at least possible that some
distress will be relieved which would not have been
reheved otherwise, and this is not in the least affected
by the question whether my will is inevitably deter-
mined to take the coui-se which it does take.


154


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


126. We pass from the presuppoeitiona of the
judgement to the judgement itself. Is a volition to
produce a good result, or the man who makes it, to
be less approved, is the voUtion to produce a bad
result, or the man who makes it, to be less con-
demned, because the vohtion is completely deter-
mined? It does not seem to me that this ahould
make any diflference to the approval or condemnation.
We approve or condemn whatever tends to produce
good or evil results, without further consideration.

If I do not save a man's life because he died before
I was bom, I do not condemn myself for not saving
him, since it is not my individual nature but the
general nature of reality which prevents me from
altering the past. If I do not save him, because I
am tied with a chain I cannot break, do I condemn
myself? If I had a stronger body, I could break the
chain, and this would be a good thing to do. I shall
therefore condemn the nature of my body for being
unable to do it. If I regard the body as a part of
myself, I shall condemn myself for this bodily im-
perfection. If I only regard it as an external reality
with which I am in close connexion, I shall condemn
the body and not myself. '

If I fail to save a man's life because I mistake the
nature of his illness, and so treat him in the wrong
manner, this is a purely intellectual mistake on my
part, unless my ignorance is due to past or pi-esent
misconduct. Postponing this latter possibihty, I shall

' The intensity of the condemnation will, of course, vaty
according to the standard attained by similar bodiea. We should
think very badly of a man's body which was ho weak that it
could not break se win ^'-cotton. But if the chain that defied
my efforts were the cable of a battle-ship, my condamnntion would
be no more than the recognition that I should have approved of
a strength which is absent from my body, and from the bodies of
all other men.


FREE WILL


155


certainly condemn myself for the failure. For the
failure is due to my want of knowledge, or of acute-
ness. These are quaUties in my mind which tend to
produce evil, and as my mind ia certainly myself,
whatever my body is, I shall condemn myself. I
shall pronounce myeelf a worse person than I might
have been. But I shall not condemn myself morally.

But now suppose that I do not will to save him,
because I should be enriched by his death. Or suppose
that I do will to save him, but that my efforts are
frustrated by ignorance due to paat indolence, or to
confusion caused by intoxication. In these cases I
shall again condemn myself. And in these cases the
condemnation will be— as it was not before — moral
condemnation. For the result does in these cases —
as it did not before — depend upon my will. ' If I had
willed differently in the past, I should not now be
ignorant or a drunkard. If I had willed differently
at the moment, I should not have preferred my own
wealth to the life of another.

I do not think that it would be denied by in-
determinists that, even if the will were completely
determined, moral condemnation of this sort would
be possible. The will would still be, as the body and
intellect had been in the previous cases, something
which tended to produce a bad result. And there
could be no reason why it should not be condemned,
as they, although regarded as completely determined,
were condemned in the previous cases.

127. The indeterminist, I conceive, would say that
while the complete determination of the will would
not destroy the validity of all approval or condemna-
tion of volitions, yet it would destroy the validity of

' Z clo not SAy that nil moral qualitlea &re qualities of VolitiOQ,
but that ail vdUtioas have moral ijualitiee.


i^afai


m


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


the particular variety of approval or condemnation
which is found in judgements of obligation.

Judgements of obhgation are, of course, different
from other judgements of approval or condemnation,
or else they could not be distinguished as a class.
But they are distinguished as a class by the fact
that they are judgements which approve or condemn
volitions. And we have seen that the complete de-
termination of voUtions could not destroy the validity
of all approval or condemnation of them. It must be
some other characteristic of judgements of obligation,
and not their reference to volitions, which is incom-
patible with the complete determination of the volitions
to which they refer.

Two such characteristics have been suggested. The
first is the supreme value of right volition, which, as
it is said, is affirmed by our judgements of obligation.
The second is the sense of responsibility which follows
on those judgements.

128. It is said that we approve right volition more
than any other excellence, and that we condemn wrong
volition more than any other defect. Some reason,
it is said, is required for this fact, and the reason is
found in the incomplete determination of the wUl.
There was nothing which made it certain beforehand
that we should will rightly or wrongly. And this
makes right volition more precious and wrong volition
more detestable.

I can see no reason whatever why the moral quality
of an act should be r^arded as intensified because it
happened without complete determination. It seems
to me that the moral quality of the act would be just
the same, wliile that of the agent would vanish. The
latter point will be dealt with later. ' But however
» Cp. SecUoQS 146-8.


FKEE WILL


157


this may be, it would be impossible to prove Free
Will in this way, for two reaaoas. Firstly, if the
alleged fact were true, it would admit of another
explanation. Secondly, there 13 reason to believe that
the alleged fact is not true.

Our judgement of the value of excellences which
are not excellences of volition is different in different
cases. We regard the intellectual excellence of
Shakespeare with more approval than the excellence
shown by the most brilliaDt punster. Each of them
has excelled all other men in a particular direction,
but we admire Shakespeare most, because we regard
excellence in his direction as more important, in the
general scale of values, than excellence in punning.
Yet it would be universally admitted that Shake-
speare's genius, on tlie one hand, and the absence of
equal genius in myself, on the other hand, were facts
completely determined. They do not depend on voli-
tion, and it is only in volition that the indeterminist
denies complete determination.

If excellences which are admitted to be completely
determined can be judged to have different values, so
that one is placed above another, then the fact that one
excellence is placed above all others is quite compatible
with its determination. It would be quite adequately
explained by our judgement that the presence of this
excellence, however certainly determined, was better,
and its absence, however certainly determined, was
worse, than the presence or absence of any other ex-
cellence.

129. And, again, is it the fact that right vohtion is
always placed above all other excellences? I think
that few people would be prepared to assert this. A
man who gives water to a thirsty dog has willed
rightly. If that man were Shakespeare, or Newtoa,


158


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


or Kant, should we be prepared to say that that
volition had more value than anything in his nature
except some other volition ? Surely most people would
regai'd the intellect which was capable of producing
Hamlet, or the Prineipia, or the three Critiques, as of
greater value.

Can we even say that the most important right
volitions are approved more than any other excellence,
and the most important wrong volitions are condemned
more than any other defect ? I doubt if we can say
even this. It might be possible to maintain another
proposition which is sometimes confused with the
former — namely that the greatest moral excellence is
approved more than any other excellence, and that the
greatest moral defects are condemned more than any
other defects. But the two propositions are very
different.

The argument, it virill be remembered, rests on the
assertion that we can place nothing higher than right
volitions, from which it is argued that they must be
undetermined. Now, if we must place the greatest
moral excellence liighest, it is clear that the argument
breaks down unless the greatest moral excellence
consists in right volition.

The simplest way of proving this would be to show
that aU moral excellence was right volition. But
what, in this case, are we to say of a loving disposition,
a fervent patriotism, or a passion for humanity? They
are not vohtions, or tendencies to vohtions, or habits of
volition. Nor can they be obtained by willing. (They
must, of course, be distinguished from resolutions to act
in particular ways. A man's will can cause him to act
as he would act if he loved his wife, or his coimtry,
or mankind. But it cannot make him love them.)

Love and patriotism, then, are qualities which, by


FREE WILL


159


the indeterminists' own position, are as completely
determined as artiatic or literary excellence. Will
indeterminists be prepared to say that, while justice
and beneficence are moral ezeellences, love and
patriotism are mere gifts of fortune, and have no
moral import at all ? I think that few of them would
do so, in spite of the inconsistency in which their
refusal plunges them. Kant, indeed, accepted the
paradox rather than the inconsistency, but he had few
precursors, and he has few successors. His attempt to
prove that the teaching of Jesus is on his side can
only be described as astounding. '

The indeterminist might save his position if he were
prepared to maintain that, although certain completely
determined qualities are to be called moral excellences,
yet they are not to be ranked as the highest moral
excellences, a position which is to be reserved exclu-
sively for excellences of the will. But if he maintained
this he would have against him the authority of most
of the churches— certainly of the Christian church —
and of most of the philosophers.

130. We have now to consider the second ground
on which judgements of obhgation are considered
incompatible with the complete determination of voH-
tion, A man who is condemned by a judgement of
obligation — who is condemned, that is, as having done
wrong in what he has willed or omitted to will — ia
held responsible for his conduct. And people are not
held responsible for anything else except an error of
vohtion. In ordinary language we say that a man may
be responsible for his ignorance, unskilfulness, or
some other defect which is not a defect of vohtion.
But wixat we really hold him responsible for is his will
not to remove the defect, or his abstention from willing
' Critique of Practical Iteason, Part I, Book I, chap. m.


i^am


160


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


to remove it. If his circumstances were such, for
example, that he could not have ceased to be ignorant,
however much he had tried, we should not call him
responsible for his ignorance. Even if the cause is not
external, but internal, we do not call him responsible
unless it is a volition or abstention from one. If
I write a play, I am responsible for writing it, for I
should not have done so if I willed not to do it. But,
if I write it, I am not responsible for its inferiority to
Hamlet, for the cause of that inferiority, though it is
to be found in my nature, is not in anyway dependent
on my will.

It is asserted that this responsibihty would be in*
compatible with complete determination, and that
any one who is not prepared to reject responsibility
must be prepared to deny complete determination of
volitions.

131. Three sorts of responsibihty have been asserted
— to our fellow men, to God, and to self. With respect
to the first I suppose that every determinist who need be
reckoned with would admit that we are responsible to
our fellow creatures for defects of will, and that this
responsibility is only for defects of will and for their
results.

But is this inconsistent with determinism ? I can-
not see that it is. For although the determinist does
not hold that voUtions are distinguished from all other
events by not being completely determined, he admits,
like every one else, that they are marked off from other
events by being determinable by expectation of plea-
sure and pain. Expectations of pleasure and pain are
not the only motives to will, but every one knows
that they are motives. On the other hand, nothing
but volitions can be directly determined by those
expectations, though other things may be determined


FREE WILL


i«l


by them tlirougli volitions. The fear of pain may
make a boy will to learn hig lesson, or it may make
bim will it more earnestly. And if the only obstacle
in the way was the absence or weakness of will, he
will now learn it. But if it is entirely beyond his
powers, the fear of pain may make him unhappy, but
will not make him successful.

Society, therefore, is quite justified in giving rewards
for right volitions and in inflicting punishments for
wrong volitions, whether those rewards and punish-
ments are dehberately bestowed by the state, or
whetlier they are the less deliberate, but scarcely less
powerful rewards and punishments of social praise and
blame. For the expectation of auch rewards and
punishments may encourage right vohtions and dis-
courage wrong volitions. But to carry out a system of
this sort with regard to good and evil qualities not
dependent on vohtions would be foolish, and (in so far
as it was a system of punishments) brutal, since in
these cases the expectation would produce no effect on
the results.

132. Now I submit that my responsibihty U> my
fellow men for my voUtiona consists in the fact that it
is reasonable for them to reward and punish me for
my volitions, and in that fact only. And, in support
of this, we may notice that it is universally agreed that
a man is not responsible in cases where his action
cannot be affected by considerations of pleasure and
pain. A lunatic who suffers from acute homicidal
mania is not hanged for murder, because the expects
tion of such a punishment would not deter a man in
such a condition. (It cannot, I imagine, be said tliat
he is not punished because he has not willed the
action. He has willed it as much as a sane murderer
has.) But when the same murderer is in the asylum^

M


162


SOME DOGMAS OF EELIGION


it is not thought wrong that he should be punished
for infraction of rules by exclusion from an entei'tain-
ment, because experience shows that the expectation
of this may affect his conduct for the future. The
homicidal maniac, then, is not held responsible for
murder, but is held responsible for untidiness, because
punishment will not prevent him from murdering, but
may keep him tidy. On the other hand, the cases of
certain of the more tyrannical despots, such as Nero,
support the contention from the other side. Psycho-
logically their states may have been quite as abnormal
aa those of the ordinary homicidal maniac. From
a medical point of view they might perhaps be called
mad. But no court would hold them to have been
legally mad. It would have declared them responsible
for their actions. And this, 1 think, would have
been right. It is in the highest degree improbable
that Nero would have committed any of his crimes
if he had known that he would certainly have been
executed for them within a month or two. And
since the voUtions of such men can be affected by the
expectation of punishment, it is right to punish them —
imleas, of course, the punishment required to affect
them is so severe as to be a greater evil than the
crime,

133. It is clear from all this that the determinist
is not in the least inconsistent in advocating that
crimes should be punished. A preventive punishment
is obviously defensible in exactly the same way for
determinists and for indeterminists. Whether the
will is free or not, it is clear that while a man is in
prison he cannot be robbiog on the highway or
breaking into houses. Deterrent piuiishment is justi-
fied for the determinist by the fact that experience
shows that the expectation of punishment will deter


FREE WILL


163


men from committing crimes which they would other-
wise have committed. And other sorts of punishment
are justified for him by the fact that experience also
shows that a man's moral nature may in some cases
be improved by influences bmught to bear on him
during the period of his punishment, or perhaps even
by the punishment itself.'

There remains vindictive punishment. With regard
to this it need only be said here that the justifica^
tion of it is at least as easy for the determinist as for
the indeterminist — or, rather, not more impossible.
So far as punishment is vindictive, it makes a wicked
man miserable, without making him less wicked, and
without making any one else either less wicked or less
miserable. It can only be justified on one of two
grounds. Either something else can be ultimately
good, besides the condition of conscious beings, or the
condition of a person who is wicked and miserable is
better, intrinsically and without regard to the chance
of future amendment, than the condition of a person
who is wicked without being miserable. If either of
these statements is true — to me they both seem
patently false — then vindictive punishment may be
justifiable both for determinists and indetermiuists.
If neither of them is true, it is no more justifiable for
indetemiinists than it is for detorminists.

As to vindictive punishment then, the two schools
are, so far as we have yet seen, on a level- But they
are not on a level as to other sorts of punishment.
The indeterminist may, indeed, beheve in preventive
punishment, since he attributes no indeterminate
volition to bolts and locks. But, as we shall see later


' Cp. my Sludies in Be^elian Cosmology, chap. v.
* Cp. bection 161.

X 3


164


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


on, he is quite inconsistent in supporting either
deterrent or reformatory punishment.

134. Responsibility towards man, then, is not
aflfectod hy determinism. But how about responsibility
towards God? God's judgement — on the hypothesis
that there is a God to judge — about the moral state of
any man could not be affected by determinism. If the
man is bad, he is bad, even if he is ao necessarily, and
an omniscient being would recognize this badness.
But responsibility, as we have seen, involves more
than this, A man is not called responsible to his
fellow men because they do right to judge him evil,
but because they do right to punish him. Now, it is
argued by the indeterminists, it could not be right for
God to punish men if their actions were inevitably
determined by the natures which he had given them,
and the circumstances in wliich he had placed them.

It seems to me that the answer is this. If there is
an omnipotent God, we are not responsible to him for
our sins either on the determinist view or the indeter-
minist If there is a God who is not omnipotent, then
we can as well be responsible to him for our sins on
the determinist view, as we can on the iudeterminist
^-or, indeed, better, as we shall see later on.

Pimishment is painful, and pain is evil. Punish-
ment, again, does not abolish the sin for which it is
inflicted — that is in the past, and irrevocable. And
sin is evil. Consequently no person can be justified
in inflicting pimishment if he might have avoided the
necessity by preventing the offence, unless the final
result of the sin and the punishment should be some-
thing better than would have happened without either
of them,' And in this case he will not be justified


Cp, my Studies in Hegelian Cosmology, chap, vi


FREE WILL


166


unless the good result which arises from the sin and
the puDishment could not be attained without them.
For both the 3in and the punishment are intiinsically
evil.

Now on the determinist hypothesis an omnipotent
God could have prevented all sin by creating us with
better natures and in more favourable surroundings.
And any good result which might follow fi*om the sin
and the punishment could be obtained by such a God,
in virtue of his omnipotence, without the sin or the
punishment Thus God would not be justified in
punishing sin, though man would be, because God
could attain the desired results without the punish-
ment, while man could not Hence we should not be
responsible for our sins to God.

135. But neither should we be responsible to an
omnipotent God on the indeterminist theory. For
such a God could have created us without free will, or
without any temptation to misuse It, and then there
would have been no sin. The common answer to this
is that a universe in which we inevitably did good
would be lower than one in which our action, whether
for good or for evil, was not completely determined.
Thus God is said to be justified in giving us free will,
and in punishing us when we misuse it.

I cannot see what extraordinary value lies in the
incompleteness of the deteiTuination of the will, which
should counterbalance all the sin, and the consequent
unhappiness, caused by the misuse of that will. If
God had to choose between making our wills undeter-
mined and making them good, I should have thought
he would have done well to make them good. But we
need not decide this point For the defence is one
which is obviously inconsistent with the idea of an
omnipotent God — if the word omnipotent is taken


166


SOME DOGMAS OF EELIGION


seriously. The defence says that God could not secure
the benefits — whatever they are — of undetermined
voKtion without also permitting the evil of sin. But
there is nothing that an omnipotent being cannot do.
Even if the two were logically contradictory, a really
omnipotont being cannot be bound by the law of con-
tradiction. If it seems to us absurd to suggest that
the law of contradiction is dependent on the will of
any person, we must be prepared to say that no person
is really omnipotent.

Thus, even on the indeterminist hypothesis, we are
not responsible for our sins to an onmipotent God.
For he could have prevented the sins without intro-
ducing any counterbalancing evil into the universe.
And, consequently, he would not be justified in check-
ing sin by pain, since pain is intrinsically evil. If God
is omnipotent, then, responsibihty is impossible on
either theory of freedom.

136. But if there is a God who is not omnipotent,
it would be quite possible for the determinist to hold
that we are responsible to him for our sins. Such
a God might be unable to create a universe wiUiout
sin, or at any rate unable to do so without producing
some greater evil. And he might find it possible, as
men do, to check that sin by means of a system of
punishments. In that case he would be justified in
doing so — provided, of course, that the necessary
punishments were not so severe as to bo a greater evil
than the sin.

And here the determinist is in a better position
than the indeterminist. For the indeterminist, as we
shall see later on,' has no right to assert that there is
even a probability that the expectation of punishment


SeotioQ U9.


TREE WILL


167


will alter our volitions. And, without such a proba-
bility, no punishment can be justified except vindictive
punishment.

It has sometimes been held that the freedom of the
human will was the only way in which the goodness
of God could be made compatible with the evil in the
universe. The evil we perceive in the universe con-
sists — at any rate chiefly, perhaps entirely — of sin and
misery. If sin was due to man's free will, and not to
God's decree, God, it was said, could not be condemned
on account of the existence of sin. And the misery
could be explained as the justifiable punishment of
sin. On the other hand, it was said, if there was no free
wiU, not only would it be impossible to justify the
existence of misery, but the sin also must be referred
to God as its ultimate cause. And it would become
impossible to regard a being as good, to whose nature
we must attribute the existence of all the evil of the
world.

But, as was shown above, if God is omnipotent, it is
impossible to account for the evil of the universe in
this way. Indeed, if God is omnipotent, it is impos-
sible that he can be good at all.' This would not be
affected by the freedom of the human will, since the
gratuitous permission of evil would be as fatal to the
divine goodness as the gratuitous creation of evil.
On the other hand, if God ia not omnipotent, his good-
ness would not be impossible upon either theory as to
the hmnan will. For a being of limited power but
perfect goodness might well create evil, and not merely
allow it, supposing that the creation of the evil was
the only way of avoiding a greater evil or attaining
a greater good.


' Cp. chap. vi.


•168


SOME DOGMAS OF EELIGION


137. There remains the question of responsibility to
self. I think that this must be admitted to exist — that
a man does feel a responsibility to himself for defects
of voUtion, or for defects caused by defects of volition,
which he does not feel in cases of a defect with which
volition has nothing to do. The analogy between this
and responsibility to otiiers seems to be that in the
latter I recognize tliat the others do well to punish me,
and in the former I recognize that I do well to feel
shame and remorse. Now why should I recognize
that it is weU to feel shame and remorse for defects
which are — directly or indirectly — defects of volition,
and not for other defects ? The indeterminist would
surest that it is because the defects of vohtion are not
completely determined. But why should I judge it
less good to feel shame or remorse for a defect because
it is an essential part of my character ? Surely, the
more closely a defect is bound up with me, the more it
is essential to my nature, the more reason I have to
feel ashamed of it.

It seems to me that the real reason why it is good
that I should feel shame and remorse in one case and
not in the other is the same as the reason why it is
good that other people should punish me in one case
and not in the other — namely, that in the one case it
may improve matters, and in the other case it cannot.
The only part of our nature which is influenced by the
expectation of pleasure and pain is the will. If, there-
fore, a defect is not a defect of volition, or dependent
on one, it will not be in any way affected by the fact
that I am miserable about it. And the misery, being
useless and painful, will be evil, and it will be well to
avoid it.

It is well that I should recognize my defects of all
sox-ts, since ignorance of one's limitations often pro-


FREE "WILL


169


duces evil. But -when I have ouce recognized that
I cannot write a play as good as Hamlet, it is profit-
less self-torture if I am miserable about it, since
my misery will certainly not remove this particular
limitation.

With defects of volition, the matter is different.
My will can be affected by expectations of pleasure
and pain, and so, if the contemplation of a defect of
volition, or its consequence, gives me pain, I may be
led to cure the defect to escape from the pain. Or if
the defect is in the past, and ii-revocable, the dread of
experiencing similar pain may keep me from similar
faults. In such cases shame and remorse may bring
advantages outweighing the evil of their painfulness,
and, since they will be profitable, it will be good to feel
them.


138. We now pass from the considerations drawn
from the validity of judgements of obUgation to the
fourth division of the indeterminist arguments. This
was that the will must be free because, if it were not
fi'ee, all choice would be absurd. It may be conceded
that scarcely any determinist would admit that all
choice was absm-d, and therefore, if it can be shown
that this would be a result of determinism, they are
logically bound to give up determinism.

It is said that it is inconsistent for a determinist to
take duty as a motive for action. For he beUeves, it
is argued, that it is already completely determined
whether he will act according to liia conception of
duty, or whether he will act otherwise. And this, it
is said, will render it unreasonable to choose to do his
duty.

The absurdity of this particular choice is the one
which is most often emphasized, But similar con-


170


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


siderations would prove that any other choice is as
absurd as the choice to do one's duty. For in each
case the deterrainist would beUeve his action to be
already completely determined, and if this made choice
absurd in one case it would do so in all others.

139. I cannot, however, see the least ground for the
conclusion that the belief in determinism makes choice
imreasonable. Of course, if the belief of the deter-
minist was that the end at which he was aiming was
completely determined to occur or not to occur, irre-
spective of what he chose, then choice would be
unreasonable.' I should be very unreasonable to
choose that the sun should rise to-morrow, or that it
should not rise. But the ordinary determinist, like
everybody else, believes when he chooses any course
that his choice may have some effect on the event.
And he is quite consistent in this belief. He is a
determinist because he believes that, while the event
may well be determined by his choice, his choice is ia
its turn completely determined.

Why should the belief that, if I choose to shut the
door, my choice to shut it was completely determined
beforehand, make it unreasonable of me to choose to
shut it ? (This ia all the information my determinism


^ Such a belief has been held. Napoleoo, for example, seems
to have believed that the time of each man's death was fixed,
independently of all other events. If I go here, I may be
drowned, if I go there. I may be shot, but, wherever I go, I slioll
die somehow at that hour. Such a belief docs render absurd all
choice directed to the preservation of my life. Why should
I protect my life ? I shall either lose it to-day, even if I protect
it, or keep it till another time, even if I do uot protect iL

But this is uot identical with determinism. It does not even
involve it, for a man could hold this who held tliat my choice to
protect life or not to protect it was cot completely determined.
It is compatible, no doubt, with determinism, but in this case
the absurdity of choice would not be due to the determinism, but
to this quite separate belief.


TTIEE WILL


171


can give me on the question. For, so long as I am not
omniscient, I can never be absolutely certain before-
hand what I shall choose. My certainty may be very
great but it can never be quite complete.) I cannot
see that it should have any such paralysing effect.
The contention that it ought to do so is, I think, due
to a confusion of this beUef with the other belief, men-
tioned above, which treats the choice as impotent to
affect the result, and which asserts that the result is
determined irrespective of it.

But suppose that I was omniscient, so that I could
not choose anything without knowing beforehand that it
was certain that I should choose it, would that render
choice unreasonable? I find it rather difficult to con-
ceive what would happen in eircumgtancea so unlike
those of which I have any experience. But I can see
no absurdity in a choice which is preceded by a perfect
knowledge that it would be made. It is to be observed
that most theists would hold that God could predict
with absolute certainty how he would will in any
circumstances, and that they would not hold that this
made it absurd in him to will.

140. There remains the defence of free will which
is based on the disastrous consequences which, as it is
asserted, would follow from the falsity of that doctrine.
I have endeavoured to show, in Chapter II, that such
arguments are never vahd. But the practical conse-
quences of the truth of any doctrine are always inter-
esting, even if they tell us nothing as to its truth or
falsity. Let us consider if any disastrous results would
follow from the truth of determinism.

It would doubtless be a great disaster if it were
absurd to recognize virtue as binding on us, or to adopt
a course of action because we believed it to be our duty
to do 8o. But we have seen that there is nothing in


172


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


determinism which makes judgements of obligation
absm-d, or -which renders it absurd to be moved by
a regard for duty.

It would also be a great disaster if people did in fact
— even without any logical excuse — no longer recognize
virtue as binding on them, or no longer adopted a course
of action because they believed it to be their duty. It
would be also a great disaster if they did these things
less frequently or less intensely. But there is no
reason, that I know of, to suppose that a belief in
determinism would tend to bring about these calami-
ties. Many men, and many communities, have, at
different times and for long periods together, accepted
determinism, and I do not think that their morality
has been observed to be inferior to that of communities
whose general circumstances wei-e similar, but who
rejected determinism. Indeed, the usual course of
indeterminist polemics has admitted tliat determiniets
are no less virtuous than other persons, and has de*
voted itself to attack what it asserts (for the reasons
which we have already considered) to be their incon-
sistency in being virtuous.

141. It is true that a belief in determinism will
tend to modify the emotion with which we regard
those whom we hold to be acting wrongly. Tliere is
nothing inconsistent in an indeterminist pitying a
sinner for his sinfulness. But, ceteris paribus, a deter-
minist is more likely to do so. For ho does not, like
the indeterminist, hold that among the differences which
separate sin from other defects is to be found the fact
that sin is not completely determined, and tliat this
difference is of fundamental moral importance. It is
more natural, therefore, for him, than it is for the
indeterminist, to look at sin, like other defects, as
a calamity to the man who suffers from it. And the


FREE WILL


173


greater his hatred of sin, the greater will he consider
the calamity, and the greater will be his pity.

The increase of pity for sinners, however, is not
a calamity. It might be so if it were incompatible
with hatred of the sin, or with the reaolve to extirpate
it by any remedy which would not be worse than the
disease. But it is clear that there is no logical incora-
patibihty between pity for sinners and the resolve to
extirpate sin. And they are not psychologically in-
compatible, for they are often found together in great
intensity. The little, for example, that we know about
the life of Jesus suggests that he combined an invari-
able intolerance of sin with an almost invariable
compassion for the sinner.

142. It is said that it would be intolerable for a man
to believe that perhaps he was inevitably determined
to bo wicked in the future. But has the man in
question any desire to be virtuous, or has he not ? If
he has no desire to be virtuous, he is not likely to find
his life made intolerable by the possibihty {it can
never be a certainty for a being whose knowledge is
finite) that he is inevitably determined not to be
virtuous in the future.

If on the other hand he has a desire for virtue, ho
knows by experience that such a desire is an important
factor in determining a man to be virtuous and not to
be wicked, so that the chance that he is determined
to be wicked is diminished by the existence of the
desire. And the stronger such a desire is, the more
likely is it to prevent his future existence from being
wicked. Thus the more intolerable the prospect of
future wickedness is to any man, the less fear is there
that such a fate should befall him. Such a state of
things is no great calamity.

Of course, a man's present desire to be virtuous is


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


£ar from being an absolute guarantee that he will not
in the future be wicked. Many men have had such
a desire who have afterwards become wicked. My
present desire is one factor in determining my future
moral state, and a very important factor. But it is
not the only factor, and the tendency may be over-
come by others.

But here the determinist is no worse off than the
indeterminist For the indeterminist, who desires
to-day to be virtuous, cannot deny that other men
who have desired to be virtuous have subsequently
become wicked. The same fate may be his. He is in
the same position of uncertainty as the determinist,
except that the determinist may logically speak of
a probability one way or the other, while the indeter-
minist has no right to do so. The indeterminist,
indeed, can assure himself that, if he does fall into
wickedness, no one will be able to give a complete
explanation of why he has fallen. I must confess
that I fail to see what comfort can reasonably be
derived from that assurance.

If a man desires food, or love, or anything else, the
important question for him is whether he will get it
or faH to get it, — not whether his success or failure
can be explained as the inevitable result of what has
preceded. The question as to the manner in which
the result has been determined may have a theoretical
interest, but has no practical importance. Surely, in
the same way, all that interests the man who desires
to be virtuous, iu so far as he desires it, is to know
whether he will be virtuous or not. Whether virtue
or wickedness comes to him from his own uncaused
caprice in the future, or from the eternal nature of the
universe, it will still be virtue or wickedness.

It is clear that neither determinism nor indeteiv


FREE WILL


175


minism, taken by itself, can settle the question whether
virtue or wickedness will finally prevail, either with a
particular person, or with the universe. But it is also
clear that, if the question is to be settled at all by
metaphysics, it can be settled only on the basis of
detemiinisra. For virtue and wickedness are depen*
dent on the wiU, and if indeterminism is true it is
impossible to predict the future state of the will of
any being, or of all beings.

143. It has been said that, if we do not possess the
freedom of indetermination, we shall be no better tlian
macliines, Kant speaks thus of the freedom of the
Monads, of which Leibniz had asserted that they were
free because they were determined internally by their
own spiritual nature. * It would', he says, ' be really
nothing better than the freedom of a roasting-jack,
which also, when it is once wound up, performs ita
motions of itself.' '

It would, doubtless, be a calamity if men stood no
higher in the scale of values than roasting-jacks. But
Kant seems to me to be wrong here. If a roasting-
jack goes right, a joint is well cooked, if it goes wrong,
it is badly cooked. If a will goes right, the man is
virtuous ; if it goes wrong, he is wicked. If the
difference between virtue and wickedness is no more
important than that between a well-cooked leg of
mutton and one which is badly cooked, then, certainly,
internal determination (which I have called above the
freedom of self-determinationj is of no more worth in
a man than in a roasting-jack. But if, as Kant would
certainly have admitted, the first difference is very
much more important than the second, then freedom
of self-determination in a man, which determines

' Crilique of Practical Season, Put I, Book I (p. 101, Harten-
etoin's ed,)-


176


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


between virtue and wickedness, 13 much more impor-
tant than the freedom of self-determination in a
roasting-jack, which only determines whether the
joint shall be well or badly cooked.

It must also be remembered that a man may be
held to be free because he possesses, in many cases,
what I have called freedom of self-direction. A roast-
ing-jack cannot have this, since it has no will.

144. It would be difficult, indeed, to imagine any-
thing more horrible than some of the determinist
views of the universe which have been held in the
Christian Church. But what made them horrible was
not the belief in determinism, but the belief in hell.
The belief that we are predestined to salvation is, as
the 17th Article of the Anglican Church remarks, a
belief which produces happiness, and not misery.

But is not a belief in hell even more horrible when
combined with determinism than it would be without
determinism? This has been asserted, but I think it
rests on a misconception, or rather on two. The first
is the belief that hell would be less unjust in a universe
where our wills were not completely determined than
in one where our wills are completely determined.
But we saw above that our responsibility to God was
not affected by the truth or falsity of determinism.
This view, therefore, must be rejected.

The second misconception ascribes to determinism
a horror which Is really due to another belief — the
belief that salvation cannot be obtained by any action
dependent on the will. So far as people believe that
salvation can be obtained by such actions, their fears —
about themselves at any rate — would have some
alleviation even if they were determinists. For in
proportion as they were really anxious to obtain
salvation they would be likely to obtain it, since


FREE WILL


177


a will to act in a particular way makes it likely that
we shall act accordingly. On the other hand, if some-
thing is required for salvation which is in no way
dependent on tlie will to obtain it, the tortures of
apprehension might rise to any intensity for indeter-
minists, as well as for determinists. For then the
desire for salvation, while it made the fear of losing it
more intense, would not in any way make the chance
of losing it less,

146. I have now considered the principal arguments
brought forward by indeterminists in favour of their
position. It remains to consider some arguments
which may be brought forward against that position.
The main at^ment against it is that which proceeds
by establishing the universal validity of the law of
Causality, and so showing that volitions, like all other
events, must be completely determined. This argument,
as I said at the beginning of the chapter, I do not
propose to consider here. I shall only point out two
inconsistencies in the position of the average indeter-
minist, The averts indeterminist, like other men,
admits the vahdity of morality ; and he attaches some
value to expectations that men will, under certain
circumstances, act in certain ways. I maintain that in-
determinism is inconsistent with both these positions.

146. In the first place indeterminism is inconsistent
with the validity of morality. Determinism, as we
have seen, was reproached with its inconsistency with
the validity of judgements of obligation, and reproached
wrongly. The accusation can be retorted with greater
truth.' Judgements of obligation are judgements

' It is interesting to note in paseiiig that this view is main-
tained by thinkers so different from one another as Hume and
Green. Compare Trtatise of Human Natvre, Book II, Part lH,
Section 2 ; and ProlegonKna to Ethics, Section 110.


178


SOME DOGAtAS OF RELIGION


■which approve or condemn the person who wills
a cel^:ain thing. I eay that I myself, or some one else,
is better or worse on account of a particular volition
than Would have been the case if the volition had not
occurred. The approval or condemnation of the agent
is essential to morality. If we are not entitled to say
that a man is virtuous or wicked, what is left ?

But how are we justified in passing from the volition
to the person who makes it? There is, perhaps, no
difficulty on any theory in saying that a man is good
or bad at the moment when he is willing well or
badly. But this is not all that we do say. Half an
hour after ordering a murder, Nero may be eating
his dinner, and thinking about nothing else. In the
intervals of his labours, St. Francis, too, must eat, and
may be too fatigued even to plan fresh labours. Yet
we should call the one ■wicked, on account of his past
crimes, and the other good, on account of his past
services. The whole fabric of moraUty would be
upset, if our approval or condemnation of a man for
his voUtion had no right to last longer than the vohtion
itself. Nor would any indeterminist, I imagine, be
prepared to deny its right to last longer.

147. The determinist can explain this consistently
■with his position. According to him the volitions
of each man spring from his character, and are the
inevitable result of that character when it finds itself
in a certain situation. The approval or condemnation
of the agent is based on the behef that the character,
indicated by the past acts, survives in the present,
and is ready, on appropriate occasions, to manifest itself
in similar acta. Nero is condemned in the present,
because he still has the character wiiich will probably
cause him, when he is tired of eating, to amuse him-
self ■with another murder. St. Francis is approved in


FREE WILL


iTff


the present, because he still has the character which
will probably cause him, when he has satisfied his
hunger, to perform fresh works of benevolence.

But how can the indeterminist defend his judge-
ment ? According to him the volition in each case is
a perfectly undetermined choice between two motives.
When the volition is over, it has ceased to exist, and
it has not, on the indeterminist theory, left a per-
manent cause behind it. For, according to that
theory, it has no permanent cause at all. Directly
Nero has ceased to think of a murder, nothing at all
connected with it remains ia his moral nature, except
the mere abstract power of undetermined choice, which
is just as likely to be exercised on the next occasion
in an utterly different way. How then can the
indeterminist venture to CiUl Nero a wicked man
between his crimes? And yet he certainly would
call him so.

Are we to say that it is, after all, the same person
who committed the murder and who is now being
condemned, and that this forms a sufficient justification
of the condemnation? I cannot see that this should
justify it. For the judgement passed on Nero at
dinner is not only that he was wicked when willing
the murders before dinner, but that he is wicked now.
But what is wicked in him now? Not his volition,
for he is now only willing to gratify his palate, which
is not wicked. Not hs character, for his previous
volition consisted in an undetermined choice of the
wrong alternative, and this has no root in his character
— or anywhere else.

148. Moreover, if the indeterminist adopts this de-
fence, he involves himself in fresh inconsistencies. If
a man is to be approved or condemned now, simply
because he is the same man who willed well or badly

N 2


180


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


in the past, then all past volitions are equally grounds
for such an approval or condemnation. But there are
cases in which every one, including indeterminists,
would admit that past volitions are not equally grounds
of approval or condemnation in the present

"We often will in our dreams to commit evil actions.
And men often will, in a state of intoxication, to
commit evil actions which they would not will to
commit when sober. Now we never consider a man to
be wicked, after he has awaked, on account of his evil
voUtions in dreams. And we do not consider him
wicked, when sober, on account of the wickedness
which he willed when drunk. In ordinary cases,
indeed, we should blame him for getting drunk. But
when this is not his fault— as in the case of a savage
who tastes alcohol for the first time^then no blame
whatever is attributed to him after he has got sober
for the volitions he formed when drunk.

Such judgements are quite inconsistent with the
theory in which the indeterminist has now taken
refuge — the theory that a man may be approved or
condemned in the present for any voUtion which
he has made in the past. For the man who dreamed
or was drunk is certainly the same man who is now
awake and sober.

But the determinist avoids all inconsistency. Ex-
perience shows us that the conditions of dreaming or
of intoxication so aflfect the moral character that no
inference can be drawn from volitions made in one of
these states as to the probable vohtions of the same
man when he is not in that state. I have no reason
to think that the brutal murder, which I planned in
a dream on Monday night, gives even the least in-
dication that I should be likely to yield, when awake
on Tuesday morning, to any temptation to commit


FBEE WILL


181


murder. And therefore, when awake on Tuesday
morning, I do not condenm myself for it

Again, in so far as we believe a man to have really
altered hia character, we no longer blame him for
what happened before it was altered. If, since he
willed a certain crime, his conduct has shown that he
can resist temptations similar to those to which be
yielded before, we no longer condemn him. Even
without this experience, if we have reason to believe
that he has repented Ms crime so sincerely and efifec-
tually that he would not in ftiture yield to a similar
temptation, we condemn him no longer. It may be
necessary to punish such men, either as an example to
others, or because the law cannot safely take account
of such dehcate and doubtful matters. But from the
point of view of morality, he is not condemned.

For determinists this is completely consistent They
pronounce a man to be wicked in the present, who has
committed a crime in the past, because they regard it
as evidence of a still-existing character of the kind which
tends to produce crimes. But if they have reason to
beUeve — such as amendment or repentance can give
them — that his character has changed since the crime,
and is no longer such as tends to produce si mi lar
crimes, they have no longer any reason to condemn
him.

The indeterminist recognizes that amendment and
repentance may remove wickedness as much as the
determinist recognizes it To deny this would be to
break with every religion in the world's history, and
with the moral judgement of all mankind. But liis
recognition of this is quite inconsistent with his in*
determinism. We have seen that he can only condenm
a man for a past crime at all, on the basis that it is
sufficient ground for condemnation that he is the same


182 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

man who committed the crime. And if this is a
sufficient ground, then it is clearly unjustifiable to
condemn him the less on account of his amendment
or repentance.

149. We pass to the second inconsistency involved in
the position of the indeterminist. The indeterminist,
like every one else, assumes that it is possible to pre-
dict, with some probability, though not with absolute
certainty, how men will act under particular circum-
stances. To reject this would render impossible all
trade, all government, and all intercourse with our
fellow men.

We continually act on the faith of such predictions.
We assume that a postmaster will sell a penny stamp
for a penny, that he will not sell two for a penny,
that a policeman will not try to kill ua for walking
along the Strand, that a soldier in battle will try to
kill the enemy, and the like. There is, of course,
no certainty. The postmaster may be drunk, the
policeman a homicidal maniac, the soldier a disciple
of Tolstoi, But we are confident of the probabilities.
I am more likely to get one penny stamp for a
penny than to get two. My life is more likely to
be attempted in a fight at close quarters than in
a walk through London.

The indeterminist admits that on his theory there
can be no certainty of prediction. For all practical
purposes the determinist mxist admit the same, since
only an omniscient person could be quite certain what
causes were at work, and with what strength. The
indeterminist, however, thinks that his theory admits
of statements of probability as to volitions.

If, however, indeterminism is true, there is no
justification whatever for making any statement as to
the probability of future voHtions. The indeterminist


r —


FREE WILL


183


theory assumes that in every case the choice between
motives is undetermined. There cannot then be the
slightest probabiUty that this choice ■will be of one
motive rather than another. Our only ground for sup-
posing that a particular man will choose in a particular
way, under particular circumstances, is that experience
has shown us that he has previously acted in a similar
way under similar circumstances, or else that most
men, or most men who resemble him in certain ways,
have previously acted in a similar way under similar
circumstances. Now why should we suppose that
similar circumstances will be followed by similar
results? There is no reason to do so unless the cir-
cumstances determine the results, or the circumstances
and the results are both determined by the same
cause. Otherwise the expectation that the similar
results would follow would be as foolish as the ex-
pectation that I should win at cards on one Lord
Mayor's day because I had won at oards on the
previous one.

According to the indeterminist theory our choice
between motives is not determined by anything at alL
And thus it follows tliat all ground for predicting the
action of any man, so far as it depends on his volition,
vanishes altogether.

One result of tliis is that the indeterminist is quite
inconsistent in expecting one line of conduct from one
man and another from another. It is just as probable
that an English general to-day should eat his prisoners,
as it was that a Maori chief should do so a hundred
years ago. It is just as probable that the drunken man
in the street should be Johnson as that it should be
Boswell.

But this is a trifle. If the indeterminist is right we
have no i-eason to expect any line of conduct from


184


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


any one, rather than any other line of conduct which
is physically possible. It is just as likely that the
imgority of Londoners will bum themselves aUve
to-morrow, as it is that they will partake of food to-
morrow. I am just as likely to be hanged for brushing
my hair as for committing a murder. When men
commit suicide, or eat, or hang other men, their action
depends on their volition, and their volition cannot be
anticipated.

150. In the general chaos to which this would
reduce our life, it is scarcely worth mentioning the
result as to punishment. Preventive punishments
might still be justified, because they trust to keeping
the prisoner's body in a place where he will be
harmless, and because their effect does not depend on
his voUtion. Yet even here the punishment could not
be carried out if the gaolers decided one morning to
release all the prisoners. And on the indeterminist
theory they are just as likely to will this as they are
to will anything else.

All other non-vindictive punishments would be
completely absurd. For they all depend on judge-
ments as to the probability of future voUtions. It
is believed that a man is less likely to will to commit
a crime which he desires to commit, if he knows that
the commission of the crime will produce consequences
which will be painful to him. And it is beUeved that
a man who has been subjected to certain influences is
less likely to desire to commit crime. If indeterminism
is true, both these beliefs are absolutely baseless.

151. There remains vindictive punishment. It has
often been beUeved that indeterminism would at
least justify tliis — a belief which has sometimes been
taken as the chief support of indeterminism. We
admitted provisionally, earlier in this chapter, that,


FREE WILL 185

if vindictiTe piuusbment could be fuS^ed at all, it
might be as well justified for the indeterminist as for
the determinist. But there is a difficulty. Yindictive
punishment is inflicted on a man because of his
wickedness. It is seldom, however, that it can be
inflicted at tiie very moment when he is sinning.
And we have seen that to regard a man as wicked
on account of a past volition is entirely inconsistent
with indeterminism. Yet vindictive punishment does
stand in a specially dose relation to indeterminisnu
For at least we can say that, in those cases where the
punishment begins before the sin ceases, vindictive
punishment is not more absurd for the'|[^eterminiat
than it is for other people.


CHAPTER VI


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


152. Bt God I mean a being who ia personal,
supreme, and good. In calling him personal, I mean
to assert that he is self-conscious, that he has that
awareness of his own existence which I have of my
own existence. In calling him supreme, I do not
mean to assert that he is omnipotent, but that he is,
at the least, much more powerful than any other being,
and so powerful that his volition can profoundly affect
the whole sum of existence. In calling him good, I do
not mean to assert that he is perfect, but that he is, at
the least, of such a nature that he would be rightly
judged to be more good than evil

All these three characteristics are, I think, implied
in the word God, as used in Western theology. A
reality which was not a person would not here be
given the name of God. Cases can be quoted, no
doubt, where the name has been used of an impersonal
reality. But I think that such statements do not meaa
more than that the reality in question is a worthy
substitute for a God, or that the belief in it is a
worthy substitute for a belief in a God. They do not
mean that the name is appropriate in a strict sense
to an impersonal reality. When the schoolboy was
told that the school was his father, his mother, and
the rest of his relations, the meaning was that it ought
to take their place with him. It is in this way, I be-
lieve, that we must interpret the statement that Law,
or Nature, or Goodness, or Duty, is God.

It is sufBciently clear that a person is not called


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


187


God, unless he is supposed to be the supreme being in
the universe, or, at least, one of a limited number of
such beings. And it cannot, I tliink, be doubted that
a supreme being, who was not believed to be good,
would not be called God. It is true that some
thinkers have admitted that the action of their God is
not what would be called good according to human
standards. But then they pronounce those standards
to be unfit for apphcation to God. In Bpite of those
standards, they tell ua, we must call him good, we
must praise and worship him, and we have no need to
despise ourselves for doing so. If a man believed in
a supreme person whom he believed to be bad, he
would not think him worthy of the name of God —
a name which, when used by a believer in God, always
implies reverence.

153. The usage in philosophy, however, is sometimes
different from the usage in theology. In philosophy
we have high authority — including Spinoza imd Hegel
— for a different practice. God is frequently defined
by philosophers as the ti-ue reaUty, of whatever nature
that reality may be, provided only that it possesses
some sort of unity, and is not a mere chaos. If the
word is used in this way, every person, except absolute
sceptics or the most extreme pluraUsts, must be said
to believe that a God exists. The question of the
existence of God, on this definition, becomes very
trivial. The important question is not whether there
is a God, but what sort of nature he, or it, possesses.

If the usage of theology and philosophy differ, which
ought to give way ? It seems to me that it should be
philosophy. It is possible to change the meaning of
terms which are used by a compai'atively small number
of students, but impossible to change the meaning of
so common a word as God in popular usage. Now


188 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION"


popular usage is distinctly in favour of the narrower,
or theological, use of the word, and philosophy ought
to accommodate iteelf to this, to avoid a dangerous
ambiguity.

Again, while the conception of the true reality is of
fundamental importance for philosophy, the conception
of a supreme and good person is also of great philo-
sophical significance. It is desirable that each of them
should have a separate name in philosophical termino-
logy. For the second no name but God has ever
been proposed, while the first is often called the Abso-
lute. If God is used as a synonym for the Absolute,
we should have two philosophical names for one
important idea, and no name for the other.

Finally, philosophical us;^ is by no means uniform.
Against Spinoza and Hegel we may put Kant and
Lotze, both of whom use the word substantially in the
theological sense. The balance of convenience, then,
seems greatly in favour of confining the name of God
to a being who is personal, supreme, and good.

154. Such a definition, of course, leaves many ques-
tions still open. Two of these may be regarded as of
fundamental importance from a religious point of view.
The first of these is whether God is Omnipotent in the
strict sense of the word — whether he could do anything
whatever, or whether there are things wliich he could
not do. The second is whether all existent reahty
other than God has been created by him, or whether
there are other beings — personal or impersonal — whose
existence is as ultimate and uncaused as God's own.

If God is not creative, he cannot be omnipotent
If there are beings whose existence is as much an ulti-
mate fact as his own existence, then he could not have
prevented their existence, and therefore his power
would be limited. But even a creative God need not


30D AS OMNIPOTENT


189


be omnipotent. It is possible that he should have
enough power to create this universe, or one of a rather
different nature, or perhaps to have abstained from
creating a universe at all, and yet that in creating he
acted under limitations which would prevent bim from
doing certain things. We have therefore three possi-
bilities, a creative and omnipotent God, a God who is
creative but not omnipotent, and a God who is neither
creative nor omnipotent. In this chapter I shall con-
sider the first of these.

This tlieory scarcely requires further explanation,
since it is familiar to every one. It holds that there
is a reaUty other than God, but that this reality is
entirely dependent on God. God, on the contrary, is
not in any way dependent on this other reality. He
is held to have created it, and to have been purely self-
determined in that act of creation. The nature of what
he created, and the character of whatever changes have
befallen it, are held to be entirely due to his will,
which is not beheved to be acting imder any limitations
which can hinder its fulfilment

155. What reasons are generally given for holding
such a theory ? We are often told by its supporters
that they beUeve it because they have an instinctive
and irresistible conviction of its truth. It is not neces-
sary to recapitulate here what has been said in
Chapter II on this ground of behef.

It is also frequently said that there must be a God,
and that God must have a particular nature, because
such disastrous consequences would follow from the
non-existence of a God, or from the existence of a God
with a different nature. The use of such considera-
tions as a ground of behef has also been discussed in
Chapter IL I shall, however, consider later on the
practical effects of belief or disbelief in a God, not as


190


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


bearing on the truth of the belief, but as a matter of
practical interest.

We have likewise discussed in Chapter 11 the posai-
bility of basing behef in the existence of God on
miracles. It is to be noted, however, that this is not
a very common ground for the behef. It is frequently
admitted by those persons who accept certain dogmas
on the evidence of miracles that the evidence of
miracles depends on the belief that there is a God,
and a God whose nature is incompatible with deceit
or error. From this, of course, it follows that the
miracles cannot be used to prove the existence of God.

Passing to more direct arguments, we find that Kant
enumerates three, which he names Ontological, Cosmo*
logical, and Physieo-TheologicaL I do not propose to
discuss the Ontological argument. It had very Uttle
influence at any time except among professed meta-
physicians, and, since Kant's destructive criticism, it
has been abandoned by all schools of philosophy.
(Hegel, indeed, asserts that Kant has not disproved it.
But what Hegel calls the Ontological argument is not
what was previously called so, and is not what Kant
intended to disprove. Nor would what Hegel calls
the Ontological ai-gument suflSce to prove a personal
God.)

Kant's Cosmologieal argument resembles very closely
the argument from the necessity of a first cause, while
his Physieo-Theological argument is what is more
commonly called the argument from design. Both
these arguments are in frequent use at the present
day, and both will require our consideration. We
shall also have to consider the argument that the truth
of Idealism would involve the existence of an omni-
scient being, and that such a being could only be God.

156. The argument for a first cause may, I think, be


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


101


fairly stated aa follows. Eventa continually happen
in the world, and every event requires a cause. And
the non-divine substances which exist in the world
cannot have existed eternally. The commencement
of the existence of each of these substances is also an
event, and will require a cause. Now an event may
be caused by another event, but then tliis earlier event
will, like every other, require a cause. If we recognize
no causes but events, every cause will itself require
a cause, and the series will never be completed. We
must, therefore, believe that the ultimate cause of all
eventa is not an event but a being, who never began to
exist, and who therefore needs no cause. And this
being is said to be Qod,

This argument, even if valid, would not be sufficient
to prove the existence of God. Even if it proved the
existence of a being who was a cause without being
itself causally determined, it could not prove that such
a being was either personal or good. Tlie nature of
the effects that it produced might prove its personahty
and goodness, but the mere fact that it was a cause
would be consistent with no personahty or with an
evil personality. Thus the argument could not reach
the desired conclusion without calling in the aid of the
argument from design.

157. But why, to go further, is a cause which is not an
event wanted at all '? (To speak accurately, we should
say, a cause which does not include an event. For the
full cause of any event always includes many condi-
tions and circumstances which ai-e not events.) Why
should we not derive one event from another, and this
again from another, backwards through unending time,
without any first cause at all ? As for the finite sub-
stances, they might either be conceived as existing
through unending past time, or as brought into exist*


192


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


ence at some time. In the latter case the event of their
commencing to existwoiUd, like all others, be dependent
on an unending series of previous events.

The supporters of the necessity of a first cause
would argue against this as follows. The event A,
with which we start, has a definite nature — certain
predicates are true of it, others are false. The law of
Causality tells us that the nature o( A is entirely
dependent on its cause. If (as the supporters of the
unending regress assert) ^ is to be explained by an
unending regress of events, then its immediate cause
will contain an event, which we may call B. The
nature of ^1 is then dependent, among other things,
on the nature of B. It cannot be determined unless
B is determined. But B is an event, and, on the same
principle, will have a cause containing an event C.
Then B is not determined unless C is determined.
And, consequently, A is not determined unless G is
determined. And, similarly, A is not determined
imless D, E, and so on are determined. The conclu-
sion drawn is that A cannot be determined unless
the earliest event in the chain is determined. But
there is no earUest event in the endless series. There-
fore A is not determined at all. And this is impossible.
We must therefore either reject the law of Causality,
which makes the determination of an event dependent
on the determination of its cause, or we must assert
that the series of causes is not endless. And this can
only be done by asserting the existence of a first cause
which is not an event.

168. I shall not inquire whether this conclusion is
justifiable, nor is the inquiry necessary for our present
purpose. Even if we grant, to the believers in a first
cause, that an unending regress of causes is impos-
sible, their position will be untenable. For the


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


193


hypothesis of a first cause involves us in hopeless
difficulties.

The argument conceives God's existence as having
no beginning in time. But this leaves two possibihties
open. Either God's existence is in time, and has no
beginning, because he has existed through unending
time in the past. Or else God's existence is timeless,
in which case of course there could be no question of
a beginning.

On the first alternative — that God exists in time —
we have a substance which has persisted through an
infinite past time. Now if one substance is admitted
to exist in time without being caused, why should not
other substances do so too ? And, if any substance
other than God can be uncreated, then the necessity of
assuming the existence of a God to create them has
disappeared, I cannot see why it should be said, of
three substances existing in time, that God did not
need a creator, but that a man and a pebble did. If
God is held to be timeless, indeed, it might possibly
be maintained that all substances existing in time re-
quired a creator, while God, wlio was out of time, did
not require one. But we are considering at present
the hypothesis that God's existence is in time.

The universe, however, does not consist merely of
quiescent substances. It contains events. And the
argument before us says tliat, apart from the creation
of substances, God is required as the first cause of the
events which occur to these substances. This conten-
tion depends upon the principle that every event must
finally be derived from a cause which is not an event,
in order to avoid the infinite regress which would
ensue if every cause was an event, and therefore
required a cause.

But how does God cause an event to happen at

o


194 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

a particular time which did not happen before? Is it
by an act of volition which occurred at a particular
time, and did not occur before? Then that act of
volition is an event, and itself requires a cause. And
if that cause is found in a previous event in God's
mind, and so on, we should get back to the unending
causal regress which the argument started by declaring
impossible. We must therefore suppose that God
causes changes without changing. Either he directly
causes an event without forming a volition which is an
event, or, if ho does form such a voUtion, then the
cause of the voUtion is not an event.'

But is this possible ? How can that which is
changeless be the sole cause of any event ? A change-
less state can, no doubt, he part of the cause of an event.
But it would contradict the law of Causality to ascribe
an event to a cause which contained no change. For
in that case the cause would first exist without pro-
ducing the effect, and would then produce it. And this
change in the action of the cause would be itself an
event which would have occurred without a cause.

159. If we pass to the second alternative about
God's nature — namely, that it is timeless, it is clear
that it is also incapable of change. And thus we get
back the difficulties which we have just considered.
An event happens, and makes the state of the universe
different from what it had been before. The cause is
said to be God's timeless nature. That nature is the
same, however, before and after the event. (In itself,
of course, there is no question of before or after.
I mean that a human being who was judging of God's


' We are not yet discussing, it will be remembered, the
hypothestB that God's nature ie timeless, but the bypotheaie that,
vhile itself remaining unchanged iti time, it can be the cause of
an event — that is, a change in time.


GOD AS OSOnPOTENT


195


nature before the event, and one who was judging of
it after the event, would be right if they made the
same judgement.) Then there is nothing in that
nature which accounts for the change ; and it cannot
be the cause. If, while the so-called cause remains
the same, the effect varies, it is clear that the variation
of the effect — that is, the event — is uncaused.

As to the substances, other than God, if they are
held to have come into existence at a particular moment
of time, the event cannot be explained by a timeless
nature in God. If, on the other hand, they are held
to have existed through all past time, they have lost
that characteristic — their commencement — on the
strength of which it was asserted that a creator was
necessary.

It has been su^ested that the series of events in
time will appear, to a timeless being, as a timeless
reality, and may thus be due to an eternal and un-
changing volition of that being. But, if the true
nature of what appears as temporal is timeless, it is
not really a series of events, and therefore the law of
Causality does not apply to it. It needs a cause no
more than God himself. And thus the ai^ument
breaks dowm.

It may perhaps bo replied that these objections are
valid as far as they go, but that God's nature is beyond
our comprehension, and that in some way which we
do not understand he may be the first cause of changes,
in spite of his own ehangelessness. I have ditJcussed
in Chapter II the validity of such appeals to believe
in something, which our reason tells us is impossible,
on the ground that our reason is certainly limited, and
may be wrong. With regard to this particular argu-
ment, however, it may be specially noticed that it
requires us to be convinced, not only that we do not

o 2


196


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


know the nature of God, but that we do not know the
nature of a cause. The position we are discussing
maintains that God is changeless and a cause. Our
objections were directed to show that a (complete)
cjiuse could not be changeless. If this ia to be doubted
on the ground that the changelessne^ may be possible
in some way which we do not understand, then what
may be possible in this mysterious way is not merely
a changeless God but a changeless cause. This
means that a cause may be what our reason says it
cannot be.

Now, if we do not understand the nature of a cause
sufficiently to trust what our reason aays about it,
the whole argument for a first cause breaks down. If
we are to be so sceptical about causes, we shall have
no right to believe that every event must have a cause,
or that an endless regress of causes is impossible,
since these conclusions rest on what om" reason tella
us about causes. And the argument for a first cause
depends, as we have already seen, on the exclusion
of the alternatives of an uncaused change, and of an
endless regress of causes.

160. Thus the hypothesis of a first cause is useless
for the purpose of extricating us from the difficulties,
whatever they may be, involved in an endless causal
regress. If we are to avoid complete scepticism, it
would be necessary for pliilosophy to show, either
that such an endless regress is not impossible, or
else that some other alternative has been overlooked.
This question, however, does not concern us here,
since our discussion of Causality has merely related
to the asserted necessity of a firat cause.

161. We must now consider the argument from
design. It cannot, I think, be better stated than in
the words of Kant, who takes a very sympathetic view


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


197


of this argument, although he does not accept ita
validity. Kant, however, speaks only of the wisdom
of the arrangement, and of the consequent wisdom
inferred in God. The more ordinary form of the
argument includes goodness among the qualities ob-
served in the world, and inferred in God. I have
therefore added goodness to Kant's statement.

'The principal points', he says 'of the physico-
theological proof are the following.

'First There are everywhere in the world clear
indications of an intentional arrangement carried out
with great wisdom ' (and goodness) * and forming a
whole indescribably varied in its contents and infinite
in extent.

' Secondly. The fitness of this arrangement is
entirely foreign to the things existing in the world,
and belongs to them contingently only ; that is, the
nature of different things could never spontaneously,
by the combination of so many means, co-operate
towards definite aims, if those means had not been
selected and arranged on purpose by a rational dis-
posing principle, according to certain fundamental
ideas.

' Thirdly. There exists, therefore, a sublime and
wise ' (and good) ' cause (or many), which must be the
cause of the world, not only as a blind and all-powerful
nature, by means of unconscious fecundity, but as an
intelligence, \>y freedom.

' Fourthly. The unity of that cause may be inferred
with certainty from the unity of the reciprocal relations
of the parts of the world, as portions of a skilful
edifice, so far as our experience reaches, and beyond
it, with plausibility, according to the rules of analogy.''

' Crit'iqw of Ihtrc Reason, first edition, p. 626. I quote from
Max UUiler's tr&nsUttoii.


198 SOME DOGMAS wlELIGIOt


162. It ia to be noticed that this argument does
not assert, that all the part of the universe which we
can observe is of such a nature that it could reasonably
be supposed to be an end in itself for a good being.
The ailment is that what we observe is of such
a nature that much of it su^ests itself as being
suitable means to an end such as a wise and good
being would propose to himself ; and, further, that it
is of such a nature that we cannot believe it to have
come into its present state except as arranged by such
a being for the promotion of such an end.

It is clear from Kant's second paragraph that this
is what he means. And this is the position generally
adopted when the argument from design is used. It
is never contended that all the facts which are brought
forward in support of it are in every respect such
as God might will for their own sake, but that in
many cases they appear adapted as means to a divine
purpose. The eye, for example, is not treated as
something of intrinsic value, but as a means to sight.
And sight again is held to be a divine means to
a further purpose.

It would be impossible to base any valid argument
OQ the assertion that all we observe is worthy to be
itself a divine end. For such a conclusion would be
absolutely unsupported by the facts. Very much of
what we observe in the universe is of such a nature
that we cannot conceive that it should have intrinsic
worth in the sight of a wise and good being. How
could we suppose that such a being should hnd the
existence of one hair more or less on a man's head
to have intrinsic worth? Can we suppose that the
universe would be less good for such a being, because
a particular man bad one hair less ? And then there
in much in the universo which is positively bad, and


"God as omnipotent


199


this certainly cannot have any intrinsic worth for liim.
A being for whom sin or misery had intrinsic worth,
could not be wise or good.

The force of these considerations cannot be avoided
by the suggestion that perhaps all existing things have
an intrinsic worth for a perfectly wise and good being,
though our minds are too feeble to perceive it in all
cases, and that, consequently, all tilings can be justified
otherwise than as means. In the first place, the
view that sin and misery can have intrinsic worth for
a wise and good being seems absolutely untenable.
There could be no justification for calling a being
good, who approved of sin and misery for their own
sakes. (To this point we shall return later.) And, in
the second place, if such a view were possible, it
would be quite irrelevant for our present purpose.
For the relation of the facts of experience to ideals
having intrinsic worth is not the conclusion of the
ai^ument from design, but the premise. And it is
clear that we can only take as a premise the relations
which we know to exist, aJid not those which may
possibly exist beyond our knowledge.

Thus it is impossible to take everything as in itself
a divine end. On the other hand, things which
are intrinsically indiffereat, or even intrinsically evil,
may have worth as means to some end other than
themselves.

163. It seems to me that, whatever worth the ail-
ment from design may have to prove the existence of
a Ood who is not onmipotent, it is quite useless as
a proof of the existence of an onmipotent God. If it
proved the existence of a God at all, it would also offer
a positive disproof of liis omnipotence.

Kant points out that the argument could not
prove the existence of a creative God. As the design


200


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


has to be contingent to the material in which it is
carried out, it gives us no reason to suppose that the
being who carried out the design created the materiaL
' The utmost ', he says, ' that could be estabhshed by
such a proof would be an architect of the world, always
very much hampered by the quality of the material
with wliich he has to work, not a creator to whose idea
everything is subject.' '

And, he goes on, we should have no reason to
consider the power and wisdom of such an architect
as infinite. We cannot logically infer to more power
or wisdom in the cause than is necessary to produce
the effect. There may be more, of course, but we
have no reason to beheve that there is more. Now
the amount of the universe that we can observe, or
infer, to exist, and the perfection of the arrangement
that we see in it, may be very great, but they are
certainly not infinite. It is not in our power to make
empirical observations which shall be infinite. Ac-
cordingly, we may possibly infer the existence of an
architect of the universe who is very much more
powerful and more wise that we are, but not the
existence in him of infinite power and wisdom.

The same, I may add, is the case with goodness.
Quantitatively, however, the criticism has much more
force with respect to goodness. If there is an architect
of the world, our observation of the world will tell us
that his power and wisdom must be enormously greater
than ours. But it seems to me that a being of very
moderate goodness might easily have designed a world
with as large a proportion of good in it as we are able
to observe in the facts around us. This point, how-
ever, will be treated more appropriately in the next
chapter.

' Op. cit, fifst edition, p. 627.


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


201


1G4. We may go further than this. If a wise and
good being has used means to an end, this is a positive
proof that he is not omnipotent. For means are those
things which have no worth in themselves, but which
it is right to use because, without using them, some
end which has worth in itself cannot be attained.
Now there is nothing which an omnipotent God can-
not do — otherwise he would not be omnipotent. He
could get the ends without the means, if he chose to
do so. And therefore it would be inconsistent with
his wisdom to use them, since they are of no value
except to get an end which he could get as well with-
out them. In so far, therefore, as the nature of any
fact in the universe suggests, that it owes its existence
to its utility as means for a divine purpose, it suggests,
with just the same force, that the divine designer of
the universe is not omnipotent.

But tliis is not aU. The God whose existence it is
attempted to prove is not only omnipotent, but good.
Now there are many things in the universe which are
not only intrinsically indifferent, but intrinsically bad.
Such, for example, is pain. The argument from design
justifies the existence of these things as means to some
greater good. And when we are dealing with human
beings, or with any being of limited power, the use
of such means may be completely justified. A surgeon,
for example, is often justified in inflicting very great
pain. But this is because his end — an end whose
good overbalauces tlie evil of the pain — cannot be
attained without the use of these means. To use an
intrinsically evil thing as a means when the end could
be obtained as well without it, would deprive the
agent of all claim to goodness as well to wisdom.
And this would be the position of an omnipotent God
who used such means.


202


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


We may conclude, then, that, whatever force the
argument from design may have in proving the exist-
ence of a God of limited power, it is worse than useless
as a proof of the existence of an omnipotent God.

165. We need not consider here the argument that
the truth of Idealism would involve the existence of
an onmiscient being, and that such a being could only
be God. There seems no reason to conclude that
omniscienco implies omnipotence, and in that case the
argument could not prove the existence of an omni-
potent God. It is true that there is nothing in the
argument to prevent the God, whose existence should
be demonstrated in this way, from being omnipotent.
But, since omnipotence is not a quality which can bo
assumed in any pereon without being demonstrated, it
will be better to treat this in connexion with the
arguments for a God who is not omnipotent. In the
next chapter I shall endeavour to show that it cannot
be used to prove the existence of a God of any natm-e.


166. We have now considered the chief ailments
put forward to prove the existence of an omnipotent
Ood. It remains to consider what objections there
are to our belief in his existence of a more positive
nature than the insufficiency of those ailments. God
has been defined as personal, and as good. I maintain
that omnipotence is incompatible with personaUty,
and that, since the world aromid us is what it is,
omnipotence is incompatible with goodness.

An omnipotent person is one who can do an3i;hing.
The behevers in an omnipotent God do not always
hold, however, that nothing happens in the universe
which is not in the long run completely determined
by God's will. For the beUevers in free will hold that
human volitions are not completely determined at all.


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


203


and, in that case, they are not completely determined
by God. But, if they also believe in an omnipotent
God, they believe that these human volitions could
have been prevented by God, if he had willed to
prevent them. And they also believe that it is due
to God's will that human beings were created and
endowed with the power to will in this manner. If
this were not so, God would not be omnipotent. For,
if their existence was independent of him, then he
could not have destroyed them.

Now suppose that God had willed to create a uni-
verse, and had not willed that the law of Identity
should be valid. It seems that we have no alterna-
tive but to be inconsistent or to be completely
unmeaning. To suppose that the imiverse would not
have been created, although God had willed that it
should, would be inconsistent with his omnipotence.
But the assertion that the universe could be created
without being a universe, and without being created,
is surely unmeaning. And yet how can the universe
be the universe, or creation be creation, unless the law
of Identity is true ?

Again, is there any meaning in the supposition that
God could create a man who was not a man, or that
he could create a being who was neither man nor not-
man ? But, if he could not, then he is bound by the
law of Contradiction and the law of Excluded Middle,
and, once more, he is not omnipotent.

The assertion that God Is omnipotent implies that
God could still be God, and omnipotent, whatever else
was the case. Any other statement might, if God
willed it to be so, be either true or false, and yet these
two statements would remain true. But these two
statements are not independent of the truth of all
other statements — we have just seen that they are not


204 SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


independent of the truth of the laws of Identity, and
so there are statements which God cannot make false.
Consequently he is not omnipotent.

To take a less abstract instance, we may ask the old
question : Could God create a being of such a nature
that he could not subsequently destroy it? Whatever
answer we make to this question is fatal to God's
onmipotence. If we say that he could not create such
a being, then there is something that he cannot do. If
we say that he can create such a being, then there is
still something that he cannot do — to follow such an
act of creation by an act of destruction.

167. Another point must be considered in reference
to onmipotent personality. Human personality is
never found to exist without a recognition of the
existence of something not itself. (We may follow
Hegel's example in calling this the Other of the
person. Other is a better term than Non-ego, since
that may surest that what is recognized by one person
as not himself must not be any other person, but some-
thing impersonal. And this suggestion would be
wrong, for what I recognize as not myself may quit©
well be another person.) We only realize our person-
ality in so far as our consciousness has a content —
a manifold to which the centre is formed by that
I, awareness of wliich constitutes personality. And
this content of consciousness involves for us the
recognition of an Other. This may be direct, as when
I know something other than myself, or have some
volition regarding it, or some emotion towards it But
even when the Other is not involved directly, it is
involved indirectly. It may be that that which directly
occupies my consciousness is some part of my own
nature, as when I think of past events in my life, or
will to correct a fault in my disposition. But when


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


206


we inquire into the nature of those events, or of that
fault, we find that they include, or in the long run
involve, the recognition of the existence of an Other.

Nor is this recognition, for finite personality, a
limitation or imperfection, which it is impossible to
remove altogether, but which hampers the fullness of
self-consciousness. On the contrary, the more vivid,
definite, and extensive is our recognition of the Other,
the more vivid and definite becomes our self-conscious-
ness. As consciousness of an Other becomes vague
and indefinite, consciousness of self becomes vague
and indefinite too. As we fall asleep the two become
gradually faint together, and as we awoke tlie two
gradually revive together.

168. An omnipotent person, if one can exist, must
be capable of being in a different position from this. He
must be capable of existing out of relation to anything
except himself. This does not, I think, follow from
the conception of a personal creator, even if the
universe is supposed to have been created at a
particular moment of time. For the creator, although
he would have existed before the creation as the only
existent reahty, might perhaps have found his Other
by contemplating the universe which he proposed to
create in the future. It is perhaps not necessary that
the Other to be recogoized should be co-existent with
the recognition.

But it is necessary that he should be capable of
existing out of all relation to an Other, if he is to be
omnipotent For, if he were not, tlien he could only
be a person on condition that a universe had arisen or
would some day arise. That is to say, it would be
impossible for him to prevent the existence, some time
or other, of a universe. And a pei*son who canuot
prevent something from taking place is clearly not


206


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


omnipotent. There is perhaps no contradiction in the
idea of a creator who must create, but it is impossible
that there should be an omnipotent creator who must
create.

169. It may be said that reahty js wider than
existence. The law of Contradiction and the multi-
plication table do not exist, but they are valid. And
so, it may be said, they are real. Now perhaps an
omnipotent God could find an Other, which was real
though not existent, in eternal truths which he con-
templated. And perhaps all that is essential for self-
consciousness is the recognition of a real Other, whether
it is existent or not.

Before this could be accepted, it would be necessary
to discuss a very fundamental and a very controversial
question in Metaphysics — how far the valid can be real
independently of the existent. But without entering
into this question, we can see, I think, that the sugges-
tion will not help us here. For what could the eternal
truths be, which the omnij>otent God is to contemplate?
They cannot be the laws of the universe, for that
would imply that there was to be a universe, and so
limit God's omnipotence. Nothing seems to remain
but the possibilities to create a universe or not to
create it, or to create a universe of one kind or a
universe of another. That all this should be possible,
it may be said, does not depend on God's willing it to
be possible — on the contrary, the possibilities constitute
his omnipotence. And so his omnipotence is not
limited if we say that he inevitably recognizes these
possibilities as real.

But when we look closer we see that for an omni-
potent God, just because he is omnipotent, there are
no possibilities to recognize. For me, who am not
omnipotent, there are definite possibilities, and these


GOB AS OMNIPOTENT


207


possibilities are real, and are not myself. I can draw
a triangle or not draw one. If I draw it, I can give it
a right angle or not. But the existence of these
definite possibilities for me to recognize depends on
the fact that there is something, other than my own
will, which prevents my doing other things. I cannot
both draw a triangle and abstain from drawing it.
Nor can I draw a triangle which is courageous, or
which has two right angles.

Now with an omnipotent God it would be different.
Nothing is impossible to him, and therefore there are
no definite possibilities which he recognizes because
his will must submit to their limitations. If we aak
what exists outside an omnipotent God, the answer —
not only about existence but about all reality — must
be : What he wills. If we ask what exists outside an
omnipotent Qod, independently of his will, the answer
must be : Nothing whatever.' There are not even
possibilities. There is nothing at all.

Since an omnipotent God, then, could exist even if
he willed that nothing else should exist and that no
laws should be true, and since his omnipotence leaves
no possibilities outside him, but only nonentity, it
follows that he could exist as the only reality, and
consequently that he could exist without recognizing
any other reaHty. His knowledge might be only of
his own quaUties and states, his voUtions might con*
cem nothing but those qualities and states, his emotions
be directed towards himself only. And from these

' This is the case, even if we suppose, with the indet«rmioistB,
that human volitions, not being completely del«rmined by any-
thing, are not completely determined by Qod's will. For our
wills are held to act in this way only because God has endowed
them with the power to do so, and because he does not withdraw
it. The volitions, although not completely determined by Ood's
will, are still completely dependent on it, since they only taka
place because he wills them to do so.


208


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIOION


qualities and states must be deducted all those that are
determined by his will— for if these were essential to
him, his will would be under limitations, since he
could not dispense with them.

170. It would be too much to say that this gives us
a second proof of the impossibihty of an omnipotent
person. Self-consciousness is not the same as con-
sciousness of an Other, and we are not entitled to
assert that they must inevitably be found together.
But we have no knowledge of the first without the
second, and it seems rather unwise to build on the
abstract possibility that a being could exist, beyond
the Limits of our experience, who could have the first,
without having the second.

And this will appear still more imprudent when we
consider that, as was said above, the recognition of an
Other is, for human beLngs, not a hindrance from
which they cannot escape, but the condition of their
development, If an onmipotent person can exist it
follows that the recognition of the Other, while it
becomes more and more definite and extensive as
personahty develops within our experience, becomes
quite unessential to the most developed personality
of all.

171. We now come to the relation of omnipotence
to goodness. There is evil in the universe. It is not
necessary to inquire how great or how small the
amount of evil may be. All that is important for the
present discussion is that there is some evil, and this
is beyond doubt. A single pang of toothache, a single
ungenerous thought, in the midst of a universe other-
wise perfectly good, would prove the existence of eviL

Tile existence of evil is beyond doubt in the sense
that no one denies the existence of pain and sin in
experience, and that no one denies that pain and sin


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


209


are, from the point of view of ordinary life, to be con-
sidered evil. But it haa been asserted that the universe,
when looked at rightly, may be completely good.
Sometimes the standard is challenged, and it is sug-
gested that pain and sin are really good, though we
think them evil Sometimes our comprehension of
the facts is challenged ; it is admitted that pain and
sin, if they existed, would be bad, but it is maintained
that thoy do not really exist.

The first of these alternatives means complete
ethical scepticism. There is no judgement about the
good of whose truth we are more certain than the
judgement that what is painful or sinful cannot be
perfectly good. If we distrust this judgement, we
have no reason to put any trust in any judgement of
good or evil. In that case we should have no right to
call anything or anybody good, and therefore it would
be impossible to justify any belief in God, whose defi*
nition includes goodness. This objection, therefore,
cannot consistently be used, by the behevers in an
omnipotent God, against the existence of evil.

The second alternative is one which can only be
supported by metaphysical arguments of a somewhat
abstruse and elaborate nature. To expound and
examine these arguments in detail would take us too
far from our subject. I wiU only say briefly that the
theory of the unreaUty of evil now seems to me
untenable. Supposing that it could bo proved that
all that wo think evil was in reality good, the fact
would still remain that we think it evil. This may
be called a delusion or a mistake. But a delusion or
mistake is as real as anything else. A savage's errone-
ous behef that the earth is stationary is just as real
a fact as an astronomer's correct belief that it moves.
The delusion that evil exists, then, is real. But then,


210


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


to me at least, it seems certain that a delusion or an
error which hid from ua the goodness of the universe
would itself bo evil. And so there would be real
evil after all. If, again, the existence of the delusion
is pronounced to be a delusion, then this second de-
lusion, which would be admitted to be real, must be
pronounced evil, since it is now this delusion which
deceives us about the true nature of reality, and hides
its goodness from us. And so on Indefinitely. How-
ever many times we pronounce evil unreal, we always
leave a reahty behind, which in its turn is to be
pronounced evlL

172. An omnipotent God is conceived as creating
the universe. In that case it seems a natural inference
that he is the cause of all the evil in the universe.
But some people, who maintain the existence of a
creative omnipotent God, maintain also that the choice
of the human will between motives has no cause, and,
therefore, is not ultimately caused by the creator.
They admit, however, that God could have dispensed
with the freedom of the human will, if he had chosen
to do so.'

We may therefore say that an omnipotent God
could have prevented all the evil in the universe if he
had willed to do so. It is impossible to deny this, if
omnipotence is to have any meaning, for to deny it
would be to assert that there was something that God
could not do if he willed to do it,

173. What bearing has this on the question of God's
goodness? It is clear that man may act rightly in
permitting evil, and even in directly causing it. It is

' It seems curious that believers in human free will should
often accept the argument fc>T God's existence from the neoessity
of a first cause. If human volition is not completely determined,
the law of causality is not universally valid. And, in that case,
what force remains in the argument for a first cause?


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


evil that a child should lose hia leg, for the loss de-
prives him of much happiness, and causes him much
pain. But the surgeon who performs the operation,
and the parent who allows it to be performed, may be
perfectly justified. For amputation may be the only
alternative to evils much greater than those it produces.

And, again, the production of sin may under certain
circumstances be justified. Supposing that it were
true — fortunately there is no reason to beUeve that it
is true — that employment as an executioner tended to
degrade morally a lai^e proportion of those who were
employed, it would by no means follow that men
ought not to be induced to act as executioners. The
evil results which might follow fi-om having no hang-
man might far outweigh the evil done to morality by
having one.

But the justification in these cases depends entirely
on the limited powers of the agents. The father and
the surgeon, for example, are justified because it is
only through the evils of amputation that worse evils
can be avoided. If they could have avoided those
worse evils by some other course that would not have
been evil at all, they would not have been justified in
deciding on the amputation.

174. Now the power of an omnipotent God is not
limited. He can effect whatever he wills. If he wills
to have A without B, he can have A without B, however
closely A and B may be connected in the present
scheme of the universe. For that scheme also is de-
pendent on his will. It thus appears that his action
cannot be justified ^as the amputation was. It rather
resembles that of a father who should first gratuitously
break his son's leg, or permit it to be broken, and
should then decide for amputation, although a complete
cure was possible.

P2


212


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


If a man did this we should call him wicked. We
do not wait to call a man wicked tiU he does more
e\Tl than good. If a man should, at the risk of his
life, save all the crew of a sinking ship but one, and
should then, from mere caprice, leave that man to
sink, whom he could easily have saved, we should
say that he had acted wickedly. Nor is it necessary
that a man should do evil for the sake of evil. To
desire to attend a concert is not a desire for evil aa
such, but if I killed a man in order to acquire his
ticket, I should have acted wickedly.

Now in what way would the conduct of an omnipo-
tent God, who permitted the existence of evil, differ
from the conduct of sucb men, except for the worse?
There are palliations of men's guilt, but what pallia-
tions could there be for such a God? A man may
have lived a long life of virtue before he fell into sin,
or, again, we may have reason to hope that he will
repent and amend. But could we have any reason for
hoping that the omnipotent God would repent and
amend ? It seems difficult to imagine such a reason.
Again, a man may be excused to some extent for his
sin, if ignorance or folly prevents him fttim realizing
the full meaning of his action. But if an omnipotent
God is not omniscient (and it seems most natural to
suppose that he is), at any rate he could be so if he
chose. Or again, a man may have a genuine repugn
nance for hLs sin, and only commit it under extreme
temptation. A man who betrays his country under
torture is less wicked than if he had betrayed it
for money. But an omnipotent God can be forced to
nothing, and can therefore not be forced to choose
between wickedness and suffering.

175. Such conduct, then, as we must attribute to an
onmipotent God, would be called wicked in men,


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


213


although the amount of evil for which any man is
responsible is insignificant as compared with the sum
of all evil, and although men have in most cases ex*
cases which would not apply to an omnipotent God.
Yet this being is still called God, by people who admit
that goodness is part of the definition of God. Why
is God called good, when his action is asserted to be
such as would prove a man to be a monster of wicked-
ness? Two hues of defence have been tried. The first is,
in substance, that the omnipotent and good God is not
really good, the second that he is not really omnipotent.

The form in which the first is put by its supporters
is that goodness in God is of a different nature from
what it is in man. Thus Mansel says that * the inflic-
tion of physical suffering, the permission of moral evil *
and various other things ' are facts which no doubt are
reconcilable, we know not how, with the infinite Good-
ness of God, but which certainly are not to be explained
on the supposition that its sole and sufficient type is
to be found in the finite goodness of man '.' And he
goes on to say tliat the difference is not one of degree
only, but of kind. Pascal is still more plain-spoken :
' What can be more opposed to our wretched rules of
justice than the eternal danmation of a child without
any will of its own for a sin in which it seems to have
had so little share that it was committed six thousand
years before the said child came into existence.'*
Nevertheless Pascal continued to call good, and to
worship, a God whom he believed to have done this.

176. But why should the word good be used in two
senses absolutely opposed to one another ? The senses
are not merely difierent, as they would be if, for example,
it was proposed to use the word good to indicate what

' Limits of Itdigiofis JJiought. fourth edition, Preface, p. xiii.
* Works, ed. Brunschvicg, ii, p. 34$.


2U


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGIOK


is generally meant by the word scarlet. For what
is called good in God would be called wicked in men,
and good and wicked are predicates directly contrary
to one another.

Is the alteration to be considered as one of mere
caprice ? Are the people who say that God is good,
while Nero was wicked, in the same position as a man
who should call Everest a valley, while he called
Snowdon a mountain ? It seems to me that there is
more than this involved, and that the real ground of
the alteration is that good is a word of praise, and that
wicked is a word of blame, and that it is felt to be
desirable to praise God rather than to blame him.

But why is it desirable to praise him? Certainly
not for the reasons which make us praise Socrates and
blame Nero, For the conduct which in God we call
good is conduct for some faint and imperfect approxi-
mation to which we blame Nero. What other reason
is left ? I can only see one — that an omnipotent God
is, and will remain, infinitely more powerful than Nero
ever was.

On this subject Mill has spoken,' and it is unneces*
sary to quote words which form one of the great turn-
ing-points in the religious development of the world.
Yet when Mill says that rather than worship such
a God he would go to hell, it is possible to raise a
doubt. To call such a being good, and to worship him,
is to he and to be degraded. But it ia not certain that
nothing could be a greater evU than to he and to be
degraded. It is not impossible that God's goodness, as
explained by Pascal and Mansel, should include the
infliction of such tortures, physical and mental, on one
who refused to worship him that they would be a
greater evil than lying and degradation. Unless it is
' Examination ({f Mamilton, chap. vH.


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


215


said that moral degradation is absolutely incommensur*
able with suffering — and I doubt if this can be main-
tained — the case does not seem impossible. Nor need
the motive of the worshipper be selfish. The goodness
of God, like the mckedness of some men, might include
the torture of the culprit's friends as well as of himself.

177. We may doubt, then, whether we should be
bound, or justified, in refusing to misapply the predi-
cate good to such an omnipotent being, if the use of
the word would diminish our chances of unending
torture. But it seems just as likely to increase them.
There are, no doubt, men who are prepared to inflict
suffering on all who do not flatter them, even when they
know that the flattery is empty and undeserved. But,
granted that God has some qualities which would be
called wicked in men, it does not follow that he has all
quahties which would be calledwicked in men, and there
is no reason tosuppose that he has this particularquality.
Many men, bad as well as good, are not appeased by
such flattery, but rather irritated by it, especially if
they know it to be insincere, or to have been insincere
when it began. God may resemble these men rather
than the others. Indeed, the probability seems to be
that he would do so, since pleasure in such flattery is
generally a mark of a weak intellect, and even if God's
goodness is hke our wickedness, it can scarcely be
su^eeted that his wisdom is like our folly. Or, again,
God's goodness may induce him to damn us whatever
we do, in which case we shall gain nothing by lying.

When everything is so doubtful there does not seem
to be the least prudence in flattery. Nor can we rest
our actions on any statement made by God as to the
conduct which he will pursue. For, if goodness in
God is different from goodness in us, we should have
no reason to believe a statement to be true rather than


216


SOME DOGMAS OF KELIGION


false, even if it were certain that it came from Qod.
Divine goodness may not exclude the desire to destroy
our happiness by false statements.

178. There remains the attempt to save the goodness
of an omnipotent God by giving up the reality of his
omnipotence, while retaining the name. Various
elements in the universe have been taken either as
good or as inevitable, and the evil in the universe
explained as the necessary consequence of the reality
of these elements. Thus, for example, the sin of the
universe has been accounted for by the free will of the
sinners, and the suffering explained as the necessary
consequence, in some way, of the sin. Thus all the
evil in the universe, it is asserted, is a necessary
consequence of free will, and it is said that free will
is so good that God was justified in choosing a
universe with all the present evil in it, rather than
surrender free will.

Or, again, it is said that it is impossible that there
should not be some evU in a universe which was
governed according to general laws, and that to be
governed according to general laws is so great a
perfection in the universe that God did well to choose
it with all the evil that it involves.

It seems to me rather difficult to see such supreme
value in free will that it would be worth more than
the absence of all the present evil of the universe.
It might be doubted, even, whether the advantage of
unbroken general laws is so groat that the evil of the
universe would not be cheaply removed at the cost
of frequent miracles ^ But we need not discuss this.


' The BupporterB of this view of the supreme value of unbroken
general laws, have often, it may be noted, been men who believed
that God did well in permitting the human will to be undeter-
mined, and in working occasional miracles.


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


217


For it is quite evident that a God who cannot create
a universe in which all men have free will, and which
is at the same time free from all evil, is not an omni-
potent God, since there is one thing which he cannot
do. In the same way, a God who camiot ordain a
series of general laws, the uniform working of which
would exclude all evil from the imiverse, is not an
omnipotent God.

Or, once more, it is said that a universe without
evil would involve in some way the violation of such
laws as the law of Contradiction or of Excluded
Middle, and that these laws are so fundamental that
the existence of evil in tho universe is inevitable.

Even if there were any ground for believing that
the absence of evil from the universe would violate
such laws as these, it is clear that a God who is bound
by any laws is not omnipotent, since ho cannot alter
them. If it is said — as it may very reasonably be said
— that these laws are so fundamental that it is un-
meaning to speak of a being who is not bound by
them, the proper conclusion is not that an omnipotent
God is bound by them, but that, if there is a God, he
is not omnipotent.

It is necessary to emphasize this point because,
remarkable as it may appear, it is not an unusual
position to maintain tliat God is absolutely omnipotent,
and, at the same time, to believe that there are certain
things he cannot do, and even to be quite certain what
those things aro.^ As against such a view as this it
seems necessary to empliasize the tolerably obvious
fact that, if there is anything which God could not do
if he wished, he is not omnipotent.

' Cp-, for example, Flint's Theism. The omnipoteiioe of God is
asserted : I. 2. III. 1, IX. 2. In VI. 1 and VUI. 1 we find atate-
meuta of some of the things which God cannot do.


218


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


179. It may be said that we are attaching too much
importance to a aUght inaccuracy of language. If
people say that there are certain things which God
could not do, then they do not believe him to be
omnipotent, and they are simply using the wrong
word when they say that they do believe him to be
omnipotent.

But then why do they use the word ? It seems to
me that the confusion of language covers a confusion
of thought. Many people are unwilling to accept the
idea that God is not omnipotent. It is held to detract
from his perfection, and to render it diflSeult to regard
him as the creator of the universe.

And there is another point of grave importance.
If God is not omnipotent, the fact that God exists
and is good gives us no guarantee that the universe
is more good than bad, or even that it is not very
bad. If God exists and is good, the imivcrse vtIU of
course be as good as he can make it. But, if there
are some things that he cannot do, how can we tell
that among these impossibilities may not be the
impossibihty of preventing the world from being more
bad than good, or of preventing it from being very
bad ? If it could be shown that God's power, though
limited, was strong enough to prevent this, it could
only be by a determination of the precise limits of
his power, and, if this could be done at all, it could
only be done by an elaborate metaphysical investiga-
tion. Such investigations are open to few, and their
results are frequently highly controversial It is not
strange that popular theology is tmwilling to accept
the position that the goodness of the universe can
only be proved in such a way.

And thus popular theology has two conflicting im-
pulses. It desires, among other things, to show that


GOD AS OMNIPOTENT


219


the universe is more good than bad — at any rate in
the long run. The only means at its disposal for
showing this — if it is to remain popular — is ita belief
in the existence of a God to whose will all evil is
repugnant, and who is powerful enough to effect the
predominance of good. But if God is to be taken aa
omnipotent, it is certain that all evil is not repugnant
to liis will, and if he is to be taken as not omnipotent,
it is not certain that he is powerful enough to effect
the predominance of good.

The inaccurate use of the word omnipotence hides
this dilemma. When popular theology is pressed to
reconcile the present existence of evil with the good-
ness of God, then it pleads that omnipotent does not
mean omnipotent, but only very powerful. But when
the sceptic has been crushed, and what is wanted is
a belief in the future extinction of evil, then omni-
potence slides back into its strict meaning, and it
is triumphantly asserted that the cause which has
an omnipotent God on its side must certainly win.
The confusion is unintentional, no doubt, but it is
dangerous.

It seems to me that when believers in God save his
goodness by saying that he is not really omnipotent,
they are taking the best coxut30 open to them, since
both the personality and the goodness of God present
much fewer difficulties if he is not conceived as omni-
potent. But then they must accept the consequences
of their choice, and realize that the efforts of a non-
omnipotent God in favour of good may, for anything
they have yet shown, be doomed to almost total defeat.
It is not a very cheerful creed, unless it can be supple-
mented by some other dogmas which can assure us
of God's eventual victory. But it is less depressing
and less revolting than the behef that the destinies


tE DOGMAS OF RELIGION


of the universe are at the mercy of a being who, with
the resources of omnipotence at his disposal, decided
to make a universe no better than this.

180. In this chapter I have only discussed the view
which makes God a being separate from the universe,
though all-powerful over it. I have not thought it
necessary to consider the view — which has been main-
tained — according to which the whole of the universe
is one omnipotent person, so that God is the sole
reality, and we are not his creatures, but parts of
himself. This view has not had much influence on
religious thought. (Pantheism, indeed, has been and
is very powerful, but the prevailing type is that which
denies personality to the unity of all things.) And
it is so little known, and of so obscure a nature, that
I could scarcely have done it justice without expound-
ing the whole pliilosopliical system of each of its
principal adherents. It is clear that the arguments
given above to prove the inconsistency of omnipotence
with personality and gooduoss would apply to God
equally, if this theory of his nature were true. In
addition to these there would be tlie further difficulty
that it would require us to regard ourselves as parts
of God. The belief that one person could be part of
another would, I think, be found very difficult to
defend.


CHAPTER Vn


A NONHDMNIPOTEKT GOD


181. We must now proceed to consider the theory
that God exists without being omnipotent, so that
there are results which his volitions could not produce.
On this hypothesis it is possible to hold either that
God created all existent reality except himself, or that
the other existent reality exists coHBtcmally with God,
and independent of his will. In the latter case God
would act on his environment in the same way that
men act on theirs. His claim to be considered as
God would rest on the very great excess of his good-
ness and power over that of all other beings,'

What grounds have we for believing in the existence
of a non-omnipotent God ? His existence is sometimes
maintained, as in the case of an omnipotent God, on
the ground of an instinctive and irresistible conviction,
on the ground of the disastrous consequences which
would result from his non-existence, or on the evidence
of miracles. These grounds of belief were discussed
in Chapter II, and need not be considered here.

It will also be unnecessary to consider here the
Ontolt^cal argument, both for the reasons mentioned
in the last chapter, and also because it has always, so


' The belief in a creative God who ib not omnipotent b&s been
recently ui^d with great force by Dr. RAshdall in his eaaay on
Personality Human and Divine in the collection entitled Personal
Idealism. The conception of a non-creative God has been
brilliantly expounded and defended in The Limits of Evolution
by Dr. Howiaon.


090


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


far as I know, been employed to prove the existence
of a God who is omnipotent.

The objections brought in the last chapter against
the validity of the ailment for the necessity of a first
cause, will apply here also, since none of them
depended on the omnipotence of the first cause. In
the case of a non-creative Grod, indeed, there will
also be additional objections to the argument. A first
cause was said to be required, both for non-divine
substances and for events. But the hypothesis of
a non-creative God implies that non-divine substances
can exist eternally and in their own right, so that no
creator is required for them. And, as for events, the
argument for a first cause asserts that it is a sufficient
explanation of them to refer them to an eternal and
imereated being for their first cause. But if this is so,
then the existence of a God is not required to explain
them, for, by the hypothesis, the non-divine beings
are also eternal and uncreated, and therefore could be
the causes required.

The position of the argument from design is different.
The objections made to that argument in the last
chapter rested on the fact that its truth would be
compatible with the existence of a God who was not
omnipotent, and, indeed, incompatible with the ex-
istence of a God who was omnipotent. Such an
objection cannot, of course, apply to the attempt to
prove, by tliis argument, the existence of a non-omni-
potent God. But this argument will not give us any
help in determining whether God is or is not creative.
A creative God without unlimited power might find it
necessary to use means to carry out his ends, since the
limitations on his power might preclude the possibiUty
of attaining his ends directly. In this case he would
produce a universe such as is asserted to exist by the


A NON-OamiPOTENT GOD


223


argument from design. On the other hand it is quite
possible that the universe might have been oi^anized
as means for an end by a being who did not create the
reaUty which he dealt with, but arranged and modified
it as a watehmaker arranges and modifies the metal
which he cannot create.

In the same way the argument that a Ckid is
necessary because all reality must be known to some
being tells us nothing as to whether that God is a
creator. Such an omniscieat being might also be the
creator of all the existent reality, other than himself,
which he knows. But we can know things which we
have not created, and, if there is an omiiiscient being
at all, there seems no reason why he should not know
various existent realities which do not owe their
existence to his will.


183. Since these ai^umente give us no help in
deciding between the two alternative forms of a belief
in a non-omnipotent God, let us consider whether
there are any other reasons which sliould lead us to
prefer either alternative to the other. I shall endea-
vour to show that the hypothesis of a creative G!od,
even when he is conceived as non-omnipotent, labours
under serious difficulties which do not affect the
hypothesis of a non-creative God.

Before considering these difficulties, however, we
must make a further distinction. A creative, but
non-omnipotent, God may be conceived either as free
not to create, or as not free not to create. It may be
held, that is, that the limitations of his power left
him free to remain permanently the sole reality of the
universe, should he choose to do so. In this case the
limitation of his power would consist in tlie fact that,
if he did choose to create, he could not create any-


224 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


thing that he chose, but had only the choice between
certain altemativea. Or it may be held that he had
no power to abstain from creating reahty other than
himself, although he had power to decide, within
certain limits, what sort of reahty he would create.
The second objection to God's personality mentioned
in the last chapter would also apply to a God who waa
free to abstain from creating.' But it need not apply
to a God who was compelled to create, since the
created universe might afford him his necessary
Other.

183. The difiSculties which, as I have said, seem to
me to arise from the hypothesis that the non-omni-
potent God is creative, arise from the goodness which
we decided to be part of the definition of God. We
»aw in the last chapter that it was impossible that an
omnipotent being should be good, in view of the fact
that there is evil in the imiverse. The behevers in the
limitation of God's power assert that they have saved
the possibility of his goodness, because it is possible
that a non-omnipotent Gkid might wish to make the
universe much better than it is, and yet be unable to
do so. That this is possible with a non-creative God,
is, I think, beyond doubt. But I am not so clear that
it is possible with a creative God. It is quite possible,
no doubt, that there are some things that the creator
of the universe— if there is a creator — cannot do. But
I cannot satisfy myself that it is possible that there
could be anything which he willed to do, and which
yet he could not do. And he would not be good — and
consequently would not be God — unless he did will to
remove tlie evil which he could not remove.

' Sections 167-70. These objections, however, would not
apply to a non-omnipotent God, if it were htld — as some philo-
sophers hold — thnt it is possible for a truth to be real without
reference to aiiy existence.


A NON-OMOTPOTENT GOD


226


184. In one sense, indeed, it is clear that nothing
exists except as God wills it, if God i3 creative. For
nothing exists unless he decides to create it— unless,
that is, he prefers its existence to its non-existence.
But we often will to produce a result, and yet say that
■we do so unwillingly, meaning that the result is the
one most desirable imder the circumstances, but is at
the same time one which, in many respects, is unde-
sirable.

The old distinction between antecedent and con-
sequent volition is useful here. We will antecedently
that which we desire in aU respects. We will con-
sequently that which, under the circumstances, we
prefer to any other alternative which the circumstances
leave poasible. The two would be coincident for an
omnipotent being, but for others they may diverge,
and voi-y frequently do so. A good man does not
antecedently will to pi'oduce anything which is not
good. But he often wills consequently to produce
much that is bad. He wills, for example, to inflict
pain in order to avoid worse evils.

With the exception of the undetermined vohtions
of non-divine beings — if such undetermined volitions
exist — everything in the universe must be held to be
caused by God, if God is conceived as creative.' And
what is caused by God must be in accordance with his
consequent will. But need it be in accordance with
his antecedent will ?

The will of any being is said to be thwarted in bo
far as he cannot act in conformity with his antecedent
will. If I wish to enter a certain field, and abstain
from doing so because there is a savage bull in it, my

' It would be due to the will of God, also, that any beiaga did
form undetermined volitions, thoiisli the charituter of the volitions
they formed would be duo to nothiag.


226


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


action 13 in accordance with my consequent will. The
bull cannot prevent me from entering the field, and
I only abstain from entering because I prefer being
disappointed to r unn ing a serious risk of death. But
my will has, nevertheless, been thwarted. I did not
will to enter the field at great risk, but I did will to
enter the field. It is this latter volition, the ante-
cedent volition, which has been thwarted.

185. If the evil of the universe thwarts God's
antecedent will, the fact that it has all arisen by his
consequent will is no more reflection on his goodness,
than the pain caused by amputation is on the
benevolence of the surgeon. But it is essential that
it should thwart his antecedent will, since God has
been defined as good. God must feel the same im-
potent hatred of the evil which he cannot remove as
is felt by a good maiL Indeed, he must feel more.
For whether God is conceived as perfectly good or
not, he is always conceived as appreciably better
than the best man. From this it would follow that
evil must be more repugnant to him than it is to the
best man.

This does not involve that God is more dissatisfied
with the state of the universe than a good man would
be. If God is much better than man, he must not
only revolt more intensely against the evil, but he
must rejoice more intensely in the good. Again, it is
possible that a divine knowledge, which embraced the
whole universe, might be able to see that the proportion
of good to evil in the universe was much greater than
it appears to us who see such a small comer of the
whole. And thus it is possible, though only possible,
that Grod's satisfaction might enormously outweigh his
dissatisfaction. But, however much the good in the
universe may exceed the evil, there is evil, and this


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


227


must be more repugnant to God than it can be to
any one else.

The only way to escape from this concUision would
be to deny that any evil did exist in the universe, or to
maintain that God's goodness was so different from
ours that his antecedent will could be in harmony with
a state of things with which the antecedent will of
a good man could not be in harmony. These sugges-
tions were considered in the last chapter.

If, indeed, we were to say that the universe was
created by a being who was not good, it would not
follow from the existence of evil in tlie universe that
the will of such a being must be thwarted. Such a
being, however, would not be a God, of whose defi-
nition, as we have seen, goodness is a part Nor
would the discussion of such a view be of any practical
interest, since, as far as I know, the theory of a
personal creator who is not good is not one which
commands any support It lias been maintained that
the creator's goodness was of a different nature to
man's, but goodness has always boon attributed to him.

186. Why is it that any pereon wills consequently
that which is contrary to his antecedent will ? It is
because things are so connected that, if he did not
will this consequently, he would produce a result still
more repugnant to his antecedent will. I remain out-
side the field, in the previous instance, although it is
repugnant to my antecedent will to do so, because
otherwise I shoiild put my hfe in great peril, and
because that is more repugnant to my antecedent will
than staying outside the field would be. In tho same
way, we are told, God creates evil things, which is an
act repugnant to his antecedent volition, because if
he did not do so, he would have to create stiU worse
things, or abstain from creating things with an amount


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


of good which more than outweighs the evil. And
either of these courses would be still more repugnant
to his antecedent voUtion than the course which he
actually takes.

In every case where the consequent volition has an
element repugnant to antecedent volition the explana-
tion is the limited power of the agent. If I could
pacify the bull by a look, I should enter the field safely,
and thus gratify both my antecedent volitions. If
God could have abstained from creating the evil he
did create, and at the same time abstained from creat-
ing any greater evil, and created all the good he did
create, he would have created a universe which was all
good and no evil, and was therefore in complete bar*
mony with his antecedent volition.

There is often considerable unwillingness among
theists, as was said at the end of the last chapter, to
admit that God is not omnipotent. But when that
has once been admitted, it seems to be generally taken
as a matter of course, that God might will consequently
to create, and so create, that which was repugnant to
his antecedent will. We have continual examples in
daily life of men willing consequently what is repugnant
to their antecedent will. It seems to be thought that
so soon as we are in a position to say that God is like
man in not being omnipotent, we are entitled to believe
that he may act repugnantly to his antecedent volition.

187. But there is another very important difference
between man and a creative God, even if that God is
not omnipotent No characteristic, and therefore no
impotence, of a man can be explained entirely from
his own nature. He is part of a universe, all the parts
of which are connected. Nothing can happen in the
rest of the universe which does not affect him, nothing
can happen in him which does not affect the rest of the


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


229


universe. And, therefore, when a man wills to do
something and cannot do it, his impotence is never
due entirely to his own nature.

This is clearest when the thing which I wish to do,
and cannot do, is to produce some effect on some being
other than myself. Then it is clear that success or
failure depends not only on my own nature, but also on
the nature of the being I am trying to affect. In
ordinary language it would sometimes be said that
a failure was due entirely to my own nature, if the
circumstances were such that an average person, in my
place, would have succeeded. But it is obvious that
this leaves out an essential element. However feeble
my effort, its failure cannot be explained merely from
its feebleness. For we cannot know that it was too
feeble to succeed, until we know the nature of the
being it was attempting to influence.

But the proposition is also true when the effect
which I vainly endeavour to produce is a change in
my own nature. My nature, in all its characteristics,
is dependent, not on itself only, but on the rest of the
imiverse. How far it will be changed, in any ease, by
the influence of my will to change it, will depend on
the result produced by my will in combination with all
the other factors which are influencing it. If my will
fails to change it, the failure cannot be explained by my
nature alone, but will depend also on the strength of
the other factors which opposed the change which was
willed, and on the feebleness of the other factors
which supported the change.

188. With a creative God the matter is different. At
the moment at which he creates nothing exists except
himself. He is the only existent reality. Whatever
happens must be explained from his nature, and from
his nature alone, for there is nothing else anywhere.


230


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


It is from his own nature, then, that we must ex-
plain the limitation of his power, which, according to
the theory we are considering, accounts for the exist-
ence of evil in the imiverse in spite of his antecedent
volition for something different and better.

But God endeavours to produce whatever he wills
antecedently. The defeat of an antecedent volition
means a defeated effort. And what I am imable to
see is the possibility of explaiDing the defeat of the
effort solely from the nature of the being who made it
He only acts by his will. And if his will is directed
to a certain end, can there be anything in his nature
which can hinder its execution ?

The result of answering this question in the negative
would not be to make the creator omnipotent. We
could still say that there were things which he could i
not do, but we should hold that it was also impossible
for him to will to do them, since the impossibility
must be found entirely in his own nature, and could
only act through his wUl, We should not be compelled
to believe — as the upholders of his omnipotence must
believe — that he could have created a universe in which
the laws of Identity and Contradiction did not apply.
But, since we should believe that whatever he willed
would find nothing to hinder it, we should concluc
that the impossibility of creating such a universe proves^
the impossibility of his willing to create it. For the
impossibihty of creating it rests entirely on his nature,
and his nature in acting is expressed simply by his will.

But if this is the case, the creator of the universe
cannot be a God. For then the cause of the evil in the
universe is not that the creator could not do what he
antecedently willed to do. Whatever he antecedently
willed to do has been done. But a person whose
antecedent will includes the production of evil cannot


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


281


be good, although, as we have seen, a being may be good
whose consequent will includes the production of evil.
And a being who is not good is not God. Even if we
say that the hmitations on the creator's nature rendered
it impossible for him to will anything better, that
would not make him good, but only assert that his
badness was inevitable. Under no circumstances can
a person be called good, whose will is not thwarted
by the production of evil.

I do not know that I can make this important and
difficult point any plainer, except by clearing away
a few objections. It is not fair to ai^e that, because
men can will all sorts of impossible things, it must be
possible for God to will things which it is impossible
for him to carry out. A non-creative God could doubt-
less do so, because the impossibility of his carrying them
out would not depend exclusively on himself. Hia
efforts to do so might be thwarted by the nature of some
other being coexistent mth him. It is only when
everjthing is completely dependent on God's nature —
as it must be in the case of a creative God — that we
can argue from the non-existence of a result to the
non-existence of any will on God's part to produce it.

189. We must also be on our guard against methods
of expression which treat God's nature as if it consisted
of different beings, capable of working in opposite
directions and neutralizing one another in the same
way that the will of one diplomatist may be opposed
by the will of another, or the will of a carver by the
nature of the marble. Thus it is said, for example,
that God is prevented from completely realizing hia
antecedent voUtions by the law of his own nature.
The will of God and the law which prevents its realiza-
tion are conceived of as so separate that their opposition
appears to present no difficulty.


232


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


But this is unjustifiable. A law is not another
existent thing, apart from the thing of wliich it is
a law, and capable of acting on it, as a wall may check
the course of a bullet. The law is simply the state-
ment of how the thing will act under certain cii-cimi-
stances. In other words, the law is not something
■which controls the thing's nature from without. We
are often tempted to give it this significance — probably
from confusion with the laws of jurisprudence, which
do control our acta from without. But this is to con-
fuse two quite different conceptions, which have nothing^
but the name in common. The laws of which we speak
here are not commands, but statements of facts. The
law of a thing's nature does not control it, but
expresses it. When we say that the law of the nature
of wax is to melt at a certain temperature, this is not
an outside authority to which the nature of the wax
submits. It is the nature of the wax.

And so the difficulty remains unsolved — how can
God's nature at once impel him towards an end and
yet be the sole obstacle to his realizing tliat end ?

190. Or, again, Qod'a will and God's power are
taken almost as separate beings.^ The tendency to
realize the antecedent volitions is ascribed to the
nature of the will, the failure to realize them completely
is ascribed to the nature of the power — that is to say
to its Hmitation. And, as we have seen, there is no
difficulty in maintaining that the antecedent voUtions
which are due to the nature of one being may be
hindered from complete realization by the nature of _
another being.

But this view involves a disruption of God's nature
which is indefensible. If there is a God, he is a person,

' Cp. Dr. Bashdall'fi Feraonalitst Suman and Dwitie, quoted
above.


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


233


and not an abstract quality.' Still less is God to be
resolved into a couple of abstract qualities which can
be treated as opposing one another. God's power— the
power of a creative God for whom there are no external
obstacles — can only mean the extent to which his own
nature does or does not permit liim to perform things.
And wo are no further towards a solution of the diffi-
culty how his nature can stop him from doing anything
except by stopping liis willing it.

Whatever a creator does, he is completely self-
determined in doing it, for there is nothing but his
own nature to determine him. Therefore he is wholly
self-determined in producing, among other things,
much that is evil. Now when a being who is com-
pletely self-determined produces evil, knowing that it
is evil, can we say that such a being is good ? I do
not SCO how we can do so. A person who consciously
produces evil can be good, if he is not completely self-
determined, for then the evil may be due to the
external forces which determine him, as when the
surgeon is forced to give pain to prevent greater pain.
But a person whose nature is such that he spontaneously
produces what he knows to be evil — what is this but
the definition of a wicked person?

191- K we combine this result with that attained in
the last chapter it would lead us to reject the idea
of a creative person who is either omnipotent or
thwarted in his volitions. This does not absolutely
exclude the possibility of a creative person. It would
be possible that a non-omnipotent person should exist
for whom the present universe would be in every


' No one has realized thia truth more clearly than Dr. Raehdall,
or expressed it more forcibly. But I confess tlint it seems to mo
that, in his treatment of the relation of God's will to his power,
be hias temporarily lost eight of his own principle.


234


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


respect desirable for its own sake, and for whom
nothing which is excluded from that universe would
be desirable for its own sake. In that case his ante-
cedent volition would be for this univerae, and for
nothing else, and it would therefore not be in the least
thwarted by his consequent voUtion to produce thia
universe and nothing else. But such a person could
not be a God, because he would not be good. It is, as
we have seen, impossible that any person should be
good to whom some features of the present universe
were not intrinsically repugnant '.

192. I have spoken so far of a creative and non-
omnipotent God who is distinct from that which he
creates. But it is also possible to beUeve in a creative
and non-omnipotent God who is the sum of all ex-
istence, and whose acts of creation consist in pro-
ducing modifications within hia own nature, and not
beings outside it, Lotze, for example, appears to take
this view. This conception, I think, does not require
separate discussion. It is obvious that the difficulties,
already considered, of regarding a person as self-
thwarted, will be just as great If his creation operates
within himself as it would bo if his creation produced
separate realities. And then, as was said in the last
chapter, the conception of God as the sum of all
existent reality involves the additional difficulty —
which seems to me wholly insuperable — of regarding
one person as part of another person.


' Another argument against the poaeibility of a crrative Ood
would be Btipplied if we foiiinj reason to believe that all eidstent
reality was eternal and ultimate. la that cose there could not
be a creative Ood, or a creator of any sort, because there would
be nothing for him to create. It aeouis to me that by following
out the lines of Hegel's philosophy we are led to this conclusion,
as I have endeavoured to show in my Studies in Uegeitan Cosmdogi/,
chap. ii.


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


193. We now pass to the theory that God is neither
omnipotent nor creative. According to this theory
all the non-divine existent beings of tlie universe are
co-eternal with God, and have not been called into
being by his will. Their existence is an ultimate fact,
and a fact which Giod has simply to accept, as we all
have to accept it about one another. God can affect the
condition of tliese other beings, in the same way that
they can affect the condition of one another, and, pre-
sumably, of God. So far there is no difference between
God and other persons. The difference is quantitative.
God is conceived to be so much more perfect in good-
ness than his fellow pereons, that the due attitude of
all of them, even the highest, towards him is that of
reverence and adoration. And he is conceived to
excel them so much in wisdom and power that his
efforts are capable of producing important effects, not
only in one small comer of tiie miiverse, but in every
part of it. His position towards us is that of a school-
master towards his scholars. He does not create us.
He cannot destroy us. His power over us is limited.
And we can resist his power, and in some cases our
resistance is effectual — at any rate for a time, perhaps
permanentiy. But, on the other hand, his power is
greater than the power of any one of us, and is so
great that it can do much, though not all, of what
he wishes to do throughout the imiverse. Indepen-
dently of his exertions the universe would not be
completely bad, since beings who are capable of im-
provement cannot be completely bad. In spite of all
his exertions, he has not yet succeeded in making the
universe completely good. It is uncertain what his
eventual success will be. But it is at any rate certain
that the universe is better because he is working in it

184. Of the three theories of God's nature which


236


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


we have to consider, thig seems to me by far the
most tenable. God has been defined as good and as
a pei-son. We have seen that, if God is held to be
omnipotent, it is, at the least, very difficult to conceive
him as a person, and absolutely impossible to conceive
him as good. The creative God who is not omni-
potent presents less difficulties. But it is almost as
difficult to conceive him as a person, unless he is
conceived as not free to abstain from creating. And,
in any case, we have seen that he can only be con-
ceived as good if he is conceived as self-thwarted, and
that the possibiUty of this is, at any rate, very doubtful.

Neither of these difficulties apphes to the conception
of God which we shall now discuss. There is no
more difficulty in believing such a God to be a person
than in beUeving myself to be a person, since he, like
myself, is one member in a universe, none of the other
elements in which are dependent on him for their
existence. These other members, therefore, may form
the Other of liis personality. Nor does the existence
of evil in the universe reflect, of necessity, on his
goodness, since it may possibly all be due to defects
in the constitution of the other beings co-eternal with
him. In that case, of course, we should know that
God's power was not sufficient to remove these evils,
but this need not imply defective goodness in him,
any more than it would in a man. He is only re-
sponsible for making the evil as small as he can. And
the existence of evil does not prove that he has not
done this.

We may admit that there is nothing antecedently
impossible in tlie existence of such a God as this.
Persona do exist And, of these persons, some excel
others in virtue, some in vrisdom, and some in jwwer.
It happens not infrequently that one person surpasses


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


237


another in all three. There seems no reasons why
one person should not surpass all others in all three
to such an extent that his goodness would fit him for
a universal worship, and his wisdom and power would
enable him to dominate the universe ae much as an
efficient schoolm^Bter dominates his school.

195. But this is not enough. There is nothing
antecedently impossible in the supposition that the
next six dice I throw will come up 4, 1, 4, 3, 6, 6.
Indeed it may be said that, in a son,se, there is no
antecedent improbability, for they must come up
somehow, and this series is just as likely as any other,
if the dice are honest. Yet, if the dice are honest,
the odds required for a prudent bet on this series
would be enormous. There is nothing antecedently
impossible, again, in the supposition that at this
moment a play equal to Hamlet is being wiitten in
Gower Street. The existence of Hamlet proves that
such a feat is possible to mankind. If one such play
has been written, another may be, and it is just as
likely to be written now in Gower Street as at any
other time and place. But wo should want a good deal
more than this negative evidence before we should
believe that the great play was actually being written.

We must now inquire what evidence can be brought
in favour of the existence of such a God. Immediate
conviction, the disastrous consequences of his non-exist-
ence, revelation, and the ontological argument present
no new features when God is conceived in this way.
And such a God is not a first cause. But the ai^iiment
from the necessity of all reality being known to some
one has not been considered at all, and the argument
from design has not been considered as applied to
a non-omnipotent God. Let us first consider the
ai-gument from design.


238


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


196. It is doubtless the case that much of what we
observe around us in the universe could be easily
explainetl as tlie means for realizing some end wliich
is good in itself, or for reaUzing some end which may
in its turn serve as means to a further end which
is good in itself. Now if reality is so arranged that
it becomes means to ends, it is a simple and natural
explanation to suppose that it has been so arranged
by some conscious being who wills the end, and
brings about the means for its sake. Much of what
appears to be so arranged would require much more
than human wisdom and power to arrange it From
this it is a natural inference — though not strictly
logical, as we shall see later on — that it was arranged
by a being of sufficient pre-eminence to deserve the
name of God. Since omnipotence precludes the
employment of means, such a God could not be
omnipotent.

I have thought it convenient to discuss this ail-
ment while speaking of a non-creative God, because
we found reason for thinking that, if there was a God
at all, he was not a creator, and therefore the alterna-
tive of the non-creative God was the only one which
remained. But the argument from design itself tells
us nothing as to whether the directing God creates
things so as to form certain arrangements, or whether
he arranges what exists independently of him, as the
watchmaker arranges the metal of the watch, and
does not create it. I shall endeavour to deal with the
argument in such a way that my remarks will be
applicable to either alternative, although, for the
reasons mentioned above, we have come to the con-
clusion that, if any God is proved by this argument,
he will not be a creator.

The foots of the case would be met, as I have


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


239


admitted, by the hypothesis that the order and good-
ness to be observed around us are due to the influence
of a person who antecedently willed the good, and
who, though not omnipotent, was very powerful.
Such a person would be entitled to be called God.
But before we can legitimately infer from this that
God does exist, we must inquire whether any other
hypothesis would explain the facts as well. Would
the order, and the tendency to produce good, which
we can observe, in certain parts of our experience,
and to a certain degree, be explicable on the sup-
position that the reality around us was not under the
influence of a God ?

197. Much of what we observe in experience appears,
at any rate, not to be spirit but matter. And the
traces of order and goodness are to be observed in this
part of our experience as well as in others. Now
suppose that this appearance is correct, and that those
parts of the universe, which present themselves prima
/acie as matter, really were matter. In that case we
should have existent reality which was unconscious,
which was not actuated by final causes, since it could
desire nothing and judge nothing good, and which was
actuated only by causes of a mechanical nature. More-
over, it would either be infinitely divisible, or divided
into a great number of vei^f small parts, and its parts
would have no intrinsic . connexions which should
arrange them in a definite order, but would enter into
various combinations according to the external forces
which actuate them.

If such matter shows an order tending to the good,
which does not arise from the action of a conscious
being with an intention to promote the good, such an
order can only ai"ise, as is commonly said, by chance.
This does not mean that the events which brought


240


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


about the order had no cause, for every event has a
cause. (Even the systems which deny this of human
voUtiona would not deny it of matter.) "What then is
meant by chance ?

108. If a roulette table were constructed in which
letters were substituted for numbers, and if the letters
indicated by consecutive settlements of the ball spoiled
out the received text of Hamlet, we should say, pro-
vided we were certain that the table was an honest
one, that this was a most extraordinary chance. Yet
the result was absolutely determined. With sufficient
knowledge, and sufficient power of reasoning, the
result could have been inferred with absolute certainty
before it happened.

There is no contingency in the connexion of the
particular cause with the particular effect. We can-
not get contingency unless we describe the cause and
effect respectively by some general class to which each
of them belongs. And then we get contii^ncy if the
nature of the general class to which the cause belongs
has no tendency to ensure that the effect shall be of
the general class to which, in point of fact, it does
belong. Thus it is not contingent that a roulette table
of the sort I have described should produce an effect
which is a succession of letters. The nature of such
roulette tables ensures that they should produce such
an effect. It could not, for example, produce a succes-
sion of numbers, becauso the holes are not marked
with numbers, but letters. But if we bring the effect
under another general class to which it belongs, and
call it not merely a succession of letters (which it is),
but also a copy of the play of Hamlet (which it also
is), then the connexion is contingent For there is
nothing in the nature of such roulette tables as a class
which makes it necessary or probable that its effect


A NON^OMNIPOTENT GOD


241


should come under the general claas of copies of Hamlet.
Thus we do not say that it is a, chance that the table
produces a sequence of letters, but we do say that it is
a chance that it produces Hamlet.

If then, matter uninfluenced by mind should assume
a form which contained ordered means towards a
good end, we should say that this was a chance, not
meaning that the particular cause could have produced
anything but what it did produce, but meaning that
there is no necessity or probability that a cause which
answera to the description of matter uninfluenced by
mind should produce such an effect as answers to the
description of ordered means towards a good end.

199. If we are perfectly sure that no cause can be
found for the eflect which would have a tendency to
produce an effect of this nature, we must accept the
view that it has happened by chance, as explained
above. But when the chance would be antecedently
a very small one, we are unwilling to accept this view.
I suppose that no evidence which our imperfect human
knowledge admits would convince us that a roulette
table spelled out Hamlet by chance. We should always
prefer the belief that it was influenced, in some way
unknown to us, and perhaps by some law as yet
unknown to science, by a mind which had for some
reason resolved that it should spell out Hamlet. Even
supposing — which is a closer analogy to the state of the
world as we perceive it— that the table should at inter-
vals, interspersed with long series of letters without
significance or coherence, give us a sentence, now of
Hamlet, now of Paradise Lost, mutilated and distorted,
but still to be recognized, we should probably insist on
attributing this to the action of a mind, however unable
we were to explain how a mind could act on the
table.

9


242


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


The reason of this unwillingness to accept chance
is, it would seem, that if we accept as a cause a mind
which wills to produce the result, there is a reason
why a significant result should be produced rather
than any other, while, if we hold that all that we
know about the cause is that it is matter unlniluenced
by mind, we have to assume that a result has taken
place against wliich there was an enormous antecedent
probability. The uninfluenced roulette table is just as
likely to produce any one combination of letters as any
other, and the number of combinations of letters which
have no significance are enormously greater than those
which have a significance. This is true even if we
take a series of a hundred letters, much more if
we take so long a series as that of the letters in
Hamlet.

200. On this principle the argument from design
urges that the traces of order directed towards good
which we perceive in the universe render the hypo,
thesis that matter is directed by mind more probable
than the hypothesis that it is not directed by mind.
In the first case the order is accounted for at once. In
the second case we have to make the additional
hypothesis that it has been brought about by causes
which were just as likely to produce any one of
many results which excluded such an order, and
therefore were more likely to exclude the order than
to produce it.

There is certainly force in this contention, but it
is not as strong as it is sometimes supposed to be. It
is sometimes put as if the antecedent improbability
was that of precisely the actual arrangement of the
universe occurring among all the possible arrange-
ments which midirected matter could fall into. But
this is wrong. For macy other arrangements of the


)N-OMNIPOTENT GOD


243


universe would have given us as good reason to trace
order directed towards good as the present arrange-
ment can. Consequently, to account for the present
state of the world, we should have, after assuming
a directing mind, to assume that it had chanced to
produce this particular arrangement, when it might
just as well, as far as we can see, have produced any
one of many others, and was therefore less likely to
have produced the existing one than some one of the
others.

Of course, if the present order is produced by a
directing mind there must be a sufficient cause why it
produced this order rather than another. But then,
if the present order were produced by undirected
matter, there must be sufficient cause why it produced
this order rather than any other arrangement. The
argument was based on the fact that all we know
about the nature of undirected matter was equally
compatible with an enormous number of other arrange-
ments. And it must accept as relevant the corre-
sponding fact that all we know about the nature of
a mind which wills the good would be equally com-
patible with a number of different orders.

Thus the greater improbability of the hypothesis
which excludes a directing mind is not to be expressed,
as is sometimes maintained, by the proportion of a
large number to unity, but of one large number to
another. But the number of arrangements which
would show some traces of such an order is very small
as compared with the total number of an'angements of
which undirected matter is capable. And thus the
argument, if not as strong as has been sometimes
supposed, retains considerable strength.

201. But there is another point to be considered.
The improbability of a result arising by chance de*

B3


244 SOME DOGMAS OF KEUGION


peDds on the number of times that it does happen
as compared with the number of times when it
might have happened and did not If I cast a die
ten times, and threw a six each time, I should have
little doubt that it had been loaded. But if I east it
sixty million times, and got gdIj one run of ten sixes,
I should find no difficulty in supposing that it came
by chance.

Now it is possible that all the traces of order in the
universe are in the position of the run of ten sixes
among sixty million throws. Our present discussion
is based on the bj'pothesis that matter does exist, and
that its existence is not necessarily connected with
spirit. In that case it would be possible that by far
the greater amount of the universe at this moment
does not exhibit the least traces of order, since it is
quite possible that by far the greater amount of the
universe is beyond the range of our observation.
And it would be possible that by far the greater
amount of past time did not exhibit, and that by £ir
the greater amount of future time will not exhibit,
any traces of order in any part of the universe, "Die
proportion of the amount of the universe which shows
such traces to the amount which does not may be so
small as to make the order which we see as expUcable
by chance as the run of ten sixes in sixty million
throws.

In answer to this it has sometimes been said that
the times and spaces which would correspond to the
sixty million throws would be so great that even to
write the figures expressing them would be fatiguing.
But this would only be a vahd objection if there were
any reason to suppose the world of matter to be limited
in time and space in such a way as to make it smaller
than this. And, on the hypothesis that there is a


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


245


world of matter at all, there seems no reason to
suppose that there is any finite duration or magnitude
which is too great to be possible for it.

The improbability that the traces of order should be
due to chance is thus lessened, but it is not removed.
For the existence of vast areas of reaUty in which no
trace of order is to be observed, while certainly possible,
is not more than possible.

The conclusion so far seems to be that, if any reality
is rightly conceived as matter, then there is a consider-
able probabihty — though by no means a certainty —
that any traces of order in it are due to the action of
a directing person. Such a person would be greatly
superior in wisdom and power to ourselves, and might
be — though this would not necessarily follow — also
superior in goodness. His superiority in all three
over all other beings might be sufficient to entitle Iiim
to be called God.

202. But the existence of matter is not universally
admitted. It has often been maintained that nothing
exists except selves, and that the reality which lies
behind the appearance of matter is in truth spiritual.
In that case all traces of order are to be found in spirit
only, because nothing else exists. How does this
affect the probability of a directing God ?

We must distinguish two varieties of the doctrine.
According to the first, the selves, taken separately, are
spiritual, but they do not form a spiritual unity. They
form a unity, no doubt, for tliey form the universe,
and the universe is certainly more or less of a unity.
But the arrangement of that unity is determined by
laws of a purely mechanical nature. The relations in
which selves find themselves with other selves are
determined by laws analogous to those on which,
according to the theory which accepts the existence


246


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


of matter, one particle of sucli matter is brought into
relation with other particlea.

203. If wo hold this view to be the truth, it will
not be so difficult, as it would have been on the
hypothesis that matter existed, to account for traces
of order without the agency of a directing God. For
every unit in the whole universe will be a self. It is
absurd to suppose that matter, if it is really matter,
should will the good, or take steps to carry out that
will. But it is by no means absurd to suppose that
selves should do so. However much the forces which
combined and separated selves were blind forceai
regardless of the good, still if all or many of the selvea:!
which they combined and separated strove towards the
good in whatever circumstances they found them-
selves, some traces of order would naturally arise in
the universe.

In such a case the universe might be compared to a
space into which human beings had been flung by
some natural force — an earthquake or a cyclone. That
they were in that place at all, and all their original
arrangement in it, and much of their future arrange-
ment, would be due to this blind natural force. But
if they kept any control of their actions, their state
would soon show some efforts towards ends. They
would try to escape, or to alleviato their position.
Some would sacrifice the advantages of others to their
own, some would sacrifice their own advantage for the
sake of others. An observer would soon be assured
that they were thinking and willing persona, and not
statues or automata.

But while a directing min d could thus be dispensed
witli, on tliis hypothesis, with less improbability than
if matter really existed, there would still be some
difficulty in dispensing with it. We perceive tracoa


r-OMNIPOTENT GOD

of order which extend over such lar^e areas of the
uiiiverse, and which are so minute and exact in their
arrangements, that it is impos8il>Io to regard tliem as
due to the efforts of a single self no higher than we
are. And it seems very diflScult to suppose them due
to the unconscious co-operation of many such selves, if
the relations and juxtapositions of tliose selves are due
to blind forces. On the other hand, if we suppose it
to be due to the conscious co-operation of selves, we
cannot suppose that those selves are no higher than
our own, since the knowledge required in order to
plan and carry out such a work would require far more
than human capabilities. It is simpler and more
probable to fall back on the supposition of a directing
person — or possibly a plurality of such peraons — of
a much higher nature.

204. But tliere is a third hj'potliesis. We may
deny that matter exists, and we may deny that selv^
are only connected by blind forces. We may hold
tliat reality consists of a system of selves, and we may
hold that the nature of that system can to some extent
be determined. We may bold further that what we
can determine about that system is such that it shows
it to exhibit an order directed towards the production
of something of spiritual significance and value — of
something wliich is either completely good, or, at any
rate, more good than bad. Such a view as this is the
basis of the systems of Fichte, of Hegel, of Lotze.

Now, if wo hold this view, it seems to me that the
directing mind is not wanted at all to account for the
traces of order in the universe. The nature of reality
has been seen to be such that it inevitably manifests
itself in order directed towards the good. It is a
harmonious system — no longer a mere aggregate,
whether of atoms or souls — and so it must manifest


SOME DOGMAS 01


tGION


itself in order. And it is a system of such a nature
that it is directed towards some end which is, on the
whole, good. And therefore the order in which it
manifests itself must be an order directed, to some
degree at any rate, towards what is good.*

305. We may be asked how such a barmomous
system of selves came into existence, and it may be
said that its production would require a directing
mind. But this is not vaUd. For, if this theory is
true, the harmonious system of selves is the funda-
mental fact of the universe. And, on any theory,
there must always be a fundamental fact which is
accounted for by nothing, and which accounts for
everything. If it were a fatal objection to this theory
that it takes a harmonious system of selves as an
ultimate fact, which cannot be explained any further,
it would be just as fatal an objection to the opposite
theory that it takes the existence and nature of God
as an ultimate fact, which cannot be explained any
further. If it is asked, ' Who made the system of
selves, and secured that it should be harmonious
rather than chaotic ? ' it may as well be asked, ' Who
made God, and secured that he should be good rather
than bad?' The fact is that both questions are un-
justifiable, since the system of selves, on the one hand,
and God on the other hand, are both put forward as
ultimate facts.

If matter, or selves mechanicaUy arranged, are
accepted as real, the probability of a directing mind
arises from the fact that nothing that we know about


' The point ia not merely that we know that the nature of
reality is such as to produce the traora of order. We knew that
before, since we knew that it did produce them. The point is
that tlie qualities which wo have determined reality to poaaeea are
8uoh that they are seen to involve the production of such an order,
and thtire ia no longer any chance or contiogency in its productioa.


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


249


the nature of the matter, or the natxire of the selves,
would explain the traces of order, and that therefore
we had a tendency to postulate an external cause
whose nature would explain them. But here the
nature of the system of selves does explain the traces
of order, and there is no need to go further.

206. Such a harmonious system of selves, if it
existed, would be the fundamental reality of the
universe. But its existence is, of course, by no means
self-evident, and we must prove its truth before we
are entitled to beUeve in it. Such a proof cannot be
attempted here, since it would involve a discussion
of a complete system of metaphysics. The theory is,
at any rate, one which is widely held. And the onus
of disproving it lies on the supporters of the argument
from design. Their position is that the hypothesis of
a directing God is the only one which, without great
improbability, can be used to explain the traces of
order in the universe. They are bound, therefore, to
disprove an hypothesis, which, if true, would explain
the traces of order in the universe without any im-
probability at all.

The existence of such a harmonious system of selves
would not disprove the existence of a directing God.
It might well be that among those selves was one
who, in goodness, wisdom, and power, so much ex-
celled all the others that he might appropriately be
called God. And so powerful a being would doubtless
have a large share in carrying out the order of the
universe. But, althougli the existence of a harmonious
system of selves is not incompatible with the existence
of a directing God, it is, as we have seen, incompatible
with any possibihty of proving his existence by the
ai-gument from design. The order in the universe
would be there, on this hypothesis, whether there was


250


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


a God or not, and cannot, therefore, be used to prove
his existence.

207. Idealism and Theism are generally held to be
theories which have a natural affinity. But they ai'e
perfectly separable. It is quite possible to believe
that there is no reahty except spirit, and yet to reject
the conception of a God. On the other side, most
people who accept the existence of God have no doubt
that matter is as real as spirit. And we see now that
under certain circumstances the interests of Theism
may lie in disproving Idealism. If there is matter,
there is mucli in the arrangement of matter which
seems to require a God to direct it. But if all reality
is a hannonious system of selves, it is perhaps itself
sufficiently godlike to dispense with a God.

The weight which Mill attaches to the argument
from design must in any case be an interesting and
significaiit fact.' But considerations which affected
him would have no force for a thinker who believed,
as Mill did not believe, that reality, of its own nature,
and without any direction, formed a harmonious
spiritual system.

208. We must now proceed from the argument
from design to the ai^ument from the necessity of
everytliing being known to some one. This ailment
has been stated by Dr. Eashdall in a ciitieism with
which he honoured a previous book of mine. ' Mr.
Mt^Taggart (whatever we may say of the " Pluralists ")
feels that the world must be a Unity, that it consists
not merely of souls but of related and inter-connected
souls which forai a system. But a system for whom ?
The idea of a system which is not " for " any mind
at all is not open to an Idealist ; and the idea of a
world each pai-t of which is known to some mind

' Essays on Beligion, III, i.


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


251


but is not known as a whole to any mind is almost
equally difficult. Wliei'e then, in hia view, is the
Mind that knows the whole? i.e. the whole system
of souls with the content of each.''

If there is no omniscient person there is doubtless
a possibility that some things may exist which are not
known to anybody — -or, at least, not fully known to
anybody. And in that case there can be nobody who
knows everything— no one, that is, who knows the
system of selves in its entirety. And, again, an
omniscient person might very probably be— though it
is not certain that he would be— a person of such
power and goodness as to be rightly called God.

309. But I cannot see that it is at all necessary
for an idealist to admit that nothing can exist except
that which is far a mind, in other words, except that
which is known. There is, no doubt, a school of
Idealism which maintains this. It has been main-
tained that to Be is to be Perceived, or that to Be
is to be Thought. To such Idealism, certainly, Dr.
Kashdall's argument applies. If all reality is a system,
and if only that has being which is known, then
some person must know the system, and so know all
reality.

There is, however, another form of Idealism — the
form which seems to me to be true — which is not liable
to these criticisms. This form of Idealism does not
say that nothing can be real except what is known. It
says that nothing can exist but persons — conscious
beings, who know, will, and feeL To the traditional
expression of the first-mentioned school. Esse erf
percipi, the adherents of the second view might, for
the sake of antithesis, oppose the maxim Esse est
percipere. But it must always be remembered that

' Personal Jdedism, Essay VIU, p. 893.


252


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


such a formula sacrifices accuracy to antithesis, since
persons have other activities as fundamental as know-
ledge.

Now if we take this view, there seems no difficulty
at all in saying that certain aspects of reality are
unknown to every one. The theory maintains that
nothing exists but persons connected in a unity. Ac-
cordingly, whatever exists must either be a conscious
person, or a quality belonging to him, or an event
happening to him, or else it must be one of those
relations which connect these persons, and make up
their unity. In the latter case, while it does not
actually fall within any one person, it involves a quality
which does. For if A and B are in relation, then
A has the quahty of being related to B, and B has
the quality of being related to A. Thus there is no
reality which cannot be expressed in a proposition
about conscious persons.

But it does not follow from this that whatever
exists must be known to some one. A proposition
about one conscious person stands in no diiferent
relation to any other conscious person than a pro-
position which was not about a person at all would
do. If a true proposition about a conscious person
cannot remain unknown, and the reason of this is
that it is about a conscious person, it can only be
because such a proposition must be known to the
person himself. But this is certainly not the case.
It is often a true proposition about a person that he
is vain, humble, or the like, without his knowing it.
Again, it must be true of every conscious person either
that he was created by a God or that he was not.
But many persons do not know either of these pro-
positions to be true — either because they are in doubt,
or because they are too young or ignorant to have


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


253


thought about them. In these cases something must
be true about a person which he does not himself know,
and in this event the form of Idealism which we are
now discussing can offer no opposition to its being true
without any one knowing it.

If I am right, then, we must reject Dr. Rashdall's
argument that Ideahsm involves an omniscient person.
My counter-argument has, of course, not been directed
against Dr. Rashdall's view that one form of Idealism
does involve an omniscient peraon, but has only pointed
out that another form of Ideahsm exists which does not.

210. Another point remains for consideration. If
it were proved that there was a person in the universe
who greatly excelled all others both in wisdom and
power, yet this would not by itself prove the existence
of a God. For God has not only to be wise and
powerful, but also good. How are we to prove that
this director of the universe is good enough to be
called God?

In the first place, he could not, as it seems to me,
be perfectly good. He is one self in a universe which
contains other selves. He is continually acting on
them. They, in their turn, are continually acting on
him, sometimes helping his plans, sometimes thwart-
ing them, sometimes rejoicing him, sometimes griev-
ing him. Selves in such a union as this form a
society. We have to consider, then, the director of
the universe as one of a society of selves.

Is it possible that one member of a society should
be completely perfect while others are not ? We see,
of course, in everyday life, that people of very different
degrees of perfection may be closely united. But
I do not see how there can be any unity at all if each
is not helped by the perfection, and hindered by the
imperfection, of every other. Any hindrance must


254


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


prevent the person hindered from being quite perfect,
and this seems to render God's perfection impossible.

'No doubt*, it might be replied, 'God is not com-
pletely perfect — at any rate, as yet. To be perfect he
would have to be in perfect harmony with his environ-
ment, to be perfectly acquiescent and happy. And
this he cannot be in a world which contains sin and
pain. But this does not prevent him from being com-
pletely perfect morally. He can be completely good
without being completely happy.'

It is surely, however, a false abstraction to maintain
that any cause can work an effect on one aspect of
a person's life and leave the others untouched. A pei>
son is not a mere aggregate of water-tight compartments.
He is essentially a unity, although that unity is mani-
fested in a plurality of activities. And, consequently,
nothing can be a hindrance to the perfection of any
side of his nature without affecting that unity, and,
through it, all the other sides of his nature. One
cause, no doubt, may have much more effect on one
side of his nature than on other sides, and so the sides
may develop unevenly. Thus three people, if arranged
in the order of their intellectual perfection, might be
placed— ji, B, C; if in the order of their moral perfec-
tion, B, A, C; and if in the order of their happiness,
C, A, B. But every cause must have some effect on
each aspect of each nature, and so, if any cause exists
which causes some imperfection in any aspect of God's
nature, it will be impossible to regard him as completely
perfect in any respect.

211. The possibihty would remain that the director
of the universe, although not perfectly good, was very
much better than any other person. This would
justify us in calling him God. Such a comparative
perfection would suffice for worship. If worship is to


A NON-OMHTPOTENT GOD


255


be anything higher than selfish propitiation of the
powerful, it requires that the being worshipped slxall
be conceived as morally better than the devotee. But,
if this ia secured, it does not seem essential that it
should be accompanied by an assertion of the absolute
perfection of the object of worship. Thus the director
of the universe, if he exists, may be a God. But it is
also possible that he may not bo a God. For that
■would require that he should be distinctly better than
the best man. And I do not see that it is impossible
that he should be even worse than the worst man.
Absolutely bad, indeed, he could not be. Evil,
though not a mere negation, is nevertheless of a dis-
tinctly negative nature, and could only exist as hmit^
ing and confining the good. An absolutely bad person
— one without any goodness in him — would be an
impossibility.

But it is not impossible that the director of the
universe should be worse than the worst man. Our
only ground of inference as to Iiia moral nature is the
present condition of the universe, which would be due
largely to his influence. It was admitted that much
of what we observe around us in the universe could
be easily explained as the means for realizing some
end which is good in itself. And if it is to be explained
this way, we might argue that the director of the uni-
verse must be good. But it seems to me that the facts
■which we observe could just as easily be explained as
the means for realizing some end which is bad in itself.
Many of the ends to which facts of the universe appear
to be adapted as means are partially good and partially
bad. Some of the ends to which the facta of the
universe appear to be adapted as means seem to be
purely bad. If we beheve the director of the universe
to be good we say, in the first case, that he brings such


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

ends about for the sake of the good in them, aad
because the good outweighs the evil with which it is
necessarily connected. In the second case, when the
ends achieved seem to be purely bad, it is said that in
some way which we do not know they may in their
turn be indispensable means to some end whose good
outweighs their evil.

And all this is quite possible. But then, it seems
to me, the contrary hypothesis is also quite possible —
that the director of the universe has proposed to him-
self an end which is distinctly bad. The existence of
the good could then be explained in the same way as
the existence of evil was by the more cheerful theory.
It would be something which the director of the uni-
verse unwillingly brought about, because the constitu-
tion of the universe prevented him from producing
the evil without produciog this amount of good also.
It would no more prove his goodness than the refresh-
ments administered in the intervals of tortures pro%'ed
the humanity of the torturers.

Nor would this possibiUty be removed, even if we
could prove that good far outweighs evil in the uni-
verse. It would still be possible that the aim of the
director of the universe was to produce a much worse
result, and that the excess of good merely proved that
the conditions under which he worked were unfavour-
able to his purpose.

212. I cannot see, therefore, that any reason has been
given for supposing a director of the universe to be
good rather than bad. But even if we assume that he
is more good than bad, it would not follow from this
that he would be a God. He might be no better than
the average good man. The size and complexity of
the universe — even of that little part of it which we
imperfectly observe — is so enormous that a being who


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


257


directed it must very greatly excel human beings in
wisdom and power. But it ia not equally necessary
that he should excel them in goodness. For it ia not
certain that the universe excels the works of men in
goodness at all, and still less certain that it excels
them very greatly in goodneBs. Indeed most men
would, I imagine, be distinctly reUeved if they were
certain that good bore as large a proportion to evil in
the universe as a whole as it did ia the work of such
men as Buddha, Aquinas, or Mill. Oi" course, a imi-
verse which was proportionately much more evil than
Mill's work mi{fhl have been produced by a person
much better than Mill, for the evil tnigJit have been
due almost exclusively to the limitations of his power.
But it is also possible that the conditions might have
allowed of a better state of things, and that some of
the existing evil is due to the defective virtue of the
agent.

It is possible, for example, that, while good is
attractive to the director of the universe, other things
are also attractive. And, when the two attractions
lead to different courses, he may sometimes be
tempted, Uke less wise and less powerful persons,
and choose the worse alternative. Or, again, to
produce the best possible result may well cause him
fatigue and pain, and it is possible that the amount of
these which he is prepared to encounter is limited.
The universe might have been better if his self-
sacrifice had been greater.

213. And, once more, if the director of the luiiverse
is finite, why should we be certain that there is only
one ? Many of the facts of experience, while they are
compatible with the theory of a single director working
xmder limitations, suggest at least as strongly the idea
of several such beings, working in opposition, or


25f


)ME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


possibly — as patriotic Tories work with patriotic
Liberals— partly in harmony aiid partly in oppo-
Bition. The opposition might be direct, between
powers whose ends are intrinsically contrary, or
indirect, between powers which had different ends,
not intrinsically opposed, but capable of clashing
under certain circumstances.

Or, supposing that only one director is at work in
the part of the universe which we know, still that
part may be very small compared with the whole.
How shall we tell that there are not other regions —
perhaps separated from ours by vast ungoverned
intervals — in which other beings, higher or lower
than he whose work we perceive here, are working
out other independent and isolated purposes?

There is nothing, perhaps, which should prevent us
from giving the name of God to each of several beings
simultaneously existing, or to one such being, existing
simultaneously with others, who equal him in wisdom
and power, but not in goodness, It may not be
impossible to revert to polytheism, or to conceive
Gt)d as striving against other persons who equal him
in everything but goodness. But the name of Grod
seems to imply that the person to whom it is applied
is of appreciable importance when measured against
the whole imiverse. A person who was only one
among millions of similar beings would scarcely bo
allowed the name. And yet this may be the case
with the person, if there is one, to whom we owe all
the order and purpose which we can observe in the
universe.

214. If we make God to be less than a creator, we
make it possible that he should be a person, and that
he should be good. And it is sufficiently cei-tain that
his wisdom and power would excel our own. But


A NON-OMNIPOTENT GOD


259


when we come to his relation to the universe, Hume's
suggestions are more easily ignored than disproved,
' In a word, Cleanthes, a man who follows your
hypothesis, is able, perhaps, to assert, or conjecture,
that the universe, sometime, arose from something
like design : but beyond that position he cannot
ascertain one single circumstance, and is left after-
wards to fix every point of his theology by the
utmost licence of fancy and hypothesis. This world,
for aught he knows, is very faulty and imperfect,
compared to a superior standard ; and was only the
first rude essay of some infant deity, who afterwards
abandoned it, ashamed of his lame performance : it ia
the work only of some dependent, inferior deity ; and
is the object of derision to his superiors : it ia the
production of old age and dotage in some supers
annuated deity ; and ever since his death, has run on
at adventures, ft^m the first impulse and active force,
which it received from him. You justly give signs of
horror, Demea, at these strange suppositions : but
these, and a thousand more of the same kind, are
Cleanthes's suppositions, not mine. From the moment
the attributes of the deity are supposed finite, all
these have place.' *

215. Finally, it is necessary once more to emphasize
the fact that, if God's moral character is saved by
Umiting his power, we have no right to be confident
as to the eventual victory of those ends in which God
is interested. We know that he will work for them,
and we know that they will be the more triumphant
or the less defeated because of his efibrts. But we do

' Dialogues cotuxming Natural Jidigion, Part V, ad Jin. I may
rem&rk that it seems to m« th&t Hume*s moat important contri-
bution to the ]ihilu3ophy of religion is to be found in these
Diuloguea, and not in the more famoua discuaaiou on Utrades
in the Knqitiry.

S 2


260 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

not know that they will be completely triumi^iant.
Nor is this alL We do not even know that they will
not be almost completely defeated. The fundamental
conditions of the universe may prevent it from being
anything but very bad, and aU that God's utmost
efforts may be able to do is to make the inevitable
calamity a little less calamitous.

That is all that the doctrine of a non-omnipotent
Qod can give us— a person who fights for the good
and who may be victorious. But it is at any rate
better than the doctrine of an omnipotent person to
whom good and evil are equally pleasing. And it is
fortunate that, as we have seen, the more attractive
of the two ideas is also the more probable. Indeed,
when the non-omnipotent Ood is also taken as non-
creative, there seems to me, as I have said, only one
reason why we should not believe in his existence —
namely, that there is no reason why we should
believe in it


CHAPTEE Vm


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


216. If the results which I have reached in the last
two chapters are valid, it would seem that we have no
reason to believe in the existence of a God. It remains
to discuss the effect which such a conclusion would
have on the happiness of those who hold it. The fact
that the belief in a proposition would render us happy
or miserable gives us no reason whatever for accepting
or rejecting the proposition. But this does not prevent
the inquiry being important Indeed, except for those
few students who pursue knowledge for its own sake,
the main interest of the inquiry into the existence of
God hes in its bearing on our happiness and on that
of our fellow creatures.

Men's desires on this subject are very divei-se.
Some people passionately desire the existence of a
God; some are indifferent ; some are desirous that God
should not exist. How a thing may be desired either
for its own sake, or as a means to something else
which is desired for its own sake. And, when a thing
is desired for its own sake, any difference of opinion
on the subject may prove to be an ultimate dif-
ference not susceptible of alteration by ai^ument
It is sometimes possible to alter a desire for an end
by argument. For example, a man who desired the
existence of an omnipotent God for its own sake,
might be convinced by argument that such an omni-
potent God would be -wicked, and might then cease to


*i«i


262


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


desire his existence. But it is also possible that of
two men who held exactly the same idea of what the
nature of an omnipotent God would be, one would
desire that he should exist, and one would desire that
he should not exist. In this case, it would be impos-
sible to alter the opinions of either of them by ail-
ment. In the same way, if one man desires to drink
claret rather than burgundy, because he prefers the taste
of claret, and another desires to drink burgundy rather
than claret, because he prefers the taste of burgimdy,
it is useless to try to alter the opinion of either by
argiunent. In the latter case the futility would be
generally ree<^nized. It is admitted that there is no
disputing about tastes. But with those desires, which
relate to our deepest needs and highest aspirations, the
uselessness of argument is often ignored whei'e it
should be admitted.

When a thing is desired as a means, however, the
desire is never so ultimate as to make ar^mcnt irre-
levant. If a man desires A only for the sake of Z, it
would always be relevant to prove to him that A will
not produce Z, or that B will produce it better, or as
well In the first case he will cease to desii-e -d at all ;
in the second case he will only desire it if £ is im-
possible ; in the third case he will be indifferent
whether A or B exists, so long as one of them does.

The interests which men conceive themselves to
liave in the existence of God may be divided into two
classes. In the first place, there are the desirable
results which we may expect will be produced in the
universe by a person who is pre-eminent in goodness,
wisdom, and power. We may call this our interest
in God's works. In the second place, the very exist-
ence of such a being, apart from the beneficent results
which his action may produce, may be considered


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


desirable. This may be called, to distinguish it from
the other, interest in God's person.

217. If God is desired through our interest in his
works, he is desired as a means. The univerae — the
sum total of existence other than God — will be more
desirable, it is said, if he exists than if he does not
exist. And for this reason God's existence is desir-
able. About such a desire as this it is not useless
to argue. We can inquire how far the existence of
God would guarantee a desirable universe, and whether
anything else could guarantee it if God did not exist.

It is clear, from what has been said in Chapter VI,
that the existence of an omnipotent creator would
afford no guarantee as to the goodness of the universe.
Such an omnipotent creator, we saw, could not be
supposed to be attracted by goodness as such, nor to
be repelled by badness as such. For if he were, every-
thing that existed would be good, and nothing would
be bad. And this is notoriously not the case.

Some things in the universe are good, and some are
bad. And, since everything would be exactly as an
omnipotent creator would like best to have it^ such
a creator must sometimes like things which are good
and sometimes things which are bad- Therefore we
have no reason at all for anticipating what the nature
^ta will be of those parts of the universe which are so far
W removed from us, either in space or time, that we do

I not know them directly. They may bo all good, so

m that evil is to be found nowhere except where we

K already know that it exists. Again, they may be all

I evil, so that there is nothing good except what we

I already know to be good. Or anything between these

^^— extremes is possible.


264 SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

an omnipotent creator can tell us nothing about the
character of the universe that we did not know already.
If we can 8c« in the universe traces of a divine design,
we might be able to infer what God wanted to produce
everywhere. But omnipotence, as we have seen, can
have no designs, for it needs no means. All we could
infer would be that everything which we know to
exist was such as to please the creator for its own sake.
And as what we know to exist consists of good and
evil, in proportions which vary from place to place,
and from time to time, it is impossible to predict how
much good and how much evil will be pleasing to the
creator in places and times which we do not know.

Thus the existence of an omnii>otent creator — to
whom, as we have seen, the name of God would be
inappropriate — would give us no reason to expect any
goodness in the universe which we should not have
expected otherwise. And therefore, from the point
of view of oiu: interest in his works, we lose nothing
by the non-existence of such a creator.

218. The existence of an omnipotent creator has,
no doubt, sometimes been made the basis of on
optimistic view of the universe. Some people have
been able to believe that the creator of such a universe
as this could be both omnipotent and good. And they
have also believed that, while a certain amount of evil
in the universe would not be incompatible with his
goodness, a greater amount would be. In particular,
it is often held that, although temporary evil is com-
patible with God's goodness, permanent evil is not.'

' Cp. Lowell [Biglow Papers, Second Series, VII) on the conflict
lietn'Mtn freeduni iiod slavery :

"Set the two forc€8 foot to foot,
An" every miia knowa who'll be winner,
Wlioee faith in God hez ary root
Tliet goes down deeper thiu] Iiis dinner.'


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


265


Such a belief would bring happiness to those who
held it. It would enable them to beUeve that the evil
in the universe would not exceed a certain amount
It might also enable them to beUeve that the evil
diminished as time went on, and perhaps died away
entirely. And a man who lost such beliefs as these
would lose much happiness.

But the position rests on a basis which is untenable.
It is not possible that the creator can be both omni-
potent and good. And, if this difficulty was removed,
and he could be both, then his goodness would be
completely untarnished by the existence, in the present
and the past, of some evil in the universe. And, if
any evil can exist without tarnishing it, it is impossible
to prove that it would be tarnished by any amount of
evil, however permanent.

Optimism wliich rests on such a basis would not
need for its destruction the rejection of the behef in
an omnipotent creator. It would destroy itself as soon
as the beUever in an omnipotent creator realized what
his own belief meant. A believer in an omnipotent
creator, if he were not hopelessly illogical, could get no
optimism out of his belief, and would lose no optimism
by ceasing to beheve in such a being,

219. Let us pass to the conception of a non-onmipo*
tent being wlio was either the creator or the director
of the universe. If non-omnipotent, he may be good,
though we found reasons in the last chapter for sup-
posing that, if he is good, he would not be creator, but
only director. If ho is good, then ho may be called

But since slavery esisted in 1862, when the poem was written,
Ood hod clearly beun either uoahle or unwilling to abolish it up
to that date. If the recognition of that fact is compatible with
faith in God, I can see no reason why a nuin should be thought
faithless who doubted as to God's power or intention in the
future.


266


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


God. From the point of view of our interest in his
works, do we gain much by believing in such a €[od,
or lose much by disbelieving in him ? It seems to mo
that we gain very little, whether we take him as direc-
tor only, or whether we waive the difficulties which
stand in the way of taking him both as good and as
creator.

Let us consider 6r8t the non-creative God. If such
a God exists, and if (as would be perhaps more
probable) he never dies, and never deserts the cause of
the good, then the universe is better than it might
possibly have been. This, so far as it goes, is a gain.
But it goes a very little way. The amount that God
may be able to effect in making the universe better
may be almost indefinitely small. It is true that we
should not call him God unless his power were very
great in compaiiaon with ours, and unless it were so
great as to have some appreciable effect on the univeiBe
as a whole. But the conditions under which his power
is to be exerted— conditions which he cannot change —
might be such that, however great be his power, how-
ever wisely it be esercised, it could only be said of
him, as of the general of a hopelessly beaten army, that
his efforts had made the result slightly less disastrous
than it would have been without him.

And, again, even if we suppose that God's exertions
in the cause of the good have produced a result which
is very greatly better than anything which would have
happened without his exertions, still what is greatly
better may yet be very bad. Those fundamental
conditions of all existence wliich he cannot change
may have such evil effects that, even after God has
succeeded in introducing very much good into the
universe, it may still be vei-y much more bad than
good.


THEISM AND HAPPIKESS


267


If we put these two considerations together — the
uncertainty of how much God may be able to do, and
the uncertainty of how much there is to be done — it
would seem that the hypothesis of a non-creative God
can give us no appreciable help towards a cheerful
view of the universe. For such a view we require
evidence of how good or bad the universe is. The
hypothesis gives us no help here. And for our pre-
sent purpose it is useless to be told that circumstances
could be imagined under which the universe would be
worse than it is.

220. The same principles apply in the case of a
non-omnipotent God who is a creator. He will make
the beat universe he can, but we cannot tell how bad
the best possible universe may be. The conditions
under which he works may be such that the best
possible may be very bad indeed.

*At any rate/ it may be said, 'if God creates the
universe, we have a certainty that it is not, on the
whole, more bad than good. For, if it were more bad
than good, it would have been better to have created
nothing at all, than to have created it. And so the
fact that God has created it proves that the evil does
not outweigh the good.'

But this implies that God was free to abstain from
creating at all. Of course this is possible. Much
would depend on the will of a creator, even if he
■were not omnipotent. And among the things which
depended on it might be whether any created world
should ever exist, or whether he should remain in
eternal isolation. But it is also possible that among
the things which the constitution of the universe
imposed as necessities on God was that he sliould
create something. In that case, the existence of the
universe only proves that it was the best thing that


268


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION"


God was able to create. It gives us no ground for
believing that the universe is good on the whole or
even that it is not, on the v^hole, very bad.

221. Is there any way by which we can escape from
the shadow of such dreary possibilities ? It seems to
me that there ia only one way. If we can so deter-
mine the fundamental nature of reality as to see
what Uraitations it imposes on the accomplishment
of God's voUtions, we might find that, while it made
it impossible that the universe should be entirely
devoid of evil, it did not make it impossible that the
good should always exceed the evil. We might also
find that the question of whether the good should
exceed the evil depended on God's volition, Now
God has been defined as good, and if we have any
reason to believe that a God exists, we may be sure
that he would will that the good should exceed the
evih In that case we might be sure that it did always
exceed it.

Or we might find that the Umitations on God's
power, while they did not admit of a universe originally
more good than evil, yet did admit of a progressive
amehoration of the universe in time, if God willed
it. And,, as God certainly would will it, we should
then be certain that this progressive amelioration
would take place, and would be caiTied as far as was
permitted by the constitution of reality — which might
be to the point of the complete extu-pation of evil.

Both these results, again, might be combined. We
might find reason to believe that it was in God's
power to ensure that good should always predominate
over evil, and also that the predominance of good over
evil should increase till only good remained. And
we might be certain in that case that God would bring
about these desirable results.


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


269


222. Thus, although the belief in a God, taken by
itself, cannot lead us to optimistic conclusions about
the universe, yet it might be possible to establish a
metaphysical position, which included the belief in
a non-onmipotent God and led to optimistic con-
clusions. But it might also be possible to establish
a metaphysical position, which would lead to equally
optimistic conclusions, and which did not include the
belief in a God. Even with a God, we are not entitled
to be optimistic unless the nature of reality, inde-
pendent of God's volitions and logically prior to them,
is such as to permit the predominance of good. Now
it is quite possible to maintain that the nature of
reality is such as to ensure the predominance of good,
independently of the volitions of a God. In that case
our optimism would not be affected if we denied God's
existence.

I cannot here examine whether the nature of reality
is such as to bring about the predominance of the
good, whether by means of God's volitions or inde-
pendently of them. The only way of answering this
question would be by the establishment of a complete
system of metaphysics. I merely wish to point out
that the existence of a God striving for the good is
neither sufficient nor necessary for an optimistic view
of the universe. There might be a God, and yet the
universe might be, on the whole, bad. There might
be no God, and yet the universe might be, on the
whole, good.

The statement that the existence of God is not
necessary for an optimistic view of the universe re-
quires some explanation. I ordy mean by it that it
is possible to conceive a theory of the nature of reality
which excludes the existence of a God, and yet leads
to an optimistic view of the universe. Such a theory


270


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


can be conceived, and, in fact, theoi-ies of this sort
have been held by great philosophers. ' But, of
course, it might be contended that all such theories
break down on further examination, while the theory
which bases optimism partly on the beUef in a God
does not break down. I do not agree with this con*
tentioii ; but I certainly do not wish to assume ita
falsity. My position is merely that the belief in
Gk)d will not justify optimism, unless it is supported
by other metaphysical conclusions (which, as far as
our present investigation goes, may or may not be
true), and that there are metaphysical conclusions
(which, as far as our present investigation goes, may
or may not be true) which would justify optimism
without a belief in God.

223. It follows from this that we must reject the
very usual assumption that theism, as such, is an
adequate basis for optimism, and the only adequate
basis. A man who believes in God, it is said, is
logically bound to take an optimistic view of the
universe, while a man who does not believe in God
has no right to take such a view. In fact, however,
the theist requires much more than his theism before
he is entitled to pronounce the universe good, and the
atheist requires much more than his atheism before
he can reject optimism as untenable.

What is the cause which leads so many people to
the view that optimism and theism are so closely
connected ? I beheve it is the same as tliat which
makes the argument from design plausible — the dif-
ficulty of apprehending the position of Idealism. '

We may hold that all existent being — other than


' E. g. Fichte, in hia earlier syatem ; Mr. Bradley ; and, as it
BeeiuB to me, Hegel.
^ Cp. Sections li(G-207.


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


271


God, if there is one — is matter, or that some of it is
matter and some of it spirit, or that all of it is spirit.
If we hold that it is all matter, we should have no
reason to take an optimistic view of the universe,
unless we supposed a God who directed and controlled
it. The nature of matter has no tendency to bring
about the good more than the bad. It naay do so if
it is controlled by a person who desires to produce
the good. But, if it is left to itself, it can only realize
a good result by chance, and that it should do this
seems very improbable, since, so far as we can judge,
the arrangements of matter which would thwart the
good are much more nimierous than the arrangements
which would promote it.

A similar result follows if we hold that, apart from
God, both spirit and matter exist In this case spirit
exists in the midst of matter. It is continually affected
by matter, and it cannot carry out its designs — in many
cases, perhaps in all — except by employing the agency
of matter. Even if spirit should aim at the good,
then, its success in attaining it will be conditional on
matter. And the extent to which such spirits as ours
can affect matter is extremely limited. We have experi-
ence every day sufficient to convince us that our efforts
cannot always make matter subservient to our pur-
poses. Unless the matter Is controlled by a spirit
much more powerful than ours, the predominance of
the good will be largely dependent on the undirected
action of matter. And it will only be by chance —
and that an improbable chance — that the undirected
action of matter will realize the good, or permit it to
be realized.

Thus, if we accept the existence of matter at all,
optimism, it may reasonably be held, does find the
existence of a God essential to it. Even if a God did


272


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


exist, it would not be cei-tain that he could realize the
good, but without him it seems almost certain that the
good would not be realized. And the some result
would happen if we substituted for matter anything
else which was not spiritual.

Even if we take all the existent beings of the uni-
verse as spiritual, the question arises whether the
individual spirits are a mere aggregate, whose juxta-
positions and relations are decided by laws resembhng
those of matter. If this is so, the chance of a predo-
minance of good in the universe, without a directing
God, is still not very large. It is larger than it would
be if matter existed, for the reasons which we con-
sidered in the last chapter, when speaking of the ai-gu-
ment from design. But, for the reasons which were
also considered then, the probability is not great. In
order that a system of individuals shall be good, it is
necessary that the relations between them shall be
satisfactory. If these relations are of such a nature
that they are as likely to thwart the good as to promote
it, they will only promote it by chance. They may,
indeed, be modified by the eflForts of the related indi-
viduals. But we do not know how far such efforts
will meet with insuperable obstacles.

224. Thus the existence of a God seems to be neces-
sary for optimism unless we are able to hold that all
existence is spiritual, and that all spirits form a sy.stem
such that it has a greater tendency to produce good
than to produce evil. And this is the metaphysical
view which is most removed from the attitude of every-
day life.

A civilized man who does not reflect on meta-
physical subjects almost always accepts both matter
and spirit as existent realities. He conceives himself
and his friends as spiritual, while their bodies and


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


273


clothes and tables arc material. Matter is lower and
less important than spirit, in his view, but it is equally
real. If he believes, as he generally does, that the
universe is on the whole good, he believes it because
he holds that the universe is created and controlled by
a God. The intrinsic nature of the universe^or at
any rate of one side of it — is no more calculated to
produce the good, than the intrinsic nature of canvas
and paint is calculated to produce a beautiful picture.

If a man does not hold this view, he is more likely
to hold that the universe is completely material than
to hold that it is completely spiritual. The arguments
— such as they are — for the first view can be learned
and appreciated without the systematic study of meta-
physics, and without using any ideas but those
which are known to every educated man. The argu-
ments for the second view, though they are much
stronger, almost inevitably require a systematic study
of metaphysics, and introduce a way of looking at
things which is very unlike our everyday way of
regarding them, though it may be much more correct.
And if the entire universe is material, there is no
ground for optimism unless all this matter was
controlled and directed by a God behind and
above it.

Finally, of the different forms which can be assumed
by the belief that all existence is spiritual, the form
which makes it an aggregate of meehauicaUy con-
nected selves is better known, and appears at first
sight simpler and more probable than the view which
makes it a really spiritual unity. The former seems
more probable because it has a greater resemblance to
the views of relation which are adopted in the physical
sciences, while the latter involves ideas which are
scarcely known except in metaphysics. As we have

X


274 SOME DOGMAS OF KELIOION

seen, the former would almost inevitably require the
existence of a God to secure a desirable result.

It is not wonderful then that it should be so gener-
ally believed that optimism requires theism as a basis.
But it ip quite possible to conceive the universe as
a spiritual unity of such a nature that it necessarily
manifests itself in more good than evil, or in continu-
ally increasing good and in continually diminishing
evil. In such a case an optimistic view of the imi-
verae would be justifiable, which did not depend on
the existence of a Qod. Such a theory must necessarily
take us far away from the standpoint of ordinary life.
It must make us look on matter as only an appearance
of spirit, and it must make us look on unity as equally
real with differentiation. It will not be easily imder-
stood, or easily proved. But it may be true.

225. Before leaving our interest in God's works, it
may be worth while to discuss the relation of the belief
in Qod to the behef in immortality. These beliefs are
often supposed to be logically joined. If the existence
of God is accepted, it is often held that from this alone
— independent of any alleged revelation on the subject
— the immortality of man may be either proved, or, at
least, shown to be highly probable. And, on the other
hand, it is held that, if the existence of God is rejected,
not only has one argument for immortality gone, but
there is no chance of proving it at all, or rendering it
in the least probable. Atheism must necessarily
involve disbelief in immortality.

Let us consider the first of these assertions. Would
the certainty of God's existence support the belief in
human immortality ? If it does so, it must be on
account of God's goodness. His wisdom and power
might possibly be arguments for proving that he could
make man immortal if he wished to do so, but they


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


275


could tbi


light on the


irow no iignt on tne question whether he
would will to do so or not. Tlie only way of deciding
this — and it is a way which is often taken — is to say
that imniortahty is very good, that its absence would
deprive the universe of almost all its value and signifi-
cance, and then to argue that Ood, who is good, could
not refuse us this gift.

226. But if immortaUty is to be proved in this way,
it is necessary to be certain that it is good. And tliis
would be difficult Many people do not desire immor-
tality. There are some who deaire no sort of immor-
taUty — who would rather cease to exist at the death of
their bodies than continue to exist in any way what-
ever. There are others who would not be unwilling
to encounter an immortal hfe of rest and tranquillity,
but who would prefer extinction to an immortaUty
which involved a continuance beyond death of the
pain and struggle of this life, even if that struggle
should be comparatively short, and should lead to
eventual repose. In the far East, again, we find two
of the greatest religions of the world teaching that
personal immortality is an evil, and that the liighest
consummation of a wise and virtuous life will lead U8
to lay down life altogether.

Even if we were able to put these difficulties on one
side, and assume that human immortaUty was certainly
good, should we be entitled to base a belief in immor-
tality on a beUef in God ? I do not see that we are
justified in this, whether God is held to be omnipotent
or not.

If God is omnipotent, then it is clear, as we saw in
Chapter VI, that there are some good tilings which he
does not antecedently will to exiat, and some bad
things wliich he does antecedently will to exist. For
some good things do not exist, and some bad things

T 2


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


do. Now how can we tell that mimortaUty is not one
of the good things which he does not will to exist, and
the annihilation of persons one of the bad thing3 which
he does will to exist ? To reply that immortality is
better than most things, and annihilation worse than
most things may be true, but is irrelevant For we
saw above that, if any evil in the universe was con-
sistent with the goodness of God, it was impossible
for us to determine any limits to its amount.

But if God is not omnipotent, then his goodness is
no security for immortahty. There are some
things which we know that he cannot realize, since^
we know that they do not exist How can we be sure
that human immortality is not among such things?
There are some bad tilings which we know that he
cannot prevent from existing, since they do exist
And among such things may be our annihilation at,
the death of our bodies.

If immortality can be proved at all, it can only be
proved by arguments of a different sort. If we are to
do anything, we must be able so to determine the
nature of reahty as to show that every self is an
eternal part of the eternal reaUty, and that its eternity
necessarily manifests itself in an existence throughout
all future time, or we must, in some similar way,
prove the immortality of the self as a direct conse-
quence of its own nature. Such a line of argument,
if possible at all — I believe, as I have said earlier, that
it is possible —is difficult and arduous. But nothing
less will suffice.

Now it seems clear that such a deduction as thia
would not be helped by a demonstration of God's
existence. If God is taken as director, and not as
creator, then my existence is independent of his will.
And if my immortahty is a consequence of my naturo,


TmiSM AND HAPPINESS


then my immortality is involved in my existence, and
is likewise independent of God's will. And in no other
way than by his will could the existence of a directing
God be supposed to bear on the question. The mere
fact that the universe contained a being who greatly
excelled me and all others in perfection could not be
a ground for believing that my existence would be
unending.

227. If we go back to the hypothesis that God is
a creator, and that, among other tilings, he creates
ourselves, then, so far from the existence of God
rendering my immortality more probable, it seems to
me that it makes it less so. The idea of creation is
generally held in a form which makes the created
being begin to exist at a point in time, so that there
was a time, however distant, when that being had not
yet begun to exist Whether this form is essential to
the idea of creation or not, it is the form in which it
is almost always found. Indeed the hypothesis of
creation is often supported by the assertion that it is
impossible for finite beings to have existed through all
past time. Now if for every man there was a time
when he did not yet exist, I cannot see how his
immortahty is to be proved. If his relation to the
universe is compatible with his non-existence in past
time, how shall we be able to prove that his relation
with the universe is not compatible with his non-
existence in future time ? Metaphysics have not yet
given us the right to discriminate in this manner
between the past and the future.

Of course the difference between the past and the
future is very considerable from the point of view of
our own interests. We are much more interested in
wliat is about to happen to us than we are in what
has happened to us. And this might be important, if


278


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


the proof of immortality rested on the goodness of the
universe or of its creator. To annihilate existing
persons might well be a much more serious blemish
on the universe than to postpone the creation of
persona not yet existent. And so, if immortality
could be based on this ground at all, we might prove
that a being would never cease to exist in the future,
although he had formerly not existed. But we have
seen that immortality cannot be based on this groimd,
and on any other it seems impossible to give any
reason why that which was once created should nut
be again annihilated.'

228. Thus we see that there is no logical connesioa
between the belief in God and the belief in human
immortality. And there lias not always been a histori-
cal connexion. Fichte, iu his earher system at any
rate, believed in immortality without believing in God.
The same may be said, in my opinion, about Hegel,
though this is disputed. Buddhism, again, which
has no God, holds immortality to be the natural state
of man, from which only the most perfect can escape.
And, in modem times, Schopenhauer is in the same
position. On the other side we find Lofze. Of all the
theists of the nineteenth century he is philosophically
the most important. And he regards inmioi-tahty as
quite undemonstrable and as very doubtful.'

What is the cause of the opinion that a beUef in
immortality requires a belief in theism ? Partly,
perhaps, it is the fact that the majority of theists do
believe in immortality, and that the majority of
Western beUevers in immortahty are theists. But,

' Cp, chap. ir.

* Lotze's defence of theism will bd fouDd in hU Mtcrocosmxts
(Book IX, chupa. iv and v) and hk ductrine of imtuoi tulity


hU Metaphysics (Sectiou 246).
iulo £iigUah.


Both theee works ara troualuted


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


279


in addition to this, it must be remembered that
materialism would make any behef in immortality
perfectly unreasonable, and that scepticism makes all
beliefs mireasonable.' Now there is a very common
idea that an atheist must either be a materialist or
a sceptic, and, therefore, that it is unreasonable for
him to believe in immortality. But this, like many
other common ideas, is erroneous.


229. We must now pass from our interest in God's
works to our interest in his person. This interest may
be due, in the first place, to the guidance which, it is
maintained, we can procure by imitating a character
so superior to our own. In this case argument is still
possible. For the "existence of God is here desired
as a means to an end which we should all admit to
be good — namely, our guidance to right action. The
qviestion is only how far the contemplation of tho
character of an existent God is a necessary means
to that pui-pose. And this is a question which admits
of ailment.

If the belief in God is rejected, we lose along with
it the behef in the present existence of any person
who is, from a moral point of view, absolutely perfect.
The behef in a being who was morally absolutely
perfect, but whose wisdom and power were too limited
to allow him to be called God, is perhaps not absolutely
impossible. But it seems impossible to see how the
existence of such a being, as distinguished from one
whose perfection was very great, could be proved. And,
historically, absolute moral perfection has never been
attributed to any person except God, unless that pei-son

' Materialism — the belief that all existent reality is material —
rnii^t be distingtiishE^ frum the belief mentioned above (Section
226j that nU Twit-Uivuie emt«at reality is material.


SOME DOGMA!


EELK


was conceived as the incarnation of God, or as his
specially favoured minister. {In the following discus-
sion I ^vilI, for the sake of brevity, use 'perfect' to
mean morally perfect.)

280. But, as we have already seen,' this loss, if
it is one, does not depend on the denial of God's
existence. Even if a God does exist, he could not be
absolutely perfect so long as the society of selves of
which he forms a part is by no means perfect. It is
impossible that any one member of the society should
be unaffected by the defects of his fellows. And,
if this is so, the disbelief in God's existence loses us
in this respect nothing which ought not to have been
lost already.

God might be looked at, no doubt, as destined to
become eventually pei'fect. But he could only become
so if all other persons were perfect too. And, if they
were perfect, they would need no moral guidance. It
would be superfluous for them to look to God for an
example of moral perfection if they were equally
examples of it.

Still God, though not at present perfect, would at
any rate be much better than any other person. If we
were certain tliat God existed, we should be certain of
the existence of a being whose character, so far as it
was known to us, and so far as its lessons were applic-
able in our circumstances, would be a far safer ideal
for our actions than the character of any man could be.
If we lose the belief in God's existence, we lose this
ideal Let us inquire how serious the loss would
prove.

231. There are cases, to begin with, in which it is
clear that it is possible to see what is right, without
having an ideal in a God conceived as existent. Many

^ SecUon 210.


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


281


pagans — and many other people — practise virtues of
which no trace is found in the conduct which they
attribute to their Gods, and would shrink with horror
from vices to which they believe their Gods addicted.
Atheists, again, who believe in no God at all, can distin-
guish between right and wrong, and their judgements
would often be accepted as correct by theista. The
possession of a divine ideal, then, is not always essen-
tial for the knowledge of the right.

In many cases, however, the knowledge of a person
good enough to serve aa an ideal is of the greatest
value, not only as a stimulus, but as a guide. It may
be so, I conceive, in two ways. In the first place, it
may suggest to us that a quality is desirable which we
should never have thought desirable if we had not
seen a person who possessed it. It is quite possible,
for example, that the goodness of self-control in grief
might not occur to some people until they saw a man
who practised self-control, and that it would be
acknowledged by them when it did occur to them.
In the second place, when something has been re-
cognized as desirable, a person who exhibits that
quality may indicate to us by his example shades of
that quality, too delicate to be determined by any
abstract rule. It does not need the contemplation of
a courteous person to teach us that courtesy, in the
abstract, is good. But for most people there is only
one way of learning in detail what courtesy is — to
live with those who are courteous already.

232. It must be admitted then that a personal ideal
— by which I mean a person believed to exist, not
merely imagined as possible — niay be of groat use as
a guide to action. But then such an ideal need not
be God. It can be another man. And it very frequently
is another man. We ore all of us guided, more or less,


282


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


by our knowledge of the characters of other men, whom
we recognize as our superiors iu certain qualities, and
whom we endeavour to imitate in respect of those
qualities.

Thus to lose God would not involve losing a personal
ideal It might be objected that a man who had
reached higher than any of those known to him in any
particular direction could not have a personal ideal in
that direction — unless he mistakenly followed a man
lower than Iiimself, which might lead him wrong. To
this it may iairly be answered that the imitation of
another person, though often useful, is not indisixinsa-
ble to riglit action, and that a man who had got so high
as this would probably be able to see what was right
without waiting for any one else to show him the way.
Nor would it follow that such a man had not the advan-
tage of feeling reverence and veneration. Different
good qualities ai-e distributed in different ways, and
& man who would be mistaken if he tliought that he
knew of any one braver than himself might perhaps
find a man worthy of his imitation in respect of
industry or unselfishness.

At the risk of appearing fanciful, I will also sugge&t
that it is not impossible that two men might each make
an ideal of the other, with respect to the same quality,
and yet each might have found a true ideal. A would
think B excelled him in that quality. B would think
he was excelled by A. Both could not be right. But,
if they happened to love each other, each might see in
the other the eternal perfection of which the temporal
imperf'ection — which is all a man can see of himself —
is only an imperfect manifestation. To pursue this
possibility, however, would take us too far into the
metaphysics of personality.

233. Bub nou-divino beings, it may be said, must


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


283


always be defective as personal ideals, unless supple-
mented by an ideal of a divine person. I may take
the wrong man as my ideal. Or, even if I take the
right man, the best man whom I know, still he may
be mistaken just on tlie point on which I am imitating
him, and so I may be misled.

Doubtless tliis may be so. But we are no better off
with a divine ideal It is true that there eaimot be
a better ideal than God, if he exists, and that the
chance that he is acting wrongly in any piulicular case,
though it exists, is much snaaller than it is in the case
of any particular man. But, on the other hand, we
are much more likely to make mistakes about what
God's character is than we are in the case of s man.
We can only gather God's character from his acts.
And as to those acte there ia much doubt. It has been,
for example, a much disputed point whether he has or
has not predestined certain of his creatures to eternal
damnation. Even if we know what he has done, we may
not be certain whether he has wiUed it for its own
sake, or as a means ; and, if as a means, we may not
be certain for what end. Now this makes all the
difference as to his character. If God has caused pain
to a wicked man, for example, we can tell nothing from
this as to his character, if we do not know whether
he did so simply because the man was wicked, or to
reform him, or to deter others, or to spare him greater
pain, or for some other reason.

If we believe that there is a God, we shall certainly
believe that he has acted well, since a goodness ex-
ceeding that of all other persons was part of the defini-
tion of God. But this belief, by itself, will give us no
guidance. If we know tliat God has acted well, and
also know why he has acted, we shall know what
good action is under certain circumstances, and this


284


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


may afford us guidance. But if we merely know that
God acted well, without knowing what he did or
why he did it, we shall get no more guidance from the
nature of God than we could have got from our abstract,
notion of the good, without reference to God at alL

234. And there is another difficulty which meets us
if we try to take God as the ideal which ia to guide
our actions. His circumstances, and his character in
non-moral aspects (such as his wisdom and his power)
are so different to ours that it ia very difficult to apply
his example so as to guide us in our difficulties. The
example, no doubt, is not altogether irrelevant. The
moral nature and the moral problems of one individual
have always some analogy to those of any otlier. And
if God is conceived as not omnipotent, and not abso-
lutely perfect, though much more powerful and more
good than any other pei-son, then we can conceive that
his duties, his perfections, his imperfections, his temp-
tations, would have, so far as we could know them,
many lessons for our guidance. But it is obvious that
they would have far less application than those of a
person whose conditions resembled our own more
closely. If there is a God, he would be morally much
superior to Socrates. But Socrates was sufficiently
superior to most of us to afford us an ideal. And
Socrates acted under conditions so much more like
our own than those under which God would act, that
it seems to me we should derive more guidance from
his example than from God's — even if we knew as
much about the character of God as we do about the .
character of Socrates.

235. This difficulty is, to a great extent, removed if
God is considered to be incarnate in some man or
men whose history is known. The conditions under
which an incarnate God acted would be far more like


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


285


the conditions under which an ordiniuy man acts than
the conditions under which an uiiincaraato God acted
could be. Thus we could obtain more guidance. In
the Christian religion, for example, we see tliat moral
guidance is more frequently sought from the earthly
life of Jesus than from the action of God in creating
and governing the world. And this is, doubtless, one
of the reasons — I do not say the chief reason — for the
the singular fascination of the idea of an incarnate
God.

But what guidance shall we lose if we hold that
a person who has been regarded as an incarnation of
God was in truth an ordinary man? This opinion
will not prove that such a man did not exist, or that he
was not a good man. All that goodness, which history
tells the beUevera in his divinity that he exhibited,
may still be held — if there is sufficient evidence— to
be his. The believers in his divinity, indeed, may
infer from his divinity the existence of greater good-
ness in him, of which no manifestations are recorded
in his history. And those who reject his divmity
will have no grounds to infer such greater goodness.
But goodness which is merely inferred cannot give
us moral guidance, for we cannot infer it unless we
already know it to be good. It is only goodness which
is observed — either directly or through history — which
we can recognize as good without having previously
known of its goodness. And so it is only goodness
which is observed which can give us moral guidance.
Wliatever goodness is observed in a pereon who is
believed to be an incarnation of God will not cease
to be there, or to be good, if he is believed to be
a man of the ordinary kind. And thus he will not
be a less satisfactory ideal for moral guidance.

' But," it may be said, ' if you no longer believe this


286


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


man to be an incarnation of God, you cannot know
that his actions are good, and so you cannot be sale
in taking them as your ideal,' I conceive that thia
objection may be validly answered by a dilemma.
When we observe an action, either we are competent
to judge of its goodness or we are not. In so far aa]
we are competent, then we can pronounce it good,
even if its author is not an incarnation of God. But
in so far as we are not competent, then it is impossible
for us to tell whether the being of whom he is as-
serted to be an incarnation is properly called God.
For no being is to be called God unless he is good,
and what evidence can we have of the goodness of the
being incarnated, except that the action of the being
who incarnates is good ?

And if the incarnation is not the incarnation of a
good being it can give us no moral guidance. How-
ever wise and powerful the being who was incarnated
might be, we should have no reason to follow his
example if he was not good. To follow the example
of any person merely because he was wise would be
foolish, since he might be using his wisdom as a means
to bring about undesirable ends. And to follow the
example of any person merely because he was power-
ful would be contemptible. It would not even be
prudent, unless we were reasonably certain that ho
would be pleased with flattery and servihty.

236. Moreover, the example of an incarnate God,
although much more useful for our guidance than that
of an unincarnate God, is much less applicable than
the example of an ordinary man. For the position of
an ordinary man is much more like ours, who are
ordinary men, than is the position of a being who is
tlie incarnation of God. We have reason, for example,
to believe that Jesus behaved with courage and dignity


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


287


at his trial and execution. This fact has much more
value for those who do not believe in his divinity than
for those who do. For the former class it shows — a«,
of course, many other examples show — that man can
rise above pain and the approach of death. And what
men have done, we, who are men, may hope, if the
need comes, to do also. At any rate, the fact that
it has been done by a man raises humanity. But it
by no means follows that, because these things can be
done by a being who is both ' perfect God and perfect
man' that they can be done by us, to whom this
description does not apply.

Again, most people would now be inclined to admit
that Jesus was right in declining to be bound by
various rules of his national church — as to the strict
observance of the Sabbath, for example. And, if he
is considered as simply a man, we may derive guidance
for ourselves from our perception that he was right as
against his contemporaries in these matters. But, if
we accept his divinity, I do not see that we have any
guidance. For it might well be that a being who wa?
both God and man might be entitled to dispense with
rules, while beings who were only men were not (I
am speaking here, of course, only of what may be
gained from example. The question of explicit teaching
is therefore irrelevant.)

God could, no doubt, be held to be incarnate without
adopting the extreme view that the being in whom it
took place was perfect God and perfect man. And,
in so far as that being resembled an ordinary man, in
so far bis example would be more applicable for our
guidance. But then, in so far as he resembled an
ordinary man, in so far his example would only help
us in the way that the example of an ordinary man
would help us, and so we should lose nothing by


288


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


denying that he was an incarnation of God, and con-
sidering liim merely as a man.

Some systems of philosophy, again, treat every man
as an incarnation of God. In this case it is clear that
whether the doctrine is true or not, we can hope for
no special guidance from it. Every possible example
offered to us will be that of an incarnation of God, and
many of them will lead us in different directions.
The question will still remain which of them we ought
to follow, and which to avoid.

237. It would seem then that we should lose little,
if anything, in the way of moral guidance by rejecting
a beUef in God. But moral encouragement is another
matter. If any man finds that he is encouraged to do
right by a belief in God's existence, taken in itself
and not as a means of producing the good, or guiding
men's actions, this is ultimate — in his case, and while
it lasts. If a man feels morally helped by hearing
music of a particular sort, and that sort only, it would
be foolish to maintain that such a man lost nothing
when he could hear no music, or only music of
another sort. And, in the same way, a man who feels
discouraged in right action when he rejects the belief
in a God, does lose something by his rejection.

Not all men would feel this, but some would. At
the same time it must be noticed that it does not
follow that the loss would be permanent in the cases
in which it is reaL A man who has been accustomed
to do right in the name of God may feel a loss when
he ceases to believe in God. So a man who has been
accustomed to be loyal to his country in the name of
a king may feel his loyalty shaken if his country
becomes a republic. But loyalty, as the history of
repubhcs shows us, can do very well without a king,
when the king has onco gone. And so it may be —


THEISM AND HAPPINESS


289


I do not say that it always will he — with morality and
God.

238. And the rejection of the behef in God may
bring discouragement of a different sort. Without
depriving us of stimulus, it may deprive ua of comfort.
It may well be that some people find some consolation
in the thought that the struggle for the good has a
leader who can, at any rate, survey the whole field,
of which each of us sees but a comer. We have
seen that the mere existence of such a leader tells us
notliing about the results of the stru^le. It may be
defeated with such a leader, or it may be victorious
without one. But if a man finds some comfort in the
existence of a leader for its own sake, and without
reference to the result, then his comfort vrill bo
diminished by the rejection of the belief in a God.
Here, aa in the last case, it is possible that a desire
which cannot be removed by argument may be re-
moved by time. And here, as in the last case, it ia
also possible that it may not be removed.

339. In a universe without a Gbd there will be no
one to worship, and there will be one person less to
love. And the loss — if any — which results from this
change is again a tiling which each man must estimate
for himself. With regard to worship, however, it is
to be remembered that no metaphysical conclusion can
deprive us of the power to feel reverence, and to feel
it justly, because it is certain upon any metaphysical
theory that there are many men who are worthy
of reverence. What we shall lose is the opportunity
of reverencing a person who is held to excel all other
persons in a very high degree. The loss in this
will depend very much on what each man finds to
reverence in his fellow men. And it must also be
remembered that an object of reverence is only of


290


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


value to us in BO £ar as we appreciate it. God is &
better object of reverence for me than Socrates, not in
proportion as he is superior to Socrates, but in pro-
portion as I can realize bis superiority to Socrates.
And, if I cannot realize his superiority to Socratea
all, then, even if God exists, my reverence for Socratea
may be of more value than my reverence for God. In
the same way, a boy*s reverence for the captain of the
eleven may be of much more value than his reverence
for God, however sincere the latter may be. For it is
possible that his idea of the captain of the eleven may
be one much more adequate to excite reverence than
his idea of God.

340. There remains love. By love of God I moan
something entirely distinct from reverence and admirtp
tion and gratitude. I mean a feehng of one person for
another, which is not unworthy to bear the same name
as the feeling of friend for friend. That, of course,
must go, if it is believed that the person that was loved
never existed.

Love will not cease. There are other persons to
love. And the non-existence of God would leave it
as possible as it was before that love should be
the central fact of all reality. It might still bo true
that nothing else had value. It might still be true
that nothing else had existence, except lovers and
their love.' But some love would have been poured
out on a dream — or rather a reflexion — which could
not return it. Whether the friends whom all men
may find could compensate for the friend whom some
men thought they had found is a question for each
man to answer. It is a question which can never be
answered permanently in the negative while there is
still a future before us.

' I have endeavoured to develop this theory ia my Studies in
Jicgclian Cosmology, chap. ix.


CONCLUSION


241. The result of our investigations has been
almost entirely negative. We have, indeed, come to
the conclusion that dogma is important. But when
■we inquired how it could be establislied, we only
found that some of the most common ways of establish-
ing it were inadmissible. We found reason to think
that immortality, if true, would involve pre-existence,
and that some of the usual objections to the truth of
immortahty were untenable. But we found no reason
for a positive belief that immortality was true. Again,
we were able to see that there was no reason why
human volitions should be exceptions to any law of
the complete determination of events, but we did not
estabUsh any such law. And our conclusion that
there was no reason to suppose that God existed gave
us no information as to what did exist.

All this was inevitable. The only way of coming to
any conclusions on matters of rehgious dogma is by
means of metaphysical arguments. This was the
result of our consideration of the question in Chapter II.
And since I have not put forward here any positive
metaphysical position, it was impossible to hope for
positive conclusions. Negative conclusions on matters
of dogma can be arrived at without the standpoint of
a positive metaphysical theory. We may point out
that the arguments for a certain dogma are untenable,
and that therefore there is no reason to believe it, or
we can go further and point out that the dogma is self-
contradictory, or incompatible with indubitable facts,

V 2


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION

and must therefore be false. We can do this, even if
we are not prepared to establish any other dogma on
the same subject.

To i-eftite a dogma may thus sometimes be easy,
while to establish a dogma is always hard, especially
as the subject-matter of various dogmas is so closely
connected, that it is difficult to establish the truth as
to one of them unless we can also determine the truth
about all the rest. And in order to establish such
dogmas as may form a basis for religion it seems neces-
sary to establish a complete system of metaphysics.
We need, for religion, to be able to regard tlie universe
as good on the whole, and it does not appear how we
could do this, except on the basis of a general theory
as to the ultimate nature of reality.

242. We are sometimes justified in basing action or
emotion on a proposition whose truth we have not our-
selves investigated. A man who has never examined
the evidence for the law of gi-avitation may reasonably
act on the assumption that it is true, because the con-
sensus of opinion among competent students of the
subject is so overwhelming that he has good grounds
to believe it on their authority. But we are not justi-
fied in assuming in thia manner the truth of dogmas.
For on these there is not the necessaiy consensus.
No dogma — at any rate, no dogma of reUgion — is
asserted which is not also denied by able students.

It follows that a man is not entitled to believe
a dogma except in so far as he has investigated it for
himself. And suice the investigation of dogma is a
metaphysical process, and rehgion must be based on
dogma, it follows further that no man is justified in
a religious attitude except as a result of metaphysical
study. The result is sufficiently serious. For most
people, as the world stands at present, have not the


CONCLUSION


293


disposition, the education, and the leisure necessary
for the study of metaphysics. And thus wo are driven
to the conclusion that, whether any religion is true or
not, most people have no right to accept any religion
as true.

This result is serious because, if this theory is true,
it will probably win increased, though not general,
acceptance, as inquiry in matters of reUgion becomes
more general, and the weight of authority and tradi-
tion becomes less. Tlie number of people who wish
to hold a religion, but are unable to do so, will become
lai^er. And this will increase the amount of human
suffering.

But it seems inevitjvble. What people want is a
religion which they can believe to be true.' Since
they are confronted on all sides with religions different
from their own, and with the denial of all reUgion, it iti
inevitable that they should ask themselves why they
believe their religions to be true. And when the
question is once asked, what can avert a widespread
recognition that the truth of religion can only rest on
foundations too controversial to be taken on tnist, and
too obscure for many people to investigate ?

Tlie result may be evil, but that is, unfortunately,
no ground for denying its truth. It is no more evil
than cancer, famine, or madness, and these are all
real. But it is not as evil as may appear at first
sight.

243. In the first place, supposing that the universe
as a whole was good, so as to form a satisfactory basis
for a religion, this would not be affected by the fact
that most people on this planet at present were not
entitled to beUeve it, and that a large number of them

' The sense in ^Mch it can be said that a religion is true is
explaineil in Sectiou S,


294


SOME DOGMAS OP RELIGION


did not believe it. Religion involves believing in
something good, and the belief in religion is itself
something good. If a religion is true, but not believed,
the second good vanishes, but not the first. Thus if
it should be true that all men are immortal, and are
progressing to a state of great perfection — to take one
dogma of religion which is sometimes maintained —
the evil inflicted on any of them by their present lack
of reUgion would be only temporary. Like all other
evils it would be destined to be removed some day.

It is necessary to be clear on this point, because the
two goods are occasionally confounded. We are asked,
for example, to consider Iiow evil the world would be
without the belief in immortaUty, and, in expoimding
this, a confusion is occasionally made between the
happiness which we have before death in beheving in
immortaUty, and the happiness which we may have
after death if immortality is true. But the latter
would not be lost by losing the behef in immortaUty,
for men would not perish when their bodies perished
because they had previously beheved that they would
do so.

244. In the second place, it must be remembered
tliat the man who has no reUgion cannot have a bad
one. If the mass of Englishmen ceased to believe in
any religion, many of them would lose much happiness
by ceasing to beUeve in heaven, but many of them
woidd gain much happiness by ceasing to beheve in
hell. If a loss of happiness would result from the loss
of belief in God, there would be a gain, both in happi-
ness and otherwise, in freedom from the belief that
the creator of such a world as this was omnipotent,
and was yet to be worsliipped. Loss of religion might
be an evil to the average man, but would certainly
not be an unmixed evil.


CONCLUSION


295


245. And, thirdly, the extent to which religion
would be lost may be exaggerated. The study of
metaphysics will perhaps never be very common, but
it may be more commou in the future than it is at
present. Tho world's leisure is increasing, and much
of it may be devoted to study. And if study at present
is rarely study of metaphysics, that is largely because
metaphysics seems unpractical If, however, people
find that they cannot have religion without it, tlien
it will become of all studies the most practical. Its
results, indeed, may not be more practically useful
than those of some other subjects. For some results
of study are, in our present civilization, essential to
life, and life is a condition precedent of reUgion, But
elsewhere we can enjoy the resiUts without investigat-
ing them ourselves. I can eat bread, although I have
never learnt to plough or bake. I can be cured of an
illness, though I have never learnt medicine. But if
— and this is the case at present — I have no right to
rely on any metaphysical result which I have not
myself investigated, then the study of metaphysics
will be for many people the most momentous of all
studies. And this may produce important results.
For, after all, one great reason why so few people
have reached metaphysical conclusions for themselves,
is to be found in the fact that so few people have tried
to reach them.

Once more, if our intereat is for tho happiness of
mankind, we may console ourselves with the reflection
that the large m^'ority of men, while human nature
remains what it ia, are not likely to give up traditional
opinions merely on the ground that they have no
logical right to hold them. Like opium-eaters, they
will preserve their happiness at the expense of their
intelligence, though, more fortunate than opium-eatera^


296


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


their dreams will not unfit them for practical life,
and will — sometimes — not quit them before death.
And wlien the average man has changed so much
that ho rejects all beliefs that he is not logically
entitled to hold, he may well have changed so much
as to have some logical right to a religion.

Finally, it is possible that a time may come when
metaphysics may attain the same certainty in a higher
sphere which is now often reached by science in
a lower sphere. If there was the same consensus of
expert opinion that immoi'tahty, for example, could be
proved as there is now that the law of gravitation can be
proved, men in general might accept the truth of immor-
taUty without investigating it, in the same way that
they now accept the law of gravitation without investi-
gating it. And in this way, perhaps, sufficient dogmas
might be accepted to form the basis for a rehgion.

There is no impossibility in this. It would be rash
to infer that metaphysics will never pass out of the
controversial stage because they have not done so yet.
But they have not done so yet, nor is there any sign
that they are about to do so. Any school of philosophy
which has for a few years a very marked predominance
over its rivals is tempted to teach its conclusions do^
matically to those who have no time or capacity for
its arguments, and to assure them that they can take
the results on trust because now, at last, all philosophic
opinion is on the same side. But a few years are
sufficient to show that such agreement as liad ever
existed was only temporary. There is not now, and
there is not likely to bo soon, such an agreement on
metaphysics as would justify any man in accepting
any dogmas on authority.

Many dogmas, indeed, are supported by such a
weight of authority that, even without investigating


J


CONCLUSION-


BO?


them, we may reasonably conclude tliat thoy are not
transparently absurd, and that there is much to be
said for them. And this is sometliing. But we want
more than this — especially when incompatible dogmas
are supported in this way, as is often the case.

246. In spite, then, of the alleviations which I have
just pointed out, we are here confronted with one
of the great tragedies of life. Many men desire pas-
sionately to know the truth as to the great problems
of religion. And no man may believe any solution of
these problems to be true unless he has tested it him-
self. Even if he tests for himself, and comes to some
conclusion, his conclusion must lack that confirmation
by the unanimous agreement of inquirers which plays
so great a part in knowledge elsewhere.

This is sad, and would be sad even if dogma were
not essential to religion. For whether dogma is essen-
tial to religion or not, it is clear that many men do
desire, and will desire, to know the truth about such
dogmas as the existence of God and the immortality
of man.

It would not, perhaps, be a dispiriting conclusion
that truth on these great matters can only be attained
by long and toilsome efforts, if we were certain tliat it
would some day be attained. But this certainty must
itself be dependent on dogma, and caimot, therefore,
be available for the comfort of those who have not
attained it. It is evident that various persons die in
a state of uncertainty about these dogmas, and othenn
are certain of incompatible conclusions, so that some
at least must be wrong. We should have therefore to
be certain, at least, of a life beyond death, if we were
to be certain that we should all eventually know the
truth on such subjects.

247. It ia sad, but I do not know why it should be


298


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION


thought strange. Is knowledge so easy to get that the
highest and deepest of all knowledge is likely to be
had for the asking? Or is everything good so com-
mon, that we should expect that rehgion — almost the
best of all earthly things — should be never absent where
it is desired ?

The matter would be different if we held to the old
opinion that it was a sin not to reach the true religion
in this life. For then religion must be open to all who
choose to take it, and cannot be dependent on meta-
physical ability, which does not depend on the will.
And again, the matter would be different if the true
religion was essential to morality. For it is notorious
that tlie comprehension of metaphysics is not essential
to morahty. But it would seldom be said now that
the attainment of tnie religion was either a duty or
a condition of dutifulness, but only that it was a great
happiness. And, in this case, what right have we to
expect that it will not be rare ?

An exclamation reported ' of Jesus has been, rather
unfairly, twisted into a canon of knowledge declaring
that the kingdom of heaven is hidden from the wise
and prudent and revealed unto babes. Such a principle
is sure to be popular, for it enables a man to believe
that he is showing his meekness and humiHty by the
confident assertion of propositions which he will not
investigate and cannot prove.* Yet some other words


■ Matt. xi. 25 ; Luke x. 21.

' This criticism applies, naturally, not to the teacher who made
the exclamation, but to the teachers who turned it into a principle.
It may be remarked that the principle is applied rather capnciously.
Many men would be prepared to use it as a ground for diatruating
Hegel, and for trusting the peasanti-y of Ireland or Wales (as the
case may be). But they Would not admit it as a ground for
accepting the peasantry of Morocco aa a safer guide in religion
than Thomas Aquinas. And yet Thomas AijuinsB was a wise
man, and the religion of a peasant in Morocco would be eminently


CONCLUSION 299

reported ' of the same teacher might be remembered.
' The kingdom of heaven is hke imto a man that is
a merchant seeking goodly pearls : and having found
one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he
had, and bought it' All that he had, — but if it is
too httle ? The greater the price, the fewer can pay it.

Sixteen centuries after the death of Jesus, the Jewish
race produced another great religious teacher, in whom
philosophical insight and rehgioua devotion were
blended as in no other man before or since. * If the
way' — so he ends his account of the beatific vision
which frees man from aU sorrow and all sin, and makes
death the least of all things — ' if the way which I have
pointed out as leading to this result seems exceedingly
hard, it may nevertheless be discovered. . . . But all
things excellent are as difficult as they are rare.'

Perhaps it will not always be so. Perhaps time as
it goes on will bring its imperfection nearer to the
perfection of eternity. But, here and now, dare we
deny that Spinoza is right? 'Omnia praeclara tarn
difficilia quam rara sunt.'

childish. But, of course, it is only ignorant orthodoxy that is
childlike simplicity. Ignorant heterodoxy is childish supersti-
tion.

■ Uatt ziii. 45.


THE Em)


OXroRD; HOH&CE HABT


Telegrams :
' SchoUrljf, London,'


41 and 45 M«ddox Street,
Bond Street, London, W,,

Qeitlier, 1906.


Mr. Edward Arnold's

List of New Books-


THE REMINISCENCES OF
LADY DOROTHY NEVILL.

Edited by her Son, RALPH NEVILL.
Demy &vo. With Portrait. 15s. net.

There are very few persons living whose knowledge of English
Society is, literally, so exteasive and peculiar as Lady Dorothy
Nevill's, and fewer stiH whose recollections of a period extending
from the day of the poslchaise to that of the motor-car are as graphic
and entertaining as hers. In the course of her life she has met
almost every distinguished representative of hterature, politics and
art, and about many of them she has anecdotes to tell which have
never before been made public. She has much to say of ber intimate
friends of an earlier day — Disraeli, the second Duke of Wellington,
Bemal Osborne, Lord Ellenborough, and a dozen others — while a
multitude of more modern personages pass in procession across ber
light-hearted pages.

There are curious domestic details of her early life, such as the
number of breakfastt to which she went in her first London season,
which can hardly have been more recently than 1844, or the composi-
tion and equipment of the cavalcade of retainers without which her
father, the third Earl of Orford, ' in his nankeen shorts and beauti-
fully embroidered waistcoat,' thought it unseemly to travel abroad.
Lady Dorothy has taken, and still takes, an interest in every con-
ceivable subject, from old English furniture to the Primrose League,
which may be said to have originated at her table.

A reproduction of a recent crayon portrait by M. Cayron is given
as frontispiece.

LONDON : EDWARD ARNOLD, 41 & 43 MADDOX STREET. W.


Mr. Edward Arnold's List of New Books

WESTERN TIBET AND THE
BRITISH BORDERLAND.

By CHARLES A. SHERRING, M.A., F.R.G.S.,

Ihdlan Civil Seavjcb; Dstdtv CokiHisuDKEm ow Alhcmu.

Royal 8vo. With ItlHslrafions, Maps and Sketches, ais. net.

During the last few years Tibet, wrapped through the centuries
in mystery, has been effectively ' opened up ' to the gaze of the
Western world, and already the reader has at his disposal an
enormous mass of information on the country and its inhabitants.
But there is in Western Tibet a. region which is still comparatively
little known, which is especially sacred to the Hindu and Buddhist,
and in which curious myths and still more curious manners abound ;
and it is of this portion of the British Borderland, its government, and
the religion and customs of its peoples, that Mr. Sherring writes. |

The book contains a thrilling account by Dr. T, G. Longstaff,
M.B., F.R.G.S., of an attempt to climb Gurla Mandhata, the highest
mountain in Western Tibet, with two Swiss guides, which is
especially noteworthy as being the first occasion on which a Tibetan
mountain has been attacked according to approved modem methods.
A special feature of the numerous illustrations with which the book
is adonied are the magnificent panoramic views.


PATROLLERS OF PALESTINE.

By the Rev. HASKETT SMITH, M.A., F.R.G.S.

EOTTOH OF ■ MtiinAv's Hanthook lo Sti>ia and PstEJTisit,' inn ;

AUTUOIOP 'Tok GoDAfiD HUMANITV: A Rdhasc^ dp Mn^NT Carmel. 'Th* DiVTNft

El*^l■HA^V,■ ' CaLVAKV AKDTHJt ToKU UF C'[[flST," HTt.

Large crown 8w. With Illustrations, io5. 6d.

The late Mr. Haskett Smith was a well-known authority on
Holy Land, and in this book he personally conducts a typical party '
of English tourists to some of the more important sites hallowed by
tradition. On the way, much interesting information is imparted in
the course of conversation between the Sheikh (as the author calls
himself), and his ' tribe,' and many apparent difficulties in the Bible
are swept away by his enlightened explanations.


Tew Books

ABYSSINIA OF TO-DAY.

Sn account of tbe jfitel Alssloii sent bs tbe amctlcan Oovecnmcnt
to tbe liliis or t!tngs.

By ROBERT P. SKINNER,

CQatMlSSIDHDI TO AbV&SIKIA, 1 90 J- (904 : Al»rKllECAN Coh^lTI-'GEJ'VRjM ^ Fn-LOW OF TriK

Ahkhicah G<oii"Arnic»L Sdcibtt; Sua noii FBLiuniiiii.

Demy %va. With numerous Illustrations and Map. las. 6d. net.

The object of this Ameiican Mission to the Emperor Menelik
was to negotiate a comnercial treaty, The Mission was extremely
well received, and the expedition appears to have been a complete
success. The picture drawn by Mr. Skinner of the Abyssinians and
their ruler is an exceedingly agreeable one ; and bis notes on this
land of grave faces, elaborate courtesy, classic tone, and Bibhcat
civilization, its history, politics, language, literature, religion, and
trade, are hill of interest ; there are also some valuable hints on [he
organization and equipment of a caravan.


HOUSEBOAT DAYS IN CHINA,

By J. O. P. BLAND.

Demy 8vo. With numerous IHustratiotis.

The author is a very prominent member of the British community
at Shanghai, and a wellknown authority on China. His account of
houseboat holidays is extremely entertaining, and is illustrated with
specially- drawn sketches.


NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION.

MY MEMOIRS.

By HENRI STEPHAN DE BLOWITZ.

Crown &V0. With Portrait. 6s.

The remarkable interest aroused by the publication of these
unique memoirs of the late Paris Correspondent of The Times has
suggested that an edition more easily within the reach of the general
public will be welcomed.


4 Mr. Edward Arnold's List of New Books

THE PRINCES OF ACHAIA AND THE
CHRONICLES OF MOREA.

a stuOfi or (Sieece iit tbc Aidsie Sscs.

By Sir RENNELL RODD, G.C.V.O., K.C.M.G., C.B.,

H.M. Envoy EnraAORDiKABV AND Ministih PLENrvoTiBTlABV to Swkdkh and Norwai;

Author of ' CvfnvMS and Lokh op MnoKfrM GcicRGR,' 'Feda, a^jd other Poems,'

' Tkh Unknown Madonna,' ' Ballaejs or the Fleet.' etC-

Demy 3vo. With lUustmfiom and Map. 14s. net.

The subject with which Sir Rennell Rodd deals in this important
work is one which has never been treated of in English, though a
few scanty notices of the period may be found. Nevertheless, it is
curiously interesting and fascinating, as filling up a great blank
the historical experience of most people.


INDIVIDUAL OWNERSHIP

AND THE GROWTH OF MODERNi

CIVILIZATION.

BEING K TRANSLATION OF

HENRI DE TOURVILLE'S

' HiSTOIRE DE LA FORMATION ParTICULABESTB '

By MAISIE G. LOCH.
Demy ivo.

The articles which are here presented in the form of a volume
were contributed by the author to the French periodical La Scitnct^
SociaU over a period of six years ending in Februaxy, 1903. Hi^H
death occurred within a few days of his completing the work.^'
M. de Tourville, after showing that the transformation of the
communal into the particularist family took place in Scandinavia,
and was largely due to the peculiar geographical character of the
Western slope, traces the development of modern Europe from the
action of the particularist type of society upon the fabric of Romaa
civilization.


Mr. Edward A mold's List of New Books

THE AFTERMATH OF WAR.

Bn account ot Ibc ■Repatriation ot SBoeca aiiO llatlucfl In tbc (Ptatigc

'Rivci Colons-

By G. B. BEAK.

Demy Bvo. With Illustrations and Map. las. 6d. net.

The author, after serving nearly two and a half years in the South
African War, was appwinled Assistant Secretary of the Orange
River Colony Repatriation Department, and subsequently Assistant
Director of Relief under the Government. His information is thus
not only first-hand but unique.

.\lthough both were originally based on Article X. of the Terms
of Vereeniging, the scheme of repatriation carried out in the Orange
River Colony differed entirely in detail from that adopted in the Trans-
vaal. Mr. Beak begins by pointing out the causes which led to the
policy of clearance and concentration and describing the effect of that
policy. He next deals with the arrangements made for the return
of the prisoners of war and the supply of everything necessary to
enable the people to resume their normal avocations. He shows
how the unprecedented drought in which the difficulties of the work
culminated led to the necessity of continuing the relief organization
after the repatriation proper had been carried out, and discusses the
questions of claims, compensation, and loans,

The book is illustrated with some extremely interesting photo-
graphs.

NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION.

THE QUEEN'S POOR.

Xffe &i tbee nn& it in Cown and dountts.

By M. LOANE.

Crown %vo. 3s. 6d.

OPINIONS ON THE FORMER EDITION.

' It Is a book which is not only a miQe of tamocous stories, quaint sayings, and
all that web of anecdote and quick repartee which sweetens a life at Ibc best
limited and austere. It is also & study in which common-sense mingles with
sympathy in a record of intiraale relalionship with the problems of poverty." —
Daily Nia-i.

Sir Arihob Clav, Bart., says of this book : ■ 1 have bad a good deal of ox-
petience of ■' relief " work, and 1 have never yei come across a book upon the
subject of the " poor " which shows such true insiRhl and such a grasp of reality
in describing the life, habits, and mental attitude of our poorer fellow-citiiens, . .
The whole Ixjok is cot only admirable from a common-sense point of view, but it is
eitremely pleasani and interesting to read, and baa tbc great charm of humour.'


6 Mr^ Edward Arnold's List of New Books

LETTERS OF
GEORGE BIRKBECK HILL,

D.C.L., LL.D., Hon. Fellow of Pembroke College, Oxford^
Arranged by his Daughter, LUCY CRUMP.


Demy 81/0. With Porlraits.


I2S. 6d. net.


Dr. Birkbeck Hill's ' Letters ' form, with a few connecting links 1
written by his daughter, an autobiography whose charm lies in its
intimate portrayal of a character which was, in its curious intensity,
at once learned, tender, and humorous. He wrote as he talked, and
his talk was famous for its fund of anecdote, of humour, of deep
poetic feeling, of vigorous literary criticism, and no less vigorous
political sentiment. As an Oxford undergraduate, he was one of the
founders, together with Mr, Swinburne, Frof. A. V. Dicey, and
Mr, James Bryce, of the Old Mortality Club. He was intimately
connected also with the Pre-Rapliaelites. At college, at home, on
the Continent, or in America, everywhere he writes with the pen of
one who observes everything, and who could fit all he saw that was
new into his vast knowledge of the past. His edition of ' Boswell's
Johnson,' of 'Johnson's Letters,' and 'The Lives of the Poets'
nave passed into classical works. But that his writings were not
exclusively Johnsonian is abundantly shown by such books as the
Letters of Hume, Swift, General Gordon, and Rossetti, as well as
by his 'Life of Sir Rowland Hill," his 'History of Har^'a^d,
University,' and various collections of essays.


ON


LETTERS TO A GODCHILD

THE CATECHISM AND CONFIRMATION.


By ALICE GARDNER,

ASSOCtATE AND LlCTDKH OF NbWNITAH ColLBGK, CaIIUHIDC.H ; AQTITOt Or ' FtlVDS OF TH
OlOBB TlM«,' ' THBODOtS OF StfDli;!!,' EIC.

Foolscap 8vo. as. 6d. net.

This series of actual Letters written to an actual Godchild on thel
subject of Confirmation is intended for parents and teachers who
either feel that some of the instruction to be derived from the
Catechism is obscured by archaism of style and thought, or who
desire something in the way of a supplement to the Catechism. It
is not intended to take the place of works of formal religious iO'j
st ruction.


Mr. Edward Arnold's List of Neit/ Books 7

TRANSLATIONS INTO LATIN AND
GREEK VERSE.

By H. A. J. MUNRO,

SouKTiHi FALLOW or TwiTv CoLLECE. ANR pRorts^oji OF Latiit Df Tid Ummsm

OK ClKtUFIIKilL

With a Prefatory Note by J. D. DUFF,

FlLLOW or TllKITV CoLiAn, CAMmupqE.

Medium &vo. With a PortraU. 6a. net.

These translations were originally printed for private circulation tn
the autumn of 1884, a few months before the author's death. They
were never published, and for years past the price asked for the
book second-hand has been high. It has therefore been decided,
with the consent of Munro's represeDtatives, to reprint the work so
that those who are interested in Latin Verse and in Munro may
acquire a copy at a reasonable price. A few sHght changes have
been introduced from Munro's own copy of the book. Some of the
translations were printed separately before 1884, but these were
much changed before their second appearance. Two, which were
found among Munro's papers, have been added ; one of them, from
Scott, has not, it is believed, been printed before.

Munro's verses are not a mere cento of tags from the classics,
dovetailed together with more or less ingenuity. The severity of his
method leads at times to a certain baldness; but at other times,
when he is inspired by his English, and writing in a favourite metre,
the result is something not easily distinguishable from an original
work of art.


NEW EDITION, ENTIRELY REWRITTEN.

PSYCHOLOGY FOR TEACHERS.

By C. LLOYD MORGAN, LL.D., F.R.S.,

PkEHCTPAL ok IjHEVERflTTV CoLLEGB, BKIffUlt \
AUTHOK OF ' TM« SrnlHQS Or CoHBtCT,' ' HaBIT lUlO ImimCT,' BTC

CrowK 8vo. 45. 6(1.

For this edition, Professor Lloyd Morgan has cnlirely rewritten,
oad very considerably enlarged, his well-known work on this impor-
tant subject. He has, in fact, practically made a new book of it.


8 Mr. Edward Arnold's List of New Books

MISREPRESENTATIVE WOMEN,

AND OTHER VERSES.
By HARRY GRAHAM,

Adthoi of 'Ruthuus R11VME.S rnf HSAB^uof, Homes' ' Bali.am of the Boca War
' MrsmriiEsENTATH'ii Mkn,' 'Fisol Ballaps,' 'Vhesb jihd Wousk.' etc

Foolscap 4(0. With Illustrations by Dan Sayhe Groesbbck. 55.

Admirers of Captain Graham's ingenious and sarcastic verse will
welcome this fresh instalment, which contains, among the ' other
verses," a number of ' Poetic Paraphrases ' and ' Open Letters ' to
popular authors.


THE LAND OF PLAY.

By MRS. GRAHAM WALLAS.

With Illustralums by Gilbert James. 3s, (id.

The four stories which make up this delightful children's book are
entitled ' Luck-child,' ' The Princess and the Ordinary Little Gill,'
' Professor Green,' and ' A Position of TrusL'


A SONG-GARDEN FOR CHILDREN.

H Gollectton oi HbU&teii's Soiifls.

Adapted from the French and German by
HARRY GRAHAM and ROSA NEWMARCH.

The Music Edited and Arranged by
NORMAN O'NEILL.

Imperial Svo. as. 6d. net.

This is a charming collection of forty-three French and German
songs for children translated and adapted by Capt. Graham and
Mrs, Newmarch, It includes nine songs arranged by J. Brahms for
the children of Robert and Clara Schumann.


Mr. Edward Arnolds List of New Books

NEW FICTION.


Crovm 8vo. 63. each.

THE LADY ON
THE DRAWINGROOM FLOOR.

By M. E. COLERIDGE.

AuTHOKor 'THKKiKGwrrHTwoFACEi,' 'ThbFimvDawm,' ' Th> Shadow oh tmb Wall,'

KTC.


OCCASION'S FORELOCK.

By VIOLET A. SIMPSON,

AlTTHOK OP 'Tm« BoHHIT COMIPIKATOMS,' ' Th« Sovbbkoh Powiii,' KTC.


THE BASKET OF FATE.

By SIDNEY PICKERING,

AuTHOB OF 'Vmitt,' 'THm K«¥ o» Pahadisb,* ■tc.


QUICKSILVER AND FLAME.

By ST. JOHN LUCAS,

AOTKoii or ' Thi Auukd Rubhtahcb.'


THE MILLMASTER.

By C. HOLMES CAUTLEY.
Croam %vo. 55.

CONCERNING PAUL AND

FIAMMETTA.

By L. ALLEN HARKER.
With a Preface by KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN.

' One of the most genuine " treats" whicb has come in one way form long time
ia Che order of books nkdng to children.'-. H'orU.


10


Mr. Edward Arnold's List of New Books


POLITICAL CARICATURES, 1906.

By Sir F. CARRUTHERS GOULD.

Super royal 4(0. 6s. net.

The change of Government, with the consequent variety of political 1
topics, very greatly enhances the attraction of this new volume of |
cartoons by ' Sir F. C. G.,' whose well-earned honour has been the
subject of congratulation on all sides. If the increased acerbity of
political relations is found to he slightly reflected in these later car-
toons, the many fresh and interesting studies are no less happily
handled than those produced under the Conservative regime.


IN A


NEW AND CHEAPER EDITIONS.

GLOUCESTERSHIRE GARDEl


By the REV. HENRY N. ELLACOMBE, M.A.,

ViCAK OF BiTTOH A^ D Ho«- Candh OF Bitisraj,,

Crown Svo. With Photogravure Frtmtispiice* J5, 6d*


TREASURY OF MINOR BRITISH
POETRY.

Selected and Arranged, with Notes, by

Prof. J. CHURTON COLLINS.

Crown %oo. 35. 6d.


EPOCHS OF ENGLISH LITERATURE.

By J. C. STOBART,

AsGiSTUrr Mastei at Mebckamt T^vi.oies' School.

Crown ivo. With Notes and Glossary, is. 6d. each.
This is a series of nine volumes, the objects of which may be said'
to be threefold : First, to teach the history of our literature in a
rational and orderly manner ; second, lo illuminate the history of
England by exhibiting the thoughts of its men of letters in their own
words ; and third, to display, as if in a gallery, some specimens of
the inheritance into which every reader of English jias entered.
The epochs treated are those connected with the names, respectively,
of Chaucer, Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton, Dryden, Pope, Johnson,
Wordsworth, and Tennyson.


Mr. Edward Arnold's List of New Books it

A HUNTING CATECHISM.

By COLONEL E. F. MEYSEY-THOMPSON,

AdTHOU op ' RUIINIKINCEI OT THE COUllS«, THK Cui', AOU THK ChASR,' 'A PllHrHG

Catbckism,' and ' A Siiooti«(. Catichish.'

Foolscap Svo. 3s, 6d. net.

This, the third of Colonel Mersey-Thompson's invaluable hand-
books, will appeal to hunting men as strongly as the previous
volumes did to lovers of rod and gun. The information given is
absolutely practical, and is conveyed, for the most part, in the form
of Question and Answer. The arrangement is especially calculated
to facilitate easy reference.


AT THE WORKS.

a studs of a "Rortb Countrs {Town.
By LADY BELL,

Adtkor o» 'Thb Diah or St. Patkck's,' 'Th» AhmtM,' btc, btc

Crown 6vo. 6s.

In this little book Lady Bell has entered upon a new branch of
literature. It is not a novel, but a description of the industrial and
social condition of the ironworkers of the North Country.


THREE LITTLE COOKS.

By LUCY CRUMP.

With Illustrations by Gertrude M. Bradley.

Croivn 81V. 33. 6d.

■ Wbere, we again ask, can we find a successor lo Misa Edgeworlh ? Till some
f«w months ago we sbould have answered this enquiry moutnfully with the one
word "Nowhere." Bui ihe reading of Mrs LucyCrump'* "Three LilfleCooka"
must convince ihe mosl confirmed sceptic thai the spiril of Maria Edgeworlh,
though in a slightly modemiud and even improved form, still lives amongst us.
The aim of this charming little book would assuredly meet with Maria's warmest
approvaJ. Its aim it to provide lessons in cookery for Ihe young.' — Sftel»U>r.


>. Edward Arnold's List oj New Books


RECENTLY PUBLISHED.
THE

CHURCH AND COMMONWEALTH.

ttbc Wisitalion Cbargca ol tbc -Riflbt Vcv. (Beorac HiOWtifl, !>.©.,
first SiBbov ot SouIbwelL

Collected and Edited by his "Wife, Lady LAURA RIDDING.

Demy 8vo, los. 6d. net.

' The book is one which will repay study, and it c&nool but etert a wholesome
iafluence. It may be recommeaded to all sorts and conditions of the clergy, and
deserves the attention of all thoughtful Chutchaten.'—Shtffitli Daily Ttltgtafh.


SOME DOGMAS OF RELIGION.

By JOHN ELLIS McTAGGART, Litt.D.,

Lecturkh i» Moral Scienco^, Trinity CqllxgKn CAbiHiDCft.

Dtmy 8w). los. 6d. net.

' Mr. McTaggart's book is full of surprises, some of them very pleasant. It is
also able, interesting, stimulating ; all the more so because it is the product of
two philosophica] methods, and belongs to more than one ceuiury — connecling
the Deism of the one with the Idealism of the other. . . . The crowning merits
of Mr. McTaggart's style are its clean-cut explicitness. and the happy directness
and not infrequent humour of its illustrations. '—Tribvni.


SIR JOSHUA FITCH.

an account ol bts Xlte and Wotfi,

By A. L. LILLEY. M.A.

Large crown Zvo. With Portrait, ys. 64, net.

> Mr. Lilley is to be congratulated upon his production of a mi^moir which does
JDStice lo a notable figure in Nineteenth Century English life and ihoughl. The
Dock should be read by all who have any interest in educational questions, and
of these it might almost be said ihat their number includes almost every thought-
ful man and woman in the land.' — Standard.


Mr. Edward Arnold's List of New Books 13

RECENTLY PUBLISHED.

THROUGH INDIA WITH
THE PRINCE.

By G. F. ABBOTT,

Knight Cohhahdek or thb IIei.i.inic Ohubh or thk Savioui:
AoTBO«oF 'SoKci or MopB>N G«BEc«,' 'Tue Talk or * Touii in Maccdohia,' rtc

Demy 8vo. Witk lUustrations and Map. las. 6d. net.

' Though [be book is first in the Geld, it is eilremely probable (bat it will tam
□□t to be one of ttie best produced as a result o[ the royal progress. Mr. Abbott
writes with knowledge, with point, and with humour, and be is not alraid (o be
outspoken. ' — Obstnir.

'The book has a, deeper and more serious interest than that of the passing
moment, and will remain an abiding cootnbution to the discussion of India's
problems.' — Daily Chronicle.


THE AENEID OF VIRGIL. '"

With a Translation by CHARLES J. BILLSON, M.A.,

CoKfUS CmilSTT Co-LlSqE, OlI'OHD.

2 vols. Crown 4(0. 303. net.

' Mr, Billson's version is at once a credit to English scholarship and a contri-
bution to English literature. To read it is to come within measurable distance
of appreciating the greatness of Virgil. With a remarkable faithfulness to the
original it combines a spontaneity and a felicity of phrase which entitle it to rank
as poetry of no mean otiiet.'—Miincheiltr Gvitrdian.


SHAKESPEARE AND HIS DAY.

B Stufis ot tbe VODtcal Clement in Sbaficepeacc and in tbe
£li3Bt)etban S)cama.

By J. A. DE ROTHSCHILD.

Thihitv Colj-ege, CaMBVIUOS.

Crown 8w. 5s. net.

' An excellent piece of independent work, the object of which \i the extracting
from a study of Shakespeare and the contemporary dramatists an ordered picture
of life in " something of the general colours and forms " of that time.' — Oallaal'.

'This capital essay will stimulate interest in an engaging tine of literair
research,'— XhiiTy TtUpaph.


X4 Mr. Edward Arnold's List of New Booki

A GUIDE TO DISEASES OF THE

NOSE AND THROAT AND THEIR

TREATMENT.

By CHARLES ARTHUR PARKER, F.R.C.S. Edin.
Demy 8vo. With 254 Ilhstraiicns. 18s. net.

EXTRACT FROM THE PREFACE.

' To acquire the necessary dexterity to examine a patient systemati-
cally so as to overlook nothing, to recognise and put in its proper
place the particular pathological condition found, and finally, but
chiefly, to treat both the patient and the local abnormality success-
fully, seem to me the three most important objects of a course of
study at a special hospital. This book, which is founded on lectures
given at Ihe Throat Hospital with these objects in view, is now
published in the hope of helping those who are either attending or
have attended a short course of study at special departments or
Special Hospitals for Diseases of the Throat and Nose. . . .'


THE DIAGNOSIS OF NERVOUS

DISEASES.

By PURVES STEWART, M.A.. M.D., F.R.C.P.,

Phvsician to OuT-pATi£hT& AT THE Wh-^minvtiik Hcisrif al. and Joint Lkctuijth oh

Mu>ICJ)im IN THi Mkdical Schuol; Phv^icjan ra TKh Ruyal NATioMAi. OjrrxDFADic

HosriTAL; Assistant Phvucian to the Italiak Uootitau

Deiity %vo. With Illustrations and Coloured Plaits. 15s. act.

This book, which is intended for the use of senior students and
practitioners, to supplement the ordinary text-books, discusses the
most modern methods of diagnosis of Diseases of the Nervous
System. The substance of the work, which is illustrated by original
diagrams and clinical photographs, nearly aoo in number, was
originally delivered in lecture form to students at the Westminster
Hospital and to certain post-graduate audiences in London and else-
where. The subject of Nervous Diseases is approached from the
point of view of the practical physician, and the diagnostic facts are
illustrated, as far as possible, by clinical cases.


Mr. Edward Arnold's List of New Books


15


THE CHEMICAL INVESTIGATION

OF GASTRIC AND INTESTINAL

DISEASES BY THE AID OF

TEST MEALS.

By VAUGHAN HARLEY, M.D. Edin., M.R.C.P., F.C.S.,

PHOPUHm or PATHoi-ooicnL CKiuiiiTBV. UnivsiisiTV Coi-URis. Ldndoh :

And FRANCIS GOODBODY, M.D. Dub., M.R.C.P.,

A36I6IAHT Pnorrsion or Pathologic*!. Chbmistiiv, Ubivkhsitv Cdu-kcr. Lomook.

Demy 8vo. 8s. 6d. net-

This book opens with a descnptioa of the method of obtaining
gastric contents, and the estimation of the capacity of the stomach.
The various Test Meals employed in diagnosis are next described.
The macroscopical examination of the gastric contents and conclu-
sions to be drawn on inspection are discussed, and a short descrip-
tion of the microscopical appearances follows. The chemical
analysis of the gastric contents is then given. The Organic Diseases
of the Stomach are all separately described, with specimen cases of
analysis to illustrate them. The Functional Diseases of the Stomach,
which are more frequently met with in ordinary practice than the
Organic Diseases, are also very fully given. The chemical methods
employed in the investigation of Intestinal Diseases are then de-
scribed with great fulness, four types of Test Meals being given.
Among the very numerous other subjects discussed and illustrated
are: Diarrhoea and Constipation, the chemical analysis relating to
each being given, Intestinal Dyspepsia and Catarrh, Colitis, In-
testinal Atrophy, Intestinal Ulceration, Intestinal Carcinoma, Sprue,
or PsUosiSi and Calculi,


MIDWIFERY FOR NURSES.

By HENRY RUSSELL ANDREWS, M.D., B.Sc. Lond.,
M.R.C.P, LoND.,

AUIITAMT OnSTBTHIC PHYilCIAN AND LkCTUITIH TO PlJril, MinwiVKl AT TM« LoHDDH

Hospital; Exahiksr to tki Cv>'Tiial MiaviX'S3 1!oaki>,

Crown "ivo. With Illustrations. 4s. tid. net.

This book is intended to supply the pupil midwife with all that is
necessary to meet the requirements of the Central Midwives Board,
and to be used as a work of reference for the certificated midwife.
It is meant not to be merely an examination book, but to be a
practical handbook for midwives.


l6 Mr. Edward Arnold's List of New Books

ALTERNATING CURRENTS.

S ticstsbood tot StuOciiIts ot Sngtnceclng.
By C. G. LAMB, M.A., B.Sc,

Ci-AKE CdLL&CE, CAUDIUtlGC

AssOoATK Mumut op thb Institl'tidn ok ELecTBiCAt EBctK«asi Abociate or the Cmr
AUD Guilds op Ldkdqn Insiitute.

Demy Svo. With lUuslrations. los. 6d. net.

The scope of this book is intended to be such as to cover approxi-
mately the range of reading in alternating current machinery and
apparatus considered by the author as desirable for a student of
general engineering in bis last year — as, for example, a candidate for
the Mechanical Sciences Tripos at Cambridge. In general it deals
with ' principles ' as distinct from ' processes " ; the details involved
in an adequate consideration of the latter are dealt with more appro-
priately in drawing office work. The subjects considered bclude
the usual questions concerned with alternate current flow, the theory
of the operation and of the testing of alternators, transformers,
induction and series motors, by direct methods and that of the
open circuit and short circuit tests ; the operation of alternators in
parallel, of synchronous motors, and the usual matters included in
such a course of reading. The treatment is directed chiefly to the
acquirement by the student of clear general ideas as to methods of
operation and the practical limitations of the problems discussed.
It is hoped that the book may take its place as a suitable introduction
to the standard works on the subject.


A MANUAL OF HYDRAULICS.

By R. BUSQUET,

Translated by A. H. PEAKE, M.A.,

DbhOHSTRATDI id MiCHANISM and AFfLlEO MbCHANIO id the tlNIVEUlTir op ClMinDOB. '

Croam 8vo. With lUustralioHS. -js, 6d. net.

This work is a practical text-book of Applied Hydraulics, in which
complete technical theories and all useful i^citlations for the erection
of hydraulic plant are presented. It is not a purely descriptive work
designed merely for popular use, nor is it an abstruse treatise suitable
only for engineers versed in higher mathematics. The book is well
illustrated, and is full of Arithmetical Examples fully worked out. In
these examples, no knowledge is assumed beyond that of simple
arithmetic and the elements of geometry.


* ' -.**.


UTC


.~., .uju-laTE OF THlCmr


-tons. los. 6d. net.

elided to h": wh as to cover at—-


STANFORD UNIVERSITY MBRARIES

STANFORD AUXILIARY LIBRARY

STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004

(415) 723-9201

All books moy be recalled offer 7 days

DATE DUE


JUNCD2


>^


2000


^


^


.i-.
