The Nature of Existence, Vol. 1 (J. M. E. McTaggart, 1921)
==========================================================
The unreality of time argued here; the most discussed metaphysics of the Cambridge school. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (natureofexistenc0001john).

cael 


eta 
ey 
petits 


pape oot 


Suaeke 
aie 


teed 


ey 


if 


Meike 
ry 


THE NATURE OF EXISTENCE 


THE NATURE OF EXISTENCE 


BY 
JOHN MCTAGGART ELLIS MCTAGGART, 


LITT.D. CAMBRIDGE, LL.D. ST ANDREWS, 
FELLOW AND LECTURER OF TRINITY COLLEGE IN CAMBRIDGE, 
; FELLOW OF THE BRITISH ACADEMY 


VOLUME I 


EDITED BY 
C. D. BROAD, Lirt.D. 


FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE 


CAMBRIDGE 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1921 
REPRINTED 
1968 


Published by the Syndics of the Cambridge University Press 
Bentley House, 200 Euston Road, London, N.W. 1 
American Branch: 32 East 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10022 


PUBLISHER’S NOTE 
Cambridge University Press Library Editions are re-issues of out-of- 
print standard works from the Cambridge catalogue. The texts are 


unrevised and, apart from minor corrections, reproduce the latest 
published edition. 


Standard Book Number: 521 07425 8 
Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 21-13018 


First published 1921 
Reprinted 1968 


First printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridge 
Reprinted in Great Britain by John Dickens & Co. Ltd, Northampton 


TO 
MY WIFE 
FOR ALL HER HELP 


PREFACE 


AM deeply indebted to Dr G. E. Moore for his kindness in 
I reading the whole of this volume, and in giving me very 
great and valuable assistance. I am also much indebted to 
Dr A. N. Whitehead and to Dr C. D. Broad for their most 
valuable criticisms on several chapters which they allowed me 


to submit to them. 
J. M°T. BE. MT. 


TRINITY COLLEGE, 
CAMBRIDGE. 
July, 1920. 


SEOT. 


POR 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


BOOK I. INTRODUCTORY 


CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY 


The object of this work. The Existent and the Real 
Reality is indefinable 0 é : 
Reality is not an ambiguous wage 


. Reality does not admit of degrees 
. Existence is indefinable : 
. Even if there should be anything real “hatte was not saint 


it would be of no practical interest to us . 


CHAPTER II. REALITY AND EXISTENCE 


. Various classes of things have been asserted to be real without 


existing 


. (a) Propositions. Is ee realiey pont in the erica of 


true and false beliefs? 


. What makes a belief true? 
. The truth of a belief is a relation of Pome spendence in iHiCn the 


belief stands to a fact 


. Truth is a relation and not a ey ; 

. Our theory is not the same as the “‘copy faery? ot truth 

. The copy theory of truth, continued 5 

. The truth of a belief does not involve the reality of propeations 
. The objection that many things are true which are never 


thought of . : : : : : . . 


. The invalidity of this Bieiod ; 

. The objection that whatever is true is fae me 

. The invalidity of this objection . 

. The falsity of a belief is a relation of non- comrespondenoe in 


which the belief stands to all facts . 


. The objection that every belief must refer to some ar 
. What ismeant by two false beliefs being beliefs in the same thing 
. The falsity of a belief does not involve the reality of propo- 


sitions . 


. Nor has any reason ever been piven for the ee of propo- 


sitions except the truth or falsehood of beliefs . 


viii TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SECT. PAGE 
24. But do beliefs involve the reality of non-existent facts? 


Beliefs which profess to refer to existent facts, whether true 


or false, do not involve this . A 22 
25. But how about beliefs which do not au ia mes to eon: 

facts? . : 23 
26. All such beliefs Aare that the eee BY one siearnbdenietia 

implies the presence of another : : “| : 3 24 
27. The same continued . 25 
28. Such beliefs do not imply the reat Se non- erat faote if the 

characteristics in question are existent . A 26 
29. Characteristics which are not existent are often deters = 

certain relations to the existent : A : ; 26 
30. But these relations will not give us what we mee : ; 28 
31. But a characteristic which is not existent as a characteristic is 

always existent as an element in a negative characteristic . 28 


32. Thus beliefs which do not profess to refer to existent facts do 
not involve the reality of non-existent facts, when such 
beliefs are true : : 6 : 5 5 : . 30 
33. Nor when they are false. : 30 
34. (6) Characteristics. It follows from ‘abe je bean ay ahovs 
that all characteristics are existent, independently or as 
elements in others . : ; 32 
35. (c) Possibilities. These also are not real without existing : 32 


36. We have seen then that there are no non-existent characteristics 

and possibilities . 33 
37. As to non-existent peieo done “We havens no reason a: sacert 

their reality. And our theory of reality would be simpler if 

they were rejected. But this would not prove that they are 


not real : . c : : 34 
38. But there does seem reason pice ee hen A : 35 
39. And, even if any were real, in studying the existent we should 

study all reality . : 36 
40. It follows from what has been maid that the eres is mob 

limited by possibilities of existence which areindependent of it 36 


CHAPTER III. METHOD 


41. Our two enquiries in this work will have rather different 


methods : 38 
42. With regard to the eathiog eng ‘Tes eed ohare tie 

inductive, because it would involve a vicious circle . é 38 
43. And because the field of observation would be infinitely smaller 

than the field of inference : 38 


44. But in two cases our conclusions will a on Pecepion “What 
is meant by awareness and perception. : : : 40 


55. 
56. 


57. 
58. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


. The first case is the initial enquiry whether anything does exist. 


The second is the enquiry as to whether substance is differen- 
tiated . 


. The nature of ne peters af this bd: 
. Our method will resemble Hegel’s in being a chain of determi. 


nations 


. But it will differ on: it (a); in ie Bieenes of iad: vicious 


(b) in the absence of the aspect of partial falsity which is 
found in the Hegelian categories 


. (c) In the explicit admission of premises for pack poncheion 


other than the preceding conclusions 

(d) In the fact that the order of the de racmuinetions fives iE 
profess to be in all respects necessary, (e) in the absence of 
uncertainty as to whether the dialectic deals with existence 
or reality 


. Certain preliminary quniaeaitons which are Seamed i 


Hegel’s method are not required by ours 


. Our method is ontological, not cre eta 
. The divisions in the later enquiry F 
. The differences of method in the later enquiry 


BOOK II. SUBSTANCE 


CHAPTER IV. EXISTENCE 


Does anything exist? 

If this is doubted or denied, it can US proved fou ine peaienes 
of the denial or the doubt 

The same continued . 

The denial that something “leet is not self- Gontadictory, nor 
its affirmation self-evident, but its truth is beyond doubt 


CHAPTER V. QUALITY 


. That which exists must have some nature besides its existence 
. And so we reach the conception of ae which is indefinable 
. Negative qualities © 

. Whatever exists will possess as ah, a ralitien as thers are 


positive qualities. Of these some will be positive and some 
negative 


. Qualities can be Aivided ‘ito simple, compound and Somplex 


qualities 


. Every compound aad pormples Gushiy can We Raalrsed into 


simple characteristics 


ix 


PAGB 


41 
42 


43 


44 


46 


57 
58 


62 


73. 


74. 


75. 


76. 


Mae 


78. 


79. 


80. 


81. 
82. 


83. 
84. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER VI. SUBSTANCE 


F "The existence of qualities involves the existence of substance . 
. Objections to this view. But it is impossible to dispense with 


the conception of substance 


. The same continued 
. The further objection that a sybacandet is nadine apne fon its 


qualities 

The objection that ithe bales iat peyehees Saat poaeias 
entirely in its relations to something else . 

The contention that the conception of substance stented te 
replaced in all cases by the conception of subject : 4 


. Why we did not reach the conception of substance earlier 


By our definition many things will be classed as substances 
which are not generally called so 


CHAPTER VII. DIFFERENTIATION 


Is substance differentiated? This is best decided a an ars 
to perception. 

It is clearly differentiated mle Colpan is ee 

And even if solipsism were true, differentiation is proved by the 
differentiation of my field of perception, or by my perception 
of a single perception-datum : 

Is it proved by a single thought? At any rate Op is proved by 
the perception of a single thought 

Thus the differentiation of substance is certain. But this dere 
not prevent us from holding that all that exists is also a single 
substance 


CHAPTER VIII. RELATIONS 


Relations exist between the various substances. The ges 
of relation is indefinable 

A relation can have more than two terms, end it can hace any 
one term 

The conception of relma is indispensable anon os sha 
it to be invalid 

These attempts are unsuecéssful. : 

And it is ultimate and indefinable. The causes mhiok have led 
to this fact being sometimes ignored . 

On the other hand, we cannot replace qualities by eclneoa 

Every relation is either simple, compound, or complex. Relations 
can also be classed in respect of reflexiveness, symmetry and 
transitiveness 


PAGE 


74 


75 


75 


76 


77 


79 


79 


80 
81 


82 
83 


84 


SECT. 


85. 


86. 


87. 


88. 


89. 


90. 


91. 


92. 


93. 
94. 
95. 


96. 


97. 
98. 


99. 


100. 
101. 
102. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER IX. DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS 


Relations and relationships. Every relationship generates a 
derivative quality in each of its terms 

Thus the nature of a thing changes if any of its Felationships 
change. Some consequences of this . 

And derivative relationships are generated by all cuatries and 
by all relationships 

Thus every characteristic of a patentee ppserates an fatiiate 
series of its characteristics. But these infinite series are not 
vicious . : 

The distinction eeeeen eee end pereneae Gucnae 
which is not the same as that between original and derivative 
qualities 

A characteristic has as ir anie! series ict characteris tos: The 
characteristics of a characteristic must be distinguished from 
its parts 

Every substance hore an jntihite maven of popeadne Fualitics, 
and of derivative primary qualities. We have no means of 
knowing whether any substance has an infinite number of 
original primary qualities 

Why is there a tendency to regard the Eoarepnon of Gialupes as 
more fundamental than those of relation and substance? 


CHAPTER X. DISSIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES 


Can two substances have the same nature? : 

It seems to me ultimately certain that they cannot 

An objection to this based on the conception of the Antes. 
itself. This objection is invalid , 

It is sometimes supposed that this theory irolyes that al 
stances must be dissimilar in original qualities. But this is a 
mistake. A dissimilarity, e.g. in igen or temporal relations, 
might be sufficient 

Or its position in any other series 

But the dissimilarity could not be only in ee polation to 
qualities which did not belong to them 

Our result is what has been called the Identity of Fedisoornibles, 
but would be better called the Dissimilarity of the Diverse. 


CHAPTER XI. SUFFICIENT DESCRIPTION 


Substances cannot be defined, but they can be described ° 
Exclusive descriptions 
Sufficient descriptions : : ; 3 : - 


xi 


PAGE 


86 
87 


88 


88 


89 


90 


91 


92 


102 
104 


xi TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SECT. 
103. Has every substance a sufficient description? There are few 


cases in which we can know what it is 

104, But it must have one, since every substance has an senate 
description : 

105. And if it had no sufficient desert the ee Poeiiptas 
would involve a vicious infinite 


CHAPTER XII. DETERMINATION 


106. Implication 

107. Inference 

108. Corresponding to aplication Between peopouilicns: hers is 
between characteristics a relation of intrinsic determination 

109. Besides this there is another relation of determination between 
the characteristics of any substance which may be called 
extrinsic determination. All the characteristics of any 
substance determine one another extrinsically . 

110. Three objections to this view 

111. A fourth ee based on the conception of ie thing -in- 
itself 3 A : 

112. It is invalid 2 

113. We are entitled to ares extents doleriinatias as reali. 
How far this is important 


CHAPTER XIII MANIFESTATION 


114. Unities of composition may be also regarded as unities of 
manifestation 

115. But the second is not more outs esa the fect 

116. Nor does a unity of manifestation serve as any explanation of 
the qualities in which it is manifested 


BOOK III. GROUPS 


CHAPTER XIV. SIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES 


117. Some substances are similar to some other substances . 
118. The plurality of the substances connected with a quality is net, 


however, completely analogous to the plurality of qualities 
connected with a substance 


119, Every substance is similar to every other substance 


PAGE 


104 


106 


108 


110 
110 


111 


112 
114 


116 
117 


119 


120 
121 


122 


127 


127 
128 


SEOT. 


120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 
124. 


125. 
126. 


127. 
128. 
129. 


130. 


131. 
132. 


133. 


134. 


135. 


136. 


137. 


138. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XV. GROUPS 


Definition of a Group. The difference between Groups and 
Classes . ; 

This difference eee considered 

Any combination of substances or groups is a erode 

Distinction between the members and the parts of a group 

The conception of a set of parts . 

The conception of content . 


Repeating groups 
CHAPTER XVI. COMPOUND SUBSTANCES 
Every group is a substance. Definition of Compound Substances 


One substance can be many groups 

Objections to the view that any two 3S Boke, of Gigcrene 
content form a compound substance 

Further objections. None of these objections are wads 


CHAPTER XVII. EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES 


IN GROUPS 


Definition of Common Qualities, and Exclusive Common Quali- 
ties. Is there an exclusive common quality in every group? 

There is, but of a type which could never be known by our 
powers of knowledge 

In some groups there are exclusive common qualities een 
can be known by our powers of knowledge, but we do not 
know that in every group there are qualities of this type 

It is only those of the second type which have = importance 
forus . . ; ; : ; ; 


CHAPTER XVIII. THE UNIVERSE 


There is no group which contains all other groups, but there is 
a substance which contains all other substances. This is the 
Universe 

Any fact about any oeer. pape Career is an ene in a not 
about the universe 


CHAPTER XIX. UNIVERSAL DETERMINATION 


Every fact about any other substance extrinsically determines 
every fact about the universe, and vice versa 

And every fact about any substance extrinsically determined 
every fact about every other substance . : : 


xili 


PAGE 


130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 


138 
138 


140 
141 


143 


143 


145 


145 


147 


148 


150 


151 


Xiv 


SECT. 


139. 


140. 


141. 


142. 


143. 


144, 
145. 
146. 
147. 
148. 
149. 
150. 
151. 
152. 


153. 
154. 


155. 


156. 
157. 


158. 


159. 
160. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


We can now return to the objection to determination at Seas 
from Section 110, and see that it is invalid 

The conclusion in Section 138 could have been reached in a 
more direct way . - 

We have no right to Ty any Rippon ona oes woe 
happen if anything were different from what it is. This result 
does not impair the validity of general laws 

The conclusion which we have reached does not pore that 
anything is causally determined 

The objections of some thinkers to the Genecuues X a. block” 
universe : 


CHAPTER XX. ORGANIC UNITY 


From the relation of manifestation between the nature of a 
substance and the qualities of the substance, there follows a 
relation between the substance itself and its parts ; 

And this involves a fresh relation of the parts to one another . 

These relations are sometimes expressed by saying that the 
whole is in every part. The phrase is unfortunate 

And so is the phrase that the nature of the whole is pate sy 
ineach part . 

This manifestation of the whole in i eat occurs in es case of 
every substance 

Such a whole may be alled an Ores euiey, The reasons in 
favour of suchaname . : . 

But it is misleading in various ways 

The same continued 

Objections to the use of the name Teme Pelolagy 

The same continued . : 

It seems better to keep the name x Bene ye Bat to discard 
the name of inner teleology 


CHAPTER XXI. SUMMARY OF RESULTS 


Causal Order, Serial Order, and Order of Classification. We have 
no reason so far to suppose that the first two occur in the 
universe 

Nor Order of Clageiqeneon! 

The same continued 

Our empirical knowledge arene to us that some sbeks are 
better expressed as unities of composition, while some are as 
well expressed as unities of manifestation : 

But we cannot be certain that this is so in any parucdinn case . 

We can, so far, find no fixed point in all this complexity of 
existence, except the universe itself . c . 


. 


PAGE 


151 


152 


153 


154 


155 


156 
157 


158 
159 
159 
160 
162 
163 
164 
165 


166 


167 
168 
168 


170 
LTE 


172 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


XV 


CHAPTER XXII. INFINITE DIVISIBILITY OF SUBSTANCE 


SECT. 
161. 


162. 
163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 
170. 
171. 
172. 
173. 


174. 


175. 


176. 


Ae 


178. 


179. 


180. 


181., 


Is every substance divisible, or are there simple substances? . 

If there are simple substances, they must be indivisible in every 
dimension. Definition of Dimension 

We perceive nothing that is simple. For, at any rate, all that we 
perceive is divisible in time 

Further consideration of this point 

This result is not affected if a self can perceive eel 

But the fact that we can perceive nothing simple does not prove 
that nothing simple exists : 

Coming back to the main issue—it is submitted that ies can. 
be no simple substance. The importance of this result, which is 
synthetic, and also self-evident and ultimate 

Reasons for hesitation about this result—(a) It is new 

(6) There is a danger of confusing the impossibility of i ney tae 
a simple substance with the impossibility of a ae substance 
existing 5 

(c) I may have been eae ey ue saswabis pomsediences 
which I conceive to follow from it 

But, after weighing these points, the aul: stalls seems ie me 
clear. Re-statement of the result ; 

It must be remembered that a simple substance mould hive no 
history or duration in time . - 

And that inseparability of parts is not Riapueliy - : : 

But is there any reason to suppose that our results would 
involve a contradiction? This will be considered in the next 
chapter 

No presumption is tied ne our view by the fact that fee 
are simple characteristics, since the relation of simple sub- 
stances, if there were any, to compound substances would be 
so different from the relation between simple and compound 
characteristics 

Does science demand ie Se es Eioge Ge eest 
Geometrical points need not be simple substances 

Nor does science demand that any geometrical point Biould 
exist 

Nor does science baer us a Dolent conception of a ‘staple ne 
stance . 

That our result ey not penn ieineovered peers need not 
excite any suspicion. Modern philosophy and the concep- 
tion of simple substance . 

Infinite divisibility of the type here asonel Hoes: not exalude 
the possibility of next terms 5 

Definition of Precedent and Sequent Sets of Pata 


PAGE 


174 
174 
175 
177 
177 
178 
178 
179 
180 
180 
180 
181 


182 


182 


183 
185 
186 


187 


188 


190 
190 


xvi TABLE OF CONTENTS 
CHAPTER XXIII. THE CONTRADICTION OF INFINITE 


DIVISIBILITY 

SECT. PAGE 
182. The infinite divisibility of substance would produce a contra- 

diction, except under one condition . : : ; rae aloe 
183. Definition of Presupposition : : . 2 é a eles 
184. Some characteristics of Presupposition : ; ‘ . 194 
185. The Fixing of Presuppositions . ; : . 194 
186. Definition of Total Ultimate Prasou positions , 196 


187. Sufficient descriptions of the members of a set of parts sina 
give a sufficient description of the whole. But this is not 


always reciprocal . 196 
188. And, if it does not happen with. A, fee the antares of ‘A will 
presuppose sufficient descriptions of all its parts ; iy 


189. If these sufficient descriptions can only be fixed by means a 
sufficient descriptions of the members of a set of parts of each 


part, there will be a contradiction . 198 
190. It may be said that they can be Tmlepondent iy “Fixed. But 

the possibility of this seems doubtful : : 199 
191. And, if it were possible, a contradiction would still arise cated 

we considered the total ultimate presupposition - 200 
192. To avoid this the nature of A must supply the sufficient te 

scriptions of all its parts : 202 
193. It cannot supply them all by eoiiee eat mee “ Ses 

supplies them by implying them . 202 


194. The same continued. It must therefore imply auiteient de: 
scriptions of all its parts which are sequent to some given set 
of parts : ‘ ; : : : : : a) Al 
BOOK IV. DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 


CHAPTER XXIV. DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 


195. The problem recapitulated : : os : . 207 
196. Some solutions are impracticable . : . 208 
197. The only practicable solution—Determining Cee omer 5 ZA: 
198. This removes the difficulty explained in the last. chapter x PUD 
199. The same continued ; 211 
200. In this way we shall gain aimeisnt Been paGus of all pana of a 

We shall also gain a sufficient description of A . : 212 
201. The conditions which will give a solution can be rather pee. 

in several respects, than those given in Section 197. s) 2l2 
202. Definitions of the terms used so far in this chapter ; 214 


203. It is not necessary that every primary part should be deter: 


mineu, directly or indirectly, by every other primary part in 
its primary whole . 5 é 5 ; ; “ a PAG 


TABLE OF CONTENTS xvii 


SECT. PAGE 
204. All sufficient descriptions of the members of a sequent set give 


sufficient descriptions of the members of a precedent set, but, 
in the reverse direction, we only know that some sufficient 
description of the members of a precedent set will give a 


sufficient description of the members of a sequent set . 216 
205. Superprimary Wholes : : ; : 5 3 Ra Alef 
206. Recapitulation . : 3 ; ; - , 3 .- 218 


CHAPTER XXV. DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 


AS CAUSAL 
207. Is Determining Correspondence a relation of Causality ? 4 PAID 
208. Causality is admittedly a relation (a) of intrinsic determination, 
(6) between existents, (c) between qualities : 219 


209. It is also held that the terms of the relation can be dicunested 
- as cause and effect, the cause being the earlier of the two, if 

they are successive : 221 
210. It is also held that the cause Cetccmincs the paeet in some ay 
in which the effect does not determine the cause. But this is 


erroneous. 222 
211. It is also erroneous io hold that the cause ecelaits che See in 

some way in which the effect does not explain the cause . 223 
212. Or to hold that the cause exerts an activity on the effect . 224 
213. Why did these erroneous beliefs arise? : 225 
214. The view that a causal series must have a first cause while it 

need not have a last effect . : 226 
215. How far does the view at which we have eg differ eon ae 

ordinary view of causality? . : ere 
216. It follows from what has been said that determining corre- 

spondence is a relation of causality . : A) Pas) 


217. But it does not follow that all existent qualities are Sax in 
causal relations. What is meant by the universal validity of 


causation . 228 
218. The universal paicity of extn orl not saps the 

universal validity of reciprocal causation . : : . 230 
219. What is meant by reciprocal causation 5 we eel 
220. It may be universal, but there is no reason to ak itisso . 233 


221. It has sometimes been supposed that complete causal deter- 
mination would make it possible to infer the nature of any 
substance from that of any other. But this is a mistake. 233 

222. Why this has been believed : : 235 

223. Whether the absence of complete causal deternnetion crouid 
yield results satisfactory to ethical indeterminism, would 
depend upon what ethical indeterminism would regard as 
satisfactory . ; : Z c ; : 4 i) 200 


XVili TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XXVI. DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 
(continued) 
SECT. PAGE 
224. Does it follow from our results that every quality in a deter- 
minate part is determined by determining correspondence? 238 
225. This does not follow , 238 
226. We cannot, at this stage in our Ae datermons exny 
what relation of Ee correspondence does occur in 
the universe . ; 239 
227. Nor can we lay down Mee pager coudiliens wate whieh = 
must comply. In particular, we cannot, at present, be 
certain that the same species of determining Sean 


occurs throughout the universe : 240 
228. Nor that more than one species does not extend over oe wha 
universe, or over part of it. : 241 
229. An enumeration of the characteristics “pia we fave found is 
belong to determining correspondence. 241 
230-232. Three sorts of relations which could not i relations = 
determining correspondence . : f . 242-3 
233. A sort of relation which might be a Eisaon of ieee 
correspondence. 244 
234-235. Certain relations beeween oes “a Sees eould pe ie 
relations of determining correspondence . : : . 245-7 
236. But perception might, under certain conditions, be a relation 
of determining correspondence : : : - . 248 


CHAPTER XXVII. EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES 
(continued) 


237. Recapitulation of the results of Chapter xviz : 250 
238. We can now show that every substance belongs to at least one 

group in which there is an exclusive common quality which 

is not a re-statement of the denotation of the group. The 

first type of these groups for substances within the Fun- 


damental System . . ; : j é : fe aah 
239. The second type 3 : : ; ; é . . 252 
240. The third type . : : : : ; ‘ : . 253 
241. The fourth type ‘ 253 
242. The first type of groups yy subeteyatd not ivan the Tada: 

mental System =. , : ; 5 ; : . 264 
243. The second type . : 254 
244, All these exclusive common qualities a are relatigaal qualities. 255 
245. But this is all that is essential . : 256 


246. It does not follow that, because we know a pateuiee) we shall 
know to which groups of these types it belongs : - 258 


SECT. 


247. 


248. 
249. 
250. 
251. 
252. 
253. 


254. 


255. 


256. 


257. 


258. 


259. 


260. 


261. 


262. 
263. 


264. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XXVIII. ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE 


Recapitulation of results in Chapter xxi as to Order. We can 
now see that the universe possesses causal order and order of 
classification 

Definition of a Fundamental ane 

Why such systems should be regarded as specially fandaasontal 

Principle of classification of these arrangements of the universe 
which depart from the fundamental system : 

But this principle is not applicable in ee owing es our 
limited knowledge . 

Recapitulation of results in Chapter XXI as i dnifties a com- 
position and unities of manifestation : 

We can now see that all primary and secondary parts are more 
appropriately called unities of manifestation 

Of substances not members of the fundamental system, ‘either 
both expressions are equally appropriate, or unity of 
composition is more appropriate 

Primary wholes and the universe are more appropriately piled 
unities of composition 

Thus primary parts occupy a poiad a nite jarpcanee in in 
the fundamental system, and the universe is more funda- 
mentally a plurality than a unity ; 

As to the natures of substances, there seems no ed for 
supposing that either unity of composition or unity of 
manifestation is the more appropriate expression 


CHAPTER XXIX. LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE 


The validity of the fabric of knowledge which we accept 
in ordinary life involves the validity of what we may call 
Exclusive Laws in the Universe 

There are some such laws which we know @ priori ees he vahd 
if there is a universe at all : 

But to justify our primd facie system of ict lodioe it will he 
necessary that some laws should be valid which we do not 
know @ priori 

And the system of (avertawog Pecsapondenee eens us is 
assert & priori that some laws are valid which we do not know 
a priore 

The same continued . 

The range of these laws is very Seeders ee das Le our 
knowledge that they exist justify our belief that we know by 
induction some of the Exclusive Laws in the Universe? 

The nature of inductive arguments 


X1x 


PAGE 


259 
260 
261 
262 
264 
265 


266 


266 


268 


270 


272 


273 


274 


275 


275 
276 


277 
278 


xx 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


SECT. 


265. 


266. 


267. 


268. 


269. 


270. 


271. 


272. 


273. 


274. 
275. 
276, 
277. 


278. 


279. 
280. 
281. 


282. 
283. 


They involve an assertion that one quality intrinsically deter- 
mines another. And this assertion cannot be justified on the 
basis of induction alone . 

The same continued 

Nor can it be justified by ys fat fhe some Palins can te 
seen & priori to intrinsically determine others 

The objection in Sections 265-266 is removed by the SER 
ment of determining correspondence 

But there is another which cannot so far be eres ba deter- 
mining correspondence, though subsequent a of 
that theory might affect it 

And a third which could not be poaorcd by 1 Bleed atthe corre- 

spondence, nor by complete causal determination 

A philosophical justification of induction has not yet pee 
found 


CHAPTER XXX. THE DIFFERENTIATION OF 
PRIMARY PARTS 


It is necessary that every primary part should be differentiated 
from all other primary parts 

This may take place by a difference in their differentiating 
groups—though this could not be the sole method with all 
primary parts - 

Or by a difference in their Pinions to ines. goberances 

Or by a difference in their original qualities 

Or by a difference in their derivative qualities 

We have no reason to assert that every primary part fad any 
quality which is common and exclusive 


CHAPTER XXXI. THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 


We can, at this point, determine definitely nothing further as to 
the unity of the universe. But it is useful to consider some 
possible results ; 

The first supposition to be poneiiera= 

It would produce a unity in many respects very close 

And between the parts of any primary part, there would exist 
a system of relations homologous to a system of relations 
existing between the primary parts of the universe 

The same continued 0 : 

And this would lead to a cor peapendence penwoed the universe 
and each primary part 


PAGE 


280 
281 


282 


283 


284 


286 


286 


288 


288 
290 
290 
291 


291 


294 
295 
295 


296 
298 


298 


SEOT. 
284. 


285. 


286. 


287. 


288. 
289. 
290. 
291. 
292. 
293. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


So that the universe would be what we may call a Self-Reflecting 
Unity . 

If the universe is he a ae then no 5 other eet in the 
same fundamental system can be such a unity. Nor can any 
substance which is not in a fundamental system be reflected, 
as the universe is, in the members of each of an endless series 
of sets of parts 

The expressions that the ee is in ec pare ad that eect 
part expresses the nature of the whole, though incorrect even 
of a self-reflecting unity, are less inappropriate with such a 
unity than elsewhere 

But, even on the first pnopondon he ee neuen ot the 
universe are more fundamental than its unity . 

The second supposition : 

It does not give as much unity as ois first : 

The third supposition. This, again, gives less unity 

The fourth supposition. Here the unity is again less 

And the same is the case with the fifth supposition 

And the sixth supposition 3 


INDEX 


Xxl 
PAGE 


299 


300 


301 


302 
303 
303 
305 
306 
307 
308 


310 


Cy 


" 


ORM Pit ee 


\< 


BOOK I 


INTRODUCTORY 


CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTORY 


1. In this work I propose to consider what can be deter- 
mined as to the characteristics which belong to all that exists, 
or, again, which belong to Existence as a whole. I shall also 
consider what consequences of theoretical or practical interest 
can be drawn from these general characteristics with respect to 
various parts of the existent which are known to us empirically. 

The Existent is, I conceive, promd facie a species of the 
Real. All that exists must, it is universally admitted, be real, 
while the position has been maintained that there is reality 
which does not exist. The first question, then, for us to consider 
is what is meant by reality, or Being—the two words, as gener- 
ally used, are equivalents. 

2. Reality is indefinable. The proposition “whatever is, is 
real,” although true, does not help us to define reality, or to 
determine it in any other way, because in “whatever is” the 
“is” involves being, and being is the same as reality. But the 
proposition, though tautologous, is not, I think, useless, since 
it brings before us the wide denotation of reality. 

Reality, then, is an indefinable characteristic, of which it can 
be said that whatever is, is real. It may thus be said to be 
universal in its denotation, but this does not mean that all pre- 
dication of unreality is contradictory. The predication of un- 
reality, indeed, is often correct. The fourth angle of any triangle, 
and the Duke of London in 1919, are both unreal?. 


1 The first of these enquiries occupies Books I, HI and IV, which are con- 
tained in this volume. The second enquiry will be pursued in Books V, VI and 
VII, which will appear subsequently. 

2 It has been objected to this that, e.g., the fourth angle of a triangle must 
be real, if we can predicate anything of it with truth. And thus any predication 
of unreality would contradict itself. But this seems to me to be mistaken. In 
order to make any predication about anything, I must have an idea of that 
thing, and the idea—the psychical event in my mind—must be real. But a 
real idea of such an angle does not involve the reality of the angle. This subject 
will be discussed in Book VI. 


4 INTRODUCTORY [BK I 


3. It has been held that reality is an ambiguous term, 
i.e., that to say that anything is real is to say nothing definite, 
unless we say something more. Before we can say whether 
Mrs Gamp is real or not, we must determine of what world the 
question is asked. She may not be real in the world of our 
ordinary life, and yet she may be real in the world of Dickens’ 
novel, and perhaps in my dream world. 

Now of course any one may, if he chooses, use the word 
reality in such a sense that, in that sense, something could be 
unreal in the world of waking life, and real in the world of fiction 
or of dreams. Between this use of the word, and the one which 
I have adopted, there is no question of truth and falsity, but 
only of convenience and inconvenience. But it seems clear to 
me that there is such a quality as that which I have called 
reality, and that it is this quality to which the name is usually 
applied, so that this use of it is the more convenient. And, in 
this sense, a thing is either real or not real, independent of 
qualifications. My dream of Mrs Gamp is, of course, real—-not 
only in a particular “world,” but absolutely. But Mrs Gamp 
herself is not real in a dream, since one person cannot be a part 
of another person’s dream. Nor is she real, as I suppose ber to 
be during my dream, in a non-dream world, since my supposition 
during the dream was wrong. (Of course, it might turn out that 
what I now think to be waking life was the dream, while the sup- 
posed dream was waking life. Then Mrs Gamp would be real, 
and the man | thought I saw five minutes ago would be unreal.) 

4. Reality, in the sense in which we bave taken it, is not a 
quality which admits of degrees. A thing cannot be more or 
less real than another which is also real. It has been said that 
reality does admit of degrees. But this can, I think, be traced 
to one of two confusions, and, when these are removed, it seems 
clear that there are no degrees of reality. 

Sometimes reality has been confused with power, and a 
thing has been said to be more real in proportion as it exerted 
more power on other things. But power and reality are quite 
different, and a thing which exerts more power is not more real 
than one which exerts less, 

Sometimes, again, it would seem that the possibility of 


CH. 1] INTRODUCTORY 5 


degrees of reality has been based on the possibility of degrees of 
truth. Even if A is not X, we may misrepresent its real nature 
less by calling it X than we should by calling it Y. And in that 
case it is usual, and not, I think, improper to say that “A is X” 
is more true than “A is Y,” though neither of them is perfectly 
true. And then, because we may say that “A is X” is more 
true than “A is Y,” it is supposed that we may say that AX 
is more real than AY. If, for example, it should be truer to say 
that the universe was an organism than that it was an ageregate, 
then it is supposed that we may say that an organic universe is 
more real than an aggregate-universe. But this is a mistake. 
“A is X” may misrepresent the nature of A less than “A is Y,”’ 
but, unless it is quite true that A is X, then A is net X, and 
AX is not real at all. Unless it is quite true that the universe 
is an organism there is no organic universe which has any reality. 

5. We have now, I think, succeeded in identifying the 
indefinable conception of reality. But what about existence? 
Can we define existence in terms of reality, or is existence, as 
well as reality, indefinable? I think that it must be pronounced 
indefinable. We are, indeed, able to say in what cases reality 
involves existence. If a substance or an event is real, it is 
existent. A man, a table, a battle, or a sneeze can only be real 
by existing. And it seems to me that we should also say that 
the qualities and relations of existent substances and events 
exist, and also the qualities and relations of those existent 
qualities and relations and so cn. Not only does Socrates exist, 
if he is real, but so does his quality of wisdom, and his relation 
of moral superiority to Nero, and, again, the quantitative rela- 
tion in which his wisdom stands to the wisdom of Aristotle. 
But, on the other hand, the quality of wisdom, and the relation 
of superiority, taken in themselves, and not as belonging to, or 
connecting, particular existents, de not exist, even if they are 
real. And, again, the proposition “Socrates is wise” (as dis- 
tinguished on the one hand from the man Socrates who is wise, 
and, on the other hand, from the psychical event of my know- 
ledge that Socrates is wise) does not exist, even if it is real. 

It might perhaps be doubted whether the characteristics of 
the existent should themselves be classed as existent. But if 


6 INTRODUCTORY [BK I 


Socrates exists and is wise, it surely would be unreasonable to 
deny that his wisdom exists. And his wisdom is nothing but 
his quality of being wise. In the same way, does not the moral 
superiority of Socrates to Nero exist? And this is nothing but 
a relation in which Socrates stands to Nero. 

To this it may be objected that in this case real wisdom 
would both exist and not exist. It would exist as a quality of 
Socrates, but not as a quality in general. But, as we shall see 
in the next chapter, it is not certain that any qualities or rela- 
tions are real apart from their existence. And even if it should 
be the case that qualities and relations were both existent, as 
qualities and relations of existent things, and non-existent, in 
their general aspects, I do not think that this would be an 
objection to our view. Qualities and relations are very different 
from substances, and the fact that a substance cannot be both 
existent and non-existent does not prove that qualities and 
relations—which are universal, and not particular as substances 
are—could not be existent in one aspect, and non-existent in 
another. 

Thus we know in what cases reality involves existence, but 
this will not give us a definition of existence. For when we come 
to define substance, we shall find that it is necessary to introduce 
the conception of existence as part of the definition. And events 
will be found to be a class of substances, so that the conception 
of an event will likewise require the conception of existence as 
part of its definition. The conception of the qualities and rela- 
tions of the existent, and the conception of their qualities and 
relations, again, can clearly not be defined without introducing 
the conception of substance. Thus an attempt to define existence 
by means of substances and events, and their qualities and 
relations, would involve a vicious circle. 

But the statement of the cases in which reality involves 
existence, though it would be vicious as a definition, is valuable 
as an explanation. The conceptions of a substance, of an event, 
of a characteristic!, and of a proposition, are conceptions of 


1 JT use the term Characteristics as a common name for qualities and rela- 
tions. It is convenient to have a common name for both, and no other seems 
available. It is true that a relation cannot be correctly called a characteristic 


CH. I] INTRODUCTORY i 


which it is easy to give examples, and which are much more 
familiar to us than the more abstract conception of existence. 
And so the nature of existence becomes clearer to us when we 
realise that existence belongs to real substances, real events, 
and their characteristics, but not to characteristics in general, 
nor to propositions, should characteristics in general and pro- 
positions be real. 

6. But cs there anything real which is not existent, or are 
the only things which are real of such a sort that their reality 
implies their existence? If this should be the case the spheres 
of reality and existence would coincide. This point will be dis- 
cussed in the next chapter, and I shall endeavour to maintain 
that there is no reason to hold that there is anything real which 
is not existent, and that, even if there is any such non-existent 
reality, its relation to existence is such that, in studying existence, 
we study the whole of reality. 

But even if this should not be so—if there is reality which is 
non-existent, and it should be of such a sort that we should not 
be studying all reality in studying existence—yet the nature of 
existence would have special interest for us. For, from the 
point of view of our practical interests, nothing is of any moment 
to us except the existent. In that which exists we have all of 
us practical interests of one sort or another. But it seems very 
difficult to suppose that any person could feel any practical 
interest in non-existent reality, for its own sake, and independent 
of any effect it may have on the existent’. 

With purely theoretical interest the case is different. Many 
of anything, as a quality can. But, as we shall see later, every relation generates, 
for each of its terms, a Relational Quality which is a characteristic of that 
term. The relation may thus be said to characterise each of its terms, though 


it is not a characteristic of either of them, and this may justify us in calling it a 
characteristic. 

1 It may be said that we have a practical interest, not only in the existent, 
but in the possibilities of existence. It is true that I have a practical interest in 
the possibility that it may rain to-morrow, but that only means that I am 
interested in to-morrow’s weather, and do not yet know all its characteristics. 
Now to-morrow’s weather is existent, for existence is as much a predicate of 
the future and past as of the present. On the other hand, the possibility that 
it might have been raining now, when in point of fact it is not raining, has no 
practical interest for me. The difference between these two kinds of possibility 
will be discussed in the next chapter (Section 35). 


8 INTRODUCTORY [BK I 


people have a strong interest in knowing the truth as such, and 
this theoretical interest could be excited about non-existent 
reality as much as about existent reality. And this gives them 
an interest in non-existent reality, if there is any such reality, 
though an interest of a different kind from that which is taken 
in the existent. For with the non-existent all that we should 
desire would be to know what the nature of the real is. We 
should have no desire that it should have one nature rather 
than another, except in so far as it might affect the existent. 
In so far as it does affect the existent, of course, we might desire 
that it should have one nature rather than another. Any desire, 
for example, that its nature should not be such as to render our 
knowledge of it limited or untrustworthy, would come under 
this head, since knowledge, if real, is existent. 

We can, then, have interest in the real, even though it 
should not be existent. But it is only that interest which we 
have in knowledge for its own sake. All our other interests—in 
happiness, for example, in virtue, or in love—deal exclusively 
with the existent, the study of which would thus in any case 
have a special importance for us. 


CHAPTER II 


REALITY AND EXISTENCE 


7. We have now to discuss the question whether there is 
anything real which is not existent, or whether, on the other 
hand, the only things which are real are of such a sort that 
their reality implies their existence, so that the spheres of 
existence and reality would coincide. I shall endeavour to 
maintain that there is no reason to hold that there is anything 
real which is not existent, and that, even if there is any such 
non-existent reality, its relation to existence is such that, in 
studying existence, we study the whole of reality. 

We must consider separately the various classes of things 
which have been asserted to be real without existing. In the 
first place, it has been asserted that Propositions are real 
without existing. By a Proposition is meant such a reality as 
“Socrates is wise,” or “the multiplication table is green,” as 
distinguished on the one hand from anyone’s belief that Socrates 
is wise or that the multiplication table is green (which belief 
would, of course, be existent), and on the other hand from any 
existent thing about which the proposition may be made— 
such as, in the case of our first example, the existent Socrates. 
Secondly it has been said that characteristics can be real 
without being existent. And finally it is said that possibilities 
are real but not existent. 

8. Let us begin with propositions. The argument for their 
reality is that there are mental states which are true or false, 
and that their truth or falsity can only be determined by their 
correspondence to a true proposition or a false proposition 
respectively. 

It is beyond doubt that there are mental states which are 
such that each of them must be true or false. There are certainly 
beliefs, and every belief must be true or false. And besides 


10 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


beliefs, there are Assumptions!. If I assert “Smith is bald,” 
that is a belief. But if I do not assert that Smith is bald, but 
only consider whether he 2s bald, or if I assert “if Smith is bald, 
be must wear a wig,” then I have not a belief about Smith’s 
baldness, but an assumption—the assumption “that Smith is 
bald.” And this assumption is true or false, according as Smith 
is or is not bald, though, since it is not an assertion, it is not 
knowledge if it is true, nor error if it is false. 

But does the reality of true and false beliefs and assumptions 
involve the reality of true and false propositions? Since what- 
ever considerations are applicable to belief in this connection 
are also applicable to assumptions, I shall, for the sake of 
brevity, speak only of beliefs. 

9. What is it that makes a belief true? It has sometimes 
been maintained that the truth of a belief lay in its coherence 
with other beliefs, or in its completeness, or in the possession of 
a systematic nature. It seems quite clear to me that all such 
views are false. Such characteristics, or some of them, may 
possibly be criteria of truth, but they cannot make the belief 
true. If I say “the table is square,” the only thing which can 
make my assertion true is the fact that the table 7s square— 
that is, the possession by the table of the quality of squareness, 
The only belief which can be made true by the coherence, or 
completeness, or systematic nature, of any belief M, is the 
belief that the belief M is coherent, or complete, or syste- 
matic. 

And in the same way we must reject the theory that what 
makes every belief true is a relation to the knowing subject. It 
is said that my beliefs are true because they work for me, or 
because they give me satisfaction, or because they are self- 
evident to me. It may be that these characteristics, or some 
of them, are criteria of truth, but they cannot be what makes a 
belief. true. The only beliefs which are made true by any relation 
to the knowing subject are beliefs about that subject. And the 
only belief which could be made true by the working for me of 
a belief M, or by its satisfying my nature or being self-evident to 


* I use Assumption, as will be seen, as the equivalent of Dr Meinong’s 
Annahme. 


CH. 11] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 11 


me, would be a belief that the belief M did work for me, or 
satisfy my nature, or was self-evident to me}. 

10. It seems to me that truth, as a characteristic of beliefs, 
may be defined as a relation in which the belief stands, and which 
is a relation of correspendence to a Fact. I should define a 
Fact as being either the pcssession by anything of a quality, 
or the connection of anything with anything by a relation. (In 
this definition I use “anything”’ to include both substances and 
characteristics.) A fact exists when the thing about which it is 
a fact is existent. Thus the squareness of the table is a fact, in 
distinction from the belief about it, which is an event in my 
mind?, and the proposition about it which the view which we 
are opposing asserts to be also real. 

The other elements in.our definition of truth do not admit 
of further definition. We shall see in the next Book that we 
cannot define the characteristic of being a relation. The char- 
acteristic of correspondence is also, I think, indefinable. And 
when we ask what sort of correspondence it is which constitutes 
truth—for not all sorts of correspondence would do so—we find 
that we cannot define the particular sort of correspondence. 
And, it may further be noted, we cannot even give other 
examples of it. It is just that sort of correspondence which is 
the relation of truth. 

11. Are we right in taking truth as a relation in which 
things stand, and not as a quality which they possess? In 
favour of the latter view it might be said that truth is affirmed 
of beliefs simply. We say that a belief is true, without any 
mention of a term other than a belief. Surely then truth 
cannot be a relation between a belief and some other term. 

There is, no doubt, a quality of being a true belief, which is 

1 Thus the only case in which a belief could be made true by its own 
coherence, or by its own satisfaction of my nature, would be the case in which 
it was a belief that it itself was coherent, or satisfied my nature. Most beliefs 
are not about themselves, but some are. The belief “all my beliefs satisfy my 
nature” is a belief about itself and others. And the belief “the last belief I 
shall ever hold satisfies my nature”’ is a belief about itself and about nothing 
else, if it happens that this belief is the last I shall ever hold. 

2 My belief ‘the table is square”’ is, or course, itself a fact. It is a relation 


to this fact which gives truth to the further belief “I have a belief that this 
table is square,” should circumstances lead me to make this further assertion. 


12 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


possessed by true beliefs. But a belief only has that quality 
because it stands to some fact in that relation of correspondence 
of which we have been speaking. It is only a matter of con- 
venience whether we give the name of truth to the relation in 
which the belief stands, or to the quality which arises from the 
relation. It seems better to give it to the relation, because the 
relation is logically prior to the quality. The belief does not 
stand in the relation because it has the quality. It has the 
quality because it stands in the relation—indeed, its quality is 
just the quality of being a term in the relation. It is the relation 
which is fundamentally important, and it is therefore more 
convenient that it should bear the name of truth, especially as 
there is no other name for this particular sort of correspondence. 

In the case of any belief whose nature is known, it is sufficient 
to say that it is a term which stands in this relation to some- 
thing. It is not necessary to specify the other term, because 
there is only one term to which any particular belief can have 
that relation, and we know what that term is, when we know 
what the belief is about. If the belief “the table is square” is 
true at all, it can only be by correspondence to one thing—the 
squareness of the table. It would be superfluous to say that 
the belief that the table was square was true of the squareness 
of the table. And tbus the fact that truth is a relation tends to 
fall into the background, since, in any particular case, it is 
superfluous to mention one term of the relation. But this does 
not make the relation any less real. 

12. Our theory that truth consists in a certain correspond- 
ence with a fact, which correspondence is not further definable, 
must not be confused with the theory that truth consists in 
resemblance to a fact—a view which has been sometimes called 
the “copy theory” of truth. Resemblance is a correspondence, 
but all correspondence is not resemblance, and the particular 
correspondence which constitutes truth is not resemblance. 
Nor does it involve resemblance. Of course all true beliefs must 
to some extent resemble the facts believed in, because every- 
thing resembles everything else to some extent. But there is no 
special resemblance between the belief and the fact. If I truly 
believe A to be a man, my belief has no greater resemblance to the 


CH. II] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 13 


quality of being a man than it has to the qualities of being a 
woman orachild. And my belief that A is a man has no greater 
resemblance to A than a belief that A was a woman would have, 
although the first belief is true, and the second would be false. 

At the same time we must recognize that the copy theory of 
truth has several important features in common with the 
theory which we have adopted, and that, if our theory is true, 
the copy theory is considerably nearer the truth than various 
others are. For the copy theory makes the truth of a belief 
depend upon its relation to a fact, and it holds that relation to 
be a relation of correspondence. And in these points it is right, 
though it is wrong in holding that the particular relation of 
correspondence in question is resemblance. 

13. There seem to be two reasons why it should have been 
supposed that the correspondence in this case was resemblance. 
In the first place, many thinkers are very unwilling to admit 
any fresh ultimate and indefinable conception—an unwillingness 
which is often very salutary, but can easily be carried too far. 
And, as the reality of the relation of resemblance cannot be 
denied, it would diminish the number of indefinable conceptions 
if the relation of truth-correspondence could be taken to be 
resemblance. And, in the second place, a true belief gives us 
information about the object of a belief, and from the nature of 
one resembling thing we can gain knowledge of the thing which 
resembles it. It was not unnatural, though it was illogical, to 
conclude that the relation was the same in both cases. 

I suspect, however, that some thinkers who have been 
accused of holding the copy theory of truth have in reality only 
held that the truth of a belief depends on its correspondence 
with a fact, and that it has been their critics who have been in 
error in supposing that the correspondence asserted could only 
be the correspondence of resemblance. 

It may be noted that the theory of truth which we have 
adopted, though it cannot be identified with the copy theory, 
might be called with some appropriateness the picture theory 
of truth. For while a picture gives information about the object 
pictured, it does not do so by being an exact copy of that object. 
A' picture may contain, on a surface of two dimensions, two 


14 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


figures of very different sizes. But from it we may learn that 
the objects represented are two three-dimensioned human bodies, 
approximately equal in size, standing at some distance from 
each other in a particular direction. 

I do not say that our theory would be in any way explained 
by calling it a picture theory. For in order to explain the 
relation which a faithful picture bears to its object, we must 
say that it represents it. And this, I think, involves that the 
picture gives us knowledge of the object. Thus the conception 
of knowledge, and therefore the conception of truth, would be 
required to explain the explanation of truth. But the relation of 
a picture to its object, while not an explanation of the relation of 
truth, seems as appropriate a metaphor for it as can be found. 

14. Now if we accept this theory of what is meant by the 
truth of beliefs, there is, I maintain, no reason to hold that the 
truth of beliefs involves their correspondence with true proposi- 
tions. We shall agree with the advocates of propositions that 
the truth of a belief involves its correspondence with something. 
But we shall say that in every case the truth of a belief involves 
its correspondence with a fact, and that there is no need for 
any further correspondence with a proposition. 

The supporters of the reality of propositions would not deny 
that every true belief did correspond to a fact. Every belief 
asserts that something (in the widest sense of “something”’) 
possesses a quality, or is connected with something by a relation, 
If the belief is true, then that thing does possess the quality, or 
is connected with something by the relation. The possession of 
such a quality, or the connection by such a relation, is a fact, 
according to our definition. And if the belief is true, it will 
correspond to the fact. It may also correspond to a true pro- 
position, but then it will have two correspondences—to the true 
proposition and the fact. What reason is there, then, to believe 
in the reality of the proposition at all? The only ground given 
for the reality of the proposition was that there must be some- 
thing, correspondence to which constituted the truth of the 
belief. Our theory admits this, and relies on the admitted 
correspondence to the fact. What reason can be given why a 
further correspondence to a proposition should be necessary? 


CH. I] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 15 


15. Two reasons have been given for the necessity of this 
further correspondence, neither of which seems to me to be 
satisfactory. The first of them is that many things are true 
which are never thought of. The second depends upon the 
assertion that all truth is timeless. 

It is said that many things are true which, in all probability, 
are never known or assumed. Take, for example, the number of 
mosquitoes born on this planet between the death of Caesar and 
the death of Queen Anne. What are the chances that any 
person has ever entertained any belief or assumption at all on 
this subject? And if there had been any such belief or assump- 
tion, what chance is there that it would have been true? And 
yet, it is asked, can we deny that there must be some number 
such that it is true that it is the number of those mosquitoes? 
Now, if there are no propositions, nothing could be true about 
this number except beliefs and assumptions. And, consequently, 
the fact that there is a truth, where there is neither belief nor 
assumption, proves the reality of propositions. 

In reply to this, some thinkers have admitted that, if pro- 
positions are not real, every fact must be present to some mind, 
but have endeavoured to avoid the reality of propositions by 
relying on the existence of an omniscient being, who entertains 
true beliefs about every fact!. But even if the existence of 
such an omniscient being,should be proved, and sbould render 
it certain that nothing could be true without being known, the 


1 Tt does not seem very satisfactory that the possibility of truth should be 
dependent on the existence of a being who was occupied in knowing, not only 
the truth that red is not green, but the truth that it is true that red is not 
green, the truth that it is true that it is true that red is not green, and so on 
through an infinite series. Such beliefs grow less significant and important as 
the series progresses, and consequently it would follow that the proportion of 
the beliefs of such a being which fell below any standard, however low, of 
significance and importance, would be infinitely greater than the proportion 
which fell above it. 

It is not necessary that an omniscient being, if there were one, should be 
occupied in this way. For, if all reality were existent, a being whose knowledge 
was intuitive and not discursive might be fairly said to be omniscient if he had 
an intuitive knowledge (somewhat analogous to our perception) of all that 
exists, although he did not believe all truths—or, indeed, any truths. But the 
existence of an omniscient being whose knowledge was of this sort would not 
meet the difficulty discussed in the text. 


16 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


believers in the reality of propositions would not be silenced. 
For their objection could be put in a more fundamental form, 
which could not be met in this way. Even if every truth should 
be known, is it not certain, they may ask, that its truth does 
not depend upon its being known? “X is Y” is not true because 
I have a true belief in it. My belief in it is true because it is 
true that X is Y. And thus, it is said, the truth is independent 
of the belief, even if the existence of an omniscient being 
ensures that every truth is believed. But, if so, there is some- 
thing true besides beliefs. Truth is objective, and a thing cannot 
be made true by believing it to be true. 

16. It follows, no doubt, from the theory which we have 
adopted that nothing is true but mental states. But I do not 
think that any of the untenable consequences, which have been 
asserted to follow from this, do really follow from it. For, 
although on this theory there is no truth independent of the 
beliefs, there is something else which is independent of the 
beliefs—the facts to which the beliefs correspond. Now these 
facts hold the same position as independent of the beliefs, and 
as determining their truth, as the propositions were asserted 
to hold by those who believed in them. Take the case of a man 
who was selfish without his selfishness being suspected or con- 
templated, either by himself or by any other person. Then there 
would not be a real truth, “X is selfish,’ but there would be 
the real fact of X’s selfishness. And supposing that his selfish- 
ness was known—either by an omniscient being or by anyone 
else—the truth of the belief in his selfishness need not depend 
on any proposition, since it would depend on the fact that he 
was selfish. 

And thus it seems to me that the alleged difficulties dis- 
appear. The element in them which was valid was the fact that 
it is essential to a true belief that it depends for its truth on its 
correspondence to something. But that is satisfied by its 
correspondence to the fact. There is no necessity that it should 
depend for its truth on anything true other than itself, and it is 
the assumption that there was such a necessity which makes 
the objection of our opponents invalid. 

Nothing, it has been said as an objection to our theory, can 


CH. 11] REALITY AND EXISTENCE Ai 


be made true by believing or assuming it to be true. And it 
has been argued that if nothing is true except beliefs and 
assumptions, then “X is Y” would be made true by believing 
or assuming it to be true. But there is an ambiguity here. 
Does “made true by believing it to be true” mean only that 
the belief is essential for the truth, or does it mean that it is 
all that is essential for the truth? It is only if the phrase is taken 
in the second sense that it must be admitted that a thing cannot 
be made true by believing it to be true. And it is only if the 
phrase is taken in the first sense that our theory involves that 
a thing is made true by believing it to be true. 

The mere fact that an assertion is believed is certainly not 
all that is required to make it true. But then our theory does 
not say that this is all that is required. It says, on the contrary, 
that it is essential, in order that a belief should be true, that it 
should correspond to a fact. Otherwise it will be false. And so 
our theory does not assert that the belief in anything is sufficient 
to make it true. It does assert that nothing is true unless it is 
believed, but there is nothing untenable in this when it is 
realized that, besides being believed, it must correspond to a 
fact. 

17. In the second place, it has been said that whatever is 
true at all is timelessly true, and that this fact renders pro- 
positions indispensable, since in them, and in them alone, can 
this timelessness be found. It cannot be found in the belief in 
the fact, since all beliefs are unquestionably in time. Nor can 
it, in many cases, be found in the fact which is believed, since 
that is often in time. It is timelessly true, it is said, that the 
date of the battle of Waterloo is 1815. Nothing timeless can 
be found, either in the battle itself, or in anyone’s belief about 
it, as they are both in time. But if propositions are real at all, 
they are certainly timeless, since they would be non-existent, 
and nothing but the existent can be temporal. Here, and here 
only, is the necessary timelessness found, and therefore pro- 
positions must be real. 

The supporters of this view would not deny that a belief, 
which corresponded with a true proposition, would be properly 
called true, although it was in time. But they would say that the 


18 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


truth of such a belief was only derivative, and depended on its 
correspondence with the proposition. It is the truth of the 
proposition which is the ultimate truth, and so the time- 
lessness of truth would be saved by the timelessness of the 
proposition. 

But is it certain that what is asserted in every true belief is 
timelessly true? It is clear that nothing would be timelessly 
true which is true at one time, and not at another. And there 
are beliefs which primd facie assert something which is true at 
one time and not at another. The belief “I am now hungry ”— 
if those words are really the complete and unambiguous ex- 
pression of my belief—is sometimes true and sometimes false, 
and therefore, when it is true, cannot be asserting anything 
which is timelessly true. But there is an explanation of what is 
meant by “I am now hungry” which would avoid that result. 
With that explanation I cannot agree, but the point cannot 
well be discussed here}. 

18. Nor is it necessary to do so, for it does not affect the 
force of the present argument. It may or may not be the case 
that what is asserted in some beliefs is sometimes true and some- 
times false. But it is certain that what is asserted in the majority 
of beliefs is not sometimes true and sometimes false. If any 
beliefs assert what is sometimes one and sometimes the other, 
it is only those which contain some reference to past, present, 
or future. All other beliefs assert something which is true or 
false without reference to the time at which it is asserted. 
“The date of the battle of Waterloo is 1815” was a belief which 
was true during the battle, will be true a million years hence, 
if anyone happens to remember it, and would have been true a 
million years ago, if anyone had happened to prophesy it. 

We must not say, however, that such beliefs as these are 
always true, since this would imply that the same belief can 


1 It will be discussed in Book V. The solution of this and similar problems, 
which will be put forward there, will involve the theory that time is unreal, and 
that, in consequence, nothing changes. But such a result will not support the 
argument for timeless propositions which is discussed in the text. For that 
argument demanded propositions as a refuge for the timelessness which was 
not to be found in beliefs. It will therefore be invalid if it should finally appear 
that beliefs, together with everything else, are timeless. 


CH. II] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 19 


exist at different and separated times, which is not the case. 
A belief is a psychical fact in a man’s mind, and my belief now 
cannot be the same as your belief now, or as mine next year. 
We must rather say that such beliefs are true or false without 
reference to the time when they are made. From this it follows 
that, if any such belief in X is true or false, all such beliefs 
in X will be true or false respectively, whenever they are 
madel, 

But this does not justify us in concluding that such beliefs 
correspond to timeless true propositions. Of course, if there 
were timeless true propositions, then all beliefs in any such 
propositions would be true whenever they were made. But the 
converse does not hold. It does not follow that, if there are 
beliefs which would be true whenever they are made, they must 
correspond to timeless propositions, or to anything timeless. 
If a belief which makes an assertion X corresponds to a fact in 
such a way as to be true, then all beliefs which make the same 
assertion will be true, whenever they are made, unless the 
assertion contains a reference to past, present, or future. It 
does not require anything timeless to secure that beliefs that the 
date of Waterloo is 1815 shall be true whenever they are made. 
That is secured by all the beliefs referring to the same fact, 
and not referring to it as past, present, or future. 

19. It is possible, then, to account for the truth of true 
beliefs without basing it on their correspondence to true pro- 
positions, and so far we have found no reason to believe in the 
reality of propositions. But how about false beliefs? Such 
beliefs do unquestionably exist, and it may be maintained that 
they can only be false by corresponding to false propositions. 

What is it that makes a belief false? We saw that the truth 
of a belief does not lie in its coherence, or completeness, or 
systematic nature, or in the fact that it works for me, or satisfies 
me, or is self-evident to me. And in the same way it seems clear 
that the falsity of a belief does not lie in its want of any of 

1 It may be asked what is meant by two different beliefs being beliefs in the 
game thing. In the case of true beliefs, which we are at present considering, the 
answer is simple. Two true beliefs are beliefs in the same thing when their truth 


consists in correspondence to the same fact. What is meant by it when the 
beliéfs are false will be considered in Section 21. 


20 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


these characteristics. The absence of one of them may be a 
criterion of falsity, but it does not constitute falsity. 

It seems to me that a false belief owes its falsity, as a true 
belief does its truth, to a relation to fact. It cannot, of course, 
be a relation of correspondence to a fact, since then the belief 
would be true. I think that the relation in question is a relation 
of non-correspondence to all facts. If A has not the relation of 
correspondence to B, it has the relation of non-correspondence to 
it. And I submit that what makes a belief false is just that 
there is no fact anywhere to which it corresponds. If I say 
“my table is of gold,” this is false because it is not a fact that 
there is anything which possesses the characteristics of being 
my table and of being golden. If I say “my table is not of 
wood” this is false because it is not a fact that there is anything 
which possesses the characteristics of being my table and of 
not being wooden. If I say “no Cambridge college in 1919 has 
a chapel” this is false because it is not a fact that there is 
anything which has the characteristics of being a group of ali 
Cambridge colleges in 1919, and of being a group all of whose 
members are devoid of chapels. If I say “whatever is a Cam- 
bridge college must be an elephant,” this is false because it is 
not a fact that there is anything which is the characteristic of 
being a Cambridge college and which itself possesses the further 
characteristic that whatever has it must be an elephant. 

20. Against tbis view it has been argued that every belief 
must refer to some object. But this seems to me to be due to a 
confusion between two truths. One of these is that every 
belief professes to refer to some fact, and, more specifically, to 
correspond to it in the way which we have already discussed. 
But this only means that every belief professes to be true, or, 
in other words, that to believe anything means to believe it to 
be true. All beliefs profess to refer to some object, but only 
those which are true really do so. The other truth is that every 
belief really has a relation to some fact or facts on which its 
truth or falsehood depends. And this is admitted by our theory. 
The mistake arises from confusing the relation, which every 
belief really has, with the reference, which every belief pro- 
fesses to have, but which false beliefs have not. 


CH. It] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 21 


21. It may be asked whether our theory can give any 
meaning to the statement that two persons, or the same person 
at different times, had false beliefs in the same thing. If Smith 
and Brown both believe that the earth is flat, it would very 
commonly be said that they had the same false belief. This is 
incorrect, for two people cannot have the same belief, since a 
belief is a psychical fact which cannot be in two minds. But it 
is impossible to deny that in some sense they have false beliefs 
in the same thing. Now if there were false propositions, we 
could say that they had beliefs in the same proposition. If their 
beliefs were true, we could say that they corresponded to the 
same fact. But with false beliefs, if our theory is true, there is 
no correspondence of the two beliefs to the same reality. They 
both, indeed, have the relation of non-correspondence to all 
facts, but they share that relation with Robinson’s belief that 
Bacon wrote Hamlet, which would not be called a belief in the 
same thing. 

But our theory gives us a perfectly satisfactory meaning for 
the phrase “in the same thing” as applied to two false beliefs. 
Two false beliefs are beliefs in the same thing when they both 
profess to be beliefs correspondent to the same fact. In the 
case of false beliefs there is no such fact, and therefore no such 
relation of correspondence. But the assertion of such a corre- 
spondence would be a quality of such beliefs. And, although a 
belief can only be true or false by means of a relation to a fact, 
there is no reason why two beliefs should not be beliefs in the 
same thing in respect of a common quality. 

Again, if two beliefs profess to be correspondent to the 
same fact, it is the absence of that fact which makes them false. 
And therefore we can also say that two false beliefs are beliefs 
in the same thing when it is the absence of the same fact which 
makes both of them false. Smith’s belief is made false by the 
absence from reality of anything which is both this planet and 
flat. And Brown’s belief is made false by the same absence. 
This unites them together, and distinguishes both of them from 
Robinson’s belief, which is made false by the absence of some- 
thing different—namely, of anything which is both Bacon and 
the author of Hamlet. 


22 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


22. Thus we can account for the falsity of false beliefs with- 
out basing it on their correspondence to false propositions, and 
we have still no reason to believe in the reality of propositions. 
We may remark that, even if we had come to the conclusion 
that true beliefs must correspond to true propositions, it would 
not have followed that false beliefs must correspond to false 
propositions. For the reality of true propositions would not 
have affected our conclusion that false beliefs correspond to 
nothing, and, if there were true propositions, the best explana- 
tion of false beliefs would be that they were the beliefs which 
did not correspond to true propositions. And this explanation 
would have the additional recommendation that there are 
several objections to the reality of false propositions which do 
not apply to the reality of true propositions}. 

23. We have thus seen that satisfactory explanations can 
be given of the truth of true beliefs, and of the falsity of false 
beliefs, without the necessity of introducing correspondence 
with propositions. And I do not know that any other reason 
has ever been given for belief in the reality of propositions 
except the asserted necessity of this correspondence—that is, if 
“proposition” is used in the sense in which I have taken it, as 
meaning a non-existent reality which is true or false inde- 
pendently of our beliefs. It is only when it is so used that the 
question of the reality of propositions has any bearing on the 
question whether it is necessary in philosophy to go beyond the 
study of the existent. If, for example, propositions are main- 
tained to be real as constituents of beliefs, and not otherwise, 
then it would follow that such propositions would be existent, 
since it is impossible that a constituent of an existent thing 
should not itself exist. But, whether they were existent or not, 
we should study them in studying the existent, since there would 
be no propositions which were not constituents of existent beliefs. 

24. The result of our discussion so far is that, while we 
have not positively disproved the reality of the propositions 
which we have been considering, we have arrived at the decision 
that there is no reason to assert their reality. But a further 
question arises. We have seen that every belief derives its 


1 Cp. Russell, Philosophical Essays, vu. p. 176. 


CH. I1] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 23 


truth or falsity from its relation to a fact or facts. Now if any 
of these facts are non-existent, we shall still have to assert that 
there is some non-existent reality, though it will consist of facts, 
and not of propositions. 

It seems to me, however, that there is no reason to assert 
that there are any non-existent facts, and that the truth and 
falsity of all beliefs can be explained on the hypothesis that all 
facts are existent. 

Beliefs may for the purpose of this enquiry be divided into 
two classes—those which profess to refer to an existent fact, 
and those which do not. Each of these classes contains, of 
course, both true and false beliefs. 

With regard to true beliefs of the first class, it is clear that 
they do not require any relation to non-existent facts. If I say 
“my table exists,” “my table is square,” or “every Cambridge 
college in 1919 has a dining hall,” what makes them true is 
their correspondence with the three facts to which they profess 
to refer—the possession by my table of the characteristic of 
existence, the possession by my table of the characteristic of 
squareness, and the possession by the group of all Cambridge 
colleges in 1919 of the characteristic that each of its members 
has the characteristic of having a dining hall. These cannot be 
facts unless the table and the group of colleges exist, and there- 
fore the facts are existent facts. 

And it is equally clear that false beliefs of this class do not 
require any relation to non-existent facts. If I say “my table 
is golden,” or “every Cambridge college in 1919 has a swimming 
bath,” these assertions could only be true if they corresponded 
with existent facts. If either of them does not correspond to 
any existent fact, it will be false, and so its falsity is no ground 
for asserting the reality of non-existent facts. 

25. We now come to the second class—to the beliefs which 
do not profess to refer to an existent fact. And these present 
a more difficult and complicated problem. “Perfection is a 
quality,” “two sides of a triangle are always longer than the 
third,” are beliefs of this class. But so also are all beliefs in 
general laws, as distinct from summaries of what takes place in 
each of a group of cases. “All Cambridge colleges in 1919 have 


24 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


dining halls” falls, as we saw, in the first class, because, in the 
natural sense of the statement, in which we took it, it is not an 
assertion of any general law, but only a summing up of seventeen 
facts about the seventeen colleges respectively. But take the 
belief “all lions are mortal.”’ In any sense in which any person 
is justified in asserting this, it is not a summing up of particular 
facts about particular lions, since no one has observed the 
death of all lions, past, present, and future. It is a belief in a 
general law which we should still hold to be true even if no 
lions existed. We could not, indeed, in that case, establish it 
by an induction based on the cbserved deaths of lions, but if 
we established inductively the law that all animals are mortal, 
it would follow from this, together with the definition of a lion, 
that all lions would be mortal, and the conclusion would still 
be held to be true if we were certain that no lions ever did or 
would exist. Such a law as this, then, does not profess to refer 
to an existent fact. Does it, in reality, always derive its truth 
or falsity from its relation to existent facts? 

26. All beliefs which do not profess to refer to an existent 
fact have one characteristic in common—they all assert that 
the presence of one characteristic implies the presence of 
another?. 

In order to make this clear, let us first note that the only 
beliefs which do not assert a concomitance of characteristics are 
such beliefs as “I am happy,” “this is red,” where the subject 
of the assertion is immediately perceived by the person who 
makes the assertion. And such beliefs are obviously among 
those which profess to refer to existent facts. With these 
exceptions, every belief asserts a concomitance of character- 
istics with one another. This is clearly the case when the subject 
of which anything is asserted is a characteristic, for what is as- 
serted of it can be nothing but its possession of another character- 
istic. But when the subject is not a characteristic, it must, if 


* It may be said that to include all beliefs we should have to say that 
presence or absence of one characteristic implies the presence or absence of 
another. But the absen:2e of a characteristic may be taken as the presence of a 
negative characteristic, and thus the expression in the text is not incorrect. 

The nature of implication will be discussed in Chapter xm. At present it 
will perhaps be sufficient to say that I use the word in the ordinary sense. 


CH. 11] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 25 


it is not perceived, be defined or described by characteristics, 
and so the assertion is that the characteristics of the definition 
or description are found along with the characteristic asserted. 
“All men are mortal” means that the characteristics which 
define a man are never to be found without the characteristic 
mortality. “Smith is wiser than Jones” means that the char- 
acteristics which enable us to identify Smith are found in a 
substance which has the characteristic of being wiser than 
Jones. 

27. Characteristics, however, can be concomitant without 
one implying the other. And, in fact, many of our beliefs do 
assert concomitance without implication. I know, for example, 
that every Cambridge college in 1919 had a dining hall, not 
because the characteristic of being such a college in that year 
implies the characteristic of having a dining hall, but because 
I know that in that year each of the seventeen colleges had, as 
a matter of fact, the latter characteristic. 

But beliefs which assert concomitance without implication 
always profess to refer to existent facts, and when we pass to 
beliefs which do not profess to make this reference, we find that 
it is always concomitance with implication which is asserted. 
I can assert that, if an eighteenth college had been founded in 
Cambridge, this college would not be an elephant, because the 
characteristic of being a college implies the characteristic of not 
being an elephant. But I cannot assert that it would resemble 
the existing colleges in having less than seventy fellowships, or 
in having a dining hall, because these characteristics are not 
implied by the characteristic of being a Cambridge college 
existing in 1919. And again, of the class of triangles, as 
studied in geometry, I can only assert such things as are implied 
by the characteristic of triangularity?. 

All beliefs, then, which do not profess to refer to existent 
facts, assert that the presence of one characteristic implies the 
presence of another. Let us first consider true beliefs of this 

1 The implication may be of such a kind that it is only known to us empiric- 
ally. I can assert that if there should be a lion in Westminster Hall to-morrow 
it would not be green, because I have good, though empirical, evidence for the 
belief that the characteristic of being a lion implies the characteristic of not 
being green. 

Cc 


26 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


class, and enquire whether it is necessary that the facts to which 
they refer should in any case be non-existent. 

28. Take, to begin with, such a general law as “all lions are 
mortal.’’ This, as we have seen, does not profess to refer to 
existent facts. It asserts a connection between two character- 
istics which would be true if no existent being had ever been a 
lion or been mortal. But it seems clear to me that its truth 
depends on its correspondence with facts which do exist. The 
characteristics of being a lion, and of being mortal, do exist, 
since there are existent substances which possess them. The 
belief in the law owes its truth to its correspondence with the 
fact that the characteristic of being a lion has the character- 
istic of implying the characteristic of being mortal, and with 
the equivalent fact that the characteristic of being mortal has 
the characteristic of being implied by the characteristic of 
being a lion. And these facts, being each of them the possession 
of a characteristic by an existent characteristic, are existent 
facts. 

29. This simple solution, however, is only possible because 
in this case the characteristics happen to be those of existent 
substances, which is not, as we have seen, essential to the 
validity of the law. And there are many beliefs which cannot 
be dealt witb in this way—for example, “a man is more valuable 
than a phoenix,” or “a man cannot be a phoenix.” Here the 
characteristic of being a man is existent, but we have every 
reason to suppose that the characteristic of being a phoenix is 
not. Of course, there may be a phoenix. But the certainty of 
my belief that a man could not be a phoenix does not depend 
on this possibility. And in the case of such a belief as “a 
perfectly virtuous man would be more admirable than a con- 
queror of the whole world,” it might well be the case that no 
existent substance possessed either characteristic, and so that 
neither characteristic existed. 

There are, no doubt, various ways in which the nature of a 
non-existent characteristic might be determined by the nature 
of an existent characteristic. In the first place, the existent 
characteristic might be a part of the non-existent character- 
istic. To be a phoenix is probably not an existent characteristic, 


CH. 11] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 27 


but to be a bird is. This cannot of course determine the whole 
nature of the non-existent characteristic, but will determine 
part of it. And this may be sufficient to justify the belief. 
Since a man cannot be a bird, he cannot be a phoenix. And 
thus the truth of the belief is justified by the nature of the 
existent characteristic “to be a bird.” 

In the second place, a non-existent characteristic might be 
determined by its relation to an existent characteristic. For 
example, if the nature of the characteristic of partial virtue is 
given, it determines, in part at least, the nature of the char- 
acteristic of perfect virtue. Thus it may be the case that if the 
characteristic of partial virtue is what it is, it will follow that 
a perfectly virtuous man is more admirable than Alexander. In 
that case the truth of the belief would be determined by the 
nature of an existent characteristic. And the same principle 
might apply when both the characteristics which found a place 
in the belief were non-existent—if, for example, the belief were 
that a perfectly virtuous man would be more admirable than 
a conqueror of the whole world. 

Or, once more, the non-existent characteristic may be deter- 
mined by a relation of another kind to the existent character- 
istic. The non-existent characteristic might be one which men 
have a tendency to believe to exist when they perceive any- 
thing as having a certain existent characteristic. Or it may 
be one whose existence would be inferred from that of the 
existent characteristic if some definite mistake were made in a 
chain of argument, of which all the other steps were logically 
correct. 

For example, if Berkeley is right, neither space nor straight 
lines exist. Yet it would remain true that two straight lines 
cannot enclose a space. But things certainly exist which have 
the characteristic of being spatial sense-data. And men have 
a tendency to believe in the existence of space and straight 
lines when they perceive spatial sense-data. And, again, the 
existence of space and straight lines can be inferred from the 
existence of spatial sense-data, if a definite mistake is intro- 
duced in an argument otherwise correct. Thus the character- 
istics of being a space and of being a straight line are so con- 


28 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


nected with the characteristic of being a spatial sense-datum, 
that since the latter has the nature which it has, the nature of 
the two former must be such that to be a space implies the 
impossibility of being contained by two straight lines. Once 
more then, the truth of the belief is determined by its relation 
to the nature of an existent characteristic. 

30. These relations between characteristics are real and 
important. But they will not serve our purpose. In the first 
place, though it would be difficult to prove that there were any 
characteristics as to which we hold true beliefs, which were not 
related to existent characteristics in one of these ways, yet it 
would not be easy, I think, to prove that there were not any 
which were not so related. 

And, in the second place, these relations are not relations of 
correspondence. My belief that a man cannot be a phoenix is, 
no doubt, determined to be true by the existent fact that the 
characteristic of being a bird implies the absence of the char- 
acteristic of humanity. But it does not correspond to that fact 
with the peculiar sort of correspondence which constitutes 
truth. It does not assert anything about the characteristic of 
being a bird, but about the characteristic of being a phoenix. 
In order that it should be true, it would have to correspond to 
something about the characteristic of being a phoenix. And, if 
that characteristic is not existent, we shall not have avoided 
the correspondence of some beliefs with non-existent facts. 
The position will be the same about beliefs which make assertions 
about perfectly virtuous men, or (if Berkeley should be right) 
about space and straight lines. 

31. But, if we go further, we shall find a way in which 
every characteristic is either a characteristic of the existent, or 
else is an element in a characteristic of the existent. For, with 
any characteristic whatever, it is true of everything, and there- 
fore of everything existent, that either it has that characteristic 
or it does not have it. And not to have a characteristic is 
equivalent to having the correspondent negative character- 
istic. If a man cannot be a phoenix, then every man will have 
the negative characteristic of not-phoenix. This characteristic 
will be existent, and since “phoenix” is an element of “not- 


CH. 11] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 29 


phoenix,” it will also be existent. For it seems clear that the 


parts of what exist must themselves exist. And thus all char- 
acteristics will exist, whether they are or are not characteristics 
of existent things. 

_ Since this is so, every assertion about a characteristic which 
nothing existent possesses, will be an assertion about something 
which nevertheless does exist, as an element in an existent 
characteristic. It will be remembered that every assertion 
which does not profess to refer to an existent fact is an assertion 
that a characteristic implies another characteristic. The truth 
of such an assertion consists in its correspondence to a relation 
between these two characteristics. And this relation is a char- 
acteristic of both of the characteristics. The characteristic of 
being a griffin, for example, has the characteristic that anything 
which has it cannot have the characteristic of being a phoenix. 
The same incompatibility is also a characteristic of the char- 
acteristic of being a phoenix. And both the characteristics of 
being a griffin and of being a phoenix are to be found as elements 
in the nature of whatever exists—they are both to be found, 
for example, in the nature of any particular table, since it will 
have the characteristics of not being a griffin and of not being 
a phoenix. The belief, therefore, corresponds to what is found 
in the nature of the table—and of everything else existent— 
that is to say, it corresponds to an existent fact. 

It may be objected that it is paradoxical and wilful to treat 
it as part of the nature of a table that it is not a phoenix, or, 
again, not a prime number, and to place such characteristics on 
a level with its characteristic of being a table, or even with its 
negative characteristic of not being a chair. And it is true, no 
doubt, that from any practical point of view it is much more 
important to believe about any substance, which is, in fact, a 
table, that it possesses the characteristics of being a table, or of 
not being a chair, than that it possesses the characteristics of 
not being a phoenix, or a prime number. And even apart from 
all practical considerations, we shall gain more knowledge of 
the nature of the substance by realizing that it possesses the 
first two characteristics than we shall by realizing that it 
possesses the other two. But it remains the fact, nevertheless, 


30 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


that the two last characteristics are as truly and objectively 
characteristics of the substance as the two first are. 

For it cannot be denied that any person who should assert 
that the table was not a prime number would be asserting 
something that was true. The assertion may be unimportant, 
foolish, a waste of time. But it is not false, and it must be true. 
And it cannot be true unless it is made true by the nature of 
that thing about which the assertion is made. If it is not a 
characteristic of the table not to be a prime number—if that is 
not part of the nature of the table, independently of whether 
the assertion is made or not—then, if the assertion is made, it 
cannot be true. And so not to be a phoenix must be a char- 
acteristic of the table. 

32. We have thus arrived at the conclusion that the truth 
of true beliefs which do not profess to refer to existing facts 
does not imply the reality of non-existent facts. For all such 
beliefs assert the implication of one characteristic by another, 
and all characteristics exist, either in their own right or as 
elements in others, and therefore all facts about them are 
existent facts. 

Everything, in the widest sense of the word, has as many 
characteristics as there are positive characteristics, since it will 
have in each case either the positive characteristic or its 
negative. If it should be asked what determines the number of 
positive characteristics, the answer must be that it is an ultimate 
fact, just as on the theory of real propositions the number of 
those propositions would be an ultimate fact. The criterion of 
the reality of a characteristic is that any person should be 
aware of it, for though there may be any number of character- 
istics of which no one is aware, it is impossible to be aware of a 
characteristic which is not real. 

33. We now pass to the case of false beliefs which do not 
profess to refer to existent facts, These beliefs, like other false 
beliefs, owe their falsity to being in a relation of non-corre- 
spondence to all facts. Take, for example, the false belief that 
every man must be a philosopher. This, as we have seen, means 
that the characteristic of being a man has itself the character- 
istic that whatever possesses it possesses the further quality of 


CH. 11] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 31 


being a philosopher. Now there is no fact which is the possession 
by the characteristic of being a man of this characteristic. And 
as this is the only fact to which the belief could correspond, the 
belief is in a relation of non-correspondence to all facts, and is 
therefore false. 

. This does not involve the reality of any non-existent fact. 
So long as there is no fact which does correspond to this belief, 
the belief will be false, whether all facts are existent or some are 
non-existent. But we may go further and point out that it must 
be the nature of the existent which makes the belief false. For 
what it falsely asserts is that a characteristic possesses another 
characteristic. Now we have seen that all characteristics exist, 
and this possession of a characteristic by a characteristic would, 
if it were real, be an existent fact. Thus the nature of the 
existent, by not including this fact, is sufficient to make the 
belief false. 

We may notice in passing a difference between those false 
beliefs which profess to refer to existent facts and those which 
do not profess to refer to them. As we have seen, all those 
which do not profess to make this reference assert the implica- 
tion of a characteristic by another characteristic. And, as we 
have seen, every characteristic does exist, either positively, or 
as an element in a negative characteristic. A false belief about 
a substance may be false in one of two ways. It may be false 
because the substance does not exist at all, as, for example, 
“the present High Treasurer of England is a Mahometan,”’ or 
because the substance has not the characteristic asserted of it, 
as, for example, “the present Pope is a Mahometan.” But we 
cannot believe a characteristic to have a certain nature without 
being aware of that characteristic, and every characteristic of 
which we are aware is real, and so exists, either positively or as 
an element in a negative characteristic. It follows that a belief 
about characteristics cannot be false in the first of the two ways 
in which a belief about a substance can be false. 

We have now gone through all sorts of beliefs—those which 
do and those which do not profess to refer to existent facts, and, 
in each class, those which are true and those which are false. 
And we have found that none of them require that any of the 


32 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


facts, their relation to which makes them true or false, should 
be non-existent facts. 

34. We saw at the beginning of the chapter that, in addition 
to propositions, characteristics were sometimes asserted to be 
real without existing. But the discussion of facts, into which 
we were led by our discussion of propositions, has enabled us to 
see that all characteristics are existent. Such characteristics as 
being a phoenix, or being a prime number, are not existent in 
respect of being themselves characteristics of anything that 
exists, but they are existent as elements of negative character- 
istics which belong to existent things. Indeed, if we knew all 
about the nature of any one existent thing, we should know all 
about every characteristic, since each existent thing has, as 
part of its nature, the fact of having or not having each char- 
acteristic. 

35. It has sometimes been said that, besides propositions 
and characteristics, possibilities can be real without existing. 
Possibility is an ambiguous word, but, in whatever sense it is 
taken, it does not, I think, involve anything which is real but 
not existent. 

Possibility may mean nothing but a lmitation of our 
knowledge. Thus, if I say that it is possible that it may rain 
to-morrow, the most obvious sense of the words is that I do not 
know whether it will rain or not. In this case, clearly, it is a 
statement, not about any non-existent reality, but about my 
existent knowledge. 

Possibility, however, is often asserted in cases where we 
know that the reality is different from what is asserted to be 
possible. Thus I may say that it was possible that I should not 
have sneezed yesterday, although I did sneeze. This may mean 
one of two things. It may only mean that I can see no reason 
why I did sneeze yesterday. In this case it is clearly once more 
an assertion about my existent knowledge. But, again, I may 
make the assertion, though I do know why I sneezed yesterday. 
I may say that it was possible that I should not have sneezed 
yesterday, but that the fact that I took snuff prevented that 
possibility from becoming actual. In this case the possibility 
means, I think, that there is nothing within some particular 


CH. 11] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 33 


field of circumstances to ensure my sneezing. For example, it 
might have meant that the fact that I was alive on that day did 
not ensure my sneezing on it, as it did my breathing on it. 

The particular field of circumstances, in reference to which 
the possibility is taken, can usually only be discovered from 
‘the context when, as in this case, the possibility is asserted 
about a single thing. In this case, for example, the possibility 
might have meant that snuff sometimes makes me sneeze, and 
sometimes does not. But when the possibility is asserted, not 
of a single thing, but of a class of things marked out by a defini- 
tion, the particular field of circumstances usually consists of 
those circumstances which are included in the definition. If it 
said “it is possible that a triangle should be equilateral,” this 
would naturally mean that the characteristic of being a triangle 
does not imply, either that the figure which possesses it is 
equilateral, or that it is not equilateral?. 

Thus, when possibility is taken in this sense, it is an assertion 
about the implication of one characteristic by another. And 
we have seen that the implication of one characteristic by 
another is always an existent fact. It is therefore no more 
necessary to accept the reality of anything non-existent when 
possibility is taken in this sense than when it is taken in the 
other. 


e 

36. It would seem, then, that there is nothing which com- 
pels us to believe in non-existent reality. There is nothing which 
makes it necessary for us to accept the reality of propositions, 
or of non-existent characteristics, facts, or possibilities. And 
these are, as far as I know, the only things which have been 
asserted to be real without existing. 

But are we entitled to go further, and conclude that there 
are reasons for positively rejecting non-existent reality?) With 
regard to characteristics and possibilities, the course of our 
argument has justified us in asserting positively that they 

1 In the mouth, however, of a person who was ignorant of geometry, the 
statement might refer to the limits of his own knowledge, and might signify 
that he did not know whether a triangle must be, could be, or could not be 


equilateral. He would be in the same ignorance about the relations of the two 
characteristics as we all are about to-morrow’s weather. 


34 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


cannot be real without existing. For we saw, to begin with, 
that all characteristics were existent. And all statements of 
possibilities have been reduced either to statements about 
existent knowledge or to statements about the implications of 
characteristics, and are therefore statements about the existent. 

37. But how about propositions? There the matter is 
rather different. If a proposition, in the sense in which we have 
been using the word, is real at all, it must be non-existent. 
Thus the question before us is—are we able to assert positively 
that no propositions are real, or must we content ourselves with 
our previous conclusion that there is nothing which makes it 
necessary for us to assert the reality of propositions? 

We can say at any rate that our theory of reality will be 
simpler, if the reality of propositions is rejected. It might 
perhaps be objected that such a belief as “a phoenix cannot be 
a griffin” cannot be explained as simply by our theory as by 
means of propositions. In the latter case the belief would be 
true because it corresponded to a true proposition. But if 
there are no propositions the truth of the belief could only be 
explained by falling back on the characteristics of not being a 
phoenix, and not being a griffin, which belong to all substances. 

But this objection would be unjustified. On our theory the 
explanation of the truth of the belief is very simple. We say 
that the belief is true because it asserts that the characteristic 
of being a phoenix implies another characteristic, which, in 
fact, it does imply. And, whether there are propositions or not, 
every belief which does not profess to refer to existent facts is, 
as we saw, an assertion about the implication of one character- 
istic by another, and is true or false according to the nature of 
those characteristics. 

Whatever complexity there is in our theory is not to be 
found in the explanation of the truth of the belief, but in the 
explanation of the existence of the characteristics. And this 
complexity is not peculiar to our theory, though the use made 
of it is, for even a believer in propositions must admit that, if 
no phoenix exists, everything existent must have the character- 
istic of not being a phoenix. 

In this respect then, our theory is not less simple than the 


CH. II] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 35 


other. And in another respect it is more simple. For it requires 
only one sort of correspondence in which a true belief must 
stand—the correspondence between the belief and the fact. 
But the theory of propositions requires two such correspond- 
ences. The belief must, it is said, correspond to a true proposi- 
tion. And it cannot be denied that it does also correspond to a 
fact. If itis true that my table is square, there must be a square- 
ness of the table, and the belief corresponds to it. 

Thus two correspondences are required, and each of them 
seems to be independent of the other. The truth of the proposi- 
tion is, if I understand the theory rightly, taken as ultimate, 
and so cannot depend on the occurrence of the fact. And the 
fact cannot depend on the truth of the proposition. It could 
not be maintained that the squareness of the table depended 
on the truth of the proposition that the table is square. 

But it is not always the case that the simplest solution of a 
problem is the true one. And it does not follow that there are 
no propositions because all the data known to us could be as 
well accounted for without propositions. But when we look 
further, we find, I think, a more positive ground for rejecting 
propositions—that there is no place left for them. 

38. If I have a true belief that my table is square, there is, 
on the one side, this belief itself. It is true, and it is subjective, 
in the sense that it depends on the existence of a knowing subject, 
who holds the belief. On the other side there is, as the advocates 
of propositions would admit, the actual squareness of the 
table—the fact. This is objective, in the sense that it does not 
depend on the existence of a knowing subject. And it is not 
true. Between these two, propositions must come, if they come 
at all. On the one hand the proposition is, like the fact and 
unlike the belief, objective. On the other hand it is, like the 
belief and unlike the fact, true. Now it seems to me that if the 
proposition is distinguished clearly from the belief, it is im- 
possible to keep it distinguished from the fact. When the sub- 
jective element in the belief is eliminated, it seems to me that 
the truth goes with it, and that we find ourselves left, not with 
a timeless, non-existent, and true proposition, but with nothing 
but the fact, which is not true (though it determines the truth 


36 REALITY AND EXISTENCE [BK I 


of beliefs), which may or may not be timeless, and which, as we 
have seen above, is always, in one way or another, existent. 

If this is right, the reality of true propositions would not 
only be superfluous but untenable. And no one, I think, would 
maintain the reality of false propositions, if true propositions 
were abandoned. The only ground, as far as I know, for main- 
taining the reality of false propositions was the view that the 
truth or falsity of every belief must be determined by its corre- 
spondence with a proposition. If this was abandoned about 
true propositions, there could be no ground for maintaining it 
of false propositions, especially as there are several objections 
to the reality of false propositions which do not apply to pro- 
positions which are true. 

If there are no propositions, there will be nothing left to be 
non-existent. Substances, characteristics, and facts have all 
been seen to be existent. And thus we shall be entitled to con- 
clude that there is no reality which does not exist. 

39. But even if there should be propositions, we should 
still be entitled to assert that, in constructing our philosophy, we 
could safely confine ourselves to the consideration of that 
reality which is existent. For, as we have seen, every assertion 
either professes to refer to an existent fact, or else asserts 
the implication of one characteristic by another. And thus 
whatever was asserted in any proposition would deal with the 
existent. 

This result depends, of course, on the view which we have 
taken that the characteristics of the existent, and the elements 
of those characteristics, themselves exist. But if this view 
should be rejected, the result would not be substantially different. 
For it would make little difference if we said, as in that case we 
must say, that we shall study all reality when we study what 
exists, together with the characteristics of what exists, and the 
characteristics of those characteristics. 

40. It follows from what we have said as to the relation of 
reality and existence, that it is not the case, as is sometimes 
supposed, that what is actually existent is surrounded by a 
sort of framework of possibilities of existence, which limit what 
does exist, and do not depend on it. We saw that “it is possible 


CH. II] REALITY AND EXISTENCE 37 


that X should be Y,” if it was not a statement about the 
limitations of our knowledge, meant that the characteristic X 
does not imply the absence of the characteristic Y. It is thus 
a statement about the implication of characteristics, and is not, 
of course, a statement about their possible implication, but 
about their actual implication. It is possible that a triangle 
should have an angle greater than a right angle, because being 
a triangle does not imply the absence of an angle greater than 
a right angle. And this is not what it possibly may not imply, 
but what it actually does not imply. 

Thus all statements of probabilities turn out to be really 
statements of actualities. It is true that the actualities of which 
they are statements are the natures of characteristics, and that 
they are not dependent on the existence of those characteristics 
as characteristics of existent substances. Whether anything 
existent is triangular or not, it will still be true that to be a 
triangle is compatible with the possession of an angle greater 
than a right angle. But, as we have seen, every characteristic 
is existent in some way or other—either as the characteristic of 
an existent thing, or as an element in a characteristic of an 
existent thing. And, therefore, since statements of possibilities 
are statements of the actual nature of characteristics, they will 
be statements about the actual nature of existence, and will 
not be independent of it.» 

Even if, however, no possibilities are independent of the 
nature of existence, it will still be permissible to ask whether, 
within the existent, we can make distinctions between what 
must be as it is, and what might have been different from what 
it is. This question, which does not concern the present enquiry, 
will be discussed in Chapter x1x. 


CHAPTER III 
METHOD 


41. It will be convenient to say something in advance of 
the method which I propose to employ in this work. Our object, 
as has been already said, is, in the first place, to consider, in 
Books II, III, and IV, what can be determined as to the char- 
acteristics which belong to all that exists, or, again, which 
belong to existence as a whole. In the second place, in Books 
V, VI, and VII, we have to consider what consequences of 
theoretical and practical interest can be drawn from this general 
nature of the existent with respect to various parts of the 
existent which are empirically known to us. The method 
adopted for the first of these purposes will be different in some 
points from that adopted for the second. 

42. With regard to our method in the earlier enquiry, it is 
clear, to begin with, that it cannot rest on induction. For this 
there are two reasons. In the first place, as will be shown later!, 
the validity of induction is by no means self-evident: If it is to 
be accepted at all, it will have to be proved that the nature of 
the existent has certain characteristics. And to prove this by 
induction would be a vicious circle. Consequently, in starting our 
enquiry into the nature of the existent, we cannot use induction. 

43. The second reason is that, even if the validity of induc- 
tion were established, it would be impossible to reach any valid 
results in the first part of our enquiry by means of induction. 
We have to enquire what characteristics belong to everything 
that exists, and what characteristics belong to existence as a 
whole. The characteristics which belong to existence as a whole 
cannot be reached by induction, since induction starts by 
observing that the same characteristic is to be found in several 
members of the same class—for example, that this man, that 
man, and the other man are mortal. Now it is clear that there 


1 Chap. xxix. 


CH. 111] METHOD 39 


cannot be a class of things, each of which is existence as a whole. 
There can only be one thing which is existence as a whole. And 
therefore the characteristics which belong to existence as a 
whole can never be reached by induction. 

Nor would it be possible to reach in this way any conclusion 
about those characteristics which belong to everything which 
exists. For the number of such existent things is, on any theory, 
so great, that the number of them in which we could observe 
any characteristic would be a very small proportion of the 
whole. And we shall find reason later on to believe that the 
number of existent things is infinite, so that the number 
in which we could observe any characteristic, which would be 
finite, would be an infinitely small proportion of the whole. 

Now, caeteris paribus, the probability of an inference varies 
directly as the proportion of the field of observation to the field 
of inference. If, of one hundred things which possess the 
characteristic X, I find successively that fifty also possess the 
characteristic Y, the conclusion that all of them possess the 
characteristic Y will become more and more probable as I pro- 
ceed from the knowledge that one of the hundred has it to 
the knowledge that fifty of the hundred have it. 

It is, no doubt, true that inductions do not vary in their 
probability only in the proportion of the fields of observation 
and inference. Indeed, it may often happen that the observation 
of a single case may enable us to infer with considerable prob- 
ability a conclusion which covers a very large field. But, 
wherever this happens, it is because the possible alternatives 
have been narrowed down by previous reasoning!. And there- 
fore it cannot happen in the initial stages of a metaphysical 
argument directed to the determination of the general nature 
of the existent. In such an argument the probability of the 
induction would vary with the proportion of the two fields, and 
as, in this case, the field of observation would be infinitely 

1 As if, for example, I was antecedently certain that a thousand dice were 
all made by the same maker, and that the maker could only be A, whose 
honesty was beyond doubt, or B, who was known to be dishonest, and whose 
interest it would be that all the dice should be loaded. In this case the dis- 


covery that a single die was loaded might be the ground of a fairly certain 
inference that all of them were loaded. 


40 METHOD [BK I 


smaller than the field of inference, the conclusion would have 
no validity whatever. 

This would no doubt leave it possible that in some later 
stage of our enquiry, when various results have been reached 
by processes other than induction, induction should be found 
capable of determining between various limited alternatives. 
But, in point of fact, it will be found that no opportunity will 
offer itself in which induction can be used. 

Our method, then, cannot be inductive. It will generally be 
a prior’. But in two cases our conclusions will rest directly on 
what is observed in perception. 

44. I use the word perception to denote that species of 
awareness which we have of the existent—awareness being a 
mental state which is not belief, though it is knowledge. It is 
of great importance to be clear as to what is meant by awareness 
and perception, as we shall have occasion to use both terms 
very frequently, especially in the last three Books. I am using 
both terms in the sense adopted by Mr Russell, and explained 
by him in his paper on “Knowledge by Acquaintance and 
Knowledge by Description?.” 

I am aware of an object or am acquainted with an object— 
the phrases are used as synonymous—when “I have a direct 
cognitive relation to that object.” “In fact, I think the relation 
of subject and object which I call acquaintance is simply the 
converse of the relation of object and subject which constitutes 
presentation. That is, to say that S has acquaintance with O is 
essentially the same thing as to say that O is presented to S.”’ 
“When we ask what are the kinds of objects with which we are 
acquainted, the first and most obvious example is sense-data. 
When I see a colour or hear a noise, I have direct acquaintance 
with the colour or the noise.” We are also acquainted, in intro- 
spection, with “objects in various cognitive and conative rela- 
tions to ourselves. When I see the sun it often happens that I 
am aware of my seeing the sun, in addition to being aware of 
the sun; and when I desire food, it often happens that I am 
aware of my desire for food.” “The awarenesses we have con- 


1 Mysticism and Logic and other Essays. The quotations in the next paragraph 
are from pp. 209-212. 


OH. TIT] METHOD 4] 


sidered so far have all been awarenesses of particular existents, 
and might all in a large sense be called sense-data. For, from 
the point of view of theory of knowledge, introspective know- 
ledge is exactly on a level with knowledge derived from sight or 
hearing. But, in addition to awareness of the above kind of 
objects, which may be called awareness of particulars, we have 
also...what may ke called awareness of wniversals.” “Not only 
are we aware of particular yellows, but if we have seen a sufficient 
number of yellows and have sufficient intelligence, we are 
aware of the universal yellow; this universal is the subject in 
such judgments as ‘yellow differs from blue,’ or ‘yellow 
differs from blue less than green does.’ And the universal 
yellow is the predicate in such judgments as ‘this is yellow,’ 
where ‘this’ is a particular sense-datum. And universal rela- 
tions, too, are objects of awarenesses; up and down, before and 
after, resemblance, desire, awareness itself, and so on, would 
seem to be all of them objects of which we can be aware?.”’ 

This, then, is what is meant by awareness. Perception is 
the awareness of what Mr Russell calls particulars, as distinct 
from the awareness of what he calls universals. In the termin- 
ology which I propose to adopt, it is the awareness of substances 
as distinct from the awareness of characteristics. The most 
obvious cases of perception are the awareness of the data 
furnished by the bodily senses, and the awareness of the con- 
tents of my own mind which is given me by introspection?. 

45. The first case in which such an appeal to perception 
will be necessary is in the initial stage of the whole process— 
the question whether anything does exist. It would be possible 
to consider what characteristics are involved in being existent, 
or in being the whole of what exists, without raising the question 
whether anything did actually exist. But, in addition to deter- 


1 JT propose to use the term “perception-data” for what Mr Russell calls 
“sense-data in a large sense,’’ and to reserve the term ““sense-data”’ for the 
data given by sight, hearing, etc. as distinct from those given by introspection. 

2 I could not accept without reservation Mr Russell’s view as to the nature 
of the objects of which we are aware by introspection, but this does not affect 
the meaning of awareness. 

3 The distinction between substances and characteristics will be discussed 
in Book II. The question whether we can perceive any other substances than 
those mentioned in the text will be discussed in Book V. 


42 METHOD [BK I 


mining what characteristics are involved in existence, we want 
to know whether anything exists, and therefore has those char- 
acteristics. And this can only be determined by an appeal to 
perception. For it is never possible for me to know that any- 
thing exists, unless I perceive it, or unless its existence is implied 
by the existence of something else which I do perceive. 

The other case in which we shall appeal to perception will 
be in Chapter vir. It is on an appeal to perception that we shall 
rest our judgment that the whole of that which exists is differ- 
entiated into parts. It would, indeed, be possible to reach this 
result @ priort. For I shall argue later tbat it is certain @ priors 
that no substance can be simple, from which it would follow 
that the whole of that which exists is differentiated into parts. 
But the view that no substance can be simple, though I believe 
it to be correct, is novel and controversial, and the proof of the 
differentiation of the existent by an appeal to perception, if not 
so symmetrical, seems more likely to command assent. 

In these two cases, then, the basis of our certainty will be 
empirical and not @ priori. This, however, will not make it less 
certain. A judgment which is directly based on a perception 
may be as certain as one which is evident @ priori. And in the 
cases before us our judgments will not be based on induction 
from the results of various perceptions—which would be un- 
trustworthy for the reasons given earlier in the chapter. A single 
perception is sufficient to prove either of them. If I perceive 
anything at all, and so can judge that the thing perceived exists, 
that is sufficient to prove the proposition! “something exists,” 
which is all that is wanted in the first case. And if I have a 
single perception which is such that I am entitled to judge that 
the thing perceived is differentiated into parts, that is sufficient 
to prove that the whole of what exists does not form one un- 
differentiated whole, since two parts, at least, are to be found in it. 

46. <A belief which is directly based on a perception experi- 
enced by the person who holds the belief may be called an 


1 We found reason in the last chapter to reject the reality of non-existent 
propositions. Having done this, it will be convenient, and not contrary to 
usage, to speak of beliefs as propositions, when, as at present, we are considering 
their content, rather than their existence as psychical facts. 


CH. 111] METHOD 43 


ultimate empirical belief. It is properly called ultimate, since, 
although it is based on something—the perception—it is not 
based on any other belief. There is an important difference 
between ultimate beliefs which are a priori arid those which are 
empirical. Those which are @ priort can be held as ultimate 
beliefs by more than one person. The belief, for example, in the 
Law of Excluded Middle as an ultimate truth, is not confined 
to myself. But an empirical bélief can only be ultimate if it 
describes a perceptum perceived by the person who holds the 
belief. Now it is not certain that two people ever do perceive 
the same perceptum. And, as we shall see, in the two cases in 
which we shall appeal to ultimate empirical propositions, the 
argument will turn very largely on beliefs such that the percepta 
on which they are based are themselves perceptions, perceived 
by introspection. Now, at any rate in our present experience, 
no person can perceive any perceptions except his own, and, 
therefore, no perception can be perceived by more than one 
person. I may be ultimately certain that I have now a per- 
ception of a certain sort. Smith may be certain, and justifiably 
certain, that I have now a perception of that sort, but for him 
it cannot be an ultimate certainty, but must be reached by 
inference. 

This, however, need not prevent an argument, founded on 
an empirical proposition of¢this sort, from being effective for 
more than one person. If, for example, I argue that something 
exists because my perceptions exist, the argument will not, 
with that premise, prove to Smith that something exists, since , 
he is not immediately certain of my perceptions. But it will 
suggest to him the analogous argument that something must 
exist, because his perceptions do so. And this argument is as 
valid as mine, leads to the same conclusion, and leads to it 
from a premise of which he is immediately certain. 

47. In the course of the next three Books, I shall endeavour 
to determine successively various characteristics of the existent. 
The order in which they will be determined will be largely a 
necessary order—the characteristic Y will be determined after 
the characteristic X, because the only possible demonstration 
of the occurrence of Y is one which starts from the fact of the 


44 METHOD [BK I 


occurrence of X. But the order of the demonstration will be 
found not to be determined completely in this way. There are 
various steps which could logically have been taken in a 
different order from that which is actually adopted. In this 
case the order chosen can only be decided by considerations of 
clearness and convenience. 

Such a method will be seen at once to have a marked 
resemblance to Hegel’s, and it will be worth while to consider 
in detail the resemblances and dissimilarities between them. In 
the first place, by the use of such a method we endeavour to 
base philosophy on the discovery of the characteristics which 
are involved in the characteristic of existence, or the character- 
istic of being the whole of what exists. In a similar manner 
Hegel’s categories owe their validity to the fact that they are 
implied by the original category of Pure Being—by which 
Hegel means either existence or reality, in the sense in which 
we have used these words. 

Then, in the second place, our determinations of the nature 
of existence will form, like Hegel’s categories, a single chain. 
They will not be divisible into separate lines of argument which 
are independent of one another. They will form a series, in 
which the exact place of many of the terms will be fixed by 
logical necessity, while even those whose places are not exactly 
determined in this way will be limited by logical necessity to 
a few alternative positions. The chain formed by the categories, 
from Pure Being to the Absolute Idea, is one of the most char- 
acteristic peculiarities of Hegel’s system, and resemblance to 
it on this point must be of great importance in determining the 
relation of the two methods. 

48. But, by the side of these resemblances, there are 
important dissimilarities. One of the chief features of the 
Hegelian dialectic is its triadic division. The whole series of the 
categories is divided into three parts—Being, Essence, and the 
Notion. Each of these again is divided into three parts, and the 
same principle of division is carried further, though not equally 
far in all parts of the series. We shall not find that our process 
from characteristic to characteristic shows any such triadic 
rhythm. 


CH. IIT] METHOD 45 


Again, the triadic division in Hegel’s system is closely con- 
nected with something still more fundamental, which he calls 
the negative aspect of the dialectic. This depends on the fact 
that, according to Hegel, the dialectic process is a movement 
from error—that is, partial error—to truth. When we consider 
the first member—the Thesis—of each triad, we find that an 
attempt to assert its validity, unreservedly and as it stands, 
involves contradictions and is untenable. Yet we cannot un- 
reservedly abandon the Thesis, for we have reached it, according 
to Hegel, by a line of argument which cannot be impugned. 
Thus we are driven on to the Antithesis, which also betrays 
similar contradictions, which render it untenable, and so on to 
the third member of the triad, the Synthesis, by the acceptance 
of which as valid the difficulties are removed, since it contains 
the Thesis and Antithesis in a modified and transcended form, 
which removes their contradictions. The Synthesis in its turn 
reveals fresh contradictions, and so we are driven on from triad 
to triad until we reach the Absolute Idea, the Synthesis of the 
last triad, in which alone no such contradictions are to be 
found?. 

It follows from this that, according to the general principles 
of Hegel’s system, we can be certain, with regard to any category 
in the system except the Absolute Idea, that the assertion of its 
validity, though not completely false, is not completely true. 

Hegel does not always carry this out consistently in detail. 
His view of the absolute truth leaves some of the lower cate- 
gories absolutely valid. In these cases the passage to the next 
category consists in demonstrating, not that the category is not 
absolutely true, but that it would not be true to deny the 
existence of further categories. And this is a very different 
thing. Still, as a rule, his demonstrations are directed to proving 
that the lower categories are actually false, though not com- 
pletely false. And there is no question that the general account 
which Hegel gives of his system requires this to be so in the case 
of every category. 


1 This account is very general, but not, I think, inaccurate. For the justi- 
fication of this, and of my other statements as to Hegel’s system, I would refer 
to my Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic, and to my Commentary on H egel’s Logic. 


46 METHOD [BK I 


In this point we shall depart from what was Hegel’s principle, 
and also his usual practice. Each characteristic demonstrated 
in the course of our process will remain there at the end of the 
process. None of them, of course, will be the whole truth, but 
that will not prevent all of them from being quite true. We 
shall be led on from one stage to the next, not by any contra- 
diction involved in asserting the first characteristic to be true, 
but by the contradiction between asserting the first to be true 
and denying the second to be true. 

49. In the third place, Hegel professes to prove the validity 
of each of his categories without any data except the validity 
of the previous category, or of the two previous categories. It 
is doubtful how far this claim is to be taken literally. If taken 
quite literally, it is clearly wrong, for in the arguments—often 
long and complicated—which lead from one category to the 
next, it is obvious that Hegel relies on various self-evident 
principles of logical inference, and the like, and that he must 
do so. 

I do not think he would have denied this. Probably the real 
meaning of his claim is that he believed himself to have dis- 
pensed with any premises except the previous category or 
categories. In an ordinary syllogistic argument, the validity of 
the mode employed is essential to the validity of the particular 
argument, but it would not be reckoned as a third premise, in 
addition to the major and the minor. It is quite clear, I think, 
that Hegel is not asserting less than this—that his claim is, at 
least, that the previous category or categories are the only 
premises. 

It may perhaps be doubted whether he is altogether correct 
in this statement, and whether he did not in fact rely, perhaps 
legitimately, on other premises. But it seems certain that he 
professes to rely on no other premises. With the arguments in 
the present work, on the other hand, it will be found that other 
premises, besides the previous stage, are often required!, and 


1 I do not think that the appeal to perception on the question whether 
anything does exist constitutes an additional difference from Hegel (cp. my 
Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic, Sections 18 and 79). But the appeal to per- 
ception to prove differentiation is an additional difference. 


CH. IT] METHOD 47 


this makes another difference from Hegel’s principles, whatever 
may be the case as to his practice. 

50. In the fourth place, as we have already said, while 
logical necessity will be found to determine to a great extent 
the positions of the particular stages in our system, it will be 
found that it does not exactly determine the positions of some 
of them. It will be possible in some cases to demonstrate the 
validity of various stages in two or more alternative orders, 
and the order actually adopted will be chosen only on grounds 
of convenience. 

Here again there is a marked difference from Hegel, who 
unquestionably believed that the order of the categories, as 
exhibited in the dialectic, was one which was in every detail 
logically necessary, and was the only order in which any of the 
categories could be demonstrated, or the Absolute Idea reached. 
It may perhaps be questioned, whéther, admitting the validity 
of all his categories, and of his demonstrations of them, some 
of the categories could not change places, but it is certain that 
he does not admit the possibility. 

A final difference is that Hegel does not seem to be very 
clear as to whether his dialectic applies only to existence, or to 
all reality (using those words in the sense which we have given 
them, and notin Hegel’s own). Generally speaking, the dialectic 
seems to apply only to the existent, but there are points in the 
argument where he seems to be speaking also of non-existent 
reality, recurring again later to the consideration of existence 
alone—an oscillation which does not seem to be clearly realized 
by him, or to be logically justifiable. 

If we take all these differences together, it must be pro- 
nounced, I think, that our method is not characteristically 
Hegelian. No method could reasonably be classed as Hegelian 
which did not accept triadic division, and the partial falsehood 
of the lower categories. On the other hand it will stand much 
closer to Hegel’s method than to that of any other philosopher. 

51. In a defence of Hegel’s system, it is necessary to 
include a general and preliminary justification of his method. 
For that method has two features which, at any rate at first 
sight, appear to be unknown, or even opposed, to our ordinary 


48 METHOD [BK I 


way of thought. These are the partial falsity of the lower 
categories (with which is connected the implication in the 
validity of one category of the validity of its contrary), and the 
reconciliation and transcendence of the contrary terms in the 
synthesis. Neither of these is so strange, or so alien to ordinary 
thought, as it appears at first sight, and for each of them, I think, 
a good defence can be made!. Buta defence is certainly required. 

In the case of our method, the position is different. The 
manner in which we shall advance, in an order more or less 
rigidly determined, from one characteristic of the existent to 
another characteristic of the existent, will present no special 
features in which it differs from the manner of argument 
adopted elsewhere in philosophy, and in other subjects. Whether 
it is correct in detail is another question, but there can be no 
reason to suppose that correctness in detail could be rendered 
impossible by any general fallacy of method. 

Is any justification needed of the fertility of our arguments? 
In the case of Hegel’s system it has been held that such a 
justification was necessary. Much more, it is said, is got out of 
the system than was ever put into it. All that we start with is 
the category of Pure Being, which is selected for the starting- 
point just because it is as abstract as possible, and contains the 
least content. And from this we pass to category upon category, 
the content of each category increasing as we go on, till we reach 
the most perfectly concrete content of all in the Absolute Idea. 
This, it is said, cannot be legitimate. No valid argument can 
have more in the conclusion than in the premises. The increase 
of content in the later stages of the dialectic must be due to the 
illegitimate introduction of those empirical elements which, it 
was professed, were to have been excluded altogether. This 
objection has been dealt with by Mr Bradley in a passage which 
I regard as by far the most important and illuminating comment 
ever made upon Hegel?. 


1 That is, I think that there is no antecedent impossibility in the chief 
characteristics of reality being connected in this manner, and that, if they were 
so related, the Hegelian dialectic—or a dialectic of the same type—would be 
true. But it does not seem to me that, as a matter of fact, they are related in 
this manner. 

2 Logic, Book III, Part 1, Chap. 1, E. 


cH. m1] METHOD 49 


I do not think that any such justification is required for our 
method. The fact that empirical data are introduced, not only 
at the beginning, but also at one point later on in the process, 
will not by itself remove the difficulty, for, by the time we reach 
the end of the process, we shall have reached a great deal which 
was not in the first stage, and is not due exclusively to the 
single element (the differentiation of the existent) which was 
added empirically after the first stage. But the fertility of the 
@ priori process will not excite wonder or doubt when it is 
remembered that various synthetic propositions are evident 
a@ prior. And, consequently, when we have established that 
whatever exists is B, we may be able to establish that whatever 
exists is C, because it is evident @ priort that whatever is B is 
also C. This explanation is not admissible in the case of Hegel’s 
dialectic, because of his repudiation of all premises in each 
transition except previous categories. For “whatever is B is 
C” is as much a premise of our conclusion “whatever exists is 
C,” as is the result of the previous stage of the process, “‘ what- 
ever exists is B.” But we have not committed ourselves to any 
such limitation of the premises, and consequently the fertility 
of the process has nothing in it different from what is found in 
other arguments, and requires no special justification. 

52. Passing from the comparison of our method with that 
of Hegel, we come to another point. Our method, and the 
results reached by it, are ontological and not epistemological. 

From the time of Kant onwards, much of modern philosophy 
has been exclusively—or almost exclusively—epistemological. 
It has started from the fact of knowledge, or rather from the 
fact of belief. It has enquired what sorts of beliefs can be true, 
and under what conditions. From this it has arrived at con- 
clusions about what can be known, and about what beliefs, 
though not strictly true, form a coherent system bearing a 
certain uniform relation to the truth. So far the conclusions of 
such a system deal with nothing existent except beliefs, but, in 
so far as it is held that certain sorts of beliefs may be true, and 
certain sorts of beliefs cannot be true, it is possible to draw 
conclusions, chiefly negative, as to the nature of existent things 
other than beliefs. But all conclusions of this sort are based on 


50 METHOD [BK I 


conclusions relating to beliefs, and such systems are therefore 
properly called epistemological. 

Our method will not be epistemological. We shall not start 
from the consideration of beliefs only. We shall, on the contrary, 
endeavour to determine those general characteristics which 
apply to existence as a whole, or to everything that exists, 
whether these things are beliefs or not. 

And thus, while the result which we shall reach will prove 
to be one which would be usually, and properly, called Idealism, 
it will be the idealism of Berkeley, of Leibniz, and—as I believe 
—of Hegel. It will not be the idealism of Kant, or of the school 
which is sometimes called neo-Hegelian. It will not, that is, 
be that idealism which rests on the asserted dependence of the 
object of knowledge upon the knowing subject, or upon the fact 
of knowledge, but the idealism which rests on the assertion that 
nothing exists but spirit}. 

53. We have now to consider the method to be adopted in 
the last three Books, in which we shall enquire what conse- 
quences of theoretical or practical interest can be drawn from 
the general nature of the existent with respect to various forms 
of the existent which are empirically known to us. This enquiry 
will fall into three parts. 

In the first, which will occupy Book V, we shall have to 
consider various characteristics as to which our experience ~ 
gives us, at the least, a primd facie suggestion that they are 
possessed, either by everything that exists, or by some existing 
thing. Starting from our conclusions as to the general nature of 
the existent, as determined by the previous enquiry, we shall 
have to ask, to begin with, which of these characteristics can 
really be possessed by what is existent, and which of them 
cannot be possessed by it, in spite of any appearance to the 


1 Spirit is here used to include, not only individual spirits, but the parts 
and groups of such spirits. And the characteristics of such spirits, and of their 
parts and groups, being characteristics of the existent, would themselves exist. 

The distinction in the text is the one which Kant has in mind when he says 
that Berkeley’s idealism is empirical, while his own is transcendental. The 
terms which he uses are not, I think, as appropriate as the more ordinary 
terms, ontological and epistemological, but it seems clear that, in this passage, 
they are meant to express the same distinction. 


CA. IIT] METHOD 51 


contrary. And then we must ask further, which, if any, of 
those characteristics which are possibly true of the existent, 
can be known to be actually true of it—perhaps of more of it 
than the primd facie appearance suggests. 

The second part of the enquiry will depend upon the first. 
As a result of the first part we shall reach the conclusion that 
some characteristics, both positive and negative, which appear 
to be possessed by existence, are not really possessed by it. In 
Book VI, therefore, we shall have to enquire how such appear- 
ances can arise. And we shall have to enquire further whether 
there are any uniform relations which we can discover between 
different variations of the appearance, and different variations 
of the reality. (If, for example, time turns out to be an appear- 
ance, we shall have to enquire whether the apparent occurrence 
of the relation of earlier and later has itself any uniform relation 
to the occurrence of any relation among timeless realities.) If 
this is so, the variations of the appearance in question will 
give us knowledge about the variations of the reality of which 
it is an appearance}. 

In the third place, there are various questions, which are or 
appear to be of practical interest to us, of which it may be 
possible to learn something by means of the knowledge which 
we have gained of the general nature of the existent. These will 
be the subject of the third part of our enquiry, which will be 
contained in Book VII. Of these questions some are usually 
stated in terms of various characteristics which we shall have 
found reason to suppose are only apparently, and not really, 
possessed by the existent. In these cases we shall have to 
enquire what the realities are which correspond to the appear- 
ances spoken of in the questions, and we must then consider 
how the questions must be restated in order to apply to the 
existent world, and what answers to the restated questions 
would be correct. 

1 The appearance might then be called, in the words of Leibniz, a phaenom- 
enon bene fundatum. In such a case the statement that the reality is as it appears 
to be is often said to be phenomenally true. This phrase, however, is misleading. 
It tends to make us forget the fact that such a statement, though it has a 


certain uniform relation to truth, is itself false, since it asserts the reality to be 
what in fact it is not. 


52 METHOD [BK I 


54. In these three Books the argument will not form a 
continuous chain, as it did in the earlier enquiry. And it will 
also differ from the argument in the earlier enquiry by being 
less rigid. In that earlier enquiry we shall aim at absolute 
demonstration. Our results will either be fallacious through 
some error in the argument, or they will be certain. We may 
have occasion, at various points, to speak of probabilities, but 
this will be only incidental. The assertion of these probabilities 
will not form steps in the main line of the argument, and they 
will not affect the claim that the stages in that line have been 
absolutely demonstrated. 

In the later enquiry it will be different. In the first part of 
it, indeed, some questions may be settled with absolute demon- 
stration, but only such as are of a negative nature. It may be 
possible to show with perfect certainty that, having regard to 
the general nature of the existent as previously determined, 
some of the characteristics which we are considering cannot be 
true of the existent. But no positive results can be reached 
with perfect certainty. The most that we could do would be to 
show that the general nature of the existent, as determined in 
the first three Books, was such that nothing which we know or 
can imagine could have that general nature without having the 
characteristic in question. But this does not give more than a 
probability. For it is possible that that general nature might 
be found also in something which had, not that characteristic, 
but some other, which we have never experienced, and cannot 
now imagine. If, for example, we should prove that the existent 
must be without simple parts, and should then show that 
nothing which we know or can imagine could be without 
simple parts except spirit, it will not give us an absolute 
demonstration that all that exists, or indeed that anything that 
exists, is spiritual. For there may be some characteristic, which 
we have never experienced or imagined, which is as compatible 
as spirituality with the absence of simple parts. And it may be 
this other characteristic which is found in part or all of the 
existent. 

In the same way, when we pass to the second and third 
parts of the later enquiry, all that can be shown is that certain 


CH. IIT] METHOD 53 


solutions are possible, and that we do not know, and cannot 
imagine, any alternatives. But here again, our inability to 
know or imagine another solution might be due only to the 
limitations of our experience. It is possible that some char- 
acteristic, which could only be known empirically, and which 
we have had no chance of knowing empirically, might be the 
key to an alternative possible solution, and that that solution 
might be the one which was actually true. In problems of this 
sort, therefore, our arguments may possibly attain a high 
degree of probability, but can never hope for certainty. 


Pe % ai oops pees | 
< a Z = ea aaen Pw sie 


i 


iy ae aes whan, cagreide stad ans 
ae ee oe SaaS ae. parities eryies “val 

aE ie Sah ha e hea ein 

ae eee 2 senegal ak wes 5 van: 16 ee a 


“iy 


ee 


. 


eo Logo aii 


An 7 ed bad ; 


oe. sea -E#) = 


BOOK II 
SUBSTANCE 


1UHO0H; os 


se =—— st: RAT RES a 


CHAPTER IV 
EXISTENCE 


55. We are about to consider what can be determined as 
to the characteristics which belong to all that exists, or, again, 
to existence as a whole. But there is one more preliminary 
question to be settled. Does anything exist? 

It would be possible no doubt, without discussing this, to 
consider what characteristics are implied in the characteristic 
of existence, and then to say conditionally, that, if anything 
does exist, it has these characteristics!. But the whole practical 
interest and importance of our enquiry depends on the answer 
to the question “does anything exist,” and it is with the con- 
sideration of this question that we shall start. 

All that concerns us now is whether anything exists. It does 
not matter how much exists, or what kind of thing it is. All 
that is wanted is to determine the truth of the statement 
“something is.” And that statement, of course, is true if any 
other statement asserting existence is true. 

56. But is any statement asserting existence true? Could 
it not be the case that all judgments, actual or possible, which 
assert existence are false? We may answer any person who 
should put this question by an argument not unlike Descartes’. 
If the sceptic should say “I deny that anything exists,” or “I 
doubt whether anything exists,”’ does nct this assertion involve 
his own existence, and so prove that something does exist? 
If, like Hume, he should deny the reality of the self, then his 
statement will take the form that the existence of anything is 


1 In such an argument we could only determine those characteristics which 
were implied in the characteristic of existence, and so could not establish the 
differentiation of the existent by an appeal to perception. But, as was said in 
the last chapter (Section 45), such an appeal to perception, although the most 
convenient and convincing way of establishing the differentiation of the existent, 
is not the only way in which it can be established. 


58 EXISTENCE [BK II 


denied or doubted. And this will involve the existence, somehow 
and somewhere, of the denial and the doubt. If it should be 
said that the denial or the doubt is as illusory as the self, that 
involves the existence of the illusion. And if it should be said 
that the existence of this illusion is again an illusion, and so on, 
at the end of the chain there must come an illusion which is 
really an illusion, and which therefore really exists. And a 
similar argument is applicable in the case of a thinker who 
should simply contemplate the question whether anything does 
exist, without either affirming it, denying it, or doubting it. 

57. I think that this is valid. Of course, like all other argu- 
ments, it finally rests on propositions taken as ultimately cer- 
tain, which, if challenged, cannot be proved by further argu- 
ment. If, for example, anyone should assert that his belief that 
nothing existed was only an illusion, and should then deny that 
this explanation involved that an illusion existed, I do not see 
how he could be refuted. But I am confident that he would be 
wrong. And I believe that this would be generally—and, 
indeed, I should suppose, universally—accepted. 

It might be said that the proposition that something exists 
is itself very generally accepted, and that if there are persons 
sufficiently sceptical to doubt or deny it, it is useless to attempt 
to refute them by arguments which the sceptic, if he carries his 
scepticism sufficiently far, may also doubt or deny. The answer 
to this is that the utility is shown by experience. Experience 
shows that some people who begin by thinking it possible that 
nothing exists, cease to think it possible when it is pointed out 
to them that, since they are thinking of the possibility, their 
thought of the possibility exists. 

The advantage of starting from the denial or doubt that 
anything exists, rather than from any other assertion, denial, 
or doubt, is, of course, only ad hominem. The proposition that 
something exists could be proved in just the same way from the 
affirmation, or the denial, that two and two made four, or that 
they made five, since each of these would involve that the 
affirmation or denial itself existed. But we were considering 
how to deal with a possible sceptic on the subject of existence, 
and we could not be certain that he would be making any 


CH. IV] EXISTENCE 59 


assertion about the sum of two and two, while we are certain 
that he will either doubt or deny that something exists. 

58. We may notice that the proposition “nothing exists,” 
which we have rejected is not self-contradictory. ‘No pro- 
position is true” is a self-contradictory proposition, for, if it 
were true, then it, together with all other propositions, would- 
not be true. But the truth of “nothing exists” is not incon- 
sistent with itself, though it is inconsistent with the assertion 
of itself, or even the contemplation of itself, by any person. 
Thus “something exists” is not a proposition of which we can 
be certain simply by pure logic, as we are of the proposition 
“something is true.” 

Again, the proposition “something exists” is not self- 
evident. It is based, as we have said, on the fact that it is 
involved in any proposition asserting that any particular thing 
exists. Now, as was said in the last chapter, the evidence that 
any particular thing exists, always consists in perception. We 
can have no reason for believing X to exist, unless we either 
directly perceive X itself, or else perceive Y, whose existence 
involves the existence of X. Thus our belief in the proposition 
“something exists” depends upon perception. If, for example, 
@ man who is contemplating the question whether something 
exists is convinced that it does by the argument given above, it 
will be because he perceives, by introspection an existent state 
of his mind—the contemplation of the question whether some- 
thing exists. 

But, although its denial is not self-contradictory, and its 
truth is not self-evident, the statement that something exists is 
about as certainly true as any statement can be. It is, of course, 
possible for a judgment based on a perception to be erroneous, 
because it is possible for the judgment to misdescribe what is 
perceived. But such an error could not invalidate this particular 
judgment. For, as we have seen, if any judgment that X exists 
is erroneous through such a misdescription, then that mis- 
description must exist, and thus the judgment that something 
exists would still be true. 


CHAPTER V 
QUALITY 


59. Something, then, exists. And now we can go further. 
For existence is not a term which has no reference beyond 
itself, so that it would be sufficient to say that the nature of 
that which exists is that it is existent. To say that something 
exists inevitably raises the question what this something is. 
And that question must be answered by asserting something of 
it other than its existence. 

The force of this argument will be missed unless we remember 
that “something” must not be taken in its literal sense. 
“Something” is the most abstract and indeterminate term that 
we can get, but if taken literally it is not indeterminate enough, 
for it would mean, in that case, some thing. And, if we say of 
the existent that it is a thing, in the ordinary sense of the word, 
we are saying much more of it than simply that it exists. We 
must take “something” here as perfectly indefinite—the abstract 
subject of predication. The German etwas is less misleading, 
though even this, at any rate in Hegel’s use of it, is too definite 
for our present purpose. 

And it must also be remembered that it is not merely 
positive qualities which we should, in this case, refrain from 
predicating of the existent. Not only the possession of this or 
that quality, but the non-possession of these qualities, would 
give the existent a nature besides its existence. And the same 
is true of relations. Nor could the existent be a substance 
without possessing a nature—substantiality—beyond its exist- 
ence. If we stop with existence, and refuse to go any further, 
the existent is a perfect and absolute blank, and to say that 
only this exists is equivalent to saying that nothing exists. 

We should thus be involved in a contradiction, since, starting 
with the premise that something existed, we should arrive at 


CH. V] QUALITY 61 


the conclusion that nothing exists. We must therefore abandon 
the hypothesis which leads to this contradiction—the hypothesis 
that the existent has no nature beyond its existence. 

We can arrive at the same conclusion in another way. If 
nothing is true of the existent except the fact that it exists, 
then it will not, for example, be true of it that it is square. But, 
then, by the Law of Excluded Middle, it will be true of it that 
it is not square. And so, after all, something will be true of it 
besides its existence. 

60. We must, then, pass beyond our first stage. It remains 
true that something exists, but, of that something, something 
besides its existence must be true. Now that which is true of 
something is a Quality of that something. And therefore what- 
ever is existent must have some quality besides existence, 
which is itself a quality. 

Quality must, I think, be considered indefinable. We 
have just said that whatever is true of something must be a 
quality. This, however, cannot be taken as a definition of quality, 
since we are not sure that all qualities are true of anything. If 
nothing were red, red would still be a quality. But can we 
define quality as that which is true or false of anything? There 
is no quality of which this is not true, and it might be thought 
that this gave us a definition of quality, since, in Chapter 1, we 
defined truth and falsity in,a manner which did not introduce 
the conception of quality. 

But this would be a mistake. What we defined was “true,” 
a term applicable to beliefs and assumptions, but not to quali- 
ties. This is quite different from “true of,” a term which is 
applicable to qualities, but not to beliefs or assumptions. There 
is the same difference between “false” and “false of.” If we 
say to define “true of” and “false of,” we can only say, I think, 
that X is true of A when a belief which asserts that X belongs 
to A is a true belief, and that X is false of A when a belief 
which asserts that X belongs to A is a false belief. Now to say 
that X belongs to A is equivalent to asserting that X is a 
quality of A. And thus our definition of quality would contain 
a vicious circle. 

If we are endeavouring to discover whether something is or 


62 QUALITY [BK II 


is not a quality, it is no doubt useful to put our question in the 
form “is it true or false of anything.” But to do this is not to 
replace the term “quality” by its definition. It is only to 
enquire whether the subject of which we speak possesses a 
characteristic which qualities, and only qualities, do possess. 

Since quality is indefinable, all that we can do is to point to 
examples of qualities. It is not so easy as it might seem to be 
sure what things are qualities. Something which at first sight 
looks like a quality may turn out to be really a relation, while 
something which might be supposed to be a relation may really 
be a quality dependent on a relation. But in some cases there 
is no doubt. Goodness, happiness, redness, sweetness are 
qualities. 

61. Something does exist, then, and it has some other 
quality or qualities besides existence. But it is also certain that 
there are qualities which it does not possess. 

This is certain because there are qualities which are incom- 
patible with each other. Squareness and triangularity are 
incompatible, and so are red and blue. This is sufficient to 
prove that whatever exists does not possess certain qualities. 
If it is square, it is not triangular; if it is triangular, it is not 
square. If it is neither, then there are at least two qualities 
which it does not possess. 

This non-possession of a quality has also a positive side. 
We gain knowledge about anything as truly when we deny the 
quality X of it as when we affirm the quality Y of it. It is true 
that to know that A is not a triangle tells us much less about 
it than we learn about B when we know that it is a triangle, 
because the differences of nature compatible with not being a 
triangle are so much greater than those compatible with being 
a triangle. Still, to know that A is not a triangle does tell us 
something about A. And, within a field already positively 

1 It might be said that the evidence for this is only empirical. But I think 
it is not. That what is red cannot be blue is a universal proposition which is 
not proved by induction, but is evident to anyone who knows what red and 
blue mean. And therefore it is not empirical. It is true that we should never 
have had the concepts of red and blue without sense-perception. But without 


sense-perception we should never have had the idea of a straight line, and this 
does not make geometry empirical. 


CH. v| QUALITY 63 


limited, the negation of one quality may imply the affirmation 
of another. If anything is a human being, and is not male, it 
must be female. 

The positive side of the non-possession of a quality can be 
conveniently expressed by converting the denial of a quality 
into the affirmation of its contradictory. Instead of denying 
that a triangle, or a spirit, has the quality of squareness, we 
can affirm that it has the quality of not-squareness. The differ- 
ence between “this is-not square” and “this is not-square”’ 
may seem trivial. But for our purpose it has significance, since 
the second, unlike the first, emphasises the positive aspect of 
all denial. 

62. Whatever exists, then, has a plurality of qualities. 
Indeed, everything that exists will have as many qualities as 
there are positive qualities. For it has, in each case, either the 
positive quality or its corresponding negative quality. We are, 
further, certain that among them will be more than one negative 
quality. For, of the three negative qualities, not-square, not- 
triangular, and not-circular, it is clear that everything must 
have at least two. It is also clear that whatever exists will have 
more than one positive quality. For existence is itself a positive 
quality, and since whatever exists possesses a plurality of 
qualities, positive or negative, it will be true of it that it is 
many-qualitied. And this is itself a second positive quality?. 

63. Qualities may be divided into those which admit of 
analysis, and can therefore be defined by a statement of that 
analysis, and those which are not capable of analysis, and are 
therefore indefinable. The latter may be called Simple Qualities. 
The former fall into two classes, according to the nature of the 
analysis, which I propose to call respectively Compound and 
Complex Qualities. 

By Compound Qualities I mean such as can be analyzed into 
an aggregate of other qualities. Any two qualities taken 
together form a compound quality. Red and sweet is a com- 
pound quality, though it has no special name.. And so is square 
and triangular, though we know that nothing can possibly have 


1 “Many-qualitied” is a quality and not a relation, though it implies, no 
doubt, a relation to each of the many qualities. 


64 QUALITY [BK II 


this particular compound quality. The most obvious examples 
of compound qualities are to be found in the species of natural 
history. If, for example, we should adopt the old definition 
of man as a rational animal, then humanity is a compound 
quality, consisting of animality and rationality. The qualities 
of which a compound quality is composed may be called its 
parts. 

A Complex Quality is one which does not consist of an 
ageregate of other qualities, but which can be analyzed and 
defined by means of other characteristics, whether qualities or 
relations, or both. Thus, if we defined conceit as the possession 
of a higher opinion of oneself than is justified by the facts, conceit 
would be a complex quality, since it is capable of analysis, but 
not of analysis into an aggregate of qualities. Every negative 
quality is complex, for it can be analyzed into two terms, of 
which one is negation and the other is the corresponding 
positive quality, and it is not an aggregate of those terms. 
Since a complex quality is not an aggregate of the character- 
istics which enter into its analysis, it is better to call them 
elements, and not parts, of the complex quality. 

64. The immediate parts or elements of a compound or 
complex quality need not be simple qualities, but may them- 
selves be compound or complex. The relation of “analyzable 
into” is such that, if X can be analyzed into Y and Z, and Z 
can be analyzed into V and W, then X can be analyzed into 
V, W and Z}. Thus, whenever in any definition we find a com- 
pound or complex term, we can replace that term with its own 
definition, and this process can go on until the definition of the 
original term is expressed entirely in terms which are simple 
characteristics. 

But are we certain that this end will be reached in the case 
of every compound or complex quality? Is it possible that 
there may be qualities such that every term in their analysis 
may again be analyzed, and that the terms thus reached may 
again be analyzed, and so on endlessly, so that no simple terms 
are ever reached—or at least, no analysis into terms all of which 
are simple. 


1 That is, the relation is transitive. Cp. Section 84. 


cu. v] QUALITY 65 


This, however, is not possible. If we ask what any particular 
quality is—what we mean when we predicate it of anything— 
the answer, in the case of any quality which is not simple, is 
that this depends on what the terms are into which it can be 
analyzed. And, therefore, if in any case the analysis could go 
on endlessly, what the quality is, and what we mean when we 
predicate it, would depend on the final term of a series which 
had no final term. Thus it would be nothing in particular, and 
we should mean nothing by predicating it. This is impossible in 
a quality. The series of analyses, then, cannot be endless, but 
must end in an analysis consisting entirely of simple character- 
istics. 

This does not mean that the analysis of a quality may not 
be infinitely differentiated. If, for example, there are an infinite 
number of simple qualities, then there would be a compound 
quality consisting of all these, and such a quality would be 
infinitely differentiated’. And a complex quality might also 
have an infinitely differentiated analysis. Such qualities could 
not be known by a human mind, but they might nevertheless be 
real. What is impossible is that there should be an analysis 
which never ends in simple characteristics. 

Since any two or more qualities form a compound quality, 
all the qualities possessed by any particular thing form a com- 
pound quality. And this compound quality may be called the 
Nature of that thing. 

1 A compound quality which consisted of all simple qualities could never be 
existent as a quality, since nothing can have all simple qualities (e.g. both red 


and blue). But it would be existent as an element in the corresponding negative 
quality, which would be a quality of all existent things. 


CHAPTER VI 
SUBSTANCE 


65. Whatever exists, then, has qualities. These qualities 
will themselves be existent, and will have qualities, and so on 
without end. But, at the head of the series, there will bé some- 
thing existent which has qualities without being itself a quality. 
The ordinary name for this, and I think the best name, is 
Substance. 

66. This conclusion has sometimes been challenged. It has 
been maintained that, in cases in which the qualities are 
commonly said to be predicable of substances, we shall, if we 
take the right view, be able to dispense with the conception of 
substance, and use only the conception of qualities. The group 
of qualities which are, in the ordinary view, held to be predi- 
cated of a substance, may, it is maintained, exist without such 
a predication. 

But is it denied that any quality is predicable of anything, 
or is it admitted that all qualities are predicable of something, 
and only denied that any of them are predicable of substances? 
If the first alternative is taken we reach an absurdity, since in 
that case we could not say of the group that it was a group, or 
that it was existent, nor of the qualities that compose it that 
they were qualities, or that they were existent. The theory, 
therefore, is incompatible with its own truth. 

But if we take the other alternative, of what can we say that 
those qualities are really predicated which, primé facie, are 
predicated of a substance? It would, I think, be generally 
admitted that we cannot answer this question by saying that 
each such quality is predicated of itself. It would not be 
asserted, for example, that, when I say that Smith is happy, 
what I really mean is that the quality of happiness is happy. 

But can each of the qualities be predicable of the group of 
qualities, of which it is one of the members, which would, in 


cH. vi] SUBSTANCE 67 


the ordinary view, be called the nature of the substance? If 
this were the case, then, whenever, in ordinary language, we 
predicate a quality of a substance, we could substitute the 
nature of that substance as the subject of our predication. And 
this is not possible. We predicate of Smith, for example, that 
he is happy. Let us take wisdom, goodness, consciousness, and 
happiness as constituting his whole nature. Now when we say 
that Smith is happy, we certainly cannot substitute for Smith 
any or all of those qualities. We do not mean that wisdom, or 
that goodness, or that consciousness is happy. Each of these 
three propositions has a definite meaning, and none of these 
meanings are what we mean by the assertion that Smith is 
happy. In the same way, we cannot mean that the aggregate 
of wisdom and goodness and consciousness is happy, or that 
any system formed by them, whatever the nature of the rela- 
tions which unite the system, is happy. 

What has been said above becomes more evident when we 
consider that in some cases, such as the one which we have 
taken as an example, while the proposition about the substance 
may be true, the propositions about the qualities must be false. 
It may be true that Smith is happy. But it cannot be true that 
happiness, or wisdom, or goodness, or consciousness, or any 
aggregate or system formed by them can be happy, because 
nothing but conscious beings can be happy, and no quality, 
and no aggregate or system of qualities, can be a conscious 
being. 

Thus the attempt to substitute the qualities for the substance 
must be given up. It is true that the actual nature of the 
existent is always enormously more complicated than the 
example we have taken, which was limited to four qualities. 
But the increase in the complication would do nothing to 
remove the difficulty. 

It is true, also, that the nature of anything is a unity as 
well as a plurality. But we cannot take this unity as that of 
which the different qualities can be predicated. However close 
may be the unity which is compounded of. goodness, wisdom, 
and consciousness, it will remain true that it cannot be happy, 
and that, even if it could be happy, we should not assert its 


68 SUBSTANCE [BK II 


happiness when we asserted the happiness of Smith, although 
Smith might be good, wise, and conscious. 

67. That of which the qualities of the existent are predi- 
cated, then, cannot be themselves, or one another, or the 
unity of them. But must it in any case be a substance? Could 
it not be in every case, as it admittedly is in some cases, another 
quality ? 

This, however, is impossible. For no quality is existent in 
its own right. The only case in which an assertion about a 
quality can be an assertion of existence is that in which the 
assertion links the quality with something else that exists—as 
when we say that courage was a quality of Nelson. And if 
there was nothing to link it with except other qualities, there 
would arise a vicious infinite series. For the first term, with 
which we begin our series, must be connected with something else 
that exists. If this something else must also be a quality, it 
can only get its existence by connection with a third existent 
thing, which, being also a quality, can only get it by connection 
with a fourth, and so on. And thus the connection of the first 
term with the existent would depend on the last term of 
a series which had no last term. It is therefore impossible 
to hold that nothing exists but qualities. There must be 
something which exists and has qualities without being itself 
@ quality. 

A similar argument will show that that which is existent 
and has qualities without being a quality cannot be in every 
case a relation. For a relation, like a quality, cannot be existent 
in its own right, and a vicious infinite series would arise in the 
same way as with qualities. 

Something must exist, then, and have qualities, without 
being itself either a quality or a relation. And this is Substance. 
We shall see in the next chapter that all substances have rela- 
tions, and shall thus arrive at the result that something exists 
which has qualities and is related without being itself either a 
quality or a relation. This is the traditional definition of sub- 
stance, and it is the one which I propose to adopt}. 


1 Strictly speaking, it would be sufficient to define a substance as that 
which exists and has one or more qualities without being itself a quality or a 


CH. VI] SUBSTANCE 69 


It is to be noticed that, although a substance is not a quality, 
yet a substance will possess the quality of substantiality. For 
we can, of course, assert of a substance the fact that it is a 
substance, and this is to predicate of it the quality of sub- 
stantiality. The existence of this quality, however, does not 
render it possible to reduce the existent entirely to qualities. 
For this particular quality would not be true of any existent, 
unless that existent was not itself a quality. 

68. To the conclusion that substance exists it has been 
objected that a substance is nothing apart from its qualities, 
and that therefore a conception of substance, as distinct from 
its qualities, is impossible, and the name itself is a meaningless 
word. But this is erroneous. It is, of course, quite true that a 
substance is nothing apart from its qualities. And if we were 
to try to form a conception of a substance which had no qualities, 
the undertaking would be as hopeless as an attempt to form a 
conception of a triangle without sides. But it does not follow 
that, because a substance is nothing apart from its qualities, it 
is not anything in conjunction with its qualities. And it does 
not follow that, because we cannot form a conception of a sub- 
stance which has no qualities, we cannot form a conception of 
a substance with qualities. 

If the argument were valid at all, it would be just as fatal 
to the qualities of the existent as to its substance. For a quality 
can only exist as the quality of something else which exists. 
And we have seen that it is untenable to suppose that this 
something else is not, in some cases, a substance. The qualities 
of the existent are therefore just as impossible without the 
substance, as is the substance without the qualities. And so, 
if substance is to be rejected on the ground of this argument, 
we should have also to reject existent qualities—a consequence 
not foreseen by the supporters of the argument, who wish to 
reject substances, but to keep existent qualities. 

The fallacy which we have just discussed is of a type which 


relation. But every substance has more than one quality, and stands in more 
than one relation. (Indeed, as we shall see later, every substance has an infinite 
number of qualities, and stands in an infinite number of relations.) No incon- 
venience will follow therefore from keeping to the usual form of the definition, 
as given in the text. 


70 SUBSTANCE [BK 1 


is not uncommon, and which is generally worked out with the 
same inconsistency as here. A and B can only exist in relation. 
Then of one of them, say A, it is asserted that, since A without 
B is nothing, A is nothing at all. And B, being left by itself, is 
now asserted to be the sole reality in the matter, and to be self- 
subsistent. But it does not follow that A is nothing at all, 
because it would be nothing out of relation to B. And, if the 
argument were fatal to A it would be just as fatal to B. 

69. An objection of a rather similar sort has been put 
forward by Dr Stout. “What then,” he says, “is the subject 
itself as distinguished from the attributes? It would seem that 
its whole being must consist in being that to which its attributes 
belong. But how can the whole being of anything consist in its 
being related to something else. There must be an answer to 
the question,— What is it that is so related!?” 

It may be admitted that the whole being of a subject cannot 
consist in its relations to its attributes—or, in our terminology, 
that the whole being of a substance cannot consist in its rela- 
tions to its qualities. But, not to mention other elements which 
enter into the being of a substance, and confining ourselves to 
its qualities only, we must note that when we have said that a 
substance is related to its qualities, we have not mentioned the 
most important point. The substance is, no doubt, related to 
its qualities. If Smith is happy, then there is a certain relation 
between the substance Smith and the quality of happiness. 
But this is not all. He is not only related to the quality of 
happiness. He is happy. And it is the latter which is funda- 
mental. The fact that he is happy is the primary fact, and the 
fact that he is related to the quality of happiness is only deriva- 
tive. For if the fact of his happiness could be reduced to his 
relation to the quality of happiness, then, on the same principle, 
his relation to the quality of happiness ought to be reduced to 
the two relations between tbat relation and its two terms— 
Smith and happiness. And so we should have started on such 
an infinite series as has caused Mr Bradley to deny the reality 
of all relations?. 


1 Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1914-15, p. 350. 
2 Cp. Section 88. 


cu. vr] SUBSTANCE 71 


Thus we may reply to Dr Stout’s question as to what it is 
which is related by giving the qualities of the substance. Smith, 
who is related, is happy, he is also a man, and so on. 

70. From another point of view the criticism has been made 
that we ought to substitute the conception of subject for that 
of substance. In this criticism the word subject is not used in 
its logical meaning of that which has predicates (as was the 
case in the passage from Dr Stout which we have just considered) 
but in its epistemological meaning of a conscious self which has 
knowledge. Now it may be the case—I shall try to show in 
Book V that it is the case—that nothing exists but spirits and 
parts and groups of spirits, together with their qualities and 
relations. But this would not justify us in discarding the con- 
ception of substance. Of such spirits, and parts and groups of 
spirits, many things would be true, besides the fact that they 
were substances, but still they would be substances, since they 
would have qualities and be related, without being themselves 
either qualities or relations. 

This objection is usually made by thinkers who rank them- 
selves as followers of Hegel. And it is true that Hegel’s phi- 
losophy affords some excuse for it. The conception of a knowing 
subject involves one of the highest categories of his dialectic, 
while the category of substance comes much lower. It would 
follow, according to Hegel’s principle of the partial falsity of 
the lower categories—a principle which we have not accepted— 
that it is always in some degree erroneous to call anything by 
the name of substance. 

But the modern critics of substance of whom I have spoken 
seem to go a good deal further than could be justified by Hegel’s 
principle. For, by that principle, every lower category is 
partially true of reality, and is absolutely true of it except in so 
far as the subsequent course of the dialectic has shown and 
transcended some error. Thus the category of substance would 
be true of reality except in those points in which it had definitely 
been shown to be false. These critics, however, apparently hold 
that, if any being has been proved to be a subject, we are 
entitled to sweep away at once all consequences inferred from 
its being a substance, in the same way that, if any figure were 


72 SUBSTANCE [BK II 


proved to be a square, we should be entitled to sweep away all 
consequences based on a previous erroneous belief that it was a 
triangle. And this would certainly not be justified by Hegel’s 
principle. 

71. Would it not have been possible, it might be asked, to 
have reached the conception of substance earlier? Could we 
not have proceeded to it direct from the conception of existence? 
For, after all, existence is itself a quality, though we did not 
use the latter name until we had deduced the possession by the 
existent of other qualities besides existence. And from this 
alone we might have deduced substance. For there cannot be 
simply existing existence. It cannot exist in itself any more than 
any other quality. If there is existence, there must be something, 
other than the quality of existence, which exists. And does not 
this take us on at once to the category of substance? 

These questions must, I think, be answered in the affirmative, 
but this does not condemn the course we have taken. For our 
method, as has been pointed out in Chapter 111, may sometimes 
have alternative paths open to it. If from A we are entitled to 
proceed to a result including both B and (C, there is nothing 
surprising in the possibility of proceeding, in some cases, either 
from A to B, and so to C, or else from A to C, and so to B. 

I believe that it would have been possible to have introduced 
substance earlier, and to have postponed quality till after we 
had reached substance. But the course which I have followed 
seems to me to be equally valid, and much more convenient. 
For this there are two reasons. In the first place, it is much 
easier, though not less illogical, to confound a substance with 
the only quality which is ascribed to it than to confound it with 
a plurality of qualities, all of which are ascribed to it. For it is 
obvious that, if qualities were only predicated of themselves, 
nothing could be both red and not-blue, since red and not-blue 
are not the same quality. Thus, in proportion as we realize that 
many qualities must be predicated of the same subject, it 
becomes clearer that the subject cannot be the quality pre- 
dicated. And we see that, as a matter of history, it has often 
been the realization of the unity over against the plurality 
which has directed men’s attention to the existence of substance. 


CH. VI] SUBSTANCE 73 


And, in the second place, to show the necessity of substance 
we had to show that we cannot substitute, for the substance of 
which any quality is predicated, the other qualities which 
belong to that substance, or the aggregate of its qualities, or any 
system formed of them. And this point does not naturally arise 
until it has been demonstrated that there is such a plurality of 
qualities. 

72. The conception of substance will be of cardinal im- 
portance throughout the rest of our enquiries, and it will 
be essential to keep closely in view the definition which we 
have adopted. Otherwise confusion may arise, for by that 
definition many things are classed as substances which would 
not usually be called so. The name of substance is often con- 
fined to that which, among other characteristics, is either time- 
‘less or persistent through time, or is more fundamentally one 
than many, or is held to be a unity of special importance. A 
sneeze would not usually be called a substance, nor would a 
party at whist, nor all red-haired archdeacons, be considered as 
a single substance. But each of the three complies with our 
definition, since each of them has qualities and is related, 
without being a quality or a relation; and each of them would 
therefore be called a single substance, although each of the two 
latter are obviously also an aggregate of several substances, and, 
as we shall see later, the first (and indeed every other substance) 
is also such an aggregate. 

It might be said that our use of the term with so wide an 
extension is inconvenient and undesirable, since it differs so 
much from the common usage. But I think, as I said above, 
that our definition of substance is the one which would be most 
generally accepted, and that the difference of usage comes from 
inconsistency only. 


CHAPTER VII 
DIFFERENTIATION 


73. Substance, then, exists. But the further question 
arises—do many substances exist, or only one? To this question 
we must now apply ourselves. It may be put more shortly—is 
substance differentiated? I propose to use the word differ- 
entiation to indicate plurality of substance only, and not to 
apply it to plurality of aspects or qualities. For example, since 
@ person is a substance, | shouJd say that a college was differ- 
entiated, because it is made up of persons. But I should not 
say that a person was differentiated because we can distinguish 
in his nature the two aspects of substance and qualities, nor 
because he possesses a plurality of qualities. If, on the other 
hand, a person turned out to consist of several substances, he 
would be said to be differentiated. 

The question whether substance is differentiated must be 
distinguished from the question whether every substance is 
differentiated. If there were no simple substances, then every 
substance would be differentiated, and, @ fortiori, substance 
would be differentiated. But supposing that there were a 
number——finite or infinite—of simple substances, then substance 
would be differentiated, since there would be more substances 
than one, but every substance would not be differentiated, 
since there would be simple substances. 

It would, I suppose, be generally held that substance, in 
the sense in which we have defined the word, is differentiated. 
Indeed, the only people who uniformly deny it would be the 
Eleatics, and a few Oriental pantheists!. But can the view, so 
generally admitted, be proved? 

In order to prove this it will be best, as I said in Section 45, 


? It is not uniformly denied by Spinoza. For his Modes are, by our definition, 


substances. And it cannot be said that he wniformly denies all reality to the 
modes. 


CH. Vit] DIFFERENTIATION 75 


to make one more appeal to perception. Such an appeal, as 
was pointed out in that Section, is not strictly necessary. For 
I shall argue later that it is certain @ priozd that no substance 
can be simple, and this, as we have just seen, would prove that 
substance was differentiated. But the view that no substance 
can be simple, though I believe it to be correct, is novel and 
controversial, and a proof of the differentiation of substances 
by an appeal to perception, if not so symmetrical, seems more 
likely to command general assent. 

74. It is evident that, if the existent is at all like what we 
normally judge it to be, substance must be differentiated. In 
the first place, unless it is the case either that solipsism is true, 
or that I myself have no reality, it must be the case that both 
I and something else exist, and this would prove that substance 
was differentiated. Nor would this result be altered if we held 
with Hume, or with Mr Bradley, that the self was not real, 
provided we held, as each of those writers do, that there is a 
separate reality which is mistakenly supposed to be a self. 

Solipsism, however, has been defended. There is, I think, 
good reason for rejecting it. But those reasons do not become 
evident until we have gone considerably further in our enquiries 
than the point we have yet reached, and it would therefore not 
be safe to rely here on the differentiation of substance into 
myself and something else. 

75. Even, however, if solipsism were granted, the normal 
position—if we can speak of a normal solipsism—would still 
hold substance to be differentiated. For, if time is real, then 
my states at each successive moment of time will be substances, 
since they will have qualities and be related without being 
qualities or relations. And so my existence at more than one 
moment of time would prove substance to be differentiated?. 
Or if time should be held to be unreal, even then the states, 
which we erroneously believe to be in time, would still be 
separate states, and so would prove differentiation. 


1 Even if such separate states should only occur when they were separated 
by a change in the nature of the self, substance would still be proved to be 
differentiated. For I certainly do change sometimes, and a single change in 
myself would be sufficient to prove that substance was differentiated. 


76 DIFFERENTIATION [BK II 


But it is well to go further in our search for clear evidence 
of differentiation. For the reality of time has been denied, and 
I shall try to show in Book V that it ought to be rejected. 
And although, as has just been said, the rejection of time 
would still leave as separate substances those states which 
appear to be in time, it would be better if we could find some 
instance which would prove differentiation by a simpler process. 

We can find such an instance in the differentiation of our 
field of perception which is manifest, if not at all moments, yet 
at most. When I experience the sensations of redness and of 
shrillness simultaneously, I am directly aware of the existence 
of two separate perception-data. And my perception-data are 
substances. They may be ephemeral in time, they may be 
peculiar to me, and unshared by anyone else, they may be parts 
of me. But they have qualities and are related, and are neither 
qualities nor relations. So they are substances, and if there are 
more than one of them, substance is differentiated. 

This would be sufficient. But it is interesting to notice 
that we can go further, and that the perception of a single 
datum proves the differentiation of substance. For, besides the 
perception-datum, there is also the petception. If, as I believe 
to be the case, the perception is a mental state, then that and 
the datum are two substances. If, on the other hand, as is 
sometimes maintained, the perception is a relation of which the 
datum is one term, then the other term must also be something 
existent—presumably the selfi—and, once more, two substances 
must exist. é 

76. Can we go still further and say that not only all per- 
ception, but all thought, involves the differentiation of sub- 
stance? If we could do so, we should, among other things, be 
able to say that the assertion of the proposition that substance 
was not differentiated would be sufficient to prove that the 
proposition was false. Whether all thought involves a differ- 
entiation of substance is a question whose answer depends ‘on 
our theory of thought. I cannot make a judgment or an 
assumption without being aware of at least two things. If, for 
example, I affirm or consider the proposition that substance is 
undifferentiated, I must be aware of what is meant by substance 


CH. VII] DIFFERENTIATION 77 


and by undifferentiated. If such awarenesses are parts of me— 
and I think that they are so—then there is a differentiation of 
substance, since parts of a self are substances. But if, as has 
been held, a judgment or an assumption can be a relation of the 
self to various non-existent terms, then a judgment or an 
assumption need not imply the existence of any substance other 
than the self. 

But even if a thought as such does not involve the differen- 
tiation of substance, my knowledge that I have a thought does 
involve it. For that knowledge is based on a perception, of 
which the thought which I know that I have is the datum, and, 
like other perceptions, it involves that substance is differ- 
entiated. 

Without bringing thought into the question, however, the 
differentiation of substance is certain. It is self-evident to 
every man that he has perceptions. And even if nothing existed 
outside himself, and even if he had only one perception, this 
would, as we have seen, be sufficient to prove that substance 
was differentiated. 

77. Substance, then, is differentiated. The proof of this on 
which we have relied is, as we have seen, empirical. We have 
based our belief that substance is differentiated on our know- 
ledge of the existence of some particular differentiation—a 
single one would be sufficient to prove our point—and this can 
only be known empirically. But since, as we have seen, the 
existence of a single perception is sufficient to prove differ- 
entiation, the position of any person who should doubt or deny 
differentiation would involve that he should doubt or deny all 
perception. And such a position would be almost equivalent to 
complete scepticism. It would not be easy for anyone to doubt 
or deny perception without admitting that he knew that he 
doubted or denied it. And his knowledge of his doubt or denial 
could only be obtained from perception. 

Since substance is differentiated there is a plurality of sub- 
stances. But nothing in the arguments by which we have 
reached this conclusion prevents us from holding that all that 
exists is also a single substance. Indeed, it is clear that it must 
be a single substance. For if we take all that exists, it is clear 


78 DIFFERENTIATION [BK II 


that it has qualities, and it is not itself a quality or relation. 
Indeed, it is a result of the definition of substance which we 
have adopted—a result not always realized by those who adopt 
it—that all parts of substances and all collections of substances 
are themselves substances. It seems desirable to mention this 
point here, to avoid misapprehension, but its introduction into 
the chain of our argument must be postponed until we have 
developed further what is involved in the nature of a single 
substance. 


CHAPTER VIII 
RELATIONS 


78. We have now a plurality of substances, and it is there- 
fore evident that there will be Relations among substances. 
What relations there will be is a question to which much of the 
rest of this work will be devoted, but that there are some 
relations is beyond doubt. All substances will be similar to one 
another, for they are all substances. And all substances will be 
diverse from one another, since they are separate substances. 
(By diversity I mean what is sometimes called numerical 
difference, and not dissimilarity, the relation of which to 
diversity will be considered in Chapter x.) And substances 
which are similar to each other, or diverse from one another, 
stand to each other in the relations of similarity and diversity. 

Relation, like quality, is indefinable. We can only show 
what we mean by it by giving examples. When we say that A 
is greater than B, is equal to B, is the father of B, is to the right 
of B, loves B, is ignorant of B, we are asserting a relation in 
which A stands to B. We cannot define a relation as that in 
which sometbing stands to something, or which holds between 
something and something, for in order to give these phrases the 
meaning which would make them true of relations, we should 
have to define them as the sort of standing or holding which 
occurs when things are related. And thus our definition of 
relation would be circular. 

79. Relations can have more than two terms, as when A, 
B, and C are all equal. And, again, it is possible for a relation 
to have only one term, at any rate in the ordinary sense of the 
word. For a subject can have a relation to itself. Every sub- 
stance has the relation of identity with itself. And some sub- 
stances are equal to themselves, despise themselves, are their 
own trustees or their own cousins. 

Thus we cannot say that every relation has more than one 


80 RELATIONS [BK II 


term. Yet that which stands in a relation, even if the relation 
has only one term, has a certain aspect of plurality. For a 
relation always connects something with something. Even 
when it only connects something with itself, the term so con- 
nected with itself is—to use a metaphor which is not, I think, 
misleading—at both ends of the relation, and this does involve 
a certain aspect of plurality, though not, of course, a plurality 
of substances. This may be more obvious if we notice that it is 
impossible to express any relation without either having two 
terms, or using one term twice. It may be the case that A loves 
nobody but himself, but this must be expressed by saying 
either “A loves A,” or “A loves himself.” It cannot be ex- 
pressed by saying simply “A loves,” which only means that A 
loves someone, without specifying whom. 

It might tend to simplicity in considering relations to self if 
we used the word term differently, so that we should say, for 
example, that in self-love there were two terms, although both 
terms were the same substance. But it seems more convenient 
on the whole to take one thing as being always only one term; 
and to speak of relations to self as relations with only one 
term. 

80. The difference between relations and qualities is suffi- 
ciently clear, though, since both terms are indefinable, it is 
impossible to define the difference between them. We may say 
that the qualities are qualities of something, while relations are 
not relations of anything, but between something and something. 
This, however, though it may help us to realize the difference, 
will not give us a definition, since “of” and “between,” as used 
here, could only be understood with the help of the conceptions 
of quality and relation. 

If what we have said is correct, it follows that relation is a 
conception which is indispensable in describing existence. For 
the existent has relations, and, since the conception of relation 
is indefinable, it will be impossible to substitute for it any other 
conceptions which can be taken as its equivalent. 

Strenuous efforts have been made by various philosophers 
to dispense with the conception of relation in their theories of 
existence. The most usual form which these efforts have assumed 


CH. vilt] RELATIONS 81 


is an attempt to substitute, in all cases, assertions of qualities 
for assertions of relations. The theories which have been put 
forward for this purpose have not confined themselves to saying 
that relation, though valid of existence, was not ultimate, but 
definable in terms of quality, so that statements about relations 
could be translated into statements about qualities. They have 
held that the conception of relation is positively invalid—one 
which is never rightly applicable anywhere. At the same time 
they do not go so far as to say that all statements which assert 
relations are absolutely and simply false—that the statement, for 
example, that London is larger than Cambridge is no more true 
than the statement that Cambridge is larger than London. But 
they say that such statements are confused and inaccurate 
versions of statements about qualities, and that such a confused 
and inaccurate version of true statements about qualities is 
nearer the truth than a similarly confused and inaccurate 
version of false statements about qualities. The statements 
about qualities are sometimes taken to be about a quality in 
each of the substances of which the relation was asserted—in 
this case Cambridge and London. Sometimes they are taken to be 
about a quality of some whole which includes both substances. 

The chief reason which has been given for the rejection of 
relations is that there is nowhere for them to be. They are not, 
it is clear, in either of the terms without being in the other. 
Nor are they in each of them, taken separately. They are, it is 
said, between the terms, and not in them. Then, it is asked, is 
there anything im which they can be? And, when this is 
answered in the negative, it is concluded that they are im- 
possible?. 

81. But this is invalid, because it assumes that a relation 
is impossible, unless some one thing can be found, in which it 
is or inheres like a quality. It takes, as the test of the possibility 
of relations, the question whether they can behave exactly as 
qualities behave, and when it is admitted that they cannot, it 


1 This is the line of Lotze’s argument, and substantially of Leibniz’s also. 
Mr Bradley’s objections are different, and lead to a different conclusion. He 
does not, like Leibniz and Lotze, endeavour to reduce relations to qualities, but 
rejects qualities and relations alike. (Cp. Section 88.) 


82 RELATIONS [BK 1 


concludes that relations are impossible, and that, in a true view 
of reality, judgments of relation would be replaced by judg- 
ments of quality. 

There is, however, no justification for the assumption that 
a relation is impossible, if it cannot inhere in something as a 
quality does. To the question “in what is a relation?” we may 
fairly answer that it is not in anything, but that it is between 
two or more terms, or between a term and itself, and that the 
conception of “between” is as ultimate as the conception of 
“in,” and has as much claim to be regarded as valid. Both are 
ultimate, neither contains any contradiction, and the justifica- 
tion of our use of both lies in the fact that it is impossible to 
state anything whatever without asserting or implying the 
reality both of qualities and of relations. That this is impossible, 
both as regards qualities and as regards relations, we have 
already seen. In the case which immediately concerns us, the 
relations of substances to substances, since substance does 
exist, it must ke identical with itself, and, as has already been 
pointed out, since more than one substance exists, they must 
be similar to one another, and diverse from one another. 

And it must be noted that the propositions asserting those 
relations will be absolutely true. It is not merely that we get 
nearer to the truth by asserting them than by denying them. 
There cannot be any substance unless it is absolutely true that 
it is identical with itself, and there cannot be more than one 
substance unless it is absolutely true that they are similar and 
diverse. ; 

82. The conception of relation, then, must be accepted as 
valid of the existent. But it might be admitted to be valid, and 
yet denied to be ultimate and indefinable. It might be said 
that it really was true that substances were in relations, but 
that the fact expressed in this way could be expressed in terms 
of qualities only, without bringing in relations. But this also is 
false. No fact which can be stated in terms of relations between 
substances can ever be stated in terms which omit the con- 
ception of relation. (I use the phrase “between substances” to. 
include “between a substance and itself.’’) 

There are three facts which have, I think, led to some doubt 


CH. VIIt] RELATIONS 83 


on this point. In the first place, a relation may no doubt be 
based on a quality in each of its terms. But this does not mean 
that it can be reduced to those qualities. If A is larger than B, 
this relation may depend on the fact that A covers a square 
mile, and B covers an acre. If A irritates B, this relation may 
depend on the political opinions of A and the sensitiveness of 
B. But a statement of the size of A and a statement of the size 
of B are not equivalent to a statement that A is larger than B, 
though the latter may be a certain and immediate conclusion 
from them. And a statement of A’s opinions and of B’s sensi- 
tiveness are not equivalent to a statement that A irritates B, 
though this may follow from them by the laws of human 
nature. 

In the second place, it is true, as we shall see in the next 
chapter, that the existence of any relation between two sub- 
stances involves the existence of a quality in each of those sub- 
stances. “A admires B” is a statement of a relation between 
A and B. But its truth implies the truth of the statements 
“A is an admirer of B,” and “B is an object of admiration to 
A,” which state qualities of A and B. But we cannot state these 
qualities in terms which omit the conception of relation, since 
the first is the quality.of being a person who admires B, and the 
second is the quality of being a person who is admired by A, and 
therefore neither of them can be stated without introducing the 
conception of admiration, which is a relation. 

In the third place, a relation determines a quality of any 
whole which contains all the terms of the relation. We may say 
that it is a quality of this room, or of the universe, to contain a 
chair A and a chair B, of which A is larger than B. But then 
this quality cannot be stated except by using the conception 
“Jarger than,” and therefore it cannot be stated without stating 
a relation. 

83. Relations, then, cannot be replaced by qualities. Can 
qualities be replaced by relations? So far as I know, this view 
has never been taken. If it were to be taken, it would be 
necessary, as Mr Russell points out}, to take the view that 
“exact likeness” is a simple relation, not analyzable into com- 


1 Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1911-12, p. 9. 


84 RELATIONS [BK II 


munity of qualities, and that there should be exact likenesses of 
various kinds. Then, instead of saying that A and B had both 
the quality of whiteness, we should say that A and B were two 
of the terms which stood to one another in an exact likeness of 
one particular kind. 

There is, however, no reason that we should depart from the 
prima facie view that there are qualities, since no reason has 
ever been given for doubting it. And the view that exact like- 
ness is a simple relation, and independent of any community of 
qualities seems clearly false. We must therefore abide by the 
conclusion—which, as I said, I do not think has ever keen 
challenged—that qualities cannot be replaced by relations. 

84. Relations, like qualities, are either simple, compound, 
or complex. A Simple Relation is one which is not capable of 
analysis, and is therefore indefinable. A Compound Relation is 
one which can be analyzed into an aggregate of simple relations. 
A Complex Relation is one which does not consist of an aggregate 
of otber relations, but which can be analyzed and defined by 
means of other characteristics, whether qualities or relations, or 
both. 

All relations also fall into other classes, which have nothing 
correspondent to them among qualities. In the first place, 
every relation is such that what stands in it can only stand in 
it to itself, or cannot stand in it to itself, or can stand in it 
either to itself or to something else. For example, a substance 
can only be identical with itself, it cannot be its own father, and 
it can admire either itself or something else. Every relation 
then is either Reflexive, Unreflexive, or simply Not Reflexive. 

In the second place, every relation is such that, if A stands 
in it to B, B must stand in it to A, or cannot stand in it to A, 
or may or may not stand in it to A. Thus if A is equal to B, B 
is equal to A. If A is B’s father, B cannot be A’s father. If A 
loves B, B may or may not love A. Thus we have the classes of 
Symmetrical, Asymmetrical, and simply Not Symmetrical rela- 
tions. 

In the third place, every relation is such that, if A stands in 
it to B, and B to C, then either A must stand in it to C, or 
cannot stand in it to C, or may or may not stand in it to C. If 


CH. VIIT] RELATIONS 85 


A is the ancestor of B, and B of C, then A is the ancestor of 
C. But if A is the father of B, and B of C, then A cannot be 
the father of C. And if A is the first cousin of B, and B of C, 
then A may or may not be the first cousin of C. Thus we have 
the classes of Transitive, Intransitive, and simply Not Transi- 
tive relations. 

What do we know, so far, as to the occurrence of examples 
of each of these classes among the relations of substances? We 
know that the relations of identity, diversity, and similarity 
hold of substances. And, in addition to these, every substance 
has a relation to each quality which inheres to it, and to each 
relation of which it is a term. 

It is clear that all three classes of the first group are repre- 
sented. For identity is reflexive, diversity is unreflexive, and 
‘similarity is simply not reflexive, if we hold, as I think we must, 
that a thing can be said to be similar to itself. 

In the next group, both diversity and similarity are sym- 
metrical. The relation of a subject to its quality is asymmetrical, 
since a substance cannot inhere in a quality. We have as yet no 
reason to hold that simply not symmetrical relations occur, but 
we shall see later that the relation of determination does occur, 
and is of this class. 

In the third group, similarity is simply not transitive. For, 
if A is only similar to B in respect of the characteristic X, and 
B to C in respect of the characteristic Y, the similarity of A to 
B and of B to C neither involves nor excludes the similarity of 
A to C1. But specific similarity is transitive. If A is similar to 
B in respect of X, and B is similar to C in respect of X, then A 
is similar to C in respect of X. We have not yet reached a case 
of intransitive relation, but one will occur in the next chapter, 
when we shall get a series of derivative characteristics, in which 
X will be the-next term above Y, and Y the next term above 
Z, while X, of course, cannot be the next term above Z. 

1 In point of fact, A and C, whatever they are, will be similar, since they 


will both be real, existent, and substances. But this does not follow from the 
similarity of A to B, and of B to C. 


CHAPTER IX 
DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS 


85. We saw in the last chapter that the fact which is most 
simply expressed by “A admires B” can also be expressed by 
‘“‘A is an admirer of B,” or “A has the quality of admiring B.” 
This, as we saw, did not enable us to dispense with the conception 
of relation, but it is nevertheless an important fact. With it we 
pass to the conception of Derivative Characteristics. 

So far, however, we have only found one class of derivative 
characteristics, namely derivative qualities. The occurrence of 
any relation involves the occurrence of a quality in each of its 
terms—the quality of being a term of that relation. 

A relation in which a substance stands may generate in this 
manner not only one quality but many qualities. If A admires 
B, C, and D, this places A in only one relation—the relation of 
admiration. But there will be three derivative qualities generated 
in A. He will possess the qualities “admirer of B,” “admirer of 
C,” and “admirer of D.” It may be convenient to say that, 
while admiration and equality are relations, the admiration of 
A for B, and the equality of A and B, are Relationships. We 
can then say that each relationship generates a quality of each 
substance which is a term of that relationship. A has the 
quality “admirer of B,” and B has the quality “object of A’s 
admiration.” 

Such qualities, though involved by the relations, can be 
clearly distinguished from them. For the quality, unlike the 
relation, is predicated, and predicated of a single substance, 
even when, as in the case we have taken, the relation is not 
reflexive. The relation is between A and B, but the quality is 
predicated of A alone. The difference is less obvious if we take 
such a relation as “greater than,” because the ordinary form 
in which that relation is expressed is “A is greater than B,” 


CH. 1x] DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS 87 


which is not grammatically different from the form in which 
we should express the quality of A which is generated by the 
relation. But the difference between the quality and the relation 
comes out clearly when we take such a relation as “A admires 
B,” where the natural statement of the derivative quality would 
be “A is the admirer of B.” 

Derivative qualities, like all others, are included in the 
nature of the substance, as that has been defined by us. And 
therefore, although the nature of a substance consists exclusively 
of qualities, it will involve all the relations and relationships in 
which the subject stands. Complete knowledge of the nature 
of any substance, if it were possible, would give us all informa- 
tion which in any way applies to that substance. 

86. It follows that, if time and change are real, and if a 
proposition of the form “A is now X” has a definite meaning, 
the nature of a thing will change when any of its relationships 
change, even if nothing has taken place which would, in ordinary 
language, be called a change in that thing. If A, who was 
thinner than B, becomes fatter than B, then the nature of B’s 
body will change, though it is neither fatter nor thinner than it 
was before. For previously it was fatter than A’s body, and 
now it is thinner than A’s body, and this change of relation- 
ships involves a change of qualities, and so a change of nature. 

Further, it follows that, when any substance changes, all 
substances must change. If A and B are any two substances, 
they must be related—by similarity and diversity, if in nc other 
way. If A changes, then the object to which B stands in certain 
relations has changed. Even if B keeps the same relations to 
the changed A, the object to which it has them will now have 
a different nature, and thus the relationship will have been 
changed. Instead of having the relations XY to a substance 
with the nature PQR, it will now have them to a substance 
with the nature PQS. And this will mean that a derivative 
quality in B has changed, and therefore that B’s nature has 
changed. 

Moreover, the nature of the past will change. In 1900 the 
coronation of Queen Victoria was the last British coronation. 
In 1903 it had ceased to be so—a change of nature which 


88 DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS [BK II 


occurred more than sixty years after the event. This seems 
startling and paradoxical, but I cannot see that there are any 
real difficulties about it, except those general difficulties which 
belong to the nature of time. I shall try to show in Book V that 
nothing does change, but, if anything at all could change, I see 
no further difficulty in the past changing in the way mentioned 
above. 

The qualities which arise in this manner out of relationships 
are as real qualities as any others. But, since they differ from 
other qualities in so important a point, it is desirable to have a 
separate name for them. I propose to call the qualities which 
are generated in this way Relational Qualities, and to call those 
which are not so generated Original Qualities. 

87. Besides generated qualities there are also generated 
relationships. In the first place, every quality generates such a 
relationship. For if a quality is possessed by a substance, that 
generates a relationship between the substance and the quality. 
And, secondly, every relationship generates such a relationship. 
For if a substance stands in a relationship, it is clearly in a 
relation to that relationship, as well as to the term with which 
the relationship connects it. If, for example, A is equal to B, 
then A, besides being related to B, is related to the relationship 
between itself and B, since to be a term in a relationship is to 
be related to it. 

I should propose to class the relations thus generated, 
together with relational qualities, under the general name of 
Derivative Characteristics. All qualities and relations which are 
not generated in this manner, I should call Original Character- 
istics. 

It is to be noticed that there are two sorts of derivative 
relations, and only one sort of derivative qualities, since deriva- 
tive relations are generated both by qualities and relations, 
while derivative qualities are generated only by relations. 

88. We can now see that every characteristic of a substance 
generates an infinite series of characteristics of that substance. 
If we start with an original quality, there is the derivative 
relationship between the substance and the quality, the deriva- 
tive quality of standing in that relationship, and so on without 


CH. 1X] DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS 89 


end. If we start with an original relationship, there is the 
derivative quality of standing in that relationship, the derivative 
relationship between the substance and that quality, and so on 
again without end. Moreover, whenever, in one of these series, 
we come to a relationship, that relationship generates, besides 
the quality derivative from it, a relationship derivative from it, 
and from each of these an infinite series arises, which again 
divides into two at each member which is a relationship. All 
the qualities in these infinite series are parts of the nature of 
the substance possessing them, and that nature therefore is a 
compound quality with an infinite number of parts. 

These infinite series, however, are not vicious, because it 
is not necessary to complete them in order to determine the 
meaning of the earlier terms. The meaning of an earlier member 
in this series does not depend on a later, but, on the contrary, 
the meaning of any later term depends on tbat of an earlier 
term. The fact that A is good starts an infinite series of qualities 
and relationships. But the meaning of “A is good” does not 
depend on the meaning of the propositions asserting these 
qualities and relations. Such an infinite series, therefore, is not 
a sign of error!. 

It is true, no doubt, that the occurrence of these qualities 
and relations becomes of less and less interest and importance 
as we go down the series, It may be very important that A is 
good. But the additional fact that A has the quality cf being a 
term in the relationship of inherence between himself and good- 
ness could scarcely be interesting to any sane man, except as an 
example of a derivative quality. But a fact does not cease to 
be a fact because no sane man would be interested in it. 

89. The qualities which make up the nature of any substance 
fall into two classes in respect of their importance. The first 
class consists of original qualities, and of those derivative 
qualities which are immediately derived from original relation- 
ships. The second class contains all other derivative qualities. 
The distinction lies in the fact that all in the second class are 


1 J venture to suggest that this consideration removes the force of Mr 
Bradley’s argument for rejecting the validity of the conceptions of quality and 
relation. 

E 


90 DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS [BK II 


generated, directly or indirectly, by those in the first class, 
and that, when we know those of the first class, it is unnecessary 
to enquire into those of the second, since they can be deduced, 
if knowledge of them should ever be wanted, by the application 
of the formulae of generation given above. We may name these 
two classes Primary Qualities and Repeating Qualities—in doing 
which we shall, of course, be giving “Primary” a different and 
wider meaning than that which we have given to “Original,” 
since the primary qualities will include both the original 
qualities and those derivative qualities which are directly 
generated by original relations. 

90. It may be objected that, if our argument is valid, the 
nature of every quality and relation, as well as of every sub- 
stance, will be a compound quality with an infinite number of 
parts. For all qualities and relations have qualities and rela- 
tionships, and these will generate infinite series in the same way 
that characteristics of substances do. Now, it may be said, it is 
impossible that the nature of qualities and relations should 
contain infinite series of characteristics. For then we should 
not know what a quality or relation meant until we had appre- 
hended the whole of the infinite series, which we are unable to 
do. But if we do not know what any quality or relation means, 
we have no right to make any assertion which speaks of qualities 
or relations. And thus we should be reduced to an absurdity, 
since this assertion itself speaks of various qualities and rela- 
tions. 

But this objection is invalid. It would be valid if the char- 
acteristics of a characteristic were parts or elements of that 
characteristic. But the characteristics of a characteristic are no 
more parts or elements of it than the characteristics of a sub- 
stance are parts of that substance. They are, indeed, parts of 
its nature, but that is a very different thing. 

This may be made clear by examples. It is a quality of 
redness that it is the colour of doctors’ gowns. It is a quality of 
triangularity that it is an object of thought to a particular 
school boy at a particular time. These qualities are parts of the 
nature of the qualities of redness and triangularity. But they 
are not parts of the qualities redness and triangularity them- 


CH. 1x] DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS 91 


selves. Redness is a simple quality, and has no parts or elements. 
And the parts of triangularity are those which are given in its 
definition, which do not include its contemplation by a particular 
school boy. 

When a characteristic is not simple, but has parts or ele- 
ments, we do not know the meaning of the characteristic unless 
we know the meaning of the parts or elements. If humanity 
means the quality of being both rational and animal, we shall 
not know the meaning of humanity unless we know the meaning 
of animality. If what is meant by conceit is the possession of 
too good an opinion of oneself, we shall not know what conceit 
means unless we know what opinion means. But this does not 
prevent our knowing what characteristics mean, as long as 
their parts or elements are not too numerous to be grasped by 
our minds. So long as the parts or elements of the character- 
istic itself comply with this condition, we can know what it 
means, although its nature will contain an infinite series of 
qualities. 

91. The number of qualities in the nature of any substance 
will, as we have seen, be infinite. But this is due to the fact that 
the number of repeating qualities will be infinite. It remains to 
consider whether the nature of any substance, or of all sub- 
stances, contains an infinite number of primary qualities. So 
far we have no ground for pronouncing any opinion on this 
point. 

We shall, however, see reason later to adopt the view that 
the number of substances is infinite. Now each substance is 
related to every other substance. For it has, at least, to every 
other substance the relation of similarity, since they are both 
substances, and the relation of diversity, since they are not the 
same substance. Since each substance stands in this relation to 
an infinite number of other substances, it will have an infinite 
number of original relationships, and therefore an infinity of 
primary qualities derived from them. 

The qualities thus proved to be infinite in number are, as 
we have just said, derivative, although they are primary. As to 
the numher of original qualities possessed by any substance, it 
is: impossible, as far as I can see, to say anything. 


92 DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS [BK II 


92. We have now dealt with qualities, substances, and 
relations, and have found it impossible to dispense with any 
one of the three in our account of existence. But it may be 
worth while to enquire why quality occupies, in common 
opinion, a more secure place than either relation or substance. 
Many systems of philosophy have rejected the conception of 
substance, or the conception of relation, while retaining the 
coneeption of quality, but, as far as I know, no system has ever 
rejected the conception of quality and retained either of the 
other two. (Some, indeed, have rejected general qualities, while 
retaining relations and substances. But, however mistakenly 
and inconsistently, they have retained qualities which are not 
general.) 

In the first place, we must ask what reasons can be found 
for the belief that characteristics stand on a firmer and more 
certain footing than substances. I think that there are three. 

The first is that it is frequently held that characteristics are 
the only things which we perceive—that is, which we are directly 
aware of as existing. This is a mistake. The perception-data 
which we perceive are substances. They may not be persistent 
or independent. They may be events or states in our minds. 
But they have qualities and are related, and they are not 
qualities or relations. And therefore, by our definition, they 
are substances. 

The cause of this mistake is, I think, that, in the case of 
those perception-data which are sense-data, we are accustomed 
in ordinary life to believe in corresponding qualities in external 
objects. I have a sense-datum of yellow, and this leads me to 
believe, rightly or wrongly, in the existence of an external 
object which is yellow. Now, as a rule, the existence of the 
sense-datum has no intrinsic interest for me, while the existence 
of the object, which it leads me to believe in, has often great 
interest for me. It is a matter of considerable interest to me 
whetber the coin in my hand is a shilling or a sovereign, or 
whether the animal I meet is a dog or a lion, and it is only as 
leading me to a conclusion on these points that the sense-datum 
of yellow interests me at all. And since the only interest of the 
sense-datum of yellow lies in the characteristic of yellowness 


CH. Ix] DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS 93 


which it leads me to attribute to the external object, it is not 
wonderful that the sense-datum should be confused with the 
characteristic. | 

The second reason is that every substance is directly con- 
nected with characteristics, while every characteristic of the 
existent is not directly connected with substances. For some of 
them are characteristics of characteristics. This does not affect 
the fact that substance is indispensable. But it may give char- 
acteristics an appearance, though a mistaken appearance, of 
greater independence than substance. 

The third reason is that we can know nothing of the nature 
of a substance except by knowing that it has certain character- 
istics. Even to know that it is a sukstance, and that it exists, 
is to know that it has the characteristics of substantiality and 
existence, nor should we ever have reason to believe that a 
particular substance existed, unless we had reason to believe 
that it had other characteristics besides these. But we can 
know a great deal about the nature of a characteristic without 
knowing what existent substance it belongs to, or whether it 
belongs to any at all. And, indeed, as we have seen, we can have 
knowledge of its nature, even if we know that it does not belong 
to anything existent. A mathematician knows many qualities 
which belong to the quality “to be a rigid body,” though he 
has good reason to believe that no rigid body ever exists. This 
does not, of course, make substance less essential than char- 
acteristics, for it does not affect the conclusion that something 
does exist, and that, if anything exists, substance must exist. 
Nor does it affect, as we have seen, the validity of our con- 
clusions as to the relation of existence and reality. But it does 
tend to give characteristics a false appearance of being inde- 
pendent of existence, and therefore more fundamental than 
substances, which are clearly not independent of existence. 

These reasons may account for the belief that characteristics 
are more indispensable than substance. But why should quali- 
ties be taken as more indispensable than relations? Why should 
relations be condemned because they cannot inhere in anything 
as qualities do, while no one condemns qualities because things 
cannot stand in them as they do in relations? I think that the 


94 DERIVATIVE CHARACTERISTICS [BK II 


answer, in some cases, is to be found in the great objection 
which many thinkers entertain to admitting that what is really 
separate can be just as really connected. The assertion of rela- 
tions involves this admission, except in the case of reflexive 
relations. All other relations require at least two terms, which 
must be really separate, since they are two, and really connected, 
since they are related. The assertion of a quality, however, does 
not involve such an admission, and thus the thinkers who are 
unwilling to make the admission take refuge from relations in 
qualities?. 

1 Of course, when two substances have the same quality, we get real separa- 
tion and real connection. But then we can assert the quality of one substance 


without asserting it of the other, while the relation cannot be asserted of one of 
the terms taken separately. 


CHAPTER X 
DISSIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES 


93. The question now arises whether two substances can 
have exactly the same nature, or whether the fact that they are 
two different substances involves that there must be some differ- 
ence in their nature. If there was no difference between the 
nature of two things, they would be exactly similar, so that our 
question may be put in the form whether Diversity implies 
Dissimilarity—using dissimilarity to exclude exact similarity 
only, and as compatible with partial similarity. 

We may note, to begin with, that, if there is to be any 
difference in their nature at all, there must be some difference 
among their primary qualities. For the formula by which the 
infinite series of repeating qualities is generated is such that 
there can be no difference in repeating qualities which does not 
arise from some difference in primary qualities. 

Primary qualities may be either original qualities or quali- 
ties immediately derived from original relationships. There 
seems no reason for denying that it would be possible for two 
substances to be diverse without any difference in their original 
qualities. It is, of course, possible that all substances may 
differ in their original qualities. It is even possible that every 
substance should have some simple original quality which no 
other substance has. And, to take a supposition which seems 
less improbable, it is possible that the aggregate of original 
qualities in any substance should differ, in some at least of its 
constituents, from the aggregate of original qualities in any 
other substance. But we have no reason to suppose that this 
must be the case. If diversity does require difference of nature, 
that requirement could be satisfied by a difference of relational 
qualities, caused by a difference in original relationships. 

We mustnot forget that the questionisabout exact similarity, 
and that exact sifnilarity involves that there should be no 


96 DISSIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES [BK II 


difference in any relationship, however external and indifferent 
that relationship is commonly supposed to be. Two things are 
not exactly similar if one of them is known to me and the other 
is not. Nor are they exactly similar if one of them is ever 
perceived or thought of by me without the other (even if at 
other times I perceive or think of them simultaneously). For 
then one has, and one has not, the quality of being cognized by 
a particular person at a particular time. Nor are they exactly 
similar if they are ever distinguished by names or numbers, 
however arbitrarily applied. For then one would have the 
quality of being called P by a particular person at a particular 
time, and the other would have the quality of being called Q by 
him at that time. 

94. Can there, then, be two things which are exactly 
similar? I think that the answer must be that there cannot. 
The connection between diversity and dissimilarity is, no doubt, 
synthetic. “A and B are two things,” and “A and B are dis- 
similar,” are not two ways of stating the same facv. But it 
seems clear to me that diversity implies dissimilarity—that two 
things cannot have the same nature. If we make the experiment 
of removing in thought all difference of nature from two sub- 
stances, we shall find that, when we have succeeded, we are 
no longer contemplating two substances, but one. And this does 
not, as I conceive, come from the impossibility, of our distin- 
guishing the two substances—which would not prove there were 
not two—but from the recognition of the impessibility of diver- 
sity without dissimilarity. The nature of a substance expresses 
completely what the substance is. And the same complete 
expression of what a substance is cannot be true of each of two 
substances. The substance is made this substance by its nature, 
and, if the nature is the same, the substance is the same. 

It would not, I imagine, be denied by anyone that there is 
one dissimilarity of relations which must exist between diverse 
substances. If A and B are diverse substances, then A is 
identical with A and diverse from B, while B is neither identical 
with A nor diverse from itself. But if our contention in the last 
paragraph 1s right, there must be some other dissimilarity 
between diverse substances, besides this one. Fcr this dis- 


CH. x] DISSIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES 97 


similarity depends on a diversity which has been previously 
established, and cannot therefore be the dissimilarity which is 
necessary to permit diversity. 

95. The view that diversity requires a dissimilarity not 
dependent on itself is the view which has, I believe, been 
adopted by the majority of philosophers. But it has been 
denied, and we must consider what causes have led to the 
denial. 

In the first place, the denial seems to be due in some cases 
to the adoption, more or less explicitly, of the erroneous con- 
ception of the Thing-in-itself. (I use this phrase here rather in 
Hegel’s sense than in Kant’s!.) It is held that the substance 
has an individuality apart and distinct from its nature, and 
that therefore two substances, while they have the same nature, 
could be diverse in respect of this distinct aspect, in much the 
same way that two heads can be fitted with the same hat. But 
this is untenable. For when we try to explain what we mean by 
this distinct aspect of the substance—indeed, when we assert 
that it exists—we can only do so by asserting qualities of the 
substance. And these qualities are part of the nature of the 
sutstance, not something apart and distinct from that nature. 
It is therefore impossible to distinguish the substance from its 
qualities in such a way as to allow the substances to be different 
while their natures are the same. 

As against this, it has been suggested to me that the assertion 
that a substance has an individuality apart from its nature 
is proved by the fact that such a judgment as “this is near 
that” may have a definite meaning. Such a judgment certainly 
does not gain a definite meaning by its terms being so precisely 
described that each description could apply only to one thing in 
the universe. Indeed “this” and “that” are each applicable to 
every cbject in the universe. And yet there is no ambiguity for 
me in such a judgment, if I am perceiving the substances which 
I designate as “this” and “that,” or if I have perceived them 
and now remember them. Hence it is argued that there must 
be in each substance an individuality which is independent of 
its qualities, and which is revealed to us when we perceive the 


1 Cp. my Commentary on Hegel's Logic, Section 135. 


98 DISSIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES [BK II 


substance—though, of course, it would be equally there whether 
the substance were perceived or not. 

This argument, however, seems to me to be invalid. No 
doubt I can have unambiguous knowledge of A—knowledge 
which enables me to identify it—either by perception or by 
description. And in the first case I shall have unambiguous 
knowledge of A which is not dependent on my knowledge of 
A’s qualities}, just as in the second case I shall have unambiguous 
knowledge of A which is not dependent on my acquaintance 
with A. But the fact that I can know the substance independ- 
ently of its qualities does not prove that its individuality is 
independent of its qualities, so that it could be diverse from 
another substance from which it was not dissimilar. 

The view that the individuality of the substance must be 
independent of any quality, which is such that the substance 
can be unambiguously known without knowing that quality, 
leads to an absurdity. For the qualities, without knowing which 
I can unambiguously know a substance by perception, include 
the quality “having an individuality independent of any 
quality.”’ Therefore, if this view were true, the substance would 
have an individuality independent of any quality which would, 
among others, be independent of its possession of the quality 
“having an individuality independent of any quality.”’ And this 
is absurd. 

To avoid this it might be admitted that the substance 
could not have such an independent individuality and diversity, 
unless it possessed the qualities which are involved in it— 
substantiality, the possession of an individuality independent 
of any quality, and the consequent possession of a diversity 
independent of dissimilarity. But it might still be maintained 
that it has an individuality which, while dependent on some of 
its qualities, is not entirely dependent on its qualities, and that 
this individuality might be different in two substances which 


1 T doubt if we ever perceive a substance without knowing some of its 
qualities, since, after a perception, we are always able to make some judgments 
as to the nature of what we have perceived. (This subject will be discussed in 
Book V.) But I can have unambiguous knowledge of a substance by perception 
although my knowledge of its qualities falls very far short of an unambiguous 
description of it. 


CH. x] DISSIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES 99 


are exactly similar. But this admission would destroy the force 
of the argument. For I can perceive a substance without 
knowing that it has substantiality, or that it possesses an 
individuality independent of any quality, or that it possesses 
a diversity which is independent of dissimilarity: And if, 
nevertheless, its individuality is not independent of these 
qualities, we cannot argue that its individuality is independent 
of any other qualities merely on the ground that I can perceive 
the substance without knowing those other qualities. 

96. This ground for rejecting our theory, therefore, musi 
be regarded as inadequate. In other cases our theory is, I think, 
rejected owing to a misunderstanding of what it means. It has 
often been supposed that the dissimilarity required must be a 
dissimilarity of what we have called original qualities, exclusive 
of relational qualities. But this is a mistake, since all that is 
asserted is that diverse substances cannot be exactly similar 
both in their original qualities and in their original relations. 

It is owing to this misunderstanding that it is urged against 
our theory that two exactly similar substances could exist at 
different times or places. It may be possible that there should 
be two substances at different times or places which were 
exactly similar in their original qualities, but they would have 
different relationships, and would therefore have different 
derivative qualities. Two substances at different times have 
different relations to each other, since one will be earlier than 
the other, and the other later than the first. And they will have 
different relationships to everything else in the time series. 
And two substances in different places will also have different 
relationships. If space is tc be taken as absolute, then one sub- 
stance will occupy one or more points of space, and these 
points will not be occupied by the other, which is in a different 
place. Then A will have the relational quality of being the 
occupant of point M, and this quality will not be shared by 
B. If, on the other hand, space is to be taken as relative, it is 
clear that the two substances could not occupy different positions 
in space if there were no difference between their relationships 
to other substances in space. 

97. There are other series of terms besides those of time 


100 DISSIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES [BK II 


and space, and it has been maintained, in the same way, that 
there could be diverse substances which were exactly similar, 
if those substances occupied different places in some such 
series. Whenever substances are counted or numbered we have, 
of course, such a series. And so important has this objection to 
our theory been considered that the expressions “numerically 
different” and “numerically diverse,” are often used to express 
what we have called diversity. 

This objection is due to the same misunderstanding. If two 
substances occupy different places in such a series their rela- 
tionships are not the same. If A and B are at different points 
in the series, they will stand in different relations to any other 
term, C, in the series. If C is in the same place in the series as 
A, it will not be in the same place as B. If C falls between them 
in the series, then one of the two will be earlier in the series 
than C,, and the other will be later. If C is on the same side of 
A and of B, then either A must be nearer to it than B, or B 
than A. And so the relationships and the relational qualities 
of A and B will be different. 

And it makes no difference if the order of the series is 
determined by some consideration which, in ordinary language, 
would be called irrelevant to the substances which are its 
terms. I may think to-day of Fielding, Meredith, and Thackeray, 
in that order, merely because in looking at a book-case my eye 
has been caught successively by Tom Jones, Evan Harrington, 
and Esmond. But it will be true of Fielding that he is a man of 
whom, on a certain day, a certain person thought before he 
thought of Meredith, and it will be true of Thackeray that he 
is a man of whom, on the same day, the same person did not 
think before he thought of Meredith. And, although this is not 
an important difference in the natures of Fielding and Thackeray, 
it is a real difference. 

Neither of the objections, then, which we have considered, 
is valid, and we must adhere to our view that diversity implies 
dissimilarity, and. that all substances must be dissimilar to one 
another. 

98. It may be said that, though we have shown that all 
substances must be dissimilar to one another, we must not 


CH. x] DISSIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES 101 


assume that they must be dissimilar either in their original 
qualities or in their relations to other substances. May they 
not be dissimilar only in their relations to characteristics which 
do not belong to them? For example, if A and B are men, 
might not their dissimilarity consist exclusively in some differ- 
ence of their relations to the characteristic of whiteness, or of 
rigidity ? 

But every such dissimilarity would involve a dissimilarity 
in the relations of A and B to other substances. If A has the 
relation Y to the characteristic X, while B has not that relation 
to it, then, if any substance C’ possesses the characteristic X, 
A and B will be in different relations to C. For C will be related 
to X, and will therefore be in different indirect relations to 
things which stand in different relations to X. And though 
‘these relations will be indirect, they will be original relations 
between the substances. If, on the other hand, X is a character- 
istic which no substance possesses, then every substance will 
possess the characteristic not-X. And, if A and B bave different 
relations to X, tbeir relations to not-X will not be the same, 
nor, consequently, their relations to the substances to which 
the characteristic not-X belongs. 

99. The result which we have reached is the principle 
which is known historically as the Identity of Indiscernibles. 
It is true that when Leibniz, who invented the name, asserted 
that diverse substances must have dissimilar qualities, he 
meant that they must have what, in the terminology we have 
adopted, would be called dissimilar original qualities. But it 
must be remembered that Leibniz rejected relations altogether, 
and held that original qualities were the only characteristics of 
substances. And it seems to me that the essence of his contention 
in maintaining the Identity of Indiscernibles lay in the assertion 
that there was a dissimilarity of characteristics, and not in his 
denial that this might start in a difference of relations. 

The name, however, is not a good one. For the principle 
does not assert that there are indiscernibles which are identical, 
but that there is nothing which is indiscernible from anything 
else. It would be better to speak of the Dissimilarity of the 
_ Diverse. 


CHAPTER XI 
SUFFICIENT DESCRIPTION 


100. A substance cannot, of course, be defined, since it is 
particular. Definition is only applicable to characteristics, 
which are universals, and only to those characteristics which 
are not simple. It consists in stating the simpler characteristics 
—ultimately the absolutely simple characteristics—into which 
the characteristic defined can be analyzed. But, although a 
substance cannot be defined, it can be described. It is described, 
more or less, by every quality which it possesses, including the 
qualities derived from the relations in which it stands. (Char- 
acteristics, whether definable or not, can also be described by 
the qualities they possess.) 

Description resembles definition in this respect, that by 
means of each we are enabled to distinguish that to which: it is 
applied from anything else. Every characteristic which is not 
simple, and so admits of definition at all, has a complete 
definition which is not a definition of anything but itself. 
Indeed nothing but a complete definition is usually called a 
definition. We should not say that “rectilinear figure” was an 
incomplete definition of a triangle, but only that it was part of 
a definition. ; 

On the other hand, an imperfect description is called a 
description. We describe Henry VII when we speak of him as 
an English sovereign, though that is a characteristic which does 
not distinguish him from Richard II or Elizabeth. And there- 
fore we must make a distinction between a description and an 
Exclusive Description. 

101. By an Exclusive Description I mean one which applies 
only to one substance, so that the substance is absolutely 
identified by the description. We must distinguish, again, 
between an exclusive description and a Complete Description. 
A Complete Description of a substance would consist of all its 


CH. XI] SUFFICIENT DESCRIPTION 103 


qualities, both primary and repeating, and would therefore, of 
course, consist of an infinite number of qualities. It follows 
from the results reached in the last chapter that a complete 
description must be exclusive, since no two substances have 
their natures completely the same, and a complete account of 
the nature of the one substance could therefore never be true of 
the nature of another. But an exclusive description need not 
be complete. “The most virtuous of all beings” could not be a 
complete description of any possible being, but it would be an 
exclusive description of any being of whom it was true, since it 
could not be true of more than one. 

Descriptions are in terms of qualities. But a description by 
means of a quality derived from a relation sometimes introduces 
a substance. If I describe Henry VII as the father of a sovereign, 

‘Iam describing him entirely by characteristics. But if I describe 
him as the father of Henry VIII, a substance comes into the 
description—the substance Henry VIII. And it is essential to 
the description. “Father of Henry VIII” is quite a different 
description to “father of a sovereign,” for the latter describes 
many substances not described by the former. 

It might seem as if a description which was partially ex- 
pressed in terms of substances had no effect in increasing our 
knowledge of the substance described, unless each substance 
mentioned in the description was itself described. For if sub- 
stances can be known without description, there is no need of 
description at all. If substances cannot be known without 
description, then the undescribed substance which forms part 
of a description is not known. And a description of anything in 
terms of the unknown is useless. 

But this overlooks the fact that there are some substances 
of which I am aware by perception, and that a description of 
some other substance by means of these may describe something 
of which I am not aware in terms of which I 4m aware. I am 
not, for example, aware of my table, and when I describe it as 
“the cause of these visual sense-data,”’ meaning the sense-data 
which I am perceiving while I make the description, I am 
describing it in terms of all of which, substances as well as 
characteristics, I am aware. And so this description may be 


104 SUFFICIENT DESCRIPTION [BK II 


exclusive although it does not contain exclusive descriptions of 
the sense-data. 

102. I propose to distinguish between those exclusive 
descriptions which contain undescribed substances, and those 
which are entirely in terms of characteristics, by calling the 
latter Sufficient Descriptions. 

A sufficient description might consist of a single simple 
quality. For if no substance but one had that quality, the sub- 
stance which had it would be sufficiently described as having it. 
It might consist of a single complex quality. Or it might consist 
of a number of separate qualities, in which case it would itself be 
a single compound quality, which has the other qualities as its 
parts. 

A sufficient description which is not a single simple quality 
may yet be comparatively simple as “the most virtuous of all 
beings.” But it may also be infinitely removed from simplicity, 
for it does not cease to be a sufficient description because no 
mind is capable of grasping it. In some cases, as we shall see 
later in this chapter, such an infinite remove from simplicity 
would destroy the sufficiency of the description by introducing 
@ vicious infinite. But if the description were of the type “A 
has the quality X, the quality Y, the quality Z...” the list of 
qualities required for excluding everything but A might be 
infinite without being vicious. 

A substance may have more than one sufficient description. 
It might, for example, be the case that “the most virtuous of all 
beings,” and “the most powerful of all beings” were descriptions 
of the same person. 

103. Has every substance a sufficient description? There 
are very few cases in which we could know that any particular 
description is a sufficient description of any existent substance!. 
But there are many descriptions such that, if one of them is a 
description of any substance, it will be a sufficient description 
of that substance. Such, for example, is “the most virtuous of 
all beings,” since it can only apply to one substance. But we 
are not certain that it applies to any substance. That virtuous 
beings do exist, indeed, we may perhaps affirm with confidence. 


1 We do know this in the case of the universe. Cp. Section 135. 


CH. xi] SUFFICIENT DESCRIPTION 105 


But it is not absolutely impossible that two beings might be 
more virtuous than any others, and exactly equal to one another 
in virtue. In that case there would be nobody who was the most 
virtuous of all beings. And if we were certain it did describe 
somebody, we should not know whom it described. Even 
supposing that I happened to have met the man who was the 
most virtuous of all beings, I could not know him to be so, 
unless, either by my own investigations or by trustworthy 
report, I knew the limits of the virtue of all other virtuous 
beings. 

Most comparatively simple descriptions which, if applicable 
to anything, would be a sufficient description of it are of this 
type. They are of the form “that which has most (or least) of 
the quality X.” And the difficulties mentioned in the last para- 
graph occur in the case of each of them. 

Descriptions by means of space and time have an appearance 
of being sufficient. “King of England in 1500” might be mis- 
taken for a sufficient description of Henry VII. But if “Eng- 
land” is taken as the proper name of a particular substance, the 
description, though exclusive, will not be sufficient. The only 
other alternative is to take “England” as descriptive—as mean- 
ing a country whose official title is England, or which is habitually 
called by that name. And then we cannot be certain that at 
some time and place in the universe—perhaps in another 
planet—there may not be another country which is called 
England in the same way. And, if this should be so, we shall 
not have got a sufficient description of the country of which 
Henry VII was king, and therefore our description of him will not 
be sufficient. And similar difficulties occur about time; for 1500 
years from the event which starts a calendar is not a sufficient 
description unless we can be sure that no other event which can 
be described in the same way ever took place or will take place. 
To date from the foundation of Rome, for example, would not 
be unambiguous, for we are not certain that in the course of the 
universe several cities of that name may not be founded. 

It may be remarked in passing that many calendars would 
give sufficient descriptions of dates, if the beliefs of those who 
established them were true. Our present reckoning starts from 


106 SUFFICIENT DESCRIPTION [BK II 


an event which those who established the calendar believed to 
be an incarnation of God, and to be the only incarnation of 
Ged in the course of time. If this were true, “1500 years after 
the Incarnation” would be a sufficient description of a date. 
The same would be the case in the Mohammedan calendar, 
since that religion, I conceive, ascribes to its founder a unique 
position in the universe, and dates its calendar from an event in 
his life. 

Moreover, if the same beliefs were true, it would be possible 
to make sufficient descriptions of places. Mecca, Medina, 
Jerusalem and Taif, could be sufficiently described by their 
relations to the life of Mohammed, who could himself be 
sufficiently described by his unique relation to God. And any 
other place could be sufficiently described by its relations to 
these four. 

But if we do not accept any of these views of the unique 
character of certain persons and events, we can get no sufficient 
descriptions by means of space and time. It is true that, if 
time has limits, a date could be sufficiently described by its 
relation to these limits. But, even if time is limited in this way, 
it would be impossible for us, with our present knowledge, to 
know any such sufficient description. 

There are, of course, many fairly simple exclusive descriptions 
by means of space and time. Such, for example, would be a 
description of Henry VII as the King of England in that planet 
in which I am making the description, 419 years before the 
time at which I am making it. But this is not a sufficient 
description, because it does not sufficiently describe the event 
of my making the description, but trusts to my immediate per- 
ception of it. 

104. Thus there are but few cases in which we can know 
that a given description is a sufficient description of any partic- 
ular substance. Are we sure that every substance has a sufficient 
description? Every substance must have an exclusive descrip- 
tion, because no substance can have exactly the same nature as 
any other. But might it not be possible that A could not be 
exclusively described without introducing the fact that A had 
the relation X to B? And this could not, as it stands, enter into 


CH. XI] SUFFICIENT DESCRIPTION 107 


a sufficient description, since it introduces a particular substance, 
while without it nothing could be a sufficient description, since 
every sufficient description must be exclusive. 

But the fact that A had the relation X to B may be 
capable of being stated in such a way that it could enter into 
a sufficient description. It may be the case, to begin with, that 
not only is A the only substance which is in the relation X to 
B, but it is the only substance which is in the relation X to 
anything. In that case we can replace “having the relation X 
to B” by “having the relation X to some substance,” which, on 
this hypothesis, will be equally exclusive, and, not introducing 
@ particular substance, will be sufficient. 

But if other substances than A have the relation X to sub- 
stances other than B, we cannot make this substitution. If, how- 
ever, we can find a sufficient description of B—for example 
“having the qualities P and Q,” we can get a sufficient descrip- 
tion of A by replacing “ baving the relation X to B” by “having 
the relation X to the only substance which has the qualities P 
and Q.” 

If, again, no exclusive description of B can be found which 
does not introduce a particular substance—e.g. “having the 
relation R to C”—a sufficient description of A is still possible. 
This may happen in two ways. Even if certain other substances 
besides A have the relation X to substances other than B, and 
even if other substances besides B have the relation R to other 
substances besides C, it may be the case that no substance 
besides A has the relation X to any substance which has the 
relation R to any substance. In this case we can make our 
description sufficient by replacing “having the relation X to B” 
by “having the relation X to some substance which has the 
relation R to another substance.” 

Or, in the second place, a sufficient description of A will be 
reached if we can find a sufficient description of C—e.g. “having 
the qualities S and 7.” For then we shall have an exclusive 
description of A by including in it “standing in the relation X 
to the only substance which stands in the relation R to the only » 
substance having the qualities S and 7.” And this description 
will be sufficient. 


108 SUFFICIENT DESCRIPTION [BK II 


If, again, C cannot be exclusively described without intro- 
ducing another particular substance—by saying, e.g., that it has 
the relation U to D—the same chances of reaching a sufficient 
description of A will recur. We shall find a sufficient description 
of A whenever either of two things happen—whenever, in the 
series of substances, B, C, D, etc., we reach one which has a 
sufficient description, or whenever the complex relation “having 
the relation X to a substance which has the relation R to a 
substance which has the relation U to a substance which...” 
becomes so rare that nothing but A stands in it to anything. 

105. But supposing that neither of those things ever does 
happen, and that the series of substances involved in the 
exclusive description of A never ceases? Shall we not then have 
a case in which a substance has no sufficient description? 

This case, however, cannot occur because such an infinite 
series would be vicious. By the results in the last chapter, A 
must be dissimilar to all other substances. The possibility of 
this depends on the existence of B, and the existence of B 
depends on its dissimilarity to all other substances. And this 
depends on the existence of C, and this on its dissimilarity to all 
other substances, and so on. If this series is infinite, it is vicious. 
For, starting from the existence of A, each earlier term requires 
all the later terms, and therefore requires that the series should 
be completed, which it cannot be. If, therefore, the series is 
infinite, A cannot be dissimilar to all other substances—cannot, 
in other words, have an exclusive description—and so cannot 
exist. Therefore, if A does exist, the series cannot be infinite. 
And if the series is not infinite, A has a sufficient description. 
Every substance, therefore, must have a sufficient description. 

It is to be noticed that the necessity that a substance should 
have an exclusive description, on which we have based our 
demonstration that it must have a sufficient description, does 
not rest on the ground that, without an exclusive description, no 
one could know it as so to distinguish it from other substances. 
Such an argument would be invalid on three grounds. In the 
first place, there seems no necessity that every substance 
should be capable of being known so as to distinguish it from 
other substances, since they can be different substances without 


CH. XI] SUFFICIENT DESCRIPTION 109 


being known to be different. In the second place, an exclusive 
description may, as we have seen, consist of an infinite number 
of qualities, in which case it could not be known by minds like 
ours. In the third place, a substance when directly perceived 
is known as distinguished from other substances without any 
description of it being required. The necessity that a substance 
should have an exclusive description arises from the fact that 
two substances cannot be completely similar, and that a sub- 
stance which is not completely similar to any other has neces- 
sarily an exclusive description. 


CHAPTER XII 
DETERMINATION 


106. We have considered the relation of substances to their 
characteristics, and the question now arises of the relation of 
the characteristics of a substance to one another. It will be 
sufficient to consider the relations to one another of the qualities 
of a substance, since these will include the qualities of standing 
in its various relations, and thus the relations of relations to 
qualities and to one another will be dealt with indirectly. The 
most obvious point about the relations of the qualities of sub- 
stances to one another is that, when A possesses the qualities 
X and Y, in some cases the proposition that it possesses X 
implies the proposition that it possesses Y, while in some cases 
it does not. 

I should say that Implication is an indefinable relation 
between propositions, and that P implies Q when (1) if I know 
that the relation holds between P and Q, and know P to be 
true, I am justified by this knowledge alone in asserting that Q 
is true, and when (2) if I know that the relation holds between 
P and Q, and know Q to be false, I am justified by this know- 
ledge alone in asserting that P is false+, From this, of-course, 
follows the proposition that Q must be true or P false. 

107. We must distinguish implication from Inference. A 
judgment WN is inferred from a judgment M, when the person 
who makes the judgment believes that the proposition P, 
asserted in the judgment M, implies the proposition Q, asserted 
in the judgment JN, and asserts Q (that is, makes the judgment 
N) for that reason. Thus, in our statement about implication, 
we could substitute “justified by this knowledge alone in in- 
ferring” for “justified by this knowledge alone in asserting.” 

1 The introduction of the knowledge of the relation in the above statement 


does not introduce a vicious circle, because the statement does not profess to 
be a definition of implication, which, as has been said, is indefinable. 


CH. XII] DETERMINATION 111 


But this does not reduce implication to inference, for P 
implies Q when we should be justified in asserting Q to be true 
if we know P to be true, and not when we do assert it for that 
reason. “No man should be enslaved” implies “no black man 
should be enslaved,”’ even if every one believed the first, and 
no one had inferred the second from it. On the other hand, “all 
men should be voters” does not imply “all voters should be 
men,” and would do so none the more, if everyone who believed 
the first had inferred the second from it. 

Implication and inference, then, are not equivalent. Nor 
can implication be defined by means of inference. We have 
said that P implies Q when, if I know that P does imply Q and 
that P is true, I am justified thereby in inferring that Q is true. 
This leaves implication still indefinable. For, in the first place, 
we require the idea of implication to define inference. If a 
judgment M caused a judgment N for any other reason than 
that the proposition stated in the first was held to imply the 
proposition stated in the second, N would not be said to be 
inferred from M. And, in the second place, P implies Q only 
when we are justified in making an inference. And if we ask 
when it happens that we are justified in making an inference, 
the only reply is that we are justified when there is an implica- 
tion. Thus implication is not defined. 

108. Corresponding to implication between propositions, 
there is clearly a relation between characteristics. If it is true 
that, whenever something has the quality X, something has the 
quality Y, this involves that, besides the relation between the 
two propositions “something has the quality X,” and “some- 
thing has the quality Y,” there is a relation between the qualities 
X and Y. I propose to call this relation Intrinsic Determination. 
(I insert “intrinsic” to distinguish it from another sort of 
determination which will be discussed later in this chapter.) 
The quality X will be said to determine intrinsically the quality 
Y whenever the proposition that something has the quality X 
implies the proposition that something has the quality Y. The 
two qualities may be in the same thing or in two different 
things. The occurrence of blueness as a quality of anything 
intrinsically determines the occurrence of spatiality as a quality 


112 DETERMINATION [BK 11 


of the same thing. But if it is a quality of one person to be a 
husband, this determines the occurrence in someone else of the 
quality of being a wife. 

If, on the other hand, the occurrence of X does not intrin- 
sically determine the occurrence of Y, we may say that Y is 
Intrinsically Undetermined by X, or Contingent to X. (This, 
of course, does not imply that X is contingent to Y, which may 
or may not be the case.) 

From the results which we have already reached we can see 
that, in the nature of each substance, there are qualities which 
are connected by the relation of intrinsic determination, and 
also qualities which are connected by the relation of contingency. 
Every substance, for example, has the quality of having qual- 
ities, and the quality of standing in relations. And each of these 
qualities is intrinsically determined by the other. For every- 
thing which has a quality must stand in a relation—its relation 
to that quality. And everything which stands in a relation must 
have a quality—the quality of being a term in that relation. 

On the other hand, since there is more than one substance, 
any substance, A, will have, as we saw in Chapter vu, the 
quality of dissimilarity to every other substance, for example 
to B. It will also have the quality of substantiality. And dis- 
similarity to B is contingent to substantiality, for B itself is a 
substance, while it is not dissimilar to itself. 

Every quality of a substance, therefore, does not intrin- 
sically determine every other. But intrinsic determination is 
not the only sort of determination which is possible. There is 
another kind of determination, which we must now consider. 

109. Let us take X, Y, and Z as representing all the infinite 
number of qualities possessed by some substance A, including 
those which are derivative from the relations in which A stands. 
Each of them may occur in other substances, but, in so far as 
this particular occurrence of them is concerned, they only exist 
as qualities of A. 

If now we enquire what A is, a complete answer must be 
given by giving the nature of A, and this consists of its qualities. 
X, Y, and Z are taken as a complete list of these, and thus the 
nature of A is X, Y, Z. Let us suppose any of the qualities 


CH. XII] DETERMINATION 113 


altered, either by addition or subtraction or substitution, so that 
the complete list would be represented by W, X, Y, Z, or by 
X, Y, or by W, X, Y. Thus the nature of the substance which 
had such qualities would be different from the nature of A. 
Therefore the substance in question could not be A. 

But all that we knew of this particular occurrence of X, Y, 
and Z, of which we are treating, was that they occurred in A. 
And if there should be no A, but something different, B, the 
fact that they would have occurred in A does not give us any 
reason to assert that they would occur in B. Thus, if one of the 
qualities of A were not there, there would be no ground to 
assert that the others would be there. In the different substance 
B, which replaces A}, the qualities X and Y might occur, for 
anything we know to the contrary, in spite of the absence of Z 
or of the presence of W. But this is only possible in the same 
way in which S and T, U and J, or any other qualities (between 
which there was no intrinsic incompatibility) could occur. If 
any part of the nature of A goes, the nature of A as a whole 
goes. The substance which replaces A might have some qualities 
in common with A, just as any other substance might have 
qualities in common with A. But we have no right to subtract 
Z, and then say “because we have only subtracted Z, and 
because there is no intrinsic determination of Z by X and Y, 
therefore X and Y remain.” By subtracting Z, we have 
destroyed A, and X and Y were here only as parts of the nature 
of A. 

No quality of a substance, therefore, could be different while 
leaving the others unchanged, and no quality of a substance is 
completely contingent to any of its other qualities. We may 
thus say that every quality of a substance will determine every 
other quality of that substance, but the determination will be 
of a very different kind from the intrinsic determination which 
we have already considered. In the first place, when one quality 


1 I do not mean by this that the absence of A would imply the existence of 
B. This has not been proved, and could only be considered at a later stage. 
All that is meant is that we were invited to consider the hypothesis that some 
qualities of A remained the same, while others were altered, and that the con- 
sequences of this, as pointed out above, would be that they would no longer be 
qualities of A, but of some other substance. 


114 DETERMINATION [BK II 


intrinsically determines another, the proposition that the first 
occurs implies the proposition that the second occurs, but there 
is no implication in this new sort of determination. We are not 
entitled to infer the occurrence of the determined from that of 
the determinant, unless the determination is intrinsic. 

Secondly, intrinsic determination is universal. Whenever 
the one quality occurs the other will occur. But the second sort 
of determination only links one particular occurrence of one 
quality with one particular occurrence of the other. 

Thirdly, since every quality of any substance determines all 
the others in this way, it is obvious that all such determination 
will be reciprocal, which is not the case with all intrinsic deter- 
mination. 

And fourthly, while intrinsic determination can exist 
between two qualities of different substances, we have so far 
only shown the second sort of determination to take place 
between qualities of the same substance, though this result will 
be extended in the next Book. 

It will be convenient to have a separate name for this second 
species of determination, but it is not very easy to find one. We 
may perhaps call it, without impropriety, Extrinsic Determina- 
tion, since it holds, not between two qualities as such, but 
between two qualities in virtue of the relation in which they 
stand to the same substance. 

Since all qualities of a substance extrinsically determine 
one another, it follows that all characteristics of a substance 
intrinsically determine one another. For if any relationship in 
which a substance stands were different from what it is, then 
one of its qualities—the quality of standing in that relationship 
—would be different from what it is. 

110. We must now consider some objections which can be 
raised to the results we have reached. In the first place, it may 
be said that it is notorious that some characteristics of a sub- 
stance can often be changed, and often are changed, without 
changing the substance, or the other characteristics. 

But the change of which we have been speaking is not a 
change in time which actually occurs, but a hypothetical 
change, which, if it did occur, would have made a substance 


CH. XII] DETERMINATION 115 


different from what it actually is, and which obviously, there- 
fore, has not occurred. Of course, if change in time is real at all, 
the same substance can be hot on Sunday and cold on Monday, 
and be a poker on both days. But this does not affect the 
question which concerns us here—the question whether, if it 
had not been, as it was, hot on Sunday, it could have been 
the same substance as the one which actually was hot on 
Sunday. — 

In the second place it may be objected that the quality, for 
example, which is possessed by Snowdon of being a mountain 
cannot determine its quality of being to-day M feet high. Fora 
substance which to-day was M — 1 feet high might be a mountain, 
and consequently, it is said, we may be confident that Snowdon, 
if to-day it were M —1 feet high, would be a mountain. 

It is, of course, quite true that a substance which was to-day 
M—1 feet high could be a mountain. But to argue from this 
that Snowdon would be a mountain if it were to-day a foot 
shorter than it is, would be to confuse intrinsic and extrinsic 
determination. That anything should be a mountain does not 
imply that it is exactly the present height of Snowdon. And, 
therefore, if the present Snowdon, with its present height, did 
not exist, there might be a mountain which possessed all the 
qualities of Snowdon (including its position in space and time) 
with the exception of its exact height and those qualities which 
are intrinsically determined by its exact height. And thus, no 
doubt, Snowdon’s quality of being a mountain does not stand 
to its quality of being M feet high in the same relation as it 
stands to its quality of being spatial. For whatever is not 
spatial could not be a mountain. 

But the difference is only that to be a mountain does intrin- 
sically determine being spatial, while it does not intrinsically 
determine being M feet high. And this leaves our point undis- 
turbed—that the two qualities of Snowdon, being a mountain 
and being M feet high, do extrinsically determine one another. 
For anything which had not the quality of being to-day M feet 
high would not be the substance which we call Snowdon. And 
it is therefore incorrect to argue that any such substance would 
have the quality of being a mountain because Snowdon has such 


116 DETERMINATION [BK II 


a quality, and because that quality does not involve Snowdon’s 
exact height. 

I have purposely taken an example where the original sub- 
stance has a proper name, as in such cases there is a peculiarity 
which has a tendency to obscure the issue unless it is realized. 
A mountain which differed from the actual Snowdon only in 
being a foot shorter, and in whatever was implied by that, 
would resemble it so closely in every characteristic in which we 
were interested, that we should certainly give it the name of 
Snowdon. And thus we might be led to suppose that the actual 
and the hypothetical Snowdon were the same substance, and 
that the hypothesis was only that this substance had different 
qualities from those it does have. But this would be wrong. 
A substance which had to-day a different height from that of 
the actual Snowdon could not be the same substance, since it 
would have a different nature. 

In the third place, it may be objected that, if there were not 
the present Snowdon, we might have reason to believe that 
there would be a mountain with most of the important qualities 
of the actual Snowdon, though without its present height, 
because the existence of other substances, in which our hypo- 
thesis makes no change, might intrinsically determine the exist- 
ence of such a mountain. 

We cannot deal with this objection at present, because we 
have not yet arrived at the consideration of the relations in 
which any substance stands to any other substances in the 
universe, When we do so, it will be seen that the objection is 
not tenable}. 

111. In the fourth place, objections may be raised which 
depend on the adoption of the conception of the Thing-in-itself, 
in the Hegelian sense of the term. It is held that the substance 
has an individuality apart and distinct from its nature, and 
that therefore a substance could have been the same substance 
even if it had had a different nature. 

This, it will be seen, is closely analogous to an objection to 
our doctrine of the dissimilarity of the diverse, which we have 
discussed earlier®. There it was argued that the individuality of 


1 Op. Section 139. 2 Section 95. 


CH. x11] DETERMINATION 117 


two substances would permit them to be different substances, 
though each had the séme nature. Here it is argued that the 
individuality of a substance would allow it to be the same sub- 
stance, even if it had had a different nature. 

And, if it could be the same substance, then the removal of 
the quality Z would not involve that A should cease to be A. 
And consequently the removal of Z would have no effect on 
the presence of X or Y, unless they are intrinsically deter- 
mined by Z. Otherwise, since our hypothesis has not removed 
them, they will remain qualities of A. Our only ground for 
supposing that there was no reason that they should remain if 
Z were removed, was that the removal of Z involved the removal 
of A. And this, it is said, we have now seen not to be the case. 

112. Our answer to this argument will run on the same 
lines as our answer to the argument against the dissimilarity of 
the diverse. When we try to explain what we mean by this 
distinct aspect of the substance—indeed, when we assert that 
it exists—we can only do so by asserting qualities of the sub- 
stance. And these qualities are part of the nature of the sub- 
stance, not something apart and distinct from that nature. It 
is therefore impossible to distinguish the substance from its 
qualities in such a way that the substance would be the same 
if its nature had been different. 

We saw, when we considered the previous argument, that 
an attempt was made to support it by the fact that such a 
judgment as “this is near that” may have a definite meaning. 
Such a judgment certainly does not gain a definite meaning by 
its terms being so precisely described that each description 
could apply only to one thing in the universe. Indeed “this” 
and “that” are each applicable to every object in the universe. 
And yet there is no ambiguity for me in such a judgment, if I 
am perceiving the substances which I designate as “this” and 
“that,” or if I have perceived them and now remember them. 
Hence it is argued that there must be in each substance an 
individuality which is independent of its qualities, and which is 
revealed to us when we perceive the substance—though, of 
course, it would be equally there whether the substance were 
perceived or not. 


118 DETERMINATION [BK It 


But, as we saw before, this argument is invalid. No doubt 
I can have unambiguous knowledge 6f A—knowledge which 
enables me to identify it—either by perception or by description. 
And in the first case I shall have unambiguous knowledge of A 
which is not dependent on my knowledge of A’s qualities, just 
as in the second case I shall have unambiguous knowledge of A 
which is not dependent on my acquaintance with A. But the 
fact that I can know the substance independently of its qualities 
does not prove that its identity is independent of its 
qualities, so that it could be the same substance if its qualities 
were different. 

The view that the individuality of the substance must be 
independent of any quality, which is such that the substance 
can be unambiguously known without knowing the quality, 
leads, as we have seen, to an absurdity. For the qualities, 
without knowing which I can unambiguously know a substance 
by perception, include the quality “having an individuality 
independent of any quality.” Therefore, if this view were true, 
the substance would have an individuality independent of any 
quality which would, among others, be independent of its 
possession of the quality “having an individuality independent 
of any quality.” And this is absurd. 

To avoid this, it might be admitted that the substance 
would not have such an independent individuality unless it 
possessed the qualities which are involved in this—substanti- 
ality, the possession of an individuality independent of any 
quality, and the consequent possibility of being the same sub- 
stance, even if its qualities had been different. But it might 
still be maintained that it has an individuality which, while 
dependent on some of its qualities, is not entirely dependent 
on its qualities, and that this individuality might be the same 
if the qualities of the substance had been different. But this 
admission destroys the force of the argument, as it did in 
Section 95. For I can perceive a substance without knowing 
that it has substantiality, or possesses individuality independent 
of any quality, or has the possibility of being the same 
substance with different qualities. And if, nevertheless, its 
individuality is not independent of those qualities, we cannot 


CH. xu] DETERMINATION 119 


argue that its individuality is independent of any other qualities 
merely on the ground that I can perceive the substance without 
knowing those other qualities. 

113. We are thus, I submit, entitled to accept the validity 
of extrinsic determination. And, in accepting it, we have not 
merely decided that, if any characteristic of a substance should 
be altered, its nature will be altered, and that this nature, 
therefore, would belong to another substance, and not to the 
first. There is also the further result that all the other character- 
istics are only given, in the original case, as characteristics of 
the first substance; and since that substance, if the new hypo- 
thesis is true, does not exist, there is no reason to suppose that 
those other characteristics would remain. The new substance, 
which the new hypothesis supposes, might have these char- 
acteristics, but there is no reason to suppose that it will. Bisa 
different substance from A. We know of B, by the hypothesis, 
that it has not the quality Z. But as to any other quality Y, 
we know no more than the abstract possibility that it may have 
it—unless the absence of Z intrinsically determines the absence 
of Y—and that it may not have it—unless the absence of Z 
intrinsically determines the presence of Y. 

This result makes by itself but little difference to our view 
of the reality round us, since it still involves the consideration 
of the substance apart from all others, and thus still remains 
more abstract than our ordinary primd facie view. But the 
conclusion we have reached here will have considerable signifi- 
cance when we come to the consideration of all substances taken 
together. | 


CHAPTER XIII 
MANIFESTATION 


114. We now pass to a different view of the relation which 
exists between the characteristics of a substance. We have 
seen that the characteristics of each substance are mutually 
dependent—a dependence whieh is due to the fact that a sub- 
stance is a real unity, and that its nature, which is made up of 
all its qualities, including those derived from relations, is also a 
real unity. 

But we have so far regarded the unity of this nature as what 
may be called a Compound Unity—a unity which is constituted 
by its differentiations. (The qualities of a substance, though, 
according to our definition of differentiation, they are not 
differentiations of the substance, are differentiations of the 
nature of the substance.) Put together the qualities X, Y, 
Z, and the rest, and they form the nature of A. That nature is 
a real unity, and so the qualities of A are not indifferent to 
each other, but mutually dependent. But the most appropriate 
expression of this sort of interdependence is negative. The 
qualities are so connected that, if oneissupposed to be withdrawn, 
the other cannot be taken as remaining. 

But the relation between the nature of the substance as a 
whole and the particular qualities can be expressed just as well 
in another manner which is complementary to this. In all such 
relations, the individual substance to which the quality belongs 
is as essential as the particular quality which belongs to it, and 
the nature of that substance is as much a unity as it is a plurality. 
It is as legitimate, therefore, to take as our starting point that 
nature as a unity, as it is to take as our starting point the 
plurality of qualities. We can say just as correctly that the 
unity of the nature of A is differentiated into the qualities. X, 
Y, and Z (taking these to represent the whole number of the 


CH. XII] MANIFESTATION 121 


qualities) as we can say that the qualities X, Y, and Z are 
united into the nature of A. 

I propose to express this by saying that the nature of the 
substance is manifested in the qualities of the substance, and 
that the nature of the substance is not only a Unity of Com- 
position, but also a Unity of Manifestation. By Manifestation 
I mean nothing more than the relation between a whole and its 
parts, when the emphasis is placed on the unity of the whole 
rather than the plurality of the parts, so that the parts are 
regarded as due to the differentiation of the whole rather than 
the whole as due to the union of the parts. Manifestation is 
often used to mean, not only this, but also more than this, but 
IT sball endeavour to show later, in discussing Organic Unity, 
that the increased significance thus attributed to it has no 
place in the general nature of existence, and for this reason 
I think it best to use the term to denote the simpler con- 
ception which does form a part of the general nature of 
existence. 

Manifestation is a relation of a whole and its parts. We must 
say, therefore, that the qualities are a manifestation of the 
nature of the substance, and not of the substance itself. We 
shall see when we have reached the conception of organic unity 
that the substance itself is manifested in the substances which 
are its parts. 

115. It must be noticed that the recognition of the qualities 
as manifestations of the nature of the substance does not dis- 
place our previous view that the nature of the substance is 
compounded of the qualities. It is no more true that the nature 
of the substance is a unity of manifestation than that it is a 
unity of composition. Our advance consists, not in passing 
from one to the otber, but in passing from a position in which 
only one is recognized as valid to a position where both are 
recognized. This is true with regard to all the conceptions which 
we reach in the course of our enquiry, and not only of those two. 
But it is desirable to emphasize it here because it has so often 
been maintained that unity of manifestation gives a truer view 
of existence than unity of composition. (As this is chiefly main- 
tained with regard to the manifestation of a substance in its 


E 


122 MANIFESTATION [BK II 


parts, it will be well to postpone considering it till we come to 
consider organic unity.) 

116. It must also be noticed that any attempt to state the 
nature which is manifested in the qualities X, Y, and Z (which 
we are taking as a complete list) can only consist in stating that 
it is a nature which has as parts of its manifestation one or 
more of those very qualities X, Y, and Z. We can, indeed, say 
of it that it is the complete nature of a substance, and that it is 
a unity of qualities. But this would not distinguish the nature 
of one substance from the nature of another. And if we were to 
try to distinguish it by saying that it is the nature of the sub- 
stance A, we do not distinguish it unless we so describe A as to 
distinguish it from all other substances. But this can only be 
done by ascribing to it one or more qualities and thus we should 
come round once more to describing the nature of A by means 
of the qualities in which that nature is manifested. 

Thus we must not look to the nature as a unity with the 
hope of explaining the qualities which manifest it. The mani- 
festation is only one way of stating the fact that these are the 
qualities of A. 

This looks at first sight as if the two ways of stating the 
relation of the nature of a substance to its component qualities 
were not, after all. equally valid. If we only know the unity by 
knowing the plurality of qualities, while we know each of the 
qualities without knowing the unity, does not this make the 
qualities more fundamental than the unity? And in that case 
is it not more expressive of their true relation to regard the 
unity as compounded of the qualities than to regard it as mani- 
festing itself in the qualities? 

But this is erroneous. The unity is as essential as the plurality. 
Qualities can only occur as qualities of something, and the sub- 
stance is as essential to its qualities as they are to it. The sub- 
stance would not be what it is without these qualities, but, on 
the other hand, this particular occurrence of the quality would 
not take place unless it were a quality of this substance. And 
as the unity which binds the qualities in one nature is due to 
their being qualities of one substance, the unity of the nature 
is as essential as the plurality of qualities. 


CH. X11] MANIFESTATION 123 


The conception of manifestation, though valid, is not by 
itself of particular fertility. It does not change our view of the 
universe very much. But it is an essential step to the conception 
of organic unity, the use of which, as we shall see, does make a 
considerable difference to our view of the universe. 

This concludes our treatment of individual substances. In 
the next Book we shall pass to the relations in which various 
substances stand to one another. 


o 


/ } 

Sole, ee! a Kir oe aT Gin a 
a ae hey To aa wet 
‘Ey pi ely -: rer 

Pale he oy plete 


5 


a < Si -2t Aek _ 
—— ; - in Tex 
; oi igh wheal Rae i) aa, 
f ea & i Tea hs 
ees 2 *: — ss a , 
* =~ - id =, ey 7 Cay 
; awe p Stee thgee oy eS 
ru. ° ta 
- 7 7 ’ 
} d 5 ee Lea 
j iS Pay, i. i MOTE Sos at 
So ; Sve ies ee are 
* fe Sts fw bese wong 
Pec oe & > POS? 
F : ; 
' ‘is =e ‘cz abi WAG. 
PSE SESS Mi EA e Ning Taal ilar 
a oe x ~ TSS 
ae 3 
M4 ia fe an =~ aml Galea i 
% are alae OS nh Sea Oe i 
“e : 
; ei U Wewnly epee 
een, eee *~ 
, ¢ : ah dae ae) 2d Sie) we bate. 


KN epee an) hel Mls a ru ia te ‘ioe =, 
Si i ae werd Jg¢ ie’ 
A Det EL teytie> 2 


— : Cie -_ eens 1 Sealab ai tr 


BOOK III 
GROUPS 


CHAPTER XIV 
SIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES 


117. We must now proceed to a further consideration of 
the relations which substances bear to one another. In the last 
Book we learned that there was a plurality of substances, that 
they stood in relations to one another, that every substance 
was dissimilar from every other substance, and that every sub- 
stance could (ideally, though not always for human knowledge) 
be so described in general terms that the description would be 
inapplicable to any other substance. What other relations can 
we determine as holding between them? 

All substances are dissimilar. No two can have the same 
nature. But the nature of any substance can be analyzed into 
many qualities. Now there is nothing to prevent the nature of 
A being partially identical with the nature of B, so that they 
have some qualities in common. In this case A and B them- 
selves will be similar as well as dissimilar. And we can see, not 
only that this is possible, but that it is actual. For the qualities, 
for example, of substantiality, existence, and the possession of 
qualities, are qualities which belong to more substances than 
one. And, if there are more than two substances, as we shall 
see later that there are, the quality of dissimilarity to A will be 
common to at least two substances, since it belongs to every 
substance but A. 

118. A quality, then, may be common to several substances, 
and we know that some of them are. But the plurality of the 
substances connected with a quality is not completely analogous 
to the plurality of qualities connected with a substance. For we 
know that every substance has a plurality of qualities—and, 
indeed, an infinite number of qualities. It is true that all those 
qualities, which constitute the nature of the substance may 
also be taken as a single quality, but then that quality is a 
compound quality which contains an infinite number of parts. 


128 SIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES [BK II 


On the other hand, while we know that some qualities do 
belong to more than one substance, we do not know that this 
is the case with all qualities. There are, to begin with, qualities 
which do not belong to any substance—such as that of being 
President of the Commonwealth of England in 1919. Then, as 
we have just said, the nature of each substance is one single 
quality, and we know that it can belong to no other substance. 
But even with qualities which, unlike these last, are either simple 
or only finitely compound or complex, we do not know of each 
of them that it applies to more than one substance, even if it 
does apply to one. 

And, further, in the case of some such qualities we know 
that they cannot apply to more than one substance. We do not, 
I think, know this of any simple qualities. But it might never- 
theless be true of them. I do not see that we can be certain 
that there is no simple quality which applies to one substance, 
and to one substance only. 

And, in the case of finitely compound and complex qualities, 
we do know of many which could not apply to more than one 
substance. We shall see in Chapter xvi that the quality of 
being a universe is one which, though not simple, is not infinitely 
compound or complex; and we shall also see that it does apply 
to one existent substance. and that it cannot apply to more 
than one. Again “the most virtuous of all dogs” is a quality 
which is not infinitely compound or complex, and which ob- 
viously cannot apply to more than one substance, though. it 
might apply to none, if dogs should not be susceptible of virtue, 
or if two equally virtuous dogs should excel all others in that 
quality. 

119. Some substances, then, are similar to some others. 
And the same considerations which have proved this will also 
prove that every substance is similar to every other substance. 
For the qualities of substantiality, existence, and the possession 
of qualities are common to all substances, and this is sufficient 
to prove that every substance is similar to every other sub- 
stance. 

And we can also see that there are qualities which are 
common to two substances, but not to all. Such (if there are 


CH. XIV] SIMILARITY OF SUBSTANCES 129 


more than two substances) is “dissimilar to A,” where A is an 
existent substance. What can we say about such similarities, 
which are confined to some substances only? This question 
leads us to the consideration of Groups. 

+ This quality can be expressed entirely in general terms by substituting 


for “A” the equivalent phrase “a substance with the qualities X, Y, and Z,” 
where X, Y, and Z form a sufficient description of A. 


CHAPTER XV 
GROUPS 


120. Bya Group I mean any collection formed of substances, 
or of collections of substances, or of both. The substances or 
collections which form the collection are called Members of the 
Group. 

A group must be distinguished from a Class. A class is 
determined by a class-concept. This concept consists of one or 
more qualities, and everything which possesses these qualities 
is a member of that class. Thus the quality “to be a member of 
the class P,”’ can be defined, the definition being “to possess the 
qualities X, Y, and Z.” And by means of this definition we can 
determine whether any particular thing is a member of the 
class. But the members of a group are determined by denota- 
tion. LZ is the group which consists of A, B, and C. Thus we 
cannot determine by a definition what are the members of a 
particular group. It is true that the quality of being a member 
of L may be defined as the quality of possessing either the 
qualities RST, or the qualities UVW, or the qualities XYZ, 
where these qualities form sufficient descriptions of A, B, and C 
respectively. But we cannot know this definition until we know 
what the members of the group are, and-therefore we cannot 
determine what they are by means of this definition!. 

The fact that a group is not determined by a definition may 
be easily overlooked. For, as we shall see, for every group there 
are certain qualities which belong to every member of the 
group, and to nothing outside it. And it might be supposed 
that these qualities defined the quality “to be a member of the 
group.” But this would be a mistake. The substances do not 
belong to the group because they have qualities in common, 

1 Another distinction is that a group, by our definition, must consist either 


of substances or of collections of substances, while there can be classes, not only 
of substances and collections of substances, but also of qualities and relations. 


CH. Xv] GROUPS 131 


but because this particular group is the group which consists 
of those particular substances. And, indeed, we shall see that 
the only qualities of which we are sure that they are found in 
every member of the group, and in nothing outside the group, 
are qualities which depend on the inclusion of particular sub- 
stances in the group, and could not therefore be used to deter- 
mine what substances are included in it. 

121. The difference between groups and classes produces 
several important consequences. It has been maintained, in 
the first place, that it is possible that a class should contain no 
members—that, for example, the Presidents of the Common- 
wealth of England in 1919 are a class. And, in the same way, 
it has been maintained that it is possible that a class should 
contain only one member—that, for example, the sovereigns of 
the United Kingdom in 1919 are a class. But a group is only 
determined by the members it contains, and it is therefore 
impossible that it should be without members. And, since a 
group has been defined as a collection of members, it must have 
more than one. 

Secondly, certain criticisms have been made of the con- 
ception of classes, on the ground of the difficulties which arise 
about classes which are members of themselves. No such 
criticisms can apply to the conception of groups, since it is 
clear that no group can be a member of itself. A group L is 
constituted of A, B, and C. Whatever A, B, and C may be, it is 
clear that none of them can be UL, for L is all three of them. It 
is true, as we have seen, that a group may be constituted of 
members of which one or more are groups. C, for example, may 
be itself a group. But it cannot be the group L, for then C 
would be identical with the group of itself with A and B, which 
is impossible. And, again, L may be grouped with A, B, and C. 
But this group, M, with its four members, will not be the same 
group as L, which is part of it. 

Thirdly, the content of two different. classes may be co- 
extensive. Cambridge cclleges in which, in the year 1919, the 
Headship is not in the gift of the Fellows are a class. Cambridge 
colleges founded between the years 1515 and 1550 are another 
class. Each class contains only the same two members— 


132 GROUPS [BK III 


Mapdalene College and Trinity College. But the classes are 
different. The two colleges, on the other hand, form only one 
group, for there can be only one group with one set of members. 

It is obvious that, whenever a class has more than one 
member, its members form a group—though, as has just been 
said, it may be the same group in the case of many different 
classes. The question whether the members of every group form 
at least one class will be discussed in Chapter xvu1. 

The members of a group may be so linked together as to be 
the members of some system of relations. And they may be 
linked so as to be members of more than one such system. A 
and B may be husband and wife, and C and D their son and 
daughter. And, on a particular day, A and ( may be partners 
at whist against B and D. Here then are two separate systems 
of relations, each of which unites each of the four to the other 
three. But, however many such systems of relations hold 
between them, they form only one group. 

122. Itis to be noticed that, according to our definition, any 
combination of substances or groups is a group. Groups vary 
much, no doubt, in their importance to us, and in the utility of 
contemplating them. The group of the people of England, for 
example, or of the Presidents of the United States, or of all 
elephants, are much more important, and much more useful to 
contemplate, than the group formed of the table at which I am 
writing, the oldest rabbit now in Australia, and the last medicine 
taken by Lewis XV. And yet the latter is just as truly a group. 
All three members of it are substances?. They can be taken as 
some sort of unity—this is proved by the fact that it is true 
that there are three of them, for if they were not united together 
and separated from all other things they would not be three. 
It is not each of them which is three, but all together, and 


1 Mr Russell would treat these two classes as the same class. (“We wish 
classes to be such that no two distinct classes have exactly the same members.” 
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, p. 184.) Since Mr Russell adopts this 
usage in dealing with mathematics, it is doubtless the best for his purpose. But 
I do not think it is the common usage, and it seems to me not to be convenient 
for philosophy. 

* T.e. they are substances if they exist, and, primd facie, they do exist. It 
is possible that we may hereafter reach the conclusion that one or more of them 
do not exist. 


cH. xv] GROUPS 133 


therefore that they are three proves that they are united. And 
if they were not separated from all otlrer things, the number 
would not be only three. (If, for example, they were not 
separated from Westminster Abbey, the number would not be 
less than four.) And so they are a group. 

There would, I think, be a tendency to admit that these 
three substances could be taken as a group by any observer who 
was led to contemplate them together, but to deny that, apart 
from such observation, it was a group. Such a group as the 
people of England might be admitted to exist objectively. But 
of a fantastic group, such as that given above, it might be said 
that it did not exist independently, as the substances which 
compose it do, but only if and when observed. 

This, however, is mistaken. The fact that the table, the 
rabbit, and the medicine are three substances is not dependent 
on their being observed as three. If no one ever thought of 
them together, no one would ever know that they were three 
substances, but they would be three substances all the same. 
And, as we have seen, the fact that they are three proves that 
they are a group. 

I have spoken above of the groups of the people of England, 
of all elephants, and so on. But “the people of England” and 
“all elephants” are names of classes, not of groups. Their con- 
tent can be determined by definition. The accurate expression 
of what I meant would have been, for example, “that group 
which has as members all those substances, and only those, 
which fall within the class of elephants.” But this expression 
would have been inconveniently long. And even this might 
have been mistaken for an attempt at a definition, though it is 
really a description of the group, based upon its denotation. 

123. We must distinguish between the members of a group 
and the parts of a group. If we take the group of all the counties 
in Great Britain, neither England nor Whitechapel are members 
of the group, but they are parts, of which the group is the whcle?. 
All members of a group are also parts of it. And, in addition to 
these, there are also parts which are either parts of members, 


1 The relation of Whole and Part appears to me to be ultimate and inde- 
finable. 


134 GROUPS [BK II 


such as Whitechapel, or groups of members, such as England!. 
And tbere are also parts which overlap different members, such 
as the diocese of Ely. 

The relation of part to whole is, of course, transitive. If A 
is a part of B, and B a part of C, then A is a part of C. But 
the relation of member to group is not transitive. If L is a 
member of the group M, and is itself a group of which A is 
a member, then A is not a member of M, though it is a part 
of M. 

124. It is common to say that a whole consists of all its 
parts. But this is not strictly accurate. Great Britain, for 
example, consists of England, Scotland, and Wales. And it 
does not consist of anything except England, Scotland, and 
Wales. But these are not all the parts of Great Britain, for 
Surrey is also a part of it. 

We require a further conception—the conception of what I 
propose to call a Set of Parts. A Set of Parts of any whole is 
any collection of its parts which together make up the whole, 
and do not more than make it up, so that the whole would not 
be made up if any of those parts, or of their parts, should be 
subtracted?. Thus England, Scotland, and Wales are a set of 
parts of Great Britain. So are all the counties in Great Britain. 
And so are England, Scotland, and the counties within Wales. 
But Scotland and Wales are not a set of parts of Great Britain, 
for they do not make up the whole. Nor are England, Scotland, 
Wales, and Surrey, for the whole would still be made up if 
Surrey were subtracted. Nor are England, Wales, and the dis- 
trict north of York, since the whole would still be made up if 
that part of the district north of York which lies south of the 
border were subtracted. One whole can thus have many sets 
of parts, and every whole will have more than one set of parts, 


1 Such a group of members may be conveniently termed a Sub-group of the 
original group. 

2 Cp. Dr Whitehead’s definition of the composition of a sense-object. (The 
Organisation of Thought, p. 159. “Call two sense-objects ‘separated’ if there is 
no third sense-object which is a part of both of them. Then an object A is com- 
posed of the two objects B and C, if (1) B and C are both. parts of A, (2) B and 
C are separated, and (3) there is no part of A which is separated both from B 
and from C.’’) 


(CH, Xv] GROUPS 135 


with the exception of those wholes which consist of two simple 
and indivisible parts?. 

The relation between a whole and its set of parts is transitive. 
If England, Scotland, and Wales are a set of parts of Great 
Britain, and if one collection of counties is a set of parts of 
England, a second is a set of parts of Scotland, and a third of 
Wales, then the three aggregates taken together will be a set of 
parts of Great Britain. 

The members of a group are a set of parts of that group. 
For when they are taken together, they make up the group, 
and if any of them, or any of their parts, were subtracted, the 
group would not be made up. 

125. A group has, besides members and parts, something 
which I propose to call Content. By Content I mean that 
plurality which is identical in the different sets of parts of a 
group. England, Scotland, and Wales are one set of parts of 
Great Britain, the counties are another, the parishes and extra- 
parochial places are another. Not only are they separate sets of 
parts, but, in the case of these three sets, no part which is to be 
found in one set is to be found in either of the others. And yet 
we realize that there is a certain identity between them so that 
in taking the set of counties and the set of parishes we are not 
taking two realities, but the same reality over again. It is this 
that I mean by Content?. 

Two groups can have the same content. For the group 
whose members are the counties of Great Britain, and the 
group whose members are the parishes and extra-parochial 
places of Great Britain, are different groups, since they have 
not the same members. Two groups will have the same content 
if there is no part of the one which is not also a part of the other. 
And we shall see in the next Chapter® that in certain cases they 


1 Thus a compound idea which consisted of two simple ideas would only 
have one set of parts. But, as.we shall see in Chapter xxu, there are no simple 
and indivisible substances. Every group, therefore, will have more than one 
set of parts, and, indeed, will have an infinite number of such sets. 

2 If a group consisted of two simple and indivisible members, it would have 
only one set of parts, and its content would not be distinguishable from that set. 
But, as was said in the last note, we shall see that there are no simple substances, 
so that this case is impossible for substances. 

3 Section 128. 


136 GROUPS [BK III 


may have the same content even if there is a part of the one 
which is not a part of the other. They will have completely 
different contents if there is no part of the one which is a part 
of the other. In all other cases they will have partially identical 
contents. 

126. Can a group be formed of two members, one of which 
is a part of the other? It seems clear that it can. It is true that, 
since all the content is taken in that substance which is the 
whole, we add no additional content if we repeat part of it a 
second time. But in spite of the partial identity of content, 
there are distinct groups. The Kitchen Committee of the House 
of Commons is a group which is a part of the group of members 
of the House of Commons, since no one is in the Committee 
who is not also in the House. But they are distinct groups, 
which have different qualities. The members of the House group 
form a body which can vote taxes, which is not the case with 
the members cf the Committee group. The members of the 
Committee group form a body elected by the House, which is 
not the case with the members of the House group. And, since 
they are distinct groups, there is a further group of which they 
are the members. 

We may call such groups Repeating Groups, since they 
repeat part of the content. The number of such groups js infinite. 
For we saw in Chapter vit that there cannot be less than two 
substances. And if there are two substances, A and B, there 
will be a group L, of which A and B are the members. And 
then there will be another group M, of which the members are 
A, B, and L, and so on endlessly. 

As we pursue this infinite series, the groups soon become, in 
most cases, of very little practical importance. There may be 
some utility in contemplating the group which consists of the 
House of Commons and the Kitchen Committee, for, as the only 
two bodies having authority over certain matters, it may often 
be worth while to contemplate them together. But the group 
which has this group and the Kitchen Committee as its members 
could be of no practical importance. And the groups further 
on in the series would be, if it were possible, even less important. 
But things which are unimportant are none the less real. 


CH. xv] GROUPS 137 


A repeating group will have some sets of parts, each of which 
will contain the same part more than once. If the group L has 
A and B as its members, and the group M has L and A as its 
members, then A and B will be a set of parts of L, and Z and 
A will be a set of parts of M. Since the relation between a 
whole and a set of its parts is transitive, M will have a set of 
parts consisting of A, B, and A. These together make up M, 
and do not more than make it up, for if either B or either of the 
two occurrences of A was withdrawn, M would not be made up. 
It is only in a repeating group that one part can occur more 
than once in the same set. 


CHAPTER XVI 
COMPOUND SUBSTANCES 


127. Every group has qualities and stands in relations. We 
saw, in Chapter xiv, that there are certain qualities which all 
groups have in common. And it is obvious that some groups, 
at any rate, have qualities and stand in relations peculiar to 
themselves. The group whose members are all the Frenchmen 
living in 1919 has the qualities of being a nation, of being a 
republic, and so on. And it stands in certain relationships of 
similarity and dissimilarity, and in certain causal relations, to 
the group whose members are all the Frenchmen living in 1899. 
Since a group has qualities and stands in relations, and is not 
itself a quality or a relation, it is a substance. 

Substances are parts of groups. Some substances, therefore, 
have substances for their parts. We may call a substance which 
has substances for its parts a Compound Substance. Our present 
position, then, is that some substances at least are compound. We 
shall see reason later to hold that all substances are compound. 

128. Every group, then, is a substance, but is every 
different group a different substance? The group of the counties 
of Great Britain and the group of the parishes of Great Britain 
are different groups. But, as we have seen, they have the same 
content. Shall we say that they are different substances 
because they are different groups, or the same substance 
because they have the same content? j 

It seems clear to me that we ought to say that they are the 
same substance. There is only one difference between them— 
of two sets of parts, which they both have, one set is the set of 
members of one group, and the other is the set of members of 
the other group. This difference only applies to their nature as 
groups, and does not go beyond it; and, while it certainly 
prevents their being one group, does not affect the question 
whether they are one substance. On the other hand, the identity 


CH. Xv] COMPOUND SUBSTANCES 139 


of the substance does seem to be bound up with the identity of 
content. 

Nor is there any difficulty in one substance being several 
groups. “To be the group whose members are X and Y” isa 
quality. “To be the group whose members are 7, U, V, and 
W” is another quality. Every substance has many qualities, 
and there is no reason why it should not have both. these, if 
the content of X and Y is identical with the content cf 7, U, 
V, and W. 

A compound substance, then, will be as many groups as it 
has sets of parts, since each of its sets of parts will be the set of 
members of a group. It will not have any set of parts of which 
it can be said that it is the set of members of the substance. 
For one set of parts can only be distinguished from the other 
sets, as being the set of members, by reference to a particular 
group. And a substance is not more specially any one of these 
groups than it is any of the others. 

And, further, every compound substance is also an infinite 
number of repeating groups. For a compound substance has 
two or more substances as its parts. And, as we saw in the last 
Chapter!, any group of two or more substances generates an 
infinite series of repeating groups. And, as all these repeating 
groups have the same content as the non-repeating group which 
generates them, they will be all identical with the same com- 
pound substance. 

It was mentioned in the last Chapter? that in certain cases 
two groups will have the same content, although there is a part 
of the one which is not a part of the other. If, for example, L 
has A and B as members, M has L and A as members, and N 
has M and A, then LZ and N have the same content, but N has 
a part M which is not a part of L. We get a general formula 
for identity of content, if we say that two groups have the same 
content, if a set of parts can be found of each, such that there is 
no part in the one set which is not also a part in the other set. 
N, for example, has, as a set of parts, A, B, A, A, and L has, as 
a set of parts, A, B. And there is no part in either of these 
sets which is not also a part in the other. 


1 Section 126. 2 Section 125. 


140 COMPOUND SUBSTANCES [BK II 


A compound substance, then, is identical with an infinite 
number of repeating groups, in each of which there are sets of 
parts which contain the same part more than once. We must 
not, however, say that the compound substance has sets of 
parts, each of which contain the same part more than once. 
A, B, A, A, for-example, is a set of parts of N, because, if any 
of the four parts were withdrawn, N would not be made up. 
But that is because WN is a repeating group. If two of the occur- 
rences of A were withdrawn, no content would be withdrawn. 
And, since it is identity of content which makes the substance, 
the substance would be fully made up. The substance has, as 
its sets of parts, all sets of parts of non-repeating groups with 
which it is identical, but not the sets of parts of repeating groups. 

A compound substance will have other substances which are 
its parts, and fall entirely within it—as in the case of the House 
of Commons and the Kitchen Committee. But there will be 
other substances again which fall partially within it, having a 
part in common with it, and a part which falls outside it. The 
House of Commons and the Privy Council, for example, overlap 
in this manner. 

129. Any two or more substances, which do not contain, 
in whole or in part, the same content, form a. compound sub- 
stance. The number of compound substances is therefore infinite, 
except on one hypothesis. Ifa finite fumber of simple substances 
formed a set of parts of the universe, then the number of com- 
pound substances would be finite. In any other case it would 
be infinite. And we shall see later that the universe does not 
consist of a finite number of simple substances, so that the 
number of compound substances will be, in fact, infinite. 

The conclusion that any two or more substances of different 
content form another substance will seem in many cases para- 
doxical. In other cases it will seem natural enough. To say that 
the group of French citizens at the present time is a substance 
has nothing surprising in it. For the group of French citizens 
at the present time is the French nation at the present time. 
And a nation is a unity so close and so important that it would 
generally be admitted that there is nothing strange in calling it 
a substance. But when we come to such a group as that men- 


CH. XVI] COMPOUND SUBSTANCES 141 


tioned earlier, which consists of a table now in Cambridge, a 
rabbit now in Australia, and a dose of medicine in France in the 
eighteenth century, then, it might be said, the unity is so slight 
that it is preposterous to call such a group a substance. 

The answer to this objection is that our definition cf sub- 
stance said nothing about the closeness or the importance of 
the unity. A substance was defined as that which had qualities, 
and stood in relations, without being itself a quality or a relation. 
And since the most fantastic group answers to this definition, 
it must be called a substance. 

Nor would it be a fair objection to our definition of substance 
that it leads to paradoxical results. For the word substance is 
applied so inconsistently in ordinary discourse that any defi- 
nition, if adhered to consistently, would lead to results so strange 
as to appear paradoxical. And besides, if we were to reserve the 
name of substance for a unity which was close or important, it 
could not have been used till much later in the system. For we 
are not, as yet, in a position to determine what would be meant 
by a close unity. And it will not be till a still later point that 
it will be possible to determine what is really important. To 
define substance by means of a conception which can only be 
reached late in a system would be at least as great a departure 
from common usage as anything produced by the course we 
have taken. Moreover, we have had much to say, and shall 
have still more to say, of that which has qualities and stands in 
relations without being a quality or a relation. We must have 
some name for it. And, if we refuse it the name of substance, 
it is not easy to find it another. 

130. Again, our use of the name may be regarded as 
inappropriate in some cases, not, as to those just discussed, on 
account of the intrinsic unimportance of the particular group 
in question, as from its unimportance as compared with its own 
members. It may be said, for example, that it is unreasonable 
to give the name of substance both to a bridge-party, and to 
the men who make up the party. The bridge-party is not a 
fantastic group, like that composed of the table, the rabbit, and 
the medicine. Its members must have various qualities in 
common, and the relations between them must be direct and 


142 COMPOUND SUBSTANCES [BK III 


obvious. But the men are so much more important, they are so 
much more persistent (even if it is held that they are not im- 
mortal), and they are so much less dependent on the bridge-party 
than the bridge-party is on them, that it might be held to be 
inappropriate to call both the ,men and the bridge-party 
substances. 

The answer to this objection is the same as to the last. The 
definition of substance which we have adopted says nothing 
about importance, persistence, or independence, and the bridge- 
party complies with it as much as the men do. 

Or again, the objection may be made, not that the compound 
substance is too unimportant, as compared with its parts, to be 
a substance, but that it is too important, as compared with its 
parts, to be taken as compounded of them. If aman, for example, 
is regarded as standing to his successive states in time as a 
whole to its parts, and if all the content of the man falls in time, 
he must be considered, not only as a substance, but as a sub- 
stance compounded of his states in time, which must also be 
considered as substances. And it may be said that this is 
unreasonable. For, even on the assumption that the whole 
content of the man falls in time, there is much in the nature of 
the man which is not to be found in any of his states. How then 
can he be compounded of the states? 

The answer here is that a substance which is made up of 
substances, and is therefore a group, must have many qualities 
which are not found in any of its parts (among others, the 
quality of being the whole, of which they are parts) and that 
among these qualities may be some of the greatest importance. 
For example, France is made up of individual Frenchmen. 
There is no content in the substance France which does not fall 
within this, that, or the other Frenchman. Yet France is a 
nation, and a republic, and no Frenchman is either. And, in 
the same way, there might be no content in John Smith which 
did not fall within this, that, or the other of his states in time, 
and yet he would have many qualities which were not qualities 
of any of those states, and it might well be that among them 
were those of his qualities which were of most importance both 
to himself and to his friends. 


CHAPTER XVII 
EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES IN GROUPS 


131. We have seen that in certain groups there are qualities 
which are common to all their members. We may call them 
Common Qualities in the group. (A common quality in a 
group, which is a quality of each of the members, must be dis- 
tinguished from a quality of the group. In many cases a quality 
which is common in the group is not a quality of the group 
itself. For example, when “to be an elephant” is a common 
quality in a group, it is not a quality of that group, since a group 
of elephants is never an elephant.) 

Are there common qualities in every group? (Among 
common qualities are included, of course, the common deriva- 
tive qualities which will arise if each member of the group 
stands in the same relation to anything.) It is clear that there 
are common qualities in every group, since there are some 
qualities—such as existence, substantiality, and the possession 
of qualities—which are possessed by all members of any group, 
and are therefore common in any group. 

But there is a further question. We see that in some groups 
there are common qualities which are not shared by anything 
except the members of that group. Such, for example, is “to 
be an elephant” in the group which contains all elephants as 
members and which has no member which is not an elephant. 
We may call them Exclusive Common Qualities. Has every 
group one or more Exclusive Common Qualities? 

132. Here, too, the answer must be in the affirmative. In 
the first place, if any group, L, has as members 4, B, and (, it 
will be an exclusive common quality in the group that each 
member is a member of the group whose members are A, B, 
and ©. This is, indeed, scarcely more than a tautology, but it 
does give an exclusive common quality. 


144 EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES [BK III 


And, again, there is at least one substance which is not a 
member of L}. Now of any one of those substances, D, it will 
be true that all the members of the group will be diverse from 
it. And, being diverse from it, they must, as we have seen, be 
dissimilar to it. Thus every member of the group has the quality 
“diverse from and dissimilar to D,”’ which is therefore a common 
quality in Z, and which is not possessed by D. 

If, however, outside the group L there is also another sub- 
stance, HZ, then “diverse from and dissimilar to D”’ will not be 
an exclusive common quality in L, since it will be shared by E, 
which is not a member of Z. But an exclusive common quality 
of this sort can always be found. There are certain substances 
which are not members of ZL. Let us take D, HE, and F, as 
representing a complete list of these. Then the compound 
quality “diverse from and dissimilar to D, H, and F” belongs 
to each member of Z, and so is a common quality in Z. And it 
is also an exclusive common quality in L, since it cannot belong 
to anything which is not a member of L. For anything which 
is not a member of Z must be either D, E, or F, and cannot, 
therefore, be diverse from all three of them. 

Such an exclusive common quality as this, however, while 
it would exist could never be known by our present powers of 
knowledge. In order to know it, we should have to be able to 
give an exclusive description of every substance which was not 
a member of L. And, further, in order to know that the quality 
in question was an exclusive quality in LZ, we should have to 
know that we had included everything which was not a member 
of [—not only would our knowledge have to be exhaustive, 
but we should have to know that it was exhaustive. This is 
obviously far more knowledge than we can acquire. Indeed, 
though not omniscience, it would have to be infinite knowledge, 
if, as we shall find reason to believe later on, the number of 
existent substances is infinite. The fact, however, that every 
group has such an exclusive common quality is not necessarily 


1 A group which did not contain all existent content would clearly have a 
substance outside it, which was not one of its members. And one which did 
contain all existent content, would still have one substance which was not cone 
of its members—namely itself. For a group is never one of its own members. 


cH. xviI] EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES 145 


unimportant, even if in some cases we can never know what 
that quality is. 

133. But some groups, at any rate, have exclusive common 
qualities which can be known by such powers of knowledge as 
we possess. We saw above that the Colleges of Magdalene and 
Trinity in Cambridge are the only members of two classes. 
And, consequently, in the group of which they are the members, 
there are two exclusive qualities, namely, “to be a Cambridge 
College in which, in the year 1919, the Headship is not in the 
gift of the Fellows,” and “to be a Cambridge College founded 
between 1515 and 1550.” 

Thus the common qualities in groups are divided into two 
classes. The first includes those which can be defined (or, being 
simple, can be known without definition) without the intro- 
duction of exclusive descriptions of all the substances which 
are members of the group, or else of all the substances which 
are not members of the group. The second includes those which 
do require the introduction of some such descriptions. We know 
that in all groups there are exclusive common qualities of the 
second class. We know that in some groups there are exclusive 
common qualities of the first class. But we have not proved, 
and we have no reason to believe, that an exclusive common 
quality of the first class is found in every group?. 

It is evident that, although we can never know an exclusive 
common quality which is defined by descriptions of the sub- 
stances excluded from the group, yet we can always find, in 
the case of any group, some common quality of that type. Thus 
the group which consists of Napoleon and the Great Pyramid 
has the quality common to both its members of being diverse 
from the Albert Memorial. But this is not an exclusive common 
quality in the group, since it is shared by Mount Everest. 

134. Not every group in which there is an exclusive common 
quality of the first class has any importance for us, or can be 
usefully contemplated by us. But, on the other hand, it is safe 
to say that no group has any importance for us, or is worth 


1 We shall see reason, however, in Chapter xxvut, to believe that every 
substance belongs to at least one group in which there is an exclusive common 
quality of the first class. 


146 EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES [BK III 


contemplating (except as an example of unimportant groups), 
if it does not possess an exclusive common quality of the first 
class. In each group the members are joined to each other, and 
separated from all others. And there can be no importance for 
me in the fact that this and that substance are joined to one 
another, except in the possession by them of a common quality 
(which may, of course, be the quality of having a common 
relation to something—perhaps to myself). Nor is there any 
importance for me in the fact that they are separated from all 
others, except in their possession of a common quality, which 
no others have. And the quality which makes it important that 
the group should be marked out cannot be simply the fact 
that, when it 7s marked out, its members agree in the quality 
of being members of that group, or in the quality of not being 
anything which is not a member—that is, it cannot be a 
quality of the second class. 

As the exclusive common qualities of the first class are the 
only ones which we ever know to be such, and the only ones 
which give a group any importance for us, it is, as a rule, of 
these only that we speak. It is therefore important to remember, 
when we say that in each group there is an exclusive common 
quality, that this is so far only proved about qualities of the 
second class. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
THE UNIVERSE 


135. There can be no group which contains all other groups 
as its parts. For, as we saw above, every group generates an 
infinite number of repeating groups, of each of which it is a 
part, and which cannot therefore be parts of it}. 

But no such considerations render it impossible that there 
should be a substance of which all others are parts. For ina 
substance no content is taken more than once, and there is 
therefore nothing in substance analogous to repeating groups. 

And, further, we can see that there is a substance of which 
all others are parts. We have seen that any two or more sub- 
stances, which do not contain, in whole or in part, the same 
content, will form a compound substance. There is therefore a 
compound substance which contains all existent content. For 
any content which is not in any given substance, A, must be 
in some substance or substances outside A, and by adding 
these to A, we shall have a substance, U, which contains all 
content. For every compound substance other than U will 
contain some but not all of the content of U, and will therefore 
be a part of U. And, if there were simple substances, they 
would all be parts of compound substances, and therefore parts 
of U. ; 

There is therefore a substance which contains all content, 
and of which every other substance is a part. This substance is 
to be called the Universe. From. a formal point of view it is 
indifferent whether we take as a definition of Universe that a 
universe contains all existent content, or that it is a substance 
of which all other substances are parts, since possession of 
either of these qualities involves the possession of the other. 
The definition by content is perhaps the more fundamental, but 


1 Cp. Section 126. A fortiori there can be no group of which all other 
groups are members. 


148 THE UNIVERSE [BK III 


the definition by relation to other substances requires less 
explanation, and is therefore perhaps more suitable for general 
use. 

Our definition is not of course a definition of the universe, 
which is a particular substance, and so does not admit of defi- 
nition. The definition is of “ universe,”’ or, in other words, of the 
quality of being a universe. But it is clear, not only that there 
must be a universe, but that there cannot be more than one. 
If there were two, they would each contain all existent content, 
that is, they would have the same content. And there cannot 
be more than one substance with the same content. 

Since “universe” can only apply to one substance, its 
application distinguishes that substance from everything else, 
and is therefore a sufficient description of it. For this reason we 
speak of the substance as the universe. And we saw! that ina 
set of parts of a substance no content can be taken more than 
once. If all content could have been finally analyzed into 
simple substances, those simple substances would have been a 
set of parts of the universe. In any case, the universe will have 
as many sets of parts as there are combinations of compound 
substances, such that each of those combinations contains all 
the content of the universe, and contains none of it more than 
once?. 

136. The fact that any substance other than the universe 
has a particular quality is an element in a fact about the 
universe. If it is a fact that John Smith is English and hates 
Thomas Brown, then it is a fact about the universe that it 
possesses the quality of having a part with the qualities of 
John Smith, and that among those qualities are the qualities of 
being English and of hating Thomas Brown. 

It does not follow from this that the only true way, or the 

1 Cp. Section 128. 

2 The number of these sets of parts would have been finite if all content 
could have been finally analyzed into simple substances, and if these were 
finite in number. Since this is not so, they are infinite in number. 

® The two facts are not identical, since the first is the possession of a quality 
by John Smith, and the second is the possession of a quality by the universe. 


But the first fact may be properly said to be an element in the second, since 


the quality of the universe is its possession of a part with the quality possessed 
by John Smith. 


CH. XVIII} THE UNIVERSE 149 


simplest or most ultimate way of stating a fact about such a 
substance is to state it as an element of a fact about the uni- 
verse. It has sometimes been maintained that no assertion can 
be absolutely true unless its subject is the universe. Very 
probably this would never have been maintained if it had not 
been really the case that a fact about any other substance is an 
element of a fact about the universe. But the passage from this 
to the view that an absolutely true assertion can have no subject 
except the universe rests, as far as I can see, on a confusion 
between a statement which is not all the truth and a statement 
which is not absolutely true. If this confusipn were not miti- 
gated by inconsistency, it would lead to the conclusion that no 
assertion can be absolutely true, even if it is about the universe. 
For no one assertion, whatever its subject, can express all that 
is true. 

And the statement which does not bring in the universe is 
as true as the other, and more simple and ultimate. It is as 
true, for, obviously, if it were not true that Smith had the 
quality of hating Brown, it would not be true that the universe 
had the quality of containing a Brown-hating Smith. And it is 
more simple and ultimate, because it does not bring in the 
universe, but only Smith, while the other statement has to 
bring in both Smith and the universe. 


2 


CHAPTER XIX 
UNIVERSAL DETERMINATION 


137. The result reached at the end of the last Chapter has 
important bearings on the question of extrinsic determination. 
It will be remembered that extrinsic determination was so 
called, not because it is the determination of one substance by 
another, but because it is the determination which holds 
between two qualities in virtue of the relation in which they 
stand to the same substance, while intrinsic determination is 
that which holds between two qualities as such. 

At the end of the last Chapter we saw that, if any substance, 
A, other than the universe, has a quality X, the universe has the 
quality of containing a part with the nature of A, which has 
the quality X. We may call this quality of the universe X’. 
It is clear that the possession of X by A, and the possession of 
X’ by the universe, intrinsically determine one another. 

We saw in Chapter x11 that all the qualities of any substance 
are connected with one another by extrinsic determination, so 
that it is unjustifiable to assert that any of them would remain 
the same if any others were different from what they are now. 
And the universe is a substance. It would therefore be unjusti- 
fiable to assert that, if A had not the quality X, any of the 
qualities of the universe would remain the same. For if A had 
not the quality X, the universe could not have the quality X’, 
and X’ extrinsically determines all the other qualities of the 
universe. 

In the same way, it would be unjustifiable to assert that, if 
any of the qualities of the universe were not the same, A would 
still possess X. For it could not possess X unless the universe 
possessed X’, and X’ is in reciprocal extrinsic determination 
with all the other qualities of the universe. 

Since we have defined a fact as the possession by anything 
of a quality, or the connection of anything with anything by a 


CH. XIx] UNIVERSAL DETERMINATION 151 


relation, we may express the results we have just arrived at by 
saying that every fact about every other substance extrinsically 
determines every fact about the universe, and that every fact 
about the universe extrinsically determines every fact about 
every other substance. 

138. And, further, it would be unjustifiable to assert that, 
if A had not the quality X, any quality of arty other substance 
would remain the same. Take, for example, the quality Y, 
possessed by the substance B. The possession of this quality by 
B stands in reciprocal intrinsic determination with the posses- 
sion by the universe of the quality Y’. And, as we have seen, 
if A had not the quality X, it would be unjustifiable to assert 
that any of the qualities of the universe, including Y’, would 
remain the same. And in that case it would clearly be unjusti- 
fiable to assert that B would continue to possess the quality 
Y, since B cannot be Y unless the universe is Y’. 

The occurrence, then, of any quality of any substance ex- 
trinsically determines every other occurrence of a quality of 
any substance. And if all the qualities of substances are thus 
determined, then the substances themselves are determined in 
the same way. For, as we have seen!, the individuality of a 
substance is inseparable from the qualities it possesses, and, by 
determining what qualities occur, and in what combinations, it 
is also determined what substance possesses them. By deter- 
mining, in other words, that a substance exists with a certain 
nature, we determine what substance exists. 

Our conclusion is, then, that all that exists, both substances 
and characteristics, are bound together in one system of ex- 
trinsic determination’. 

139. We can now return to the consideration of the third. 
objection to the view that extrinsic determination occurs between 
all the characteristics of a single substance, which was dis- 


1 Section 95. 

2 Characteristics include relations as well as qualities. But if all the qualities 
of a substance are determined, including the qualities of standing in certain 
relations, then the relations of the substances are determined. 

Besides characteristics of substances, there exist also characteristics of 
existent characteristics. But if the characteristics of substances are determined, 
their characteristics will be determined also, and also the characteristics of 
those characteristics, and so on. 


152 UNIVERSAL DETERMINATION {BK III 


cussed in the last Book!. The objection was that, if there were 
not the present Snowdon, we might have reason to believe that 
there would be a mountain, with most of the important qualities 
of the actual Snowdon, though without its present height, 
because the existence of other substances, in which our hypo- 
thesis makes no change, might intrinsically determine the exist- 
ence of such a mountain. 

We can now see that the objection is untenable, because, if 
the present Snowdon did not exist, the present universe would 
not exist. We should therefore have no right to assume that 
there would be any substances which would resemble the sub- 
stances now intrinsically determining Snowdon to such an extent 
that they would intrinsically determine the existence of a 
mountain with many, or with any, of the important qualities of 
Snowdon. 

The supposition that anything should be different from 
what it is, therefore, is one which we have no right to make. To 
ask what would happen, or what would remain in the universe, 
if I had sneezed yesterday once less often than I did sneeze, is 
as hopeless and unprofitable as it would be to ask what would 
happen, or what would remain in the universe, if twice three 
were seven, or if things which were equal to the same thing 
were not equal to one anotber. It is true that in these two 
cases there is intrinsic determination—that a group numbers 
twice three implies that it does not number seven—but the 
question is as futile when the determination is only extrinsic. 

This result will appear unduly paradoxical, unless we 
remember that it does not deny our right to make the suppo- 
sition that the same substance may have different characteristics 
at different moments of time. All that is denied, in the case of 
a substance existing in time, is our right to make the supposition 
that, at any moment of time, it should have been different from 
what it actually is at that moment?. 

140. It would have been possible to arrive at our conclusion 
in a different way. Instead of connecting each substance with 
each other substance by means of the connection of both with 
the universe, we might have proceeded more directly. Every 


1 Section 110. 2 Cp. Section 110. 


CH. X1x] UNIVERSAL DETERMINATION 153 


existent substance is related to every other existent substance 
And so, if A should not have existed with exactly the nature 
XYZ, which it actually has, B could not have had the quality 
which it actually has, of standing in the relation W to something 
which has the nature XYZ. And this quality is connected by 
extrinsic determination with all the other qualities of B. Thus 
the occurrence of any quality in A extrinsically determines the 
occurrence of every quality in B, and vice versa, and this can be 
extended to all other substances and their characteristics. 

This method has the advantage of being more direct than 
the one which we have employed above, but it seemed better 
to use the method which lays stress on the connection of all 
other substances through the universe, because that connection 
is of such general importance, especially in connection with the 
conception of organic unity, to which we shall proceed in the 
next Chapter. 

141. We have no right, then, to make any supposition about 
what would happen if anything were different from what it is. 
Will this introduce any difficulty with regard to general laws? 
It is very usual to state general laws hypothetically. “If a 
man’s head is cut off, he dies.”” “If an Australian Archdeacon’s 
head is cut off, he dies.” “If anything is a rigid body, not 
operated on by forces, its centre of gravity will move with 
uniform velocity in a straight line.” With regard to the first of 
these, there might seem to be no difficulty. Men’s heads have 
been cut off. And so this law might be said to be equivalent to 
‘Whenever a man’s head is cut off, he dies.”’ But this will not 
help us for the other two. For I do not know that any Australian 
Archdeacon has been or will be beheaded. And I have reason 
to believe that notbing ever has been or will be a rigid body, 
not operated on by forces. Thus, if they were to be stated in 
this hypothetical form, the law about the Archdeacons might 
turn out to be a statement about what would have happened if 
things had been different from what they are, and the law 
about rigid bodies certainly would be such a statement. And 
such statements are illegitimate. And yet it is impossible to 
deny that such laws as those about the Archdeacon and the 
rigid body are true. 


154 UNIVERSAL DETERMINATION [BK II 


But there is really no difficulty. For the proposition ex- 
pressed in a general law is not primarily a statement about any 
individual, actual or possible. It is primarily a statement of the 
relation between two characteristics. The relation in question 
is, no doubt, of such a nature that, in the case of those general 
laws which deal with characteristics that occur in existence, 
we can infer that, in all cases in which the characteristic X 
occurs, the characteristic Y will occur also. But this is not the 
essence of the law. That consists in the connection of character- 
istics. And this connection can exist, even when nothing 
existent has these characteristics?. 

142. The interdependence of all existent characteristics, 
which we have now proved, is not, of course, equivalent to the 
determination of all characteristics by general laws. The deter- 
mination of a characteristic by a general law means that the 
occurrence of some other characteristic Y intrinsically deter- 
mines the occurrence of X. The assertion that all character- 
istics are determined by general laws would mean that, for any 
occurrence of any characteristic X, an occurrence can be found 
of a characteristic Y, which is such that Y intrinsically deter- 
mines’ X?, And all that we have proved is that characteristics 
determine one another extrinsically. 

Since we are not considering here a determination which is 
intrinsic, or which acts by general laws, we are not dealing with 
causality. We shall consider later what meaning should be 
given to this term. But the ordinary view of causality certainly 
includes, among other elements, the presence of general laws. 
X is not held to be the effect of Y unless it is connected with Y 
by some general law. And we shall find reason to accept this 
view as correct. Extrinsic determination, therefore, is not 
causality. 

The result which we have reached, however, seems to be 
very much the same as the results which Hegel conceived him- 
self to have established in his categories of Causality and 
Reciprocity. In those categcries he reaches the conclusion that 


1 It has been seen in Chapter 11 that this is not incompatible with the view 
that nothing is real except the existent. 
2 Cp. Section 217. 


CH. XIx] UNIVERSAL DETERMINATION 155 


everything is ‘determined by everything else, and he cannot 
mean that the determination takes place by general laws. For 
he does not, it seems clear, introduce the idea of general laws 
until he comes to the category of Universal Judgment, which 
is further on in the dialectic!. 

143. The objection has been raised to certain theories of 
reality that they make the universe a “block” universe, in 
which every part is rigidly connected with every other part. 
This objection is generally raised against theories which regard 
all parts of the universe as connected with all other parts by 
general laws. In that case, every part would certainly be 
rigidly connected with every other part. But the rigidity to 
which objection is taken would arise, even if determination by 
general laws were not complete. For, as we have just seen, no 
characteristic of any substance is extrinsically contingent to 
any other, and it is therefore not legitimate to say that A might 
have possessed the characteristic W, instead of the character- 
istic X, without affecting the possession by A of the character- 
istic Y, or by B of the characteristic Z. And the connection 
here is just as rigid as the connection by general laws. 

The objections to a “block” universe are, as far as I know, 
based entirely on judgments of value. It is asserted that such 
a rigid universe would be very unpleasant, or would be destruc- 
tive to morality, and it is therefore said that a universe of such 
a nature is to be condemned as evil, to which it is sometimes 
added, on pragmatic grounds, that it is to be rejected as false. 
The value of contingency is a point on which opinions differ, 
and which does not.concern us here. We have only to note 
that, if the abserice of contingency 7s an evil, it is an evil which 
is inevitable and universal. 

1 The details of Hegel’s treatment of causality, however, are very different 


from the conclusions at which we have arrived, especially his extraordinary view 
that cause and effect are identical. 


CHAPTER XX 
ORGANIC UNITY 


144. We saw in Chapter xi that the qualities of a sub- 
stance could be taken, not only as the parts of which the nature 
of that substance was composed, but also as the manifestations 
of that nature, taken as a whole. We saw also, in the last 
Chapter, that the existence of each substance involved the 
existence of a quality of the universe—the quality of having 
that substance as one of its parts. This is true of other wholes 
besides the universe. If any substance, A, has a part, B, whose 
nature consists of the qualities X YZ, then it will be a quality 
of A to have a part whose nature is X YZ. And this quality of A 
may, by the result reached in Chapter x11, be considered, not 
only as one of the parts of the nature of A, but also as a mani- 
festation of that nature. 

From this relation of the qualities of A and B there follows 
a relation between A and B themselves. A substance which is 
a whole may be considered as compounded of its parts. And 
this is the way in which we do, prima facie, consider it. But 
since, as we have just seen, the fact of having a part of such a 
nature may be considered as a manifestation of the nature of 
A, the existence of the part may be taken as dependent on the 
existence of the whole. Instead of considering the parts as 
constituting the whole, we may—not more truly, but just as 
truly—take the whole as issuing in the parts. And so we may 
say that the parts are the manifestation of the whole. 

We must distinguish between the manifestation of the whole 
and the manifestation of the nature of the whole. A is mani- 
fested in the substances which are the parts of A, while the 
nature of A is manifested in the qualities of A, which are parts 
of that nature (including, of course, the qualities of having as 
its parts B, and the other substances which are its parts). For, 
in the sense in which we are using the word manifestation, 


OH. Xx] ORGANIC UNITY 157 


nothing can be manifested except in its own parts, and it is 
obvious that the parts of a substance are substances, while the 
parts of the nature of a substance are qualities. 

To each part of A there will correspond a quality of A—the 
quality of having that part. But for every quality of A there 
will not be a correspondent part. For every substance has other 
qualities besides the qualities of having the parts which it has. 

We saw in Chapter xu that to the question as to any sub- 
stance “What is the nature which is manifested in such and 
such qualities?” we can only answer by saying that it is the 
nature which is manifested in those qualities, because the nature 
of a substance consists of nothing else besides the qualities in 
which it is manifested!. But to the question “ What is the nature 
of that substance which is manifested in such and such parts?” 
it is possible to return an answer which does not mention any 
of the parts, because we may answer by means of those qualities 
which have no reference to parts. Smith, Brown, and their 
fellow-citizens, are the parts of the British nation, and that 
nation could not be completely described without including the 
quality of having Smith as a citizen, and so of Brown and the 
rest. But we can say of the British nation that it is a great 
power, a limited monarchy, contains two established Churches, 
and so on, and in this way it might be possible to form a sufficient 
description without including any of those qualities which are 
qualities of possessing a particular part. 

145. The new relation of the whole to its parts, which is 
reached at this stage, involves a fresh relation of the parts to 
one another. We saw in the last chapter that all the substances 
in the universe were interdependent, and the grounds on which 
we arrived at that conclusion would equally justify us in con- 
cluding of any whole, besides the universe, that its parts were 
interdependent. If any part were different, it would no longer 
be the same whole, and, if it were not the same whole, we 
should have no reason for holding that any of the other parts 

1 This would only be tautological if all the primary qualities of the substance 
were enumerated in the question—and their number is infinite, since the 
number of substances, and so of the relations of each substance to others, is 


infinite. To the question “what is the nature of B which is manifested in X?” 
it may be answered “the nature which is also manifested in YZ.” 


158 ORGANIC UNITY [BK III 


would exist. But now we can go further. For the parts are 
now seen to manifest the whole, taken as a unity. No part 
could do this, if the others did not do so also. For, if any part 
were wanting, then the whole containing that part could not 
be manifested at all. Thus no part could manifest the whole, if 
the others did not do so also. And thus the parts may be said 
to co-operate in manifesting the whole. 

The interdependence is not more complete than before, but 
it is more positive. We no longer say only that, if one of the 
parts were different, the whole would be different, and we 
should have no ground for supposing that the other parts 
would remain. We say also that the parts have a common 
function to perform—the manifestation of the whole—and that, 
while each of them performs it in a different way, yet none 
could perform it unless the others were performing it also. To 
the idea of mutual indispensability is now added the more 
positive idea of mutual co-operation. 

146. The more positive relation of the whole to the parts, 
and of the parts to one another, which we have now reached, is 
sometimes expressed by saying that the whole is in every part. 
The phrase seems to me unfortunate. It is not desirable in 
philosophy to use any phrase which, in its literal sense, is false, 
unless it is quite obvious that it is only used metaphorically. 
It does not seem quite obvious in this case that the phrase is 
only used as a metaphor, while, if it is not used as a metaphor, 
it is false, since no whole can be, in the literal sense}, within any 
one of its parts. ; 

And the phrase does, I think, lead to confusion. In the case 
of a whole whose parts were conscious beings, each of whom 
perceived the whole, or judged it to exist, it might be said that 
the edea of the whole was in every part, and this (if we limited the 
statement to the one set of parts who were conscious beings) 
would be literally true. And when it is said that the whole is in 
each of the parts—which can only be true as a metaphor—it is 


73 


1 I do not take “literal” as equivalent to “spatial.” It seems to me that 
such words as in, out, whole, parts, greater, smaller, can be used as literally of 
what is non-spatial as of what is spatial. The statements that my thought is in 
my mind, and that Meredith was in the Order of Merit seem to me as literally 
true as the statement that the grave of Nelson is in St Paul’s. 


CH. Xx] ORGANIC UNITY 159 


sometimes, I think, assumed that every whole of which this 
may be said metaphorically is one of which it would be literally 
true that the idea of the whole is in every part. And this leads 
to error, since the metaphor is applied to many wholes whose 
parts are not conscious beings, and it is only when the parts 
are conscious beings that the idea of the whole can be in each 
of them. : 

But while the expression that the whole is in the parts is 
unfortunate, we must admit that it is not unnatural that it 
should have arisen. When it is realized that the whole cannot 
be manifested at all, unless it is manifested in each particular 
part, then each part is seen to perform a unique function in 
relation to the whole. It is, indeed, no more essential to the 
whole than all the other parts are, but that it should be just 
what it is, and nothing else, is essential to the whole!. And since 
the whole, to which the special nature of this part is essential, 
is taken as a unity, it is not surprising that attempts should 
have been made to express the relation by saying that the 
whole is in each part. 

147. Again, it is sometimes said that in such a whole as 
this the nature of the whole is expressed in each part. This, 
also, is not literally true. The nature of the whole is expressed 
—or, so we have called it, manifested—in all the parts taken 
together, but not in each, separately. And in this case, also, it 
seems undesirable to use the expression, even as a metaphor. 
But, in this case also, there is some excuse for the expression 
having been adopted, since the unique function of each part in 
assisting to manifest the whole might not unnaturally be con- 
fused with the expression of the nature of the whole by that 
part alone’. 

148. Every substance which has parts is manifested in this 


2 “Thy voice seemed weak. It dropped. 
Creation’s chorus stopped.” 
Browninea, The Boy and the Angel. 

2 We shall see later (Section 286) that there is a possible form of unity of 
which it would be more appropriate to say that the whole was in every part, 
or that each part expressed the nature of the whole, than it is with a merely 
organic unity. But, even with this further unity, the expressions would not be 
literally true. 


160 ORGANIC UNITY [BK III 


way in its parts. If we recur to our example of a fantastic sub- 
stance, the nature of that substance includes the quality of 
having as one of its parts the oldest rabbit in Australia. And 
therefore the substance itself is manifested in the rabbit. This 
does not seem so natural an expression as when we say that my 
body as a whole is manifested in my heart, or that a picture as 
a whole is manifested in its various details, but the manifestation 
is there in the first case as much as in the other two. (The 
reason why the expression seems more natural in the second 
and third cases will be considered later in the chapter.) 

Since substances which are wholes overlap each other, the 
same substance will be a manifestation of various overlapping 
wholes. William Pitt in 1800 is a manifestation both of the 
Privy Council in 1800 and of the House of Commons in 1800, 
since it is a quality of both of them to have Pitt as a member. 

149. I have entitled this chapter Organic Unity, because it 
seems to me that our present position is very like that which 
has generally been given by philosophers the name of organic 
unity, or of Inner Teleology. It is, I suppose, beyond doubt 
that by these names—which, when they are both used, are 
taken as synonyms!—there is always designated a differentiated 
unity in which the position of the whole in relation to the parts 
is stronger than in a unity which is merely mechanical, and in 
which the relation of the parts to one another binds them 
together more closely than is the case in a mechanical unity. 

The name of organic unity has been given to this conception, 
not because it is held to be peculiar to the organic life which is 
studied in biology, but because it is held to be especially promi- 
nent and obvious in that organic life. This, I think, is true. If 
our arguments have been correct, all wholes are organic unities 
in this sense. But some wholes exhibit the special character- 


1 Hegel uses Teleology as the name of one category, and Life as the name 
of another, immediately succeeding Teleology. The conception of organic unity 
is introduced under the category of Life. But the full conception of inner 
teleology is not attained till the last subdivision of Teleology, while the con- 
ception of organic unity comes in the first subdivision of Life. And the passage 
from one of those subdivisions to the other is, according to Hegel’s method, a 

collapse into immediacy,” which reaches no fresh result, but only restates a 
result previously reached. 


CH. xx] ORGANIC UNITY 161 


istics of organic unity far more obviously than others do. Most 
of the unities in which these characteristics are specially obvious 
fall into two classes—biological organisms, and objects which 
are recognized as beautiful. Why is this so? Why does a horse, 
or a Persian rug, or the sky during a beautiful sunset, appear 
more obviously an organic unity than a heap of stones, or a 
yard of plain canvas, or a sky which is not specially beautiful? 
I conceive that the reascn is that in the cases of the first class 
a small alteration will change a characteristic of the object to 
which we ascribe high importance—importance not only for a 
personal need of the observer at the moment, but importance 
which stands high when judged by objective standards of 
value. If a heap of stones was slightly increased in size, it 
would be different, but the difference is not one which we 
should regard as important, except for some special purpose. 
But a very slight change in a living body may make it diseased, 
or kill it; and a very slight change in a beautiful thing may make 
it ugly. And these are qualities which we regard—rightly or 
wrongly does not matter here—as important when judged 
from objective standpoints. 

Now the essential feature of an organic unity is that the 
parts manifest the whole—that, since the whole as a unity is 
what it is, the parts must be what they are. This, as we have 
seen, is really the case with all wholes, and therefore all wholes 
are really organic unities. But their organic nature only becomes 
obvious when it becomes obvious that a set of parts only 
slightly different would be a manifestation of the nature of a 
whole which was different in some important characteristics. 
This is not the case with the heap of stones—the addition or 
subtraction of a stone, or the interchange of two of the stones, 
would make it a different whole, but not different in any 
important characteristics. But life and beauty are held by us 
to be important characteristics, and slight changes in the parts 
may destroy them. And thus it is obvious with wholes which 
are living or beautiful that the parts are manifestations of the 
nature of the whole, since different parts would be so obviously 
inconsistent with the whole being the same. 

There are, no doubt, other cases in which the organic nature 


162 ORGANIC UNITY [BK III 


of the whole is obvious although the whole possesses neither life 
nor beauty. But there are no large and well-defined classes of 
wholes in which organic unity is obvious, except the classes of 
biological organisms and beautiful objects. 

150. This, then, is the justification of the name of organic 
unity. It is not however without its inconveniences. For the 
association of the philosophical and the biological conceptions 
by the use of the same name has caused some philosophers to 
assert certain propositions about the one, which could only be 
justifiably asserted about the other. 

In the first place, the explanation of biological facts by the 
ordinary principles of physical science, which are sometimes 
called “mechanical” principles, has not progressed as far as 
the explanation of the facts relating to inorganic matter. An 
organic nature, in science, has thus become associated with a 
failure, at any rate for the present, of mechanical explanation. 
And so it has sometimes been supposed that, in putting forward 
the philosophical conception of organic unity as a fundamental 
principle in the explanation of the universe, we are asserting 
that the universe is not capable of mechanical explanation, or, 
at any rate, that, in so far as existence is successfully described 
in terms of organic unity, it cannot be successfully described in 
terms of mechanical determination. And this, as we have seen, 
is erroneous. It is not less correct to regard the whole as com- 
pounded of the parts than to regard the parts as a manifestation 
of the whole. Both are true. The superiority of our position 
when we have reached organic unity does not lie in the superi- 
ority of what we have reached last, but in the fact that we have 
reached both. 

In the second place, the analogy with biology may lead us 
to limit unduly the scope of the conception in another direction. 
Even if it is admitted that it applies to all existence—that is 
to say, that all substantial content falls within some organic 
unity, it would often be denied that all substances were organic 
—for example, the substance, mentioned before, which consists 
of a table, a rabbit, and a dose of medicine. And this, I think, 
is suggested by biology. For although a sheep is a biological 
organism, and so is a shepherd, yet a flock of sheep, or a sheep 


CH. xx] ORGANIC UNITY 163 


and its shepherd, or the group formed of the left legs of all 
sheep, are not biological organisms. But this restriction is 
unjustified when applied to our conception. For all these 
groups are substances which have parts, and we have seen that 
every substance which has parts is an organic unity. 

151. In the third place, it must be noted that organisms as 
conceived by biology are less complete unities than the organic 
unities which are contemplated under our present conception. 
For in these organic unities the wholes are seen to be as funda- 
mental as their parts, while in biology the wholes are not as 
fundamental as their parts. 

The units of matter which make up a biological organism 
can exist, and in every case have existed, and will exist again, 
outside that organism. If, indeed, it were the case that they 
could only exist as parts of other organisms, the fact that the 
same piece of matter could be successively in many organisms 
might only balance the fact that in the same organism one 
piece of matter can be succeeded by another. But the fact that 
the same matter which exists in an organism can, and at other 
times does, exist without being a part of any organism, while 
an organism cannot exist without some pieces of matter as its 
parts, does, it would seem, make a biological organism more 
dependent on its parts than its parts are on it. 

There is another respect in whicb the material units are more 
fundamental than the biological organisms which they compose. 
Biology deals with events in time. Now the higher organisms 
have a nature which involves their death and dissolution within 
a certain time from their birth, and even if death is not inevitable 
for some lower organisms, still they can die, and in many cases 
do so. With the matter which makes up the organisms it is 
different. Not only does it not necessarily cease to exist, but 
there is no known cause which could bring its existence to an 
end. 

The confusion produced by the association in this case does 
not work in the same manner as in the first and second cases. 
In those the result was that elements from the biological con- 
ception were illegitimately introduced into the philosophical 
conception. Here, on the other hand, what generally happens 


164 ORGANIC UNITY [BK II 


is, I think, that philosophers have been led mistakenly to con- 
clude that the parts are not more fundamental than the whole 
in a biological organism, because they are not more fundamental 
than the whole according to the philosophical conception of 
organic unity. 

Indeed, this has often gone further. For many philosophers 
have regarded the whole as being, according to the philosophical 
conception of organic unity, more fundamental than its parts, 
and this has led them to hold that the wholes are more funda- 
mental than the parts in biological organisms. Their reason 
for supposing that, in the philosophical conception the whole 
was more fundamental than the parts, was, I think, largely 
due to misleading associations connected with the name of 
inner teleology, which, as we have said, is frequently used as a 
synonym for organic unity. 

152. These associations tend to a confusion between inner 
teleology and teleology in the ordinary sense, which, to dis- 
tinguish it from inner teleology, is sometimes called external. 
It is true that writers who speak of inner teleology generally 
begin by stating, and even emphasizing, the difference between 
it and external teleology. But, in the course of the argument, 
the associations aroused by tbe noun have often been too strong 
for the adjective. In external teleology the occurrence of the 
facts which are teleologically explained is accounted for by 
their position as means to the end which has been adopted by 
some conscious being. In this case the end—the purpose of that 
conscious being—exists as something quite distinct from the 
facts which are its means. It is itself a separate fact—a volition 
in the mind of the conscious being who entertains the purpose. 
Now, even when it is realized that in inner teleology there is no 
separate fact to explain and unify the plurality, there is often 
a tendency to forget that the aspect of unity—which, when the 
conception is spoken of as inner teleology, is spoken of as the 
end—is nothing but the unity of the whole which is formed by 
the plurality of separate facts which realize that end. It is 
often supposed to be something more than just this unity, 
though less than a separate thing. What, under these conditions, 
it could possibly be, is not easy to see, nor is it made very clear 


CH. xx] ORGANIC UNITY 165 


by those who support the position. But it seems to be sometimes 
taken as being a principle from which the nature of the facts 
which constitute the plurality united by it might in some way 
be deduced’. And, if it is held to be this, it is naturally con- 
sidered to be more fundamental than the plurality of parts 
which is deduced from it. 

153. The name of teleology is also misleading in another 
way. It suggests that the organic unities to which it is applied 
must necessarily possess value. In the case of external teleology 
an end is often—though not always—aimed at because the 
person who adopts it judges it to be good. And, in any case, 
the attainment of an end gratifies desire, and so tends to give 
pleasure, which is generally regarded as good. Thus external 
teleology has a certain connection with value, though, even if 
it were the case that nothing was aimed at which was not 
believed to be good, many things would be aimed at which, in 
point of fact, are not good. But there is no connection with 
value in the case of inner teleology. The whole manifested in 
the parts may be evil and not good, or it may have no value at 
all, positive or negative. 

There seems, however, in the case of some writers to be a 
confusion in this respect between the two kinds of teleology. 
To begin with, they exaggerate the connection which exists 
between external teleology and value, by maintaining that no 
man wills anything unless he believes it to be good. And from 
this they conclude that the end in inner teleology must also be 
directed towards the good, while from the fact that it is immanent 
they conclude that, unlike the ends of external teleology, it 
cannot fail to be realized, and from the fact that it is not in any 
one’s mind they conclude that it must be really good, and cannot 
be mistakenly supposed to be good. Thus they arrive at the 
conclusion that the connection of inner teleology with value is 
closer than that of external teleology, when in reality inner 
teleology has no such connection at all. 


We may remark in passing, however, that, while a substance 

1 This view derives no support from Kant, who teaches that the unity in 

inner teleology can only be expressed as the unity which does unite those parts. 

Nor is it supported by Hegel, who never held, as he has so often been accused 
of holding, that a plurality could be deduced from a unity. 


166 ORGANIC UNITY [BK III 


does not necessarily possess value because it forms an organic 
unity, yet the conception of organic unity may have an important 
bearing on the judgments which we form as to the value of the 
universe. Before we reached organic unity, a part of a whole 
was regarded mainly as determined by the other parts, for, 
although it is no doubt determined by the whole, the whole was 
regarded as a compound of those parts. But in organic unity 
each part is regarded as determined by a whole which is not 
merely compounded of the parts, but is manifested in them. 
And the relation of each part to the others is that it is not only 
determined by them, but that it co-operates with them in mani- 
festing the whole. Nowa conscious being is a part of the universe, 
and it may very well make a considerable difference to the way 
in which he contemplates the universe, whether he regards him- 
self mainly as determined by other parts, which are external to 
him, or as determined by the whole of which he is himself a 
parti. 

154. Thus neither the name of organic unity nor the name 
of inner teleology is without its inconveniences. But some 
name we must have, and it does not seem possible to find one 
which is better than organic unity. The name of inner teleology 
is in a different position. It is, I think, more misleading than 
organic unity, while it has not the advantage which the other 
has of pointing to an empirical subject-matter which illustrates 
the conception with special clearness. It seems therefore desir- 
able to lay it aside. 


1 Mysticism may be based on either conception, but the difference between 
the two conceptions may perhaps be the explanation of the difference between 
different forms of mysticism which are very dissimilar in important character- 
istics. I am inclined to think that the difference between Spinoza’s Second and 
Third Knowledge—and, consequently, the distinction he draws between ordinary 
love of God and intellectual love of God—is based on two ways of regarding 
the relation of God to the modes, of which the first does not, and the second 
does, involve what we have called organic unity. But Spinoza’s meaning is so 
obscure that I make the suggestion with great diffidence. 


CHAPTER XXI 
SUMMARY OF RESULTS 


155. We have now discussed at some length the relations 
of wholes and parts. The results which we have reached apply 
through the whole of the universe. For the universe itself is a 
whole, and every other substance is a part, while many, if not 
all, of these other substances are both wholes and parts. Thus 
our results apply to all substances. 

But the effect which they produce ‘is limited. In the first 
place we have not demonstrated the existence of anything in 
the universe which can fairly be called order. 

A whole may be more or less ordered. And we should, I think, 
say that any whole was ordered in proportion as it possessed 
any one of three characteristics, each of which is compatible 
with the other two. The first of these is that its parts should 
determine one another in accordance with general laws. We 
may call this Causal Order. The second is that its parts should 
be connected with one another by such a relation that the parts 
in question should form a single series. We may call this Serial 
Order. 

The third may be called Order of Classification. To define 
this it is necessary to define first what I should propose to call 
a Classifying System. The parts of a whole may be said to form 
a Classifying System when there is such an arrangement of 
parts within parts as to fix the place of each part in the whole 
with reference to other parts, and when each group of parts 
formed by the arrangement possesses some exclusive common 
quality other than that which arises from its denotation’. And 
a whole may be said to possess Order of Classification if its parts 
can be arranged in a classifying system, and if that system is of 
such a nature that it is based on common qualities which are of 
fundamental importance to the parts which possess them. The 

1 Cp. Sections 132-133. 


168 SUMMARY OF RESULTS [BK IIL 


greater the extent to which the system carries the classification, 
the more perfect will be the order. 

We saw, when we were dealing with universal determina- 
tion, that we had not yet reached any conclusions as to the 
extent to which facts are determined by general laws, and there- 
fore we can say nothing so far as to causal order. Nor have we 
found any reason to suppose that there is any relation between 
all or most substances by means of which they can ke arranged 
in a single series. Serial order is not therefore to be asserted of 
the universe, at any rate at present. 

156. There remains order by classification. This is the sort 
of order which is formed in the animal kingdom, when its 
members are grouped into species, genera, families, etc., and 
also in the subject-catalogue of a library. No whole can be 
completely ordered by means of order of classification only. 
Order of classification may, for example, group species into 
genera, but, except by an introduction of sub-genera, it cannot 
give the species any definite position within the genus. Even 
if sub-genera are introduced, each of them must contain more 
than one species, if they are to be instrumental in establishing 
order by classification. And the order of classification will not 
be able to determine the mutual positions of the species in each 
sub-genus. Unless a serial order should be found to exist 
between them, their mutual positions would remain unordered. 
But a whole which had as much order of classification as the 
animal kingdom, or as a good subject-catalogue, would certainly 
be called an ordered whole, though the order would not bé com- 
plete. 

A whole, as we have said, would not be considered to be 
ordered because it formed a system by classification unless the 
classification were based on fundamentally important qualities. 
If a library were divided according to the material used in 
binding the books, and these groups were subdivided according 
to the number of pages in each volume, we should have a classi- 
fying system, but its existence would not, I think, be held to 
justify us in calling the library an ordered whole. 

157. A whole is only to be considered as ordered by classi- 
fication when the classification unites things in so far as they 


CH. XxI] SUMMARY OF RESULTS 169 


are like, and separates them in so far as they are unlike. And 
this can only take place when fundamentally important qualities 
occur in such a manner in the parts of the whole that a reason- 
ably definite system can be established by taking them as 
criteria. Now we have as yet no reason to believe that such 
qualities do so occur in the parts of the universe as to establish 
a reasonably definite system by their means. It is true that, 
when we observe subordinate wholes, we often find that a 
grouping by one possible criterion appears far more reasonable 
and profitable than grouping by some other. It is far more 
sensible to adopt sex or religion as a principle for classifying the 
human race than to divide it into those who have, and those 
who have not, an even number of hairs on their heads. Division 
by sex or by religion may be relevant to many questions in 
which a reasonable man might feel a practical or theoretical 
interest, whereas division by the number of hairs cannot, as far 
as can be seen, have the least relation to any question in which 
any reasonable man could take the slightest interest. 

But it does not follow from this that we have reached even 
a fragment of a system which would introduce order into the 
universe. In the first place, we should have no reason to assert 
that thesubstances which possess sex or religionformedacomplete 
set of parts of the universe. And if they did not, this system 
of classification would not extend over the whole universe, nor 
sbould we have any reason to believe that there would be any 
complementary system of classification which would arrange 
the remaining part. 

And, in the second place, the fact that one system is, and 
another is not, relevant to questions in which a reasonable man 
can take any practical interest, will not help us unless it can be 
established that the questions in which reasonable men take 
practical interest are matters which are fundamentally important 
in the nature of the universe. And, even if this is true, we have 
not proved it yet. Our theoretical interest, indeed, may be 
said to be directed mainly to what is fundamentally important 
in the nature of the universe. But our knowledge is very incom- 
plete, and the fact that one system appears to us to rest on more 
fundamentally important qualities than another, may be due to 


170 SUMMARY OF RESULTS [BK III 


our ignorance. An observer whose knowledge was limited to a 
map of England might well condemn as capricious and useless a 
classification of English towns which should place Cambridge 
nearer to Oxford than to Ely. Yet greater knowledge might 
enable him to see that such a classification had considerable 
significance. 

We have failed, then, so far to find—if the metaphor may be 
permitted—any grain in substance. It can be divided and 
united in as many ways as there are possible combinations of 
substances, the number of which we shall see reason in the next 
chapter to regard as infinite. And of all these ways in which it 
can be arranged, we have no reason to suppose that any one 
expresses its nature better than any other. 

158. And, besides this, there is a second problem, of some- 
what similar nature, on which we have as yet no light. When 
we look at those parts of the universe which are known to us 
empirically, we find that there are cases in which the conception 
of unity of composition seems far more appropriate than the 
conception of unity of manifestation. In the case of the fan- 
tastic whole previously considered, it is, no doubt, equally true 
to say that the table, the rabbit, and the medicine are mani- 
festations of the whole, as it is to say that the whole is composed 
of the table, the rabbit, and the medicine. But the second 
statement seems much more expressive of the real nature of the 
whole. And even in cases where the reality is not, from our 
point of view, so arbitrary, it often happens that unity of com- 
position seems the more natural conception to use. We should 
certainly think of a heap of stones as composed of the stones 
rather than of the stones as manifestations of the heap. On the 
other hand, there are cases, such as the successive states of a 
human consciousness for example, where it seems at least as 
natural to take them as manifestations of the whole—in this 
case the man—as it would be to take the man as compounded 
of them}. 


1 Some philosophers would maintain that, in this last case, manifestation is 
more appropriate than composition. But I cannot think of any case where the 
superior appropriateness of manifestation would be so universally admitted as 
the superior appropriateness of composition is admitted in the cases mentioned 


CH. Xx] SUMMARY OF RESULTS 171 


159. Such examples as these suggest very strongly that 
there are certain cases in which the nature of the differentiated 
unity is better expressed by composition than by manifestation, 
even if we are unable to define the limits within which the two 
classes of cases fall. But we have no right to be certain that 
this is so. It is true that in some cases, as was said above, 
manifestation seems much less appropriate than composition. 
But we can never be certain that, if we know more about the 
whole in question, manifestation might not seem to be equally 
appropriate. A unity is not necessarily trivial or superficial 
because it appears so to us. For, as we have seen, a group is 
determined by denotation, and it is quite possible for us to 
know of what members a group consists, and yet to be ignorant 
of the most important relations between its members. 

_ From this it follows that it is quite possible that, when a 
unity appears to us to be trivial and superficial, the judgment 
is due to our ignorance, and not to any r il triviality or super- 
ficiality in tbe group. A group whose members were the shopmen 
to a particular greengrocer in London, the policeman on a 
particular beat in Liverpool, and the porter of a particular 
club in Melbourne, looks, when described in this way, a group 
of very superficial importance, and one to which the conception 
of manifestation would be quite inappropriate. Nor would 
there be any reason to think that such a description was not an 
exclusive description which completely identified the group. 
For it might well be the case that the description it contained 
of each man was an exclusive description of that man, and in 
that case it would itself be an exclusive description of the 
group. And yet, though the description is exclusive, it might 
completely ignore relations of the members which made the 
unity very far from superficial. All three men might be brothers, 
and their mutual affection, and the influence which each 
exerted on the others, might be such as to render their mutual 
relations the most important and significant characteristics in 
the life of each of them. 


above. The fact that composition thus appears to have a stronger position than 
manifestation is perhaps connected with those relations between a whole and 
its parts which will be discussed in Chapter xx. 


172 SUMMARY OF RESULTS [BK III 


160. And thus the information which we have reached so _ 
far about the nature of substance is deficient in two respects. 
Existent content falls within many substances, and the greater 
number of these (indeed, as we shall see later, all of them) are 
groups which overlap each other in great complexity, and each 
of which may be taken either as a unity of composition or as a 
unity of manifestation. Now, in the first place, if none of these 
divisions are more fundamental than others, we have no reason 
to believe that existence is an ordered whole, and, while some 
of them certainly seem to us more fundamental than others, we 
have no reason to believe that any of them really are so. And, 
in the second place, while there is much to suggest that some 
groups are more appropriately expressed as unities of com- 
position, while some are equally well expressed as unities of 
manifestation, we can find no demonstration that this is really 
the case. 

Can we find any fixed points in all this complexity? At 
present, I think, we can find only one—the universe. If there 
were simple substances, which, of course, would not be groups, 
they would also be fixed points, but the existence of simple 
substances has not been proved, and we shall see in the next 
chapter that there is reason to disbelieve in it. But the universe 
does exist, and its position among substances is unique and 
important, for it includes all content, and it includes all sub- 
stances other than itself. It has thus, objectively, and not 
merely from the point of view of our interests, a position much 
more fundamental than that of most substances, if not of all. 

And from the point of view of our own interests, also, the 
determination of the nature of the universe as a whole is not 
unimportant. For example, since the universe is a substance, 
we now know that it is an organic unity. And the category of 
organic unity has its chief importance for mysticism because it 
applies to the universe as a whole. The essence of mysticism is 
to emphasize unity, and though it can be based, and has been 
based, on unity of composition, yet the closer unity which is 
reached in the category of organic unity affords it a more 
favourable basis. And the conception of organic unity only 
reaches its full importance when we recognize, not only that the 


CH. xxI] SUMMARY OF RESULTS 173 


universe contains such unities, but that it is also itself such a 
unity. Only, therefore, when the conception of organic unity is 
applied to the universe as a whole, does that conception become 
really important for mysticism. If, for example, as I suggested 
above, the explanation of Spinoza’s Third Knowledge, and the 
consequent intellectual love of God, is to be sought in the 
difference between organic unity and unity of composition, it 
is only in the application of the conception of organic unity to 
the universe as a whole that the explanation is to be found. 

But this one fixed point of the universe, while, as we have 
said, important in itself, does nothing to introduce order among 
the different substances which are its parts. If we are to find 
any order, we must look further. 


CHAPTER XXII 
INFINITE DIVISIBILITY OF SUBSTANCE 


161. At the end of the last chapter we were left with the 
result that the parts of the universe were combined in wholes 
which overlapped one another with enormous complexity— 
perhaps with infinite complexity. No principle had been dis- 
covered which enabled us to assert that among all such com- 
binations of substantial content, any were more intricate or 
fundamental than the rest. The universe itself, indeed, was 
found to be in a unique position. But this goes a very little 
way towards introducing order into the existent. 

Another question now arises. Every substance, except the 
universe, is a part of another substance. And many substances 
are both parts of other substances, and wholes of which other 
substances are parts. But is this true of all substances, or are 
there some which are parts without being wholes? In other 
words, are there any simple substances? 

If no substance is simple, then every substance has content, 
since content has been defined as that plurality which is identical 
in different sets of parts of a whole. And, conversely, if a sub- 
stance has content, it has parts, and so will not be simple. Thus 
our question may also be put—has every substance content? 

162. Itis clear that a substance is not simple if it is divisible 
at all, even if there are certain ways in which it is not divisible. 
In other words it must be indivisible in every Dimension. 

The conception of dimension is applicable, not only in 
space, but wherever a series can be found. The terms of any 
series form a field of one dimension. Wherever there is a series 
such that each of its members is again a series, we have a field 
of two dimensions. The members of this field are each in some 
one position in one series, and in some one position in the other. 
If each of these members is again a series, we have a field of 
three dimensions, and so on!. 

1 Cp. Russell, Principles of Mathematics, Section 354. 


CH. Xx] DIVISIBILITY OF SUBSTANCE 175 


We shall speak of a substance as possessing a dimension 
wherever it forms either a series or a term of a series in that 
dimension. Thus we shall say that a line possesses the dimensions 
of breadth and thickness as well as the dimension of length; 
and that an individual moment in the time series possesses the 
dimension of time. This is a departure from the ordinary usage 
of geometry, which would say that a line possesses no spatial 
dimension, except length. 

When dimension is defined in this way, it is clear that, 
while it is applicable to the dimensions of space, it is also 
applicable elsewhere. If what is three-dimensional in space is 
also in time, then it has time as a fourth dimension. For when 
we have got any member of the three-dimensional field of 
space—anything which occupies some one position in each of 
the three spatial series—the states of that thing at the different 
moments of time form another series. 

Again, a pleasure may be said to have at least two dimen- 
sions. For a pleasure lasts for a certain time, and has at each 
moment of that time a certain intensity—the same or different. 
And therefore, by our definition of dimension, it has two dimen- 
sions just as much as a figure which has a certain length hori- 
zontally, and at each point of this has a certain particular 
height—the same or different. 

163. Are any substances simple? We must begin our en- 
quiry by noticing that the question cannot be decided by argu- 
ments drawn from our perceptions. Whatever we perceive is a 
substance, and, if we perceived anything which we knew to be 
simple, we should know that there were simple substances, 
though it would not be certain that all compound substances 
consisted of simple substances. But, in point of fact, nothing 
that is perceived is simple. 

We perceive, to begin with, sense-data, which are appre- 
hended by means of the external senses. And we also perceive, 
by introspection, events in our own minds, which we have 
classed with the sense-data under the more general name of 
perception-data. Now in the first place there appears to be 
reason to think that every perception-datum has extensive 
quantity, in the form of what has been called extensity. In this 


176 INFINITE DIVISIBILITY [BK III 


case every perception-datum will have parts. But the extensity 
of all perception-data has been denied. Nor is their extensity 
necessary to prove our present assertion. 

For, as we have seen, time is a dimension of whatever exists 
in time. And everything which exists through several parts of 
time will have, as its own parts, itself as existing in each of 
those parts of time. “St Paul’s Cathedral in the nineteenth 
century,” and “St Paul’s Cathedral in 1801,” are both names 
of substances. But they are the names of different substances, 
since many assertions are true of St Paul’s in the nineteenth 
century which are not true of St Paul’s in 1801, and vice versa. 
And the second substance is part of the first. If we take the 
substances which are named “St Paul’s in 1801,” “St Paul’s in 
1802,” and so on to “St Paul’s in 1900,” they will together 
include all the content which is included in “St Paul’s in the 
nineteenth century.” 

Now every perception-datum which I perceive lasts for a 
finite time. Stimuli which follow one another at a certain rate, 
give us separate perceptions of separate and successive sense- 
data. But if they follow on one another more rapidly they give 
us a single sense-datum, in which there are no successive parts 
which are separate sense-data. Thus there is a minimum dura- 
tion for a sense-datum, and all sense-data last through a period 
of time. So also do the perception-data which are not sense-data. 
Now if the perception-datum lasts through a period of time, it 
is divisible in the dimension of time. If time has no simple 
parts, the perception-datum will have no simple parts. Ifevery 
period of time has an infinite number of simple parts, the per- 
ception-datum will have an infinite number of parts which will 
not be further divisible in this dimension. If a period of time 
has a finite number of simple parts, the datum will have a finite 
number of parts which will not be further divisible in this 
dimension. But, in any case, every period of time is divisible 
into parts, and therefore every perception-datum will be divisible 
into parts. 

1 T do not mean that whatever has quantity has parts. Some relations have 


quantity, but they are not divisible into smaller relations. My assertion is that 
all substances which have extensive quantity have parts. 


CH. Xxit] _ OF SUBSTANCE 177 


164. It might be objected that a perception-datum does 
not always change while it is perceived, and that if there is no 
change there will be no successive parts. But this would be 
incorrect, for the nature of anything which exists through time 
cannot be exactly the same at two different moments of time. 
At the later moment its temporal relations to various events in 
the past and future will be more or less different from what 
they were at the earlier moment. And a difference in relations 
involves a difference in relational qualities. 

We must remember also that a substance is not necessarily 
simple because it cannot be divided into parts which have the 
same nature as itself in any particular respect. A college, for 
example, in spite of the fact that it does not consist of colleges, 
is not a simple substance, since it does consist of human beings. 
In ordinary life this distinction is clearly recognized. But in 
philosophical discussion there is sometimes a tendency to assume 
that a sense-datum, for example, is simple if it cannot be 
analyzed into sense-data, and to ignore the fact that the shortest 
possible sense-datum is compound in respect of the still shorter 
parts of which it consists. 

165. It would be universally admitted that each of us per- 
ceives sense-data and also, by introspection, various events which 
take place within himself. I think that, in addition to this, it is 
possible for a man to perceive himself, and that most men do so 
frequently, though not always. The correctness of this view will 
be discussed in a later part of this work}. At present it is suf- 
ficient to point out that, if a man does perceive himself, he does 
not by doing so perceive anything which is simple. In the first 
place each self has many parts which are simultaneous. At 
many moments, if not at all moments, the field of consciousness 
is differentiated. And if, as I believe to be the case, the per- 
ceptions, judgments and volitions of a self are parts of that 
self, this would prove that the self was not simple. 

But the view that perceptions, judgments and volitions are 
parts of the self which experiences them has been denied. And 
it is not necessary for our present purpose to decide the question?. 


1 Book V. 
2 This also will be discussed in Book V. 


178 INFINITE DIVISIBILITY [BK II 


It is certain, at any rate, that any perception I have of myself 
is of that self as existing through a certain duration of time. 
And the self which is thus perceived is therefore not simple, 
since it consists of as many parts as there are parts of time 
through which it exists?. 

Our argument, then, for holding that we perceive nothing 
simple rests on the fact that all we perceive is divisible in time. 
It would not be invalidated if we came to the conclusion that 
time has simple parts. For we are not here trying to show that 
what is perceived in time has no simple parts, but that what is 
perceived in time has no simple parts which are perceived. Nor 
would it be invalidated by a demonstration that time was unreal. 
For, even if time should prove to be mere appearance, yet what- 
ever appears as an event in time would really exist, though it 
would not really be an event, or temporal. And thus the plurality 
which was the basis of our argument would not disappear. 

166. Our result, so far, is merely negative. There is nothing 
in our perception of substances to give us any reason to believe 
that there are simple substances. But this leaves it possible 
that even the substances which we perceive consist of simple 
substances which we do not perceive. It may still be the case 
that all compound substances—and a fortiori that some com- 
pound substances—consist of simple substances. 

167. We come back, then, to the main question. Can a 
substance exist without content, and so be simple? It seems to 
me that it cannot—that there can be no substance without 


1 Tf, owing to its duration in time, the perceived self cannot be simple, 
a fortiori the self as a whole cannot be simple, since that exists through a dura- 
tion of which the duration of the self perceived in any one perception is only a 
part. In order not to exaggerate the significance of our denial of the simplicity 
of the self, it must be remembered that, by the assertion that A has B and C 
as its parts, we do not assert that A is less of a unity, or less important, than 
Bor C. For all our interests, theoretical and practical, it may be the whole which 
is important, and not its parts. And if any of the substances in the universe 
can be shown to be more ultimate and fundamental than others, it may be A, 
and not B and C, which rank highest in this respect. 

It must also be remembered that, when we assert that a self has parts, we 
are not asserting that its parts could exist, like the parts of human bodies, or 
of other material compounds, sometimes as parts of that self, and sometimes 
not as parts of it. And the objections made to the assertion that a self has parts 
are sometimes due to a failure to sce this. 


CH. XXII] OF SUBSTANCE 179 


content, and therefore none without parts, so that there can be 
no simple substance. 

The result thus reached is of great importance. The impossi- 
bility of simple substances is, in itself, a matter of considerable 
theoretical interest. But its consequences, as it seems to me, 
have still greater interest—not only theoretical but practical. 
(The rest of this work will consist to a large extent of a deduction 
of these consequences.) Our decision on this point, therefore, 
requires the most careful consideration. 

The proposition that no substance can exist without content 
is clearly synthetic. We do not mean by substance that which 
has no content. We defined it as that which has qualities and 
stands in relations without being itself a quality or a relation. 
In saying that it has content, we are not asserting over again 
that it is substance, but asserting a fact about substance. 

And the proposition is, I think, self-evident and ultimate. 
It is self-evident, because it does not need proof; and it is 
ultimate because it cannot be proved from any proposition 
more clearly self-evident. All that each of us can do is to regard 
it carefully, and to see whether he does accept it as self-evident. 
It does not follow that exposition and discussion will be useless. 
They may clear away misapprehensions, make the meaning of 
the proposition clearer, suggest consequences of its truth or 
falsehood which may make its truth or falsehood more clearly 
evident. But a positive proof is impossible. 

168. There are, it must be admitted, several considerations 
which should make us hesitate before we accept the view that 
every substance must have content and parts. In the first 
place, while the proposition, as we have just said, is put forward 
as self-evident and ultimate, it is certainly not universally 
accepted as such. Indeed, as far as I know, the assertion that 
it is self-evident and ultimate has never been made before. 
This does not show that the assertion is wrong. Among self- 
evident and ultimate propositions there are some—the Law of 
Excluded Middle, for example—which are, as a matter of fact, 
so obvious that they are universally accepted as self-evident 
and ultimate. But there are others whose self-evidence and 
ultimate truth, though just as real, does not suggest itself till 


180 INFINITE DIVISIBILITY [BK 111 


after long and careful examination and analysis of the facts of 
experience. Our assertion, therefore, need not be mistaken 
because it is new. But, on the other hand, the rash acceptance 
of propositions as self-evident and ultimate has been a fruitful 
source of error. And undoubtedly we take a very heavy intel- 
lectual responsibility when, without the universal concurrence 
of mankind, we assert of any proposition that, though it cannot 
be proved, it ought not to be doubted. 

169. There is a second risk of error which also requires 
careful attention. It seems clear that we do not know what a 
simple substance would, in the ordinary phrase, “be like”— 
that is, we do not know what other qualities it would, or could, 
have, except those which were implied in its being a substance, 
and in being without content. For, as was shown above, we 
never perceive a simple substance, and, as far as I can see, it is 
quite impossible to imagine a simple substance. But the limits 
of our imagination are not the limits of possibility. We cannot 
therefore argue from the impossibility of imagining simple sub- 
stances to the impossibility of their existence. And we must be 
on our guard against making the mistake of confusing the two 
impossibilities, and of supposing that we see clearly the impos- 
sibility of a simple substance, when in reality all we see is our 
failure to imagine a simple substance. 

170. There is a third risk of error of the danger of which, so 
far as it affects myself, I am profoundly conscious. With the 
help of the result which we are now discussing, I believe it 
possible, as I shall explain in the later Books of this work, to 
reach conclusions which, to me at any rate, seem very desirable. 
Without this result I do not see how any conclusions can be 
reached which are nearly so desirable. The history of philosophy 
shows with weary repetition how easy it is to accept a propo- 
sition as true, if its truth is held desirable, on evidence which 
would never have been deemed sufficient if its correctness had 
not been desired. All that I can say is that I have never for- 
gotten this danger, and that I have done all that I could to 
guard myself against it. 

171. But, after taking account of all these grounds for 
hesitation, it does seem to me that we must accept the pro- 


CH. XXIT]} OF SUBSTANCE 181 


position that a substance must have content and parts. As far 
as I can see there is a positive connection between the two 
qualities—the quality of being a substance and the quality of 
having content and parts. Just as our belief in the law of 
Excluded Middle rests, not on the impossibility of imagining a 
statement which was neither true nor false, but on the recog- 
nition of the positive necessity that whatever is a statement 
should be either true or false, so in this case also we are not 
dependent on the failure of our imagination, but on the recog- 
nition of an immediate implication of one quality by the other. 

The matter can be put in different ways, and although 
these furnish no proof of our contention—which we have ad- 
mitted to be incapable of proof—still they may make the matter 
clearer. We may ask ourselves whether a substance could be 
made without a filling of some sort, and whether there could 
be any filling for a substance except a set of parts. Or we may 
reflect that if a substance had no parts there would be nothing 
inside it, and we may ask ourselves whether the conception of a 
substance with no inside is tenable. 

Another way in which we may regard our problem—and one 
which I think does make it clearer—is with reference to internal 
structure. By internal structure I do not mean anything which 
implies any high degree of organization or unity, but a quality 
which inevitably belongs to any whole of parts. The parts of 
such a whole will necessarily have some relations to each other, 
and the fact that it has these related parts is what I mean by 
its having internal structure. A simple substance could, of 
course, have no internal structure. And it seems to me that 
when we endeavour to separate the two qualities of substanti- 
ality and internal structure we find them connected in such a 
way that the separation is impossible, since the removal of the 
second implies the removal of the first. The peculiar sort of 
reality which a substance must have, if it is to be real at all, 
depends on possession of internal structure. 

172. Another point which must not be forgotten is that a 
simple substance could have no history, and no duration. For 
it must be undivided in any dimension, and, for anything which 
exists in time, time is a dimension. I think that some of the 


182 INFINITE DIVISIBILITY [BK III 


writers who appear to have no difficulty in accepting the 
possibility of simple substances have ignored this point, and, 
while they fix their attention on the absence of simultaneous 
differentiation, make no attempt to exclude successive differ- 
entiation. If they realized that their substance, besides having 
no simultaneous parts, could only exist for one simple and 
indivisible moment of time, they might revise their judgment 
about the possibility of simple substances?. 

173. And we must also remember that the question is about 
the possibility of a simple substance—that is, one which has no 
parts at all. A substance which has any parts is not simple, 
although its parts are so closely attached to one another that 
there is no known force which can separate them. Nor is it 
even simple if the nature of its parts is such that it can be seen 
@ priori to be impossible that any of them should exist except 
as parts of that whole, or that the whole should exist without 
any one of them. If these things are true, the whole will be 
more closely united than it would otherwise have been, but it 
will still be compound and not simple. 

Now in some cases I think that this has been forgotten, and 
that it has been asserted that simple substances were possible, 
when the conception in the thinker’s mind was not really one of 
a simple substance, but of a compound substance closely united. 

174. It seems to me then, that it is self-evidently and ulti- 
mately true that every substance must have content and parts, 


1 I am not suggesting that a substance cannot exist at a single and indi- 
visible moment of time. It is clear that, if there are single and indivisible 
moments of time at all, there must be substances—which would in ordinary 
language be called states of more persistent substances—each of which exists 
only at one of these moments. And, as I shall try to show in my second volume, 
there seems good reason for holding that the series which appears to us as the 
time-series is made up of simple and indivisible terms. It will follow that when 
the series appears to us as the time-series, these terms will appear as simple and 
indivisible moments. And thus there will be substances each of which will, 
sub specie temporis, exist only at one of such moments. 

My point is that there cannot be a substance which is absolutely simple and 
has no parts in any dimension, and that some people fail to see this because 
they have not excluded the idea of successive parts from the conception which 
they are forming, and therefore are not really contemplating the conception of 
a simple substance. The true solution is, as I shall argue in the second volume, 
that there are substances which are indivisible in the dimension of apparent time, 
but that, in other dimensions, they are divisible into parts of parts to infinity. 


CH. XxIt| OF SUBSTANCE 183 


and that there is no simple substance. But it has been admitted 
that this is by no means so certain as, for example, the self- 
evident and ultimate truth of the Law of Excluded Middle, or of 
Kuclid’s first axiom. And if we could find any circumstances 
which raised a strong presumption against the proposition being 
true at all, we might find reason to doubt our conclusion that it 
is self-evidently and ultimately true. Can we find anything 
which would raise such a presumption? 

In the first place, is there any reason to suppose that the 
hypothesis that the proposition was true would involve a contra- 
diction? I do not see any way in which it could be supposed 
that it did involve a contradiction, except one. If every sub- 
stance has parts, then every substance has an unending series 
of sets of parts, since each part in any set will be a substance 
which has parts, and the parts of the parts will form a fresh set 
of parts of the original whole. It might be said that this infinite 
series was vicious. This point will be discussed in the next two 
chapters. 

175. In the second place, is there any presumption raised 
against our view by the fact that there are simple character- 
istics? It is beyond doubt that there are simple characteristics. 
Red, for example, is a simple quality. And, further, it is beyond 
doubt that there are no compound characteristics except such 
as are composed of simple characteristics. Every quality and 
every relation must mean something, so that when it is asserted 
that anything has that quality, or stands in that relation to 
anything, the assertion may be significant. And the meaning 
of a compound characteristic depends on the meanings of its 
parts. A compound characteristic, therefore, which had no 
simple parts, would involve a vicious infinite regress. Its 
meaning would depend on the meaning of some set of its parts. 
But, whatever set might be taken, the meaning of each term in 
it would depend on the meaning of a set of its parts, and so on 
infinitely. The meaning of the original characteristic could only 
be fixed when the end of the series had been reached, and terms 
had been found whose meaning did not depend on anything 
beyond themselves. And as the series would have no end, 
there would be no such terms in it. Such a compound char- 


184 INFINITE DIVISIBILITY [BK III 


acteristic, therefore, would have no meaning, and so could not 
be real. 

But the occurrence of simple characteristics gives no pre- 
sumption in favour of simple substances. For it is evident that, 
if there were simple substances, the relations between them and 
compound substances would be very different from those be- 
tween simple and compound characteristics. We cannot be 
aware of a compound characteristic without being aware of the 
simple characteristics of which it consists. This follows from 
what was said above, since to be aware of a characteristic is to 
know its meaning!. But we can be aware of a compound sub- 
stance without being aware of the simple substances which 
compose it. For the awareness of a substance is perception, 
and we can perceive a compound substance without perceiving 
any simple substances as its parts. Indeed, as was shown 
above, we never do perceive simple substances, and therefore, 
whether they exist or not, we are not aware of them. Simple 
substances, then, if they did exist, would be in relations to 
compound substances so different from those which hold 
between simple and compound characteristics, that the reality 
of simple characteristics gives no presumption for the existence 
of simple substances. 

Indeed I think that the consideration of simple character- 
istics should rather strengthen our belief that we judged rightly 
in regarding the impossibility of simple substances as a self- 
evident truth. For it seems to me that the possibility of a 
characteristic being both real and simple can be seen to depend 
on its being a characteristic; or, as it might otherwise be ex- 
pressed, of being a universal, or being significant. I do not mean 
that the possibility of its being a real and simple characteristic 
depends on its being a characteristic—which would be tau- 


1 We can, of course, have an exclusive description of a compound char- 
acteristic without being aware of the simple characteristics which compose it. 
Humanity, for example, is a compound quality. And if I know of humanity 
only that it is the chief subject discussed by a certain writer in the twentieth 
chapter of his first book, I shall have an exclusive description of humanity 
without being aware of any of the qualities which compose it. But then I shall 
not be aware of humanity. I shall have a description of it which applies to 
nothing else, but I shall not be aware of it, since I shall not know what it means. 


CH. Xx11] OF SUBSTANCE 185 


tologous—but that the possibility of its being real and simple 
depends on its being a characteristic. This would support the 
view that a substance cannot be both real and simple. It is 
not much more than a fresh expression of our original pro- 
position; but, as we have said, it is by such restatements that 
we may hope to throw light on the contention that a proposition 
is ultimately true. 

176. In the third place, do we find in what is taught us by 
science anything which could give us a presumption in favour 
of simple substances? Supposing that views which were 
generally accepted in science did involve the existence of simple 
substances, we should have to enquire into the precise meta- 
physical significance of those views, and to consider whether, in 
rejecting simple substances, we should really come into conflict 
with science, or only with the uncritical metaphysics of scientists. 
But it is not necessary to consider this question, because there 
is nothing in any of the teachings of science which involves the 
existence of simple substances. 

It has never been suggested, I think, that anything in the 
science of psychology rendered probable the existence of simple 
substances—in the sense in which we have used this phrase. If 
any science demands it, then, it must be physical science, and 
the simple substances must be—or appear as—matter. Nothing 
can be simple, as we have seen, if it has extension in space, since 
then it must be spatially divisible. Does physical science suggest 
that anything which is spatially indivisible does exist? 

It might be said that physical science asserts that the truths 
of geometry are applicable to existent matter in space, and that’ 
this involves that something exists of which the conception of 
a spatially indivisible point is true. 

This, however, would not show that the substance which 
was spatially indivisible was a simple substance, since it might 
be divisible in some other dimension. The objects of physical 
science have the dimension of time as well as those of space, 
and I do not know that there is anything in science which 
would make it difficult to hold that, in the dimension of time, 
every part was divisible into other parts to infinity. 

I do not, however, wish to press this point, because, as I 


H 


186 INFINITE DIVISIBILITY [BK III 


said above, I believe that the time series is composed of simple 
parts. But there might be differentiation in other dimensions. 
For example, there is perhaps no inherent impossibility in 
spatial relations existing between minds, and, if there were 
such relations, it might also be the case that there were no 
spatial relations between the parts of any mind, and that the 
mind, therefore, was not spatially divisible, while it had spatial 
relations. Such a mind would therefore, among other qualities, 
have the quality of being a geometrical point. But it would not 
be a simple substance, for it would have non-spatial parts. And 
the possibility would remain that none of its parts were simple 
in this dimension. 

Science does not assert, of course, that this is so, but there 
is nothing in the hypothesis which is incompatible with any 
scientific result. And if this were the only alternative which 
would avoid simple substances, we should be entitled to accept 
it, since we have found reason to believe simple substances to 
be impossible. 

177. There is, however, no necessity to adopt this hypo- 
thesis, for, even without it, we should not be compelled to 
accept simple substances. There is nothing in science which 
compels us to believe that anything spatial contains parts which 
are not spatially divided. 

And this conclusion does not depend on the view w that space - 
is only an illusion, and that whatever appears to us as in space 
is really non-spatial. I believe this to be the case. But we need 
not rely on it in order to avoid simple substances.» Even if 
space were absolutely real, there would be no reason to hold 
that the contents of space had simple parts. 

It is true that geometry deals with points, which are spatially 
indivisible, and that geometry has a certain relation to what 
exists in space. The assertions of geometry—for example, that 
two sides of a triangle are always longer than the third side— 
do give us valid information about everyday objects. If three 
streets, when correctly drawn on a map, are not to be dis- 
tinguished from the drawing of a triangle, we can be sure that, 
in walking from one corner to another, we shall have further to 
walk if we go through two streets than if we go through one. 


cH. xxi] OF SUBSTANCE 187 


But we have no reason to think that the assertions of geometry 
are exactly applicable to what exists in space. Our reasons for 
believing that they are applicable at all are only empirical—we 
see that, in point of fact, they are applicable. And the only 
conclusion which can thus be justified is that the axioms of 
geometry are approximately true of the existent. We cannot 
tell if they are exactly true of it, for our powers of observa- 
tion are limited, and, however closely we can observe, there 
will always be variations which would be too small to be 
observed, and which no observation will assure us are absent. 

If existent space had no simple parts, it would contain no 
points, lines or planes!. But since it is infinitely divisible it will 
contain parts which are smaller, narrower and thinner than any 
given part. It will contain, therefore, parts whose size, breadth, 
or thickness are too small to be observed, by any finite powers 
of observation. No observation therefore can tell us whether 
existent space is such that it has no simple parts, or whether it 
is such that geometry is exactly applicable to it. And thus 
science does not demand that what is spatially existent shall 
have simple parts?. 

178. But, it may be objected in the fourth place, though 
the conclusions of science do not require that any substance 
should be simple, yet the conceptions of science are such that 
their occurrence refutes our contention that no substance can 
be simple. For, it may be said, geométry gives us a perfectly 
clear conception of a point, and one which involves no impos- 
sibility. Now a point, which is defined as having no parts, 
would be simple. But a point is a substance, since it has qualities 
and stands in relations, without being itself a quality or a rela- 
tion. And thus, it would be urged, we have a clear conception 
of a certain sort of simple substance which involves no impossi- 


1 Strictly speaking, perhaps, nothing but the points would be necessarily 
excluded. But it is not probable that space would have simple parts in respect 
of one of its dimensions, and yet have no simple parts with respect to one or 
both of the others. 

2 Sections 176 and 177 were written before the publication of Dr Whitehead’s 
Principles of Natural Knowledge. On this subject Dr Whitehead speaks with a 
competence and a knowledge which I am far from possessing. That my conclu- 
sions should agree with his has much strengthened my confidence in them. 


188 INFINITE DIVISIBILITY [BK III 


bility. And this refutes the contention that there is an intrinsic 
impossibility that a substance should be simple. 

This objection, however, is unjustifiable. A point is no 
doubt a substance. But to be a point is a quality. A substance 
which was a point would have other qualities besides this 
quality of punctuality. And they might be such that it was 
divisible in other dimensions, in spite of being a point. It might 
be divisible in time, if it persisted through time, or in some 
such way as was mentioned in Section 176. Since a substance 
which was a point could be divisible in this way, the fact that 
we have a clear conception of a point does not prove that we 
have a clear conception of an indivisible substance. 

Of course many people have had a clear conception of a 
geometrical point who did not realize that a substance which 
was such a point need not be simple. But this does not affect 
the argument. Anyone has a clear conception of a geometrical 
point who knows the definition of such a point and is aware of 
the simple characteristics which enter into that definition. The 
clearness of his conception will be the’same, whether he draws 
from it the right conclusion that a substance which is such a 
point need not be simple, or the wrong conclusion that such a 
substance must be simple, or whether he draws no conclusion 
on the subject at all. 

179. Finally it might be said that the novelty of our view, 
while not actually proving it to be false, did raise a presumption 
against it. If it is really a self-evident and ultimate truth that 
no substance can exist without content, is it probable that the 
impossibility of simple substances, which follows from it so 
directly, should not have been accepted long ago, very generally, 
if not universally ? 

But it must be remembered that, though ultimate truths 
are logically prior to all others, they are not always the truths 
which occur to us first when we contemplate any particular 
subject. And there would be nothing very suspicious in the 


1 The question whether there are simple parts in the time series is not relevant 
here. I am endeavouring to disprove the contention that the quality of being a 
geometrical point involves the quality of being indivisible. And this would be 
disproved by the possibility of its being divisible in time, even if it were divisible 
into indivisible parts. 


CH. XxII] OF SUBSTANCE 189 


fact that substance had been discussed for many years without 
one particular ultimate truth about substance being discovered. 
And it becomes still less suspicious when we remember that 
many questions may be raised and settled about substance 
without determining the possibility of simple substances. 

Looking back on the history of modern philosophy, we shall 
find that Leibnitz did, in effect, reject simple substances; for 
though he called his monads simple, he treated their perceptions 
as their parts, and, since a monad perceived the perceptions of any 
other monad in perceiving that othermonad, the perceptions, and 
so the monads, were differentiated into parts of parts to infinity. 
Schelling’s theory of substance, if I understand it rightly, also 
involved that there were no simple substances. Kant’s views as 
to the nature of noumenal substance, which were based exclu- 
sively on ethical grounds, seem to leave it quite open whether 
there were or were not any simple substances. Neither Descartes 
nor Spinoza can be taken as being on either side of the question. 
Material substance for Descartes, and all substance for Spinoza, 
were infinitely divisible, but it was of no importance to their 
systems whether substance was divided into an infinite number 
of simple substances, or whether every part of it was again 
divisible. And although Descartes called selves simple, he did 
not affirm them to be simple in the sense in which we have used 
the word, since he admitted that they possessed simultaneous 
differentiations and successive states. Fichte and Lotze, again, 
do not deal with the problem at all. 

It is rather difficult to say what Hegel’s position was on this 
question. If I am right in my interpretation of his system, he 
regarded the universe as having a set of parts, each member of 
which was a self, which was conscious of all the other selves?. 
If they were also conscious of the parts of those other selves, 
and if the consciousness was perception rather than judgment, 
this would involve that there was no simple substance?. 

I believe that Hegel did regard the selves as being conscious 
of the parts of the other selves, and that he regarded this con- 


1 Cp. my Commentary on Hegel's Logic. 
2 For a proof that the impossibility of simple substances would follow from 
these premises, cp. below, Section 236, where a similar hypothesis is discussed. 


190 INFINITE DIVISIBILITY [BK III 


sciousness as perceptual in its nature. But I should doubt if he 
ever drew the conclusion that there could be nosimple substances. 

The result, I think, is that in the whole line of great philoso- 
phers from Descartes to Lotze, only the British Empiricists 
affirmed the existence of simple substances. All of the others, 
if they have not denied the existence of simple substances, have 
not affirmed the existence of such substances, or even failed to 
find them impossible, but have never raised the question at all. 

If we turn to the philosophy of the present day we find very 
little ontological discussion of substance. This is largely due to 
the great extent to which that philosophy has based even its 
ontological conclusions on purely epistemological considerations. 
When the attention of philosophers has been directed so little 
to the subject, it need not arouse surprise if we find reason to 
believe that more remains to be said about it. 

180. Our conclusion, then, is that there are no simple sub- 
stances, and that every substance has parts within parts to 
infinity. Every substance is thus infinitely divisible. But this 
infinite divisibility is of course of a different type from the 
infinite divisibility generally asserted of time and space. It is 
generally held that time and space have simple parts, but that 
the number of these simple parts in any time or space, however 
small, is infinite, because no parts in the series are next to one 
another. But in the type of infinite divisibility which we are - 
considering here, it is possible—though not necessary—that 
there should always be next terms, and it is possible therefore 
that the number of terms in each set of parts should be finite. 
The necessity of infinite divisibility comes in through the fact 
that beyond any set of parts, A, there is always another, con- 
sisting of the parts of the parts of A. 

181. Can we say, then, that the sets of parts of any sub- 
stance form an infinite series? This is only correct if we make 


1 In the senses in which they themselves used the word substance, Locke 
did not assert the existence of simple substances, while Hume denied the exist- 
ence of all substances. But the ideas of Locke, and the impressions and ideas 
of Hume, would be substances according to our definition. And when one of 
these is what Locke or Hume would call simple, and when it occupies only a 
minimum perceptible of time, it would seem that it is to be taken as absolutely 
indivisible, and so as a simple substance. 


CH. XxIT] OF SUBSTANCE 191 


the qualification that it is not always the case that two sets of 
parts have definite positions in the series with reference to each 
other. There will be sets such that neither of them can be 
reached from the other by further division. This is the case, for 
example, with the two sets of parts of the United Kingdom, one 
of which consists of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland, and 
the other consists of Great Britain, Ulster, Munster, Leinster 
and Connaught. Two sets only hold definite places in the series 
in reference to each other, if no part in the second set falls 
within more than one part of the first, while at least one part 
of the first set contains more than one part of the second. (It 
is not necessary that each part of the first should do so. If B 
and C formed the first set, the second set might be D, FE and C, 
where D and E were a set of parts of B.) In t’is case we may 
conveniently speak of the second set as Sequent to the first, 
and of the first as Precedent to the second. 

It is to be noticed, however, that, even when neither of two 
sets is sequent to the other, there is always to be found a set 
which is sequent to both, because, in any whole which has no 
simple parts, there is always some set of parts which can be 
reached by division from each of any two sets of parts. Thus 
the set of counties of the United Kingdom would be sequent to 
both the sets given above. 

It is no objection to our theory that it involves an infinite 
series, for not all infinite series are vicious. But some infinite 
series are vicious. In the next chapter we shall consider whether 
such a series as this would in any case be vicious. 

The result of this chapter is to leave us, so far, with the want: 
of order, discussed in the last chapter, in an aggravated form. 
If there had been simple substances, they might have ranked 
together with the universe as the most fundamental unities 
of the existent. They might, indeed, have more claim to such a 
position than the universe itself. This chance, then, of finding 
some fixed points in the unending complexity of wholes and 
parts, is lost. But when we consider further all that is implied 
in the fact that every substance is divisible, we may succeed in 
finding a principle of order which will be sufficiently far-reaching. 


CHAPTER XXIII 
THE CONTRADICTION OF INFINITE DIVISIBILITY 


182. We have come to the conclusion, then, that no simple 
substances can exist, and that every substance that does exist 
is divided into parts, which again have other parts, and so on to 
infinity. We must now enquire whether this infinite series of 
sets of parts involves any contradiction. If we did arrive at 
the conclusion that it did involve a contradiction, we should no 
doubt be bound to scrutinize with additional care our conclusion 
that no simple substance could exist. For, if we found ourselves 
compelled to adhere to that conclusion, we should be confronted 
with a hopeless difficulty. We have seen that some substances 
do exist. And we have just decided that all substances must 
consist of parts of parts to infinity. If we were compelled to add 
to this the further conclusion that no substance can, without 
contradiction, be divided into parts of parts to infinity, we could 
not escape from contradiction in any way. If, on the other 
hand, we should find that such an infinite series of parts of parts 
would involve a contradiction unless the substance had a - 
certain nature, we should be certain that all substances had 
that nature, since under no other conditions could they have 
the infinite series of sets of parts which they do have. © 

I believe that this is the case—that the infinite series in 
question does involve a contradiction unless the substance is 
of a certain nature, and that we may conclude, therefore, that 
it is of that nature. The discussion of this question will occupy 
the present chapter, and the first of the next Book. 

The mere fact that a series is infinite is, as we have seen, no 
reason for condemning it as vicious. The infinity of some series 
renders them vicious, but other infinite series are perfectly 
legitimate. Nor can we argue that infinite divisibility would be 
vicious, in the case of substances, because it would admittedly 
be vicious in the case of characteristics!. But it seems to me 

1 Cp. Section 175, 


CH. XXIII] INFINITE DIVISIBILITY 193 


that, unless certain conditions are complied with, it is vicious for 
another reason. 

183. This reason depends on the occurrence, between a sub- 
stance and its parts, of a relation which I propose to call Pre- 
supposition. I should define Presupposition as follows. When 
the occurrence of the quality X determines intrinsically the 
occurrence of either the quality Y or the quality Z (whether as 
belonging to the same subject as X, or to some other), but does 
not intrinsically determine whether it shall be Y or Z which 
does occur, then X is said to presuppose Y or Z. In this state- 
ment, however, though it seems the natural way to express the 
relation, the phrase “Y or Z” is used ambiguously. For we 
have said both that X intrinsically determines Y or Z, and that 
it presupposes them, whereas nothing can both determine 
intrinsically and presuppose the same thing. A more accurate 
expression is that X determines intrinsically Y-or-Z, but that 
it either presupposes Y or presupposes Z, according as Y or Z 
does actually occur’. (In this statement Y and Z are to be 
taken as standing for any number of terms not less than two.) 

Thus the possession by any substance of the quality of being 
human intrinsically determines that the same substance shall 
be male-or-female, and presupposes either that it is male or 
that it is female, according to which it is. Again, the possession 
by any substance of the quality of being a human parent 
intrinsically determines that some other substance shall be 
son-or-daughter, and presupposes either that it is a son, or that 
it is a daughter. 

It may be the case that whatever is either Y or Z is also W. 
Then X will intrinsically determine that something is W, but 
will not intrinsically determine what sort of W it is. In this 
case we shall say that X intrinsically determines W, but pre- 
supposes some particular W. Thus, in our first case the quality 
of humanity intrinsically determines the quality of sexual 

1 [ have taken in the text the case in which X determines the occurrence of 
either Y or Z, but excludes the occurrence of both together. If we take a case 
in which X renders the occurrence of either Y or Z necessary, while the occur- 
rence of both is possible, we may put it that X intrinsically determines Y-alone- 


or-Z-alone-or-YZ, but that it either presupposes Y alone, or presupposes Z 
alone, or presupposes YZ, where “‘ Y alone” means “ Y without Vb” 


194 THE CONTRADICTION OF [BK III 


differentiation but presupposes some particular kind of sexual 
differentiation. And in our second case the quality of being a 
human parent intrinsically determines (this time in another 
substance) the quality of being sexually differentiated, while it 
presupposes some particular sexual differentiation. 

184. The nature of presupposition may be expressed not 
unfairly by saying that X presupposes whatever it requires but 
does not supply. X requires Y-or-Z, for if it occurs, something 
must occur which is Y or Z. But it does not presuppose Y-or-Z, 
for it supplies it, since it intrinsically determines it, and so, if 
we know that X occurs, we know that Y-or-Z occurs. But in 
addition to this, it either requires Y or requires Z, and this it 
does not supply. For the fact that X occurs does not determine 
whether it is Y or Z which occurs. 

It is possible that presupposition should be reciprocal, even 
when the amount given about each of the terms is equal. If it 
were the case that the series of events in time had no first or 
last terms or limits, then the fact that there were events in a 
given hour, M, would intrinsically determine that there were 
events in any subsequent hour, NV, and would presuppose their 
nature. For they must have some nature, and it would be 
impossible to infer what nature they had from the fact that 
there had been some events, whose nature was not specified, in 
@ previous hour. But, again, the fact that there were some 
events in the hour N would imply that there were events in the 
preceding hour, M, and would presuppose their nature. 

Presupposition is a transitive relation. If X presupposes 
either Y or Z, and Y presupposes either T or S, and Z presup- 
poses either U or V, then X presupposes either T or S or U or 
V. Also it is clear that, if X intrinsically determines Y, and Y 
presupposes either U or V, then X presupposes either U or V— 
unless indeed it happens that X either directly or indirectly 
determines one of the two, and consequently excludes the other. 
For X clearly requires whatever is required by what X requires, 
and therefore it must presuppose it unless it supplies it—that 
is, unless it determines it intrinsically. 

185. When X intrinsically determines W, and presupposes 
some particular W, it may happen that X and R, taken together, 


CH. XXIII] INFINITE DIVISIBILITY 195 


would intrinsically determine some particular W. Then, if R 
occurs as well as X, the fact that they do both occur will not 
presuppose some particular W, since it will intrinsically deter- 
mine the existence of that particular W. Or again, we may 
know as a matter of fact that it is some particular W, and no 
other, which is the W presupposed by X. When, in either of 
these ways, it is known what the particular W is which is pre- 
supposed by X, we may say that the W is Fixed. 

Supposing that X presupposes some particular V, and also 
some particular W, it may be the case that the fixing of the V 
would involve the fixing of the W. For example, if anything is 
triangular, that fact presupposes either that it is equilateral, or 
that it is isosceles, or that it is scalene. It also presupposes 
certain definite relations in which the magnitude of its three 
angles stand to one another. But if the relative magnitudes of 
the angles are given, the presupposition in the first case is fixed. 
If all three angles are equal to one another, the triangle is equi- 
lateral, if two are equal, it is isosceles, and if no two are equal, 
it is scalene. 

This relation between presuppositions may or may not be 
reciprocal; for if the fixing of the V involves the fixing of the 
W, it may or may not be the case that the fixing of the W 
involves the fixing of the V. If somethmg is a book on the 
shelves of a particular library, this presupposes that it has 
some particular subject, and also some particular place in the 
library. If the books in that library are arranged according to 
subjects, the fact that it has such and such a subject will imply 
that it is in such and such a place in the library. And the fact 
that it is in such and such a place will imply that it has such 
and such a subject. Thus the relation is reciprocal. On the 
other hand, if we know of something that it is a species recog- 
nized by zoology, without knowing which species it is, this pre- 
supposes that it belongs to some particular genus, and also to 
some particular order. And here the fixing of the genus involves 
the fixing of the order, but the fixing of the order does not involve 
the fixing of the genus?. 


1 Tt may be noticed also that in some cases V and W may be so related that, 
if’ V is fixed to one of its possible cases, it fixes what the case of W is, while it 


196 THE CONTRADICTION OF [BK III 


186. When two presuppositions are related in this way, it 
might be maintained that there are not really two separate pre- 
suppositions. The fact that something is a species, it may be said, 
does not really require both the genus and the order without 
supplying them, since, if the genus is given, the order is supplied 
by that fact. But I think it more accurate to say that they 
are both presuppositions, but that they do not both form part 
of the Total Ultimate Presupposition. I should define the Total 
Ultimate Presupposition of X as being the aggregate of all the 
presuppositions of X after all those have been removed, the fixing 
of which is implied in the fixing of any of those which remain. 
(In cases in which the fixing of either of two presuppositions 
reciprocally implies the fixing of the other, it is indifferent 
which of the two is eliminated.) 

Everything which has a presupposition at all has a total 
ultimate presupposition. Even if it were the case that it had 
only one presupposition, or if it were the case that none of its 
presuppositions were such that the fixing of one of them implied 
the fixing of any other, it would still be the case that it had a 
total ultimate presupposition defined as above, although in the 
first case that total ultimate presupposition would consist only 
of a single presupposition, and in neither case would there be 
any presupposition which did not form part of it. 

187. Having thus discussed the nature of presupposition, 
we must now apply the results which we have attained to the 
consideration of the question whether the impossibility of simple 
substances would in any case produce a contradiction. ~ 

Let the substance A have a set of parts B and C. Then, if 
we have sufficient descriptions of B and C, we have a sufficient 
description of A—namely, the whole which has a set of two 
parts which have respectively the sufficient descriptions of B 
and of C. (For the sake of brevity, I shall write this in future 
as “the whole which is composed of B and C.’’) This is a 


does not do so if fixed to others of its possible cases. We have seen that the 
fixing of the relative magnitudes of the angles of a triangle involves the deter- 
mination of whether it is equilateral, isosceles or scalene. This relation is not in 
all cases reciprocal, for we cannot infer the exact relative magnitudes of the 
angles from the fact that the triangle is isosceles or scalene. But if the triangle 
is equilateral, we can infer that all its angles are equal. 


CH. Xxu1I] INFINITE DIVISIBILITY 197 


sufficient description of A, for it applies to A, and to nothing 
but A, since there cannot be two wholes which have the same 
set of parts!. And this is true, whatever sufficient descriptions 
are taken of B and C. So long as they are sufficient descriptions, 
it does not matter how trivial and insignificant are the qualities 
which compose them. 

On the other hand a sufficient description of A does not 
necessarily involve sufficient descriptions of B and C. It may 
be the case that there is always some sufficient description of 
A which involves sufficient descriptions of all its parts. (We 
shall see later that this is actually the case.) But all sufficient 
descriptions of A do not involve sufficient descriptions of all 
its parts. It would be quite possible, for example, to find a 
sufficient description of some particular college, which did not 
even enable us to determine how many members composed any 
set of its parts, and which, therefore, a fortiori, did not enable 
us to determine sufficient descriptions of each of those members. 

188. A is a substance, and this quality of being a substance 
implies that it is not simple, and has therefore an infinite 
number of sets of parts. Each member of each of these sets 
must, of course, have a sufficient description. The nature of 4, 
then, since it contains the quality of being a substance, requires 
sufficient descriptions of the members of all these sets. If there 
is nothing in the nature of A which supplies these descriptions, 
it will presuppose them. 

If the nature of A presupposes sufficient descriptions of the 
members of any set, M, of its parts, it will presuppose sufficient 
descriptions of the members of any set of its parts, N, which is 
sequent to M. For if it does not presuppose them, it must 
supply them, since it requires them and can only escape pre- 
supposing them by supplying them. But sufficient descriptions 
of the members of WN will imply sufficient descriptions of the 
members of M, since each member of M is either itself a member 


1 It will be remembered that, according to our use of “whole,’’ the same 
parts form the same whole, even if they are connected by two different systems 
of relations. If B and C were connected as being father and son, and also by 
being partners in the same business, we should not say that they formed two 
wholes, but that they were one whole, whose parts were connected by two 
systems of relations. 


198 THE CONTRADICTION OF [BK III 


of N, or is a whole made up of members of NV, and, as we have 
seen, sufficient descriptions of the parts give a sufficient descrip- 
tion of the whole. And so, if the nature of A presupposes 
sufficient descriptions of the members of M, and therefore does 
not supply them, it cannot supply sufficient descriptions of the 
membersof N, since, by supplying the latter,it would supply what 
they imply—namely sufficient descriptions of the members of M. 

Since A has no simple parts, it will have an infinite number 
of sets of parts which are sequent to any given set. And, there- 
fore, if its nature presupposes sufficient descriptions of the 
members of any set of its parts, it will have an infinite number 
of presuppositions. 

The fact that A has an infinite number of presuppositions 
may not involve any contradiction. But when we consider the 
nature of these particular presuppositions, we find that a contra- 
diction is involved. 

189. We have seen that a sufficient description of any 
substance is given, if sufficient descriptions are given of all the 
members of any set of its parts. Now, in the first place, if this 
were the only way in which the sufficient description of a sub- 
stance could be given, there would be a contradiction. The fact 
that A is a substance presupposes the sufficient descriptions of 
the members of a set, M, of its parts. And these sufficient 
descriptions of the members of M could only be given, on our 
present hypothesis, by giving sufficient descriptions of the mem- 
bers of sets of their parts. These members of the sets of parts of 
members of M will also form a set of parts of A—the set N. 
And, in the same way, sufficient descriptions of the members 
of N could only be given by giving sufficient descriptions of the 
members of sets of their parts, which members will form another 
set of parts of d—the set P!. And this process will continue to 
infinity. 

Such an infinite series will be vicious. For the sufficient 
descriptions of the members of M can only be made sufficient 

1 It will be seen that V comes into this argument, not as a set of parts of 
A, but as the aggregate of the sets of parts of the members of M. In the same 
way P only comes into the argument as the aggregate of the sets of parts of the 


members of NV. In the argument in Section 191, on the other hand, N and P 
will enter as sets of parts of A. 


CH. XXIII] INFINITE DIVISIBILITY 199 


by means of sufficient descriptions of the members of N, and 
these by means of sufficient descriptions of the members of P, 
and so on infinitely. Therefore the sufficient descriptions of the 
members of M can only be made sufficient by means of the last 
stage of an unending series—that is, they cannot be made 
sufficient at all. But the existence of A, which presupposes 
sufficient descriptions of the members of M, implies that there 
are such sufficient descriptions. And therefore the fact that there 
can be no such sufficient descriptions implies a contradiction. 

190. But, it may be replied, the hypothesis which we have 
been discussing is not correct. A substance can be sufficiently 
described without describing sufficiently the members of a set 
of its parts. The United Kingdom, for example, might be de- 
scribed as a Great Power, a monarchy, a nation which possessed 
two established churches, and so on, till the description 
became sufficient, without introducing sufficient descriptions 
of any of its parts. There is therefore, it is said, the possibility 
that each part of A, in each of its infinite number of sets of 
parts, had some quality which did not consist of the possession 
of such and such parts, and which distinguished it from each 
of the infinite number of other substances in the universe. (We 
may say that when the sufficient descriptions of the members 
of M are given otherwise than by means of the sufficient 
descriptions of their sets of parts, the presuppositions by A of 
these sufficient descriptions are Independently Fixed.) In this 
case it may be said, there will be no vicious infinite series. The 
existence of A will presuppose the sufficient descriptions of each 
of its parts in every set, but each of these presuppositions will 
be independently fixed by the ultimate fact that this part has 
such and such a sufficient description. It will no longer be 
necessary to seek to give definiteness to each sufficient descrip- 
tion by reaching the end of an endless series. 

It seems doubtful, however, whether this is a possible alter- 
native. Since A exists, we know that there exist an infinite 
number of substances, each of which is described, though not 
sufficiently described, by its position in the series of such sub- 
stances—that is, as being a member of a particular set of A’s 
parts, and as being a part of some particular member of the 


200 THE CONTRADICTION OF [BK II 


precedent set. The supposition is that each of these substances 
will also have a quality or qualities which, either by themselves 
or in conjunction with those mentioned in the last sentence, 
form a sufficient description of it. Now these additional qualities 
must be independent of the position of the substance in the 
series. They cannot be dependent on its position with regard to 
sequent terms in the series, for that would lead to the vicious 
infinite discussed in the last Section. And they cannot be de- 
pendent on its position with reference to the precedent terms of 
the series, for then those precedent terms would imply a sufficient 
description of the sequent term and would not presuppose it. 
And our present hypothesis is that they do presuppose it. 

The concurrence then of these additional qualities with 
those which arise from the position of the substance in the series, 
must be ultimate and undetermined. And can we suppose that 
there are an infinite number of ultimate concurrences of this 
sort—that, for each of the infinite number of substances re- 
quired by the absence of simple substances, there occurs a 
quality or qualities such as to give a sufficient description? 

It seems to me that we cannot accept this supposition, in 
which case this attempt to avoid the contradiction involved in 
infinite divisibility would break down. But, even if this were 
not so, the existence of such sufficient descriptions of the terms, 
independent of their place in the series, would fail to remove 
the contradiction. 

191. Ifeach part had such a sufficient description, it would, 
no doubt, be sufficiently described without reference-to the 
parts of which it consisted. But this would not affect the fact 
that it would also be sufficiently described by means of sufficient 
descriptions of all the members of any set of its parts—this, as 
we have seen, is true of any whole. 

Now how would this affect the total ultimate presupposition 
of A? The presupposition of sufficient descriptions of the 
members of the set M (which we may call the presupposition 
}-) will not be part of the total ultimate presupposition presup- 
posed by A. For when the presupposition v—the presupposition 
of the sufficient descriptions of the members of the set N—is 
fixed, it fixes the presupposition ». And thus, by the definition 


CH. xxiIt] INFINITE DIVISIBILITY 201 


of total ultimate presupposition, one of the two presuppositions 
does not form part of it, while, since the fixing of » would not 
involve the fixing of v, it is not indifferent which of the two is 
left out. It must be pw which is omitted. 

But if we take any set of parts P, which is sequent to N, we 
shall reach a fresh presupposition by A—the presupposition, 
a, of sufficient descriptions of the members of the set P. And 
the fixing of 7 will fix v, so that v also must be eliminated from 
the total ultimate presupposition. And the same fate will befall 
7, and so on without end. No presupposition of this series could 
remain in the total ultimate presupposition unless the set of 
parts to which it referred had no set sequent to it. Accordingly 
the total ultimate presupposition presupposed by A will contain 
neither w, nor any presupposition whose fixing implies the 
fixing of pu. 

This, however, is impossible. For the total ultimate pre- 
supposition was defined as the aggregate of all the presuppo- 
sitions, after those had been removed, the fixing of which was 
implied by the fixing of any of those which remained. It is 
therefore impossible that the total ultimate presupposition pre- 
supposed by A should contain neither , nor any presuppo- 
sition whose fixing implies the fixing of p. 

Let us state this consideration in other words. We saw in 
Section 189 that, if no presupposition in the series is inde- 
pendently fixed, a contradiction arises. It is therefore necessary 
—since they must be fixed somehow—that at least one of the 
presuppositions must be independently fixed. But, as we have 
seen, it is not necessary for any of the presuppositions which 
are precedent to any presupposition to be independently fixed, 
since it will be fixed by the fixing of any sequent presupposition. 
And every presupposition is precedent to some presupposition. 
Therefore it is not necessary for any presupposition to be inde- 
pendently fixed. And thus we have a contradiction. 

The infinite series of presuppositions of A, then, will involve 

I do not say that no presupposition is independently fixed. Apart from 
the difficulty raised in Section 190, which has been waived for the purpose of 
the present argument, I see no reason why they should not all be independently 


fixed. The contradiction is that every term in the series can be fixed otherwise 
than independently, and that therefore it is not necessary that any term should 


202 THE CONTRADICTION OF [BK III 


a contradiction, whether presuppositions can or cannot be fixed 
independently. As it is sometimes maintained that all infinite 
series involve a contradiction, it may be well to repeat that, 
although the contradiction would not arise unless the series 
were infinite, it does not arise merely from the fact that it is 
infinite, but from the relations in which each term stands to the 
term sequent to it. 

192. The nature of any substance, then, cannot presuppose 
sufficient descriptions of the members of any set of its parts. 
And, as it certainly requires them, it must supply them. Now 
there are two ways in which the nature of anything can supply 
sufficient descriptions of other things. It can include them or 
imply them. Let us first consider inclusion. 

It might seem at first sight as if there was no difficulty at 
all about this. For the nature of A certainly includes sufficient 
descriptions of all its parts. It is part of the nature of A that 
it has a part with a description which sufficiently describes B, 
a part with a description which sufficiently describes C, and so 
on with all the other parts in all the sets. Such a description 
would contain an infinite number of parts, because A has an 
infinite number of parts, each of which must be separately 
described in this description of A. But a description is not 
necessarily vicious because it contains an infinite number of 
parts. And if this description is part of the nature of A, then 
that nature supplies, as well as requires, sufficient descriptions 
of all the parts of A. 

"But when we look further we shall see that such a description 
would involve a contradiction unless there were something in 
the nature of A which implied sufficient descriptions of the 
endless series of parts, without including those descriptions. 
And therefore we are driven to implication—the other way in 
which what is required can be supplied—as the only way in 
which contradiction can be avoided. 

193. For, without this, the infinite number of parts of the 
description would require an infinite number of ultimate con- 
currences between additional qualities and those which arise 


be independently fixed, while at the same time it can be shown, as in the text, 
that it is necessary that some term should be independently fixed. 


CH. XXII] INFINITE DIVISIBILITY 203 


from the position of the part in the series. And, as was said in 
Section 190, it does not seem that such an infinite number of 
ultimate concurrences can be accepted. 

194. And a contradiction would also arise for reasons 
analogous to those discussed in Section 191. The description of 
A which includes sufficient descriptions of all its parts is adequate 
for a certain purpose—the purpose of providing those sufficient 
descriptions. Now it is clear that a description which is adequate 
for a given purpose may be more than adequate for that purpose 
—that is, it might be such that it would still have been adequate 
if certain parts of it had been omitted. And thus we get the 
conception of a Minimum Adequate Description for any purpose 
—a description which is sufficient for that purpose, and not 
more than sufficient. 

It is clear that for every adequate description for any pur- 
pose, there must be at least one minimum adequate description 
which will differ from it by the omission of elements superfluous 
for the purpose, or will be identical with it, if no element in the 
original description is superfluous?. 

Now what would be the minimum adequate description in 
the case which we are considering here? It could not contain 
the sufficient descriptions of the parts which are members of 
any set of parts M/, because sufficient descriptions of those parts 
are implied by sufficient, descriptions of the parts which are 
members of any sequent set of parts N. It is therefore super- 
fluous for our purpose to retain them both, and not superfluous 
to retain the latter. The former, therefore, must go. But, in 
the same way, the latter must also go in their turn, because 
they are implied by sufficient descriptions of any set of parts, 
P, which is sequent to them. And so on without end. Thus there 
will be no minimum adequate description. The only possible 

1 An adequate description might have more than one minimum adequate 
description. Let us take a case where the adequacy is for the purpose of providing 
a sufficient description. Then “the kindest and the best of men” has two 
minimum adequate descriptions, since either “the kindest of men” or “the 
best of men” would be a sufficient description. And again, two adequate 
descriptions might have the same minimum adequate description—e.g. “the 
kindest of men and a court official” and “the kindest of men and a British 


peer,” would each have “the kindest of men” as its minimum adequate 
description for the purpose of providing a sufficient description. 


204 INFINITE DIVISIBILITY [BK III 


minimum adequate description would consist of sufficient 
descriptions of the parts of A which are members of a set of 
parts which had no sequent to it. And since A has no simple 
parts, there can be no such set. 

And thus there is a contradiction. There must be a minimum 
adequate description for the description in question, and yet 
there cannot be one. There is only one way in which this can be 
avoided. A chain of implications must run downwards from 
precedent sets to sequent sets, such that sufficient descriptions 
of the members of the precedent set imply sufficient descrip- 
tions of the members of the sequent sets. In this case the 
inclusion of the description of the precedent set will render 
inclusion of the descriptions of the sequent sets unnecessary, 
since they can be deduced from it. And thus the minimum 
description of A which is adequate for providing sufficient 
descriptions of all its parts will be the description of the parts 
of the precedent set, from which the chain of implications starts. 

Of the two ways in which the nature of A could supply the 
sufficient descriptions of its parts, we have now seen that 
inclusion without implication would involve a contradiction. 
We have therefore no hope left but in implication. We must 
find a description of A which, while it may include sufficient 
descriptions of the members of one or more sets of its parts, 
implies sufficient descriptions of the members of the infinite 
number of sets of parts which are sequent to the last of these. 

Can we find such a description? We have seen that any 
sufficient description of the members of a set of parts implies a 
sufficient description of the whole, and therefore that any 
sufficient description of the members of a sequent set of parts 
implies a sufficient description of the members of a precedent 
set of parts. But the reverse is not true. Many sufficient 
descriptions of a whole do not imply sufficient descriptions of 
the members of any one set of its parts, much less of the infinite 
number of such sets. But if the contradiction is to be avoided, 
there must be some description of every substance which does 
imply sufficient descriptions of every part through all its infinite 
series of sets of parts. To discover what such a description could 
be will be our first task in the next Book. 


BOOK IV 
DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 


~~ 
~ 


> 


eg ed fat 


iam: ¥ Waa 1“ 


er fey 


ride. Gate ie% 


CHAPTER XXIV 
DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 


195. In the last Chapter we saw that, from the fact that no 
substance can be simple, it would follow, under certain circum- 
stances, that the nature of a substance involved a contradiction, 
and that, therefore, no substance could exist. This contradiction 
would arise, we found, if the nature of any substance, A, pre- 
supposed sufficient descriptions of sequent sets of its parts to 
infinity. This condition can be analyzed into two elements— 
firstly, that the fact that A is a substance implies that it has 
parts within parts to infinity, and that those parts have sufficient 
descriptions, and, secondly, that no description of A implies 
some sufficient description for each of its parts. 

The first of these elements is obviously true, if no substance 
can be simple. For then the fact that anything is a substance 
implies that it has parts within parts to infinity, and each of 
these must have a sufficient description. If, therefore, no 
description of A implies some sufficient description for each of 
its parts, then the nature of A involves a contradiction. 

But we have seen that substances do exist, and the nature 
of an existent substance cannot contain a contradiction. We 
can be certain, then, that there must be some description of 
each existent substance which does imply sufficient descriptions 
of all the parts of A. We are entitled to assert this, even if we 
do not know of any description of A which would do this. And 
if we come to the conclusion that only a description of a certain 

1 Jf an argument were offered to us, in which we could detect no error, to 
prove that there could be no such description of A, it would be obvious that 
there was some mistake somewhere, since all the conclusions combined would 
produce a contradiction. In that case there might be no reason for doubting the 
last argument rather than for doubting one of the others. But since the other 
propositions have been accepted as certain, and no argument has ever been 


offered to prove that there could be no such description of A, it is this last 
proposition which we ought to reject. 


208 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


type could do this, we shall be entitled to assert that a descrip- 
tion of this type must be true of A. Can we arrive at any 
conclusion as to the type of description in question? 

We saw at the end of the last Chapter that the description 
may be one which includes sufficient descriptions of the mem- 
bers of one or more sets of its parts, so long as it implied, 
without including, sufficient descriptions of the members of the 
infinite number of sets of parts which are sequent to the last 
set included in the description. In what way could such impli- 
cations be determined ? 

196. There are certain realities, other than substances, each 
of which does imply an infinite series of other realities. Would 
it be possible to get what we want by a law which asserted that 
each part of A was in a certain one-to-one correspondence with 
each term of such an infinite series, the nature of the corre- 
spondence being such that, in the fact that a part of A corre- 
sponded in this way to a reality with a given nature, there 
would be implied a sufficient description of that part of A? 

What infinite series are there of this sort? We get such 
series with propositions. For example, “M is N” implies “it is 
true that M is N,” and again “it is true that it is true that M 
is N,” and so on infinitely. But a one-to-one correspondence 
with the terms of such a series as this would never give us the 
series of parts of A. For the infinite series in the case of the 
substance is an infinite series of sets of parts, and the number 
of members in each set increases as we pass from precedent to 
sequent sets. No one-to-one correspondence with such a series 
as this series of propositions could give the required increasing 
plurality in the later set of parts, and such a series, therefore, 
cannot help us. 

Again, there are the infinite series of derivative character- 
istics which were discussed in Chapter 1x. And here we can get 
an increasing plurality in the later terms. Take the case of M 
being equal to N. This relationship, in the first place, involves 
two more relationships, since both M and N have relationships 
to the relationship of equality of which they are terms. In the 
next stage there are involved four more relationships. For the 
relationship between M and its relationship of equality to N 


cH. xxIv] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 209 


has relationships both to M and to the relationship of equality, 
and a corresponding fact is true of the relationship between 
N and the relationship of equality. In the third stage eight 
fresh terms are involved, and so on infinitely. 

Would it be possible to determine the parts of A by a corre- 
spondence to the series of relationships generated in this way 
by the relation of any two terms? But in this case, like the last, 
there is no uniform kind of correspondence which could prevail 
between the terms of such a series, and the parts of A. For in 
this series the fresh terms generated in each stage are not parts 
of the terms in the stage above, but are intercalated between 
all the terms generated in all the previous stages. With the 
parts of A, on the other hand, the new terms introduced in 
each stage—that is, in this case, in each set of parts—are parts 
of the terms in the stage above, and do not occupy positions 
between them. No principle of one-to-one correspondence, 
therefore, with the terms of the first series, could determine the 
series of the parts of A. 

Of course propositions, and those characteristics which are 
not simple, have parts, and some of them have parts of parts. 
But it would be impossible to get our infinite series of sets of 
parts of substances by any correspondence to them, because it 
is not the case that every part of a proposition or of a character- 
istic has again parts., On the contrary, every characteristic 
which is not itself simple is made up of simple parts, and every 
proposition can be analyzed into members which cannot be 
analyzed further. 

Can we hope to obtain what we want by means of any 
correspondence of the series of sets of parts of A with any other 
infinite series of substances? But, if the series to which it is to 
correspond is not a series of parts within parts to infinity, 
correspondence to it can never give us what we want. And, if 
it is a series of parts within parts to infinity, will not the same 
difficulties arise about it as arose about A? 

197. I believe that there is one way out of the difficulty, 
and only one way. 

Let A have a set of parts, Band C. (The number of parts in 
the set may be any number, finite or infinite.) Let it be true in 


210 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


the first place, that each of these parts has a set of parts corre- 
sponding to each set of parts of A. In the second place, let it 
be true that the correspondence is of the same sort throughout, 
that it is a one-to-one relation between the members of the sets 
of parts, and that it is such that a certain sufficient description 
of C, which includes the fact that it is in this relation to some 
part of B, will determine a sufficient description of the part of 
B in question. And, in the third place, let it be true that the 
correspondence is such that, when one determinant is part of 
another determinant, then any part determined by the first 
will be part of a part determined by the second. 

For the sake of brevity, I shall write B/ C for that part of 
B which corresponds to C, and B/C! D for that part of B 
which corresponds to that part of C which corresponds to D, 
and so on. I shall call such a correspondence a Determining 
Correspondence, since by it, with the help of sufficient descrip- 
tions of B and C, we can determine a sufficient deseription of 
B!C. I shall speak of C as the Determinant of B/C, and of 
B!C as the Determinate of C, or as determined by C. I shall 
say that B/ C! Dis Directly Determined by C/ D, and Indirectly 
Determined by D, which is the determinant of its deter- 
minant. I shall call A a Primary Whole, and B a Primary 
Part. B/C, B! C! D, B! C! D! E, and so on, I shall call 
Secondary Parts. I shall call B/C a secondary part of the 
First Grade, B/ C! D a secondary part of the Second Grade, and 
so on}, 

198. If the conditions mentioned in the last paragraph but 
one are fulfilled, it follows that sufficient descriptions of the 
primary parts will determine sufficient descriptions of parts 
within parts of A through an infinite series. For in B we have 
B! B and B! C, and in C we have O/ B and C! GC. And all these 
four are parts of A, and will have parts correspondent to them 
both in B and C. In B, then, there will be B/ B/ B, B/ B/C, 
BIC! B, and B/C! C. In C there will be C/ B/ B, C! BIC, 
C!C! B, and C!C!C. Each of these eight, again, will have 


1 I do not define here the terms used in this paragraph, as their meanings 
will turn out to be rather wider than is required to cover the cases now before 
us. The definitions will be given in Section 202. 


cH. xxIv] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 211 


parts correspondent to it both in B and C, and so on without 
end. 

We have thus got an infinite series of parts of parts of A, 
where the sufficient description of each set of parts implies the 
sufficient description of the set of parts below it. And thus the 
infinite series is no longer vicious. It was vicious before, as we 
saw in the last chapter, because a sufficient description of each 
stage in the series was implied by a sufficient description of a 
lower stage, while a sufficient description of a higher stage pre- 
supposed a sufficient description of a lower one—that is, 
implied that there should be such a description, while not 
implying what it was. And this, as we saw, rendered it impossible 
that the presupposition should have a total ultimate pre- 
supposition, while, on.the other hand, it could not be without 

“one. 

Now, however, we have found a sufficient description of one 
set of parts which implies sufficient descriptions of all lower 
sets. Since it implies those descriptions, it does not presuppose 
them. And thus the difficulty about the total ultimate presup- 
position is removed. 

And, again, the series would not be vicious because it 
involved an infinite number of ultimate concurrences. For both 
the sufficient description of each secondary part, and its place 
in the series, would follow from the sufficient descriptions of 
the primary parts. 

199. The third condition is essential, as, if it were not 
inserted, it would not be necessary that determining correspond- 
ence should determine parts of every part of A, though it would 
determine an infinite number of parts in every primary part of 
A. Without the third condition, it would be possible, for 
example, in the case given above, that seven of the parts of the 
third set should fall within three of the parts of the second set, 
while the remaining part of the second set should be itself the 
eighth part of the third set, corresponding both with a part of 
the first set and with a part of the second. It might, for example, 
be true of the same part that it was B/ C and B! C! D, or that 
it was B/C and B/ B/ B, or any other combination. It might 
also be a member of the fourth set of parts, and of every sequent 


212 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


set of parts. In that case determining correspondence would 
not determine any part of that part, while at the same time, 
being a substance, it must have parts within parts to infinity. 
And thus, in the case of that part, the vicious presupposition 
would not be avoided. But the insertion of the third condition 
removes this possibility. 

200. The sufficient description which thus implies sufficient 
descriptions of each of this infinite series of parts of parts of A 
implies sufficient descriptions of all parts of A. It is true that 
some parts of A will not be found in the infinite series. For 
example, the part which consists of B/C and B/ B/C will not 
be found there, nor, if A has three primary parts B, C, and D, 
will the part consisting of B and C be found there. But when, 
e.g., we had reached in the series sufficient descriptions of B/ C 
and B/ B/C, these would imply a sufficient description of the 
part consisting of these parts. And, if we are right in our con- 
clusion that an infinite series of sets of parts involves a contra- 
diction unless it is determined by determining correspondence, 
we are certain that every substance which is not in the series of 
determining correspondence can be divided into substances 
which are in that series. For if there were any such substance 
which could not be so divided, then, since every substance is 
divided into parts of parts infinitely, there would be infinite 
series of sets of parts which were not determined by determining 
correspondence. And this would be a contradiction. 

The sufficient description of members of the set of primary 
parts of A will, of course, give us a sufficient description of A. 
For, as we saw in the last chapter, a sufficient description of 
the members of any set of parts of a whole gives a sufficient 
description of the whole. 

201. Is it necessary, it might be asked, to take the primary 
parts of A as an ultimate fact, in order to imply the sufficient 
description of all sequent sets of parts of A? Could not the 
same result be produced by means of another substance in 
connection with A. Suppose that, besides A, there was G, and 
that the relation between them was such that A and G had 
each a set of parts corresponding to every set of parts of the 
compound substance composed of A and G. This would certainly 


cH. xxIv] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 213 


produce the infinite series of implications required to determine 
all the parts of A. But then it would be the compound substance 
composed of A and G which would be the primary whole, and 
A and G would be its primary parts, and therefore the original 
formula would still be applicable. 

There are three respects in which the conditions might be 
different from those given in Section 197, and yet the corre- 
spondence might be such as to avoid the vicious infinite series. 
In the first place, we have so far taken cases in which each 
primary part of A has a set of parts corresponding to each set 
of parts of A. But this is not necessary. It is sufficient if each 
primary part has a Differentiating Group, consisting of two or 
more primary parts of A, and if it has a set of parts corresponding 
to each set of parts of that group. If A has the primary parts 

'B, C, and D, sufficient descriptions of an infinite series of sets of 
parts within parts of A would be determined if B had parts 
corresponding to B and C and to their parts, while C had parts 
corresponding to C and D and to their parts, D, finally, having 
parts corresponding to D and B and to their parts. Nor is it 
necessary that a primary part should be a member of its own 
differentiating group. The differentiating group of B might be 
C and D, while those of C and D might be respectively D and 
B, and B and C. 

It is not necessary, then, that every primary part should be 
a determinant of parts in every other primary part of A. And, 
in the second place, it is not necessary that every primary part 
should be a determinant at all. Let B and C have each B and 
C as its differentiating group. Then all parts of B and C have 
sufficient descriptions determined by the relation between B 
and C. Now if the parts of D were determined by B and C, and 
by their parts, all parts of D would have sufficient descriptions 
determined. And thus sufficient descriptions of all parts of A 
would be reached, although D was not a determinant of any 
part of A. 

In the third place, it is possible that in the case of some 
primary parts, the place of the differentiating group may be 
taken by a single primary part. If, in the case just given, the 
parts of D had no determinant except B and its parts, the 


214 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


infinite series of sets of parts of D would have their sufficient 
descriptions determined, since there is an infinite series of parts 
of parts within B}. 

In order that this should happen, the sufficient descriptions 
of the infinite series of sets of parts of B must be determined. 
And therefore it is necessary that in each primary whole there 
should be at least one group of primary parts in which deter- 
mining correspondence is Reciprocal. (I call determining corre- 
spondence Reciprocal in any group of primary parts when each 
member of the group determines, either directly or indirectly, 
secondary parts of each of the other members, and when no 
secondary part of any member is determined by any primary 
part outside the group.) It is only by means of such reciprocity 
that an infinite series of implications of sufficient descriptions 
can be established in the first place, though one such infinite 
series, when it has been established, may establish another 
without reciprocal determination. 

202. We are now in a position to give definitions of the 
terms of whose use we gave examples in Section 197. Deter- 
mining Correspondence may be defined as follows. A relation 
between a substance C and the part of a substance Bis a relation 
of determining correspondence if a certain sufficient description 
of C, which includes the fact that it is in that relation to some 
part of B, (1) intrinsically determines a sufficient description of 
the part of B in question, B/ C, and (2) intrinsically determines 
sufficient descriptions of each member of a set of parts of B/ C, 
and of each member of a set of parts of each of such members, 
and so on to infinity?. 

1 Tn this case the highest series of sets of parts of D which would be deter- 
mined by determining correspondence would consist of D/ B/ B, and D/ B/ C. 
These are directly determined, not by primary parts, but by secondary parts 
of the first grade (B/ B and B/ C) and will be themselves secondary parts of the 
second grade, so that D will have no secondary parts of the first grade. In the 
same way, if D stands in the place of a differentiating group for H, the highest 


set of parts in H which are determined by determining correspondence would 
consist of E/ D/ B/ B, and E! D/ B! C, which are secondary parts of the third 
grade. 

* The determining correspondence, which is a relation between the two 
substances, is, of course, not to be confounded with the relation of intrinsic 


determination, which is a relation between certain sufficient descriptions of the 
two substances. 


CH. xxIv] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 215 


We have seen that such an infinite series cannot be deter- 
mined unless (3) the sufficient description of C also includes a 
statement that each member of a set of C’s points has some 
substance to which it stands in a relation of determining corre- 
spondence, as the part of B does to C itself; unless (4) either B 
and C form a group, or part of a group, in which determination 
is reciprocal, or else each of them is itself determined, either 
directly or indirectly, by a relation of determining correspond- 
ence to substances which are in such a reciprocal relation to one 
another; and unless (5) when one determinant is part of another 
determinant, any part determined by the first will be part of a 
part determined by the other. These three conditions, however, 
do not form part of the definition, but can be deduced from it, 
since, as has just been said, the second clause in the definition 

‘could only be true in cases in which these three conditions were 
also true. 

Proceeding with our definitions, a Primary Whole is a sub- 
stance (1) such that it is not necessary, in order to describe 
sufficiently any of its parts, to introduce any determining 
correspondence with anything except another of its parts, and 
(2) such that it is not necessary to introduce determining corre- 
spondence with any of its parts to describe sufficiently any 
substance outside it, and (3) such that it has no part of which 
the previous clauses (1) and (2) are both true’. 

Primary Parts may be defined as follows. When a set of 
parts of a substance is such that none of its members are deter- 
mined by determining correspondence, and that, from sufficient 
descriptions of all its members, there follow, by determining 
correspondence, sufficient descriptions of the members of an 
infinite series of sequent sets, then the members of that set are 
called Primary Parts. 

Any member of any of these sequent sets is called a Secondary 
Part. If it is directly determined by determining correspondence 
with a primary part, it is called a secondary part of the First 


1 The difference between a primary whole and a reciprocally determining 
group is that, while the latter is self-contained in respect of the determination 
of its own secondary parts, its parts can determine secondary parts which are 
outside the group. In a primary whole, on the other hand, no part has either 
a determinant or a determinate outside the primary whole. 


216 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


Grade. If it is directly determined by determining correspond- 
ence with a secondary part of the first grade, it is called a 
secondary part of the Second Grade, and so on. 

The Differentiating Group of any primary part B consists of 
those primary parts, to which, and to the secondary parts of 
which, the parts of B correspond. 

203. We have seen that every primary part in a primary 
whole need not have parts directly determined by all the 
primary parts in that whole. Is it necessary that it should have 
parts indirectly determined by all of these primary parts? It is 
clear that this is not the case. For, as we have seen, it is possible 
that some primary parts should not be determinants at all. 
And if D, for example, determines nothing, it cannot determine 
something which determines something else. 

But even if every primary part in some primary whole was 
a direct determinant of something, it would not follow that all 
these primary parts determined parts of all the others, either 
directly or indirectly. Suppose that, of four primary parts, B, 
C, D, and E, the differentiating group of B, and also that of 
C, was B and C, while the differentiating group of D, and also 
that of H, was B, D, and E. Thus each of the four parts would be 
a determinant. And they would all fall within the same primary 
whole, since B must be within the same primary whole as C, 
and also within the same primary whole as D and E. Yet 
neither the parts of B nor the parts of C would be determined, 
either directly or indirectly, by D or E. Band C form a system 
such that their parts are determined by nothing outside that 
system. 

But though their parts are not determined, either directly or 
indirectly, by D or EL, they both determine parts of D and £, 
B determining them directly, and C indirectly through B. And 
of any two primary parts in the same primary whole it is 
necessary that each of them should either determine parts of 
the other, or itself have parts which are determined by that 
other, or both. For without this, the two primary parts would 
belong to two primary wholes, and not to the same one. 

204. We saw in the last chapter that sufficient descriptions 
of the members of a sequent set will always give sufficient 


cH. xxIv] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 217 


descriptions of the members of a precedent set, since the parts 
in a precedent set are wholes made up of the more numerous 
members of the sequent set. Determining correspondence en- 
sures that sufficient descriptions of the members of a precedent 
set will give sufficient descriptions of the members of a sequent 
set. But there is a difference between the two cases. For any 
sufficient descriptions of the members of the sequent set will 
give sufficient descriptions of the members of the precedent set, 
while all that determining correspondence involves is that some 
sufficient descriptions of the members of the precedent set will 
give sufficient descriptions of the members of the sequent set. 
The members of the precedent set may have other sufficient 
descriptions which would not do this. But this result is, as we 
have seen, sufficient to remove the contradiction. 

205. We have spoken of primary wholes by that name 
because they are self-contained as far as determining corre- 
spondence goes. But, unless the whole universe forms a single 
primary whole, a primary whole will also be a part. It will be 
a part of the universe, to begin with, and, if there are more 
than two primary wholes in the universe, each of them will be 
a member of various groups of primary wholes, each of which 
groups will be a separate substance. And there will also be 
substances which consist of one or more primary wholes, 
together with one or more parts of other primary wholes. We 
may speak of wholes of which primary wholes are parts as 
Super-primary Wholes. 

Between such wholes and their parts there will be no relation 
of determining correspondence. And so, while any sufficient 
descriptions of the parts will imply sufficient descriptions of the 
wholes, there will be nothing to ensure that any sufficient 
descriptions of the wholes will imply sufficient descriptions of 
the parts. It is thus possible that the nature of a super-primary 
whole will presuppose sufficient descriptions of all its parts. 
But that will not produce a contradiction, because the series of 
presuppositions generated will not be infinite. A super-primary 
whole may, in some cases, be divided into other super-primary 
wholes. But a finite number of steps will analyze it into a set 
of parts, all of which are primary or secondary parts. These, of 

I 


218 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


course, will each have an infinite series of parts within parts, 
but these series will not be vicious, because, being within 
primary parts, the terms of each series will be related by deter- 
mining correspondence. 

206. To sum up the results of this chapter—the absence of 
simple substances does not involve a contradiction if the 
universe has a set of parts which answer to our definition of 
primary parts. (These primary parts may form one primary 
whole, or may be divided into any number of primary wholes.) 
The theory that the universe has such a set of parts I shall call 
the theory of the determining correspondence of substance. 

Are we entitled to accept this theory as proved? We have 
found that there are no simple substances, and therefore the 
nature of the existent must be such as to prevent the absence of 
simple substances from involving a contradiction. For this, as 
we have seen, it is necessary that sufficient descriptions of the 
unending series of parts should be implied in sufficient descrip- 
tions of their wholes. And we have seen that this will be the 
case if the theory of the determining correspondence of sub- 
stances is true. 

But would it be possible to imply the sufficient descriptions 
of the parts by sufficient descriptions of their wholes in any 
other way besides this? If so, we cannot be sure that the theory 
of determining correspondence is true. But what has to be done - 
is to imply an infinite series of stages, each stage with more 
members in it than the stage before it, and, as we have seen, to 
imply it in something which does not itself contain such an 
infinite series. And how could this possibly be done except— 
to use a metaphor which is not inappropriate—by that reflec- 
tion of a plurality on itself which does imply an infinite number 
of stages, each containing more members than the one before 
it? And when we try to specify the sort of reflection which 
must take place, we can see that, to give sufficient descriptions, 
this reflection must take the form which we have called deter- 
mining correspondence. 

I submit, therefore, as the legitimate conclusion from this 
chapter and the two which precede it, that we are entitled to 
adopt the theory of determining correspondence as proved. 


CHAPTER XXV 
DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE AS CAUSAL 


207. We have now established that a relation of determining 
correspondence holds between various substances. And it may 
be well at this point to enquire whether this relation is to be 
called a relation of causality. The question is, in a sense, only 
verbal. We shall not here endeavour to discover any fresh 
characteristics of the relation of determining correspondence, 
but to decide whether the characteristics which it is already 
known to possess are such as to make the name of causality 
appropriate to it. But the question, though in this sense verbal, 
is not therefore trivial. Causality is a term which has occupied 
a prominent place in almost every philosophical system—in 
those which deny the validity of causation no less than in those 
which assert it. And it is therefore not unimportant to discover 
the relation of our system to these others in this respect. If 
determining correspondence is a case of causality, then causality 
does hold between some existents, since determining corre- 
spondence has been shown to hold between some existents. 

What, then, is meant by causality? There would be general 
agreement that, unless causality is to be rejected altogether, 
the beheading of Charles I must be held to have caused his 
death, while it did not cause his birth, or the death of Henry VIII. 
And, again, the uxoriousness of Charles I caused him to be 
contemptible, while it did not cause him to be King of England 
or President of the United States. What is the relation which 
is thus considered to hold between the beheading of Charles I 
and his death? 

208. There are three things which would be universally 
admitted to be necessary to this relation. The first is that it is 
a relation of determination, and of what we have called intrinsic 
determination. The occurrence of the beheading of Charles I 
determines the occurrence of his death. And the determination 


220 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


is clearly intrinsic, and not merely the extrinsic determination 
which, as we have seen, holds between each fact in the universe 
and every other fact. For causality is a relation which may 
hold between A and B, and not between A and C. There may 
be no causal relation between the execution of Charles I and 
the last eruption of Vesuvius. And the proposition “Charles I 
was beheaded” implies the proposition “Charles I is dead.” 
This shows that the determination is intrinsic. 

In the second place, the relation of causality only holds 
between existents. We should not say that the definitions and 
axioms of Euclid were the cause that two sides of a triangle are 
longer than the third side, though they do determine that they 
are longer. And we should not say that the law of the tides 
was partly caused by the law of gravitation, though we should 
say that the height of the sea at a particular time and place 
had the attraction of the moon as part of its cause. 

Again, the beheading of an English king in the eighteenth 
century intrinsically determines the death of that king. But we 
should not say that it caused it, because, in point of fact, no 
English king was beheaded in the eighteenth century, and so 
the relation of determination is not between existents. All that 
we can say is that, if a king of England had been beheaded in 
the eighteenth century, it would have caused his death—that 
is, that, if the terms had been existent, the relation of causality - 
would have held between them. 

In the third place, the relation of causality is always a rela- 
tion between qualities (including relational qualities). Our 
ordinary language, indeed, conceals this. We speak of Luther 
as a part-cause of the Reformation, and of the beheading of 
Charles I as the cause of his death. And both Luther and the 
three events are not qualities, but substances, each of which 
has many qualities. Indeed, instead of saying that the beheading 
caused the death, we might describe the substances by other 
qualities, and say that an action by a masked man caused an 
event deplored by the White Rose League. 

But when we look more closely into the matter we see that 
the relation is really between two qualities. It is only one 
quality in the earlier event which is held to determine one 


OH. XXv] AS CAUSAL 221 


quality in the later. That the earlier was the beheading of 
Charles I determines that the later was the death of Charles I. 
But that the earlier was an action by a masked man does not 
determine that the later was an event deplored by the White 
Rose League. The intrinsic determination, and therefore the 
causality, is a relation which connects only one quality in each 
substance, and does not connect the others. 

And, again, when the uxoriousness of Charles I is said to be 
the cause that he is contemptible, it is clear that the relation must 
be between qualities. For in this case both the qualities belong 
to the same substance. And nothing can be the cause of itself. 

209. These three points about the nature of causality are, 
I think, beyond dispute. In the fourth place, it is commonly 
held that the two terms of the relation can be distinguished 
from each other as respectively cause and effect, and that the 
cause cannot be subsequent to the effect, so that the prior term 
is the cause, except in cases where the two terms are either 
timeless or simultaneous in time. 

If this were all, the point would merely concern nomencla- 
ture. The earlier term would be called the cause, and the later 
the effect. There would, however, be no difference between cause 
and effect in cases where the two terms are timeless or simultane- 
ous. And the possibility of timeless or simultaneous causation 
is often, though not always, admitted. 

But now we come to three features which are sometimes 
held to distinguish all causes from effects. And the assertion of 
these distinctions is combined with the assertion that a cause 
cannot be subsequent to its effect. By means of these features, 
if we accepted them, we should be able to distinguish between 
cause and effect even in cases of timeless and simultaneous 
causation. And now the distinction between cause and effect 
has become more than a question of nomenclature. For it is a 
question of fact whether, in all cases of intrinsic determinations 
between existent qualities, one of the two terms has any of 
these features, while the other has not, and whether, if this is 
so, and if the two terms occur at different times, it is always 
the earlier term which has them. 

The first of these features which is sometimes held to dis- 


222 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


tinguish the cause from the effect is that the cause determines 
the effect in some way in which the effect does not determine 
the cause. It is often held, for example, that our choice between 
resisting a temptation and yielding to it would not be deter- 
mined if it were not caused, even if it were itself the inevitable 
cause of certain effects. 

In the second place, it is sometimes held that the cause 
explains the effect in some way in which the effect does not 
explain the cause. 

In the third place, it is sometimes held that the cause 
exercises a certain activity on the effect. Even if the occurrence 
of A intrinsically determines the occurrence of B, this is not, 
it is said, sufficient to constitute causation unless an activity is 
also present. 

Now it seems to me that all these features, which have been 
held by different thinkers to differentiate the cause from the 
effect, must be rejected—the first on the ground that such 
non-reciprocal determination of one term by the other is not 
limited to the determination of the earlier by the later, and the 
seccnd and third on the ground that no such explanation, and 
no such activity, are to be found in causal relations at all. 

210. Let us first consider the non-reciprocal determination. 
It is, of course, often the case that the determination of two 
qualities which are causally connected is not reciprocal. Be- 
heading is the cause of death. And, while beheading determines 
death, death does not determine beheading, since there are 
many other ways in which death can occur. Here then, the earlier 
does determine the later, in a way in which the later does not 
determine the earlier. But in other cases non-reciprocal deter- 
mination goes the other way. Drinking alcohol must precede 
intoxication. And here it is the later which determines the 
earlier. For I cannot get drunk witbout drinking alcohol, but 
I can drink alcohol without getting drunk. 

And we find that the determination may run non-recipro- 
cally from earlier to later, or from later to earlier, according as 
the qualities taken are taken in a more or less precise form. In 
so far as it is taken in a less precise form, it is more probable 
that it will be determined without determining. We have seen 


CH. Xxv] AS CAUSAL 223 


that drinking alcohol is determined by getting drunk, and does 
not determine it. But any event which is a drinking of alcohol 
is also a drinking of a definite amount under definite conditions. 
And if we take this more definite quality we find that the drink- 
ing now determines the drunkenness, and not vice versa. For it 
would be impossible to drink that amount under those con- 
ditions without getting drunk, while it would be possible to get 
drunk without drinking that amount under those conditions— 
much less drink, for example, might be sufficient for a man 
with a different constitution. 

Thus, if the cause is to be taken, as it always is taken, as 
something which cannot be subsequent to the effect, we cannot 
say that the cause determines the effect in a way in which the 
effect does not determine the cause. 

211. Then, secondly, it is asserted that the cause explains 
the effect in some way in which the effect does not explain the 
cause. Now if explanation here merely means that the events 
are taken as an instance of a general law, then, of course, 
causality does give an explanation. If I ask why the event B 
has, among other qualities, that of being the death of a human’ 
body, I may be told that it was immediately preceded by the 
event A, which was the beheading of the same body, and 
that there is a general law that the beheading of a body 
is immediately followed by its death. But this does not 
explain the quality of B in any way in which it does not 
explain the quality of A. They are both included in the general 
law. 

But it is more than this which is meant when the cause is 
said to explain the effect. It is supposed that a causal law 
shows in some way why the occurrence of X, the quality in the 
cause, implies the occurrence of Z, the quality in the effect, and 
that, as a consequence of this, a particular case of Z is explained 
by its relation to X in some deeper and more thorough manner 
than by being shown to be an instance of a general law, while 
the occurrence of X is not explained in the same way by its 
relation to Z. 

This, however, is a mistake. Hither the causal law in question 
is ultimate, or it can be deduced from some more general law 


224 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK Iv 


which is ultimate?. And, it must be remembered, an ultimate 
law need not be self-evident. It may be one which we can only 
reach by induction. In that case the implication by the occur- 
rence of X of the occurrence of Y presents itself to us as a mere 
fact. We see that it is so, but that is all about it. There is no 
question of any “why,” and there is no explanation, except in 
the sense that the case has been brought under a general law. 

But even if the ultimate causal law should be self-evident, 
we should not have reached the sort of explanation which is 
asserted here. It might possibly be said that the self-evidence 
of the relation was in a sense the explanation of it. But it would 
be no more the explanation of the later by the earlier than it 
would be the explanation of the earlier by the later. 

212. There remains the view that the cause exerts an 
activity on the effect. This, also, seems to me to be quite un- 
founded. If we ask for the proof of the existence of such an 
activity, we are usually referred to introspection. When I will 
to move my hand, and my hand is moved, I am directly aware, 
it is said, of an activity which I am exerting in my volition. 

Even if there were such an activity in such cases, it would 
give us no reason to believe that there was any such activity 
when the cause was not a volition, nor any indication of what 
the cause would in that case be like. And therefore some of the 
more consistent supporters of this view are driven to maintain 
that nothing but a volition is ever a cause—all events which are 
not the effects of human volitions being the direct effects of 
divine volitions, and having no other causes. It would, however, 
be a very strained and inconvenient use of the word cause, 
which compelled us to say that the only cause of the destruction 
of Lisbon was a divine volition, and that the earthquake had 
no effect at all. 


1 I believe that the astonishing view, held by some philosophers, that 
cause and effect are identical, may be due to their unwillingness to admit that 
all cases of causality bring us finally to ultimate laws which cannot be deduced 
from others. If cause and effect are identical, it is thought, the only law required 
to connect them will be the law that a thing is itself. But whatever the relation 
of identity may be and do, it is not the same relation as that which is called 
causality. Nor is a thing explained in any way by the fact that it is identical 
with itself. 


CH. Xxv] AS CAUSAL 225 


But I do not believe there is any such activity to be per- 
ceived, even when our volitions are causes. In my own case I 
can perceive no such activity. And I can perceive something 
which could be mistaken for such an activity. I am conscious 
of willing. And then I am sometimes conscious of a feeling of 
tension or strain within myself. But this is all. Now this feeling 
is not the volition, nor an element in the volition. It is an effect 
of the volition, and is subsequent—though only slightly sub- 
sequent—to it. But I think that it is wrongly supposed to be 
the volition, or an element in it, and that its quality of being a 
tension is mistaken for the quality of being an activity. In this 
way, I think, the belief arises that a volition is a cause which 
exerts an activity. Thus I submit that we must reject the view 
that we are directly aware of an activity in the cases where the 
causes are our volitions. And no other reasons, except this 
asserted direct awareness, have ever been given why we should 
believe such an activity to exist. 

213. A cause, then, cannot be distinguished from an effect, 
in respect of its determining or explaining the effect, or of 
exercising activity on it. It can only be distinguished as the 
term of the relation which is prior to the other in time, if either 
is prior to the other. In cases in which the terms are timeless or 
simultaneous, neither of them can be called the cause}. 

What is the reason of the belief that it is the earlier term 
which exerts activity, or which determines or explains the later? 
Professor Taylor gives two reasons to which this may be due. 
“(a) Even granting that an event may be determined by sub- 
sequent events, yet, as we do not know what these events are 
until after their occurrence, we should have no means of inferring 
by what particular events yet to come any present event was 
conditioned, and thus should be thrown back on mere unprin- 
cipled guess-work if we attempted to assign its, as yet future, 
conditions. (b) A more important consideration is that our 
search for causes is ultimately derived from the search for 
means to the practical realization of results in which we are 


1 We might, however, reasonably call one term the cause if it appeared as 
being in time, and as being prior to the other, though in reality both terms were 
timeless. 


226 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


interested. We desire to know the conditions of occurrences 
primarily in order to produce those occurrences for ourselves by 
setting up their conditions. It is therefore essential for our 
practical purposes to seek the conditions of an occurrence ex- 
clusively among its antecedents.” 

Two other reasons might also, I think, be given. Our ordinary 
unreflective notion of causality has been largely moulded by 
persons who accepted the doctrine of undetermined free will. 
Now, according to that doctrine, if such a free will existed, a 
free volition would determine what succeeded it. But it would 
not determine what preceded it, since its occurrence is inde- 
pendent of conditions. There would thus be a class of important 
events which determined what succeeded them, but not what 
preceded them. And from this it would be an easy step to the 
belief that events could only be determined by their antecedents 
and not by their consequents. 

In the second place, as we shall see in Book VII, the direction 
of the time series from earlier to later is more fundamental to the 
series than the direction from later to earlier. And this might 
produce the view that activity, or explanation, or determina- 
tion, proceeded from earlier to later. 

214. It may be remarked in passing that the view that 
each causal series must have a first cause, while it need not have 
@ last effect, seems to be due, to a considerable extent, to the 
belief that the cause determines or explains the effect in a way 
in which the effect does not determine the cause. Determining 
and explaining are transitive relations. If Z is determined by 
Y, and Y by X, then Z is determined by X. And the same is 
the case with explanation. If determination and explanation 
were always of the effect by the cause, then nothing is causally 
determined or explained except by the earliest term in the 
whole series—the first cause. If there is no first cause, nothing 
in the series is causally determined or explained at all. And if it 
is held that everything which is causal must be completely 
determined or completely explained, then there must be a first 
cause, while there is no corresponding necessity for a last effect. 

We have seen, however, that an effect can determine the 


1 Hlements of Metaphysics, 1, 5, Section 5, 


CH. Xxv] AS CAUSAL 227 


cause in just the same way in which the cause can determine 
the effect. Nor is there any sense in which the cause can explain 
the effect, and in which the effect cannot explain the cause. It 
follows, therefore, that an infinite causal regress would not be 
vicious on this ground, and that, so far as we can yet see, it 
might exist?. 

215. Our conclusion, then, is that causality is a relation of 
intrinsic determination between the occurrence of existing 
qualities, and that, when one quality occurs before the other, it is 
convenient to speak of the earlier quality as the cause, but that 
the cause is not distinguished from the effect in any other way, 
and that, where the relation is timeless or simultaneous, neither 
of the two terms can be called the cause. 

This result differs from the ordinary view of causality in one 
respect only. The ordinary view holds that there is some addi- 
tional difference between the cause and the effect besides their 
relative positions in time, and that this additional distinction 
could be found in cases which were not temporally separated. 
And, therefore, it would not allow that there were any causal 
relations in which one term was not the cause, and the other 
the effect. 

This is doubtless an important difference. But it is not 
sufficient to make the name of causality inapplicable to the 
relation as defined by ys. For in any case in which the two 
terms of the relation are, or appear as being, at different 
moments of time, we shall be using terms in just the same way 
as that in which they are used on the ordinary view. And it is 
this class of cases with which mankind is mostly concerned. 
Even in cases of timeless or simultaneous causation, we shall 
agree with the ordinary view in holding that they are cases of 
intrinsic determination between the occurrence of existing 


1 T do not say that this is the only ground which has led to the assertion 
that there must be a first cause, while there need not be a last effect. Another 
ground, I think, is the belief that an infinite past is impossible, since it would 
be a completed infinite, while an infinite future would not be completed. I 
cannot see, however, in what sense an infinite past is more completed than an 
infinite future. Each is bounded in one direction by the present. Each is 
unbounded in one direction. The fact that the infinite past is unbounded in one 
direction, and the infinite future in the other, does not seem to me to make the 
first less probable than the last. This, however, is a digression. 


228 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


qualities. And this is, after all, the most essential point on any 
view of causation. When a man says that the beheading of 
Charles I was the cause of his death, the essence of the assertion 
is that the beheading involved the death, so that from the fact 
that he was beheaded it could be inferred that he died, and, 
if he had not died, it could be inferred that he had not been 
beheaded. For some people the assertion may mean more, but 
this is always the most important part of the meaning. 

216. Since we have defined causality in this way, we must 
answer the question with which this chapter began in the 
affirmative. Determining correspondence is a causal relation. 
A certain quality in each secondary part of the first grade is 
intrinsically determined by a certain quality in some primary 
part. A certain quality in each secondary part of the second 
grade is intrinsically determined by a certain quality in each 
secondary part of the first grade, and so on infinitely. 

Thus, if we are right in holding that we have demonstrated 
the theory of determining correspondence, we have demon- 
strated that causality does occur. And not only have we 
demonstrated that causality does occur, but we have demon- 
strated the validity of a particular causal law. For we have 
shown that the specific relation which exists between the deter- 
mining quality and the determined quality is a relation of that 
particular sort which we have called determining correspond- 
ence. 

And not only have we demonstrated the occurrence of a 
particular causal relation, and therefore the validity of a 
particular causal law, but we haye demonstrated that this 
relation occurs in every part of the universe, however small. 
For every part of the universe is either a determinant of deter- 
mining correspondence, or determined by it (or both), or else 
can be divided into parts determined by determining corre- 
spondence. 

217. This is a result of great importance, but we must note 
that it does not involve what would be normally called the 
universal validity of causation. We see that every part of the 
universe, however small, consists of substances, some of the 
qualities of which are terms in causal relations. But it has not 


CH. Xxv] AS CAUSAL 229 


been shown that all the qualities of every substance are terms 
in causal relations. 

It would, I think, be generally considered that, in order 
that causality should hold universally, it would be necessary 
that the occurrence of any quality of any substance should be 
intrinsically determined by the occurrence of some other quality. 
The statement that this is the case is what is usually called the 
Law of the Uniformity of Nature. But there does not seem any 
reason to say that this would make causality hold universally 
more than it would be made to hold universally if the occurrence 
of any quality of any substance intrinsically determined the 
existence of some other quality. It does not seem more im- 
portant that each quality should be determined, than that each 

quality should itself determine. Let us consider both cases. 

In order that each quality should be determined, it would 
be necessary that the following statement should be true. Let 
G be any quality which occurs. Then, in each case in which G 
occurs, a quality H can be found, which occurs in a relation M 
to the occurrence of G, and which is such that, in each case in 
which H occurs, it will stand in the relation M to some occur- 
rence of G. 

In order that each quality should determine, it would be 
necessary that, in each case in which G occurs, a quality K can 
be found which occurs in a relation P to the occurrence of G 
and which is such that, in each case in which G occurs, it will 
have an occurrence of K standing in the relation P to it. 

Thus G might be death in a human body. The H which 
would be found in connection with a particular case of G might 
be beheading of a human body. The relation M would then be 
that they were qualities of the same body, and that death 
immediately followed beheading. The law, therefore, would be 
that whenever a human body was beheaded, the death of that 
body immediately followed. 

Again, with G as the death of a human body, K might be 
isolation from beings still living on this planet, and P might be 
that the isolation befell the self which had previously been 


1 The common belief that the first is more important is, I think, connected 
with the belief that an event is explained by its cause but not by its effect. 


230 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


living in that body. The law would then be that, whenever a 
body died, the self previously living in it would be isolated 
from beings still living on this planet. 

The universal validity of causality would involve that such 
laws as these were true of whatever quality was taken as G. 
I do not say that causal laws invariably take such a form as 
this. They do take it in some cases, but in others (especially, 
though not exclusively, in the sciences of inorganic matter) the 
laws of most importance take a quantitative form. For example, 
a change in the temperature of water determines a change in 
the space it occupies, and the amount of the one change is con- 
nected with the amount of the other according to some definite 
formula. But, if such a formula is to be true, then many laws 
of the type which we have given above must be true. If the 
changes of temperature and size are connected in this way, 
then, whenever the change takes place from one particular 
temperature to another, there must be a change from some 
particular size to another. And these changes will be the H 
and G, of which one is always found in a certain relation to the 
other. And thus the universal validity of causality would 
involve that laws of this type should be true of every quality. 

218. Our results have given us no reason to believe that 
causality is universal. If we had reached any reason for such a be- 
lief it could only have been by the establishment of determining 
correspondence. Now we have not shown that all qualities 
of all substances are related to others by determining corre- 
spondence, either directly or indirectly. All that is proved is 
that there must be such relations of determining correspondence 
as will afford sufficient descriptions of every secondary part. 
And this leaves it possible that there may be qualities, both of 
primary and of secondary parts, which neither determine a 
determining correspondence nor are determined by one. (It 
will be shown in the next chapter that the undetermined char- 
acter of such qualities would not involve a contradiction.) It 
remains, therefore, possible that there are qualities of various 
substances which are neither causally determinant nor causally 
determined. 


This, of course, still leaves it possible that causality may be 


CH. XXv] AS CAUSAL 231 


universal. But, as far as I know, no satisfactory proof of this 
has yet been given, and it seems clear that the proposition that 
causality is universal is not self-evident. 

Nevertheless, the conclusions which we have reached are of 
great importance. For we have shown that causal determination 
does occur, and that it occurs in every part of the universe, 
however small. And, although causal determination has not 
been shown to extend to all qualities of every substance, it has 
been shown to extend, in the case of every secondary part of 
the universe, to such qualities as will constitute a sufficient 
description of that substance. And, if we have demonstrated 
that causal determination extends as far as this, we have 
demonstrated a great deal. 


219. There are three further points about causality as to 
which it may be well to say something. In the first place, it 
must be noticed that our statement of what would be meant by 
the universality of causation does not imply reciprocal deter- 
mination. The H which can be found for any occurrence of G 
is to be such that every occurrence of H stands in the relation 
M to an occurrence of G, but it has not been said that every 
occurrence of G will have an occurrence of H standing in the 
relation M to it. It may well be the case that different occur- 
rences of G may be related respectively to occurrences of H, JJ, 
and L, by the relations M, N, and O, and therefore, while 
every occurrence of H stands in the relation M to an occurrence 
of G, not every occurrence of G has an occurrence of H standing 
in the relation M to it. Thus, in our previous example, beheading 
of a body determines its death, but death does not determine 
beheading. Death may be caused by hanging or poisoning’. 

1 Of course, if @ does not reciprocally determine H, it will be necessary, if 
the law of the uniformity of nature should be true, that H whenever it occurs 
should be determined by some other quality. Since, for example, death of a 
body does not imply previous beheading of that body, there must, if the law of 
the uniformity of nature be true, be some other quality or qualities, the occur- 
rence of which or of one of which on any occasion implies beheading of a body. 
This quality need not, of course, be a quality of the body beheaded. There 
might, for example, be a law that whenever a Queen Consort of England has 


the quality of misleading her husband in a particular way, her husband’s body 
will have the quality of being beheaded. 


232 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IY 


In the same way, while the K which is to be found for each 
occurrence of G is to be such that, in each case in which G 
occurs, it will have an occurrence of K standing in the relation 
P to it, it has not been said that every occurrence of X will 
stand in the relation P to an occurrence of G. Thus death of the 
body, in our previous example, determines cessation of inter- 
course, but cessation of intercourse does not determine death. 
A man may be isolated from intercourse with other persons or 
this planet by the paralysis of his body, as well as by its death. 

The universality of causality, then, does not involve the 
universality of reciprocal causality. The latter, however, has 
also been asserted to exist. Let us consider what is meant by 
this. 

It is clear, in the first place, that any law which asserted 
that all causal determination was reciprocal would be false. We 
know that drunkenness determines the drinking of alcohol, and 
we know that the drinking of alcohol does not determine 
drunkenness, since there have been cases in which men have 
drunk alcohol without getting drunk. Here, then, is at least 
one case of causal determination which is not reciprocal. 

If, then, universal reciprocal determination is taken to mean 
that every determination of one quality by another is reciprocal, 
it is clear that reciprocal determination does not hold universally. 
And when it is said that all causal determination is reciprocal, 
something else, less far-reaching than this, has, I think, been 
meant. It has been meant, not that every determination of a 
quality is reciprocal, but that every quality has at least one 
determination which is reciprocal. It would be admitted that 
beheading determined death without death determining be- 
heading, but it would be asserted that all deaths by beheading 
have some peculiar quality which is found in no other sort of 
death, and that this peculiar quality and the quality of being 
beheaded reciprocally determine one another. Again, it would 
be asserted that there is some other quality which occurred 
whenever the quality of death occurred, and only then, so that 
it stands in reciprocal determination with death. 

If such reciprocal determination were universal, the law 
asserting it might be expressed as follows. Let G be any quality 


CH. Xxv] AS CAUSAL 233 


which occurs. Then, in each case in which G occurs, a quality 
H can be found, which occurs in a relation VM to that occurrence 
of G, and which is such that, in each case in which H occurs, it 
will stand in the relation M to an occurrence of G, and that, in 
each case in which G occurs, an occurrence of H will stand in 
a relation MV to it. 

220. It is possible that such reciprocal determination as this 
should be universal. It involves no contradiction, and it is 
impossible to prove empirically that it is not the case. There 
may be many qualities, even among those for which we can find 
determinants, for which we cannot find any reciprocal deter- 
mination with another quality. Yet for each of these there may 
be a determinant, unknown to us, where the determination is 
reciprocal. But, on the-other hand, it seems impossible to prove 
the universality of reciprocal determination. It could not be 
proved from the universality of causal determination, even if 
the latter were itself established. For it is obvious that there is 
no contradiction in a determination which is not reciprocal, 
since, as we have seen, many determinations—such as the deter- 
mination of death by beheading—are not reciprocal. 

221. In the second place, it has sometimes been said that, 
if every quality was causally determined, it would follow that 
complete knowledge of any substance would imply complete 
knowledge of every other substance in the universe, and that 
this result would not necessarily follow if there were qualities 
which were not causally determined. But this seems to me to 
be erroneous. In one sense of the phrase “complete knowledge 
of any substance,” the result would follow, even if all qualities 
were not causally determined. In another sense of the phrase 
it would not follow, even if they were all causally determined. 

Every substance in the universe is related to every other 
substance in the universe. And complete knowledge of all that 
was true about any substance, A, would include knowledge of 
all its relations to all other substances. This, of course, includes 
knowledge of sufficient descriptions of all those substances, 
since I do not know A completely unless I can identify the 
substance B to which it stands in the relation P. But further, 
in addition to a sufficient description of B, every other fact 


234 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


which is true of B adds to my knowledge of A, since it tells me 
that A is in the relation P to a substance of which this fact is 
true. A complete description of A, therefore, would, since it 
would include all facts true of A, include complete descriptions 
of all other substances. It would therefore be true that, if we 
had complete knowledge of A, we should have complete know- 
ledge of B, and of every other substance, whether all qualities 
were causally determined or not. 

But this inclusion of knowledge of all other substances in 
the knowledge of A is not what is meant by the theory which 
we are discussing. What is meant is that, from a knowledge of 
A which does not include complete knowledge of B, complete 
knowledge of B might be inferred by anyone who had sufficient 
knowledge of the laws by which one quality causally determined 
another, and sufficient power of reasoning to carry out the 
arguments required. And there seems to be no reason to 
believe that the truth of this would be involved by the causal 
determination of all qualities. 

There is nothing in the causal determination of all qualities 
which would exclude the possibility that there should be two 
substances in the universe such that no quality of either should 
be causally determined by any quality of the other, either 
directly or indirectly. Nor is there, as far as I can see, anything 
else which excludes the possibility!. It is perfectly possible — 
that two substances should exist in the universe which are 
completely unrelated to each other in respect of causality. It 
is, of course, impossible that there should be two substances in 
the universe which are not related in some way, but it does not 
follow from this that there cannot be two substances which are 
not related causally. 

And, even if it were the case that every substance in the 
universe should be causally related to every other substance in 


1 The only sort of causal determination which we have proved to exist is 
determination by determining correspondence. And we have seen that it is 
possible for the universe to be divided into two or more primary wholes, no 
part of any one of which is connected by determining correspondence with any 
part of the other. It would, of course, be possible that parts of two primary 
wholes should be connected by some other sort of causal determination; but 
this remains merely a possibility. 


CH. xxv] i AS CAUSAL 235 


the universe, the theory which we are considering would not be 
proved. For it might still be the case that, though some qual- 
ities of B were causally determined by qualities of A, there were 
other qualities of B which were not causally determined, either 
directly or indirectly, by qualities of A. And in this case no 
knowledge of A would enable us to infer all the qualities of B. 

222. Why has it been supposed that, if every quality was 
causally determined, such an inference could be made from the 
nature of any one substance to that of any other? I am inclined 
to think that it is partly due to a confusion between what we 
have distinguished as extrinsic and intrinsic determination. It 
was perceived, more or less clearly, that we have no right to 
believe that, if anything were different from what it is, anything 
else would be the same as what it is. And then this negative 
and general extrinsic determination was confused with positive 
and particular intrinsic determination. We have no right to 
believe that, if any flower in a crannied wall had been different 
from what it was, Shakespeare would have written Hamlet. 
But it does not follow, as Tennyson seems to suggest, that the 
most complete knowledge of the flower would render it possible 
to infer that Shakespeare did write Hamlet. 

Thus, even if every quality was causally determined, we 
should not be entitled to hold that complete knowledge of 
every substance could be inferred from complete knowledge 
of any one substance. And, even if it were, the possibility of 
making such inferences would be of no practical importance. 
The number of substances in the universe is infinite, and their 
relations are infinitely complicated, and there would therefore 
be no guarantee that the nature of any particular B could be 
inferred from the nature of A, except by a thinker with a power 
of carrying out an argument of infinite length and complexity. 
It is obvious that this is of no importance with regard to the 
knowledge of beings whose powers, like our own, are only finite. 
And even if there should exist in the universe a being whose 
powers of inference were infinite and who was capable of ac- 
quiring complete knowledge of some one substance, the possi- 
bility of making such inferences would be of no importance to 
him if he were also directly omniscient, as in that case he would 


CHAPTER XXVI 
DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE (continued) 


224. We must now proceed to consider certain further 
questions about determining correspondence. We have seen that 
from a sufficient description of B, which includes the fact that 
C is in the relation X to some part of B, there follows a sufficient 
description of B/C. But can we go further, and say that there 
is implied in this sufficient description of B, not only a sufficient 
description of B/ C, but the whole nature of B/C? Or, on the 
other hand, is it possible that B/ C should have qualities which 
were not in any way implied in this sufficient description of B? 

If any quality of B/ C is not implied by this sufficient descrip- 
tion of it, then the quality is presupposed by this description. 
For, by the Law of Excluded Middle, B/ C must be either S or 
not-S, where S is any quality. That it should be B/ C, therefore, 
implies that it is S-or-not-S, and, if it does not further imply 
that it is one and not the other, it will presuppose, either that it 
is S, or that it is not-S—whichever it actually is. 

We saw, in Section 184, that any term NV presupposes what- 
ever is presupposed by what NV implies. And a certain sufficient 
description of B implies sufficient descriptions of all the parts of 
B through an infinite series. If, therefore, each of these sufficient 
descriptions of a part of B presupposed some other qualities of 
that part, then the sufficient description of B would have an 
infinite series of presuppositions. Would this involve a contra- 
diction? 

225. We cannot decide that it would do so for those reasons 
which led us to conclude, in Section 191, that a contradiction 
would arise from the infinite series of presuppositions which was 
then considered. For the fixing of the presuppositions in the 
sequent terms of the series need not imply the fixing of the 
presuppositions in the precedent terms. If, for example, in the 
secondary parts of the second grade which make up B/C, we 


cH. xxv1] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 239 


fixed the other qualities of those parts, which are presupposed 
by their sufficient descriptions, this would not necessarily fix, 
in B/ C itself, the qualities which are presupposed by its sufficient 
description. And, in that case, when we come to consider the 
total ultimate presupposition of B, none of these presuppositions 
would disappear from it because of their implication in lower 
terms of the same series, and therefore no contradiction will 
ensue. . 

On the other hand, the objection raised in Section 190 would 
apply in this case also. For there would have to be an infinite 
series of concurrences, in order that each of the infinite series 
of substances, determined by determining correspondence, 
should have its presupposition fixed in respect of each quality 
not implied by the determining correspondence. And we came 
to the conclusion in Section 190 that we could not accept such 
an infinite series as this. 

If we are correct in this, it will follow that it will be impossible 
for all the parts of B to infinity to have any qualities other 
than those determined by determining correspondence. But this 
result only follows from the infinity of the series. It would be 
possible that all or any of the parts for any finite number of 
grades might have qualities not determined by determining 
correspondence. And among such parts would, of course, be 
included all substance which could even be observed by any 
observer whose powers of observation were not infinite—that 
is, of all substances which are of any practical interest to us at 
present. 

226. The question now naturally arises whether we are able 
to discover what relation of determining correspondence actually 
does occur in the universe. If we could show a priori that there 
was only one relation which was a relation of determining 
correspondence, or only one whose occurrence was compatible 
with the other results which we have reached as to the nature 
of the existent, we should know that that relation does occur in 
the universe, and that it is the only relation of determining 
correspondence which does occur. But I do not think that it is 
possible to show this @ priori. When, in Book V, we introduce 
considerations of an empirical nature, it will, I think, be possible 


240 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


to give good reasons for believing that there is a certain relation 
of determining correspondence which occurs in the universe, and 
which is the only one which does occur. But, till then, the 
point must remain undetermined. 

227. Nor are we able, as far as I can see, to lay down at 
present any further conditions which must be satisfied by any 
relation of determining correspondence which actually does 
occur. There are, in particular, two important possibilities which 
we cannot exclude. In the first place, I cannot see that it can 
be shown to be necessary that the same sort of determining 
correspondence should occur everywhere. It seems to me quite 
possible that, if there is more than one primary whole, the 
relation might be a different one in each of them. And even 
within one primary whole, there seems no reason to deny that 
B might have a different sort of determining correspondence 
with the parts of C from that which D has with the parts of L, 
or even from that which B itself has with the parts of F, or, 
again, from that which G has with the parts of B. 

But no fresh sort of determining correspondence could be 
introduced into any stage after the first in the determination of 
the infinite series of sequent sets of parts. For in the first stage 
the sufficient descriptions of all the members of these sequent 
sets of parts must be implied. And this would not be the case 
if a fresh sort of correspondence, not stated in the first stage, 
came into force in any sequent stage. It is possible, of course, 
that A should have a set of parts which determine a sequent 
set by a relation which has every characteristic of determining 
correspondence, except that of generating an infinite series of 
further sequent sets. And the set so determined might determine 
another set by another relation which had again every charac- 
teristic of determining correspondence except that of generating 
such a series. This might continue for any finite number of sets. 
But it would not be determining correspondence, since none of 
the relations would possess the characteristic of generating 
the infinite series of sets. Eventually, if the original con- 
tradiction is to be avoided, we must reach a relation of 
determining correspondence, which will generate such an infinite 
series. And then, for the reason given above, no fresh sort of 


cH. xxv1] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 241 


determining correspondence can be introduced after the first 
stage in such a series. 

228. In the second place, we cannot at present exclude the 
possibility that there might be more than one species of deter- 
mining correspondence extending over the whole universe, or 
over a part of it. It might, for anything we can see yet, be 
possible that the universe should have two sets of parts, which 
were such that none of the members of either were directly 
determined by determining correspondence, and also such that _ 
from sufficient descriptions of all the members of either set 
there followed, by determining correspondence, sufficient descrip- 
tions of the members of all sequent sets!. In that case the 
universe would have two sets of parts, each of which was by 
our definition a set of primary parts, and each of which would 
start a system of determining correspondence extending over 
the whole universe. And the number of such sets of parts need 
not be confined to two. 

When, in Book V, we introduce empirical considerations, 
we shall, I think, see good reason for rejecting both these possi- 
bilities. We shall, as was said above, find grounds for concluding 
that there is only one relation of determining correspondence 
which does occur in the universe, and we shall also find grounds 
for believing that there is only one set of primary parts. But at 
present we can go no further on this point. 

229. Meanwhile it may be useful to consider certain forms of 
correspondence, of which our experience tells us, and to enquire 
how far they do, and how far they do not, comply with the 
conditions required for determining correspondence. Such a 
discussion may enable us to realize more clearly the nature of 
determining correspondence. 

Let us begin by enumerating certain characteristics which 
we have found to belong to determining correspondence. (1) A 
relation between a substance C and part of a substance B is a 

1 Tt will be remembered that a whole can be divided into two sets of parts, 
neither of which is sequent to the other. The group of Cambridge graduates, 
for example, has one set of parts which consists of the group of Doctors, the 
group of Masters, and the group of Bachelors. It has another which consists of 


the group of graduates in Divinity, the group of graduates in Law, and so on. 
Neither of these sets is sequent to the other. 


242 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


relation of determining correspondence, if it is such that a 
certain sufficient description of C, which includes the fact that 
it is in that relation to some part of B, intrinsically determines 
a sufficient description of the part of Bin question, B/ C. (2) A 
relation of determining correspondence is a relation such that 
one determinant term can determine more than one determinate 
term. (3) It is a relation such that B/ C is determined by only 
one determinant, C; while C, though it may be the direct 
determinant of many parts of A, is the direct determinant of 
only one of the parts of A which fall within B. (4) It is, in some 
cases at least, reciprocal. (5) It is such that it is possible to have 
a whole divided into a set of parts, and each of these into a set 
of parts, and so on infinitely, in such a way that sufficient 
descriptions of all these parts are determined, by means of 
determining correspondence, by a sufficient description of the 
whole. 

230. To begin with, let us consider the case of a pattern 
which is drawn on a transparent surface, and the shadow of 
which is thrown on sheets which stand at different angles to 
that surface, no two sheets standing at the same angle. The 
relation between the pattern and the shadows does conform to 
some of the conditions required by a determining correspond- 
ence. It conforms to the first. For if we know the shape of the 
pattern, and the angle at which each of the sheets stands to the 
transparent surface, we shall have data which imply the shape 
of the shadow on each of the sheets. It will conform to the 
second condition, since one pattern may have many shadows 
on different sheets. And it will conform to the third condition, 
since each shadow can (on a sheet set at that angle to the pattern) 
be the shadow of only one pattern, while the pattern can only 
have one shadow on each sheet. 

But it will not conform to the fourth condition. There is no 
possibility of reciprocal determination, since the parts of the 
pattern cannot be shadows of the shadows of the pattern. And 
therefore it cannot conform to the fifth condition. If the shadows 
had parts within parts infinitely, it could only be because the 
pattern had, as a fact independent of the relation between it 
and the shadows, parts within parts infinitely. And thus the 


cH. xxv1] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 243 


pattern would have had an infinite series of sets of parts, each 
of which would have presupposed those which were sequent to 
it, while it would itself be implied by them. And thus a contra- 
diction would arise in the manner explained in Chapter xx. 

231. Or, again, suppose that a collection of volumes of 
poetry were catalogued on some system which excluded cross- 
entries, and that there were several copies of the catalogue, each 
copy being on paper cf a different colour. Then, again, the first 
three conditions would be satisfied. The sufficient description of 
C would be any sufficient description of one of the volumes, 
which included the fact that the volume was entered in B, 
which would be sufficiently described as the copy of the cata- 
logue which was on red paper. And this gives us a sufficient 
description, B/ C, of the entry of the book in that copy of the 
catalogue. Thus the first condition is satisfied. The second con- 
dition is satisfied, since one book can be entered in many copies 
of the catalogue. And each entry will only refer to one book, 
while each book will have only one entry in each catalogue, so 
that the third condition is satisfied. 

But the fourth condition is not satisfied. For the parts of 
the books catalogued cannot consist in catalogue entries which 
catalogue the catalogues. This is impossible, because books con- 
sisting of such entries would not be volumes of poetry. And 
therefore the fifth condition fails also. On the one hand, if only 
books, and not their parts, are catalogued, the catalogue entries 
cannot have parts within parts to infinity which correspond to 
anything in that which is catalogued. If, on the other hand, the 
parts of books are catalogued, there could only be such an 
infinite series in the entries, if the book catalogued had, as an 
independent fact, such an infinite series of parts. And this 
would lead, as in the last case, to a contradiction. 

232. Suppose, however, we alter our ease, and take a 
certain number of catalogues, each of which catalogues itself, 
the others, and the entries in itself and in the others. The first 
three conditions would be satisfied as before. And so would the 
fourth, since an entry of the red book would be part of the blue 
book, and an entry of the blue book would be part of the red 
book. Also sufficient descriptions would be implied of an infinite 


244 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


series of entries. If there were two catalogues, the red and the 
blue, then the red would contain entries of itself and of the 
blue. It would also contain entries of the entries in itself of 
itself and of the blue, and also of the entries of both of them in 
the blue. And so on infinitely. 

But still the fifth condition would not be satisfied. An entry 
of the blue book is, as we have just said, part of the red book. 
And the further entries, which record the entries in the blue 
book of the blue book and the red book, are also parts of the 
red book. But they are not parts of the entry of the blue book 
in the red book. The entry “blue book” cannct, it is clear, have 
as its parts “the blue book’s entry of the red book,” and “the 
blue book’s entry of the blue book.” And therefore the infinite 
series of entries will not be a series of parts divided into 
parts infinitely, and we shall not have satisfied the fifth 
condition. 

233. Let us now suppose that B is positive, and C is 
negative, and that they determine parts, of themselves and of 
each other, to resemble them in this respect, so that B/ C is the 
negative part of the positive part of A. In this case the first 
condition will be satisfied, since B/ C will be sufficiently described - 
in this way. The second condition will be satisfied, since C' will 
determine C/ C as well as B/ C. So also will the third condition, 
since B/ C will correspond to nothing but C, and C is the direct 
determinant of only one of those parts of A which fall within 
B. The fourth condition will be satisfied, since B will determine | 
a part of C, and C will determine a part of B. Finally, the 
fifth condition will be satisfied. There will be four secondary 
parts cf the first grade—the positive part of the positive part, 
the negative part of the positive part, the positive part of the 
negative part, and the negative part of the negative part. Each 
of these will again have positive and negative parts, and so on 
infinitely. Thus all the conditions are satisfied. 

The same result might happen with other qualities besides 
positive and negative. And the number of qualities which were 
thus combined might be more than two, so that the primary 
whole might contain more than two primary parts. Also it 
would not be necessary that every primary part should deter- 


cH. xxv1] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 245 


mine every other, provided that some of them formed a recipro- 
cally determining group. 

But for such a determining correspondence as this, it is 
necessary that the qualities should have certain characteristics. 
Firstly, they must be incompatible with one another. If this 
were not the case, sufficient descriptions of the parts of B 
would not be given by saying of one of them that it was positive 
and of the other that it was negative, as both descriptions 
might belong to the same part. Secondly, they must be such 
that a whole and its part can have the same quality. For the 
infinite series will not arise unless a positive part can have a 
positive part, and a negative part a negative part. Thirdly, they 
must be such that a whole and its part can have different 
qualities. For it is also necessary to have the positive part of a 
“negative part, and the negative part of a positive part. And 
these characteristics must be true at any stage in the infinite 
process, whether the wholes in question are primary parts, 
secondary parts of the first grade, or secondary parts of any 
other grade. 

Whether there is any set of qualities which have these 
characteristics is a question which does not concern us now. 
I do not assert that there is such a set, nor, if there is, that 
positive and negative are such a set. 

234. Can we find an example of determining correspondence 
in the world of spirit? Could knowledge be a term in such a 
correspondence? Let us take first that knowledge which consists 
in judgments. Only true judgments are parts of knowledge’. 
A true judgment is one which corresponds to a fact, and since 
a judgment, which is a state of the mind of a knowing being, is 
a substance, and that which is known is sometimes a substance, 
there are cases of knowledge which are correspondences between 
substances. 

B knows that a substance exists which has the sufficient 
description XYZ. Will a sufficient description of this substance, 


1 I do not mean to assert that all true judgments are parts of knowledge. 
It is a true judgment that the Visitor of Peterhouse in 1919 was a Bishop, but 
it is at any rate doubtful whether a man could be properly said to know this, 
if he made that judgment because he believed the Visitor to be the Bishop of 


Gibraltar. 


246 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


C, which includes the sufficient description X YZ, and also the 
fact that B has this knowledge of C, give us a sufficient descrip- 
tion of B’s knowledge of C? 

In the first place, it will fail to do so, because it is possible 
for a man to know the same fact at two different times. There 
would then be two states of his mind, of each of which the 
description “B’s knowledge that a substance exists which has 
the sufficient description XYZ” would be true. And therefore 
this description would not be a sufficient description of either 
state, since it is true of hoth. In consequence of this, the first 
and third conditions laid down above would not be satisfied. 

They would, however, be satisfied if the assumption were 
made that each of the knowing beings had only one act of 
knowledge of any substance which it knew at all. A substance 
would then be sufficiently described, if it is described as the 
knowledge of B, that is, of a substance sufficiently described as 
RST, that there exists another substance which is sufficiently 
described as X YZ. 

But when this preliminary difficulty is removed, we should 
find others. Firstly, in many cases the fourth condition could 
not be satisfied, even if we grant, what I believe to be true, 
that every act of knowledge is a part of the knower. In that 
case a part of B would be determined by C. But if C is not 
itself a knowing being, this determination cannot be reciprocal. 
If I know the Great Pyramid, a part of my mind is determined 
by being knowledge of the Great Pyramid. But no part of the 
Great Pyramid can be determined by being knowledge of my 
mind. And, since the fourth condition fails, the fifth must fail 
also. 

Secondly, the fifth condition would fail, even in cases when 
B and C can know one another. For it is not part of the sup- 
position that either of them knows more than one substance. 
Nor would even this give us the fifth condition, unless we also 
supposed that the knowledge was reciprocal, and unless we 
supposed also that each knowing being knew the parts of every- 
thing which he knew. 

Thirdly, it is not part of the supposition that the acts of 
knowledge of any knowing being form a complete set of parts of 


cH. xxv1] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 247 


that being, so that there is nothing to insure that determining 
correspondence would be provided for all parts of B. 

235. Could we avoid those difficulties by specifying still 
further the sort of knowledge which we are considering? Let 
each of the primary parts of a primary whole be a knowing 
being, each of which knows other primary parts and their parts, 
and, except that knowledge, has no parts whatever. Deter- 
mination can now be reciprocal, since the primary parts which 
are known can also know and the secondary parts which are 
known can be acts of knowledge. Thus the fourth condition is 
satisfied. And thus we have an endless series of parts deter- 
mined in B. There will be first his knowledge of himself and of 
C. Then his knowledge of his knowledge of himself and C, and 
his knowledge of C’s knowledge of himself and C. And so on 
through an infinite series. 

But still the fifth condition has not been satisfied. Sufficient 
descriptions of the primary parts, indeed, intrinsically deter- 
mine sufficient descriptions of an endless series of substances, 
each of which is part of the primary whole, and part also of one 
of the primary parts. But, beyond this point, the parts deter- 
mined are not parts of parts previously determined. They are all 
judgments, and a judgment about a part cannot be part of a 
judgment about a whole, so that the reciprocal determination, 
while it produces an endless series, does not produce an endless 
series of parts within parts. 

For example, in the case given above, BkC (where & stands 
for “knowledge of”) implies BkCkB and BkCkC, since in. C 
there are CkB and CkC, and B knows the parts of everything 
which it knows. But BkCkKB is not a part of BkC, though both 
are parts of B, and though CkB is part of C. A judgment has 
parts (though not parts within parts to infinity), but a set of 
parts of a judgment are never all judgments, and therefore a 
set of parts of a judgment about a whole can never be judgments 
about the parts of the whole. If, for example, I know something 
about the United Kingdom, my judgment about the United 
Kingdom could not be divided into two judgments about Great 
Britain and Ireland respectively. Even if my judgment about 
the United Kingdom should be that it consists of two parts, 


248 DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE [BK IV 


Great Britain and Ireland, the judgment would not consist of 
two judgments, one about Great Britain and one about Ireland. 

236. Thus knowledge cannot give us an example of deter- 
mining correspondence, if knowledge is taken as restricted to 
judgments. But there is something besides judgment which has 
a claim to be called knowledge. This is perception. And in the 
case of perception the difficulty which we have just been con- 
sidering does not occur. For it must, I think, be admitted that 
the perception of a part may be part of a perception of the whole. | 
If I perceive the surface of a panel as a whole4, and at the same 
time perceive the details of the carving on the surface, the per- 
ception of each particular detail is part of the perception of the 
panel as a whole. 

We can thus, I think, get an example of what determining 
correspondence would be, by taking a primary whole, each of 
whose primary parts is a percipient being which perceives other 
primary parts and their parts, and which has itself no parts 
except those perceptions. (We must also assume that the per- 
ception is, in some cases at least, reciprocal, and that no per- 
cipient has more than one perception of any perceptum.) The 
first four conditions would be satisfied, as they were in the case 
of knowledge by judgment. And the fifth condition would also 
be satisfied. For as B’s perception of C’s perception of B would 
be part of B’s perception of C, we should have an infinite series 
of parts within parts. 

Of such perception as this we have no experience. Our 
experience, I think, if properly analyzed, shows that a self can 
perceive itself, and that it frequently does so. But we have no 
experience of any self perceiving another self, nor, consequently, 
of the reciprocal perception of selves. And, again, we have no 
experience of a percipient being with no other activity but. per- 
ception, and with no parts but perceptions. 

Still, we know what perception is like, and it does not seem 


1 Strictly speaking, of course, I do not perceive the panel, or its details. 
I perceive sense-data, from which I am led to a belief in the panel and the 
details. The sense-data thus related to the details are, it seems clear, part of the 
sense-data thus related to the panel, and my contention is that my perception 
of the sense-data related to the details is part of my perception of the sense-data 
related tu the panel. (This subject will be discussed in Book V.) 


cH. xxv1] DETERMINING CORRESPONDENCE 249 


impossible to form a conception of a society of selves which in 
this manner perceived themselves, and each other, and their 
parts. It is not useless, therefore, to have come to the conclusion 
that in this, if it occurred, we should have a relation of deter- 
mining correspondence, And here we must leave the question 
till we resume it in Book V. 


CHAPTER XXVII 
EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES (continued) 


237. The results which we have reached in the earlier 
chapters of this Book naturally lead us to the reconsideration 
of the question discussed in Chapter xvi, the occurrence in 
groups of exclusive common qualities. Are there, that is, any 
qualities which belong to more than one substance, without 
belonging to all? For if there is such a quality, the substances 
which possess it will form a group in which the quality in ques- 
tion is an exclusive common quality—that is, will belong to 
every substance which is a member of the group, and to no 
other substance}. 

In our previous consideration of the subject we found, not 
only that there were such qualities, but that every group 
possessed them. But the only exclusive common qualities 
which we could be certain that all groups possessed, were 
qualities which were mere restatements of the denotation of 
the group. If the group consists of the members A, B, and 
C, and if D, H, and F are taken as a complete list of the 
substances which are not members of the group*, then we 
saw that there will be two exclusive common qualities in that 
group. One is the quality of being a member of the group 
which consists of A, B, and C, and the other is the quality 
“dissimilar to D, to H, and to F.” But the first of the qualities 
is little more than a tautology, and the second could only be 
known to us if we knew all the infinite number of substances 
which are not members of the group, and also knew that we 
knew all of them?. 


1 Such a quality cannot also be a quality of the group, since no group is 
one of its own members. 

2 We now know that existent substances are infinite in number, and that 
the substances outside any group with a finite denotation will likewise be 
infinite in number. But this will not affect the validity of the argument. 

3 Cp. Section 132. 


cH. xxvul] EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES 251 


It is alsa possible, as was pointed out beforet, for the members 
of a group to have some exclusive common quality which is not 
@ mere restatement of the denotation of the group, and which 
therefore is not tautological, and can be known without infinite 
knowledge. And we know empirically that this sometimes 
happens. The Colleges of Magdalene and Trinity in Cambridge 
form a group the members of which have the exclusive common 
quality “to be a Cambridge College in which, in the year 1919, 
the Headship was not in the gift of the Fellows.” At the point, 
however, at which we then left the subject, we know nothing 
about the frequency of such groups, nor had we any @ priori 
knowledge as to the nature of any of the exclusive common 
qualities. 

238. But now the position is different. We shall find our- 
selves able to show that there are qualities of certain sorts which 
are exclusive common qualities in groups, and which are not 
restatements of the denotations of the groups*. And although 
we shall not be able to show that each group has in it such an 
exclusive common quality, we shall be able to show that every 
substance does belong to at least one group which has in it such 
an exclusive common quality. The qualities whose occurrence 
can thus be demonstrated will, in every case, turn out to be 
relational qualities. 

Let us take first those.substances which are primary wholes, 
primary parts, or secondary parts in the system of determining 
correspondence. (We will call this system, for a reason which 
will appear in the next chapter, the Fundamental System, and 
will speak of these substances as being within the fundamental 
system.) We shall find several sorts of qualities such that each 
of these substances will be a member of one or more groups 
which have a quality of one of these sorts as an exclusive 
common quality. 

In the first place, substances within this system are either 
primary wholes, primary parts, or secondary parts. And we 


1 Section 133. 
2 For the sake of brevity I shall, in the rest of this chapter, use “exclusive 
common quality” so as not to include those which are restatements of the 


denotations of the groups. 


252 EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES [BK IV 


have thus three groups, each of which has an exclusive common 
quality—the compound quality which is the definition of a 
primary whole, a primary part, or a secondary part. And 
secondary parts, again, form an infinite number of groups—the 
group of secondary parts of the first grade, the group of second- 
ary parts of the second grade, and so on. And each of these has 
an exclusive common quality in the definition of secondary parts 
of that grade. 

239. In the secdnd place, the primary parts are divisible 
into a set of groups, by taking all those primary parts which fall 
within the same primary whole as a separate group. In the 
same way the secondary parts of the first grade can be divided 
into groups according to the primary part in which they fall. 
The secondary parts of the second grade can be divided according 
to the secondary parts of the first grade in which they fall, and 
so on to infinity. 

Each of these groups will have an exclusive common quality 
which is not a restatement of the denotation. In the group of 
primary parts which fall within the primary whole A, the 
exclusive common quality will be to be a primary part which 
falls within the primary whole A. In the group of secondary 
parts of the first grade which fall within the primary part B, the 
exclusive common quality will be to be a secondary part of the 
first grade which falls within the primary part B, and so on. 

When we include in the exclusive common quality “falling 
within the primary part B,” or “falling within B/ C, a secondary 
part of the first grade,” and so on to sequent terms, we do not 
bring in any element which is a mere restatement of the denota- 
tion of the group. It is true that B has, among other qualities, 
the quality of being a group of which its secondary parts of the 
first grade are members. But the position of B in the system of 
determining correspondence involves that it must have a suffi- 
cient description independent of any qualities determined by its 
own parts. We are thus asserting that its parts have the common 
quality of being parts of something which has this independent 
sufficient description. And this is not a mere restatement of the 
denotation of the group of parts. The same is true of B/C, or 
any sequent part. 


CH. xxvi1] EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES 253 


The case of primary wholes is rather different, since it is 
possible that a primary whole may not have any sufficient 
description which is independent of qualities determined by its 
primary parts. But even if this should be so, we should not 
bring in any element which is a mere restatement of the denota- 
tion of the group. For we should not be saying merely that B 
was a primary part falling within the group constituted of B 
and C. We should be saying that B was a primary part falling 
within the primary whole constituted by the primary parts B 
and C. And the fact that the group was a primary whole is not 
a mere restatement of its denotation. For every primary part 
belongs to many groups of primary parts which are not primary 
wholes—groups, ¢.g., in which primary parts from two primary 
wholes are included. 

240. This, then, is the second system of groups with ex- 
clusive common qualities which can be determined to exist in 
the universe. In the third place, there is the system which 
would be formed if, instead of grouping together only the 
primary parts which were parts of A, or the secondary parts of 
the first grade which were parts of B, we took all parts in the 
fundamental system which were parts of A, and all parts in the 
fundamental system which were parts of B, and so on. 

241. Fourthly, every secondary part in the fundamental 
system, 7.e., every part except primary wholes and primary 
parts, has a determinant. We may give the name of Final 
Determinant of any part to its direct determinant, if it is a 
secondary part of the first grade, and, if it is of any other grade, 
to the last of its indirect determinants. Thus B/C, D/ E!C, 
F!G!H!C have all of them C as their final determinant. All 
secondary parts, then, can be divided into groups according to 
their final determinant. The exclusive common quality in each 
of these groups will be to be finally determined by B, or C, or 
some other primary part. Those secondary parts which are not 
in the first grade, will, in addition to their final determinant, 
have a penultimate determinant, and those, therefore, which 
have the same final determinant can be subdivided into groups 
having the same penultimate determinant. Here the exclusive 
common quality will be, for example, to have the final deter- 


254 EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES [BK IV 


minant C, and the penultimate determinant D, or, as it may also 
be expressed, to have the determinant D/C. Those which are 
not in the first two grades will be further subdivided into groups 
in which the exclusive common quality is the possession of the 
same last three determinants, and so on infinitely. 

242. Passing to substances which are not parts of the 
fundamental system, we find that their relation to that system 
enables us to determine that certain groups of those substances 
will have in them exclusive common qualities. 

In the first place, as we have seen, every substance which is 
not a member of the fundamental system can be divided into 
substances which are members of that system. (We can, for 
the sake of brevity, express this by saying that every external 
substance can be divided into internal substances.) And every 
external substance can be divided into internal substances, 
which are all of the same grade. If, for example, we take the 
substance which consists of B, C/ D, and D! C! E! F, then, since 
D!C! E! F is a secondary part of the third grade, and B and 
C! D are divisible into parts of the same grade, the whole 
external substance can be divided into parts of that grade, 
though not into parts of any higher grade. Other substances 
could be divided into parts all of which were of a higher grade, 
while others, again, could only be divided in this way when a 
lower grade had been reached. 

All external substances, then, could be divided into groups 
according to the highest grade of internal substances to which 
all the content of the external substance could be reduced. The 
first group would consist of those external substances all of 
whose content was given in a set of parts whose members were 
primary wholes. The second group would consist of those sub- 
stances where the highest grade in question was that of primary 
parts, and so on infinitely. And this gives an exclusive common 
quality for each group. 

243. In the second place, some, though not all, external 
substances will be such that all the parts of any of them fall 
within some one primary whole, should there be more than one. 
Those external substances, each of which has all its parts falling 
within a primary whole, A, will form a group, in which there 


CH. Xxvi1] EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES 255 


will be an exclusive common quality—that of having all its 
parts falling within the primary whole A. In each such group, 
some, though not all, of its members will be such that all the 
parts of any one of them will fall within some one primary part. 
Then those of them, each of which has all its parts falling 
within a primary part B, will form a group, in which there will 
be an exclusive common quality of having all parts falling 
within a primary part B. And so on infinitely. 

244. Thus the result is that every substance which is a 
member of the fundamental system is a member of a group with 
an exclusive common quality of the first type; that every such 
substance, except primary wholes, is a member of a group with 
an exclusive common quality of the second type; that every 
such substance, except primary wholes, is a member of at least 
one group with an exclusive common quality of the third type; 
and that every such substance, except primary wholes and 
primary parts, is a member of at least one group with an ex- 
clusive common quality of the fourth type. And, further, that 
every substance which is not a member of the fundamental 
system is a member of a group with an exclusive common 
quality of the fifth type, while some of them are members of 
one or more groups with an exclusive common quality of the 
sixth type. Every substance, then, is a member of at least one 
group in which there is an exclusive common quality besides 
those which are restatements of its denotation. 

All these exclusive common qualities, however, are rela- 
tional qualities. Each of them is the quality of standing in a 
certain relation to sométhing. Can we say anything about the 
occurrences of exclusive common original qualities? I do not 
think that we can. We know empirically that in certain groups 
there are exclusive common qualities which are original. Some 
substances are happy, and some are not. And there is therefore 
a group of substances which has the exclusive common original 
quality of happiness. But it is, so far as I can see, impossible 
to determine anything @ priori as to the occurrence of such 
qualities. And, in particular, I can see no reason to assert 
@ priort that every substance is a member of at least one group 
which has an exclusive common original quality. Our @ priors 


256 EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES [BK IV 


knowledge about the original qualities of substances, here as 
elsewhere, does not take us as far as our original knowledge about 
their original relations, and, consequently, about their relational 
qualities. 

245. But in demonstrating the occurrence of exclusive 
common qualities, whether these properties are original or not, 
we have done what is really essential. In order that we may be 
able to build up a system of knowledge about anything that 
exists, it is not necessary that there should be found in it 
groups with exclusive common original qualities. Groups with 
some exclusive common qualities are necessary, but it is indiffer- 
ent whether these are original or relational. 

Without groups with exclusive common qualities, it would 
be impossible to make any general statement about substances, 
except such as applied to all existent substances. It would be 
logically possible to make a certain number of general pro- 
positions about existent substances, since some such proposi- 
tions do apply to all existent substances. And there would be 
no logical impossibility in making propositions about particular 
existent substances, since each might be sufficiently described 
by means of qualities which it did not share with any other 
substance. And, further, it would be logically possible to reach 
such scientific propositions as can be known @ priort. We can 
see that equilateral implies equiangular, for example, whether - 
there does or does not exist a group of equilateral sub- 
stances?. 

But no scientific propositions could be reached which de- 
pended on induction, since, as a basis for induction in any 
science, we require experience of several existent substances 
with a quality which is common to them, and which is not to 
be found in every substance. And scientific propositions 
reached a@ priori would no longer have the same relevance to the 
existent that we find these to have at present, since we could 

1 These three possibilities are only logical—that is, there is no logical impos- 
sibility in our having such knowledge under such conditions. As a matter of 
psychological fact, it would, I suppose, be impossible that such knowledge, or 
any knowledge, could arise in a being who was unable to discover, in the course 


of his empirical experience, qualities which belonged to some of the substances 
he knew, without belonging to all. 


CH. xxviI] EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES 257 


find no groups of substances in which the conditions of the pro- 
positions were realized even approximately. 

We do not, indeed, need the arguments of this chapter, or 
any other philosophical arguments, to assure us that there are 
groups of substances having exclusive common qualities in 
them. Each of us can reach this conclusion by an argument from 
his own perceptions which is sborter and more certain than 
any such argument can be. I have perceived more than one 
sense-datum, which is a sense-datum of red. And I have per- 
ceived other sense-data which are not sense-data of red. It is 
clear, therefore, that there is more than one substance which 
has the quality of being a sense-datum of red, and that all 
existent substances have not that quality. And this alone is 
sufficient to prove that a group can be found in which there is 
an exclusive common quality. 

But such an argument as this cannot prove to us that every 
substance belongs to such a group. And therefore it would still 
remain possible that there are substances to which no general 
propositions would apply, except those which apply to all sub- 
stances. But the arguments of this chapter have shown us that 
every substance belongs to at least one group with an exclusive 
common quality, and that therefore every substance has at 
least one quality which belongs to it, and to some other sub- 
stance, without belonging to all other substances. This result is 
of great interest and importance. And it is important and 
interesting even though all the exclusive common qualities of 
which we can be certain are relational and not original. ' 

In the case of the first type of exclusive common qualities 
in internal substances we were able to determine @ priori, not 
only the type of the qualities, but the qualities themselves. 
And the same was the case with the first type in external sub- 
stances. But the other types are different. The qualities of 
these types are derived from relations to some particular part 
of the fundamental system. They can only be known if those 
parts are known. Now sufficient descriptions of all parts of the 
fundamental system follow by principles which are known 4 
priori from sufficient descriptions of the primary parts. But 
there is no way by which sufficient descriptions of the primary 


258 EXCLUSIVE COMMON QUALITIES [BK IV 


parts can be deduced @ priori. These must be known empirically, 
if they are to be known at all. The qualities of some types, 
therefore, can only be known empirically. And, although every 
substance has not been shown to be a member of a group with 
an exclusive common quality of those types, yet this has been 
shown about every internal substance, except primary wholes. 
246. It does not follow that because we know a substance 
we shall be able to know what groups it belongs to in which 
there are exclusive common qualities of one of these six types. 
For to know this we must know the place of the substance in 
the fundamental system, or, if it is outside it, the place of its 
parts in that system. And we might know a great deal about a 
substance without knowing this. In particular, we might know 
of some group or groups with an exclusive common quality to 
which the substance belongs, without knowing to what groups 
it belongs in which the exclusive common quality comes under 
any of these six types. Trinity College in Cambridge, as we 
have seen, belongs to a group which has in it the exclusive 
common quality of being a Cambridge college whose Headship 
is not in the gift of the Fellows. But we may know this without 
knowing what qualities it has which come under any of the six 


ty pes. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 
ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE 


247. In Chapter xxI we came to the conclusion that we 
had at that point, no reason to believe that the universe was 
ordered. We defined an ordered universe as one which possessed. 
at least one of three characteristics. The first was that the parts 
should determine one another according to general laws. This 
was called causal order. The second was that its parts should 
be connected with one another by such a relation that they 
should form a single series. We called this serial order. 

The third we called order of classification. We said, to begin 
with, that the parts of a whole may be said to form a classifying 
system, when there is such an arrangement of parts within 
parts as to give each part a definite place in the whole with 
relation to other parts, and when each group of parts formed 
by the arrangement possesses some exclusive common quality 
other than those which are merely restatements of the denota- 
tion of the group?. And we said that a whole may be said to 
possess order of classification if its parts can be arranged in a 
classifying system of such a nature that the exclusive common 
characteristics in the groups are of fundamental importance to 
the parts which possess them. The greater the extent to which 
the system carries the classification, the more perfect will be 
the order. 

Without considering the question whether the universe 
possesses serial order, we can now see that it possesses both the 
other characteristics. For we saw in Chapter xxv that causal 
determination, though it possibly did not extend to all qualities 
of all substances, did extend to some qualities of every sub- 
stance, and to such an extent as afforded a sufficient description 
of every substance determined by it. 


1 Such a system must, of course, provide exclusive descriptions of each part 
in the system, as otherwise they could not be identified, and it would not be 
known what part was in any particular place. 


260 ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


And the same relation of determining correspondence which 
ensures this, ensures also that the universe possesses order of 
classification. For by means of that relation, the parts of the 
universe can be arranged in a classifying system based on 
qualities which are of fundamental importance. Such a system 
may be called a Fundamental System. 

248. The system in question is one which divides the 
universe, in the first place, into primary wholes, then divides 
each of these into their primary parts, each of these into second- 
ary parts of the first grade, each of these into secondary parts 
of the second grade, and so on infinitely?. 

Each of the groups thus formed will, as we saw in the last 
chapter, have in it an exclusive common quality which is not a 
mere restatement of the denotation of the group. In the group 
of primary wholes that exclusive common quality will be the 
quality of being a primary whole. In the group of primary 
parts which fall within the primary whole A, the exclusive 
common quality will be that of being a primary part which 
falls within A. In the group of the secondary parts of the first 
grade which fall within the primary part B, the exclusive 
common quality will be to be a secondary part of the first grade 
which falls within the primary part B. In the group of the 
secondary parts of the second grade which fall within B/ (, the 
exclusive common quality will be to be a secondary part of the 
second grade which falls within B/ C, which is a secondary part 
of the first grade. And so on with all the others. 

Here we have a system which arranges all the content of 
the universe. It does not, indeed, contain all substances as 
members. It does not contain as members such substances as 
that which consists of B and C, in the case in which B and C 
are not the whole of A. Nor does it contain as members such 


1 The first step in this system will of course drop out, if it should prove to 
be the case that the universe is a single primary whole. It might be thought 
that between primary wholes and primary parts there should come another 
stage, that of differentiating groups. But these groups may overlap. The 
differentiating group of B, for example, may be BOD, and the differentiating 
group of H may be CDF. And thus division by these groups would not arrange 
the parts of the universe in one definite system, in which such part is either 


united to or separated from every other in the grouping at each particular 
stage. 


CH. XXVIII] ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE 261 


substances as that which consists of B/C and OC! D/ E. But 
though the system does not contain them as members, it does 
contain their parts as members. 

249. Why should this system be regarded as more funda- 
mental than other systems of classification? In the first place, 
this system of division of the universe is involved in the fact 
that there is a universe at all. The universe is a substance. 
Every substance is divided into parts of parts infinitely. And 
the only way to avoid the contradiction which would otherwise 
be involved in this infinite series is that the universe should 
contain primary parts (arranged in one or more primary wholes) 
the parts of each of which should be in determining correspond- 
ence with other primary parts, and their parts. And since this 
relation of primary parts and their parts to one another gives 
us the system which we are now considering,’ that system is 
implied in the fact that there is a universe. It does not seem 
possible that any other system than this is implied in that fact, 
except a system which is implied in this system. And this is 
sufficient to entitle us to regard the system as specially funda- 
mental to the universe. 

And, in the second place, we are not certain that any system 
of classification extends over the whole universe, except this 
system, and any other which is implied by this. The infinite 
number of parts of the universe could, indeed, be arranged in 
an infinite number of ways. Any two or more could be grouped 
together, and any two or more of these groups could again be 
grouped, and so on. But such an arrangement would not be a 
system of classification unless each group of parts formed by it 
possessed some exclusive common quality which is not a restate- 
ment of its denotation. And we do not, so far as I can see, 
know that any arrangement has this quality, except the one 
which we are now considering, and any which may be implied 
in it. This gives us a second reason for regarding this system as 
fundamental. 

In the third place, the system which we have described, 
while it does not include every part in the universe, does, as we 
have seen, include the parts of every part, and therefore implies 
the existence of every part which it does not include, and has a 


262 ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


definite relation to every division in every arrangement (whether 
systematic or not) that can be made of the parts of the universe. 
And this cannot be the case with any system of arrangement 
which does not depend on determining correspondence. For it 
can only be the case with a system which contains parts of every 
part of the universe, that is, a system which contains parts of 
parts to infinity. And, as we have seen, no such system can 
exist unless it is determined by determining correspondence. 

For these three reasons we may regard such a system as a 
fundamental system, and as therefore producing order in the 
universe. And such a system has two other characteristics 
which render the order produced by it more perfect. The first is 
that, since its divisions are carried on to infinity, it never 
leaves any content in any of its divisions which cannot be 
further determined by the system. The second is that the 
principle which has determined any division is the same principle 
that determines the sub-divisions of that division to infinity— 
namely, the same sort of determining correspondence!?. 

We saw in an earlier chapter? that, so far as we had yet gone, 
the possibility was not excluded that there should be two or 
more independent systems of determining correspondence, each 
of which extended over the whole universe. Considerations to 
be introduced in Book V will give us good reason to suppose that 
this is not actually the case. But, if it were the case, the universe 
would still be an ordered universe. It would have several 
systems of classification, independent but not incompatible, 
each of which would be based on qualities of fundamental 
importance, and each of which, therefore, might be called a 
fundamental system, as opposed to systems of classification 
which were not based on qualities of fundamental importance, 
and to arrangements which were not systems of classification 
at all. 

250. There are, of course, an infinite number of arrange- 
ments of the infinite number of parts of the universe. Such of 
these arrangements as cannot be deduced from the fundamental 


1 As contrasted, for example, with a system which should classify mankind 
by races, should then classify the persons of each race by sex, and then the 
persons who were of the same race and sex by age. 

2 Section 228. 


CH. XXVIII] ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE 263 


system, may, whether they are systems of classification or not, 
be considered as more or less expressing the fundamental nature 
of the universe in proportion as they depart less or more from 
the arrangement of the fundamental system. 

In the first place, there are those divisions which divide 
groups which the fundamental system does not divide, without 
making any alteration in that system. For example, if the 
differentiating group of B should be C, D, E, and F, then B’s 
secondary parts of the first grade would be B/C, B/ D, B! E, 
B! F. These four members would in the fundamental system 
form one group, between which, and the four groups formed by 
the parts of the four members respectively, the fundamental 
system would give no intermediate groups. But if it should 
happen, for example, that B/ C and B/ D possessed an exclusive 
common quality which was not shared by B/ E and B/ F, then 
there would be two intermediate groups, one of B/ C and B/ D, 
and one of B/ E and B/ F, which would give a supplementary 
systematic arrangement. And, even if there were no exclusive 
common quality, this would still be a supplementary arrange- 
ment of the parts in question, although it would not be syste- 
matic. 

In such a case as this the arrangement, while it supple- 
ments the fundamental system, cannot be said to depart from 
it. But, in the second place, there are arrangements which do 
depart from the fundamental system. Such, for example, 
would be an arrangement which brought together B/C! D!/ E 
and C/ F! G! D, as the only members of a set of parts of some 
higher part. For then these two parts would be brought as 
close to one another as any two parts could be, and would have 
a common whole which they shared with nothing else, while in 
the fundamental system they would have no common whole 
short of the primary whole, and each of them would have sub- 
stances much nearer to itself than the other was. 

Such an arrangement, then, will depart from the funda- 
mental system. And it will depart from it more or less according 
to the number of cases in which parts are grouped differently in 
the two systems, and according as the difference in their relative 
positions in the two systems is large or small. 


264 ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


251. We have thus, theoretically, a test of the degree to 
which any arrangement, other than the fundamental system, 
expresses the fundamental nature of the universe, since it will 
do so more or less in proportion as it departs less or more from 
the fundamental system. But this would only be of practical 
importance if we were able to determine the places in the 
fundamental system of the substances included in the arrange- 
ment to be judged. 

And even if we were able to determine the places in the 
fundamental system of those substances which we know em- 
pizically, it would not follow that the fundamental system 
would give us much aid in those classifications and divisions 
which we find it necessary to make in order to deal with the 
subject-matter of our empirical knowledge. It is clear that it 
might not help us if we were seeking for a classification whicb 
is to serve some special need of our own, because, if our need 
has no simple and definite relation to the fundamental qualities 
of the things dealt with, the classification which suits our needs 
may be one which, from the point of view of those qualities, may 
be trivial and fantastic. It would, for example, be trivial and 
fantastic, from any general standpoint, to classify a collection 
of pictures by the state of the gilding on their frames. But if a 
curator had to decide how a grant for regilding the frames 
should be expended, such a classification would be the one which 
he would require. 

Even, however, when we have no such special need_to con- 
sider, but are only desirous of arranging what we empirically 
know in such a way as to understand it best, it does not follow 
that the fundamental system would give us much aid towards 
that classification. Let us suppose, for example, that the 
universe was a single primary whole, and that its primary parts 
were material atoms. In that case we should know of no exist- 
ence outside our primary whole, since nothing else existed. And 
we should know nothing of the particular natures of any primary 
part, or of any secondary part, since we have no empirical 
acquaintance with any atom, or with any part of any atom. 
Everything which we know empirically would be a group of 
primary parts within one all-embracing primary whole, and 


CH. XXVIII] ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE 265 


consequently the only arrangements in the universe which could 
help us to arrange what we know empirically would be arrange- 
ments of primary parts within their primary whole. And such 
arrangements could not be found in the fundamental system, 
since that system goes in one step from a primary whole to the 
set of its primary parts. 

It is not, indeed, probable that the primary parts are in any 
case material atoms—this question will be discussed in Book V. 
But it is quite possible that, in some part of the field which 
each of us knows empirically, each primary part would occupy 
so small a portion of that field that it could not be known 
separately, in which case the same consequences would follow. 

It is, of course, a further question whether the arrangement 
which was best for the purpose of understanding what we know 
empirically could ever be one which did not merely supplement 
the fundamental system but positively departed from it. But 
I can see no ground for denying the possibility of this. 

252. We now pass to another point, which, while not bear- 
ing on the order of the universe, as we have used that term, is 
sufficiently akin to it to be treated conveniently in the same 
chapter. We saw in Chapter xx1 that, besides the absence of 
any reason, at that point, to believe the universe to be ordered, 
there was another respect in which we failed, at that point, to 
detect what we ventured to call any grain in the universe. This 
was that we had no reason to hold of any substance that it 
would be more appropriately called a unity of manifestation, 
or organic unity, than a unity of composition, or, again, more 
appropriately called a unity of composition than a unity of 
manifestation. We saw that our empirical knowledge of certain 
wholes was such that it seemed far more natural to speak of the 
wholes as compounded of the parts than to speak of the parts as 
the manifestation of the whole. In other cases, again, to speak 
of manifestation seemed at least as natural as to speak of com- 
position. But we saw that this apparent difference between the 
two classes of cases might be deceptive, and we had nothing 
else by which to decide. We did know that both expressions 
were true of every substance. We had no reason to hold that, 
when the whole nature of the substance was taken into account, 


266 ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


one expression was more appropriate to that nature than the 
other. 

253. But we are now in a different position. We are able 
to see that primary and secondary parts—that is, all members 
of the fundamental system except primary wholes—are more 
appropriately called unities of manifestation than unities of 
composition. For we find that, if we take a certain sufficient 
description of any one of them, it will imply sufficient descrip- 
tions of a set of its parts, that a sufficient description of any 
one of these parts will again imply sufficient descriptions of a 
set of its parts, and so on infinitely. And this chain of implica- 
tions from whole to part renders it more appropriate to say that 
each whole is manifested in its parts, than to say that it is com- 
posed of them. 

It is true, no doubt, that sufficient descriptions of each 
member of a set of parts will also determine a sufficient descrip- 
tion of the whole. It might be thought that this fact would 
balance the other, so that the expressions of unity of manifesta- 
tion and unity of composition would be equally appropriate. 
But it must be remembered that the series of implications from 
part to whole is not a series which is valid by itself, as apart 
from the series of implications from whole to part. For such a 
series would be infinite, since there are no parts which are not 
also wholes. And, as we saw in Chapter xxi, such an endless 
series would be vicious, unless there were also the series of 
implications from whole to parts. There is no corresponding 
limitation with regard to the series from whole to parts, which, 
even when taken by itself, involves no contradiction. This latter 
series of implications must, therefore, be taken as the more 
characteristic of the two, and it is therefore more appropriate 
to speak of the parts in the fundamental system as unities of 
composition. 

254. When we consider substances which are not members 
of the fundamental system, the position is different. If we 
limit ourselves to what we know about their natures @ priori, 
it is more appropriate to speak of them as compounded of their 
parts than as manifested in them. For we have no reason to 
believe that any sufficient description of the whole would imply, 


CH. XXVIII] ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE 267 


without including, sufficient description of its parts, while we 
do know that, with them as with every other substance, sufficient 
descriptions of their parts do imply a sufficient description of 
the whole. This does not mean that an infinite series could exist 
of parts within parts of such substances, sufficient descriptions 
of each of which were implied by sufficient descriptions of its 
parts, without any implication of sufficient descriptions of the 
parts by sufficient descriptions of the wholes. That, as we have 
seen, would be a contradiction. But it would be avoided by the 
fact that, as we have seen, any substance H, which is not a 
member of the fundamental system, is divided into parts which 
are members of the fundamental system. Then a sufficient 
description of H will be implied by sufficient descriptions of 
those parts of H, while, to find sufficient descriptions of the 
latter, we shall not have to pursue the series of implications 
from parts to wholes. For, since these parts of H are members 
of the fundamental system, sufficient descriptions of them will 
be implied in the sufficient descriptions of precedent members 
of the fundamental system. Thus we may say, in general, of sub- 
stances which are not members of the fundamental system, that 
each of them is more appropriately called a unity of composition, 
but that each of them consists, in the long run, of parts which 
are more appropriately called unities of manifestation. 

But, in the case of some such substances, we know empirically 
that there is a sufficient description of the whole which implies, 
without including, sufficient descriptions of a set of its parts. 
A substance, for example, might have a sufficient description 
which contained as an elentent that it was a company of actors 
in a pantomime of the type normal in 1870. Such a description 
would imply sufficient descriptions of a set of its parts. For it 
would imply that the company contained four actors, and no 
more, and that they were respectively clown, pantaloon, 
harlequin, and columbine. And it would be a sufficient descrip- 
tion of an actor to say that he was, for example, clown in such 
acompany. For the company was already sufficiently described, 
and such a company would only contain one clown. Thus the 
sufficient description of the whole would imply sufficient 
descriptions of a set of its parts, by virtue of the law, known to 


268 ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


us empirically, that a company of such a type contained a 
clown, a pantaloon, a harlequin, and a columbine, and that it 
contained only these. We know then that sufficient descriptions 
of some substances which are not members of the fundamental 
system! do imply sufficient descriptions of their parts, and it is 
very possible that this happens in the case of many other sub- 
stances, though we have no reason to suppose that it happens 
with all. 

When a sufficient description of such a substance does imply 
sufficient descriptions of its parts in this way, it is as appropriate 
to call it a unity of manifestation as a unity of composition. 
But it does not seem to me to be more appropriate to call such 
substances unities of manifestation, as itis with substances which 
are members of the fundamental system. The reason that it was 
more appropriate in the case of the latter was, as we saw, that 
an infinite chain of implications from whole to part ran through 
the fundamental system, which was intrinsically valid without 
depending on a series in the reverse direction. But in the case 
we are now considering the implication from whole to parts is 
not carried to infinity—the sufficient description of the panto- 
mime company implies a sufficient description of the clown, but 
the latter does not imply sufficient descriptions of sets of his 
parts to infinity. This can only be done by determining corre- 
spondence—only, that is, in the case of members of the funda- 
mental system. There seems, therefore, no reason to consider 
either expression more appropriate. It is equally suitable to say 
that the company is compounded of the clown and the others, 
as to say that it is manifested in them. 

255. Thus, with a substance which is not a member of the 
fundamental system, it is possible that the two forms of expres- 
sion may be equally appropriate, or that unity of composition 
should be preferable, while of primary and secondary parts, 
which are all members of the fundamental system, it is certain 

1 If two substances partially overlap one another, we are certain they are not 
both members of the fundamental system, since no members of it can overlap 
one another. Now some substances whose sufficient descriptions imply sufficient 
descriptions of their parts do partially overlap each other. Two pantomime 


companies can, for example, have the same clown, while their other members 
are different. 


CH. XXVIII] ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE 269 


that in every case unity of manifestation is the more appro- 
priate expression. But the fundamental system, besides primary 
and secondary parts, contains primary wholes. Is either form 
of expression the more appropriate for those latter? 

At first sight it might appear that a primary whole was 
more appropriately called a unity of manifestation. For that 
sufficient description of a primary part, B, in which sufficient 
descriptions of all its parts are implied, must be one which gives 
sufficient descriptions of all the other primary parts which 
directly differentiate B. It is only because we start by knowing 
that B is differentiated by C, for example, that we know that 
it has the part B/C. And these sufficient descriptions of the 
determinants of B must include sufficient descriptions of their 
determinants. Unless we know that C is differentiated by D, we 
shall not know that B has the parts B/ C/ D. Thus the sufficient 
description of B which we require must include sufficient 
descriptions of all the substances which differentiate it, directly 
or indirectly. All of these substances are to be found in the same 
primary whole as B, and a sufficient description of that primary 
whole could be found which contained sufficient descriptions of 
them. Thus it might be said that a sufficient description of the 
whole stands to sufficient descriptions of its primary parts in 
the relation in which sufficient descriptions of primary parts 
stand to sufficient descrrptions of their parts—namely, that the 
whole infinite series of sufficient descriptions of the parts 
depends upon it. And if primary parts are more appropriately 
called unities of manifestation, the same, it might seem, would 
be the case with primary wholes. 

But this is erroneous. Doubtless that sufficient description 
of B in which sufficient descriptions of all its parts are implied, 
does involve sufficient descriptions of other primary parts of 
A, which could be included in a sufficient description of A. But 
this sufficient description of A would contain as parts sufficient 
descriptions of the primary parts. It would state that A was a 
primary whole, containing such and such primary parts, and 
that each of these primary parts had such and such primary 
parts as its differentiating group. It would therefore include the 
sufficient descriptions of the primary parts. But the sufficient 


270 ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


descriptions of the primary parts imply those of their parts 
without including them. And thus the primary wholes do not 
stand to their parts in the same relation as the primary parts do 
to theirs. 

On the other hand, any sufficient descriptions of the primary 
parts will imply a sufficient description of their primary whole. 
The process, therefore, which best expresses the nature of their 
mutual relations is from primary parts to primary wholes, and 
not vice versa, and primary wholes will be more appropriately 
called unities of composition than unities of manifestation. 

The same will be the case with the universe itself. The 
universe is either one primary whole, or consists of more than 
one primary whole. If it is a primary whole, we have seen 
already that it is more appropriately called a unity of composi- 
tion. If it consists of several such wholes, it is clear that those 
wholes cannot be determined by determining correspondence 
with the universe, because, by the definition of a primary whole, 
nothing in it is in determining correspondence with anything 
outside it. The universe, then, would be more appropriately 
spoken of as a unity compounded of the primary wholes, for 
the same reason that a primary whole is more appropriately 
called a unity compounded of its primary parts. 

Of course it is possible that the sufficient description of a 
primary whole should imply sufficient descriptions of its primary 
parts, or that the sufficient description of the universe should 
imply sufficient descriptions of the primary wholes, in the same 
way that a sufficient description of the pantomime company 
implied sufficient descriptions of its members—that is, in some 
other way than by determining correspondence. But we have no 
reason to believe that this is the case, and, if it were, it could 
only, as with the pantomime company, make the two expres- 
sions equally appropriate, without making unity of manifestation 
the more appropriate of the two. 

256. The result of all this seems to be that, although the 
universe and the primary wholes are very real unities, yet the 
primary parts occupy a position of unique significance in the 
fundamental system, and so in existence. It is from them that 
the infinite series of implications begins, by which every sub- 


cu. xxvit] ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE 271 


stance of lower grades in the fundamental system, and indirectly 
every other substance, is determined. For although, as we have 
seen, the parts of any primary part B can only be implied by 
bringing in something besides B, all that has to be brought in 
are the other primary parts which differentiate B directly or 
indirectly... 

It is sometimes asked whether the true account of the uni- 
verse is a pluralism or a monism. The answer must be that it is 
both, since the universe is unquestionably a unity, and unques- 
tionably has parts. But if it is asked which aspect is the more 
fundamental, the answer must be that pluralism is the more 
fundamental, because, as we have just seen, the primary parts, 
which are a plurality, have this position of unique significance. 
It expresses the relations of the universe and the primary parts 
more appropriately—so far as we can determine those relations 
a priori—to say that the universe is composed of the primary 
parts than to say that it is manifested in them. And this leaves 
the balance on the side of pluralism. 

It must not be inferred from this, however, that the unity 
of the universe and the individuality of the primary parts are 
so related that a high degree of the one is incompatible with a 
high degree of the other. On the contrary, we shall find reason 
in Book V to believe that the closeness of the unity of the uni- 
verse is due to the fact that its primary parts are connected by 
a relation which is only possible between terms which are 
highly developed individuals. 

Before closing our discussion of this subject, it may be well 
to remind ourselves that, in the case of those groups which have 
no sufficient descriptions which imply, without including, 
sufficient descriptions of their parts, we are not always driven 
to use that sufficient description of each group which is implied 
in sufficient descriptions of its parts. It may well have other 
sufficient descriptions, and one of them may be more convenient 
to use. It is highly probable that no sufficient description of the 
group of Cambridge graduates could be found which implied 
without including sufficient descriptions of its members. But 
it does not follow that we cannot sufficiently describe it except 
by saying that it is the group consisting of a member sufficiently 


272 ORDER IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


described as X YZ, another sufficiently described as UV W, and 
so on through all people who have been or will be graduates of 
Cambridge. It is possible to describe the group sufficiently by 
defining graduation and sufficiently describing the University 
of Cambridge. 

257. Wesaw that, while a substance was manifested in and 
compounded of the substances which are its parts, the nature of 
a substance, which is a compound quality, is manifested in and 
compounded of the simple qualities of which it is made up. It 
seems to me that it is always more appropriate to say that it is 
compounded of them than that it is manifested in them, since 
the simple qualities themselves are logically prior to the com- 
pound quality which consists of them. 


CHAPTER XXIX 
LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE 


258. For the validity of such a fabric of knowledge as we 
accept in everyday life, it is essential that there should occur 
in the universe exclusive common qualities which are not mere 
restatements of the denotations of groups. Without this it 
would be impossible to classify in any manner the parts of the 
universe. But, though this is essential, it is not sufficient. For 
such a fabric of knowledge to be valid, it is also essential that 
there should be general laws in the universe, according to which 
‘one such exclusive quality of the universe should intrinsically 
determine another in such a way that the determination occurs 
more than once in the universe!, And it is essential that we 
should be able to know such laws. 

There are other laws which do not answer to this description. 
Any statement that any quality intrinsically determines any 
other quality is a law. And, in the first place, there are the laws 
in which the determinant quality does not occur in the universe 
at all, and in which therefore the relation of determination also 
does not occur in the universe. The quality of being a phoenix 
determines the possession by the same substance of the quality 
of occupying space. This is a law, but the relation of determina- 
tion does not occur inthe universe, because no existent substance 
is a phoenix. 

In the second place, there are the laws where the relation of 
determination occurs only once in the universe. Such is the law 
that the quality of being a universe determines the possession 
by the same substance of the quality of infinite divisibility. 
And, again, if a monotheistic theory of the universe were correct, 
a law that the quality of deity determines some other quality 
in the same substance would fall in this class. 


1 Such laws are often expressed in the form that a combination of the 
qualities X and Y determine the quality Z. But the qualities X and Y make 
together a single compound quality, so that this form can be reduced to the one 
igiven above. 


274 LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


In the third place, there are the laws where the qualities 
connected are not exclusive qualities, but belong to every sub- 
stance. Such is the law that the quality of being a substance 
determines the possession by that substance of the quality of 
infinite divisibility. 

The laws which we are here considering may be distinguished 
from the first and second of those classes by calling them Laws 
in the Universe. The first class do not apply to the universe at 
all. Each of the second has only a single example in the uni- 
verse, and therefore, though they might be said to be laws of 
the universe, could not appropriately be said to be laws in it. 
The distinction from the third class may be met by calling the 
laws which we are considering Exclusive Laws in the Universe, 
since the qualities with which they deal are exclusive qualities. 

259. Is it possible to know such laws @ prior? It is not 
possible to know them completely @ priori, because we do not 
know @ priori that anything exists at all, and therefore cannot 
know @ priori that any law applies to what does exist. But it is 
possible to know @ prior: that some such laws are valid if any- 
thing does exist. If anything exists, we know a@ priori that the 
system of determining correspondence applies to it. And we 
know @ priori that if two substances, G and H, have each the 
quality of being determined by determining correspondence, 
and also the quality of being parts of the same substance, K, 
which is also determined by determining correspondence}, then 
G and H will each have the quality of being determined by the 
same relation of determining correspondence. For, as we saw 
in Section 227, no fresh sort of determining correspondence can 
be introduced in any stage after the first in the determination 
of the infinite series of sequent sets of parts. And, therefore, G 
and H must both be determined by that relation of determining 
correspondence by which K is determined. Now this is a law 
in the universe. For there is more than one substance in the 


1 In most cases the highest grade of substances which are determined by 
determining correspondence are secondary parts of the first grade, so that @ and 
H could be parts of the second, or of any lower grade. But in some cases, as 
was pointed out in Section 201, the highest grade of substances determined by 
determining correspondence may he secondary parts of some grade lower than 
the first. 


CH. XXIx] LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE 275 


universe which is determined by determining correspondence, 
and every one of them will have parts which are determined by 
determining correspondence. And it is an exclusive law in the 
universe. For it is not every substance which is in the position 
of G and H. Primary wholes, for example, primary parts, and 
secondary parts of the first grade, can never be in that position. 

260. But in order to justify our primé facie system of every- 
day knowledge, we shall want more than this. For that system 
involves the validity of laws in which the intrinsic determination 
of one quality by another, which is asserted by them, cannot, 
so far as we can see at present, ever be known @ priori. All the 
laws of inductive science are of this nature. We have, or claim 
to have, good reason for thinking them to be true, but they 
cannot be known @ priort. Our only ground for believing them 
is that we have verified them (or the more ultimate laws from 
which they are deduced) in so many cases that we are justified 
in believing that they are valid in all cases. 

On the validity of such laws as these depends the whole of 
science, except pure mathematics. And it is on the validity of 
such laws that the whole conduct of our life is based. If they 
are not valid we should have no reason to put bread in our 
mouths rather than stones, to put our hands in water rather 
than in fire, or to approach a cat more readily than a tiger. 

Prima facie, then, there are exclusive laws in the universe 
which we do not know @ priort. But have we any philosophical 
justification for asserting that this is true? Is it possible, that 
is, to show @ priori that, since there is a universe, there are 
exclusive laws in it whose nature is not known @ priori? 

261. We have seen that, since there is a universe, the parts 
of that universe must be connected by determining correspon- 
dence. Now determining correspondence connects, in each case, 
one particular part of the universe with some other particular 
part, and we cannot tell a priori which particular part is con- 
nected with any other. Further, in each case there must be 
some particular relation of determining correspondence which 
connects the two parts. And we saw above (Section 226) that 
we could not tell @ priori what this particular relation was, or 
even if it was the same relation in every case. 


276 LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


And this justifies us in asserting that there are laws in the 
universe which are not known 4 priori. For it follows from the 
results in Section 259, that, if we take any substance K which is 
determined by determining correspondence to a substance C, 
so that it may be described as B/ C, and if the particular relation 
of determining correspondence in this case is X, there will be a 
law connecting the quality of being a part of K with the quality 
of standing in the relation X to a part of C. 

Let us suppose, for example, that the relation of determining 
correspondence by which C determines K is the perception of 
the determinant by the determinate. Then we shall get the law 
that whatever has the quality of being a part of K has also the 
quality of being a perception of a part of C. Or if the relation 
of determining correspondence is one of resemblance in respect 
of positivity or negativity, we shall get the law that whatever 
has the quality of being a part of K has also the quality of 
resembling a part of C in respect of positivity or negativity. 

Such laws as these are exclusive laws in the universe. To be 
a part of K is a quality of the existent, and so is the quality 
which it involves. They are both exclusive qualities, since 
neither of them is possessed by all substances. And the deter- 
mination of one of them by the other occurs more than once in 
the universe, since K has more than one part—has indeed, an 
infinite number of parts. 

And, while we know a priori that, given the existence of a 
universe, such a law as this must be true, we cannot tell @ priori 
what the law will be. For we cannot know 4 priori what particu- 
lar determinant part will determine any particular determinate 
part, nor can we know @ prior: what particular relation of deter- 
mining correspondence will hold between them. 

In a similar way we may be certain that, if H is a part of K 
which is determined by correspondence with that part of C 
which is determined by correspondence with D—if, that is, H 
can be described as B/ C/ D—and if the relation of determining 
correspondence between B/C! D and C! D is perception, then 
every part of H will be a perception of a part of C/ D. And so 
also of all parts of K of whatever grade. 

262. We must not say however, that every part of H will be 


CH. XXIx] LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE 277 


@ perception of a part of C’s perception of D. It is possible, as 
we have seen, that the relation of determining correspondence 
which holds between C' and B/C is different from that which 
holds between C and C/ D, and that the first might be perception 
while the second was some other relation. In that case we 
cannot be certain that the perception of a part of C/ D would 
be a perception of a part of O’s perception of B. 

But if it is the case, as we shall find reason to believe 

in Book V, that there is only one sort of determining corre- 
spondence which occurs in the universe, and that this relation 
is perception, this objection would no longer hold, and we could 
conclude that every part of H would be a perception of a part 
of C’s perception of D, and that this part of C’s perception of 
D would be a perception of a part of D. 
_ And again, on the supposition that there is only one sort of 
determining correspondence in the universe, we can extend our 
conclusions to the parts of primary parts. If, for example, the 
relation of determining correspondence is perception, there 
would be a law that the parts of any primary part B, which had 
a determining group consisting of C and D, would be perceptions 
of C and D, and of the parts of C and D. And it could not be 
known @ priori that any particular law of this type would be a 
law in the universe, for we could not know a priori what the 
sort of determining correspondence in the universe would be, 
nor could we know a prior: what the differentiating group of 
any particular primary part would be. 

263. But even without the supposition that there is only 
one sort of determining correspondence in the universe, we have 
found that the range of law in the universe is very extensive. 
We have not, indeed, reached the conclusion that every quality 
of every existent substance is determined by an exclusive law 
in the universe. But we have found that some quality is deter- 
mined by such a law in every substance which forms part of a 
substance determined by determining correspondence. And such 
substances include the whole substantial contents of the uni- 
verse an infinite number of times. 

And the extent to which determination on these laws is 
earried in the case of each of these substances is very great. 


278 LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


For although we do not know that it determines every quality 
of each of them, we do know that it determines each of them 
enough to give an exclusive description of it—a description 
which, by the aid of the sufficient descriptions of the primary 
parts to which it refers, becomes a sufficient description. And 
thus the laws determine enough about the qualities of each of 
these substances to distinguish it from all other substances. 

And these laws, as we have seen, cannot be known @ priorv. 
It is proved that each of them can be deduced from the system 
of determining correspondence together with certain facts—that 
there is a universe, that it contains, for example, a substance 
K, which is determined by determining correspondence with C, 
and that the relation of determining correspondence in this case 
is perception. Now the system of determining correspondence, 
as we have seen, is a law which can be known @ priori, and, 
while the facts in question cannot be known @ priori, they are 
not laws. But the combination of the two elements gives some- 
thing which is a law and which cannot be known @ priord. 

As was said at the beginning of this chapter, it is necessary 
for the validity of the fabric of knowledge which we accept in 
everyday life that there should be exclusive laws in the universe, 
and that we should be able to know such laws, and also that we 
should be able to know such laws in cases where we do not know 
them @ priorr. We have now seen that there are exclusive laws 
in the universe of a type such that we cannot know them 
a priort. How does this result affect the credibility of our belief 
that we do, in point of fact, know some such laws without 
knowing them a priori? 

264. A law which is not reached @ priori can only be 
reached by induction, or by deduction from some other result 
which has been reached by induction. Now every induction 
can be put in the form that, since X,, X,, X3, etc., have been 
found in the relation Y to Z,, Z,, Zs, etc. (where X and Z are 
qualities, and X,, Z,, etc., are different occurrences of those 
qualities), therefore any occurrence of X stands in the relation 
Y to an occurrence of Z, though it has not yet been observed 
to stand in it. 

In the case of such a law as “drinking prussic acid determines 


CH. XXIx] LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE 279 


death,” it is clear that this is the case. X is the quality of drinking 
prussic acid, Z is the quality of being dead, and Y is the relation 
that Z immediately follows X as a quality of the same body. 

Or, again, take the law that the weight of gold is propor- 
tionate to its bulk. Here X is the quality of being gold. Z is 
the complex quality of possessing a bulk and weight which are 
in a certain definite proportion to each other—so many pounds 
to so many cubic inches. Y is the relation of belonging to the 
same substance at the same time. When, in various pieces of 
gold, X,, X,, and so on, we always find that Z is a quality at 
the same time of the same substance, we conclude that Z is 
always found in that relation to X. That is to say, we conclude 
that the weight is in a certain definite proportion to the bulk— 
from which, of course, follows the wider proposition that it is in 
some definite proportion to the bulk. 

Take, again, the law that a change in the temperature of 
water determines a change in its bulk, the magnitude of the 
change in the temperature determining the magnitude of the 
change in its bulk. Here X is the quality of being water which 
is changing its temperature. Since such a change of temperature 
is quantitative, every such change must have a definite magni- 
tude, though changes of all magnitudes are equally examples 
of X. Y is the relation of being qualities of the same substance 
at the same time. Z is the quality of being water which is 
changing its bulk in such a way that the magnitude of that 
change stands in a certain definite proportion to the magnitude 
of the change in that case of X to which it is related by Y. 
When in various cases in which the quality X occurs, we find 
that the quality Z stands in this relation to it, we conclude 
that, whenever X is found, Z will stand in this relation to it— 
that is, that every change in the temperature of water deter- 
mines a change in its bulk, the magnitude of the latter change 
being determined by the magnitude of the former. 

In cases such as the two last, the conformity of the induction 
to the type we have laid down is not so obvious as in cases like 
that of the prussic acid, which involved no quantitative element. 
It has therefore been sometimes thought that laws which 
involved quantity did not conform to that type. But this is 


280 LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


erroneous, for, as we have just seen, quantitative laws can be 
reduced to this type. Thus we are entitled to assert that all 
induction concludes that every occurrence of X stands in the 
relation Y to an occurrence of Z, on the ground that, in certain 
cases, the occurrence of X has been found by observation to 
stand in the relation Y to the occurrence of Z. (It will also, of 
course, be an essential condition of the inference that no occur- 
rence of X has been observed in which the absence of Z was 
observed.) 

265. Under what conditions will it be justifiable to reach 
such a conclusion on such grounds? It is clear, to begin with, 
that we are not entitled to hold that every occurrence of X will 
be accompanied by the occurrence of Z, unless we are entitled 
to hold that Z is intrinsically determined by X. For no number 
of cases in which X is accompanied by Z could be held to justify 
us in asserting that X is accompanied by Z in other cases, if, on 
the ground of some wider induction, we have good reason to 
believe that X does not intrinsically determine Z. Supposing 
that it were the case that on the day of the admission of each 
Warden of the Cinque Ports there had been a magnetic storm 
of exceptional intensity, no sensible man would expect that 
such a storm was likely to happen at the admission of the next 
Warden, because very wide experience has convinced us that 
such characteristics as these are not related to each other by 
intrinsic determination. 

Now can induction, by itself, and without aid from any 
results reached @ priori, give us good reason to believe that any 
one quality does intrinsically determine any other? I do not 
see that it can. Suppose that we know a hundred cases of the 
occurrence of X, and that we know by observation that each of 
them is accompanied by Z. Will this by itself exclude the 
supposition that X does not intrinsically determine Z? 

If X does not intrinsically determine Z, the connection of X 
with Z in each of the observed cases may be called merely con- 
tingent. By saying that in any particular case the connection 
of X with Z is contingent, I do not mean that there is no reason 
why, in this particular case, X should be accompanied by Z, 
but that there is no reason why X as such, and wherever it 


CH. XXIx] LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE 281 


occurs, should be accompanied by Z. There may be circum- 
stances which intrinsically determine that Charles I, who was a 
King of England, should be beheaded, and that Charles II, who 
was also a King of England, should not be beheaded. But the 
fact that Charles II was not beheaded shows that the connection 
between being King of England and being beheaded is con- 
tingent in any case in which it does occur. 

If then, the connection between X and Z is contingent, the 
presence of X in each of the hundred cases leaves it possible 
that Z should or should not occur in that case. This gives a 
great number of possible combinations—the number is 21, 
Now of these combinations, the one in which each of the hundred 
cases of X is accompanied by Z is no less probable than any one 
other—though, of course, enormously less probable than all 
the others taken together. If, then, there is no intrinsic deter- 
mination of one of the qualities by the other, one of these 
combinations must occur, and be contingent. And, since, if this 
hypothesis is true, the combination in which Z is found in every 
case is no more unlikely to occur than any other, how can its 
occurrence render it improbable that the hypothesis is true? 

Can we argue that this particular combination, though it 
could exist contingently, would also exist if X did intrinsically 
determine Z, and that it is more probable that X should intrin- 
sically determine Z than,that, of all the great number of possible 
contingent combinations, just that one should occur which 
would produce the same result as would be produced by intrinsic 
determination? But such an argument would not be valid 
unless we previously knew something about the occurrence of 
intrinsic determinations in the universe. For, unless we knew 
this, we should have no means of judging as to the relative 
probability of an intrinsic determination and of a contingent 
connection. There might, for anything we knew, be no intrinsic 
determinations at all. And, if we were ignorant whether there 
were any such determinations, it would be impossible to estimate 
the relative probability, in any particular case, of an intrinsic 
determination and of a contingent connection. 

266. Thus it appears that we must know something as to 
the occurrence of intrinsic determinations in the universe before 


ie 


282 LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


we can accept any induction as valid. This result will not be 
affected by the number of instances in which the connection of 
any two qualities has been observed. Nor will it make any 
difference if the induction, instead of being based on simple 
enumeration were fortified by any of the methods which, if 
induction is valid at all, make an induction more certain. There 
would still remain the possibility of the result arising contin- 
gently, and the impossibility of judging the relative probability 
of this and intrinsic determination. 

Nor should we be entitled to trust induction because we find 
that it works in practice. If we did this we should believe in an 
induction, in cases in which it had not been verified by observa- 
tion, because, in other cases, inductions which had been made 
had been verified by observation. To argue in this way from the 
correctness of some inductions to the correctness of others 
would itself.be a process of induction, and, if it were used as a 
defence of induction in general, would involve a vicious circle. 

We must therefore be able to know, without induction, that 
in some cases an exclusive quality of the existent does intrin- 
sically determine anotber in such a way that the determination 
occurs more than once in the universe. Without this, we shall 
have no basis for induction. Whether we have, even with this, 
a basis for induction, will be considered later. 

267. It is true that, in a certain class of cases, we have not 
to wait for the theory of determining correspondence in order 
to be certain, without induction, that such intrinsic determina- 
tion does take place. We know 4 priori that the quality of being 
or appearing green intrinsically determines the quality of being 
or appearing spatial. This requires no experience, but is evident 
as soon as the meaning of the terms is known. And I know, not 
by induction, but by observation, that the quality of being or 
appearing green does occur more than once in the universe. 
The same is the case with the quality of being a feeling of pain 
and the quality of having a certain intensity, and so with many 
others. 

But such cases as these will not help us. For with them we 
only know @ priori that there are intrinsic determinations 
because we know d priori what the intrinsic determinations are. 


CH. XXIx] LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE 283 


Now when we attempt to prove an intrinsic determination by 
induction, we do not know @ priori that there is such an intrinsic 
determination—if we did, it would be superfluous to try to 
prove it by induction. Intrinsic determinations, therefore, which 
are known @ priori can never be such as are required in order to 
justify our inductions. 

Nor can we argue that, because some intrinsic determinations 
—those which are known @ priori—occur, it is probable that 
others—which are not known @ priori—occur likewise. For this 
would be itself an induction, and, if we based the validity of all 
inductions upon it, there would be a vicious circle. 

And, even if there were not a vicious circle, the argument 
from intrinsic determinations known @ priori to others which 
are not known @ priori would be very precarious on account of 
the great difference between the two classes of cases. In the 
first, the determination is evident from the meaning of the two 
qualities. In the second, not only is our knowledge of the law 
itself dependent on experience, but apart from experience we 
can lay down no probabilities as to what the law—if there is a 
law—will be. Apart from experience I have no reason to suppose 
that cutting off Charles I’s head would kill him. And I have no 
reason to suppose that it would not kill Oliver Cromwell or 
George Washington. Apart from experience I have no reason to 
suppose that my will to move my hand will move my hand, and 
will not move my foot, or destroy Pekin. To argue from the 
occurrence of the one sort of intrinsic determination to another, 
so different from it in such important features, would give very 
little ground for belief. 

268. It is therefore necessary, for the validity of induction, 
that we should be able to know, without the aid of induction, 
that in some cases an exclusive quality of the existent does 
intrinsically determine another in such a way that the deter- 
mination occurs more than once in the universe, and that the 
nature of the determination is such that we cannot know it 
@ priori. And this we are entitled to assert in consequence of 
the results which we reached in the earlier part of this chapter. 
For we found that exclusive qualities of the existent did intrin- 
sically determine other exclusive qualities in cases in which the 


284 LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


determination in question could not be known @ priori. And we 
found that this intrinsic determination was very widely spread 
throughout the universe. We found that some quality was so 
determined in every substance which is a part of a substance 
determined by determining correspondence, so that the sub- 
stances in which such qualities occurred included the whole 
substantial content of the universe an infinite number of times 
over, and that every substance whatever had parts which were 
determined in this way. Further, we found that the qualities 
thus intrinsically determined are in each case sufficient to give 
a sufficient description of the substance which has them. 

We are therefore entitled, without resting our conclusion on 
induction, to conclude that there do occur in the universe a 
large number—indeed an infinite number—of such intrinsic 
determinations as induction claims to discover. And thus we 
have removed the objection to the validity of inductions men- 
tioned in Section 265. For we have eliminated the possibility, 
on which that objection rested, that there might be no intrinsic 
determination of one quality by another, except in those cases 
in which the intrinsic determination itself was evident 4a 
priort. 

269. But there are two other objections to the validity of 
induction, rather similar in nature to the one which we have 
just discussed, and our theory of determining correspondence, — 
as at present developed, will not help us with either of them. 
Granted, in the first place, that there is intrinsic determination 
throughout the universe, and that inductions assert intrinsic 
determination, what reason have we to hold that the intrinsic 
determinations which are asserted to be reached by induction 
either are, or follow from, any of those intrinsic determinations 
by determining correspondence which have been proved to 
exist? And, if they do not, then the results reached by induction 
can derive no advantage from the establishment of determining 
correspondence, but are in the same position as before. 

It might seem at first sight, indeed, that the conclusions 
commonly reached by induction, which we are seeking to justify, 
could not possibly be determined by determining correspon- 
dence. For those relations between qualities which are asserted 


CH. XXIx] LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE 285 


by induction, either in science or in everyday life, are not 
relations of determining correspondence. Nor are the qualities 
which they are held to connect such as we shall see reason later 
to believe can be connected by determining correspondence. 

It might, however, be possible, when we introduce empirical 
considerations in Books V and VI, to show that the qualities, 
and the relations between them, which are dealt with in science 
and in everyday life, might be an appearance of which the 
reality was the qualities, and the relations between them, which 
form the system of determining correspondence. And it might 
be possible to show that the relation between the appearance 
and the reality was such that the validity of laws in the reality 
would involve the validity of laws in the appearance. 

But if this went no further than a demonstration that such 
a solution was possible, it would not be sufficient. For then it 
would be also possible that the qualities and their relations 
which are dealt with in the inductions were not the appearance 
of the qualities and their relations which form the system of 
determining correspondence. And in that case the establish- 
ment of determining correspondence would not help us. 

It might be said that when X had been found with Z a 
hundred times, so that the chance of its happening contingently 
was only one in 21°, it would be much more probable that it 
did not happen contingently, but was due to one of the intrinsic 
determinations which we now know to exist. But I do not see 
how it is possible to estimate the chance that it should be due 
to one of these intrinsic determinations, so as to compare it 
definitely with the chance—doubtless extraordinarily small— 
that it is due to contingency. The question whether the former 
is more probable than the latter is certainly more definite than 
the question in Section 265, when we did not know whether 
there were any such intrinsic determinations at all. And the 
affirmative answer is now to an undefined degree more probable, 
since we have eliminated one alternative which would involve 
a negative answer—the alternative that there are no intrinsic 
determinations at all, except those which are evident @ prior. 
But I cannot see how the chance that it should be due to an 
intrinsic determination by determining correspondence could 


286 LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


be made so definite as to be definitely pronounced greater than 
some other chance, however small the latter may be. 

270. And, if this objection were got over, there would still 
be a third. Supposing that to the fact that in all our hundred 
cases X had been found with Z, we could add the certainty that 
X was a quality which was intrinsically determinant of some- 
thing, and that Z was a quality which was intrinsically deter- 
mined by something—should we then have any basis for the 
conclusion that X intrinsically determined Z, or was any part 
of a compound quality which intrinsically determined Z? I do 
not see that we should. It would remain possible that X intrin- 
sically determined W, which we had not observed, and that Z 
was intrinsically determined by Y, which we had not observed, 
and that the connection between X and Y in the hundred cases 
we had observed was purely contingent. The chance of this 
last, indeed, is only 1 in 21°, But on the other hand there is the 
possibility that the real determinate and determinant are for 
some reason inaccessible to our observation. And 1 do not see 
that the chance that this possibility is not actual could be 
made so definite as to be definitely pronounced greater than 
some other chance, however small the latter might be. 

271. Thus it would seem that a philosophical basis for 
induction has not yet been found. Of the three objections which 
we have considered, the first, as we have seen, is removed by 
the establishment of determining correspondence. The second 
might possibly be removed by a development of the theory of 
determining correspondence. But the third could not be removed 
by determining correspondence at all. 

Nor does there seem much reason to hope that it can be 
removed in any other way. For it is difficult to see how pbilo- 
sophy could ever go further in aid of induction than to show 
that every quality intrinsically determined another, and was 
intrinsically determined by another. And we have seen that 
even if philosophy could do this—and it has not yet done so— 
it could not provide a philosophical basis for induction. 

But, however fully we accept this conclusion, we shall all of 
us continue to accept the validity of induction. We cannot 
demonstrate that the chance that the other alternative hypo- 


CH. XXIx] LAWS IN THE UNIVERSE 287 


theses are false is more than one to 21°, But we cannot help 
regarding it as much greater than this. And therefore when we 
have to chose between accepting one of those hypotheses or 
believing that the concomitance of X and Z in our hundred cases 
cannot be contingent, we invariably accept the latter. We do 
not, of course, assert that X by itself intrinsically determines 
Z—the concurrence of some other quality, V, may be necessary. 
But we do conclude without hesitation that X either intrinsically 
determines Z by itself, or is a member of a group of qualities 
which intrinsically determines Z. We should do this if the 
qualities had been found together a hundred times, as in our 
example. And of course we often have cases in which they have 
been found together for many more than a hundred times, as in 
the case of the concomitance of the quality of being leaden with 
the quality of sinking in water, and of the quality of being 
beheaded with the quality of being dead. To suppose that the 
qualities only come together in the same way in which, in a 
particular year, the qualities of being Lady Day and being 
rainy may come together is a conclusion which we feel it 
impossible not to reject. 

Is this due to a blind and unreasonable psychological impulse, 
resembling the impulse which tends to make each of us regard 
himself and his own interests as more important in the universe 
than they really are, or that other impulse which tends to make 
us believe everything good of our friends and everything bad 
of our enemies? Or is it the case that the probabilities really 
are as we tend to judge them to be, and that we really see them 
to be so, though we can assign no mathematical proportions? 
It might be rash to deny that the latter was possible. But it 
would be much more rash to assert that it was actually the case, 
and, since this is so, we must adhere to our conclusion that a 
philosophical justification of induction has not yet been found. 


CHAPTER XXX 
THE DIFFERENTIATION OF PRIMARY PARTS 


272. In this Book we have so far considered in what way 
the secondary parts in the system of determining correspondence 
could be sufficiently described by their correspondence with 
primary parts, and what consequences would follow from their 
possession of a nature which permits this. We have now to 
consider in what way the primary parts themselves can be dis- 
criminated from one another. In some way or another they 
must be discriminated, because, as we have seen, every substance 
must be discriminated from every other, by means of a sufficient 
description which applies to that substance alone. Moreover, 
secondary parts could not be sufficiently described by their 
determining correspondence with primary parts, unless those 
primary parts are themselves discriminated. 

273. In the first place, two primary parts could be dis- 
tinguished from each other by the fact that their differentiating 
groups were different, and that, in consequence, their secondary 
parts corresponded to different primary parts. B and C, for 
example, could be distinguished from one another, if the differ- 
entiating group of B was E and F, so that its secondary parts 
of the first grade were B/ E and BY! F, and the differentiating 
group of C was G and H, so that its secondary parts of the first 
grade were C/G and C! H. For the possession of any set of its 
parts is a quality of any whole, and this quality would be 
different in B and C}. 

We have no reason to hold that no two primary parts have 
the same differentiating group—indeed, we have not excluded 
the possibility that all primary parts have the same differenti- 


} It would not be necessary that the groups should have no members in 
common. It would be sufficient if no two groups had all their members in 
common. 


CH, Xxx] PRIMARY PARTS 289 


ating group. But, on the other hand, it is possible that no two 
primary parts have the same differentiating group. 

It is possible that some primary parts should only be dis- 
criminated from one another in this way. But it is impossible 
that all primary parts should be discriminated only by differ- 
ences in their differentiating groups. For this would lead either 
to a vicious circle or to a vicious infinite series. 

If B and C are to be discriminated by the fact that one of 
them has determining correspondence with E and F, and the 
other with G and H, this presupposes the discrimination of 
EL, F, G, and H. For unless E and F were discriminated from 
G and H, it would be impossible to discriminate B and C by 
their respective correspondence with them. 

_ Now, if there is no other way to discriminate primary parts, 
EL, F, G, and H could only be discriminated by the differences 
in their differentiating groups of primary parts, and the members 
of those groups, again, by the difference in their own differenti- 
ating groups, and so on. And this would always involve either 
a vicious circle or a vicious infinite series. If the series returns 
upon itself, so that B could only be discriminated from C by its 
relation to a term which could only be discriminated by its 
relation to B, there is clearly a vicious circle. For then B can 
only be discriminated by a process which can only take place if 
the discrimination of B is previously given. If, on the other 
hand, the series never returns upon itself, then it is a vicious 
infinite series. For the discrimination of B would depend on the 
discrimination of #, that on the discrimination of K, and so 
on. That is, B could not be discriminated without the last term 
of this series. And, as the series has no last term, it could not 
be discriminated at all. 

Thus this cannot be the only way of discriminating all 
primary parts. But, as was said above, it remains possible that 
it should be the only way of discriminating some primary parts. 
If B and C were discriminated by their differentiating groups, 
and then #, F, G, and H were discriminated by the possession 
of qualities, or combinations of qualities, such as were possessed 
by no other substance in the universe, there would be no vicious 
circle or infinite series. For then B and C would have sufficient 


290 THE DIFFERENTIATION [BK IV 


descriptions. If the sufficient descriptions of H and F are repre- 
sented by X and Y respectively, B can be described as the only 
primary part whose differentiating group consists of a substance 
with the sufficient description X and a substance with the 
sufficient description Y. And this will not only be an exclusive 
description of B, but also a sufficient description of it. 

274. There must, then, be some other way in which primary 
parts can be discriminated from one another. And there are 
several others. A second way in which they could be discrimin- 
ated would be by the relations in which they stood to other 
substances, other than the relation, which we have just discussed, 
of having these substances as members of their differentiating 
groups. B might be the only substance which stood in the 
relation Y to #, and the relation Z to F. 

The substances, by their relations to which primary parts 
were thus discriminated, might be primary parts, or secondary 
parts, or substances which were not members of the funda- 
mental system at all+. It would, of course, be impossible for all 
primary parts to be discriminated only by relations of this sort 
to other primary parts, as this would again involve a vicious 
circle or a vicious infinite series. But some of them might be 
discriminated only in this way. And it would be possible that 
all primary parts should be discriminated by their relations to 
substances which were not primary parts. In that case, however, 
it would be necessary that the substances in question should be 
discriminated in some way which did not depend on the primary 
parts to which they were in relation. 

275. The third possibility is that all or some of the primary 
parts should be sufficiently described by means of their original 
qualities. In such a case the primary part would be discriminated 
by the fact that it possessed some original quality which was 
not possessed by anything else. It is possible that the unique 
quality possessed by the primary part should be a simple quality. 
For example, if a certain primary part were the only conscious 
substance in the universe, then ‘“‘conscious substance” would 
be a sufficient description of it. But it is also possible, and it 


1 Those which were not members of the fundamental system would, as we 
have seen, consist of parts which were members of the fundamental system. 


CH. Xxx] OF PRIMARY PARTS 291 


would appear to be more probable, that any such unique 
original quality of a substance would be a compound or complex 
quality1. 

276. In the fourth place, the primary parts might be dis- 
criminated by qualities which were not original but derivative 
—qualities of standing in a certain relation to something. We 
have already discussed the possibility of discrimination by 
means of the relations in which the primary parts stand to 
other substances which are independently discriminated. But 
it 1s possible in certain cases to discriminate a substance by 
means of a relation in which it stands to another substance 
which is not independently discriminated. For the relation 
itself may be unique, or may present certain unique features. 
The fact that A loves B might afford a sufficient description of 
A without requiring a sufficient description of B, if no one else 
in the universe, except A, loved anybody, or if A’s love of B 
had some quality which no other love ever had, or had a degree 
of intensity which differed from that of any other love. 

277. We see then that there is no difficulty involved in the 
fact that each primary part must have a sufficient description, 
and, therefore, a nature different from that of every other 
primary part. There are, as we have seen, several possible ways 
in which this could happen. And, again, it is certain that there 
are qualities common to all primary parts. For there are some 
qualities which belong to all substances, and others which belong 
to all substances which are primary parts. But has every primary 
part qualities which it shares with some other primary parts, 
but not with all—qualities which, among primary parts, are both 
common and exclusive? 

If there are more than two primary parts, then every primary 
part will have such common and exclusive qualities of a certain 
sort. For then every primary part will be in at least one group 
which contains one or more of the others, and not all of them. 
And the quality of being a member of that group will be a 
common and exclusive quality which it will possess. But, as we 


1 It must be remembered that we have classed as compound qualities all 
collections of simple qualities, however disconnected and heterogeneous. For 
example, “Swedenborgian socialist diplomatist” is a compound quality. 


292 THE DIFFERENTIATION [BK IV 


saw earlier, such qualities are of no great importance. The more 
interesting question is whether every primary part has a common 
and exclusive quality which is not the mere restatement of the 
denotation of a group. 

I do not see that we have any reason to suppose that this 
must be the case. It is of course possible—and might be said 
to be probable—that the uniqueness of the nature of each 
‘primary part should be due to the fact that it possessed various 
qualities, each of which was shared with some, though not all, 
of the other primary parts, while the combination was unique 
and belonged only to the one part. But this is not certain. It 
would be possible that, in some or in all cases, the nature of the 
primary part consisted only in the common qualities which it 
shared with all other primary parts, and in some quality which 
it shared with none of them. 

If, indeed, we were certain that the universe contained mote 
than one primary whole, we should be certain that each primary 
part had at least one exclusive common quality, which was not 
the mere restatement of the denotation of a group. For to 
belong to a particular primary whole is a quality, and every 
primary part would, on this hypothesis, have a quality of this 
sort, which it shared with some other primary parts, and not 
with all. Nor would such a quality be a mere restatement of 
the denotation of a group. The quality of B would not be merely 
that it was a member of a group whose other members were 
C, D, and E. It would be part of the quality that this group, 
of B, C, D, and E, of which B was a member, was itself a primary 
whole. 

It is possible however that the whole universe should be a 
single primary whole, and then the quality of belonging to that 
whole would not be an exclusive quality among primary parts. 
And, in any case, we should have no reason to believe that there 
were any qualities which were common and exclusive qualities 
among the primary parts in a primary whole—+.e. which belonged 
to some of the primary parts in a primary whole, but not to all 
of them. 

Since we are not certain that there are any such exclusive 
common qualities of primary parts, we cannot, @ fortiori, be 


CH. Xxx] OF PRIMARY PARTS 293 


certain that there are general laws in the universe according to 
which an exclusive quality of a primary part should be intrin- 
sically determined by an exclusive quality of anything existent, 
in such a way that the determination occurs more than once in 
the universe. For, if this did happen, the quality of the primary 
part would be an exclusive common quality. And thus we are 
not certain that there are general laws in the universe which 
determine qualities of primary parts. There may be such laws, 
but we are not entitled to assert that there are. 


CHAPTER XXXI 
THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 


278. We have now arrived at various results about various 
parts of the universe, and the question remains, what is the 
nature of the bond which unites all these parts together. In 
other words, what sort of unity has the universe? 

Like every other substance, the universe is a unity of mani- 
festation as well as a unity of composition. Its nature as a 
whole may as truly be said to manifest itself in its several 
qualities, as to be made up of these qualities. And, passing 
from the relation in which it stands to its qualities to the relatioh 
in which it stands to its parts, the universe itself may as truly 
be said to manifest itself in its parts as to be made up of them. 
It is, therefore, an organic unity. 

The fact that it can be regarded as a unity of manifestation 
and as an organic unity is not unimportant about any sub- 
stance. And, as we saw above (Section 160) this fact has a 
special importance in the case of the universe. But although 
this unity is specially important in the case of the universe, it 
is only the same unity which is possessed by every substance in 
the universe. And therefore it tells us nothing about the amount 
of unity in the universe. For the unity of some substances is 
very slight. Every group of substances in the universe, however 
arbitrarily selected, and however slightly connected, is, as we 
have seen, a substance, and therefore a unity of manifestation, 
and an organic unity. 

I do not see that it is possible, from the results which we 
have reached so far, to determine anything more as to the 
unity possessed by the universe. But if some qualities, which 
we have seen to be possible, though not necessary, qualities of 
the universe, were actually qualities of it, much more definite and 
distinctive unity might be ascribed to the universe. And it is 
worth while to work out some of these cases, and to see what 


CH. XxxI] THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 295 


results would follow from suppositions which are at any rate 
possible. 

279. Let us first consider the group of assumptions which 
would bring about the closest unity. It is possible that the 
universe should consist of several primary wholes or of one 
only. Let us assume that it consists of only one primary whole. 
It is possible either that all the primary parts in the universe 
should be determinants, or that some of them should be only 
determined and not determinant. Let us assume that they are 
all determinants. If they are all determinants, it is possible 
that every primary part should determine a part of every other 
primary part, but it is possible that this should not be the case. 
Let us assume that it is the case. Then, if this assumption is 
made, it is possible that every primary part directly determines 
a part of every other primary part, or that in some cases the 
determination is only indirect. Let us assume that it is in all 
cases direct. Finally, it is possible that the determining corre- 
spondence is of the same sort throughout the universe, or that 
it is of different sorts in different cases. Let us assume it is 
always of the same sort. We will call the view that the universe 
is such as it would be if these assumptions were correct, the first 
supposition. 

280. On this supposition the unity of the universe is in 
many respects very close. To begin with, every primary part in 
the universe is the determinant of a part within each primary 
part. That is to say, the determinants of the parts within each 
primary part are a set of parts of the universe, and contain all 
its content. And this relation links the universe as a whole more 
closely as to each of its parts, and, through the whole, links the 
parts more closely to each other. And, since determining corre- 
spondence between two substances involves the intrinsic deter- 
mination of the nature of the determinate by part of the nature 
of the determinant, there will be a relation of intrinsic deter- 
mination between the natures of all the primary parts of the 
universe, on the one hand, and the natures of all the secondary 
parts in each primary part, on the other hand—a relation, that 
is, of causal determination. 

It is not, indeed, necessarily the whole nature of the segondary 


296 THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


part which is intrinsically determined by the whole nature of 
the primary part to which it corresponds. It is possible that 
there should be qualities in the secondary part which are not 
determined by anything in the primary part, and qualities in 
the primary part which determine nothing in the secondary 
part. But at any rate so much of the nature of the primary 
part as will distinguish it from all others stands in this relation 
to as much of the nature of the secondary part as will dis- 
tinguish it from all other parts of the primary part to which it 
belongs. 

It will also, of course, follow that each secondary part of the 
first grade throughout the universe stands in a similar relation 
to a secondary part of the second grade within each primary 
part, and so on infinitely. And this network of causal rela- 
tions—much closer and more inclusive than would have been 
the case except on the present supposition—introduces a good 
deal more unity into the universe. 

281. Another point must also be considered. In each 
primary part there are secondary parts which are determined 
by each primary part. And by our supposition the particular 
relation of determining correspondence is the same in every 
case of determining correspondence throughout the universe. 
From this it follows that in any primary part B, not only will 
all its secondary parts of the first grade have a one-to-one 
correspondence with the primary parts of the universe, but 
there will be a system of relations existing between those 
secondary parts of B which may be called homologous to a 
system of relations existing between the primary parts of the 
universe. For the manner in which these secondary parts are 
determined by determining correspondence will depend for each 
of them upon three things—the fact that it 7s a secondary part 
of B, and of the first grade, the fact that the particular relation 
of determining correspondence is what it is, and the fact that 
the primary part which is its determinant has a certain nature. 
And the first two of the facts are, on our present assumption, 
the same for every secondary part of the first grade within B. 
All dissimilarities, therefore, between the determined sufficient 
descriptions of these secondary parts of B must correspond to 


cH. xxx1] THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 297 


dissimilarities between the determinant sufficient descriptions 
of the primary parts, and all similarities which exist between 
some, but not all, of these sufficient descriptions of the secondary 
parts must correspond to like similarities between some, but not 
all, of the sufficient descriptions of the primary parts. For such 
dissimilarities and exclusive similarities cannot be determined 
by the two data which are the same for all the secondary parts 
in question, and must therefore be determined by the only 
datum which varies for the different secondary parts—that is, 
the various primary parts to which they correspond. Since the 
system of relations between B’s secondary parts of the first 
grade will correspond in this way to the system of relations 
between the primary parts of the universe, it may be called 
homologous to it. Not only will the parts of B correspond to 
the parts of the universe, but some of the links which connect 
them together will correspond to some of the links which connect 
the primary parts together. 

But what would happen, it might be asked, if the sufficient 
description of each primary part of the universe, to which the 
secondary parts of B corresponded, was in each case just some 
simple quality, possessed by that primary part and by nothing 
else? Then there would be no exclusive similarities to be repro- 
duced, and no dissimilarities, except the uniform one that each 
primary part had a different simple determinant quality from 
all the others. In this case what would be the system of relations 
among the primary parts which would be reproduced among the 
secondary parts of B? 

But even in this case it would still be true that a system of 
relations of the primary parts within the universe would corre- 
spond to a system of relations of the secondary parts of the 
first grade within B. For the determinant sufficient descriptions 
of the primary parts would have this relation to each other— 
that each consisted of a different quality, and that between 
those qualities there were to be found no exclusive similarities 
or exclusive common dissimilarities. And, in the same way, that 
part of the determined sufficient descriptions of the parts of B 
which distinguished them from one another would be in each 
case a different quality and between those qualities there would be 


298 THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


found no exclusive similarities or exclusive common dissimilari- 
ties. And thus the system of relations of the determinates 
might, as in the other cases, be said to be homologous to the 
system of relations of the determinants. The system of relations 
between the parts of B would indeed be one which formed only 
a slight unity between them, but in that respect it would corre- 
spond to the system of relations between the primary parts, 
which also form only a slight unity. 

282. The extent to which the relations between the primary 
parts are homologous to those among the secondary parts of B 
must not be exaggerated. We have seen that it is not necessary 
that every quality of each determinant primary part should 
enter into its determinant sufficient description, or be implied 
in it. The primary part may have many other qualities which 
are independent of this particular sufficient description, and we 
have no reason to suppose that there will be anything corre- 
spondent to them in the secondary parts of B, or that the 
relations which are dependent on those qualities will be homo- 
logous to any relations among the secondary parts of B. And, 
again, we have seen that it is not necessary that every quality 
of each secondary part should enter into its determinant sufficient 
description, or be implied in it. And so there may be, dependent 
on these qualities, many relations which are not homologous to 
any relations which occur between primary parts of the universe. 
But, after allowing for all this, it remains true that the corre- 
sponding qualities are sufficient, on the one side, to differentiate 
each primary part from all the others in the universe, and, on 
the other side, to differentiate each of the secondary parts of B 
from all the others. And since the corresponding qualities are, 
at any rate, as exhaustive as this, the homologous relations 
cannot be insignificant. 

283. We have established, then, that the secondary parts 
of B of the first grade correspond to the primary parts of the 
universe, and that various relations between these secondary 
parts of B correspond to relations between the primary parts of 
the universe. But if we take the primary parts, not in any 
abstract isolation, but in the relations which they really bear 
to each other, we have the universe as it really is. And, if we 


cH. xxx1] THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 299 


take the secondary parts of B in the same way, we have B as 
it really is. We are thus entitled to say that B, and every other 
primary part of the universe, corresponds to the universe in 
respect of its parts, and of relations between them. 

It must be noted, with regard to this correspondence of the 
primary parts with the universe, that it is only derivative. The 
primary fact is the correspondence of the secondary parts of 
the first grade with the primary parts, and it is from this, as we 
have seen, that the correspondence of the primary parts with 
the universe arises. 

284. The universe then, on the supposition which we are 
now considering, has the quality that each member of a certain 
set of its parts corresponds with the universe as a whole. We 
may call this quality, by a metaphor which is not inappropriate, 
the quality of Self-Reflection. 

Self-reflection is a form of unity. A whole which is self- 
reflecting has an additional sort of unity, which is not shared 
by any whole which is not self-reflecting. For a self-reflecting 
whole is connected in a special way with its parts. And, through 
this, the parts in question are connected in a special way with 
each other, since each of them has a system of internal relations 
between their own parts, all of which correspond with the same 
system, and so correspond with each other. 

We must distinguish between that relation of a whole to its 
parts which follows from the fact that it is an organic unity, 
and that other relation of a whole to its parts which follows 
from the fact that it is a self-reflecting unity. In an organic 
unity, as we saw in Chapter xx, the parts manifest the whole. 
But the whole is only manifested in all the members, taken 
together, of any one set of its parts. It is not manifested in one 
member by itself. But a self-reflecting unity is reflected 
separately in each member of the set of parts in which the 
reflection takes place. Every substance is an organic unity, and 
therefore every substance which is a self-reflecting unity possesses 
two sorts of unity—organic unity and unity of self-reflection. 

It may be objected that such a term as self-reflection 
exaggerates the closeness of the connection between the universe 
and each primary part, since there is no reason to suppose that 


300 THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


the primary parts resemble the universe except in the system 
of their internal relations. This, however, does not make the 
metaphor inappropriate, since a reflection is not an exact copy 
of the object reflected. The object may be in three dimensions, 
and the reflection is in two. The object may be a mountain, and 
the reflection may be in a hand-glass. But such differences do 
not prevent the one from being a reflection of the other. 

285. If the universe is a self-reflecting unity, it is thereby 
distinguished from many other substances, if not from all. For 
the course of our argument has shown us that, if any substance 
is to be a unity which is self-reflecting into parts determined by 
determining correspondence, and self-reflecting in consequence 
of that correspondence, it can only be on one condition. That 
condition is that it should have a set of parts, each member of 
which has as its differentiating group all the other members of 
that group, and nothing but those members. That is to say, no 
part of it must be determined by correspondence to anything 
outside it. Now we saw, in Chapter xxiv, that every primary 
part must have some other primary part in its differentiating 
group, and that, therefore, some members, at least, of every set 
of its parts will be determined by something outside itself. And 
the same will consequently be the case with secondary parts, of 
whatever grade. 

The only case, therefore, which is not excluded, is the case ~ 
of a substance which is a group of primary parts, each member 
of which has as its differentiating group all the members of that 
group, and nothing but those members!. But if the universe is 
such a group, as it is on our present supposition, there can be 
no other substance, in the same system of determining corre- 
spondence, which is such a group. For then every primary part 
has all others in its differentiating group, and cannot, therefore, 
be a member of any self-reflecting group which excludes any 
primary part—that is, of any self-reflecting group except the 
universe. 


1 In other words, a set of parts of each member of the group would be 
directly determined by the members of the group. A reciprocally determined 
group is not necessarily a self-reflecting group, since a group is reciprocally 
determined when each member of it determines parts of each of the members 
of the group, either directly or indirectly. 


cH. xxxI] THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 301 


Unless, then, there are several independent systems of deter- 
mining correspondence in the universe, no other substance could 
share with the universe the quality of being a unity which is 
self-reflecting into parts determined by determining correspond- 
ence, and which is self-reflecting in consequence of that corre- 
spondence. 

It is possible, no doubt, that there may be unities of self- 
reflection into parts otherwise determined, or in consequence of 
other determination. But we have no reason to suppose that 
this is actually the case. 

It is also to be noticed that the self-reflection of the universe 
is not confined to reflection in each of its primary parts. Within 
each secondary part of the first grade there will be a set of 
secondary parts of the second grade, each of which will have as 
its final determinant one of the primary parts of the universe. 
And consequently it will follow, by an argument analogous to 
that with regard to primary parts, that each secondary part of 
the first grade will correspond to the universe in respect of its 
internal system, and may therefore be said to reflect the uni- 
verse. And the same will be true of the secondary parts of all 
lower grades to infinity. 

And this last characteristic of the self-reflection of the 
universe—that self-reflection in the members of one set of parts 
involves self-reflection in the members of the infinite series of 
sequent states—could not be shared by any self-reflecting unity 
when the self-reflection did not depend on determining corre- 
spondence. For it is only by determining correspondence that 
what happens in one set of parts can involve what happens in 
all the infinite series of sequent sets. If, therefore, the universe 
is self-reflecting through an infinite series of sequent sets of 
parts, no other substance could also have that quality, unless 
there was more than one system of determining correspondence. 

286. We saw, in Sections 146 and 147, that there are two 
qualities which are sometimes asserted to belong to every 
organic unity. One is that the whole is in every part. The other 
is that each part expresses the nature of the whole. We saw 
that the fact that a substance is an organic unity did not make 
either of these statements literally true of that substance. But 


302 THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


we saw also that the fact that each part of an organic whole 
performed an unique function in the manifestation of the whole, 
made the use of these expressions, though incorrect, not un- 
natural. 

Now when an organic unity is also a self-reflecting unity, the 
expressions, though still not correct, are more appropriate than 
they would be if the unity was organic without being self- 
reflecting. It is less inappropriate to say that the whole is in 
each part if the unity is self-reflecting. For a whole, while it is 
manifested in its parts, is not manifested in each part separately, 
while in a self-reflecting unity the whole is reflected separately 
in each part of the set of reflecting parts. This is not equivalent 
to the whole being in each part, which is impossible, but it has 
a certain resemblance to it. 

Again, it is less inappropriate to say that each part expresses 
the nature of the whole if a unity is self-reflecting than if it is 
only organic. For the nature of the whole is only very partially 
expressed in the fact that a particular substance is one of the 
parts which manifest it. But in a self-reflecting unity each of 
the reflecting parts has within it a system of reflection homo- 
logous to a system of relations which exists within the whole. 
And although this does not make each part express the whole 
nature of the whole, it gets nearer to it than would otherwise 
have been the case. 

287. Our first supposition, then, if true, would give a unity 
to the universe which would be much closer than that unity 
which we have seen that the universe certainly does possess. 
But, even on this supposition, the universe will not be a whole 
in which the unity is more fundamental than its differentiations, 
or even as fundamental as its differentiations. For nothing in 
our present supposition lessens the force of those arguments 
which lead us to conclude, in Section 256, that the primary 
parts occupy a position of unique significance in the funda- 
mental system, and so in existence. Sufficient descriptions of 
the primary parts are not necessarily implied in any sufficient 
description of the universe—except in one which actually con- 
tains sufficient descriptions of the primary parts as elements in 
it. On the other hand any sufficient descriptions of all the 


cH. xxx1] THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 303 


members of the set of primary parts of the universe implies a 
sufficient description of the universe!. And for this reason it 
must, I think, be said that even on the supposition which we 
have just been discussing, the aspect of differentiation in the 
universe is more fundamental than the aspect of unity. 

288. Such are the results of our first supposition. But, as 
has already been said, we have no reason to believe that this 
supposition agrees with the facts, and we must proceed to con- 
sider what would follow from other suppositions. Let us now 
suppose that the first four of the assumptions which made up 
our first supposition are correct, but that the fifth is not. Let 
us assume, that is, that the universe forms a single primary 
whole. Let us assume that every primary part in the universe 
is determinant. Let us assume that every primary part deter- 
mines a part in every other primary part, and that it determines 
it directly. Let us, however, no longer assume that the deter- 
mining correspondence is of the same sort throughout the 
universe, but let us admit the possibility that it is of different 
sorts’. What conclusions about the unity of the universe could 
be deduced in the case of this second supposition? 

289. It will still be the case, as with the first supposition, 
that each primary part determines, in each primary part, a 
secondary part of the first grade, that each secondary part of 
the first grade in the universe determines, in each secondary 
part of the first grade, a secondary part of the second grade, 
and so on to infinity. The network of causal relations will there- 
fore be as close as it was on the first supposition. 

But we can no longer say, as we did on the first supposition, 
that each primary part, and also each secondary part of every 


1 This follows from the general principle that any sufficient description of 
all the members of any set of parts of any whole implies a sufficient description 
of that whole (cp. Section 187). What is implied will be a sufficient description 
of the substance which is, in point of fact, the universe. It will not necessarily 
be implied that this substance has the quality of being the universe. But this 
does not affect the argument in the text. 

2 The sort of determining correspondence might vary with the primary part 
which was determinant, or with the primary part which was differentiated, or 
with both. But as we have seen, whatever sort of determining correspondence 
held between any determinant primary part C, and its determinate B/ C, 
would have to hold between the parts of C and the parts of B/ C. (Section 227.) 


304 THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE [BK Iv 


grade, stands in a correspondence with the universe in respect 
of their internal relations, so that each of them may be said to 
reflect the universe. The argument by which we reached the 
conclusion that this did occur on the first supposition began by 
saying that the manner in which those secondary parts are 
determined by determining correspondence will depend for each 
of them upon three things—the fact that it 7s a secondary part 
of B, and of the first grade, the fact that the particular relation 
of determining correspondence is what it is, and the fact that 
the primary part which is its determinant has a certain nature. 
It then continued by pointing out that the first two of these 
facts were the same for every secondary part of B of the first 
grade, and that therefore all dissimilarities and exclusive 
similarities in the sufficient descriptions of these secondary parts 
must correspond to dissimilarities and exclusive similarities in 
the determinant sufficient descriptions of the primary parts. 
But on our present supposition it is no longer the case that 
both the first two parts are necessarily the same for each of the 
secondary parts. The sort of determining correspondence which 
occurs between C and B/ C may possibly be quite different from 
the sort of determining correspondence which occurs between 
Dand B! D. It does not, therefore, follow that all dissimilarities 
and exclusive similarities in the determined sufficient descrip- 
tions of the parts of B will correspond to similar dissimilarities 
and similarities in the determinant. sufficient descriptions of the 
primary parts. Some of them may correspond to dissimilarities 
and exclusive similarities in the different sorts of determining 
correspondence. We have no reason, therefore, to suppose that 
there is a system of relations which connects the parts of B, 
and which is homologous to any system of relations between 
the primary parts of the universe. 

Now our only reason for saying that the primary parts 
corresponded to the universe at all was that, in the case of the 
first supposition, we had seen that the parts of each primary 
part were connected by a system of relations which was homo- 
logous with a system which connected the primary parts of the 
universe. And, since we are not now entitled to say this, we 
are not now entitled to say that the primary parts do correspond 


cH. xxxI] THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 305 


to the universe, or that the universe is reflected in them. And, 
on similar grounds, we shall not be entitled to say that the 
secondary parts of any grade correspond to the universe, or that 
it is reflected in them. 

The second supposition, therefore, does not imply so close a 
unity in the universe as the first did. And the result which was 
reached, even on the first supposition, that the plurality in the 
universe was more fundamental than the unity, will be true 
@ fortiort on the second supposition, as it will be also on the 
other suppositions which we must now proceed to consider. 

290. Let us make our third supposition as follows. Let us 
still assume that the universe forms a single primary whole, that 
every primary part in the universe is determinant, and that 
every primary part determines a part in every other primary 
part. But let us no longer assume that this determination is in 
every case direct. That is, if B and C are two primary parts, 
let us admit the possibility that B may have no part B/ C, pro- 
vided that it has some part of a lower grade, whose final deter- 
minant is C, such as B/ D! C, B! E! D! C, or the like. 

In this case it is clear that the connection between the 
universe and the primary parts is less close than in the last 
case. On the second supposition the primary part as a whole 
did not necessarily reflect the universe, but its parts had a 
one-to-one correspondence with the primary parts of the uni- 
verse. But this will not be the case here. The secondary parts 
of the first grade in each primary part have no longer necessarily 
@ one-to-one correspondence with the primary parts. If the 
primary parts of the universe were B, C, D, E, it would be 
possible for B’s set of secondary parts of the first grade to be, 
for example, B/ B and B/C, and for C’s set to be C/ B, C! D, 
C/E. D, again, might have no secondary parts of the first 
grade at all, for it might be differentiated by correspondence 
with B only, so that its highest set of parts would be D/ B/ B, 
and D/ B/C. None of these sets is in one-to-one correspondence 
with the set of primary parts, and yet there would be in each 
primary part a part finally determined by each primary part. 
In the same way, the secondary parts of the second grade 
within each secondary part of the first grade are not necessarily 


306 THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


in one-to-one correspondence with the primary parts of the 
universe. 

It will, however, still be the case, as on the two earlier sup- 
positions, that each primary part is causally related to some 
part of each primary part, since it does determine a part in 
each, either directly or indirectly. And, although the network 
of causal relations will not be so symmetrical as it was on the 
two last suppositions, it is, in this case as in those, prolonged 
infinitely downwards. For when a part of B is once found 
which is determined, directly or indirectly, by C (and, by the 
supposition, there is such a part of B) then all the parts of that 
part to infinity are determined by parts of C. 

Does the fact that this causal relation takes place through 
determining correspondence unite the universe more closely 
than it is united by the fact that there is a causal relation? It is 
possible that this might be true. But this would depend upon 
what sort or sorts of determining correspondence did occur, 
and upon the nature of the characteristics of primary parts. 
And these are questions which must be postponed till the next 
Book, and, consequently, to the next volume. 

The causal determination, however, is a matter of some 
importance. For the fact that each primary part has some part 
determined by every primary part does connect each primary 
part with all other primary parts (and so with every member of ~ 
one set of parts of the universe) by intrinsic determination, and 
this is a closer and more vital bond than the connection by 
extrinsic determination which we had previously seen to connect 
all parts of the universe. On the other hand, since the con- 
nection here need not be direct, it is possible that in some cases 
the part of B which is determined by C may be a very small 
one’. How much this would affect the closeness of the union 
would again depend on those more concrete considerations 
which must be postponed till the next Book. 

291. We now come to a fourth supposition. Let us con- 
tinue to assume that the universe forms one primary whole, 
and that all primary parts are determinants. But let us drop 


1 Tt could be B/ H/ F/...!/ C, where the number of steps denoted by the 
asterisks might be any finite number. 


cH. xxx1I] THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 307 


the further assumption that every primary part determines a 
part in every other primary part. Let us suppose, for example, 
that the universe consists of six primary parts, B, C, D, E, F 
and G. Let B and C form a reciprocally differentiating group, 
so that the secondary parts of the first grade which belong to 
B are B! B and B! C, while those of C are C! Band C0! C. Let 
D and E likewise form a reciprocally differentiating group, and 
let the differentiating group, both for F and G, be BDFG. Then 
it will not be possible to form, within the universe, any smaller 
group K, such that it is not necessary, in order to describe 
sufficiently every part of K, to introduce any determining 
correspondence with anything except a part of K. And therefore 
there are no primary wholes within the universe, which will 
therefore be a single primary whole. And each primary part is 
in at least one differentiating group, and is therefore a deter- 
minant. But each primary part does not determine a part in 
each primary part. For neither D, E, F, or G determine any 
parts in B or C. The parts of B and C are determined by the 
closed reciprocal group of B and C, and have therefore no 
primary parts as their determinants, direct or indirect, except 
Band C. In the same way, neither B, C, F or G determine any 
parts in D or £. 

What can we say about the unity of the universe on this 
supposition? Itis no longer the case that each primary part is con- 
nected with all the others in respect of its determination of parts 
within them by determining correspondence. But it is still the 
case that each primary part is connected with each other primary 
part in respect of determining correspondence. For the universe 
is still one primary whole, and that means that no group from 
which any part of the universe is excluded can be self-sufficing 
in respect of determining correspondence. Every such group 
must have some part which determines, or is determined by, 
something outside the group. And this would join all the 
primary parts of the universe—and through them the secondary 
parts—more closely than they are joined by extrinsic deter- 
mination, though less closely than they would be joined on the 
previous suppositions. 

292. Fifthly, we may continue to assume that the universe 


308 THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE [BK IV 


forms a single primary whole, but no longer assume that all the 
primary parts are determinant. We may admit the possibility 
that some of them should be determined without themselves 
determining anything. 

The unity of the universe which would result on this sup- 
position would be the same as would result on the last. There 
will now be some primary parts which do not determine parts 
in any primary part. But this will not destroy any unity in the 
universe which remained on the previous supposition that there 
are some primary parts which do not determine parts in all 
primary parts. 

293. The final supposition which we may make is that the 
universe forms more than one primary whole. This will diminish 
its unity still further. For now there are different parts of the 
universe which are independent of each other in respect of 
determining correspondence. They are not, of course, completely 
isolated from each other. Everything in the universe is related 
to everything else. And, in particular, everything in the uni- 
verse is related to everything else by extrinsic determination. 
And it is possible that they may be related to each other causally, 
for there may be other causal relations besides those of deter- 
mining correspondence. But we have not established the occur- 
rence of any such other causal relations, and it is therefore 
possible that there may be no causal relations between the 
primary wholes. 

It must be noticed that the assumption that only_one sort 
of determining correspondence occurs throughout the universe 
may be combined, not only with the assumption that every 
primary part directly determines a part in every other primary 
part, but also with any one of the other assumptions—that it 
determines such a part directly or indirectly, that it is always 
determinant of a part in some primary part, that, at any rate, 
it is in the same primary whole with every other primary part, 
and, finally, that it is not in the same primary whole as all of 
them. But it will not, I think, appreciably increase the amount 
of unity in the universe, except in combination with the assump- 
tion that every primary part directly determines a part in every 
primary part. 


oH. xxx1] THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSE 309 


This concludes the first part of our investigation—the en- 
deavour to determine, as far as possible, the characteristics 
which belong to all that exists, or which belong to existence as 
a whole. There remains the consideration of what consequences 
of theoretical and practical interest can be drawn from the 
general nature of the universe, thus determined, with respect 
to various parts of the existent which are empirically known 
to us. This will find its place in a second volume which I hope 
to publish in a few years. 


INDEX 


OF TERMS DEFINED OR TREATED AS INDEFINABLE 


References are to Sections 


Assumption, 8 

Awareness, 44 

Being, 1 

Causal Order, 155 

Cause, 207-212 

Characteristic, 3 

Class, 120 

Classification, Order of, 155 

Classifying System, 155 

Complete Description, 101 

Complex Quality, 64 

Composition, Unity of, 114 

Compound Quality, 64 

Compound Substance, 127 

Content, 125 

Contingency, 109 

Derivative Characteristic, 85 

Determining Correspondence, 202 

Differentiating Group, 202 

Differentiation, 73 

Dimension, 162 

Exclusive Common Quality, 131 

Exclusive Description, 101 

Existence, 5 

Extrinsic Determination, 109 

Fact, 10 

Fixing of Presupposition, 185 

Fundamental System, 248 

Grade of Secondary Parts, 202 

Group, 120 

Implication, 106 

Independent Fixing of Presupposition, 
190 

Inference, 107 

Intrinsic Determination, 108 

Laws in the Universe, 258 

Manifestation, 114 

Member, 120 

acne Adequate Presupposition, 


Nature of Substances and Character- 
istics, 64 

Organic Unity, 149 

Original Quality, 86 

Part, 123 

Perception, 44 

Precedent Set of Parts, 181 

Presupposition, 183 

Primary Part, 202 

Primary Quality, 89 

Primary Whole, 202 

Proposition, 8, 45 

Quality, 60 

Reality, 2 

Reciprocal Correspondence, 201 

Reflexive Relation, 84 

Relation, 78 

Relational Quality, 86 

Relationship, 85 

Repeating Group, 126 

Repeating Quality, 89 

Secondary Part, 202 

Self-Reflecting Unity, 284 

Sequent Set of Parts, 181 

Serial Order, 155 

Set of Parts, 124 

Simple Quality, 64 

Sub-Group, 123 s 

Substance, 67 

Sufficient Description, 102 

Super-primary Whole, 205 

Symmetrical Relation, 84 

Total Ultimate Presupposition, 186 

Transitive Relation, 84 

Truth, 10 

Unities of Composition and Manifesta- 
tion, 114 

Universe, 135 

Whole, 123 


~ 
.P 
4 
re 
@ 
<..., 
7 
> 
—"s 
“aee! 
oa 
a 
*y 
7 
ry 
/ 
“a : 
A 
ties 
i 
ga, le 
= 
L 


———?... 
we? ia 
L eo 
— = 


"7; 


aa 


= 


ae 


Tet 


ete tatet, 


fe 


ane, 


wares 


Rear’ 


X 


bra : 


} 


ae 


4 
a 


