Thrice-Greatest Hermes

Studies in Hellenistic Theosophy and Gnosis

Being a Translation of the Extant Sermons and Fragments of the Trismegistic
Literature, with Prolegomena, Commentaries, and Notes



By

G. R. S. Mead

London and Benares
The Theosophical Publishing Society
[ 1906 ]


Contents


I Corpus Hermeticum 1

CORPUS HERMETICUM 1 3

PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 3

COMMENTARY 15

OF VISION AND APOCALYPSIS 15

THE GREAT AND LITTLE MAN 16

THE PRESENCE 17

THE VISION OF CREATION 17

THE DESCENT OF THE LOGOS 18

THE REVELATION OF THE PLEROMA 19

THE SECOND EMANATION 21

THE DESCENT OF MAN 22

THE FIRST MEN 23

“INCREASE AND MULTIPLY” 24

LOVE 25

THE WAY OF DEATHLESSNESS 25

THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL 26

THE EIGHTH SPHERE 26

THE THREE “BODIES” OF THE BUDDHA 27

THE PREACHING OF THE GNOSIS 29

A HYMN OF PRAISE AND PRAYER FOR THE GNOSIS 30

THE NAME "POIMANDRES” 31

THE GOOD SHEPHERD 32

CORPUS HERMETICUM II 35

THE GENERAL SERMON 35

CORPUS HERMETICUM II. (III.) 36

TO ASCLEPIUS 36

COMMENTARY 42

“AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GNOSIS OF THE NATURE OF ALL THINGS” 42

SPACE IS A PLENUM 43

THE SPOUSE OF DEITY 44

GOD IS CAUSE THAT SPIRIT IS 44

HE WHO IS WITHOUT A WIFE IS HALF A MAN 45

CORPUS HERMETICUM III. (IV.) 46

THE SACRED SERMON 46

COMMENTARY 48

TEXT AND TITLE 48

THE TRINITY 48

FROM THE SYSTEM OF THE NICOLAITANS 49

THE "BOOKS OF THE CHALD7EANS” 49

THE “FLOOD” 50

CORPUS HERMETICUM IV. (V.) 52

THE CUP OR MONAD 52

COMMENTARY 56

THE TITLE 56

THE BAPTISM OF THE MIND 57

THE HOLY GRAIL 57

THE "HATING OF THE BODY” 58

THE GNOSIS AND ITS BLESSINGS 59

THE ANCIENT PATH 60

CORPUS HERMETICUM V. (VI.) 61

THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST 61

COMMENTARY 65

THE TITLE 65



MAYA 66

THE HIGHER PANTHEISM OR PANMONISM 67

HYMN TO ALL-GOD 67

CORPUS HERMETICUM VI. (VII.) 68

IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD AND ELSEWHERE NOWHERE 68

COMMENTARY 71

THE TITLE 71

DUALISM? 71

GOD THE PLEROMA OF GOOD 73

CORPUS HERMETICUM VII. (VIII.) 75

THE GREATEST ILL AMONG MEN IS IGNORANCE OF GOD 75

COMMENTARY 76

A PREACHING 76

THE PROBABLE COMPLETION OF AN OXYRHYNCHUS LOGION 76

CORPUS HERMETICUM VIII. (IX.) 78

THAT NO ONE OF EXISTING THINGS DOTH PERISH, BUT MEN IN ERROR

SPEAK OF THEIR CHANGES AS DESTRUCTIONS AND AS DEATHS 78

COMMENTARY 80

THE COSMOS AS “SECOND GOD” 80

THE LAW OF APOKATASTASIS 81

CORPUS HERMETICUM IX. (X.) 82

ON THOUGHT AND SENSE 82

COMMENTARY 86

TITLE AND ORDERING 86

“SENSE -AND-THOUGHT” 87

THOSE IN GNOSIS 87

THE TRUE GNOSTIC 88

THE GOAL OF THE GNOSIS 88

THE POSSIBILITY OF KNOWING GOD 89

CORPUS HERMETICUM X. (XI.) 90

THE KEY 90

COMMENTARY 102

THE CONSUMMATION OF THE “GENERAL SERMONS” 102

THE WILL OF GOD 103

OF GNOSIS AND ECSTASIS 103

OF APOTHEOSIS 104

THE METAMORPHOSES OF THE SOUL 105

THE LADDER OF BEING 105

CONCERNING TRANSMIGRATION 106

GNOSIS THE VIRTUE OF THE SOUL 107

THE VEHICLES OF THE SOUL 107

THE DUAL SOUL 108

"HE WHO STANDS” 108

THE OLYMPIAN PATH 109

“WHEN MIND BECOMES A DAIMON” 109

THE “SCOURGE” OF THE CHRIST 110

THE DISPENSATION OF THE UNIVERSE 110

CORPUS HERMETICUM XI. (XII.) 112

MIND UNTO HERMES 112

COMMENTARY 122

TITLE AND FORM 122

THE 7EON-LORE 123

THE ROOT OF FORM 124

"BECOME ALL THINGS” 125

THE GOOD’S OWN PATH 126

CONCERNING INDIA 126



CORPUS HERMETICUM XII. (XIII.) 128

ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 128

COMMENTARY 138

THE SAYINGS OF THE GOOD DAIMON 138

HERMES AND BASILIDES 139

THE SERMONS ON FATE 140

MATERIALITY AND CORPORALITY ARE ENERGIES OF GOD 141

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIII. (XIV.) 142

THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 142

THE SECRET HYMNODY 149

COMMENTARY 152

CONCERNING THE TITLE 152

THE TERM APOCRYPHON 152

THE THREE STAGES OF PROBATION 153

THE HOLY MOUNT OF INITIATION 154

THE BIRTH FROM ABOVE 155

THE VIRGIN BIRTH 155

THE RACE OF THE LOGOS 156

THE SELF-TAUGHT 156

THE NEW CREATION 157

THE WAY OF BIRTH IN GOD 157

OF THE TEN AND THE TWELVE 158

THE DAWN OF COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS 161

THE VOW OF SILENCE 161

OFTHEOGDOAD 161

A HYMN FOR MORNING AND FOR EVENING PRAYER 162

“THROUGH THE WORD” 164

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIV. (XV.) 165

[A LETTER] OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES TO ASCLEPIUS 165

COMMENTARY 169

ASCLEPIUS AND TAT 169

COMPARE WITH “MIND UNTO HERMES” 170

THE GOOD HUSBANDMAN 170

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVI.) 171

THE DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO KING AMMON 171

COMMENTARY 178

CONCERNING THE TITLE 178

A TRADITION CONCERNING THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE 179

A SPECULATION AS TO DATE 180

THE DELINEATION OF THE SUN 181

CONCERNING THE DAIMONES 181

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVII.) 183

COMMENTARY 184

ON THE ADORATION OF IMAGES 184

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVIII.) 185

[THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS] 185

(ABOUT THE SOUL’S BEING HINDERED BY THE PASSION OF THE BODY) 185

(ABOUT THE BLESSING OF THE BETTER [ONE] AND PRAISING OF THE KING) 189

COMMENTARY 192

THE APOLOGY OF A PCEMANDRIST 192

SPECULATIONS AS TO DATE 192

THE STORY OF THE PYTHIC GRASSHOPPER 193

THE TRUE KING 194

THE FELLOW-RULERS OF THE HEIGHT 194

II The Perfect Sermon 195

THE PERFECT SERMON 196



OR THE ASCLEPIUS 196

I 196

II 197

III 198

IV 199

V 200

VI 201

VII 203

VIII 204

IX 206

X 207

XI 208

XII 210

XIII 211

XIV 212

XV 213

XVI 214

XVII 215

XVIII 216

XIX 217

XX 219

XXI 221

XXII 222

XXIII 223

XXIV 225

XXV 226

XXVI 228

XXVII 229

XXVIII 231

XXIX 233

XXX 234

XXXI 236

XXXII 237

XXXIII 239

XXXIV 241

XXXV 242

XXXVI 243

XXXVIII 246

XXXIX 246

XL 247

XLI 249

COMMENTARY 251

THE TITLE 251

THE OLD LATIN TRANSLATION AND THE GREEK ORIGINAL 251

OF THE WRITER AND THE PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE 252

THE DOCTRINE OF THE WILL OF GOD 253

CONCERNING SPIRIT AND THE ALL-SENSE 254

THE PROPHETIC UTTERANCES 255

THE PROSCRIPTION OF THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS 256

THE LAST HOPE OF THE RELIGION OF THE MIND 257



I

Corpus Hermeticum



- 1 -



- 2 -


CORPUS HERMETICUM I.
PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN
(Text: R. 328-338; P. 1-18; Pat 5b-8.f

1 .



T chanced once on a time my mind was
meditating on the things that are 1 2 , my thought
was raised to a great height, the senses of my
body being held back - just as men are who are weighed
down with sleep after a fill of food, or from fatigue of
body.


Methought a Being more than vast, in size beyond all
bounds, called out my name and saith: What wouldst thou
hear and see, and what hast thou in mind to learn and
know?


2. And I do say: Who art thou?

He saith: I am Man-Shepherd 7 , Mind of all master-hood 4 5 ;
I know what thou desirest and I’m with thee everywhere.

3. [And] I reply: I long to learn the things that are, and
comprehend their nature, and know God. This is, I said,
what I desire to hear.


He answered back to me: Hold in thy mind all thou
wouldst know, and I will teach thee.

4. E’en with these words His aspect changed 3 , and
straightway, in the twinkling of an eye, all things were
opened to me, and I see a Vision limitless, all things
turned into Light, - sweet, joyous [Light]. And I became
transported as I gazed.


1 P. = Parthey (G.), Hermetis Trismegisti Poemander (Berlin; 1854). Pat. = Patrizzi (F.), Nova de Universis Philosophia
(Venice; 1593).

2 Ttsgi xcov OVTCOV..

3 noifravSgrig.

4 0 ifj? aUOsvxla? voU?. The aUOevxla was the snmma potestas of all things; see R. 8, n. 1; and § 30 below. Cf. also C. H.,
xiii. (xiv.) 15.

5 r)Uay)'] xj) l8sQ.


- 3 -



But in a little while Darkness came settling down on part
[of it], awesome and gloomy, coiling in sinuous folds 6 , so
that methought it like unto a snake 7 .

And then the Darkness changed into some sort of a Moist
Nature, tossed about beyond all power of words, belching
out smoke as from a fire, and groaning forth a wailing
sound that beggars all description.

[And] after that an outcry inarticulate came forth from it,
as though it were a Voice of Fire.

5. [Thereon] out of the Light . . 8 . . a Holy Word
(Logos) 9 descended on that Nature. And upwards to the
height from the Moist Nature leaped forth pure Fire; light
was it, swift and active too.

The Air, too, being light, followed after the Fire; from out
the Earth-and-Water rising up to Fire so that it seemed to
hang therefrom.

But Earth-and-Water stayed so mingled each with other,
that Earth from Water no one could discern 111 . Yet were
they moved to hear by reason of the Spirit-Word (Logos)
pervading them.

6. Then saith to me Man-Shepherd: Didst understand this
Vision what it means?

Nay; that shall I know, I said.

That Light, He said, am I, thy God, Mind, prior to Moist
Nature which appeared from Darkness; the Light-Word
(Logos) [that appeared] from Mind is Son of God.

What then? - say I.

Know that what sees in thee 11 and hears is the Lord’s
Word (Logos); but Mind is Father-God. Not separate are


6 axokiGOc; Eansigafjisvov. The sense is by no means certain. Menard translates “de form sinueusi Everard, “coming
down obliquely”; Chambers, “sinuously terminated.” But f. in the Sethian system “the sinuous Water - that is,
Darkness (see Hipp., Philos., v. 19).

7 Cf. Hipp., Philos., v. 9 (S. 170, 71): “They say the Serpent is the Moist Essence.”

8 A lacuna of six letters in the text.

9 The idea of the Logos was the central concept of Hellenistic theology; it was thus a word of many meanings,
signifying chiefly Reason and Word, but also much else. I have accordingly throughout added the term Logos after the
English equivalent most suitable to the context.

10 Cf. II, vii. 99, as quoted by Apion in the chapter “Concerning the iEon” as Comment, on C. H., xi. (xii.).

11 That is, in vision.


- 4 -



they the one from other; just in their union [rather] is it
Life consists.

Thanks be to Thee, I said.

So, understand the Light [He answered], and make friends
with it.

7. And speaking thus He gazed for long into my eyes 12 , so
that I trembled at the look of Him.

But when He raised His head, I see in Mind the Light,
[but] now in Powers no man could number, and
Cosmos 11 grown beyond all bounds, and that the Fire was
compassed round about by a most mighty Power, and
[now] subdued had come unto a stand.

And when I saw these things I understood by reason of
Man-Shepherd’s Word (Logos).

8. But as I was in great astonishment, He saith to me
again: Thou didst behold in Mind the Archetypal Form
whose being is before beginning without end. Thus spake
to me Man-Shepherd.

And I say: Whence then have Nature’s elements their
being?

To this He answer gives: From Will of God. [Nature 14 ]
received the Word (Logos), and gazing on the Cosmos
Beautiful 11 did copy it, making herself into a cosmos, by
means of her own elements and by the births of souls.

9. And God-the-Mind, being male and female both, as
Light and Life subsisting, brought forth another Mind to
give things form, who, God as he was of Fire and
Spirit 16 , formed Seven Rulers who enclose the cosmos that
the sense perceives 17 . Men call their ruling Fate 18 .


12 Cf. C. H„ xi (xii) 6.

13 xoapov. The word kosnios (world-order) means either “order” or “world”; and in the original there is frequently a
play upon the two meanings, as in the case of logos.

14 Nature and God’s Will are identical.

15 That is, the ideal world-order in the realms of reality.

16 Presumably the Pure Air of § 3.

17 xOv ala07]TOv xoapov. The sensible or manifested world, our present universe, as distinguished from the ideal
eternal universe, the type of all universes.

18 slpagpevt].


-5 -



10. Straightway from out the downward elements God’s
Reason (Logos 19 ) leaped up to Nature’s pure formation,
and was at-oned with the Formative Mind; for it was co-
essential with it 20 . And Nature’s downward elements were
thus left reason-less, so as to be pure matter.

11. Then the Formative Mind ([at-oned] with Reason), he
who surrounds the spheres and spins them with his whirl,
set turning his formations, and let them turn from a
beginning boundless unto an endless end. For that the
circulation of these [spheres] begins where it doth end, as
Mind doth will.

And from the downward elements Nature brought forth
lives reason-less; for He did not extend the Reason
(Logos) [to them]. The Air brought forth things winged;
the Water things that swim, and Earth-and-Water one
from another parted, as Mind willed. And from her
bosom Earth produced what lives she had, four-footed
things and reptiles, beasts wild and tame.

12. But All-Father Mind, being Life and Light, did bring
forth Man 21 co-equal to Himself, with whom He fell in
love, as being His own child; for he was beautiful beyond
compare, the Image of his Sire. In very truth, God fell in
love with His own Form 22 ; and on him did bestow all of
His own formations.

13. And when he gazed upon what the Enformer had
created in the Father, [Man] too wished to enform; and
[so] assent was given him by the Father 2 ’.

Changing his state to the formative sphere 24 , in that he
was to have his whole authority 25 , he gazed upon his


19 The Logos which had previously descended into Nature.

20 Opoouaio?, usually translated “consubstantial”; but oUoia is “essence” and “being” rather than “substance.”

21 The Prototype, Cosmic, Ideal or Perfect Man.

22 Or Beauty (pogtpn?).

23 Cf. The Gospel of Maty in the Akhmim Codex: “He nodded, and when He had thus nodded assent . . . .” ( F . F. F.,
586).

24 The Eighth Sphere bounding the Seven.

25 For note on E^ouoia, see R. in loc. and 48, n. 3.


- 6 -



Brother’s creatures 26 . They fell in love with him, and gave
him each a share of his own ordering 27 .

And after that he had well-learned their essence and had
become a sharer in their nature, he had a mind to break
right through the Boundary of their spheres, and to
subdue 28 the might of that which pressed upon the Fire 29 .

14. So he who hath the whole authority o’er [all] the
mortals in the cosmos and o’er its lives irrational, bent his
face downwards through’ 11 the Harmony 31 , breaking right
through its strength, and showed to downward Nature
God’s fair Form.

And when she saw that Form of beauty which can never
satiate, and him who [now] possessed within himself each
single energy of [all seven] Rulers as well as God’s [own]
Form, she smiled with love; for ’twas as though she’d seen
the image of Man’s fairest form upon her Water, his
shadow on her Earth.

He in his turn beholding the form like to himself, existing
in her, in her Water, loved it and willed to live in it; and
with the will came act’ 2 , and [so] he vivified the form
devoid of reason.

And Nature took the object of her love and wound herself
completely round him, and they were intermingled, for
they were lovers.

15. And this is why beyond all creatures on the earth man
is twofold; mortal because of body, but because of the
essential Man immortal.

Though deathless and possessed of sway o’er all, yet doth
he suffer as a mortal doth, subject to Fate.


26 That is the Seven Spheres fashioned by his Brother.

27 xdfiq, rank or order.

28 Or “wear down” (xaxocTtovfjoai). The reading xaxavofjoai, however, may be more correct; “he had a mind to come
to knowledge of’ this Boundary or Ring Pass not. See R. 49, n. 1.

29 Sc. the Mighty Power of § 9.

30 TiagsxutJjsv. Cf. Cyril, C.J., i. 33 (Frag, xiii.); R. 50: “beugt sich . . . niedet ’’ But compare especially Plato, Phadnis , 249
C., where he speaks of the soul “raising up her face (Clvaxutjiaaa) to That which is.” Cf. also Apion in Clement. Horn.,
vi. 4, in Comment. C. H., xi. (xii.)

31 That is, the harmonious interplay, concord or system of the spheres ruled by the Rulers; in other words, the
cosmos of Fate.

32 SveQyeia, energy, and realization.


-7 -



Thus though above the Harmony, within the Harmony he
hath become a slave. Though male-female 11 , as from a
Father male-female, and though he’s sleepless from a
sleepless [Sire], yet is he overcome [by sleep].

16. Thereon [I say: Teach on] 14 , O Mind of me, for I
myself as well 35 am amorous of the Word (Logos).

The Shepherd said: This is the mystery kept hid until this
day. Nature embraced by Man brought forth a wonder, oh
so wonderful. For as he had the nature of the Concord 16
of the Seven, who, as I said to thee, [were made] of Fire
and Spirit 17 - Nature delayed not, but immediately brought
forth seven “men,” in correspondence with the natures of
the Seven, male-female and moving in the air 18 .

Thereon [I said]: O Shepherd, . , 39 . . . ; for now I’m filled
with great desire and long to hear; do not run off 40 .

The Shepherd said: Keep silence, for not as yet have I
unrolled for thee the first discourse (logos).

Lo! I am still, I said.

17. In such wise then, as I have said, the generation of
these seven came to pass. Earth was as woman, her Water
filled with longing; ripeness she took from Fire, spirit
from dither. Nature thus brought forth frames to suit the
form of Man.

And Man from Life and Light changed into soul and
mind, - from Life to soul, from Light to mind.

And thus continued all the sense-world’s parts 41 until the
period of their end and new beginnings.

18. Now listen to the rest of the discourse (logos) which
thou dost long to hear.


33 That is “a-sexual” but having the potentiality of both sexes.

34 For the various suggestions for filling up this lacuna, see R. in loc.\ and for that of Keil, see R. 367.

35 Sc. as well as Nature.

36 Harmony.

37 See § 9.

38 petagoloug. A term that must have a more definite meaning than the vague “sublime” by which it is generally
translated.

39 For Keil’s completion of the lacuna, see R. 368.

40 pH perhaps meaning diverge from the subject, or go too fast; lit., it means “do not run away.”

41 That is, the parts of what Hermes elsewhere calls the “cosmic man.”


- 8 -



The period being ended, the bond that bound them all
was loosened by God’s Will. For all the animals being
male-female, at the same time with man were loosed apart;
some became partly male, some in like fashion [partly]
female. And straightway God spake by His Holy Word
(Logos):

“Increase ye in increasing, and multiply in multitude, ye
creatures and creations all; and man that hath Mind in
him, let him learn to know that he himself is deathless,
and that the cause of death is love 42 , though Love is all 4 ’.”

19. When He said this, His Forethought 44 did by means of
Fate and Harmony effect their couplings and their
generations founded. And so all things were multiplied
according to their kind.

And he who thus hath learned to know himself, hath
reached that Good which doth transcend abundance; but
he who through a love that leads astray, expends his love
upon his body, - he stays in Darkness wandering 4 ’, and
suffering through his senses things of Death.

20. What is the so great fault, said I, the ignorant commit,
that they should be deprived of deathlessness?

Thou seem’st, he said, O thou, not to have given heed to
what thou heardest. Did not I bid thee think?

Yea do I think, and I remember, and therefore give Thee
thanks.

If thou didst think [thereon], [said He], tell me: Why do
they merit death who are in Death?

It is because the gloomy Darkness is the root and base of
the material frame; from it 46 came the Moist Nature; from
this 47 the body in the sense-world was composed; and
from this [body] Death doth the Water drain.


42 Cf. C. H, xvi. 16.

43 Omitting the id before Ovtol

44 tigovoia, that is Nature as Sophia or Providence or Will.

45 There is a word-play between tiXavt]? and TtXavwpsvo?.

46 Sc. Darkness.

47 Sc The Moist Nature.


- 9 -



21. Right was thy thought, O thou! But how doth “he
who knows himself, go unto Him,” as God’s Word
(Logos) hath declared?

And I reply: the Father of the universals doth consist of
Light and Life, and from Him Man was born.

Thou sayest well, [thus] speaking. Light and Life is Father-
God, and from Him Man was born.

If then thou learnest that thou art thyself of Life and
Light, and that thou [only] happen’st to be out of them,
thou shalt return again to Life. Thus did Man-Shepherd
speak.

But tell me further, Mind of me, I cried, how shall I come
to Life again .... for God doth say: “The man who hath
Mind in him, let him learn to know that he himself [is
deathless].”

22. Have not all men then Mind?

Thou sayest well, O thou, thus speaking. I, Mind, myself
am present with holy men and good, the pure and
merciful, men who live piously.

[To such] my presence doth become an aid, and
straightway they gain gnosis of all things, and win the
Father’s love by their pure lives, and give Him thanks,
invoking on Him blessings, and chanting hymns, intent on
Him with ardent love.

And ere they give the body up unto its proper death, they
turn them with disgust from its sensations, from
knowledge of what things they operate 48 . Nay, it is I, the
Mind, that will not let the operations which befall the
body, work to their [natural] end. For being door-keeper
I’ll close up [all] the entrances, and cut the mental actions
off which base and evil energies induce.

23. But to the Mind-less ones, the wicked and depraved,
the envious and covetous, and those who murder do and
love impiety, I am far off, yielding my place to the
Avenging Daimon, who sharpening the fire, tormenteth


48 slSoxs? aUxGOv id


- 10 -



him and addeth fire to fire upon him, and rusheth on him
through his senses, thus rendering him the readier for
transgressions of the law, so that he meets with greater
torment; nor doth he ever cease to have desire for
appetites inordinate, insatiately striving in the dark 49 .

24. Well hast thou taught me all, as I desired, O Mind.
And now, pray, tell me further of the nature of the Way
Above as now it is [for me] 50 .

To this Man-Shepherd said: When thy material body is to
be dissolved, first thou surrenderest the body by itself
unto the work of change, and thus the form thou hadst
doth vanish, and thou surrenderest thy way of life 51 , void
of its energy, unto the Daimon’ 2 . The body’s senses next
pass back into their sources, becoming separate, and
resurrect as energies; and passion and desire 3 ’ withdraw
unto that nature which is void of reason.

25. And thus it is that man doth speed his way thereafter
upwards through the Harmony. To the first zone he gives
the Energy of Growth and Waning; unto the second
[zone], Device of Evils [now] de-energized’ 4 ; unto the
third, the Guile of the Desires de-energized; unto the
fourth, his Domineering Arrogance, [also] de-energized;
unto the fifth, unholy Daring and the Rashness of
Audacity, de-energized; unto the sixth, Striving for Wealth
by evil means, deprived of its aggrandisement; and to the
seventh zone, Ensnaring Falsehood, de-energized”.

26. And then, with all the energizings of the Harmony
stript from him, clothed in his proper Power, he cometh
to that Nature which belongs unto the Eighth’ 6 , and there
with those-that-are hymneth the Father.


49 The text of this paragraph is hopelessly confused in the MSS.

50 tisqI if]? CIvoSou xfj? Y lvo ( Jl -s vy l?-

51 i0 r)0og, the “habitual” part of man, presumably way of life impressed by habit on the body; or it may be “class” of
life as in the Vision of Er.

52 Cf.C.H., x. (xi.) 16.

53 0 0upOg Mai r| £7u0ufj.ia, - the masculine and feminine as positive and negative aspects of the “animal soul.”

54 avevsgyrpov.

55 Cf.C.H., xiii. (xiv.) 7.

56 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 15.


- 11 -



They who are there welcome his coming there with joy;
and he, made like to them that sojourn there, doth further
hear the Powers who are above the Nature that belongs
unto the Eighth, singing their songs of praise to God in
language of their own.

And then they, in a band 07 , go to the Father home; of their
own selves they make surrender of themselves to Powers,
and [thus] becoming Powers they are in God. This the
good end for those who have gained Gnosis - to be made
one with God.

Why shouldst thou then delay? Must it not be, since thou
hast all received, that thou shouldst to the worthy point
the way, in order that through thee the race of mortal kind
may by [thy] God be saved?

27. This when He’d said, Man-Shepherd mingled with the
Powers' 8 .

But I, with thanks and blessings unto the Father of the
universal [Powers], was freed, full of the power He had
poured into me, and full of what He’d taught me of the
nature of the All and of the loftiest Vision.

And I began to preach to men the Beauty of Devotion
and of Gnosis:

O ye people, earth-born folk, ye who have given
yourselves to drunkenness and sleep and ignorance of
God, be sober now, cease from your surfeit, cease to be
glamoured by irrational sleep! 09

28. And when they heard, they came with one accord.
Whereon I say:

Ye earth-born folk, why have ye given up yourselves to
Death, while yet ye have the power of sharing
Deathlessness? Repent, O ye, who walk with Error arm in
arm and make of Ignorance the sharer of your board; get


57 xdfsi, order, group, sc. of the Nine; - the Father being the Ten, or consummation.

58 Cf. K. K, 25: “Thus speaking God became Imperishable Mind.”

59 Cf. the logos, “Jesus saith, I stood in the midst of the world, and in the flesh was I seen of them, and I found all
men drunken, and none found I athirst among them, and my soul grieveth over the sons of men, because they are
blind in heart.” Sayings of Our Lord from an Early Greek Papyrus, Grenfell & Hunt (London; 1897).


- 12 -



ye from out the light of Darkness, and take your part in
Deathlessness, forsake Destruction!

29. And some of them with jests upon their lips 61 ’ departed
[from me], abandoning themselves unto the Way of
Death; others entreated to be taught, casting themselves
before my feet.

But I made them arise, and I became a leader of the
Race 61 towards home, teaching the words (logoi), how and
in what way they shall be saved. I sowed in them the
words (logoi) of wisdom 62 ; of Deathless Water were they
given to drink 6 ’ 1 .

And when even was come and all sun’s beams began to
set, I bade them all give thanks to God. And when they
had brought to an end the giving of their thanks, each
man returned to his own resting place.

30. But I recorded in my heart Man-Shepherd’s
benefaction, and with my every hope fulfilled more than
rejoiced. For body’s sleep became the soul’s awakening 64 ,
and closing of the eyes - true vision, pregnant with Good
my silence, and the utterance of my word (logos)
begetting of good things.

All this befell me from my Mind, that is Man-Shepherd,
Word (Logos) of all masterhood 6 ’ 3 , by whom being God-
inspired I came unto the Plain of Truth 66 . Wherefore with
all my soul and strength thanksgiving 67 give I unto Father-
God.

31. Floly art Thou, O God, the universals’ Father.

Holy art Thou, O God, whose Will perfects itself by
means of its own Powers.


60 Cf. P. S. A., xii. 2.

61 The Race of the Logos, of all who were conscious of the Logos in their hearts, who had repented and were thus
logoi.

62 Cf. Mark iv. 4: “He who soweth soweth the Word (Logos)”

63 Cf. K. K., 1 - the drink given by Isis to Horns.

64 vfjt]ng, lit. soberness, watchfulness, lucidity.

65 See § 2 above.

66 Cf. K. K. (Stob., Ec., i. 49; p. 459, 20, W.), and Damascius, in Phot., Bibl., p. 337b, 23.

67 sUkoyiav, - a play on Xoyoq.


- 13 -



Holy art Thou, O God, who willeth to be known and art
known by Thine own.

Holy art Thou, who didst by Word (Logos) make to
consist the things that are.

Holy art Thou, of whom All-nature hath been made an
Image.

Holy art Thou, whose Form Nature hath never made.

Holy art Thou, more powerful than all power.

Holy art Thou, transcending all pre-eminence.

Holy Thou art, Thou better than all praise.

Accept my reason’s 68 offerings pure, from soul and heart
for aye stretched up to Thee, O Thou unutterable,
unspeakable, Whose Name naught but the Silence can
express.

32. Give ear to me who pray that I may ne’er of Gnosis
fail, [Gnosis] which is our common Being’s nature 69 ; and
fill me with Thy Power, and with this Grace [of Thine],
that I may give the Light to those in ignorance of the
Race, my Brethren, and Thy Sons.

For this cause I believe, and I bear witness; I go to Life
and Light. Blessed art Thou, O Father. Thy Man 7 " would
holy be as Thou art holy, e’en as Thou gavest him Thy full
authority 71 [to be].



68 XoyiKaq.

69 tH? yvwaew? x(F xax oUaiav H[J.cbv, “our being,” that is, presumably, the “being” of man and God, the “being”
which man shares with God.

70 Cf.C.H., xiii. (xiv.) 20.

71 E^ouoiav.


- 14 -



COMMENTARY


OF VISION AND APOCALYPSIS

The “Poemandres” treatise not only belongs to the most important type of the
Trismegistic literature, but is also the most important document within that type. It
constitutes, so to speak, the Ground-Gospel of the Poemandres Communities, in
the form of a revelation or apocalypse received by the founder of the tradition, that
founder, however, being not a historical personage but the personification of a
teaching-power or grade of spiritual illumination - in other words, of one who had
reached the “Hermes,” or rather “Thrice-greatest,” state of consciousness or
enlightenment.

This stage of enlightenment was characterized by a heightening of the spiritual
intuition which made the mystic capable of receiving the first touch of cosmic
consciousness, and of retaining it in his physical memory when he returned to the
normal state.

The setting forth of the teaching is thus naturally in the form of apocalyptic, and
of apocalyptic of an ordered and logical nature; for it purports to be a setting forth
of the spiritual “Epopteia” of the Inner Mysteries, the Vision revealed by the Great
Initiator or Master-Hierophant, Mind of all-masterhood.

This Vision, as we are told by many seers and prophets of the time, was
incapable of being set forth by “tongue of flesh” in its own proper terms, seeing
that it transcended the consciousness of normal humanity. Being in itself a living,
potent, intelligible reality, apart from all forms either material or intellectual in any
way known to man, it pervaded his very being and made his whole nature respond
to a new key of truth, or rather, vibrate in a higher octave, so to say, where all
things, while remaining the same, received a new interpretation and intensity.

The interpretation of this Vision, however, was conditioned by the “matter” of
each seer; he it was who had to clothe the naked beauty of the Truth - as the
Gnostic Marcus would have phrased it - with the fairest garment he himself
possessed, the highest thoughts, the best science, the fairest traditions, the most
grandiose imagination known to him. Thus it is that we have so many modes of
expression among the mystics of the time, so many varieties of spiritual experience
- not because the experience itself was “other,” the experience was the “same” for
all, but the speaking of it forth was conditioned by the religious and philosophical
and scientific heredity of the seer.

This element, then, is the basic fact in all such apocalyptic. It is, however, seldom
that we meet with a document that has come to us straight from the hand of a seer
writing down his own immediate experience without admixture; for the delight of
the Vision was not that it gave new facts or ideas of the same nature as those
already in circulation, but that it threw light on existing traditions, and showed
them forth as being parts of a whole. Once the man had come into touch with the
Great Synthesis, there rushed into his mind innumerable passages of scripture,
scraps of myths, fragments of cosmogenesis, logoi and logia, and symbols of all
kinds that fitted naturally. These were not any special writer’s monopoly, there was


- 15 -



no copyright in them, they were all utterances of the same Logos, the Great
Instructor of humanity.

Thus the literature that was produced was anonymous or pseudepigraphic. There
was first of all a nucleus of personal vision and direct illumination, then a grouping
of similar matter from various sources into a whole for didactic purposes. Nor was
there any idea among these mystics and scripture -writers that the form once issued
should become for ever stereotyped as inerrant; there were many recensions and
additions and interpolations. It was left to those without the sense of illumination
to stereotype the forms and claim for them the inerrancy of verbal dictation by the
Deity. Those who wrote the apocalypses from personal knowledge of vision could
not make such claim for their scriptures, for they knew how they were written, and
what was the nature of hearing and sight.

We have accordingly to treat all such documents as natural human compositions,
but while doing so, while on the one side analyzing them with microscopic
attention as literary compositions, put together from other sources, over-written,
redacted and interpolated, we have also, on the other, to bear in mind that this was
not done by clever manipulators and literary charlatans, but by men who regarded
such work as a holy and spiritual task, who endeavoured to arrange all under the
inspiration of a sweet influence for good, who believed themselves under guidance
in their selection of matter, and in recombining the best in other scriptures into a
new whole that might prove still better for the purpose of further enlightenment
suitable to their immediate environment.

The “Poemandres” treatise is of this nature - that is to say, though we have not
the original form before us, we have what was intended to be read as a single
document. We shall accordingly endeavour in our comments not to allow the
anomalies of its outer form to detract from our appreciation of its inner spirit, and
yet, on the otirer hand, not to permit the beauty of much that is in it to blind us to
the fact that the present form has evolved from simpler beginnings.

THE GREAT AND LITTLE MAN

1 . In deep meditation the disciple reaches the consummation of his efforts, and
receives initiation from the Master of the masters, who is to confer upon him
authority (s^ooalocv - see § 32) to teach, that is, to be a master or a Hermes.

2. That this Grand Master of the Inner Mysteries was Man and Shepherd of
men, the Very Self of men, has been amply shown in the Prolegomena, but the
striking parallelism with the very wording of our text, the Great Man, the “Being
more than vast,” who tells the litde man, that though for the first time he now
knows Iris Greater Self, that Self has ever been “everywhere with thee,” is best
shown by tire beautiful logos from the Gospel of Eve (presumably an Egyptian gospel),
which we have already quoted elsewhere 72 :

“1 stood on a lofty mountain 7 i , and saw a gigantic Man and another, a dwaf; and
I heard, as it were, a voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to hear; and He spake unto


72 From Epiphanius, Hares., xxvi. 3; see note to the first Hermes-Prayer (i. 11).

73 Symbolical of a high state of consciousness, the Mount of Perfection.


- 16 -



me and said: I am thou, and thou art I; and wheresoever thou mayest be, I am
there 74 . In all am I scattered, and whencesoever thou wiliest, thou gatherest Me; and
gathering Me, thou gatherest Thyself.”

THE PRESENCE

3. The conditions of the seeing of the Holy Sight had been fulfilled by the
disciple; he had weaned himself from all lower desires. No longer, like the theurgist
in the Hermes-invocations of the popular cult, does he pray for wealth and fame
and cheerful countenance, and the rest; his one desire, his only will, is now to
“learn the things that are, and comprehend their nature and know God.” He craves
for Gnosis, - Gnosis of Cosmos and its mysteries, Gnosis of Nature, the Great
Mother, and, finally, Gnosis of God, the Father of the worlds. This is the one
question he “holds in his mind,” his whole nature is concentrated into this one
point of interrogation.

It is to be noticed that we are not told, as in the Gospel of Eve, that the seer stood,
as it were, apart from himself, and saw his little self and Greater Self
simultaneously. He is conscious of a Presence, of a Persona in the highest
theological meaning of the word, who is not seen so much as felt, speaking to him
Mind to mind; he hears this Presence rather than sees it.

THE VISION OF CREATION

4. The first part of his mental question is: How came this cosmos into being?
The answer is the changing of the Boundless Presence into “Light, sweet joyous
Light.” He loses all sight of “all things” in his mind, the mental image he had
formed of cosmos, and is plunged into the infinitude of Limitless Light and Joy,
which transports him out of himself in highest ecstasy.

But he has craved for Gnosis, not Joy and Light, but Wisdom, the understanding
and reconciliation of the great Opposites, the Cross of all Manifestation.

Therefore must he know the Mystery of Ignorance as well as that of Knowledge.
Within the Infinitude of Light appears the Shadow of the Unknown, which
translates itself to his consciousness as Darkness, - the Shadow of the Thrice-
unknown Darkness, which, as Damascius tells us 75 , was the First Principle of the
Egyptians, the Ineffable Mystery, of which they “said nothing,” and of which our
author says nothing.

This Darkness comes forth from within outwards to the disciple’s
consciousness, it spreads “downwards” in sinuous folds like a Great Snake,
symbolizing, presumably, the unknown, and to him unknowable, mysteries of the
differentiation of the root of matter of the cosmos that was to be; its motion was
spiral, sinuous, unending vibrations, not yet confined into a sphere; not yet ordered,
but chaotic, in unceasing turmoil, a terrible contrast to the sweet peace of the Light,
gradually changing from Dark Space or Spirit into a Fluid or Flowing Matter, or


74 Cf. the Oxyrhynchus logion 5: “Jesus saith: Wherever there are [two], they are not without God, and wherever there
is one alone, I say, I am with him.”

75 See note to the fifth Hermes-Prayer (v. 2).


- 17 -



Moist Nature; that is, presumably, what the Greek mystics would have called Rhea,
the Primal Mother or Matter of the future universe.

It wails and groans - that is, its motion is as yet unharmonized. In the
terminology of the Sophia-mythus, it is the inchoate birth from the Sophia Above,
in the Fullness, brought forth by herself alone, without her syzygy or consort. On
account of its imperfection she wails and groans to the Father of All and His
Perfections, that her Perfection may be sent to fashion her child, who is herself in
manifestation, into a world of order, and eventually into a Perfection in its turn' 6 .

The Primal Undifferentiated or Chaotic Sound, from the Darkness of its first
state, gradually manifests itself under the brooding power of the Boundless Light,
into less confused thunderings and murmurings, and finally reaches a stage
symbolized by a “Cry,” a “Voice of Fire,” of Fire, not Light, expressing a need and
want, longing for union with the Articulate Power or Cosmic Word.

The three most primal stages thus seem to be symbolized by Darkness, Moist
Essence, Fire. These were not our differentiated elements, but the Primal Pre-
cosmic Elements.

The same idea, though in different forms, is met with in a system of the Gnosis
preserved for us by the Old Latin translator of Irenasus 77 , and also by Theodoret 78 ,
who ascribes it to the Sethians, whom he says are also called Ophianas or Ophite.
Now Seth was Typhon or Darkness, Dark Light, and this Seth may very well have
been symbolized as the Great Serpent of Darkness, as it is in our text; hence the
name “Those of the Serpent,” perhaps given them by their theological adversaries
(orthodox Jews and Christians). In this system the Primal Elements are given as
Water, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos. The Light was the Child of the supreme
Trinity - the First Man, the Second Man, and the Holy Spirit or First Woman. This
Light the Jewish and Christian over-working of the original tradition called the
Cosmic Christ.

Thus the Fire of Desire, or Cry of the Darkness, was to be satisfied or checked
or quenched by the Light’s fashioning its inchoate substance into the cosmos; and
so in another Vision, preserved in a treatise of the same type, Hermes sees, by
gazing “through the Master,” the cosmos in its finished beauty, when all things in it
are full of Dght and nowhere is there Fire 79 .

THE DESCENT OF THE LOGOS

5. Upon this Cry for Light, into the Heart of the Dark-Moist-Fiery-Nature is
dropped a Holy Word, the Seed of the future Cosmos. This Word is Articulate (its
Limbs are perfect), Seasonable and Ordering. The Cosmic Animal Nature is
impregnated with the Light of the Supernal Reason, which pervades its whole
being.

This pervading immediately effects an ordering of the Chaotic Elements into
Pure Fire, Pure Air, and Pure Water-Earth. Moreover, it is to be gathered from the


76 Cf. F. F. F, 340, 341.

77 Har., I. xxx. (Stieren, i. 363 ff.).

78 Har., Fabb., i. 14. See F. F. F., pp. 188 ff.

79 “The Mind to Hermes,” C. H., xi. (xii.) 6, 7.


- 18 -



sequel that Nature saw the Word and all his Beauty in her Fire and Air, but as yet
only heard him in her Water-Earth.

6. The Shepherd thus explains that Light*" is really Mind, and Mind is God, -
God prior to Nature, but not prior to Darkness. The Unity of Light and Darkness
is a still higher Mystery. Light and Mind is the highest concept the disciple can yet
form of God. The Light-Word, or emanation of Supernal Reason, is Son of God,
Son of Great Mind.


THE REVELATION OF THE PLEROMA

With the words “What then?” Reitzenstein (p. 37) perceives that the sequence of
the narrative is broken by a second vision, and is only resumed with § 9. This he
regards as an interpolation of another form of cosmogenesis, into the one which is
being described.

It seems to me, however, that the breaking of the main narrative may be
regarded as a necessary digression rather than as an interpolation of foreign
material - necessary in order to bring on to the scene the hitherto invisible
Greatnesses, “within” the Veil of Light, which constitute the Economy of the
Pleroma. More had to be seen by the disciple before he was in a position to
understand what he had so far seen. He must now unite with the Light, his
previous seeing being that of its reflection, the logos within him. Not that this
logos and Light (or Mind) are separate. They are in reality one, the Son is one with
the Father in the state that transcends the opposites. The Logos apparently comes
forth, yet it remains ever with the Father, and this coming forth and yet remaining
constitutes its Life - in other words, it is an emanation. Thus Hermes is bidden to
understand the Light as Life, and so make friends with it.

7. Hitherto the Light had been one for him a sameness which his highest vision
could not pierce, the Veil of Light that shut the Beauties, Perfections and
Greatnesses of the Intelligible from the eyes of his mind. To pierce this veil a still
more expanded power of sight had to be given him by the Master. The little word
or light-spark within him is intensified by the Great Word of the Master, this Word
being an Intelligible Utterance of the Mind, an intensification of being.

He now sees and understands the countless Powers within the Light, which
constitute the Intelligible Archetypal Form or Idea of all worlds. Between the
special sensible cosmos of his prior vision and this Immensity was a Mighty Power,
or Great Boundary (Horos) 81 , that encircled the elements of the sensible cosmos
and held its Fire in check.

8. In amazement he asks whence come these apparently disorderly and untamed
elements of the new world in process that have to be subdued and separated from
the Concord of the Perfection of the Powers? And the answer is that Chaos, too,
has its being from God’s Will. Discord and Concord, Chaos and Cosmos, are both
of God. The Primal Elements are, as it were, the Passions of God’s Will desiring
Himself. It is Himself as Mother or Spouse desiring Himself as Father. In other of


80 That is, the condition “seeing.”

81 Not Horns.


- 19 -



the Trismegistic tractates 82 this “Feminine Aspect” of Deity is called Wisdom and
Nature and Generation and Isis. He is Wisdom as desiring Himself, - that Desire
being the Primal Cause as Mother of the whole world-process, which is
consummated by His Fullness uniting with His Desire or Wisdom, and so
perfecting it.

This is the whole burden of the Gnostic Sophia-mythus, which I have given very
good reasons for believing derived its main element from Egypt 8 ’. Curiously
enough, Reitzenstein (pp. 39, 40) quotes the two chapters (liii. and liv.) from
Plutarch on which I base my conclusions, but he does not notice that in this
respect the Christianized Gnosis is distinctly dependent on Egypt.

And so Philo 84 also tells us that the Mother of All is Gnosis (£7uaxf][xr]), the very
same name that Plutarch gives to Isis.

The Mother, when thought of as without the Pleroma, is impregnated by the
Word, which Basilides would have called the All-seed Potency of the Pleroma,
endowed with all Powers, and sent forth as the seed of the sensible cosmos that is
to be. The Mother in her higher Nature contemplates the Eternal Cosmos or Order
of the Pleroma, and in her lower Nature copies its Beauties by means of the
permutations and combinations of her elements and the generations and
transformations of her lives or souls.

This form of cosmogenesis Reitzenstein (p. 46) regards as of a pantheistic
nature, while the general narrative he holds to set forth a world-representation of a
dualistic tendency. It is true, as he himself admits, that this blend of contradictory
conceptions meets us frequently in Gnostic systems of a more or less
contemporary date; nevertheless he lays great stress upon this difference, and so
insists upon an interpolation.

In this he is confirmed (p. 39) by the fact that whereas § 9 speaks of God the
Mind being male-female, we are in the second vision face to face with “eine iveibliche
A-llgottheif who stands next to the Highest God.

I must, however, confess that these contradictions do not make so great an
impression upon my mind as they seem to have done on the critical faculty of
Professor Reitzenstein. There is no system known to me, even of the most
exclusive monotheism, into which dualism does not creep somehow or other at
some stage; it cannot be avoided, for it is in the nature of things.

The dualism of our text is, however, by no means so very marked, for though it
is not distinctly stated in § 4, it leaves it clearly to be inferred that the Darkness
comes from the Light itself, for previously there was nothing but Light; “all tilings”
had become Light to the eye of the seer. It is the mystery of the sad-eyed Serpent
of Darkness wrapping itself round the lower limbs of the Light.

It was, in my opinion, precisely for the sake of removing the thought of dualism
that the seer is shown a still more intimate vision within the Light Veil, where all
ideas of monotheism, dualism, tritheism, polytheism, and pantheism lose their
formal distinctions in a Formless State, or, at any rate, in a State of Being where all


82 For references, see R. 39, n. 1; also 44.

83 Cf. my note on Plut., De Is. et Os., liv. 6, in the Prolegg.

84 De Ebriet., § 30.


- 20 -



are interblended with all. In describing it, the “tongue of flesh” has to use the
familiar language of form, but every word employed has a new significance; for
even the “tongue of angels” cannot describe it, or any of the “tongues” of heaven;
He alone who speaks forth the Words of the One Tongue can express it.

Whence this sublime conception of the Pleroma came, I do not know; it seems
to me impossible to find a geographical origin for such tilings, as, indeed, it seems
vain to seek a geographical origin for dualism and the rest. For the writer or writers
of our tractate these ideas came from the nature of tilings, from the immediate
experience of sight.

The form of expression, of course, may be susceptible of a geographical
treatment, but as yet I am not satisfied that any clear heredity has been made out
for this supposed interpolation. The Feminine Divinity, next the Highest God, is
not set over against that God, but is His own Will. He is in the Pleroma Vision as
much and as little male and female as in the general narrative. He transcends all
opposites and contains all opposites in Himself.

What is clear, however, is that in the combination of both visions we have
before us a simple and early form of the Gnosis which we meet with later in
Christian over- workings, and especially in the very elaborate expositions of the
Basilidian and Valentinian schools, the systems of which can, in their main
elements, be paralleled and compared point by point with our treatise; but this
would be too lengthy a proceeding in our present study, for it would require a
volume to itself in any way adequately to treat of it 85 .

THE SECOND EMANATION

9. We now return to the main narrative. Within the World-Egg, which was
encircled by the Mighty Power (the Gnostic Horos), there had already been
developed three Cosmic Elements (not our mixed elements) - Fire, Air, and Water-
Earth. This had been effected by the descent of the Cosmic Logos into the Primal
Elements of Disorder. As the Logos descended, Fire and Air ascended, and the
Logos remained in Water-Earth, if his was the result of the First Outpouring from
the Potency of the Pleroma, the First Word uttered by Mind.

The Second Outpouring of Mind was of Mind no longer regarded as Light only,
but as Light and Life, Male-Female. This emanation appeared as Enforming Mind -
that is, the Fashioner or Former, Artificer or Demiurge of lives or souls; it was the
ensouling of the Ordered Elements of Nature with lives, whereby these Elements
were drawn together into forms.

The Great Mind, as Light and Life, reflected itself in the “pure formation” of
Nature - that is to say, in Fire and Spirit (Air), Fire for Light and Spirit for Life, to
further enform things.

The Mighty Power or Self-limitation of Mind, the Boundary that no mortal can
pass, marks off the formative area of the whole cosmos. This area, however, was by
no means only the mixed sensible world (cosmos) which we perceive with our


85 The reader, however, may be referred to the chapters on “The Basilidian Gnosis,” “The Valentinian Movement,”
“Some Outlines of iEonology,” and “The Sophia-Mythus,” in F. F. F, pp. 253-357.


-21 -



present physical senses. On the contrary, there are within it various orders (cosmoi)
of the main cosmos. For the Ordering Mind, as the Enformer or Soul-fashioner,
differentiates itself into seven Ruling Forms or Spheres which “enclose” the mixed
sensible cosmos; these spheres, therefore, must be of a psychic nature - that is to
say, of a pure or subde substance; they are Forms of subtle matter endowed with
reason. They constitute the Cosmic Engine of the fashioning of souls, or psychic
natures, and of their perpetual transforming. Their energies and activities are those
of Fate, or the ordered sequence of cause and effect, symbolized by spheres
perpetually entering into themselves.

10. In all the main phases there is to be observed the idea of a downward
tendency followed by an upward. The Darkness descends; it then transmutes itself
and aspires above in a Cry or Yearning for Light. The Word descends; immediately
the Fire and Air ascend. The Formative Mind descends; immediately the Word
ascends from the mixed Water-Earth - and at-ones itself widi its co-essential
emanation from the Father - to a space about the Seven, and thus leaves the still
down-tending elements in the Element Water-Earth deprived of its immediate
presence, after giving physical matter the initial impulse to order. This physical
matter our author calls “pure matter,” meaning thereby matter deprived of the
immediate presence of Reason.

11. Hereupon from the impulse she has received Nature begins her physical
enformation, develops her physical elements and bodies of irrational lives. Water-
Earth divides into water and earth, and also air, for this air is clearly something
different from the Spirit- Air that ascended; the lower air is one of the downward
elements.


THE DESCENT OF MAN

12. When this had been accomplished, there followed a Third Outpouring - the
descent of Man, the consummation of the whole Enformation of things, a still
more transcendent manifestation of Mind, the One Form that contains all forms,
His Very Image coequal with Himself. He finally comes Himself to consummate
and save the cosmos in the Form of Man - that is, to gather it to Himself and take
it back into the Pleroma.

Nevertheless the Word and the Formative Mind and Man are not three different
Persons; they are all co-essential with each other and one with the Father. For the
Word is co-essential with the Demiurgic Mind (§ 10), and the latter is Brother of
Man (§ 13), and Man is co-equal with God (§ 12).

13. And so Man, the Beloved, descends; and in Inis descent he is clothed with all
the powers of his Brother’s creative energy, the creative energy of Life conjoined
with rational Light.

Having learned the lesson of the conformations and of the limitations of the
Spheres, he desires to break right through the Great Boundary itself; but to do this


- 22 -



he must descend still further into matter. Before he can burst through upwards he
must break through downwards.

14. Accordingly he breaks through the Spheres downwards, seeking his consort
Nature below, and shows her his Divine Form radiant with all the energies
bestowed on him by all the Powers above.

And she in her great love wound herself round the image of this Form mirrored
upon her water, and the shadow of it thrown upon her earth; just as the Darkness
wound itself, like a Great Serpent, round the lower parts of the Light, so does
Nature coil herself round the shadow and reflection of Man. Man is above, yet is he
below; man is free, yet is he bound - bound willingly in love for her who is himself.

Reitzenstein (pp. 47-49) is greatly puzzled with all this, and seeks to distinguish
several contradictory elements, presumably supposing that these elements are
woven together into a literary patchwork from distinct traditions. I cannot myself
follow him here with any clearness. Of course the writer or writers of our treatise
did not discover new ideas or invent new terms; they used what was in their minds
and the minds of their circle. It was, however, the weaving of it into a whole, not as
a literary exercise, but as a setting forth in the most understandable terms with
which they were acquainted of the “things seen,” that was their main interest.
Those who had the “sight” would understand and appreciate their labours, those
who had not would never understand, no matter what terms or what language were
used.

When, then, Reitzenstein (p. 47) says that in § 11, in the bringing forth by Nature
of irrational lives, there is a confusion of contradictory conceptions, he fails to see
that Nature is ever the World-Soul, the spouse of Mind; though Darkness she is
spouse of Light. Unaided she brings forth things irrational, a phase of that birth of
Nature by herself that is incomplete.

So also in § 13, Reitzenstein detects contradictory elements, which he ascribes to
two different regions of ideas. He does not, however, perceive that though in one
sentence the “formations” are said to be those of the Father, and in the next those
of the Brother, this is no real confusion, because the Formative Mind is the Father,
enforming Himself in Himself; this self-energizing, when regarded by itself, may be
spoken of as other than the Father, but is not really so.

Nor can I see that there is any real contradiction in the breaking through of the
Spheres as though they were the product of an opposing Power to that of the Son.
The Fate was certainly so regarded by men who were under its sway; but our
treatise is endeavouring precisely to give an insight into the state of tilings beyond
the Fate. The burden of its teaciting is that all these oppositions are really illusory;
man can transcend these limitations and come into the freedom of the Sons of
God. Even the most terrible and fundamental oppositions are not really so, but all
are Self-limitations of God’s Will; and man is Son of God co-equal with Him.

THE FIRST MEN

16. Our treatise then describes the first appearance of man on earth, which it
regards as a great mystery never before revealed, “the mystery kept hid until this


- 23 -



day.” This I take to mean that it had hitherto never been written about, but had
been kept as a great secret.

This secret was the doctrine that the first men, of which there were seven types,
were hermaphrodites, and not only so, but lived in the air; their frames were of fire
and spirit, and not of the earth-water elements. The Celestial Man, or type of
humanity, was gradually differentiating himself from his proper nature of Light and
Life, and taking on bodies of fire and air, was changing into mind (Light-fire) and
soul (Life-spirit).

This presumably lasted for long periods of time, the lower animal forms
gradually evolving to greater complexity as Nature strove to copy the “Form” of
Man, and Man devolving gradually until there was a union, and the human subtle
form could find vehicles among the highest animal shapes.

The first incarnate men appear to have been at first also hermaphrodite; and it
must have been a time when everything was in a far greater state of flux than things
are now.


“INCREASE AND MULTIPLY”

18. This period of pre-sexual or bi-sexual development having come to an end,
the separation of the sexes took place. The commandment is given by the Word:
“Increase ye in increasing and multiply in multitude” (a'U^avsaOs £v ati^fjasi xal
7iM]0uvsa0s £v %kr\Qei).

It is true that this is reminiscent of the oft-repeated formula in the Greek
Targum of Genesis, - cct)£;avsG0s xal 7iM]0uvsa0s, 86 - but it is only slightly
reminiscent, the main injunction being strengthened, and the rest of the logos being
quite different from any tiling found in Genesis. As nothing else in the whole
treatise can be referred to direct Hebrew influence, we must conclude that the
formula was, so to speak, in the air, and has so crept into our treatise 87 .

It has, however, given rise to a diatribe copied on to the margin of one MS.- B.
(Par. 1220) - by a later hand, and incorporated into the text of M. (Vat. 951). It is in
B. ascribed to Psellus 88 , who goes out of his way to stigmatize Hermes as a sorcerer
and a plagiarist throughout of Moses; in brief, the Devil is a thief of the Truth to
lead men astray. In this we learn more about the limitation of the so-called “Prince
of Philosophers” than of aught else.

19. This increasing and multiplying, the perpetual coupling of bodies, and the
birth of new ones, is effected by the Fate, or Harmony of the Formative Spheres,
the Engine of Birth, set under Forethought or Providence (xqovoia). This Pronoia
can be none else than Nature herself as the Wisdom or Knowledge of God - in
other words, His Will.


86 Cf. Gen. i. 22 and 28, viii. 17, ix. 7, and xxxv. 11 (in the singular).

87 See, however, Frag. XX., and R. 126, n. 1. Cf. the same formula in C. H., iii. (iv.) 3 (P. 32, 11), and R. 116, n. 2.

88 And is printed in Boissonade’s (V. C.) edition of Michael Psellus, De Operatione Damonum (Niirnberg, 1838), pp.
153, 154.

89 If, indeed, the Psellus of our scholion is the Younger Psellus (eleventh century); the De Op. Dam., however, is
ascribed by many to the Elder Psellus (ninth century). See, however, the section “The Original MS. of our Corpus”
in ch. i. of the “Prolegomena.”


- 24 -



LOVE


The motive power of all is Love. If this Love manifests itself as Desire for things
of Matter, the Lover stays in Darkness wandering; if it becomes the Will to know
Light, the Lover becomes the Knower of himself, and so eventually at-one with
Good.

20. But why should love of body merit Death - that is to say, make man mortal?
The disciple attempts an explanation from what he has seen. Although his answer
is approved, the meaning is by no means clear.

The physical body, or body in the sense-world, is composed of the Moist
Nature, which in a subsequent phase remains as Water-Earth, and in a still
subsequent phase divides itself into the elements of physical earth, water, and air.
The dissolution of the combination of these elements is effected by Death - that is,
Darkness, the Drainer of the Water, the Typhonean Power. Water must thus here
symbolize the Osirian Power of fructification and holding together. The Moist
Nature then seems to be differentiated from the Darkness by the energizing of
Light in its most primitive brooding. But seeing that the Light is also Life, the
Darkness, which is posited as the ultimate opposite, is Death.


THE WAY OF DEATHLESSNESS

21. The Way of Deathlessness is then considered. The disciple repeats his lesson,
and the Master commends him; the Way Up is the Path of Self-knowledge.

Still the disciple cannot believe that this is for him; he cannot understand that
Mind is in him, or rather is himself, in so much as Mind as Teacher seems to be
without him. The play is on Mind and mind; the one gives the certitude of
Immortality, the other is still bound by the illusion of Death. The disciple has not
this certitude; Mind, then, is not his.

22. The Master then further explains the mystery. Gnosis must be preceded by
moral purification; there must be a turning-away before the Re-turn can be
accomplished. The whole nature must be changed. Yet every effort that the little
man seems to make of his own striving is really the energizing of the Great Man.

23. Those, however, who yield themselves to lower desires, drive the Mind away,
and their appetites are only the more strengthened by the mind.

The text of this paragraph is very corrupt, so that the exact sense of the original
is not recoverable; and this makes it all the more difficult to understand what is
meant by the Avenging Daimon, the Counterpart of the Mind. This difficulty is
increased by § 24, where we are told that the “way of life” (to fjOoc) is at death
surrendered to the Daimon.

If, however, the reader will refer to the section on “The Vision of Er” (in the
Miscellanea of the “Prolegomena”), which in my original MS. followed as a
Digression on this passage, he will be put in contact with the Platonic view of the
Daimon and “way of life”; in our treatise, however, the teaching is of a more
intimate character, and must be taken in conjunction with C. H., x. (xi.) 16 and 21,
where we shall comment on it at further length.


- 25 -



THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL


24. The subject of instruction is now the Way Above (tivoSoc), or ascent of the
soul out of the body at death.

The physical body is left to the work of change and dissolution. The life of
integration and conservation ceases, and the life of disintegration begins.

The form (siSoc) thus vanishes, apparently from the man’s consciousness; that is
to say, presumably, he is no longer clothed in the form of his physical body, but is
apparently in some other vehicle; the particular fixed form, or “way of life,” or
“habit,” he wore on earth being handed over to the Daimon deprived of all energy,
so that apparently it becomes an empty shell.

The next sentence is a great puzzle, and I can only guess at the meaning. The
senses which had previously been united by the mind become separate - that is,
instead of a whole they become parts (jxspr]), they return to the natural animal state
of sensation, and the animal part of man, or his vehicle of passion and desire,
begins in its turn to disintegrate, the mind or reason {logos) being gradually separated
from it, or, rather, its true nature showing forth in the man as he gradually strips off
the irrational tendencies of the energies.

25. Those irrational tendencies have their sources in the Harmony of the Fate-
Sphere of seven subordinate spheres or zones; and in these zones he leaves his
inharmonious propensities, deprived of their energy. For the Harmony is only evil
apparently; it is really the Engine of Justice and Necessity to readjust the foolish
choice of the soul - that is, to purify its irrational desires, or those propensities in it
that are not under the sway of right reason and philosophy. For a better
understanding of the characteristics ascribed to the “seven spheres,” we must “run
off’ into another Digression, which the reader will find relegated to ch. xii. of the
“Prolegomena,” under the title “Concerning the Seven Zones and their
Characteristics.” This, then, having been taken as a direct commentary on § 25, we
continue with the text of our treatise.

THE EIGHTH SPHERE

26. The soul of the initiated strips itself naked of the “garment of shame,” the
selfish energizings, and stands “clothed in its own power.” This refers probably to
the stripping off of the “carapace of selfhood,” the garments woven by its vices,
and the putting on of the “wedding garment” of its virtues.

This state of existence is called the Eighth 90 , a state of comparative “sameness”
as transcending the zones of “difference.” It is the Ogdoad of the Gnostics, the
Jerusalem Above, the plane of the Ego in its own form, the natural state of “those-
that-are.”

In another sense it may perhaps mean that the man, after passing through the
phases of the lower mind, now enters within into the region of the pure mind, the
Higher Ego, and there is at-oned with all the experiences of his past lives that are
worthy of immortality, his virtuous energizings, - the “those-that-are,” that perhaps


90 Cf. Com. on C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 14.


- 26 -



constitute the “crown of mighty lives” sung of by the Pythian Oracle when
celebrating the death of Plotinus 91 .

In this state the man, who has freed himself from the necessity of reincarnation,
hears the Song of the Powers above the Ogdoad - that is to say, in Gnostic terms,
the Hymn of the /Rons of the Pleroma. Such a man would have reached the
consummation of his earthly pilgrimage, and be ready to pass on into die Christ-
state, or, at any rate, the state of super-man. He would be the Victor who had won
the right of investiture with the Robe of Glory, and the dignity of the crowning
with the Kingship of the Heavens. This Final Initiation is most beautifully set forth
in the opening pages of the Pistis Sophia, and especially in the Song of the Powers
(pp. 17 ff.) beginning with the words: “Come unto us, for we are thy fellow-
members. We are all one with thee.”

The consummation of the mystery is that the alter-egos of the Individual Ego, or
the sum total of purified personalities which in that state constitute its membership,
or taxis, of their own selves surrender themselves to a fullness of union or a
transcendency of separation, in which they become the powers or energies of a
New Man, the true Son of Man; they pass into a state where they each blend with
all, and yet lose nothing of themselves, but rather find in this new union the
consummation of all their powers. In this state of Sonship of the Divine they are
no longer limited by bodies, nor even by partial souls or individual minds; but,
becoming Powers, they are not only in God, but one with the Divine Will - nay, in
final consummation, God Himself.

27. Of such a nature was the Shepherd; He, too, was the Christ of God, the Son
of the Father, who could take all forms to carry out the Divine Will. When the
form, - even though that form might for the disciple take on the appearance of the
cosmos itself, as he conceived it, - had served its purpose, the Shepherd once more
“mingled with the Powers.”

THE THREE “BODIES” OF THE BUDDHA

The Shepherd was a Christ for those who prefer the name of Christian
Tradition, a Buddha for those who are more familiar with Eastern terms. And that
this is so may be clearly seen by considering the so-called “three bodies” ( trikayam )
of a or the Buddha, for Buddhahood is a state beyond individuality in the separated
sense in which we understand the term.

In the Chinese Version of Ashvaghosha’s now lost Sanskrit treatise, Mahay ana-
shraddhotpada-shastrcd 2 ’, we read:

“It is characteristic of all the Buddhas that they consider all sentient beings as
their own self, and do not cling to their individual forms. How is this? Because they
know truthfully that all sentient beings as well as their own self come from one and
the same Suchness, and no distinction can be established among them.”


91 Cf. Porphyry, Plotini Vita, xxii., ed. Creuzer (Oxford, 1835); also Theosoph. Ret’. (July 1898), p. 403.

92 Ashvaghosha’s Discourse on the Awakening op Faith in the Mahay ana. Translated for the first time from the Chinese
Version by Teitaro Suzuki (Chicago, 1900). Mahayana means the “Great Vehicle” of Buddhism.


- 27 -



“All Tathagatas are the Dharinakaya 9 , itself, are the liighest truth (paramarthasatya )
itself, and have nothing to do with conditionality ( samvrittisatya ) and compulsory
actions; whereas the seeing, hearing etc., of the sentient being diversify the Activity 94 of
Tathagatas.

“Now this Activity has a twofold aspect.

“The first depends on the phenomena-particularizing consciousness by means of
which the Activity is conceived by the minds of all who fall short of the state of a
Bodhisattva in their various degrees. This aspect is called the Body of
Transformation (Nirmanakaya).

“But as the beings of this class do not know that the Body of Transformation is
merely the shadow [or reflection] of their own evolving consciousness, they
imagine it comes from some external sources, and so they give it a corporeal
limitation. But the Body of Transformation [or what amounts to the same thing,
the Dharmakaya] has nothing to do with Limitation or measurement.”

That is to say, a Buddha can only communicate with such minds by means of a
form, that form being really that of their own most highly evolved consciousness.
There are, however, others who have the consciousness of the “formless” state, but
have not yet reached the Nirvanic Consciousness. These in this system are called
Bodhisattvas.

“The second aspect [of the Dharmakaya] depends on the activity-consciousness
( karmavijnana ), by means of which the Activity is conceived by the minds of the
Bodhisattvas while passing from their first aspiration (chittotpadd) stage up to the
height of Bodhisattva-hood. This is called the Body of Bliss (Sambhogakaya)” (pp.
100 , 101 ).

We have used the term “formless state” in the penultimate paragraph to signify
the states of consciousness in “worlds” called Arupa; but these are only “formless”
for consciousness which has not reached the Bodhisattva level - presumably the
Buddhic plane of Neo-theosophical nomenclature.

For “this Body has infinite forms. The form has infinite attributes. The Attribute
has infinite excellencies. And the accompanying reward of Bodhisattvas - that is,
the region where they are predestined to be born - also has infinite merits and
ornamentations. Manifesting itself everywhere, the Body of Bliss is infinite,
boundless, limitless, unintermittent, directly coming forth from the Mind” (p. 101).

The older Chinese Version says: “It is boundless, cannot be exhausted, is free
from the signs of limitation. Manifesting itself wherever it should manifest itself, it
always exists by itself and is never destroyed” (p. 101, n. 2).

In other words, one who has reached the Nirvanic Consciousness - that is to say,
a Master - can teach or be active on “planes” that are as yet unmanifest to us
ordinary folk; these “planes,” however, even when the disciple is conscious of
them, are conditioned by the self-limitation of his own imperfection. The Vehicles
of this Activity are called Dharmakaya, Sambhogakaya and Nirmanakaya; and the
limitation of their Activity is determined on the side of the disciple by the degree of


93 Lit. Body of the Law.

94 The italics are mine throughout.


- 28 -



his ability to function consciously in those states which are known in Neo-
theosophical nomenclature respectively as those of Atman, Buddhi and Higher
Manas, or, in more general terms, those of the divine, spiritual and human aspects
of the self.

In the first degree of conscious discipleship, then, the Master communicates with
His disciples and teaches them by means of the Nirmanakaya; that is to say, He
quickens the highest form of consciousness or conception of masterhood they
have so far attained to - taking the form of their greatest love, perhaps, as they have
known Him in the flesh, or as He has been told of as existing in the flesh, but not
His own-form, which would transcend their consciousness.

The next stage is when the disciple learns to transcend his own “egoity,” in the
ordinary sense of the word; this does not mean to say that his true individuality is
destroyed, but instead of being tied down to one ego-vehicle, he has gained the
power of manifesting himself wherever and however he will, at any moment of
time; in brief, the power of self-generation on the plane of egoity, in that he has
reached a higher state which is free from the limitations of a single line of egoity.

He now begins to realise in the very nature of his being that the “Self is in all and
all in the Self.” Such a disciple, or Bodhisattva, is taught by the Master in this state
of being, and the Kaya which he supplies for the energizing of his beloved Father is
perfecdy unintelligible to us, and can only be described as an expanded
consciousness of utmost sympathy and compassion, which not only strives to
blend with the Life of all beings, but also with the One Being in the world for him,
the Beloved. Such a sensing of the Master’s Presence is called the Sambhogakaya of
the Master, His Body of Bliss.

There is a still higher Perfection, the Dharmakaya, or Own-Nature of
Masterhood. But how should the dim mind of one who is Without imagine the
condition of One who is not only Within, but who combines both the Without and
the Within in the Transcendent Unity of the Perfect Fullness?

THE PREACHING OF THE GNOSIS

27. With the exposition of the Consummation of die Teaching and the return to
earth of the consciousness of the Seer, our treatise breaks off into a graphic
instruction of how the Gnosis is to be utilized. The Wisdom is no man’s property;
he who receives it holds it in trust for the benefit of the world-folk.

I am, however, inclined to believe that §§ 27 to 29 are a later interpolation, and
that the treatise originally ran straight on after the conclusion of the Shepherd’s
Instruction with the words: “But I recorded in my heart the Shepherd’s
benefaction” (§ 30).

Until the end of § 26 we have moved in the atmosphere of an inner intimate
personal instruction, set forth in a form evidently intended only for the few; indeed,
as we find in other treatises emphatic injunctions to keep the teaching secret, we
cannot but conclude that the oldest and most authoritative document of the school
was guarded with the same secrecy. The general impression created by the
instruction is not only that it itself is the consummation and reward of a strict and


- 29 -



stem probation, and not a sermon to be preached on the house-tops, but also that
those who followed that way were not propagandists, but rather members of a
select philosophic community.

With § 27, however, all is changed; we are introduced to the picture of a man
burning with enthusiasm to communicate, if not the direct teaching itself, at any
rate the knowledge of its existence and saving power to all without distinction. In a
few graphic sentences the history of the fortunes of this propagandist endeavour is
sketched. An appeal is made of the most uncompromising nature; it is a clarion call
to repentance, and we seem to be moving in an atmosphere that is Hebrew rather
than Greek, prophetical rather than philosophical.

It would seem almost that this propagandist phase had been forced upon the
community rather than that it was natural to it; something seems to have occurred
which obliged it to enter the arena of general life and proclaim its existence
publicly. What this compulsion was we have no means of determining with any
exactitude, for the historical indications are very obscure. If we were to conjecture
that it was the vigorous preaching of nascent Christianity which wrought this
change, we should, I think, be taking part for whole, for prior to Christianity there
was the most energetic propaganda made by the Jews, the intensity of which may
be estimated by the phrase “Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte,” and
the nature of which may be most clearly seen in the propaganda of the Sibylline
writers, with whose diction the appeals to the “earth-born folk” in our text may be
aptly compared, while the prayer at sunset may be paralleled with the prayers of the
Essenes and Therapeuts.

On the other hand, the tradition of the Gnosis and Saving Faith preached by our
Pcemandrists is distinctly not Hebrew; it is a philosophizing of other materials -
materials which, as we have seen, were also partly used by Jewish and Christian
mystics, and adapted to their own special traditions.

We thus see that at the time when Christianity came to birth there were many
rival traditions contending for general recognition, all of them offering instruction
in the Gnosis and hopes of Salvation, and I myself believe that all of them were
partial manifestations of the impartial Quickening of the Spiritual Life which was at
that time more abundantly poured forth than ever before or after in the Western
world.

With § 30, if my conjecture of an interpolation is correct, the original treatise is
continued, and we are told the nature of the awakening of the spiritual
consciousness which has come to the new-born disciple.

Henceforth all things are new for him, they all have new meanings. He has
become a man, instead of a “procession of fate”; he has reached the “Plain of
Truth.” In Christian terms the Christ has been born in his heart consciously.

A HYMN OF PRAISE AND PRAYER FOR THE GNOSIS

31. The treatise is concluded with a most noble hymn, in which the further
growth and effort of the man in spirit is set forth. Henceforth his effort will be to


- 30 -



become like unto the Father Himself, to pass from Sonship into the Perfection of
perfection, Identity or At-one-ment with the Father.

The sentence, “That I may give the Light to those in ignorance of the Race, my
Brethren and Thy Sons,” seems to me to be either an interpolation, showing the
same tendency as that of the propagandist section, or an indication that the whole
hymn was added at the same time as the propagandist paragraphs, for the treatise
proper seems to end naturally and consistently in the Hellenistic form of the
tradition with the words, “I reached the Plain of Truth .” 95

THE NAME “POIMANDRES”

Many have already remarked that the name “Poimandres” is formed irregularly
in Greek, and this has led to an interesting speculation by Granger, who writes:

‘While, however, the name Poimandres does not answer to any Greek original, it
is a close transliteration of a Coptic phrase. In the dialect of Upper Egypt p e nfrftre
means ‘the witness. ’ That the Coptic article fp e ] should he treated as part of the name
itself is not unusual; compare the name Pi of 6 . 2 Such a title corresponds very closely in
style with the titles of other works of this same period - for example, the True Word of
Celsus, or the Perfect Word, which is an alternative title of the Asclepius. The term
Poemandres, therefore, on this supposition, contains an allusion to the widely spread
legend of Hermes as witness 97 , a legend which is verified for us from several sources.

But the writer has adapted the details to his purpose. Hermes is not himself the
witness, hut the herald of the witness. ” 98

Granger then propounds the very strange theory, contradicted by all the
phenomena and opposed to every authority, that the Coptic Gnostic works of the
Askew and Bruce Codices were originally composed in Coptic with the adoption of
Greek technical terms, whereas they are manifestly translations from the Greek.
He, however, continues:

‘There seems no adequate reason why such works may not have been composed
in Coptic. The Egyptian Gnostic writings of the third century exhibit the same
qualities of style as the Coptic biographies and apocalypses of the fourth and
following centuries. And so I am prepared to believe that the Poemandres may have
been first composed in Coptic. Or shall we say that the work was current from the
first in both languages?” 99

We should say that the last guess is most highly improbable, and only denotes
the indecision of the writer. The original “Poemandres” may very well have been
composed not in Coptic but in Demotic; but the reasons given by Granger, as
based on the phenomena of the Gnostic Coptic writings, are not to be seriously
considered. Nevertheless, the name “Poimandres” may be a Greek transliteration of
an Egyptian name, though we hardly think that “The Witness” will suit the theme.


95 It is to be noticed that the Hymn is a Song of Holiness. “Holy art thou” is nine times repeated - most probably
intentionally. This was noticed long ago by Casaubon. See R. 58, n. 3.

96 Palladius, Hist. Hans., 89.

97 G. has just referred to the story of Hermes being witness for Horns when indicted on a charge of bastardy by
Typhon, as related in Plutarch.

98 Granger (F.), “The Poemandres of Hermes Trismegistus,”/. Th. Stud., vol. v., no. 191, p. 400.

99 Ibid., p. 401.


-31 -


In any case “Man-Shepherd” was certainly the idea conveyed to the Non-Egyptian
by the name, however philologically unsound its form may be in Greek.


THE GOOD SHEPHERD

It has been no part of our task to attempt to trace the Hermes-idea along the line
of pure Greek descent, for this would have led us too far from our immediate
subject. There is, however, one element of that tradition which is of great interest,
and to which we may draw the attention of the reader in passing. The beautiful idea
of the Christ as the “Good Shepherd” is familiar to every Christian child. Why the
Christ is the Shepherd of all men is shown us by this first of our marvelous
treatises. In it we have the universal doctrine apart from any historical dogma, the
eternal truth of an ever-recurring fact, and not the exaggeration of one instance of
it.

The representation of Christ as the Good Shepherd was one of the earliest
efforts of Christian art; but the prototype was far earlier than Christianity - in fact,
it was exceedingly archaic. Statues of Hermes Kriophoros, or Hermes with a ram or
lamb standing beside him, or in his arms, or on his shoulder, were one of the most
favourite subjects for the chisel in Greece. We have specimens dating to the archaic
period of Greek art 1011 . Hermes in these archaic statues has a pointed cap, and not
the winged head-dress and sandals of later art. This type in all probability goes back
to Chaldaean symbolic art, to the bearers of the twelve “signs of the zodiac,” the
“sacred animals.” These were, in one human correspondence, the twelve septs or
classes of priests. Here we see that the Greek tradition itself was not pure Aryan
even in its so-called archaic period. Chaldaea had given of her wisdom to post-
diluvian Greece, even as she had perchance been in relation with Greece before the
“flood.” Here, then, we have another element in the Hermes-idea. In fact, nowhere
do we find a pure line of tradition; in every religion there are blendings and have
been blendings. There was unconscious syncretism (and conscious also) long
before the days of Alexandria, for unconscious syncretism is as old as race-
blendings. Even as all men are kin, so are popular cults related; and even as the
religion of nobler souls is of one paternity, so are the theosophies of all religions
from one source.

One of the greatest secrets of the innermost initiated circles was the grand fact
that all the great religions had their roots in one mother soil. And it was the
spreading of the consciousness of this stupendous truth which subsequently - after
the initial period of scepticism of the Alexandrian schools - gave rise to the many
conscious attempts to synthesise the various phases of religion, and make
“symphonies” of apparendy contradictory philosophical tenets. Modern research,
which is essentially critical and analytical, and rarely synthetical, classifies all these
attempts under the term “syncretism,” a word which it invariably uses in a
depreciatory sense, as characterising the blending of absolutely incompatible
elements in the most uncritical fashion. But when the pendulum swings once more


100 See Reseller’s Lexikon, art. “Hermes.” “Hermes in der Kunst” - “Periode des Archaismus.”


- 32 -



towards the side of synthesis, as it must do in the coming years - for we are but
repeating to-day in greater detail what happened in the early centuries - then
scholarship will once more recognise the unity of religion under the diversity of
creeds and return to the old doctrine of die mysteries.

In connection with the “Good Shepherd” glyph, it will be useful to quote from
Granger’s instructive exposition on the subject 101 , where he writes:

“Since the identification of Jesus with Hermes took place in circles which formed
part of the Christian community 102 , we shall not be surprised to find that one of the
leading types of Christian art, the Good Shepherd, was immediately adopted from a
current representation of the Greek Hermes 103 . As we see from Hippolytus (Refut., v.

7), the Gnostics were especially interested in Hermes as Hermes Hogius, a type which
was increasingly frequent in later Greek art. And this epithet was connected by them
with the conception of Jesus as the Hogos. Now another type of Hermes, the
Kriophoros, seemed to bring together Jesus as the Hogos and Jesus as the Good
Shepherd. These representations of Jesus begin in the second century; and so they
correspond in order of time with the appearance of the Gospel according to the
Hgyptians, and of those Gnostic compositions which largely depend upon it 104 .

“Another fact leads us to think that the figure of the Good Shepherd had its roots
in a previous tradition. ‘It is probable that there were no statues before the age of
Constantine, except the Good Shepherd. ’ 105 We must therefore add Hermes to the
list of pagan types which were taken over for its own purpose by the rising Christian
art.

“Moreover, we are enabled to advance one step further the long-standing controversy
as to the portraits of Jesus. Since the figure of the Good Shepherd is borrowed from
Greek sculpture, it cannot be used as evidence for the earliest conceptions about the
appearance of Jesus. And so the arguments of Farrar and others fall to the ground, in
so far as they take the presence of this type to show that there was no genuine tradition
of Christ’s appearance 106 .

‘We are now in a position to throw a little further light upon the famous
inscription of Abercius. The inscription speaks of a Shepherd - Who feedeth on the
plains His flock of sheep, and hath great eyes that gage forth every way. For He did
teach me [ how to understand and] scriptures worthy to believe. ’ 107

‘The Shepherd, whose great eyes look in every direction, is no other than Hermes
treated as a symbol of Christ. And so some of the arguments which may be directed


101 Op. tit., pp. 408 ff.

102 G. seems here to be referring to the Naassene Document, but without any suspicion apparently of its composite
character.

103 See Sittl, Klassische Kunstarchaologie, 111, 809, 819.

104 G. here again refers apparently to the Naassene Documents, which, however, did not depend on the Gospel
according to the Egyptians, as we have shown; nor have we any sure ground for dating this widespread mystic gospel of
Egypt as being of the second century rather than of the first. G. (p. 411) suggests that the scene of the Gospel of the
Egyptians was on top of the Mount of Olives after the resurrection, which may very well be the case, and that the title
of C. H., xiii. (xiv.), “The Secret Sermon on the Mountain,” has reference to this gospel, which is by no means
probable, for our sermon keeps entirely within its own tradition in its setting.

105 Lowrie, Christian Art and Archeology, p. 290.

106 Taken in connection with the above quotation from Lowrie, we should say that it disposes of the whole
contention. And for further corroboration of this view we would refer the reader to the Acts of John.

107 G. gives the Greek text only, omitting the first line, which runs: “The disciple of the Pure Shepherd.” Cf. R. 115.


- 33 -



against the Christian character of this inscription, and to which Harnack 10S attaches
an exaggerated weight, are turned aside. ”

With all of this may be compared what we have already written in the
Prolegomena on “The Popular Symbolic Representation of the Shepherd” in the
chapter on “‘Hernias’ and ‘Hermes.’”

Compare also the Hymn to Attis in the Naassene tradition, where he is invoked
“as Pan, as Bacchus, as Shepherd of bright stars.” This is the macrocosmic side of
the microcosmic mystery.

We should also not forget the interesting grouping on a Christian lamp 109 and
gem 110 , which goes back very probably to the third century 111 . It represents the
Christ as the Good Shepherd, after the Hermes type, with a lamb on his shoulder.
Above his head are the Seven “Planets,” the Lords of the Fate, and in addition the
Sun and Moon on either side, as is frequently the case in Mithraic representations.
Round his feet seven lambs 112 crowd, symbolical of the “seven peoples,” one under
each “planet.” Moreover, on the right is Noah’s dove and ark, and Jonah being
swallowed by the whale, while on the left is Jonah again, vomited on to the land
and peacefully resting beneadi the shade of the miraculous gourd-tree.

This seems to me to be a symbol of the mysteries, a glyph of rebirth. The lambs
are the purified lower nature of the man, the purest essence of which is exalted to
the head of the Great Man. This purified “little man” is swallowed by the Cosmic
Fish, the Great Mother, the Womb of the Almighty, and the man is born again to
rest under his own tree in the Paradise of the Further Shore.

It is also of interest to note that die Hermetic colonies already planted in
Mesopotamia, in the earliest Islamic times of which the Arabian writers tell us,
called their head the “Shepherd.” 11 ’

From all of which we conclude that the Good Shepherd was one of the leading
ideas of Hellenistic theology.


108 Cf. Class. Ret’., ix. 297.

109 Garucci, Storia della Arte Christiana, vi. tav. 474; Perret, Catacombes de Rome, tab. 17, no. 5.

110 Perret, ibid., tab. 16, no. 80.

111 R. 113.

112 The gem has only six.

113 Cf. Chwolsohn (D.), Die Ssabier tend der Ssabismus, ii. 628. Cf. R. 166 ff.


- 34 -


CORPUS HERMETICUM II.

THE GENERAL SERMON

THE title only is preserved in our Corpus, the text having
disappeared with the loss of a quire or quires before the
parent copy came into the hands of Psellus.



- 35 -



+- - »

CORPUS HERMETICUM II. (III.)

TO ASCLEPIUS
(Text: P. 19-30; Pat. 18b-20.)

1 . Hermes. 1

LL that is moved, Asclepius, is it not moved in
something and by something?

Asclepius. Assuredly.

Her. And must not that in which it’s moved be greater
than the moved?

Asc. It must.

Her. Mover, again, has greater power than moved?

Asc. It has, of course.

Her. The nature, furthermore, of that in which it’s moved
must be quite other from the nature of the moved?

Asc. It must completely.

2. Her. Is not, again, this cosmos vast, [so vast] that than it
there exists no body greater?

Asc. Assuredly.

Her. And massive too, for it is crammed with multitudes
of other mighty frames, nay rather all the other bodies
that there are?

Asc. It is.

Her. And yet the cosmos is a body?

Asc. It is a body.

Her. And one that’s moved?

3. Asc. Assuredly.

Her. Of what size, then, must be the space in which it’s
moved; and of what kind [must be] the nature [of that
space]? Must it not be far vaster [than the cosmos], in



1 From here till the end of § 4 is quoted by Stobteus, Phjs., xviii. 2; G. pp. 147-149; W. 157, 6 ff.


- 36 -


order that it may be able to find room for its continued
course, so that the moved may not be cramped for want
of room and lose its motion?

Asc. Something, Thrice-greatest one, it needs must be,
immensely vast.

4. Her. And of what nature? Must it not be, Asclepius, of
just the contrary? And is not contrary to body bodiless?

Asc. Agreed.

Her. Space, then, is bodiless. But bodiless must either be
some godlike thing or God [Himself]. And by “some
godlike thing” I mean no more the generable but the
ingenerable 2 .

5. If, then, space be some godlike thing, it is substantial 3 ;
but if ’tis God [Himself], it transcends substance. But it is
to be thought of otherwise [than God], and in this way.

God is first “thinkable” 4 5 for us, not for Himself, for that
the thing that’s thought doth fall beneath the thinker’s
sense. God then can not be “thinkable” unto Himself, in
that He’s thought of by Himself as being nothing else
than what He thinks. But He is “something else” for us,
and so He’s thought of by us.

6. If space is, therefore, to be thought, [it should] not,
[then, be thought as] God, but space. If God is also to be
thought, [He should] not [be conceived] as space, but
energy that can contain [all space] .

Further 3 , all that is moved is moved not in the moved but
in the stable. And that which moves [another] is of course
stationary, for ’tis impossible that it should move with it.

Asc. How is it, then, that things down here, Thrice-
greatest one, are moved with those that are [already]


2 That is, beyond genesis, the universe of becoming, or the sensible universe.

3 ohaiwSs?.

4 Or intelligible.

5 From here till the end of § 9 (exclusive of the last sentence) is quoted by Stobasus, Phjs., xix. 2; G. pp. 154-157; W.
163, 14 ff.


- 37 -



moved? For thou hast said 6 the errant spheres were
moved by the inerrant one.

Her. This is not, O Asclepius, a moving with , but one
against, they are not moved with one another, but one
against the other. It is this contrariety which turneth the
resistance of their motion into rest. For that resistance is
the rest of motion.

7. Hence, too, the errant spheres, being moved contrarily
to the inerrant one, are moved by one another by mutual
contrariety, [and also] by the stable one through
contrariety itself. And this can otherwise not be.

The Bears 7 up there, which neither set nor rise, think’st
thou they rest or move?

Asc. They move, Thrice-greatest one.

Her. And what their motion, my Asclepius?

Asc. Motion that turns for ever round the same.

Her. But revolution - motion round same - is fixed by rest.
For “round-the-same” doth stop “beyond- same.”
“Beyond-same” then, being stopped, if it be steadied in
“round-same” - the contrary stands firm, being rendered
ever stable by its contrariety.

8. Of this I’ll give thee here on earth an instance, which
the eye can see. Regard the animals down here, - a man,
for instance, swimming! The water moves, yet the
resistance of his hands and feet give him stability, so that
he is not borne along with it, nor sunk thereby.

Asc. Thou hast, Thrice-greatest one, adduced a most clear
instance.

Her. All motion, then, is caused in station and by station.

The motion, therefore, of the cosmos (and of every other
hylic animal 8 ) will not be caused by things exterior to the
cosmos, but by things interior [outward] to the exterior -


6 Sc. in some previous sermon.

7 Sc Ursa Major and Ursa Minor.

8 That is, living material organism.


- 38 -



such [things] as soul, or spirit, or some such other thing
incorporal.

Tis not its body that doth move the living thing in it; nay,
not even the whole [body of the universe a lesser] body
e’en though there be no life in it 9 .

9. Asc. What meanest thou by this, Thrice-greatest one? Is
it not bodies, then, that move the stock and stone and all
the other things inanimate?

Her. By no means, O Asclepius. The something-in-the-
body, the that-which-moves the thing inanimate, this
surely’s not a body, for that it moves the two of them -
both body of the lifter and the lifted? So that a thing that’s
lifeless will not move a lifeless thing. That which doth
move [another thing] is animate, in that it is the mover.

Thou seest, then, how heavy laden is the soul, for it alone
doth lift two bodies. That things, moreover, moved are
moved in something as well as moved by something is
clear.

10. Asc. Yea 10 , O Thrice-greatest one, things moved must
needs be moved in something void 11 .

Her. Thou sayest well, O [my] Asclepius! 12 For naught of
things that are is void. Alone the “is-not” is void [and]
stranger to subsistence. For that which is subsistent can
never change to void 1 ’.

Asc. Are there, then, O Thrice-greatest one, no such
things as an empty cask, for instance, and an empty jar, a
cup and vat, and other things like unto them?

Her. Alack, Asclepius, for thy far- wandering from the
truth! Think’st thou that things most full and most replete
are void?


9 That is, in the lesser body.

10 For a criticism of Parthey’s text of the following three paragraphs, see R., pp. 209, 300. Parthey had uncritically
conflated the text of our Corpus and the readings of Stobteus, in ignorance that he had before him two different
recensions of the same text. I follow Reitzenstein.

11 Cf. P. S. A., xxxiii. 1.

12 From here to the end of § 12 is quoted by Stobteus, Phys., xviii. 3; G. pp. 149-150; W. 158, 13 ff.

13 The variant in Stobteus reads: “No single thing of things that are is void by reason of the [very nature of]
subsistence. The ‘is’ could not be ‘is’ were it not full of subsistence [itself].” The rest of the variants need not be
noted in translation.


- 39 -



11. Asc. How meanest thou, Thrice-greatest one?

Her. Is not air body?

Asc. It is.

Her. And doth this body not pervade all things, and so,
pervading, fill them? And “body”; doth body not consist
from blending of the “four”? Full, then, of air are all thou
callest void; and if of air, then of the “four”. 14

Further, of this the converse follows, that all thou callest
full are void - of air; for that they have their space filled
out with other bodies, and, therefore, are not able to
receive the air therein. These, then, which thou dost say
are void, they should be hollow named, not void; for they
not only are, but they are full of air and spirit.

12. Asc. Thy argument {logos), Thrice-greatest one, is not to
be gainsaid; air is a body. Further, it is this body which
doth pervade all things, and so, pervading, fill them. What
are we, then, to call that space in which the all doth move?

Her. The Bodiless, Asclepius.

Asc. What, then, is Bodiless?

Her. ’Tis Mind and Reason (Logos), whole out of whole, all
self- embracing, free from all body, from all error free,
unsensible to body and untouchable, self stayed in self,
containing all, preserving those that are, whose rays, to use
a likeness, are Good, Truth, Light beyond light, the
Archetype of soul.

Asc. What, then, is God?

13. Her. Not any one of these is He; for He it is that
causeth them to be, both all and each and every thing of all
that are. Nor hath He left a thing beside that is -not; but
they are all from things -that- are and not from things-that-
are-not. For that the things-that-are-not have naturally no
power of being anything, but rather have the nature of the


14 The physical elements - earth, air, water and fire - were supposed to be severally combinations of the Primal
Elements, Earth, Air, Water and Fire, one Element dominating in each. Thus our air would consist of a proportion
of all four Great Elements, but would have Air predominant in it; and so for the rest.


- 40 -



inability-to-be. And, conversely, the things-that-are have
not the nature of some time not-being.

14. Asc. What say’st thou ever, then, God is?

Her. God, therefore, is not Mind, but Cause that the Mind
is; God is not Spirit, but Cause that Spirit is; God is not
Light, but Cause that the Light is. Hence should one
honour God with these two names [the Good and Father]
- names which pertain to Him alone and no one else.

For no one of the other so-called gods, no one of men, or
daimones, can be in any measure Good, but God alone;
and He is Good alone and nothing else. The rest of things
are separable all from the Good’s nature; for [all the rest]
are soul and body, which have no space that can contain 1 '
the Good.

15. For that as mighty is the Greatness of the Good as is
the Being of all things that are - both bodies and things
bodiless, things sensible and intelligible things. Call not
thou, therefore, aught else Good, for thou would’st
impious be; nor anything at all at any time call God but
Good alone, for so thou would’st again be impious.

16. Though, then, the Good is spoken of by all, it is not
understood by all, what thing it is. Not only, then, is God
not understood by all, but both unto the gods and some
of men they out of ignorance do give the name of Good,
though they can never either be or become Good. For
they are very different from God, while Good can never
be distinguished from Him, for that God is the same as
Good.

The rest of the immortal ones are natheless honoured
with the name of God, and spoken of as gods; but God is
Good not out of courtesy but out of nature. For that
God’s nature and the Good is one; one is the kind of
both, from which all other kinds [proceed].


15 In the original there is a word-play - grata (separable) and ywgfjoai (contain) - which is impossible to reproduce
in translation.


-41 -



The Good is He who gives all things and naught
receives 16 . God, then, doth give all things and receive
naught. God, then, is Good, and Good is God.

17. The other name of God is Father, again because He is
the that-which-maketh all. The part of father is to make.

Wherefore child-making is a very great and a most pious
thing in life for them who think aright, and to leave life on
earth without a child a very great misfortune and impiety;
and he who hath no child is punished by the daimons
after death.

And this the punishment: that that man’s soul who hath
no child, shall be condemned unto a body with neither
man’s nor woman’s nature, a thing accurst beneath the
sun.

Wherefore, Asclepius, let not your sympathies be with the
man who hath no child, but rather pity his mishap,
knowing what punishment abides for him.

Let all that has been said, then, be to thee, Asclepius, an
introduction to the gnosis of the nature of all things.


si



T* *


COMMENTARY


“AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GNOSIS OF THE NATURE OF ALL THINGS”

This treatise has no precise title, for, as we have already seen in treating of the
make-up of the Corpus, the traditional title, “Of Hermes to Tat, the General
Sermon,” found in all the MSS., cannot apply to our tractate, which is addressed to
Asclepius, and from which Stobasus quotes under the general title, “Of Hermes,
from the [Sermons] to Asclepius.”

The supposition, however, that Sermon (II.) has dropped out from the parent
copy of our Corpus, owing to the loss of one or more quires or quaternions,
explains those phenomena so admirably, that it has only to be brought forward, as
it has been by Reitzenstein, to carry conviction.

It is a curious fact, however, that Stobseus starts his quotations from this treatise
precisely with the same words with which our text begins; nevertheless these words


16 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 3: Tis “He alone who taketh naught.”


- 42 -



plunge us so immediately into a secondary subject, that Reitzenstein thinks there
may have been a more general introduction which Johannes may very well have
omitted.

That, however, the lost pages of our Corpus should have contained such an
introduction, broken at precisely the very same point to a word, would seem to be a
coincidence the reverse of probable; nevertheless the treatise itself purports to be a
very formal one, for we learn from the concluding words (§ 17) that it was intended
to be “An Introduction to the Gnosis (Tipoyvooaicc) of the Nature of All Tilings.”

We are, therefore, driven to conclude that, in spite of a most improbable
coincidence, the beginning may have been lost, and that we have therefore to regret
the loss not only of the whole of the “General Sermon” to Tat, but also of the
introduction to the “Introduction to the Gnosis” addressed to Asclepius, and
therewith, in all probability, some precious indications of how “Tat” and
“Asclepius” are to be precisely defined.

Parthey’s conflated title (p. 19) from the MSS., and Stobasus, “Of Hermes the
Thrice-greatest, the General Sermon to Asclepius,” must therefore be definitely
abandoned, and, in lieu of the lost general title, we must be content with the simple
heading, “To Asclepius.”


SPACE IS A PLENUM

The subject is that of the Fullness of Being or the Plenum of things. Space is a
Plenum, - the fundamental concept of modern scientific speculation.

Asclepius, however, must guard himself against the confusion of Space with
God; for God is not Space, but Cause thereof, - the True Transcendency of “that
which can contain all things” (§ 6).

“In Him we move.” “All that is moved is moved in what is stable,” or “in Him
who stands” (8v Scream); where it is to be noticed that the term, “He who stands,”
is found in Philo, and is made much of in Gnostic tradition, especially in the so-
called Simonian Gnosis, for in The Great Announcement , from which Hippolytus has
preserved some passages, the Logos is called “He who stands” or “He who has
stood, stands and will stand”. 1 This is the aspect of the Reason of things that holds
and compacts all together, the Stock or Pillar of Immobility, the opposite aspect
being that of the Separator or Divider; the two together forming the Cross of
Manifestation, the resolution of the Sphere of Sameness.

The World-Soul is in perpetual motion; this perpetual motion is ordered and
reduced to a cosmos and harmony of motion by the introduction into it, by means
of the Reason, of the root-forms of motion (mentioned in the Timaus and
elsewhere); - up, down; right, left; front, back; in, out; round, - and no-motion.

All bodies are essentially inert; it is the soul that moves them, either immediately
or mediately (§ 9).

What the precise meaning of § 10 may be I cannot say; the tradition of the
original text was variable, showing that the copyists had difficulty with it. As,
however, the doctrine throughout is that of a Plenum (as, indeed, it is elsewhere in


17 R., p. 305, also makes a brief reference to this.


- 43 -



the Trismegistic writings), I can only suppose that the instructor of “Asclepius” was
endeavouring to clinch his point by arguing that the only Void was the “is-not” or
non-being; now as nonbeing cannot possibly “exist,” there can be no such thing as
Void.


THE SPOUSE OF DEITY

That, then, in which “the All doth move,” in which all things “live and move and
have their being,” is the Bodiless; in other words, the Mind or Reason of God, the
Logos, - who, as Philo tells us, is the Place of God, - that is, Infinite Space itself,
the Container of all tilings, the very Spouse of Deity. Spouse or Son, it matters not;
that in which all moves and lives and breathes is Wisdom, Good and Truth, the
/Ron of icons, Light of light, Life of life, the Archetype of Soul itself (§ 12).

GOD IS CAUSE THAT SPIRIT IS

“God, then, is not Spirit”, 18 much less “a spirit”, 19 “but Cause that Spirit is”; for
God is “Good alone.” Therefore: “Call not thou aught else Good.”

And now let us turn to F. C. Conybeare’s important criticism of Matt. xix. 17 =
Mk. x. 18 = Lk. xviii. 19, in the first number of The Hibbert journal ' 2(l where he
brings forward very strong evidence that the original reading was: “Call thou me
not Good; One only is Good, God the Father,” - a reading known to Mar cion, the
Clementine Homilies, Athanasius, Didymus, Tatian, and Origen (the two last
inferentially).

If we compare this with our text, “Call not thou, therefore, aught else Good, for
thou would’st impious be; nor any thing at all at any time call Good but God
alone,” and “He is Good alone and nothing else,” - we cannot fail to be struck with
the precise similarity of the phrasing and blend of ideas.

If, further, we take this in connection with the still more striking contrast, “God
is not Spirit,” with the Johannine “God is Spirit,” we might at first sight almost
persuade ourselves that our treatise had these Christian declarations immediately in
mind. But the general phenomena of similarity of diction and idea of the
Trismegistic literature with those of the New Testament documents is so much
more satisfactorily explained by the fact that both literatures use mainly the
common Hellenistic theological phrases of the time, that we need not distress
ourselves with any suggestions either of plagiarism or of direct controversy.

Doubtless the declaration, “God is Spirit,” was a commonplace among the
religio-philosophical circles of the time, and Hermes is here simply refining on a
common idea. The reading, “Call thou not me Good,” which appears to have been
preserved mainly in Gnostic tradition, may also as easily have come from a similar
general idea that the One and Only One was Good alone.


18 Cf. Joh. iv. 24: “Ttveupa 6 ©so?.”

19 As the A.V. has it erroneously.

20 See his article, “Three Early Doctrinal Modifications of the Text of the Gospels,” in The Hibbert journal (Oct.
1902), pp. 98-113. J. R. Wilkinson’s few remarks (H. ]., Ap. 1903, pp. 575, 576) on Conybeare’s criticism of this
synoptic passage do not seem to me to be of any weight.


- 44 -



It is, moreover, of special interest to notice that the second clause of the
Marcionite reading runs: “There is one [only] Good, God the Father,” while in our
treatise the two names of God are given as Good and Fadier; and so we read (§
16): “God, then, is Good, and Good is God”; and immediately after (§ 17): “The
other name of God is Father.” 21

Striking however, as are those coincidences, we are nevertheless wholly
unpersuaded that there was any immediate literary contact between those two sets
of Scripture. All that can be said is that their literary similarities are due to a
common theological language and their many points of contact in ideas to a
generally common atmosphere of theological conceptions.

HE WHO IS WITHOUT A WIFE IS HALF A MAN

Again, the doctrine of the duty to beget children (§ 1 7) seems at first sight to be
an interpolation by a Jewish editor, the Jews holding that “he who is without a wife
is half a man.” We must, however, remember that the Egyptian priests were
married, and that the rule with them, as with the Pythagoreans, was that a man
should first of all discharge his duty 7 to society and live the “practical,” “political” or
“social” life, before retiring into the life of contemplation. He must first beget
children, not only that the race might be continued, but also that bodies might be
supplied by parents devoted to the ideal of the religious or philosophic life, so that
advanced souls might find birth in favourable conditions, and so the Order be
continued.

This also is the ancient rule laid down by the Manu of the Aryan Hindus in the
Mdnava Dharma Shastra. The duties of the householder station of life (Grihastha
ashrama) must first be performed, before the parents can retire to the
contemplative life (Vanaprastha ashrama). In special cases, however, exceptions
could be made.

It may then be that Asclepius stands for those pupils who were still living the
married life.

The scribe of the thirteenth century, Codex B. (Parisinus, 1220), has laconically
written on the margin of this paragraph the single word “nonsense” (cpkuapicc); he
was presumably a monk.


21 Cf. the expression, “God, Father and the Good,” C. H., x. (xi.) 1.


-45 -



• — / - » *■ ♦


CORPUS HERMETICUM III. (IV.)

THE SACRED SERMON

OF HERMES

(Text: P. 31-33; Pat. 8b-9.)


gl HE Glory of all things is God, Godhead and Godly
Nature. Source of the things that are is God, who
is both Mind and Nature, - yea Matter, the Wisdom that
reveals all things. Source [too] is Godhead, - yea Nature,
Energy, Necessity, and End, and Making-new- again 1 .


Darkness that knew no bounds was in Abyss, and Water
[too] and subde Breath intelligent; these were by Power of
God in Chaos.


Then Holy Light arose; and there collected ’neath Dry
Space 2 3 from out Moist Essence Elements; and all the
Gods do separate things out from fecund Nature.

2. All things being undefined and yet unwrought, the light
things were assigned unto the height, the heavy ones had
their foundations laid down underneath the moist part of
Dry Space’, the universal things being bounded off by
Fire and hanged in Breath to keep them up.

And 4 Heaven was seen in seven circles; its Gods were
visible in forms of stars with all their signs; while Nature
had her members made articulate together with the Gods
in her. And [Heaven’s] periphery revolved in cyclic course,
borne on by Breath of God.

3. And every God by his own proper power brought forth
what was appointed him. Thus there arose four-footed
beasts, and creeping things, and those that in the water
dwell, and things with wings, and everything that beareth


1 Cf. P. S. A., xxvi 2.

2 Lit. “Sand”; this presumably refers to the Light, and would thus mean “within the area or sphere of Light” - that is
to say, manifestation. The “Moist Essence” is apparently the Water of Chaos, or primal substance.

3 ixp’ by appro; presumably the “Water” of space. The heavy things are apparently primasval or cosmic “Earth.”

4 The emended text from here to the end of the first sentence of § 3 is given by R. 47, n. 1.


- 46 -



seed, and grass, and shoot of every flower, all having in
themselves seed of again-becoming 3 .

And they selected out 5 6 the births 7 of men for gnosis of the
works of God and attestation of the energy of Nature; the
multitude of men for lordship over all beneath the
Heaven and gnosis of its blessings, that they might
increase in increasing and multiply in multitude, and every
soul infleshed by revolution of the Cyclic Gods, for
observation of the marvels of the Heaven and Heaven’s
Gods’ revolution, and of the works of God and energy of
Nature, for tokens of its blessings, for gnosis of the power
of God, that they might know the fates that follow good
and evil [deeds] and learn the cunning work of all good
arts.

4. [Thus] there begins their living and their growing wise,
according to the fate appointed by the revolution of the
Cyclic Gods, and their deceasing for this end.

And there shall be memorials mighty of their handiworks
upon the earth, leaving dim trace behind when cycles are
renewed.

For every birth of flesh ensouled, and of the fruit of seed,
and every handiwork, though it decay, shall of necessity
renew itself, both by the renovation of the Gods and by
the turning-round of Nature’s rhythmic wheel.

For that whereas the Godhead is Nature’s ever-making-
new- again the cosmic mixture, Nature herself is also co-
established in that Godhead.


Jl

si



/IN*

4 '* *


5 Or “reincarnation” (nciXiyyevea'uxQ).

6 eaneQ[xoXdyo\)v.

7 %a<; ysveasi?.


- 47 -



COMMENTARY


TEXT AND TITLE

The text seems to be very corrupt, and at one time I thought it incomplete; but it
may very well end with the reference to the mighty deeds of the men of old.

The title “Sacred Sermon” would lead us to expect something of a special nature,
something that would constitute a basis of doctrine. For we hear of the “Sacred
Sermon” of Orpheus, and of the “Sacred Sermon” of Pythagoras, and are told that
they formed the most sacred deposits of these two mystic schools respectively, and
were regarded with special reverence; they thus seem to have been looked upon in
some fashion as containing the groundwork of these systems.

And this is precisely what we find with our treatise; it is to a large extent a
summary of the general ideas of the “Shepherd” cosmogony adapted to the needs
of a simpler formularization.

When, however, Reitzenstein (p. 193) refers to this treatise cursorily as the
preaching of some prophet or other which has been transferred to Hermes by the
Redactor of our Corpus, he suggests that we are dealing with a doctrine foreign to
the cosmogonical ideas of the “Shepherd.” It is, indeed, true that if we compare the
data of the two treatises together, detail by detail, we shall find strong
contradictions; but the general “feel” of both is the same, the general atmosphere is
identical.


THE TRINITY

Prefixed to the cosmogenesis is a formal theological prooem, the precise meaning
of which escapes me because of its almost mnemonic nature; it is, indeed quite in
sutra style. There appears, however, to be a distinct trinitarian^ idea lurking in the
first sentence, the trinity consisting of God (6 ©sdq) and Godhead (to GbTov) and
Nature (f] qumc)- The Glory or Power of all things is this Divine Trinity. The
Source (or Beginning), the End and the Ever-renewing of all tilings are owing to
this Triad. All three seem to be almost interchangeable terms. The Godhead is the
Mind of God, Godly Nature is the Wisdom of God. Again, at the end of the
sermon (§ 4) we are told that the Godhead (or that which is Divine) is “Nature’s
ever-making-new-again the cosmic mixture.” Godhead in operation is Nature,
while at the same time Nature is co-established in Godhead, and both are one in
God, the Source of all.

The cosmogenesis begins with the grandiose image: “Darkness that knew no
bounds was in Abyss.”

We have already, in commenting on “Darkness” in the “Poemandres” treatise,
referred, in explanation, to a Gnostic tradition in which the Primal Elements appear
as Water, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos, and have given some reason for ascribing
the form of this tradition to Egypt - that is, Archaic Egypt, a parallel tradition to
the Sumerian, both derived from a still more Archaic source.


8 Not, of course, in a technical Christian sense.


- 48 -



FROM THE SYSTEM OF THE NICOLAITANS


If, now, we turn to Epiphanius (remembering that he picked up what he knew or
thought he knew about the Gnostics in Egypt), we shall find that he has preserved
from another Gnostic system an even more striking parallel with our text.

The Bishop of Salamis is denouncing the Nicolai'tans 9 , who for him were the
earliest Christian Gnostics, there being very numerous and various sects of them,
all deriving from a certain Nicolaus, whom Epiphanius would have us believe to
have been one of the first seven deacons of the Church.

If, in reality, however, the Nicolai'tans = the Balaamites of early Talmudic
Rabbinism 10 , then the original Nicolai'tans were the earliest Christians, for
“Balaamites” was the Rabbinical by-name of the followers of Balaam (Bileam) =
Jeschu, and Balaam = Nicolaos, in Hebrew and Greek respectively.

Curiously enough, moreover, in the paragraph (§ 4) before the one from which
we are going to quote, Epiphanius ascribes the use of the mystic words, “Kaulakau
Kaulakau,” to the Nicolai'tans, words which we have, with high probability, shown
in the chapter “Myth of Man in the Mysteries” (§ 16 J., end) to have been used by a
Jewish Gnostic of the time of Philo, writing in an Egyptian environment, and
dealing with the Man-tradition, which is one of the main elements of the
“Poemandres” doctrine. All of which carries us back to the dawn of Christianity.

Speaking, then, of these Nicolai'tans, Epiphanius writes (xxv. 5):

“ Others of them, again, plaster together empty names, saying: There was Darkness
and Abyss fodog) and Water; and Spirit in the midst of them made separation of
them. ” 11

Here we have precisely the same elements as in our text for the foundation of a
cosmogonical representation. What precise relationship these various traditions
may have had to one another we cannot say with any certainty; but what we can say
is that the writer or writers of our treatise are dealing with a material common to
themselves, to pre-Christian Jewish Gnosticism and the earliest forms of the
Christian Gnosis.


THE “BOOKS OF THE CHALDEANS”

The sentence (in § 2), “All tilings being undefined and yet unwrought
(axaxaaxsudccrToov)” is also to be noticed, and, together with the opening sentence
of the cosmogony, compared with the LXX. version of Gen. i. 2:

‘And the earth was invisible and as yet unwrought (axaraoxeuacnog), and
Darkness was upon the Abyss, and the Spirit of God was borne upon the Water. ”

Are we, then, to suppose that our Trismegistic writer based himself directly upon
this famous “oracle” of Jewish Scripture?

The Jewish Gnostics would doubtless do so in their commentaries; but the
phenomena of the Christianized Jewish Gnostic systems persuade us rather that
these Gnostic Jews did not derive their ideas directly from the text of their national


9 A-dv. Har., xxv. 1-5.

10 See D.J. L., p. 188, where this identification is worked out with some probability.

11 Ed. Dindorf (Leipzig, 1859), ii. 35, 36.


- 49 -



Scripture, but from what we may call parallel traditions of an esoteric nature. We
shall see later on, when treating of Zosimus, that there were translations of the
Chaldasan sacred books in the Alexandrian Library, and we cannot but believe that
the general ideas of Chaldean cosmogony were familiar to all the learned of the
time. For Chaldasa and Egypt were regarded as the two most wisdom-loving
nations of antiquity, the two most sacred lands. What wonder, then, that Chaldaean
and Egyptian ideas should be blended together, and turned out into a “scientific”
whole, by die spirit of Greek “philosophizing,” in our treatises?

I would therefore conclude that both here, and in the repetition of the formula,
“increase in increasing and multiply in multitude” (§ 3), from the “Poemandres”
treatise (§ 18), the similarities are not due to direct plagiarism, but to the fact that
such logoi were “in the air.” I would also suggest that the somewhat peculiar term
axocmaxeoamoq was not original with the Greek Targum of Genesis, first made at
Alexandria some 250 years B.C., but that it was rather taken from the theological
and philosophical language of the day and used by the Hebrew translators; that, in
brief, in the LXX. translation already we have to take into account the strong
influence of the technology of Hellenistic theology.

With regard to the whole of our treatise, I would suggest that we have the heads
of topics which were to be subsequently explained and commented upon, rather
than a didactic treatise setting forth a clear teaching. Like the proem, the
cosmogenesis itself is straidy condensed, so condensed that the indications are too
vague for us to form any clear mental picture of die process that is suggested. We
have nothing but a series of headings that may have meant somediing very definite
to the writer - may, in fact, have summed up for him a whole body of doctrine -
but which for us, in our ignorance of detail, can have but little precise meaning.

To add to our difficulties, the text, as we have already said, appears to be very
faulty. It is very probable that owing to its original brevity, copyists and readers
would be tempted to gloss it in the interests of what would appear to them greater
clearness; these glosses creeping into the text later on would, since the gloss-makers
did not know the original scheme, blurr rather than elucidate the mother-text - and
hence our tears.

The most striking doctrine in the exposition is that of Renewal or Making-new-
again (avavsojmc). All animal and vegetable forms contain in themselves “the seed
of again-becoming” (to oneo^a xfjc naXiyyeveaiaq). I do not think that this is
intended simply to mean that the individual is continued in the species; for we read
that “every birth of flesh ensouled . . . shall of necessity renew itself
(avavsooOf]asTou).” The doctrine that is preached is, therefore, that of palingenesis or
“re-incarnation”; the renewal on the karmic wheel of birth-and-death (quasojc
xuxkou SvapiOjiiou dqopqpoc).


THE “FLOOD”

The last point to which we need call the reader’s attention is the sentence: “And
there shall be memorials mighty of their handiworks upon the earth, leaving dim
trace behind when cycles are renewed.”


- 50 -



The thought of the writer is evidently turned back towards the past, to a time
when a mighty race, devoted to growth in wisdom, lived on earth and left great
monuments of their wisdom in the work of their hands, dim traces of which were
to be seen “in the renewal of the times.” This seems to me to be a clear reference
to the general belief of the time (commonly, though erroneously, called Stoic) that
there were alternate periods of destruction, by fire and water, and of renewal. In
Egypt the common belief, as we have pointed out elsewhere, was that the last
destruction had been by water and flood. Before this Flood our author believed
there had been a mighty race of Egyptians, the race of the First Hermes, and that
some dim traces of the mighty works of this bygone wisdom-loving civilization
were still to be seen.

I am, myself, strongly inclined to believe in this tradition; and I have sometimes
speculated as to the possibility of there being buried beneath one or more of the
pyramids the remains of some prehistoric buildings (perhaps also of pyramid-
shape) that have survived the “Flood.”


-51 -



+- - » '

CORPUS HERMETICUM IV. (V.)

THE CUP OR MONAD

OF HERMES TO TAT

(Text: P. 34-40; Pat. 26b-27.)

1. Hermes.


ITH Reason (Logos ) , not with hands, did the
World-maker 1 make the universal World 2 3 ; so that
thou thus shouldst think of Him as everywhere
and ever-being, the Author of all things, and One and
Only, who by His Will 1 all beings hath created.



This Body of Him is a thing no man can touch, or see, or
measure, a Body inextensible, like to no other frame. ’Tis
neither Fire nor Water, Air nor Breath 4 ; yet all of them
come from it 5 . Now being Good He willed to consecrate
this [Body] to Himself alone, and set its Earth in order
and adorn it 6 .


2. So down [to Earth] He sent the Cosmos 7 of this Frame
Divine 8 , - man, a life that cannot die, and yet a life that
dies. And o’er [all other] lives and over Cosmos [too], did
man excel by reason of the Reason (Logos) and the Mind.
For contemplator of God’s works did man become; he
marvelled and did strive to know their Author.


3. Reason (Logos) indeed, O Tat, among all men hath He
distributed, but Mind not yet; not that He grudgeth any,
for grudging cometh not from Him 9 , but hath its place
below, within the souls of men who have no Mind.


1 6 8y]|Aiougy6<;.

2 xov Ttavxa xoapov.

3 0eX?]aig.

4 Perhaps meaning fEther.

5 Cf. C. H, xiii. (xiv.) 6.

6 xoopfjoai, the whole is a play on the word xoapo? ( kosnios ) which means “order,” “ornament,” and “world.” I have
tried to retain it in English by using both meanings. The three preceding sentences, from “This Body” onwards, are
quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., I. ii. 30; G. i. 26; W. 38, 10 ff., under the heading “Of Hermes.”

7 That is, “Order.”

8 That is, the Body of God; the One Element.

9 Cf. C. H, v. (vi.) 2.


- 52 -


Tat. Why then did God, O father, not on all bestow a
share of Mind?

Her. He willed, my son, to have it set up in the midst for
souls, just as it were a prize.

4. Tat. And where hath He had it set up?

Her. 10 He tilled a mighty Cup 11 with it, and sent it down,
joining a Herald [to it], to whom He gave command to
make this proclamation to the hearts of men: Baptize 12
thyself with this Cup’s baptism, what heart can do so,
thou that hast faith thou canst ascend to Him that hath
sent down the Cup, thou that dost know for what thou
didst come into being!

As many then as understood the Herald’s tidings and
doused themselves in Mind, became partakers in the
Gnosis; and when they had “received the Mind” they were
made “perfect men.”

But they who do not understand the tidings, these, since
they possess the aid of Reason [only] and not Mind, are
ignorant wherefor they have come into being and
whereby.

5. The senses of such men are like irrational creatures’;
and as their [whole] make-up is in their feelings and their
impulses 1 ’, they fail in all appreciation of 14 those things
which really are worth contemplation. These centre all
their thought upon the pleasures of the body and its
appetites, in the belief that for its sake man hath come
into being.

But they who have received some portion of God’s gift 1 ’,
these. Tat, if we judge by their deeds, have from Death’s
bonds won their release; for they embrace in their own
Mind all things, things on the earth, things in the heaven,
and things above the heaven, - if there be aught 16 . And


10 A critical text of most of these two paragraphs is given, R. 214, n. 1.

11 xgaifipa, lit. a crater or mixing-bowl.

12 The meaning of this term is not to “sprinkle” with water, but to “plunge the whole body” into water.

13 Kcd ev 6uft(p Kcd ev ogYU Tl 1 v K Q & a tv exovts?.

14 Lit. “they do not wonder at.”

15 Sc. the Mind.

16 Cf. C. H. xi. (xii.) 19: “And contemplate what is beyond - if there be aught beyond the Cosmos.”


- 53 -



having raised themselves so far they sight the Good; and
having sighted It, they look upon their sojourn here as a
mischance; and in disdain of all, both things in body and
the bodiless, they speed their way unto that One and Only
One.

6. This is, O Tat, the Gnosis of the Mind, Vision of things
Divine; God-knowledge is it, for the Cup is God’s.

Tat. Father, I, too, would be baptized.

Her. Unless thou first shalt hate thy Body, son, thou canst
not love thy Self. But if thou lov’st thy Self thou shalt
have Mind, and having Mind thou shalt share in the
Gnosis.

Tat. Father, what dost thou mean?

Her. It is not possible, my son, to give thyself to both, - I
mean to things that perish and to things divine. For seeing
that existing things are twain. Body and Bodiless, in which
the perishing and the divine are understood, the man who
hath the will to choose is left the choice of one or other;
for it can never be the twain should meet. And in those
souls to whom the choice is left, the waning of the one
causes the other’s growth to show itself.

7. Now the choosing of the Better not only proves a lot
most fair for him who makes the choice, seeing it makes
the man a God, but also shows his piety to God. Whereas
the [choosing] of the Worse, although it doth destroy the
“man,” it only doth disturb God’s harmony to this extent,
that as processions pass by in the middle of the way,
without being able to do anything but take the road from
others, so do such men move in procession through the
world led by their bodies’ pleasures 17 .

8. This being so, O Tat, what comes from God hath been
and will be ours; but that which is dependent on
ourselves, let this press onward and have no delay; for ’tis
not God, ’tis we who are the cause of evil things,
preferring them to good.


17 Critical text of simile is also given by R. 102, n. 2. Quoted by Zosimus in § “On the Anthropos Doctrine.”


- 54 -



Thou see’st, son, how many are the bodies through which
we have to pass, how many are the choirs of daimones,
how vast the system of the star-courses 18 [through which
our Path doth lie], to hasten to the One and Only God.

For to the Good there is no other shore 19 ; It hath no
bounds; It is without an end; and for Itself It is without
beginning, too, though unto us it seemeth to have one - the
Gnosis.

9. Therefore to It Gnosis is no beginning; rather is it [that
Gnosis doth afford] to us the first beginning of Its being
known.

Let us lay hold, therefore, of the beginning, and quickly
speed through all [we have to pass].

’T'is very hard, to leave the things we have grown used to,
which meet our gaze on every side, and turn ourselves
back to the Old Old [Path] .

Appearances delight us, whereas things which appear not
make their believing hard.

Now evils are the more apparent things, whereas the
Good can never show Itself unto the eyes, for It hath
neither form nor figure.

Therefore the Good is like Itself alone, and unlike all
things else; for ’tis impossible that That which hath no
body should make Itself apparent to a body.

10. The “Like’s” superiority to the “Unlike “and the
“Unlike’s” 2 " inferiority unto the “Like” consists in this:

The Oneness 21 being Source 22 and Root of all, is in all
things as Root and Source. Without [this] Source is
naught; whereas the Source [Itself] is from naught but
Itself, since It is Source of all the rest. It is Itself Its
Source, since It may have no other Source.


18 Kcd auvs^siav nod Spopou? aaxsgwv, the Septenary Spheres or “Cyclic Gods”; for the aus^eia (lit. continuity) is
evidently the same as the appovia, Harmony, Concord, System.

19 a8ia(3atov, - lit. not to be crossed, not to be forded.

20 Reading with B., ton avopoiou.

21 pova?, - the Monad, that is the Good.

22 Or, Beginning.


- 55 -



The Oneness then being Source, containeth every
number, but is contained by none; engendereth every
number, but is engendered by no other one.

11. Now all that is engendered is imperfect, it is divisible,
to increase subject and to decrease; but with the Perfect
[One] none of these things doth hold. Now that which is
increasable increases from the Oneness, but succumbs
through its own feebleness when it no longer can contain
the One.

And now, O Tat, God’s Image 2 ’ hath been sketched for
thee, as far as it can be 24 ; and if thou wilt attentively dwell
on it and observe it with thy heart’s eyes, believe me, son,
thou’lt find the Path that leads above; nay, that Image
shall become thy Guide 2 ’ itself, because the Sight [Divine]
hath this peculiar [charm], it holdeth fast and draweth
unto it those who succeed in opening their eyes, just as,
they say, the magnet [draweth] iron 26 .



COMMENTARY


THE TITLE

This beautiful little treatise, in which the great principles of the Gnosis are set
forth so clearly and lucidly by the philosopher-mystic who penned it so many
centuries ago, bears a double, or rather a triple, title: “Of Hermes to Tat: The Cup
or Monad [or Oneness].” 2 The double title, however, is but a choice of names, for
The Cup is The Oneness, - The One Element 28 , the “Body” of God, which is the
Cause of all bodies and yet itself is bodiless; in other words, the Monad is the
Intelligible Cosmos itself, God’s Image, elsewhere called His Alone-begotten Son.

That this idea of a Cup or Mixing-bowl (Crater), in the symbolic sense of an all-
containing receptacle, in which all the elements were blended together, and in the
metaphysical sense of a transcendent Unity, the source of all things measurable and


23 The Universal Cosmos or Monad.

24 The above sentences, beginning with “The Oneness,” second paragraph of § 10, are quoted by Stobseus, Phjs., I. x.
15; G. pp. 116, 117; W. 127, 6 ff .; under the heading, “Of Hermes.”

25 Cf. C. H., vii. (viii.) 2; ix. (x.) 10; x. (xi.) 21; R. 23, n. 5.

26 This simile is also used in the Naassene Document, and in Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris, where I have noticed it.

27 See R. 193. Unfortunately, though he twice quotes from our treatise, Stoba:us adds nothing to our knowledge of
the title, since he prefixes his extracts with the simple heading, “Of Hermes.”

28 Which is to be equated, I believe, “meta-physically” with the Quintessence or Hither.


- 56 -



numberable, was one of the main doctrines of the Trismegistic tradition, is plain
from the Pcemandrist Zosimus, who refers especially to this Cup as the symbol of
Spiritual Baptism - that is, the plunging of the whole nature into the Great Ocean
of Spirit or Mind, so that the man becomes irradiate with Life and illumined with
Light.

For a consideration of this Crater or Cup symbolism I must refer the reader to
the chapter so entitled in the “Prolegomena”; it there being shown that in all
probability it was transmitted along the Orphic line of tradition, though doubtless
the Egyptian had some similar ideas.

Our treatise should be read in the closest connection with C. H., xi. (xii.), “The
Mind to Hermes,” which is its “esoteric” counterpart. What is here set forth for
Tat by Hermes is there imparted to Hermes by the Mind; what is here set forth for
the probationer or “hearer” is there set forth for the advanced disciple or “seer”;
or, to use Mystery terms, what is here told to the Mystes is there revealed to the
Epopt. Thus, then, the Tat-instruction begins.

THE BAPTISM OF THE MIND

1 . All things are made by Reason, the Formative Energy of the Mind. The Ideal
Cosmos, or World-Order, is the Divine Body.

2. Earth is the sensible Cosmos; on Earth man, the image of the Image, or
Reason, of God rules. The purpose of man is thus to become the contemplator
(0saxf]q) of the works of God; it is by the “wonder” aroused in him by the sight of
these marvels that he will rise eventually into a knowledge of God Himself. This
“wonder” is, then, the beginning of the True Philosophy or God-knowledge (fj top
0s ov xaxavbr\oiq) .

3. All men have in them “reason” (the ray of the Reason or Logos), but as yet
few have “Mind.” This “mind” is the true Son of Mind, it is the real man, the
perfect man, self-conscious of his Self. This true Self-consciousness is the prize set
up for souls to win: the crown of humanity, the Christ-state (or, at any rate, the
super-man or true man state).

The Christ-Baptism is the plunging of the whole nature into the Mind-filled Cup,
- the Pleroma of the Divine Being whose Body and Mind are one, - for is not the
Cup the Body of God, “consecrated unto Himself alone” (§ 1), the Universal Body
of all tilings?


THE HOLY GRAIL

It would be fascinating to speculate on what connection this Cup of Initiation
may have had with the Mystic Eucharist, and the Original of the later Grail-
tradition, which a great master of music and song has in our days made to live again
in undying melody, and so restored it to its more universal significance. How
Wagner sensed the marvel of the wondrous Vision with a poet’s intuition may be
seen from his own words:

“To the enraptured ga^e of one longing for celestial love, the clear blue atmosphere
of heaven seems at first to condense itself into a wonderful, scarcely perceptible, but


- 57 -



daringly beautiful Vision. Then with gradually increasing precision the wonder-
working angelic host is delineated in infinitely delicate outlines, as, conveying the holy
vessel in its midst, it insensibly descends from the Maying heights of heaven. As the
vision grows more and more distinct, ... the heart throbs with the pain of ecstasy ; . . .
and when at last the Grail shows itself in the marvel of undraped reality, ... the
beholder’s brain reels - he falls down in a state of adoring annihilation. . . . With
chaste rejoicing the angelic host then returns to the heavenly height, fading away into
the nothingness whence it first emanated. ”

But for the Seers of the Gnosis there was a more intimate realization, for they
were bidden to cast aside all hesitation and fearlessly to plunge themselves into the
very Cup Itself, the Ocean of Divine Love and Wisdom.

This was the Proclamation or Preaching (x^puygcc), or Good Tidings, of the
Herald of God to men, to those who had the Living Faith they could “ascend to
Him who had sent down the Cup,” God’s Greatest Gift.

By such a Baptism as this, not by a symbolic sprinkling with water, is it that man
is to be redeemed. This is the consummation of man’s earthly pilgrimage, the
realization of the “Gnosis of the Mind, Vision of tilings Divine; God-knowledge is
it; for the Cup is God’s.”


THE “HATING OF THE BODY”

6. In § 6 we have given us a discipline of the mystic way, the “hating of the
body,” which is by no means to be taken literally.

A misunderstanding of this discipline led many of the mystics of the time (and,
for a matter of that, has led most of the mystics of all time) to the false belief that
the body (or matter generally) was the source of evil. Hence we have all the
mortifications and chastisements of the flesh which the monkish spirit introduced
into Christendom, and which persist in some quarters even to our own day. Against
this the Common Sense of Christianity as a general religion, basing itself on the
general utterances of the Christ, has ever protested.

Our mystic philosopher, in urging his disciples to hate the body, apparently does
so because they are in the first stages of awakening, and so far have not got the
“Mind” active in them.

In taking the first steps there must be developed a consciousness of the strong
antithesis of good and evil, of love and hate, in order that the will of the disciple
may be strengthened towards the good and weakened towards the bad.

When, however, his will is balanced between the two, when he as easily wills good
as evil, then, and not till then, is he prepared to learn the further great lesson: that
real wisdom consists in balance, in the Middle Way; that nothing is evil in itself -
the Body is as honourable in its own sphere, as absolutely necessary and
indispensable, as is the Mind in its.

He learns the great secret that to have one’s thoughts always in heaven is as
erroneous as to have them always on earth; that there is a higher mode of existence,
when the things of heaven and earth are within each other, and not apart.


- 58 -



As the Introduction to The Book of the Great Logos according to the Mystery
has it:

“Jesus saith: Blessed is the man who knoweth this Word (Logos), and hath
brought down the Leaven and home up the Earth and raised it Heavenwards. ” 29

Heaven and Earth must kiss each odier for this consummation, this truly Sacred
Marriage.

And yet in the third Synoptic (xvi. 25, 26) we read:

“Jesus saith: If any man come unto Me, and hate not his father, and mother, and
wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own soul also, he cannot be
My disciple. ”

Here we have precisely the same word “hate” ([xtasT) as in our text. That,
however, this “dark saying” was interpreted in a mystical sense by Gnostic
tradition, as by no means referring to physical parents but to the past causes of our
imperfections 30 , 1 have already pointed out on several occasions’ 1 ; we may therefore
conclude that in a gnostic teaching, such as is our treatise, the terms “hate” and
“body” are not to be literally interpreted.

8. And that this is so may be seen from the declaration in § 8: “For ’tis not God,
’tis we who are the cause of evil tilings, preferring them to good”; - where the cause
of evil is not assigned to the body but to man’s own choice. And finally, to clinch
our contention, we would refer the reader to the Sermon to Asclepius, C. H., vi.
(vii.) 6:

“Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius - things which we
cannot flee or hate. ”


THE GNOSIS AND ITS BLESSINGS

9. In § 9 we have to notice the phrase: “Therefore to It Gnosis is no beginning;
rather is it that Gnosis doth afford to us the first beginning of Its being known ”; and
compare it with the logos quoted by the Jewish commentator in the Naassene
Document (§ 25): “The Beginning of Perfection is Gnosis of Man, but Gnosis of
God is Perfect Perfection.”

The claim for the Gnosis is therefore a modest one. The Gnosis is not an end in
itself; it is but the beginning of the True Knowledge of God. They who receive the
Baptism of the Mind are made “perfect men,” not Perfect; not until they have
received this touch of the Christ-consciousness have they reached true manhood.

Those who have received this Baptism know why they have come into being, -
the purpose of life. They become consciously immortal; they know they are
deathless, they do not only believe it; their immortality is no longer a belief it is a fact
of knowledge.

They have won their freedom from Death and Fate, and know the real
constitution of the cosmos up to the Threshold of the Good, the Plain of Truth -


29 Codex Brucianus; see F. F. F., p. 520.

30 Cf. the Pistis Sophia, 341-343, where the text is given as: “He who shall not leave father and mother to follow after
Me is not worthy of Me,” and explained by the Saviour to mean: “Ye shall leave your Parents the Rulers, that ye may
be Children of the First Everlasting Mystery.”

31 See, for instance, Extracts from the “Vdhan” (London, 1904), pp. 374-376.


- 59 -



that is to say, presumably in Buddhist terms, as far as the Nirvanic state of
consciousness. Not yet, however, have they entered Nirvana that is to say, become
one with the Logos. They have seen the Sight or Vision of Nirvana, but not
entered into the Promised Land, that “Blessed Space,” which, as Basilides tells us,
“can neither be conceived of nor characterized by any word.” 12

The Vision is an earnest of what they may be. They have become Gods, it is
true, already, or, in other words, enjoy the same freedom and consciousness as the
Gods or Angels, but there is a still more transcendent state, when they will be at-
oned with Deity Himself.


THE ANCIENT PATH

Hard as it is to leave the “tilings we have grown used to,” the things habitual, it
must be done if we are to enter into the Way of the Gnosis. But no new Padi is
this, no going forth into new lands (though it may have all the appearance of being
so). The entrance on the Path of the Gnosis is a Going-Home, it is a Return - a
Turning-Back (a True Repentance). “We must turn ourselves back unto the Old
Old Way” (id Tiakaid xai dpyaia).

And for the followers of the Doctrine of Thrice-greatest Hermes, this Old Old
Path could have meant nothing but the Archaic Wisdom of Ancient Egypt. The
Wisdom of Egypt was thus the Gnosis.


32 See F. F. F, p. 261.


- 60 -



+- - ♦

CORPUS HERMETICUM V. (VI.)

THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST

OF HERMES TO HIS SON TAT

(Text: P. 41-48; Pat. 12b-13b.)

1 .


WILL recount for thee this sermon (logos) too, O
Tat, that thou may’st cease to be without the
mysteries of the God beyond all name 1 . And
mark thou well how That which to the many seems
unmanifest, will grow most manifest for thee.



Now were It manifest, It would not be. For all that is
made manifest is subject to becoming, for it hath been made
manifest. But the Unmanifest for ever is, for It doth not
desire to be made manifest. It ever is, and maketh
manifest all other things.


Being Himself unmanifest, as ever being and ever making-
manifest, Himself is not made manifest. God is not made
Himself; by thinking-manifest 2 3 , He thinketh all things
manifest.


Now “thinking-manifest” deals with things made alone,
for thinking-manifest is nothing else than making.

2. He, then, alone who is not made, ’tis clear, is both
beyond all power of thinking-manifest, and is unmanifest.

And as He thinketh all things manifest, He manifests
through all things and in all, and most of all in whatsoever
things He wills to manifest.

Do thou, then, Tat, my son, pray first unto our Lord and
Father, the One-and-Only One, from whom the One’
doth come, to show His mercy unto thee, in order that
thou mayest have the power to catch a thought of this so
mighty God, one single beam of Him to shine into thy


1 Cf. § 8 end, and § 9 beginning.

2 £v tpavxocaia - that is to say, by thinking into manifestation.

3 Presumably the Manifested God; the One-and-Only One being the Unmanifested, the God beyond all name.


-61 -



thinking. For thought alone “sees” the Unmanifest, in that
it is itself unmanifest.

If, then, thou hast the power, He will, Tat, manifest to thy
mind’s eyes. The Lord begrudgeth not Himself to
anything, but manifests Himself through the whole world.

Thou hast the power of taking thought, of seeing it and
grasping it in thy own “hands,” and gazing face to face
upon God’s Image 4 . But if what is within thee even is
unmanifest to thee, how, then, shall He Himself who is
within thy self be manifest for thee by means of [outer]
eyes?

3. But if thou wouldst “see” Him, bethink thee of the sun,
bethink thee of moon’s course, bethink thee of the order
of the stars. Who is the One who watcheth o’er that
order? For every order hath its boundaries marked out by
place and number.

The sun’s the greatest god of gods in heaven; to whom all
of the heavenly gods give place as unto king and master.
And he, this so-great one, he greater than the earth and
sea, endures to have above him circling smaller stars than
him. Out of respect to Whom, or out of fear of Whom,
my son, [doth he do this]?

Nor like nor equal is the course each of these stars
describes in heaven. Who [then] is He who marketh out
the manner of their course and its extent?

4. The Bear up there that turneth round itself, and carries
round the whole cosmos with it - Who is the owner of
this instrument? Who He who hath set round the sea its
bounds? Who He who hath set on its seat the earth?

For, Tat, there is someone who is the Maker and the Lord
of all these things. It could not be that number, place and
measure could be kept without someone to make them.
No order whatsoever could be made by that which lacketh
place and lacketh measure; nay, even this ' is not without a
lord, my son. For if the orderless lacks something, in that


4 The Intelligible Cosmos.

5 Namely, that which lacketh place, number, and order; that is, disorder, chaos.


- 62 -



it is not lord of order’s path, it also is beneath a lord - the
one who hath not yet ordained it order.

5. Would it were possible for thee to get thee wings, and
soar into the air, and, poised midway ’tween earth and
heaven, behold the earth’s solidity, the sea’s fluidity (the
flowings of its streams), the spaciousness of air, fire’s
swiftness, [and] the coursing of the stars, the swiftness of
heaven’s circuit round them [all] !

Most blessed sight were it, my son, to see all these
beneath one sway - the motionless in motion, and the
unmanifest made manifest; whereby is made this order of
the cosmos and the cosmos which we see of order.

6. If thou would’st see Him too through things that suffer
death 6 , both on the earth and in the deep 7 , think of a
man’s being fashioned in the womb, my son, and strictly
scrutinize the art of Him who fashions him, and learn
who fashioneth this fair and godly image of the Man 8 .

Who [then] is He who traceth out the circles of the eyes;
who He who boreth out the nostrils and the ears; who He
who openeth [the portal of] the mouth; who He who doth
stretch out and tie the nerves; who He who channels out
the veins; who He who hardeneth the bones; who He who
covereth the flesh with skin; who He who separates the
fingers and the joints; who He who widens out a treading
for the feet; who He who diggeth out the ducts; who He
who spreadeth out the spleen; who He who shapeth heart
like to a pyramid; who He who setteth ribs together; who
He who wideneth the liver out; who He who maketh
lungs like to a sponge; who He who maketh belly stretch
so much; who He who doth make prominent the parts
most honourable, so that they may be seen, while hiding
out of sight those of least honour?

7. Behold how many arts [employed] on one material, how
many labours on one single sketch; and all exceeding fair,


6 As opposed to the immortal world-order.

7 Cf. § 9 below, where it almost seems to mean “water.”

8 The Heavenly Man of “The Shepherd” treatise; man is the image of The Man, the Logos or Image of God. This
and the following passage is referred to by Lactantius, D. Institt., ii. 10.


- 63 -



and all in perfect measure, yet all diversified! Who made
them all? What mother, or what sire, save God alone,
unmanifest, who hath made all things by His Will?

8. And no one saith a statue or a picture comes to be
without a sculptor or [without] a painter; doth [then] such
workmanship as this exist without a Worker? What depth
of blindness, what deep impiety, what depth of ignorance!
See, [then] thou ne’er, son Tat, deprivest works of
Worker!

Nay, rather is He greater than all names, so great is He,
the Father of them all 9 . For verily He is the Only One;
and this His work, to be a father.

9. So, if thou forcest me somewhat too bold, to speak, His
being is conceiving of all things and making [them] 10 .

And as without its maker it is impossible that anything
should be, so ever is He not unless He ever makes all
things, in heaven, in air, in earth, in deep, in all of cosmos,
in every part that is and that is not of everything. For
there is naught in all the world that is not He.

He is Himself, both things that are and things that are not.
The things that are He hath made manifest, He keepeth
things that are not in Himself.

10. He is the God beyond all name; He the unmanifest,
He the most manifest; He whom the mind [alone] can
contemplate, He visible unto the eyes [as well]; He is the
one of no body, the one of many bodies, nay, rather He of
every body.

Naught is there which He is not. For all are He and He is
all 11 . And for this cause hath He all names, in that they are
one Father’s. And for this cause hath He Himself no
name, in that He’s Father of [them] all 12 .

Who, then, may sing Thee praise of Thee, or [praise] to
Thee?


9 The translation of this sentence is conjectural; for the text is not only corrupt, but there appears to be a lacuna in it.

10 The male and female energies of the Divine Parent.

11 For emended reading, see R. 244.

12 That is, of all names. For the following, cf. P. S. A., xxxi. 3.


- 64 -



Whither . , again, am I to turn my eyes to sing Thy praise;
above, below, within, without?

There is no way, no place [is there] about Thee, nor any
other thing of things that are.

All [are] in Thee; all [are] from Thee, O Thou who givest
all and takest naught, for Thou hast all and naught is there
Thou hast not.

11. And when, O Father, shall I hymn Thee? For none can
seize Thy hour or time.

For what . , again, shall I sing hymn? For things that Thou
hast made, or things Thou hast not? For things Thou hast
made manifest, or things Thou hast concealed?

How 13 , further, shall I hymn Thee? As being of myself? As
having something of mine own? As being other?

For that Thou art whatever I may be; Thou art whatever I
may do; Thou art whatever I may speak.

For Thou art all, and there is nothing else which Thou art
not. Thou art all that which doth exist, and Thou art what
doth not exist, - Mind when Thou thinkest, and Father
when Thou makest, and God when Thou dost energize,
and Good and Maker of all things.

(For that the subtler part of matter is the air, of air the
soul, of soul the mind, and of mind God.)


si



T '


COMMENTARY


THE TITLE

The redactor of our Corpus must have taken this sermon from some collection
of “Those to Tat,” for it begins “xcd xovde not xov Xoyov.” One other sermon at
least, then, must have preceded it; but whether it was our C. H., iv. (v.), “The Cup,”
or the lost C. H. (ii.), “The General Sermon,” it is impossible to say.


13 Text from here on given in R. 68, n. 4.


- 65 -



The sermon bears no title proper, and the enunciation of the subject, which
stands in its place, is derived from the second sentence of the treatise itself, and has
plainly been superscribed by some later Byzantine editor.

MAYA

The opening paragraphs of this fine tractate are very difficult to render into
English in any way that can preserve the subtle shades of meaning of the Greek. As
this subtle word-play has been entirely missed by all previous translators, I have
made a rough attempt to preserve it by using the somewhat clumsy term
“manifest.” The word-play in Greek may be seen from the following list of the
original terms taken in the order of their occurrence: dqavdc, cpavsQwxaxov, Cpqavsc,
cpouvopsvov, ecpavT], atpocvsq, cpavfjvcu, pavsqa, atpocvrjq, tpavsqcov, tpocvepauxoa,
cpavxaaia, pavxaaicov, cpccvxaaia, dpavxocaiaaxoq xal a tpavf]?, pavxaaicov, cpalvexou,
cpavfjvcu. These all occur in § 1 and the first two lines of § 2.

I have translated cpccvxaaicc by “thinking-manifest,” seeing that it is the power by
which an object is made apparent or manifest. The doctrine is die same as that of
the Vedanta philosophy, the Maya of the Vedantavadins. Maya is generally
translated “illusion,” but this is not a good equivalent, for it comes from the root
ma, to make or measure. The Logos is called in the Vedanta, Mayin (masc.), the
Maker, Measurer, or Creator, and His Power, or Shakti, is Maya (fern.). It is the
Power of the Divine Thought, and so far from being illusion in any ordinary sense
of the word, is very real for us, and is only non-real as compared to the Logos
Himself, the One Reality in the highest philosophical sense of the term.

The idea is magnificently summed up for us in a logos of Phosilampes 14 , quoted
by the redactor of the Untitled Apocalypse of the Codex Brucianus, which runs as
follows:

‘Through Him is that-which-really-is and that-which-really-is-not,
through which the Hidden-which-really-is and the Manifest-which-really-is-
not exists. ”

Also compare Hippolytus’ summary of the “Simonian” Gnosis:

“Of this Twofold Nature he calls the one side the Hidden and the other
the Manifest, saying that the concealed [parts] of the Fire are hidden in the
manifest, and the manifest produced by the concealed. . . .

“And the manifest side of the Fire has all things in itself which a man
can perceive of things visible, or which he unconsciously fails to perceive.
Whereas the hidden side is everything that we can conceive as intelligible, . .

. o r which a man fails to conceive. ” 15

2. ‘The Ford begrudgeth not Himself to any thing. ”


14 Perhaps a by-name of Basilides; see F. F. F, p. 554.

15 Hipp., Philos., vi. 9; see my Simon Magus (London, 1892), p. 13.


- 66 -



Compare this with C. H., iv. (v.) 3:

‘Not that He grudgeth any, for grudging cometh not from Him”; and
compare both with the saying of Plato in the Timceus (29 E):

‘He was Good, and to the Good there can never at any time be any
grudging of aught. ”

THE HIGHER PANTHEISM OR PANMONISM

10. With the soul-satisfying pantheism of § 10 we may with interest compare the
address to the Logos in The Martyrdom of Peter, which still retains many Gnostic
elements.

‘Thou that art to be understood by pint alone! Thou art my father, Thou my
mother, Thou >ny brother, Thou my friend, Thou my servant, Thou my master. Thou
art the all, and all is in Thee. Yea, all that is, is Thou; and there is nothing else that
is but Thee alone!” 16


HYMN TO ALL-GOD

The treatise ends with one of the most magnificent Hymns to God ever written
in any language - a hymn which some foolish copyist has spoilt by tagging on to it
the gloss of a reader noted on the margin of the MS. from which our scribe copied.

With the sentence: “All are in Thee, all are from Thee,” compare the Naassene
Hymn (quoted in Hippolytus’ Introduction, in “The Myth of Man”):

‘“From Thee’ is Father, and ‘Through Thee, ’Mother, - the two Immortal Names,
Parents of JFons, 0 Thou who hast the Heaven for Thy City, 0 Man of Mighty
Names!”


16 Lipsius (R. A.) and Bonnet (M.), Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha (Leipzig, 1891), i. 98.


- 67 -



+- - »

CORPUS HERMETICUM VI. (VII.)

IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD AND ELSEWHERE NOWHERE

(T ext: P. 48-53; Pat. 14a-15a.)

1 .

OOD, O Asclepius, is in none else save God
alone; nay, rather, Good is God Himself
eternally.

If it be so, [Good] must be essence, from every kind of
motion and becoming free (though naught is free from It),
possessed of stable energy around Itself, never too little,
nor too much, an ever-full supply. [Though] one, yet [is It]
source of all; for what supplieth all is Good. When I,
moreover, say [supplieth] altogether [all], it is for ever Good.
But this belongs to no one else save God alone.

For He stands not in need of any thing, so that desiring it
He should be bad; nor can a single thing of things that are
be lost to Him, on losing which He should be pained; for
pain is part of bad.

Nor is there aught superior to Him, that He should be
subdued by it; nor any peer to Him to do Him wrong, or
[so that] He should fall in love on its account; nor aught
that gives no ear to Him, whereat He should grow angry;
nor wiser aught, for Him to envy.

2. Now as all these are non-existent in His being, what is
there left but Good alone?

For just as naught of bad is to be found in such
transcendent Being, so too in no one of the rest will Good
be found.

For in them all are all the other things 1 - both in the litde
and the great, both in each severally and in this living one 2
that’s greater than them all and mightiest [of them].



1 That is, things not Good.

2 Or animal; that is, cosmos as a single life or living creature.


- 68 -


For things subject to birth 1 abound in passions, birth in
itself being passible. But where there’s passion, nowhere is
there Good; and where is Good, nowhere a single passion.
For where is day, nowhere is night; and where is night,
day is nowhere.

Wherefore in genesis the Good can never be, but only be
in the ingenerate.

But seeing that the sharing in all things hath been
bestowed on matter, so doth it share in Good.

In this way is the Cosmos good; that, in so far as it doth
make all things, as far as making goes it’s Good, but in all
other things it is not Good. For it’s both passible and
subject unto motion, and maker of things passible.

3. Whereas in man by greater or by less of bad is good
determined. For what is not too bad down here, is good;
and good down here is the least part of bad.

It cannot, therefore, be that good down here should be
quite clean of bad, for down here good is fouled with bad;
and being fouled, it stays no longer good, and staying not
it changes into bad.

In God alone, is, therefore, Good, or rather Good is God
Himself.

So then, Asclepius, the name alone of Good is found in
men, the thing itself nowhere [in them], for this can never
be.

For no material body doth contain It, - a thing 4 bound on
all sides by bad, by labours, pains, desires and passions, by
error and by foolish thoughts.

And greatest ill of all, Asclepius, is that each of these
things that have been said above, is thought down here to
be the greatest good.

And what is still an even greater ill, is belly-lust, the error
that doth lead the band of all the other ills - the thing that
makes us turn down here from Good.


3 Or genesis.

4 Jr. the body.


- 69 -



> o


4. And I, for my own part, give thanks to God, that He
hath cast it in my mind about the Gnosis of the Good,
that it can never be It 5 should be in the world 6 . For that
the world is “fullness” 7 of the bad, but God of Good, and
Good of God.

The excellencies of the Beautiful are round the very
essence [of the Good]; nay, they do seem too pure, too
unalloyed; perchance ’tis they that are themselves Its
essences.

For one may dare to say, Asclepius, - if essence, sooth, He
have - God’s essence is the Beautiful; the Beautiful is
further also Good.

There is no Good that can be got from objects in the
world. For all the things that fall beneath the eye are
image-things and pictures as it were; while those that do
not meet [the eye are the realities 8 ], especially the [essence]
of the Beautiful and Good.

Just as the eye cannot see God, so can it not behold the
Beautiful and Good. For that they are integral parts of
God, wedded to Him alone, inseparate familiars, most
beloved, with whom God is Himself in love, or they with
God.

5. If thou canst God conceive, thou shalt conceive the
Beautiful and Good, transcending Light, made lighter than
the Light by God. That Beauty is beyond compare,
inimitate that Good, e’en as God is Himself.

As, then, thou dost conceive of God, conceive the
Beautiful and Good. For they cannot be joined with aught
of other things that live, since they can never be divorced
from God.

Seek’st thou for God, thou seekest for the Beautiful. One
is the Path that leadeth unto It - Devotion joined with
Gnosis.


5 Sc. the Good.

6 Cosmos.

r pleroma. The “world” is the pleroma of evil, but ‘God” the pleroma of good,

lacuna unfortunately occurs here in the text.


- 70 -



6. And thus it is that they who do not know and do not
tread Devotion’s Path, do dare to call man beautiful and
good, though he have ne’er e’en in his visions seen a whit
that’s Good, but is enwrapped with every kind of bad, and
thinks the bad is good, and thus doth make unceasing use
of it, and even feareth that it should be ta’en from him, so
straining every nerve not only to preserve but even to
increase it.

Such are the things that men call good and beautiful,
Asclepius, - things which we cannot flee or hate; for
hardest thing of all is that we’ve need of them and cannot
live without them.



COMMENTARY


THE TITLE

This sermon, which bears no proper title, but has been headed by some editor
with the enunciation of the subject taken from the opening sentence of the treatise
itself, belongs to the Asclepius-group.

Reitzenstein (p. 194) thinks that this tractate and the previous Asclepius-
Dialogue - C. H., ii. (hi.) - may very well have formed part of the same collection of
Asclepiana.


DUALISM?

The teaching of our sermon is apparently dualistic; but is it not only formally so,
and as an exercise to raise the thought of the pupil away from the “things he has
grown used to”? For at the end Hermes declares:

“Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius - things which we
cannot flee or hate\ for hardest thing of all is that we’ve need of them and cannot live
without them.”

This is a clear advance on the formal Tat-teaching as to “hating” the body given
in C. H., iv. (v.) 6, and points clearly to an instruction in which the cosmos was not
regarded as the pleroma of bad, in spite of the formal and emphatic statement in
§ 4:

“6 yag xoogog TiXrigoopid eon rfjg xax/ac. ”

Moreover, if we turn to C. H., ix. (x.), 4 - another treatise of Hermes to
Asclepius, and curiously enough having as superscription almost the same
proposition as heads our present treatise we read:


-71 -



“ycofiov vhfj avrijc [xaxiafi i) yfj, ovy 6 xoopiog, cbc evioi no zb sgovai
j3Xaa(p/]jUovvrsg. ”

“Bad’s place is earth, and not the world, as some will sometimes say with impious
tongue. ”

Here we have a formal denial in an Asclepius -tractate of the formal proposition
in our Asclepius-sermon.

The cosmos is not evil; it is the beautiful world-order. Evil is a thing connected
with the earth; there is no such thing as a 7iky]qoojjia of evil; evil has at best only a
yojptov. They who say such tilings blaspheme.

This is strong language, and there seems no other conclusion to be drawn from
it but that there were various schools widiin the Trismegistic tradition, and that
they wrangled dieologically together.

Is it, however, possible that the Hermes of our treatise is only speaking
metaphorically, so that he may intensify the ideal of the Good, and that he was
subsequently taken as speaking literally? For he must have known that the Cosmos
was regarded as the Son of God, par excellence , the fairest and best-beloved of all,
God’s Very Image.

On the other hand, we know that in the Trismegistic doctrine the “cosmic man”
was opposed to the “essential man,” that, in fact, the term “cosmic” was used in
the nomenclature of the time in a theological as well as in a philosophical sense.
This was especially the case in Christianity. Many instances could be cited from the
New Testament documents; and we have also a striking example of the use of
“cosmos” in this sense in the second logion of the First Oxyrhynchus Fragment:

“Jesus saith: Except ye fast to the world (rdv xoopiov), ye shall in no wise find the
Kingdom of God. ”

As, moreover, we nowhere else find mention of a “pleroma of evil,” we may
permissibly conclude that it is here not intended to be taken literally, but only as a
metaphorical expression.


- 72 -



GOD THE PLEROMA OF GOOD


“God is the Pleroma of Good, and Good is the Pleroma of God. ”

And so, speaking of die Triumphant Christ as the Cosmic Logos, Paul writes:

“And Him hath He (God) given as Head over all things unto the Church 9 , which
is His Body - the dullness ( Vleroma ) of Him who doth fulfil all things in all. ” 10
The thought-atmosphere in which the idea of the “Church” as the Pleroma arose
may be sampled from Philo, De Proem. etPcen., § xi. (M. ii. 418, p. 920; Ri. v. 232):

“And thus the soul, becoming a Pleroma of virtues bj means of the three best
[blessings] - nature, instruction (mathesis) and practice (askesis), - leaving no vacant
spot in her for entrance of aught else, brings unto birth a pefect number, - her two
hexads of sons, a miniature and copy of the circle of the types of life 11 , for the
improvement of the things down here.

“ This is the House 12 that naught can harm, the pefect and continual in the public
scriptures, and also in the secret meanings of the mystic ones, - the House that won the
priye, as I have said, of lordship o’er the tribes of its [own] race. ”

“It was thus from this House in course of time, as it increased and became
populous, that well-regulated cities were established, yea, disciplines of wisdom and of
righteousness and holiness, in which the transmutation (psTa7ioir]oig) of the rest of
virtue was sought out in manner worthy of so high a work. ”

In the Trismegistic tradition, however, the idea is simpler, as we learn from “The
Definitions of Asclepius,” C. H. (xvi.) 3:

“For that the Fullness of all things is One and is in One, - this latter One not
coming as a second One, but both being One. . . .

‘For should one try to separate ivhat seems to be both All and One and Same
from One, - he will be found to take his epithet of ‘All’ from the idea of multitude
and not from that of fullness (pleroma ), - which is impossible; for if he put All for the
One, he will destroy the All. ”

Nevertheless, the Pleroma 11 of Life is more specially the Cosmos as the Son of
God - that is, as the Logos. Thus in C. H., xii. (xiii.) 15, we read:

“Matter is one; and the World-order (Cosmos), as a whole, - the Mighty God and
Image of the Mightier One, both with Him unified, and the Conserver of the Will
and Order of the Father, - is Fife’s Fullness (Pleroma). . . .

‘How then, 0 son, could there be in the God, - the Image of the Father, the
Plenitude (Pleroma) of Fife 14 , -dead things ?”

And again in C. H., ix. (x.) 7:

‘For [Cosmos] being a most wise Breath, bestows their qualities on bodies together
with the one Pleroma - that of Fife. ”


9 Trj EKK^aia, that is, the Spiritual Body of the “Elect.”

10 Eph. i. 23. Cf. Col. ii. 19: “In Him dwelleth the whole Fullness of the Godhead as in a body.”

11 Sc. the Zodiac.

12 Sc. of God.

13 Cf. John i. 16: “Of His Fullness we have all received, and grace on grace.”

14 Cf. John i. 4: “In Him was Life and the Life was the Light of men.”


- 73 -



5. This Pleroma of God is die Good and Beautiful. The Path to this True Good
is one of balance, - for it is the Way of Devotion united unto Gnosis - in Sanskrit
terms, the Bhakti-Marga and Jnana-Marga combined 1 ".

6. Finally we learn, though inferentially, that things are not bad in themselves;
the evil is that men are content with the little goods they have and cling desperately
to these, in ignorance of the greater blessings to which they could attain, did they
but open their spiritual eyes for the True Vision of the Good. For even the psychic
visions of the soul, in spite of their beauty, give man no hint of that Most Blessed
Sight of All.


15 Compare C. H., i. 27: “And I began to preach to men the beauty of Devotion and of Gnosis.”


- 74 -


CORPUS HERMETICUM VII. (VIII.)

THE GREATEST ILL AMONG MEN IS IGNORANCE OF GOD


1 .


(T ext: P. 54, 55; Pat. 18a.)



HITHER stumble ye, sots, who have sopped up
the wine of ignorance unmixed, and can so far
not carry it that ye already even spew it forth?


Stay ye, be sober, gaze upwards with the [true] eyes of the
heart! And if ye cannot all, yet ye at least who can!


For that the ill of ignorance doth pour o’er all the earth
and overwhelm the soul that’s battened down within the
body, preventing it from fetching port within Salvation’s
harbours.


2. Be then not carried off by the fierce flood, but using the
shore-current 1 , ye who can, make for Salvation’s port, and,
harbouring there, seek ye for one to take you by the hand
and lead you 2 unto Gnosis’ gates.

Where shines clear Light, of every darkness clean; where
not a single soul is drunk, but sober all they gaze with
their hearts’ eyes on Him who willeth to be seen.

No ear can hear Him, nor can eye see Him, nor tongue
speak of Him, but [only] mind and heart.

But first thou must tear off from thee the cloak which
thou dost wear, - the web of ignorance, the ground of
bad, corruption’s chain, the carapace of darkness, the
living death, sensation’s corpse, the tomb thou earnest
with thee, the robber in thy house, who through the
things he loveth, hateth thee, and through the things he
hateth, bears thee malice.

3. Such is the hateful cloak thou wearest, - that throttles
thee [and holds thee] down to it, in order that thou may’st
not gaze above, and, having seen the Beauty of the Truth,


1 Lit. back or up-current.

2 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 11; ix. (x.) 10; x (xi.) 2; R. 23, n. 5.


-75 -


and Good that dwells therein, detest the bad of it; having
found out the plot that it hath schemed against thee, by
making void of sense those seeming things which men
think senses.

For that it hath with mass of matter blocked them up and
crammed them full of loathsome lust, so that thou may’st
not hear about the things that thou should’st hear, nor see
the things that thou should’st see.



COMMENTARY

A PREACHING


THERE is little to be said about this powerful appeal to cease from the
drunkenness of physical sensations and to awaken to the Light.

Reitzenstein (p. 194) calls it a “ Prophetenpredigf ’ and says that nowhere in the
MSS. is it ascribed to Hermes; by which he can only mean that it bears no other
superscription than the descriptive sentence which heads it.

The style and spirit remind us not so much of C. H., iii. (iv.), as Reitzenstein (p.
206, 1) suggests, as of the interpolated or superadded passages in the “Poemandres”
treatise (§ 27):

“O ye people, earthbom folk, ye who have given yourselves to drunkenness, and
sleep, and ignorance, be sober now, cease from your surfeit, cease to be glamoured by
irrational sleep!”

Did this sentence give rise to our little sermon; or is the sentence a summary of
the preaching? Or do both sentence and sermon come from a common stock?

THE PROBABLE COMPLETION OF AN OXYRHYNCHUS LOGION

The last hypothesis seems to be the most satisfactory choice; and we may
compare what would appear to be a familiar figure of speech among such
communities with logion 3 of the First Oxyrhynchus Fragment:

‘Jesus saith: I stood in the midst of the world (zov xoopioo), and in the flesh did I
appear unto them; and I found all men drunken, and none found I athirst among
them; and my soul grieveth over the souls of men, because they are blind in their heart
and see not ...”

Can we fill up the missing word from our sermon?

“But sober all they gage with their hearts' eyes on Him who willeth to be seen. ”

The missing word seems, therefore, to be “God.”


- 76 -



The Gospel that is preached is the Beauty of the Gnosis, - “the Beauty of the
Truth and Good that dwells therein”; just as in C. H., i. 27:

“And I began to preach to men the beauty of Devotion and of the Gnosis. ”

The tempest-tossed on the Sea of Ignorance are to make for the Harbour of
Salvation - evidently some great organization devoted to the holy life; therein they
must seek for one who knows, who can take them by the hand and lead them unto
the Gates of the Gnosis.

This suggests that the organization consisted of a general body, within which
were grades of instruction; the many were striving for illumination, some few had
reached it.


- 77 -



+- - » *

CORPUS HERMETICUM VIII. (IX.)

THAT NO ONE OF EXISTING THINGS DOTH PERISH, BUT MEN
IN ERROR SPEAK OF THEIR CHANGES AS DESTRUCTIONS AND

AS DEATHS

OF HERMES TO TAT

(Text: P. 56-59; Pat. 48a, 48b.)

1. [Hermes.]

ONCERNING Soul and Body, son, we now
must speak; in what way Soul is deathless, and
whence comes the activity 1 in composing and
dissolving Body.

For there’s no death for aught of things [that are]; the
thought [this] word conveys, is either void of fact, or
[simply] by the knocking off a syllable what is called
“death,” doth stand for “deathless.” 2 3

For death is of destruction, and nothing in the Cosmos is
destroyed. For if Cosmos is second God, a life’ that
cannot die, it cannot be that any part of this immortal life
should die. All things in Cosmos are parts of Cosmos, and
most of all is man, the rational animal.

2. For truly first of all, eternal and transcending birth, is
God the universals’ Maker. Second is he “after His
image,” Cosmos, brought into being by Him, sustained
and fed by Him, made deathless, as by his own Sire, living
for aye, as ever free from death.

Now that which ever-liveth, differs from the Eternal; for
He 4 hath not been brought to being by another . , and even if
He have been brought to being . , He hath not been brought
into being by Himself, but ever is brought into being.



1 Evegysia.

2 The text is obscure, and the translations without exception make nonsense of it. Some words seem to be missing.

3 Living thing, “animal.”

A Sc. the Eternal.


- 78 -


For the Eternal, in that It is eternal, is the all. The Father
is Himself eternal of Himself, but Cosmos hath become
eternal and immortal by the Father.

3. And of the matter stored beneath it 5 , the Father made
of it a universal body, and packing it together made it
spherical - wrapping it round the life 6 - [a sphere] which is
immortal in itself, and that doth make materiality eternal.

But He, the Father, full-filled with His ideas, did sow the
lives 7 into the sphere, and shut them in as in a cave,
willing to order forth 8 the life with every kind of living.

So He with deathlessness enclosed the universal body,
that matter might not wish to separate itself from body’s
composition, and so dissolve into its own [original]
unorder.

For matter, son, when it was yet incorporate, was in
unorder. And it doth still retain down here this [nature of
unorder] enveloping the rest of the small lives 9 - that
increase-and-decrease which men call death.

4. It is round earthly lives that this unorder doth exist. For
that the bodies of the heavenly ones preserve one order
allotted to them from the Father as their rule 10 ; and it is by
the restoration 11 of each one [of them] this order is
preserved indissolute 12 .

The “restoration” then of bodies on the earth is [thus
their] composition, whereas their dissolution restores
them to those bodies which can never be dissolved, that is
to say, which know no death. Privation, thus, of sense is
brought about, not loss of bodies.


5 Sc. beneath the cosmos, world-order or universe.

6 The text here seems to me to be very faulty; for tioiov, Ttoia, I read i^Cpov, i^cpa. In such unintelligible phrases as aUTCp
to tioiov, and to pet’ amot) tioiov, the writer is evidently dealing with the Cosmos as the one life, the avnotcpov, from
which all other lives are derived; and if he did not write onjTotcpov, he assuredly wrote £(pv. He wrote sense and not
the nonsense of the present text.

7 Sc. the great lives or so-called heavenly “bodies.”

8 Or beautify.

9 As distinguished from the great lives or animals, the so-called heavenly “bodies.”

10 rf|v a Qxfy, - or source or principle.

11 anoxcnaamaiQ, a term used of the cyclic return of stars to their original positions.

12 If we may be permitted to coin a neologism.


- 79 -



5. Now the third life - Man, after the image of the Cosmos
made, [and] having mind, after the Father’s will, beyond
all earthly lives - not only doth have feeling with the
second God, but also hath conception of the first; for of
the one ’tis sensible as of a body, while of the other it
conceives as bodiless and the Good Mind.

Tat. Doth then this life not perish?

Her. Hush, son! and understand what God, what Cosmos
[is], what is a life that cannot die, and what a life subject to
dissolution.

Yea, understand the Cosmos is by God and in God; but
Man by Cosmos and in Cosmos.

The source and limit and the constitution of all things is
God.


ji.


COMMENTARY


THE COSMOS AS “SECOND GOD”

The superscription enunciates the nature of the treatise. It is evidendy taken
from the Dialogues to Tat, and originally formed part of some General
Dissertation or of a collection of Dissertations.

It formed part of an instruction in which the Cosmos was treated of as “Second
God,” as we find it also in Philo 13 ; but just as Philo guards against any idea of
duality, so does our treatise when it ends with the words (§ 5):

‘The source and limit and the constitution of all things is God. ”

The Great Body of the Cosmos, the Sphere or Perfect Form, the root of all
forms, seems to be bounded by the idea of the fiEon or Eternity, or Deathlessness.
It is, as it were, the Cave or Womb of all things in genesis, centred in the Pleroma
of ideas, the Intelligible Cosmos, which is full-filled with the ideas of God (§ 3).


13 Leg. Alleg, § 21; M. i. 82; P. 1103 (Ri. i. Queest. Sol., i. (quoted by Euseb., Prap. Ernng., vii. 13). See in the
“Prolegomena,” “Philo Concerning the Logos.”


- 80 -



THE LAW OF APOKATASTASIS


The eternal order and life of Cosmos is preserved by the law of apokatastasis or
restoration (§ 4), the law of ever-becoming, and cyclic renewal, the making-new-
again (dvccvscoaiq) of C. H., iii. (iv.) 1.

There is no question of loss of body, - this is an illusion; there is a privation of
sense, a going into latency of some particular phase of consciousness.

There are then Great Lives - God, Cosmos, Man. Cosmos is made in the image
of God, Man in the image of Cosmos. Therefore has Man sense and mind; by the
former he is “in sympathy with” the Cosmos, as Body by the latter he is conscious
of God as Mind, - that is the Bodiless. Or as we might phrase it, by sense Man
knows the Sensible Cosmos, by mind the Intelligible Cosmos, the Good Mind; for
God is Source and Limit and the Constitution of all tilings - the Cosmos, both
Intelligible and Sensible, included.


- 81 -



+- - » '

CORPUS HERMETICUM IX. (X.)

ON THOUGHT AND SENSE

THAT THE BEAUTIFUL AND GOOD IS IN GOD ONLY AND
ELSEWHERE NOWHERE

(Text: P. 60-67; Pat. 14, 15.)

1 .


GAVE the Perfect Sermon (Logos) yesterday,
Asclepius; to-day I think it right, as sequel
thereunto, to go through point by point the
Sermon about Sense.



Now sense and thought do seem to differ, in that the
former has to do with matter, the latter has to do with
substance. But unto me both seem to be at-one and not to
differ - in men I mean. In other lives 14 sense is at-oned
with nature, but in men thought.

Now mind doth differ just as much from thought as God
doth from divinity. For that divinity by God doth come to
be, and by mind thought, the sister of the word (logos ) 1 5
and instruments of one another. For neither doth the
word (logos) find utterance without thought, nor is thought
manifested without word.


2. So sense and thought both flow together into man, as
though they were entwined with one another. For neither
without sensing can one think, nor without thinking sense.

But it is possible [they say] to think a thing apart from
sense, as those who fancy sights in dreams. But unto me it
seems that both of these activities occur in dream-sight,
and sense doth pass out of the sleeping to the waking
state.


For man is separated into soul and body, and only when
the two sides of his sense agree together, does utterance
of its thought conceived by mind take place.


14 Or animals.

15 There is here the usual play on the meanings, reason, word, sermon or sacred discourse.


- 82 -



3. For it is mind that doth conceive all thoughts good
thoughts - when it receives the seeds from God, their
contraries when [it receiveth them] from one of the
daimonials; no part of Cosmos being free of daimon, who
stealthily doth creep into the daimon who’s illumined by
God’s Light 16 , and sow in him the seed of its own energy.

And mind conceives the seed thus sown, adultery, murder,
parricide, [and] sacrilege, impiety, [and] strangling, casting
down precipices, and all such other deeds as are the work
of evil daimones.

4. The seeds of God, ’tis true, are few, but vast and fair,
and good - virtue and self-control, devotion. Devotion is
God-gnosis; and he who knoweth God, being filled with
all good things, thinks godly thoughts and not thoughts
like the many [think] .

For this cause they who Gnostic are 17 , please not the
many, nor the many them. They are thought mad and
laughed at 18 ; they’re hated and despised, and sometimes
even put to death.

For we did say 19 that bad must needs dwell here on earth,
where ’tis in its own place. Its place is earth, and not
Cosmos, as some will sometimes say with impious tongue.

But he who is a devotee of God, will bear with all - once
he has sensed the Gnosis. For such an one all things, e’en
though they be for others bad, are for him good;
deliberately he doth refer them all unto the Gnosis. And,
thing most marvellous, ’tis he alone who maketh bad
things good.

5. But I return once more to the Discourse (Logos) on
Sense. That sense doth share with thought in man, doth
constitute him man. But ’tis not [every] man, as I have
said, who benefits by thought; for this man is material,
that other one substantial.


16 That is to say man, or rather the ego in man. The translators seem to make nonsense of this passage through
rejecting the original reading.

17 oi ev yvwasi ovts?, lit. they who are in Gnosis.

18 Cf. Plat., Phadr., 249 D: The wisdom-lover “is admonished, by the many as though he were beside himself.”

19 Sc. in some other sermon.


- 83 -



For the material man, as I have said, [consorting] with the
bad, doth have his seed of thought from daimons; while
the substantial men [consorting] with the Good, are saved
by God.

Now God is Maker of all things, and in His making. He
maketh all [at last] like to Himself; but they, while they’re
becoming 211 good by exercise of their activity, are
unproductive things.

It is the working of the Cosmic Course 21 that maketh their
becomings what they are, befouling some of them with
bad and others of them making clean with good.

For Cosmos, too, Asclepius, possesseth sense-and-
thought peculiar to itself, not like to that of man; ’tis not
so manifold, but as it were a better and a simpler one.

6. The single sense-and-thought of Cosmos is to make all
things, and make them back into itself again, as Organ of
the Will of God, so organised that it, receiving all the
seeds into itself from God, and keeping them within itself,
may make all manifest, and [then] dissolving them, make
them all new again; and thus, like a Good Gardener of
Life, things that have been dissolved, it taketh to itself,
and giveth them renewal once again.

There is no thing to which it gives not life; but taking all
unto itself it makes them live, and is at the same time the
Place of Life and its Creator.

7. Now bodies matter [-made] are in diversity. Some are of
earth, of water some, some are of air, and some of fire.

But they are all composed; some are more [composite],
and some are simpler. The heavier ones are more
[composed], the lighter less so.


20 Or being made.

21 It is difficult to bring out the full delicacy of wording of the original in translation. First God’s ultimate intention is
stated to be the making all things like (ogoia) Himself; this is the great sameness of union with Him. But meantime
while this making, creating or becoming, is going on, these imperfections cannot produce - that is, become creators
in their turn; they are unproductive (oupoga). That which is the instrument of God’s making is the cosmic course
(cpoga). We are finally (§ 7) told that it is bodies which are the cause of difference or diversity (ev Sioapoga), the
opposite pole, so to speak, to the likeness (opoia) with God.


- 84 -



It is the speed of Cosmos’ Course that works the
manifoldness of the kinds of births. For being a most
swift Breath, it doth bestow their qualities on bodies
together with the One Pleroma - that of Life.

8. God, then, is Sire of Cosmos; Cosmos, of [all] in
Cosmos. And Cosmos is God’s Son; but things in
Cosmos are by Cosmos.

And properly hath it been called Cosmos [Order]; for that
it orders 22 all with their diversity of birth, with its not
leaving aught without its life, with the unweariedness of its
activity, the speed of its necessity, the composition of its
elements, and order of its creatures.

The same, then, of necessity and of propriety should have
the name of Order.

The sense-and-thought, then, of all lives doth come into
them from without, inbreathed by what contains [them
all]; whereas Cosmos receives them once for all together
with its coming into being, and keeps them as a gift from
God.

9. But God is not, as some suppose, beyond the reach of
sense-and-thought. It is through superstition men thus
impiously speak.

For all the things that are, Asclepius, all are in God, are
brought by God to be, and do depend on Him - both
things that act through bodies, and things that through
soul- sub stance make [other things] to move, and things
that make things live by means of spirit, and things that
take unto themselves the things that are worn out.

And righdy so; nay, I would rather say, He doth not have
these things; but I speak forth the truth, He is them all
Himself. He doth not get them from without, but gives
them out [from Him] .

This is God’s sense-and-thought, ever to move all things.
And never time shall be when e’en a whit of things that
are shall cease; and when I say “a whit of things that are,”


22 Or adorns.


- 85 -



I mean a whit of God. For things that are, God hath; nor
aught [is there] without Him, nor [is] He without aught.

10. These things should seem to thee, Asclepius, if thou
dost understand them, true; but if thou dost not
understand, things not to be believed.

To understand is to believe, to not believe is not to
understand.

My word (logos) doth go before [thee] 21 to the truth. But
mighty is the mind, and when it hath been led by word up
to a certain point, it hath the power to come before
[thee 24 ] to the truth.

And having thought o’er all these things, and found them
consonant with those which have already been translated
by the reason, it 25 hath [e’en now] believed, and found its
rest in that Fair Faith.

To those, then, who by God[’s good aid] do understand
the things that have been said [by us] above, they’re
credible; but unto those who understand them not,
incredible.

Let so much, then, suffice on thought-and-sense.


si



T* *


COMMENTARY


TITLE AND ORDERING

This treatise bears a double title: - “On Thought and Sense,” and “That the
Beautiful and Good is in God only.” The former heading is clearly taken from the
concluding words: “Let so much then suffice on thought-and-sense”; whereas the
introductory sentence speaks of the Sermon on Sense only. The latter heading
seems to be a thoughtless repetition of the title of C. H., vi. (vii.).

The opening words: “I gave the Perfect Sermon yesterday, Asclepius,” inform us
not only that we have to do with an Asclepius Dialogue, but also that our sermon


23 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 11; vii. (viii.) 2; x. (xi.) 21; R. 23, n. 5.

24 That is, presumably, before the pupil of the Gnosis is conscious of it in his physical brain.

25 Sc the mind.


- 86 -



followed direcdy on die “Perfect Sermon,” a Latin version of which has fortunately
been preserved to us 26 .

It is, therefore, of very great interest to find that Lactantius 27 , in quoting a
sentence from our treatise (§ 4) - “Devotion is God-gnosis” - continues with the
words: “Asclepius, his hearer, has also explained the same idea at greater length in
the Perfect Sermon.”

Lactantius had, therefore, a collection before him in which these two sermons
stood in close connection.

Reitzenstein (p. 195) thinks that our sermon must be an extract from a longer
one, because he cannot bring himself to believe that so short a treatise could have
been found in immediate connection (as the opening words suggest) with so
lengthy and detailed a tractate as the “Perfect Sermon.” This may be so; and yet the
formal beginning and ending of our sermon would seem to suggest that we are
dealing with a complete tractate and not with an extract.

“SENSE-AND-THOUGHT”

The doctrine that in men “sense-and-thought” together constitutes human
“sense” throws some light on the meaning of the term “sense” as used elsewhere in
the Trismegistic literature, where we should expect to find “mind” employed, and
that, too, in the sense of the higher mind.

Normal human “thought,” then, is, so to say, sensible, entirely bound up in
sense-impressions; it is the mind alone that can soar beyond the senses, for it alone
can be “illumined by God’s Light” (§ 3).

The mind is, as it were, a womb or woman, that can be impregnated either by
the “Seeds of God” or by the “Daimonial Energy”; she thus conceives and brings
forth virtues or vices.

All of this is precisely the same doctrine as Philo preaches, as may be seen by the
passages we have quoted in the “Prolegomena” on the subject of the “Sacred
Marriage.”


THOSE IN GNOSIS

The Seeds of God are Virtue and Self-control and Devotion or Piety; and
Devotion in its true sense is God-gnosis, or Knowledge of God. The Gnostics,
then, “they who are in Gnosis” - a curious expression - because of their natural
divorcement from the “world,” “please not the many, nor the many them.”

“They are thought mad and laughed at; they’re hated and despised, and
sometimes even put to death.”

Mark the impersonal note, the calm laying down of the causes of
misunderstanding between the “many” and the “few”; and compare this with the


26 For it would, of course, be absurd to suppose that the “Perfect Sermon” could in any way be thought to indicate
C. H., vi. (vii.), the last Asclepius Dialogue in our Corpus; especially when our sermon (§ 4) directly combats the
teaching of C. H., vi.

27 Div. Institt , ., ii. 15 (Ed. Fritz., i. 106); cf. also v. 14.


- 87 -



more personal note of the saying underlying the following Synoptic
accommodations:

“Blessed are ye when men hate you and excommunicate you, and revile and
expel your Name as evil, for the Son of Man’s sake” (Luke vi. 22).

“Blessed are ye when men revile you and persecute you and say all evil against
you, lying, for My sake” (Matt. v. 11).

It is clear, at least it seems so to me, that “Luke” has kept closer to the original,
and that that original was addressed not only to the members of a community, but
to those who had been cast forth from some other community “for the sake of the
Son of Man” - that is, because of the immediate inspiration of the Logos, which
doubtless did not pay sufficient attention to the prejudices of the “many” of that
community.

“Matthew,” on the contrary, seems to have adapted the Saying for general
purposes and the necessities of the Cult of Jesus 28 .

THE TRUE GNOSTIC

Excellent also is the doctrine that the true “Gnostic,” the man who is
consciously growing into the stature of the Christ, the true “Devotee of God,”
“will bear with all,” for he is beginning to know the Reason of diings.

“For such an one all tilings, e’en though they be for others bad, are for him
good; deliberately he doth refer them all unto the Gnosis.”

He sees the Good, he sees God, in all things. He is the true Alchemist. For
“thing most marvellous, ’tis he alone who makedi bad things good”; by spiritual
alchemy he transmutes the evil of the world to good; he drains the “cup of
bitterness” unto the dregs, and transmutes it into the pure Water of Life.

In every Man, then, there are two “men,” the material (or hylic) and the
substantial (or spiritual, o'6aiob8r]p).

Evil, however, is not a permanent thing; it is but the process of “becoming
good,” the productive side of diings (§ 5).

THE GOAL OF THE GNOSIS

It is difficult to bring out the delicacy of the wording of the original in
translation. First God’s ultimate intention is stated to be the making of all things
like unto (Ojxoioc) Himself; the world-process is to be ultimately consummated in
the Great Sameness of Union with Him. But meantime while this making, creating
or becoming, or transformation, is going on, the imperfections cannot produce,
that is, become creators in their turn; they are unproductive (apopcc). That which is
the instrument or organ of God’s making is the Cosmic Course (popa). We are
finally (§ 7) told that the differences of bodies are conditioned by the speed of this
Cosmic Course; therefore the opposite poles, Other and Same, are both ultimately
referable to Cosmos, the Likeness of God.


28 R. (p. 213, 1) brings this passage of our sermon into connection with some assumed persecution of the
Poemandres communities in the course of the fourth century; but I cannot myself see the slightest ground for such
an assumption.


- 88 -



The end to be achieved is to develop the “sense-and-thought” of the Cosmos,
the One Sense, not manifold, but simple. This is the deliberate working with the
Will of God, the Cosmic Will, the perpetual renewing of all things (dvavdojmc).

The Cosmos, then, as the Logos of God, is the Good Gardener of Life; it is
both the place of Life and its Creator - that is to say, both female and male, both
Mother and Father.


THE POSSIBILITY OF KNOWING GOD

But the Cosmos is not apart from God, nor even in God; God does not have
Cosmos as a possession, but is Cosmos and all therein (§ 9). Cosmos is Son of
God, His Very Self (§ 8).

Therefore we can learn to know somewhat of the nature of God by sense and
thought, for, “God is not, as some suppose, beyond the reach of sense and
thought” (avcua0y]x6q xai avorpog); that is, God does not entirely transcend sense
and thought, for God is all tilings.

“As some suppose” doubtless refers again to the “blasphemers” of § 4 - that is,
the apparently dualistic doctrine set forth in C. H., vi. (vii.) 29 .

And so, finally, we learn that Faith, in the true sense, is a certitude of the mind,
or of true manhood. “To understand is to believe” (§ 10). Gnosis and not belief is
the Fair Faith.

Compare with this the “Perfect Sermon,” x. 1 :

' The reason for a thesis such as this, 0 my Asclepius, I would that thou should 'st
grasp, not only with the keen attention of thy soul, hut also with its living power as
well.

“ For ’tis a reason that most men cannot believe; the Perfect and the True are to be
grasped by the more holy minds. ”


29 Reitzenstein (p. 171, 2) compares this doctrine of the insensibility and incognizability of God with the Sabasan
Gnosis.


- 89 -



+- - ♦

CORPUS HERMETICUM X. (XI.)

THE KEY

OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES

(Text: P. 67-84; Pat . 9b-12.)

1. Hermes.

Y yesterday’s discourse (logos) I did devote to
thee, Asclepius, and so ’tis [only] right I should
devote to-day’s to Tat; and this the more
because ’tis the abridgment of the General Sermons
(Logoi) which he has had addressed to him.

“God, Father and the Good,” then, Tat, hath’ 11 the same
nature, or more exactly, energy.

For nature is a predicate of growth, and used of things that
change, both mobile and immobile, that is to say, both
human and divine, each one of which He mlleth into
being.

But energy consists in something else, as we have shown in
treating of the rest, both things divine and human things 31 ;
which thing we ought to have in mind when treating of
the Good’ 2 .

2. God’s energy is then His Will; further His essence is to
will the being of all things. For what is “God and Father
and the Good” but the to be of all that are not yet? Nay,
subsistence” self of everything that is; - this, then, is God,
this Father, this the Good; to Him is added naught of all
the rest.

And though the Cosmos, that is to say the Sun, is also sire
himself to them that share in him; yet so far is he not the
cause of good unto the lives, he is not even of their living.



30 The three are only different names for one idea; the verb is in the singular in the Greek. Cf. C. H., ii. (iii.) 16 and
17: “Good then is God and God is Good”; and “The other name of God is Father.”

31 That is to say, presumably, in the General Sermons

32 . Lit. of this

33 . U7iag§i?. Cf. C.H., xvi. 4.


- 90 -



So that e’en if he be a sire, he is entirely so by the
compulsion of the Good’s Good-will, apart from which
nor being nor becoming could e’er be.

3. Again, the parent is the children’s cause, both on the
father’s and the mother’s side’ 4 , only by sharing in 35 the
Good’s desire [that doth pour] through the Sun. It is the
Good which doeth the creating.

And such a power can be possessed by no one else than
Him alone who taketh naught’ 6 , but mils all things to be; I
will not, Tat, say makes.

For that the maker is defective for long periods (in which
he sometimes makes, and sometimes doth not make) both
in the quality and in the quantity [of what he makes]; in
that he sometimes maketh them so many and such like,
and sometimes the reverse.

But “God and Father and the Good” is [cause] for all to
be. So are at least these things for who can see.

4. For It doth will to be, and It is both Itself and most of
all by reason of’ 7 Itself. Indeed all other things beside are
just because of It; for the distinctive feature of the Good
is “that it should be known.” Such is the Good, O Tat.

Tat. Thou hast, O father, filled us so full 38 of this so good
and fairest Sight, that thereby my mind’s eye hath now
become for me almost a thing to worship.

For that the Vision of the Good doth not, like the sun’s
beam, fire-like blaze on the eyes and make them close;
nay, on the contrary, it shineth forth and maketh to
increase the seeing’ 9 of the eye, as far as e’er a man hath
the capacity to hold the inflow of the radiance that the
mind alone can see.

Not only does it come more swiftly down to us, but it
does us no harm, and is instinct with all immortal life.


34 Lit. both with regard to seed and nourishment.

35 Lit. taking.

36 Cf. C. H., ii. (iii.) 16: “The Good is He who gives all things and naught receives.”

37 Lit. for.

38 E7tXr]gcoaa?, - reminding us of 7iM]{X0(jia.

39 Lit. light.


-91 -



5. They who are able to drink in a somewhat more than
others of this Sight, ofttimes from out the body fall asleep
into this fairest Spectacle, as was the case with Uranus and
Cronus, our forebears 40 . May this be our lot too, O father
mine!

Her. Yea, may it be, my son! But as it is, we are not yet
strung to the Vision, and not as yet have we the power
our mind’s eye to unfold and gaze upon the Beauty of the
Good - Beauty that naught can e’er corrupt or any
comprehend.

For [only] then wilt thou upon It gaze when thou canst
say no word concerning It. For Gnosis of the Good is
holy silence and a giving holiday to every sense.

6. For neither can he who perceiveth It, perceive aught
else; nor he who gazeth on It, gaze on aught else; nor hear
aught else, nor stir his body any way. Staying his body’s
every sense and every motion he stayeth still.

And shining then all round his mind, It shines through his
whole soul, and draws it out of body, transforming all of
him to essence.

For it is possible, my son, that a man’s soul should be
made like to God, e’en while it still is in a body, if it doth
contemplate the Beauty of the Good.

7. Tat. Made like to God! What dost thou, father, mean?
Her. Of every soul apart are transformations, son.

Tat. What meanest thou? Apart!

Her. 41 Didst thou not, in the General Sermons, hear that
from One Soul - the All-soul - come all these souls which
are made to revolve in all the cosmos, as though divided
off?

Of these souls, then, it is that there are many changes,
some to a happier lot and some to [j ust ] the contrary of
this.


40 See Lact, D. Institt., i. 11; P. S. A., xi. 4, xxxvii. 3; and Ex. i. 4.

41 From here to end of § 8 is quoted by Stobatus, Phjs., I. xli. 48 (G. i. 429, 430; W. 416, 18 ff.).


- 92 -



Thus some that were once creeping things change into
things that in the water dwell, the souls of water things
change to earth-dwellers, those that live on the earth
change into things with wings, and souls that live in air
change into men, while human souls reach the first step of
deathlessness changed into daimones.

And so they circle to the choir of the Inerrant Gods; for
of the Gods there are two choirs, the one Inerrant, and
the other Errant. And this is the most perfect glory of the
soul.

8. But if a soul on entering in the body of a man persisteth
in its vice 42 , it neither tasteth deathlessness nor shareth in
the Good; but speeding back again it turns into the path
that leads to creeping things. This is the sentence of the
vicious soul.

And the soul’s vice is ignorance 4 ’. For that the soul who
hath no knowledge of the things that are, or knowledge of
their nature, or of Good, is blinded by the body’s passions
and tossed about.

This wretched soul, not knowing what she is, becomes the
slave of bodies of strange form in sorry plight, bearing the
body as a load; not as the ruler, but the ruled. This
[ignorance] is the soul’s vice.

9. But on the other hand the virtue of the soul is Gnosis.
For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while
on the earth 44 divine.

Tat. But who is such an one, O father mine?

Her. He who doth not say much or lend his ear to much.
For he who spendeth time in arguing and hearing
arguments, doth shadow fight. For “God, the Father and
the Good,” is not to be obtained by speech or hearing.

And yet though this is so, there are in all the beings senses,
in that they cannot without senses be.


42 sav xaxr| |xsivr|.

43 Cf. C. H., xii. (xiii.) 3: “The great ill of the soul is Godlessness”; also below § 20: “What greater chastisement of any
human soul can there be, son, than lack of piety?”

44 Lit. already.


- 93 -



But Gnosis is far different from sense. For sense is
brought about by that which hath the mastery o’er us,
while Gnosis is the end of science 4 ', and science is God’s
gift.

10. All science is incorporal, the instrument it uses being
the mind, just as the mind employs the body.

Both then come into bodies, |I mean] both things that are
cognizable by mind alone and things material 46 . For all
things must consist out of antithesis and contrariety; and
this can otherwise not be.

Tat. Who then is this material God of whom thou
speakest?

Her. Cosmos is beautiful , , but is not goof 7 - for that it is
material and freely passible 48 ; and though it is the first of
all things passible, yet is it in the second rank of being and
wanting in itself.

And though it never hath itself its birth in time, but ever
is, yet is its being in becoming, becoming for all time the
genesis of qualities and quantities; for it is mobile and all
material motion’s genesis 49 .

11. It is intelligible'" rest that moves material motion in
this way 51 , since Cosmos is a sphere - that is to say, a head.
And naught of head above’s material, as naught of feet
below’s intelligible 02 , but all material.

And head itself moved in a sphere-like way - that is to say,
as head should move 0 ’, is mind.

All then that are united to the “tissue” of this “head” (in
which 04 is soul) are in their nature free from death, - just


45 smovr\\ir\<;.

46 Or hylic.

47 But cf. P. S. A., xxvii. 1.

48 That is capable of suffering, or impressionable by agencies other than itself.

49 Genesis and becoming are both yeveen? in Greek.

50 Noetic as opposed to hylic - the antithesis and contrariety mentioned above.

51 Namely the ever-becoming of genesis.

52 Or mental, in the sense of being of the same nature as the mind.

53 xecpatixccx;.

54 In which “tissue.”


- 94 -



as when body hath been made in soul, are things that have
more soul than body.

Whereas those things which are at greater distance from
this “tissue” - there, where are things which have a greater
share of body than of soul - are by their nature subject
unto death.

The whole, however, is a life; so that the universe consists
of both the hylic and of the intelligible 0 '.

12. Again, the Cosmos is the first of living things, while
man is second after it, though first of things subject to
death.

Man hath the same ensouling power in him as all the rest
of living things 56 ; yet is he not only not good, but even
evil 07 , for that he’s subject unto death 08 .

For though the Cosmos also is not good in that it suffers
motion, it is not evil, in that it is not subject unto death.
But man, in that he’s subject both to motion and to death,
is evil 09 .

13. Now then the principles 61 ' of man are this-wise
vehicled: mind in the reason (, logos ), the reason in the soul,
soul in the spirit 61 , [and] spirit in the body.

Spirit pervading [body] 62 by means of veins and arteries
and blood, bestows upon the living creature motion, and
as it were doth bear it in a way.

For this cause some do think the soul is blood, in that
they do mistake its nature, not knowing that [at death] it is
the spirit that must first withdraw into the soul, whereon
the blood congeals and veins and arteries are emptied, and


55 §§ 12, 13 are quoted by Stobasus, Phjs., I. xxxix. 9 (G. i. 307; W. 350, 13 ff.).

56 That is to say, the world-system itself and all the globes in it.

57 Cf. Ex. i. 11 and 15.

58 Whereas the system and its globes are regarded as practically immortal.

59 Reitzenstein (p. 40, 1) gives a revised text of the major part of this utterance of Hermes, from “Cosmos is
beautiful” onwards, but unfortunately he omits just the most obscure sentences in it.

60 Lit. a man’s soul, where 7S used in a general sense, and not in the particular sense applied to it in the category
which immediately follows.

61 Ttvsupati.

62 Cf. P. S. A., vi. 4.


- 95 -



then the living creature is withdrawn; and this is body’s
death.

14. Now from One Source 6 ’ all things depend; while
Source [dependeth] from the One and Only [One]. Source
is, moreover, moved to become Source again; whereas the
One standeth perpetually and is not moved.

Three then are they: “God, the Father and the Good,”
Cosmos and man.

God doth contain Cosmos; Cosmos [containeth] man.
Cosmos is e’er God’s Son, man as it were Cosmos’s child.

15. Not that, however, God ignoreth man; nay, right well
doth He know him, and willeth to be known.

This is the sole salvation for a man - God’s Gnosis. This
is the Way Up to the Mount 64 .

By Him alone the soul becometh good, not whiles is
good, whiles evil, but [good] out of necessity.

Tat. What dost thou mean, Thrice-greatest one?

Her. Behold an infant’s soul, my son, that is not yet cut
off 65 , because its body is still small and not as yet come
unto its full bulk 66 .

Tat. How?

Her. A thing of beauty altogether is [such a soul] to see,
not yet befouled by body’s passions, still all but hanging
from the Cosmic Soul!

But when the body grows in bulk and draweth down the
soul into its mass, then doth the soul cut off itself and
bring upon itself forgetfulness, and no more shareth in the
Beautiful and Good. And this forgetfulness becometh
vice.

16. It is the same for them who go out from the body.

For when the soul withdraws into itself, the spirit doth
contract itself within the blood, and soul within the


63 a Qxn-

64 Lit. to Olympus.

65 Sc. from the world-soul.

66 Cf. the instructive exposition of Basilides in F. F. F., pp. 274 f.


- 96 -



spirit 67 . And then the mind, stript of its wrappings, and
naturally divine, taking unto itself a fiery body, doth
traverse every space, after abandoning the soul unto its
judgment and whatever chastisement it hath deserved.

Tat. 6 * What dost thou, father, mean by this? The mind is
parted from the soul and soul from spirit? Whereas thou
said’st the soul was the mind’s vesture, and the soul’s the
spirit.

17. Tier. The hearer, son, should think with him who
speaks and breathe with him 69 ; nay, he should have a
hearing subtler than the voice of him who speaks.

It is, son, in a body made of earth that this arrangement of
the vestures comes to pass. For in a body made of earth it
is impossible the mind should take its seat itself by its own
self in nakedness.

For neither is it possible on the one hand the earthy body
should contain such immortality, nor on the other that so
great a virtue should endure a body passible in such close
contact with it. It taketh, then, the soul for as it were an
envelope.

And soul itself, being too a thing divine, doth use the
spirit as its envelope, while spirit doth pervade the living
creature.

18. When then the mind doth free itself from the earth-
body, it straightway putteth on its proper robe of fire,
with which it could not dwell in an earth-body.

For earth doth not bear fire; for it is all set in a blaze even
by a small spark. And for this cause is water poured round
earth, to be a guard and wall, to keep the blazing of the
fire away.

But mind, the swiftest thing of all divine out-thinkings,
and swifter than all elements, hath for its body fire.


67 This is generally translated “the spirit is contracted into the blood, and the soul into the spirit,” but such a
translation contradicts § 13, where we are told that “the spirit withdraws into the soul” at death. It seems to mean that
the spirit passes ivithin, out of the blood, and the soul is then clothed in a spirit-vesture, or borne in a spirit-vehicle.

68 From here to the end of § 18 is quoted by Stobasus, Phjs., xl. 3 (G. i. 312, 313; W. 310, 25 ff.); only the dialogue is
ascribed in error to Asclepius and Tat and not to Hermes and Tat.

69 Cf. P. S. A., x. i.


- 97 -



For mind being builder 711 doth use the fire as tool for the
construction of all things - the Mind of all [for the
construction] of all things, but that of man only for things
on earth.

Stript 71 of its fire the mind on earth cannot make things
divine, for it is human in its dispensation 2 .

19. The soul in man, however, - not every soul, but one
that pious is - is a daimonic something and divine.

And such a soul when from the body freed, if it have
fought the fight of piety - the fight of piety is to know
God and to do wrong to no man - such soul becomes
entirely mind.

Whereas the impious soul remains in its own essence,
chastised by its own self, and seeking for an earthy body
where to enter, if only it be human.

For that no other body can contain a human soul; nor is it
right that any human soul should fall into the body of a
thing that doth possess no reason. For that the law of
God is this: to guard the human soul from such
tremendous outrage 71 .

20. Tat. How father, then, is a man’s soul chastised?

Her. What greater chastisement of any human soul can
there be, son, than lack of piety? What fire has so fierce
flame as lack of piety? What ravenous beast so mauls the
body as lack of piety the very soul?

Dost thou not see what hosts of ills the impious soul doth
bear?

It shrieks and screams: I burn; I am ablaze; I know not
what to cry or do; ah, wretched me, I am devoured by all
the ills that compass me about; alack, poor me, I neither
see nor hear!


70 8y]|Aiougy6<;.

71 [Ed. Sc. stripped]

72 xfj 8ioixr]aei, i.e. in its economy.

73 This paragraph is quoted by Stobasus, Phys., xli. 49 (G. i. 430, 431; W. 417, 15 f£). For the idea, cf. P. S. A., xxxii. 2.


- 98 -



Such are the cries wrung from a soul chastised; not, as the
many think, and thou, son, dost suppose, that a [man’s]
soul, passing from body, is changed into a beast.

Such is a very grave mistake, for that the way a soul doth
suffer chastisement is this:

21. When mind becomes a daimon, the law requires that it
should take a fiery body to execute the services of God;
and entering in the soul most impious it scourgeth it with
whips made of its sins.

And then the impious soul, scourged with its sins, is
plunged in murders, outrage, blasphemy, in violence of all
kinds, and all the other things whereby mankind is
wronged 74 .

But on the pious soul the mind doth mount and guide it 73
to the Gnosis’ Light. And such a soul doth never tire in
songs of praise [to God] and pouring blessing on all men,
and doing good in word and deed to all, in imitation of its
Sire 76 .

22. Wherefore, my son, thou shouldst give praise to God
and pray that thou mayst have thy mind Good [Mind]. It
is, then, to a better state the soul doth pass; it cannot to a
worse.

Further 77 there is an intercourse 78 of souls; those of the
gods have intercourse with those of men, and those of
men with souls of creatures which possess no reason.

The higher, further, have in charge the lower; the gods
look after men, men after animals irrational 79 , while God
hath charge of all; for He is higher than them all and all
are less than He.

Cosmos is subject, then, to God, man to the Cosmos, and
irrationals to man. But God is o’er them all, and God
contains them all.


74 Cf. P. S. A., xxv. 4 and xxviii. 1.

75 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 11; vii. (viii.) 11; ix. (x.) 10; R. 23, n. 5.

76 Namely, the Good.

77 From here to the end is quoted by Stobteus, Phjs., I. xxxix. 8 (G. i. 305-307; W. 303, 14 f£).

78 xoivwvia. Cf. P. J. A., xxiii. 1.

79 Cf. P. S. A., v. 1.


- 99 -



God’s rays, to use a figure, are His energies; the Cosmos’s
are natures; the arts and sciences are man’s 80 .

The energies act through the Cosmos, thence through the
nature-rays of Cosmos upon man; the nature-rays [act]
through the elements; man [acteth] through the sciences
and arts.

23. This is the dispensation 81 of the universe, depending
from the nature of the One, pervading [all things] through
the Mind, than which 82 is naught diviner or of greater
energy; and naught a greater means for the at-oning men
to gods and gods to men.

He, [Mind,] is the Good Daimon. Blessed the soul that is
most filled with Him, and wretched 8 ’ is the soul that’s
empty of the Mind.

Tat. Father, what dost thou mean, again?

Her. 84 Dost think then, son, that every soul hath the Good
[Mind]? For ’tis of Him we speak, not of the mind in
service 8 ’ of which we just were speaking, the mind sent
down for [the soul’s] chastisement.

24. For soul without the mind “can neither speak nor
act.” 86 For oftentimes the mind doth leave the soul, and at
that time the soul nor sees nor understands, but is just like
a thing that hath no reason. Such is the power of mind.

Yet doth it not endure a sluggish 87 soul, but leaveth such a
soul tied to the body and bound tight down by it. Such
soul, my son, doth not have Mnd; and therefore such an
one should not be called a man , 88 For that man is a thing-


80 Cf. Ex. viii. 1.

81 Stobcrjaig, compare 19.

82 Sc. the Mind.

83 xaxoSalpwv, as opposed to 6 ayaOdg Salpwv. It is impossible to reproduce the original word-play in translation.

84 Stobasus (Gaisford) here reads “A.” - that is, Asclepius.

85 ton iiTtrigsxixou, compare § 21, “the services of God” (tag ton Oeou UTtrigsaiag); that is to say, Hermes speaks of
the Universal Mind and not of the mind in man.

86 A quotation from the ancient gnomic poet Theognis (v. 177). Theognis lived c. 570-490 B.C.

87 vwtgag, - ? vwOgag. Everard translates “an idle or lazy soul,” in his usual slipshod fashion of inserting doubles;
Parthey gives “ inertem animani Menard, "Tame vicieuse”-, Chambers, “inert.” Several of the old editors omit the entire
sentence.

88 Cf. Philo, De Son/., § 20; M. i. 639; P. 584 (Ri. iii. 241): “not for those who are called men, but for those who are truly
so.”


- 100 -



of-life 89 divine; man is not measured with the rest of lives
of things upon the earth, but with the lives above in
heaven, who are called gods.

Nay more, if we must boldly speak the truth, the true
“man” is e’en higher than the gods, or at the [very] least
the gods and men are every whit in power each with the
other equal.

25. For no one of the gods in heaven shall come down on
the earth, o’er- stepping heaven’s limit; whereas man doth
mount up to heaven and measure it; he knows what things
of it are high, what things are low, and learns precisely all
things else besides. And greater thing than all; without
e’en quitting earth, he doth ascend above. So vast a sweep
doth he possess of ecstasy 90 .

For this cause can a man dare say that man on earth is god
subject to death, while god in heaven is man from death
immune.

Wherefore the dispensation of all things is brought about
by means of 91 these, the twain - Cosmos and Man 92 - but
by 93 the One.



89 Or animal.

90 Excrcaaewg, lit. extension, or consciousness.

91 8ia.

92 Cf. P. S. A., x. 3.

93 Vno.


- 101 -



COMMENTARY


THE CONSUMMATION OF THE “GENERAL SERMONS”

What “yesterday’s sermon,” which Hermes addressed to Asclepius, may have
been, we have no means of deciding. The similarity of the phrase with the opening
words of C. H., ix. (x.) is noticeable, and points, perhaps, to a collection of
Sermons to Asclepius and Tat strung together in some chronological order, as
delivered day by day. If this be the fact, however, we must assume that such
introductions were prefixed by the editor of that collection.

“The Key of Thrice-greatest Hermes” must have been considered one of the
most remarkable documents of the school, for, as we have already mentioned in
the case of “The Cup” treatise, the apocryphal “Books of Moses” plagiarize the
title 94 .

That it was an important treatise may also be seen from the fact that Stobasus
reproduces no less than five extracts from it under the title, “From the [Sermons]
of Hermes to Tat,” or simply “Of Hermes.” Strangely enough in two cases (xxxix. 8
and xl. 3) S to bee us makes the persons of the dialogue Asclepius and Tat; this,
however, must be a mistake, for it contradicts his own headings, it contradicts the
nature of the sermon, it contradicts the supposed introduction of the editor of the
collection from whom the redactor of our Corpus has taken his text, and it
contradicts Chalcidius, who quotes from our treatise as a treatise of Hermes 93 .

Nevertheless, in spite of the importance of the treatise, it purports to be an
epitome 96 , an abridgment of the “General Sermons” (oi ysvixol koyoi) 97 addressed
to Tat.

The sermon itself, however, has by no means the appearance of being an
abridgment; on the contrary, it is one of the most complete and fundamental
expositions that we have.

I would, therefore, suggest that the general reference in the words, “as we have
shown in treating of the rest” (§ 1), and the precise reference to “The General
Sermons,” in § 7, have originated this wording of the introduction with the editor
of the collection of Asclepius and Tat Sermons which I have previously supposed.
It is a gloss of the editor and no part of the original text.

If this argument holds good, “The Key,” instead of being an epitome, is a
further teaching that presupposes a prior instruction already given in “The General
Sermons,” and so stands out as a more intimate exposition of the inward doctrine
of the higher grades of the school.


94 R. 182, 3; 190, 2.

95 Chalcid., Comment, in Timceum (ed. Fabric.), p. 350.

96 Compare also the introduction to C. H., xvi. (see R. 191, 1); and also Ex. i. 16 and Comment.

97 Cf. § 7, below; C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 1; and Exs. ix. 1 and xviii. 1. The title must be so translated, I think, in spite of the
fact that in the introductory words of the above treatise the term is immediately followed by the antithesis “rebirth”
(TtaXiyysvsoia), as though the Sermons were on birth or genesis (ysvsai?), - which, as we know from the Naassene
Document, was the subject of the Lesser Mysteries, whereas Rebirth was that of the Greater. Everard gives “in the
general speeches”; Parthey, “in communibus ”; Menard, “dans les discours generally ?' ; Chambers, “in the Generalities.”


- 102 -



Reitzenstein (p. 461) would have it that the doctrine of Sermons, ix. (x.) and x.
(xi.), is a mediate one between the dualism of vi. (vii.) and the pronounced
pantheistic mysticism of v. (vi.) and xi. (xii.); but I should fancy that these labels,
even if they are correctly attached, would not represent such overwhelming
contradictions to the Trismegistic doctors as they appear to do to their modern
critics. There were different points of view; there were different grades of
instruction; every doctrine had more truth in it at the proper time and in the right
place. In any case this sermon is one of die most beautiful tractates preserved to us.

THE WILL OF GOD

1 . Our treatise begins with the statement that the universe and all therein is due
to the Energy or Effective Working of God - that is to say, His Will. This Will is
immutable and constant - the Law of the universe.

How subtly these philosophers in their most intimate circles used these terms
may be seen from the Gnostic Doctor, Basilides, who writes:

“Naught was, - neither matter, nor substance, nor voidness of substance, nor
simplicity, nor impossibility of composition, nor inconceptibility, nor imperceptibility,
neither man, nor angel [Hermetice, daimon], nor God; in fine, neither anything at all
for which man has ever found a name, nor any operation which falls within the range
either of his perception or conception.

“Such, or rather far more removed from the power of man ’s comprehension, was
the state of Non-Being, when the Deity beyond Being, without thinking, or feeling, or
determining or choosing, or being compelled, or desiring, willed to create universality. ”

‘ When I use the term will, ” writes Basilides, “I do so merely to suggest the idea of
an operation transcending all volition, thought, or sensible action. ” 9S

2. God’s Energy, or Self-realization, is, then, His Will (Oskqcnq); His Essence
(ohm a) or Substance is “to will the being of all things”; in brief, He is the Very
Subsistence (bna of all - a term which subsequently came into great
prominence in the later Platonic philosophy.

3. In § 3 we have a clear distinction drawn between the transcendent idea of God
as Creator or Wilier, and the ordinary conception of God as Maker or Fabricator or
Demiurge - a distinction that meets us in almost every Gnostic system. In our
treatise, however, there is no setting of the one idea over against the other in any
sense of antagonism. It is only stated that the self-operation of Deity transcends all
such limited conceptions as that of a Maker or Fabricator.

OF GNOSIS AND ECSTASIS

4. The distinctive feature of God as the Good, or the Desirable, the Supreme
Consummation, is “that He should be known” (to yvooqiCsaOcu); in other words, the
science of all sciences is the Gnosis of God.

5. The Vision Glorious, the One Sight, is next spoken of under the simile of the
shining of a Ray of the Light and Life of the Spiritual Sun into the mind. This


98 Hipp., Philos., vii. 21 (ed. D. and S., p. 358); F. F. F., pp. 257, 258.


- 103 -



consummation of Ecstasis", we are told, was a transcending of the limitations of
body, and was a faculty possessed by the forebears ( fipoyovoi ) of the “race” into
which Hermes and now Tat are being born; these ancestors are mentioned under
symbolic Greek names, evidently a substitute for Egyptian ones, for the reference is
clearly to the priesthood of some past civilization of the Nile Land. At the same
time, it can be referred to certain grades of super-men, regarded as gods, who had
reached to certain stages of celestial dignity 100 .

To this idea of ancient Masters of the Gnosis in Egypt, Lactantius refers as
follows:

“And so it appears that he [Cronus] was not born from Heaven (which is
impossible j, but from that man who was called Uranus; and that this is so,
Trismegistus bears witness, when, in stating that there have been very few in whom the
pefect science has been found, he mentioned in their number Uranus, Cronus, and
Hermes his kinsfolk. ” 101

Lactantius seems to be somewhat under the fascination of the theory of
Euhemerus, and has no credence in the Heaven-born, in spite of the Christ Birth.
We, however, learn from him that he knew of a statement by Hermes in this
connection in which, besides Uranus and Cronus, an ancient Hermes was
mentioned. Now in our treatise this is not the case, and Tat and not Hermes is the
speaker; whereas in P. S. A., xxxvii., where Hermes speaks of his progenitor
Hermes, no mention is made of Uranus and Cronus. Therefore Lactantius refers to
a lost treatise of Hermes.


OF APOTHEOSIS

6. The nature of Ecstasy is then further explained; it is the fruit of meditation or
contemplation, the consummation of the Theoretic Life.

“The Gnosis of the Good is holy silence and a giving holiday (xazagyla) to every
sense. ”

The Holy Silence reminds us of the Sige of the Christian Gnostics; here,
however, instead of the Mother-fEon of Cosmos, it is used in the sense of the pure
mother-nature of the little cosmos of man, the divine womb that brings to birth the
true man.

With this may be compared C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 2:

‘Wisdom conceived by mind in silence, such is the matter and the womb from out
which man is bom, and the true Good the seed. ”

It is hardly necessary to add that this is the Yoga of the Upanishads. Indeed, the
first part of § 6 might be taken word for word from those sublime treatises of
Vaidik theosophy, and shows how identical is the thought of those who have first-
hand experience of the higher consciousness.


99 Cf. § 25, where ecstasis is explained as an extension of consciousness, - a certain “greatness” (|xsys0o<;).

100 See the “Chart of Orphic Cosmogony,” facing p. 87 of my Orpheus (London, 1896), where Uranus and Cronus
are referred to the two lower of the three Noetic “planes” transcending the Sensible Universe.

101 Div. Institt., i. 11 (ed. Fritz., i. 29, 30).


- 104 -



“For it is possible, my son, that a man’s soul should be made like to God
(&7io0soo0rjvcu), e’en while it still is in a body, if it doth contemplate the Beauty of
the Good.”

This is the “deification” (anoOeaxJiq), or “apotheosis” of a man; he becomes like
unto God, in that he becomes a god. The Beauty of the Good is the Cosmic Order;
and the mode of this meditation was to bring the soul into sympathy with the
Cosmic Soul.


THE METAMORPHOSES OF THE SOUL

7. The secret of this divine operation (or theurgy) is based upon the fact that the
soul can be transformed into every likeness. The Great Likeness of God is the
Cosmic Order, the making oneself into this Likeness is the supreme transformation
or transfiguration of the soul.

The separated or individual soul is in perpetual pilgrimage, revolving on the
wheel of transformation. This doctrine was shared in by many other faiths, and it
was also Egyptian.

In this connection we may refer instructively to Hippolytus’ quotations from the
Naassene Document (§ 3 S.):

“And they 102 say that the soul is very difficult to discover, and hard to understand;
for it never remains of the same appearance, or form, or in the same state, so that ive
can describe it by a general type, or comprehend it by an essential quality. ”

On this Hippolytus comments:

‘These variegated metamorphoses they 103 have laid down in the Gospel superscribed
‘According to the Egyptians.

The Gospel according to the Egyptians is lost, with the exception of a few fragments.
We, however, here learn that it described the metamorphoses of the soul. It was a
Gospel having its origin in Egypt and suited to Egyptian modes of thought. It
follows, therefore, that the doctrine of the soul’s transformation was Egyptian 104 .

THE LADDER OF BEING

The Hermetic doctrine of the evolution of the soul, by means of multitudinous
transformations, is characterised by certain main moments, for in the course of it it
passes through definite stages of existence designated as animal, human, daimonic,
and god-like; there being, further, two grades of being within the choir of gods -
the errant and inerrant. The final stage is the most perfect glory (86%x) or power of
the soul.

With all of this there is a strikingly exact parallel of ideas in the Pauline Letters.


102 The quotation is from the text of the Hellenistic Commentator, who is referring to the Chaldasans.

103 The Gnostics Hippolytus calls the Naassenes.

104 Reitzenstein (p. 22, 2) says that it was in error that the Greeks stated the Egyptians believed in metempsychosis; in
this I believe that Reitzenstein is himself in error. The Egyptians at any rate demonstrably believed in soul
metamorphosis; and when we find people who lived in Egypt teaching this metamorphosis in connection with
metempsychosis, it is but natural to conclude that the Greeks, who were in touch with the living tradition of Egypt,
knew more about the matter than modern scepticism.


- 105 -



“But some one will say: How do the dead rise, and with what body do they come [?
back]?

“Thou foolish one! That which thou sowest is not made quick unless it die.

“And that which thou sowest - ’tis not the body that shall be thou sowest, but a
naked grain of wheat or of one of the other seeds 105 .

“Tis God that gives to it 106 a body as he will, -yea to every one of the seeds its
proper body.

“Not every flesh is the same flesh; but there is one of men, another flesh of beasts,
another flesh of birds, and another of fishes.

‘There are also bodies celestial, as well as bodies terrestrial. But the glory of the
celestial [bodies] is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another.

“[And of the former] the glory of the sun is one, and the glory of the moon is
another, and [yet] another is the glory of the stars; for star dijfereth from star in glory.

“So also is the resurrection of the dead. ” 107

And by “resurrection of the dead,” I believe that Paul meant what all the
instructed of the time meant - namely, the “reaching the first step of
deathlessness,” as Hermes has it in our treatise. The death or vice of the soul is
ignorance, the virtue or life of the soul is Gnosis.

“For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth, divine. ”

CONCERNING TRANSMIGRATION

8. With § 8, however, we are confronted with what appears to be a great
difficulty. Hermes here seems to teach distinctly that a vicious (that is, an ignorant)
soul, one who has not attained to Gnosis, goes back to attachment to animal
bodies, while in §§ 19 ff., he at great length denies that a human soul can possibly
do so. Is there any solution of this apparently complete self-contradiction in one
and the same treatise?

Far as I am from desiring to play the apologist for any scripture, I am prevented
from appending an impatient “No” to this query, for the following considerations:

In the first place, Hermes in § 8 is speaking of the vicious or ignorant soul, while
in § 19 he is speaking not only of the “human” soul, but of the human soul that
hath the Good Mind (§ 23); whereas the ignorant soul “doth not have Mind, and,
therefore, such an one should not be called a man ” (§ 24). Here, then, we have a
fundamental distinction in souls incarnated into the “body of a man” (§ 8); they are
of two classes.

The doctrine of § 8 applies to one class, the doctrine of § 19 to another.

Metempsychosis, in the sense of continued revolution on the wheel of life and
death, is only for him who “persisted! in his vice” - that is to say, is still ignorant.
Gnosis thus means the freedom from samsdra, to use a common Brahmanical and
Buddhistic term.


105 The “grain of mustard seed”

106 Sc. the soul as grain.


107 1 Cor. xv. 35-42.


“wheat” if a good body comes therefrom, “tares” if an imperfect growth results.


- 106 -



The ignorant soul does not see the Light, being “blinded by the body’s passions,
and tossed about”; this is the “turmoil” of which Plato speaks in the T imams.

And here I must refer the reader to “Plato Concerning Metempsychosis,” in the
“Prolegomena,” a chapter which I have written mainly in elucidation of the
problems raised by our treatise.

GNOSIS THE VIRTUE OF THE SOUL

9. So much, then, for the soul which persisteth in its vice or ignorance; but the
virtue of the soul is Gnosis.

“F or he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth, divine. ”

This is precisely the same idea as that of the JIvanmukta in Indian theosophy -
namely, the man who has reached Mukti or Liberation while still living in the body.

Hermes thus proceeds to distinguish Gnosis, the end of human science, from
sense or opinion. Gnosis is the apotheosis of the mind, its immediate perception of
the things-that-are - namely, the Intelligible Cosmos.

1 1 . The Sensible or Hylic Cosmos is then explained, and also the nature of man,
and his relationship to the Cosmos and God.

THE VEHICLES OF THE SOUL

13. The vehicles of man’s “Soul” are then categorized 8e dvOpdmou o^sixai

tOv tqouov Tohiov), the Soul being here used in the sense of the Self, and as
distinguished from the “soul” in the category. They are as follows, one within the
other, in the sense of being respectively more intimate to the true nature of man:

Mind (vovq); reason (Xoy oq); soul (rpu^zr]); spirit (Ttvsbjioc); body (ctCOjioc).

The remarkable similarity of this category with the psychology of the
Upanishads cannot fail to strike the student of those mother-treatises of Vaidik
theosophy. Thus we read in the Kathopanishad, I. iii. 10, 11:

“Beyond the senses are the rudiments (m ; beyond the rudiments wfiulsive mind;
beyond the mind, the reason; beyond the reason, the Great Self.

‘Beyond the Great, the Increate 109 i; beyond the Increate, the Man 1,0 i; beyond the
Man, not any thing ; That is the goal; That is the final end. ”

The analogy is striking. Body = gross elements; spirit = subde elements; soul =
impulsive mind (manas); reason = reason ( buddhi m ); Mind = the Great (Mahal);
Source (ct^pf]) = the Increate; the One and Only (to 8v xod povov) = the Man.

These so-called “vehicles,” “envelopes,” or “sheaths” ( koshas ), are elsewhere
given in the Upanishads as: anna-maya-kosha - that is, the kosha composed of, or
resulting from, food (body); prana-may a-k., of life (spirit); mano-maya-k., of impulse
(soul); vijnana-maya-k., of discrimination (reason); ananda-maya-k., of bliss (Mind).


108 The subtler elements.

109 Avyakta, undifferentiated cosmic substance,
no p urus f, a , the Tme Man.

111 The warns and bnddhi of the Upanishads are not to be confounded with these terms as at present employed in
modem Theosophical literature.


- 107 -


“Spirit” is thus seen to correspond to life (prana)', it is that which “bestows upon
the living creature motion, and, as it were, doth bear it” (i.e. support it) “in a way”
(§ 13). It is not Life, but individualized life, and in the Aupanishad literature is
differentiated into five modes, which may be almost translated as etheric currents
or modes of motion in the body 112 .

The quotation from Proclus in “Plato Concerning Metempsychosis,” will have
sufficiently shown that this “life” is of the same nature as the animal life. It is that
principle of soul which man shares with the animals.

THE DUAL SOUL

And here we may refer to Jamblichus (De Myst ., viii. 6), when referring to the
“Hermaic writings” he says:

“Man has two souls, as these writings say. The one is from the first Mind, and
partakes also of the power of the Creator, while the other, the soul under constraint,
comes from the revolution of the celestial [spheres]; into the latter the former, the soul
that is the seer of God 11 ] insinuates itself at a later period.

‘ This being so, the soul that descends into us from the worlds [or spheres] keeps
time with the circuit of these worlds, while the soul from the Mind existing in us in an
intelligible fashion is free from the whirl of genesis; by this the bonds of Destiny are
burst asunder; by this the Path up to the Gods whom mind alone can see is brought to
birth ; by such a life as this is that Great Art Divine, which leads us up to That
beyond the spheres of genesis, brought to its consummation. ”

Hermes in our treatise is, however, more precise as to the so-called “vehicles” or
“souls,” for he writes (§ 17):

‘Mind taketh, then, the soul for, as it were, an envelope. And soul itself being, too,
a thing divine 114 , doth use the spirit as its envelope, while spirit doth pervade the
living creature. ” 115


“HE WHO STANDS”

The Supreme Principle of all, the One and Only One, who “standeth
perpetually” (§ 14), is the Intelligible Logos (f] voqifj manic, f. § 11), the 6 em(bc of
the Christianized Gnosis, as seen especially in the Simonian Great Announcement. He
is the Cause of the perpetual motion of the Hylic Cosmos. Compare this with the
following passage of Numenius:

“Now there are two modes of life, the first of the First and the second of the Second
God. For it is evident that the First God should be standing (sard>g), and the
Second, on the contrary, moved. The First, then, is occupied about things intelligible,
and the Second about things intelligible and sensible.

“Marvel not that I say this; for thou shalt hear what is still more marvellous. For
I say that it is not the motion that appertains to the Second, but the rest that pertains


112 Cf. K. K., 44, 45, Comment.

113 Cf. C. H., ix. (x.) 3: “The daimon who’s illumined by God’s Light.”

114 That is, being logos, as from the Creator or Second Mind.

115 Cf. Exx. iv. 2; xv. 2; xix. 3; and Frag, xviii.


- 108 -



to the First, which is the innate ‘ motion ’from which both their cosmic order and their
eternal community and their preservation [or salvation] is poured forth on things
universal. ” 116


THE OLYMPIAN PATH

15. In § 15 the Gnosis is again declared to be the only Path of Salvation or

Safety 11 . It is the Way Up to the Mount 118 , the Olympian Path.

The term Eleusis was also interpreted as Anabasis, or the Way Up 119 . Compare

the Jewish commentator in the Naassene Document (§ 27):

‘First is the Mystery called Fleusis’ and Anaktoreion ’ - Eleusis because we come
1 20 121

from Above , streaming down from Adamas , . . . and Anaktoreion from
‘Returning Above. ’ ”


“WHEN MIND BECOMES A DAIMON”

16. The next main doctrine touched on is one of immense importance, for it
gives us the inner teaching which illuminates the “dark saying” in the “Poemandres”
(§ 24), when treating of the Way Up (& ,vo8oq):

“And thou surrenderest thy way of life unto the daimon. ”

For in our treatise Hermes tells us that at death:

“The mind stript of its wrappings, and naturally divine, taking unto itself a fiery
body, doth traverse every space, after abandoning the soul unto its judgment and
whatever chastisement it hath deserved. ”

The key to this is the sentence (§ 21):

“When mind becomes a daimon, the law requires that it should take a fiery body
to execute the services of God. ”

At death, the mind, of its own nature, perforce becomes a “servant of God,” a
Therapeut 1 " 2 ; the man is his own judge and his own chastizer.

The “fire of hell” is then but the reflection of the light of the mind; it is the
burning remorse of a mind that now sees the inevitable results of every selfish
action - thought, word, and deed; that each of these comes inevitably back on the
sender forth of it.

The soul, thus, lives out (and that too in the most realistic fashion, it realises the
actuality of the law in all its most minute details) the inevitable consequences of its
past vicious deeds in body.


116 Quoted by Eusebius, Prop. Evang., XI. xviii. 20, 21 (539 B), ed. Dindorf (Leipzig, 1867), ii. 41. We do not know
Numenius’ date, but it was probably about the first half of the first century A.D. Though Numenius is almost
invariably designated as a Pythagorean, he was rather a universalist, for his object was not only to trace the doctrines
of Plato up to Pythagoras, but to show that they were not at variance with the doctrines and mysteries of the
Brahmans, Jews, Magi and Egyptians.

117 Cf. the passage from Jamblichus quoted above.

118 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 1: “The Passing o’er the Mount.”

119 Cf. C. H, i. 24.

120 Eleusis meaning Coming, Advent.

121 The Man or Mind.

122 Cf. 23: “The mind in service.”


- 109 -



Here we have the hint of a psychology and of an inner teaching that persuades
us there was a profound wisdom at the back of the intermediate instruction of
these schools.

Compare this most reasonable theory of after-death “illumination” with the
crudities of the eternal torment idea of popular religion with which we are so
familiar, and reflect on what a “falling off’ there has been from the Gnosis of the
early days.

And what is the “fiery body” of the mind but the ray-like or starry vehicle of the
man, the ocbyosidst; f\ daxposiheq of Philoponus? 12 ’

This is the true “Astral Body” of a man, and not the “watery vesture” which is
referred to under the term in modern nomenclature.

This is the true Body of Purification, that burns up all impurities, and in the light
of the conflagration burns into man the memory of the Gnosis.

The soul is thus “chastised by its own self’; and if Hermes had taught us nothing
else, he would have amply deserved the gratitude of humanity, and the title of
Thrice-greatest. Yet is “Hermes” no single man, but a mind illuminated by the
Mind.


THE “SCOURGE” OF THE CHRIST

21. So then “the impious soul, scourged widi its own sins, is plunged in murders,
outrage, blasphemy, in violence of all kinds, and all the other things whereby
mankind is wronged.”

This is the “scourge” by which the Christ drives the unworthy out of His
Temple. It does not mean that the soul is driven into doing these things, but that it
is made to realize or suffer them - the consequences of its prior misdeeds. Whatever
wrong it has done to its fellows, such it suffers, in the realization of its true nature,
whereby the Light of Gnosis brings into amazing contrast the darkness or
ignorance of its past actions 124 .

THE DISPENSATION OF THE UNIVERSE

22. And so Hermes explains the nature of “the dispensation of the universe” -
the interlinking of the grades of being from God downwards the intercourse or
communion of souls.

God, Cosmos and Man are grades of being. Each is a sun, as it were, in their
operations, or powers or rays. God’s rays are His energies or self-realizing
operations; those of Cosmos are the natures of things, those of Man are the arts
and sciences.

This communion or intercourse of higher with lower natures is to be realized on
the side of man by the consummation of the sacred marriage, whereby man
becomes a god, and finally God.


123 See my Orpheus, pp. 292 ff.

124 With this compare the function of the Mind on the soul in incarnation, as described in C. H., xii. (xiii.) 4.


- 110 -



He only is blessed who is filled with God - that is to say, the true Gnostic who
has received the consecration of the Fullness or Pleroma 125 .

Whereas the soul that is empty of God is deprived of that Fullness, cut off from
it, and so empty of the Mind. This is the state of Emptiness (hsvoojicc) or
Insufficiency (baidqypa).

24. Such souls, says Hermes, should not be called men. For a true man is not only
equal to a god, but even higher than the gods. Such a man we should, in Christian
nomenclature, call a Christ - one animated or illuminated by the Mind or Spirit of
God.


125 Cf. John i. 16: “Of His Fullness have we all received.”


- Ill -



+- - »

CORPUS HERMETICUM XI. (XII.)

MIND UNTO HERMES
(Text: P. 85-99; Pat. 20b-23.)

1 . Mind.

ASTER this sermon [logos) 1 , then, Thrice-
greatest Hermes, and bear in mind the spoken
words; and as it hath come unto Me to speak, I
will no more delay.

Hermes. As many men say many things, and these diverse,
about the All and Good, I have not learned the truth.
Make it, then, clear to me, O Master mine! For I can trust
the explanation of these things, which comes from Thee
alone.

2. Mind. Hear [then], My son, how standeth God and All.

God; fEon 2 ; Cosmos; Time; Becoming 1 .

God maketh fEon; fEon, Cosmos; Cosmos, Time; and
Time, Becoming.

The Good, - the Beautiful, Wisdom, Blessedness, - is
essence, as it were 4 5 , of God; of fEon, Sameness 3 ; of
Cosmos, Order; of Time, Change; and of Becoming, Life
and Death.

The energies of God are Mind and Soul; of fEon,
lastingness 6 and deathlessness; of Cosmos, restoration and
the opposite thereof 7 ; of Time, increase and decrease; and
of Becoming, quality.

fEon is, then, in God; Cosmos, in fEon; in Cosmos, Time;
in Time, Becoming.



1 Or thy reason.

2 Eternity; the ideal world, beyond time. Cf. P. i". A ., xxx, xxxi.

3 Genesis.

4 That is to say, the term “ess-e nee” cannot really be applied to God, for He is beyond “fe-ing.”

5 Or identity.

6 Or duration.

7 a.vza.KOX.amomoi<;.


- 112 -



/Eon stands firm round God; Cosmos is moved in /Eon;
Time hath its limits 8 in the Cosmos; Becoming doth
become in Time.

3. The source 9 , therefore, of all is God; their essence,
/Eon; their matter, Cosmos.

God’s power is /Eon; /Eon’s work is Cosmos - which
never hath become, yet ever doth become by /Eon.

Therefore will Cosmos never be destroyed, for /Eon’s
indestructible; nor doth a whit of things in Cosmos perish,
for Cosmos is enwrapped by /Eon round on every side.

Her. But God’s Wisdom - what is that?

Mind. The Good and Beautiful, and Blessedness, and
Virtue’s all, and /Eon.

/Eon, then, ordereth 10 [Cosmos], imparting deathlessness
and lastingness to matter.

4. For its 11 becoming doth depend on /Eon, as /Eon doth
on God.

Now Genesis 12 and Time, in Heaven and on the Earth,
are of two natures.

In Heaven they are unchangeable and indestructible, but
on the Earth they’re subject unto change and to
destruction.

Further, the /Eon’s soul is God; the Cosmos’ soul is /Eon;
the Earth’s soul, Heaven.

And God’s in Mind; and Mind, in Soul; and Soul, in
Matter; and all of them through /Eon.

But all this Body 1 ’, in which are all the bodies, is full of
Soul; and Soul is full of Mind, and [Mind] of God.

It 14 fills it 15 from within, and from without encircles it,
making the All to live.


8 Or is accomplished.

9 TtriY?].

10 Or adometh.

11 Sc. Matter’s Becoming or Genesis.

12 Or Becoming.

13 Sc. Cosmos.


- 113 -



Without, this vast and perfect Life 16 [encircles] Cosmos;
within, it fills [it with] all lives 17 ; above, in Heaven,
continuing in sameness; below, on Earth, changing
becoming.

5. And fEon doth preserve this [Cosmos], or by Necessity,
or by Foreknowledge, or by Nature, or by whatever else a
man supposes or shall suppose. And all is this, - God
energizing.

The Energy of God is Power that naught can e’er surpass,
a Power with which no one can make comparison of any
human thing at all, or any thing divine.

Wherefore, O Hermes, never think that aught of things
above or things below is like to God, for thou wilt fall
from truth. For naught is like to That which hath no like,
and is Alone and One.

And do not ever think that any other can possibly possess
His power; for what apart from Him is there of life, and
deathlessness and change of quality? For what else should
He make? 18

God’s not inactive 19 , since all things [then] would lack
activity; for all are full of God.

But neither in the Cosmos anywhere, nor in aught else, is
there inaction. For that “inaction” is a name that cannot
be applied to either what doth make or what is made 20 .

6. But all things must be made; both ever made, and also
in accordance with the influence of every space 21 .

For He who makes, is in them all; not stablished 22 in some
one of them, nor making one thing only, but making all.


14 Sc. Soul.

15 Sc. Body, of Universe or Cosmos.

16 Or Animal; that is, Soul.

17 Or animals.

18 Sc. than those which are Himself.

19 OQyoc,. There is a word-play in the terms egyov (work), evegy&v (working in, energizing), evsQyrjt; (active, energetic),
Evsgysioc (in-working, activity), and aQybq (not-working, inactive, idle), agyia (inactivity, idleness), which it is
impossible to bring out fully in English.

20 Or what becomes.

21 This seems to mean, that all things in the world of genesis (making, creating, or becoming) have their root-activity,
first from the sameness of becoming of the one sphere or space, and then their differentiated activity from the seven
spheres, spaces, or planes, which are the instruments of God in the differentiation of the Cosmos.


- 114 -



For being Power, He energiseth in the things He makes
and is not independent of them, - although the things He
makes are subject to Him.

Now gaze through Me 21 upon the Cosmos that’s now
subject to thy sight; regard its Beauty carefully - Body in
pure perfection, though one than which there’s no more
ancient one, ever in prime of life, and ever-young, nay,
rather, in even fuller and yet fuller prime!

7. Behold, again, the seven subject Worlds 24 ; ordered 20 by
/Fon’s order 26 , and with their varied course full-fil li ng
TEon!

[See how] all things [are] full of light, and nowhere [is
there] fire; for ’tis the love and blending of the contraries
and the dis similars that doth give birth to light down
shining by the energy of God 27 , the Father of all good, the
Leader of all order, and Ruler of the seven world-
orderings!

[Behold] the Moon, forerunner of them all, the instrument
of nature, and the transmuter of its lower matter!

[Look at] the Earth set in the midst of All, foundation of
the Cosmos Beautiful, feeder and nurse of things on
Earth!

And contemplate the multitude of deathless lives, how
great it is, and that of lives subject to death; and midway,
between both, immortal [lives] and mortal, [see thou] the
circling Moon.

8. And all are full of Soul, and all are moved by it, each in
its proper way; some round the Heaven, others around the
Earth; [see] how the right [move] not unto left, nor yet the
left unto the right; nor the above below, nor the below
above.


22 [Ed. probably meaning established]

23 Mind - i.e. with the mind’s eye, or spiritual sight, or by the help of the Master’s illuminating power. Cf. C. H., i. 7
and xiii. (xiv.) 11.

24 Koapou?, cosmoi or world-orders.

25 Or adorned, or made beautiful.

26 The order of the iEon (Eternity, the Spiritual Space), asonian or everlasting order.

27 The text from “Now gaze . . .” to here is given in R. 36, n. 1.


- 115 -



And that all these are subject unto Genesis 28 , My dearest
Hermes, thou hast no longer need to learn of Me. For that
they bodies are, have souls, and they are moved.

But ’tis impossible for them to come together into one
without some one to bring them [all] together. It must,
then, be that such a one as this must be some one who’s
wholly One.

9. For as the many motions of them [all] are different, and
as their bodies are not like, yet has one speed been
ordered for them all, it is impossible that there should be
two or more makers for them.

For that one single order is not kept among “the many”;
but rivalry will follow of the weaker with the stronger, and
they will strive.

And if the maker of the lives that suffer change and death,
should be another 29 , he would desire to make the
deathless ones as well; just as the maker of the deathless
ones, [to make the lives] that suffer death.

But come! if there be two ’ 0 , - if Matter’s one, and Soul is
one, in whose hands would there be the distribution’ 1 for
the making? Again, if both of them have some of it, in
whose hands may there be the greater part?

10. But thus conceive it, then; that every living body doth
consist of soul and matter, whether [that body be] of an
immortal, or a mortal, or an irrational [life] .

For that all living bodies are ensouled; whereas, upon the
other hand, those that live not, are matter by itself.

And, in like fashion, Soul when in its self is, after its own
maker, cause of life; but the cause of all life is He who
makes the things that cannot die.

Her. How, then, is it that, first, lives subject unto death are
other than the deathless ones? And, next, how is it that


28 Or becoming.

29 From the maker of the immortals.

30 Sc. makers.

31 Sc. of matter and life.


- 116 -



that Life which knows no death, and maketh
deathlessness, doth not make animals immortal?

11. Mind. First, that there is some one who does these
things, is clear; and, next, that He is also One, is very
manifest. For, also, Soul is one, and Life is one, and
Matter one.

Her. But who is He?

Mind. Who may it other be than the One God? Whom
else should it beseem to put Soul into lives but God
alone? One, then, is God.

It would indeed be most ridiculous, if when thou dost
confess the Cosmos to be one. Sun one. Moon one, and
Godhead’ 2 one, thou shouldst wish God Himself to be
some one or other of a number!

12. All things, therefore. He makes, in many [ways]. And
what great thing is it for God to make life, soul, and
deathlessness, and change, when thou [thyself] dost do”
so many things?

For thou dost see, and speak, and hear, and smell, and
taste, and touch, and walk, and think, and breathe. And it
is not one man who smells, a second one who speaks, a
third who touches, another one who smells, another one
who walks, another one who thinks, and [yet] another one
who breathes. But one is he who doth all these.

And yet no one of these could be apart from God. For
just as, shouldst thou cease from’ 4 these, thou wouldst no
longer be a living thing, so also, should God cease from
them (a thing not law to say), no longer is He God.

13. For if it hath been shown that no thing can inactive”
be, how much less God? For if there’s aught He doth not
make (if it be law to say), He is imperfect. But if He is not
only not inactive, but perfect [God], then He doth make
all things.

32 Or Divinity.

33 Or make; a play on the double meaning of the Greek verb.

34 Lit. become inactive of (xaxagYr]0fj<;).

35 A word has here dropped out in the text, which I have supplied by (inactive), and not by the usual

conjecture “apart from God.”


- 117 -



Give thou thyself to Me, My Hermes, for a little while 16 ,
and thou shalt understand more easily how that God’s
work is one, in order that all things may be - that are being
made, or once have been, or that are going to be made.
And this 7 ’ 1 is, My beloved, Life; this is the Beautiful; this is
the Good; this, God.

14. And if them wouldst in practice’ 8 understand [this
work], behold what taketh place with thee desiring to
beget. Yet this is not like unto that, for He doth not enjoy.

For that indeed He hath no other one to share in what He
works, for working by Himself, He ever is at work,
Himself being what He doth’ 9 . For did He separate
Himself from it 40 , all things would [then] collapse, and all
must die, Life ceasing.

But if all things are lives, and also Life is one; then, one is
God. And, furthermore, if all are lives, both those in
Heaven and those on Earth, and One Life in them all is
made to be by God, and God is it 41 - then, all are made by
God.

Life is the making-one of Mind and Soul; accordingly
Death is not the destruction of those that are at-oned 42 ,
but the dissolving of their union.

15. FEon, moreover, is God’s image; Cosmos [is] fEon’s;
the Sun, of Cosmos; and Man, [the image] of the Sun.

The people call change death, because the body is
dissolved, and life, when it’s dissolved, withdraws to the
unmanifest. But in this sermon ( logos ), Hermes, my
beloved, as thou dost hear, I say the Cosmos also suffers
change, - for that a part of it each day is made to be in the
unmanifest, - yet it is ne’er dissolved.


36 Cf. P. J. A., iii. 1: “Now lend to me the whole of thee.”

37 Sc. work, doing, making, or creating.

38 Eqy®, in deed, in work.

39 Or makes.

40 Sc. His work, or creation.

41 1 this life.

42 That is, Mind and Soul, sc. the Logos and World-Soul, or ego and animal soul.


- 118 -



These are the passions of the Cosmos - revolvings and
concealments; revolving is conversion and concealment
renovation.

16. The Cosmos is all-formed, - not having forms external
to itself, but changing them itself within itself. Since, then,
Cosmos is made to be all-formed, what may its maker be?
For that, on the one hand, He should not be void of all
form; and, on the other hand, if He’s all-formed, He will
be like the Cosmos. Whereas, again, has He a single form,
He will thereby be less than Cosmos.

What, then, say we He is? - that we may not bring round
our sermon (logos) into doubt; for naught that mind
conceives of God is doubtful.

He, then, hath one idea \ which is His own alone, which
doth not fall beneath the sight, being bodiless, and [yet] by
means of bodies manifesteth all [ideas] 44 . And marvel not
that there’s a bodiless idea.

17. For it is like the form of reason (Jogos) A5 and mountain-
tops in pictures 46 . For they appear to stand out strongly
from the rest, but really are quite smooth and flat.

And now consider what is said more boldly, but more
truly!

Just as man cannot live apart from Life, so neither can
God live without [His] doing good 47 . For this is as it were
the life and motion as it were of God - to move all things
and make them live.

18. Now some of the things said 48 should bear a sense
peculiar to themselves. So understand, for instance, what
I’m going to say.


43 The root of form; used also loosely in Greek to denote form.

44 Or forms.

45 Or idea of the sermon.

46 xai ev rat; ygatpat; axgwgeiai. All the translators talk of “margins” in MSS., and make entire nonsense of the
passage. I can find absolutely no authority for translating axgwgeiai margins.

47 Or making the Good; that is, iEon.

48 Or points of the sermon.


- 119 -



All are in God, [but] not as lying in a place. For place is
both a body and immovable, and things that lie do not
have motion.

Now things lie one way in the bodiless, another way in
being made manifest.

Think, [then,] of Him who doth contain them all; and
think, that than the bodiless naught is more
comprehensive, or swifter, or more potent, but it is the
most comprehensive, the swiftest, and most potent of
them all.

19. And, thus, think from thyself, and bid thy soul go unto
any land; and there more quickly than thy bidding will it
be. And bid it journey oceanwards; and there, again,
immediately ’twill be, not as if passing on from place to
place, but as if being there.

And bid it also mount to heaven; and it will need no
wings, nor will aught hinder it, nor fire of sun, nor aether,
nor vortex- swirl 49 , nor bodies of the other stars; but,
cutting through them all, it will soar up to the last Body
[of them all] 50 . And shouldst thou will to break through
this as well, and contemplate what is beyond - if there be
aught beyond the Cosmos 51 ; it is permitted thee.

20. Behold what power, what swiftness, thou dost have!
And canst thou do all of these things, and God not [do
them] ?

Then, in this way know' 2 God; as having all things in
Himself as thoughts, the whole Cosmos itself.

If, then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God, thou
canst not know Him. For like is knowable to like [alone].

Make, [then,] thyself to grow to the same stature as the
Greatness which transcends all measure; leap forth from


49 f] 8 ivt], presumably the vortex or “whorl” of the solar system (cf. “Vision of Er”).

50 Sc. the body or limit of the whole cosmos.

51 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 5: “And things above the heaven - if there be aught.”

52 Or think.


- 120 -



every body; transcend all Time; become Eternity 53 ; and
[thus] shalt thou know God.

Conceiving nothing is impossible unto thyself, think
thyself deathless and able to know all, - all arts, all
sciences, the way of every life 34 .

Become more lofty than all height, and lower than all
depth. Collect into thyself all senses of [all] creatures, - of
fire, [and] water, dry and moist. Think that thou art at the
same time in every place, - in earth, in sea, in sky; not yet
begotten, in the womb, young, old, [and] dead, in after-
death conditions 33 .

And if thou knowest all these things at once 56 , - times,
places, doings, qualities, and quantities; thou canst know
God 57 .

21. But if thou lockest up thy soul within thy body, and
dost debase it, saying: I nothing know; I nothing can; I
fear the sea; I cannot scale the sky; I know not who I was,
who I shall be; - what is there [then] between [thy] God
and thee?

For thou canst know naught of things beautiful and good
so long as thou dost love thy body and art bad.

The greatest bad there is, is not to know God’s Good 38 ;
but to be able to know [Good], and will, and hope, is a
Straight Way, the Good’s own [Path], both leading there
and easy 39 .

If thou but sett’st thy foot thereon, ’twill meet thee
everywhere, ’twill everywhere be seen, both where and
when thou dost expect it not, - waking, sleeping, sailing,
journeying, by night, by day, speaking, [and] saying
naught. For there is naught that is not image of the Good.

22. Her. Is God unseen?


53 Lit. iEon.

54 TiavtO? Craou r|0og, - or nature of every animal.

55 QIC H.jxiii. (xiv.) 11.

56 Or art simultaneously conscious of.

57 A critical text from “Make, then, thy self’ to here is given by R., p. 238.

58 to 0sTov - lit. the Godly, or Divine.

59 Cf. Ex. i. 4.


- 121 -



Mind. Hush! Who is more manifest than He? For this one
reason hath He made all things, that through them all
thou mayest see Him.

This is the Good of God, this [is] His Virtue, - that He
may be made manifest through all 60 .

For naught’s unseen , even of things that are without a
body. Mind sees itself 61 in thinking, God in making 62 .

So far these things have been made manifest to thee,
Thrice-greatest one! Reflect on all the rest in the same way
within thyself, and thou shalt not be led astray.



COMMENTARY


TITLE AND FORM

The title in the MSS. is simply “Mind to Hermes.” When, therefore, Cyril, in
quoting the first three paragraphs of § 22 of our treatise, says that Hermes wrote
these words “to his own mind,” 61 he is evidendy either a very careless reader 64 , or
had not seen at first hand the treatise from which he quotes.

From its contents, moreover, it is very evident that our treatise, as far as its form
is concerned, looks back to the “Poemandres” as the type of instruction to Hermes
(or to a Hermes).

This highly authoritative form of enunciating doctrine was evidently chosen
because it was desired to impart a more intimate instruction than that of the
“General Sermons” and the like, - to wit, the inculcation of the fEon-doctrine, in
connection with the marvellous doctrine of At-one-ment with all tilings which
constitutes the Path of the Good. The doctrine is no longer “Become (or make
thyself like) Cosmos,” but “Become fEon” (§ 20).

Now it is remarkable that the instruction given in our treatise by the Mind to
Hermes is, almost point for point, the “esoteric” teaching of which the Sermon of
Hermes to Tat, entitled the “Cup or Monad” - C. H., iv. (v.) - is the “exoteric”
form.

That the instruction in these Trismegistic schools of initiation was divided into
grades is manifest on all sides; and, therefore, nothing is more natural than to find
these two sermons standing in such intimate relations to one another as to


60 The preceding question and answer is quoted with very slight verbal variants by Cyril, Contra Julianum , ii. 52.

61 Or is seen.

62 Or doing.

63 C.Jul, ii. 52; ed. Migne, col. 580 B.

M Cf. R. 128, i.; 196, 3.


- 122 -



doctrine, the one containing the more intimate and advanced explanation of the
more general instruction of the other.

And that this inner instruction on the “Cup” doctrine must have been thought
to be of very great value, is evident when we reflect that “The Cup” sermon was
one of the most famous of all the treatises of Hermes, for, as we have seen, its title
was worth being plagiarized, and the Baptism of the Cup, of which it treated,
constituted the goal of the endeavour of the disciples of the School, as Zosimus
tells us.

Mystically, then, the main interest of our treatise centres in the doctrine of the
At-one-ment (as the inner consummation of the Baptism in the Cup or Monad), to
which the /Ron -idea is but a formal introduction; historically, however, the
introduction of the /Eon-idea presents itself as a critical problem, for the term is
not found in the “Poemandres,” and, therefore, presumably was not used in the
earliest documents of the School.

THE 2E ON-LORE

When, then, did this /Eon-idea impose itself upon the older form of tradition of
the Trismegistic schools? This is a most important question; for if we can in any
way answer it, we shall be in a position to assign a terminus ad quern for the earlier
forms of Hermetic doctrine.

The answer to the question seems to me to be involved in the supposition that
the /Eon-doctrine must have influenced “Hermeticism” at more or less the same
date as that at which it influenced “Gnosticism.”

Now “Gnosticism,” in its Christianized forms, is practically never found without
the /Eon-lore.

The earliest forms of Christian Gnosis referred to by the later Patristic
hcCresiologists are bound up with /Eonology. Not only so, but the very earliest
reference to Gnosticism by any Christian writer presupposes the /Eon-doctrine,
and uses it in illustration of the spiritual state of the writer 65 .

The widespread influence of the /Eon-doctrine can thus be traced back to at
least the origins of Christianity.

Now as the Gnosis existed before any Christian form of it was developed, the
question of the date when the /Eon-doctrine was introduced into it must be
referred to pre-Christian times.

And, indeed, the very simple character of the /Eon-lore in our treatise 66 , as
compared with the mind-bewildering complexity and transcendency of first and
second century Christian Gnosticism, is all in favour of an early date for its
introduction into “Hermeticism,” which is only another name for “Gnosticism” of
a preponderatingly Hellenic form.

If this line of reasoning holds good, we have in it a very strong presumption that
the older forms of the Trismegistic treatises were pre-Christian.


65 Namely, Paul in his Letters, which are the earliest of all Christian documents. See my article, “Some Notes on the
Gnostics,” in The Nineteenth Century and After (Nov. 1902), pp. 822-835; and D. J. L., pp. 353 ff.

66 Perhaps the clearest exposition is to be found in P. S. A., xxx. and xxxi.


- 123 -



And that this is so may be seen by the absolute identity of the teaching of our
treatise (§ 2) with that of Philo, when he writes:

‘But God is the Artificer of Time as well For He is Father of its Father; and
Time’s Father is the Cosmos, which manifests its motion in the genesis of Time. . .

‘This [Cosmos] then, the Younger Son, the Sensible, being set a-moving has
caused Time’s nature to appear and disappear; so that there nothing is which future is
with God, who has the very Bounds of Time subject to Him. For ’ tis not Time, but
Time’s Archetype and Paradigm, Eternity (or TEon), which is His Tfe 67 . But in
Eternity naught is past, and naught is future, but all is present only. ” 68

This passage of Philo is of the utmost importance for estimating the date of our
treatises; for not only does it prove that the oldest forms of the Trismegistic
literature were pre-Christian, but it further persuades us that our treatise, which
belongs to a later type of this literature, may be dated as contemporary with Philo.

Chapter xi. in the Prolegomena, “Concerning the fEon-Doctrine,” should be
taken in close connection with this treatise, for it is not only introductory to it, but
frequendy refers direcdy to it.

For the rest, it is not necessary to attempt any detailed comments, since the
instruction of the writer is clear enough for any careful reader to follow with ease
after making himself acquainted with the general ideas in the preceding treatises.
One or two notes on special points, however, may be attempted.

THE ROOT OF FORM

Thus in § 16, the sentence: “The Cosmos is all-formed (Ttavxopoppot;), - not
having forms external to itself, but changing them itself within itself,” - reminds us
of P. S. A., xix. 3: “The ‘Thirty-six’ who have the name of Horoscopes are in the
self-same space as the fixed stars; of these the essence-chief, or prince, is he whom
they call Pantomorph, or Omniform (Tcavidpoppoc, vel omnformis) ,wh < ) fashioneth
the various forms for various species”; and also of P. S. A., xxxv.: “But they are
changed as many times as there are moments in the hour of that revolving circle in
which abides that God whom we have called All-form.”

Compare also C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 12, where, speaking of the “Circle of the types of
life,” Hermes says it is “composed of elements, twelve in number, but of one
nature, an omniform idea.”

With this compare Hermes-Prayer iv., addressed to Thoth as the Logos:

‘Thee I invoke alone, thou who alone in all the Cosmos dost impose order on gods
and men, who dost transform thyself in holy forms, making to be from things that are
not, and from the things that are, making the not to be. ”

But the main interest of our treatise is not that the Intelligible Cosmos or Logos
can create and destroy and transmute all forms at will, but that man as the
microcosm has potential in him this great magic power.


67 Cf. C. H., i. 6; the Union of the Logos and Mind - or First-Born Son and Father - is Life; they are united in TEon.
68 Quod Deus Im., § 6; M. i. 277; P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73).


- 124 -



“BECOME ALL THINGS”


The daring instruction given to Hermes in §§ 19 and 20 is distinctly a discipline
of the Egyptian Wisdom; for though it is here set forth plainly and without
circumlocution, as a straightforward intimate instruction, stripped of all mysterious
hints or hesitating subterfuges 69 , it is clearly in the same circle of ideas of which
popular Egyptian theurgy had some inkling. But whereas the philosopher-mystic
was bidden to do this for himself of his own volition and achievement, the
theurgist had to beg some god to do it for him.

Thus in the same Prayer, to which we have already referred, we read (§§ 2, 3):

“O holy Thoth, the true sight of whose face none of the gods endures! Make me to
he in every creature s name [or ‘true form’], - wolf dog, or lion, fire, tree, or vulture,
wall, or ivater, or what thou wiU’st, for thou art able so to do. ”

So also in P. S. A.., vii., we have the same idea, for certainly the phrasing of the
sentences suggests something beyond the ordinary powers of the mind or
imagination.

“He mingles with the elements by reason of the swiftness of his mind. He plunges
into the sea’s depths by means of its profundity. He puts his values on all things.

‘Heaven does not seem too high for him; for it is measured by the wisdom of his
mind as though it were quite near.

“No darkness of the air obstructs the penetration of his mind. No density of earth
impedes his work. No depth of water blunts his sight.

“Though still the same, yet is he all, and evey where is he the same. ”

It is indeed a marvellous “yoga” system that is sketched for us in our treatise.
There is no question here of abstraction or negation, but a courageous
identification or At-one-ment of oneself with all that lives and breathes. This is the
Path of the Gnosis, the Way to Know God.

In other words, man is to copy his prototype, the Mind, and just as the Mind or
Man, in the “Poemandres” treatise, “had a mind to break right through the
Boundary of the spheres” (§ 13), so is our philosopher bidden to “soar up to the
Last Body of them all” (§ 19), that Last Body being the One Element of Cosmos
itself.

“And shouldst thou will to break through this as well, and contemplate what is
beyond - if there be aught beyond the Cosmos; it is permitted thee. ”

That the hard and fast distinctions which modern commentators would draw
between words, in considering these mystical treatises, would have been laughed at
by the writers of them, is amply manifested when the writer with enthusiastic
fervour bursts forth:

“Then in this way know God, as having in Himself as thoughts the whole Cosmos
itself.

“If then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God 70 , thou canst not know Him
7 . Tor like is knowable to like [alone]. Make, then, thyself to grow to the same


69 Or, as the writer of the Pistis Sophia would say, ev 7iaggr]aia, “face to face without a parable.”

70 Sc. as Cosmos.


- 125 -



stature as the Greatness which transcends all measure; leap forth from every body;
transcend all time; become Eternity; and thus shalt thou know God. ”

Every body or space must be transcended, even the Body of Cosmos itself; for
the man must grow into the “stature of the Greatness that transcends all measure,”
that is, the intelligible superspatial Pleroma, the /Ron as the Logos and Paradigm of
Cosmos. And every time and all Time must also be transcended; for the man must
become Eternity - that is, the /Eon as the Paradigm of Time.

THE GOOD’S OWN PATH

In no scripture that I know is this Path more admirably set forth - the Good’s
own Path. All things, all spaces, and all times have to be realized as being within
oneself simultaneously, if this is realized or known, not only imagined, then a man
becomes a true Knower of God, a Gnostic.

Nor has ever a truer sentence been written than the wonderful words concerning
this Path to the Supreme:

“If thou but sett’st thy foot thereon, ’twill meet thee everywhere, ’twill
everywhere be seen, both where and when thou dost expect it not - waking,
sleeping, sailing, journeying, by night, by day, speaking, and saying naught. For
there is naught that is not image of the Good.”

CONCERNING INDIA

In conclusion, I would only point out that if for the hopeless reading in the first
sentence of § 19 we were to take Patrizzi’s emendation, which has been adopted by
Parthey, we should have the interesting sentence:

“And, thus, think from thyself and bid thy soul go unto India. ”

If this should be the original reading, it is remarkable that India should have
been selected of all places. We know, however, from a study of what is known of
the life of Apollonius of Tyana, that this “Gnostic” philosopher made an enormous
propaganda of Indian ideas among the philosophic and mystic communities and
schools of the first century. Apollonius must have known something, perhaps a
great deal, concerning the siddhis acquired byjy ^-practices. At any rate, we find his
biographer Philostratus making him write the following letter to his Eastern hosts
on Inis return from India:

“I came to you by land and ye have given me the sea; nay, rather, by sharing with
me your wisdom ye have given me power to travel through heaven. These things will I
bring back to the mind of the Greeks, and I will hold converse with you as though ye
were present, if it be that I have not drunk of the Cup of Tantalus in vain. ” 72

That an intensely great interest was taken in Indian ideas at Alexandria is shown
by the fact that we find Plotinus himself in 242 starting off with the expedition of
Gordian to the East in the hope of coming in contact with the Indian Wisdom.


71 Sc. as Father of this Only Son.

72 Philos., Vit. Ap., iii. 51. Cf. my Apollonius of Tyana, the Philosopher Reformer of the First Century A.D. (London, 1901), p.


But all these considerations, though interesting in themselves, do not
immediately concern us, unless we are subjectively persuaded that the emendation
of Patrizzi is firmly established. Should, however, this reading in any way be
confirmed by objective evidence, we should have to reconsider the question of date
by the light of it, though, I fear, with little chance of any definite result. For though
the propaganda of Indian ideas by Apollonius could not have begun prior to the
middle of the first century, we have in this fact no very sure criterion, for “India”
must have been in the air, and strongly in the air, even prior to Apollonius’ visit to
India, or why should he have been induced to make so long and dangerous a
journey? Indeed, “India” had been in the air ever since the expedition of Alexander
- that is, from the beginning of the Alexandrian period - the second quarter of the
fourth century B.C. onwards.


- 127 -



+- - » *

CORPUS HERMETICUM XII. (XIII.)

ABOUT THE COMMON MIND

OF HERMES TO TAT

(Text: P. 99-113; Pat. 23b-25b.)

1. Hermes.



HE Mind, O Tat, is of God’s very essence - (if
such a thing as essence of God 7 ’ there be) - and
what that is, it and it only knows precisely.


The Mind, then, is not separated off from God’s
essentiality, but is united unto it, as light to sun.


This Mind in men is God, and for this cause some of
mankind are gods, and their humanity is nigh unto
divinity.


For the Good Daimon said: “Gods are immortal men,
and men are mortal gods.”

2. But in irrational lives Mind is their nature. For where is
Soul, there too is Mind; just as where Fife, there is there
also Soul.


But in irrational lives their soul is life devoid of mind 74 ; for
Mind is the in-worker of the souls of men for good; - He
works on them for their own good.

In lives irrational He doth co-operate with each one’s
nature; but in the souls of men He counteracteth them.

For every soul, when it becomes embodied, is instantly
depraved by pleasure and by pain.

For in a compound body, just like juices, pain and
pleasure seethe, and into them the soul, on entering in, is
plunged 7 ’.

3. O’er whatsoever souls the Mind doth, then, preside, to
these it showeth its own light, by acting counter to their
prepossessions, just as a good physician doth upon the


73 That is, if we can use such a term with respect to God.

74 That is, of the mind manifested in man as distinguished from the general Mind.

75 (3oc7ra£eTai.


- 128 -



body prepossessed by sickness, pain inflict, burning or
lancing it for sake of health.

In just the selfsame way the Mind inflicteth pain upon the
soul, to rescue it from pleasure, whence comes its every ill.

The great ill of the soul is godlessness 76 ; then followeth
fancy 77 for all evil things and nothing good.

So, then, Mind counteracting it doth work good on the
soul, as the physician health upon the body.

4. But whatsoever human souls have not the Mind as
pilot, they share in the same fate as souls of lives
irrational.

For [Mind] becomes co-worker with them, giving full play
to the desires towards which [such souls] are borne, -
[desires] that from the rush of lust strain after the
irrational; [so that such human souls,] just like irrational
animals, cease not irrationally to rage and lust, nor ever are
they satiate of ills.

For passions and irrational desires are ills exceeding great;
and over these God hath set up the Mind to play the part
of judge and executioner.

5. Tat. In that case, father mine, the teaching {logos) as to
Fate 78 , which previously thou didst explain to me, risks to
be over- set.

For that if it be absolutely fated for a man to fornicate, or
commit sacrilege, or do some other evil deed, why is he
punished, - when he hath done the deed from Fate’s
necessity?

Tier. All works, my son, are Fate’s; and without Fate
naught of things corporal - or good, or ill - can come to
pass.


76 otOeor/]?. Cf C. H., x. (xi.) 8, 9: “And the soul’s vice is ignorance”; and § 20: “What greater chastisement of any
human soul, can there be, son, than lack of piety?” The only way of salvation from the bonds of Fate is thus “piety”
or “godliness.” See R. 102, 1, for references.

77 8o?a.

78 Heimarmene.


- 129 -



But it is fated too, that he who doeth ill, shall suffer. And
for this cause he doth it - that he may suffer what he
suffereth, because he did it.

6. But for the moment, [Tat,] let be the teaching {logos) as
to vice and Fate, for we have spoken of these things in
other [of our sermons]; but now our teaching {logos) is
about the Mind: - what Mind can do, and how it is [so]
different, - in men being such and such, and in irrational
lives [so] changed; and [then] again that in irrational lives
it is not of a beneficial nature, while that in men it
quencheth out the wrathful and the lustful elements.

Of men, again, we must class some as led by reason, and
others as unreasoning.

7. But all men are subject to Fate, and genesis and change,
for these 79 are the beginning and the end of Fate.

And though all men do suffer fated things, those led by
reason (those whom we said the Mind doth guide) do not
endure like suffering with the rest; but, since they’ve freed
themselves from viciousness, not being bad, they do not
suffer bad.

Tat. How meanest thou again, my father? Is not the
fornicator bad; the murderer bad; and [so with] all the
rest?

Her. [I meant not that;] but that the Mind-led man, my
son, though not a fornicator, will suffer just as though he
had committed fornication, and though he be no
murderer, as though he had committed murder.

The quality of change he can no more escape than that of
genesis.

But it is possible for one who hath the Mind, to free
himself from vice.

8. Wherefore I’ve ever heard, my son, Good Daimon also
say - (and had He set it down in written words, He would
have greatly helped the race of men; for He alone, my son,
doth truly, as the First-born God, gazing upon all things,


79 Sc. genesis and change.


- 130 -



give voice to words (logoi) divine) - yea, once I heard Him
say:

“All things are one, and most of all the bodies which the
mind alone perceives. Our life is owing to [God’s] Energy
and Power and hEon. His Mind is Good, so is His Soul as
well. And this being so, intelligible things know naught of
separation. So, then, Mind, being Ruler of all things, and
being Soul of God, can do whate’er it wills.”

9. So do thou understand, and carry back this word {logos)
unto the question thou didst ask before, - I mean about
Mind’s Fate.

For if thou dost with accuracy, son, eliminate [all] captious
arguments {logoi), thou wilt discover that of very truth the
Mind, the Soul of God, doth rule o’er all - o’er Fate, and
Law, and all things else; and nothing is impossible to it, -
neither o’er Fate to set a human soul 80 , nor under Fate to
set [a soul] neglectful of what comes to pass. Let this so
far suffice from the Good Daimon’s most good [words] 81 .

Tat. Yea, [words] divinely spoken, father mine, truly and
helpfully. But further still explain me this.

10. Thou said’st that Mind in lives irrational worked in
them as [their] nature, co-working with their impulses.

But impulses of lives irrational, as I do think, are passions.

Now if the Mind co-worketh with [these] impulses, and if
the impulses of [lives] irrational be passions, then is Mind
also passion, taking its colour from the passions.

Her. Well put, my son! Thou questionest right nobly, and
it is just that I as well should answer [nobly].

11. All things incorporal when in a body are subject unto
passion, and in the proper sense they are [themselves] all
passions.

For every thing that moves [another] is incorporal; while
every thing that’s moved is body.


80 Cf. Lact, D. L, ii. 15.

81 The critical text of this paragraph is given R. 78.


- 131 -



Incorporals are further moved by Mind, and movement’s
passion.

Both, then, are subject unto passion - both mover and the
moved, the former being ruler and the latter ruled.

But when a man hath freed himself from body, then is he
also freed from passion.

But, more precisely, son, naught is impassible, but all are
passible.

Yet passion differeth from passibility; for that the one is
active, while the other’s passive.

Incorporals 82 moreover act upon themselves, for either
they are motionless 8 ’ or they are moved; but whichsoe’er
it be, it’s passion.

But bodies are invariably acted on, and therefore are they
passible.

Do not, then, let terms trouble thee; action and passion
are both the selfsame thing. To use the fairer sounding
term, however, does no harm.

12. Tat. Most clearly hast thou, father mine, set forth the
teaching {logos).

Her. Consider this as well, my son; that these two things
God hath bestowed on man beyond all mortal lives - both
mind and speech (logos) equal to immortality. He hath the
mind for knowing God and uttered speech (logos) for
eulogy of Him 84 .

And if one useth these for what he ought, he’ll differ not a
whit from the immortals 8 ’. Nay, rather, on departing from
the body, he will be guided by the twain unto the Choir of
Gods and Blessed Ones.

13. Tat. Why, father mine! - do not the other lives make
use of speech (logos)?


82 Reading aowpaxa for awpaxa.

83 The words I have translated by “act,” “active” and “action,” may be more literally rendered by “energize,”
“energic” and “energy.” The “motionless” has “energy” because it is the cause of motion to that which it moves.

84 Following the emendation of R.

85 The critical text of the above paragraphs is given R. 156, n. 6.


- 132 -



Her. Nay, son; but use of voice; speech is far different
from voice. For speech is general among all men, while
voice doth differ in each class of living thing.

Tat. But with men also, father mine, according to each
race, speech differs.

Her. Yea, son, but man is one; so also speech is one and is
interpreted, and it is found the same in Egypt, and in
Persia, and in Greece.

Thou seemest, son, to be in ignorance of Reason’s
(Logos) 86 worth and greatness. For that the Blessed God,
Good Daimon, hath declared:

“Soul is in Body, Mind in Soul; but Reason (Logos) is in
Mind, and Mind in God; and God is Father of [all] these.”

14. The Reason, then, is the Mind’s image, and Mind
God’s [image]; while Body is [the image] of the Form; and
Form [the image] of the Soul.

The subtlest part of Matter is, then, Air; of Air, Soul; of
Soul, Mind; and of Mind, God 87 .

And God surroundeth all and permeateth all 88 ; while Mind
surroundeth Soul, Soul Air, Air Matter.

Necessity 89 and Providence and Nature are instruments of
Cosmos and of Matter’s ordering; while of intelligible
things each is Essence, and Sameness is their Essence.

But of the Bodies 911 of the Cosmos each is many; for
through possessing Sameness, \these\ composed Bodies,
though they do change from one into another of
themselves, do natheless 91 ever keep the incorruption of
their Sameness.

15. Whereas in all the rest of composed bodies, of each
there is a certain number; for without number structure
cannot be, or composition, or decomposition.


86 It is impossible to bring out the word-play of the original in English; and so the double meaning is lost.

87 This sentence is tagged on to the end of C. H., v. (vi.) by some scribe.

88 Cf. § 20 below.

89 Reading avayxT] for avayxri; see § 21 below.

90 Sc. the elements.

91 [Ed. (archaic) Nevertheless]


- 133 -



Now it is units that give birth to number and increase it,
and, being decomposed, are taken back again into
themselves.

Matter is one; and this whole Cosmos - the mighty God
and image of the mightier One, both with Him unified,
and the conserver of the Will and Order of the Father - is
filled full of Life 92 .

Naught is there in it throughout the whole of FEon, the
Father’s [everlasting] Re-establishment 9 ’, - nor of the
whole, nor of its parts, - which doth not live.

For not a single thing that’s dead, hath been, or is, or shall
be in [this] Cosmos.

For that the Father willed it should have Life as long as it
should be. Wherefore it needs must be a God.

16. How, then, O son, could there be in the God, the
image of the Father 94 , in the plenitude 9 ’ of Life - dead
things 96 ?

For that death is corruption, and corruption is
destruction.

How then could any part of that which knoweth no
corruption be corrupted, or any whit of him the God
destroyed?

Tat. Do they not, then, my father, die - the lives in it, that
are its parts?

Tier. Hush, son! - led into error by the term in use for
what takes place.

They do not die, my son, but are dissolved as compound
bodies.

Now dissolution is not death, but dissolution of a
compound; it is dissolved not so that it may be destroyed,
but that it may become renewed.


92 Lit. a Pleroma of Life.

93 OlTioxaxaaxaaig.

94 Reading Ttocxgd? for tiavxo?.

95 Pleroma.

96 A critical text of the last five paragraphs is given R. 25, n. 1.


- 134 -



For what is the activity of life? Is it not motion? What
then in Cosmos is there that hath no motion? Naught is
there, son!

17. Tat. Doth not Earth even, father, seem to thee to have
no motion?

Her. Nay, son; but rather that she is the only thing which,
though in very rapid motion, is also stable.

For how would it not be a thing to laugh at, that the
Nurse of all should have no motion, when she engenders
and brings forth all things?

For ’tis impossible that without motion one who doth
engender, should do so.

That thou shouldst ask if the fourth part 9 is not inert, is
most ridiculous; for that the body which doth have no
motion, gives sign of nothing but inertia.

18. Know, therefore, generally, my son, that all that is in
Cosmos is being moved for decrease or for increase.

Now that which is kept moving, also lives; but there is no
necessity that that which lives, should be all same.

For being simultaneous, the Cosmos, as a whole, is not
subject to change, my son, but all its parts are subject unto
it; yet naught [of it] is subject to corruption, or destroyed.

It is the terms employed that confuse men. For ’tis not
genesis that constituteth life, but ’tis sensation; it is not
change that constituteth death, but ’tis forgetfulness.

Since, then, these things are so, they are immortal all, -
Matter, [and] Life, [and] Spirit, Mind [and] Soul, of which
whatever liveth, is composed.

19. Whatever then doth live, oweth its immortality unto
the Mind, and most of all doth man, he who is both
recipient of God, and co-essential with Him.

For with this life alone doth God consort; by visions in
the night, by tokens in the day, and by all things doth He


97 Sc. element.


- 135 -



foretell the future unto him, - by birds, by inward parts, by
wind, by tree.

Wherefore doth man lay claim to know things past, things
present and to come.

20. Observe this, too, my son; that each one of the other
lives inhabiteth one portion of the Cosmos, - aquatic
creatures water, terrene earth, and aery creatures air; while
man doth use all these, - earth, water, air, [and] fire; he
seeth heaven, too, and doth contact it with [his] sense.

But God surroundeth all, and permeateth all 98 , for He is
energy and power; and it is nothing difficult, my son, to
conceive God.

21. But if thou wouldst Him also contemplate , behold the
ordering of the Cosmos, and [see] the orderly behaviour
of its ordering; behold thou the Necessity of things made
manifest, and [see] the Providence of things become and
things becoming; behold how Matter is all-full of Life;
[behold] this so great God in movement, with all the good
and noble [ones] - gods, daimones and men!

Tat. But these are purely energies, O father mine!

Her. If, then, they’re purely energies, my son, - by whom,
then, are they energized except by God?

Or art thou ignorant, that just as Heaven, Earth, Water,
Air, are parts of Cosmos, in just the selfsame way God’s
parts are Life and Immortality, [and] Energy, and Spirit,
and Necessity, and Providence, and Nature, Soul, and
Mind, and the Duration 99 of all these that is called Good?

And there is naught of things that have become, or are
becoming, in which God is not.

22. Tat. Is He in Matter, father, then?

Her. Matter, my son, is separate from God, in order that
thou may’st attribute unto it the quality of space. But what
thing else than mass 1 "" think’st thou it is, if it’s not


98 Cf. § 14 above.

99 Sc. iEon.

ion Probably in the sense of “quantity.”


- 136 -



energized? Whereas if it be energized, by whom is it made
so? For energies, we said, are parts of God.

By whom are, then, all lives enlivened? By whom are
things immortal made immortal? By whom changed
things made changeable?

And whether thou dost speak of Matter, or of Body, or of
Essence, know that these too are energies of God; and
that materiality is Matter’s energy, that corporality is
Bodies’ energy, and that essentiality doth constitute the
energy of Essence; and this is God - the All.

23. And in the All is naught that is not God. Wherefore
nor size, nor space, nor quality, nor form, nor time,
surroundeth God; for He is All, and All surroundeth all,
and permeateth all.

Unto this Reason (Logos), son, thy adoration and thy
worship pay. There is one way alone to worship God; [it
is] not to be bad 1 " 1 .


a


101 Lactantius, D. /., vi. 25, translates the last two sentences into Latin, with the strange remark that Hermes so spake
in treating “About justice.” See the following Commentary on § 6, and Ex. xi.


- 137 -



COMMENTARY


THE SAYINGS OF THE GOOD DAIMON

This Sermon has as its subject the Common or General Mind - Great Mind,
Good Mind, Good Daimon. For Mind, as we are told (§ 2), is the Benefactor of
men (sUspysTriq avOqoiTioov); He is the Good Shepherd, the Good Husbandman, the
Good Physician, as He is called in different tractates.

From a critical standpoint, the point of greatest interest is that our Hermes in no
less than three places (§§ 1, 8, 13) quotes certain Sayings of the Good Daimon.

Now the first of these quotations (§ 1) - “Gods are immortal men, and men are
mortal Gods” - is one of the most cited Sayings of Heracleitus 102 . Hermes,
however, does not mean to say that Heracleitus was Agothodaimon, but that
Heracleitus was the mouthpiece of the Good Mind when he uttered this “word”
{logos).

Nor was this the opinion of Hermes only; it was the belief apparendy of
Heracleitus himself when he declared:

“Not because you hear me say so, but because you hear the Reason (Logos) so
declare, is it wise to confess that All are One. ” 103

At any rate the term Logos, as used by Heracleitus, in connection with such a
declaration, is taken by Hippolytus 104 to mean the All-pervading Reason, and not
the normal reason of man.

What, then, is our surprise to find the second of Hermes’ quotations of a Saying
of the Good Daimon qualified by the words (§ 8): “And had He set it down in
written words” or “in writing,” when that quotation begins with the words: “All are
One” 105 - the root-formula of Heracleitus.

Such Sayings of Heracleitus must have been the common property of all the
philosophers of the time and of their pupils. But the quotation of Hermes does not
end with the formula of Heracleitus; it continues, how far exactly it is difficult to
determine. Reitzenstein (p. 127) would apparently make it end with the word
“fEon,” but I am inclined to think it goes to the end of § 8. In either case it
includes the term “/Ron.”

If, now, we turn to the third quotation from the Sayings of the Good Daimon (§
13), we are at once struck with its remarkable resemblance to the form of teaching
in C. H., xi. (xii.) 4. Though there is no precise verbal agreement, there is a striking
identity of style of formula.

In our treatise, however, the Saying is used in authoritative illustration of the
meaning of the Reason (Logos), whereas in the “Mind to Hermes,” - that is, in the
Sermon of the Good Daimon Himself to Hermes - Reason is omitted, Mind and
Reason being there transcended by /Ron and Mind.


102 Diels, 62; Bywater, 67; Fairbanks, 67 (p. 40), which see for references to ancient authors who quote it.

103 Diels, 50; Bywater, 1; Fairbanks, 1 (p. 24).

104 Philos., ix. 9.

105 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 25, and xvi. (“Definitions of Asclepius”) 3; for references to the Magical and Alchemical
literature, see R. 39, 1; 106, 5; 127, 3.


- 138 -



Moreover, the whole style of what follows this quotation in our treatise is exactly
the same as the style of instruction in C. H., xi. (xii.) - short categorical formulas;
and, further, the previous quotation (§ 8) contains the key-word TEon, which
characterizes the teaching of the “Mind to Hermes.”

I therefore conclude that our Hermes is using a more intimate instruction,
known only to the Hermes-grade, and not published for the Tat-degree; and that
this is the meaning of his saying that it has not been written down. He means
simply that it has not yet been allowed to be published for those in the Tat-stage.

There were, then, other treatises now lost of the same type as that of the “Mind
to Hermes”; in them there were quotations from the Sayings of Heracleitus; the
“Obscure Philosopher” being regarded as one who had come into direct contact
with the Logos or Mind, and as one, therefore, who spoke with the authority of
direct revelation.


HERMES AND BASILIDES

The next point of critical interest is the sentence in § 7:

“I meant not that, hut that the Mind-led man, my son, though not a fornicator,
will suffer just as though he had committed fornication, and though he he no murderer,
as though he had committed murder. ”

If we now turn to the quotation which Clement of Alexandria 106 gives us from
Book XXIII. of the Exegetica, of Basilides, we read:

“F or just as the hahe, who, although it hath done no wrong previously, or actively
committed any sin, yet hath the capacity of sin in it, - whenever it is subjected to
suffering is advantaged and reaps many benefits, which otherwise are difficult to gain ;
in just the selfsame way is it, that although a pefect man may not have sinned in act,
and yet doth suffer pains, he suffereth them in just the selfsame fashion as a babe;
having within himself the tendency to sin, but refusing to embrace the opportunity to
sin, he doth not sin. So that even for such a man as this we ought not to suppose the
incapacity for sin.

“tor just as it is the will to commit fornication that constitutes the fornicator, even
though he does not find the opportunity of actually committing fornication, and the will
to commit murder that constitutes the murderer, although he may not be actually able
to effect his purpose; so also in the case of the ‘ sinless ’ man I mean, if I see him
suffering even if he has actually done no sin, I shall say he is evil by his will to sin.

For I will say anything rather than that Providence is evil. ” 107

Providence, as in our treatise, is here the instrument of the Good (§ 14), of the
Will of God; it is the will of man that is the source of evil, as we learn from C. H.,
iv. (v.) 8: “For ’tis not God, ’tis we who are the cause of evil things, preferring them
to good.”

In our treatise, then, the very same problem is treated as in the Exegetica of
Basilides. Hermes speaks of the “Mind-led man,” the “man who has the Logos in


106 Strom., IV. xii., § 82 (P. 600; S. 217): Dindorf., ii. 363.

107 See F. F. F, 274, 275.


- 139 -



him”; Basilides speaks of die “perfect man.” So also in C. H., iv. (v.) 4, die “perfect
man” is he who has “received the Mind.”

The ideas of Hermes and of Basilides are practically identical; the words of both
are strikingly similar when they cite fornication and murder as typical sins, and
these and no others.

Compare again with this idea of the babe in Basilides the words of Hermes in C.
H., x. (xi.) 15:

“Behold an infant’s soul, my son, that is not yet cut off, because its body is still
small and not as yet come unto its full bulk. ... A tiling of beauty 7 altogether is such
a soul to see, not yet befouled with body’s passions, still all but hanging from the
Cosmic Soul.”

And with this compare what Hippolytus 108 tells us of Valentinus:

‘Valentinus says that he once saw a babe that had only just been bom, and that
he proceeded to question it to find out who it was. And the babe replied and said it
was the Logos. ”

And also the Psalm of Valentinus quoted by the same heresiologist 1 " 9 :

All things dependingfirom Spirit I see;

All things supported by Spirit I view;

Flesh from Soul depending;

Soul by Air supported;

Air from Wither hanging;

Fruits borne of the Deep;

Babe borne of the Womb.

Here, then, as in other instances, we have intimate points of contact between the
Hermetic and Christian Gnosis. Is there, however, any question of direct
plagiarism? I think not; but that the Christian doctors and the Hermetic
philosophers were both in contact with the same body of inner teaching.

4. With the action of the Mind on the soul in incarnation (§ 4) compare C. H., x.
(xi.), 18, 19, where the office of the Mind in respect to the soul out of incarnation is
graphically described.


THE SERMONS ON FATE

6. In § 6 Hermes tells us that he has already spoken about Fate in others of his
Sermons; while in §§ 14 and 21 he three times refers to Necessity and Providence.

In this connection it is to be noticed that Lactantius (D. I., vi. 25), in quoting the
last two sentences of our treatise, says that he takes them from a Sermon by
Hermes “On Justice.”

Now, Stobasus has preserved for us an Extract (xi.) from a Sermon dealing with
Justice, Providence, Necessity and Fate; also an Extract (x.) from a Sermon of
Hermes to Tat dealing with Fate, and ending with the words: “Such is the Sermon
on the rule of Providence, Necessity and Fate.” We have also an Extract (xiii.) “Of


108 Philos., vi. 42 (D. and S., 302); F. F. F., p. 306.

109 Philos., vi. 37 (D. and S., 290); see emended text in Hilgenfeld (A.), Die Ket^ergeschichte des Urchristenthums (Leipzig,
1884), p. 304; F. F. F., p. 307.


- 140 -



Hermes from the Books to Ammon,” entitled “Of the General Economy,” which
deals with Providence, Necessity and Fate.

There were, then, according to Hermes, already existing not one but several
Sermons on Fate, and, as we learn from Stobasus, not only in the Tat-literature but
also in the Ammon-literature. It seems, then, probable that in the collection used
by Lactantius the Tat-Sermons on Fate immediately preceded our treatise, and that
one of these sermons (the one immediately preceding our treatise, presumably) was
entitled “On Justice,” thus confirming the title I have prefixed to the Stobasus
Extract xi.

MATERIALITY AND CORPORALITY ARE ENERGIES OF GOD

22. Finally, in § 22 it has to be noticed that with the express teaching that Matter
and Body are so far from being evil that they are Energies of God - His materiality
and corporality - the charge of dualism against our philosophers must for ever be
abandoned. Their doctrine was that of pan-monism; and, therefore, wherever we
find signs of dualism, or even distinct statements of an indubitably dualistic nature,
we must understand that this was a formal convenience for the better insistence
upon die need of strenuous exertion to solve the mystery of the opposites, rather
than an essential doctrine of the Gnosis.


- 141 -



+- m ♦ - fc -

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIII. (XIV.)

THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN

CONCERNING REBIRTH AND THE PROMISE OF SILENCE

OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES UNTO TAT HIS SON

(Text: R. 339-348; P. 114-128; Pat . 15b-17b.)

1. Tat.



N ; the General Sermons 1 2 , father, thou didst
speak in riddles most unclear, conversing on
Divinity; and when thou saidst no man could
saved before Rebirth’, thy meaning thou didst


Further, when I became thy Suppliant, in Wending up the
Mount 4 5 , after thou hadst conversed with me, and when I
longed to learn the Sermon (Logos) on Rebirth (for this
beyond all other things is just the thing I know not), thou
saidst, that thou wouldst give it me - “when thou shalt
have become a stranger to the world.” 3

Wherefore I got me ready and made the thought in me a
stranger 6 to the world-illusion.

And now do thou fill up the things that fall short 7 in me
with what thou saidst would give me the tradition 8 of
Rebirth, setting it forth in speech or in the secret way.

I know not, O Thrice-greatest one, from out what matter
and what womb Man comes to birth, or of what seed 9 .


1 [Ed. Mead added the word ’’Now” to the beginning of the sentence, which is suggesting a direct continuation of
the previous Sermon]

2 ev tot? Ysvixovg. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 1 and 7.

3 ntxKiyy svsoia.

4 Reading std if]? ton ogou? pexa(3aaew? with P., and not Hocxa-(3aaew? with R. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 15; jamb., D. M., viii.
6 .

5 KOOfJlOU.

6 Reading aTtrjXXoxgitoaa with the majority of the editors, and not the 0 lTcr] 8 giaa of R.

7 xa Uaxegf] ftaxa avoc7tXf](Xoaov.

8 7 taga 8 ouvai, the word used for the giving of this lesson or inner instmction is the technical term for the “handing
on” of a doctrine or being initiated into it.

9 R.’s reading would make this refer to Hermes: “I know not from what womb thou com’st to birth.” But the whole
instruction seems to favour the usually accepted reading.


- 142 -



2. Hermes. Wisdom that understands 1 " in silence 11 [such is
the matter and the womb from out which Man is born],
and the True Good the seed.

Tat. Who is the sower, father? For I am altogether at a
loss.

Her. It is the Will of God, my son.

Tat. And of what kind is he that is begotten, father? For I
have no share of that essence in me, which doth transcend
the senses 12 . The one that is begot will be another one
from God, God’s Son?

Her. All in all, out of all powers composed.

Tat. Thou tellest me a riddle, father, and dost not speak as
father unto son.

Her. This Race 1 ’, my son, is never taught; but when He
willeth it, its memory is restored by God.

3. Tat. Thou sayest things impossible, O father, things that
are forced. Hence answers would I have direct unto these
things. Am I a son strange to my father’s race?

Keep it not, father, back from me. I am a true-born son;
explain to me the manner of Rebirth.

Her. What may I say, my son? I can but tell thee this.
Whene’er I see within myself the Simple Vision 14 brought
to birth out of God’s mercy 1 ’, I have passed through
myself into a Body that can never die. And now I am not
what I was before; but I am born in Mind.

The way to do this is not taught, and it cannot be seen by
the compounded 16 element by means of which thou seest.

Yea, I have had my former composed form dismembered
for me. I am no longer touched, yet have I touch; I have
dimension too; and [yet] am I a stranger to them now.


10 aotpia voega.

11 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 5.

12 ifj<; ev epioi ouaiai; if]? vorjrrji;.

13 Cf. Ex. i. 3.

14 OUikaaTOV, that is to say, not made up, non-fictitious, not compounded; that is, simple - the opposite of
compounded.

15 Cf. below, § 7: the man “who hath been taken pity on by God”; and also §10.

16 TtXoCCTTOV.


- 143 -



Thou seest me with eyes, my son; but what I am thou dost
not understand [even] with fullest strain of body and of
sight.

4. Tat. Into fierce frenzy and mind-fury hast thou plunged
me, father, for now no longer do I see myself.

Her. I would, my son, that thou hadst e’en passed right
through thyself, as they who dream in sleep yet sleepless.

Tat. Tell me this too! Who is the author 17 of Rebirth?

Her. The Son of God, the One Man, by God’s Will.

5. Tat. Now hast thou brought me, father, unto pure
stupefaction.

Arrested from the senses which I had before, . . 18 . . ; for
[now] I see thy Greatness identical with thy distinctive
form.

Her. Even in this thou art untrue 19 ; the mortal form doth
change with every day. ’Tis turned by time to growth and
waning, as being an untrue thing 211 .

6. Tat. What then is true, Thrice-greatest One?

Her. That which is never troubled, son, which cannot be
defined; that which no colour hath, nor any figure, which
is not turned, which hath no garment, which giveth light;
that which is comprehensible unto itself [alone], which
doth not suffer change; that which no body can contain 21 .

Tat. In very truth I lose my reason, father. Just when I
thought to be made wise by thee, I find the senses of this
mind of mine blocked up.

Her. Thus is it, son: That which is upward borne like fire,
yet is borne down like earth, that which is moist like
water, yet blows like air 22 , how shalt thou this perceive
with sense - the that which is not solid nor yet moist,
which naught can bind or loose, of which in power and


17 Ysvsaiougyo?-

18 A lacuna unfortunately follows.

19 t|is68r|.

20 d>? t|isC8o?.

21 Cf. P. S. A., xxxi . A

22 Cf.C.H., i v. (v.) 1.


- 144 -



energy alone can man have any notion, - and even then it
wants a man who can 2 " perceive the Way of Birth in
God 24 ?

7. Tat. I am incapable of this, O father, then?

Her. Nay, God forbid, my son! Withdraw into thyself, and
it will come; mil . ’ and it comes to pass; throw out of work
the body’s senses, and thy Divinity shall come to birth;
purge from thyself the brutish torments - things of matter.

Tat. I have tormentors then in me, O father?

Her. Ay, no few, my son; nay, fearful ones and manifold.

Tat. I do not know them, father.

Her. Torment the first is this Not-knowing 2 ", son; the
second one is Grief; the third, Intemperance; the fourth,
Concupiscence; the fifth, Unrighteousness; the sixth is
Avarice; the seventh, Error 26 ; the eighth is Envy; the
ninth, Guile 27 ; the tenth is Anger; eleventh, Rashness; the
twelfth is Malice.

These are in number twelve; but under them are many
more, my son; and creeping through the prison of the
body 28 they force the man that’s placed within 29 to suffer
in his senses. But they depart (although not all at once)
from him who hath been taken pity on by God’ 0 ; and this
it is which constitutes the manner of Rebirth. And . . 31 . .
the Reason (Logos).

8. And now, my son, be still and solemn silence keep!
Thus shall the mercy that flows on us from God not
cease.

Henceforth rejoice, O son, for by the Powers of God
thou art being purified for the articulation of the Reason
(Logos).


23 Retaining the reading Seogevou 8s ton Suvagsvou.

24 xf|v ev 0sa> ysvsaiv - f. § 10.

25 ayvoia.

26 CLTUXVr}.

27 86 Xoq.

28 Cf. C. H., xvi. 15.

29 EvSiaOsxov.

30 Cf. above, § 3: “brought to birth out of God’s mercy”; and also § 10.

31 A lacuna in the text.


- 145 -



Gnosis of God hath come to us, and when this comes, my
son, Not-knowing is cast out.

Gnosis of Joy hath come to us, and on its coming, son,
Sorrow will flee away to them who give it room. The
Power that follows Joy do I invoke, thy Self-control. O
Power most sweet! Let us most gladly bid it welcome, son!
How with its coming doth it chase Intemperance away!

9. Now fourth, on Continence I call, the Power against
Desire.

. . 32 . . This step, my son, is Righteousness’ firm seat. For
without judgment 3 ’ see how she hath chased
Unrighteousness away. We are made righteous, son, by
the departure of Unrighteousness.

Power sixth I call to us, - that against Avarice, Sharing-
with-all 34 .

And now that Avarice is gone, I call on Truth. And Error
flees, and Truth is with us.

See how [the measure of] the Good is full, my son, upon
Truth’s coming. For Envy hath gone from us; and unto
Truth is joined the Good as well, with Life and Light.

And now no more doth any torment of the Darkness
venture nigh, but vanquished [all] have fled with whirring
wings.

10. Thou knowest [now], my son, the manner of Rebirth.
And when the Ten is come, my son, that driveth out the
Twelve, the Birth in understanding” is complete, and by
this Birth we are made into Gods.

Who then doth by His mercy gain this Birth in God,
abandoning the body’s senses, knows himself [to be of


32 Something has here evidently fallen out in the text.

33 ywgi? Kgiaswg. If, however, we must read x-uaew? with the majority of the editors, I cannot understand the various
translations. Everard gives “without labour”; Parthey, “ nulla contention c”; Menard, "sans conibaf\ Chambers, “without
contention.” I would, therefore, render it: “See how she hath chased out Unrighteousness without a home”; for it
seems to me that in ycogi? xxiasw? we have the exact antithesis of shgaaga. Righteousness has here her firm seat or
abode, and Unrighteousness is thus naturally without a home.

34 xoivwviav.

35 vosga ysvsai?, lit., intellectual birth.


- 146 -



Light and Life’ 6 ] and that he doth consist of these, and
[thus] is filled with Bliss.

11. Tat. By God made steadfast, father, no longer with the
sight my eyes afford I look on things, but with the energy
the Mind doth give me through the Powers’ 7 .

In heaven am I, in earth, in water, air; I am in animals, in
plants; I’m in the womb, before the womb, after the
womb; I’m everywhere!

But further tell me this: How are the torments of the
Darkness, when they are twelve in number, driven out by
the ten Powers? What is the way of it, Thrice-greatest
one?

12. Her. This dwelling-place’ 8 through which we have just
passed, my son, is constituted from the circle of the types-
of-life, this being composed of elements, twelve in
number, but of one nature, an omniform ’ 9 idea. For man’s
delusion there are disunions 4 " in them, son, while in their
action they are one. Not only can we never part Rashness
from Wrath; they cannot even be distinguished.

According to right reason {logos), then, they 41 naturally
withdraw once and for all, in as much as they are chased
out by no less than ten powers, that is, the Ten.

For, son, the Ten is that which giveth birth to souls. And
Life and Light are unified there, where the One hath being
from the Spirit. According then to reason {logos) the One
contains the Ten, the Ten the One.

13. Tat. Father, I see the All, I see myself in Mind.

Her. This is, my son, Rebirth - no more to look on things
from body’s view-point (a thing three ways in space
extended), 42 . . A though this Sermon (Logos) on Rebirth,


36 Completed from C. H., i. 22.

37 xfj 8ia Sivapewv vo?]Tixfj evegyeia.

38 oxrjvo?, - tent or tabernacle of the human soul. Cf. below, § 15.

39 Cf. commentary on C. H., xi. (xii.) 16.

40 Sia^uyai - the opposite of aui^uyiai.

41 That is, the Twelve.

42 As opposed to some other dimension, presumably.

43 Some words are evidently missing.


- 147 -



on which I did not comment 44 ; - in order that we may not
be calumniators 4 ' of the All unto the multitude, to whom
indeed the God Himself doth will we should not.

14. Tat. Tell me, O father: This Body which is made up of
the Powers, is it at any time dissolved?

Her. Hush, [son]! Speak not of things impossible, else wilt
thou sin and thy Mind’s eye be quenched.

The natural body which our sense perceives is far
removed from this essential birth.

The first must be dissolved, the last can never be; the first
must die, the last death cannot touch.

Dost thou not know thou hast been born a God, Son of
the One, even as I myself?

15. Tat. I would, O father, hear the Praise-giving with
hymn which thou didst say thou heardest then when thou
wert at the Eight [the Ogdoad] of Powers.

Her. Just as the Shepherd did foretell [I should], my son,
[when I came to] the Eight 46 .

Well dost thou haste to “strike thy tent,” 47 for thou hast
been made pure.

The Shepherd, Mind of all masterhood 48 , hath not passed
on to me more than hath been writ down, for full well did
He know that I should of myself be able to learn all, and
hear what I should wish, and see all things.

He left to me the making of fair things 49 ; wherefore the
Powers within me, e’en as they are in all' 0 , break into song.

16. Tat. Father, I wish to hear; I long to know these
things.


44 See § 1.

45 8ux(3okoi, compare § 22. The lacuna probably contained some reference to keeping silence.

46 Cf.C.H., i. 26.

47 Xuoai to oxf]vog. Cf. above, § 12. The meaning is generally to free oneself from the trammels of the body. Compare
the Pythian Oracle concerning Plotinus: “But now since thou hast struck thy tent and left the tomb of thy daimonic
soul” (vtiv 8’ Ots Sr| axf]vo? psv skuaao, arjpa 8’ Ekeitjia? (Jjuyfjy Saipovig). Porphyry, Plotini Vita, xxii.; f Ex. vii. 3;

Ex. iii. 1 .

48 Cf. C. H., i. 2.

49 Sc. psalms and praise-giving.

50 Sc. prophets.


- 148 -



Her. Be still, my son; hear the Praise-giving now that keeps
[the soul] in tune. Hymn of Re-birth - a hymn I would not
have thought fit so readily to tell, had’st thou not reached
the end of all.

Wherefore this is not taught, but is kept hid in silence.

Thus then, my son, stand in a place uncovered to the sky,
facing the southern wind 31 , about the sinking of the
setting sun, and make thy worship; so in like manner too
when he doth rise, with face to the east wind.

Now, son, be still!

THE SECRET HYMNODY

17. Let every nature of the World receive the utterance of
my hymn!

Open thou Earth! Let every bolt of the Abyss be drawn
for me. Stir not, ye Trees!

I am about to hymn creation’s Lord, both All and One.

Ye Heavens open, and ye Winds stay still; [and] let God’s
deathless Sphere receive my word (logos)\

For I will sing the praise of Him who founded all; who
fixed the Earth, and hung up Heaven, and gave command
that Ocean should afford sweet water [to the Earth], to
both those parts that are inhabited and those that are not,
for the support and use of every man; who made the Fire
to shine for gods and men for every act.

Let us together all give praise to Him, sublime above the
Heavens, of every nature Lord!

’Tis He who is the Eye of Mind; may He accept the praise
of these my Powers!

18. Ye Powers that are within me, hymn the One and All;
sing with my Will, Powers all that are within me!

O blessed Gnosis, by thee illumined, hymning through
thee the Light that mind alone can see 32 , I joy in Joy of
Mind.


51 Also used of the south-west quarter. The “south wind” is thought to have extended from SSE. to W.

52 to vo^TOv tprog.


- 149 -



Sing with me praises all ye Powers!

Sing praise, my Self-control; sing thou through me, my
Righteousness, the praises of the Righteous; sing thou, my
Sharing-all, the praises of the All; through me sing, Truth,
Truth’s praises!

Sing thou, O Good, the Good! O Life and Light, from us
to you our praises flow!

Father, I give Thee thanks, to Thee Thou Energy of all
my Powers; I give Thee thanks, O God, Thou Power of
all my Energies!

19. Thy Reason (Logos) sings through me Thy praises.
Take back through me the All into [Thy] Reason - [my]
reasonable oblation 3 ’!

Thus cry the Powers in me. They sing Thy praise, Thou
All; they do Thy Will.

From Thee Thy Will’ 4 ; to Thee the All. Receive from all
their reasonable oblation. The All that is in us, O Life,
preserve; O Light illumine it; O God in-spirit it”.

It is Thy Mind that plays the Shepherd’ 6 to Thy Word’ 7 , O
Thou Creator, Bestower of the Spirit [upon all] ’ 8 .

20. [For] Thou art God; Thy Man’ 9 thus cries to Thee
through Fire, through Air, through Earth, through Water,
[and] through Spirit, through Thy creatures.

’Tis from Thy /Lon I have found Praise-giving; and in Thy
Will 60 , the object of my search, have I found rest.

Fat. By thy good pleasure 61 have I seen this Praise-giving
being sung , 62 O father; I have set it in my Cosmos too.


53 Cf. below, 21.

54 Cf. P. S. A., Comment, and R. 39, n. 1.

55 The Spirit being Light and Life.

56 Ttoipaivsi, acts as a shepherd or feeds; Poemandres is thus the Shepherd of men or the feeder of men, He who gives
them the heavenly food.

57 The Word or Reason or true Man in man.

58 Ttveupatotpoge 8r|fuougY®-

59 Cf. C.H., i. 32.

60 (3ouM].

61 0sXt]fji.a.

62 Cf., for instance, The Ascension of Isaiah, i. 6: “In the twentieth year of the reign of Hezekiah, Isaiah had seen the
words of this prophecy.” - Charles’ Trans. (London, 1900), p. 5.


- 150 -



Her. Say in the Cosmos that thy mind alone can see, my
son.

Tat. Yea, father, in the Cosmos that the mind alone can
see; for I have been made able by thy Hymn, and by thy
Praise-giving my mind hath been illumined. But further I
myself as well would from my natural mind send praise-
giving to God.

21. Her. But not unheedfully, my son.

Tat. Ay. What I behold in mind, that do I say.

To thee, thou Parent of my Bringing into Birth, as unto
God I, Tat, send reasonable offerings 61 . O God and
Father, thou art the Lord, thou art the Mind. Receive
from me oblations reasonable as thou would’st wish; for
by thy Will all things have been perfected.

Her. Send thou oblation, son, acceptable to God, the Sire
of all; but add, my son, too, “through the Word” (Logos).

Tat. I give thee, father, thanks for showing me to sing
such hymns.

22. Her. Happy am I, my son, that thou hast brought the
good fruits forth of Truth, products that cannot die.

And now that thou hast learnt this lesson from me, make
promise to keep silence 64 on thy virtue, and to no soul, my
son, make known the handing on to thee the manner of
Rebirth, that we may not be thought to be calumniators 6 '.

And now we both of us have given heed sufficiendy, both
I the speaker and the hearer thou.

In Mind 66 hast thou become a Knower of thyself and of
our [common] Sire.



63 Cf. above, § 18.

64 Cf P. S. A., xxxii. 4.

65 8ia(3o).oi, slanderers, calumniators; compare § 13; also Ex. i. 16.

66 voegfi)?.


- 151 -



COMMENTARY


CONCERNING THE TITLE

“The Secret Sermon on the Mountain” is the main title given in all the MSS.,
with the exception of A; the subsidiary contents-title is evidently derived from the
same edition to which we owe the other contents-titles preserved in our Corpus.
Reitzenstein (p. 193), however, thinks that the main title has arisen by mistake.
What the mistake is he does not tell us; perhaps he means that in our Sermon there
is no mention of “ On a Mountain,” but rather, as in § 1, if we accept his reading, of
“Down a Mountain.” But in this we cannot follow him; for the whole teaching is
precisely “On the Mount” - to the top of which Tat has now come. For the
“Mountain” was symbolic of stages of inner development, and in § 9 we are told
precisely: “This step (the fifth) is Righteousness’ firm seat,” - showing that the
Mountain was conceived as an ascent or stair of steps as is so often seen in
Egyptian frescoes.


THE TERM APOCRYPHON

Again, with regard to the title, the term “Secret” (anoxQupoi; - apocryphal) is
used in its original sense of hidden away, meaning esoteric or not put into
circulation, as applied to a logos or sermon, or a collection of logoi or sayings.

A logos in this sense had very much the same meaning for our Ancients as the
Sanskrit maha-vakyam (“great saying”) has to-day for an Indian theosophist who
applies the term to the great mystical utterances of the Upanishads; such as: “That
art thou” (Tat tv am asi ), etc.

In classical antiquity these logoi or logia were regarded as words of wisdom, and
were the most sacred legacies of the sages to humanity. These oracular utterances
were frequently collected together, and even prior to the days of syncretism formed
the most sacred “deposits” (8ia0rjxcu) of various nations; the same term being
subsequently given to the Christian Bible.

Thus Herodotus calls Onomacritus, the first collector of the archaic Orphic
Hymns, a “depository of oracles” (8icc0bt7]v yqqajiCOv), - the word carrying the
meaning of “one who arranges,” corresponding exactly to the term Vyasa in
Sanskrit, the supposed “author” of the Mahdbharata.

Such collections of logoi or logia were then generally called “deposits,” the word
also sometimes bearing the meaning of “testaments” as containing the expression
of the Divine will or dispensation. The same term is used by Strabo (x. 482) of the
Laws of Lycurgus; it was also applied by the Orphics and Pythagoreans to such
sacred laws 67 ; while Ecclesiastical writers subsequently used it in reference to the
Canonical Books 66 .


67 Grotius, ap. Jablonski, ii. 397; Lobeck, Aglaoph., p. 714.

68 Euseb., Chron., 99 A.


- 152 -



The Orphics and Pythagoreans also called these collections “sacred utterances”
(knot koyoi) ; and even Clement of Alexandria refers to such a saying of Orpheus as
“that truly sacred utterance” (xdv Ovxooc; Ispdv koyov).

That such collections were kept secret is not surprising; indeed, such must have
been the case from time immemorial. But even on the ground of purely Greek and
Roman history, we are not without information of collections of oracles carefully
guarded as the secret scriptures or bibles of nations.

Cicero 69 speaks of such a bible of the Veii. The Athenians, in the time of the
Kings, possessed a similar bible of logia 70 \ and Dinarchus 71 tells us that the safety of
the State depended on this secret scripture (d7ioppf]xouq 8ioc0fjxcc<;) These occult
sayings (a7io0svxcc 87trj) are further called by Suidas (s.v.) “withdrawn volumes”
((3i(3kia &vaxsyoop7]x6xoc) - that is to say, books withdrawn from public perusal, or,
in other words, apocryphal, hidden or secret (dxoxpupa).

And not only was this the case with the ancient writings themselves, but also
with the commentaries upon them, and by degrees with everything referring to
them, until finally we find Themistius the rhetorician, in the fourth century,
speaking of that “mass of Archaic wisdom not open to the public or in general
circulation, but scarce and occult.” 2

We have, therefore, translated the term by “secret” as conveying the proper
meaning of the epithet in the title, and not by “apocryphal,” a word that nowadays
connotes the judgment of a theological canon.

THE THREE STAGES OF PROBATION

1. In the first paragraph Tat definitely refers to three Stages of Probation, before
he is deemed fit to hear the Sermon on Rebirth.

(i) First there is the General or Preliminary Instruction contained in a collection
of discourses called the General Sermons (Tsvixoi Aoyoi).

(ii) Next is the Stage where Tat becomes the Suppliant of Hermes, a stage
characterized by Conversation or Dialogue (8iccksy0fjvou); that is to say, Tat was
allowed to ask questions. This is further symbolically described by a phrase, 87ii xrjc
xoh Oqouc [XExa'SdaEOJC, which is difficult to translate, but which seems to mean
either Passing up, or Wending up, the Mountain, or Wending over the Mountain.
That is to say, that Hermes was gradually leading Tat to the top of the Mountain, in
plain words, as far as his normal intellect could carry him; the Top of the Mountain
representing the highest point of unaided mental faculty.

This stage was, I believe, represented by the collection of Sermons to Tat, or
Dialogues with Tat, known as the Ais^oSixoi Aoyoi - a term somewhat difficult to
translate precisely.

The fundamental meaning of 8is ^o8oq is a “way through and out,” a “pathway”
or “passage,” or “means of escape.” It thus comes to mean the course of a


69 De Div., i. 44.

70 Herod., v. 90.

71 Or. c. Demos., 91, 20.

72 Or., IV. 60: “axupo? ag^aia? aotpia?, ov> xoivrp ot)8s ev frsacp xuXiv8oo[Aevr]<; aXka eraaviou xai anoderou.”


- 153 -



narrative, or a detailed narrative, exposition, discussion. Hence also a “passage” of
Scripture. As set over against yevixbc, (General), therefore, Sis^oSixOc; would mean
Detailed or Expository; but at the same time it would to the Greek ear suggest the
meaning of the Means of Escape or the Way out of Ignorance.

(iii) The third Stage is that of Moral and Mental Purification. “Wherefore I got
me ready and made the thought (to ppovypa) in me a stranger to the world-
illusion” (xfjq xoti xoctjiou 6l7cdr/]c) - the Error that in § 7 sums up the first six vices,
and is in § 9 driven out by Truth.

Stage ii. may have been technically known as that of the Suppliant, though, of
course, of this we cannot be sure. In any case the term must be considered in close
connection with Philo’s treatise On the Contemplative Eife, which, as Conybeare tells
us, most probably formed Book IV. of Philo’s voluminous work, or rather apology,
De Eegatione. The alternative title of this work was The Suppliants. By “Suppliant”
Philo tells us he means “one who has fled to God and taken refuge with Him.” 7 ’

Here, however, the term is used in a narrower sense, as adapted to the personal
relationship of disciple to master, who, during the time of probation, stands to him
as the representative of God. The master is his spiritual father, the image of God
the Father 74 .


THE HOLY MOUNT OF INITIATION

As to the symbolic use of the term Mountain, I need hardly remind my readers
that it was perhaps the most common figure employed in the apocalypses of the
time. Instances come immediately crowding into the mind, such as the “Mount of
Galilee” in the Askew and Bruce Gnostic Codices, on which all the great initiations
and rites are performed by the Risen Lord; or the Mount Tabor 75 of The Gospel
according to the Hebrews, “My Mother the Holy Spirit took me by one of the hairs of
the head and carried me unto Mount Tabor”; or in the Acts of John, where the
Vision of the Spiritual Crucifixion is shown to John on the Mount; or in The Gospel
of Eve, where the Vision of the Great and Little Man is seen on the Mount; or in
The Shepherd of Hennas, where the Angel of Repentance bears off Hermas to the
Mount of Arcadia, etc. In every case the Mountain is no physical mountain, but the
height of contemplation, an interior state of spiritual consciousness.

Stage iii., again, is of interest because of the terms in which it is described; they
may be compared with the same teaching in the Behnesa logos :

Jesus saith: “Except ye fast to the world, ye shall in nowise find the Kingdom of
God.”

Again, in Tat’s prayer for the consummation of his probation: “And now do
thou fill up the things that fall short in me” (xa tiaTEpypaxa avoc7iky]pooaov), it
should be noticed that we have the well-known technical terms of the Christianized
Gnosis, the Pleroma and Hysterema, or Fullness and Insufficiency.


73 De Sac. Ab. et C., i. 186, 33.

74 See the praise-giving of Tat, § 21.

75 “The Mountain of Light,” the traditional scene of the Transfiguration.


- 154 -



THE BIRTH FROM ABOVE


The time has come for Tat to receive, through his master, the touch of the true
Mind-consciousness, the Christ is to be born in his heart, the light of the Pleroma
is to shine into his inmost being. It is to be a New Birth, a Regeneration
(naXiyyeveoiq), or Re-birth (av<xyevvr\oiq), in the sense of being born from Above
(avoo0sv).

Compare John iii. 3: “Amen, Amen, I say unto thee; Except a man be born from
Above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.” And also 7: “Marvel not that I said
unto thee, Ye (pi) must be born from Above,” - where the comment on a prior
saying, “Ye must be born from Above,” formally unsuited to the scheme of a
dialogue between Jeschu and Rabbi Nakdimon, reveals the work of the Haggadist.

So also in 1 Pet. i. 22, 23: “Having made your souls holy by hearkening to the
Truth . . 76 . . being Re-born (ayayzyzvvr^zvoi) not from the seed of destruction,
but from the Seed that cannot be destroyed, through the Word 7 ( (Logos ) of God,
who lives and endures.” 78

These passages from the New Testament Scriptures are not, of course, cited to
show any dependence of our Hermetic authors on the New Testament writers; but
simply to show how they mutually explain one another. For indeed the doctrine of
the New Birth and of the Sacred Marriage was beyond all else the crowning
mystery of the Spiritual Way for all the mystic schools of the time 79 .

THE VIRGIN BIRTH

2. The secret that Tat would learn is the Mystery of the Birth from the Virgin
Womb - the Birth of Man, the Great Mystery of Regeneration. Many illustrations of
the meaning of this pivot-doctrine of the Christian teaching might be quoted from
Gnostic writings, but it will be sufficient to remind the reader of what the Jewish
Commentator in the Naassene Document (§ 28) has written in contrasting the
Great Mysteries (or the heavenly ones) with the Little Mysteries (those of fleshly
generation). Speaking of the Mysteries of Regeneration, he writes:

“For this is the Gate of Heaven, and this is the House of God, where the Good
God dwells alone; into which no impure [man] shall come, but it is kept under
guard for the spiritual alone, - where when they come, they must cast away their
garments, and all become bridegrooms, obtaining their true manhood, through the
Virginal Spirit. For this is the Virgin big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son.”

And to this the Christian Commentator adds: - “not psychic, not fleshly, but a
blessed TEon of TEons.”


76 Precisely as did Tat.

77 Cf. precisely the same formula in our treatise, § 21.

78 That is, of God as iEon and God as Life, which is the union of God as Mind and Logos.

79 The antiquity of the ideas connected with this spiritual mystery may be seen from what Reitzenstein (pp. 227 ff.)
has to say concerning mystic auvouola or congress; of it, as perhaps of nothing so much in the world, may it be said
cormptio optimi pessima.


- 155 -



The Jewish Commentator uses the language of Philo, who, as we have shown,
centred his ideas round the conception of the Sacred Marriage and the Virginal
Spirit.

So, too, does our treatise. The Womb is Silence, the silence of contemplation,
the image of the Great Silence the Mother of the /Rons in many a Christianized
Gnostic System; the Matter is Wisdom; the /Eon’s coming to consciousness in man
is the Birth of Man the Son of God; and the Seed is the Good or Logos sown by
the Will of the Father. This is the Birth of the Christ in man, the Great Mystery
that awaits us when we have made ourselves strangers to the world-illusion.

Is this Son then, asks Tat, other than God? No, answers Hermes; it is the
Mystery of Sameness, not of Difference; it is the Pleroma, not the Insufficiency, -
“All in all, out of all powers composed,” the Common Fruit of the Pleroma, as the
Valentinians would have expressed it.

THE RACE OF THE LOGOS

It is a Race, not an individual; it is We and no longer I s ". This is the Race of the
Logos; the Self-taught Race of Philo; or, as Hermes says: “This Race, my son, is
never taught, but when He willeth it, its memory is restored by God.”

This is the avapvyrnc of Pythagoras and Plato, - the regaining of the
consciousness of the Divine State; it must be self-perceived. And so Philo tells us:

“But as for the Race of Devotees who are taught ever more and more to see, let
them strive for the intuition of That-which-is; let them transcend the sun which
men perceive [and gaze upon the Light beyond, the

True Sun or Logos], nor ever leave this rank which leads to Perfect Blessedness.
Now they who betake themselves to the [Divine] Service, [do so] not because of
any custom, or some one’s advice or appeal, but are carried away by Heavenly Love.” 81

They are of the Race of Elxai, the Hidden Power or Holy Spirit, the Spouse of
Iexai, the Hidden Lord or Logos 82 .

THE SELF-TAUGHT

3. Hermes cannot teach to Tat this Birth in words, even as Isis is not permitted
to declare it openly to Horus (K. K, 36):

“I may not tell the story of this Birth; for it is not permitted to describe the origin of
thy descent, 0 Horns, son of mighty power, lest afterward the Way-of-Birth of the
immortal Gods should be known unto men ” - that is, the Mystery of the Birth of
Horus.

Hermes can only guide Tat towards the realisation of the Blessed Sight, by
putting himself into that sublime state of consciousness, so that Tat, so to speak,
bathes, or is baptized in, his master’s spiritual presence, the Cup of the Mind. This,
as we have seen already from several treatises, was the way of transmission of the
Power of the powers, the true Laying-on of Hands.


80 Compare the Song of the Powers in Pistis Sophia (pp. 16, 17), where the “We” alternates with the “I.”

81 D. V.C., M. 473, 10; P. 891.

82 See D.J.L., pp. 374, 375.


- 156 -



Hermes describes the change that takes place in himself when he passes into the
higher spiritual consciousness. He seems to “pass through himself’ - to “involve”
himself, as it is said somewhere in the Mahdbhdrata of the Rishis - “into a Body that
can never die,” that is, into a, or rather the , Essential or Cosmic Body 8 ’, that
embraces the cosmos within it. The way to do this is not taught, for it cannot be
understood from any sensible experience, the outer physical form of the adept
remaining as it was before. It is an inner change. The Birth of a Christ is the
striking of a new keynote; everything remains apparently as it was before, but all
things receive a new interpretation.

No physical sight, even of the greatest intensity, can penetrate the Veil of this
Mystery.

“Thou seest me with eyes, my son; but what I am thou dost not understand.”

With this compare the marvellous Ritual of Initiation in The Acts of John:

“Who I am thou shalt know when I depart 84 . What I am seen to be, that am I
not; but what I am, thou shalt see when thou comest.” 8 ’

None but those who have reached the Christ-state can know it; no teaching will
avail to explain its manner and its mysteries. It must be realized.

THE NEW CREATION

4. But Tat, who has “made himself ready,” is becoming quickened by the power
of his master. His spiritual senses are being born; already he is losing touch with the
physical; he no longer sees himself. But this is not enough; he must not only be
able to lose consciousness of his physical body, and see and hear as though with
the mind alone, but he must “invert” himself, pass right through himself, and no
longer see things as without him, but all tilings as within him.

All this is a New Creation to be accomplished in the man himself. The Author or
Genesiurge of Re-birth, as contrasted with the Maker or Demiurge of Birth, is the
One Man, the Logos, the Energic Reason and Will of God; the one is the Creator
of the Immortal Body, the other is the Maker of the mortal frame.

THE WAY OF BIRTH IN GOD

5. The reading of the next sentence is faulty, and it is impossible to extract the
correct meaning. The “Greatness” (to jisyeGoq) and “distinctive form” (^apaxxf]p)
are terms fami li ar enough to us in Christian Gnostic writings 86 . Greatness connotes
the same idea as /Ron; “character” or “distinctive form” or “rank” is generally the


83 Cf. R. 52. But compare especially § 6, and C. H., iv. (v.) 1.

84 That is, when the Presence is withdrawn, - by contrast.

85 Texts and Studies, V. i. 14.

86 The term “Greatness,” however, is probably of Egyptian derivation. In the Papyrus Insinger, written somewhere
during the last half of the first century B.C. and first half of the first century A.D., according to Spiegelberg, God’s
Wisdom and Providence are praised (coll, xxxv., xxxvi.). The superscription of this section runs: “The Four-and-
Twentieth Teaching: The Instruction: Learn the Greatness of God, that thou mayest let it come into thine heart”
(xxxv. 17); and later on: “He knoweth the Blasphemer who thinketh wickedness, He knoweth the Pious with the
Greatness of God in his heart. The tongue, before even it is questioned - its words God knoweth” (xxxvi. 3-5). This
is further explained by the sentence: “Thoth is heart and tongue of the Pious; lo! his house is God!” (xxxv. 19). R.
237.


- 157 -



impression from a typical original, and here stands for the form by which a man is
recognised.

6. Hermes then proceeds to describe the nature of this Greatness or fEon, or
Sameness, manifested in difference. It is, alchemically speaking, the One Element,
which can only be comprehended by one Born in God - that is, by a God.

7. The way of this Birth is then described as a de-energizing, or throwing out of
work of the body’s senses, with a corresponding energizing of the One Sense, the
/Ronic Consciousness; or as a purging out of the tendencies of the lower nature,
and replacing them by the energies of the Divine Powers.

This is the Mystery of Repentance (jxexocvola), not a change of mind only, but a
change throughout the whole nature; all things in the man turn towards God.

The forces or energies of the soul have no direction in themselves; it is the will
of man that can turn them “downwards” or “upwards,” so that they become vices
or virtues.


OF THE TEN AND THE TWELVE

8. But not only does Hermes set forth a formal exposition of this Repentance in
terms of the conquest and driving out of the Horde of Vices by the Company of
Virtues, but at the same time he performs an efficacious theurgic rite of invocation
whereby he enables Tat to realize the instruction in immediate experience.

The Virtues that Hermes invokes are not abstractions, but definite substantial
powers; they are, in fact, the “filling up” of Tat’s “insufficiency”; in other words,
they are what the Christian Gnostics would have called the /Rons of the Pleroma.

Behind all there is a definite scheme of numbering. There is a Twelve and a Ten
and a Seven and a Three and a One.

The Torments of the Darkness are the Twelve; they are not torments in
themselves, but only for him who is in Error. They are Twelve yet are they one, for
though they are “pantomorph” or “omniform,” yet are they of one nature; the
Twelve are thus conditioned by the main irrational “types of life,” or animal
natures, - the so-called zodiac.

These divisions are not, however, fundamental, they are solely for man’s
delusion or error; in action they are one - that is, they keep man in Error or
Ignorance. Thus they can be regarded as one, or two, or three, or four, or six; and
so combined and recombined.

Twelve, then, is the nature of the “animal soul” in man - the number of his
going-forth into externality. This out-going is arrested when man repents, and turns
himself to return, to go within; the cosmogonical is transformed by the
soteriological; the “enformation 8 according to substance” gives place to the
“enformation according to gnosis.” As Ignorance characterized the Twelve, so does
Gnosis characterize the Ten, the Perfect Number or Number of Perfection.

The Going-forth was that of the multiplication of species - Twelve (3 X 4 or 2 X
6); the Return is Ten, that is the Seven and the Three; and Seven is addition (3 + 4)
and not multiplication.


87 [Ed. Middle English term for to form or to shaped


- 158 -



Multiplication seems here to mean the generation, by two parents, of things of
the same kind and power; while addition signifies the intensification of the same
nature to a higher power. The Ten is “that which giveth birth to souls” - that is,
human souls; and not only human souls, but, in its consummation, to divine souls.

It may, perhaps, be of interest here to set down simple lists of the vices and
virtues as given in our treatise, and to append to them the list of vices in C. H., i. 24
and 26.


1. Not- knowing.

1. Gnosis.

2. Grief.

2. Joy.

3. Intemperance.

3. Self-control.

4. Concupiscence.

4. Continence.

5. Unrighteousness.

5. Righteousness.

6. Avarice.

6. Sharing-with-all.

7. Error.

7. Truth.

8. Envy.


9. Guile.

8. The Good.

10. Anger.

9. Life.

11. Rashness.

10. Light.

12. Malice.


1. Growth and Waning.

First Zone.

2. Device of Evils.

Second Zone.

3. Guile of the Desires.

Third Zone.

4. Arrogance.

Fourth Zone.

5. Daring and Rashness.

Fifth Zone.

6. Getting Wealth.

Sixth Zone.

7. Falsehood.

Seventh Zone.

8. Those- that-are.

Eighth.

9. The Powers in a band.

Ninth.

1 0. The Father.

Tenth.


It is at once seen that the first seven virtues are arranged so as to be the direct
antitheses of the first seven vices. The root of the Twelve is Ignorance; indeed, all
the Twelve are permutations of Ignorance. They seem to be twelve, whereas they
are but one in nature; again, not only are they twelve, but manifold (§ 12).

Thus, for instance, Rashness and Wrath or Anger are but one, and so of the rest;
the permutations are infinite. This may be seen from the septenary classification in
“The Shepherd” treatise, where we have: Guile of the Desires (3), a combination of
Guile (9) and Desire or Concupiscence (4); Device of Evils (2), a combination of
Guile (9) and Malice (12); Unholy Daring and Rashness (5), a combination of
Unrighteousness (5) and Rashness (11); Getting Wealth by evil means (6), a


- 159 -



combination of Guile (9) and Avarice (6). So also just as Anger (10) and Rashness
(1 1) are one, so are Envy (8) and Avarice (6) but aspects of the same thing; and so
again Intemperance (3) and Concupiscence or Desire (4), Grief (2) and Ignorance
(1), etc.

All are summed up in Ignorance, or Error, just as the seven virtues are summed
up in Gnosis or Truth 88 . And just as Ignorance is the source of vice, so is
Knowledge or Gnosis the beginning of Truth. Gnosis is not the end but the
beginning of the Path, the end of it is God or the Good.

The difference between the “Poemandres” arrangement and the categories of our
treatise is conditioned by the fact that in the former the process of transformation
in the case of a good man after death is described, whereas in the latter the Way of
Rebirth in a living man is set forth.

That the Virtues (and Vices, therefore) were categorized according to the
fundamental numbers of the Gnosis may be seen in most systems of Christian
Gnostic asonology; indeed, it was a common plan of the general Gnostic theosophy
of the time. In our treatise we have set forth the manner of the immediate practical
ethical realization of what might be taken by a superficial student of Gnostic
asonology as an empty schematology of purely metaphysical abstractions 89 . These
things, however, meant everything to the Gnostic; they were fullnesses - no
abstractions, but transcendent realities.

So also in the Shepherd of Hern/as (Vis. iii. 8, 7), just as in our treatise, we are
presented with the Vision of a Band of seven Women, each the mother of the next,
seven Virtues, called: Faith, Continence, Simplicity, Freedom- from-malice,
Seriousness, Gnosis (87uaxf][xr|), Love.

And not only do we have the Seven, but also the Twelve, twelve Maidens (Sim.
xv. 1-3): Faith, Continence, Power, Long-suffering, Simplicity, Freedom-from-
malice, Chastity, Joyfulness, Truth, Understanding, Concord, Love.

To these are opposed twelve Women in dark robes: Infidelity, Incontinence,
Disobedience, Error, Grief, Depravity, Wantonness, Quickness-to-wrath,
Falsehood, Folly, Slander, Hate.

Zosimus also speaks of the Twelve Fates (Motpca) of Death, and associates them
with the Passions 90 .

But, indeed, the subject is infinite, for it is the consummation of all right
endeavour and all true progress in humanity. We must, then, leave it for the
present, to avoid running to too great length in these comments. Sufficient for the
moment to point to the fact that the Ten is not only the Wedding Garment of
Purity, but also the Robe of Power or Glory. In its consummation also it is the
Garment of the Christ, the One Robe without seam throughout, for the Ten
contains the One, and the One contains the Ten.


88 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 2.

89 The usual way, indeed, in which it is taken.

90 Berthelot, 244; R. 214.


- 160 -



THE DAWN OF COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS


13. The result of this Potent Invocation of the Powers, - that is to say, the
realization of the full meaning of the sacred rite which consummates itself in the
consciousness of Hermes, and so communicates itself in some measure to Tat 91 , - is
that Tat begins to “see”; “I see the All, I see myself in Mind.”

“In heaven am 1 , in earth, in water, air; I am in animals, in plants; I’m in the
womb, before the womb, after the womb, - I’m every where” (§ 11).

Compare this with C. H., xi. (xii.) 22, where Hermes is himself being taught by
Mind:

“ Collect into thyself all senses of all creatures, - of fire, and water, dry and moist.

Think that thou art at the same time in every place, in earth, in sea, in sky; not yet
begotten, in the womb, young, old and dead, in af ter- death conditions. ”

This is, as we have seen, a pure Egyptian formula, and connotes the opening of
the “cosmic consciousness.”

This consciousness, whatever else it may be, is a transcending of our three-
dimensional limitation of consciousness, - that of the “body’s view-point, - a tiling
three ways in space extended.”


THE VOW OF SILENCE

The mystery of this New Birth in consciousness is to be kept secret; therefore
Hermes has not commented on it, presumably in the Expository Sermons;
moreover, it must even now be kept secret (§ 22), and therefore is the treatise a
Secret Sermon. The reason for this is given both here and in § 22: “That we may
not be thought to be calumniators” (8ia(3okoi), by the Many or Unknowing. What
may be the precise meaning of this phrase I do not know, and can only speculate.

Those who had reached the full grade of Hermes are to keep silence on their
“virtue” or power (§ 22); they were never to boast of their Gnosis. If they did, it
would only bring the Gnosis into contempt; for they would still appear as ordinary
men, would probably often say and do things, when they were not in the higher
state of consciousness, which fell below the standard of their high ideals, and so
they would be slanderers or calumniators of the Gnosis before the world.

14. The New Birth is further characterized as the Essential Birth (fj ol)moj8r]c
ysveaiq); it was the birth of the Essential Man, the God, Son of the One, to which
other treatises refer 92 .


OF THE OGDOAD

15. Tat now desires to hear the Praise-giving of the Powers, which only those
can sing who have reached the stage called Eighth, or the Ogdoad; this is the state
above the Harmony or the Hebdomad of Fate (C H., i. 26). The man is now free
and no longer a slave. It is the power of prophetic hymnody, for the man now


91 Cf.C.H., i. 7; xi. (ixi.) 6.

92 Cf. P. S. A., vii. 2.


- 161 -



hears the True Harmony of things and is above the Concatenation of Difference; it
is the state “that keeps the soul in tune.” He who has reached this height can ever
sing in tune; it is the state of the Hearer of the Eternal Praise-giving, and those who
reach it can express it infinitely, each in his own fashion.

The idea of the Ogdoad is represented in many a Christian Gnostic system,
especially in the Valentinian tradition, which has many Egyptian elements in it.

So we read in the Excerpts from Theodotus appended to the writings of Clement of
Alexandria:

“Him whom the Mother 4 brings to birth, she leadeth unto Death and to the
world; but him whom Christ brings to rebirth, He changeth into Eife, unto the
Ogdoad.” 94

Many were the names given to the Ogdoad by the Christian Gnostics, - such as
the Jerusalem Above, Wisdom, the Land flowing widi milk and honey, the Holy
Spirit, the Land of the Lord, the Mesotes.

These terms were, however, with the exception of the last, Jewish synonyms; the
term Ogdoad itself was in all probability Egyptian. Thus in one of the Magic Papyri
we read:

‘Having known the power of the book, thou shalt hide it, my son. For in it there
is stored the Authentic Name, which is the Name Ogdoad, - He who doth order and
doth regulate all things. ’ 05

A HYMN FOR MORNING AND FOR EVENING PRAYER

1 6. The Hymn that follows is to be kept secret - that is to say, it is to be taken by
Tat as an example of the form of prayer he is now to use in his private devotions,
and is therefore probably intended to replace some other form of prayer which he
had hitherto been using, as was the custom in such communities.

The instruction to use it at sunset and sunrise, in the open air, reminds us of the
appended passages to “The Shepherd” treatise, where we read (§ 29):

“And when even was come and all sun’s beams began to set, I bade them all give
thanks to God.” 96

Compare also what Philo tells us of the Therapeuts:

“Twice a day, at dawn and even, they are accustomed to offer up prayers; as the
sun rises praying for the sunshine, the real Sunshine, that their minds may be filled
with Heavenly Eight, and as it sets praying that their soul, completely lightened of the
lust of the senses and sensations, may withdraw to its own Congregation and Council-
chamber, there to track out Truth. ” 97

So also Apollonius of Tyana is said to have prayed and meditated three times a
day: at daybreak (Phil., V. A., vi. 10, 18; vii. 31), at mid-day (vii. 10), and at


93 Sc. the Lower Mother, Nature.

94 Ex: x. ex Theodot., § 80 (ed. Dindorf, iii. 453).

95 Leyden Papyms W. S., 139, 45 (Leemans); <f. also ibid., 141, 5; R. 54. For further comments on the Ogdoad, see
Commentary on C. H., i. 26.

96 Cf. also P. S. A., xli. 1.

97 D. V. C., M. ii. 475; P. 893.


- 162 -



sundown (viii. 13); and with regard to “keeping silence on their virtue,” we are told
of the Later Pythagoreans, of whom he was so conspicuous an example:

“In particular they kept the rule of silence regarding the Divine Service [that is, the
Gnosis], For they heard within them many Divine and unspeakable things on which
it would have been difficult for them to keep silence, had they not first learned that it
was just this Silence which spoke to them” (i. 1 )f

And so the Hymn has to be heard in silence; all earthly sounds must be stilled
for the Heavenly Harmony to be heard.

17. It is to be noticed that in four out of the five MSS. the title “Secret
Hymnody” is followed by the indication “Logos IV.”

Reitzenstein (p. 345, n. 21) thinks that the three prior “Logoi” were:

I. “Holy art Thou, O God” - C. H, i. 31, 32.

II. “The Glory of all things is God” - C. H., iii. (iv.).

III. “Whither stumble ye, sots?” - C. H., vii. (viii.).

The latter two, however, are not hymns; the only other hymn in our Corpus
being:

“Who then may sing Thee praise of Thee?” - C. H., v. (vi.) 10, 11.

Our Hymn is a Hymn to the Sun, it is true, but to the Spiritual Sun, not the
physical orb of day. It is to the Eye of Mind that these orisons are addressed - to
the All-seeing Light.

Nor is this Eulogy a formal Te Deum, but a potent theurgic Praise-giving. All
nature is to thrill with the joy of this thankfulness.

Most beautiful is this Song of Praise, all of it, but we would specially call
attention to the words:

' Thy Reason sings through me Thy praises. Take back through me the All into
Thy Reason - my reasonable oblation 19 ! From Thee Thy Will; to Thee the All!”

The Outbreathing of the Universe through the Reason or Logos 100 is the
manifestation or realisation of the Will of God. The Logos is Son, Will is Mother
and God Father.

The Inbreathing of the Universe is through Man (“Thy Man thus cries to Thee,”
§20): “Take back through Me the All.” This is accomplished in the first instance by
the sacrifice of the reason, of man’s small limited reason, to the Great Reason of
things.

And yet the All, the Universe itself, is not something other than God; it is all
God.

“ From Thee Thy Will”; Thou art the Source of all. “ To Thee the All”; Thou art the
End of all, the Desirable One, The Good.

Compare with this the Hymn in the Jewish deposit of the Naassene Document:


98 See my Apollonius ofTyana, pp. 123 and 120.

99 Cf. 1 Pet. ii. 5: “Ye also as living stones are built up, a spiritual house for holy service, to offer up spiritual oblations
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ,” And also Rom. xii. 1: “I beseech you, therefore, brethren, to present your
bodies as a living oblation, holy, well-pleasing unto God, - your reasonable service.”

10,1 Hesychius in his Lexicon defines Logos as the “Cause of Activity,” or that which underlies action, - lj ton
Sgapato? UTtoOsai?.


- 163 -



“Fro/// Thee is Father, and Through Thee Mother, - the two Immortal Names,
Parents of /Rons, O Thou who hast the Heaven for thy City, O Man of Mighty
Names!”

Also notice: “The All that is in us, O Life, preserve; O Light, illumine it; O God,
in-spirit it!” And compare it with § 12, where we are told: “While Life and Light are
unified there, where the One hath being from the Spirit.”

The Prayer is for the Baptism of Light - Illumination by the Gnosis 101 ; this was
the Dowsing in the Mind of “The Cup” treatise, even as true Baptism in primitive
Christianity was called Illumination or pomapoc.

“THROUGH THE WORD”

21. Tat now feels himself impelled to utter praises himself. He says what he feels.
His master has given him the impulse, has made the conditions for him whereby he
is conceived as a Child of God, a Prophet. But as yet he is not grown into the
stature of a true Seer. His higher nature has received the germ, but this must have
time to develop, and only gradually will its power descend into his lower mind.

At present his thankfulness is poured forth to his master, who has performed the
theurgic rite of initiation (“All tilings have been perfected”) for him.

But Hermes restrains him; it is not to the master that his thanks are due, but to
God. And if he cannot as yet give thanks direct to God, then let him send those
thanks - “acceptable oblations” - to God “Through the Word.”

And that this was and is the practice of universal Christendom requires no
pointing out; - the most striking parallel to the wording of our treatise being 1 Pet.
ii. 5: “Spiritual oblations acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.”

Tat has now passed from the rank of Hearer to that of Knower; he is now a true
Gnostic: “Thou hast become a Knower of thyself, and of our Sire.”

Compare logos 2 of the latest found Sayings at Oxyrhynchus:

“( Strive therefore?) to know yourselves, and ye shall know ye are Sons of the
(almighty?) Father; (and?) ye shall know that ye are in (the City of God? 102 ), and ye
are (the City? 103 ). ”


101 Compare yvcoai? ayicn, tpwxiahsi? ano ao\5 (§ 18); cpakiip tpw? (§ 19); Eracpcoxiaxai pou 6 vofp (§ 21).

102 Sc. the Ogdoad.

103 Cf. 1. Pet. ii. 5: “Ye are built up as living stones, a spiritual house for service.”


- 164 -



+- - »

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIV. (XV.)

[A LETTER] OF THRICE- GREATEST HERMES TO ASCLEPIUS

UNTO ASCLEPIUS GOOD HEALTH OF SOUL ! 1

(Text: P. 128-134; Pat . 49, 50.)

1 .

INCE in thy absence my son Tat desired to
learn the nature of the things that are, and would
not let me hold it over, as [natural to] a younger
son fresh come to gnosis of the [teachings] on each single
point, - I was compelled to tell [him] more, in order that
the contemplation 2 3 [of them] might be the easier for him
to follow.

I would, then, choosing out the chiefest heads of what
was said, write them in brief to thee, explaining them
more mystic-ly 7 , as unto one of greater age and one well
versed in Nature.

2. If all things manifest have been and are being made,
and made things are not made by their own selves but by
another; [if] made things are the many , - nay more, are all
things manifest and all things different and not alike; and
things that are being made are being made by other [than
themselves]; - there is some one who makes these things;
and He cannot be made, but is more ancient than the
things that can.

For things that can be made, I say, are made by other
[than themselves]; but of the things that owe their being
to their being made, it is impossible that anything should
be more ancient than them all, save only That which is not
able to be made.



1 eu tpgovsvv. I do not know the exact meaning of this expression. Everard translates “to be truly wise”; Parthey, “recte
sapere’ following Patrizzi; Menard, “sagesse”; Chambers, “to be rightly wise.” I would suggest that ev> cpgovslv was the
form used among these disciples of the Inner Way for the usual yaigsiv. Instead of wishing one another happiness,
they wished each other wisdom, good thought, right thinking, good health of soul.

2 Oswpla.

3 That is to say, more fully and profoundly, as to one more advanced in the mystic science.


- 165 -


3. So He is both Supreme, and One, and Only, the truly
wise in all, as having naught more ancient [than Himself].

For He doth rule o’er both the number, size and
difference of things that are being made, and o’er the
continuity of their making [too] .

Again, things makeable are seeable; but He cannot be
seen.

For for this cause He maketh, - that He may not be able
to be seen.

He, therefore, ever maketh 4 5 ; and therefore can He ne’er
be seen.

To comprehend Him thus is meet; and comprehending, [it
is meet] to marvel; and marvelling, to count oneself as
blessed, as having learnt to know one’s Sire.

4. For what is sweeter than one’s own true Sire? Who,
then, is He; and how shall we learn how to know Him?

Is it not right to dedicate to Him alone the name of God,
or that of Maker, or of Father, or rather [all] the three; -
God for His Power, and Maker for His Energy, and
Father for His Good?

Now Power doth differ from the things which are being
made; while Energy consisteth in all things being made.

Wherefore we ought to put away verbosity and foolish
talk, and understand these two - the made and Maker. For
that of them there is no middle [term] ; there is no third.

5. Wherefore in all that thou conceivest, in all thou
nearest, these two recall to mind; and think all things are
they, reckoning as doubtful naught, nor of the things
above, nor of the things below, neither of things divine,
nor things that suffer change or things that are in
obscuration'.


4 Cf. C. H, xvi. 18.

5 tCOv ev [xuxtt). I do not know what is the exact meaning of this expression. Everard translates “things that are in
darkness or secret”; Parthey, “qua sunt in abdito”-, Menard, “dans les profondenrs ” ; Chambers, “those in secrecy.” I
suggest that the technical term puyo?, signifying generally a shut-in or locked-up place ( conclave , as Damascius
translates it), is to be referred, along the line of Platonic and Pythagorean tradition, to Pherecydes. Porphyry ( De
Antro Njnrph., C. 31) tells us that the synonyms “puyoi (chambers?), recesses (or pits), caverns, doors, gates” were


- 166 -



For all things are [these] twain. Maker and made, and ’tis
impossible that one should be without the other; for
neither is it possible that “Maker” should exist without the
“made,” for each of them is one and the same thing.

Wherefore ’tis no more possible for one from other to be
parted, than self from self.

6. Now if the Maker is naught else but That which makes,
Alone, Simple, Uncompound, it needs must do this
[making] to Itself, - to Which its Maker’s making is “its
being made”. 6

And as to all that’s being made, - it cannot be [so made]
by being made by its own self; but it must needs be made
by being made by other. Without the “Maker” “made” is
neither made nor is; for that the one without the other
doth lose its proper nature by deprivation of that other.

If 7 , then, all things have been admitted to be two, - the
“that which is being made” and “that which makes,” - [all
then] are one in union of these, - the “that which leadeth”
and the “that which followeth.”

The making God is “that which leadeth”; the “that which
is being made,” whatever it be, the “that which
followeth.”

7. And do not thou be chary of things made because of
their variety, from fear of attribution of a low estate and
lack of glory unto God.

For that His Glory’s one, - to make all things; and this is
as it were God’s Body, the making [of them] 8 .

But by the Maker’s self naught is there thought or bad or
base.


used by Pherecydes as symbolical expressions to signify “the geneses and apogeneses of souls,” whatever these terms
may mean exactly. The “birth” and “decease” of a soul, in this connection, presumably mean its coming into the
world of genesis out of the womb of the World-soul, and its reception back again into the bosom of the great
Mother. If this be so, our text would seem to indicate that things are in two states, - in a state of change (that is, in
the active condition), and again in a passive condition, in the state which Indian philosophers call laya or pralaya. See
for the of Pherecydes Sturz’s Phereydis Fragmenta, pp. 43 ff. (Leipzig, 1824).

6 Or genesis.

7 From here to the end of the sermon, with the exception of the final sentences of § 7 and § 10, and the third
sentence of § 9, and with a few very slight verbal variants, is quoted by Cyril, Contra Julianum, ii. 64 (Migne, col. 598
D).

8 Cf. C. H, xvi. 18.


- 167 -


These things are passions which accompany the making
process, as rust doth brass and filth doth body; but neither
doth the brass-smith make the rust, nor the begetters of
the body filth, nor God [make] evil.

It is continuance in the state of being made i that makes
them lose, as though it were, their bloom; and ’tis because
of this God hath made change, as though it were the
making clean of genesis.

8. Is it, then, possible for one and the same painter man to
make both heaven, and gods, and earth, and sea, and men,
and all the animals, and lifeless things, and trees, and yet
impossible for God to make all things?

What monstrous lack of understanding; what want of
knowledge as to God! 9

For such the strangest lot of all do suffer; for though they
say they worship piously and sing the praise of God, yet
by their not ascribing unto Him the making of all things,
they know not God; and, added unto this not-knowing,
they’re guilty even of the worst impiety to Him - passions
to Him attributing, or arrogance, or impotency.

For if He doth not make all things, from arrogance He
doth not make, or not being able, - which is impiety [to
think] .

9. One Passion hath God only - Good; and He who’s
Good, is neither arrogant nor impotent.

For this is God - the Good, which hath all power of
making all.

And all that can be made is made by God, - that is, by
[Him who is] the Good and who can make all things 10 .

But would’st thou learn how He doth make, and how
things made are made, thou may’st do so.

10. Behold a very fair and most resemblant image - a
husbandman casting the seed into the ground; here wheat,
there barley, and there [again] some other of the seeds!


9 Or genesis.

10 This sentence, which appears to be very tautological, is omitted by Cyril.


- 168 -


Behold one and the same man planting the vine, the
apple, and [all] other trees!

In just the selfsame way doth God sow Immortality in
Heaven, and Change on Earth, and Life and Motion in
the universe.

These are not many, but few and easy to be numbered; for
four in all are they, - and God Himself and Genesis, in
whom are all that are.


..*7 VIS'*

“ * cyi *


COMMENTARY

ASCLEPIUS AND TAT

Fabricius, in his bibliotheca Grceca 11 , says that the title should be “On the Nature
of the All,” and that he has recovered it from Cyril, C. Jul., ii., but I cannot verify
this statement.

The form of this treatise is different from any of the preceding, being that of a
letter. It evidently belongs to the Asclepius-Tat type of tradition, as in C. H., x. (xi.):
“My yesterday’s discourse I did devote to thee, Asclepius, and so ’tis only right I
should devote to-day’s to Tat.”

The distinction drawn between Tat and Asclepius is of interest; Tat is the
younger, - who has only “just come to Gnosis of the teaching on each single
point.” Can this mean that he has only just been permitted to share in the
“Expository Sermons” or “Detailed Discourses”? It is probable, for C. H., x. (xi.) 1,
continues: “And this the more because ’tis the abridgment (epitome) of the General
Sermons which he has had addressed to him.”

Asclepius is older, and already 87naxy]jioov xfp cpuasooc; - well-versed in the study of
Nature.

What may be the exact significance underlying these personifications it is very
difficult to say; but the same facts, whatever they may have been, are clearly
referred to in K K. (Stob., Ed, i. 49; p. 386, 24 W.); especially the later accession of
“Asclepius” to the School, and the fact that “Tat,” because of his too great
“youth,” could not have handed on to him the tradition of the complete or all-
perfect contemplation (6/,ox£/vf]c Osoopicc) - that is, of the mathesis or gnosis, or, in
other words, the “learning of the tilings that are, the contemplating of their nature
and the knowing God” (C. H., i. 3); or the “being taught the nature of the all and
the Supreme Vision” {ibid., 27).


11 Ed. Harles (4th ed.), vol. i. lib. i. cap. vii.


- 169 -



This view of the tradition of the School seems to clash entirely with the other
view set forth in C. H., xiii. (xiv.), where Tat has handed on to him the “manner of
Rebirth,” but a probable explanation has already been attempted in the
“Prolegomena,” chap, xvi.: “The Disciples of Thrice-greatest Hermes.”

COMPARE WITH “MIND UNTO HERMES”

The treatise itself requires little commentary; the similarity of its doctrine,
however, with that of the “Mind unto Hermes” is remarkable. For instance,
compare the last sentence of § 7 of our treatise with C. H., xi. (xii.) 14: “For that
indeed He hath no other one to share in what He works, for working by Himself,
He ever is at work, Himself being what He doth.”

Compare also the first sentence of § 8 with C. H., xi. (xii.) 20: “Behold what
power, what swiftness thou dost have! And canst thou do all of these things, and
God not do them?”


THE GOOD HUSBANDMAN

With the Good Husbandman “image” (§ 10) compare:

“Come unto me, Good Husbandman, Good Daimon, Harpocrates, Chnouphis . .
. who rollest down the stream ofNilus, 12 and mingle st with the Sea . . . as man with
woman. ” 13

And in the Alchemical literature:

“[Come then], and coming contemplate, enquire of Acharantus (?), the
Husbandman, and learn of Him, what is it that is sown, and what that which is
reaped; and thou shalt learn that he who soweth corn shall reap com also, and he who
someth barley shall in like manner reap barley. ” 14

So also Zosimus in the “Book Concerning the Logos”:

“And that I tell thee truth, I call to witness Hermes, when he says: Go unto
Achaab (?), the Husbandman, and thou shalt learn that he who soweth corn gives
birth to com. ” 15


12 The Heavenly River of fructifying essence.

13 Abhandl. d. Berl. Akad. (1865), p. 120, 26; R. 143.

14 Berthelot, p. 30.

15 Berthelot, p. 89.


- 170 -


CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVI.)

THE DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO KING AMMON

THE PERFECT SERMON OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO THE KING

(T ext: R. 348-354; Pat. at end. ) u '

1 .

REAT is the sermon {logos) which I send to thee,

O King - the summing up and digest, as it were,
of all the rest.

For it is not composed to suit the many’s prejudice, since
it contains much that refuteth them.

Nay, it will seem to thee as well to contradict sometimes
my sermons too.

Hermes, my master, in many a conversation, both when
alone, and sometimes, too, when Tat was there, has said,
that unto those who come across my books, their
composition will seem most simple and [most] clear; but,
on the contrary, as ’tis unclear, and has the [inner]
meaning of its words concealed, it will be still unclearer,
when, afterwards, the Greeks will want to turn our tongue
into their own, - for this will be a very great distorting and
obscuring of [even] what has been [already] written.

2. Turned into our own native tongue 17 , the sermon {logos)
keepeth clear the meaning 18 of the words {logoi) [at any
rate] .

For that its very quality of sound, the [very] power of the
Egyptian names, have in themselves the bringing into act
of what is said.

As far as, then, thou canst, O King - (and thou canst [do]
all things) - keep [this] our sermon from translation; in
order that such mighty mysteries may not come to the
Greeks, and the disdainful speech of Greece, with [all] its



16 At the end after P. J. A., but the pages are unnumbered.

17 This presumably means from the hieroglyphic into the demotic - xfj 7tocTQCpa SiaXsxxO) Eg(j.r]veu6(ji.evo?.

18 Lit. the mind.


- 171 -


looseness, and its surface beauty 19 , so to speak, take all the
strength out of 20 the solemn and the strong - the
energetic 21 speech of Names.

The Greeks, O King, have novel words, energic of
“argumentation” [only]; and thus is the philosophizing of
the Greeks - the noise of words.

But we do not use words; but we use sounds full-filled
with deeds.

3. Thus, then, will I begin the sermon by invocation unto
God, the universals’ Lord and Maker, [their] Sire, and
[their] Encompasser; who though being All is One 22 , i and
though being One is All; for that the Fullness of all things
is One, and [is] in One, this latter One not coming as a
second [One], but both being One.

And this is the idea 2 ’ that I would have thee keep, through
the whole study of our sermon. Sire!

For should one try to separate what seems to be both All
and One and Same from One, - he will be found to take 24
his epithet of “All” from [the idea of] multitude, and not
from [that of] fullness 23 - which is impossible; for if he
part All from the One, he will destroy the All 26 .

For all things must be One - if they indeed are One. Yea,
they are One; and they shall never cease being One - in
order that the Fullness may not be destroyed.

4. See then in Earth a host of founts of Water and of Fire
forth- spirting in its midmost parts; in one and the same
[space all] the three natures visible - of Fire, and Water,
and of Earth, depending from one Root 27 .


19 Or, perhaps, smartness.

20 Make jejune, so to say - s^ix r]Xov 7ioif]or].

21 That is, “words of power,” words that do things.

22 Cf. R. 127, 3; and P. S. A., i. 1.

23 Lit. mind.

24 The construction is very elliptical; EKSs^apevoi; simply.

25 That is, completeness, perfection, - TtXrjgupaxoi;.

26 Cf. Plato, Soph., 259 D, E.

27 Cf. P. S. A., iv. 1.


- 172 -


Whence, too, it 28 is believed to be the Treasury 29 of every
matter. It sendeth forth of its 30 abundance, and in the
place [of what it sendeth forth] receiveth the subsistence
from above 11 .

For thus the Demiurge 12 - I mean the Sun - eternally doth
order Heaven and Earth, pouring down Essence 11 , and
taking Matter up, drawing both round Himself and to
Himself all things, and from Himself giving all things to
all.

For He it is whose goodly energies extend not only
through the Heaven and the Air, but also onto Earth,
right down unto the lowest Depth and the Abyss.

6. And if there be an Essence which the mind alone can
grasp 14 , this is his Substance 13 , the reservoir 16 of which
would be His Light.

But whence this [Substance] doth arise, or floweth forth,
He, [and He] only, knows.

Or rather, in space and nature, He is near unto Himself . .
. though as He is not seen by us, . . . understand [Him] by
conjecture 17 .

7. The spectacle of Him, however, is not left unto
conjecture; nay [for] His very rays 18 , in greatest splendour,
shine all round on all the Cosmos that doth lie above and
lie below.


28 Sc. Earth.

29 A magazine, a store-house, - xapieiov. The term “treasure” (0y]aaug6g) is found in most lavish use in the Greek-
Coptic Gnostic works, and also in Christian Gnostic literature and Jewish Apocalyptic.

30 Sc. matter’s.

31 if|v avw6ev Utkxq^iv, - hyparxis, substance or subsistence, a word of frequent use and highly technical meaning with
the last of the Neo-Platonists, especially with Proclus. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 2.

32 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 4.

33 Lit. bringing or drawing down; xoexayeiv = dedncere, elicere - used frequently of magic arts.

34 vot]xf] ouoia = intelligibilis essentia.

35 oyxog = moles, mass, bulk, volume; in later philosophy it means “atom,” and may mean so here, of course in the
philosophical and mystic and not in the physical sense.

36 UTtoSo^ = receptaculum.

37 The text is very corrupt. Patrizzi translates: “ Vel quia ipso loco, et natnra prope se ipsum existens, non a nobis conspicitur cogit
nos per conjectnras intelligere ” - which certainly does not represent the Greek. Menard conjectures brilliantly but in entire
emancipation from the text: “ Pour conrprendre par induction ce qui se derobe a notre vue, il faudrait etre pres de Ini et analogue a sa
nature.” Reitzenstein discovers two lacunas in the text, but does not attempt to fill them. As the text stands, then, all
attempt at translation seems hopeless.

38 Lit. his very sight, - ahxf] f) ojay, that is, his rays, 6 Jug being used of the visual rays which were supposed by the
science of the time to proceed from the eyes. Cf. Ex. vii. 4.


- 173 -



For He is stablished in the midst, wreathed with the
Cosmos’ 9 , and just as a good charioteer, He safely drives
the cosmic team 40 , and holds them in unto Himself 41 , lest
they should run away in dire disorder.

The reins are Life, and Soul, and Spirit, Deathlessness, and
Genesis.

He lets it, then, drive [round] not far off from Himself -
nay, if the truth be said, together with Himself.

8. And in this way He operates 42 all things. To the
immortals He distributeth perpetual permanence; and
with the upper hemisphere of His own Light - all that he
sends above from out His other side 4 ’, [the side of him]
which looks to Heaven - He nourisheth the deathless
parts of Cosmos.

But with that side that sendeth down [its Light], and
shineth round all of the hemisphere 44 of Water, and of
Earth, and Air, He vivifieth, and by births and changes
keepeth in movement to and fro the animals 4 ’ in these
[the lower] parts of Cosmos. . . .

9. He changes them in spiral fashion, and doth transform
them into one another, genus to genus, species into
species, their mutual changes into one another being
balanced - just as He does when He doth deal with the
Great Bodies.

For in the case of every body, [its] permanence [consists
in] transformation.

In case of an immortal one, there is no dissolution; but
when it is a mortal one, it is accompanied with
dissolution 46 .


39 Wearing the Cosmos as a wreath or crown; the visible sun being regarded as a “head.” See “The Perfect Sermon.”

40 Lit. car or chariot - agga.

41 Lit. binds it to himself - avaStiaa? si? Eauxov.

42 8r|fjuougY s ^-

43 Lit. part.

44 xuxo? = a, hollow, vase, or vessel.

45 That is, those lives subject to death, as opposed to the immortals.

46 Compare “Sermon to Tat,” I. (Menard). Cf. Stob., Eel, i. 61; 274, 24 W.


- 174 -



And this is how the deathless body doth differ from the
mortal, and how the mortal one doth differ from the
deathless.

10. Moreover, as His Light’s continuous, so is His Power
of giving Life to lives continuous, and not to be brought
to an end in space or in abundance.

For there are many choirs of daimons round Him, like
unto hosts of very various kinds; who though they dwell
with mortals, yet are not far from the immortals; but
having as their lot from here unto the spaces of the
Gods 47 , they watch o’er the affairs of men, and work out
things appointed by the Gods - by means of storms,
whirlwinds and hurricanes, by transmutations wrought by
fire and shakings of the earth 48 , with famines also and with
wars requiting [man’s] impiety, - for this is in man’s case
the greatest ill against the Gods.

11. For that the duty of the Gods is to give benefits; the
duty of mankind is to give worship 49 ; the duty of the
daimons is to give requital.

For as to all the other things men do, through error, or
foolhardiness, or by necessity, which they call Fate 011 , or
ignorance - these are not held requitable among the Gods;
impiety alone is guilty at their bar.

12. The Sun is the preserver ' 1 and the nurse of every
class' 2 . And just as the Intelligible World'’, holding the
Sensible in its embrace, fills it [all] full, distending it with
forms of every kind and every shape - so, too, the Sun
distendeth all in Cosmos, affording births to all, and
strengtheneth them.

When they are weary or they fail, He takes them in His
arms again.


47 Lit. “the land of these” - that is, of the immortals.

48 Cf. Ex. ix. 5.

49 Or, to be pious. Cf. P. S. A., ix. 1.

50 ei(juxg(jiiv7]v.

51 OCOTt]Q.

52 Or genus.

53 Or Cosmos.


- 175 -



13. And under Him is ranged the choir of daimons - or,
rather, choirs; for these are multitudinous and very varied,
ranked underneath the groups of Stars ' 4 , in equal number
with each one of them.

So, marshalled in their ranks, they are the ministers of
each one of the Stars, being in their natures good, and
bad, that is, in their activities (for that a daimon’s essence
is activity); while some of them are [of] mixed [natures],
good and bad.

14. To all of these has been allotted the authority o’er
things upon the Earth; and it is they who bring about the
multifold confusion of the turmoils on the Earth - for
states and nations generally, and for each individual
separately.

For they do shape our souls like to themselves, and set
them moving with them, - obsessing nerves, and marrow,
veins and arteries, the brain itself, down to the very
heart' 3 .

15. For on each one of us being born and made alive, the
daimons take hold on us - those [daimones] who are in
service at that moment [of the wheel] of Genesis, who are
ranged under each one of the Stars 36 .

For that these change at every moment; they do not stay
the same, but circle back again.

These, then, descending through the body 37 to the two
parts 58 of the soul, set it 39 awhirling, each one towards its
own activity.

But the soul’s rational part is set above the lordship of the
daimons - designed to be receptacle of God.

16. Who then doth have a Ray shining upon him through
the Sun within his rational part - and these in all are few


54 imo xaq TCbv aaTSgwv 7tXiv6i8a?. 7tXiv01g = 7tXiv01ov, and is used of any rectangular figure, and also of groups of stars
as in Eratosth. apud Strab., II. i. 35; v. 36 (Lex. Sophocles); compare at tcov 7tXiv0iwv vnoygayai, the fields, or spaces,
into which the Augurs divided the heavens, tenrpla , or regiones coeli (Lex. Liddell and Scott).

55 Lit. viscera.

56 Cf. P. S. A., xxxv. 2.

57 Cf.C.H., xiii. (xiv.) 7.

58 The two irrational parts, “passion” and “desire” (0up6? and Emhupia).

59 The soul.


- 176 -



on them the daimons do not act; for no one of the
daimons or of Gods has any power against one Ray of
God.

As for the rest, they are all led and driven, soul and body,
by the daimons - loving and hating the activities of these.

The reason {logos), [then,] is not the love that is deceived
and that deceives 60 . 1

The daimons, therefore, exercise the whole of this terrene
economy 61 , 2 using our bodies as [their] instruments.

And this economy Hermes has called Heimarmene 62 . 3

17. The World Intelligible 63 , 4 then, depends from God;
the Sensible from the Intelligible [World].

The Sun, through the Intelligible and the Sensible
Cosmos, pours forth abundantly the stream from God of
Good, - that is, the demiurgic operation.

And round the Sun are the Eight Spheres, dependent
from Him - the [Sphere] of the Non-wandering Ones, the
Six [Spheres] of the Wanderers, and one Circumterrene.

And from the Spheres depend the daimones; and from
these, men.

And thus all things and all [of them] depend from God 64 .

18. Wherefore God is the Sire of all; the Sun’s [their]
Demiurge; the Cosmos is the instrument of demiurgic
operation.

Intelligible Essence regulateth Heaven; and Heaven, the
Gods; the daimones, ranked underneath the Gods,
regulate men.

This is the host 6 ' of Gods and daimones 66 . Through these
God makes all things for His own self.


60 This Eros is the lower love ( cf. C. H., i. 18: “love, the cause of death”), not the Divine Love who inspires Hermes
in “The Perfect Sermon” and who is mentioned C. H., xviii. 14.

61 8iobo]criv.

62 Or, Fate; cf. C. H., i. 9; and P. J. A., xix.

63 Or, Intelligible Cosmos.

64 Cf. P. S. A., iv. 1 n.; and xix.

65 Or army, or hierarchy. Compare the “soldier” degree of the Mithriaca.

66 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 22; and P. S. A., v. 1.


- 177 -


And all [of them] are parts of God; and if they all [are]
parts - then, God is all.

Thus, making all, He makes Himself; nor ever can He
cease [His making], for He Himself is ceaseless 67 .

Just, then, as God doth have no end and no beginning, so
doth His making have no end and no beginning 68 .



COMMENTARY

CONCERNING THE TITLE

Patrizzi has run (xvi.) and (xvii.) together, under the title “Definitions of
Asclepius - Book I.,” though he clearly saw that (xvii.) did not belong to (xvi.) by
his remark, “ videntur sequentia ex alio libro sumptaP He also heads (xvii.) 1-10
“Definitions of Asclepius - Book II.,” and 11-16 “D. of A. - Book III.,” though the
contents have evidendy nodiing to do with such a title.

In the MSS. a later hand has added to the general title a catalogue of contents as
follows:

“Of God; Matter; Evil; Fate; the Sun ; Intelligible Essence; Divine Essence;

Man; the Economy of the Pleroma ; the Seven Stars; the Man after the Eikeness” 69 -
for which largely irrelevant list Patriot substitutes the title: “Of the Sun and
Daimons. ”

Reitzenstein (p. 192) is of opinion that this contents-list, and also the similar
headings in (xviii.), are due to some Byzantine scribe, who also foolishly
interpolated (xvii.).

But even to (xvi.) the title “Definitions of Asclepius” seems very inappropriate;
while, on the other hand, we find Lactantius (D. I., ii. 5), in referring to the
“incursions of daimones,” claiming that it was a doctrine also of Hermes, and
adding:

“Asclepius, his hearer, has also explained the same idea at greater length in that
Perfect Sermon ’ which he wrote to the King ”

This is quite definite, and the authority of Lactantius should perhaps be
preferred to that of the MSS., but as the title would clash with “The Perfect
Sermon” of Hermes to Asclepius, and as Lactantius may just possibly mean “in that
initiatory sermon,” - the term pefectus being used in a general and not in an


67 Cf. C. H., xiv. (xv.), 7 and 5.

68 See Commentary to Frag. iv. (Lact., D. L, ii. 15).

69 R. 348 n.


- 178 -



appellative sense, - I have kept the traditional title and placed that of Lactantius
second.

A TRADITION CONCERNING THE TRISMEGISTIC LITERATURE

1. Like “The Key” - C. H., x. (xi.) - of Hermes, our treatise is an Epitome' 0 ;
Asclepius has previously written a number of Sermons to the King.

The reference to the “Conversations” between Hermes and Asclepius and Tat,
sometimes when both the latter were present and sometimes with Asclepius alone,
presupposes the existence of this class of Dialogue, and indicates that the
Correspondence of Asclepius with the King is a later deposit of our literature 71 .

This literary activity of Asclepius is claimed in the introduction to be authorized
by Hermes, and, moreover, purports to have been originally written in Demotic
Egyptian. In other words, the writer would have us believe that the Greek is a
translation from Egyptian. This it clearly is not; and we can only conclude that the
“prophecy” as to direct translation is a literary fiction of our author.

2. On the other hand, it is highly probable that our author was in contact with a
living tradition, to the effect that the Hermes -teaching was originally Egyptian, and
that this was “interpreted” into Greek - that is, into Greek modes of thought,
rather than “translated” in the ordinary sense into Greek.

In any case, the contempt shown by our author for the Greek language and
“philosophizing,” and his admiration for Hieroglyphic Egyptian as a “language of
the Gods” - a magical tongue, that by its mantric power compelled the
understanding of the hearer, by putting him in sympathy with the ideas pictured by
the ideograms, or sounded forth by the “names of power” 72 - show that he was not
only not a Greek, but also no lover of Greek Philosophy.

This is exceedingly puzzling, seeing not only that the majority of the writers of
our tractates are plainly deep students and lovers of Plato, but also that the author
of our tractate himself also writes very much in the same style as they do.

All of this seems to indicate that in his introduction he was using for his own
purposes some tradition about the ancient Thoth-literature that was current in his
time. A form of this tradition was also made use of by Philo of Byblus in the first
century, when he makes the Phoenician priest Sanchuniathon discover the origin of
the Phoenician cosmogony and mystery- teaching in the Books of Taautos, “whom
the Egyptian called Thoyth, the Alexandrians Thoth, and the Greeks changed into
Hermes.”

Sanchuniathon, he says, “having come across the secret writings that had been
discovered and brought from the shrines of the Temples of Ammon, -
compositions which were not known to all, - practised by himself the science (xrjv
[xa0r]CTtv) of all things.” 73


70 Cf. also Ex. i. 16, and Comment.

71 This deduction, however, has to be modified by the view we hold as to the authorship of the introduction. See
Comment., § 5.

72 Cf. R. 269.

73 Ap. Euseb., Prop. Ei\, I. ix. 29.


- 179 -



Philo also professes to quote from one of the earliest priests of Phoenicia, a
certain Thabion, who is said apparendy to have got his information from a writing
of the Seven Kabiri, and of Asclepius, the pupil of Taautos. This Thabion asserted
that Taautos was made King of Egypt by Kronos - that is, Ammon/ 4

Here we are evidently in contact with certain traditions with regard to Thoth-
Hermes, his ancestors and pupils, and secret writings. Presumably many such
traditions were floating about, and were used according to the fancy and taste of
Hellenistic writers for their own purposes.

But there was also another tradition concerning a certain King Ammon, used in
one form by Jamblichus, when he writes:

“It was Hermes who first taught this Path [sc. the Way up to God]. And Bitys 7 ]
the Prophet, translated [his teachings concerning it] for King Ammon, discovering
them in the inner temple in an inscription in the sacred characters at Satis in Egypt. ” 76
What our author and Jamblichus have in common is that there were certain
secret teachings of Hermes in the Sacred Language of Ancient Egypt hidden away
in the inner shrines of the temples, and that these were translated into the current
Egyptian language of the time for a certain King Ammon.

It must, then, have been some tradition of this kind that our author or writer had
in mind; he would have it believed that he was writing in the style or according to
the model of a certain literature.

Who this King Ammon was can only be guessed at; but to my mind it is
probable that the “translations” of Bitys were made in connection with the
translation activity of Manetho for King Ptolemy, and this translation was into
Greek. Our author, however, would refer it to some Egyptian King, and so seek to
invoke the authority of a high antiquity for the treatise he was putting into
circulation.


A SPECULATION AS TO DATE

5. What seems to differentiate our treatise from the rest of the tractates, is the
prominence its author gives to the doctrine of the Sun as Demiurgic Orderer of all
things, if his so to speak pantheistic form of Sun-worship is peculiarly Egyptian .

Now if we remember the disdainful way in which Greek “philosophizing” is
spoken of in the introduction, we may be tempted to take the sentence, “And if
there be any essence which the mind alone can grasp” (§ 6), as a somewhat
patronizing reference to the Intelligible World of Greek Philosophy, as also the
analogy in § 12; but when we turn to §§ 17 and 18 the exposition fully adopts the
doctrine of the Intelligible and Sensible Worlds. This is so irreconcilable a
contradiction that one is almost compelled to believe that the introduction is by
another hand altogether, and that our sermon proper begins with § 3.

But even so, the sermon is addressed to some King or other - “The Perfect
Sermon to the King” of Lactantius - without any further qualification. Who,


74 Ibid., I. X. 38, 39.

75 Cf. Zosimus (§ 8).

76 De My st., viii. 5.

77 Cf.R. 198,1; and also Comment on § 17 below.


- 180 -



however, this King may have been historically must remain a matter of pure
conjecture.

7. When, then, Reitzenstein, pointing to § 7, says that the symbolism of the Sun
as a charioteer wearing a crown of rays corresponds with that of the pictures of the
Aurelian Sun-god, and adds further it is the Roman Empire-god of the third
century, we are quite prepared to acknowledge a similarity of symbolism. But if it is
intended to suggest that, therefore, we are to date our document by this similarity,
it must be admitted that the indications are far too vague; for the symbolism of the
Sun as the ray-crowned charioteer is fundamental with the cult of Mithras, and is
found in Greece long before the Aurelian period.

THE DELINEATION OF THE SUN

It is interesting, however, here to notice that the Sun is “wreathed with cosmos,”
and to compare this with the passage concerning the Macro-prosopus in the
Untitled Apocalypse of the Coptic Gnostic Codex Brucianus, and especially with the
sentence:

“The Hair of His Head is the number of the Hidden Worlds, and the Outline of
His Face is the Type of the TEons.” 78

In this Untitled Apocalypse there is a strong Egyptian under- colouring; that,
however, the idea of a crown of powers was pre-eminently Egyptian may be seen
from many a passage in the Pistis Sophia.

8. It is also of interest to notice that the delineation of the Sun in § 8 reminds us
of the Orphic Phanes, especially the reference to the two hemispheres above and
below, - the two parts of the Egg in Orphic symbolism.

9. The hint that the sun-life runs in some sort of spiral or serpentine fashion in
animals, and that this also is the case with the Great Bodies or Celestial Animals, is
of interest.


CONCERNING THE DAIMONES

10. Our author then proceeds to set forth his doctrine of the daimones or
ministers of the Gods, who are assigned to the lower hemisphere of operation,
from the Earth to the Sun, the Gods presumably occupying the higher hemisphere
of activity. These daimones are what a Hindu or Buddhist would call karmic agents,
for they are all connected with what is called the Fate-Sphere, the Instrument or the
Wheel of Genesis, or Samsara.

1 5. These daimones rule over the lower energies of the soul; the higher energy or
rational part of the soul is set above them, and is designed to be the “receptacle of
God,” - or rather of His Ray, - the Mind proper.

16. With § 16 compare the remarkable passage in one of the Letters of
Valentinus:


78 F. F. F, 549.


- 181 -



“One [alone] is Good, whose free utterance is His manifestation through His Son ;
it is by Him alone that the heart can become pure, when every evil essence has been
expelled from it.

“Now its purity is prevented by the many essences which take up their abode in it,
for each of them accomplishes its own deeds, outraging it in divers fashions with
unseemly lusts.

“As far as I can see, the heart seems to receive somewhat the same treatment as an
inn [or caravanserai], which has holes and gaps made in its walls, and is frequently
filled with dung men living filthily in it and taking no care of the place as being
someone else’s property. Thus is it with the heart so long as it has no care taken of it,
ever unclean and the abode of many daimons.

“Tut when the Alone Good Father hath regard unto it, it is sanctified and shineth
with light; and he who possesseth such a heart is so blessed that ‘he shall see God. 79

The language of Valentinus is remarkably like that of our treatises; Valentinus
himself was an Egyptian.

17. Entirely Egyptian also is the Scheme of Dependency given in § 17, as we
have already pointed out on several occasions, quoting from a Hymn of Valentinus.

The sentence: “Wherefore God is the Sire of all; the Sun’s [their] Demiurge” -
distinctly contradicts Reitzenstein’s (p. 198, 1) statement that the Sun in our treatise
is worshipped as the All-god. The Sun is He “by whom all tilings are made,” - the
Creative Logos of God 80 .

19. The treatise is evidently incomplete; if, however, we turn to the contents-title
given at the beginning of these comments we can gain but little information as to
what is missing, for the contents there given do not in any but the vaguest fashion
correspond to the substance of our treatise, nor do the subjects treated of come in
the same order as in the contents-heading. The Divine Essence, Man, the Economy
of the Pleroma and the Man after the Likeness, which are clearly not treated of in
our text, may then have been treated in the missing portion of our tractate; but this
is all we can say.


79 Quoted by Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., II. xx. 114; P. 489 (ed. Dindorf, ii. 219). See for further critical text,
Hilgenfeld (A.), Ket^ergesch. d. Urchrist., p. 296; F. F. F., 300, 301.

80 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 5.


- 182 -



+- - » '

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVII.)

[OF AS CLEPIUS TO THE KING ]

(T ext: R. 354; Pat. at end of last piece.)


Asclepius.



F thou dost think [of it], O King, even of bodies
there are things bodiless 1 .

The King. What [are they]? - (asked the King.)


Asc. The bodies that appear in mirrors - do they not seem
then to have no body?

The King. It is so, O Asclepius 2 ; thou thinkest like a God 1 ! -
(the King replied.)


Asc. There are things bodiless as well as these; for instance,
forms 4 5 - do not they seem to thee to have no body, but to
appear in bodies not only of the things which are ensouled,
but also of those which are not ensouled?


The King. Thou sayest well, Asclepius.

Asc. Thus, [then,] there are reflexions of things bodiless on
bodies, and of bodies too upon things bodiless - that is to
say, [reflexions] of the Sensible on the Intelligible World, and
of the [World] Intelligible on the Sensible.

Wherefore, pay worship to the images, O King, since they
too have their forms as from the World Intelligible.

(Thereon His Majesty arose and said:)

The King. It is the hour 3 , O Prophet, to see about the comfort
of our guests. To-morrow, [then,] will we resume our sacred
converse 6 .


1 Cf. Plat, Soph., 229 D, 240 A, 246 B.

2 The corrector of B has changed the name Asclepius into Tat, as he has everywhere in C. H, ii. (iii.); R. 193, 1.

3 0eiwQ.

4 Or ideas.

5 Cf. Plat, Soph., 241 B.

6 6soi.oyfiaofji.sv.


- 183 -


COMMENTARY

ON THE ADORATION OF IMAGES

The loss of the end of the previous sermon, and also the loss of almost the
whole of (xvii.), is to be accounted for by the falling out of one or more quires
from the original MS. of our Corpus 7 , a phenomenon similar to that already
remarked in the case of C. H., ii. (iii).

And that this is the fact is brought out interestingly by the note of Reitzenstein
(p. 193, 1) - namely, that one of the correctors of one of the copies (Paris MS.) of
this faulty original has precisely in these two places changed the name Asclepius
into Tat. He was puzzled, and thought that his “correction” would set matters
right; as a matter of fact, however, it only adds to the confusion.

What the main subject of our treatise may have been we can hardly conjecture;
part of it, however, must have been devoted to an explanation of the rationale of
image-adoration, - “Wherefore pay worship to the images, O King,” - of which we
hear so much in P. S. -A.

These symbolic images of the Gods are said to have their “forms” (Idsac) in
sympathetic relation with the Intelligible World. These are mutual “reflections,” the
one of the other.

Now as the Ka of the God was thought to have immediate relation with the
image-symbol of the God, and the Gods were of the Intelligible World, - the
statues of the Gods were thought to be images of the Image in some special way;
they were regarded as providing a straight path or line of connection between Earth
and Heaven, just as a man who made himself like to the Man after the Likeness
became in himself a Way Up.


7 R. 198.


- 184 -



«

CORPUS HERMETICUM (XVIII.)

[THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS]

(ABOUT THE SOUL’S BEING HINDERED BY THE PASSION OF THE BODY)

(T ext: R. 355-360; Pat. at end. )

1 .

OW, in the case of those professing the
harmonious art of muse-like melody - if, when
the piece is played, the discord of the
instruments doth hinder their intent, its rendering
becomes ridiculous.

For when his instruments are quite too weak for what’s
required of them, the music-artist needs must be laughed
at by the audience.

For He, with all good will, gives of His art unweariedly;
they blame the [artist’s] weakness.

He then who is the Natural Musician-God, not only in
His making of the harmony of His [celestial] songs, but
also in His sending forth the rhythm of the melody of His
own song[s] right down unto the separate instruments 1 , is,
as God, never wearied.

For that with God there is no growing weary.

2. So, then, if ever a musician desires to enter into the
highest contest of his art he can - when now the
trumpeters have rendered the same phrase of the
[composer’s] skill, and afterwards the flautists played the
sweet notes of the melody upon their instruments 2 , and
they complete the music of the piece with pipe and



1 &xqi xcov xocxa fjisgo? OQyuvuv, - that is, to “parts” as opposed to “wholes”; “wholes” signifying generally noumenal
or celestial essences, “parts” meaning the separate existences of the phenomenal or sensible world.

2 agxi 8s xai oa>X?]xa>v xoiq pelaxot; xo x% pekcpSia? XiyoQOv EgY«oaftsvwv. - I do not know what this means exactly.
Menard translates: quand les joueurs de flute ont exprime les finesses de la melodic, Patrizzi gives: melicis organis melodia
dulcedinem.


- 185 -


plectrum - [if any thing goes wrong,] one 1 does not lay the
blame upon the inspiration 3 4 5 of the music-maker.

Nay, [by no means,] - to him one renders the respect that
is his due; one blames the falseness of the instrument, in
that it has become a hindrance to those who are most
excellent - embarrassing the maker of the music in [the
execution of] his melody, and robbing those who listen of
the sweetness of the song.

3. In like way also, in our case, let no one of our audience
for the weakness that inheres in body, blame impiously
our Race'.

Nay, let him know God is Unwearied Spirit 6 - for ever in
the self-same way possessed of His own science,
unceasing in His joyous gifts, the self-same benefits
bestowing everywhere.

4. And if the Pheidias - the Demiurge - is not responded
to, by lack of matter to perfect His skilfulness, although
for His own part the Artist has done all he can, let us not
lay the blame on Him.

But let us, [rather,] blame the weakness of the string 7 , in
that, because it is too slack or is too tight, it mars the
rhythm of the harmony.

5. So when it is that the mischance occurs by reason of
the instrument, no one doth blame the Artist.

Nay, [more;] the worse the instrument doth chance to be,
the more the Artist gains in reputation by the frequency
with which his hand doth strike the proper note 8 , and
more the love the listeners pour upon that Music-maker,
without 9 the slightest thought of blaming him.


3 Or perhaps “he,” meaning the judge of the contest.

4 XCG TtVSUftaTl.

5 The Race of the Prophets, or Gnostics - the Race of the Logos.

6 Referring to the “inspiration” or “breath” above, - cb? axapocxov psv Ecru Ttveupa 6 6so?. Compare John iv. 24:
Ttvsupa 6 0so? - God is Spirit.

7 The metaphor has become somewhat mixed by the introduction of Pheidias, who was a “musician” in marble and
ivory and gold, and not on strings and pipes.

8 liy KQobae wg noXKimq Jtgo? xov xovov Ejjwieaouar]?.

9 Reading Eyovxeq for £ ay_ov.


- 186 -



So will we too, most noble [Sirs], set our own lyre in tune
again, within, with the Musician!

6. Nay, I have seen one of the artist- folk 10 - although he
had no power of playing on the lyre - when once he had
been trained for the right noble theme, make frequent use
of his own self as instrument, and tune the service of his
string by means of mysteries, so that the listeners were
amazed at how he turned necessitude into magnificence 11 .

Of course you know the story of the harper who won the
favour of the God who is the president of music-work.

[One day,] when he was playing for a prize, and when the
breaking of a string became a hindrance to him in the
contest, the favour of the Better One supplied him with
another string, and placed within his grasp the boon of
fame.

A grasshopper was made to settle on his lyre, through the
foreknowledge of the Better One, and [so] fill in the
melody in substitution of the [broken] string 12 .

And so by mending of his string the harper’s grief was
stayed, and fame of victory was won.

7. And this I feel is my own case, most noble [Sirs]!

For but just now I seemed to make confession of my want
of strength, and play the weakling for a little while; but
now, by virtue of the strength of [that] Superior One, as
though my song about the King had been perfected [by
Him, I seem] to wake my muse.

For, you must know, the end of [this] our duty will be the
glorious fame of Kings, and the good-will of our
discourse (logos) [will occupy itself] about the triumphs
which they win.

Come then, let us make haste! For that the singer willeth
it, and hath attuned his lyre 1 ’ for this; nay more, more


10 Meaning presumably prophets.

11 It is difficult to follow the exact meaning of some of the writer’s rhetorical sentences, even if our text is sound;
here, however, the text, even after passing through Reitzenstein’s hands, is still very halting, and so I venture on this
translation with all hesitation.

12 The song of the cicala was so pleasant to the ear of the Ancients, that we frequently find it used in poetry as a
simile for sweet sounds. Plato calls the grasshoppers the “prophets of the Muses.”


- 187 -



sweetly will he play, more fitly will he sing, as he has for
his song the greater subjects of his theme.

8. Since, then, he 14 has the [stringing] of his lyre tuned
specially to Kings, and has the key of laudatory songs, and
as his goal the Royal praises, let him first raise himself
unto the highest King - the God of wholes.

Beginning, [then,] his song from the above, he, [thus,] in
second place, descends to those after His likeness who
hold the sceptre’s power 11 ; since Kings themselves,
indeed, prefer the [topics] of the song should step by step
descend from the above, and where they have their [gifts
of] victory presided o’er for them, thence should their
hopes be led in orderly succession.

9. Let, then, the singer start with God, the greatest King
of wholes, who is for ever free from death, both
everlasting and possessed of [all] the might of
everlastingness, the Glorious Victor, the very first, from
whom all victories descend to those who in succession do
succeed to victory 16 .

10. Our sermon (logos) then, doth hasten to descend to
[Kingly] praises and to the Presidents of common weal
and peace, the Kings - whose lordship in most ancient
times was placed upon the highest pinnacle by God
Supreme; for whom the prizes have already been prepared
even before their prowess in the war; of whom the
trophies have been raised even before the shock of
conflict.

For whom it is appointed not only to be Kings but also to
be best.

At whom, before they even stir, the foreign land 1, doth


13 For the idea of the prophet being the lyre of God, cf. Montanus (op. Epiphan., Har., xlviii. 4). See also the
references to Philo given by R. 204, n. 1.

14 Sc the singer.

15 Cf. K. K, 39 ff.

16 But see Plasberg’s reading. R. 370.

17 to (3ag(3agov.



- 188 -



(ABOUT THE BLESSING OF THE BETTER [ONE] AND PRAISING OF THE

KING)


11. But now our theme (logos) doth hasten on to blend its
end with its beginnings - with blessing of the Better
[One] 18 ; and then to make a final end of its discourse
{logos) on those divinest Kings who give us the [great]
prize of peace.

For just as we began [by treating] of the Better [One] and
of the Power Above, so let us make the end bend round
again unto the same - the Better [One].

Just as the Sun, the nurse of all the things that grow, on
his first rising, gathers unto himself the first-fruits of their
yield with his most mighty hands, using his rays as though
it were for plucking off their fruits - yea, [for] his rays are
[truly] hands for him who plucketh first the most
ambrosial [essences] of plants - so, too, should we,
beginning from the Better [One], and [thus] recipient of
His wisdom’s stream, and turning it upon the garden of
our souls above the heavens 19 , - we should [direct and]
train these [streams] of blessing back again unto their
source, [blessing] whose entire power of germination [in
us] He hath Himself poured into us.

12. ’Tis fit ten thousand tongues and voices should be
used to send His blessings back again unto the all-pure
God, who is the Father of our souls; and though we
cannot utter what is fit - for we are [far] unequal to the
task - [yet will we say what best we can].

For Babes just born have not the strength to sing their
Father’s glory as it should be sung; but they give proper
thanks for them, according to their strength, and meet
with pardon for their feebleness 211 .

Nay, it is rather that God’s glory doth consist in this [one]
very thing - that He is greater than His children; and that
the prelude and the source, the middle and the end, of


18 too xgeixxovo?, - that is God, or the inner God, as in the last section.

19 eig xa lpexega xcov <|iu3(® v UTisgougavia cpuxa.


20 Lit. “in this.”


- 189 -



blessings, is to confess the Father to be infinitely puissant
and never knowing what a limit means.

13. So is it, too, in the King’s case.

For that we men, as though we were the children of the
King, feel it our natural duty to give praise to him. Still
must we ask for pardon [for our insufficiency], e’en
though ’tis granted by our Sire before we [even] ask.

And as it cannot be the Sire will turn from Babes new-
born because they are so weak, but rather will rejoice
when they begin to recognise [his love] 21 - so also will the
Gnosis of the all [rejoice], which doth distribute life to all,
and power of giving blessing back to God, which Fie hath
given [us].

14. For God, being Good, and having in Himself eternally
the limit of His own eternal fitness, and being deathless,
and containing in Himself that lot of that inheritance that
cannot come unto an end, and [thus] for ever ever-flowing
from out that energy of His, He doth send tidings to this
world down here [to urge us] to the rendering of praise
that brings us home again 22 .

With Him 2 ’, therefore, is there no difference with one
another; there is no partiality 24 with Him.

But they are one in Thought. One is the Prescience 2 ’ of
all. They have one Mind - their Father.

One is the Sense that’s active through them - their passion
for each other 26 . ’Tis Love 27 Himself who worketh the one
harmony of all.

15. Thus, therefore, let us sing the praise of God.

Nay, rather, let us [first] descend to those who have
received their sceptres from Him.

21 Lit. “at their recognition,” - ETti ify Erayvwasw? - a play on epignosis and gnosis, and a parallel between the wisdom of
God and the royal knowledge of the King.

22 si? xov8s tov xdopov Tiagsywv if|v aTiayyslaav si? 8iaawcruxr|v sVKpt]fjilav, - where it may be possible to connect
aTtayysXia with the familiar suayyslaov.

23 Exsias.

24 to aXkonQooaXkov.

25 Tigoyvwai?.

26 to si? aXXr(Koo<; tpiUgov.

27 6 £gw?, - the Higher Love.


- 190 -



For that we ought to make beginning with our Kings, and
so by practising ourselves on them, accustom us to songs
of praise, and train ourselves in pious service to the Better
[One].

[We ought] to make the very first beginnings of our
exercise of praise begin from him 28 , and through him
exercise the practice [of our praise], that so there may be
in us both the exercising of our piety towards God, and of
our praise to Kings.

16. For that we ought to make return to them, in that they
have extended the prosperity of such great peace to us.

It is the virtue of the King, nay, ’tis his name alone, that
doth establish peace.

He has his name of King because he levelleth the summits
of dissension with his smooth tread 29 , and is the lord of
reason (logos) that [makes] for peace.

And in as much, in sooth, as he hath made himself the
natural protector of the kingdom which is not his native
land 10 , his very name [is made] the sign of peace.

For that, indeed, you know, the appellation of the King
has frequently at once restrained the foe.

Nay, more, the very statues of the King are peaceful
harbours for those most tempest-tossed.

The likeness of the King alone has to appear to win the
victory, and to assure to all the citizens freedom from hurt
and fear.



28 Sc. the King.

29 The word-play between (3aaitei><; and (3aosi Xsia is unreproducible in English.

30 ify (3aaiXsia? xfjg (3ag(3agixfj<;.


- 191 -



COMMENTARY


THE APOLOGY OF A PGEMANDRIST

This, the last piece in our Corpus, differs so greatly both in style and form of
contents from the rest of our sermons that we are plainly dealing with a different
order of endeavour.

The style is for the most part so very artificial and forced, that we are conscious
of labour and effort, and sometimes of such obscurity as to make a clear rendering
almost impossible. The contents are of the nature of an elaborate set Eulogy of
Kings.

Whether or not this concluding piece ever bore a proper title it is impossible to
say, for the existing headings are plainly added by a later redactor ’ 1 , - as we have
already seen in a number of other instances. I have therefore ventured to
superscribe as the main title “The Encomium of Kings,”’ 2 and have placed the
contents-headings in parentheses.

Reitzenstein, in his analysis of the Corpus, concludes (p. 207) that this Eulogy
was appended to the collection of treatises by the original redactor, or collector.

He was an Egyptian Rhetor, who was a follower of the Trismegistic tradition,
and his object in making the collection was mainly to show the Rulers of the
Empire that not only was there nothing in the Hermes religion that could excite
their suspicion, but that, on the contrary, it was in its most fundamental teachings
admirably calculated to inculcate Loyalty to the Rulers of the Empire’s destinies.

It is, indeed, to this “Apology,” so to speak, that we owe the good fortune of the
preservation of our Corpus.

SPECULATIONS AS TO DATE

Who the “most noble [Sirs]” of §§ 5 and 7, to whom the Eulogy is immediately
addressed, may be, is difficult to determine, for though the subject is the
“Encomium of Kings” in general, some actual King was evidently in the mind of
the writer when he penned § 16. Perhaps the “most noble” may have been the high
officials of Egypt.

The lost conclusion of our Encomium, for our actual text is evidently
incomplete, may have given clearer indications of the Emperor for whose ultimate
perusal the Eulogy was intended. As it is, the indications are of the vaguest.

Reitzenstein, however, is of opinion (pp. 207, 208) that the indications in § 16
best suit the reign of Diocletian {imp. 285-305 A.D.); but he is aware that, as far as
these are concerned, an earlier date is not excluded (p. 208). It is only when he has
treated, in his Addenda (pp. 371-374), the Encomium as an example of later Greek
“art-prose,” or rhythmic prose, the scheme of the accentuation of which has been
of late years carefully studied, especially by Meyer and Wilamowitz, that he comes
definitely to the conclusion that the external form of our Rhetor’s effort fits


31 In fact, are due to the first hand in B C D M. See R. 355, 1; 358, 12.

32 See § 15 - f) kqoq tot)? (3aodsa? stHprifria - and compare note to Clem. Alex., iii., in “Fragments from the Fathers.”


- 192 -



precisely the time of Diocletian’s Triumph, 302 A.D. I cannot, however, say that I
am convinced by his arguments.

The strained and elaborate introduction (§§ 1-5) needs no further comment; no
doubt it is very “fine writing,” but it is difficult to pin some of it down to any
precise meaning in translation.

THE STORY OF THE PYTHIC GRASSHOPPER

6. With § 6, however, our interest is awakened, for it reminds us of the famous
Introduction to the Protrepticus, or Exhortation to the Greeks , of Clement of
Alexandria, when he says:

“I could tell thee also of another - brother to these 3 J - story and singer, of Eunomus
the Eocrian and the Pythic grasshopper.

“AtPytho there was gathered together a solemn assembly of Greeks to celebrate the
Death of the Serpent, with Eunomus to sing the funeral song of the beast.

‘ Whether his song was a hymn or a dirge I cannot say; anyhow, there was a
contest, and Eunomus had to harp it in the heat of the day, when the grasshoppers,
warmed by the sun, were singing underneath the leaves along the hills.

“They were singing not to the Serpent, the dead thing, but to God the All-wise, a
song of unrestrained mode far better than the modes of Eunomus.

“A cord breaks for the Eocrian; the grasshopper flies on to the yoke; it chirped on
the harp as on a branch; and the minstrel, modulating to the song of the grasshopper,
filled up the missing string.

“It was not that the grasshopper was attracted by the song of Eunomus, as the
story would have it, setting up a bragen statue at Pytho of Eunomus, harp and all,
and his helper in the contest; it flew on naturally and sung naturally. The Greeks,
however, thought it played the music. ” 34

This passage shows that the story referred to by our author was well known, so
well known indeed that Clement takes it as a text for a naturalistic explanation of
Hellenic miracle. No literary dependence, however, of one or the other can be
entertained, for the similarity of the “xfiv vsopav dvs7ikf]pooasv al)xG)” of our text
and the “6 Cp86q xfiv Xeinouaav dvs7ikf]pooas yopSrjv” of Clement is far too slight a
link to bear the weight of any argument of this nature ’ 5 .

1 1. There is evidently a lacuna after § 10, and, judging by the opening words of §
1 1 , it must be of some length, for the Praise of Kings so far is of a very brief
description.

It is also of interest to notice how much easier the style of our author is when he
treats of the Praises of God; his words seem to come far more easily, as though he
had a subject to deal with with which he was more familiar, as, indeed, he ought to
have been if he had studied the treatises he has collected together.


33 Amphion, Arion and Orpheus.

34 Clem. Al., Prot., i. 1; P. 2 (ed. Dindorf, i. 2).

35 Cf. R. 205, 206.


- 193 -



THE TRUE KING


13. The idea that all his subjects are the children of the King is Egyptian; or,
rather, it is the tradition of all nations who believed in Divine Kings. The true King
was he who, so to speak, contained all his subjects within himself; they were all
“members,” or, as we should say, cells, of Inis true Body. The nation was the King;
the victory of the nation was ascribed to the virtue of the King 36 .

THE FELLOW-RULERS OF THE HEIGHT

14. The last three sentences of § 14 Reitzenstein (p. 208) would take as referring
to the Kings under the suzerainty of the Emperor, who were bound to him by a
common bond of love, in order that he may the more insist on the Diocletian
date’ 7 . I would, however, refer the idea to the ideal of harmony and unity of the
Beings of the Intelligible World, as described, for instance, by Plotinus, when he
writes:

“They see themselves in others. For all things are transparent, and there is nothing
dark or resisting and everyone is manifest to everyone internally, and all things are
made manifest; for light is manifest to light. For everyone has all things in himself
and again sees in another all things, so that all things are everywhere, and all in all,
and each in all, and infinite the glory. For each of them is great, since the small also is
great. Find the sun there is all the stars, and, again, each and all are the sun. In each,
one thing is pre-eminent above the rest, but it also shows forth all. ” 3S

Compare this also with the intuition of the seer in The Untitled Apocalypse of the
Codex Brucianus:

‘Their Crowns send forth Kays; the Brilliancy of their Bodies is as the life of the
Space into which they are come; the Word (Fogos) that comes out of their mouth is
Eternal Fife, and the Fight that comes forth from their Eyes is Rest for them; the
Movement of their Hands is their Flight to the Space out of which they are come, and
their Gafing on their own Faces is Knowledge of themselves; their Giving to
themselves is a repeated Return, and the Stretching out of their Hands establishes
them; the Hearing of their Ears is the Perception in their Heart; and the Union of
their Fimbs is the Ingathering of Israel; their Holding to one another is their
Fortification in the Fogos. ” 39

This is die Egyptian counterpart of the Plotinian Ecstasis; and Plotinus was by
birth an Egyptian.


36 This belief, indeed, is the power of the Japanese in our own day.

37 He thus, apparently, would take the sxeiae as referring to these subject kings and rulers.

38 En., V. viii. 4.

39 F. F. F, 557.


- 194 -



II

The Perfect Sermon



- 195 -


THE PERFECT SERMON


OR THEASCLEPIUS

(Text: The Greek original is lost, and only a Tatin version remains to us. I use the text of
Hildebrand (G. F.J, L. Apuleii Opera Omnia ex Fide Optimorum Codicum (Leipzig 1842),
Pars II., pp. 279-334; but have very occasionally preferred the text in Patriyyi’s Nova de
Universis Philos ophia (Venice, 1593), or of the Bipontine edition of Appuleius, Tucii Apuleji
Madaurensis Platonici Philosophi Opera (Biponti, 1788), pp. 285-325.)


I


l . 40 [I. M. 41 ]

[Tris/negistus.\

OD, O Asclepius, hath brought thee unto us
that thou mayest hear a Godly sermon 42 , a
sermon such as well may seem of all the
previous ones we’ve [either] uttered, or with which we’ve
been inspired by the Divine, more Godly than the piety of
[ordinary] faith.

If thou with eye of intellect 4 ’ shalt see this Word 44 thou
shalt in thy whole mind be filled quite full of all things
good.

If that, indeed, the “many” be the “good,” and not the
“one,” in which are “all.” Indeed the difference between
the two is found in their agreement, - “All” is of “One” 4 ’
or “One” is “All.” So closely bound is each to other, that
neither can be parted from its mate.

But this with diligent attention shalt thou learn from out
the sermon that shall follow [this].

But do thou, O Asclepius, go forth a moment and call in
the one who is to hear 46 .



40 I have added numbers to the paragraphs for greater convenience of reference.

41 Menard has divided the treatise into fifteen parts, which I have thus distinguished; the numbering of the chapters
are those usually found.

42 Or, a sermon about the Gods.

43 Intelligens.

44 Reason or sermon or logos-, cf. iii. and below: “For that the Reason,” etc.

45 But ii. 1, referring again to this idea, has the reading: “‘All’ is ‘One.’” Cf. C. H., xvi. 3; and also xx. 2 below.

46 This, as we shall see later on, is Tat. See xxxii. below.


- 196 -


(And when he had come in, Asclepius proposed that
Ammon too should be allowed to come. Thereon Thrice-
greatest said:)

[Tot.] There is no cause why Ammon should be kept away
from us. For we remember how we have ourselves set
down in writing many things to his address 47 , as though
unto a son most dear and most beloved, of physics many
things, of ethics [too] as many as could be.

It is, however, with thy name I will inscribe this treatise.

But call, I prithee, no one else but Ammon, lest a most
pious sermon on a so great theme be spoilt by the
admission of the multitude.

For ’tis the mark of an unpious mind to publish to the
knowledge of the crowd a tractate brimming o’er with the
full Greatness of Divinity.

(When Ammon too had come within the holy place, and
when the sacred group of four was now complete with
piety and with God’s goodly presence - to them, sunk in
fit silence reverently, their souls and minds pendent on
Hermes’ lips, thus Love 48 Divine began to speak.)

II

1. [Tris.] The soul of every man, O [my] Asclepius, is
deathless; yet not all in like fashion, but some in one way
or [one] time, some in another.

Asc. Is not, then, O Thrice-greatest one, each soul of one
[and the same] quality?

Tris. How quickly hast thou fallen, O Asclepius, from
reason’s true sobriety!

Did not I say that “All” is “One,” and “One” is “All,” in
as much as all things have been in the Creator before they
were created. Nor is He called unfitly “All,” in that His
members are the “All.”


47 Lit. to his name.

48 Cnpido-, without doubt Eros in the lost original; tf. xxi. 1 below; and Frag, xviii.


- 197 -



Therefore, in all this argument, see that thou keep in mind
Him who is “One”-“All,” or who Himself is maker of the
“All”

2. All things descend from Heaven to Earth, to Water and
to Air.

’Tis Fire alone, in that it is borne upwards, giveth life; that
which [is carried] downwards [is] subservient to Fire.

Further, whatever doth descend from the above,
begetteth; what floweth upwards, nourisheth.

’Tis Earth alone, in that it resteth on itself, that is Receiver
of all things, and [also] the Restorer of all genera that it
receives.

This Whole 49 , therefore, as thou rememberest 01 ', in that it
is of all, - in other words, all things, embraced by nature
under “Soul” and “World,” ' 1 are in [perpetual] flux, so
varied by the multiform equality of all their forms, that
countless kinds of well-distinguished qualities may be
discerned, yet with this bond of union, that all should
seem as One, and from “One” “All”.' 52

III

1. That, then, from which the whole Cosmos is formed,
consisteth of Four Elements - Fire, Water, Earth, and Air;
Cosmos [itself is] one, [its] Soul [is] one, and God is one.

Now lend to me the whole of thee 00 , - all that thou can’st
in mind, all that thou skill’st in penetration.

For that the Reason 04 of Divinity may not be known
except by an intention of the senses like to it 55 .

’Tis 56 likest to the torrent’s flood, down-dashing headlong
from above with all-devouring tide; so that it comes


49 This, as we have already noted, is a variant of the reading in i., where we find “ omnia twins esse ’ (“all” is of “one”)
and not “ omnia mum esse” (“all” is “one”).

50 Presumably from some previous sermon.

51 Sc. the Cosmos.

52 The Latin of this paragraph is very obscure.

53 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.) 15: “Give thou thyself to Me, My Hermes, for a little while.”

54 Ratio — that is, Logos.

55 Lit. divine — that is, by a concentration like to the singleness of the Godhead.

56 That is, “This Reason is.”


- 198 -



about, that by the swiftness of its speed it is too quick for
our attention, not only for the hearers, but also for the
very teachers ' 7 .

2. [11. M.] Heaven, then, God Sensible, is the director of
all bodies; bodies’ increasings and decreasings are ruled by
Sun and Moon.

But He who is the Ruler of the Heaven, and of its Soul as
well, and of all things within the Cosmos, - He is God,
who is the Maker of all things.

For from all those that have been said above' 8 , o’er which
the same God rules, there floweth forth a flood of all
things streaming through the Cosmos and the Soul, of
every class and kind, throughout the Nature of [all] things.

The Cosmos hath, moreover, been prepared by God as
the receptacle of forms of every kind ' 9 .

Forth- thinking Nature by these kinds of things, He hath
extended Cosmos unto Heaven by means of the Four
Elements, - all to give pleasure to the eye of God.

IV

1. And all dependent from Above 611 are subdivided into
species in the fashion 61 which I am to tell.

The genera of all things company with their own species;
so that the genus is a class in its entirety, the species is part
of a genus.

The genus of the Gods will, therefore, make the species of
the Gods out of itself.


57 “Quo efficitnr nt intentionem nostrum . . . celeri velocitate praetereat.” Compare with this the description of the instruction
of the Therapeuts in Philo’s famous tractate, De Vita Contenrplativa, 901 P., 483 M. — Conybeare’s text, p. 117
(Oxford; 1895): “For when in giving an interpretation, one continues to speak rapidly without pausing for breath, the
mind of the hearers is left behind, unable to keep up the pace” — 6 xcov axpowpevwv vou? auvopapxetv aSuvxciiv

UCTTSgi^Sl.

58 This seems to refer to the Elements.

59 Omniformium speciertim.

60 Omnia autem destper pendentia. Compare with this the famous Psalm of Valentius, “All things depending from Spirit I
see” — Tiavxa xpepapeva xveupaxi (3 Xstiw — H ippolytus, Philos., vi. 37. For revised text see Hilgenfeld’s (A.)
Ket^ergeschichte, p. 304 (Leipzig, 1884), and for a translation, my Fragments of a Faith Forgotten, p. 307 (London; 1900).
See also end of xix. 4 below, and C. H., xvi. 17.

61 Genere.


- 199 -



In like way, too, the genus of the daimons, and of men,
likewise of birds, and of all [animals] the Cosmos doth
contain within itself, brings into being species like itself.

There is besides a genus other than the animal, - a genus,
or indeed a soul, in that it’s not without sensation, - in
consequence of which it both finds happiness in suitable
conditions, and pines and spoils in adverse ones; - I mean
[the class] of all things on the earth which owe their life to
the sound state of roots and shoots, of which the various
kinds are scattered through the length and breadth of
Earth.

2. The Heaven itself is full of God. The genera we have
just mentioned, therefore, occupy up to the spaces of all
things whose species are immortal.

For that a species is part of a genus, - as man, for instance,
of mankind, - and that a part must follow its own class’s
quality.

From which it comes to pass that though all genera are
deathless, all species are not so.

The genus of Divinity is in itself and in its species 62 [also]
deathless.

As for the genera of other things, - as to their genus, they
[too] are everlasting; [for] though [the genus] perish in its
species, yet it persists through its fecundity in being born.
And for this cause its species are beneath the sway of
death; so that man mortal is, mankind immortal.

V

1. And yet the species of all genera are interblended with
all genera; some 6 ’ which have previously been made, some
which are made from these.

The latter, then, which are being made, - either by Gods,
or daimons, or by men, - are species all most closely like
to their own several genera.


62 That is, the Gods.

63 Sc. species.


- 200 -



For that it is impossible that bodies should be formed
without the will of God; or species be configured without
the help of daimons; or animals be taught and trained
without the help of men 64 .

2. Whoever of the daimons, then, transcending their own
genus, are, by chance, united with a species 63 , by reason of
the neighbourhood of any species of the Godlike class, -
these are considered like to Gods 66 .

Whereas those species of the daimons which continue in
the quality of their own class, - these love men’s rational
nature [and occupy themselves with men], and are called
daimons proper.

Likewise is it the case with men, or more so even. Diverse
and multiform, the species of mankind. And coming in
itself from the association spoken of above, it of necessity
doth bring about a multitude of combinations of all other
species and almost of all things.

3. Wherefore doth man draw nigh unto the Gods, if he
have joined himself unto the Gods with Godlike piety by
reason of his mind, whereby he is joined to the Gods; and
[nigh] unto the daimons, in that he is joined unto them [as
well] .

Whereas those men who are contented with the
mediocrity of their own class, and the remaining species
of mankind, will be like those unto the species of whose
class they’ve joined themselves 67 .

VI

1. [III. M.] It is for reasons such as these, Asclepius, man
is a mighty wonder, - an animal meet for our worship and
for our respect.

For he doth pass into God’s Nature 68 , as though himself
were God. This genus [also] knows the genus of the


64 Cf. C. H., xvi. 18, for the hierarchy of Gods and daimones; and for the “intercourse of souls,” C. H., x. (xi.) 22.

65 That is, one of the immortal species, or a God.

66 That is, they become Gods.

67 A suggestion of man’s attraction to the various species of the animal nature.

68 This contradicts somewhat the more careful wording of C. H., x. (xi.) 1, where the term Energy is preferred.


-201 -



daimons, as though man knew he had a [common] origin
with them. He thinketh little of the part of human nature
in him, from confidence in the divineness of [his] other
part.

How much more happy is the blend of human nature
[than of all the rest]! Joined to the Gods by his cognate
divinity, a man looks down upon the part of him by
means of which he’s common with the Earth.

The rest of things to which he knows he’s kin, by [reason
of] the heavenly order [in him], he binds unto himself
with bonds of love; and thus he turns his gaze to Heaven.

2. So, then, [man] hath his place in the more blessed
station of the Midst; so that he loves [all] those below
himself, and in his turn is loved by those above.

He tills the Earth. He mingles with the Elements by
reason of the swiftness of his mind. He plunges into the
Sea’s depths by means of its 69 profundity. He puts his
values on all things.

Heaven seems not too high for him; for it is measured by
the wisdom of his mind as though it were quite near.

No darkness of the Air obstructs the penetration of his
mind. No density of Earth impedes his work. No depth of
Water blunts his sight 70 .

[Though still] the same [yet] is he all, and everywhere is he
the same.

3. Of all these genera, those [species] which are animal
have [many] roots, which stretch from the above below 71 ,
whereas those which are stationary 72 - these from [one]
living root send forth a wood of branching greenery up
from below into the upper parts.


69 Sc. the mind’s.

70 Cf.C.H., xi. (xii.) 19.

71 Compare with this the symbolism of the “fire-tree” and the “rootage” of the aeons, in the “Simonian” system of
the Gnosis, taken by Hippolytus from the document entitled The Great Announcement (Hipp., Philos., vi. 9 and 18).
Also the common figure of the Ashvattha tree of Indo-Aryan mythology; for instance, in the Kathopanishad, II. vi. 1:
“The old, old tree that sees no morrow’s dawn, [stands] roots up, branches down” (see Mead and Chattopadhyaya’s
Upanishads, i. 74 — London; 1896). Ashvatthah = a-shvah-tha, that is, “which stands not till to-morrow.” The idea is
that the world-tree ( samsaravriksha ) never lasts till to-morrow, for all things are perpetually changing.

72 Lit. non-animal.


- 202 -



Moreover, some of them are nourished with a two-fold
form of food, while others with a single form.

Twain are the forms of food - for soul and body, of which
[all] animals consist. Their soul is nourished by the ever-
restless motion of the World 7 ’; their bodies have their
growth from foods [drawn] from the water and the earth
of the inferior world' 4 .

Spirit 7 ’, with which they 76 all are filled, being interblended
with the rest 77 , doth make them live; sense being added,
and also reason in the case of man - which hath been
given to man alone as a fifth part out of the asther.

Of all the living things 78 [God] doth adorn, extend, exalt,
the sense of man alone unto the understanding of the
Reason of Divinity 79 .

But since I am impressed to speak concerning Sense, I will
a little further on set forth for you the sermon on this
[point]; for that it is most holy, and [most] mighty, not less
than in the Reason of Divinity itself.

VII

1. But now I’ll finish for you what I have begun. For I was
speaking at the start of union with the Gods, by which
men only 8 " consciously enjoy 81 the Gods’ regard, - I mean
whatever men have won such rapture that they have
obtained a share of that Divine Sense of intelligence
which is the most 82 Divine of Senses, found in God and in
man’s reason.

Asc. Are not the senses of all men, Thrice-greatest one,
the same?


73 Or Cosmos.

74 Cf. xi. 2.

75 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, and Commentary thereon.

76 That is, animal bodies.

77 Presumably the rest of the Earth elements.

78 Lit. animals.

79 Lit. the Divine Reason, Ratio, or Logos.

80 Sc. of the animals. Cf. xviii. 1 below.

si Perfruuntur. Cf, for the idea, xxii. 1 below.

82 Lit. more.


- 203 -



Tris. Nay, [my] Asclepius, all have not won true reason 81 ;
but wildly rushing in pursuit of [reason’s] counterfeit 84 ,
they never see the thing itself, and are deceived. And this
breeds evil in their minds, and [thus] transforms the best
of animals into the nature of a beast and manners of the
brutes.

2. But as to Sense and all things similar, I will set forth the
whole discourse when [I explain] concerning Spirit.

For man is the sole animal that is twofold. One part of
him is simple: the [man] “essential,” 8 ' as say the Greeks,
but which we call the “form of the Divine Similitude.”

He also is fourfold: that which the Greeks call “hylic,” 86
[but] which we call “cosmic”; of which is made the
corporal part, in which is vestured what we just have said
is the divine in man 87 , - in which the godhead of the Mind
alone, together with its kin, that is the Pure Mind’s senses,
findeth home and rest, its self with its own self, as though
shut in the body’s walls.

3. [IV. M.] Asc. What, then, Thrice-greatest one, has
caused it that man should be planted in the world, and
should not pass his life in highest happiness in that part
[of the universe] where there is God?

[Tris.] Rightly thou questionest, O [my] Asclepius! And we
pray God that He bestow on us the power of setting forth
this reason; since everything depends upon His Will, and
specially those things that are set forth about the Highest
Whole, the Reason that’s the object of our present
argument. Hear, then, Asclepius!

VIII

1. The Lord and Maker of all things, whom we call rightly
God, when from Himself He made the second [God], the
Visible and Sensible 88 , - I call him Sensible not that He


83 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 23, 24; iv. (v.) 3; and ix. 3 below.

84 Lit. image.

85 The Greek term ouaicbS?]? is here retained. Cf. viii. 2 below.

86 The Greek iiXixdv being retained in the Latin.

87 Cf.C.H., xvi. 15.

88 Sc. the Logos as Cosmos. Cf. xxxi. 1 below.


- 204 -



hath sensation in Himself (for as to this, whether or no
He have himself sensation, we will some other time
declare), but that He is the object of the senses of those
who see; - when, then, He made Him first, but second to
Himself, and that He seemed to Him [most] fair, as one
filled to the full with goodness of all things, He fell in love
with Him as being part of His Divinity 89 .

2. Accordingly, in that He was so mighty and so fair, He
willed that some one else should have the power to
contemplate the One He had made from Himself. And
thereon He made man, - the imitator of His Reason and
His Love 90 .

The Will of God is in itself complete accomplishment;
inasmuch as together with His having willed, in one and
the same time He hath brought it to full accomplishment.

And so, when He perceived that the “essential” 91 [man]
could not be lover 92 of all things, unless He clothed him in
a cosmic carapace, He shut him in within a house of body,
- and ordered it that all [men] should be so, - from either
nature making him a single blend and fair-proportioned
mixture.

3. Therefore hath He made man of soul and body, - that
is, of an eternal and a mortal nature; so that an animal
thus blended can content his dual origin, - admire and
worship things in heaven, and cultivate and govern things
on earth 9 '.

By mortal things 94 I do not mean the water or the earth
[themselves], for these are two of the [immortal] elements


89 The Greek original of this passage is quoted by Lactantius, Dip. Institt., iv. 6, and runs as follows in Fritzsche’s (O.
F.) text (Leipzig, 1842): “The Lord and Maker of all things (whom ’tis our custom to call God) when He had made
the second God, the Visible and Sensible, — I call him Sensible not that He hath sensation in Himself (for as to this,
whether or no He have himself sensation, we will some other time enquire), but that He is object of senses and of
mind; — when, then, He’d made Him first, and One and Only, He seemed to Him most fair, and filled quite full of all
things good. At Him He marvelled, and loved Him altogether as His Son.” With the last words, cf. Plat., Tim., 37 D.

90 Diligentia.

91 The Greek ofioicbSt]? being again, as in vii. 2, retained in the Latin. Cf. C. H., i. 15 and ix. (x.) 5.

92 Diligentem.

93 This sentence is also quoted by Lactantius (Dip. Institt., vii. 13) in the original Greek, which reads: “From the two
natures, the deathless and the mortal, He made one nature, — that of man, one and the selfsame thing. And having
made the selfsame [man] both somehow deathless and also somehow mortal, He brought him [forth], and set him up
betwixt the godlike and immortal nature and the mortal; that seeing all he might wonder at all.”

94 That is, the “things on earth.”


- 205 -



that nature hath made subject unto men, - but [either]
things that are by men, or [that are] in or from them 9 ';
such as the cultivation of the earth itself, pastures, [and]
buildings, harbours, voyagings, intercommunications,
mutual services, which are the firmest bonds of men
between themselves and that part of the Cosmos which
consists [indeed] of water and of earth, [but is] the
Cosmos’ terrene part, - which is preserved by knowledge
and the use of arts and sciences; without which [things]
God willeth not Cosmos should be complete 96 .

In that necessity doth follow what seems good to God;
performance waits upon His will.

Nor is it credible that that which once hath pleased Him,
will become unpleasing unto God; since He hath known
both what will be, and what will please Him, long before.

IX

1. [V. M.] But, O Asclepius, I see that thou with swift
desire of mind art in a hurry to be told how man can have
a love and worship of the Heaven, or of the things that
are therein. Hear, then, Asclepius!

The love of God and Heaven, together with all them that
are therein, is one perpetual act of worship 97 .

No other thing ensouled, of Gods or animals, can do this
thing, save man alone 98 . ’Tis in the admiration, adoration,
[and] the praise of men, and [in their] acts of worship, that
Heaven and Heaven’s hosts find their delight.

2. Nor is it without cause the Muses’ choir hath been sent
down by Highest Deity unto the host of men; in order
that, forsooth, the terrene world should not seem too
uncultured, had it lacked the charm of measures, but
rather that with songs and praise of men accompanied
with music 99 , He might be lauded, - He who alone is all, or


95 That is, the two elements mentioned.

96 The above paragraph seems to have been very imperfectly translated into Latin.

97 Una est obseqnioruni freqnentatio. Cf. Ex. i. 3.

98 Cf. C. H., xvi. 11: “The duty of mankind is to give worship.”

99 Mnsicatis ; or perhaps “Muse-inspired”; a word which, like so many others, occurs only in the Latin of this treatise.


- 206 -



is the Sire of all; and so not even on the earths 100 , should
there have been an absence of the sweetness of the
harmony of heavenly praise.

3. Some, then, though they be very few, endowed with the
Pure Mind 101 , have been entrusted with the sacred charge
of contemplating Heaven.

Whereas those men who, from the two-fold blending of
their nature, have not as yet withdrawn their inner reason
from their body’s mass 1 " 2 , these are appointed for the
study of the elements, and [all] that is below them.

4. Thus man’s an animal; yet not indeed less potent in that
he’s partly mortal, but rather doth he seem to be all the
more fit and efficacious for reaching Certain Reason, since
he has had mortality bestowed on him as well.

For it is plain he could not have sustained the strain of
both, unless he had been formed out of both natures 10 ’, so
that he could possess the powers of cultivating Earthly
things and loving Heaven.

X

1. The Reason of a thesis such as this, O [my] Asclepius, I
would that thou should’st grasp, not only with the keen
attention of thy soul, but also with its living power 104 [as
well].

For ’tis a Reason that most men cannot believe; the
Perfect and the True are to be grasped by the more holy
minds 10 ’. Hence, then, will I begin.

2. [VI. M.] The Lord of the Eternity 106 is the first God; the
second’s Cosmos; man is the third 107 .


100 In terns , pi.

101 Cf. vii. 1 and 2 above.

102 The reading is “interiorem intelligentiam mole corporis resederuntf of which I can make nothing; resedemnt is evidently an
error.

103 There is here a “double” in the text, which the editor has not removed.

104 Vivacitate. Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 17; and xix. 1 below.

105 Cf. C. H, ix. (x.) 10.

106 That is, the iEon. Cf. xxx. 1 below.

107 Cf. Ex. i. 8.


-207 -



God is the Maker of the Cosmos and of all the things
therein; at the same time He ruleth 108 all, with man
himself, [who is] the ruler of the compound thing 1119 ; the
whole of which man taking on himself, doth make of it
the proper care of his own love, in order that the two of
them, himself and Cosmos, may be an ornament each
unto other; so that from this divine compost of man,
“World” seems most fitly called “Cosmos” 11 " in Greek.

3. He knows himself; he knows the World as well 111 . So
that he recollects, indeed, what is convenient to his own
parts. He calls to mind what he must use, that they may be
of service to himself; giving the greatest praise and thanks
to God, His Image 112 reverencing, - not ignorant that he
is, too, God’s image the second [one]; for that there are
two images of God - Cosmos and man 11 ’.

4. So that it comes to pass that, since man’s is a single
structure, - in that part [of him] which doth consist of
Soul, and Sense, of Spirit, and of Reason, he’s divine; so
that he seems to have the power to mount from as it were
the higher elements into the Heaven.

But in his cosmic part, which is composed of fire, and
water, and of air, he stayeth mortal on the Earth, - lest he
should leave all things committed to his care forsaken and
bereft.

Thus human kind is made in one part deathless, and in the
other part subject to death while in a body.

XI

1. Now of that dual nature, - that is to say of man, - there
is a chief capacity. [And that is] piety, which goodness
follows after.


108 Reading gubernat for gubemando.

109 That is, the compost, or “cosmic” part of himself, apparently, of v. 2.

11,1 The original Greek Koopog is here retained in the Latin; it means “order, adornment, ornament,” as well as
“world.”

111 The idea is that man is a microcosm; he is, as to his bodies, “cosmic” (“ mundanus homrf"), for his vehicles are made
of the elements; he is thus in these an image or seed (microcosm) of the universe, the macrocosm.

112 Sc. Cosmos. Cf. xxxi. 1 below.

113 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 25, last sentence.


- 208 -



[And] this [capacity] then, and then only, seems to be
perfected, if it be fortified with virtue of despising all
desires for alien things.

For alien from every part of kinship with the Gods 114 are
all things on the Earth, whatever are possessed from
bodily desires, - to which we rightly give the name
“possessions,” in that they are not born with us, but later
on begin to be possessed by us; wherefore we call them by
the name possessions 113 .

2. All such things, then, are alien from man, - even his
body. So that we can despise not only what we long for,
but also that from which the vice of longing comes to us.

For just as far as the increase of reason leads our 116 soul,
so far one should be man; in order that by contemplating
the divine, one should look down upon, and disregard the
mortal part, which hath been joined to him, through the
necessity of helping on the lower 11, world.

3. For that, in order that a man should be complete in
either part, observe that he hath been composed of
elements of either part in sets of four; - with hands, and
feet, both of them pairs, and with the other 118 members of
his body, by means of which he may do service to the
lower (that is to say the terrene) world.

And to these parts [are added other] four; - of sense, and
soul, of memory, and foresight, by means of which he
may become acquainted with the rest of things divine, and
judge of them.

Hence it is brought about that man investigates the
differences and qualities, effects and quantities of things,
with critical research; yet, as he is held back with the too
heavy weight of body’s imperfection, he cannot properly


114 Ab omnibus divince cognationis partibus.

115 This seems somewhat tautological. The first clause runs: “quacunque terrena corporali apiditate possidentur; qua merito
possessionem nomine nunatpantnr.” This Latin word-play seems almost to suggest that we are dealing with an
embellishment of the translator; it may, however, have stood in the original. Cf. xii. 2 below.

116 Lit. my.

117 Reading inferioris for interioris, as immediately below in § 3. Cf. vi. 3, last sentence.

118 This seems very loose indeed; the text or the Latin translation is probably at fault, unless the “other members” are
supposed to be grouped in sets of double pairs.


- 209 -



descry the causes of the nature of [all] things which [really]
are the true ones.

4. Man, then, being thus created and composed, and to
such ministry and service set by Highest God, - man, by
his keeping suitably the world in proper order, [and] by his
piously adoring God, in both becomingly and suitably
obeying God’s Good Will, - [man being] such as this, with
what reward think’st thou he should be recompensed?

If that, indeed, - since Cosmos is God’s work, - he who
preserves and adds on to its beauty by his love, joins his
own work unto God’s Will; when he with toil and care
doth fashion out the species 119 (which He hath made
[already] with His Divine Intent), with help of his own
body; - with what reward think’st thou he should be
recompensed, unless it be with that with which our
forebears 1211 have been blest?

5. That this may be the pleasure of God’s Love, such is
our prayer for you, devoted ones.

In other words, may He, when ye have served your time,
and have put off the world’s restraint, and freed
yourselves from deathly bonds, restore you pure and holy
to the nature of your higher self 121 , that is of the Divine!

XII

1. Asc. Righdy and truly, O Thrice-greatest one, thou
speakest. This is the prize for those who piously
subordinate their lives to God and live to help the world.

Tris. [To those], however, who have lived in other fashion
impiously, - [to them] both is return to Heaven denied,
and there’s appointed them migration into other bodies 122
unworthy of a holy soul and base; so that, as this
discourse of ours will show 12 ’, souls in their life on earth
run risk of losing hope of future immortality.


119 Singular — that is, the species in the Cosmos, according to the type in the Divine Mind.

120 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 5; Lact., D. I., i. 11; and xxxvii. 3 below.

121 Lit. part.

122 hi corporalia . . . migratio.

123 The Latin here does not construe.


- 210 -



2. But [all of this] doth seem to some beyond belief; a tale
to others; to others [yet again], perchance, a subject for
their mirth 124 .

For in this life in body, it is a pleasant thing - the pleasure
that one gets from one’s possessions 12 '. Tis for this cause
that spite, in envy of its [hope of] immortality, doth clap
the soul in prison 126 , as they say, and keep it down, so that
it stays in that part of itself in which it’s mortal, nor
suffers it to know the part of its divinity.

3. For I will tell thee, as though it were prophetic-ly 127 ,
that no one after us 128 shall have the Single Love, the Love
of wisdom-loving 129 , which consists in Gnosis of Divinity
alone, - [the practice of] perpetual contemplation and of
holy piety. For that the many do confound philosophy
with multifarious reasoning 1 ’ 11 .

Asc. Why is it, then, the many make philosophy so hard to
grasp; or wherefore is it they confound this thing with
multifarious reasoning?

XIII

1. Tris. ’Tis in this way, Asclepius; - by mixing it, by means
of subtle expositions, with divers sciences not easy to be
grasped, - such as arithmetic, and music, and geometry.

But Pure Philosophy, which doth depend on godly piety
alone, should only so far occupy itself with other arts, that
it may [know how to] appreciate the working out in
numbers of the fore-appointed stations of the stars when
they return, and of the course of their procession.

Let her, moreover, know how to appreciate the Earth’s
dimensions, its qualities and quantities, the Water’s


124 Cf. C. H., i. 29; also xxv. 3 below.

125 Cf. xi. 1 above.

126 Obtorto . . . collo.

127 Ego enim tibi quasi pradivinans dixero. Notice the dixero, — the “prophetic” tense, if we may be permitted to coin a
term to characterize this use, which reminds us so strongly of the “Sibylline” literature and the allied prophetic
centonism of the time.

128 Cf. Ex. ix. 8, and xiv. 1 below.

129 Lit. philosophy. Cf. in Philo, D. IV C, the “Heavenly Love” with which the Therapeuts were “afire with God.” Cf.
xiv. 1, and Ex. i. 3.

130 Cf. C. H, xvi. 2.


-211 -



depths, the strength of Fire, and the effects and nature of
all these. [And so] let her give worship and give praise
unto the Art and Mind of God.

2. As for [true] Music, - to know this is naught else than to
have knowledge of the order of all things, and whatsoe’er
God’s Reason hath decreed.

For that the order of each several thing when set together
in one [key] for all, by means of skilful reason, will make,
as ’twere, the sweetest and the truest harmony with God’s
[own] Song 1 ’ 1 .

XIV

1. Asc. Who, therefore, will the men be after us? 1 ’ 2

Tris. They will be led astray by sophists’ cleverness, and
turned from True Philosophy, - the Pure and Floly [Love].

For that to worship God with single mind and soul, and
reverence the things that He hath made, and to give
thanks unto His Will, which is the only thing quite full of
Good, - this is Philosophy unsullied by the soul’s rough
curiousness.

But of this subject let what has been said so far suffice.

2. [VII. M.] And now let us begin to treat of Spirit and
such things.

There was first God and Matter 1 ’’, which we in Greek 1 ’ 4
believe [to be] the Cosmos; and Spirit was with Cosmos, or
Spirit was in Cosmos, but not in like way as in God 1 ”; nor
were there things [as yet] from which the Cosmos [comes
to birth] in God.

They were not; just for the very reason that they were not,
but were as yet in that [condition] whence they have had
their birth 1 ’ 6 .


131 Cf. “Heaven’s harmonious song” in xxviii. 1 1 below.

132 Cf. xii. 3 above, and notes.

133 The Greek 13X7] is here retained by the translator.

134 Grace.

135 The Latin translation is confused. The original seems to have stated that Spirit and Cosmos (or Matter) were as
yet one, or Spirit-Matter.

136 That is, presumably, they were in potentiality.


- 212 -



For those things only are not called ingenerable which
have not yet been born, but [also] those which lack the
fertilizing power of generating, so that from them naught
can be born.

And so whatever things there are that have in them the
power of generating, - these two are generable, [that is to
say,] from which birth can take place, though they be born
from their own selves [alone]. For there’s no question that
from those born from themselves birth can with ease take
place, since from them all are born.

3. God, then, the everlasting, God the eternal, nor can be
born, nor could Fie have been born. That 1 ’' is, That was,
That shall be ever. This, therefore, is God’s Nature - all
from itself [alone].

But Matter 1 ’ 8 (or the Nature of the Cosmos) 1 ’ 9 and Spirit,
although they do not seem to be things born from any
source 140 , yet in themselves possess the power of
generation and of generating, - the nature of fecundity.

For the beginning 141 [truly] is in [just that] quality of nature
which possesses in itself the power and matter both of
conception and of birth . This , then, without concep-
tion of another, is generable of its own self.

XV

1. But, on the other hand, [whereas] those things which
only have the power of bringing forth by blending with
another nature, are thus to be distinguished, this Space of
Cosmos 144 , with those that are in it, seems not to have
been born, in that [the Cosmos] has in it undoubtedly all
Nature’s potency 143 .


137 Hoc.

138 Again 15Xr] in the Latin text.

139 Cf. “Matter or Cosmos” of xvii. 2.

140 Principio, “beginning” the same word as that used in the Vulgate translation of the Proem of the fourth Gospel.

141 Initium.

142 This seems to make it clear that the idea “Cosmos” is regarded under the dual concept of Spirit-Matter.

143 Sc. Primal Nature, or Spirit-Matter.

144 Cf. xxx. 1, and xxxiv. 1 below.

145 The Latin construction is very faulty.


- 213 -



By “Space” I mean that in which are all things. For all
these things could not have been had Space not been, to
hold them all. Since for all things that there have been,
must be provided Space.

For neither could the qualities nor quantities, nor the
positions, nor [yet] the operations, be distinguished of
those things which are no where.

2. So then the Cosmos, also, though not born, still has in
it the births 146 of all; in that, indeed, it doth afford for all
of them most fecund wombs for their conception.

It, therefore, is the sum of [all that] quality of Matter
which hath creative potency, although it hath not been
[itself] created.

And, seeing that [this] quality of Matter is in its nature
[simple] productiveness; so the same [source] produces
bad as well [as good].

XVI

1. I have not, therefore, O Asclepius and Ammon, said
what many say, that God could not excise and banish evil
from the Scheme 147 of Things; - to whom no answer need
at all be given. Yet for your sakes I will continue what I
have begun, and give a reason.

They say that God ought to have freed the World from
bad in every way; for so much is it 148 in the World, that it
doth seem to be as though it were one of its limbs.

This was foreseen by Highest God and [due] provision
made, as much as ever could have been in reason made,
then when He thought it proper to endow the minds of
men with sense 149 , and science and intelligence.

2. For it is by these things alone whereby we stand above
the rest of animals, that we are able to avoid the snares
and crimes of ill.


146 Natnras.

147 Lit. nature.

148 Sc. evil or bad.

149 Presumably meaning the higher sense.


- 214 -



For he who shall on sight have turned from them, before
he hath become immeshed 1 '" in them, - he is a man
protected by divine intelligence and [godly] prudence.

For that the ground-work of [true] science doth consist of
the top-stones of virtue.

3. It is by Spirit that all things are governed in the
Cosmos, and made quick, - Spirit made subject to the Will
of Highest God, as though it were an engine or machine.

So far, then, [only] let Him be by us conceived, - as Him
who is conceivable by mind alone, who is called Highest
God, the Ruler and Director of God Sensible 151 , - of Him
who in Himself includes all Space, all Substance, and all
Matter, of things producing and begetting, and all
whatever is, however great it be.

XVII

1. It is by Spirit that all species in the Cosmos are [or] 132
moved or ruled, - each one according to its proper nature
given it by God.

Matter 133 , or Cosmos, on the other hand, is that which
holds all things, - the field of motion 134 , and the that
which crowds together 133 all; of which God is the Ruler,
distributing unto all cosmic things all that is requisite to
each.

It is with Spirit that He fills all things, according to the
quality of each one’s nature.

2. [Now,] seeing that the hollow roundness 136 of the
Cosmos is borne round into the fashion of a sphere; by
reason of its [very] quality or form, it never can be
altogether visible unto itself.


1511 [Ed. meaning to ensnare .]

151 That is, Cosmos.

152 [Ed. Menard’s original writing, Livre II, p. 135, simply states: “Quant a l’esprit, il fait mouvoir on gouverne tous
les etres particuliers qui sont dans le monde, selon la nature de Dieu leur a assignee.’ Thus, the extra [or] appears
superfluous here.]

153 Again uXt].

154 Agitatio.

155 Freqttentatio.

156 Cava rotunditas — that is, presumably, concavity.


-215 -



So that, however high a place in it thou shouldest choose
for looking down below, thou could’st not see from it
what is at bottom, because in many places it confronts
[the senses], and so is thought to have the quality [of
being visible throughout] L ' 7 .

For it is solely owing to the forms of species, with images
of which it seems insculpted, that it is thought [to be] as
though ’twere visible [throughout]; but as a fact ’tis ever to
itself invisible.

3. Wherefore, its bottom, or its [lowest] part, if [such a]
place there be within a sphere, is called in Greek a-eides 158 ;
since that eidein 159 in Greek means “seeing,” - which
“being-seen” the sphere’s beginning 16 " lacks.

Flence, too, the species have the name eideai 161 , since
they’re of form we cannot see.

Therefore, in that they are deprived of “being-seen,” in
Greek they are called Hades; in that they are at bottom 162
of the sphere, they’re called in Latin Inferi.

These, then, are principal and prior 16 ’, and, as it were, the
sources and the heads of all the things which are in
them 164 , through them, or from them.

XVIII

1. Asc. All things, then, in themselves (as thou, Thrice-
greatest one, dost say) are cosmic [principles] (as I should
say) of all the species which are in them, [or] as it were,
the sum and substance of each one of them 16 ’.


157 Propter quod multis locis instat, qnalitatenique habere creditur. The Latin translation is evidently faulty. Menard omits the
sentence entirely, as he so often does when there is difficulty.

158 A-siSt]? — that is, “Invisible”; that is, Hades (Ai8f|g or A8r]g).

159 siSsvv — ? iSsvv.

160 p>ri mum spheres-, the top or bottom presumably, or periphery, of the world-sphere.

161 siSsai — ? iSeai — that is, forms, species, — but also used of the highest species, viewed as “ideas.”

162 Sc. at the centre.

163 Or principles and priorities ( antiquiora ).

164 Sc. the “ideas.”

165 The Latin text is hopeless.


- 216 -



Tot. So Cosmos, then, doth nourish bodies; the Spirit,
souls; the [Higher] Sense (with which Celestial Gift
mankind alone is blest) 166 doth feed the mind.

And [these are] not all men, but [they are] few, whose
minds are of such quality that they can be receptive of so
great a blessing.

2. For as the World’s illumined by the Sun, so is the mind
of man illumined by that Light; nay, in [still] fuller
measure.

For whatsoever thing the Sun doth shine upon, it is anon,
by interjection of the Earth or Moon, or by the
intervention of the night, robbed of its light.

But once the [Higher] Sense hath been commingled with
the soul of man, there is at-onement from the happy
union of the blending of their natures; so that minds of
this kind are never more held fast in errors of the
darkness.

Wherefore, with reason have they said the [Higher] Senses
are the souls of Gods; to which I add: not of all Gods, but
of the great ones [only]; nay, even of the principles of
these.


XIX

1. [VIII. M.] Asc. What dost thou call, Thrice-greatest one,
the heads of things, or sources of beginnings?

Tris. Great are the mysteries which I reveal to thee, divine
the secrets I disclose; and so I make beginning of this
thing 167 with prayers for Heaven’s favour.

The hierarchies 168 of Gods are numerous; and of them all
one class is called the Noumenal 169 , the other [class] the
Sensible 1711 .


166 Cf. vii. i.

167 Initium facio\ or perhaps perform the sacred rite, or give initiation.

168 Genera.

169 Intelligibilis (= oi vorpoi); lit. that which can be known by intellect (alone).

170 Sensibilis (= oi aia0t]Toi); lit. that which can be known by the senses.


- 217 -



The former are called Noumenal, not for the reason that
they’re thought to lie beyond our' 71 senses; for these are
just the Gods we sense more truly than the ones we call
the visible, - just as our argument will prove, and thou, if
thou attend, wilt be made fit to see.

For that a lofty reasoning, and much more one that is too
godlike for the mental grasp of [average] men, if that the
speaker’s words are not received 172 with more attentive
service of the ears, - will fly and flow beyond them; or
rather will flow back [again], and mingle with the streams

r • 173

or its own source .

2. There are, then, [certain] Gods who are the principals 1,4
of all the species.

Next there come those whose essence 1 75 is their principal.
These are the Sensible, each similar to its own dual
source 176 , who by their sensibility 177 affect all things, - the
one part through the other part [in each] making to shine
the proper work of every single one.

Of Heaven, - or of whatsoe’er it be that is embraced
within the term, - the essence-chief 1 8 is Zeus; for ’tis
through Heaven that Zeus gives life to all.

Sun’s essence-chief is light; for the good gift of light is
poured on us through the Sun’s disk.

3. The “Thirty-six,” who have the name of Horoscopes 179 ,
are in the [selfj same space as the Fixed Stars; of these the
essence-chief, or prince, is he whom they call
Pantomorph, or Omniform 18 °, who fashioneth the various
forms for various species.


171 That is, the “Sense” of those who have reached the “Trismegistic” grade, though of course beyond the range of
the normal senses.

172 The text is faulty.

173 Cf. x. 1 above; and C. H., x. (xi.) 17.

174 Principes.

175 The Greek original ohoia being retained.

176 That is, presumably, essence and sensibility.

177 That is, presumably, their power of affecting the senses.

178 The Greek ouoiagyt]? is retained in the Latin.

179 Horoscopi (= cbgooxoTtoi); generally called Decans; tf. Ex. ix., where the Decans are explained.

18,1 navTOfjioQtpov vel omniformetrr, see xxxv. below; also C. H., xi. (xii.) 16, Comment.


- 218 -



The “Seven” who are called spheres, have essence-chiefs,
that is, [have each] their proper rulers, whom they call [all
together] Fortune and Heimarmene 181 , whereby all things
are changed by nature’s law; perpetual stability being
varied with incessant motion 182 .

The Air, moreover, is the engine, or machine, through
which all things are made - (there is, however, an essence-
chief of this, a second [Air]) - mortal from mortal things
and things like these 18 ’.

4. These hierarchies of Gods, then, being thus and [in this
way] related 184 , from bottom unto top, are [also] thus
connected with each other, and tend towards themselves;
so mortal things are bound to mortal, things sensible to
sensible.

The whole of [this grand scale of] Rulership, however,
seems to Him [who is] the Highest Lord, either to be not
many things, or rather [to be] one.

For that from One all things depending 18 ’, and flowing
down from it, - when they are seen as separate, they’re
thought to be as many as they possibly can be; but in their
union it is one [thing], or rather two, from which all things
are made; - that is, from Matter, by means of which the
other things are made, and by the Will of Him, by nod of
whom they’re brought to pass.

XX

1 . Asc. Is this again the reason, O Thrice-greatest one?

Tris. It is, Asclepius. For God’s the Father or the Lord of
all, or whatsoever else may be the name by which He’s


181 That is, Fate, siftagfjLsvt].

182 Quoted in the original Greek by loan. Laurentius Lydus, De Mensibus, iv. 7; Wiinsch (Leipzig, 1898), p. 70, 22; as
follows: “And Hermes is witness in his [book], called ‘The Perfect Sermon,’ when saying: ‘They that are called the
Seven Spheres have a Source that is called Fortune or Fate, which changes all things and suffers them not to remain
in the same [conditions].”’ The quotation is continued without a break; the rest of it, however, corresponds to
nothing in our context, but is somewhat similar to ch. xxxix. 1, 2.

183 That is, the region of things subject to death. The text is faulty. Cf with this “engine” the “cylinder” of the K. K.
Fragments (10).

184 Ab imo ad summum se admoventibur, for admoventibns compare “ genus admotum superis” Silius Italicus, viii. 295.

185 Cf. iv. 1 above, and the note.


- 219 -



named more holily and piously by men, - which should be
set apart among ourselves for sake of our intelligence.

For if we contemplate this so transcendent God, we shall
not make Him definite by any of these names.

For if a [spoken] word 186 is this: - a sound proceeding
from the air, when struck by breath 187 , denoting the whole
will, perchance, of man, or else the [higher] sense, which
by good chance a man perceives by means of mind, when
out of [all his] senses 188 , - a name the stuff of which, made
of a syllable or two, has so been limited and pondered,
that it might serve in man as necessary link between the
voice and ear; - thus [must] the Name of God in full
consist of Sense, and Spirit, and of Air, and of all things in
them, or through, or with them 189 .

2. Indeed, I have no hope that the Creator of the whole of
Greatness, the Father and the Lord of all the things [that
are], could ever have one name, even although it should
be made up of a multitude - He who cannot be named, or
rather He who can be called by every name.

For He, indeed, is One and All 190 ; so that it needs must be
that all things should be called by the same name as His,
or He Himself called by the names of all.

3. He, then, alone, yet all-complete in the fertility of either
sex, ever with child of His own Will, doth ever bring to
birth whatever He hath willed to procreate.

His Will is the All-goodness, which also is the Goodness
of all things, born from the nature of His own Divinity, -
in order that all things may be, just as they all have been,
and that henceforth the nature of being born from their
own selves may be sufficient to all things that will be
born.


186 Vox (= name), presumably Xoyoq in the original; a play on “word” and “reason,” but also referring to the
mysterious “name” of a person.

187 Spirit n, or spirit.

188 Ex sensibus - presumably, in ecstasis.

189 The text of this paragraph is very unsatisfactory.

190 Cf. i. 1 above.


- 220 -



Let this, then, be the reason given thee, Asclepius,
wherefore and how all things are made of either sex.

XXI

1. Asc. Thou speak’st of God, then, O Thrice-greatest
one?

Tris. Not only God, Asclepius, but all things living and
inanimate. For ’tis impossible that any of the things that
are should be unfruitful.

For if fecundity should be removed from all the things
that are, it could not be that they should be for ever what
they are. I mean that Nature 191 , Sense, and Cosmos, have
in themselves the power of being born 192 , and of
preserving all things that are born.

For either sex is full of procreation; and of each one there
is a union, or, - what’s more true, - a unity incompre-
hensible; which you may rightly call Eros 19 ’ or Aphrodite,
or both [names].

2. This, then, is truer than all truth, and plainer than what
the mind [’s eye] perceives; - that from that Universal God
of Universal Nature all other things for evermore have
found, and had bestowed on them, the mystery of
bringing forth; in which there is innate the sweetest
Charity, [and] Joy, [and] Merriment, Longing, and Love
Divine.

We might have had to tell the mighty power and the
compulsion of this mystery, if it had not been able to be
known by every one from personal experience, by
observation of himself.

3. For if thou should’st regard that supreme [point] of
time when . . , 194 the one nature doth pour forth the young
into the other one, and when the other greedily absorbs
[it] from the first, and hides it [ever] deeper [in itself];
then, at that time, out of their common congress, females


191 Here, presumably, meaning hyle.

192 Na tt tram again.

193 Cf. 1, 2, above.

194 Quo ex crebro attritu pmrinms lit ... .


-221 -



attain the nature of the males, males weary grow with
female listlessness.

And so the consummation of this mystery, so sweet and
requisite, is wrought in secret; lest, owing to the vulgar
jests of ignorance, the deity of either sex should be
compelled to blush at natural congress, - and much more
still, if it should be subjected to the sight of impious folk.

XXII

1. The pious are not numerous, however; nay, they are
very few, so that they may be counted even in the
world 195 .

Whence it doth come about, that in the many bad inheres,
through defect of the Gnosis and Discernment of the
things that are.

For that it is from the intelligence of Godlike Reason 196 ,
by which all things are ordered, there come to birth
contempt and remedy of vice throughout the world.

But when unknowingness and ignorance persist, all
vicious things wax strong, and plague the soul with
wounds incurable; so that, infected with them, and
invitiated, it swells up, as though it were with poisons, -
except for those who know the Discipline of souls and
highest Cure of intellect.

2. So, then, although it may do good to few alone, ’tis
proper to develope and explain this thesis: - wherefore
Divinity hath deigned to share His science and intelligence
with men alone. Give ear, accordingly!

When God, [our] Sire and Lord, made man, after the
Gods, out of an equal mixture of a less pure cosmic part
and a divine, - it [naturally] came to pass the
imperfections 197 of the cosmic part remained commingled
with [our] frames, and other ones 198 [as well], by reason of
the food and sustenance we have out of necessity in


195 Cf. Ex. i. 16.

196 Cf. vii. 1 above.

197 Vitia\ lit. vices.

198 re. imperfections.


- 222 -



common with all lives 199 ; by reason of which things it
needs must be that the desires, and passions, and other
vices, of the mind should occupy the souls of human kind.

3. As for the Gods, in as much as they had been made of
Nature’s fairest 201 ' part, and have no need of the supports
of reason and of discipline 201 , - although, indeed, their
deathlessness, the very strength of being ever of one
single age, stands in this case for prudence and for
science, still, for the sake of reason’s unity, instead of
science and of intellect (so that the Gods should not be
strange to these), - He, by His everlasting law, decreed for
them an order 202 , circumscribed by the necessity of law.

While as for man, He doth distinguish him from all the
other animals by reason and by discipline alone; by means
of which men can remove and separate their bodies’ vices,
- He helping them to hope and effort after deathlessness.

4. In fine. He hath made man both good and able to share
in immortal life, - out of two natures, [one] mortal, [one]
divine.

And just because he is thus fashioned by the Will of God,
it is appointed that man should be superior both to the
Gods, who have been made of an immortal nature only,
and also to all mortal things.

It is because of this that man, being joined unto the Gods
by kinsmanship, doth reverence them with piety and holy
mind; while, on their side, the Gods with pious sympathy
regard and guard all things of men.

XXIII

1. But this can only be averred of a few men endowed
with pious minds. Still, of the rest, the vicious folk, we
ought to say no word, for fear a very sacred sermon
should be spoiled by thinking of them.


199 Lit. animals.

200 Mundissima — that is, most cosmic, or “adorned.”

201 Or science.

202 Ordinem — that is, Cosmos. Compare this also with the idea of the Gnostic Horos which “surrounds” the Pleroma.


- 223 -



[IX. M.] And 21 ' 1 since our sermon treats of the relationship
and intercourse 2 " 4 of men and Gods, - learn, Asclepius,
the power and strength of man!

[Our] Lord and Father, or what is Highest God, - as He’s
Creator of the Gods in Heaven, so man’s the maker of the
gods who, in the temples, suffer man’s approach, and who
not only have light poured on them, but who send forth
[their] light [on all]; not only does a man go forward
towards the God[s], but also he confirms the Gods [on
earth] 205 .

Art thou surprised, Asclepius; nay is it not that even thou
dost not believe?

2. Asc. I am amazed, Thrice-greatest one; but willingly I
give assent to [all] thy words. I judge that man most blest
who hath attained so great felicity.

Tris. And righdy so; [for] he deserves our wonder, in that
he is the greatest of them all.

As for the genus of the Gods in Heaven, - ’tis plain from
the commixture 2 " 6 of them all, that it has been made
pregnant from the fairest part of nature 2 " 7 , and that the
only signs [by which they are discerned] are, as it were,
before all else their heads 2 " 8 .

3. Whereas the species of the gods which humankind
constructs is fashioned out of either nature, - out of that
nature which is more ancient and far more divine, and out
of that which is in men; that is, out of the stuff of which
they have been made and are configured, not only in their
heads alone, but also in each limb and their whole frame.

And 2 " 9 so mankind, in imaging Divinity, stays mindful of
the nature and the source of its own self.


203 This sentence and the first half of the next, down to “suffer man’s approach,” is quoted word for word in Latin
by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxiii.

204 Cf. C. H, x. (xi.) 22.

205 The Latin translation of this paragraph seems confused.

206 This is, apparently, the “star stuff’ of which their bodies are made.

207 De mundissima parte natures esse prcegnatum — whatever that means; but cf. p. 348, n. 1.

208 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 10, 11.

209 This sentence, together with the first five sentences of the next chapter, down to the words “and constant
worship,” are quoted in Latin with two or three slight verbal variants by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxiii.


- 224 -



So that, just as [our] Sire and Lord did make the Gods
asonian, that they might be like Him; so hath mankind
configured its own gods according to the likeness of the
look of its own self 210 .


XXIV

1. Asc. Thou dost not mean their statues, dost thou, O
Thrice-greatest one?

Tris. [I mean their] statues, O Asclepius, - dost thou not
see how much thou even, doubtest? - statues, ensouled
with sense, and filled with spirit, which work such mighty
and such [strange] results, - statues which can foresee
what is to come, and which perchance can prophesy,
foretelling things by dreams and many other ways, -
[statues] that take their strength away from men, or cure
their sorrow, if they do so deserve.

Dost thou not know, Asclepius, that Egypt is the image of
the Heaven 211 ; or, what is truer still, the transference, or
the descent, of all that are in governance or exercise in
Heaven? And if more truly [still] it must be said, - this
land of ours is Shrine of all the World.

2. Further, in that ’tis fitting that the prudent should know
all before, it is not right ye should be ignorant of this.

The time will come when Egypt will appear to have in
vain served the Divinity with pious mind and constant
worship 212 ; and all its holy cult will fall to nothingness and
be in vain.

For that Divinity is now about to hasten back from Earth
to Heaven, and Egypt shall be left; and Earth, which was
the seat of pious cults, shall be bereft and widowed of the
presence of the Gods.

And foreigners shall fill this region and this land; and
there shall be not only the neglect of pious cults, but -
what is still more painful, - as though enacted by the laws,


210 Cf xxxvii. 2 below.

211 Cf Comment, on K K., 46-48.

212 Augustine’s quotation ends here.


- 225 -



a penalty shall be decreed against the practice of [our]
pious cults and worship of the Gods - [entire]
proscription of them.

3. Then shall this holiest land, seat of [our] shrines and
temples, be choked with tombs and corpses 21 ’.

O Egypt, Egypt, of thy pious cults tales only will remain,
as far beyond belief for thy own sons [as for the rest of
men]; words only will be left cut on thy stones, thy pious
deeds recounting!

And Egypt will be made the home of Scyth 214 or Indian,
or some one like to them, - that is a foreign neighbour 21 ’.

Ay, for the Godly company 216 shall mount again to
Heaven, and their forsaken worshippers shall all die out;
and Egypt, thus bereft of God and man, shall be
abandoned.

4. And now I speak to thee, O River, holiest [Stream]! I
tell thee what will be. With bloody torrents shalt thou
overflow thy banks. Not only shall thy streams divine be
stained with blood; but they shall all flow over [with the
same] .

The tale of tombs shall far exceed the [number of the]
quick; and the surviving remnant shall be Egyptians in
their tongue alone, but in their actions foreigners.

XXV

1. Why dost thou weep, Asclepius? Nay, more than this,
by far more wretched, - Egypt herself shall be impelled
and stained with greater ills.

For she, the Holy [Land], and once deservedly the most
beloved by God, by reason of her pious service of the
Gods on earth, - she, the sole colony 217 of holiness, and


213 Sepulchrorum erit mortuorumque plenissima. This sentence is quoted verbatim by Augustine, De Civitate Dei, xxvi.

214 Compare Colossians iii. 11: “Where there is neither Greek nor jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, barbarian,
Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all.”

215 Vicina barbaria-, lit. a neighbouring foreign country. Compare this with the previous note. It is strange the two,
Scyth and barbarian, coming twice together.

216 Divinitas.

217 Dednctio the technical term for leading out a colony from the metropolis or mother city. Compare Philo, De Vita
Contenrplativa, P. 892, M. 474 (Conybeare, p. 58): “In Egypt there are crowds of them [the Therapeuts] in every


- 226 -



teacher of religion [on the earth], shall be the type of all
that is most barbarous.

And then, out of our loathing for mankind, the World will
seem no more deserving of our wonder and our praise.

All this good thing 218 , - than which there has been fairer
naught that can be seen, nor is there anything, nor will
there [ever] be, - will be in jeopardy.

2. And it will prove a burden unto men; and on account
of this they will despise and cease to love this Cosmos as a
whole, - the changeless work of God; the glorious
construction of the Good, comprised of multifold variety
of forms; the engine of God’s Will, supporting His own
work ungrudgingly; the multitudinous whole massed in a
unity of all, that should be reverenced, praised and loved, -
by them at least who have the eyes to see.

For Darkness will be set before the Light, and Death will
be thought preferable to Life. No one will raise his eyes to
Heaven; the pious man will be considered mad, the
impious a sage; the frenzied held as strong, the worst as
best.

3. For soul, and all concerning it, - whereby it doth
presume that either it hath been born deathless, or that it
will attain to deathlessness, according to the argument I
have set forth for you, - [all this] will be considered not
only food for sport 219 , but even vanity.

Nay, [if ye will] believe me, the penalty of death shall be
decreed to him who shall devote himself to the Religion
of the Mind.

New statutes shall come into force, a novel law; naught
[that is] sacred, nothing pious, naught that is worthy of the
Heaven, or Gods in Heaven, shall [e’er] be heard, or
[even] mentally believed.


province, or nome as they call it, and especially at Alexandria. For they who are in every way the most highly
advanced, lead out a colony (aTioixiav axeXXovxai), as it were to the Therapeutic father-land”; and also the numerous
parallel passages cited by Conybeare from Philo’s other writings.

218 Sc. the Cosmos.

219 Qixii.2 above.


- 227 -



4. The sorrowful departure of the Gods from men takes
place; bad angels 2211 only stay, who mingled with humanity
will lay their hands on them, and drive the wretched folk
to every ill of recklessness, - to wars, and robberies,

deceits, and all those things that are opposed to the soul’s

221

nature .

Then shall the Earth no longer hold together; the Sea no
longer shall be sailed upon; nor shall the Heaven continue
with the Courses of the Stars, nor the Star-course in
Heaven.

The voice of every God 222 shall cease in the [Great]
Silence that no one can break; the fruits of Earth shall rot;
nay, Earth no longer shall bring forth; and Air itself shall
faint in that sad listlessness.

XXVI

E This, when it comes, shall be the World’s old age,
impiety, - irregularity, and lack of rationality in all good
things.

And when these things all come to pass, Asclepius, - then
He, [our] Lord and Sire, God First in power, and Ruler of
the One God [Visible] 22 ’, in check of crime, and calling
error back from the corruption of all things unto good
manners and to deeds spontaneous with His Will (that is
to say God’s Goodness), - ending all ill, by either washing
it away with water-flood, or burning it away with fire, or
by the means of pestilent diseases, spread throughout all
hostile lands, - God will recall the Cosmos to its ancient
form 224 ; so that the World itself shall seem meet to be


220 Nocentes angeli, — usually daimones in our tractates; still, as Lactantius ( D . L, ii. 15) says that Hermes calls the
daimones “evil angels” (ayykXooz n ovrjQoin;), he most probably took it from the Greek original of our sermon.

221 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 21.

222 Omnis vox diviner, or, perhaps, the “whole Word of God.”

223 That is, Cosmos.

224 The above passage is cited in the original Greek by Lactantius ( D . 1., vii. 8) as from the “Perfect Sermon” of
Hermes. As we might expect from what had been already said on this subject, it differs from our Latin translation,
and runs as follows:

“Now when these things shall be as I have said, Asclepius, then will [our] Lord and Sire, the God and Maker of
the First and the One God, look down on what is done, and making firm His Will, that is the Good, against
disorder, — recalling error, and cleaning out the bad, either by washing it away with water-flood, or burning it away
with swiftest fire, or forcibly expelling it with war and famine, — will bring again His Cosmos to its former state, and
so achieve its Restoration.”


- 228 -



worshipped and admired; and God, the Maker and
Restorer of so vast a work, be sung by the humanity who
shall be then, with ceaseless heraldings of praise and
[hymns of] blessing.

2. For this [Re-] birth of Cosmos is the making new 22 ' of
all good things, and the most holy and most pious
bringing-back again of Nature’s self, by means of a set
course of time, - of Nature, which was without beginning,
and which is without an end. For that God’s Will hath no
beginning; and, in that ’tis the same and as it is, it is
without an end.

Asc. Because God’s Nature’s the Determination 226 of the
Will. Determination is the Highest Good; is it not so,
Thrice-greatest one?

3. Tris. Asclepius, Will is Determination’s child; nay,
willing in itself comes from the Will.

Not that He willeth aught desiring it; for that He is the
Fullness of all things, and wills what things He has.

He thus wills all good things, and has all that He wills.
Nay, rather, He doth think and will all good.

This, then, is God; the World of Good’s His Image.

XXVII

1. Asc. [Is Cosmos] good, Thrice-greatest one?

Tris. [’Tis] good 227 , as I will teach thee, O Asclepius.

For just as God is the Apportioner and Steward of good
things to all the species, or [more correctly] genera, which
are in Cosmos, - that is to say, of Sense 228 , and Soul, and
Life, - so Cosmos is the giver and bestower of all things
which seem unto [us] mortals good; - that is to say, the
alternation of its parts, of seasonable fruits, birth, growth,
maturity, and things like these.


225 Cf. C. H, Hi. (iv.) 1.

226 Consilium = (3outr).

227 This seems a formal contradiction of C. H., x. (xi.) 10, but is not really so.

228 Meaning higher sense, presumably; reading sensns for sensibus.


- 229 -



And for this cause God doth transcend the height of
highest Heaven, extending everywhere, and doth behold
all things on every side.

2. Beyond the Heaven starless Space doth stretch, stranger
to every thing possessed of body.

The Dispensator who’s between the Heaven and Earth, is
Ruler of the Space which we call Zeus [Above].

The Earth and Sea is ruled by Zeus Below 229 ; he is the
Nourisher of mortal lives, and of fruit-bearing [trees].

It is by reason of the powers of all of these 2 ’ 1 ' that fruits,
and trees, and earth, grow green.

The powers and energies of [all] the other [Gods] will be
distributed through all the things that are.

3. Yea, they who rule the earth shall be distributed
[through all the lands], and [finally] be gathered in a
state 2 ’ 1 , - at top of Egypt’s upper part 2 ’ 2 , - which shall be
founded towards the setting sun, and to which all the
mortal race shall speed.

Ajc. But now, just at this moment, where are they, Thrice-
greatest one?

Tris. They’re gathered in a very large community 2 ”, upon
the Libyan Hill 2 ’ 4 . And now enough concerning this hath
been declared.

4. [X. M.] But now the question as to deathlessness or as
to death must be discussed.

The expectation and the fear of death torture the
multitude, who do not know True Reason.

Now death is brought about by dissolution of the body,
wearied out with toil, and of the number, when complete,
by which the body’s members are arranged into a single


229 Jupiter Plutonius. Menard suggests “ Zens souterrain ( Sarapis ?)”; the original was probably Zeus Aidoneus.

230 It is not clear who “these” are; perhaps all that have so far been mentioned, but this does not seem satisfactory.
Doubtless the Latin translation is, as usual, at fault.

231 Or city.

232 In sunwio Mgypti initio.

233 Civitate.

234 In monte Libyco; lit. on a (or the) Libycan, or Libyan or African Hill or Mount. Compare with this xxxvii. below.


- 230 -



engine for the purposes of life. The body dies, when it no
longer can support the life-powers 213 of a man.

This, then, is death, - the body’s dissolution, and the
disappearance of corporeal sense 2 ’ 6 .

As to this death anxiety is needless. But there’s another
[death] which no man can escape 2 ’ 7 , but which the
ignorance and unbelief of man think litde of.

5. Asc. What is it, O Thrice-greatest one, that men know
nothing of, or disbelieve that it can be?

Tris. So, lend thy ear, Asclepius!

XXVIII

1. When, [then,] the soul’s departure from the body shall
take place, - then shall the judgment and the weighing of
its merit pass into its highest daimon’s power 2 ’ 8 .

And when he sees it pious is and just, - he suffers it to rest
in spots appropriate to it.

But if he find it soiled with stains of evil deeds, and fouled
with vice, - he drives it from Above into the Depths, and
hands it o’er to warring hurricanes and vortices of Air, of
Fire, and Water 2 ’ 9 .


235 Vitalia.

236 This passage is quoted in the original Greek by Stobasus, Florilegium, cxx. 27 (G. iii. 464; M. iv. 105, 106; Pat. 45,
under title “Death”), under the heading “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Asclepius.” It runs as follows:

“Now must we speak of death. For death affrights the many as the greatest of all ills, in ignorance of fact. Death
is the dissolution of the toiling frame. For when the ‘number’ of the body’s joints becomes complete, — the basis of
the body’s jointing being number, — that body dies; [that is,] when it no longer can support the man. And this is
death, — the body’s dissolution and the disappearance of corporeal sense.”

The directness and the sturdy vigour of the Greek original has clearly lost much in the rhetorical paraphrasing of
the Latin translator.

237 Necessaria.

238 Cf. C. H, x. (xi.) 21.

239 The substance of these two sentences is contained in a “quotation” from the Greek by J. Laurentius Lydus, De
Mensibus, iv. 149 (Wiinsch, 167, 15): “According to the Egyptian Hermes who, in what is called ‘The Perfect Sermon,’
says as follows: ‘But such souls as transgress the norm of piety, when they do leave their body, are handed over to
the daimones and carried downwards through the air, cast forth as from a sling into the zones of fire and hail, which
poets call Pyriphlegethon and Tartarus.’” That this is a “quotation,” however, I doubt very much, for if we compare
it with D. M., iv. 31 (W. 90, 24), which very faintly echoes the teaching of our chaps, iv., v., xxvii., we shall find that
Tartarus and Pyriphlegethon are entirely due to Laurentius himself. The passage mns as follows:

“For the Egyptian Hermes, in his Sermon called Perfect, says that the Avenging of the daimones, being present in
matter itself, chastise the human part [of us] according as it has deserved; while the Purifying ones confined to the air
purify the souls after death that are trying to soar aloft, [conducting them] round the haily and fiery zones of the air,
which the poets and Plato himself in the Phado call Tartarus and Pyriphlegethon; while the Saving ones again,
stationed in the lunar space, save the souls.” Cf. Ex. ix. 6.


-231 -



2. ’Twixt Heaven and Earth, upon the waves of Cosmos,
is it dragged in contrary directions, for ever racked with
ceaseless pains 240 ; so that in this its deathless nature doth
afflict the soul, in that because of its unceasing sense, it
hath the yoke of ceaseless torture set upon its neck.

Know, then, that we should dread, and be afraid, and
[ever] be upon our guard, lest we should be entangled in
these [toils].

For those who do not now believe, will after their
misdeeds be driven to believe, by facts not words, by
actual sufferings of punishment and not by threats.

3. Asc. The faults of men are not, then, punished, O
Thrice-greatest one, by law of man alone?

Tris. In the first place, Asclepius, all things on Earth must
die.

Further, those things which live by reason of a body, and
which do cease from living by reason of the same, - all
these, according to the merits of this life, or its demerits,
find due [rewards or] punishments.

[And as to punishments] they’re all the more severe, if in
their life [their misdeeds] chance to have been hidden, till
their death 241 . For [then] they will be made full conscious
of all things by the divinity, just as they are, according to
the shades of punishment allotted to their crimes.


24<l Menard here quotes a couple of lines from Empedocles (c. 494-434 B.C.), cited by Plutarch, but without giving
any reference. They are from the famous passage beginning Ecrav avayxr]<; xgrjpa x-t-L (369-382), of which the
following is Fairbanks’ translation. See Fairbanks (A.), The First Philosophers of Greece (London, 1898), p. 205:

“There is an utterance of Necessity, an ancient decree of the Gods, eternal, sealed fast with broad oaths:
Whenever any one defiles his body sinfully with bloody gore or perjures himself in regard to wrongdoing, — one of
those spirits who are heir to long life (Salpwv owe paxgaiwve? XeXkyaai (3ioto), — thrice ten thousand seasons shall he
wander apart from the blessed, being born meanwhile in all sorts of mortal forms (tpuopevov Ttavxova 8ia xpbvou
ei'Sea 6vt]T(av) changing one bitter path of life for another. For mighty Air pursues him Seaward, and Sea spews him
forth on the threshold of Earth, and Earth casts him into the rays of the unwearied Sun, and Sun into the eddies of
Air: one receives him from the other, and all hate him. One of these now am I too, a fugitive from the gods and a
wanderer, at the mercy of raging Strife.”

241 Cf. the Vision of Thespesius (Aridteus) in Plutarch, De Sera Numinis Vindicta : “Thus he had to see that the shades
of notorious criminals who had been punished in earth-life were not so hardly dealt with . . . ; whereas those who
had passed their lives in undetected vice, under cloak and show of virtue, were hemmed in by the retributory agents,
and forced with labour and pain to turn their souls inside out.”


- 232 -



XXIX


1. Asc. And these deserve [still] greater punishments,
Thrice-greatest one?

Tris. [Assuredly;] for those condemned by laws of man do
lose their life by violence, so that [all] men may see they
have not yielded up their soul to pay the debt of nature,
but have received the penalty of their deserts.

Upon the other hand, the righteous man finds his defence
in serving God and deepest piety. For God doth guard
such men from every ill 242 .

2. Yea, He who is the Sire of all, [our] Lord, and who
alone is all, doth love to show Himself to all.

It is not by the place where he may be, nor by the quality
which he may have, nor by the greatness which he may
possess, but by the mind’s intelligence alone, that He doth
shed His light on man, - [on him] who shakes the clouds
of Error from his soul, and sights the brilliancy of
Truth 24 ’, mingling himself with the All-sense of the Divine
Intelligence; through love 244 of which he wins his freedom
from that part of him o’er which Death rules, and has the
seed of the assurance of his future Deathlessness
implanted in him.

3. This, then, is how the good will differ from the bad.
Each several one will shine in piety, in sanctity, in
prudence, in worship, and in service of [our] God, and see
True Reason, as though [he looked at it] with [corporal]
eyes; and each will by the confidence of his belief excel all
other men, as by its light the Sun the other stars 243 .

For that it is not so much by the greatness of his light as
by his holiness and his divinity, the Sun himself lights up
the other stars 246 .

Yea, [my] Asclepius, thou should’st regard him as the
second God 247 , ruling all things, and giving light to all

242 Compare the Fragment quoted in Greek by Lactantius, D. I, ii. 15, and by Cyril, C.J., iv. 130.

243 Cf. xiii. (xiv.) 7-9, Comment.

244 Cf. xii. 3 above.

245 Astris.

246 Stellas.


- 233 -



things living in the Cosmos, whether ensouled or
unensouled.

For if the Cosmos is a living thing, and if it has been, and
it is, and will be ever-living, - naught in the Cosmos is
subject to death.

For of an ever-living thing, it is [the same] of every part
which is; [that is,] that ’tis [as ever-living] as it is [itself];
and in the World itself [which is] for everyone, and at the
self-same time an ever-living thing of life, - in it there is
no place for death 248 .

5. And so he 249 should be the full store of life and
deathlessness; if that it needs must be that he should live
for ever.

And so the Sun, just as the Cosmos, lasts for aye. So is he,
too, for ever ruler of [all] vital powers, or of [our] whole
vitality; he is their ruler, or the one who gives them out.

God, then, is the eternal ruler of all living things, or vital
functions, that are in the World. He is the everlasting
giver-forth of Life itself 2 ' 11 .

Once for all [time] He hath bestowed Life on all vital
powers; He further doth preserve them by a law that lasts
for evermore, as I will [now] explain.

XXX

1. For in the very Life of the Eternity 251 is Cosmos moved;
and in the very Everlastingness 2 ' 2 of Life [itself] is Cosmic
Space 237 .

On which account it 234 shall not stop at any time, nor shall
it be destroyed; for that its very self is palisaded 233 round


247 Cf. C. H, xvi. 5. ff.

248 The text of this paragraph is very corrupt.

249 That is, the Sun.

250 See Comment on C. H., xvi. 17.

251 Mternitatis, doubtless aicovo? in the original Greek, — that is, the iEon; f. x. 2 above. For the general iEon-doctrine,
see chap, xi. in the Prolegomena, and xxxii. 1 below.

252 JEternitate\ iEon again.

253 Lit. the Space of Cosmos; cf. xv. 1 above.

254 Sc. Cosmos.

255 Circumvallatns et quasi constrictus. Compare with this the idea of the Horos or Boundary in the asonology of “Them
of Valentinus,” as set forth by Hippolytus ( Vhilosophnn/ena , vi. 31):


- 234 -


about, and bound together as it were, by Living’s
Sempiternity 256 .

Cosmos is [thus] Life-giver unto all that are in it, and is
the Space of all that are in governance beneath the Sun.

The motion of the Cosmos in itself consisteth of a two-
fold energy. ’Tis vivified itself from the without by the
Eternity 257 , and vivifies all things that are within, making
all different, by numbers and by times, fixed and
appointed [for them] .

2. Now Time’s distinguished on the Earth by quality of
air, by variation of its heat and cold; in Heaven by the
returnings of the stars to the same spots, the revolution of
their course in Time.

And while the Cosmos is the home 258 of Time 2 ' 59 , it is kept
green [itself] by reason of Time’s course and motion.

Time, on the other hand, is kept by regulation. Order and
Time effect renewal of all things which are in Cosmos by
means of alternation.

3. [XI. M.] All things, then, being thus, there’s nothing
stable, nothing fixed, nothing immoveable, of things that
are being born, in Heaven or on the Earth.

Immoveable 26 " [is] God alone, and rightly [He] alone; for
He Himself is in Himself, and by Himself, and round
Himself, completely full and perfect.

He is His own immoveable stability. Nor by the pressure
of some other one can He be moved, nor in the space [of
anyone] .


“Moreover that the formlessness of the Abortion should finally never again make itself visible to the perfect
iEons, the Father Himself also sent forth the additional emanation of a single iEon, the Cross [or Stock, xov
croxugov], which being created great, as [the creature] of the great and perfect Father, and emanated to be the Guard
and Wall of protection [lit. Paling or Stockade — yagaxcopa, the Roman vallun. ?] of the iEons, constitutes the
Boundary ( 5 qoq) of the Pleroma, holding the thirty iEons together within itself. For these [thirty] are they which
form the divine creation.” See F. F. F., p. 342.

256 [Ed. meaning (in philosophy)', existence within time but infinitely into the future; as opposed to eternity, understood
as existing outside time.]

257 That is, the iEon.

258 Tkeceptaculum.

259 Cf. C. H, xi. (xii.) 2.

260 That is, changeless.


- 235 -



4. For in Him are all [spaces], and He Himself alone is in
them all; unless someone should venture to assert that
God’s own motion’s in Eternity 261 ; nay, rather, it is just
Immoveable Eternity itself, back into which the motion of
all times is funded, and out of which the motion of all
times takes its beginning.

XXXI

1. God, then, hath [ever] been unchanging 262 , and ever, in
like fashion, with Himself hath the Eternity consisted, -
having within itself Cosmos ingenerate, which we
correctly call [God] Sensible 26 ’.

Of that [transcendent] Deity this Image 264 hath been
made, - Cosmos the imitator of Eternity.

Time, further, hath the strength and nature of its own
stability, in spite of its being in perpetual motion, - from
its necessity of [ever] from itself reverting to itself.

2. And so, although Eternity is stable, motionless, and
fixed, still, seeing that the movement of [this] Time (which
is subject to motion) is ever being recalled into Eternity, -
and for that reason Time’s mobility is circular, - it comes
to pass that the Eternity itself, although in its own self, is
motionless, [yet] on account of Time, in which it is - (and
it is in it), - it seems to be in movement as all motion.

So that it comes to pass, that both Eternity’s stability
becometh moved, and Time’s mobility becometh stable.

So may we ever hold that God Himself is moved into
Himself by [ever-] same transcendency of motion 26 ’.

For that stability is in His vastness motion motionless; for
by His vastness is [His] law exempt from change 266 .

3. That, then, which so transcends, which is not subject
unto sense, [which is] beyond all bounds, [and which]


261 That is, again, in the iEon.

262 Stabilis.

263 Cf. viii. 1 above.

264 Cf. x. 3 above.

265 Eadem inimobilitate. The whole is an endeavour to at-one the “Platonic” root-opposites “same” (Talkov) and
“other” (Oaxsgov) — the “Self’ and the “not-Self,” sat-asat , dtmdndtman , of the Upanishads.

266 Lit. motionless.


- 236 -



cannot be grasped, - That transcends all appraisement;
That cannot be supported, nor borne up, nor can it be
tracked out 267 .

For where, and when, and whence, and how, and what,
He is, - is known to none 268 . For He’s borne up by [His]
supreme stability, and His stability is in Himself [alone], -
whether [this mystery] be God, or the Eternity, or both, or
one in other, or both in either.

4. And for this cause, just as Eternity transcends the
bounds of Time; so Time [itself], in that it cannot have
bounds set to it by number, or by change, or by the period
of the revolution of some second [kind of Time], - is of
the nature of Eternity.

Both, then, seem boundless, both eternal. And so stability,
though naturally fixed, yet seeing that it can sustain the
things that are in motion, - because of all the good it does
by reason of its firmness, deservedly doth hold the
chiefest place.

XXXII

1. The principals of all that are, are, therefore, God and
JEon 269 .

The Cosmos, on the other hand, in that ’tis moveable, is
not a principal 270 .

For its mobility exceeds its own stability by treating the
immoveable fixation as the law of everlasting movement.

The Whole Sense 271 , then, of the Divinity, though like [to
Him] in its own self immoveable, doth set itself in motion
within its own stability.

’Tis holy, incorruptible, and everlasting, and if there can
be any better attribute to give to it, [’tis its], - Eternity of
God supreme, in Truth itself subsisting, the Fullness of all


267 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 6; also xxxiv. 3 below.

268 Compare the Hymn in C. H., v. (vi.) 10, 11.

269 Or Eternity.

270 Lit. does not hold the chief place.

211 Cf. 3 below.


- 237 -



things, of Sense, and of the whole of Science, consisting,
so to say, with God 272 .

2. The Cosmic Sense is the container 2 ' 1 of all sensibles,
[all] species, and [all] sciences.

The human [higher sense consists] in the retentiveness of
memory, in that it can recall all things that it hath done.

For only just as far as the man-animal has the divinity of
Sense 274 descended; in that God hath not willed the
highest Sense divine should be commingled with the rest
of animals; lest it should blush for shame 2 ' on being
mingled with the other lives.

For whatsoever be the quality, or the extent, of the
intelligence of a man’s Sense, the whole of it consists in
power of recollecting what is past.

It is through his retentiveness of memory, that man’s been
made the ruler of the earth.

3. Now the intelligence of Nature 2,6 can be won by quality
of Cosmic Sense, - from all the things in Cosmos which
sense can perceive.

Concerning \this\ Eternity, which is the second [one], - the
Sense of this we get from out the senses’ Cosmos, and we
discern its quality [by the same means].

But the intelligence of Quality [itself], the “Whatness” of
the Sense of God Supreme, is Truth alone, - of which
[pure] Truth not even the most tenuous sketch, or
[faintest] shade, in Cosmos is discerned.


272 Consistens, nt ita dixerim, cum deo. Is there possibly here underlying the Latin consistens cum deo the expanded form of
the peculiar and elliptical nQOq tov 6sov of the Proem to the Fourth Gospel (the apud deum of the Vulgate)? This was
explained by the Gnostic Ptolemy, somewhere about the middle of the second century, as “at-one-ment with God,”
in his exegesis of the opening words, which he glosses as: “The at-one-ment with each other, together with their at-
one-ment with the Father” (f| kqo <; aXkfkoix; apa xai f) tiqoq tov Ttatsga Evcoaig). So that the first verse of the Proem
would run: “In the Beginning was the Logos, and the Logos was (one) with God; yea, the Logos was God. He was in
the Beginning (one) with God” — ? consistens cum deo. See Irenteus, Ref. Om. Fleer., I. viii. 5 — Stieren (Leipzig; 1853), i.
102; also F. F. F., p. 388.

273 Or receptacle.

274 That is, the divine or higher sense, connected with memory in its beginnings and with the Platonic “reminiscence”
(the Pythagorean mathesis) in its maturity.

275 Cf. C. H, x. (xi.) 19.

276 That is, Cosmos.


- 238 -



For where is aught [of it] discerned by measurement of
times, - wherein are seen untruths, and births [-and-
deaths], and errors?

4. Thou seest, then, Asclepius, on what we are [already]
founded, with what we occupy ourselves, and after what
we dare to strive.

But unto Thee, O God most high, I give my thanks, in
that Thou hast enlightened me with Light to see Divinity!

And ye, O Tat, Asclepius and Ammon, in silence hide the
mysteries divine within the secret places of your hearts 277 ,
and breathe no word of their concealment! 278

5. Now in our case the intellect doth differ from the sense
in this, - that by the mind’s extension intellect can reach to
the intelligence and the discernment of the quality of
Cosmic Sense.

The Intellect of Cosmos, on the other hand, extends to
the Eternity and to the Gnosis of the Gods who are above
itself 279 .

And thus it comes to pass for men, that we perceive the
things in Heaven, as it were through a mist, as far as the
condition of the human sense allows.

’Tis true that the extension [of the mind] which we
possess for the survey of such transcendent things, is very
narrow [still]; but [it will be] most ample when it shall
perceive with the felicity of [true] self-consciousness.

XXXIII

1. [XII. M.] Now on the subject of a “Void,” 280 - which
seems to almost all a thing of vast importance, - 1 hold the
following view.

Naught is, naught could have been, naught ever will be
void.


277 Lit. breasts.

278 Cf C. H, xiii. (xiv.) 22.

279 The super-cosmic Gods, or beings of the Intelligible Cosmos; the iEons of the Gnostics.

280 Cf C. H, xi. (xii.) .


- 239 -



For all the members of the Cosmos are completely full; so
that Cosmos itself is full and [quite] complete with bodies,
diverse in quality and form, possessing each its proper
kind and size.

And of these bodies - one’s greater than another, or
another’s less than is another, by difference of strength
and size.

Of course, the stronger of them are more easily perceived,
just as the larger [are]. The lesser ones, however, or the
more minute, can scarcely be perceived, or not at all -
those which we know are things [at all] by sense of touch
alone.

Whence many come to think they are not bodies, and that
there are void spaces, - which is impossible.

2. So also [for the Space] which is called Extra-cosmic, - if
there be any (which I do not believe), - [then] is it filled by
Him with things Intelligible, that is things of like nature
with His own Divinity; just as this Cosmos which is called
the Sensible, is fully filled with bodies and with animals,
consonant with its proper nature and its quality; - [bodies]
the proper shape of which we do not all behold, but [see]
some large beyond their proper measure, some very small;
either because of the great space which lies between [them
and ourselves], or else because our sight is dull; so that
they seem to us to be minute, or by the multitude are
thought not to exist at all, because of their too great
tenuity.

I mean the daimones, who, I believe, have their abode
with us, and heroes, who abide between the purest part of
air above us and the earth, - where it is ever cloudless, and
no [movement from the] motion of a single star [disturbs
the peace].

3. Because of this, Asclepius, thou shalt call nothing void;
unless thou wilt declare of what that’s void, which thou
dost say is void; - for instance, void of fire, of water, or
things like to these.


- 240 -



For if it should fall out, that it should seem that anything
is able to be void of things like these, - though that which
seemeth void be little or be big, it still cannot be void of
spirit and of air.

XXXIV

1. In like way must we also talk concerning “Space,” 281 - a
term which by itself is void of “sense.” 282

For Space seems what it is from that of which it is [the
space]. For if the qualifying 28 ’ word is cut away, the sense
is maimed.

Wherefore we shall [more] righdy say the space of water,
space of fire, or [space] of things like these.

For as it is impossible that aught be void; so is Space also
in itself not possible to be distinguished what it is.

For if you postulate a space without that [thing] of which
it is [the space], it will appear to be void space, - which I
do not believe exists in Cosmos.

2. If nothing, then, is void, so also Space by its own self
does not show what it is unless you add to it lengths,
breadths [and depths], - just as you add the proper
marks 284 unto men’s bodies.

These things, then, being thus, Asclepius, and ye who are
with [him], - know the Intelligible Cosmos (that is, [the
one] which is discerned by contemplation of the mind
alone) is bodiless; nor can aught corporal be mingled with
its nature, - [by corporal I mean] what can be known by
quality, by quantity, and numbers. For there is nothing of
this kind in that.

3. This Cosmos, then, which is called Sensible, is the
receptacle of all things sensible, - of species, qualities, or
bodies.


281 Cf. xv. 1 above.

282 Intellect u caret.

283 Principale, — lit. principal.

284 Signa\ characteristics, presumably.


-241 -



But not a single one of these can quicken without God.
For God is all, and by Him [are] all things, and all [are] of
His Will.

For that He is all Goodness, Fitness, Wisdom,
unchangeable, - that can be sensed and understood by His
own self alone.

Without Him naught hath been, nor is, nor will be.

4. For all things are from Him, in Him, and through Him,
- both multitudinous qualities, and mighty quantities, and
magnitudes exceeding every means of measurement, and
species of all forms; - which things, if thou should’st
understand, Asclepius, thou wilt give thanks to God.

And if thou should’st observe it 283 as a whole, thou wilt be
taught, by means of the True Reason, that Cosmos in
itself is knowable to sense 286 , and that all things in it are
wrapped as in a vesture by that Higher Cosmos 287 [spoken
of above] .

XXXV

1. Now every single class of living thing 288 , Asclepius, of
whatsoever kind, or it be mortal or be rational, whether it
be endowed with soul, or be without one, just as each has
its class 289 , so does each several [class] have images of its
own class.

And though each separate class of animal has in it every
form of its own class, still in the selfsame [kind of] form
the units differ from each other.

And so although the class of men is of one kind, so that a
man can be distinguished by his [general] look, still
individual men within the sameness of their [common]
form do differ from each other.


285 Sc. the Cosmos.

286 Sensibilew, probably referring to the sensns par excellence ; that is, the higher or cosmic sense.

287 That is, the Intelligible Cosmos; presumably the iEon.

288 Animalium.

289 Genus.


- 242 -



2. For the idea 2911 which is divine, is bodiless, and is
whatever is grasped by the mind.

So that although these two 291 , from which the general
form and body are derived, are bodiless, it is impossible
that any single form should be produced exacdy like
another, - because the moments of the hours and points
of inclination [when they’re born] are different.

But they are changed as many times as there are moments
in the hour of that revolving Circle in which abides that
God whom we have called All-formed 292 .

3. The species 29 ’, then, persists, as frequently producing
from itself as many images, and as diverse, as there are
moments in the Cosmic Revolution 294 , - a Cosmos which
doth [ever] change in revolution. But the idea 29 ’ [itself] is
neither changed nor turned.

So are the forms of every single genus permanent, [and
yet] dissimilar in the same [general] form.

XXXVI

1. Asc. And does the Cosmos have a species, O Thrice-
greatest one?

Tris. Dost not thou see, Asclepius, that all has been
explained to thee as though to one asleep?

For what is Cosmos, or of what doth it consist, if not of
all things born?

This 296 , then, you may assert of heaven, and earth, and
elements. For though the other things possess more
frequent change of species, [still even] heaven, [by its]
becoming moist, or dry, or cold, or hot, or clear, or dull,


290 Species', meaning here apparently the genus or class.

291 Apparently the idea and mind.

292 Cf. C. H., xi. (xii.) 16; and C. H., xvi. 15; also xix. 3 above, and xxxvi. 2 below.

293 That is, apparently, the “divine species,” or idea, the genus.

294 Cf. xl. 3 below.

295 Species.

296 That is, that there are genera embracing many species.


- 243 -



[all] in one kind 297 of heaven, - these [too] are frequent
changes into species 298 .

2. Earth hath, moreover, always many changes in its
species; - both when she brings forth fruits, and when she
also nourishes her bringings -forth with the return of all
the fruits; the diverse qualities and quantities of air, its
stoppings and its flowings 299 ; and before all the qualities of
trees, of flowers, and berries, of scents, of savours -
species.

Fire [also] brings about most numerous conversions, and
divine. For these are all-formed images of Sun and
Moon 300 ; they’re, as it were, like our own mirrors, which
with their emulous resplendence give us back the
likenesses of our own images.

1. [XIII. M.] But 301 now let this suffice about such things;
and let us once again return to man and reason, - gift
divine, from which man has the name of rational animal.

Fess to be wondered at are the things said of man, -
though they are [still] to be admired. Nay, of all marvels
that which wins our wonder [most] is that man has been
able to find out the nature of the Gods and bring it into
play.

2. Since, then, our earliest progenitors were in great
error’" 2 , - seeing they had no rational faith about the
Gods, and that they paid no heed unto their cult and holy
worship, - they chanced upon an art whereby they made
Gods [for themselves]

To this invention they conjoined a power that suited it,
[derived] from cosmic nature; and blending these together,
since souls they could not make, [they set about] evoking


297 Specie.

298 The construction is here confuted and elliptical.

299 This clause seems to be out of place.

300 Presumably of the ideal Sun and Moon; for “all-formed,” cf. xxxv. 2 above.

301 The first six paragraphs of this chapter are quoted in Latin, with two slight verbal variants, by Augustine, De
Civitate Dei, xxiv., xxvi.

302 Menard thinks he can distinguish the hand of a Christian scribe in this sentence, which he translates with great
freedom, “ qui s’egaraient dans I’incredulite.” A more careful translation, however, does not seem to favour this
hypothesis. Hermes says simply that primitive mankind were ignorant of the Gods, and so in error.

303 That is, images. Cf. xxx. above; and C. H., xvii.


- 244 -



daimons’ souls or those of angels; [and thus] attached
them to their sacred images and holy mysteries, so that the
statues should, by means of these, possess the powers of
doing good and the reverse.

3. For thy forebear, Asclepius, the first discoverer of
medicine, to whom there is a temple hallowed on Libya’s
Mount’ 114 , hard by the shore of crocodiles’ 11 ’, in which his
cosmic man’ 116 reposes, that is to say his body; for that the
rest [of him], or better still, the whole (if that a man when
wholly [plunged] in consciousness of life’ 117 , be better),
hath gone back home to heaven, - still furnishing, [but]
now by his divinity, the sick with all the remedies which
he was wont in days gone by to give by art of medicine.

4. Hermes, which is the name of my forebear, whose
home is in a place called after him ’ 08 , doth aid and guard
all mortal [men] who come to him from every side’ 09 .

As for Osiris’ [spouse]; how many are the blessings that
we know Isis bestows when she’s propitious; how many
does she injure when she’s wrath!

For that the terrene and the cosmic Gods are easily
enraged, in that they are created and composed of the two
natures.

5. And for this cause it comes to pass that these are called
the “sacred animals” by the Egyptians, and that each
several state’ 10 gives service to the souls of those whose
souls have been made holy ’ 11 , while they were still alive; so
that [the several states] are governed by the laws [of their
peculiar sacred animals], and called after their names.


304 Cf. xxvii. 3 above.

305 In monte Libya circa littns crocodilorum. Does this refer to a Crocodilopolis (xgoxoSelXwv noXv;, Ptol., iv. 5, § 65)? And
if so, to which of these cities, for there were several? The best known of these is Arsinoe in the Faiyyum; but there
was also another down south, in the Thebaid, on the W. bank of the Nile, lat. 25° 6', of which remains are still visible
at Embeshanda, on the verge of the Libyan desert. See Smith’s Diet, of Gk. and Rom. Geography (London, 1878), sub voc.

306 Presumably his mummy.

307 In sensu vitce.

308 Hermopolis therefore (compare Lact., D. Institt, i. 6); that is to say, Hermopolis Magna (Eggon noX ig psYakr]), the
modem Eshmun, on the left bank of the Nile, about lat. 27° 4'.

309 To get wisdom. Augustine’s quotation ends here.

310 Or city. For the animal cult of the Egyptians, see Plutarch, De Is. et Os., lxxii. ff.

311 Or consecrated.


- 245 -



It is because of this, Asclepius, those [animals] which are
considered by some states deserving of their worship, in
others are thought otherwise; and on account of this the
states of the Egyptians wage with each other frequent war.

XXXVIII

1. Asc. And of what nature, O Thrice-greatest one, may be
the quality of those who are considered terrene Gods?

Tris. It doth consist, Asclepius, of plants, and stones, and
spices, which contain the nature of [their own] divinity.

And for this cause they are delighted with repeated
sacrifice, with hymns, and lauds, and sweetest sounds,
tuned to the key of Heaven’s harmonious song’ 12 .

2. So that what is of heavenly nature ’ 1 ’, being drawn down
into the images by means of heavenly use and practices,
may be enabled to endure with joy the nature of mankind,
and sojourn with it for long periods of time.

Thus is it that man is the maker of the Gods.

3. But do not, O Asclepius, I pray thee, think the doings
of the terrene Gods are the result of chance.

The heavenly Gods dwell in the heights of Heaven, each
fil li ng up and watching o’er the rank he hath received;
whereas these Gods of ours’ 14 , each in its way, - by
looking after certain things, foretelling others by oracles
and prophecy, foreseeing others, and duly helping them
along, - act as allies of men, as though they were our
relatives and friends.


XXXIX

1. [XIV. M.] Asc. What part of the economy 315 , Thrice-
greatest one, does the Heimarmene, or Fate, then occupy?
For do not the celestial Gods rule over generals’ 16 ; the
terrene occupy particulars?


312 Cf. “God’s song” in xiii. 2 above.

313 Namely, the nature of the Gods.

314 The terrene Gods; the daimones of C. H., xvi. 14.

315 f lationis-, lit. reason.

316 Catholicomni.


- 246 -



Tot. That which we call Heimarmene, Asclepius, is the
necessity of all things that are born 117 , bound ever to
themselves with interlinked enchainments.

This, then, is either the effector of all things, or it is
highest God, or what is made the second God by God
Himself, - or else the discipline’ 18 of all things both in
heaven and on earth, established by the laws of the
Divine.

2. And so these twain, Fate and Necessity, are bound to
one another mutually by inseparable cohesion’ 19 .

The former of them, the Heimarmene, gives birth to the
beginnings of all things; Necessity compels the end of [all]
depending from these principals.

On these doth Order follow, that is their warp-and-woof,
and Time’s arrangement for the perfecting of [all] things.
For there is naught without the interblend of Order ’ 20 .

That Cosmos’ 21 is made perfect in all things; for Cosmos’
self is vehicled ’ 22 in Order, or totally consists of Order.

XL

1. So, then, these three, Fate, [and] Necessity, [and] Order,
are most immediately effected by God’s Will, who rules
the Cosmos by His Law and by His Holy Reason.

From these, accordingly, all willing or not-willing is
altogether foreign, according to God’s Will’ 2 ’.

They are not moved by wrath nor swayed by favour, but
are the instruments of the Eternal Reason’s self-


317 Or borne, qua geruntur.

318 Disciplina = ? gnosis.

319 Glutino.

320 Cf. J. Laurentius Lydus, De Mensibus, iv. 7 (Wiinsch, 70); the rest of the quotation following on what has been
already quoted in the note to xix. 3. The Greek is either a very much shortened form or the Latin a very much
expanded one, for the former may be translated as follows: “And Fate is also fated Activity (or Energy), or God
Himself, or the Order that doth follow that Activity set over all things in the heaven and all things on the earth,
together with Necessity. The former (Fate) gives birth to the very beginnings of things, the latter compels the ends
also to come into existence. And on them there follow Order and Law, and there is naught that’s orderless.” Cf. Ex.
i. 15, and Ex. xi. 1.

321 Mundus = cosmos, meaning also order in Greek.

322 Gestatnr.

323 Divinitus.


-247 -



compulsion, which is [the Reason] of Eternity 124 , that
never can be turned aside, or changed, or be destroyed.

2. First, then, is Fate, which, as it were, by casting in the
seed, supplies the embryo of all that are to be.

Follows Necessity, whereby they all are forcibly compelled
unto their end.

Third, Order [comes], preserving warp-and-wooF 2 ' of [all]
the things which Fate and [which] Necessity arrange 126 .

This, then, is the Eternity, which neither doth begin nor
cease to be, which, fixed by law unchangeable, abides in
the unceasing motion of its course.

3. It rises and it sets, by turns, throughout its limbs 127 ; so
that by reason of Time’s changes it often rises with the
very limbs with which it [once] had set.

For [its] sphericity, - its law of revolution 128 , - is of this
nature, that all things are so straightly joined to their own
selves, that no one knoweth what is the beginning of their
revolution 129 ; since they appear for ever all to go before
and follow after their own selves.

Good and bad issues 110 , [therefore,] are commingled in all
cosmic things.

4. [XV. M.] And now it hath been told you on each
several point, - as man hath power [to tell], and God hath
willed it and permitted it.

This, then, alone remains that we should do, - bless God
and give Him praise; and so return to taking thought for
body [’s comfort].

For now sufficiently have we been filled with feast of
mind by our discourse on sacred things 111 .


324 That is, the iEon.

325 [Ed. i.e. the fundamental structure or fabric.]

326 Fate thus seems to be regarded as the Creator, Order as the Preserver, and Necessity as the Destroyer or
Regenerator.

327 Membra-, that is, parts, presumably constellations.

328 Cf. xxxv. 3 below.

329 Vt olubilitatis-, that is, their turning into themselves; the symbol of which was the serpent swallowing its tail.

330 Eventus et fors.

331 Cf. the conclusion of C. H., xvii.


- 248 -



XLI


1. Now when they came forth from the holy place” 2 , they
turned their faces towards the south 111 when they began
their prayers to God.

For when the sun is setting, should anyone desire to pray
to God, he ought to turn him thitherwards 114 ; so also at
the rising of the same, unto that spot which lies beneath
the sun -1-15 .

As they were just beginning to recite the prayer, Asclepius
did whisper:

[Asc.] Let us suggest to father, Tat, - what he did bid us
do 336 , - that we should say our prayer to God with added
incense and with unguents.

Whom when Thrice-greatest heard, he grew distressed
and said:

2. [Tris.] Nay, nay, Asclepius; speak more propitious
words! For this is like to profanation of [our] sacred rites,
- when thou dost pray to God, to offer incense and the
rest.

For naught is there of which He stands in need, in that He
is all things, or all are in Him.

But let us worship, pouring forth our thanks. For this is
the best incense in God’s sight, - when thanks are given to
Him by men 117 .

3. [We give] Thee grace, Thou highest [and] most
excellent! For by Thy Grace we have received the so great
Light of Thy own Gnosis.

O holy Name, fit [Name] to be adored, O Name unique,
by which the Only God 118 is to be blest through worship
of [our] Sire, - [of Thee] who deignest to afford to all a
Father’s piety, and care, and love, and whatsoever virtue is


332 De adjto ; “down from,” literally.

333 This is apparently an error for south-west or west.

334 That is, to the setting sun or the west. Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 16, Comment.

335 Subsolanus , lying beneath the sun; that is to say, eastern.

336 Cf. xxxviii. 1 above.

337 For the three preceding paragraphs, see Lact., D. /., vi. 25.

338 The Cosmos, presumably, as the One God.


- 249 -



more sweet [than these], endowing [us] with sense, [and]
reason, [and] intelligence; - with sense that we may feel
Thee; with reason that we may track Thee out from the
appearances of things 1 ’ 9 ; with means of recognition that
we may joy in knowing Thee.

4. Saved by Thy Power divine, let us rejoice that Thou
hast shown Thyself to us in all Thy Fullness. Let us rejoice
that Thou hast deigned to consecrate us, [still] entombed
in bodies, to Eternity.

For this is the sole festival of praise worthy of man, - to
know Thy Majesty.

We have known Thee; yea, by the Single Sense of our
intelligence, we have perceived Thy Light supreme, - O
Thou true Life of life, O Fecund Womb that giveth birth
to every nature!

5. We have known Thee, O Thou completely filled with
the Conception from Thyself of Universal Nature!

We have known Thee, O Thou Eternal Constancy!

For in the whole of this our prayer in worship of Thy
Good, this favour only of Thy Goodness do we crave; -
that Thou wilt keep us constant in our Love of knowing
Thee ’ 411 , and let us ne’er be cut off from this kind of Life.

With this desire we [now] betake us to [our] pure and
fleshless meal’ 41 .



339 Suspicionibus ; hints, perhaps, and so phenomena.

340 Or of Thy Gnosis.

341 Ccenam.


- 250 -



COMMENTARY


THE TITLE

The titles in the Latin MSS. vary. The heading preferred by Hildebrand is
“Asclepius, or a Dialogue of Thrice-greatest Hermes”; while in the Bipontine
edition, the title stands: “Thrice-greatest Hermes Concerning the Nature of the
Gods; A Sermon addressed to Asclepius.” Menard, the French translator, prefers:
“A Sermon of Initiation, or Asclepius.”

The treatise begins with a transparent gloss, in all probability originally the
marginal note of some scribe, or student, which has improperly crept into the text.
It runs: “This Asclepius is my Sun-god”; that is to say, apparently: “This Sermon
‘Asclepius’ has illumined me”; from which it is evident that the title lying before the
scribe was “Asclepius” simply, as may be seen from § 2: “It is, however, with thy
name I will inscribe this treatise.” Stobseus, moreover, in quoting from the original
Greek (of xxvii. 4), heads his extract simply, “Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to
Asclepius.”

On the other hand, the Church Father Lactantius, writing at the beginning of the
fourth century, and quoting from the Greek original, says twice, categorically (D. I.,
iv. 6 and vii. 8): “Hermes in illo libro qui \6yoq xeXeioq inscribituH \ that is, “Hermes in
the Book entitled ‘The Perfect Sermon,’ or ‘The Sermon of Initiation’”; while
Johannes Laurentius Lydus on three occasions quotes from this “Perfect Sermon”
of Hermes, and on each occasion so names it.

I have accordingly preferred this as the main title, and added “The Asclepius” as
an alternative.

THE OLD LATIN TRANSLATION AND THE GREEK ORIGINAL

Of the Greek original we have quotations or references by Lactantius (see viii. 1
and 3; xxv. 4: xxvi. 1; xli. 2), Johannes Laurentius Lydus (see xix. 3; xxviii. 1; xxxix.
1, 2), and Stobasus (see xxvii. 4).

If we compare these Greek quotations with our Latin translation, we shall find,
not only that the Latin is an exceedingly free rendering of the Greek, showing many
expansions and contractions, and often missing the sense of the original, but also
that even in Greek there were probably several recensions of the same text 342 .

Indeed, the free rendering of our translation is of such a nature that it is
impossible to base upon it any certain conclusions as to the date of the original or
its precise worth in the history of religion ’ 4 ’.

That, however, our Latin translation is an ancient one is proved by Augustine’s
verbal quotations from it (see xxiii. 1; xxiii. 3-xxiv. 2; xxiv. 3; xxvii. 1-4). It was thus
in existence about 400 A.D. at least 344 .


342 See R. 195, 2.

343 The so-founded opinions of Bemays and Zeller are characterized by Reitzenstein (p. 195) as of as little value as
the opinions which made the whole of our literature dependent on New Platonism.

344 Augustine’s date is 354-430 A.D.


-251 -



Tradition, however, has assigned to it a far higher antiquity, attributing it to no
less distinguished a writer than Appuleius, and so referring it to the first half of the
second century.

This attribution has, of course, for long been questioned by modern criticism,
and Reitzenstein, though he does not discuss the subject, accepts the adverse
verdict and refers us to a “Pseudo-Appuleius.”

Hildebrand, whose minute acquaintance with Appuleius’ peculiar style and
neologisms is a guarantee of his competence, has thoroughly gone into the matter;
and though he sums up against tradition, it is in a half-hearted way. The translation,
if not by Appuleius, is at any rate in old African Latin, and there is nothing in the
style which absolutely forbids the possibility of its being by the author of The Golden
Ass and the initiate of Isis. The strongest point, other than philological, against
tradition is that Augustine does not say the translation was by Appuleius; but this
seems to me to be unworthy of serious consideration.

It is, of course, difficult to turn possibilities into probabilities, but I see no
reason why the Greek original of our Sermon should not be assigned to the earlier
Hermes-Asclepian dialogues as well as to any others. That it was one of the most
famous is evident by its wide quotation, and by the fact that several recensions of
the Greek text were in circulation.

OF THE WRITER AND THE PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE

The Latin translator retains a number of the original Greek technical terms, and
if we could only rely on his translation giving us the substance of the original in all
cases, we should be presented in several passages with phenomena which would
persuade us that the writer of the original intended his readers to think he was an
Egyptian, and that his native nomenclature was other than Greek, as is also the case
in C. H. (xvi.).

For instance, in vii. 2, “the man ‘essential,” 45 as say the Greeks,” - but this may
be a gloss of the Latin translator.

Again, in x. 2: “So that . . . ‘World’ seems most fitly called ‘Cosmos’ in Greek,” -
which seems to be the original.

Yet again, the “multifarious reasoning” of xii. 3 reminds us strongly of “the
philosophizing of the Greeks - the noise of words,” in C. H., xvi. 2.

On the other hand, the phrase, “which we in Greek {grace ) believe to be the
Cosmos,” would seem to make the original author forget his Egyptian role.

While “its bottom ... is called in Greek A-eides,” coupled with “in Greek they
are called Hades ... in Latin Infer?’ (xvii. 3), may be assigned to a gloss of the
translator.

In xxiv. 1 , however, the sentence, “Dost thou not know, Asclepius, that Egypt is
the image of the Heaven? . . . This land of ours is shrine of the whole world” -
coupled with the rest of the chapter, and Ch. xxv. - could hardly have been written
by a Greek. In xxviii. 1, moreover, the “weighing of the merit” of the soul is
strongly Egyptian, and so with the image and animal-cult.


345 Cf. C. H, xiii. (xiv.) 14.


- 252 -



As to the persons of the dialogue, I would suggest that originally the sermon was
addressed to Asclepius alone, and that the slight narrative indications were added
later to adapt it to wider circles.

The chief disciple is evidently Asclepius; he it is who is already “well versed in
Nature,” according to C. H., xiv. (xv.) 1; that is to say, he has progressed beyond
the stage of Hearer, for he questions Hermes, whereas Tat does not ask questions,
but listens only, he is “the one who is to hear” (i. 1). To them is added Ammon on
the proposal of Asclepius; and Ammon is admitted on the ground that he had
already had much written to him, but apparently had not yet been admitted to oral
teaching.

The teaching is delivered in solemn surroundings in the holy place or shrine (i.
2), and teacher and pupils constitute the “sacred four.” Hermes teaches in a state of
exaltation; the place is filled with “God’s goodly presence,” and “Love Divine”
instructs them, through Hermes’ lips, in answer to the Pure and Single Love of
Philosophy in their hearts (cf. xii. 3; xiv. 1).

The same hand that wrote the warning against revealing the sermon to others in
i. 2 also probably wrote: “And ye, O Tat, Asclepius and Ammon, in silence hide the
mysteries divine within the secret places of your hearts, and breathe no word of
their concealment!” (xxxii. 4); he also, presumably, glossed “Asclepius” (xxxiv. 2)
with “and ye who are with him,” and added the naive whisper of Asclepius to Tat
(xli. 1).

This redactor (if our analysis is correct), moreover, was a member of a select’ 46
ascetic community, judging at any rate by his last sentence (xli. 5); in which case
Ammon can hardly be equated with any King Ammon, but must be taken as
standing for some grade of the community. I would suggest that this grade was
similar to that of the Exoterici of the Pythagoreans or the outer circles of the
Essenes, of which the members still lived in the world, but received instruction. In
this case, however, the “we” of the last sentence would have to be taken as
referring to Asclepius and Tat, and not to Ammon.

As to the dependence of our sermon on the rest of the literature, I find more
points of contact between it and C. H., x. (xi.), “The Key” sermon addressed to
Tat; none of the references, however, which I have given in the notes, show any
literal dependence.


THE DOCTRINE OF THE WILL OF GOD

In the general doctrine the stress laid on the concept of the Will of God’ 4 is to
be specially noticed. This Will seems to be almost personified, and is, of course, a
fundamental doctrine of the Trismegistic religio-philosophy 348 .

In xxvi. 1 it is identified with the Goodness ’ 49 of God, and the Nature of God’ 6 ".
But what it seems to correspond to most nearly is the fEon or Eternity-idea which


346 Cf. for references to the “few,” xxii. 1; xxiii. 1; xxxiv. 3; xl. 1.

347 Cf. vii. 3; viii. 2; xi. 4; xiv. 1; xvi. 3; xix. 4; xx. 3; xxii. 4; xxv. 2; xxvi. 1, 2 and 3.

348 Cf. especially C. H., iv. (v.) 1; x. (xi.) i.

349 In the Greek text of Lactantius this is “the Good.”

350 Cf. vi. 1; xiv. 3.


- 253 -



is set forth very clearly in xxx.-xxxii. - in fact, more clearly than anywhere else in the
Trismegistic literature. God and /Ron are the sources of all things; and /Eon is “the
Eternity of God, in Truth itself subsisting, the Fullness of all things” (xxxii. 1). The
Will of God is thus the /Eon or Pleroma, the Wisdom, the Energy, the Spouse of
the Supreme.

This Will rules Cosmos with Law and Holy Reason (xl.); Cosmos being the
Order of things involved in Fate and Necessity the instruments of the Divine
Will 351 .

Our sermon is also characterized by the frequent use it makes of the terms Spirit
and Sense.


CONCERNING SPIRIT AND THE ALL-SENSE

The Spirit is evidendy Cosmic Life (vi. 4; xxvii. 1) and individual life (x. 4) 352 . The
exposition of it begins with xiv. 2; Spirit and Matter, or the Nature of the Cosmos
(xiv. 3), are practically regarded as the Positive and Negative, or Masculine and
Feminine Energies of the Divine.

Spirit is the Ruler (xvii. 1) of all tilings in Cosmos or Nature; it is the immediate
Instrument of the Will of God (xvi. 3); and is, indeed, loosely identified with that
Will (xix. 4); while in still looser fashion Spirit seems to be symbolized by “Heaven”
and the Sensible Cosmos by “Earth” (xix. 2).

It is very probable that this doctrine of Spirit as Divine Breath is fundamentally
Egyptian, and owes nothing to immediate Semitic influence. However this may be,
the use of the term Sense, as apparently in some way superior to Reason (vi. 4; x.
4), is very striking, and, as in some cases opposed to the exaltation of the Reason
found elsewhere in our tractates, under the influence of this leading idea of Greek
philosophy, discloses an Egyptian point of view.

We have already noticed this use of the term in some of our tractates, but in our
present sermon it is brought into great prominence. This Sense is not the
differentiated senses, but a Unit or Cosmic Sense.

It is “the Divine Sense of intelligence,” and is found only in God and in man’s
reason (vii. 1; xxxii. 2).

It is the “Higher Sense (with which Celestial Gift mankind alone is blest)” -
characterized as the “feeder of the mind” (xviii. 1); yet on the other hand this
“Higher Sense” is that “which by good chance a man perceives by mind, when out
of all his senses.”

This Sense is in some fashion closely connected with Nature and Cosmos (xxi.
1); through it man “disciplines his soul,” and “cures his intellect,” thus gaining
“intelligence of God-like Reason” (xxii. 1), and finally “mingling himself with the
All-sense of the Divine Intelligence” (xxix. 2).

This All-sense is the same as the “Whole Sense of Divinity,” and is the Likeness
of God; it is “in its own self immoveable,” and yet “doth set itself in motion within
its own stability” (xxxii. 1). Man must make himself like unto this Likeness.


351 Cf. also C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 19, 20, and R. 39, n. 1.

352 Cf. C. H., x. (xi.) 13, and Commentary.


- 254 -



This Likeness is evidently the /Ron or Intelligible Cosmos; for the “Cosmic
Sense is the Container of all sensibles” (xxxii. 2).

In man its chief normal characteristic is the retentiveness of memory, “through
which man is made ruler of the Earth” (xxxii. 2). This Sense is then man’s
continuum , the germ of everlastingness in him, the root-ground of consciousness
(xxxii. 3), the Single Sense of the intelligence (xli. 4), which is fully brought to birth
only when a man “is wholly plunged in consciousness of life (in sensu vita:)" (xxxvii.
3), - the “spiritual life” of the Christian Gnostics.

The fact that we have only a translation to deal with prevents us laying too much
stress on details, but the general idea is clear enough; so too with the rest of this,
the longest of our sermons, we must be content to refer only to general points, the
chief of which are the “prophetic” utterances.

THE PROPHETIC UTTERANCES

These present us with problems of very great difficulty, and, so far, I have
neither seen any solution nor has any occurred to me.

So much work has been done on contemporary prophetic utterances of this
nature, especially on the Sibylline Literature, that it may be said that the scholastic
mind has reached certain general criteria with regard to such pronouncements - the
chief of which is that the hypothesis of genuine prophecy is not to be entertained.

In the Sibylline literature, indeed, this is clearly established; for much of it
consists of traditional history written in the prophetical tense, so to say; when the
history comes to an end the date of the “prophetical” writer is at once detected, for
all that follows has no longer any relation to historical events.

In the case of our “prophecies,” however, we have nothing of this nature to
guide us. All we can say is that they seem to have been written, most probably, at a
time when the Trismegistic communities were being persecuted.

That this was in the course of the fourth century, however, as Reitzenstein (p.
213) supposes, seems to me to be, so far, destitute of any sure objective
confirmation; it not only compels us to suppose that the prophecies are later
interpolations (which they may possibly be), but that these interpolations are later
than Lactantius; whereas there is every probability that the Church Father had the
text of them before him 333 , and his date is the beginning of the fourth century.

On the other hand, Zosimus, writing somewhere about the end of the third and
beginning of the fourth century, breathes no word of persecution, and leads us to
suppose that the community was still flourishing. We are thus still in the gravest
uncertainty.

The first of our “prophecies” is in xii. 3: “For I will tell thee as though it were
propheticly” - addressed to Asclepius, and, therefore, probably not due to the
redactor who we have supposed added the narrative sentences.

The lament of the writer is that “the Single Love, die Love of Pure Philosophy,”
is fast disappearing from the world; he can hardly have had Christianity in mind
when writing these words, for he contrasts the “Pure Philosophy” with


353 See xxv. 4, and note.


- 255 -



“multifarious reasoning” and “divers sciences,” and the latter can hardly be said to
be characteristic of General Christianity.

If, however, his words may be said to include also Gnostic Christianity, then he
was clearly not in sympathy with it; but this can hardly be the case, seeing that the
resemblances between the Trismegistic and Christian Gnosis are of a very intimate
nature.


THE PROSCRIPTION OF THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS

Turning next to xxiv. 2, we meet with the clear statement that the worship of the
Gods will be legally proscribed by the “barbarian” masters of Egypt (also xxv. 3).

Such a general proscription in this emphatic sense took place in Egypt only with
the destruction of the Serapeum by the Christians themselves in 389 A.D. Of
persecutions of the Christians by the Roman authorities in Egypt prior to this we
get clear indications in the writings of the Christian Gnostic Basilides, who
flourished at Alexandria at the beginning of the second century, and wrote specially
of martyrdom. But this will little help us for the proscription of a cult that favoured
the worship of the Gods and of their images.

Can it, then, be possible that these prophetic utterances were written at a time
when many of the same nature were being penned by Jew and Christian? For our
author, as for Jewish and Christian writers, the “End of the World” was at hand;
his expectation is in this precisely the same as that of the writers of the New
Testament documents.

The cause of this dire event is that Egypt, the “shrine of the whole world,” the
“Holy Land ” ^ par excellence , will be polluted with all iniquity and violence. The Cult
of the Gods will cease, and the Gods will leave the Earth and mount to Heaven.
The man’s whole heart is bleeding for Egypt, even as the heart of a Jew for
Jerusalem.

If there is any immediate historical references in these heartfelt utterances, we
must seek them in such phrases as: “This holiest land, seat of our shrines and
temples, shall be choked with tombs and corpses” (xxiv. 3); “the tale of tombs shall
far exceed the number of the quick” {ibid., § 4) 355 ; and “Egypt shall be made the
home of Scyth or Indian, or someone like to them - that is, a foreign neighbour.”

It is true that the Christians were ever reproached with worshipping the dead,
and building churches over the bones of the dead - an act of utter pollution
according to all Pagan notions; but the words of our author, even allowing for all
hyperbole, can hardly be construed in this sense.

People like Scyths or Indians, again, if we are to suppose any historical reference,
can hardly be imagined to refer to the Romans; while the Goths under Alaric, who
ravaged Greece in 395, 396 A.D., are too late even for Reitzenstein. Moreover, we
have already in our notes pointed to the strange conjunction of Scyth and
Barbarian in our text as being also found in Colossians.


354 The “image of the Heaven”; cf. K. K., 46-48.

355 This is very different language from the more moderate tone of C. H., ix. (x.) 4, where we are told about the
Gnostics, “they are thought mad and laughed at; they’re hated and despised, and sometimes even put to death.”


- 256 -



On the other hand, nothing but the entire State suppression of the Pagan
Religion in all its forms can satisfy xxv. 3, and this just suits the end of the fourth
century.

If, however, we cannot entertain so late a date, and I do not think we can, there
seems nothing for it but to give the writer some credit for his prognostication of
the future; for eventually things certainly turned out for him and all he held most
dear very much as he imagined or feared they would.

THE LAST HOPE OF THE RELIGION OF THE MIND

At any rate the last hope of the Pure Love, the Religion of the Mind, is in the
Trismegistic Communities, if indeed it is so permitted to interpret xxvii. 3:

“Yea, they who rule the earth shall be distributed [through all the lands], and
finally be gathered in a state, - at top of Egypt’s upper part, - which shall be founded
towards the setting sun, and to which all the mortal race shall speed. ”

We need not insist upon details, for our translator may have gone wide of the
original; for instance, the “race” may, instead of being “mortal” in the original, have
been the “Race” of which we have already heard so much in Philo and these
tractates; but the similarity of the idea cannot fail to remind us of Philo when, in
writing of the Redeemed of Spiritual Israel, he says:

“Those who were but scattered in Hellas and non -Grecian (Barbarian) lands, over
islands and over continents, shall rise up with one impulse, and from diverse regions
flock together unto the one spot revealed to them. ” 356

And with this further compare the famous passage on the Therapeuts:

“Now this Race of men is to be found in many parts of the inhabited world, both
the Grecian and non-Grecian world, sharing in the Pefect Good.

“In Egypt there are crowds of them in every province, or nome as they call it, and
especially round Alexandria. For they who are in every way (or in every nome) the
most highly advanced, come as colonists 357 , as it were, to the Therapeutic
fatherland. ” 35S

Moreover, just as the Therapeuts in the immediately following lines of Philo are
said to have their community on a hill, so too in our text we immediately find
mention of the Trismegistic communities as having their chief centre on the Libyan
Hill, - a community which is spoken of as “very large” in numbers, and so is
somewhat of a contradiction to the numbers of the Pious given in xxii. 1 , where we


356 De Execrat., § 9; M. ii. 435, 436; P. 937 (Ri. v. 255).

357 Cf. in our Sermon, xxv. 1: Egypt, “the sole colony of holiness.”

358 D. V. C, C. 56 ff; M. i. 474; P. 892. Cf. F. F. F, 69.


- 257 -



are told “they may be counted even in the world,” unless the sentence is to be
taken as rhetorical.

This Hill is called the Libyan Mount, a vague enough title; nor is this vagueness
removed when we find it again referred to (in xxxvii. 3) as the place of burial of the
body of the First Asclepius, and obtain the additional information that it is “hard
by the shore of crocodiles,” for this can hardly refer to Crocodilopolis in the
Fayyum, the most northern of the towns so named, seeing that the Libyan Mount
is “at the top of Egypt’s upper part,” and “towards the setting sun.”

This, however, corresponds admirably with the location of Philo’s Therapeut
community on the southern shore of Lake Mareotis, just south of Alexandria; but
few indeed will be found to entertain the possibility even that Philo and our author
may be speaking of the same people from different standpoints and under different
names.

As far as I can see, there is no certainty in the matter; and, therefore, I leave it as
a problem of immense interest that has not as yet found a solution.


- 258 -



END OF VOLUME II



- 259 -
