The Gnostic John the Baptizer: Selections from the Mandaean John-Book (G. R. S. Mead, 1924)
Public domain.
Source: Internet Archive (gnosticjohnbapti00mead).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

Aah - . : fo / J : Pos yt of ee
CEES A,


oF

we

Lat 48

> >;
4


?
‘Se
nes
4544
>


bas


7
+
o~


retest
peer Né
‘Sy
che
+,
<


SAAS


aha
Le
r

é
Pi
>


° 7»;
bah ata!
ate :
a
7
ate
4


7 Fe
r
S773?) of
PL PF
CP PP PP F.
IW?
Met AS
a
<4


ru?


Et OW.
mob SS lie ‘ a ee bas “6
a a Se v , Pbk ahs x
> 5 Se
atm ree LX , “ ‘ . ee


One ,
bb Ae nln A
Oh tah techn a

a ae ee ee
. = A ae oS
oh em o wy
A eee eS . ,
a tea
ae ee


i

a eS

ee
thy oi Ae #%


-
Ket hh,


. >
Tete ete:


>
a ye : :
Oa er Ey - : "nS pa ;
¥ . ‘ , oe oe
- ee
ea


ik Se
>


ee
ee


THE UNIVERSITY
OF ILLINOIS
LIBRARY |


LID
M4'o¢g


-parresoPHy.


UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN


The person charging this material is responsible for its
renewal or return to the library on or before the due date.
The minimum fee for a lost item is $125.00, $300.00 for
bound journals.


Theft, mutilation, and underlining of books are reasons
for disciplinary action and may result in dismissal from
the University. Please note: self-stick notes may result in
torn pages and lift some inks.

Renew via the Telephone Center at 217-333-8400,
846-262-1510 (toll-free) or circlib @ uiuc.edu.

Renew online by choosing the My Account option at:
http://www.library.uiuc.edu/catalog/


THE UNIVERSITY
OF ILLINOIS
LIBRARY |


BS).
M4e¢g


-parresorHy.


a ve


BOW 44 4 Vee OL we Se  _


Latest Date stamped below. A
charge is made on all overdue


books.
U. of I. Library


OCT 14 193% |


ae |
AK


14685-S


Cy rane


iis ©


>


THE GNOSTIC
JOHN THE BAPTIZER


SELECTIONS FROM
THE MANDAAAN JOHN-BOOK


Together with Studies on John and Christian
Origins, the Slavonic Josephus’ Account of John


and Jesus, and John and the Fourth Gospel Proem


By


G. R. S. MEAD


Author of ‘ Thrice-Greatest Hermes,’ ‘ Fragments of a
Faith Forgotten, ‘Echoes from the Gnosis,’ etc., Editor
| of ‘The Quest’


\


JOHN M. WATKINS ‘
LONDON


1924


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2021 with funding from
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign


:


https://archive.org/details/gnosticjohnbapti0Omead ,,


~ iy ALA - ?


CONTENTS.


FOREWORD - - . . : Vv


I. JOHN THE BAPTIZER AND CHRISTIAN ORIGINS | 1-28


A Recent Study on J ohn’s Symbolism - - 1
The John-passage in ‘ The Antiquities’ of Josephus - 2
The N. T. Account: The Dress and Food of HERG ARO 4
Popular Messianic Expectations - . Y
The Sanctification of the Jordan-water - 9
The Probable Symbolic Signification of John’s Baier 10


The Baptism of the Proselytes’ - - - 11
One of John’s Discourses and its uatkrennt - 18
The Fish and Fishers eee Bt “ 14
Hani-Oannés-Ioannés_ - - - 16
John-Jonah - - : . 18
Rabbinic Fish Symbolism - - 20
The Samaritan Ta‘eb: A Reborn Joshua or a Nant - 21
John’s Eschatological Symbolism - 22.
John and Jesus generally - . : 24
John and the Messiahship of Jesus . “ 26


Il, FROM THE JOHN-BOOK OF THE MANDAIANS” - 29-96


Introductory - - - - - 29

i. THE GNOSTIC JOHN THE BAPTIZER . - 25-61

Portents at John’s Birth - : 35

John’s Proclamation concerning hintseles - 40

His Assumption of the Prophet’s eet ; - 4]

John’s Light-ship - - - 49,

John the Ascetic - - - - 44

Of Judgment-Day~ - - - - 45

The Letter of Truth - - - - 46

John’s Invulnerability . - 48

John and the Baptism of Tedue - . 48

John’s Marriage : . - - 52

~3 John on his own Passing - 54

~ John’s Birth, Upbringing and Firet Apecance . 56
John’s Answer to ek Concerning the jhe of

Death - - - 59


GB1IG713


1V


ii. THE STORY OF THE BREACH WITH JUDAISM


PAGE


- 62-70


Miryai is expelled from Jewry - ei 62
A Variant of the Same 64
The Exiled Community settle on the Hunhrated 65
The Jews persecute the Mandzeans - 67
They beg them to Return - - - 67
iii SoME TYPICAL EXTRACTS - . - 71-96
The ‘ Fisher of Souls’ Saga - ral
The Light-ship of the Fisher - - 75
The Good Fisher overwhelms the Evil Widhers - 76
The Final Submission of the Evil Fishers 4 79
The Good Shepherd - - 81
The Loving Shepherds of the Good Shepherd - 83
The Treasury of Life - 86
In the Beginning - - : - 89
Exhortations - - 91
The Song of the Poor S Peatanon 93
Ill. THE SLAVONIC JOSEPHUS’ SEAN OF THE
BAPTIST AND JESUS - - 97-119
INTRODUCTORY 97
TRANSLATION OF THE INTERPOLATIONS - 1038-110
i. John’s Proclamation and his Rebuke of Hae
Authorities - 103
ii. His Interpretation of Philip’ s renin ar) Oe
iii. His Persistent Rebuking of Agrippa and his
Execution - >) Wie we
iv. The Ministry, Trial and Graciisidn of Jesus - 106
v. The Treatment of the First Christians sit | OF
vi. The Trilingual Inscription concerning Jesus 108
vil. Portents at the Death of Jesus and Roe
of his Resurrection - - 109
viii. A Prophecy concerning Jesus - ee 1110
GENERAL REMARKS 110
TV. THE FOURTH GOSPEL PROEM 120-127
A NEW VERSION VENTURE 120-127
Connection - | 120
Translation - 123
AFTERWORD - 128


FOREWORD.


THE main materials contained in these pages will certainly be
new for the vast majority of readers. Moreover the Mandzan
narratives, legends and discourses are not only interesting because
of their own distinctive matter and manner, but they are also
arresting ; for they raise a number of problems, some of which are
far-reaching and one is fraught with implications of immense
importance. The definite solutions of these problems, however,
lie in the future, and the most important of them will perhaps
never be reached ; for, in the absence of straightforward historical
information, general agreement on any subject that concerns
Christian origins immediately or even indirectly is now well-nigh
a psychological impossibility.

The writer’s intention in publishing these selections is not to
speculate about the problems, for we are not yet in a position
to state them with sufficient accuracy, but the very modest
undertaking of making accessible for English readers some
specimens of narrative and doctrine from one collection only of
the traditional gnostic material which the Mandan scribes have
preserved to our own day through centuries of copying, and which
hands on an early literature purporting at least in part to
go back to times contemporaneous with Christian origins. For
I think it will be of service for them, as a beginning, to read for
themselves what the Mandzans have conserved from the past of
the now legendary story of their great prophet, John the Baptizer,
and some of the most characteristic notions and doctrines ascribed
directly to him,—and that too in their full native setting and not
in the form of brief summaries or isolated sentences, which is
practically all they will meet with in the very few articles on the
subject which have yet appeared in English,—and in articles only,
for of books there are none.

Moreover it has been impossible to do even this previously ;


vi


for it is only quite recently that we have had put into our hands
a reliable and complete version in German of two of the three main
collections preserved to us; and we are still awaiting the transla-
tion of the most important deposit, without which it is impossible
to survey the whole field thoroughly and so make really reliable
inferences. All prior attempts at partial translation have been
tentative at best and for the most part erroneous. But though
we are still without a scientific version of the Treasury, it is
nevertheless already possible to give almost a complete setting
forth of one topic; for the selections from the John-Book here
presented include practically all the matter that refers directly to
the prophet, seeing that the Treasury makes only one brief reference
immediately to him.

In this material a figure is depicted which in many ways differs
greatly from the familiar picture sketched in the gospels and briefly
referred to in the classical Josephus. The interest of the Gnosties
has never been in external history, so that for the most part we
are either in complete ignorance of, or lamentably uninformed
about, the persons of their great teachers and writers. Their
interest was rather in inner or psychic story and the imaginative
history of ideas. Consequently the Mandean picture of John is
the prophetical and intimate aspect it presented to those within
the mystic atmosphere of the community and to the fond memory
of an esoteric tradition. No external view is preserved. I have
deliberately brought out this contrast as strongly as possible by
setting the Mandzwan story in the midst between two studies of
traditions which make much of John’s wild appearance and strange
dress, a popular external element which would at first sight suggest
an equally primitive quality of his thought and action. This has
been done to enable the reader to realize as strongly as possible
the difficulties surrounding the fundamental! problem of historicity,
though the sharpness of the contrast is already somewhat modified
by the doctrinal considerations brought out in the first study,
which may theoretically help to bridge over to some extent the
gap between the crudest features of the popular external tradition
and what claims to be an internal tradition, no matter how it
may have been sublimated in the form in which it has reached us.
The second study, on the Slavonic Josephus’ account of the Baptist
and Jesus, though throwing no, or scarcely any, light on doctrine,


vil


is, in my opinion, of importance from the point of view of possible
external popular tradition, and in any case will be a novelty for
most readers.

It is a remarkable and somewhat saddening reflection that
now, when after long years of waiting we are at last obtaining
adequate versions of these so faithfully preserved Mandan
gnostic scriptures, their handers-on themselves are dying out, and
those of them who remain do not seem to be sufficiently instructed
or to possess the general education to throw light on the problems
which their documents present to scholars. They do not seem to
have any notion of the history of religion or the critical power in
any way to analyze their own scriptures and compare them with
parallel developments in the past. What I do not quite
understand, however, is why, with regard to the philological side
of the subject, no attempt, as far as I can ascertain, has been made
by any European Semitic scholar scientifically to study Mandean
with the Mandezans themselves, and so collaborate with them in
translation. They all speak Arabic as well as their native tongue;
and it is somewhat puzzling that neither Brandt nor Lidzbarski,
who have, after the pioneer work of Noldeke on the language,
busied themselves so sedulously with the documents, should not
have visited them. They are accessible; and indeed do not seem
in any way to be averse from giving information, as is seen from
Siouffi’s informant in the eighties of last century and quite recently
from the account of Miss E. 8S. Stephens (now Mrs. Drower). The
latter has made great friends with the Amara community and
gives an entertaining chapter about them, under the heading
“A Peculiar People,’ in her brightly-written travel-book, By Tigris
and Euphrates.’ It is the description of an intelligent and deeply
interested observer, but of one unaquainted with the literature of
the subject, and therefore not in a position to press for information
on points of importance, if perchance it could be obtained. The
account deals with externals, but it may be of interest to our
readers to reproduce what Mrs. Drower was told about the
shalmono and the masseqtd-ceremony, or rite of the making of
a ‘ perfect’ in this connection.

“There is a way . . . in which a Subba may reach a state


? London, Hurst & Blackett, 1923, pp. 204-219.


Vill


of holiness akin to that of the dweller in Mshuni-Koshto [the M.
Abode of the Blessed], and this strange and unworldly people often
resort to it. To achieve this state a man must renounce worldly
desires and the delights of the flesh, but his path is harder than
that of the Catholic monk in that he continues to live among men,
a layman, and amongst his family without being able to partake of
the joys of family life. In fact, after the ceremony of renunciation
has taken place, the funeral service is read over him and he is,
henceforth, no more than a living ghost.

“He may carry on his trade of farmer, boat-builder, or
silversmith as before; but his personal life is one of renunciation,
deprivation and self-mortification. He may not smoke, drink wine,
coffee, tea, or any drug. He may not give an order, or express
a desire. Should he need anything, he must procure it himself,
or do without. His detachment from worldly things must be so
complete that if a fire were to burn his house, destroy his goods
and suffocate his wife and children he must show or feel no trace
of emotion. . . . ‘A permanent gaiety must be shown in his face.’

“The ceremony which separates the ‘shalmono’ from the
world of the living is called the “Massakhto.’ The applicant goes
to the bishop, who questions him closely as to the seriousness of
his intentions, and impresses upon him the irrevocable nature of
the step he wishes to take. After seven days’ preparation with _
the bishop, if the applicant’s desire is unshaken, he spends seven
days and seven nights in a church [?] or place apart.

“ Every day the bishop and priests come to him, and for food
the postulant eats three tiny flat loaves of sacramental bread,
-about as large as an Osborne biscuit, daily ; also part of the flesh
of a dove.

“ At the end of the week a feast is prepared to which the new
‘shalmono’ is invited, usually in the house of the bishop. At the
end of the feast all the priests who have eaten arise, with a last
mouthful of food in their hands. Solemnly, then, the Prayer for
the Dead is recited for the ‘shalmono,’ and, just as for a dead:
man, the last mouthful is eaten, the last mouthful which is
supposed to stay the departed soul on its journey through
purgatory.

“The life of a ‘shalmono’ is harder than that of a priest, for
priests and priestesses may marry; indeed, marriage is obligatory.”


1x


The last sentence suggests that the shalmono is a celibate
from the start, but Mrs. Drower has already spoken of his wife
and children and quotes Siouffi to the same effect, and the
documents lay it down expressly that celibacy in no case
whatever was approved, not even in that of a prophet.

It is evident that we have in this indication of a present-day
class of * perfect’ separated out from the mass of the faithful,
a subject for sympathetic enquiry, with the object of ascertaining
whether among them there are any who enjoy mystic experience,
and if so what is its nature, and whether it throws any light on the
spiritual phases of the tradition. ;

Mrs. Drower is happy in choosing for the heading of her
account ‘A Peculiar People’ and not ‘A Strange Sect’ or some
such title. For one of the great points of interest is that the
Mandzans show all the signs of being a race distinct from their
neighbours. They make no converts and seem for many centuries
to have kept themselves to themselves. They are not Arabs or
Jews in type, but (?) ‘ Babylonians,’ ‘Chaldeans,’-—a problem for
the ethnologist to decide.


| Snain AW, t ay Lite AN
} OY ina eet A Nise aA Nea by Pate A
Yara? ae Ch bats ‘ate! oie ES ai) ue wale ain ve
Mi * A Can ee 71) sep: ay Bea Anatol aan
VSAM ure Wiciba i ALND BH + Fuaudibiel
Batt aaty: i na eat ght nr WEY Be toe
fe TAX WY th aba at Cathe ity tanned ri i fhe
red it ETS ris Pagan ne blac PP dirt ted abt a7
see hha aay NATH te A OY ath HE eowk tout imme
; PV MSRe CMW aur eid i stead duit
Te PR SL inion ke ni :


3 ok A neg at bys peatatbsy cf aeols eos
5 | f ae £3 | Cy, my thd Bs AL DRONE: Sit aos a op


Da ia hd) ink Rao adh: te wiley Oey
‘4 i ik ” \ at hie iy ae ee ui sie M Wi a se psil it iyi rns
yes ie om Of sce i Aeatind agi (a Ong mlanik 4, “Ou b Nae
POON Re ON) ish Hiatt ay Howat |
. ARGH SS i ALY 2! Sit i et wih Mesh. ‘(ys tind :
| SMH hui Malik 4 Sa isco tea
Rh ya Baht AIR ait PRC), HP Eee ert ies, vr
. ; aa PRE aa Pe wa MARY)
f Li eS uel 7 ip fy a * iii A iy ‘
yi haa len a
1 . i
eae
A
‘ " fil
} \ ng:
1 Mi "4
i eK roti
. a ls hy ihe
1% f ‘ ae) a 4 j ie
| h d 4 } cars y it
t -. ; d fhe FAI
Tie ny TM aeat hd ¥! AM it , ‘ ‘, {
dy tals : f ‘ r ; 4 / ¢} on
¥ as ‘ ‘ nee hy Ad if g ME ,
f iy i, sete uy
) pon


ey


Lk om ho ' ian i abe a


I


JOHN THE BAPTIZER AND
CHRISTIAN ORIGINS.


A RECENT STUDY ON JOHN’S SYMBOLISM.


A bDISsTINoT ray of light has been cast on the obscure
background of Christian origins by Dr. Robert Hisler in
a series of detailed studies on the movement and
doctrines of John the Baptizer. These studies, with
other cognate essays, appeared originally in the pages
of The Quest (1909-14), and are now available in
book-form in an arresting volume, called Orpheus—the
Fisher: Comparative Studies in Orphic and Christian
Cult Symbolism.*

By way of introduction and as the most complete
contrast to the Mandan tradition of the Gnostic John,
I will set forth in my own way the chief points of
these detailed and fully-documented essays in summary
fashion. Hisler’s main point of view is that John based
his doctrines and practices largely, if not entirely, on
the Hebrew scriptures—the Law and the Prophets
—of which, he contends, he was a profound knower.
The John-movement is thus regarded as a characteristic
Jewish prophetical reform founded on absolute faith in
the present fulfilment of prior prophecy. Hereby is
brought out in the strongest possible manner the
Jewish conditioning of John’s preaching and teaching,
and this stands in the sharpest contradiction to the


' London, Watkins, 1921. Chh. xv.-xxvi. (pp. 129-207) are devoted to
the special subject of John and his doctrines.


2


Mandean tradition which claims that John was
a Gnostic and not a Torah-man, and declares that the
Jews could by no means understand him, but on the
contrary rejected his revelation and drove out his
community.

In Hisler we have a ripe scholar in whom the
heredity of Rabbinical lore is so to say innate. He
has almost an uncanny flair for biblical texts; it is
not too much to say that his knowledge of the religious
literature of his people is profound, his acquaintance
with oriental sources very extensive and his linguistic
accomplishments are enviable. Few are thus better
able to enter with sympathy and understanding into
the idiosyncrasies and depths of the Jewish mind in
the various periods of its development, and thus for
the time to live in the prophetical, apocalyptic and
rabbinical thought-world of the days of the Baptist
and share in its old-time beliefs and hopes and fears.
Our exponent is thus an excellent advocate of the
theme he sets forth. If his wide-flung net has not
caught all the fish of the literary and archeological
ocean, he has fished most carefully the stream of John
the Baptist tradition, apart from the Mandan, landed
a rich catch and shown others how most fruitfully to
set about bringing to the surface things about John
which have long been hidden in the depths of a buried
past.


THE JOHN-PASSAGE IN ‘ THE ANTIQUITIES’ OF JOSEPHUS. -


In all reason, apart from Christian testimony, John
the Baptizer is a historic character, witnessed to by
the Jewish historian Josephus, the courtly Flavian
chronicler who flourished in the last quarter of the


3

1st century A.D. The famous passage in his Antiquities
(XVIII. v. 2, ed. Niese, iv. 161, 162) referring to John is
undoubtedly genuine, and has been assailed only by the
very extreme doctrinaire non-historical school, who find
it a very inconvenient thorn in their flesh. A Christian
forger would have dotted the i’s and crossed the t’s with
the pen of his tradition, or at any rate betrayed himself
in some way by the prejudice of his thought; but this
we do not find. The passage runs as follows as nearly
as I can render it:


Some of the Jews thought that Herod’s army had been
destroyed, and indeed by the very just vengeance of God, in return
for [his putting to death of] John the Baptizer. For in fact
Herod put the latter to death [though he was] a good man, nay
even one who bade the Jews cultivate virtue and, by the practice
of righteousness in their dealings with one another and of piety
to God, gather together for baptism. For thus in sooth [John
thought] the dipping (in water) would seem acceptable to him
(God), not if they used it as a begging-off in respect to certain
sins, but for purity of body, in as much as indeed the soul had
already been purified by righteousness.

Now since the others' were gathering themselves together (or
becoming organized),—for indeed they were delighted beyond
measure at the hearing of his (John’s) ‘ sayings’ (logoi),—Herod,
fearing that his extraordinary power of persuading men might lead
to a revolt, for they seemed likely in all things to act according to
his advice, judged it better, before anything of a revolutionary
nature should eventuate from him, to arrest him first and make
away with him, rather than when the change came, he should
regret being faced with it.

Accordingly, on Herod’s suspicion, he was sent in bonds to
Macheerus, the above-mentioned fortress, and put to death there.
The Jews, however, believed that destruction befell the army to
avenge him, God willing to afflict Herod.


1 The rest of the Jews other than Herod’s party presumably.


2 A mountain fortress in Persea on the boundary between Palestine and
Arabia.


4


This statement of Flavius Josephus is sufficiently
categorical. It states clearly that John the Baptizer
was a very remarkable prophetical reformer of the day
and that his following was very considerable. John’s
‘sayings,’ Josephus tells us, had an astonishingly
persuasive power over the Jewish populace. Herod
fears John’s influence and is convinced that he could
do anything he pleases with the people. But what
interests us most in this unfortunately too short
statement is the reference to the nature of John’s
practice and teaching. His proclamation to the Jews,
like that of all the prophets before him, was a strenuous
call to righteousness,—they were to practise righteous
dealings with one another (love of neighbour) and piety
to God (love of God). There was also an external rite
of baptism; but it had to be preceded by a cleansing
of the soul through the fulfilling of this duty to
neighbour and to God. Josephus particularly points
out that the public washing or dipping was by no
means intended as a magical rite, which so many
believed in those days capable of washing away sins.
The baptism was not a daily practice, Josephus seems
to imply, as among the Essenes and other sects, but
a public corporate act; and therefore the historian is
clearly in error in regarding it as simply for the puri-
fying of the body. On the contrary, it distinctly
conveys the impression of being designed as an outer
testimony to some belief—an act of faith.


THE N.T. Account: THE DREss AND Foop oF
REPENTANCE.


And now let us pass to our New Testament
information. Without laying stress on the details of
the story of John’s infancy as given in the third gospel,


5


reminiscent as they may be of the Old Testament
birth-stories of the old-time national heroes Isaac,
Samson and Samuel, not to mention the coincidence
that the two heroines of the gospel birth-narratives
bear the names of Miriam and Elisheba, the sister and
wife respectively of Aaron, the first priest, we may
very reasonably believe, as it is stated, that John was
of priestly descent ; and therefore in every probability
he was well versed, if not highly trained, in the
scriptures.

Vowed from his birth to God by his parents, his
strange dress and peculiar ascetic mode of life are quite
in keeping with prophetical traditions, and thus of the
schools of the prophets and of the Nazirs. As the
prophets of old, notably Elijah, he wore a skin robe.
But in keeping with the spiritual significance of his
whole teaching, which will be more fully brought out
in the sequel, such an outer sign in high probability
had an inner meaning for this great proclaimer of
repentance, of the turning back of Israel in contrition
unto God.

Now there were certain Palestinian pre-Christian
allegorists or exponents of the scriptures on quasi-
mystical lines called Dorshé Reshumoth. According
to a Rabbinic legend, going back along this line of
interpretation, the ancient myth of Gen. 32 was con-
ceived more spiritually. After the fall, the first falling
away from God, Yahveh-Elohim clothed Adam and
Eve in coats of skin (‘67), not because of their naked-
ness, but in exchange for their lost paradisaical
garments of light ('67).

John lived at a time when such mystical inter-
pretations, with a host of prophetical and apocalyptic
notions, were in the air. It might very well then be


6

that he himself in wearing a skin-robe intended some-
thing more than a simple copying of the fashion of the
ancient prophets. In keeping with his ruling idea he
may have thought it a most appropriate outer sign of
repentance, a return to the first garments of fallen
man, the proper robe of penitent sinners, and therefore
especially of a leader who would show the people
a whole-hearted example of turning again to God, thus
retracing in a contrary direction the way of the fall.

So too with regard to food, there must be a return
to the primitive law laid down for primal fallen man
(Gen. 1): ‘Behold, I have given you every herb
bearing seed, which is upon the face of the earth, and
every tree, in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed ;
to you it shall be for meat.” It was only after the
Deluge that men were permitted to eat animal food,
according to the Noahic covenant as it is called.
Imbued with ideas of penitence and repentance, John
would desire to return to the strictest food-regulations
of the earliest days of the fall, in keeping with his
symbolic manner of clothing. Not only so, but
seemingly with a refinement of self-discipline as
a means of contrition, John chose from out the many
‘fruits from a tree yielding seed’ that of the carob or
locust-tree, which was considered by the Jewish
allegorists the most appropriate food of repentance.
For we have preserved from this line of tradition an
ancient proverb: ‘ Israel needs carob-pods to make him
repent,” said to be based on a prophecy in Isaiah (1a,) -
which the Midrash (Wayikra Rabba, 35) quotes as: “ If |
ye be willing and obedient, the good of the land shall
ye eat; but if ye refuse and resist, carob-pods shall ye
eat ’’—where the last clause differs considerably from
the R.V., which reads: “ye shall be devoured by the


7


sword.” Perhaps the ‘husks’ eaten by the Prodigal in
the gospel-parable may in the original Aramaic have
been carob-pods (Lk. 151%). Much controversy has
raged round the ‘locusts’ eaten by John, and early
versions are various.

As for drink,—in addition to water for general
purposes, John is said to have in particular sipped the
honey of the wild bees. Why is this brought into so
great prominence? Again perhaps this custom was
determined for John by the same circle of ideas. He
probably bethought him of Deut. 321: ‘“‘He made him
to suck honey out of the rock,” and also of Ps. 8lis:
“ And with honey out of the rock shall I satisfy thee.”
From such considerations it may plausibly be believed
that John adopted an asceticism of repentance with
regard to clothing and food as completely in accordance
with the scriptures as possible, and this in addition to the
customary discipline of a vowed Nazir, ‘consecrated ’
or ‘made holy’ as such from birth. The technical
term for a Nazir is a Nazirite unto God, or holy unto
God, as of Samson (LXX. Judges, 137, 16),—in brief
God’s ‘ holy one.’


PoPpULAR MESSIANIC EXPECTATIONS.


According to Josephus the great fear of Herod was
that the reformatory movement of John would develop
into a dangerous political Messianic revolt. The
populace was on the tip-toe of expectation; many
rumours were afloat as to the nature of the long-
expected God’s Anointed. Some thought he was to be
a Nazir who would free Israel from their present foes,
even as in days of old the Nazir Samson had freed them
from the yoke of the Philistines. Moreover the well-
known prophecy (Is. 111) about the ‘sprout’ from the


B


8


root or stem of Jesse gave rise to much speculation,
helped out by that word-play which exercised so
powerful a fascination over the imaginative minds of
the Jews of that day, and long before and after over
other minds in many other lands. Now ‘ sprout’ in
Hebrew is neser or nezer; and this neser was to be the
longed-for ‘saviour’ (again neser)—sounding so well
together with naziv. Indeed, as was thought, he must
needs be a Nazarai-an (Heb. nosert, Gk. nazorat-os).
Or again, as others expected, he was to be a carpenter
(Aram. bar nasar), this being, according to a Samaritan
Midrash, as we shall see in the sequel, in association
with the expectation that the coming Redeemer was to
be a second Noah, spiritually hewing and preparing the
timber for a new ark of salvation.

All this was in the air and widespread; it is then
quite believable, whether John himself made any such
claims or no, that there were many rumours current of
a Messianic purport concerning the strange appearance
and powerful appeal of the renowned Baptizer. His
Nazarite vow, his garb and diet of repentance, his
confident proclamation of the very near approach of the
catastrophic end of this seon or age or world,—all would
conspire to make some, if not many, think that he himself
was the great Nazir-Neser, the expected ‘ holy one’ of
God. By others he was thought to be Elijah returned, as
the prophet Malachi (the Book of the Angel or Messenger
of Yahveh) had foretold (4s): “ Behold, I will send you
Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible Day of
the Lord come’’; or even, may be, some thought that
that prophet of promise like unto Moses (Deut. 1815) had
been raised upinJohn. John himself apparently made
no claim to be any of these; he was a proclaimer of
the near approach of the great and terrible Day and


9


a powerful exhorter to repentance. It is doubtful even
whether he gave himself out to be simply ‘the voice
of one crying in the wilderness” (Mk. 1s); for such
a knower of the scriptures would have been aware that
the original of Isaiah 403 read : ‘ The voice of one crying :
In the wilderness, etc.” But apparently John was not
only an inspired prophet, he was also a wonder-worker,
if certain echoes concerning him in the Synoptics ring
true. For there we read that because of his healing
wonders Jesus was thought by some to be John returned
from the dead, and that the same accusation in this
connection of being possessed by a demon brought
against Jesus had also been brought against John.


THE SANCTIFICATION OF THE JORDAN-WATER.


However all this may be, John was utterly
convinced, not only that the time of the End was close
at hand, but also that the prophecies were beginning
to be fulfilled. But what of his characteristic baptizing
in the Jordan of all places? This is taken as a simple
historic fact which requires no explanation by the vast
majority ; but it presents a serious problem for those
who are aware that in those days the brackish waters
_ of the sluggish Jordan were deemed by theologians and
ritualists as unfit for purificatory purposes. What then
could have induced John to reject this priestly and
purist tabi? The only feasible motive is to be found
in supposing that John was convinced that a remark-
able prophetical vision of Ezekiel (471s), where the
prophet is addressed as Son of Man, was being fulfilled.
In the longed-for time of the Messianic deliverance
a mighty stream of holy water from the temple-hill of
Zion was to flow down and heal the waters of the
unclean Jordan-land, the Arabah or Desert.


10


Hisler has acutely conjectured that this idea of
a fount of living and healing water for Israel goes back
ultimately to Isaiah 28:6, not however as it stands at
present in the R.V. wording, but in its extended form
which was well known up to the 8rd centurya.pD. This
reads as follows according to his rendering: ‘ Behold,
I lay down in Zion a living stone, a stone of probation,
a precious threshold-stone for a foundation. Out of its
hollow shall flow forth rivers of living water; he that
believeth on me shall not suffer from drought.”

This was naturally taken by the allegorists of the
time in a spiritual sense, even as they explained the
water miraculously supplied to the Israelites in the
Desert as a figure for the Torah or Law. The living
water signified the Word of Yahveh, the outpouring
of the spirit of God. Thus the Messianic Spring of
living water could well be believed to typify an intensi-
fication or consummation of the Divine Law, heralding
the manifestation of the Sovereignty of God in
the Last Days. But spiritual reality and material
happenings were never widely divorced in the mind
of a pious Jew, and thus there was a literal meaning
as well to be given to prophecy.


THE PROBABLE SYMBOLIC SIGNIFICANCE OF JOHN’S
Baptism.


If all this is well conceived, it is not difficult to
understand what Josephus tells us of John’s method,
though the proper sense of John’s motive seems to have
escaped the historian. Deeply stirred by the strenuous
exhortations of the teacher and the extraordinary power
of a proclaimer so utterly convinced of the near coming
of the terrible Day, little wonder that the people, just


11


as in evangelical revivals of our own day, were filled
with an agony of penitence which would find relief only
in a public confession of their sins. Thereafter they
were plunged in the Jordan, signifying no external
washing, but a very drowning as it were of the old body
of sin in that now sacred stream to which faith ascribed
hife-redeeming properties, a regeneration wrought by the
saving spring of God’s outpouring flowing down from
the sanctuary into the desert. If they repented, if
they once unfeignedly turned again to God, then would
the prophetical promise in Micah 71 be fulfilled: ‘He
will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, he
will subdue our iniquities. Yea, thou wilt wash away
all our sins into the depths of the sea.”


THE BAPTISM OF THE PROSELYTES.


But in practising this baptismal rite John was
running counter to far more than the priestly purist
taba which regarded the Jordan water as unfit for
purification. He was baptizing Israelites, and in so
doing putting the Chosen ones on a level with those
gentiles who had to submit to a bath of purification
before they could be admitted to the privileges of the
sons of Abraham. A _ proselyte or a ‘new-comer’
(advena) who would join the church or ecclesia of
Israel, had to submit to a baptismal rite, the pre-
Christian origin of which is no longer disputed. It
was a bath not only of purification but also of
regeneration in the presence of legal witnesses. The
candidate stood in the water and listened to a short
discourse consisting of commandments from the Law.
Thereon the gentile convert dipped completely under
the water, signifying the drowning of his previous
impious and idolatrous self. Thereafter he arose


12


reborn a true Israelite. And this new birth was taken
in a very literal sense, for after the rite the neophyte, or
‘new-born babe,’ could no longer inherit from his former
gentile relatives; not only so, but according to Rabbinic
casuistry he could not even commit incest with one of
them. This regenerative gentile baptism (tebilah
gerim) was made by the theologians to depend from
the promise in Ezekiel (8625-2): ‘I will sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your
filthiness and from all your idols, will I cleanse you.
A new heart I will give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you.”

But this prophecy clearly applied to Israel only.
It could never have been intended as the sanction of
a customary rite for converted gentiles. It is thus
very credible that a fervent eschatologist, filled with
Messianic expectations, such as John, would conceive
the promise as foreshadowing a unique miraculous
event of the Last Days. Moreover John’s insistence
on baptism for the Jews, at a time when their religious
leaders thought it necessary to impose baptism on
gentile converts as a purificatory regenerative rite
making them fit to be associated religiously with the
naturally born sons of Abraham, seems clearly to have
been dictated by the deeper spiritual conviction that it
was Israel itself who required regeneration. For John,
from the standpoint of spiritual values, the Jews were
no more a privileged people; they had forfeited their
birthright; Israel itself was now no better than the
heathen. Physical kinship with Abraham could no
longer be considered a guarantee against the Wrath
to come. To escape the trials and terrors of that Day
the only way for them was to repent, and so become
members of the new spiritual Israel by submitting to


13


a rite similar to that which they arrogantly imposed on
the gentiles. What greater humiliation than this could
there be to the racial pride of the Jew? But things
were so desperate, that it required even this act of
humiliation as an earnest of truly sincere repentance
and contrition. Unrepentant they were no better than
heathen idolaters.


ONE OF JOHN’S DISCOURSES AND ITS SYMBOLISM.


Let us now turn to the first part of the short but
powerful address of the Baptizer handed on by Mt.
(3710) and Lk. (879), a most interesting example of those
stirring utterances or ‘sayings’ of his referred to by
Josephus.


Ye out-births of vipers, who hath given you a glimpse of
fleeing from the Wrath to come? Make fruit, therefore, worthy of
(or sufficient for) your repentance. And think not (Lk. begin not)
to say within (or among) yourselves: We have Abraham [for]
father. For I say unto you that God is able of these stones
(Aram. ’ab‘nayya) to raise (or wake) up children (Aram. b’nayya)
for Abraham. But even now the axe is laid unto the root of the
trees: every tree, therefore, which beareth not good fruit, is hewn
down and cast into the fire.


This graphic discourse, contained in Q, begins with
the same terrible phrase ‘ generation’ or ‘ out-births of
vipers’ which Jesus also uses on several occasions. It
may possibly go back to Micah 177, where we read,
referring to the heathen: “ They shall lick the dust
like serpents, like those creeping on the earth.” And
if ‘ licking the dust’ can be taken in the sense of the
allegorists of the time, who interpret it as eating
excrement, a fate allotted to the serpent-shaped souls
of the damned in Shedl, it becomes all the more
strikingly graphic. In vain do they think they will


14


escape because they are of kinship with Abraham, or
that God cannot repeat the wonder he once wrought,
of raising up children out of the barren rock of their
forefather. God is able to make a new Israel out of
the very stones, just as he had of old hewn, like stones
(Heb. ’abanim), a line of sons (Heb. baénim) from the
once barren rock of Abraham, as Isaiah says (5112):
‘“ Took unto the rock whence ye were hewn . . . look
unto Abraham your father.”

This for the ‘stones’; but what of the ‘trees’?
There are other passages in the O.T. (e.g. Ps. li, Jer.
17s) which liken the man who delights in the Law
and has faith in Yahveh to fruit-bearing trees; but the
most arresting verse in this connection is to be found
in the continuation of the same vision in Ezekiel (471-8)
which so graphically depicted the Messianic Source.
This reads (v. 12):

“By the river upon the banks thereof, on this side
and on that side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose
leaf shall not fade; they shall bring forth new fruit
month after month, because their waters issue from
the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat
and the leaf thereof for medicine.”’

The mystical application of this prophetical
utterance to the righteous of Israel as the fruit-
bearing trees of the longed-for days of the Messiah,
would surely strike the imagination of so intuitive
a mind as John’s; it is indeed all of a piece with his
general conception and expectation and fits in most
deftly.


THE FISH AND FISHERS SYMBOLISM.


But this does not exhaust the imagery of Eizekiel’s
striking vision of the outpouring of God’s spirit in the


15


days of the End, which made so deep an impression
upon John. The prophet uses another graphic figure,
which also greatly influenced early Christianity and
was made much of later on in the symbolic interpreta-
tions of some of the Church Fathers. If only we had
the mystical exegesis of this figure as conceived in
the mind of the pre-Christian Palestinian Dorshé
Rashumoth, who anticipated in some ways the
Alexandrian Jewish allegorists of Philo’s day, we
should probably find that they had already given
spiritual significance to the following arresting verses
(9 and 10) of the vision. These read in Hisler’s
rendering:

‘‘ Wheresoever the river shall come, everything that
moveth shall live; and there shall be a very great
multitude of fish, because the waters shall come
thither. . . . And it shall come to pass [that] the
fishers stand by it from En-Gedi unto En-Eglaim ; they
shall be [a place] to spread forth nets [for all fish]
according to their kinds.”

En-Gedi and En-Eglaim were two oases with fresh-
water springs—the Gedi or Kid Spring and the Eglaim
or (?) Calf Spring—on the shores of the Dead Sea or
Salt Lake. The former was the chief centre of the
Essenes. With such a striking figure before him it
would be easy for John, the proclaimer of repentance
and the turning again to God of a righteous remnant,
to believe that in the Days of the End there were to
be prophets who should be ‘ fishers of men.’

Now it is remarkable that we have a number of
references to this fishing of souls bound up with echoes
of legends of John the Baptizer, which blend into
a at stream of Gnostic traditions which still exists
to-day and goes back eventually to very early times.


16


The Mandezans, that is believers in the Manda or
Gnosis, or Nazoraya as they call themselves, known to
the Arabs as the Subba’s or Baptists, have much to
tell us of the ‘Fisher of Souls’ and the evil ‘fishers
of men,’ as we shall see later on.

Their saga of the Fisher of Souls is a beautiful
conception within the setting of eschatological and
soteriological notions, and seems to be an integral
element of the syncretic stream of the Manda which
goes back far towards Gnostic beginnings. Now the
Mandean traditions are hostile not only to Christianity
but also to Judaism. Many of their notions can be
closely paralleled with some of the doctrines of the
religion of Mani, with some of the main elements
underlying the scheme of the Coptic Gnostic Pistis
Sophia and the two treatises of the Bruce Codex;
points of contact may also be found in what we know
of the doctrines of the Elchasaites, and in some parts
of the Clementine romances which preserve early
EKbionite traditions and legends of Simon the Magian,
with whom John is brought into connection.

And here it may be noted that, if it is surprising to
find the influence of John the Baptizer spreading as far
east as Mesopotamia, it is not out of keeping with the
fact that the baptism of John was also practised in the
east Mediterranean area far outside Palestine among
the Dispersion and indeed among some of the early
Christian communities, as we learn from the Acts and
Kipistles, witness especially the Apollos incident
(Acts 182, I. Cor. 112). |


Hant-Oannés-IOANnés.
No little of mythic notions from old Babylonian,
Chaldw#an and Iranian traditions is to be found


17


immixed in the oldest deposits of this Mandawan
stream; there is thus a pre-Christian background as
well. Indeed the Fisher-figure cannot fail at once to
remind students of the comparative science of religion
of the ancient Babylonian fish-clad fisher-god Hani-
Oannés—the archaic Ha, father of Marduk the saviour-
god of Babylon who rose yearly from the dead. This
primeval God of Wisdom was the culture-god who had
taught early mankind all the arts of civilization.
Berossus, the Chaldean priest who wrote for the
Greeks a history of his people, tells us of no less than
six manifestations of Oannés in successive periods;
and this notion of revelation and saving in successive
periods is fundamental with the Mandzans. Oannés
rose from the sea—the waters presumably of the
Persian Gulf, in the old story; but Marduk, his son,
descended from heaven.

It is by no means improbable that the picturing of
appropriate ancient myths which floated freely in the
thought-atmosphere of Babylonia, may have determined
some of the imagery of Ezekiel’s visions by the ‘river
of Babylon,’ and indeed may otherwise have psychically
influenced indirectly no little of Jewish apocalytic
literature, as for instance when the Ezra Apocalypse
(at the end of the 1st century A.D.) tells us that the
Redeemer of the world, the Celestial Man, is expected
to rise from the ‘heart of the ocean.’ If then, as
fizra LV. permits us to conclude, certain apocalyptists
and allegorists, who were probably Jews of. the
Babylonian or Syrian Dispersion, could conceive of
their pre-existent Messiah as in some way associated
with the figure of the ancient Hani (Oannés, Iannés,
Idannes), and expected the Redeemer of Israel to arise
from the depths of the great waters, it is not


18


improbable that in those days, when the interplay of
mystical associations was so prevalent and eagerly
sought out, some of the most enthusiastic followers
of John may have believed that this baptizing ‘ fisher
of souls’ was the expected manifestation.


J OHN-J ONAH.


Similarity in the sounds of names fascinated men’s
minds, and Hani-Oannés-John is not the only name-play
we meet with in the Baptist’s story. Attempts have
been made by scholars to show that ‘the sign of the
prophet Jonah ’ (Q—Matth. 12:9. = Lk. 1121.) was perhaps
originally connected with John, and that a testimony
of Jesus to John has been converted already in Q, the
early non-Markan source of matter common to Mt. and
Lk., into a testimony of Jesus concerning himself.
(On this point see Hisler, op. czt., pp. 156-162, where
all is set out in detail.) It is further of interest to note
that Jonah in Hebrew means Dove, and that among
the Mandezans there was a class of the perfect called
Doves. Compare also the Greek Physiologus (xli.):
“The Dove . . . which is John the Baptist.” The
names Jonah and John could easily be brought into
close connection, and indeed Jonah is sometimes found
as a shortened form of Johanan.

The Jonah-legend provided a very suitable setting
wherein to depict the life of a prophet who caused his
hearers to repent, and it may be that Jesus referred to
John as ‘a greater Jonah’ (Mt. 12«.). The most striking
image in the mythic story is the Great Fish. Now the
belly of the Great Fish for the Jewish allegorists, and
indeed it is plainly stated in the legend itself, was Sheol,
the Underworld, the Pit. But another mythic Great


19


Fish, or perhaps the same in another aspect, was the
cosmic monster Leviathan. And symbolists, allegorists
and mystics got busy with this mythic figure. Thus we
find that Leviathan was the name given by the Ophites
of Celsus, who are plainly of Syrian Babylonian origin,
to the Seven,—that is to the cosmic animal psyché, the
hierarchy of rulers and devourers of the animal souls
of men as well as of animals proper, each of the Seven
being symbolized by an animal figure, probably an
animal-faced (lion, etc.) dragon or fish. In the
Mandean tradition the Fisher of Souls takes the
Seven in his net and destroys them, even as in the
old Babylonian myth the Saviour-god Manduk catches
Tiamat, their mother, the primeval dragon of the deep,
in his net and destroys her. And strangely enough
there is an old Rabbinical legend of Jonah preserved
in the Midrash Yalqut Yona (§1), which relates that,
when the prophet was in the belly of the Great Fish,
he prayed that it should carry him quickly to the
Leviathan, so that he might catch it with his fishing
tackle. For Jonah desired, when once again safely
ashore, to make of its flesh a feast for the righteous,
—a distinct reference to the Messianic fish-banquet
which is to take place in the days of the End.

The Jewish folk of the Babylonian dispersion, who
were surrounded with images of the fish-clad Hani-
Oannés and of his priests, would easily think of them
as representing a man swallowed by a fish, and as
easily be reminded of the story of their great prophet
Jonah, who was fabled to have made the proud King of
Ashshur and all the Ninevites repent ; and the mystics
subsequently would easily associate all this with
Messianic notions.


20


RABBINIC FISH-SYMBOLISM.


It has recently been shewn by that acute scholar
J. Scheftelowitz from hitherto neglected Rabbinical
documents that ‘fish’ was quite a common symbol for
the righteous man of Israel, who lived all his life in
the waters of the Torah or Sacred Law. The evidence
goes back as early as the times of Rabban Gamaliel
the Elder, the teacher of Paul, who was therefore
a contemporary of John and Jesus. Thus we read in
the Midrash Tanhuma to Deut. 5:2: “ As a fish delights
in water, even so a master of the scriptures dives into
the streams of balm’’—the sweet smelling waters of
the Law; compare the sweet savour and perfume of
the gnosis and of the heavenly essences and per contra
the stench of the evil fishers or teachers of false
doctrine in the Mandan John-Book. Decisive in this
connection is the following passage from the Aboth de
R. Nathan (ch. 40):

“The pupils of Rabbi Gamaliel the Elder were
divided into four kinds of fish: into clean and unclean
[brackish water] fish from the Jordan and fish from the
Ocean, according to their high and low descent and to
the degree of their learning and quickness of their
understanding.”

Though they were not ‘fishers of men,’ they were
fish of Yahveh swimming in the holy stream, the life-
giving waters of the Law. It was thus very natural
for John, remembering the striking passage in Ezekiel.
(47:2) about the fish who repented, to contrast with
them the unrepentant as a ‘generation of vipers,’
(cp. the fish-scorpion contrast in Mt. 710). Nor could
John have been ignorant of the prophecy in Jeremiah


21


(161s) concerning the gathering together of dispersed
Israel: ‘‘ Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the
Lord, and they shall fish them,” and have given it
a spiritual significance. But of an even more arresting
nature is the following from Beresith Rabba (ch. 97):

‘‘ As the Israelites are innumerable, even so are the
fishes; as the Israelites will never die out on the earth,
the fishes will never die out in their element. Only the
Son of Man named ‘ Fish’ could lead Israel into the
Land of Promise,—namely Joshuah ben Nun (= Fish).”’
The Greek transliteration of Joshuah in the LXX.
version is invariably Jesus.


THE SAMARITAN TA‘EB—A REBORN JOSHUAH OR NOAH.


Now in Samaritan tradition, and it will be
remembered that the Samaritans rejected all the
Jewish scriptures save the Five Fifths of the Law,
their future Redeemer was to be called Joshuah. This
Deliverer they called the Ta‘eb, the Returner, and they
believed he would be a reborn or returned Joshuah.
The Ta‘eb is the Samaritan ‘ Messiah.’ In this connec-
tion a recently translated Samaritan Midrash (B.M.
Samaritan MS. Or. 3393’) is especially instructive. It
understands the title Ta‘eb as signifying ‘he who
repents’ or even ‘he who makes to repent,’ not so
much the Returner as the Turner-back of others. Itis
brought into close connection also with Noham, mean-
ing Repenting, and is thus by word-play associated
with Noah. Our Samaritan Midrash accordingly brings
Noah on to the scene of expected redemption, and
becomes a spiritualized version of the Deluge-story,
abounding in mystical word-plays. One or two speci-


' Ed. by Adalbert Merx, Zeitschr. f. alt. Wiss., 1909, xvii. 80.


22


mens of them may now be given, as the ideas behind
them are reminiscent of the John-circle of ideas.

Whereas in the old story Yahveh orders Noah:
“ Make thee an ark (ébah),” the Midrash makes God
say unto the Ta‘eb: “ Make thee a conversion ’’—or
repentance (Aram. shuba, tubah). And so it continues
in many details glossing the original parts of the ark
by means of word-play, introducing notions of propitia-
tion, expiation and atonement. A single passage from
the original will make this clear, and in reading it we
should remember that Samaria was a hot-bed of mystic
and gnostic movements of all sorts.

Behold I bring a [flood of] conversion [and] of divine favour
upon the earth, to save Israel and gather it from everywhere
under the sky. I shall perform my covenant, which I have set up
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. And thou shalt enter into the
conversion, thou and thy house and the whole house of Israel
with thee; and take with thee all kind of . . . praying and
fasting and purification, which thou performest, and take all unto
thee, and it shall be for conversion for thee and for them. And
the Ta‘eb did everything as God had commanded him.

The ark (¢bah) saved Noah from the flood of perdition, and
the conversion (shubah, tubah) will save the Penitent One (Ta‘eb)
and all the sons of Israel from the [flood of] perversion.

The ‘flood of perversion’ is that of ‘the cursed
eon. Among the many Messianic expectations of
those days, therefore, was the belief that in the Last
Days it would again be as in the times of Noah, as
indeed we are expressly informed by Q (Mt. 24s72.= Lk.
17 z6tt.).


JOHN’S ESCHATOLOGICAL SYMBOLISM.


There are other points of interest in the fragmen-
tary ‘sayings’ of John and other references preserved in
the synoptic accounts, but of these we shall select only


23


one as being of special interest. John’s expectation of
the nature of the catastrophe of the times of the End
was somewhat complex. Three phases of elemental
destruction haunted his imagination. Similar disasters
had already happened in the past at the culmination of
certain successive critical periods in the history of
mankind. There had been a destruction by water,
another by a mighty wind and tempest which over-
whelmed the great Tower (to which many a Rabbinic
legend testifies), and a destruction by fire in the days
of Lot. John’s baptism or water-purification may well
have been intended as an outer sign of the inner
attempt to avert from the righteous the dire results
of the great forthcoming world ‘ trial’ by the water of
God’s Wrath that would overwhelm the wicked. But
there were two other ‘ baptisms’ or purifications which
he expected a greater than himself to effect in similar
fashion and for a similar purpose. There was to be
a purification or baptism by fire; and, in Christian
interpretation, the third and last and greatest was to
be effected by means of the holy ‘spirit.’ This would
not be out of keeping with the belief of John, for it was
ever the spirit of God, as water, fire or wind, that would
purify and save the righteous. But the graphic figure of
the winnowing fan in John’s declaration shows clearly
that the notion was connected in his mind with the
necessary wind without which winnowing was im-
possible—the mighty wind or spirit of God. For the
good this would result in a blessed harvesting, but for
the evil it would be a scattering as of chaff.

Though all these notions may well have come to
John within the ambit of the Jewish scriptures, many
prophetical pronouncements in which graphically depict
all these forms of Divine visitation, it is nevertheless

C


24


not without significance that the rites of purification
by water, fire and wind (ventilation) were an integral
element of some of the Hellenistic mystery-institutions,
and that the periodic catastrophic scheme is clearly to
be paralleled in the later Babylonian astral religion,
and especially in its blending with Iranian conceptions
which centre round the swon-cult (Zervanism), and all
those notions of the Great Year and world-periods,
which later Stoicism took over and made familiar to
Imperial times. This Great Year had three ‘ seasons’
—summer, winter, spring—each of which was assigned
to one of the three most ancient elements: fire, water
and wind. As the Great Year turned on itself the
constellations returned at the end of the revolution to
the same positions they had occupied in a former Great
Year. There were thus critical moments in the xonic
movement, and at these cosmic catastrophes occurred.

It is hardly to be supposed that John had any such
‘scientific’ notions in his mind: but it is undeniable
that many had such conceptions in his day, and indeed
among the learned and mystics we find blends of such
‘science’ with prophetical intuitions. But for the
Jewish eschatologist it was a once for all event he
expected, whereas for such men as the Stoic thinkers
it was a perpetual recurrence.


JOHN AND JESUS GENERALLY.


And what is the outcome of this enquiry? It
seems to me that a very important background of
Christian origins is here indicated. It points toa wide-
spread Jewish eschatological and therefore necessarily
Messianic movement prior to Christianity, of which
earliest Christianity was at first a culmination, what-


25


ever modifications and completions were subsequently
introduced. It is therefore to be regretted that our
information concerning John the Baptizer and his
doctrines is so meagre.

It is quite natural that some of John’s adherents
should have attached themselves to Jesus on his public
appearance as a proclaimer before the martyrdom of
their own imprisoned prophet. The suddenness with
which Mk., our earliest narrative, introduces Jesus
‘calling’ the first four of his disciples and their instant
leaving all and following him to become ‘fishers of
men,’ is inexplicable without there having been some
prior knowledge of the Way on the part of Simon and
Andrew, Jamesand John. They may well have already
been familiar with John’s teaching. Indeed the writer
of the Fourth Gospel tells us categorically (Jn. 140) that
Andrew, the brother of Simon-Peter-Kephas, had been
a disciple of the Baptizer.

But if some of John’s actual ‘disciples’ followed
Jesus before any question of Messiahship arose, it is
probable that far more of his lay-adherents also did
so. Indeed the earliest history of the expansion of
Christianity, that is of the Jesus Messianic move-
ment, preserves traces that in some places there was
a considerable Johannine influence, notably the con-
tinued use of John’s baptism. On the contrary, most
of John’s disciples to all seeming refused to recognize
the Jesus Messianic claims, and the echoes of history
preserved in the Mandan traditions declare that they
most emphatically rejected them.

In any case it may well be that some of the great
figures, types and symbols used by Jesus in his
exhortations and teaching were not original to him,
but that he shared them, together with other mystic,


26


apocalyptic and prophetical notions, with circles that
had been instructed by John. Jesus is made to dis-
tinguish John as the greatest prophet who had come
before him, nay as more than a prophet; and yet the
least in the Kingdom of Heaven is said to be greater
than a John. ‘This can only mean in the Kingdom in
its fulness; for surely most of the Christians fell far
short of the high virtue of the Baptist. What is
furthermore exceedingly probable, if not unquestionably
evident, is that the whole of John’s mentality was
flooded with what we can only call mystic notions and
conceits, graphic figures, highly spiritualized, the
mentality of a prophet and seer. If John is the fore-
runner of Jesus, many of the Baptizer’s eschatological
and associated beliefs are probably the forerunners of
earliest Christian general doctrine. And with all this
in mind, it is difficult not to believe that Jesus not
only knew more of John personally and what lay at
the back of him, but used more of his ideas and
symbolisms than the gospels would lead us to suppose.

The Mandzean tradition deserves most careful
analysis from this point of view; but before presenting
it we may add a few words on the estrangement of the
John- and Jesus-movements.


JOHN AND THE MESSIAHSHIP OF JESUS.


Though the Synoptics in some passages are at
pains to let it appear as if John recognized the Messiah- —
ship of Jesus, and the later and ‘correcting’ Fourth
Gospel emphatically affirms that he did so from the
baptism onwards, there was evidently very consider-
able doubt on the question in the earliest tradition.
Q (Matth. 11s:.=Lk. 7w:) lets the reader see that John


27


to the end had no conviction, much less prior spiritual
apperception, on the subject. For it tells us that just
before his end the imprisoned prophet sent messengers
to Jesus asking him in complete uncertainty: “ Art
thou he that should come, or look we for another ? ”’
To this unambiguous question no direct answer is
given. John’s disciple-messengers are bidden simply
to report to their master the wonderful healings of
which they have been told or which they have
witnessed. The proof of Messiahship is made here to
rest solely on wonder-doings; any prior spiritual
recognition by John of Jesus as the Expected One is
unknown to this tradition, nor is it able to report that
John accepted the wonders as proof of the fulfilment
of his expectation. From this we may reasonably feel
assured that, though some of John’s disciples followed
Jesus when he began his public ministry after John
had been put in prison, and continued the proclama-
tion of the near Coming of the Kingdom, the majority
refrained. They continued in their own way and
discipline; nor did they subsequently recognize the
Messiahship of Jesus, for above all they had no authority
from their master to do so.

This is a negative inference; but the positive
rejection of the Christian Messianic claim is brought
out with sharp polemical emphasis in the Mandan
tradition, which claims to derive from John and regards
Jesus as the Deceiver-Messiah. The baptism of Jesus
by John is acknowledged, but explained in polemic
mystic fashion. There are however signs that, apart
from the subsequent bitterness of outer theological
controversy, there was originally an inner deeper
gnostic ground of division, for Jesus is not represented
as unknowing, but on the contrary, is made to answer


28


certain test questions of John with profound moral
insight. But the most surprising fact of Mandan
tradition is that it preserves no indications of having
entertained any belief in distinctive Jewish Messianism
at all. Its soteriology is peculiar to itself and the
tradition repudiates Jewish prophecy and apocalyptic
and in fact the whole Torah, as emphatically as it does
Christian doctrine. Nevertheless on its own showing,
in the beginning the particular community of which
John was so great a prophet, is depicted as settled in
Judea, even in Jerusalem, and is claimed to have had
a profound knowledge of the inner meaning of the
Law. It is made to look back to a still more ancient
tradition which is claimed to be purer and wiser than
that of the Hebrews. Though the legendary ‘historical’
side of the question is exceedingly obscure, our best
authorities are agreed that, as far as the mythic
element is concerned, the Mandan tradition preserves
many traces of the earliest forms of the pre-Christian
Gnosis known to us. The problem is thus exceedingly
complex.


ai


FROM THE JOHN-BOOK OF THE
MANDAAANS.


WE will now proceed to see what the Gnostic John-
folk have to say about the person of Yohana and
concerning their early Palestinian community, and will
conclude with some typical extracts from their John-
Book collection, of which the most characteristic and
important will be what may be called the sagas of the
Fisher of Souls and of the Good Shepherd; but first
a word or two as to our sources of information.


INTRODUCTORY.


The Mandzans (lit. Gnostics—mandd=gnosis) of
the lower Euphrates are the only known surviving com-
munity of the ancient Gnosis. That they have survived
to our own day’ is a remarkable testimony to the
strength of their convictions and of loyalty to a tradi-
tion which they claim to go back to pre-Christian days.
The documents call them Nazorwans.2 The Arabs
generally refer to them as Subba’s or Baptists, while
the first Portuguese Jesuit missionaries of the Inquisi-


1 In 1875 N. Siouffi, the French Vice-Consul at Mosul, estimated them
at some 4,000 souls in all (Htudes sur la Religion des Soubbas ow Sabéens,
Paris, 1880). ‘These were then to be found chiefly in the neighbourhood of
Basra and Kut. Siouffi’s estimate, however, was certainly too low ; for Shaikh
K. Dojaily, Lecturer in Arabic at the School of Oriental Studies, informs me
that he quite recently obtained from the supreme head of all the communities
at Naziriyah the precise statistics, and that they still number about 10,000
men, women and children.

* This is a very ancient general designation used by a number of early
sects. It has nothing to do with Nazareth (Q. Nazara), which is quite
unknown outside the gospel-narratives, not to speak of the philological
impossibility of such a word-formation as Nazorzan from Nazareth.
Lidzbarski rejects W. B. Smith’s (in Der vorchristliche Jesus, Giessen, 1906)
derivation—Nazar-Ya (=Jehoshua—Jesus — Sotér—Saviour), and makes out
a good case for origin in 4/NZR, with the meaning of ‘to observe’; hence
‘Observers ’—sc. of the laws or ordinances or may be of the holy life
(Liturgies, pp. xvi.ff.).

29


30


tion erroneously introduced them to Europe in the
early part of the 17th century as the ‘Christians of
St. John.’ But Christians they certainly are not; on
the contrary they have ever been strenuously opposed
to Christianity, though they may have sometimes so
camouflaged themselves to avoid Moslim persecution
in the first place and the Inquisitional methods of the
missionaries in the second.

The Mandezan religious literature (for of secular
literature there is none) supplies us with the richest
direct sources of any phase of ancient Gnosticism which
we possess; these documents are also all the more
valuable because they are purely Oriental without any
Hellenistic immixture. Indeed our only other con-
siderable direct sources, that is sources not contami-
nated or rendered suspect by transmission through
hostile hands, are the Trismegistic literature, the Coptic
Gnostic documents and the recent Manichean finds in
Turfan. The Mandan language is little used by the
faithful except for religious purposes. The M. com-
munities in general have for long used Arabic as their
common speech, though one or more groups speak
Persian. Mandean is a South Babylonian dialect
of Aramezan, its nearest cognate being the Northern
Babylonian as in the Babylonian Talmtd. Their
graceful script is peculiar to the Mandzans ; the vowels
are in full lettering and are not indicated by points or
other diacritical marks.

-Their literature was once far more extensive; for
what we possess is manifestly in the form of extracts
collected from manifold more ancient sources, which
are no longer extant.

The chief existing documents are as follows:

1. The Sidra Rabbaé (Great Book) or Genza


31


(Treasury), which is divided into Right and Left pages,
for the living and the deceased respectively, it is said
but I am told that in some copies the alternate pages are
reversed and in some ceremonies read simultaneously
by two readers facing each other. It consists of sixty-
four pieces or tractates,—theological, cosmological,
mythological, ethical and historical. This collection is
indubitably prior to the Mohammedan conquest
(cir. 651 A.D.), and its sources are of course far more
ancient.

2. The Sidra d’ Yahya (Book of John), also called
Drdashé d’Malké (Discourses of the [Celestial] Kings).
A considerable number of its pieces, which can be
listed under thirty-seven headings, deal with the life
and teachings of John the Baptizer. Yahya is the Arabic
form of John, the Mandan Yohana, Heb. Yohanan;
the two forms, Arabic and Mandan, alternate and
show that the collection was made, or more probably
redacted, after the Moslim conquest.

3. The Qolastad (Quintessence or Selection, called
also the Book of Souls)—Liturgies for the Baptismal
Ceremony, the Service for the Departed (called the
‘Ascent ’—Masseqtad) and for the Marriage Ritual.
These hymns and prayers are lofty, though most of
them are presumably not so ancient as those in the
Genza.

4. The Divdn, containing the procedure for the
expiation of certain ceremonial offences and sketches
of the ‘regions’ through which the soul must pass in
its ascent.

5. The Asfar Malwdshé (Book of the Zodiacal
Constellations).

6. Certain inscriptions on earthen cups and also
pre-Mohammedan lead tablets.


32


It would not be difficult to prepare an annotated
bibliography (as we have done elsewhere for the Coptic
Gnostic Pistis Sophia document) tracing the history
of the development of Mandzan study in the West
from the 17th century onwards, but this is a sketch not
a treatise. It is sufficient to say that, owing to the
difficulty of the language, no one did any work of
permanent value on the texts till the Dutch scholar
A.J.H. Wilhelm Brandt published his arresting studies
—Die Mandaische Religion (Leipzig, 1884) and Man-
didische Schriften (Gottingen, 1893), the latter contain-
ing a version of selected pieces from the Genzd. Brandt
was the real pioneer trarslator (basing himself on
Néldeke’s indispensable Mandzean Grammar, 1875) ;
his predecessors were either entirely ignorant of the
language or indulged mainly in guess-work. Brandt’s
art. ‘Mandeans’ in Hastings’ Encyclopedia of Religion
and Ethics (1915) is a valuable summary of his most
matured views, and to it I would refer my readers as
the best general Introduction available. Brandt’s
philological equipment in so difficult and rare a dialect
as Mandan, however, was not sufficient for the work
of full translation. Moreover he does not seem to me
to have sufficiently realized the great importance of the
subject for the general history of pre-Christian and early
Christian Gnosticism. This, however, was fully recog-
nized by the late Prof. Wilhelm Bousset, who devoted


1 Brandt passed away from this scene of his labours on March 4, 1915,

and his posthumous work Die Mandder: thre Religion und thre Geschichte
(Trans. of Koninklijke Akadamie van Wetenshappen te Amsterdam, Nov.,
1915) is practically a German edition of this article. Kessler’s art. ‘ Mandier ’
(Ledencyk. f. prot. Theolog., 3rd ed., Herzog-Hauck, Leipzig, 1903) is a helpful
study ; it entirely supersedes his Hnc. Brit., 9th ed., art. K. avers that the
M.literature preserves the oldest form of the Gnosis known to us. Art.
‘Mandeans,’ Hnc. Brit., 11th ed., 1911, is stated to be part K. and part
G. W. Thatcher ; it is a poor production even as a summary of K.’s later art.
It is short, contemptuous and superficial, and deprives the reader of much
that is most valuable in K. in the shape of references and parallels. It would
have been really better to have translated K. literally.


33


many pages of his admirable study Hauptprobleme der
Gnosis (Géttingen, 1907) to showing the enormous
light which the earliest deposits of the Genzd throw on
pre- and non-Christian Gnostic notions. Indeed in this
work Bousset gave a quite new historical perspective
to Gnostic studies, and showed the great importance of
the Mandan, Coptic Gnostic and Manichean docu-
ments, when critically treated, for tracing the genesis
and development of the widespread Gnosis of antiquity,
which had its proximate origin in the influence of
Persian ideas on Babylonian religious traditions from
the time of the Great Kings (6th century B.c.) onwards,
with further Hellenistic immixture and modifications
after the conquest of Alexander the Great (last third
of 4th century B.c.). There is also a parallel blending
and Hellenization of Egyptian mystery-Jore as seen
most clearly in the Trismegistic tradition. More
recently Prof. R. Reitzenstein, who has done such
excellent work on the Trismegistic Gnosis and on the
Hellenistic mystery-religions, has published a valuable
contribution to M. research in his Das Manddische
Buch des Herrn der Grosse (Heildelberg, 1919). Both
these scholars are free from that apologetic tendency to
which so few Christian scholars can rise superior in
dealing with the Gnosis. But the savant to whom we
owe most is Prof. Mark Lidzbarski, whose extraordinary
knowledge of Aramean dialects and allied Semitic
linguistics has at last placed in our hands reliable
versions of two of the M. collections: Das Johannesbuch
der Mandéder (Giessen, 1915) and Manddische Liturgicn
(Berlin, 1920). L. has also made a translation of the
Genzd, the publication of which is eagerly expected.’


1 On May 15, 1923, Dr. R. Hisler informed me: ‘‘ L. writes that his trans. of
Genz is finished ; printing will begin soon and take about a year and a half.”
Unfortunately since then the difficulties of publication in Germany have so


34


Until this appears it is not possible to be reasonably
sure of all one’s ground and so get an all-round
perspective of it. Meantime, as no really adequate
translation of any pieces have so far appeared in
English,’ I think it will be of service to give a selection
of renderings from the German of Lidzbarski’s John-
Book, so that readers of these pages may become
acquainted with specimens of the material, and be in
a better position in some measure to appreciate for
themselves its nature, quality and importance; for it
may eventually turn out to be one of the most valuable
indications we possess for Background of Christian
Origins research. These renderings will be as close to
the German as possible, so that readers may have
L.’s version practically before them, and the inevitable
leakage of translation from translation be reduced to
aminimum. Even so, I hope that what seems to me
to be the beauty of the original, will not be entirely
evaporated. The major part of the material of the
Liturgies is indubitably in verse; but the John-Book
as well, if not also mainly in verse, as a most competent
Aramean scholar assures me, is clearly in rhythmic
prose (Kunstprosa) and highly poetical. L., however,
has not broken up the lines as in the Liturgies.


increased, that the arrangements for printing have fallen through, and this
most indispensable basic source of information for students of the Mandan
Gnosis is accordingly held up.


1 To be precise, in book-form ; for I have already published the following
versions in The Quest in the last two years; they are but a third of the
translations I have made in MS. from the John-Book and the Liturgies.
Isay this, however, in no disparagement of Miss A. L. B. Hardcastle’s
sympathetic and painstaking studies, containing some versions in which the ©
work of Brandt and his predecessors was fortified by her own praiseworthy
efforts to grapple with a dictionary-less language. These studies were
suggested, warmly encouraged and appreciated by myself, and were as
follows: ‘ The Liberation of Johanna’ (Theosophical Rev., Sept. 1902) ; ‘ Frag-
ments from the Mandan Traditions of J. the B.’ (Quest, Ap. 1910); ‘The
Book of Souls: Fragments of a Mandzan Mystery Ritual’ (ib. Jan. 1912) ;

The Mandean Chrism’ (7h. Jan. 1914).


35


First let us begin with the pieces purporting to
give information concerning the person of the prophet.


I—THE GNOSTIC JOHN THE BAPTIZER.


PORTENTS AT JOHN’S BiRTH (§$18).'


In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


A CHILD was planted out of the height, a mystery revealed in
Jerusalem. The priests saw dreams; chill seized on their children,
chill seized on Jerusalem.

Early in the morning he* went to the temple. He opened
his mouth in blasphemy and his lips of lying. He opened his
mouth in blasphemy and spake to all of the priests:

“In my vision of the night I beheld, [I beheld] in my vision.
When I lay there, I slept not and rested not, and sleep came not
to me by night. I slept not and rested not, [and I beheld] that
a star appeared and stood over Enishbai.’ Fire burned in Old
Father (Aba Saba) Zakhria;° three heaven-lights appeared.’ The


1 Because YOhana is mentioned only once in the Genzd, Brandt supposes
that the John-Book pieces must be later in date. But surely this is not
a scientific conjecture. Itis rather to be supposed that the John-pieces were
naturally gathered together from the general mass of material when the
collection-process began. Though Yahya is the Arabic form of the name,
Y6hana alternates with it; this shows a later redaction in the Mohammedan
period, when the people vulgarly spoke Arabic, but says nothing as to the date
of earlier writings from which the pieces were copied out.


2 Ur-ashlam, a mock-name or derisive caricature-permutation=‘ Ur
perfected’ it. Ur is originally the Chaldean Deus Lunus; he is the eldest
son of Raha, the World-Mother, and corresponds in some respects with the
Yaldabaodth of ‘ Ophite’ gnosticism.

8 Who it was is not disclosed. The dreamer’s report is at first utterly
discredited.

4 The Elisabeth of Luke. The name may be some mystical echo of
Elisheba, the wife of Aaron, the first priest, just as the Miriam of the Jesus
birth-story reminds us of Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Moses, the first
prophet. If the pre-Christian Palestinian Dorshé Reshumoth may be thought
incapable of going so far, the Alexandrian Jewish allegorists, to whose school
Philo belonged, would, and did, sublimate the sister or wife of a sage into a
figure of his spiritual virtue or power. This will become clearer later on.


5 The Zacharias of Luke.


6 Cp. the more concrete three Magi motive. Itshould, however, be noted
that Origen (1st half of 3rd cent.) is the first of the Fathers to state that the
number of the Magi was 3; Chrysostom, 150 years later, gives their number
as 12 (see Lynn Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science
London, 1923, i. 472ff.).


36


sun sank and the lights rose. Fire lit up the house of the people
(synagogue), smoke rose over the temple. A quaking quaked in
the Throne-chariot, so that Earth removed from her seat. A star
flew down into Judea, a star flew down into Jerusalem. The sun
appeared by night, and the moon rose by day.”

When the priests heard this, they cast dust on their head.
Yaqif the priest weeps and Beni-Amin’s tears flow.” Shilai and
Shalbai® cast dust on their heads. Elizar* [the chief priest]
opened his mouth and spake unto all of the priests: “ Yaqif
interprets dreams, but as yet he has no understanding of these.
Beni-Amin interprets dreams; is he not a man who discloses your


a


1 Merkabah ; here presumably meaning heaven generally.


2 The narrative is largely in the familiar style of Danielic and Talmiidic
chronological camouflage; the Daniel Book (c. 164 B.c.) throws back the
religio-political conflict of the Jews with the kingdom and Hellenistic religion
of Antiochus Epiphanes to the days of Nebuchadiezzar (c. 600 B.c.), and
the Talmiid Jesus stories, for instance, throw back the setting to some
100 years B.c. or advance it to some 100 years a.p. See my Did Jesus Live
100 B.C. ?—An Enquiry into the Talmud-Jesus Stories, the Toldoth Jeshu
and Some Curious Statements of Epuphanws—Being a Contribution to the
Study of Christian Origyns (London, 1903). It is to be noted that the
Talmitid knows nothing of John; it evidently regards the John-Jesus move-
ment as one and the same kind of heresy. Y.and B. may perhaps be
personified types of members of certain contemporary communities or
mystical groups. In §54 Y. and B. are called the ‘Two Gold-sons.’ This
reminds us of alchemical symbolism; see my tracing of ‘ psychical’ alchemy
to Babylon in The Doctrine of the Subtle Body in Western Tradition (London,
1919), Proem, pp. 25ff. They may have belonged to the early ‘ Sons of the
Sun’ tradition—the later Sampszeans of Epiphanius, still later in wider
distribution known to the Moslim historians as Shemsiyel: (Shamish=the
Sun). This hypothesis is strengthened by the apparently cryptic gloss Beni-
Amin, ‘Sons of (the) Amén’ (cp. Rev. ii. 14: ‘‘ These things saith the
Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God”’).
I have no space here to follow up this conjecture; but L. seems to me to be,
not only nodding, but fast asleep, when he assumes that the Mandzan writers
were simply ignoramuses who mistook Ben-Yamin for Beni-Amin. The
Heb. derivation of Benjamin is given very variously in the Apocrypha and
Pseudepigrapha of the O.T. LL. refers to Yaqif (clearly Jacob) as Joseph.


3 Of whom we have no further information.


4 Can this be camouflage for Rabbi Elazer ben Hyrcanus, the founder
of the famous Rabbinical school at Lud (Lydda) and teacher of Akiba? He
flourished 70-100 a.v. RR. Eliazer was imprisoned for heresy; the Talmid
account connects this accusation of heresy with an interview between him
and a certain Jacob of Kephar Sechania, a city in lower Galilee, who is said
to have been one of the disciples of Jeshu ha-Notzri, ¢.e. J. the Nazdreean (see
D.J.L.100 B.C. ?—pp. 216ff. for reference and discussion). But Eliazeris a
name of great distinction in Pharisaic priestly tradition, especially that of the
Maccabeean proto-martyr priest, the teacher of the martyred Seven Sons and
the Mother in IV. Maccabees.


37


secrets ? Tab-YOmin' gives us no revelation, though you deem he
can give information on all that is and [that] is not.

Earth groans out of season and is sent a-whirl through the
heaven-spheres. Earth’ opens her mouth and’ speaks to Elizar:
* Go to Lilyukh,” that he may interpret the dreams you have seen.”
Thereon Elizar opened his mouth and spake unto all of the
priests : “ Who goes to Lilyukh, that he may interpret the dreams
you have seen?” Then wrote they a letter and put it in the
hand of Tab-Y6min. ‘Tab-Ydmin took the letter and betook
himself to Lilyukh. lLilyukh lay on his bed; sleep had not yet
flown from him. A quaking came into his heart, shivered his
heart and brought it down from its stay. Tab-Yomin drew near
to Lilyukh. Tab-YOmin stepped up to Lilyukh, shook him out of
his sleep and spake to him: “The priests saw dreams,

[the above paragraph is repeated verbally down to] . . . and
the moon rose by day.”

When Lilyukh heard this, he cast dust on his head. Naked,
Lilyukh rose from his bed and fetched the dream-book. He
opens it and reads in it and looks for what stands there written.
He opens it and reads therein and interprets the dreams in silence
without reading aloud. He writes them in a letter and expounds
them on a leaf. In it he says to them: “ Woe unto you, all of
you priests, for Enishbai shall beara child. Woe unto you, ye
rabbis, for a child shall be born in Jerusalem. Woe unto you, ye
teachers and pupils, for Enishbai shall bear a child. Woe unto
you, Mistress Torah (the Law), for Yohana shall be born in
Jerusalem.”

Lilyukh writes unto them in the letter and says to them:
“The star, that came and stood over Enishbai: A child will be
planted out of the height from above; he comes and will be given
unto Enishbai. The fire, that burned in Old Father Zakhria:
Yohana will be born in Jerusalem.”

Tab-Yomin took the letter and in haste made off to Jerusalem.

' Unidentified by L. Can it be camouflage for Tabbai, father of
R. Jehuda, who was ‘pair’ to Simeon ben Shetach, in the Pal. Talmid
Jesus-story (Chag. 77d), see Mead, op. cit. pp. 148f.

* The source of E.’s inspiration is the Earth ; the source of John’s is the


Sun (see below §20—p. 43).


This is most probably Elijah (the Eliyahi of the O.T.); I owe this
illuminating conjecture to Dr. M. Gaster. Is there here also a hidden
reference to an existing ‘ School of the Prophets’ ?


38


He came and found all the priests sitting in sorrow. He took the
letter and laid it in the hand of Elizar. He (E.) opens it and
reads it and finds in it wondrous discourses. He opens it and
reads it and sees what stands therein written. He reads it in
silence and gives them no decision about it. EHlizar then took it
and laid itin the hand of Old Father Zakhria.. He (Z.) opens it
and reads it and sees what stands therein written. He reads it in
silence and gives no decision about it. Hlizar now opened his
mouth and spake to Old Father Zakhria: “Old Father, get thee
gone from Judea, lest thou stir up strife in Jerusalem.” Old
Father then raised his right hand and smote on the head Hlizar :
“ Blizar, thou great house, thou head of all the priests! If thou
in thy inner [part] knewest thy mother, thou wouldst not dare
come into our synagogue. If thou in thy inner [part] knewest,
thou wouldst not dare read the Torah. For thy mother was
a wanton. A wanton was she, who did not match with the house
of her husband’s father. As thy father had not the hundred gold
staters for writing her the bill of divorcement, he abandoned her
straightway and enquired not for her. Is there a day when I come
and look forth,’ and see not Misha bar Amra?’ Yea, is there a day
when I come without praying in your synagogue, that you (pl.)
should be false and dishonest and say a word which you have ne’er
heard about me? Where is there a dead man who becomes living
again, that Enishbai should bear a child? Where is there a blind
man who becomes seeing, where is there a lame man for whom
his feet [walk again], and where is there a mute who learns [to
read in| a book, that EHnishbai should bear a child? It is two and
twenty years to-day that Ihave seen no wife. Nay, neither through
me nor through you will Enishbai bear a child.”

Then all of the priests arose and said to Old Father Zakhria,
[they said] in reproach: “Be at rest and keep thy seat, Old
Father, and let the calm of the Good (pl.) rest upon thee. Old

1 This is the same motive as that in the Talmiid Jesus-stories and
Toldoth. It is the language of popular, Bazaar theological controversy, and


is in keeping with Jewish figurative diction in which ‘fornication’ is the
general term for all lapses from right religious beliefs and views.


2 ? in vision.
3 Moses, son of Amram.


4 Klsewhere we learn that Zakhrié was 99 and Enishbai 88 at John’s
birth and that John himself began his ministry at the age of 22. A mystic
psephology is here clearly employed.


89


Father, if there were no dreams in Judea, then would all that
Misha has said, be lying. Rather shall thy word and our word be
made good, and the dreams we have seen. YoOhana will receive
Jordan and be called prophet in Jerusalem.”

Thereon Old Father removed himself from their midst, and
Elizar followed him. Then were seen three lights (lit. lamps)
which companied with him (Z.). They (the priests) ran up,
caught Old Father by the hem of his robe and said to him: “Old
Father, what is’t that goes before thee, and what is’t that follows
thee?’ Then answered he them: “O Elizar, thou great house,
thou head of all of the priests, I know not whom the lights guard
which go before me. I know not with whom the fire goes which
follows me. [But] neither through me nor through you will
Enishbai bear a child.”

Then all the priests rose and said to Old Father Zakhria,
[they said] in reproach: “Old Father Zakhria, be at peace, firm
and decided, for the child will be planted from out of the most
high height and be given to thee in thy old age. Y6hana will be
born, YOhana will receive Jordan and be called prophet in Jerusalem.
We will be baptized with his baptizing and with his pure sign
[will we] be signed. We will take his bread and drink his drink
and with him ascend to Light’s region.”

All the priests arose and said to Old Father Zakhria, [they
said] in reproach: “Old Father! We will enlighten thee as to
thy race’ and thy fathers, from whom thou hast come forth.

[there follows a list of prophets and sages, beginning with Moses,
which I omit, as it requires a lengthy commentary for which
space here does not serve,—ending with]. . . Tab-Yomin and
the school-teachers have come forth from thy race. The blessed
princes, who are thy forbears, Old Father, all of them have taken


no wife and begotten no sons.” Yet in their old age’ each of them


1 Sc. the race of the righteous, of the spiritual or perfect. It has many
names in mystical literature of the first centuries, as for instance in Philo,
who distinguishes ‘ race’ and ‘kin ’ of God from ‘people’ of God. See for
references and quotations my Thrice-greatest Hermes (London, 1906), Index
8.v. * Race.’


2 The same mystic idea underlies the words of Philo about the women
Therapeuts (D.V.C.): ‘Their longing is not for mortal children, but for
a deathless progeny which the soul that is in love with God can alone bring
forth.” See my translation in Fragments of a Faith Forgotten (London,
2nd ed., 1906), p. 75. It is the Melchisedec motive also.

’ The Later Platonists glossed ‘old age’ as used by Plato to signify
the age of wisdom.


D


40


had a son. They had sons, and they were prophets in Jerusalem.
If now out of thee as well a prophet comes forth, thou dost then
revive this race again. Yea, Yohana will be born and will be
called prophet in Jerusalem.”

Then Elizar opened his mouth and said to Old Father: “Old
Father! If Yohana receives Jordan, then will I be his servant,
be baptized with his baptizing and signed with his pure sign. We
will take his bread and drink his drink and with him ascend to
Light’s region.” Then Old Father opened his mouth and said
unto all of the priests: “If the child comes out of the most high
height, what then will yow do in Jerusalem ? ”


They’ have taken the child out of the basin of Jordan and
laid him in the womb of Enishbai.


Life is victorious and victorious is the Man® who has come
hither.


JOHN’S PROCLAMATION CONCERNING HIMSELF AND HIS
ASSUMPTION OF THE PROPHET’S MANTLE ($19).


Yahya proclaims in the nights, Yohana on the Night’s
evenings.”


YAHYA proclaims in the nights and says:

“Through my Father’s discourses I give light and through
the praise of the Man, my creator. I have freed my soul from the
world and from the works that are hateful and wrong. The
Seven’ put question to me, the Dead who have not seen Life, and
they say: ‘In whose strength dost thou stand there, and with


1 The prophets are god-sons of their god-parents; father and son are the
usual terms for the relationship between master and pupil in sacred things.


2 That is, the heavenly messengers.


3 The Heavenly Man of Light. The Man-doctrine is an essential
element of the Gnosis, as it was also with Jesus. (‘Son of Man’ is the
Arameean idiom for‘ Man’ simply.) See Reitzenstein’s Poimandres (Leipzig,
1904), my Thrice-greatest Hermes (1906), and Bousset, op. czt. (1907), indexes.


4 This introductory formula, as is the case with other headings and
conclusions, is due to the collectors and editors. It is unexplained, but seems
to refer to the dark period before the dawn of the Day of Light which was
expected. The days of this age are spiritual nights. N.B. a prophet
‘ proclaims,’ he does not ‘ preach.’


5 'This-World-rulers or Archontes, the Planets or Planetary Spirits, which
the MM. regarded as evil powers. They are the ‘Dead’ as having no
spiritual Life.


4]


whose praise dost thou make proclamation?”’ Thereon I gave to
them answer: “I stand in the strength of my Father and with
the praise of the Man, my creator. I have built no house in
Judea, have set up no throne in Jerusalem. I have not loved the
wreath of the roses, not commerce with lovely women. I have
not loved the defective,’ not loved the cup of the drunkards.
I have loved no food of the body, and envy has found no place
in me. I have not forgotten my night-prayer, not forgotten
wondrous Jordan. I have not forgotten my baptizing, not [for-
gotten] my pure sign. I have not forgotten Sun-day,’ and the
Day’s evening has not condemned me. I have not forgotten
Shilmai and Nibdai,’ who dwell in the House of the Mighty. They
clear me and let me ascend; they know no fault, no defect is
in me.”

When Yahya said this, Life rejoiced over him greatly. The
Seven sent him their greeting and the Twelve’ made obeisance
before him. They said to him: “Of all these words which thou
hast spoken, thou hast not said a single one falsely. Delightful
and fair is thy voice, and none is an equal to thee. Fair is thy
discourse in thy mouth and precious thy speech, which has been
bestowéd upon thee. The vesture which First Life did give unto
Adam, the Man,’ the vesture which First Life did give unto Ram,’


1 A technical term—the things that ‘fall short’ as compared with the
‘fulness’ of perfection; cp. the plérdma and hysteréma of numerous Greek
Gnostic documents.


2 Brandt (Art. H.#.H.) apologetically conjectures that this observance of
Sun-day (hab sabbi) was taken over from Syro-Christian usage. But
reverence for Sun-day is fundamental with the MM., and it is one of their
celestial personifications. 'The MM. loathed idolatry and sun-worship; they
worshipped Life and Light, but may have venerated the light as the symbol
of that Light. The same puzzle occurs with the prayer-custom of the
Essenes, who turned to the rising sun in their morning orisons. The problem
we have here to face is the existence of a pre-Christian Sun-day as rigidly
observed as the Jews and others kept the Sabbath, and not a ‘ Pagan’ holy-day.


®’ The twin Jordan- Watchers.

4 Sc. Life.

5 The powers of the Cosmie Animal-life Circle or Zodiac, which were
held by the MM. to be equally inimical with the Seven. Both orders were
sons of the World-mother Namriis, generally called Riha, 7.e. Spirit, the
World-spirit, spirit here being used in the wide-spread sense of the lower,
animal spirit. ’

® Sc. the Celestial Man or Adam of Light.


Ram the Great, coupled also with Bihram (presumably the Pahlavi
or Later Persian form, also Bahram=Avestan Verethragna).


42


the Man, the vesture which First Life did give unto Shurbai,' the
Man, the vesture which First Life did give unto Shum bar Na, —
has He given now unto thee. He hath given it thee, O Yahya,
that thou mayest ascend, and with thee may those ascend
x x x *& * * The house of defect’ will be left behind in the
desert. Everyone who shall be found sinless, will ascend to
thee to the Light’s region; he who is not found sinless, will be
called to account in the guard-houses.’”


And Life is victorious.


JOHN’S LIGHT-SHIP (§ 20).


Yahya proclaims in the nights, Yohana on the Night’s


evenings.


YAHYA proclaims in the nights and says: “In the name of
Him who is wondrous and all-surpassing! The Sun sat in his
Court (? Corona), and the Moon sat in the Dragon. The Four


1 Not identified.


2 Shem, son of Noah. The first age or world-period was that of Adam ;
the second, of Ram and Rid (fem.) ; the third, of Shurbai and Sharhab-él ; the
fourth, that of the Flood. The second generation perished by the sword and
pestilence, the third by fire (cp. § 25 below). The Indian yugas came from
the same source. As to the prophetical vesture in this special connection,
apart from the more general wide-spread notion of the garment of light or
robe of glory, cp. the Rabbinical tradition in the medixzval Yaschar or Sepher
Hai-yaschar (The Book of the Just, more commonly known as The Book of
the Generations of Adam or The Book of the History of Man) which contains
ancient material, translated into French by Chevalier P. L. B. Drach: “ After
the death of Adam and Eve the coats [sc. of skin—see R. Hisler’s brilliant
conjecture that J. the B. outwardly assumed his camel’s hair robe in memory
of the first garments of the fallen protoplasts, as a sign of repentance, in the
preceding study| were given to Enoch, son of Jared. Enoch, at the time
of his being taken to God, gave them to his son Methusaleh. After the death
of Methusaleh, Noah took them and hid them in the ark. Ham stole them,
and hid them so successfully that his brethren were unable to find them.
Ham gave them secretly to his eldest son, Chus, who made a mystery of it
to his brothers and sons. When Nimrod {[=Zoroaster, see Bousset, op. cit.,
index| reached the age of 20 years, he (Chus) clothed him with this vesture, _
which gave him extraordinary strength” (Migne, Dic. des Apocryphes, ii.
1102, 1150; and see my World-Mystery (London, 2nd ed., 1907), § ‘ The Soul-
Vestures,’ pp. 115ff.). It would not be difficult to penetrate under the
camouflage of the Rabbinic tradition, but space does not serve.


5 Sc. the body.
4 Mysticé ‘this world’ ? |
The prison-houses of the Seven and Twelve.


43


Winds of the House get them gone on their wings and blow
not.’”

The Sun opened his mouth and spake unto Yahya :* “Thou
hast three [head-] bands [and] a crown which equals in worth the
whole world. Thou hasta ship of mashklil,’ which sails about
here on the Jordan. Thou hast a great vessel which sails about
here ’twixt the waters.’ If thou goest to the House of the Great
[One], remember us in the Great’s presence.” Thereon Yahya
opened his mouth and spake to the Sun in Jerusalem: “ Thou
enquirest about the [head-] bands, may the Perfect (pl.) watch
o’er thy crown. This mashklil-ship they have carpentered together’
with glorious splendour. On the vessel that sails ’twixt the
waters, the seal of the King has been set. She® who in thy house’
plays the wanton, goes hence and approaches the dung-house;°
she seeks to have children from her own proper spouse,’ and she
does not find them. If she then” has fulfilled her vow, and she
departs,” she is unworthy for the House of the Life and will not be
allotted to the Light Dwelling.


And praiséd be Life.


1 All was at peace, the Sun shining brightly, the Moon sunk in the
darkness beneath. Cp. ‘The Mystic Hymnody’ at end of ‘The Secret
Sermon on the Mountain ’ (Corp. Herm. xili-xiv., Mead ii. 230): ‘‘ Ye Heavens
open, and ye Winds stay still; [and] let God’s Deathless Sphere receive my


word!”


2 Note that it is the Earth that speaks to Elizar (§ 18—p. 37), signi-
fying the lower source of his inspiration.


’ Meaning not yet determined; L. thinks it means some sort of wood,
but this does not seem to be very appropriate.


4 Se. the waters above and the waters below the firmament.


> For the Carpenter-motive in connection with the John-Noah hewing of
the timber for the salvation-ark-building see the previous study and
especially the Samaritan Midrash concerning the S. Ta’eb (Deliverer or
Messiah) and the mystic ark of conversion (pp. 8 and 21f.).


® A cryptic sentence referring to the ‘fornicators’ who are not true
the True Religion of the MM. ; ‘she ’= the soul.


’ That is the world-house illuminated by the Sun.

8 Sc. hell.

9 Sc. God, as in the thought-sphere of Philo’s Therapeuts.
10 After renouncing heretical views.


1 That is from the body.


44


JOHN THE ASCETIC (§ 21).


Yahya proclaims in the nights, Yohana on the Night's
evenings.


YAHYA proclaims in the nights and speaks: “ Stand not I here
alone? I go toand fro. Where is a prophet equal tome? Who
makes proclamation equal to my proclamations, and who doth
discourse with my wondrous voice ?”’

When Yahya thus spake, the two women weep. Miryai’ and
Enishbai weep, and for both tears flow. They say: “ We will go
hence, and do thou stay here; see that thou dost not bring us to
stumble.—I (M.) will go hence, and do thou stay here; see that
thou dost not bring me to stumble.—I (E.) will go hence, and do
thou stay here; see that thou dost not fill me with sorrow.”

Then Yahya opened his mouth and spake to Enishbai in
Jerusalem: “Is there any who could take my place in the height ?
Is there any who could take my place in the height, so that thou
mayest pay for me ransom? If thou canst pay for me ransom,
then bring thy jewels and ransom me. If thou canst pay for me
ransom, then bring thy pearls and ransom me. If thou canst pay
for me ransom, then bring thy gold and ransom me.” ”

Thereon Enishbai opened her mouth and spake to Yahya in
Jerusalem: “ Who is thy equal in Judea, who is thy equal in
Jerusalem, that I should look on him and forget thee ?’”—‘‘ Who
is my equal, who is my equal, that thou shouldst look on him and
forget me? Before my voice and the voice of my proclamations
the Torah disappeared in Jerusalem. Before the voice of my
discourse the readers read no more in Jerusalem. The wantons
cease from their lewdness, and the women go not forthtothe....
Hither [to me] come the brides in their wreaths, and their tears
flow down to the earth. The child in the womb of his mother
heard my voice and did weep. The merchants trade not in Judea,


1 Miryai is the personification of the first Mand. community among the
Jews. She is presumably not to be confounded in any way with Miriam, the
mother of Isti M&iha (Jesus Messiah), who is called Miryam (not Miryai) in
§ 30; but this requires further investigation.


; y ‘Jewels,’ ‘pearls’ and ‘gold’ are presumably the figures of spiritual
riches.


45


and the fishers fish not in Jerusalem.' The women of Israel dress
not in dresses of colour,’ the brides wear no gold and the ladies no
jewels. Women and men look no more at their face in a mirror.
Before my voice and the voice of my proclamations the water rose
up to the pillars.. Because of my voice and the voice of my
proclamations the fish brought to me their greetings. Before my
voice and the voice of my proclamations the birds made obeisance
and said: “‘ Well for thee, and again well for thee, Yahya, and well
for the Man whom thou dost worship. Thou hast set thyself
free and won thy release, O Yahya, and left the world empty. The
women have not led thee away with their lewdness, and their
words have not made thee distracted. Through sweet savours
and scents thou hast not forgotten thy Lord from thy mind.
Thou has not made thyself drunken with wine and hast done no
deeds of impiety. No backsliding has seized on thee in Jerusalem.
Thou hast set thyself free and won thy release and set up thy
throne for thee in Life’s House.”


And Life is victorious.


OF JUDGMENT-Day (§ 25).


Yahya proclaims in the nights, Yohana on the Night’s
evenings.


YAHYA proclaims and speaks: “Ye nobles, who lie there, ye
ladies, who will not awaken,—ye who lie there, what will you do on
the Day of the Judgment? When the soul strips off the body,
on Judgment-Day what will you do? O thou distracted, jumbled-
up world in ruin! Thy men die, and thy false scriptures are
closed. Where is Adam, the First Man, who was here head of the


' The ‘merchants’ and ‘fishers’ in all probability mean the Seven, as
in the ‘ Fisher of Souls’ piece.


2? The MM. wear white robes.


® Sc. of the temple; cp. the miraculous spiritual outpouring of the Last
Days expected by John, based on O.T. prophecies, as set forth in the previous
introductory study; also one of the Odes of Solomon, quoted in the Pistis
Sophia (ch. 65, pag. 131, Mead p. 110): “A stream came forth and became
a great wide flood. It tore away all to itself and turned itself against the
temple,” etc. The whole Ode is most instructive in this connection, and the
Odes in general move in a very similar atmosphere to the John-lore. (See
for Trans. from Syriac, Rendel Harris and Mingana, The Odes and Psalins
of Solomon, Manchester, 1920). The ‘fish’ and ‘birds’ of the next sentences
are the faithful.


46


zon? Where is Hawwa (Eve), his wife, out of whom the world
was awakened to life? Where is Shit-il (Seth), son of Adam, out
of whom worlds and eons arose? Where is Ram and Riad, who
belonged to the Age of the Sword? Where are Shurbai and Shar-
hab-él, who belonged to the Age of the Fire? Where is Shum bar
Na (Shem, son of Noah), who belonged to the Age of the Flood ?
All have departed and bave not returned and taken their seats as
Guardians in this world.’ [The Last Day] is like a feast-day, for
which the worlds and the eons are waiting. The Planets are
[like] fatted oxen, who stand there for the Day of the Slaughter.
The children of this world are [like] fat rams, who stand in the
markets for sale. But as for my friends, who pay homage to Life,
their sins and trangressions will be forgiven them.”


And Life is victorious.


THE LETTER OF TRUTH (§ 26).


[The introductory formula and beginning of this piece are
missing from the MSS.]


kK ok * * kK


[Yohana is apparently speaking. |
I TAKE no delight in the eons, I take no delight i: in 1 all of the
worlds; I take’ no delight'in the eons ~* 0% 0° *) 7°)"
x * *« * by the Letter of Truth’ which has come hither.
They’ took the Letter and put it in the hand of the Jews.


1 Tibil; L. frequently retains this as a proper name—e.g. ‘in the Tibil’
—and alternates it with the common noun ‘world.’ Whether there is
a distinction in the original I do not know, it seems to be simply the Heb.
tebel (=world, earth). Where L. has Tibil, I shall render it by ‘ this world.’


2 Cp. the Messianic Marriage Feast parable (Matth. xxii. 4): ‘‘ My oxen
and my fatlings are killed . . .: come to the marriage-feast.”’


* Kushta is the general term for the religious ideal of the MM.; it is
elastic in meaning and cannot be translated by a single rigid concept. The
original sense seems to have been ‘Truth,’ * Righteousness’ and perhaps
‘Order? (cp. the Avestan Asha and the Vedic Rita). It thus means the true
religion, loyalty, trust and faith (see J.B. xvii.f.). Kushtais fem. It is tobe
noted that in Avestan literature Ashi (fem.) is the heavenly impersonation of
rectitude, fortune, chastity, riches (cp. wthrd’s), and Chisti (fem.) of religious
wisdom (?=gndsis)—see M. N. Dhalla, Zoroastrian Civilization, New York,
1922, pp. 45, 51f., 68, 77, 84. With the frequent recurrence of the letter-
symbol in M. scripture, cp. the’ Syriac ‘Hymn of the Soul,’ or ‘ of the Pearl,’
which belongs to the same main stream of the Gnosis (see my Hymn of the
Liobe of Glory, ‘ Echoes from the Gnosis’ series, vol. x., London, 1908).


4 Presumably the heavenly messengers.


47


These open it, read in it and see that it does not contain what
they would, that it does not contain what their soul wills. They
took the letter and put it in the hand of Yohana. “ Take, Rab
Yohana,” say they to him, “ Truth’s Letter, which has come here
to thee from thy Father.’ Yohina& opened it and read it and
saw in it a wondrous writing. He opened it and read in it and
became full of life. ‘“‘ This is,” says he, “ what I would, and this
does my soul will.”


Yohana has left his body’; his brothers make proclamations,
his brothers proclaim unto him on the Mount, on Mount Karmel.’
They’ took the Letter and brought it to the Mount, to Mount
Karmel. They read out of the Letter to them’ and explain to
them the writing,—to Yaqif and Beni-Amin and Shumél.’ They


assemble on Mount Karmel.
*K * *k 5 * *


[What follows is presumably the beginning of the Letter.]


Gnosis of Life® who is far from the height [writes]:

“TI have come unto thee, O Soul, whom Life has sent into this
world. In-robes of the Hight? went I into the world. I went in
the vesture of Life and came into the world. The vesture I
brought of the Seven, I went as far as the Hight. The vesture of
the Seven I took and took hold of the Hight with my hand. [I have


1 Sc. Life or perhaps rather the Man.
2 This seems cryptically to refer to some Gnostic scripture prior to John.
3 Sc. in trance.


* Sufis would at once conclude that this refers to the Divan, the nightly
Meeting of the Perfect in spirit presided over by the Qutb (Pillar or Axis), the
Head of the age. Mt. Karmel is identified with the story of Elijah and has
always continued to be a sacred mount. Doubtless communities of ‘ Sons ot
the Prophets’ and the rest had continuously there their retreats. Can it be
that Tab YOmin went to Mt. Karmel to find Lilyukh (Eli-yahu)? Karmel=
the Garden or Garden-land. It had been a sacred spot long before the days
of Elijah, who hid there from his pursuers in its numerous grottos. The
Arabs still call it Jebal Mar Elyas (Mount Lord Elijah). Yamblichus in his
Life of the sage says that Pythagoras visited it.


° Sc. the heavenly messengers.
6 Sc. the brethren who had equally ‘ left the body.’
7 Plainly Samuel.


* Manda d’Haiyé, the M. Saviour; he is ‘far from the height’ because
he is the Exile, the Stranger, in this world.


° The higher Ogdoad ; I conjecture, therefore, that this is a more ancient
piece. The John-gnosis had depressed the Hight and the Seven and Twelve
to the infernals, yet retained memory of a Great Eight and the rest.


48


taken them] and I take them, and I will take them and not let
them go. I have taken them and hold them fast, and the wicked
spirits shall change into good.

““Wherefor do ye weep, generations, wherefor weep ye,
O peoples? Wherefor fadeth your splendour? For you have
I brought my Image, I betook myself into the world.”


And Life is victorious.


JOHN’S INVULNERABILITY (§ 27).


Yahya proclaims in the nights, Yodhana on the Night’s
evenings.


YAHYA proclaims in the nights and speaks: “Is there any one
greater than I? They measure my works; my wage is pres:
and my crown, and my praise brings me on highin peace.” * *

Yaqif leaves the house of the people, Beni-Amin leaves the
temple, EKlizar, the great house, leaves the dome of the priests.
The priests spake unto Yahya in Jerusalem: ‘“ Yahya, go forth
from our city! Before thy voice quaked the house of the people,
at the sound of thy proclamations the temple did quake, at the
sound of thy discourse quaked the priests’ dome.” Thereon Yahya
answered the priests in Jerusalem: “Bring fire and burn me;
bring sword and hew me in pieces.” But the priests in Jerusalem
answered to Yahya: “Fire does not burn thee, O Yahya, for Life’s
Name has been uttered o’er thee. A sword does not hew thee in
pieces, O Yahya, for Life’s Son’ rests here upon thee.”


And Life is victorious.


JOHN AND THE BAPTISM OF JESUS (§ 80).


Yahya proclaims in the nights, Ydhana on the Night’s
evenings.


YAHYA proclaims in the nights.—Glory rises over the worlds.

Who told Yeshu (Hshu)? Who told Yeshu Messiah, son of
Miryam, who told Yeshu, so that he went to the shore of the
Jordan and said [unto Yahya]: “ Yahya, baptize me with thy baptiz-
ing and utter o’er me also the Name thy wont isto utter. If I show
myself as thy pupil, I will remember thee then in my writing;


1 Clearly Gnosis of Life, the Son of God and Father of John.


49


I attest not myself as thy pupil, then wipe out my name from thy
page.”

Thereon Yahya answered Yeshu Messiah in Jerusalem: “ Thou
hast lied to the Jews and deceived the priests. Thou hast
cut off their seed from the men and from the women bearing
and being pregnant. The sabbath, which Moses made binding,
hast thou relaxed’ in Jerusalem. Thou hast lied unto them with
horns’ and spread abroad disgrace with the shofar.”

Thereon Yeshu Messiah answered Yahya in Jerusalem: “If
I have lied to the Jews, may the blazing fire consume me. If I
have deceived the priests, a double death will I die. If I have cut
off their seed from the men, may I not cross o’er the End-Sea.
If I have cut off from the women birth and being pregnant, then
is in sooth a judge raised up before me. If I have relaxed the
sabbath, may the blazing fire consume me. If I have lied to the
Jews, I will tread on thorns and thistles. If I have spread dis-
grace abroad with horn-blowing, may my eyes then not light on
Abathur.’ So baptize me then with thy baptizing, and utter o’er
me the Name thy wont is to utter. If I show myself as thy pupil,
I will remember thee then in my writing; if I attest not myself
as thy pupil, then wipe out my name from thy page.”

Then spake Yahya to Yeshu Messiah in Jerusalem: ‘A stam-
merer becomes not a scholar, a blind man writes no letter.
A desolate house’ mounts not to the height, and a widow becomes
not a virgin. Foul water becomes not tasty, and a stone does not
with oil soften.”

Thereon Yeshu Messiah made answer to Yahya in Jerusalem:
“A stammerer a scholar becomes, a blind man writes a letter.
A desolate house mounts unto the height, and a widow becomes
a virgin. Foul water becomes tasty, and a stone with oil softens.”

Thereon spake Yahya unto Yeshu Messiah in Jerusalem: “ If


' This makes it clear that the strict observance of a sabbath (Sunday)
by the MM. was not taken over from the Christians, as Brandt supposes.


2 Cp. the Joshua ben Perachiah Jesus-story in the Talmiid (B. Sanhedrim
107b, Sota 47a): Joshua replied [to Jeshu]: ‘Thou godless one, dost thou
occupy thyself with such things ?—directed that 400 horns should be brought
and put him under strict excommunication” (Mead, D.J.L. 100 B.C.?
pp. 137 and 146f.).


’ The Man ‘with the Scales’—the Avestan Rashnu—who weighs the
good and bad deeds of the departed (J.B. xxix. f.).


* Generally meaning an unmarried man.


50


thou giv’st me illustration for this, thou art [really] a wise
Messiah.”’

Thereon Yeshu Messiah made answer to Yahya in Jerusalem :
“A stammerer a scholar becomes: a child who comes from the
bearer, blooms and grows big. Through wages and alms he comes
on high; he comes on high through wages and alms, and ascends
and beholds the Light’s region.

“A blind man who writes a letter: a villain who has become
virtuous. He abandoned wantonness and abandoned theft and
reached unto faith in almighty Life.

“A desolate house who ascends again to the height: one
of position who has become humble. He quitted his palaces and
quitted his pride and built a house on the sea[-shore]. A house
he built on the sea[-shore], and into it opened two doors, so
that he might bring in unto him whoever lay down there in mis-
ery,—to him he opened the door and took him within to him-
self. If he would eat, he laid for him a table with Truth. If he
would drink, he mixed for him [wine-]cups [with Truth]. If he
would lie down, he spread a bed for him in Truth. If he would
depart, he led him forth on the way of Truth. He led him forth
on the way of Truth and of faith, and then he ascends and beholds
the Light’s region.

“A widow who a virgin becomes: a woman who already in
youth has been widowed. She kept her shame closed, and sat
there till her children were grown. If she passes over, her face
does not pale in her husband’s’ presence.

“Foul water that is made tasty: a girl wanton who has got
back her honour: she went up a hamlet and she went down
a hamlet without taking her veil from her face.

“A stone with oil softens: a heretic who has come down from
the mountain.” He abandoned magic and sorcery and .made


1 Presumably her spiritual children.
2 Meaning God.


* L. thinks that by zandiq (heretic) is meant a Zoroastrian or Manichean
who comes down from the mountains to join the Mandzans who live in the
plains. This seems to me entirely mistaken. The Z.’s and M.’s lived as
well on plains as on mountains. In every probability it means the Mount of
Darkness on which the Seven assemble to plot against the righteous. The
Seven are the lords of all the false religions. For the Mount of Hades, the
Prison Mount of the Underworld in Bab. tradition, see my paper ‘ New-found
Fragments of a Babylonian Mystery-play and the Passion-story,’ Quest,
Jan. 1922, p. 173.


51


confession to almighty Life. He found a fatherless and filled
him full and filled full the widow’s pockets.

“Therefor baptize me, O Yahya, with thy baptizing and utter
o’er me the Name thy wont is to utter. If I show myself as thy
pupil, I will remember thee in my writing; if I attest not myself
as thy pupil, then wipe out my name from thy page. Thou wilt
for thy sins be haled to account, and I for my sins will be haled
to account.”

When Yeshu Messiah said this, there came a Letter out of
the House of Abathur: “ Yahya, baptize the deceiver in Jordan.
Lead him down into the Jordan and baptize him, and lead him up
again to the shore, and there set him.”

Then Raha’ made herself like to a dove and pete a cross”
over the Jordan. A cross she threw over the Jordan and made its
water to change into various colours.” “O Jordan,” she says, “ thou
sanctifiest me and thou sanctifiest my seven sons.”’


[Then follows what, from its animadversion on Christian
institutions and especially on the use of the crucifix, is plainly
a later addition. Riuha is apparently still speaking; she is the
Mother of all heresies. ]

“The Jordan in which Messiah Paulis’ was baptized, have
I made into a ‘ trough.” The bread which Messiah Paulis receives,


! The Lower Spirit, the This-World-Mother.


® Sc. of light; cp. the great light that shone on Jordan at the baptizing
of Jesus in ‘ The Gospel according to the Hebrews.’ Tatian’s Diatessaron
(Syriac, 2nd half of 2nd cent.) also preserves this feature. Bar Salibi (+ 1171)
glosses this as follows: ‘‘ And immediately, as the Gospel of the Diatessaron
testifies, a mighty light flashed upon Jordan and the river was girdled with
white clouds, and there appeared his many hosts that were uttering praise
in the air; and Jordan stood still from its flowing, though its waters were not
troubled, and a pleasant odour therefrom was wafted.”’ There is a strong
Mandan flavour about this gloss, which doubtless rested on early tradition.
See F. C. Burkitt, Evangelion da-Mepharreshe (Cambridge, 1904), ii. 115.
This is the Christian and not the M. ‘cross,’ as e.g. used in the baptismal
ceremony, which is made of a number of long sticks or wands, the ends
of which are stuck in the ground and the tops crossed one over the
other to represent rays of light.


®* The Jordan is white for the MM.; the various colours signify heresies.


4 L. thinks that this stands for Paul, and this is very probably so. But
at the same time he informs us that ‘ Paulus,’ as Lorsback has shewn, is the
equivalent of a Persian word meaning ‘ Deceiver.’ It therefore may mean
simply the Messiah Deceiver.


Kvidently a ‘ font.’


52


have I made into a ‘sacrament.’ The drink which Messiah Paulis
receives, have I made into a ‘supper.’ The head-band ‘which
Messiah Paulis receives, have I made into a ‘priest-hood.” The
staff which Messiah Paulis receives, have I made into a‘ dung
[-stick].’’”
[ ? Gnosis of Life speaks (ep. § 29) :]
“Det me warn you, my brothers, let me warn you, my belovéd!
Let me warn you, my brothers, against the . . . who are like
unto the cross. They lay it on the walls; then stand there and
bow down to the block. Let me warn you, my brothers, of the
god which the carpenter has joinered together. If the carpenter
has joinered together the god, who then has joinered together the
carpenter ? ”
Praiséd be Life, and Life is victorious.


(For those who are not familiar with the atmosphere of bitter
inner and outer theological strife of the times, it is as well to note
that the last two pieces are in the form of haggadic controversy
between the followers of John and Jesus respectively.)


JOHN’S MARRIAGE (§ 81).


Yahya proclaims in the nights, Yohana on the Night’s
evenings.


YAHYA proclaims in the nights and speaks: “The [heavenly]
wheels and chariots’ quaked. Sun and Moon weep and the eyes
of Raha‘ shed tears.”

He’ says: “Yahya, thou art like to a scorched mountain,
which brings forth no grapes in this world. Thou art like to
a dried-up stream, on whose banks no plants are raised. Thou
hast become a land without a lord, a house without worth. A false


The original suggests a head-covering.


We should have expected ‘crosier.’ Is there word-play in all these
terms ?


The celestial spheres.
The World-Mother- Spirit.


Who, is not clear ; perhaps Gnosis of Life, the M. Saviour. -


53


prophet hast thou become, who hast left no one to remember thy
name. Who will provide thee with provision, who with victuals,
and who will follow to the grave after thee?”

When Yahya heard this, a tear gathered in his eye; a tear in
his eye gathered, and he spake: “It would be pleasant to take
a wife, and delightful for me to have children. But only if I take
no woman,—and then comes sleep, desire for her seizes me and
I neglect my night-prayer. If only desire does not wake in me,
and I forget my Lord out of my mind. If only desire does not
wake in me, and I neglect my prayer every time.”

When Yahya said this, there came a Letter from the House
of Abathur: “ Yahya, take a wife and found a family, and see
that thou dost not let this world come to an end. On the night
of Monday and on the night of Tuesday go to thy first’ bedding.
On the night of Wednesday and on the night of Thursday devote
thyself to thy hallowed praying. On the night of Friday and on
the night of Saturday go to thy first bedding. On the night of
Sunday and (? yea) on the night of the Day devote thyself to thy
hallowed praying. On Sunday take three and leave three, take
three and leave three.” See that thou dost not let the world come
to an end.”

Thereon they’ fashioned for Yahya a wife out of thee, thou
Region of the Faithful.* From the first conception were Handan
and Sharrath born. From the middle conception were Birhaém
and Rhimath-Haiyé born. From the last conception were
Nsab, Sam, Anhar-Ziwa <and Sharrath> born.” These three
conceptions took place in thee, thou Ruins, Jerusalem.

Yahya opened his mouth and spake to Anhar in Jerusalem:


1 That is, after the marriage-ceremony.


* This is unexplained. Lidzbarski thinks it means three baths; but
more probably it means three hours for sleep and three hours for prayer, and
these again repeated.


* Presumably the Divine Powers.


‘ That is, those faithful to Truth. It refers to the M. Abode of the
Blessed, Mshuné Kushta. She is thus the personified Mother of the wife of
Yahya.

° These are elsewhere mostly names of heavenly beings and are in part
to be paralleled with the children of Eve (Hawwa) in the Genzd (R. 108).
Handan is otherwise unknowv. Shar-rath may be Shar, who is elsewhere
called ‘‘ the great, hidden First Vine, who bears a thousand times a thousand
fruits and ten thousand times ten thousand shoots.” Bihram is a later form
of the Avestan Verethragna; he is generally called ‘the Great.’ R’himath-


54.


“Instruct thy daughter, that she may not perish; and I will
enlighten my sons and teach [them], that they may not be
hindered.” Thereon Anhar opened her mouth and spake to Yahya
in Jerusalem. “I have borne sons in this world,” said she to
him, “ yet have I not given birth to [their] heart'inthe world. If
they let themselves be instructed, then will they ascend to Light’s
region ; if they let not themselves be instructed, then will the
blazing fire consume them.”


JOHN ON HIS OWN PASSING (§ 81 CONTD.).


Yahya opened his mouth and spake to Anhar in Jerusalem:
“Tf I leave the world, tell me, what wilt thou do after me? °—
“ T will not eat and will not drink,” she answered him, “ until I see
thee again.” —“A lie hast thou spoken, Anhar, and thy word has
come forth in deception. If a day comes and a day goes, thou
eatest and drinkest and forgettest me out of thy mind. I asked
thee rather, by Great Life and by the eve of the Day whose name
is dear : If I leave the world, tell me, what wilt thou do after
me ?’’—' I will not wash and I will not comb me,” says she to
him, “until I see thee again.”—“ Again hast thou spoken a lie
and thy word has come forth in deception. If a month comes and
a month goes, thou washest and combest thee and forgettest me
out of thy mind. Again did I ask thee, Anhar, by the first bed
in which we both lie: If I leave my body, tell me, what wilt —
thou do after me?”—‘TI will put on no new garments,” she
answers him, “ until I see thee again.” —*“ Again hast thou spoken
Haiyé = the Living or Life’s R. In the Qolasté or Liturgies there is
a R’hum-Hai twice mentioned; he is ‘ Life’s Beloved,’ one of the four Song
of Light, or alternately of Salvation. Nsab is elsewhere (§ 4, 8) called
N.-Ziwa, that is Radiant N.; he is regarded as the Great Watcher (§ 9), and
his name means ‘ Planter,’‘ Fashioner.’ Sam is also called S.-Haiyé, S. the
Living; he too is ‘Watcher of the eons’ (G. R. 313, 12ff.), and his name
means ‘ Stablisher.’ Anhar-Ziwa or the Radiant A. is feminine (ep. § 69, nye
the name might possibly remind us of the Zoroastrian Anahita, Anaitis,
Anhar is elsewhere called the ‘ Hidden Light,’ and her name means ‘ Lightener.’
Can she then have any connection with the Iexai or Yechai, the complement
of Elxai (the ‘ Hidden Power’), mentioned by Epiphanius? The muddled-
up account of the Elchaszans in the heresiological Fathers seems to me to
have a close connection with Mandzan notions (see my D. J. L. 100 B.C. ?
—ch. xviii, ‘ Concerning the Book of Elxai,’ pp. 365-387 (London, 1903),


and Brandt’s study, Hichasai: en Religionsstifter wnd sein Werk (Leipzig,
1912). The second Sharrath is evidently a doublet. I


That is, spiritual sense.


55


a lie, Anhar, and thy word has come forth in deception. If a year
comes and a year goes, thou puttest new garments on thee and
forgettest me out of thy mind.”

“Why dost thou not tell me all, Yahya,” says she to him;
‘and how sorely thou bruisest the whole of my body! If thou
dost depart, when wilt thou return, that my eyes may fall upon
thine ?”—“ If a woman in labour descends into Shedl’ and a bell
is hung up for her in the graveyard. If they paint apicture in
Sheol, and she then goes forth and they give a feast in the
graveyard. If a bride parades round in Shedl, and they celebrate
marriage in the graveyard. If the wedding-companions borrow in
Shedl, and the paying-back takes place in the graveyard.” *

Then answered she him: “My lord, how shall it be that
a woman inlabour . . . ” [and soon, repeating the above].

“Tf thou knowest,” he makes answer unto her, “that this
does never happen, why dost thou press me with asking: When
dost thou return? I- go hence and return not. Happy the day
when thou dost still see me. If there were a going-away and
returning, then would no widow be found in this world. If there
were a going-away and returning, then would no fatherless be
found in the world. If there were a going-away and returning,
then no Nazoreans would be found in the world.”’

Thereon Anhar opened her mouth and spake to Yahya in
Jerusalem: “I will buy thee for dear gold a brick grave’ and have
a boxing of wood‘ joinered together for thee in the graveyard.”
But Yahya opened his mouth and spake to Anhar in Jerusalem :
“Why wilt thou buy a brick grave for dear gold and have a boxing
of wood joinered for me in the graveyard? Art sure that I am

1 That is, dies.


2 It was the popular custom apparently, which, however, the Mandzans
did not follow, when a woman was in labour, to ring a bell to ward off evil
influences (cp. the Egyptian sistrum) ; and a picture (or pantacle) also, with
a similar apotropaic purpose, was painted. If the birth was successful,
a birth-feast was given. It was also the custom, when bride and groom
were poor, for their friends to borrow money or go bail for the expenses of
the wedding-festivities.


’ L. prefers to translate this as ‘ vault,’ but he seems to me to miss the
meaning and that too in face of his own note, where he admits that the
first word simply means ‘ brick.’


4 Both references seem to refer to Egyptian motives in burial customs.
For the extraordinarily interesting deduction to be made from this hint in
connection with a striking phrase in one of the following Miryai-pieces
(§ 85) see the note appended there (p. 69, n. 3).


<


E


56


returning, that thou dost say: Nodust shallfallon him? Instead
of buying a brick grave for dear gold, go rather and share out for
me bread. Instead of getting a boxing joinered together, go rather
and read for me masses for the departed.”

Thereon Anhar opened her mouth and spake to Yahya in
Jerusalem: “Thou dost go hence and forget me, and I shall be
cut off in the Sinners’ Dwelling.’””

[But Yahya answered her:] “If I forget thee, may the Light
Dwelling forget me. If I forget thee, may my eyes not fall on
Abathur. If I ascend to Life’s House, thy wailing will arise in
the graveyard.”


Praiséd be Life, and Life is victorious.


JOHN’S BIRTH, UPBRINGING AND FIRST APPEARANCE (§ 82).


Yahya proclaims in the nights, Yohana on the Night’s
evenings.


YAHYA proclaims in the nights and speaks: “The [heavenly]
wheels and chariots quaked. Harth and Heaven weep and the
tears of the Clouds flow down.”

“My father,” says Yahya, “was ninety and nine and my
mother eighty and eight years old. Out of the basin of Jordan
they’ took me. They bore me up and laid me in the womb of
Bnishbai. ‘ Nine months,’ said they, ‘thou shalt stay in her womb,
as do all other children.’* No wise woman,” * said he, “brought
me into the world in Judea, and they have not cut my cord in
Jerusalem. They made for me no picture of lies, and for me hung
up no bell of deceit.’ I was born from Enishbai in the region of
Jerusalem.”

The region of Jerusalem quakes and the wall of the priests
rocks. HElizar, the great house, stands there and his body trembles.
The Jews gather together, come unto Old Father Zakbria and
they speak to him: “O Old Father Zakhria, thou art to have
ason. Tell us now, what name shall we give him? Shall we give


1 That is the Dwelling of the Seven Rulers, and therefore this§world.
2 Sc. the heavenly messengers.

8 This is perhaps to guard against docetism.

4 Presumably = midwife.

5 See above § 31,—p. 55, n. 2,


57


him for name ‘ Yaqif of Wisdom,’ that he may teach the Book in
Jerusalem? Or shall we give him for name ‘Zatan the Pillar,’*
so that the Jews may swear by him and commit no deceit ?”’

When BEnishbai heard this, she cried out and she said: “ Of all
these names which you name, will I not give him one; but the
name Yahya-Yohana will I give him, [the name] which Life’s self
has given unto him.”

When the Jews heard this, they were filled with wicked anger
against her and said: “ What weapon shall we make ready for
[a certain] one’ and his mother, that he be slain by our hand ?”’

When Anodsh,’ the treasure,’ heard this he took the child and
brought it to Parwan, the white mountain, to Mount Parwan, on
which sucklings and little ones on holy drink are reared up.’

[There I remained] until I was two and twenty years old.
T learned there the whole of my wisdom and made fully my own the


1 Zatan-Estiina, a name found also in § 35—>p. 67.


2 Jesus is sometimes in the Talmiid referred to simply as ‘a certain
one’ or ‘that one.’


8 Knoch.


4 Uthra (iitrd) is a frequently occurring general term in Mandean, of
which the precise meaning has not yet been determined; L. leaves it
untranslated. Uthra means literally ‘ Riches,’ ‘Wealth’; and may very
well then stand for the notion of Treasure. It might even convey the idea
of Fulness (Gk. Plérdma), but this is hazardous. The difficulty with
Treasure is that there are also two technical M. terms for Treasure,
Treasury or Treasure-house (sc. of Liie, cp. § 57, forewords). Uthra
seems sometimes to equate with Angel; but again this has a term for
itself (malaka). In any case it means a heavenly or spiritual being, excarnate
or incarnate, and therefore the phrase signifies the Heavenly or Spiritual
Enoch. See L.’s dissertation, ‘ Uthra und Malaka,’ in Orientalische Studien
Theodor Noldeke zwm siebzigsten Geburtstag (12 Marz, 1906) gewidmet
(Giessen, 1906), pp. 537-545.


®> Cp. with the above threat of killing and the removal of the child the
‘Slaughter of the Innocents’ and the ‘ Flight into Egypt’ motives of the
parallel Christian stories. The ‘little ones’ is elsewhere found frequently
in Mandan as a technical term for the initiates of the community. The
sacred drink, the mambihd of the M. ‘ eucharist,’ doubtless throws back to
the Mazda-yasnian hadma. Parwan is mentioned only in this passage.
It may, however, be a clerical error; for occasionally mention is made of
a land ealled the ‘pure Tarwan.’ Or is it Mt. Karmel?


6 The numbers 99, 88, and 22 seem to belong to some system of mystic
psephology, or gematria as the Kabalists afterwards called it. Cp. the 888
value of the name of Christ in the second-century system of the Gnostic
Markos and the 666 of the Beast in the Apocalypse. I would suggest,
though with hesitation, that 10’s, 100’s and 1000’s represent ‘ powers,’ i.e.
so-called higher or wider planes of activity or development, and digits
certain fundamental characteristics. In this connection it is of interest to
note that such numbers as 1111, 2222, occur in classical Pythagorean


psephology.


58


whole of my discourse. They clothed me with vestures of glory
and veiled me with cloud-veils.. They wound round me a girdle,’ of
[living] water a girdle, which shone beyond measure and glistened.
They set me within a cloud, a cloud of splendour, and in the seventh
hour of a Sunday they brought me to the Jerusalem region. Then
cried a voice in Judea, a crying proclaimed in Jerusalem. They call
out: “What woman had a son, who then was stolen? What
woman has made for him a vow’ and been heedless about it?
What woman had a son, who was stolen? Let her come and see
after her son.” |

Who told Battai, who instructed Battai, who told Battai to
go and say to Hnishbai: “ A youth has come to Judea, a prophet
come to Jerusalem. A youth has come to Judea; his guardian
angel stands by him. His mouth is like thee and his lips [like]
his father, Old Father Zakhria. His eyes are like thee and his
brows [like] his father, Old Father Zakhria. His nose is like thee
and his hands [like] his father, Old Father Zakhria.”’

When Enishbai heard this, she hurried out veil-less. When
Old Father Zakhria saw her thus, he wrote her a bill of divorce-
ment. The Sun down-murmured from heaven and the Moon from
its place mid the stars. The Sun opened his mouth and spake to
Old Father Zakhria in Jerusalem: “Old Father Zakhria, thou
great dotard (?), who has grown old and lost his wits, like an Arab
whom his kismet has forsaken. A youth has come to Judea,
a prophet come to Jerusalem. <A youth has come to Judea; why
dost thou send Enishbai away ?”’


When the youth saw her alone, he set himself free and fell
down from the cloud. He set himself free and fell down from the
cloud and kissed the mouth of Enishbai. When Andsh, the
treasure, saw him [do this], he spake unto Yahya in Jerusalem:
“Stands it for thee written in thy book, is it declared unto thee


1 This is a reference to the heavenly cloud or surround; e.g. Enoch
dwells in a cloud and from its matter fashions the body in which he appears
upon earth or elsewhere in man-form.

2 This spiritual girdle is symbolized by the M. sacred cord of 60 threads;
ep. the Parsi cord or kustv, composed of 72 strands and wound three times
round the body, and also the Brahmanical sacred thread.

® Presumably before his birth, and perhaps dedicating him to God as
a Nazir.

4 This phrase is most probably a late interpolation.


59


on thy page, to kiss her alone, on the mouth ?’’—Thereon answered
Yahya and spake unto Andsh, the treasure, in Jerusalem: “ Nine
months I abode in her womb,’ so long as all other children
abide there, without any reluctance on her part; therefore is it
no charge against me now to kiss her alone, on the mouth. Nay,
hail and again hail to the man who repays father and mother in
full. A man who recompenses father and mother, has not his
like in the world.”

When Yahya said this, Anésh, the treasure, knew that Yahya
is wise. Thereon And6sh, the treasure, spake to the Sun in Jeru-
salem: “Take for me care of the youth, the Man, who is sent
by the King. Take for me care of the youth, until we ask for
him.” Then Andsh, the treasure, spake to the Moon in Jerusalem:
“Take for me care of the youth, the Man, who is sent by the
King. ‘Take for me care of the youth, until we ask for him.”


Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the Man
who has come hither.


JOHN’S ANSWER. TO JESUS CONCERNING THE ANGEL OF
DEATH (§ 33).


Yahya proclaims in the nights, Yohanai on the Night’s
evenings.


YAHYA proclaims and speaks: “Stand I not alone ? Because
of my voice the [heavenly] wheels quake and the chariots capsize.
The tempest became silent and settled down in the world’s deserts.
Sun and Moon wail, and Earth and Heaven mourn.”


Messiah opened his mouth and spake to Yahya in Jerusalem :


1 Cp. Pistis Sophia (p. 115; Mead?, p. 97), where Jesus is made to say
to his mother: “ Thou, also, Mary, hast received form which is in Barbélo
{the Great Mother], according to matter, and hast received likeness which
is in the Virgin of Light, according to light . . . ; and on thy account
the darkness hath arisen, and moreover out of thee did come forth the
material body in which I am, which I have purified and refined.” Again
(p. 120; M. p.100): “Mary, my mother according to matter, thou in whom
I have sojourned.” And again, Mary speaking (p. 123; M. p. 103): ‘ ‘ Grace
and Truth met together,’—it is I, Mary, thy mother, and Elizabeth, mother
of John, whom I have met. ‘Grace’ then is the power of Sabadth in me,
which went forth out of me, which thouart. . . . . ‘Truth’ on the
other hand is the power in Elizabeth, which is John, who did come and
hath made proclamation concerning the way of Truth {the M. Kushta]
which thou art,—who hath made proclamation before thee.”


60


“T asked thee, Yahya, by Great Life and by Sunday, whose name
is dear. I asked thee Yahya, by the Way, whereby the Men of
piety put to the test go without hindrance. Tell me: To what is
the shape of Sauriél’s' knife like? Tell me: If the soul leaves
the body, with what is it clothed, and to what is it like in the
vain body? Surely the soul is not possibly like the blood, that it
should become heated in the body and come to a stop in it?
Surely the soul is not possibly like the wind, that it should fare to
the mountains, be lost there and come toa stop? Surely the soul
is not possibly like the dew, that it should fall on the fruit and
be lost ?”’

When Messiah said this, Yahya cries aloud; tears come to
him without ceasing, and he speaks: “ [God] forbid that the high
King of Light should look for lot in deceivers. The soul is not
like the blood, that it should become heated in the body and come
to a stop. The soul is not like the dew, that it should fall on
the fruit and be lost. The soul is not like the wind, that it should
fare to the mountains and come to a stop. Firmly developed has
the soul been brought into the vain body. If the soul has kept
herself perfect, she ascends in a garment of glory.

‘Sauriél’s knife consists of three flames.” When he (§8)
drives her (the soul) to hasten, so as to bear her away, he lets
loose the three flames against her. One he lets loose against her
in the evening, the other at cock-crow; the third lets he loose
*gainst her at the coming-forth of the rays. If the fire begins to
be fierce, the soul slips out of the feet and the knees. Out of the
feet and the knees slips she, and draws nigh to the hips. Thereon
leaves she the hips, reaches the heart, and seeks to keep there her
ground. Then falls she into the breast, andit squeezes... .
The eyes, the face and the lips of the man twitch, and the Loneue
twists hither and thither.

“Then Sauriél sits on the eyebrows; [he sits] and speaks to
her: ‘Go hence, O Soul! Why dost thou still watch over the
body ?’—Then says she to him: “Thou wilt hale me, Sauriél, out
of the body. First show me my vesture [and clothe me there-
with]; then hale me out and hence bring me.’-—' First bring me


1 The Angel of Death, as with the Jews. Cp. the knife, sword or '
scymytar of the Ophite Diagram in Origen’s reply to Celsus.


® Cp. the flaming sword of the Hebrew form of the Paradise-myth.


61


thy works and thy wage,’ makes he answer to her; ‘then will
I show thee thy vesture and clothe thee. — I knew not, O Sauriél,’
says she to him, ‘that my time is come, and they then send
quickly for me, for doing good works, so that thou mayest bring
me my vesture and clothe me therewith.’—Natheless he made
answer unto her: ‘ Has no one yet died before thee and have they
not yet carried forth anyone to the graveyard ?’—Thereon she says
to him: ‘Through the power of him who has died before me, and
through the power of him whom they have carried forth to the
graveyard .. . ed tole Beta

““{The women] who wept ran hither and thither and [the
men] who wailed ran hither and thither, as long as the body lay
there before them. When the soul leaves the body, four’ go forth
to the graveyard. [The women] who wept ran hither and thither,
the men who wailed ran hither and thither; and they ran hither
and thither crying, until they lowered it into the pit. When they
had lowered the vain body and covered it over [sc. with earth],
then the women ceased from their death-wail. They filled up the
pit, and the men went away... ... .. In haste left they the
body and grave and went away; they took hold of cup and ate
bread and forgot the vain body.—Now, an thou wilt, Sauriél, let
me stay here still two days. Then will I sell the whole of my goods
and share out among my sons, and will take my vesture with me,
the robe that ascends to Light’s region.’

“Natheless Sauriél returned answer unto her: ‘Is there
a child that has left the womb of its mother, and that they shall
have brought back again into its mother, that I should leave thee
in the Wicked Ones’® Dwelling, so that thou mayest see after a
sharing among thy sons? I will lead thee hence and put the robe
of darkness upon [thee], for that thou hast not let thyself be
warned in this world, and hast not loved thy way to Light’s region.
Therefore shalt thou be put in ward in the House of the Wicked,
till Heaven and Earth pass away.’”’


And praised be Life.


1 Here something seems to have fallen out. The following recital of the
soul describes a burial which has taken place.

? Unexplained; it may possibly mean two female and two male
professional mourners.

§ Sc. the Seven Rulers.


IJ.—THE STORY OF THE BREACH WITH
JUDAISM.


MIRYAI IS EXPELLED FROM JEWRY (§ 84).


In the Name of Great Life, may hallowed Light be glorified.


MIRYAI am J, of the Kings of Babel’ a daughter, a daughter
of Jerusalem’s mighty rulers. They have given me birth; the
priests brought me up. In the fold of their robe they carried me
up into the dark house, into the temple. Adonai laid a charge on
my hands and on my two arms: I must scour and cleanse the
house [that is] without firmness. There is naught therein for
supporting the poor, naught to revive the tormented souls.

My father went to the house of the people, my mother went to
the temple. My father went out and said to me, and my mother
went out and charged me: “ Miryai, close thy inner doors and bolt
the bar. See that thou goest not forth into the main streets and
that the suns of my Lord’ fall not upon thee.”

But I, Miryai, listened not to what my mother did tell me,
and hearkened not with the ear to what my father did charge me.
I opened the inner doors, and the outer let I stand open. Out
went I into the main streets and the suns of my Lord fell upon
me. To the house of the people would I not go, but my way
bore me unto the temple [sc. of the Mandzans]. I went and
I found my brothers and sisters, how they stand and carry on
proclamations. My brothers carry on proclamations and my
sisters throw out explanations.’ With the voice of their proclama-
tions and with the voice of their explanations I became drowsy
and laid me down on the spot.’ My brothers went forth and did
not wake me, and my sisters withdrew and roused me not. But.
thou, my sister in Truth,’ dost rouse me from sleep and dost say:
“ Arise, arise, Miryai, before the day breaks and the cock lets crow
his morn-call, before the sun shines and his glory rises over the


1 A by-name for Jerusalem.


* Presumably Adonai ; M.’s Lord is (below) the King of Light and later
on her Lord is Gnosis of Life.


Cp. the prophesyings and interpretations of Early Christendom*and
the ‘ glossolaly ’ of the earliest Pauline communities.


M. became entranced. ° Presumably a heavenly visitant.


65.


worlds, before the priests and the priests’ sons go forth and sit
them down in the shade of the Ruins—Jerusalem, before thy
father comes and brings upset upon thee such as thou never
hast had.”

I, Miryai, keep secret my prayers and utterly secret keep my
discourses.

Karly, day began to dawn, early the cock let crow his call,
early the sun shone and his glory rose over the worlds. The priests
and priests’ sons went out and sat them down in the shade of the
Ruins—Jerusalem. Then came my bodily father and brought on
me upset such as I never have had. He spake:

“Where hast come from, thou debauched trough, whom
[2 locks] and bars [cannot keep in] ? Where hast thou come
from? Woe [unto thee], thou bitch in heat, who [? mindest]
not [door-]pins and lockings! Where hast thou come from ?
Woe, woe [unto thee], thou bit of coarse stuff that has been
patched on my robe!”

“Tf I am a debauched trough, I will burst thy [boltings] and
bars. If I am a bitch in heat, I will draw back the pins and the
lockings. If I ama bit of coarse stuff that has been patched on
thy robe, then out of thy robe cut and rip me.”

Thereon he cried: “Come (pl.), look on Miryai, who has left
Jewry and gone to make love with her lord. Come, look on
Miryai, who has left off coloured raiment and gone to make love
with her lord. She forsook gold and silver and went to make love
with her lord. She forsook the phylacteries’ and went to make
love with the man with the head-band.’’? |

Then Miryai makes answer unto him: “Far lies it from me to
love him whom I have hated. Far lies it from me to hate him
whom I have loved. Nay, far from me lies it to hate my Lord,
the Life’s Gnosis, who is for me in the world a support. A support
is he in the world for me and a helper in the Light’s region.
Dust in the mouth of the Jews, ashes in the mouth of all of the
priests! May the dung that is under the feet of the horses, come
on the high ones and Jerusalem’s mighty rulers.”


Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the Man
who has come hither.
1 Tutifti=Heb. tefillim.
2 Cp. § 22, ‘the pure burzingd,’ and J. B., pp, 380! and 50."


64


A VARIANT OF THE ABOVE FROM THE OXFORD MS. (L.’s J. B.,
PP, 123-125).


In the name of Great Life, may hallowed Light be glorified.


AT the door of the house of the people her mother came upon
Miryai. Her mother came upon Miryai and put question to her:
“Whence com’st thou, my daughter, Miryai, whose face gathers
roses ? Roses gathers thy face and of sleep are thy eyesfull. Full
of sleep are thy eyes, and upon thy forehead lies slumber.”’

Thereon she made answer: “It is two,—three days to-day
that my brothers sat down in the house of my Father. In my
Father’s house sat down my brothers and let wonderful proclama-
tions be heard. Because of the voice and the ringing of the
proclamation of the treasures, my brothers, there comes no sleep
over my eyes. Sleep comes not over my eyes, nor slumber upon
my forehead.”

“ Hast thou not heard, Miryai, my daughter, what the Jews
are saying about thee? The Jews are saying: Thy daughter has
fallen in love with a man. She has gotten hate against Jewry
and love for Nazoreanity. Hate has she gotten against the house
of the people and love for the door of the temple (sc. of the MM.).
Hate has she gotten against the phylacteries and love for the
flaunting wreaths. Work does she on Sabbath; on Sunday she
keeps her hands still. Miryai has cast aside straightway the Law
that the Seven have laid [upon us].”’

As Miryai stands there, she puts dust on her feet, and speaks:
“Dust in the mouth of the Jews and ashes in the mouth of all of
the priests! May the dung that lies under the horses, come on
the elders who are in Jerusalem! I cannot hate him whose love
I have won, nor love him ’gainst whom I have gotten hate. Yea,
I have won the love of my Lord the Life’s Gnosis, [and hope] that
in him a helper will for me arise, a helper and a support from the
region of Darkness unto Light’s region.”


Thou hast won the victory, Gnosis of Life, and helped all thy
friends to victory.


And Life is victorious.


65


THE EXILED COMMUNITY SETTLE ON THE EUPHRATES (§ 85).
In the Name of Great Life, may hallowed Light be glorified.


MIRYAI am I, a vine, a tree, who stands at the mouth of
Bu-phrates (Frash). The tree’s leaves are precious stones, the
tree’s fruits pearls. The vine-tree’s foliage is glory, its shoots
precious light. Among the trees its scent it diffuses, and it
spreads over all the worlds. The birds of the air scented it;
a flock settled down on the tree. A flock on it down-settled, and
they would build their nest there. They flutter about in it
and settle not down in it firmly. Of its foliage they eat
from its inner part they drink wine. They eat what is not to be
cast away, and drink what was not wine.’

While the birds sat on the vine, winds and tempests broke
loose. They shook the good birdlets awake, they smote ’gainst
the tree; on all sides they scattered the leaves of the vine-tree
and scared the birds out of their place. Many a bird there was
who flew not away, but held on fast with claws and with wings,
till the winds and the tempests were over. Many again held
not on fast and were hurried away... . Woe unto those
who did not hold fast, but were dashed from the tree and flew off.
How fair is the tree of Life and fair the birds who dwell on it !


The winds and the tempests passed and rest came over the
world.


As the birds sit there and chirp and would be a-building their
nest, as the birds sit on the vine, an eagle wheeled and flew
hither. A white eagle-bird’ came, looked down and caught sight
of the birds. Round wheeled he, sped down on them with his
wings, and came and sat on the tree. In converse with him
joined the birds, and said to him:

“By thy Life, Eagle! On this tree were we birds without
number.—But there broke loose against them the winds, and on
the tree came raging tempests. They shook them off from the
tree, so that they tore their wings from them [nearly]. Many a one
held fast, whom the winds and tempests could not tear away;
but many a one flew off at top speed.—We speak to thee, therefore,


1 The whole description is intentionally symbolic or allegorical.
* The White Eagle is manifestly Gnosis of Life.


66


O Eagle, we ask thee respecting the birds, because thou art sharp
of sight and dost see all in this world: What have the winds and
the tempests done with those birds, our brothers? What spyest
thou out (?) over them ?”

_ Then made he answer unto them: “ You had better not to
have known, my brothers, what has become of those birds. Sling-
shots drove them far from me; their wings broke; torn off were
they, broken off; they went hence and relied on the bird-catchers.’
The harrier and hawk wheeled round them, tore pieces out of their
flesh and fed on those who were fat. Woe to those who fell prey
to the water,’ if there was no portion for them at the crossing.
Well for you, ye birds, who hold fast to this vine [here]; you
became a companionship of Miryai, the vine, who stands at the
mouth of Euphrates. See and satisfy yourselves, ye birds, that
I have come to you. I have come to my brothers to be a support
for them in this world. I have come to heal Miryai, [come] to
bring water to the good, beloved plants, to the vines, who stand
at the mouth of Euphrates. In a white’ pail I draw water and
bring it to my plants. I bear and I hold [it] on the arms of glory
which are my own. I bear and I hold [it] and give [them] to
drink. Well for him who has drunk of my water. He drinks,
finds healing and confirmation, and grows to double [his stature].
The vines who drank water, brought forth good fruit. Their
leaves turned on high and made a brave show. ‘The branches
which drank no water, brought forth bitter herbs and worm-
wood (?). Woe to those who have not gone forward upon the
Way; woe to those who have not passed on by the way-stone !
They hated Life’s Treasure-House,’ Miryai, the dear Truth.

“ My brothers, hold fast, be a companionship of Miryai. I will
look round in the world, let Life’s call sound forth and rouse the
sleeping and wake [them].”

The eagle flew off from the tree; he wheeled round and
instructed his friends. He speaks to them: “Give ear to me, my


1 Presumably the Seven.
2 Presumably the End-Sea.


8 White for purity, the M. colour par excellence. The water is of course —
the Living Water or Water of Life.


4 Or Treasury, Simath-Haiyé, a feminine personification, called else-
where the ‘Mother of all the [Light] Kings’; she is par excellence the
Treasure or Treasury of Light.


67


brothers! Stay fast and endure persecution. Be a companion
ship to Miryai. Woe to the Jews, who were a persecution for
Miryai! Woe to Hlizar, the great house, the pillar that props the
temple! Woe to Zatan, the pillar,’ who has witnessed lies against
Miryai !”’

THE JEWS PERSECUTE THE MANDZANS (§ 85 CONTD.).

ALL the Jews gathered together, the teachers, the great and
the little; they came [together] and spake of Miryai:

“She ran away from the priests, fell in love with a man, and
they took hold of each other’s hands. Hold of each other’s hands
they took, went forth and settled at the mouth of Euphrates.
We will slay them and make Miryaiscorned in Jerusalem. Astake’
will we set up for the man who has ruined Miryai and led her
away. There shall be no day in the world when a stranger’ enters
Jerusalem.”

They split open their fellings and catch the doves in
Jerusalem.’


THEY BEG THEM TO RETURN (§ 35 CONTD.).


ALL the Jews gathered together and followed after Miryai.
They went and found that a throne was set up for Miryai on the
bank of Euphrates. A white standard was for her unfurled and
a book stood upright on her lap. She reads in the Books of Truth
and rouses all worlds from their sleep. She holds in her hand
the staff of Life’s water; the girdle is bound round her loins.
Miryai in humbleness prays and proclaims with wondrous voice.
The fishes gather out of the sea, the birds’ from the mouth of
Kuphrates. They come to hear Miryai’s voice, and no more long
to lie down to sleep. They breathe in the sweet scent around her
and forget the world.


1 Mentioned also in $32, but unexplained.

2 In the Lud (cp. note on R. Eliezar, founder of the Lud school in $18,
p. 34) Ben Stada Talmiid Jesus stories, Jeshu is stoned and hanged on
a stake afterwards (see D. J. L. 100 B.C. ?—pp. 176tf.). It was the custom
for the dead body after the stoning (e.g. of an adulterer, or of a for-
nicator—+t.e. heretic) to be exposed on a stake or post.

* Gnosis of Life is called the Stranger (sc. to the world) par excellence.

* The MM. were bitterly persecuted. The fellings or slaughterings of the
‘trees’ and the snaring or imprisonment of the ‘doves’ refer to the
martyrdom of the faithful. Cp. the hewing-down of the ‘trees’ in the
Synoptic John-sermon and also the John-Jonah (Dove) word-play.

5 * Fishes ’ and ‘ birds’ are the new ‘ hearers’ of the faith.


68


When the Jews saw this, they stood up before her. They
felt shamed, doubled their fists, smote on the fore-court of their
breast and lamented. The mother of Miryai spake, and tears
streamed into her bosom.

“Took on me, Miryai, my daughter,” says she unto her;
“Jook on me who am thy mother! My daughter art thou and the
daughter of all of the priests. Thy head is the great chief of the
temple. Rememberest thou not, Miryai, that the Torah lay on
thy lap? Thou didst open it, read therein and knewest what
stands init. The outer keys lay in thy hands, and the inner thou
didst put in chains.’ All the priests and priests’ sons came and
kissed thy hand. For whom thou wouldst, thou didst open the
door; whom thou wouldst not, must turn and go back to his seat.
A thousand stand there and two thousand sit there. They submit
themselves to thee, as a eunuch-made slave, and they give ear to
thy word in Jerusalem. Why didst thou forget thy brothers and
thy heart abandon the priests? Lo, the brides weep in Judea,
the women and men in Jerusalem. Their beloved gold have they
cast from them, and they give themselves up to wailing and
mourning for thee. They say: ‘We will make away with our
goods, until Miryai returns. Gold forge we [? no longer], and cast
away fair raiments of silk and bracelets (?).’ They stand on the
roofs and look out, that they may see thee again in Jerusalem.
For thee they make vows, if thou comest to me and we go hence.
My daughter, arise, come back to thy dwelling-place, the city
Jerusalem. Come, light up thy lamps, which have been put out
from the day when thou withdrewest thyself.” Have no longing
after this man, who has prisoned thee and taken thee off. Leave


1 Presumably kept hidden, or made conditions concerning their revelation.


* Compare with the above eloquent invitation to return the similar
motive in the Talmitd Jesus stories: (1) ‘‘ When King Jannai directed the
destruction of the Rabbis, R. Joshua ben Perachiah and Jeshu went to
Alexandria. When security returned, R. Simeon ben Shetach sent him
a letter to this effect: ‘From me, Jerusalem the holy city, to thee,
Alexandria in Egypt, my sister. My spouse tarries in thee, and I dwell
desolate’” (Bab. Sanhedrim, 107b, Sota, 47a). (2) “The inhabitants of
Jerusalem intended to appoint Jehuda ben Tabbai as Nasi [Prince or
President of the Sanhedrim] in Jerusalem. He fied and went away to
Alexandria, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem wrote: ‘From Jerusalem the
Great to Alexandria the Little: How long lives my betrothed with thee,
whilst I am sitting grieving for him?’” (Pal. Chagiga, 77d). See my
D.J.L 100 B.C. ?—pp. 187#f., 148ff.—for a discussion of these passages. Can
Tabbai possibly in any way connect with the Tab-Yomin of the Portents-
piece § 18?


69


the man, who is not of thy dwelling-place,' alone by himself in the
world. Let him not say: I have gone and carried off Miryai from
her place. Come, teach the children, so that they may learn. Lay
the Torah in thy lap and let us hear thy voice as it used to be.
From the moment and the day when thou didst detach the dough’
has it been covered up a

When Miryai pie this pal her mother, she laughed and
rejoiced in her mind. “It surely could not be the Jews,’ says she
unto her, “the infamous, worthless priests! It surely would not
be the Jews who stand there and bow down to a brick-grave !”
They shall be buried in the Darkness.

“Go, go,” says she unto them, “ye fools, ye abortions,’ ye who
were not of the world. I am no woman who is stripped for
wantoning; and it is not that I have fallen in love with a man.
Stripped am I not for returning to you and for again seeing you,
doming of blasphemy. Go, go hence from me, ye who have
witnessed falsehood and lying against me. Against me ye wit-


99


1 Clearly indicating that the Manda was originally not Jewish.


2 Heb. hallah, the priests’ share of the dough. Cp. Lev. xv. 20, 21:
“Of the first of your dough (marg. coarse meal) ye shall offer up a cake for
a heave-offering.”


8 Cp. L.’s note (p. 114’), referring to the above-quoted (p. 68, n. 2) Talmid
passage (1), where the same bowing down is recorded of Jeshu, namely:
‘he set up a brick-bat and worshipped it.” LL. again prefers to render the
two words here as ‘vault’ simply. The Talmitid puzzle has never been
solved ; but the passage of the J. B. above (p. 55) connects it with a coffin, and
strongly suggests an Egyptian atmosphere. Cp. now what Josephus
(Antigq. I. ii.; Cory’s An. Fragg. pp. 171, 172), Hebraizing the Egyptian
tradition, says of the Sons of Séth (=Sothis=Sirius), how ‘“ they made two
{kinds of] monuments, one of brick and the other of stone, and on each
engraved their discoveries.’”’ This passage is from Manetho’s lost work
Sothis, on the authenticity of which and its implications, I would refer the
reader to my lengthy researches in Thrice-greatest Hermes, i. 99-127: the
above passage will be found on p. 114. From this I would venture to
suggest that the Talmid charge against Jeshu of learning ‘ magic’ in Egypt
is reflected in the queer term ‘brick-bat’ or ‘bricking.’ According to
Manetho’s legend or tradition the most ancient lore of the priests, of the
period of the First Thoth or Hermes, before the Flood, was preserved in the
most primitive brick pyramids. The pyramids were originally tombs. That
my suggested version is in the right direction is borne out by the following
sentence of the text: ‘They shall be burved in the Darkness.”


‘ A common Gnostic figure, appearing frequently in Manicheism. In
the Christianized Gnosis it is the technical term for the unripe birth from
Achamoth, the Wisdom Without. For the most interesting echo in the N.T.
cp. Paul’s famous utterance: ‘And last of all he appeared unto me also,
as unto ‘the Abortion’ ’—sc. of whom you have all heard.


> This is presumably ironical = “ who thought that ye were not of this
world.”


70


nessed wantonness and thieving, and held me up as ye are your-
selves. Blessed be the Man who freed me from my fetters and
planted my feet here. No wantonness have I committed with
him and attempted no theft in the world. Instead of the witness
ye have witnessed against me, there came to me prayer and
praise-giving.”’

As the priests stand there and speak with Miryai at the
mouth of Euphrates, there came a pure eagle-bird, whose wings
are the fulness of worlds.’ He flew down on the Jews, dashed at
them with his wings, bound them and sank them down unto the
water’s bottom, deeper [down] than the foul-smelling mud. He
sank them deeper down than the blazing [water], that is inside
the dark water. He sank their ships down to the blazing water’s
bottom. He destroyed the temple and laid fire to Jerusalem.”

He brought downfall upon them and in Jerusalem slew the
disciples.

He descended unto her (Miryai), folded before her his wings,
settled down by her, narrated and proclaimed to her; and they
held out the loved hand of Truth to each other. He embraced her
in potent embracing, forced her down and set her on the throne.

“ Miryai,” he speaks to her, “with favour look upon me,
remember me in the Life’s presence. Iam thy Good Messenger,
the Man, who gives ear to thy discourse. I beseech thee for the
high Truth, the Truth which the Jordans have chosen.”

““O Good Treasure,” she makes answer unto him, “ Treasure
whom Life has sent! Thy glory and thy light has risen upon us,
and thy honour is approved in Light’s region. Hveryone who
gives ear to thy voice, will be in the pure region included. In
Life’s Treasury will he be included and thy rays will rise lover
him] twofold. For everyone who gives not ear to thy voice,
waking and sleep will be wiped out. Let him belong to the Jews,
to the slaves and all of the priests, the sons of the Harlot. I and
thou will circle aloft and victorious mount to Light’s region.”


May Life be our pledge, and Life is victorious.


1 That is, presumably, fill the whole of the worlds in their span.


2 The MM. evidently believed that the destruction of Jerusalem was
a retribution for the persecution of their community.


Il11—SOME TYPICAL EXTRACTS.


UNDER the first two headings readers have been made
acquainted with all those pieces from the Mandan
John-Book that can be held to have in any sense
a historic intention. To these are now added a few
extracts of such specimens of the rest of the contents
as do not require a commentary.

We will begin with ‘The Fisher of Souls’ tractate
from the John-Book. It seems to me to throw great
light on the symbolic phrase of the gospels, indeed to
give it a background, and not to be explained in reverse
order as the Mandzan expansion of an isolated Christian
expression.


THE FISHER OF SOULS SAGA (§§ 36-39)'.


In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


A FISHER am I, a Fisher who elect is among fishers. A Fisher
am I who among the fishers is chosen, the Head of all catchers
of fish. I know the shallows of the waters, the inner :
and the . . . I fathom; I come to the net-grounds, to the
shallows and all fishing-spots, and search the marsh in the dark
all over. My boat is not cut off [from the others] and I shall
not be stopped in the night.

I see the fish’ in (? on) the dike. I pressed forward on the
way witha .. . that was notofiron. I covered (?) the
which was for us an obstruction. Aside did I push the swimmers


' This section is the most difficult of all to translate owing to the
abundance of technical fishing terms. In spite of marvellous philological
industry and wide-flung enquiries L. has been unable to identify a number
of words.


2 Sc. the faithful.


72


who hinder Life’s way. On my headI seLupa . . . in whose
shadow the fish sit. The fisher-trident which I have in my hand,
is instead a margnad select, a staff of pure water, at whose sight
tremble the fishers.

I sit in a boat of glory and come into this world (Tibil) of the
fleeting. I come to the water’s surface; thither to the surface
of the water I drew, and I drew to the crossing’s surface. I come
ina . . . ,inslow, steady course. The water by my boat is
not ruffled, and no sound of my boat is heard. Before me stands
Hibil (Abel), at my side Shitil (Seth) of sweet name is to be seen,
close by me, close in front of me, Anésh (Enoch) sits and proclaims.

They say: “O Father, Good Fisher, hallo! O Fisher of
loveable name !”

Close by me, close near my boat, I hear the uproar (?) of the
fishers, the fishers who eat fish,’ and their stench rushes on me,—
the uproar of the fishers and the uproar of their mongers who
revile and curse one another. Everyone accuses the other. The
buyer says to the fisher: “ [Take back ?] thy fish! They are
stinking already, and no one wants to buy them off of me. Thou
makest the catch far out at sea, so that loss falls on the
buyer.”

Thereon speaks the fisher and makes the man, his customer,
hear: “A curse on thee, a curse on thy buyers, a curse on thy
bell,’ a curse on thy boat for not filling up. Thou hast brought
no salt and sprinkled it over thy fish which thou boughtest, so
that the fish of thy boat will not be stinking and thou then canst
sell for hard cash. Next, hast thou no meal and no dates brought,
no salt . . . hast thou brought. If then thou comest with
empty hands, one who is of fair favour has no dealing with thee.
Go, go, thou godless [fellow], buy not from us to do business with
thy fraudulent scales. Thou holdest them down to buy at false
weight, [then in selling] keepest them up with thy elbow and
gettest ten for five. Now does thy buying flee away, and thy
buyer, and is as though it never had been. Thou dost complain
of the . . . of men and dost cherish no noble thought.”


1 Sc. the Seven.


2 Lit. ‘on the high sea.’ L. glosses this as meaning that they are not
river fish; but this seems to me unnecessary, as my rendering suggests.


5 Used apparently by the fish-seller for advertising his wares.


73


When the Chief Fisher, the Head of the race of the Living,
the highest of all catchers of fish, heard this, he said to him
(? Anésh): “Bring me my .. . , hand me the squbra,' that
I may make a call sound forth into the marsh, that I may
warn the fish of the depths and scare away the foul-smelling birds
that pursue after my fish. I will catch the great sidmd,’ and
tear off his wings on the spot. I will take from him * * * and
will blow into my squbrad. A true squbrad is it, so that the
water may not mix with pitch.”

When the fishers heard the call, their heart fell down from
its stay. One calls to the other and speaks to him: “Go into thy
inner ground. For there is the call of the Fisher, the Fisher who
eats no fish. His voice is not like that of a fisher, his sgubra not
like our squbrd. His voice is not like our voice, his discourse not
like to this world.”

But the fishers stand there; they seek not shelter in their
inner ground. As the fishers stand there and are thinking it
over, the Fisher came swiftly upon them ; he opened the cast-net,
divided ... . He cast them bound intothe... . He tied
them up with knots. They speak to him: “Free us from our
bonds, so that thy fish may not leap up to our boat. We catch
not those who name thy Name.”

When the fishers thus spake to me, I smote them with a club
made of iron. I bound their traders on the shore which lends
not... (?). I roped them with ropes of bast and broke up
their ships * * * * . I burnt up the whole of their netting and
the. . . which holds the nets together. I threw chains round
them and hung them up aft on my ship’s stern. I made them
take an oath, took from them their mystery, in order that they
may not catch the good fish,—that they may not steal them from
me, stick them on a cane, hang them up,’ cut them in pieces and
throw them into baskets (?) with laurel and aloe. They (the


fishers) are laid low and cannot rise up. The nets... ...,
and they no longer stab the fisher-trident into the Jordan. They
do not cut off * * * * * * and stand not in the river-lands


' Evidently a wind-instrument of some kind.
* Presumably a water-bird.


Sc. to dry in the sun.


74


and make not their catch in the shallows. They cast not the


cast-net therein and take not . .. and aloe.

I spake to those who eat the ... of the fish whose name
is eel. They eat the eel and the... , which stands upright on
its forefeet. They eat the... ... OE tu ag eye ba |


them in the marshes of Deception, and ye were caught and were
tied up. Water from the Ulai they drink not and know not the
way to the Kshash river.. I bound them fast in their ships, and
threw out my ropes to the good ones. To them I speak: “ Draw
your boat up here, so that it runs not into the dike.”

As the Chief of the fish-catchers thus spake, the fishers made
answer unto him and said; “ Blessed be thou, O Fisher, and
blessed be thy boat and thy bark. How fair is thy cast-net, how
fair the yarn that is init. Fair is thy cord and thy lacing, thou
who art not like the fishers of this world. On thy meshes are no
shell-fish, and thy trident catches no fish. Whence art thou
come hither? Tell us! We will be thy hired servants. We will
bake and stir about broth and bring it before thee. Hat, and the
crumbs which fall from thy hand,—these will we eat and therewith
be filled.”

But I made answer unto them: “O ye fishers, who lap up
your filth, no fisher am I who fishes for fish, and I was not formed
for an eater of filth. A Fisher am I of souls who bear witness ta
Life. A Poor Fisher am I who calls to the souls, collects them
together and gives them instruction. He calls to them and bids
them come and gather together unto him. He says unto them:
If ye. . . come, ye shall be saved from the foul-smelling birds
I will save my friends, bring them on high and in my ship make
them stand upright. I will clothe them with vestures of glory
and with precious light will enwrap them. I will put a crown of
ether upon them and what else for them the Greatness erects on
their head. Then sit they on thrones and in precious light do
they glisten.' I bear them thither and raise them aloft; but ye
Seven shall stay here behind. The portion of filth and of filthy


1 K.is the infernal river which the souls have to cross after death; its
waters are figured as dragons and its waves as scorpions (§ 51). Ulai is also
ariver. If it is in any way connected with the Euleus from which the
Kings of Persia are fabled to have drunk, the sense is hard to find. It is
ON Pee an infernal stream, at any rate one from which the evil fishers

rank.


76


doings shall be your portion. On the day when the Light ascends,
the Darkness will return to its region. I and my disciples will
ascend and behold the Light’s region.”


Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the Man
who has come hither.


THE LIGHT-SHIP OF THE FISHER (§ 37).


In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


A FISHER am I of Great Life, a Fisher am I of the Mighty ;
a Fisher am I of Great Life, an Envoy whom Life has sent. It
(Life) spake unto me: “Go, catch fish who do not eat filth, fish
who do not eat water-fennel and reek not of foul-smelling fennel.
They do not come nigh to devour bad dates and get caught in the
nets of the marsh.”

Life knotted for me a noose and built for me a ship that
fades not,—a ship whose wings are of glory, that sails along as in
flight, and from it the wings will not be torn off. ’Tis a well-
furnished ship and sails on in the heart of the heaven. Its ropes
are ropes of glory and a rudder of Truth is there to it. Sunday
takes hold of the pole, Life’s Son seized the rudder. They draw
thither to the shekinahs and dispense Light among the treasures.
Thrones in them (sc. the shekinahs) they set up, and long
drawn out come the Jordans upon them. On the bow are set
lamps that in the wildest of tempests are not put out. All
ships that sight me, make obeisance submissively to me.
Submissively they make me obeisance and come to show their
devotion unto me.

In the bows stands the Fisher and delivers wondrous
discourses. [There are] lamps [there], whose wicks shift not
hither and thither, and a ... is not by him. He wears no
ring of Deception, and with white robes is he clad. He calls to
the fish of the sea and speaks to them: “ Give heed to yourselves
in the world! Beware of the foul-smelling birds who are above
you. If you give heed to yourselves, my brothers, I will for you


76


be a succour,—a succour and a support out of the regions of
Darkness unto Light’s region.”


Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the Man
who has come hither.


THE Goop FiSHER REJECTS THE OVERTURES OF THE EHVIL
ONES AND OVERWHELMS THEM (§ 88).


In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


THE Fisher clad him with vestures of glory, and an axe hung
from his shoulder ... ... and commotion of mischief, and
a bell is not on the handle.’ When the fishers caught sight of
the Fisher, they came and gathered around him. “Thou art,”
say they unto him, ‘a ... Fisher, thou who hast caught no
fish of the marsh. Thou hast not seenthe ... ... in which
thectiah eauher tye ys oe ee - 0 bee. e) Werwill maikeapiee
familiar with the fishers ; He our great partner and take a share
as we [do]. Grant us a share in thy ship, and take thou a share
in our ship. A bargain! Take from us as partner and grant us
a share in thy ship. Grant us a share and we will give thee
a share in what we possess. Join thy ship with ours and clothe
thee in black as we [do], so that, if thou holdest thy lantern on
high, thou mayst find something, that the fish may not see thy
glory and thy ship may take in fish. If thou dost give ear (to us),
thou shalt catch fish, throw them into thy ship and do business.
If thou givest no ear to our discourse, thou shalt eat salt; but
if thou doest our works, thou shalt eat oil and honey. Thou
stirrest a broth, thou fillest a bowl and sharest it with all of the
fishers. We appoint thee as head over all of us. The fishers
gather together beside thee, the first follow behind thee; they
will be thy slaves, and thou takest three shares of what falls to
our share. Our father shall be thy servant and we will call
ourselves thy bondsmen. Our mother shall sit on thy couch (?)


‘ Uncertain. Pére Anastase of Baghdad informs L. that now-a-days a
bell is attached to the rudder-bar; but here it seems to have some connection
with the axe.


17


and net nets, she shall be thy maid-servant and knit for thee yarns
of all kinds. She shall space out the floats of cedar and put the
lead-sinkers into the meshes,—meshes, meshes which are then
more heavy than all of the world. She shall divide the water
by means of the yarns, and when the fish run into them they
shall be stopped. Then they know not the way that they seek,
and have no wit to turn back to their way. Like walls that
collapse, they (the nets) come and fall on the good. They do not
let the fish rise, nor turn their face to the boulders. They make
them sink deep under the mud and shut them into
"ae ae They collect them into heaps and shake them (2) tie
ofthe ... ... . Thereistherea ... ...,into which the
fish dash and are stopped. On the ... ofthe ... wattle-
work is set up between two machines. Nets are laid down and

: . , which are filled with bad dates as bait, which cause
en to eat death. Woe to the fish who is blinded by them,
whose eye sees not the Light. Wise are the fish who know them.
They pass by all of the baits. [The others] repair thither and

. , and the nets will be for them there a lodging. One of
a thousand sees it and of two thousand two see it. Its ... is
closed, and a bell is hung on its side-door,—a bell that is forged
in mischief and catches the whole of the world. There, is the
water mingled with fennel ...... ... ... the pegs (?)
of death. Woe to the fish who fall int andi

When the Fisher heard this, he stamped on the bows of the
ship. The Fisher stamped on the ships of the fishers; the fishers
lie in the shallows close crowded together, tied up together like
bundles of wheat, and cannot rise up. The reeds swish ...,
and the fish of the sea lie over the fishers. They snarl in the
marsh and the water rings them round in its circle (?).

Then shrilling he spake with his voice. He discoursed with
his voice sublime and spake to the catchers of fish: ‘ Off from me,


' L. suggests so as to seek the spawning places or in order to hide
themselves.


® The numerous gaps which have to be left owing to uncertainty of
translation make a number of the above sentences unintelligible. The
concluding paragraphs are presumably an allegory of the attractions of false
religions, and can hardly be thought to be part of the speech of the fishers.


Presumably as the waves made by the foundering ships reach the
shore.


78


ye foul-smelling fishers, ye fishers who mix poison. Begone,
begone, catch fish, who [eat ?] your own filth. Down with you
to your ... and go to the end of the crossing. I am no Fisher
who catches fish, and my fish are tested. They are not caught
by the hook with bad dates, a mess which [my ?] fish do not eat.
They fall not into the nets that are coloured’ and turn not to
the lamps of the Lie. They sink not down through the mud of
the water, and go not after the ... of Deception. They (? the
nets) divide not the water “ * * * * *, that shall fall on the
good. If the fishers cast o’er them the cast-net, they tear asunder
the net and set themselves free. There will be no day in this
world on which the fishers catch [my ?] fish. There will be no
day in this world on which the dove loves theravens. Accurséd
be ye, ye foul-smelling birds, and accurséd your nest, so that it
may not be filled. Woe to your father Sirma,’ whose bed is in the
reeds. Woe to thee, hungry Safna, whose wings do not dry in this
world.’ Woe to thee, foul-smelling Sagia, thou who seest the fish
and sighest [for them]. He shrieks and cries bitterly, when he
strikes for the fish and misses them. Woe to thee, Arbana.. .,
thou who haulest the fish out of the deeps. Well for him who
frees himself from the talons of those who catch fish. Well for
him who frees himself from the men who are watchers of this
world. Begone, begone with you, ye Planets, be of your own
houses a portion. Water does not mix with pitch, and the Light
is not reckoned as Darkness. The perfect ones’ partner cannot be
called your partner. The good (sing.) cannot belong to the
wicked (pl.) nor the bad to the good. Your ship cannot be tied up
with mine, nor your ring (?) be laid on my ring. There, is the head
of all of you; count yourselves unto his realm! This your crass
father stays stuck in the black water. Your mother, who nets
nets and heavy double machines, have I beaten with the staff
of (living) water and smashed a hole in her head. I lead on my
friends, raise them on high in my ship and guide them past all
the tax-gatherers.’ I guide them through the passage of outrage,


1 The Mandzan colour is white.


2 In the M. text, 146, 12, this is given as Sidma. L. thinks it is
a water-fowl of some kind.


Presumably because it is always diving after its prey.
4 Sc. the Seven.


79


the region where the fishes are taken. I make them escape the
fish-eaters. But ye will come to an end in your dwellings. I and
my friends of the Truth will find a place in Life’s shekinah. Into
the height will I bear them on thrones surrounded with standards
of glory.


The Seven are vanquished and the Stranger-Man stays
victorious. The Man of piety put to the test was victorious and
helped the whole of his race unto victory.


Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the Man
who has come hither.


THE FINAL SUBMISSION OF THE EVIL FISHERS (§ 39).


In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


"TIS the voice of the Pure Fisher who calls and instructs the

fish of the sea in the shallows. He speaks to them: “ Raise your

up, on the surface of the water stand upright; then will

your force be double as great. Guard yourselves from the fishers

who catch the fish and beat on the Jordan.’ Shilmai and Nidbai*

curse them, and they depart and settle themselves down behind

me a mile off. The fish curse their casting-net ... ... in
their place.”

When the Fisher thus spake, warning all [of the fish, when]

the fishers his voice heard, they came up and gathered around

him. They put themselves forward to ask of him questions, and


knew not whence he came. “ Where wast thou, Fisher,” they ask
him, “that we heard not thy voice in the marsh? Thy ship is
not like our ship, andthy ... isnot * * * ** *, Thy ship


is not tarred over with pitch, and thou art not like the fishers of
this world.”


The fishers see him, become scarlet for shame and remain
standing in their places. They say to him: “ Whence comes it


1 Sc. to frighten the fish into the nets.
2 The Jordan- Watchers.


80


that thou dost fish without finding? Thy ship is not like our
ship; it shines by night like the sun. Thy ship is perfected in
eether, and wondrous standards are unfurled above it. Our ship
sails along in the water, but thy ship between the waters. Our
reeds (? rods) grumble at one another and break into pieces.
Among them is the fish-trident of wrath, on which ... and
4 Bre N00, Lay ees , O Fisher, is such that
thes the fish see it, they take soriieieal off. We have not yet
seen any fishers which are like unto thee. The wind wafts thy
ship on, the mast ... ... for the fisher and a rudder that
gleams in the water-shallows. On thy cast-net is no cord, and
they have not laid * round it. There are no
in it, which are a cunning device against the fish of the
pee Thou keepest thy yarn ... ... and hast no
clapper and no hatchet. Thy yarn (=net) fishes not in the water
and is not coloured for catching fish.”

When the fishers thus spake, the Fisher made answer unto
them: “ Have done, ye fishers and fishers’ sons; off, get you gone
from me! Off, go up to your village, the Ruins, Jerusalem. Ask
about me of your father, who knows me, ask of your mother, who
is my maid-servant. Say to him: There is a Fisher in the boat,
in which are four ... . [There is] a rudder, and it stands
there, and a mast ye ” and redemptions:
They lay waste the land of Jerusalem.”

When they heard this from the Fisher who has come hither,
and understood, they spake to him: ‘Have compassion, for:
bearance and mercy on us and forgive us our sins and transgressions.
We are thy slaves, show thyself indulgent towards us. We will
look after thy fish that none of them fails. We will be the
servants of thy disciples, who name thy Name in Truth. We will
continue to look after all who name thy Name.”


Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the Man
who has come hither.


Other pieces set forth such figures as those of ‘ The


Bait of some kind presumably.


Detailing probably the remaining two of the four objects referred to.


81


Heavenly Plough’ and of ‘The Sowers’; but perhaps
the most interesting is the saga of ‘ The Good Shepherd.’
Here again it is difficult to believe that it was derived
from Christian sources; it seems to be as independent
as the Fisher of Souls’ figure. The ‘discourse’ runs
as follows:


THE GOOD SHEPHERD (§ 11).


In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


A SHEPHERD am I who loves his sheep; sheep and lambs I
watch over. Round my neck [I carry] the sheep; and the sheep
from the hamlet stray not. I carry them not to the sea-shore,
that they see not the whirl of the water, may not be afraid of the
water, and if they are thirsty may not drink of the water.’ I bear
them away [from the sea], and water them with the cup of my
hand, until they have drunken their fill. I bring them unto the
good fold; and they feed by my side. From the mouth of
Euphrates, from the mouth of Euphrates the Radiant,’ things of
marvellous goodness I brought them. I brought them myrtle,
white sesame brought them and brought them bright standards.*
I cleansed them and washed them and made them to smell the
sweet odour of Life. I put round them a girdle, at sight of which
the wolves tremble. No wolf leaps into our fold; and of no fierce
lion need they be alarmed. Of the tempest they need not be
frightened; and no thief can break in upon us. A thief breaks
not into their fold; and of a knife’ they need not be anxious.

When my sheep were quietly laid down and my head lay
there on the threshold, a rift was rent in the height and thunder
did thunder behind me. The clouds seized hold one of another,


1 The salt, bitter, water of the sea of death and destruction, as opposed
to the fresh, sweet water, the living water or water of Life.


* Equating with the Heavenly Jordan.
® All symbolic objects in the cult.


Sc. the knife or sword of the Angel of Death.


82


and unchained were the raging tempests. Rain poured down
in sheets and hail that smites elephants low, hail that shatters
the mountains. And the tempests unchain themselves in an hour.’
Seas burst forth; they flooded the whole of the world. There,
under the water, no one escaped, once he sank from the height as
into a gulf. The water swept off everyone who had no wings or
no feet... He speeds on, and knows not he speeds; he goes, and
knows not he goes. Thereupon I sprang up and I entered the
fold to bear my sheep forth from their place. I saw my eyes
full.° I saw the sea, I saw the fierce-raging tempest, I saw the
storm-clouds that send forth no [friendly] greeting the one to the
other. Ten-thousand times ten-thousand dragons are in each
single cloud. I weep for my sheep, and my sheep weep for them-
selves. The little lambs are lamenting who cannot come out of
the fold’s door.

When then * * * * * *, I entered the house, I mounted up
to the highest place [in it], and I call to my sheep. To the
sheep in my care dol call. I pipe to them; I get them to hear,
so that they come unto me. ‘To them I pipe on my pipe, and beat
on my tabour (?), [leading them] to the water.’ I call to them:
“My little sheep, little sheep, come! Rise up at my call! Come,
rise at my call; then will you ’scape the cloud-dragons. Come,
come unto me! I am a shepherd whose boat is soon coming.
My boat of glory is coming; and I come with it, and bring my
sheep and lambs in aboard it. Every one who gives ear to my
call and heed gives unto my voice, and who turns his gaze unto
me, of him take I hold with my hands and bring him unto me in-
board my boat.’”’ But every lamb, male and female, that suffered
himself to be caught, the water-whirl carried away, the greedy
water did swallow. Whoever gave no ear to my call, sank under.
To the highest part of the vessel I went. The bows stand up
with the bow-post.’ I say: How woeful am I for my sheep who


1 This may mean at a certain period or appointed time.
2 The faithful are figured as birds as well as sheep.
* An untranslatable idiom.
4 Sc. of this world.
That is, the living water.


This is conjectural.


83


because of the mud have sunk under. The water-whirl sank
them away from my reach, the swirling whirl of the water. How
grieved am I for the rams whose fleece on their sides has dragged
them down into the deep. How grieved am I for the lambkins
whose bellies have not [yet] been filled fullof milk. Of a thousand,
one I recovered; of a whole generation I found again two. Happy
is he who [stood up?] in the water, and in whose ears no water
has entered. Happy the great rams who have stamped with their
feet. Happy is he who has escaped from the Seven and Twelve,
the sheep-stealers. Happy is he who has not couched down,
has not lain down, has not loved to sleep deeply. Happy is he
who in this defective age of Bishlom’ has stayed whole. Happy
are they who free themselves from the snares of Riha (the
Mother World-Spirit), from the filth and the shame and the
bondage that have no end. My chosen! whoever shall live at the
end of this age of Nirig (Mars), for him let his own conscience be
a support. He will come and mount up to the Radiant Dwelling,
to the region whose sun never sets, and whose light-lamps never
darken.


Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the Man
who has come hither.


THe LOVING SHEPHERDS OF THE GOOD SHEPHERD (§ 12).


In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


A TREASURE calls from without hither and speaks:

“Come, be for me a loving shepherd and watch me a thousand
out of ten thousand.’”—

“So then will I be a loving shepherd for thee and watch thee
a thousand out of ten thousand. But how full is the world of
vileness and sown full of thorns and of thistles ! ”’—

“Come, be for me a loving shepherd and watch mea thousand


' Lidzbarski (p. 465) thinks this refers to the Moslim period. Else-
where we find the parallel phrase ‘age of Bizbat,’ which L. also refers to
Muhammad. But Bizbat is clearly a corrupt form of Baal-Zebul, and
therefore the reference should be more general.


2 Presumably stars.


84


out of ten thousand. I will bring thee then sandals of glory
with them canst thou tread down the thorns and the thistles.
Earth and heaven decay, but the sandals of glory decay not.
Sun and moon decay, but the sandals of glory decay not. The
stars and heaven’s zodiacal circle decay, but the sandals of glory
decay not. The four winds of the [world-] house decay, but the
sandals of glory decay not. Fruits and grapes and trees decay,
but the sandals of glory decay not. All that is made and engen-
dered decays, but the sandals of glory decay not. So then be for
me a loving shepherd and watch me a thousand out of ten
thousand.”’—


‘“T will then be a loving shepherd for thee and watch thee
a thousand out of ten thousand. But if a lion comes and carries
off one, how am I to retrieve him? If a thief come and steals one
away, how am I to retrieve him? If one falls into the fire and is
burnt, how am I to retrieve him? If one falls into the water and
drowns, how am I to retrieve him? If one stays behind in the
pen, how am I to retrieve him ?’’—

““Natheless, come therefore, be for me a loving shepherd
and watch me a thousand out of ten thousand. If a lion comes
and carries off one, let him go his way and fall a prey to the lion.
Let him go his way and fall a prey to the lion, in that he bows
himself down to the sun. If a wolf comes and carries off one let
him go his way and fall a prey to the wolf, in that he bows himself
down to the moon. If a thief comes and steals away one, then let
him go his way and fall a prey to the thief. Let him go his way
and fall a prey to the thief, in that he bows himself down before
Nirig (Mars). If one falls into the fire and is burnt, let him go
his way and fall a prey to the fire. Let him go his way and fall
a prey to the fire, in that he bows himself down to the fire. If
one falls into the mud and stays stuck there, then let him go his way
and fall a prey to the mud. Let him go his way and fall a prey to
the mud, in that he bows himself down to Messiah. If one falls
into the water and drowns, then let him go his way and fall a prey
to the sea. Let him go his way and fall a prey to the sea, in that
he bows himself down to the seas. If one stays behind in the pen,
let him go his way and fall a prey to the pen-demon.’ Let him go


1 Spirit or jinn (?*


S5


his way and fall aprey to the pen-demon, in that he bows himself
down to the idols. ... ...' Come, be for mea loving shepherd
and watch me a thousand out of ten thousand.’”—

“So will I then be for thee a loving shepherd and watch thee
a thousand out of ten thousand. I will watch a thousand of
thousands, yea of ten thousand those who adore him.” ®


“But some of them wander from me. I went up into high
mountains and went down into deep valleys. I went and found
him where he can crop nothing. Of each single sheep I took hold
with my right hand and on the scale did llay him. A thousand
among ten thousand have the [right] weight.”

Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the Man
who has come hither.

The next piece I have selected, treats of the source
of all glory and enlightenment, called the Treasury of
Life, that in which all spiritual powers and blessings
are stored. The origin of the motive is without doubt
the Iranian concept of the hvareno, the divine and
kingly glory. In the Mandzan tradition it has become
highly developed and is frequently personified as
a female greatness. Thus in the Oxford MS. F. it is
spoken of as “the Mother of all the Kings [of the
Light], from whom all worlds have come forth, who
separated herself from the fervency of the Hidden
Mysteries.” Many roles are assigned to this Light of
Life in the complexities of the celestial and cosmic
dramas ; and in the human stage it shines forth as the
glory with which the perfected are vestured and


' A still more degraded form of cult is mentioned, but the meaning
baffles the translator; itis referred to those who bow down before Riha,
here in mockery called ‘ Holy’ Spirit.

2 The above is obscure, especially the ‘pen-demon’ reference. The
general sense, however, seems to be that those who fall away from the
Mandvzean faith are not to be restrained by force, but let go their way.

® Sc. Life. The concluding paragraph runs on without break in the
German, being assigned to the same speaker; but the subject is clearly
changed and the whole spirit is different. The Good Shepherd now seeks
for the lost sheep and does not leave it to perish.


86


crowned. I have chosen the simplest of the narratives
or discourses on the topic. In the still more complex
system of the phase of development represented by
the Pistis Sophia collection there is no mention of the
Treasury of Life, but the Treasury of Light is one of
its most important conceptions. The Mandzan tradi-
tion conserves the echoes of an earlier phase, for it is
indubitably less over-worked.


THE TREASURY OF LIFE (§ 57).
In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


THE Treasury am I, Life’s Treasury (Simath-Haiyé); the
Treasury am I, the Mighty One’s Treasury; the Treasury am
I, Life’s Treasury. A crown was I for the Mighty from everlasting.

The Treasury am I, Life’s Treasury. Ever did I give light to
the treasures and to the shekinahs, and was for adornment to
Jordan. For adornment became I to Jordan, who was from ever-
lasting, through whom the treasures give light. Great [Life]
made me limpid and lucent and made me into a vesture. He
made me into his vesture, which day in and day out ai
measureless praise of the At‘ther.

The Treasury am I, Life’s Treasury. To the King of the
Splendour became I a crown. The treasures shine through my
glory and praise my form beyond measure.

The Treasury am I, Life’s Treasury—I who as adornment
settled down on the King of the Splendour, so that he shone in
his mind, that he became bright and shining, and his form glittered
more than the [light-] worlds. As I (lit. it) gave light and
enlightenment unto the treasures and to the shekinahs [e’en] in —
the AXther, the King laid me as vesture round N‘sab the Radiant.’
N‘’sab the Radiant then took me, brought me and laid me as
vesture o’er Jordan. As vesture o’er Jordan he laid me, through
whom the treasures shine beyond measure.

The Treasury am I, Life’s Treasury. The wicked are blind


In § 9 (p. 89) N. is called the Watcher who has his station in every
region, 2.¢. the Great Watcher.


87


and see not. I call them unto the Light, yet they busy themselves
with the Darkness. “O ye wicked,” I unto them cry, “ ye who
sink down in the Darkness, arise and fall not into the deep.”
I cry unto them; yet the wicked hear not and sink into the great
Sea of the Ending. Therefore was Jordan made a bridge for the
treasures ; a bridge for the treasures became he, while he cut off the
wicked and hurled them into the great Sea of the Ending.

The Treasury am I, Life’s Treasury. A crown I became for
Life’s Gnosis. He bestowed on me the rulership over the treasures
and the shekinahs which are there [yonder].

The Treasury am I, hife’s Treasury. Of the light-worlds
was I the enlightener. Day in and day out they sing praise to
Great [Life], and through me they mount upward and behold the
Light’s region.

The Treasury am I, Life’s Treasury. A vesture for the light-
worlds became I.

(The Treasury] am I, Life’s Treasury. A King for the
Nazoreans became I. I became a King for the Nazoreans, who
through my Name find praise and assurance. Praise and assurance
they find through my Name, and on my Name they mount up and
behold the Light’s region. For the Men of purity put to the test
—[for them] their eye became full of Light. Full of Light was
their eye, and in their heart Life’s Gnosis took seat. Whoever of
me, Life’s Treasury, makes his investment, loves not gold and
silver, loves not gold and possessions, [loves not] food of the body,
and envy with him has no place. Envy found with him no place,
and he did not forget his night-prayer. He forgot not the dis-
courses and writings, and he forsook not his Lord’s word. He
forsook not the prayer of his Father, Life’s Gnosis; wherefor into
the great End-Sea he falls not. He forgot not Sunday, nor did he
neglect the Day’s evening. He forgot not the way of Great [Life,
the way] of wages and alms. He will be rapt away in the night-
prayer, he will be rapt away in shining vestures which have come
from Great [Life]. Treasures for him fill up what falls short,
and what is empty they load for him full. If he bears a pure load,
he is counted with the Men of piety put to the test who separate
themselves [from the world] in the Name of Yawar.’  Life’s


1 Y. is the Helper or Saviour. The shekinah or celestial abode of
Yawar, the Chosen, is the Home of the Blessed (ep. J.B. 1894).


G


88


Treasury rested upon them, to their form it gave light, and for
them a way to Great [Life’s] House has been established.

I have called with clear voice and directed hereto the disciples :
“The vine who bears fruit, doth ascend; who bears none will
here be cut off. Whosoever lets himself be enlightened through
me and instructed, ascends and beholds the Light’s region ; who-
ever does not let himself be enlightened through me and instructed,
is cut off and falls into the great End-Sea.”’


Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the Man
who has come hither.


That the Mandean religion preserves echoes of
a wealth of ancient mythical elements found in
Iranian, Babylonian and Semitic traditions is evident
on all hands. A process of syncretism had presumably
gone on for generations before an impulse from within
caused the blending to assume a distinctively Mandan
form; and when this emerged, the preservation of the
memory of the process had no interest for the faith and
fell back into the depths of the subconscious. At any-
rate the writers or recorders of the tractates throughout
seem honestly persuaded of the complete independence
of their tradition from every other form of religion.
They are for ever proclaiming the blessings of loyalty
to what they claim to be the original, the one and only,
revelation of Truth vouchsafed to the world throughout
the ages, and declaring that continued spiritual contact
with instructors from on high who mediated this divine
wisdom, was still possible. They certainly do not
give one the idea of being intellectualists consciously
at work on a syncretic synthesis of prior material ;
on the contrary they seem to live and move in a milieu
of prophetical outpourings and to have been extremely
sensitive to psychical impressions. Inspirational dis-
courses and intuitive interpretations of prophetical


8Y


utterances seem to have been their delight. The
following piece may enable the reader to sense some-
what of the peculiar atmosphere of mystical expectancy
in which they sought instruction. The topic is one of
the chief points of their questioning—the conflict that
arose between the Light and the Darkness in the
beginnings and how victory is to be achieved. They
were not of course absolute Dualists, for always and
everywhere victory les with Life Everlasting, who
transcends not only the Darkness but also the Light.


IN THE BEGINNING (§ 18).


In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


To you I say and declare, ye chosen and perfect, ye who
dwell in the world: Become not of the Darkness a portion, but
lift up your eyes to Light’s region. From the Evil unto the Good
separate yourselves out; from the sinful evil of the region of
Darkness separate yourselves out. Love and instruct one another,
that your sin and [your] guilt be forgiven you. See and hear and
get you instructed, that ye may ascend to Light’s region victorious.


The good sit there and are in search; and all who are under-
standing let themselves be instructed. The good speak, take
counsel together and say: ‘ Who will come, who tell me, who will
set [it] forth for me, who give me instruction? Who will come,
who will tell me whether there was one King or two [in the
beginning|?’’ The good speak and let themselves be instructed.

“Two Kings were there, two natures were fashioned—a King
of this world and a King from outside of the worlds. The King of
this age girt on a sword and [put on] a crown of Darkness.
A crown of Darkness he put on his head, and took a sword in his
right hand. A sword he took in his right hand; he stands there
and slaughters his sons, and his sons slaughter each other. The
King from outside of the worlds set a crown of Light on his head.
A crown of Light he set on his head, and took Truth in his right
hand. Truth in his right hand he took, and stands there and


90


instructs his sons. He stands there and instructs his sons, and his
sons instruct one another.”

“Whe will come, who tell me what was before this? When
the heaven was not yet outspread and stars were not yet in it
figured, when the earth was not yet condensed and into the water
no condensation had fallen, when sun and moon came not as yet
into this world, how was the soul then ?”

“When the soul still sat in the Bowl,’ she felt neither hunger
nor thirst. When the soul still sat in the Bowl, she had no pains
and no faults. When the soul still sat in the Bowl, she felt no cold
and no heat. When she still sat in the Bowl, the locks on her
forehead’ were incurled, and an sether-crown sat on her head.
Her eyes were light-rays (?), and they gazed on the region of the
House of Great [Life]. Her mouth was of purel[st] perfection,
and sang the praise of the King of Light’s region.

‘From the day when the Wicked began to think, evil pictured
itself forth in him. He fell into great wrath and ventured a fight
with the Light. The Envoy was sent to tread down the power of
the rebels.

“They brought living water and into the muddy water they
poured it. They brought light-giving light and into the gloomful
darkness they cast it. They brought the delightsome wind and
into the frantic wind cast it. They brought the living fire and
into the consuming fire cast it. They brought the soul, the pure
mind, and into the vain body cast it.

“Out of fire and of water was the one heaven spread out.
Out of fire and of water have they made dense the earth on the
anvil. Out of fire and of water fruits, grapes and trees did arise.
Out of fire and of water was imaged the corporeal Adam.

“They fashioned the Envoy and to be head of the generations

1 Kannd. lL. leaves this technical term untranslated; but in note 4 to
p. 4 he shows that it frequently means a wine-cup or wine-bowl. I would
therefore venture to connect it with the widespread notion of the kratér or
mixing-bowl of souls as handed on, for instance, by Plato in the Timeus,
presumably from Hither Asian sources. One of the treatises of the Corpus
Hermeticum is called ‘The Cup’ or ‘The Bowl,’ or alternatively ‘The


Monad.’ It was not only the source of souls, but also the Mind into which
they had to be dowsed for spiritual baptism or regeneration.


2 Presumably the rays of glory, signifying a state of contemplation.
8 The supernal powers.


4T can find no explanation of this occasionally recurring figure; it
indubitably goes back to some ancient myth.


91


they sent him. With heavenly voice he called hence into the
worlds’ disquiet. At the call of the Envoy Adam, who lay there,’
awoke. Adam, who lay there, awoke and went forth to meet the
Envoy: ‘Come in peace, O Envoy, Life’s Messenger, who hast
come from the House of my Father. How firmly is planted withal
dear, beautiful Life in his region! But how [meanly] for me has
a stool been set up and my dark form sits on it lamenting.”

“Thereon the Envoy made answer and spake to the corporeal
Adam: ‘Thy throne has been set up in beauty, O Adam; and ’t is
thy form sits here lamenting. All’ were mindful of thee for thy
good and fashioned and sent me to thee. Iam come and will give
thee instruction, O Adam, and free thee from this world. Give
ear and hearken and get thee instructed, and mount to Light’s
region victorious.”

Adam gave ear and had faith.—Hail to him who gives ear
after thee® and has faith! Adam received the Truth.—Hail to
him who receives the Truth after thee! Adam looked up full of
hope and ascended.—Hail to him who ascends after thee!


Give ear and hearken and let yourselves be instructed, ye
perfect, and ascend to Light’s region victorious.
And praiséd be Life.

That the moral instruction given to the Mandzans
is excellent may be seen in almost any piece; but there
are distinctive collections of ethical exhortation of
which the following is an example.


EXHORTATIONS (§ 47).


From the Light-region have I (Life’s Gnosis) come forth,
from thee, thou glorious dwelling. With vestures of glory have
I been clad and a crown of victory on my head has been set.
I came and found the Nazdéreans, how they stand on the shore of
the Jordan. I set up my throne and sat down, as a father who
sits ’midst his sons.

! In a number of the Gnostic systems of the Early Christian period the
body of the first man is said to lie like a log till the light-spark is breathed
into him.

2 Sc. the heavenly powers.

* Presumably Adam


92


The Good sits there and teaches his sons all truth, in which
is no error.


My sons! See that you commit no adultery ; see that you no
theft commit. They who commit adultery and who steal, mount
not up to Life’s house. They mount not up to Life’s house and
do not behold Light’s region.

My sons! See that you practise no magic and afflict not the
soul in the body. The magicians and falsificators are hurled into
seething pots and fire is their judge.

My sons! See that ye remove not the boundaries, that the
boundary-stone you displace not. The eye of those who remové
boundaries, looks not on the Light.

My sons! See that you do not abandon the slave to the
hands of his master and the slave-girl to the hands of her mistress ;
abandon not the weak to the strong. [He who acts otherwise]
will be fettered in a distant region, in the tax-gatherers’ house; *
his eyes behold only the Darkness and his foot finds no firm
ground.

My sons! See that you take not [to wife] a slave-girl who
has not been made free, and thereby bring your sons into the
house of a master. For if the slave one day sins, then on the day
when his master passes judgment upon him, will the sins which
the slave commits, fall on the head of his father.

My sons! See that you are not hinters and that your eyes
make no suggestions [sc. to women]. For the hinters and wink-
givers will be assigned to the guard-stations. To the guard-stations
will they be assigned and be judged with stern justice.

My sons! See that you eat not up interest and interest on
interest, else in the dark mountain will you receive judgment.

My sons! See that you pay no homage to the idols, the satans
and demons, to the worship of idols:and to the lusts of this
world; for on the godlings and satans will a stern judgment fall,
and they who pray to them will not ascend to Life’s house and not
look on Light’s region.

Give heed to what I have charged you, and let no evidence be
given of crime and of lying; on evidence of crime and of lying you
will be haled to account ’fore the judge. You will be haled to


' The region of the lower world-rulers.


93


account ’fore the judge who judges all worlds. He judges each one
according to his works and his merit.

My sons! All that is hateful to you, do not to your neigh-
bours; for ‘in the world into which you have come, is a heavy
justice and judgment. Heavy justice and judgment is there
therein, and every day will minds made secure in it be chosen.
For everyone who is laden, mounts upward; but he who is empty
is judged here. Woe to the empty, who stands empty there in
the house of the collectors of taxes. When he had it in his hand,
he gave nothing; there will he search in his pocket and he will
find nothing. The wicked and liars will be hurled into the Dark-
ness. They will into the blazing fire cast, into the blazing fire
will they cast him into whose ears the call has been made, but he
would not give ear. I showed it him unto his eye, but he would
not see; I showed it him, but he would not see with his eye.


Life is victorious, and victorious is the Man who has come
hither.


The Mandzans possess a rich collection of litur-
gical songs and hymns which Lidzbarski has translated
for the first time in his excellent edition of them
(Manddische Lnturgien, Berlin, 1920). From these
236 hymns we choose one of the most typical as
a& specimen, and as perhaps of more than ordinary
interest to the general reader who may have puzzled
over the unqualified beatitude ‘‘ Blessed are the poor.”
It is taken from the Oxford Collection (Bk. I., No. lvi.)
and may be entitled:


THE SONG OF THE POOR’S EXALTATION.
In the Name of Great Life may hallowed Light be glorified.


A Poor MAN am I,’ who comes out of the [celestial] Fruits,
a Stranger to the world, who comes out of the Distance.
' Or “One of the Poor am I.” Compare the Ebionim or Poor of early


Christianity ; the Poor (spiritually) are those who have voluntarily renounced
this world’s goods.


94


A Poor man am J, to whom Great Life gave ear,
a Stranger to this world, whom the Light-treasures made
world-strange.
They brought me out of the abode of the good ones ;
ah me! in the wicked ones’ dwelling they made me to dwell.
Ah me! they made me to dwell in the wicked ones’ dwelling,
which is filled full of nothing but evil.
It is filled full of nothing but evil,
filled full of the fire which consumes.
I would not and will not
dwell in the dwelling of naughtness.
With my power and with my enlightening
I dwelt in the dwelling of naughtness.
With my enlightening and my praise-giving
I kept myself stranger to this world.
I stood among them
as a child who has not a father,
As a child who has not a father,
as a fruit who has not a tender.
I hear the voice of the Seven,
who whisper in secret and say :
“Whence is this Stranger man,
whose discourse is not like to our discourse ?
I listened not to their discourse ;
then were they full of wicked anger against me.
Life, who gave ear to my call,
a Messenger sent forth to meet me.
He sent me a gentle Treasure,
an armoured, well-armoured Man.
With his pure voice he makes proclamation,
as the Treasures make in the House of Perfection.
He speaks :
“ Poor one, from anguish and fear be thou free!
Say not: I stand here alone.
For thy sake, O Poor,
this firmament was outspread,
Was this firmament spread out,
and stars were pictured upon it.
For thy sake, O Poor,
this firm land came into existence,


95


Came into existence this firm land,
the condensing took form, fell into the water.
For thy sake came the sun,
for thy sake the moon was revealéd.
For thy sake, O Poor, came the Seven,
and the Twelve are hither descended.
Thou Poor one! On thy right rests glory,
on thy left rest [light-] lamps.
Hold steadfast in thy security,
until thy measure has been completed.
When thy measure has been completed,
I will myself come to thee.
I will bring thee vestures of glory,
so that the worlds will long for them, desireful.
I will bring thee a pure, excellent head-dress,
abundant in infinite light.
I will set thee free from the wicked,
from the sinners will I deliver thee.
I will make thee dwell in thy shekinah
free thee into the region unsullied.”’
I hear the voice of the Seven,
who whisper in secret and speak :
““ Blessed is he who is to the Poor one a father,
who is unto the Fruit a tender.
Hail to him whom Great Life knows,
woe to him whom Great Life knows not.”
Hail to him whom Great Life knew,
who has kept himself stranger to this world,
The world of the defect,
in which the Planets are seated.
They sit on thrones of rebellion
and drill their works with the scourge.
For gold and for silver are they disquiet,
and strife they cast into the world.
Disquiet are they and therein cast strife ;
therefore will they go hence and seethe in the fire.
The wicked shall seethe, and their pomp
shall vanish and come to an end.
But I with my offspring and kindred
shall ascend and see the Light’s region,


96


The region whose sun never sets,
and whose light-lamps never darken—
That region, the state [of the Blessed],
whereto your souls are called and invited.


And so are our good brothers’ souls,
and the souls of our faithful sisters.


Life is exalted and is victorious, and victorious is the
Man who has come hither.


III.


THE SLAVONIC JOSEPHUS’ ACCOUNT
OF THE BAPTIST AND JESUS.


In The Antiquities of the Jewish historian Flavius
Josephus there are three passages of outstanding
importance for Christian readers, seeing that they are
the only external witnesses to Christianity from the
first century. As such they have been submitted to
the closest cross-examination and scrutiny. The
general result of the enquiry into the authenticity
of their testimony has established for most scholars
the judgment, that we have here to deal not with
a homogeneous body of evidence, but with three
different witnesses, one of which is distinctly good,
another as distinctly bad, and a third very probably
good. The passage on John the Baptist is well-nigh
universally accepted as affording no grounds for
reasonable scepticism, and as_ therefore providing
a most valuable external proof that John was a
historical character. The account of Jesus, on the
other hand, has been called into most serious question
by the vast majority of liberal scholars, and by very
many conservatives, on numerous grounds, and chiefly
because the writer unequivocally affirms that Jesus
was the Messiah,—a statement which no Jew could
have made. The third is a reference to James, the
brother of Jesus ‘called’ or ‘said to be Messiah ’—a


hesitation which may fairly be ascribed to Josephus
97


98


himself. Many then who reject the Jesus-passage as in-
dubitably spurious, accept the James-reference as free
from reasonable suspicion, and thus obtain a brief but
valuable external first-century evidence for earliest
Christianity. |

Josephus composed his Antiquities in Greek, and
completed them in 93/94 a.D. They are a general
survey of the traditions and history of his people up
to the special period of which he had already treated
in detail in his first and most famous work, The Jewish
War. In describing there the events which led up
to the outbreak of the revolt, he treats of all the other
religious and political movements in Palestine, even
the most insignificant, contemporary with the begin-
nings of Christianity, and yet he says not a single
word about the Baptist or Jesus. This is a very
striking and puzzling omission. Where precisely we
should expect to find such mention, and where far
greater opportunities occur for bringing it in than in
The Antiquities, we are confronted with ‘the silence ~
of Josephus.’ The War was first of all composed in
Aramaic and circulated among the Jews of Palestine
and Babylonia, doubtless to convince them of the
futility of resisting the might of the Roman arms.
Of this original edition, however, no trace has so far
been discovered. The work known to us is in Greek.
It is not a translation so much as a re-composition
very carefully prepared on the models of Greek history ;
and in this Josephus sought the help of Greek stylists.
It reads indeed like an original composition; what-
ever the Aramaic contained, the work as it now stands
has been clearly adapted to suit the mentality of the
wider public of the Greco-Roman world and the
literary circles of the day to whom it was presented.


99


This Greek edition was composed between 75 and 79
A.D. It is of course not impossible to suppose that in
the Aramaic there may have been reference to the
John- and Jesus- movements. But why then should
Josephus have cut them out, when there is an indubi-
table passage concerning John and a highly probable
reference to Jesus in The Antiquities ? To conjecture
a satisfactory answer to this dilemma is exceedingly
difficult; it remains an unsolved crux. For had there
been any such passages in the Aramaic edition of the
War, surely Christian apologists would have seized
upon them and insisted that they should be restored
to the Greek text ?—unless by chance they contained
matter they would not like to see in wider circulation.

That clear light will ever be thrown on this
‘silence of Josephus’ problem is hardly to be expected.
Nevertheless the subject may be said to have recently
entered on a new phase: certain hitherto unknown
material has been brought forward, which has forced
the problem once more into the arena of controversy ;
and it may very well be that in the future this new
material will have always, directly or indirectly, to
be taken into consideration whenever the familiar
Josephean passages are reviewed or rediscussed.

There is extant in a number of MSS. a Slavonic
or Old Russian translation of the War. In this
version there are no less than eight pieces referring
to John the Baptist (8), Jesus (4) and the first
Christians (1). These remarkable passages, of which
the Greek text shows no trace, have been excerpted and
the Slavonic text of them critically established by the
collation of four MSS.

In the first place it is agreed on all hands by the
German scholars who have investigated them, that


100


these pieces were not originally composed in Slavonic
and interpolated into the translation. Not only is the
style foreign to correct Slavonic idiom, but the peculiar
nature of the contents is so alien to Slavonic mentality,
that to suppose so late a writer as a Slavonic
translator, who could at the very earliest be assigned
only to the 10th century, is out of the question. They
are indubitably translations,.and moreover clearly
rendered from Greek. This is shown not only by the
construction of the sentences in general, but also by
the clumsiness and uncertainty of the translator in
his rendering of particles and conjunctions; moreover
the Greek original for the veil or curtain of the temple
(katapetasma) is retained.

These eight pieces were excerpted from the rest
of the text and first made accessible for the general
world of scholarship, in German translation, by
A. Berendts, in 1906.'

The consensus of learned opinion in Germany
(and elsewhere apparently no notice whatever has been
taken of the ‘find’) from the start has been entirely
unfavourable to their authenticity. That is to say, no
one has so far ventured to claim them for Josephus
himself. They were immediately and almost unani-
mously dismissed as transparent Christian forgeries,
and that too of a late date and of no sort of historic
value of any kind. Here and there, however, were
signs of some hesitation in endorsing so wholesale and
precise a verdict; for a few, the matter seemed not so
simple as it appeared at first sight. The first caveat
was entered and the subject brought into a new
perspective by R. Seeberg in a somewhat popular but


1* DieZeugnisse vom Christentwm im slavischen * De bello judaico” des
Josephus ’—Texte und Untersuchungen, N.F. xiv. 4.


10]


highly suggestive treatment, which he boldly entitled
‘A New Source for the Karliest History of Christianity.”
Though Seeberg’s reputation as a_ specialist on
questions of origins forbade the rejection of his view
as that of an irresponsible eccentric, no attention was
paid to it, perhaps because he had not attempted to
work out his theory in detail. This task, however,
was speedily undertaken by Johannes Frey, of the
University of Dorpat, who had just published a very
valuable and thorough-going study of the History of
the Passion. In 1908 Frey produced a substantial
volume,’ in which he treated the material to an acute
analysis and with minute elaboration, and in other
respects showed a remarkable grasp of all the puzzling
complexities of a whole series of problems which an
intensive scrutiny of the passages brought out.

In the first place Frey called attention to the fact
that the general characteristics of these pieces were
very different from those of all other ancient Christian
forgeries known to us. His main contention through-
out this very thorough enquiry is that the author,
whoever he may have been precisely, must be held in
general to be a Jew and not a Christian. There is no
evidence of direct dependence on early canonical
Christian literature, no sign that he had any acquain-
tance with the precision of written tradition. In so far
as there is agreement with the Gospels or Acts, it is
only in respect to the barest generalities; there is
nothing even to show acquaintance with the precise
inner oral traditions of the Christians themselves. It
is all set forth from an external standpoint. Neverthe-


1 * Hine neue Quelle zwr Geschichte des Urchristentums,’ in the periodical
Reformation, 1906, NNr. 19 and 20.

2 Der slavische Josephusbericht iiber die wrchristliche Geschichte nebst
seimen Parallelen, Dorpat, 1908.


102


less the writer is not simply fabricating freely out of
his imagination. He has traditional material of some
sort to goon. He is trying to set forth what he has
heard and gathered, and what at times puzzles him
considerably. He reports opinion—what people say;
some this, others that. He would also play the part
of the impartial historian, considering probabilities
and even possibilities. He is not a hostile critic by
any means; on the contrary, he is in general sym-
pathetic. Indeed he regards both John and Jesus as
outstanding personalities, even astonishingly so, and
his sympathies are enlisted for them because he thinks
they have both been most unjustly done to death.
His attitude is thus in general that of a friendly
Jewish outsider—a very difficult part for a convinced
Christian to play without betraying himself in some
fashion as a believer in the full Christian claims. He,
however, nowhere asserts that Jesus was the Messiah.
Frey’s main contention, then, following Seeberg, is
that the writer worked on Jewish general popular oral
sources; in other words, he had at his disposal tradi-
tions proximate to the occurrences, and therefore
worthy of attention as giving a picture of an early
outside view of nascent Christianity.

Seeberg thinks that Christian manipulation must
be admitted in three or four places; but Frey tries to
show that he is here mistaken. Frey is perhaps not
sufficiently cautious in thus leaving no loophole. But
even with this qualification, if the main contention
of both scholars can stand, the possibility of our being
faced with early external traditions of some kind is
a matter of quite extraordinary interest, and deserves
the careful attention of all students of Christian
beginnings.


103


As practically nothing is known of these passages
by English readers, it may be of service to present
those few of them who see this study, with a transla-
tion of the German version of these eight extracts.
They may then judge for themselves how the contents
strike them. But whatever may be their opinion as
to their value or worthlessness, it cannot be denied
that every scrap of material, however intractible, that
can be held by any trained mind to contain the
possibility of having even the remotest bearing on the
surroundings of earliest Christianity, possesses a
unique interest and fascination of its own; for the
first century is otherwise practically silent outside the
New Testament documents.

The version that follows is made from the German
translation given in Frey’s volume; I have, however,
added the sub-titles. It is literal and clumsy, like the
German, which faithfully follows the Slavonic. The
variant readings in the MSS. are slight, and I have
not noted them in detail. Jor the present paper is
intended for the general reader solely, and not for the
specialist, who must deal at first hand with Frey’s
technical exposition, which, as far as I am aware, has
not yet been disposed of, or indeed in any way
answered.


I.


JOHN’S PROCLAMATION AND HIS REBUKE OF THE
AUTHORITIES.


(Follows on B. J. II. vii. 2.)


1. Now at that time a man went about among the Jews in
strange garments; for he had put pelts on his body everywhere
where it was not covered with his own hair; 2. indeed to look at
he was like a wild man.

H


104


3. He came to the Jews and summoned them to freedom,
saying: “ God hath sent me, that I may show you the way of the
Law, wherein ye may free yourselves from many holders of power.
4, And there will be no mortal ruling over you, only the Highest
who hath sent me.” 5. And when the people had heard this, they
were joyful. And there went after him all Judea, that lies in the
region round Jerusalem. )

6. And he did nothing else to them save that he plunged
them into the stream of the Jordan and dismissed them, instruct-
ing them that they should cease from evil works, and [promising]
that there would [then] be given them a ruler who would set
them free and subject to them all that is not in submission;
but no one of whom we speak (?),’ would himself be subjected.
7. Some reviled, but others got faith.

8. And when he had been brought to Archelaus and the
doctors of the Law had assembled, they asked him who he is and
where he has been until then. 9. And to this he made answer
and spake: “I am pure; [for] the Spirit of God hath led me on,
and [I live on] cane and roots and tree-food.” 10. But when they
threatened to put him to torture if he would not cease from those
words and deeds, he nevertheless said: “It is meet for you [rather]
to cease from your heinous works and cleave unto the Lord your
God.”

11. And there rose up in anger Simon, an Esszean by extrac-
tion, a scribe, and he spake: “We read every day the divine
books. 12. But thou, only now come from the forest like a wild
animal,—thouw darest in sooth to teach us and to mislead the people
with thy reprobate words.” 138. And he rushed forward to do
him bodily violence. 14. But he, rebuking them, spake: “I will
not disclose to you the mystery which dwelleth in you, for ye have
not desired it. 15. Thereby an untold calamity is come upon you,
and because of yourselves.”

16. And when he had thus spoken, he went forth to the other


1 This is uncertain. It seems to mean ‘no one who had ceased from
evil works.” This clause, however, which comes at the end of the sentence
in the Slavonic, may belong to the next sentence; in which case it would
read: ‘‘ At his words some reviied, etc.” (p. 33, n. 1).


? Ger. Holzspdne, ‘ chips,’ ‘shavings,’—a quite impossible meaning. It
occurs again at the end of § III.


105


side of the Jordan; and while no one durst rebuke him, that one
did what [he had done] also heretofore.


II.
His INTERPRETATION oF PuHturp’s DREAM.
(Follows on B. J. II. ix. 1.)


1. While Philip was [still] in possession of his dominion, he
saw a dream,—how an eagle tore out both his eyes. 2. And he
summoned all his wise men. 38. But when each interpreted the
dream differently, there came to him suddenly, without being
summoned, that man of whom we have previously written, that
he went about in skins of animals and cleansed the people in the
waters of the Jordan. 4. Andhespake: “Give ear to the word of
the Lord,—the dream which thou hast seen. 5. The eagle—that
is thy venality; because that bird is violent and _ rapacious.
6. And that sin will take away thy eyes—which are thy dominion
and thy wife.” 7 And when he had thus spoken, Philip died
before evening and his dominion was given to Agrippa.


Il.


His PERSISTENT REBUKING OF AGRIPPA AND HIS
EXECUTION.


(Follows immediately on the preceding.)


1. And Herod, his brother, took his wife Herodias. 2. And
because of her all the doctors of the Law abhorred him, but durst
not accuse him before his face.

8. But only that one whom they called a wild man, came to
him in anger and spake: “ Why hast thou taken the wife of thy
brother? 4. As thy brother hath died a death void of pity, thou
too wilt be reaped off by the heavenly sickle. 5. God’s decree will
not be silenced, but will destroy thee through evil affliction in
foreign lands. 6. For thou dost not raise up seed for thy brother,
but gratifiest thy fleshly lust and committest adultery, seeing that
four children of him are alive.”

7. Now when Herod heard [this], he was filled with wrath
and commanded that they should beat him and drive him away.
8. But he accused Herod incessantly wherever he found him, and


106


right up to the time when he (H.) put him under arrest and gave
orders to slay him.

9. Now his disposition (or character) was extraordinary and
his mode of life not that of a man; indeed just like a bodiless
spirit, thus did this one too continue. 10. His lips knew no
bread; not even at Easter [? orig. Passover] did he taste un-
leavened bread, saying that, in remembrance of God who had
freed the people from slavery, it was given for eating in the flight,
for the way was in haste. To wine and intoxicating drink he let
himself not even draw near. And every animal he abhorred [as
food], and every wrong he rebuked, and tree-produce served him
for use.


IV.
THE MInistry, TRIAL AND CRUCIFIXION OF JESUS.
(Follows on B. J. II. ix. 8.)


1. At that time also a man came forward,—if even it is fitting
to call him a man [simply]. 2. His nature as well as his form
were a man’s; but his showing forth was more than [that] of
aman. 38. His works, that is to say, were godly, and he wrought
wonder-deeds amazing and full of power. 4. Therefore it is not
possible for me to call hima man [simply]. 5. But again, looking
at the existence he shared with all, I would also not call him an
angel.

6. And all that he wrought through some kind of invisible
power, he wrought by word and command.

7. Some said of him, that our first Lawgiver has risen from
the dead and shows forth many cures and arts. 8. But others
supposed [less definitely] that he is sent by God.

9. Now he opposed himself in much to the Law and did not
observe the Sabbath according to ancestral custom. 10. Yet, on
the other hand, he did nothing reprehensible nor any crime; but
by word solely he effected everything.

11. And many from the folk followed him and received his
teachings. 12. And many souls became wavering, supposing that
thereby the Jewish tribes would set themselves free from the
Roman hands.

13. Now it was his custom often to stop on the Mount of
Olives facing the city. 14. And there also he avouched his cures


107


to the people. 15. And there gathered themselves to him of
servants (Knechten) a hundred and fifty, but of the folk a multitude.

16. But when they saw his power, that he accomplished
everything that he would by word, they urged him that he
should enter the city and cut down the Roman soldiers and Pilate
and rule over us. 17. But that one scorned it.

18. And thereafter, when knowledge of it came to the Jewish
leaders, they gathered together with the High-priest and spake:
““We are powerless and weak to withstand the Romans. 19. But
as withal the bow is bent, we will go and tell Pilate what we have
heard, and we will be without distress, lest if he hear it from
others, we be robbed of our substance and ourselves be put to the
sword and our children ruined.” 20. And they went and told it
to Pilate. |

21. And he sent and had many of the people cut down.
22. And he had that wonder-doer brought up. And when he had
instituted a trial concerning him, he perceived that he is a doer of
good, but not an evil-doer, nor a revolutionary, nor one who aimed
at power, and set him free. 23. He had, you should know, healed
his dying wife.

24. And he went to his accustomed place and wrought his
accustomed works. 25. And as again more folk gathered them-
selves together round him, then did he win glory through his
works more than all.

26. The teachers of the Law were [therefore] envenomed
with envy and gave thirty talents to Pilate, in order that he
should put him to death. 27. And he, after he had taken [the
money], gave them consent that they should themselves carry out
their purpose.

28. And they took him and crucified him according to the
ancestral law.


Ae
THE TREATMENT OF THE FIRst CHRISTIANS.


(Follows on B. J. II. xi. 6, after the notice on the death of
Agrippa.)

1. Again Claudius sent his authorities to those states—
Cuspius Fadus and Tiberius Alexander, both of whom kept the


108


people in peace, not allowing them to depart in anything from the
pure laws.

2. But if anyone diverged from the word of the Law, plaint
was brought before the teachers of the Law. 38. Often they
expelled him and sent him to the Emperor’s presence.

4, And at the time of these two many had been discovered
as servants of the previously described wonder-doer; and as
they spake to the people about their teacher,—that he is living,
although he is dead, and that he will free you from your servitude,
—many from the folk gave ear to the above-named and took upon
themselves their precept,—5. not because of their reputation;
they were indeed of the humbler sort some just cobblers, others
sandal-makers, others artisans.

6. And [yet] as marvellous signs they accomplished in truth
what they would.

7. But when those noble governors saw the misleading of
the people, they deliberated with the scribes to seize and put them
to death, for fear lest the little be not little if it have ended in the
great. 8. But they shrank back and were alarmed over the signs,
saying: ‘‘ In the plain course such wonders do not occur. 9. But
if they do not issue from the counsel of God, they will quickly be
convicted.” 10. And they gave them [the Christians] authority
to act as they would.

11. But afterwards, becoming pestered by them, they had
them sent away, some to the Emperor, but others to Antioch,
others again to distant lands,—for the testing of the matter.

12. But Claudius removed the two governors, [and] sent
Cumanus.


VI.


THE T'RILINGUAL INSCRIPTION CONCERNING JESUS.
(Inserted in B. J. V. v. 2.)


At it (the barrier of the Temple) were columns .. . and
on these inscriptions in Greek and Roman and Jewish characters,
publishing the law of purity and [proclaiming] that no foreigner
should enter the inner [court]; for they called it the Holy [Place]
to which one had to ascend by fourteen steps, and whose upper
part was built in a square.


109


And over these tablets with inscriptions hung a fourth tablet
with inscription in these [three] characters, to the effect: Jesus
has not reigned as king; he has been crucified by the Jews,
because he proclaimed the destruction of the city and the laying
waste of the temple.


VIL.


PORTENTS AT THE DkEaTH OF JESUS AND RuMOURS
OF HIS RESURRECTION.


(Follows on B. J. V. v. 4, at the end of the description of the
Temple-curtain.)


1. This curtain (katapetasma) was prior to this generation
entire, because the people were pious; but now it was lamentable
to lookat. 2. It had, you should know, been suddenly rent from
the top to the ground, when they delivered over to death through
bribery the doer of good, the man—yea, him who through his doing
was no man.

3. And of many other signs they tell which came to pass
at that time.

4, And it was said that after he was put to death, yea after
burial in the grave, he was not found.

5. Some then assert that he is risen; but others, that he

has been stolen by his friends. 6. I, however, do not know which
speak more correctly.
7. For a dead man cannot rise of himself—though possibly
with the help of another righteous man; unless it (lit. he) will be
an angel or another of the heavenly authorities, or God himself
appears as a man and accomplishes what he will,—both walks
with men and falls, and lies down and rises up, as it is according
to his will.

8. But others said that it was not possible to steal him,
because they had put guards all round his grave,—thirty Romans,
but a thousand Jews.

9. Such fis narrated] as to that curtain (katapetasma).
Moreover [as to] the cause of its tearing there are [? various
statements].


110


VIII.


A PROPHECY CONCERNING JESUS.


(In B. J. VI. v. 4, where in our texts the prophecy of the
world-ruler is referred to Vespasian solely.)


Some indeed by this understood Herod, but others the crucified
wonder-doer Jesus, others again Vespasian.


In conclusion a few very general remarks may be
added calling attention to the most salient points.

In the John-pieces (I.-III.) there is nothing
sufficiently distinctive to show any literary dependence
on the New Testament accounts. On the contrary,
there are entire novelties and wide divergences. In
the first place the strong political colouring given by
the writer to the proclamation of the prophet is quite
out of keeping with anything to be found in the
Christian presentation. But the most striking
difference is the protracted period assigned to John’s
activity. ‘At that time’ means during the ethnarchy
of Archelaus. Now Herod the Great died in 4 B.c.,
and Archelaus, who succeeded him, was deposed in
6 A.D. It is quite inconceivable that any Christian
writer who had the gospel-story before him, could
have made what would be so astounding a statement
to Christian ears,—one that would at once appear to
the most moderately instructed as an egregious blunder.
Surely the last thing an intelligent forger would desire
to do would be to give occasion to his readers to call
the canonical narrative into question concerning so
prominent a feature as John’s almost equal age with
Jesus, and so practically invite them to dismiss all the
graphic details of the birth-stories as fictitious ?—unless


111


it be that he wrote before these stories were in
circulation. No one short of a lunatic would concoct
‘evidence’ against his own side. The writer must
therefore have moved in circles who would see no
difficulty in assigning to John a public activity of at
least 30 years; for he tells us that John survived the
death of Philip, which took place somewhere between
35 and 36 A.D.

The cross-examination of John by the authorities
and the incident of Simon the Essene are also arresting
novelties; but there is nothing improbable in them.
The introduction of the name Essene does not in any
way depend on Christian tradition; for the surprising
fact is that, though there are close parallels between
some of the doctrines of the Essenes and gospel-ethics,
and between some of their practices and the regula-
tions, for instance, laid down for the mission of the
apostles and the communal observances of the earliest
Christian communities, the New Testament writers
never mention the name. The wording of the refusal
of John at the end of his rebuke to disclose a certain
mystery to his official opponents has led some to the
supposition that this is a cryptic reference to Jesus,—
meaning ‘the mystery dwelling among you.’ That
of course would be impossible at so early a date as
prior to A.D. 6. But surely, quite apart from this,
a Christian apologist would have been at pains to
bring out clearly so essential a feature as John’s
acknowledgment of the Messiahship of Jesus, and not
go out of his way to disguise it? It is a curious
and thought-provoking phrase. It may refer to the
‘kingdom,’ to the indwelling rule and law of God, that
is brought to consciousness in the hearts of the
repentant; or it may possibly be that John had


112


some inner mystical doctrine to reveal, for we have
to remember that the Mandan or Gnostic John-
tradition, which has come down to our own days, has
ever laid the greatest stress on the mystical element
in the teaching of the Baptizer.

The interpretation of the dream of Philip, lke the
stress laid upon John’s strange appearance and dress
and his extraordinary mode of life, is just such a detail
as would strike the imagination and linger in the
memory of the people. What more likely and in
keeping with precedent than that a prophet should
interpret the dream of the king? But here we have,
not only a novelty for readers of the gospel-account,
but also a contradiction with Josephus himself. The
unfavourable character given to Philip, the stress laid
on his ‘venality,’ is in complete contrast with the
reputation given him by Josephus in his Antiquities
(XVIII. iv. 6), where he is praised for the mild and
peaceable disposition he displayed in his government,
and for the personal interest he took in the administra-
tion of justice. Now the Antiquities was completed
in 93/94 a‘D. Had then our writer known it, he would
not presumably have made Josephus contradict
himself so egregiously. This raises the question as
to the possibility of his having written before the
Antiquities got into wide circulation.

Piece III. in some respects agrees with and in
others differs from the synoptic account of the marriage
of Herod Antipas, tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, with
the wife (Slav. Jos. widow) of his brother Philip. But
Josephus himself in his Antiquitics (XVIII. v. 1 and 4)
tells the story quite differently from both. There we
read that Herodias was married first of all to Herod
Boéthus, and that the wife of Philip was Salome, the


113


daughter of this union; so that Philip was son-in-law
of Herodias. Herod Antipas, says Josephus, was the
second husband of Herodias, and the marriage took
place while the first husband, Boéthus, was still alive.
Josephus, moreover, says that Philip died childless;
while our author avers that he left four children
surviving him. Moreover Josephus in the famous
passage concerning John in the Antiquities (XVIII. v. 2)
knows nothing of John’s execution being due to so
personal a cause as is depicted both by the gospels and
our author, though very differently; it is in the
Antiquities ascribed solely to Antipas’ apprehension
of the political consequences of the John-movement.
Our author is then clearly ignorant of both the
Antiquities-account and also of the most characteristic
feature of the gospel-narrative, the graphic story of the
dancing of the daughter of Herodias. Everything
therefore goes to show that he is drawing on some
other traditional source.

Finally, as tbe climax to John’s extraordinary
scruples about food, it is asserted that he would not
touch unleavened bread even at Passover-time,—an
absolutely obligatory observance in Jewry. Moreover
he is made to give an exegetical justification for his
abstention. This is the distinctive touch of a Jewish
hand; it is exceedingly unlikely that it would ever
have occurred to a late Christian.

As to the John-pieces then we seem to be moving
in a thoroughly Jewish atmosphere, and there is
nothing characteristically Christian about them.

The Jesus-pieces (IV. and VI. to VIII.) are
naturally the most arresting and form the main crux
of the whole matter. It seems to be generally held
that all the eight pieces are by the same hand. They


114


may be said to have in general the same terms of
expression, to breathe the same spirit and present
similar characteristics. In the main Jesus-pieces the
author makes a show of trying to get at a reasonable
point of view; but he hesitates in his judgment and
frankly confesses his inability to make up his mind.
He is convinced that the more generally credible events
themselves are historic; but as to the sheerly miracu-
lous elements he is content to set them forth as
rumours giving rise to absolutely contradictory
opinions. So non-committal and rationalistic a pro-
ceeding is quite foreign to the mentality of a convinced
Christian. This attitude of reserve and the very
striking divergences of the writer from the gospel-
accounts are in the sharpest possible distinction to the
perspective and procedure of the compilers of such
apocryphal documents as the Acts of Pilate and The
Gospel of Peter. In the latter the literary dependence
on the gospels is manifest on all hands; what is
added is in no way contradictory, but adduced solely
to exalt the greatness of Jesus and heighten the
impression of the miraculous element.

If piece IV. is carefully and critically compared
with the famous spurious passage concerning Jesus in
our text of the Antiquities (XVIII. iii. 3), it will at
once be seen that if there is any possible question
of dependence between them, it is not on the side
of our author. Even among the opinions he cites,
there is no hint of Messiahship. When he says that
some ‘supposed that he had been sent by God,” it
means no more than what he makes John assert of
himself,—namely, that he was a prophet. It seems to
me moreover highly improbable that any late Christian
could have referred to his Lord, the one and only Son


115


of God, as ‘that wonder-doer’ or the ‘ crucified wonder-
doer Jesus.’

The divergences from the gospel-account of the
Jesus-story are so striking that they need not be dwelt
on. To every instructed Christian the gospel-narra-
tives are presumably so familiar in all their details,
that the contradictions with our author’s account will
present themselves automatically. Nevertheless the
more one meditates on the account in piece IV. of the
typical external acts of the ministry and the intrigues
of the Jewish authorities to compass the death of
Jesus, the more does it seem within its own measures
not to be inconsistent; in fact it hangs very well
together from an outside point of view. That view is
in no way due to a manipulation of gospel-information ;
it is based on very different data, and has all the
appearance of an honest attempt to piece together and
interpret floating traditions and conjectures reflected
from days contemporaneous perchance with the
attempts of the ‘many’ to set forth the events, as the
introduction to the Lukan gospel informs us.

The phrase ‘servants’ as applied to the disciples,
it may be noted, is a thoroughly Jewish conception ; it
was used by the Rabbis to emphasize the relationship
between pupils and teacher. The precise figure 150
may be a round number; otherwise it depends on
a tradition for which the 12 and the 70 were of no
importance.

The final sentence, which avers, not only that the
Jewish authorities themselves crucified Jesus, but that
this was in accordance with the Law, is so astonishing
in the latter respect that it has been set down to
a gross blunder of the Slavonic translator from the
Greek original, which may have read ‘contrary to the


116


-Law’—«ara with the genitive and not the accusative.
This seems a reasonable supposition ; though we must
remember that Jewish rulers in Maccabsean days did
crucify their political opponents.

The trilingual inscription statement (VI.) is a wild
piece of fanciful combination. The writer has heard
of an inscription connected with the execution of
Jesus; indeed it was required by law that the formal
charge should be placarded in all cases of capital punish-
ment. Moreover he has heard that this particular
notice was set forth in three languages; and he also
has heard that there were trilingual inscriptions out-
side the inner court of the Temple. In combining the
two he departs so far from his general sobriety that we
might almost think the passage was by another hand;
but this is otherwise not probable. The first charge
against Jesus was that he had excited the people to
revolt; of this he was acquitted by Pilate. The
authorities had then to give some other excuse: Jesus
was executed not because of any Messianistic agitation,
but because he prophesied disaster to the temple and
the holy city. Some excuse had to be found that
would placate the people.

In piece VII. the rending of the veil and the
reference to many other portents seem to depend on
characteristically Christian tradition ; but it need not
be supposed that this tradition was in the fixed gospel-
form in which we now have it. The phrase ‘prior to
this generation ’ is intended to mean some 30/40 years
before Josephus wrote his History (75-79 a.p.). It is
interesting to note that at that time similar portents
were in the air; for Jewish tradition (the Talmuds and
Josephus himself, B.J. VI. v. 3) makes mention of
a mysterious spontaneous opening of the heavy iron


117


temple-doors 40 years before the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the Gospel of the Hebrews refers to
a similarly mysterious breach in the iron threshold
of the same doors. There were widespread legends of
portents current in the folk-memory. Our author
then goes on to treat of the rumours and contradictory
statements about the resurrection; and here, as
before, he ruminates on possibilities, giving the con-
jectural pros and cons, but declining to commit himself
on the side of the most vital belief of Christendom.

Piece V., concerning the early Christians, is
equally as far from literary dependence on the canonical
Acts as are the Jesus-pieces on the Gospels. There
are wide divergences; and the whole produces an
impression of utter ignorance of the detailed, methodical
setting-forth of the thirty years of history contained
in the Acts. Isolated facts, such as Paul’s being sent
to Cesar at Rome, are absurdly generalized on the
one hand, and on the other the events of decades are
crammed into the narrow time-frame of some four
years, the period of office of the two governors men-
tioned (44-48 a.p.). The phrase “ But if they do not
issue from the counsel of God, they will quickly be
convicted” is thought by some to indicate literary
dependence on a similar saying in the Acts. But the
latter famous utterance, ascribed to Gamaliel (prior
to 7 A.D.), is worded so very differently that, if any
connection between them can be supposed, it may well
be ascribed in both cases to the uncertain echoing
in the popular mind of a well-known Rabbinical
pronouncement.

In conclusion, then, it may be said that the hope
of extracting anything of value out of these astonishing
and puzzling interpolations depends on establishing


118


the reasonableness of the hypothesis, that they are
based on echoes of popular traditions still floating
about in the Jewish environment of Christianity in,
say, the last third of the first century. There is,
I think, much that goes to show the likelihood of this
supposal, or at least to deter us from summarily
dismissing it. But even if we are persuaded to this
extent, we are confronted with the still more difficult
task of imagining a satisfactory conjecture as to the
status and motive of the writer.

If we hold him to have been a Jew, as the above
analysis seems to require, what plausible motive can
we ascribe to him for interpolating the matter into the
text of Josephus? Was he a disinterested lover of
history who thought that Josephus had fallen short
of historical impartiality by neglecting to mention two
such remarkable personages as John and Jesus and
two such important movements as those associated
with their names, and desired to amend the historian
in this respect in days when copyright had not yet
been dreamed of? Or may we assume that a pupil of
Josephus would think himself entitled to amend the
narrative ?

If, on the contrary, he was a Christian, the
interest in filling the gaps would be easily under-
standable, had he based himself on canonical tradition.
But the divergences from and flat contradictions of that
tradition are so extraordinary, that one is all the time
kept asking in astonishment: What sort of a Christian
could this man ever have been ?

To have succeeded in producing such an impression
designedly argues the procedure of a mind of such
extraordinary subtlety and psychological dexterity that
it is too uncanny forcredence. Any deliberate attempt


119


of this kind would surely have betrayed itself in some
way; but as a matter of fact there is no indication of
subtle manipulation of gospel-data anywhere. It is
not only very difficult but entirely out of the question
to think that any late Christian forger could have thus
deliberately challenged the firmly established canonical
tradition on so many points. Therefore if the writer
were a Christian, he must have been a first-century
man; that is to say he wrote before the Greek
canonical gospels were in general circulation or at any
rate before they had penetrated to his environment.

There remains only one other possible conjecture
—from which everybody has so far instinctively shrunk:
Can the writer after all have been Josephus himself?
But if so, why does he contradict himself so flatly,—
to say nothing of the difficulty of conjecturing his
motive for cutting out the passages ?

It thus appears that, whatever hypothesis of
authorship we make—whether Christian, Jew or
Josephus, we are left floundering in a welter of incon-
sistencies; all that can be said is that the Jew
alternative is the least improbable.

And there we must leave this baffling problem, in
the hope that our readers will at any rate be interested
in having it brought to their notice; for in any case
these passages must be considered striking curiosities,
even perhaps the greatest to be found, in the ancient
literature that is generally classed under the caption—
‘Christian forgeries.’


IV.


THE FOURTH GOSPEL PROEM:
A NEW VERSION VENTURE.


CONNECTION.


AFTER I had for some time been making a close study
of Lidzbarski’s translations of the Mandwan John-
Book and Liturgies, I had occasion in another connec-
tion to refer to the Greek text (Westcott & Hort) of
the prologue to the fourth gospel. As I read, I found
that a number of Mandezan associations came welling
up from the preconscious, especially with regard to
Life and Light, the use of the term Man and the way
the sentences about John the Baptist linked on to
these concepts. I found I was almost automatically
construing parts of this familiar text from a new angle
or at any rate envisaging them in a new perspective.
I had already for long been convinced that the
historical references broke awkwardly into the doctrinal
proem proper, and that this contained what may be
called some characteristic general gnostic notions.
Moreover I had long been of the opinion that the
proem was based on a ‘source’; but thought that this
‘source’ was most probably already in Greek when it
was made such deft use of by the inspired writer of the
‘pneumatic’ gospel. I now asked myself, could it
possibly have been originally in Aramaic, for there are
indubitably some strained constructions in it, that
might be explicable as literal renderings of Semitic
idioms. Translation into Greek would doubtless make
the original appear to be more hellenistically coloured
than was actually the case and so ‘philosophize’ it


somewhat. The main difficulty seemed to lie in deter-
120


121


mining what could have been the Semitic original of
the leading term rendered by Logos? Was it Word or
Wisdom or some other Divine Power or Potency ?
On this I could form no conclusion. But further,
whatever it was, could it have been translated by any
other Greek term than Logos? For the student of
comparative Hellenistic theology is not confined to
seeking for parallels or associations with the idea
behind this term in Stoicism and Philo simply; he has
to take into consideration a far wider field of research.
In the Trismegistic literature, for instance, in which
the Heavenly Man doctrine is prominent, the parallel
notion is rendered by Nozs, Mind, and in the Hellenistic
poem so beloved by the Later Platonists and generally
known as the ‘Chaldzan Oracles,’ the Mind of the
Father stands at the summit; while in allied Gnostic
tradition connected with the ‘ Chaldean Mysteries’ or
even said to be based on the ‘ Chaldzean Books,’ where
again the Divine Man doctrine is prominent, the term
preferred is Mind. Mind, moreover, in the Valentinian
system stands at the head of the Plérdma. This is
solely with regard to translation into Greek in the
general Hellenistic theological language of the time, and
says nothing about the Semitic or Chaldean original
terms, which may have been numerous, apart from the
very general (notably Egyptian) Oriental magical notion
of creation by the word. Certainly the Man-doctrine
was wide-spread and where personifications were the
order of the day, Man and Mind would go better
together than Man and Word or Reason or even
Wisdom. It is, however, with all hesitation that
I have ventured to use the term Mind in my transla-


! See my ‘Echoes from the. Gnosis’ series, vols. viii. and ix., The
Chaldean Oracles, London, 1908.


122


tion, and more to call attention to the problem than
anything else.

With these ideas—namely the supposal of a probable
Aramaic original of the proem-source and the conse-
quent ‘ philosophizing’ by translation into Hellenistic
Greek of some terms that in the original were more
concretely presented, I attempted the following version.
This I did before I had read Prof. C. F. Burney’s
recent (1922) arresting study, entitled The Aramaic
Origin of the Fourth Gospel (Oxford, The Clarendon
Press). The contention of the Professor of the Inter-
pretation of Holy Scripture at Oxford, who is so great
an authority on the O.T., is that not only for the proem
but for much, if not the whole, of the gospel there is
an Aramaic background. Whatever may be ultimately
decided on this novel and far-reaching hypothesis, it
should inaugurate a fruitful line of N.T. research.
My own venture is far more modest in every way;
I deal with a single ‘source’ only, and have not the
competence to treat even that technically from the
Semitic side. The only remark I would venture to
make on Prof. Burney’s labours is in respect to the
Johannine Greek quotations from the O.T. The
problem whether the few of them which differ from the
LXX. Greek Targum or Translation,—the Authorised
Version of the time so to say,—were made freshly from
the Hebrew, does not seem to me necessarily to help
to prove the author’s contention. They are far more
likely to have been taken from what is said to have
been probably the earliest Christian Greek document,
—a collection of proof-texts to establish the claims of
Christian Messianism from O.T. prophecy, at times not
without accommodation. They sometimes agree with
and sometimes diverge from the Septuagint rendering


123


All this has been most thoroughly worked out by Proff.
Rendel Harris and Vacher Burch in their indispensable
work (Pt. I., 1916, Pt. II., 1920) on the now famous
Testimony Book (Testimonia contra Judéos).

I also conjectured, presumably owing to the
rhythms of the Mandsan books running in my head,
that the ‘ source’ might have been in verse; and found
that the Greek broke up easily into some sort of
rhythmic lines. But of course this was pure guess-
work on my part. Professor Burney, however, with
his wide knowledge of Hebrew and Palestinian Aramaic,
has come most definitely to this conclusion as to the
proem. If the rest of the gospel cannot be so treated,
this seems to me to be an additional indication that in
the prologue we are dealing with a ‘source.’ Though
my tentative translation from the Greek differs both in
analysis and phrasing from Prof. Burney’s, I so far see
no compelling reason to alter the phrasing by his, and
let the breaking up of the lines stand to indicate
rhythm rather than the measured lines he has so
ingeniously endeavoured to reconstruct into Aramaic.


TRANSLATION.


1. In Beginning’ was Mind;’


' In the original this was probably the usual cosmological formula ‘in
the beginning.’ The Greek may suggest a more metaphysical meaning and
the Vulgate Latin seems to continue the process, for principrwm might
carry the meaning of ‘ primality’; cp. Cicero, T'wsc. i. 23, 54: “ There is no
origin of primality (principit); for it is out of primality that all things
originate”; Tertullian, Adv. Hermog. 19: ‘In Greek the term primality,
namely dpx7, takes the primacy (princtpatum), not only in the category of
order (ordinativuwm), but also in that of potency (potestivwm).”


2 If there is any Mandzan term with which to seek a parallel it might
perhaps be Mana, which seems generally to mean Mind. Prof. Rendel
Harris, in his illuminating study of the Proem, would make the original
of Logos ‘Wisdom’ (Hokhmah), and brings forward some striking
quotations from the O.T. sapiential literature and Patristic commentaries in
justification. This Hebrew (O.T.) and Greek (Apocryphal) Wisdom-literature
is clearly influenced Hellenistically, and the equation Logos=Sophia in the
Gk. version of the 4th gospel is of great interest. In addition to R. H.’s
Origin of the Prologue to St. John's Gospel, see his interesting paper ‘ Athena,


124


And Mind was with Gop.’
2. So? Mind was God.
This? was in Beginning with Gop.
38. All kept coming into existence* through’ it? ;
And apart from it came into existence not
a single [thing].
4. What has come into existence in it’ was Life ;*
And Lire? was the Light of the [true] Men.”
5. And the Light shineth in the Darkness ;


And the Darkness did not emprison” it.


Sophia and the Logos,’ pp. 56-72 of the Bulletin of the John Rylands Library,
Manchester, July, 1922. It may be objected that ‘Word’ is to be preferred,
seeing that in the Targums Memrah=the Creative Word, Logos; but my
contention is that the Greek Nots is nearer to the Deity than the Greek
Logos.

1 The Gk. phrase zpds roy Gedv is a grammatical puzzle; this is, however,
probably solved by the hypothesis of a literal translation from a Semitic
original. The Gnostic Heracleon (2nd cent.), the first known commentator on
the fourth gospel, who was apparently ignorant of Semitics, conjectured that
jvepevos (‘at-one-with,’ ‘in-co-adunition-with’) should be supplied; others
think the phrase is Hellenistic (Koiné) for rapa 7 Oew—+.e., ‘along with,’ ‘ by
the side of,’ or simply ‘with’ God. In the Greek text 6 eds is distinguished
(and I think deliberately), by the prefixing of the definite article, from the
following simple 6eds, But ‘The God’ is clumsy in English, and so
I resort to the type-trick of capitalization to mark the distinction.

2The Gk. xat renders probably a Semitic particle that serves several
other purposes than that of a purely copulative function.

8 Sc. Mind or God, not as a second God, but as the Divine or Creative
Intelligence of Gop.

4 Or ‘continued to become’ (impf.),—the idea of ‘ perpetual creation.’

®° The Old Syriac versions (e.g. C.) read ‘in’ and not ‘through’; see
F.C. Burkitt, Evangelion da-Mepharreshe: The Curetonian Version of the
Four Gospels, with the Readings of the Sinai Palimpsest and the Early
Syriac Patristic Evidence (Cambridge, 1904), i. 423. The Old (i.e. pre-
Peshitta) Syriac versions should be a great help in determining the Aram.
original, as the two dialects are closely related.

6 Sc. Mind.

1 Se? Mind,

8 That would be the Mandzan Second Life.

° Or ‘The Life ’—the same distinction as with the terms for ‘ God.’

10 The article cannot be neglected; it signifies those who are really
Men, 2.e. conscious members of the celestial or angelic humanity or true Race.
All this connects with the Anthrépos-doctrine of the Gnosis. Man (the
Aram. idiom ‘ Son of Man,’ if translated literally, is misleading in Gk.) is the
Celestial or Primal Man, Adam Qadmon. As Thrice-greatest Hermes says,
the vast majority of mortals are not worthy to be called ‘Men’; all men have
Reason, but few as yet have Mind (ze. are spiritual). The true Men who
have the Light of Life are the Prophets and Perfect.


Suppress,’ ‘ hold back,’ ‘detain.’ Burney has ‘ obscured it not.’


125


(‘There was a Man sent by God,—his name Yoanes
This [Man] came for bearing witness, that he might
bear witness about the Light, in order that all [men]
might have faith through it. That [Man] was not the
Light, but [came] in order that he might bear witness
about the Light.)

6. It was the True Light,

Which enlighteneth every Man’
Who cometh into the world.®
7. It was in the world;
And the world kept coming into existence
through it*;

And the world did not know it.’

8. It came unto its own ;°
And its own did not receive it.

9. But as many as received it,
To them it gave power’
To become Children of God,’—

10. To those who have faith in his name,’—


1 This paragraph seems clearly to be an interpolation into, or overworking
of, his original ‘source’ by the writer, or perhaps part compiler, of the
fourth gospel.

2 Prophet or Divine Messenger.

® This world (Gk. xécpos, Heb. tebel, Mand. tibil); there were other
worlds according to the Manda or Gnosis. ‘This world’ in the sense of the
earth ; the world in the wider meaning would be the Heb. ‘olam.

4 Sc. the Light, z.e. the Life of Mind.


5 If the reader prefers to personify the Light and its synonyms, he can
substitute ‘him’ for ‘it’; and so also in the following phrases.

6 Sc. creations (n.pl.), world and other creations up or down to man;
cp. Jn. xix. 27, where the ‘disciple whom he loved’ is said to have taken
the Mother ‘ unto his own’ (eis ra id1a), Which is generally supposed to mean
‘his own home.’ ‘Its own’ therefore signifies ‘ habitations.’ The following
‘its own’ (m.pl.) refers to the ‘inhabitants.’

7 Sc. spiritual power—lit. ‘ allowance,’ ‘ possibility,’ generally translated
‘authority’; it is not physical power (dvvapis, ‘lordship,’ ‘domination ’), but
moral power— grace.’

5 That is of Mind.


® That is who have faith in the still higher Power (the mystic ‘Name’
or Soul, or Mind, or Primality) of Great Life—Gon.


126


Who were brought to birth,

Not out of [the blending of] bloods,’
11. Nor of urge’ of flesh,

Nor of urge of a male,—

But out of God.
12. So* Mind became flesh*

And tabernacled’ in us,°—
13. And we beheld its glory,


Glory as of [? an] only-begotten’ from Father,—
Full’ of Delight? and Truth.


(°Ydanés beareth witness about him,” and hath
cried aloud, saying—he it was who said—: He who


1 That is, of earthly parents; for they were born from Above, 7.e. were
spiritual births.


2 It means ‘ wish’ rather than ‘ will ’—‘ desire,’ ‘ urge.’
8 Lit.‘ and’ (xkat); but clearly meaning ‘ by such birth from above.’


4 This seems to mean simply ‘was enfleshed.’ The Old Syriac has
‘body,’ not ‘ flesh’; so also in 11.


5 Lit. ‘ pitched its tent’; this refers to the extended shekinah-doctrine.
In the Mandan tradition skind is the frequently-recurring technical term
for the ‘ dwelling,’ ‘ housing,’ ‘ tenting,’ or ‘ spiritual body’ or ‘ glory,’ of the
celestials—the withrda’s or ‘treasures’ or perhaps ‘ fulnesses’ (lit. ‘ riches’).
Burney has: ‘And set his shekinté among us,” referring solely to Yeshi‘
Messiah. Shekintad is Palestinian Aramaic for Heb. shekinah.


6 Namely the Prophets or Perfect.


7 Mono-genés,—this in pre- and post-Christian Gnostic tradition is the
general technical term for ‘born,’ ‘emanated’ or ‘created’ from a ‘single’
source (ovo-), t-.e. one-and-only parent, and is used of spiritual beings who
are superior to the conditions of sex-generation. Cp. the perikopé on Melchi
Sedek (King of Peace, Prince of Righteousness) in Heb. vii. 1-21. He is there
said to be ‘father-less, mother-less, [earthly] genealogy-less, without
beginning of days or end of life, but made-in-the-likeness of Gop’s Son.”
In common speech monogenés is usually found as meaning the only
one of a kind; if only one daughter has been born to a man, she would be
characterized as monogenés. But the vulgar tongue is not the language of
mysticism. In the above-referred to article (p. 123) Prof. Rendel Harris thinks
- that the meaning of monogenés as ‘child of one parent only,’ as applied

to Athena born from the head of Zeus, which he suggests, but rejects, is a
‘quite new’ idea ; but I have been insisting on it for a score of years at least.
He would render it as ‘ darling,’ but this is really too bowrgeois.

8 This picks up Mind in 121; it is m. sing.

* The root-meaning of ydpus.

10 This is the second redactorial interpolation or overworking.


"The Greek translator unquestionably understood this as referring to
Yesht‘ Messiah. But the puzzling phrasing of the quotation from the
Baptist logoi-tradition—‘ my First ’—seems to require ‘it’ instead of ‘ him,’
viz., the Mind-Life-Light of the ‘ source,’ as in the first interpolation.


127


cometh behind me hath been before me,’ for he was
my First.*)
14. For of its Fulness’® we all received,
And Delight over against Delight.’
In that the Law (Torah) was given by Moses,
Delight and Truth kept coming into the word through
Yeshu‘ Messiah.°®


No man hath seen God at any time ;’


An only-begotten <god>, who is in’ the bosom: of
the Father,—he dictated.)


' Cp. L. and S. Lex. s.v. €umporfev: “ The future is unseen and was


therefore regarded as behind us, whereas the past is known and therefore
before our eyes.”


2 Inexplicable in the usual translation, but it might refer to First Life
in Mandzan tradition.

* Or pléréma picking up the ‘ full’ of 133.

4 This seems to me to be a distinct reference to the Gnostic notion of
pairs or syzygies in the Plérdma; cp. the ‘‘ Hence pairing with each other
(avturrovxovvtes) ”’ of the Apophasis ascribed to Simon Magus (Hippolytus,
Ref. vi. 18). The term is used by Xenophon (Ana. v. 4, 12) of two bands of
dancers facing each other in rows or pairs (see my Simon Magus, 1892, p. 20).


° The third interpolation or overworking of the ‘ source.’


§ Incovs Xpurrés—YéEsiis Hristos. I have, however, kept what I hold to be
the Heb.-Aram. original name-combination. It means the Anointed Saviour
or Liberator—that is Saviour or Vindicator anointed by the Divine Spirit or
Creative and Perfecting Life of God; cp. the O.T, Joshua (LXX. Jesus).


7 Cp. the Jewish Gnostic commentator of the Naassene Document,
quoting from a prior ‘scripture,’ or an oral ‘logos’ (‘what was spoken’):
‘* His voice we heard, but his form we have not seen.” (See my analysis
of this very important Gnostic Document in Thrice-greatest Hermes, London,
1906, in Prolegomena, § ‘The Myth of Man in the Mysteries’; the quo-
tation is to be found ini. 169.) Compare with this Jn. v. 87: “ Ye have
never at any time heard his voice, nor have ye seen his form,” addressed to
the Jews in general; whereas the Naassene quotation refers to the Perfect.
This is very important, for if my analysis of the NN. document, which
Hippolytus copied, is correct, the Jewish mystic, who commented on the
Hellenistic source, was in all probability contemporary with Philo (c. 80 B.c.
—45 A.D.), and therefore we have here an indication of another ‘source’ of the
fourth gospel (of which there may have been a number).


° The Gk. 6 dv eis tov KdArov (‘ into the bosom’) is grammatically impos-


sible: it must rest on a Semitic idiom. The Old Syriac (C.) has‘ Son from
the bosom of the Father.


® Cp. the Commentary of Ephraim Syrus, which runs: ‘* The Word of the
Father came from His bosom, and clothed itself with a body in another
bosom ; from bosom to bosom it went forth, and pure bosoms have been filled
from it: blessed is He who dwelleth in us!” (Burkitt, op. cvt., ii. 140).


1 Namely the gospel which follows; the verb has no object. The Gk.
€Enyjoaro means also ‘ related in full,’ ‘ set forth’; the Mandan technical
term is ‘ discoursed.’


AFTERWORD.


THE legend-like Mandzean tradition concerning the
person of John and the distinctive gnostic type of
doctrine which it associates with him could by no
means have been deduced from, or expanded out of, the
bare external historical facts reported by the classical
Josephus; it differs moreover in many ways-from the
more detailed story of the Gospels and their perspec-
tive of his doctrinal and prophetical activity. As to
the graphic picture of the Gospels, which suggests the
sudden arising of a solitary wild figure unconnected
with any community or order, a feature so strongly
stressed also by the Slavonic Josephus,—the Mandzan
handing-on is completely silent. It gives no hint of any
peculiarity of this nature in John’s dress, much less of
any uncouthness in his appearance; indeed, though it
makes no statement, it would lead us to infer that
John was clad in white, and in all other respects
presented little of the wild features of a desert-bred,
skin-clad eremite. The classical Josephus is also
silent on this popular trait. That John was a prophet,
all these accounts are agreed ; that he baptized, all are
agreed. That he suffered a martyr’s death, Josephus
and the Gospels are agreed; but strange to say, the
Mandean tradition has not a word on so important
and tragical an event. It is difficult to believe that
the Mandzean Nazoreeans could have been ignorant of
the way in which their great prophet met his end; for


had they believed he was not executed by Antipas,
128


129


they would in all probability have contradicted in their
own fashion the report of the Jews and Christians in
this respect.

This omission of all reference to the death of
John would be incomprehensible, did we not reflect
in the first place that no attempt is made in the exist-
ing Mandan documents to give anything that could
be called a‘ Life’ of John, and conjecture in the second
that in all probability nothing of doctrinal importance
was attached to the way of his ending as it was in the
case of Jesus. It is of course supposable that there
may have been at one time documents of greater detail
and more historical value relating to John, which have
since fallen into oblivion owing to the focussing of
interest on the more plastic material of psychical
legend and mystical reverie; but conjecture cannot
restore them.

Though in the present restricted exposition no
attempt is made to treat the comparative side of the
subject, owing to the regrettable fact that we are still
without the scientific translation of the main and
oldest deposit of the Mandan scriptures, it may be
noted that there are fragmentary traditions on other
lines that would make both Dositheus and Simon the
Magian disciples of John. Now Dositheus (Dousis or
Dosthai) was the precursor of Simon; and the latter
was held by the heresiological Church Fathers to be
the fons et origo of gnosticism, which he certainly was
not, but only one of many of the time with already
a long heredity behind them. It is to be further noted
that the distinctive Simonian school or tradition,
which was in no sense Christian, continued at least
well on into the third century, and that the Dositheans,
who were equally non-Christians, are known of as


130


being numerous even in the sixth century.’ By the
rumour that these Gnostic teachers were ‘ disciples of
John’ we must understand in general, I believe, that
there was simply in some respects similarity of doc-
trine betwen them. These Dosthai-Simon legends and
reports are associated with early Ebionite controversies
(underlying the Pseudo-Clementine romances), and the
doctrines involved in them link up with similar notions
found in the wide-spread pre-Christian syncretisms,
and even universalizing attempts, of many kinds of
saving-cults of both a popular and restricted apocalyptic
and gnostical character, common to such plainly dis-
tinguishable types as the Persian, Chaldean, and
Aramean religious complexes of the early Hellenistic
period. The mass of detailed research work which has
been done chiefly in the last generation on Babylonian,
Iranian, Syrian, Aramean, Egyptian and Hast Mediter-
ranean religious endeavours, whether Hellenistically
tinged or otherwise, which flourished so luxuriously
during the three centuries before our era and continued
to do so in their various ways for the following three
centuries and some of them far later, is beginning to
make an impression outside the ranks of the specialists,
and compelling the attention of the general historian.
It is coming to be seen that the unprejudiced evalua-
tion of these many endeavours and movements and
the getting of them into a proper perspective constitute
an indispensable task for those who would trace the
religious features, phases and fortunes of ‘ world
history’ in the main moments of its development, and
especially those of them which most strongly influenced
Western culture in its later formative periods.


1 See my Fragments of a Faith Forgotten (London, 2nd ed., 1906),
pp. 162 ff.


131


We have recently had presented to us an arrest-
ing, if provocative, attempt of this kind in Oswald
Spengler’s Downfall of the West. Its two stout
volumes of some 1,200 pages have been very widely
read in Germany and by knowers of German, and the
work has been much discussed and criticized. For
naturally specialists and authorities cannot easily
brook the incursions into their distinctive territories
of a free lance with a knack of, or even genius
for, recognizing underlying similar tendencies where
previously for the most part the more superficial
distinctions have been stressed into fundamental
differences. It is true that where so wide a field is
surveyed, it is not difficult to catch up such an his-
torical innovator on numerous points of detail, but on
the other hand his method certainly does at times
enable the reader to fix his attention on the wood
rather than on the trees and on the great rivers rather
than on the streamlets. We do not, perhaps naturally
enough, see eye to eye with Spengler throughout, but
here we are not considering his work as a whole. He
is referred to because he is the first general historian
and philosopher of history who has brought the Man-
deans into the picture; and in this he seems, in our
judgment, to have got them into a tolerably proper
perspective. It may be mentioned also that it was
only after the whole of the preceding matter had been
written that I read‘Spengler’s work, and that for
many years | have been regarding the phenomena of
pre-Christian Gnosticism and allied movements from
more or less the same angle. It may then be of interest
_ to reproduce Spengler’s boldly sketched picture of the
conditions in which the heredity of the pre-Christian
Gnosis is to be sought and of the apocalyptic eschato-


132


logical expectations and hopes of salvation that
preceded the birth of Christianity.’

‘What lay in the prophetical religions (Persian,
Chaldzan, Jewish) as a presage or presentiment, what
at the time of Alexander the Great emerged in meta-
physical outlines, was now brought to completion.
And this completion ‘aroused in tremendous strength
the primitive feeling of nervous dread. It pertains to
the last mysteries of humanity and of free-moving
life in general that the birth of the I and the birth of
world-dread are one and the same; that a macrocosm
is spread out before a microcosm,—vast, overwhelming,
an abyss of foreign, light-shot being and activity that
makes the tiny, solitary self shrink back timorously
into itself. Such fear of their own consciousness as
from time to time suddenly overwhelms children, is
experienced again by no grown-up even in the darkest
hours of his life. This deadly fear, however, oppressed
the dawning of the new culture. In this morn of the
‘magic’ world-consciousness, that was faint-hearted,
uncertain, obscure about itself, a new glance was taken
at the near end ofthe world. This is the first thought
with which up to now every culture has come to con-
sciousness of itself. A downpour of revelations,
wonders and peerings into the primordial ground of
things swamped every deeper mind. They thought,
they lived, only in apocalypticimages. Reality became
appearance. Strange and awesome sights were re-
counted from one to another, read out of confused and
obscure scriptures and at once seized on with imme-


1 Der Untergang des Abendlandes: Umrisse einer Morphologie der
Weltgeschichte, Band II. Welthistorische Perspectiven (Miinchen, 1923,
revised ed.), pp. 258ff. The work has now run into upwards of 50,000
copies, a proof of very widely extended serious interest, for it is not
a ‘popular’ exposition. It may be stated that Spengler shows by his
references that he is acquainted with the most recent Mandzan studies.


133


diate inner certainty. From one community to another,
from village to village, wandered such writings, of
which it is impossible to say that they belonged to any
one single religion. They are Persian, Chaldean,
Jewish in colouring; but they have all taken up what
was at that time circulating in men’s minds. The
canonical books are national; the apocalyptic are inter-
national and literally so. They come into existence
without any appearing to be their authors. Their
contents mingle and melt together; they read to-day
one way and to-morrow another. But they are any-
thing but poésy, fiction (Dichtung). They are like
the fearsome figures round the doors of the Romance
cathedrals in France, which also are no ‘Art,’ but
Dread turned into stone. Every man knew these
angels and demons, these heaven-ascending and hell-
descending numinous beings,—the Primal Man or
Second Adam, the Messenger of God, the Saviour of the
Last Day, the Son of Man, the Eternal City and the
Final Judgment. In the foreign cities and in the
high-seats of the powerful Persian and Jewish priest-
hood there had to be a conceptual fixation of distinc-
tive doctrines; but here down among the folk there
was hardly any particular religion, but rather a general
‘magic’ religiosity which filled all souls and fastened
upon sights and shapes of every conceivable origin.
The Last Day had drawn nigh. They expected it.
They knew that ‘he’ must now be manifested, ‘he’
of whom all revelations spake. Prophets arose. People
banded together into ever new associations and circles
in the conviction of having now come to better know-
ledge of their native religion or of having found the
true one. In this period of tremendous and yearly
increasing tension, in the years hard by the birth of


134


Jesus, alongside numerous other communities and
sects arose the Mandean religion of salvation. Of its
founder or origin we are in ignorance. In spite of its
detestation of the Judaism of Jerusalem and its
marked predilection for Persian settings of the notion of
salvation, it nevertheless seems to have stood very near
the popular belief of Syrian Jewry. Of its marvel-filled
scriptures one piece after another now comes to light.
‘He’ is everywhere,—the Son of Man,’ the Saviour
sent into the deep, who must himself be saved, the
goal of the expectation. In the John-Book the Father
raised on high in the House of Perfection, surrounded
with Light, speaks to his Only-begotten Son: My Son,
be for me an Envoy—go unto the world of the Dark-
ness, in which is no Light-ray. The Son cries on
high: Father of Greatness, what sin have I done that
thou hast sent me into the deep? And at the end:
Without faults I ascended, and fault and defect were
not in me. |

“All the traits of the great prophetical religions and
the whole treasury of the deepest insights and figures
which have since been assembled in apocalyptic, lie
here at the bottom in common. But of ‘antique’
(?=Hellenic) thinking and feeling not a breath has
penetrated into this underworld of the ‘magic.’ The
beginnings of the new religion are, it may well be, for
ever lost to memory. But one historical figure of
Mandaism comes on to the stage with arresting clear-
ness, tragical in its striving and ending, like Jesus
himself: it is John the Baptizer. Scarce still belong-
ing to Jewry, and filled with strong detestation . . .
of the spirit of Jerusalem, he proclaims the End of the


The Mandzeans do not_use this idiom; it is ever simply the Man.—
G.R.S. M.


135


World and the Coming of the Barnasha, the Son of
Man, who is no longer the promised national Messiah
of the Jews, but the Bringer of the World-conflagration.
To him went Jesus and became one of his disciples.
Jesus was thirty years old when the awakening came
upon him. The apocalyptic and in particular the
Mandan thought-world from now on filled his whole
consciousness. The other world of historic reality lay
round him as in seeming only, strange and unmeaning.
That ‘he’ will now come and put an end to this so
unreal reality, was Jesus’ great certainty, and for this
certainty he came forward as announcer like John, his
teacher. The oldest gospel-accounts taken into the
New Testament still let some glimmer of this period
shine through in which he was in his consciousness no
more than a prophet.” It was later that the conviction
came upon him: Thou art thyself ‘ he.’

This is a boldly sketched outline bringing into
special prominence the dominant eschatological feature
of the picture, but with no indications of the particular
Mandzan colouring or shading that must be used in
the completed canvas. For this, however, we cannot
reproach Spengler, seeing that we find ourselves com-
pelled to refrain from any such attempt. And the
reason for this abstention is quite simple. Lidzbarski’s
substantive and scientific translation of the John-
Book and Liturgies enables the student at first-hand
to become so exhaustively acquainted with this part of
the material, that much in it reads differently, and the
whole atmosphere savours differently from the general
impression produced even by the most attentive
perusal of Brandt’s praiseworthy and painstaking
pioneer labours. It seems therefore naturally to follow
that, when we get the full translation of the remaining

K


136


and earliest deposit, the Genzd, from Lidzbarski, and
can then survey the whole of its matter in detail, and
so review in their native settings and contexts the
selected features of it sketched by Brandt and in
reliance on him utilized by Bousset and Reitzenstein,
for instance, we shall be enabled to appreciate the
whole tradition more understandably and analyze
it more accurately. We shall then be in a posi-
tion to trace, for instance, the development of the
meaning attached to the figure of the victor and of
the formula ‘the Man who has come hither,’ and also
the modifications of eschatological notions within the
Mandeean scheme of reference and much else.

Meantime it is already evident that the Mandan
Nazoreean tradition preserves traces of doctrine and
endeavour and other features of very great value for
recovering long-lost indications of one of the most
important backgrounds of Christian origins and of
a subsequent parallel development of religious faith.
In any case the study of the Mandwan documents
cannot fail to come to the front as an indispensable
task in the elucidation of the characteristic Gnosis as
an integral and widely-diffused factor in the general
history of religion in the critical centuries in the Near
Kast and Mediterranean West before and after the
beginnings of the present era. And this study, were
it necessary where so much similar recent research has
already made it certain on all hands, gives the final
death-blow to the old misleading view that Gnosticism
was of interest solely as a Christian heresy, and was to
be evaluated as such and comfortably disposed of in
the good old cavalier Patristic fashion.


It is pleasant to think that new light will be


137


thrown, directly or indirectly, on our subject by
a number of important studies which are in hand or
which have been already made public in lecture-form.
Among them may be mentioned the Lectures on
Manicheism by Prof. F. Crawford Burkitt and the
long-expected work on the same religion by the veteran
Tranist Prof. J. Wiliams Jackson, and also the arresting
Schweich Lectures of this year on the Samaritans by
Dr. Moses Gaster, whose researches into their little-
known literature, based on his unique and famous
collection of MSS. that has just been acquired by the
British Museum, open up quite new vistas of O.T.
study and also supply indications of a new and hitherto
unsuspected background that may be brought into line
with Mandzwanism and hence with general Christian
origins.


LONDON:
WomMEN’s PRINTING Society, LTp.
Brick STREET, PICCADILLY, W. I.


,
i )
VANE
Mate

ll


Pe Ns


ut
4
ay


ie MeN
os ,


is) a) sale f
neces ki i. } / y i


| ane bh re


ke


oy
pies og a &
joe ee a ba “ae met:
‘ Virv fe


ite ene ye Be


Ae.


if ‘ne Af


ae


=


|


|
|


|


4
z
<q
a
xc
“?
o
Zz
ae |
=
u
o
>
=
+2]
c
WwW
=
z
~


At #4


oS
“A 7 pe

oe ey
ee ees


re rere
yee ee PV
rere A
rrr er we
vow
w4


yr
vy Vy y


ah de te
veer
yo


oy
yee Pe
~e


- ¥
Verve ee YY vw


ey ee


¥

ue

A Aa

ey
(Aaa


|e de
a \ i ae
of SEER ARAL L,
PPI LLL SP
SLIP LSM TLL ILS


A Andel A ee


very ey ey
BAL LL Sos a


Cy Vt TP


A


PPE PL LLL LIS Le Oe


PELE LHS.


5
a 4


LM pt yy de eed
vivre LIPS LAL L RLS Lg pre es
BEEPS Maas ELL LE LL ~ yi
PLRALAER EL, Yep oe ee
re; La vr pi. wy
SFL AREA
o me Pie:


LEE


Ch ae


oe


7
eye
rer?


4
OS Ka ae
anette
nA a ar
pre


LR Ao
ad


a
Saas


ba
Ce er
5 Myra


es
ee


te


ow
or


et
ohn
Mw
Mom ‘
ey et
ne aa


ayy

May

Kner
oy )


ey


ey PE


DLA Dia te te te Oe te Le ang
OX ery re Kotak
Sette Ponte ah


in hates
ee
rr
Rinne,
le


¥
er eee SS
bi ai i Sl es "


Shee
Se a
ae ime
“A
KN


vt
Pewee gy
KE eI N,
alae a er ne
ee es : , awe
ey ,


wre
ae. ‘
ye


4: + - t 4 .
PRO ey esate ae
