The Megha Duta; or, Cloud Messenger (Kalidasa; Horace Hayman Wilson (trans.), 1813)
==========================================================
Kalidasa's lyric masterpiece — the exiled yaksha's message to his distant love, carried by the monsoon cloud — in Horace Hayman Wilson's 1813 verse translation, the FIRST English rendering of the Meghaduta (Calcutta, College of Fort William). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/india.history.resource.37528).



LHE MEGHADUTA


KALIDASA


00048237


POPP RECS ACSO AOS SO AOSOR OA


ISSUED OUT
WITH PERMISSION ONLY.


XOSt RSL EST RT TET
BOMBAY BRANCH _ i


TOWN HALL, HOMBAY:


i OF THE Y
ROYAL ASIATIC aeeveline
OIREL IESE IST DISSE IEE


Digitized with financial assistance from the
Government of Maharashtra
on 02 January, 2016


pu


ae


MEGHA DUTA;


beige EEA PE oI kt Me “f Nishi
Aes adie ,
: sei Samson.


CLOUD MES ener ey
A POEM, -
-IN ‘THE. SANSCRIT’ LANGUAGE.


a


BY. CALIDASA.. 4Re3y


ac


Wh
eee INTO ENGLISH: ‘VERSE, -
WITH NOTES: AND ILLUSTRATIONS,


BY. HORACE HAYMAN WILSON,,-
Assistart Surgeon in the Service of the Honorable: East India Company, and Secretary
to the Asiatic Society.:


PUBLISTIED- UNDER THE SANCTION —


COLLEGE OF FORT WILLIAM.


Calcutta ¢


PRINTED LY P. PEREIRA, AT THE HINDOOSTANEE PRESS, -


1813.


ao:
ated | r
(al
ABR 37°


U0


00048237


DEDICATION


= ="


———


TO TUE RIGHT HONORABLE
THE EARL OF MINTO,
| GOVERNOR pene OF INDIA.
Sc. Sc &c,
‘My Lord,


~ TT Ave takeri the liberty of giving to thé following little work the
‘sanction of your Lordship’s name, not with the idea, that so humble a
‘tribute cam add any thing to it’ lustre s but with the hope. that it may
reflect somé credit upon the pages to which it is prefixed.
New to public criticism, and reasonably ambitions of public approval,
T am naturally anXidus to introduce this. first production of my ‘literary
labors, under the most ¢lizible auspices,.to the notice of the world; anid .
F am confident that the countenance of one who has always professed
himself an encourager of letters, and who is known: to merit the palm
which he bestows,. wiil ensure me, in the first instance‘at least, a favorable


reception,


DEDICATION,


It must be a matter of indifference to Society, and still more so ta
your Lordship, that an unimportant individual should express his admiras
tion of the firmness and energy which India has witnessed in your
Lordship’s political career, and which have been so successfully exerted
in suppressing internal commotion, and prosecuting foreign conquest:
Tam unwilling however to pags over the present opportunity of joining
in the voice of an English public, and applauding the justice that has
‘crowned your Lordship’s administration of the East, with the dignities
of Great Britains . :

Wishing that the country to which your ‘Lordship’s services are about
to be transferred, may long continue to benefit by them,


4 HAVE THE HONOR TO BE,
YOUR LORDSHIP’S,


MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT,


ce H. H. WILSON.


fe


PREFACE.


| Tue antiquity and excellence of the sacred language | of the Hindus, —
have naturally attracted attention, and excited cur iosity possessing cons
sider able claims to be regar ded as the most ancient form of speech with
which mankind is acquainted, it appeals strongly to the interest ‘that
invests the early ages of the world; and constructed upon perhaps the
" most perfect plan, which human ingenuity has devised, it tempts us ‘to
an enquiry whether it?s perfection be limited by it’s structure, or whether
the merits of Hindu compositions par take, or not, of the beauty of the
language, in which they are composed,

- It has fallen to the lot of the English nation especially, to. prosecute
these’ enquir ies, and the result has been’ conformable to' the patriotic wish
of Sir Wm. Jonzs; that as the ‘continental nations of Europe hatl béen
‘the most diligent cultivators’ of the other oriental tongues, the merit? of
Sanserit research might chiefly pelong t6 his own: countrymen :- influs
enced by his. advice and example, his countrymen have labored ‘withong_
contemptible success, in this interesting ‘pursuit, and ‘have rendered the
language and literature of this division ‘of the. east aécessible ‘to the
world, The efforts of Sanscrit Scholars have hitherto however ‘been


PREFACE.


directed rather to the useful, than the pleasing, rather to works of
science than imagination. The complicated grammar of the Hindus has
been most successfully investigated, their mythology amply illustrated,
and much of their philosophy satisfactorily explained; their astronomical
works have been exhibited to the philosophers whose modern attainments
have rendered ancient science an object rather of curiosity than informe
ation, and their laws are ne longer concealed behind the veil of an
unknown tongue, from the knowledge of those who are charged with
the administration of justice in Hi indoostan. It only remains, to explore
‘tie field of their lighter literature, and transfer some Eo U3 most elegant
flowers to a European soil.
The Drama of Sacontala,. and the songs of JavavEva have prepared
the readers of the west, for the character of Sanscrit Poetry. To those
who know low much poctical beauty depends upon poetical expression,.
it is needless to observe, that these works have been much in ured by a
translation into prose, although that prose proceeded from the elegant
pen of Sir Wm. Jones: even in this state however they have received the
admiration of the Scholars of Ewrope;' even in their present dress it is
impossible to avoid discovering,. that they teem with fanciful imagory and
‘natural feeling, and that beyond the pale of mythological. allusion they
offer little to offend the most fastidious taste.

it has been observed by Mr. Corrprooxs,’ and. higher authority
cannot be desired, that the profane Poetry of the Eiindus affords beticr


orn ee ee eo ee ~—- = ae


' 4Sea the Appendix to Rossrzsov's Disquisition on India:
? Essay on Sunscrit and Pracrit Prosody, Asiatic Researches, Vol. 10.


PREFACE,


specimens of style and taste, than are to be found in the pocms which
are considered by them as sacred: such are the Purdias, the Mahalb?ia-
raé, aud the Radmdyana: the portions of these works therefore, which
on various occasions have appeared before the public, cannot be allowed
to detract from the general merits of Sanscrit composition, even though it
should appear that they have more charms,in me eye of literary curiosity,
than of public taste: they are recommended to the Hindus themselves, not-
by their beauty, or sublimity, the conduct of the story, or the elegance of
the styles but they owe their celebrity to their traditionary divineness, to the
force of habit, and the power of religious faith: the stories related in them,
the followers of Brauma have been accustomed to venerate, and the ex«
cellence of the compositions it would be sacrilege in them to deny: at the
same time, there are few Pandits of real learning who would not rather
peruse the Mé gha Diita than the Rdmayana; there are few, who in the
sincerity of unbiassed delight, do not transfer the palm of poetical pre-emi-
nonce from YVautmicr’ to CxLipa’s, |

Of the latter ef these eminent Bards little is ascertained by history,
though much is detailed by tradition: he is the real or supposed author of
a number of poetical works, each of which is of the highest merit. * The
Drama of Saconraza is attributed to him, and the text of another of his .
works, the Ritu Sanhava or Assemblage of the Seasons, has been printed
under the inspection of Sir Wm. J ONES, The present poem is believed to
be the offspring of his fertile imagination, and to the same source are


ascribed the Raghu Vasa or Race of Racuu, an epic poem; Cumara


———__ nee aa oe ee rt


3 Author of the Ramayana,


Som 8:


Wo 4 PREFACE.


f


Samb’hava, the birth of the deity Cumana, a poem chiefly mythological ;


aregular Drama entitled Urvasr, the name of one of the courtezans of


Swerga; and a farce called Hésydriiava, or the Sea of laughter; the’
Sringara Tilaca and Pragnotiara Mala, two short amatory poems,
and asmall treatise in verse upon poetical metre, called Sruta Bod’ha.


Several other works are said to be the compositions of Cx.ipAs, many of


z
. . . ¢ : . .
-which it has been conjectured are attributed to him, merely in consequence


of the reputation derived from those of which he was really the author.
The era of CXLipXs is generally asserted to be that uf VicramApiTya,
in whose court he formed one of the nine illustrious writers, characterised
by the epithet of the Nine Gems; as the name Vicramxpitva how-
ever has been undoubtedly applied to more than to one monarch, the
establishment of this fact leads us no satisfactory result, with respect to
the age of the poet. Sir Wm. Jones‘ conceiving the VicramApirya
mentioned, to be the same as the sovereign from whom the present
Hindu year, 1870, is dated, places the poet in the century preceding
the Christian era: Mr. Bentiey,’ trusting the Bhoja Prabandha and
Ayeen Achery, conceives VicramXpiTya to have been the same as Raja
Vicrama, successor to Raja Buosa, and places the Nine Gems in the
court of this monarch, in the end of the 11th, or the beginning of the 12th
century after Curist; and Mr. Coresrooxe,’ relying chiefly upon the


testimony of an inscription found at Bud’dha Gayd is inclined to consider


* Preface to Sacontala. ; os
5 Essay on Hindu Chronolegy, Asiatic Researches, Vol. 8.
§ Preface to the Amera Césha with Translation.


PREFACE. vii


the age of AMERA Sinua author of the Amera Cosha, to be at least 900.
years; and Amerra Srna was algo one of the Nine Gems, and conse-
quently a contemporary of Catipas: this last opinion seems entitled to the
preference. . :
To whatever name or period the Cloud Messenger may be assigned, it is
the production of a poet: ‘the circumstances of eastern- society and
climate, tend in a great measure to exclurie sublimity, either moral or
physical from their literary compositions, but the same circumstances are
favorable to the less awful graces of poetry, to the elegantly minute
observation of nature, and the tender expression of natural sensibility: the
frowning rock, or foaming cataract, the furious tyrant, or undaunted
patriot are not to be traced in Sanscrit verse, but we shall frequently meet
with the impassioned lover, or affectionate husband, with the unobtrusive
blossoms of the flower, and the evanescent tints of the sky: in point of
language Sanscri¢ writers are certainly unsurpassed, and perhaps un~
equalled, and their style in general is as full as it is sweet, as majestic as it
is harmonious ; the exceeding copiousness of the language -sometimes
leads them into those tricks of composition, which formerly exercised the
misdizected ingenuity of Eurepe, and puns, and quibbles and endless alli~
teration constitute the’ stanza3 their attention also to minute objects
sometimes terminates in quaintness, and affectation, but from the faults
‘of either sty le, or fancy, the subject of our present enquiry is entirely
exempt: there are alsoa copiousness and consistency in it, which are
not often paralelied in oriental writings; a quick succession of thought
and description, which the title of the work does not lead us to expect,


and a successful avoiding of inconsistency or absurdity, which so


wil PRETPACE


‘protracted an apostrophe as forms the theme of the poem shiglit have
induced us to apprehend § the style of the work is also exceedingly simple,
while at the same time, it is exquisitely polished; the merits of the work
are so highly appreciated by the Hindus, that notwithstanding its short
ness, it is classed amongst their Maha Cavyas or Great poems, and not-
withstanding its perspicuity, itis the object of much critical acumen,

_and learned elucidation : the“manuscript from which the text of the
following pages is printed, and for which the translator js indebted to
the kindness of Mr. Cotesrooxe, unites with the original, no fewer than
six Commentaries, the respective works of Marir Na&t’uy; Carysnxa
Maura, Sanctana Goswamt, Buarata Maruca, RAMancv’n Tercas
LANCARA and Hara Govinna VaCHESPATI.

In the conversion of the Megha Duta into English the translator has in
general endeavored to avoid being licentious, without attempting to be
literal ; the idioms of the languages are too different to admit of a very
precise transfusion of the one into the other, and it has been more the ob=
ject of the following translation, to render thoughts, than words: with a
few exceptions however, most of which are specified in the notes, it is believed
thatthe ideas of Caispa’s, will be found conveyed with tolgrable fidelyxy 2
tothe English reader, whose critical sagacity may discover, that the number

of lines in the translation is nearly double the amount of those of the
original, it may be sufficient, to observe, that this excess is balanced by the
number of syllables, of which one line of Sanscrit contains nearly double
the syllables of which one line of English consists, and that the little con-
nective particles which take up much space in the translation, are in a great


measure unknown to the readily compounded language of the original text.


PR EFACE. =


The translator believes that some apology may he requisite for the
TIength, and nature of many of the notes accompanying the translation:
some of them were indispensibles it was absolutely necessary to explain
the allusions to customs, or notions, to domestic manners, or religious
belief, to render the text intclligible in many places, and in cthers, to
enable the European reader to judge of the beauty or propriety of the
thoughts. The notes.to the geographical part of the poem, itis hoped -
will not be regarded as uscless or irrelevant, as they may perhaps throw seme
light upon the ancient geography of central Hindoostan. Illustrating
passages in the poem, by extracts from other Sanscrit authors, as well as
a few verbal and etymological remarks, may possibly be serviceable or ine
teresting, to the few and meritorious students of the beautiful though ine
tricate language of the original. Tracing the analogies between Greek,
and Hindu Mythology, furnished an amusement to the translator, which
he thinks communicable to others$ and the analogies between the poetry
of the east, and west, are given especially for the benefit of those liberal
critics, who admire upon the strength of prescription, the beauties of
clasi¢cal and modern writings, and) deny all merit to the same or similar
ideas, when ‘they occur in the works of oriental writers. Itis also enters
taining to observe, how much men resemble each other, in spite of the
accidental varieties of complexion or education of place, or time.

There are perhaps other subjects in the following pages which require
explanation, or apology ; as however this preface has already exceeded
reasonable limits, they must be consigned to the forbearance of the
reader, or they may be attributed to tle inexperience of the translator,


and the occupation of his time and attention in more serious pursuits...
a


THE


MEGHA DUTA;
OR,


CLOUD MESSENGER:


ARGUMENT.


Pm Yee


A YACSH-4A, or Demigod so called, anda servant of the Hindu God of wealth,
Cuvena, had incurred the displeasure of his lord, by neglecting a garden entrusted to
his charge, and allowing it to be injured by the entrance of Arna‘vara, the elephant of
Anpra, Deity of the firmament: as.a punishment for his offence, he was condemned to
twelve months banishment from Alaca, the city of the ‘Yacshas, and consequent separa~
tion from his home and wife. The seat of his exile is the mountain Ra magiri, and upon
the opening of the poem, he is supposed to have passed a period of eight months in solitary
seclusion : the poem opens at the commencement of the rainy season, when heavy Clouds
’ are gathering in the south, and proceeding in.a northerly course, or towards the Himdla
mountains, and the fictitious position of the.residence of the Yacshas. To one of these,
the distressed Demigod addresses himself, and desires the Cloud:to waft his sorrows to a
-beloved and regretted wife. For this purpase he first describes the route which the
Messenger is to pursue, and this gives the Poet an opportunity of alluding to the principal

mountains, rivers, temples, &c. that are to be met with on the road from Riamagirt to


a
ae


ARGUMENT «ll


- Oujein, and thence, omar “due north, to the ‘Hind laya or snowy mountains: the fabulous
‘fnountain Caila’sa, and the city of Cuve’na, Alaca,, ‘which are supposed to be in the central
part of the snowy range, are next described, and. we then come to the personal descrip-
tion of the Yeesha’s wife. The Cloud is next instructed how to express the feelings and


situation. of the exile, and he is then dismissed ‘from the . presence of the Deity, and the-
Poem df Ca’ Lipa’sa.


NOT E.


It may be necessary to observe that in reading the Saxscrit names which occur in the:
following work the consonants are to be prononnees as in sii eae with the exception
of C which is uniformly used for K agreeably to Sir Wat. Jones’s system. The vowels
have their natural pronunciation, ‘and the accent above a vowel marks its being long.


The vowels may be thus pronounced ;


; A as in America. AK as in Fer.
i as in . City. Y as in Italian or like our ce.
U vas in Full. wu do. or like oo.
KE as in Italian or like a in mode.
O as in English.


_ THE,


MEGHA DUTTA
or


CLOUD MESSENGER.


V V HERE. Rimagiri’s shadowy. woods extend, -


And those pure streams. where Sira' bathed, descends ~


afemrmnfacenturentaantyHa:
grRarguinragnaaaary: y -


” Samotations,


Vense 1. Rémagiri]. ‘Is a compound term signifyi ing. the mountain of Rat MA, and
may be applied to any of those hills in which the ‘hero resided during his exile, or peregri-
nations. His first and most celebrated residence was the mountain Chitraciit’‘a in Bundelcund,
now known by thé name of Comptah, and stilla'place of sanctity, and pilgrimage. We find .
that tradition has assigned to another mountain, a part of the Kimoor range, the honor of
affording him, and his companions, Sira and Lacsumana, a temporary asylum upon his
progress fo the south, and it is consequently held in veneration by the neighbouring vile
lagers : see Capt. Buunt’s journey from Chunarghur to Yertnagoodum, Asiatic Researches,
7:60, An account of.a journey from Mirsapore to Nagpore, however, in the Asiatic Annual


B


+


2 MEGHA DUTA OB


Spoiled of his glories, severed from his wife,
A banished Yacsha passed his lonely lifes 4
Doomed by Cuviira’s anger to sustain,


‘Twelve tedious months of solitude and pain.


augasaarameageeag
fe@ramangyraliqainegraag 1h
Arnotations,


Register for 1806, has determined the situation of the scene of the present poem, to be in

the vicinity of the latter city: the moderna name of the mountain is there stated to be

Ramtéc; it is marked in the maps Ramtege, but I understand the proper word is Ramtinc?,.

which in the Mahratta language has probably the same import as Ramagiri, the hill of
Rama. It is situated but a short distance to the north of Nagpore, and is covered with
buildings consecrated to Ra’ma and his eee which receive the periodical visits of
numerous and devout pilgrims.

Verse 2. Where Siva bathed.] In his patie Rama was accompanied by his younger
brother Lacsumana, and his faithful consort Siva, or as she is called in the original, the
- daughter of Janaca, until the Jatter was carried off by the demon or giant RAVANA: see
the Ramayana: the performance of her ablutions in the springs of the mountain, is here
stated to have rendexed their water the object of religious veneration.

A Aas 3. Spoiled of his glories.] In the original, “ His greatness was gone to its
setting!” a figure with which English poetry is perfectly familiar ; thus Woolsey i in Henry


the 8th,
Nay then farewell! i


P’ve touched the highest point of all my greatness,
And from that full meridian of my glory,
‘T haste now4o my setting.

Verse 4. A Yacsha] Is a demigod of which there exists a Gava or class; they
have few peculiar attributes, and are regarded only as the companions or attendants of
Cuvera, the god of wealth; the word is derived from A&I to worship, either because ‘
they minister to Cuve’ra, are reverenced themselves by men, or are beloved by the
Apsaras, the courtezans of Inpra’s heaven: they have however their own female com-
panions, or wives, as appears by the poem, One writer cited and ceasured by a Come


CLOUD MESSENGER.


«a


To these drear hills through circling days confined,

In dull unvaried grief, the Gon repined; Ca 8
And sorrow withering every youthful charm, |

Had slipped the golden bracelet from his arm,


nfaaaattscerna gaa aart
Aaa ARAR TATA lt
———————— EE ————————————————————————— lr ——————————


Amiotations,


mentator on the Amera Cosha, derives the name from S18] to eat, because he says they
devour children; occasionally indeed the Yacshas appear as imps of evil, but in general
their character is perfectly inoffensive.

Verse 5. Cuvera| In Hindu mythology performs the functions of the grecian
Puorvus; he is the lord of wealth, and master of nine inestimable treasures, his capital
is situated on mount Caildsa, and inhabited by Yacshas, Cinnaras, and other inferior
Geities: he has a variety of appellations alluding to these circumstances, but is most
commonly designated by the one here employed ; the term‘ is expressive of his defor-
mity, being derived from & vile, and az body, and he is deseribed as having three legs,
and but eight teeth: no images of him occur, nor is any particular worship paid to him,
and ‘in these respects there is a considerable analogy between him, and his grecian
paralell: Puurvs js described as blind, malignant and cowardly, and seems to have
received ‘but very slender homage frem G'reck or Roman, deyotion. The term Anger
here used is more literally, Czrse ; Imprecation is the great weapon of a Brahman, saint,
and deity, and>in either case is deadly and inexpiable: The gods themselves are ’subjact
to its force whether denounced by other deities, or by holy men, thus InpRA was
cursed by the Sage, Gavurama, and the circumstance of Brauma, not receiving any
peculiar worship from the Hindus, is stitl attributed to the operation of an Anathema
pronounced upon him by Siva.

Verse 10. Had Slipped the golden bracelet from his arm. i This is a favorite idea with
Hindu poets, and repeatedly occurs; thus in the elegant drama of Sacontala; DUSHMANTA


‘ays: = gaffer Peaerrtantfahh PRiesraraaia ia fant |


sanghramiaqnataarranaaeecnahieaa |
or in Sir Wa. Jones's version, “ This golden bracelet sullied by the flame which preys


go 8 MEGHA DUTA 02>


| When with Ashe: rha’s glooms the air was hung,
And one dark Cloud around the mountain clung; 12
In form some elephant, whose sportive rage,


_ Ramparts, scarce equal to his might, engage,


. Long on the mass of mead-reviving dew,
The heavenly exilg fixed his eager views 16
And still the melancholy tear suppressed,


Though bitterest sorrow wrung his heaving breast; _/


| waemyunfcaiaanige war

ayaismituammgadized uw atl
AQAA UT AAR ATT
TaspabacnqwaTaysaaay |


— ws


Amuotations,


on me, and which no dew mitigates, but the tears gushing nightly from my eyes, has fallen
again and again on my wrist, and has been replaced on my emaciated arm.”

Verse 1. When with A’shitha’s glooms] The month A’shdd’ha or A’ sha ir’ ha compre-«
hends the Jatter part of June, and the commencement of July, and is the period about
which the south-west monsoon, or rainy season usually sets in.

‘Vense 13. Jn form some elephant] Thus in the Purdna Sarcaswa clouds are described
as RIALS HATA RUT: Shaped like buffaloes, boars and wild elephants. In Cuar-
MAN’S Bussy D’ Ambois they are said to assume,

In our faulty apprehensions
‘The forms of dragons, lions, elephants

And Sraxespears although he omits the elephant, gives them with his usual overflow
ofi imagery, a great variety of shapes.

ae Sometimes we see a cloud that’s dragonish,

A vapour sometime like a bear or lion,


*


CLOUD MESSENGER:


BS)


Reflexion told what promise of delight,

Sprang from such gathering shades to happier sight,~ 20
Where the worn traveller is joyed to trace,

Hlis home’: approaching, and a-wife’s embraces

What hope alas was his! yet fancy found,

Some solace in the glooms'that deepened round, fe 24
And bade him hail amidst the iaboriiie air, -

A friendly envoy to his distant fairs.


Raaanaiay fears area faa:
RUS a lalasaiayae rss Ws ll.
uaMAaaiee farisiiaaaaaarl,
Sita aaN aaa] SI awAayy aR he


Annotations; -


A towered citadel, a pendant rock,
A forked mountain, or blue promontory,
With trees upon ’t that nod unto the world,
And mock our eyes with air, -
AnTHony, and CLEOPATRA,


Verse 20. Sprang from such gathering shades to happier sight] The commencement
of the rainy season being peculiarly delightful in Himdoostan, from the contrast it
‘affords to the sultry weather immediately preceding, and also rendering the roads
pleasant, and practicable, is usually selected for travelling. Hence frequent allusions
eccur in the poets to the’ expected return of such persons, as are at this time absent
from their family and home.


C


6 MEGHA DUTA-OF .


Who charged-with grateful tidings might impart,
New life and pleasure to her drooping heart. “28


Cheered with the thought he culled each budding flower,
And wildly wooed the fertilizing power;


(For who! a prey to agonizing grief,


/


Explores not idlegt sources for relief? we B2


wae aye aay
Pagiagya yaaa nAgaaT YU
was ivafaangia iguana
WMA MIT ATA gah qaai|Nr |


Annotations.


Verse $2. ‘The expression of this passage is somewhat different from it’s construction
in the original, the simplicity of which perhaps unfits it for Lxglish verse: the sentiment
has been translated rather than the words, which are to this effect: A Cloud is
* but an assemblage of smoke, fire, wind and water, how therefore should tidings be
-abtained from.it:by those who have life, and sensible organs. The Guhyaca from his
“ excegsive affliction not remembering this, addressed -his sujt to it; and verily, those
“ pained with desire, are unable to discriminate animated from inanimate beings.”
‘The author has here with great ingenuity apologized for the whole plan of his poem,
and attributed the apparent absurdity .of talking rationally to a Cloud, to the state
-of the Yacsha’s mind. The term Guhyaca which occurs in the original, is an appellative
of the same celestial being who is understood by the word Vacsha explained above.
It-is severally derived by Etymologists from WE to conceal, WS] a disagreeable sound,
or U8] a privity, because these beings are in charge of the treasures of Cuvera, ;
emit unpleasant sounds, or are attached to sensual objects. A recent and superficial
writer has derived it from 2] the podex, founded upon a legend cited in an Essay upon

mount Caucasus, by Mr. Witrorp, Asiatic Researches, Vol. 6, which has no relation
to the followers of Cuvwra; and has asserted that the dark souls of men addicted in


CLOUD MESSENGER: y


‘And as to creatures sensible of pain,

To lifeless nature, loves not to complain?)

Due homage offered, and oblations made,

The Yacsha thus the Cloud majestic prayed. “ 36


TAMA CMIAaT_ AIT
RA YR ARI UA aay Ml WN


Annotations.


this world to selfish gratification transmigrate into these demigods, a statement founded

upon I know not what authority. On the contrary indeed they are amongst the

highest forms which the second quality or that of a pesson attains
TPATIAATTATTTESA | FAT ATR RATS LATTA ul

Menez. 12,47. See Sir Ws. Jones’s translation.

Verse 35. And oblations made,} The oblation of :the blossoms of the Cut‘aja, (Nerium
anlidysentericum) is called Argha (st) in the original, a religious rite which seems to be
analogous to the libation of the earlier periods of the Grecian ritual, Sin the Amera
Césha, is described as a species of worship, and is perhaps more properly the act of offering a
libation to a venerable person, or to a deity, although it also implies the oblation itself,
otherwise denominated SIBI; this oblation, of which water forms the basis, is presented
in a cup, a shell, or any metallic oblong and boat shaped vessel; the vessel in the spoken
dialects is called by a similar name ( As | ) Argha; indeed Mr, WiiForp states,
Asiatic Researches, 3, 364, & 8, 274, that Argha-in Sanserit means a boat, whence he
deduces the ship Argo,:&c. and whence with Mr. Bryant’s assistance we may deduce
the Ark of scripiure: the Sanscrit word however has not been found in any of the
vocabularies of the language with the import Mr. Witrorp has ‘assigned to it.

The oblation called Argha or Arghya, generally consider ed, comprises eight articles,
thus enumerated,

31 etiqumfichefisneat | aa: fesrincganegiel ‘cafe I
‘“. The eight-fold Arghya is formed of water, milk, the points of Cusa grass, curds, clarified
“ butter, rice, barley, and white mustard.” In the A’chéra Dersa of Svridaita, ina passage
quoted from the Dévi Reais ina, ue ares stated somewhat dite, thus,


afc GRAAGNAe | mA UgeTAM aaa |


8 . MECHA DUTA. Ob;


Hail! friend of Inpra, counsellor divine,.


Illustrious offspring of a glorious lines


Siig Ryaafafetgena AAA
SARAH ATR AE ARIAS a? |


Arictations,


“ The general Argha proper for any ‘of the gods consists’ of Saffron, the Bé/, unbroken
“ grain, flowers, curds, Duérva grass, Cusa gtass, and Sesamum.”” Water is not mentioned
here, being considered as the vehicle- of the whole: the same author adds, that should -
any of these not be procurable they many ee supplied by the imagination, -
SHA PAL ATS AGATA A N
Besides the Argiia common to all the Gods, there are peculiar ones for separate deities:
thus we find a few new blown buds, are sufficient for a Cloud, and in the Sarcaswa Purdna
the Argha for the Sun is. thus enumerated,
SEAR APH A TEY FTAA HT

“ Having presented an Arghya to the Sun-of water mixed with sandal, and flowers,” and’
an oblation to the: same planet as given by Mr.. Coresroox®r, Asiatic Researches, 5,
357 ; is said to consist of Ti’a, flowers, barley, water-and red.sanders. Water alone is also
sufficient to constitute the Argha. In the articles which form the Argha of the Hindas,
as well as in the mode of presentation, that of pouring. it out or libating, we trace it’s
analogy with the ancient libations of course wine could never enter into Hindu offerings
of this kind, but we find that the Greeks had their vy@ddia tes or sober sacrifices, from:
which wine was excluded: these were of four kinds; T& vigérrovde, libations of water,
TH wehionovee of honey, TH yarexléenoda2 of milk,.and 7a éAudstovdz of oil; which liquors were
sometimes mixed with one another. According to Porpuyry most of. the libations in the
primitive times were dds. See Porrer’s Antiquities of Greece. We have here then three
ef the four fluid substances of an Argha, as first enumerated above, if we may compare
the clarified butter with the ofl: honey: would of course-be omitted. on.the same account
as wine, being a prohibited article in. Hindu law: with respect to the solid parts of the
offering, a reference to the same authority will shew, that they: consisted of green herbs, *
grains, fruits, flowers and frankincense, analogous to the grasses, rice, barley, flowers,
sandal, &c. of the Sanscrit formule.

Verse 37, fail! fricnd of Inpra] Inpra. is the sovereign deity of Swerga, or the


CLOUD MESSENGER. | on)


Wearer of shapes at will; thy worth I know,
And bold entrust thee'with my fated woe; —~ 49
For better far. solicitation fail,


With high desert, than with the base prevail. |


Noe > i 2 ON i
rafiarafareamre Cp mTsE
UA as TATARSTAN tS


Annotations,


Tindu Olympus; the Cloud is here considered as his friend or counsellor, in allusion to
his functions as regent of the atmosphere, where he appears in the character of the
Juriren tonans, or veOsdyyegera Zevs: the appellative HU4N used in the original, is con«
sidered by Etymologists as irregulgrly derived from the passive form of HE to adore,
to worship.

Verse 38. Illustrious offspring of a glorious line.] According to the original, “ Des.
cended from the celebrated line of the Pushcardévartacas,’’ translated in a prose version of
this passage, “ Diluvian Clouds;” see Conesrooke, on Sanscrit and Pracrit prosody,
Asiatic Researches, Vol. 10. Clouds, agreeably to the Brahma da Purdna are divided into
three classes according to their origin from fire, the breath of Brauma’,, or the wings of ls


mountains, which were cut off by InpRA (421). These latter are also called WERT AR
being especially the i io of water, thus in ee Purdiia Sarvasway,
PATA AT STAAL | TRAYTAA HAMMACLPAL II ,

¢ The name Pushcard’ is applied to those Clouds which are swollen with abundant
“¢ water, and which are on that account termed Pushcardvartaca, (or reteptacles of that
© fluid).”

Verse 39. Wearer of shapes at will] Or Camarupa monte bus desire, and ® form,
shape; thus Socrates, in the Clouds.

Le. Tiovros wav bri ay Rwdovlar
pe ‘foc: Why then,
Clouds can assume what shapes they will, believe me,
ComBerLann’s Translation.

Verse 40. For better far solicitation fuil, §&c.] This a sentiment of rather an original

strain, and indicates considerable elevation of mind: something of the same kind occurs


D


wo . MEGHA DUTA OR | |


‘Thou art the-wretch’s aid, affliction’s friend!
To me, unfortunate, thy succor lend. - _ AA
My lonely staie compassionate behold,


‘Who mourn the vengeance of the God of golds

- Coridemned amidst these dr eary rocks to pine,

"And all I wish, and all Tlove resign. ~~ | 48
| Where divell the Yaeshas in their sparkling fields,


. And Siva’s crescent groves surrounding gilds,


aqnpiaaafantararaare fara
Baudauar eR feg_ iar \
TAA RAS MTAR AALS STAT 7
aS ateraciaes AEA TA | ON
MAR SRTAIZ ALE TAA RATT

| Peaeacfensiaaryqaarersgarey |


2g ~— gianotationns,


fe Maseing rer apes of the Bondman, where PisanDER saysy
‘I'd rather fall under so just a judge,
Than be acquitted by a judge corrupt,
- And partiab in his censure.
-Vense 4G. The God of gold Cuvera; see above.
Verse 50. Where Stv4’s crescent realms surrounding gilds.] The crest of Siva is the |
new moon, which is sometimes described as forming a third eye in his forehead; the.
‘Himdla mountains amongst which we shall hereafter find Cai/asa to be situated: are
Siva’s favorite haunts; he also resides occasionally on that mountain, and is represented
as the particular friend and frequent guest of CuvE’Ra-


CLOUD MESSENGER, . A


Direct thy licensed journey, and relate;

‘To her who mourns in Alaca my fates «8B
"There shalt thou find the partner of my woes,

True to her faith, and stranger to reposes |

Her task to weep our destiny severe,

And count the moments of ihe lingering years we 56
A painful life she Teads, but stil she lives,

While hope its aid invigorating gives |


awWaS fate furs equa ASAT
AUIS HA ALT AT AG Lah
Rene qafsaTaa aaa
alngiaaclary celts ay ang: I


Sunstations.


Vense 52, I have here taken a liberty with the order of the original, and brought
the deseription of the Yacsha’s wife a little in advance, in order to preserve the descrip-
tion which follows of the Cloud’s progress more connected: the Hindu poets are not
very solicitous in general about arrangement, but it is possible that in this case I may
not have improved upon that of Cauipa‘s. The 10th stanza of the Sanscrit corresponds
with these lines.

Verse 53. Alaca is the capital of Cove'ra, and the residence of his-dependant deities.

Verse 56. And count the moments of the lingering year.]

Tempora si numeres bene que numeramus amantes. Ovi.
Or count the time like those who faithful love. .
Verss 58, While hope it’s aid invigorating gices.| Thus in the Tristia of Ovin, 3, 3. 16,
Spesque tut nobis causa vigoris erit. '
And hope in you shall be our cause of strength. .


ag -. - MiicHa DOTA oR.


For female hearts, though fragile as the flowers


Are firm, when closed by a investing, power. 60


Still as thou ridest on the friendly gale, .
Shall widowed wives thy march advancing hail; we
And all whom no tyrannic. laws control,


Shall bless thy shadows, deepening as they roll: ~~ 64


TAMARA AA AAT SSAA
Slaeqaawayquiaraaaaae CY
AQ APIA UAAATaRTA
aaAafawanfasege ys t


MMAATRT AVI aa TAA
aguitguiagcatagaiqaig bt & tt


SImotations,


Verse 60. The thought i is not explained ath more fully in the original than in the
. ‘translation, but the allusion is sufficiently obvious: the poet treating the heart as.a
flower, assigns to Tope the function of shutting up -its. petals, an office thus given "


Dr. Darwin. to some of his, “ Pellucid forms.”
. Guard the coy blossom from the pelting shower,


_ From each chill leaf the silvery drops repel,
And close the timorous floret’s golden hell, e j
.So should young Sympathy, &e. . Botanical Garden.
Verse 62.. Shall widowed wives thy march advancing hail.}) This refers to the circum
stances mentioned above: Note on Y, 20, »
- Verse 63. And all whom no tyrannic laws control,] Or in the original, “ Every one
“ who is not dependant as I am upon the will of another.”


‘CLOUD: MESSENGER al ety


The gentle breeze shall fan thy stately way,


En sportive wreathes thie Cranes around thee play; ~~.


Oo
Annotations,


Vense 65. Nothing can be more beautifully harmonious than the original language of —
this stanza: the exact adaptation of sound to sense, isa school boy absurdity; founded
upon the excessive admiration entertained by early scholars of the expressiveness of the
Greek tongue, and is a thing which’ experiment does not verify: general notions are all
that can be conveyed by mere sounds, and although the harshness, or softness of the
lines, which describe the steady or clamorous march of the Greeks or Trojans, (see the
opening of the third Book of Homenr’s Iliad), may convey some ideas of discipline or
disorder, yet to those whe are ignorant’ of the precise meaning of the words, they can
convey even those ideas but very imperfectly; as far however as. 9d

«6 ‘The sound caz be an echo to the sense,”

‘The present lines instance it very favorably;'and the waneaaia &c. of the text
proceeds as equably and as smoothly as the gentle breeze which it describes.

Verse 66. Valdca, (aaa) is said in Mr. Cotesrooxe’s Amera Césha, to mean a
small Crane; the word is alsvays feminine, and perhaps therefore means the female bird
only ; indeed some of the Commentators on this poem call it the female of the Vaca, (a%)
Ardea Torra and Putea; the rainy season is that of their gestation, which explains their
attachment to the Clond, and the allusion to its impregnating faculty mentioned in the
text of the original, alerasaafeaa" —The periodical jaurnies and orderly flight 6f this
kind of bird, have long furnished classical poetry with embellishments; they are frequently
¢iluded to by Homer, as are the wild geese, of which mention is also made below :—thus
in the passage of the Iliad, referred to in the preceding note, and again, B, 2. 459.

Tay v,acr bgufBeay merenvacy Ebyen TOMA, .

Xyvav, 4 vegdvov, 4 nunvev SouaiLodeigna vy

“Acia év Atiiiv, Kavorgfou ou? péebgce
Not less their number than th’ embodied cranes,
Or milk white swans in Asia’s watery plains,
That o’er the windings of Cuyster’s springs,
Stretch their long necks and clap their rustling mites Pore,


E


a is | x ‘MEGHA DUTA OR
" Pleased on thy left the Chiétaca one
"Pursue thy path, and cheer it with his: song $ 68


| RBA TU SPN SAAR RT Ny


. - Strmotations, ,


The translator has omitted the geese. Mizron also describes the. fight of these birds,
So steers the prudent Crane, :
Her annual voyage borne on winds.
. . Paradise Lost, 7. 436,
- And again line-442. |
Others on silver lakes and rivers bathed,
» Their an eoway breast,
Yet oft they quit,
The dank, and rising on stiff penons tower,
The mid aerial sky. -
Verse 67, The Chdtaca is a bird er to drink no water but rain water; of
course he always makes a prominent figure in the description of wet or cloudy weather;
thus in the rainy season of our author’ 3, (RIVER) Ritu Sankiva or assemblage of
seasons.
: nae Serentene’: I Sen PRT Uae PEA | be
LaPeer: | aT: aa FRSA i
The thirsty Cha‘taca impatient eyes,
_ The promised waters of the laboring skies;
© _ Where heavy Clouds with low but pleasing song,
a In slow procession murmuring move along.

Ih the translated Amera Cosha, it appearsthat the Chdtaca is a bird not vet well
known, but that it is possibly” the same as the Pipiha, a kind of cuckoo, ¢Cuculus radiatus )i
“The term 4H. is rendered by the Commentators ‘in general left, on the left side, but
RAMANA TH TURCALANCA RA interprets. it beautiful, and maintains that the cry of
birds to be auspicious should be upon the right side, not upon the left; Buarata
Mazuzica however cites astrological writers to PrOxes: that the Chataca is one of the
exceptions to this rule.

af Suemarsraaeyetier: Tas | HUTT ATTIRE: SURAT I
“ Peacocks, Chdtacas, Chashas, oe jays) and other male birds, occasionally also Aniie


CLOUD MESSENGER. M-, 2 15
And when thy thunders soothe the parching carth,
And showefs éxpected, raise her mushicom births
The Swans for mount Caildsa shall prepare,


And track thy course attendant through the aire 4 7


saqiafeafaraaseciaaay
VAT AAA AAI TAL TAS WU


Ainotations,


“Jopes, going chearfully along the deft, give good fortune to the host.” The Greek
Notions agreed with those of Ramana?’ and considered the flight of birds upon the
right side to be auspicious, the Romans made it the left, but this difference arose from the
situation of the observer, as in both-cases the auspicious quarter was the east ; the
oievoroAos facing the north and Aruspex the south: in general, according to the Hindus,
those omens which occur upon the left side are unpropitious. The musical accompani«
ment described in the text is perfectly classical, thus Virain eae 3! of the birds has,
Variee circumque supra we
Mthera mulcebant cantu.
Around, above, the birds of various kind,’
Charmed all the air with song.
fineid 'T. 32, '
Vense 71. “ The Réjahansas desivous of going to the lake Ménasa, shall a aecompany
“ thee as far 48 Cuilisa, having laid in their- provisions for the road, from the new sioois
“ of the filaments of the stalk of the lotus;” This is the closer reading of the text. The
Rajuhansa, is described as a white Gandcr with red legs and bill, and together with the
common Goose is a favorite bird in Hindu poetry: not to shock European prejudice,
J have in all cases substituted for these birds, one to which, we are rather more accustom. |
_ed in verse, the Swan; which however owes its dignity to the idle fable of it’s musical
death: the motion of the goose is supposed by the J2éndus, to resemble the shufhing
‘walk which they esteem graceful in a woman, thus in the Ru Sanhdra, or the Scasoney
of cur poet, SSR SCC MUIR a IGIGe
Nor with the poose the smiling fair,
In graceful motion can compare,


wm  Micua DUTA OR
eo
a Short be thy greeting to this bil] addressed;
_ This hill with Rama’s holy feet i imprest s
| Thy ancient fr iend, whose scorching: SOYrows Mourn,


' Thy frequent absence, and delayed return.) 0" 6


— sIgufqaawaayyafagTed
Se garcgahaacigraaagy N
RSH aefrys ayaa
7 a fea ae HAC ga WARM


Annotations,


BMount: Caildsa is the destination of the Cloud, and the Rdjchansas are supposed to
migrate annually to the celebrated lake Ma‘nasa or Manasarour, which if it exists at all,
' Jies in-the bosom of the Zima la2 laya nen the supposed situation of the mythological
Cailésa.

Verse 73, The term SYR in the original does not seem to convey any very
_ Precise idea : if translated “ask,” or “© address,” both which meanings may be affixed
to it, is still leaves us in the dark as to the object of the address, or enquiry: one com-
. Snentator explains it “ask the way,” but this the Yacsha isto tell, not the mountain ;
the others seem to-agree that it means to address, that is perhaps to take leave of it &c.
' previous to its departure; the cause of the friendship supposed to exist between the
Cloud and mountain we shall have further occasion to notice. .

| Verse 74. With Ramas holy feet imprest.| In the original text we have, “ marked
. & with the venerable feet of Racuurats.” This’ appellation is given to Raa, as the
‘most distinguished, the lord or master as “it were, of the line of Racuu, an ancestor
of that warrior and himself a celebrated hero and sovereign. Rasa is hence also
termed Racuava, (a4) a regular derivative from Hacuu, iniplying family descent;
the exploits of the two-heroes form the chief subject of another poem by our author
_ entitled Raghucansa, (TaD or the race of Raguv.. The Commentator Bharata Mallica
has taken much pains with the word .W2! which occurs in the original and which being
hh n the pial number he is apprehensive may be translated “ with inany feet,” he therz«


~ a2 T


CLOUD MESSENGER; ae
Yet ere thy ear'can drink what love inspires,
‘The lengthened way my: guiding aid requiress .
On on whose path, full many a lofty hill,


Shall éaxe thy toils, and maany.a cooling rilly ¥~ ~~ 80


ey,


HAA ALY RIAA YAM TST
we taaraqaracsyasyaIay |
fan ieahtekuegyraaaa
* dpa la gaa sy T_T | WI


Annotations,


fore cites Médini to shew that it may have other senses, and that it also implies the mark.
-of a foot, or a.mark, an impression in general, and that, consequently we may render the
passage ‘ the hill whose sides are marked with many traces of. Ray MA, or, with many
“ impressions of his feet.” | :
Verse 77. To drink with the ear is a figurative expression, common in English and.
classical writers. Thus SuaxusPrane.
My ear hath not yet drunk a hundred wor ds,
Of that tongue’s utter ance, yet I know the sound. "
: Romeo and Juiiet,
And Worace in the 13th Ode of the 2d Book. ©
. Pugnas et exactos tyrannos,
. Deane humeris bibit aure vuleus.
’ But thronging crowds will press to hear,
And drink the strain with eager ear,
‘That tells of bloody fight,. or sings,
The downfall of: tyrannic hings.

Vense 80, In the construction of the text of the original, a pleasing artifice occurs, co
which Hindu poets are in the frequent use; the repetition of the same word in order
‘to encrease its force, and heighten its effect, thus we have above, fisz: fax and eu:
esta: or weary, weary; feeble, feeble ; you may repose, &c. ” In no language perhaps
has this figure been carried far ther than in the Hagish; and it may be a. question whether
in the well known,


F


18 | wiiena DTA oR


‘Rise Soin these streams and seck. the upper sky}

Then to the north with. daring pinions fly:

The beauteous Sylphs shall mark thee with amaze,

As backward bent thou strik’st their upward gaze, “84


*


°


By qqreiaaiegyay |
ea EATS AUTH t


LS


2


Srnotations.


Fallen, fallen,.

Fallen, fallen,

Fallen from his high estate. 7
we may not be justified in saying, “ something too nite of this.’” A fine instance of
the figure occures in Honacz’s masterly Ode.—Justum et Tenacem, &e.


Ilion, - ion.

- Fatalis incestusque judex,

Et mulier peregrina vertit in pulcerem.

. The stanger Harlot, and the judge unjust,. .

Have levelled Ilion, Ilion, with the dust.
Verse 8f. We now begin the geographical part of the Poem, whicheas far as if cam
he made out through the difference of ancient and modern appellations, seems to be very
accurately conceived ? the two extreme points of the Cloud’s progress are the vicinity of”
Nagpur, as mentioned in the note: on Verse: I, and the mountain Cailisa, or rather the
- Himalaya vange. During this, course the poet notices some of the most celebrated places,
with the greater number of which we are still acquainted, In the first instance we have
here -his direction due north from the mountain of Rdmagiri ; and we shall notice the
' other points as they occur. : e
_ Verse 83. . Literally the wives of the Sidd‘kas; the Sidd“has are originally humar
" peings, but who by devout abstraction have -attained superhuman powers, and a station:
apparently intermediate between men aud Gods; they tenant the upper reg ions of the air.


CLOUD MESSENGER. ae


In doubt if by the gale abruptly torn,

Some mountain peak along the air is borne;

The ponderous Elephants who prop the skies, ? cm
Shall view thy form expansive with surprize; wes 83
Now first their arrogance exchanged for shame, |


Lost in thy bulk their long unrivalled fame.


camrararetetagaguiaaye Ci
fear qaiqetaRae waa Uy! i


Smotations,


Verse 86. Sonte mountain peak along the air is borne.] Thus Lucretius, 4, 110.
EInterdum magni montes woulsaque saxdy.
Montibus anicire and solem subcedere proptcre
. Mountains hence,
And mountain rocks torn from their base abrupt,
Seem oft to hover, blotting now the sun.
Goon’s translation. Also, B. 6. 183.

Quum montibus adsimilata,
Nubila portabunt venti transcersa per aurgs,
For mark what Clouds of mountain bulk the winds,
Drive through the welkin when the tempests rave. Ibid.

Verse 8%. Each of the four quarters, and the four intermediate points of ‘the coms
pass, has according to the Hindus, a regent or presiding deity ; ; each of these deities also
has his male and female elephant; the names of them all are enumerated i in. the Ancra
(osha; see Mr. Covesrooke’s translation,


200 MEGHA DUTA OR


| a
Eastward where various gems with blending Tay,
In Inpra’s bow o'er yonder. hillock play, : . 92
. And on thy shadowy form such radiance shed, :
_ As Peacocks plumes around a Crisuna spread,!
Direct thy courses to Malas smiling ground,
Where fragrant vlipe breathes the fields arounds - ae 06:


TABATA AAA TSN,
SMlagAs rg awAe a |
damrreageATR TATA

ai aeeginaiertrataletr hat


Ammotations, -


Verse 91. A reference to the map will shew, that it was necessary for the Cloud to
begin the tour by travelling towards the east, in order to get round the lofty hills which


-! ina manner form the eastern boundary of the Vindhya chain, It would otherwise have
' been requisite to have taken it aeross the most inaccessible part of those mountains,


where the poet. could not have accompanied it, and which would also have offended -
some peculiar notions entertained by the Hindus of the Vindhya hills, as we shall again
have occasion to remark, ;
Verse 92. Invra’s how is the Rain-bow.
Verse 93.. The body of Crisun‘a is represented of a dark blue color, and the
plumes of the peacock are frequently arranged upon the images ‘of this deity: the
plumage of this bird has been often compared to he Rain- bow ; thus Miron in the


-Tth Book, line 443, of Par adise lost,


. Whose gay. train,
Adorns him colored, with the florid hue,
. Of Rain-bows, and starry eyes. ’
The color of the Cloud, and that of the deity being similar, we thus have a very
close and pleasing comparison,
Verse 95. It is not easy after the lapse. of ages to ascertain pr ecisely the scite of


‘several places enumerated in the poem before us. The easterly progress of the Cloud,


one MESSENGER, eh


Thy fertile gifts, which looks of loye reward,
Where bright-eyed Peasants tread the verdant sward. ee


Thence sailing north and veering to the west, . .
On Amracitas lofty ridges rest; wae a 100.


>


mearare fame tayrantana:
aafgsarcayars®: dana
VYMTIMITACMAaA_ Ay |
fgigaargsagnitfatgearata ye Ul


Annotations.


and the subsequent direction by which he is to reach the mountain A‘mraciifa, prove
that the place here mentioned must be somewhere in the immediate vicinity of Rutlun-
pour, the chief town of the northern half of the, province of Chetcesger’h, and described .
in Captain Buwn7t’s tour, Asiatic Researches, Vol. 7, and also in that of the intelligent
though anonymous traveller, in the Asiatic Annual Register, for 1806. The only modern
traces that can be found of it are in a place called JZa/da, a little to the north of Rutiup-
poor, In Prowemy’s map there is a town called Muleta, and situated’ with respect to
the Vind’ hya mountains, similarly with the Mila of our poet. I should have supposed
that the Mala mentioned from the geography of the Purdnas by Mr. Witrorp, (Asiatic

" Researches, 8, 336), was the same with the place alluded to in the text of Canivas: if _.
however that gentleman is correct in applying the name to the Afalbhoom of Alidnapoor, :
it will be much farther to the east than-will do for our present purpose, and must ke
an entirely different place. There is little reason to think that either of these Malas are
the country of the &/alli who are mentioned by Piiny, and w rho are more probably the
same with the Maada of Arrien, and the inhabitants as is stated by Major ene
of the province of Multan.

Verse 100. The course pointed out to the Cloud, and an allusion which follows to
the vicinity of the Narmada river, furnish us with reasons for supposing, that the moun-
tain here méntioned, is that more commonly designated by the name of Omercuntuc.
dhe change of sound is not more violent, than it isin a number of evident corruptions


-G


22 : MEGHA DUTA oR?
_ Oft have thy showers the mountain’s flares allay ed,
Then fear not wearied to demand its aid §
Not e’en the vilest, when a falling fr iend,
Solicits help it once was his tolend, 104 -
The aid that gratitude exacts denies;


€


Much less the virtuous shall the claim despise.


RAT YM aRaaraaaryA Sy
aed AAT AAA ANAL: |
AMSSUVUAQATATAyay
Waeava ters aaa Nl LO Ut


————s a


Gunotations..


‘from the Senscrit language, now current m the dialects of India. The term A’mracuta”
; means the Mango Peak, and refers to the abundance of Mango trees in the incumbent |
and surrounding forests. Should this conjecture be correct, it will ‘invalidate the deriva-
' tion assigned with some ingenuity to the word Omercuntuc, in a prefatory note to a
pleasing little oriental poem, published in Engdand, called the Metamorphosis: of Sora.
‘The author of that note imagines the proper name to be Omer C’handaca,and he is happy
in the affinity of the sound, though not in his definition of the sense, as: “ the district of’ |
‘6 Omer,” is exceedingly unmeaning, and erroneous. Amera C’handaca might mean the-
“ inmortal portion,” but I do not know of any reason for assigning such an <prthes to the.
mountain in question.

Vense 103. The Fizdus,have been the object - -of much idle panegyric, and sual
idle detraction; some writers have investéd them with every amiable attribute, and they
have been deprived by others of the common virtues of humanity. Amongst the excel-
Jencies denied to them, gratitude has been always particularized, and there are many of
the European residents in India, who scarcely imagine that the natives of the country
ever heard of sucli a sentiment. To them, and to all detractors-on this head, the above

‘verse isa satisfactory reply, and that no doubt of its tenor may remain, I add the literal


1
A


CLOUD MESSENGER: 93


j


‘When o’er the wooded mountain’s towering heady _


Thy hovering shades like flowing tresses spreads . 108


Its form shall shine with charms unknown before,


"That heavenly hosts may gaze at, and adore;


This earth’s round breasts bright swelling from the ground,
And with thy orb as witha ample crowned, (~~ 118


Next bending down-wards nee thy lofty flig ght,
On Chitraciwfa’s humbler peak alight;


Sa —— a —=—=


Sarraaicaanaay apa
Wao laarasafaautaayT tp
qaarQUAt Aya GAM ana |
TAAL TY aa aT TIS! I USN
weaeyhqeniaqufgare


FRAT AA ATT LAY AAT |


' Annotations,


translation of the original passage: Not even a low man when laid hold of for
“ support bya friend, will turn’ away his face with forgetfulness of former kindness ;
S¢ how therefore should the exalted act thus.” -


Verse 112,
beautiful song.


Vense 113.


We have something of this comparison reversed in SHAKESPEARE’s


Hide, oh hide, those hills of snow,
Which thy frozen bosom hears,
On whose tops the pinks that gr OW; :
Are of those that April wears.
- The mountain here mentioned niust be in the ae of Ounercuntue,


ee 4 “MECHA DDTA ok:


: Orer the tall hill thy weariness ; forego,
a ‘And quenching rainedr ops on its flames BESLOW 5 | AG


+S For speedy fruits are certain to await,


Assistance yielded to the good and great.


Thence journeying ‘onwards: Yr indhyas ridgy chain, f Ee
ands Reva’ 8 an that bathes its foot attains oe 120


sraituantmmigecranti
Bee naan r Xe 7
fgainferaastauyaggaas
aarti racing '


Aunetations,


and part of the same range; the name signifies, “‘ the wariegated .or wonderful peak,”
and is applied to a number of hills ; -the most famous hill of this name, as was mentioned
in the first note, is situated in Bendel c’hand.

. Verse 119. The Vindhya range of mountains holds a very distingutshed station .
both inthe mythology and geography of Hindoostan, these points are both discussed
at some'length in the tour from Mirzapore to Nagpore, i already cited, and as in those pas-
‘sag res which 1 have been able to investigate, I find a perfectly accurate statement, I shall
here transcribe the words of its author. ©

> % Bind’h, in Sanscrit named Vind hya, constitutes the limit between i. jidbaslan and the
Deccan, the most ancient Hindu authors assign it as the southern boundary of the region,

which they denominate Aryabhuma.or Aryaverta. Modern authors, in like mariner make
this the line which discriminates the northern from the southern nations of Jndia. It«
reaches almost from the eastern to’ the western sea: and the highest. part of the range,

deviates little from the line of the tropic. The mountainous tract; however, which
retains the appellation, spreads much more widely ; It meets the Ganges, in several places
-towards the north; and the Cem: is held to be its southern limit.


CLOUD MESSENGER. 25
Where amidst rocks whose variegated glow,
The royal elephant’s rich trappings show, -


Arduous she winds, and next through beds of flowers,


She wins her way, and: washes Jambu bowers g 4124


PareTrataaa eran fastr |
ayfaeee feafat Parayiaryrse | Be |


- Annotations,


Sanscrit’ etymologists. deduce its name from a circtmstance to which I have just’ now
alluded; it is called Bind’hya, says the author of a Commentary on the Amercosh, because
people think (EqRaTA) ‘the progress of thesun is obstructed (#4) by. it; suitably to
this notion, the most.elevated ridge of this tropical range of mountains is found. to rum


from a point, that lies between Chhota Nagpore, and Palamu, to another that is situated
in. the vicinity of Ougeiz:. But the course of the .Nermada river better indicates the’


direction of the principal range of the Vind’h hills. From Amracuta, where this river has
als source, on the same spot with the Sove, and the £atsu, to the gulf of Cambayay
where it disembogues itself into the’sea, the channel of the Nermada is confined by a:
range of hills, or by a tract of elevated ground; in which numerous rivers take their rise ;
and by their subsequent’ course towards the Sone sind Jamuna on one side, and towards:
the Topti and Oodacer ow the other, suiliciently indicate’ the superior elevation of that
tract through which the Mermada has forced its way.

The vast extent of this mountainous tract, contrasted with the small elevation of these
Hills, viewed from the plains of Hindoostan, has furnished grounds fora legend, to which
the mythological writings of the ZZindus often allude ; Vind hya having once prostrated


himself before his spiritual guide, Acasty A, still remains in that posture by command of °


the holy personage. This humiliation is the punishment of his presumption in emulating.

the lofty height of Hindlaya and Mcru, According to ‘this legend, Vind hya has one

foot at Chienat 2 and hence the real name’ of that fortress: is: said to be Chcrenadri,

- €3UE) his other foot is, I think placed, by thesame legend, in the vicinity of Gaya:

the vulgar, very inconsistently, suppose the head of the prostrate mountain, near the tem-

ple of Vind@’hya Vasini, four miles from ALirzapore.” . ’
Verse 120, The &écvaisaname of the Aermeda river, which as we. have secu in

)


t


athe,


Fie


ee, Micra DUTA OR


Tere the-soft dews thy path ‘has lost restume,

And sip the gelid current’s vich perfume,
Where the wild Blephant delights te shed,

. ‘Ehe juice exuding fragrant from his heads “ - 49g
. Then swift proceed, nor shall the blast have force, -

To check with empty gusts thy ponderous course,


c


aad


: wafghtansetiterqagie
SATA TAS ALAA AAT aT WW


-smEgatelaraiaagegiat
 fcadmatiigegradtaicaa 1 ul


Annotations,


the preceding note, rises from’ the mountain A’mraci‘t’a. or Omercuntuc. It may be here
- observed that the rivers are always personified by the Hindus, and are in general female
personifications. Thus we have Ganaa’ the daughter of Ja’unv, Yauuna, the daughter
of the Sun, and Reva or Nerma‘dd the daughter of Himala, as is said in the hymn,
"translated from the Vay Purdnd, and given by Gaptain Buunt; Asiatic Researches, 7,
103. The names of the Nermada es are thus stated in the Amera Cosha,
- , PAAR RAAT NATTA
og Réva, Nermad > Sémédbhava and Mecala- Canyaca” which are explained by the best
Commentators, thus, “ who flows, who delights, who is descended from the line of the moon, and
who ts the daughter of Mecala ;” the last term is applied either to the VinPhya. mountain,
or is considered to be the name of a Rishi or saint, and progenitor of the river” Goddess.
Tradition has assigned to this river a yery. Ovidian kind of tale, which is related in Cap=
tain Buunt’s tour, and which has been repeated in verse, with much elegance and spirit,
by the author of the Metamorphosis of Sona. .
Vense 124. .Jambu bowers. ] The rose apple (Eugenia Jamboo).
Verse 127, «The juice exuding fragt rant from his..head.] tis rather extraordinary
oe this J juice © which nude from the temples. a the eleplant,, especiallyin the season -


ae


CLOUD MESSENGER ~~ 8


Reviving nature hounteous shall dispense,
To cheer thy journey, every charm of sense$ 132.
Blossoms with blended green and russet hue, —
And opening buds shall smile upon thy views
Earth’s blazing woods i in incense shali arise, . '.


And warbling birds with music fill the skies, a 136.


4,


aueyakaatingartene
earyanggaraeeqaSy u
Kray RT aya Salt
WF aagiT AAA Nl NU


Sinotations,


of rut, should have been unnoticed by writers on natural history. I have not: found
‘any mention of it in the works of Burrow, nor in the more recent publication of Suaw 5
neither do any other writers on this subject seem to have observed it: the author of the
‘Wild sports of the East states that “ on each side of the elephant’s temples there is an
“ aperture about the size of a pin’s head, whence an ichor exudes;” but he does not
appear to have been aware of its nature; indeed his descriptions though entertaining
are frequently defective, owing to his extremé ignorance of the languages, the literature
of which-he so liberally. devotes to the flames: in the Amera Césha this fluid is termed
Rai cand ala and the elepkant .while it flows is distinguished by the terms Ufiar
nfsane from ‘the animal out of rut, or after the juice Has ceased to exude, and who


is then_ called Set: or HE! all these names are expressive of the. circumstances ;
“the exudation and fragrance of this fluid is frequently alluded: to in®Sanserit poetry ;
it’s scent is commonly compared to the odor of tlie- sweetest’ flowérs and is then
supposed to deceive and attract the bees: these circumstances occur ia this passage from
@ work already referred: to, the Ritu Sanka: ry


8 _- wiicua DUTA OR


Respectful Demigods shall curious count, a
"The chattering Storks in lengthening order mounts
' Shall mark the Chdtacas who in thy train,
Expect impatiently the dropping rain: - 149
‘And when thy muttering thunders speak thee near
-Shall clasp their brides half extasy, half fear |


Ah! much I oe the long protracted way, e
Where charms so numerous spring to tempt delay $ = 4d
Will not the frequent hill retard thy flight,

Nor flowery plain persuade prolonged delight?


SH fered aa

| Sabpraicnaaafae aaa: |
WAM elanaadaaareyaesy
Qaralatgaaeataafaigata y RS
Sermiaganivadaty arafaaa
AIAHIT PITH IGATg ae Ul


Snnstations,


eaferniadiare ta tarateaigate: t
SPRUCE IGE MRVATUNAA RT: ”
Roars the wild Elephant inflamed with love,
And the deep sound reverberates from above;


_ His ample front like some rich lotus shews,
Where sport the bees, and fregrant moisture flows,


CLOUD MESSENGER: | 89
Or can the Peacock’s animated hail, © | we .
The bird with lucid eyes, to lure thee fail? ss HB


SAGA TAA TATA RT
Weg enealara aga TWAT Il Ra


Annotatfons,


Verse I47. Oran the Peacock’s animated hail.} The wild peacock is exceedingly
abundant.in many parts of Hindoostan, and is especially found in marshy places; the.
"habits of this bird are in a great measure aquatic, and the setting in of the rains is the
season in ‘Which they pair; the peacock is therefore always introduced in the description
of cloudy or’ rainy weather, together with the Crancs and Chatacas, whom we have
already had occasion to notice. Thus ina little poem descriptive of the rainy season, &c.
entitled Ghatacarpara, (aeaay) the author says, addressing his mistress,


Aare at: fiefermePrnamigaenahn N

Oh thou whose teeth enamelled vie,

With smiling Cunda’s pearly ray;

Hear how the Peacock’s amorous cry;

‘Salutes the dark and cloudy day.
And again in one of the Satacas or Centos of Buartar Hani, where he is Seseibiie
the same season,


fafeguaaiararearn| afeang ioral awahil
When smiling forests whence the tuneful cries,
Of clustering pea fowls shrill and frequent ris,
Teach tender feelings to each human breast,
And please alike the happy or distressed.


I


sg ‘MEGA DOTA OR) -


‘Lot where awhile the Swans reluctant cower,
Dasdrita’s ficlds await the coming shower:
Then shall their groves diffuse profounder gloom,
And ‘brighter buds the deepening shade ‘lume: % 152
_-*Fhen shall the ancient tree whose branches wear,
. The mar rks of village reverence and care,
Shake.through edch leaf, as birds profancly wrest,


‘The venerend boughs to form the riging nests =~ = -156


UTS aaa ye HARA SA
afsitaestayareamasa
RUAN AAAI
Erna atranicaeiataeNT QU:


ares a


| ‘giunotations,


Verse 150. Dasarna's fields await the coming shower.} No traces of this name ate to
be found.in modern maps; it is enumerated in Major Witrorp’s lists’ from the Puranas,
Asiatie Researches, Vol. 8, amongst the countries situated behind the Vin@hya mountains,
and sorseponds according to him with the Dosarene of Ptolemy Ly - and the Periplus;
Ptolemy’s map has also a Dosara and Dosaronis F fwoium, and in the Pauranic list of
rivers, there is. also a Dosarna river, which js said to rise from the mountain Chitracita.
It may possibly correspond at least in part with the modern district of Chetcesgerh,
as the etymology of both words refers to similar circumstances: Cheteesger’h is so named
from. its being supposed to comprise Thirty-six forts, 3 and according to Buarata, the
Commentator on our text, Dasarna i is derived from Dasa, (&x) Ten, and Rina (#24),
a strong hold or Durea, ‘the Droog of the Peninsula, and thence means ithe district of
the Ten-citadels.

Vense 153. Then shall the ancient tree, &c.] A number of trees receive particular ~
_ veneration from the Hindus, as the Indian fig, the oly fig tree, the Myrobalan trees, &c.
In most villages there is at least one of these which is considered particularly sacred,
‘and is car ey kept and watered by the villagers, i is. hung occasionally with garlands, ang


~.
a


r


CLOUD MESSENGER. | 31


Where royal Vidisa confers renown;
-. Thy warmest wish shall fruit delightful crowns:
’ There Vétravati’s stream ambrosial laves,
A genile bank with mildly murmuring waves, ee {60
And there her rippling brow and polished face,
Invite thy smiles, and sue for thy embrace.


%


aureaqyfaafateaystarat
FAIA AAAI aT |

aC Tar Gita AAA AAS TAA,
a ee rl aS :


nn nr nn nt. meee sy
SS Se


Annotations,


receives the Prana‘m or veneratory inclination of the head, or even offerings and libations,
The birds mentioned in the text by the epithet neafMusl are the Vacas or Cranes; the
term signifies, “ who eats the food of his female,” ae commonly a house, meaning in
this’ compound a wife; at the season of pairing it is said, that the female of this bird
assists in feeding the male, and the same.circumstance is stated with respect to the -crow, '
and the sparrow, whence the.same epithet is applied to them also, ; a

Verse 157. Where royal VidiSa confers renown.| Vidisais described as the capital.
of the district.of Dasdrna. it appears to be the modern Bhilsah in the province of
Malwa. It is still a place of some note, and is well known in India for the’ superior
quality of the Tobacco raised in its vicinity..

Verse 159. The Verravatti isthe modern Betwah; it rises on the Hotth side af:
the Virdhya chain, and pursuing a north easterly course of 340 miles, traverses the
province of Malwa, and the south-west corner of Allahabad and falls into the Jumna
helow Cédpce, in the early part of its course it passes through Bhilsa or # idis@, ae


y


a _ -‘MEGHA DUTA.OR.


Next o’er the lesser hills thy flight suspend,
And growth erect to drooping flowrets lend 5 164
While sweeter fragrance breaths from each recess,


Than rich perfumes the hirelingwanton’s dress.


On Naga Nadi’s banks thy waters shed, eA |
And raise the feeble jasmin’s languid heads 168
Grant for a while thy interposing, shroud,


To where those damsels woo the friendly Cloud,


SCI a CECE SEICE (eit ie
aT a aaatiowanzya |p
ama fraft wartime
qeafaqaahfnarssy areata WR |.
faqrarmagaanaatatcsiaia faq
AVaaasaavdfaasirants


_ Anotations,
' Verse 163. Next o’er the lesser hills thy flight suspend] The term in the text
ANTRLA is explained by the Commentators, to signify either the hill named Nichais 9
"a mountainous range of little note; or, of litile elevation. It is of no great moment but
perhaps the latter, which meaning we select, is the most satisfactory.

Verse 164. (And growth erect to drooping flowrets lend.| This passage more literally
rendered is “ that hill which with upright flowers is like the body with its hair on end;”’
the erection of the hairs of the body is with the Hindus constantly supposed to be the
effect of pleasure or delight. %

_+ Verse 167. ‘On Naga Nadi’s banks.] Some of the Commentators notice various read-
ings of the name of this river, which-occurs as given in the translation Naganadi, (amet)
the mountain stream; Nave Nadi, (aaaz}) the new river; and Vananadi, (wat) the


CLOUD MESSENGER. gy


As while the garland’s flowery stores they seck;
The scorching sun beams singe the tender check, 172
‘The ear-hung lotus fades, and vain they chase,


Fatigued, and faint, the drops that dew the face.


What though to northern climes thy journey lay,
Consent to track a shortly devious way$ a 176


MSA AMIATAR AA MAN GAA
Vacancy aA | RS It
Ce ORACLE COICO CO i Ce

Maras WARS AAA SK aT |


Ginotatiorw,


forest river, It is probably one amongst a number of small streams falling from the Viz-
a hya range of hills, and indeed the whole province of Malwa abounds in water, so that as
is stated in the 4yeen Achery, “ you cannot travel two or three cose, without meeting
with streams of good water, whose banks are shaded by the wild willow and other. trees,
and decorated with the hyacinth and other beautiful and odoriferous flowers.” Guadwin’s
translation, Vol. 2. I have given the preference to the Naga-Nadi as above, from finding
a river west of the Bctwah, which we have crossed, named the Parbatiy, and which rising
in the Vind’hya chain runs north-west, till it joins another called in ARRowsMITH’s map
the Scpra, and the two together fall into the Chumbul: the word Parbatty or Parvati .

means sprung from the mountains, and Naga Nadi, as 1 have mentioned, bears a similar
import; so that they possibly are synonimes of the same stream.

Verse 171. As while the garland’s flowery stores they seek.] The use of garlands in the
decoration of the houses and temples of the Hindus, and of flowers in their offerings
and festivals, furnishes employment to a particular tribe or cast, the Mdlaca‘ras or
wreathe makers; the females of this cast are here alluded to,


K


34 | "MEGHA DUTA OR’


To fair Ujaini’s palaces and pride,
And beauteous daughters, turn awhile aside §
‘Those glancing eyes, those lightning looks unseen,


Dark are thy days, and thou in vain hast been. 180


oo


rs


faye TARRTUA NANT T aa
Sans SA fqatnaa saa gate tl Rely.


— Arnotations,


Verse 177. Ujayini, or the modern Oujein, is supposed to have been the residence
of our poet, and the capital of his celebrated patron VicramaA DITYA; few cities perhaps
can boast of a more continuous reputation, as it has been a place of great note from the
earliest periods of Hindu tradition, down to the present day. It is now in the possession
of the family of Sindiah, and is the capital of his territories. A full and highly interest-
ing account of it is to be found in the sixth Volume of the -Asiafic Researches, in the
narative of a journey from Agra to this city by the late Dr. Hunter; a gentleman,
the activity of whose mind was only equalled by the accuracy of his judgement, and the
extensiveness of whose acquirements was only paralelled by the unwearied continuance
of his exertions. His recent’ death has: inflicted a severe blow: upon literature in
general, and particularly upon the literature of the east.

Verse 179. Those lighining looks unseen.] Thus Tasso speaking of Clorinda

Lampeggiar gli occhi e folgorar gli sguardi
Keen: flash her eyes, her ‘looks like lightning glow.

Verse 180. Dark are thy ty days.} ‘The expression of the poet is simply “if you de
© not enjoy the glances, &c. you are defrauded,” (afagnifa) and the Commentators
explain it by adding, “ of the object of your life.” That is, if you have not seen these
beauties, you might as well have been blind, or not have existed at all; this compliment
is rather hyperbolical but we are acquainted with it in Europe, and the Jtalian proverb,

. © He who has not seen Home has not seen any thing” conveys a similar idea.


CZOUD MESSENGER. 39


Diverging thither now the road proceeds:

Whete eddying waters fair Nirvind’hya leads,

Who speaks the language amorous maids devise,

"Fhe lore of signs, the eloquence of “eyeSy ~~ BL,
And secks with lavish beauty to arrest, ‘


Thy course, and woo thee to her bridal breast;
%


. Phe torrent passed, bchold the Sindhu glide, We |
As though the hair-band bound the slender tide s- 183


daangialsensgfeasiyaar

wat wy aaanatiaassam: |
fafazaranufaastena ata
Slumspryu aaa fazqareyag il 2° Ih
auagag afaataranagyiay:
qassanTKenqeahesttow: |


Annotations,


Verse 182. Famed Nirvind’hya teads.] This stream has not been found by name
in'the maps, but a number of small rivers occur between the Parbatty, aud the river
mentioned below, the Sipra, one of which must be the Nirvind’hya of the poet: the
four following lines descriptive of the female personification of the current are englished,
rather with respect to the sense, than the words, the plainness of which might perhaps
offend European fastiduousness. There is not hewever any one of CaLipa‘’sa’s river
ladies who behaves so indecorously as several of Drayton’s similar personifications, and
- there is not one of them possessed of speech at all, to say nothing of such speech
as is made use of by the Hayle, and other like © lusty nymphs,” of that author’s
_ Poly-olbion. ;

Venss 187, Behold the Sindhu glide.] Thisis a stream also with which the maps


36 ‘MEGIA DUTA OR


Bleached with the withered foliagé that the breeze,

Klas showered rude from overhanging trees$

‘Yo thee she locks for succor to restore,

Her lagging waters, and her leafy shore, ne 182
Behold the city whose immortal fame,


Glows in Avanti’s or Viséla’s name}.


Renowned for deeds that worth and love inspire,
And. bards to paint them with poetic fires wa 196


‘Soraya acreage
ag aaaatafatyateaa aaaiey Ut SU
“- MarAh_aaaawaacangen
aafeeraqaryt Maw sifaeet y


Minotations,


are not acquainted by name; as however it is the nearest river to Oujeiz, it may
probably be the same with that nosv called Sd gurmuttee ; the river having been diminished
_ by the preceding hot weather, the poet compares it toa long single braid of hair, and
conformably to the personification of it as a female, he supposes the braid to have been
bound in consequence of the absence of the Cloud, after the fashion in which the hair
is worn by those women ‘whose husbands are absent: a custom we shall again be
called upon to notice.
Verse 192, The synonimes of Oujeiz are thus enumerated in the vocabulary of


He machandra. . ;
SafaTMpeuTsr TIA USAt
. Ujjayini, Visalé, Acanti, and Pushpacaran dint.
Verse 195. Renowned Sor deeds, §c.] I have here taken some liberty with the text,
the literal translation of which is “ famous for the story of Upayana, and the populous


CLOUD MESSENGER. 37


-


Of Inpra’s paradise transferred to earths


The fairest portion of celestial birth,


The last reward to acts austerest given s_


400


The only recompense then left to heaven. i"
physio


os


waaay ease RF Mal
La guag aaerniaASAAA NH BRN


Annotations.


residence of the learned,” the story of Upayana, or Varsara‘sa, as he is also named,
is thus told concisely, by the Commentators on the poem: Prapyo’TrA was a sovereign
of Oujein, who had a daughter named VasavapaTTA, and whom he intended to ‘bestow
in marriage upon aking of the name of Saxgava. In the mean time’ the princess
sees the figure of Vatsarasa sovereign of Cusha Dwipa in a dream, and becomes
enamoured of him; she contrives to inform him of her love, and he carries her off from
her father and his rival. The same story ‘is alluded to in the Malati Madhava, a
Drama by Buavanuvu'ts, but neither in that nor inthe Commentary on the Mégha
Duta, is mention made of the author, or of the work. in which it is related. Mr.
Covesrooxe in his learned Essay on Sanscrit, and Pracrit Prosody, in the 10th Volume
of the Asiatic Researches, has stated that the allusion by BHAVABHU‘TI was unsup-
ported by.other authority, not having perhaps noticed the similar allusion in this
poem. Ifehas also given an abstract of the Va'savadatid of Susann’nv; a tale which
corresponds in many points with that of Upayana as here explained. .

Verse 200. The only recompense then left to heaven.) To understand this properly
it is necessary to be acquainted with some of the Hindu notions regarding a future
state. The highest kind of happiness is absorption into the divine essence, or the return
of that portion of spirit which is combined with the attributes of humanity, to its original
source. This happiness according to the Philosopher is to*be attained only by the most
perfect abstraction from the world, and freedom from passion even while ‘in a state of
terrestrial existence, but there are certain places, which in the popular creed are
invested with so much sanctity, as to entitle all who die within their precincts, to final
absorption or annihilation; one of these is Oujein or Avanti, and they are all enumerated
in this verse.


L


38 MEGHA DUTA-GR


_ ‘Here as the early Zephyrs waft along, a
In swelling harmony the weodland song,


They scatter sweetness from the fragrant flower,


That joyful opens to the morning hour;


—_


alefqargnanag aia gat
HAsyMMplSAMATA AAAS II


Annotations,


PANTATTATA MMM A af Ta | gitaraadsaasatrerci er 0


“ Ayo hyd, Mat’huré, Maya, Cast, Canchi, Avanticd, and the city Dw
“* seven places which grant eternal happiness.”


dravatt, are the


Besides this ultimate felicity the Hindus have several minor degrees of happiness,


-amongst which is the enjoyment of Inpra’s Swerga or in fact of a
p2radise.
to the merits of those admitted to it, and they, who have enjoycd this
“ Swerga, but whose virtue is exhausted, revisit the habitation ef mortals :”
alluded to seems however to be something different from that so descri
Jones; it appears by the explanation of the Commentators, that the a
of Swerga, had proved insufficient for the recompence of certain acts of


u
however were not such as to merit final emancipation; the divine ea


to seek elsewhere for the balance of their reward, and for that purpose


e


MonumMMEDAN


The degree and duration of the pieacwees of this paradise are proportioned
lofty region of


the case now
d by Sir Wu.


sted pleasures


sterity, which .
had therefore
they returned


to earth bringing with them the fairest portion of Swerga, in which they continued to
live in the discharge of pious duties, till the whole account was settled, and their


liberated spirits were reunited with the great, uniform, ard primeval ca
r


tion of Swerga thus brought to éarth was the city Avanti, whose supe
divine privileges are here alluded to, and thus explained by the poet.


e. The por-
or sanctity amd


Verse 201. There as the early Sephyrs waft along.\ So in Paradise lost, 4, G4i.


Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest birds.
And again in Samson Agonistes.


The ‘breath of heaven fresh blowing, pure and sweet,


With day spring born.


CLOUD MESSENGER. 59


With friendly zeal they sport around the maid,
Who early courts their vivifying aid,
And cool from Sipra’s gelid waves embrace, °


‘Each languid limb, and enervated grace, 203


Here should thy spirit with thy toils decay,

Rest from the labors of the wearying way,

Round every house the flowery fragrance spreads

Oe’r every floor the painted footstep treads s a 212


wae ara ag yaa
fagiafgarnsanar Sat! i 23 U
AY ~
Maina ToT HG
 Sayftanrsafaigiheasarree I


Annotations,


Verse 207. The Sipra is the river upon the banks of which Oujein stands, and
which is called Sipparch in the maps. In Arrowsmiru however there is another stream
with asimilar name, the Sipra, which appears-to be a continuation of the Sagarmuttee,
considerably to the north-east of Oujein; there can be no doubt of the position, of the
river mentioned by the poet.

Verse 219. The painted footstep.] Staining the soles ef the feet with a red color
derived from the Mchndce, the Lac, &c. is a favoritg practice of the Hindu toilet; it is
thus elegantly alluded to in the ode to one of the female personifications of music, the
Ragini ASAUVEREE. : .

The rose hath humbly bowed to meet,
With glowing lips her. hallowed feet,
And lent them all its bloom.

Hindu odes by Joun Davin Paterson, Esq. published in the new series of Guapw1x’s

Oriented Miscellany, Calcutte,


40


MEGHA ‘DUTA OR


Breathed through each casement, swell the scented air

Soft odors shaken from dishevelled ae ;

Pleased on each terrace dancing with delight, .

The friendly Peacock hails thy grateful flights | 216
Delay then, certain in Ujayin to find,


All that restores the frame, or cheers the mind,


& .
: Hence with new zeal to Siva homage pay,


The Gop whom earth, and hell, and heaven obey % 220
The.choir who tend his holy fane shail view,


With awe, in thee his neck’s celestial blue;


RASM RTH MAAS AAT
aMecafarsianicwhsergy BY II
apawwefaichanaeacdeqaia:
UMA a ayITAaANT MT AVS ATS Il


the preceding,


Srnofations,


Verse 219. The Commentators have thought proper in explaining this verse and-


to transpose the order of the explanations; I do not see for what reason,


’ and have therefore conformed to the text.


Verse 220. The Gov whom earth and heaven, and hell obey.| Lord of the three


worlds is the expression of the original text, the worlds are Swerga or heaven, Patala
or hell,.and Bhémi or the earth.


Verse 222. With awe in thee the same celestial hue} The dark blue of the Cloud


is compared to the color of the neck of Srva, which became of this hue, upon his
swallowing the poison produced at the churning. of the ocean; the story is thus related
in WiLkins’s translation, of an episode of the Mahabhdrat, affixed to his Bhégavat


CLOUD MESSENGER. At


Soft through the rustling grove the fragrant gale,

Shall sweets from Gand’havati’s fount exhale ee 224
Where with rich dust the lotus blossoms teem,

And youthful beauties frolic ii stream, |


Here, till the sun has vanished in the west,


Till evening brings its sacred ritual, rests 298
4


Yh ee F


WARTS aaa
Baws iategahreraharngis yl Sk
SQPORQAR VTA A SAMA AS
AYARAaAS aa acaiayar


Annotations,


Gita. “ As they continued to churn the ocean more than enough, that deadly poison issued
from its bed, burning like a raging fire, whose dreadful fumes in a moment spread
throughout the world, confounding the three regions of the universe with its mortal
stench, untill Serv at the word of Braauma’ swallowed the fatal drug to save mankind,
which remaining in the throat of that sovereign Dew of magic form, from that time he
was called Neen-Kant hecause his throat was stained blue.’”

Verse 228. Till evening brings ils sacred ritual rest.| There are three daily and essen-
tial ceremonies performed by the Brahmans termed Sand’hyas, (8*eyl) either from the
word Sand’hi, (afd) junction, because they take place at the joinings of the day as
it were, that is, at dasn, noon, and twilight, or as the term is -otherwise derived from
(AD with, and (a) to meditate religiously. When the ceremonies of the Sandhya
are of a public nature they comprehend the ringing of bells, blowing the Conch, beating
a tabor &c. and this kind of sound the Cloud is directed by the Jaesha to excite, as an


act of devotion,


tal
Flees J


Ag - MEGHA DUTA on


Then reap the recompense of holy prayer,

Like drums thy thunders echoing in the air. (4

They who with burning feet, and aching arms, | ws |

With wanton gestures, and emblazoned charms, 232
In Manaveva’s fane the measure tread,

Or wave the gorgeous chowrie o’er his heads

Shall turn on thee'the grateful-speaking eye,


Whose glances gleam like bees along the sky,  _/ 236


Rieraafree easy sgpaatar
ARAMA AAAs aya ssa | RS I
WeMIaaeTUayaAarays

| Taearaterafatreret RATT |


" gunotations.


Vense 231. They who in Siva’s fane the measure tread.} The female attendants
upon the idol.

‘Vensn 234. The gorgeous Chowrie.]) The Chowrie or more properly Chounri, (cs 7 jy)
is a brush of Peacock’s feathers, or the tail of a particular kind of Cow, &c. set ina
handle of such materials as suit the fancy, or the means of the proprietor; it is used as
a fan, or to whisk off flies and other insects, and anes re of attention is always
paid by the Hindus to the figures of their gods.

Verse 236. Whose glances ‘gleam like bees along the sky cy} Although this allusion
may be new to European imagery, it is just and pleasing; the consequence of the glance
is well conveyed by the sting of the bee, while its poetically radiating nature is not
unaptly compared to the long flight of a line of these insects: the lengthened light of a
glance is familiar to us, for SuakeEspeane speaks of,  Lyes streaming through the
“ airy region,” and the continuous flight of hees was poticed so long back. as the time


”


CLOUD MESSENGER, ag


As from thy presence, showers benign and sweet,

Cool the parched earth, and soothe their tender fects

Nay more Buavcnti shall herself approve,

And pay thy sefvices with looks of loves; + 210
When as her Srva’s twilight rites begin,

And he would clothe him in the reeking skin,

He deems thy form the sanguinary hide,

And casts his elephant attire aside; / 218


AMAAVI AUNT

catia fretanyaaiact rascal 29 II
WIE s aad nwaawata
Wheagascy fra astayel Cae aa Wl


amotations, i
of Homer, who describes them as proceeding in branches, a circumstance which his
trenslator Pors has omitted.

/ Boloude'y de werovias ee divbeow elagvotcw
Branching they fly abroad o’er vernal flowers,
@r asin Pops,
Clustring in heaps on heaps the driving ‘bees, &c,
Etymologists might find aresemblance here between the Greek (nerovla) and the Sanscrié
(ania) Patanti, they go, fall, or alight,

Verse 238. And soothe their tender feet.] It is to be xecollected that these ladies
are dancing bare-footed. Divesting the feet of the shoes upon entering an apartment
being a mark of reverence of respect exacted hy oriental arrogance, and readily paid _
by oriental servility.

Verse 239. Buavant shall herself wanna Buavanti is one of the many names .
of the consort of S1va; the reason of her satisfaction, and indeed the whole of this
passage, although familiar to a JZindu and although much amplified in the translation,


AR MEGA DUTA OR


For at his shoulders like a dusky.robey.
Manitling impends thy. vast and shadowy globe?

‘Where ample forests, ‘stretched it’s skirts below. /

_ Projecting trees like dangling limbs bestows _// 248
And vermil roses fiercely blooming shed,


Their rich reflected glow, their blood-resembling: red.


d


AUCH ETISIAAS Aaa |
ware eiaragde salar | BS I


etre _— +


net = : end


Aunotations,


requires a little explanation to be rendered intelligible to the English reader. Siva
is supposed to be. dancing at the performance of the evening -Said’liya and to have
assumed as his cloak the bloody skin of an elephant formerly belonging to an Asur
destroyed by him; as this is no very seemly ornament, ‘Buavan't ‘is ‘delighted to find it
supplied by the Cloud which being of a dusky red, through ‘the reflexion of the China
T ivsaee now abundant, and being skirted, as it- ‘overhangs a forest, by the projecting
branches-of trees, resembles the elephant hide -in color and ‘it’s dangling limbs, as well
as in it’s bulk, and is mistaken for it by Siva in his religious enthusiasm; the cies pers
formed by the Cloud has often been assigned to it in the west, thus Horace Ode 2,
Book 1, ,
Nube candentes humeros amictus,
Augur Apouo.
Wa Or come Arouno versed in fate, and ‘shroud,
a Thy shining shoulders with a veiling Cloud.
‘So Minron in his Penscroso speaking of the morning describesit as,
“ Kerchiefed-in a comely Cloud.
Ls invests sentiments of the mind with a similar garb and hag,
For true repentance never comes too late,
As soon as born she makes herself'a shroud,
' The weeping mantle of a fleecy Cloud.
Anda Poet of later day, but of no inferior name has made a yery fine use of this figure,


. CLOUD MESSENGER. | | 45
\
Amidst the darkness palpable that shrouds,
Deep as the touchstone’s gloom; the night with clouds, 252
With glittering lines of yellow lightning break,


And frequent trace in heaven the golden streak: a


TBAATAUTIaaiayaaal 4
TaaAAaTa Ase ave Arty: tt


Annotations, - |
Tv’e known her long, of worth most excellent;.
But in the day of woe she.ever rose,
Upon the mind with added majesty,
As the dark mountain more sublimely towers,
MMantled in Clouds and storm.
Miss. Baruiie’s De Montrorr.
The action, the elephant skin, and other attributes of Siva, are well deseribed in @
passage cited by Mr. CoLezrooxe in his Essay on Sanscrit prosody, from the Drama
of Buavasny "1, though there assigned té a form.of his consort Duraa’
_ Infenafiany a aia ernhays Prema
SISA TAA AIST UA UT AH
Which, with the leading memker of the sentence, may be thus rendered,
May from thy dance terrific spring success !
The elephant hide that front thy waist depends,
Swings to thy motions, and the whirling claws
Have rent the crescent that adorns thy crest;:
From the torn orb immortal Amrit falls,
And as the drops celéstial trickle down,
They dew thy necklace, and each hollow skull,
Laughs loud with life: attendant spirits yield,
The shout of wonder, and the song of praise:
Verse 251. Amidst the darkness palpable that shrouds.] So Minton’ s celebrated
expression,


And through the palpable obscure find out,

His uncouth way.
The literal interpretation of the original nassage is “ the darkness that may he pierced
witha needle.”


N


46


MEGIA DUTA OR
To those fond fair who tread the royal ways
The path their doubtful feet explore betrays \ 295
Those thunders hushed, whose shower-foreboding sound,


Would check their ardour, and their hopes confound.


On some cool terrace, where the turtle dove |


‘In gentlest accenjs breathes connubial love, ~~ 260


Repose awhile, or plead your amorous vows »
Through the long night, the lightning for your spouses


Your path retraced, resumed your*promised fight,


- ‘When in the east the Sun restores the light ; _~  . 964
. And shun his courses for with the dawning skys


The sorrowing wife dispels the tearful eyes


WefamanaiaaasagenagT |
saree iaagagarnrta arg ll Bel
arpenigg waaseiggaataaen
atattatgriaaaatentasenrast I
qoqdiatiampeazaia
WPCAAMATYIYSAIMYIMARAE I Vo tt


| aigeatdaaaataaaitang srt


wire argM she ease easy n


Smatations. Dg
To those fond fair. who tread the ro gyal way.] We must here make an
allowance fie Indian prejudices which always assign the active part of amorous interes.
course to the female, and make the mistress seek her lover, not the lover his mistress,


CLOUD MESSENGER: — . at


Her Lord returneds so comes the Sun to chase,
The dewy tears that stain the Padma’s face, _/ 288
And ill his eager penitence will bear,


That thou shoulds’t check his progress thro’ the air.


Now to Gambhira’s wave thy shadow flies,
And on the stréam’s pellucid surface-lies, .—~ 272
Like some loved image faithfully imprest, |


Deep in the maiden’s pure unsullied breasts


VamITA TITAS ARs Ala
TTT ART eM cawVass: tt VU
TAT vafaaiagraayaq
Rrarafaqaayaara waaay sez Il


—— a 0 nn a
SSS ee = SS Se


Srnotations,


Verse £68. The dewy tears that stain the Padma’s face.} The Padma is a name of
that exquisitely beautiful flower the Lotus ; comparing the dow to tears occurs thus in
the Latin Anthology in the Idyllium de Rosa.

Quam matutinus flentem conspexrit Eous.

Whom weeping marked the early eastern gale,
And again Suakesrrare in the Midsummer night's dream.

That same dew which some time on the buds,

Was wont to swell like round and orient pearis,

Stood now, within the. pretty flowret’s eyes,

Like tears.

Verse 271. Now to Gamb’hiras stream.] This river -and the Gandhacatt in the vici«
nity of the temple of Siva which lately occurred, are probably amongst the numerous
and nameless brooks with which the province of Jfalwa abounds,


oe MEGHA PUTA OR


And vain thy struggles‘to escape her wiles,

Or disappoint those sweetly treacherous smiles, 276
‘Which glistening. Sapharas insidious dart, -

Bright-as the lotus, at thy vanquished heart: 7


mara cieacraehoaUedt
HAA yy TERT RAAT AAA | VR


Fe saan na


Annotations.


Verse 277, Which elisteniag Sapharas.] The Sophara i is described a8 a siall white
glistening fish, which darting rapidly through the water, is not unaptly compared to the:
twinkling glanees. of a sparkling eye. Assigning the attributes of female beauty to
a stream ceases to be incongruous, when we advert to it’s constant personification by the
Hindus ; and it is as philosophical as it is poctical to affiance a river and a Cloud: the
emiles of rivers, nay of the ocean itself, have often been distributed by poetical:
imagination, thus Lucretius invoking. Venus says,
Tiki rident eguora pontt,
The ocean waves daugh on you.

for his late translator Mr. Goop is very angry at the conversion of this laugh inte

a smile, as effected by less daring of his Preece Minton again gives the Ocean

nose as well as dimples, oe Bs Me, dR ae
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean patties

And Mefastasio in his beautiful ode to Venus ane
Ei flutti ridono;
Nel mar placati.
The waves now placid play;
And laugh amidst the deep.

All these however as well as our author are far surpassed by Dearron j in his Poly
Olbion, where hill and dale, forest and river, are constantly described with male or female |
attributes: with respect to the streams he is not satisfied with wedding them to various
objects, but fairly subjects them to the pains of parturition ; the instances-are frequent,
but we may be content with the following, especially as it is explore and defended by
his very learned illustrator. z.


CLOUD MESSENGER, 49

ree ‘ \
What breast so. firm wamoved by female charms? '

Not thine my friend; for. now her waving arms, —~ 980
* Oerhanging Bayas, in thy. grasp enclosed, |

Rent her coerulean vest, and charms exposed,

Prove hew successfully, she tempts delay,

And wiss thee lojtering from the lengthening way. = 28 {


5)


aarintgary yaa gyrate
Caatightasyaq aga hare
TMA ay Aaa aaqAaweata

| SAMA ASTaAg RAAT I Vs |


Annotations,


hen Poo/, quoth she, was young,-a lusty sea-born lass,
Great ALsrion to this nymph an earnest suitor was;

And bare himself so well, and so in favor came, ~

‘That he in little time upon this lovely dame,

Begot three maiden isles his darlings.and delight.

As Albion (son of Neptune), from whom that first name of this Britaiz was supposed, is
well fitted to the frnitful bed of this Poo/, thus personated as a sea nymph, the plain truth
(as words may certify your eyes saving all impropriety of object) is that in the Pool are
seated three isles Bruntsey, Fursey and St. Helen’s, in situation and magnitude as I name
them, nor is the fiction of begetting the isles improper seeing Greek antiquities tell us of

- divers in the’ Mediterranean, and ane Archipelag us, as Rhodes, Delus, Hiera, the Lchinades

“and others which have been as it: were brought forth out of the salt womb of

, Aupritrite.” Sevnen’s illustrations,

Venst 281 O’erhanging Bayas.] The Vetasa, (ana) or Bayas, is a kind of weed
prowing near brooks. I am not aware if the botanists have yet assigned it any
scientific name: the translation of the whole of this passage is not very literal,


O


t


5


58


" MEGIA QUTA oR


Thence satiate lead oe gentle breeze,
That bows the lofty summits of the trees,

And pure with fragrance that the earth in flowers,
Repays profuse to fertilizing showers a
Vocal with sounds the elephants excite,.

To Dévagiri wings its welcome flight:


ee


 arerrgiongqurneadger
SHAS faa ly
A gaauisnfaacagg zit


shar afcwafanraraary aaa BY


<= oS eee ea eee:
a en


988 °


en ain Rec as a ne


Annotations.


Vense 286, That. Bows the lofty summits of ihe trees.| , $0 SHAKESPEARE.


As the wind,-
That by. the top doth-take the mountain pine,
And make him stoop to the vale. . Cymbeline.


And sweet as after gentle showers,-
The breath is of some thousand flowers.


Verse 287. That the earth in flowers, §c.]. Thus in. Sir Puinir Sypyex’s “ Remedie
“ for love.”


Verse 290. Deévcagiri is the mountain of the deity, and may perhaps be the same
with a place called in tie map Dewagur, situated south of the Chumbul, in the centre of


the province ef Malwa, and precisely in the line ‘of the Cloud’s progress, which as we
shall hereafter find has been continued nearly due north from Oujcin. This hill is the,


scite of a temple of Cartice ya, which as well as that of Siva described above,


we


must suppose to have enjoyed in the days of antiquity considerable reputation,. or they
would not have been so particularly specified in the poem.


‘CLOUD MESSENGER. 61


There change thy form, and-showering roses shed,
Bathed in the dews of heat


Son of the Crescent’s God, whom holy ire,


en, on. Scanpa’s head 292


Called from the flame of all devouring fire,
To snatch the Lord of Swergti from despair,
And timely-save the trembling’ hosts of air. —<— 996


3.


nererg laa ae frQaR MTA

Tapa Qa AA AAS: Wr
Wasagawieyaaredtargaar
leepbh he Wael UB


test sae ree etme ee 2G a rset tat : =


atimotationsy. -


Verse 291, Then change thy form, and showering roses shéd.] The Cloud ‘as the
Commentators say is directed to fall in flowers, because it can take what shape it pleases;
we generally. understand a poet much better than we comprehend his learned and
Jaborious ‘annotators ; raining flowers, or by authority, roses, is a common event ia
English poetry, Thus Tuompson-in the opening of his Spring. -

. Veiled in a shower, -
Of shadowing roses on our plains deéeond.-
And Mixron, rather more: intelligibly,
The flowery, roof,
Showered roses.
Verse 292, Bathed in the dews s of heacen.| ‘ Moistened “with the’ waters of the
; “Mandacini, 7 the celestial Ganges. Scanpa, or CaRnrigey a, is the son of Siva and
‘Panvati and the Mars of Hindu mythology; there are various legends: respecting
his birth one of which is presently, noticed by the poet:
! Werse 293. Several instances: of the solitary production of offspring; oceur in the
Hindz as. well as in the Grecian mythology., Thus as Paunas’ sprang’ from the
brow of Juparer, we haye' ScanpA generated solely by the‘deity Siva; Guxaa


bg rs os ‘uicHa pUTA OR:
Next bid thy thundeis oer the mouttain float,
‘ And echoing caves repeat the pealing notes
Fit music for the bird whose lucid eye,
Gleats like the horned beauty of the sl sky, | - $00
“Whose moulting’ plumes 0 love maternal dear,
: Lend brilliant pendants to Buav&ni’s edr,


€


Sikiaazafaniadayse ayaa.
CAPA RT VVC aU RUA |
VaTaA*FaT WMA Uy aIAyAL |

osy * UB feaame it saa nBen.


Arnotattons, .

springs from the head of the same deity, and Ganer’sa is the self-born son of the
goddess Parvary: the miraculous birth. of the warrior deity Scanpa, was for the
purpose of destroying Taraca an Aszr or demon, Who by ‘the performance of: continued
_and severe austerities had ¢ acquir ed pewers formidable to the gods: . the eccentric genius
of Sourney, has rendered’ it iinneceéssai'y, by his last ‘poem, ‘the Curse of Kehéma, for
me to explain the nature, or results of these acts of devotion: the germ “Of ScaNDA was
cast by Siva into the flame of Aan, the god of fire, who being unable.to sustain the~
-encreasing burthen, transferred it to the goddess Guna; she accordingly. was delivered
‘of the deity Scapa, who was afterwards received and reared amongst thickets. of the -
' Sara reed, (Saccharum Sard) by the six daughters of a king named Crirtca, or accord.
ing to silt legends by the wives of SéVen} great Rishis or Saints; in either case they
form in astronomy the asterism of the Pleiades: upon his coming to maturity Scanpa
encountered and killed the ‘demon, who had filled the region of InpRa with dismay,

Emissumque imd.de ‘sede Ty ryphota terrd,

Culitibus, fecisse meiuin.


CLOUD MESSENGER. . 5g


To him whose youth in Ker thickets. strayed, * .

Re cared by the nymphs, thy adoration pa Lid, « ae 204
Resume thy road, and to the world proclaim, |
"The glorious tale of Rayrio va’s fame, |
Sprung from the bloed of countless oxen shed,


And a fair river through the regions spread. ~~ i


>


SA Lea Mae aa AT
faqeesaanvadtinwd aan: u
qqraaqang tC aaara yy agate,
sarang faaica i tagaaatar li vo


Annotations,
Celestial hostilities and,
“ Things to our thought,
“ So unimaginable as hate in heaven,
‘‘ And war so near the place of god in bliss,”
Form one of the many analogies between Greek and Hindu faith.


Venes S01, &c. Whose moulting plumes to love maternal dear.) Scanna or Cantt-
CeEYA is represented mounted upon a Peacock, and Buava’n1 we have already ‘seen is
the wife of Stva, and half mother to this. deity; we have also noticed the frequency
of the allusion to the delight the Peacock is supposed to feel upon the appearance of
cloudy, and rainy weather. .

Verse 306.. Raytineva ‘is the name of a ae of the: Chandratia ans, or family of
the moon: from his performance of the Gomédha, (aia) or sacrifice. of the cow,
which is prohibited in the present period of the world, he’must belong to one of the
preceding Yugs or ages: I find in Sir Wm. Jowes’s lists, (see his Chronology of the
Hindus, Asiatic Researches Vol. 2),. the eighteenth name in the-line of the moon, in
the second age, is Ranrina‘va, and as that is the only name resembling the appellation
in our text, it is perhaps a corruption or error for RANTIDE VA. ©

- Verse 507, Spruxg from the blood of countless oxen shed.] The sacrifice of the


P


we MEGHA PUTA OK


“Qach lute armed spirifrom thy path retires,
. Lest drops ungenial damp the tuneful wires;
Celestial couples bending from the skies, /.


‘Turn on thy distant course their downward eyes ' 312


: MMA AAHAAAM PA ase |
ae i


anatations,


- horse or “of the cow, the ae or sete appears to have been. common im the eariest
periods of the Afindu ritual, It has “been: conceived that the sacrifice was not. real
but typical, and that the form. of sacrificing only was performed upon the. victim, after

" which it was set at liberty: the text of this passage however is unfavorable to such a
Notion, as the metamorphosis of the blood of the kine into a river, certainly, implies

that blood was diffused. The expression of the original literally rendered is, “ sprung

' from the blood of the daughters of Surrsu1.” that is, kine; Suripnt being a celebrated

"cow produced at’. the churning of the ocean, and fanied for granting to her votaries.

whatever they desired. “ Daughter of Surrsu1” is an expression of common occur-

rence to denote the cow,

. Verse 308. Anda ie river through the regions spread.}. The namé of this river is

_ not mentioned in the text ef the poem, but is- said by the Commentators to be- the

Charmanvati, and such a name occurs in Major Watrorp’s lists from the: Purdnas,

amongst those streams which seem to arise from the. north-west portion of the Vind’ hya

Mountains: the modern: ‘appellation of the Charmanvati is generally conceived to bé.the
Chumbul which corresponds with it in souree and situation, and which as it must have
been traversed by, the Cloud in it’s northerly course, would most probably have been des-
eribed by the poet. Itmay be curious to trace the change of Charmanvati into Chumbul,
which seems very practicable notwithstanding. their present ‘dissimilarity. Tavernier
describing the route from Surat: to Agra by way of Brainpore, calls this river the
Chammelnadi ; the possessive termination Vaté ant) having been confounded with Nad?
(at) 2 river; Chaimmelnadi ia therefore the Chammel river: again the addition Nadi,
being regarded as superfluous it has been dropped altogether, and we have the Chammel
or Chambel; the word Charmed may. readily be deduced: from: Charmen asin the


CLOUD MESSENGER: , fs


And waich thee eaters thy long descents.

To rob the river’s scanty dtores intent

As clothed in sacred darkness not thine own,

‘Thine is the azure of the costly stones ; $16
A centr al sapphire, in the loosened girth, | |


Of scattering pearls, that strung the blooming ear the


The sieannlet traversed, to the eager sight,

Of Désapura’s fair impart delights a 2320
Welcomed with looks that sparkling, eyes bestow.

Whose arching brows like graceful creepers glo: ry


J


Wega anataanressigeh
Qaqaqaeays Raga, hes ll
arg atedg raf ama arar feng


~~


by,


~


veges We aaa ACY Aa |


SS


Aunotations. |


dialects of ZZindoostan, the letters N. and L. are constantly interchangeable, arid careless’
pronounciation may easily:convert Charmel into Chammel,. or Chanbel. .


Verse 310. These two lines occur a little earlier in the Sunscrit, but as they seemed
more connected with the two following, and to pe rather awkward in their original’
position, they have been introduced here.

Verse 315. In sacred darkness not thine own. “Being of the same dark ,blue color ag
Crise na; a hue the poet charges the Cloud with havitaetolen.

Verse 317. A central sapnhite: §e.} This comparison when understood is tappily
imagined, but to understand it, we must suppose qpurselves above the- Cloud, and to be
looking obliquely . downwards upon its: dark body, - as shining drops of rain form a
continuous line ‘on either side of it, and connect it with the earth,

Versx 320. Das apura according to its etymelogy should mean avdistrict; that: of


MEGHA DUTA or
3 Whose ust turned lashes, to thy lofiy way,
Tbe pearly ball, and. or dark display 3 ua
Such contiast as the lovely Cunda shews,


- When the or bee sits ts Pleased amidst her snows.


fence to the and of Brana’s Gvorel sons, on
Orer Curws fatal field thy journey runs $ $ a 328
With deepest glooms hang o’er the deadly plain, :


Dewed with the blood of mighty warriors slain; |


os RUAIGIAY RCM a arate farary
ARG SLITAT AAR ASaATA Ye
TAA YATLAV AAI ea

aa igaruataga Cre Sait 7


Err terenrrer eerie seco Se — — ee ee == a ear ret eS ———_


ee Sunatations,
the t tcn cities; itis said however by the Commentators ‘to be the ‘name ofa city, and
by one of them, Manuina1'h, to be that of the city of Rantine’va: if he is correct
it may possibly be the modern Rintimpore or Rantampore, especially as that. town, lying
a little to the north of the Chumbul, and in the line: from ‘Oujein .to Tahnesar, is’ conse-
quently i in the course of the Cloud’s progress, and the probable position of Dasapura.
Verse 325. Such contrast as the lovely. Cunda shews.] The Cunda (Jasminum pr.des-
cens) bears a beautiful white flower, and the large black bee being seated. in the centre .
of its cup, they afford a very delicate and truly Boece resemblance to the dark Jris,
-and white ball of a full black eye. 2
Verse 327. Hence to the land of Branue’s Jevored sons. | "Brahma varta (zea) is
the abode of Brauma or the holy b jand of the Hest, | it is thus Geter ibed by AZenu. ne 17,


Waa MATERA | Tea MATS LEST MN
“ Betwesn the two divine rivers Saraswaté and Drishadwati, lies the tract of land which


the sages have named Brahmdverta; because it was frequented by the Gods.”
Vase 528, Curu-Cskétra (SRA) | the field of the ia is the scene of the celex


CLOUD. MESSENGER. . | 59


There Arnsun’s wrath’ opaosing armies.felt,

And countless arrows. strony. Gdndiva dealt,‘ 332
Thick as thy drops, that in the pelting shower,: . .
Incessant. lurile round the shrinking flower. gore .


qaranifgaren dander |
WUT naan naaegayata ! yo tt


Annetations.


brated battle between them and the Paynus, which forms the subject of the: Muhdb’hérata;
it lies a little to the south-east of Tuhnesar, and is still a place of note and pilgrimage.
It is not far from. Panniput, the seat of ancther celebrated engagement, that between
the assembled princes of Hindoostan, and the combined strength of the: Mahrattas. This
. part of the country indeed presenting few obstacles to the movement of large armies, |
has in every period of the history of Hindoostan been the theatre of contention. ;
Verse 331. Arsun was the friend and pupil of Crisuna, and the third of the
Panpava princes. He has been Jong ago introduced to European readers, especially
in Mr. Wiix1ns’s masterly translation of the Bhd gavat Gita, and appears in the opens
ing of that Pees poem, in a very amiable Tighe)


awamemiang gaara | asarguriaederayganl yy ll -
aRAAAAVATTA:| MARIS ISG ASAT || BM


s Alas! that for the lust of the enjoyments of dominion, we stand here ready to murder’
“ the kindred of-our own blood; I would rather patiently suffer that the sons of Dirrita- _
* RASTRA, with their weapons in their hands, should come upon: me ane unopposed, kill *
* me unguarded in the field.”

Verse 332. Asthe horses and swords of Chivalry received particular names, so '
the weapons of the Hindu knights have been Sumenly. nonbreds oe nae: is the bow:
of ArsuNn.

Verse 333. Thick as thy drops that in the peliing shoxwer.] This verse Poss abundant
analogies i in western composition; thus, in see

Lucida tela diet.
_ The lucid arrows of the dayas.. oy F


Q ’ ‘


88 mEiGHs DUTA oR”


Over Saraswati?s ae wing your course, ea
335


And inward prove their purifying forces
. Most holy, since oppressed with heaviest griet,

The ploughshare’s mighty Lord, here sought reliefs
From kindred strife, and Revati withdrew,


And to these banks, and holy musing flew.“ 340


ec


fanrerarafeaatetadarsargy
wags qatana agate i"
Ban aahwaR a goqetwAl ar

Seat See N wa


en are wg 2 eines ern nee aoe ee a


a


: ctimatations.

The «6s sharp sleet of arrowy shower,” of Mruron, and its imitation by Gnay,
Iron sleet of arrowy shower,
Hurtles in the dusky air.

Are passages well known, . , , i

Verse 835. ° The Saraswati, or as it ig corruptedly called, the Sarsooty,’ falls from

.the southern portion of the Himdlaya mountains, and runs into the great desart where
the maps lose it. It flows a little'to ‘the nor-west. of Curucshé tra, and though rather

_out of the line of the Cloud’s progress, not suficiently so to prevent the introduction
into the poem of a stream so celebrated, and so holy.

. Verse 331. We have here the reason why the waters of the Saraswati are objects of
religious veneration: Bararaa is the elder brother of Crisuna, he is called (aga)
LanGativa, (Sa) Hatasurir, &c. from his being armed with a ploughshare,
which he is said to have employed as Bills were formerly used, for pulling his enemies

‘ down from their horses, &c. ‘which enabled him then to dispatch them with his club;
although Crisny a took an active part in the warfare between the Curus and Pandus,
Bavanama refused to join either party, and retired ‘into voluntary seclusion, filled.

' with grief at the nature of the contest, deserting even: according to Cauipa’ sa, the
inebriating eyes of his wife. : :

-Vense 339. : VATL is ‘the wife of BAbAnama; see the preceding 1 note.


CLOUD MESSENGER, | "Bg:


Thy journey next o’er Canar hala bends,


Where J£unv’s daughter from the Iilis descends,


Srarotaions,
Verse Sil, The name isCaLac'waua in the original but it more properly is as


given above; the meaning of the word agreeably toa forced etymology, ig thus ex-
plained in the Ganga wae E Malan ya section of the Scandse Purana,


wa FATS SATA | sameeren ll
“ What man () s0 wicked, (BU) as nol to obtain, (A) future happiness from bathing
“ there, thence the holy sages have called this Zirtha by the name of Canac’hala,” -
It algo occurs in this passage of the Heri Vansa postion of the Mahab’har at,


WPTSCAATANSTSETS Il

“ Gangadwdra, Canac hala, and where the moon impends.”
Andi in both instances is applied to the place where the Ganges descends into the low
ground of £2indoostan, The name is still retained as appears from the testimony of
an impartial witness, Lieut. Wess, in his survey of the sources of the Ganges, a
survey which has essentially improved the geography of those regions; ‘ the party
arrived at Hfaridwa‘ra and encamped at the village of Canae’hala,” (Kanlvhal) on the
west bank of the Ganges, at the distance of about two miles from the fair.” Asiatic
Researches 11, 449.

Vense 342, Where JA uNv’s daughter from the hills deseends.| JaAuNv’s daughter is
Gunow or the Ganges, which river ‘ after forcing its wey through an extensive tract
‘¢ of mountainous country here first enters on the plains.” It is rather extraordinary
that Caripa’sa should have omiited the name of Haridwdra (Hurdwdr), and preferred
Canac’hala; especially as.the former occurs in the Puranas, in the Scanda Purana as
mentioned in the note, page 450, Vol. I. of the Researches, and in this passage. from
the Matsya Purdna cited in the Pura’ aes Sarcaswa.

eg TSTMS AUTH | Ufa genta TATRA ll
“ The Ganges is every where easy of access except i in three places, Haridwéra, Prayd ga,
“ and her junction with the sea.” Ja‘unu is the name of a sage who upon being disturbed
inhis devotions by the passage of the river, drank up its waters, Upon relenting


60 | “MEGHA DUTA OR


Whose len gthening stream, to Sxcans virtue given,
Conducts his numerous progeny to heavens oe ‘B44
She who with: smilling waves disportive strayed,

Through Sampuv’s locks, and with his tresses played s
Unheeding as she flowed delighted down, |


The gathering storm of Gourt’s jealous frown, 348


aN « ° ~~ AQ. TA
INC EC CM Se CICCR COR kt
CA ALAA MART AS SMT N URN


Annotations,

however, he allowed. the ‘stream ‘to re-issue from his car, and the affinity of Gunga’
to the saint arises from this second birth.
Verse 343. To Sacan’s cirtue given. 1 The Ganges according to the legend was
' brought from heaven, by the religious rites of Baracinat’ HA the great prandeon of,
Sa’Gar, who as well as that king had engaged in a long series of acts of austerity, for ,
. the purpose of procuring the descent of the river to wash the ashes of Sacar’s 60,000
sons; the youths had been reduced to this staté, by the indignation of Capiua, a saint,
whose devotions they had disturbed in their eager quest of the horse, that was to be the
victim of an Aswaméd ha by their father; their misfortunes did not however cease with
their existence, as their admission to Swerga depended according to the instructions of
Garupa, upon the use of the water of the Ganges in the administration of their funeral

rites. At this period the Ganges watered the plains of heaven alone, and it was no
easy undertaking to induce her to resign those for an humble and earthly course: Sagar,

his son ANsuMAN, and grandson Dwitira, died without being able to effect the descent
of the heavenly stream, but his great grandson BuacinaT’HA was. more fortunate, and
his long continued austerities were rewarded by the fall of the Ganges, the bathing
of the ashes of his ancestors with the holy water, and the establishment of them in

the enjoyments of Swerga: the whole story is told in the first Book of the Ramdy YAN,
from the 32d, to the 35th, section; see the Ramdyana with translation, by the worthy *

and indefatigable missionaries, Messrs. Carry and MaRsHMan.

Verse 345. She who with smiling waves disportive stray yea, J The ear th being unable


CLOUD MESSENGER. 61


Should her clear current tempt thy thirsty lip,

And thou inclining bend the stream to sip,

Thy form like Inpra’s Elephant displayed, - a
Shall clothe the crystal waves with deepest shade, ~ 352
With sacred glooms the darkening waves shall glide, ,

As where the Jiomna mixes with the tide,


Nar


= ae fees


AQLMIA UIT aay ays S WAN
MAC SECHc AUC aM VeATAT Nl
gutenavicvaasafa=sraaal
WAMAINAIAAATAATAT NUS Ul


> aimotations. te
to bear the sudden descent of so great a river as the Ganges, Stva was induced at the »
intercession of Bragrirar’ua, to interpose his sacred head: accordingly Guwnea first
alighted on the head of the deity and remained for a considerable period wandering
amongst the tresses of his long and entangled hair, to the extreme jealousy and displeae
sure, according to Caripasa, of the Goddess Goury or Panvatr, Srva's consort.

Verse 351. Thy form like Inpra’s Elephant.) We have already noticed that pre-
siding deities are attached to the various points ef the compass, and that each of these
deities is furnished with a male and female Elephant; amongst these the most distimguishe
ed is Ainavata; the Elephant of Ixpra in his capacity of Regcnt of the east.

Verse 854. As where the Jumna mingles with ihe tide.] The waters of the Jamna or
Yamuna are described as inuch darker than those of the Ganges at the point of their cons
fluence, from the circumstances of the stream being less shallow and less discolored with
clay or sand: occasionally indeed the waters of the Ganges there are so white from the
diffusion of earthy particles, that according to the creed of the natives, the river flows
with mk. The confluence of rivers always forms a sacred spot in Zndia, but the meeting
of the Ganges and Jumna, at Prayaga or Al/ahavad, from the sanctity of both the currents,
and from the supposed sulterrancous addition of the Saraswati, isa place of distinguished
heliness,


R


§2 _ : MEGHA DUTA OR


| As Srva’s Bull upon his sacred neck,
~ Amidst his ermine, owns some sable speck, — 356
So shall thy shade upon the mountain show,
Whose sides are silvered with eternal snow 4
Where Gunaa leads her purifying waves, foe
_ And the Musk Deer spring frequent from the'cavese 360:


From writhing boughs should forest fasies arise,


“Whose breath the air, and brand the Yac supplies,.


sariguhateaafanagaran
— AUIWART HS STOTT Ip
| TAMAAHTAAATT RATS
TU Snylaqaagarg aS] aaa Rea
| aQatatharamuayy YI
oe are AeRTeg AAT TATN  aE rr


open eye yrenn yppreernn-srtroreeer nee treet ean oi nace in re ram rors nearer
ae ame a === ~ —————


‘Shnotations, Ae os
Tae 355, As Stva’s Bull upon his sacred neck.] The Bull'is the’ vehicle of Srvay.

and the animal of the God is always painted of a milk white color. ,
Verse 360. And the Musk Deer spring frequent from the caves,| This animal is what

-is called the Thibet Musk “ Dut its favorite residence is among’ the lofty Zimnalley
© (Himélaya) mountains, which divide ‘Tartar ‘y from EZindoostan.”’. See the best account

of the Musk Deer yet published, in. Guapwiks’s Oriental Miscellany, Calcutta 1798,
- accompanied with accurate drawings by Mr. Hous of the figure, teeth, hoofs, &c.

Verse 861. Should forest flames arise.] The conflagration of the woods in Jndix,
is of frequent occurrence, and the causes of it: are here described by the poet. The
- intertwining _branches of the Sazal, (Pinus longifolia) of the Bambu, and ‘other
trees, bene set in motion by the wind, their mutual friction. engenders flame}: this


CLOUD MESSENGER. | 63


Instant afford the aid *tis thine to. ler,
And with-a thousand frierdly streams deséend 364
For still on earth prosperity proceeds,


From acts of love, and charitable deeds.


wean afeqaeaicnqgage
UIA fA GLAAM AT ATSB] ARATE WC


Annotations,


spréad abroad by the air, ,and according to the Poet by the thick tails of the Yac’
of Tartary or Bos Grunniens (from which Chowrics are made), readily communicates
to the surrounding foliage, dried up by the heat of the sun and exceedingly inflammable;
the burning of a forest is so well described in the Ritu Sanhdra that I cannot: ayer
citing the passage although its length perhaps requires an apology. _


Ux MAAR MAGI | aUmaatany Se eT
feAAGRATIAT AA LATA | Facofevage teem WRU
PRAT SHARE \ mRRNAAATERA i |
AR ferfaRAB AA | RAM Reaftzme: mata RQ |
wiafinaafigiuanicty | eqns aig aL Il
qaqa arafiqnenigrrateaes RY Ul
TEMAS AAG | MEER TESAT
UfLUAAA ATS ATTA RAT | erfroarrgrEs Ars Pac NR


Which omitting a few repetitions and exerescences. ‘may be thus translated ;
The forest flames; the foliage sear and dry 5
Bursts in a blaze beneath the torrid sky ;.
Fanned.by the gale the fires resplendent grow,
Brighter than blooming. Sqflower’s verinil glow,


G4 _MEGHA DUTA OR


Shame is the fruit of actions indiscreet, wa


| And vain presumption ends but in defeats
So shall the Sarabhas who thee oppose,


Themselves to pain, and infamy exposes


When round their heads, amidst the lowering sky,


White as a brilliant smile, thy hail stones i of


Sere eaARA CALI RNA] TATA

UMAg ILC TA ag aaPaAaAA |

: nea fee aaC ara feereraaiatr
RUA OCA AAT TA Il vet


annotations,


Brighter than Afinium’s fiereeness, as they wind
' Around the branch, or shoot athw art the rind,
Play through the leaves, along the trunk asceud:
’ And o’er the top in tapering radiance end:
‘The crackling Bambu rushing flames surround,
‘Roar through the rocks, and through the caves resound;
The dry blade full to their rage supplies,
And instant flame along the herbage flies;
" Like palest gold the towering ray aspires,
And wafting gusts diffuse the wasting fires,
Wide fly the sparks, the bur ning branches fall, -
And one relentless blaze envelope all,


368


372


Ve RSE (869. The S“arab’ha is a fabulous animal described as possessing eight legs,.
and of a fierce untractable nature; it is supposed to haunt these mountains especially.
Verse 372. (White as a brilliant smile.} Jt is remarkable that a laugh or smile, is.


alivays compared to objects of a white color by Hindu writers, -


ae
Or


CLOUD MESSENCER.


Wext to the mountain wil dh the foot imprest,
Of lia who weats the cr sack nt for his crest,
Devoutly pass, and with religious low,


is, 20 ; Pe x.
Around the spot in pious circles got. ye O76


c eo oN
RATA e ATO MAAS THs
td Beltre aS aa | ATARTE Vaan csr ere ort iH


SS SS SS


Smrotation


Verss 573. Next to the mountain with the foot imprest.] .The fancied or artificial
print of some saint or deity, on hills or detached stones, is a common occurrence
in the creeds of the east; the idea is not confined to the inhabitants of Wiadostan, but is
asserted similarly by those of Nepal, Cey’on, and Ava, as may be seen in Turner’s journey
to Nepal, Syaes's Enbassy to Ava, &e. The Azussulinans also haye the same notion with
respect to many of the Prophets, for they believe that the marks of Anan’s feet remain
on a mountain in the centre,of Colon, and that those of ApRAIAM were impressed upon
a stone which was formerly at W!ecea, and which he had used as a temporary scaffold in
constructing the upper part of the primary Caaba: a number of similar storics may be.
fonnd in Mirkkond, and other Mohkummedan authors, The dfimalaya mountains are the
seone of most of Stva’s adventures, his religious abstraction, his love, marriage, &c.
and the place here mentioned may have some connexion with the Git, and neighbouring
hill at Haridwdra, mentioned in Capt. Rapren’s accourt.of the survey of the Ganges,
by the name of Haraca Pairi, the foot of Ifara or Siva. -

Verse 376. Around the spat in pious circles go.| Cireumambulating a venerable’
object, or person, is a ususal mark of profound respect; thus in Sacontala, Canna thus
addresses his foster daughter on the eve of her departure,


PN ON, eek x
THTTR 3 BAT GMA |
“ My best beloved come and walk with me round the sacrificial fire.”
And again in the Ramayana wé have the same cerémony described thus;


HARGYTT TATRA AGATA | FATAL aS TAAL |
asigceadans Sarasa | eel PTR ETA AMEE RT
s


—


63 MEGHA DUTA O8


For there have Saints the sacred altar raised,
; And there eternal offerings have blazed
“And blest the faithful worshippers, for they,

The stain of sin, with life shall cast away: 380
And after death a glad admittance gain, we
"To Siva’s glorious, and immortal trains

Here wake the chorus: : bid the thunder’s sound,

Deep and reiterated roll around, ae 384
Loud as a hundred dr ums; -while softer strains,.


*
ae swelling ¢ gale br Cae she 8 through the canes $


afaedataaneree aan
neqAsahernaIy Raa y UA UNO
WET AYL Haast aa Weer ar a:
aca feaqrienavhadiandiie tt


7 ; smatations,
ie Hearing the words of JANaxa the four supporters of Raauu’ s race previously placed
“ according to the direction of Vasuis’THA, took the hands of the four damsels within
their’ &. and with their spouses circumambulated the fire, the- altar, the king, and the
§ sages,” Ramayana with translation, 1, 60, 57.
Verse 380. The swelling gale breathes sweetly through the canes.) The whistling of
the wind in the hollow reeds, or Bambus,. may easily be conceived to afford the music
of the pipe or flute, of which it was the origin if we may believe Lucretius.
Lt Zephyri cava per eilendnen sibila primum,
Agrestes docucre cacas inflare cicutas.
And Zephyr whistling through the hollow reeds,


y Taught the first swains the hollow reeds to sound.
; Goon’s translation.


CLOUD MESSENGER. a rt


And from the lovely songsters of the skies, -


Hymns to the victor of ies fise. " 888


Thence to the snow clad hills thy course direct,
And Crouncha’s celebrated pass selects
That pass the swans in annual flight seploies


And erst a Hero’s mighty arrows tore. \~ — $92


fAPICIAACAT SRT eT,

: ad ~N * .

UF MA AA IIA AMAAAT ||US |
WAAMSA INES Hira eM AMT,
Usa ea Raa yA "


Annotations,


Views 587. The lovely songsters of the .skies, ave the females of the ‘Cinnaras or’
demigods attendant upon Cuvera, and the musicians of Swerga.’ a

Verse 538. Hymns to the victor of Tripura rise.] Tripura is the name of-a city or
rather as its etymology implies, dhree cities collectively; these formed the domain of a
celebrated Demon or Asur destroyed by Siva, and were reduced to ashes by that Deity :
according to the Commentators we have here a full and ee concert in honor of
Maanveva. ; ;

. Verse 384. And Crouicha’s celebrated pass select.| 1 have not been able to make
any thing of this pass or hole (area) the original text states it to be on the very
skirt (Suz) of the snowy mountain, and calls it also eRER the gate of the geese, who
fly annually this way to the Muanasarovara \ake: Crouncha is described as a mountain in
the Mahabharat, and being personified j is there called the son of Maindca: a mountain
also called Crouncha Meru occurs in Mr. Witroro’s lists amongst’ those mountains
situated in the north. It must lie at some distance from the plains, ‘and perhaps the
Poet by using the term SU implies its relative situation with the lofticst part of the
range or proper snow clad mountains.

Verse 385, And erst a ILero’s mighty arrows. is The Cres pass, or defile


68
MEGUA DUTA OR


Wi nay oa r
nding’ thy w ey, due north eer the defile,
siae :
Thy form compressciy with borrowed grace shall smile:


ru : q
The sable {cot that Barr marked with dread,


ee 7 "
A God triumphent o'er creation spread, 395


Symeintions.
in the Crouncha mountain, is said to have been made by the arvows of Buticeratt, or
Panasurama who was educated by S1ya on mount Caiéesa, and who thus opened himself
“a passage from the mountains upon the occasion of his travelling southwards to destroy
the Cshetriya or military race. Panasurama is an Avaiar or descent of Visuny in the
person of the son of the Saint JarsanaGny, and this Saint being also descended froin the
celebrated sage Buriev his sou is named. Burieuratt, or, Chief of that race.
Verse 390. The sable foot that Baut marked with dread] “The: story of Bary and

‘ the Vamana or dwarf Avatar has been frequently repeated from the account of Sonnerat
and the relations in the Asiatick Researches.’ As the former is not very prolix it may”
_ be here inserted to save ihe trouble of-further reference. ‘¢ The fifth incarnation was Jn
“a Bramin dwarf, under the name of VameEn; it was wrought to restrain the pride of the
giant Beny. The latier, after having conquered the Gods, expelled them from Sorgon;
he was generous, true to his word, compassionate, and charitable. Vichcnow, under the
form of a very little Bramin, presented himself before him, while he was sacrificing,
and asked him for three paces of Jand to build a hut. Bexy ridiculed the apparent
imbecility of the dwarf, in telling him, that he ought not to limit his demand to a bequest
so trifling; that his generosity could bestow 9 much Jarger donation of land. Vamen

answered, that being of so small a stature, whet he asked wwas more than suflicient.
“The prince immediately grarited his request, and to ratify his donation, poured watcr
into bis right hand, which was no sooner done, than the dwarf grew so prodigiously,
_ that his body filled the universe! He measured the earth with one pace—and the heavens
with another—and then summoned Bey to give him his word for the third. The prince
‘then recognized Vicaenov, adored him, and presented his head to him; but the God,
’ satisfied with his submission, sent him to govern the Pandalon, and permitted him to
return evely year to the ear th, the day of the full moon, in the month of November.”

; Sounesar’ s Voyages in the past Indies, Calcutta efitian, Vol. 1, p. 22.


CLOUD MESSENGER. a


Ascended thence a transient period rest,
Renowned Caildsa’s venerated guest 5
That mount whose sides with brightest lustre shine,


A polished mirror, worthy charms divine; Ay 490


Tea S UAT YSP aay:
aaTaar facaafanctaatta’ BTA Ul


er eS a a a Co a ES ET a ET ee ee:


Simotations,


Verse 398, Cuilésa’s venerated guest.] Cuilésa, as it here appears, a part of the
FTimala range, isin fable a mountain of costly gems.or of crystal, the scite of Cuvera’s.
- ¢apital, and the favorite haunt of Siva; I shall borrow from the notes to Souruey’s Curse
of Kehi'mr, a description of.it from Bann xus, curious enough in itsel’, but still more so for
its strange medley of accuracy and incorrectness, and its unconth transformation, and
commixture of the Sanscrit names. “‘ The residence of Ixora (Js wara or oq) is. upon
the silver mount Cadaja (Caitdésa or aaa)» to the south of the famous mountain JMahameru,
being a most delicious place, planted with all sorts of trecs, that bear fruit all the year
round, The roses-and other flowers send forth a most odoriferous scent; and the pond
at the foot of the mount is inclosed.with pleasant walks. of trees, that afford an agreeable
shade whilst the Peacocks and divers other birds entertain the ear with their harmonions
Noise, as the beautiful women do the eyes. The circumjacent woods are inhabited by a
certain peeple called Munis or Rixis; ( Rishis or afar), who avoiding the conversation
of others, spend their time in offering daily sacrifices to their God. . 7

It is observable, that though these Pagans are generally black themselves, they do re
present these Rizis-to be of a fair-eomplexion, with long white beards, and long garments
hanging-cross-ways, from about the neck down over the breast. They are in such high
esteem aniong them that they believe whom they bless are blessed, and whom they curse
are cursed. ; ,

Within the mountain lives another.generation,.called, Jexaquinnera.( Yaesha or agq and

Cinnara or faz qt) and Quendra, (Indra or Zz) who are free from all trouble, and spend
their days in a atinal contemplation, praises and prayers to God. Round about the
mountain stand seven ladders by which you ascend to a spacious plain, in the middle


awhereof isa bell of silver and a square table, surrounded with nine precious stones of
7 :


HO MEGHA DUTA OR


Whose base a RAvan from its centre wrung,
Shaken not sundered, stable though unstrungs
- Whose lofty peaks to distant realms in sight,


Present a Siva’s smile, a lotus whites - AOL


aRreeye fae Dierafegad
qabir gihiz qiaas Aaya | ol


Annotations, .


divers colours; upon this table lies a silver rose called Tamarepua (2?) which contains two
women as bright and fair as a pearl : one is called Bricasirr, (?) i.e. the lady of the mouth,
the other Tarasrrq, (?) i. e. the lady of the tongue. Because they praise Gon wilh the mouth
and tongue. In the centre of this rose is, the triangle of Quivelinga, (¢Siva-linga) which
they say is the permanent residence of God.” Batn#us. The laiter part of this descrip-
tion is qnite néw to the Pandits and I suspect is rather Mohummedan than Hindu.

Verse 402. Shaken not sundeéred, stable though unstrung.| This alludes to a legend
of Ra‘vana’s having attempted to remove the mountain from its. situation, although he
did not succeed as well as Satan and his compeers, when

“« From their foundations loosening to and fro,
“ They plucked the seated hills,’”’:
Tle considerably unhinged its foundations. The story perhaps originates with the curious
vibrating rock at Maisbaliputan: of which it may be said as is observed by Setpen of
. Main-amber i. e. Aimbrose’s stone in Cornwall, not far from Penzance, that ‘ it is so
great that many men’s united strength cannot remove it, yet with one finger you may
‘ Wag it.”
Verse 403. Whose lofty peaks to distant realms in sight.| The lofty peaks of the
Himalaya range of mountains are very justly stated by the’ Poet, to be visible to
surrounding regions (Coffe) they are seen in the south from situations more remote
than those in which any other peaks have been discerned, and the supposition of their
exceeding even the Andes i in elevation, has been confirmed by recent enquiries, which will
become public with the appearance of the 12th Volume of the Asiatic Researches.


CLOUD. MESSENGER. a


And lo! those peaks than ivory more-clear,

When yet unstained the parted tusks appear; -

Beam' with new lustre, as around their head,

Thy glossy ‘glooms metallic darkness spreads we 408
As shews a Hatasnrira’s sable vest,


More faix the pallid beauty of his breast.


saMifaafaacna ena vaya

ay RaeleanaSzMTyAy I
apraefefaraaaga warayfaat
dna ayaasaaae | )


a eye SoS ee eee:
Sa See : one


=


Annotations,


Verse 408. Thy glossy’ glooms metallic darkness spread.] The expression in the
original (fenaftaragany) may be rendered, “ shining like antimony mixed up with oil,’
amixture used for darkening the eye lashes or the edges of the. eye-lids,.a practice
common to the females of the east: Jt is also explained to mean merely, ‘ black-divided
antimony,” and the shining greyish blue of the sulphuret of antimony;- the substance:
alluded to, may often be observed in the hte of heavy Clouds,

Verse 409, Harav’unita is a name of Barara a, and implies as has been before
explained his use of a plough share asa weapon; heis represented of a white color,.
clothed in a dark blue vest, and is thus alluded to in the introduction to the Gita Govinds
of Javaorva,


ReagBrQawagqarigaa Main ApmagMT |


ALATA RHIHTAINSE
Thus translated by Sir Wa. Jonrs in his Essay on the Chronology of the Hindis, “ Thou
« bearest on thy bright body a mantle shining Jike a blue Cloud, or like the water of the.
* Yamuna tripping towards tliee through fear “of thy furrowing ploughshare, Oh Ce’sava!
** assuming the form of Banaraa, be victorious Oh Heri! Lord of the universe.”


2 . | MEGHA DUTA OB.


Haply across thy long and mountain ways"

In sport may Gouriqwith her Siva stray, 412

Her serpent bracelet from her wrist displaced,

And in her arms, the mighty God embraced:

Should thus it fortune, be it thine to lend, _ |

A path their holy footsteps. may ascend 5 aa £46
~ Close in thy hollow form thy stores comprest,


While by the touch of feet celestial blest.


~ Next let each maid of heaven, each blooming girl,


‘Thy graceful form in sportive mischief whirls . 420


fenrnf@ayan aaa ral aca eel

astaaiasetecataay |

agian lata iayrasiare:

ANAT HAITTGALATTAT t) 2M
wiemsauagiategagarra  *
_ RfreheargqandaguaqTan lt


roe: ew =
0 FS aparcaemens


SSS .


Annotations.


Vnaas: 419. In sport may: Gover with her Stva stray.] ‘Thave siready noticed that
these mountains are the scene of Stva’s loves and sports: they may still be considered
as his favorite haunts for some traces of him seem to start up in every direction amongst
‘them. See the late travels to the source of the Ganges, and Col. Hanpyicen- Tour
to Sirinegur.


Verss 420, | ‘Thy g staceful form in sportive ial d whirl. 7 The meaning of this can


CLOUD MESSENGER. 15


While lightning gems around each wrist that wind,
Release the treasures in, thy breast confined +

Nor fear their aim thy progress to delay 5

A grateful succor in the sultry day; 424
For soon thy thunders shall disperse a train,


Of heart as timid, as of purpose vain.


Where bright the mountain’s crystal glories break,


Explore the golden lotus-covered lake: A428


AAA ATA ag VGA TIA Ag A,
ASTHAUEMSM IRA ANITA! [I ean
Bas yUlahaamiaaqicaad
TAMIA AAU Hi iayaTay r


PeeScae —_— SS eo rr


Annotations,
only be readily conceived by those who know what a Goolab-pash is; a small vessel for
sprinkling rose water, &c. In sucha capacity is the Cloud to be used by the youthful


goddesses. :
~WVerse 421, While lightning gems around each wrist that wind.| The diamond and


thunderbolt according to Hindu notions are of one substance, and are called by the
saine appellation, (a3) as the fall of the thunderbolt is usually followed by rain, and
may thus be considered as it’s cause, the propinquity and the mutual friction of the same
substance upon the wrists of our young ladies, is in like manner supposed to occasion
the dispersion of the fluid tréasures of the Cloud, ios
Vense 426. Of heart as timid as of purpose vain.| ‘ Unsteady in their sports,” is the

literal expression of the original, but the Commentators dilate the sentiment in the
manner here adopted: our joint want of gallantry may find a precedent even inthe poet
of this science, for Ovip makes Hero write thus to Leander.

Ut corpus teneris ita mens infirma puellis,

JW eak as her frame the tender virgin’s mind,


U


7h . . MEGHA DUTA OR


Imbibe the dews of Mdnasa, and spread,
A friendly veil round Atravata’s heads
Or life dispensing with the Zephyrs go,


‘Where heavenly trees, with fainting. blossoms blow. 432


Now on the mountain’s side like some dear friend,


Behold the city of the Gods impend;


yaa AAATAA RRUAS TAT A
malaenic nhac atgie@anea | ev It
RAUF IU AAT ITI IF SRA ©
APSEAVAT SAM VGA ASA


= = <<


aunefattons.


Verse 429. Manasa, Manasarocara or commonly Wiowcentout is a celebrated Jake:
situated in the centre of the Himdlaya mountains, and was long said to be the source
of the Ganges, and Brahmaputra rivers; with respect to the first of these the statement
has been found to be erroneous, and we have no positive proofs of its accuracy, with regard -
to the latter. Some period has elapsed since it was visited by Europeans, and the chief
information possessed at present, has been derived from the vague reports of Hind.
Pilgrims, the lake being of great note in their sacred books and an object of. their
veneration, ,

We here take leave of the geographical part of the poem which is highly creditable.
to Catipasa’s accuracy, and now come to the region cf unmixed fable, the residenee of”
Cuvena and his attendant demigods.

Vense 430. A friendly veil round Armsearie head.) Inpga’s Elephant ut suphy
Verse 351. :

Verse 432. Where heavenly trees, with fainting en blow.], Literally. the Calpa,,
trees, one of the five kinds which flourish in Inpra’s heaven. They are thus enumerated, ;
in the Amera oie

SS Sara afar: | Barry RarE TTS Ul -

“Vents ne “The city of the Gods impend.} Alaca the capital of Cuve ra.


“


CLOUD MESSENGER. #5


Thy goal behold, where Ganga’s winding rill,
Skirts like a costly train the sacred hills. - 5 ABS
. Where brilliant pearls descend in lucid showers,


And Clouds like tresses, clothe her lofty towers.


There.every palace with thy glory vies, | i

Whose soaring suramits kiss the lofty skies; —-~ 410
Whose beauteous inmates bright as lightning elare,

And tabors mock the thunders of the airs

The rainbow flickering gleams along the walls,

And glittering rain,.in sparkling diamonds falls,- ALL
There lovely triflers wanton through the days.


Dress all their care, and all their labour plays


manatee afadg tystaaia
AarTVaaTAARA ea aTAT SA SUN
fagaaiatarsfamrearsataar

WF MTATSAACH PRAT ARATITAA, It
SH asaya Ss Aya
TMAayaa_AAaA SRE: | eS


Te SoS a, DISD


Annotations. .

Verse 440. I have-availed:myself of the aid of the Commentators to’ make out this
passage rather more fully than it occurs in the original, and consequently more intelligibly.
to the Luglish reader: sthe poet describes_the toiket of the Yacshinis, or female Yacshas,
through the six seasons of the year, by mentioning as the ‘selected: flowers, those +


- MEGA DUTA OR


One while the fluttering lotus fans the fair, e


Or Cunda top-knots crown, the jetty hairs 418
Now o’er the cheek the Lod’h’s pale pollen shines,
Now’midst their curls the Amaranth entwines $
These evaces varying with the varying year,

“Sirisha blossoms deck the tender ear 3 352


Or new Cadambas with thy coming born,


The parted locks, and polished front adorn,


equiaaaaa aA IHS
stan gaatserag aaa f
ASUMATTLIR LAT We

dams irae AS aAATTTTATA Ml G9 |


Seo ee


 *


Armotations,


peculiar to each periqd. Thus the ZLotws blooms in Sarat or the sultry season, two
months of our autumn; the Cunda (Jasminum pubescens) in Sis‘ira oy the dewy season,
the Lodth, a species of tree, (Symplocos racemosa Rox.) is in blossom in Himanta or
winter; the Curuvaca (Gomphrena globosa) in Vasanta or springy: the Sirisha (Mimosa
Sirisha) in the hot months or Grishma, and the Nipa or Cadamba (Nauclea Cadamba)
at the setting in of the rains: it is to the Commentators also, that I am indebted for the |
sole occupation of the Goddesses being pleasure and dress: the fact is,
. To sing, to dance,
To less, and trofl the tongue, and roll the eye,
constitutes a very well educated’ female according tothe customs of Mindcdstan: we
cannot help however being pleased with the simplicity and propriety of taste, which
_gives to the graceful ornaments of nature so prominent a part ,in the decoration of
feminine’ besuty,


CLOUD MESSENGER,


Thus graced they woo the Yacshas to their arms,


And gems, and wine, and music, aid their charms 3


,
The strains divine with art celestial thrill,
And wines from grapes of heavenly growth distil ;
The gems bestrew each terrace of delight,


Like stars that glitter through the shades of night.


There when the Sun restores the rising day,


What deeds of love his tell-tale beams display s


yaakqarwawyqueawata

SH fayH AHA AAA |
BR aAAACRT TRATES

gil eatag ent TRC IEG ae a Nh.
rr Z TATE ARITA

aA NA Rafe na fears tl


W7%


456


460


oo
DIN Te na aero =)


Qnnotation,


Verse 458, And wines from grapes of heavenly growth distil ;] So Minton, Paradise


lost, 5, 426.


Verse 460. Like stars that glitter through the shades of night.] Thus B. Jonson,


In Heaven the trees,
Of life ambrosial fruitage bear, and vines yield nectar,


And again line 835,
Rubied nectar flows,
Fruit of delicious vines the growth of Heaven.


The Starres that are the Jewels of the night,
x


78


MEGHA DUTA OR


The withered garlands on the pathway feund,
The faded lotus prostrate on the ground, ieee A464
The pearls that bursting zones have taught to roam,


Speak of fond maids, and wanderers from home.


High on its costly stem with diamonds bright,
The splendid lamp glows vivid through the nights_/ 468


amas —
HA AMAAAYT AT SAS AMIE


Starke fags aaaaatara | i ee tt


a aaars faniniedaaaeng ar
AMAA fA QRACy UI gGagy A


Annotation,


Verse 466. Speak of fond maids and wanderers from home.] Ihave already mentibned


that the ZZindus always send the lady to seek her lover, and they usually add a very
reasonable degree of ardor and impatience ; , our poet in another place, compares the
female so engaged to a rapid current: thus in the Ritu Sankéra.


SumerecufmRegnrargean epee: |
fiqa: BATT a Sirf ena GEN SATA \


Fast flow the turbid torrents as ‘they sweep,
The shelving vallies to rejoin the Deep,

And like the damsel prodigal of charms, *
Who seeks impatiently her lover’s arms,
Bound o’er each obstacle with headlong force,
And banks and trees demolish in their course.


Varse 468. The splendid lamp glows vivid through the night.| The meaning is given


more nearly in an Epigram in the Anthology.


Ludite, sed vigiles nolite extinguere lychnos.


I have-indeed in this place concentrated and in part omitted, two verses of the original,


as offensive to our notions of the decorum of composition. J gannot admit however


CLOUD MESSENGER. 79


Or the soft glories of the lunar beam,


In gems condensed, diffuse their grateful gleam:


Say a aanareyre ayaa,
saan aycaaafe: 1) 0}


SSS Sao a — a ae a SSS


Annotation,


that Hindu literature, speaking generally, is more liable to the reproach of indecency
than that of Europe: nothing can be found in their serious works half so licentious as are
many passages in the writings of Ovin, Catunuus, Prorerrics, and even the elegant
Fraccus; to descend to modern times Artosto and Boccacto amongst the Italians;
Buantome, Creprtton, Vourarre, La Fonraiys, and the writers of many recent
philosophical novels amongst the Frencn, furnish us with more than paralells for the
most indelicate of the Hindw writers; with respect to ourselves, not to go back to the days
jn which “ obscenity was wit,” we have little reason to reproach the Hindus with want
-of delicacy, when we find the exceptionable though elegant poetry of Lirrxe generally
circulated, and avowedly admired. We should also recollect the circumstances of Indian
society before we condemn their authors for the ungarbled expressions, which we conceive
to trespass upon the boundaries of decorum. These authors write to men only; they
never think of a woman as-a reader: now even in polished Ewropean society, amongst men
alone, conversation takes commonly greater liberties than any Hindu composition, and it
is fair to infer that were our writings addressed only to the male portion of society, they
would partake gf a similar character: extreme attention to delicacy would in that case be
regarded as puerile or fastidious; it is so now in works of science, and‘Gisson and Hume,
seera to consider it so in historical writing: if then we were not apprehensive of bullying
those minds whose purity we are interested in preserving, the breach of the rules of delicacy
would take place to a greater extent than it has done in works of imagination. Iam not
sure that were this to happen the quantity of virtue in the world would be much dimi-
nished; what is natural, cannot be vicious: what every one knows, .surely every one may
express; and that mind which is only safe in ignorance, 8r which is only defended by
decorum, possesses but a very feeble defence and impotent security. J have said more
upon this subject than was perhaps necessary, but I am anxious that the Hindus should
huve justice done to them, and not be held up to the world, as they have been by a
mistaken, and I am afraid, a spiteful zeal; as monsters of impurity,


"Verse 469. The moon gemor Chandracdnta (FAA).


83. _ MECHA DUTA CR


What though while Srva with the God of gold,

Delights a friencly intercourse to holds 472
The Lord of Love, remembering former woe,
Wields not in Alaca his bee-strung bow:

Yet still he triumphs, for each maid supplies,
The fatal bow, with love-inspiring eyes,

And wanton glances emulate the dart,


That speeds uncrring to the beating heart.


a ALAR A aaa ABT ATTA

TAMA A TA MAMAaAM aT: |

QE VIA aqua
Sa_QAaieiagaasaaaata WOU
aa SU ayaa ays aaay aay

AFM AQUA AM AAS Bait |
mRiquunalawagiuigrde
QUA AHS Ta PAL RAAT NORM


Annotation,


Verse 473. The Lord of Love remembering former woe.| This alludes to the fate which
befell the Hindu Curip upow his assailing Siva, whom at the desire of the Gods he
inflamed with the love of Parvati: Siva in his wrath reduced the little deity to ashes
by a flame from the eve in his forehead, and although he was subsequently restored to
animation, he is here sunnosed to remain in dread of his former enemy; the whole story
is spiritedly told in Sir Wau Joves’s hymns to Campo and to Dur@a.

Yerss 477, And wanton glances emulate the dart.] The eye darting arrows isan idea


CLOUD MESSENGER. 81


The gale that blows eternally, their guide,
High over Alaca the Clouds divide, oa 480
Scattered they lie, as if dispersed by fear,

And conscious crime spoke retribution near:

Some just award, for showers that lately soiled,


The painted floor, or gilded roof despoiled. 48.4


North-ward from where Cuvéra holds his state,


Where Inpra’s bow surmounts the arching gate;


AVS aya gfAaGgayaecaa
PSMA Seva HABIT AA |]
ayy eaaaaiadegaay
MUTA Vy Tala FALHRS: || Og I
SAINT AT AVES ALU za
ATAMAACIU_gRUA TTA |


ee ——————— TS a ST SR eee
sunotations, ;
fimiliar to English poetry, as in these instances.
Her eye darted contagious fire. MiLTon.
Her eyes carried durts of fire,
Feathered all with swift desire. Gregne’s Never too late.


I mote perceive how in her glancing sight, |
Legions of loves with little wings did fly, ;
Darting their deadly arrows fiery bright. Spenser. Sonnet, 16,
And those love darting eyes shall rollno more. Pope's Elegy.
Verse 484. The paintcd floor] Itis customary amongst the Hindus upon festival
oceasions to smooth and paint the ground on which worship is to be performed, or the


Y


s9 MEGHA DUTA OR


Where on rich boughs, the clustering flower depends,
And low to earth, the tall Manddra bends: va 488
Pride of the grove, whose wants my fair supplies,
| And nurtures like a child; my dwelling lics.
"There is the fountain emerald steps denote,
Where golden buds, on stalks of coral float, 492
And for whose limpid waves the Swans forsake,


Pleased at thy sight, the mount encircled lake:


~


TAY ARARAAT ATA fe aA
SANGHA AA AAAI || Ov Ul
ARAMA ACCRA ATS AU ATT

AA A a aN e_ oN ;
SARA TA AAR ase zaqaret It

AW Maar sqraaAadayRS
aylegraay OITA ABU ATG ISAT oul


Aamstations,
assembly to be held; as this spot is generally in an open area svithin: the walls of the house)
a shower of rain is of course very hostile to: such decoration,

Vense 488. Zhe tall Mandara.] The Coral tree, Erythrina Indica.

Verse 490. And nurtures like a child.) Tender attachment to natural objects is one
of the most pleasing featurés in the poetical compositions of the ZZindus. It is very fre~
quently expressed, and perhaps in few places with more beauty than in the Drama of
SaconTaLa, where upon departing from the bower of her foster father, she bids adieu to the
plants she had carefully tended, and the orphan fawn she had reared. The whole of this
scene must be read with pleasure, and may be classed with the departure of GoLDsMITH’S
village family from Auburn, and the farewell of Eve to the bowers of Paradise.


CLOUD MESSENGER. €3


Soft from the pool ascends a shelving ground,

Where shades devoted to delight abound; ogee 496
Where the ceerulean summit towers above,

The golden circle of a plaintain grove

Lamented haunts; whom now in thee I view,


As glittering lightnings girt thy base of blue. 500


See where the clustering Mdd’havi entwincs,


And bright Curuvaca the wreath confines 3


amraectariaac tases’:
Asa nanAadieaygaws: |
aeteariqug freasaarnratae

YR Waa CaaS aT AAT | OE I


Sauotations.


Vense 498. The golden circle of a plaintain grove.| Minton, applies the epithet
golden to the fruits of heaven, as often as Caurpas, thus in the fourth book within a
few lines we have. *
Blooming ambrosial fruit,

Of vegetable Goldy

And again,
Others whose fruit burnished with Golden rind,
Ilung amiable, Hesperian fables true.

Verse 501. The Madhavi entwines.| This creeper, (Gertneria racemosa, or Banisteria
Bengalensis). is often alluded to by the Poets for its superior elegance, and the beauty
of its red bloossoms,

Vense 502. Curuvaca is the crimson Amaranth, the Sanscrit name is also applied to a


blue species of Barderia,


8! | | MEGHA DUTA OR


Profuse, Asoca sheds its radiant flower,
And budding Césare adorns the bower; 501
These are my rivals; for the one would ercet,

As I would willingly, my charmer’s feet,

And with my fondness, would the other sip,


The grateful nectar of her honied lip. 508


THM SAMA ANCA
Va AHRTIAI AAA RIS VY
VaawWaaeamaanqyawaat
RIFUUACA TAA STAT! || OS tl


Annotations,
Verse 503. Profuse, Asoca sheds its radiant flower.] Jonesia Asoca, speaking of which
Sir Wo. Jones says, “ The vegetable world scarcely exhibits a richer sight, than an


Asoca tree in full bloom.
- Vunse 504. And budding Cesara.| A tree yielding a strong smelling flower, ( AZimusops


elengi). ;
Verse 505. These are my rivals, &c.] These allusions refer to some particular notions
of the Hindus respecting the Cesara and Asoca, which plants are said to blossom upon
being touched respectively by the face, or foot ofa female; the story is probably originally
poetical, thus Drayton in his Shepherd’s Serina, expatiateg upen a similar idea. a

The verdant meads are been,

When she doth view them,

. In fresh‘and gallant green,

Straight to renew them:

And every little grass,

Broad itself spreadeth,

Proud that this bonny lass,

Upon it treadeth.


CLOUD MESSENGER. «83 -


A. golden column on a crystal base,

Begirt with jewels rises o’er the places.

Here when the evening twilight shades the skics,

The blue necked Peacock to the summit flics, a 512
And moves in graceful circles to the tone,


My faiy awakens from her tinkling zone.


These be thy guides; and faithfully preserve,
The marks I give thees or e’en more, observe, 516
Where painted emblems holy wealth design,


Cuvéra’s treasures; that abode is mine:


AT VASA Qa Tass |
~~ . ces ‘ aN 2 aN
HATHMMVNTARY SITY WW: |)
| aR aaaa a aa aa
TAMA La SfaNAA AALS TBE OS I
- \ DN LAS UN
wines cafaetaguagag
News: aN A
Sosa ayy ey ASEl I


Sinotations,


Verse 512. The blue necked Peacock to the summit flies.] The wild Peacock although
it lays its nest upon the ground is said by Capt. WintianspN, to roost constantly on
the loftiest trees.

Verse 514, My fair awakens from her tinkling xone.] A girdle of small bolls
(gzufica) isa favorite Hindu ornament; also silver circles at the ancles and wrists
Wnich emita ringing noise as the wearer moves.

Verse 518. Cuvina’s Treasures.] Vhick with sparkling or jental | gems.


' The portal shone. Paradise lost, 8, 507,


Z .


8


.MEGHA DUTA OR
. Haply its honors are not now to‘boast, ye
Dimmed by my fate, and in my exile losts ae 529
For when the sun withdraws his cheering rays,


Faint are the charms the Camale displays.


ot)


RelA ay aa galas
| Senaaagaaeg area ire heen


ee : —— —— — por et ee ee
St a CR a soa dna ST


cumatations
Yor such Cuvr‘an’s nine tredsures are sometiines supposed to be: TRO comment-
ing upon Amera, thus enumerates them fr fy the Sabdariiaca.


USP gaa LS HATRESU | POG CES eC CO Cel

“ Fhe Padma, Mahapadma, Sanc’ha, Macara, CacWhapa, Mucunda, Nanda, Nila and
C’harva, are the nine NiPhis”? The Sabda Retnavali ‘also has the same reading. In
Hemachandra and the Sabda Méla WE is substituted for TR. Nivhi (Fava), is the
generic name, but how it should be rendered into English, Tam not prepared to say. Mr.
CoveBnooks, calls the particular Mid’his, aurifercus , gems: Sce his translation of the
Amera Cosh. Some of the words bear the meanings of precious or holy things, thus
Padma is the lotus, Sanc’ha the shell or conc’h: again, some of them imply large
numbers, thus Padma is 10,000 Millions and Mahapadma is 100,000 Millions, &e: hut
all of them are not receiv ed in either the one or the other acceptation: we may translate
. almost allinto Things, thus, a lotus, alarge lotus, a shell, a certain fish, a tortoise, a crest,
a mathematical ‘figure used by the Fainds;, Nila refers only to color, but C’Aarva the ninth
means.a Dwarf: Mr. KinpersLey translating through the medium of the Tamu! has called
eight of Cuvera’s gems, the coral, pearl, .cat’s eye, emerald, diamond, sapphire, raby
and topaz. The ninth he leaves undetermined. ‘In Dr. Tlunren’s Dictionary, I find one
only of the nine in the Hindoostance language, wai OF Eye ewei Neclom, or Neclmun, derived
from ataAR aa blue gem, and interpreted the Sapphire U3UI Padma-color means a
ruby, and possibly the Padma may be the same; perhaps ReQY the lorfoise, means tortoise
shell, and Afacara may ‘he an error for Maraca or Maracata an emerald, or it may imply the
same stone from the green color of the fish: these however are mere conjectures. Agreeably
to the system of the Tantricas the Nid his are personified, and upon certain occasions, ag
the worship of Lacsumt, the goddess of prosperity, &c. come in for a share of religious -
veneration; they have also their peculiar snantras, or. mystical Verses.

Verse 522. The Camalu is a name of the lotus.


y


CLOUD MESSENGER. ST


To those loved scenes repaired, that awful size,

Like a young Elephant, in haste disguises 524
Lest terror seize my fair one, as thy form

Tangs o’er the hillock, and portends the storm.

Thence to the inner mansion bend thy sight,

Diffusing round a miid and quivering ght, Ue 528
As when through evening shades, soft flashes play,

Where the bright fire-fly wings his gliticring way.


MMA! RAI AAA AACA MS at


; ena yannfaatgaataaw ||
we waNaag ass wea


~N


agaaieatantwifgearseizal Set


ee: es ee ———— ae a ee


Annotations.

Verse 530. IFhere the bright fire-fly wings his glittering way.] The fire-fly presents a
very beautiful appearance, as it’s soft and twinkling light is contrasted with the deep shade
of the bushes, in which it may be seen in great numbers during the wet season. The phe-
nomenon is common to the east and the west Jndics, and it may be amusing to see the
. effect produced ‘by it on different persons and at different periods: Moors meeting with itin

America, writes some elegant stanzas on the subject, and adds to the lightness of his verse,
the solidity of prose in the authority of this note. ‘ The lively and varying illumination with
which these fire-flies light up the woods at night gives quite an idea of enchantment. Puis
ces mouches se devcloppant de ? obscurité de ces arbres, et s'approchunt de nous, nous les
voyions Sur les orangers aoisins, qu'ils mettoient tout en feu, nous rendant la vue de leurs beaut
fruits, que la nuit acoit racie &c. UL, Urstotne Des Antituss.” See Moore’s Odes and
Epistles. We have now to hear the description of a traveller of 1672, the learned
and very devout, Jonannes Fryer, M. D.

“ The next Day at Twelve a Clock at Noon we struck into our old Road at
Bfoorbar, from whence before we were misguided; we ‘packed hence by Five-in the


88: MEGHA DUTA OR


There in the fane, a beautcous creature stands}
The first best work of the Creator’s hands 5
Whose slender limbs inadequately bear,


A full erbed bosom, and a weight of cares.


€


naflsgniata qarmarareyen
aaastarefiaigaafagati i


Simetations


Afternoon, and left our Burnt Wood on the Right-hand, but entered another made us
better Sport, deluding us with false Flashes, that you would have thought the Trees
on a Flame, and. presently, as if untouch’d by Fire, they retained their wonted Verdure.
The Coolies beheld the Sight with Horror and. Amazement, and were consulting to set
me down, and shift for themselves; whereof being informed, I cué two or three with my
Sword, and by breathing a Vein, let Shitan (the Devil) out, who was crept into their
Fancies, and. led them as they doa startling Jade, to smell to what their Wall-Lyes
represented amiss; where. we found an Host of Flies, the Subject both of our Fear and
Wonder, which the sultry Heat and Moisture had generated into Being, the certain
Prodyomus of the ensuing Rain, which follow’d us from the Hills.

This gave my ‘Thoughts the Contemplation of that Miraculous Bush crowned with
Innocent Flames, that gave to Moses so pleasant and awful a Prospect; the fire that consumes
every thing, seeming wailisr to dress than offend it,”

Vere 532. The first best work of the Creator’s hands.] Literally the first creation of
Brauma’ and first may refer to time, or to degree ; it most probably here means best; So
Miiton speaking of Eve.

: Oh Fairest of creation, last and hest,
_Of all Gon’s works. ’ Paradise lost 9, 896.

We now enter upon perhaps | the most pleasing part of this elegant little poem, the des-
cription of the Yacsua’s wife. I may perhaps come under the denomination of those who
according to the illiberal and arrogant criticism of such a writer asa Mr. Pinkerton
prove, “ That the climate of India, while it inflames the imagination, impairs the judg--
*¢ ment,”’ when standing in very little awe of such a poetical censor, | advance an
_ opinion, that we have few specimens cither in clossival or modern Poeiry, of more genuine
tenderness or delicate feeling.


CLOUD MESSENGER, £2.


Whose tecth like pearls, whose lips like Bim as show,


And fawn like eyes still tremble as they’glow. | YZ 838


Lone as the widowed Chacravaci mourns,


Her faithful memory to her husband turns,


2


SUPT TA Hae RA Garay
anaarg] afaeaae eas ea NSU
wWaldian icinanae a aile ma
aihpafaagstanaatiae a7 I


8 re  ———————————————————eEe™EeeEOeeeeeo eo


Aanotation,


Verse 535. Whose Ups like Bimbas show.) ‘The Bimba (Bryonia grandis) bears 2.
red fruit to which the lip is very commonly compared.

Verse 587. The Chacravéci is the ruddy goose (Anas Casarca,) more Suneiy
known in India, by the appellation, Brahmany Duck or Goose. These birds are always
observed to fly in pairs during the day, but are supposed to remain separate during
the night: in the IZindoostance Philology of Messrs. Grucunist and Roervex, an
amtsing account of ihe popular belief on this subject is thus given, “ This bird in the
© poetry of the Hivdus is their turtle dove, for constancy and connybial affection,
s¢ with the singular circumstance of the pair being doomed for ever to nocturnal separa-
*¢ tion for having offended one of the ZZind« divinities (Afimis or Saints) whence, ,

6 Chukwa chukwee do junein mut maro ko,e

46 Ye mare kurtar ke ruen bich hora ho,e

« Mark heaven’s decree and man forbear.

“ To aim thy shafts or puny thunder,

“At these poor fowls a hapless pair, »

*¢ Who pass the lonely nights asunder.
“ If we believe popular tradition and assertions, the cause is so far confirmed by the
“¢ effect observable in the conduct of these birds to the present day, who are said to
* eceupy the opposite banks of a water, or stream regularly every evening, and exclaim.
* the live long night to each other, thus


Aa


a | MBGHA DUTA ‘OR™


‘And. sad, and silent,’ shalt thou find my wife,


Half oft fay soul, and ae of: fany ie: 540.
io muprueaitgregas st
SaRnoteetese, l oS,


ud 4 . Senetation. aes
eat * Chuckuses muen oon ‘Nuheen: nuheen chuckioas
, 6: Chuckesa muen “a,00n | 2° Nuheen nuheen chucki,ee,.°
oy @ Say. shall I’ come iny dear to thee, :
~y : ‘6b Ah no indeed that: cannot be,.- :
eo 2+) But may I wing my love to yous,
: ne on we “Nay chuck alas this will not do” °°
“Vans BO. EH calf Of my. soul and partner of. ny life. Ts: ' So" Minrony.
ae “| Part of my: soul I seek ince and, thee Bay
ae My other-half} *,
canine “ “My second ‘oxisterice,™” ave, the: ona of fhe’ ‘original, “and thie other"
paveeieee amy: half, is > not “more tneommon in ‘Sanserit than i ii” western oe thus:
ee tae! Sbisiied a vevy-é “extensive citeulation : my ‘life, my sel 4 are common to most:
of ‘the’ European languages, and the most frequent | epithet; . by: which a. mistress is;
“addressed i in Persian or Hi indbostanie gle i is of ‘a ‘similar import. Amongst the Romans,
pita: and: anima. were “used in the, sane: manner, or: even. in Eee pens “warmth of
friend as Horace calls’ Viner, Oa, ee tee woos
a > Anime dimidium motes mae


<p ee - Half of. my ‘soul,.
“Ana Paopeatius addressing: his mistress. calls : her ‘Bis life
: . Aratas’ rumpam; mea.vita,.‘catenas, | °° - ’


; _ SPYLburst, my life,’ the brazen chains. © ~ ,
We: aiiay, suppose the- Romans. derived these pretty words from the: Greeks, and indeed
. as we learn fiom J ivenal §) 194, they were ‘very fond ‘of employing, though not in the
; most becoming mantier, the original terms Zovy wa Wxu, the English translation of which .
Kas beén given--at $ome™ length -by: Mis. TienE, inher poem of Psyche,-and with some
addition by: Lord. ‘Byron, dn -his Anglo- Greek song,’ the. burthen of which is, the old
sentijnent . ipa modern antique shape, or my life. Z dove 4 yu § in the: Zuy: pa ows ayarw. of the-.


Greek of the Mored nee nae eke key — oe Oe eet a eee -


ae


CLOUD MESSENGER. ans!


Nipped by chill sorrow, as the flowers enfold, °

Their shrinking petals, from the withering cold. °

I view her now! long weeping swells her eyes,

And those dear lips, are dried by parching sighss;\“7 544
Sad on her hand her pallid cheek declines, |
‘And half unseen, through veiling’ tresses shines 3

As when a darkling night the moon enshrouds,


A few faint rays break. straggling through the Clouds. 5.18


qamanyaagieawaas yar

fama qiarniniacaaeraeTee |

RQ AU TA ARTA TATA RT. .

Fergie PATI ealaifguta t a3 N


ea
SS ———————E————aeS————— lle


Smrotation,.


Verse 541, Nipped by chill sorrow as the flowers enfold.] So in Lord Lyrrievon’s
Monody.
A sudden blast from Appenninus blows,
Cold with perpetual snows; °
The tender blighted plant shrinks up its leayes, and dies.
Vensz 543. Long weeping seuctle her eyes.) In tls: she resembles ue Lestia of
Catullus,
. Flendo tureidul rabent oculi,
Her swollen eyes are red with weeping.


‘WEGHA DUTA OR:


-&
Love


Now at thy sight-I mark fresh sorrows flow,
"And sacred sacrifice augments her woes 3


‘T mark her now, with fancy’s aid retrace
3 a


This wasted figure, and this haggard faces M 552
“Now from her favorite bird she seeks relief,
And tells the tuneful Sivicd her grief,
Mourns o’er the fe, eathered pr isoner °s kindred fate,
556


And fond}; y questions of is absent mate.


mea faaaiaytarsfaay para
ara auaranqaaanag aa mal Ut
GRalaay aaa aia AC a
. ghz patiataiafgratyain ae ny


——— OE ————————————————————————————————


Annotation.


Vense 550. And sacred sacrifice augmenis her woe.) Thus Laopamera to ProresiLavs
in Ovin,. <
Thura damus.lacrymemgue SUDCHy
We offer incense up, and add our tears.
The commentators however are not agreed how to interpret this passage in the original text,
(laa SM) | nor the expression, (faaefa?). “ She falls before thee,” they seem however
to conéeive it means, that the approach of the Cloud reminding her of its being the period
‘at whigli absent husbands usually return home, she recollects that the return of her own
lord ‘is proscribed, and thevefore either falls ina swoon, or with excess of affliction:
the sacrifice is to be. performed to render the Gons propitious, or itis a sacrifice called
aay usually performed by women at the beginning of the rainy season: some interpret
Ut “In the: -city,”’ not, “ Before, in front.” ig
Verse 554. The Sérieaé (Gracula religiosa) is a small bird better known by the

name of Auina, it is representel as a female, while the Parrot is described as a male


¢c


CLOUD MESSENGER, ; On}
Ta vain the lute for hi: armony is strung,
rece round the robe-neglec ted shoulder slung;


And. faltering accents: ania. to catch in vain,


oe ‘ays
Our race’s old commen norative straint See -. - AGG


Annetations.


bird, and as these.two have in all ZZindi tales,’ the faculty of human speech, they ars
eonsiantly introduced, the one inveighing against the faults of the male sex, and the other
exposing the defects of the female’: they are thus. represented in the fourth story of tli«t,
entertaining collection the Buetal Pucheesec.


Farerat Fa oe wea oh orate aa TIA | fi
Bay Bray a El faa aT AF ovary TI aan AA CPTI ante -


Ladies have always been distinguished for maintaining pet animals, and the re
’ seems to have been equally prevalent in the east and west, and in ancient or modern
times: the swallow of Lesbia, Passcr deticie. mec pueiiwe, may rival the Sdrica of the wife
of the Taesha, and Bullfineh of Mrs. Turocxmorrox: see Cowrrn’s Roems.
Verse 557... In vain the lute for harmony is strung.) ’Vhe lute is ‘here put for the
Veena or Been, a stringed instrument of sacred origin, and high celebrity amongst the
Hindus. In Bengal however players on this instrument are very rarely met with, and
amongst the natives of this province, the Lvelish fiddle is it’s substitute: in the Jalras or
Dramatic performances still current amongst them, I have seen the entrance of Na vena,
the traditionary inventor of the Verna, bearing in it’s stead a violin, The Veeza is much
the most harmonious and scientific of all the Afinds instruments of music: a deseri ption
of it may be found in the first Volume of the Asiatic Restarches, —
Verses 558. Robe-negiccted is here put for Afsaraa dirty clothes, so Laopaxei i A says
Wt qua possum squalore tuos imitare labores, &c.
And with my squalid vesture ape thy toils. .
Vense 560. Our race’s old commemoralice strain.} “ The verse made in hononr of my
kindred” a circumstance that points out some affinity to the songs of the ancient minstrels,


and family bards.
Bb


OL


- MEGHA DUTA OR


‘The falling tear that from reflexion springs,


Corrodes incessanily, the silvery strings


Recurring woe still pressing on the heart,
The skilfal hand forgets its grateful art,
And idly wandering strikes.no measured tone,


But wakes a sad wild warbling of its own.


At times such solace animates her mind, of


As widowed wives.in cheerless absence finds
She counts the flowers now faded on the floor,


That graced with monthly piety the door,


asta aaaaacraaraay


Heanqaeganlraarag ea feacat Ny Mt


WAM AAT AA aay IAaa gy] |


| frruatyanwaieee] page: |


———— poeeepapeaesteeeenasaanearpece fesceesenpepreneesnespecerest


Leander, -


a


‘Annotations,


ty ;
Femineé tardas fallimus arte moras,
With arts, as women usc, we cheat the lazy time.


56.4


568


Verse 568. As widowed wives in cheerless absence jind.} So in Wero’s epistle to


Verse 570. That graced with monthly piety the door.| The [indus pay a species of


adoration to many inanimate objects: amongst others the door way, or door post


.Feceives such homage as is rend
- @ month, :


ered by hanging up a flower or a garland there once


| CLOUD: MESSENGER:


ice)
qr


Thence reckons up the period. since from home,

And far from ‘her, was 1 compelled to roams - 572

And deeming fond my. term of exile run, 7

Conceives my homeward journey is begun.

Lightened by tasks like these the day ee -
«B76


When thou shalt view her on the earth’s cold breast, |


But much I dread a bitterer night succeeds: —


Or louely couch of separation rest,
. Disturbed by tears those pallid cheeks that burn,
And visions of her dearer half’s return. a . 580


a


uiagratatenrcayrarcad
mela aaa ea aaZT I aE 1
LHNTagaarisayigaim
WRU alg aaa
apetyeaqaaangadigns
Mays aa AW aalRaAITMAaSy || VOY


Amnotations, _


Verse 576. So Carunzvs.
. Nune et amara dies, et noctis amarior umbra est, —
The day is bitter now, but Diterer still,
Will be night’s shadows.


96


k~ aie ae ser oer


“MECHA DUTA.OL-


| Now seeking sleep, a-husband to restore,


And waking | now, his absence td deplores


‘Deprived of slumber by returning woes, se


Or mocked by idle phantoms of repose $ 584
Till her slight: form, consuraed by ceaseless pain, '
' Shews like the moon, fast hastening to ils wane,
Crisp from iis pur ifying wave her hair
Conceals the charms, no more her pleasing cares £88


And with neglected nails her fingers chase,


Fatigued, the tresses wandering o’er her face.


’


SY Serie acenaagaatiiaany q
aeag a RaREAaRaT THRE |]


Ata aneya anaes aA aT


WIA STRAIT yaa SSM
Fasgi aaretia amaaiaatiata rat
ERAT CaaS TAA


chimotations.


Verse 582, In the 1th Edy yl of Tueocarros, we have the same circumstances stated:


Dorie o avs’? srac CHa yrunds Unvos ex Mes


Oy Yecbus 3 lotion buee yhunds Unvos avy we.
You come when pleasing sleep has closed mine eye,
And like a vision with my slumbers fiy. Fawkes’s Transhtion.


In the translation ef the Sanscrit, I have here intermixed two stanzas and part ofa third,
ag slightly altered the arrangement. ; ,


CLOUD MESSENGER, - 9;


Firm winds the fillet, ag it first was WOve, : . ;
When fate relentless forced me from my love g.. wee 592°
And never flowery wreathes, nor costly pearls,

Must hope to decorate the fotterod ‘curls s

Loosed by no hand, until the law divine,


Accomplished, that delighted hand is mine. “~~ 596


Tea aWTHAwsa_as i iaiaz

Ba aaifaaaeaasre FRITH | ee I
sgaafeteicadafearerateat
WIA aM MAAAAAS SAT | -

WM SAG HAAG Aaa CaaS, |
maUETTRSATTAATA Raa E ac N Ve


toro ec ee te ce te gl el cacti


Annotations,

Verse 591. Firm winds: the fillet, us-it first was wove.] The Féxi isa braid into
which the long hair of the Hindoostance women is collected, when they have lost their
husbands: the dancing girls also wear their hair inthis manner. N eglecting the ornament
of this part especially, has been in all ages, except the present perhaps, an mnciestion
of grief; we have thusin Ovi,

Nee mthi pectendos cura est prebere capillos,
Nor yield I now my tresses to the comb.
Tutrocritvs takes the hair of entirely, from one of his amorous damsels,

Effeuy Seu ueharige mdicas rpixes auld Se Aorme ,
Océ &t Hs val dépue
Soon from my cheeks the crimson color fled,
And my fair tresses perished on my head:
Forlorn I lived, of body quite bereft,
For bones and skin were all that I had left: Fawnes’s Translatio:.


Ce


Idyll 2, 89,


98 MEGHA DUTA.OR


Dull as the flower when clouds through zther sweep,
_* Not w ‘holly waking, nor resigned to sleeps _

Her heavy eyclids languidly unclose, t ~
‘To where the’ moon its silvery radiance throws dese ax’ GOO
Mild through the chamber 3, once a “welcome light,
"Avoided now, and hateful to her sight.
oT hose char ms that glittering ornaments oppress,

Those restless slumbers that .proclaim distress, ' GOA

: That slender fioure worn by grief severe,. ,
Shall surely gain thy sympathizing tears
For the soft breast is swift to overflow, .


- In moist compassion, at the claims of woe. 608


| Hiv-ulava ni aeiced iia 7
a) asters Gi uirquafaganta I .
btext Baaiaayyhy aq aA
_BRysdiawana eng aa yy AU .
: wea NCU AIAR ATTA a
weal raz iafannaag: aeaamaa, if
“ mEUgquanastaeaa
| graregrafangarefaqeragqan | eA


Annotations,
Verse 607. For the soft breast is swift to overflow.] This sentiment -is “yather dilated —
“from tlie original, which says “a soft- heart is pinay the abode- of i ci the @


CLOUD’ MESSENGER. Wat


Ihe same fond wife as when compelled to part,
Eler love was mine, I still possess her hearts ae


Tor well knowa faith this confidence affor ds,


Nor vain conceil.suggests unmeaning words; G12
No boaster I! and time shall quickly teach,

With observation joined, how just my speech.

O’er lier left limbs shall glad pulsations play,

And signs auspicious indicate thy ways oe Ps 616


sagan aaa aAyTaSAe
fAURIAPQU ATS ASTRA |
ATA AYA TAT nt
“qaeteatak ra nista seman, tt ox


peed AC HAGE
Mea away alagryienas 7


ao SE SE SS SEE SOE


- Gnnotations, :
tenor however is given in the translation, and may be the meaning of T IBULLUS, when
he expresses hinself thus:
' #lebiss non tua sunt duro precordia ferro, ©
Vincta, rec in tenero stat tibi corde silexy,
Sure thou wilt weep ;
For well I know nor flint nor ruthless stesl,
Can arm the breast of such a gentle maid. GraINncER
Vense 615. O’er her left limbs shall glad pulsation play. | Palpitations in the left

limbs, and a throbbing in the left eye, are here described as auspicious omens,. when
occuring in the female: in the male the right side is the auspicious side, ‘corresponding
with the je of a Greek ‘sy thus described by Ronen :


iva . MEGHA DUTA oh


While its deep roots the sportive fish divide, ~


And like the lotus tembling on the tide,


; So tremulous throbs the eye's enchanting ball,


. Loose o’er whose lids negiected tresses fall. 629


Soothed by expected bliss should gentle slecp,

- Over her soft limbs and frame exhausted creep,

. Delay thy tidings, and suspend thy flight,
And watch in silent patience through the nights x 624
Withhold thy thunders, lest the awful sound,


Her slumber banish, and her dreams confound,


BEMTERaTaqareMsagegn
Haswarpa_gaaasiqenaayAtis | CV |
WABICATHSISA AAA AAS
 Rarsvatgciaciswe fatten t
) BRTaATAA A eTaAAT
TVAIVAATAEATRI NT AAA | Ul


| eirmatatians,

as “The third: sort of internal omens were the Tlaays)- or Takuma chwvicudle so called
imo TE Ta ANEW from Palpitating ; such were the palpitations of the heart, the eye, or any of
‘the muscles, called in Latin, saltationes, and BewSog or Aringing in the ears, which in the
right-ear was a lucky omen; so also was the palpitation of the right-eye as Theocritus
telleth us. ;
Adagio shine pros 6 dsbs05
My right eye-twinkles.”


Verse 627. Like winding. shrubs.|


CLOUD MESSENGER, — | IOL


Where her fond arms, like winding shrubs ‘she flings Bs


Around my neck, and to my bosom clings. ae S688:


. Behold her rising with the early morn, °


Fair as the flower that opening buds adorns
Aind strive to animes her drooping mind,
With cooling rain drops, and refreshing wind eA 632
Restrain thy lightnings, as her timid gaze,
Shrinks from the bright intolerable blazes
And murmuring softly, gentle sounds prepare,
‘With words like these to raise her from despair. “ 63


oO ~


niga aacaicaeesazigaan
aaldaveia tage sans asa: lh
myzergqufafaaieq aad aay

AY AW YY AAT GAVSTITSA | CF Ut
AQUI TA aaa
Tagan aMaasaaaaNaa Nt
yeafgiataaaraearaaey
amacaaraa AAA TARA Nf a? U


>


‘


Annotations,


So, doth the woodbine the sweet honey: eu
Gently entwist, the female ivy so,
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm, — Midsummer Night's Dream.


Vensz, 630. Fair as the ig fewer that opening buds adorn.) The he Commentators have


Dd


_ 102 MEGA DUTA oR


- §-Oh wife adored? whose [ord still lives for thees .
_§ Behold his friend, and messenger in mes -
* § Who now approach thy beauteous presence fraughty -.


Ww ith many a tender, and consoling thoughts ~~ G19


. *


‘ Such tasks are mine: where absent lovers strays |
§ I speed the wanderer lightly on his ways. :
$ And with my thunders teach his: lagging mind,


$ “New HOPS the braid of absence ta unbind, PS og G14-


wiiatgantuatfeanagae

| FAS UTA ARM MAA, "
Tgetaacataatemeaay aaa
arate aac pers egy repanifal as il


| _ Pmnatations, :
"taken, great pains to explain this. allusion te the flower, or in the original the Malati
a kind of Jasmin; their labor is however very. idle, as the a has always been
. familiar to Poetry, thus Carutnis calls a lady,
Alba parthenice velut, °
. Luteumve papacer,
Like the white Pasties, or yellow poppy.
» And Cuavens has, .
That Emilie that fayrer was to seene,
Than is the lily upon his stalk green,
. Verse G41, Such tasks are mine. e- This allusion has been explained in the Note


on Verse..
ss ERSE 644, The braid Ss absence is the Ve“ NI, see Note on vere 591. ,


1 ovD ME ESSENG En. OS


‘As beautcous Maire with glad surprize,
Bent on the Son of air her epening eyes; .—


So iny fair partner's pleased uplifted gave, eo


| Thy fricndly presence witly delight surveyss Gis
She smiles, she spe aks, her misery foregocs,
And deep attention on thy words bestows $
For such dear tidings happiness impart,
Scarce less than mutual meeting to the heart. 4 $52


Ae


Bai caitra aaa fae eas cir a
MARUI ae qardeqaaney ss ATL

ST MUAIUCHI Tage al waa
arma eee wrawygalmigaa: | Gat


_ Gnatations, tt


Verse 645. Marr’niry is a name_of Sira, derived from JLit'hila, the place of her
nativity, and the modern Zirhut: the allusion relates to the discovery of Her in Lauca, by
Rama’s envoy [Lanuman, the moukcy chief, said to be the son of the wind. Fh

Verse 151. Scarce less than mutual mecting to the heart.| They have. a proverb
similar to this in the Hindoostanee language, “a letter is halfa meeting,” the expression


is common in the Poetry of the Rekhiw, and occurs thus ina Ghuzul by Jinat.


?


SEleis a a remus ad

It also exists in the Arabic language, and is thus given in one of the exercises of Capt.
Lockstt’s translation of the Mecué Amil, and the Shereh Afecut Amil, or an Arabic
Grammar, and Commentary. .


- 12 29a Dan ca


Sti Gs buset byl


ff Core espondence they say is half an in tor view.”


104°


oe.


- _MEGHA DUTA OR


: Being, of years ts protracted, aid thy fr iend,


And, with my wor ds thine, own suggestions blena;


= Say thuss. ¢ Thy lord oer RA&ma’s mountain strays,
‘ 6. Nor cares but those of absence blight his dayss 656


§. His only wish by me his friend to know,


see If he is blest with health, that thou art S03 |
6 For ‘still this fear especially . must wait,


‘ On every cr eature of our passing state. _ $60


¢ What though to distance driven by wrath divine ;
* Imagination joins his form with thine;
s Such as I view is his emaciate frame, fe


$ Such his regrets, his scorching: pangs the same3 034 / 664


AAA TAAL IAA ITS |
 ATTAAATTE MTA Meg AE |
SAT RU ATT REA faa


RCICCICCE SCOT EOE iuG| Yo |}


SHAF qi gaqaneagaay


en Vv


— oo ee e
= Se ee et


é


Aimotations.


VERSE 659, For still this fear especially must wait.] It is to he recollected here that even


these heavenly beings are of a perishable nature, and subject to the infirmities of exist-


ence:


"ihe whole are swept away ateach Maha pralaya or destruction of the universe,


Which like the baseless fabric of a vision,
Leaves not a wreck behind.


CLOUD MESSENGER,


6 To every sigh of thine, his sigh replies,


© And tears responsive trickle from his eyes,


‘ By thee unheard, by those bright eyes unseen, |
¢ Since fate resists, and regions intervene, i

‘ To me the message of his love consigtied,

c Pourtrays the sufferings of liis constant minds ;


‘ Oh, were he present, fondly would he seek;


* In secret whiser that inviting cheeks ee


+ Woo thee in close approach his words to hear, a


¢ And breathe these tender accents in thine ear.?


‘¢ Goddess beloved, how vainly I explore, J

s¢ The world to trace the semblance I adore

s¢ ‘Thy eraceful form the flexile tendril shews3

s¢ And like thy locks the peacock’s plumage glows


adrpugnantstererasf
qEwaienistateasttaysars | WU
Wewaaahiaaaegayqce >
CRI CED ICUCH CARE CnC ciL ae
ASAT TEU Asa AAAS”
WR fat aaaqaacag Wert
wainbay yiare hal Hashes ara :

AW Va fala faarg ae gaya ll


Ee


108.


663


 - 672


67S |


106 MEGHA DUTA OR |


‘ Mild as thy cheeks, the moons new beams appear,
‘> And those soft eyes adorn the timid deers ee | 680
¢ In rippling brooks thy curling brows I see, — .


-s But only view combined these charms in thee.


ee


C


Suara qaztd egy faarer
"ar Amaia fachiataieaermate HRN


Annotations,


Verse 679. Mild as thy cheeks the moon’s new beams appear.] Comparing a beautiful
face to the moon has been supposed peculiar to oriental poets; instances howevér may
be found in English verse ; .perhaps that passage ‘in Popr, where speaking of an. amiable
female and thie moon, he says, “ Serene in virgin modesty she shines,” may not be

exactly in point, although the general idea is similar. Spenser however is sufficiently
precise.
Her spacious forehead like the clearest moon,
. Whose full growne orbe begins now to be spent,
~-\ Largely displayed in native silver shone,
Giving wide room to Beauty’s regiment.

-Verst 682. But only view combined these charms in thee.| This turn of the compliment,
closely faithful.to the original, conveys a high idea of the gallantry of a Hindu Bard;
and as this gallantry cannot be the ten times repeated retail of Romantic folly, or
Chivalrous frenzy, it may be considered as the natural expression of unsophisticated
tenderness. We have in these lines a complete description of beauty agreeably to
Hindu fancy, and I do not think the series of comparisons will much suffer, by being
contrasted with any. similar series in classical or modern writers. I am not aware
indeed that so continued and simple a strain of imagery is often to be found in the latter,
and it may be doing them an injustice to bring forward as analogous a passage and its
imitations which is certainly of inferior beauty. To begin with Pops.

Sylzia’s like autumn ripe, yet mild as May,
More bright than morn, yet fresh as early day :
This as well as the rest of the Pastoral is : borrowed from Trerocritus, Orr, and


‘CLOUD MESSENGE> a


sc Ren in’ these wilds our unrelenting fate,

%6 Proscribes the union, love and art creates _ 68
am raya aa farranqaaieeaay

HMA ITNT iaraieseiaaRy AH


SSS EE


Synotations, -


Viren. In the'7th Eclogue of the latter Poet, these comparisons‘ occur,

Nerine Galatea, thy ymno mihi dulcior Hy ry ble,

Candidior cycnis, hederd formosior alba,

Oh Gadatea nymph, than swans more bright,

More sweet than thyme, more fair than ivy white. ©-Wartow.
This is an imitation of Taeocritvs in his th Idyll. = 1S

Aevuclégs wads noridely, dxarulépa 3 dvds,

Mécxa yaupclépe, Diepwlepe dpOanos apts

Softer than Lambs you seem, than curds more white,

"Wanton as calves bofore the uddeted kine,

Bright asthe unvipe fruitage of the vine, Fawkes,
Ovrnalso‘has imitated and amplified this same passage.
€andidior nivei folio Galatea ligustri,.
Floridior pratis, longo procerior alno,
Splendidior vitro, tenero lascisivior ‘hedo, - : 7,
Lcevior assiduo detrttr? eygore conchis, : ;
Solibus hybernis, estivd gyatior umbrd, me
Nobilior pomis, platano conspectior altdy
Lucidior glacie, maturd dulcior wod,
Mollior et eygni: plumis, et lacte coacto, ase
Et si non fugias riguo Sormosior horta.. . Wdranon: B. 13.
Devyoen has translated, and much improved this passage :. > ,

‘ Oh lovely Galatea, whiter far,.
Than falling snows, and_rising lilies are,
‘More flowery than the meads, as er ystal bright,
Erect as ales s, and of equal height;


»


108 MEGHA DUTA OR


« ‘When with the colors that the rock supplies,

« O’er the rude stone thy pictured beauties rise,

“ Fain would I think, once more we fondly meets .
| -& And seek to fall in homage at thy feet; ef 688 ~

“In vain 5 for envious tears my purpose blight,


= And veil the lovely i image from my sight,


of eesaeidiaas |
RUG AsaeRAa TRAIT || WY UN


ee Annotations.
More wanten than a kid; more steek thy skin,
Than orient shells that on the shore are seen;
Than apples fairer when the boughs they lade;
.. Pleasing-as winter sun, or summer shade: ,
More grateful to the sight than goodly plains,
'. And softer to the touch than down of swans,
Or curds new turned ; and sweeter to the taste, -
Than swelling grapes that to the vintage haste, -
More clear than j ice, or running sireains that. stray,
- ‘Through garden plats, but Ah! more swift than. they.
Ovin’s description is very much in. the style of Persian Poetry, and infinitely. an ap-«
pr opriate, less simple and less delicate than the passage above, We-may add another
specimen of perhaps superior merit, from one of that school which can never be too highly
rated; the Lover in one of Forn’s dramas thus describes his mistress.
, View well her face, and in that little round,
You may observe a world of variety.
For coral, lips; for sweet perfunje, her breath $
“For jewels, eyes; for threads of purest gold,
Hair; for delicious choice of flowers, cheeks;
Wonder in every portion of that form.
Verse 685. When oe the colors that the rock supplies.| “ Having painted you with
mineral colors; ” (age) that is, according to the Commentators w ith red chalk, &e.


CLOUD MESSENGER: 2” 199


¢. Why should the God hie wields the five-fold dart,


« Direct his shafts at this afflicted hearts _° 632


UP RUAIg Moya
ea brargaaniaray ae aa Il


Sree te eo ee ee


Sunotations,

‘Our very limited: acquaintance with the high land which is the scene of the Yacskws
exile, prevents our specifying the mineral substances- which he may be supposed to have
employed: the expression in the text however is one of many circumstances that render
it probable, that the mountains which run across the northern-most part of the Peninsula,
are-rich in the objects of mineralogical enquiry: we know that copper mines have been
discovered in the eastern extremity of them, the Ore of which is very productive: The
Sulagram stones or Ammonites are found in the Narmada, .and the several kinds of
Macchicas a class of ores not yet investigated, are usually called aaa and Wat
or River-born, and Tapti- born, in reference to their being found in the course of the
Tapli river.

Varse 691, Why should the God who wields the five-fold dart. } Ciinoevas the Hindu
Curip, is represented, asthe Eros of the Greeks, armed with a Bow and arrows; These
weapons are of peculiar construction and most poetically formed; the bow is of sugar
cane, the bow string consists of a line of bees, and the arrows are tipped each with a
separate flower ; the weapons and application of the allegory, will be best explained by a
verse in Sir Wa. Jones’s, hymn to this Deity.

He bends the luscious cane, and twists the string,
With bers how stocet, but abt how keen their sting +
He with five flowrets tips the ruthless darts,
Which through fice senses pierce enraptured hear ts: :
Strong Chumpa, rich in odorous gold,
Warm Arca nursed in heavenly mould: :
Dry Nagesar in silver smiling ;

’ Hot Jxriticum our sense beguiling,
And last to kindle fierce the scorching flame,
Love shafly which Gods bright Bé/a name.

In the Romaunt cf the Rosc, there is something of asimilar allegory: Cupip is armed
with “ten brade arrows,” of which, “ five were shaven well and dight,” and of a
nature to produce virtuous attachment; while the other five, ‘ also black as fiend in
hell,” were Pride, Villaine, &c. and of pernicious properties.


Fr


“110 | -“MEGHA DUTA OR


ss Nor spare to agonize an aching breast,


‘Ss By sultry. suns, and banishment oppressed 3


‘6 Oh! that these heavy hours would swiftly ae :
696


6. And lead a happier fate, and milder sky.


c


_ % Believe me Dearest that ray doom severe,
* Obtains from heavenly eyes the frequent tear ¢.
"6 And where the spirits of these groves atiend,


« The pitying a a in Poy showers descends


was eae NTA TUTGY ways
fatengiarraaaeeearaniia i Ww
TATU peAyAMAM ISA
PUT ARUATAMAATLUAT I


Aynatations.


-'Vitrsv 699. And where the spirits of these groves attend.] Si’hali Dévatas are literally
the Deities of the soil ; so completely has Hindu like. Grecian faith, peopled inanimate
nature; our poetical creed -is addicted to a similar practice, as in the beautiful modern
. imitation of the ancient Drama, Toxty’s Honey moon, where Zamora exclaims,


And if as some believe, ‘
There is a spirit in the waving woods ;
Life in the leaping torrent; in the rocksy
And seated hills, a contemplative soul, —
Brooding on all things round them;
Here, to all nature, I repeat my Vow,
Never to love but you.


‘CLOUD MESSENGER. 7 lil


“© As oft in sleep they mark my outstretched arms,

‘© That clasp in blissful dreams thy fancied charms, |

‘6 Play through the air, and fold in: fond embrace,

a Impassive matier, and etherial spaces = 4 704


>


“¢ Soft and delightful to my senses blows,

* The breeze that south-ward wafts Himdla’s SNOWS,
‘And rich impregnated. with gums divine,

«“ Exuding fragrant from the shattered pine, ~~. 408


WY AMARVIT PS MAS NS TAA |
HRM ATRL SIT AMET a fat [PROS
aes eae gases ea SAAI

HRN ARAMA awaggat


Aunetations,


Verse 702. That clasp in blisful dreams thy fancied charms.]
Pur nel sonno almen’ taloray:
Vien’ colet che m’ innamora,:
Le mie pene a consolar.- Merasrasto. Cantata, >
She whom I love in sleep appears,
And soothes my grief, and calms my fears.
Verse 703. Play through the air, c.| So poor Olympia in Antosto,
Di qua Tun braccio, e di 14 altro gira,
And here one arm, and there the other ee
And with as much success as Zxeas,,
Ter conatus ibi collo dare brachia circum,
Ter frusira comprensa manus effugit imago,.
Thrice round her neck my eager arms I threw,
Thrice from my empty arms the Phantom flew. Prrr.


Y


112 ee ~uiicua DUTA.OR


_ 66 . Diffuses sweels to all, but most to mes


ss Has it not touched 5 ‘does it not breathe of thee?


“ What are my tasks: to speed the lage ging ae
ee And-urge impatiently the rising light; -
“¢ The light returned, I sicken at the rays,


‘


-- © And shun as eagerly the shining day:


e ee Maia ane my labors i in this lonely state. -_ Pa ;
. But fate proscribes, and we must bow to fate. 716


wiagaaaaimatgaaizan
— udaeatetratcqamaii | wow
7 deraaguinanetd anita
egreree tara Rasa |
“eEgrS SEMAGAT TANIA
| sical if ee mt i i


Deanne tin me Tr enlist Sale wet es ee ART ng Chnbe ate aR: ARTS SS RES SAE. SS Rt


‘notations.
Verse 710. Flas it not touched; does it not breathe of thee?] We have here another
elegant and tender compliment, in a strain even superior to. thé similar thought in Ben.
Joxson’s admired little Ode from the Greek.
* But thou thereon didst only breathe,
' And sent it back to me,
’ Since when it looks and smells I swear,
iN ot ofitself but thee,


CLOUD MES SENGER. 133


‘¢. Let then my firmness save thee from despairs


‘6 Who trust. myself, nor sink beneath my cares.
F > F .


AAMAS en UaqmAAsa
neal usnlee sito | :


Annotations,


Vense 717, Let then my firmness .save thee from despair.] We are scarcely prepared
for this sudden fortitude of the Yacsha, but it is not by any means unnatural: tho task of
consoling partners ‘intafliction, necessarily diverts the mind from its own distr ess; the
lofty reliance upon one’s self here recommended, is analogous to the advice given by the
dream which JupiTer sends to AcAmMemNoN. Homer's iliad, B. 2d, ,

ou be oxow exe Doeci
Do you rely upon your own mind.
Or it is something in the manner of a passage in the clegant poem of Caroxius addressed.
to LHinse lf.
Quin te animo offirnas, icque istinc reducisy
Et Diis invitis, desine esse miser,
Trusé to thy self, on strength of soul rely,
And hostile Gods, and wretchedness, defy. ,
Goxpsuitn's Travel/cr winds up with morality of this description when he remarks. 7
Still to ourselves in every place consigned,
Our own felicity we make or find.
‘Mivron’s strain Homeyer) in Satan’s sublime apostrophe to Hell, is still more. elev ated,
Tail horrors hail! and thou profoundest Hell, -
} Receive thy new possessor: one who brings,
A mind not to be changed by place or time; ; “
The Mind is its own place, and in itself, .
Cana make a Heaven of Hell, a hell of Heaven.

Reference to this noble principle is very frequent in the writings of the Findus. The

Atmana Bédha or Knowledge of Spirit, a small treatise which contains the ethical part of


the Vedanta pliilosophy, and which has keen lately translated and published by Dr. Tarzor,
Gg |


1k: MEGHA DUTA OR.


«Trust to futurity, for still we views... Be
« The always wretched, , always blest.are few; 720


6s: Life like. a iAleels revolving orb turns round 3


s Now whirled in air, now. dragged along the ground.


RUA GEL Aaa
AM aquicscaaaaikaaa tl ved tl


ere


: A ,


¢


_ Simotations
concludes with this stanza.


| Rae aeegehiinRinieceetieart
; RIAA fafafineRESaSQIAAAMAT I
“« He who has made the pilgrimage of his own spirit, a pilgri image ‘in which there is
no concern respecting situation, place, or time, which is, every where; in which neither
' cold nor heat are experienced, which. bestows’ perpetual happiness and freedom from
- sorrow; he is without action, knows all things 3, pervades all things, and obtains eternal
. beatitude.” “A fine passage inculcating the same feeling occurs in Menu, where the
legislator exhorts a witness to speak the truth.


SRA Seta '
Ha! ara aua ay Ay | I= se te


«& The soul itself i its own witness, the.soul seek) is its own reftige; offend not thy conscious
soul, the supreme internal, witness of men.” Sir Wa. Jones’s Translation.

Vinse 720, ‘The always wretched always blest are few.] We have here a fine tone
of morality, in which the writings of the Hinds are generally very. abundant: the
vicissitudes of fortune have been commented on much in the game. strain by a great
“variety of poets, amongst whom the Sanscrit bard is entitled to a pre-eminent station.
Several passages, and indeed whole poems, De Fortund are given in Burmannus, as thus
in Epigram 143. By Avsonivs.

Fortuna nunquan sistit in eodem. statu,

Semper movetur, eariat et mutat vices,
Et sunuaa in Gnum mergit, ac mersa erigit,

Fortune in one position never stays,
_ But still unceasing-and unwearied strays;


CLOUD MESSENGER. 115


**, When from his serpent couch that swims the de ep,
“ Sar angi rises from celestial sleep3 ae 724
* When four more months unmarked have run their cour Se 5
“ To us all gloom; the curse has lost its force: ‘
“ The grief from separation born expires, aan at,
! | 198


And Autuinn’s nights reward our chaste desires,


MUA AS MAAS AMAT
WIVAAT RAAT AAMT TAT I

mere rai fae eae eT |

ee ieee uicmaNTaig AAATAUT WWE U


Annotations,


And still diversifies each human statey

Exalts the lowly, or subverts the great. -
Agait in the same collection we mect with fortune’s wheel.

Tuta neé in solida rerum Fortuna favore est,

Cum minime credas, impulit illa rotam.

No trust in fortune’s favor should’st thou feel,

When least expected, lo! she whirls her Vicel.
Tibuizus consoles himself with a similar reflection,

Vexatir celer? fors levis orbe rotdy

Fate round the world is driven on whirling wheel.

Verse 72%, The serpent couch is the great snake ANANTA, upon which Visuyn‘s, or as

he is here chilled the holder of the bow Sarnga, (the horn bow) reclines, during four
months, from the 11th of Aghdiha to the 11th of Cartic or as it has occurred in this year
(1813) from.the of 23d June to the 26th of October: the sleep of Visunv, during the four
months of the periodical rains in J¥éndoostan, seems to bear an emblematical relation to
that season; it has been compared to the Egyptian Hieroglyphical account of the sleep
of Iforus, typical of the annual overflow of the Mile, by the late Mr. Parersow in “his
ingenious essay an the origin of the. Hindu religion; Asiatic Researches Vol. 8,


116


eee ete ee ee


86 Afro ted ‘slumber, and ar oused. the tear.


MEGHA DUTA OR


“-. Once more I view thee as mine eycs unclose,


“© Laid by my side, and lulled by soft repose 5


And now I mark thee startle from thy sleep,


ser Leese thy enfolding arms, and wake to weep 152
6 My anxious love long vainly seeks reply s
al Till, as the smile relumes that lucid eye,
“6 Thy arch avowal owns, that jealous fear, .
ee 756


s¢ While thus, Oh Goddess with the dark ‘black eyes,


.s My fond assurance confidence supplies $


"- 6 Let not the tales that idle tatlers bear,
“6 Subvert thy a vor teach thee to despair J 740


f


yagtrenfaradawentyTa


faaqafantaqataatfeyg at tt


| aaTeraghnnqager gaa
| See ara Ha aleaaTE I aR
| erage aha raR ERT


niavetarghana ga neatararteay u


oe ee Stes


SS Se


Arnotations.


VERSE 739, This passage’ may either be explained, do not lose your trust in me,”
or “ do not break your faith with me.” we may indeed conceive the two sentiments to be


iny olved in each oe as they are in this passage,


Lingua mendace,
See a te m’ accusa, ma Frere ha tante
. Prove della mia fed.


CLOUD. MESSENGER. HT


“¢ 'True love no time nor distance can destroy,
ms And independant of all ‘present joys
s¢ It grows in absence, as renewed delight,


6¢ Some dear memorials, some loved lines excite.”? wy 44.


>


Such, vast Disperiser of the dews of heaven,
Such is my suit, and such thy promise given :


Fearless upon thy friendship I rely, - “
oa


Nor ask that promise, nor expect replys 48


Qqwas Para tafereraca gai

44 Te Teg any AY Ta TARGA)
aaa aaa aaaa | |
PUAM AIGA TAN CATATAATA |


=


AIOtatiONs.


Srene mi conosce € Irene il crede s
: Ahno! Merasrasio. Cantata,
Do slanderous ‘tongues my truth impeach,
_And can they gain Irenx’s ear,
Do not a thousand trials teach,
How firm my faith; then vain their speech,
She knows my heart, and vainer still my fear.

Verse 748, Nor ask that promise nor expect rep'y.| We cannot help pausing here to
semark the ingenuity of the Poet in the conduct of his work. Ie sets out with excusing
the apparent absurdity of the Yacsha’s' addressing himself to a Cloud as to a rational
being, by introducing a pleasing and natural sentiment, see Verse 52. The Cloud has now
received his charge and something is expected by way of reply, expressive either of refusal
Yo have given the Cloud any thing like the faculty of sseech, would have been


Ih.


or assent,


118


' MEGHA DUTA OR


To thee the thirsty Chdtacas complain;


Thy only answer is the falling rains


-And still such answer from the Good proceeds, we
152


Who grant our wishes, not in words, but deeds,


Thy task performed, consoled the mourner’s mind $


Haste thy return these solitudes to finds


Soar from the mountain, whose exalted brow,
-. The horns of Siva’s bull majestic plough, ea 756


_ And hither speeding, to my sorrowing heart,


Shrunk like the bud at dawn, relief impart.


faruisiugfanfaadaareras


Taney uiagens taaiiaa |) AU
SPRAY A HAT RIE THA Sa
ware eiauaayerara faye: t


agayienmegesiivaaia


Stele erect iH a MN


eietaetane


straining probability over-much, and we see in the above lines with what neatness


‘Carrwasa has
-Vanse 757.


extricated himself from the dilemma.
Thus Ovin in his Tristia.
Prospera sic vobis mancat Fortuna nec unquam,
Contacti simili sorte rogetis opem.
So may on thee propitious fortune wait,
‘. Nor may’st thou need such did, nor mourn so sad a fate.


CLOUD MESSENGER. 119


With welcome news my woes tumultuous still,

And all my wishes tenderly fulfil. 760
Then to whatever scenes invite thy way, .
Waft thy rich stores, and grateful glooms convey 5

. And ne’er may destiny like mine divide,- 5


Thy brilliant spouse, the lightning: g, from thy side. eo 164


»


This said he ceased s the messenger of air,
Conveyed to Alaca his wild despair 5

The God of wealth relenting learnt his state,
‘And swift curtailed the limit of his fate ; 58 :
Removed the curse, restored him to his wile:

And blest 7 ceaseless joy their everlasting life. Ay pu


ye’


wapetgaagheagagran —
VI AMAYCT aT HeAAA LIST U
CUPSM PATH ACHGMVAyyAM
| Sohal E ANGE

SMA AIA RATT ag:
ae ea ATT!
aan Sa
onfaeraaTay SAAT WEY
siaslaciaeiat aguante :
RAR TA TA MARZ

THE END.


ERRATA
tle


—_
Pack 8. Note For. yéduiiéoroda~ read = yoruilierovda-
— 60.1. 345. smiling’ - smiling |
—- 64. Note » fall ‘——- fuel
—— 79. Note —— held’ ; —— held
— 86. Note —- Cuve‘an’s . ——~.° Cuvi'ra’s,
Bee Cee Note ; he a ee oe
— 90. Note Chucku,ee &e —— - Chukuee &c.
—— 102. Note - Verse. —— Verse, 20,
— 105. L. 672 —— whiser = « whisper
— 109. Note ~ verse — verse
ni i Note—— also - ~—e al so-
THAI
way rr BEE, WE
Ro" UE ay aay
é aoe
RB Qo BCs mT aay
Re RB oy. aay
BR. RS air - ahr
<< as Ba a aR
BR Ww Faas ea
oe wo" ae G Ie SEO
: So Ne
wh VR | ae Thal
ee .) URAAL


Ce


1 ER
7 AMOR
SRE 8
: aaa :
RR


. ER R AT AY 5


* TATION E *
4


we


<aftixe te a °
. —


< FENIS.


ae
genie tafe
_.
i oe
ARS
: SQ


ADVERTISEMENT.


PUBLICATIONS |
ix |


.


SANSCRIT LITERATURE.


GRAMMARS. -
Eb


A GRAMMAR of the Sanserit. language by. H, T, Cousnooxs, Bs, Vol. the ests


- Calcutta, 1805. :
A Sanserit Pama +) Me. Wa. Casey, one Vol Quarto. Serainpore, 1806,
3.
A Sanscrit Grammar by C. Wiriciss, Esq. one Vol. Qo. London; 1808.
‘A,


An Essay on 1 the srivelpies of .the Sanscrit- language by, H. P. Fonsezn, Esq. ‘¥ ol. the
first. Qo. Calcutta, Hee :

co OB,

Phe Grammatical Setras or aphorisms of Paiiini. with seléctions from various Com.

Nagari character, 2 Vols. Octavo. Caleutea, 1809. .

6. foe

The Sid dhi. nta Caumudi a Grammar, coiuatié to the system of Pa ini by Bratto‘st

Dicsuira. Nagari Character, one Vol, Qo. Calcutta, tele. , ;
7.
The Mugd'ha Bédha a Grammar. ‘by Voraby VA, Bengali. hacacter, one’ Yolk.


Duodecimo. Scenes e, 1807,


o


mentators.


9


DICTIONARIES,
1.
The. Amera Cosha or. Vocabulary of Amena Srnwa with marginal Translation, Notes,
wand Alphabetical Index, by H. T. aged Esq. one Vol. Qo. Rul ck 1808, -


2.
‘The Vocabulary of He MACHAN a Ragen Character, one Vol. Octo. Calcutta, 18 1807,


ADVERTISEMENT.


The Ameva Césha, Midini Cisha, Tried nda S shes and Hé inion, four original Vocabulariesé
one ooh Octo. Nagari Charsttet Caleutia, 1807,
4.


fin the pyess; an AlphabeticeDictionary Sanscrit and “Enalish,. translated and enlarged _
- from a modexn compilation by Raguuman: Vinya Buvsuana, by H. H. Winsoy, Esq,


¢


LAW.
The institutes of Menu Translated by Sir Wa. Jones, now incorporated with bis works.-

* Translation of a Digest of Hindu Law compiled by Jacanna ana Tercapancn ANANAS-
by H. T, Cozzznooxke, Esq. 4 Vols. large Octo. CHES, 1798.

; The Day patties or Law of inheritance, two. Treatises translated from the. e Chapter of the
Mild cshara, and the work oboe: TA ‘Varn. ANA, by H, Tr. opm ae one Yol.
Qo. Coleutta, Bie

wu Ment Sankita or the institutes of Menu in the original Text with the gloss of Cullica
Bhatta, Nagari. Character, one Vol. Qo. Calcutta, 1813.
5.
| Mnéeshava, ora Centnentary on the legal. work ‘of Yasxvavatea, together with the:
Srey Text. WNagari Char acter,.one Vol. Qe. Calcutta, 1812,
63 7
‘The Da yarhiga or Law of Inheritance of JTMU TA Va'naw Ae Nagari Character, ane _
. Fol. Qo: Caleutia, 1813. ;


so san nananbakndiomiecicnaial


Se


Liane: ARD PHIL OLOPHS
, ib =
. ‘The Bhagavat Gita transla ated by ©. W ALKINS; Esq.


we


Ts snslation of the # itopadésa by Cc. Wirxins, Pea


3.
Sacontais or the Fatal Ring, an Indian Drana, Translated’ by S Sir Wa. Jongs. See his wor rhs,
a . € 4.
The HW uopadésa or Collection of fables, translated by Sir Wx. J ones. Do.
5s :


The or riginal Text of the Hitopadésa, with the Dafa Cumdra Char itra, and the S’atacas


of Bhartré Hari: Na; gart i Char acter, one e Vol, Qo. Serampor?, '
on :


ADVERTISEMENT.


6.
Rite Sanhidra or assemblage of the seasons. Bengali Character, one Vol. Octo.
Calcutta, 1792, Fi


2


ea Nios Te a |
Gita Govinda or the Songs of Javaneva. Nagari Character, one Vol. Octo. Calcutta, 1808.
De . s. ; ‘
Bhagavat Gita, Nagari Character, one, Vol. Octo. Calcutta, 1808.
af 9.


The Chandi, or Dévi Mahéting ya from the Marear déya Purdiia, Nagari Character, one
Vol. Octo. Calcutta, 1808.
” ‘10.
Ghat’a Carpara, and Avene s ataca, two short eee Nagari Character, one Vol. Octo, |
Calcuita, 1808.
Wh.
The three first Volumes of the Ré mayana with a prose: Translation ny, Messrs. Cars¥
and Marsuman, Serampore, Qo. ;
: 12.
Translations of the Paranoia ‘CHANDRODAYA a Drama, . and the A'ima Bodha
treatise on the, Vedanta Philosophy, by Dr. Tayor. London, 1812,
13.
The Mégha Duta in the original Text with a Trarislation into English Verse, &e,


meee
‘Sn the press,
The Mi, gha Coteya with the Commentary of Manur Na‘r’s.


bv cetunhe-eadnanniid: sha bbhauninzaazdenchieddepseuhadtehinvaddecinnc tececanmicheccteacta)


‘Printer, P. Pereina, Hi ndoostanee Prissy Calcutta,


dg Lee


0


Digitized with financial assistance from the
Government of Maharashtra
on 02 January, 2016
