Menander: The Principal Fragments (Allinson) (Menander, 1921)
==========================================================
Honestly-labeled fragments: the principal surviving fragments of Menander — the master of Greek New Comedy, whose work survives only in fragments and quotations — with facing Greek text, in Francis G. Allinson's Loeb translation (1921). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/menanderprincipa00menauoft).

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY


EDITED BY
¥ APPS, Pa.D., LL.D. T. E. PAGE, Litt.D. W.H. Ὁ. ROUSE, Lirtt.D.


MENANDER


ἐ.
a ΄ ΤΩ
, goed abo 1 ὦν POS


SAAR AAI


eo —SE—
————— νη,


MENANDER™-


THE PRINCIPAL FRAGMENTS


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
FRANCIS G. ALLINSON


PROFESSOR OF GREEK LITERATURE AND HISTORY
IN BROWN UNIVERSITY


LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN
NEW YORK : G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
MCMXXI


CONTENTS


PAG
GENERAL INTRODUCTION :—
he lllustrationss Notes: on’) 06 ee vii
revi ransiationwwotes-On. (oi isle: iste bos Vili
Transmission of Menander . . \ ΨΥ ets ix
YESH) gelatin Ns a EY Soh eats, Ce ee Xil
The New Comedy in Menander (Plots, Characters,
σοὶ ΘΓ ΒΝ. = ist ae deety <a XV
Vocabulary and Style of Menander . .. .. xix
Mounces and Lepatees . jx sue ΔΝ XX
ἘΠΕ EW RULENGS: ie ce ee ak ee Se et ΡΥ eT
Ι!
Ἐπ TS hs καρ iM λοι θὰ έν Κλ 5 oe 17
BIBLIOGRAPHY :—
ΕΠ ΟΠ ie fae ee ee ee, ee ov
Editions ... Shae ἐδ τήνδ. eee GO Lad, Peo as ORNL
Articles, Books, Reviews... . . ἐφ δι Ὑ{ ἀ ee Ob
THE ARBITRANTS .. . ATER os RSE TON ἃ, Le 1
THE GIRL FROM SAMOS ... . ere ον ΣΎΝ Ν 129
THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT ... , 195
εφουδ τη ERC POMS ΤΩΝ 289


FRAGMENTS FROM SIXTY-SEVEN OTHERIDENTIFIED PLAYS 307
bistomtne ixtant ΤΉ ΠΕ, eee) | 308


SNC TER LED COMEDY) rie haa Mele Gils 463


CONTENTS ~—


SELECTIONS FROM UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS . 475


FRAGMENTS ASSIGNED WITH DOUBT TO MENANDER .. 9534


INDEX OP PROPER NAMES ΤῊ, yd Sia mk ov)
ILLUSTRATIONS :—
Menander . . .%2#. 08 3 SS INE , Frontispiece
A Comic Poet Rehearsing a Mask . . . To face p. 131


vi


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


ILLUSTRATIONS


For the authenticity of the portrait-head of
Menander, the frontispiece, it may be urged that a
reasonable consensus! of expert opinion has come to
favour this bust, now in the Boston Museum of Fine
Arts,” as second only, if not equal, to the Copen-
hagen portrait. The resemblance between this and
the face of the comic poet on the Lateran relief
(facing page 131) re-enforces the identification, if
either one is accepted as Menander.

The beardless comic poet of the relief, who holds
in his left hand one of the masks ὃ apparently set


1 See Fr. Studniczka, Das Bildnis Menanders, Neue Jhrb.
41/42, 1918, 31 pp. (5 cuts, 10 plates), who discusses in detail
the numerous Menander portraits, especially the group of
heads in Copenhagen, Boston, Philadelphia, etc. (The Univ.
of Penn. head is wrongly assigned by 8. to Boston.) Recently
Fred. Poulsen (Ikonographische Miscellen, Copenhagen, 1921)
has attacked Studniczka’s conclusions. Poulsen, however,
accepts (/.c. p. 31) the Lateran figure as representing a comic
poet, not an actor.

2 Furnished by the courtesy of Mr. L. D. Caskey of the
Museum.

3 Carl Robert (Szenen aus zwei Komédien des Menandros,
Halle, 1908) suggests the identification of the three masks
with Moschion, Chrysis, and Demeas in the Girl from Samos.


vil


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


out by his companion! from the cupboard behind
her, has on the table before him the excerpted rdle (?)
belonging to the mask. Above is the lectern-frame
to hold the open scroll. The fingers of the poet's
right hand seem to beat accompaniment to the
recitation. (See Studniczka, op. cit. p. 26.)


Tue TRANSLATION 2


The editor wishes to crave indulgence froni the
reader in two particulars. First, for the occasional
juxtaposition of prose and verse in his translation.
In the case of mutilated or much-restored text and
doubtful context prose translations or summaries
seemed inevitable, and in the case of the minor
fragments the translator felt that it was admissible
to treat each one as a unit, versifying those only
which seem more vivid in verse. Secondly, the use
ef the siz-stress iambic verse in translating the
corresponding Greek trimeters is, as the translator

1 Tt is tempting to identify this lady with the charming,
though fabled, Glycera who figures in the Alciphron letters
as Menander’s devoted helper. Kdérte (MJenander und Gly-
kera, Hermes, 54, 19) points out the amusing anachronisin
involved, but the tradition might easily have become canonical
by about 50 A.p.—the approximate date of the an ary

* The translator wishes to express his indebtedness for


valuable help received from his colleague, Professor W. C.
Bronson.


Vill


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


is well aware, somewhat unfamiliar! to English ears,
but the continuity of the Greek, often unbroken
from line to line, seems to him to be thus more
easily reproduced, treated as a tertium quid between
prose and verse.

The translator has nowhere intentionally forced
the meaning to suit the metre and, finally, he has
not felt at liberty to try to make the English more
racy than the original by introducing tempting, but
anachronistic, modern colloquialisms that would


obscure the milieu of Menander.


Tue TRANSMISSION OF MENANDER


What we now possess of Menander in connected
scenes has been restored to us since 1891 and, for
the most part, since 1905. The traditional estimate
of his plays, verifiable only by numerous minor frag-
ments and by the uncertain reflection in Roman
Comedy, had become so firmly imbedded in our
literary creed that the opportunity for a more inde-
pendent opinion, based upon recent discoveries of
manuscripts, has entailed an excessive reaction in
the minds of some competent critics. This was,

1 R. Browning’s long poem, Fifine at the Fair, might be


cited as a precedent. In that poem, however, the sixth
stress is chaperoned by rhyme.


ix


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


perhaps, inevitable. Exaggerated or uncritical praise
provokes unmerited depreciation.' The off-hand
pairing? of Menander and Aristophanes is a mis-
mating not only in rank, but also in literary purpose
and method.

The verdict * passed upon Menander by Greeks


1 As in 1897 with the rediscovered Bacchylides.

” This juxtaposition of the protagonists of the Old and the
New Comedy came to a concrete embodiment in the double
hermae of the two poets ; ¢f. the example in the Museum at
Bonn. For a double herm of M. and Homer see Studniezka,
op. cit. p. 16.

3 e.g. Aristophanes of Byzantium, some thirty years after
Menander’s death, crystallized the opinion that reappears
nearly three centuries later in Quintilian’s more reasoned
diagnosis. Julius Caesar, master of the word as well as of
the world, in his famous reference to Terence (O dimidiate
Menander, etc.; see Suetonius, Vita Terenti), was fully aware
of Menander’s qualities. For Ovid’s reaction οὐ Schwering
(see Bibliography). In the first century after Christ,
Plutarch and Dion Chrysostom actually preferred (for reasons
not far to seek) Menander to Aristophanes, a verdict which
weakens, indeed, our respect for their literary objectivity
but, none the less, indicates the dominant influence of
Menander as the ‘‘bright and morning star of the New
Comedy” (σελασφόρος ἀστήρ, Greek Anthol. L.C.L. vol. i.
p. 86). Their contemporary, Quintilian, avoiding this error,
selects unerringly the vital quality of Menander (see below,
The Arbitrants, p. 2).

In the next century Aulus Gellius in his learned mosaic
(Nectes Atticae, ii. 23, 12, 15, 21; iii. 16, 3), gives us detailed
additional contacts with Menander’s continued popularity.
Lucian, his contemporary, has imbedded in his text two of
the fragments (see below, p. 126, Hpitrep. fr. 7; and p.
482 [Lucian *Amores] fr. 535), and his explicit reference
(Pseudol. 4) to the prologues of Menander indicates, what is
otherwise clear enough (e.g. Dial. Meretric. 8,1; 9; Piscator
17; and cf. Kock on fr. 962), the presence of the Menandrean


7


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


and Romans who possessed the great corpus of his
unmutilated works, if due allowance for the personal
equation be made, is probably not out of accord with
some portions, at least, of what we now have at our
disposal, :

.Down to the fourth or fifth century of our era
Menander was read in the Nile valley and, in fact,
throughout the Roman world. That he formed part
of the standard literature in western Europe we
know from Sidonius Apollinaris, bishop of Auvergne,
472 a.p., who draws! a comparison between the
Epitrepontes of Menander and the Hecyra of Terence.
When Menander disappeared from first-hand know-
ledge in Europe is uncertain. Possibly Psellus, the
accomplished philologian and litterateur of the
eleventh century in Constantinople, may still have
had access to complete plays. His allusion, however,


;


to “ Menandreia”’ is suggestive rather of extensive


ῷ


florilegia than of the ‘twenty-four comedies”? un-
abridged, which he is said to have edited.


element in Lucian’s crucible. For Alciphron (possibly con-
temporary with Lucian) there has been formulated the
proportion—Alciphron : Menander : : Lucian : Aristophanes.
From Aelian’s Medley (ca. 220 a.p.) Menander may be taken
**by the handful” (see Christ, Griech. Lit. Gesch.°, § 380).

1 Kp. iv. 2. For the contemporary reading of only Homer
and Menander, see Den Graeske Litteraturs Skaebne, Ada
Adler (cited by Poulsen, op. cit. p. 40).

* See Krumbacher, Byzant. Litteraturgesch.*, pp. 437,


ΧΙ


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


LIFE


The Attic poet Menander was born in the year
343/42 B.c, and died in 292/91 B.c.! His father was
Diopeithes of Cephisia. When Philip crushed Greek
independence at Chaeronea the boy was only five
years old. At twenty-one he saw a Macedonian
garrison placed on the harbour acropolis by Antipater,
the successor of Alexander. In the same year
Demosthenes, by a self-inflicted death, brought to a
close his long struggle against Macedon, and Aristotle
bequeathed to Theophrastus the headship of the
Peripatetic school. | As fellow-pupil with Menander


443. See also his references, passim, op. cit., to K. Sathas,
Μεσαιωνικὴ βιβλιοθήκη. The naive mediaeval imitations of
Menander and Philemon are self-evident forgeries, and the
authenticity of the Rodosto catalogues of the sixteenth
century, which list twenty-four comedies of Menander, is
rejected by Krumbacher, op. cit. p. 509. Poulsen, however,
op. cit. p. 46, accepts the Kodosto data.

A conspectus of the long list of authors and lexicons from
which the fragments of Menander are culled in Kock’s
Comicorum Atticorum Fragmenta—from Pliny the elder in
the first century to Planudes in the fifteenth—night suggest,
from the paucity of citations between the fifth and the ninth
centuries, that wide knowledge of Menander at first hand
could not be confidently assumed after the time of the Flori-
legium of Stobaeus (ἢ fifth century). Suidas apparently
derived his knowledge of Menander from secondary sources.
(See Krumbacher, op. cit. p. 569.)

) For this antedating by one year the current dates for
Menander’s life, see W. EK. Clark, Menander: Chronology,
C.P. i. 313-328 (1906); W. S. Ferguson, The Death of
Menander, C.P. ii. 805-312 (1907), contirms this revised date.


ΧΙ


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


under Theophrastus was the versatile Demetrius of
Phalerum, and from him, when he became the Mace-
donian viceroy in Athens, the handsome ! young poet
secured official protection and participated, we are
told, in the gaieties of contemporary Athenian life.

Before this Menander had been the companion-at-
arms (συνέφηβος 5) of Epicurus, his junior by one
year, and when he was in his ‘‘ thirties’’ Zeno ὅ the
Stoic was already in Athens developing the philo-
sophy of the Porch. Suggestions of the influence of
Theophrastus? reappear now and again in Menander’s
character-drawing, but the impact of the creed of his
companion Epicurus is obvious, and the philosophic
*‘impassiveness ’ (ἀταραξία) of the Epicureans seems
occasionally 5 tempered to an even finer edge of Stoic
courage.


1 The portrait-bust (frontispiece), if correctly identified as
Menander, re-enforces this tradition.

5 For Menander’s lost play, entitled Συνέφηβοι (see list
infra, p. 309), cf. Kock. Com. Att. Fragm. p. 131, with
Cicero’s comments on Caeeilius, Terence and Menander.

3 It is uncertain when Zeno began his public teaching, and
the apparent echoes of Stoic doctrine in Menander yield only
elusive indicia.

4 Le Grand, Daos, p. 324, cites six titles from the
**Characters” of Theophrastus as identical with titles of
Menander’s plays.

5 See fragments infra, e.g. Nos. 247/8, p. 364; No. 481,
p. 443; No. 549, p. 491; No. 556, p. 495; No. 762, p. 530;
and cf. Epitrep. lines 693-697, pp. 96, 98; and Lpitrep.
862-887, pp. 116, 118. (cf. Post, Dramatic Art of Menander,
Ῥ. 124, on Hpitr. 887 etc.)


xiii


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


Menander, however, was born to be a playwright,
not a philosopher. Whatever impulse was needed
may well have come from his uncle Alexis, whose
long life spans the century from Aristophanes to
the death of Menander and whose two hundred
plays bridge easily the transition from the Old to
the New Comedy. This rate of productivity was
exceeded by the younger poet, who wrote more
than one hundred plays in about thirty-three
years.

Menander’s first play, the “ Self-Tormentor ”’ (q.v.
infra, p. 349), was written in his nineteenth or
twentieth year,! and he gained his first victory with
“Anger”? (infra, note p. 416) in 316/15 B.c. His
activities were cut short at the age of fifty-two by
drowning, it is said,’ in the harbour of Piraeus. By
the road from Piraeus to Athens Pausanias saw the
tomb‘ of Menander and the cenotaph of Euripides,
a juxtaposition which, perhaps, over-emphasized in

1 See W. E. Clark, op. cit.

2 See Capps, A.J.P. xxi. p. 60 (1900).

9. From an unsupported statement of a commentator on
Ovid, Ibis, 589. The craving to invent ‘ parallel” deaths of
famous men is perhaps responsible for the mythical tale of
Quintus Cosconius that Terence also was drowned as he was
returning from Greece with a cargo of translations of 108 of
Menander’s plays! (See Suetonius, Vita P. Terenti.)

4 The epigram inseribed upon it is very probably the one


preserved in the Greek Anthology. (See L.C.L. edition by
Paton, vol. ii. p. 398, No. 370.)


χὶν


»....΄Φ “νὼ


ἜΤ τὰ συν


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


tradition the real relation between the two poets.


Menander was not a cenotaph of Euripides.


Tae New Comepy ΙΝ MENANDER


After the Macedonian conquest the Athenians,
lacking the stimulus of complete political independ-
ence, turned more and more to rhetoric, to ethical
philosophies, to aesthetic complacency and to the
New Comedy of Manners. This New Comedy no
longer offers the lyric beauty, the rapier wit, nor—
as we know it! in Menander at least—the naked
licence and the daring personal or political satire of
Aristophanes. It does not, indeed, always nor only
seek to provoke laughter, but is the scenic repre-
sentation of human life: the pathetic, the serious,
the gay, the amusing, the commonplace.

Menander’s rival, Philemon, with his coarser jests,
enjoyed a greater measure of popularity,? and so far
overshadowed Menander’s more delicate character-
drawing that the latter won the prize only eight
times.


1 In Menander’s fragments, as we know them—barring the
ubiquitous courtesan aud the recurring theme of a virgin
betrayed—there is scarcely an allusion to offend modern taste,
and the few instances of personal satire seem to be confined
to his earlier plays. (cf Le Grand, Daos, p. 38.)

2? The vogue for Philemon continued, indeed, into late
Byzantine times ; see above, p. xi, note 2.


XV


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


The Plots —A certain monotony! in the frame-
work of the plots is the first, and, to some extent,
the last impression received in studying the re-
mains of the New Comedy. We are by repetition
familiarized with the seduction or violation of a
maiden; with abandoned infants; with the ulti-
mate recognition scene, brought about by _ birth-
tokens—rings, trinkets, vestments; reconciliation ;
happy marriage. But there are a thousand and
one variants in developing these plots, and, as
Le Grand? has pointed out, in evaluating any
ancient work of art it is essential to bear in mind
what the Greeks regarded as primary and not as
merely secondary: “la comédie grecque n'a été ni
plus ni moins monotone que la tragédie, la poésie nar-
rative, la sculpture ou l’architecture.” Menander’s
own plots, as we now know or infer them, were re-
enforced and developed by side scenes and by well
executed delays which led up to the dénouement
through an ingenious piecemeal surrender of con-
tributory details.


1 See admirable discussion by C. R. Post, 7’he Dramatic
Art of Menander, H.S.C.P. vol. xxiv. pp. 111-145.

2 See Le Grand, Daos, especially pp. 644 ff. This monu-
mental and detailed study of the New Comedy may serve to
fill out the necessarily inadequate observations possible in
this brief sketch. Compare the English translation of the
same work by James Loeb (see Bibliography below).


Xvi


—— ιν


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


Character-Drawing.—Menander’s fame is due to
the delicacy and the verity of his character-drawing
and his spirited dialogue.

If the framework of the plot in the New Comedy
appears conventional the dramatis personae, the types
of character presented, are standardized almost like
the familiar pieces on a chess-board. But the pieces
are numerous: the cook, physician, diviner or mendi-
eant priest, philosopher, confidante (female or male),
banker, usurer, merchant, lover, the intervening
father, facetious or grandiloquent slaves, courte-
sans, old nurses and their mistresses, the major-
domo, parasite, soldier, farmer, seafarer—the interest
centres on the combinations possible in the ordinary
game of life, and the more skilful poet best plays his ~
pieces—knight, bishop, and pawn—so as to avoid a
stalemate at the end.

Menander’s “ mirror of life ’’—his traditional meed
of praise—reflected, without needless refraction, con-
temporary life. But contemporary Athens had fallen
on evil days. The “ passing show” ! that crossed his
mirror was a tamed menagerie; the political and
social atmosphere was no longer vibrant either
with victory or with struggle. Yet Menander’s


1 of. infra, p. 443, fragm. No. 481.
xvii


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


characters are no mere marionettes. Many! of his
characters live in the memory and emerge from their
conventional types. The sordid is relieved by
elements of generosity and unselfishness and by
romantic love,? to which Ovid bears testimony while
perhaps appreciating its quality only imperfectly.
Menander’s artistic fidelity to Life secured his post-
humous fame.

Prologue.—The wooden device of the isolated pro-
logue, conventionalized by Euripides, was shrewdly
adapted by Menander, who postponed ὃ it until after
the audience had been won‘ by dramatic dialogue.
Whether Menander, and others, regularly made use
of a postponed prologue is, at present, only a matter


of inference.


1 ¢.g. Abrotonon in the Arbitrants; cf. Capps, Edit. of
Menander, p. 30 et passim. See also Le Grand, op. cit.
pp. 232-3, on the character-drawing of Davus; also Post, op.
cit, p. 141.

2 Many lovers loved before Euripides—and also after him !
Excessive emphasis on the obvious influence of Euripides in
this and in other elements (see Bibliography, e.g. Leo)
ignores the fact that Menander had Life itself as a model.
See the admirable analyses in the three articles by H. W.
Prescott (vide Bibliography) and more especially ‘‘ The Ante-
cedents of Hellenistic Comedy,” C.P. 13, pp. 115-135.

8 of. infra, p. 203, Periceir. ; p. 297, fragm. 1 of 7'he Hero ;
and p. 489, fragm. No. 545. M. was not the only one to use
this device ; cf. C. H. Moore (C.P. xi. 1-10, on the /ragm.
incert. P.S.I. 126), who adds Τύχη Προλογίζουσα to some
twenty such personifications known from the New Comedy,
and examines their prototypes in Greek Tragedy. See also
Le Grand, op. cit, 508-524; Post, op. cit. pp. 127-131.

4 Post, op. cit. p. 131.


xviii


“--
© εὐ A OO a Te ee


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


Chorus.—The “chorus’’! noted here and there in
. the MSS. as a stage direction marks off the quasi-
“acts.”’2 No actual words are transmitted. Inno-


vations, perhaps begun by Agathon, resulted, in the


ΕΣ)


New Comedy, in a “Comus” performance probably


accompanied by song and dance and given by
groups of persons sometimes to be identified by
words of the actors before or after the performance.


GreEEK VOCABULARY AND STYLE?


Menander’s choice of words and expressions,


whether in dialogue or monologue,‘ is eminently


? See Flickinger, ‘‘ Xopod in Terence’s Heauton, the shifting
of Choral Roles in Menander, and Agathon’s Embolima,”
ΟΡ. vii. 1 (1912). Also in Hermes, vol. 43 (1908), two
articles by A. Korte, two by Fr. Leo, and one by O. Immisch.
Also see Loeb (trans. of Le Grand’s Daos), ‘‘ New Comedy,”
pp. 336-39, 367-70, and Croiset, ‘Litter. Greeque,” iii.
Ῥ. 610. See also Menander’s own sententious reference to
the *‘ Mutes in Life’s Chorus,” infra, p. 353.

2 Le Grand, op. cit. p. 465.

5. cf. Durham, ‘‘ Vocabulary of Menander” (see Biblio-
graphy) ; Croiset, ‘‘Style of Menander” (Hellenic Herald,
July, 1909, trans. from Revue des Deux Mondes); also the
analysis in Le Grand, op. cit. pp. 325-344. The free use of
asyndeton, for example, is obviously suited to the spoken
word; tragic colouring, on occasion, is certainly a self-
explanatory device; and Menander’s traditional ‘‘senten-
tiousness ”—the κομβολόγιον of apothegms—fits normally into
the context discovered. The language was entering the
penumbra of the κοινή (6.4. οὐθέν, γίνομαι, etc.), but the Attic
light is not yet eclipsed. (ef. Croiset, ‘‘Le Dernier des
Attiques—Ménandre,’’ Revue des Deux Mondes, vol. 50.)

* See Le Grand, op, cit. p. 550.


xix


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


suitable to the matter in hand, his diction being
usually of great clarity, his realism, while avoiding ,
unnecessary vulgarity, adapted to the characters,
whether slave or master. His vocabulary is dictated
by contemporary, not traditional, Attic Greek.


Sources AND LEGATEES


The patent familiarity of Menander with Euripides !
must not be allowed to obscure his contacts with
the other great writers of Tragedy, nor with
Aristophanes himself, whose fervid vigour still crops
out in Menander although “in Plautus and Terence
the lineaments of this kinship have been effaced...
Even if the New Comedy is the adoptive child of the
Tragedy of Euripides its mother was, after all, the
Old Comedy.” ? But even less must we forget that
the main source of Menander’s vitality was Life®
itself—the daily life in Athens.

The use, or abuse, of Menander by writers of
Roman ὁ Comedy—ranging from actual translation


1 See bibliographies, passim.
_? Fr. Leo, ‘*‘ Der neue Menander,” //ermes, 43 (see context).

5. See H. W. Prescott (op. cit. supra, Ὁ. xviii, note 2) and,
inter alia, his suggestion of the influence of the Sicilian-
Attic type of comedy (C.P. 13, p. 118). With this might be
compared the double herm, thought by Poulsen (op. cit. p. 43)
to be Menander and Epicharmus (ἢ).

4 eg. Atilius, Caecilius, Afranius, Luscius, Plautus,
Terence, Turpilius (Christ, Griech. Litt. Gesch.°, p. 373).


XX


GENERAL INTRODUCTION


to the telescoping of plots or free selection of
material—is a problem to which many! writers have
given detailed attention. Terence, four? of whose
six extant plays are frankly attributed to the Greek
of Menander, seems to offer the best points of con-
tact. In at least three comedies Terence made use
of “contaminatio ” of plots or even blending of the
material, but, as fortune has preserved no one of
these Menandrean plays, we are still unable to
estimate the exact meaning, and justice, of Caesar’s
apostrophe (see above, p. x, note 3) and whether
the alleged lack of “vis comica’’ in Terence
means lack of inventiveness? in the necessary re-
making of material to suit the exigencies of the
Roman theatre. Meanwhile Terence’s beauty of


diction and vivid charm remain unimpeached.


1 See bibliographies passim and, especially, for Plautus
and Terence, Prescott (three articles cited in Bibliography,
p. xxxi); Leo, Plautinische Forschungen ; Le Grand, op. cit.
pp. 353-365 ; C. R. Post, op. cit. with conspectus, H.S.C.P.
SRV: 11;

2 The Hecyra, although also attributed in the Didascalia to
the Greek of Menander, is apparently derived more nearly
from Apollodorus. See Lefebvre, Ménandre, ed. princeps,
pp. 31-83 (1907), for comparison of the Hecyra and Epitrep. ;
see also Lafaye, infra, Bibliography. See below, p. 353,
The Heiress, with reference to the Phormio of Terence.

3 That Caesar was πού implying a lack in Terence of τὸ
παθητικόν seems evident.


Xxi


EXTANT WRITINGS


From the plays of Menander, probably aggregating when
complete more than 100,000 lines, we possess to-day (ex-
elusive of the 758 gnomic verses loosely attributed! to
Menander and of numerous fragmentary words preserved in
citations) only some 4,000 lines. We know these from the
following sources 2 :—

1. The Cairo papyrus, discovered in Egypt in 1905, con-
tains portions of five comedies and some minor fragments as
yet unidentified. Although no one play is complete, yet, in
the case of three of them, continuous scenes are preserved
and the main outlines of the plots, with many details, may
be followed or inferred. For one of these plays, the Peri-
ceiromene, two MSS.-—the Leipzig and the Heidelberg—
partly duplicate, partly supplement the Cairo text, and a
third MS., Oa. pap. vol. ii., adds 51 lines near the end of the

lay.
x De A series of other discoveries of new fragments and the
identification of material existing in various collections have
enlarged our knowledge of seven or, possibly, eight of the
plays already known. There are: 125 lines of the Georgos
(Egypt, 1907, now in Geneva); 118 lines of the Colaz; 23
lines of the Perinthia ; and 40 lines (much broken) of the
Misoumenos, published from 1903-1910 in vols. iii. vi. and vii.
respectively of the Oxyrhynchus papyri ;* 101 lines (some 34
reasonably complete) of the Citharistes, Berlin Klassikertexte,
Heft v. 2, 1907; 20 lines of the Coneiazomenae in the library
of Dorpat, identified by Zureteli and published by Korte
(1910); certain fragments in St. Petersburg containing 56


1 Not included in this edition—various other Byzantine
anthologies were current.

2 For details see the text and introductions below.

5. To these must be added now (1920-21) a fragm. of 27
broken lines and a few verse-ends, published in Oa. pap.
vol. xiii. No. 1605. The word Θρασωΐνιδ- in col. ii. 25 seems
to identify this fragm. with the Misowmenos.


XXili


EXTANT WRITINGS


lines of the Phasma, identified by Jernstedt and included in
Korte’s edition, and two other fragments here included in
the Epitrepontes (see below, p. 10) but printed by Kérte as
Unidentified Comedy No. II., and one other fragment
assigned to the Canephorus ; and, finally, an important frag-
ment of the Hpitrep. published in 1914, Ox. pap. vol. x.
No. 1236 (see below, p. 12).

3. Two other finds may be mentioned here, although not
accepted in this edition: (a) in the papyri from Ghordn (see
Korte, Hermes, 43, p. 48) an attempt has been made to
identify certain fragments with the ”Amoros of Menander.
This is rejected both by Korte, op. cit., and by Le Grand,
op. cit. p. 222. (b) In the Papiri Greci e Latini, vol. ii.
(P.S.I. 126), is published Frammenti di una Comedia di
Menandro. Kérte (N. Jhrb. 39, 1917) accepts this as written
by Menander.

4. In Kock’s Comicorum Atticorum Fragmenta (with

Demianczuk’s Supplementum Comicum) are edited from
various sources: (a) about 1,000 lines under 90 titles
actually identified, including those already mentioned, and
(6) more than 800 lines from unidentified plays, together
with 169 others which have been attributed with doubt to
Menander.
τ In this edition the material from (1) and (2) is included,
being equivalent to what is found in the second Teubner
edition (plus the Ox. pap. fragment No. 1236) or in the
second edition of Sudhaus. In addition there are here given
the most significant fragments from sixty-seven of the other
identified plays, and also more than two hundred of the
unidentified fragments, aggregating 612 lines. Although
these minor fragments, with a few exceptions, can give little
suggestion as to plot-entanglement, they still remain of essen-
tial value in our estimate of Menander’s ethical quality and
in their reflection of contemporary life.


χχὶν


THE TEXT


For the material in the Cairo papyrus the text reflects
primarily Lefebvre’s second (1911) edition, facsimile and
apograph, which superseded the editio princeps. Many
changes, however, due to independent examinations of the
papyrus by Jensen and by Sudhaus, have been accepted in
whole or in part. A multitude of corrections or supplements
made by other commentators, including Kérte and Sudhaus
in their respective second editions, with some by the present
editor, have been incorporated or’modified. For the first
four plays a comparison with the edition by Capps (1910)
will show continuous indebtedness to him where subsequent
knowledge has not entailed changes. In addition his stage
directions have often been incorporated with little or no
change.

For the text of the other recently discovered fragments
there have been chiefly used the second editions of Kérte and
Sudhaus respectively, Grenfell and Hunt’s Georgos, the
Oxyrhynchus papyri, and Kretschmar (for the Georgos, Colaa,
and Phasma).

For the other minor fragments the text has been based
upon Kock’s Comic. Attic. Fragm. (collated with Meineke,
Diibner, Reitzenstein) and Demiariczuk’s Supplem. Comicum.

Supplements in the text are indicated by half-brackets, ™,
superior to the line. Conjectural insertions are indicated by
angular brackets, < >, and, in the translation, assumed
context is indicated by brackets. The paragraphus, ;
indicating in the MSS. a change of speaker, is inserted under
each line where its presence is certain. In broken portions
of the text the double point, (:), also indicating, in the
MSS., a change of speaker (or, rarely, se/f-address), has been
occasionally retained where the new speaker could not be
designated,

_ The critical notes tacitly assume a few obvious corrections
of the apograph and also, where no further discussion is now


XXV


THE TEXT


necessary, the mass! of corrections, supplements, or emen-
dations already recorded in the critical apparatus of Capps,
of van Leeuwen, of Korte?, of Sudhaus*, of Grenfell and
Hunt, etc. Subsequent additions or changes are referred to
the proper source, when known.


—_—_—


' See infra, Bibliography.


Xxvl


BIBLIOGRAPHY


TRANSLATIONS !


H. Grotius, H. Stephanus, F. Diibner (Latin), prose and
verse. Minor Fragments in Diibner’s ed. Menandri et Phile-
monis Fraymenta, Paris, 1846.

B. P. Grenfell and A. 5. Hunt, Georgos, Oxford, 1898 ;
and fragm. of Periceiromene, Ox. pap. 1899; and partial
trans. of Colax, Perinthia, Misoumenos, Ox. pap. 1903, 1908,
1909.

U. von Wilamowitz-Méllendorff (German), Der Landmann
des Menandros, 1899.

M. Gustave Lefebvre (French), The Cairo MS. ed. princeps,
Le Caire, 1907.

C. Robert (German), Szenen aus zwei Komédien des Menan-
dros, Berlin, 1908.

F, α. Allinson (The Arbitration Scene), The Renascence of
Menander, N.Y. Nation, March, 1908.

A. 8. Hunt (The Arbitration Scene), Menander’s Comedies,
Blackwood’s Mag., June, 1908.

Maurice Croiset (French), LZ’ Arbitrage, Paris, July—Oct.,
1908.

*“Unus Multorum” (Lord Harburton), Zhe Lately Dis-
covered Fragments of Menander, Oxford, 1909.

C. O. Zuretti (Italian), Menandro, Scene e Frammenti,
Milan-Palermo-Naples (no date, 71911). This is the most
complete trans. of both the old and new material yet pub-
lished. Useful attempts to envisage the plots are prefixed to
many fragments.

O. Hey, (German trans. in the original metres of) Menan-
ders Perikeiromene, Bayr. Gymn., 1917.


1 Other translations, not seen by the present editor, are:
D. Bertotti (Italian), L’ Arbitrato, Pinerolo, 1910, and L. N.
de Olwer (Spanish), ΑἹ] theatro di Menandro. . . texto originale
y version directa de los numeros fragmentos, Barcelona, 1911.


ΧΧΥ


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Epirions


(The present editor has not had access to the original
editions or articles marked with an asterisk. }


(A) For minor fragments known before 1876: δ τέο prin-
ceps, Guillaume Morel, 1553; Hortelius, Basle, 1560; H.
Stephanus, 1569; N. Rigaltius, Paris, 1613; Grotius, Paris,
1626 ; Winterton, Cambridge and London, 1653; Hemster-
huys, 1708 ; Le Clerc, Amsterdam, 1709; Bentley, 1710.

The following have been chiefly used in this edition: Fr.
Diibner, Menandri Fragmenta, Paris, 1846; A. Meineke,
Fragmenta Comicorum Graecorum, Berlin, 1847; Th. Kock,
Comicorum Atticorum Fragmenta, Leipzig, 1888; BR. Reitzen-
stein, Der Anfang des Lexicons des Photius, Leipzig and
Berlin, 1907; I. Demiariczuk, Supplementum Comicum,
Krakéw, 1912.

(B) For other fragments (exclusive of the Cairo MS.):
C. G. Gobet, Menandri fragmenta inedita, Mnemosyne, 1876 ;
U. Jernstedt, The Porphyrius Fragments of Attic Comedy,
Acta Univ. Petrop. 1891 (per Capps, p. 34, and Kérte*, pp.
liv.-lvi.); J. Nicole, Le Lahoureur de Ménandre, Bale et
tenéve, 1898; B. T. Grenfell and A. 5, Hunt, Afenander’s
Georgos, Oxford, 1898; idem, Periceiromene, fragm. Ox. pap.
vol. ii. cexi. London, 1899; idem, Colax frag. Ox. pap. iii.
1903; idem, Perinthia, Ox. pap. vol. vi. 1908; A. Hunt,
Misoumenos, Ox. pap. vii. 1910; idem, Epitrep. frag.; Ox.
pap. x. 1236, 1914; idem, Colax (fragm.), Ox. pap. x. 1237,
1914; idem, Arguments of Menander’s Plays, Ox. pap. x.
1235, 1914; A. Korte! ἅμα 2 and S. Sudhaus! 842, see below ;
A. Kretschmar, De Menandri reliquiis nuper repertis, Leipzig,
1906; F. Leo, Komédienfragment aus Oxyrhyncos, Hermes,
44,-1909.

(C) For text of Cairo MS.: M. Gustave Lefebvre, ed.
princeps, Frayments d'un Manuscrit de Ménandre, text and
trans., Cairo, 1907; idem, Papyrus de Ménandre (No. 43227
in Cairo Museum), Facsimile and Apograph, Cairo, 1911;
H. von Arnim, Neue Reste von Komidien Menanders,* Oster.
Gymn., 1907; M. Croiset, Ménandre, Arbitrage, text and
trans., Paris, 1901; J. van Leeuwen, Menandri quaiuor
fabularum fragmenta, Leyden, 1908; idem, sec. ed. (with
prolegomena and commentary), Leyden, 1908; third ed.
Leyden, 1919; C. Robert, Der Neue Menander, Berlin, 1908 ;


XXVili


BIBLIOGRAPHY


5. Sudhaus, Menandri reliquiae nuper repertae, Bonn, 1909;
idem, sec. ed. includes also text of the other seven plays (see
Korte*, below), Bonn, 1914; A. Kérte, Menandrea, ed.
minor et maior, Teub., Leipzig, 1910; idem, sec. ed. (ed.
minor et maior), in addition to Cairo MS. edits text of
Georgos, Citharistes, Colax, Coneiazomenae, Misowmenos,
Perinthia, Phasma, and St. Pet. fragm. (as Hab. Incerta ii.),
very full bibliography, Teubner, Leipzig, 1912; Edward ᾿
Capps, Four Plays of Menander, with introduction, com-
mentary, critical appendix, bibliography, Boston, New York,
Chicago, London, 1910; Chr. Jensen, De Menandri Codice
Caerensi. This is an independent collation of the MS., R.M.,
65, 1910; tbidem, p. 635; L. Bodin and P, Mazon, Avisto-
phane et Ménandre, Extraits, third ed. Paris, 1910.


ArticLes, Books, Rrvinws


[To save space the following selected list is given of the
names of important contributors to the establishing of the
text of Menander previous to 1910. For details see foot-
notes, passim, of this edition or the bibliographies in Capps
(1910) and Korte (i912). ]


T. L. Agar, H. von Arnim, E. Bethe, F. Blass, L. Bodin,
Chr. Brunn, E. Capps, W. E. Clark, C. G. Cobet, Churton
Collins, W. L. Collins, W. Cronert, M. Croiset, K. Dziatzko,
5. Kitrem, R. Ellis, W. 5. Ferguson, F. Fischl, G. A. Ger-
hard, Th. Gomperz, B. G. Grenfell, C. Haeberlin, A. M.
Harmon, W. Headlam, W. A. Heidel, O. Hense, H. van
Herwerden, E. Hiller, A. E. Housman, A. Humpers, A. 8.
Hunt, V. Jernstedt, R. Kauer, F. G. Kenyon, Th. Kock,
A. Kolar, A. Korte, A. G. Laird, J. van Leeuwen, P. Le-
grand, Fr. Leo, L. Maccari, P. Mazon, A. Nauck, J. Nicole,
A. Platt, H. W. Prescott, K. Rees, A. J. Reinach, Th.
Reinach, H. Richards, C. Robert, K. Fr. W. Schmidt,
A. Semenov, Nowell Smith, BR. E. Sonnenburg, K. Staven-
hagen, E. L. De Stefani, 5. Sudhaus, B. Warnecke, H. Weil,
J. W. White, F. W. Wright, U. von Wilamowitz-Mdéllen-
dorff, G. Zereteli, C. O. Zuretti.


Subsequent to 1910 :—


Ada Adler, Den graeske Litteraturs Skaebne,* Studier fra
Sprog. og Oltidsforskning, Nr. 119; F. G. Allinson, Some


XXiX


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Passages in Menander, Trans. A.P.A. xlv. 1914; idem,
Menander’s Epitrep. revised by Oxyr. Fragm. A.J.P. xxxvi.
2, 1915; W. N. Bates, Review of Studniczka’s Bildnis
Menanders, Class. Weekly, xiv. 11, 1921; A di Bella, La
Commedia di Menandro, Catania, 1912; J. W. Cohoon,
Rhetor. Studies in Arbitr. scene of Epitrep. (Princeton diss. )
Boston, 1915; D. B. Durham, 7'he Vocabulary of Menander
(Princeton diss.), 1913, and reviewed, F. G. Allinson, C.P.
xi.; R. C. Flickinger, Χοροῦ in Terence’s Heauton ; the Shifting
of Choral réles in Menander, C.P. vii. 1912; P. Fossantero
(review of Schdll’s diss.*), La Perinzia di Menandro nell’
Andria di Terenzio, Rivista di Filologia, 42, 1914; K. Fiirst,
On Menander as imitator of Euripides (original article* in
Bohemian ?, Festsehr. Kral 3), review in B.Ph.W. 36, 1916;
L. Galante, Caratteri della lingua di Menandro, Pinerolo,
1914; P. Groenboom, Varia (Hpitrep. 358), Mnemosyne, 44,
1916; R. Herzog, Menanders Epikleros (tentative assignment
to this play of the ‘‘Frammento di Menandro,” P.S.I. No.
126), Hermes, 51, 1916; Joh. Hutloff, De Menandri Hpitre-
pontibus, Berlin, 1913; A. C. Johnson, Date of Menander’s
Andria, A.J.P. xxxv. 1914; Ida Kapp, Zu den Epitrepontes,
Herm. xlviii. 1912; A. D. Knox, On Hpitrep. 357, Cl. Rev.
xxviii. 1913; cbidem, The New Callimachus and Menander ;
A. Kolar, Zur Samia des Menandros, Wiener Stud. 39, 1917 ;
A. Korte, Was verdankt die Klass. Philologie den liter. Papy-
rusfunden (KK. accepts as certainly Menandrean the fragm.
P.S.1. 126), Neue Jhrb. 39, 1917; tdem, Die Περιοχαὶ τῶν
Μενάνδρου δραμάτων, B.Ph.W. 38, 1918; idem, Glykera und
Menander, Hermes, 54, 1919; idem, Zu neweren Komédien-
Junden, Sitz. bericht. ἃ. Sachs. Ak. ἃ, W. 71, 1919; A.
Krieger, De Awlulariae Plautinae exemplari Graeco,* Giess.
diss. 1914; Καὶ. Kunst, Wo hat die Betrachtung der Alt. new.
Komiéd. literarhistorisch anzukniipfen?, N. Jhrb. 23, 1920;
G. Lafaye, La modéle de Térence dans l Hecyre, Rev. de
Phil. 40, 1916; Ph, E, Legrand, Daos, Tablcau de la comédie
grécque pendant la période dité nouvelle (673 pages. A detailed
study of the New Comedy), Lyons and Paris, 1910; Fr. Leo,
Χοροῦ bei Plautus, Hermes, 1911; idem, Geschichte der
Rémischen Literatur (see pp. 101-245), Berlin, 1913; W. M.
Lindsay, Jahresbericht iiber Plautus, 1907-1911, in Bursian’s
Jahr. ber. 1914 (1tes heft, pp. 13-14); James Loeb, The New
Yreek Comedy (translation of Le Grand, Daos, see above),
with an introd. by J. W. White, London and N.Y. 1917;


XXX


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Josef Mesk, On Epitr. 357, B.Ph.W. 33, 1913; tdem, De
Compositione des plautinischen Miles Gloriosus (Contaminatio
from Menander ?), Wien. Stud. xxxiv.; idem, Hydria,* R.M.
Ixxi.; A. de Molin, Les Comédies de Ménandre,* Bibliotheque
Univ. et Revue Suisse, Ixii., Avril, 1911; C. H. Moore, Τύχη
Προλογίζουσα, C.P. xi. 1-10; idem, Some New Comic Frag-
ments, C.P. xi. 1916 (both of these deal with the alleged
Menander Fragment in P.S.I. 126); M. Miiller, Beitrdge zu
Textkritik (zu Menander),* Progr. Patsckau, 1912; G. Pas-
quale, Sul dramma Attico, Atene e Roma, 1917, pp. 117-189,
and 1918, pp. 11-24; Fr. Poland, Zur Charakteristik Menan-
ders, N. Jahrb. xxxiii. and xxxiv. 1913; C. R. Post, The
Dramatic Art of Menander, H.S.C.P. xxiv. pp. 111-145,
1913; Fred. Poulsen, Ikonographische Miscellen, Copenhagen,
1921; H. W. Prescott (three articles), Interpretation of
Roman Comedy, C.P. xi. 125-147, 1916, Antecedents of Hellen-
istic Comedy, C.P. xiii. 113-137, 1918, and C.P. xiv. 108-135,
1919; C. Robert, Zu den Epitrep. des Menand., Sitz.ber. ἃ. k.
preuss. A. d. Wiss. xxii. 1912; idem, Tyro, Hermes, 51,
1916; H. Rubenbauer, Der Bau des iamb. T'rimeters bet
Menander, Tiibingen, 1912; idem, Der B. d. trochi. Tetram.
bei M., Philolog. 72, 1912; W. Schwering, De Ovidio et
Menandro, R.M. Ixix., 1914; A. Sehrt, De Menandro Luri-
prdis imitatore, Giess. diss.* 1912; P. E. Sonnenburg, De
Menandri Heroe, R.M. Ixix. 1914; F. Studniczka, Das
Bildnis Menanders (31 pp. and 16 illustr.), N. Jahrb. 41,
1918; 8S. Sudhaus, Menander Studien, Bonn, 1914; W. Siiss
(review of A. Sehrt, see above, discussing Euripides and
Menander), B.Ph.W. No. 34, 1914;, A. Todesco, Da Menan-
dro alla Comedia classica Italiana, Atene e Roma, 19, 1916;
B. L. Ullman, Proper names in Plautus, Terence and Menan-
der, C.P. xi. 1916; A. Weiher, Zu 261 jf: der Samia, B.Ph. W.
1913; John Williams White, The Verse of Greek Comedy
(464 pages and index ; indispensable for reconstruction of the
text of M.), Macmillan ἃ Co., London, 1912; U. von Wilamo-
witz-Méllendorff, Die Samia des Menandros, Sitz. ber. der
k. preuss. Acad. ἃ. W. pt. 1, 66-96, 1916; F. Wilhelm, Zur
Hlegie, R.M. 71, 1916; G. Wissowa, Περικειρομένη tr Tacitus,
Hermes, 51, 1916; C. O. Zuretti, Review of Sudhaus’s sec.
ed. of Menander, Rivista di Filol. 43, 1915.


Note.—C.P. = Classical Philology; H.S.C.P. = Harvard
Studies in Classical Philology.


XXXi


MENANDER
THE ARBITRANTS


΄


THE ARBITRANTS!


INTRODUCTION
I


Tue Epitrepontes, or “Those Who Submit their Case
to Arbitration,” is the most complete of the five plays
partially preserved in the Cairo papyrus. Alciphron 3
cites thiscomedy among the chefs-d’ euvreof Menander,
and Quintilian® mentions it with five others, now
known only by meagre fragments, when he speaks
of Menander as a model in matter and manner for
the young Roman orators. “He alone,” continues
Quintilian, “in my judgment, if read with diligence
would suffice to secure all the qualities which we
are inculcating ; so completely has he mirrored
human life,...so aptly does he conform to every
circumstance, character and mood.” The Arbitration
scene of Act II, with which the mutilated papyrus
begins, is only one incident in the play, but it reflects
so perfectly these qualities of Menander that it is
not surprising that the poet drew the title from it.

The list of dramatis personae, the argument, the
whole of the first “ Act”’ (with two exceptions noted
below), considerable portions within the play, and
some lines at the end have been lost. Important
details in regard to the plot and the characters are
uncertain and some of them are likely to remain
subjects for ingenious controversy, but the resultant


1 For coinage of this word cf. English: confessants.
2 Ep. ii. 4, 19. δ inet x. 10:


INTRODUCTION
9


impression, in spite of mutilation, is that of an
artistic whole.!

The plot is as follows. At the women’s night
festival of Tauropolia, in the course of the year
preceding the opening of the play, Pamphila, daughter
of Smicrines, had been violated by Charisius, a well-
to-do young man. The girl retained the ring of her
betrayer but no recollection of his face. The two,
meeting afterwards as strangers, are married and are
living happily in an Attic country deme, probably
Acharnae, when a child is born to Pamphila which
she, with the help of her old nurse, Sophrona, causes
to be exposed, apparently among the foot-hills of
Mount Parnes, together with certain birth-tokens,
including the ring of the unknown father. Charisius
is informed of the circumstance by his eavesdropping
slave, Onesimus. Being much in love with his wife
he is unwilling to divorce her but refuses to live
with her. He gives himself up to revellings with
boon companions and the harp-girl, Abrotonon. With
a reference to this situation the play apparently
begins.” An unidentified character, possibly a public
caterer, is cross-questioning Onesimus about the
somewhat strained domestic relations within. The
remainder of this dialogue, now lost, and the other
missing scenes of Act I, doubtless developed the

1 Of all the extant material this play offers the best chance
to appraise Menander. Also the reconstruction of its plot
and text requires the most discussion. Hence the space
accorded to it in this volume. This must. serve in lieu of
details necessarily omitted in the general and special intro-
ductions for lack of space. See M. Croiset, Menandre,
LD Arbitrage, 1908, pp. 2 ff. for an admirable evaluation of
this play.

* Assuming that the fragment (600 K.) of three lines
belongs in this position.


3


INTRODUCTION
a
situation and put the audience in possession of the
facts necessary to an understanding of the subse-
quent action.!

When we are able? again to pick up the thread,
at about thirty-five lines before the end of Act I, the
father of Pamphila, the close-fisted and _ irascible
Smicrines, has arrived upon the scene. He has come to
investigate and to discuss with his daughter rumours
current about his son-in-law’s dissipated life. He is
full of resentment and alarm at the misuse of the
dowry money. He has, perhaps, already a germin-
ating thought of getting it back again by means of a
divorce. But neither the true nor the garbled story
of the birth of a baby is as yet known to him.

After Onesimus’s monologue at the opening of
Act II, Smicrines probably emerges from his inter-
view with Pamphila and is on his way back to Athens,
when he becomes, incidentally and unwittingly, the
arbitrator over the fate of his own grandchild. ‘Thus
the audience is skilfully put in possession of the
irony of the situation and can welcome with an
especial relish the subsequent appearances of the
angry or perplexed Smicrines, who forms a real piéce
de resistance up to the very end.

The Arbitration scene, which is preserved intact,’
opens in the midst of a dispute between a shepherd


1 The wooden, though not unusual, device of inserting a
formal prologue (cf. Lhe Girl Who Gets Her Hair Cut
Short, page 198), may have been avoided in this carefully
developed play.

2 From the ‘‘St. Petersburg’ fragment. For the reasons
for accepting and inserting this fragment here see below,
page 10.

8. This is the beginning of the Cairo papyrus, as preserved,
and with it begins the actual numbering of the lines in this
edition.


4


INTRODUCTION


and a charcoal-man. The abruptness of the opening
is only apparent, so as to give the desired realistic
touch of speakers coming suddenly within earshot.
All essential details come out naturally.

The foundling child, recently exposed by Pamphila,
has been discovered by the shepherd, Davus. Un-
willing to rear it himself he has given it, upon
request, to Syriscus, a charcoal-burner,! whose wife
had lost her own baby. The birth-tokens Davus
retained himself. Syriscus, learning this, now
demands them of him. Davus refuses to give them
up. They appeal to a dignified gentleman, Smicrines
as it happens, who now appears on the scene, and
ask him to arbitrate their quarrel. Smicrines decides
that the birth-tokens, along with the foundling, go
to the care of the foster parents. Syriscus and his
wife, with the baby, are on the way to the house of
Chaerestratus to pay him, as landlord, their tithes.
As they pause in front of the houses to go over the
newly rescued birth-tokens, Onesimus comes up and
recognises among the trinkets the lost ring of his
master, Charisius. This ring, through the clever
assistance of Abrotonon, who had been in attendance
upon the women at the Tauropolia festival, leads
ultimately to the happy discovery that Charisius is
himself the father of the child. In Act ITI, lines
202-363, Abrotonon’s vivacious narration of the
Tauropolia episode ; her rapid planning of an auda-
cious but benevolent trick upon Charisius; and the
dialogue with Onesimus leave nothing to be desired
on the score of realism. Of the next 130 lines, to
the end of Act III, only fragmentary suggestions


1 Probably of the deme Acharnae on the wooded foot-hills
of Mt. Parnes. See Aristophanes, Acharnians.


5


INTRODUCTION


are preserved, but at least thus much seems clear;
Smicrines has again returned, determined to take
back home the dowry and his daughter. He hears
that a child has been born to Charisius and the harp-
girl. He knows nothing of Pamphila’s own affair.
There follow: a mutilated soliloquy by Smicrines ;
one by the Cook; and various dialogues including
that with the young friends of Charisius who vainly
strive to appease and to divert the old man’s indig-
nation against his son-in-law.

Smicrines goes into the house determined to over-
bear all opposition on the part of Pamphila to a
formal separation from her husband.

At the beginning of Act IV? Smicrines is making
clear to Pamphila, with such patience as he is
capable of, the impossible situation for a wife whose
husband keeps up a “double establishment.”
Pamphila, conscious of her own history, persists in
her loyal devotion to her husband. Charisius, as we
learn at line 669, overhears this conversation.
Smicrines (in the missing lines) goes off once more,
baffled.

In the remainder of Act IV, partly well-preserved
and partly restored by the lucky find of another
papyrus fragment,’ we have two recognition scenes,
with vivid dialogue and narrations, in which Pamphila


1 For details see running interpretation of the fragmentary
text.

2 The placing of this fragment here and its interpretation
are due to Professor Harmon’s ingenious and convincing
proof, see below, page 12.

% For the combination, with the two extant pages of the
Cairo MS., of the newly discovered Oxyrhyneus papyrus and
the consequent identification and placing of the important,
though mutilated, fragments β1 4, see below, page 12.


6


INTRODUCTION


and, later, Charisius himself discover the real truth.
This heals all their trouble.

In Act V, of which the first portions are missing
or mutilated, we can at least identify! a scene in-
volving the emancipation of Onesimus and the pur-
chase and emancipation of the astute and beneficent
Abrotonon; we may infer a lost scene in which the
kindly Syriscus and his wife are rewarded for their
jealous care of the child’s interests; and we have,
practically intact, the final dénowement in which old
Smicrines, last of all, is allowed, after malicious bait-
ing by Onesimus and Sophrona, to learn the truth.
When the Cairo manuscript finally breaks off we are
evidently very near the end.

Apart from the breaks due to the fragmentary
transmission of the text, the transparent plot needs
no elaborate elucidation. Menander, as is his wont,
leads up to the romance of love within the marriage
bond.? He holds his mirror to contemporary life but
contrives to reflect far more of good than of evil.
Charisius commits one outrageous act, represented as
alien to his character when sober. He is generous
to his wife when he learns of her misfortune and of
her deception in marrying him without a confession.
He “hates the gay life”’ in which he tries to drown
his continued love for Pamphila. When he hears
from Abrotonon her cunningly distorted tale he
rejects the usual plea of masculine immunity from
blame and holds that his own crime far outdistances
his wife’s innocent misfortune.

Pamphila, innocent throughout except for the not


1 The interpretation and exact placing of certain fragments
(see text) is conjectural.
2 cf. Plutarch, Quaest. Conw. vii. 3.


INTRODUCTION


unnatural concealment of her misadventure, is loyal
to her husband when the uncomfortable results of
his real transgression bear most heavily upon him.
Both are rewarded for their rightmindedness.

The harp-girl, Abrotonon, though canny enough
in her own interest, is “honest” and generous-
minded. The sterling goodness of Syriscus, the
charcoal-man, might convert coals into diamonds.
Davus is the only villain in the play, as preserved,
and swift retribution overtakes his contemptible
willingness to defraud the baby of his chance of a
* recognition.”

Even the close-fisted and crusty old Smicrines
betrays his innate sense of justice by his indignant
verdict against Davus. Nor does the mere fact that
his anxiety is apparently greater concerning the
dowry than for his daughter’s happiness exclude a
belief in his paternal affection, made evident, indeed,
by the gift of a generous marriage portion in the
first place. He passes, as is just, through an inter-
mittent Purgatory of hostility and baiting to emerge,
as is not unjust, at the end of the play, into the
serene Paradise of a happy grandfather. He is an
admirable terlium quid to unify both the action of the
play itself and the complex motives in human
character.!


1 The Hecyra of Terence, with its inverted resemblances
to the plot of the Arbitrants, reproduces more directly the
Hecyra of Apollodorus of Carystus which, in turn, we may
assume, was a remodelling of Menander’s play.


INTRODUCTION


II


CoNSPECTUS OF THE SEQUENCE OF THE FRAGMENTS AS
ASSUMED IN THIS EDITION,


Quaternion
Line Numbers. Pages.
Fragm. 600 Κι, (three lines) 1 X, p. 13 or
. 15?
The St. Pet. fragments 1 ae 15, 16
(49 lines ; lacunae) or Y, 1-2?
Sairo MS. (1,3) 1 In this| Teubner,
Numbers. Edition. | Ed. No. 2.
—357 Cairo D1, D2, Cl, C2, B1-4,
C3, C4 1-357 | 1-857 Y, pp. 3-12
198-407 450-499 »  D3,4 [=TNMI1, VX1 358-408
and TNM2, VX2] 358-427 { and Y, pp. 13-14
4316-4315,
29-448 , YR2 4 lacuna 14 + oe:
lines 428-462 | 408-420, | Y, p. 15
08-428 » YR + lacuna 14 +
lines 463-497 | 4207-431); | Y, p. 16
» Zl + lacuna ca, 23
lines 498-532 Ziipak
» 42 + lacuna ca, 28
lines 533-567 Viel Ὁ. ἃ
Lacuna of two quaternion
pages = 70 + lines 568-637 Z, pp. 3, 4
In this lacuna insert, at
end, Frag. 184 K. and
Frag. 566 K.
00-569 Cairo, H1, H2 (Oxyrh. fr.
1236 recto) 638-707 | 432-501 Z, pp. 5, 6
Q2, 583-590) Oxyrhynchus, 1236 verso + “-----" -τςο-ς
Cairo Bl + Q2 708-748 |_| Bx |Z, p.7
Q1, 591-599) Lacuna 10 - lines; Cairo τ: Ὁ ὙΞ τὸ
p2 + οἱ 744-776 5. | BS E|Z, p.8
U1, 570, 575) Lacuna 4+ lines U1; β8 Ne saat
lac. of ca. 10 lines 777-810 |@a %¢|Z,p.9
U2, 576-581) Lacuna 4+ lines U2; p4 ants Bias
lac. of ca. 10 lines 811-847 |5 I a 2] Z, p. 10
——
00-671 Cairo H3, H4 848-919 | 520-591 Z, pp. 11, 12
End of play missing = ?
lines 920- Ζ, p. 18


1 It is not practicable to reckon an exact number of lines for the
missing first Act, but it may be assumed that at least 210 lines preceded
Dl. Assuming therefore some 35 lines as lost at the end of the play, the
total length would be at least 1164 lines (or 1225, see below). (Sudhaus,
ed2, assumes 1305.) In Capps’s edition the numbers for D1—C4 and for
H1-2 and H*4 are the same as in this edition.


INTRODUCTION


The delimitation into the conventional five ‘‘ acts” is now
possible, three of the four appearances of the chorus being
identified and the fourth placed with reasonable certainty.
The length of Act I is wholly inferential, that of Act II and
Act V may be conjectured approximately. This would give
a normal average length for the acts, as follows:


Act I ; : : 3 : ; circa 200 + lines
Act II (begun on St. Pet. verso) (x)


+201 lines . ὡ δ ὃ ἢ ὑφ 9 00. Ὁ τὼ
Act III (settled in Cairo text) 202-497 . 297 ᾿
Act IV (beginning, as assumed, with Z*

498-764 : : : Ε ὃ ὰ 268 33
Act V begins in 8” 765 to 919 + (zx) . circa 200 + ,,


Total 1225 + lines


Tue TEXT AS HERE RECONSTRUCTED.


The reconstruction of this mosaic-like text from the
fragments listed in the preceding conspectus is the outcome
of long and critical examination and discussion by many
scholars in England, France, Germany, and the United
States. There has been progress from possibility to pro-
bability, and, in some cases, from error to certainty.

The order adopted in the present text differs in some
respects from that of all preceding editions. Certainty at
all points cannot be arrived at unless some further discovery
throws new light on what is now doubtful. The following
memoranda will indicate that the arrangement is not, with
possibly one exception (ὖ.6. U' and U*), an arbitrary one,

1. The short fragment, No. 600 in Kock’s fragmenta ades-
pota, is referred to the opening of the play by a general
consensus of opinion.

2. The St. Petersburg fragments, from their content, are
to be referred to this play with confidence. About their
position there has been much controversy. The history of
their discovery is given by Professor Edward Capps, Four
Plays of Menander (1910), pp. 34-35, who was the first to
recognize that the recto belonged to this play and who placed
the fragments at Act IIJ-IV. The allusion, lines 33-35,
just before the entry of the Chorus, seemed, with other


10


INTRODUCTION


indicia, to point to an advanced state of the action. ‘The
verso only was at first included by Van Leeuwen (ed. 1908)
and placed at Act I-II. Croiset (Revue des études grecques,
1908) favoured the insertion later in the play. Miss I. Kapp
(Hermes, xlvii. 317-319) argued for the position Act 1-1],
and Sudhaus (Hermes, xlviii. 15 ff.) likewise approved of this
position which he adopts in his second (1914) edition, pre-
fixing also fragm. Z!* (for which, see below). Kdérte, in the
second Teubner edition (1912), excludes the fragments, for
reasons rehearsed pp. xxi ff., while admitting that much of
the matter is germane to the play. ;

The earlier position in the play is here adopted because
there seems to be no suggestion in these lines that Smicrines
knew of the birth of a son to Charisius, not even the garbled
story of Abrotonon. His general indignation against Char-
isius seems consistent with his feelings at a first visit to
Pamphila. On the other hand allusions in the fragments VX
and YR would seem to make the matter in the St. Petersburg
fragments inadequate if placed after these fragments (for
which see below).

3. Fragments NTM!+VX?! and NTM?+VX2. The liaison
between NTM and VX was already contemplated and tested
by M. Lefebvre who discusses it in the facsimile edition of
1911 (Introd. pp. x—xiii). After long hesitation, however,
he rejected the combination. Professor Carl Robert (1912,
Sitzungber. der kénigl. priiss. Acad. der Wiss. xxii.) revised
the scheme with a slight difference: viz., he raised up frag-
ment VX! one line so that the first verse-end, -δη, on the
right, comes opposite εὐθὺς the fourth, instead of the fifth,
verse-end of fragm. M!, on the left, etc. The meagre verse-
ends thus rearranged Robert filled out with conjectural
matter including two proper names (one of these, Moschion,
not mentioned in the extant fragments, is a ‘‘delegate-
at-large” from other plays of Menander and the New
Comedy).

After much hesitation the present editor has adopted
Robert’s arrangement as being more probable than any other
combination (noting especially what M. Lefebvre, l.c., has to
say about ‘‘les caractéres extrinséques”). This does not
involve, however, the acceptance of Professor Robert’s in-
genious and over-subtle conjectural restorations, but, with
the fragments YR! following closely, it does preempt the


4 Τ1


INTRODUCTION


position to which Professor Capps, with great probability at
the time (1910), referred the St. Petersburg fragments.

4. Fragments 2.3. The placing of these small, but in-
teresting fragments at the beginning of Act IV is due to
Professor Harmon’s keen insight. The character on the
margin of Frag. Z! he interprets, not as a page number, 6,
but as a quaternion signature, this quaternion, Z, being the
sixth in the codex according to Kérte’s arrangement. The
internal evidence of the fragments is even more convincing.
Smicrines is urging upon his daughter the plight of a wife
whose husband keeps up a ‘‘ double establishment”? (ef. dfs).
It must therefore be placed after Smicrines has been told the
trumped-up story of Abrotonon’s child. It would, therefore,
be utterly out of place in Act I where Sudhaus prefixes it to
the St. Petersburg fragments.

δ. Fragment No. 1236 of Oxyrhynchus Papyri, vol. x.
(1914). This unexpected find has contributed in three par-
ticulars to greater certainty in the interpretation of the text.
First: the recto duplicates the Cairo pap. lines 285-406
(=665-686 of this edition), confirming or modifying one or
two doubtful verse-ends. Second: the verso contains some
twenty-one verses of which about one half are new and give
several clues to the speakers. Third: the other half of
these verses overlaps a portion of the mutilated fragments,
Cairo p+, hitherto conjecturally assigned (see Korte’, pp. 93,
94) to the Periceiromene because of the marginal designa-
tions of speakers taken by Lefebvre to indicate ‘‘ Polemon”
of that play. As it is now certain that these fragments,
B4, belong to the Hpitrepontes, other readings of these
letters now seem probable (see note on text of 729). As the
recto of Ox. No. 1236 coincides with lines 385-406 of the
Cairo papyrus, its verso might be assigned to either one of
the lacunae which precede and follow respectively at a
convenient distance. The context, however, shows that it
follows and, by overlapping §', proves that the parts of this
latter fragment follow in the order: 6'**-4, Moreover p?
contains the break and indication of a Chorus ; consequently
we have the beginning of Act IV, now made definitive just
about where (764) it had been previously assumed μ᾽ Capps,
Robert and others. Finally, the fragments 6! and 95; 6?
and Q' may be combined by virtue of the contexts and seem
capable of physical union also.


12 .


INTRODUCTION


6. Fragments U1 and U*. The placing of these small but
important fragments has caused much controversy. In the
second Teubner edition (1912) the order: H?; —U*; —Q?;
—U!; —Q! could still be accepted with confidence. The
discovery of Oxyr. pap. No, 1236 and the consequent addition
of 6'* made this impossible. Various combinations, including
physical union, of 6'+ U? and β5- U! at once suggested
themselves to different scholars independently. Robert, in
Hermes, xlix. 3 ‘‘ Das Oxyrhynchosblatt der Epitrepontes ”
published his combination and confident conjectural recon-
struction with, apparently, insufficient regard to the physical
obstructions to the union. His scheme and further hypo-
thetical combinations are tested (with a phototype repro-
duction) and rejected in A.J.P. vol. xxxvi. 2, pp. 185-202
(F. G. Allinson: ‘‘ Menander’s Hpitrepontes Revised by the
New Oxyrhyncus Fragment”). The tentative arrangement
adopted in the present edition offers, it is believed, a plausible
context without any mechanical difficulties. Sudhaus, who
died before his second edition was completed, left {71 and U?
outside of the consecutive text. They are there printed at
the end.


Note to 2, p. 10.—The probable decipherment of Σμικρί, in
margin of St. Petersburg fragment (made by Hutloff and
others), is contributory evidence to the identification with
this play.


13


ΓΕΠΙΤΡΕΠΟΝΤΕΣ MENANAPOT


TA TOY APAMATOS ΠΡΟΣΩΠΑ


Μάγειρος Δᾶος
Ὀνήσιμος ᾿Αβρότονον
Σμικρίνης Χαρίσιος
Χαιρέστρατος Παμφίλη
Σιμμίας Σωφρόνη
Σύρισκος


Χορὸς συμποτῶν


/
Koda: Τύνη Συρίσκου καὶ τὸ παιδίον: ὑπηρέται τοῦ
Μαγείρου""


14


Oe Ψ᾿ ΘΒ Ν


THE ARBITRANTS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


Cook, or public caterer, from Athens.

ONESIMUS, @ slave to Charisius.

Smicrives, father of Pamphila.

CHAERESTRATUS,! a land-owner ; friend of Charisius.

Stumias, friend of Charisius and Chaerestratus.

Synriscus, a charcoal-burner and tenant-slave of Chaerestratus.

Davus, an Attic shepherd.

ABROTONON,? a harp-girl ; a slave.

Cuarisius, husband of Pamphila.

PaMPHILA, wife of Charisius.

SopHrRona,® an old servant woman of Smicrines and nurse
of Pamphila.

Cuorus of revellers.


Motes: The wife of Syrisovs.
THE Basy, child of Pamphila and Charisius.
AssIsTANts of the Cook.


1 This name, by the convention of Comedy, was given to a
young man. Hence the character of friend rather than father
(the alternative theory of some editors) best suits Chaeres-
tratus throughout the play.

2 Abrotonon, also spelled Habrotonon.

3 Conventionally in the New Comedy Sophrona is the
name of anurse. Compare the nutrix in Terence’s Hunuch,
adapted from Menander, and also in his Phormio, adapted
from the Greek of Apollodorus. Some editors have assumed
that Sophrona is the wife of Smicrines.


15


ἘΠΙΤΡΕΠΟΝΤΕΣ MENANAPOY


ACT I


Scene. ONHSIMOS καὶ “A”


can
600 K οὐχ ὁ τρόφιμός σου, πρὸς θεῶν, ᾿Ονήσιμε,
ὁ νῦν ἔχων ἱ τὴν" Α βρότονον τὴν ψάλτριαν,
ἔγημ᾽ ἔναγχος;
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
πάνυ μὲν οὖν.
(Lacuna of — lines to recto of St. Pet. fragm.)


1 adesp. 105 = Pet. 2a. For St. Petersburg fragments see
above, introduction, p. 10.


Norr.—Lines ‘‘ 1-49” of St. Pet. fragm. cannot be defi-
nitely renumbered in this text.

Lines 1-15. Change of speakers as indicated in MS., see
Capps, crit. notes; Hutloff; S*. See Capps for suppl. not
otherwise noted.


16


THE ARBIFRANTS


Scrnt.—A deme of Attica, probably Acharnae, before the
house of Chaerestratus, now occupied by Charisius and
Abrotonon, and an adjoining house, that of Charisius, in
which his wife, Pamphila, still lives. The highway
stretches off, nearly south, to the Acharnian Gate of
Athens. In the background, to the north, lies Mt. Parnes.


AOR UU
ScENE. ONESIMUS and “A” (someone unidentified,
possibly the Cook)


(Onesimus meets “ A.’ Their conversation, as preserved
in the following fragment, turns upon the domestic


affairs of Charisius.)
con
Did not, Onesimus, your master, the young heir


The one who keeps Abrotonon, the harp-girl, now,
"Fore God I ask, did he not marry recently ἢ


2?


ONESIMUS


He did indeed .. .


(The remainder of the scene and of the whole Act is lost
except the “δὲ. Petersburg”’ fragments, which are inserted
here, as follows :)


17


MENANDER
Scene. SMIKPINHS, XAIPESTPATOS, (ΣΙΜΜΊΑΣ ὃ)


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ


ἅνθρωπος οἶνον: αὐτὸ τοῦτ᾽ ἐκπλήτ' τομαι'
ἔγωγ᾽. ὑπὲρ -«-δὲ;- τοῦ μεθύσκεϊ σ᾽ θ᾽ οὐ λέγω"
ἀπιστίᾳ γάρ ἐσθ᾽ ὅμοιον τοῦτό γε,
εἰ καὶ βιάζεται κοτύλην τις τοὐβολίοῦ"

(5) ὠνούμενος πίνειν ἑαυτόν.


ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤΟΣ
φι Γ᾽ as |
τοῦτ᾽ ἐϊγώ
, ϊ δι > \ 8 Γ 8a)
προσέμενον" οὗτος ἐμπεσὼν Siac'Keda
τὸν ἔρωτα.
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
τί δ᾽ ἐμοὶ τοῦτο; πάλιν οἰμώϊξεται."
al δὲ AY / / ae ) ΄ Γ, Ἶ
προῖκα δὲ λαβὼν τάλαντα τέτταρ ἀργύρίου,
οὐ τῆς γυναικὸς νένομιχ᾽ αὑτὸν οἰκέτίην"
(10) ἀπόκοιτός ἐστι' πορνοβοσκῷ δώδεκα
τῆς ἡμέρας δραχμὰς δίδωσι,


ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤΟΣ
δώδεκα.
Γ , τ ΤΣ > lal e \ \ ΄
πέπυσ᾽τ᾽ ἀκριβῶς οὑτοσὶ τὰ πράγματα.
3 ἀπιστίᾳ, MS. / ἀπληστίᾳ, conj. Wilam.
11 δίδωσι: with space, MS. // In margin X, perhaps = Χαιρ',
52, Hutloff.


12 “xémva'7’, Leeuw. [Γἐπίστα᾽ τ᾽, Cob./ "eddyio™7’, Wilam.


1 Probably this line = about 200. For convenience, how-
ever (as in L?, K*, and Capps’s edition), the numbering begins
again with the first line preserved in the Cairo papyrus.

2 Roughly : obol = 1d. (or .03} cents) ; drachma = circa
94d.; mina = circa £32; talent = circa £225.


18


THE ARBITRANTS


Scene. SMICRINES, CHAERESTRATUS
(later SIMMIAS ?)

(Smicrines, father of Pamphila, coming from the city, is
soliloquising about the reports which have reached him in
regard to the dissolute life which his son-in-law, Charisius, is
leading. The project of inducing his daughter to separate
from her husband is already forming in his mind. It is with
the financial side of the situation that he seems to be chiefly
occupied at this first visit to Pamphila.

The beginning of his monologue is lost. He does not at
first see Chaerestratus, who interjects various side remarks.)


SMICRINES, CHAERESTRATUS (in concealment)
SMICRINES (soltloquizing)
The fellow and his wine! ’Tis this that knocks me
out—
Now I’m not talking of his merely getting drink
But this now verges on what's quite incredible,
For even if a fellow should compel himself
To drink his wine, paying an obol? the half-pint
At most—
CHAERESTRATUS (aside)
‘Tis just what I expected! He'll rush in
And drive Love out of doors !


SMICRINES
What’s this tome? Again
I say : “ He'll smart for it!” For dower though he’s
had
Four talents? down in cash he hasn’t thought himself
His wife’s domestic merely ; sleeps away from home ;
And to a panderer twelve drachmas? every day
He pays,—
CHAERESTRATUS (aside)
Yes, twelve. Precisely he has learned the facts.
19


α 2


MENANDER


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
Γμηνὸϊς διατροφὴν ἀνδρὶ καὶ πρὸς ἡμερῶν
Tv
ἕξ.


ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤΟΣ
εὖ") λελίό όγ' ἰσται" δύ᾽ ὀβολοὺς τῆς ἡμέρας,


(16) δον τι τῷ πεινῶντι «πρὸς: πτισίάνη!ν ποτέ.


ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ (ἢ)

ἢ "Χαρίσι os o'e προσμένει, Χαιρέϊστρατε.

a) ΓΕ ΄ >
Uris ὅδ᾽ ἐσ᾽ τὶ δή," γχυκύταθ᾽;
ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤΟΣ
© nr fr / | δ
0 τῆς νύμφης π' ατήρ.
ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ

Tri γὰρ παθ)᾽ ὼν ὡς ἀθλιός τις ἐργάτης!"
Γβλέπει σκύθρωφ᾽, o' τρισκακοδαϊίμων;


5


XAIPESTPATOS
Wart piav
(BO) Ope.” ΟΡ ΟΣ tase eee
chs Pine (pt baa | rec hee mae are hae eee


Shen CU a ORAS =e), ΟΣ
(Pabliba ofal circa 16 unis by St. Pet. verso)


13 "unvd's, Sudh. Hermes, xviii.

14 Γέξ : εὖ), Sudh. op. cit. // ἡμέρας : “‘membr. puncta add.
peter pase

15 Continued to Chaerestratus, Hutloff. / To Smicrines,
5: I ἱκανόν τι, Wilam. suppl. // <mpds> inserted, S*. //
mri avn'y, Gomperz suppl.

16 ΓΧαρίσι' os, K? suppl. // Xapéorpare', Capps suppl.

τίς


17 Γτίς ὅδ᾽ ἐστὶ 5%), Jern. suppl., rather long. / ἐσῖτι,
55, who reports MS. ..... τι]. γλυκυτατε. OTNSL......%
“Ττήρ.


18 Γτί γὰρ παθτὼν, Hutloff./ ‘rl οὖν ra® av, K*. // ἐργάτης",
Leeuw. / ΓΦιλόσοφος", Wil. / Hutloff sees φ.

19 Wilam. suppl // ψάλτριαν to Chaerest., Hutloff./S? divides
line before 6. 20 τὴν ἔνδον οἰκοῦσαν, 28? suppl.


20


THE ARBITRANTS


SMICRINES


Enough to keep a man a month and six whole days
Besides.
CHAERESTRATUS (aside)


Well reckon’d! that! Two obols by the day !
About enough for gruel for a hungry man !


SIMMIAs 2


(comes from the house to summon Chaerestratus. He
does not at first notice Smicrines.)


Charisius awaits you now, Chaerestratus—
But, my dear sir, who’s this ?


CHAERESTRATUS
Our young wife’s father, he—


SIMMIAS
Then why on earth like some poor, sorry, labourer
Looks he so glum, the thrice unfortunate? . . .


(In the broken lines Chaerestratus apparently first gives
Simmias some idea of the situation, explaining Smicrines’s
indignation at his son-in-law. There is allusion to a ““ harp-
girl” (19). After these asides Chaerestratus, in the lacuna
of some 15 lines, has apparently addressed himself to attempt-
ing to mollify the angry father-in-law, and when the text, on
the other side of the St. Petersburg fragment, begins again, he
is, ἐξ may be inferred, concluding his exhortation to Smicrines
by calling down a blessing conditioned on his leniency to
Charisius. This, however, has no immediate effect on the old
man, who presently goes in to his daughter.)


1 2,6. 12 x .18 = $2.16; 35 days (7.e. 29 + 6) x .06, $2.10


(approx.).
The identification of the interlocutor here as ‘‘ Simmias ”
is an inference from his appearance below at line 413.


21


MENANDER


XAIPESTPATOS
οὕτως aya ὍΣ TL σοι γένοιτο.
ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ
\ /
μὴ λέγε
Γμάταιά y |
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ


οὐκ εἰς κόρακας; οἰμώξει μακρά.
(25) "arn εἶμι νῦν εἴσω, σαφῶς τε πυθόμενος
Γὅπως ἐ ἔχει" τὰ τῆς θυγατρός, βουλεύσομαι
Γὅντινα τρόπον πρὸς τοῦτον ἤδη προσβαλῶ.


ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤΟΣ
Γφράσωμ!εν αὐτῷ τοῦτον ἥκοντ᾽ ἐνθάδε;
ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ
΄
Γφράσωμεν.
XAIPEZTPATOS


᾽ὔ > 4 rn
οἷον κίναδος, οἰκίαν ποεῖ
ν᾽


Γδιάσταϊτον.
ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ


πολλὰς ἐβουλόμην ἅμα.


ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤΟΣ
Cri λέγεις;
ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ
/ \ \ > “
μίαν μὲν τὴν ἐφεξῆς.

23 Pet. 2b. γένοιτο: Capps, K*.//mh λέγε, to Simmias,
Allin. / cont. to Chaerest., ge Hutloff.

24 μάταιά γ᾽, Allinson suppl. / In MS. ‘space for 7 letters
and for : before οὐκ, Hutloff. / μηδὲν σύ γ᾽, Leeuw. // οὐκ ete.
to Smicr., Hutloff.

25 Jern. suppl. / εἴσειμι viv, S*. 26 Korte suppl.

27 Leeuw. suppl. 28 Jern. suppl. 29 Jern. suppl.

30 Γδιάστα τον, S* suppl. ἀνάστατον, Kock. {πολλάς ete.
to Simmias, also distrib. of foll. parts, Allinson.

31 Suppl. Capps. / Γπολλάς"), Jern. suppl.


22


THE ARBITRANTS


CHAERESTRATUS (fo Smicrines)


23 So may some blessing come to you !


stmMIAs (to Chaerestratus)
Don’t talk in vain.
SMICRINES


Nay you go feed the crows! Go join the dead and
howl !!

But I'll now go inside and when I’ve clearly learned

How matters with my daughter stand, I’ll form my
plans

So as to make assault on him immediately.
[Smicrines goes into the house of Charisius to Pam-


phila.


CHAERESTRATUS (to Simmias)
Are we to tell him that this fellow has arrived ?


SIMMIAS
Let's tell him, yes.

CHAERESTRATUS

The foxy rascal! How he splits
A household !


SIMMIAS
I could wish the same to many more.


CHAERESTRATUS
What’s that you say ?
SIMMIAS
For instance, that next door.


1 Exclamatory curses like this (lt. ‘‘ You shall howl the
long howl”) are difficult to render without recourse to
expressions, anachronistic for the Greek, such as: ‘‘ The
Devil take you !” ete.


23


(40)
836 K


MENANDER


XAIPESTPATOS
τὴν ἐμήν;
ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ
eg Mg FA ded os Xapi
τὴν o'nv γ᾽. ἴωμεν δεῦρο πρὸς Xapicuov.
ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤΟΣ
Γἴωϊμεν, ὡς καὶ μειρακυλλίων ὄχλος
Γεὶς τὸν τόπον τις ἔρχεθ᾽ ὑποβεβρεγμένϊων,"
‘ois! μὴ ᾽νοχλεῖν εὔκαιρον εἶναί μῖοι δοκεῖ."
ΧΟΡῸ ΥἹ


ACT II
Scene. ONHSIMOS

ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
ἐπισφαλῆ μὲν͵) πάντα τἀνθρώπει᾽ ἐγὼ"
οἰόμενος εἶναι . . ..
Καὶ ταξρονενια ak wold ἘΠ ΕΠ. Ue
id ὃ A
Οἱ Dea TAS, ων ΑΨ ΟΣ ΣᾺ uh Shee. eee
ὃ / Γ δ᾽ >’ lal e / ἊΣ / ΠῚ
γέρων δ᾽ ἐκεῖνος ὁ κατάρατος Σμικρίνης
ἡδὲ IT. ΄ lal δ᾽ > \ y fs |
οὐδὲ λόγον ἡμῶν OVO ἐπιστροφὴν ἔχων


32-34 Jern. suppl. 35 Kock and Jern.
36 ff. to Onesimus, Capps. // ἐπι' σφαλῇ μὲν", Jern. suppl. //
τἀνθρώπει", C. W. E. Miller. // ἐγὼ, S®. 37 S* suppl.
37-39 Perhaps supply :
oidu'evos εἶναι, νῦν κατοῖδα τό τε λαλεῖν!"
καὶ τὸ πολυπραγμονεῖν ὃν ἐπισφαλέστατον""
6 δεσπόϊτης δὲ διατελεῖ μισῶν ἐμέ. (Allinson),
// Jernstedt made the tempting insertion here of Fragm.
581 K, 1.6.
ἐμοὶ πόλις ἐστὶ καὶ καταφυγὴ καὶ νόμος
καὶ τοῦ δικαίου τοῦ τ᾽ ἀδίκου παντὺς κριτὴς
ὁ δεσπότης" mpds τοῦτον ἕνα δεῖ ζῆν ἐμέ.
rejected as inconsistent with the begin. of lines 37, 38; see
Hutloff, op. cit. 40 Capps suppl.
41 Capps suppl. from Fragm. 836 Κα. ‘‘ Quoted with ἡμῶν
and ὑμῶν and with ἔχων, ἔχω, Exe.”


24


THE ARBITRANTS


CHAERESTRATUS
What? Mine?
SIMMIAS
Yes, yours! Let’s go in here to see Charisius.


CHAERESTRATUS
Let’s go, for see, there’s coming here a perfect mob
Of young bloods half-seas-over, and I hardly think
It’s just the time to choose to interfere with them.
[Chaerestratus and Simmias go into the house of
Chaerestratus. The revellers enter and give a
performance. |
CHORUS


ACT “Ti
(Enter Onesimus from the house of Chaerestratus.)
Scener. ONESIMUS alone


ONESIMUS
Affairs of mortal men are shaky—all of them!


(Onesimus, in the broken lines 37-49, seems to continue his
soliloquy somewhat as follows: ‘‘ Reflecting on this, I have
now decided that to chatter and play the busybody is the
shakiest thing of all. My master keeps on disliking me, and
as for that accursed old man, Smicrines, he has no care nor
heed for us.”


1 A different and tempting coutext for lines 36-40 was
formerly secured (see notes to text) by the insertion here of
Kock, fragm. 581, which nearly coincides with the extant
fragmentary words. This would yield’ the following charac-
teristic moralising :

For me,—as my thought goes,—one’s master is at once
City and refuge and the code of law and judge

In all of what is right and wrong. I’ve got to live
According to his views alone. But that old man,
That curséd Smicrines, nor cares for us nor heeds,


25


(45)


MENANDER


veg .

ἕως ἐλα.

ἐδεῖτο χ

ἄπωθεν.

τούτῳ τι.

κατὰ TO a
. Kop .
ΠΣ AI Oe ae ie
(Lacuna of ? lines to Dt. See note to p. 9.)


Scene. SYPISKOS, AAOS, SMIKPINHS


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ


1 φεύγεις τὸ δίκαιον.


ΔΑΟΣ
lal /
συκοφαντεῖς, δυστυχής.


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ -


> » 2 νὰν \ \ ?
ov δεῖ σ᾽ ἔχειν τὰ μὴ σ.


183 Καὶ


ΔΑΟΣ
ἐπιτρεπτέον τινί
ἐστι περὶ τούτων.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
βούλομαι.
ΔΑΟΣ
κρινώμεθα.
42-49 See Hutloff, op. cit., for traces of additional letters.
Lines 1-5. Changes of speaker follow pap. punct. except
line 3, where βούλομαι: is assumed from pap. βούλομαι" /
ΚΞ, 55 give βούλομαι, κρινώμεθα to Davus, ignoring the (:) in
line 2. See Capps, ad loc.
3 D', quat. y, p. 3.


26


THE ARBITRANTS


Onesimus may then have animadverted upon his own
officiousness in informing Charisius about Pamphila’s
previous misfortune, and may have continued to speculate
on the crisis in family affairs which the old man’s interven-
tion is likely to superinduce.

Exit Onesimus into the house of Chaerestratus.

Enter Smicrines from the house of Charisius. He comes
upon Syriscus and Davus engaged (beyinning of Cairo
papyrus) in the dispute over the birth-tokens belonging to the
foundling. By comic irony he becomes, unknown to himself,
arbitrator over the fate of his own grandson.)


Scene. SYRISCUS, DAVUS (the wife of Syriscus
carries the baby), (later) SMICRINES


(The Cairo papyrus begins here.)

Syriscus and Davus are at an impasse in their dispute
about certain trinkets found by Davus along with a baby left
exposed, which Syriscus had later adopted. Davus had held
back all reference to these birth-tokens, wishing to retain them
without the baby. Syriscus has accidentally discovered his
treachery.

SYRISCUS
You'd shun what’s fair.


DAVUS
And you, unchancy, blackmail me.


SYRISCUS
You have no right to what’s not yours.
DAVUS


Let’s leave the case
To some third person.


SYRISCUS
I agree.


DAVUS
Let’s arbitrate.


27


10


MENANDER


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
τίς οὖν;
ΔΑΟΣ
/ \
ἐμοὶ μὲν πᾶς ἱκανός. δίκαια δὲ
πάσχω" τί γάρ σοι μετεδίδουν;


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
τοῦτον λαβεῖν
βούλει κριτήν;
Η ΔΑΟΣ
ἀγαθῇ τύχῃ.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
πρὸς τῶν θεῶν,
βέλτιστε, μικρὸν ἂν σχολάσαις ἡμῖν χρόνον;


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝῊΗΣ
a /
ὑμῖν; περὶ τίνος;
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
ἀντιλέγομεν πρᾶγμά τι.
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
, “ ’ \ /
TL οὖν ἐμοὶ μέλει;
ΞΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ


κριτὴν τούτου τινὰ
ζητοῦμεν ἴσον" εἰ δή) σε μηδὲν κωλύει,
διάλυσον ἡμᾶς.
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
LA / a °y2 /
ὦ KAKLOT ἀπολούμενοι,
δίκας λέγοντες περιπατεῖτε, διφθέρας


ἔχοντες;


ΦΈΡΟΝ
ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως---τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽ ἐστὶν βραχὺ
καὶ ῥάδιον μαθεῖν, πάτερ,---δὸς τὴν χάριν.


6 Δα [ἴῃ 1. margin.
28


THE ARBITRANTS


SYRISCUS
Who shall it be ?
DAVUS
For my part anyone will do.
(Aside) It serves me right for why did I go shares
with you?


Enter Smicrines. |
SYRISCUS (indicating Smicrines)
Will you take him as judge ?


DAVUS
Luck help me, yes!


syriscus (to Smicrines)
Good sir,
Now, by the gods, could you give us a moment’s time?


SMICRINES
Give you? And wherefore?


SYRISCUS
We've a question in dispute.


SMICRINES
What's that to me, pray ὃ


SYRISCUS
Some impartial judge for this
We're seeking now, and so, if nothing hinders you,
Adjust our quarrel.
SMICRINES
Rascals marked for misery !
In goatskins dressed, do you debate and prate of law?


SYRISCUS
But none the less—the matter’s short and easily
Decided—grant the favour, father. By the gods,


ΒΡ


MENANDER


173 K 15 μὴ καταφρονήσῃς, πρὸς θεῶν. ἐν παντὶ δεῖ
καιρῷ τὸ δίκαιον ἐ ἐπικρατεῖν ἁπανταχοῦ,
καὶ τὸν παρατυγχάνοντα τούτου τοῦ μέρους
ἔχειν πρόνοιαν: κοινόν ἐστι τῷ βίῳ
πάντων.


ΔΑΟΣ


᾿ μετρίῳ γε συμπέπλεγμαι ῥήτορι.
20 τί γὰρ μετεδίδουν;


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
ἐμμενεῖτ᾽ οὖν, εἰπέ μοι,
οἷς ἂν δικάσω;
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ καὶ ΔΑΟΣ
πάντως.


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝῊΣ
ἀκούσομαι: τί γὰρ
τὸ κωλύον; σὺ πρότερος, ὁ σιωπῶν, λέγε.


ΔΑΟΣ
μικρόν γ᾽ ἄνωθεν, οὐ τὰ πρὸς τούτον μόνον
πραχθένθ᾽ τὰν ἢ σοι καὶ σαφῆ τὰ πράγματα.--
25 ἐν τῷ doer τῷ πλησίον τῶν “χωρίων
τούτων ἐποίμαινον “ριακοστὴν ἴσως,
βέλτιστε, ταύτην ἡμέραν αὐτὸς μόνος,
κἀκκείμενον παιδάριον εὗρον νήπιον,
ἔχον δέραια καὶ τοιουτονί τινα
80 κόσμον.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
περὶ τούτων ἐστίν.
19 Aao/ in 1. margin.


21 “kal Aaos", Peas conject. / Pap. has Sup only between
lines. 23 .a/in 1. margin.


30


THE ARBITRANTS


Do not despise us, for at all times it behooves

That justice gain the upper hand, yes, everywhere,
And every one that comes along should look to this
And make it his concern. It is the common lot
We all must share.


DAvus (aside)


I’ve grappled no mean orator,
Why did I give him part in this ὃ


SMICRINES
Will you abide
By my decision? Say.


syriscus and pavus (together)
Of course.


SMICRINES

I'll hear. For what’s

To hinder? (70 Davus) You! you close-mouthed
fellow there! Speak first.


DAVUS
I'll start a little further back, not simply tell
His part, that I may make the matter plain to you.
Within this bushy thicket here, hard by this place
My flock I was a-herding, now, perhaps, good sir,
Some thirty days gone by, and I was all alone,
When I came on a little infant child exposed
With necklace and with some such other ornaments.


SYRISCUS (interrupting)


About just these our quarrel !


31


MENANDER


AAOS
ο » 7A xX / Ρ
UK ἐᾷ λέγειν.


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
ἐὰν λαλῇς μεταξύ, τῇ βακτηρίᾳ
Γκα᾿θίξομαί σου.

ΔΑ͂ΟΣ

Ἁ /

καὶ δικαίως.


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
λέγε.
ΔΑΟΣ
λέγω.
/ a
Tav'eihounv. ἀπῆλθον οἴκαδ᾽ αὔτ᾽ ἔχων.
I =} / ΝΜ n> gS / /
τρέφειν ἔμελλον" ταῦτ᾽ ἔδοξέ μοι τότε.
733 K 86 ἐν νυκτὶ βουλὴν δ᾽, ὅπερ ἅπασι γίγνεται,
διδοὺς ἐμαυτῷ, διελογιζόμην. “ἐμοὶ
ὔ / \ - / oS \
τί παιδοτροφίας καὶ κακῶν; πόθεν δ᾽ ἐγὼ
τοσαῦτ᾽ ἀναλώσω; τί φροντίδων ἐμοί;
τοιουτοσί τις ἦν. ἐποίμαινον πάλιν
40 ἕωθεν. ἦλθεν οὗτος--- ἔστι δ᾽ ἀνθρακεύς —
/ a
εἰς TOV τόπον τὸν αὐτὸν ἐκπρίσων ἐκεῖ
/
στελέχη. πρότερον δέ μοι συνήθης ἐγεγόνει.
» fal > ΄ \ »
ἐλαλοῦμεν ἀλλήλοις. σκυθρωπὸν ὄντα με
> \ “ / 4 »” ’ὔ “ec “ ” “ec / / 33, 2. ’
ἰδὼν “ τί σύννους, φησί, “Ados;” “Ti γάρ; ἐγώ,
-“ ᾽ a
45 “ qreplepyos εἰμι." καὶ TO πρᾶγμ᾽ αὐτῷ λέγω,
ὡς εὗρον, ὧς ἀνειλόμην. ὃ δὲ τότε μὲν
5 , ᾿ » -“ / > , ayy? “ce a ’
εὐθύς, πρὶν εἰπεῖν πάντ᾽, ἐδεῖθ᾽" “οὕτω τί σοι
> \ / lal ν᾽ Ψ ἡ ’ὔ
ἀγαθὸν γένοιτο, Ade,” παρ᾽ ἕκαστον λέγων,
“ ἐμοὶ τὸ παιδίον δός: οὕτως εὐτυχής,


30 Aao/ ἴῃ τ. margin. 37 D?, quat. y, p. 4.
32


THE ARBITRANTS


DAVUS
He won't let me speak !


SMICRINES (to Syriscus)
If you put in your chatter, with this stick of mine
I'll fetch you one.
DAVUS
And serve him right.


SMICRINES (fo Davus)
Speak on.
DAVUS
L will.
| took him up and with him went off to my house,
| had in mind to rear him—’twas my notion then—
But over night came counsel, as it does to all,
And with myself I reasoned : “ What have I to do
With rearing children and the trouble? Where shall |
Find so much money? Why take on anxieties?”
Thus minded was I. Back unto my flock again
At daybreak. Came this fellow—he’s a charcoal-
man—
Unto this selfsame place to saw out tree-stumps there.
Now he had had acquaintance with me heretofore,
And so we fell to talking. Noticing my gloom
Says he, “Why’s Davus anxious δ᾿ “ Now why not ?”’
says I, ;
“For I’m a meddler.”’ And I tell him of the facts ;
How I had found, how owned*the child. And
straightway then,
Ere I could tell him everything, he begged and
begged ;
480, Davus, blessed be your lot!” at every word
Exclaiming. Then: “Give me the baby! So, good
luck


MENANDER


Φ e > 4 o » ree \

30 οὕτως ἐλεύθερος. γυναῖκα," φησί, ‘ yap
ἔχω. τεκούσῃ δ᾽ ἀπέθανεν τὸ παιδίον "-
ταύτην λέγων, ἣ νῦν [ἔχ᾽ εἰ τὸ παιδίον ---

ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
γ0ὺ 7
ἐδέου;
ΔΑΟΣ
νον ,ὔ ’
Σύρισκ᾽.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
“«ἔγωγ᾽.:-
ΔΑΟΣ
“ \ id /
ὅλην τὴν ἡμέραν
/ lal \ / /,
κατέτριψε. λιπωροῦντι Kai πείθοντί με

55 ὑπεσχόμην. ἔδωκ᾽. ἀπῆλθεν, μυρία
εὐχόμενος ἀγαθά. λαμβάνων μου κατεφίλει
τὰς χεῖρας.

ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
ἐπόεις ταῦτ᾽;
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
ἐπόουν
AAO
ἀπηλλάγη.
| μετὰ τῆς γυναικὸς περιτυχών μοι νῦν, ἄφνω
"πὰ τότε συνεκτεθέντα τούὐύτῳ---μικρὰ δὲ
iO ἣν ταῦτα καὶ λῆρός τις, οὐθέν---ἀξιοῖ
᾿ ἀπολαμβάνειν, καὶ δεινὰ πάσχειν φήσ᾽ ὅτι
οὐκ ἀποδίδωμ᾽, αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἔχειν ταῦτ᾽ ἀξιῶ.
ἐγὼ δέ γ᾽ αὐτόν φημι δεῖν ἔχειν χάριν
οὗ μετέλαβεν δεόμενος" εἰ μὴ πάντα δὲ
53 Σύρισκ᾽ to Davus, Capps conject. }{«- ἔγωγ᾽ > inserted,


Hense, Leeuw. The pap. has ἐδέουσύρισκ : ὅλην τὴν ἣμ., ane
foot short. um / in 1. margin.


34


THE ARBITRANTS


Be yours! So, be you free! For ᾿νε awite,’ says he,
“ And she gave birth unto a baby and it died”’—
(Meaning this woman here that holds the baby now)—


SMICRINES (to Syrtscus)
You begged ?


pavus (to Syriscus, who at first fails to answer)
Syriscus !


SYRISCUS


Yes, | did.


DAVUS
The live-long day
He pestered me, and when he urged, entreated me,
I promised him; I gave the child, and off he went
Calling down countless blessings, seized my hands
and kissed
And kissed them.


SMICRINES (to Syriscus)
You did this ?


SYRISCUS
I did.
DAVUS
Well, off he went. ἃ

Just now he meets me with his wife, and suddenly
Lays claim to all the things then with the child | ἢ

exposed—
(Now these were small and worthless, merely nothing)

—claims
That he should have them; says he’s treated scurvily
Because I will not give them, claim them for myself.
But I declare he’d better feel some gratitude
For what he did get by his begging. If I fail


Dp 2


65


70


1
oo


MENANDER


τούτῳ δίδωμ᾽, οὐκ ἐξετασθῆναί με δεῖ.
? \ 7 2 φι Be “
εἰ καὶ βαδίζων εὗρεν ἅμ᾽ ἐμοὶ ταῦτα κα
ἣν κοινὸς Ἑρμῆς, τὸ μὲν ἂν οὗτος ἔλαβ[ε δή,"
\ ny “ye , δ᾽ Ty! 2 > Ey bp
τὸ δ᾽ ἐγώ: μόνου δ᾽ εὑρόντος, ov παρὼν
“ Ψ ἊΨ » Ὁ“ 2 Ν ᾽ > \
ἅπαντ᾽ ἔχειν ole σε δεῖν, ἐμὲ δ᾽ οὐδὲ ἕν;
Ν δέ / / nr ᾽ “Ὁ er 7
τὸ πέρας: δέδωκά coi τι τῶν ἐμῶν ἕ


ry
4
σύ ye!


κών"
> Ce Sie) Ld > / \ fa) Μ
εἰ τοῦτ᾽ ἀρεστόν ἐστί σοι, καὶ νῦν ἔχε"
> δ᾽ » » / Lal δ᾽ » ὃ “' Ἢ
εἰ δ᾽ οὐκ ἀρέσκει, μετανοεῖς δ᾽, ἀπόδος Ta! λιν,
\ \ > / ? 09 nr ͵ /
Kal μηδὲν ἀδίκει μηδ᾽ ἐλαττοῦ. πάντα δέ,
\ / /
Ta μὲν Tap ἑκόντος, τὰ δὲ κατισχύσαντά με,


᾽ lal >» ¥ ΄ θ᾽). \ Ul
οὐ δεῖ σ᾽ ἔχειν. εἴρηκα Tov γ᾽ ἐμὸν λόγον.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
εἴρηκεν;
τῷ ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ


δ0


85


οὐκ ἤκουσας; εἴρηκεν.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
καλῶς.
» al ol \ a , Le | e \
οὐκοῦν ἐγὼ μετὰ ταῦτα" μόνος εὗρ᾽ οὑτοσὶ
\ / \ / ag a 6 /
τὸ παιδίον, Kai πάντα ταῦθ᾽ ἃ νῦν λέγει
ὀρθῶς λέγει, καὶ γέγονεν οὕτως, ὦ πάτερ.
οὐκ ἀντιλέγω. δεόμενος, ἱκετεύων ἐγὼ
᾽ “ a? a \ /
ἔλαβον παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοῦτ᾽" ἀληθῆ yap λέγει.
/ aA ς ‘
ποιμήν τις ἐξήγγειλέ μοι, πρὸς OV οὑτοσὶ
> / lal / / “ \
ἐλάλησε, τῶν τούτῳ συνέργων, ἅμα τινὰ
- / nr ,
κόσμον συνευρεῖν αὐτόν: ἐπὶ τοῦτον, πάτερ,
> \ / e / Γ Ἧ] ya
αὐτὸς πάρεστιν οὑτοσί.-- τὸ πα΄ tt ον
\ ,
δός μοι, γύναι.---τὰ δέραια καὶ γνωρίσματα


74 Οἱ, quat. y, p. 5. 76 Sup in τ΄. margin.


36


THE ARBITRANTS


To give him all, no need to bring me to account.
_Even if walking with me he had found these things,
And ‘twere a “ Share-all Windfall,” he had taken this,
I that. But when I made the find alone, do you,

(to Syriscus)
Although you were not by, do you, I say, expect
To have it all yourself, and not one thing for me?
In fine, I gave you of my own with all good will:
If this still pleases you, then keep it even now,
But if it doesn’t suit and if you’ve changed your mind,
Why, then return it. Don’t commit nor suffer wrong.
But ‘twere not fair that you get all, by my consent
In part, and, partly, forcing me. I’ve said my say.


SYRISCUS
Has said his say ?
. SMICRINES
You're deaf? He’s said his say.


SYRISCUS
᾿ All right,
Then I come after. All alone this fellow found
The baby. Yes, and all of this he’s telling now
He tells correctly, father, and it happened so.
I do not contradict. 1 did entreat and beg
And I received it from him. Yes, he tells the truth.
A certain shepherd, fellow labourer of bis,
With whom he had been talking, then brought word
to me
That with the baby he had found some ornaments.
To claim these things, see, father, he is here himself !
Give me the baby, wife.
(Takes the child from his wife's arms.)
Now, Davus, here from you
He’s asking back the necklace and birth-tokens too,


Ὁ!


MENANDER


z - n A
οὗτός σ᾽ ἀπαιτεῖ, Aa’. ἑαυτῷ φησι yap
a | nm
ταῦτ᾽ ἐπιτεθῆναι κόσμον, οὐ σοὶ διατροφήν.
κἀγὼ συναπαιτῶ, κύριος γεγενημένος
᾽ lal
90 τούτου' σὺ δ᾽ ἐπόησάς με δούς. νῦν γνωστέον,
βέλτιστέ, σοι ταῦτ᾽ ἐστίν, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ:
\ yy HK 5A req 4 7,9 / , »"
τὰ χρυσῖ ἢ ταῦθ᾽ δ᾽ τί ποτ᾽ ἐστί, πότερα δεῖ
\ ἧς -
κατὰ τὴν δόσιν τῆς μητρός, ἥτις ἣν ποτε,
lol ‘ Lal lol
τῷ παιδίῳ τηρεῖσθ᾽, ἕως av ἐκτραφῇ,
95 ἢ τὸν λελωποδυτηκότ᾽ αὐτὸν ταῦτ᾽ ἔχειν,
εἰ πρῶτος εὗρε, τἀλλότρια. τί οὖν τότε,
ὅτ᾽ ἐλάμβανον τοῦτ᾽, οὐκ ἀπήτουν ταῦτά σε;
ὅδ δ
οὔπω Tap ἐμοὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἣν ὑπὲρ τούτου λέγ' εἷν.
ἥκω δὲ καὶ νῦν οὐκ ἐμαυτοῦ ᾿ σ᾽" οὐδὲ ἕν
ΠῚ] > cal ce A « lol » sa
100 ἔδιον ἀπαιτῶν. ‘‘ kowvos Ερμῆς"" μηδὲ ἕν
᾽ / lal ¢
“Tetloury” ὅπου πρόσεστι σῶμ᾽ ἀδικούμενον.
Γ. 5. κε αὶ ” n> ν > AD ,
180K ᾿οὐχ᾽ “εὕρεσις TOUT ἐστιν, ἀλλ᾿ ἀφαίρεσις.
Γβλένψον δὲ κἀκεῖ, πάτερ' ἴσως ἔσθ᾽ ο᾽ὑτοϊσὶ
Γὸ παῖς ὑπὲρ ἡμᾶς, καὶ τραφεὶς ἐν ἐργάταις
TS a1 Ud a? > δὲ \ e a /
105 Γὑπ' ερόψεται ταῦτ᾽, εἰς δὲ THY αὑτοῦ φύσιν
r » «| ὅλες 50 , x / »“"Ἵ ΣΕ.
ἄρ'ας ἐλεύθερόν τι τολμήσει ποεῖν
722K 'On'pav λέοντας, ὅπλα βαστάζειν, τρέχειν
Γὲν ἀϊγῶσι. τεθέασαι τραγῳδούς, οἷδ᾽ ὅτι,
Γκ' αὶ ταῦτα κατέχεις πάντα. Νηλέα τινὰ
Ἁ
110 Πελίαν τ᾽ ἐκείνους εὗρε πρεσβύτης ἀνὴρ
5 / ” “ 5 A ~ /
αἰπόλος, ἔχων οἵαν ἐγὼ viv διφθέραν'"
fol ,
ws δ᾽ ἤσθετ᾽ αὐτοὺς ὄντας αὑτοῦ κρείττονας,
λέγει τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽, ὡς εὗρεν, ὡς ἀνείλετο,
-“ ,
ἔδωκε δ᾽ αὐτοῖς πηρίδιον γνωρισμάτων,


98 τοῦτ᾽, L?. τότ᾿, Hense, Leo, Wilam., Capps. } λέγειν,
Hense. / λέγων, 122. 104 Jensen.

106 ‘&p'as, Heidel. / das, Leo, J.

111 Ο quat. y, p. 6.


38


THE ARBITRANTS


For he declares that these were placed upon himself

For his adorning, not for eking out your keep.

I too join in, and ask for them, as guardian—

On giving him you made me that. (Zo Smicrines) And
now, good sir,

Methinks ‘tis yours to settle whether it be right

These golden trinkets and whatever else there be,

As given by his mother, whosoe’er she was, .

Be put by for the baby till he come of age,

Or this footpad who stripped him is to-have these
things,

That others own, provided that he found them first !

“Why didn’t I,” you'll say, “ when first I took the
child,

Demand them then of you?’ It was not then as yet

Within my power to speak thus in the child’s behalf,

And even now I’m here demanding no one thing

That’s mine, mine only. ‘ Windfall! Share-all!”’
None of that!

No “finding” when ‘tis question of a person wronged.

That is not “ finding,” nay, but outright filching that !

And look at this too, father. Maybe this boy here

Was born above our station. Reared ’mongst
working-folk

He will despise our doings, his own level seek

And venture on some action suiting noble birth :

Will go a-lion-hunting ; carry arms; or run

A race at games. You've seen the actors act, I know,

And all of this you understand. Those heroes once,

Pelias, Neleus, by an aged man were found,

A goatherd in his goatskin dressed as I am now,

And, when he noticed they were better born than he,

He tells the matter, how he found, how took them up,

He gave them back their wallet, with birth-tokens
filled.


᾽


39


MENANDER


115 ἐξ οὗ μαθόντες πάντα τὰ Kal’ αὑτοὺς σαφῶς
ἐγένοντο βασιλεῖς οἱ τότ᾽ ὄντες αἰπόλοι.
εἰ δ᾽ ..-ἐκλαβὼν ἐκεῖνα Δᾶος ἀπέδοτο,
αὐτ τὸς ἢ ἵνα κερδάνειε δραχμὰς δώδεκα,
ἀγνῶτες ἂν τὸν πάντα διετέλουν χρόνον

181K 120° οἱ" ig ei καὶ ετοιδῦτοϊ τῷ γένει.

οὐ δὴ καλῶς ἔχ' ει καὶ μὲν σῶμ᾽ ἐκτρέφειν
ἐμὲ τοῦτο, ἵ τὴ ν᾽ αὐτ'οῦ δὲ τῆς σωτηρίας
ἐλπίδα λαβόντα Δᾶον ἀφανίσαι, πάτερ.
γαμῶν ἀδελφήν τις διὰ γνωρίσματα

125 ἐπέσχε, μητέρ᾽ ἐντυχὼν ἐρρύσατο,
ἔσωσ᾽ ἀδελφόν. ὄντ᾽ ἐπισφαλῆ φύσει
τὸν βίον ἁ ἁπάντων τῇ προνοίᾳ δεῖ, πάτερ,
τηρεῖν, πρὸ πολλοῦ ταῦθ᾽ ὁρῶντ᾽ ἐξ ὧν ἔνι.
“ἀλλ᾽ ἀπόδος, εἰ μή, “ona »'“apeonel.” τοῦτο yap

130 ἰσχυρὸν οἴεταί τι πρὸς τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽ ἔχειν.
οὐκ ἔστι δίκαιον. εἴ τι τῶν τούτου σε δεῖ
ἀποδιδόναι, καὶ τοῦτο πρὸς ζητεῖς λαβεῖν,
ἵν᾽ ἀσφαλέστερον πονηρεύσῃ πάλιν,
εἰ νῦν τι τῶν τούτου σέσωκεν ἡ τύχη:

136 εἴρηκα: κρῖνον ὅ τι δίκαιον νενόμικας.


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
3 ’ Μ 3 > ; / \ /
ἀλλ᾽ εὔκριτ᾽ ἐστί: πάντα τὰ συνεκκείμενα
τοῦ παιδίου oti: τοῦτο γινώσκω.


ΔΑΟΣ
καλῶς"
τὸ παιδίον δ᾽;
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ

3 , 5 - \ Ath a}
ov γνώσομ᾽ εἶναι, μὰ At'a, σοῦ
- - 55 a an θ “- Γδὲ te |
τοῦ viv ἀδικοῦντος, τοῦ βοηθοῦντος ' δὲ καὶ

140 ἐπεξιόντος τ᾽ ᾧ Ἰἀδικεῖν μέλλοντί σοι.


116 adesp. 488. 138 L} suppl.
: 40


THE ARBITRANTS


And thus they found out clearly all their history,
And they, the one-time goatherds, afterwards were
kings.
But had a Davus found those things and sold them off,
That he might profit by twelve drachmas! for himself,
Through all the coming ages they had been unknown
Who were such great ones and of such a pedigree.
And so it is not fitting, father, that I here
Should rear his body and that Davus seize meanwhile
His life’s hope for the future, make it disappear.
A youth about to wed his sister once was stopped
By just such tokens. One a mother found and saved,
And one a brother. Since, O father, all men’s lives
Are liable to dangers, we must watch, look out,
With forethought far ahead for what is possible.
“Well, if you are not suited, give him back,” says he.
This is his stronghold in the matter, as he thinks.
But that’s not just. If you must give up what is his,
Then in addition do you claim to have the child
That more securely you may play the rogue again
If some of his belongings Fortune has preserved ?
I’ve said my say. (1700 Smicrines) Give verdict as you
hold is just.
SMICRINES
Well, this decision’s easy: “ All that was exposed
Together with the child goes with him,” I decide.


DAVUS
All right. But now, the child ?


SMICRINES

By Zeus, I won't decide

He’s yours who wrong him, but he’s his who came

to aid,

This man’s, who stood against you, you who'd injure

him.
' For table of (sreek money, see note 2 on p, 18.
41


MENANDER


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
πόλλ᾽ ἀγαθά σοι γένοιτο.
ΔΑΟΣ
δεινή γ᾽ ἡ "κρίσις,"
νὴ τὸν Δία τὸν σωτῆρ᾽ ἅπανθ᾽ εὑρὼν "μόνος"
ἅπαντα περιέσπασμ᾽, ὁ δ᾽ οὐχ εὑρὼν ἔχει."
οὐκοῦν ἀποδιδῶ;
i ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
φημί.
AAO
δεινή γ᾽ ἡ κρίσις,"
145 ἡ μηθὲν ἀγαθόν μοι γένοιτο.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
φέρε Tay. |
ΔΑΟΣ
ὦ Ἡράκλεις, ἃ πέπονθα.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
τὴν πήραν xara!
καὶ δεῖξον" ἐν ταύτῃ περιφέρεις γάρ. βραχὺ
πρόσμεινον, ἱκετεύω σ᾽, iv ἀποδῷ.


4


AAOS
τί yap ἐγὼ
ἐπέτρεψα τούτῳ;
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
δός ποτ᾽, ἐργαστήριον.
ΔΑΟΣ


150 ᾿αἰϊσχρά γ᾽ ἃ πέπονθα.
143 ἔχει, Headlam, Wilam./C/.. J*.
146 xdAa', L? reports x or A. / λίαβέ", K* suppl.
148 B!, quat. y, p. 7.
150 No punct. at the end of this line.


THE ARBITRANTS


SYRISCUS
Now yours be many blessings !


DAVUS

Nay, a verdict rank !
By Zeus the saviour! I, the sole discoverer,
Am stripped of all and he who did not find receives !
Am I to hand these over ?


SMICRINES
Mes:
DAVUS
A verdict rank—
Else may no blessing ever light on me!
SYRISCUS


Here, quick !
DAVUS
Good Heracles, how I am treated !


SYRISCUS
Loose your sack
And show us, for it’s there you carry them—
(To Smicrines, about to leave)
Nay, stop,
I beg, a little, till he gives them up.
pavus (aside)
Why did
I let him judge our case ?
SMICRINES
Come, give, you quarry-slave !


pavus (handing over the tokens)
What shameful treatment !


43


MENANDER


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
πάντ᾽ ἔχεις;
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
, ,
οἶμαί ye δή.
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
ἐμή τι καταπέπωκε τὴν δίκην ἐμοῦ
λέγοντος, ὡς ἡλίσκετ᾽.


ΤῊ,


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ

οὐκ ἂν ὠόμην.
᾽ »
ἀλλ᾽ εὐτύχει, βέλτιστε" τοιούΐϊτους | ἔδει


θᾶττον δικάζειν πάντας.


ΔΑΟΣ
Γἀδίϊκ ‘ov πράγμ' ατος,
155 ὦ Ἡράκλεις. οὐ γέγονε δεινοτέρα κρί 'σΐῶς;


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
\ 3 > Let
πονηρὸς ἦσθας, ὦ Tovnp —


AAO
om'ws σὶὺ νῦν
τούτῳ φυλάξεις αὐτ' ὃς ἀσφαλῶς τά δ' ε", ὃ
εὖ ἴσθι, τηρήσω σε πάντα Tov χρό νον.


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
οἴμωζε καὶ βάδιξε. σὺ δὲ ταυτί, γύναι,
160 λαβοῦσα πρὸς τὸν τρόφιμον ἐνθάδ᾽ εἴσφερε.
Χαιρέστρατον νῦν γὰρ μενοῦμεν ἐνθάδε,
εἰς αὔριον δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἔργον ἐξορμήσομεν


152 Inv. margin, up’, J°.
155 Seworgpa, Seu... τῶ tC. C- JP.


156 ὦ πονήρ᾽ : 1,2. // Sup'/ in 1. margin.
157 Jensen suppl.


44


THE ARBITRANTS


SMICRINES (to Syriscus)
Have you all ἢ


SY RISCUS
[ think so, yes.
SMICRINES
You have, unless he swallowed something down while |
Gave verdict of conviction.


SYRISCUS
Hardly that, I think.
(100 Smicrines, who turns to leave)
Nay, then, good sir, may Luck attend you. Suchas you
I’d sooner have the judges all.
| Eat Smicrines to City.
DAVUS
But how unjust,
O Heracles! This verdict, was it not too rank ?


SYRISCUS
You were a rascal, rascal you !


DAVUS
Look out yourself,

Yes, you now, that you keep these trinkets safe for him.
Aye, mark you well, I'll ever have an eye on you.


| Katt Davus towards Mt. Parnes.


syriscus (calling afier him)
Go hang! Go gang your gait! But you, my wife,
take these
And carry them in here to our young master’s house.
For meanwhile here we will await Chaerestratus
And in the morning we'll start off to work again


45


MENANDER


τὴν ἀποφορὰν ἀποδόντες. ἀλλὰ ταῦτά μοι
πρῶτ᾽ ἀπαριθμῆσαι καθ᾽ ἕν. ἔχεις κοιτίδα τινα:
165 Bard’ εἰς τὸ προκόλπιον.


Scene, ZYPISKOS, ὈΝΗ͂ΣΙΜΌΣ


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
/ 4
μάγειρον βραδύτερον
οὐδεὶς ἑόρακε. τηνικαῦτ᾽ ἐχθὲς πάλαι
ἔπινον.


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
[ \ \ Ss /
οὑτοσὶ μὲν εἶναι φαίνεται
ἀλεκτρυών τις καὶ μάλα στριφνός" λαβέ.
‘ Ν , , , e /
τουτὶ δὲ διάλιθόν τι. πέλεκυς οὑτοσί.
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
170 τί ταῦθ᾽;
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
ὑπόχρυσος δακτύλιός τις οὑτοσί,
“pea ~ a ΄, a BY ΄
αὐτὸς σιδηροῦς. γλύμμα ταῦρος ἢ TPayos—
> x ’ r / ‘ /
οὐκ ἂν διαγνοίην---ΚΚλεόστρατος δέ τίς
ct e e \ /
[ἐστιν ὁ ποήσας, ὡς λέγει TA γράμματα.


' ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
ἄγε," δεῖξον.

170 Ov/ in], margin, // ταῦθ᾽ Capps. ταῦτ᾽ L*.
46


THE ARBITRANTS


When we have made our payment. Stop. Let's
count them first.
Count over, one by one. Have you a basket! there ὃ
Well, loose your dress and drop them in.
(While Syriscus examines the tokens and his nife
holds out the fold of her dress, Onesimus comes
out of the house of Chaerestratus.)


Scene. SYRISCUS, ONESIMUS


onestmus (to himself)
A slower cook
Nobody ever saw. Why, this time sete
Long since they had their wine.


SYRISCUS
(talks to his wife of the trinkets without noticing Onesimus)
Now this one seems to be
A sort of rooster and a tough one too! Here, take.
And here is something set with stones. This one’s
an axe.
ONESIMUS
(becoming aware of Syriscus and his occupation )
What’s this ἢ


syriscus (still failing lo notice Onesimus)
This one’s a gilded ring without ; inside
It’s iron. On the seal is carved—a bull ?—or goat ?
I can’t tell which, and one Cleostratus is he
Who made it—so the letters say.


ONESIMUS (interrupting )
I say, show me!
1 Or casket, chest. See Girl Who Gets Her Hair Cut Short,
633.
+7


175


180


MENANDER


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
ἤν. σὺ δ᾽ εἶ τίς;
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
autos ἐστι.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
τίς;
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
Γὸ δαϊκτύλιος.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
ὁ ποῖος; οὐ γὰρ μανθάνω.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
‘rod! δεσπότου τοὐμοῦ Χαρισίου


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
χολᾷς.
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
Γὸν ἀϊπώλεσεν.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ


τὸν δακτύλιον θές, ἄθλιε.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
Tov" ὦ "wet epov σοι θῶ; πόθεν δ᾽ αὐτὸν λαβὼν
Γἔχεις!;


r


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
᾿Απολλον καὶ θεοί, δεινοῦ κακοῦ.
"οἷον" τὸ σῶσαι χρήματ᾽ ἐστὶν ὀρφανοῦ
παι δός. ὁ προσελθὼν εὐθὺς ἁρπάζειν βλέπει.
ἱ τὸν δαϊκτύλιον θές, φημί.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
προσπαίζεις ἐμοί;
τοῦ δεσπότου ‘orl, νὴ τὸν ᾿Απόλλω καὶ θεούς.
182 φημί: L*. 183 B*, quat. y, p. ὃ.
48


THE ARBITRANTS


syriscus (startled into handing him the ring)
Well, there! But who are you?


ONESIMUS
The very one !
SY RISCUS
Who is?
ONESIMUS
The ring.
SY RISCUS


What ring d’ye mean? 1 don’t know what you mean.


ONESIMUS
Charisius’s ring, my master’s ring !


SYRISCUS
You're cracked !
ONESIMUS
The one he lost.
SYRISCUS
Put down that ring, you wretched man !


ONESIMUS

Our ring? “ Put down” for you? Where did you
get it from ?

SY RISCUS
Apollo and ye gods! What awful nuisance this,
To bring off safe an orphan baby’s property !
The first to come forthwith has plunder in his eyes.
Put down that ring, I say.


ONESIMUS


You'd jest with me, you would ?
It’s master’s ring, by your Apollo and the gods !


49


185


190


145


MENANDER


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
, / / vn” / :
ἀποσφαγείην πρότερον ἂν δήπουθεν ἢ
’ὔ
τούτῳ τι καθυφείμην. ἄραρε, δικάσομαι
ἅπασι καθ᾽ ἕνα. παιδίου ᾿᾽στίν, οὐκ ἐμά.
/ , \ / al /

στρεπτόν TL τουτί' λαβὲ σύ. πορφυρᾶ πτέρυξ.
εἴσω δὲ mraplay'e. ἵσὺ" δὲ τί μοι λέγεις;


ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
ἐγώ;
Χαρισίου ᾽στὶν οὑτοσί: τοῦτόν ποτε
ρ
/ f ᾽
μεθύων ἀπωλ εσ᾽, ὡς ἔφη.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
Χαιρεστράτου
ΟῚ aby; Ὰ A an > a
᾿ οἰκέτης. Ἶ gee τοῦτον ἀσφαλῶς
wor δ'ὸς ἵν᾽ ἐγὼ ool παρέχω σῶν.
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
βούλομαι
αὐτὸς ' φυλάττειν.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ


οὐδὲ Ev μοι διαφέρει"
εἰς ταὐτὸ γὰρ παράγομεν, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ,
δεῦρ᾽ ἀμφότεροι.

ok ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ

νυνὶ μὲν οὖν συνάγουσι καὶ
οὐκ ἔστιν εὔκαιρον τὸ μηνύειν ἴσως
αὐτῷ περὶ τούτων" αὔριον δέ.

192 5".


i The word, usually meaning house-slave, here refers to
a peasant granted the right of cutting out stumps on the


50


THE ARBITRANTS


SYRISCUS
. Τα have my throat cut sooner than give in at all
To him, I vow. That’s settled. 1 will have the law
On each and all by turns. The boy’s they are, not
mine. (Returns to enumerating the tokens.)
This one’s a collar. Take it, you (¢o his nife).
A chiton’s fold
Of purple, this. Go, take them in.
(His wife with the child and tokens, eacept the ring, goes in.)
(To Onesimus) Now tell me, you.
What's this you’re saying to me?


ONESIMUS
I? This ring is his,

Charisius’s. Once, when drunk, or so he said,
He lost it.

SYRISCUS

I’m Chaerestratus’s tenant slave.!

So either save it carefully or give to me
That I may keep and safe deliver.


ONESIMUS
I preter
Myself as guard. ;
SYRISCUS
To me that matters not one whit,
For both of us are stopping, as it seems, in here,
In the same lodging-place.


ONESIMUS
Just now it’s no good time,


Perhaps, when guests are coming in, to tell him this
Our story, but to-morrow.


owner’s property on condition of paying a reyuler rental.
See line 163.


E 2


200


yo
>
ou


210


MENANDER


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
KATAMEVO,


Μ “ 4 oe | / ε /
αὔριον ὅτῳ βούλεσθ᾽ ἐπιτρέπειν ἑνὶ λόγῳ
Ψ »ῸΝ a n > /
ἕτοιμος. οὐδὲ νῦν κακῶς ἀπήλλαχα.

> a
πάντων δ᾽ ἀμελήσανθ᾽, ws ἔοικεν, δεῖ δίκας
a \ \ / \ /
μελετᾶν' διὰ τουτὶ πάντα νυνὶ σῴζεται.


XOPOT


ACT Itt
Scene. ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
ONH3IMO=
\ / “ tal a /
τὸν δακτύλιον ὥρμηκα πλεῖν ἢ πεντάκις
na » ‘ \ ,
τῷ δεσπότῃ δεῖξαι προσελθών, καὶ σφόδρα
x > \ "Γὸ ἢ Ν Ν > an lal
ὧν ἐγγὺς 7'dn! καὶ πρὸς αὐτῷ παντελῶς
ἀναδύομαι. καὶ τῶν πρότερόν μοι μεταμέλει
μηνυμάτων. λέγει γὰρ ἐπιεικὼς πυκνά'
“ὡς τὸν φράσαντα ταῦτά μοι κακὸν KaK'ds |
ὁ Ζεὺς ἀπολέσαι. μή με δὴ διαλλαγίὶ εὶς"


Γ


τα καὶ"


-“ \ lal
πρὸς τὴν γυναῖκα Tov φράσαντα ταῦ
συνειδότ᾽ ἀφανίσῃ λαβών. καλῶς [ἐγὼ


[ \ , ὦ πῶσ pF +
ETEPOV TL προς TOVUTOLS KUKAV ATED χομὴν ;


’ fa \ ΝΜ > nr eae! 7
κἀνταῦθα κακὸν ἔνεστιν ἐπιεικῶς | μέγα.


202 Ον , in l. margin,
210 ἐγὼ, S® suppl.
211 κυκᾶν [0] .C.... 95.  ἀπεσχόμην, 8°.


THE ARBITRANTS


SY RISCUS
I will wait till then.
‘To-morrow, in a word, I’m ready to submit
This case to anyone you like.
[ Eait Onesimus into the house of Chaerestratus.
Now this time, too,
lve come off not so badly, but it seems as though
A man must give up all besides and practise law.
By this means, nowadays, is everything kept straight.
| Eat Syriscus into the house.
Re-enter the group of revellers. They give an exhibition
and retire into the house of Chaerestratus. |
CHORUS.


ACT VIII
(Enter Onesimus from the house of Chaerestratus.)
Scene. ONESIMUS alone.


ONESIMUS
I’ve started, now five times and more, to go and show
This ring to master. I! go up to him and then,
When I'm already close and by his very side
I’m always shirking it. And now I’m sorry for
My former tattling. For quite constantly he says:
“May Zeus bring wretched ruin on the wretched man
Who told me that!” If he should make up with his
wife
As like as not he'd seize and make away with me
Because 1 told the tale and know of it. *Twas well
I kept from stirring up some other mess with this,
For even here and now the mischief’s fairly big.
[ Abrotonon rushes out of the house remonstrating
mith one and another of the revellers who try to
detain her. | a
3


MENANDER


Scenkr. ONHSIMOS, ABPOTONON


ABPOTONON
»“» 5
ἐᾶτέ μ᾽, ἱκετεύω σε, καὶ μή μοι κακὰ
,ὔ ᾽ > / e ΝΜ > Γ' 7
παρέχετ᾽. ἐμαυτήν, ws ἔοικεν, ἀθλ' ία,
215 λέληθα χλευάζουσ᾽: ἐρᾶσθαϊι προσεδόκων,"
. er Cal “
εἴον δὲ μισεῖ μῖσος ἅνθρωπός μέ τι.
οὐκέτι μ᾽ ἐᾷ γὰρ οὐδὲ κατακεῖσθαι, τάλαν,
παρ᾽ αὑτόν, ἀλλὰ χωρίς.
ONHSIMOS
ἀλλ᾽ ἀποδῶ πάλιν
τι: , > 7ὔ ”
Tap ov παρέλαβον ἀρτίως; ἄτοπον.
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
τάλας
Ξ- ΄ a > , > ,
220 οὗτος, TL τοσοῦτον ἀργύριον ἀπολλύει;
ἐπεὶ τό γ᾽ ἐπὶ τούτῳ τὸ τῆς θεοῦ φέρειν
lal lal e ?
κανοῦν ἔμοιγ᾽ οἷόν τε νῦν ἐστ᾽, ὦ τάλαν'
ἘΦ ϊς , ΄ re Τίρε ς. ὅπ]
920 K ayvn γάμων yap, φασιν, ἡμέραν τρίτην
ἤδη κάθημαι.
ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
a x 2 \ a a
πῶς ἂν οὖν, πρὸς TOV θεῶν,
225 πῶς ἄν, ἱκετεύω----


Scene. ONHSIMOX, ABPOTONON, ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
ποῦ ᾽στῖιν ὃν ζητῶν ἐγὼ
περιέρχομ᾽; οὗτος ἔνδον. Γἀπόδος," ᾧγαθέ,

213 ABp/ in 1. margin. 216 B*, quat. y, p. 6.
219 : ταλας : pap. // ABp/ in r. margin.
221 Diogen. 2. 46.


1 Only girls of irreproachable character were chosen to
carry the baskets of offerings in the religious processions. For


54


THE ARBITRANTS


Scene. ONESIMUS, ABROTONON. ~:


ABROTONON
Let go of me! Please, sir! Don’t give me trouble,
please ! (To herself )


1 made myself, it seems, poor me, a laughing-stock
And knew it not. I looked for love, instead of that .
The fellow hates me with a superhuman hate ;

Even his banquet couch no more he lets me share :
Poor wretch! 1116 apart.


onesImus (to himself, not seeing Abrotonon)


What! Give it back to him
From whom but now I had it? No! Nonsensical!


ABROTONON (fo herself)
Poor man, why does he waste his money, such a pile :
So far at least as he’s concerned, poor wretch ! I might
Be basket-bearer ! for the goddess—yes, I- might,
For here am I left virgin, as the saying goes,
The third day now.
ONEsIMuS (to himself’)
How, by the gods? How could I, pray ἢ
| Enter Syriscus through one of the side-entrances. Abro-
tonon stands aside until his departure. |


Scene. ONESIMUS, ABROTONON, SYRISCUS
SYRISCUS
Where is the man I’m hunting everywhere ?
(Sees Onesimus in the vestibule about to enter the house. )
You sir
In there ! Give back, good sir, that ring, or once for all


the Panathenaea, for example, see Aristophanes, Lysistrata,
646.


55


MENANDER


τὸν δακτύλιον ἢ δεῖξον ᾧ μέλλεις ποτέ.
κρινώμεθ᾽. ἐλθεῖν δεῖ μέ ποι.


ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
,
TOLOUTOVL
> \ a ? A a \ Ul
ἐστιν τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽, ἄνθρωπε' τοῦ μὲν δεσπότου
- /
ἔστ᾽, οἶδ᾽ ἀκριβῶς, οὑτοσὶ Χαρισίου,

r cal cal /
ὀκνῶ δὲ δεῖξαι: πατέρα yap τοῦ παιδίου
αὐτὸν TOM σχεδόν τι τοῦτον προσφέρων,
μεθ᾽ οὗ συνεξέκειτο.


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
πῶς, ἀβέλτερε;


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ


Ταυροπολίοις ἀπώλεσεν τοῦτόν ποτε,
παννυχίδος οὔσης καὶ γυναικῶν' κατὰ λόγον
ἐστὶν βιασμὸν τοῦτον εἶναι παρθένου,
ἣ δ᾽ ἔτεκε τοῦτο κἀξέθηκε δηλάδη.
εἰ μέν τις οὖν εὑρὼν ἐκείνην προσφέροι
τοῦτον, σαφὲς ἄν τι δεικνύϊοι" τεκμήριον.
νυνὶ δ᾽ ὑπόνοιαν καὶ ταραχὴν ἔχει.
ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
σκόπει
αὐτὸς περὶ τούτων. εἰ δ᾽ ἀνασείεις, ἀπολαβεῖν
τὸν δακτύλιόν με βουλόμενος δοῦναί τέ σοι
μικρόν τι, ληρεῖς" οὐκ ἔνεστιν οὐδὲ εἷς
παρ᾽ ἐμοὶ μερισμός.
ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
οὐδὲ δέομαι.
241 Hesych.
244 δέομαι : ταῦτα δὴ, J*./Sedpo δὴ, S*. / / Sup/ in rv. margin, J>,


56


THE ARBITRANTS


Go show it him whom you've in mind. Let's have it
out.
I must be off.


ONESIMUS


The matter stands, my man, like this.
The ring here is my master’s,—I am certain sure—
Charisius’s, but to him I hesitate
To show it, for ‘twere much the same as to declare
Him father of the child with whom the ring was found.


SYRISCUS
Why so, you fool ?


ONESIMUS


"Twas at the Tauropolia,!
The all-night women’s festival, he lost it once.
*Twould seem that it’s a question of a maiden wronged,
That she gave birth to and of course exposed this child.
If someone now could find her and produce this ring,
He’d make clear demonstration. But,as matters stand,
‘Twould merely mean suspicion and confusion too. 7

SY RISCUS

See you to that yourself. But if you make this stir,
Wishing that I take back the ring and give to you
A little something, that is folly. “For with me
There’s no “ divide.”


ONESIMUS
Nor do 1 wish it.
' For the Tauropolia, see Capps's ed., note ad loc. Also :


Religious Cults associated with the Amazons, Florence M.
Bennett, Columbia Univ. Press, 1912.


57


MENANDER


ΣΥΡΙΣΚΟΣ
ταῦτα δὴ
245 Γἥξ 'ω διαδραμών---εἰς πόλιν γὰρ ἔρχομαι.
Γνυν---περὶ τούτων εἰσόμενος τί δεῖ ποεῖν.
ABPOTONON
τὸ παιδάριον, ὃ νῦν τιθηνεῖθ᾽ ἡ γυνή,
? 4 te ἣν Φ La ,
Ονήσιμ᾽, ἔνδον, οὗτος εὗρεν ἀνθρακεύς;
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
‘as! φησιν.
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
ὡς κομψόν, τάλαν.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ


καὶ τουτονὶ
δ \ s , , b] fa) ,
250 τὸν δακτύλιον ἐπόντα τοὐμοῦ δεσπότου.


ABPOTONON
” / > . a ] ᾽ , Μ > ,
αἴ, δύσμορ᾽, εἶτ᾽, εἰ τρόφιμος ὄντως ἐστί σου,
τρεφόμενον ὄψει τοῦτον ἐν δούλου μέρει:
κοὐκ ἂν δικαίως ἀποθάνοις;
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
ὅπερ λέγω,
\ ὁ, ἢ > \ 5
τὴν μητέρ᾽ οὐδεὶς οἶδεν.
ABPOTONON
ἀπέβαλεν δέ, φής.
255 Ταυροπολίοις αὐτόν;
ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
παροινῶν γ᾽, ὡς ἐμοὶ
5 . 7 τ » ΄ ’
τὸ παιδάριον eid’, ἀκόλουθος.


25] B4, quat. y, p. 10.


ae


THE ARBITRANTS


SYRISCUS

Well, all right.
When I’ve run here and yonder—for I’m off to town——
ΕἼ] come again to know of this, what we're to do.


| Katt Syriscus towards Athens. Abrotonon comes up to
Onesimus.
ABROTONON


Was it this charcoal-man, Onesimus, who found
The baby boy the woman's nursing now indoors ἢ


ONESIMUS
Yes, so he says.
ABROTONON
O what a dainty child, poor thing !


ONESIMUS
And this ring here was on him. *Tis my master’s ring.


ABROTONON

Fie, luckless, fie! If, then, it’s your young master's
child

For certain, will you see it brought up like a slave ἢ

You ought to die. “Twould serve you right !


ONESIMUS
Tis as I say,
Its mother no one knows.
ABROTONON


He lost the ring, you say,
During the feast of Tauropolia ?


ONESIMUS

Yes, he
Was in his cups—at least, the slave attending him
Informed me so.


54


“κα


260


MENANDER


ABPOTONON
δηλαδὴ
εἰς τὰς γυναῖκας παννυχιζούσας μόνος
ἐνέϊπεσε' κἀμοῦ γὰρ παρούσης ἐγένετο
τοιοῦτον ἕτερον.
᾿ ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
σοῦ παρούσης;
ABPOTONON
πέρυσι, ναί,
Ταυροποίλίοις" π'αισὶν γὰρ ἔψαλλον κόραις,
ὑτή θ᾽ Γὁμοῦ συϊνέπαιζί' οἷν, οὐδ᾽ ἐγὼ τότε--
αὐτή θ᾽ Γὁμοῦ συϊνέπαιζ' οἷν, Y
οὔπω γάρ- ἄνδρ᾽ ἤδειν τί ἐστι, καὶ μάλα,
μὰ τὴν Adpoditnyv— :
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
τὴν δὲ παῖδ᾽ ἥτις ἵποτ᾽" ἦν
οἶσθας;


ABPOTONON
πυθοίμην ἄν: Tap αἷς yap ἣν ἐγὼ


265 γυναιξί, τούτων ἦν φίλη.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
πατρὸς τίνος


ἤκουσας;
ABPOTONON


‘ \ rn
οὐδὲν oda, πλὴν ἰδοῦσά γε

΄ Ξ: ,

γνοίην ἂν αὐτήν. εὐπρεπής τις, ὦ θεοί,
,
Kal πλουσίαν ἔφασάν τιν᾽.

ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
αὑτή ᾽στιν τυχόν.
258 «νει... . τ. μου, J”, Leo and others suppl.


26] avrn..... ὡς νεπαιζον, L*; Headlam, Leeuw. suppl./
aut. τε -- αὐταί θ᾽, S%./aiirn θ᾽ ὁμοῦ συνέπαιζ εἶν, Capps conject.


60


THE ARBITRANTS


ABROTONON
Of course! And then alone he came
Upon the women as they made a night of it.
I know, for once just such a thing as this occurred
When I was by.
ONESIMUS
When you were by ?


ABROTONON
Why yes, last year
At Tauropolia. For maids [| thrummed the lute
And I myself played with them. Then—that is—
not yet
Had 1 had knowledge of man’s way and what it is—
That's true as true, by Aphrodite !


ONESIMUS
But the girl ?
Who was she? Can you tell me that ὃ


ABROTONON
1 could inquire.
She was the women’s friend, the women whom |
served.
ONESIMUS


And who’s her father? Heard you that ἢ


ABROTONON
Nay, I know naught
Except I'd know her if I once caught sight of her.
A handsome girl, ye gods ! and she’s a wealthy one,
They said.
ONESIMUS
It may be she’s the one.


61


MENANDER


ABPOTONON
οὐκ οἶδ᾽. ἐπλανήθη γάρ μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν οὗσ᾽ ἐκεῖ,
270 εἶτ᾽ ἐξαπίνης κλάουσα προστρέχει μόνη,
τίλλουσ᾽ ἑαυτῆς τὰς τρίχας, καλὸν πάνυ
καὶ λεπτόν, a θεοί, ταραντῖνον σφόδρα
ἀπολωλεκῖυϊ᾽" ὅλον γὰρ ἐγεγόνει ῥάκος.


ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
καὶ τοῦτον εἶχεν;
ABPOTONON
Gi 2 wy > ’ > > \
ely ἴσως, ANN οὐκ ἐμοὶ
275 ἔδειξεν" οὐ γὰρ ψεύσομαι.


ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
τί χρὴ ποεῖν
ἐμὲ νῦν;
ABPOTONON
ὅρα σὺ τοῦτ᾽: ἐὰν δὲ νοῦν ἔχῃς
ἐμοί τε πείθη, τοῦτο πρὸς τὸν δεσπότην
φανερὸν ποήσεις. εἰ γὰρ ἐστ᾽ ἐλευθέραϊς"
παιδός, τί τοῦτον λανθάνειν δεῖ τὸ γεγονός";


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
280 πρότερον ἐκείνην ἥτις ἐστίν, ᾿Α ββρότονον,
εὑρῶμεν' ἐπὶ τούτῳ δ᾽ ἐμοὶ σὺ νῦν---
ABPOTONON
reget
> ΕῚ - , Ν ᾽ n \ Γ. eas
οὐκ ἂν δυναίμην, τὸν ἀδικοῦντα πρὶν 'cadas
γ 21 ane a Alo) ship ae
τίς ἐστιν εἰδέναι. φοβοῦμαι τοῦτ᾽ ἐγ ὦ
μάτην τι μηνύειν πρὸς ἐκείνας ἃς λέγω."
281 ἔα, Allinson suppl. /ot, Capps to Abrot. /yiv. ελ' (or
pa), J%./ γενοῦ, J? 53, Note paragraphus.,
62


THE ARBITRANTS


ABROTONON
I do not know.

But thus it was: while with us there she wandered off
And of a sudden then she comes back on a run
Alone, and bathed in tears, and tearing at her hair.
Her silken Tarentine so very beautiful—
Ye gods, diaphanous !—was ruined utterly,
For it was all in tatters.


ONESIMUS
Did she have this ring -


ABROTONON
Perhaps she had it but she did not let me see—
For [ll not try to cheat you.


ONESIMUS
Weli, what now am I
To do about it ?
ABROTONON
Look you here! If you have sense
And will obey me, you will make this matter clear
And tell your master. If the baby’s mother be
A free-born girl, what need to keep him in the dark
About the circumstances ?


ONESIMUS
Well, Abrotonon,
First thing of all now let’s discover who she is.
And so, with this in view, I want you to—


ABROTONON (2nterrupting)
Nay, stop !
I could not do it till 1 clearly know the one
Who wronged her. This I fear—to let out anything
At random to those women whom I tell you of.


03


285


290


295


300


MENANDER


τίς oldev εἰ καί, τοῦτον ἐνέχυρον Na3'wv'
τότε τις παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ τῶν παρόντων, ἀπέβαλεν
ἕτερος κυβεύων; τυχὸν ἴσως εἰς συμβολὰς
ὑπόθημ᾽ ἔδωκ᾽, ἢ συντιθέμενος περί τινος
περιείχετ᾽, εἶτ᾽ ἔδωκεν. ἕτερα μυρία

ἐν τοῖς πότοις τοιαῦτα γίγνεσθαι φιλεῖ.
πρὶν εἰδέναι δὲ τὸν ἀδικοῦντ᾽ οὐ βούλομαι
ζητεῖν ἐκείνην οὐδὲ μηνύειν ἐγὼ

τοιοῦτον οὐδέν.

ΤῈ ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ


Γκαϊ κῶϊς" μέντοι λέγεις.


οὐ
Poh: ,
τί οὖν ποήσει TLS;
ABPOTONON
/ > ἊΨ ΄
θέασ᾽, ᾿Ονήσιμε,
ἂν συναρέσῃ σοι τοὐμὸν ' ἐν᾿θύμημ᾽ apa:
ἐμὸν ποήσομαι τὸ πρᾶγμα τ' οὔτ᾽ ἐγώ,
Ν / P a1 > ” ‘
τὸν δακτύλιον AaB'ov'ca τ᾿ εἴσω τουτονὶ
εἴσειμι πρὸς ἐκεῖνον.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
λέγ᾽ ὃ λέγεις" ἄρτι γὰρ


ABPOTONON
κατιδών μ᾽ ἔχουσαν ἀνακρινεῖ πόθεν
» ΄ ες" ’ /
εἴληφα. φήσω" “ Ταυροπολίοις παρθένος
ἔτ᾽ οὖσα᾽"---τά τ᾽ ἐκείνῃ γενόμενα πάντ᾽ ἐμὰ
ποουμένη:" τὰ πλεῖστα δ᾽ αὐτῶν οἶδ᾽ ἐγώ.
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
ΝΜ , ᾽ > ,
ἄριστά γ᾽ ἀνθρώπων.


286 Οὐ, quat. y, p. 1]. 293 Ov / in r, margin.
294 ABp/ in r. margin.


-«...-


a


THE ARBITRANTS


Who knows but that-some boon-companion present
then
Got it as pledge from him and lost it afterwards
When playing dice? He gave it as security,
Perhaps, to back some contribution. Or, perchance,
Agreeing on some wager, may have been involved
And so have given it. When men are in their cups
No end of things like that are apt to come about.
But till I know who wronged her [1] not search for her
Nor even tell a word of this.


ONESIMUS


That’s not half bad.
But what is one to do?


ABROTONON
Look you, Onesimus!
Will you, I ask you, fall in with this scheme of mine ?
As my affair [1] treat the matter—as my own.
This ring here I will take and then go in to him.


: ONESIMUS
Say what you mean—though I begin to understand.


ABROTONON
He'll notice that I have it. Where I got it from
He'll ask. I'll say: “ At Tauropolia, when I
Was virgin still.” And everything that then befell
That other girl I'll make my own, for I myself
Know pretty much the whole.


ONESIMUS
That beats the universe !


65


305


MENANDER


ABPOTONON
᾽ , ν᾽ “-“ 4

ἐὰν δ᾽ οἰκεῖον 7
αὐτῷ τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽, εὐθὺς «μὲν; ἥξει φερόμενος
ἐπὶ τὸν ἔλεγχον, καὶ μεθύων γε νῦν ἐρεῖ
πρότερος ἅπαντα καὶ προπετῶς" ἃ δ᾽ ἂν λέγῃ
προσομολογήσω, τοῦ διαμαρτεῖν μηδὲ ἕν
προτέρα λέγουσ᾽.


310


a F


ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
e / \ Ν “
ὑπέρευγε, νὴ τὸν “Ἡλιον.


ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
\ \ \ 5. Ψ a a ,
τὰ κοινὰ ταυτὶ δ᾽ ἀκκιοῦμαι τῷ λόγῳ,
τοῦ μὴ διαμαρτεῖν: “ ὡς ἀναιδὴς ἦσθα καὶ
itapos Tis.”
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
εὖγε.
ABPOTONON
“κατέβαλες δέ μ᾽ ὡς σφόδρα,
Γι 7 , δ᾽ , he » , Pia ΄ 32> ,”
iwiatia ὃ οἱ ἀπῶώλεσ ἢ τάλαιν EYO,
Γφήσω. πρὸ τούτου δ᾽ ἔνδον αὐτὸ βούλομαι
Γλα᾿ βοῦσα κλαῦσαι καὶ φιλῆσαι καὶ πόθεν
Μ > a \ Μ ”
Γἔλα!βεν ἐρωτᾶν τὴν ἔχουσαν.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
ε
Ηράκλεις.
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
ἈΠῈ / δὲ “ce δί ’ ὦ r
To! πέρας δὲ πάντων, “ παιδίον τοίνυν, ἐρῶ,


εἴτα , » \ ν᾿ “ € ‘
€o'TL γεγονος σοι, —Kal TO VUY ευρημένον


ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ


/ \ ΄ , ,
πανούργως καὶ κακοήθως, ᾿Αβρότονον.


304 «μὲν!» Croiset added.
311 σφόδρα, J? corr. / σφόδραν, 1,5.
317 .. 71, pap., J*.

66


THE ARBITRANTS


ABROTONON
Now, if he did it, straight into the trap he’ll fall
And, just now being drunk, he’ll be the first to speak,
And fluently, of all details; but I'll agree
And back up all he says; no single slip [1] make
By speaking first.
ONESIMUS
Delightful! Good! By Helios!


ABROTONON
And [1] be coy in talk, and, lest I make a slip,
Will work in hackney’d things like : “ What a man
you were!
How vehement and shameless !”’


ONESIMUS
Good !
\BROTONON
“ον rough you were.
And threw me down! And what a dress I spoiled,
poor me!”
I'll say. But first, within the house, [’ll take the child
And weep, and kiss it; where she got it from, I’ll ask
The one who has it.
ONESIMUS


Heracles !


\BROTONON
To cap it all
11 say: “So here you have a baby born to you!”
And 1 will show the foundling.


ONESIMUS
O Abrotonon,
A master-stroke of malice and of roguery !
67


5.2


MENANDER


ABPOTONON
ἂν δ᾽ ᾿ἐξετασθῇ ταῦτα καὶ φανῇ πατὴρ
820 ὧν οὗτος αὐτοῦ, τὴν κόρην ζητήσομεν


κατὰ σχολήν.
ONH3IMOZ


ἐκεῖνο δ᾽ οὐ λέγεις, ὅτι
ἐλευθέρα γίνει. σύ: τοῦ γὰρ παιδίου
μητέρα σε νομίσας λύσετ᾽ εὐθὺς δηλαδή.


ABPOTONON
οὐκ οἶδα' βουλοίμην δ᾽ av.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜῸΣ
> A i 4
ov yap οἶσθα σύ;
325 ἀλλ᾽ ov χάρις τις, ᾿Αβρότονον, τούτων ἐμοί;


ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
νὴ τὼ θεώ: πάντων γ᾽ ἐμαυτῇ σ᾽ αἴτιον
ἡγήσομαι τούτων.

ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ

7\ \ la

ἐὰν δὲ μηκέτι
ζητῇς ἐκείνην ἐξεπίτηδες, ἀλλ᾽ ἐᾷς,
“παρακρουσαμένη με, πῶς τὸ τοιοῦθ᾽ ἕξει;


ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
τάλαν,
“ / > ἐς Ἐ
380 τίνος ἕνεκεν; παίδων ἐπιθυμεῖν σοι δοκῶ;
ἐλευθέρα μόνον. γενοίμην. ὧ θεοί,
τοῦτον Aa Bop"! μισθὸν ἐκ τούτων.


ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
λάβοις.


322 C4, quat. y, ee
382 Ov superscribed above λάβοις.


68


THE ARBITRANTS


ABROTONON


If this shall be established and he’s shown to be
Its father, at our leisure then we'll seek the girl.


ONESIMUS
That other point you’re holding back: you'll be set


free.
For, thinking you the mother of his child, of course


He'll buy your freedom instantly.


ABROTONON
I wish he might,


But 1 don’t know.
ONESIMUS
Ah, don’t you though? At any rate,
Abrotonon, are no thanks due to me for this ?


ABROTONON
By the Twain Goddesses, of course. All this my luck
At least I'll give you credit for.


ONESIMUS
Then here’s a point :
What if on purpose you stop looking for the girl,
Ignore the matter, and go back on me?


ABROTONON
You fool !


Why.should I? Daft on babies am I, do you think ὃ
May I but merely get my liberty! O gods,
May I get that as wage for this !


ONESIMUS
God grant you may.
͵ 69


MENANDER


ABPOTONON
οὐκοῦν ovv'ap'éoK' ;
poke: σοι:


ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
-συναρέσκει διαφόρως.
ἂν γὰρ κακοηθεύσῃ, μαχοῦμαί σοι τότε"
335 δυνήσομαι γάρ. ἐν δὲ τῷ παρόντι νῦν
ἴδωμεν εἰ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν.


ABPOTONON
οὐκοῦν συνδοκεῖ;


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
μάλιστα.
a ABPOTONON
τὸν δακτύλιον ἀποδίδου ταχύ.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
λάμβανε.
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
981 Καὶ φίλη Πειθοῖ, παροῦσα σύμμαχος
moet κατορθοῦν τοὺς λόγους ods ἂν λέγω.


ScenE. ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
340 τοπαστικὸν τὸ γύναιον: ὡς ἠσθἴη) θ᾽ ὅτι

κατὰ τὸν ἔρωτ᾽ οὐκ ἔσ τ᾿ ἐλευθερίας τυχεῖν,
ἄλλως δ᾽ ἀλύει, τὴν ἑτέραν πορεύεται
ὁδόν. ἀλλ᾽ ἐγὼ τὸν πάντα δουλεύσω χρόνον,
λέμφος, ἀπόπληκτος, οὐδαμῶς προιοητικὸς

929 Aristaen. 2. 1.

340 τοπαστικὸν, 1,7, {τό γ᾽ ἀστικόν, Capps. // #068 Leeuw. /
joder, 1.3. 343 Aristaen. 1. 19,


7° ;


——


THE ARBITRANTS


ABROTONON
Is it a bargain then ?
ONESIMUS
A bargain, certainly.
For if you play your tricks on me, I'll fight you then;
Pll have the vantage ground. But, as things stand,
* -let's'seé
If this now turns out well.


ABROTONON
All right, then you agree ?


ONESIMUS
Of course.


ABROTONON
The ring, then, hand it over—do. Be quick.


ONESIMUS (giving the ring)
Well, take it then.


ABROTONON (taking the ring)
Persuasion dear, as my ally
Stand by me, make to prosper everything I say !


[ Exit Abrotonon into the house of Chaerestratus.


Scene. ONESIMUS alone


ONESIMUS
She knows her way about,that woman ! When she saw
She has no chance in love for winning liberty,
But wanders blind, she takes the other road. While I,
A sniffing, senseless dolt, with no such forethought
blest,


7?


MENANDER


345 Ta τοιαῦτα. παρὰ ταύτης δ᾽ ἴσως τι λήψομαι,
ἂν ἐπιτύχη" καὶ γὰρ δίκαιον.----ὡς κενὰ

564 Κ καὶ διαλογίζομ᾽, ὁ κακοδαίμων, προσδοκῶν
χάριν κομιεῖσθαι παρὰ γυναικός. μὴ μόνον
'κακόν τι προσλάβοιμι. νῦν ἐπισφαλῆ

: \ , aly Pasty SA κα ee peat |

350 τὰ πράγματ EOTL TA περὶ τὴν κεκτημένην
ταχέως" ἐὰν γὰρ εὑρεθῇ πατρὸς «ἡ;» κόρη
ἐλευθέρου μήτηρ τε τοῦ νῦν παιδίϊου"

ἊΣ ’ κα / 4 Γ / γῇ
yeyovul , ἐκείνην λήψεται ταύτην ἀϊφείς".
OL.€U....+...0a.p ἀπολείπειν' δΐμως"

τὰ \ “ td > / ὃ iF a}
355 καὶ νυν YAPLEVTWS EKVEVEVKEVAL δο' κῶ
τὸ μὴ δι’ ἐμοῦ ταυτὶ κυκᾶσθαι. χαιρέϊτω
τὸ πολλὰ πράττειν. ἂν δέ τις λάβῃ μ᾽ Γἔτι"
, a A , , ᾿ of. δ]
περιεργασάμενο' ν' ἢ λαλήσαντ᾽, ἐκτεμεῖϊν
δίδωμ᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ τοὺς ---ὀδίόιντας.


Ἴ


᾿ ἀλλ᾽ obi)
360 τίς ἐσθ᾽ ὁ προσιών; XuVKpivns ἀναστρέφει
ἐξ ἄστεως πάλιν, ταραϊκτ κῶς ἔχων
αὖθις. πέπ'υσϊται τὰς ἀληθείας ἴσως
, ? > ps ὃ ‘ δὲ Ἵ tA
παρά τινος οὗτος. ἐκποδὼν δὲ β'ούλομαι
ποεῖν ἐμαυτὸν τὴν ταχίστην οὐ δ᾽ ἔχειν
365 πράΐγματα γ᾽" ᾿Αβρότονον γὰρ τί δρᾷ yravali pe
δε (i
εἴ.


351 ταχέως, Capps ? τελέως. [«-ἡ;» κόρη, Wright add.

353 a pels’, Arnim. / ows’, S®

354 οἱ. ev [8 places] va. v ἀπολείπειν τ΄... L*. | (πευ[ι]ξε
™ . wg(o)u. . ἀπολείπειν. o[u.., δ΄, {7 οἶδ᾽ εὖ: πονοῦσον

ναῦν ἀπολείπειν, Allinson conject. / ὅμως, S®, or 7 οἶδ᾽ εὖ γ᾽. ἔθυς

γὰρ ναῦν ἀπ., Cappsconject , and ἢ πονεῖ, Allinson. {{ἐπείξεται

τὴν ἔνδον ἀπολείπειν: ὅμως, S® ιἐπείξεται, Korte). // ναῦν called

impossible by «Ὁ, 358 Dé (NT! M' VX!) quat. y, p. 13.


72


THE ARBITRANTS


Shall be a slave forever. But from her, perhaps,
I'll get some gainif she succeeds. That’s only fair !—
What groundless reckonings—misguided me—to hope
To get back thanks from woman ! Only heaven send
I don’t get mischief new! Now Mistress’s affairs
Are ticklish—on the brink. For if the girl is found
To be of free-born father and turns out to be
This baby’s mother, her he'll take, his wife divorce.
Right well I know: “ Desert a sinking ship!” ?
And yet
Here too methinks I’ve dodged, and neatly too, all
charge
Of this mess being stirred by me. Goodbye, 1 say,
To playing meddler in affairs of other folks.
And if again you catch me putting in my oar
Or chattering, I'll give you leave and liberty
To cut my—molars out !
(Sees Smicrines approaching from the city.)
I say! Whom have we here
Approaching? It is Smicrines come back from town.
He’s all wrought up again. From someone he has
learned
The truth perhaps. I think I’ll make off quick and
shun
All complication, for I ought to find out first
About Abrotonon and how she’s coming on.


[ Eatt Onesimus into house of Chaerestratus.


' Text of line 354 very uncertain.


359 <68>, metri causa, for οὑτοσὶ of pap., Byington.
Wilam.

362 J? suppl. 364 J? suppl.

365 πράΐγματα, γ᾽, “3, | πρὸς, δ΄, | πρόΐτερον yap ᾿Αβρότονον τί
δρᾷ γνῶναι, Wilam. // Text combined from J? and Wilam.


73


MENANDER


Scene. XMIKPINHS, (MATEIPOS)
=MIKPINH>
ἑξηπαρήκεν Cpe) κα «mAs eeiMid | ok >
882 K aowr'os plitic yee ἡ πόλις"
ὅλη γὰρ aber τὸ κακόν eves
Ἐλευθ cod ol Mrs k δὴ

370 σαφῶς ἐμ ὸ;
πίνειν τ εν come
τοὔνομ᾽ α καταισχύνοντα pares TAs! ψαλτρίας
ξῆν αὐτὸΐν (aban οὶ ἐν At ah Dg
πλέον Hwepav. .... 1...

375 αὐτὸν διαλΐλα ο. νον
Οὐ μο, ΤΩΝ ὥς μα ον ΣΝ ΡΝ
πο 6.5) 0 Sonal weet tee Teele
προσῆλθ : at ΠΣ sees ίω
ὅτε τὴν. τον 2 SU oe one

380 πυνθαν Γὀμενος ἱ - + τῆς ἐμέ,
φίλοι, ΕΣ «τρόπῳ
ἐναπτ . TOT ἣν ἁπλοῦν

καὶ ψάλτρια
. . κύβοι - TUX
385 . ἀϊλλὰ χαιρέτω
Sad πολλῶν ἐγὼ
εν ὧν ἐκ τῆς ἐμῆϊς!
1 i oon Raed 2%
«μοι μόνη
390 .


- + lewargta


366 Capps. / M’ begins, left.


367-8 Robert identified Frag.
369 (right) Robert begins with VX!. // ἐλευθ. from photo.,


Capps. || εὐθὺς, K*, 553,
74


882 Κὶ,


THE ARBITRANTS


Enter Smicrines. |


ScENES (summarized). Smicrines, (later) the Cook (and
later) Stum1as and CHAERESTRATUS.


In these broken lines, 366-391, Smicrines, in a monoloque,
seems to be rehearsing the misdeeds of his son-in-law ; ‘‘ He
has cheated me. . . he is a prodigal . . . the whole city
hums with his evil doings . . . it’s clear. . . he is given to
drink . . . he disgraces my (2) name living with a harp-girl

. more than — days . . . Ah, wretched that Iam...
partner in . . . J, on learning of this . . . have come... .
Then it was a simple matter . .. harp-girl . . . dice... .
Nay, good-bye to (forbearance?) . . . (he wastes all) the
large (property) that 1 acquired,” etc.

(At line 388 the Cook seems to be speaking. He seems to be
incensed about something in regard to the luncheon that he
has served. He will never again submit his culinary skill to
such lack of appreciation. Smicrines stands aside and,
listening, obtains additional, misleading, information.)


————————


375-382 Capps. cf. also K*, 55, J®. // In 375 ovoy or ενον,
Capps suppl. “᾿Αϑρότωννον.

384 τυχώϊν" or τυχόν, J?. 386 πολλῶν, ὅδ", | πολλὴν, alii.

387 ? ἐκτησάμηϊν", S”. 388 J,


75


MENANDER


οὐδεὶς ΣΙ κί ελ Kds' ἕτερος ὑμῖν.

ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ

,
ποικίλον,

ἄριστον ἀριστῶσιν.

MATEIPOS (ἢ)

ὦ τρισάθλιος

ἐγὼ κατὰ πολλ' ά.} νῦν μὲν οὖν οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅπως


386 Def we Nib dt τς eee te Mn ERR. ΠΟ πλὴν
ahs tee ee we μαγείρου “Tis τύχῃ
g.Ww....... ς βαλεῖτ᾽ eis μακαρίας.

ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
. ἐς τίνος
400" fo sami Σ τι bohbesad:< ν -ἰρ ία pees


ἶνας. δέει ΟἿ oy Yay τὸ εὐ εξ δον vee
παῖς jo 6 ote Soke Aka hen pie ee
παχιὰ Xk eather es tink Glee


=MIKPINH=
Xalpiow .. ..Ὑὸὖὸῦὺ 1 τὺ ν μετὰ τῆς Wad τρίᾶς
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
GOB POD. ws ca ce ee ea bs i ΝΣ
PEE πὸ eb il ae ΡΟ ee


391 AeA or λει, J’./ Sey=ol] δ᾽ ἐγ[ώ, Allinson. VX! ends.

392 Allinson restored from: οὐδεὶς σ΄. ne... . . ἕτερος, J},
Perhaps sc. for 391-392 ; "τοιοῦτος ἔσται γὰρ μάγειρος, οἶδ᾽ ἐγώ!
οὐδεὶς Σικελικὺς ἕτερος ὑμῖν : ποικίλον, cf. Plato, Rep. Σικελικὴν
ποικιλίαν ὄψων, see A.P.A. T'rans.vi p 121, Allinson. But
J* gives : οὐδεὶς vug..4..(.) ἕτερος | οὐδεὶς “Suya'?’ ay
ἕτερος, S*.


393 ἀριστῶσιν : (12, with ; uncertain. D* = (NT? M? VX).
76


THE ARBITRANTS


COOK..


Ox as aes ὃ Sicilian} cook like me, I’m sure
You'd never “have another one.


SMICRINES (aside)
: A dainty lunch
Is this they're having!
COOK
O thrice wretched that | am
On many grounds. Somehow or other now indeed—


. then he seems toadd . . . ‘*if ever again any need of, a
Cook overtakes you . . . you may go (for all I care) to—
Blessedness "ἢ (397).

[Exit Cock.


In the broken lines (399-419) Smicrines is speaking with
someone, apparently Charisius, who is now (see 405, note)
present. A ‘‘harp-girl” is referred to; certain ‘* moneys ”
—perhaps the dowry or Abrotonon’s wages—are mentioned.
It may be that she is referred to as likely to become ‘* house-
mistress ” (412).


1 Sicilian dainties were proverbial ; cf. Plato, Rep. 404 p.


B95 ΕΙΣ reads ταν Gro Nam fo toe π᾿ o€ = ἅλισκομ᾽
ἀπΙευίσκεῖπτος. /A.. εθ(ε)αιν.. ... kxXos=- ] Birxos, Capps.

397 waravlas, pap J7. /paxaplay, conject. Wilam., 85,

398 Zu: / in r. margin. 399 M2? begins (right).

401 VX? begins (left). 404 Su./ in 1. margin.

405 Xap/ in aa margin.


77


MENANDER
*)


NOU bid. Sort s0a Ae he . ἔϊχουσι δὴ
(ef)
Ap oleh. tees pa .Γπέϊμπειν" ἵνα
ἰ-- το δι
ti tal ig ei, 9 ΤΡ ὑόν ΜΑΣ Ta χρήματα
RTO) Webi, τον Cee eee ων ἡλίκη
ἔξ Ae Py a hk RT ΝΣ "Bow Nopat


Clb ἐρίων ἀλλα ον, ΕΝ oan pee


ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ


ἀπίωμεν ας εν 4 ΈΝΣ . Γνὴ τὸν “Ηλιον
415 μπμοροθιγολον it. wha γενῶ ἃ Ls. 4. ταύτην ἐγὼ
mMpwonvap....... sll ΣΤ ΤῊΣ


> Ἁ F
GEDNDO'S 05.618 6s «kad οἱ:


ae Le oe ye” es Yn


MOO τε TD Pe Nd ee! ot nee an ee
θυγατέρα .. 1...

/ ΓΣ ὃ κ
τέτοκε, κ' άτοιδα νῦν


se ΝῊ σι ὺ ἃ


An ovr ΟΝ ae ἥν ἢ
DACA NEE γεν ρα τιν κυ Δ τὴν ἔπε ΛΑΩ͂Ν
425 τδια Κρ, eee 7 ι. {ποιῷ erst er ἀκ


407 ἔχουσι δὴ, J*.  χουτιδη, L*.
413 "S%uulas K*, Ricci suppl. // S:/ in 1. margin.


78


~ a


THE ARBITRANTS


At line 413 Simmias, friend of Charisius, is present and
exclaims: ‘‘Good Heracles . . .!”

In the broken lines 414-448 and 463-483, including the hetter
preserved lines 438 ff., it is hazardous to assign the parts,
with the eaception of the lines given to Smicrines. Charisius
ts addressed, or referred to, at line 426. One or both of his
Sriends, Simmias and Chaerestratus, are present. (At 473,
later, Chaerestrutus is certainly resent.)

In line 414 must come a change of speaker, us “" Simmias ”
occurs a3 subject. In the next line someone continues (or breaks
m): “μοῦ us go away... by Helios!” Someone refers to the
“*superciliousness” of the old man (2. It is Charisius
probably who says: “1 at least am done for” (418). Somebody
is referred to as ‘‘hesitant” or ‘‘boresome.” ‘One of the
Friends goes off at line 419 and, probably, Churisius.

In lines 420-448 Smicrines and (probably) one of the friends
are talking about Charisius. Smicrines says: ‘‘ And then...
my daughter. . . she (probably Abrotonon) has given birth
to a child.” Someone makes a reply, now unintelligible.
Smucrines resumes, speaking of Charisius, ‘*Charisius . . . this
your friend was not ashamed to beget a child bya harlot. . .
He has taken (her into his house).” One of the young men
replies (431-4383).


416 M? ends (right).

420 Su:/ inl. margin. ;

422 Capps supp]. τέτοκ᾽ ἐκ "Χαρισίου", 833,
423 85 suppl. λαβόντ᾽ ἀπαγαγεῖν τὴν ἐμήν.
425 diaxpwe ..?, 4135, / διακονεῖν alii.


79


430


435 .


440


MENANDER


SMIKPINHS
Xap‘ ίσι


τὸ φ. :
ὑμῶν ἑταῖρος, οὗτος οὐ is 0 "yey νετο
παιδάριϊ ον ἐκὶ πόρνης ἱποεῖν . . ..


πρόσω. . .. (eT.

εἴληφίεν ..
(ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤῸΣ ἡ ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ ἢ)

we . TH

TRPOE + ΕΛ ee te eee

ERE PUG |S, SNS SARS W IEE ὁ εν ERs

(ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ ἢ)
δ τὰς claw ΕΣ νῶν ae ΈΒΈΩΝ
. .. vu Blov


(XAIPESTPATOS ἢ
\ ΄σ
. 4. + Tov δυστυχῆ:


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝῊΣ
τοῦτοϊν μὲν οὖν ἐῶμεν. ἀλλ᾽ ἴσως ἐγὼ
πολυπραγμ'οι ὦ πλείω τε πράττω τῶν ἐμῶν.
κατὰ λόγον ἐξὸν ᾿ ἀπιέναι τὴν θυγατέρα
λαβόντα. τοῦτο pel ν π' Ἰοήσω, καὶ σχέδον
δεδογμένον μῖοι τυγχίανει. μαρτύρομαι.
ὑμᾶς δ᾽ ὁμοϊ λογεῖν.. οὐ νυν, Δ ΕΣ


θ᾽ in “ \ > \ τ
μεθ᾽ ὧν ἔΐπινεν οὗτος, ὅστις τὴν ἐμὴν
θυγατέρα 7
avalée:

, (ΣΙΜΜΙΑΣ ?)

υ. ξ΄. αὐ εν


427 VX? ends (left).
428 YR* begins (left).


80


se oN, ἐν et Medco eg, (TO Uae ΔΉ ΩΣ


THE ARBITRANTS


Smicrines (434-436) speaks three more, now unintelligible,
lines and refers to ‘“‘the unfortunate.” The friend tries to
make capital out of this for Charisius, and emphasises: ‘the
unfortunate one.” Smicrines then (438) continues :-—** Well
then, let’s leave him out. But perhaps I am a busybody, and
exceed my rights, although it were permissible, according to
reason, for me to take my daughter and go off. This, indeed,
I will do and, as it happens, it is all but decided on by me.
I call you to witness. But (I call upon) you to concede (the
facts)—you, with whom (this fellow who has treated my)
daughter . . . unworthily (was drinking).”


429 ποεῖν, S? sup ᾿ 431 ἘΞ begins (right).

438-444 δ᾽ anol "4 439 Order, Leo. [ τῶν ἐμ. mp. L?. |;
441 ποήσω, J.

446 ἀναξι᾽ : v, double point probable, 43...


MENANDER


(SMIKPINH® ὃ)


(Lacuna of about 14 lines.)


(XAIPESTPATOS ἢ SIMMIAZ)
a \ © \ / al ’
μισεῖ τὸν ἡδὺν λεγόμενον τοῦτον βίον"
| 1.5 ΓΙ a δ᾽ - ? ε ,
ἔϊπιινε we'ta tov δ'εῖνος, εἶχεν ἑσπέρας
465 Γτὴν δεῖνα, σχήσει δ᾽ avpio'v τὴν δ'εῖν᾽.---


(ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝῊΗΣ ἢ)


ἔχει
νον Ἐν Ce MeL oa
αὐ λει κεν hs ck tale cas bee ἐπ Εν
AA. sy cf ohak ts dee iba sciend ΠΡ ἘΜΟῚ ΓΔΑ 5:
ama .. :

470 οὐδ᾽ ar.

μέρος Te . /
ἢ μή μ᾽ ἔϊτ᾽ εἴπῃς.


cares “δ΄ ?
ἡμῖν KEKNO' EVY
XAIPESTPATOZ
Φ - / / 1
οὗτος ὁ γέρων φαίνεται
[Δ]
ὑψηλὸς wv τις, VI Av’—


447 C../inl. margin. ? = Suor Suvporasp, J*. {{ μηδὲ σὺ,
J2. | wh δεσΐποτ, 83,

463 YR! 464 εἶχεν, 53. | ἔσχεν. 1,3, K*

465 J* reports —]oaid. | σχήσει δ᾽, Allinson suppl / ---Ἴενδ,
L?. { [τὴν δεῖν᾽ ZueAr ey δ᾽, S? suppl. favo... . ew sexes, L* |
αὔριοϊν τὴν δ'εῖν᾽ ἔχει", 55. / αὔριοῖν ἀφήσ'ειν, Hutloff / ἔχει,
w. change of speaker, Allinson.


82


THE ARBITRANTS


The friend (Simmias or Chaerestratus?) again tries, line
446, to put in a plea for Charisius. Smicrines cuts him
short ; ᾧν =e ow don’ t you even (Ὁ try to say another word) .
although .

' (Fourteen lines are lacking.)

At line 463 the friend is still trying to shield Charisius
and, while admittiny his irregularities, claims that they are
due ‘sianply to his despair ; he is seeking sa a from his
sorrow :


(sIMMIAS ἢ)
He hates this so-called “ gay ” life. He was drinking
with so-and-so; last night he had such and such a


girl; he will provide ior having such and such a one
to-morrow. !


Smicrines seems to be speaking in the broken lines
(406-473) and seems to say: ‘‘She bore (him a child). .
Don’t (say) anything more to me. . . he has given us as a
relative . .


CHAERESTRATUS
(perhaps re-enters and says to (9) Simmias, or, if he is
already present, says as an aside)


This old man is evidently a high and mighty one,
by Zeus.


1 The broken lines from here on to line 630 are rendered
in prose. Much of lines 498-540, for example, is conjectural.


473 κεκήδευκ᾽ δ᾽, κεκηδευκὼς, Wilam. {{’ οὗτος ὁ γέρων". Allin-
son suppl. // φαίνεται", Robert suppl. // Xaip/ in r. margin, L?.
Xap, K%.

‘474 νὴ al’, Leo suppl. // 474-477 Robert, S% //477 “δ᾽ ot δὲ


γινώσκειν, Karte corr. pap. δεουδεγινωσκων.


83


MENANDER


(2MIKPINH® ?)
οὐκ οἱ ἰμώξεται
475 καταφθαρείς τ᾽ ἔΐν ματρυ "λείῳ τὸν βίον
μετὰ τῆς καλῆς 'γυν'αἰκὸς ἣν ἐπεισάγει
βιώσεθ᾽; ἡμᾶς δ᾽ "οὐ δὲ γινώσ κ'εῶν δοκῶν


(XAIPESTPATOS ἢ)
crime’ ς ἥξει λαβὼν
ΝΣ ΠΝ ὃ ηλαδὴ
ΟΝ ΔῊ ον feted: e sshd wabtbames
Sines πὰ Beans lacks Δ “αὐ a ae a v
Be ee cha: ΡΥ ΝΡ Ὁ ἐστί μοι


(Lacuna of 14 lines to bottom of page.)


ACT IV


Scene. ZMIKPINHS, ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊ


ceisigh aoe
198 ¢ τα) ἀλλ᾽ εἴ με σῴζων τοῦτο μὴ πείσαις ἐμέ,
οὐκέτι πατὴρ κρίνοι ἂν ἀλλὰ δεσπότης.


478 ἥξει, K*. / εἰσάξει, 83.

484-497 In this lacuna put ‘xopod' and beginning of
\ct IV to fragm. Z.

498 ff. Fragm. Z'~? placed here by Harmon. See Introd.

Ρ- 12, and cf. L? p. xviii and Pl xliv. Z!~? ave prefixed in
Act I to the St. Pet. fragm. by S* who interprets the sign ¢


page 6. For supplements, not otherwise noted, in Ζι.-Σ
see δ,


84


THE ARBITRANTS


SMICRINES


Let him go to perdition and, when he has gone to
ruin in a brothel, lead his life with this fine wench,
this “extra” he brings in. While as for us, he thinks
we donotevenknow........

| Katt Smicrines.


(CHAERESTRATUS ? ΟΥ̓ SIMMIAS ἢ)


ee he will come back, bringing
(help to carry her off) of course.


(The remaining four lines are unintelligible. )
(A lacuna of about 14 or 15 lines to the bottom of the page on


which YR! was placed. In this space would come the end of
ACT ΠῚ, the CHORUS, and the beginniny of act Iv.) υ


ACT IV


Scene. SMICRINES, PAMPHILA


PAMPHILA


But if, while trying to rescue me, you fail to con-
vince me of this, you'd no longer be thought a father
but a slave-master.


499 (line 2 of Z) Change of speaker indicated by para-
yraphus and double point. /S? continues to Pamphila to
middle of line 4.


85


MENANDER


=MIKPINHS


500 “λόγου δὲ δεῖται ταῦτα Kal συμπείσεως,


cal “-“ , ~
οὐκέτι "Bracpo'd "---ἰ[ταῦτα Tapdirn Bod
\ ᾽ “κ΄. 7 OX 9) (Ἀ᾿ a rd
φωνὴν ἀφιεῖσ᾽. εἰ δὲ κἀμὲ Set λέγειν,
᾿ἕτοιμ'ό᾽ς "εἰ μι, τρία δέ σοι προθήσομαι.
Γι 351 Δ Μ 5 θ , θ᾽ ka .- ’ὔ
οὔτ᾽" ἂν ἔτι σωθείη ποθ᾽ οὗτος "οὔ τε σύ"
΄, - »
"ζήσει μὲν" ἀμε' Alas, ἡδέως, ' σὺ" δ᾽ "οὐ; σφόδρα:
Fe Ta τ 3... a tee ea my woo KR
οὐδ᾽ οἰκίαν ot κοῦσ᾽ ἐαθείης ἔτ᾽ ἂν
r A ‘ ὃ ects ΄ rh νὋἔ
χρῆσθαι τυχὸν διακόνῳ τούτων τ'ινὸς
© τὼν εἰσφέρει χρείαν ἔχουσ᾽. ἅπανϊἷτα yap"
,
Γεἶῖναι νομίζετ᾽ ἀνδρός. ἔστ'αι δ᾽ οὐδὲ ἕν"


510 Γγυναικὸς.. γῆν
ΠῚ .
(Lacuna of about 24 lines, ἢ


=MIKPINHS


"kav ταῖς ἑορταῖς, Παμφίλη, τούτου σκόπει"


[2°] τὴν πολυτέλειαν. Θεσμοφόρια δὶς τίθει,
’ , ‘ Μ' -“ , ,
Σκίρα δίς: τὸν ὄλεθρον τοῦ βίου καταμάνθανε.
535 οὔκουν ἀπόλωλεν οὗτος ὁμολογουμένως:
σκόπει τὸ" σὸν δ᾽ ἡ: φησὶ δεῖν εἰς “Med para


Z3 δεῖται ete J*./darro.. ριτ.. 1,

Z 4 "βιασμοῦ, Allinson conj. }ΓλΓο"γισμοῦῦ, 83, Space and
traces uncertain. Some equivalent of βιασμός required by
sense. // Παμφίλη S*—traces very uncertain.

503 Z 5. Z7 ποθ᾽, 85 corr. / ποτ᾽, L?.

510 = Z 13), γυναικός 53 add. and before Z 13 suppl. line
to suggest connection.

Z13 τίθει. 33. / 71s ἢ, ἈΞ, who writes Θεσμοφοριαδίς and
Σκιροδίς (cf. Doric ᾿Ολυμπιάνδι"5).

Z 16 τὸ σὸν, J*. {|{ Πειραιᾶ, 3, / Suv. ρ΄. v, LA.


86


THE ARBITRANTS


SMICRINES

“« Now this calls for argument and persuasion, and
no more of your violence’; that’s what Pamphila,
raising her voice, keeps shouting! But if I too am
permitted to make-a remark I’m ready. And I'll
advance three propositions for you. Neither could
he any longer come off safe and sound, nor could you.
He will live heedlessly, a life of pleasure, but you
not so at all. And not even while living at home
would you any longer, perchance, be allowed the use
as a servant, in case of need, of some one of his
imported ladies !—Naturally, for all things are held
to belong to the husband and not a single thing will
be yours, his wife.!


Πρ σοῦ Cer ar arte «af at < ‘amas 6 ew ct ee Ὁ δ᾽ ἃ «2... (Φ (ὃ


(After a lacuna of some 24 lines Smicrines is detaihng what
his daughter may expect if she continues tu live with a man
who keeps up a double establishment.)


SMICRINES


And in the matter of festivals, Pamphila, notice his
extravagance. Item: Thesmophoria,? put that down
for two; Scirophoria,? for two! Observe carefully
how his substance goes to waste. Has he not,
admittedly, come to utter ruin? Well, consider,
pray, your réle. He claims he must be off to(Peiraeus).*


1 Lines 505-510 largely conjectural ; see text.

2 Asif to say: He must bear the double expenses for two
ladies incidental to the festivities of the Thesmophoria (the
great women’s festi: al in October in honour of Demeter—e.g.
“Christmas” ἢ) and those of the Scirophoria (the June
festival when the women’s parasols were en évidence—e.g.
“Raster” ἢ), and so on through the year. (See reference to
Professor Harmon, Introd. p. 12.)

8 That is, to ménage No. 2, established down at ‘‘ The
Harbour.”


37


MENANDER


αὐτὸν Badica καθᾳδειτᾳκσισελοί----

ὃ ΕΠ Te
τουτοισεδυνησω. περίμ'ε᾽ν᾽" εἰς πίόλεν ἴδ᾽ ἰὼν
ἀδεσ. .. το πίνει μεῖτὰ πόρι"ης δηϊλαδη."


Ἴ


ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊ
540 “πορ᾽ εὐϊσομ᾽, ὡϊς ἐξῆλθ'έ τις. ....
ἀρὴν Waitt ic epeuges. ἡπαν τὶ EA πὰ πο ΠΝ:
πᾶς ΠΑ αν σοι βούλοϊμαι..


IG, παι ἢ er eas? MUP Gry tak ete
(Lacuna of about 24 lines.)


(Further lacuna! of 70 lines, = 568-637, containing, near the
end, the fragments Nos. 184 K and 566 Καὶ.)


Scene. ITAM®IAH, SQ®PONH, ABPOTONON


ἔν a es κ΄ δὺ pee eee ee Ney ee | OS ee ee .
πὰ @ BL404 ald, Ete A Ri δ Me ἀν le νος oe" ee
OH Se) ew ee eee Pelle! Var otea ree


a" « ὁ...» © ie a ,Δ} δ Oe 4 ΙΝ πευαδιυ


ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊ
184 K ἐξετύφην μὲν οὖν
κλάουσα.
* % * * * * * * % * *
ΣΩΦΡΟΝΗ
566 K χαλεπόν, ἸΙαμφίλη,


ἐλευθέρᾳ γυναικὶ πρὸς πόρνην μάχη.


1 This lacuna (568-637) represents pp. 3, 4 Quat. z. Fr.
184 K was first inserted here by Capps. Εν. 566 Καὶ, included
in this play by Croiset, was placed here by Robert. Pam-
phila is given a speaking part by Jensen, Κα", Wilam., ete.


Z17 L2./ καθεδεῖτ᾽ ἐκεῖσ᾽ ἐλθὼν ἐφ᾽ ᾧ". 55. | καθὰ Beir’, ἐκεῖσ᾽
ἐλθών, ποεῖ. ? Allinson.


5


THE ARBITRANTS


On his arrival there he does his devoirs. By this you
will be vexed. Stay. Returning again to the city he
continues unrestrainedly his drinking, of course with
some harlot.

PAMPHILA


Pll be going now, since someone has come


Smicrines, in the fragmentary lines (from the middle of 541
through 542 and 543) seems to try to re-enforce his argument.

(A lacuna of (?) two pages (= 70 lines), sufficient (1) for
᾿ Smicrines, after Pamphila has gone back into the house, to finish
his monologue and go off, and (2) for the first lines of a new
scene. )


Scene. PAMPHILA, SOPHRONA, ABROTONON


(Pamphila and Sophrona come out conversing. Abrotonon,
who has come. from the house of Chaerestratus with
the baby and who may, perhaps, have been speaking,
conceals herself.)


PAMPHILA


SOPHRONA

BMS ea hued cee ts O Pamphila, ‘tis hard
For high-born wife to battle with a courtesan.

Z 18 τουτοισεδυνησω, L?. | τοῦτ᾽ οἶδ᾽ ὀδυνήσει. S? conject. |
τούτοις ὀδυνήσεις, ? Allinson. { εἰς πόλιν δ᾽ ἰὼν, 55.

πος 19 ἄδειπνος ὧν πίνει μετὰ πόρνης δηλαδή, S? conj. | ἀδεσῖμό".

ara’ πίνει, ? Allinson.

540, Z 20.

Z 20-23 5 supplies dialogue (g.v.) between Smicrines and
Pamphila.


Ra


MENANDER


πλειονα κακουργεῖ, πλείον᾽ οἶδ᾽, αἰσχύνεται
οὐδέν, κολακεύει μᾶλλον.
+ * Ἃ Ἕ ι ¥ * * ἋἝ Χ
ABPOTONON
Γτὸ παιδίον"
638 ἔξειμ᾽ ἔχουσα. κλαυμυρίζεται, τάλαν"
πάλαι γὰρ οὐκ old 6 τι κακὸν πέπονθέ μοι.
ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊ
640 τίς ἂν θεῶν τάλαιναν ἐλεήσειε με;


ABPOTONON
AZT,


ὦ φίλτατοϊν τ' ἔκνον, προσόψει μηϊτέϊρα
καὶ γὰρ mpoo'nrO'e! xalipia’.
ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊ
πορεύσομαι.
ABPOTONON
μυικίρόν, γύναι, πρόσμεινον.
'ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊ
» \ r
ἐμὲ καλεῖς;
ABPOTONON
ἐγώ"
Ph pile Oe ΟΣ = Os ΓΙ , cS
év'av'tiov ᾿ βλέ! π᾿, "el pie γινώσκεις, γύναι
645 αὕτη ᾽στιν ἣν ἑόϊρ'ακα--- χαῖρε, φιλτάτη.


637 τὸ παιδίον, Croiset suppl.
638 Η; quat. 2, p. 5.

641-2 See S? notes, and J*.

644 S* suppl. 645 S* suppl.


go


THE ARBITRANTS


She works more mischief; knows of more; she knows
no shame;
At flattery she’s better. 2... . EM Lag vee


i. Aer resis Wc ξὺν ΟΝ ie te ς a oP ie Bema © wae 6 «© ὁ ὁ


ABROTONON (comes forward with the child)
Pll go out with the baby
(she makes the child cry to attract attention)
How he cries and cries!
Poor little thing! He’s strangely ailing now long
since.


PAMPHILA (n0¢ as yet noticing Abrotonon)
Would that some god would pity take on wretched
'


me!
ABROTONON
You sweet, sweet baby, Mother you shall 566. For.
look,


She’s here this very moment.


PAMPHILA
I'll be going now.
ABROTONON (addressing Pamphila)
A moment, lady, wait!


PAMPHILA
Is't me you're calling +


ABROTONON
Yes.
Look squarely at me, lady, see if you know me—
y (aside to herself)
‘Tis she, whom then I saw!
(again to Pamphila)
Now greeting, dear, my dear!


οι


[510]


MENANDER


ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊΗ
τίϊς δ' εἶ! σύ;
ABPOTONON
"yetpla S'ed'po μοι τὴν σὴν δίδου.
λέγε μοι, 'γ'λ᾽υἱκεῖία: πέρυσιν HAO 'es ἐπὶ θέᾳ᾽
τοῖς Ταυροπολίοις; εἷμα καλὸν ἀπ'ὠλ[εἰσίας";


ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊ
γύναι, πόθεν ἔχεις, εἶπέ μοι, τὸ παιδίοϊν"


660 λαβοῦσ᾽;


ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
opas τι, φιλτάτη, σοι γνώριμον"
rs ΤῊ ae 9 “Ψ , ὃ ’ φ ,ὔ
ὧν τοῦτ᾽ ἔχει; μηδέν με δείσῃς, ὦ γύναι.


᾿ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊ


ΓΣ aoe 5
€T'EKES αὑτὴ τοῦτο;


»
οὐκ
ABPOTONON
προσεποησάμην.
> ἀν: » 4, \ » » νὼ
οὐχ ἵν ἀδικήσω τὴν τεκοῦσαν, αλλ ἵνα
κατὰ σχολὴν εὕροιμι. νῦν δ᾽ εὕρηκά σε.
ὁρῶ γὰρ ἣν καὶ τότε.
ΠΑΜΦΙΛΔῊ
τίνος δ᾽ ἐστὶν πατρός:


ABPOTONON
Χαρισίου.


646 tls δ᾽ εἶ σύ; /(AB.) χεῖρα, Stand J*., Allinson queries :
. y(x) [10 letters] τα 8. . po, and suppl. (continuing all to
Abrotonon) Γἀκοὴν δὲ τάχισ᾽τα δεῦρό μοι τὴν σὴν δίδου, cf.
Soph. El. 80, ὀξεῖαν ἀκοὴν τοῖς ἐμοῖς λόγοις διδούς.

647 γλυκεῖα, “5. 4: ἦλθες ἐπὶ θεᾷ, 855. suppl. from J*,
HLOECE ICCANL.


Q2


THE ARBITRANTS


PAMPHILA
But who, I ask, are you ὃ


ABROTONON

Here now, give me your hand!
Sweet lady, tell: Came you last year to see the show,
The Tauropolia? You spoiled a pretty dress— ?


PAMPHILA
(tgnoring her question as she catches sight of the trinkets
on the baby)
Where, woman, tell me, did you get that child you
have ?


ABROTONON (tndicating the necklace, etc.)
Do you, my dear, see anything well known to you
Of what he wears ?>——Nay, lady, fear me not at all.


PAMPHILA
Aren't you yourself its mother ὃ


ABROTONON
That was mere pretence,
Yet not to wrong the mother but to take my time
About the finding. Now, it seems, I have found—
ou!
Whom then I saw, I see.


PAMPHILA
But who’s its father, who ?


\BROTONON
Charisius.


648 Allinson suppl. ?eiua καλὸν anwAeoastrom€...C...
... NWA. C.1° as J? reports. / εὐπρεπὲς ἀπόλωλέ σοι,
S’. | ἐν διαφανεῖ χλανιδίῳ, S*.

651 ὧν. Lef. suppl.

93


MENANDER


NAM#IAH
τοῦτ᾽ ola ἀκριβῶς, φιλτάτη;
ABPOTONON
Téxelivo’s αὐτόϊς" οὐ σέ τὴν νύμφην opa—
[520] τὴν ἔνδον οὖσαν;
ΠΑΜΦΙΛῊ
ναίχι.


ABPOTONON
μακαρία γύναι,
θεῶν τις ὑμᾶς ἠλέησε. τὴν θύραν
660 τῶν γειτόνων τις ἐψόφηκεν ἐξιών.
εἴσω λαβυῦσά μ᾽ ὡς σεαυτὴν εἴσαγε,
ἵνα καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ πάντα μου πύθῃ σαφῶς.


Scene. ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ


ΟΝΗΉΣΙΜΟΣ
ὑπομαίνεθ᾽ οὗτος, νὴ τὸν ᾿Απόλλω, μαίνεται,
μεμάνητ᾽ ἀληθῶς, μαίνεται, νὴ τοὺς θεούς.

665 τὸν δεσπότην λέγω, Χαρίσιον. χολὴ
μέλαινα προσπέπτωκεν ἢ τοιοῦτό re"!

Cri ay ap ἄν τις Γεἰκά σ' εἰ εν ἄλλο γεγονέναι;
[680] πρὸς ταῖς θύραις γὰρ ἔνδον apti'ws πολὺν"
᾿ χρόνον διακύπτων vd" ιέτριβεν ἄθλιος".

610 ὁ πατὴρ δὲ τῆς νύμφης τι περὶ Tov πὶρ [άγματος"
ἐλάλει πρὸς ἐκείνην, ὡς ἔοιχ᾽. ὃ δ᾽ οἷα μὲν
ἤλλαττε χρώματ᾽, ἄνδρες, οὐδ᾽ εἰπεῖν καλόν.

657 Γἐκεινοῖς αὐτόϊς, Allinson suppl. from... / AE.
. © OY, J? (or, to preserve apostrophe, ἐκεῖνος ubrdé’). |
eee rv Γἐπίδηλον", K%. | ἐγῷδ', ἐγῷδ᾽. ἀλλ᾽ οὔ ce. ., 8? reading
CUNAE (eel. Re


94


THE ARBITRANTS


PAMPHILA
You know that for a fact, my dear?


ABROTONON
Yes, he himself! 1)0.1 not see in you his bride,
The woman of this house ?


PAMPHILA
Yes, yes.


ABROTONON
O woman blest,
Some god Aas shown you mercy !
(Urgently) Hark! The next door creaks.
Someone is coming out. Come, take me in with you
That you may clearly learn the full particulars.


[ Exeunt into the house of Charisius.


Enter Onesimus from the other house. |


Scene. ONESIMUS alone.
ONESIMUS
He’s going crazy, by Apollo; yes, he’s crazed !
Clean crazed he is,in truth ; he’s crazy, by the gods!
Charisius 1 mean, my master. Taken with
An atrabilious fit he is, or some such thing.
Nay, what else could one fancy has befallen him ?
For at the double-door just now ‘he spent long time
In there, the wretched man, stooped down and
peeping through.
There was his young wife’s father telling her, it seems,
Something about this business. And Charisius
Changed colour, sirs, as much as were not even right


τσ LA eR EEL eh i εὐ ΠῚ ets
664 μεμάνητ᾽, Jensen. 665 Oxyr. No. 1236, recto.
669 K? suppl. DE EAM ged πο ἐλ ila , Oxyr. 1236.
671 ofa μὲν, Oxyr. 1236. 672 H2, quat. z, p. 6.


95


685


MENANDER


“ ὦ γλυκυτάτη,᾽ δέ, “ τῶν λόγων οἵους λέγεις ”
> , Ἁ Υ > 2 / ΄
ἀνέκραγε, τὴν κεφαλήν T ἀνεπάταξε σφόδρα
αὑτοῦ. πάλιν δὲ διαλιπών" “οἵαν λαβὼν
Wer ee 3 > ΄ ” \ ‘ ,
γυναῖχ᾽ ὁ μέλεος ἠτύχηκα.᾽ « TO δὲ πέρας,
Aa ΄ ΄ > - ν᾿ oe /
ὡς πάντα διακούσας ἀπῆλθ᾽ εἴσω ποτέ,
Ul

βρυχηθμὸς ἔνδον, τιλμός, ἔκστασις συχνή.
Bevo Si τς ΄ ” ay ΄

ἔγω yap “ αλιτήριος πυκνὸν πάνυ
ἔλεγεν, “ τοιοῦτον ἔργον ἐξειργασμένος
αὐτὸς γεγονώς τε παιδίου νόθου πατὴρ
οὐκ ἔσχον οὐδ᾽ ἔδωκα συγγνώμης μέρος

542λ > , ΜΘ , s
οὐθὲν ἀτυχούσῃ ταὔτ᾽ ἐκείνῃ, βάρβαρος
ει , ” a» 3 /
ἀνηλεής Te. δλοιδορεῖτ᾽ ἐρρωμένως
Γαὑ τῷ, βλέπει θ᾽ ὕφαιμον ἠρεθισμένος.

ῇ 3.3 \ , er >’ fal ὃ ig
TEPPLK ἐγὼ MEV, AVOS εἰμι τῷ OEEL*

iA »» \ > Ν x vo ΄
οὕτως ἔχων γὰρ αὐτὸν ἂν ἴδη μέ που

\ / \ > ’ Μ
τὸν διαβαλόντα, τυχὸν ἀποκτείνειεν ἄν.
διόπερ ὑπεκδέδυκα δεῦρ᾽ ἔξω λάθρᾳ.

a , > ’ lol

Kal ποῖ τράπωμαί γ᾽; εἰς TL βουλῆς; οἴχομαι,
ἀπόλωλα: τὴν θύραν πέπληχεν ἐξιών.
Ζεῦ σῶτερ, εἴπερ ἐστὶ δυνατόν, σῷζέ με.


Scene. XAPISIOS, ONHSIMOS, ABPOTONON
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
ἐγώ τις ἀναμάρτητος, εἰς δόξαν βλέπων
καὶ τὸ καλὸν ὅ τί ποτ᾽ ἐστὶ καὶ ταἰσχρὸν σκοπῶν,
682 συγγνώμης μέρος, Oxyr. 1226. / Conject. by Leeuw.


684-5 Ar., Wilam. / λοιδορεῖ τ᾽ and αὑτόν, 33.
686 Oxyr. recto ends...


οὔ


THE ARBITRANTS


To tell. And, “O my sweet, what noble things you
say!”

He aA aloud, and smote his head with vehemence.

And presently again: “ To have a wife like this

And chance on such misfortune, wretched me!”’
At last—

When, having overheard it all, he’d gone indoors—

Hair-plucking, roaring, bursts of frenzy manifold

Went on within. For, “Sinner that I am,” he'd say,

And say again, “ when I had done the same myself,

And when I’m proved the father of a bastard boy,

No whit of pardon felt I, nay, nor granted her,

Although she’d had the same mischance. Barbarian,

Unfeeling one!” Thus stoutly he berates himself.

With bloodshot eyes he flames. And I’m dried up
with fear

And all a-shiver I, for if, in mood like this

He anywhere catch sight of me who slander’d her,

Tis like enough he'd kill me. So I’ve sneaked out
here

Unnoticed. Where to go? What plan? All’s up
with me!

I’m dead and done for! There’s the door now.
Out he comes !

O save me, Saviour Zeus, if it be possible !


(Hastily conceals himself as Charisius comes out. )


Scene. ONESIMUS, CHARISIUS, (and later)
ABROTONON


CHARISIUS
(to himself, reviening his nife’s remarks which he had
just overheard)
The sinless saint I was, mine eyes on honour fixed !
Could sean the noble and disgraceful, which is which,


97


H


695


[560]


700


705


710


MENANDER


> / > / > Ν a /
ἀκέραιος, ἀνεπίπληκτος αὐτὸς τῷ βίῳ---
/
εὖ μοι κέχρηται καὶ προσηκόντως πάνυ
Ν / > ry ay ee »)
τὸ δαιμόνιον--- ἐνταῦθ᾽ ἔδει ξ᾽ ἄνθρωπος wv.
/ a »"
“ὦ τρισκακόδαιμον, καὶ μέγα φυσᾷς καὶ λαλεῖς.
΄ ᾽ ἐφ
ἀκούσιον γυναικὸς ἀτύχημ᾽ οὐ φέρεις,
> Ν se / ᾽ > Ὁ “Ὰ /
αὐτὸν δὲ δείξω o εἰς Gpwou ἐπταικότα.
καὶ χρήσετ᾽ αὐτή σοι τότ᾽ ἠπίως, σὺ δὲ
/ > / , / > a,
ταύτην ἀτιμάζεις. ἐπιδειχθήσει θ᾽ ἅμα
ἀτυχὴς γεγονὼς καὶ σκαιὸς ἀγνώμων T ἀνήρ.
¢ ,
Γὅμοι ά γ᾽ εἶπεν οἷς σὺ διενόου τότε
Ἁ / fel
Γπρὸς τὸν πατέρα" " κοινωνὸς ἥκειν τοῦ βίου,
Γ᾽ \ / 71 > ὃ a > / ’ » \ r
ἐμὲ τοίνυν" οὐ δεῖν τἀτύχημ᾽ αὐτὴν φυγεῖν
Ν “ ᾽ ,
ro συμβεβηκός. σὺ δὲ τις ὑψηλὸς σφόδρα᾽"--


Spee er τὰν Slike ΕΑ terete we alae ta te


/
ἀρ yl, Gao ὁ ΤΡ eg ee
es / lal
wee es OlUY TAUTH σοφῶς
te ee ew ee Gwe pérecot Ota TéNOUS
ig
εν ν ν ees δαιμόνων tis ὁ δὲ πατὴρ
ampenéatat αὐτὶ ἢ' χρήσεται---τί δέ μοι πατρός;
ἐρῶ διαρρήδην" “ἐμοὶ σύ, Σμικρίνη,
/ ΄ ᾽ ΄
μὴ πάρεχε πράγματ᾽. οὐκ ἀπολείπει μ᾽ ἡ γυνή.
,ὔ a ΄ \ / , »”
τί οὖν ταράττεις καὶ βιάξῃ ἸΙαμφίλην;


Γ
c
[ONH'SIMO®S ἐξέρχεται


/ , “ / » ,
τί; σ᾽ av βλέπω yo;


706 Allinson suppl./Tdyrws ἄρ᾽, Capps./ Tap" ἄνδρα κ' οὐ, 833,

708-729 Oxyrhynchus verso.” See Gr-H. for all supple-
ments except the following: 711 éu%, Allinson. / &é@Ae,
Capps. 712 sc. Ὁ "ἤδη κυκῶν τῶν, Allinson. // δαιμ'όνων,
Gr-H. | γειτόνων, 53, 1713 “amper'éorar’, Capps. αὐτ«ῇ;»,
Gr-H. corr. αὐτῆς of pap.

716-717 ovn, between lines, pap. Oxyr. / Allinson suppl.


98


, “ore eee


THE ARBITRANTS


Myself so innocent and spotless in my life !—

Right well and very fittingly the power divine

Has used me—here but human I’m shown up to be.

“ You thrice-unlucky, puffed-up boastful chatterer,

Your wife’s involuntary ill-luck you ll not bear.

But I will show that you have stumbled just as much.

To you she'll then be kind, but you dishonour her,

And you shall be shown up to have become at once

A luckless and a loutish and unfeeling man.

Most like indeed to your thoughts then was what

but now

She said unto her father: ‘ Partner of his life

I] come and, being such, I must not shirk ill-luck

When it befalls.’ But you were high and mighty,
you!”


In the broken lines 708-735, Charisius is first continuing
his monologue. He seems to exclaim: ‘‘ Barbarian that I
was! ... cleverly along with her... some deity <now>
utterly <confounding> will pursue me; but her father will
treat her most unbecomingly. Yet what have I to do with
her father? I will speak forth explicitly: ‘Don’t make me
any trouble, Smicrines. My wife is not deserting me. Why
then do you disturb and bring pressure upon Pamphila γ᾽ ἢ


{Onesimus comes out, speaking to Abrotonon concealed in
the vestibule. )


Cuarisius (continues, to Onesimus).—What, do I see
you again ?


1 The actual restorations in 708-735 are, some of them,
tours de force (see text), but the general meaning is pretty
clear.


99


MENANDER


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ

πάνυ κακῶς ἔχω σφόδρα,
Toliwor τάλας, καὶ σοῦ δέομαι--- τοῦτ᾽ ola 0 '—

ores",

μὴ μ᾽ ἐγκαταλίπῃς.

ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ

οὗτος" ἐπακροώμενος

720 ἕστηκας, ἱερ ὀσυλ᾽, ἐμοῦ;


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
"n'a τοὺς θεούς,

ἀλλ᾽ ἀρτίως ἐξῆλθον.

ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ

a ?, ἐμοὶ" λαθεῖν

ἔσται σε; πρῴη ἵν, μιαΐρέ, κακὰ τ ἢ oh ᾿πόουν
πάντ᾽ ἐπακροάσει.

ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ

πότε δέ; ποῦ; θέλων δὲ νῦν
oe ͵ ΠΡΟΣ RPE
ἐγώ σε λανθάνειν πον' ἢ πάλιν τρέμων

725 βροντῶντα.


-


ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
δια τ εἱλεῖς λαλῶν; τύπτου σὺ γάρ."


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
ἀλλ᾽ ov Bev: ὀφθήσεϊι μ᾽ ἀδικῶν yap, δεσπότα."


718 τοῦτ᾽ ofa’, ὁ' λῶς,, Allinson. / τουτοισ. ε.. a, pap.
Oxyr. | τούτοις % ndvos? ΚΒ.

719-736 4’ Sigins and overlaps Oxyr. verso (719-729) as
indicated in text.

721-736 For discussion of various restorations of Oxyr. fr.
+B’, see article A.J.P. No. 142, pp. 192-5, F. G. Allinson,
The text, especially for 721-729, is offered exempli gratia.

721 ἐξῆλθον (: ? Hunt), continued to Charis., S*.


100


THE ARBITRANTS


Onesmus (calling back to Abrotonon within the door)


—I am ina very bad way. Ah, wretch that I am!
And I beseech you—you know this (that I would say)
—in a word, do not leave me in the lurch.!


Cuarisius (raising his voice).—You !


Do you stand
there as an eavesdropper, listening to me, you
temple-looter ?


OneEsimus.—No, by the gods, but I’ve just come out.

Cuanistus.—Will it (ever) be possible for me to
escape (your slyness)? All that I did before, you
scamp, through your eavesdropping was abominable.


OneEsimus.— But when ?


Ἀν:


Where ?


Why even now
when I wish to escape you, I am troubled long since
as I tremble at your thunder,


Cuarisius.—What, still chattering? There, take
. that (strikes him).
Onesimus.—Well, no matter.


For, master, you'll
be proved to be wronging me,


' The translation of lines 717-787 is given in prose as the
reconstruction of the lines is, at best, problematical.


722 εσταισε mpat, B?./ εσταισεπρα. .. μια
Oxyr./ + pw: (not πρα), «75. //Text suppl. Al
conject.: πέπραγα, μιαρέ, κακὰ τὰ σὰ τάδε.


MNO ios t2 es
linson from Capps’s
723 πότε δέ; ποῦ ; Allinson suppl. // θέλων δὲ νῦν, S?.
724 S* suppl.
725 διατελεῖς, S? suppl. // Remainder, Allinson suppl. /
περίεργος ὥν, τάλας ; 52.
726 οὐθέν- -ἀδικῶν, Capps.


"
:
A
4


ΙΟΙ


MENANDER


XAPIZIOS
τίσεις | "ye τ᾽ αὔτ᾽" εἰσ'αυτίκ᾽.


[ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ προσέρχεται}
ABPOTONON
be Χ , sf |
® Χαρίσιε,
οὐκ οἷσθα πᾶν.
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
, so? 5» ’
οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ἐγώ;
ABPOTONON
\ ΄ 7
TO παιδίον


’ * rf a> 4 ΄ Ἧ
OUK V € μον" TOUT ELTTA προσποουμενος.


ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
730 οὐκ ἣν σόϊν; ἀλλὰ τίνος; τάδ᾽ αὐτίκ᾽ Nei’ ἐμοί."
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
βούλει μ᾽ ἀπ΄ ἐλευθεροῦν, ἐὰν τὴν μητέρα----;"
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
ἀλλ᾽ ἐξαπεϊλῶ σ᾽ ἐς κόρακας, εἰ μὴ τάχα γ᾽ ἐρεῖς."
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
Ἅ 9). ἡ Ir. > a ” vy oe \ Pet
ἔμ᾽ ἔπρ'επεν εἰπεῖν: ἔτεκεν αὔθ᾽ ἡ σὴ γυνή.
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
ἔχει σᾳ φῶς;
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
/ ᾽ ’ ae PS / Ἵ
σαφέστατ, ἐρὼτ Ονήσιμον.
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ


τί φής, Ον[ἡσιμ᾽;)} ἐξεπειράθηϊτε μου; "


727 Χίαν [1]. margin, β΄. // Line suppl., Allinson. / τίς εἶ o%;
(AB.) τίς ; ληρεῖς. (X.) τί βούλει ; ποῖ φέρει; S*% {ΠΑ βρότονον
προσέρχεται, Allinson suppl. from stage direction Oxyr.
between lines, z.e..[.. .].


728 A? A inl. margin = Αβρ 1 {{ Suppl. Allinson from Capps;
οὐκ οἶσθα πάντ᾽ etc. | οὐκ eis ἀγῶνα (fits traces), S*.
102


i τ


THE ARBITRANTS


Cuarisius.—At any rate you'll pay for this hereafter.

(Abrotonon comes forward.)
AxsrotTonon.—Charisius, you don’t know all.
Cuarisius.—I? Not know?


Axsrotonon.—The baby was not mine. I said that
by way of pretence.


Cuarisius.—It was not yours ? Whose then? Tell
me this at once.


Axsrotonon.—Will you have me set free if its
mother


Cuanisius (¢nterrupting).—Nay, I’llsend you packing
to the crows if you don’t quickly tell.


AsroTonon.—I must out with it! Your wife her-
self is its mother.


Cuarisrus.—Is that sure?
Axsrotonon.— Perfectly sure. Ask Onesimus.


Cuarisius.—What have you to say, Onesimus ἢ
Were you two experimenting on me?


729 ἐμόν, K? suppl. {// Remainder, Allinson. // Oxyr. ends.

730 σόϊ", K2. // Remainder, Allinson.

731 A. ./ in 1. margin. // ἀπΙελευθεροῦν, ἐὰν, Capps. | ἀπελ-
θεῖν, 53. {{ τὴν μητέρα, Allinson.

732 AP/in 1. margin. // ἐξαπελῶ, Capps. [ ἐξαπέρχου, S*. /
ἐξαπεῖδον, K*. // Remainder, Allinson suppl. e.g.

733 Suppl. e.g. Allinson.

734 Allinson suppl. //e. eo... ἔχεις ‘is very probable,”
45. || ἔδεισα, S?.

735 J. / ἐξεπειράθης ἐμοῦ, S?. // Q? begins (right).


103


MENANDER


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
Γαὕ'τη μ᾽ Γἔϊπίεὔσε, νὴ τὸν ᾿Απόλλω “Kal θεϊοὐϊς",


'ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
Ε. ΨΕ, 4 Ἵ - e ‘
TL; σὺ ME περισπᾷς, ἱεροσυλε;
Α ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ


μὴ μάχου,
«γλυκύ: τατε' τῆς γαμετῆς γυναικός ἐστί σου,
Tauris! yap, οὐκ ἀλλότριον.
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
εἰ γὰρ ὠφελεν.
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
740 Γνὴ τὴν φίλην Δήμητρα.
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
τίνα λόγον λέγεις;
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
Γναὶ μὰ Δί", ἀληθῆ.
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ
Παμφίλης τὸ παιδίον


ry τι
ὄντως ἄρ᾽ ἣν;
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
καὶ σόν γ᾽ ὁμοίως.
ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ


Παμφίλης;
[590] 743 "A βρότοννον, ἱκετεύω σε, μή" μ᾽ ἀναπτέρου.
(Lacuna of 9 lines to 83.)
736 End of β΄ (left). S? suppl. // In B’. . ~up’oy and in Q?
toe, «12. // καὶ θεούς, Croiset, J”.


737 τί; σύ με, Allinson. / τί δέ we, Capps. / καὶ σύ με, 83,
738 τολυκύι rare, Allinson. / Γσκαιόϊντατε, S*, 73.
739 Γαὐτῆ-ς", Capps. | τέκνον", K}, 533.


104


; THE ARBITRANTS


Onesimus.—She persuaded me to it. Yes, by
Apollo and the gods.


Cuarisius.— What ἢ


Temple-looter, you'd cheat
me?


ABROTONON


Don't wrangle on,


My dearest sir! ‘Tis your own wedded wife’s, this


child,


Her own and not another’s.


CHARISIUS
Would to god ’twere so !


ABROTONON
_ By dear Demeter, yes!


.


CHARISIUS
What tale is this you tell?


ABROTONON
A true one, yes, by Zeus.


ee <> Eee


CHARISIUS


The baby Pamphila’s ?
Twas really hers?
ABROTONON
And, item, yours too,


CHARISIUS


Pamphila’s !
Abrotonon, I pray, don’t make me walk on air !


(Lacuna of circa 9 lines to fragment B.)


740 This ‘‘ woman’s” oath assigns the words to Abrotonon,
ef. Wright’s Stud. in Menand. p. 27.


741 Suppl. J®, 55. / εὖ ἴσθ᾽, Capps.
742 Suppl. Capps and confirmed by report of J?
ἐκεῖν᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἦν, 85, 743 ᾿Αβρότοϊνον, suppl, Leeuwen.


MENANDER


ABPOTONON


ee .. Be


Ἐν τοῖος ΝΟΣ ea SW,
“ὦ ἡ WT εἰδέ
Πρ το ΡΣ Δεν,
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
2 διε
“πὰ St he εἶν idee Uae. 916 aaa RICE
μα ἘΠῚ ee
ABPOTONON
mF. wy wp te Aga ἃ ὦ γος ΕΝ ΤΗΣ
oxyetads Gow of blades «ole cass ee
(XAPIZIOZ)
τοῦτο δὴ
A
:) eee Aree eee ee eS - βούλομαι


: Sarat” Para


~ ~ ~


ΓΧΟΡΟΥ


ACT V
Scene. ONHSIMOS, XAIPESTPATOS


seve coeds ob lemévov
ταὶ ὑτηΐῖς ὕ 'πίερὶ
Oa ee τῆς. p

753 β5 begins. / x Capps. / A, Robert. // Line omitted, S*.

759 To Abrot. ?, cf. line 249.

756 cf. line 291.

739 ᾿ἀβέλϊτερε, K?, J*. / “Svc uope, Capps. // To restore lines
762-3 S* Conject. : (Xap.) "ἀλλ᾽ εἰσίωμεν: εἰδέναι yap’ βούλο-
μαι | τὰ τῆς γυναικὸς πῶς ἔχει νῦν πράγϊματα.

764 ε, Capps reports. / Not indicated, L?, 53, // ΓΧορουῖ
space in pap. L*.

765-776 Problems: (1) The juncture of B?+Q'. Sudhaus
brings σκεπτέον down to line 769, securing the desirable
juxtaposition σκεπτέον | ὅπως, but this distorts by one line


106


ie


THE ARBITRANTS


In the dozen lines (753-764) down to the end of the act only
mutilated verse-ends remain, but the sense yielded by them is
entirely consistent with the éclaircissement in the above scene.

Abrotonon, apparently, is at first explaining why she
pretended to be the mother, and tells Charisius, in the fourth
line, that she could not betray her real belief ‘* until she knew
everything.” Dialogue follows in which, apparently, all
three take part. Charisius, finally, seems to be saying: “1
wish” to learn of all ‘‘ these things” from Pamphila herself.
He rushes into his own house to be reconciled with his wife.
Onesimus and Abrotonon go off together, and perhaps have
the conversation referred to at the beginning of the next act.
Later, we may perhaps assume, Onesimus is called in by
Charisius and emancipated.


CHORUS.


ACT V
Scene. ONESIMUS, CHAERESTRATUS


The four broken verse-ends that follow are very meagre.
Possibly they may be filled out somewhat as follows! :—


ONESIMUS
(Behold me just now) set at liberty (within.)
(And now I wish to manage all) in behalf of (the


1 The interpretation of these lines 765-776, although they
are in great part well preserved, is beset with unusual
perplexities. See notes on text.


the arrangement (also adopted by S*) of Q? and is therefore
excluded ; see Allinson, op. cit. p. 191, A.J.P. No. 142.
(2) No change of speaker is preserved down to 776 (Robert,
J?, 53), and the choice of the new speaker (here assumed)
is conditioned on the restoration of the preceding text.
(3) Additional crowded traces of letters now reported in 768;
see δ΄, (4) Meaning and context of τὸ μετὰ ταῦτα, 769,
doubtful.

765 This line is restored after Sudhaus (M.S. p. 26).

766 ralirn’s ὕΊπίερ', J? and Capps. / urn. 0. L2. | raurny
ἐγὼ, δ",

' 107


MENANDER


> 1, ty
atin (thd eal dude we obits We Eee TE OP
I


Polv St Nee pe oer rep
Χαιΐ ρέστρ᾽ αθ᾽" ἥδε τὸ nerd tal Ora, “δεῖ σ᾽," ἔφη,
770 “ὅπως 'διαϊμενεῖς ὧν Χαρισίῳ ' τὸ πᾶν'
οἷός ποτ ᾿--ἶσθα---πιστός." οὐ γάρ ἐσἵτί τοι"
ἑταιρίδιον τοῦτ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ τυχὸν 6 τι ποεῖ"


σπουδῇ δὲ καὶ παιδάριον ἡ μῖν εὗρεν---


yl


ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤΟΣ
εἶ


ἐλεύθερος" πάξ' “μὴ βλέπ᾽ εἰς τὴν γῆν ἔχων"
775 καὶ πρῶτον αὐτὴν κατὰ μόνα ts λάβ' . εἶτα δὲ"
τὸν φίλτατον καὶ τὸν γχυκύτατ' ον φίλον ἐμοὶ"


(Lacuna of circa 4 verses to 11.)


For 765-770 the following, exempli gratia, might meet the
conditions :


765 ὁρᾷς ew ἔνδον ἀρτίως ἀφ' ιμένον"
"yoy βούλομαι πράττειν ἅπαν ταλύτηϊς ὕπερ]
Γτῆς πραττομένης αὑτῇ τοσαῦτ᾽" ὁ, ἀλδν.
τὴ Παμφίλῃ γ᾽ anew πάντα. σκεπτέϊον",
Χαιρέστρατ᾽ ἤδη» τὸ μετὰ ταὶ ὕτ᾽ enol Ὑ᾽ ἔφη"
770 ““ὅπως διαμενεῖς ὧν Χαρισίῳ 7,” ete.


768 Q' inl. margin. 8? ends. [12 letters] \we",...1, L*./
[9] AwA . “ual pup = “ol παραδίδ᾽ωΐμι wa'p Tb ρων" (+ avavrlov),
ΕἸΣ Age

7169; Xs ἐς τ νι ar’ ηδε, L2. | Χαιρέστραθ᾽. ἥδε, Capps. {
Χαιρέστρατ᾽, ἤδη», S? is more violent but gives better con-
text. // ra"ira, δεῖ σ᾽, ἔφη", Capps. / Perhaps ταῦτ᾽ ἐμοί γ᾽ ἔφη,
and sc. ὅρα, Allinson.

770 rd wav, Leo. | φίλος, Arn, and Ell., 3323, who reports

wry Siu as another verse-end for B’.

771 wor’, 73. | wep, L?.
772 Capps suppl.

773 ἡμῖν, 15. 55. // εὗρεν : εἶν, to Chaerestr., Allinson. /

εὕρ᾽ : ἔσει, to ?Charis., Capps. / εὗρε νῦν, contin. to Ones., S*.


108


THE ARBITRANTS


girl who) against (her own advantage managed all):
(and restored everything to Pamphila).

Look now,
Chaerestratus. For next thereafter, “ See to it,”
Said she, “that you stand by Charisius in all,
Loyal as heretofore-—you know.” Why, surely she
Is no mere strumpet! Nay, what’s more, her services
Are not the common sort, but by her energy
She actually found for us our child.


CHAERESTRATUS (interrupting)
Well, you
Are free! Enough! Don’t stand there, looking on
the ground! :
_ And first go take her by herself alone, and then
Ἢ My friend, the dearest and the sweetest in my eyes,
; ἢ RUS Tol 22) 6 alle ee nk ee A ee, A


_ _ (Chaerestratus seems to be planning for a conference with
_ Charisius to persuade him that he owes his new-found
_ happiness to Abrotonon and should, therefore, give up his
_ anger against her on account of her benevolent deceit, and buy
_ her freedom from her master. The person (feminine) whom
Onesimus is first to interview alone may be either Abrotonon
_ herself, in order to have her carefully primed, or else Pam-
phila, who would be now all-powerful with Charisius and
who, as we have come to know her, is above ordinary jealousies
and would certainly feel nothing but gratitude towards
Abrotonon.
After a lacuna of circa 4 lines just such a scene of per-
suaston follows (if the fragment {71 is correctly inserted here).


774 Capps suppl. / μὴ BAém εἰς “ra πρὶν κακάϊ, 833, / μὴ
BrerC.., ΤΆ,
_ 1775 αὐτήν reported as certain, see Sudh. M.S. pp. 24-5./
αὖτ. ν(.6. ἡ or o), «75. {/ AaB’ εἶτα δὲ", Allinson. / If αὐτόν is
read, sc. Xzplotov', Capps. / ce, Σωφρόνη, S*.
776 Allinson suppl. (sc. e.g. next line) Γαὐτὸν Χαρίσιον
᾿ ἐκκάλει. | maida δεῖ | (ἔνδον προσειπεῖν), S*.


|: 109


MENANDER


ScENE.
(XAPIZIO3)
[570] 790 ἐπ᾿ αὐτοῖν. ὁ amram: atts
᾿ (ΧΑΙΡΕΣΤΡΑΤΟΣῚ
ὄντως ᾿Α βἱρότονον
(ΧΑΡΙΣΙΟΣ)
ἀλλ᾽ ἐξαπατ' ὡσ᾽ ἐμὲ... .. ..
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
ἀπέσωσε συλ' χλαβοῦσά μοι τὸ παιδίον,"
ἔγωγε προσ ἔλαβον.
ΟΣ ΠΡ 2 κάτω, Ὁ a
ἰοτι.
a - Kar
εἰ TO καλὸν € .
Wenrep MURS: <a¥ tthe Pia, ae
790 ἀπελήλυθί εν
PORT CREED cial ciicheut’ an Vey hese μς ΜΕ Δ ῊΣ


GOT Otte senha nee
ae
od Kpl'vopat


~ \
795 αν. ἐμ μα, νῶ ted. ἐς. kext see
ccd
ooa MC.
FM OL mse ἀδύτου as JAX beset ae aaa
ἔνδον ποι.
ἔοικεν : οὐ
δοῦν, ἡ MOG OT Ge Vo et 33a ee ee
(Lacuna of circa 14 verses.)


780 5, U! begins in 1. margin. ;
781 and 782 Lefebvre suppl., see 12, p. xiv.


THE ARBITRANTS


Scene. CHARISIUS, ONESIMUS (CHAERE-
STRATUS, probably ABROTONON, and perhaps
PAMPHILA).


Charisius is exultant over the happy turn of affairs, but
he is still piqued at Abrotonon for tricking him even to his
own advantage. He had forgiven Onesimus more easily, but
Abrotonon had furnished the brains in the scheme. His
amour-propre has been damaged by her cleverness. Charisius
makes some remark. Then Chaerestratus (?) puts in: ‘‘ In
reality it is Abrotonon ” whom you have to thank. Charisius


replies: ‘‘ Yet she cheated me...” Onesimus says: ‘‘Nay,
she saved the child, joining her forces with mine... I at least
lent a helping hand.”

From the next fifteen broken lines, 786-800, not wah can be
inferred with certainty. There is frequent change of speakers
with, apparently, two longer speeches interspersed. It is
probably a continuation of the same scene.


(A iacuna of about 14 lines, 801-814.)


783 Ov/ inl. margin, L®. //S* suppl.
785 S*. | ἅπαν, J?.

786 B® begins.

786-789 Verse-ends report, J*.

791 and 794 Suppl. S*.

800 End of 8° (right).


815.


[580 |
820


825


830


[600] 848


MENANDER


a ere a
ee cow var ter ΡΥ
νος ann FiO vergronwas
BM LGR ele Fie a ON On
ον 4s Clg ἐμὲ βλέπει
ἜΑ ΡΥ te 00 DOE er . 1)... τ νι Ὁ
Προ τς
ἀν ραν ιν RT a er ΟΝ
sine GY aoa AO RHO ταῖν epee eo, PS
Soil dhe Seco OT RUE ee ha. ae
pita hs. Seats A Pie eee ea aa ee


SS PRRs Tey, AE rare


oT AT! MOEN ἡ FEE μον IST. ΕΝ


Sh divin dite Mt OU AEA οι HOUR
2B NS a eh ἊΝ δ, amet
ise GA wt anna. eee agetongiam Tham
Vinee cea
(Lacuna of circa 11 lines to H*.)
XAIPESTPATOS
ἘΝ OL 9 os) othe aol ca mrad
σώφρονα: τοιαυτησὶ yap οὐκ ἀπέσχετ᾽ ἂν
9 vm 3 a> 999 ee
ἐκεῖνος, εὖ TOUT O10. ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἀφέξομαι.
815 U?.


815-820 Verse ends, J?/—in 817 αὖ τούτῳ σφόδρα ; in 819


J? reports vos ἐμὲ. / S*, eis ἐμε.


820 Sudhaus (Hermes, xlviii., pp. 14 ff.) reconstructs : Γλέγε
μοι, πόθεν τὰ περιδέρ'αι᾽ ἔξχεις τάδεϊ, i.e. Charisius to Abro-
tonon. / J? approves, except ‘‘line ends with ἔχεις." The
fragm. U? is placed here as a sequence to the position


assumed for {0}.
112


THE ARBITRANTS


In the following 21 fragmentary lines, 815~835, there is
little to indicate the subject-matter. An ingenious, but very
doubtful, restoration of line 820 (see notes, text) would bring
in the “necklace” again and perhaps the other birth-tokens.
TLhe.good charcoal-burner, Syriscus, is due to appear again
somewhere to receive his reward for preserving the child. But
this item, with others, may have been appropriately introduced
after the more acute dénouement (915-end) and so may have
rounded out an otherwise short closing act.


(A lacuna of about 11 lines, 836-848.)


When the text of the papyrus again begins (848), someone,
apparently Chaerestratus, has been commissioned to take


‘Abrotonon to her master and to arrange, by formal purchase,


to set her free from slavery. Someone—either Charisius or
Abrotonon herself—is described as ‘‘ sound-minded,” or
**self-controlled,” o7 ‘‘ honest,” and Chaerestratus departs


_ with his charge, uttering, as he leaves, the following two-edged


compliment :
CHAERESTRATUS


ὦ : is ἐπ ουραὶ minded, else he’ ἐ Hever I iio well,
Have held aloof from such a girl. Tl do the same.


[ Ea eunt Chaerestralus and Abrotonon.


821 B* begins. 824 Teh Capps, S*,
831 S* reports u\.uvAC.


831-5 Verse-ends reported τὶ J*.
534 S* suppl. 835 a, J®. / a, 53.
848 H?, quat.z, p. 11.


113


MENANDER


Scene. ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝῊΣ


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝῊΣ
860 ἂν μὴ κατάξω τὴν κεφαλήν σου, Σωφρόνη,
΄ Ἄν». / / ΄
κάκιστ᾽ ἀπολοίμην. νουθετήσεις καὶ σύ με;
ke path ae. OF \ ΟΝ A
προπετῶς ἀπάγω τὴν θυγατέρ᾽,᾿ ἱερόσυλε γραῦ;
> \ / “- \ -“ /
ἀλλὰ περιμείνω καταφαγεῖν τὴν προῖκά μου
Ν \ > fol » A “ ,
τὸν χρηστὸν αὐτῆς ἄνδρα; καὶ λόγους λέγω
855 περὶ τῶν ἐμαυτοῦ; ταῦτα συμπείθεις με σύ;
οὐκ ὀξυλαβῆσαι κρεῖττον; οἰμώξει μακρὰ
ἂν Γἔντι λαλῇς. τί; κρίνομαι πρὸς Σωφρόνην;
[610] ““μετάπεισον αὐτήν, ὅταν ἴδῃς." οὕτω τί μοι
ἀγαθὸν γένοιτο, Σωφρόνη, γάρ, οἴκαδε
860 ἀπιών--- τὸ τέλμ᾽ εἶδες παριοῦσ᾽; ἐνταῦθά σε
\ 4 / .. > lal
τὴν νύκτα βαπτίζων ὅλην ἀποκτενῶ,
> ’ 1 ee ee \ a > ΄
κἀγώ σ' εἰ ταὔτ᾽ ἐμοὶ φρονεῖν ἀναγκάσω
\ \ / / ,
καὶ μὴ στασιάζειν. ἡ θύρα παιητέα,
/ ’ » ἴω δί
κεκλειμένη γάρ ἐστι. παῖδες. παιδίον.


865 ἀνοιξάτω τις. παῖδες, οὐχ ὑμῖν λέγω;


853 ἀλλὰ, 1,3, | ἀλλ᾽ gf, S*, Wilam.
114


=,


THE ARBITRANTS


Scene. SMICRINES alone


Smicrines has returned determined to carry out his threat
to force Pamphila to abandon her husband and to go back,
with her dowry, to her father’s house. Since persuasion does
not avail with her, force must be employed. From the tume
Smicrines enters at the side-entrance till he reaches his son-in-
law’s door he is scolding at Sophrona, rehearsing, in mono-
logue, his intended conversation with her. He alone is still
in ignorance of the true sitwation.


SMICRINES (to himself’)

If I don’t crack that head of yours, O Sophrona,
May deep damnation seize me! You'd admonish me ὃ
You too? I’m headstrong, am I, taking home my girl ?
You hag, you temple-looter! [I’m to wait about
Till this fine lord of hers shall eat up what I gave
As dowry? And am I to bandy arguments
About my own? To that would you persuade me, you ἢ
Were it not better quick to take the upper hand ?
You'll rue it bitterly if you wag tongue again.
What? I discuss the case with Sophrona as judge?
«Persuade her to a change when you get sight of her!”
As so I hope for blessing, you ‘tis [11] persuade.
For, Sophrona, on my way home—you’ve seen the

pond
As you’ve passed by—well, there 11] make an end

of you
And souse you under all the livelong night, until
I make you think my thoughts and stop your taking

part
Against me.

(Approaches the door of Charisius’s house.)

I must bang this door. It’s locked. Boys! Boy!
Let someone open! Boys! Do I not order you?
(Onesimus opens the door and comes out, but bars the

entrance to Smicrines.)


115


[620]


870


174 K


MENANDER


Scene. SMIKPINH>S, ONHSIMOS


ONHZSIMOS
/ , ν 6 , + ΄ - ,
τίς ἐσθ᾽ ὁ κόπτων τὴν θύραν; ὦ, Σμικρίνης
ὁ χαλεπός, ἐπὶ τὴν προῖκα καὶ τὴν θυγατέρα
ἥκων;
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
ἔγωγε, τρισκατάρατε.


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
\ ,
καὶ μάλα

2 a fa]
ὀρθῶς: λογιστικοῦ γὰρ ἀνδρὸς καὶ σφόδρα
φρονοῦντος ἡ σπουδή" τό θ᾽ ἅρπασμ᾽, Ἡράκλεις,
θαυμαστὸν οἷον'

=MIKPINH

\ - A ,

πρὸς θεῶν καὶ δαιμόνων---


ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
Μ / \ \ A \
οἴει τοσαύτην τοὺς θεοὺς ἄγειν σχολὴν
ὥστε τὸ κακὸν καὶ τἀγαθὸν καθ᾽ ἡμέραν
νέμειν ἑκάστῳ, Σμικρίνη;


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
λέγεις δὲ τί;
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
σαφῶς διδάξω σ᾽" εἰσὶν αἱ πᾶσαι πόλεις,
ὅμοιον εἰπεῖν, χίλιαι: τρισμύριοι
οἰκοῦσ᾽ ἑκάστην: καθ᾽ ἕνα τούτων οἱ θεοὶ
ἕκαστον ἐπιτρίβουσιν ἢ σῴζουσι;


870 Assignment of parts, Capps. {|{{ΡὈτό θ᾽, L*/ τὸ 8, 83,
who assigns from τὸ δ᾽ ἅρπασμα to δαιμόνων, all to Smicrines.
After σπουδή there is a double point (;) or C, and no change
of speaker is indicated in 871.


116


THE ARBITRANTS


Scene. SMICRINES, ONESIMUS


ONESIMUS
Who’s knocking at the door? Oh, is it Smicrines,
The tough one, for the dowry and his daughter come ?


SMICRINES
You're right. It’s I, you thrice accurséd scamp,


ONESIMUS
Quite so,
Indeed! ‘Tis like a calculator, very keen,
This energy! And this kidnapping, Heracles,
A perfect marvel this !


SMICRINES
By gods and deities!


ONEsIMUs (didactically)
Now do you think that gods have leisure time to spare
For parcelling the good and ill, day in, day out,
To each.and all, O Smicrines ?


SMICRINES
What do you mean ἢ
ONESIMUS
I will instruct you clearly. In the world, all told,
Roughly there are one thousand cities,! and in each


Dwell thirty thousand. Do you think that each of
them,


Each several one, the gods preserve or ruin?


1 cf. Ar. Wasps, 707, and Ferguson, Greek Imperialism,
Ρ. 42.


878-880 Parts assigned, Allinson, 1.6. σῴζουσι: mas: L?. /
S* gives line 879 to Onesimus.


117


880
102K


885


[040]


890


MENANDER


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝῊΣ
πῶς;
λέγεις γὰρ ἐπίπονόν τιν᾽ αὐτοὺς ζῆν βίον."
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ


““οὐκ ἄρα φροντίξουσιν ἡ ἡμῶν "oi θεοί;

φήσεις. ἑκάστῳ τὸν τρόπον ἐπ} ΜΝ

φρούραρχον" οὗτος ἐνδ' ελεχὴς παρὼν ἕνα

ἐπέτριψεν, ἂν αὐτῷ κακῶς χρῆσθαι δοκῇ,

ἕτερον δ᾽ ἔσωσεν. οὗτός ἐσθ᾽ ἡμῖν θεός,

oT αἴτιος καὶ τοῦ καλῶς καὶ τοῦ κακῶς

πράττειν ἑκάστῳ. τοῦτον ἱλάσκου ποῶν

μηδὲν ἄτοπον μηδ᾽ ἀμαθές, ἵνα πράττῃς καλῶς.
SMIKPINHS

εἶθ᾽, οὑμός, ἱερόσυλε, viv τρόπος ποεῖ

ἀμαθές τι;


Ἴ


ΟΝΗΉΣΙΜΟΣ
συντρίβει σε.
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
τῆς παρρησίας.
ONHZIMOX
ἀλλ᾽ ἀπαγαγεῖν παρ᾽ ἀνδρὸς αὑτοῦ θυγατέρα
ἀγαθὸν σὺ κρίνεις, Σμικρίνη;
=MIKPINH
/ \
λέγει δὲ Tis
lal ? > / > \ ‘al > ral
τοῦτ᾽ ἀγαθόν; ἀλλὰ νῦν ἀναγκαῖον.
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
θεᾷ;
\ \ > -“ / ᾽ ΄ /
TO κακὸν ἀναγκαῖον λογίζεθ᾽ οὑτοσί.
τοῦτόν τις ἄλλος, οὐχ ὁ τρόπος, ἀπολλύει.
881 S?.


882 ἐνδελεχὴς παρὼν, Robert, S*, 55, // ἕνα, Allinson, /


φύλαξ, Robert.
118


THE ARBITRANTS


SMICRINES
What !
If that were true, the gods would live a life of toil !


ONESIMUS

«Well, do not then the gods look out for us?” you'll
say.

To ἘΠῚ of us they have allotted Character

As garrison-commander. Ever present, he

Brings one to ruin, whoso seems to use him ill;

Another man he saves. Our deity is this,

And he’s responsible for each man’s faring well

Or badly. Him propitiate by doing naught

That’s boorish or outlandish, that you prosper well.


SMICRINES
Well, then, you temple-looter, is my character
Now doing aught that’s boorish ?


ONESIMUS
ΤΥ : :
It is smashing you!
SMICRINES
Why, what impertinence !
j


ONESIMUS
Well, do you call it “ good ”
From husband to divorce one’s daughter, Smicrines ?


SMICRINES
Who says it’s good? ’Tis now necessity.


ONESIMUS
You see?
This man sets down what's base as a necessity !
Some other, not his Character, destroyeth him.


883 χρή, Σμικρίνη, from xp: pap., S?.
884 H4, quat. z, p. 12.
890 αὑτοῦ, Ell., Leo. / σαυτοῦ, pap.


895


[650 |


900


MENANDER


καὶ νῦν μὲν ὁρμῶντ᾽ ἐπὶ πονηρὸν πρᾶγμά σε
ταὐτόματον ἀποσέσωκε, καὶ καταλαμβάνεις
διαλλαγὰς λύσεις τ᾽ ἐκείνων τῶν κακῶν,
αὖθις δ᾽ ὅπως μὴ λήψομαί σε, Σμικρίνη,
προπετῆ, λέγω σοι. νῦν δὲ τῶν ἐγκλημάτων
ἀφίεσο τούτων, τὸν δὲ θυγατριδοῦν λαβὼν
ἔνδον πρόσειπε.
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
θυγατριδοῦν, μαστιγία;


ΟΝΉΣΙΜΟΣ
΄ “* \ , a ” Lg τ
παχύδερμος ἦσθα Kal σύ, νοῦν ἔχειν δοκῶν.
οὕτως ἐτήρεις παῖδ᾽ ἐπίγαμον; τοιγαροῦν
τέρασιν ὅμοια πεντάμηνα παιδία


905 ἐκτρέφομεν.


[660 |


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
οὐκ οἷδ᾽ ὅ τι λέγεις.
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
ἡ γραῦς δέ γε
40.» ς ? - / \ ¢e \ ΄
οἶδ᾽, ὡς ἐγώμαι. τότε γὰρ οὑμὸς δεσπότης


τοῖς Ταυροπολίοις---


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
Σωφρόνη.
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
4 \
ταύτην λαβὼν
χορῶν ἀποσπασθεῖσαν.--αἰσθάνει γε:


120


THE ARBITRANTS


And you, now, started full tilt for a wicked deed,

Haphazard luck has saved and for these ills you'll
find

Adjustment and release. But let me, Smicrines,

Not find you headstrong any more! I tell you that

Yet from these allegations stand acquitted now.

Go you within. Take up your daughter’s child and
give

Your blessing to it.

(Onesimus stands aside and motions towards the door.)


SMICRINES
Daughter's child, you whipping-post ?


ONESIMUS
You were a fathead,! you, and thought yourself so
smart !
So carefully you watched your marriageable child !
And therefore five-months’ infants, first class prodi-
gies,
We rear !
SMICRINES
I don’t know what you mean.


ONESIMUS
But that old crone,
I'm thinking, knows. For master, at the Festival
Of Tauropolia—


SMICRINES (calling into the house)
Ho! Sophrona!
ONESIMUS
He caught
And drew her from the dance and—Get my meaning ἢ


' Literally ‘‘pachyderm,” giving a different turn in
English.


121


MENANDER
SMIKPINHS
ναί"
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
νυ My! δ᾽ ἀναγνωρισμὸς αὐτοῖς γέγονε καὶ


910 ἅπαντ᾽ ἀγαθά.


ΞΟΕΝΕ. SMIKPINHS, ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ, ΣΩΦΡΟΝΗ


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
/ ΄ 4 ΄“
TL φησιν, ἱεροσυλε γραῦ;
ΣΏΩΦΡΟΝΗ
“ἡ φύσις ἐβούλεθ᾽, ἣ νόμων οὐδὲν μέλει"
γυνὴ δ᾽ ἐπ᾿ αὐτῷ τῷδ᾽ ἔφυ."
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
TL μῶρος εἶ;
ΣΩΦΡΟΝΗ
τραγικὴν ἐρῶ σοι ῥῆσιν ἐξ Αὐγῆς ὅλην,
ἂν μή ποτ᾽ αἴσθῃ, Σμικρίνη.
ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ
σύ μοι χολὴν


915 κινεῖς παθαινομένη: σὺ γὰρ σφόδρ᾽ οἶσθ᾽ ὅτι


Γπτέραϊς λέγει νῦν.
ΟΝΗΣΙΜΟΣ
οἷδά «γ᾽ εὖ;, εὖ ἴσθ᾽, ὅτι
Γὴ γραῦς προτέρα συνῆκε.


908 val, Lefebvre. [γε : νὴ : pap.


912 ἔφυ: TIMWPOSEL :
916 τέρας, Capps suppl. / οὗτος, Arnim, ete. // οἶδά <7’ εὖ;»,


Allinson suppl. and assigned to Onesimus. | οἶδ᾽ <éywy’>,
Capps. / οἶδα. (Smi.)<7a@s>, S?. / οἶδα : εὖ ἴσθ᾽, L?.


917 ἡ γραῦς προτέρα, Wilam./..... C προτερα, L*,


[22


THE ARBITRANTS


SMICRINES
Yes
ONESIMUS


And now they've had a recognition scene, and all
Is well.


Enter Sophrona from the house of Charisius. |
Scene. SMICRINES, ONESIMUS, SOPHRONA.


SMICRINES
What is he saying, temple-looting hag ?


SOPHRONA (who has overheard Onestmus) }


“Tis Nature willed it, unto whom no law’s a bar,
And just for this was woman born.”


SMICRINES
What's that? You're daft ἢ


SOPHRONA
From Auge I'll declaim a tragic speech entire
If you don’t sometime soon wake up, O Smicrines.


SMICRINES
You stir my bile with your declaiming. Monstrous
this
He’s saying, you know well '
ONESIMUS (2nlerrupting)


I know at least, know well,
The crone was first to see through this.


1 Sophrona answers by quoting from the Auge, a lost play
by Euripides, in which (also by means of a ring) Heracles is
identified as the father of Auge’s child. (See Capps, ad loc.)


123


MENANDER


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝῊΣ
’ὔ /
πάνδεινον λέγεις.
ΣΩΦΡΟΝΗ
[6700] ‘ov yéyo'vey εὐτύχημα μεῖζον οὐδὲ ἕν.


ΣΜΙΚΡΙΝΗΣ


et τοῦ τ᾿ ἀληθές ἐσθ᾽ ὃ λέγεις, τὸ παιδίον


[Cairo MS. of Ἔπιτρ. ends.]}


124


THE ARBITRANTS


SMICRINES
Outrageous tale !


SOPHRONA


There’s never been a greater piece of luck, not one!


SMICRINES


If this is true that you are saying, then the child—


(End of the MS. For the probable close of the play, see
above, Introduction, page 8.)


125


894 K


850 K


175 Καὶ


178 K


176 Καὶ


179 K


185 K


OTHER FRAGMENTS OF
EIIITPEMONTES


ie
al oN) / >
φιλῶ σ᾽, ᾽Ονήσιμ᾽, Γεἰ od καὶ περίεργος el.
2.
> \ / /, > ΕῚ ’ὔ 5» > /,
οὐδὲν yAUKUTEpOY ἐστιν ἢ πάντ᾽ εἰδέναι.
ὃ.


’ ᾽ > -“
δα νον ΣΘΑΙ ΟΝ τ ον ον θεῖς
Μ ς 9 ἣν 4 / /
ἄριστον; ὁ δ᾽ adver ein κατακείμενος.


ἀργὸς δ᾽ ὑγιαίνων τοῦ π ee πολὺ
ἀθλιώτερος, διπλάσια ee ἐσθίει μάτην.


UL ea Dee ee a ἐπέσπασα
ἐπὶ τὸ τάμε γε ἅλας, ἐὰν οὕτω τύχῃ.
0.
ἐλευθέρῳ τὸ καταγελᾶσθαι μὲν πολὺ
” / > \ 3. 9 lal ΝΠ ΄
αἴσχιόν ἐστι, τὸ δ᾽ ὀδυνᾶσθ᾽ ἀνθρώπινον.
Lal
i.
> \ ’ / xX \ a
οὐθὲν πέπονθας δεινόν, ἂν μὴ προσποῇ.
8.


ὌΝ προ ee


No. 1 is referred to Epitrepontes by van Leeuwen, ete. /


εἰ σὺ καὶ, Capps. | καὶ σύ, Codd.


No. 2 referred to Epitrepontes by van Leeuwen. / γλυκύ-


τερόν ἐστιν, Cobet. / yap γλυκύτερον, Codd.
No. 3, line 1. Phot. 5. ἄλυς.


No. 4, line 2. διπλάσια γοῦν ἐσθίει μάτην, Codd. | μάτην γοῦν
ἐσθίει διπλάσια, Wilam. cf. Hutloff, who prefixes it to


126


OTHER FRAGMENTS OF
“ ARBITRANTS ”


1. (CHARISIUS ?)
Onesimus, I love you, busybody though you are.
2. (ONESIMUS ?)
There’s naught more pleasing than to know the facts
entire.
3. (ONESIMUS to COOK ?)
Now why don’t you serve breakfast? He’s sprawled
out there long since upon the couch, and chafes.
4. (SMICRINES ὃ)
An idle man in health is much more wretched than


the fever-patient, at any rate he eats a double
portion and for naught.


5. (A coor)
I cast more salt upon the salted-meat, if so it chance.
6.
For free-born man to be mocked is more shameful
by far, but suffering pain is common to mankind.


Lard


΄.
You've suffered naught outrageous, if you'll make as
if it were not so.
ὃ,
A (wide-necked) jug (Ὁ).


St. Pet. fragments, as does also S*, who conjectures : διπλάσια
γοῦν μάτην 'kat'eo@le:. . . // γ΄, Allinson suppl.

No. 5 ἐπέσπασα, MSS., Athen. / ἐπισπάσω, Herw. {{ ἐὰν,
Elmsley. / ἂν, Codd.

No. 6 αἴσχιον, Codd. , αἴσχιστον, Heringa, Kock.

No. 8, note cf. Kock, ‘“‘xurpas εἶδος μεγαλοστόμον καὶ
μεγάλης. | Capps compares: ἐγχυτριάζειν.
127


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS}?
INTRODUCTION


A.ruoucH more than half of this play is lost, the
parts preserved are so nearly unbroken that we can
study with confidence Menander’s style and method
through continuous scenes. Some of the characters
seem little more than stock types, but Chrysis, if we
may judge by what remains, exhibits some of the
more delicate character-drawing—unselfishness and
pathos—that recurs in the admirable delineation of
Abrotonon in The Arbitrants. Demeas, too, is much
more than a type. He will not be confused in
memory with any other of Menander’s personages.
An allusion to Chaerephon in v. 401 is thought
(cf: Capps, p. 233) to date the composition some time
not later than 310 sB.c. This would tally well
enough with the poet’s growing firmness of touch
in delineating character.

Certain details in the unfolding of the plot are
lost owing to the breaks in the text, but, by holding
in solution some alternative possibilities, we may
probably follow the main? thread of the story and,

1 The title of this play is inferred from the allusions in
lines 53 and 142 which seem to identify it with the ‘‘Samian
Girl of Menander,” cited by Phrynichus in quoting from the
play the one fragment (see below) previously known. For a
possible supplementary title: ‘‘or the Wet-nurse,” see note 1
on p. 136.

2 Possibly, however, the story of the Samian girl, who


gives the title to the play, may have been made very promi-
nent in the missing acts.


130


(δ “wnesnjy αν1)..9}}»7}}


aSVIK V


ONISUVOHHY LAOd OLWOD


Vv


INTRODUCTION


incidentally, enjoy fully the two or three scenes
which add materially to a vivid conception of
Athenian life.

The plot, as far as it can be made out, is briefly as
follows. Demeas, a well-to-do Athenian bachelor,
has adopted Moschion, whom he loves as his own
son. He is living in a comfortable home,: with
Chrysis as mistress of the house. Chrysis had come
to Athens as a young girl of unknown parentage
from Samos. Demeas had taken her to his home,
and a sincere affection exists between them, although
her supposed foreign extraction prevents formal
marriage, according to traditional Athenian custom.
The son, Moschion, has fallen in love with Plangon,
daughter of Niceratus, Demeas’s friend and next-
door neighbour. As Niceratus is too poor to give
Plangon an adequate marriage portion the young
couple do not venture to confess their love to their
fathers. During a somewhat prolonged absence ! of
Demeas from home Chrysis gave birth to a child by
him. The child died. Meanwhile Plangon has
given birth to a child by Moschion, and Chrysis,
from an unselfish desire to help Moschion, and also,
doubtless, impelled by her awakened maternal
instinct, undertakes to rear the child. Demeas
returns, and Chrysis, knowing (apparently) that he
is averse to having a child of his own, does not
attempt to assume that the child is hers, but says
that it is a foundling and persuades him, with
difficulty, to allow her to keep it in the house.?

1 This is an inference, as our text stands, but a necessary
one. Otherwise Menander’s ‘“‘mirror of life” is badly
cracked !


2 There is another theory, adopted by various editors, that
there are two babies in the house at once—one Plangon’s and


131
K 2


a.


INTRODUCTION


It may seem, indeed, less probable that he would
have consented to rear a foundling than to have
been reconciled to his own child by Chrysis. The
situation, however, is necessary for the entanglement
of the plot. Demeas on his return hears some vague
rumours which make him anxious about Moschion,


one the child of Demeas and Chrysis. This theory is ably
defended by Capps (see Menander, Introduction, pp. 224 ff.).
There are some allusions in the text as preserved that seem
to give colour to it. If it could be shown that Menander was
often inclined to the broadly farcical it might seem more
cogent, but, in our ignorance of the matter contained in the
missing lines, the alternative theory, adopted above, furnishes
a working hypothesis which is, I believe, at least not incon-
sistent with the situations developed in the course of the play.
The main difficulty is a difficulty on any (tenable !) theory.
Demeas is surprised when he sees Chrysis suckling a baby
herself. His surprise only proves that he, not knowing that
she had herself given birth to a child, had accepted without
suspicion her request to adopt a foundling. The confused
references to the baby by the excited Niceratus and Demeas
and the contradictions and involuntary admissions of half-
truth into which the slave, Parmenon, is betrayed, would all
seem natural to an audience in possession of the plot as
unfolded in the missing scenes. In line 384, for instance,
Niceratus’s exclamation, ‘‘ Was I not bamboozled by him?”
seems to imply definitely that in this scene he now knows
that the baby is Plangon’s and Moschion’s. Two babies are
not mentioned outright in the lines preserved. When Demeas
(1. 377) says ‘‘mine” it is subtle (see Capps, ad loc.), but
not necessary, to assume that he is unconsciously speaking of
his son, not his grandson. That Demeas (1. 170) gives more
than one maid-servant to the banished Chrysis might seem
to lend colour to the theory of two babies, both alive ; but
line 161, just before, certainly lends no support to this. The
chief difficulty, perhaps, in the theory of the one living child
is that there seems to be insnfficient reason why Parmenon
should not own up that the baby is the child of Moschion
and Plangon when (ll. 101 ff.) he finds Demeas has made his
damaging discovery.


132


INTRODUCTION


and has recourse at once to the usual parental
therapeutics. He announces to Moschion that he
is to marry Plangon, the daughter of Niceratus.
Moschion acquiesces with such unexpected alacrity
that Demeas, even at this point, is almost rendered
suspicious. When our manuscript begins, at the
opening of the second! act, the preparations for the
wedding are well under way. The text itself will
develop the remainder of the plot, as far as it is
extant.


1 The question of the identification of the Acts in the
fragments preserved is perplexing. The first fragment of the
Cairo MS. seems to be near the beginning of the play, 1.6.
very near the beginning of Act II. The lacuna (after 1. 204)
seems to be mechanically determined (see Capps, p. 233) as
consisting of about 140 lines. Consequently it is assumed
that line 414 begins Act III. But the closing scene of this
** Act III” also seems to bring us close to a natural ending
of the whole play. We must therefore either assume two
acts missing at the end, with a recrudescence of plot-entangle-
ment, involving perhaps (on the two living babies theory) a
resurrection of Chrysis’s suppressed infant or, more probably,
a detailed recognition of the supposed ‘‘ Samian” as being
really of Attic parentage; or else assume that the missing
acts should have a place somewhere earlier in the play. In
the latter case Act ‘‘ III” should be numbered Act V, and
the numbering of the lines would be mere guess-work.


133


49. “eg


"SAMIA MENANAPOT


TA TOY APAMATOS ΠΡΟΣΩΠΑ


Anpéas Νικήρατος
Παρμένων Μοσχίων
Μάγειρος [Τρύφη]
Χρυσίς


Χορὸς συμποτῶν


Κωφά: ὑπηρέται τοῦ Μαγείρου, γραῦς, δοῦλοι."


134


Brae


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


Demegas, an Athenian citizen.

PaRMENON, house-slave of Demeas.

Cook, or public caterer.

Curysis, a free-born Samian girl, nominal wife of Demeas.
Nicrratvs, neighbour of Demeas and father of Plangon.
Moscuion, adopted son of Demeas.

(TRYPHA, ? slave in the household of Niceratus.)

Cuorus of revellers.


Motes: Servants of the caterer; an old nurse; men-servants
and maids of the houschold of Demeas.


Scrnze: Athens, before the adjacent, but not contiguous,
houses of Demeas and Niceratus.


Thewhole of the first? act is lost. For the complicated
situation there unfolded, see above.

Between the acts the audience is probably provided with
entertainment by the chorus, perhaps made up of wedding
guests,


1 Or, possibly, in some country deme of Attica. Compare
Harmon, B.Ph.W.S. No. 34/5, p. 1111. |
2 But see above, Introduction, p. 133, note 1.


135


TAMIA? MENANAPOY
ACT II
Scene 1. AHMEAS
AHMEAS
OT ea 18 χὰ aided het wknaed δ ον
ἢ μαίνομαι seek OSS ἘΘΛΔΑρΟ,
NaBov ἐπ᾿ ἀγαθοὶ δι oe demisis
« \ / , >? lol ig \
ὡς yap τάχιστ᾽ εἰσῆλθον, ὑπερεσπουδακὼς
\ a / / / \ n wT. a
5 Ta τοῦ γάμου πράττειν, φράσας TO πρᾶγμ᾽ ἁπλῶς
τοῖς ἔνδον ἐκέλευσ᾽ εὐτρεπίζειν πάνθ᾽ ἃ δεῖ,
καθαρὰ ποεῖν, πέττειν, ἐνάρχεσθαι κανοῦν.
> / , > / / 3.6 “ Ν \ /
ἐγίγνετ᾽ ἀμέλει πάνθ᾽ ἑτοίμως, TO δὲ τάχος
τῶν πραττομένων ταραχήν τιν᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐνεπόει,
“ > / > \ / \ Μ  “-. \
10 ὅπερ εἰκός. ἐπὶ κλίνης μὲν ἔρριπτ᾽ ἐκποδὼν
Ν ’ / Δ ee / a
TO παιδίον Kexparyos, al δ᾽ ἐβόων ἅμα"
1 A double title, Σαμία ἢ Τίτθη, is suggested by Harmon,


B.P.W.S. No. 34/35, p. 1109. cf. fragm. of Titthe of Statius
Caecilius. Compare also Menander’s Τίτθη, see below, p. 438.


] G, quat. y, p. 1.
11 αἱ δ᾽, “« est sir,” 1. οἱ δ᾽, 53,


136


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


ACT I}
Scene 1. DEMEAS alone


Apparently only a few lines are missing. The papyrus
begins with three broken lines in which Demeas, who has just
come out of his house in a state of great excitement, appears
to be saying in effect :

DEMEAS

‘Tm either crazy or I’ve been most shamefully treated,
that too by her whom on a time I took in kindness and haye
honoured ever since.” ἢ

He then continues (taking the audience, from time to time,
into his confidence) :

For soon as ever I had come into the house,

All in a hurry to prepare the wedding-feast,

1, merely stating to the household what was on,

Gave orders to make ready all things requisite :

To furbish up; to cook ; and with the basket-rite 2

To make beginning. Everything was going on,

Of course, quite smoothly, but the haste to do their
tasks

Would bring in some confusion, as you might expect,

Amongst them. On a bed there lay, to one side flung,

The baby, bawling on and on, The servants too


1 See Capps ad loc. The numbers begin with the first line
indicated in the Cairo MS. Act I and some additional lines
have been lost.

2 A basket with barley grains, to be scattered on the head
of the victim, was first carried around the altar. See Capps
ad loc., and cf. Pericetromene, 878.


1Si


15


30


MENANDER


“ ἄλευρ᾽, ὕδωρ, ἔλαιον ἀπόδος, ἄνθρακας."
᾽ \ \ / \ /
καὐτὸς διδοὺς τούτων TL Kal συλλαμβάνων

Γ > ΔῊ -“ » ᾽ ’ “

εἰς τὸ ταμιεῖον ἔτυχον εἰσελθών, ὅθεν
πλείω προαιρῶν καὶ σκοπούμενος συχνὰ"
οὐκ εὐθὺς ἐξῆλθον. καθ᾽ ὃν δ᾽ ἣν χρόνον ἐγὼ
ἐνταῦθα, “κατέβαιν᾽ ἀφ᾽ ὑπερῴου τις γυνὴ
ἄνωθεν εἰς τοὔμπροσθε τοῦ ταμει--δ;ίου
οἴκημα: τυγχάνει γὰρ ἱστεών τις ὦν,

[cA 7, ἢ 28 / / > \ 4 /

ὥσθ᾽ ἥ τ ἀνάβασίς ἐστι διὰ τούτου τό τε
ταμιεῖον ἡμῖν. τοῦ δὲ Μοσχίωνος ἢ ἣν

τίτθη τις αὕτη πρεσβυτέρα, γεγονυϊῖ᾽ ἐμὴ
θεράπαιν᾽, ἐλευθέρα δὲ νῦν. ἰδοῦσα δὲ

τὸ παιδίον κεκραγὸς ἠμελημένον

> / > > MN > a> ww Μ ’ > > -“
ἐμέ τ᾽ οὐδὲν εἰδυῖ᾽ ἔνδον ὄντ᾽, ἐν ἀσφαλεῖ
εἶναι νομίσασα τοῦ λαλεῖν, προσέρχεται,
καὶ ταῦτα δὴ τὰ κοινά δε φίλτατον τέκνον,"
εἰποῦσα καὶ “ μέγ ἀγαθόν' ἡ μάμμη δὲ ποῦ;
ἐφίλησε, περιήνεγκεν'" ὡς δ᾽ ἐπαύσατο
κλᾶον, πρὸς αὑτήν φησιν" “ὦ τάλαιν᾽ ἐγώ,
πρῴην τοιοῦτον ὄντα Μοσχίων᾽ ἐγὼ

αὐτὸν ἐτιθηνούμην a ἀγαπῶσα, νῦν δ᾽, Γἐπεὶ"
παιδίον ἐκείνου γέγονεν, ἄλ' λη καὶ τό de!


ΙΝ ΨΥ ΜΟΥ κε. δ, ΣΝ an ᾽ . ἣν Ὁ κ ᾽ . . δ᾿ oo


ΝΞ ---:-Ξ
ee ae eae ae ee es Ρέναι
ites Se bs Ween Silent θεραπαινιδίῳ τινὶ
15 συχνὰ, Hense, Wil. ΒᾺΡΡ]. ε. . - ., L*./ τινᾳ, 53.


18 ταμει--δ)ίου, Herw., Hense, S?. | rapestou, LA, | ταμιειδίον,
Croenert, Capps.


33 yeyov.AC . An, J? 37 α", quat. y, p. 2.
39 /.....4.... κακαὶ, OF wv.tkat, J,


138


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


Were shouting, “ Flour! Water! Give me oil! Some
coals!”

And I myself, too, helping, giving this and that,

Into the store-room, as it chanced, had gone, from
whence

I did not come directly, busy laying out

More food than common and inspecting many things

Within. Just then, while I was there,a woman came,

Descending from an upper storey, from above,

Into the store-room’s antechamber.—For with us,

There’s an apartment, as it happens, for the looms,

So placed that through it is the entrance to the stairs

And to the store-room.—She was nurse to Moschion

And getting on in years, a former slave of mine

But now set free.—And, when she caught sight of the
child

A-bawling, bawling as it lay left all alone,

She, knowing nothing of my being there inside,

Comes forward ; thinks herself quite safe for chattering

Such things you know as women will—thus: “ Dar-
ling child !”’

Says she, and “ Blessed treasure, where’s its mammy

one ?.”’

And then she kissed and carried it about and, when

It stopped its crying, to herself she says, “ Ah me!

Ah, wretched that I am, it seems but yesterday

That I was fondly suckling Moschion himself,

And, now that here he has a baby of his own,

Another <serves as nurse.>


See Oe ew te eter 6) te Bar “ohn 6 Viomre ο΄ ὁ Ae." '.5, baa Re, ἀκα
ar Peen eer ὦ a ite, Ve le οἷς δ Se. eh eet oe τὸ Hideto ie τ We Te
ee υ ον LO! (SC e Oe. AS) Sel Chae “et 168. 2 eee ον ὁ ee he
ne eo Oa ee) τὸ νὴ.» reve! Les οὐ. οἵ sa. ey se. Serle. “δον ye ©


Ree Se TOS ἴα ὁ δὰ ἴον ᾿ς οὐ fie eo hey ἃ Tal! ay wm eee. ἴον» Vs, a Ye


139


40


[40]


50


[50]


55


60


[60]


MENANDER


/
ἔξωθεν εἰστρέχοντι" “ λούσατ᾽, ὦ τάλαν,
\ δί » , ἐς ΕΝ a ΄
τὸ παιδίον, φησίν" “ τί τοῦτ᾽; ἐν τοῖς γάμοις
a a ἈΝ \ \
τοῖς τοῦ πατρὸς TOV μικρὸν οὐ θεραπεύετε;
/ -"
εὐθὺς δ᾽ ἐκείνη “ δύσμορ᾽, ἡλίκον λαλεῖς,"
᾽ “ec yy ὃ » \ > / » “cc > ὃ / ay
φησ᾽, “ἔνδον ἐστὶν αὐτός." “ov δήπου ye: ποῦ;
n / » \ /
“ἐν τῷ ταμιείῳ —Kal παρεξήλλαξέ τι---
\ a /
“ αὐτὴ καλεῖ, τίτθη, oe,” καὶ “ βάδιζε καὶ
“ον > ᾽ 7 ᾽ » 6 > / ΕΣ]
σπεῦδ᾽. οὐκ ἀκήκο᾽ οὐδέν, εὐτυχέστατα.
» ΓΑΙ Py / δ᾽ oo 4.1 / fol > fol
εἰποῦσ᾽ ἐκείνη ὧ ' τάλαινα τῆς ἐμῆς
- > an
λαλιᾶς," ἀπῆλθεν ἐκποδὼν οὐκ οἶδ᾽ Γὅποιι.
> \ a fol “ > /
κἀγὼ προῆλθον τοῦτον ὅνπερ ἐνθάδε
/ a lol
τρύπον ἀρτίως ἐξῆλθον, ἡσυχῆ πάνυ,
e Ae δ) / > \ ine BRS /
ὡς οὔτ᾽ ἀκούσας οὐδὲν οὔτ᾽ ἠσθημένος.
Ν fal
αὐτὴν δ᾽ ἔχουσαν αὐτὸ THY Σαμίαν ὁρῶ
Μ - / \ “
ἔξω διδοῦσαν τιτθίον παριὼν ἅμα.
ὥσθ᾽ ὅτι μὲν αὐτῆς ἐστι τοῦτο γνώριμον
> \ δ᾽ “ i / oe |} ᾿᾽ ra
εἶναι, πατρὸς δ᾽ ὅτου ποτ᾽ ἐστίν, εἴτ᾽ ἐμοῦ
+ a 9 > / > ¥ Ν ς “ Ὅν ΄
εἴτ᾽ —ov λέγω δ᾽, ἄνδρες, πρὸς ὑμᾶς τοῦτ᾽ ἐγώ,
“7? ¢ “ \ a >] , / /,
οὔθ᾽ ὑπονοῶ, TO πρᾶγμα δ᾽ εἰς μέσον φέρω
> lal
ἅ τ᾽ ἀκήκο᾽ αὐτός, οὐκ ἀγανακτῶν οὐδέπω.
a \
σύνοιδα γὰρ TO μειρακίῳ, νὴ τοὺς θεούς,
/
Kal κοσμίῳ τὸν πρότερον ὄντι χρόνον ἀεὶ
καὶ περὶ ἔμ᾽ ὡς ἔνεστιν εὐσεβεστάτῳ.
/ ? > \ \ / -“
πάλιν δ᾽, ἐπειδὰν τὴν λέγουσαν καταμαθῶ
fal “- a
τίτθην ἐκείνου πρῶτον οὖσαν, εἶτ᾽ ἐμοῦ


43 The numbers (40, 50, etc.) in brackets continue the num-


bering in 123, ignoring the lacunae.
58 οὔθ᾽ (= ὃ ἔτι) Wilam, J*. / οὔθ᾽, alw.


140


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


W o from without came running in: “You baggage,
bathe

The child,” says she. “ What does this mean? Do
you neglect

The little fellow on his father’s wedding day?”

Straightway the girk: ‘‘ How loud you chatter, luck-
less one!”

Says she: “The master’s there inside.’”’ “It can’t
be. Where?”

*‘ Why, in the store-room.
she says:

* Your mistress, nurse, is calling you,” and adds:
“ Now go,

And hurry. Not a thing he’s heard, most luckily.”

Then, with the words: “Ah me, my wretched
chattering !”

The old nurse vanished somewhere and made off.
And I

Came forth with just such mien as when I now came
here,

Quite calm as though I had not heard nor noticed
aught.

And as I passed I saw the Samian out there

Nursing the child herself. So that it’s ascertained

That hers it is—whoever fathered it, or I,

Or—nay, [ll mention not, good sirs, this further
thought

That I conjecture—I just tell you what’s the fact

And what I’ve heard myself—and I’m not angry—yet.

For in my heart I’m certain, by the gods, the lad

In times gone by has ever been a decent sort,

And always shown the utmost reverence for me.

But then again whene’er I realise the facts :

She was his nurse who let the matter out—this first ;


7


Then in changing voice


141


65 λάθρᾳ λέγουϊσ'αν, εἶτ᾽ ἀποβλέψω πάλιν


70


[70]


αὐτὸν παραγαγεῖν ἐστι TOU


MENANDER


> \ > lal > Ν Ν /
els THY ἀγαπῶσαν αὐτὸ Kal βεβιασμένην
? fa) / ΝΜ e/ > ο
ἐμοῦ τρέφειν ἄκοντος, ἐξέστηχ᾽ ὅλως.
ἀλλ᾽ εἰς καλὸν yap τουτον-“ὶ; πῖαρ ὀνθ᾽ ὁρῶ
τὸν ἸΠαρμένοντ᾽ ἐκ ths‘ ἀγορᾶς" ἐατέον


CG Ὁ“ ay, ae π᾿
TOV OUST ἀγει.


Scene 2. AHMEAS, ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩΝ, MATEIPOS


TIAPMENOQN
,ὔ > Ime Toms \ \ 6 fe ἢ > 3 \
μάγειρ᾽, ἐγὼ μὰ τοὺς θεούς, οὐκ οἶδα σὺ
rm ἐν , eg Γ a | e \ \ “-
ἐφ᾽ ὅ τι μαχαίρας περιφ' é'p' εις" ἱκανὸς γὰρ εἶ
λαλῶν κατακόψαι πάντα.


MATEIPOS
m'ploo' παίζεις ἐμοί,
ἰδιῶτ᾽; :
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
ἐγώ;
ΜΑΓΕΙΡΟΣ


ὃ a , ao ple 4 2 i | \ θ UA

οκεῖς YY ἐμοί, νὴ τοὺς θεοὺς,
> / / i / /

εἰ πυνθάνομαι πόσαϊἷς τραπέζας μέλλετε


a / » "ἢ lal / > r, = | /
TOEL, TOTAL YUVALKES εἰσι, πηνικα


Μ Ν a > / a
ἔσται τὸ δεῖπνον, εἰ δεήσει προσλαβεῖν
τραπεζοποιόν, εἰ κέραμός ἐστ᾽ ἔνδοθεν
68 13, quat. y, p. 3. τουτον-«“ὶΣ» mapdv@ ὁρῶ, S*, from
τον ΩΝ }(.}} Θ᾽ δρῶ, J?.
70 Allinson ΒᾺΡΡ. τούτους θ᾽ obs ἄγει, 31, [τούτους ἐκποδών, 55,
71 Wilam. suppl. 1S παι. Eee ss ἰσεμοι, 43.
74 Croenert, Headlam, suppl.


142


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


Next,that she talked behind my back; and then again,

When I recall the one who fondled it and urged

Against my wish its rearing, I’m beside myself.

(Enter Parmenon and the Caterer nith his assistants
loaded mith their paraphernalia. Demeas notices
their approach and draws aside for the moment,
remarking :)

But stay, for just in time I see this Parmenon,

Back from the Market, present here. I must give way

And let him lead this fellow and his crew inside.


(Demeas stands aside.)


Scene 2. DEMEAS, PARMENON, CATERER


PARMENON
Come, Cook! Now, by the gods, I see no reason why
You carry knives about. Your chatter is enough
To hash up all and sundry.


CATERER
What? You mock at me,

You ignoramus ?

PARMENON

1}

CATERER |

I think so, by the gods.
When I but ask how many tables you intend
To set; how many ladies; at what hour you serve
The dinner; if atable-dresser must be fetched
Besides ; if you've sufficient crockery within ;


1 Compare the scene in The Counterfeit Heracles, fragm.
No. 518 K, below.


143


MENANDER


al e /
ὑμῖν ἱκανός. εἰ τοὐπτάνιον κατάστεγον,
» ΝΜ Sibel y / /
80 εἰ τᾶλλ ὑπάρχει πάντα;


ΠΑΡΜΕΈΝΩΝ
κατακύόπτεις γέ με,
> / rf r| , ᾽ ,
εἰ λανθάνει oe,'hi'dtat’, εἰς περικόμματα,
οὐχ ὡς ἔτυχεν.
MATEIPOS
vv
οἴμωζε.
ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩ͂Ν
καὶ σὺ τοῦτό γε
\ Ὁ > ᾽ \ ΄ Dy ν
παντὸς ἕνεκ. ἀλλὰ παράγετ᾽ εἴσω.


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
Παρμένων.
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
ἐμέ τις καλεῖ; ;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
«σὲ; ναίχι.
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
χαῖρε, δέσποτα.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
85 τὴν Γσπυρίδα κ'αταθεὶς ἧκε δεῦρ᾽.
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
ἀγαθῇ τύχῃ.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ :
τοῦϊτον μὲν οὐδέν, ὡς ἐγώμαι, λανθάνει"
τάϊχ᾽ οἷδ'ε γὰϊρ πὶραττόμενον ἔργον" ἔστι γὰρ


περίεργος εἴ τις ἄλλος. ἀλλὰ 'τὴν" θύραν
προϊὼν πέπληχε.
84 <oe> Wilam. inserted. 86 Headlam.


87 S*from7C.... Cya.. ραττομενον, 4",
144


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


Your bake-house, is it covered in; if all things else
You have


PARMENON
You hash me into hash, if you don’t know,
And like an expert too, my friend. :
CATERER


Go hang!


PARMENON
The same
To you, by all means. (700 attendants) Come, pass in.
(The Cook and attendants enter the house. Demeas comes
Jornard.)
DEMEAS
Hist, Parmenon !
PARMENON (looking about)
Somebody calling me?
DEMEAS (approaching him)
Yes, you.
PARMENON
Ah! Greeting, sir.
DEMEAS (sternly)
You stow that hamper and return.


PARMENON (disturbed)
Luck help me, yes.
(Parmenon slips into the house with the basket.)
DEMEas (alone)
There’s not a thing, I take it, that escapes this man,
He’s quick to know what’s going on. A meddler he,
If ever anyone. Enough! He’s banged the door.
He’s coming.
(Parnienon, as he comes out, calls back to Chrysis.)


145
L


MENANDER


TIAPMENON
δίδοτε, Χρυσί, πάνθ᾽ ὅσ᾽ ἂν
90 ὁ μάγειρος ait: τὴν δὲ γραῦν φυλάττετε
ἀπὸ τῶν κεραμίων, πρὸς θεῶν. τί δεῖ ποεῖν,
δέσποτα;


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
“ τί δεῖ ποεῖν Γσέ'; δεῦρ᾽ ἀπὸ τῆϊς θύρας.
[90] ἔτι μικρόν.
TIAPMENON
ἤν.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
ἄκουε δὴ ΓῚ νῦν, Πα “ριμένων""
ἐγώ σε μαστιγοῦν, μὰ =i δώδεκα θ'εούς,"
95 οὐ βούλομαι διὰ πολλά.


ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩΝ
μαστιγοῦν; ‘ri γὰρ"
πεπόηκα;


AHMEAS
, , 5. is 6 cbr gh Jee
συγκρύπτεις TL πρὸς μ᾽, 7 cOnp ' ἐγώ.
TIAPMENQN
μὰ τὸν Διόνυσον, μὰ τὸν ‘Ar! Τό Ἰλλίω, ᾿γὼ μὲν οὔ,
μὰ τὸν Δία τὸν σωτῆρα, μὰ τὸν ᾿Α'σκληπιόν,---"


Ἴ


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
παῦ, μηδέν᾽ ὄμνυ᾽: οὐ γὰρ εἰκάξεις καλῶς."
ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩΝ
a , > o>?
100 ἢ μήποτ ap—
AHMEAS


οὗτος, βλέπε δεῦρ᾽.


89 δίδοτε, S? from pap., see M.S. p. 42. 8.5 continues line
to Demeas. [πέπληχε : δίαγε, L?.

92 σέ inserted from σε in margin, S*.

97 ᾽γὼ μὲν of, Headlam suppl. / μὰ τὸν “Apn, 85.


146


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


PARMENON
Chrysis, you provide for everything
The Caterer demands. But, ’fore the gods, do you
Keep that old hussy from the pots. (Zo Demeas)
Now, master, what?
What must I do?


DEMEAS (sarcastically)
« What must you do?”’ Come from the door.
A little further.
PARMENON (obeying)
Well?


DEMEAS
Now listen, Parmenon.
I do not wish to scourge you, by the twelve gods, no,
For many reasons.
PARMENON
Scourge me? Why? What have I done?


DEMEAS
You're holding something back from me. I’ve
noticed it.
PARMENON


By Dionysus! By Apollo! No, not I.
No, no, by Zeus the Saviour! By Asclepius!


DEMEAS
Stop, stop, no oaths from you. Wide of the mark
your guess.
PARMENON
Now may I never—
DEMEAS


You! Look here.
147


MENANDER


ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩΝ
ἰδού: βλέπω""
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
\ ᾽ὔ , > /
TO παιδίον Tivos ἐστίν;


TIAPMENON
»Μ \ ,
ἤἢν---τὸ παιδίον----;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
,ὔ YT, ee 71 an
τίνος ἔϊστ᾽ épwt'd.
TIAPMENON
Χρυΐϊσί δῖος."


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
πατρὸς δὲ τοῦ;
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
[100] σόϊν γ᾽ ἐστίν.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
ἀπόλ!ωλας" φενακίζεις p.
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
ἐγώ;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
οἶδα γὰρ ἀκριβῶϊς πάντα καὶ τὸ παιδίον"
“ / | Mee BJ a | ve / 4
105 oTt Μοσχίωνός ἐστιν, OTL σύνοισθα συ,


ὃ Γγὰρ τὶ εκ'εῖν οὔ φίησι νῦν αὕτη τρέφει.
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
ΣΈ ΩΝ
τίς φησιν;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ


3 > / r /
ei'S'ov: a'\X’ ἀπόκριναι τοῦτό pou
oe ΣΝ Cee


100 ἰδού, Jens. βλέπω, Dumbabin and Sudhaus, R.M. 1911,
p. 489. / φράσον, S*. 101 14, quat. y, p. 4.

102 ἔστ᾽ ἐρωτῶ, Jens. 103 Jens. suppl.

104 οἶδα γὰρ, 93, 1,2. || τὸ παιδίον, Allinson suppl. from
|-αἰπςζ... cov, ““ παιδίον possible,” 55,


148


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


PARMENON
Well, there 1 do.


DEMEAS
The baby? Whose is he?


PARMENON (confused)
I say—the baby—why—


DEMEAS

Is whose, I ask.
PARMENON
Well—Chrysis’s,


DEMEAS
Its father, who?
PARMENON
"Tis yours.
DEMEAS
You're done for. You are cheating me.


PARMENON
What. 8
DEMEAS
I know the whole precisely ; know about the child
That it is Moschion’s; that you are in the plot,
She suckles now the child she says she didn’t bear !


PARMENON
But who says that ?
DEMEAS
[ saw it—Nay, but tell me this,
What is [the truth] ?


106: S? suppl: from (GT . EK. . we not, as read_by him.


107 Jensen. ae
108 S? suppl. τὶ yap from pap. . ες. λ(.)} τίνος, ἈΞ and
Capps. // 55.
149


*
ie
;
q
si δι".


MENANDER


TIAPMENQN


εἰἰ γένοιτο τἄλλα λανθάνειν.


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
τί “λανθάνειν "; ἱμάντα, παῖδές, τις δότω
pa / \ ᾽ lol
110 ἐπὶ τουτονί μοι τὸν ἀσεβῆ.


TIAPMENQN
μή, πρὸς θεῶν.


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
στίξω σε, νὴ τὸν “Ἡλιον.


ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
/ > /
στίξεις ἐμέ;
AHMEAS
4 | ’
ἤδη γ.


ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
/
ἀπόλωλα.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ


ποῖ σύ, ποῖ, μαστιγία;
[110] λάβ᾽ αὐτόν. ὦ πόλισμα Κεκροπίας y'Oovos,
Φ \ 9 / ° / / fal
ὦ ταναὸς αἰθήρ, ὦ--τί, Δημέα, βοᾷς;
115 τί Bods, ἀνόητε; κάτεχε σαυτόν. καρτέρει.
2O\ \ >’ lal , /
οὐδὲν yap ἀδικεῖ Μοσχίων ce: παράβολος
ὁ λόγος ἴσως ἔστ᾽, ἄνδρες, ἀλλ᾽ ἀληθινός.
ΟΝ AY aa , aT ee
εἰ μὲν yap ἢ βουλόμενος ἢ 'Kpatovpe'vos
ἔρωτι τοῦτ᾽ ἔπραξεν ἢ μισῶν ἐμέ,"
120 ἣν Γὰἂν ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς διανοῖίας 4's τότ' εἰ
ἐμοί τε mapat'e'taypévos. νυνὶ δέ μοι
118 Kérte, Leeuw. suppl. | δουλόμενος, 53.
120 (end) ctor. = ἧς τότίε!, 95, 55. 121 Jensen,
150


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


PARMENON
God grant the rest remain concealed.


DEMEAS
What’s that? “Concealed” !
(Shouting to the slaves within)
A scourge, slaves, someone give to me
To flog this godless fellow here.


PARMENON
No, by the gods !


DEMEAS
By Helios' Now I'll tattoo you.


PARMENON
Me? Tattoo?
DEMEAS
Yes, now. (A slave appears mith a lash.)


PARMENON
I’m done for! (Takes to his heels.)


DEMEAS
Where, you whipping post, where now?
O, catch him. (Parmenon makes good his escape.)
Citadel of land Cecropian !
O far-flung ether! O—(checking himself) Why
shoutest, Demeas ?
Why dost thou shout, thou fool? Restrain thyself.
Endure.
For Moschion does thee no wrong. (To the audience)
This statement, sirs,
Is hazardous, perhaps, but truthful. If some wish
Had made him do it, or the mastery of Love
Or hate of me, he'd still be of the self-same mind
As formerly he was, with all his forces ranged,
Lined up against me. As it is, in my eyes now


151


[120]


[130]


[140]


125


130


135


140


MENANDER


> / \ / ’ > nr /
ἀπολελόγηται Tov φανέντ αὐτῷ γάμον
ἄσμενος ἀκούσας" οὐκ ἐρῶν γάρ, ὡς ἐγὼ
τότ᾽ ὠόμην, ἔσπευδεν, ἀλλὰ τὴν ἐμὴν
Ἑλένην poy βουλόμενος ἔνδοθέν ποτε"
αὕτη yap! ἐστιν αἰτία τοῦ γεγονότος.
Γκατέλαβεν αὐτόν που μεθύοντα δηλαδή,
μ siden


Γοὺκ ovr ἐν ἑαυτοῦ' πολλὰ δ᾽ «ἔργ᾽ > ἐργάξεται


τοιαῦτ᾽ ἄκρατος καὶ νεότης, ὅταν λάβῃ
καιρόν, ἐπιβουλεύσαντά τοι τοῖς πλησίον.
οὐδενὶ' τρόπῳ γὰρ πιθανὸν εἶναί μοι δοκεῖ,
τὸν εἰς ἅπίαντας κόσμιον καὶ ᾿ σώφρονα

τοὺς ἀλλοτρίους εἰς ἐμὲ τοιοῦτον γεγονέναι,
οὐδ᾽ ε εἰ δεκάκις TONTOS ἐστι, μὴ γόνῳ,

ἐμὸς υἱός. οὐ γὰρ τοῦτο, τὸν τρόπον δ᾽ ὁρῶ.
χαμαιτύπη, δ᾽ ἄνθρωπος, ὄλεθρος---ἀλλὰ τί;
οὐ γὰρ περίεσται, Δημέα. νῦν ἄνδρα χρὴ
εἶναί σ᾽. ἐπιλαθοῦ τοῦ πόθου, πέπαυσ᾽ ἐρῶν,
καὶ TATU ἰχημα" μὲν τὸ γεγονὸς κρύφθ᾽ ὅσον
ἔνεστι, διὰ τὸν υἱόν, ἐκ τῆς δ᾽ οἰκίας

ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν εἰς κόρακας ὦσον τὴν κακὴν
Σαμίαν. ἔχεις δὲ πρόφασιν ὃ ὅτι τὸ παιδίον
ἀνείλετ᾽. ἐμφανίσῃς γὰρ ἄλλο μηδὲ ἕ ἕν,
δακὼν δ᾽ ἀνάσχου: καρτέρησον εὐγενῶς.


᾿
ἐ
Ε
-
.
5


145


Scene 3. AHMEAS, MATEIPOS
MATEIPOS

ἀλλ᾽ apa πρόσθεν τῶν θυρῶν ἐστ᾽ ἐνθάδε,

παῖ, Παρμένων; ἅνθρωπος ἀπορέδρακέ με


᾿ ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ μικρὸν συλλαβών.


128 ««ἔργ᾽ Σ, Leo inserted.

130 weet Herw., Leeuw./....v pap. / μηδέν, 83,

131 Γοὐδενὶ] πον, ois fram. «νι ~2 χω, pap.

135 ΕἾ, quat. y, p. 5. 139 Pap. has τατυμημεν.
152


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


He’s cleared himself, for when this marriage scheme
was broached ς

He eagerly gave ear. For not because in love,

As then I thought, was he so eager, but because

He wished at last to shun my “ Helen” there within.

For her 1 hold responsible for what has chanced.

She came upon him, we'll suppose, when drunk,
forsooth,

And not himself. Many a deed like this is wrought

Through youth’s incontinence, when Opportunity,

Who plots against his neighbour, gets the upper hand.

For not at all does this seem credible to me

That he, so orderly, and continent towards all

Outsiders, now should prove to be like this towards me;

Not though he ten times were adopted, not my son

By blood. For I don't think of that. His character

I mark. But she’s a common woman of the slums,

A pest, a—nay, why rage? By that, O Demeas,

You'll get no further. Now you needs must be aman ;

Forget your longing ; cease from loving ; and conceal,

As far as may be, for your son’s sake, this mischance

That has occurred, and thrust headforemost to the
crows,

Out of your house, this evil Samian. You have

A pretext, too, because she took that baby in.

For you must not make clear a single thing beside.

Endure and set your teeth. Bear up like high-bred
man.


[Enter Caterer with an attendant from the house.
Scene 3. DEMEAS, CATERER


CATERER (to his slave)
Now isn’t he somewhere here outside the door—say,
boy—
That Parmenon? The fellow’s run away from me
And helped me not one little bit.


153


MENANDER


AHMEAS
ἐκ TOD μέσου
ἄναγε σεαυτόν.
ΜΑΓΕΙ͂ΡΟΣ
Ἡράκλεις, τί τοῦτο, παῖ;
μαινόμενος εἰσδεδράμηκεν εἴσω τις γέρων .---
150 ἢ τί τὸ κακόν TOT ἐστί; τί δέ pot τοῦτο, παῖ;
νὴ τὸν ΠΠοσειδῷ, μαίνεθ᾽, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ:
κέκραγε γοῦν παμμέγεθες. ἀστεῖον πάνυ
[160] εἰ τὰς λοπάδας ἐν τῷ μέσῳ po't! κειμένας
ὄστρακα ποήσαι πάνθ᾽ ὅμοια. - τὴν θύραν
1δὅ πέπληχεν. ἐξώλης ἀπόλοιο, Παρμένων,
κομίσας με δεῦρο. μικρὸν ὑπαποστήσομαι.


Scene 4. AHMEAS, ΧΡΥΣΙΣῚ


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
” » / »
οὔκουν ἀκούεις; ἄπιθι.
ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
ποῖ γῆς, ὦ τάλαν;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
> »
εἰς κόρακας ἤδη.
ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
δύσμορος----
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
/ ςς ΄ »”
val, ““ δύσμορος"
» Ν > / Ἀ ϑ , , ’ ’
ἐλεεινὸν ἀμέλει τὸ δάκρυον. παύσω σ᾽ ἐγώ,
160 ὡς οἴομα----
παν 1 $2 adds Μάγειρος to Se. 4.


159 There is double ‘point [on ) after δάκρυον, but no para-
graphus.


154


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


DEMEAS (fo the cook)
Be off with you !
Out of my way. (Demeas rushes into the house.)


CATERER (to his slave)
Good Heracles! What means it, boy?
Some old man in a frenzy burst in at a run,
Now what the mischief, boy? What does it mean,
I say?
(Hears a clamour within.)
He’s crazy, by Poseidon, as I think. At least
He’s roaring mightily. Nice thing ’twould be indeed
If he should take my platters, lying there exposed,
And smash them all to shards. He’s banging at the
door.
May utter ruin seize you, Parmenon, who brought
Me here. [I'll stand off, so—a little to one side.
(Withdraws into the angiportus or alley-way between the
houses, to watch Demeas, Chrysis, and nurse mith the
child come from the house. Demeas is speaking.)


Scene 4. DEMEAS, CHRYSIS


DEMEAS
You hear me, don’t you? Off! Begone!


CHRYSIS
But where, poor dear ?

DEMEAS

Straight to the crows.
CHRYSIS (weeping)
Unhappy—

DEMEAS
Oh, “ unhappy,” yes !
Of course your weeping’s pitiful. [11 stop you, though,
I think. 155


MENANDER


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
τί ποοῦσαν;
ΔΗΜΈΑΣ
οὐδέν. ἀλλ᾽ ἔχεις
τὸ παιδίον, τὴν γραῦν: ἀποφθείρου τάχυ.


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
“ ὅπ. ΩΝ /
OTL TOUT ἀνειλομην;
AHMEAS
διὰ τοῦτο Kai—


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ


7 ες » Ὁ)
τί “ καί;

ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
διὰ τοῦτο' τοιοῦτ᾽ ἦν τὸ κακόν, «εὖ; μανθάνω:
τρυφᾶν γὰρ οὐκ ἠπίστασ᾽.

ΧΡΥΣΙΣ

οὐκ ἠπιστάμην;
165 τί δ᾽ ἔσθ᾽ ὃ λέγεις;


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
καίτοι πρὸς ἔμ᾽ ἦλθες ἐνθάδε
ἐν σινδονίτῃ, Χρυσί,---μανθάνεις;---πάνυ
λιτῷ.
ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
at
τί οὖν;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
4% 4 > , ͵ a 4
TOT ἣν ἐγώ σοι πάνθ᾽, OTE
φαύλως ἔπραττες.
ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
fal \ /
νῦν δὲ Tis;
103 «εὖ!» insert and continue to Demeas, Allinson./<oi>


insert Ell., Wil., and give <od> μανθάνω to Chrysis. There
is no (:) and no paragraphus.


156


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


CHRYSIS
From doing what ?


DEMEAS (checking himself’)


Oh, nothing. But you have
The child; the crone. Off with you to perdition!
Quick !
CHRYSIS
Because of his adoption?


DEMEAS
That, and—
CHRYSIS
Well, why “and” ὃ
DEMEAS
Yes, that. “Twas some such thing amiss, I know it


well:
You knew not how to live in clover.


CHRYSIS
““ Knew not how—?”
What’s this you say ?
DEMEAS
And this, though you came here to me—
D’ye know it ?—Chrysis, in a shift, a plain one, too.


CHRYSIS
Well, what of that ?
DEMEAS


Then I was all in all to you,
When you were poor.
CHRYSIS


And who is now ?


157


MENANDER


AHMEAS
μή μοι λάλει.
“Exel! ς τὰ σαυτῆς πάντα: ,προστίθημί σοι,
170 ‘dou, θεραπαίνας, pual* ἐκ τῆς οἰκίας
ἄπιθι.


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽ ὀργή τίς ἐστι: προσιτέον.
᾿ βέλτιστ᾽, ὅρα---
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
, /
τί μοι διαλέγει;


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
\ a
μὴ δακῆς.
AHMEAS
€ / \ 3. [4 \ + a / / a
170 | ἑτέρα yap ἀγαπήσει τὰ Tap ἐμοί, Χρυσί, νῦν,
καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς θύσει.


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
τί ἐστιν;


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ


e\ , ΄ὔ΄ ᾿Ξ,
175 vloy πεποηκας" TaVT ἔχεις.


XPYSIS
” t,
οὔπω" δάκνει.
ὅμως --
ἫΝ ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
κατάξω τὴν κεφαλήν, ἄνθρωπέ, σου,
ἄν μοι διαλέγῃ.
170 Paragraphus? {{ ἰδού, Robert. / Γὅθεν θ]εράπαινα, S*. 1]
χρυσί᾽, Lef., Capps. / Χρυσί, Sudh. R.M. 1911, p. 190, for
hiatus. But see Maas, R.M. 1913, p. 362.


171 προσιτέον : pap. The punct. indicates an aside. |
F*, quat. y, p. 6.


158


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


DEMEAS (impatiently)
Don’t talk to me.
You've all that is your own. Then too I give to
ou—
Has, see—maidservants, gold. Out of my house.
Begone!
cHRYSIS (aside)
This thing’s some gust of wrath. I must make up to
him. (To Demeas, pleadingly)
Dear sir, look here—
DEMEAS
Why talk to me?


CHRYSIS
Nay, don’t be vexed.
DEMEAS
Another woman, Chrysis, now will gladly take
My gifts and thank the gods besides.


curysis (benildered)
What’s up?
DEMEAS
Bat you,
You've got yourself a son, you’ve all you want.


CHRYSIS
Not yet ;
You're grieved.
(Once more appealing to him)
Yet still—


DEMEAS


I'll break tha’ headpiece, wench, of yours,
If you talk on to me!


159


180


[180]


MENANDER


ΧΡΥΣῚΣ
καὶ δικαίως" ἀλλ᾽ ἰδού,
> / ceed
εἰσέρχομ᾽ ἤδη.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
Ν / “ > , lol /
TO μέγα πρᾶγμ. ἐν TH πόλει
v \ la) ? lal Ψ Ψ
ὄψει σεαυτὴν νῦν ἀκριβῶς ἥτις εἶ.
e / / / \ /
ai κατά σε, Xpuci, πραττόμεναι δραχμὰς δέκα
« cal / "εν \ ta) \
μόνας ἑταῖραι -«δια:-τρέχουσ᾽ ἐπὶ δεῖπνα καὶ
/ a 3 ” aA ᾽ / Δ
πίνουσ᾽ ἄκρατον ἄχρις ἂν ἀποθάνωσιν ,---ἢ
πεινῶσιν ἂν μὴ τοῦθ᾽ ἑτοίμως καὶ ταχὺ


lal ΕΣ > > Ν an? 30». a
ποῶσιν. εἴσει δ᾽ οὐδενὸς TOUT, O10 ὅτι,


ia , A , ’ὔ 8 - ee ὁ ΄
185 ττον GU, καὶ γνώσει TLS OVT ἡμαρτανες.


ἕσταθι.


190


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
τάλαιν᾽ éyw<ye> τῆς ἐμῆς τύχης.


Scene 5. ΧΡΥΣΙΣ, ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤΟΣ


NIKHPATOS
\ \ / “ lal \ \ /
τουτὶ TO πρόβατον τοῖς θεοῖς μὲν τὰ νόμιμα
[2 / \ \ lal Ν -“
ἅπαντα ποιήσει θυϑὲν καὶ ταῖς θεαῖς.
. Ν », Ἁ ες / 5 lal 7
αἷμα γὰρ ἐχει, χολὴν ἱκανὴν, ὀστᾶ καλά,
fal / Ka / > \ lal > /
σπλῆνα μέγαν, ὧν χρεία ‘ott τοῖς ᾿Ολυμπίοις.
178 ἤδη : pap. | Continued to Chrysis, K%, 55,
181 Capps restored. / ἑταῖραι τρέχουσιν ἐπὶ τὰ δεῖπνα καὶ, L?./


Sudh. conject. omission of line after ἑταῖραι.
186 éyw<ye>, Leo insert.


160


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


CHRYSIS


And serve me right. But, see,
I’m going in now.


DEMEAS (blocking her way)
High and mighty business, this !
Now you, when on the town, will know just what
you are.
The girls of your sort, Chrysis, earn as courtesans
Their scant ten drachmas! as they run now here, now
there,
To dinners, drinking to excess until they die
Or slowly starve, if they don’t find death ready-made
And quick. You'll find this out as soon as anyone,
[ll warrant, and you'll know yourself and your
mistake.
(As Chrysis approaches the door and tries to enter)
Keep off! Stand back!


(Goes in. Chrysis, leaning against the portico, weeps.)


CHRYSIS

Ah, wretched me, what fate is mine!

[Enter Niceratus from the market. A slave accompanies
him with a skinny old sheep. |


Scene 5. NICERATUS, CHRYSIS


NICERATUS (soliloquizing)


This sheep here, when it’s sacrificed, will furnish all
That’s called for by the gods—and goddesses to boot.
For it has blood ; has bile a-plenty ; handsome bones ;
A spleen full big—just what Olympians require.


1 For Greek money values see table, p. 18 above.


161
M


MENANDER


, al
πέμψω δὲ γεύσασθαι κατακόψας τοῖς φίλοις
τὸ κῴδιον: λοιπὸν γάρ ἐστι τοῦτό μοι.

[190]. ἀλλ’, Ἡράκλεις, τί τοῦτο; πρόσθε τῶν θυρῶν
“ ΠΝ ΄ ᾿ Ἔν. 4.’
ἕστηκε Χρυσὶς ἥδε κλάουσ᾽; οὐ μὲν οὖν
ΝΜ / \ U

195 ἄλλη. τί ποτε TO γεγονος;


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
ἐκβέβληκέ με
ὁ φίλος ὁ χρηστός σου" τί γὰρ ἄλλ᾽;
- ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤῸΣ
ὦ Ἡράκλεις,
τίς; Δημέας;


‘


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ


ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤΟΣ
διὰ τί;
ΧΡΥΣΙΣ


διὰ τὸ παιδίον.


ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤΟΣ
ἤκουσα καὐτὸς τῶν γυναικῶν ὅτι τρέφεις
ἀνελομένη παιδάριον. ἐμβροντησία.
200 ἀλλ᾽ ἔστ᾽ ἐκεῖνος ἡδύς, οὐκ ὠργίξετο

εὐθύς, διαλιπὼν δ᾽ ἀρτίως.

195 τί ποτε τὸ γεγονός; Head., Leeuw., ete. to avoid
Cevuve - Of pap. : τιποτεστι τογεγονοξ.

200-201 οὐκ--ἀρτίως continued to Niceratus, Allinson.
There is a : after ἀρτίως, a paragraphus under εὐθύς, and only
one point after ἡδύς.


162


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


And for my friends 1] chop up and will send to them

The fleece to taste. For that is what is left to me.

(The slave takes the sheep into the house of Niceratus.
Niceralus becomes aware of Chrysis in front of the
next-door house. )

But, Heracles, what’s this? Is’t Chrysis standing here

Before the door a-weeping? It is she, none else.

(Accosting her)
Why, what on earth’s the matter ?


CHRYSIS


That fine friend of yours
Has turned me out. What would you more ?


NICERATUS


Good Heracles !
Who? Demeas?


CHRYSIS


Yes.


NICERATUS
Why?


CHRYSIS


Upon this child’s account.


NICERATUS


Now from my women-folk myself I’d heard of this,
That you’ve adopted and are bringing up a child.

A crack-brained scheme! But he’s an innocent, he is.
He didn’t fly off at the start—no, not till now,

After an interval.


163
M 2


[200]


MENANDER


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ


ὃς καὶ φράσας
> \ 4 2 ὃ > n ΚΙ, ΚΟ.
εἰς τοὺς γάμους μοι τἄνδον εὐτρεπῆ Tole ty
μεταξύ μ᾽ ὥσπερ ἐμμανὴς ἐπεισπεσίὼν"
ἔξωθεν ἐκκέκλεικε.
NIKHPATOS


Δημέας y"ora!;
(Lacuna of circa 140 verses to ἘΝ.)


At the end of the preceding scene Niceratus offered Chrysis
the shelter of his house, into which they retired, with the child
and nurse. At this point the unfounded suspicions which
Demeas harbours against Moschion and Chrysis were cleared
up (vv. 412 ff.). Probably Moschion has heard of them from
Parmenon, whom he has met in the city. We must assume,
further, that after Demeas retired into his house to resume the
interrupted arrangements for the wedding Moschion and
Niceratus held a conversation, in which the latter, curious
concerning the quarrel between Demeas and Chrysis, questioned
the young man about the baby which Chrysis had taken to
rear, and that Moschion declared that it was a foundling
of unknown parentage. The scene between Demeas and


Scene. AHMEAS, NIKHPATOS
AHMEAS


ἀλλὰ πάλιν ἐλθὼν---
NIKHPATOS
ee TE ee ee ee 1
τὸ δεῖνα “ μικρόν; ὦ τᾶν, οἴχοϊ μαι"
πάντα πράγματ᾽ ἀνατέτραπται, τέλος ἔχει.

345 Ἐδ| quat. y, p. 11. οἴχομαι, Wil. [οὐχᾷ., pap. | οἴχεται,
Lef., Capps.

346 Line confused: πανταταπραγματ᾽ ανατετραπται τελὺς
exer : vn Aca, pap. | πάντα πράγματ᾽, Herwerd., Wik. // νὴ
«-τὸν;» Ala, Cron. ete. // mdvra τέλος ἔχει, τὰ πράγματ᾽ ava-
τέτραπται : νὴ Δία, trans. δὲ,


164


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


CHRYSIS

Yes, when he'd bidden me :

Make all things ready for the wedding in the house,

He burst in like a madman in the midst of all
And barred me out of doors.


NICERATUS
Can Demeas be mad ?


(Lacuna of about 140 lines.)


Niceratus, into which we are introduced in 18, then ensues.
Demeas has learned that his suspicions were unfounded as
regards his son and, incidentally, has apparently learned also
the true explanation of the situation which (v. 54) originally
led him to suspect Chrysis, and he is now eager enough to
receive her back into his home (v. 367). As to his quarrel
with Chrysis, he cannot divulge to Niceratus the real reason
for it. But in answer to the latter’s inquiries concerning it
he probably refers to the “ fowndling’’ as the cause of the
trouble and then informs Niceratus that it is a bastard child
of Plangon, without, however, saying who the fatheris. He
tries to persuade Niceratus that it is, after all, a “ trifling”
matter.


Scene. DEMEAS, NICERATUS


DEMEAS


ἂν ρα en δ 8


NICERATUS
What's that? “Trifling’”? O my friend,
I’m done-for quite.
Everything has gone to ruin. ΑἸ] is over.
(Rushes mithin.)
1 The livelier trochaic measure (ll. 345-413) is intended
to reflect the greater excitement. The frequent changes of


speakers within a single line, usual in Greek, is mechanically
difficult in English verse.


165


350


[210]


MENANDER


AHMEAS
\ \ /
νὴ «τὸν; Δία.
ig \ Ἁ “- }ὺχ ΄ tal /
οὑτοσὶ TO πρᾶγμ᾽ ἀκούσας χαλεπανεῖ, κεκράξεται.
τραχὺς ἅνθρωπος, σκατοφάγος, αὐθέκαστος τῷ
τρόπῳ.---
ἐμὲ γάρ ὑπονοεῖν τοιαῦτα τὸν μιαρὸν ἐχρῆν, ἐμέ;
\ \ “ , > / ee « ΄
νὴ τὸν “Ἥφαιστον, δικαίως ἀποθάνοιμ᾽ ἄν. “Hpa-
κλεις,
ἡλίκον κέκραγε." τοῦτ᾽ ἣν. πῦρ βοᾷ. τὸ παιδίον
φησὶ ᾿ῥαχ)"ιεῖϊν, εἶτα) πρήσειν. υἱϊδοῦν ὀπτώμενον
,
ὄψομαι. πάΐλιν πέπληχε τὴν θύραν.--στρό-
λος [ἢ]
βιλος ' ἢ
Γ / > #7) / b]
σκηΐπτός, οὐκ ἄνθρωπός ἐστι.


NIKHPATOS
,
Anpéa, συνίσταται


ΕἾ uae εἶν ἡ \ , ὃ A , ΓΑΔ ,
355 ἐπ᾿ ἐμὲ Kal πάνδεινα ποιεῖ πράγμαθ᾽ ἡ Xpvots.


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
,ὔ ,
' τί bys;
NIKHPATOS
\ lal / / \ . a ccd
τὴν γυναῖκά μου πέπεικε μηδὲν ὁμολογεῖν ὅλως
\ \ / »Μ \ ἈΝ / \ /
μηδὲ τὴν κόρην' ἔχει δὲ πρὸς βίαν τὸ παιδίον
> / ὔ / “ \ 4 ΟΣ 2.
οὐ προήσεσθαί τέ φησιν. ὥστε μὴ θαύμαζ᾽ ἐὰν
αὐτόχειρ αὐτῆς γένωμαι.


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
τῆς γυναικὸς αὐτόχειρ;


352 φησι... ver... . ἐμπρήσειν, Jens. / ῥαχιεῖν, Korte. // εἶτα
πρήσειν, Leo.// υἱϊδοῦν from ὑιδοῦν, Rich., corr. for viwdour, pap,
353 bpo/...ma.. ΡΔΡ. | ὄψομαι, Wil./rddAw, J?.//4, add. Lef-


166


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


DEMEAS
Yes, by Zeus.
If this fellow hears what’s happened, vexed he’ll be,
he'll baw] and bawl.
Why, the man is savage, swinish, obstinate in
character—
Curséd me, did it behoove me thoughts like that to
entertain ?
By Hephaestus, I’d be justly done to death.
(Hears an outcry in Niceratus’s house.)
Good Heracles!
How he’s roaring! I was right. He shouts for fire ;
says that he
First will chop, then burn the baby. Roasting grand-
son I shall see.
Now again the door he’s banging. Cyclone he, or
thunderbolt,
Not a trace of human in him.


NICERATUS (at the door)
Demeas, ’gainst me is leagued
Chrysis in outrageous action.


DEMEAS
What is this you say to me?
" NICERATUS
Chrysis has my wife persuaded not a single fault to
own ;
What is more, my daughter neither. She by force
the baby holds ;
Says she will not hand him over. Hence you need
+ not be surprised
If this hand of mine shall slay her.


DEMEAS
Slay the woman with your hand?


167


MENANDER


NIKHPATOS


360 πάντα yap σύνοιδεν αὕτη.


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
μηδαμῶς, Νικήρατε.


ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤῸΣ


σοὶ δ᾽ ἐβουλόμην προειπεῖν.


[220]


365


AHMEAS
οὑτοσὶ μελαγχολᾷ.
εἰσπεπήδηκεν. τί τούτοις τοῖς κακοῖς τις χρήσεται;
οὐδεπώποτ᾽ εἰς τοιαύτην ἐμπεσών, μὰ τοὺς θεούς,
οἶδα ταραχήν. ἔστι μέντοι τὸ γεγονὸς φράσαι
σαφῶς


πολὺ κράτιστον.---ἀλλ᾽, "Απολλον, ἡ θύρα πάλιν


ψοφεῖ.


Scene. AHMEAS, ΧΡΥΣΙΣ, NIKHPATOS


ΧΡΥΣΙΣ
ὦ τάλαιν᾽ ἐγώ, τί δράσω; ποῖ φύγω; τὸ παιδίον
λήψεταί μου.

ΔΗΜΕΑΣ

Χρυσί, δεῦρο. .
ΧΡΥΣΙΣ ΄
τίς καλεῖ μ᾽;

168


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


NICERATUS
Yes, for she knows all about it.


DEMEAS
Don’t do that, Niceratus.


NICERATUS
Yes, I wanted to forewarn you.


(Rushes back into the house.)


DEMEAS
Sure, he’s melancholy mad.
With a jump indoors he’s vanished. In this mischief
what’s to do? ;
Never, by the gods, no never, have I known myself
till now
Caught in such a hurly-burly. After all, *twere far
the best
Clearly to explaia the matter—Phoebus! There’s
the door again.
(Chrysis comes running from the house of Niceratus, the
baby in her arms. Niceratus, a club in his hand, is
im hot pursuit. He has overheard enough to infer
that Moschion is father of the child.)


Scene. DEMEAS, CHRYSIS, NICERATUS


CHRYSIS
What am I todo, unhappy? Where escape to? From
me now
He will wrest the child.
DEMEAS
Here! Chrysis !


curysis (bewildered)
Who is calling ἢ


169


MENANDER


AHMEAS ;
εἴσω τρέχε.
ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤῸΣ
ποῖ σύ, ποῖ φεύγεις;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
Απολλον, μονομαχήσω τήμερον,


e ΝΜ » , , ’ / ’ὔ ΄
ὡς ἔοικ᾽, ἐγώ. τί βούλει; τίνα διώκεις;


ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤΟΣ
/
Anpea,
370 ἐκποδὼν ἄπελθ᾽. ἔα pe γενόμενον τοῦ παιδίου


ἐγκρατῆ τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽ ἀκοῦσαι τῶν γυναικῶν.


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ


μαίνεται.
᾽ \ / 3
αλλα τυπτήσεις μ᾽;
ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤῸΣ
ἔγωγε.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
θᾶττον εἰσφθάρηθι σύ.
[280] ira μὴν K'ayo'y'e'. φεῦγε, Χρυσί: ΐ ἐστί
ἀλλὰ μὴν K'ayo'y'e'. φεῦγε, Χρυσί: κρείττων ἐστί


μου.


\ /
πρότερος ἅπτει μου σὺ νυνί.


ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤΟΣ
ταῦτ᾽ ἐγὼ μαρτύρομαι.
374 πρότερος---νυνί : pap. / Continued to Demeas, L, 03, //


ταῦτ᾽, J*./rovr’, 1,3,


170


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


DEMEAS (pointing to his onn house)
Here! Run in!
NICERATUS
(to Chrysis as she runs toward the house ὁ »f Demeas)
You, now! Where—where are you running ?
(Tries to intercept her, but Demeas intervenes.)


DEMEAS (to himself’)
By- Apollo, as it seems,
I am in for single combats, that’s the order of the day.
(To Niceratus)
What d’ye want? Whom are you chasing ?


NICERATUS
Demeas, stand off! Away!
Once my hands are on the baby I will hear the
women’s tale.


DEMEAS (aside, trying to hold Niceratus)
He is crazy. (170 Niceratus) What! You'll hit me?


NICERATUS
Yes, sir!


DEMEAS (aside lo Chrysis)
Quick now! Curse you, in!

(To Niceratus)
Well, then, here is one from me, sir.
(Returns the blow and grapples with Niceratus while he

calls to Chrysis.)

Chrysis! He’s the stronger. Run‘
(Chrysis makes her escape into the house of Demeas. The
men separate. Demeas continues.)

You began it first and seized me.


NICERATUS
I protest that is not so.


171


MENANDER


AHMEAS
375 σὺ δ᾽ él” eviOéplay'! γυναῖκα λαμβάνεις βακ-
τήριον ;
Γκαὶ διώκεις;
ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤΟΣ
συκοφαντεῖς.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
: καὶ ov yap.
NIKHPATOS
TO παιδίον
‘od δίδω! σ᾽ ἐμοί;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ


/ > U
γέλοιον" τοὐμον;
NIKHPATOS
’ ᾽ » Μ Ω
aXX οὐκ ἐστι σὸν.
AHMEAS
/ = , ” 0
περίμεϊν᾽. ὥνθρωποι,---
NIKHPATOS
κέκραχθι: τὴν γυναῖκ᾽ ἀποκτενῶ
εἰσιών: τί γὰρ ποήσω;


AHMEAS
a \ ,
τοῦτο μοχθηρὸν πάλιν
380 οὐκ ἐάσω. ποῖ σύ; μένε δή.


ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤῸΣ
μὴ πρόσαγε τὴν χεῖρά μοι.
376 Suppl. Robert. 377 οὐ δίδωσ᾽, δ,
ΜΝ ΩΣ 1, 45 suppl.


ΑἿΣ ἢ x yap va (: ἢ cont. to Niceratus, J*. // πάλιν, 43, //
, quat. y, p. 12.


172


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


DEMEAS


And against a free-born woman you would take and
use your stick ?
You would chase her?


NICERATUS
This is blackmail.
DEMEAS
That description just fits you.


NICERATUS
She, refusing me the baby


DEMEAS
Nonsense! Mine?


NICERATUS
Nay, yours ‘tis not
(Tries to push him aside.)
DEMEAS
Wait a bit, sir. Help me, people !


NICERATUS
Bawl! I'll kill the woman though,
Once inside. For what else can I ?
DEMEAS (aside)


Here’s a sorry mess again.
I'll prevent him.


(To Niceratus, threateningly, again blocking his may)
Where now? Stop there!


NICERATUS
Don’t you lay your hand on me !


173


MENANDER


AHMEAS
‘4 ὃ \ Ta U
κάτεχε O17) TE AVTOP.


NIKHPATOX
ἀδικεῖς, Δημέα, pe, δῆλος εἶ,
καὶ τὸ πρᾶγμα πᾶν σύνοισθα.


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
τοιγαροῦν ἐμοῦ πυθοῦ,
[240] τῇ γυναικὶ μὴ ᾽νοχλήσας μηδέν.
ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤῸΣ


ἄρ᾽ ὁ σός με παῖς

ἐντεθρίωκεν;

ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
φλυαρεῖς. λήψεται μὲν τὴν κόρην"

385 ἔστι δ᾽ οὐ τοιοῦτον. ἀλλὰ περιπάτηϊσον ἐνθαδὶ

μικρὰ" μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ.

ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤΟΣ
περιπατήσω;


ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
καὶ σεαυτὸν σύλ'λαβε.
> ᾿ / / i > / cr / ἢ
οὐκ ἀκήκοας λεγόντων," εἰπέ μοι, ᾿Νικήραϊτε,
τῶν τραγῳδῶν ὡς γενόμενος ' χρυσὸϊς ὁ Ζ'εὺς 'ἐρρύη
διὰ τέγους, κατειργμένην δὲ παῖδ᾽ ἐμοίχευσέν


5


morte’;
NIKHPATOX
390 εἶτα δὴ τί τοῦτ᾽;
384 Hesych.
386 σύλλαβε, Ell., Wilam./ ἀνάλαβε, Legrande. / κατάλαβε,
Leo.


388 χρυσὺς ὁ Zeds, transposed, Crin./ ὁ Ζεῦς χρυσὺς, L*.
389 π.τε: suppl. J*.


174


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


DEMEAS
Calm yourself.
NICERATUS
You do me mischief, Demeas. You’re shown


up plain.
You know all about the matter.


DEMEAS


Well, then, get your facts from me.
Leave the woman unmolested.


NICERATUS (suspiczously)


Yes, but there’s your son, I say.
Was I not by him bamboozled ?


DEMEAS
Nonsense! He will wed the girl.
No, there’s no such thing the matter. Come and
walk a bit with me—
Just aside here.
NICERATUS
I go walking ?


DEMEAS
Yes, and take yourself in hand.

(The two men talk as they stroll up and down.)

Haven't you heard the actors telling, answer me,
Niceratus,

How that Zeus a golden shower once in bygone days
became,

Through a roof he trickled downward, tricked a maid
imprisoned there?


NICERATUS
What of that, pray ὃ


75


MENANDER


AHMEAS
ἴσως δεῖ πάντα προσδοκᾶν: σκόπει
τοῦ Tléyous εἴ σοι μέρος τι ῥεῖ.


[250]


NIKHPATOS
TO πλεῖστον. ἀλλὰ τί
τοῦτο πρὸς ἐκεῖν᾽ ἐστί;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
τοτὲ μὲν γίνεθ᾽ ὁ Leds χρυσίον,
τοτὲ δ᾽ ὕδωρ. ὁρᾷς; ἐκείνου τοὗργόν ἐστιν. ὡς ταχὺ


᾿ εὕρομεν.


395


400


NIKHPATOS
καὶ βουκολεῖς με;
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
μὰ τὸν ᾿Απόλλω, ᾽γὼ μὲν οὔ.
ἀλλὰ “χείρων οὐδὲ μικρὸν ᾿Ακρισίου δήπουθεν εἶ:
εἰ δ᾽ ἐκείνην ἠξίωσε, τήν γε σὴν---


ΝΙΚΗΡΑΤΟΣ
οἴμοι τάλας,
Μοσχίων ἐσκεύακέν με.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
λήψεται μέν" μὴ φοβοῦ
a lal Wak « ᾽ » al = \
τοῦτο. θεῖον δ᾽ ἔστ᾽, ἀκριβῶς <oida,> τὸ γεγεν-
<v>npévov.
μυρίους εἰπεῖν ἔχω σοι περιπατοῦντας ἐν μέσῳ
ὄντας ἐκ θεῶν, σὺ δ᾽ οἴει δεινὸν εἶναι τὸ γεγονός.
Χαιρεφῶν πρώτιστος οὗτος, ὃν τρέφουσ᾽ ἀσύμ-
βολον,
> / , ᾽ 3
ov θεός σοι φαίνετ᾽ εἶναι;
397 Hesych.
398 Order of words and «οἶδα», suppl. Ell., Leo, Wilam. /


εστινακριβως To γεγενήμενον, pap. || yeyer<v>nuévoy, corr.
Leeuw.


176


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


DEMEAS

One must, haply, watch, look out for everything.
Look and see if your roof’s leaking.
NICERATUS

Aye, it’s leaky everywhere.
What has that to do*with this case ?


DEMEAS

Zeus at one time turns to gold,

Next to water. See? His doings! We have found
the leak quite soon.


NICERATUS
Me like silly sheep you’re cheating.


DEMEAS
By Apollo! No, not I.
Why, you’re not one whit less honoured, mark you,
than Acrisius.
Just as Zeus that maiden favoured, so your daughter—


NICERATUS
Woe is me!
Moschion has tricked me, tricked me—


DEMEAS
He will take her, never fear!
‘Tis a thing that comes from heaven, i know well,
this child that’s born.
I can name you by the thousand persons strolling in
our midst


Who are sprung from gods, yet you, sir, think this


chance a dreadful thing.

Chaerephon here, first and foremost, never has to pay
his scot—

Seems he not like an immortal ?


177


[200]


MENANDER


NIKHPATOS


φαίνεται" τί γὰρ πάθω;
᾿ οὐ μαχοῦμαί σοι διὰ κενῆς.


ΠΔΉΜΕΑΣ


νοῦν ἔχεις, Νικήρατε.
᾿Ανδροκλῆς ἔ ἔτη τοσαῦτα ζῇ, τρέχει, παῖδας" πολὺ


405 πράττεται, μέλας περιπατεῖ λευκός: οὐκ ἂν ἀπο-


θάνοι
5 A > ‘ / > / ᾿ , > > ’
οὐδ᾽ ἂν εἰ σφάττοι τις αὐτόν. οὗτός ἐστιν οὐ θεός;
> \ a? LA rd / ,
ἀλλὰ ταῦτ εὔχου γενέσθαι συμφέροντα" θυμία.
'πρόσαγε" τὴ" ν κόρην μέτε!ισ "yy! οὑμὸς υἱὸς αὐτίκα
ἐξ ἀναγκῆς" ἐστὶ ya'p τὰ" πολλὰ γ᾽ ἡμῖν νοῦν
᾿ ᾿
ἔχειν.


410 εἰ δ᾽ ἐλήφθη τότε Td poEus, μὴ παροξύνοϊυ.


NIKHPATOS
παπαῖ."
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
a > a
τἄνδον εὐτρεπῆ;
NIKHPATOX
ποήσω.
AHMEAS


τὰ παρ᾽ ἐμοὶ δ᾽ιοτρεφῆ,.


404 παῖδας, Leo, Capps./ maida‘, L? = o or "| πηδᾷ, Ονδη,,
Wilam., S*.

408 πρόσαγε τὴν, J*, S*.// κόρην μέτεισιν, Leeuw., «12, S*.

409 ἐστι ΔΙΡΊ.Νπολλ.. IMLLIN® YI.) Cxer., J? suppl.

410 πάροξυς, «5. {| μὴ παροξύνον, Leeuw. // παπαῖ, Allinson. /
| τότε! 1. [Ὁ m.C.(.)lrapC ml... πὶ, 3%

411 /: ποήσω: .12, L?.// Paragraphus reported under both
410 and 411. // δπιοτρεφῆ" or ὃ δΓὲ Aavaidav), Allinson.


178


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


NICERATUS


Seems so, yes. What’s that to me?
I'll not fight you on a quibble.


DEMEAS
You have sense, Niceratus.

Androcles these years a many lives and gads, is much
with boys ;

Raven-haired, though gray,! he saunters. He will
never die at all,

Not though one should cut his gullet. Is he not in
truth a god?

So, then, pray that this prove lucky. Incense burn.
Now hasten, go.

He will come to fetch your daughter—yes, my son
will come forthwith—

He will have to, for compulsion chiefly helps us to
have sense—?

But if he was then caught headstrong, don’t be
headstrong, you—


NICERATUS (tnterjects)
Tut! Tut!
DEMEAS
Your things ready ?
NICERATUS
I'll prepare them.


DEMEAS-
Mine are ready-made—by—Zeus.®


1 Or, perhaps, ‘‘ fair,” ‘‘ blond.”
2 Text, meaning, and division of parts in 409-1] are
doubtful. :
8 The missing joke (?) apparently harks back to the allusion
to Danaé in lines 388-396. Perhaps ‘‘ Mine’s a nest of
~ Danaés !”
179
N 2


MENANDER


NIKHPATOS
\ Ss
κομψῶς εἰ.
ΔΗΜΕΑΣ
χάριν δὲ πολλὴν πᾶσι τοῖς θ'εοῖς ἔχω,"
[2170] οὐδὲν εὑρηκὼς ἀληθὲς ὧν τότ᾽ ὥμην Γκατανοεῖν."
ΧΟΡΟΥ͂


ACT III
Scene 1. MOZXION
ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
, \ / \ 2 = Sir IT <1 |
ἐγὼ τότε μὲν ἧς εἶχον αἰτίας μό' λις
415 ἐλεύθερος γενόμενος ἠγάπηϊσα) Kali


Wat


age \ ae δ. Ta ,
τοῦθ᾽ ἱκανὸν εὐτύχημ᾽ ἐμαυτ' ᾧ γεγονέ
ὑπέλαβον: ὡς δὲ μᾶλλον ἔννοϊυς γίνομαι
καὶ λαμβάνω λογισμόν, ἐξέ'στηκα' νῦν
τελέως ἐμαυτοῦ καὶ παρώξυμίμαι σφ᾽ ὀδρα

420 ἐφ᾽ οἷς μ᾽ ὁ πατὴρ ὑπέλαβεν ἡμαρτηκέναι.
εἰ μὲν καλῶς οὖν εἶχε τὰ περὶ τὴν κόρην,
\ \ a 3 § > / “ ,
καὶ μὴ τοσαῦτ᾽ ἣν ἐμποδών---ὅρκος, πόθος,
280 ovos, συνήθει᾽, οἷς ἐδουχλούμην ἐγώ.---
μ
οὐκ ἂν παρόντα γ᾽ αὗτις ἡτιάσατο
425 αὐτόν με τοιοῦτ᾽ οὐδέν, GAN ἀποφθαρεὶς


1 ΤΥ quat. y, p. 1s.


413 Hense suppl. 415 53.
416 05, 53, 417 K*.


180


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


NICERATUS
Ha, quite subtle!


| Exit Niceratus into his house to prepare for the wedding. |
DEMEAS (alone)
Very grateful now I feel to all the gods.
I’ve found true no single item out of all I then
supposed.
[| Exit Demeas into his house. A band of revellers enters
and gives a performance. |
CHORUS


ACT CIT
(Enter Moschion from the house of Demeas.)
Scene 1. MOSCHION (alone)


MOSCHION
At that time from the blame, which then was laid
on me,
Set free with difficulty, I was well content,
And counted quite enough for me, as great good luck,
The way things stood. But as I grow more self-
possessed
And as I cast up my accounts, I’m utterly
Beside myself and bitterly enraged when I
Reflect on how my father thought that I had sinned.
If all the girl’s affairs were now in first-rate shape
Nor obstacles so many—oaths, desire, and time,
And habit, whereunto I made myself a slave,
He never would have had the chance a second time |
_ To blame me so, unto my very face at least,


1 See above, Introduction, page 133, note 1.


181


430


440


MENANDER


’ fol , Xx > \ ’ /
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως ἂν ἐκποδὼν εἰς Βάκτρα ποι
x /, 4 > / > -“
ἢ Καρίαν διέτριβον αἰχμάζων ἐκεῖ.
νῦν δ᾽ οὐ ποήσω διά σε, Πλαγγὼν φιλτάτη,
’ “ > / > \ Μ , > ae κ'
ἀνδρεῖον οὐδέν: ov yap ἔξεστ᾽, οὐδ᾽ ἐᾷ

n “ -“ »
ὁ τῆς ἐμῆς νῦν κύριος γνώμης "ἔρως.
οὐ μὴν ταπεὶ ὑνῶς οὐδ᾽ ἀγεννῶς παντελῶς

Dy / 5 | re ee: | 3 \ na / ,
παραπεμπτέον τοῦτ, ἄλλα τῷ λόγῳ μόνον,
εἰ μηδὲν ἄλλ᾽, αὐτὸν φοβῆσαι βούλομαι,
φάσκων ἀπαίρειν: μᾶλλον εἰς τὰ λοιπὰ γὰρ

’ lal
φυλάξετ᾽ αὗτις “un dev εἴς μ᾽ ἀγνωμονεῖν,
ὅταν φέροντα μὴ παρέργως τοῦτ᾽ ἴδῃ.
> ᾽ e \ \ > ὃ / / μ / 7
αλλ, οὑτοσὶ yap εἰς δέοντα μοι π᾿ ἀν
᾿

Γκαιρὸν πάρεστιν ὃν μάλιστ᾽ ἐβουλόμην.


υ


Scene 2. MOSXION, ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩΝ


ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩ͂Ν
\ \ / \ / , , / \
νὴ τὸν Δία Tov μέγιστον, ἀνόητόν τε καὶ
/
εὐκαταφρόνητον ἔργον εἴμ᾽ εἰργασμένος"
> \ > - » ΙΝ \ ,
οὐδὲν ἀδικῶν ἔδεισα καὶ τὸν δεσπότην
ΜΝ , ee. 4 \ Μ
ἔφυγον. τί δ᾽ ἦν τούτου πεποηκὼς ἄξιον;
x ἃ \ e \ lal ,
καθ᾽ ἕν yap οὑτωσὶ σαφῶς σκεψώμεθα:
e Ud > / > /
ὁ τρόφιμος ἐξήμαρτεν εἰς ἐλευθέραν
κόρην: ἀδικεῖ δήπουθεν οὐδὲν ἸΤαΐρμένων."


ἌΡ “ / > ry 7

exunoev αὕτη" ἸΙαρμένων οὐκ αἴτιος.
\ ὃ , Se ars > \ ΤΥ Ἵ

τὸ παιδάριον εἰσῆλθεν εἰς τὴν οἰκ' ίαν

432 J*, S? from pap. : mapC [(.)( ).. εο. τουτ.


182


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


But from this city vanishing, I'd go far off

To Bactria or Caria, and dwell out there

As warrior. But, as it is, on thy account,

My dearest Plangon, no heroic deed 1] do.

For ‘tis not practicable, nor will Eros now,

The present lord and master of my will, consent.

And yet not tamely nor like low-born man must I

Ignore this altogether, but in word, at least,

If nothing more, I’d like to scare him and pretend

I’m making off. For in the future rather more

He'll check himself from doing what’s unkind to me

Again, when once he sees me counting this no joke.

Enough! For at the very time most opportune

For me, look, here’s the fellow whom 1 wished for
most.


[Re-enter Parmenon. Moschion conceals himsel 7


Scene 2. MOSCHION, PARMENON
PARMENON (to himself )


By Zeus the highest, I have been and done a deed

That's senseless and contemptible. Not one thing
wrong

I'd done and yet I feared and from my master ran.

Pray, what was there that I had done to warrant this Ὁ

Come, point by point, just let us clearly face the facts.

First item: “My young master wronged a free-born
girl.”

But Parmenon, I take it, surely-does no wrong.

“She’s found with child.” But Parmenon is not to
blame.

“The little baby made its way into the house—


MENANDER
τὴν ἡμετέραν" ἤνεγκ᾽ ἐκεῖνος, οὐκ Γἐγώ."
τῶν ἔνδον ὡμολόγηκε τοῦτό τις" τί δή";

450 τί Παρμένων ἐνταῦθα πεπόηκεν κακόν;
οὐδέϊν. τί οὖν ἔφυγες 'o'v; "rds, ἀβέλτερε;
καὶ 6% ᾿φόβει wie. γέλοιον. ἠπείλησέ μοι:

[310] 'στίξει μ᾽. Γὄνοϊμα θήϊσει." διαφέρεϊι δ᾽ οὐδὲ γ'ρὺ
ἀδίκως ᾿παθεῖν" ταῦτ᾽ ὴ δικαίως" ἔστι δὲ


455 [πάντα ἵτρόποιν οὐκ ἀστεῖον.


ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
οὗτος.


ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
fal ’ὔ
χαῖρε σύ.
ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
ἀφεὶς ἃ φλυαρεῖς ταῦτα θᾶττον εἴσιθι
εἴσω.
bi ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩ͂Ν
τί ποήσων;
ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
/ A / \
χλαμύδα καὶ σπάθην τινὰ
ἔνεγκέ μοι.
ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩ͂Ν
σπάθην ἐγώ σοι;


ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
καὶ ταχύ.
449 03, 53. 450 I?, quat. y, p. 14.
451 ot; πῶς, Capps. | οὕτως, 1,3.
452 Allinson suppl. caid...... e, L*./ J? reads re at end,
hence Se:Adralre, K2, S®.
453 /.. 1m EIA... wad. .., J%/S* suppl. “


184


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


Our house.” ’Twas he that brought it in, not I.
«Some one

Of those within has owned to this.’”” Now what of
that ?

How here has Parmenon done wrong? In not one
thing.

Why did you run away then? What is that, you fool ?

* Well, then, he scared me.’ That’s absurd. “He
threatened me,

Said he’d tattoo me. Brand a name.” It makes no

~ whit
Of difference if ’tis justly or unjustly done ;
Say what you will, tattooing’s not polite !


MOSCHION (suddenly showing himself’)
Hey, you!


PARMENON (startled)
Well. Hail, yourself !


MOSCHION
You drop your nonsense. Go within.
Be quick!
PARMENON
My errand, what?


MOSCHION
Bring out a cloak for me
And sword.
PARMENON
I? Bring a sword for you?


MOSCHION
And quickly too !


454 ταῦτ᾽, J*, 1,1. τοῦτ᾽, 1,3.
᾿ 456 ἀφεὶς, J*, L2,


4 185


[320]


MENANDER


MIAPMENQN
5»
ἐπὶ τί;


MOSXIQN
βάδιζε καὶ σιωπῇ τοῦθ᾽ ὅ σοι


460 εἴρηκα ποίει.


465


ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
, \ \ lal ,
τί δὲ τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽;


ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ


εἰ λήψομαι
ἱμάντα---


ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩ͂Ν
μηδαμῶς: βαδίξω γάρ.


ΜΟΣΧΊΙΩΝ


, -
τι οὖν


, -" r

μέλλεις; πρόσεισι νῦν ὁ πατήρ. δεή! σ' εἴται",
Γδεήσεθ᾽" οὗτος καταμένειν pov δηλαδὴ
ἄλλως---μέχρι τινός" δεῖ γάρ. εἶθ᾽, ὅταν δοκῇ,
π'εἰσθήσομ᾽ αὐτῷ. πιθανὸν εἶναι det" ud 'vov—
“ \ \ , > ὃ , ea Ne ,
6, wa τὸν Διόνυσον, ov δύναμαι Tro'eiv' ἐγώ.

- / “
τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν: ἐψόφηκε πρ'οἱὼν τὴν θ)ύραν.


463 Γδεήσεθ᾽ 1, first omitted as dittography, then placed in
margin, J*./ Transposed by S*.// wou δηλαδὴ, J?, 53,


186


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


PARMENON
What for ?
MOSCHION


Off with you, hold your tongue and do just this
That I have told you.


PARMENON
What is up?


MOSCHION «
If I can find
A strap—
PARMENON
No, no! I’m off.


MOSCHION
Why, then, do you delay?
(Exit Parmenon into the house.)
My father now will come and he'll be begging me
To stay. But quite in vain he’ll beg, that is, up to
A certain point. For that’s the programme. When
that’s reached
And it seems best, I'll then give in. Now plausible
Is all I need be. Dionysus! That is just
The thing I can’t be. Hark! The door now. Out
he comes.


(Parmenon, not Demeas, comes out of the house, but
without the cloak and sword.)


187


MENANDER


Scene 3. MOXXION, IIAPMENON
ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩΝ
ὑστερίζειν μοι δοκεῖς σὺ παντελῶς τῶν ἐνθάδε
πραγμάτων, εἰδὼς δ᾽ ἀκριβῶς οὐδὲν οὐδ᾽ ἀκηκοὼς


470 διὰ κενῆς σαυτὸν ταράττεις" εἴσιθ᾽ 'Hdn τοῦτ᾽


[ἀν είς.
MOZXIQN
> ,
οὐ φέρεις.---;
ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩ͂Ν


π' οοὔσ'᾽ι γάρ σοι τοὺς γάμους" κεράννυται,


"Oumar, ἀνάπτεταί ‘re! θύμαθ᾽ Ἡφαίστου
dh Novi.
ΜΟΣΧΙΩ͂Ν
/
[380] οὗτος, οὐ φέρεις---:
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ d
σὲ yap ‘tou! περιμένουσ᾽ οὗτοι πάλαι.
μετιέναι τὴν ἱπαῖ'δα μέλλεις; εὐτυχεῖς" οὐδὲν
κακόν


475 ἐστί σοι" θάρρει.. τί βούλει;


ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
/ > > ,
νουθετήσεις μ᾽, εἰπέ μοι,
ἱερόσυλε;
470 5.5 supplemented from εἰσιθ} |}. 11. ovr’. | εἰς. {{ ταῦτ᾽
ἀφεὶς, J?.


471 No paragraphus, but there is one point after φέρεις.
νυται L2
κεραν"

472 Pap. confused : θυμιαματι... war’ ἀνάπτεται Oumar’ npat-
στου. Δ. γι. {{ἰ For various restor, see Capps. {| φΊλ[ οἱγί, pap.,
J.) ite; 1,


188


(S? indicates paragraphus. ) // yauous oiwos


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


Scene 3. MOSCHION, PARMENON


PARMENON


You, it seems to me, have fallen hopelessly behind
the times,
Naught you know and naught from others you have
heard that’s accurate.
You excite yourself for nothing. Leave all this now.
Go within.
MOSCHION
Do you bring—?
PARMENON
Nay, wine is mixing and your wedding’s going on}
Incense rises; and Hephaestus laps the victim with
his flame.
MOSCHION


You, I say, are you not bringing— ὃ


PARMENON


No, for they await you long.
Get your οἰ]. Why do you dally? You're in luck.
You've naught to fear,
Cheer up now. What will you further ὃ


MOSCHION


Tell me, temple-looter, you—
You'd advise me! (Strikes him.)


474 No division in line, J?.

476 ἱερόσυλε : παῖ, L?./ J? reports only the upper point but
accepts : and assigns the following to Demeas./ παῖ only to
Demeas, Allinson.


189


MENANDER


AHMEAS
παῖ:
ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩ͂Ν
, cal /
τί ποιεῖς, Μοσχίων;


ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
οὐκ εἰσδραμὼν
Tas 7 > / “
θᾶττον ἐξοίσεις ἅ φημι;
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ
διακέκομμαι τὸ στόμα.


MOSXION
Γἔτι λαϊδλεῖς, οὗτος;


ΠΑΡΜΕΝΩΝ
βαδίζω, νὴ Δί᾽, ἐξεύρηκά τε


Γμέγα κ'ακόν.
ΜΟΣΧΙΩ͂Ν
μέλλεις;
ΠΑΡΜΈΝΩΝ


ΝΜ \ / » or , = |
ἄγουσι τοὺς γάμους ὄντως, t' ov.


ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
480 Γσπεῦσ'ον, ἐξάγγελλέ μοί τι. νῦν πρόσεισιν. ἂν
δέ μου
Γμὴ δέη τ᾽, ἄνδρες, καταμένειν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀποργισθεὶς ἐᾷ


Γἀπιέναι,"


.) \ ΝΜ ᾽ὔ / n
—ToUTL yap apTL παρέλιπον .---τί δεῖ
ποεῖν;


Igo


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


pEMEas (calling from mithin)


Slave, O!


PARMENON
Moschion! What are you up to?


MOSCHION
In!
Quickly run, fetch what [tell you. (Strikes him again.)


PARMENON
You have cut my lip in two!


MOSCHION
You! Still talking?


PARMENON
Iam going. Zeus! I’ve gained for all my pains
Mickle mischief.
MOSCHION


Still delaying?


PARMENON (opening the door and pointing nithin)
Look, in truth the wedding’s on.


MOSCHION
Hurry, bring me news about it.
(Exit Parmenon into the house. Moschion speaks to the
audience. )
Now he'll come; yet, should he fail,
Sirs, to urge that I remain here, but, enraged, would
let me go—
(I just now ignored that item)—what on earth am I
to do?


ΙΟΙ


MENANDER


[340] Γεἰκότωϊς οὐκ ἂν ποήσαι τοῦτ᾽, ἐὰν δέ---πάντα yap


F / | / ΝΜ \ 7» > /
γίνε' ται----γέλοιος ἔσομαι, νὴ Al, ἀνακάμπτων


πάλιν.
* x + % + "κ * x
FRAGMENT
437 K φέρε τὴν λιβανωτόν' σὺ δ᾽ ἐπίθες τὸ πῦρ, Τρύφη.
* * * * * * * *


102


THE GIRL FROM SAMOS


‘Tis not likely he would act so, but, if so—for all
things chance—

Then, by Zeus, my course retracing! I shall be a
laughing-stock.


End of the MS.


From one of the last scenes, describing the wedding cere-
mony, we have one line preserved.


Frankincense bring and, Trypha, heap the fire high.


(We may assume that Moschion in the end is completely
reconciled with Demeas, his adoptive father. Chrysis, too,
the supposed foreigner from Samos, perhaps by the timely
intervention of some new character, is probably found to be of
pure Attic birth and therefore an eligible wife for Demeas, so
that the play closed with a double wedding.)


1 Or trans. ‘‘My throw revoking”; cf. Eubulus, The
Gamblers, fragm. 57 K.


193
Ὁ


; Stal cris
δι τὴν LEAP
ot a al
ἔ ὴ “ ἢ
of κι ie a oes y ~~
ee. his ..- Ζ "
‘ ac 4
Se
amr y
y


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER
Ἢ HAIR CUT SHORT


fo
Vo
ἃ “
>)
P
7
é


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER
HAIR CUT SHORT’


INTRODUCTION


Tus comedy, the Periceiromene, is not often cited
in antiquity, but it was, as may be assumed from the
‘frequent echoes? of the story, one of the famous
plays.

The play owes its title to the act of the jealous
soldier-lover, Polemon, who in a sudden rage cuts off
short the hair of Glycera, whom he deeply loves. He
has seen her being kissed by Moschion, whom Glycera
alone knows as her brother, being unable to reveal
the fact through fear of injuring his career.

The development of the plot, in so far as we are
able to make out the details, may be inferred from
the text itself together with the accompanying
explanations inserted below.

Polemon, it may be noticed, though impulsive, is
not the regulation braggart soldier—miles gloriosus.
Pataecus, it is assumed (see Capps, Introduction), is
the second husband of Myrrhina and, therefore, as
he supposes, the step-father of Moschion. When he
finds later that Moschion is his own son, an explana-
tion from Myrrhina will be forthcoming as to why
she concealed from him the fact that Moschion. is
only her adopted son.


1 Sometimes cited by the Greek title: Pericecromene.
“ See Capps, Introd. to Periceiromene, note 1, pp. 131-133.


197


INTRODUCTION


The exposition of the argument is given in a
belated prologue following some introductory scenes.
The goddess Agnoia, or Misapprehension, officiates
in this capacity, as does the tutelary Genius of the
household in the Hero.

The chorus, probably composed of Polemon’s
boon-companions, appears after the second act and
probably at other places in the course of the play.
The play may be dated about 302-301 8.6.,} only ten
years before Menander’s death, when his work was
already matured.

To the two lines preserved in the Comicorum
Atlicorum Fragmenta (Nos. 391, 392 K) there have
been added since 1899, from three? successive
discoveries ‘in Egypt, 444 verses, and Fragment
No. 569 K is with confidence added to the play, so
that we now possess 448 lines. There are numerous
minor lacunae in the text and various unsolved pro-
blems in regard to the plot, but the long stretches
of almost unbroken text give large opportunity for
critical study of Menander and in some parts, at
least, re-enforce his traditional reputation.

The Greek text is numbered at the left, beginning
arbitrarily with line 1 of the Cairo MS., ignoring
what has been lost before this point. Allowance is
made, however, for the subsequent lacunae assumed,


1 See Capps, 1.6. p. 146. Kérte, 2nd ed., p. xliii., prefers
the date 305-304 8.0,

3 These are: (1) Oxyr. papyr. ii. p. 11 (1899), Bives some
insignificant verse-ends and 5] nearly complete lines from
near the end of the play; (2) the Cairo papyr. (1907), 320
lines (of these lines 42-59 recur in a Heidelberg papyrus,
No. 219); (3) the Leipzig fragments from Antinupolis (pub-
lished by Kérte 1908); contain 12] lines, of which 48 lines
overlap the text of the Cairo MS.


198


INTRODUCTION


so that we arrive at 907 for the last numbered line.
The numbers in [ | on the left hand of the Greek
text are for identification with those of the text of
the facsimile edition (L?) of the Cairo MS., be-
ginning with the point where they diverge from the
present edition. The beginning of the Leipzig,
Heidelberg, and Oxyrhynchus fragments respec-
tively are indicated in the notes.


199


‘TIEPIKEIPOMENH MENANAPOT


TA TOY APAMATOS IITPOSOQIIA


Πολέμων Ados
Γλυκέρα Πάταικος
Σωσίας Μοσχίων
Δωρίς ᾿Αβρότονον
Δγνοια θεός Μυρρίνη


Χορὸς συμποτῶν᾽


200


——


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR
CUT SHORT


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


PoLEMON, jealous lover of Glycera.

GLYCERA, daughter of Pataecus ; sister of Moschion.
Sostas, body-servant of Polemon.

Doris, Glycera’s maid.

MISAPPREHENSION, the goddess Agnoia.

Davus, a slave of Moschion.

Parascus, real father of Glycera and Moschion.
ΜΌΒΟΗΙΟΝ, son of Pataecus, adopted by Myrrhina.
ABROTONON, @ courtesan.


MyrRHINA, a rich Corinthian matron, now married to
Pataecus.


Cuorus of revellers.
ScenE: A street in Corinth! before the houses of Polemon


and Pataecus. The street leads, on one side, to the
Market-place, on the other, to the country.


' In Greek poetry, as we know it, only sparing use is made
ot Corinth as a mise-en-scéne; cf. Allinson, Greek Lands
and Letters, pp. 201-217.


569 K


IIEPIKEIPOMENH MENANAPOY


ACT I
Scene. ΠΟΛΈΜΩΝ, TAYKEPA


The initial scenes, now lost (about 120 verses), created the
situation in the household of Polemon which remained un-
changed until near the end of the play—Glycera living as a
refugee in a neighbour's house, Polemon trying by every means
to regain her. One of the first scenes was an interview between
these two, ending in a rupture which seemed irreparable.
The evening before (vv. 33, 180) Polemon had seen Moschion
kissing Glycera and, ignorant that he is her brother, had
departed in violent anger to a place in the country, promising
to decide at a later time upon his course of action (v. 39).
The night he had spent in an effort to drown his sorrow


MOAEMON
Γλυκέρα, τί κλάεις; ὀμνύω σοι Tov Ata


τὸν ᾿Ολύμπιον καὶ τὴν ᾿Αθηνᾶν, φιλτάτη, —


ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ
’ \ \ / »Μ ,
ὀμωμοκὼς καὶ πρότερον ἤδη πολλάκις.


Scene. TAYKEPA, ΔΩΡΙΣ


202


THE GIRL» WHO GETS HER
Dear Re ΤΠ SHORE


ACT. 1
Scene. POLEMON, GLYCERA


(v. 869). Lhe next morning he had returned to his house,
and in a fit of jealous rage had shorn the hair from the
head of Glycera with his sword. It is after this outrage
has been committed that the two appear before the house
and engage in an angry dialogue in which Glycera, unable
to explain the real facts, protests in vain her innocence of
wrong-doing.

To this scene probably belongs the following quotation.
If so, Polemon must already have repented his rash act and
become willing to forgive Glycera, although the affair with
Moschion is still unexplained.


POLEMON
Why are you weeping, Glycera? 1 take my oath,
My dearest, by Athena and Olympian Zeus—
GLYCERA
It's under oath you've been ere now these. many
times.
(At the close of the scene Polemon returns to the country.)


Scene. GLYCERA, DORIS


With the help of her maid, Doris, Glycera carries out her
plan of leaving Polemon’s house. Myrrhina, the wife of the
next-door neighbour, Pataecus, offers to give her shelter
(vv. 143, 282). They hastily move thither, taking with them
the necessary personal effects. The goddess Misapprehension


203


MENANDER


Scene. AINOIA


ATNOIA


“τούτων θέλει τὸ μὲν τρέφειν, ἔχειν τέκνον >
Ι Γαὐτὴ  προθυμηθεῖσα θῆλυ, τὸ δ᾽ ἕτερον
εγυναικὶ" δοῦναι πλουσίᾳ τὴν οἰκίαν
"ταύτη' ν κατοικούσῃ, δεομένῃ, παιδίου.
᾿γέγον" ε δὲ ταῦτ᾽. ἐνιστ' αμένων δ᾽ ἐτῶν τινων
5 ‘kal t'od πολέμου καὶ τῶν Κορινθιακῶν κακῶν
‘av ξανομένων, ἡ γραῦς ἀπορουμένη σφόδρα,
τεθραμμένης τῆς παιδός, ἣ ἣν νῦν εἴδετε
ὑμεῖς, ἐραστοῦ γενομένου τε τοῦ σφοδροῦ
τούτου νεανίσκου, γένει Κορινθίου
10 ὄντος, δίδωσι τὴν κόρην ὡς θυγατέρα
αὑτῆς ἔχειν. ἤδη δ᾽ ἀπειρηκυῖα καὶ
προορωμένη τοῦ ζῆν καταστροφήν τινα
αὑτῇ παροῦσαν, οὐκ ἔκρυψε τὴν τύχην,
λέγει δὲ πρὸς τὴν μείραχ᾽ ὡς ἀνείλετο
15 αὐτήν, ἐν οἷς τε σπαργάνοις δίδωσ᾽ ἅμα'
τὸν ἀγνοούμενόν T ἀδελφὸν τῇ φύσει
ppater, προνοουμένη TL τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων,
εἰ ποτε δεηθείη βοηθείας τινός,
ὁρῶσα τοῦτον ὄντ᾽ ἀναγκαῖον μόνον
20 αὐτῇ, φυλακήν τε λαμβάνουσα μή ποτε
δι’ ἐμέ τι τὴν "Άγνοιαν αὐτοῖς συμπέσῃ
Line prefixed, Capps.
1 ΗΠ, quat. y, p. 3.
ΒΟ, οι. τῆς δας 4+. ἃ πῶ Ἢ μενον, J, |


2. Kj ἐνισταμένων, J 5.


γέγονε δὲ τοῦτ᾽.


204


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


appears and tells the story of the twin infants who had been
exposed many years ago by their parents and discovered by a
poorold woman. The first few lines of the narrative are lost ;
the disposition which the woman made of the boy and the girl
is now disclosed :


Scene. MISAPPREHENSION


MISAPPREHENSION
She’s fain to rear the one of these, the girl, because
She craved a daughter for herself, the other child
She gave unto a wealthy woman dwelling here
Within this house, who lacked a child. This was the

way
It happened. But, when several years had intervened
And when the war and evil times waxed always worse
In Corinth, then the aged woman, straitened sore—
Because the girl, whom now you see, was fully grown
And this impetuous young fellow, born and bred
Corinthian, had appeared as lover—gives to him
The girl, as if her daughter born, to have and hold.
At length, her powers failing, and foreseeing now
Some sudden end of life, no longer she concealed
The circumstances, but she tells the girl how she
Adopted her as foundling ; gives to her besides
The swaddling-clothes! belonging to her; and
explains

About her own blood-brother hitherto unknown.
Making for human fortune some provision thus
If ever she might need assistance, for in him
She saw her one relation; watching well besides
Lest, thanks to me, Misapprehension, something
chance


' Probably including the birth-tokens,
205


25


30


90


40


MENANDER


> , A κ᾿ ΄ ae ben)
ἀκούσιον, πιλουτοῦντα καὶ μεθύοντ᾽ ἀεὶ
ον Ὁ lal a \
ὁρῶσ᾽ ἐκεῖνον, εὐπρεπῆ ' δὲ" καὶ νέαν
>) ? ,
ταύτην, βέβαιον ἴδ᾽" οὐθὲν ° κατελείπετο.
αὕτη μὲν οὗν ἀπέθανεν" ὃ δὲ τὴν οἰκίαν
/ . ,
ἐπρίατο ταύτην ὁ στρατιώτης οὐ πάλαι.
ἐν γειτόνων δ᾽ οἰκοῦσα τἀδελφοῦ, τὸ μὲν
lal > a
πρᾶγμ᾽ ov μεμήνυκ᾽, οὐδ᾽ ἐκεῖνον βούλεται,
fal /
εἶναι δοκοῦντα λαμπρόν, εἰς μεταλλαγὴν
a 39 ΨΦ
ἀγαγεῖν, ὄνασθαι δ᾽ ὧν δέδωκεν ἡ τύχη.
» A > / δ᾽ ’ θ ον ἃ = ’ ΤΣ » ἴω
ἀπὸ ταὐτομάτου ὀφθεῖσ᾽ ὑπ᾽ [αὐ τοῦ,---θρα-
συτέρου,
ὥσπερ προείρηκ᾽, ὄντος, ἐπιμελῶς τ᾽ ἀεὶ
φοιτῶντος ἐπὶ τὴν οἰκίαν,---ἔτυχ᾽ ἑσπέρας

/ , ’ -“
πέμπουσά ποι θεράπαιναν" ὡς δ᾽ ἐπὶ ταῖς θύραις
αἰὐτὶὴν γενομένην εἶδεν, εὐθὺ προσδραμὼν

> ἃ \ a
ἐφίλει, περιέβαλλ᾽: ἣ δὲ τῷ προειδέϊναι'
10 \ yv > > ΝΜ \ δ᾽ Γι Ἵ
ἀδελφὸν ὄντ᾽ οὐκ ἔφυγε. προσιὼν δ᾽ Γἅτερος
ὁρᾷ. τὰ λοιπὰ δ᾽ αὐτὸς Γεἴρη χ᾽ ὃν τρόϊπον"
ὃ μὲν ὥχετ᾽ εἰπὼν ὅτι κατὰ σχολὴν ἰδεῖν!

Shi | shai" ey ͵΄ ὭΡΑ 9 284 wile a \
αὐτὴν <é>Tt βούλεθ᾽, Γἣ δ᾽. ἐδάκρυ᾽ ἑστῶσα καὶ
> / > w an 9 > ͵ὔ A
ὠδύρεθ᾽ ὅτι ταῦτ᾽ οὐκ ἐλευθέρως ποεῖν

- >]
ἔξεστιν αὐτῇ. πάντα δ᾽ ἐξεκάετο
ay ἡ lal , > > / 7 ¢
ταῦθ᾽ ἕνεκα τοῦ μέλλοντος εἰς ὀργήν θ᾽ iva

Φ ’ , Γ «ἢ » b] \ \ ° 2 ,
οὗτος adik'n't ,—éyw yap ἦγον ov φύσει

24 8 οὐθὲν, van Leeuw./ @ οὐθὲν, pap.

35 εὐθὺ, L?./ εὐθὺς, Herw. 36 ΕΖ, quat. y, p. 4.

37 ἅτερος, Wilam./ ὁ σφοδρὸς, 83.

᾽
38 J? ἤγουν air ΔΝ Τα.


39 ἰδεῖν, K*, 732, 55, and insert «-ἔξ» τι in line 40. / ἴδοι,
Reinach.// ἰδὼν with αὐτήν τι, 93,

42-59 Also in Heidel. pap.

13 θ᾽ ἵνα, L*, Heid. pap. omits θ᾽.
, 44 ἀφίκητ᾽ Headl. | ἀφίκετ᾽, L*.


206


repens 2.


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


Against their will, because she saw that he was
rich

And ever drinking, while the girl was comely, young,

And left in utterly unstable union.

And so she died. But he, the soldier, bought this
house

Not long ago. The girl, however, though she dwelt

As next- oot neighbour to her br Sher, has not let

The matter out nor wishes him to change a lot

That seems so brilliant, but she’d like him to enjoy

, The gifts of fortune. She, as luck would have it,
chanced

Last evening—for, as said above, he’s overbold

And makes a point of always hanging round the
house—

To have been seen by him as she was sending off

Her maid upon some errand. Catching sight of her

Just by the door and running up to her, for thwith

He kissed and kissed and kept on hugging her. But
she,

Apprised before that ‘twas her brother, held her
ground,

Just then up came the other man and saw it all.

The sequel he has told himself how it befell.

Now he went off remarking that at leisure he

Would wish a further interview.2 But she the while

Stood there and wept, bemoaning that she was not
free

To act untrammelled. All of this was set ablaze

Because of what’s to follow. First: that he should
fall

Into a passion—for ‘twas I that egged him on


1 Polemon.
2 Text of 39-41 is not certain.


45


50


05


60


MENANDER


τοιοῦτον ὄντα TOUTOV,—apxnV δ᾽ ἵνα λάβ᾽'ῃ"
μηνύσεως τὰ λοιπά, τούς θ᾽ αὑτῶν ποτε
> a

εὕροιεν. ὥστ᾽, εἰ TOUT ἐδυσχέρανέ τις
» , > 9a  ΉΥ / /
ἀτιμίαν τ᾽ ἐνόμισε, μεταθέσθω πάλιν'

\ \ fa) \ \ \ ᾽ , \ CF,
διὰ yap θεοῦ καὶ τὸ κακὸν εἰς ἀγαθὸν ῥέπει

΄ x > al /

γινόμενον. ἔρρωσθ᾽, εὐμενεῖς τε γενόμενοι
ἡμῖν, θεαταί, καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ σῴώζετε.


ACT. 1
Scene. ΣΩΣΊΑΣ, ΔΩΡΙΣ


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
ε \ (aay > , \ ,
ὁ σοβαρὸς ἡμῖν ἀρτίως καὶ πολεμικὸς,
ς a lal /
ὁ τὰς γυναῖκας οὐκ ἐῶν ἔχειν τρίχας,
κλάει κατακλινείς. κατέλιπον ποούμενον
ἄριστον αὐτοῖς ἄρτι, καὶ συνηγμένοι
εἰς ταὐτόν εἰσιν οἱ συνήθεις, τοῦ φέρειν
rn -“ x 6

αὐτὸν TO πρᾶγμα ῥᾷον. οὐκ ἔχων δ᾽ ὅπως

> ay 7 TZ at / > ’ 4 /
τἀνταῦθ᾽ axo'va'n γινόμεν᾽, ἐκπέπομφέ pe
ry


e / ” 8 Ε] / > π᾿ ἮΝ
ἱμάτιον οἱ ἴσ'οντ᾽ ἐξεπίτηδες, οὐδὲ ὃν


δεόμενος ἀλλ᾽ ἢ περιπατεῖν με βούλεται.
ΔΩΡῚΣ

ἐγὼ προΐελ θΓοῦ σ᾽ ὄψομαι, κεκτημένη.

40 θ᾽ αὑτῶν, Heidl. pap.

47 ἐδυσχέρανε, Heidl. pap./ ἐδυσχέραινε, 1,3.


51 σῴζετε, L?./ σώσατε, Heidl. pap.
54 κατέλιπον, L*./ κατέλαβον, H. pap.


61 προ \O.YC’, J? suppl.


“a wee -
ἜΝ ρας ΚΜ τὰ


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


Though he’s not such by nature—next, that thus
might start
The train of revelations ; then, that they should find,
In course of time, their next of kin. And so, if one
Of you grew vexed and thought this a disgrace,
let him
Now alter his opinion. For by help of God
The evil, even as it comes to being, turns
To good. Now fare ye well, spectators, and may you
Prove gracious to us and the sequel prosper too.
[ Eatt Misapprehension. Enter Sosias from the country.
_ He begins to stroll up and donn before the two
houses. |


ACT. IT
Scene. SOSIAS, and (later) DORIS


SOSIAS

This man of ours that was but now so blustering

And warlike, he who won’t permit that women wear

Their hair full length. lies sprawled out weeping.
[ but now

Have left him giving them a luncheon and his friends

Have come together hoping that more readily

He'd bear his trouble. He, because he has no way

To learn what here is going on, has sent me forth

For merely this, to fetch a mantle, though he lacks

No single thing except he’d keep me on the go.


Enter Doris from the house of Pataecus. She calls back
to her mistress nithin the house. She does not see
Sosias, who stands at one side. |


DORIS (as she comes out)
Yes, mistress, | will go outside to take a look.
_ * 209
P


860 K
65


MENANDER


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
ἡ Δωρίς. οἵα γέγονεν, ὡς δ᾽ ἐρρωμένη.
ζῶσιν τρόπον τιν᾽, ὡς ἐμοὶ καταφαίνεται,


Φ ΄ ,
auTal. πορευσομαι δέ.


ΔΩΡΙΣ
κόψω τὴν θύραν'
> Ν \ > Lal ’ » \
οὐδεὶς yap αὐτῶν ἐστιν ἔξω. δυστυχὴς
wa / ” ” /
ἥτις στρατιώτην ἔλαβεν avdpa: παράνομοι
ἅπαντες, οὐδὲν πιστόν. ὦ κεκτημένη,


: ΝΜ / a
ως ἄδικα πασχεις. παῖδες.


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ


εὐφρανθήσεται


κλαοῦσαν αὐτὴν πυθόμενος νῦν: τοῦτο γὰρ


70 ἐβούλετ᾽ αὐτός.


ΔΩΡῚΣ


παιδίον, κέλευέ μοι


(A lacuna of circa 70 verses to 4}.


68 παῖδες : (and line 70, αὐτός :), L*./ Capps assumes (:) = self-
interruption, and cont. to Doris.


210


τ Te =


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


sosias (aside)
Ah, Doris! Howshe has grownup! How well she
looks!
They live in lively fashion here, it seems to me,
These ladies. But I’m off now.


(Sostas, about to leave, pauses.)


poris (approaching Polemon’s house
P 8


At the door [1] knock,
For none of them is here without. Unhappy she
Who takes a soldier-man! They’re lawless, all of
them,
No spark of honour. O my mistress, how unjust
Your treatment is! (Knocking)
Slaves! Hey!


sosias (aside)
Well, he'll be glad enough
When now he hears she’s weeping. For that’s just
the thing
That he himself was wishing for.
(Exit Sosias to the country. A slave opens the door.)


DORIS
Boy, call me here


Geer es se a A we Fe Pelee Foret rte et sé! PONG FG δι ME" δὲ Me οὐ Ve


(She gives a command to the slave and later, jinding that
Polemon is not at home, enters his house, presumably
to recover Glycera’s birth-tokens.)


(About 70 verses lacking.)


MENANDER
Scene. AAOS


AAOS


παῖδες. μεθύοντα μειράκια προσέρχεται
΄ > > n / /
πάμπολλ᾽. ἐπαινῶ διαφόρως κεκτημένην"
εἴσω πρὸς ὑμᾶς εἰσάγει τὴν μείρακα.
σι Siw / ¢ f, a / /
τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι μήτηρ. ὁ "tplodimwos ζητητέος.
145 ἥκειϊν" γὰρ αὐτὸν τὴν ταχίστην ἐνθάδε


Γεὔκ!αιρον εἶναι φαίνεθ᾽, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ.
ΧΟΡΟΥ͂
ACT III

Scene. MOSXION, AAOS
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ


Ade, πολλάκις μὲν ἤδη πρός μ᾽ ἀπήγγελκας
λόγους


875 K οὐκ ἀληθεῖς, ἀλλ᾽ ἀλάξζξων καὶ θεοῖσιν ἐχθρὸς εἶ.


Γὺ νυνὶ πλανᾷς με---


εἰ δὲ κα
141 4', quat. y, P: 7.
143 πρὸς ὑμᾷς, L*./ πρὸς <n>mas, Leo.
145 ἥκειν yap, 1,3, J*.
147 λόγους, J*, L?. 148 ἀληθεῖς, L*.


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT
Scene. DAVUS (alone)


Daas een a) 8) ve ἡ 4 δ Ὁ οὖ leh Meal wo fie Vols © edie eo be ‘sits


(Davus has learned that Glycera has sought shelter in the
house of his master and assumes that Moschion’s infatuation
for her is reciprocated. Toward the end of the scene a crowd
of revellers is seen approaching.)


DAVUS
(Knocking at the door of Pataecus’s house)

Hey, slaves! A lot of drunken youths are coming up,

A perfect gang of them. Especial praise [ pay

Our mistress, for she brings the girl in here. Now
that’s

A mother for you! My young master we must seek.

Yes, that’s the programme, for, it seems, ’tis just the
time

That he should come here double quick. That's
what I think.

[| Exit Davus to find Moschion. The band of revellers


gives entertainment between the acts. |


CHORUS


ACT ΠῚ
(Davus returns nith Moschion.)
Scene.) MOSCHION, DAVUS


MOSCHION
Davus, many a time you've brought me tales, ere this,
that are not true.
Nay, you are a quack impostor and a god-detested
man,
But if now, too, you mislead me—
1 The change to the livelier trochaic measure of the Greek


is imitated here (lines 147-232) and at line 705. See note on
The Girl from Samos, line 345.


213


MENANDER


ΔΑΟΣ
κρέμασον εὐθύς, εἰ π' ava. |


ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
[80] 160 ἥμερον λέγεις τι.
= AAO
χρῆσαι πολεμίου τοίνυν | δίκην."
Γὰν" δ᾽ ἀληθὲς ἡ καὶ ταϊὶλάβης τ᾽ ἔνδον αὐτὴν ἐνθάδε,
ὁ δεδιωκηκίὼς ἐγώ" σοι ταῦτα πάντα, Μοσχίων,
καὶ πεπεικὼς τὴν μὲν ἐλθεῖν δεῦρ᾽ ἀναλώσας
no! yous
μυρίους, τὴν σὴϊν! dé μητέρ
ποεῖν
155 πάνθ᾽ ἅ σοι δοκεῖ, τίς ἔσομ' αι;


᾿ ὑποδέχεσθαι καὶ


ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
τίς" βίος μάλισθ᾽, ὅρα!
Ade, τῶν πάντων ἀρέσκει;
ΔΑΟΣ
[τοῦ τ᾿ ἐπιβλεψίώμεθα."
ΜΟΣΧΙΩ͂Ν
ἄρα τὸ μυλωθρεῖν κράτιστον:


ΔΑΟΣ
εἰς μυλῶνϊα;
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
προσδοκᾷ"
ovtoa'i' φερόμενος ἥξειν.
150-173 J? or S? a , except the following :


157 Ta προσδοκᾷ", 55 suppl.
158 οὑτοσὶ or οὗτος :, J*.//Htew:, J% / ἡμῖν Ὑ 55,


214


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DAVUS
Hang me quick if | mislead.


MOSCHION
Now you talk with moderation.


DAVUS
Treat me, then, like enemy.

But if this is true l’m saying, and you find her there
within ;

If ‘twas I that chased and captured all this for you,
Moschion :

If ‘twas I won her to come here, using countless
arguments,

If ‘twas I that made your mother give her welcome
and prepare

All your pleasure—what’s for me, then ?


MOSCHION


Look you, Davus, what life, say.
Of all lives you'd find most pleasing ἢ


DAVUS
Let’s look into that with care,


MOSCHION
Wouldn’t you preter the treadmill ¢


DAVUS
I—the treadmill ?


MOSCHION (objectively) 1
Now, thinks he,
With all speed to that I’m coming !


1 The restoration of the text of these two lines is very
doubtful.
215,


MENANDER


ΔΑΟΣ
μηδ' εἰμϊιᾷ" τέχνῃ, Neyo.”
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
βούλομαι δὲ προστάτην σε πραγμάτων ‘EdXn-
᾿ Γνε κὶ ὥν"
[90] 160 "xa διοικητὴν στρατοπέδων.
ΔΑΟΣ


Gs a s Tez Ta,
ὑ" μέλει ξένων ἐμοὶ
οἵ μ᾽ ἀποσφάττουσιν εὐθύς" ἡσυχῆ κλέψαι θέλω".


ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
AN GE? 5, Seas exOou .. εκδοσει σα .. εἰλαβ.
Sarre δἰ καινοὶ τάλαντα---
ΔΑΟΣ


παντοπωλεῖν Bown oma! ᾿
Μοσχίων, ἢ ἱτυρ' οπ' ω'λεῖν ἐΐν ἀγορᾷ καθημέϊνος"


165 ὀμνύω μ'ηδὲν “μέλειν μοι πλουϊσίῳ καθεστάναι
πα τ᾿ ἐδ: ταῦτ᾽ voila ἐν μᾶλλον.
ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
Ob pave
Cidex ..... LuyeLO ... WEN... WLTEV.....
γραῦς
ΔΑΟΣ


τὸ γαστρίζεσθ᾽ ἀρέσκεϊι, δέσποτ᾽, ἀγαπήσειν ἐγώ"
[φή μ᾽ ἐφ᾽ οἷς εἴρηκα τούτοις.
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
Ν TA 4 \ ᾽ Ἵ
μὰ 'Δία σὺ στρατηγὸς οὐκ
[100] 110 ἦσθας, ἀλλὰ τυροπώλει καὶ ταλαιπώρει.
158 μηδεμιᾷ τέχνῃ λέγω, Allinson, from μηδ. u.. TexvN..... J”.
169 δία---οὐκ, Capps suppl., cf. line 160.
210


—~=erine ὦ


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DAVUS
Nay, by no means; no! I say,


MOSCHION
I'd prefer perhaps to have you Lord Protector of the
Greeks
And Comptroller of the Armies.


DAVUS
Nay, | don’t go in for that;

Soldiers straight would slit my gullet; on the quiet

let me steal.

MOSCHION
(An illegible remark. He recommends, perhaps, risky
speculation on bottomry.)
DAVUS

oe Let me have a General-store,
Moschion, or in the Market I would sit and cheeses

sell—
I’m not anxious, no, | swear it, to become a millionaire
πο τον το] εἰς τ IS. ot soe rather.


MOSCHION


(An illegible, sarcastic remark comparing Davus with “ an
old hag.’’)
DAVUS
Just to stuff my paunch suffices, Master, I’m content,
I say,
On the terms that I have mentioned.


MOSCHION
Zeus! You were not born to lead
Haggle cheeses till you're haggard.
Ε δ :


217


175


MENANDER


ΔΑΟΣ
καλῶς
ταῦτα μὲν δή, φασίν, εὔχθω. δ'εῦρο δ᾽ ἦλθεν ἣν
ποθεῖς"
οἰκίαν avor'ye, τρόφιμε.


MOZXION
δεῖ μέν, ὀρθῶς γὰρ λέγεις" ᾿
ἐϊμὲ δὲ! παραμυθεῖ ἵσθ᾽ ἐκείνην νῦν προσήκει καὶ
γελᾶν"
ἐπὶ θεοῖς ἐχθρῷ πτεροφόρᾳ χιλιάρχῳ;
ΔΑΟΣ
καὶ μάλα.
ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
εἰσιὼν δέ μοι σύ, Δᾶε, τῶν ὅλων κατάσκοπος


πραγμάτων γενοῦ" τί ποιεῖ; ποῦ ᾽στιν ἡ μήτηρ;
ἐμὲ 5
εἰς τὸ προσδοκᾶν ἔ ἔχουσι πῶς; τὸ τοιουτὶ μέρος


οὐκ ἀκριβῶς δεῖ dpad'cai' σοι: κομψοὸς εἶ.
ΔΑΟΣ
πορεύσομαι.
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
περιπατῶν δὲ προσμ'εν᾿ ὦ σε, <Ade>, πρόσθε τῶν
θυρῶν.


[110] 180 ἀλλ᾽ ἔδειξεν μέν τι τοιοῦθ᾽ ὡς προσ HNO 'ov & ἑϊσπ' ἐρας"


προσδραμόντ᾽ οὐκ ἔφυγεν, ἀλλὰ περιβαλοῦσ᾽


en'éorra'ce.


174 73, quat. y, p. 8. 179 <Ade>, J? inserted.
oe ay
181] ἐπέσπασε, Capps suppl./e... (.) σε, J%/ec... με! = ἐπ-
eoxeue, S®*.


218


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DAVUS
Good! But, as the saying goes,
Now enough of prayers and praying. Here’s your
wished-for girl arrived.
Straight into the house, young master.


MOSCHION
Right you are. Yes, that’s my lay.
It’s my chance now to console her and to mock her
soldier-man,
God-detested, feather-crested commandant !


DAVUS
Indeed you may.
MOSCHION
You, there, Davus, go indoors now, be my spy on


everything.

Make report: What is she doing? Where’s my
mother? As for me, ὁ

How are they disposed to welcome? In a matter
such as this

You've no need of nice instructions, you are clever.


DAVUS
I will go.
MOSCHION
I'll await you, Davus, strolling up and down before
the door.
[Exit Davus into the house of Pataecus. _Moschion
soliloquizes. |


Well, when I approached last evening, this is how
she then behaved :

Fled not when I ran to meet her, but embraced
and held me fast.


219


MENANDER


, ‘ ΄ -“ J Lal
οὐκ ἀηδής, ws ἔοιϊκέϊν, εἰμ᾽ ἰδεῖν οὐδ᾽ évt'vyet'y,
» \ \ ᾽ 6 lal > ᾽ e ,ὔ ΠΝ
οἴομαι, μὰ τὴν Αθηνᾶν, ἀλλ᾽ ἑταίραις 'προσ-
brs
τὴν δ᾽ ᾿Αδράστειαν μάλιστα νῦν, ἀρ'έσκοι", προΐσ-
κυν ῶ.
ΔΑΟΣ


185 Μοσχίων, ἡ μὲν λέλουται καὶ κάθηται.


ΜΟΣΧΙΩ͂Ν
/,
φιλτάτη.
AAOZ
¢ \ / lal AD > 40» «
ἡ δὲ μήτηρ σου διοικεῖ περιπατοῦσ᾽ οὐκ οἶδ᾽ 6 τι.
εὐτρεπὲς δ᾽ ἄριστόν ἐστῖιν, ἐκ δὲ τῶν ποουμένων
περιμένειν δοκοῦσί μοί σε.


ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
«καὶ πάλαι ἴω συνδοκεῖ".
εἴμ᾽ ἀηδής; ‘elim'a's wilted συμπ'αρόντα μ᾽ ἐν-
“ape ἀρ δ:
ΔΑΟΣ
[120] 190 "wa! Δίϊα!.
ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
νῦν ‘r'ol'v'uv λέγ᾽ ἐλίθ) ών.


ΔΑΟΣ
ὡς ὁρᾷς, ἀναστρέφω.
184 S? suppl. from ap. io. ω.
188 Allinson suppl. / καιπαλαιγαρσιι pen tat , J, 8? reads


παλαιλιιορ[υ] and suppl. πάλαι δὴ θρύπτομαι.

189 Cairo pap. has οὐκ εἰμ᾽ at beginning./ Capps omits οὐκ
and makes interrog./Wilam., K* transpose οὐ to end and
give to Davus.

190 μὰ Δία ete., S* suppl. from «3,


220


.


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


I am not, it seems, unpleasing, when one meets or
looks at me,

By Athena, to my thinking I’ma charmer to the girls,

But I now to Adrasteia!—may it please her—make
my bow.


(Davus returns from his errand.)


DAVUS
She is freshly bathed, and seated, Moschion.


MOSCHION
The darling thing !
DAVUS ;
And your mother walks about there busied with—l
know not what !
And the luncheon’s served and ready, and from what
is going on,
Seems to me, ’tis you they wait for.


MOSCHION


So I thought long since myself.
Am I then unpleasing ? Did you tell them that I’m
ready here ἢ
DAVUS
No, by Zeus.
: MOSCHION
Go now and tell them.


pavus (obeying)
As you see, I’m off again.
(Davus re-enters the house.)


1 For the Greek formula: ‘‘ Make obeisance to Adrasteia ”’
(Nemesis), ef. ‘‘ Knock on wood,” the similar superstition
surviving in English. ef. Fragm. No. 321 K. Adrasteia (the
Inescapable) = Nemesis (Retribution).


221


MENANDER


MOSXIQN
ἡ μὲν αἰσίχυ' νεῖ τ᾿ ἐ! πειδὰν εἰσίωμεν δηλαδὴ
παρακαλύψ'ε erat τ᾽, ἔθοϊς γὰρ τοῦτο, τὴν δὲ μητέρα
εἰσιόντ᾽ εὐθὺς φιλῆσαι ig) ὩΣ ἀνακτήσασθ᾽ ὅλως,
εἰς τὸ κολακεύειν τρέπεσθαι, ζῆν τε πρὸς ταύτην
ἁπλῶς"
195 ὡς γὰρ οἰκείῳ κέχρηται τῷ παρόντι πράγματι.

ἀλλὰ τὴν θύραν ψοφεῖ τις ἐξιών. τί τοῦτο, παῖ;
ὡς ὀκνηρῶς μοι προσέρχει, Δᾶε.


ΔΑΟΣ
Ν \ \ ,ὔ
ναὶ μὰ τὸν Δία'
4 \ > / id \ > \ 53 \ \
πάνυ yap ἀτόπως. ws yap ἐλθὼν εἶπα πρὸς τὴν


/
τέρα
cid fn, ρ τ » 4 » Γ’ iv; ,ὔ
ὅτι πάρει, “ μηθὲν ἔτι τούτων" φησῖί, “ Tivos
ἀκήκοεν;


[130] 200 ἦ σὺ λελάληκας πρὸς αὐτ (ὃν! ὅτε φοβηθεῖσ᾽ ἐνθάδε
᾿καϊταπέφευγ᾽ αὖ' τὴ mplos ἡμᾶς; πάνυ" γε μὴ
ὥρας σύ γε,
Γφή 'σ᾽, “txov, arr Γἐκφθάρηθι καὶ Bade,
παιδίον,
ἐκποδών." ἄκουε τόδ᾽" ἄλλ' οἱ πάντ᾽ ἀϊν᾿ἡρπαστ᾽
ἐκ μέσου.


Γοὺ σ᾽ φόδρ᾽ Τἤκ'ίουσεν παρόντα σ᾽ ἡδέως".


191 αἰσχυνεῖτ᾽, S*.// At end, “2.
θεν
199 μηθὲν, Κι, {μηκετι, L?. // τίνος, 83. πῶς, Κι.
20] πρὸς ἡμᾶς ; πάνυ γε Housm.
202 Yor’, from pap. ἵκοιο. | tov’: , S*. // ἐκφθάρηθι a a it
203 ἄκουε τόδ᾽ ἄλλο, Allinson suppl. / δ ede lb... @AA., 45}


ἄκουε δὴ νῦν, Capps./: τί ἐστιν : ἀλλὰ, S*.
204 32 suppl.


222


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


MOSCHION


She'll be shy now when we enter, that, of course, I
may assume,

Cover up her face—’tis custom—but I must on
entering

Forthwith up and kiss my mother, win her wholly
to my will,

Turn to flattery and tell her that for her alone I live.

For she treats this present business just as if it were
her own.

Hark! Again the door is creaking, some one comes.

(Davus returns, crestfallen.)
Well, slave, how now?
How you hesitate, now, Davus, to approach me !


DAVUS 9
Yes, by Zeus,

It’s too queer. Why, when I entered, told your
mother you're at hand,

Straight she says: “No more of that, sir.” Adds:
« From whom, pray, has he heard ?

Is it you who've told your master that, because the
girl was scared,

Here with us she’s taken refuge? May you not live
out the year.

Off,” says she, “Off to perdition! Slave. begone,
away, away!”

Listen now to one thing more, sir: all our scheme
is ruined quite ;

Far from pleased was -she on learning of your
presence.


MENANDER


MOZXION
/
eas iasepy Ἣν μαστιγία,
205 Tad δὲ κ'έχρησαι μοι---
ΔΑΟΣ
/ \ s ,
γέλοιον" ἢ μὲν οὖν μήτηρ---


ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
, /
τί φής;
Γ9 ᾽ ” Μ > \ x / n ’ >
ap ἄγειν ἄϊκουσαν αὐτὴν ἢ τί πρᾶγμ᾽: οὐχ
“ » > -
ἕνεκ᾽ ἐμοῦ
3 . / > Ὁ / >
εἶπας ws πέπεικας ἐλθεῖν πρός μ΄.


5


AAOS
5 \ ᾽ v ,
ἐγὼ δ᾽ εἴρηκά σοι
΄ ͵ , > Lal > ’ὔ Ν \ » / ἢ \
ὡς πέπεικ᾽ ἐλθεῖν ἐκείνην; “a τὸν Ἀπόλλω, γὼ
μὲν οὐ.
"el δοκῶ ψεῦδοϊς, tpddimé μου, σοῦ καταψεύ-
δεσῖθ᾽ ἔϊτι,
[140] 210 Γδῆσον.
ΜΟΣΧΙΩ͂Ν
3 \ Ἵ Γ ive ’ ἘΠ A r / 7
ov THY wnTEp αὐτὸς ταῦτα cUpmTrE πεικέν 'αι
> / Μ / 3 γ᾽) ε / ᾽ > Lal
ἀρτίως ἔφησθα, ταύτην ἐνθάδ᾽ ὑποδέξασθ᾽ ἐμοῦ
ἕνεκα:
ΔΑΟΣ
nf e a Μ , ,
τοῦθ᾽, ὁρᾷς, ἔφην. vat’ μνημονεύω.


ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
καὶ δοκεῖν
ἕνεκ᾽ ἐμοῦ σοι τοῦτο πράττειν;
205 From..... Oe i Sh et
206 ap’, Allinson. // εἰσάγειν ax, Leo (space for only 7 or 8


letters). // ἢ τί, L?.
209 S* suppl. jou πολυκαταψευδεσ.. pap.


224


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


MOSCHION
Whipping post,
You have duped me!
DAVUS
Now you're joking—why, your mother—


MOSCHION
What is that?
Did she take her in unwilling? Or how was it?
Didn’t you say
You persuaded her to come here for my pleasure ?


pavus (as if trying to remember)
I say that?
“JT persuaded her to come here?’’ By Apollo, no,
not I.
If, young sir, you think I trick you—still am lying—
bind me fast.
MOSCHION
Didn’t you claim just now that you, sir, had my
mother won to this
So that here the girl she welcomed, just to please me?


pavus (as if recalling nith difficulty)
So I did.


There now, see, I said so. Yes, sir, I recall it.


MOSCHION
And you thought
That on my account she did this?


210 δῆσον, S* suppl. and continued to Davus ; οὐ τὴν etc. to
Moschion,
211 J*, quat. y, p. 9.


225


MENANDER


AAO
> »Μ \ /
οὐκ ἔχω τουτὶ φράσαι"
> rhs ς , wy
ἀλλ᾽ ἔγωγ᾽ ἔπειθον.
ἥν τὸ ΜΟΣΧΙΩ͂Ν
εἶεν: δεῦρο δὴ βάδιζε.


ΔΑΟΣ
ποῖ;
ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
215 μὴ μακράν. εἴσει---
ΔΑΟΣ
τὸ δεῖνα, Μοσχίων, ἐγὼ τότε---
μ'ικὶρὸν ἔτι μεῖνον.
<tay ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
978 K φλυαρεῖς πρός με.

ΔΑΟΣ


—


\ \ > /
μὰ Tov ᾿Ασκληπιοὸν,
> » =| ’ IAN ᾽ » Ἢ yy ᾽ /
οὐκ ἔγωγ᾽, ἐὰν ἀκούσῃς. τυχὸν ἴσως ov βούλεται,
rT θ᾽ / > > ὃ “ 00᾽ ΄ Μ 3 ᾽
μανθάνεις, ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς ταῦθ᾽, ὡς ἔτυχεν, ἀλλ
ἀξιοῖ
γι 4 5 f ᾽ > hel \ \ a ey
πρὶν συνειδέναι σ᾽, ἀκοῦσαι τὰ παρὰ σοῦ γ΄ε,
νὴ Δία.
[150] 220 "od γὰρ ὡς" αὐλητρὶς οὐδ᾽ ὡς πορνίδιον τρισάθλιον
Γῆλθεν.
ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
ἐπινοεῖς λέγειν μοι, AGE, τι πάλιν.
ΔΑΟΣ
,
δοκίίϊμασον""
Γοΐδ᾽ ὁπ'οῖϊόν ἔστιν, οἶμαι: καταλέλοιπεν οἰκίαν
fou φλ᾽υαρίία---μεταστῆν᾽ εἰ σὺ τρεῖς ἢ τέτταρας
215 μ. μακρανεισει: L?. / εἴσει to Davus, J*, 53.
216 J2. 218 μανθάνεις, J?. 219 πρὶν συνειδέναι, 4,
220 Sudh. suppl. 221 J? suppl. 222 ἘΞ,
223 S? suppl. from ουιλυαρ[ια]. εἰαστην.


226


5


ΗΕ GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DAVUS


That's a point I can’t make clear,
But, at any rate, I urged her.


MOSCHION (threateningly)
Very good. Come here, then,


DAVUS
Where?
MOSCHION (strikes him)
Cut it short. [ll make you know it.


DAVUS


What the mischief, Moschion,
I then—wait yet, just a minute—


MOSCHION
Now you'd play the fool to me.


DAVUS

By Asclepius, I do not, if you'll listen. She, perhaps,

Won’t give in, you understand me, offhand, at the
first assault,

But demands, before agreement, she should hear your
side, by Zeus.

For she comes as no mere flute-girl nor degraded


courtesan—
MOSCHION
Davus, now you are inventing further twaddle all for
me.
DAVUS


Testit. I see through this business, as I think. For
good and all

She has left her house—no fooling. Three days’
space at most, or four,


MENANDER


e Bi Dv ἐξ / 3 > “
npepas Prov Net, προσέξει σοί τις" ἀνεκοινοῦτό μοι
225 ἱτοῦτ᾽: ἀκοῦσαι yap ‘oe δ'εῖ νῦν.


ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
bet


fal / /
ποῦ oe δήσας κατα' λ' πίω,


moelis με περίπ᾽ ατὶον πολύν τινα.


Γπρός pile λελάΐληϊκας


Ade; περιπατεῖν


ἀρτίως μὲν οὐκ ᾿ἀλ!ηθὲς
πάλιν.
ΔΑΟΣ


οὐκ ἐᾷς φρονεῖν | μ᾽ ἀθορύβως. μεταβαϊλοῦ τρό-
πον τινὰ
2 »
κοσμίως T εἴσω πάρ'εϊλθε.


ΜΟΣΧΙΩ͂Ν
ΟΡ ΣΙΩΝ
σ᾽ ἴτ᾽ ἀγοράσει;
ΔΑΟΣ
\ /
καὶ μάλα"
[160] 230 ἐφόδι᾽ οὐχ ὁρᾷς μ᾽ ἔχοντα;


ΜΟΣΧΊΙΩΝ
ΛΩΝ δί
παῦε, Γπάρ'αγε, παιδίον.
ΔΑΟΣ
εἰσιὼν «δὲ; κἄϊν! τι τούτων συνδιορθώσαις.
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
\
ἑκὼν"
ὁμολογῶ νικᾶν σε.
224 12, 225 L.// oe δεῖ, Leo.
229 Capps. 230 “53 suppl.


231 εἰσιὼν <de> κἂν τι for δ᾽ εἰσιωνκα .. τι, L*.// ἑκὼν, J*.


228


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


If to stay your suit you're willing, someone then will
pay you heed.

This she let me know. Yes, surely, now ’tis time
for you to hear.


ΜΌΒΟΗΙΟΝ (half persuaded)

Where meanwhile am I to leave you, Davus, safe in
fetters bound ?

You would send me off a-strolling on a pretty lengthy
stroll.

Just now you've been babbling to me one more tale
that is not true—

DAVUS

You won't let me plan unruffled. Change your
tactics in a way:

Into the house go now discreetly.


MOSCHION
You'll procure us food ?


DAVUS
Of course.
I have ways and means, you see it?
y uy:


MOSCHION
Stop your chatter, slave, lead on.


DAVUS
Yes, you too go in and help me straighten out a thing
or two.
MOSCHION


I give in; I do it gladly.
(Exit Moschion into the house. Davus lingers outside. )


229


MENANDER


AAO
μικροῦ, “Πράκλεις, καὶ νῦϊν δέει"
αὖός εἰμ᾽. οὐκ ἔστι γὰρ ταῦθ᾽, ὡς TOT ῴᾧμην,
ΠῚ εὐκρινῆν.


Scene. AAOS, SOSIAS


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
πάλιν πέπομφε τὴν χλαμύδα φέμοντά με
235 καὶ τὴν σπάθην, iv’ ἰδῶ τί ποιεῖ καὶ λέγω
ἐλθών. ἀκαρὲς δέω δὲ φάσκειν καταλαβεῖν
τὸν μοιχὸν ἔνδον, ἵν᾿ ἀναπηδήσας τρέχῃ,
εἰ μή γε παντάπασιν αὐτὸν ἠλέουν,
κακοδαίμον᾽ οὕτω δεῖσπ᾽ότην. οὐδ᾽ ἐνύπνιον."
[110]240 ἰδὼν γὰρ 018 ὦ τῆς πικρᾶς ἐπιδημίας.
ΔΑΟΣ
ὁ ξένος ἀφῖκται: χαλεπὰ ταῦτα παντελ᾿ ὦ
Ἴ40 Καὶ τὰ “πράγματ᾽ ἐστί, νὴ τὸν ᾿Απόλλω, ταῦτα δή. 3
καὶ τὸ κεφάλαιον οὐδέπω λογίζομαι,
τὸν δεσπότην, ἂν ἘΞ ἀγροῦ θᾶττον π'άλιν"
245 ἔλθῃ, ταραχὴν οἵαν ποήσει παραφ Γανείς."


Scene. ΔΑΟΣ, ΣΩΣΊΑΣ, (ΔΩΡΙΣ)
ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
ὑμεῖς δ᾽ ἀφήκαθ᾽, ἱερύσυλα θηρία,
Γἀφή 'κατ᾽ ἔξω τῆς θύρας;


232 νῦν δέει, Schmidt. 233 εὐκρινῆ, L?.

236 ἀκαρές, L*. 239 δεσπότην, Headlam.

240 πικρᾶς, Croenert, Headlam.

242 ταῦτα, L?. {| δή, S*. 243 Sch. Ar. Pl. 35.

246 ff. sc. In margin, at 246, Swo’, J?/. σ, ΤΑ. /; at 252,


Σωσ', J?/ Aa, L?, // at 257 rn S*. // K?, S* give parts of
Davus to Θυρωρός-.


230


ΣΝ


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DAVUS
Close shave that, good Heracles!
Now with terror I am shrivelled. Not so easy as
I thought !


(Sosias arrives from the country in time to catch sight of
Moschion as he enters the house. Sosias is accompanied by
a couple of targeteers—his “army.” He stations his forces
in front of the house of Pataecus. He does not see Davus,
who stands at one side.)


Scene. SOSIAS, DAVUS (in concealment)
SOSIAS

Again I’m on a mission ;_ bringing cloak and sword.
I’m told to reconnoitre ; then to make report
Of what she’s doing, and I’m just upon the verge
Of telling how I caught the lover here within
That he may leap up and come running. That I’d do
Did I not feel that he’s so very pitiful,
My master, luckless that he is. It is no dream,
For I believe my eyes. A bitter coming home!
(Soszas enters Polemon’s house to deposit cloak and sword.)


DAVUS (in concealment)
The hireling has arrived. A sorry state of things
Is this, yes, by Apollo absolutely so.
Not even yet [ reckon in what’s chief of all:
If from the country soon his master comes again ;
How great confusion he will cause when he turns up.


Scene. SOSIAS, DAVUS (in concealment),}
DORIS (appears later)
SOSIAS
(Re-enters from the house, berating the house-slaves.)
You let her out, you sacrilegious animals,
You let her out the door?


1 Some editors here assign the parts of Davus to a Door-
tender,


231


MENANDER


AAOZ
ἀνασ'τρ' ἐφ' ει'


Γάνθτρωπος ὀργιζόμενος" ᾿ὑπαποστήσομαι.


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
ἥδ᾽ Γὠ'χεθ᾽ ὡς τὸν γείτον᾽ εὐθὺς δηλαδή,
[180] 250 τὸν μοιχόν, οἰμώξειν φράσασ᾽ ἡμῖν μακρὰ
καὶ μεγάλα.
ΔΑΟΣ
ἄντιν ὁ στ p δοϊκιμάσει"
μ ρατιώτης δοΐκιμάσει
τοῦτον: ἐπιτυγχάνει τι. :
ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
κόψω τὴν θύραν.
ΔΑΟΣ
ἄνθρωπε κακόδαιμον, τί βούλει; ποῖ φέρει;


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
> a s
ἐντεῦθεν εἶ;


ΔΑΟΣ
τυχόν: ἀλλὰ τί 'π'ολυπραΐγμ οἵνεῖς;"
ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
255 ἀπονενόησθε; πρὸς θεῶν, "ἐλ εὐυθ"έρ' αν"
ἔχειν γυναῖκα πρὸς β'ίανν τ' οὔ" κυρίου"
τολμᾶτε κατακλείσαντες;


247 ἀναστρέφει, St from :.. ()τασ΄.. εφ.., J”.

248 Schmidt, 55, J? suppl.

250 J4, quat. y, p. 10.

251 J* suppl. from \“]....-. // So’ in r, margin.


232


vit


eT ae


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DAvus (aside)


The fellow’s coming back
Again enraged ; I'll stand off here a little—so,


SOSIAS
She’s gone off straight, of course she has, to him next
door—
The lover—bidding us a mighty big and long
**Go hang!”’
DAvus (aside)

The soldier in this fellow will approve

A prophet. Yes, he hits the mark.


SOSIAS
(going up to the door of Myrrhina’s house)
I'll rap the door.


DAavus (coming out of concealment)
Misguided fellow, what d’ye want? Where are you
bound?
SOSIAS
Are you from here ?
DAVUS
Perhaps. But why thrust your nose in?


SOSIAS
Have you clean lost your senses? By the gods, you
dare
To keep a free-born lady from her rightful lord
By force imprisoned here?


253 To Davus, Allinson./ To Θυρωρός, J®, S*. // ποῖ φέρει ; J2.
254 J? suppl.
255 To Sosias, J?, 8%.


233


[190] 260


265


MENANDER


550}
΄ \ |
ὡς πὸ νηρὸς εἶ
καὶ συκοφάντης ὅσπε'ρ ἔξω ' περιπολεῖς".


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
, , > ΝΜ ef on om |
πότερα νομίζετ᾽ οὐκ ἔχειν ἡμᾶς χολήν,
οὐδ᾽ ἄνδρας εἶναι;
ΔΑΟΣ
μὴ μὰ Δία, te'tpw'B0'rovs. |
ὅταν 8 'o! τετράδραχμος τοιούϊτους ᾿λαϊμβάνῃ"
ἢ ῥᾳδίως μαχούμεθ᾽ ὑμῖν.


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
ΓΉράκλ, εἰἷς",
πράγματος ἀσελγοῦϊς" ὁμολογεῖτε δ᾽, εἰπέ μοι",
Γἔχειν; ;—
ΔΑΟΣ
ἄπ'ελθ᾽, ἄνθρω" π᾿... αριων' οὔχετ' αὐ
Γαὕτη!". :
ΣΩΣΙΑΣ


σ᾽ &ka'Neca' wapruv: Γὡμολογ) εῖτ᾽ ἔχειν.


ΔΑΟΣ
οὐκ 'εἴχομεν οὔποτ᾽ | ἔν' δον". ὄψομαί τινας---


257 πονηρὸς εἶ!, S* suppl.// In right margin . w’ with room
for one letter only preceding ; therefore to ii 5%.


258 Allinson suppl./ OCTC.. =W'. ΣΤΟΩ͂Ν , Jf


doris αὐτὴν αἰτιᾷ, S*./ogtia..0.., L?.

260 μὴ μὰ, Corr. in pap. from μαμα, 15.

261 δ᾽ ὁ τετράδραχμος, Capps. | δε τετραδραχμοις, L?./c in ots
appears to be deleted, J*. | τετραδράχμους, LBS

262 J?. 263 ἀσελγοῦς, J*.// Remainder 8? suppl.

264 ἔχειν, S*, who continues whole line to Sosias.// : ἄπελθ᾽
tvOpwr’ . . αριων, J*.// "ov Παρίων Ὁ) Allinson.


234


ρον ἘΠ: ΞῚ


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DORIS (comes to the door)


How meddlesome you are!
Blackmailer you, who roam around outside our door.


SOSIAS
Think you we have no bile and are not even men?


DAVUS
What? Men? Now God forbid. Four-obol! raw
recruits !
When your four-drachma ! leader gets the likes οὐ you
Right readily we'll fight you.


SOSIAS
Nay, good Heracles !
What utter wantonness! But tell me: you admit
You have her ? ?
DAVUS
Sir, be off !—{ What donkeys !]%—She is gone.


SOSIAS
Ah so! Now you I call to witness that you owned
You had her.
DAVUS
No, we hadn’t. Never! Some I’ll see—
1 For modern equivalents of Greek coinage, see note, p. 18.


? Conjectural, as are several parts of lines 263-267. See
text. 9 Conjectural.


265 Allinson ?? suppl. from .....e..A..(u) apie...
AACICIT’ ἔχειν, J? (eoa is one too long). / wapruy ἂν
λέγοιτ᾽, Or μαρτύριον λέγει τ᾽, J? conject./ μάρτυς dv λέγει τ᾽, δ".

266 Allinson conject. from (a) odx(«)u (circa 10 letters)
~ eve... ψομαι, 43, and (b) οὐχίκ)ειι (circa 7)’evt.. .W.. μαι,
S?, and (c) οὐκ Γἔχομεν οὔποτ᾽ ἔνδον] ἤϊσθηϊμαι, K? suppl.
(λἸήψομαι is more likely than dpoua).// twas: and paragraphus,
L?, / K? continues ὑμῶν to Davus.


235


MENANDER


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
ὑμῶν ᾿φθαρέν'τας; πρὸς τίν᾽ οἴεσθ᾽, εἰπέ μοι,

, Teal faa tes \ s \ \
παίζειν; 'tis'o λῆρος; κατὰ κράτος τὸ δυστυχὲς
οἰκίδιον τοῦτ᾽ αὐτίκ᾽ ἐξαιρ[ήσ'ομεν.

[200] 270 ὅπλιεζε τὸν μοιχόν.
ΔΑΟΣ
πονηράν, ἄθλιε,
“ A tor 8 Fat eral ΄
ὥσπερ Tap ἡμῖν οὗσαν ἐπ'ιμέϊνεις πάλαι;


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
e τὸ wv \ 7 Γν, i 57 | \ 4
οἱ παῖδες οἱ TA TEATL ἔχουϊσι' πρὶν πτύσαι
διαρπάσονται πάντα, κἂν “ τετρωβόλους "
καλῆς.
ΡΖ sa ΔΑΟΣ
» ΄ Ν Φ
ἔπαιζον: σκατοφάγος γὰρ εἶ.


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
,
πολιν
275 οἰκοῦντες---


ΔΑΟΣ
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἔχομεϊν".


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
ai'B'ot, λήψομαι
σαρίσαν---
ΔΑΟΣ
» Peis , req " THe ἂν
ἀπαγ ἐς κόρακας, '@'s εἴσειμ᾽ eyo,
ἕως ἔοικας σκ' Χηρὸς οὕτωϊς.
267 Suppl. and gives to Sosias, Allinson,
268 Leo suppl. Bile ΚΣ


272 πελτί᾽ ἐχου.., L?. 274 yaper: 1.3,
275 αἰβοῖ, J*, S*./ εἰσοι, L*,


236


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


sosias (inlerrupling)
Yes, some of you destroyed! But tell me now, with
whom
D’ye think to have your jest? What nonsense this?
By force
This luckless shanty we shall take by storm forthwith.
Go now and arm the lover.


DAVUS
Have you all this time
Been waiting, wretch, for this poor girl as though


with us?
SOSIAS
These boys of mine, targe-bearers, everything will
sack


”?


Ere you can spit, although “ four-obols”’ is the name
You give us.
DAVUS


Joking that ; “dung-eater” suits you best '


SOSIAS
We city-dwelling folk—


DAvus (interrupting)
We haven’t her.


SOSIAS
Oh! Bosh!
I'll take a pike to you.
DAVUS
Go feed the crows! Nay, I'll
Go in, since you seem such a rough.
(Davus goes in. Doris comes forward.)


276 σάρισαν : L?.// ὡς, K?./ ἀλλ᾽, 55.
277 ok'Anpds οὕτωϊς, K?./ ἀπίονοεῖσθαι, S*.


237


MENANDER


ΔΩΡΙΣ
’
ΓΣ Ἰωσία.
ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
71 Ν > / 'E =| A / / / \
σὺ" μὲν εἰ mpoo'e μίοι, Δωρί, μέγα τί σοι κακὸν
Γδιώσω. σὺ τ'ούϊτων γέγονας αἰτιωτάτη.


Γ


ΔΩΡῚΣ
[210] 280 Γοὕ'τως ὄναιο, λέγ᾽ ὅτι πρὸς γυναῖκά ποι
Γδεί'σασα καταπέφευγε.


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ


“ πρὸς γυναῖκά ποι
Γὸ aa Pid
εἰἴσασα;


ΔΩΡῚΣ
\ \ Vv μὲ κι \ /
καὶ yap οἴχεθ ὡς τὴν Μυρρίνην.
ΓΞ a / > e ,ὔ x A /
τὴν γείτον᾽" οὕτως μοι γένοιθ᾽ ἃ βούλομαι.


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
Γόρᾷ'ς ἵν᾽ οἴχεθ᾽, οὗ τὸ μέλημ᾽ ἔστ᾽, ἐνθάδε---


ΔΩΡΙΣ
285 "ri! μήϊν; τί δ᾽ ἄλλο νῦν! σὺ βούλει, Lo'cia;!


αἰ πᾶ ε o'eavto'v, d'maly .....evdnr...


(Lacuna, circa 57 verses, to Leipzig.)


»,
Vv, a


277 : Σωσία, J*. 278 51 suppl.

279 δώσω, Arnim.// Lef. suppl.

280 Suppl. Housman. 283 βούλομαι: L*,

284 S?, J? suppl. from /.... ow’.

285 τί μήν; Capps suppl. {{τί δ᾽ ἄλλο νῦν, Allinson. //Zwoia; J.

286 Suppl. S*, J® (but S* has ἄναγε and o'eaurn'v. / Allinson
conject. o'eavré|y and continues to Doris), // εὔδηλϊος εἶ!,
Korte.


238


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DORIS
Hist! Sosias!
SOSIAS
If you come near me, Doris, I will pay you out,
Yes, thoroughly. You’ve been the most to blame
for this.
DORIS


Now as you hope for safety, say that she in fear
Has run off somewhere to a woman.


SOSIAS
«She in fear—
Off somewhere to a woman?”


DORIS
Yes, to Myrrhina,
Next door, she’s gone. Else may no wish of mine
come true.


sosias (tragically)


You see where she has gone! Gone to her darling,


here !
DORIS


Of course. What else now do you ask for, Sosias ?
(Impatiently, to Sosias)
Be off! Be off with you!


(Lacuna of about 57 verses to the first Leipzig fragment.)


In this interval Polemon, repentant of his own conduct
and eager for Glycera’s return, whether by force or persuasion,
has been in consultation with Pataecus. As Polemon and
Sosias are conferring they are joined by Pataecus. Abrotonon
also appears. Perhaps the wily Davus may have secured
her to divert Sosias and his men by liberal potations.


559


MENANDER


Scene. ΠΟΛΈΜΩΝ, ΣΩΣΊΑΣ, ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ,
ABPOTONON


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
Γἐκ εἶθεν ἥκει χρήματ᾽ εἰληφώς" ἐμοὶ


, bid / \ Ν fA
345 WlLOTEVE’ προ οῶσιν σε καὶ TO στρα το πεδον.


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
κάθευδ᾽ ἀπελθών, ὦ μακάριε, τὰς: μάχας


[οὐϊχ ὑγιαίνεις---σοὶ λαλῶ---


ταύτας ἐάσας.
ἧττον" μεθύεις γάρ.
ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
φ a / reef
ἧττον; ὃς πέπωκ᾽ ἴσως
΄ \ / low aks « /
κοτύλην, προειδὼς πάντα ταῦθ᾽, ὁ δυστυχής,


350 τηρῶν T ἐμαυτὸν εἰς τὸ μέλλον;


ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ


> ,
ev λέγεις.

Γπεϊσθητί μοι.
ΣΩΣΙΑΣ


’ + bate \ A / ] /
τί δ᾽ ἐστὶν ὃ κελεύεις ἐμοί;


ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
ὀρθῶς ἐρωτᾷς: νῦν ἐγὼ δή σοί γ᾽ ἐρῶ.
344-356 Leipzig MS. alone. Begins 344.
240


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


Scene. POLEMON, SOSIAS with his men,
PATAECUS, ABROTONON }

Pataecus is a friend of both parties and is convinced that
the quarrel is due to a misunderstanding, not to disloyalty on
the part of Glycera. He has understood from the women that
Glycera has fled because of Polemon’s treatment of her (v. 369).
He advises Polemon to abandon hostile measures and to try to
win Glycera back by gentler means.


sosias (to Polemon)


He comes from yonder, having just received some
cash.
Believe me, he betrays the army and yourself.


PATAECUS (to Sosias)
Be off and sleep, you fool, drop all this fighting, do.
Your health’s not good—y es, you I net ou’re

not so well,

Nay, less; for you are drunk !

sosias (indignantly)

What, “1655. ὃ When I have drunk
Perhaps a gill or two—no more—foresaw all this
And saved myself for future need, poor me?


POLEMON
(recognising that Sosias is drunk, to Pataecus aside)
You're right.
(To Sosias.)
Give in to me.
sostas (submissively)
What is it you’re commanding me ὃ
POLEMON
Ah, that’s the way to ask me. Now I’ll speak to you.
1 Note that four actors are present at once in this scene.


241


359


[220] 360


MENANDER


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
Αββρότονον, ἐπισήμηνον.


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ


εἴσω τουτονὶ
an > ΄ / a Δ ΝΜ
πρῶτον ἀπόπεμψον τούς τε παῖδας οὗς ἄγει.


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ


an fal Ν / ΄
κακῶς διοικεῖς τὸν πόλεμον. διαλύεται,
δέον λαβεῖν κατὰ κράτος.


ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
οὑτοσί με γὰρ
ὁ Ilataixos ἐξόλλυσιν;
ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
᾽ Μ rats ,
οὐκ ἔσθ᾽ ἡγεμών.
ΑΒΡΟΤΟΝΟΝ
πρὸς τῶν θεῶν, ἄνθρωπ᾽, ἄπελθ᾽.


ΣΩΣΙΑΣ
ἀπέρχομαι.
ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
ὦμην σε ποιήσειν τι" καὶ γάρ, ᾿Αβρύτονον,
ἔχεις TL πρὸς πολιορκίαν σὺ χρήσιμον,
δύνασαί τ᾽ ἀναβαίνειν, περικαθῆσθαι, ----τοἵ στρέ-
φει,


λαικάστρι᾽; ἠσχύνθης; μέλει τούτων τί σοι;


357 ES, quat. y, p. 13 = Lp. va, 14. Leipzig MS. here
overlaps Cairo KE’.
358 ἀπέρχομαι: L*.


242


sya?


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


SOSIAS (striving to save his importance)
Abrotonon, you give the signal.


PATAECUS (to Polemon)
First send off
Indoors this fellow and the crew that follows him.


sostas (to Pataecus)


You run the war but ill.
(To Polemon.) Disbanding is his way,
When capturing by force is called for.


POLEMON
What? ’Tis he,
Pataecus, ruins me?


sosias (grumbling)
Well, he’s no captain, no.


ABROTONON (trying to coax him aay)
Now come, sir, by the gods, be off.
sosias (with dignity)
_I will withdraw.
[Exit Sostas into the house, followed by his army.


POLEMON ὦ
I thought you’d manage something. Yes, Abrotonon,
You've qualities quite useful in a siege. You've skill
In boarding, or in close investment—Going, you ?
Where now, you strumpet? You ashamed? Mind
aught of this?


(Abrotonon, offended, departs.)


1 Except for indicated change of speaker the following
lines, 359-362, would better suit Sosias.


243


MENANDER


Scenkr. YTOAEMON, TIATAIKOS
MATAIKOS
> , nw ὦ 4 ,ὔ ar
εἰ μέν τι τοιοῦτ᾽ ἦν, ἸΤολέμων, οἷόν φατε
ὑμεῖς, τὸ γεγονός, καὶ γαμετὴν γυναῖκά σου---
TIOAEMQN
365 οἷον λέγεις, ΠΠάταικε. διαφέρει δὲ τί;
ἐγὼ γαμετὴν νενόμικα ταύτην.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
\ ’
μὴ Boa.
/ ᾽ »".Ὲ 4
τίς ἐσθ᾽ ὁ δούς;
ΟΛΕΜΩΝ
ἐμοὶ τίς; αὐτή.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
πανυ καλῶς.
ἤρεσκες αὐτῇ τυχὸν ἴσως, νῦν δ᾽ οὐκέτι,
ἀπελήλυθϊἴεν)" δ᾽ οὐ κατὰ τρόπον σου χρωμένου
[230] 310 αὐτῇ.
ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
7 , > \ , ,ὔ fal
TL ONS; οὐ KATA τρόπον; τουτί ME τῶν
πάντων λελύπηκας μάλιστ᾽ εἰπών.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
ἐρεῖς,
nan? 40») > ω ΄ ἃ \ A -
TOUT 010 ἀκριβῶς, ὡς ὃ μὲν νυνὶ ποεῖς
ἀπόπληκτόν ἐστι. ποῖ φέρει γώρ, ἢ τίνα
ἄξων; ἑαυτῆς ἐστ᾽ ἐκείνη κυρία’
/
375 λοιπὸν TO πείθειν τῷ κακῶς διακειμένῳ
ἐρῶντί T ἐστίν.
865 L?.//: διαφέρει δὲ τί : S* to Pat. from Leipz.
367 αὐτή, edd./ αὕτη, L*.
372 ὡς ὃ, Wilam./ dere, Leipz. and L?.


373 Leipz. |: ποῦ φέρει yap: and paragraphus, L*.
374 Lp. vB = = ES, if 18.


244


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


Scene. POLEMON, PATAECUS


PATAECUS
If this that has befallen were of some such sort
As, Polemon, you say; if you a wedded wife—


POLEMON (excitedly)


Now how you talk, Pataecus! But what matters it ?
I’ve held her as my wedded wife.


PATAECUS


Don’t bawl, don’t bawl!
And who gave her away ἢ


POLEMON
Tome? She gave herself.


PATAECUS ;
All right. Perhaps you pleased her then, but now,
no more.
And she has gone for good because you treated her
In ways unseemly.
POLEMON

What? “Unseemly?” This your word

Beyond all else has cut me deep.


PATAECUS
You will admit—

(Of this I’m certain)—that what you are doing now
Is crazy. Where, for instance, are you rushing? Or
To capture whom? For she is mistress of herself.
There’s one course left, persuasion for the wretched

man,
The lover.


MENANDER


TIOAEMOQN
ὁ δὲ διεφθαρκὼς ἐ ἐμοῦ
ἄποντος αὐτὴν οὐκ ἀδικεῖ μ᾽;


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
ὥστ᾽ ἐγκαλεῖν
ἀδικεῖ σ᾽ ἐκεῖνος, ἄν ποτ᾽ ἔλθης εἰς λόγους"
εἰ δ᾽ ἐκβιάσει, δίκην ὀφλήσεις" οὐκ ἔχει
[240] 380 τιμωρίαν γὰρ τἀδίκημ᾽, ἔγκλημα δέ.


ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
50» 4 a
οὐδ᾽ ἄρα vov—;
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
9509 Φ rn
οὐδ᾽ apa νῦν.


ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ
> sw ὦ
οὐκ O10 6 TL
λέγω, μὰ τὴν Δήμητρα, πλὴν ἀπάγξομαι.
Γλυκέρα με καταλέλοιπε, καταλέλοιπέ με
ΤΓλυκέρα, ἸΠἀταικ᾽. ἀλλ᾽ εἴπερ οὕτω σοι δοκεῖ
/ / 4 \ \ Ψ
385 πράττειν,---συνήθης ἦσθα γὰρ καὶ πολλάκις
λελάληκας αὐτῇ,-- πρότερον ἐλθὼν διαλέγου"
πρέσβευσον, ἱκετεύω σε.


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
τοῦτό μοι δοκεῖ,
ὁρᾷς, ποεῖν.
TIOAEMON
δύνασαι δὲ δήπουθεν λέγειν,
Πάταικε;
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
μετρίως.
387 Πατί in r. margin. 388 Πολί in r. margin.
246


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


POLEMON


Well, but he that has corrupted her
When I was absent? He, you’ll own, does wrong to


me.
PATAECUS
He wrongs you, yes, enough for you to lodge com-
plaint


If ever you shall come to argument. But if
You kidnap her by force, they'll have the law of you.
This wrong calls not for private vengeance but com-
plaint.
POLEMON

Not now, then—?

- PATAECUS

No, not even now.


POLEMON
Then what to say

I know not, by Demeter, save I’m like to choke.
My Glycera has gone and left me! Left me, gone!
My Glycera, Pataecus! Nay, if so you think
It’s best—for you are well acquainted and with her
You’ve often chatted—you go first and have a talk,
Be my ambassador, I pray you.


pATAECUS (about to go)
] agree,
You see, to that.
POLEMON (detains him)


You're good at speaking, I presume,
Pataecus ὃ
PATAECUS


Pretty fair.
247


MENANDER


ΠΟΛΈΜΩΝ


ἀλλὰ μήν, Ἰ]άταικε, δεῖ.


[250] 390 αὕτη ᾽στὶν ἡ σωτηρία τοῦ πράγματος.
ἐγὼ γὰρ εἴ τι πώποτ᾽ ἠδίκηχ᾽ ὅλως.---
εἰ μὴ διατελῶ πάντα φιλοτιμούμενος .--
τὸν κόσμον αὐτῆς εἰ θεωρήσαις---


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
καλῶς
ἔχει.
ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
θεώρησον, ἸΠάταικε, πρὸς θεῶν"
395 μᾶλλον μ᾽ ἐλεήσεις.


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
ὦ Πόσειδοϊν.


ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
δεῦρ᾽ ἴθι:
ἐνδύμαθ᾽ of’, οἵα δὲ φαίνεθ᾽ ἡνίκ᾽ ἂν
λάβῃ τι τούτων' οὐ γὰρ ἑοράκεις ἴσως.


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
ἔγωγε.
ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ
καὶ γὰρ τὸ μέγεθος δήπουθεν ἣν
Μ > a b \ , / fal ’ /
ἄξιον ἰδεῖν. ἀλλὰ τί φέρω νῦν εἰς μέσον


[260] 400 τὸ μέγεθος, ἐμβρόντητος, ὑπὲρ ἄλλων λαλῶν;


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟ
A Ν ΓΔ > / Te 2
μὰ tov AV, οὐδέν.


392 Εἰ", quat. y, p. 14.
398 Πατί in 1. margin.


248


aa te


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


POLEMON
Indeed there’s need of it,
Pataecus ; nay, my whole salvation hangs on this.
For if I’ve ever done her wrong in any way—
If I don’t always care for her devotedly—
If you’d but look upon her finery—


(Motions toward his house, inviting Pataecus in.)


PATAECUS (soothingly)
Oh, that’s
All right.
POLEMON
Just take a look, Pataecus, by the gods!
You'll pity me the more.


PATAECUS (aside)
Poseidon !


POLEMON
Here! come here!
What dresses! What an air she has when she’s
dressed up
In this or that! Nay, come. You never saw,
perhaps.
PATAECUS
O yes, I have.
POLEMON
Why, just their grandeur, I may say,
Were worth a look. But why drag in this “ grandeur ”’
now,
Crazed that I am, to chatter thus beside the point ?


PATAECUS (reassuringly)
Oh, not at all, by Zeus.


249


MENANDER
᾿ ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
οὐ γάρ; ἀλλὰ δεῖ γέ σε


᾿ ἐδεῖν: βάδιξε δεῦρο.


ΠΑΤΑΙΚῸΣ


πάραγ᾽.


ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ
εἰσέρχομαι.


AGT IV
Scene. MOSXION


MOSXIQN
οὐκ εἰσφθερεῖσθε θᾶττον ὑμεῖς ἐκποδών;
λόγχας ἔχοντες ἐκπεπηδήκασί μοι.
405 οὐκ ἂν δύναιντο δ᾽ ἐξελεῖν νεοττιὰν


χελιδόνων, οἷοι πάρεισ᾽, οἱ βάσκανοι.


>
“ ἀλλὰ ξένους," φής, “ elyov.” εἰσὶ δ᾽ οἱ ξένοι


€ , ie / ἷ ς /
οι περιβόητοι---Σ ὡσίας εἰς ουτοσι.--


40] ἀλλΓὰ Sei γέ σε, Leipz./ ἀλλὰ δεῖ Πάταικέ σε, L?.


402 : παραγ᾽: εἰσερχομαι: 123.
404 End of Lp. νβ.


250


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


POLEMON ( pressing him on to the house)
You think not? But at least
You'll have to see them. Step this way.


PATAECUS
You first.


POLEMON
I go.


[Polemon leads the way into his house, Pataecus follow-
ing. Moschion appears at the door of the house of
Pataecus. He looks about anxiously for the enemy.
When he sees Polemon entering the other house with
Pataecus, and none of the “ army’’ present, he comes
out of the house reassured. |


IAC Rory:
Scene. MOSCHION


MOSCHION (to Polemon and Pataecus as they disappear
in the other house)


In with you. Curse you! Quick—and rid me of
your sight !
With lances forth they sprang at me—
(looking about him) but could not take
By storm a swallow’s nest, this army, scurvy knaves '
“Now they had mercenary troops,” you say. But
these,
The troops much talked of, are—
(catching sight of Sostas lying drunk by the door)
this Sosias alone !


251


872 K
[270] 410


[280 | 420


425


MENANDER


-“ , » / \ \ Δ
πολλῶν γεγονότων ἀθλίων κατὰ τὸν χρόνον
\ a \ \ / 4 lal \
Tov νῦν, --φορὰ yap γέγονε τούτου νῦν καλὴ
ἐν ἅπασι τοῖς “Ελλησι δι᾿ 6 τι δή ποτε---
οὐδένα νομίζω τῶν τοσούτων ἄθλιον
Μ LA e > \ a b] ,
ἄνθρωπον οὕτως ws ἐμαυτὸν ζῆν ἐγώ.
e \ / ’ > a ’ \ e γι
ὡς γὰρ τάχιστ᾽ εἰσῆλθον, οὐδὲν ὧν ἀεὶ
Μ ᾽ 8, / > \ \ Ἁ /
εἴωθ᾽ ἐποίουν, οὐδὲ πρὸς τὴν μητέρα
εἰσῆλθον, οὐ τῶν ἔνδον ἐκάλεσ᾽ οὐδένα
Ν a

πρὸς ἐμαυτόν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς οἶκον ἐλθὼν ἐκποδὼν
ἐνταῦθα κατεκείμην συνεστηκὼς πάνυ.

τὸν Δᾶον εἰσπέμπω δὲ δηλώσονθ᾽ ὅτι

ἥκω, τοσοῦτον αὐτό, πρὸς τὴν μητέρα.
οὗτος μὲν οὖν, μικρόν τι φροντίσας ἐμοῦ,

‘A -“

ἄριστον αὐτοῖς καταλαβὼν παρακείμενον,

+) / = ‘ 5 \ / lol /
ἐγέμιζεν αὑτόν. ἐν δὲ τούτῳ TO χρόνῳ

/
κατακείμενος πρὸς ἐμαυτὸν ἔλεγον: “αὐτίκα
’ fal
πρόσεισιν ἡ μήτηρ «ἀπ;-αγγελοῦσα μοι
\ an 5 / > ᾽ Ἃ ’
παρὰ τῆς ἐρωμένης ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἂν φησί μοι
\ a
εἰς ταὐτὸν ἐλθεῖν." αὐτὸς ἐμελέτων λόγον---


(Lacuna of circa 157 verses to K*.)


417 οἶκον, Lef./ οἶκόν τινα, pap.
425 <am>ayyedovoa, Croen., Sudh.


nN
on
ἴω


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


Of all the many born to wretchedness in this

Our generation—for amongst the Hellenes all,

Whate’er the cause, there has sprung up a noble
cro

Of such—there’s no one of them all so wretched
lives,

In my opinion, as myself. For soon as I

Went in, without attempting any single thing

Of all that was my wont, not even mother’s room

I entered, nay, nor any of the household called,

But to a room betook myself aside and there

I lay, quite self-controlled. And I send Davus in

To tell my mother this, and merely this, that I’ve

Arrived. However he, with little care for me,

On finding luncheon laid out ready for them there,

Went on and took his fill. I, lying down the while,

Kept saying to myself: “ Here presently will come

My mother and will bring me word from her I


love,

Upon what terms she says that she and I might
make '

Agreement.’”’ I was practising a speech myself. . .


(Lacuna of about 157 verses to 13.)


Moschion probably goes on to tell of a confidential talk
between Glycera and Myrrhina which he has overheard. He
is convinced that his hopes are illusory and realizes that he
has been duped by Davus. He has also heard things which
arouse his curiosity regarding Glycera (v. 665), but not enough
to reveal the facts in full. When Pataecus comes out of
Polemon’s house, Moschion conceals himself from view. He
is present, but unobserved by the others, throughout the follow-
ing scenes.


253


MENANDER |


Scene. TAYKEPA, If[ATAIKOS, AOPIS,
MOSXION


TATKEPA
585 ᾿ἐλθοῦ'σα πρὸς ‘tiv μ'ητέρ᾽ αὐτοῦ, pi'AT ate,
Γ \ ὃ la) τη] a 23 "ὃ / > al
καὶ δεῦρο καταφυγοῦσ᾽ ἐδυνάμην---οὐ σκοπεῖς;---
[29] ἵνα με NaBy! γυναῖκα--- κατ᾽ ἐμὲ γὰρ πάνυ
lyéy'ov’ οὐἱ δέν".---ἀλλ᾽ οὐ τοῦθ᾽, ἑταίραν δ᾽ ἵνα μ᾽ ἔχη"
Pia? > - ’ BY ” /
εἶτ᾽ ov λαθεῖν τούτους ἂν ἔσπευδον, τάλαν,
590 αὐτός «τ᾽:- ἐκεῖνος; ἀλλ᾽ ἰταμῶς εἰς ταὐτό με
lel »N / ἢ [X / δ᾽ [2 > \
τῷ πατρὶ κατέστησ᾽, εἱλόμην δ᾽ οὕτως ἐγὼ
ἀφρόνως ἔχειν, ἐχθράν τε πρᾶξ'ιν ἐκτελ εἴν"
ς cal θ᾽ [-: / a fis > \ > al
ὑμῖν θ᾽ ὑπόνοιαν καταλιπεῖν ‘aioypav ἐμοῦ
ἣν ἐξαλείψιαιτ᾽ οὐκέτ᾽, οὐδ᾽ αἰσχ' ὑνομαῦ;
Γ


595 ΠΙάταικε, καὶ σὺ ταῦτα συμπεπ'εισμένος"
A


ἦλθες τοιαύτην θ᾽ ὑπέλαβές με γεγονέναι";


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
[300] μὴ δὴ γένοιτ᾽, ὦ Ζεῦ πολυϊτίμητ᾽, ἄδικα δὲ"

δείξαις ἀληθῶς ὄντ᾽: ἐγὼ ᾿μὲν πείθομαι."
ἀλλ᾽ ἄπιθι μηδὲν ἧττον.

585 K*, quat. z, p. 3, 1. 18, ἐλθοῦσα πρὸς, 55. suppl. //
φίλτατε, 9.

586 S* suppl. |- οὐ σκοπεῖς, pap., S®.

588 ‘yéy'ov’, J* suppl. {|{οὐ" δέν", Capps suggests some nega-
tive. /...ovov... ἀλλ᾽, L*. // τοῦθ᾽, Capps. / τοῦτ᾽, 1,2, S*.

590 αὐτός <7’>, Leo.

592 Croenert, J* from mpam......, pap.


254


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


Scene. GLYCERA, PATAECUS, DORIS,
MOSCHION (in hiding)

While inspecting the wardrobe of Glycera in Polemon’s
house, Pataecus seems to have noticed something among her
belongings that aroused in him a suspicion as to her identity.
Therefore, when he summons her from the house, he has three
objects in view: the first, to secure an explanation of her
conduct with Moschion ; the second, to discharge his mission
of reconciling her with Polemon ; the third, to discover who she
really is. He finds her unwilling to return to Polemon (vv. 599,
625, 630, cf. 904). She assures Pataecus, however, that her
relations with Moschion have been innocent, though she admits
that she has put herself in a false position with him.


GLYCERA

oe eee ~ [supply eg. .:... I could have come
With no such purpose] to his mother, dearest sir,
Nor could have taken refuge here—do you not see ?>—
That he might wed me—(for in truth he’s far beyond
Poor me!)—Oh no, not that, but so that he might have
And hold me as his mistress. Wouldn't I, poor thing,
He too himself, have sought to keep it dark from them?
Would I have boldly faced his father and preferred
To be thus senseless, bring to pass a hateful deed
And in your minds embed disgraceful thoughts of me
Which you would ne’er blot out? I feel no shame

at that?
Pataecus, came you here persuaded, even you,
Of this, and thought that I had been a girl like that ?


PATAECUS
Nay, Zeus most reverend forbid! But may you prove
In sober fact these charges wrong you. I believe ;
Yet, all the same, go back to him.


594 éfarcipalrl, J?, S*.// αἰσχΓὑνομαῖ!, Leo.
597 ἄδικα δὲ, Wilam.
598 μὲν, Capps.// πείθομαι, Wilam. 599 Capps suppl.


255


MENANDER


TATKEPA
‘els ἄλλας κόρας"
600 ὑβριζέτω τὸ λοιπόν.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
οὐχ ὑβριστικῶς"
γέγονε τὸ δεινόν.
TATKEPA
> if Γδ᾽ » /
ἀνόσιον ' δ᾽ ἔπραξέ pe.
ΓῚ 7 x /, Γ > / /
οἷον μάλ᾽) ἂν θεράπαιναν ' ἐργάσαιτό τις.


5
5


(Lacuna of 16 verses to K*.)


TAYKEPA
éy'@ δ᾽ ἐκεῖνα ᾿ λαμβάΐνω τὰ χρήματα"
620 τοὐμοῦ πατρὸς καὶ μητρός, εἴθ᾽ισμαι δ᾽ ἔχειν
ἀεὶ Tap ἐμαυτῇ ταῦτα καὶ τηρ' εῖν.


7


MATAIKOS


βούλει;
ΓΛΎΥΚΕΡΑ
/ a
κομίσασθαι ταῦτ΄.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
Γἀπέγίνωκας σὺ γὰρ!
310 κομιδῇ τὸν ἄνθρωπον; τί βούλει, φιλτάτη;
μιδῇ ρ ἢ
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ


lal lal ,
διὰ σοῦ γενέσθω τοῦτό μοι.


600 Capps suppl./ οὐκ ἑἱ κούσιον!, 83, 601 Capps suppl.
602 οἷον μάλ᾽, Allinson suppl.// Remainder S? suppl.


619 K?4, quat. 2, p. 3.1. 17. 619-620 S* suppl.
622 βούλει : κομίσασθαι ταῦτ᾽ : L*. {|ἰἀπέγνωκας σὺ γὰρ
Capps. 624 wos] assumed from w.t., J?


256


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


GLYCERA
‘Gainst other girls
In future let him waaton.


PATAECUS
Nay, not wantonly
This outrage happened.


GLYCERA
Godless things he did to me,
Such treatment, surely, as you'd give some servant
maid.
(Lacuna of 16 verses to K'.)

Glycera seems to have declared to Pataecus that she is free-
born and also to have asked him to examine the proofs of her
origin for himself, that he may assist her to establish her legal
independence of Polemon. When the text begins again


Glycera is explaining to Pataecus the nature of the objects,
contained in the chest, which she has asked him to examine.


GLYCERA


And I received those objects as a legacy
From father and from mother, and it is my wont
To guard and keep them ever with me.


PATAECUS
Well, what is
Your wish ἢ
GLYCERA


To have them brought here safe.


PATAECUS
You've given up
The fellow utterly? What, dearest, do you want ἢ
GLYCERA
Through you may I obtain this.


MENANDER


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
πραχθήσεται.
a , a
625 τοῦτό «γε; γέλοιον: ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ πάντων ἐχρῆν
‘oplayv a’.
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ
» . Vi FOr IV ’
ἐγώδα τἄμ᾽ ἄρισθ᾽.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
οὕτως ἔχεις;
’ cal nr fal /
‘tis τῶν θεραπαινῶν οἷδε ταῦθ᾽ ὅπου ᾿στί σοι;
TATKEPA
Γὴ Δωρὶς οἶδε.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
καλεσάτω τὴν Δωρίδα
Γἔξω τῆς. ἀλλ᾽ ὅμως, Γλυκέρα, πρὸς τῶν θεῶν,
, ’
630 Γἕως map'eat ἐφ᾽ ois λόγοις νυνὶ λέγω,


ΔΩΡῚΣ
(.) δοιι (2) ὦ κεκτημένη.


ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
Γ eat ν 7 \ /
τάχ᾽ eicop’' οἷον τὸ κακόν.


TATKEPA
tJ / /
ἐξένεγκέ μοι
[320] ἵτὴν κοιτίδ᾽ ἔξω, Δωρί, τὴν τὰ ποικίλα


625 -γγε:, Capps.

626 Ellis suppl./ J® confirms. // Maz/ in r. margin.

627 : at end.

629 τῆς : to indicate change of addressee.

630 Suppl. from..... pest, J*./ ἕπου, πάρεστ᾽, K*./ ? dure’
apéor’? Allinson. {ἐκεῖν᾽ ἀἸφεῖτ σ᾽, S*.// εφοισνυνι λογοσδεγω-
Aeyw, L?./ Rearranged, Adyoltls suppl., Capps.

EIU ees cee t(.) δοιι (: ὦ κεκτημενὴ : {5 rejects ἔνδον,
δός : is ‘* possible.”/ ᾽ διαλλάγηθ᾽: ἰδού γέ μ᾽} 1 ΑἸ] πβοη,  Γσύγ-
258


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


PATAECUS
Well, it shall be done.
A foolish business !_ But on all accounts you first
Should see— }
GLYCERA (interrupting)
I know what's best for me.


PATAECUS
So that’s the way
You feel? What maid of yours knows where you
keep these things ?


GLYCERA
My Doris knows.


PATAgcus (0 an attendant)’
Go, someone, call out Doris here.
Yet, Glycera, no less, I beg you by the gods,
While still ‘tis possible, upon the terms | urge!
Be reconciled.


(Enter Doris from the house.)


DORIS
Well, here I am, my mistress, here !


MOSCHION (aside)
Now soon [] know what mischief’s up.


GLYCERA
Go, Doris, fetch
‘My casket out, the one—you know—that holds, by
Zeus,


1 Text in lines 630-637 is badly broken.


γνωθι, τὴν xaply δόϊς :!, S2./ The : before ὦ uncertain. // Awp/
in r, margin.

632 Suppl. and to Mosch., Capps. {(Γλ.} τί δ᾽ ἐστιν; (Δ.)
οἷον---, 883, 633 Suppl. van Leeuw.


259


MENANDER


Γἔχουσαν---οἶσθα, ν)ὴ Δί᾽,---)ν δέδωκά σοι


635 Γτηρεῖν. τί κ'λαίεις, ἀθλία; .


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
/ /
πέπονθά τι,
r Ἁ \ , \7 a, 19 ΓᾺ \ Ν = | ,
νὴ tov Δία τὸν cwrhp’,'éy@ καινὸν π' άνυ"
| ela * "ἢ -“ , >’ / Ὁ \ ΡΒ ΙΝ “Ἵ
ἄελπτον οὖν' πρᾶγμ᾽ οὐδέν. ἡ KouTis φανεῖ".


(Lacuna of circa 7 verses to the second Leipzig fragment.)


Scene. MOXXION, TATAIKOS, TAYKEPA
MATAIKOS


OO EP es ee kee
646 Τὸν" καὶ τότ᾽ εἶδον. ov παρ᾽ αὐτὸν οὑτοσὶ
/ a la) a \ 6 i |
τράγος τις, ἢ βοῦς, ἢ τοιουτὶ θηΐρί ον
Γέσίτηκεν;
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ
ἔλαφος, φίλτατ᾽, ἐστίν, οὐ τράγος.


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
Γι τῇ Ἄν Ἂν yar Ὁ ἰδ \ \ ,
KEpa'T EXEL, TOUT οἰδα. καὶ τουτὶ τρίτον"
650 Γπετεινὸς ἵππος. τῆς γυναικὸς τῆς ἐμῆς
| pe ,Ἵ 39. 5 \ a \ 7 10 ,
τὰ χρὴ MAT ἐστὶ ταῦτα, καὶ μάλ αθλίας.


634 Suppl. Leo, S*from....... go... no.

635 Van Leeuw., Headlam./. . Aaeis, pap., S* / ἀϊλύεις,
Capps, K®.//Maz/ in r. margin.

636 Γνὴ--- τοῖν, suppl. Crois.// éye καινὸν, Capps.

637 Γἄελπτον obvl, S*.// courts, Wilam.// φανεῖ, Allinson. //
End of Cairo MS. of Periceiromene.

646 Lp. éa.


ov .
648 ἡ τραγος : Leipz. pap.
649 Line to Pataecus, K*./(rpayo'v!, 648)./ κέρατ᾽ ἔχει τοῦτ᾽.
to Glyc., 8°./ : οἶδα etc. to Pataec., S*.


260


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


Embroideries—the one which I’ve entrusted you
To keep. Now why these tears,! poor girl ?
(Exit Doris into the house.)


patagcus (to himself’)
Some very strange
Experience, by Saviour Zeus, has come to me.
Well, well, there’s naught exceeds belief! The chest
will show.


ΝΑ eecle τς 6) α΄ κς πὸ, τον, αν Vere Var “see 06 7 ν 8,


(Lacuna of about 7 verses to the second Leipzig fragment.)


Doris has brought out the chest and returned again into the
house. Pataecus examines the embroideries. He has just
made out the first pattern (perhaps a hippocamp, see Sudh.
M.S. p. 91) which he has recognized, and now goes on to
number two.


Scene. MOSCHION (still in hiding), PATAECUS,
GLYCERA


PATAECUS
Which even then I saw. [5 not this next one here
Some he-goat? Oranox? Or some such animal
Worked on it?
GLYCERA
That's a stag, my dearest, not a goat.


PATAECUS
Well, horns it has. So much I know. And here’s
this third,
A wingéd horse it Ὁ. My wife’s possessions these!
Yes, hers, my own, poor luckless woman that she was.


' Some edd. (see critical notes) : ‘‘ Why do you loiter,
you wretched girl?” (See Capps, ad loc.)


261


660


665


MENANDER


ORR
ἕν τῶν a ᾿δυνάτων ἐ ἐστί, τουτί μοι δοκεῖ


σκοποῦντι, τὴν ἐμὴν τεκοῦσαν μητέρα


εἰ δὲ γεγένητ᾽ αι τοῦτ᾽, ἀδελφὴ δ᾽ ἔστ᾽ ἐμὴ


ὦ
:
Ε
ΞΞ
Γαὕτη, κάκιστ᾽ Ἰλώβαβμ᾽ ὁ δυστυχὴς ἐγώ.


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
\ ᾽ / lal > “
..u. . δὴ τἀπίλοιπα τῶν ἐμῶν;


TATKEPA
Γσήμαι ν᾽ ὃ βούλει, τοῦτο πυνθάνου τ᾽ ἐμοῦ.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ


‘ a a /
‘robev' λαβοῦσα ταῦτα κέκτησαι; φράσον.


ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ

[ἐν τ᾽ οἷσδ᾽ ἀνῃρέθην ποτ᾽ οὖσα παιδίον.
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ

ra


/ \ \ td ΄ θ΄ / 7 Γ Bhs
ἐπάναγε σαυτὸν μικρὸν ὡς ῥοθ' οὐμ' εἶνος
ἥκω τύχης εἰς καιρὸν οἰκείας ἐγώ."
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ

μόνη δ᾽ ἔκεισο; τοῦτο γὰρ σήμαινέ μοι.
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ

οὐ δῆτ᾽, ἀδελφὸν δ᾽ ἐξέθίηκ'ε κἀμέ τις.
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ

‘ \ “ aT ΟῚ ee ΄
τουτὶ μὲν ἕν μοι τῶϊν ἐμ οἱ ζητουμένων.

652 ἕν, Wilam. suppl.


654 Capps suppl. 655 S* suppl.
656 Γαὕτη, S® suppl. || κάἀκιστ' ἔφθαρμ᾽, K.


657 [ἢ δυσ᾽ τυχῆ δὴ. Capps suppl. from photo. {᾿δήλοὶϊν τίν᾽


ἤϊδη, Καὶ.


661 ῥοθίοὐμ᾽ εἶνος!, Allinson ΒῈΡΡ]. ῥόθιον u'élyal, S2./ ῥέθϊος
βλέπω", Capps, gives line to Pataecus. // No paragraphus.


262


αἰσχρῶς πρὸ Eo Bau θυγατέρ᾽ αὐτῇ γενομένην.


ee ie ie tal x “ὦ


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


MOSCHION (aside)


A chia impossible is this, methinks, as I

Now turn it over, that my mother brought to birth
And shamelessly exposed a daughter born to her.
But if this happened and if she’s my sister, mine,
Why then I’m ruined utterly, O luckless me!


PATAECUS
[Ill-starred in truth the fate] of all else left of mine?!


GLYCERA
Make clear what you are seeking and inquire of me.


PATAECUS
Where did you get these things, to treasure thus?
Explain.
GLYCERA


They found me as a baby and these things with me.


MOSCHION (to himself, aside)


Put further out to sea, you labour in the surf.?
The crisis of my private fortunes now is come.


PATAECUS (resuming his questions)
But were you laid there all alone? Come, tell me
that.
GLYCERA


Why, no. A brother also they exposed with me.


MOSCHION (aside)
That point is number one of what I sought to know.


1 In this line, of doubtful reading, Pataecus seems to be
adverting to the fate of the other child, his boy. (See Capps,
ad loc.)

2 Or (?): Draw back a little that I may scan your face
(Given to Pataecus). See Capps’s reading, notes on text.


263


1078 Καὶ
670


MENANDER


MATAIKOZ -
πῶς οὖν ἐχωρίσθη τ᾽ ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων Siyxa';
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ


Γ᾽’ “Ἵ 4 2 5 a/
ν ΠΕΥΡΊΣ ΚΑ as at σοι"


ἔχοιμ᾽ ἂν ε ἐπεῖ


τἀμὰ δ᾽ ἐπερώτα, ῥητὰ γὰρ ταῦτ᾽ ἐστί μοι,


ἐκεῖνα δ᾽ αὐτῇ μὴ φράσειν ὀμώμοκα.
ΜΟΣΧΙΩ͂Ν


καὶ τ' οὔ 'τό μοι. σύσσημον εἴρηκεν σαφές:
ὀμώμοκεν τῇ μίητρί. ποῦ ποτ᾽ εἰμὶ γῆς;
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
ὁ δὴ λαβών σε “kai τρέφων τίς ἣν ποτε;
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ
γυνή μ᾽ ἔθρεϊ ψ᾽, ἥπερ᾽ τότ᾽ εἶδ᾽ ἐκίκ!ειμένην.
5 ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
τοῦ δὴ τ'ὁποὶυ τί ἱμνηϊμόνευμά σοι λέγει;
Ἂς ΓΛΎΚΕΡΑ
κρήϊνην) τιν᾽ eine, vial, τόπον ἴθ᾽) ὑπόσκιον.
: ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
τὸν αὐτὸν ὅνπερ χὠ τιθεὶς εἴρηκέ μοι.
Ay ΓΛΥΚΕΙΑ
τίς δ᾽ οὗτός ἐστιν; εἰ θέμις κἀμοὶ φράσον.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
ὁ μὲν τιθεὶς παῖς, ὁ δὲ τρέφειν ὀκνῶν ἐγώ.
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ


σὺ δ᾽ ἐξέθηκας ὧν πατήρ; τίνος χάριν;


668 55 restored. / ταμαδερωτα, Leipz. pap./7a δ᾽ ἐμά <u>


ἐρώτα, Capps.


673 ἔθρεϊψ᾽, ἥπερ), K* suppl. //éx«<«>emevyy, or εἶδε κειμένην,


Capps.


675 εἶπε. vai, S? suppl./ εἶπε καὶ, K*.// θ΄, Capps suppl.


676 1η ), ἐβ.
204


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


PATAECUS

How were you separated from each other then ?
GLYCERA

Knowing trom hearsay I could tell the whole to you ;


But ask of my affairs, for I may tell of them.
To keep the rest a secret I’ve made oath to her.


MOSCHION (aside)

Another token for me! She has spoken plain.
She’s under oath to mother. Where on earth am I ?
PATAECUS
And he that found and reared you, who might he

be, pray ?

GLYCERA

A woman reared me, one who saw me then exposed.
PATAECUS

And mentioned what clue to identify the place ?
GLYCERA

A fountain-pool she spoke of, yes, a shaded spot.
PATAECUS

The same that he who left them there described to me.
GLYCERA

And who is that? If lawful, let me also know.


PATAECUS
A servant left them, but ‘twas I refused to rear.


GLYCERA


And you exposed them, you, the father? Tell me
why.


205


MENANDER


MNATAIKOS
680 πόλλ᾽ ἐστὶν ἔργ᾽ ἄπιστα, παιδίον, TYY'ns"!
ἡ μὲν τεκοῦσ᾽ ὑμᾶς γὰρ ἐκλείπει Bi'ov'


εὐθύς, μιᾷ δ᾽ ἔμπροσθεν ἡμέρᾳ, τέκνοΐν---'
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ
, , , θ᾽ . / ΄ > Γ. 3 , = |
τί γίνεταί ποθ᾽; ws τρέμω, τάλαιν᾽ ‘eyo.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
/ > / / Μ r ἰθ , |
πένης ἐγενόμην, βίον ἔχειν Γεἰθισ μένος.
TATKEPA
685 ἐν ἡμέρᾳ; πῶς; ὦ θεοί, δεινοῦ πόϊτμου".
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ


ἤκουσα τὴν ναῦν ἣ παρεῖχ᾽ ἡμῖν τρ ἱοφὴν'
Γἄγρ'ιον καλύψαι πέλαγος Αἰγαίας ἁλός.
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ
τάλαιν᾽ ἔγωγε τῆς τύχης.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
ἐφόλκια
ἡγησάμην δὴ πὶ τω χὸν ὄντα παιδία
690 “Tpep ew a'Bou'hou παντελῶς ἀνδρὸς τρόπ'ον."
ἥδιστα μέντοι κτημ' ἄτων πάντων Téx'va',
τὸ ποῖϊον ἔτι! λέλ' OUT 'e;
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ
μηνυθήσεται"
ἣν καὶ δέραια καὶ β'ραϊ χύς τις ἀνάγλυφος
κόσμος προσὼν γ'νώρισμα τοῖϊς ἐκκεὶιμένοις.


682 ὕ", 684 Wilam. suppl. 685 K*. 690 K*.
690-705 For conject. restor. see Sudh. Menander Studien,
pp- 90-94.


691 S* suppl. // Paragraphus doubtful.
692-3 8?.// μηνυθήσεται, K*.
694 γίνώτρισμα, S?.// éxxelmerors, Capps suppl.


266


ee ..ὄ..


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


PATAECUS

There comes, my child, from Fortune many a cireum-
stance

Incredible. For she who gave you birth, she died

Forthwith ; and just one day before she died, my
child—


GLYCERA
What is it happened? How I tremble! Ah, poor
me !
PATAECUS


I came to poverty, though used ere this to wealth.


GLYCERA
Allin a day? But how? O gods, what awful fate !


pATaEcus (theatrically)
I learned that in the wild Aegean’s wide-spread brine
Was whelmed the ship that brought us in our
sustenance.
GLYCERA
Ah, wretched me, what ill luck that!
PATAECUS
So, beggared now,
Methought it were the part of one quite reft of sense
Children to rear and trail like cargo, towed astern—
(Yet children are the sweetest things of all to own!)!—
What sort of stuff besides was left ?


GLYCERA
That shall be told :
A necklace and some little ornament embossed
Were placed as tokens with the children there
exposed,

1 Lines 691-705 are badly mutilated (see text) and some
details are only a matter of conjecture. Moschion, who is
eavesdropping through the scene, learns the secret of his
birth. At the end of the scene, where the text is much
broken, he apparently comes forward and reveals himself.


267


MENANDER


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
695 ἐκεῖνον! ἀναθεώμ' εθ᾽.
ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἔϊστ᾽ ἔτι.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
τί bys; .
TATKEPA
πότ ΤῊ ΟΠ ΛΠ:
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
Γἀλὶλ᾽ ἐστὶν! obt'os, ὡς ory’, οὑμὸς πατήρ.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
ΓΧῚ eee ate , .
€'yols av εἰπτεῖν . . «ἐν « « Covn Tis HV;
ene :
ἣν yap" χορός τε παρθένων ἐνταῦθά τις--
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
οὐκοῦν συνῆκας;
ἡβίς ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ


Sahar’ ἐς τε ΧΆ 'ανί 'διοἰ ν'
χρυσῆ τε μίτρα πάντα ‘kad’ év' εἰρημένα.
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
οὐϊκέϊτι καθέξω, φιλτάτη, ἥν


695 ἐκεῖνον ἀναθεώμεθ᾽, Wilam.// ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ alr’ ἔτι, S*.// (:)
at end,

696 533 reads: (Mar.) τί p'ns; (Γλυκ.) τὰ Aol’ ἁδελφὺς ἔσχε. | |
δ᾽ηλαδή, K°.

697 To Mosch., S*.//J? confirms πατήρ. // Paragraphus
doubtful.

698 To Pataec., 85. || ἀργυρᾶ, or πορφυρὰϊ, suppl. 5". //
ΓξΊνοῦσαν εἰπεῖν [εἰκόν᾽ Ἢ ἐν ζώνῃ τις ἦν, Capps, and gives 697
and 698 to Glycera. // Punctuation 698 and 699, Allinson.

699 To Pataec., Capps./ ἦν γάρ only to Pataec., 5",

700 ουκουνσυνηκας : to Mosch., 3, [βάδΓηϊν συνΓῆϊκα, Capps. //
Remainder and all of 70] suppl. and given to Glycera, 5*.

702 φιλτάτη is *‘ sure,” Suddh. M.S., p. 91.// Moo/ in r.
margin, S?.


268


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


PATAECUS
Let’s have a look at them.


GLYCERA
But that we can’t do now.


PATAECUS
Why so? ;
GLYCERA
hae Raw Υπερ te. - « you-see:|*


MOSCHION (zn hiding)
Why! This man is my father, mine, as it would
seem !
PATAECUS


Was there a girdle, could you say, included there ἢ


GLYCERA
There was. And worked thereon a choral dance of
girls—
MOSCHION


(aside, seeing Pataecus give a start of recognition)
Ah, that you recognized !


GLYCERA (continues to describe)
A robe diaphanous ;
A head-band made of gold. I’ve mentioned each
and all.
PATAECUS (convinced )
No longer, dearest, will I keep you in suspense.


1 Text of 696 is illegible. It apparently furnished some
clue to Moschion. For the conjecture: ‘‘ Because my
brother had the rest,” see critical notes.

2 This would be just as appropriate continued, as an aside,
to Glycera, but change of speaker is indicated in the text.


269


MENANDER


MOZXIQN
᾽
ἀμέλει δ᾽ ἐγὼ
/ , « Γ
3 .& προσεχεσθδεηου νὸν. k's DB
πάρειμι, τοῦτον. y af... 1... . a. eyo.


Scene. TAYKEPA, MOSXION, ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
CTATKEPA
ποῦ. ὦ θεοί, τίς ἐστιν οὗτος;
(ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ)
στ οι ον
(Lacuna of circa 100 lines to Oxyr. fragm.)


ACT V
Scene. TOAEMON, ΔΩΡΙΣ
ν
. μοι
a'opevo's!
᾿ λόγος
$10 ς
‘ λέγεις
ΤΗΣ bee ὉΝ ΔΆΝ ὮΝ
(Lacuna of 19 verses.)
(Lacuna of 10 verses.)
(Lacuna of 3 verses.)
. - as
. ν
BO δρηον αν ἴρο, οὐ ἐφ ὁ tone ἈΝ ΩΣ ΩΝ κ᾿ μον RO
τα


(Lacuna of 4 verses.)


_, tel ee κα ἡ


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


MOSCHION
(apparently as he comes out of concealment makes remarks,
not now legible, perhaps to the following effect)
|Well, anyhow, 1 am ready to have an interview.
I'll go forward and ask all details, |


Scent, GLYCERA, MOSCHION, (PATAECUS)!


ε GLYCERA (or PATAECUS ὃ)
(startled by Moschion’s sudden appearance)
O ye gods! Now who are you, sir?


MOSCHION


See eee ee ν᾿ ο΄ ο΄ Ὁ ὁ δ΄ ει υϑυ ree SO tes 2) et) ‘en oy ὁ 6 Xe Ὁ


(Lacuna of about 100 lines.)


ACT V


At the beginning of this act Polemon learns from Doris
that Glycera is Moschion’s sister and that her father is the
_ wealthy Pataecus. She is a free-born girl and a formal
marriage with her has become legally possible. Now his
jealous rage seems more unpardonable than ever. He is
therefore in the depths of despair.


Scene. POLEMON, DORIS


(After broken lines and lacunae, we find Polemon and Doris
engaged in conversation. Polemon is much wrought up.)


ΤᾺ new scene, beginning in lively trochaic verse.


703-704 Illegible, 85 (M.S. 1.6.) reads: (Mosch.) [ταύτῃ
προσέχεσθ᾽ ἕτίοιμός εἰμ᾽. ἀχῖλ᾽ "Aly" rixpus\. | πάρειμι τοῦτον
Γἀϊνακρινῶν ἅπίαντ!" ἐγώ. aor

705 S* suppl. ἐστιν. οὗτος : // Conject. at end saris);
Mo'cxiwv'.// For new scene and metre see Capps ad loc.
806 Oxyr. col. 1.


808-809 K? has Cuevo and λόγους.


MENANDER


ΠΟΛΈΜΩΝ
857 ἵν᾽ ἐμαυτὸν ἀποπνίξαιμι.
ΔΩΡῚΣ ᾿
μὴ δὴ Γτοῦτό γε."
TIOAEMON
ἀλλὰ τί ποήσω, Awpi; πῶς Bio'copat,'
ὁ τρισκακοδαίμων, χωρὶς ov αὐτῆς;
ΔΩΡῚΣ
πάλιν"
860 ἄπεισιν ὡς σέ--
ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ
πρὸς θεῶν, οἷον λέγεις.
ΔΩΡΙΣ
ἐὰν προθυμηθῇς ἀκ'άκιως ᾿τοὐνθένδ᾽ ἔχειν.
ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
οὐκ ἐνλίποιμ᾽ ἂν οὐθέν, εὖ τοῦϊτ᾽, ὦ φίλη,"
ὑπέρευ λέγεις. βάδιζ᾽. ἐγώ σ᾽ ἐλευθέραν"
αὔριον ἀφήσω, Δωρί, ἀλλ᾽ ὃ δ'εῖ λέγειν!"
865 ἄκουσον. εἰσελήλυθ᾽. οἴμοι, ἵμάργ᾽ "ἔρως,"
ὡς κατὰ κράτος μ᾽ εἴληφας. ἐφίλησεν τότε"
802 K ἀδελφόν, οὐχὶ μοιχόν, ὁ δ᾽ Γἀλάστωρ ἐγὼ"
καὶ ζηλότυπος ἄνθρωπος, ἀϊνακρῖναι δέον,"
εὐθὺς ἐπαρῴνουν. τοιγαροῦν ἀπάγξομαι,"
870 καλῶς ποῶν. ἰ
τί ἐστι, Δωρὶ φιλίτάτη);


Ἴ


857 ff. cf. Gren. and Hunt, and Blass. Oxyr. col. ii.

859 πάλιν, van Leeuw.

862 Paragraphus under line, but no change of speaker
apparent.// & φίλη, Weil suppl.

863 ἐγώ σ᾽, MS./ Blass, Capps corr. to δ᾽.

864 For hiatus, ef. on Samia, 170./ Blass, Capps insert
<a>. “


272


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


POLEMON
Myself to throttle.
DORIS
Nay, now don’t do that at least—


POLEMON
But what am I to do then, Doris? How ean I,
The thrice unlucky, live without her?


DORIS
͵ Back again
She’s coming to you—
POLEMON
Gods, to think of what you say !—
DORIS


If naughtiness hereafter you take pains to shun.


POLEMON
In nothing 11 be lacking. What you say, my dear,
Is well, exceeding well. Now go. I'll set you free
To-morrow, Doris.
(Doris hastily turns to go.)
Now [1 tell you what to say.
So hear— (Doris has entered the house.)
She has gone in; has vanished. Woe is me!
O raging Eros, how you've captured me by force !
It was a brother not a lover then she kissed ;
But I the Vengeance-driven, jealous man, forthwith,
Though questioning was called for, played my
drunken trick.
So then [1] hang myself and justly.
(Doris comes out.)
Doris dear,
What now?


865 Capps suppl. wapy’.// W ilam. Ἔρως.
868 Polak suppl. 869 S


MENANDER


ΔΩΡῚΣ

ἀγαθά' πορεύσεθ᾽ ὡς σέ'

ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν

κατεγέλα δ᾽ ἐμοῦ."
ΔΩΡῚΣ
μὰ τὴν ᾿Αφροδίτην, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνεδύετ' ο στολήν," ἢ
ὁ πατὴρ ἐπεξ' ἡτ αζ΄. ἐχρῆν σε νῦν τελ'εῖν"
εὐαγγέλια τῶν Ὑδτν δ Δ Ἄ; ἀϊσεὶ βὲς πάνυ"
875 ἱ στένειν ἐκείνης εὐτυχηκυίας ' τόδε."

ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
νὴ τὸν At,’ ὀρθῶς γὰρ λέγεις ὃ δεῖ ποεῖν."
ὁ μάγειρος ἔνδον ἐστί: τὴν ὗν θ' υέτω." ὲ


én


ΔΩΡῚΣ
κανοῦν δὲ ποῦ, καὶ τἄλλ᾽ ἃ δεῖ;
ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ
καὶ νοῦν μὲν οὖν
ὕστερον ἐνάρξετ᾽, ἀλλὰ ταύτην σφ᾽ αττέτω.᾽
880 μᾶλλον δὲ κἀγὼ στέφανον ἀπὸ βωμοῦ ποθεν'
ἀφελὼν ἐπιθέσθαι βούλομαι.


Ἴ


ΔΩΡῚΣ
πιθαϊνώτερος"
πολλῷ φανεῖ γοῦν.
MOAEMQN
ἄγετε ‘viv Γλυκέραν ταχύ."
871 δ᾽ ἐμοῦ, Capps.
873 Weil suppl./ πάλαι, G.—H. ising Ke.
874 Capps suppl. from photo. age... ./ 08... G.-H., K*. /
πόθεν γε δεῖ, Allinson. jroo eure γὰρ--, S*.
875 loréview, Capps. / Γ[θύλειν, G. —H., K2, δὲ.
876 van Leeuw. suppl./ ὁ δ᾽ ἀπ᾿ ἀγορᾶς, Wilam.


877 6 above μαγ-, MS. 878 Aw/ inl. margin.
882 Van Leeuw.


274


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DORIS
Good news. “She'll come to you.”


POLEMON
She mocked at me !
DORIS
By Aphrodite, no! Why, she was putting on
Her robe. Her father iveked and looked. Ἵν δυο
right that now
You celebrate Thankoffering for what has chanced.
When she has luck like this, ‘tis impious to mourn.


POLEMON
By Zeus, it’s right you are. You make my duty clear.
A cook’s within there. Let him sacrifice the sow.
DORIS
But where’s the basket and what else we need ὃ


POLEMON
That rite
Shall come on later, but this victim let him slay.
Nay, rather somewhere from an altar I prefer
To snatch a wreath and thus invest me.
(Lakes a garland from the altar of Apollo-A guieus, near
the door, and puts it on his head. )


poris (sarcastically)
Good, you'll seem


More plausible ! by far.


POLEMON
Now, quick, bring Glycera.

1 Or Doris, with sarcasm, may mean: more ‘‘ natural,”
i.e. in your 7éle as sacrificer (of hair and other victims !). See
Capps, ad loc.

275


885


890


MENANDER


ΔΩΡῚΣ
καὶ μὴν ἔμελλεν ἐξιέναι δ'ὴ χὠ πατήρ."


ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν
αὐτός; τί γὰρ πάθῃ τις;


ΔΩΡῚΣ


ὦ ταῦ


ν, ὠποδραμεῖ";


ΓΙ


ἔφυγεν. ‘klaxov toa"


odto'v ἣν θύραν ‘Woden; |
r


εἴσειμι καὐτὴ συμποήσουσ᾽, ‘el TL δεῖ."
Scene. ΠΑΤΆΙΚΟΣ, TAYKEPA
MATAIKOX
πάνυ σου φιλῶ τὸ “ cuvdiarray'Onoopuat.””
ὅτ᾽ εὐτύχηκας, τότε δέχεσθαι τὴν δίϊκην,
τεκμήριον τοῦτ᾽ ἐσ' τὶν “λλίηνος τρ'ὀπου."
ἀλλ᾽ ἐκκ'αλείτω τις δ'ραμὼ ν---αὐτ' ὃν δ᾽ ὁρῶ."


Scene. ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ, TAYKEPA, ΠΟΛΈΜΩΝ,
ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ
ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ
ἐξέρχομ᾽- ἀϊλλ᾽ ἔθυον ὑπὲρ εὐπραξίας,"
ΓΡλυκέραν ὕπ'αρ εὑρηκυῖαν ods ᾿ἐβούλετο"
πῖυθό μεΐνοϊς.
884 Capps./ οὐ μενεῖς, J. W. White. J
885 S?suppl./e. ηενι(γ)ακοντοόσοι νννθ. ραν... MS./ οὔ τ᾿ οἷι
δρ!άκοντός efor.) τὴν. Capps.


886 συμποήσουσ᾽. Capps, K*./ συμπονήσουσ᾽, δ΄".
890 [8 ὁρῶ], S*.


276


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


DORIS
And see! She was just coming, and her father, too.
(The door rattles.)


POLEMON

He too? What will become of me?

(Rushes into his house.)

DORIS

What, sir, you're off ?
He’s gone! An awful portent if a door but creak ἢ
ΤΊ] go in too myself to help if there is need.
(Ewit Doris into the house of Polemon. Enter Pataecus

and Glycera from the house of Pataecus.)


Scene. PATAECUS, GLYCERA


PATAECUS
I'm much delighted with your: “Him [1] meet
half-way.”
Accepting reparation just when Fortune smiles,
That is a proof of true Hellenic character.
(70 a slave.)
But run, somebody, call him out—Stay. Here he is.
᾿ (Enter Polemon from his house.)


Scene. PATAECUS, GLYCERA, POLEMON,
MOSCHION (in hiding)
POLEMON
I’m coming out, but I was making sacrifice
For happy outcome, hearing Glycera had found
In sober fact the wished-for friends.


891 /.. Aeu/ in rv. margin.// ἐξέρχομ᾽, van Leeuw.
892 Γἐβούλετοϊ, van Leeuw.


720 Καὶ μέλλω λέγειν ἄκουε: ταύτην γνϊησίων


MENANDER


MATAIKOS


ὀρθῶς γὰρ λέγεις, ἃ δ᾽ οὖν ἐγὼ"


895 παίδων ἐπ᾽ ἀρότῳ σοι δίδωμι.


900


905


MOAEMQN
TapBava. |
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
καὶ προῖκα τρία τάλαντα.
ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ
καὶ καλῶϊς τόδε."
ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ
τὸ λοιπὸν ἐπιλαθοῦ στρατιώτης ‘wv, ὅπως
προπετὲς ποήσης μηδὲ ἕν ' ποθ᾽ ὕστερον."
ΠΟΛΕΜΩ͂Ν


"Απολλον: ὃς καὶ νῦν ἀπόλωλα Tra'p’ ὀλίγον,"


, , , Hp i pave 7
πάλιν τι πράξω προπετές; οὐδὲ μὴν ὄναρ,
Πλυκέρα: διαλλάγηθι, φιλτάτη, μόϊνον."

TATKEPA
νῦν μὲν γὰρ ἡμῖν γέγονεν ἀρχὴ ἱπρωγμάτων"
ἀγαθῶν τὸ σὸν πάροινον.

ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ

ὀρθῶς, νὴ Δία."

ΓΛΥΚΕΡΑ
διὰ τοῦτο συγγνώμης τετύχηκαϊΐς ἐξ ἐμοῦ."
ΠΟΛΕΜΩΝ


σύνθυε δή, ἸΠἀταιχ᾽.


898 Herwerden suppl. 899 mode’ in 1. margin.


900 Weil suppl. / μήποτε. G.—H. / μΓέμψομαι (w. Γλυκέρᾳ),


Weil. -
278


ae a διδόναι


ee ey


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


PATAECUS
You're right in that.
But hear what I shall say: “1 offer her to thee
To wife, to get thee lawful children.”


POLEMON
I accept.
PATAECUS


** Three talents too as dowry.”


POLEMON
And to that, agreed !
PATAECUS
From this time on forget your soldiering, nor do
A single thing that’s headstrong, never more again.


POLEMON
Apollo! I, who all but perished even now,
Do anything again that’s headstrong? Nay, not I,
Not even dreaming! Glycera, my dearest one,
Only be reconciled.

GLYCERA

I will; your drunken trick

Has proved a source of blessing for us—


POLEMON
Right, by Zeus!
GLYCERA
And therefore full forgiveness you have gained from
me.
POLEMON


Come then, Pataecus, join our sacrifice.


901 G.—H./yAvxepar, MS./ Γλυκέρᾳ, Wilam., δ“.
905 Παταιχ᾽, G.-H. [|παταικε : pap.


MENANDER


ΠΑΤΑΙΚΟΣ

ἑτέρους ζη ἱτητέον
ἐστὶν γάμους pou τῷ γὰρ vid λαμβάϊΐνω
τὴν τοῦ Φιλίνου θυγατέρ᾽.


4


MOSXIQN
ὦ Τὴ Γκαὶ θεοί."


(A few verses are lacking.)


907 (= Oxyr. ὅ1.) ὦ γῆ Γκαὶ @eot-1 G.—H. / Assign.


Mosch., Capps./To Glycera, G.—H., 55


OTHER FRAGMEN'TS
391 K 1 οὕτω ποθεινὸν ἐστιν ὁμότροπος φίλος.


392 K 2 ὅμως δ᾽ ἀπόδειξον ταῦτα τῇ γυναικὶ <Kal>.


2 <xai>, inserted Korte,


280


to


THE GIRL WHO GETS HER HAIR CUT SHORT


PATAECUS
I must
Arrange another wedding. For my son I take
The daughter of Philinus.


MOSCHION
(involuntarily betraying his presence)
Earth and gods, I say!


(End of the manuscript. A few verses are lacking.)


OTHER FRAGMENTS


Another fragment preserved may belong to the dialogue
between Pataccus and Polemon, where Polemon, grateful for
the intervention of Pataccus, may exclaim:


Thus welcome is a friend whose breeding matches
yours,
A fragment is preserved, possibly from the dialogue between
Polemon and Doris. See line 286.
But none the less go show this to the woman.


seat |


ἜΣ ἐόν», Pad τῶ δὲ


>
af


- wes ia wer
: Sri ϑὰ vate qual & ‘of!


a!


vir Cee ey


SAS SW ain arigs την ivan Peas }
ime | bow bes eadagts Bsn
a ea) fur νων ‘Sere aed aay’ ἢ er


Teh


: 7" a . +
ἘΜ.
͵

Ἂ ἱ at 1 one “mn p | yap mon BS ΙΝ

An Vals οι owe. coewte hese πον ΕΚ ΙΝ
τεῦ τὐὐι yeobir ἦν δι τ οἢ Ψ

. pi

ἐν φᾷ εν ἰν. weihewd. gabe ΒΡ ἘΠ ν, αἵ omonlew ae
“hh? ἢ

wi ς Tana Wie ee ΤΟΝ Tongan: Ra


sci, soe, αὐτὶ han sion 5.5
4 ι ” ΐ . A
ΠΝ “nl oF : One OF 2251 SI? oor duet


ῃ


THE HERO


THE HERO!
INTRODUCTION


Tue fragments preserved of this play, though brief,
are of unusual significance, as the Cairo papyrus
contains a metrical hypothesis and the cast of
characters.

A household god or tutelary “ Hero,” like “ Mis-
apprehension”? in The Girl who Gets her Hair cut
Short, sets in motion the train of circumstances
leading to the dénouement.

The plot as given, or inferred, is as follows. Some
eighteen years before the action begins Myrrhina, a
girl of good family, was wronged by a young man,
who was unknown to her, probably at some festival
(compare the scene in The Arbitrants). She gave
birth to twins, a boy and a girl. Her nurse exposes
the children, placing with them birth-tokens, in-
cluding some object which had belonged to the lover.
A shepherd, Tibeius, a freedman of Laches, finds and
rears the children in ignorance of their parentage.
Meanwhile ~Myrrhina marries Laches. Later, in a
time of famine, Tibeius is compelled to borrow money
of his former master, Laches, but dies before he is
able to clear off the debt. His foster-son, Gorgias,


* Although the title itself is mutilated, the play has
been identified with certainty from fragment δεζ, which
includes two lines previously preserved (No. 211, Kock) from
The Hero.


284


ἃ Δ. eee ee


Se


INTRODUCTION


and the sister, Plangon, undertake to work it off as
servants in the house of Laches and Myrrhina, who,
unknown to them, is their own mother.' Pheidias,
a young neighbour of good family, has a love affair
with Plangon, but there can be no thought of
marriage with a dowerless girl. Davus, a slave and
fellow-servant of Plangon, is also in love with her
and is eager to marry her and save her from disgrace.
Here the play begins. See hypothesis below.


1 Probably Laches himself is their father, if a situation
similar to that in The Arbitrants may be assumed. ‘There is,
indeed, no proof of this in the parts preserved, outside of the
statement in the somewhat inaccurate hypothesis, but the
New Comedy was not grudging in dealing out a general
rehabilitation at the end.


ΚΘ
ἭΡΩΣ ΜΈΝΑΝΔΡΟΥ [A 1]
“Appev ‘te θῆλύ θ᾽ ἅμα τεκοῦσα παρθένος !
> > , , sy? 9
ἔδωκεν ἐπιτρόπῳ τρέφειν: εἶθ᾽ ὕστερον
” κ᾿ ΄ a δ᾽ es
ἔγημε τὸν φθείραντα. ταῦτα δ᾽ ὑπέθετο
ε Ν > XN > lal , ‘
ὁ τρέφων πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀγνοῶν. θεράπων δέ τις
δ ἐνέπεσεν εἰς ἔρωτα τῆς νεάνιδος,
ὁμόδουλον εἶναι διαλαβών. γείτων δέ τις
προηδικήκει μετὰ βίας τὴν μείρακα.
Ν ety 5.9,7 | € \ ε , ,
τὴν αἰτίαν ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὸν ὁ θεράπων στρέφειν


ἐβούλετ᾽. οὐκ εἰδυῖα δ᾽ ἡ μήτηρ ἄγαν [10]
10 ἐδυσχέραινε. καταφανῶν δὲ γενομένων,


e / Ν A
εὗρεν μὲν ὁ γέρων τοὺς ἑαυτοῦ γνωρίσας.


ὁ δ᾽ ἠδικηκὼς ἔλαβε τὴν κόρην θέλων.


TA TOY ΔΡΑΜΑΤῸΣ ΠΡΟΣΏΠΑ


Γέτας Σωφρόνη
15 Ados Σαγγάριος
“ Ἥρως θεός Γοργίας
Μυρρίνη Λάχης
Φειδίας
Χορός."


ΒΡ the late origin of this metrical hypothesis betrayed
by its language (c.g. the past tenses in narration), see Capps’s
ed., ad loc.


286


;


THE HERO


Hyportuesis!


A girl gave birth to twin children, a girl and boy, wad
gave them to a steward to rear. Then afterwards she married
her seducer. But he that was rearing them, ignorant (of the
circumstances), gave the children, as security for loans of
money, to him (i.e. the husband). And a servant-man fell in
love with the girl, supposing that she was a fellow-slave. Now
a neighbour had already wronged the girl by violence. The
servant-man wished to assume the responsibility, but the
mother, ignorant of the facts, was enraged at him. When
the facts came out, the old man (the husband) found through
α recognition-scene that the children were his own, and he
that had wronged the girl voluntarily took her to wife.


DRAMATIS PERSONAE
GETAS,? a slave.
Davus, a slave of Laches.
The *‘ Hero,” or household god.
MyRRHINA, mother of the children, now wife of Laches.
PHEIDIAS, a young neighbour, lover of the girl.
SopHrona, old nurse of Myrrhina.
SanGARIvS,? a slave, perhaps of Pheidias.
Gorcras, the son of Myrrhina, brother of Plangon, the
daughter.
Lacues, father of the children, now husband of Myrrhina.
Cuorvus, possibly consisting of the group of hunters men-
tioned in FRAGMENTUM ΒΑΒΒΑΙΤΙΟΟΜ. See below,
Scene: the Attic deme of Ptelea (probably on the foothills


of Mt. Aegaleus, opposite the south-western end of Mt.
Parnes), before the houses of Laches and Pheidias.


! This hypothesis is inaccurate in several particulars. The
children were probably exposed with birth-tokens through
the agency of a nurse, not given directly to the overseer to
rear. And it was not the steward who pledged the children
in payment of debts, but the boy himself, when grown,
undertook that he and his sister should work off the debt as
servants to their unknown father and mother.

2 In the MS. of Misowmenos G.-H. find the name spelled
Getés.

Ὁ. Sangarius. This name, also spelled Sangas, reappears in
Terence, Hunuchus, as Sanga.

287


ΗΡΩΣ MENANAPOY
AGE.1
Scene 1. TETAS, AAOS


TETAS
[20] Κακόν τι, Δᾶέ, μοι δοκεῖς πεποηκέναι
παμμέγεθες, εἶτα προσδοκῶν ἀγωνιᾷς
lal a \ / »” Ἣν
μυλῶνα σαυτῷ καὶ πέδας" εὔδηλος εἶ.
/ \ \ / \ \ “ 7
τί γὰρ σὺ κόπτεις τὴν κεφαλὴν οὕτω πυκνά;
5 τί τὰς τρίχας τίλλεις ἐπιστάς; τί στένεις;
ΔΑΟΣ
οἴμοι.
rETAS
τοιοῦτόν ἐστιν, ὦ πονηρὲ συ.
εἶτ᾽ οὐκ ἐχρῆν, κερμάτιον εἰ συνηγμένοι’


le hee | ga ὅσα \ ὃ la) ,
σοι τυγχανε τι, TOUT εἐμοι OOVVAL TEDS,


ry 1


2? / \ \ \ /
ἵν᾿ ἀπολάβῃς Ta' κατὰ σεαυτὸν πράγματα


10 ὅταν καλῶς θῆς; ὡς σὶ!υνάχθομαί γέ σοι.


Γπασχόντι παμπόνϊηρα.
1 Ter’/ in 1. margin, L?.  ἀγωνιᾷς, J*. ἀγωνιᾶν, L*.
6 Ter’/ in r. margin, L*.
9 K? suppl. 10 Wilam. suppl.
ΠΥ ee A ρα: δ΄, J* suppl.


THEsHERO


ACT I—Protocvur
Scene 1. GETAS, DAVUS


GETAS


You've been and done, I’m thinking, Davus, some-
thing bad,
Some great, big mischief; and you're taking on


because

You look for gyves and treadmill—plain as plain
ean be.

If not, what means such frequent beating of your
head?


Or why stop short and pluck your hair? Or why
these groans?


DAVUS
Ab me!


GETAS


Just so. That’s what it is, poor rascal, you!
Then ought you not, if you’ve been lucky and amassed
Some little savings, to have handed them the while
To me, that you might get them back when you've
arranged
Your business? For I’m grieved, I too, along with you
Who suffer such distress.


289


U


[30]


15 Γβέλτιστ᾽, ἐρῶντι:


MENANDER


ΔΑΟΣ
\ \ >? 40 ὦ
σὺ μὲν οὐκ οἷδ᾽ ὅ τι
Γχηρεῖς" κακῷ γὰρ ἐμπ'᾿ ἔπλεγμαι πράγματι.
Γἀλλοῖόν ἐστ᾽" ἔγωγε δ᾽ ἔφθαρμαι, Γέτα.


TETAS
5


Γπῶς yap, κατάρατε;
ΔΑΟΣ
\ rn ᾿ ΤΟ Ἢ θ aA
μὴ καταρῶ, πρὸς ἱτῶν' θεῶν,
Ξ
TETAS
/ \ / > r
TL σὺ λέγεις; ἐρᾷς;
ΔΑΟΣ
ἐρῶ.
TETAS
Γπλέον δυοῖν σοι' χοινίκων ὁ δεσπότης


[42] παρέχει. πονηρόν, A@. ὑπερδειπνεῖς ἴσως.


[40]


ΔΑΟΣ
/ \ / / € “
πέπονθα τὴν ψυχήν τι παιδίσκην ὁρῶν
συντρεφομένην, ἄκακον, κατ᾽ ἐμαυτόν, ὦ Γέτα.
TETAS


20 δούλη ᾿στίν;


ΔΑΟΣ
οὕτως ἡσυχῇ, τρόπὸν τινά.

\ \ ᾿ 7 > lal > \
ποιμὴν yap ἣν Τίβειος οἰκῶν ἐνθαδὶ
Πτελέασι, γεγονὼς οἰκέτης νέος ὧν ποτε.

, , , -“ /
ἐγένετο τούτῳ δίδυμα ταῦτα παιδία,


ὡς ἔλεγεν αὐτός, ἥ τε ΠΠλαγγών, ἧς ἐρῶ, .---


11 μὲν L?, 83. ] Δα in r. margin, 1.3.

12 ληρεῖς, Croiset. κακῷ ete. Capps suppl. ἑτέρῳ γε
συΐϊμπ., S2.

13 Allinson suppl./].. .7. \ ἔφθαρμαι (no interpunct.) J*.

14 K* suppl. // Δα’ in τ. margin, J*.


290


—


THE HERO


DAVUS

I don’t know what you mean,
That’s nonsense. This affair is bad, quite different,
Wherein I’m coiled. I’m ruined, Getas, utterly !


GETAS -
But how, you curséd fool ἢ


DAVUS
Nay, by the gods, good sir,
Curse not a lover.
GETAS
What? A lover, you?


DAVUS
I am.
GETAS
Your master gives you more than double rations, then.
ΓΑ bad thing, Davus. You, perchance, are overfed.


DAVUS
Tis somewhat with my heart that’s wrong as I behold
A harmless maiden, Getas, in my station reared.


GETAS
So she’s a slave ?
DAVUS
Yes—partly—in a fashion—yes.
You see, Tibeius was a shepherd dwelling here
In Ptelea, though once a house-slave in his youth.
To him, as he gave out the tale, these babies, twins,
Were born—this Plangon, she with whom 1 am in
love—


15 Leeuwen suppl. // Aa/ in r. margin.
16 Ad, 444 K. 18 Δα! ἴῃ 1. margin. _
20 Ter/ in r. margin. -
201
υ 2


MENANDER


TETAS
25 νῦν μανθάνω.


ΔΑΟΣ
Ν / / ᾽ e /
τὸ μειράκιόν θ᾽, ὁ Topyias.
TETAS
ὁ τῶν προβατίων ἐνθάδ᾽ ἐπιμελούμενος
νυνὶ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν;


ΔΑΟΣ
ie x ” /
οὗτος. ὧν ἤδη γέρων
ὁ Τίβειος ὁ πατὴρ εἰς τροφήν γε λαμβάνει
τούτοις παρὰ τοῦ woo δεσπότου μνᾶν, καὶ πάλιν---
80 ) λιμὸς γὰρ ἣν---μνᾶν, εἶτ᾽ ἀπέσκλη.
ΓΕΤΑΣ
τὴν τρίτην ι
«ς > > / \ « , . ,
[50] ὡς οὐκ ἀπεδίδου τυχὸν ὁ δεσπότης ὁ σὸς; i
AAOZ 7
ἴσως. τελευτήσαντα δ᾽ αὐτόν, προσλαβὼν j
ὁ Ῥοργίας τι κερμάτιον, ἔθαψε καὶ ᾿
τὰ νόμιμα ποιήσας πρὸς ἡμᾶς ἐνθάδε ᾿
35 ἐλθὼν “ἀγαγών τε τὴν ἀδελφὴν ἐπιμένει
τὸ χρέος ἀπεργαζόμενος.


ΔΑΟΣ
μετὰ τῆς ἐμῆς κεκτημένης ἐργάζεται
ἔρια διακονεῖ τε.


ΓΕΤΑΣ
ἡ Πλαγγὼν δὲ τί;


TETAS |
/
παιδίσκη; 7
25 Aa/ in r. margin. 27 Aa/ in r. margin.
30 Ter / in r. margin. 36 Ter/ in r. margin.
37 Δα! in 1. margin.
38 re: παιδισκη: πανυ, L* Capps. // Aa in r. margin.
292


THE HERO


GETAS
Ah, now I understand.
DAVUS


—and Gorgias, the lad—


GETAS
The one now here with us who has our sheep in
charge ?
DAVUS


Yes, he. Tibeius, then, the father, being old,
Receives a mina! from my master as a loan
For their support, and then a second one—for times
Were hard —and then he dried up, skin and bone.

GETAS

Yes, when
Your master, haply, would not give him number
three ?

DAVUS
Perhaps. However, when he died, this Gorgias
Secured some little cash and buried him, and then,
When he had done what custom calls for, came to us


And brought along his sister and is living here
And working off the debt.


GETAS
But Plangon, what of her?


DAVUS
She's living with my mistress. As her task she works
_ The wool and serves.
GETAS
A maiden serves !


1 For Greek money values see note on page 18 above.


293


40


[60]


45


\ "
πράττεις ὑπὲρ σαυτοῦ;


MENANDER


ΔΑΟΣ
πάνυ---
/ lal -

Γέτα, καταγελᾷς;

TETAS

μὰ τὸν ᾿Απόλλω.
ΔΑΟΣ
/ v4
πάνυ, Γέτα,

> / \ ,ὔ
ἐλευθέριος καὶ κοσμία.

ΓΕΤᾺΣ


ce ΄ ,
TL OVY OU; τι


AAO
λάθρᾳ μέν, Ἡράκλεις,
οὐδ᾽ ἐγκεχείρηκ᾽, ἀλλὰ τῷ ᾿μῷ δεσπότῃ
εἴρηχ᾽ , ὑπέσχηταί T ἐμοὶ σίυνοικιεῖν"
αὐτήν, διαλεχθεὶς πρὸς ‘Tov ἀδελφόν.


TETAS
Ν “
λαμπρὸς εἶ."
ΔΑΟΣ
, ͵ > na wa ee. Ἴ
τί λαμπρός; ἀποδημεῖ τρίμηνον ἐπί τινα
> ef > / \ n
πρᾶξιν idia'y εἰς Λῆμίνον. ἐλπίδος δὲ viv
ἐχόμεθα τῆς αὐτῆς" ἐκεῖθεν, εὔχομαι,
σῴζοιτο.
ΓΕΤΑΣ
Sr ne r a 2. 3) wy
χρηστὸς ἰοὑτοσί: θυσιῶν τάχ᾽ ἂν
ὄνησις εἴη.


Ἴ


43 εἴρηχ᾽, Capps corr./ efpnn’, L?.

44 Aaumpds εἶ, Wilam. 46 Sonnenburg suppl.

47 ἐκεῖθεν, Allinson. /C..1.C . ἐκεῖνος εὔχομαι, Sonnen-
burg, δ΄,

48 Γ οὑτοσὶ θυσιῶν, S?.// τάχ᾽ ἂν, Capps. / τέ μοι, S?.


294


=


.
ἕ


THE HERO


DAVUS
She’s perfectly—
You're laughing at me, Getas ὃ


GETAS


By Apollo, no!


DAVUS
She’s perfectly the lady, Getas, modest too !


GETAS


But what of you? What are you doing for yourself
In your affair ?
DAVUS
Clandestinely, good Heracles,
I’ve made her no advances, but have said my say
To master and he’s promised she shall be my mate
When with her brother he has talked it out.


GETAS
Well, then,
That's fine for you.
DAVUS
You call it fine? Why, he’s from home
In Lemnos three months now on business of his own.
May he come safe from there! For now to this same
hope
We're clinging still.
GETAS
(aside) Good fellow this! (To Davus)
But it were well
To sacrifice. ’Twould help, perhaps.


295


MENANDER


AAOS
πολὺ π 'ρεπόντως καὶ καλῶς"
50 φρονεῖς. ἐγὼ γὰρ και Γριώτατος σφόδρ᾽ ἂν
[10] θύσαιμ᾽ : ἀνόητόν. ἐστ


-
τιν ἀμελεῖν τῶν Oeav'—
ὦ ξυλοφόρ᾽, a's ἐμὲ δεῦρο φέρε πλῆθος ξύλων."


ΔΑΟΣ
> , a.) / Vs
ρον oe ee ae = OUTOMOT ἡράσθης, Tera;
TETAS
55 ov yap ἐνεπλήσθην. . . . ..


OTHER FRAGMENTS


HPQ ΘΕΟΣ
No. 1
οὐκ εἰμὶ τούτων τῶν — ἡρώων κακῶν."
No. 2


209 K δέσποιν᾽, Ἔρωτος οὐδὲν ἰσχύει πλέον,
οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸς ὁ κρατῶν ‘Tau! ἐν οὐρανῷ θεῶν


, , r
Ζεύς, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκείνῳ πάντ᾽ ἀναγκασθεὶς ποεῖ.


49 Capps suppl. 50 Allinson suppl.

51 ἀνόητον, L*, 53, J?. // ἐστιν, S*. {ἀμελεῖν τ. 0. Allinson.

52 Allinson suppl., see Capps. | wkvAopopw: . σπ, -- ᾧ Evdo-
φορῶ, or ξυλοφυρῶν ἀπ πίομαι S*. (For other fragments
inserted here by δ΄, see below, p. 300).

55 Fr. 345 Kock.

No. 1 Frag. Zenob. 5, 60, assigned to Hero by Capps,
Kock. {| Γκακῶν!, Capps suppl.

No. 2, line 2, «τῶν;» Grotius add.


296


OTHER FRAGMENTS OF “THE HERO”


DAVUS
"Twere very fit ;
A happy thought! For now most opportune would be
My sacrifice. "ΤῚΝ senseless to neglect the gods—
(to a peasant passing by)
Hey! Faggot-bearer! [Bring me here a lot of
wood |


(Perhaps belonging to this same dialogue is another fragment
from “ The Hero.’’)


DAVUS
(perhaps resuming after his request for faggots)
Ἐν cee Oh, Getas, have you never loved ?
GETAS
Wo; Hor ΠΕ πο ΕΠ ΒΟΥ my*belly full...


OTHER FRAGMENTS OF “THE HERO”


Τὰ


Part of a line which seems to belong to a prologue post-
poned, as in the “ Pericetromene,” until after the opening
scenes. The Hero-god is speaking and says:


“1 am not one of these (malignant ὃ) ‘ Heroes.’


»)


A fragment, preserved for its sententious commentary on
the power of Love, may belong to a later dialogue between
Davus and Myrrhina.

DAVUS
Than Love, my mistress, there exists no greater force.
Nay, even Zeus himself, who over heaven’s gods
Holds sway, to Love’s compulsion yields in every-
thing.
297


210 K
212 K


213 Καὶ


214 Καὶ


215 K


216 K


868 K


MENANDER


No. 3
> a \ “- \ \ > /
ἐχρῆν yap εἶναι TO καλὸν εὐγενέστατον,
τοὐλεύθερον δὲ πανταχοῦ φρονεῖν μέγα.


Νο. 4
χοῦς κεκραμένου
» \ ΝΜ col
οἴνου: λαβὼν ἔκπιθι τοῦτον.


No. 5
πεφαρμάκευσαι, γλυκύτατ᾽, ἀναλυθεὶς μόλις.


Νο. 6
ΓΟΡΓΙΑΣ
\ \ a 2 Μ
νυνὶ δὲ τοῖς ἐξ ἄστεως

κυνηγέταις ἥκουσι περιηγήσομαι
τὰς ἀχράδας.

No. 7

a» > \ lal /

ev ἴσθι, κἀγὼ τοῦτο συγχωρήσομαι.


No. 8
τῶν «δὲ; παιδισκῶν τινι
δούς
Νο. 9
ὦ δυστυχής, εἰ μὴ βαδιεῖ.
Νο. 10


Ν Ν /
Ξ-- ποήσεις ἀστικὸν σαυτὸν πάλιν


No. 3, line 2, rejected by W. Meyer (Sitz. berichte d. bay,
Acad. 1890).

No. 5, πεφαρμάκευσαι or ἐπεφαρμακεύσω, Photius (Berlin),
Ρ. 115, 19, and Suidas.

No. 6. Fr. Sabbaiticum.

No. 8, «δὲ» Meineke inserted.


298


OTHER FRAGMENTS OF “THE HERO”
3.


To Davus, likewise, may probably be given the following
sententious expression of noblesse oblige :


’T were right that Honour’s beauty stamp the nobly-
bred

And that the free-born everywhere think lofty
thoughts.


eee HMPA AS of well-mixed wine
A pitcher-full. Now take and drink it down. . .


~


9.


An allusion to the power of Love (made, perhaps, by Davus
to Pheidias) :


Scarce from the spell set free, dear sir, you're drugged
again.


6.


In the following the young Gorgias may, perhaps, be
alluding to the band of hunters who are to take the réle of
chorus :


Now round our pear-trees I will guide
These hunters from the city who have j just come up.
Ti
Be well assured, I too will yield in this.


8.
. . .. . To some one of the slave-maids giving (it).


as


O luckless you, unless you'll go. ........


10.
. . . you'll make yourself a city-man again.


299


MENANDER
MOND, AT
Fragments from Cairo MS}
Peete dies ἀφ 08 CSN Ot; Os wea. os
Ἐν ΠῚ δ τὸν» Obie ως OR rere eee
ΧΟΡΤΟΥ!
ACT


Scene. AAXHS, MYPPINH


(Aay. a PQ ane κλεῖς, ἔα μ᾽ ὦμάρ ἵτυρον snes
eos vupp'n . : :
ted ks μῶν ε :
Ri Oe oe OL A Te peesrene
hageOrTe THS 4. MOAAHS eR Meike
wiv eyes διγ σοι ρδη ας τ ΠΕ oe


105% Fah alt hale
ee ae ene SO eae er
TOUT@ :. TO 2). .. ΠΡ pntépa'
᾿ μᾶλλον 60% ηγοῦ τίς πότ᾽ ἐστι. (Μ.) φασὶ μὲν"
τὴν Θρᾷττα᾽ ν. (A.) ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἔστι. (Μ.) τίς δ᾽
ἐστίν ποτε.
15 (A.) σὺ: τάλαινα. <(M.) τί;» (A.) dlalvepas γε νὴ
Δί, ὦ γύναι.
ἐς κόρακας, ἐξέστηκας; (Μ.) οἷα γὰρ λέγεις.
1 These fragments are combined in this order by S? (see also


J?) and added to Act I. Suppl. not otherwise accredited are
by S? or 55. Other conjectures of 55 are omitted.


4 ὦ Ἡράκλεις, Jensen./... καθισ, L*, K.// ἀμάρτυρον, K*.//


λέγειν, Ὁ}:
15 πί; transferred from r. margin by S* (13) and assigned
to Myrrhina. // cvtadavap . . lepwsyevndiawyuvar te: LA,


φανερῶς νὴ AU ὦ γύναι. (Myr.) τί <yap>, Καὶ.
16 Whole line to Myr., S*.//: ofa γὰρ λέγεις : to Myr., 1,",


300


OTHER FRAGMENTS OF “THE HERO”
ll.


Several fragments of the Cairo papyrus, preserved in a very
mutilated condition, apparently belong to this play. The
arrangement and interpretation can be only tentative. Laches,
if he is assumed as one of the speakers, has now, as it would
seem, returned safely from Lemnos.

Lines 1-12.—Three mutilated lines close an “Act.”’ There
follows the usual interlude of a “ chorus.” 1

Lines 13 ff —Myrrhina is having a dialogue, perhaps with
Laches. Plangon’s affairs are discussed, and Myrrhina’s
own past history is disclosed.

(LACHES) 3
Good Heracles! Let me talk without anyone to
overhear.

After some, now unintelligible, sentences, Laches perhaps
is saying:

LACHES
Explain who in the world is her mother.


MYRRHINA
They say it is the Thracian woman.


LACHES
But it isn’t.
MYRRHINA
Well, who is it then ?
LACHES
‘Tis you, unfortunate !
MYRRHINA
What !
LACHES
Yes, clearly, you my wife, by Zeus. Crows pick you!
You're astonished ἢ
MYRRHINA
Why—I—what things you say!
1 See fragment No. 6, above.
5. «* Heracles ” is not an expletive for a woman.


MENANDER


(A.) ἃ καὶ ποήσω, καὶ δέδοκταί μοι πάλαι.
(M.) ἱδρώς, ἀπορία. (A.) νὴ AC εὖ γ᾽, ὦ Μυρρίνη,
ἐπ᾽ ἐμαυτὸν ἔλαβον ποιμέν᾽, ὃς βληχώμενον---


(Lacuna of circa 14 lines.)


ἵν. δεῖ Div) va cdvery a qolanon Unpigi-er Deine
(A.) ‘ri πέπονθας; ὡς ya'p avdpia's παρίστασαι.
(M.) ὡς οἰκτρόν, ἣ τοιαῦτα δυστυχῶ μόνη,
211 K ἃ μηδὲ πιθανὰς τὰς ὑπερβολὰς ἔχει.
(A.) Γἰάσεται μὲν τὸ" πάθος ἡ γνώμη σφόδρα'
25 adr’ ἠδίκηκ'εν ἐκ βίας σέ τίς ποτε;
(Μ.) Γναιχὶ" . . . .«ρ: (A.) ὑπονοἱεῖς! ὅσ' περὶ ποτ᾽ ἦν;"
eee Th
noyuv'el. οὕτωϊς i. ἘΜ. Ὁ. τ
McA hea ΑΘ ΡΩΦΊΝ socks ΝΣ eee
sha ee TOT RURAL fh ols? ses


Raper en er ον Be ads ee
a
one 6, Oa


4


wee ee XE lpErTaTOD :
BB ce dle die Net ho RAR ter loop dee:


18 ἀπορία : J*./ ἀπορρεῖ, 1.5", K* to Laches.
22, 23 Restored from Kock, gil, by Korte. il Te pap.


... Jtavta... τυχωμ.. BY pple ary it . pBodas εχ.
26 J. [85 conj. Tvaixl, μεθύων ita Srobouts δότιεὶ ror’ ‘qn


29 S2./ novxnv.c.. vis, 73,
302


OTHER FRAGMENTS OF “THE HERO”


LACHES

That which I shall also make good. I’ve settled that
long since.

MYRRHINA
Sweat and confusion !
LACHES

Yes, good, by Zeus, my Myrrhina, I took unto myself
a shepherd who (, . . adopted?) a bleating
(baby ?).


(Lacuna of some 14 lines.)


mare ae ca (© W'S) 67-8 <0) eee. δ 6 "Se @) 6 ὁ. ὁ a8 6) δ ws Olas


LACHES
What is the matter with you? Nay! You stand
there like a statue!


MYRRHINA
How pitiable ! I who all alone have such misfortunes
as have no believable climax beyond them !


LACHES
Your resolve will bring efficient healing. But did
someone by violence once wrong you ἢ


MYRRHINA


LACHES
Do you guess who in the world it was

. . She was thus brought to shame (at the festival

of?) Alea Athena.

After some unintelligible verse-ends the conversation con-

tinues at line 35:
(LACHES ?)

ΡΝ Δ 2 os ursitell


3°35


MENANDER


(M.) ἔϊτη ᾽στὶν ὀκτὼ καὶ δέκ᾽. (A.) οὐκ ἔστιν μόνη
2... τν... laut’ ἔστω δὲ τοῦτ᾽, εἰ συ-ν;»δοκεῖ.
(Μ.) . . . WIC τὸ πρᾶγμα γίνεται: (A.) πῶς λαν-
θάνει
39 . οπρι. πεσών σε; πῶς δ᾽ ἀπόϊλωλε!! πηνίκα---


36 μονη, J”.

38 J*./ Γκρίσιϊς, S? suppl. {|Ρ: πῶς λάνθανει to Laches, Allin-
son./ To Myr., S*.

39 . οπρι. πεσων, corr. to τὸ προπεσόν, J*./ ce, S*, J*./ os,
pap. | 6 προπεσών σοι, ? Allinson. / 7. ρ(ε). πεσὼν = παρεκπε-
σών, 8%.

S* and J? refer to this play also the verse-ends in fragment
n. These (revised by J?) are :


Recto Verso
Satoh cake Toe ἄσωτο. .. εἰὔδηλῖον . . . ..
. Kal συνδοκῖει. .. ἐϊλθεῖν ἐκεῖῖνον.
. τ ει δ᾽ αὐτῷ ma. . νὴ τὸν Ποσειδῶ...
ΣΉ Πα dis iat λαβεῖν odo
Lg ae EN CXC CIP ΟΝ ΟΣ


304


i es


OTHER FRAGMENTS OF “THE HERO”


(MYRRHINA ὃ)
She is eighteen years old.


(LACHES ὃ)
She is not the only one . . . But granted, if you
agree .
MYRRHINA
a re this thing happens.
LACHES
How without your knowledge does . . . fell upon
your ΠΟ σα": Ὁ Ὁ When. 4...


395


a + ‘4
ὰς »"»ἂἄμν Meth ς %


Ty, Jal Se 800 WER sig


- 1
᾿
,
5
> a 3 ον


ge]


ν΄.
ae


a tiled


δ ee ea oe


FRAGMENTS FROM SIX'TY-SEVEN
- OTHER IDENTIFIED PLAYS —


a
a
; 75
Pa
᾿ %
φι -
4
᾿
᾿ -
“ao
ἊΣ
δ


TITLES OF SIXTY-SEVEN IDENTIFIED PLAYS


N.B.—The Greek titles are in alphabetical order


ΑΔΕΛΦΟΙ.
ΑΛΙΕῚΣ

ANAPIA
ANEYIOIL .
APPH®OPO2
ΑΣΠΙΣ

ΒΟΙΩΤῚΣ
ΓΕΩΡΓΟΣ.
ΔΑΚΤΥΛΙΟΣ.
ΔΕΙΣΙΔΑΙΜΩΝ.
AHMIOTPLOS
AIAYTMAI . are
Als ἘΞΑΠΑΤΩ͂Ν.
ATZKOAOS . :
EATTON ΤΙΜΩΡΟΥΜΕΝΟΣ
ἘΜΠΙΜΠΡΑΜΕΝΗ


ἘΠΑΓΓΕΛΟΜΕΝΟΣ..
ἘΠΙΚΛΗΡΟΣ
ΕΥ̓͂ΝΟΥ͂ΧΟΣ.
ΕΦΕΣΙΟΣ
ΗΝΙΟΧΟΣ.
ΘΑΙ͂Σ...
ΘΕΟΦΟΡΟΥΜΈΝΗ


ΘΗΣΑΥΡΟΣ
ΘΡΑΣΥΛΕΩΝ
ΘΥΡΩΡΟΣ.
IEPEIA .
IMBPIOI
INNOKOMOZS
KAPINH


KAPXHAONIOS

* KATAVETAOMENOS
KEKPY@AAOS .
KI@OAPISTHS
KNIAIA

KOAAE
KYBEPNHTAI .
KQNEIAZOMENAI


308


THe BrRoTHERS

THe FisHERMEN :
Tue Lapy oF ANDROS
THE Cousins ‘
Tuer PEpPLos- BEARER
THE SHIELD .

Tur ΒΟΕΒΟΤΙΑΝ GIR
Tre FaRMER

THE Ring .


THE SUPERSTITIOUS “MAN :


THE BrRipAL-MANAGER .

Tur Girt Twixs

Tue DovusLe DECEIVER .

Tue PrevisH Man.

Tue Seir-ToRMENTOR

THe WomAN WHO Is SEP
on Fire.

THE PROMISER .

Tue Herress

THe EunvcH

THe MAN FROM EPHESUS .

THe CHARIOTEER

THAIS 4: |. oe) oe

THE Woman  PosskssEepD
WITH A DIVINITY

Tur TREASURE

THRASYLEON . ΐ

THe Doorn TENDER

THE PRIESTESS .

THE IMBRIANS .


THE GRooM ee .

THe Cartan WAILING-
Woman °

THE CARTHAGINIAN |


Fase ACCUSER
HEADDRESS .
CITHARA PLAYER
Lapy oF Cnipus
Toapy
THE PILots ΝΥΝ
THE WomMEN WHO WOULD
DRINK HEMLOCK .


THE
THE
THE
THE
THE


PAGE
313
315
317
319
319
323
323
324
341


341 ~


343
343


345 -


345
349


351
351
353
353
355
355
357


357
359
361
361
363
365
367


367
369
369
369
371
38]
383
397


399


TITLES OF SIXTY-SEVEN IDENTIFIED PLAYS (cont.


AETKAAIA
MEOH
MISOrYNH=
ΜΙΣΟΥΜΕΝΟΣ.
ΝΑΥΚΛΗΡΟΣ
ΞΕΝΟΛΟΓΟΣ
OAYNOIA .
OPT'H
TIALAION .
TIAAAAKH
TIEPINOIA
TMIAOKION .
MQAOTMENOL .
PATIIZOMENH .


ΣΙΚΥΏΝΙΟΣ.
ΣΤΡΑΤΙΩ͂ΤΑΙ
ΣΥΝΑΡΙΣΤΩΣΑΙ͂
TITOH
TPOSANIOS
TAPIA

YMNIS


ὙΠΟΒΟΔΙΜΑΙΟΣ -


bANION
ASMA .
PIAAAEAFOI
XAAKEIA .


XHPA .
¥ETAHPAKAHS
YO@POSEHS


THe LAapy ofr Leucas

DRUNKENNESS

THe MisoGynist

Tue Hatep Man

ΤῊΝ SHIPMASTER ;

THE DRAFTING OFFICER

Tur Lapy From OLyNTHUS

ANGER .

THE SLAVE

THE CoNcUBINE P

THE GIRL FROM PERINTHUS

TH NECKLACE

THOSE OFFERED FOR SALE

THe GIRL WHO GETS
FLOGGED .. :

Tur MAN FROM Srcyon .

THE SOLDIERS

THE LADIES AT LuncHEon

THe Wert-NvuRSE

TROPHONIUS

THE URN

Hymunis . _

THE CouNTERFEIT Baby

PHANIUM

THE GHOST :

THE BRoTHERS IN Love

Tue Fast oF THE CopPER-
SMITHS

Tur Wipow .

THE COUNTERFEIT HERACLES

Tue Notsr-sHy Man


PAGE


401
403
405
409
415
417
417
417
419
42]
423
429
433


435
435
437
437
439
439
44]
44]
443
447
448
457


457
459
459
46]


More or less meagre fragments are given (cf. Kock’s Com.
Att. fragm.) under the following additional eighteen titles :


ANATIOEMENH
ANAPOTTNOS
ΑΠΙΣΤΟΣ


ATTON


A®POAISIA
AAPAANOS
ETXEIPIAION
@®ETTAAH
ΚΑΝΗΦΟΡΟΣ


ΜΗΝΑΓΥΡΤῊΣ
ΝΟΜΟΘΕΤΗΣ
ΟΜΟΠΑΤΡΙΟΙ
T14PAKATA@HKH
ΠΡΟΓΑΜΟΙ
ΠΡΟΕΓΚΑΛΩΝ
SYNEPQSA
SYNE@HBOI
[XAAKIS3].


399


INTRODUCTION


Tue titles of about ninety plays of Menander are
known. Apart from the five more or less frag-
mentary plays of the Cairo papyrus, edited above,
identified fragments have been preserved from more
than eighty others which yield amounts varying from
a few words only to 123 lines of an individual play.
In the present volume selections are given from
sixty-seven! of these identified comedies, arranged
according to the alphabetical order of the Greek
titles, and including the longer fragments which are
edited in the Teubner edition and in Sudhaus’s
second edition as a supplement to the Cairo papyrus.

The selection has usually been determined by
the intrinsic interest of the fragments themselves,
although some have been included for other reasons
as, for example, citations which reappear, in sub-
stance, in Terence? or in Plautus. The omitted
fragments, it is believed, contain little of value
except for the technical student.

The mere list of titles is instructive. Geographical
roles—such as the “ Andrian,” ‘ Boeotian,” “ Car-
thaginian,”’ “Cretan,” “ Cnidian,’” ‘ Ephesian,”
““ Messenian,” “Olynthian,” “ Perinthian,” “Samian,”’
* Sicyonian ’’—indicate, over and above the intimate
relations in commerce and war with the outside
world, a plentiful admixture of foreign residents and
a cosmopolitan outlook, notwithstanding the jealously
guarded tradition which demanded Attic parentage
for the begetting of lawful children.

Furthermore, although the types are conven-

' For list see previous pages.

2 Citations from Terence are made in accordance with
the notation of lines in Sargeaunt’s edition, Loeb Classical
Library.

310


INTRODUCTION


tionalized, and although the variations of plot, as
has been repeatedly pointed out, are comparatively
small in the New Comedy of manners, yet a recapi-
tulation of the list of titles reflects with some com-
pleteness the characteristic elements which made
up contemporary Attic society as a whole. It is
Menander’s merit, as remarked by Quintilian and
now made clearer to us by recent finds, that he
could treat special and hackneyed themes so as to
portray the foibles and the virtues of other men
remote in place and time.

The repetition of the same titles by different play-
wrights was much in vogue in the New as in the
_Old Comedy. In the collection of Comic Fragments
more than 250 identical titles reappear respectively
in the writings of from two to eight different authors
There would doubtless be many more if we had the
complete record. Among Menander’s titles forty-
eight were shared by him with from one to six other
playwrights. In the case of some writers this may
have been due to poverty of imagination, but we
must remember that even the great tragedians seem
to have felt a tacit challenge to recast some of the
themes of their predecessors, as, for example, in the
case of the “ Choephoroi”’ of Aeschylus, followed by
the “ Electra” of Sophocles and of Euripides.

This quasi-standardization of titles—like the con- _
ventionalizing of types of characters—may have
tended to pique rather than to dampen the interest
of the audience, and to facilitate the concentration
of their critical judgment upon the merits of the
poets thus brought into obvious competition. In
this connection it may be noted that the “ Hypobo-
limaios,’ although this title had been used by at
least two of Menander’s predecessors, was regarded,
after his death at least, as one of his masterpieces.


311


1: κΚ


3K


4K


5 K


6K


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED
PLAYS


AAEA®OI
ὦ μακαριόν μ᾽ Γὁτιὴ" γυναῖκ᾽ ! od λαμβάνω.
εἰ δ᾽ ἔστιν οὗτος τὴν κόρην ' ὁ" διεφθορώς.


ἔργον εὑρεῖν συγγενῆ
/ / > ’ \ Ἁ ε ΄“-
πένητός ἐστιν" οὐδὲ εἷς γὰρ ὁμολογεῖ
αὐτῷ προσήκειν τὸν βοηθείας τινὸς
δεόμενον" αἰτεῖσθαι γὰρ ἅμα τι προσδοκᾷ.


a - al -" /
ov παντελῶς δεῖ τοῖς πονηροῖς ἐπιτρέπειν,
» ῬΞ | / ᾽ > \ , ΝΜ ,
ἀλλ᾽ ἀντιτάττεσθ᾽: εἰ δὲ μή, τἄνω κάτω
ἀρ ς ᾽ ͵, ea:
ἡμῶν ὁ βίος λήσει μεταστραφεὶς ὅλος.


\ “ Ν e / ᾽ Ἀ \
. . « πρὸς ἅπαντα δειλὸν ὁ πένης ἐστὶ yap
καὶ πάντας αὑτοῦ καταφρονεῖν ὑπολαμβάνει.


΄ , /
ὁ γὰρ μετρίως πράττων περισκελέστερον
ἅπαντα τἀνιαρά, Λαμπρία, φέρει.


1 w ὁτιὴ γνναῖκ, Bentley, ue: γυναῖκα, MS.
2 6, Kock add.


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED
PLAYS


THE BROTHERS


There was a like-named play by six other comic poets:
Alexis the unclé of Menander, Philemon, Diphilus, A pollo-
dorus, Hegesippus, and Euphron. Terence’s play, although
ascribed in the didascalia wholly to Menander, was indebted
in part at least (see Prologue) to the ‘‘Companions in
Death” by Diphilus. Citations from Terence are made from
Sargeaunt’s edition, ‘‘ Loeb Classical Library.”


O happy me, in that I fail to take a wife! !
But if this is he that ruined the girl.?


A task it is to find anyone akin to a poor man.
For not a single one admits that he belongs to him
if he needs assistance. Quite naturally, for he
expects him to be asking for something.


We absolutely must not yield to the wicked, but
oppose them. Otherwise before we know it our
whole life will be turned topsy-turvy.


For the poor man is craven in everything and has
the suspicion that everybody looks down on him.?°
(Perhaps connected with this.)
For he that is moderately well off, Lamprias,
bears more unflinchingly all that brings annoyance.
1 cf. Terence, Adelphoe, 48, 44.
2 cf. Terence, Adelphoe, 296, 297, 308.


3 cf. Terence, Adelphoe, 605 ff.
4 Bentley translates ‘‘ poor.”


313


MENANDER


8 K ὀκτώ τις ὑποχεῖν aveBoa καὶ δώδεκα
κυάθους, ἕως κατέσεισε φιλοτιμούμενος.


9 Bees es Kowa τὰ τῶν φίλων.


10.K ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἀγροῖκος, ἐργάτης, σκυθρός, πικρός,
φειδωλός."


11K θεός ἐστι τοῖς χρηστοῖς ἀεὶ
ὁ νοῦς γάρ, ὡς ἔοικεν, ὦ σοφώτατοι.


12 K τί πολλὰ τηρεῖν πολλὰ δεῖ δεδοικότα;


AAIEI® (AAIETS ?)


13 K χαῖρ᾽, ὦ φίλη γῆ, διὰ χρόνου πολλοῦ σ᾽ ἰδὼν
ἀσπάζομαι: τουτὶ γὰρ οὐ πᾶσαν ποῶ
τὴν γῆν, ὅταν δὲ τοὐμὸν ἐσίδω χωρίον"
τὸ γὰρ τρέφον με τοῦτ᾽ ἐγὼ κρίνω θεόν.


e lal e \ ‘ - ,
14 K 0 πρῶτος ευρῶν διατροφὴν πτωχῷ τεχνὴν
\ ’ / > / ig a \ °
πολλοὺς ἐπόησεν ἀθλίους" ἁπλοῦν yap ἣν
τὸν μὴ δυνάμενον ζῆν ἀλύπως ἀποθανεῖν.


15 K ὡς δὲ τὴν ἄκραν
/ ς la ef 5 / \
κάμπτοντας ἡμᾶς εἶδον, ἐμβάντες ταχὺ
ἀνηγάγοντο.


1 2,96. (ef. Terence, Ad. 866-867), ἀκριβής, χαλεπὸν γεγά-
μῆκα νῦν. Allinson.


314


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


Someone kept bawling out to pour “eight” cups
and “twelve,” until he floored him in the drinking
bout.


Friends have all in common. !


But I, a country gawk, a working man, dour, sour,
miserly (have married a wife !) 3


O ye the wisest of the wise, unto the good their
Reason ever is a god, it seems.


Why should one have excess of caution from excess
of fear?


THE FISHERMEN


Of fifteen citations preserved from this play the following
are the more significant.


ςς Breathes there the man. ...?”


Greeting, O dear my country, long the time gone by

Till now I see and kiss thee. Not to every land

Would I do this, but only when I see my own

Home place. The spot that bred me, this I count
a god.


The man who first invented the art of supporting
beggars made many wretched. For the obvious
thing were that he who cannot live without misery
should die.?°


As we doubled the headland they saw us, and,
embarking, quickly put to sea.
1 ef. Terence, Adelphoe, 804.


2 ef. Terence, Adelphoe, 866, 867 ; Aristoph. Clouds, 43.
3 cf. Plautus, Trinum, 2. 2. 58.


315


MENANDER


21,22,23K ... παχὺς yap bs exert’ ἐπὶ στόμα.


24 K


39 K


41,42 K


48 K


50 K


Nes Pn ρ τον

ἐτρύφησεν ὥστε μὴ πολὺν τρυφᾶν χρόνον.

pve eee ola Φ Meats Hatin sores aly

ἴδιον ἐπιθυμῶν μόνος μοι θάνατος οὗτος φαίνεται
> / ΝΜ \ / cal

eVOdvatos, ἔχοντα πολλὰς χολλάδας κεῖσθαι

παχύν,
ὕπτιον, μόλις λαλοῦντα καὶ τὸ πνεῦμ᾽ ἔχοντ᾽ ἄνω,
ἐσθίοντα καὶ λέγοντα “σήπομ᾽ ὑπὸ τῆς ἡδονῆς."


1


εὐποροῦμεν, οὐδὲ μετρίως: ἐκ Κυΐνδων χρυσίον,
Περσικαὶ στολαὶ δὲ Κεῖ as” ; ᾿ πορφυραῖ, τορεύματα
ἔνδον ἔ ἔστ᾽, ἄνδρες, ποτήρι᾽ ® [ἄλλα τ᾽ ἀργυρώματα),


κἀκτυπωμάτων πρόσωπα, τραγέλαφοι, λαβρώνια.


ΑΝΔΡΙΑ


εὑρετικὸν εἶναί φασι τὴν ἐρημίαν
’ nw,
οἱ Tas ὀφρῦς αἴροντες.


, ᾽ 3: ἡ a Ψ
εἶτ΄, +. AOVTAT aUTNY aUT\Ka...
Kal τεττάρων WOV μετὰ τοῦτο, φιλτάτη,
/,
TO νεοττίον.
\ 3... Ὁ, κὸν > “
τὸ δ᾽ ἐρᾶν ἐπισκοτεῖ
» -“
ἅπασιν, ὡς ἔοικε, καὶ τοῖς εὐλόγως
καὶ τοῖς κακῶς ἔχουσιν.


ζῶμεν γὰρ οὐχ ὡς θέλομεν, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς δυνάμεθα.


Perhaps fragm. 797 K (see below) is to be referred to the
᾿Ανδρία on account of the apparent reminiscence in Terence’s
play.


1 Note in fragm. 23 the change to trochaic inetre.
3 δὲ κεῖνται, Heindorf./ δ᾽ ἐκεῖναι, MS.


316


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


For a fat hog lay upon his snout. . . . So wan-
tonly he gormandized that he’d not wanton long.
If I desired some appropriate form of death this one
alone appears as euthanasia: prone on my back to
lie, with well-creased paunch, fat, scarce uttering a


word, with upward panting breath, and eat and eat
and say: “1 rot for very pleasure.”


We are well off and in no mere average way.
There is gold from Cyinda; there is store of purple
robes from Persia; we have within, gentlemen,
repoussé work, drinking cups, and other silver ware,
and masks of raised relief, goat-stag drinking horns,
wide-eared vessels.


THE LADY OF ANDROS


Menander, by certain changes and additions, afterwards
adapted this in his ‘‘ Perinthia”’ (q.v.), and Terence drew his
“ Andria”’ from a contaminatio of the two.
The “eyebrow-lifters’! claim that solitude
ministers to invention.


Give her a bath forthwith ......... And
after that, my dear, the yolks of four eggs.”


Love darkens counsel; as it seems, for all—both
for the reasonable and the ill-advised alike.


We live, not as we wish to, but as we can.®


1 The “ high-brows.” ef. Terence, Andria, 406.
2 ef. Terence, Andria, 483, 484.
* ef. Terence, Andria, 805.
3 ποτήρι ἄλλα τ᾽ ἀργυρώματα, ΚΟΟΚ. ἰ ποτηρίδια, τορεύματα,
MS.


317


MENANDER


ANEWIOI
59 K φύσει yap ἐστ᾽ ἔρως
\ ‘al , [2 ᾽ “Ἢ Ψ
καὶ νουθετοῦντος κωφόν" ἅμα δ᾽ οὐ ῥάδιον
νεότητα νικᾶν ἐστι καὶ θεὸν λόγῳ.
a > / b> hier | \ ey lal Μ
60 K εὐδαιμονία τοῦτ᾽ ἐστὶν υἱὸς νοῦν ἔχων"
ἀλλὰ θυγάτηρ KTH ἐστὶν ἐργῶδες πατρί.
62 Καὶ Γρΐσ᾽ |! εἰσιὼν
/ / nw μὰ / a
Tavov, λύχνον, λυχνοῦχον, ὃ TL πάρεστι: φῶς
/
μόνον πολὺ ποίει.


63 K τὸ κακῶς τρέφοντα χωρί᾽ ἀνδρείους ποεῖ.


ΑΡΡΗΦΟΡΟΣ ἡ ΑΥ̓ΛΗΨΡΙΣ


65 K A
ov γαμεῖς, ἂν νοῦν ἔχῃς,
τοῦτον καταλιπὼν τὸν Biov: γεγάμηκα “γὰρ
αὐτός: διὰ τοῦτο σοὶ παραινῶ μὴ γαμεῖν.
Β
δεδογμένον τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽" ἀνερρίφθω κύβος.
Α
5 πέραινε. σωθείης δὲ νῦν. ἀληθινὸν
εἰς πέλαγος αὑτὸν ἐμβαλεῖς γὰρ πραγμάτων,
οὐ Λιβυκόν, οὐδ᾽ Αἰγαῖον Γοὐδὲ Σικελικὸν" "
οὗ τῶν τριάκοντ᾽ οὐκ ἀπόλλυται τρία
4 7 > > ‘ / >
πλοιάρια' γήμας δ᾽ οὐδὲ els σέσωσθ᾽ ὅλως.


1 ola’, add. Dobree.
2 οὐδὲ Σικελικόν, Cobet add.


318


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE COUSINS


Tis nature’s way that Love
Is something deaf to admonition and withal
"Tis hard to down a god or youth in argument.


A son with sense—that’s happiness, but troublesome
Is the possession of a daughter to her sire.


Go in and fetch
A torch, a lamp, a lamp-stand, or what else there be,
But anyhow make light a-plenty ....


Heroes are bred by lands where livelihood comes hard.


THE PEPLOS BEARER or THE FLUTE GIRL


For these arrephoroi or maidens who carried the peplos
and other holy things at the festival of Athena Polias see the
“ Lysistrata” (641 ff.) of Aristophanes.

The fragments of this play, scanty as they are, acquaint us
with a considerable cast of characters.

A
ee You will not marry, if you’ve any sense,
And leave this life of yours. For I who speak to you
Have married. Therefore I advise you: “Do not
wed !”
B
The matter’s voted and decreed. Be cast the dice!


A

Well then, goon. But heaven send you come off safe.

On a real sea of troubles you’re embarking now—

No Libyan, no Aegean, nor Sicilian sea

Where three boats out of thirty may escape from
wreck —

There is no married man at all who has been saved !


319


>
oO
A


67 K


68 K


70 K


es
72 Καὶ


MENANDER


ἐὰν δὲ κινήσῃ μόνον τὴν Μυρτίλην

ταύτην τις ἢ τίτθην καλῇ, πέρας ' ποεῖ
λαλιᾶς" τὸ Δωδωναῖον ἄ ἄν τις χαλκίον,

ὃ λέγουσιν ἠχεῖν, ἢν παράψηθ᾽ ὁ παριών,
τὴν ἡμέραν ὅλην, καταπαύσαι θᾶττον ἢ
ταύτην λαλοῦσαν: νύκτα γὰρ προσλαμβάνει.


, ff /
πάντας μεθύσους τοὺς ἐμπόρους
- A /
ποεῖ τὸ Βυζάντιον. ὅλην ἐπίνομεν
\ / \ \ ‘ / Δ A / -“
τὴν νύκτα διὰ σὲ καὶ σφόδρ᾽ ἄκρατόν μοι δοκῶ.
/ lal /
ἀνίσταμαι γοῦν τέτταρας κεφαλὰς ἔχων.
\ a -
τὰ πατρῷα μὲν ποεῖ καιρός ποτε
’ / , , > / \ ,
ἀλλότρια, σῴζει δ᾽ αὐτά που τὰ σώματα"
/ » »"
βίου δ᾽ ἔνεστιν ἀσφάλει᾽ ἐν ταῖς τέχναις.
Α
» /
ἑλλέβορον ἤδη πώποτ᾽ ἔπιες, Σωσία;
(ΣΩΣΙΑΣ)
“
ἅπαξ.
Α
/ “ a / \ fal
πάλιν νῦν πῖθι' paiver yap κακῶς.


/ ᾽ \9 a a
πάντη TTL” τῷ καλῷ λογῳ
΄ \ € “ ͵ > . ‘ ‘
ἱερὸν: ὁ νοῦς yap ἐστιν ὁ λαλήσων θεός.


ὦ τρισκατάρατε, ζωπύρει τοὺς- ἄνθρακας"
᾽ \ \ > , ,
ἀνδρὸς χαρακτὴρ ἐκ λόγου γνωρίζεται.


1 Bentley, πέρας οὐ ποεῖ.
3 πάντη ‘orl, Mein., πάντ᾽ ἐστὶ, MS.


! This copper or bronze (cymbal) at Dodona became pro-
verbial. Strabo (z, epitome 3) says: ‘‘There was in the Holy
Place a copper cymbal (or ? caldron) and above it the statue


320


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


But if one merely sets this Myrtile a-going or calls
“nurse,” she chatters to the limit. The Dodonaean
bronze,! which they say rings on the livelong day,
if a passer-by but touch it, you might check sooner
than this woman’s chatter; for she takes in the
night in addition.


Byzantium makes all the traders tipsy. The whole
night through for your sake we were drinking, and,
methinks, ‘twas very strong wine too. At any rate
I get up with a head on for four.


Some occasion alienates your patrimony, while it
Spares, we'll say, your mere body; but secure live-
lihood exists in handicraft.


A
Have you ever yet drunk hellebore, Sosias ?


SOSIAS
Yes, once.
A
Now take another drink. For you are badly crazed.


-.......... For right Reason there is sanctuary
everywhere, for Mind is the god to give an oracle.


O thrice accursed, fan the coals to flame!
A man’s character is revealed by his speech.?


of a man with a copper scourge in his hand. . .. This scourge
was triple and wrought in chain-fashion with astragali (7.e.
chuckies or ‘jackstones’) dependent from it, And whenever
these astragali were stirred by the winds they, by continually
striking the copper, would give forth sounds reéchoing long
enough for one, who was measuring the time from the
beginning to the end of the echo, to count up to four hundred.”
* Proverb, repeated in Self-Tormentor, 143 K.


321


74K


88 K


89 Καὶ


90 K


MENANDER


ASTI=


-- ,
® τρισάθλιοι
i / 3) | 1 / / yy lal ΝΜ ’
σατράπαι',ἡ τί πλέον ἔχουσι τῶν ἄλλων; βίον
ὡς οἰκτρὸν ἐξαντλοῦσιν οἱ τὰ φρούρια
τηροῦντες, οἱ τὰς ἀκροπόλεις κεκτημένοι"
εἰ πάντας ὑπονοοῦσιν οὕτω ῥᾳδίως
ἐγχειρίδιον ἔχοντας αὐτοῖς προσιέναι
0 ’
οἵαν δίκην διδόασιν.


a / \ , e lal \ a

ὃ βούλεται yap μόνον ὁρῶν καὶ προσδοκῶν
/ a

ἀλόγιστος ἔσται τῆς ἀληθείας κριτής.


στρατιώτην, Σμικρίνη, σωτηρίας
ΝΜ >» ig al , ? / 7 »
ἔστ᾽ ἔργον εὑρεῖν πρόφασιν, ὀλέθρου δ᾽ εὔπορον.


πολλοὶ γὰρ ἐκλελοιπότες
τὸν χάρακα τὰς κώμας ἐπόρθουν.


Μ \ > /
ἔχων τὴν ἀσπίδα
lj
ἔκειτο συντετριμμένην.


“Ἑλληνίς, οὐκ ᾿Ιβηρίς.


ΒΟΙΩΤΙΣ


r rn r >
ov δεῖ διαβολῆς καταφρονεῖν, οὐδ᾽ ἂν σφάδρ᾽ ἣ
ψευδής: ἐπίσταντ᾽ αὐξάνειν αὐτήν τινες,
» ἃ tA \ nm? > na v
80 ods φυλάττεσθαι τὰ τοιαῦτ᾽ ὀρθῶς ἔχει.
πολλὰ δύσκολα
e xv , rn -“ > > > /
εὕροις ἂν ἐν τοῖς πᾶσιν" ἀλλ εἰ πλείονα
τὰ συμφέροντ᾽ ἔνεστι, τοῦτο δεῖ σκοπεῖν.


πλοῦτος δὲ πολλῶν ἐπικάλυμμ᾽ ἐστὶν κακῶν.


1 σατράπαι, Kock add.


ῳ


~


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE SHIELD
Pride

ie ip O thrice-wretched nabobs! What do they
possess more than others? What pitiful results
from baling of life’s bark, with all the garrisons they
set and citadels they own! If they, beneath it all,
are conscious that thus lightly all men, dagger in
hand, are coming after them, what a penalty they pay!

Prejudice

Now if he sees and looks for only what he longs

for, he'll not be a rational judge of truth.


The problem for a soldier, Smicrines,! is to find a
pretext for saving himself; for dying there is plenti-
ful provision.

For many, leaving the stockade utterly deserted,
were plundering the villages.


He lay there with his shield crushed to shape-
lessness.


She’s no Iberian, she’s a Greek.


THE BOEOTIAN GIRL


One must not despise slander, no matter how false
it may be. Some people know ‘how to increase it,
and on their account it is well to be on one’s guard
against such actions.


You'd find in them all many things to harass;
but if the advantages are in the majority—that’s
the thing to look at.


Property covereth a multitude of woes.
' ef. the Smicrines of The Arbitrants. For the thought
cf. Plato, Apology, 39a.
323
y 2


MENANDER


THE FARMER


ARGUMENT :—Cleaenetus, an old bachelor farmer, is living
in α country deme where he continues to work like a day-
labourer although owner of the farm. Years before he had
(apparently) known and loved Myrrhina, from whom, how-
ever, he had separated before the birth of her daughter. She
meanwhile had (apparently) married and is now a widow
living in poverty. Her son, Gorgias,' finds employment in
the country with Cleaenetus. One day the old farmer, wield-
ing his heavy two-pronged mattock, wounds himself severely,
and would have died but for the really filial care of the young
man. Grateful for this, Cleaenetus in his convalescence
questions Gorgias about his circumstances and, not connect-
ing the mother with his own former love affair, determines to
marry her daughter, Gorgias’s half-sister, to relieve at the same
time their poverty and his own loneliness. Myrrhina, when
informed of this, is greatly perplexed, partly perhaps because
she is secretly aware that Cleaenetus is the girl’s father (if
this may be assumed), and certainly because her dauyhter has
fare had an affair with the son of their rich neighbour

When the (longer) fragment begins the lover, son of ‘“X,”
has been placed in an awkward position. His father, who
has doubtless heard of his amour with a portionless girl, has
determined to marry him at once to his own half-sister. The
development of the plot is lost, but, judging from similar plots
in Menander, we may assume that all difficulties were sur-
mounted in the parts of the play now lost. Perhaps there
may have been a recognition scene between Cleaenetus and
Myrrhina, the former marrying the latter instead of her
daughter and thus giuing legitimacy and a dowry to their
daughter, who would thereby be enabled to marry the rich
man’s son. Cleaenetus may also have adopted Gorgias and
put him in the way of marrying “ Hedeia,” his new brother-
in-law’s half-sister.*


1 G.-H. think that Gorgias is the rich neighbour ‘‘ X.”

2 The above agrees more nearly with Kretschmar than with
Grenfell and Hunt’s edition in the interpretation of the text
and the assignment of parts. G.—H. take Gorgias (of fragm.
93, 95 K—line 102 not being included in their edition) as the
rich father of Hedeia’s lover.


324


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


se.


With speaking parts preserved :


1. “Z,” a youth, son of “X”’ and half-brother of Hedeia.

2. Myrruina, @ poor widow (?), (formerly known (?) to
Cleaenetus), mother of the young man (Gorgias ?) and
of his half-sister, “Y,’’ with whom “ Ζ᾽᾽ is in love.

3. Davus, a slave of “X.””

4. PHILINNA, an old woman, confidential servant of
Myrrhina and nurse of her daughter.

5. Goratas, (9) the son of Myrrhina.


Il. Other characters, some of them mutes :


6. CLEAENETUS, the farmer of the title-réle.
7. Syrus, another slave of “X.”
8. ‘*X,”! a well-to-do Athenian, father of “ 2."
9. Heperta,? half-sister of “Ζ,᾽᾽ daughter of “Δ᾽ and of
his present wife.
10. “Y,” a young girl, daughter of Myrrhina (and (?) ille-
gitimate daughter of Cleaenetus).


ScENE: Athens (3), the house of ‘‘ X,”’ awell-to-do Athenian,
on one side of the stage and that of Myrrhina on the other.
The son of “ΧΑ comes out of his father’s house and goes
towards that of Myrrhina and stands hesitating before her
door while he makes an explanatory speech. When the frag-
ment begins he is speaking, perhaps, of his relations with the
brother of his sweetheart. He has just been off on a business
trip and, upon his return, finds preparations for his own
wedding already in full swing.


1 The ‘‘Gorgias” of line 102 and of fragm. 93, 95 K is
identified by Blass and G.-H. with ‘‘X,” but, as being a stock
name in the New Comedy for a young man (cf. The Hero), it

eems probable that it is the name of Myrrhina’s son.

* Hedeia, a probable conjecture by Wilamowitz.


325


MENANDER


-EQPTOS
(“2
πο mee τς προσιὼν πράττων ve
PEW ih Peper) a ὑποφοβούμενος υ -
Γἣν δ movn'p ὃς ὁ ὐδ᾽ ἐδόκουν " ἁμαρτάνειν",
Γἀλλὰ τό θ᾽ ὁ μειρακίσκος ἐν ἀγρῷ διετέλει.

5 Γἔτυχε de! συμβεβηκὸς 6 6 μ' ἀπολώλεκε

ἀπόδη" μον εἰς Κόρινθον ἐ ἐπὶ πρᾶξίν τινα.

ἀνιὼν" ὑπὸ νύκτα γινομένους ἑτέρους γάμους
καταλαμ βάνω μοι, τοὺς θεοὺς στεφανουμένους
τὸν πατέρα θύοντ᾽ ἔνδον" ἐκδίδωσι δὲ

10 Γαὐτὸς ὁ) πατήρ. ὁμοπατρία γάρ ἐστί μοι
ἐκ τῆσδε τῆς" νυνὶ γυναικὸς τρεφομένης

Γγεγῶσ᾽ "ἀδελφή. τίνα δὲ δυσφεύκτῳ κακῷ
Γτρόπον μάχωμ᾽ οὐκ οἶδ'α' πλὴν οὕτως ἔχω"
γἐξῆλθον ἐ ἐκ τῆς οἷ" κίας οὐδὲν φράσας.

15 Γοὕτως λιπὼν δὲ τὸν γάμον τὴν φιλτάτην
ΓΉ δεζ αν ἀδικήσαιμ᾽ av" ov yap. εὐσεβές.
Γκμό'πτειν δὲ “μέλλων τὴν θύραν ὁ ὀκνῶ πάλαι:
Tov'« olda γὰρ τὸν ἀδελφὸν εἰ νῦν ἐξ ἀγροῦ -
Γέϊνθάδ᾽ ἐπιδημεῖ. πάντα προνοεῖσθαί με δεῖ.

20 ἀλλ᾽ ἐκποδὼν ἐ ἄπειμι καὶ βουλεύσομαι
τοῦτ᾽ αὔθ᾽, ὅπως δεῖ διαφυγεῖν με τὸν γάμον.


‘
%
7
é


3 Suppl. Nicole from Fr. 99 Κα ἣν δ᾽ ob πονηρὺς οὐδ᾽ ἐδόκουν
(although long for space). {{ἁ μαρτάνειν, K?.

4 ἀλλὰ τόθ᾽, Allinson./ καὶ yap τόθ᾽, K?.

5 ἔτυχε δὲ, Allinson. / νῦν δ᾽ ἔτυχε, K*./ ἔτυχε τὸ, G.—-H.

7 ἀνιὼν, Allinson./ κατιὼν, ΚΞ, { ἐλθὼν, G.-H. // ἑτέρους,
Dzaiatzo. | ἤδη, G.—H./ γινομένους γὰρ τοὺς γάμους, S*./ γινομενὴ
Tous γαμους, pap.

8 στεφανομένους, G.—H., ecrapavous, pap.


9 Nic. suppl. 10 Bury suppl.
326


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE FARMER


et en ov i' ee mikes 46 π Wi ς δου οι len Ὁ ue: «el @ ἢ, ὦ ἀνέ es) we” ὁ


I was not base nor did I even think I erred
about it. However, the young fellow at that time
was staying in the country. Now, as it happens,
there has occurred something which has ruined me
while I was off in Corinth on some business. On my
return at nightfall I find other nuptials under way
for me, the statues of the gods receiving wreaths,
my father making sacrifice within. It is my father
himself who is giving away the bride—for I have a
half-sister born of her whom he now has to wife.
In what way I am to fight against this pressing evil, I
know not. However, this is how I’m placed. I left
the house without saying a word. But if I should
thus desert the marriage I should be wronging my
dearest Hedeia. That would be a breach of duty.
And this long while now I have been hesitating to
knock at this door; for I don’t know whether the.
brother is now here at home, come back from the
country. I must provide for everything. Well, Ill
be off, out of the way, and I'll make plans about
precisely this, how I am to escape the marriage.


(Exit © Z.”)


ars eanes νι νυνί, pap. 12 Suppl. Préchac, K?.
13 tpondy μάχωμ᾽, S* suppl.
14 Γέξῆλθον ἐκ τῆς οἰ!κίας, G.—H. suppl. ᾿
16 ΓῊδεϊταν Wilam. in lacuna of three letters (... αν) suppl.
(as written Ἡδῖαν). [{εὐσεβές, Nic., K?, corr. for ευσεβός of pap.
17-19 Nic. restored.
327


(Mv.)


30
(Mv.)


(Aa.)
36


MENANDER


Scene. MYPPINH, ®IAINNA


TaN ὡς πρὸς εὔνουν, ὦ Pidw<v>a, τοὺς λόγους
Γποουμένη σε πάντα τἀμαυτῆς λέγω.
Γὲν τοῖσδ᾽ ἐγὼ νῦν εἰμί. (Φι.) καί, νὴ τῶ θεώ,
Γἔγ᾽ῳ γ᾽ ἀκούουσ᾽, ὦ τέκνον, μικροῦ δέω
Γ aS \ θ / > θ a \ / x
πρὸς τὴν θύραν ἐλθοῦσα Kai καλέσασα τὸν
Γ. Ἵν»! > a > a μὴ fal
aralfov ἔξω τοῦτον εἰπεῖν ὅσα φρονῶ.
Γέἐμοΐϊ ye, Φίλινεν;»α, χαιρέτω. (Φι.) τί χαιρέτω;
Γοἰμῳζέτω μὲν οὖν τοιοῦ 'τος ὦν. γαμεῖ

\
Γὸ μιαρὸς οὗτος ἠδικηκὼς τὴν κόρην;
Γχόγους" τοσούτους κατατ'ἰθου" προσέρχεται
Γὴμῖν! ὁ θεράπων ἐξ ἀγροῦ Δᾶος" βραχύ,
Thirty, μεταστῶμεν. (Φι.) τί δ᾽ ἡμῖν, εἰπέ μοι,
Γτούτου" μέλει; (Μυ.) καλόν γ᾽ ἂν εἴη, νὴ Δία.


Scene. AAOS, MYPPINH, ®IAINNA


ἀγρὸν εὐσε' βέστερον' γεωργεῖν 'ovd ‘eva
οἶμαι: φέρει γὰρ μυρρ'ίνην, κιττὸν! καλόν,
Μ a ΝΜ » ΚΓ. ae
ἄνθη τοσαῦτα: τἄλλα δ᾽ a'y τις καταβάλῃ,


24-25 Blass suppl. 26, 27 Nic. suppl.
28 ἐμοί, Ell., G.—H.
29 οἰμωζέτω, Nic.// τοιοῦτος, Nic./ rot.tws, pap./toodtos, S*.
30 οὗτος, pap./ οὕτως. Wilam.
31 λόγους, G.—H. suppl.// τοσούτους κατατίθου, Nic,, G.—H.
restored. 32 ἡμῖν, G.—H.
33 φίλη, 53,2... ἡ, 43. τῃδὶ, α.-Η.
34 τούτου, Nic. suppl. ;
35-37 are variously restored from frag. 96 K, i.e.
ἀγρὸν εὐσεβέστερον γεωργεῖν οὐδένα
οἶμαι: φέρει γὰρ ὅσα θεοῖς ἄνθη καλά,
κιττόν, δάφνην" κριθὰς δ᾽ ἐὰν σπείρω, πάνν
δίκαιος ὧν ἀπέδωχ᾽ ὅσας ἂν καταβάλω.
37 τἄλλα... καταβάλῃ = frag. 899 K.


328


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


Scene 2. MYRRHINA, PHILINNA
(Enter Myrrhina and Philinna from Myrrhina’s house,


conversing.)
MYRRHINA
Well, Philinna, to you because you're loyal I say my
say and tell youall my tale. Such is my present plight.
PHILINNA
Yes, and, by the Twain Goddesses, on hearing you,
my child, I all but have to go to his door and call out
that impostor to tell him what I think.
MYRRHINA
For all I care, Philinna, here’s “ Good-bye” to him!
PHILINNA
What? “Good-bye”? Nay,a plague on him, I say,
for being such an one! Shall this blackguard go marry
when he has done a wrong like this to our maid ?
MYRRHINA
Have done with so much talk. Here we have
Davus the servant coming from the country. Let's
step aside a little, my dear.
PHILINNA
What do we care about him? Now tell me that.
MYRRHINA (urgently)
It really would be wise, by Zeus.


Scene 3. DAVUS, MYRRHINA and PHILINNA
(in concealment)
DAVUS
(enters, nith Syrus his fellon-slave)

Methinks there’s no one tills a more religious soil.
For it yields its dues of myrtle,! ivy fair, so many
flowers. And what other crops soever anyone puts

1 A pun on Myrrhina’s name, of whose presence Davus is
already aware.


i 329


40


(Aa.)


45


(Mv.)
50
(Dr. )


(Aa.)
56


MENANDER


-“ /
ἀπέδωκεν ὀρθῶς καὶ δικαίως, ov πλέον"
, » -} A \ / e , , 2 ΚΝ! "»"“
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸ τὸ perpen ὁ Σύρος εἰσένεγχ᾽ ὁμῶς


πάνθ᾽ ὅσ᾽ Γἀναϊ φέρομεν: ταῦτα πάντ᾽ εἰς τοὺς
γάμους.

ὦ χαῖρε πολλά, Μυρρίνη. (Μυ.) «πάνυ καὶ
σύγε


οὔ ge καθεώρων, γεν«ν:ικὴ Kal κοσμία
/ / /, / / , ϑ fal /
γύναι. τί πράττεις; βούλομαί σ᾽ ἀγαθῶν λόγων,
la \ ΄ » / x e \
μᾶλλον δὲ πράξεων ἐσομένων, ἂν οἱ θεοὶ
MeN wal, γνῶναι καὶ φθάσαι rpato's φράσας."
‘ , ΄, e _\ ΄ ΓΡ Auer
ὁ Κλεαίνετος yap, οὗ τὸ μειράκιον ‘aypov
ἐργάζεται, πρώην ποτ᾽ ἐν ταῖς ἀμπέλοις"
r am | ὃ / \ aN i wa Us | /
σκ' ἀΐπτων διέκοψε TO σκέλος χρηστ ὥς πάνυ.

9.2 ΄ / \ / + Pay ;
τάλαιν᾽ ἐγώ. (Aa.) θάρρει, τὸ πέρας δ᾽ ἄκουέ μου.
ἀπὸ τοῦ γὰρ ἕλκους, ὡς τριταῖον ἐγένετο,
βουβὼν ἐπήρθη τῷ γέροντι, θέρμα τε
ἐπέλαβεν αὐτόν, καὶ κακῶς ἔσχεν πάνυ.
ἀλλ᾽ ἐκκορηθείης σύ γ᾽, οἷα τἀγαθὰ
ἥκεις ἀπαγγέλλων. (Mv.) σιώπα, γράδιον.
ἐνταῦθα χρείας ενομένης αὐτῷ τινος
κηδεμίόννος οἱ μὲν οἰκέται καὶ βάρβ'αροι,


38 πλέον, Nic. restor.

40 ὅσ᾽ ἀναφέρομεν, Ell. restor. / πανταοσαφερομεν, MS. |
<&>nav7’ ὅσα φέρομεν, S*.

41 «πά;»νυ, G.—H. restor.

42 οὔ σε, Rich./ orye, MS./ ὥς ye, G.—H.

45 γνῶναι, Kaibel./-yetoa, G.—-H., Blass. // rparos φράσας,
G.-H.

46 ἀγρὸν, G.—-H. 47 Nic. restor. 48 Kaibel restor.

51-52 βουβὼν.. .. αὐτόν = fragm. 98 Καὶ,

53 ἐκκορηθείης σύ γ᾽ = fragm. 903 Καὶ.


330


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


in, it pays back fair and square—no more, but just the
same amount! (T'urning towards the house of “ X.’)
Here, Syrus, take in all of this together, whatever
we have brought. All this is for the wedding. (To
Miyrrhina, who, with Philinna, comes out of concealment.)
My best greetings, Myrrhina.


MYRRHINA
The same to you, by all means.


DAVUS
I did not see you, discreet and noble lady. How
goes it with you? I wish toinform you of some good
news—or rather of some events approaching, if so
be the gods will—and to be the first to tell. For
Cleaenetus, on whose farm your lad is working, while
hoeing ! in the vineyards one day recently, laid open
his leg with a good, deep cut.


MYRRHINA .
Oh dear me !
DAVUS
Cheer up, and hear me out. For you must know
that, in consequence of the wound, on the third day
a tumour swelled up on the old man, a fever seized
him, and he was in a very bad: way.


PHILINNA
Off to the dust-heap, you! Such “ good news” as
you have come to tell!


MYRRHINA
Hush, Gammer!
DAVUS
And then, when he had need of some caretaker,
his brutal house-slaves said with one accord : “ It’s all


1 He was using the two-pronged mattock (v. 65).


331


-1


οι


MENANDER


“ ἔξζησ᾽ ἐκεῖνος" ἔστιν οἰμώξειν μ'ακιράν""
ἔλεγον ἅπαντες, ὁ δὲ σὸς υἱός, οἷον εἰ
νομίσας ἑαυτοῦ πατέρ᾽, ἀπορθ'ώ 'σαΐς πάλιν!"
ἤλειφεν, ἐξέτριβεν, ἀπέν"ι “ξεν, φαγεῖν
προσέφερ' ε', παρεμυθεῖθ᾽, ὃ πάνυ φαύλως ἔχει,
δα ζῶντ᾽ gata! αὐτὸν ἐπιμεχούμενος.
φίλον τέκν᾽ οἷν. (Δα. ) νὴ τὸν Δί, εὖ δῆθ᾽ οὑτοσί.
ὃ δ᾽ - ἀναλαβὼν “γὰρ Dray eveep Ἑαὶ σχολήν
Bude ων “ἀπαλλαγεὶς δικέλλης καὶ κακῶν,
Γρὕτω" τίς ἐστι σκληρὸς ὁ γέρων. τῷ βίῳ---
rob μειρ' ακίου τὰ πράγματ᾽ ἀνέκρινεν, τίνα
ear, οὐχὶ παντάπασιν ἀγνοῶν ἴσως.
Γδιερχοὶ μένου δὲ τοῦ νεανίσκου τ ‘abe,
"ra τε T's ἀδελφῆς ἐμβαλόντος σοῦ «τε καὶ
"Τῶν σῶν, πάθη" μ᾽ ἔπαθέν τι κοινόν, καὶ χάριν
THs ἐπιμελείας WET ἐκ παντὸς “λόγου
Γδεῖ ἣν αὑτὸν ὀποδοῦναι, μόνος T ὧν καὶ γέρων
"ποῦ [νὴ ἔ ἔσχε" τὴν γὰρ παῖδ᾽ ὑπέσχ τ αἱ γαμεῖν.
Γκαεφάλαιόν ἐστι τοῦτο τοῦ παντὸς λόγου.
Κη ἥξουσιν ἤδη δεῦρ᾽, ἄπεισιν εἰς ἀγρὸν
Γὁμὶοῦ λαβών: παύσεσθ᾽ε πενίᾳ pa! χόμενοι
δυσνουθετήτῳ 'θ ηρίς ω Kal δυσκόλῳ,"


57 6.-Η.

59 πάτερ᾽ ἀπορθώσας πάλιν, (ἃ.--. restor./ πορίσας φάρμακα,
Kretsch.

61 παραμυθεῖθ᾽ ὃ, G.-—H./ παραμυθεῖτο πάνυφαυλος, pap.

62 διαζῶντ᾽, Haberlin from 6..¢.v7’, MS. Scan “dya.”

63 φίλον, Weil.

64 ὃ δ᾽, K2.//avadaBev, Blass./ ἐπαναλαβὼν, 833,


65 διαγὼν, (.-Η. 66 οὕτω, Blass.
67 τοῦ μειρακίου, Blass, Ell.
θ8ι ἔα leks S25. ἐν pap. and S! conj. Γτυχὺν"


69 Kaibel, Weil suppl.
70 τά τε, Weil. // σοῦ «τε suppl. Blass.


332


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


over with him, it’s time to bid him the long fare-ill /”’
’ But your son, as though he thought Cleaenetus his
own father, raising him up again, kept on anointing
him, rubbing him down, washing the wound, bringing
him food to eat, encouraging when he was very ill,
and by his care restored and brought him through
alive.
MYRRHINA
Dear child!
DAVUS

By Zeus, that’s well said of him! For this
(Cleaenetus) on convalescing, while he had leisure
indoors, set free from his mattock and cruel toil—so
austere is the old man’s way of life—made detailed
inquiries into the young man’s circumstances, although
perchance he was not absolutely unacquainted with
them. And as the young fellow rehearsed them,
including facts about his sister and you and your
misfortunes, Cleaenetus experienced a not un-
usual impulse and thought that on account of the
nursing he should by all means make return. So,
being a lone, old man, he took a resolution. He has
promised, in fact, to marry your girl. That's the
head and front of my whole story. They will be
here any minute now. He will go back to the
country and take her with him. There will be an
end to your fight with poverty—that intractable and
most implacable beast, and that too in the midst of


——— eee,


71 Γτῶν σῶν, πάθη μ’, Dziatzko./......... , pap.
73 δεῖν, Rich./ δέον, Nic. 74 νοῦν, G—-H.
77-78 ὁμοῦ, G.—-H. // παύσεσθε. . . δυσκόλῳ, Blass restor.,


cf. Theophylact. Hp. 29, πεπαύμεθα πενίᾳ μαχόμενοι δυσνου-
θετήτῳ θηρίῳ καὶ δυσκόλῳ.


333


80


85


(Di.)


MENANDER


Γκ' αἱ ταῦτ᾽ 'év'dorer: δ'εῖ yap ἢ πλουτεῖν ἴσως


ἢ ζῆν ὅπ'ου' μὴ μάρτυρας! τ' οὔ δυστυχεῖν

π'οἷ'χλλούς τις ἕξει τοὺς ὁρῶντας" ἔστι δὲ

‘aypo's εἰς τὸ τοιοῦτ᾽ εὐκτὸν ἥ T ἐρημία.

Γεὐ αγγελίσασθαι πρ' ὃς" σὲ ταῦτ᾽ ἐβουλόμην.

Γἔρρίιωσο πολλά. (Μυ.) καὶ σύ. (Φι.) τί πέ-
πονθας, τέκνον;

τί περιπατεῖς τρίβουσα τὰς χεῖρας; (Μυ.) τί
γάρ;

ΓΦίλινν᾽, ἀποροῦμαι νῦν τί ποιῆσαί με δεῖ.

Γπερὶὶ τίνος; (Μυ.) ἡ παῖς ἐστι τοῦ τόκου, φίλη,

Beppe) οχουων υιρνε 8 ana πιο ὲδα


Γ


ΓΧΟΡΟῪΥ


79-81 Weil restor., cf. fragm. 928 K.

81-82 For thought cf. fragm. 466 Καὶ.

82 ἀγρὸς, Weil, Kaibel.

84 ἔρρωσο, G.—H./ éppwow, pap., o and w confused in pap.
cf. 1. 87.// πολλά. (Μν.) καὶ σύ (omit ye of pap.), K*, Kaibel, S*.

84-86 Nic. suppl.

87 “rept, Stephani, S?./ofuo, Nic./.... 1, G.—H.// rod τόκου,
φίλη, S*./ τούτῳ xod...., G.—H./ tovrwvKov . wa, pap. // No
: in line.// In pap. Florent. verse-ends 80-87 are preserved,


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


the city. For one ought perhaps to be rich or else
live where one will not have many witnesses to see
one’s ill-fortune. Nay, the country loneliness is the
thing to wish for in such circumstances.—This is the
good news which I wished to bring to you. I wish
you a hearty “ Farewell.”
MYRRHINA
The same to you.
(Eait Davus. Myrrhina walks up and down in great
distress. )


PHILINNA
Now child, what is the matter with you? Why
do you walk about and wring your hands?


MYRRHINA
Why not, Philinna? For I now am at a loss what
to do.
PHILINNA
Do, about what ἢ
MYRRHINA


The girl is near her time, my dear... .


After some broken verse-ends there is indication of the
entrance of a Chorus. After the interlude, in a new Act,
Gorgias and Philinna—see names in margin, lines 101-102 |
—have a dialogue.

CHORUS


88 ἐγγὺς, S* conject. ἢ

89-94 In pap. Florent. are the following verse-ends εἰ
—rat/—era! —/ —/—| ἐγώ, S? reports.

90-95 “‘post septem versus a vers. 88 "XOPO'Y apparet,”
52,


335


(? Top.)


100


(Di. )


105
(Di. )


MENANDER


ACT
Scenz. TOPLAS, SIAINNA
TOLOD'T
στροβει
TOUT
ἐγώ" τί ποήϊσω oes enna κόψω Ἣν θύραν'
αὐτῶν" ... ; niet


πρὸ τῶν θυρίῶ ὧν τίς οὗτος; ἐστὶν Poprias
οὐδεὶς γάρ εἰμ᾽ ἕϊτερος.


τί <é'> ἐστιν; (Γορ.) ἠδέ άν,
τὴν μητέρ᾽ A.ET. 2 . .-
Φίώλιννα, κάλεσον. .. ..

μὰ τὼ θεώ, τέκνον.


\ > fal
σὺ yap Tap ἡμῶν a


110


115


120


125,


ἐπεὶ TOV@V .OVT .

τῇ» APTeMey «ς΄ Ὁ Ὁ puniat

PO καλῶν eng aio oo ee ae
καὶ νῦν τί ποϊήσω. ᾿
ἢ πρὸς μαλακῖιζ.


0 PTE LOR IE ἀν κε cis om, denen βέλει

Te ROUTE TOs TOV ols wi eigh. τρείοδει

etl. > Cis £ Γ

ἡμῖν ὑπολοιπον.

παρρησίαν πῆ ss setae sams

ce “

Ὁρῶν τα TOUT aim > oe cue ee Rees

ἡμᾶς τε τοὺς .. ee ee ee ee es
. ἐπειτ.

οὐδ᾽ ἄξιον.

ὑμῖν» ἐῶν wo ne! a

“ ΤΕ]

ἅπασι δ᾽ αἰ.

Ἐν a ae Aer de Meas og! Fe

i ie πο ὃ.

OLKBIOT IT 5 vis) ss on es 9 ---.


336


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


ACT
Scene. GORGIAS, PHILINNA


After a soliloquy, Gorgias knocks at Myrrhina’s door and
Philinna appears, saying: Who is this before our door?
It is Gorgias. (Gore.) You're right, I’m no one else... .
Then Gorgias seems to say: Philinna, call my mother out
here.... (pHIL.) Nay, by the Twain Goddesses... . She
seems to go on to refer to the approaching birth of the baby ....
From the remaining fragmentary lines, 107-125, we can
conjecture the sense only vaguely. Possibly Myrrhina is
summoned and the situation is discussed. Probably Gorgias
brings the proposition of marriage from Cleaenetus.


96-125 See Sudhaus, 2nd ed.

99 ποήσω | ποιήσω, S* rep.

101 S:Awy/ in 1. margin. {{ θυρῶν tis οὗτος; ἐστὶν Γοργίας,
Allinson trans. from 5, who suppl. θυρῶν τίς ἐστιν οὗτος
Γοργίας.

102 Popy.’/ in 1. margin.

108 S? queries 76<K>wv ἀντ.


337


MENANDER


OTHER FRAGMENTS!


97 K εἰμὶ μὲν ἄγροικος, καὐτὸς οὐκ ἄλλως ἐρῶ,
καὶ τῶν κατ᾽ ἄστυ πραγμάτων οὐ παντελὼς
ἔμπειρος, ὁ δὲ χρόνος τί μ᾽ εἰδέναι ποεῖ
πλέον.


«
94 K ὁ δ᾽ ἠδικηκὼς ὅστις ἔσθ᾽ οὗτός ποτε
τὴν ὑμετέραν πενίαν, κακοδαίμων ἔσθ᾽ ὅτι
io oe Pe Te A Φ Ν /

τοῦτ᾽ ἠδίκηκεν οὗ τυχὸν μεταλήψεται.

> \ / ᾽ > lal / , / A
εἰ καὶ σφόδρ᾽ εὐπορεῖ yap, aBeBaiws tpuda:

5 τὸ τῆς τύχης γὰρ ῥεῦμα μεταπίπτει ταχύ.


93 Καὶ εὐκαταφρόνητόν ἐστι, Vopyia, πένης
κἂν πάνυ λέγῃ δίκαια" τούτου γὰρ λέγειν
¢ / / ,’ Φ a Lal
ἕνεκα μόνου νομίξεθ᾽ οὗτος, τοῦ λαβεῖν.
\ o > \ e Ν ,
καὶ συκοφάντης εὐθὺς ὁ TO τριβώνιον
ὅ ἔχων καλεῖται, κἂν ἀδικούμενος τύχη.


2 / > /
95 Καὶ οὗτος κράτιστός ἐστ᾽ ἀνήρ, ὦ Vopyia,

Ψ lal - ? » a

ὅστις ἀδικεῖσθαι πλεῖστ᾽ ἐπίστατ᾽ ἐγκρατῶς"
\ > %e7 a \ , \

τὸ δ᾽ ὀξύθυμον τοῦτο Kal λίαν πικρὸν
-“ ᾿ “ /

δεῖγμ᾽ ἐστὶν εὐθὺς πᾶσι μικροψυχίας.


100 K ἐμβεβρόντησαι; γελοῖον, ὃς κόρης ἐλευθέρας
εἰς ἔρωθ᾽ ἥκων σιωπᾷς, καὶ μάτην ποιουμένους
περιορᾷς γάμους σεαυτῷ.

1 These five fragments arranged in this order by G.—H.


338


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


OTHER FRAGMENTS
(CLEAENETUS ὃ)
I am a country boor, even I will not deny it, and


I am not perfectly acquainted with city ways, but
time keeps improving my knowledge.


(CLEAENETUS (2) 10. (9) the son of Myrrhina)
Now he, whoever he is that has wronged you in
your poverty, is possessed by an evil genius in com-
mitting this injustice of which perhaps he’ll have his
share. For even if he’s very wealthy, he wantons
insecurely. Yes, for Fortune’s current is swift to
change its course.


(cLeagNETUS(?) to Gorgias the son of Myrrhina)

"Tis easy, Gorgias, to despise a poor man, even if
he says what’s very just; for his words are thought
to spring from this alone—the wish for gain. And
forthwith the man with old, worn cloak is named a
blackmailer, even though it happens he’s the one
that’s wronged.


(CLEAENETUS(?) to Gorgias)

That man, Gorgias, is most masterful who with
self-mastery knows how to bear the greatest wrongs,
but this sharp-tempered, bitter spirit is forthwith to
all a demonstration of pettiness of soul.


(pavus(?) or “x’’(?) to the son of “x’’)
What, thunderstruck, you fool? It’s laughable !
When you've fallen in love with a free-born maid
you're tongue-tied and you ignore the nuptials,
made for you in vain.
339


MENANDER


AAKTTAIOZ


102 Καὶ ἔπίειτα δ᾽ adtixa} τοῦθ᾽ ὁ) κακοδαίμων ἔφη
. > x 2 / eS
ὡς οὐκ ἂν ἐκδοίη ye θυγατέρ᾽ ἄσμενος,


“ /
Kal ταῦτα πεντήκοντα παιδίσκας ἔχων.


103 K οἰκόσιτον νυμφίον


> \ / % > ’
οὐδὲν δεόμενον προικὸς ἐξευρήκαμεν.


ΔΕΙΣΙΔΑΙΜΩΝ


Α
109 K ἀγαθόν τί μοι γένοιτο, πολύτιμοι θεοί:
ὑποδούμενος τὸν ἱμάντα γὰρ τῆς δεξιᾶς
ἐμβάδος ἀπέρρηξ'.


Β
εἰκότως, ὦ φλήναφε'
Ν \ φ \ \ / Μ᾽ > I
campos yap ἦν, σὺ δὲ μικρολόγος ap’ ov θέλων


καινὰς πρίασθαι.


110 K ov δεῖ γὰρ ἀδικεῖν οἰκέτας," ἄλλως τε καὶ
> ,
ὅταν μετ᾽ εὐνοίας τι μὴ πονηρίᾳ
πταίσωμεν: αἰσχρόν ἐστι τοῦτο γὰρ πάνυ.
1 ἔπειτα δ᾽, Μοίη. [ αὐτίκα, Allinson αὖθις, Mein. τίς γὰρ 'ποθ᾽"
οὕτως Γὡς σὺ! κακοδαίμων ἔφυ, Kock, g.v. for MS.


2 οἰκέτας, Cobet, τοὺς οἰκέτας, A., Trine., τοὺς ἱκέτας other


MSS.
340


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE RING


A finger-ring not seldom plays an important part in
the unravelling of the plot. Compare, for example, “ The
Arbitrants.”’

And then forthwith! the misguided one said this,
that he would not be glad to give a daughter in
marriage, nay, not if he had fifty maidens.


A self-provisioning bridegroom we have found, who
stands in no need of a dowry.


THE SUPERSTITIOUS MAN


Menander’s skill in character-drawing has often suggested
his indebtedness to the influence of Theophrastus, who, accord-
ing to common tradition, had the poet among his two thousand
pupils. The title of this play recalls specifically one of the
““Characters”’ of Theophrastus and re-enforces, as being good
Attic, this meaning of the Greek word, which has sometimes
been erroneously relegated to later Greek.

\


A
Now may some blessing be mine, O highly

honoured gods! For as I was fastening on my

sandals, I broke the strap of the right-hand one.


(2)
Naturally, you babbling fool, for it was rotten, and
you out of stinginess were unwilling to buy new
shoes.


For one ought not to treat one’s house-slaves
unjustly, and especially when they make some
blunder with kind intent, not out of rascality. No,
for such treatment is very disgraceful.?


1 Text of line 1 very uncertain. f


2


2 “Right,” therefore a lucky omen.
3 ef. fragm. 1093 K below.


341


MENANDER


544 K! παράδειγμα τοὺς Συροὺς λαβέ:
ὅταν φάγωσ᾽ ἰχθὺν ἐ ἐκεῖνοι, διά τινα
αὐτῶν ἀκρασίαν τοὺς πόδας καὶ γαστέρα
οἰδοῦσιν, ἔλαβον σακίον, εἶτ᾽ εἰς τὴν ὁδὸν

5 ἐκάθισαν αὑτοὺς ἐπὶ κόπρου, καὶ τὴν θεὸν
ἐξιλάσαντο τῷ ταπεινοῦσθαι σφόδρα.


ΔΗΜΙΟΥ͂ΡΓΟΣ 2


113K (A) τί τοῦτο, παῖ; διακονικῶς γὰρ νὴ Δία
f / / Ν /
προελήλυθας. (B) vat' πλάττομεν γὰρ πλάσ-
ματα,8
τὴν νύκτα τ᾽ ἠγρυπνήκαμεν" καὶ νῦν ἔτι
ἀποίητα  πάμπολλ᾽ ἐστὶν ἡμῖν.


/ “ > / \ fal Μ
114 K μακάριος οὁστίς οὐσίαν και VOU ἔχει"
χρῆται γὰρ οὗτος εἰς ἃ δεῖ ταύτῃ καλῶς.


AIATMAI


117-118K συμπεριπατήσεις γὰρ τρίβων᾽ ἔχουσ᾽ ἐμοί,
ὥσπερ Κράτητι τῷ κυνικῷ ποθ᾽ ἡ γυνή.
καὶ θυγατέρ᾽ ἐξέδωκ᾽ ἐκεῖνος, ὡς ἔφη
αὐτός, ἐπὶ πείρᾳ δοὺς τριάκονθ᾽ ἡμέρας.


1 Among the fragmenta adespota. Referred by Meineke to
this play.
2 cf. Schol. Aristoph. Hq. 650. δημιουργοὺς ἐκάλουν καὶ τὰς
viv λεγομένας ὑπονυμφίδας, τουτέστι Thy παρεστῶσαν τῇ νύμφῃ
γυναῖκα. ὅθεν ἐστὶ καὶ Μενάνδρῳ Δημιουργός.


342


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


Take, for example, the Syrians. Whenever they
eat fish, by a kind of incontinence their feet and
belly swell up; they put on sackcloth and then
go and seat themselves on a dung-heap by the
_wayside and propitiate the goddess by excessive
self-humiliation.!


THE BRIDAL MANAGER


(a) Slave, what now? For you've come forth, by
Zeus, with bustling serviceableness! (B) Yes, for
we concoct concoctions. Aye, the night through we ©
were sleepless, and even yet there’s very much
unfinished on our hands.


Blessed is the man who has both mind and money,
for he employs the latter well for what he should.


THE GIRL TWINS


Why, you'll be promenading with me clad in a
coarse cloak just as on a time the wife of the Cynic
Crates walked with him.


And he married off a daughter, giving her, as he
said himself, for a trial marriage of thirty days.


1 Referred (doubtfully) to this play.


3 Or ἡπέμματα, Meineke.
1 Sean ἀπόητα.


123 K


124 K


125 K


128 K


μι


MENANDER


ΔΙΣ EZATATON


βουληφόρως
τὴν ἡμετέραν, ὦ Δημέα, προκατέλαβες
ὅρασιν.


’ \ 4 \ / , , \
ἐμοὶ παράστα' τὴν θύραν κόψας ἐγὼ
καλῷ τιν᾽ αὐτῶν.


ὃν οἱ θεοὶ φιλοῦσιν ἀποθνήσκει νέος.


ΔΥΣΚΟΛΟΣ


- ᾽ fol / ’ “- \ ,
τῆς Αττικῆς νομίζετ᾽ εἶναι τὸν τόπον
Φυλήν, τὸ Νυμφαῖον δ᾽ ὅθεν προέρχομαι
Φυλασίων.


\ , A ᾽ , ,
περὶ χρημάτων λαλεῖς, ἀβεβαίου πράγματος"
εἰ μὲν γὰρ οἶσθα ταῦτα παραμενοῦντά σοι
εἰς πάντα ' τὸν χρόνον, φύλαττε μηδενὶ
»” / > \ x \ 4
ἄλλῳ μεταδιδούς, αὐτὸς ὧν δὲ κύριος"
εἰ μὴ δὲ σαυτοῦ, τῆς τύχης δὲ πάντ᾽ ἔχεις,
τί ἂν φθονοίης, ὦ πάτερ, τούτων τινί;
1


εἰς πάντα, A, πάντα, B, ἅπαντα, Bentley.


1 For Demeas as a stock character cf. The Girl from Samos.

2 For the thought cf. passim, from Herodotus (i. 31) to
William Watson’s Keats.

3 cf. references, Kock, ad loc., to Julian, Alciphron, ete.

4 cf. Misapprehension in The Girl Who Gets Her Hair Cut
Short.


344


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE DOUBLE DECEIVER


The plot of this play may, perhaps, be inferred from
the “ Bacchides’’ of Plautus, where, indeed, the line so often
cited (see No. 125) is repeated verbatim.

Counsellor-like you anticipated our eyes, Demeas! !


Stand by me. I will knock at the door and call
some one of them.


“Quem di diligunt adulescens moritur.”—Ptavtus,
Bacch. 4, 7, 18.


The man dies young on whom the gods their love
bestow.2


THE PEEVISH MAN


The loss of this play is the more to be regretted as the
scene seems to have been laid in the deme of Phyle, embracing
the site of the historical fortress and of the Sanciuary of
the Nymphs in the gorge beyond the convent of “Οὐ Lady
of the Defile.”’ The name of the ‘* Peevish Man,” it would
seem, was Smicrines (a type known from ‘* The Arbitrants”’
and recurring in The Shield’”’), so miserly in character
that he actually ‘‘ feared lest the smoke should carry off some
of his property”’ through the smoke-vent.*

PAN (?)

(addressing the spectators * and speaking the prologue)

Please assume that this place is Phyle in Attica,
and that the Nymphaeum from which I come forth
is that of the Phyle-folk.


You babble about money, a matter insecure. For
if you have knowledge that this will abide with you
for ever, keep it close and share with none, but be
yourself its lord and master. Whereas if you possess
all this, not as your own but Fortune’s, why should
you, father, begrudge it to anyone of these? For


345


MENANDER


αὐτὴ γὰρ ἄλλῳ τυχὸν ἀναξίῳ τινὶ
παρελομένη σου πάντα προσθήσει πάλιν.
διόπερ ἔ ἔγωγέ | φημι δεῖν, 6 ὅσον χρόνον

10 εἶ κύριος, χρῆσθαί σε γενναίως, πάτερ,
αὐτόν, ἐπικουρεῖν πᾶσιν, εὐπόρους ποεῖν
οὺς ἂν δύνῃ πλείστους διὰ σαυτοῦ" τοῦτο γὰρ
ἀθάνατόν ἐστι, κἄν ποτε πταίσας τύχῃς,
ἐκεῖθεν ἔσται ταὐτὸ τοῦτό σοι πάλιν.

15 πόλλῳ δὲ κρεῖττόν ἐστιν ἐμφανὴς φίλος
ἢ πλοῦτος ἀφανής, ὃν σὺ κατορύξας ἔχεις.


129 Καὶ ὡς θύουσι δ᾽ οἱ "Τοιχωρύχοι
κοίτας * φέροντες, σταμνί;, οὐχὶ τῶν θεῶν
ἕνεκ᾽, ἀλλ᾽ ἑαυτῶν" ὁ λιβανωτὸς εὐσεβές,
καὶ τὸ πόπανον τοῦτ᾽ ἔλαβεν ὁ ὁ θεὸς ἐ ἐπὶ τὸ πῦρ

5 ἅπαν ἐπιτεθέν' οἱ δὲ τὴν ὄσφυν a ἄκραν
καὶ τὴν χολὴν ὀστᾶ T ἄβρωτα τοῖς θεοῖς
ἐπιθέντες αὐτοὶ τἄλλα καταπίνουσ᾽ ἀεί.


130 K οὐδὲ els
μάγειρον ἀδικήσας ἀθῷος διέφυγεν"
ἱεροπρεπής πώς ἐστιν ἡμῶν ἡ τέχνη.


131,132K οὐδενὸς χρὴ πράγματος
τὸν εὖ πονοῦνθ᾽ ὅλως ἀπογνῶναί ποτε.
sand Sang Baile λησεν ania ARON “of
ἁλωτὰ yiveT ἐπιμελείᾳ καὶ πόνῳ
ἅπαντα.
on an ΄, a aA

BS 2 ini “σιωπῇ φασι τούτῳ τῷ θεῷ

οὐ δεῖν προσιέναι.


135 K οὐκ ἔνεστί σοι φυγεῖν
οἰκειότητα, δᾶερ.
1 ἔγωγε, Tyrwhitt, ἐγώ σε, MS.
2 κοίτας, MS., κίστας, Grot., Kock,
346


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


She herself, perhaps, taking all this away from you,
will bestow it in turn on someone else who is un-
worthy. Wherefore I say that you yourself, what
time you are the master, ought to use this nobly,
father, ought to succour all and through your help
effect that as many as possible should live in easy
circumstances. For this is something that will never
die, and, if reverses some day befall you, from this
source you in turn will have the self-same help. A
visible friend is a better thing by far than wealth
which you keep buried out of sight.


Look at their mode of offering sacrifices, the
burglars that they are. They bring chests and
wine-jars, not for the gods’ sake but their own.
The frankincense is a pious thing, and the god
receives this cake placed whole upon the fire, while
they, after adding in for the gods the tip of the loin,
the gall, and the inedible bones, always gulp down
the rest themselves.


The Cook Rules the Roast.

No single person ever made escape scot-free after
unrighteous treatment of a cook. Our guild is
somehow sacrosanct.

Labor Omnia Vineit.

The man who labours well need never despair of
anything at all . . . By attention and by toil all
things are attained.!

Pan's Ritual.

In silence one ought never to approach this god,
they say.

Kinship, my brother-in-law, it is not possible for


thee to ignore.
1 cf. Soph. O.T. 110.


347


142 K


143 K


145 K


MENANDER


EATTON TIMQPOTMENO®!


Supplementum Comicum, Demianczuk, Ρ 54; Terence,
Self-Tormentor, 61-64, q.v.; and Kock, 140, for lines 2 and 8.


tee ee Tb yap'®
ris ae ᾿Αθηνᾶς δαιμονᾷς, γεγονὼς ἔτη


τοσαῦθ᾽; ὁμοῦ γάρ ἐστιν ἑξήκοντά σοι
Γὴ καὶ ὌΝ 13 καὶ τῶν Αλῃσι χωρίον
κεκτημένος κάλλιστον εἶ, νὴ * τὸν Δία,
ἐν τοῖς τρισίν γεῦ καί, τὸ μακαριώτατον,
ἄστικτον."


ἐξὶ ἱσταρίου δ᾽ ἐκρέματο φιλοπόνως πάνυ.
κρόκην ἔνει Ὑ γραῦς! Τ καὶ "θεραπαινὶς ἣ ἣν μία:
αὕτη συνύφαινεν ῥυπαρῶς διακειμένη.


ἀνδρὸς χαρακτὴρ ἐκ λόγου γνωρίζεται.


” “ \ \ / > Ud
οἴκοι μένειν χρὴ καὶ μένειν ἐλεύθερον
> 4 n
ἢ μηκέτ᾽ εἶναι TOV καλῶς εὐδαίμονα.


1 Menander’s first play. See Capps, A.J.P. xxi. p. 60.
Reitzenstein, from Terence, l.c. quid quaeris ?
Reitzenstein, from Terence, l.c. aut plus eo.

el, vy Reitzenstein./ ἦν ἢ, MS.

Perhaps understand καλοῖς χωρίοις as having been men-
tioned previously, Demianezuk, p. 55.

6 ef. Schol. on Lucian, Jup. Tragoed. 48, Μένανδρος ἄστικ-
ΤῸΝ χωρίον εἰώθει λέγειν τὸ ἀνεπιδάνειστον.

7 κρόκην ἕνει Allinson,/ γραῦς, E. K. Rand (or, perhaps,
ἐταλασιούργει Allinson), supplied from Terence, Self-Tor-
mentor, 292-295, anus subtemen nebat. For expression
cf. Men. Kock, 892, κρόκην δὲ νήσεις! καὶ στήμονα.


σι ὁ & to


348


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE SELF-TORMENTOR


Confirmation (now increased by Demianczuk’s addition,
see below) that Terence’s like-named play (sce Prologue) was
taken from Menander’s may be drawn from the followiny
fragments.

Scene: The deme of Halae (Aexonides (?) adjoining the
deme Halimus, or, possibly, of Halae Araphenides).


How now, by Athena? Are you cracked, although
so well along in years? For in round numbers you
are sixty or even more. And of the Halae folk
you are the owner of a bit of land the fairest, by
Zeus, amongst the three? at least, and, best of all,
unmarked by mortgage stone.”


With utter devotion to her toil she® clung to her
loom. An old woman was spinning thread and
there was one handmaiden. She, in squalid con-
dition, was weaving with her.*


A man’s character discovers itself in his speech.°


He who is truly happy should remain at home
and remain free or else should cease to live.


1 The three: this (now obscure) item is omitted by Terence.
See note on text.

2 Greek mortgages were recorded, in situ, on stelae.

* She=the mistress.

+ of. Terence, Self-Tormentor, 291-294. While the old
woman was spinning the thread, presently to become the woof,
the mistress and maid were engaged at the loom (KE. K. Rand.)

5. ef. Terence, Self-Tormentor, 384.


349


154 Καὶ


155 K


156 Καὶ


160 Καὶ


161 K


162 K


MENANDER


EMIITIMITPAMENH


. . « ἐξώλης ἀπόλοιθ᾽ ὅστις ποτὲ

ὁ πρῶτος ἣν γήμας, ἔπειθ᾽ ὁ δεύτερος,

Ps Lb / μ ΝΒ, ,ὔ ene Ff ,
εἶθ᾽ ὁ τρίτος, εἶθ᾽ ὁ τέταρτος, εἶθ᾽ ὁ μεταγενής.


,
+ νι νον τρία γάρ ἐστι, δέσποτα,
4 / , \ ,
δι᾿ ὧν ἅπαντα yiveT’, ἢ κατὰ τοὺς νόμους,
fal \
ἢ ταῖς ἀνάγκαις, ἢ TO τρίτον ἔθει τινί.


ἐφ᾽ ᾧ φρονεῖς μέγιστον ἀπολεῖ τοῦτό σε
~ Φρ μεγ ᾿
‘ - » “. \ \ Μ /
TO δοκεῖν τιν᾽ εἶναι" Kal γὰρ ἄλλους μυρίους.


EMATPEAOMENO®


τὸ σὸν ταπεινὸν ἂν σὺ σεμνύνῃς, καλὸν
ἔξω φανεῖται, φίλ᾽ ἄνερ' ἂν δ᾽ αὐτὸς ποῆς
ταπεινὸν αὐτὸ καὶ τιθῆς ἐν μηδενί,

οἰκεῖος οὗτος κατάγελως νομίζεται.


\ \ \ a v Μ
τὰ γὰρ τολμηρὰ τῶν ὄχλων ἔχει
’ Lal Lal \ > / ,
ἐν τοῖς λογισμοῖς τὰς ἐπιδείξεις δυσκόλους,
> A \ , x ΄, \ \ ~
ἐν τῷ δὲ πράττειν, ἂν λάβῃ τὸν καιρὸν ed,
, \ ,

ἀπροσδόκητον τὴν τέχνην ἐξηύρετο.


a. 3 , A \ ͵ ay a /
τοῖς ἀναιδέσιν βοηθεῖ yap λόγοις τοῦθ᾽ ev μόνον,
ἂν βραχεῖς αὐτοὺς ποῇ τις τόν τε καιρὸν εὖ λάβῃ.


35°


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE WOMAN WHO IS SET ON FIRE!


. . . . Now may he perish, root and_ branch,
whoever was the first to marry, and then the second
one, and next the third, and then the fourth, and
then the last one on the list.


For there are three ways, master, through which
all things come to pass: either by the laws, or by
necessity, or, third, by some custom.


This thing on which you pride yourself the most
—this thinking you are somebody—will ruin you.
For it has ruined countless others.


THE PROMISER


If you exalt your low estate, it will seem fair to
outsiders, my friend. But if you of your own motion
make it lowly and hold it as of no worth, this is
considered as home-made self-ridicule.


In the hour of calculation the daring plans of
mobs are set forth with difficulty, but when the
time for action comes, if the occasion is carefully
selected, they hit on unexpected ways and means.


For to shameless proposition’ this is helpful, this
alone: if one brings them swift to issue and selects
oceasion well.


1 For form of title cf. Pericetromene, ‘The Girl Who Gets
Her Hair Cut Short.”


354


164 Καὶ


165 K


166 K


169 K


187 K


188 K


MENANDER


ἘΠΙΚΛΗΡΟΣ


7.9...» \ / > / /

ap ἐστὶ πάντων ἀγρυπνία λαλίστατον.
ἐμὲ γοῦν ἀναστήσασα δευρὶ προάγεται
λαλεῖν ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς πάντα τὸν ἐμαυτοῦ βίον.


“ - “-“
ὥσπερ τῶν χορῶν
v ας;
οὐ πάντες ἀδουσ᾽, ἀλλ᾽ ἄφωνοι δύο τινὲς
Lal / / »
ἢ τρεῖς παρεστήκασι πάντων ἔσχατοι
, apy ¢ ,
εἰς τὸν ἀριθμόν, καὶ τοῦθ᾽ ὁμοίως πως ἔχει:
/ / [ον ᾽ 2 > /
χώραν κατέχουσι, ζῶσι δ᾽ οἷς ἐστιν Bios.
a “Ὁ ,
ἢ δεῖ μόνον
aA a , , , ᾽ a
ζῆν ἢ γενόμενον πατέρα παίδων ἀποθανεῖν'
lal lal /
οὕτω TO μετὰ ταῦτ᾽ ἐστὶ τοῦ βίου πικρόν.
ron " \
τί δ᾽ ἂν ἔχοι νεκρὸς


> / ee ,’ ΄ fal » 5ολ Ψ
ἀγαθόν, ὅπου γ᾽ οἱ ζῶντες ἔχομεν οὐδὲ ἕν;


ΕΥ̓ΝΟΥ͂ΧΟΣ


μὴ θεομάχει, μηδὲ προσάγου τῷ πράγματι
χειμῶνας ἑτέρους, τοὺς δ᾽ ἀναγκαίους φέρε.


Φ , /
v — v οὗτός ἐστι γαλεώτης γέρων.


1 ef. Terence, Hun. 77, 78.


352


ed


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE HEIRESS


This was one of the six plays praised by Quintilian
(10. 1.70). Zhe plot of Terence’s ** Phormio’’ may, perhaps,
give suggestions for reconstructing this. Menander wrote two
editions.


Surely of all things insomnia is most provocative
of talking. Anyhow it has roused me up and
brings me out here to speak forth my whole auto-
biography from the beginning.

The Mutes in Life’s Chorus.
Just as in choruses not everyone doth sing,
But certain two or three mere numbered dummies
stand
Last in the rows, so here ’tis somehow similar :
These fill a space, while these who have life’s fulness—
live !


Either a man ought to live single or die when
once he is father of children, so bitter is life’s sequel.


What blessing could a corpse possess, seeing that
we who live have not a single one?


THE EUNUCH


In the didascalia of Terence’s like-named play Menander’s
“ Hunouchos”’ is cited as the original, the names of the
characters being changed.


Fight not against the gods nor add to the affair
new tempests. Endure the necessary ones.!


This old man is a spotted lizard.*


2 i.e. ** blotched with freckles ” not a tortoise-shell cat ! as
one might infer from Terence, Hun. 688, 689, who trans-
lates : ‘‘ weazel.” L. and 8. sub voce, incorporate his mistake.


353


A A


189 K


190 K


201 K


202 K


MENANDER


πάντα τὰ ζητούμενα
lal / \ e [4
δεῖσθαι μερίμνης φασὶν οἱ σοφώτεροι.


> \
οὐκ ἐξ ἴσου τὰ πράγμαθ᾽ οἱ θεοὶ σφίσιν
> cal « Med ns a » ᾽ θ᾽ Ὁ
αὐτοῖς T ἔνειμαν καὶ βροτοῖς. ἀλλ᾽ αὐτίκα
\ ,ὔ
αὐτοὶ μὲν ὄντες ἀθάνατοι καὶ κύριοι
\ \
ἁπαξαπάντων ἀθανάτους τὰς ἡδονὰς
ἔχουσιν."


ΕΦΕΣΙΟΣ


᾽ \ \ ΝΜ “ \ \ ,»
ἐγὼ μὲν ἤδη μοι δοκῶ, νὴ τοὺς θεούς,
“-“ /
ἐν τοῖς κύκλῳ τρέχοντα Kal πωλούμενον.


HNIOXO*®


ἀλλὰ θεὸς οὐδεὶς εἰς TO προκόλπιον φέρει
ἀργύριον, ἀλλ᾽ ἔδωκεν εὔνους γενόμενος

, r 9 > / 71 ma) > / /
mop'ov,” εἰσβολὴν T ' ἔδειξεν εὐπορίας τινὸς,
ἣν ἂν παρῆς σύ, μηκέτ᾽ αἰτιῶ θεόν,
ἤδη δὲ τῇ σαυτοῦ ζυγομάχει μαλακίᾳ.


3 \ > > / nr » \

οὐδεὶς μ᾽ ἀρέσκει περιπατῶν ἔξω θεὸς
\ , ,ὔ
μετὰ γραός, οὐδ᾽ εἰς οἰκίαν παρεισιὼν
grt ἃ A , \ , a \
ἐπὶ τοῦ cavidiov. τὸν δίκαιον δεῖ θεὸν
, / /

οἴκοι μένειν σῴξοντα τοὺς ἱδρυμένους.

1 Kock’s reconstruction from the citation ; see Aristid. i.
592, Dindorf ed., οὐκ ἐξ ἴσου τὰ πράγματα οἱ θεοὶ σφίσι τ᾽ avtuis
καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἔνειμαν, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοὶ μὲν ἅτ᾽ ὄντες ἀθάνατοι καὶ


κύριοι τῶν ἁπάντων ἀθανάτους καὶ τὰς εὐτυχίας ἔχουσιν.
2 πόρον, εἰσβολήν τ᾽, Preller./ répyns βουλὴν, MS.


354


_ FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


All things that we would fain secure call for brood-
ing thought, as the sages say.


Not share and share alike the gods have parcelled out

Men’s circumstances and their own. For instance,
they,

Being themselves immortal, overlords of all

And everything, have pleasures endless evermore.!


THE MAN FROM EPHESUS


Already, by the gods, I seem to see myself
stript naked in the auction-ring, a-running round
and round, and up for sale.?


THE CHARIOTEER


Now no god bulges your bosom’s fold with coin,
but, if haply well-disposed, he offers some resource
and shows some opening to ‘attain to wealth. And
if you let this slip, no longer blame a god but, from
this time on, quarrel with your own yoke-mate,
weakness.


No god pleases me who strolls around out of
doors with an old woman,* nor even one who makes
entrance into a house on the divining-board.4 The
right-minded god ought to stay at home and take
care of the family which has dedicated his statue.

1 cf. Terence, Andria 959-961.

2 cf. Lucian, Vitarwm Auctio.

3 ? Priestess of Cybele.


4 Meaning uncertain. See Kock. Perhaps cf. the modern
vagary of the ““ ouija-board.”


355


MENANDER


203 K (a) ἐλεεῖν δ᾽ ἐκεῖνος ἔμαθεν εὐτυχῶν μόνος.
(Ὁ) ὁ χρηστός, ws ἔοικε, καὶ χρηστοὺς ποεῖ.


75 \ > \ \ ” 4 TA
(c) ul ἐστὶν ἀρετὴ τὸν ἄτοπον φεύγειν ἀεί.


a Φ δὲ \ 1 » /
205 K ὧν O€ μη΄ © ALTLOS τρόπος,
, fal / fal a
τά γ᾽ ἀπὸ τῆς τύχης φέρειν δεῖ γνησίως τὸν εὐγενῆ.


ΘΑΙ͂Σ
Supplementum Comicum, Demianczuk, p. 55.


” ον οῶνὕἵ ΝΜ lel
ἄγγαρος," ὄλεθρος. ἡδέως ἄν μοι δοκῶ
ὅμως πεπονθὼς ταῦτα νῦν ταύτην ἔχειν.


217 K_ ἐμοὶ μὲν οὖν ἄειδε τοιαύτην, θεά,
θρασεῖαν, ὡραίαν δὲ καὶ πιθανὴν ἅμα,
ἀδικοῦσαν, ἀποκλήουσαν, αἰτοῦσαν πυκνά,
μηδενὸς ἐρῶσαν, προσποουμένην δ᾽ ἀεί.


218 K φθείρουσιν ἤθη χρήσθ᾽ ὁμιλίαι κακαί.


ΘΙΟΦΟΡΟΥΜΈΝΗ


223 K εἴ τις προσελθών μοι θεῶν λέγοι, “ Κράτων,
ἐπὰν ἀποθάνῃς, αὖθις ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἔσει"
ἔσει δ᾽ ὅ τι ἂν βούλῃ, κύων, πρόβατον, τράγος,
ἄνθρωπος, ἴ ἵππος" δὶς βιῶναι γάρ σε δεῖ:
5 εἱμαρμένον τοῦτ᾽ ἐστίν, ὅ τι βούλει δ᾽ ἑλοῦ""
co oe La) ” > \ > a aA lal
ἅπαντα μᾶλλον, εὐθὺς εἰπεῖν ἂν δοκῶ,
/ -
“ ποίει με πλὴν ἄνθρωπον" ἀδίκως εὐτυχεῖ
1 μή ᾽στιν, Meineke.
2 = ἀκρατής, cf. Πωλούμενοι, frag. No. 1 (below, p. 432).


356


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


(a) He alone learned compassion through prosperity.


Di ae eee) eo ck aoe? 9 3 a). 6. hie 8g, (ie eye) tal @ we te) @ ἴδ᾽ fo “em


wae «© es weet ei Re) sc elie) & pin ye VRE wp Chae! eye fel 6! ἃ


(c) There is one virtue, always to shun the eccentric.!


The nobly-born should nobly bear those flings of
Fortune for which character is not responsible.


THAIS


(Lovely Thais, sit beside me ;
1 detect, but still abide thee !)


“ Loose-bridled” ? Pest! Methinks, though I
_have suffered this, that none the less I’d now be
glad to have her.


Sing to me, goddess, sing of such an one as she:
audacious, beautiful, and plausible withal; she does
you wrongs; she locks her door; keeps asking you
for gifts; she loveth none, but ever makes pretence.


Communion with the bad corrupts good character.?


THE WOMAN POSSESSED WITH A
DIVINITY


If some god should come up to me and say:
“ Crato, you, after your death, shall again have being
anew and you shall be whatsoever you desire—a dog,
sheep, goat, man, horse—for you have to live twice.
This is decreed. Choose what you prefer.” Forth-
with, methinks, I’d say: ‘‘ Make me anything but
human. That is the only living organism which


1 ¢.e. either the eccentric man, or eccentricity.
- 3 Kurip. fragm. 1013 (Nauck). ef. 1 Corinth. 15, 33.


357


10


224 K


225 K


226 K
227 K


235 K


MENANDER


κακῶς TE πράττει τοῦτο τὸ ξῷον μόνον.

ὁ κράτιστος ἵππος ἐπιμελεστέραν ἔχει
ἑτέρου θεραπείαν' ἀγαθὸς ἃ ay γένῃ κύων,
ἐντιμότερος εἶ τοῦ κακοῦ κυνὸς πολύ.
ἀλεκτρυὼν γενναῖος ἐν ἑτέρᾳ τροφῇ

ἔστιν, ὁ δ᾽ ἀγεννὴς καὶ δέδιε τὸν κρείττονα"
ἄνθρωπος ἃ ἂν ἢ χρηστός, εὐγενής, σφόδρα
γενναῖος, οὐδὲν ὄφελος ἐν τῷ νῦν γένει.
πράττει δ᾽ ὁ κόλαξ ἃ ἄριστα πάντων, δεύτερα
ὁ συκοφάντης, ὁ κακοήθης τὰ Tpit ἔχει."
ὄνον γενέσθαι κρεῖττον ἢ τοὺς χείρονας
ὁρᾶν ἑαυτοῦ ζῶντας ἐπιφανέστερον.


καὶ ταχὺ
4 lal -“
πάλιν τὸ πρῶτον περισοβεῖ ποτήριον
αὐτοῖς ἀκράτου.
ὁ πλεῖστον νοῦν ἔχων
/ 9* ao. , 3 4 , a A
μάντις τ᾽ ἄριστός ἐστι σύμβουλός θ᾽ ἅμα.


μέσως 3 μεθύων τὴν Θηρίκλειον ἔσπασεν.


. 2. ἀπὸ μηχανῆς θεὸς «ἡμῖν; ἐπεφάνης.


ΘΗΣΑΥ͂ΡΟΣ


εἶτ᾽ οὐ μέγιστός ἐστι τῶν θεῶν "ἔρως
καὶ τιμιώτατός ἯΙ τῶν πάντων πολύ;
ae yap οὕτως ἐστὶ φειδωλὸς σφόδρα
τὰ τρίτ᾽ ἔχει, Codd. Vind. et Caes. τρίτος λέγεται A, schol.


Hur., τρίτα λέγει, Mein. and Kock, τρίτα δ᾽ ἔχει ὃ Allinson.
2 But cf. Alexis, Agon. 5, μεστὴν ἀκράτου Θηρίκλειον.


UES


1 ef, Lucian, Gallus, 20. The cock-avatar of Pythagoras
says: “. .. and finally (I became) a rooster frequently, for I
was pleased with that type of life.”


358


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


unfairly gets its good or ill-fortune. The best horse
receives more careful grooming than others. If you
are a good dog you are held in far greater esteem
than a bad dog. A noble rooster} exists on special
diet, while the cock of low degree actually lives in
fear of his superior. A human being, even if he is
good, high-bred, very nobly-born, gets no good of
that in this present day and generation! The flat-
terer fares best of all; the blackmailer comes next ;
the malignant man has the third place. ‘Twere
better to be born a jackass than to see one’s inferiors
living in greater splendour than oneself.”


And quickly again he sends the first cup of
unmixed wine flying around the company.


He who has the most common sense is at once the
best prophet and adviser.


Half-drunk he tossed off the Thericlean 2 bowl.


Deus ex machina.


You are by your epiphany a veritable “god from
the machine.”


THE TREASURE


The argument may be partly inferred from the lke-
named play by Luscius Lavinius (sce Prologue to Terence’s
«* Hunuch,”’ L.C.L. p. 239, note).

The date, between 310 and 308 Β5.ο. (Kock III. p. 67).

This title was used by six other Comic poets besides


Menander.
No Fool like an Old Fool.


Is not, then, Eros greatest of the gods and anyhow
by far the most esteemed of all? For no man is so


2 Thericles, a Corinthian potter.


359


236 Καὶ


240 K


241 K


MENANDER


ἄνθρωπος οὐδ᾽ οὕτως ἀκριβὴς τοὺς τρόπους,
ὃς οὐχὶ τούτῳ μερίδα τῷ θεῷ νέμει

τῆς οὐσίας" ὅσοις μὲν οὖν πράως ἔχει,

νέοις ἔτ᾽ οὖσι τοῦτο προστάττει ποεῖν"

οἱ δ᾽ εἰς τὸ γῆρας ἀναβολὰς ποιούμενοι,
οὗτοι προσαποτίνουσι τοῦ χρόνου τόκους.


ee , , fal Α 5 / »Μ

ὅταν δ᾽ ἐρῶντος τόλμαν ἀφέλῃς οἴχεται,
> r

εἰς τοὺς ἰαλέμους τε τοῦτον ἔγγραφε.


- ΄ / > >” \
πολλοῖς ὑπέκκαυμ ETT EPWTOS μουσικὴ


ποῖν 'np'ov'.


@PA>TAEQN


\ , ΨΥ δ. ‘ > Ὁ ’ s
κατὰ πόλλ, ap ἐστὶν οὐ καλῶς εἰρημενον
τὸ γνῶθι σαυτόν: χρησιμώτερον γὰρ ἣν

Ν a
τὸ γνῶθι τοὺς ἄλλους.


e / r , , /

ὁ δεύτερος πλοῦς ἐστι δήπου λεγόμενος,
,ὔ cal

ἂν ἀποτύχῃ τις οὐρίου, κώπαισι πλεῖν.


ΘΥΡΩ͂ΡΟΣ


Supplementum Comicum, Demianczuk, p. 56.


οὐκ ἀδελφός, οὐκ ἀδελφὴ παρενοχλήσει, τηθίδα *
οὐδ᾽ ἑώρακεν ὃ τὸ σύνολον, θεῖον 4 οὐδ᾽ ἀκήκοεν"
εὐτύχημα δ᾽ ἐστὶν ὀλίγους" τοὺς ἀναγκαίους ἔχειν.
πονηρόν, Kretschmar suppl. from Philodemus.
τηθίδα, Wilam., cf. 923 K, τιτθίδα, MS.

ἑώρακεν, Blass. / ἑόρακε, MS.


θεῖον, ὃ and Wilam. / θεῖος, Reitzenstein.
ὀλίγους τοὺς, Reitzenstein, / ὀλιγοστοὺς, MS.


-“οὖιν π


οι


360


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


very niggardly and none so painfully exact in habit
as not to share with this god a part of his property.
At all events Eros orders those towards whom he
is gentle to do this while they still are young,
whereas those who make postponement till old age
pay interest in addition for the lapse of time.


But when you take boldness from a lover he is
done for, and you may write him down with those
who are fit subjects for a dirge.


For many music is an evil provocative to love.


THRASY LEON
“ Know thyself.”


In many ways the saying ‘‘ Know thyself” is not
well said. It were more practical to say: “ Know
other folks.”


By the “second voyage”! is doubtless meant: If
fair winds fail, take to the oars.


THE DOORTENDER


From the “ Supplementum Comicum”’ is obtained a frag-
ment from a play not found among Menander’s titles in
Kock’s collection.


The Man without a Relation.

There will be no brother, no sister to cause annoy ;
an aunt he has not ever even seen; has not even
heard of an uncle. Now it is a piece of luck to have
' relations scarce.


1 Proverbial for ‘‘ the next best way.”
361


MENANDER


, -"
923 K! ἔργον ἐστὶν εἰς τρίκλινον συγγενείας εἰσπεσεῖν
Φ \ \ / nr Μ , \
ov λαβὼν τὴν κύλικα πρῶτος ἄρχεται λόγου πατὴρ
καὶ παραινέσεις ” πέπαικεν, εἶτα μήτηρ δευτέρα,
a /
εἶτα τήθη παραλαλεῖ τις, εἶτα βαρύφωνος γέρων.
5 τηθίδος πατήρ, ἔπειτα γραῦς καλοῦσα φίλτατον.


e > , / nw /
ὁ δ᾽ ἐπινεύει πᾶσι τούτοις.


ΙΕΡΕΙΑ


In vol. x, No. 1235, ‘‘Oxyrhynchus Papyri” (q.v.), are
preserved considerable remains of three consecutive columns
from a work containing, apparently in alphabetical ὃ order,
the arguments and opening words of Menander’s comedies.
These fragments contain: first, some unintelligible verse-ends
from a play alphabetically* preceding the “Ἱέρεια ; next, pro-
bably the opening words (now illegible) and the argwment
of the Ἱέρεια ; and, finally, the opening words and the (incom-
plete) argument of the *luBprot.


1 This fragment, 923 Καὶ (δήλων δραμάτων), is to be joined
to the oneabove by reason of content and of metre and both
referred to the Θυρωρός, hitherto unknown. See Demianczuk,
Suppl. Com. p. 56.

2 παραινέσεις, Schweig./ παραίνεσις, MS./rapawéoas πέπωκεν,
Mein. (?).

3% Not Θρασυλέων (as assumed by G.—H., l.c. p. 81), but
@vpwpds, if correctly inserted in this edition would, on our
extant list, immediately precede the Ἱέρεια.


1 Oxyrhynchus pap. vol. x. 1235. The translation of the
Argument by Messrs. Grenfell and Hunt, pp. 86-87, is here
given. For their further inferences see p. 82, op. cit.

2 cf. title above, p. 357, The Woman Possessed with a
Dwinity.

362


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


To this play and in this connection is to be referred the
following :

It is something strenuous to take the plunge into
a family dinner-party where the paterfamilias, with
cup in hand, first leads off the speech-making, inter-
larding jest and admonition ; then the mother second ;
next a grandmother puts in her chatter; then an old
man, father of the maternal aunt, with deep, bass
voice; and then an old gammer who calls the young
man “dearest.” The latter has to nod assent to all
of these.


THE PRIESTESS


The plot is concerned with the discovery of a lost relation- ,
ship. An old man (apparently formerly the husband of the
priestess) had lost his son and had been separated from his
wife. The boy had been brought up as their own by some
neighbours along with their genuine son. The Oxyrhynchus
Argument yields) the following data: ‘‘ The former husband
of the priestess .. . having recovered tried to seek out the son
whom he loved. His servant was persuaded to be brought to -
the priestess under pretence of being possessed,” in order that
he might be accorded treatment; and he secretly obtained
information and discovered the truth. The true son of the
mother of the supposititious child desiring to marry the
daughter of the priestess sent his mother to speak with the
priestess about him. While the women were talking [the old
man, who] had become suspicious, and especially im con-
sequence of the information of his servant that there was a
difference in personal appearance, addresses the younger of
his neighbour’s sons as his own. The youth discerning his
mistake intimidates his brother in advance by saying that the
old man was mad and was declaring every young man to be
his son. Accordingly when the old man subsequently learned
the truth and addressed the older as his son the latter sends
him away as being mad. At the same time... the old man
having recovered his son marries the priestess, and the son
receives the daughter of the priestess whom he had loved, and
the marriages of all three pairs are celebrated... . Such are
the incidents of the plot. The play is one of the bestand.. .”


363


MENANDER


The following fragment from the Ἱέρεια was already
known:


245 K "οὐδεὶς δι᾿ ἀνθρώπου θεὸς ower, γύναι,
ἑτέρου τὸν ἕτερον" εἰ γὰρ ἕλκει τὸν θεὸν
- / Μ > ἃ ,
τοῖς κυμβάλοις ἄνθρωπος εἰς ὃ βούλεται,
ὁ τοῦτο ποιῶν ἐστι μείζων τοῦ θεοῦ.
> 2 Ww , \ / 1 a +
5 ἀλλ᾽ ἔστι τόλμης Kal Biov! ταῦτ᾽ ὄργανα
ε ) ae > / > / « , 2
εὑρημέν᾽ ἀνθρώποις ἀναιδέσιν, ᾿ Ῥόδη,
εἰς καταγέλωτα τῷ βίῳ πεπλασμένα.


IMBPIOI
Oxyr. pap. No. 1235, lines 104-5.*


5 Φ , / /
δι’ ὅσου χρόνου σέ, Δεμέα τ. .. -.
>
βέλτιστ᾽, ἐγὼ


247,248 K οὐκ ἔστιν οὐδέν, πάτερ; ἐν ἀνθρώπου φύσει
μεῖζον λογισμοῦ. τῷ διαθέσθαι πράγματα
ἕκαστός ἐστι καὶ λογίσασθαι κατὰ τρόπον
᾿ ἄρχων, στρατηγός, ἡγεμὼν δήμου, πάλιν
5 σύμβουλος: ὁ λογισμῷ διαφέρων πάντ᾽ ἔχει."
1 βίου, MS./ Bias, Bentley.
4 Possibly this name may connect fragm. 546 K with this
play.
3° See above, Ἱέρεια, p. 362, for this Oxyrhynchus MS. For
difficulties concerning the date indicated (i.e. 296-295 or
299 p.c.) in the argument, see discussion by the edd. (Oxyr.
pap. l.c. p. 82, 83). The year 299 B.c. would allow of a more
plausible estimate for Menander’s output of plays.
4 Meineke retains the division of these lines in two frag-
ments, ὁ... 1, 2 and 3-5.


1 Trans.: “lady,” if the speaker is not her husband.

2 It is not shown by the fragmentary Argument whether
this Rhode is the Priestess or some other character. The
didactic tone of addressing the lady makes tempting the


364


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS
The Cymbals of Cybele.


* Desine fata deum flecti sperare precando.” —
ViraiL, Aeneid, vi. 376.


No god, my wife,! saves one man through another's
help.

For if a human being can by cymbals’ clash

Deflect the god to whatsoever he desires,

Then greater than the god is he that doeth this.

Nay, these are ways and means for shameless live-
lihood,

Invented, Rhode,? for the wants of shameless men,

Contrived to make a mockery of human life.


THE IMBRIANS


The opening words and a few lines of the plot are preserved
_in the Oxyrhynchus argument (see above, Ὁ. 362), enough to
identify the meaning of the title. We read (in Oxyr. pap.
1235, lines 103-121): “This ws the beginning of ‘The
Imbrians’ :

‘For how long a time, Demeas, I... .

‘“*My good man, I....

“This he wrote in the archonship of Nicocles, being his
seventy-... (2th) play, and issued ἐξ for production at the
Dionysia ; but it did not take place on account of the tyrant
Lachares. The play was subsequently acted by the Athenian
Calippus. The plot is as follows: Two poor men who were
friends lived in close association at Imbros and married twin-
sisters; and sharing all their possessions too they worked
industriously both on land and sea... .”’


There is nothing greater, father, in man’s nature
than reasoning power. By the rational disposition
of affairs each man is according to character a ruler,
a general, a popular leader, or, again, a councillor.
He who excels in reasoning power controls all.


insertion here of the vigorous apostrophe to a ‘‘ Rhode” in
fragm. 546 (see p. 491), but the mere recurrence of a proper
name is insufficient evidence.


365


MENANDER


ΙΠΠΟΚΟΜΟΣ
249 K (A)
Μόνιμός τις ἦν ἄνθρωπος, ὦ Φίλων, σοφός,
ἀδοξότερος μικρῷ δ᾽.
: (ΦΙΛΩΝ)
ὁ τὴν πήραν ἔχων;
(A)

πήρας μὲν οὖν τρεῖς" ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνος ῥῆμά TL


1


ἐφθέγξατ᾽ οὐδὲν ἐμφερές, μὰ τὸν Δία,

τῷ γνῶθι σαυτόν, οὐδὲ τοῖς βοωμένοις

τούτοις" ὑπὲρ δὲ ταῦθ᾽ ὁ προσαιτῶν καὶ ῥυπῶν'
5 τὸ γὰρ ὑποληφθὲν τῦφον εἶναι πᾶν ἔφη.


KAPINH ”


257 K ὦ μεγίστη τῶν θεῶν
νῦν οὖσ᾽, Avaider’, εἰ θεὸν καλεῖν σε δεῖ.
δεῖ δέ τὸ κρατοῦν γὰρ νῦν νομίζεται θεός.


ἐφ᾽ ὅσον βαδίζεις, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ἥξειν μοι δοκεῖς.


~ e /
258 K περὶ τὸν τράχηλον ἁλύσιόν τί σοι δότω.


1 Cobet, after the best MSS.
2 cf. Latin praefica.


.-.-.͵͵͵,εεεεεοᾶ :στιττπ,͵Πςππππ΄΄΄’ᾧἷ΄΄΄ῖ΄β..:τττπγωχηιτ ὔὕηὠάωὧον-


1 Soph, fragm. 71, wneapected ; Aristot. Top. 8. 6. 1, im-
probable. Usually rendered insignificant.


366


a τὰ


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE GROOM
(a)


There was a certain Monimus, a wise man, Philo,
but a little too paradoxical.1


(PHILO)
The one with the wallet?


(a)

The wallet! He was a three-bagger!? But he
uttered a saying not at all resembling, by Zeus, that
maxim: “ Know thyself,” nor yet the saws so often
cited, but far beyond them, the squalid beggar though
he was. For he said that every several assumption
was vanity.


THE CARIAN WAILING-WOMAN


In the first fragment preserved we have an apotheosis of
Effrontery like that of Misapprehension in the postponed
prologue of the “ Periceiromene.” She ts @ more vigorous
sister to personified Persuasion, addressed by Abrotonon in
the “‘ Arbitrants.”” The personification was canonical, for
in the Court of the Areopagos the accuser stood on the ‘* Stone
of Shamelessness’’ (λίθος ᾿Αναιδείας), while the defendant,
accused of homicide, stood on the ““ Stone of Outrage”’ (λίθος
“YBpews).

O thou who now art chief amongst the gods, O
Effrontery, if it is right to name thee god—and it ἐς
right, for now-a-days the thing that sways is deemed
a god—to what lengths thou dost go and what a goal,
methinks, thou’lt reach !


Let her give thee a necklace to circle thy neck.


2 Apparently he was a humpback and had a paunch in
addition to the orthodox Cynic’s wallet.


367


260 K


261 K


262 K


263 K


265 Καὶ


268 K


272 K


or


273 K


274 Καὶ


MENANDER


KAPXHAONIO®


For the use of this play as a source by Plautus in the —
* Poenulus’”’ and by Ovid, ‘*Ars Amatoria,” see Schwering.
RM. lxix. 1, pp. 238 ff.

ἐπιθυμιίά ‘cas! τῷ Βορέᾳ '“λιβανΐδιον |
ὀψάριον οὐδὲν ἔλαβον. ἑψήσω φακῆν.

e \ \ 1) \ is’ “ 9 BD /
αὑτὸν yap οὐδεὶς οἷδ᾽ ὅτου " ποτ᾽ ἐγένετο,
ἀλλ᾽ ὑπονοοῦμεν πάντες ἢ πιστεύομεν.

ἔργον ἐκ πολλοῦ χρόνου
» e / Y an
ἄνοιαν ἡμέρᾳ μεταστῆσαι μιᾷ.
, , x Μ + \
χρεία διδάσκει, κἂν ἄμουσος ἢ, σοφὸν


Καρχηδόνιον.


lal a / /
τὸ καλῶς ἔχον που κρεῖττόν ἐστι καὶ νόμου.


ΚΑΤΑΨΕΥΔΟΜΕΝΟΣ


ἱππεῖς προκαλεῖσθαι εἰς πεδίον.
cf. Plato, Theaet. 188 Ὁ; Lucian, Piscator, 9. .


-KEKPT®AAOS


παρὰ τοῖς γυναικονόμοις δὲ τοὺς ἐν τοῖς γάμοις
διακονοῦντας ἀπογεγράφθαι πυθόμενος
πάντας μαγείρους κατὰ νόμον καινόν τινα,

ἵνα πυνθάνωνται τοὺς κεκλημένους, ἐὰν
πλείους τις ὧν ἔξεστιν ἑστιῶν τύχῃ,

δὄλθώνες ὦ τι


9 3 » \ “ \ / »

εἶτ᾽ εὐθὺς οὕτω τὰς τραπέζας αἴρετε,

μύρα, στεφάνους ἑτοίμασον, σπονδὰς πόει.

(a) ἡδὺ τὸ μύρον, παιδάριον. (B) ἡδύ; πῶς γὰρ οὔ;
νάρδινον.


1 ἐπιθυμιάσας and λιβανίδιον, Bentley. | ἐπιθυμήσας (ἐπιθυ-
uloas)... ιἰδιον MSS. 2 ὅτου, Cobet./ οἶδε τοῦ, MS,


368


* FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


ὶ THE CARTHAGINIAN
+ This is, perhaps, the prototype of Plautus’s ‘ Poenulus’
ἢ (q.v. prol. 53).
ss A Fisherman
' Although I made incense offering to Boreas |
caught never a fish. I'll boil a mess of lentils.


᾽


᾽


«4 Wise Son who knows his onn Father’

a For no one knows his own father, but all of us
_ have a conjecture or a belief.

It is a task in a single day to remove folly ingrained
by time.

Practice teaches a Carthaginian to be clever even
though he be uncultured.
“Ἢ That which is right is, I suppose, better even than
law.


7 THE FALSE-ACCUSER


To challenge cavalry into the open.


THE HEAD DRESS


ἢ But after I had ascertained, at the “Board of
| Commissioners on Laws for Ladies,” that a certified
~ list had been drawn up, according to a new law, of
all the caterers who serve at weddings, that they
may thus learn about all the guests who are bidden
so as to see if anyone happens to entertain more
guests than the law allows, and going. ... .


Then forthwith thus do ye remove the tables,! and
do thou make ready perfumes, wreaths. Go on and
make libation.

(a) This unguent, child, is fragrant.

(8) Fragrant? Of course it is. It’s made of
spikenard.

1 ¢.e. the movable tops of the table-standards,
369
ΒΒ


Ἶ
ἢ
4
Ἷ
:
:
q
th


10*%


31


MENANDER


ΚΙΘΑΡΙΣΤῊΣ


οὖς χρόνον πολύν τινα


. . ἢ δεδυκέ


. ὦ φιλτάτη

Tisai

. εἰ Ka'pdiav
.ος δ᾽ ἣν τῷ κακῷ
ὧν γάμου
. μία
69 ..@

. κατέλιπες

» af @
. τε δὴ

. @V


Ἰυναπήρκει δέ μοι


.σ


. AoE τῆς ἐμῆς
. POs πῶς ἄφνω


/ /
. V λέγων τρέχεις
. .-€TAL


Ὁ we \ \
: ὕβρει τὸ γεγονὸς


βίαι
τῶν αὐτὴν σύ μοι
οὖν μητέρα

.-gat τί σοι

. οὐθενὸς
. οὖν ἔδει

. λάθραι

εν pov


(Lacuna of 3 lines.)


. wave ὅσα
.-as


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE CITHARA PLAYER


To nine fragments previously known are now prefixed,
with some hesitation, 101 lines from @ Berlin papyrus, of
which more than a third are more or less complete.

A few particulars of the plot can be gathered. A young man
while away from Athens in Asia Minor has fallen in love
with, and apparently already married, a rich woman, daughter
of his father’s neighbour, Phanias, a cithara virtuoso. The
young man has just returned to Athens and is expecting his
bride by another ship. Her non-arrival is causing him
anxiety. In the past he has led his own life and eluded com-
panionship with his father. Now he wishes to obtain his
consent to the marriage and seeks an interview with him.
The father, Laches (?), arrives from the country wondering
that his son is, for once, eager to see him. In the lost scenes
the father’s reasons for opposing the match were doubtless
developed as well as the circumsiances—including the unex-
pected wealth of the bride—by which a happy outcome is
effected. In fragments Nos. 285, 286 Καὶ there seem to be
contained flings ai Phanias, the harp-player.

There were apparently two houses represented in the scene,
one the town house of Laches and his son, the other that of
their neighbour, Phanias.


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


A MATRON (ἢ).

A Frrenp or MoscHion (A).
Tre Faturr (LAcuEs ἢ).
Moscuion, his Son.
Puanias, the Cithara Player.


The Berlin MS. opens with somé 34 mutilated lines from
the beginniny of the play. In these someone is apparently
conversing with a woman about his love affair. Incolumn 11.
a@youny man, perhaps the same person as the speaker above,
tells a friend about his marriage with a rich Greek maiden.
The context is lost.


1 See Korte’, p. xlvi.


Col, IL
36


40


(A.)


(M.)
45


(M.)
(A.)


50


MENANDER
οτος ἐν Acti dD. Mt Ep νοῦ


ζηλοῖς λαβών 't'e tHIv' . . .. ugha’
θυγατέρα δεῦρο πλουσίαν θ᾽ Nj! ἢ μόνη ty
ταύτην, σεαυτὸν δ᾽ οὐχί; (Μ. ) πάντ᾽ ἐγὼ Σμόνῃς
ταύτης λογίξομαί τ᾽ ἐμᾳυτοῦ τὴν ἐμήν.
ἐλευθέρα T ἣν καὶ mates becca Bos,
καὶ πάντα ταῦτ᾽ ἐκτησάμην" ἀϊγαθ" ἢ τύχῃ,
οὐ δεῖ λαβεῖν με Topvo' ambit aie Ῥίον,
τί δὴ τὸ λυποῦν σ᾽ ἐστί; Tt “γὰρ οὐϊκ ἤγαγες
ἐνταῦθα τὴν γυναῖκα Kali τὴν οὐσίαϊν;
οὐκ οἷδ᾽ ὅπου γῆς ἐστιν" οὐκ ἐλήλ'νθεν
οὔπω γε νυνὶ τῶν χρόνων κα ὄντων μακρῶν.
λογίζομαι πᾶν, μή τι κατὰ θάλατταν 7
ἀτύχημα γεγονὸς ἢ περὶ... «ας. (A.) μὴ ᾿μαθῶς;
οὐκ 010. ἀθυμῷ καὶ δέδοιχ᾽ ὑπερβολῇ.
εἰκός τι πάσχειν. (M.) πρὸς ἀγρρὰν δ᾽ οὕτως ἅμα
προάγων ἀκούσῃ καὶ τὰ λοίφ᾽ ὧν μρε γενοῦ
σύμβουλος. (A.) οὐθὲν κωλύει με. (Μ.) ταῦτα δὲ
εἴσῳ τις a'yéT'w τὴν ταχίστην ἐκποδών.

In addition to the sources noted below, see critical notes
of Kérte’s 2nd ed. Between lines 27-31 S* assumes the


beginning of an Act and denies at line 34 any trace of an
extra line.


37 (Μοσχίων), Allinson, to (“ B”), ΚΞ, 55,

41 πορο. .. θιον, MS. / πορνοβόσκου ψωθίον, K??/ ropy"tdi0r
μέγ᾽ ἄθλιον, 833,

42 (A) Allinson, to (B), K?.

44 To (Μοσχίων), Allinson, to (A), K?.

43-52 Distribution of parts, Allinson.

47 '"πέτρ'α5, ? suppl. Allinson. / ‘Anor'ds, v. Herwerden, /
"roum'as, ὃ".


372


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


Scenr. A and MOSCHION


a (the friend).—Are you [so] eager for {. . .] and,
having taken to wife the daughter of . . . have you
come here and do you regard as rich her only and
not yourself?


ΜΌΒΟΗΙΟΝ (?).—I consider that all these things and
all my own personal property belong to her. She
was both free-born and of a Greek city. And all this
I acquired by the kindness of Fortune. No brothel-
keeper must entrapme... .


a.—What is it, then, that troubles you? And
why didn’t you bring the woman and her property
here ὃ


MoscH1on.—I do not know where in the world she
is. She has not arrived, not yet at least, although
the time that has elapsed is now long. I am think-
ing everything over ; I fear that some mischance has
occurred on the sea or rocky shores.


a,—You mean lest through inexperience


moscHion.—I do not know. I am discouraged
and fear exceedingly.


a.—It’s likely something is the matter.


MoscHION.—Well, going on like this towards the
market-place along with me you shall hear the rest
of the facts and give me advice about them.


a.—There is nothing to prevent me.


moscHion (to his slaves)—Let someone take these
things into the house out of sight as quickly as
possible.


(Exeunt A and Moschion. Enter Laches (?).)
373


60


(Mo.)


Col. ΤῈ
70


(Aa.)


MENANDER


Scene. AAXHS

ΛΑΧΗΣ ?
καὶ τί ποτ᾽ ἂν εἴη; πάνυ γὰρ οὐχ αὑτοῦ ποεῖ ΐ
ἔργον" μεταπέμπετ᾽ ἐξ a ἀγροῦ με Μοσχίων, '
ὃς ἄλλοτ᾽ » εἰ μὲν ἐνθάδ᾽ ὧν τύχοιμ᾽ ἐγώ,
εἰς ἀγρὸν ἔφευγεν, εἰ δ᾽ ἐκεῖσ᾽ ἔλθοιμ᾽ ἐγώ,
ἐνταῦθ᾽ ἀναστρέψας ἐ ἔπινε" καὶ μάλα
κατὰ ; λόγον, οὐ γὰρ ἣν ὁ νουθετῶν πατήρ.
οὐ μ ay δι᾿ op! γήν" καὶ γὰρ αὐτὸς ἐγενόμην
εἷς ἢ τῶν duva' pera οὐσίαν μικρὰν ποεῖν.


οὐκ [αἰτία ᾿ oTu! ν ἡ γυνὴ κατὰ τοῦτό γε,


ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἐμοῦ ᾽στιν" οὐθὲν ἀγαθὸν γοῦν ποεῖ.
εἰσιτέον, εἰ τῇ 18” ἐστίν. ἂν δὲ μὴ τύχῃ

ὧν ἔνδο᾽ ν, ἄρ'τι πρὸς ἀγορὰν πορεύσομαι"
ἐκεῖ γὰρ αὐϊτόϊν που πρὸς Ἑρμαῖς ὄψομαι.


Scene. ΜΟΣΧΙΩΝ (ΛΑΧΗΣ)
ΜΟΣΧΊΩΝ
ap οὖν ὁ Γπατὴρ' ἐλήλυθ᾽, ἢ πορευτέον
ἐμοὶ πρ'ὸς ἐκεῖ 'νόν ἐστιν; οὐ γὰρ δεῖ χρόνον
τὸ πρᾶΐγμα λαμβάνειν '6'\ws οὐδ᾽ ὁντινοῦν.


ἤδη δοίκεῖ μοι πρὶ οσ' μένειν.
αἰτεῖν. εν Ql. ε


προσνειμάτω τὸν Bee ns ako ge χραῖ, μζοκοι,:
ἐγὼ δὲ περὶ cov. (Mo.) yaip'e, πάππα φίλτατε.


59 δι᾽ ὀργήν, K2./ πρὸς ὀργήν, Wilam./ ἐπέστην, S?.

60 K? suppl. {τῶν λεγομένων, S*.

61 S? suppl./ ἠδίκηκεν, ΚΞ, Wilam.

63° K? suppl. / efow', S*.

73 To Laches, Allinson [to “Tr”, K2.// πάππα φίλτατε, K?
suppl. ef. Philemon, fragm. 42 Καὶ. πόλλὰ μοι, πάτερ, S? suppl.


374


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


Scene. ? LACHES (alone)


And now what in the world may this mean? For
he is not acting at all according to his own habit!
Moschion summons me from the country, he who
on other occasions used to run off to the country
if I happened to be here, whereas if I went out there,
he’d come back here and go to drinking. And he acted
very rationally. There was no father by to criticise
him! Yet I did not admonish in anger; for even 1
myself was one of those who are capable of diminish-
ing one’s means. In this at least my wife is not to
blame: the boy takes after me. Anyhow he does
naught that’s good. I must go in to see if he’s here.
But if he does not happen to be in the house 1 shall
go on at once to the market-place, for I shall find him
somewhere yonder, I suppose, near “ Hermes’ Row.”

(Exit Laches (?) into the house.)
(Enter Moschion.)


Scene. MOSCHION (at first alone and, later),
LACHES


MOSCHION
I wonder whether my father has arrived or whether
I’ve got to goafter him. For absolutely this business
must not take up any timeatall. Methinksnow.. .
to ask... I think [ἃ better stay . . . let him
assign... .
(Re-enter Laches from the house.)


LACHES (catching up some remark, now lost)
And I concerning you!


MOSCHION
Greeting! My dearest father!


375


MENANDER


καὶ σύ ye “ri δὴ" λέγειν πρὸς ἐμὲ βούλει, τέκνον ;"

> ” > \
οὐκ ἔλεγον εὐθὺς
arr’ ἀνδρεϊστέον.

/ ll PY
τίνα λογον ἀεὶ προσ.
πολλὰ περὶ πολλῶν.
γῆμαί με βούλει καὶ Tt He IES
ὀβομήσεως γὰρ τοῦτ'ο δεῖ πολλῆς πάνυ“
ὦ Μοσχίων, ον μ.
ἔμ εἰ μὴ προστίθῦ nS

ν δεῖ λαβεῖν: αὐτὸς δὲ. :

Dini b pai) τοῦτο πολὺ ἵπρῶτόν ἐστι Kat!

/ \ / > > ν»Γ oy (Ὁ
μόνον κατὰ λόγον, εἰ δ᾽ ἄΐμεμπτος παντελῶς

\ \ / 5 / >

πρὸς TO γένος ἐστίν, ἀλλ,
εἰ παρθένον δὴ πίρ'ότείρον. ae

/ x n r, \ \ a , 7
σύμβουλον ἂν καλῆς "we γὰρ περὶ τῶν γάμων
αὐτὸς κεκρικὼς Γὅ Ἰλοῖν

ὃ) ὃ £5 > 3B fal |
ἃ δὴ δέδωκᾳς ‘aos ad μ᾽ ἀποστερεῖς.
μηθεὶς μάτην ε ΝΟ ἐν TS Er εἰ
τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλ᾽ ἄκουσον, συστρ'όφως 08 μολὼν"
εἰς τὴν "ἔφεσον ἔπεσον ὙΠ
τῆς ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἦν τῆς Bibeotas yap τότε"
δειπνοφορία τις παρθένων ἐλευθέρων""
εἶδον κόρην ἐνταῦθα Φανίου "ye τοῦ"
Εὐωνυμέως. (Aa.) Εὐωνυμεῖς κἀϊκεῖ τινες"


74 and foll. to Λάχης, as above.
96 γε τοῦ, Allinson./ τινός, K*.


376


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


LACHES


The same to you. Now what is it that you wish
to say to me, my son?


(In the broken lines 75-91, the son and father seem to con-
verse, about as follows :)

(moscuion) I did not tell you forthwith—but I
must play the man... . You've ‘frequently been
very urgent about many matches . . . you wished
me to marry . . . for, as you said, this is a matter
that calls for much intelligence.

(tacnes) Moschion, 1 am ready . . . one whom
you ought to marry . . . a free-born girl. This is
by far the first consideration and only according to
reason, if she is absolutely beyond criticism in her
pedigree. . . . For if you ask me to act as adviser
in the matter of marriage, making up an individual
ἘΠῚ ΠΙΘΉ gays Oa ees ceca Sas


(At line 91 Moschion tells of his love affair abroad.)


(moscuion) Now hear the rest, I will tell you con-
cisely. Arrived at Ephesus I fell (in with)...
For then there was solemn procession of free-born
virgins, bringing meat-offerings to Artemis! of the
Ephesians. I saw there a maiden, daughter of
Phanias of the Euonymeus? clan.


LACHES


What! Are there any Euonymeuses even out
there in Ephesus ?


1 of. N.T. The Acts, xix. 28, ‘Great is Diana of the
Ephesians ! ”

2 Euonymus, son of Gé and Uranus, gave his name to an
Attic deme, and there was also a tribe of the same name at
Ephesus.


377


100


281 K


or


10


282 K


283 K


284 K


MENANDER


εἴσ᾽ ἐν ’Edéow; (Mo. )χρέα μὲν οὖν ἱπράξων παρῆν"
ἐντεῦθεν. (Aa.) ἄρα τοῦ Kt "θαριστοῦ Φανίου
ταύτην λαβεῖν ἐσπούδα κ᾽ ας σὺ τὴν κόρην,"


τοῦ γείτονος νῦν ὄντος; οὔποτε eee ἢ


OTHER FRAGMENTS


ῴμην. ἐγὼ τοὺς πλουσίους, ὦ Φανία,

οἷς μὴ τὸ δανείζεσθαι πρόσεστιν, οὐ στένειν
τὰς νύκτας οὐδὲ στρεφομένους ἄ ἄνω κάτω
οἴμοι λέγειν, ἡδὺν δὲ καὶ πρᾷόν τινα

ὕπνον καθεύδειν ἀλλὰ τῶν πτωχῶν τάδε.11
νυνὶ δὲ καὶ τοὺς μακαρίους καλουμένους
ὑμᾶς ὁρῶ ποῖν! οὔντας * ἡμῖν ἐμφερῆ.

ap ἐστὶ συγγενές τι λύπη καὶ Bios:
τρυφερῷ βίῳ σύνεστιν, ἐνδόξῳ βίῳ
πάρεστιν, ἀπόρῳ συγκαταγηράσκει βίῳ.


τὸ κουφότατόν σε τῶν κακῶν πάντων δάκνει,
συ.» / 7, «A
πενία. τί yap τοῦτ᾽ ἐστιν ἧς γένοιτ᾽ ἂν els
φίλος βοηθήσας ἰατρὸς ῥᾳδίως;
τ ᾽


εἰ τοὺς ἀδικηθέντας, πάτερ, φευξούμεθα,
τίσιν ἂν βοηθήσαιμεν ἄλλοις ῥᾳδίως;


τὸ μηθὲν ἀδικεῖν ἐκμαθεῖν thnk ὧ Mhrrnee
ἀστεῖον ἐπιτήδευμα κρίνω TO


101 οὔποτε, Allinson suppl./ ov. o... MS,
1 σάδε, K?. Ἰ τίνα, MS.


3 πονοῦντας, Geel. | ποιοῦντας, MS.


378


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


MOSCHION
He had gone there from here to get in some debts.
LACHES
So then you've been in haste to marry this daughter
of Phanias, the cithara player, who is now our neigh-
bourt, Neyer...


OTHER FRAGMENTS


I used to think, Phanias, that the wealthy, who
ean live without borrowing money, do not groan
o’nights nor even toss up and down exclaiming, ‘‘ Oh,
me,’ but that they have a pleasant and tranquil
sleep, whereas such evils as these belong to beggars.
But now I see that you, the so-called happy ones,
have suffering corresponding to our own. In truth
grief and life are in a certain way akin. Grief con-
sorts with a life of luxury ; it inheres in a life of high
repute; it grows old along with a life of straitened
circumstances.


It is the most unsubstantial of all evils that is
stinging thee, namely poverty. For what is this
poverty of which a single friend might be the
physician by lightly bringing aid?


If, father, we are going to shun those who have
been wronged, to what other persons would we
readily bring aid?


For, Laches, I consider that it is a habit befitting
the urbane life to learn thoroughly the lesson of
doing nothing that is unjust.


379


285 K


286 K
287 K
288 K
289 K


726 K
(fragm.
incerta)


290 K


291 K


MENANDER


, > ae > Ν ’
φιλόμουσον εἶν᾽ αὐτὸν πάνυ
» ΄ , > / ’ >. ΒΤ
ἀκούσματ᾽ εἰς τρυφήν τε παιδεύεσθ᾽ ἀεί.


᾽ > , \ > \ ,
OUK οἰκοσιτοὺυς TOUS AKPOAaTAS λαμβάνεις.


e “ ε΄, , ’ \ rn
οὕτω TL πρᾶγμ᾽ ἔστ᾽ ἐπίπονον τὸ προσδοκᾶν.


e , lal + ae \ \ / /
ως ποικίλον πρᾶγμ ἐστὶ καὶ πλάνον τύχη.
σκοῖδον | Διονύσου.


» > , 9
ἔργον ἐστί, Pavia,”
μακρὰν συνήθειαν βραχεῖ λῦσαι χρόνῳ.


ΚΝΙΔΙΑ


5" \ / 4 \ ° /
οὐθὲν γένους γένος yap οἶμαι διαφέρειν,
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ δικαίως ἐξετάσεις, καὶ γνήσιος
΄ et ,

ὁ χρηστός ἐστιν, ὁ δὲ πονηρὸς Kal νόθος.


> ’ , > . » / ,
ταὐτόματόν ἐστιν ὡς ἔοικέ που θεός,

/ \ “ bY / ,
σῴζει TE πολλὰ τῶν ἀοράτων πραγμάτων.


1 σκοῖδος' ταμίας τις καὶ διοικητής. Μακεδονικὸν δὲ τὸ ὄνομα,
Photius.// Διονύσου or Διονύσιον, Wilam./ Acdvuoorv, MS.

2 The proper name possibly indicates connection with this
comedy.


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


. . . that he is a great dilettante in the fine arts
and forever nurtured on sensuous music.


You receive as your auditors those who are not
self-supporting.


Such a wearisome kind of a thing is expectation !
How complex and misleading a thing is Fortune!
Dionysus’s majordomo.


It’s a hard task, Phanias, to break up long habit in
a short time.


THE LADY OF CNIDUS
For one pedigree, I think, surpasses another no
whit, but if you will examine impartially, the good


man is legitimate and the bad is actually bastard.


The accidental is surely, as it seems, a god, and
many unnoticed circumstances bring safety.


1 Perhaps to be referred to this play.


381


σι


10


MENANDER


KOAAB


Terence, in his prologue to the “‘ Bunuchus’’ (1. 30 ff.),
makes specific acknowledgment of his obligation to this play
of Menander for the characters of the flatlerer-parasite and of
the boastful soldier. In Terence’s play the flatterer is Gnatho,
while in Menander's play two of these flatterers or parasites
are found, Gnatho and Struthias, both of these being stock-
names' for the type. In Terence the boastful soldier is
Thraso ; in this play, Bias. Menander develops a somewhat
different type in the character of Polemon in the “‘ Periceiro,
mene,” and Thrasonides in “The Hated Man.” All four
of these are nomina ad sensum.

From the 130-1402 lines preserved, some of them hopelessly
mutilated, only a few features of the Comedy can be inferred.
Terence’s obligations to the two plays of Menander, the
“Colax”’ (Toady) and the ““ Bunuchus” respectively, cannot
now be definitely determined.


. oY τῶν TAaTépav μεὶμνημένος
mee ως ὑόν, ὡς πᾶσιν δοῖκ' εἶ.
ae ἢ es 47 ἃ fe ᾿ Tv.
ἐπεὶ yap ἐξέπλευσεν" ἐπὶ πράξεις twa's,
ὁ πατὴρ κατέλιπεν οἱἰκίαν ἐμοὶ κενὴν

ἜΝ ὃ / x ἐν | > \ \

. τὸ παιδάριον" ᾿α'ὐτὸς τροφὴν

. v διοικηταῖς τισιν.

\
. Kako Satpov, τυχὸν lows
> / CA es ὃ
. ov ἀθλίως οὕ τ᾽ σφόδρα
οὐ τον ἐς τοῦτό pot Tr'o'NTEov.
Rew Si Saha inline aie
nol, τετρὰς yap σὶύνοδος ἡμῶν γ'ίἵνεται
LOY Nuit
gad . ἑστιάτῳρ δεσίπό'της
Set ws ὩΣ τὰ SEVER O oe, , Voce namie


Γ
Γ


(Lacuna of — ? lines.)


For suppl. ete. not otherwise noted, see G.-H., Oxyr. iii.,
also Oxyr. v. appendix i. p. 313, Kretschmar, De Menandri
Reliquiis, and Korte, 2nd ed.

10 ndi τετρὰς yap', Leo suppl. See note, below, on fragm.
292 K and on 320 K.

11 δεσπότης, G.—H. suppl./ δ᾽ %o'@ ὁ τῆς, Wilam., S?.

13 For lacuna assumed here, see 8? ad loc.


382


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS
THE TOADY


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.


Doris, α maid-servant.

PHEIDIAS, ὦ young man.

GnatHo, a porasite (a hanger-on of Pheidias?).
Daves, a slave of Pheidias.

A Stave-DEALER (procurer).

Bras, a boastful soldier.

SrRuTHIAS,* a parasite-flatterer (hanger-on of Bias.)
Sostas, a slave, attendant on the Caterer.

CATERER.


Scene. ATHENS


Scene. PHEIDIAS (alone)


Pheidias states, apparently in monologue, that his father ἡ
has gone away from home on some business, leaving him in
an empty house. A young girl is referred to. He apostro-
phizes himself as “unlucky,” and debates as to his line of
action. Atline 9 he apparently takes a resolution: ‘‘ This
must Ido, Our tribal festival is going on here—for it is the
Fourth....” Then there is, apparently, a reference to the
‘* public host, master of the feast.” δ


(Lacuna of some lines.)


1 of. Lucian, Fugitivi, 19 (cited Oxyr. pap. x.p.93), “... being
able on the score of flattery to outbid Gnathonides or
Struthias.” In this play Menander may have utilised with
effect two hostile flatterers, partisans of Pheidias and Bias
respectively. See G.—H. ad loc.

2 In the Oayr. pap. iii. pp. 17-24, were published 91 lines.
From additional fragments published (Oxyr. pap. x. No. 1237)
it is now known, as was before suspected, that the fragments
in vol. iii. contain parts of scenes rather than continuous
matter. See text below at lines 13, 52, and 70.

3 Struthias is apparently the flatterer or toady of the title-
role. See fragm. 293 K below.


- 383


MENANDER


Scene. ®EIAIAS, ΔΩΡΙΣ, (ΔΑΟΣ ὃ)


ς ρει ΑΗ eT... .
15 Γὴ τῷ hog yap ha! pT pov ἢ δόξῃ μέγαν
k sa hve ΠΣ μὴ τρίτον
. ποτὶ αινίαν ἀγρίαν ἄγε
218 aaa [Δω.) viv ἐγὼ
Bee | σε θαρρεῖ" D> Φειδία. (Φει. ) θαρρεῖν; ἐμοὶ
20 Γἀδύνατον' ἀτυχίας ἐμ ih ς ταύτης μέλει
PEE ἂν εὐχήν τις! εἴπῃ φλήναφον.--
CAD:).. ΤΣ . δέσποι ν᾽ ᾿Αθηνᾶ, σῷξέ με.
Caer: ieee eens. DS f ἀκριβῶς. τὰ πάτρια


ΠΤ ws TOUS αὐτου τ πόλεις


BS sug δεῖπνον, ρο θα (Δω.) τί λέγεις, ἄθλιε;
(Φει.) Γσυχλαμβάνειν γε τοῖς; πονηροῖς τοὺς θεούς"
πα γαθο γὰρ ὄντες οὐδὲϊν ἀγαθὸν πράττομεν.
Γἀλλ᾽ ὅδ᾽ ὁ διμοιρίτης" φέρων αὐτός ποτε
Γἐπορεύεθ᾽ ἱδρῶν cavui'ov, πήραν, κράνος,
30... .. . - ov, duBoriav, K@dvov


17 Γποτ!αινίαν, Allinson ?/ τ᾿ αινίαν, Kretschmar, K*.

18 νῦν ἐγὼ, to Doris. | γυνεγωδωρι5, with no trace of other
letters, Ῥᾶρ. [ ἐγὼ Δωρὶς "τέ gor’, Leo suppl. // ΔΩΡΙΣ to be
transferred to ‘margin, Robert.

19 Γλέγω σε ΘΑΡΡΕΙ͂Σ Allinson suppl./'@appetv ἐροῦμεν, Leo
suppl. // θαρρεῖν; ἐμοὶ, Allinson. / θαρρεῖν: ἐμοὶ, pap. || θαρρεῖν
ἐμοὶ Γλέγεις", K*.

20 Γἀδύνατον: ἀτυχίας", e.g. Allinson.

21 Γδιάπαντος, Allinson suppl. e.g.// ἂν εὐχήν Ts" , ΚΞ suppl.

22 Supply 7.6.6. "és κόράκας. (Awp.) ὦ δέσποιν".

23 ἀκριβῶς, 113. ἀϊκρειβῶς, pap., 853.

23-25 S* suppl. from Eur. Fragm. 286N :

Γκὰν ταῖς θυσίαις ἅπαντ᾽ ἀϊκριβῶς τὰ πάτρια
Γτηροῦντες οὐθὲν ὠφελοὶ ῦσ᾽ αὑτούς, πόλεις
Γμάτην γὰρ εὐσεβ)᾽) οῦσι.

28 διμοιρίτης, G.—H. suppl. from marg. schol.: διμοιρίτης 6

διπλοῦν λαμβάνων τῶν στρατιωτῶν μισθόν.


384


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


Scene. PHEIDIAS, DORIS (and, perhaps, DAVUS)


PHEIDIAS
... Pheidias is still speaking in: monologue, or perhaps
Davus is addressing him, referring sententiously to three
factors : ‘* pedigree,” “reputation,” and (3) “ wealth.” Doris
enters and (1, 18) says:
DORIS 3


Now I bid you, Pheidias, cheer up.


PHEIDIAS
I, cheer up? For me that’s out of the question.
{ am wholly concerned with this my’ ill-luck. If
anybody says any babbling prayer—(to the crows
with him!)
DORIS
Dear lady Athena, preserve me!


(Pheidias makes some, now unintelligible, remark, perhaps
to the effect that neither individuals nor whole cities yain
anything from pious sacrifices and- prayers to the gods.)


DORIS
What’s that you say, you pitiful wretch ?


PHEIDIAS

I say that the gods lend a hand to the wicked.
For we, though good, get nothing good. Nay, this
captain now on double pay! used to march all in a
sweat carrying in person his javelin, wallet, helmet,
[mattress, spear,] halbert and sheepskin. Now his


1 See note on text ; or perhaps ‘‘ semi-centurion.”


29 ἐπορεύεθ᾽ ἱδρῶν σαύνιον, Herwerden. /!@épaxa, σάγμα,
σαύν᾽ιον, S*.


30 533 suppl. e.g. Γστρώματα, σιγύν(ον.


MENANDER


Γ a , 0θ᾽ ε sa | A Μ /
νυν TAVTaA Tav οτρισα TUXNS OVOS φέρει,


Γὸ δέ ποτε Βῖθυς γέγονεν ἐξ!αίφνης Bias:
Γθεοὶ γὰρ αὐτῷ τοῦτ᾽ ἔϊνεμον. (Δω.) τὸν ἐνθαδὶ
Col. Il Γμέγαν, κακοδαιμ'ο'νοῦντα πέρυσι. . acu...
(Pe.). . 2... . Typ OvatpiBhy Tape. . . cao
36 a7... - - «ον' oxwT'tlomevov. . . .oT.. ©.
evT. . .. «οὔτι ovta mali'des: ἔχομε: ..
omo. .... «ng ὄδίπεσθεν. (Φει.) οἴχομαι.
ne'er δὲ δεῦρ᾽, ἐπεὶ κατέπτηκέν ποθεῖν""}
40 πόλῆν τιν᾽ ἢ ναῦν ἢ σατράπην ἢ σ'υμμάχους"
προδοὺς ἐκέρδανέν τι' δῆλός ἐστι. (Δω.) πῶς;
(Φει.) οὐθ'εὶς ἐπλούτησεν ταχέως δίκαιος wr"
ὁ μὲϊν γὰρ αὑτῷ συλλέγει καὶ φείδεται,
ὁ δὲ τὸν πάλαι THpod'yT’ evel δ᾽ ρεύσας πάντ᾽ Γἔχει."
(Δω.). ὡς ἀδύϊνατον τοῦτ᾽. (Φει.) ὀμνύω τὸν “Ηλιον"
46 εἰ μὴ φέίρων ὁ παῖϊς ὄπισθ᾽ ἐβάδιξ'ἐ) μου
τὰ @Odo'v'a ‘kai tis! ἣν ὑπόνοια κραιπάλης,
ἐβόω!ν ἂν εὐθὺς π'ᾳρακολουθῶν ἐν ἀγορᾷ:
“ἄνθρωπί'ε, T'é'pvat'y πτωχὸς ἦσθα Kal νεκρύς,
50 νυνὶ} δὲ πλουἱτεῖς "" λέγε, τίν᾽ εἰργάζου τέχνην;


31 Leo suppl. 32 Wilam. suppl.

33 Assign (end) to Doris? or to Dayus’? See on line 41.

35 (end) map... σας, pap.

38 ὄπισθεν" space rep. by S*= ? change of speaker.

39 ἥκει δὲ Γδεῦρ᾽, ἐπεὶ, S* suppl. // G.-H. assign line to
Pheidias.

41 πῶς; to Doris, Rob. / To ‘‘ B” (= Davus), K?, etc.

42-44 = fragm. 294 Κα, This identifies the play, see
Kérte*, Introd.

49-50 Restored from fragm. 731 K, see K*.


386


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


thrice unlucky ass does all this carrying, and _ this
whilom barbarian (Bithynian)! has turned of a sudden
into [the valiant] Bias,? for the gods bestowed this
on him.
Doris (? DAVUS)
This man here powerful . . . so wretched last
ΠΡ cic Sac i hd aS ae a


ΝΠ <i iet 6" S8 οὸὋὸοοο'έὸο © 6 6 “6 06 (8 UY ὁ ee ve “Ὁ Jer “8 ve


ΝΡ στ “es. «| amar “oh « SG te ὁ Ge οὗ “e “ee δοὺς ο΄ 8


PHEIDIAS

I’m done for. Now he’s come here slinking in
from somewhere. He has made a little something
by betraying some city, or ship, or satrap, or allies.
He is shown up.

boris (07 DAVUs)

How’s that?

(PHEIDIAS)

No one gets rich quickly if he is honest. For the
honest man collects and saves up for himself, while
one of the other sort gets all by plotting against the
one who has long been careful.

(Doris)
What an impossible situation that!
(PHEIDIAS)

1 swear, by the Sun, if it were not that my slave
is walking behind carrying the jars of Thasian, so
that there would be suspicion that I had been drink-
ing, I'd be following him along forthwith in the
Market-place and bawling out: “Fellow, last year
you were a beggar and a corpse, and now you're
wealthy. Come, tell me, at what trade did you

1 Some play on words is omitted— perhaps bi-thys (Bithy-
nian) and Bi-as or perhaps some barbarian name,


2 ef. the returned soldier, Stratophanes, in fragm. 442; cf.
also 439 Καὶ.
387


MENANDER


col , ’ , , Γ εἶ ΄ »μ nw , w
τοῦτό γ᾽ amoKplw'at, πόθεν ἔχεις ταῦτ᾽; οὐκ ἄπει
> a Γδ Aly 56275 ἢ 4 ie} ΜΕ ἢ ΄ὶ
ἐκ τῆσ' δε γῆς ἑτέρωσε; τί διδάσ' κ'εις κακά;

Ψ cal -“ -

τί λυσιτελεῖ-:ν:- ἡμῖν ἀποφαίνεις τἀδικεῖν;"
be Som; ΝΡ ΤΥ Ὁ ἀπ Οὐγ 7)"

\ ΄ a ὩΨῪ

. καὶ πέπρακ᾽ ἄρα

> ’
Bee τον "eh ees oo a
Peer rena RR ΠῚ Ὁ
ig tb oks & ‘anne okie ee Sar
. ἔχω, τὸ δ᾽ ἐγκαΐ λεῖν"


60. solide ore  τοῦν ἀπ δὸ ὡς 08 δέδν
Ourlitargos ΕΗ καὶ abelediee wep ΧΡΟΜΈΡΟΡΙ
wee ee ee τρις ClUBeBpovrncat mddat
πα ΡΥ ΘΕ ἘΠ ΤΠ ΤΑΝ τιολι

. αἷς χέρσιν

65 . τουτονὶ


. § λαμβάνων:


Scene. (? AAOX), ΓΝΆΘΩΝ
οὐκοῦν Lvabwv
3 Y A
ra ae ee ee ΠΩ]
(Lacuna of —? lines.)


52 Ox. pap. col. i. No. 1237 begins. ἐκ τῆσ' δε γῆς, Wilam.
suppl. //érépwoe, G.—H./ ἐκ τῆς Γὁδοῦ; μισῶ] σε, δ᾽. | ἐκ tHe
τον ἘΩ͂Ν ὁ woe. τί διδασ. εἰς κακά, Ox. pap. ν. p. 313. / Ox. pap.
x. No. 1237 begins. . . σε; τί διδάσκεις κακά;

53 λυσιτελεῖ--ν;», G.—-H. corr. Ox. pap. v.// ἀποφαίνεις, Ox.
pap. iii./ ἀποβαίνεις, Ox. pap. χ.

54 Ox. pap. iii. here continues εἷς ἐστ. ν of line 70, but a
lacuna must be assumed for continuation of lines 54-69 in
Ox. pap. x. 1237.


388


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


work? Answer me this, at least: What is the
source of your wealth? Be off from this land to
some other place? Why do you set a bad example?
Why do you show off injustice to us as advan-
tageous?”’


(In the dialogue following, reference is perhaps made to the
sale of the girl by the slave-dealer. At line 67, where Davus
is recorded as speaker, there is probably a change of scene.
Davus refers to Gnatho, the parasite. In v. 68 someone
addresses the latier : “Ὁ Gnatho,” and it is possible that it
is Qnatho speaking below (after a break of some lines), but it
is more likely to be Davus, as he addresses Pheidias (line 71)
as “my young master.”’)


eee EEE UE EEE ENE


57... ἐκείνου μὲν ᾧ, G.-H./. . . € κεινουμένῳ, S*.

67 Aaos is written between the lines.

67-68 Γνάθων, cf. parasite name in Ter. Hunuchus, see
G.-H., Ox. pap. x. p. 93.


389


(70)


75


(Peu.)


81


90


MENANDER


(Ὁ ΔΑΟΣ, or TNA@ON), PEIATAS


els ἐστί ὧν [ὸ Πρλδξια ἘΝ ἀιυγεί ἀὴρ εἰ Ὁ

δι’ οὗ τὰ πάντ᾽" π᾿ όλωλε, τρόφιμε, πράγματα
ἄρδην' "λέγω σ' ἴοι 1 λόγον ὅσας ἀναστάτους
πόλεις ἑ ‘op aka Sy τ οὔτ᾽ ἀπολώλεκεν μόνον
ταύτας, ὃ νῦν δὰ “τοῦτον ἐξεύρηκ᾽ eye"

ὅσοι τύραννοι πῴποθ', ὅστις ἡγεμὼν

μέγας, carpe "ns's φρούραρχ. οἷς, οἰκιστὴς τόπ'οἷυ,
στρατηγός, οὐ yap! ἀλλὰ τοὺς τελέως λέγω
ἀπολωλότας ἢ νῦν, τοῦτ᾽ ἀνήρηκεν μόνον

οἱ κόλακες" οὗτ'οι δ᾽ εἰσὶν αὐτοῖς ἄθλιοι.
σοβαρὸς μὲν ὁ λόγος" ὅ τι δὲ τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ποτέ,
οὐκ οἷδ᾽ ἔγωγε. (?) Ta's τις ἂν κρίνας κακῶς
εὔνουν ὑπολάβοι τὸν ἐπιβουλεύοντά σοι.

κἂν μὴ δύνηται; (5) πᾶς δύναται κακῶς ποεῖν.


(Lacuna — ?)


περανούμεν το, ως 0. teks oe cal νῦν τις


5 TOY πορνοβοσκο. - ~ «| το νει ἢ
πάντων.
ΔΑΟΣ
TOU ς πὰ ke whan er Moms eee
ἕδος see wee Bee te
μα : με δα PORTS? eh’ AS


(Lacuna — ?)


70 S* assumes lacuna of 10 or more lines. // εἷς ἐστιν trans-
ferr ed from line 54./ K? supplies Γὅ κόλαξ ὁ κατάρατος Στρου-
éias'./ 53 throws εἷς ἐστιν to end of line./ Assigned to Davus,
cf. τρόφιμε, F'./G.—-H. to Gnatho, see 67 and 68.


39°


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


Scene. DAVUS (GNATHO?), PHEIDIAS


pDavus.—There is one man .......
through whom, my young master, everything is ruined
utterly. I say my say to you. As many cities as
you have seen subverted, their ruin has been merely
this which, now, thanks to him, I have discovered.
All tyrants whatsoever, every great leader, satrap,
garrison commander, founder of a colony, general—
nay, but I mean all those who have fallen utterly
in our time—these, these alone, the flatterers have
destroyed. These are their cause of misery.


PHEIDIAS.—-Your argument is imposing. But I for
my part don’t know what the point is.


(pavus).—Anyone by error of judgment might
think that the one who is plotting against you is
well disposed.


(pHerp1as).—Even if he lacks power?
(pavus).~-Everyone has power to do evil,


(Lacuna. )
Scene. (ὃ PHEIDIAS), DAVUS, (? GNATHO)


(In these lines there is a reference to the Slave-dealer (the
procurer). At 86 Davus re-enters and at 92 the marginal
name may be “ Gnatho.’’)

(Lacuna.)


72 λόγον, Allinson, S?.

73 ἑόρακας, G.—H. ΠΣ ca, S2./€.. aka... ovr, pap.

79 G.-H. suppl./é τι Γσύνιεισιν, 8*./ our... εἰσιν, pap.

81 mals, G.-H./ πΙῶϊς, Robert.

84 Ox. pap. col. ii, No. 1237 begins.

84-92 S* combines with this fragm, also fragm. 2 of pap.
1237. This brings line 84 above to line 86 (see S? ad loc.).

86 Aaos between the lines.

92 In r. margin iA . . 0, name of a speaker. 'Tva'@, suppl.
Allinson. | ΓΣτρουθ', 5 29/ The initial letter is perhaps B,
G.-H.


9:1


100


(Πορ.)


105


110


115


MENANDER


> oy jens PQUCAUTOD » γ. ἐὰν pia py ere ©
ὅτ᾽. t\pos βίαν μεθῆϊκας αὐτήν. εἰ δὲ νῦν
TS, reer . bedi pel dee Ses gee
μ' re Tram euyped” "ἑτέρους | συ) στρατ πώτας δηλαδὴ"
ov's 7 ᾿αραφυλάξει' παῖδες, ἐκτρίβο᾽ Hse ἄν."
ἤτοι ποθ' ,οὗτος ἢ σὺ πιστευθεὶς λόγοις"
ὑπεναν' τί ον τε μηθὲν ὧν ποεῖϊς ποεῖν"
δόξας ἔ ἔχεις τὸν ἄνδρ᾽ ἀφύλακτον, & ἔκτοπον.
τῶν πραττομένων, τῆς οἰκίας. ὅτ'αν δὲ σὺ"
β' ούλῃ διοικηθήσεται τὰ λοιπά σοι.
s0U0....0% "ἧς φανερός. οὐ λιμοί, βίαν"
ἔχοντες ἐ ἐν tats! χερσίν, ἄλλο δ᾽ οὐδὲ ἔ ἕν;
ὠνεῖθ᾽ ὁ γείτων: ἀλλ᾽ ἐὰν ais On? ὁ μὲν"
πρόσ'εἰισιν ἑξήκ' οἶνθ᾽ ἑταίρους παραλαβ'ώ ὧν, ἢ
᾿ὅσ'ουΐἷς " Ὀδυσσεὺς ἦλθεν εἰς Τροίαν ἔ ἔχων,
"βοῶ ὧν, ἀπειλῶν" " “ἄν σε μή, μαστιγία,


Ἴ


5


"Os ἐμὴν πἔπρακας πλέον ἔχοντι xpucio'y—"”
Recs ‘td'da πωλῶ; pa τοὺς δώδεκα 'Oelods,


hs sak ‘wlelvo's | διὰ τοῦτον" ἡ wl ἐλάμβανεν
[ὅσον οὐχὶ δέκα, τρεῖς μνᾶς ἑκάστης ἡμέρας

i \ a] / ὃ «ὃ δ᾽ “ ,
παρὰ τοῦ" ξένου. ἐδοικα δ᾽ οὕτω λαμβάνειν"
Γὲκ τῆς ὁδ' οὔ γὰρ ἁρπάσονθ᾽ ὅταν τύχῃ
Γαὐτήν"; δικάσομαι, πράγμαθ᾽ ἕξω, wapt'vpas |
Γπαρέχειν δεήσει". . .. ..


93 Ox. pap. iii. col. iii. begins here.

97-101 G.—H. suppl.

101 ἔϊκτοπον", Kretschmar, G.—H.

102-3 Another lacuna here?, §*.// 103 G.—H., S?, and Καὶ:
give 103 ff. to Πορνοβοσκός. To Gnathon? Allinson. // βίαν,
Leo./Blov, G.—H. 106-108 G.—H. 109 ὃς ἐμὴν, Leo.

110 Leo conject. τί δ᾽ ᾿Ισθμιάδα.

111 we ἐλάμβανεν, G.—H. 113 Leo.

114 ἐκ τῆς ὁδοῦ, S* qv. 115 αὐτήν, Rob. 116 Leo.


392


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


(GNATHO ?)

*4 Because you let her go perforce. But if now
he will certainly send for some fellow-soldiers against
whom you will be on your guard (saying), “ My boys,
now we can crush him.’’ Surely on a time he, or
you, being believed by reason of your words and
seeming to do naught of what you are doing against
him, will have this man off his guard and excluded
from what’s going on and from your house, and
whenever you like you'll have the rest regulated.


Scene. SLAVE-DEALER (alone)


(SLAVE-DEALER)

χω BS heaps Rein ear cee ian ρσι are they
not starvelings, with violence in their hands and not
one thing else? My neighbour was trying to pur-
chase her, but if this one gets wind of it he’ll come
up bringing? along sixty companions, as many as
Odysseus came to Troy with, bawling, threatening :
“If I don’t (settle) you—you whipping post! You’ve
sold my girl.to one who had more gold.” I put her
up,for sale... .? No, by the twelve gods, no

. . just for him! Why, she alone all but brought
in ten. She wins three minae daily from the stranger.
But I’m afraid to keep on like this taking receipts.
For will they not, when occasion arises, carry her
off on the street? Ill be a defendant at law; [1]
have legal difficulties; I'll have to furnish witnesses


108


(Little can be inferred about the subsequent unfolding of the
plot. It may, however, be assumed that Pheidias ultimately
yets the better of his rival, sets free the girl and marries her.)

1 For this scene cf. Terence, Hun. 772 ff.


393


292 K }
(May.)


293 K


297 K


295 K


296 K


MENANDER


OTHER FRAGMENTS
-
σπονδή" δίδου σὺ σπλάγχν᾽, ἀκολουθῶν" ποῖ βλέ-
πεις;

σπονδή: φέρ᾽, ὦ παῖ Σωσία' σπονδή" καλῶς.
> lol 2 “-“ ’ / ΕῚ ,
ἐγχοῦ.2 θεοῖς ᾿Ολυμπίοις εὐχώμεθα
Ὀλυμπίαισι,) πᾶσι πάσαις: λάμβανε
τὴν γλῶτταν: ἐπὶ τούτῳ διδόναι σωτηρίαν,
ὑγίειαν, ἀγαθὰ πολλά, τῶν ὄντων τε νῦν
ἀγαθῶν ὄνησιν πᾶσι' τοῦτ᾽ εὐχώμεθα.


(Βίας) κοτύλας χωροῦν δέκα
ἐν Καππαδοκίᾳ κόνδυ χρυσοῦν, Στρουθία,
τρὶς ἐξέπιον * μεστόν γ᾽" (Στρ.) ᾿Αλεξάνδρου πλέον
τοῦ βασιλέως πέπωκας. (Βι.) οὐκ ἔλαττον, οὐ
μὰ τὴν ᾿Αθηνᾶν. (Στρ.) μέγα γε.


γελῶ τὸ πρὸς τὸν Κύπριον ἐννοούμενος.


Χρυσίδα, ἹΚορώνην, ᾿Αντίκυραν, ᾿Ισχάδα
καὶ Ναννάριον ἔσχηκας ὡραίαν " σφόδρα.


ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ γεννήτην δύναμ᾽ εὑρεῖν οὐδένα .
’ /
ὄντων τοσούτων, ἀλλ᾽ ἀπείλημμαι μόνος.


1 cf. Athen. xiv. 659d=fragm, 292 K. Μένανδρος ἐν Κόλακι
Tov τοῖς τετραδισταῖς διακονούμενον μάγειρον ἐν TH τῆς Πανδήμου
᾿Αφροδίτης ἑορτῇ ποιεῖ ταυτὶ λέγοντα. See above on line 10 of
Κόλαξ and on frag. 320 K below.

2 ἐγχοῦ, Cobet./ εὔχου, MS.(A)./ ἔχει, K*.

3 "ρλυμπίαισι, Herwerd./’OAuuriag:, MS.(A).

4 ἔπιον A, corr. Bentley ; ef. Plut. de adul. 13 (57a) καθά-
περ ὁ Στρουθίας ἐμπεριπατῶν τῷ Βίαντι καὶ κατορχούμενος THs
ἀναισθησίας αὐτοῦ τοῖς ἐπαίνοις ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τοῦ βασιλέως πλέον
πέπωκας.

5. Capps conject.: ἔσχηκα γ᾽ ὡραίας.


394


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


OTHER FRAGMENTS


CATERER
(to his attendant at the celebration of “ the Fourth.”’)


A libation! You, my attendant, pass me the
viscera. Which way are you looking? A libation !
Come, my boy Sosias,a libation! That's right. Now
pour in. Let’s pray to the Olympians all, to gods
and goddesses. There, take the tongue. By virtue
of this may they grant safety, health, blessings mani-
fold, and enjoyment of our present blessings to all.
Be this our prayer.

Bis (the boaster)

In Cappadocia, Struthias, I drank off three times
a golden tankard holding ten half-pints, brimming
full too.

STRUTHIAS (a toady)
You’ve drunk more than Alexander the King.


BIAS
Not less. No, by Athena!


STRUTHIAS
Great drinking, that !


(GNATHO ?)
I laugh when I recall that remark to the Cyprian.?


STRUTHIAS ? (10. BIAS ?)
You’ve had Chrysis, Corone, Anticyra, Ischas, and
very beautiful Nannarion.


(PHEIDIAS ?)

Now I am not able to find even a single chief of
our clan, although there are so many, but I am cut
off alone.

1 ef. Terence, Hun. 498-499.


395


MENANDER


298 K πρόσεισιν οἷον ἀψοφητὶ θρέμματος
“raver |}


299 K v v — κωβίος, ἠλακατῆνες,
κυνὸς OUpaiov.. . ....


300 K βοῦς Κύπριος."
KTBEPNHTAI


301 K τἀργύριον εἶναι, μειράκιον, σοι φαίνεται
οὐ τῶν ἀναγκαίων καθ᾽ ἡμέραν μόνον
τιμὴν παρασχεῖν δυνατόν, ἄρτων, ἀλφίτων,
ὄξους, ἐλαίου, μείξονος δ᾽ ἄλλου τινός;

δ ἀθανασίας δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν, οὐδ᾽ ἂν συναγάγῃς
τὰ Ταντάλου τάλαντ᾽ ἐκεῖνα λεγόμενα"
ἀλλ᾽ ἀποθανεῖ καὶ ταῦτα καταλείψεις τισίν.
τί οὖν λέγω; μηδ᾽ αὐτὸς εἰ σφόδρ᾽ εὐπορεῖς
πίστευε τούτῳ, μήτε τῶν πτωχῶν πάλιν

10 ἡμῶν καταφρόνει, τοῦ δέ Υ εὐτυχεῖν ἀεὶ
πάρεχε σεαυτὸν τοῖς ὁρῶσιν ἄξιον.


802 Καὶ οἷοι λαλοῦμεν ὄντες οἱ τρισάθλιοι
ἅπαντες οἱ φυσῶντες ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῖς μέγα'
αὐτοὶ γὰρ οὐκ ἴσασιν ἀνθρώπων φύσιν.
οὗτος μακάριος ἐν ἀγορᾷ νομίζεται"

5 ἐπὰν ἀνοίξῃ τὰς θύρας, τρισάθλιος,
γυνὴ κρατεῖ πάντων, ἐπιτάττει, μάχετ᾽ ἀεί,
ἀπὸ πλειόνων ὀδυνᾶτ᾽, ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἀπ᾽ οὐδενός.


303 Κὶ τί λέγων ἀποτρώγειν ἀξιώσει νῦν ἐμοῦ
τὸ μισθάριον; μένω γὰρ ἐξ ἐχθιξζινοῦ


1 ψαύων, K*, cf. ἐπιψαύων in Plutarch’s citation, de adul. 13
(5 7 a). | barr buses, Kock.


PPE Ppatighaney, Corinthia (126, K), lines 3-5, ἐν τῇ
Κύπρῳ.... oxatopayeiv. ... τοὺς βοῦς ἠνάγκασαν.


396


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


(The toady) comes up noiselessly and strokes you
as he might an animal.


~ ae Gudgeon, spindle-tunnies, tail-fin of a


Cyprian ox.}
THE PILOTS


Does money, young man, seem to you capable
of furnishing the price not only of the daily necessi-
ties—bread, meal, vinegar, and oil—but also of
something greater? But there is no price for
immortality, not even if you get together those
storied talents of Tantalus. Nay, you shall die and
leave these things to others. What am I saying,
then? Why, even if you are very well off yourself,
do not trust to this, nor, again, despise us, the
beggarly poor, but at least show yourself continuously
worthy of good fortune in the eyes of beholders.


How to be Happy— Unmarried.


How we do chatter, men thrice wretched that we are,
Yes, all of us, so much puffed up about ourselves !
For men themselves know not the nature of mankind.
Now here’s a man deemed happy in the market-place :
But when he opens his front door, thrice lu¢kless one,
A woman rules supreme, gives orders, bickers on
And on. His griefs are more and many. None
have I!


On what pretext will he now see fit to nibble
down my paltry wages? For [ am still waiting since
yesterdays ....


1 A term of contempt like σκατυφάγος, see Pericetr. 274.


397


MENANDER


KONEIAZOMENAITI


A fragment of 20 mutilated’ lines in the library of
Dorpat was happily identified by Zereteli as belonging to the
“* Coneiazomenae”’ of Menander, the remains of the last three
verses being identical with fragment No. 306 of Kock's collec-
tion. (T'wo) women in despair were about to drink hemlock,
a more modern method of swicide than the orthodox hang-


ΤΠ vat aati
lap ἐστὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἐνύπνιον; (B) εἰ καθεύδομεν.----
Γπροῖκα δὲ δίδωσι τρία" τάλαντα, πένθ᾽ ἅμα
Γμνᾶς εἰς στολὴν καὶ! κόσμον. (A) οὐκ ἐγρήγορα.
r> pes , \ ἢ Ὡς a
ἀλλ᾽ ἐξεγείρου: τοὺς γάμους y ἤδη ποεῖ.
i AO κροτὶών. (A) τί λέγεις; κροτὼν ἐγώ;
A" δ Ν fol ’ <a
began: Ha τὸ δειλινὸν παρῆν. (A) τί οὖν;
ΟΣ Δ. 9 «πωρακ᾽ αθήμενος λαλεῖ.
τίνι τῶν ἑταίρων; (8) Χαιρέᾳ. (A) ποῦ; βού-
λομαι
Γαὐτοὺς ὁρᾶν. (8) ἐγγ᾽)ύς τις ἔστιν ἐξέδρα
ἐνννννν, (A) €vtad6'a δή που δεξιᾶς.
Γἐνταῦθα νῦν λαλοῦσιν. (A) ὄψομ᾽ εἰσιών.
Γχελοιδόρημ᾽ ap’ o'v δικαίως τῇ Tvyn’
Γ / / id \ > a) 7 “ Μ /
τί yap; ὡς τυφλὴν αὐτὴν κακῶς εἴρηκά που,
aun δι »ω ἢ / ’ t Da | a ὍΣ. /
νῦν δ᾽ ἐξέσωσέ μ᾽ ὡς Elovy’ ὁρῶσά τι.

For readings supplied, not otherwise noted, see K*./ Other
conject. restor. see δ".

6 K? divides this line between A and Β.}} κροτών, see Men.
frag. 318, ὑγιέστερος κροτῶνος, on Which Kock cites Zenobius
6, 27: ἐπὶ τῶν πάνυ ὑγιαινόντων ἣ παροιμία ἀπὸ τοῦ ζῴου τοῦ
κρότωνος, κτλ. ν

14 τί γάρ; ὡς, Wilam./ ὡς γὰρ ete. Κα 5,


398


«σαὶ, 4. =


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE WOMEN WHO WOULD DRINK
HEMLOCK


ing. Fortune intervenes. A marriage is planned which implies
a happy termination. The part preserved is apparently
from the closing scenes of the comedy. Only one character,
‘* Chaereas,” is mentioned by name in the lines as preserved.
“4” and ‘‘B” are, perhaps, confidential slaves ; ‘‘C’” is,
perhaps, one of the would-be hemlock-drinkers.


(a) Is this then a dream?

(8) If we are sleeping—nay, but he offers three
talents as dowry, and along with them five mnae
for dress and adornment.

a) I am not awake!

Ἃ Well, rouse up. He’s making ready the
wedding now. . . a tick.

(a) What’s that you say? I, a tick?

(8) . . . last evening was present.

(a) What of it?

B) . . . seated he talks.

+} With what one of his companions ?

(8) With Chaereas.

(a) Where? I wish to see them.

(s) There is an exedra near... αὶ

(a) Here somewhere on the right.

(8) They are chattering there now.

(a) [ll go in and see them.


(Exeunt a and B. Enter c (one of the women ?).)
SCENE.

(c) So then I have been reviling Fortune unjustly.
And why? I have maligned her forsooth as though
she were blind, whereas, as a matter of fact, she has
saved me, it would seem, by seeing a thing or two.

1 Much of the text is purely conjectural.


399


307 K


309 K


310 K


MENANDER


Ι ᾽ Ul ὃ al r / > ’ ‘
ἐπόνησα δεινῶ᾽ς, τοῖς πόνοις δ᾽ εἰργαζόμην


Tess “ > / ees | \ > Ἄ > /

Ta νῦν ἀγαθά, τούτων yap οὐκ ἂν ἐπέτυχον,

Γ > \ | he: SNE / "1 oe 1 / Ν fal
εἰ μὴ TOT ἐπόνησ᾽᾿. ὥστε! μηθείς, πρὸς θεῶν,


΄ a / > / ’
πράττων κακῶς λίαν ἀθυμήσῃ ποτέ'


» \ > a na , ,
ἴσως yap ἀγαθοῦ τοῦτο πρόφασις γίνεται.


ANOTHER FRAGMENT


\ a \ \
τὸ γνῶθι σαυτὸν ἔστιν, ἂν τὰ πράγματα


, foal © Ν r /
εἰδῇς > τὰ σαυτοῦ Kal τί σοι ποιητέον.


AETKAAIA


For the story of Phaon, with which legends about Sappho
were entwined, see the fragments of ‘‘ Phaon” by Plato of the
Old Comedy (cf. Kock, ‘‘ Comic. Attic. Fragm.” i. p. 645).
Turpilius, like his contemporary Terence, made over into
Latin plays matter from the New Comedy. Six of his titles
are on Menander’s list. In his ‘‘ Leucadia” he retails the
story of the Phaon love-affair, the leap of the despairing


ὅστις ὑπέχει χρυσίῳ
\ a x \ a \ /
τὴν χεῖρα, κἂν μὴ φῇ, πονηρὰ βούλεται.
a aX / ᾽ ΄ / a lal
ἀεὶ νομίζονθ᾽ οἱ πένητες τῶν θεῶν.


1 Gore... γίνεται = fragm. 306 K. // μηθείς, MS.
5 εἰδῇς, Meineke, Kock, K*. ἴδῃς, MSS.


400


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


I suffered terribly, but by my sufferings I was work-
ing out these present blessings, for I had never
gained this had 1 not then suffered. Therefore, by
the gods, let no one ever be excessively despondent
because he fares ill, for just this, perhaps, turns out
to be the occasion of blessing.


ANOTHER FRAGMENT
Know Thyself.
This “ Know Thyself” means if thou wilt inves-


tigate thy own circumstances and what should be
thy own line of action.


THE LADY OF LEUCAS


woman from the cliff and her rescue. In our uncertainty
about the genesis of the tradition concerning Sappho herself,
the loss of the context in Menander’s play (Fragm. No. 312,
313) is to be regretted, but it is likely that Menander here,
as elsewhere, merely used the adornment of an old tale
to point a contemporary moral (see Le Grand, “ Daos,”
p. 43).


An Itching Palm.


He who holds out his hand to have coin dropped
in is ready for evil, even though he deny it.


The poor are always held to be protégés of the
gods.


1 Menander returns once and again to this hackneyed
Delphic maxim. See above : U'he Groom, p. 367 ; Thrasyleon,
p. 361 ; and below, 538 K.


401


DD


MENANDER


312,313K οὗ δὴ λέγεται πρώτη Σαπφὼ


οι


319 K


co


10


\ ΄ / lal / »
τὸν ὑπέρκομπον θηρῶσα Φάων
lal tn ,
οἰστροῦντι ῖ πόθῳ ῥῖψαι πέτρας
> Ν fal ’ \ 9 > > )
ἀπὸ τηλεφανοῦς" ἀλλὰ ~ KAT εὐχὴν -
>
onv, δέσπὸο ava—E ..... -
Ἐς ΤΡ re are
, / 3 A (ὃ > a
τέμενος πέρι Λευκάδος ἀκτῆς.


MEOH


Bie) > “ / \ /
εἶτ᾽ οὐχ ὅμοια πράττομεν Kal θύομεν;
ὅπου γε τοῖς θεοῖς μὲν ἠγορασμένον
δραχμῶν ἄγω προβάτιον ἀγαπητὸν δέκα,
> / \ \ ΄ Ss \ /
αὐλητρίδας δὲ Kal μύρον Kai ψαλτρίας,
Μενδαῖον, Θάσιον, ἐγχέλεις, τύρον, μέλι,
-“ ,
μικροῦ τάλαντον, γίνεται τε κατὰ λόγον
~ al \ ’ \ ” “-“ 7
δραχμῶν μὲν ἀγαθὸν ἄξιον λαβεῖν δέκα
ἡμᾶς, ἐὰν καὶ καλλιερηθῇ τοῖς θεοῖς,

7 \ \ nr , | cd = | tal 5 A /
τούτων δὲ πρὸς ταῦτ᾽ ἱἀντ'ανελεῖν ἢ τὴν ζημίαν,
πῶς οὐχὶ τὸ κακὸν τῶν ἱερῶν διπλάζεται;
ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν ὧν γ᾽ ὁ θεὸς οὐκ εἴασα τὴν

> \ ry es \ \ ’ a ,
ὀσφὺν ἂν ἐπὶ τὸν βωμὸν ἐπιθεῖναί ποτε
> \ / / “ Ἁ »Μ
εἰ μὴ καθήγιζέν τις ἅμα τὴν ἔγχελυν,
“ , > , 2 a a
iva Καλλιμέδων ἀπέθανεν εἷς τῶν συγγενῶν.
1 οἰστροῦντι, ἸΚοοῖκ. [οἰστρῶντι MS.
2 ἀλλά ΜΗ, | ἅλμα, Wordsworth.
8 πέρι, Bernhardy, accent. Meineke joins the two as one
fragment. ὃ
4 re Codex A./ τὸ Mein.


© ἀντανελεῖν, Dobree. ἀνελεῖν, Codex A.


402


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS
The Leucadian Cliff:


Where you know, as the first—so the legend records —
It was Sappho, in quest of her Phaon the proud,
Who was stung by desire and ventured the leap
From the headland far-seen. But, O master and lord,


While we pray by thy will... ........-->
i See: Soe let fair silence enfold
Thy demesne ! on Leucadia’s foreland.”
DRUNKENNESS


Do we not fare, then, as befits our method of
offering sacrifice? Where, for example, I bring to
the gods a scrawny sheep,® costing scarcely ten
drachmas,‘ while the flute-girls and scented oil and
harp-girls, wine of Mende or Thasos, eels, cheese,
and honey cost all but a talent; and where by
analogy it is reasonable for us to receive (only) ten
drachmas’ worth of blessing even in the event that
our sacrifice to the gods is auspicious, while in the
reverse case it is reasonable for us to balance against
this the loss accruing from these—how is not the
evil from the sacrifices duplicated?® 1, at any rate,
if I were the god, would never have allowed anyone
to put the loin on the altar unless along with it he
were dedicating the eel® in order to have secured
‘the death of Callimedon, one of his kinsmen,

1 4.e. the precinct of Apollo.

2 This is one of the few anapaestic citations preserved from
Menander. The suggestion that the metre implies that the
lines are from a choral ode is rejected by Le Grand, p. 43.

3 ef. the scene in The Girl from Samos, 187 ff.

4 For table of Greek money, see above, p. 18, note.

5 Because they lose their money and penalty besides is
exacted of those who make the sacrifice” (Kock).


6 Kels were considered a delicacy; cf. the scene in
Aristoph. Acharn. 880 ff.


403


DD) 2


320 K


cr


321 Καὶ


325 K


«
ῳ


MENANDER


ἐμὲ yap διέτριψεν ὁ
κομψότατος ἀνδρῶν Χαιρεφῶν, ἱ ἱερὸν γάμον
φάσκων ποήσειν δευτέραν" μετ᾽ εἰκάδα
καθ᾽ αὑτόν, ἵνα τῇ τετράδι" δειπνῇ παρ᾽ ἑτέροις"
τὰ τῆς θεοῦ γὰρ πανταχῶς ἔχειν καλῶς.


» ’ \
Αδράστεια καὶ
θεὰ σκυθρωπὲ Νέμεσι, συγγινώσκετε.


ΜΙΣΟΓΥΝΗΣ


(SIMTAO3)
πρὸς TO πρᾶγμ᾽ ἔχω
κακῶς.
(Β)


ἐπαριστερῶς γὰρ αὐτὸ λαμβάνεις"

τὰ “δυσχερῆ γὰρ καὶ τὰ λυπήσαντά σε
ὁρᾷς ἐν αὐτῷ, τὰ δ᾽ ἀγάθ᾽ οὐκέτι βλέπεις.
εὕροις δ᾽ ἂν ᾿οὐδὲν τῶν ἁπάντων, Σιμύλε,
ἀγαθὸν ὅ ὅτῳ TL μὴ πρόσεστι καὶ κακόν.
γυνὴ πολυτελής ἐστ᾽ ὀχληρόν, οὐδ᾽ ἐᾷ
ζῆν τὸν λαβόνθ' ὡς βούλετ᾽" ἀλλ᾽ ἔνεστί τι
ἀγαθὸν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς, παῖδες" ἐλθόντ᾽ εἰς νόσον

1 δευτέρᾳ. For the 21st πρώτη μετ᾽ εἰκάδα (or ἐπ᾽ εἰκάδι)
seems to have been used, but in counting back from the end
of the month δευτέρα, according to the usual idiom, meant the
day before (cf. pridie Calendas), cf. Ar. Clouds, 1131.

* See Κόλαξ, line 10.


1 See Greek text, notes.
2 The ‘‘ Fourth”; see Greek text. The fourth of the
month was the birthday of Heracles, and this day, according


404


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


For Chaerephon, the cleverest of men, thwarted
me by professing that he will make at his house a
feast of holy matrimony on the twenty-second ! inst.,
in order that he may dine at the house of others
on the Fourth.? For, says he, the rites of the goddess
are every way in good shape.


O Adrasteia? and O sullen goddess Nemesis,
forgive.


THE MISOGYNIST


The ““ Misogynist,” or possibly ‘* The Wife-hater,” was by
one tradition the best of Menander’s comedies.


How to be happy though married.


SIMYLUS
I am ill-pleased with this affair.


B

Yes, for you take it in left-handed style. That is,
you see in it the difficulties and that which annoys
you, but you have given up looking further at the
benefits. Now, Simylus, you’d not find a single one
of all your blessings with which there is not also
combined some evil. For instance, a wealthy wife
is an irksome thing, nor does she even allow the one
who took her to wife to live as he likes. Yet there
is a certain benefit accruing from her, for example,
children; or, if her husband fall ill, she nurses him


to Hesiod (Works and Days, 800), was the luckiest day for
weddings. But here the “ Fourth” may mean the 24th, @.e.
the fourth day after the twentieth, or, more probably, the
27th, z.e. the fourth (the third) day before the ‘‘ New and the
Old.” But see note on (the text of) fragm. 292 K above.

3 See note on line 184 of The Girl Who Gets Her Hair
Cut Short.


405


10


327 K


328 K


329 K


330 Καὶ


331 K


333 Καὶ


MENANDER


Tov ἔχοντα ταύτην ἐθεράπευσεν ἐπιμελῶς,
ἀτυχοῦντι συμπαρέμεινεν, ἀποθανόντα τε
ἔθαψε, περιέστειλεν οἰκείως" ὅρα

εἰς ταῦθ᾽, ὅταν λυπῇ τι τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμέραν.
οὕτω γὰρ οἴσεις πᾶν τὸ πρᾶγμ᾽: ἂν δ᾽ ἐκλέγῃ
ἀεὶ τὸ λυποῦν, μηδὲν ἀντιπαρατιθεὶς

τῶν προσδοκωμένων, ὀδυνήσει διὰ τέλους.


- ᾽ , \ / fol id /
ἐθύομεν δὲ πεντάκις τῆς ἡμέρας,


ἐκυμβάλιζον δ᾽ ἑπτὰ θεράπαιναι κύκλῳ᾽
αἱ δ᾽ ὠλόλυζον.
ἕλκει δὲ γραμματείδιον
ἐκεῖσε δίθυρον καὶ παράστασις, μία
δραχμή.
ὄμνυμί σοι τὸν Ἥλιον,
7) μὴν ἀποίσειν σοι γράφην κακώσεως.
(Α
a?
χαῖρ᾽, ὦ Τλυκέριον.
(TATKEPION)
Kal ov.
(a) .
πολλοστῷ χρόνῳ
ὁρῶ σε.


a a /
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ! τὰ βίου νῷν ἴσως δεῖ φροντίσαι.


χλαμύδα, καυσίαν,
λόγχην, ἀόρτην, ἱμάτια,
υ - ἐπιχρύσους σανδαλοθήκας.
οὐδέ, Meineke. / οὐ, MS.
406


,


f


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


carefully ; she stays by him in adversity ; she buries
him, if he die, and Jays him out properly. Consider
these points whenever you are vexed by some every-
day matter, for, if you do, you will put up with
everything. Whereas, if you are forever picking
out the annoying circumstances, without balancing
against them any of the things you may hope for,
you will be forever tormented. .


We were offering sacrifice five times a day, and
seven serving women were beating cymbals around
us, while the rest of the women pitched high the
chant.


A two-leaved writing tablet and a deposit of one
drachma draw you (? me) thither.


I swear to you by Helios, verily I'll enter against
you an action for maltreatment !


A
Greeting, Glycerium.
GLYCERIUM
The same to you.
A


It’s a very long time since I’ve seen you.


But there is no need, perhaps, to be concerned
about the means of livelihood of us twain,


. a military cloak, a broad-brimmed hat, a
javelin, a knapsack, robes.


Gold-plated sandal-cases.
1 Or girdle.
497


MENANDER


MIZSOTMENOZ
Fr. I (R) Teepe!
Ἰγείτοϊν
Fr. II(R) πηνίκα
ἜΝ


eos (ἘΣ ΜΉ ΟΣ πεν τιν 8 sak he τς
Baie ἡ pariusia tongs @ κρήσαμδι COORG
. yo 'nTos ἐκτόπου"
. . «νὴ τὸν “Ηλιον :
«ὡς Γέτα.
Ι0.. ..-- Θρασωνίδης αὐθαδίας
.. . ἀνθρώπου λαβεῖν
Ἐν a . τουτὶ AaBwv :
PEATE) co sees ws ant, ois ΠῚ τ τῆς
Aes . vos οὐδὲ γρῦ
I... .... . ydlp Année
Pier ας τα τος eae
σειν τὸ χης ΠΡ ἢ
wea. pel a κλάων, ἀντιβολῶν, ὄνος λύρας.
(?) Γσυμπεριπατήσω καὐτός, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ:


5... πρὶοσιὼν "ἐγὼ, S suppl.
_ 9 Ter in r. margin.
10 Θρασωνΐίδης, Hunt suppl.
12... AaBev: , 53. {| KAew in r. margin.
13 KAew in r. margin.
16... ax ἐρᾷς ἐγὼ, S*. 17 της. “xat?, 83,
18 ὄνος λύρας. See fragm. 527 K below,


408


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE HATED MAN


(To thirteen short fragments, previously known, 1s now
added a longer one (“ Oxyr. Papyri,” No. 1013, VII. 103)
containing some fifty mutilated lines. It is possible to see in
them a pendant to the plot of “ The Girl Who Gets Her Hair
Cut Short.” A jealous soldier, Thrasonides, falls in love with
his captive maid, Crateia ; quarrels with her and then wishes
ardently for a reconciliation. There seems to be a young
rival, Cleinias,) perhaps a double of Moschion. Demeas,
father of Crateia, arrives and frees his daughter.)


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


GETAS, a slave.

CLEINIAS (α young man ?).

DemeEas, father of Crateia.
THRASONIDES,? the jealous soldier-lover
FatHER of Thrasonides.

(Crateia, the young girl.)


(In lines 1-17 Getas and Cleinias appear to be talking with
Demeas. The conversation continues between Demeas and
Cleinias. )


DEMEAS
18 | . . weeping, beseeching (like) a jackass at a
musicale ! 3
CLEINIAS


I'll take a stroll with you myself, I think.


1 For Cleinias, retained by Terence as the name of a young
man, see Terence, Self-T’ormentor, and Andria, 86 (Korte 3).

2 cf. Thraso in the Hunuchus of ‘erence and Gnatho with
Gnathonides (Lucian) ; see The Toady, p. 382 above, for
genesis of name.

3 For the proverb, cited in full by Photius, see below, 527 Κα.


409


MENANDER


(Ay.) . . τοῦτο δ᾽ εἴρημετε. . « αυτοῦ σ᾽ ἀξιῶ
ΙΣΤ 5 τῶν ἀπολυτροῦν ὦ ov πατήρ. (Κλ.) ἐγὼ δέ γε
ἱμισὶῷ γυναῖκας ἐντετυχηκώς, Δημέα.
Fr. 1 (V) Lah
1, ral
25 7 matp
Tou 'xére.!
Pe ΤΠ) το, νἱ Nes
Fr.I(V)..... .x
πεπόνθαμεν : ΠΝ τὰς
80. . θασι τοῦτο τί


iatlon μιμο. ok ae
(@p.) διὰ τί Κράτεια φ.ρ.
(Β.) ὁ τοῦτο πράξας € e AN
(Op.) ) ἀλλὰ πατὴρ ε.
35 ἅπαντ᾽ a. :
βουλευτέϊον.
ζῆν εὖ πρέπει
(Θρ.) ὦ τοῦ παρα. oe
πατὴρ Κρατείας ΘΝ ἀ ὩΣ
40 νῦν ἢ μακάριον ἢ τρισάθλιοπ v', πάτε [οὶ :
δείξεις με τῶν ζώντων ἁπάντων γενόμενον".
εἰ μὴ γὰρ οὗτος δοκιμάσει με κυρίως"
δώσει τε ταύτην, οἴχεται Θρασωνίδ' ης"
ὃ μὴ γένοιτ᾽" ἀλλ᾽ εἰσίωμεν: . . κεν


+


Fr. 4 (R) 45 Tes he 48 Fr. 4 (V)
Wore wav 50 πατὴρ δώφει'
ἡ 'δὺ τί μητῖ ἀϊδελφοῦτ
Ἰπόνοϊ ἐστιν :ἶ
Fr.5(R) 77 of Fr.5(V) WF
Teas!
ae


410


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


DEMEAS
5 I think right . . . to ransom her as her
father.
CLEINIAS
But 1 at least hate women, Demeas, after my
encounters.


wawey ὁ “bsg τ We @ hel Fe? aid Trae enw 6


(After some unintelligible lines Thrasonides is talking with
someone, ‘‘ B,” apparently his father.)


THRASONIDES


39 | . . the father of Crateia . . . Now father, you'll
show me up either as blissful or else turned into the
most wretched of all living men. For unless he shall
approve of me in due form and shall give her to me,
it is all over with Thrasonides! Now this may
Heaven forbid! Butlet’s goin... .


(There follow meagre fragments of some ten lines.)


1 cf. Kock, fragm. 939, for a reference to Demeas arriving
to ransom his daughter (G.—H.) ; also see Kock on fragm. 338.


20 ciphuere—etpnuar? G.—H.// "pds! τοῦτο δ᾽" ef γ᾽ ἡμέτερος":
αὐτόν, 3,

21 ἀπολυτροῦν Sv, Wilam.// aroAutpotv@ ὥν, MS.

34°marnp, G.—H./ πάτερ, S*.

44°. κεν, K3./ Sei δοϊκεῖ, S%.


411


MENANDER


OTHER FRAGMENTS!


338 K παιδισκάριόν με καταδεδούλωκ᾽ εὐτελές,
ὃν οὐδὲ εἷς τῶν πολεμίων «οὐ:- πώποτε.


335 K εἰ γὰρ ἐπίδοιμι τοῦτο, κἂν ὃ ψυχὴν "radu"
λάβοιμ᾽ ἐγώ. νυνὶ γάρ---ἀλλὰ ποῦ θεοὺς
οὕτως δικαίους ἔστιν εὑρεῖν, ὦ Γέτα;

380 Καὶ παρ᾽ ἐμοὶ γάρ ἐστιν ἔνδον, ἔξεστιν δέ μοι


Α , A νον ἀν’. ῃ

καὶ βούλομαι τοῦθ᾽ ὡς ἂν ἐμμανέστατα
»" al ,

ἐρῶν τις, οὐ ποιῶ δέ.


»
337 Καὶ Δπολλον, ἄνθρωπόν τιν᾽ ἀθλιώτερον
ἑόρακας; ap ἐρῶντα δυσποτμώτερον;


330 K ἀπαμφιεῖ γὰρ τὸ κατάπλαστον τοῦτό ἴσου 4
/
καὶ λανθάνειν βουλόμενον ἡ μέθη ποτέ.


341,342 Καὶ ((ὦ δυστυχής,"
τί οὐ καθεύδεις; σύ μ᾽ ἀποκναίεις ὃ περιπατῶν.


erwin Ὁ νὰ κὰκ ie pen!
εἴσελθε κἂν νῦν, ὦ μακάριε.


343 K Λακωνικὴ κλείς ἐστιν, ὡς ἔοικέ, μοι
περιοιστέα.


340 K Γπρῴην ἐπανῆλθον" ἐκ Κύπρου λαμπρῶς πάνυ
πράττων' ἐκεῖ γὰρ ὑπό τιν᾽ ἦν τῶν βασιλέων.


1 For addit. fragm., Ox. pap. 1605, see Introd. p. xxiii,
note 3.

2 Mein. corr./ dv οὐδεὶς τῶν πολεμίων πώποτε, MS.

3 κἂν, Allinson, καὶ, MS. and Kock. // πάλιν, Bentley.

4 gov, Hemsterhuis./ μου, Suid. Phot. (Reitzenstein).

> Note scansion in fourth foot. 5 Kock suppl.


412


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


OTHER FRAGMENTS


THRASONIDES


A worthless little wench has enslaved me, me
whom no single one of my enemies ever (vanquished).


THRASONIDES

For if I should behold this, even once again I

might recover my life. For, as it is—but where,
Getas, is one to find gods so just?


THRASONIDES
For she is in there, in my house, and I have the
liberty and wish for this as one who is most madly
in love and yet I do it not.


Apollo! Have you ever seen a man more
wretched? A more luckless lover?


CRATEIA (?)


For drunkenness will on a time strip off this your
manner, assumed and calculated to deceive.


Why don’t you sleep? You irk me by your walking
up anddown. . . Do go in even now, my dear sir.


Methinks I'll have to carry around with me a

Spartan house-key.!
THRASONIDES

I’m just back from Cyprus; I’ve fared very
brilliantly. For out there I was in service with one
of the kings.

1 For the double meaning of ‘“‘key” and ‘‘collar-bone” (see
L. & S. sub voce), compare the German students’ argot
‘*Knochen” for ‘‘ Haus-schliissel.” The word here is ex-


plained, however, by some commentators as referring to a
bar put up outside the door.


413


348 K


349 K


350 K


351 K


352 K


MENANDER


NATKAHPOY


A
ἥκει λιπὼν Αἰγαῖον ἁλμυρὸν βάθος
Θεύφιλος ἡ ἡμῖν, ὦ Στράτων. ὡς εἰς καλὸν
τὸν υἱὸν εὐτυχοῦντα καὶ σεσωσμένον
πρῶτος λέγω σοι τόν. τε χρυσοῦν κάνθαρον.
STPATON


5 ποῖον;


A
TO πλοῖον: οὐδὲν οἶσθας, ἀθλιε.
ΣΤΡΑΤΩῺΝ

τὴν ναῦν σεσῶσθαί μοι λέγεις;

Α

ἔγωγε μὴν

τὴν ναῦν ἐκείνην ἣν ἐπόησε Καλλικλῆς
ὁ Καλύμνιος, Εὐφράνωρ δὲ κυβερνᾷ ' Θούριος.
ὦ φιλτάτη γῆ μῆτερ, ὡς σεμνὸν op oop’ εἶ
τοῖς νοῦν ἔχουσι. κτῆμα πολλοῦ τ᾽ ἄξιον.
ὡς δῆτ᾽ ἐχρῆν, εἴ τις πατρῴαν παραλαβὼν
γῆν καταφάγοι, πλεῖν τοῦτον ἤδη διὰ τέλους,


καὶ μηδ᾽ ἐπιβαίνειν γῆς, ἵν᾿ οὕτως ἤσθετο.
e \ ᾽ \ > > /
οἷον παραλαβὼν ἀγαθὸν οὐκ ἐφείσατο.


΄“ ,ὔ cal 9 , ᾽ » e -“
ὅ τε ἸΙολυνείκης πῶς ἀπώλετ οὐχ ορᾷς;
μ Lal , > , , A ,
ὦ Zed πολυτίμηθ᾽, οἷόν ἐστ᾽ ἐλπὶς κακόν.
A , > 9 ͵ , r >, \ , -“
καὶ φύσει πως εὐάγωγον ἐστι πᾶς ἀνὴρ ἐρῶν.
1 δὲ κυβερνᾷ, Heringa./& ἐκυβέρνα, Mein., Kock.


414


ee a kee


_—-


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE SHIPMASTER


A
O Straton, Theophilus has returned for us leaving
the deep, Aegean brine! How pat it comes that I’m
the first to tell you that your son is successful, he is
safe and sound and your “ gilt-edged”” vessel! too!
STRATON
What sort of vessel ??
A
The boat! You poor fellow, you don’t know a thing!
STRATON
You inean my ship is safe and sound ?
A
Yes, at any rate I mean the ship built by Callicles
of Calymna with Euphranor of Thurii as helmsman.


THEOPHILUS (?)

O land, O dearest mother mine, how very reverend
a possession and worth how much art thou in the
eyes of the intelligent. How right indeed it were
that anyone who inherited an ancestral estate and
devoured it should from that time on sail forever
nor even set foot on land, that he might come to
perceive how good a thing he had failed to save
when he obtained it!


And do you not see how Polyneices perished ὃ 5

O Zeus most honoured, what an evil thing is hope!

And somehow naturally every man when he’s in
love is a ductile thing.


1 For the double meaning ‘‘ boat” and ‘‘ drinking cup” cf.
the colloquial use of a ‘‘ schooner of beer.”

2 Apparently in this play there was a quarrel of brothers,
illustrated by that of Polyneices and Eteocles (Kock).


415


354 K


356 Καὶ


Ὺ


301 Καὶ


363 Καὶ


ult peep


MENANDER


EENOAOTOS f


ἀνδρὸς πένητος υἱός, ἐκτεθραμμένος
οὐκ ἐξ ὑπαρχόντων, ὁ ὁρῶν ἠσχύνετο ‘
τὸν πατέρα μίκρ᾽ ἔχοντα: παιδευθεὶς γὰρ εὖ


τὸν καρπὸν εὐθὺς ἀπεδίδου χάριτος καλόν.


οὕτως ἀσυλλόγιστον ἡ τύχη ποεῖ

τὸ συμφέρον ti} ποτ᾽ ἐστιν ἀνθρώπου βίῳ,
καθ᾽ οὗς δὲ κρίνει πράγματ᾽, οὐ χρῆται νόμοις
οὐδ᾽ ἔστιν εἰπεῖν ζῶντα “ταῦτ᾽ " οὐ πείσομαι.


OATNOIA


€ ΝΜ “ ε Ν ,ὔ
ὡς ἄδικον, ὅταν ἡ μὲν φύσις
ἀποδῷ τι σεμνόν, τοῦτο δ᾽ ἡ τύχη κακοῖ.


μετ᾽ ᾿Αριστοτέλους γὰρ τέτταρας τῆς ἡμέρας
ὀβολοὺς φέρων... ..


ΟΡΓΗ *


καίτοι νέος ποτ᾽ ἐγενόμην κἀγώ, γύναι,
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐλούμην πεντάκις τῆς ἡμέρας

Βα) » \ lal > \ [ANG “ > \ r
TOT * ἀλλὰ νὺν. οὐδὲ χλανίδ εἰχον' ἀλλὰ νῦν,

\ 7

οὐδὲ μύρον εἶχον" ἀλλὰ νῦν. καὶ βάψομαι,
καὶ παρατιλοῦμαι νὴ Δία καὶ γενήσομαι

1 τί for 6 τι which would ρῖνο,.,.,., οἷ...

= Bentley, metre causa, transposed order and inserted
δέ! οὐ χρῆται νόμοις, καθ᾽ ods κρίνει τὰ πράγματα, MS.

5. This was the play with which Menander won his first


victory. Date: 316-315 B.c. See fragm. Parian Marble.
See Capps, ‘‘ Chronological Studies,” A.J.P. xxi, p, 60.


416


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE DRAFTING OFFICER


(A young man apparently secks his fortune among the
mercenary troops to save his father from poverty.)

A poor man’s son who had been brought up above
his means, on seeing that his father had but little,
was ashamed. He proved this for, being well trained,
he paid back forthwith the fair fruit of gratitude.


So unexpectedly does Fortune bring about what's
beneficial, as the case may be, in human life. She
makes use of no fixed laws by which she decides
circumstances. Nor is it even possible for anyone
to say while life lasts: “ That is something that will
not be my lot!”’


THE LADY FROM OLYNTHUS


What injustice when Nature bestows some majestic
gift and thereupon Fortune spoils it !


For he in service with Aristotle! receiving the
wage of four obols? per diem. . . .


ANGER


And yet, wife, I too was once a young man, but
then I did not bathe five timesaday. But now I do.
Nor did I even have a fine over-cloak. But now
1 have. Nor even scented oil. But now I have.
And I will dye my hair and I will pluck me smooth,
by Zeus, and in short shrift will turn into a Ctesippus,®

1 The admiral operating at Lemnos in 314 B.C.

2 For table of Greek money values see p. 18.

3 An effeminate spendthrift who, to refill his purse, sold


the blocks from the monument reared in honour of his father
Chabrias, the famous commander.


41]


364 Καὶ


5


367 K


371 K


MENANDER f


Κτήσιππος οὐκ ἄνθρωπος ἐν ὀλίγῳ χρόνῳ" |
καθ᾽ ws ἐκεῖνος κατέδομαι καὶ τοὺς λίθους
ἁπαξάπαντας, οὐ γὰρ οὖν τὴν γῆν μόνην.


διαφέρει “Χαιρεφῶντος οὐδὲ γρῦ
ἅνθρωπος ὃ ὅστις ἐστίν, ὃς κληθείς ποτε
εἰς ἑστίασιν δωδεκάποδος, ὄρθριος
πρὸς τὴν σελήνην ἔτρεχε τὴν σκιὰν ἰδὼν
ὡς ὑστερίζων, καὶ παρὴν ἅμ᾽ ἡμέρᾳ.
τοῦθ᾽ ἑταῖρός ἐστιν ὄντως. οὐκ ἐρωτᾷ, πηνίκα
δεῖπνόν ἐστιν, ὥσπερ ἕτεροι, καὶ τί δειπνεῖν κωλύει
τοὺς παρόντας, εἶτα δεῖπνον ἕτερον εἰς τρίτην


βλέπει,

ie “- , cod > 7 ἽἼ 9 “- (ὃ

εἶτα δ᾽ ἕτερον εἰς τετάρτην",Σ εἶτα περίδειπνον
πάλιν.


Supplementum Comicum, Demianezuk, p. 57.
(A) ἐμφαίνεται
ὅτι πρόσφατος ἣν ἐπιχώριος. (B) Kal τοὔνομα
τί λέγεις; (A) ἀλάστωρ," φησί.


ΠΑΙΔΙΟΝ


ἂν πάντα δουλεύειν ὁ δοῦλος μανθάνῃ,
/
πονηρὸς ἔσται: μεταδίδου παρρασίας,
/ fal ΄
βελτίον᾽ αὐτὸν τοῦτο ποιήσει πολύ.


᾿Εφέσια τοῖς γαμοῦσιν οὗτος περιπατεῖ
λέγων ἀλεξιφάρμακα.
1 Grot. transp. ὄντως ἐστίν of MS.


2 Lacuna suppl. by Porson. Cobet notes that the Attic
usage is τετράδα. See fragm, 320 K above.


418


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


and be no more a man, and then, as he did, I will
devour even the stones one and all; anyhow I will
not devour only the realty in land.


Not one whit different from Chaerephon is that
man, whoever he is, who once upon a time, bidden
to dine when the sun’s shadow marks twelve feet,!
rising at crack of dawn took a look at the shadow
and ran by the light of the moon, as though late, and
arrived along with the daylight.


. Here’s a guest for you of the real sort! He does
not ask, as others do, *‘ At what hour is your dinner ?”’
and ‘ What’s to hinder those who are here from
dining ?’’—and then looks out for another dinner on
the third and then again another for the fourth day
and yet again for a funeral feast.


(a) ’Tis clear that he’s a late arrival amongst our
folk.

(8) And what do you say his name is?

(aie says: “Avenger. *


THE SLAVE


If the slave learns to be slavish in everything he
will be a good-for-nothing. Give him his share in
speaking freely, this will make him far better.

This fellow walks up and down discoursing
Ephesian spells for those who marry.

1 This occurred at sunrise and at sunset.


2 Or ‘‘ Accursed,” see Pericetromene, 867.


3 cf. also Demianc. p. 57, No. 7, on δαιμόνων ἀλαστόρων,
also see Menander, Periceivomene, 867.


419


MENANDER ;


372, 373K ἁλύσιον
χρυσοῦν ἐπόρισας. εἴθε λιθοκόλλητον ἣν"
καλὸν ἣν ἂν οὕτως... 6 sh

μάραγδον εἶναι ταῦτ᾽ ἔδει καὶ σάρδια.

ΠΑΛΛΑΚΗ


376 K μικρὸν ἐπιμείνας προστρέχει,
’ /
“ἠγόρακά σοι περιστέρια ἢ λέγων.


378 Καὶ πολλοὺς λογισμοὺς ἡ πονηρία κυκλεῖ."


ΝΜ


399 K ἀλλὰ τῶν χρηστῶν ἔχει τιν᾽ ἐπιμέλειαν καὶ θεός.


THE GIRL FROM PERINTHUS


Terence’s “ Andria” is avowedly a ‘‘contaminatio” of
Menander’s “ Perinthian Woman” and his “ Andria,” the
latter being itself a recasting by the author of the earlier
play. From the commentary of Donatus we learn that the
Jirst scene of the “ Perinthia” of Menander and of the
** Andria” of Terence were almost identical. In this scene
in the *‘ Perinthia” an old man is talking with his wife,
but in Terence’s “ Andria” with a freedman, Sosias. In
Menander's ** Andria,” on the other hand, the old man was
alone. Other details also in Terence’s “ Andria” followed
more closely the ‘“‘ Andria” of Menander. Thus the pre-
parations for torturing, Davus by fire in the ‘‘ Perinthia” are
much toned down in Terence, and the bibulous midwife in
Menander’s ‘‘ Andria” (see Kock’s fragments 41 and 42,
cited above) proved to be better than her reputation, as ts the


1 περιστέρια “radl!, sc. ? Cobet. 2 κυκλεῖ. κυκλοῖ, MS.


420


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


You procured a golden chain. Would that it were
set with precious stones, for then it would be fine


cope weed gel) lee ©) Fal ey ie Were ies sei, 610k iow) Eee Be Fe νον “δ΄ ὃ .ὃ


(and) these should be an emerald and cornelians.


THE CONCUBINE


After waiting a little, he runs up to her and says:
“I’ve bought some doves for you at market.”


Rascality circles round with reckonings manifold.


But even a god has a watchful care over the Good.


case with Terence’s Lesbia (see “ Andria,” 228 ff. and 481 /f.).4
But this may have been the same also in the missing
sequel of the “‘Perinthia.” The more recently discovered
fragments (Ox. pap.” vol. vi. p. 150 ff.) give a scene of
some twenty lines, nearly intact, supplementing the nine
short fragments previously known. Of these latter, three must
certainly precede the longer fragment ; the order of the others
is uncertain. In the lines preserved no mention is made of
the girl from Perinthus who, like the Samian girl, gives the
title to the Comedy. It may be inferred, however, that in
Perinthus, the city on the Propontis, the girl had been left as
a child and that her real Athenian provenance was ultimately
discovered by some happy accident, as in the case of the girl
from Andros, or in that of the Samian girl. The vivid scene
where the slave is threatened with burning throws rather a


1 See Korte, 2nd ed. pp. lii-—liv.
421


397 K


398 K


393 K


MENANDER


lurid light on the power of the master over the slave. The
actual burning is, of course, not consummated, but, even if it
was the master’s intent merely to frighten his erring slave,
Davus gives no intimation that Laches is exceeding his rights.
No parallel exists in Greek Comedy except the threatened
holocaust of Mnesilochus—a free man !—in the ““ Thesmo-
phoriazusae” of Aristophanes. Terence (‘‘ Andria,” 860)
tones this down to ordinary torture and fetters, probably
following Menander’s “ Andria.”


ITEPIN@OIA


οὐδεμίαν ἡ γραῦς ὅλως


a \ / \
, κύλικα παρῆκεν, ἀλλὰ πίνει τὴν κύκλῳ.


τὸ παιδίον δ᾽ εἰσῆλθεν ἑψητοὺς φέρον
«ὀβολοῦ.:


Ὁ“ Ν / > /
ὅστις παραλαβὼν δεσπότην ἀπράγμονα
nr a >
καὶ κοῦφον ἐξαπατᾷ θεράπων, οὐκ οἶδ᾽ 6 τι
φΦ ra /
οὗτος μεγαλεῖόν ἐστι διαπεπραγμένος,
> ΄ \ , 9 > 45 ,
ἐπαβελτερώσας τὸν πάλαι γ ἀβέλτερον.


Ox. pap. vol. vi. p. 150


(Aa.) ΓΤέβειε καὶ Téra’),
Γφυλάττετ᾽ αὐτόν)" σὺ δ᾽ ἀκολούθει, ΓΠυρρία!
1 ὀβολοῦ, Allinson add. from Terence, Andria, 368-9.
2 πάλαι γ᾽, Reitzenstein./ tote, MS./ πρότερον, Cobet./ ποτ᾽
ὄντ᾽, Scaliger.


1 See Grenfell and Hunt’s Introduction (Ox. pap., l.c.).

* Mysis, the name for the corresponding speaker in Terence,
suggests an imported maid more nearly suited, geographically,
to Perinthus than to Andros. Mysis, however, as a proper


422


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


DRAMATIS PERSONAE
Lacues, an old gentleman of Athens.


Davus,  \;-
5 his slaves.
PyYRRHIAS, f l


Characters inferred :
THE Son of Laches.
Tue Giru from Perinthus.
A Servant-Matp of the Perinthian.
(A Mipwire.)
Getas and ΤΊΒΕΙΟΒ, slaves (mutes).


THE GIRL FROM PERINTHUS


(Servant of the Perinthian.*)


The old hag never misses a goblet but drinks as it
circles round.*
DAVUS
The slaye went in, carrying two-pennyworth 4 of
small boiled fishes.
DAVUS
A slave who is blessed with an easy-going, empty-
headed master and cheats him hasn’t accomplished
any mighty deed in making a yet greater dolt of the
one who was a dolt long since.


LACHES
(who has overheard Davus [566 preceding fragm. })


Tibeius and Getas, guard him! And you, Pyrrhias,
follow me.


name in Menander is only conjectural, Terence occasionally
retained a name—Davus, for example, in this play—and
changed others.

3 See Terence, Andria, 229-232.

1 See Terence, Andria, 368-369, where, by the same token,
Davus suspects that no wedding is really under way. Note,
as suggestive of the Greek prototype, Terence’s use of the
word ‘‘obolo.”


423


MENANDER


(Aa.) Γκληματίδας ἔξεισιν φέρων τὸ πύρ' δανον"
καὶ Tip: πρόδηλον. @ Τίβειε καὶ Γέτα,
ΝΜ ,ὔ ᾽ ’ /, ἊΨ
ἔπειτα κατακαύσει μ᾽. ἀφείητ᾽ ἄν, Γέτα,
5 Γσύνίδουλον ὄντα καὶ διασώσαϊντ᾽; οὐ πάνυ.
Γοὐκ᾽ ἄν μ᾽ ἀφείητ᾽, ἀλλὰ περιόψεσθέ με;
Γ ef Ἵ Ν > / ΝΜ /
οὕτω πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔχομεν; προσέρχεται
Γὸ ILup|pias ὅσον γε φορτίον φέρων'
Γἀπόϊλωλα' καὶ δᾷδ᾽ αὐτὸς ἡμμένην ἔχων
γλ 5 κι , 3, ako We
10 ΓΛάχης ἀκολουθεῖ. (Λαχ.) περίθετ᾽ é'v' κύκλῳ
ταχὺ :
Γτὰ ξύλ᾽. ἐπ'ίδειξαι, Ade, τὴν πανουργίαν
, , id \ , > Mees | ,
τέχνην τιν᾽ εὑρὼν διαφυγών τ᾽ ἐνθένδε με.
(Δα.) τέχνην ἐγώ; (Λαχ.) vai, Ade, τὸ μὲν “ἀπράγμονα
a Cae A > an” aes “ὃ , ”»
καὶ κοῦφον ἐξαπατᾶν ” γάρ ἐστι “ δεσπότην
15 φλύαρος. (Aa.) ἤ, ἤν. (Aay.) εἰ δέ τις τὴν τῶν
φρενῶν
΄ > / > \ Ἀ -“ /
στακτὴν---ἐκνίσθης; (Aa.) οὐχὶ πρὸς σοῦ, δέσποτα.


2 κληματίδας, Wilam. suppl. 5 G.—H. suppl.
6 Leo suppl. 7 Leo suppl. 8 Wilam. suppl.
9-10 G.—H. suppl. 11 τὰ vA’, Wilam.


13-14 cf. fragm. 393, Korte.

15 ἤ, ἤν. Allinson./ ἠήν, G.-H., which is a new word (ef.
Durham, Vocabulary of Menander, p. 65). ;

16 Note ἕκν in 2nd foot, cf. note on 342 K.


1 Quoted from Davus’s words, see 393 K above. This
proves (see Korte) that the fragment belongs to the
Perinthia.


424


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


DAVUS
He'll come out bringing brush-wood and the
kindling and fire. That’s sure. O Tibeius and
~Getas! And then he'll burn me up. Would you
abandon me—you, Getas, especially—me your fellow-
slave who saved you? Surely not. You'd not
abandon me. Nay, are you going to let me suffer?
Is that the way we stand towards each other? Here
comes Pyrrhias bringing a load, the biggest ever!
I’m done for! And Laches himself follows with a
lighted torch.
LACHES (giving orders)

Put the wood around him quickly. Now, Davus,
make an exhibit of your rascality by finding some
device and making good your escape from me, from
here.

DAVUS

I! A device? ;

LACHES

Yes, Davus, for this cheating “an easy-going,

empty-headed master’! is a fool’s business.


DAVUS
(as Laches, perhaps, hands the torch to a slave)
Oh! Look!
LACHES
Nay, if someone (could sap”) your heart drop by
drop—You were troubled, were you?


DAVUS ὁ

Master, this is not like you.

2 The exact meaning of the aposiopesis is uncertain. G.
and H., taking the word in the very late sense ‘‘ ashes,”
translate: ‘‘ Lacnes: But if one feels his brain turning to
ashes—were you hurt? Davus: Not by you, master.”


425


(Aa.)


20


394 K
395 K
396 K


399 K
400 K


MENANDER


ὁ μὲν πονηρός, ὁ θρασὺς ἐνθάδ᾽ ἀρτίως
κατὰ τῶν σκελῶν" τὴν κληρονομίαν pi χ᾽ τάτοϊυ"
. ἐκποδών. (Aa.) ἕξειν χάριν
cae ave ate og OD ἡμῶν," (Aay.);: ederie!
. . . . (“Tlupplias.) ὡς ἀφίκετο
. . « φερόμενος yap Kav κύκλῳ
i s+ -pTov.7 éotl TO


OTHER FRAGMENTS
οὐπώποτ᾽ ἐζήλωσα πολυτελῆ νεκρόν"
> \ ” Μ Ὁ ὃ >» > > > r
εἰς τὸν ἴσον ὄγκον τῷ σφόδρ᾽ ἔρχετ᾽ εὐτελεῖ.
ὅσ᾽ ἔστι μαλακὰ ' συλλαβὼν
ἐκ τῆς πόλεως τὸ σύνολον ἐκπήδα, φίλος.
4. 50 r G rn > Pa ie
ἐπὶ τῶν ἁμαξῶν εἰσι πομπεῖαί τινες
σφόδρα λοίδοροι.
οὐδ᾽ αὐτός εἰμι σὺν θεοῖς ὑπόξυλος.


5. οἷ


’
τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλ᾽ ἀνέπαφα σώματ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἕλῃ « —?


401 K Αἰάντειος 3 γέλως.


17-18 ὁ---σκελῶν, cf. Ar. Pax, 241, ὁ κατὰ τοῖν σκελοῖν. This
expression in the Paz (cf. also, perhaps, Eccles. 742, hard to
parallel outside of Lucian, see F. G. Allinson, Selections from
Lucian, p. xxxviii), is interpreted by some ‘‘ proktologists ”


as referring to a disaster, caused by fear, as in Frogs, 308.
20 Aax. between lines.
21 was suprascriptum. | 113. Γπτῶς, G.—H.


1 μαλακά, soft, yielding to the touch, hence (apparently)
movables. Diibner trans.: tua cum convasaveris. See 440 K.


2 Meineke ? οὐδὲ ληπτέα.
3 MSS. have Αἰάντειος, ? Aidwreos.


426


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


LACHES
The scamp! The one who here a moment ago
was so bold now—astraddle!! . . . the inheritance
of my dearest son . . . out of the way.
DAVUS
I thought that you'd feel grateful that [they were
instructed] by us.
LACHES


ey SER ΠΕ ΟΠ a se ar a tks soy tat ars eh ase Meta
(Two more unintelligible lines to end of fragment.)


OTHER FRAGMENTS


A SLAVE(?)
I’ve never envied an expensive corpse. He and
the very cheap one go alike to the self-same dignity.


Collecting all your movables, make your escape,
friend, altogether from the city.


On the wagons in the parade some very ribald
abuse goes on.”


Not even I, thanks to the gods, am wooden within.°


Nor let him even touch the other inviolate
persons.


The laughter of Aias.*


1 G. and H., referring to the scholium on Arist. Peace, 241,
translate: ‘‘in a cowardly manner.’”’ See note on text.

3 Referring to the processions at the Dionysiac festival.
cf. Kock’s note on fragm. 558 (trans. by Plautus, Cist. 1.1.91).

3 cf. Lucian, Gallus, 24, for description of the interior of
the great chryselephantine statues.

4 The actor Pleisthenes, in the réle of Ajax, laughed
ironically at Odysseus when he said ‘‘ One should do justly.’


427


402 K


10


15


403 K


MENANDER


ΠΛΟΚΙ͂ΟΝ


ἐπ᾽ ἀμφότερ'α νῦν [ἡ ᾿πίκληρος | ἡ καλὴ"
μέλλει καθευδήσειν' κατείργασται μέγα
καὶ περιβόητον ἔ ἔργον. ἐκ τῆς οἰκίας
ἐξέβαλε τὴν λυποῦσαν [ἣν ἐβούλετο,
ἵν᾽ ἀποβλέπωσι ieee εἰς TO Κρωβύλης
πρόσωπον ἢ T εὔγνωστος [οὖσ᾽ ἐμὴ γυνὴ
δέσποινα" καὶ τὴν ὄψιν ἣν ἐκτήσατο---
ὄνος ἐν πιθήκοις τοῦτο δὴ τὸ λεγόμενον
ἔστιν. σιωπᾶν βούλομαι τὴν νύκτα τὴν
πολλῶν κακῶν ἀρχηγόν. οἴμοι, Κρωβύλην
λαβεῖν ἔμ᾽, ἑκκαίδεκα τάλαντα ἵἱ προῖκα καὶ"
‘rap ῥ᾽ ἵν᾽ ἔΐχίουσαν πήχεως" εἶτ᾽ ἐστὶ τὸ
φρύωγμά πως ὑπόστατον; μὰ τὸν Δία
\ 2 ’ Ν \ > a > a
τὸν Ολύμπιον καὶ τὴν ᾿Αθηνᾶν, οὐδαμῶς.
ὃ / θ \ δὲ Γὃ al /
παιδισκάριον θεραπευτικὸν δὲ ‘Set! Adyou
΄ > , θ᾽. δέ ee Te «σὰ ἐ Ὁ ,
τάχιον ἀπάγεσθ᾽: ὧδέ τις ἄρ᾽ ἀν'τεὶισ ἄγοι
Γἑτέραν."
(Α)
ἔχω δ᾽ ἐπίκληρον Λάμιαν" οὐκ εἴρηκά σοι
τοῦτ᾽; εἶτ᾽ ἄρ᾽ οὐχί; κυρίαν τῆς οἰκίας
1 ἀμφότερα νῦν, Mein./ ἀμφοτεραν ιν, Μ5.} ἀμφότερον οὖς,
Kock, from Terence, Heaut. 342.// ἡπίκληρος, Haupt. / ἐπί-
κληρος, MS.//% καλὴ, O. Ribbeck./ of¢a δὴ, Mein.
4 fv, Mein., MSS./ ὡς, Kock.
6 Combined from MSS., Haupt.
7 180. ἀποβλέπωσι from line 5.
8-9 Meineke’s order is: ἐστὶ δὴ τὸ λεγόμενον | τοῦτο.
11 προῖκα καὶ, suppl. Allinson. / φερομένην, Kock. / τάλαντον
ὦ θεοί, Mein.
12 τὴν piv’ ἔχουσαν, Kock, ef. Lucian, de merced. conduct.


35. γεινεσουσαν, etc., MSS.// τὸ, for article at end cf. Georg.
26; Periceir. 243; Perinth. 23.


428


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE NECKLACE


(The misery attendant wpon marrying a rich wife is a
familiar quarry for the comic poets. Compare, for example,
“The Heitress.’’)

This fine heiress is likely now to sleep at ease on
either cheek! A great and notorious deed has now
been accomplished. Out of the house she has cast
the irksome woman whom she wished to banish, so that
all may fix their eyes on the face of Crobyle—and that
she may be recognized as my wife, the mistress of the
house—even that face which she won as her own, an
ass among apes, as thé saying goes. I prefer to
keep silence about the night, which was the primal
cause of many evils. Ah, me! To think that I took
Crobyle to wife with her sixteen talents dowry! and
her nose a cubit long! Now is this insolence in any
wise to be endured? No, by Zeus the Olympian,
by Athena, not at all! But this servant wench must
be led off quicker than one can speak. Now then,
let someone lead in here a second as her substitute ! 3


A
I have to wife a Lamia,’ an heiress. Have I not
told you thist. Have I not, really? We have her,


1 For table of Greek money see above, p. 18, note.
2 Text confused ; emendations uncertain ; see Greek. For
the situation compare below fragment 438 K, note.
3 These Lamiae, dread vampires in antiquity, are on
occasion strangely transformed into beneficent spirits in
- modern Greek folklore.


15 δεῖ, suppl. Allinson. / καὶ, Kock./ τοῦ, Jacob.

16 ἀπάγεσθ᾽- ὧδέ τις ἄρ᾽ ἀντεισάγοι, Allinson./ amayec@wderis
αρανπισαγοι, Codex V. /.... apaavris, Cod. Urb. / θᾶττον
ἀπάγοι τις ἢ ᾽τέραν ἂν εἰσάγοι, Jacob.

17 ἑτέραν, add. Allinson.


429


404 Καὶ


MENANDER


Kal TOV ἀγρῶν Kal TOV ἁπάντων ἄντικρυς 4
, » e
ἔχομεν, Απολλον, ὡς αλεπῶν χαλεπώτατον.
ἅπασι δ᾽ ἀργαλέα ᾿στίν, οὐκ ἐμοὶ μόνῳ,
υἵῳ πολὺ μᾶλλον, θυγατρί.
(Β)


πρᾶγμ᾽ ἄμαχον λέγεις.
(Α)
εὖ οἶδα.


a7 , “ Δ , a
σκα

OT pL κοδαίμων, ὅστις ὧν πένης γαμεῖ

καὶ παιδοποιεῖθ᾽. ὡς ἀλόγιστός ἐστ᾽ ἀνήρ,

ὃς μήτε φυλακὴν τῶν ἀναγκαίων ἔχει,

μήτ᾽ ἂν ἀτυχήσας εἰς τὰ κοινὰ τοῦ βίου

3 / / lal

ἐπαμφιέσαι δύναιτο τοῦτο χρήμασιν,

> ᾿" ἢ > 4 \ , /

aXX ἐν ἀκαλύπτῳ καὶ ταλαυπώρῳ βίῳ

χειμαζόμενος ζῇ, τῶν μὲν ἀνιαρῶν ἔχων

τὸ μέρος ἁπάντων, τῶν δ᾽ ἀγαθῶν οὐδὲν μέρος"

ὑπὲρ γὰρ ἑνὸς ἀλγῶν ἅπαντας νουθετῶ.


999 K Κρωβύλῃ τῇ μητρὶ πείθου καὶ γάμει τὴν συγγενῆ.
(incerta fragm.)


405,406 K ὅστις πένης ὧν ζῆν ἐν ἄστει βούλεται,


δι


ἀθυμότερον ἑαυτὸν ἐπιθυμεῖ ποεῖν'
ὅταν γὰρ͵ εἰς τρυφῶντα καὶ σχολὴν ἄγειν
δυνάμενον ἐμβλέψῃ, τότ᾽ αὑτὸν ἔστ᾽ ἰδεῖν
ὡς ἄθλιον ζῇ καὶ ταλαίπωρον βίον.
κακῶς ὁ δεσπότης βεβούλευται πάνυ"
ἐν ἀγρῷ γὰρ οἰκῶν οὐ σφόδρ᾽ ἐξηλέγχετο
τῆς μερίδος ὼν τῆς οὐδαμοῦ τεταγμένος,"
εἶχεν δὲ παραπέτασμα τὴν ἐρημίαν.

1 καὶ τῶν ἁπάντων ἄντικρυς, Kock, from Spengel’s καὶ


τῶν πατρῴων ἄντικρυς. κιπαντωναντεκεινες, Cod. Υ΄. καὶ πάντων
ἀντ᾽ ἐκείνης, Meineke. 2 τεταγμένος, Mein., for τεταγμένη».


430


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


and no mistake, as mistress of house and lands and
of everything, O Apollo—the sorest sore of all.
Sour is she toward all—not me alone—toward my
son even more and toward my daughter.!


B
You tell of an affair where resistance is in vain.
A

I know it well. *


O thrice unlucky he who though poor marries and
begets children. How irrational is a man who has
neither taken precaution for necessities, nor, if he
meet with misfortune in the common events of life,
would be able to cloke this with money, but lives
storm-tossed in the midst of an unsheltered life of
hardship, with his share of all distresses but no share
of blessings! For I, though suffering for one alone,
admonish all. ‘


Obey Crobyle, your mother, and marry your
kinswoman.


PARMENON (?)

Whoever wishes, though a poor man, to live in
the city is desirous of making himself still more
despondent. For whenever he turns his eyes upon
the luxurious man who is able to live at his ease,
then it is possible for him to see what a life of
wretched hardship is his own.

Our master has counselled very badly. For while
he lived in the country, he, as belonging to the class
that has no definite position, was not open to much
criticism but was curtained off by solitude.


1 See Le Grand, Daos, p. 165, note 1.
431


408 K


407 K


410 K


411 K


420 K


421 K


MENANDER


ἄρ᾽ ἐστὶν ἀρετῆς καὶ βίου διδάσκαλος
ἐλευθέρου τοῖς πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις ἀγρός.


LJ / > Μ Μ a /

ὦ Παρμένων, οὐκ ἔστιν ἄγαθον τῷ Bio

φυόμενον ὥσπερ δένδρον ἐκ ῥίζης μιᾶς,

> 45: \ > “ / \ /

ἀλλ᾽ ἐγγὺς ἀγαθοῦ παραπέφυκε καὶ κακόν,
fa) r ᾽

ἐκ τοῦ κακοῦ τ ἤνεγκεν ἀγαθὸν ἡ φύσις.


ma Ν »“» ᾽ la fal ,
ἀεὶ TO λυποῦν ἀποδίωκε τοῦ βίου"
Ν Ψ lal
μικρόν τι TO βίου καὶ στενὸν ζῶμεν χρόνον.


> ” ς Lal / ΝΜ > /
οὐκ ἔστιν εὑρεῖν βίον ἄλυπον οὐδενός.


MOQAOTMENO!I


Supplementum Comicum, Demianczuk, p. 58.
ayyapopope! καὶ ταῦθ᾽ ἃ viv ποιεῖς πόει,
ἐξὸν διαρρηγνύμενον ἀγαθῶν μυρίων
σιτιζόμενον τὴν νύκτα καὶ τὴν ἡμέραν
διάγειν.


Tri, ὦ" τάλας, ἕστηκας ἔτι πρὸς ταῖς θύραις


τὸ φύρτιον θείς; σιτόκουρον ἄθλιον,
Γ Ν a 2 > \ > / >’ /
ἄχρηστον!" " εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν εἰλήφαμεν.


fa] \ / /

ov πανταχοῦ TO φρόνιμον ἁρμόττει παρόν,
- ? » lal

καὶ συμμανῆναι δ᾽ ἔνια δεῖ.


1 For ἄγγαρος = ἀκρατής, see Θαίς, fragm, from Suppl.Com.
2 τί ὦ and ἄχρηστον, add. Porson.


432


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


PARMENON (?)
Surely the country is for all men a teacher or
virtue and of the freeman’s life.


« Every Rose conceals a Thorn.”


There is no blessing, Parmenon, in life that springs
like tree from single root, but near to blessing, and
beside it, grows up evil too; and nature from the
evil brings forth good.


Chase ever from thy life what brings annoy. The
span of life we live is something brief, the time is
scant.


It is impossible to discover anyone whose life is
immune from trouble.


THOSE OFFERED FOR SALE


(Lo the two fragments previously identified from this play
may now be added one from the “ Supplementum Comicum”
(Demianczuk, p. 58)).


Fare on in your unbridled course and keep on
doing this which now you do, since it’s permitted
you to spend your time bursting with countless good
things, battening on food by night and day.


Why, O wretch, laying your burden down, are you
still standing by the door? We've taken into our
house a mere bread-consumer, miserable and useless !


“ Aliquando et insanire jucundum est.’’—SENECA.


Not everywhere is the presence of prudence
timely, but on occasion we should even join in
madness.


433


MENANDER


PATIIZOMENH


425 K ὁ μὴ δεχόμενος τῶν θεῶν τὸ σύμφορον
> “Ὁ ὃ / “ lal nr / 1
αὐτῷ διδόντων ἕνεκα τοῦ ζῆν βούλεται
ας ΤΣ Ὁ eae τὸ δ᾽ STONY Tete
beds δίδωσιν, ov τρόπου ἁμαρτία.


420 K ἀτύχημα κἀδίκημα * διαφορὰν ἔ ἔχει:
τὸ μὲν διὰ τύχην γίνεται, τὸ δ᾽ αἱρέσει.


427 K ap ἐστὶν ἀγαθῶν πᾶσι πλείστων «αἰτία:
3 7,
ἡ σύνεσις, ἂν ἢ πρὸς τὰ βελτίω σοφή.


433 K ἔρχεται τἀληθὲς ἐς φῶς ἐνίοτ᾽ οὐ ζητούμενον.


ΣΙΚΥΏΝΙΟΣ


438K... . . ἅβραν γὰρ ἀντωνούμενος
ἐρωμένην αὐτῇ μὲν οὐ παρέδωκ᾽ ἔχειν
τρέφει δὲ χωρίς, ὡς ἐλευθέραν πρέπει.


439 Καὶ εὐλοιδόρητον, ὡς ἔοικε, φαίνεται.
τὸ τοῦ στρατιώτου σχῆμα καὶ τὸ τοῦ ξένου.


440 K ὁ πλέων κατήχθη, κρίνεθ' οὗτος πολέμιος"
ἐὰν δ᾽ ὃ ἔχῃ τι μαλακόν, ἀγγαρεύεται.


441 K κακὴ μὲν ὄψις, ἐν δὲ δείλειαι φρένες.


1 οὐ βούλεται, MS./Grot. omits οὐ metri causa.

2 Supply ? e.g. ἀτυχεῖν μάλισθ᾽ οὗτος: Allinson.

3 MSS. have ἔσθ᾽ before ἁμαρτία. Omit metri causa (or
transfer to context), Allinson.

4 Contrasted also by Aristotle, Nich. Eth. 5, 8, 7.

5 αἰτία, Cobet conj./ ἀξία, MS.

5 Bentley add δ᾽. 7 See fragm. 395 K.


434


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE GIRL WHO GETS FLOGGED


He who refuses the benefits offered him by the
gods towards his living, wishes (to be unfortunate at
all hazards). But a god it is that bestows or with-
holds misfortune and the error is not inherent in
character. .


Misfortune and injury differ: the one arises from
chance, the other from choice.!


Intelligence, if it is clever in the direction of the
better, is responsible for the greatest benefits for all.


The Truth, sometimes not sought for, comes forth
to the light.


THE MAN FROM SICYON


For, buying in her stead 5 a dainty lady’s maid, he
loved her and did not hand her over to his wife’s
control but keeps her separately as befits a free-born
woman.


Open to reproach, as is natural, seems the mien
both of the soldier and of the stranger.


If a voyager puts into port he is adjudged an
enemy and is mulcted * (by the customs officers) in
whatever he has that yields to confiscation.


An aspect base, and vile the mind within.


1 A distinction served up by Menander from Aristotle.

2 For a similar ‘‘ rotation in office” and the replacing of
the maid dismissed by Crobyle, see above, fragm. 402 Καὶ,
> Literally: his possessions are pressed into service.


435


FF 2


442 K


443 K


447 K


448 K


449 K


450 K


452 K


MENANDER


Στρατοφάνη, λιτόν ποτ᾽ εἶχες χλαμύδιον Ka!
ρατοφάνη, χες χλαμ
παῖδ᾽ ἕνα.


΄ “ \ e - ΝΜ \ ΄ Ν ΄ cal 1
ὡς αἰεὶ TOV ὁμοῖον ἄγει θεὸς ὡς τὸν ὁμοῖον.


ΣΤΡΑΤΙΩΤΑΙ


ἀπορῶν τι βούλευσαι κατὰ σαυτὸν γενόμενος"
« nr lal lal
TO συμφέρον yap οὐχ ὁρᾶται τῷ βοᾶν,
ἐν τῷ πρὸς αὑτὸν δ᾽ ἀναλογισμῷ φαίνεται.
οὐδεὶς ξύνοιδεν ἐξαμαρτάνων πόσον *
is -“
ἁμαρτάνει τὸ μέγεθος, ὕστερον δ᾽ ὁρᾷ.


XSTNAPIZTOZAI


"Epos δὲ τῶν θεῶν
ἰσχὺν ἔχων πλείστην ἐπὶ τούτου δείκνυται" ὃ
διὰ τοῦτον ἐπιορκοῦσι τοὺς ἄλλους θεούς.


ἀστεῖον τὸ μὴ
/ -» \ / Μ

συνάγειν γυναῖκας μηδὲ δειπνίζειν ὄχλον,
ἀλλ᾽ οἰκοσίτους 4 τοὺς γάμους πεποηκέναι.
(A) ἂν ἔτι πιεῖν μοι δῷ τις. (B) ἀλλ᾽ ἡ βάρβαρος
ἅμα τῇ τραπέζῃ καὶ τὸν οἶνον ὠχετο
ἄρασ᾽ ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν.
τρισάθλιόν γε καὶ ταλαίπωρον φύσει
πολλῶν τε μεστόν ἐστι τὸ ζῆν φροντίδων.

! Note dactylic metre. 2 πόσον, Kock./ ὅσον, Meineke.


3 Transposed, metri causa, for ἰσχὺν ἐπὶ τούτου δείκ. mA.
! Σ
ἔχων, Kock. * See above, fragm. 103 K.


436


τ΄. νυ πὰς."


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


Stratophanes, once on a time you had one slave
only and a plain little cloak.
** Birds of a Feather.”
How universally God joineth like to like!


THE SOLDIERS


When at a loss about something go and take
counsel by yourself. For in the midst of shouting
the advantageous course is not to be seen, but as one
reasons with oneself it shines out clear,


While in the very act no one is conscious of the
greatness of his sin, but later on he sees.


THE LADIES AT LUNCHEON


Now herein ’tis proved that of the gods Love has
the greatest power. For his sake they swear falsely
by the other gods.


A clever scheme this, not to get a lot of women
together and entertain a crowd but to have made
your wedding-feast for home-eaters.


(a) If someone will give me something more to
drink. ;

(8) But that barbarian maid went and carried off
from us the wine along with the food-trays.


Life in the nature of things is thrice wretched
and distressful and is filled with many cares.


1 ef. The Toady, line 43.
437


453 K


460 Καὶ


462 K


MENANDER


Kal τὸν ἐπὶ κακῷ
/ ’ / > / 4 Φ
γινόμενον ἀλλήλων ἀγαπησμόν, οἷος ἣν.


πατὴρ δ᾽ ἀπειλῶν οὐκ ἔχει μέγαν φόβον.


TITOH


” 1 i Le ὃ /
εἰ" τις ὑμῶν παιδίον
’ / 7 ἢ / ” 4
ἡτήσατ᾽ ἢ κέχρηκεν, ἄνδρες γλυκύτατοι.


οἱ τὰς ὀφρῦς αἴροντες ὡς ἀβέλτεροι

καὶ “ σκέψομαι" λέγοντες: ἄνθρωπος γὰρ ὧν
σκέψει σύ; περὶ τοῦ; " δυστυχεῖς ὅταν τύχῃ;
αὐτόματα γὰρ τὰ πράγματ᾽ ἐπὶ τὸ συμφέρον
ῥεῖ κἂν καθεύδης ἢ πάλιν τοὐναντίον.


ΤΡΟΦΩΝΙΟΣ
(A)


/ Ἂς -“ / > id fol
ξένου τὸ δεῖπνόν ἐστιν ὑποδοχῆς.
(ΜΑΓΕΙΡΟΣ)
τίνος;
rn / a / a /
ποδαποῦ; διαφέρει TO μαγείρῳ τοῦτο yap:
οἷον τὰ νησιωτὰ 8 ταυτὶ ξενύδρια
᾽ 7 > , ,
ἐν προσφάτοις ἰχθυδίοις τεθραμμένα
καὶ παντοδαποῖς, τοῖς ἁλμίοις μὲν οὐ πάνυ
᾽ fod
ἁλίσκετ᾽, ἀλλ᾽ οὕτω παρέργως ἅπτεται"
\ ͵΄
τὰς δ᾽ ὀνθυλεύσεις καὶ τὰ κεκαρυκευμένα
“-“ ‘ , >’ \ > /
μᾶλλον προσεδέξατ᾽: ᾿Αρκαδικὸς τοὐναντίον
εἴ tis, Porson./ ἣν ἄν, Mein. with query.


av; περὶ τοῦ; Cobet./ ri περὶ τοῦ or σὺ περί του vulgo.
3 Leo, τὰ μὲν νησαῖα. νησιωτικά, Kock.


438


1
2


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


. . . and this mutual affection based on mischief,
what a thing it was!


In a father’s threats inheres no overpowering


dread.
THE WET-NURSE


(For this as alternative title to ‘‘ The Girl from Samos” see
above, p. 136, note 1.)


If ever some one of you, sweet sirs, asked to
borrow or has loaned a baby.


They who raise their brows like dunces and say:
“1 will consider’’—What, though human, you will
consider? About what? You suffer mischance
whenever it happens so, for the current of events,
even if you sleep, automatically runs towards
prosperity or, again, flows the other way.


TROPHONIUS


A
The dinner is for the reception of a stranger.


: CATERER

Of whom? From what country? For this makes
a difference to the cook. For instance: these pre-
cious guests from the islands, brought up on all
kinds of fresh fish, are not very much captivated
by salt sea-food but partake of it by the way,
whereas they are the rather attracted to dressed
meats, seasoned and served with savoury sauces.
An Arcadian, on the other hand, as an inlander, is


439


MENANDER


ἀθάλαττος Γὼν "}" τοῖς λ' εἰπαδίοις 5 ἁλίσκεται"
5 Ν / ς [4 “ 3

10 ᾿Ιωνικὸς πλούταξ' ὑποστάσεις TOW,
κάνδαυλον, ὑπηβινητιῶντα βρώματα.


408 Κὶ τὸ μηθὲν ' ἀδικεῖν καὶ φιλανθρώπους Toei.


TAPIA


466 K ὡς ἡδὺ τῷ μισοῦντι τοὺς φαυλοὺς τρόπους
ἐρημία, καὶ τῷ μελετῶντι μηδὲ € ἕν
πονηρὸν ἱ ἱκανὸν κτῆμ᾽ ἀγρὸς τρέφων καλῶς.
ἐκ τῶν ὄχλων δὲ ζῆλος, ἥ ἣ τε κατὰ πόλιν

5 αὕτη τρυφὴ λάμπει μέν, ἐς δ᾽ ὀλίγον χρόνον.


467 Καὶ < γέροντα δυστυχοῦντα τῶν θ᾽ αὑτοῦ κακῶν
ἐπαγόμενον. λήθην ἀνέμνησας πάλιν
ἐπὶ τἀτυχεῖν τ᾽ ἤγειρας.


408 K εὐθὺς καταχρήσεσθ᾽ αὑτὸν ἀνορωρυγμένην
ταύτην ἰδόντα.


409 Καὶ οἱ Θρᾷκες, Λίβυ,
Τρῶες καλοῦνται" πάντα νῦν ἤδη ᾽σθ᾽ ὁμοῦ.


470 K οἱ δὲ κατὰ χειρῶν λαβόντες περιμένουσι, φίλτατε."
.ν


ΥΜΝΙΣ


472 K vn τὴν ᾿Αθηνᾶν, μακάριόν Y ἡ χρηστότης
πρὸς πάντα καὶ θαυμαστὸν ἐφόδιον βίῳ.


1 ὥν Mein. / ἐν MS.

2 χεπαδίοις, Madvig, dim. of Aewds./ λοπαδίοις, MSS.,
Durham, Vocabulary of Menander, p. 75.

3 πριῶ, Coriies. | ποιῶν, MS.

4 nner, MS. A./ μηδὲν, Kock.

5 φίλτατε, ? ἸΚοοῖς. φίλτατοι, MS.


440


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


captivated by limpets. An Ionian is a wealthy
wanton; for him I prepare jelly-soups, Lydian
entrées, meats that irritate desire.


To refrain from all injustice renders us also
humane.


THE URN


How sweet a thing is solitude for him who hateth
mean, bad ways; and for him that hath not one
design that’s evil how adequate a possession a farm
that keeps him well. For from the throng comes
stimulating rivalry, and this city luxury is brilliant,
it is true, but for brief time.!


You have stirred once more an old man’s memory
while he strove in his misfortune to cover up his ills
in Lethe and you have roused him to his misery.


. . to make away with himself as soon as he saw
it (1.6. the urn) dug up.


The Thracians, O Libys, are called “Trojans” !
Now-a-days everything is all a jumble! 3


They’ve had their finger-bowls, my dear, and now
BWAIG οἴ πον


ΗΥ̓ΜΝΙΒ58


Uprightness, by Athena, is in all respects a blessed
and marvellous viaticum in life. After chatting with


1 cf. The Farmer, line 80.

2 So one might cavil to-day at the loose inclusion of the
Bulgarians in the Slavic group.

® Cited as a man’s name (see Kock), but also found as a
woman’s name, cf. Lucian, Dial. Meretr. 13.


441


481 Καὶ


10


15


MENANDER


τούτῳ λαλήσας ἡμέρας σμικρὸν μέρος

εὔνους ἐγὼ νῦν εἰμι. “ πειστικὸν λόγος "
πρὸς τοῦτ᾽ ἂν εἴποι τις μάλιστα τῶν σοφῶν.
τί οὖν ἑτέρους λαλοῦντας εὖ βδελύττομαι;
τρόπος ἔσθ᾽ ὁ πείθων τοῦ λέγοντος, οὐ λόγος.
τὸ γὰρ λέγειν εὖ δεινόν ἐστιν εἰ φέροι
BraBnv τινα.


ὙΠΟΒΟΛΙΜΑΙ͂ΟΣ ἢ ΑΓΡΟΙ͂ΚΟΣ


rn 3 /
τοῦτον εὐτυχέστατον λέγω,
“ / 3 4 /
ὅστις θεωρήσας ἀλύπως, ἸΙαρμένων,
\ \ eur eae 2 po rn “ φ ,
Ta σεμνὰ ταῦτ᾽ ἀπῆλθεν, ὅθεν ἦλθεν, ταχύ,
/ >
τὸν ἥλιον τὸν κοινόν, ἄστρ᾽, ὕδωρ, νέφη,
πῦρ' ταὐτά, κἂν ἑκατὸν ἔτη βιῷς, ἀεὶ
Μ Ι x > \ / 3) ἰῷ /
ὄψει παρόντα, κἂν ἐνιαυτοὺς σφόδρ᾽ ὀλίγους,
σεμνότερα τούτων ἕτερα δ᾽ οὐκ ὄψει ποτέ.
/ ΄ s \ ,
πανήγυριν νόμισον τιν᾽ εἶναι τὸν χρόνον,
r ’ e
ὅν φημι, τοῦτον ἢ ᾿πιδημίαν ἐν @
” ᾽ ΄ 7 a ,
ὄχλος, ἀγορά, κλέπται, κυβεῖαι, διατριβαί.
- 5 f.
ἂν πρίῷος" 5 ἀπίης καταλύσεις, βελτίονα
’ / DS, > fol > Ν > /
ἐφόδι᾽ ἔχων ἀπῆλθες, ἐχθρὸς οὐδενί:
ὁ προσδιατρίβων δ᾽ ἐκοπίασ' εν ἀπ' ο'λέσας
nr lal /
κακῶς TE γηρῶν ἐνδεής του * γίνεται,
x , > \ ΒΟ 5 50 θ ͵
ῥεμβόμενος ἐχθροὺς nip’, ἐπεβουλεύθη ποθέν,
fel \ >’ /
οὐκ εὐθανάτως ἀπῆλθεν ἐλθὼν εἰς χρόνον.
1 Kock adds vv. 8 and 9 from Maximus, Conf. Serm. 15,
p. 580.
2 πρῷος, Preller./mpa roy or πρῶτος, MSS.
3 δ᾽ ἐκοπίασεν ἀπολέσας, Porson, Mein., but Mein. Philol.
xiii. 525 defends the common reading δὲ κοπιᾶσας ἀπώλεσεν. |


σκοπίασας ἀπώλεσεν, Cod, A, Kock.
4 tov, MS./ που, Haupt., Kock.


1 Possibly a changeling, but there is no proof of this.
442


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


this man for a small part of a day 1 am now his well-
wisher. To this some one of the sages might cer-
tainly say, “‘ Eloquence is a persuasive thing.” Why,
then, do I feel a loathing for the others who talk
well? It’s the character of the speaker that does
the persuading, not eloquence. For eloquent speech,
if it entail damage, is something dire.


THE COUNTERFEIT BABY!
or THE RUSTIC


(Quintilian (1. 10. 18; 10. 1. 70) praises specifically this
comedy with others. The same title was also used by Cratinus
Minor, Alexis, Philemon, and Eudoxus. The Latin play of
Caecilius preserves the names of the characters found in the
Greek original.)

“ Life's passing show.”
That man, O Parmenon, I count most fortunate
Who quickly whence he came returns, when he,
unvexed,
Has looked on these majestic sights—the common sun,
Water and clouds, the stars and fire. If thou shalt live
An hundred years, or very few, thou’lt always see
These same sights present, grander ones thou'lt ne’er
behold.
So count this time I speak of as some festival
Or city visit where one sees the market-place,
The crowd, the thieves, the dice, the loungers at the
clubs,
Then, if thou’rt off betimes unto thy lodging-place,
Thou go’st with fuller purse and none thine enemy,
While he that tarries longer, worn, his money gone,
Grows old and wretched and forever knows some lack,
A vagrant he, the sport of enemies and plots.
Gaining no easy death the transient guest? returns.

2 Or transl, ‘‘by staying out his time.” ef. Diibner:
longaevus.

443


MENANDER


482,483K παύσασθε νοῦν 'réy'ovtes! οὐδὲν yap πλέον 5

ἁνθρώπινος νοῦς ἐστιν, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ τῆς Τύχης
(εἴτ᾽ ἐστὶ τοῦτο πνεῦμα θεῖον εἴτε νοῦς)
τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι τὸ κυβερνῶν ἅπαντα καὶ στρέφον

5 καὶ σῷξον, ἡ πρόνοια δ᾽ ἡ θνητὴ καπνὸς
καὶ φλήναφος. πείσθητε κοὺ ᾿μέμψεσθέ με’
πάνθ᾽ ὅσα νοοῦμεν ἢ λέγομεν ἢ πράττομεν
Τύχη ᾿στίν, sae δ᾽ wei ἐπιγεγραμμένοι.


Τύχη κυβερνᾷ πάντα: ταύτην καὶ φρένας
10 δεῖ καὶ πρόνοιαν τὴν θεὸν καλεῖν μόνην,
εἰ μή τις ἄλλως ὀνόμασιν χαίρει κενοῖς.


484 K τὰ δεύτερ᾽ ἀεὶ τὴν γυναῖκα δεῖ λέγειν,
τὴν δ᾽ ἡγεμονίαν τῶν ὅλων τὸν ἄνδρ᾽ ἔχειν.
οἶκος δ᾽ ἐν ᾧ τὸ πάντα πρωτεύει γυνή,
οὐκ ἔστιν ὅστις πώποτ᾽ οὐκ ἀπώλετο.


485 K τοῦτο μόνον ἐπισκοτεῖ
καὶ δυσγενείᾳ καὶ τρόπου πονηρίᾳ
καὶ πᾶσιν οἷς ἔσχηκεν ἄνθρωπος κακοῖς,
τὸ πολλὰ κεκτῆσθαι: τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλ᾽ ἐλέγχεται.


= > \ ᾽ eo , any
486 K ov παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ τὴν πρόνοιαν αἰτίαν
lal ς΄ lal , Lal
κρίνων ἂν ὀρθῶς ὑπολαβεῖν τίς μοι δοκεῖ,
ἀλλ᾽ ἔστι καὶ ταὐτόματον ἔνια χρήσιμον.


, an
487 K ἀεὶ κράτιστόν ἐστι τἀληθῆ λέγειν.
lal me \ -“
ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ τοῦτ᾽ ἐγὼ παρεγγυῶ
> >’ / fal / cal /
els ἀσφάλειαν TO βίῳ πλεῖστον μέρος.


1 λέγοντες, Kock./ ἔχοντες, MS.
2 πλέον, condemned by Mein. and Kock (q.v.).


444


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


“Fortune holds the helm.”


Have done with talking of intellect; for the
human intellect amounts to nothing, while For-
tune’s—whether we call it divine spirit or intellect
—this is what steers all and veers and saves, whereas
mortal forethought is smoke and nonsense. Take
my advice and you'll not blame me: everything
that we think or say or do is Fortune, and we are
but countersigners . . . Fortune ever holds the
tiller. This goddess alone we ought to speak of
as both intellect and forethought unless we per-
versely take pleasure in empty names.


_ “The woman should follow, not lead, through life.”


Woman should always take the second place in
speaking and the man should take the lead


in all. For there is never a household, wherein a.


woman holds first place in all things, which does not
go to utter ruin.


This only, the possession of much wealth, casts a
veil over both ignoble birth and wicked character
and all the iils that man is heir to, but all else
has the veil withdrawn.


Anyone who decides that forethought is not
responsible for every blessing would have, I think,
a correct opinion; nay, there are times when mere
chance is useful.


Tis always best to tell the truth. At every crisis


I recommend this as a chief contribution to security
in life.


445


~


MENANDER


488 K πολλῶν κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν θηρίων
ὄντων, μέγιστόν ἐστι θηρίον γυνή.


489 K Ἄπολλον, ἀλλὰ σκαιὸν οὐ μετρίως λέγεις,
μετὰ μαρτύρων ἀτυχεῖν, παρὸν λεληθέναι.
490 K δυσπαρακολούθητόν τι πρᾶγμ᾽ ἐστὶν Τύχη.


494 K μικρὰ Llavadnvav ἐπειδὴ δι᾿ ἀγορᾶς πέμποντά σε,
Μοσχίων, μήτηρ ἑώρα τῆς κόρης ἐφ᾽ ἅρματος.


ΦΑΝΙΟΝ f


497 K ‘or'ota! δὴ φιλοῦσιν ἰατροὶ λέγειν
τὰ φαῦλα μείζω καὶ τὰ δείν᾽ ὑπέρφοβα,
πυργοῦντες αὑτούς-- --
498 K ὑπελήλυθέν τέ μου
7, ev \ /
νάρκα τις ὅλον TO δέρμα.


499 K ἄνθρωπος ὧν ἥμαρτον: οὐ θαυμαστέον.
500 K φειδωλὸς ἦν καὶ μέτριος ἀγοραστής.


Ex Ori Milesii scriptis (Reitzenstein)
πότων 3 τε Kal κώμων ἅπαντες ἤδεμεν.
1 ὁποῖα, Bergk and Colet./ ofa, MS.


2 Por εἰδέναι ὁ. gen. see Kretschmar, de Menandri reliquiis,
p- 114.


446


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


Though many the wild beasts on land and in the
sea, the beastliest one of all is woman.


By Apollo, you talk like a lout and observe no
moderation, airing your misfortunes before witnesses,
when it is possible to keep them unknown.


A thing hard to track is Fortune.


When the maiden’s mother saw you from their
wagon,! Moschion,?

At the Small Panathenaea,® passing through the
market-place—


PHANIUM Ν


Just as physicians, you know, by way of building
a towering reputation, are wont to diagnose insignifi-
cant troubles as greater ones and to exaggerate real
dangers


Over my whole skin has crept a kind of numbness.


Being human I erred; there is no need for
surprise.


He was a thrifty and moderate purchaser.
We all were experts in drink and in carousals.


1 Perhaps ‘‘on your chariot.”

2 Moschion = calf. The type for ‘‘ calf”-love (cf. ‘‘ young
buck ”) in the New. Comedy ; cf. The Girl from Samos, etc.

3 The annual or ‘‘ lesser” celebration.


447


MENANDER


THE GHOST


Terence, in the prologue to his ‘“‘Eunuchus,” while making
one of his chronic attacks wpon his rival Luscius Lavinius,
says that the latter has ruined “The Ghost” of Menander in
spite of his careful translation from Greek. Donatus, in his
commentary wpon this passage (Ter. “Eun.” prol. 9), gives a
brief swmmary of the plot of ‘The Ghost.” In substance he
says: A young man has a stepmother who, before she married
his father, has had by a neighbour a daughter. The maiden,
whom she wishes to have continually near her, is brought up
secretly in the adjoining house, and the party wall between the
neighbour's and her husband’s house is pierced by a passage
with its entrance made to resemble a shrine which she covers
with garlands and boughs. Under the pretext of ritual per-
formances she is able to enjoy regular visits from her daughter.
The young woman, however, is seen by the stepson, who at first
is terrified, as he takes the maiden for a ghost. Further
encounters change terror into love, and a happy marriage is
arranged with the consent of all parties concerned.

This commentary has made possible the identification of
certain fragments. Ona strip of parchment in the Imperial
Public Library of Petrograd! Jernstedt recognized in 1891
portions of ‘The Ghost’? (Phasma) of Menander. The two
sides of the strip yield fifty incomplete but fairly intelligible
lines. Highteen of the verses had been previously published


! For the history of this and the two other strips of parch-
ment see Korte? (Introd. pp. liv., lvi) and Capps, Menander,
p. 34. Also see above, p. 10, on the St. Petersburg fragm.
included in The Arbitrants.


448


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


with the addition of another overlapping fragment of seven
lines, and were included (see Kock, “ Comic. Attic. Fragmenta,”
No.530) among Menander’s unidentified fragments. Thus
there are now fifty-six nearly consecutive lines and one other
fragment of two lines known to be from this comedy.


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


1. A Faminy Divinity (doubtless connected with the ritual
at the sham shrine). Perhaps, after a dialogue with
Pheidias and his exit at line 8, this divinity in one of
Menander’s belated prologues explains the sitwation
to the audience (cf. 1. 19).”


. ῬΗΒΙΡΙΑΒ, the stepson.


bo


. A Servant (a Freedman) or PAEDAGOGUS.
. THE GuostT (i.e. the stepmother’s daughter).
. A Cook (in fragm. 501 K).


ao ἢ ὦ»


Scgne: Athens(?). Two adjoining houses with a concealed
communicating passage.


1 See the position of the ‘‘ prologue” in the Periceiromene.

2 Korte assumes the presence of two divinities in lines
1-25 and illustrates by the personification of ‘‘ Luxuria ” and
‘‘TInopia” in the Trinwmmus of Plautus. For the single
tutelary divinity cf. Menander’s Hero. Sudhaus (2nd ed.)
says: ‘* Prologus non daemon est, sed homo.”


449


MENANDER


St. Pet. fragm.


a


(a)


uo


20


ΦΑΣΜΑ
ive peu. Cir Bebe tes H
Jf RR, OS Po δ eee συλλαμβάνῃς


: roy νυμφίον σαυτὸν φρονεῖ τιν
τῆ ς παρθένου τὴν μητέρα
αν μονα έρῳ τοῦθ᾽ ὁμομητρίῳ τινί
+ + «μὴ παραδῷς, πρὸς τῶν θεῶν,
[πρόφασιν κατ' ἃ σαυτοῦ μηδεμίαν' οὕτω πόει.
κεἶεν, ποήσω τὶ οῦτο' τί γὰρ ἄν τις πάθοι.
ἣ δ᾽ οὐχὶ φάσμ᾽" ἔστ᾽, ἀλλὰ παῖς ἀληθινὴ
ie τῆσδε γεννη "θεῖσα τῆς γαμουμένης.


Γτίκτει yap ἡ" μήτηρ πρὶν ἐλθεῖν ἐνθάδε
e.
.


rs


ἐκ γείτονος" ταύτην, δίδωσι T ἐκτρέφειν
τίτθῃ, μεθ᾽ ἧςν "ὃν ἐστιν ἐν τῶν γεεξιτόνων,
Γἔνδον Tpepou'e ένη καὶ φυλαττομένη κόρη,
"ἁνὴρ ὅταν ἔλθῃ" δεῦρο, τὸν δ᾽ ἄλλον χρόνον
ὁπόταν ἀπῇ πλέω' x φυλακῆς τ᾿ ἐλάττονος
Γδέῃ, λιποῦσ᾽ ἣν εἶχεν οἰκίαν τότε
Tone 7 Lang ,

. τίν᾽ οὖν φαντάζεται


γι


ral /
ἐνταῦθα φαίνεται
Γ᾽ 0 Ld / 71 \ \ » fal a sy
ἐνθάδε τρόπον; t'outl yap ἔτι ποθεῖτ᾽ ἴσως
"-“ /
Γμαθεῖν σαφέστερον. πεπόηκεν ἡ γυνὴ


For additions (conjectural) to text by Korte, Jernstedt,
Kock, etc., see K*, and Kock, Oom. Frag. iii. pp. 151-155.
For other conjectural supplements see Sudhaus?and Hutloff
(appendix to de Men. Epitr. pp. 71 ff.) who assume that
lines 1-25 are from the prologue, all spoken by the young
man (with self-dialogue).

9 Assigned to ‘‘A” (the Divinity), Allinson.

10 Suppl. Allinson. / αθεῖσα, MS./ ἀπαλλαϊχθεῖσα, S*./ λάθρᾳ
δὲ maideu' θεῖσα, Kock.

14 τρεφομένη or ἐχομένη, Wilam.

16 Kock suppl./ ‘é7’ οἴχετ᾽ ἀποδημῶν, 8533,

17 Allinson suppl. // xev not κεν in MS., Hutloff. / εἴλη"-
xev, S?, 18 Allinson suppl.


450


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE GHOST


(After some six, only partly intelligible, verses a continuous
translation is given of the text with the conjectural additions.)


A (ἢ


ΠΕ ΠΤ. . oy isan of the Dionysia. .....

Lk S| τ Πὰς the accomplishing you may grasp

Bie tated, £1,005 the bridegroom yourself to be
prudent

+ SS τος, the maiden’s mother,

es te lta ae ay i ἢ this to some other, a brother on
the mother’s side.

ΠΥ rer do not, for the gods’ sake, give


away any pretext against yourself. Thus do.


B (PHEIDIAS ἢ)

Very well, thus will I act. For what else could
one do? [Exit Pheidias ?
Scene. (Prologue.)

a (? The Divinity to the Spectators)


Now she is not a ghost, but a real maiden born

10 of this one who lives here as wedded wife. For the
mother gave birth to her by a neighbour before she
came here and gave her to a nurse to rear, and the
maiden is now with her in the house of our neigh-
bours, brought up within and under careful guard
whenever the husband comes here, but the rest of
the time, whenever he’s off on a voyage and there
is need of less precaution, she leaves the house
where she keeps herself meanwhile and appears
here. In what way, then, does this apparition come
here? For it is this, perhaps, that you are wishing
oto learn more clearly. By dividing the wall the
451


Ὁ Ὁ 2


25


Be


30
35


40


MENANDER


Γδιελοῦσα τὸν τοῖχον διέξοδόν τινα
Γὅπως ἂν οἷαί T wot πάντ᾽ ἐπισκοπεῖν.

Γὴ γὰρ διέξοδος κε edu Tat ταινίαις
γθαλλοῖς θ᾽ ὅπως μήτις προσελθὼν καταμάθῃ.
Γἔστιν δὲ καὶ βωμός" τις ἔνδον τῆς θεοῦ


(Lacuna ? of perhaps 10 verses.)


Scene.  (? TATAATOTOS, SEIAIAS)
.νᾶατ. ..««{σε .. ο΄. ae
πῶς εἰσιν οἱ πυροὶ [κατ᾽ by paw inate
τί δέ σοι μέλει τοῦτ᾽; (Παι. ) οὐθέν, ἀλλὰ τῷ λόγῳ"
εἰς τὴν ἀλήθειαν καταχρήσᾳ ἴσθαι δοκῶ."
ἂν τίμιος δακέτω σ᾽ ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ τοῦτο τοῦ
πένητος. αἰσθοῦ σαυτὸν ὄντα, ‘Pevdia, |
ἄνθρωπον, ἄνθρωπον δὲ καὶ «τὸν ἄθλιον,
ἵνα μὴ ᾿πιθυμῇς τῶν ὑπὲρ σ [ὲ πραγμάτων.
ὅταν δ᾽ ἀγρυπνεῖν εἴπῃς, τίς εὖ σαυτὸν σκοπῶν!
τὴν αἰτίαν γνώσει" περιπατεῖς "Kar ἀγοράν."
εἰσῆλθες εὐθύς, ἂν κοπιάσῃς τὼ σκέλη!
μαλακῶς ἐλούσω, πάλιν. ἀναστ' ἃς ἐνέφαγες'
πρὸς ἡδονήν' ὕπνος αὐτὸς ὁ Bit os ἐστί σου.
τὸ πέρας" κακὸν ἔχεις οὐδέν, ἡ νόσος τρυφὴ"
ἔσθ᾽ ἣν διῆλθες. φορτικώτερον. δέ τι!


ἐπέρχεταί μοι, τρόφιμε, συγγνῴϊμην ἔχε,"


21 διελοῦσα, Wilam. 22 Kock suppl.

23 Allinson suppl.

24 θαλλοῖς, Kock. // @ ὅπως μήτις, Allinson. {{προσελθὼν, 43,

26 ff. Sc. The Παιδαγωγός, so designated by Καὶ, S*.// Or
“« Servant ” ? 28 δέ σοι, MS./ δ᾽ ἐμοί, Wilam.

29 δοκῶ, K*./ θέλω, Jern.

30 Hinos, MS./ τίμιοι, Wilam., K*. // Wilam, suppl. at end.

31 Φειδία, Cobet suppl.

33 σε πραγμάτων, Wilam./ ὑπὲρ oayrdy wary, 83.

34 εἶ σαυτὸν σκοπῶν, Wilam.


452


“Ἴ


+
7


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


woman has made a communicating passage, that
they may be able to keep watch on everything.
For the passage-way is completely concealed by
fillets and boughs that nobody on coming in may
notice it. And there is also an altar to the goddess
WERT... |.


(About 10 verses are lacking.)
Scene. SERVANT (? a freed man) ann PHEIDIAS


SERVANT
How is wheat selling to-day ?

PHEIDIAS
What does that matter to you?


SERVANT

Oh, nothing, but I have a fancy to make use of the
illustration to bring out the truth. If the price is
high let this vex you on behalf of me, a poor man.
Take notice, Pheidias, that you are human yourself,
and that the wretched man is also human, in order
that you may not covet what’s beyond you. But
when you say that you suffer from insomnia, you'll
know the cause if you'll examine yourself what man
youare. You take a stroll in the market-place ; you
come in forthwith; if your two legs are tired you
take a luxurious bath ; you risé up and eat greedily
at pleasure ; your life itself is a sleep. In fine, you
have no ill; your disease is luxury through which
40 you have passed—but something rather hackneyed,

my young master, occurs to ane rr please excuse me—


ὡ
Φ


35 “περιπατεῖς, MS., “Hutloff, || κατ᾽ ἀγοράν, S*, note.
36 τὼ, Kock, Cob et. 37 Wilam. "suppl.
39 τρυφὴ, Kock, [δέ σου, K?. 40--459 Cobet suppl.


453


50


σι
σι


501 Καὶ


MENANDER


\ Ἂν ,
τὸ δὴ λεγόμενον---οὐκ ἔχεις ὅποι, χέσῃς"

\ nr lal
ὑπὸ τῶν ἀγαθῶν, εὖ ἴσθι. (Φει.) μὴ ὥϊρας σύ γε"
“ Δ
ἵκοιο. (Παι.) τἀληθῆ λέγω, νὴ τοὺς θεούς,"

σι. oy > / ‘ 7 ® /
TOUT ἔστι τἀρρώστημα. (Φει.) καὶ. -ἴλαν,
ews > a \ , ry , |
ἀτόπως ἐμαυτοῦ καὶ βαρέως 'ἔχω πάνυ.
m1 θ Dae Wwe 4 Γ Ν rr |

ἀϊσθενικόν ἐστι Tavonto'v κἀκρατές.
5 a
Γεῖϊεν, πάνυ yap ταυτὶ λελο' γίσθαι μοι δοκεῖς,"
Tri! μοι παραινεῖς; (Παι.) 6 τι παραινῶ; ᾿γὼ
τς φράσω."
Tei! μέν τι κακὸν ἀληθὲς εἶχες, Φειδία,
ζητεῖν ἀληθὲς φάρμαϊκον τούτου σ᾽ ἔδει"

nr > > » Ν e \ \ \ /
νῦν δ᾽ οὐκ ἔχεις" κενὸν εὑρὲ Kal TO φάρμακον
πρὸς τὸ κενόν, οἰήθητι δ᾽ ὠφελεῖν τί σε.

4 / ’ e lal > 4

περιμαξάτωσάν σ᾽ αἱ γυναῖκες ἐν κύκλῳ
καὶ περιθεωσάτωσαν' ἀπὸ κρουνῶν τριῶν


ὕδατι περίρραν᾽ ἐμβαλὼν ἅλας, φακούς.


, , » Ὁ
ἐπισημαίνεσθ᾽, ἐὰν


΄ , 7, . \ ,
ἡ σκευασία καθάριος ἢ καὶ ποικίλη.


43 K? suppl., comparing Περικειρ. 131.

47 ἀσθένικον, Jern. | φιλόνικον, Kock. // xaxparés, Wilam./
κοὺ φιλεῖ, With εἴκειν for εἶεν in line 48, Kock.

49 ᾿γὼ φράσω, Kock.

50-56 = Fragm, from Clem. Alex. Strom. vii. 4. 27, iden-
titied by Cobet.


454


50


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


as the saying goes, you know, you are so crowded by
your blessings, know it well, that you have no room
to ease yourself !

: PHEIDIAS


May you not live out the year!


SERVANT
It’s the truth I’m telling you. Yes, by the gods,
that is your sickness.
PHEIDIAS
And yet, you wretch, I’m in a very strange and
cruel plight.
SERVANT
Your folly is weakness and incontinence.


PHEIDIAS
Very well, then. What do you advise me? For,
methinks, you’ve reasoned this out very carefully.
SERVANT
What do I advise? I'll explain. If, Pheidias, you
had any real misfortune it would be necessary for you
to seek for it some real remedy. But, as it is, you
have none. For this empty ill find also an empty
remedy, and think up something to help you. Let
the women stand round you, massage you thor-
oughly and fumigate you with brimstone. From
three fountains sprinkle yourself with water after
throwing in some salt and lentils . .


cook (fo banqueters)


Signify your approval if the dressing be cleanly
and recherché.


455


MENANDER


PIAAAEA®OI


503 K ἤδη δ᾽ ἐπιχύσεις διάλιθοι, χλαβρώνιοι,
Πέρσαι δ᾽ ἔχοντες μυιοσόβας ἑστήκεσαν.


504 Καὶ οὐ ῥάδιον
ἄνοιαν ἐν μικρῷ μεταστῆσαι χρόνῳ.


505 K νὴ τὸν Δία τὸν μέγιστον ἐκτυφήσομαι.


506,507 Καὶ ὡς ἡδὺ τὸ ζῆν, εἰ μεθ᾽ ὧν κρίνῃ τις av}


a) \ lol e lol fol Ul
τοῦτ᾽ ἔστι TO ζῆν, οὐχ ἑαυτῷ ζῆν μόνον.


e 3 f. ,
508 K ὥστ᾽ ἔγωγ᾽ ἂν εἱλόμην που σαυνίῳ πεπληγμένος.


XAAKEIA


509 K οὐκ ἂν γένοιτ᾽ ἐρῶντος ἀθλιώτερον
/ lal
οὐδὲν γέροντος πλὴν ἕτερος γέρων épar:
@ /
ὃς yap ἀπολαύειν βούλεθ᾽ ὧν ἀπολείπεται
\ \ / na ca > Μ 5
διὰ TOV χρόνον, πῶς οὗτος οὐκ ἔστ᾽ ἄθλιος;


510 Καὶ τοῦτο δὴ τὸ νῦν ἔθος,
᾽ fal
“axpatov” ἐβόων, “ τὴν μεγάλην. ψυκτῆρά τις
” > lal > ’ > /
προὔπινεν αὐτοῖς ἀθλίους ἀπολλύων.


1 On the unusual position of ἄν see Kock, ad loc.


450


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE BROTHERS IN LOVE


Two brothers who are in love with two sisters make a not
unusual theme. Compare the “Stichus”’ of Plautus, for
which Menander’s play seems to have served as the original
(see Kock, ad loc.).

Ready were beakers set with gems, wide cups with
handles, and Persian attendants stood ready with
fly-flaps.


It is not easy to remove folly at short notice.
By Zeus the highest, I shall be puffed up.


How sweet is life, when with the persons of one’s
choice :


This is living, not to live unto oneself alone.


So that I, at least, smitten possibly with a javelin,
had been content (sc. to die).


THE FEAST OF THE COPPERSMITHS


The feast of the coppersmiths, including other artisans as
well, was celebrated on the last day of the month Pyanepsion
(Oct.—Nov.), in honour of the divine smith, Hephaestus, and
still finds an echo in the ringing hammers of Hephaestus
Street in modern Athens.

There could not be anything more wretched than
an old man in love, except yet another old man in
love. For how can he fail to be wretched who wishes
to enjoy what age deprives him of ?


As is the custom nowadays, you know, they bawled
out, “ Unmixed wine!” “The big goblet!”” And
one, by way of ruining the poor fellows, drank their
health in a wine-cooler,

457


MENANDER


XHPA


513 K ἑκοῦσα δ᾽ ἁδελφὴ ποήσει τοῦτό σοι
> / / , @7 / /
avTadayov γ᾽ ἕξουσα τούτῳ διδομένη.


\ / a? a
514 Καὶ TO λεγόμενον TOUT ἔστι νῦν,
ΝΜ / / \ , > wy
τἄνω κάτω, φασίν, Ta κάτω δ᾽ ἄνω.


515 K βοῶν ποείτω τὴν πόλιν διάστατον.
516 Κὶ πρὸς τὴν ἀδελφὴν ἀνάδοχον τῶν χρημάτων.


517 K dls παῖδες οἱ γέροντες.


ΨΕΥΔΗΡΑΚΛΗΣ


518 K μάγειρ᾽, ἀηδής μοι δοκεῖς εἶναι σφόδρα:
πόσας τραπέζας μέλλομεν ποεῖν, τρίτον
ἤδη μ᾽ ἐρωτᾷς" χοιρίδιον ἕν θύομεν,
ὀκτὼ ποήσοντες τραπέζας δ᾽ ἢ μίαν
τί σοὶ διαφέρει τοῦτο; παράθες σήμϊεροϊν."
οὐκ ἔστι κανδύλους ποεῖν, οὐδ᾽ οἷα σὺ
εἴωθας εἰς ταὐτὸν καρυκεύειν, μέλε,
σεμίδαλιν, @d. πάντα γὰρ τἀναντία
Any , AO Gy tte Σ
νῦν ἐστιν" ὁ μάγειρος γὰρ ἐγχύτους ποεῖ,
10 πλακοῦντας ὀπτᾷ, χόνδρον ἕψει καὶ φέρει
μετὰ τὸ τάριχος, εἶτα θρῖον καὶ βότρυς.
ἡ δημιουργὸς δ᾽ ἀντιπαρατεταγμένη
κρεάδι᾽ ὀπτᾷ καὶ κίχλας τραγήματα.
ἔπειθ᾽ ὁ δειπνῶν μὲν τραγηματίξεται,
15 μυρισάμενος δὲ καὶ στεφανωσάμενος πάλιν
δειπνεῖ μελίπηκτα τὰς κίχλας.


or


 ohuepoy, Allinson./ σημίαν, MS., being a repetition of 4
μίαν, line 4,/ Σιμία, Dindorf, Meineke.


458


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


THE WIDOW


Your sister will do this for you of her free-will,
since she, when married off to him, will have a
substitute.!


As the old saying goes, so it is to-day: “upside
down,” say they, and “ downside up!”


Let him split the city in two by bawling.
Guarantor for the money to the (your ?) sister.


Old men are children for the second time.


THE COUNTERFEIT HERACLES


Cook, you seem to me to be very disagreeable. This
is the third time now that you ask me how many tables
we intend to set.2, We are sacrificing only one little
porker ; but whether we are going to set eight tables
or one, what difference does that make to you? Do
serve up some time to-day! It is ποῦ ἃ case of pre-
paring Lydian entrées, nor even such sauces as you
are wont to mix up, of honey, flour and eggs, for now
it is altogether the reverse. For the cook makes
moulds, bakes flat cakes, boils groats and serves them
after the smoked fish, and then a cheese-omelette
and grapes. But the woman cook, arrayed as rival,
roasts bits of meat and thrushes as if for dessert, and
thereupon the banqueter nibbles away at them and,
after anointing and decking himself with a wreath,
settles down again to dine on the thrushes as if
honey-cakes.

' Perhaps cf. fragm. 516.
2 of. The Girl from Samos, 1. 75 ff.
459


MENANDER


- cal ,
519 K νῦν δ᾽ εἰς γυναικωνῖτιν εἰσιόνθ᾽ ὅταν
ΝΜ / \ \ ’ \ /
ἴδω παράσιτον, τὸν δὲ Δία τὸν Κτήσιον
ἔχοντα τὸ ταμιεῖον οὐ κεκλεισμένον,
’
ἀλλ᾽ εἰστρέχοντα πορνίδια .......


520 K μήτηρ τέθνηκε ταῖν ἀδελφαῖν ταῖν δυοῖν
ταύταιν" ' τρέφει δὲ παλλακή τις τοῦ πατρὸς
αὐτάς, ἅβρα τῆς μητρὸς αὐτῶν γενομένη.

521 Κ ὑπὲρ μὲν οἴνου μηδὲ γρῦ, τίτθη, λέγε"

x ” ne ᾿Φ ΝΜ “ > \ /
ἂν τἄλλα δ᾽ ἧς ἄμεμπτος, ἕκτην ἐπὶ δέκα


Βοηδρομιῶνος ἐνδελεχῶς ἄξεις 5 ἀεί.


522 K ἀστοργίαν ἔχει τιν᾽ ὁ σκληρὸς βίος.


VO®OAEHS


~ / \ ’ὔ \ - \
526 Καὶ ἐπίσημον οὖν τὴν ἀσπίδ᾽ εἰς τὴν τοῦ Διὸς
στοὰν ἀνέθηκαν.


527 K ὄνος λύρας.


1 Note fem. dual forms.
2 ἄξεις, Cobet./éfers, MS.


n δ᾽ ὅλη παροιμία: ὄνος λύρας ἤκουε καὶ σάλπιγγος
Photius.


460


ον
US,


FRAGMENTS FROM IDENTIFIED PLAYS


But now, whenever I see a parasite entering the
women’s apartments and House-protector Zeus failing
to keep the storehouse locked but allowing harlots to
ih) ᾿ς, ,


The mother of these sisters twain is dead and
gone, but a concubine of their father, formerly their
mother’s dainty young maid, is rearing them.


About wine, nurse, do not say even so much as
*boo,’ but if you shall be blameless in other things
you shall always celebrate, the whole day through,
the sixteenth of Boedromion.!


The austere life involves a certain lack of natural
affection.


THE NOISE-SHY MAN


They dedicated the shield conspicuous in the Porch
of Zeus.


An ass at a musicale ! 3


1 On this day of the month Boedromion (nearly = Septem-
ber) the Athenians celebrated a wine festival in honour of
the naval victory near Naxos under Chabrias in 376 B.c.

2 See 1.18 of The Hated Man (above, p. 409) for use of
this proverb, ὁ.6. ‘‘ An ass listened to a lyre, a sow to a
trumpet.”


461


a ati Ἵ
ἂψ afl fail ah we
ἢ Sis ᾿ \ ᾿ ὩΣ ἊΝ


κύον... + a


he 5


ΓΙ: ἈΝ"
ἔυ δι in ἢ an} thy oa vrs ‘ils ἢ» mF You ΓΙ ΠῚ: ὼΐἕἂ wire
ΑΝ ΠΝ ΠΝ
᾿ ᾿ ΓΤ τὶ ἐδ ἢ». ΡΨ] νι j Nwis 4 Vis δι,
ἕν μὰ ‘ νι irae inital δὲ
" 4 Ι Φ ἠδ ar 3
7 j if ΓΈ! wy Ἢ Δὲ {ΤΠ ἢ ΠΡΊΩΝ Sia 4 et!


i '


LO pInW 10 dintrss sin ᾿ vial “ὐΉΣ ΩΝ ail ‘


io δ τ ὲ ων,


Oe CHT a


, ‘ ny PY DLSitl “οἰ loot eenntenfy! Bee
aan’


ὌΝ ᾿ “δὴ pie as é
et heh |

ἐν “ὋΝ
; ΜᾺ,


AN UNIDENTIFIED COMEDY


AN UNIDENTIFIED COMEDY


Four fragments, preserved in the Cairo papyrus and now
connected as belonging to one comedy, yield provisionally
the following outline. There are two youths, Moschion
and Chaereas. The latter is betrothed to the daughter of
Cleaenetus, with whom, however, Moschion is in love.
Chaereas, thinking, or feigning, that her father wishes him to -
marry her, poses as unwilling to yield her to Moschion and to
marry Moschion’s sister as proposed. Moschion, meanwhile,
has begotten a child by her and marries her with her father’s
consent and, apparently, with the connivance of Chaereas.
When the misunderstanding has been cleared up, Chaereas
probably marries the sister of Moschion.


Lise ss 5. (Β)
ἘΠ ies
ex.
ἔκσωσον
pedptupa ...
- 5. νν ᾽ ete
5 ἐπ avtop'wpw
’
γείτοσιν ἑτοιμ
TOV ἐγκεκλει
ἘΠ ΣΝ
παῖ, Μοσχίων


ἀρεοπαγίτης ἐστί
it το γὰρ σ᾽ éyaipor. τος
(Χαι.) ἀδικεῖ μ᾽ ἐκεῖνος οὐδὲν ἐξ ἐμοῦ παθών."
Fragm. LPSa. Arnim joined Land P; Ricci added ἣ ; L*
added a. Sudhaus (ed. sec.) adds fragm. L' "4 2 at beginning
of LPSat and LPSa¥ respectively. Line 5 of fragm. L',...
AAaxalt..., possibly contained the word Xa"ipéa).
5 J* suppl.
10 S? suppl. from ε. ιγαρ.( τ. ip... ** Pap. torn,” 93.


464


AN UNIDENTIFIED COMEDY


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


LACHES, an old man, father of Moschion.

CHAEREAS, a young man, jilted by the daughter of Cleaenetus.
CLEAENETUS, an old man, father-in-law of Moschion.
(Moscuion, son of Laches.)


The papyrus begins with ten broken lines, containing
_ dialogue apparently between Laches and Chaereas. At
line 8, Laches, informed by Chaereas of Moschion’s love
affair, apostrophizes his son. Chaereas, line 10 ff., com-
plains of Moschion for depriving him of his promised bride,
the daughter of Cleaenetus. Laches refers to what he has
apparently already proposed, a consolation marriage between
his own daughter and Chaereas. Cleaenetus and Chaereas
seem to be acting together, for some reason not altogether clear,
behind Laches’s back. Chaereas, in collusion with Cleaene-
tus, has been entrusted with preparing Laches for subsequent
developments. Cleaenetus, who presently appears, pretends
to be utterly indignant at Moschion. Chaereas plays the réle
of reluctantly giving up his promised bride and of helping
Laches to calm down the assumed indignation of Cleaenetus.
(The first fragment begins with ten broken verses.)


Oh ye ae ee eet Gee Pe ἃ er ek A a See


CHAEREAS


1, He does me wrong, although he’s suffered naught
from me.
465


MENANDER
Μ \ > fol , \ ΄
ἤρα μεν ἀεὶ τῆς κόρης καὶ πολλά μοι
/ Lal e ἌΝ ν > ν ἃ
πράγματα παρεῖχεν" ὡς δ᾽ ἐπέραινεν οὐδὲ ὃν
αὑτῷ παραδοῦναι τὸν ᾿'γάμοϊν πείθων, ἰδού,
= > / / 5 > , \ Ε] ΄
15 ἐξειργάσατο. (Λα.) τί οὖν ἀναίνει τὴν ἐμήν
ἔχειν θυγατέρα; (Χαι.) τοῖς δὲ δοῦσι τίνα λόγον
ἐρῶ, Λάχης; γενοῦ γάρ, ἱκετεύω "a ἐγώ---
(Κλε.) οἴμοι τί ποήσω; (Χαι.) τίς ὁ βοῶν ἐστίν ποτε
πρὸς ταῖς θύραις; (Aa.) εὔκαιροϊς hele, νὴ Alay.
20 ᾿Κλεαίν) εἶτος πρὸϊς ἐμέ. (Χαι.) τί ποιήσω, Λάχης;
(Aa.) πείθωμεν αὐτόν. ὦ βίας ἐρρωμένης"
(Χαι.) πείθω παραδοῦναι τὴν ἐμὴν ἀδικούμενος
[αὐτός; (Λα.) ὑπόμεινον, δ ἐμέ. (Χαι.) νὴ τὸν
“Ἥλιον
[αἰσχύνομαι, Λάχης, σε. (Λα.) τί βοᾷς; rt δὲϊ
πίαθώϊνν;
17 Restored by J? for ἱκετευσ. ἐγω:, .13 reports the (:) at
end as ‘‘ certain.” »
19 K* suppl./ εὐκαιρότϊ ης ole, J?, 833,
20: K* supply ico aac Oral, Werks exe, pap. | ΚλεαίνΓεθ᾽ ἧκε
mpos' ἐμέ, ? « 3. [Γαὐτὴ mploanyay’ a's με, S*.
21 ὦ, “5. ἔα, K*.//J* reports: ‘‘no (:) in line.”/S? gives
second part to Chaereas.
24 τί Bogs; 93. //7 (orm)... y..CC.v.? 553} τί δὲ παθών;
Allinson. / παίζομαι (to Cleaenetus), S?.


466 ἢ


AN UNIDENTIFIED COMEDY


Forever he played lover to the girl and much
He troubled me, but when he made no headway, none,
By urging me to yield to him the marriage, look,
He consummated it.
LACHES
Why then refuse to wed
My daughter? '
CHAEREAS
Yes, but, Laches, what am I to urge
To those who made betrothal? Nay, be thou, I pray—


CLEAENETUS (enters, shouting outside)
Ah me, what shall I do?


CHAEREAS (pretending not to recognize Cleaenetus)
Who’s that a-bawling, pray,
There near the door ?
LACHES
Cleaenetus, by Zeus, has come
20 To me, and just in time.
CHAEREAS (hurriedly, aside)
What, Laches, shall I do ?
LACHES (aside to Chaereas)
Let’s win him over.
(As Cleaenetus continues to storm)
Ha! what lusty violence !
cHAEREAS (sttll aside to Laches)
Am I to urge, when wronged myself, to give away
My bride?
(LacuEs to Chaereas)
For my sake, patience.
CHAEREAS
By the Sun, you're right.
You put me, Laches, to the blush.
LacuEs (to Cleaenetus, who is still crying out)
Why bawl? What’s wrong?
467


H H 2


MENANDER


(Xau.) [ἄϊκουε δή μου" Μοσχίων τὴν παρθένον
20 Γἑλ! ὼν ἐ ἔχει, Κλεαίνετ᾽ 4 (Κλε.) " ἢ δικήμεθα.
(Χαι.) μηθὲν βοήσῃς" νησίω iy ἐπὶ σπορᾷ
‘raise ὁ ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ 'παρώ ὦν, Λάχης ὁδί,
ἐπ οὐ τὶ τ᾽ ἐπιβεβαιοῖ: φὴς σύ; (A a.) pnw i, Χαιρέα'
(Κλε.)30 "ot! γάρ τι βούλ'ομ᾽ ἀντιλέγειν, μὰ τοὺς θεούς "


(Lacuna of circa 5 lines)


EPPO. A820, 84, πρὸ Se) PU eee
Si ae, κν PANO, GUM, esa) ean
Ur cits cake Me hk Pee Cee + ἐμοί:
20.;, ΝΗ oes ἐδ Beet Gee αἰλῶς ἔχει


: geen τρόπον


. τί! γάρ μοι διαφέρει;
που γεγονότα: Ξ
(Aa.) Ὁ "οὐ b χαλεπὸς ἽΝ anna πρᾶός γ᾽ εἶ σφόδρα.
45 Γὁρῶ σ᾽ ἀγανακτοῦντ ᾿ οὐδέν: (Χαι.) οὐδὲ γάρ σ᾽
op'@
Γἔγωγε. (Aa.) πῶς δὲ χρή μ᾽ ᾿ἀγανακτίεῖν; οὐδὲ ἕν.
Γἐγὼ 1 δ᾽ ‘aren’! ἔκ τηλικούτων νῦν φόβων


28 παρών, 43.

29 τοῦτ᾽, ουὅ, pap., J*.// φής ov; (Aa.) φημί, J?.//Xapéa: 13.

30 ‘ob! γάρ τι BovATow ἀντιλέγειν! S*. / To Cleaenetus,

» Allinson./ To Laches, $?.// ua τοὺς θεούς suppl. and continued

to Cleaen., Allinson. / καλῶς ποῶν to Chaereas, S?*.

56 βρῶ δ / pas, KA.

38 . πος ἦν, S%.) ποση : (or nt) 5.

39 ἐμοί : 43. εἴσω, K*.// In right margin, Χαιρ.

44 Suppl. and to Laches, J*.

45 J2, 85.

46 Γἔγωγε. (Aax.) πῶς δὲ χρή μ᾽, S*.// ἀγανακτί εῖν οὐδὲ Ev,
S? suppl. from ἃ yavarrCuiCe. . . v, S*, pap.

47 Suppl. from....... Ay steers κοντων, «12, 533,


468


AN UNIDENTIFIED COMEDY


CHAEREAS (according to plan)
Now hear me. Moschion has carried off the maid,
Cleaenetus. He has her.
CLEAENETUS
We are wronged! We're wronged!
CHAEREAS
Stop bawling. Now his father, Laches, present here,
For lawful child-begetting,! ratifies this bond.
(Turning to Laches)
Do you assent to that?
LACHES
Yes, Chaereas, I do.
CLEAENETUS
80 No word Id urge against it, by the gods, not I.

A lacuna of five lines. In these and the eleven broken
lines that follow Chaereas overcomes his pretended reluctance
to give up the daughter of Cleaenetus and is praised by Laches
for his magnanimity. Laches apparently gladly accepts the
solution and is himself praised for being so mild-mannered.
It is agreed that there need be no further vexation felt. Only
later does Laches perceive that he has been made the victim
of a benevolent plot.

LACHES (to Chaereas)
44 You are not harsh with us, in fact you’re very mild.
I see you’re vexed no whit.


CHAEREAS
And I see you the same.
LACHES
And why should I be vexed? There is no cause,


not one.
I’m off now to my son to set his mind at rest
From what he feared so much but now.
1 The regular marriage formula. See note on fragm. 720 K
below.


469


50


all


MENANDER
τὸν υἱὸν éx"rvadwevos. (A.) ἀλλὰ μὴν πάλαι
ἡμῖν ἔδοξε ταῦτ᾽" ἔχει τὴν παρθένον
ὁ Μοσχίων: “xa” ἐθελοντής, οὐ βίᾳ.
ῳόμεθα χαϊλεϊπανεῖν σε τοῦτο πυθόμενον.
ἀστεῖος ἀποβέβηκας" εὐτυχήκαμεν.
περὶ τοῦ βοῶμεν; (Aa.) πῶς λέγεις; (Κλε) ὥσπερ
λέγω.
οὐ Χαιρέᾳ τὸ πρῶτον ἐξεδώκατε
τὴν παῖδα; (Κλε.) μὰ Δία. (Aa.) τί σὺ λέγεις ;
οὐ Χαιρέᾳ;
ἀλλὰ τίνι; (Κλε.) πάνυ γέλοιον" οὐκ ἀκήκοας
τῷ σῷ νεανίσκῳ. (Aa.) τί Γχλέγεῦῶς; (Κλε.) νὴ
τοὺς θεούς.
καὶ παιδίον γὰρ γέγονεν ἐκ τούτου. (Λα!) [τὶς
φής; :
ἐκ Μοσχίωνος; ὦ πολυτίμητοι 'O'e'oi,'
ἐρρωμένου πράγματος. (Κλε.) Ἄπολλον, νοῦν
ἔχεις;
48 vidv, ?/ δὰν, K2, 82. πάλῳ, J?.
50 Γἔλαβ᾽ 1, J. / ἔγημ᾽, K*./ εἴληφ᾽, S?./.. nv-, pap., $2.
57 τί λέγεις; J? correct., metri causa, for τί σύ λέγεις :
of pap.
60 7", 55, from Απολλο.


470


AN UNIDENTIFIED COMEDY


CLEAENETUS

. ' Ah, well, long since
We planned it. Moschion has now the maid to wife.
| «0 He took her voluntarily, was not compelled.
We thought that you’d be vexed on hearing this, but

ou

ie proved yourself a gentleman. We're fortunate.
Why need we bawl ?


LACHES
What’s that you say?
CLEAENETUS
Just as I say.
LACHES
Did you not first to Chaereas betroth your child ?
CLEAENETUS


Not so, by Zeus.
LACHES
What's that? If not to Chaereas,
To whom ?
CLEAENETUS
It’s very laughable—did you not hear ?—
To your own boy.
LACHES
What’s that you say ?
CLEAENETUS
Yes, by the gods,
And, what is more, she’s had a child by him.
LACHES
What’s that ?
By Moschion? O greatly honoured deities !
High-handed business this !
CLEAENETUS
Apollo! Are you sane?
I praised you all too soon, it seems.


471


MENANDER

πρωΐ γέ σ᾽, ws ἔοικ᾽, ἐπήνεσ᾽. (Aa.) ovd'é ἐν!

ὁ Χαιρέας ἄρ᾽ ἠδίκηται φίλτατος;
(Κλε.) τί γὰρ ἠδίκηται Χαιρέας; (Λα.) οὐθέν; τί οὗν"

ἐβόα, πορευθ' εὶς" δεῦρ᾽; (Κλε.) ἴσως ἐβούλετο---

(Aa.)6 65 ἐβούλετ᾽; em’ éu'é ταῦτα συνετάξασθ᾽ apa.

ὦ Τῇ. (Κλε.) τί ποίνεῖς"!; (Aa.) οὐθέν" ἄλλ᾽

ὅμως ἔα
δὶς ἢ τρὶς avax'payeiv με, πρὸς τῆς ᾿Εστίϊας",
68 .


(Also possibly from this Comedy)


921 Καὶ ὦ Λάχης, Λάχης"


61 οὐδὲ ἕν, Καὶ2, J? confirms.

66 ποιεῖς, Καὶ 5. jm at ater

68 Perhaps suppl. (cf. ne in 1. 67) "pds τῆς ᾿Αφροδίτης, πρὸς
θεῶν Γενετυλλίδων."}

1 From a scene in trochaic verse,


472


AN UNIDENTIFIED COMEDY


LACHES "
In not one thing
Has this our dearest Chaereas then suffered wrong ?
CLEAENETUS
Why, no, for how has Chaereas been wronged ?
LACHES
In naught ?
Why, then, did he come here and shout ?
CLEAENETUS
Perhaps he wished—


LACHES
Wished it? Then you against me have combined in
this.
O Earth!
CLEAENETUS
What are you up to?
LACHES


Nothing. None the less
Permit me two or three good bawls. ’Fore Hestia!
(‘Fore Aphrodite! ’Fore the Goddesses of Birth !)


(Possibly belonging to this play the following fragment)
Laches, Laches


wie), ye, ° 9) Verge’ ier 6 Me eo. rey vee wh ee te) Le ee


473


ye Mes ye τὴ j ) Ὗ
agit as ἰὴ nf ΤῊΝ
mache Siri | en Or ia
we ἌΜΑ ΔῸΣ
+ ou catia ΤΟ ἢ gn ae
Ww ae eeu pe ways
Fes dre Ψ ἌΣ
WWudde has sagt sare oi RING
Fave ar)
WHOA!


ΩΣ a MR ΧῊ


cb on te


ΤΟ ΝΥ πῆ ste 4
"ἢν ον


᾿
᾿


weetwalad ul tomehty al


ἊΣ Ay


ἢ ΘΕ τὰν 3


SELECTIONS FROM UNIDENTIFIED
MINOR FRAGMENTS


INTRODUCTION


About six hundred fragments, varying in length
from one word te some eighteen verses, from plays
whose titles are not known, are handed down in
citations from antiquity. Of these some fifty are
attributed with doubt to Menander.

The fragments (about 290 1) selected for this
volume cover, it is believed, what will be most
useful, by way of supplement to the material pre-
served from identified plays, in forming an estimate
of Menander.

For convenience of identification the numbering
given by Kock (Comicorum Atticorum Fragmenta,
Vol. III.) is retained.

The selections illustrate the quotable, sententious
character of Menander’s writing, and often throw
light upon some detail of Greek life. Detached
sentiments, however, may often be misleading, and
only the missing context would show whether the
thought was mock-sententious or to be taken seriously.
Obviously many sentiments are not to be ascribed
to the author himself; but, on the other hand,
lofty thoughts put, for example, in a slave’s mouth,
may well represent Menander’s own attitude towards
the best ethical sentiment current in the Athens


' Fragments now identified as belonging to the newly
discovered plays are included in their proper place.


476


INTRODUCTION


of his day. The tragic colouring of certain passages,
which older commentators found difficulty in re-
conciling with genuine Menandrean Comedy, is
abundantly justified now that we have connected
scenes in the approximately complete plays of the
Cairo papyrus.

The text, with exceptions noted, is based upon the
editions of Kock and Meineke, to which the reader
is referred for further critical notes.

Meineke adds, with hesitation, under the name
of Menander seven hundred and fifty-eight gnomic
lines arranged in alphabetical order. These are
of mixed or doubtful provenance.


477


531 Καὶ


on


10


532 K


SELECTIONS FROM UNIDENTIFIED
MINOR FRAGMENTS


εἰ γὰρ ἐγένου σύ, τρόφιμε, τῶν πάντων μονος,
ὅτ᾽ ἔτικτεν ἡ μήτηρ σ᾽, ἐφ᾽ ᾧ τε διατελεῖν
πράττων ἃ βούλει καὶ διευτυχεῖν ἀεί,

καὶ τοῦτο τῶν θεῶν τις ὡμολόγησ ἕ σοι,

ὀρθῶς ἀ ἀγανακτεῖς" ἔστι γάρ σ᾽ ἐψευσμένος
ἄτοπόν τε πεπόηκ᾽ τ ΕΟ, ἐπὶ τοῖς αὐτοῖς νόμοις
ἐφ᾽ οἷσπερ ἡμεῖς ἔσπασας τὸν ἀέρα

τὸν κοινόν, ἵνα σοι καὶ τραγικώτερον λαλῶ,
οἰστέον ἄμεινον ταῦτα καὶ λογιστέον.

τὸ δὲ κεφάλαιον τῶν λόγων, ἄνθρωπος εἰ,

οὗ μεταβολὴν θᾶττον πρὸς ὕψος καὶ πάλιν
ταπεινότητα ζῷον οὐθὲν λαμβάνει.

καὶ μάλα δικαίως" ἀσθενέστατον γὰρ ὃν
φύσει μεγίστοις οἰκονομεῖται πράγμασιν,
ὅταν πέσῃ δέ, πλεῖστα συντρίβει καλά.

σὺ δ᾽ οὔθ᾽ ὑπερβάλλοντα, τρόφιμ᾽, ἀπώλεσας
ἀγαθά, τὰ νυνί T ἔστι μέτριά σοι κακά.

ὥστ᾽ ἀνὰ μέσον που καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν δὴ φέρε.


καὶ τοῦτον ἡμᾶς τὸν τρόπον γαμεῖν ἔδει
ἅπαντας, ὧ Ζεῦ σῶτερ, ὡς ὠνούμεθα. Ἶ
οὐκ ἐξετάζειν μὲν. τὰ μηθὲν" χρήσιμα,
τίς ἣν ὁ πάππος ἧς γαμεῖ, τήθη δὲ τίς,


1 ὠνούμεθα. Hirschig. / ὠνήμεθα, MS.
2 μηθέν, MSS.


478


SELECTIONS FROM UNIDENTIFIED
MINOR FRAGMENTS


The Common Lot.


If you, young master, when your mother gave you
birth, were born the only one of all mortals who
could do forever what you please and always be
prosperous, and if some one of the gods made with
you this agreement, you do well to be indignant ; for
he has played you false and done a monstrous thing.
But if you, under just the same conditions as all of
us, breathe this common air of heaven—to employ a
phrase that rather smacks of tragedy—then you must
bear this better ; you must use your reason. Nay, to
sum up the whole argument, you are a human being,
than which no living creature suffers more sudden
change—now to high estate and then again to
humiliation. And very justly. For, although by
nature it’s exceeding weak, it is steward over vast
affairs and, whenever it has a fall, brings down with
it very many noble things. But you, young master,
have not lost blessings that exceed all measure, and
these your present ills are of the average kind. In
the future, therefore, strike an average somehow and
endure.

The Matrimonial Market.

We ought to do our marrying—yes, all of us, by
Zeus the saviour—as we do our shopping. We should
not make scrutiny of useless details—‘“‘ Who was the
grandfather of the girl one is to marry ; who was her


479


ee a


MENANDER


5 τὸν δὲ τρόπον αὐτῆς τῆς γαμουμένης, μεθ᾽ ἧς
βιώσεται, μήτ᾽ ἐξετάξειν ' μήτ᾽ ἰδεῖν"
οὐδ᾽ 5 ἐπὶ τράπεζαν μὲν φέρειν τὴν προῖχ᾽ , ἵνα
εἰ τἀργύριον καλόν ἐστι δοκιμαστὴς ion,
ὃ πέντε μῆνας ἔνδον ov γενήσεται,
10 τῆς διὰ βίου δ᾽ ἔνδον καθεδουμένης a ἀεὶ
μὴ δοκιμάσαντα μηδέν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰκῆ λαβεῖν
ἀγνώμον᾽, ὀργίλην, χαλεπήν, ἐὰν τύχῃ,
λάλον.
περιάξω τὴν ἐμαυτοῦ θυγατέρα
τὴν πόλιν ὅλην" οἱ βουλόμενοι ταύτην λαβεῖν
15 λαλεῖτε, προσκοπεῖσθε πηλίκον. κακὸν
λήψεσθ'' ἀνάγκη γὰρ γυναῖκ᾽ εἶναι κακόν,
ἀλλ᾽ εὐτυχής ἐσθ᾽ ὁ μετριώτατον λαβών.


533 K ἀπολεῖ pe τὸ γένος. μὴ λέγ᾽, εἰ φιλεῖς ἐ ἐμέ,
μῆτερ, ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστῳ τὸ γένος. οἷς ἂν τῇ φύσει
ἀγαθὸν ὑ ὑπάρχῃ μηδὲν οἰκεῖον προσόν,
ἐκεῖσε καταφεύγουσιν, εἰς τὰ μνήματα
καὶ τὸ γένος," ἀριθμοῦσίν τε τοὺς πάππους ὅσοι"
οὐδὲν δ᾽ ἔχουσι πλεῖον, οὐδ᾽ ἐρεῖς ὅτῳ
οὐκ εἰσὶ πάπποι; πῶς yap ἐγένοντ᾽ ἄν ποτε;
+ μὴ λέγειν δ᾽ ἔχουσι τούτους διά τινα
τόπου μεταβολὴν ἢ ἢ φίλων ἐρημίαν,
10 τί τῶν λεγόντων εἰσὶ δυσγενέστεροι;
os ἂν εὖ γεγονὼς ἢ τῇ φύσει πρὸς τἀγαθά,
κἂν Αἰθίοψ ἢ, μῆτερ, ἐστὶν εὐγενής.
Σκύθης τις; ὄλεθρος" ὁ δ᾽ ᾿Ανάχαρσις οὐ Σκύθης;
1 ἐξετάζειν, Bentley. / ἐξετάσαι, MS.
ἢ οὐδ᾽, Hirschig. / aaa’, MS.
δ In v. 5 note the ‘‘forbidden” combination: —¥ ¥ YY —
but cf. Verse of Greek Comedy, White, 165. / ? omit καὶ and


read τὸ γένος τ᾽.
4 οἱ, Bothe, or Salmas (see Kock). { εἰ, MS.


480


σι


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


grandmother ?”’ while failing either to examine or
observe the character of the woman herself with
whom as wife one is to live. Nor, in order that an
assayer may test, to see if it is good, the money
which will not remain five months in the house,
should a man carry the dowry to a bank, while he
fails to appraise a single quality of her who is to be
for life encamped forever in the home, but takes
haphazard a woman who is inconsiderate, irritable,
harsh—perhaps a chatterbox besides.

I will take my own daughter the rounds of the
whole city: “You who are inclined to take her,
chat with her; observe for yourselves beforehand
how great an evil you'll receive.” ! For a woman is
necessarily an evil, but he that gets the most toler-
able one is lucky.


The Man’s the Gond for @ that !


This “ pedigree’”’ will kill me, mother. Don’t insist,

If you love me, on “ pedigree’ at every word.

Whoever by inherent nature have no worth

These all in this take refuge—in their monuments

And pedigrees ; of grandsires reel you off their list

And then have not a thing the more. Nor will you
claim

That there’s a man alive who has no father’s sire.

For, come now, tell me this: How else could he be
born ?

But those, who by some shift of home or lack of friends

Can mention none, are they for this more lowly born

Than those that can? The man whose natural bent
is good,

He, mother, he, though Aethiop, is nobly born.

“A Scyth,” you say? Pest! Anacharsis was a Scyth!

1 i.e. ‘caveat emptor /”


481


534 K


10


10


536 K


MENANDER


ἅπαντα τὰ ζῷ᾽ ἐστὶ μακαριώτατα

καὶ νοῦν ἔχοντα μᾶλλον ἀνθρώπου πολύ.
τὸν ὄνον ὁρᾶν ἔξεστι πρῶτα τουτονί,
οὗτος κακοδαίμων ἐ ἐστὶν ὁμολογουμένως"
τούτῳ κακὸν Ov αὑτὸν οὐδὲν γίνεται,

ἃ δ᾽ ᾿ἡ φύσις δέδωκεν αὐτῷ ταῦτ᾽ ἔχει.
ἡμεῖς δὲ χωρὶς τῶν ) ἀναγκαίων κακῶν
αὐτοὶ παρ᾽ αὑτῶν ἕτερα προσπορίζομεν.
λυπούμεθ᾽ ἂν πτάρῃ τις, ἂν εἴπη κακῶς
Ὀργίζομεθ᾽, ἂν ἴδῃ τις ἐνύπνιον σφόδρα
φοβούμεθ᾽, ἂν γλαῦξ ἀνακράγῃ δεδοίκαμεν."
ἀγωνίαι, δόξαι, φιλοτιμίαι, νόμοι,
ἅπαντα ταῦτ᾽ ἐπίθετα τῇ φύσει κακά.


εἶτ᾽ οὐ δικαίως προσπεπατταλευμένον
γράφουσι τὸν Προμηθέα πρὸς ταῖς πέτραις,
καὶ γίνετ᾽ αὐτῷ “λαμπάς, ἄλλο δ᾽ οὐδὲ ἕν
ἀγαθόν; ὃ μισεῖν olw ἅπαντας τοὺς θεούς,
γυναῖκας ἔπλασεν, ὦ πολυτίμητοι θεοί,
ἔθνος μιαρόν. γαμεῖ τις ἀνθρώπων; γαμεῖ;
λάθριοι τὸ λοιπὸν ἄρ᾽ ἐπιθυμίαι κακαί,
γαμηλίῳ λέχει τε μοιχὸς ἐντρυφῶν,

καὶ φαρμακεῖαι, καὶ νόσων χαλεπώτατος
φθόνος, μεθ᾽ οὗ ζῆ πάντα τὸν βίον γυνή.


μὰ τὴν. ᾿Αθηνᾶν, ἄνδρες, εἰκόν᾽ οὐκ ἔχω

εὑρεῖν ὁμοίαν τῷ γεγονότι πράγματι,

ζητῶν πρὸς ἐμαυτὸν τί ταχέως ἀπολλύει.
1 Lines 9-11 [ J] Kock,


482


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


No such Ass as Man}


All living beings are most blessed and are possessed
of sense much more than man. [or example, take
this jackass here. His lot is luckless, as is generally
agreed. For him no evils come through himself, but
he has only those which Nature has imposed upon him.
Whereas we, apart from necessary evils, ourselves
through ourselves contrive others in addition. Let
someone sneeze and we're perturbed; let someone
revile us and we’re vexed; if someone sees a vision
we are greatly frightened; hoots an owl, we are
filled with fear. Contentions, reputations, ambitious
rivalries, and laws—these evils have all been added
to those that Nature gives.


Inevitable Eve.


Now is it not just that they depict Prometheus
riveted fast upon the crags, and that he has a torch-
race in his honour, but not one single benefit besides ?
He moulded women, O ye right reverend gods !—an
abominable caste, hated of all the gods, methinks.
Is some man bent on marrying? On marrying? In
the sequel evil passions lurk unseen—a paramour
who wantons in the marriage-bed ; and poisons; and
envy, most grim of all diseases—all these are lurking
for him with whom a woman is to live his whole life
through.

Ut vidi, ut peru!”

By Athena, gentlemen, I cannot hit upon a figure
that will match what has actually occurred, as | turn
over with myself what brings me swift to ruin. For

1 ef. Lucian, Gallus, 27, for a comparative study of various
avatars made by the Pythagoras-Cock.


483
iy


538 K


MENANDER


στρόβιλος ἐν ὅσῳ συστρέφεται, προσέρχεται,
προσέβαλεν, ἐξέρριψεν, αἰὼν γίνεται.

ἀλλ᾽ ἐν πελάγει, συγκλυσμός" ἀναπνοὴν ἔχει

FF Ζεῦ σῶτερ᾽ εἰπεῖν “" ᾿ἀντέχου τῶν σχοινίων,"
ἑτέραν περιμεῖναι χἀτέραν τρικυμίαν,

ναυαγίου τ᾽ ἂν ἐπιλάβοι᾽ ; ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἅπαξ
ἁψάμενός εἰμι καὶ φιλήσας ἐν βυθῷ.


ὁ μὲν "Erixappos τοὺς θεοὺς εἶναι λέγει
ἀνέμους, ὕδωρ, γῆν, ἥλιον, πῦρ, ἀστέρας.
ἐγὼ δ᾽ ὑπέλαβον χρησίμους εἶναι θεοὺς
τἀργύριον ἡμῖν καὶ τὸ χρυσίον." aes
ἱδρυσάμενος τούτους γὰρ εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν
εὖξαι: τί βούλει; πάντα σοι γενήσεται,
ἀγρός, οἰκίαι, θεράποντες, ἀργυρώματα,
φίλοι, δικασταΐ, μάρτυρες. μόνον δίδου"
αὐτοὺς γὰρ ἕξεις τοὺς θεοὺς ὑπηρέτας.


«“ > / / \ Ὁ“ x 3
ὅταν εἰδέναι θέλῃς σεαυτὸν ὅστις εἶ,
ΝΜ > \ / so, -#e e -“
ἔμβλεψον εἰς τὰ μνήμαθ᾽ ὡς ὁδοιπορεῖς.

nr -“ 4
ἔνταῦθ᾽ ἔνεστ᾽ ὀστὰ τε Kai κούφη κόνις
ἀνδρῶν βασιλέων καὶ τυράννων καὶ σοφῶν
καὶ μέγα φρονούντων ἐπὶ γένει καὶ χρήμασιν
αὑτῶν τε δόξῃ κἀπὶ κάλλει “σωμάτων.
κατ * οὐδὲν αὐτοῖς ὁ τῶνδ᾽ ἐπήρκεσεν χρόνον."
κοινὸν τὸν ἅδην ἔ ἔσχον οἱ πάντες βροτοί.
πρὸς ταῦθ᾽ ὁρῶν γίνωσκε σαυτὸν ὅστις el.


1 B. add. μόνους.

* nat’, K./ καί, MS. {ἀλλ᾽, Meineke.

αὐτοῖς, Kock and Meineke ὃ / αὑτῶν, MS.
χρόνον, Meineke? ‘‘cum Grotio.” / χρόνος, MS.


~~ @


484


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


instance, a cyclone, while it gathers strength, comes
on ; it strikes; whirls off; an age goes by. Or on
the sea when billows clash: there’s breathing space
to cry “Zeus Saviour!” “Cling to the rigging!”
or to await a second and again a triple surge, and on
a piece of wreckage you may lay hold. But here no
sooner have I seized and kissed than I’m in an abyss !


The Almighty Dollar.


Epicharmus claims as gods Winds, Water, Earth,
Sun, Fire, and Stars, whereas it were my thought that
Gold and Silver are for us the useful gods. Just
dedicate their shrines within your house and say your
prayers. What do you wish for? All things shall
be yours: estate and houses, servants, silver-plate,
friends, jurymen, and witnesses. Pay! pay! that’s
all. For you will have the gods themselves as
adjutants.


Know Thyself.


When thou wouldst know thyself and who thou
art, look on the grave-stones as thou journeyest by.
There are the bones and unsubstantial dust of men
who once were kings, of despots, of the wise, of men
who plumed themselves on noble birth, on wealth,
and on their fame and bodies beautiful.! Yet none
of these things availed them aught against Time.
Hades is the common lot of mortals all. Look thou
on these and know thyself the man thou art.?


1 cf. Plato, Republic, 618 a—n.
2 For a fine verse translation see J, A. Symonds, Greek
Poets, chap, xix,


485


539 K


540 K


MENANDER


ὁ πάντα βουληθεὶς ἂν ἄνθρωπος πονεῖν

πᾶν ἂν γένοιτο: πλούσιος τρόπον τινά:
πάλιν φιλόσοφός τινι, μαθήσει χρώμενος"

τὸ σῶμ᾽ ὑγιαίνει τινὰ δίαιταν προσφέρων.
πλὴν ἕν τι τῶν πάντων ἀδύνατον ἣν ἄρα
εὑρεῖν, δι᾽ οὗ τρόπου τις οὐ λυπήσεται.

οὐ γὰρ τὸ μὴ πράττειν κατὰ νοῦν ἔχει μόνον
λύπην, παρέχει δὲ φροντίδας καὶ τἀγαθά.


μειράκιον, οὔ μοι κατανοεῖν δοκεῖς ὅτι

ὑπὸ τῆς ἰδίας ἕκαστα κακίας σήπεται,

καὶ πᾶν τὸ ᾿λυμαινόμενόν ἐστιν ἔνδοθεν."

οἷον ὁ μὲν ἰός, ἂν σκοπῇς, τὸ σιδήριον,
τὸ δ᾽ ἱμάτιον οἱ σῆτες, ὁ δὲ Opi τὸ ξύλον.

ὃ δὲ 2 τὸ κάκιστον τῶν κακῶν πάντων, φθόνος
φθισικὸν πεπόηκε καὶ ποήσει καὶ ποεῖ,
ψυχῆς πονηρᾶς δυσσεβὴς παράστασις.


Mein. XIV and 541 Καὶ


(M. XIV)


541K.


ἄξιον yap θαύματος

τὸ πάθος ἔρωτος ὁπόθεν ἀρχὴν λαμβάνει.

(Reconstructed from Plut. ‘‘ Fragm.” vol. v, p. 565,

Wyttenbach.)
/ / /

ον νιν νιν νος τίνι δεδούλωνταί ποτε;
Μ A “-“ εἶ Ε] “ 7ὔ Bal
ὄψει; φλύαρος" τῆς γὰρ αὐτῆς πάντες ἂν
ἤρων' κρίσιν γὰρ᾽ τὸ βλέπειν ἴ ἰσὴν ἔχει.
ἀλλ᾽ ἡδονή τις τοὺς ἐρῶντας ἐπάγεται
συνουσίας; πῶς οὖν ἕτερος ταύτην ἔχων
οὐδὲν πέπονθεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀπῆλθε καταγελῶν,
ἕτερος δ᾽ ἀπόλωλε; καιρός ἐστιν ἡ νόσος
ψυχῆς, ὁ πληγεὶς δ᾽ εἴσω δὴ τιτρώσκεται.

1 πᾶν τὸ λυμαινόμενόν ἐστιν ἔνδοθεν, Dobree. [πάντα τὰ λυ-


μαινόμεν᾽ ἔνδοθέν ἐστιν, MS.
2 ὃ δὲ, ΜΗ, | σὲ δὲ, Kock, from Dobree.


486


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


* Man is born to trouble.”

The man who has the will to undergo all labour
may win to every goal; he is in a fashion rich; or,
by virtue of some knowledge is a philosopher; or by
some regimen he is sound of body—yet, when all’s
said and done, one thing he cannot find—the way
through which one may shun sorrow. For ’tis not
merely failure to fare as you desire that causeth
grief, but even blessings bring entail of trouble.


Defilement cometh from within.
Young man, methinks it has not dawned upon your
mind
That everything is wasted by its native ill,
That all that brings defilement cometh from within.!
For instance, if you'll notice, rust in iron tools ;
In over-cloak the moths; the woodworm in the wood ;
And then, again, there’s envy, worst of evils all,
The impious propensity of evil souls,
Which hath consumed, consumes, and ever shall
consume.


« Tell me where is Fancy bred.”
It is worth our while

To wonder where Love’s dealings have their origin.
er. ar ae . To what then is a man enslaved ?
A face? That's nonsense! All would love the self-

same girl,
Their eyes would be for them the same criterion.
Some pleasure in companionship entices love ὃ
Why, then, in spite of this does one man suffer naught,
But off he goes and mocks, while this man’s done for

quite ἢ
Soul-sickness is occasion, and the stricken man,
We must conclude, is wounded by an inward blow.


1 From Plato, Republic, 609; cf. St. Matt. xv. 11.
487


542 K


on


543 Καὶ


545 Καὶ


MENANDER


” \ > lal δ. ἃ / 1 ’ /
εἴπερ TOV ἀδικοῦντ᾽ ἀσμένως ) ἠμύνετο
lal ,

ἕκαστος ἡμῶν Kal συνηγωνίζετο

ἴσως νομίζων ἴδιον εἶναι τὸ γεγονὸς

» / \ / 5 al a
ἀδίκημα, Kal συνέπραττον ἀλληλοῖς πικρῶς,

a \ “

οὐκ ἂν ἐπὶ πλεῖον τὸ κακὸν ἡμῖν ηὔξετο
τὸ τῶν πονηρῶν, ἀλλὰ παρατηρούμενοι
καὶ τυγχάνοντες ἧς ἔδει τιμωρίας

” 4 ' 3 ΣᾺ Φ bal “4
ἤτοι σπάνιοι σφόδρ᾽ ἂν ἦσαν ἢ πεπαυμένοι.


Ἕ -“ ᾽
Δέρκιππε καὶ Μνήσιππε, τοῖς εἰρημένοις
lal id / »
ἡμῶν ὑπό τινος ἢ πεπονθόσιν κακῶς
a \ » e \ /
ἔστιν καταφυγὴ πᾶσιν, οἱ χρηστοὶ φίλοι.
\ \ > ὃ / θ᾽ 2 v \ ’
καὶ γὰρ ἀποδύρασθ᾽ 5 ἔστι μὴ γελώμενον,
la) » (x8 / ’ὔ 4 lol
Kal συναγανακτοῦνθ᾽ ὁπόταν οἰκείως ὁρᾷ
ev ΄ lal \ / /
ἕκαστος αὑτῷ TOV παρόντα, παύεται
re \ / fel ΄“
τοῦτον μάλιστα τὸν χρόνον τοῦ δυσφορεῖν.


(Reconstructed, cf. Lucian, ‘* Pseudol.” 4 and *‘ De Con-
scribend. Hist.’’ 41.)
"EXeyxos εἰμ᾽ ἐγώ,
΄ ΄, > , \ ,
ὁ φίλος ᾿Αληθείᾳ τε καὶ ἸΪαρρησίᾳ
/ / /
᾿Βλευθερίᾳ τε (συγγενέστατος) θεός,
μόνοισιν ἐχθρὸς τῶν βροτῶν τοῖς τὴν ἐμὴν
al , / ᾽ ᾽ \ \ a
γλῶτταν δεδιόσι, πάντα τ᾽ εἰδὼς Kal σαφῶς
διεξιὼν ὁπόσα σύνοιδ᾽ ὑμῖν (κακά,)
τὰ σῦκα σῦκα, τὴν σκάφην σκάφην λέγων.


σμενῶς, Grot. | ἀδικοῦντα μὲν ὡς, MS.


1 ὰ
2 ἀποδύρασθ᾽ ἔστι, L. Dindorf. / ἀποδύρασθαί τι, MS,


488


ee


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


The League to enforce Justice.


If each of us were glad to join the struggle and
to unite in exacting penalty from the _ offender,
deeming as equally his own the injustice that has
come to pass, and if we made common cause in the
bitter strife, the mischief of bad men would not wax
ever greater, but the wicked, held under close
surveillance and receiving their due punishment,
would be either very scarce or utterly suppressed.1


De Amicitia.?


Dercippus and Menippus, for ill-words or ill-treat-
ment suffered by any, one of us, for us all there is a
refuge, namely, in good friends. For it is possible to
take one’s fill of lamentation without meeting ridicule,
and then each one chiefly finds surcease from vexation
what time he sees a friend stand by him with
intimate sympathy.


A Spade a Spade !


Confutation * is my name, the friend of Truth and
Frankness, and a deity close akin to Freedom, an
enemy to those mortals only who fear my tongue,
and one who both knows all things and makes clear
all details, whatsoever evil of yours I know of. 1
call a fig a fig; a spade‘ a spade.


Wey. G79 BK.
εἰ πάντες ἐβοηθοῦμεν ἀλλήλοις ἀεί,
οὐδεὶς ἂν ὧν ἄνθρωπος ἐδεήθη τύχη».
“ΤῈ always all of us brought help to one another, no human
being would have needed Fortune’s aid.”
2 cf. 554, !
8 For the personification, ef. the deity ‘‘ Misapprehension ”
in the prologue to The Girl Who Gets Her Hair Cut Short.
* Literally : a scoop.


489


MENANDER


546 K τοὺς τῆς γαμετῆς ὅρους ὑπερβαίνεις, γύναι,
Α > / / A » "4
τὴν αὐλίαν: πέρας yap αὔλειος θύρα
ἐλευθέρᾳ γυναικὶ νενόμιστ᾽ οἰκίας"
τὸ δ᾽ ἐπιδιώκειν εἴς τε τὴν ὁδὸν τρέχειν,
= Μ / / > >. ἊΨ « ἠὃ 1
5 ἔτι λοιδορουμένην, κυνός ἐστ᾽ ἔργον, ‘Pddn.


547,548 K πάντες μὲν οἱ Θρᾷκες, μάλιστα δ᾽ οἱ Γέται
ἡμεῖς ἁπάντων--καὶ γὰρ αὐτὸς εὔχομαι
ἐκεῖθεν εἶναι τὸ γένος,---οὐ σφόδρ᾽ ἐγκρατεῖς
ἐσεῖς fotos Ute cet ede ee

- \ ς a ᾽ \ ? ’ Ἁ | ee APE
5 γαμεῖ yap ἡμῶν οὐδὲ els εἰ μὴ δέκ᾽ ὴ
ied Lal , ‘een / ,
ἕνδεκα γυναῖκας, δώδεκ᾽ ἢ πλείους τινές.
ἂν τέτταρας δ᾽ ἢ πέντε γεγαμηκώς τις ἢ,"
καταστροφὴ γῆς, ἀνυμέναιος, ἄθλιος,
ἄνυμφος οὗτος ἐπικαλεῖτ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἐκεῖ.


549 Καὶ ἄνθρωπος ὧν μηδέποτε τὴν ἀλυπίαν
» a \ Lal \ \ ’
αἰτοῦ παρὰ θεῶν, ἀλλὰ τὴν μακροθυμίαν.
“ \ ” \ / Ψ /
ὅταν yap ἄλυπος διὰ τέλους εἶναι θέλῃς,
my Α , > 4 , a A ΄ δ) ΄
ἢ δεῖ θεόν σ᾽ εἶναί tw’ ἢ τάχα δὴ νεκρόν.
5 παρηγύρει δὲ τὰ κακὰ bv ἑτέρων κακῶν.


Supplementum Comicum, Demianczuk, Ρ. 60, and 550, 551 K.


ὡς τοῖσιν εὖ φρονοῦσι σύμμαχος τύχη" "
ἅπαντι δαίμων ἀνδρὶ συμπαρίσταται


1 Meineke refers this fragm. to the Ἱέρεια, q.v.

2 τις ἢ, K./ τύχῃ, MS.

3. καταστροφὴ γῆς, K. | καταστροφῆς τις, Tyrwhitt.

* Line | prefixed and lines 7-11 added to Kock’s fragments,


490


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


Women should be neither seen nor heard.


You re overstepping, wife, a married woman's bounds—
The street-door of the peristyle! For free-born dame
The street-door is the limit by convention fixed.
This chasing and this running out upon the street,
Your billingsgate still snapping, Rhode,} is for dogs.


Race-Swcide in Thrace.


All Thracians, and we Getae most especially—
(Yes “ we,’ I say, for I myself claim origin
From parts out there)—are not so very self-restrained.


For not a single one among us marries, save

He takes wives ten or else eleven—some indeed
Take twelve or more. Or has he wed but four or five
He then is called “a bouleversement of the state,”
Unmarried, feckless, bachelor,” by folks out there.


“7 am the Captain of my Soul.” —HENLEy.


Being a man ne’er ask the gods for life set free
From grief, but ask for courage that endureth long.
For if to shun all grief from first to last thou’rt fain
Thou must become a god or else perchance a corpse!
Looking on ills of others, solace take in thine.


God is good.
As for the righteous-minded, Fortune is ally.
By every one of us at birth® forthwith there stands
1 Possibly the same Rhode as in The Priestess, see above,
p- 365.
2 Or, by other readings, g.v., translate :


** And should one, having wed but four
Or five, meet some catastrophe, he then is called... .”
3 From Plato, Republic, 620 p.


491


MENANDER


/ -“
εὐθὺς γενομένῳ μυσταγωγὸς τοῦ βίου
/
ἀγαθός: κακὸν yap δαίμον᾽ οὐ νομιστέον
5 εἶναι, βίον βλάπτοντα θνητόν,; οὐδ᾽ ἔχειν
/ [2 DF 43 \ -, \ ,
κακίαν ἅπαντα δ᾽ ἀγαθὸν εἶναι τὸν θεόν.
ἀλλ᾽ οἱ γενόμενοι τοῖς τρόποις αὐτοὶ κακοί,
7ὕ x9 > \ an , ,
πολλὴν T " ἐπιπλοκὴν τοῦ βίου πεποημένοι
a /
ἢ 5 πάντα τὴν abtov' ἀβουλίαν δία
/ ’ὔ ᾽
10 τρίψαντες," ἀποφαίνουσι δαίμον᾽ αἴτιον
a /
Kal κακὸν ἐκεῖνόν φασιν αὐτοὶ γεγονότες.


552 Καὶ ὦ γῆρας, ἐχθρὸν σωμάτων ἀνθρωπίνων,
ἅπαντα συλῶν τὰ καλὰ τῆς εὐμορφίας,
καὶ μεταχαράττον τὴν μὲν ἀνδρίαν μελῶν
εἰς τἀπρεπές, τὸ δὲ τάχος εἰς ὄκνον πολύν.


- ΄ x\ a , / »
593 K €av πονηροῦ γείτονος γείτων Eon,
“ \ tal -“

πάντως παθεῖν πονηρὸν ἢ μαθεῖν σε δεῖ.
>\ b a δὲ 6 , ΄, Μ
ἐὰν ἀγαθοῦ δὲ γείτονος γείτων eon,
e / > \ \ /
ὡς προσδιδάσκεις ἀγαθὰ καὶ προσμανθάνεις.


/ fal “Ὁ
554 Καὶ οὐκ ἐκ πότων καὶ τῆς καθ᾽ ἡμέραν τρυφῆς
ζητοῦμεν ᾧ πιστεύσομεν τὰ τοῦ βίου,
\ »
πάτερ; οὐ περιττὸν οἴετ᾽ ἐξευρηκέναι
» \ “ a » , ΄
ἀγαθὸν ἕκαστος, ἂν ἔχῃ φίλου σκιάν;


1 θνητόν, MS. | χρηστόν, Kock, who also omits οὐδ᾽ exe, |
κακίαν. 2 +’, Capps. / 8’, MS.

5. ἢ, Capps. / εἰ, MS. / cal, Demianczuk,

* αὑτῶν, Demianczuk. / ἑαυτῶν, MS, // δία, Capps. / ἐκ-, MS,

° τρίψαντες, Capps./ ἐκτριψ. MS, δ δὲ, Rutger add,


492


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


A spirit guide, beneficent, to lead us through

Life’s mysteries. For we are not to think of this

As evil Genius to harm our mortal life,

Nor fraught with wickedness, but hold that God is
good !

In everything. Yet those who turn out base them-
selves

In character and gender great complexity

Of life, or ruin all things by their heedlessness,

Declare and hold divinity responsible

And claim that he is base, becoming such themselves.


«Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
And delves the parallels in beauty’s brow.”
Suaks., Sonnet LX.
Old age, thou enemy of mortal frames, ‘tis thou
Dost plunder all that’s fair from shapes of loveliness,
Dost grave a new unseemliness on manly limbs,
And it is thou dost make the swift full hesitant.


De Propinqutate.

If you’re a neighbour to a neighbour who is bad
you must in everyway learn or suffer what is bad.?
But if you are neighbour to a neighbour who is
good, more and more good recipypeal you both teach
and learn.

De Amicitia.*

In the midst of our daily revelling and drink, do
we not, father, seek for someone to whom we may
confide our life’s affairs? Does not each man think
that he has discovered some unusual blessing if he
gains even the semblance of a friend ?

1 From Plato, Republic, 37 9B.
2 See Plato, Aol. 25 ο. 5. of. 543 above.
493


555 K


556 Καὶ


557 K


559 K


560 K


561 K


MENANDER


ὀχληρὸν ὁ χρόνος ὁ πολύς. ὦ γῆρας βαρύ,
ὡς οὐδὲν ἀγαθόν, δυσχερῆ δὲ πόλλ᾽ ἔχεις
τοῖς ζῶσι καὶ λυπηρά. πάντες εἰς σὲ δὲ
ἐλθεῖν ὅμως εὐχόμεθα καὶ σπουδάζομεν.


ἔνεγκ᾽ ἀτυχίαν καὶ βχάβην εὐσχημόνως.

τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν ἀνδρὸς νοῦν ἔχοντος, οὐκ ἐὰν}
ἀνασπάσας τις τὰς ; ὀφρῦς οἴμοι. λαλῇ,

ἀλλ᾽ ὃς τά γ᾽ αὑτοῦ πράγματ᾽ ἐγκρατῶς φέρει.


>

πλεονεξία μέγιστον ἀνθρώποις κακόν'

e \ , “- rn ,
οἱ γὰρ θέλοντες προσλαβεῖν τὰ τῶν πέλας
> / / ,
ἀποτυγχάνουσι πολλάκις νικώμενοι,

\ >» T, Lal > /
τὰ δ᾽ ἴδια προστιθέασι τοῖς ἀλλοτρίοις.


λύπης ἰατρός " ἐστιν ἀνθρώποις λόγος"
ψυχῆς γὰρ οὗτος μόνος ἔχει θελκτήρια"
λέγουσι δ᾽ αὐτὸν οἱ πάλαι σοφώτατοι
ἀστεῖον εἶναι φάρμακον.


/ > , > > ,
θύων οὐδεπώποτ᾽ ηὐξάμην
ἐγὼ τὸ σῷζον τὴν ἐμὴν συνοικίαν,
2 \ ἔχ ΓΠῚ 3 > a - 7,
ἀλλὰ παρέλ' εὐπον" " οἰκετῶν εἰναι στάσιν
ἔνδον παρ᾽ αὑτῶν πρᾶγμα χρησιμώτατον.


τῆς σκιᾶς τὴν πορφύραν

πρῶτον ἐνυφαίνουσ᾽: εἶτα μετὰ τὴν πορφύραν

Lol » » ‘ ΄
τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν οὔτε λευκὸν οὔτε πορφύρα,
ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ αὐγὴ τῆς κροκῆς κεκραμένη.

1 ἐὰν, Meineke. / ἄνω, MS,

5 jarpés, as in Ar. Eccl, 363, Pl. 400, ef. below, fragm. 591
and 677.

3 The text and metre are confused. παρέλειπον, Meineke, /
παρέλιπον, MS, | ἀλλ᾽ <ov> παρέλιπον, Buecheler, / Punctua-
tion, Allinson,


494


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


De Senectute.


Life lengthened out is irksome. O burdensome
old age, how thou dost bring never a blessing but,
while life lasts, many an annoyance and sorrow! Yet
none the less we all pray and are eager to come to
thee.

Stoic Equipoise.
Hurts and misfortunes bear with grace and dignity.
That is the way of any man possess’d of sense,
Not his who jerks his eyebrow up and cries, “Ah me!”’
But his who bears his troubles with self-mastery.


Anti- Expansion.

In the front rank of man’s woes is grasping greed.
For they who are fain to annex their neighbours’
holdings frequently are defeated and fail, and to
their neighbours’ possessions contribute their own in
addition.

The spoken Word.

The spoken word is man’s physician in grief.
For this alone has soothing charms for the soul. And
the wisest men of olden times call this a dainty drug.


When making sacrifice I never prayed for my
whole household’s safety, but I used to leave that
out. It is a very useful thing to have indoors a
house-slaves’ wrangle self-engendered.


They first inweave the purple’s shading. Then
after the purple this next colour is neither white nor
purple, but as it were the tempered sheen of the
weft.


495


562 K


567 K


568 K


571 Καὶ


572 K


MENANDER


© mre Sh} oe a n> » »
"+ + ἡ πῶς δὴ τὸ τραῦμα τοῦτ᾽ ἔχεις;
»” lol \ “-“ >

“ μεσαγκύλῳ." “πῶς πρὸς θεῶν; " “ἐπὶ κλίμακα

Ν a > / »” b] \ \ [4
πρὸς τεῖχος ἀναβαίνων." ἐγὼ μὲν δεικνύω
> ὃ , e δὲ / > / 1
ἑσπουόδάκώς, οἱ δὲ πάλιν ἐπεμυκτήρισαν.


» / »
οἴμοι τάλας erie ποῦ ποθ᾽ ai φρένες
ἡμῶν ἐκεῖνον ἦσαν ἐν τῷ σώματι


» ¢ VA
TOV χρόνον, ὅτ᾽ οὐ ταῦτ᾽ ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖν ῃρούμεθα;


οἷος δὲ καὶ τὴν ὄψιν εἶναι φαίνεται
> ᾽ e fal / /
ab ov τοιοῦτος γέγονεν, οἷον θηρίον.
\ \ > a \ ‘ e a “
τὸ μηδὲν ἀδικεῖν καὶ καλοὺς ἡμᾶς ποεῖ.


xX ‘ lal IDA \ ΄ ΄
κἂν σφόδρα σαφῶς εἰδῇς τι, τὸν κρύπτοντά σε
μηδέποτ᾽ ἐλέγξῃς: δύσκολον τρᾷγμ᾽ ἐστὶ γὰρ
ἃ λανθάνειν τις βούλεται ταῦτ᾽ εἰδέναι.


ὅταν ἕτερός σοι μηδὲ ev τέλεον 3 διδῷ,
δέξαι τὸ μόριον: τοῦ λαβεῖν γὰρ μηδὲ ὃν
τὸ λαβεῖν ἔλαττον πλεῖον ἔσται σοι πολύ.


“ / μὰ > \ /
ὁταν TL πράττης ὅσιον, ἀγαθὴν ἐλπίδα
/ na an , “
πρόβαλλε σαυτῷ, τοῦτο γινώσκων ὅτι
La / \ \ Re Ὁ
τόλμῃ δικαίᾳ καὶ θεὸς συλλαμβάνει.

1 Refer to Colax, Cobet.
* τέλεον, Bentley, / πλέον, MS.
496


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


Miles Gloriosus.


“How, pray, did you get this wound?” ‘ From
a javelin.” ‘How, by the gods?’’ “ While scaling
the wall on a ladder.’ So I explain in all seriousness,
but they for reply turned up their noses.


Ah me, the wretched one that I am! Where,
pray, in what part of our body, were our senses at
that time when we made choice not of this but
of that?


Handsome is that Handsome does.


What a man he seems even to look at since he has
turned out to be the man he is! He looks like a
monster! To avoid all injustice actually makes us
handsome.


Let sleeping Dogs lie.
Even though you know something perfectly well,
never cross-question the man who would hide it from


you. For it’s an uneasy business, this knowing what
another would fain conceal.


Half a Loaf better than no Bread.


Whenever one offers you no one thing complete,
accept the fraction; for obtaining the lesser part
will be a great deal more for you than getting
nothing at all.


“ God helps those who help themselves.”


When what you do is righteous, hold good hope
before you as a shield, assured of this, that even God
lends a hand to honest boldness.


497


MENANDER


573 K ὀργῇ παραλογισμός ποτ᾽ οὐδεὶς φύεται"
αὕτη κρατεῖ νῦν' ἂν δὲ μικρὸν παρακμάσῃ,
/ , - ’ > /
κατόψεται τί μᾶλλόν ἐστι συμφέρον.


514 K εἰ καὶ σφόδρ᾽ ἀλγεῖς, μηδὲν ἠρεθισμένος
πράξῃς προπετῶς" ὀργῆς γὰρ ἀλογίστου κρατεῖν
ἐν ταῖς ταραχαῖς μάλιστα τὸν φρονοῦντα δεῖ.


575 K σὺ μὲν παραινεῖς ταῦθ᾽ ὁποῖά ' σοι πρέπει"
ἐμὲ δὲ ποεῖν τὸ καθῆκον οὐχ ὁ σὸς λόγος,
εὖ ἴσθ᾽ ἀκριβῶς, ὁ δ᾽ ἴδιος πείθει τρόπος.

576 and

577 K οὐδὲν διαβολῆς ἐστιν ἐπιπονώτερον"
τὴν ἐν ἑτέρῳ γὰρ κειμένην ἁμαρτίαν
δεῖ 5 μέμψιν ἰδίαν αὐτὸν ἐπάναγκες λαβεῖν.

5 ὅστις δὲ διαβολαῖσι πείθεται ταχύ,
ἤτοι πονηρὸς αὐτός ἐστι τοὺς τρόπους,
ἢ παντάπασι παιδαρίου γνώμην ἔχει.


578 K δεῖ τὸν πολιτῶν προστατεῖν αἱρούμενον
\ a / \ / > ; EL 4
τὴν TOD λόγου μὲν δύναμιν οὐκ ἐπίφθονον,
ἤθει δὲ χρηστῷ συγκεκραμένην ἔχειν.


ΝΞ ε a . , , ,
579 K ἡ νῦν ὑπό τινων χρηστότης καλουμένη
μεθῆκε τὸν ὅλον εἰς πονηρίαν βίον"
οὐδεὶς γὰρ ἀδικῶν τυγχάνει τιμωρίας.
1 ταῦθ᾽ ὁποῖα, Meineke. | ταῦτα ὅσα, MS.
4 δεῖ, Dindorf. ἀεί, ΜΗ, / εἰς, Salmas., Kock.
498


—_ =.


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


In the nature of things there is no way of cheating
by argument a burst of wrath. This at the moment
holds sway ; but when it is once past its fury, there
will appear what is more expedient.


Even if you're deeply g grieved do not when much
excited act hastily in any ything. For the wise man
ought above all, in the midst of trouble, to hold sway
over senseless wired


Now you are giving me such advice as it is right
you should, but chow this precisely: ‘tis not your
words but my own character that persuades me to do
my duty.

De Calumnia.


There’s naught more distressing than calumny ;
for you must necessarily take unto yourself as your
own fault the error inherent in another.

Now whosoever lightly yields assent to slander is
either bad himself in character or has outright the
judgment of a child.


The Leader.


The man elected as a leader of his fellow-citizens
should have that power of eloquence which does
not engender envy but is blended well with noble
character.


This present-day “ goodness,” so called by some,
abandons all the world to viciousness. For no one,
though he doeth wrong, is getting his just punish-
ment.


499


580 K


581 K


582 K


583 K


584 K


586 K


MENANDER


τί διακενῆς εἶ χρηστός; «εἰ yap>" ὁ δεσπότης
αὐτὸς ᾿ἀποβάλλει" πάντα, σὺ δὲ μὴ * λαμβάνεις,
σαυτὸν ἐπιτρίβεις, οὐκ ἐκεῖνον ὠφελεῖς.


ἐμοὶ πόλις ἐστὶ καὶ καταφυγὴ καὶ νομὸς
καὶ τοῦ δικαίου τοῦ T ἀδίκου παντὸς κριτὴς
ὁ δεσπότης. πρὸς τοῦτον ἕνα δεῖ ζῆν ἐμέ.


πατρῷ᾽ ἔχειν δεῖ τὸν καλῶς εὐδαίμονα'

\
τὰ μετὰ γυναικὸς δ᾽ εἰσιόντ᾽ εἰς οἰκίαν
οὔτ᾽ ἀσφαλῆ τὴν κτῆσιν οὔθ᾽ ἱλαρὰν ἔχει.


ὅταν πένης ὧν καὶ γαμεῖν τις ἑλόμενος
τὰ μετὰ γυναικὸς ἐπιδέχηται χρήματα,
αὑτὸν δίδωσιν, οὐκ ἐκείνην λαμβάνει.


δύ᾽ ἔσθ᾽ ἃ κρῖναι τὸν γαμεῖν μέλλοντα δεῖ,


ἤτοι προσηνῆ γ᾽ ὄψιν ἢ ἢ χρηστὸν τρόπον"
τὴν γὰρ ὁμόνοιαν τὴν πρὸς ἀλλήλους ποεῖ.


ὅστις γυναῖκ᾽ ἐπίκληρον ἐπιθυμεῖ λαβεῖν
πλουτοῦσαν, ἤτοι μῆνιν ἐκτίνει θεῶν,
ἢ βούλετ᾽ ἀτυχεῖν μακάριος καλούμενος.


αἰσχύνομαι τὸν πατέρα, Κλειτοφῶν, μόνον.
ἀντιβλέπειν ἐ ἐκεῖνον οὐ δυνήσομαι
ἀδικῶν, τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα ῥᾳδίως χειρώσομαι.
1 Jacobs add.
2 Allinson corr. metri causa ἀπολλύει of MSS.
3 μή, not οὐ, K.


4 See Epitrep. St. Pet. fragm. p. 24, for repetition of these
words in part.


500


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


Why are you a good servant all to no purpose?
If your master is throwing away everything and you
are not acquiring, you wear yourself out ; you don’t
~ help him.


For me my master is at once a city and place
of refuge and law and judge in everything of what
is right and wrong. With eyes on him alone I needs
must live.!

Patrimony v. Matrimony.

To be rightly happy a man must needs inherit
from his father. For the dower that enters the
house with a wife is a possession that brings neither
security nor charm.


Who gives the Groom away ?
Whenever one who is poor and who elects to
marry receives the dower along with the bride, he
does not take her, but gives himself away.


There are two things which the man intending
marriage ought to consider: whether her face is
winning at least or her disposition good. For these
engender mutual harmony.


The dour Dowry.

The man who would fain take to wife a wealthy
heiress is either paying off some score of the gods’
wrath or else he wishes to be luckless while hailed
as “lucky man.”’


I feel shame, Cleitophon, before my father only.
I shall not be able to look him in the face if I do
wrong, but all the rest I'll manage easily.
1 See Arbitrants, Act II, p. 25.
501


587 K


588 K


589 K


590 K


591 Καὶ


593 Καὶ


594 Καὶ


MENANDER


>
ὑπερήφανόν που γίνεθ᾽ ἡ λίαν τρυφή, -
ὅ τε πλοῦτος ἐξώκειλε τὸν κεκτημένον
> Ie 5 > > 9 pS! , om
εἰς ἕτερον ἦθος, οὐκ ἐν ᾧ TO πρόσθεν ἦν.


κρεῖττον γάρ ἐστιν, ἂν σκοπῇ τις κατὰ λόγον,
> lal
μὴ πόλλ᾽ ἀηδῶς, ὀλίγα δ᾽ ἡδέως ἔχειν,
’ > a x al Ld
πενίαν τ ἄλυπον μᾶλλον ἢ πλοῦτον πικρον.


Lal \ ,
ἄνευ κακῶν γὰρ οἰκίαν οἰκουμένην
> ” e “ » \ “ \ e ’
οὐκ ἔστιν εὑρεῖν, ἀλλὰ τοῖς μὲν ἡ τύχη
/ , , , - ’ e ,
τούτων δίδωσιν ἀφθονίαν, τοῖς δ᾽ οἱ τρόποι.


ὦ μεταβολαῖς χαίρουσα παντοίαις τύχη,
Ud » 2» ag? « x 2 \
σόν ἐστ᾽ ὄνειδος τοῦθ᾽, ὅταν τις WY ἀνὴρ
δίκαιος ἀδίκοις περιπέσῃ συμπτώμασιν.


a \ Ἃς lal / lal
τῷ μὲν TO σῶμα διατεθειμένῳ κακῶς
’ » ’ lal a \ 4
χρεία ot ἰατροῦ, τῷ δὲ τὴν ψυχὴν φίλου"
λύπην γὰρ εὔνους οἷδε θεραπεύειν λόγος.


> » >, wv > \ ’ fal ,
οὐκ ἔστ᾽ ἄπιστον οὐδὲν ἐν θνητῷ βίῳ,
οὐδ᾽ ἂν γένοιτο. πολλὰ ποικίλλει χρόνος
᾿ /
παράδοξα καὶ θαυμαστὰ καὶ ζώντων τρόποι.


ἀδύνατον ὡς ἔστιν τι σῶμα τῆς τύχης"
e \ / \ \ / \ “4
ὁ μὴ φέρων δὲ κατὰ φύσιν τὰ πράγματα
\ fa]
τύχην προσηγόρευσε TOV ἑαυτοῦ τρόπον.
1 See above, fragm. 559.
502


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


Excessive luxury becomes somehow overproud, and
wealth strands its possessor and leaves him with a
different character and not the man he was before.


For ‘tis better, if one considers in the light of
reason, not to possess much with discomfort, but little
with a relish, and painless poverty is preferable to
embittered wealth.


For ’tis impossible to find a dwelling where the
dwellers have no ills, but unstinted store of these
is bestowed on some by Fortune, and on some by
Character.


O Fortune, thou who takest delight in shifting
change of every sort, the reproach is thine, whenever
any man though just falls into mishaps unjustified.


For him who is ill at ease in his body there is need
of a physician, but need of a friend for him whose
soul is ill. For loyal words have the secret of healing
grief.

Fact stranger than Fiction.


In life of mortals there is not, nay, nor could there
come to pass, a single thing beyond our credence.
Time and men’s ways embroider many an unexpected
marvel on life’s web.


Fortune a Scapegoat.


Fortune cannot possibly have any corporeal exist-
ence; but the man who cannot bear events in
Nature’s way calls his own character Fortune.


593


MENANDER


595 K ἀεὶ δ᾽ ὁ σωθείς ἐστιν ἀχάριστον φύσει.
“gh ἠλέηται καὶ τέθνηκεν ἡ χάρις
ἣν δεόμενος τότ᾽ ἀθάνατον ἕξειν ἔφη.


596 K ἐὰν ἐγὼ φῶ νῦν ἔχειν βακτηρίαν
χρυσῆν, τί μοι σεμνότερον ἔσται τὸ ξύλον;
ἀληθὲς εἶναι δεῖ τὸ σεμνόν, οὐ κενόν.


597 K πένητος οὐδέν ἐστι δυστυχέστερον.
ἅπαντα μοχθεῖ κἀγρυπνεῖ κἀργάξεται,


“5


iv’ ἄλλος ἐλθὼν μεταλάβῃ καὶ κτήσεται.


598 Καὶ ἄνθρωπε, μὴ στέναζε, μὴ λυποῦ μάτην"
χρήματα, γυναῖκα καὶ τέκνων πολλῶν σπυράν,
ἅ σοι τύχη κέχρηκε, ταῦτ᾽ ἀφείλετο.


599 K ὀκνεῖ δὲ νοῦν ἔχουσ᾽ ἴσως"
ἀεὶ δὲ τοῖς παροῦσι δακρύοις ἐμποεῖ
τὸ θηλὺ τῆς ψυχῆς ἀναβολὴν τῷ πάθει.


601 Καὶ ἐπιτρίβουσιν ἡμᾶς οἱ θεοὶ
μάλιστα τοὺς γήμαντας: ἀεὶ γάρ τινα
ἄγειν ἑορτήν ἐστ᾽ ἀνάγκη...


602 K οὐδείς. ἐστί μοι
ἀλλότριος, ἃ ἂν ἢ χρηστός" ἡ φύσις μία
πάντων, τὸ δ᾽ οἰκεῖον συνίστησιν τρόπος.


504


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


Thankless by nature always is the man who has
been saved. No sooner has pity been shown than
the gratitude is gone which in his hour of need he
vowed he'd feel for ever.


If I now assert that my staff is made of gold,
wherein will its wood be aught the more august for
me? The august must needs be real, not empty
show.


There is nothing more luckless than a poor man,
He toils at all things, loses sleep, and works away,
only to have another come and have his share and
take possession.


« The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away.”


Fellow, don’t keep on groaning, do not grieve in
vain. The things which Fortune lent to you—
money, and wife, and crop of many children sown—
she has taken back again.


She hesitates perhaps because she has sense. But
a woman can always by her ready tears gain a respite
for her soul’s suffering.


The gods afHict us married men above all others ;
for there is ever necessity of celebrating some
festival.!


“© Humani nil a me alienum.’—TEreENCE.


For me none is a foreigner
If so be he is good. One nature is in all
And it is character that makes the tie of kin.


1 ef, Fragm. z, Epitrep., p. 86, line 532.
595


603 K


604 K


605 Καὶ


608 Καὶ


609 K ”


610 K


611 K


612 Καὶ


MENANDER


» yy / e \ , /
οὐκ ἐστι μείζων ἡδονὴ ταύτης πατρί,
-“ lal ᾽ -
ἢ σωφρονοῦντα καὶ φρονοῦντ᾽ ἰδεῖν τινα
τῶν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ.


πολλοὺς δι’ ἀνάγκην γὰρ πονηροὺς οἶδ᾽ ἐγὼ
ὅταν ἀτυχήσωσιν γεγονότας, οὐ φύσει
ὄντας τοιούτους.


᾽
τὸ δ᾽ εὖ φέρειν
Μ “ A , , /
ἐστιν τοιοῦτον, av δύνῃ μόνος φέρειν,


καὶ μὴ ᾿πίδηλον τὴν τύχην πολλοῖς ποῆς.


ἐὰν κακῶς μου τὴν γυναῖχ᾽ οὕτω λέγῃς,
τὸν πατέρα καὶ σὲ τούς τε σοὺς ἐγὼ πλυνῶ.


ἤλιε, σὲ γὰρ δεῖ προσκυνεῖν πρῶτον θεῶν,
δι’ ὃν θεωρεῖν ἔστι τοὺς ἄλλους θεούς.


νῦν δ᾽ ἕρπ᾽ ἀπ᾽ οἴκων τῶνδε: τὴν γυναῖκα γὰρ
τὴν σώφρον᾽ οὐ δεῖ τὰς τρίχας ξανθὰς ποεῖν.


ἅπανθ᾽ ὅσα ζῇ καὶ τὸν ἥλιον βλέπει
\ al a “ιν > a
Tov κοινὸν ἡμῖν, δοῦλα ταῦτ᾽ ἔσθ᾽ ἡδονῆς.


’
ἔχω δὲ πολλὴν οὐσίαν καὶ πλούσιος
a el Ἁ / / ιν. ᾽ » ’
καλοῦμ ὑπὸ πάντων, μακάριος δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ οὐδενός.


506


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


A father can have no greater joy than this, to
see one of his own children both continent and
wise.!


‘I know of many men who have perforce turned
criminals through misfortune although they were not
such by nature.


To bear up well means this: if you can bear your
fortune all alone and not expose it to the crowd.?


Glass Houses.°


If you heap abuse like this upon my wife, I'll give
your father and you and all your tribe ἃ public
scouring ! ;


O Sun, thee first of all the gods ‘tis right to
reverence, for thanks to thee ’tis possible to see the
other gods.


And now begone from this house; for a woman
who is chaste ought not to dye her hair yellow.


Whatever lives and looks upon this Sun’s light,
common to us all—all this is slave to pleasure.


Now I have large means and am called rich by
everybody, but happy by no one.


1 cf. 3 Ep. St. John, 4 ; Soph. Antig. 660 ff.
2 cf. Georgos, 79 ff.
3 cf. 710 below.


5°7


6138 Καὶ


614 K


615 K


616 K


617 K


618 K


619 Καὶ


620 K


621 K


MENANDER


καλὸν τὸ Κείων νόμιμόν ἐστι, Pavia:
ς \ , lol a > na “
ὁ μὴ δυνάμενος ζῆν καλῶς οὐ ξῇ κακῶς.


κακῶς ἀκούων ὅστις οὐκ ὀργίζεται"
ze vd
πονηρίας πλείστης τεκμήριον φέρει.


ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἀνόητος, εὐτελὴς ὑπερβολῇ,
ὁ δ᾽ ἄσωτός ἐστι, πολυτελής, θρασὺς σφόδρα.


ἡ δ᾽ εὐπατέρεια φιλόγελώς 1 τε παρθένος
Νίκη μεθ᾽ ἡμῶν εὐμενὴς ἕποιτ᾽ ἀεί.


“Ἑλληνές εἰσιν ἄνδρες, οὐκ ἀγνώμονες
\ a
καὶ μετὰ λογισμοῦ πάντα πράττουσίν τινος.


Μ lal 4 ᾽ > /
ἄνοια θνητοῖς δυστύχημ᾽ αὐθαίρετον.
τί σαυτὸν ἀδικῶν τὴν τύχην καταιτιᾷ;


/ “~ 3 > \ > /
χαλεπὸν ye τοιαῦτ᾽ ἐστὶν ἐξαμαρτάνειν,
ἃ an /

ἃ καὶ λέγειν ὀκνοῦμεν οἱ πεπραχότες.


εὐηθία μοι φαίνεται, Φιλουμένη,
τὸ νοεῖν μὲν ὅσα δεῖ, μὴ φυλάττεσθαι δ᾽ ἃ δεῖ.


e \ ἊΣ \ = ' a > a /

0 μὴ φέρων yap εὖ τι τῶν ἐν TO βίῳ

ἀγαθῶν ἀλόγιστός ἐστιν, οὐχὶ μακάριος.
᾿ ef. φιλομμειδής, of Aphrodite.


eee


* The law in Ceos commanded those over sixty to drink
hemlock !—Strabo, 10. 486. Dr. Wm. Osler, expert in Greek
as well as in medicine, may have had the Ceians also in mind


508


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


 Oslerizing.”’
That's a fine custom, Phanias, of the Ceians—


that a man who can’t live well does not continue
to live ill.}


It is proof of lowest character when a man, who
is ill-spoken of, does not grow enraged.


Now I am unintelligent, exceedingly frugal, but
he’s a wastrel, lavish, exceedingly rash.


May she, the noble-sired, laughter-loving maiden
Victory, attend us ever with good will.


Greeks are men, not brutes devoid of sense, and
due reflection accompanies their every action.


Folly is a self-chosen misfortune for mortals. Why,
when you are wronging yourself, do you lay the
blame on Fortune ?


Grievous indeed it is to commit such transgressions
that we who have done them hesitate even to speak
of them.


It seems to me, Philoumene, to be sheer folly
to perceive what one ought to perceive and then
not to guard against what one ought to guard
against.


The one who does not carry lightly any of life’s
blessings is senseless, not blessed.
when he issued his famous (semi-serious) extravaganza. For
other less debatable compliments to the island home of bard


and sophist, see Plato, Protag. 341 Ἑ, and Legg. i. 638 8.
Also ef. Aristoph. Frogs, 970.


5°9


MENANDER


622 K τἀπίθανον ' ἰσχὺν τῆς ἀληθείας ἔχει
ΘΕ ἡ / \ / »
ἐνίοτε μείζω καὶ πιθανωτέραν ὄχλῳ.


\ \ a ,
623 K τοὺς Tov ἴδιον δαπανῶντας ἀλογίστως βίον
τὸ καλῶς ἀκούειν ταχὺ ποεῖ πᾶσιν κακῶς.


624 K οὐπώποτ᾽ ἐζήλωσα πλουτοῦντα σφόδρα
Μ > / \ Ld Μ
ἄνθρωπον, ἀπολαύοντα μηδὲν ὧν ἔχει.


θ25-620Κ μὴ πάντοθεν κέρδαιν᾽, ἐπαισχύνου δέ μοι'
\ A / > - »Μ
τὸ μὴ δικαίως εὐτυχεῖν ἔχει φόβον.
ὦ τρὶς κακοδαίμων, ὅστις ἐκ φειδωλίας
κατέθετο μῖσος διπλάσιον τῆς οὐσίας.


627 K οὐ γὰρ τὸ πλῆθος, ἂν σκοπῇ τις, τοῦ ποτοῦ
a “-“ fal rg
ποιεῖ παροινεῖν, TOD πιόντος δ᾽ ἡ φύσις.


628 Καὶ χαλεπὸν ὅταν τις ὧν πίῃ πλέον λαλῇ,
\ , > \ /
μηδὲν κατειδώς, ἀλλὰ προσποιούμενος.


629 K (A) ἐπίσχες ὀργιζόμενος. (Β) ἀλλὰ βούλομαι.
(A) οὐδεὶς γὰρ ὀργῆς χάριν ἀπείληφεν, πάτερ.


630 K οὐκ ἔστιν ὀργῆς, ὡς ἔοικε, φάρμακον
ἄλλ᾽ ἢ λόγος σπουδαῖος ἀνθρώπου φίλου.


1 τἀπίθανον, Kock, / τὸ πιθανόν, MS.


510


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


For the crowd the incredible! has sometimes
greater power and is more credible than Truth.


In the case of those who senselessly squander
their own means, fair fame quickly changes to ill
fame in the estimation of all.


I have never envied a very rich man if he gets no
good out of what he possesses.


Do not get gain from every source, but, prithee,
have some sense of shame. Unrighteous luck brings
fear.


ΝΟ ΟΣ 6 ο΄ 6 a 6 ο΄ 6 ee τ 6 tenet δ ἢ, Oe Or Lee


O thrice unlucky he who by his ‘thrift has laid up
a store of hate that is double his possessions.


If one will notice, it is not the number of cups
that inspires drunken folly but the character of him
that drinks.


It’s a grievous thing when anyone talks more
than he drinks, without real knowledge, just making
pretence. 3


(a) Cease from your wrath. (B) So I desire.
(a) For no one, father, receives favour through
wrath.


There is no other medicine of wrath, as it seems
except the earnest counsel of @ friend.


1 Or, perhaps, the probable ; see note on text.
2 Too good a listener was equally objectionable ; ¢f. Lucian,
Symposium 3: “1 hate a fellow-guest with a long memory.”


511


631 K


632 K


633 Καὶ


634 K


635 K


636 Καὶ


637 K


638 K


639 K


MENANDER


οὐδεὶς ἐφ᾽ αὑτοῦ τὰ κακὰ συνορᾷ, Πάμφιλε,
σαφῶς, ἑτέρου δ᾽ ἀσχημονοῦντος ὄψεται.


ὁ συνιστορῶν αὑτῷ τι, κἂν ἡ ,θρασύτατος,
ἡ σύνεσις αὐτὸν δειλότατον εἶναι ποεῖ.


δεῖ τοὺς πενομένους μέχρι ἂν ζῶσιν πονεῖν"
ἀπραξία γὰρ λιτὸν οὐ τρέφει βίον.


e \ id a / ,
ὁ φθονερὸς αὑτῷ πολέμιος καθίσταται"
αὐθαιρέτοις γὰρ συνέχεται λύπαις ἀεί.


\ e / / > > / e ᾽ ς “ Ἁ ,
καλὸν οἱ νόμοι σφόδρ᾽ εἰσίν: ὁ δ᾽ ὁρῶν τοὺς νόμους
λίαν ἀκριβῶς συκοφάντης φαίνεται.


ὁ προκαταγινώσκων δὲ πρὶν ἀκοῦσαι σαφῶς
αὐτὸς πονηρός ἐστι πιστεύσας κακῶς.


καλόν γε βασιλεὺς τῇ μὲν ἀνδρείᾳ κρατῶν,
τὰ δὲ τοῦ βίου δίκαια διατηρῶν κρίσει.


μὴ τοῦτο βλέψῃς εἰ νεώτερος λέγω,
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ φρονοῦντος τοὺς λόγους ἀνδρὸς Γλέγω"."


οὐχ αἱ τρίχες ποιοῦσιν αἱ λευκαὶ φρονεῖν,
ἀλλ᾽ ὁ τρόπος ἐνίων τῇ φύσει γέρων .,. 3


) sc. ὥν in next line, Allinson. /Cobet would read γίνεται,

‘nam qui hoe faciunt, non vidert calumniatores, sed esse
Pent

2 χέγω, Cobet, Rouse, metri causa. | ἐρῶ, MS.

3 ef. Aesch. Septem, 622; γέροντα τὸν νοῦν.


512


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


Why beholdest thou the Mole... ?


No man, Pamphilus, beholds clear-eyed his own
defects, but just let someone else disgrace himself
and that he’ll see.


Conscience doth make Cowards.


The man who hath some load upon his mind, even
though he be very bold, him conscience turns into a
perfect coward.


The poor must labour while life lasts, for idleness
cannot support even the frugal life.


The envious man is his own enemy ; he is forever
grappling with vexation self-imposed.


The laws are a very fine thing, but he who keeps
his eye too close upon the code turns out to be a
backbiter.


He who condemns in advance before he clearly
learns, is criminal himself by reason ot his wicked
credulity.


‘Tis fine when a king holds sway with manly
vigour while observing with discrimination life’s just
prerogatives.


Have regard to this: not whether 1 that speak am
somewhat young, but whether I speak the words
of wisdom.


‘Tis not white hair that engenders wisdom, but
some people's character is naturally mature.


MENANDER


640 K ὅστις στρατηγεῖ μὴ στρατιώτης γενόμενος,
οὗτος ἑκατόμβην ἐξάγει τοῖς πολεμίοις.


641 Καὶ ὁ τῶν γεωργῶν ἡδονὴν ἔχει βίος,
ταῖς ἐλπίσιν τἀλγεινὰ παραμυθούμενος.


642 K ἐν τοῖς πολεμίοις ὑπερέχειν τὸν ἄνδρα δεῖ:
τὸ γὰρ γεωργεῖν ἔργον ἐστὶν οἰκέτου.


643 K τὰ “μεγάλα κέρδη ῥᾳδίως ἢ ἢ πλουσίους
τοὺς παραβόλως πλέοντας ἢ νεκροὺς ποεῖ.


θ44 Καὶ ὅταν ἀτυχῇ τις, εὐνοοῦντος οἰκέτου
οὐκ ἔστιν οὐδὲν κτῆμα. κάλλιον βίῳ.


045 K ὅταν φύσει τὸ κάλλος ἐπικοσμῇ τρόπος
χρηστός, διπλασίως ὁ προσιὼν ἁλίσκεται.


646 Καὶ ἕν ἐστ᾽ ἀληθὲς φίλτρον, εὐγνώμων τρόπος.
τούτῳ κατακρατεῖν ἀνδρὸς εἴωθεν γυνή.


647 Καὶ οἰκεῖον οὕτως οὐδέν ἐ ἐστιν, ὦ Λάχης,
ἐὰν σκοπῇ τις, ὡς ἀνήρ τε καὶ γυνή.


648 Καὶ γαμεῖν κεκρικότα δεῖ σε γινώσκειν, ὅτι
ἀγαθὸν μέγ᾽ ἕξεις, ἂν λάβῃς μικρὸν κακόν.


649 K τὸ γυναῖκ᾽ ἔχειν εἶναί τε παίδων, Παρμένων,
πατέρα μερίμνας τῷ βίῳ πολλὰς φέρει.


650 Καὶ ὅστις πενόμενος βούλεται ζῆν ἡδέως,
ἑτέρων γαμούντων αὐτὸς ἀπεχέσθω γάμου.


651 K τὸ γαμεῖν, ἐάν τις τὴν ἀλήθειαν σκοπῇ,
κακὸν μέν ἐστιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀναγκαῖον κακόν.


514


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


The man who leads an army when he has never
been a soldier leads out a hecatomb to offer to
the foe.


The farmer's life holds pleasure, for with hopes
it comforteth his pains.


Tis in affairs of war a man should have pre-
eminence, for farming is'a menial’s trade.


Great gains with ease turn those who sail on
reckless voyages either into rich men or into ghosts.


When anyone meets misfortune life has no fairer
possession than a loyal slave.


When good character adds adornment to natural
charms, whoever comes near is doubly captivated,


There is one genuine love-philtre—considerate
dealing. By this the woman is apt to sway her man.


If you come to look at it, there’s no such cosy
combination, Laches, as is Man and Wife.


You who are resolved to marry must know this:
you'll have large benefit if you receive a small evil.


To have a wife and to be father of children,
Parmenon, entails many cares in life.


If one is poor and wishes to live happily, let him,
while others do the marrying, hold aloof.


Marriage, if one will face the truth, is an evil, but
a necessary evil.


515


Take


652 K


653 K


654 K


655 Καὶ


656 K


657 K


658 K


659 K


660 K


661 K


662 K


MENANDER


, \ a / , a
τότε τὰς γυναῖκας δεδιέναι μάλιστα δεῖ,
ὅταν τι περιπλάττωσι τοῖς χρηστοῖς λόγοις.


οὐδέποθ᾽ ἑταίρα τοῦ καλῶς 1 πεφρόντικεν,
ἣ τὸ κακόηθες πρόσοδον εἴωθεν ποεῖν.


ἢ μὴ γαμεῖν γάρ, ἂν δ᾽ ἅπαξ λάβῃς, φέρειν
μύσαντα πολλὴν προῖκα Kal γυναῖκα δεῖ.


ὀδυνηρόν ἐ ἐστιν εὐτυχοῦντα τῷ βίῳ
ἔχειν ἔρημον διαδόχου τὴν οἰκίαν.


οὐκ ἔστιν οὐδὲν ἀθλιώτερον πατρός,
πλὴν ἕτερος ἂν ἢ 5 πλειόνων πατήρ.


ἔστιν δὲ μήτηρ φιλότεκνος μᾶλλον πατρός"
ἡ μὲν γὰρ αὑτῆς οἶδεν ὄνθ᾽, ὁ δ᾽ οἴεται.


θυγάτηρ ἐ ἐπίγαμος, κἂν ὅλως μηδὲν λαλῇ,
διὰ τοῦ σιωπᾶν πλεῖστα περὶ αὑτῆς λέγει.


μηδὲν ὀδύνα τὸν πατέρα γινώσκων ὅτι
ὁ μέγιστ᾽ ἀγαπῶν ‘kat! δι᾿ 3 ἐλάχιστ᾽ ὀργίζεται.


οὐκ ἔστ᾽ ἄκουσμ᾽ ἥδιον ἢ ἢ ῥηθεὶς "λόγος
πατρὸς πρὸς υἱὸν περιέχων ἐγκώμιον.


οὐδέποτ᾽ ἀληθὲς οὐδὲν οὔθ᾽ υἱῷ πατὴρ
εἴωθ᾽ ἀπειλεῖν οὔτ᾽ ἐρῶν ἐρωμένῃ.


ὁ σκληρότατος πρὸς υἱὸν ἐν τῷ νουθετεῖν
τοῖς μὲν λόγοις πικρός ἐστι, τοῖς δ᾽ ἔργοις πατήρ.


1 2 τοῦ καλοῦ. ΚΤ ἕτερος ὃς ἂν 7, Porson.
3 Meineke, for 6 μέγιστον ay. δι᾽, MS.


516


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


Then is when you most must fear women, when
they veneer a thing with fine words.


A courtesan who is wont to make of dishonour
her revenue never makes honour a subject of care.


Rither you must not wed a wife or, if you take her
once for all, you must close your lips and endure the
big dowry and the dame.


It is a painful thing for a man who has won
success in life to have his house barren of an heir.


There is nothing more wretched than a father,
except another one who is father of more children.


A mother loves her child more than a father does,
for she knows it’s her own while he but thinks
it’s his.


A marriageable daughter, even if she utters never
a word, by her very silence says most of all about
herself.


Cause your father no distress, knowing this: that
he who loves most is also angered for the least
cause.


There is no more pleasant thing to hear than
when a father speaks words of praise to his son.


Never a word of truth is wont to be found in
threat of father to his son or of lover to his beloved.


The harshest man, rebuking a son, in his words is
bitter, but in his action is a father.


517


MENANDER


663 K υἱῷ προθύμως τἀξιούμενον ποῶν
κηδεμόν᾽ ἀληθῶς, οὐκ ἔφεδρον ἕξεις βίου.


\ 2 , \ / a
664 Καὶ τοὺς εὖ yeyovoTas Kat τεθραμμένους καλῶς
κἀν τοῖς κακοῖς δεῖ λόγον ἔχειν εὐφημίας.


= fal \ /
665 Καὶ πλοῦτος ἀλόγιστος προσλαβὼν ἐξουσίαν
-“ »" / a
καὶ τοὺς φρονεῖν δοκοῦντας ἀνοήτους. ποεῖ.


666 K κρεῖττον ὀλίγ᾽ ἐστὶ L χρήματ᾽ ἀνυπόπτως ἔχειν,
ἢ πολλὰ φανερῶς ἃ μετ᾽ ὀνείδους δεῖ λαβεῖν.}


667 K οὐκ ἔστι λύπης, ἄν περ ὀρθῶς τις σκοπῇ,
ἄλγημα μεῖζον τῶν ἐν ἀνθρώπου φύσει.


668 K πολλῶν φύσει τοῖς πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις κακῶν
ὄντων μέγιστόν ἐστιν ἡ λύπη κακόν.


669 K ἔξωθέν εἰσιν οἱ δοκοῦντες εὐτυχεῖν
λαμπροί, τὰ δ᾽ ἔνδον πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις ἴσοι.


670 Καὶ οὐδέν με λυπεῖ μᾶλλον ἢ χρηστὸς τρόπος
εἰς χαλεπὸν ὅταν 7 συγκεκλημένος βίον.


> / / b] cal Mise" / QA
671 K οἰκτρότατον ἐστι TELPAV ETL γήρως ὀδῷ
ἀδίκου τύχης δίκαιος εἰληφὼς τρόπος.


072 Καὶ ἄνδρα τὸν ἀληθῶς 5" εὐγενῆ καὶ τἀγαθὰ
καὶ τὰ κακὰ δεῖ πταίοντα γενναίως φέρειν.


673 Κα ταῖς ἀτυχίαισι μὴ ᾽πΐχαιρε τῶν πέλας"
πρὸς τὴν τύχην γὰρ ζυγομαχεῖν οὐ ῥάδιον.


' δεῖ transposed metri causa, Allinson. / ἃ δεῖ μ. ὁ. A. MS.
2 ἄνδρα τὸν ἀληθῶς, Porson. {τὸν ἀληθῶς ἄνδρα, MSS.


518


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


If you heartily do your duty by your son you'll
have in him in reality a protector, no mere substitute?
inheritor of life.


The well-born and well-bred should, even in evils,
temper speech with auspicious silence.”


Irrational wealth, when it has acquired power in
addition, renders senseless even those who seem wise.


Better is the possession of small wealth without
suspicion than large wealth which one must receive
in open shame.*


Amongst the natural ills of man there is, if one
but look at it aright, no greater pain than grief.


Of all the many evils common to all men by
nature the greatest evil is grief.


Those who seem to be fortunate are magnificent
on the outside, but in their inward parts are on a par
with all men.


Nothing grieves me more than when good character
is locked up fast in the hardships of life.


It is most pitiable when on the threshold of old
age just character has received the shock of an
unjust fortune.


The truly well-born man must nobly bear his bless-
ings and, if he stumble, nobly bear his evils too.


Do not exult over the misfortunes of your neigh-
bours, for it is not easy to struggle against one’s
yoke-mate Fortune.


1 Reference to the third athlete who “sat by” waiting
to fight the winner in a contest.
2 cf. Fragm. 672. 3 Text (q.v.) is uncertain.


519


MENANDER


674 K οὐκ ἐμὸν ἀνοίγειν λανθάνουσαν ἀ ἀτυχίαν
ἔστ᾽, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον κατακαλύπτειν φημὶ δεῖν.


675 K μέγιστόν ἐστιν dpa τοῖς ἐπταικόσιν
τὸ παρόντας ἐγγὺς τοὺς συναλγοῦντας βλέπειι.
676 and
677 Καὶ el τἄλλ᾽ “ἀφαιρεῖν ὁ πολὺς εἴωθεν χρόνος
ἡμῶν, τό γε φρονεῖν ἀσφαλέστερον ποεῖ.
πάντων ἰατρὸς τῶν ἀναγκαίων κακῶν
χρόνος ἐστίν. οὗτος καὶ σὲ νῦν ἰάσεται.


678 K ὦ δέσποτ᾽ ἄναξ, «ἔξξεστιϊ τοῖς σοφοῖς βροτῶν
χρόνῳ σκοπεῖσθαι τῆς ἀληθείας πέρι.


680 K ὁ μὲν λόγος σου συνέσεως πολλῆς γέμει,
τὰ δ᾽ ἔργα σύνεσιν οὐκ ἔχοντα φαίνεται.


681 Καὶ ὁ μὲν λόγος σου, παῖ, κατ᾽ ὀρθὸν εὐδρομεῖ,
τὸ δ᾽ ἔργον ἄλλην οἶμον ἐκπορεύεται.


A


ὁ μὴ φρονῶν μέν, πολλὰ δ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστου λαλῶν
δείκνυσιν αὑτοῦ τὸν τρόπον τοῖς ῥήμασιν.


682
683 Καὶ πολὺ κρεῖττόν ἐστιν ἕν καλῶς μεμαθηκέναι
ἢ πολλὰ" φαυλῶς περιβεβλῆσθαι πράγματα.


084 Καὶ ὅταν λέγῃς μὲν πολλά, μανθάνῃς δὲ μή,
τὸ σὸν διδάξας τοὐμὸν οὐ μαθὼν ἔσει.


5" a , ,
685 K ἡ τῶν ὁμοίων αἵρεσις μάλιστά πως
rn , ε / “
τὴν τοῦ βίου σύγκρασιν ὁμόνοιαν ποεῖ.
: 1 ἔξεστι, Cobet, metri causa. | ἔστι, MS.


2? μεμαθηκέν᾽ ἣ. Γπάμπολλα, ? Capps.
520


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


It’s not my habit to uncover misfortune that lurks
concealed, but I say one should rather veil it close.


It is indeed great comfort for those who are down
to see sympathizers close beside them.


If lengthened age is apt to rob us of all else, at
any rate it makes intelligence the more secure.
Time is healer of all the necessary ills. And even
you he now will heal.


My lord and master, for mortals who are wise it is
possible in good time to look into what’s the truth.


Thy talk is freighted with much mother-wit, but
thy actions are seen to have no wit at all.


Thy talk, boy, runs fair along the straight high-
road, but thy action strikes off by another path.


The one who has no wisdom but who chatters
much on every point exhibits his character in his
words.


It is far better to have come to know one thing
thoroughly than to be superficially dressed up with
many.


Whenever you talk much but do not learn, you
will be in the position of having imparted your store
of knowledge without learning mine.


The selecting of those like to oneself somehow
is most apt to bring unity out of life’s blending.


521


MENANDER


686 Καὶ ἀνὴρ ἀχάριστος μὴ νομιξζέσθω φίλος,
μήθ᾽ ὅ <ye>" πονηρὸς κατεχέτω χρηστοῦ τόπον.


687 K γυναικὶ δ᾽ ὅστις ὅρκον ὀμνύων ἀνὴρ
δὲ cal δί Γ Ψ 379 > /
μηθεν ποεῖ δίκαιον, ov'k ἔστ᾽" εὐσεβής.


688 K ἐμὲ δ᾽ ἀδικείτω πλούσιος καὶ μὴ πένης:
ῥᾷον φέρειν γὰρ κρειττόνων τυραννίδα.


689 K πρᾷον κακοῦργος σχῆμ᾽ ὑπεισελθὼν ἀνὴρ
κεκρυμμένη κεῖται παγὶς τοῖς πλησίον.


690 Κ' μισῶ πένητα πλουσίῳ Swpovpevov:
ἔλεγχός ἐστι τῆς ἀχορτάστου τύχης.

691 K χρυσὸς μὲν οἶδεν ἐξελέγχεσθαι πυρί,

ἡ δ᾽ ἐν φίλοις εὔνοια Kapa κρίνεται.

692 Κὶ καιρῷ τὸν εὐτυχοῦντα κολακεύων φίλος
καιροῦ φίλος πέφυκεν, οὐχὶ τοῦ φίλου.


, “- / /
693 Καὶ ἀπόντι μᾶλλον εὐχαριστίαν ποει"
lal \ , / ᾽ > ,
Τῷ γάρ πάροντι γινετ εὐτονώτερον.


694 K φρόνησιν ἀσκῶν ἄφροσιν μὴ χρῶ φίλοις,
ἐπεὶ κεκλήσει καὶ σὺ παντελῶς ἄφρων.


ved / / \ / a ,
695 Κ΄ μυστήριόν cov μὴ κατείπῃς τῷ φίλῳ
κοὐ μὴ φοβηθῇς αὐτὸν ἐχθρὸν γενόμενον.
696 K ὁ γὰρ ἀδίκως Ti καθ᾽ ἑτέρου ζητῶν κακὸν
αὐτὸς προπάσχει τοῦ κακοῦ τὴν ἔκβασιν.


1 Rouse inserts metri causa.
° οὐκ ἔστ᾽, Kock./ οὗτος, MS.


522


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


Let not an ungrateful man be deemed a friend
nor let the miscreant be ranked with the good.


The man who pledges his oath to a woman and
then does naught that is just, is no righteous man.!


May 1 be injured by the rich, not by the poor ;
for it is easier to put up with the despotism of
superiors.


A malefactor who assumes the guise of mildness
is a concealed snare for his neighbours.


I hate a poor man who makes presents to the rich.
It is evidence of his starveling lot.


Gold knows how to be tested by fire, and loyalty
among friends is tested when a crisis comes.


A friend who for the opportune moment flatters
him that prospers is by nature friend, not of his
friend, but of the opportunity.


Show gratitude the rather to the absent; for
towards one who is present it is all too attentive.


If you go in for wisdom, do not make intimates
of those who lack wisdom or you will bear the name,
yes, you, of utterly unwise.


Don't tell your secret to your friend and you'll
not fear him when he turns into an enemy.


For he who ‘gainst another seeks to do some unjust
thing experiences himself a foretaste of the issue
of that wrong.


1 The MS. reading (q.v.) would involve a cynical paradox.


δ 523


697 K


698 K


699 K


700 K


701 Καὶ


702 K


MENANDER


ὅταν ἐκ πονηροῦ πράγματος κέρδος λάβῃς,
τοῦ δυστυχεῖν νόμιζέ σ᾽ ἀρραβῶν᾽ ἔχειν."


δούλῳ γενομένῳ, δοῦλε, δουλεύων φοβοῦ"
ἀμνημονεῖ γὰρ ταῦρος ἀργήσας ζυγοῦ.


ἐλεύθερος πᾶς ἑνὶ δεδούλωται, νόμῳ,
δυοῖν δὲ δοῦλος, καὶ νόμῳ καὶ δεσπότῃ.


νόμος φυλαχθεὶς οὐδέν ἐ ἐστιν ἢ νόμος,
ὁ μὴ φυλαχθεὶς καὶ νόμος καὶ δήμιος.


μὴ πάσχε πρῶτον τὸν νόμον καὶ μάνθανε.
1 \ Lol 0 r δὲ nr 8 Dv B ΄
ρὸ τοῦ παθεῖν δὲ τῷ φόβῳ προλαμβάνου.


12 7


καλῶς ἱ ποεῖ


pg ee ὁ διδάσκων γράμματ᾽ ‘ov
ude!’ φοβερᾷ προσποτίζει * φάρμακον.


> ,
acTl


καλὴν γυναῖκ᾽ ἐὰν ἴδῃς μὴ θαυμάσῃς"
τὸ γὰρ πολὺ κάλλος καὶ ψόγων πολλῶν γέμει.


γνώμην ἀρίστην τῇ γυναικὶ μὴ λέγε’
γνώμῃ γὰρ ἰδίᾳ τὸ κακὸν ἡδέως ποεῖ.


μὴ κλᾶε τοὺς θανόντας" οὐ γὰρ ὠφελεῖ
x / Δ) / 4 \ a
τὰ δάκρυ᾽ ἀναισθήτῳ γεγονότι Kal νεκρῷ.


ἐὰν τροφὴν δοὺς τὸν λαβόντ᾽ ὀνειδίσῃς,
ἀψινθίῳ κατέπασας ᾿Αττικὸν μέλι.


1 Cobet condemns νόμιζε σε. . . ἔχειν as not Menandrean,

2 lob! καλῶς ἵποεῖ!, Grot./ καλῶς, MS. 3 δέ, Meineke add.

4 προσποτίζει Heins. / (ποτίζωῳ c. dupl. ace.) προπορίζει,
some MSS. / mpoomopi¢e:, Paris. codex. cf. Kock, Meineke.


524 :


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


Whenever you get gain from base transaction
consider that you have mortgaged yourself to mis-
fortune.


Fear, slave, when you are slave to him who was
a slave; for bull, from yoke set free, forgets it
altogether.


All free-born men are slaves to one alone—to Law ;
A slave is slave to two—his master and the Law! !


A law observed is nothing more than merely Law ;
When broken it is law and executioner.


Don’t learn your lesson by first smarting under Law,
But, ere you suffer aught, anticipate by fear.


He who teaches a woman letters does not do well;
he feeds more poison to a frightful asp.


On seeing lady fair don’t go and worship her ;
Because great beauty’s also full of many flaws.


Don’t offer to your lady ? excellent advice,
For on her own advice she loves to do what’s bad.


Weep not the dead. For tears do not avail an
unperceiving corpse.®


If thou on giving help dost chide the recipient, then
thou art besprinkling Attic honey with wormwood.‘

1 Reminiscence of Herod. vii. 104; Plato, Republic, 564.

2 Or, perhaps, ‘‘ wife.”

’ ef. Lucian, de Luctu, 19.

4 He that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.—Rom. xii. 8.


525


710 K


711K


712K


714 Καὶ


MENANDER


“ ΄ \ eal ae |
ταν TL μέλλῃς τὸν πέλας κακηγορεῖν,
αὐτὸς τὰ σαυτοῦ πρῶτον ἐπισκέπτου κακά.


μηδέποτε πειρῶ στρεβλὸν ὀρθῶσαι κλάδον,
οὐκ ἣν ἐνεγκεῖν οὗ * φύσις βιάζεται.


2 \ > el b \ " ΧἽ 3 fal /
επᾶν ἐκ μεταβολῆς ἐπὶ "τὸ" ὃ κρεῖττον γένῃ,
ὅτ᾽ εὐτυχεῖς μέμνησο τῆς προτέρας τύχης.


ὅταν γέρων γέροντί “twa! " γνώμην διδῷ δ
γέρων γεροντί ‘Twa’ * γνώμην διδῷ,


θησαυρὸς ἐπὶ θησαυρὸν ἐκπορίζεται.


71,716 Κ ὁ λοιδορῶν τὸν πατέρα δυσφήμῳ λόγῳ


719 Καὶ


720 Καὶ


724 Καὶ


725 Καὶ


τὴν εἰς τὸ θεῖον ἐκμελετᾷ βλασφημίαν.
ὁ μὴ τρέφων τεκοῦσαν ἐκ τέχνης νέος
» - ’ ΕῚ 6 > \ - LO
ἄκᾶρπος οὗτος ἐστιν ὃ ἀπὸ ῥίζης κλάδος.
- + + εἰρήνη γεωργὸν κἀν πέτραις

/ fal / \ > , “
τρέφει καλῶς, πόλεμος δὲ κἀν πεδίῳ κακῶς.


(Cited also Schol. Eur. “Andr.” 4, Pr, Trag. Adesp 444 N.)
- 2 + « παίδων ἐπ᾽ ἀρότῳ γνησίων
δίδωμί σοὐγὼϊ τὴν ἐμαυτοῦ θυγατέρα.


ἀρχὴ μεγίστη τῶν ἐν ἀνθρώποις κακῶν
ἀγαθά, τὰ λίαν ἀγαθά.


μέμφομαί σοι τοῦθ᾽ ὅτι
χρηστά με λέγοντ᾽ οὐκ εὖ ποήσειν προσδοκᾷς.


1 κακηγορεῖν, Meineke, ed. major. / κατηγορεῖν, MS.

? od'K! Fv... οὗ, Jacob corr./od ἣν ἐνεγκεῖν ὅπου, MS. /
Grotius conject. οὐκ ἔστ᾽ ἀνάγκη ἡ. >. B.

5 Add τὸ, ? Meineke. / N.B. — J Ὁ in second foot.

* "rwa', suppl. Grotius. ® διδῷ, Kock. / διδοῖ, MS.

* ἐστιν, Allinson. [οὗτός ἐστ᾽, Meineke, [ἐστιν οὕτως, MS. Q.P.


? σοὐγὼ, Kock. / σοί γε, MS.
526


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


When thou art on the point of making some ugly
fling at thy neighbour, think over first thy own defects.!


Never attempt to straighten out a twisted branch ;
you cannot achieve where nature suffers violence.


When by a change you come to better circumstance,
Remember in prosperity your former lot.


When aged men to aged offer some advice
A store of treasure piled on treasure they provide.


He who rails at his father with reviling words
rehearses blasphemy against divinity.
The young man who fails to support by his trade
the mother who bore him is a barren offshoot from
the stock.?


Peace maintains the farmer well, even on stony
ground ; war but ill, even upon the plain.


The Marriage Service.
For the begetting of lawful children I give to thee
my daughter.®


A chief source for evils amongst men are benefits,
excessive benefits.


In this I blame you because you expect that,
although I speak honestly, 11] not act so.


1 ef. 608 above. 2 cf. 805.

5. Vor the formula cf. The Girl Who Gets Her Hair Cut
Short, lines 894-5. Also see p. 469 above. To incorporate
this formula as a side remark was as natural as for us to slip
in: ‘* For better or for worse.” cf. e.g. Lucian, Timon, 17.


527


* 728 K


729 K


730 K .


732 K


734 K


737 K


738 K


739 K


742 Καὶ


MENANDER


- + +. νον οὐκ ἐλευθέρου φέρειν
νενόμικα κοινωνοῦσαν ἡδονὴν ὕβρει.


οὐκ es. οὐχὶ τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχει
διάνοιαν αἰτῶν εἷς ἕκαστος καὶ λαβών.


> “- a
εν νον οὐ λυποῦντα δεῖ
παιδώριον ὀρθοῦν, ἀλλὰ καὶ πείθοντά τι.
\ , ᾽
κομψὸς στρατιώτης οὐδ᾽ ἂν εἰ πλάττοι θεὸς
-" ᾽
οὐδεὶς γένοιτ᾽ ἄν.
ἃ γὰρ μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν τις ἐσπούδα[ζ1 ἔχων",
ταῦτ᾽ εἶδε νύκτωρ.
a τ \ fal
πᾶς Oo μὴ φρονῶν
> / \ / . 7ὔ
ἀλαζονείᾳ καὶ ψόφοις ἁλίσκεται.
> »Μ ΒΝ la > / ig > \ Lal
οὐκ ἔστ᾽ ἀνοίας οὐδέν, ws ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ,
τολμηρότερον.
\ “-“ lal
ὦ νύξ, σὺ yap δὴ πλεῖστον ᾿Αφροδίτης θεῶν
μετέχεις μέρος.
\ a 4
Tov τῇ φύσει
> a > \ \ > / rn
οἰκεῖον οὐδεὶς καιρὸς ἀλλότριον ποεῖ.
πάντα γὰρ
ταῖς ἐνδελεχείαις καταπονεῖται πράγματα.


ἔστι δὲ
γυνὴ λέγουσα χρήσθ᾽ ὑπερβάλλων φόβος.


Μ > / > / a
ἔθυον οὐ προσέχουσιν οὐδέν μοι θεοῖς.


+ Corr. and suppl. Piccolos. / ἐσπούδασε, MS.


528


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


It’s not my belief that it is the part of the free-
born to put up with pleasure that is partner with
insolence.


Not everyone has the same notion while asking as
he has after receiving.


One ought not to correct a child [merely] by
vexing him, but also by a certain persuasion.!


None might become a dainty soldier, not even if a
god should mould.


For what one has dwelt on by day, these things he
sees in visions of the night.”


Every fool is caught by quackery and empty noise.
There’s nothing, as I think, more bold than folly.


O Night, I call on thee, for surely thou amongst
the gods hast greatest share in Aphrodite.


No occasion renders foreign the one who is by
nature kin.


For all things are worked out by diligence.


Now a woman who speaks you fair is a surpassing
terror.


I was making sacrifice to gods who paid no heed
to me.

1 Meineke compares Terence, The Brothers, 57,58 : ‘‘ pudore
et liberalitate liberos | retinere satius esse credo quam metu,”
and therefore refers this fragment to Menander, Adelphi.

2 cf. Herodotus, vii. 16.

529


MM


760 K


761 Καὶ


762 K


763 K


764 K


767 K


769 K


776 Καὶ


MENANDER

εἷς ἐστι δοῦλος οἰκίας ὁ δεσπότης.

ε , > >» -“ ” 3
ὡς χαρίεν ἐστ᾽ ἄνθρωπος, ὅταν ἄνθρωπος 7).
e n \ ς Ὁ ’ 3 € / ,

ὁ νοῦς γὰρ ἡμῶν ἐστιν ἐν ἑκάστῳ θεός.
ὑπεδεξάμην, ἔτικτον, ἐκτρέφω, φιλῶ.

- , ’ \ \ ” 1 ,

Κορινθίῳ πίστευε καὶ μὴ χρῶ φίλῳ.

lal , \ ev ” U

μισῶ πονηρόν, χρηστὸν ὅταν εἴπῃ λόγον.
ἅπαντα δοῦλα τοῦ φρονεῖν καθίσταται.


λέγεις, ἃ δὲ λέγεις ἕνεκα τοῦ λαβεῖν λέγεις.


792,193 Κὶ οὐκ ἔστι τόλμης ἐφόδιον μεῖζον βίου.


fee Ὁ ἐαθΌ δ. (0. οὐ Φυο 8 SR σέ. Se πὰ ἐν


οὐκ ἔστι Γόλμης ἐπιφανεστέρα θεύς.


796 K λυπεῖ με δοῦλος μεῖζον οἰκέτου φρονῶν.


797 Καὶ


805 Καὶ


809 Καὶ


810 Καὶ


γ᾽ \ / ’ / ’ / / 9
opyn φιλούντων ολίγον ἰσχύει χρονον."

, fal > / \ /
νόμος γονεῦσιν ἰσοθέους τιμὰς νέμειν.

al e

ἡδύ γ᾽ ἐν ἀδελφοῖς ἐστιν ὁμονοίας ἔρως.

’ , » ᾽ὔ ΕΝ /
αἰσχυνόμενος αἴσχιστα πενίαν ἂν φέροις.

? Perhaps trochaic ? μὴ [Κορινθίῳ] πίστενε μηδὲ χρῶ, ete. cf.
Meineke.


2 cf. Terence, Andria, 555. See note above on ’Avdpia,
50 K,


530°


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS


The master is the one slave of the household.
How charming a thing is man when he is man,
For our intellect in every one of us is God.

I conceived, I brought to birth, I rear, I love.


Trust [not]1 a Corinthian, and make him not thy
friend.


I hate a bad man saying what is good.
All things are slaves to intelligence.
You speak, and what you speak you speak for gain,


There is no greater equipment in life than
effrontery.

There is no more illustrious goddess than
Effrontery.


This troubles me—a slave who thinks more deeply
than a servant should.


A lovers’ quarrel has but short-lived strength.?


The law requires that we mete out to parents
honours fit for gods.


Sweet amongst brethren is the love of unity.*


If but ashamed of that which is most shameless,
thou mightest endure poverty.


1 See note on text.

2 ef. Terence, Andria, 555: amantium irae amoris inte-
gratiost.

3 of. 715, 716K. 4 of. Psalm cxxxiil.


53!
M M 2


MENANDER

ἄνθρωπος ἀτυχῶν σῳζεθ᾽ ὑπὸ τῆς ἐλπίδος.
«“ an ¢ \ > /
ἅπαντα σιγῶν ὁ θεὸς ἐξεργάζεται.
τί δ᾽ ὄφελος εὖ λαλοῦντος, ἂν κακῶς φρονῇ.
λυκοφίλιοι μέν εἰσιν αἱ διαλλαγαί.
ὁ μηδὲν ἀδικῶν οὐδενὸς δεῖται νόμου.

/ \ 8 ἢ > > \ /
Kabifaver μὲν ἐνίοτ᾽ εἰς τὰ σήσαμα.
πένης λέγων τἀληθὲς οὐ πιστεύεται.
ἐλευθέρως δούλευε" δοῦλος οὐκ ἔσει.
ὡς ᾿Αλεξανδρῶδες ἤδη τοῦτο" κἂν ζητῶ τινα,
αὐτόματος οὗτος παρέσται: κἂν διελθεῖν δηλαδὴ


\ / al / ᾽ - yy
διὰ θαλάττης δῇ] πόρον τιν᾽, οὗτος ἔσται μοι
βατός.


Σ δῇ, Meineke. , δέῃ, MS., Kock. {|ἰ πόρον, Kock. / τόπον, MS.


532


UNIDENTIFIED MINOR FRAGMENTS
In adversity a man is saved by hope.*
In silence God brings all to pass.


What is the use of one who speaks fair, if his
thought is bad ?


This reconciliation is the friendship of the wolf.
The man who does no wrong needs no law.?


He takes his seat on occasion in the Sesame
Market.


A poor man though he speak the truth is not
_ believed.


Retain a free man’s mind though slave, and slave
thou shalt not be.


How very Alexander-like is this forthwith: “If I
require someone’s presence, of his own accord he
‘will appear! And if, forsooth, I needs must tread
some pathway through the sea, then it will give
me footing !’’®


1 ef. Romans, vili. 24. 2 cf. Romans, xiii. 3.
3 cf. Lucian, How to Write History, 40.


533


1092 K


1093 K


1094 K


1099 K


1100 K


1103-
1105 K


1109 K


hg ote’


AM®ISBHTHSIMA


οὔτ᾽ ἐκ χερὸς μεθέντα καρτερὸν λίθον
ῥᾷον κατασχεῖν, οὔτ᾽ ἀπὸ γλώσσης λόγον.


»“" , “ “
ὡς κρεῖττόν ἐστι δεσπότου χρηστοῦ τυχεῖν
ἢ ζῆν ταπεινῶς καὶ κακῶς ἐλεύθερον.


ψυχὴν ἔχειν δεῖ πλουσίαν" τὰ δὲ χρήματα
ταῦτ᾽ ἐστὶν ὄψις, παραπέτασμα τοῦ βίου.


Supplementum Comicum, Demianczuk, p. 59.


TO μὲν ἐξαμαρτάνειν ἃ ἅπασιν ἔμφυτον
καὶ κοινόν, ἀναδραμεῖν" δὲ τὴν ἁμαρτίαν
οὐ τοῦ τυχόντος ἀνδρός, ἀλλ᾽ ἀξιολόγου.


κἂν μυρίων γῆς κυριεύης * πήχεων,
θανὼν γενήσει τάχα τριῶν ἢ τεττάρων.


ἂν καλὸν ἔχη τις σῶμα καὶ ψυχὴν κακήν,
καλὴν ἔχει ναῦν καὶ κυβερνήτην κακόν.


μέλλων τι πράττειν μὴ προείπῃς μηδενί.
ἅπαντα μεταμέλειαν ἀνθρώποις φέρει.
μόνη σιωπὴ μεταμέλειαν οὐ φέρει.


ταμιεῖον ἀρετῆς ἐστιν ἡ σώφρων γυνή


1 ef. Fragm. 993 K for ἀνατρέχω, meaning ἀναλύω. See
βιυρρίεην. Comic. 1.6. for identification of this | fragment.
2 κυριεύῃς πήχεων, Meineke. / πηχῶν κυριεύῃς, MS.


534


FRAGMENTS ASSIGNED WITH DOUBT
TO MENANDER,


It is not any too easy to check either a stout stone
let go from the hand or words which have left your
tongue.


How much better it is to have a good master than
to live a free man in sordid humiliation ! 2


One should have a wealthy soul, for as to riches
they are outward show, a curtain screening life.®


To do wrong is something innate and common to
all men, but to retrace one’s course of wrong belongs
not to the average man but to the eminent.


Though thou art master of ten thousand ells of land,
Thou after death shalt have, perhaps, but three or
four.4


If so be one has a fine body and a poor soul he
has a fine boat and a poor pilot.


When on the verge of action say not one word
beforehand to anybody. All things, save silence
only, bring repentance to a man.


The woman who is discreet is a magazine of virtue.


1 cf. Horace, Hp. 1.18 74.

2 cf. The Superstitious Man, Fragm. 110, above.

3 Attributed also to Antiphanes, 327, and to Alexis, 340.

4 «And Aeacus grants at the most not more than a foot’s
space,” —Luc. Necyom. 17.


535


Abrotonon, 15, 201. Epitrepontes
and Periceiromene, passim

Acharnae, 17

Acharnian(s), 17; 5, note

crisius, Samia, line 395

Adrasteia, Periceiromene, line 184 ;
404 (821 K)

Aegean Sea, Periceiromene, line
687 ; 319; 415

Aelian, x, note 3

Aethiop, 480, line 12

Afranius, xx, note 4

Agathon, xix

Agnoia, 198, 201;
204

Ajax (Aias), 427 (401 K)

Alciphron, viii, note 1; x, note 3;


xi; 2

Alea Athena, Hero, line 30 ; p. 302

Alexander (the Great), 395, 533
(924 K)

Alexis, xiv; 313; 443; 535, note 3

Anacharsis, 480 (533 K, line 13)

Anaideia, 366 (257 K)

Andrian, 310

Androcles, Samia, line 404

Anticyra, 395

Antiphanes, 535, note 3

Apollinaris, Sidonius, xi

Apollodorus, xvi; 313

Arcadian, 439

Areopagos, 367

Aristophanes, x; XiV; XV; XX;
Acharnians, 5, note; 403, note;
Clouds, 315, note ; Ecclesiazusae,
426, note; Frogs, 426, note;
Lysistrata, 319; Peace, 426, note;
Thesmophoriazusae, 422; Wasps,
117, note

_ Aristophanes of Byzantium, x and

note 3


Periceiromene,


MENANDER


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


(Numbers refer to pages, unless otherwise designated.)


Aristotle (philosoph.), xii; (ad-
miral), 416 (357 K)

Atilius, xx, note 4

Auge, 123


Bactria, Samia, line 426
Bias, 383, Colax, passim
Bithynian, 387 (and note)
Boédromion, 461 (521 K)
Boeotian, 310

Boreas, 369

Byzantium, 320 (67 K)


Caecilius, Statius, xiii, note 2; xx,
note 4; 136, note; 443
Caesar, Julius, x, note 3; xxi,


note 3
Calippus, 365
Callimedon, 403
Calymna, 415 (348 K)
Cappadocia, 395
Caria, Samia, line 427
Carthaginian, 310
Cecropian, 151
Ceos, Ceian, 509 (and note)


Chaereas, 399; 465 (Unident.
Comedy, passim)
Chaerephon, 130; Samia, line


401; 405; 419
Chaerestratus, 153
passim
Charisius, 15; Zpitrepontes, passim
Chrysis, 135; Samia, passim; 395
(295 K)
Cicero, xiii, note 2
Cleaenetus, 325; 465; (Georgos and
Unident. Comedy, passim)
Cleinias, 409; Misowmenos, passim
Cleitophon, 501


Epitrepontes,


537


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


Cleostratus, Epitrepontes, line 173
Confutation (prologue), 489, note 3
Corinth, 201 ; Georgos, line 6(p. 326)
Corinthian, 531 (764 K)

Corone, 395

Crateia, 409

Crates, 343 (117 K)

Cratinus, 443

Cretan, 310

Crobyle, 429; 431

Ctesippus, 417 (363 K)

Cyinda, 317

Cyprus, 413


Danaé, 179, note

Davus (Daos), 15; 201; 287; 325;
383; 423. Epitrepontes, Periceiro-
mene, Hero, Georgos, Colax, and
Perinthia, passim

Demeas, 135; 344, note ; 345; 365;
409. Epitrepontes, and Misou-
Menos, passim

Dercippus, 489

Dion Chrysostom, x, note 3

Dionysia, 365; 451

Diphilus, 313

Dodonaean bronze, 320 (66 K)

Doris, 201; 383. Periceiromene and
Colax, passim


Effrontery (prologue), 367

Ephesian, 310; 418 (371 K)

Ephesus, 377; 378

Sot apts xx, note 2; 485 (537
)


Epicurus, xiii

Eros, Samia, line 430 ; Hero, fragm.
2; 358 (235 K)

Eudoxus, 443

Euonymeus, 377

Euphron, 313

Euripides : xiv; xv; xviii; xx; Auge
of, cited in Lpitrepontes, line
913; fragm. of, 357, note


Gellius, Aulus, x, note 3

Getae, 491 (547 K)

Getas, 287; 409; 423. Hero, Misou-
menos and Perinthia, passim

Glycera, 201; Pericieromene, passim

Glycerium, 407


6538


Gnathon, 383; Colaz, passim ;
Gorgias, 287; 325, note ; Hero an
Georgos, passim


Halae, 349
Hedeia, 325
Hegesippus, 313


erodotus, 344, note; 525, note;}


529, note
Homer, xi, note 1
Horace, 535, note (1092 K)
Hymnis, 441, note 2


Iberian, 322 (79 K)
imbros, 365
Ionian, 441
Ischas, 395


Lachares, 365 ’
Laches, 287; 371; 423; 465. Hero,
itharistes, Perinthia, Unident.

Comedy, passim 473 (921 K), 515,
(647 K)

Lamia (-ae), 428; 429, note

Lamprias, 313

sa ρι, Luscius, xx, note 4; 359;


Leucas, 402 (313 K)

Libyan, 319

Libys, 441

Lucian, x, note 3; 426, note; de
Luctu, 525, note; de Mercede
Conductis, 428, note; 441, note ;
Dialogi Meretric, 441; Fugitivi,
383, note; Gallus, 358, note;
427, note; 483, note; Piscator,


368 (268K); Quomodo Hist,
Conscribenda Sit, 533, note;
Symposium, 511, note; Timon,
409, note, 527, note; Vitar,
Auctio, 355, note

Lydian, 441, 459

Mende, 403

Menippus, 489

Messenian, 310

Misapprehension (prologue), see
Agnoia


Monimus, 367


Moschion, 135; 201; 371; 447 and
note 2; 465. Epitrepontes, Peri-
ceiromene, Citharisies, Unident.

Comedy, passim

(Myrrhina, 201; 287; 325. Periceiro-
mene, Hero, Georgos, passim

Myrtile, 321


Nannarion, 395

Neleus, Epitrepontes, line 109 (110)
Nemesis, 221, note; 404 (321 K)
Niceratus, 185; Samia, passim
Nymphaeum, 345


Odysseus, Colaz, line 107
Olynthian, 310

Onesimus, 15; Epitrepontes, passim
ae x, note 3; xiv, note 3; xviii;


Pamphila, 15; Epitrepontes, passim

Pamphilus, 513 (631 K)

Panathenaea, 447 (494 K)

Parmenon, 135; Samia, passim ;
433; 443 (481 K)

Pataecus, 201; Periceiromene, pas-
sim

Peiraeus, Epitrepontes, line 536

Pelias, Epitrepontes, line 110

Perinthian, 310

Persia, Persian, 317; 457

Phanias, 371; Citharistes, passim ;
509 (613 K)

Phaon, 400; 402 (312 K, line 2);


403
Pheidias, 287; 383; 449. Hero,
Colax, Phasma, passim
Philemon, xi, note 2; xv; 313;


374, note; 443
Philinna, 325
Philinus, 281
Philoumene, 509 (620 K)
Phyle, Dyscolus, 127 K, line 2


Plangon, Samia, line 428; 284;
Hero, line 24

Plato: Apology, 323, note; 493,
note; Republic, 76, note; 485,
note; 487, note; 491, note;
493, note ; 525, note ; Z'heaeletus,
368 (268 K)


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


Plautus : xx and note 4; xxi, note
1; 310; 315, note; 345; Poenulus,
369; Stichus, 457; Trinummus,
449, note

Plutarch, x, note 3; 7, note

Polemon, 201; Periceiromene, pas-
sim

Polyneices, Nauclerus, 350 K

Prometheus, 535 K, line 2

Ptelea, Hero, line 22

Pyrrhias, 423 (Perinthia.)


Quintilian, x, note 3; 2; 311; 353;
443


Rhode, 364, note; 491, note


Samian, 310

Sangarius, 287, note; Hero, passim

Sappho, 400; 401; 403 (312 K),
line 1

Scirophoria, Epitrepontes, line 534

Scyth, 533 K, line 13

Seneca, 433

Sicilian, Epitrepontes, line 392;
Arrephoros, 65 K, line 7 (p. 319)

Sicyonian, 310

Simmias, 15; Epitrepontes, 21; 79

Simylus, 405

Smicrines, 15; LZpitrepontes, pas-
sim; 323, 76 K

Sophrona, 153; 287.
and Hero, passim ;

Sosias, 201; Periceiromene, passim ;
321 (69 K); 383 (292 K)

Spartan, 413

Strabo, 320, note

Straton, 415

Stratophanes, 437

Struthias, 383; Colax, passim

Syrians, 343

Syriscus, 15;

Syrus, 325


Epitrepontes,


Epitrepontes, passim


Tauropolia, Epitrepontes, lines 234 ;
255; 260; 907 ;. 57, note

Terence, x and note 3; xi; xii,
note 3; xiii; xiv, note 3; xx and


note 4; xxi; 310; 400; 505
(602 K); Names in, 15, note;
409, note; Adelphi, 313 and


539


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


notes; 315, notes; 529, note;
Andria, 317, notes ; 355, note;
409, note ; 420; 422; 423, notes ;

ὙΠ 05; note ; Eunuch., 353 and
notes ; 359; 382; 393, "note ; 395,
note ; 409, note ; 448 ; Hecyra,
>a IP xxi, note 2; 8, note ; ’ Phormio,
xxi, note 2; ‘Self-Tormentor, xiv;
321, note 2; 349 and notes; 409,
note 3; 428, note

Thasian, 387

Thasos, 403

Theophilus, 415

Theophrastus, xii; xiii

Thericles, 359, note

ee Epitrepontes, line


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


PARIS GARDEN, STAMFORD STREET, LONDON, S.E. I.


Pak


Thracian, Hero, line 14 ᾽

Thracians, 441; 491 :

ee 409 ; Misoumenos,

passi

Thurii, ἘΣ line 8 (848 K)

Tibeius, Hero, line 21; 428
(Perinthia)

Trojans, 441

Troy ot ce A δι (p. 392)

Trypha,

ἐξα ες τὰς aid cote 4; 400


Virgil, 365


Zeno (Stoic), xiii


BY THE CORNWALL PRESS, LTD.,


THE LOEB CLASSICAL
LIBRARY


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED


Latin Authors.


APULEIUS. The Golden Ass (Metamorphoses.) Trans. by W. Adlington
(1566). Revised by S. Gaselee. (37d /mipression.)

AUSONIUS. Trans. by H. G. Evelyn White. 2 Vols.

BOETHIUS: TRACTS AND DE CONSOLATIONE PHILOSO-
PHIAE. Trans. by Rev. H. F. Stewart and E. K. Rand.

CAESAR: CIVIL WARS. Trans. by A. G. Peskett. (ρα /mpression.)

CAESAR: GALLIC WAR. Trans. by H. J. Edwards. (22d /impression.)

CATULLUS. Trans. by F. W. Cornish; TIBULLUS. Trans. by J. P.
Postgate; and PERVIGILIUM VENERIS., Trans. by J. W. Mackail.
(4th Linpression.)

CICERO: DE FINIBUS. Trans. by H. Rackham. (22d /inpression.)

CICERO: DE OFFICIIS. Trans. by Walter Miller. (22d /mpression.)

CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. Trans. by E. O. Winstedt.
3 Vols. (Vol. I 37d Impression. Vol. 11 2nd Impression.)

CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. Trans. by W. Watts (1631).
2Vols. (2nd Lmpression.)

FRONTO: CORRESPONDENCE. Trans. by C. R. Haines. 2 Vols.

HORACE: ODES AND EPODES. Trans. by C. E. Bennett. (47/4
Impression.)

JUVENALAND PERSIUS. Trans. by G. G. Ramsay. (22d [inpression.)

LIVY. Trans. by B. O. Foster. 13 Vols. Vol. I.

MARTIAL. Trans. by W. C. Ker. 2 Vols.

OVID: HEROIDES AND AMORES. Trans. by Grant Showerman.
(2nd Impression.)

OVID: METAMORPHOSES. Trans. by F. J. Miller. 2 Vols. (Vol. I
and Edition.)

PETRONIUS. Trans. by M. Heseltine; SENECA: APOCOLO-
CYNTOSIS. Trans. by W. H. Ὁ. Rouse. (37d /mpression.)

PLAUTUS. Trans. by Paul Nixon. 5 Vols. Vols. I and II.

PLINY: LETTERS. Melmoth’s Translation revised by W. M. L.
Hutchinson. 2 Vols.

PROPERTIUS. Trans. by H. E. Butler. (2nd /mpression.)

QUINTILIAN. Trans. by H. E. Butler. 4 Vols. Vols. I and II.

SALLUST. ‘Trans. by J. C. Rolfe.

SENECA: EPISTULAE MORALES. Trans. by R. M. Gummere.
3 Vols. Vols. I and II.

SENECA: TRAGEDIES. Trans. by F. J. Miller. 2 Vols.

SUETONIUS. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. (aud Jinpression.)

TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Trans. by Sir Wm. Peterson ; and AGRICOLA
AND GERMANIA. Trans. by Maurice Hutton. (2d Jmpression.)

TERENCE. Trans. by John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. (37d /wipression.)

VIRGIL. Trans. by H. R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. (Vol. I 24d Jpression.)


T


Greek Authors.


ACHILLES TATIUS. Trans. by 5. Gaselee.
AESCHINES. Trans. by C. ἢ. Adams.
APOLLODORUS. Trans. by Sir J. G. Frazer. 2 Vols.
APOLLONIUS RHODIUS. Trans. by R. C. Seaton. (2nd Impression.) —
THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Trans. by Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols.
(Vol. I 37d /iupression. Vol. 11 and Impression.)
APPIAN'S ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by Horace White. 4 Vols.
CALLIMACHUS anv LYCOPHRON, | ‘i'rans. by A. W. Mair; and
ARATUS. Trans. by G. R. Mair.
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA. Trans. by Rev. G. W. Butterworth.
DAPHNIS AND CHLOE. Thornley's ‘Translation revised by J. M.
Edmonds ; and PARTHENIUS. ‘Trans. by 5. Gaselee.
DIO CASSIUS: ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by E. Cary. 9 Vols.
Vols. I to VI.
EURIPIDES. Trans. by A. S. Way. 4 Vols. (Vols. I and II 3rd
Impression. Vols. 111 and LV end Lmipression.)
GALEN: ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES. Trans. by A. J. Brock,
THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. | ‘rans. by W. R. Paton. 5 Vols.
(Vols. Land II 2nd [ntpression.)
THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, BION, MOs-
CHUS). Trans. by J. M. Edmonds. (37d Impression.)
HERODOTUS. Trans. by A. Ὁ. Godley. 4 Vols. Vols. I and II.
HESIOD AND THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Trans. by H. G. Evelyn
White. (22d Lmpression.)
HOMER: ODYSSEY. ‘Trans. by A. T. Murray. 2 Vols.
JULIAN. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. Vols. I and II.
LUCIAN. Trans. by A. M. Harmon. 8 Vols. Vols. I and 11]. (2nd
Impression.)
MARCUS AURELIUS Trans. by C. R. Haines.
MENANDER. ‘Trans. by F. G. Allinson.
PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. Trans. by W. Η. 8.
Jones. 5 Vols. and Companion Vol. Vol. I.
PHILOSTRATUS anp EUNAPIUS: LIVES OF THE SOPHISTS.
Trans. by W. Cave Wright.
PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF TYANA.
Trans. by F. C. Conybeare. 2 Vols. (2ad Impression.)
PINDAR. Trans. by Sir J. E. Sandys. (2nd Edition.)
PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAEDO, PHAED-
RUS. Trans. by H. N. Fowler. (37d Lnpression.)
PLATO: THEAETETUS AND SOPHIST. Trans. by H. N. Fowler.
cacy Ace THE PARALLEL LIVES. Trans. by B. Perrin. 11 Vols.
ols. I to X.
PROCOPIUS: HISTORY OF THE WARS. Trans. by H. B. Dewing
7 Vols. Vols. I to [II.
QUINTUS SMYRNAEUS. Trans. by A. S. Way.
SOPHOCLES. Trans. by F. Storr. 2 Vols. (Vol. I 3xd Impression.
Vol. 11 21d Lmpression.)
ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPH. Trans. by
the Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly.
STRABO: GEOGRAPHY. Trans. by Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols. Vol. I.
THEOPHRASTUS: ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS. Trans. by Sir Arthur
Hort, Bart. 2 Vols.
THUCYDIDES. Trans. by C. F. Smith. 4 Vols. Vols. I—III.
XENOPHON: CYROPAEDIA. Trans. by Walter Miller. 2 Vols.
XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY anp SYM-
POSIUM. Trans. by C. L. Brownson and O. J. Todd. 3 Vols. Vols.
I and II.


2


IN PREPARATION


Greek Authors.


AENEAS TACTICUS, ASCLEPIODOTUS anp ONESANDER, The
Illinois Club.


AESCHYLUS, H. W. Smyth.
ARISTOTLE, ORGANON, St. George Stock.


ARISTOTLE, POLITICS anno ATHENIAN CONSTITUTION,
Edward Capps.


ATHENAEUS, C. B. Gulick.


DEMOSTHENES, DE CORONA anp MIDIAS, C. A. Vince and
J. H. Vince.


DIO CHRYSOSTOM, W. E. Waters.

DIOGENES LAERTIUS, W. L. Hicks.

EPICTETUS, W. A. Oldfather.

EUSEBIUS, Kirsopp Lake.

GREEK IAMBIC AND ELEGIAC POETS, E. D. Perry.
GREEK LYRIC POETS, J. M. Edmonds.
HIPPOCRATES, W. H. S. Jones.

HOMER, ILIAD, A. T. Murray.

ISOCRATES, G. Norlin.

LONGINUS, W. Hamilton Fyte.

MANETHO, S. de Ricci.

PAPYRI, A. S. Hunt.

PHILOSTRATUS, IMAGINES, Arthur Fairbanks.
PLATO, ALCIBIADES, HIPPARCHUS, ERASTAI, THEAGES


CHARMIDES, LACHES, LYSIS, EUTHYDEMUS, W. R. M
Lamb.


PLATO, LAWS, R. G. Bury.
PLATO, PARMENIDES, PHILEBUS ano CRATYLUS, H. N.


Fowler.
PLATO, PROTAGORAS, GORGIAS, MENO, W. R. M. Lamb.
PLATO, REPUBLIC, Paul Shorey.
PLATO, SYMPOSIUM, W. R. M. Lamb.
PLATO, POLITICUS, H. N. Fowler.
PLUTARCH, MORALIA, F. C. Babbitt.
POLYBIUS, W. R. Paton.
ST. BASIL, LETTERS, Prof. Van Den Ven.
XENOPHON, MEMORABILIA ann OECONOMICUS, E. C, Mar-


chant.


XENOPHON, SCRIPTA MINORA, E. C. Marchant.


Latin Authors.


AMMIANUS, C. U. Clark.

AULUS GELLIUS, S. B. Platner.

BEDE, ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, Rev. H. F. Stewart.
CICERO, AD FAMILIARES, E. O. Winstedt.

CICERO, DE NATURA DEORUM, H. Rackham.

CICERO, DE ORATORE, ORATOR, BRUTUS, Charles Stuttaford.


CICERO, DE SENECTUTE, DE AMICITIA, DE DIVINATIONE
W. A. Falconer.


CLAUDIAN, M. Platnauer.

FRONTINUS, DE AQUIS ann STRATEGEMATA, C. E. Bennett.
LUCAN, S. Reinach.

LUCRETIUS, W. H. D. Rouse.

OVID, TRISTIA ann EX PONTO, A. L. Wheeler.
PLINY, NATURAL HISTORY, F. G. Moore.

ST. AUGUSTINE, MINOR WORKS, Rev. P. Wicksteed.
SCRIPTORES HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE, D. Magie.
SENECA, MORAL ESSAYS, J. W. Basore.

STATIUS, H. G. Evelyn White.

TACITUS, ANNALS, John Jackson.

TACITUS, HISTORIES, C. H. Moore.

VALERIUS FLACCUS, A. F. Scholfield.

VELLEIUS PATERCULUS, F. W. Shipley.


DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION.


London = »s WILLIAM HEINEMANN.
New York = = G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS.


t
‘
« i, 5.
é
‘
wie Se OF
» ᾿ς “vs
» Bee og
δ τον es a
cs Naat ited <P Sart


PA Menander, of Athens


4245 Menander, the principal
A2 ΕῪ sfiyments
1921 C


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY


ἘΣΣῚ :
