THE PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY, VOL. 1
Dmitri Mendeleev (1834-1907)
Translated from the Russian (6th edition) by George Kamensky; edited by T. A. Lawson. London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1897. Vol. 1 of 2.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier principleschemi00lawsgoog.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

VOL.  I.

THE

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

By  D.  MENDELEEFF

TRANSLATED FKOM  THK  RUSSIAN (SIXTH KDITION)  BY

GEORGE KAMENSKY,  A.R.S.M.

OF  THK  IMPERIAL  MINT,  HT  PETKIIHBURO  ;  MEMBER  OF  THE  IlUa*«IAX  PHV8ICO-CHEMICAL  rtOClKTY

EDITED BY

T.  A.  LAWSON,  B.Sc.  Ph.D.

KXAMCNBIl  LV  COAL-TAR PRODUCTS  TO  THE  CITY  AXD  GUILDS  OF I/JXDOX  INSTITUTE

FELLOW  OF  THE  IK8TITUTE  OF  CHKMIlHTHY

• •.-.-  -■•*-■  • ■•"•,'- •

IN TWO VOLUMES

VOLUME  I.

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
NEW YORK AND BOMBAY

1897

All riKiitt^ rejierved

•  •

» •

•

•

.•  •

•  •• t

•  •  •

• •

•  •

• _

• • «

•

•  •«

•• •

• •

••  •

•  •• 1

•

•  •

•  •  •

•  • •

•  •  •

• •

•..:  3

•

••  •

•  •  • •

• •

• •

1  •

•

•

•  •  •

• •  •  •  •

PREFACE

TO THE

ENGLISH TKANSLATION

The  first  Esglish  edition  of  this  work  was  publisbed  in  1891,  and
that  a  second  edition  is  now  called  for  is,  we  think,  a  sufficient
proof  that  the  enthusiasm  of  the  author  for  his  science,  and  the
philosophical  method  of  his  teaching,  have  been  duly  appreciated
by  English  chemists.

In  the  scientific  work  to  which  Professor  MendeleefTs  life
has  been  devoted,  his  continual  endeavour  has  been  to  bring  the
scattered  facts  of  chemistry  within  the  domain  of  law,  and  accord-
ingly in  his  teaching  he  endeavours  to  impress  upon  the  student
the  principles  of  the  science,  the  generalisations,  so  far  as  they  have
been  discovered,  under  which  the  facts  naturally  group  themselves.

Of  those  generalisations  the  periodic  law  is  perhaps  the  most
important  that  has  been  put  forward  since  the  establishment  of  the
atomic  theory.  It  is  therefore  interesting  to  not^  that  Professor
Mendel6eif  was  led  to  its  discovery  in  preparing  the  first  Russian
edition  of  this  book.

It  is  natural,  too,  that  the  further  application  and  development
of  that  generalisation  should  be  the  principal  feature  of  this,  the
latest  edition.

There  are  special  difficulties  in  rendering  the  Russian  lan-
guage into  good  English,  and  we  are  conscious  that  these  have
not  been  entirely  overcome. Doubtless  also  there  are  errors  of

51S52

vi  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

stateraent  which  have  escaped  correction,  but  we  believe  that  the
present  edition  will  be  found  better  in  both  respects  than  its  pre-
decessor. We  have  thought  it  our  duty  as  translators  to  give  as
far  as  ]X)ssible  a  faithful  reproduction  of  Professor  Mendel^efTs
work — the  sixth  Russian  edition — without  amplifying  or  modifying
his  statements,  and  in  this  we  have  the  author's  approval.

Although  other  duties  have  prevented  Mr.  Greenaway  from
undertaking  the  care  of  the  present  edition,  he  has  been  kind
enough  to  give  us  the  benefit  of  his  suggestions  on  several  points.
We  also  wish  to  thank  the  Managers  of  the  Royal  Institution  for
permission  to  reprint  the  lecture  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution
by  Professor  Mendel^ff  (Appendix  I.),  and  to  the  Council  of  the
Chemical  Society  for  permission  to  reprint  the  Faraday  lecture
which  forms  Appendix  II.

In  conclusion,  we  are  indebted  to  Mr.  F.  Evershed,  who  has
given  us  much  valuable  assistance  in  revising  the  sheets  for  the
presH.

G.  K.

T,  A.  L.

AiiijusI  18!)7

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

TO

THE SIXTH RUSSIAN EDITION

This  work  was  written  during  the  years  18G8-1870,  its  object
being  to  acquaint  the  student  not  only  with  the  methods  of  observa-
tion, the  experimental  facts,  and  the  laws  of  chemistry,  but  also
with  the  insight  given  by  this  science  into  the  unchangeable  sub-
stratum underlying  the  varying  forms  of  matter.

If  statements  of  fact  themselves  depend  u\>ou  the  person  who
observes  them,  how  much  more  distinct  is  the  reflection  of  the  per-
sonality of  him  who  gives  an  account  of  methods  and  of  philosophical
speculations  which  form  the  essence  of  science  !  For  this  reason  there
will  inevitably  be  much  that  is  subjective  in  every  objective  exposi-
tion of  science.  And  as  an  individual  production  is  only  significant
in  virtue  of  that  which  has  preceded  and  that  which  is  contemporary
with  it,  it  resembles  a  mirror  which  in  reflecting  exaggerates  the
size  and  clearness  of  neighbouring  objects,  and  causes  a  person  near
it  to  see  reflected  most  plainly  those  objects  which  are  on  the  side
to  which  it  is  directed.  Although  I  have  endeavoured  to  make  my
book  a  true  mirror  directed  towards  the  whole  domain  of  chemical
changes,  yet  involuntarily  those  influences  near  to  me  have  been  the
most  clearly  reflected,  the  most  brightly  illuminated,  and  have  tinted
the  entire  work  with  their  colouring.  In  this  way  the  chief  pecu-
liarity of  the  book  has  been  determined.  Experimental  and
practical  data  occupy  their  place,  but  the  philosophical  principles

Viii  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

of  our  science  form  the  chief  theme  of  the  work.  In  former  times
sciences,  like  bridges,  could  only  be  built  up  by  supporting  them
on  a  few  broad  buttresses  and  long  girders.  In  addition  to  the
exposition  of  the  principles  of  chemistry,  it  has  been  my  desire  to
show  how  science  has  now  been  built  up  like  a  suspension  bridge,
supported  by  the  united  strength  of  a  number  of  slender,  but
firmly-fixed,  chains,  which  individually  are  of  little  strength,  and
has  thus  been  carried  over  diflSculties  which  before  appeared  in-
superable. In  comparing"  the  science  of  the  past,  the  present,  and
the  future,  in  placing  the  particulars  of  its  restricted  experiments
side  by  side  with  its  aspirations  after  unbounded  and  infinite
truth,  and  in  restraining  myself  from  yielding  to  a  bias  towards
the  most  attractive  path,  I  have  endeavoured  to  incite  in  the  reader
a  spirit  of  inquiry,  which,  dissatisfied  with  speculative  reasonings
alone,  should  subject  every  idea  to  experiment,  encourage  the  habit
of  stubborn  work,  and  excite  a  search  for  fresh  chains  of  evidence  to
complete  the  bridge  over  the  bottomless  unknown.  History  proves
that  it  is  possible  by  this  means  to  avoid  two  equally  pernicious
extremes,  the  Utopian — a  visionary  contemplation  which  proceeds
from  a  current  of  thought  only — and  the  stagnant  realism  which
is  content  with  bare  facts.  Sciences  like  chemistry,  which  deal
with  ideas  as  well  as  with  material  substances,  and  create  a  possi-
bility of  immediately  verifying  that  which  has  been  or  may  be
discovered  or  assumed,  demonstrate  at  every  step  that  the  work
of  the  past  has  availed  much,  and  that  without  it  it  would  be
impossible  to  advance  into  the  ocean  of  the  unknown.  They
also  show  the  possibility  of  becoming  acquainted  with  fresh
portions  of  this  unknown,  and  compel  us,  while  duly  respecting
the  teachings  of  history,  to  cast  aside  classical  illusions,  and  to
engage  in  a  work  which  not  only  gives  mental  satisfaction  but  is
also  practically  useful  to  all  our  fellow-creatures.*

>  CbemiBti^,  like  every  other  science,  is  at  once  a  means  and  an  end.  It  is  a
means  of  attaining  certain  practical  results.  Thus,  by  its  assistance,  the  obtaining
of  matter  in  its  various  forms  is  facilitated ;  it  shows  new  possibilities  of  availing
ourselves  of  the  forces  of  nature,  indicates  the  methods  of  preparing  many  sub-
stances, points  out  their  properties,  &c.  In  this  sense  chemistry  is  closely  connected
with  the  work  of  the  manufacturer  and  the  artisan,  its  sphere  is  active,  and  is  a

PREFACE  IX

Thus  the  desire  to  direct  those  thirsting  for  truth  to  the  pure
source  of  the  science  of  the  forces  acting  throughout  nature  forms

means  of  promoting  general  welfare.  Besides  this  honourable  vocation^  chemistry
has  another.  With  it,  as  with  every  ether  elaborated  science,  there  are  many  lofty
aspirations,  the  contemplation  of  which  serves  to  inspire  its  workers  and  adherents.
This  contemplation  comprises  not  only  the  principal  data  of  the  science,  but  also
the  generally-accepted  deductions,  and  also  hypotheses  which  refer  to  phenomena
as  yet  but  imperfectly  known.  In  this  latter  sense  scientific  contemplation  varies
much  with  times  and  persons,  it  bears  the  stamp  of  creative  power,  and  em-
braces the  highest  forms  of  scieutiiic  progress.  In  that  pure  enjoyment  ex-
perienced on  approaching  to  the  ideal,  in  that  eagerness  to  draw  aside  the  veil
from  the  hidden  truth,  and  even  in  that  discord  which  exists  between  the  various
workers,  we  ought  to  see  the  surest  pledges  of  further  scientific  progress.  Science
thus  advances,  discovering  new  truths,  and  at  the  same  time  obtaining  practical
results.  The  edifice  of  science  not  only  requires  material,  but  also  a  plan,  and
necessitates  the  work  of  preparing  the  materials,  putting  them  together,  working
out  the  plans  and  the  symmetrical  proportions  of  the  various  parts.  To  conceive,
understand,  and  grasp  the  whole  symmetry  of  the  scientific  edifice,  including  its
unfinished  portions,  is  e<iuivalent  to  tasting  that  enjoyment  only  conveyed  by  the
highest  forms  of  beauty  and  truth.  Without  the  material,  the  plan  alone  is  but
a  castle  in  the  air — a  mere  possibility ;  whilst  the  material  without  a  plan  is  but
useless  matter.  All  depends  on  the  concordance  of  the  materials  with  the  plan  and
execution,  and  the  general  harmony  thereby  attained.  In  the  work  of  science,  the
artisan,  architect,  and  creator  are  very  often  one  and  the  same  individual ;  but
sometimes,  as  in  other  walks  of  life,  there  is  a  difference  between  them  ;  sometimes
the  plan  is  preconceived,  sometimes  it  follows  the  preparation  and  accumulation
of  the  raw  material.  Free  access  to  the  edifice  of  science  is  not  only  allowed  to
those  who  devised  the  plan,  worked  out  the  detailed  drawings,  prepared  the
materials,  or  piled  up  the  brickwork,  but  also  to  all  those  who  are  desirous  of
making  a  close  acquaintance  with  the  plan,  and  wish  to  avoid  dwelling  in  the
vaults  or  in  the  garrets  where  the  useless  lumber  is  stored.

Knowing  how  contented,  free,  and  joyful  is  life  in  the  realm  of  science,  one
fervently  wishes  that  many  would  enter  its  portals.  On  this  account  many
pages  of  this  treatise  are  unwittingly  stamped  with  the  earnest  desire  that  the
habits  of  chemical  contemplation  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  instil  into  the
minds  of  my  readers  will  incite  them  to  the  further  study  of  science.  Science  will
then  flourish  in  them  and  by  them,  on  a  fuller  acquaintance  not  only  with  that
little  which  is  enclosed  within  the  narrow  limits  of  my  work,  but  with  the  further
learning  which  they  must  imbibe  in  order  to  make  themselves  masters  of  our
science  and  partakers  in  its  further  advancement.

Those  who  enlist  in  the  cause  of  science  have  no  reason  to  fear  when  they
remember  the  urgent  need  for  practical  workers  in  the  spheres  of  agriculture,  arts,
and  manufacture.  By  summoning  adherents  to  the  work  of  theoretical  chemistry,
I  am  confident  that  I  call  them  to  a  most  useful  labour,  to  the  habit  of  dealing
correctly  with  nature  and  its  laws,  and  to  the  possibility  of  becoming  truly  practical
men.  In  order  to  become  actual  chemists,  it  is  necessary  for  beginners  to  be  well
and  closely  acquainted  with  three  important  branches  of  chemistry— analytical,
organic,  and  theoretical.  That  part  of  chemistry  which  is  dealt  with  in  this
treatise  is  only  the  groundwork  of  the  edifice. For  the  learning  and  development

X  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

the  first  and  most  important  aim  of  this  book.  The  time  has  ar-
rived when  a  knowledge  of  physics  and  chemistry  forms  as  im-
portant a  part  of  education  as  that  of  the  classics  did  two  centuries
ago.  In  those  days  the  nations  which  excelled  in  classical  learning
stood  foremost,  just  as  now  the  most  advanced  are  those  which  are
superior  in  the  knowledge  of  the  natural  sciences,  for  they  form
the  strength  and  characteristic  of  our  times.  In  following  the  above
and  chief  aim,  I  set  myself  a  second  object :  to  furnish  a  text-book
for  an  elementary  knowledge  of  chemistry  and  so  satisfy  a  want
which  undoubtedly  exists  among  students  and  those  who  have  re-
course to  chemistry  either  as  a  source  of  truth  or  welfare.^ Hence,

of  chemistry  in  its  truest  and  fullest  sense,  beginners  ought,  in  the  first  place,  to
turn  their  attention  to  the  practical  work  of  analytical  chemistry ;  in  the  second
place,  to  practical  and  theoretical  acquaintance  with  irome  special  chemical  ques-
tion, studying  the  original  treatises  of  the  investigators  of  the  subject  (at  first,
under  the  direction  of  experienced  teachers),  because  in  working  out  particular
facts  the  faculty  of  judgment  and  of  correct  criticism  becomes  sharpened  ;  in  the
third  place,  to  a  knowledge  of  current  scientific  questions  through  the  special
chemical  journals  and  papers,  and  by  intercourse  with  other  chemists.  The  time
has  come  to  turn  aside  from  visionary  contemplation,  from  platonic  aspirations,
and  from  classical  verbosity,  and  to  enter  the  regions  of  actual  labour  for  the
common  weal,  to  prove  that  the  study  of  science  is  not  only  an  excellent  education
for  youth,  but  that  it  instils  the  virtues  of  industry  and  veracity,  and  creates  solid
national  wealth,  material  and  mental,  which  without  it  would  be  unattainable.
Science,  which  deals  with  the  infinite,  is  itself  without  bounds.

-  I  recommend  those  who  are  commencing  the  study  of  chemistry  with  my
book  U)  first  read  only  what  is  printed  in  tlie  large  type,  because  in  that  part  I
have  endeavoured  to  concentrate  all  the  fundamental,  indispensable  knowledge
required  for  that  study.  In  the  footnotes,  printed  in  small  type  (which  should  be
read  only  after  the  large  text  has  been  mastered),  certain  delaiis  are  discussed ;
they  are  either  further  examples,  or  debatable  questions  on  existing  ideas  which
I  thought  useful  to  lay  before  those  entering  into  the  sphere  of  science,  or  certain
historical  and  technical  details  which  might  be  withdrawn  from  the  fundamental
portion  of  the  book.  Without  intending  to  attain  in  my  treatise  to  the  complete-
ness of  a  work  of  reference,  I  have  still  endeavoured  to  express  the  principal
developments  of  science  as  they  concern  the  chemical  elements  viewed  in  that
aspect  in  which  they  appeared  to  me  after  long  continued  study  of  the  subject  and
participation  in  the  contemporary  advance  of  knowledge.

I  have  also  placed  my  personal  views,  suppositions,  and  arguments  in  the  foot-
notes, which  are  chiefly  designed  for  details  and  references.  But  I  have  endeavoured
to  avoid  here,  as  in  the  text,  not  only  all  that  I  consider  doubtful,  but  also  those
details  which  belong  either  to  special  branches  of  chemistry  (for  instance,  to
analytical,  organic,  physical,  theoretical,  physiological,  agricultural,  or  technical
chemistry),  or  to  <lifferent  branches  of  natural  science  which  are  more  and  more
coming  into  closer  and  clofer  contact  with  chemistry. Chemistry,  I  am  convinced,

PREFACE  XI

although  the  fundamental  object  of  this  work  was  to  express  and
embrace  the  general  chemical  teaching  of  the  present  day  from  a
personal  point  of  view,  I  have  nevertheless  striven  throughout  to
maintain  such  a  level  as  would  render  the  '  Principles  of  Chemistry '
accessible  to  the  beginner.  Many  aspects  of  this  work  are  deter-
mined by  this  combination  of  requirements  which  frequently  differ
widely.  An  issue  was  only  possible  under  one  condition,  i.e.  not
to  be  carried  away  by  what  appears  to  be  a  plausible  theory  in  ex-
plaining individual  facts  and  to  always  endeavour  to  transmit  the
simple  truth  of  a  given  fact,  extracting  it  from  the  vast  store  of  the
literature  of  the  subject  and  from  tried  personal  experience.  In
publishing  a  new  edition  of  this  work  I  have  striven  to  add  any  facts
of  importance  recently  discovered  ^  and  to  revise  the  former  edition
in  the  above  spirit.  With  thig  object  I  have  entirely  gone  over  this
edition,  and  a  comparison  of  it  with  the  former  one  will  show  that
the  additions  and  alterations  have  cost  as  much  labour  as  many

mnst  occupy  a  place  among  the  natural  sciences  side  by  side  with  mechanics ;  for
mechanics  treats  of  matter  as  a  system  of  ponderable  points  having  scarcely  any
individuality  and  only  standing  in  a  certain  state  of  mobile  equilibrium.  For
chemistry,  matter  is  an  entire  world  of  life,  with  an  infinite  variety  of  individuality
both  in  the  elements  and  in  their  combinations.  In  studying  the  general
uniformity  from  a  mechanical  point  of  view^,  I  think'  that  the  highest  point  of
knowledge  of  nature  cannot  be  attained  without  taking  into  account  the  indi-
\'idnality  of  things  in  which  chemistry  is  set  to  seek  for  general  higher  laws.
Mechanics  may  be  likened  to  the  science  of  statesmanship,  chemistry  to  the  sciences
of  jurisprudence  and  sociology.  The  general  universe  could  not  be  built  up  without
the  particular  individual  universe,  and  would  be  a  dry  abstract  were  it  not  enlivened
by  the  real  variety  of  the  individual  world.  Mechanics  forms  the  classical  basis  of
natural  philosophy,  while  chemistry,  as  n  comparatively  new  and  still  young  science,
already  strives  to— and  will,  in  the  future— introduce  a  new,  living  aspect  into
the  philosophy  of  nature  ;  all  the  more  as  chemistry  alone  is  never  at  rest  or  any-
where dead — its  vital  action  has  universal  sway,  and  inevitably  determines  the
general  aspect  of  the  universe.  Just  as  the  microscope  and  telescope  enlarge  the
scope  of  vision,  and  discover  life  in  seeming  immobility,  so  chemistry,  in  discovering
and  striving  to  discern  the  life  of  the  invisible  world  of  atoms  and  molecules
and  their  ultimate  limit  of  divisibility,  will  clearly  introduce  new  and  important
problems  into  our  conception  of  nature.  And  I  think  that  its  roky  which  is  now
considerable,  will  increase  more  and  more  in  the  future ;  that  is,  I  think  that  in
its  further  development  it  will  occupy  a  place  side  by  side  with  mechanics  for  the
comprehension  of  the  secrets  of  nature.  JJut  here  we  require  some  second  Newton  ;
and  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  will  soon  appear.

'  I  was  much  helped  in  gathering;  data  from  the  various  chemical  journals  of
the  last  five  years  by  the  abstracts  made  for  me  by  Mr.  V.  V.  KourillolT,  to  whom  I
tender  my  best  thanks.

XU  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

chapters  of  the  work.  I  also  wished  tx)  show  in  an  elementary
treatise  on  chemistry  the  striking  advantages  gained  by  the
application  of  the  periodic  law,  which  I  first  saw  in  its  entirety  in
the  year  1869  when  I  was  engaged  in  writing  the  first  edition  of
this  book,  in  which,  indeed,  the  law  was  first  enunciated.  At  that
time,  however,  this  law  was  not  established  so  firmly  as  now,  when
80  many  of  its  consequences  have  been  verified  by  the  researches  of
numerous  chemists,  and  especially  byRoscoe,  Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran,
Nilson,  Brauner,  Thorpe,  Carnelley,  Laurie,  Winkler,  and  others.
The,  to  me,  unexpectedly  rapid  success  with  which  the  teaching
of  the  periodicity  of  the  elements  has  spread  in  our  science,  and
perhaps  also,  the  perseverance  with  which  I  collected  in  this  work,
and  upon  a  new  plan,  the  most  important  data  respecting  the  ele-
ments and  their  mutual  relations,  pxplained  suflSciently  the  fact
that  the  former  (5th,  1889)  edition  of  my  work  has  been  translated
into  English  *  and  German  *  and  is  being  translated  into
French.®  Deeply  touched  by  the  favourable  opinions  expressed
by  English  men  of  science  upon  my  book,  I  ascribe  them  chiefly  to
the  periodic  law  placed  at  the  basis  of  my  treatise  and  especially  of
the  second  part  of  the  book,  which  contains  a  large  amount  of  data
having  a  special  and  sometimes  quite  unexpected,  bearing  from
the  point  of  view  of  this  law.  As  the  entire  scheme  of  this  work
is  subordinated  to  the  law  of  periodicity,  which  may  be  illustrated  in
a  tabular  form  by  placing  the  elements  in  series,  groups,  and  periods,
two  such  tables  are  given  at  the  end  of  this  preface.

In  this  the  sixth  edition  I  have  not  altered  anv  essential  feature
of  the  original  work,  and  have  retained  those  alterations  which
were  introduced  into  the  fifth  edition.^ I  have,  however,  added

^  The  English  translation  was  made  by  O.  Kamensky,  and  edited  by  A.  J.
Greenaway ;  published  by  Longmans,  Qreen  <&  Co.

*  The  German  translation  was  made  by  L.  Jawein  and  A.  Thillot ;  published
by  Bicker  (St.  Petersburg).

*  The  French  translation  has  been  commenced  by  E.  Achkinasi  and  H.  Carrion
from  the  fifth  edition,  and  is  published  by  Tignol  (Paris).

'  The  fifth  edition  was  not  only  considerably  enlarged,  compared  with  the
preceding,  but  also  the  foundations  of  the  periodic  system  of  the  elements  were
placed  far  more  firmly  in  it  than  in  the  former  editions.  The  subject-matter  was
also  divided  into  text  and  footnotes,  which  contained  details  unnecessary  for  a  first
acquaintance  with  chemistry. The  fifth  edition  sold  out  sooner  liian  1  expected,

PREFACE  XIU

many  newly  discovered  facts,  and  in  this  respect  it  is  necessary  to
say  a  few  words.  Although  all  aspects  of  the  simplest  chemical
relations  are  as  far  as  possible  equally  developed  in  this  book,  yet
on  looking  back  I  see  that  I  have,  nevertheless,  given  most
attention  to  the  so-called  indefinite  compounds  examples  of  which
may  be  seen  in  solutions.  I  recur  repeatedly  to  them,  and  to
all  the  latest  data  respecting  them,  for  in  them  I  see  a  starting
point  for  the  future  progress  of  our  science  and  to  them  I
affiliate  numerous  instances  of  definite  compounds,  beginning
with  alloys  and  silicates  and  ending  with  complex  acids.  There
are  two  reasons  for  this.  In  the  first  place,  this  subject  has
deeply  interested  me  from  my  youth  ;  I  have  devoted  a  portion  of
my  own  researches  to  it,  and  therefore  it  occupied  an  important
position  even  in  the  first  edition  of  my  book  ;  besides  which  all  that
has  been  subsequently  accomplished  in  our  science,  especially  during
the  last  five  or  six  years,  shows  that  at  the  present  day  an  interest
in  these  questions  plays  an  important  part  in  the  minds  of  a
large  circle  of  contemporary  workers  in  chemistry.  This  personal
attachment,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  to  the  question  of  solutions  and
such  indefinite  compounds,  must  involuntarily  have  impressed  itself
upon  my  work,  and  in  the  later  editions  I  have  even  had  to  strive
not  to  give  this  subject  a  greater  development  than  previously,
so  great  was  the  material  accumulated,  which  however  does  not
yet  give  us  the  right  to  consider  even  the  most  elementary  questions
respecting  solutions  as  solved.  Thus,  we  cannot  yet  say  what  a
solution  really  is.  My  own  view  is  that  a  solution  is  a  homo-
geneous liquid  system  of  unstable  dissociating  compounds  of
the  solvent  with  the  substance  dissolved.  But  although  such  a
theory  explains  much  to  me,  I  cannot  consider  my  opinion
as  proved,  and  therefore  give  it  with  some  reser\'e  as  one  of
several  hypotheses.* As  a  subject  yet  far  from  solved,  I  might

8o  that  instead  of  issuing  supplements  (containing  the  latent  discoveries  in
chemistry),  as  I  had  proposed,  I  was  obliged  to  publish  the  present  entirely  new
edition  of  the  work.

"  This  hypothesis  is  not  only  mentioned  in  different  parts  of  this  book,  but  is
partly  (from  the  aspect  of  the  specific  gravity  of  solutions)  developed  in  my  work,
Tfu  Investigation  of  Solutions  from  their  Specific  Gravity,  1887.

XIV  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

naturally  have  ignored  it,  or  only  mentioned  it  cursorily,  but  such  a
treatment  of  solutions,  although  usual  in  elementary  treatises  on
chemistry,  would  not  have  answered  my  views  upon  the  subject  of
our  science,  and  I  wished  that  the  reader  might  find  in  my  book
beyond  everything  an  expression  of  all  that  a  study  of  the  subject
built  up  for  me.  If  in  solutions  I  see  and  can  frequently  prove
distinct  evidences  of  the  existence  of  those  definite  compounds
which  form  the  more  generalised  province  of  chemical  data,  I
•could  not  I'efrain  from  going  into  certain  details  respecting
solutions ;  otherwise,  there  would  have  remained  no  trace  of  that
•general  idea,  that  in  them  we  have  only  a  certain  instance  of  ordi-
nary definite  or  atomic  compounds,  subject  to  Dalton's  laws.
Having  long  had  this  idea,  I  wished  to  impress  it  upon  the
reader  of  my  book,  and  it  is  this  desire  which  forms  the  second  of
those  chief  reasons  why  I  recur  so  frequently  to  solutions  in  this
work.  At  present,  my  ideas  respecting  solutions  are  shared  by
few,  but  I  trust  that  by  degrees  the  instances  I  give  will  pave
the  way  for  their  general  recognition,  and  it  is  my  hope  that  they
may  find  adherents  among  those  of  my  readers  who  are  in  a
position  to  work  out  by  experiment  this  difficult  but  higlily
interesting  problem.

In  conclusion,  I  desire  to  record  my  thanks  to  W  D.  Saix)genikoff',
who  has  corrected  the  proofs  of  the  whole  of  this  edition  and  com-
piled the  indexes  which  greatly  facilitate  the  search  for  those
details  which  are  scattered  throughout  the  work.

D. MENDELfiEET.

XV

ft.

.2

•  •  •

6  S  I A

•  ■  •

o  5  I w

w  «  II

Pn . ;^  . I  .1 .1

O . o  . S  . I . E^ . U5

. ^ .  ^ .  ^ . I . g .

IH % v^  .^  .G .E^ •

, ^  O  Ol I Ct4

O . H  . M  . O .1 . H

-<  O  *5 I H

W . CO  . ><  . iJ . >H . I

?2  N  o I X

M ^  *-■  ^ I I

W . o  . X  . a . I .1

fe  S£,  :S i

« HH ^^  '^  • ^J • '

rH  f-l  »-•

O

C = r i  r :  J z i z : -

o

oa

° ;

3 I

o

o

a

a
o

Q. o te
p;; « «

o

p;

p^

o
p^

I I

o o

«" P5

o ,

VOL. I,

a

XVlll  TRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

CIIArTKR  TAOK

X. SODIUM CHLORIDE. BRRTHOLLET*S LAWS. HYDROCHLORIC ACID .  417

XI. THE HALOGENS  : CHLORINE, BROMINE, IODINE AND FLUORINE . .  4.59

XII. SODIUM 518

XIII.  POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, CJESIUM AND LITHIUM.  SPECTRUM

ANALYSIS 543

XIV.  THE VALENCY AND SPECIFIC HEAT OF THE METALS. MAGNESIUM,

CALCIUM, STRONTIUM, BARIUM, AND BERYLLIUM . . .  581

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

INTEODUCTION

The  study  of  natural  science,  whose  rapid  development  dates  from
the  days  of  Galileo  (tl642)  and  Newton  (tl727),  and  its  closer  applica-
tion to  the  external  universe  ^  led  to  the  separation  of  Chemistry  as  a

1  The  investigation  of  a  substance  or  a  natural  phenomenon  consists  (a)  in  determin-
ing the  relation  of  the  object  under  examination  to  that  which  is  already  known,  either
from  previous  researches,  or  from  eicperiment,  or  from  the  knowledge  of  the  common
riurronndings  of  life — that  is,  in  determining  and  expressing  the  quality  of  the  unknown
by  the  aid  of  that  which  is  known ;  (b)  in  measuring  all  that  which  can  be  subjected  to
measurement,  and  thereby  denoting  the  quantitative  relation  of  that  imder  investigation
to  that  already  known  and  its  relation  to  the  categories  of  time,,  space,  temperature,
mass,  &c. ;  (r)  in  determining  the  position  held  by  the  object  under  investigation  in  the
system  of  known  objects  guided  by  both  qualitative  and  quantitative  data ;  {d)  in  de-
termining, from  the  quantities  which  have  been  measured,  the  empirical  (visible)  depen-
dence (function,  or  '  law,'  as  it  is  sometimes  termed)  of  variable  factors — for  instance,  the
dependence  of  the  composition  of  the  substance  on  its  properties,  of  temperature  on
time,  of  time  on  locality,  &c. ;  (e)  in  framing  hypotheses  or  propositions  as  to  the  actual
cause  and  true  nature  of  the  relation  between  that  studied  (measured  or  observed)  and
that  which  is  known  or  the  categories  of  time,  space,  &c. ;  (/)  in  verifying  the  logical
consequences  of  the  h3rpothe8es  by  experiment ;  and  {g)  in  advancing  a  theory  which
Khali  account  for  the  nature  of  the  properties  of  that  studied  in  its  relations  with  things
already  known  and  with  those  conditions  or  categories  among  which  it  exists.  It  is
certain  that  it  is  only  possible  to  carry  out  these  investigations  when  we  have  taken  as
a  basis  some  incontestable  fact  which  is  self-evident  to  our  imderstanding ;  as,  for  instance,
number,  time,  space,  motion,  or  mass.  The  determination  of  such  primary  or  fimda-
mental  conceptions,  although  not  excluded  from  the  possibility  of  investigation,  frequently
does  not  subject  itself  to  our  present  mode  of  scientific  generalisation.  Hence  it  follows
that  in  the  investigation  of  anything,  there  always  remains  something  which  is  accepted
without  investigation,  or  admitted  as  a  known  factor.  The  axioms  of  geometry  may  be
taken  as  an  example.  Thus  in  the  science  of  biology  it  is  necessary  to  admit  the  faculty
of  organisms  for  multiplying  themselves,  as  a  conception  whose  meaning  is  as  yet
unknown.  In  the  study  of  chemistry,  too,  the  notion  of  elements  must  be  accepted  almost
without  any  further  analysis.  However,  by  first  investigating  that  which  is  visible  and
Hubject  to  direct  observation  by  the  organs  of  the  senses,  we  may  hoi)e  that  in  the  first
place  hypotheses. will  be  arrived  at,  and  afterwards  theories  of  that  which  has  now  to  be
placed  at  the  basis  of  our  investigations.  The  minds  of  the  ancients  strove  to  seize  at
once  the  very  fundamental  categories  of  investigation,  whilst  all  the  successes  of  recent

YOU  I.  B

I

1

partioulur  branch  of  tiatuj'al  philosophy,  not  only  owing  to  the  in-  I
creasing  store  of  observations  and  experiments  relating  to  the  mutut^J
transformations  of  substances,  but  also,  and  more  especially,  becaussa
in  addition  to  gravity,  cohesion,  heat,  light  and  electricity  it  becatiiel
necessary  to  recognise  the  existence  of  particular  internal  forces  in  the'a
ultimate  parts  of  all  substances,  forces  which  make  themselves  tnani-  I
feat  in  the  transformations  of  substances  into  one  another,  hut  remain  M
hidden  (latent)  under  ordinary  circumstances,  and  whose  existence  can-  I
not  tlierefore  be  directly  apprehended,  and  so  for  a  long  time  remained  \
unrecognised.  The  primary  object  of  chemistry  is  the  study  of  the  I
homogeiieoua  substances "  of  which  all  the  objects  of  the  universe  are  J

knowledge  are  bused  an  tho  nbovo-cited  method  of  InveBtigntion  withnnt  the  detarmin^  fl
tion  of '  the  bcginuing  of  &11  beginningn.' B;  Follawin;  thia  iuductive  method,  the  ezootfl
■nencsi  hare  alrend;  BDCcesded  in  bucoming  occurateij  ncctnnintcd  with  mnch  ol  tha J
inviaible  world,  which  diieotlf  i«  imperceptible  to  (he  organs  of  wnse  (for  ei&mple.  Um
molecular  raotion  ot  uU  bodies,  the  compoaition  of  the  heavenly  luminnries,  the  patha  ol
thtir  motion,  the  neceaait;  tor  the  ei»ten«e  of BubatoDcea  which  cuinot  be  ■□bjocted
to  eiperiment,  &e,),  and  have  veriSed  tlie  lmawled|;e  thas  obtained,  uid  emptoyed  il  tor
increBiBiiig  the  intereBta  of  hnmonity. It  may  theretoie  be  aafely  BSid  that  Ike  indtie- I
tivK  method  of  invatigation  ia  a  more  perfect  mode  of  acqairing  knowledge  thui  tlMV
dedostive  method  alone  (Hl«rting  from  a  little  of  the  unknown  accepted  aa  incontMtaUqifl
to  snive  at  the  mnch  which  is  visible  and  observHble)  by  which  the  uicients  atroTa  Mi^
embrace  the  oniTerBc.  By  inTeatigatingthenniveme  by  an  indnctive  method  (endeavoar-
ing  from  the  mach  which  is  ohserrable  to  arrive  at  a  little  which  may  b«  verified  and
is  inrtnbitable)  the  new  science  refnaaa  to  reoDgnise  dogma  ui  truth,  but  through  reiuon,
by  a  slow  and  laborioua method  of invesligntiou,  strives  tor  and  attains  to  true  de-

*  A  Bubatauce  or  material  ia  that  wliieh  occupiea  apace  aud  has  weight ;  thai  i^  J
which  presents  a  mass  attraated  by  the  earth  and  by  other  tnfUBSB  of  material,  and  of 'I
which  the  objeeii  of  nature  are  compoaed,  aud  by  means  of  which  the  i
phenomena  of  nature  are  acaomphshed.  It  ia  easy  to  diacovcr  by  examinini
iDTeatigating,  by  variouB  methods,  the  objects  met  with  in  nature  and  in  the  aifa,  Vk
name  of  them  are  homogeneoaa,  whilst  others  are  mmposed  of  a  mixture  of  s
homogeneous  substances.  This  is  most  clearly  apparent  in  solid  snbnti
mclals  used  in  the  arta  (lor  eiample,  golcl,  iron,  copper)  muat  be  homogeneous,  otherwiH  \
they  are  brittle  and  unSt  for  man;  purpoaes.  Homogeneous  matter  exhibits  eilnnM
propertiee  in  all  ita  parts.  By  breaking'  up  a  Ijomogeoeous  sabstsnce  we  obtain  parti
which,  although  dilTorent  in  form,  resemble  each  other  in  their  properties.  Qlau,  pun
sugar,  marble,  &c..  are  eiamplea  of  homugeneona  Bubalances.  Eiamples  of  DOU-hcnBO-
geneons  Bubatances  are.  however,  much  more  frequent  in  nature  and  the  arta.  Thna
the  majority  of  the  rocks  are  not  homogeneous,  la  porphyries  bright  pieces  of  a  miners
nailed  '  orthoolsBs '  are  often  seen  lutersperseil  amongst  the  dark  mass  of  the  rook.  In
ordinary  red  granite  it  ia  easy  to  distinguish  large  pieces  of  orthoclaBe  mixed  with  dark
■emi- transparent  qaartz  and  flexible  lamiUB  of  mica,  Simihirly,  plants  and  animala  an
Don-homogeneoua.  Thus,  leaves  are  composed  ol  a  skin,  fibre,  pulp,  sap,  and  a  gmm
oolouring  matter.  As  an  example  of  thone  non-homogeaeoua  subetancea  which  are  fn>-
dueed  artificially,  gonpowdet  may  be  cited,  which  is  prepared  by  mixing  together  known
proportions  of  sulphur,  nitre,  and  charcoal.  Many  liquids,  aUn,  are  not  homogeneona,  u
may  be  obBerred  by  the  aid  of  the  microacope,  when  drops  of  blood  are  seen  to  consist  of
a  colourless  liqoid  in  which  red  corpuaclea,  invisible  (o  the  naked  eye  owing  lo  their
■mall  siie,  are  floating  abonL It  it  these  corpoacles  which  giire  blood  its  pecnliai  ecJour.

J

ESTBOOUOTION

tde  up,  with  the  imnsformations  of  these  substances  into  OBch  other,
vith  the  phenomena.'  which  accompany  sftch  tranaformationa.
Every  chetnicaJ  change  or  reaction,^  an  it  is  called,  can  only  take  place
under  a  condition  i>t  most  intimate  and  dose  contact  of  tjie  re-acting

^pllbstancea,''  and  ia  detenuined  by  the  forces  proper  to  the  Bmallest
fatvisible  particles  (molecules)  of  matter.  We  must  di^tiuguisl)  three
Bhief  classes  of  chemical  transformations.
1.  Cotnbitiation  is  a  reaction  in  which  the  union  of  two  substances
yields  a  new  one,  or  in  general  terms,  from  a  given  number  of  sub-
stance.s,  a  lesser  number  is  obtained.  Thus,  by  heating  a  mixture  of
iron  and  sulphur^  a  single  new  substance  is  produced,  iron  sulphide,  in

Hilk  is  alsu  It  trejinparent  liqoid.  in  wliiob  mici-oBCdpiaul  drapa  of  int  aie  Qoatiug,  vliicfa
rise  to  the  top  wbeu  milk  ia  Isft  at  rest,  forming  cream.  It  19  puaaible  to  extinct  (toid
Lon-botoogenealiH  sabstaiice  bhoae  hom.ogeneontt  BobetiLDCUa  of  which  it  ib  made
Thus  orthocUBe  maj  he  sapunited  from  porphyry  bj  breaking  it  off.  9o  also  gold  ia
aariterong  sand  hy  waBhing  away  tbd  miiture  of  day  and  sand.
■try  deals  only  with  the  homogeDeonB  anhstaDL-eB  met  with  in  nature,  or  eitiacWd
natural  or  artificial  naD-homogeneoDs  sabEtauceii.  The  various  miitnceB  found
nature  form  the  aubjectB  ot  otlier  natnraL sciaocaa — aa  geognosy,  botany,  ecology,

All  Ihoaa  events  which  are  auoompliBhed  by  EubataDcea  ia  time  are  tensed  '  pheno-
Phenonieiia  in  themuelvea  form  the  [nndainou
the  (iriioary  and  moat  generally  nndarstooc
tore  we  endeavour  to  rcoaon  about  other  pheODtiieou  He  uleuly  na  whou  dealing  with  motion.
For  IhiB  reacon  mechanica,  which  treatH  ol  raotioQi  forma  the  fundamental  science  ol
natnial  philocophy,  and  sll  other  eciences  endeavour  to  reduce  the  phenomena  with
which  they  are  eoDc«med  to  mechanical  principles.  Astronomy  waa  the  Qrat  to  take
to  this  path  of  reSMiuing,  aad  Bucceeded  in  many  eaaea  iu  reduciug  aBtronomical  to
pnraly  mecbanieal  phenomena.  Chemistry  and  physics,  phyaiotogy  and  biology  are  pro-
eeediogin  the  same  direction.  One  of  tlie  moat  important  questions  ot  all  natural  science,
and  one  which  has  been  handed  down  from  tlae  philo«ophers  of  claasic  times,  ia,  whether
the  comprehension  of  all  tliat  is  visible  can  Ug  reduced  to  motion  ?  Its  participation  in
all,  boat  the  '  fl<ed '  stars  to  the  moat  minute  parts  of  tlie  coldest  bodies  (Dewar.  in  1SB«
showed  that  many  subatance  a  cooled  to  —180°  fluoiesce  more  atrongly  than  at  the  ordinary
ie.  that  there  is  a  motion  in  them  which  produces  light)  must  now  be
ondoubtable  from  direct  experiment  and  ohservatioD.  bnt  it  does  not  follow
from  tbia  that  by  motion  alone  can  all  be  explained.  This  folhiwa,  however,  from  the
fact  tlut  we  cannot  apprehend  motion  otherwise  than  by  cecogniaing  matter  in  a  state
motion.  If  light  and  eleutricity  bo  understood  aa  particular  forma  ot  motion,  then  we
inevitably  recognise  the  existence  of  a  peculiar  Inminiteroua  (universal)  etiier  as  a
ial,  truismitting  this  tonn  of  motion.  And  so,  under  the  present  stale  of  know-
inevitably  necessaiy  to  recogoiao  the  particular  calegoriBs,  motion  and  matter,
as  chemistry  ia  more  doselyconoemedwitli  the  various  forms  ot  the  latter,  it  should,
lagMber  with  mechanica  or  the  study  of  motion,  Lie  at  the  basis  of  natural  science,

*  The  verb  '  to  react '  meaua  to  act  or  change  chemically.

*  If  a  phenomenon  proceeds  at  visible  or  meaaurable  dietoncea  (aa,  tor  ingtaticr.
Itraction  or  gravity),  it  cannot  be  desoiibed  aa  chemical,  suite  these  phenomena
ilaoe  at  distances  immeasurably  nioM  and  undiatinguishable  lo  the  eye  or  the

;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  purely  molecular.

Ilia  pnrpoBB  a  piece  ot  iron  may  be  made  red  hot  in  a  forge,  and  then  placed
with  a  tump  of  snlphoc,  when  iron  Bulphide  will  be  obtained  aa  a  molten

PBINOfPlis'  OF COffiSTE^

which  the  constituent  substiinces  cannot  lie  distinguished  even  by
the  highest  magnifying  power.  Before  the  reaction,  the  iron  could  be
Bepnrated  from  the  mixture  by  a,  magnet,  and  the  sulphur  by  diBsolving
it  in  certain  oily  liquids  ; '  in  general,  before  combination  they  might
be  mechanically  separated  from  each  other,  but  after  combination  both
substances  penetrate  into  each  other,  and  are  then  neither  mechanieallj
separable  nor  individually  distingttishable.  As  a  rule,  reactions  ot
direct  combination  are  accompanied  by  an  evolution  of  heat,  and  the
common  case  of  combustion,  evolving  heat,  consists  in  the  combination
of  combustible  substances  with  a  portion  {oxygen)  of  the  atmosphere,
the  gases  and  vapours  contained  in  the  smoke  being  the  pri')ducts  of
combination.

2.  Reactions  of  decomptmtion  are  caaes  the  rererae  of  those
combination,  that  is,  in  which  one  sabatance  gives  two — or,  in  general,
given  number  of  substances  a  greater  number.  Thus,  by  heating  wood
(and  also  coal  and  maiiy  animal  or  vegetable  substances)  without
to  air,  a  combustible  gus,  a  watery  liquid,  tar,  and  carbon  are  obtaine<L
It  is  in  this  way  that  tar,  illuminating  gas,  and  charcoal  are  prepared
on  a  large  scale.*  Al!  limestones,  fur  example,  flagstones,  chalk,
marble,  are  decomposed  by  heating  to  rediiess  inti>  lime  and  a  peculiar
gas  called  carbonic  anhydride.  A  similar  decomposition,  taking  pUoe,
however,  at  a  much  lower  temperature,  proceeds  with  the  green  copper
carbonate  which  is  contained  iii  natural  malachite.  This  example  will
be  studied  more  in  detail  presently.  Whilst  heat  is  evolved
ordinary  reactions  of  combination,  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  absorbed
the  reactions  of  decomposition.

3.  The  tliird  class  of  chemical  reactions— where  the  number  at]
re- acting  substances  is  equal  to  tlie  number  of  substances  formed-

ot

4

liquid,  the  combinatiou  being  nvcompcuiied  by  ■  visible  i
Or  elsa  iron  filiDgg  are  miied  with  powdered  sulphur  ia
to  8  piutn  oF  aolpbur.  and  the  tuiilnre  phued  in  a  glass  t
place.  CombiuDition  does  not  commenoe  vithout  the  aid
atarled  in  uij  portion  of  the  iniitiire  it  eiteDds  tliroa

adjacsBt  parlg  ot  the  n-

rise  in  temperature  thus  produced  ii

'  Sulphur  is  sUghtlf  (oluble  in  n
and  in  some  other  lirinids.  lion  is  i
tore  uao  be  dissolved  away  from  the

'  Decomposition  ot  this  kind  ia
the  sabstanoe  ia  heated  and  rapa
liqnids.  Id  general,  decomposition,
physical  change  of  Btat»— such  as,
liXened  «jmplete  decoiupotiition  to  1

acrca-ue  in  the  glow  uf  tha  ii
Jie  proportion  of  S  parts  ot  i>
ibe,  which  is  then  heated  in  a
of  external  heat,  bat  irhea  M
;hoat  the  entire  uaK

ilphide  to  tikiie  thC
e  the  reaotioB. Tbt

^niparature  required  foral
Ki  high  as  to  soften  the  gli
anylhinoiU;  it  ia  very  solnhle  in  carbon
isoluhle  in  carbon  bisulphide,  and  the  snlpbi

tenned'dry  distillation,' because,  as  in  dial

ira  are  given  oft  which,  on  o

m  absorbing  hoal,  presents  much  in  eommon  to  K

tor  example,  that  of  a  liquid  into  a  gas. Devilla

oiling,  and  compared  parUal  decamposition,  w'

le  presence  ol

te  products  ot  decomposKum

I

INTRODUCTION  5

be  considered  as'  a  simultaneous  decomposition  and  combination.  If,
for  instance,  two  compounds  A  and  B  are  taken  and  they  react  on  each
other  to  form  the  substances  C  and  D,  then  supposing  that  A  is
decomposed  into  D  and  E,  and  that  E  combines  with  B  to  form  C,  we
have  a  reaction  in  which  two  substances  A,  or  D  E,  and  B  were  taken
and  two  others  C,  or  E  B,  and  D  were  produced.  Such  reactions
ought  to  be  placed  under  the  general  term  of  reactions  of  ^recMrrange-
ment,*  and  the  particular  case  where  two  substances  give  two  fresh
ones,  reactions  of  *  substitution.*^  Thus,  if  a  piece  of  iron  be  immersed
in  a  solution  of  blue  vitriol  (copper  sulphate),  copper  is  formed — or,
rather,  separated  out,  and  green  vitriol  (iron  sulphate,  which  only
differs  from  the  blue  vitriol  in  that  the  iron  has  replaced  the  copper)  is
obtained  in  solution.  In  this  manner  iron  may  be  coated  with  copper,
so  also  copper  with  silver  ;  such  reactions  are  frequently  made  use  of
in  practice.

The  majority  of  the  chemical  changes  which  occur  in  nature  and
are  made  use  of  technically  are  very  complicated,  as  they  consist  of  an
association  of  many  separate  and  simultaneous  combinations,  decom-
positions, and  replacements.  It  is  chiefly  due  to  this  natural  complexity
of  chemical  phenomena  that  for  so  many  centuries  chemistry  did  not
exist  as  an  exact  science  ;  that  is  so  say,  that  although  many  chemical
changes  were  known  and  made  use  of,'^  yet  their  real  nature  was
unknown,  nor  could  they  be  predicted  or  directed  at  will.  Another
reason  for  the  tardy  progress  of  chemical  knowledge  is  the  participation
of  gaseous  substances,  especially  air,  in  many  reactions.  The  true
comprehension  of  air  as  a  ponderable  substance,  and  of  gases  in  general
as  peculiar  elastic  and  dispersive  states  of  matter,  was  only  arrived  at
in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  and  it  was  only  after  this
that  the  transformations  of  substances  could  form  a  science.  Up  to
that  time,  without  understanding  the  invisible  and  yet  ponderable
gaseous  and  vaporous  states  of  substances,  it  was  impossible  to  obtain
any  fundamental  chemical  evidence,  because  gases  escaped  from  notice

^  A  reaction  of  rearrangement  may  in  certain  cases  take  place  with  one  substance
only ;  that  is  to  say,  a  substance  may  by  itself  change  into  a  new  isomeric  form.  Thus,
for  example,  if  hard  yellow  sulphur  be  heated  to  a  temperature  of  250^  and  then  poured
into  cold  water  it  gives,  on  cooling,  a  soft,  brown  variety.  Ordinary  phosphorus,  which
is  transparent,  poisonous,  and  phosphorescent  in  the  dark  (in  the  air),  gives,  after  being
heated  at  270^  (in  an  atmosphere  incapable  of  supporting  combustion,  such  as  steam),  an
opaque,  red,  and  non-poisonous  isomeric  variety,  which  is  not  phosphorescent.  Cases  of
isomerism  point  out  the  possibility  of  an  internal  rearrangement  in  a  substance,  and  are
the  result  of  an  alteration  in  the  grouping  of  the  same  elements,  just  as  a  certain  number
of  balls  may  be  grouped  in  figures  and  forms  of  different  shapes.

*®  Thus  the  ancients  knew  how  to  convert  the  juice  of  grapes  containing  the  saccharine
principle  (glucose)  into  wine  or  vinegar,  how  to  extract  metals  from  the  ores  which  are
foimd  in  the  earth's  crust,  and  how  to  prepare  glass  from  earthy  substances.

6  PRINCIELES  OF  CHEMISTRY

between  the  reacting  and  resultant  sabstances. It  is  easy  from  the
impression  conveyed  to  as  by  the  phenomena  we  observe  to  form  the
opinion  that  matter  is  created  and  destroyed :  a  whole  mass  of  trees
bum,  and  there  only  remains  a  little  charcoal  and  ash,  whilst  from  one
small  seed  there  grows  little  by  little  a  majestic  tree. In  one  case
matter  seems  to  be  destroyed,  and  in  the  other  to  be  created. This
conclusion  is  arrived  at  because  the  formation  or  consumption  of  gases,
being  under  the  circumstances  invisible  to  the  eye,  is  not  observed.
When wood bums  it undergoes  a chemical change  into gaseous
products,  which  escape  as smoke. A  very  simple  experiment  will
prove this. By collecting  the  ismoke it may  be  observed  that  it
contains gases  which differ entirely  from air, being  incapable  of
supporting  combustion  or  respiration. These  gases  may  be  weighed,
and  it  will  then  be  seen  that  their  weight  exceeds  that  of  the  wood
taken. This  increase  in  weight  arises  from  the  fact  that,  in  bumingj
the  component  parts  of  the  wood  combine  with  a  portion  of  the  air  ;  in
like  manner  iron  increases  in  weight  by  rusting. In  burning  gunpowder
its  substance  is  not  destroyed, but  only  converted into  gases  and
smoke. So  also  in  the  growth  of  a  tree  ;  the  seed  does  not  increase  in
mass  of  itself  and  from  itself,  but  grows  because  it  absorbs  gases  from
the  atmosphere  and  sucks  water  and  substances  dissolved  therein  from
the  earth  through  its  roots. The  sap  and  solid  substances  which  give
plants  their  form  are  produced  from  these  absorbed  gases  and  liquids
by  complicated  chemical  processes. The  gases  and  liquids  are  converted
into  solid  substances  by  the  plants  themselves. Plants  not  only  do
not  increase in  size,  but  die,  in  a  gas  which  does  not  contain the
constituents  of  air. When  moist  substances  dry  they  decrease  in  weight ;
when  water  evaporates  we  know  that  it  does  not  disappear,  but  will
return  from  the  atmosphere  as  rain,  dew,  and  snow. When  water  is
absorbed by  the earth,  it does not  disappear  there for  ever,  but
accumulates  somewhere  underground,  from  whence  it  ^afterwards  flows
forth  as  a  spring. Thus  matter  does  not  disappear  and  is  not  created,
but  only  undergoes  various  physical  and  chemical transformations —
that  is  to  say,  changes  its  locality  and  form. Matter  remains  on  the
earth  in  the  same  quantity  as  before  ;  in  a  word  it  is,  so  far  as  we  are
concerned,  everlasting. It  was difficult  to  submit  this  simple  and
primary  truth  of  chemistry  to  investigation,  but  when  once  made  clear
it  rapidly  spread,  and  now  seems  as  natural  and  simple  as  many  truths
which  have  been  acknowledged  for  ages. Mariotte  and  other  savants
oi  the  soventoonth  century  already  suspected  the  existence  of  the  law
^f  the  indestructibility  of  matter,  but  they  made  no  efforts  to  express
^^  or  to  apply  it  to  the  requirements  of  science* The  experiments  by

of  which  this  simple  law  was  arrived  at  were  made  during  the

half  of  the  last  century  by  the  founder  of  modem  chemistry,

lVoisier,  the  French  Acndemician  and  tax  farmer. The  numerous

tperimenta  of  this  savant  were  conducted  with  the  aid  of  the  balance,

which  is  the  only  means  of  directly  and  accurately  determining  the

quantity  of  matter.

Lavoisier  found,  by  weighing  all  the  substances,  and  even  the
apparatus,  used  in  every  experiment,  and  then  weighing  the  aubstances
lt>tained  after  the  chemical  change,  that  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the
.batauces  formed  was  always  ei]ua1  to  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the
'substances  taken  :  or,  in  other  words  :  Mattkr  is  not  crbated  and
DOKS  NOT  DISAPPBAR,  or  that,  matter  is  everlasting. This  expression
naturally  includes  a  hypothesis,  but  our  only  aim  in  using  it  is  to
condsely  express  the  foliowinglengthy  period— That  in  all  experiments,
and  in  all  the  investigated  phenomena  of  nature,  it  has  never  been
observed  that  the  weight  of  the  substances  formed  was  less  or  greater
(as  far  as  accuracy  of  weighing  permits  ")  than  the  weight  of  the  sub-
^(tenceS  originally  taken,  and  as  weight  is  proportional  to  mass  "  *^'  or
iDtityof  matter,  it  follows  thtkt  no  one  has  ever  succeeded  in  observ-
a  disappearance  of  matter  or  its  appearance  in  fresh  quantities.
law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter  endows  all  chemical  investi-
ktions  with  exactitude,  as,  on  its  liosi.s,  an  equation  may  be  foimed  for
'ery  chemical  reaction. If  in  any  reaction  the  weights  of  the  sub-
ices  taken  be  designated by  the letters  A,  B,  C, Ac., and the
reights  of  the  substances  formed  by  the  letters  M,  N,  0,  Ac,  then

I  +  N  +  O  +

Therefore,  should  the  weight  of  one  of  the  re-acting  or  resultant  sub-
■tauces  be  unknown,  it  may  be  detemuned  by  solving  the  equation.

"  The  oiperimcntit  condacted by  Stuu (deschbed  >u  deloil  in  Chsp.  XXIV.  on

Sa*<9r)  lonn  Bome  of  the  UDurateTreiearches,  proving  tlmt  tlie  weight  of  mntler  is  not

■Iterad  in  chomickl  teoetions,  because  he  amumtelj  weighed  (["trodQciDg  all  the  neces-

nn)  the reacting  and  reenltsnt  BnhsUuceij. Landolt  (18SS)  duried  on

ini  in  inverted  aiid  sealed  gUes  U-tvbes,  and  on  weighing  the  iahm  before

in  Iwhen  the  reacting  eolntiona  were  sepBrnled  in  euh  of  the  bruichea  of  the

id  BTter  ^when  the  aolntiona  had  been  well  mixed  logether  by  shaking),  Fonnd

ST  the  weight  remained  perfectly  ooniilant  or  that  the  vaiia^on  waa  «i  small

Dce,  0'9  milligruu  in  s  total  weight  of  ahont  n  million  mllligruDH)  wB  to  be

Eribed  lo  the  inevitable  enors  of  weighing.

'*  The  idea  of  the  mass  of  matter  was  first  shaped  into  an  eiact  fonn  bj  Galileo

id  ltl9),  and  more  capeciaUy  by  Newton  (born  IMS.  died  1737),  in  the  glorious  epoch

elapment  of  tlie  prinoii^cB  of  indaotive  reasoning  enonciated  by  Bacon  and

n  their  philosophical  treatises. Shortly  after  the  death  of  Newton.  I«voiaier,

sin  natural  philosophy  should  rank  with  thatof  OoUleo  and  Newton,  was  bom

M  9fl,  ITIS. The  death  of  Laraisier  occurred  during  the  Beign  of  Terror  of  Ui«

8  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  chemist,  in  applying  the  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter,
and  in  making  use  of  the  chemical  balance,  must  never  lose  sight  of
any  one  of  the  re-acting  or  resultant  substances.  Should  such  an  over-
sight be  made,  it  will  at  once  be  remarked  that  the  sum  of  the  weights
of  the  substances  taken  is  unequal  to  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the
substances  formed.  All  the  progress  made  by  chemistry  during  the
end  of  the  last,  and  in  the  present,  century  is  entirely  and  immovably
founded  on  the  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter.  It  is  absolutely
necessary  in  beginning  the  study  of  chemistry  to  become  familiar  with
the  simple  truth  which  is  expressed  by  this  law,  and  for  this  purpose
several  examples  elucidating  its  application  will  now  be  cited.

1.  It  is  well  known  that  iron  rusts  in  damp  air,^^  and  that  when
heated  to  redness  in  air  it  becomes  coated  with  scoria  (oxide),  having,
like  rust,  the  appearance  of  an  earthy  substance  resembling  some  of  the
iron  ores  from  which  metallic  iron  is  extracted.  If  the  iron  is  weighed
before  and  after  the  formation  of  the  scoria  or  rust,  it  will  be  found
that  the  metal  has  increased  in  weight  during  the  operation. '^  It
can  easily  be  proved  that  this  increase  in  weight  is  accomplished  at
the  expense  of  the  atmosphere,  and  mainly,  as  Lavoisier  proved,  at  the
expense  of  that  portion  which  is  called  oxygen.  In  fact,  in  a  vacuum,
or  in  gases  which  do  not  contain  oxygen,  for  instance,  in  hydrogen  or
nitrogen,  the  iron  neither  rusts  nor  becomes  coated  with  scoria.  Had
the  iron  not  been  weighed,  the  participation  of  the  oxygen  of  the  atmo-
sphere in  its  transformation  into  an  earthy  substance  might  have  easily
passed  unnoticed,  as  was  formerly  the  case,  when  phenomena  like  tlie
above  were,  for  this  reason,  misunderstood. It  is  evident  from  the

French  Revolution,  when  lie,  togetlier  with  twenty-six  other  chief  fanners  of  the  revenue,
was  guillotinc'd  on  May  8,  1794,  at  Paris;  but  his  works  and  ideas  have  made  him
immortal.

^*  By  covering  iron  with  an  enamel,  or  varnish,  or  with  unrustablo  nietuls  (such  as
nickel),  or  u  coating  of  paraffin,  or  other  similar  substances,  it  is  protected  from  the  air
and  moisture,  and  so  kept  from  rusting.

^5  Such  an  experiment  may  easily  be  made  by  taking  the  finest  (unrusted)  iron  fiUngs
(ordinary  filings  must  be  first  washed  in  ether,  dried,  and  passed  through  a  very  fine
sieve).  The  filings  thus  obtained  are  capable  of  burning  directly  in  air  (by  oxidising  or
forming  rust),  especially  when  they  hang  (are  attracted)  on  a  magnet.  A  compact  piece
of  iron  does  not  bum  in  air,  but  spongy  iron  glows  and  smoulders  like  tinder.  In  making
the  experiment,  a  liorse-shoe  magnet  is  fixed,  with  the  poles  downwards,  on  one  arm  of  a
rather  sensitive  balance,  and  the  iron  filings  are  applied  to  the  magnet  (on  a  sheet  of
paper)  so  as  to  form  a  beard  about  the  poles.  The  balance  pan  should  be  exactly  under
tlie  filings  on  the  magnet,  in  order  that  any  which  might  fall  from  it  should  not  alter  the
weight.  The  filings,  having  been  weighed,  are  set  light  to  by  applying  the  fiame  of  a
candle ;  they  easily  take  fire,  and  go  on  burning  by  themselves,  forming  rust.  When  the
combustion  is  ended,  it  will  be  clear  that  the  iron  has  increased  in  weight ;  from  6^  parts
by  weight  of  iron  filings  taken,  there  are  obtained,  by  complete  combustion,  7^  parts  by
weight  of  rust.

INTRODUCTION  9

law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter  that  as  the  iron  increases  in
weight  in  its  conversion  into  rust,  the  latter  must  be  a  more  complex
substance  than  the  iron  itself,  and  its  formation  is  due  to  a  reaction  of
combination.  We  might  form  an  entirely  wrong  opinion  about  it,  and
might,  for  instance,  consider  rust  to  be  a  simpler  substance  than  iron,
and  explain  the  formation  of  rust  as  the  removal  of  something  from
the  iron.  Such,  indeed,  was  the  general  opinion  prior  to  Lavoisier,
when  it  was  held  that  iron  contained  a  certain  unknown  substance
called  '  phlogiston,'  and  that  rust  was  iron  deprived  of  this  supposed
substance.

2.  Copper  carbonate  (in  the  form  of  a  powder,  or  as  the  well-known
green  mineral  called  *  malachite,'  which  is  used  for  making  ornaments,
or  as  an  ore  for  the  extraction  of  copper)  changes  into  a  black  sub-
stance called  'copper  oxide'  when  heated  to  redness. ^^  This  black
substance  is  also  obtained  by  heating  copper  to  redness  in  air — that  is,
it  is  the  scoria  or  oxidation  product  of  copper.  The  weight  of  the
black  oxide  of  copper  left  is  less  than  that  of  the  copper  carbonate
originally  taken,  and  therefore  we  consider  the  reaction  which  occurred
to  have  been  one  of  decomposition,  and  that  by  it  something  was  sepa-
rated from  the  green  copper  carbonate,  and,  in  fact,  by  closing  the  orifice
of  the  vessel  in  which  the  copper  carbonate  is  heated  with  a  well-
fitting  cork,  through  which  a  gas  delivery  tube  ^"^  passes  whose  end  is
immersed  under  water,  it  will  be  observed  that  on  heating,  a  gas  is
formed  which  bubbles  through  the  water.  This  gas  can  be  easily
collected,  as  will  presently  be  described,  and  it  will  be  found  to  essen-

* '  For  the  purpose  of  experiment,  it  is  most  convenient  to  take  copper  carbonate,
which  may  be  prepared  by  the  experimenter  himself,  by  adding  a  solution  of  sodium  car-
bonate to  a  solution  of  copper  sulphate.  The  precipitate  (deposit)  bo  formed  is  collected
on  a  filter,  washed,  and  dried.  The  decomposition  of  copper  carbonate  into  copper  oxide
is  effected  by  so  moderate  a  heat  that  it  may  be  performed  in  a  glass  vessel  heated  by  a
lamp.  For  this  purpose  a  thin  glass  tube,  closed  at  one  end,  and  called  a  '  test  tube,'
may  be  employed,  or  else  a  vessel  called  a  '  retort.'  The  experiment  is  carried  on,  as
described  in  example  three  on  p.  11,  by  collecting  the  carbonic  anhydride  over  water,
as  will  be  afterwards  explained.

*^  Gas  delivery  tubes  are  usually  made  of  glass  tubing  of  various  diameters  and  tliick-
nesaes.  If  of  small  diameter  and  thickness,  a  glass  tube  is  easily  bent  by  heating  in  a  gas
jet  or  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp,  and  it  may  also  be  easily  divided  at  a  given  point  by  making
a  deep  scratch  with  a  file  and  then  breaking  the  tube  at  this  point  with  a  sharp  jerk.
These  properties,  together  with  tlieir  impermeability,  transparency,  liardness,  and  regu-
larity of  bore,  render  glass  tubes  most  useful  in  experiments  with  gases.  Naturally  they
might  be  replaced  by  straws,  india-rubber,  metallic,  or  other  tubes,  but  these  are  more
difiScalt  to  fix  on  to  a  vessel,  and  are  not  entirely  impervious  to  gases.  A  glass  gas
delivery  tube  may  be  hermetically  fixed  into  a  vessel  by  fitting  it  into  a  perforated  cork,
which  should  be  soft  and  free  from  flaws,  and  fixing  the  cork  into  the  orifice  of  the
vessel.  To  protect  the  cork  from  the  action  of  gases  it  is  sometimes  previously  soaked
in  paraffin,  or  it  may  be  replaced  by  an  india-rubber  cork.

colourless  and  transparent  like  air,  niid  is  therefore  evolved  without
any  atrifcing  feature.  The  carbonic  anhydride  evolved  may  be  weighed,'*
and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Hum  of  the  weights  of  the  black  copper
oxide  and  carbonic  anhydride  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  copper
carbonate  "  originally  taken,  and  thus  by  carefully  following  out  the

'•  Qftses,  like  all  otlwr  nubHloui^es,  may  bo  «
nesB  unA  the  difficoltjr  <iF  clinJing  witb  Uie-m  ii
h;  very  BensitiTe  balanceB;  Ihat  U,  b  sucb  u,
wnall  diSerence  in  wejglit— lor  oiuiDpte,  ■  cent
gruns. In  order  to  weigh  a.  gas,  a.  glass  globe  t

Urge

ighed.  but,  owing  to  Ibeir  extreme  light-

«8,  tbey  can  only  be  weiglMd

idomble  load,  indiote  k  vtxf

m  or  a  milligram  witb  a  load  of  1,M»

Lshed  with  a  tight-fitting  stop-oock  U

the  best). The  atop-

to  1>e  weighed  is  thm

let  into  the  globe,  its  weigbt  can  be  determined  Erom  the  increase  in  the  weight  ol  till
globe.  It  is  uecHDsar)',  hnwever,  that  the  temperatare  and  presaare  ot  the  etr  kbont  tiM
bitlancB  should  rettuin  constant  tor  both  weighings,  as  the  weigbt  of  the  globe  in  lir  irill
(acoordiug  to  the  laws  ot  hydro»tatio«|  Tftry  with  itH  density.  The  volume  ot  the  airdift^
placed,  and  its  weight,  most  therefore  be  iietanniued  by  observing  the  tempflr>tiin,
density,  and  moisture  ot  the  atmosphere  daring  tbe  time  ot  cucperimetil.  This  will
be  purtly  explained  later,  but  may  be  studied  more  in  detail  by  pbysica.  Owing  to  the
Koinploity  of  all  these  operations,  the  hibbb  of  a  gas  in  UHUally  determined  from  its
rolntne  and  densit  j,  or  trom  the  weight  of  a  known  volume.

"  The  copTier  earhonate  sbonld be  dried  before  weighing,  as  otherwise— besiaei

id  carbonic  anhydride — water  will  be  obtained  in  the  decompositjon.

Wal«r  formn  a  part  of  the  eompoaition  of  malocbite,  and  has  therefore  to  be  tijieo  mta

coiimderation. The  water  produced  in  the  decomposition  may  be  all  collected  by  absoib-

Ing  it  in  antpburic  acid  ot  calcinm  ehloride,  as  will  bedescrihed  fnrtberon. In  ordei  ta

' Tarious  stages  of  all  chemical  reactions  we  arrive  at  a  confirniation  of
the  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter.

3.  Red  mercury  oxide  (wliich  is  formed  as  mercury  rust  by  heating
mercury  in  air)  is  decomposed  like  copper  carbonate  {only  by  heating
nioru,alowly  and  at  a  somewhat  higher  temperature),  with  the  formation
of  the  peculiar  gas,  oxygeii.  For  this  purpose  the  mercury  oxide  is
placed  in  a  glass  tube  or  retort,'*  to  which  a  gas  delivery  tube  is

' ftttached  by  means  of  a  cork. This  tube  is  beut  dowawartia,  as  shown
n  the  drawiiig  (Fig.  1). The  open  end  of  the  gas  delivery  tube  is  im-

I  mersed  in  a  vessel  filled  with  water,  called  a  pneumatic  trough,"' When

dry  n  ull  it  munt  be  lieated  at  nbo

ullOO"

until  ilB  weight  rei

QaiuB  coi

Qstaut,  or  hi

.  placed

ODder  HI  air  pump  ovor  aulpbnrio  1

Mid.M

will  ilImi  be  pteaentlj  deecribed. As  water  is

1  Bbwrbed  by  uma'

r  subatancea,  the  poi

uibility

I  Bight

of.

••  Ah  tho  (lecompOBitiDn  of  red  >

Diide  a

t  me«ni7  requires

so  high.

ledneHS,  m  to  soften  otdioiu?  glase

.ecessary  for  this  e

■peritne,

nt  to  take  ;

[or  leM  tniM)  made  or  bsrd  glua

,  whicli

1  i»  Mb  to  BtiiDd

high  l«c

without

•oftenms. For  the  aiime  reasou,

the  Ian

ip  used  InDst  give

a  atrot.]

i  heat  aod

a  large

flmme,  cmpable  of  emtintdng  the  whalo  bu'

tUiuj  of  the  retort,  ■

which  ahonld  be  as  i

eiperii

uLtiuallf  Vie  m>ia«  of  bd;  n

lalerial  (

or  raelJ,  &c.).  bnt  usa Jly  i  glass

one,  (IB

.  iihuwQ  iu  the  draw

iug,  is  used,  as  it  all

swathe

obeerved. For  thi.

with  which  they  are  kept  cleaji,  uid  Ftdui

th.'  fact  ttlso  that  gl

BBsiano

it  aclKi  .1.1  1

._v  ii.any

oooIbL

which  alToct  other  materials  (For  inatanee,  metala),  glaaa  vessels  of  alllDDdH —

li  aa  retorts,  lest  tuhes,  cylinders,  heakera.  flaakB,  globe",  &c, — are  preferred  to  any

JT  for  uhemieal  BjiperimBnts. Qlaea  tbbbsIb  may  be  heated  without  any  danger  ii  the

■  ([dlowiDg  precaations  be  observed:  1st,  they  shaald  be  made  of  thin  glase,  aa  otherwiw

ark  from  the  had  heat-conducting  power  of  glass  :  3nd,they  should  be

■giTOonded  by  a  ligoid  or  with  mnd  (Fig.  3),  or  sand  hath  as  it  is  caUed ;  or  else  aboald

in  a  cnrrent  of  hot  gases  without  loufhfng  the  fuel  from  which  they  proceed,  or  in

W  f  UOe  of  ■  smokeleea  lamp. A  comroou  cnndle  or  lamp  forma  a  deposit  of  soot  go  ■

12  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

the  gas  begins  to  be  evolved  in  the  retort  it  is  obliged,  having  no  other
outlet,  to  escape  through  the  gas  delivery  tube  into  the  water  in  the
pneumatic  trough,  and  therefore  its  evolution  will  be  rendered  visible
by  the  bubbles  coming  from  this  tube.  In  heating  the  retort  containing
the  mercury  oxide,  the  air  contained  in  the  apparatus  is  first  partly
expelled,  owing  to  its  expansion  by  heat,  and  then  the  peculiar  gas
called  *  oxygen '  is  evolved,  and  may  be  easily  collected  as  it  comes  off.
For  this  purpose  a  vessel  (an  ordinary  cylinder,  as  in  the  drawing)  is
filled  quite  full  with  water  and  its  mouth  closed  ;  it  is  then  inverted
and  placed  in  this  position  under  the  water  in  the  trough  ;  the  mouth
is  then  opened.  The  cylinder  will  remain  full  of  water — that  is,  the
water  will  remain  at  a  higher  level  in  it  than  in  the  surrounding  vessel,
owing  to  the  atmospheric  pressure.  The  atmosphere  presses  on  the
surface  of  the  water  in  the  trough,  and  prevents  the  water  from  flow-
ing out  of  the  cylinder.  The  mouth  of  the  cylinder  is  placed  over  the
end  of  the  gas  delivery  tube,^^  and  the  bubbles  issuing  from  it  will  rise
into  the  cylinder  and  displace  the  water  contained  in  it.  Gases  are
generally  collected  in  this  manner.  When  a  sufficient  quantity  of  gas
has  accumulated  in  the  cylinder  it  can  be  clearly  shown  that  it  is  not
air,  but  another  gas  which  is  distinguished  by  its  capacity  for  vigorously
supporting  combustion.  In  order  to  show  this,  the  cylinder  is  closed,
under  water,  and  removed  from  the  bath  ;  its  mouth  is  then  turned  up-
wards, and  a  smouldering  taper  plunged  into  it.  As  is  well  known,  a
smouldering  taper  will  be  extinguished  in  air,  but  in  the  gas  which
is  given  off  from  red  mercury  oxide  it  burns  clearly  and  vigorously,
showing  the  property  possessed  by  this  gas  for  supporting  combustion
more  energetically  than  air,  and  thus  enabling  it  to  be  distinguished
from  the  latter.  It  may  be  observed  in  this  experiment  that,  besides
the  formation  of  oxygen,  metallic  mercury  is  formed,  which,  volatilising
at  the  high  temperature  required  for  the  reaction,  condenses  on  the
cooler  parts  of  the  retort  as  a  mirror  or  in  globules.  Thus  two  sub-
cold  object  placed  in  their  flames.  The  soot  interferes  with  the  transmission  of  heat,  and
80  a  glass  vessel  when  covered  with  soot  often  cracks.  And  for  this  reason  spirit  lamps,
which  burn  with  a  sniokcless  flame,  or  gas  burners  of  a  peculiar  construction,  are  used.
In  the  Bunson  burner  tlie  gas  is  mixed  with  air,  and  bums  with  a  non-luminous  and
smokeless  flame.  On  the  other  hand,  if  an  ordinary  lamp  (petroleum  or  benzine)  does
not  smoke  it  may  be  used  for  heating  a  glass  vessel  without  danger,  provided  the  glass  is
placed  well  above  the  flame  in  the  current  of  hot  gases.  In  all  cases,  the  heating  should
be  begun  v<?ry  carefully  by  raising  the  temperature  by  degrees.

^  In  order  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  holding  the  cylinder,  its  open  end  is  widened  (and
also  ground  so  that  it  may  be  closely  covered  with  a  ground-glass  plate  when  necessary),
and  placed  on  a  stand  below  the  level  of  the  water  in  the  bath.  This  stand  is  called  '  the
bridge.'  It  has  several  circular  ox>ening8  cut  through  it,  and  the  gas  delivery  tube  is
placed  under  one  of  these,  and  the  cylinder  for  collecting  tlie  gas  over  it.

INTRODUCTION  18

stances,  mercury  and  oxygen,  are  obtained  by  heating  red  mercury
oxida  In  this  reaction,  from  one  substance,  two  new  substances  are
produced — that  is,  a  decomposition  has  taken  place.  The  means  of
collecting  and  investigating  gases  were  known  before  Lavoisier's  time,
but  he  first  showed  the  real  part  they  played  in  the  processes  of  many
chemical  changes  which  before  his  era  were  either  wrongly  understood
(as  will  be  afterwards  explained)  or  were  not  explained  at  all,  but  only
observed  in  their  superficial  aspects.  This  experiment  on  red  mercury
oxide  has  a  special  significance  in  the  history  of  chemistry  contempo-
rary with  Lavoisier,  because  the  oxygen  gas  which  is  here  evolved  is
contained  in  the  atmosphere,  and  plays  a  most  important  part  in
nature,  especially  in  the  respiration  of  animals,  in  combustion  in  air,
and  in  the  formation  of  rusts  or  scorise  (earths,  as  they  were  then
called)  from  metals — that  is,  of  earthy  substances,  like  the  ores  from
which  metals  are  extracted.

4.  In  order  to  illustrate  by  experiment  one  more  example  of
chemical  change  and  the  application  of  the  law  of  the  indestructibility
of  matter,  we  will  consider  the  reaction  between  common  table  salt
and  lunar  caustic,  which  is  well  known  from  its  use  in  cauterising
wounds.  By  taking  a  clear  solution  of  each  and  mixing  them  together,
it  will  at  once  be  observed  that  a  solid  white  substance  is  formed,
which  settles  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  and  is  insoluble  in  water.
This  substance  may  be  separated  from  the  solution  by  filtering  ;  it  is
then  found  to  be  an  entirely  different  substance  from  either  of  those
taken  originally  in  the  solutions.  This  is  at  once  evident  from  the
fact  that  it  does  not  dissolve  in  water.  On  evaporating  the  liquid
which  passed  through  the  filter,  it  will  be  found  to  contain  a  new  sub-
stance unlike  either  table  salt  or  lunar  caustic,  but,  like  them,  soluble
in  water.  Thus  table  salt  and  lunar  caustic,  two  substances  soluble  in
water,  produced,  by  their  mutual  chemical  action,  two  new  substances,
one  insoluble  in  water,  and  the  other  remaining  in  solution.  Here,
from  two  substances,  two  others  are  obtained,  consequently  there
occurred  a  reaction  of  substitution.  The  water  served  only  to  convert
the  re  acting  substances  into  a  liquid  and  mobile  state.  If  the  lunar
caustic  and  salt  be  dried  '*  and  weighed,  and  if  about  58|  grams  ^^  of

1  Drjring  ie  necessary  in  order  to  remove  any  water  which  may  be  held  in  the  salts
($ee  Note  17,  and  Chapter  I.,  Notes  18  and  14).

*■  The  exact  weights  of  the  re-acting  and  resulting  substances  are  determined  with  the
greatest  diflficulty,  not  only  from  the  possible  inexactitude  of  the  balance  (every  weighing
is  only  correct  within  the  limits  of  the  sensitiveness  of  the  balance)  and  weights  used
in  weighing,  not  only  from  the  difficulty  in  making  correctiouH  for  the  weight  of  air  dis-
placed by  the  vessels  holding  the  substances  weighed  and  by  the  weights  themselves,
bat  also  from  the  hygroscopic  nature  of  many  substances  (and  vessels)  causing  absorption

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMIRTBY

Bait  and  170  grams  of  lunar  caustic  be  taken,  then  143^  grams  of  iii-
Botable  silver  chloride  and  85  grams  of  Eodiura  nitrate  will  be  obtained.
The  Bum  of  the  weighU  of  the  re-»cting  and  resultant  substances  are
eeen  to  be  similar  and  equal  to  226],  gmma,  which  necessarily  follows
from  the  law  of  the  indesttuetibility  of  matter.

Accepting  the  truth  of  the  above  law,  the  question  natumlly  a
as  to  whether  there  is  any  limit  to  the  various  chemical  ti-ansforma-
tions,  or  are  they  unrestricted  in  number — thnt  is  to  say.  is  it  possible
from  a.  given  substance  to  obtain  an  ei^uivalent  quantity  of  any  other
■ubstance  1  In  other  words,  does  there  exist  a  perpetual  and  infinit«
change  of  one  kind  of  material  into  every  other  kind,  or  is  the  cycle
of  these  transformations  limited  1  This  is  the  second  essential  problem
of  Chemistry,  a  question  of  quality  of  matter,  and  one,  it  is  evident,
which  is  more  complicated  than  the  question  of  quantity.  It  cannot
be  solved  by  a  mere  superlicial  glance  at  the  subject.  Indeed,  on
seeing  how  all  the  varied  forms  and  colours  of  plants  are  built  up  from
kir  and  tlie  elements  of  the  soil,  tind  how  metallic  iron  can  be  trans-
formed into  colours  such  as  inks  and  Fmsaian  blue,  we  might  be  led
to  think  that  there  is  no  end  to  the  qualitative  changes  to  which
matter  is  susceptible.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  experiences  of
everyday  life  compel  us  to  acknowledge  that  food  cannot  be  made  out
of  a  stone,  or  gold  out  of  copper.  Thus  a  definite  answer  can  only  be
looked  for  in  a  close  and  diligent  study  of  the  subject,  and  the  problem
has  been  i-esolved  in  diffei'ent  way  at  different  times.  In  ancient  times
the  opinion  most  generally  held  was  that  everything  visible  was  com-
posed of  four  elements — Aii-,  Water,  Earth,  and  Fire,  The  origin  of
this  doctrine  can  be  traced  far  1>ack  into  the  confines  of  Asia,  whence
it  was  handed  down  to  the  Greeks,  and  most  fully  expounded  by
Eiiipedocles,  who  lii'ed  before  -460  B.C.  This  doctrine  was  not  the
result  of  exact  researi^h,  but  apparently  owes  its  origin  to  the  clear
division  of  bodies  into  gases  (like  air),  liquids  {like  water),  and  solids
(like  the  earth).  The  Arabs  appear  to  have  been  the  iirst  who
attempted  to  solve  the  qui?stion  by  experimental  methods,  and  they
introduced,  through  Spain,  the  tasf;e  for  the  study  of  similar  problems
into  Europe,  where  frt.im  that  time  there  appear  many  adepts  in
chemistry,  whicli  was  considered  as  an  unholy  art,  and  called  'al-
chemy,' As  the  alchemists  were  ignorant  of any  exact  law  which

of  inoiature(niinlheikCmoe(ibBre,uiil[rDm  UiediSlcnU]i  in  notloHinganf  of  UiGanbatMce
to  l>e  weight^  in  the  leTsrol  opecnbionB  (altering,  eritporating,  siid  dryiug,  ice.)  which
h»TB  to  be  pertormed  be[ore  airlTiDg  at  a.  flnft]  result.  All  these  cinnmiBtBjiciis  hare  lo
be  taken  into  oonaidecatioa  in  eiHCt  rase*Tches,  und  their  eliminition  reqairss  veiym
facial  piecBDtionB  vhich  uc  impncticable  in  preUminkr;  sxperimentB.

oould  guide  them  in  their  researches,  they  iibtaiiitnl  must  anomalous
results. Tlieir chief  service  to chemiatry was that  they made a
number  of  experiments,  and  discovered  many  new  chemical trans-
formatioRB  ;  bat  it  is  well  known  how  they  solved  the  fundanienbil
problem  of  chemistry. Their  view  may  be  taken  as  a  positive  acknow-
ledgment of  the  infinite  traiiamutability  o£  matter,  for  they  aimed  at
discovering  the  Philosopher's  Stone,  capable  of  converting  everything
into  gold  and  diamonds,  and  of  making  the  old  young  again. This
'solution  of  the  question  wag  afterwards  i-ompletely  nvertlirown,  but  it
must  not, for  this reason,  be  thought that  the  hopes  held  by  the
[  alchemists were  only the fruit of their imaginations. The first
chemical  experiments  might  well  lead  them  to  their  conclusions. They
I  took,  for  instance,  the  briglit  metallic  mineral  galena,  and  extracted
metallic  lead  frum  it. Thus  they  saw  that  from  a  metallic  substance
i which  is  unfitt«d  for  use  they  could  obtain  another  metallic  substance
which  is  ductile  and  valuable  for  many  technical  purposes. Further-
[  more,  they  took  this  lead  and  obtained  silver,  a  still  more  valuable
I  metal,  from  it. Thus  they  might  easily  conclude  that  it  was  possible
to  ennoble  metals  by  means  of  a  whole  series  of  tran.smutations^that
is  to  say,  to  obtain  from  them  those  which  are  more  and  more  preeious.
iog  got  silver  from  lead,  they  assumed  that  it  wuuld  he  possible  to
I  obtain  gold  from  silver. The  mistake  they  made  was  that  they  never
I  Veighed  or  measured  the  substances  used  or  protluced  in  their  experi-
I  ments. Had  they  done  so,  they  would  have  leamt  that  the  weight  of
I  the  lead  was  much  less  than  that  of  the  galena  from  which  it  was
obtained,  and  the  weight  of  the  silver  in6oit^aimiil  compared  with  that
[  of  the  lead. Had  they  looked  more  closely  into  the  process  of  the  ex-
I  traction  of  the  silver  from  lead  (and  silver  at  the  present  time  is  chiefly
I  ■obtained  from  the  lead  ores)  they  would  have  seen  that  the  lead  does
not  change  into  silver,  but  that  it  only  contains  a  certain  small  quan-
I  tity  of  it,  and  this  amount  having  once  been  separatefl  from  the  lead
[  It  cannot  by  any  further  operation  give  more. The  silver  which  the
Alchemists  extracted  from  the  lead  was  in  the  lead,  and  was  not  ob-
tained by  a  chemical  change  of  the  lead  itself. This  is  now  well  known
from  experiment,  but  the  first  view  of  the  nature  of  the  process  was
very  likely  to  be  an  erroneous  one.^' The  methods  of  research  adopted

"  B««idee  whicb,  in  the  majority  of  caaea.the  first  explnnntion  of  iDont  subjects  which
do  not  repc&t  themaelvea  in  everydnj  experience  under  vnriomi  B8pectB,but  nlvRjainone
tortn,  or  only  M  intarvalB  and  infreqaentljr.  ia  nauallj  tvrong.  Thus  the  ditil;  evidence
«l  the  rising  of  Iho  Htm  and  utum  evokes  the  erroaeoas  idea  that  the  heutena  move  sad
the  earlfa  itands  still.  This  appuent  (rath  is  tar  from  being  the  real  truth,  and,  as  ■
a  at  lact,  in  oontradiotory  lo  it. Similnrlr,  an  ordinarj  miud  and  eveirda;  eiperi-

incombDitible,  whereas  it  bnina  Doi  onlf  as  filioga,  bnt  tr

i

16  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

by  the  alchemists  could  give  but  little  success,  for  they  did  not  set  them-
selves clear  and  simple  questions  whose  answers  would  aid  them  to  make
further  progress.  Thus  though  they  did  not  arrive  at  any  exact  law,
they  left  nevertheless  numerous  and  useful  experimental  data  as  an
inheritance  to  chemistry ;  they  investigated,  in  particular,  the  trans-
formations proper  to  metals,  and  for  this  reason  chemistry  was  for
long  afterwards  entirely  confined  to  the  study  of  metallic  substances.

In  their  researches,  the  alchemists  frequently  made  use  of  two
chemical  processes  which  are  now  termed  *  reduction '  and  '  oxidation.'
The  rusting  of  metals,  and  in  general  their  conversion  from  a  metallic
into  an  earthy  form,  is  called  'oxidation,'  whilst  the  extraction  of  a
metal  from  an  earthy  substance  is  called  '  reduction.'  Many  metals —
for  instance,  iron,  lead,  and  tin — are  oxidised  by  heating  in  air  alone,
and  may  be  again  reduced  by  heating  with  carbon.  Such  oxidised
metals  are  found  in  the  earth,  and  form  the  majority  of  meteJlic  ores.
The  metals,  such  as  tin,  iron,  and  copper,  may  be  extracted  from  these
ores  by  heating  them  together  with  carbon.  All  these  processes  were
well  studied  by  the  alchemists.  It  was  afterwards  shown  that  all
earths  and  minerals  are  formed  of  similar  metallic  rusts  or  oxides,  or
of  their  combinations.  Thus  the  alchemists  knew  of  two  forms  c^f
chemical  changes  :  the  oxidation  of  metals  and  the  reduction  of  the
oxides  so  formed  into  metals.  The  explanation  of  the  nature  of  these
two  classes  of  chemical  phenomena  was  the  means  for  the  discovery
of  the  most  important  chemical  laws.  The  first  hypothesis  on  their
nature  is  due  to  Becker,  and  more  particularly  to  Stahl,  a  surgeon
to  the  King  of  Prussia.  Stahl  writes  in  his  *  Fundamenta  Chymiae,'
1723,  that  all  substances  consist  of  an  imponderable  fiery  substance
called  *  phlogiston '  (materia  aut  principium  ignis  non  ipse  ignis),  and  of
another  element  having  particular  properties  for  each  substance.  The
greater  the  capacity  of  a  body  for  oxidation,  or  the  more  combustible
it  is,  the  richer  it  is  in  phlogiston.  Carbon  contains  it  in  great
abundance.  In  oxidation  or  combustion  phlogiston  is  emitted,  and  in
reduction  it  is  consumed  or  enters  into  combination.  Carbon  reduces
earthy  substances  because  it  is  rich  in phlogiston,  and  gives  up  a

a8  wire,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see.  With  the  progress  of  knowledge  very  many  primitive
prejudices  have  been  obliged  to  give  way  to  true  ideas  which  have  been  verified  by
experiment.  In  ordinary  life  we  often  reason  at  first  sight  with  perfect  truth,  only
because  we  are  taught  a  right  judgment  by  oar  daily  experience.  It  is  a  necessary
consequence  of  the  nature  of  our  minds  to  reach  the  attainment  of  truth  through  ele-
mentary and  often  erroneous  reasoning  and  through  experiment,  and  it  would  be  very
wrong  to  expect  a  knowledge  of  truth  from  a  simple  mental  effort.  Naturally,  experiment
itself  cannot  give  truth,  but  it  gives  the  means  of  destroying  erroneous  representations
whilst  confirming  those  which  are  true  in  all  their  consequences.

INTRODUCTION  17

portion  of  its  phlogiston  to  the  substance  reduced.  Thus  Stahl  supposed
metals  to  be  compound  substances  consisting  of  phlogiston  and  an
earthy  substance  or  oxide.  This  hypothesis  is  distinguished  for  its
very  great  simplicity,  and  for  this  and  other  reasons  it  acquired  many
supporters.*-*^

Lavoisier  proved  by  means  of  the  balance  that  every  case  of  rusting
of  metals  or  oxidation,  or  of  combustion,  is  accompanied  by  an  increase
in  weight  at  the  expense  of  the  atmosphere.  He  formed,  therefore,
the  natural  opinion  that  the  heavier  substance  is  more  complex  than
the  lighter  one.^* Lavoisier's  celebrated  experiment,  made  in  1774,

^*  It  is  tnie  that  Stalil  was  acquainted  with  a  fact  which  directly  disproved  his
hypothesis. It  was  ahready  known  (from  the  experiments  of  Geber,  and  more  especially
of  Kay,  in  1630)  that  metals  increase  in  weight  by  oxidation,  whilst,  according  to  Stalil's
hypothesis,  they  shotdd  decrease  in  weight,  because  plilogiston  is  separated  by  oxidation.
Stahl  speaks  on  this  point  as  follows : — '  I  am  well  aware  that  metals,  in  their  transforma-
tion uito  earths,  increase  in  weight. But  not  only  does  this  fact  not  disprove  my  theory,
bat,  on  the  contrary,  confirms  it,  for  phlogiston  is  lighter  than  air,  and,  in  combining
with  substances,  strives  to  lift  them,  and  so  decreases  their  weight;  consequently,  a
substance  which  has  lost  phlogiston  must  be  heavier.* This  argument,  it  will  be  seen,  is
founded  on  a  misconception  of  the  properties  of  gases,  regarding  them  as  having  no  weight
and  as  not  being  attracted  by  the  earth,  or  else  on  a  confused  idea  of  plilogiston  itself,
since  it  was  first  defined  as  imponderable. The  conception  of  imponderable  phlogiston
tallies  well  with  the  habit  and  methods  of  the  last  century,  when  recourse  was  often  had
to  imponderable  fluids  for  explaining  a  large  number  of  phenomena. Heat,  light,  mag-
netism, and  electricity  were  explained  as  being  peculiar  imponderable  fluids. In  this
sense  the  doctrine  of  Stalil  corresponds  entirely  with  the  spirit  of  his  age. If  heat  be
now  regarded  as  motion  or  energy,  then  phlogiston  also  should  be  considered  in  this
light. In  fact,  in  combustion,  of  coals  for  instance,  heat  and  energy  are  evolved,  and
not  combined  in  the  coal,  although  the  oxygen  and  coal  do  combine. Consequently,  the
doctrine  of  Stahl  contains  the  essence  of  a  true  representation  of  the  evolution  of  energy,
but  naturally  this  evolution  is  only  a  consequence  of  the  combination  occurring  between
the  coal  and  oxygen. As  regards  the  history  of  chemistry  prior  to  Lavoisier,  besides
Stahl's  work  (to  wliich  reference  has  been  made  above),  Priestley's  Experimeuts  and
Observations  on  Different  Kinds  of  Air,  London,  1790,  and  also  Scheele's  Opuscula
Chimica  et  Physica^  Lips.,  1788-89,  2  vols.,  must  be  recommended  as  the  two  leading
works  of  the  English  and Scandinavian  chemists  showing  the  condition  of chemical
learning  before  the  propagation  of  Lavoisier's  views,  and  containing  also  many  important
observations  which  lie  at  the  basis  of  the  chemistry  of  our  times. A  most  interesting
memoir  on  the  history  of  phlogiston  is  that  of  Rodwell,  in  the  Philosophical  Magazine,
1868,  in  which  it  is  shown  that  the  idea  of  plilogiston  dates  very  far  back,  that  Basil
Valentine  (1394-1415),  in  the  Cursus  Triumphalis  Antimonii,  Paracelsus  (1493-1541),
in  his  work,  De  Iterum  Natitra,  Glauber  (1604-1068),  and  especially  John  Joachim  Becher
(1625-1682),  in  his  Physica  Subterranea^  all  referred  to  phlogiston,  but  under  different

names.

•'•  An  Englishman,  named  Mayow,  who  lived  a  whole  centuiy  before  Lavoisier  (in
1666),  understood  certain  phenomena  of  oxidation  in  their  true  as^HJct,  but  was  not  able
to  develop  his  views  with  clearness,  or  support  them  by  conclusive  experiments  ;  he
cannot  therefore  l^e  considered,  like  Lavoisier,  as  the  fomuler  of  contemporary  chemical
learning.  Science  is  a  universal  heritage,  and  tlierefore  it  is  only  just  to  give  the  highest
honour  in  science,  not  to  those  wlio  first  enunciate  a  certain  truth,  but  to  those  who  are
firnt  able  to  convince  others  of  its  autlienticity  and  establish  it  for  tlie  general  welfare.
But  scientific  discoveries  are  rarely  made  all  at  once ;  as  a  rule,  the  first  tetichers  do  not

VOL.  I,  C

18  I'laSCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

gave  iiiilubitulile  support  to  his  opinion,  which  iu  many  respects  was
contradictory  to  Stahl'a  doctrine.  Lavoisier  poured  four  ounces  of  pure
mercury  into  a  glass  retort  (fig.  3),  whose  neck  was  bent  as  shown  in
the  di-awing  and  dipped  into  the  vessel  r  b,  also  full  of  mercury.  The
projecting  end  of  tlie  neck  was  covered  with  a  glass  bell-jar  P.  The
weight  of  all  the  mercury  taken,  and  the  volume  of  air  remaining  in
the  apparatus,  namely,  that  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  retort,  and
uiid<-r  the  bell-jar,  were  determined  before  beginning  the  experiment.
It  was  most  important  in  this  experiment  to  know  the  volume  of  air
in  order  to  learn  what  part  it  played  in  the  oxidation  of  the  mercury,
liecause,  according  to  Stuhl,  phlogiston  is  emitted  into  the  air,  whilst,
according  to  lAvoisier,  the  mercury  in  oxidising  absorbs  a  portion  of
the  air  ;  and  consequently  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  determine
whether  the  amount  of  air  increased  or  decreased  in  the  oxidation  of
the  metal. It  was,  therefore,  most  impoi-tant  to  measure  the  volume

of  the  iiir  in  the  appai-atusljoth  before  and  after  the  experiment.  For
this  purpose  it  was  necessary  to  knuw  the  total  capacity  of  the  retort,
the  viiluinc  of  the  mercury  jioured  into  it,  the  volume  of  the  bell-jar
above  the  level  of  the  mercury,  and  also  the  temperature  and  pi-essare
of  the  air  at  the  time  of  its  measurement.  The  volume  of  air  con-
tained in  the  apparatus  and  isolated  from  the  sunounding  atmosphere
could  be  determined  from  these  data.  Ha^■ing  armnged  bis  apparatus
in  this  manner,  L:i\oiaicr  heated  the  retort  holding  the  mercury  for  a
period  of  twelve  days  at  a  temperature  near  the  Iwiling  point  of
The  mercury  Iwcame  covered  with  a  quantity  of  small  red

Ml.tfl-il  ill  II.IIV

liit'iiit:  i.tlu-'i^  ul  tlic  truth  tlic,

J.  iiav,.  disii.

v.-re.l;  «illi  time,  however,  »

trui-  (..'rnUi  ■.oiii

t-  ("ninrd,  ixi-wsHiiijt  BviTv  im

L.,.i.»  for  n...l<

:iiiv;  tlii^  truth  sptwrent  to  all.

but  U  niubl  •».

t  1k'  fui^iHtfii  Hint  *ikU  tire  eii

itirfiy  uAKlr

l<-.l  to  the  hibours  and  dmm

ot  ilulu  ucculniil

lut-l  l>)-  iiiAiij'  .Hhi'rh. Surli  V

:»■<  Liivi.i«i.M

r,  iiihI  sui'li  nre  ult  the  great

(..un-kT.  ..r  sri..

lie.', nii'j-  »rr  tlm  rimiiciBtom

or  all  imst  a

ml  iiri'si'i.t  leunimg.ttna  their

atiua^  »ill  iil»»

J-  l«i  n-v.THl  l>j-  iwfttf rity.

INTRODUCTION  19

scales ;  that  is,  it  was  oxidised  or  converted  into  an  earth.  This
substance  is  the  same  mercury  oxide  which  has  already  been  mentioned
(example  3).  After  the  lapse  of  twelve  days  the  apparatus  was  cooled,
and  it  was  then  seen  that  the  volume  of  the  air  in  the  apparatus  had
diminished  during  the  time  of  the  experiment.  This  result  was  in
exact  contradiction  to  Stahl's  hypothesis.  Out  of  50  cubic  inches  of
air  originally  taken,  there  only  remained  42.  Lavoisier's  experiment  led
to  other  equally  important  results.  The  weight  of  the  air  taken  decreased
by  as  much  as  the  weight  of  the  mercury  increased  in  oxidising  ;  that  is,
the  portion  of  the  air  was  not  destroyed,  but  only  combined  with  mercury.
This  portion  of  the  air  may  be  again  separated  from  the  mercury  oxide
and  has,  as  we  saw  (example  3),  properties  different  from  those  of  air.
It  is  called  *  oxygen.'  That  portion  of  the  air  which  remained  in  the
apparatus  and  did  not  combine  with  the  mercury  does  not  oxidise
metals,  and  cannot  support  either  combustion  or  respiration,  so  that
a  lighted  taper  is  immediately  extinguished  if  it  be  dipped  into  the
gas  which  remains  in  the  bell-jar.  *  It  is  extinguished  in  the  residual
gas  as  if  it  had  been  plunged  into  water,'  writes  Lavoisier  in  his
memoirs.  This  gas  is  called  'nitrogen.'  Thus  air  is  not  a  simple
substance,  but  consists  of  two  gases,  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  and  therefore
the  opinion  that  air  is  an  elementary  substance  is  erroneous.  The
oxygen  of  the  air  is  absorbed  in  combustion  and  the  oxidation  of
metals,  and  the  earths  produced  by  the  oxidation  of  metals  are
substances  composed  of  oxygen  and  a  metal.  By  mixing  the  oxygen
with  the  nitrogen  the  same  air  as  was  originally  taken  is  re-formed.
It  has  also  been  shown  by  direct  experiment  that  on  reducing  an
oxide  with  carbon,  the  oxygen  contained  in  the  oxide  is  transferred  to
the  carbon,  and  gives  the  same  gas  that  is  obtained  by  the  combus-
tion of  carbon  in  air.  Therefore  this  gas  is  a  compound  of  carbon
and  oxygen,  just  as  the  earthy  oxides  are  composed  of  metals  and
oxygen.

The  many  examples  of  the  formation  and  decomposition  of  sub-
stances which  are  met  with  convince  us  that  the  majority  of  substances
with  which  we  have  to  deal  are  compounds  made  up  of  several  other
substances.  By  heating  chalk  (or  else  copper  carbonate,  as  in  the
second  example)  we  obtain  lime  and  the  same  carbonic  acid  gas  which
is  produced  by  the  combustion  of  carbon.  On  bringing  lime  into
contact  with  this  gas  and  water,  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  we  again
obtain  the  compound,  carbonate  of  lime,  or  chalk.  Therefore  chalk  is
a  compound.  So  also  are  those  substances  from  which  it  may  be  built
up.  Carbonic  anhydride  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  carbon  and
oxygen  ;  and  lime  is  produced  by  the  oxidation  of  a  certain  metal

c2

20  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

called  *  calcium/  By  resolving  substances  in  this  manner  into  their
component  parts,  we  arrive  at  last  at  such  as  are  indivisible  into  two
or  more  substances  by  any  means  whatever,  and  which  cannot  be  formed
from  other  substances.  All  we  can  do  is  to  make  such  substances  com-
bine together  to  act  on  other  substances.  Substances  which  cannot  be
formed  from  or  decomposed  into  others  are  termed  simple  suhstances
(elements).  Thus  all  homogeneous  substances  may  be  classified  into
simple  and  compound  substances.  This  view  was  introduced  and
established  as  a  scientific  fact  during  the  lifetime  of  Lavoisier.  The
number  of  these  elements  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  number
of  compound  substances  which  are  formed  by  them.  At  the  present
time,  only  seventy  elements  are  known  with  certainty  to  exist.  Some
of  them  are  very  rarely  met  with  in  nature,  or  are  found  in  very  small
quantities,  whilst  the  existence  of  others  is  still  doubtful.  The  number
of  elements  with  whose  compounds  we  commonly  deal  in  everyday  life
is  very  small.  Elements  cannot  be  transmuted  into  one  another — at
least  up  to  the  present  not  a  single  case  of  such  a  transformation  has
been  met  with  ;  it  may  therefore  be  said  that,  as  yet,  it  is  impossible
to  transmute  one  metal  into  another.  And  as  yet,  notwithstanding
the  number  of  attempts  which  have  been  made  in  this  direction,  no
fact  has  been  discovered  which  could  in  any  way  support  the  idea  of
the  complexity  of  such  well-known  elements  ^^  as  oxygen,  iron,  sulphur,
&c.  Therefore,  from  its  very  conception,  an  element  is  not  susceptible
to  reactions  of  decomposition.'"

^*''  Many  of  the  ancient  philosophers  assamed  the  existence  of  one  elementary  form  of
matter.  ThiH  idea  still  appears  in  our  times,  in  the  constant  efforts  which  are  made  to
reduce  the  number  of  the  elements  ;  to  prove,  for  instance,  that  bromine  contains  chlorine
(»r  that  chlorine  contains  oxygen.  Many  methods,  founded  both  on  experiment  and
tlieorj,  have  Iwen  tried  to  prove  the  compound  nature  of  the  elements.  All  labour  in
this  direction  has  as  yet  been  in  vain,  and  the  assurance  that  elementary  matter  is  not
so  homogeneous  (Hingle)  as  the  mind  would  desire  in  its  first  transport  of  rapid  generali-
sation is  strengthened  from  year  to  year.  All  our  knowledge  shows  that  iron  and
other  elements  remain,  even  at  such  a  high  temperature  as  there  exists  in  the  sun,  as
different  substances,  and  are  not  converted  into  one  common  material.  Admitting,  even
mentally,  the  possibility  of  one  elementary  form  of  matter,  a  method  must  be  imagined
by  which  it  could  give  rise  to  the  various  elements,  as  also  the  modus  operandi  of  their
formation  from  one  material.  If  it  be  said  that  this  diversitude  only  takes  place  at  low
temperatures,  as  is  observed  with  isomerides,  then  there  would  be  reason  to  expect,  if  not
the  transition  of  the  various  elements  into  one  particular  and  more  stable  form,  at  leaBt
the  mutual  transfonnation  of  some  into  others.  But  nothing  of  the  kind  has  as  yet  been
observed,  und  the  akliemist's  hope  to  manufacture  (as  BerthoUet  puts  it)  elements  has  no
theoretical  or  practical  foundation.

'^  The  weakest  point  in  the  idea  of  elements  is  the  negative  character  of  the  determi-
native signs  given  tliem  by  Lavoisier,  and  from  tliat  time  ruling  in  chemistry.  They  do
not  decompose,  they  do  not  change  into  one  another.  But  it  must  be  remarked  that
el»*ments  fonn  thi-  limiting  horizon  of  our  knowledge  of  matter,  and  it  is  always  difficult  to
<letermine  a  positive  side  on  the  borderland  of  what  is  known. Besides,  there  is  no  doabt

INTRODUCTION  21

The  quantity,  therefore,  of  each  element  remains  constant  in  all
chemical  changes  :  a  fact  which  may  be  deduced  as  a  consequence  of
the  law  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter,  and  of  the  conception  of
elements  themselves.  Thus  the  equation  expressing  the  law  of  the
indestructibility  of  matter  acquires  a  new  and  still  more  important
signification.  If  we  know  the  quantities  of  the  elements  which  occur
in  the  re-acting  substances,  and  if  from  these  substances  there  proceed,
by  means  of  chemical  changes,  a  series  of  new  compound  substances,
then  the  latter  will  together  cont^iin  the  same  quantity  of  each  of
the  elements  as  there  originally  existed  in  the  re-acting  substances.
The  essence  of  chemical  change  is  embraced  in  the  study  of  how,
and  with  what  substances,  each  element  is  combined  before  and  after
cfiange.

In  order  to  be  able  to  express  various  chemical  changes  by  equations,
it  has  been  agreed  to  represent  each  element  by  the  first  or  some  two
letters  of  its  (Latin)  name.  Thus,  for  example,  oxygen  is  represented  by
the  letter  0  ;  nitrogen  by  N  ;  mercury  (hydrargyrum)  by  Hg  ;  iron
(ferrum)  by  Fe  ;  and  so  on  for  all  the  elements,  as  is  seen  in  the  tables
on  page  24.  A  compound  substance  is  represented  by  placing  the
symbols  representing  the  elements  of  which  it  is  made  up  side  by  side.
For  example,  red  mercury  oxide  is  represented  by  HgO,  which  shows
that  it  is  composed  of  oxygen  and  mercury.  Besides  this,  the  symbol
of  every  element  corresponds  with  a  certain  rehitive  quantity  of  it  by
weight,  called  its  *  combining '  weight,  or  the  weight  of  an  atom  ;  so  that
the  chemical  formula  of  a  compound  substance  not  only  designates  the
nature  of  the  elements  of  which  it  is  composed,  but  also  their  quantita-
tive proportion.  Every  chemical  process  may  be  expressed  by  an
equation  composed  of  the  formulae  corresponding  with  those  substiinces
which  take  part  in  it  and  are  produced  by  it.  The  amount  by  weight
of  the  elements  in  every  chemical  equation  must  be  equal  on  both  sides
of  the  equation,  since  no  element  is  either  formed  or  destroyed  in  a
chemical  change.

On  pages  24,  25,  and  26  a  list  of  the  elements,  with  their  symbols
and  combining  or  atomic  weights,  is  given,  and  we  shall  see  afterwards
on  what  basis  the  atomic  weights  of  elements  are  determined.  At
present  we  will  only  point  out  that  a  compound  containing  the  elements
A  and  B  is  designated  by  the  formula  An  Bm,  where  m  and  7i  are  the
coefficients  or  multiples  in  which  the  combining  weights  of  the
elements  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  substance. If  we  represent

(from  the  results  of  spectrum  analysis)  that  the  elements  are  distributed  as  far  as  the
most  distant  stars,  and  that  they  support  the  highest  attainable  temperatures  without
decomposing.

22  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

the  combining  weight  of  the  substance  A  by  a  and  that  of  the
substance  B  by  6,  then  the  composition  of  the  substance  An  B7n  will
be  expressed  thus  :  it  contains  7ia  parts  by  weight  of  the  substance  A
and  mh  parts  by  weight  of  the  substance  B,  and  consequently  100  parts

of  our  compound  contain percentage  parts  by  weight  of  the

na  -f  nw

substance  A and  -  i ^^  ^^6  substance  B. It  is  evident  that  as

na  +  mh

a  formula  shows  the  relative  amounts  of  all  the  elements  contained

in  a  compound,  the  actual  weights  of  the  elements  contained  in  a  given

weight  of  a  compound  may  be  calculated  from  its  formula. For  example,

the formula  NaCl of table  salt shows (as Na=23 and  Cl=35*5)

that  58-5  lbs.  of  salt  contain  23  lbs.  of  sodium  and  35*5  lbs.  of  chlorine,

and  that  100  parts  of  it  contain  39*3  per  cent,  of  sodium  and  60*7  per

cent,  of  chlorine.

What  hfis  been  said  above  clearly  limits  the  province  of  chemical
changes,  because  from  substances  of  a  given  kind  there  can  be  obtained
only  such  as  contain  the  same  elements.  Even  with  this  limitation,
however,  the  numbei-  of  possible  combinations  is  infinitely  great.  Only
a  comparatively  small  number  of  compounds  have  yet  been  described
or  subjected  to  research,  and  any  one  working  in  this  direction  may
easily  discover  new  compounds  which  had  not  before  been  obtained.
It  often  happens,  however,  that  such  newly- discovered  compounds
were  foreseen  by  chemistry,  whose  object  is  the  apprehension  of  that
uniformity  which  rules  over  the  multitude  of  compound  substances,
and  whose  aim  is  the  comprehension  of  those  laws  which  govern  their
formation  and  properties.  The  conception  of  elements  having  been
established,  the  next  objects  of  chemistry  were  :  the  determination  of
the  properties  of  compound  substances  on  the  basis  of  the  determination
of  the  quantity  and  kind  of  elements  of  which  they  are  composed  ;  the
investigation  of  the  elements  themselves  ;  the  determination  of  what
compound  substances  can  be  formed  from  each  element  and  the
properties  which  these  compounds  show  ;  and  the  apprehension  of  the
nature  of  the  connection  between  the  elements  in  different  compounds.
An  element  thus  serves  as  the  starting  point,  and  is  taken  as  the
primary  conception  on  which  all  other  substances  are  built  up.

When  we  stat«  that  a  certain  element  enters  into  the  composition
of  a  given  compound  (when  w(»  say,  for  instance,  that  mercury  oxide
contains  oxygen)  we  do  not  mean  that  it  contains  oxygen  as  a  gaseous
substance,  but  only  desire  to  express  those  transformations  which
mercury  oxide  is  capable  of  making  ;  that  is,  we  wish  to  say  that  it  is
possible  to  obtain  oxygen  from  mercury  oxide,  and  that  it  can  give

INTRODUCTION  23

up  oxygen  to  various  other  substances ;  in  a  word,  we  desire  only  to
express  those  transformations  of  which  mercury  oxide  is  capable.  Or,
more  concisely,  it  may  be  said  that  the  composition  of  a  compound  is
the  expression  of  those  transformations  of  which  it  is  capable.  It  is
useful  in  this  sense  to  make  a  clear  distinction  between  the  conception
of  an  element  as  a  separate  homogeneous  substance,  and  as  a  material
but  invisible  part  of  a  compound.  Mercury  oxide  does  not  contain
two  simple  bodies,  a  gas  and  a  metal,  but  two  elements,  mercury  and
oxygen,  which,  when  free,  are  a  gas  and  a  metal.  Neither  mercury  as
a  metal  nor  oxygen  as  a  gas  is  contained  in  mercury  oxide  ;  it  only
contains  the  substance  of  these  elements,  just  as  steam  only  contains
the  substance  of  ice,  but  not  ice  itself,  or  as  corn  contains  the  substance
of  the  seed,  but  not  the  seed  itself.  The  existence  of  an  element  may
be  recognised  without  knowing  it  in  the  uncombined  state,  but  only
from  an  investigation  of  ijbs  combinations,  and  from  the  knowledge  that
it  gives,  under  all  possible  conditions,  substances  which  are  unlike
other  known  combinations  of  substances.  Fluorine  is  an  example  of
this  kind.  It  was  for  a  long  time  unknown  in  a  free  state,  and
nevertheless  was  recognised  as  an  element  because  its  combinations
with  other  elements  were  known,  and  their  difference  from  all  other
similar  compound  substances  was  determined.  In  order  to  grasp  the
difference  between  the  conception  of  the  visible  foi-m  of  an  element  as
we  know  it  in  the  free  state,  and  of  the  intrinsic  element  (or  *  radicle,'
as  Lavoisier  called  it)  contained  in  the  visible  form,  it  should  be
remarked  that  compound  substances  also  combine  together  forming  yet
more  complex  compounds,  and  that  they  evolve  heat  in  the  process  of
combination.  The  original  compound  may  often  be  extracted  from
these  new  compounds  by  exactly  the  same  methods  as  elements  are
extracted  from  their  corresponding  combinations.  Besides,  many
elements  exist  under  various  visible  forms  whilst  the  intrinsic  element
contained  in  these  various  forms  is  something  which  is  not  subject  to
change.  Thus  carbon  appears  as  charcoal,  graphite,  and  diamond,  but
yet  the  element  carbon  alone,  contained  in  each,  is  one  and  the  same.
Carbonic  anhydride  contains  carbon,  and  not  charcoal,  or  graphite,  or
the  diamond.

Elements  alone,^ although  not  all  of  them,  have  the  peculiar  lustre,
opacity,  malleability,  and  the  great  heat  and  electrical  conductivity
which  are  proper  to  metals  and  their  mutual  combinations.  But
elements  are  far  from  all  being  metals.  Those  which  do  not  possess
the  physical  properties  of  metals  are  called  non-metals  (or  metalloids).
It  is,  however,  impossible  to  draw  a  strict  line  of  demarcation  between
metals  and non-metals,  there being  many  intermediary  substances.

24  PKINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Thus  graphite,  from  wliich  pencils  are  manufactured,  is  an  element
with  the  lustre  and  other  properties  of  a  metal ;  but  charcoal  and  the
diamond,  which  are  composed  of  the  same  substance  as  graphite,  do'
not  show  any  metallic  properties.  Both  classes  of  elements  are  clearly
distinguished  in  definite  examples,  but  in  particular  cases  the  distinc-
tion is  not  clear  and  cannot  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  exact  division  of
the  elements  into  two  groups.

The  conception  of  elements  forms  the  basis  of  chemical  knowledge,
and  in  giving  a  list  of  them  at  the  very  beginning  of  our  work,  we
wish  to  tabulate  our  present  knowledge  on  the  subject.  Altogether
about  seventy  elements  are  now  authentically  known,  but  many  of
them  are  so  rarely  met  with  in  nature,  and  have  been  obtained  in  such
small  quantities,  that  we  possess  but  a  very  insufficient  knowledge  of
them.  Tlie  substances  most  widely  distributed  in  nature  contain  a
very  small  number  of  elements.  These  elements  have  been  more
completely  studied  than  the  others,  because  a  greater  number  of
investigators  have  been  able  to  carry  on  experiments  and  observations
on  them. The  elements  most  widely  distributed  in  nature  are  : —

Hydrogen, H  =1. In water, and in animal and  vegetable

organisms.

Carbon,  C  =12. In  organisms,  coal,  limestones.

Nitrogen, N  =14. In  air  and  in  organisms.

Oxygen, O  =16. In  air,  water,  earth. It  forms  the  gi^eater

part  of  the  mass  of  the  earth.

Sodium, Na=2.*V In  common  salt  and  in  many  minerals.

Magnesium,  Mg= 24. In  sea-water  and  in  many  minerals.

Aluminium,  Al=27. In  minerals  and  clay.

Silicon,  Si  =28. In  sand,  minerals,  and  clay.

Phosphorus,  P  =.S1. In  bones,  ashes  of  plants,  and  soil.

Sulphur, S  =32. In  pyrites,  gypsum,  and  in  sea- water.

Chlorine,  CI  =35-5.  In  common  salt,  and  in  the  salts  of  sea-
water.

Potassium, K  =39. In  minerals,  ashes  of  plants,  and  in  nitre.

Calcium, Ca  =40. In  limestones,  gypsum,  and  in  organisms.

Iron,  Fe  =56. In  the  earth,  iron  ores,  and  in  organisms.

Besides  these,  the  following  elements,  although  not  very  largely
distributed  in  nature,  are  all  more  or  less  well  known  from  their
applications  to  the  requirements  of  everyday  life  or  the  arts,  either  in
a  free  state  or  in  their  compounds  : —

Lithium,  Li=7. In  medicine  (Li.^  CO3),  and  in  photography  (LiBr).
Boron, B=  11.  As  borax,  B4Na207,  and  as  boric  anhydiide,  B^Oj.

INTRODUCTION

25

Fluorine,  F  =19.
Chromium,  Cr  =52.
Manganese,  Mn=55.

Cobalt,

Nickel,

Copper,

Zinc,

Arsenic,

Bromine,

Zn  =65.
As  =75.
Br  =80.

As fluor  spar,  CaF^, and as  hydrofluonc

acid,  HF.
As chromic anhydride, CrOg, and potas-
sium dichromate,  KjCrjOy.
As manganese peroxide, MnOj, and po-
tassium permanganate,  MnKOj.
Co  =59*5  In  smalt  and  blue  glass.
Ni  =59*5  For  electro-plating  other  metals.
Cu  =63. The  well-known  red  metal.

Used  for  the  plates  of  batteries,  roofing,  tkc.

White  arsenic  (poison),  AS2O3.

A  brown volatile  liquid  ; sodium bromide,

NaBr.
In  coloured  fires  (SrN20(j).
Ag=109.  The  well-known  white  metal.
Cd=112.  In  alloys. Yellow  paint  (CdS).
Sn=119.  The  well-known  metal.
Sb=120.  In  alloys  such  as  type  metal.
I  1=127.  In  medicine  and  photography  ;  free,  and  as

KI.
Ba=137.  "Permanent white,"  and as  an  adulterant

in  white  lead,  and  in  heavy  spar,  BaSO^.
Pt=196..

Au=197.'

T-r —000 ■^^^ll'k'^Q^^^  ^^^^Is.

Pb  =207. )

Bi  =209.  In  medicine  and  fusible  alloys.

U  =239.  In  green  fluorescent  glass.

The  compounds  of  the  following  metals  and  semi-metals  have  fewer
applications,  but  are  well  known,  and  are  somewhat  frequently  met
with  in  nature,  although  in  small  quantities  : —

Strontium, Sr  =87.

Silver,

Cadmium,

Tin,

Antimony,

Iodine,

Barium,

Platinum,

Gold,

Mercury,

Lead,

Bismuth,

Uranium,

Beryllium,

Titanium,

Vanadium,

Selenium,

Zirconium,

Be  =9.

Ti  =48.
V  =51.
Se  =79.

Palladium,Pd=107.
Cerium,  Ce=140.
Tungsten,  W=184.
Osmium,  Os=192.
Iridium,  Ir=193.
Thallium, Tl=204.

Zr  =91.
Molybdenum,  Mo  =96.

The  following  rare  metals  are  still  more  seldom  met  with  in  natui*e,
but  have  been  studied  somewhat  fully  :  —

Scandium, Sc  =44.  Germanium,  Ge:=72.

Gallium,  Ga=70.  Rubidium,  Rb=86.

26  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Yttrium,  Y =89.  Cfesium, Cs=133.

Niobium,  Nb  =  94.  Lanthanum,  La =138.

Ruthenium  Ru=102.  Didymium, Di=14:2.

Rhodium,  Rh=103.  Ytterbium, Yb=173.

Indium,  In  =114.  Tantalum, Ta  =183.

Tellurium,  Te=125.  Thorium, Th  =232.

Besides  these  66  elements  there  have  been  discovered  : — Erbium,
Terbium,  Samarium,  Thullium,  Holmium,  Mosandrium,  Phillipium,
and  several  others.  But  their  properties  and  combinations,  owing  to
their  extreme  rarity,  are  very  little  known,  and  even  their  existence  as
independent  substances  ^^  is  doubtful.

It  has  been  incontestably  proved  from  observations  on  the  spectra
of  the  heavenly  bodies  that  many  of  the  commoner  elements  (such  as
H,  Na,  Mg,  Fe)  occur  on  the  far  distant  stars.  This  fact  confirms  the
belief  that  those  forms  of  matter  which  appear  on  the  earth  as  elements
are  widely  distributed  over  the  entire  universe.  But  we  do  not  yet
know  why,  in  nature,  the  mass  of  some  elements  should  be  greater
than  that  of  others-^sbi"^

The  capacity  of  each  element  to  combine  wrth  one  or  another
element,  and  to  form  compounds  with  them  which  are  in  a  greater  or
less  degree  prone  to  give  new  and  yet  more  complex  substances,  forms
the  fundamental  character  of  each  element.  Thus  sulphur  easily  com-
bines with  the  metals,  oxygen,  chlorine,  or  carbon,  whilst  gold  and
silver  enter  into  combinations  with  difficulty,  and  form  unstable  com-
pounds, which  are  easily  decomposed  by  heat.  The  cause  or  force
which  induces  the  elements  to  enter  into  chemical  change  must  be  con-
sidered, as  also  the  cause  which  holds  ditierent  substances  in  combina-
tion— that  is,  which  endues  the  substances  formed  wuth  their  particular
degree  of  stability.  This  cause  or  force  is  called  affinity  (qffinitas,
affinity,  Vencandfscha/t),  or  chemical  affinity.^^ Since  this  force  must

^  Possibly  some  of  their  compounds  are  compounds  of  other  already-known  elements.
Pure  and  incontestably  independent  compounds  of  these  substances  are  unknown,  and
some  of  them  have  not  even  been  separated,  but  are  only  supiKJsed  to  exist  from  the
results  of  spectroscopic  researches.  There  can  be  no  mention  of  such  contestable  and
doubtful  elements  in  a  short  general  handbook  of  chemistry.

^  ^*^  Clark  in  America  made  an  api>roximate  calculation  of  the  amount  of  the  dif-
ferent elements  contained  in  the  earth's  crust  (to  a  depth  of  15  kilometres),  and  found
tliat  the  chief  mass  (over  50  per  cent.)  is  composed  of  oxygen;  then  comes  silicon,  &c. ;
while  the  amount  of  hydrogen  is  less  than  1  per  cent.,  carbon  scarcely  0"25  per  cent.,
nitrogen  even  less  than  008  i)er  cent.  The  relative  masses  of  such  metals  as  Cu,  Ni,  Au
is  minute.  Judging  fnmi  the  density  (see  Chapter  VIII.)  of  the  earth,  a  large  proiwrtion
of  its  mass  must  be  composi'd  of  iron.

-0  This  word,  first  intnKluced,  if  I  mistake  not,  into  chemistry  by  Glauber,  is  based
on  the  idea  of  the  ancient  ])hilosophers  that  combination  can  only  take  i)hice  when  the
substances  combining  have  something  in  common — a  medium. As  is  genenilly  the  case,

INTKODUCTION  27

be  regarded  as  exclusively  an  attractive  force,  like  gravity,  many
writers  (for  instance,  Bergniann  at  the  end  of  the  last,  and  Berthollet
at  the  beginning  of  this,  century)  supposed  affinity  to  be  essentially
similar  to  the  universal  force  of  gravity,  from  which  it  only  differs  in
that  the  latter  acts  at  observable  distances  whilst  affinity  only  evinces
itself  at  the  smallest  possible  distances.  But  chemical  affinity  cannot
be  entirely  identified  with  the  universal  attraction  of  gravity,  which
acts  at  appreciable  distances  and  is  dependent  only  on  mass  and  dis-
tance, and  not  on  the  quality  of  the  material  on  which  it  acts,  whilst
it  is  by  the  quality  of  matter  that  affinity  is  most  forcibly  influenced.
Neither  can  it  be  entirely  identified  with  cohesion,  which  gives  to
homogeneous  solid  substances  their  crystalline  form,  elasticity,  hard-
ness, ductility,  and  other  properties,  and  to  liquids  their  surface  tension,
drop  formation,  capillarity,  and  other  properties,  because  affinity  acts
between  the  component  parts  of  a  substance  and  cohesion  on  a  sub-
stance in  its  homogeneity,  although  both  act  at  imperceptible  distances
(by  contact)  and  have  much  in  common.  Chemical  force,  which  makes
one  substance  penetrate  into  another,  cannot  be  entirely  identified  with
even  those  attracting  forces  which  make  different  substances  adhere  to
each  other,  or  hold  t<jgether  (as  when  two  plane-polished  surfaces  of
solid  subst^inces  are  brought  into  close  contact),  or  which  cause  liquids
to  soak  into  solids,  or  adhere  to  their  surfaces,  or  gases  and  vapours  to
condense  on  the  surfaces  of  solids.  These  forces  must  not  be  con-
founded with  chemical  forces,  which  cause  one  substance  to  penetrate
into  the  substance  of  another  and  to  form  a  new  substance,  which  is
never  the  case  with  cohesion.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  forces  which
determine  cohesion  form  a  connecting-link  between  mechanical  and
chemical  forces,  because  they  only  act  by  intimate  contact.  For  a
long  time,  and  especially  during  the  first  half  of  this  century,  chemical
attraction  and  chemical  forces  wore  identified  with  electiical  forces.
There  is  certainly  an  intimate  relation  l)etween  them,  for  electricity  is
evolved  in  chemical  reactions,  and  has  also  a  powerful  influence  on
chemical  processes — for  instance,  compounds  are  decomposed  by  the
action  of  an  electrical  current.  And  the  exactly  similar  relation  which
exists  between  chemical  phenomena  and  the  phenomena  of  heat  (heat
being  developed  by  chemical  phenomena,  and  heat  being  able  to  decom-
pose compounds)  only  proves  the  unity  of  the  forces  of  nature,  the
capability  of  one  force  to  produce  and  to  be  transformed  into  others.
For  this  reason  the  identification  of  chemical  force  with  electricity  will

another  idea  evolved  itself  in  antiquity,  and  has  lived  until  now,  side  by  side  with  the
first,  to  which  it  is  exactly  contnidic'tor>' ;  this  considers  union  as  dex>endent  on  contrast,
on  polar  difference,  on  an  effort  to  fill  up  a  want.

28  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

not  bear  experimental  proof.*®  As  of  all  the  (molecular)  phenomena
of  nature  which  act  on  substances  at  immeasurably  small  distances,
the  phenomena  of  heat  are  at  present  the  best  (comparatively)  known,
having  been  reduced  to  the  simplest  fundamental  principles  of
mechanics  (of  energy,  equilibrium,  and  movement),  which,  since
Newton,  have  been  subjected  to  strict  mathematical  analysis,  it  is
quite  natural  that  an  effort,  which  has  been  particularly  pronounced
during  recent  years,  should  have  been  made  to  bring  chemical
phenomena  into  strict  correlation  with  the  already  investigated  phe-
nomena of  heat,  without,  however,  aiming  at  any  identification  of
chemical  with  heat  phenomena.  The  true  nature  of  chemical  force  is
still  a  secret  to  us,  just  as  is  the  nature  of  the  universal  force  of  gravity,
and  yet  without  knowing  what  gravity  really  is,  by  applying  mechani-
cal conceptions,  astronomical  phenomena  have  been  subjected  not  only
to  exact  generalisation  but  to  the  detailed  prediction  of  a  number  of
particular  facts  ;  and  so,  also,  although  the  true  nature  of  chemical
affinity  may  be  unknown,  there  is  reason  to  hope  for  considerable  pro-
gress in  chemical  science  by  applying  the  laws  of  mechanics  to  chemical
phenomena  by  means  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat.  As  yet  this
portion  of  chemistry  has  been  but  little  worked  at,  and  therefore,  while
forming  a  current  problem  of  the  science,  it  is  treated  more  fully  in
that  particular  field  which  is  termed  either  *  theoretical '  or  *  physical '
chemistry,  or,  more  correctly,  cimviical  inechanics.  As  this  province  of
chemistry  requires  a  knowledge  not  only  of  the  various  homogeneous

•'"  Ehp«icially  conclusive  are  those  casew  of  so-called  metalepsis  (Dumas,  Laurent).
Chlorine,  in  coinbiniii}^  with  hydrogen,  forms  a  very  stable  substance  called  * hydrocliloric
acid,'  which  is  split  uj*  by  the  action  of  an  electrical  current  into  chlorine  and  hydrogen,
the  chlorine  api>euring  at  the  positive  and  the  hydrogen  at  the  negative  pole.  Hence
electro-chemists  considered  hydrogen  to  be  an  electro-positive  and  chlorine  an  electro-
negative element,  and  that  they  are  held  together  in  virtue  of  their  opiwsite  electrical
charges.  It  ap[K»ars,  however,  from  metalepsis,  that  chlorine  can  replace  hydrogen  (and,
inversely,  hydrogen  can  replace  chlorine)  in  its  comiwunds  without  in  any  way  changing
the  grouping  of  the  other  elements,  or  altering  their  clflef  chemical  properties.  For
instance,  acetic  acid  in  which  hydrogen  has  been  replaced  by  chlorine  is  still  capable  of
forming  salts.  It  must  be  observed,  whilst  considering  this  subject,  tlmt  the  explanation
suggesting  electricity  as  the  origin  of  chemical  i)heiionieua  isuns<jund,  since  it  attempts  to
explain  one  class  of  i)henomena  whose  nature  is  almost  unknown  by  another  class  which
is  no  better  known.  It  is  most  instructive  to  remark  that  together  with  the  electrical
theorj'of  chemical  attraction  there  arose  and  surx'ives  a  view  which  explains  the  galvanic
current  as  being  a  transference  of  chemical  action  through  the  circuit — i.e.,  regards  the
origin  of  electricity  as  being  a  chemical  one.  It  is  evident  that  the  connection  is  very
intinuite,  although  both  phenomena  are  independent  and  represent  different  forms  of
molecular  (atomic!  moti«>n,  whose  real  nature  is  not  yet  understood.  Nevertheless,  the
connection  between  thr  plienomena  of  both  categories  is  not  only  in  itself  very  instructive,
but  it  extends  the  applicability  of  the  general  idea  of  the  unity  of  the  forces  of  nature,
conviction  of  the  trutli  of  which  has  held  so  important  a  place  in  the  science  of  the  last
ien  years.

INTRODUCTION  29

substances  which  have  yet  been  obtained  and  of  the  chemical  trans-
formations which  they  undergo,  but  also  of  the  phenomena  (of  heat  and
other  kinds)  by  which  these  transformations  are  accompanied,  it  is  only
possible  to  enter  on  the  study  of  chemical  mechanics  after  an  acquain-
tance with  the  fundamental  chemical  conceptions  and  substances  which
form  the  subject  of  this  book.^'

As  the  chemical  changes  to  which  substances  are  liable  proceed
from  internal  forces  proper  to  these  substances,  as  chemical  phenomena
certainly  consist  of  motions  of  material  parts  (from  the  laws  of  the
indestructibility  of  matter  and  of  elements),  and  as  the  investigation
of  mechanical  and  physical  phenomena  proves  the  law  of  the  indestruc-
tibility of  forces^  or  the  conservation  of  energy — that  is,  the  possibility
of  the  transformation  of  one  kind  of  motion  into  another  (of  visible
or  mechanical  into  invisible  or  physical) — we  are  inevitably  obliged  to
acknowledge  the  presence  in  substances  (and  especially  in  the  elements
of  which  all  others  are  composed)  of  a  store  of  chemical  energy  or  in-
visible motion  inducing  them  to  enter  into  combinations.  If  heat
be  evolved  in  a  reaction,  it  means  that  a  portion  of  chemical  energy  is

51  I  consider  that  in  an  elementary  textbook  of  chemistry,  like  the  present,  it  is  only
possible  and  advisable  to  mention,  in  reference  to  chemical  mechanics,  a  few  general
ideas  and  some  particular  examples  referring  more  especially  to  gases,  whose  mechanical
theory  must  be  regarded  as  the  most  complete.  The  molecular  mechanics  of  hquids  and
solids  is  as  yet  in  embryo,  and  contains  much  that  is  disputable;  for  this  reason,
chemical  mechanics  has  made  less  progress  in  relation  to  these  substances.  It  may  not
be  superfluous  here  to  remark,  with  respect  to  the  conception  of  chemical  affinity,  that
up  to  the  present  time  gravity,  electricity,  and  heat  have  all  been  applied  to  its  elucida-
tion. Efforts  have  also  been  made  to  introduce  the  luminiferous  ether  into  theoretical
chemistry,  and  should  that  connection  between  the  phenomena  of  light  and  electricity
which  was  estabUshed  by  Maxwell  be  worked  out  more  in  detail,  doubtless  these  efforts
to  elucidate  all  or  a  great  deal  by  the  aid  of  luminiferous  ether  will  again  appear  in
theoretical  chemistry.  An  independent  chemical  mechanics  of  the  material  particles  of
matter,  and  of  their  internal  (atomic)  changes,  would,  in  ray  opinion,  arise  as  the  result
of  these  efforts.  Two  hundred  years  ago  Newton  laid  the  foundation  of  a  truly  scientific
theoretical  mechanics  of  external  visible  motion,  and  on  this  foundation  erected  the
edifice  of  celestial  mechanics.  One  hundred  years  ago  Lavoisier  arrived  at  the  first
fundamental  law  of  the  internal  mechanics  of  invisible  particles  of  matter.  Tliis  subject
is  far  from  having  been  developed  into  a  harmonious  whole,  because  it  is  much  more
difficult,  and,  although  many  details  have  been  completely  investigated,  it  does  not
possess  any  starting  points.  Newton  only  come  after  Copernicus  and  Kepler,  who  had
discovered  empirically  the  exterior  simplicity  of  celestial  phenomena.  Lavoisier  and
Dalton  may,  in  respect  to  the  chemical  mechanics  of  the  molecular  world,  be  compare<l
to  Copernicus  and  Kepler.  But  a  Newton  has  not  yet  appeared  in  the  molecular  world ;
when  he  does,  I  tliink  that  he  will  find  the  fundtxmental  laws  of  the  mechanics  of  the
invisible  motions  of  matter  more  easily  and  more  quickly  in  the  chemical  structure  of
matter  than  in  physical  phenomena  (of  electricity,  heat,  and  light) ;  for  these  latter  are
accomplished  by  particles  of  matter  already  arranged,  whilst  it  is  now  clear  that  the
problem  of  chemical  mechanics  mainly  lies  in  the  apprehension  of  those  motions  which
are  invisibly  accomplished  by  the  smallest  atoms  of  matter.

80  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

transformed  into  heat ;  ^^  if  heat  be  absorljed  in  a  reaction,^  that  it  is
partly  transformed  (rendered  latent)  into  chemical  energy.  The  store
of  force  or  energy  going  to  the  formation  of  new  compounds  may,  after
several  combinations,  accomplished  with  an  absorption  of  heat,  at  last
diminish  to  such  a  degree  that  indifferent  compounds  will  be  obtained,
although  these  sometimes,  by  combining  with  energetic  elements  or
compounds,  give  more  complex  compounds,  which  may  be  capable  of
entering  into  chemical  combination.  Among  elements,  gold,  platinum,
and  nitrogen  have  but  little  energy,  whilst  potassium,  oxygen,  and
chlorine  have  a  very  marked  degree  of  energy.  When  dissimilar  sub-
stances enter  into  combination  they  often  form  substances  of  diminished
energy.  Thus  sulphur  and  potassium  when  heated  easily  bum  in  air,
but  when  combined  together  their  compound  is  neither  inflammable
nor  burns  in  air  like  its  component  parts.  Part  of  the  energy  of  the
potassium  and  of  the  sulphur  was  evolved  in  their  combination  in  the
form  of  heat.  Just  as  in  the  passage  of  substances  from  one  physical
state  into  another  a  portion  of  their  store  of  heat  is  absorbed  or
evolved,  so  in  combinations  or  decompositions  and  in  every  chemical

^^  The  theory  of  heat  gave  the  idea  of  a  store  of  internal  motion  or  energy,  and
therefore  with  it,  it  became  necessary  to  acknowledge  chemical  energy,  but  there  is  no
foundation  whatever  for  identifying  lieat  energy  with  chemical  energy.  It  may  be  sup-
posed, but  not  positively  affirmed,  that  heat  motion  is  proper  to  molecules  and  chemical
motion  to  atoms,  but  that  as  molecules  are  made  up  of  atoms,  the  motion  of  the  cue
passes  to  the  other,  and  that  for  this  reason  heat  strongly  influences  reaction  and
appears  or  disappears  (is  absorbed)  in  reactions.  These  relations,  which  are.  apparent
and  hardly  subject  to  doubt  on  general  lines,  still  present  much  that  is  doubtful  in
detail,  because  all  fonns  of  molecular  and  atomic  motion  are  able  to  pass  into  each
other.

'"^  The  rt'actions  which  take  place  (at  the  ordinary  or  at  a  high  temperature)  directly
between  Hubstuiioes  nuiy  be  clearly  divided  into  exothermal,  which  are  accompanied  by
an  evolution  of  heat,  and  endothennal,  which  are  accompanied  by  an  absort>tion  of  heat.
It  is  evident  that  the  latter  require  a  source  of  heat.  They  are  determined  either  by  the
directly  surrounding  medium  (as  in  the  formation  of  carbon  bisulphide  from  cliarcoal  and
sulphur,  or  in  decompositions  which  take  place  at  high  temperatures),  or  else  by  a
secondary  reaction  proceeding  simultuneously,  or  by  some  other  fonn  of  energj'  (light,
electricity).  So,  for  instance,  hydrogen  sulphide  is  decomjKJsed  by  iodine  in  the  presence
of  water  at  the  exiM'nst-  of  the  heat  which  is  evolved  by  the  solution  in  water  of  the
hydrogt'u  i<Klid«'  produced.  This  is  the  reason  why  this  reaction,  as  exothermal,  only-
takes  place  in  the  presence  of  water;  otherwise  it  would  be  accompanied  by  a  cooling
♦•fleet.  As  in  the  combination  of  dissimilar  substances,  tlie  bonds  existing  In^tween  the
molecules  and  atoms  of  the  homogeneous  substances  have  to  be  broken  asunder,  whilst  in
reactions  of  r«'arrun;;enicnt  the  fonnation  of  any  one  substance  proceeds  simultaneously
with  the  fonnation  of  anotlu^r,  and,  as  in  reactions,  a  series  of  physical  and  mechanical
changes  take  place,  it  is  impossible  to  separate  the  heat  directly  depending  on  a  given
reaction  from  the  total  sum  of  the  observed  heat  eflect.  For  this  reason,  thenno-chemical
data  are  very  complex,  and  cannot  by  themselves  give  the  key  to  many  chemical  problems,
as  it  was  at  first  supposed  they  might.  They  ought  to  forma  i)artof  chemical  mechanics,
but  alone  tiiev  do  not  constitut<»  it.

USTTRODUCTION  31

process,  there  occurs  a  change  in  the  store  of  chemical  energy,  and  at
the  same  time  an  evolution  or  absorption  of  heat.^**

For  the  comprehension  of  chemical  phenomena  as  mechanical  pro-
cesses— i.e,f  the  study  of  the  inodiis  operandi  of  chemical  phenomena —
it is most important to consider  : (1) the facts  gathered from
stoichiometry,  or  that  part  of  chemistry  which  treats  of  the  quantita-
tive relation,  by  weight  or  volume,  of  the  reacting  substances  ;  (2)  the
distinction between the different forms and classes of chemical
reactions ; (3)  the  study  of Jhe  changes  in  properties  produced by
alteration  in  composition  ;  (4)  the  study  of  the  phenomena  which  ac-
company chemical  transformation  ; (5)  a generalisation  of  the  con-
ditions under  which  reactions  occur. As  regards  stoichiometry,  this
branch of chemistry has been  worked out  most  thoroughly, and
comprises  laws  (of  Dal  ton,  Avogadro-Gerhardt,  and  others)  which  bear
so  deeply  on  all  parts  of  chemistry  that  at  the  present  time  the  chief
problem  of chemical  research  consists  in the  application  of  general
stoichiometrical laws to concrete examples, i.e., the quantitative
(volumetric or  gravimetric) composition  of substances. All other
branches  of  chemistry  are  clearly  subordinate  to  this  most  important
portion of  chemical  knowledge. Even  the  very signification  of  re-
actions of  combination,  decomposition,  and  rearrangement,  acquired,  as
we  shall  see,  a  particular  and  new  character  under  the  influence  of  the
progress  of  exact  ideas  concerning  the  quantitative  relations  of  sub-
stances entering  into chemical  changes. Furthermore,  in  this  sense
there  arose  a  new — and,  till  then,  unknown — division  of  compound
substances  into  definite  and  ind^Jlnite  compounds. Even  at  the  beginning
of  this  century,  Berthollet  had  not  made  this  distinction. But  Prout
showed  that  a  number  of  compounds  contain  the  substances  of  which
they  are  composed  and  into  which  they  break  up,  in  exact  definite  pro-
portions by  weight,  which  are  unalterable  under  any  conditions. Thus,
for  example,  red  mercury  oxide  always  contains  sixteen  parts  by  weight
of  oxygen  for  every  200  parts  by  weight  of  mercury,  which  is  expressed
by  the  formula  HgO. But  in  an  alloy  of  copper  and  silver  one  or  the
other  metal  may  be  added  at  will,  and  in  an  aqueous  solution  of  sugar,
the  relative proportion of  the  sugar  and  water  may  be  altered  and
nevertheless  »  homogeneous  whole  with  the  sum  of  the  independent

'•*  As  chemical  reactions  are  effected  by  heating,  so  the  heat  absorbed  by  substances
l)efore  decomposition  or  change  of  state,  and  called  '  specitic  heat,'  goes  in  many  cases  to
the  preparation,  if  it  may  be  so  expressed,  of  reaction,  even  when  the  limit  of  the
temperature  of  reaction  is  not  attained.  The  molecules  of  a  substance  A,  wliich  is  notable
to  reaction  a  substance  B  below  a  temperature  t,  by  being  heated  from  a  somewhat  lower
temperature  to  t,  undergoes  that  change  wliich  had  to  be  arrived  at  for  the  formation
of  AB.

32  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

properties  will  be  obtained — i.e.,  in  these  cases  there  was  indeiiiiite
chemical  combination.  Although  in  nature  and  chemical  practice  the
formation  of  indefinit/C  compounds  (such  as  alloys  and  solutions)  plays
as  essential  a  part  as  the  formation  of  definite  chemical  compounds,  yet,
as  the  stoichiometrical  laws  at  present  apply  chiefly  to  the  latter,  all
facts  concerning  indefinite  compounds  suffer  from  inexactitude,  and  it
is  only  during  recent  years  that  the  attention  of  chemists  has  been
directed  to  this  province  of  chemistry.

In  chemical  mechanics  it  is,  from  a  qualitative  point  of  view,  very
important  to  clearly  distinguish  at  the  very  beginning  between  rever-
sible and  non-reversible  reactions. Substances  capable  of  reacting  on
each  other  at  a  certain  temperature  produce  substances  which  at  the
same  temperature  either  can  or  cannot  give  back  the  original  substances.
For  example,  salt  dissolves  in  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and
the  solution  so  obtained  is  capable  of  breaking  up  at  the  same  tempera-
ture, leaving  salt  and  separating  the  water  by  evaporation. Carbon
bisulphide is formed from sulphur and  carbon  at about  the same
temperature  at  v/hich  it  can  be  resolved  into  sulphur  and  carbon. Iron,
at  a  certain  temperature,  separates  hydrogen  from  water,  forming  iron
oxide,  which,  in  contact  with  hydrogen  at  the  same  tern pei*ature,  is  able
to  produce  iron  and  water. It  is  evident  that  if  two  substances,  A
and  B,  give  two  others  C  and  D,  and  the  reaction  be  reversible,  then
C  and  D  will  form  A  and  B,  and,  consequently,  by  taking  a  definite
mass  of  A  and  B,  or  a  correspbnding  mass  of  C  and  D,  we  shall  obtain,
in  each  case,  all  four  substances — that  is  to  say,  there  will  be  a  state
of  chemical  equilibrinm  between  the  reacting  substances. By  increasing
the  mass  of  one  of  the  substances  we  obtain  a  new  condition  of  equi-
librium, so  that  reversible  reactions  present  a  means  of  studying  the
injiitence  of  mass  on  the  modus  oj^randi  of  chemical  changes. Many
of  those  reactions  which  occur  with  very  complicated  compounds  or
mixtures  may  serve  as  examples of non- reversible reactions. Thus
many  of  the  compound  substances  of  animal  and  vegetable  organisms
are  broken  up  by  heat,  but  cannot  be  re-formed  from  their  products
of  decomposition  at any  temperature. Gunpowder,  as  a  mixture  of
sulphur,  nitre,  and  carbon,  on  being  exploded,  forms  gases  from  which
the  original  sul)stances  cannot  l^e  re-formed  at  any  temperature. In
order  to  obtain  them,  recourse  must  be  had  to  an  indirect  method  of
combination  at  the  moment  of  sejxirafion. If  A  does  not  under  any
circumstances  conibiiie  directly  with  B,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  cannot
give  a  compound  A  1>. For  A  can  often  combine  with  C  and  B  with
D,  and  if  C  has  a  great  affinity  for  D,  then  the  reaction  of  A  C  or  B  D
produces  not  only  C  1),  but  also  A  B. As  on  the  formation  of  C  D,

INTRODUCTION  83

the  substances  A  and  B  (previously  in  A  C  and  B  D)  are  left  in  a
peculiar  state  of  separation,  it  is  supposed  that  their  mutual  com-
bination occurs  because  they  meet  together  in 'this  twscent  state  at  the
moment  of  separation  {in  statu  nascendi).  Thus  chlorine  does  not
directly  combine  with  charcoal,  graphite,  or  diamond  ;  there  are,  never-
theless, compounds  of  chlorine  with  carbon,  and  many  of  them  are
distinguished  by  their  stability.  They  are  obtained  in  the  action  of
chlorine  on  hydrocarbons,  as  the  separation  products  from  the  direct
action  of  chlorine  on  hydrogen.  Chlorine  takes  up  the  hydrogen,  and
the  carbon  liberated  at  the  moment  of  its  separation,  enters  into  com-
bination with  another  portion  of  the  chlorine,  so  that  in  the  end  the
chlorine  is  combined  with  both  the  hydrogen  and  the  carbon.^*

As  regards  those  phenomena  which  accompany  chemical  action,  the
most  important  circumstance  in  reference  to  chemical  mechanics  is  that
not  only  do  chemical  processes  produce  a  mechanical  displacement  (a
motion  of  particles),  heat,  light,  electrical  potential  and  current ;  but
that  all  these  agents  are  themselves  capable  of  changing  and  governing
chemical  transformations.  This  reciprocity  or  reversibility  naturally
depends  on  the  fact  that  all  the  phenomena  of  nature  are  only  different
kinds  and  forms  of  visible  and  invisible  (molecular)  motions.  First
sound,  and  then  light,  was  shown  to  consist  of  vibratory  motions,  as
the  laws  of  physics  have  proved  and  developed  beyond  a  doubt.
The  connection  between  heat  and  mechanical  motion  and  work  has
ceased  to  be  a  supposition,  but  has  becoihe  an  accepted  fact,  and  the
mechanical  equivalent  of  heat  (425  kilogrammetres  of  mechanical  work
correspond  with  one  kilogram  unit  of  heat  or  Calorie)  gives  a  mecha-
nical measure  for  thermal  phenomena.  Although  the  mechanical
theory  of  electrical  phenomena  cannot  be  considered  so  fully  developed
as  the  theory  of  heat,  both statical  and dynamical electricity are

^  It  is  possible  to  imagine  that  the  cause  of  a  great  many  of  such  reactions  is,  that
substances  taken  in  a  separate  state,  for  instance,  charcoal,  present  a  complex  molecule
composed  of  separate  atoms  of  carbon  which  are  fastened  together  (united,  as  is  usually
said)  by  a  considerable  affinity ;  for  atoms  of  the  same  kind,  just  like  atoms  of  different
kinds,  possess  a  mutual  affinity.  The  affinity  of  chlorine  for  carbon,  although  unable
to  break  this  bond  asunder,  may  be  sufficient  to  form  a  stable  compound  with  atoms  of
carbon,  which  are  already  separate.  Such  a  view  of  the  subject  presents  a  hjrpothesis
which,  although  dominant  at  the  present  time,  is  without  sufficiently  firm  foundation.  It
is  evident,  however,  that  not  only  does  ohemical  reaction  itself  consist  of  motions,  but
that  in  the  compound  formed  (in  the  molecules)  the  elements  (atoms)  forming  it  are  in
harmonious  stable  motion  (like  the  planets  in  the  solar  system),  and  this  motion  will
affect  the  stability  and  capacity  for  reaction,  and  therefore  the  mechanical  side  of  chemical
action  must  be  exceedingly  complex.  Just  as  there  are  solid,  physically  constant  non-
volatile substances  like  rock,  gold,  charcoal.  Sec,  so  are  there  stable  and  chemically  con-
stant bodies ;  while  corresponding  to  physically  volatile  substances  there  are  bodies  like
camphor,  which  are  chemically  unstable  and  variable.

VOL.  I.  O

c

iii~  iiauiii  a*.  i:ifrfi'  ^nr-ii^ 3«ir  iiif  suiTt-t!Ti  'wni:!  31  3S  SfiiiiiiiKsiirr  sad

F".L."-.*-r :•:•  iir Li :r:»*r  Tiiiic l :ti".*.'T ••TM»n-i'i^ 7*!i^i4anx.  hat  aike
r-y J_rr-r.i':  ir.c. ":.i«  -s**  ^i.  ■vijJi  "l^^  T^i'rjtCAZi^-s usukZy  «Mc«r  in

t'— :  -i.'.rv  -.  :*:- •^-rz  ikS  ibe  .>:•— :c>Ti':c d  i-latxaI  is  dfcte&Jent  on

;..4.  r .:.:rr •T.—^i::.  Tij>:rAl, n-ftjLiT-i.tC :r  •:zhrrT  yXfiM.^ijs^ The
fo..  ,«■;.::  ir*.  ',\^ >:^f :-i:rl::i5  itii:'- rx-rr:  in infahpco*  oc the

'^ "  y  T'-ft^  '".  •  • '  r- .  — C"':.  r :: .  ;o;i !  r^,ic: : : ::  s  :f  vivin  bin  at  ion  odIt  take
plA/^<:  v.irr.i:.  '.-err^iin  denaite  i-mits  of  lemr-rriture,  and  canuot  be
.vyyif/,j,;iijfj«:ri  .^utsyie  these  limits.  We  m^y  cite  a>  examples  not  onlv
th:,t  fh-  oor/ii/i-tion  of  chan.-oal  begins  at  a  red  heat,  but  also  that
'Ulorluir  ixtA  Wilt  only  c-omVjine  with  water  at  a  temperature  below  0'.
'V\»t'  i'  *ii\u\^,\i}A*  cannot  hie  formed  at  a  hi:;:her  temperature,  for  thej
ntf  t\it  It  wholly  or  partially  broken  up  into  their  component  parts.
A  '«if,jin  rivr  in  u^nifXirature  is  necessary  to  start  combustion.  In
««ihiin  i;aHi"i  \\io.  t'WfrX  of  this  rise  may  be  explained  as  causing  one
of  Mii.  I.  ;.*r,in;^  UkIkjh  to  change  frr^m  a  solid  into  a  liquid  or  gaseous
fofiM  'Mil-  lmui^{^'.r^itu'^i  iuU)  a  fluid  form  facilitates  the  progress  of
Mm- iiii'ho/i.  Iht/iuw? it aids  the  intimate  contact  of the  particles

INTRODUCTION  35

reacting  on  each  other.  Another  reason,  and  to  this  must  be  ascribed
the  chief  influence  of  heat  in  exciting  chemical  action,  is  that  the
physical  cohesion,  or  the  internal  chemical  union,  of  homogeneous
particles  is  thereby  weakened,  and  in  this  way  the  separation  of  the
particles -of  the  original  substances,  and  their  transference  into  new
compounds,  is  rendered  easier.  When  a  reaction  absorbs  heat — as  in
decomposition — the  reason  why  heat  is  necessary  is  self-evident.

At  the  present  day  it  may  be  asserted  upon  the  basis  of  existing
data,  respecting  the  action  of  high  temperature,  that  all  compound
bodies  are  decomposed  at  a  more  or  less  high  temperature.  We  have
already  seen  examples  of  this  in  describing  the  decomposition  of
mercury  oxide  into  mercury  and  oxygen,  and  the  decomposition  of
wood  under  the  influence  of  heat.  Many  substances  are  decomposed
at  a  very  moderate  temperature ;  for  instance,  the  fulminating  salt
which  is  employed  in  cartridges  is  decomposed  at  a  little  above  1 20^
The  majority  of  those  compounds  which  make  up  the  mass  of  animal
and  vegetable  tissues  are  decomposed  at  200°.  On  the  other  hand,
there  is  reason  to  think  that  at  a  very  low  temperature  no  reaction
whatever  can  take  place.  Thus  plants  cease  to  carry  on  their  chemical
processes  during  the  winter.  Raoul  Pictet  (1892),  employing  the  very
low  temperatures  (as  low  as  —  200°C.)  obtained  by  the  evaporation  of
liquefied  gases  (see  Chap.  II.),  has  recently  again  proved  that  at  tempera-
tures below  —  1 20°,  even  such  reactions  as  those  between  sulphuric  acid
and  caustic  soda  or  metallic  sodium  do  not  take  place,  and  even  the
coloration  of  litmus  by  acids  only  commences  at  temperatures  above
—  80°.  If  a  given  reaction  does  not  take  place  at  a  certain  low  tempera-
ture, it  will  at  first  only  proceed  slowly  with  a  rise  of  temperature  (even
if  aided  by  an  electric  discharge),  and  will  only  proceed  rapidly,  with
the  evolution  of  heat,  when  a  certain  definite  temperature  has  been
reached.  Every  chemical  reaction  requires  certain  limits  of  tempera-
ture for  its  accomplishment,  and,  doubtless,  many  of  the  chemical
changes  observed  by  us  cannot  take  place  in  the  sun,  where  the
temperature  is  very  high,  or  on  the  moon,  where  it  is  very  low.

The  influence  of  heat  on  reversible  reactions  Is  particularly  instruc-
tive. If,  for  instance,  a  compound  which  is  capable  of  being  reproduced
from  its  products  of  decomposition  be  heated  up  to  the  temperature  at
which  decomposition  begins,  the  decomposition  of  a  mass  of  the  sub-
stance contained  in  a  definite  volume  is  not  immediately  completed.
Only  a  certain  fraction  of  the  substance  is  decomposed,  the  other  por-
tion remaining  unchanged,  and  if  the  temperature  be  raised,  the  quan-
tity of  the  substance  decomposed  increases  ;  furthermore,  for  a  given
Tolume,  the  ratio  between  the  part  decomposed  and  the  part  unaltered

D  2

36  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

corresponds  with  each  definite  rise  in  temperature  until  it  reaches  that
at  which  the  compound  is  entirely  decomposed.  This  partial  decom-
position under  the  influence  of  heat  is  called  dissociation.  It  is  pos-
sible to  distinguish  between  the  temperatures  at  which  dissociation
begins  and  ends.  Should  dissociation  proceed  at  a  certain  temperature,
yet  should  the  product  or  products  of  decomposition  not  remain  in
contact  with  the  still  undecomposed  portion  of  the  compound,  then
decomposition  will  go  on  to  the  end.  Thus  limestone  is  decomposed
iu  a  limekiln  into  lime  and  carbonic  anhydride,  because  the  latter  is
carried  off  by  the  draught  of  the  furnace.  But  if  a  certain  mass  of
limestone  be  enclosed  in  a  definite  volume — for  instance,  in  a  gun
barrel — which  is  then  sealed  up,  and  heated  to  redness,  then,  as  the
carbonic  anhydride  cannot  escape,  a  certain  proportion  only  of  the
limestone  will  be  decomposed  for  every  increment  of  heat  (rise  in  tem-
perature) higher  than  that  at  which  dissociation  begins.  Decomposition
will  cease  when  the  carbonic  anhydnde  evolved  presents  a  maximum
dissociation  jyTcssure  corresponding  with  each  rise  in  temperature.  If
the  pressure  be  increased  by  increasing  the  quantity  of  gas,  then  com-
bination begins  afresh  ;  if  the  pressure  be  diminished  decomposition
will  recommence.  Decomposition  in  this  case  is  exactly  similar  to
evaporation  ;  if  the  steam  given  off  by  evaporation  cannot  escape,  its
pressure  will  reach  a  maximum  corresponding  with  the  given  tempera-
ture, and  then  evaporation  will  cease.  Should  steam  be  added  it  will
be  condensed  in  the  liquid  ;  if  its  quantity  be  diminished— t.e.  if  the
pressure  be  lessened,  the  temperature  being  constant — then  evaporation
will  go  on.  We  shall  afterwards  discuss  more  fully  these  phenomena  of
dissociation,  which  were  first  discovered  by  Henri  St.  Claire  Deville,
We  will  only  remark  that  the  products  of  decomposition  re- combine
with  greater  facility  the  nearer  their  temperature  is  to  that  at  which
dissociation  begins,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  initial  temperature  of
dissociation  is  near  to  the  initial  temperature  of  combination.

{b)  The  injfnence  of  an  electric  cvrrent^  and  of  electricity  in  general,
on  the  progress  of  chemical  transformations  is  very  similar  to  the
influence  of  heat.  The  majoi-ity  of  compounds  which  conduct  elec-
tricity are  decomposed  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current,  and  as
there  is  great  similarity  in  the  conditions  under  which  decomposition
and  combination  proceed,  combination  often  proceeds  under  the  in-
fluence of  electricity.  Electricity,  like  heat,  must  be  regarded  as  a
peculiar  form  of  molecular  motion,  and  all  that  refers  to  the  influence  of
heat  also  refers  to  the  phenomena  produced  by  the  action  of  an
electrical  curient,  with  this  difference,  only  that  a  substance  can  be
separated  into  its  component  parts  with  much  greater  ease  by  electricity,

INTRODUCTION  37

since  the  process  goes  on  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  The  most
stable  compounds  may  be  decomposed  by  this  means,  and  a  most  im-
portant fact  is  then  observed — namely,  that  the  component  parts
appear  at  the  different  poles  of  electrodes  by  which  the  current  passes
through  the  substance.  Those  substances  which  appear  at  the  positive
pole  (anode)  are  called  *  electro-negative,'  and  those  which  appear  at
the  negative  pole  (cathode,  that  in  connection  with  the  zinc  of  an
ordinary  galvanic  battery)  are  called  *  electro-positive.'  The  majority
of  non-metallic  elements,  such  as  chlorine,  oxygen,  <Lc.,  and  also  acids
and  substances  analogous  to  them,  belong  to  the  first  group,  whilst  the
metals,  hydrogen,  and  analogous  products  of  decomposition  appear
at  the  negative  pole.  Chemistry  is  indebted  to  the  decomposition  of
compounds  by  the  electric  current  for  many  most  important  discoveries.
Many  elements  have  been  discovered  by  this  method,  the  most  im-
portant being  potassium  and  sodium.  Lavoisier  and  the  chemists  of
his  time  were  not  able  to  decompose  the  oxygen  compounds  of  these
metals,  but  Davy  showed  that  they  might  be  decomposed  by  an
electric  current,  the  metals  sodium  and  potassium  appearing  at  the
negative  pole.  Now  that  the  dynamo  gives  the  possibility  of  pro-
ducing an  electric  current  by  the  combustion  of  fuel,  this  method  of
Sir  H.  Davy  is  advantageously  employed  for  obtaining  metals,  &c.  on
a  large  scale,  for  instance,  sodium  from  fused  caustic  soda  or  chlorine
from  solutions  of  salt.

(c)  Certain  unstable  compounds  are  also  decomposed  by  the  action
of  light.  Photography  is  based  on  this  property  in  certain  substances
(for  instance,  in  the  salts  of  silver).  The  mechanical  energy  of  those
vibrations  which  determine  the  phenomena  of  light  is  very  small,  and
therefore  only  certain,  and  these  generally  unstable,  compounds  can  be
decomposed  by  light — at  least  under  ordinary  circumstances.  But
there  \a  one  class  of  chemical  phenomena  dependent  on  the  action  of
light  which  forms  as  yet  an  unsolved  problem  in  chemistry — these  are
the  processes  accomplished  in  plants  under  the  influence  of  light
Here  there  take  place  most  unexpected  decompositions  and  combina-
tions, which  are  often  unattainable  by  artificial  means.  For  instance,
carbonic  anhydride,  which  is  so  stable  under  the  influence  of  heat  and
electricity,  is  decomposed  and  evolves  oxygen  in  plants  under  the
influence  of  light.  In  other  cases,  light  decomposes  unstable  com-
pounds, such  as  are  usually  easily  decomposed  by  heat  and  other
agents.  Chlorine  combines  with  hydrogen  under  the  influence  of
light,  which  shows  that  combination,  as  well  as  decomposition,  can
be  determined  by  its  action,  as  was  likewise  the  case  with  heat  and
electricity.

38  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

(cT)  Mechanical  causes  exert,  like  the  foregoing  agents,  an  action
both  on  the  process  of  chemical  combination  and  of  decomposition.
Many  substances  are  decomposed  by  friction  or  by  a  blow— as,  for
example,  the  compound  called  iodide  of  nitrogen  (which  is  composed  of
iodine,  nitrogen,  and  hydrogen),  and  silver  fulminate.  Mechanical
friction  causes  sulphur  to. burn  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  contained
in  potassium  chlorate.  Pressure  a£fects  both  the  physical  and  chemical
state  of  the  reacting  substances,  and,  together  with  the  temperature,
determines  the  state  of  a  substance.  This  is  particularly  evident  when
the  substance  occurs  in  an  elastic -gaseous  form  since  the  volume,  and
hence  also  the  number  of  points  of  encounter  between  the  reacting
substances  is  greatly  altered  by  a  change  of  pressure.  Thus,  under
equal  conditions  of  temperature,  hydrogen  when  compressed  acts  more
powerfully  upon  iodine  and  on  the  solutions  of  many  salts.

(e)  Besides  the  various  conditions  which  have  been  enumerated
above,  the  progress  of  chemical  reactions  is  accelerated  or  retarded  by
the  condition  of  contact  in  which  the  reacting  bodies  occur.  Other
conditions  remaining  constant,  the  rate  of  progress  of  a  chemical  re-
action is  accelerated  by  increasing  the  number  of  points  of  contact.  It
will  be  enough  to  point  out  the  fact  that  sulphuric  acid  does  not  absorb
ethylene  under  ordinary  conditions  of  contact,  but  only  after  con-
tinued shaking,  by  which  me^ns  the  number  of  points  of  contact  is
greatly  increased.  To  ensure  complete  action  between  solids,  it  is
necessary  to  reduce  them  to  very  fine  powder  and  to  mix  them  as
thoroughly  as  possible.  M.  Spring,  the  Belgian  chemist,  has  shown
that  finely  powdered  solids  which  do  not  react  on  each  other  at  the
ordinary  temperature  may  do  so  under  an  increased  pressure.  Thus,
under  a  pressure  of  6,000  atmospheres,  sulphur  combines  with  many
metals  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  mixtures  of  the  powders  of
many  metals  form  alloys.  It  is  evident  that  an  increase  in  the  number
of  points  or  surfaces  must  be  regarded  as  the  chief  cause  producing
reaction,  which  is  doubtless  accomplished  in  solids,  as  in  liquids  and
gases,  in  virtue  of  an  internal  motion  of  the  particles,  which  motion,
although  in  different  degrees  and  forms,  must  exist  in  all  the  states  of
matter.  It  is  very  important  to  direct  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
internal  motion  or  condition  of  the  parts  of  the  particles  of  matter
must  be  different  on  the  surface  of  a  substance  from  what  it  is  inside  ;
because  in  the  interior  of  a  substance  similar  particles  are  acting  on
all  sides  of  every  particle,  whilst  at  the  surface  they  act  on  one  side
only.  Therefore,  the  condition  of  a  substance  at  its  surfaces  of  contact
with  other  substances  must  be  more  or  less  modified  by  them — it  may
be  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  caused  by  an  elevation  of  temperature.

INTRODUCTION  39

These  considerations  throw  some  light  on  the  action  in  the  large  class
of  contact  reactions  ;  that  is,  such  as  appear  to  proceed  from  the  mere
presence  (contact)  of  certain  special  substances.  Porous  or  powdery
substances  are  very  prone  to  act  in  this  way,  especially  spongy
platinum  and  charcoal.  For  example,  sulphurous  anhydride  does  not
combine  directly  with  oxygen,  but  this  reaction  takes  place  in  the
presence  of  spongy  platinum.^®

The  above  general  and  introductory  chemical  conceptions  cannot  be
thoroughly  grasped  in  their  true  sense  without  a  knowledge  of  the
particular  facts  of  chemistry  to  which  we  shall  now  turn  our  attention.
It  was,  however,  absolutely  necessary  to  become  acquainted  on  the
very  threshold  with  such  fundamental  principles  as  the  laws  of  the
indestructibility  of  matter  and  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  since  it  is
only  by  their  acceptance,  and  under  their  direction  and  influence,  that
the  examination  of  particular  facts  can  give  practical  and  fruitful  results.

'"•  Contact  phenomena  are  separately  considered  in  detail  in  the  work  of  Professor
Konovaloff  (1884).  In  my  opinion,  it  must  be  held  that  the  state  of  the  internal  motions
of  the  atoms  in  molecules  is  modified  at  the  points  of  contact  of  substances,  and  this
state  determines  chemical  reactions,  and  therefore,  that  reactions  of  combination,  de-
composition, and  rearrangement  are  accomplished  by  contact.  Professor  Konovaloff
showed  that  a  number  of  substances,  under  certain  conditions  of  their  surfaces,  act  by
oont^t ;  for  instance,  finely  divided  silica  (from  the  hydrate)  acts  just  like  platinum,
decomposing  certain  compound  ethers.  As  reactions  are  only  accomplished  under  close
contact,  it  is  probable  that  those  modifications  in  the  distribution  of  the  atoms  in  mole-
cules which  come  about  by  contact  phenomena  prepare  .tHe  way  for  them.  By  this  the
rdle  of  contact  phenomena  is  considerably  extended.  Such  phenomena  should  explain
the  fact  why  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen  yields  water  (explodes)  at  different
temperatures,  according  to  the  kind  of  heated  substance  which  transmits  this  tempera-
ture. In  chemical  mechanics,  phenomena  of  this  kind  liave  great  importance,  but  as  yet
they  have  been  but  little  studied.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  contact  is  a  necessary
condition  for  every  chemical  reaction.

40  PKINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

CHAPTER  I

ON WATER AND ITS COMPOUNDS

Water  is  found  almost  everywhere  in  nature,  and  in  all  three  physical
states.  As  vapour,  water  occurs  in  the  atmosphere,  and  in  this  form
it  is  distributed  over  the  entire  surface  of  the  earth.  The  vapour  of
water  in  condensing,  by  cooling,  forms  snow,  rain,  hail,  dew,  and  fog.
One  cubic  metre  (or  1,000,000  cubic  centimetres,  or  1,000  litres,  or
35*316  cubic  feet)  of  air  can  contain  at  0°  only  4  8  grams  of  water,  at
20*'  about  17*0  grams,  at  40°  about  50*7  grams  ;  but  ordinary  air  only
contains  about  60  per  cent,  of  this  maximum.  Air  containing  less
than  40  per  cent,  is  felt  to  be  dry,  whilst  air  which  contains  more  than
80  per  cent,  of  the  siime  maximum  is  considered  as  distinctly  damp,^
Water  in  the  liquid  state,  in  falling  bjs  rain  and  snow,  soaks  into  the

I  In  practice,  the  chemiHt  has  to  continually  deal  with  gases,  and  gases  are  often
collected  over  water ;  in  which  case  a  certain  amount  of  water  passes  into  vapour,  and
thin  vapour  niixeH  with  the  gtiftes.  It  is  therefore  most  important  that  he  should  be  able
to  calculate  the  amount  of  water  or  of  moisture  in  air  and  other  gases.  Let  us
imagine  a  cylinder  standing  in  a  mercury  bath,  and  filled  with  a  dry  gas  whose  Tolume
equalH  u,  temperature  t^,  and  pressure  or  tension  h  mm.  {h  millimetres  of  the  column  of
mercury  at  0'"-').  We  will  introduce  water  into  the  cylinder  in  such  a  quantity  that  a  small
part  romaiuH  in  the  liquid  state,  and  consequently  that  the  gas  will  be  saturated  with
acjueous  vapour ;  the  volume  of  the  gas  will  then  increase  (if  a  larger  quantity  of  water  be
taken  Home  of  the  gas  will  be  dissolved  in  it,  and  the  volume  may  therefore  be  diminished).
We  will  further  suppose  that,  after  the  addition  of  the  water,  the  temperature  remains
constant;  then  since  the  volume  increases,  tlie  mercury  in  the  cylinder  falls,  and  therefore
the  pressure  as  well  as  the  volume  is  increased.  In  order  to  investigate  the  phenomenon
we  will  artificially  increase  the  pressure,  and  reduce  the  volume  to  the  original
volume  V.  Then  the  pressure  or  tension  will  be  greater  than  h,  namely  h  +/,  which
means  that  by  the  introduction  of  aqueous  vapour  the  pressure  of  the  gas  is  increased.
The  researches  of  Dalton,  Gay-Lussac,  and  Hegnault  showed  that  this  increase  is  equal
to  the  maximum  pressure  which  is  proper  to  the  aqueous  vapour  at  the  temperature  at
which  the  obserxation  is  made.  The  maximum  pressure  for  all  temperatures  may  be
found  in  the  tables  made  from  observations  on  the  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour.  The
quantity  /"will  be  equal  to  this  maximum  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour.  This  maybe
expressed  thus :  the  maximum  tension  of  aqueous  vapour  (and  of  all  other  vapours)
saturating  a  space  in  a  vacuum  or  in  any  gas  is  the  same.  This  rule  is  known  as
Dalton^ 8  law.  Thus  we  have  a  volume  of  dry  gas  v,  under  a  pressure  /i,  and  a  volume
of  moist  gas,  saturated  with  vajwur,  under  a  pressure  h  +/. The  volume  v  of  the  dry

gas  under  a  pressure  //  +/  occupies,  from  Boyle's  law,  a  volume  i-L  ;  consequently  the

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  41

soil  and  collects  together  into  springs,  lakes,  rivers,  seas,  and  oceans.
It  is  absorbed  from  the  soil  by  the  roots  of  plants,  which,  when  fresh,

vh
volume  occupied  by  the  fiqueous  vapour  under  the  pressure  h+f  equals  v—- — - ,  or

—-J Thus  tlie  volumes  of  the  dry  gas  and  of  the  moisture  which  occurs  in  it,  at  a

pressure  h  +/,  are  in  the  ratio  / :  h.  And,  therefore,  if  the  aqueous  vapour  saturates  a
space  at  a  pressure  n,  the  volumes  of  the  dry  air  and  of  the  moisture  which  is  contained
in  it  are  in  the  ratio  n— /:  ^  where  /  is  the  pressure  of  the  vapour  according  to  the
tables  of  vapour  tension.  Thus,  if  a  volume  N  of  a  gas  saturated  with  moisture
be  measured  at  a  pressure  H,  then  the  volume  of  the  gas,  when  dry,  will  be  equal  to

N ^. In  fact,  the  entire  volume  N  must  be  to  the  volume  of  dry  gas  2;  as  H  is  to
H

H  — /;  therefore,  N  :  a;  =  H  :  H— /,  from  which  x  =  N— — ^. Under  any  other  pressure —

—•pr  XT jt

for  instance,  760  mm.— the  volume  of  dry  gas  will  be ,  or 1^  and  we  thus  obtain

760  760

the  following  practical  rule :  If  a  volume  of  a  gas  saturated  with  aqueous  vapour  be
measured  at  a  pressure  H  mm.,  then  the  volume  of  dry  gas  contained  in  it  will  be
obtained  by  finding  the  volume  corresponding  to  the  pressure  H,  less  the  pressure  due
to  the  aqueous  vapour  at  the  temperature  observed.  For  example,  87*5  cubic  centi-
metres of  air  saturated  with  aqueous  vapour  were  measured  at  a  temperature  of  15*8°,
and  under  a  pressure  of  747*8  mm.  of  mercury  (at  0°).  What  will  be  the  volume  of  dry
gas  at  0°  and  760  mm.  ?

The  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour  corresponding  to  15*8°  is  equal  to  12'9  mm.,  and

therefore  the  volume  of  dry  gas  at  16'8°  and  747*8  mm.  is  equal  to  87*5  x ; at

747*8

784*4
760  mm.  it  will  be  equal  to  87*5  x  —^  —  ; and  at  0° the  volume  of  dry  gas  will  be

87-6  X  T?i:fx_?I? -  =84*81  c.c.
760 278  +  15-8

From  this  rule  may  also  be  calculated  what  fraction  of  a  volume  of  gas  is  occupied  by

moisture  under  the  ordinary  pressure  at  different  temperatures ;  for  instance,  at  80°  C.

f^  81*5,  consequently  ICO  volumes  of  a  moist  gas  or  air,  at  700  mm.,  contain  a  volume  of

81*5
aqueous  vapour  100  x  . , or  4*110 ; it  is  also  found  that  at  0°  there  is  contained

0-61  p.c.  by  volume,  at  10°  121  p.c,  at  20°  229  p.c,  and  at  50°  up  to  1211  p.c.  From
this  it  may  be  judged  how  great  an  error  might  be  made  in  the  measurement  of  gases
by  volume  if  the  moisture  were  not  taken  into  consideration.  From  this  it  is  also
evident  how  great  are  the  variations  in  volume  of  the  atmosphere  when  it  loses  or  gains
aqueous  vapour,  which  again  explains  a  number  of  atmospheric  phenomena  (winds,
variation  of  pressure,  rainfalls,  storms,  t^c.)

If  a  gas  is  not  saturated,  then  it  is  indispensable  that  the  degree  of  moisture  should
be  known  in  order  to  determine  the  volume  of  dry  gas  from  the  volume  of  moist  gas.
The  preceding  ratio  gives  the  maximum  quantity  of  water  which  can  be  held  in  a  gas,
and  the  degree  of  moisture  shows  what  fraction  of  this  maximum  quantity  occurs  in  a
given  case,  when  the  vapour  does  not  saturate  the  space  occupied  by  the  gas.  Conse-
quently, if  the  degree  of  moisture  equals  50  p.c. — that  is,  half  the  maximum — then  the
volume  of  dry  gas  at  760  mm.  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  dry  gas  at  760  mm.  multiplied  by

-~  --■  1  or,  in  genera],  by  -~-  •',  where r  is  the degree  of  moisture. Thus,  if  it  is

required  to  measure  the  volume  of  a  moist  gas,  it  must  either  be  thoroughly  dried  or
quite  saturated  with  moisture,  or  else  the  degree  of  moisture  determined.  The  first  and
last  methods  are  inconvenient,  and  therefore  recourse  is  usually  had  to  the  second.  For
this  purpose  water  is  introduced  into  the  cylinder  holding  the  gas  to  be  measured  ;  it  ik

42  PRLSX^IPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

contain  from  40  to  80  per  cent,  of  water  by  weight.  Animals  contain
about  the  same  amount  of water. In  a  solid  state,  water  appears

left  for  a  certain  time  so  that  the  gas  may  become  saturated,  the  precaation  being  taken
that  a  portion  of  the  water  remains  in  a  liquid  state ;  then  the  volume  of  the  moist  gas
is  determined,  from  which  that  of  the  dry  gas  may  be  calculated.  In  order  to  find  the
weight  of  the  aqueous  vapour  in  a  gas  it  is  necessary  to  know  the  weight  of  a  cubic
measure  at  0^  and  760  mm.  Knowing  that  one  cubic  centimetre  of  air  in  these  circum-
stances weighs  0*001293  gram,  and  that  the  density  of  aqueous  vapour  is  0*62,  we  find
that  one  cubic  centimetre  of  aqueous  vapour  at  0°  and  760  mm.  weighs  0*0008  gram,
and  at  a  temperature  t°  and  pressure  /^  the  weight  of  one  cubic  centimetre  will  be

7i 273
00008 XX  We  already  know  that  v  volumes  of  a  gas  at  a  temperature  i°

760 278  +  ^  6  r

pressure  h  contain  vx^  volumes  of  aqueous  vapour  which  saturate  it,  therefore  the

weight  of  the  aqueous  vapour  held  in  v  volumes  of  a  gas  will  be

vx 00008 X /-x^^*^^ .
760 278  + 1

Accordingly,  the  weight  of  water  which  is  contained  in  one  volume  of  a  gas  depends
only  on  the  temperature  and  not  on  the  pressure.  This  also  signifies  that  evapora-
tion proceeds  to  the  same  extent  in  air  as  in  a  vacuum,  or,  in  general  terms  (this  is
Dalton'a  law),  vapours  and  gases  diffuse  into  each  other  as  if  into  a  vacuum.  In  a  given
space,  at  a  given  temperature,  a  constant  quantity  of  vapour  enters,  whatever  be  the
pressure  of  the  gas  filling  that  space.

From  tliis  it  is  clear  that  if  the  weight  of  the  vapour  contained  in  a  given  volume

of  a  gas  be  known,  it  is  easy  to  determine  the  degree  of  moisture  r=  -  -^ -  x  —  x
*  -^  ^  ux  00008 t

278  "¥  t  . .

On  this  is  founded  the  very  exact  determination  of  the  degree  of  moisture  of
^73

air  by  the  weight  of  water  contained  in  a  given  volume.  It  is  easy  to  calculate  from
the  preceding  formula  the  number  of  grams  of  water  contained  at  any  pressure  in  one
cubic  metre  or  million  cubic  centimetres  of  air  saturated  with  vapour  at  various  tempera-
tures ;  for  instance,  at  30°  /-  31*5,  hence  2>  =  29*84  grams.

The  laws  of  Mariotte,  Dalton,  and  Gay-Lussac,  which  are  here  applied  to  gases  and
vapours,  are  not  entirely  exact,  but  are  approximately  true.  If  they  were  quite  exact,
a  mixture  of  several  liquids,  having  a  certain  vapour  pressure,  would  give  vapours  of  a
very  high  pressure,  which  is  not  the  case.  In  fact  the  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour  is
slightly  less  in  a  gas  than  in  a  vacuum,  and  the  weight  of  aqueous  vapour  held  in  a  gas
is  slightly  less  than  it  should  be  according  to  Dalton's  law,  as  was  shown  by  the  experi-
ments of  Regnault  and  others.  This  means  that  the  tension  of  the  vapour  is  less  in  air
than  in  a  vacuum.  The  difference  does  not,  however,  exceed  5  per  cent,  of  the  total
pressure  of  the  vapours.  This  decreinefit  in  vapour  tension  which  occurs  in  the  inter-
mixture of  vapours  and  gases,  although  small,  indicates  that  there  is  then  already,  so  to
speak,  a  beginning  of  chemical  change.  The  essence  of  the  matter  is  that  in  this  case
there  occurs,  as  on  contact  (see  preceding  footnote),  an  alteration  in  the  motions  of  the
atoms  in  the  molecules,  and  therefore  also  a  change  in  the  motion  of  the  molecules
themselves.

In  the  uniform  intermixture  of  air  and  other  gases  with  aqueous  vapour,  and  in  the
capacity  of  water  to  pass  into  vaiK>ur  and  form  a  uniform  mixture  with  air,  we  may
perceive  an  instance  of  a  pliysical  phenomenon  which  is  analogous  to  chemical  phe-
nomena, forming  indeed  a  transition  from  one  class  of  phenomena  to  the  other.  Between
water  and  dry  air  there  exists  a  kind  of  afTmity  which  obliges  the  water  to  saturate  the
jiir.  But  such  a  homogeneous  mixture  is  formed  (almost)  independently  of  the  nature  of
the  gas  in  which  evaporation  takes  place  ;  even  in  a  vacuum  the  phenomenon  occurs  in
exactly  the  same  way  as  in  a  gas,  and  therefore  it  is  not  the  property  of  the  gas,  nor  its
relation  to  water,  but  the  property  of  the  water  itself,  which  compels  it  to  evaporate,  and

ON  WATER AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  43

as  snow,  ice,  or  in  an  intermediate  form  between  these  two,  which
is  seen  on  mountains  covered  with  perpetual  snow.  •  The  water  of
rivers,^  springs,  oceans  and seas,  lakes,  and wells contains various

therefore  in  this  case  chemical  afSnity  is  not  yet  operative — at  least  its  action  is  not
clearly  pronounced.  That  it  does,  however,  play  a  certain  part  is  seen  from  the  deviation
from  Dalton's  law.

*  In  falling  through  the  atmosphere,  water  dissolves  the  gases  of  the  atmosphere,
nitric  acid,  ammonia,  organic  compounds,  salts  of  sodiom,  magnesium,  and  calcium,  and
mechanically  washes  out  a  mixture  of  dust  and  microbes  which  are  suspended  in  the
atmosphere.  The  amount  of  these  and  certain  other  constituents  is  very  variable.  Even
in  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  same  rainfall  a  variation  which  is  often  very  considerable
may  be  remarked.  Thus,  for  example,  Bunsen  found  that  rain  collected  at  the  beginning
of  a  shower  contained  8*7  grams  of  ammonia  per  cubic  metre,  whilst  that  collected  at  the
end  of  the  same  shower  contained  only  0*64  gram.  The  water  of  the  entire  shower  con-
tained an  average  of  1*47  gram  of  ammonia  per  cubic  metre.  In  the  course  of  a  year
rain  supplies  an  acre  of  ground  with  as  much  as  5^  kilos  of  nitrogen  in  a  combined  form.
Marchand  found  in  one  cubic  metre  of  snow  water  15*68,  and  in  one  cubic  metre  of  rain
water  10*07,  grams  of  sodium  sulphate.  Angus  Smith  showed  that  after  a  thirty  hours'
fall  at  Manchester  the  rain  still  contained  84*8  grams  of  salts  per  cubic  metre.  A  con-
siderable amount  of  organic  matter,  namely  25  grams  per  cubic  metre,  has  been  found
in  rain  water.  The  total  amount  of  solid  matter  in  rain  water  reaches  50  grams  per
cubic  metre.  Rain  water  generally  contains  very  little  carbonic  acid,  whilst  river
water  contains  a  considerable  quantity  of  it.  In  considering  the  nourishment  of
plants  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  view  the  substances  which  are  carried  into  the  soil
by  rain.

River  watery  which  is  accumulated  from  springs  and  sources  fed  by  atmospheric
water,  contains  from  60  to  1,600  parts  by  weight  of  salts  in  1,000,000  parts.  The  amount
of  solid  matter,  per  1,000,000  parts  by  weight,  contained  in  the  chief  rivers  is  as
follows :— the  Don  124,  the  Loire  135,  the  St.  Lawrence  170,  the  Rhone  182,  the  Dnieper
187,  the  Danube  from  117  to  234,  the  Rliine  from  158  to  317,  the  Seine  from  190  to  482,
the  Thames  at  London  from  400  to  450,  in  its  upper  parts  887,  and  in  its  lower  parts  up
to  1,617,  the  Nile  1,680,  the  Jordan  1,052.  The  Neva  is  characterised  by  the  remarkably
small  amount  of  solid  matter  it  contains.  From  the  investigations  of  Prof.  G.  K.  Trapp,
a  cubic  metre  of  Neva  water  contains  82  grams  of  incombustible  and  28  grams  of
organic  matter,  or  altogether  about  55  grams.  This  is  one  of  the  purest  waters  which  is
known  in  rivers.  The  large  amount  of  impurities  in  river  water,  and  especially  of  organic
impurity  produced  by  pollution  with  putrid  matter,  makes  the  water  of  many  rivers  unfit
for  use.

Tlie  chief  part  of  the  soluble  substances  in  river  water  consists  of  the  calcium  salts.
100  parts  of  the  solid  residues  contain  the  following  amounts  of  calcium  carbonate^
from  the  water  of  the  Loire  58,  from  the  Thames  about  50,  the  Elbe  55,  the  Vistula  65,
the  Danube  65,  the  Rhine  from  55  to  75,  the  Seine  75,  the  Rhone  from  82  to  94.  The
Neva  contains  40  parts  of  calcium  carbonate  per  100  parts  of  saline  matter.  The  con-
siderable amount  of  calcium  carbonate  which  river  water  contains  is  very  easily  explained
from  the  fact  that  water  which  contains  carbonic  acid  in  solution  easily  dissolves  calcium
carbonate,  which  occurs  all  over  the  earth.  Besides  calcium  carbonate  and  sulphate,
river  water  contains  magnesium,  silica,  chlorine,  sodium,  potassium,  aluminium,  nitric  acid,
iron  and  manganese.  The  presence  of  salts  of  phosphoric  acid  has  not  yet  been  determined
with  exactitude  for  all  rivers,  but  the  presence  of  nitrates  has  been  proved  with  certainty
in  almost  all  kinds  of  well- investigated  river  water.  The  quantity  of  calcium  phosphate
does  not  exceed  0*4  gram  in  the  water  of  the  Dnieper,  and  the  Don  does  not  contain  more
than  5  grams.  The  water  of  the  Seine  contains  about  15  grams  of  nitrates,  and  that  of  the
Rhone  about  8  grams.  The  amount  of  ammonia  is  much  less ;  thus  in  the  water  of  the
Rhine  about  0*5  gram  in  June,  and  0*2  gram  in  October ;  the  water  of  the  Seine  contains

riilNClPLEH UK CHEHISTRY

I  substances  in  solution  mostly  salt,— that  is,  substances  resembling
common  table  salt  in  their  physical  properties  and  chief  chemical
tninaformutiona.  Further,  the  quantity  and  nature  of  these  salts
differ  in  different  waters.^ Everybody  knows  that there  are  salt.

Thin  in  lesa  Ihun  in  rain  wuler. Nutnithstwiding  thie  i

Rliiiie  alnne,  which  It  not  so  tmy  large  a.  rirer,  eutia«  16,91S
1  tliB  owan  Bverj  day.  The  diffeceiite  betwee
&iD  and  river  wnter  dependa  on  the  fact  that  the  Boil  through  whioh  th«
BEB  is  able  to  retain  the  ammonis,  (Soil  tan  also  absorh  rnanj  othyf  tab-
is  jihoHphoric  acid,  potaBaium  ealta,  &<:.}
The  waterH  of  Bpringar  nvere,  vellBr  and  in  general  of  ^oae  localities  froni  ttbicb  it  IB
taken  for  drinking  pnrpoBee,  maj  be  injnriona  to  health  if  it  contniuB  much  organic
pallution,  the  more  so  an  in  such  water  the  lower  arganiams  (bacteria)  mo)'  rajridl]'
develop,  aod  theee  nrganisms  oIMn  aerre  as  the  cairieiB  or  cai
For  instance,  certain  pathogenio  (diHease-piodacing)  bacteria  are  known'  to  prodnos  '
typhoid,  the  Siberian  plague^  and  cholera. Thaiika  to  the  work  of  PaHtetlTT  U

"  B  province  of  researuh  liaa  made  tonHiderable  progreaa.  It  is
poaaible  to  inveatigale  the  unmber  and  properties  ut  tlie  (jernia  in  water,
logical  reseiuckes  a  gelatinooa  medinm  iu  whiuli  tht  germs  can  develop  and  moltipl;  is
piepufd  with  gelatin  and  water,  which  hjw  proriuuKly  been  heated  several  times,  kt
intervals,  to  100°  [it  is  thus  rendered  slerile— tliat  is  to  aay,  all  the  j^erma  in  it  are  kUled).
The  water  to  be  investigated  is  added  to  this  prepared  medium  in  a  defiuit«  and  small  j
qaantiCy  (aometimea  diluted  with  ateritised water  to  faeiUtt

a  protected  from  dust  (which  contains  garms),  a
lower  organisms  aru  developed  from  ench  germ.  These  (amiliei
(coloDiea)  are  visible  to  the  nulled  eye  (as  spats),  they  may  be  counted,  and  by  eKaauuitig
them  under  the  mieroscope  and  observing  the  number  of  organiama  they  produce,  tieir
BgniGcaiue  may  be  determined.  The  majority  of  bacteria  are  harmless,  but  thei«  ue
decidedly  pathogenic  bacteria,  whose  preiionee  is  one  of  the  causes  of  malady  and  of  thtt
spread  of  certain  diaeasea.  The  number  of  bacteria  in  one  cubit  ci
sometimes  attains  the  immense  Hgiues  of  hundreds  ol  thoosanda  and  millions.  CertMii
well,  spring,  and  river  waters  contain  very  few  bacteria,  and  are  free  from  diionsB
producing  bacteria  under  ordinary  circumatances.  By  boiling  water,  Llie  bacteria  in
ftTe  killed,  bat  the  organic  matter  necesaary  for  their  nourishment  r^maioa  in  the  wat
The  beat  kinds  of  water  for  drinking  porposes  do  not  contain  more  than  300  bacteria  in
■  cabio  oentlmetre.

The  amonnt  of  gases  disaolved  is  river  water  ia  much  more  constant  than  that  of  ila
solid  constitoents. One  litre,  or  1,000  c.c,  of  water  contains  10  to  5!>  c.c,  o(  gas  measnrad ,
■t  Domial  tempsrature  and  presanre. Iu  winter  the  amount  of  gas  is  gnatet  lliaa  in .

(procaeding  in  all  lilteliliood  (ror
ot  oxygen.  U  tlis  total  amount
the  same  proportion ;  in  many  c
water  of  many  deep  and  rapid  rii
rapid  toTDution  from  atmoipherii
and  slow  course,  in absorbing  i

■ago,  o(  ao  vols,  of  nitrogen,  30  vola  of  carbonic  anhydride
'mm  the  soil  and  not  (rum  the  almoapherej,  and  of  10  vols.
rf  giLSes  be  leas,  the  cooatituent  gases  are  still  in  abnut
Jies,  however,  carbonic  anhydride  predominates. Th#
■n  contaLnn  lesa  carbonic  anhydride,  which  showa  Dieii
water,  and  that  they  have  not  sQcceeded,  during  a  long
greater  quantity  of  carbonic  anhydride. Thni,  fet
instance,  the  water  ot  the  Rliine,  near  Strasburg,  according  to  Deville,  ooutains  8  oo.
of  carbonic  anhydride,  10  c.c,  of  nitrogen,  and  7  c.c.  of  oxygen  per  litre. Fcom  the
ressanheaof  Prof.  M.  B.  Kapoustin  and  hia  pupils,  it  uppeara  that  in  delefmimiig  Um
quality  of  a  watvr  (or  drinking  purposes,  it  is  most  importan
liOD  at  tbe  dissolved  gases,  more  especially  oxygen,

*  Spring  miter  in  formed  from  rainwater  percolating  through  the  soil. Naturally
I  evaporated  directlj  from  tbe  SDrfooe  of  the  earth

iconpotf- ^^M

aturaUy  a  ^^M
Idomtba^^H

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS

45

fresh,  iron,  and  other  waters. The  presence  of  about  3|  per  cent.

vegetation  on  it.  It  has  been  shown  that  out  of  100  parts  of  water  falling  on  the  earth
only  86  parts  flow  to  the  ocean ;  the  remaining  64  are  evaporated,  or  percolate  far  under-
ground. After  flowing  underground  along  some  impervious  strata,  water  comes  out  at
the  surface  in  many  places  as  springs,  whose  temperature  is  determined  by  the  depth
from  which  the  water  has  flowed.  Springs  penetrating  to  a  great  depth  may  become
considerably  heated,  and  this  is  why  hot  mineral  springs,  with  a  temi>erature  of  up  to
80^  and  higher,  are  often  met  with.  When  a  spring  water  contains  substances  which
endow  it  with  a  peculiar  taste,  and  especially  if  these  substances  are  such  as  are  only
found  in  minute  quantities  in  river  and  other  flowing  waters,  then  the  spring  water  is
termed  a  mineral  water.  Many  such  waters  are  employed  for  medicinal  purposes.
Mineral  waters  are  classed  according  to  their  composition  into — (a)  saline  waters,  which
often  contain  a  large  amount  of  common  salt ;  {b)  alkaline  waters,  which  contain  sodium
carbonate ;  (c)  bitter  waters,  which  contain  magnesia ;  (d)  chalybeate  waters,  which  hold
iron  carbonate  in  solution ;  (e)  aerated  waters,  which  are  rich  in  carbonic  anhydride ;
(/)  sulphuretted  waters,  which  contain  hydrogen  sulphide.  Sulphuretted  waters  may  be
recognised  by  their  smell  of  rotten  eggs,  and  by  their  giving  a  black  precipitate  with  lead
salts,  and  also  by  their  tarnishing  silver  objects.  Aerated  waters,  which  contain  an
excess  of  carbonic  anhydride,  effervesce  in  the  air,  have  a  sharp  taste,  and  redden  litmus
paper.  Saline  waters  leave  a  large  residue  of  soluble  solid  matter  on  evaporation,  and
have  a  salt  taste.  Chalybeate  waters  have  an  inky  taste,  and  are  coloured  black  by  an
infusion  of  galls ;  on  being  exposed  to  the  air  they  usually  give  a  brown  precipitate.
Generally,  the  character  of  mineral  waters  is  mixed.  In  the  table  below  the  analyses
are  given  of  certaiu  mineral  springs  which  are  valued  for  their  medicinal  properties.
The  quantity  of  the  substances  is  expressed  in  millionths  by  weight.

—

OB

1

1

2

Sodium
chloride

1

Sodium
sulphate

Sodium
carbonate

Potassium
1 iodide  and
bromide

Other  potas-
sium salts

Iron
carbonate

Magnesium
salts

1
152

Carbonic
anhydride

1

X Sulphuretted
® hydrogen

1

Total  solid
contents

I.

1.928  , —

1
152 —

24

_

448

, 1.300

2,609  L

II.

816  ' 386

1,239 26

43

9

257

46

' 1,485

— 1 2,812

m.

1.085 1,430

1,105  ' —

4

90

—

187

65

1.32e

11 3,950

IV.

343  1 3,783

16 3,431

"

14

-

251

112

' 2,883

— 7,950

V.

3,406 15,049

— —

1 2

—

17

1,587

229

—

76 120,290

VI.

352 3,145

95

35

50

1

260

11

20

— 3.970  i

VII.

308 1,036

2,583 1,261

—

4

178

75

—

—

5,451

VIII.

1,726  1 9,480

— —

40

120

26

208

40

—

— •

11,790

IX.

551 2.040

1,150 999

—

1

30

209

50

2,740

—

4,070

X.

285

558

279 3,813

1 —

—

7

45

45

2,268

—

5.031  '

XI.

340

910

Iron  and  aluminium  su

Iphates:

(1,020
1 1,660

940

t

190

2,550
330

Sulphuric '
< and  hydro-
i  chloric  acids

' 1

I.  Sergieffsky,  a  sulphur  water,  Gov.  of  Samara  (temp.  8°  C),  analysis  by  Clause.
II.  Geleznovodskya  water  source  No.  10,  near  Patigorsk,  Caucasus  (temp.  22'5°),  analysis
by  Fritzsche.  III.  Aleksandroffsky,  alkaline-sulphur  source,  Patigorsk  (temp.  46'5°),
average  of  analyses  by  Herman,  Zinin  and  Fritzsche.  IV.  Bougountouksky,  alkaline
source,  No.  17,  Essentoukah,  Caucasus  (temp.  21-6°),  analysis  by  Fritzsche.  V.  Saline
water,  Staro-Russi,  Gov.  of  Novgorod,  analysis  by  Nelubin.  VI.  Water  from  artesian
well  at  the  factory  of  state  papers,  St.  Petersburg,  analysis  by  Struve.  VII.  Spriidel,
Carlsbad  (temp.  88'7°),  analysis  by  Berzelius.  VIII.  Kreuznach  spring  (Elisenquelle),
Prussia  (temp.  8'8°),  analysis  by  Bauer.  IX.  Eau  de  Seltz,  Nassau,  analysis  by  Henry.
X.  Vichy  water,  France,  analysis  by  Berthier  and  Puvy.  XI.  Paramo  de  Ruiz,  New
Granada,  analysis  by  Levy ;  it  is  distinguished  by  the  amount  of  free  acids.

46  PRIN'CIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

of  salts  renders  sea- water  ^  bitter  to  the  taste  and  increases  its  specific
gravity.  Fresh  water  also  contains  salts,  but  only  in  a  compara-
tively small  quantity.  Their  presence  may  be  easily  proved  by  simply
evaporating  water  in  a  vessel.  On  evaporation  the  M^ater  psisses
away  as  vapour,  whilst  the  salts  are  left  behind.  This  is  why  a  crust
(incrustation),  consisting  of  salts,  previously  in  solution,  is  deposited  on
the  insides  of  kettles  or  boilers,  and  other  vessels  in  which  water  is
boiled.  Running  water  (rivers,  «fec.)  is  charged  with  salts,  owing  to  its
being  formed  from  the  collection  of  rain  water  percolating  through  the
soil.  While  percolating,  the  water  dissolves  certain  parts  of  the  soil.
Thus  water  which  filters  or  passes  through  saline  or  calcareous  soils
becomes  charged  with  salts  or  contains  calcium  carbonate  (chalk).
Rain  water  and  snow  are  much  purer  than  river  or  spring  water
Nevertheless,  in  passing  through  the  atmosphere,  rain  and  snow  succeed
in  catching  the  dust  held  in  it,  and  dissolve  air,  which  is  found  in  every
water.  The  dissolved  gases  of  the  atmosphere  are  partly  disengaged,
as  bubbles  from  water  on  heating,  and  water  after  long  boiling  is  quite
freed  from  them.

In  general  terms  water  is  called  pure  when  it  is  clear  and  free  from
insoluble  particles  held  in  suspension  and  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  from

-*  Sea  water  contains  more  non-volatile  saline  constituents  than  the  usual  kinds  of
fresh  water.  This  is  explained  by  the  ftvct  that  the  waters  flowing  into  the  sea  supply
it  with  salts,  and  whilst  a  large  quantity  of  vapour  is  given  oflf  from  the  surface  of  the
sea,  the  salts  remain  behind.  Even  the  specific  gravity  of  sea  water  differs  considerably
from  tliat  of  pure  water.  It  is  generally  about  102,  but  in  this  and  also  in  respect  of
the  amount  of  Halts  contained,  samples  of  sea  water  from  different  localities  and  from
different  depths  offer  rather  remarkable  variations.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  point  out
that  one  cubic  metre  of  water  from  the  undermentioned  localities  contains  the  following
quantity  in  grams  of  solid  constitutents : — Gulf  of  Venice,  19,122 ;  Leghorn  Harbour
24,812 ;  Mediterranean,  near  Cetta,  87,665  ;  the  Atlantic  Ocean  from  82,585  to  85,695,  the
Pacific  Ocean  from  85,283  to  34,708.  In  closed  seas  which  do  not  communicate,  or  are
in  very  distant  communication,  with  the  ocean,  the  difference  is  often  still  greater.  Thus
the  Caspian  Sea  contains  6,300  grams  ;  the  Black  Sea  and  Baltic  17,700.  Common  salt
forms  the  chief  constituent  of  the  saline  matter  of  sea  or  ocean  water ;  thus  in  one  cubic
metre  of  sea  water  there  are  25,000-81,000  grams  of  common  salt,  2,600-6,000  grams  of
magnesium  cliloride,  1,200-7,000  grams  of  magnesium  sulphate,  1,500-6,000  grams  of
calcium  sulphate,  and  10-700  grams  of  potassium  chloride.  The  small  amount  of  organic
matter  and  of  the  salts  of  phosphoric  acid  in  sea  water  is  very  remarkable.  Sea  water
/the  composition  of  which  is  partially  discussed  in  Chapter  X.)  contains,  in  addition  to
salts  of  common  occurrence,  a  certain  and  sometimes  minute  amount  of  the  most  varied
elements,  oven  gold  and  silver,  and  as  the  mass  of  water  of  the  oceans  is  so  enormous
these  '  traces  '  of  rare  substances  amount  to  large  quantities,  so  that  it  may  be  hoped  that
in  time  methods  will  be  found  to  extract  even  gold  from  sea  water,  which  by  means  of  the
rivers  forms  a  vast  reservoir  for  the  numerous  products  of  the  changes  taking  place  on
the  earth's  surface.  The  works  of  English,  American,  German,  Russian,  Swedish,  and
other  navigators  and  observers  prove  that  a  study  of  the  composition  of  sea  water  not
only  explains  much  in  the  history  of  the  earth's  life,  but  also  gives  the  possibility  (espe-
cially since  the  researches  of  C.  O.  Mokaroff  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Academy)  of  fixing  one's
position  in  the  ocean  in  the  absence  of  otlier  means,  for  instance,  in  a  fog,  or  in  the  dark.

ON  WATER  AND ITS COMPOUNDS  47

which  it  may  be  freed  by  filtration  through  charcoal,  sand,  or  porous
(natural  or  artificial)  stones,  and  when  it  possesses  a  clean  fresh  taste.
It  depends  on  the  absence  of  any  taste,  decomposing  organic  matter,
on  the  quantity  of  air^  and  atmospheric  gases  in  solution,  and  on  the
presence  of  mineral  substances  to  the  amount  of  about  300  grams  per
ton  (or  1000  kilogristms  per  cubic  metre,  or,  what  is  the  same,  300
milligrams  to  a  kilogram  or  a  litre  of  water),  and  of  not  more  than
100  grams  of  organic  matter.^ Such  water  is  suitable  for  drinking  and

^  The  tAHte  of  water  is  greatly  dependent  on  the  quantity  of  dissolved  gases  it  con-
tains. These  gases  are  given  off  on  boiling,  and  it  is  well  known  that,  even  when  cooled,
boiled  water  hats  until  it  has  absorbed  gaseous  substances  from  the  atmosphere,  quite  a
different  taste  from  fresh  water  containing  a  considerable  amount  of  gas.  Tlie  dissolved
ganes,  especially  oxygen  and  carbonic  anhydride,  have  an  important  influence  on  the
health.  The  following  instance  is  very  instructive  in  this  respect.  The  Grenelle  artesian
well  at  Paris,  when  first  opened,  supplied  a  water  wliich  had  an  injurious  effect  on  men
and  animals.  It  appeared  that  this  water  did  not  contain  oxygen,  and  was  in  general
very  poor  in  gases.  As  soon  as  it  was  made  to  fall  in  a  cascade,  by  which  it  absorbed  air,
it  proved  quite  fit  for  consumption.  In  long  sea  voyages  fresh  water  is  sometimes  not
taken  at  all,  or  only  taken  in  a  small  quantity,  because  it  spoils  by  keeping,  and  becomes
putrid  from  the  organic  matter  it  contains  undergoing  decomposition.  Fresh  water  may
be  obtained  directly  from  sea- water  by  distillation.  The  distilled  water  no  longer  contains
sea  salts,  and  is  therefore  fit  for  consumption,  but  it  is  very  tasteless  and  has  the  pro-
perties of  boiled  water.  In  order  to  render  it  palatable  certain  salts,  which  are  usually  held
in  fresh  water,  are  added  to  it,  and  it  is  made  to  flow  in  thin  streams  exposed  to  the  air
in  order  that  it  may  become  saturated  with  the  component  parts  of  the  atmosphere—
that  is,  absorb  gases.

^  Hard  water  is  such  as  contains  much  mineral  matter,  and  especially  a  large  pro-
portion of  calcium  salts.  Such  water,  owing  to  the  amount  of  lime  it  contains,  does  not
form  a  lather  with  soap,  prevents  vegetables  boiled  in  it  from  softening  proi>erly,  and
forms  a  large  amount  of  incrustation  on  vessels  in  which  it  is  boiled.  When  of  a  high
degree  of  hardness,  it  is  injurious  for  drinking  purposes,  which  is  evident  from  the  fact
that  in  several  large  cities  the  death-rate  has  been  found  to  decrease  after  introducing  a
soft  water  in  the  place  of  a  hard  water.  Putrid  water  contains  a  considerable  quantity
of  decomposing  organic  matter,  chiefly  vegetable,  but  in  populated  districts,  especially  in
towns,  chiefly  animal  remains.  Such  water  acquires  an  unpleasant  smell  and  taste,  by
which  stagnant  bog  water  and  the  water  of  certain  wells  in  inhabited  districts  are  par-
ticularly characterised.  Water  of  this  kind  is  especially  injurious  at  a  period  of  epidemic.
It  may  be  partially  purified  by  being  passed  tlirough  charcoal,  which  retains  the  putrid
and  certain  organic  substances,  and  also  certain  mineral  substances.  Turbid  water  may
be  purified  to  a  certain  extent  by  the  addition  of  alum,  which  aids,  after  standing  some
time,  the  formation  of  a  sediment.  Condy's  fluid  (potassium  permanganate)  is  another
means  of  purifjring  putrid  water.  A  solution  of  this  substance,  even  if  very  dilute,  is  of
a  red  colour ;  on  adding  it  to  a  putrid  water,  the  permanganate  oxidises  and  destroys  the
organic  matter.  When  added  to  water  in  such  a  quantity  as  to  impart  to  it  an  almost
imperceptible  rose  colour  it  destroys  much  of  the  organic  substances  it  contains.  It  is
especially  salutary  to  add  a  small  quantity  of  Condy's  fluid  to  impure  water  in  times  of
epidemic.

The  presence  in  water  of  one  gram  per  litre,  or  1,000  grams  per  cubic  metre,  of  any
substance  whatsoever,  renders  it  unfit  and  even  injurious  for  consumption  by  animals,
and  this  whether  organic  or  mineral  matter  predominates.  Tlie  presence  of  1  p.c.  of
chlorides  makes  water  quite  salt,  and  produces  thirst  instead  of  assuaging  it.  The
presence  of  magnesium  salts  is  most  unpleasant ;  they  have  a  disagreeable  bitter  taste

PRINCIPLES OF I.HEMISTRY

every  pructical  application,  but  evidently  it  is  not  pure  in  a  chemicalj
sense.  A  clwmically  pure  uKit'.r  is  necessary  not  only  for  scientilic
purposes,  as  an  independent  substance  having  constant  and  deliriite
properties,  but  also  for  many  practical  purposes — for  instance,  in  photo-
graphy and  in  the  preparation  ot  medicines — Ijecnuae  many  properties
of  substances  in  solution  are  clianged  by  the  impurities  of  natural
waters.  WaWr  is  usually  purified  by  distillation,  because  the  soli
substance-B  in  solution  are  not  transfurmed  into  vapours  in  this  process.
Such  dinliUed  water  is  prepared  by  chemists  and  in  laboratories
boiling  water  in  closed  metallic  boilers  or  stills,  and  causing  the  ste
produced  to  pit,ss  into  a  condenser^ that  is,  through  tubes  (which  shouhl'
be  made  of  tin,  or,  at  all  events,  tinned,  &s  water  and  its  impurities
do  not  act  on  tin)  surrounded  by  cold  water,  and  iu  which  the  steam,
being  cooled,  condenses  into  water  which  is  collected  ^  in  a  receiver.
By  standing  exposed  to  the  atmosphere,  however,  the  water  in  timo
absorbs  air,  and  dust  carried  in  the  air.  Nevertheless,  in  distillation,
water  retains,  besides  air,  a  certain  (juantity  of  volatile  iinparitiw
(especially  organic)  and  the  walls  of  the  distillation  apparatus  are  partljR:

ite

to-
iea

ilidM
■ss.^H

"I

4

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS

49

corroded  by  the  water,  and  a  portion,  although  small,  of  their  substance
renders  the  water  not  entirely  pure,  and  a  residue  is  left  on  evaporation.*
For  certain  physical  and  chemical  researches,  however,  it  is  necessary
to  have  perfectly  pure  water.  To  obtain  it,  a  solution  of  potassium
permanganate  is  added  to  distilled  water  until  the  whole  is  a  light  rose
xjolour.  By  this  means  the  organic  matter  in  the  water  is  destroyed
(converted  into  gases  or  non- volatile  substances).  An  excess  of  potas-
sium permanganate  does  no  harm,  because  in  the  next  distillation  it  is
left  behind  in  the  distillation  apparatus.  The  second  distillation  should
take  place  in  a  platinum  retort  with  a  platinum  receiver.  Platinum  is
a  metal  which  is  not  acted  on  either  by  air  pr  \vater,  and  therefore
nothing  passes  from  it  into  the  water.  The  water  obtained  in  the
receiver  still  contains  air.  It  must  then  l)e  boiled  for  a  long  time,  and
afterwards  cooled  in  a  vacuum  under  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump.  Pure
water  does  not  leave  any  residue  on  evaporation  ;  does  not  in  the  least
change,  however  long  it  be  kept ;  does  not  decompose  like  water  only

retort  (fig.  5)  heated  by  a  lamp. Fig.  5  illustrates  the  main  parts  of  the  usaal  glass
laboratory  apparatus  used  for  distillatiou. The  steam  issuing  from  the  retort  (on  the

Fio.  5. —Distillation  from  a  glass  retort.  The  neck  of  the  retort  fits  into  the  inn^r  tube  of  the
Liebig*8  couilen»icr.  The  spacj  between  the  inner  and  oater  tube  of  the  cou  lender  is  filled  with
cold  water,  which  enters  by  the  tube  g  and  flowd  out  at/.

right-hand  side)  pastes  tlirough  a  glass  tube  surrounded  by  a  larger  tube,  through  which
a  stream  of  cold  water  passes,  by  which  the  steam  is  condensed  and  runs  into  a  receiver
(on  the  left-hand  side).

*  One  of  Lavoisier's  first  memoirs  (1770)  referred  to  this  question.  He  investigated
the  formation  of  the  earthy  residue  in  the  distillation  of  water  in  order  to  prove  whether
it  was  possible,  as  was  affirmed,  to  convert  water  into  earth,  and  he  found  that  the
residue  was  produced  by  the  action  of  water  on  the  sides  of  the  vessel  containing  it,  and
not  from  the  water  itself. He  proved  this  to  be  the  cose  by  direct  weighing.

VOL.  I.  '^  B

50

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

once  distilled  or  impure  ;  and  it  does  not  give  babbles  of  gas  on  heating,
nor  does  it  change  the  colour  of  a  solution  of  potassium  permanganate.
Water,  purified  as  above  described,  has  constant  physical  and
chemical  properties.  For  instance,  it  is  of  such  water  only  that  one
cubic  centimetre  weighs  one  gram  at  4®  C. — i,e,  it  is  only  such  pure
water  whose  specific  gravity  equals  1  at  4®  C.® Water  in  a  solid  state

^  Taking  the  generally-accepted  specific  gravity  of  water  at  its  greatest  density — i.e.
at  4^  as  one — it  has  been  shown  by  experiment  that  the  specific  gravity  of  water  at  different
temperatures  is  as  follows :

At  0°

+  10°
16°
20°

»»

>»

»

0-99987

At

80°

0*99974

»

40°

099915

))

50°

0-99827

n

100°

099574
099283
0-98817
095859

A  comparison  of  all  the  data  at  present  known  shows  that  the  variation  of  the
f-pecific  gravity  St  with  the  temperature  t  (determined  by  the  mercurial  thermometer)
may  be  expressed  (Mendeldeff  1891)  by  tlie  formula

{t-iy

St  =  l-

(94-1  +  t)  (703'51  -  /)  1-9

'  C.  acctmling
to  the  mer-
ciiriHl  ther-
mometer

-10

0

10

20

80

60

70

90

100

120

100

200

8p.  gr.  St
(at  4^  =  1,000,000)

998,281
999,878
999,788
998,272
995,748
988,174
977,948
965,537
958,595
948,314
907,203
863,478

Variation  of  sp.  gr  with  a  rise  of

Pressure  per

1  atmosphere

or  (Is/dp

Temp,  per  1°  C.
or  ds/dt

Volume  t.iking  voL
at4°=l

■»264

-1-65

-85

-208

-299

-4fi0

-569

-670

-718

-810

-995

-1,200

+  54

1,001,7  2

+  50

1,000,127

4  47

1,000,263

+  45

1,001,731

+  48

1,004,276

+  40

1,011,967

-f89

1,02^,549

+  41

1,035,692

+  42

1,043,194

+  48

1,060,093

+  55

1,102,216

+  73

1,158,114

If  the  temperature  be  determined  by  the  hydrogen  thermometer,  whose  indications
between  0°  and  100^  are  slightly  lower  than  the  mercurial  (for example,  about  0*1°  Cat
20^),  tlien  a  Hlightly  smaller  sp.  gr.  will  be  obtained  for  a  given  t.  Thus  Chappuis  (1892)
obtained  0*998238  for  20°.  Water  at  4°  is  taken  as  the  basis  for  reducing  measures  of
length  to  measures  of  weight  and  volume.  The  metric,  decimal,  system  of  measures  of
weights  and  volumes  is  generally  employed  in  science.  The  starting  point  of  this  system
in  th<^  metre  (89-37  inches)  divided  into  decimetres  (=01  metre),  centimetres  ( =0*01  metre),
millimetroH  (=0*001  metre),  and  micrometres  (=  one  millionth  of  a  metre).  A  cubio
decimetre  is  called  a  /t<re,  and  is  used  for  the  measurement  of  volumes.  The  weight  of
a  litrn  of  water  at  4*^  in  a  vacuum  is  called  a  kilogram.  One  thousandth  part  of  a  kUo-
grani  of  water  weighs  one  gram.  It  is  divided  into  decigrams,  centigrams,  and  milli-
gramb  ( -  0  001  gram).  An  English  pound  equals  453*59  grams.  The  great  advanti^e  of
this  systom  is  tliat  it  is  a  decimal  one,  and  that  it  is  universally  adopted  in  science  and  in
most  international  relations.  All  the  meosures  cited  in  this  tvrrk  are  metrical.  The
units  most  often  used  in  science  are  : — Of  length,  tlie  centimetre ;  of  weight,  the  gram ;
of  time,  the  second ;  of  temperature,  the  degree  Celsius  or  Centigrade.  According  to
the  most  trustworthy  determinations  (Kupfer  in  Russia  1841,  and  Chaney  in  England
1892),  the  weight  of  a  c.  dcm.  of  water  at  4*^  in  vacuo  is  about  999  9  grms.  For  ordinary
pur}iosG8  the  weight  of  a  c.  dcg.  may  be  taken  as  equal  to  a  kg.  Hence  the  litre  (deter-
mined by  the  weight  of  water  it  holds)  is  slightly  greater  than  a  cubic  decilnetre.

OS  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  51

forms  crystals  of  the  hexagonal  system'"  which  areseeii  in  show,  which

'"  As  solid  Hobiituicea  appear  in  inrlependpnt.  regular,  cryatalline  form»  whicli  ive
dupsndent,  judging  Irom  their  cleavnge  or  liuuiniition  (in  virtue  ol  wliich  mica  breukti

op  into  IsTninoe,  and  IcelanJ  f par,  Arc.,
ui  anglea  wliicli  are  definite  lur  €iu;li  y
btrdncia}  in  diffcreut  directioDH  whiuli

opU'-'fsliounded  by  fiieen  inclined  toeaeli  othei
tancei.  iin  mi  inequility  ot  attiactiuD  (c-ollbHioii.
.eriiecl  at  deliuits  angles the  detenDiaatiun  ul

52  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

generally  consists  of  star-like  clusters  of  several  crystals,  and  also  in
the  half -melted  scattered  ice  floating  on  rivers  in  spring  time.  At
this  time  of  the  year  the  ice  splits  up  into  spars  or  prisms,  bounded  by
angles  proper  to  substances  crystallising  in  the  hexagonal  system.

The  temperatures  at  which  water  passes  from  one  state  to  another
are  taken  as  fixed  points  on  the  thermometer  scale  ;  namely,  the  zero
corresponds  with  the  temperature  of  melting  ice,  and  the  temperature
of  the  steam  cli.<en2jagecl  from  water  boiling  at  the  normal  barometric
pressure  (that  is  7G0  millimetres  measured  at  0'',  at  the  latitude  of  45®,
at  the  sea  level)  is  taken  as  100^  of  the  Celsius  scale.  Thus,  the  fact
that  water  liquefies  at  0°  and  boils  at  100°  is  taken  as  one  of  its
p?*o|ier1ies  as  a  definite  chemical  compound.  The  weight  of  a  litre  of
water  at  4°  is  1,000  grams,  at  0°  it  is  999*8  grams.  The  weight  of  a
litre  of  ice  at  0°  is  less-  namely,  917  grams  ;  the  weight  of  the  same
cubic  measure  of  water  vapour  at  760  mm.  pressure  and  100^  is  only
OGO  gram  ;  the  density  of  the  vapour  compared  with  air  =  0'62,  and
compared  with  hydro i^en  =  9.

These  data  briefly  characterise  the  physical  properties  of  water  as
a  separate  substance.  To  this  may  be  atlded  that  water  is  a  mobile
litjuid,  colourless,  transparent,  without  taste  or  smell,  ttc.  Its  latent
heat  of  vnporisation  is  534  units,  of  liquefaction  79  units  of  heat."
The large amount  of heat  stored  up  in  water  vapour  and also in

cryntalliiic  fm  m  tliereforo  affords  one  of  the  most  iinix)»'tant  cluiract<»riRtic8  for  identifyiD^
definite  oliemical  compounds.  The  elements  of  erys'allo^rapliy  whicli  comprise  a  special
Hcienee  sliould  tlu'n-fon'  be  familiar  to  all  who  desire  to  work  in  scientific  chemistry.  In
this  work  we  shall  onlv  have  occasion  to  speak  of  a  few  crystalline  forms,  some  of  which
Rr3  shown  in  fi^s.  C^  to  12.

"  Of  all  known  liquids,  water  exhibits  the  (;freatest  rohfsion  of  particles.  Indeed,  it
jis<-ei.<lh»  to  a  ^eater  lieij^ht  in  capillary  tubes  than  other  liquids ;  for  instance,  two  and  a
h.ilf  times  as  liigh  as  alcohol,  nearly  three  times  as  high  as  ether,  and  to  a  much  greater
heiifht  tlmn  oil  of  vitriol,  <tc.  In  a  tube  one  mm.  in  diameter,  water  at  0''  ascends  15  J)  mm.,
mej'f-urinjx  from  the  height  of  the  liquid  to  two-thirds  of  the  height  of  the  meniscus,  and
at  IOC  it  rises  IS'.^  mm.  The  cohesion  varies  very  uniformly  with  the  temperature ;  thus
at  oO  the  height  of  the  rai)illary  column  equals  13"i)  mm.— that  is,  the  mean  between  the
eohiinns  at  0  and  100''.  This  uniformity  is  not  destroyed  even  at  tem|)erature8  near
the  freezing  point,  and  h'«nee  it  may  be  assumed  that  ut  higli  temperatures  cohesion  will
vary  as  uniformly  as  at  ordinary  temperatures;  that  is,  the  diffi'rence  between  the  columns
»t  0^  and  ICO''  being  28  mm.,  the  height  of  the  column  at  500'^  should  be  15'2-(5  x  28)  =
1  '2  mm. ;  rr,  in  other  words,  at  these  high  temperatures  the  cohesicm  l)etween  the  particles
of  water  would  be  almost  nil.  Only  certain  solutions  (sal  ammonitu*  and  litliium  chlc-
rid«*),  and  thost!  only  with  a  great  excess  of  water,  rise  higher  than  pure  water  in
capillary  tubes.  The  greit  cohesion  of  water  doubtless  detennines  many  of  both  its
I>liysical  and  chemical  properties.

Tlie  quantity  of  heat  rc(|uired  to  raise  the  tem]H»rature  of  one  part  by  weight  of  water
from  0°  to  I'',  i.e.  by  1°  C,  is  called  the  unit  of  hraf  or  calorie;  the  specific  heat  of
liquid  water  at  0  '  is  taken  as  equal  to  unity.  The  variation  of  this  si>ecific  heat  with  a
rise  in  temperature  is  inconsiderable  in  comparison  with  the  variation  exhibite<l  by  the
•pecifio  heats  of  other  liquids. According  to  Ettuiger,  the  specific  heat  of  water  at  20®

ON WATER  AND  ITS COMPOUNDS  53

liquid  water  (for  its  specific  heat  is  greater  than  that  of  other  liquids)
renders  it  available  in  both  forms  for  heating  purposes. The  chemical

=  1016,  at  50^  =  1089,  and  at  100^  =  1-073.  Tlie  Rpeciiic  heat  of  water  is  greater  tlian
that  of  any  other  known  liquid ;  for  example,  the  Hpecific  heat  of  tdcohol  at  0°  is  055 —
Le,  the  quantity  of  heat  whicli  raises  55  parts  of  water  1°  raises  100  parts  of  alcohol  1°.
The  specific  \ieaX  of  oil  of  turpentine  at  0°  is  041,  of  ether  0-53,  of  acetic  acid  O*o274,  of
mercury  0*033.  Hence  water  is  the  best  condenser  or  absorber  of  heat.  This  property
of  water  Iku  an  inixxurtant  significance  in  practice  and  in  nature.  Water  prevents  ra])id
cooling  or  heating,  and  thus  tem])ers  cold  and  he^it.  The  s;i)ecific  heats  of  ice  and
aqneoufi  vaiK>ar  are  much  leiis  than  that  of  water;  namely,  that  of  ice  is  0*504,  and
of  steam  0*48.

With  an  increase  in  pressure  equal  to  one  atmosphere,  the  compressibility  of  water
{9ee  Note  9)  is  0000047,  of  mercury  000000352,  of  etlier  0  00012  at  0=,  of  alcohol  at  13°
00000^5.  The  addition  of  various  substances  to  water  generally  decreases  both  its
compressibility  and  cohesion.  The  compressibility  of  other  liquids  increases  with  a  rise
of  temperature,  but  for  water  it  decreases  up  to  53^  and  then  increases  like  other  liquids

The  expansion  of  water  by  heat  (Note  9)  also  exhibits  many  peculiarities  which  are
not  found  in  other  liquids.  The  expansion  of  water  at  low  temperatures  is  very  small
compared  with  other  liquids ;  at  4*^  it  is  almost  zero,  and  at  100"^  it  is  equal  to  0  OOOH ;
below  4^  it  is  negative — i.e..  water  on  cooling  then  expands,  and  does  not  decrease  in
volume.  In  passing  into  a  solid  state,  the  specific  gravity  of  water  decreases ;  at  0'^  one
c.c.  of  water  weighs  0'99U887  gram,  and  one  c.c.  of  ice  at  the  same  temperature  weighs
only  0'U175  gram.  The  ice  formed,  however,  contracts  on  cooling  like  the  majority  of
other  substances.  Thus  100  volumes  of  ice  are  produced  from  92  volumes  of  watsr — that
is,  water  expands  considerably  on  freezing,  which  fact  determines  a  number  of  Datural
phenomena.  The  freezing  point  of  water  falls  with  an  increase  in  pressure  (0'007'^  per
atmosphere),  because  in  freezing  water  expands  (Thomson),  whilst  with  bubstances  which
contract  in  solidifying  the  melting  point  rises  with  an  increase  in  pressure ;  thus,  paraffin
under  one  atmosphere  melts  at  40  ,  and  under  100  atmosj)lieres  at  49  ^

When  liquid  water  passes  into  vai)our,  the  cohesion  of  its  particles  must  be  destroyed,
as  the  particles  are  removed  to  such  a  distance  from  each  other  that  their  mutual
attraction  no  longer  exhibits  any  influence.  As  the  cohesion  of  aqueous  particles  varies
at  different  temperatures,  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  expended  in  overcoming  this
cohesion — or  tlie  Intent  heat  of  evaporation — will  for  this  reason  alone  be  different  at
different  temperatures.  The  quantity  of  heat  which  is  consumed  in  the  transformation
of  one  part  by  weight  of  water,  at  difTerent  temperatures,  into  vapour  was  determined  by
Regnault  with  great  accuracy.  His  researches  showed  that  one  part  by  weight  of  water
at  0',  in  passing  into  vapour  having  a  temperature  i*^,  consumes  006*5  + 0*305/ units  of
heat,  at  50^  621*7,  at  100^  637*0,  at  150^  (;52-2,  and  at  200^  667*5.  But  this  quantity
includes  also  the  quantity  of  heat  required  for  heating  the  water  from  0*^  to  t^—i.e.
besides  the  latent  heat  of  evajioration,  also  that  heat  which  is  used  in  heating  the  water
in  a  liquid  state  to  a  temperature  t^.  On  deducting  this  amount  of  heat,  we  obtain  the
latent  heat  of  evaporation  of  water  as  606*5  at  0^,  571  at  50'%  534  at  100",  494  at  150^,  and
only  453  at  200°,  which  shows  that  the  conversion  of  wat<?r  at  different  temperatures  int^
vapour  at  a  constant  temperature  requires  very  different  quantities  of  heat.  This  is
chiefly  dependent  on  the  difference  of  the  cohesion  of  water  at  different  temperatures  ;
the  cohesion  is  greater  at  low  than  at  high  temperatures,  and  therefore  at  low  tem-
peratures a  greater  quantity  of  heat  is  required  to  overcome  the  cohesion.  On  comparing
these  quantities  of  heat,  it  will  be  observed  tliat  they  decrease  rather  uniformly,  namely
their  difference  between  0°  and  100"  is  72,  and  between  100°  and  200°  is  81  units  of  heat.
From  this  we  may  conclude  that  this  variation  will  be  approximately  the  same  for  high
temperatures  also,  and  therefore  that  no  heat  would  be  required  for  the  conversion
of  water  into  vapour  at  a  temperature  of  about  400  .  At  this  temperature,  water
passes  into  vapour  whatever  be  the  iiressure  (see  Chap.  II.  The  absolute  boiling  point
of  water,  according  to  Dewar,  is  370°,  the  critical  pressure  196  atmospheres). It  must

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS

65

substances,  that  it  is  impossible  to  describe  the  majority  of  them  at
this  early  staj2^  of  chemical  exposition. We  shall  become  acquainted

what  height  does  the  piston  rise  under  these  circamstances?  that  is,  in  other  words,  What
is  the  volume  occupied  by  the  steam  under  a  known  pressure  ?  For  this  we  must  know
the  wei{(ht  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  steam  at  various  temperatures.  It  has  been  shown
by  experiment  that  the  density  of  steam,  which  does  not  saturate  a  space,  varies  very
inconsiderably  at  all  possible  pressures,  and  is  nine  times  the  density  of  hydrogen  under
similar  conditions.  Steam  which  saturates  a  space  varies  in  density  at  different  tem-
peratures, but  this  difference  is  very  small,  and  its  average  density  with  reference  to  air
is  0*64.  We  will  employ  this  number  in  our  calculation,  and  will  calculate  what  volume
the  steam  occupies  at  100°. One  cubic  centimetre  of  air  at  0°  and  760  mm.  weighs

0*001293
0*001298  gram,  at  100°  and  under  the  same  pressure  it  will  weigh  — - or about

1*868
0*000946  gram,  and  consequently  one  cubic  centimetre  of  steam  whose  density  is  0*64
will  weigh  0*000605  gram  at  100°,  and  therefore  one  gram  of  aqueous  vapour  will  occupy
a  volume  of  about  1,658  c.c.  Consequently,  the  piston  in  the  cylinder  of  1  sq.  cm.  sec-
tional area,  and  in  which  the  water  occupied  a  height  of  1  cm.,  will  be  raised  1,658  cm.
on  the  conversion  of  this  water  into  steam.  This  piston,  as  has  been  mentioned,  weighs
1,088  grams,  therefore  the  external  work  of  the  steam — that  is,  that  work  which  the
water  does  in  its  conversion  into  steam  at  100^ — is  equal  to  lifting  a  piston  weighing
1,088  grams  to  a  height  of  1,658  cm.,  or  17*07  kilogram-metres  of  work — i.e.  is  capable  of
lifting  17  kilograms  1  metre,  or  1  kilogram  17  metres.  One  gram  of  water  requires  for
its  conversion  into  steam  584  gram  units  of  heat  or  0*584  kilogram  unit  of  heat — i.e.  the
quantity  of  heat  absorbed  in  the  evaporation  of  one  gram  of  water  is  equal  to  the  quan-
tity of  heat  which  is  capable  of  heating  1  kilogram  of  water  0*584°.  Each  unit  of  heat,
as  has  been  shown  by  accurate  experiment,  is  capable  of  doing  424  kilogram-metres  of
work.  Hence,  in  evaporating,  one  gram  of  water  expends  424  x  0*534  =  (almost)  227
kilogram-metres  of  work.  The  external  work  was  found  to  be  only  17  kilogram-metres,
therefore  210  kilogram-metres  are  expended  in  overcoming  the  internal  cohesion  of  the
aqueous  particles,  and  consequently  about  92  p.  c.  of  the  total  heat  or  work  is  consumed
in  overcoming  the  internal  cohesion.  The  following  figures  are  thus  calculated  approxi-
mately : —

Total  work  of

Extornal  work  of

Internal
work  of  vapour

Temperature

evaporHtion  in

VHpour  ill

1

kilogram-metres

kilogratn-metrea

0°

2r>5

13

242

60°

242

15

227

100°

226

17

209

150°

209

19

190

20U'>

192

20

172

I

The  work  necessary  for  overcoming  the  internal  cohesion  of  water  in  its  passage  into

VApour  decreases  with  the  rise  in  temperature — that  is,  corresponds  with  the  decrease  of

cohesion ;  and,  in  fact,  the  variations  which  take  place  in  this  case  are  very  similar  to

ili€»8e  which  are  observed  in  the  heights  to  which  water  rises  in  capillary  tubes  at

diiTerent  temperatures. It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  amount  of  external— or,^a8  it  is

termed,  useful — work  which  water  can  supply  by  its  evaporation  is  very  small  compared

mrith  the  amount  which  it  expends  in  its  conversion  into  vapour.

In  considering  certain  physico-mechanical  properties  of  water,  I  had  in  view  not  only

tlieir  importance  for  theory  and  practice,  but  also  their  purely  chemical  significance ;  for

it 18  evident  from  the  above  considerations  that  even  in  a  physical  change  of  state  the

l^reatest  part  of  the  work  done  is  employed  in  overcoming  cohesion,  and  tliat  an  enor

xnoas  amount  of  internal  energy  must  be  expended  in  overcoming  chemical  cohesion  or
fbffinitjr,

66  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

with  many  of  them  afterwards,  but  at  present  we  shall  onlj  cite  certain
<M>mpoun(jH  formed  by  water.  In  order  to  see  clearly  the  nature  of
the  various  kindft  of  compounds  formed  by  water  we  will  begin  with
the  mr^t  feeble,  which  are  determined  by  purely  mechanical  superficial
properties  of  the  reacting  substances.'*

Water  \h  mechanically  attracted  by  many  substances  ;  it  adheres  to
their  surfaces  just  as  dust  adheres  to  objects,  or  one  piece  of  polished
glass  adheres  to  another.  Such  attraction  is  termed  '  moistening,'  *  soak-
ing,' or  *  ab-jorption  of  water.'  Thus  water  moistens  clean  glass  and
mlheres  to  its  sur-face.  Is  absorbed  by  the  soil,  sand,  and  clay,  and  does
not  flow  away  from  them,  but  lodges  itself  between  their  particles.
Himilarly,  water  sofiks  into  a  sponge,  cloth,  hair,  or  paper,  *$:c.,  but  fat
and  greasy  substances  in  general  are  not  moistened.  Attraction  of
this  kind  does  not  alter  the  physical  or  chemical  properties  of  water.
For  instance,  under  these  circumstances  water,  as  is  known  from  every-
day experience,  may  be  expelled  from  objects  by  drying.  Water  which
is  ill  any  way  he^ld  mechanically  may  be  dislodged  by  mechanical
means,  by  friction,  pressure,  centrifugal  force,  &c.  Thus  water  is
squeezed  from  wet  cloth  by  pressure  or  centrifugal  machines.  But
objf'cts  which  in  practice  are  called  dry  (because  they  do  not  feel  wet)
oft<*ri  still  contain  moisture,  as  may  be  proved  by  heating  the  object
in  a  ghiss  tube  closed  at  one  end.  By  placing  a  piece  of  paper,  dry
earth,  or  any  similar  object  (especially  porous  substances)  in  such  a
glass  tul)e,  and  heating  that  part  of  the  tube  where  the  object  is  situa-
ted, it  will  be  remarked  that  water  condenses  on  the  cooler  f)ortions  of
the  tube.  The  presence  of  such  absoibed,  or  *  hygroscopic,'  water  is
generally  best  detected  in  non-volatile  substances  by  drying  them  at
100\  or  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump  and  over  substances  which

'*  When  it  iM  lUH'OKH'vry  to  lieat  a  coiiHiderable  mass  of  liquid  in  diflFerent  vessels,  it
would  Ih'  vovy  uuorononiioal  to  make  use  of  metallic  vessels  and  to  construct  a  sepera^/e
furniico  ft»r  each  ;  hucIi  cases  are  continually  met  with  in  pnvctice.  Steam  from  a  boiler
i<t  intn>duced  into  the  litjuid,  or,  in  general,  into  the  vessel  which  it  is  required  to  heat.
The  Hiram,  in  condensing  and  passing  into  a  litpiid  state,  parts  with  its  latent  heat,  and
as  tliis  is  very  consitlernhh*  a  huuiU  cpnuitity  of  steam  will  produce  a  considerable  heating
effiH't.  If  it  hv  nn|uir«Hl,  for  instance,  to  heat  1.000  kilos  of  water  from  20*^  to  50°,  which
riHptinw  appi>>\inw\tely  itO.OOO  units  of  heat,  steam  at  100^  is  passed  into  the  water
fnnn  a  hoilcr.  Kach  kilogram  of  water  at  50'  contains  alniut  50  units  of  heat,  and  each
kilognun  oi  Mteum  «t  100 '  contains  087  units  of  heat ;  therefore,  each  kilogram  of  steam
in  *HH»ling  to  r»0  gives  up  r>s7  units  of  heat,  and  consequently  52  kilos  of  steam  are
crtpahle  of  KctUing  1. 000  kil«>s  of  water  fn^m  20''  to  50^^.  Water  is  very  often  applied  for
h<N«ting  in  chtMuical  practiw».  Ft»r  this  puqKtse  met-allic  vessels  or  pans,  called  '  water-
iMths'  art*  made  nst*  t^f.  They  ari»  cU^setl  by  a  cover  fonneil  of  concentric  rings  lying  on
eaoh  other.  The  venmOs—  «iuch  as  Innikers,  eva|x>rating  basins,  retorts,  A^c. — containing
liqnuU,  arx»  ph^i^nl  i  n  thei»i»  rings,  and  the  WHt«»r  in  the  bath  is  heated.  The  ste«m  given
t4t  \u'^^U^  Uie  UHtom  of  Uie  %'e!s$ieU  to  be  heated,  and  thus  effects  the  evaporation  or
ili«iiUaUmi,

ON  WATER  AND  IT8  COMPOUSDS  67

lltrnct  water  clicinicaliy. By  weighing  a  sulistance  before  find  after

Iryiog,  it  is  easy  to  determine  the  amount  of  hygroscopic  water  from

losa  in  weight.'^ Only  in  this  case  the  amount  of  wAt«r  must  bo

In  order  to  ili;  any  gnbatHnce  nt  nlxint  lOD'— tLut  iq,  at  the  bo'ilinK  point  o(  watur
water  |iaaB«d  uS  at  thk  Cenifjeruture)- — an  apparatus  rolled  a  ^  drying-ovea  '
It  cnnHiste  of  a  itonMe  copper  box; wntvr  in  pouml  into  the  spoee^
intvmnl  and  external  buxeot  vid  tbe  oven  ta  llieu  lieattid  over  a  «tme  or  by
uuifi,  or  etttQ  steoin  From  a  boiler  ih  [lOMsed  between  tlje  walls  of  the  two
a  the  water  boilK,  the  temperature  inside  tile  inner  boi  will  be  apiiroiimiitely
The  Habetsnce  to  b«  dried  is  placed  inside  the  oven,  and  tlie  dooi  in  doted,
loliw  ore  cut  in  the  door  to  allow  the  free  poasage  of  air.  wluch  cnrneB  off  the
rapour  by  llie  chimney  on  the  top  of  tbe  oTen. Often,  however,  deaiccalion  ia
n  in  copper  ovfna  heated  directly  oier  a  lamp  (fig- 13|. In  this  cue  any  deaiied

I,— Diylllg  own.  nunpiwnl  nt  hniipl  ro
U  plscal  iintlieK«n»  hi^dr  tlieotfii.

VJttnre  may  be  obtained,  which

There  are  HnhstAnces  wliic

tatDIe  than  100''.  and  then  sni-l

ibe  amonnt  of  water  in  a  EObslance  which  does  not  p»rt  with  anjiJiiiig  except

ft  red  heat,  the  tiubstiince  is  placed  in  a  bnlh  tube. By  first  wcichinR  the  lube

^Utd  then  with  the  nubatouce  In  be  dried  in  it,  the  weight  of  tbe  Bnbtttance  taken  may

The  tube  is  then  connected  on  one  side  with  a  Kas-holder  tall  ol  air,  whieli,  on

bking  a  atoiMoch,  pisses  Hnt  throogh  a  flask  contunintc  snlphuric  acid,  and  then  into

inglnmpsol  pumice  stone  moiatened  with  snlphnric  n*id. In  paasinK

thfnogb  Iheoe  vessels  the  oir  is  thorcDghl}  d'iod,  having  given  up  all  its  moisture  to  the

snlphuric  acid. Thus  dry  sir  Kill  pass  into  the  bulb  tube,  snd  as  hygroscopic  water  ia

entirely  pven  op  from  a  snbetance  in  dry  air  even  at  the  ordinary  tompemtare.  and  ttill

_BHit«  npidlj  on  healing,  tbe  moistnce  given  up  by  the  ■ubstonoe  in  the  tube  will  ba

58  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

judged  with  care,  because  the  loss  in  weight  maj  sometimes  proceed
from  the  decomposition  of  the  substance  itself,  with  disengagement  of
gases  or  vapour. In  making  exact  weighings  the  hygroscopic  capacity
of  substances — that  is,  their  capacity  to  absorb  moisture — must  be  con-
tinually kept  in  view,  as  otherwise  the  weight  will  be  untrue  from  the
presence  of  moisture. The  quantity  of  moisture  absorbed  depends  on
the  degree  of  moisture  of  the  atmosphere  (that  is,  on  the  tension  of  the
aqueous  vapour  in  it)  in  which  a  substance  is  situated. In  an  entirely
dry  atmosphere,  or  in  a  vacuum,  the  hygroscopic  water  is  expelled,
being  converted  into  vapour  ;  therefore,  substances  containing  hygro-
scopic water  may  be  completely  dried  by  placing  them  in  a  dry  atmo-
sphere or  in  a  vacuum. The  process  is  aided  by  heat,  as  it  increases  the
tension  of  the  aqueous  vapour. Phosphoric  anhydride  (a  white  powder),
liquid  sulphuric  acid,  solid  and  porous  calcium  chloride,  or  the  white
powder  of  ignited  copper  sulphate,  are  most  generally  employed  in  dry-
ing gases They  absorb  the  moisture  contained  in  air  and  all  gases  to
a  considerable,  but  not  unlimited,  extent. Phosphoric  anhydride  and
calcium  chloride  deliquesce,  become  damp,  sulphuric  acid  changes  from
an oily thick liquid  into  a  more  mobile liquid,  and  ignited copper
sulphate  becomes  blue  ;  after  which  changes  these  substances  partly
lose  their  capacity  of  holding  water,  and  can,  if  it  be  in  excess,  even
give  up  their  water  to  the  atmosphere. We  may  remark  that  the  order
in  which  these  substances  are  placed  above  corresponds  with  the  order
in  which  they  stand  in  respect  to  their  capacity  for  absorbing  moisture.
Air  dried  by  calcium  chloride  still  contains  a  certain  amount  of  mois-
ture, which  it  can  give  up  to  sulphuric  acid. The  most  complete  desic-
cation takes  place  with  phosphoric  anhydride. Water  is  also  removed
from  many  substances  by  placing  them  in  a  dish  over  a  vessel  contain-
ing a  substance  absorbing  water  under  a  glass  bell  jar.** The  bell  jar,

•

carried  off  by  the  air  passing  through  it.  This  damp  air  then  passes  through  a  U-sliaped
tube  full  of  pieces  of  pumice  stone  moistened  with  sulphuric  acid,  which  absorbs  all  the
moisture  given  off  from  the  substance  in  the  bulb  tube.  Thus  all  the  water  expelled
from  the  substance  will  collect  in  the  U  tube,  and  so,  if  this  be  weighed  before  and  after,
the  difference  will  show  the  quantity  of  wa'er  expelled  from  the  substance.  If  only  water
(and  not  any  gases)  come  over,  the  increase  of  the  weight  of  the  U  tube  will  be  equal  to
the  decrease  in  the  weight  of  the  bulb  tube.

^*  Listead  of  under  a  glass  bell  jar,  drying  over  sulphuric  acid  is  often  carried  on  ip

a  desiccator  consisting  of  a  shallow  wide-mouthed  glasH  vessel,  closed  by  a  well-fitting

ground-glass  cover. Sulphuric  acid  is  poured  over  the  bottom  of  the  desiccator,  and  the

•ubatance  to  be  dried  is  placed  on  a  glass  stand  above  the  acid. A  latqral  glass  tube  with

a  Btop-oock  is  often  fused  into  the  desiccator  in  order  to  connect  it  with  an  air  pump,  and

TO  allow  dryini^  under  a  diminished  pressure,  when  the  moisture  evaporates  more  rapidly.

••  »ot  Ihat  in  the  usual  form  of  desiccator  the  desiccating  substance  (sulphuric  acid)

''^••^  beneath  the  substance  to  be  dried  lias  the  disadvantage  that  the  moist  air  being

•r  Ihaa  dry  air  distribates  itself  iu  the  upper  portion  of  the  desiccator  and  not  below.

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  59

like  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump,  should. be  hermetically  closed.  In
this  case  desiccation  takes  place  ;  because  sulphuric  acid,  for  instance,
first  dries  the  air  in  the  bell  jar  by  absorbing  its  moisture,  the  substance
to  be  dried  then  parts  with  its  moisture  to  the  dry  air,  from  which  it  is
again  absorbed  by  the  sulphuric  acid,  «tc.  Desiccation  proceeds  still
better  under  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump,  for  then  the  aqueous  vapour
is  formed  more  quickly  than  in  a  bell  jar  full  of  air.

From  what  has  been  said  above,  it  is  evident  that  the  transference
of  moisture  to  gases  and  the  absorption  of  hygroscopic  moisture  present
great  resemblance  to,  but  still  are  not,  chemical  combinations  with
water.  Water,  when  combined  as  hygroscopic  water,  does  not  lose  its
properties  and  does  not  form  new  substances.''*

The  attraction  of  water  for  subbtances  which  dissolve  in  it  is  of  a
different  character.  In  the  solution  of  substances  in  water  there  pro-
ceeds a  peculiar  kind  of  indefinite  combination  ;  a  new  homogeneous
substance  is  formed  from  the  two  substances  taken.  But  here  also  the
1x»nd  connecting  the  substances  is  very  unstable.  Water  containing
different  substances  in  solution  boils  at  a  temperature  near  to  its  usual
boiling  point.  From  the  solution  of  substances  which  are  lighter  than
water  itself,  there  are  obtained  solutions  of  a  less  density  than  water^
as,  for  example,  in  the  solution  of  alcohol  in  water  ;  whilst  a  heavier
substance  in  dissolving  in  water  gives  it  a  higher  specific  gravity.
Thus  salt  water  is  heavier  than  fresh. '^

We  will  consider  ctqiieous  solutioiia  somewhat  fully,  because,  among
other  reasons,  solutions  are  constantly  being  formed  on  the  earth  and
in  the  waters  of  the  earth,  in  plants  and  in  animals,  in  chemical  pro-
cesses and  in  the  arts,  and  these  solutions  play  an  important  part  in
the  chemical  transformations  which  are  everywhere  taking  place,  not

Herapel,  in  his  desiccator  (IHOl),  avoids  this  by  placing  the  absorbent  above  the  substance
to  be  dried.  Tlie  process  of  desiccation  can  be  further  accelerated  by  cooling  the  upi>er
portion  of  the  desiccator,  and  so  inducing  ascending  and  descending  currents  of  air  witliin
the  apparatus.

**  Chappnis,  however,  determined  that  in  wetting  1  gram  of  charcoal  witli  water  7  units
of  heat  are  evolved,  and  on  pouring  carbon  bisulphide  over  1  gram  of  charcoal  as  much
as  24  units  of  heat  are  evolved.  Alumina  (1  gram),  when  moistened  with  water,  evolves
2^  calories.  Tliis  indicates  that  in  res^^ect  to  evolution  of  heat  moistening  already
presents  a  transition  towards  exotheimal  combinations  (those  evolving  heat  in  their
fonnation).

'•'  Strong  acetic  acid  (C2H4O.,.),  whose  specific  gravity  at  15°  is  1055,  does  not  become
lighter  on  the  addition  of  water  (a  lighter  substance,  sp.  gr.  =  0*999),  but  heavier,  so  tlmt
a  solution  of  80  parts  of  ac>etic  acid  and  20  parts  of  water  has  a  specific  gravity  of  1074,
and  even  a  solution  of  equal  parts  of  acetic  acid  and  water  (50  p.c.)  has  a  sp.  gr.  of  1*005,
which  is  still  greater  than  that  of  acetic  acid  itself.  Tliis  shows  tlie  high  degree  of  con-
traction wliich  takes  place  on  solution.  In  fact,  solutions-— and,  in  general,  liquids— K>a
mixing  with  water,  decrease  in  volume.

)i)ly  bi>ciius<<  wator  is  everjwhent  met  with,  but  chiefly  becanw  &  snb-'
, BtaiiL'o  in  solution pre^nta the  most favourable  conditions  for  the  1

proc«aa  of  ctiemit^al  cimnges,  which  require  a  mobility  of  parts  and  a
,  poBuhle  diBt«nsion  of  pnrt^.  In  dissolving,  a  solid  sulistnuce  Acquires
'  a  mobility  of  parts,  and  a  gns  lo&ee  its  elasticity,  and  therefore  reactions
often  take  placn  in  solutions  which  do  not  proceed  in  the  undissolved
■uUsiancea,  Further,  a  sultstnnce,  distributed  in  water,  evidently
hreiiks  up  -that  is,  becomes  more  like  a  gas  and  acquires  n  greater
■  mobility  of  parts. All  ihase  consiilenttinns  require  llmt  in  describing

th(> pn^perties  of  substances,  particular  attention  should  be  paid  to
tliwr  relation  to  water  us  a  solvent.

It  is  well known that  water dissolves  many  sul:>stnnee8. Salt,

BUgar,  nicohol,  and  a  nuniber  of  other  substances,  dissolve  in  water  and

kform  homogeneous  liquids  with  it. To  demonstrate  the  solubility  of

ater,  a  gas  should  be  taken  which  h&s  a  high  co-efficient  of

Hluhility —for  instance,  Buinionia. This  is  introiluccd  into  a  bell  .jiir

■  cylindor, as  in  lig. Ht,  which  is  previously  tilled  with  niercory

d  stands  in  a  mercury  luith. If  water  be  tlien  introduced  into  tLe

ON  WATER  AND ITS  COMPOUNDS  fil

cylinder,  the  mercury  will  rise,  owing  to  the  water  dissolving  the
ammonia  gas.  If  th^  column  of  mercury  be  less  than  the  barometric
column,  and  if  there  be  sufficient  water  to  dissolve  the  gas,  all  the
ammonia  will  be  absorbed  by  the  water.  The  water  is  introduced  into
the  cylinder  by  a  glass  pipette,  with  a  bent  end.  The  bent  end  is  put
into  water,  and  the  air  is  sucked  out  from  the  upper  end.  When  full
of  water,  its  upper  end  is  closed  with  the  finger,  and  tlie  bent  end
placed  in  the  mercury  bath  under  the  orifice  of  the  cylinder.  On
blowing  into  the  pipettp  the  water  will  rise  to  the  surface  of  the
mercury  in  the  cylinder  owing  to  its  lightness.  The  solubility  of  a  gas
like  ammonia  may  be  demonstrated  by  taking  a  flask  full  of  the  gas,
and  closed  by  a  cork  with  a  tube  passing  through  it.  On  placing  the
tube  under  water,  the  water  will  rise  into  the  flask  (this  may  be
accelerated  by  previously  warming  the  flask),  and  begin  to  play  like  a
fountain  inside  it.  Both  the  rising  of  the  mercury  and  the  fountain
clearly  show  the  considerable  affinity  of  water  for  ammonia  gas,  and
the  force  acting  in  this  dissolution  is  rendered  evident.  A  certain
period  of  time  is  required  both  for  the  homogeneous  intermixture  of
^ases  (diflTusion)  and  the  process  of  solution,  which  depends,  not  only  on
the  surface  of  the  participating  substances,  but  also  on  their  nature.
This  is  seen  from  experiment.  Solutions  of  different  substances
heavier  than  water,  such  as  salt  or  sugar,  are  poured  into  t^iU  jais.
Pure  water  is  then  very  carefully  poured  into  these  jars  (through  a
funnel)  on  to  the  top  of  the  solutions,  so  as  not  to  disturb  the  lower
stratum,  and  the  jars  are  then  left  undisturbed.  The  line  of  demarca-
tion between  the  solution  and  the  pure  water  will  be  visible,  owing  to
their  different  co-efficients  of  refraction.  Notwithstanding  that  the
solutions  taken  are  heavier  than  water,  after  some  time  complete
intermixture  will  ensue.  Gay-Lussac  convinced  himself  of  this  fact  by
this  particular  experiment,  which  he  conducted  in  the  cellars  under  the
Paris  Astronomical  Observatory.  These  cellars  are  well  known  as  the
locality  where  numerous  interesting  researches  have  been  conducted,
because,  owing  to  their  depth  under  ground,  they  have  a  uniform  tem-
perature during  the  whole  year  ;  the  temperature  does  not  change
during  the  day,  and  this  was  indispensable  for  the  experiments  on  the
diffusion  of  solutions,  in  order  that  no  doubt  as  to  the  results  should
arise  from  a  daily  change  of  temperature  (the  experiment  lasted  several
months),  which  would  set  up  currents  in  the  liquids  and  intermix  their
strata.  Notwithstanding  the  uniformity  of  the  temperature,  the  sub-
stance in  solution  in  time  ascended  into  the  water  and  distributed  itself
uniforndy  through  it,  proving  that  there  exists  between  water  and  a
substance  dissolved  in  it  a  particular  kind  of  attraction  or  striving  for

62  PRINXIPLES  OF  CHE3USTRY

mataal  interpenetration  in  opposition  to  the  force  of  gravity.  Further,
thiii  effort,  or  rate  of  diffusion,  is  different  for  salt  or  sugar  or  for
various  other  substances.***  "^  It  follows  therefore  that  a  peculiar  force
acts  in  solution,  as  in  actual  chemical  combinations,  and  solution  is
determined  hj  a  particular  kind  of  motion  (by  the  chemical  energy
of  a  Kulistance)  which  is  proper  to  the  substance  dissolved  and  to  the
solvent.

(rraham  made  a  series  of  experiments  similar  to  those  above
descrilied,  and  showed  that  the  rate  of  difftunon}''  in  water  is  very
variable  —  that  is,  a  uniform  distribution  of  a  substance  in  the  water
dissolving  it  is  attained  in  different  periods  of  time  with  different
solutions.  Graham  compared  diffusive  capacity  with  volatility.  There
are  sul^tances  which  diffuse  easily,  and  there  are  others  which  diffuse
with  difficulty,  just  as  there  are  more  or  less  volatile  substances.  Seven
hundreil  cubic  centimetres  of  water  were  poured  into  ajar,  and  by  means
of  a  syphon  (or  a  pipette)  100  cub.  centimetres  of  a  solution  containing
10  grams  of  a  substance  were  cautiously  poured  in  so  as  to  occupy
the  lower  portion  of  the  jar.  After  a  hipse  of  several  days,  successive
layers  of  50  cubic  centimetres  were  taken  from  the  top  downwards,
and  the  quantity  of  substance  dissolved  in  the  different  layers  deter-
niine<l.  Thus,  common  table  salt,  after  fourteen  days,  gave  the
following  amounts  (in  milligrams)  in  the  respective  layers,  beginning
from  the  top:  104,  120,  126,  19»,  267,  340,  429,  535,  654,  766,  881,
991,  1,090,  1,1  H7,  and  2,266  in  the  remainder  ;  whilst  albumin  in  the
same  time  gave,  in  the  tirst  seven  layers,  a  very  small  amount,  and
l>eginiiing  from  the  eighth  layer,  10,  15,  47,  113,  343,  855,  1,892,  and
in  the  remninder  6,725  milligrams.  Thus,  the  diffusive  power  of  a
solution  (lepends  on  time  and  on  the  nature  of  the  substance  dis-
solved, which  fact  may  serve,  not  only  for  explaining  the  process  of
solution,  but  also  for  distinguishing  one  substance  from  another,
(iraham  showed  that  substances  which  rapidly  diffuse  through  liquids

jiu.u  Ctralmin,  in  the  jelly  formed  by  gelatine,  and  De  Vries  in  gelatinous  silica
((!hapt*'r  XVIII.)  numt  frequently  employed  coloured  (tinted)  Hubstancen,  for  instance,
K^t'i-/);,  which  Hhowed  the  rate  of  difTusion  with  very  great  clearness.  Prof.  OouiofT
tmiplnyed  the  method  deHcribed  in  Chapter  X.,  Note  17,  for  this  purpose.

''  The  reHcarchcH  of  Graham,  Fick,  Nernst,  and  others  showed  tiiat  the  quantity  of  a
dissolved  substance  which  is  transmitted  (rises)  from  one  stratum  of  liquid  to  another  in
a  vertical  cylindrical  vessel  is  not  only  proportional  to  the  time  and  to  the  sectional  area
of  tlic  cylinder,  hut  also  to  the  amount  and  nature  of  the  substance  dissolved  in  a  Btratum
of  li(|uid,M>  that  each  substance  has  its  corresixniding  co-efKcientof  diffusion.  The  cause
of  the  diiTusion  t»f  st>lutions  must  be  considered  as  essentially  the  same  as  the  cause  of
the  diffusion  of  gases — that  is,  as  dependent  on  motions  wliich  are  proper  to  their  niole-
culi'M  ;  hut  here  most  probably  those  purely  chemic.U,  although  feebly-develope<l,  forces,
which  incline  the  substances  dissolved  to  the  formation  of  definite  compounds,  also  play
their  {uirt.

are  able  to  rapidly  pass  through  raembranes  and  crystallise,  whilst
sultstances  which  lUffuse  slowly  and  do  not  crystallise  are  coIIo'hIk,
that  is,  resemble  glue,  and  penetrate  through  a  membrane  slowly,  and
form  jellies  ;  that  is,  occur  in  insoluble  forms,"*  as  will  be  explained
in  speaking  of  silica.

f  ,  ■*  The  rate  of  iliRuBioD— like  the  rate  ot  tiu  w
(■Fhiuh  piajB  on  important  put  in  the  vilkl  proci
pioceBKH),  pnaentB,  accarding  to  Graham':
pueiug  from  ancli  ccj^talliiable  sabBtuneea  as  I
Btancei  which  are  capable  cA  giving  julhea  (Rum,
Eolutions  ■lid  pass  through  membrane*  timuh  irn
Ihvrefore  diatingnithea  IwEwecn  crytlalleid;  wl
diSuBo  ilowlr.  On  breaking  eulid  CDllaid*  itit
temaiked.  The  frMliire  of  sach  eabstancrKs  in  I
'  coDEkoidal '  Irscture.  Almost  oil  the  BuhBtiBUC<
eonuBl  are  colloids,  and  thie  is  at  all  eients,  pa

majoritj  of  minaral  BobatanceB.  Tlie  colloid  ft
aninials  and  plants— almost  always  coutiin  wat
works,  of  grannloB,  of  hairi,  ot  rancoQs,  shupele
from  the  fonoi'  taimn  by  crya'allina  i
tionB,  or  from  a  molten  stata.  they
present  a  lonD  which  ia  similar  tu
that  of  tlie  liquid  from  which  thej
were  formed.  OUsb  may  be  taken
as  the  best  example  of  this.  Colloids
are  distingaiKfaoble  from  crystal-
loida.  not  only  by  thi  abaence  of
erystolhne  form,  bat  by  many  other
properties  wh-cJi  admit  of  clearly
distinjaiBhing  both  theae  chuses  of
■olids,  m*  Graham  uhowed.  Nearly
nil  colkridB  are  capable  of  paasing,

■olable into  na imiolnble  state.
belt  example  ■«  Ehown  by  whits

(albamin)  in  the  r»w  and ^'"^"'^
ible farm, and in Uie bard- wlilati  i

nflolnble form. Tiie
ijoritj  of  colloids,  on  pauing  into  an  iuoi
W  having  a  gelatinous  appearance,
glue,  jelly,  Ice. Thas  gelatin,  or  c
kter,  *wells  up  into  an  inocluble  jelly- If
'Mlablelti  water,  bal  on  (Doling  it  again  formi
of  the  pnip^iei  which  di
•lowly  through  a  membra

in — throngh  menibranea.  or  dialytii

of  organiBms  and  also  in  technical

'eoearchei,  a  sharply  defined  cliange  in

LJority  of  salts  and  orids  to  snb-

o,  Ac.)

The  form

«r  diffuse  into

pidly  than

the  latte

,and  Graham

dly,  and

coHoidi,  which

of  oleav^e  is

at  ot  glue

or  glass.

It  is  termed  a

which  ani

mal  and  t

e  reaBon

why  animals  and  plants

e  to  the

cryBtoilin

e  tornu  at  the

in  organ  i.

me-that  is,  in

a  take  mo

St  peculia

forms,  ot  net.

LBsaa.  ,Vo..

which  art

quite  different

Inble  form  in  the  preunre  of  n
'liich  is  tamilior  to  every  one  in  starch,
mmon  carpenter's  gine,  when  soaked  in
his  jelly  be  heated,  it  melts,  and  is  then
a  jelly  which  is  iuEoluble  in  water.  One
:ollmdB  from  crysUlloidB  is  that  the  former  p»s»  very
latter  peaetrate  very  rapidly. This  may  be  shoi

in  at  both  end>,  and  by  covering  its  lower  end  Kill>  ■  bladder  or
with  T^;etable  parchment  (unsiied  paper  immersed  for  two  or  three  minules  in  ■  mixture
ot  mlphnrie  acid  and  half  its  volume  ot  water,  and  then  wathedj,  or  any  other  mem-
bmnooa  mbstanre  (all  such  cubstances  are  themaelvCB  colloids  in  an  iueolable  fonn|.
The  membrane  must  be  flmily  tied  to  the  cylinder,  so  as  not  lo  leave  any  opening.
Saoh  an  apparatnn  is  called  a  lUalyer  Iflg.  15),  and  the  prncesB  of  eeparaiion  of  cryatal-
Icadt  bom  eotloida  by  meaua  ot  sach  a  membrane  is  termed  dialytit. An  aq

64  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTBY

Hence,  if  it  be  desired  to  increase  the  rate  of  solution,  recourse
must  be  had  to  stirring,  shaking,  or  some  such  mechanical  motion.
But  if  once  a  uniform  solution  is  formed,  it  will  remain  uniform,  no
matter  how  heavy  the  dissolved  substance  is,  or  how  long  the  solution
be  left  at  rest,  which  fact  again  shows  the  presence  of  a  force  holding
together  the  particles  of  the  body  dissolved  and  of  the  solvent.*^

solution  of  a  crystalloid  or  colloid,  or  a  mixture  of  both,  is  poured  into  the  dialyser,
which  is  then  placed  in  a  vessel  containing  water,  so  that  the  bottom  of  the  membrane
is  covered  with  water.  Then,  after  a  cartain  period  of  time,  the  crystalloid  passes  through
the  membrane,  whilst  the  colloid,  if  it  does  pass  through  at  all,  does  so  at  an  incompar-
ably slower  rate.  The  crystalloid  naturally  i)asses  through  into  the  water  until  the  solutiou
attains  the  same  strength  on  both  sides  of  the  membrane.  By  replacing  the  outside
water  with  fresh  water,  a  fresh  quantity  of  the  crystalloid  may  be  separated  from  the
dialyser.  While  a  crystalloid  is  passing  tlirough  the  membrane,  a  colloid  remains  almost
entirely  in  the  dialyser,  and  therefore  a  mixed  solution  of  these  two  kinds  of  substances
may  be  separated  from  each  other  by  a  dialyser.  The  study  of  the  prop>ertie8  of  colloids,
and  of  the  phenomena  of  their  j)a88age  through  membranes,  should  elucidate  much
resjHicting  the  phenomena  which  are  accomplished  in  organisms.

*^  The  formation  of  solutions  may  be  considered  in  two  aspects,  from  a  physical  and
from  a  chemical  point  of  view,  and  it  is  more  evident  in  solutions  than  in any  other
department  of chemistry  how closely  these i>rovinces of natural science are allied
together. On  the  one  hand  solutions  form  a  jjarticular  case  of  a  physico-mechanical
inter-penetration  of  homogeneous  substances,  and  a  juxtaposition  of  the  molecules  of  the
substance  dissolved  and  of  the  solvent,  similar  to  the  juxtaposition  which  is  exhibited  in
homogeneous  substances. From  this  point  of  view  this  diffusion  of  solutions  is  exactly
similar  to  the  diffusion  of  gases,  with  only  this  difference,  that  the  nature  and  store  of  energy
are  different  in  gases  from  what  they  are  in  liquids,  and  that  in  liquids  there  is  consider-
able friction,  whilst  in  gases  there  is  comparatively  little. The  penetration  of  a  dissolved
substance  into  water  is  likened  to  evaporation,  and  solution  to  the  formation  of  vapour.
This  resemblance  was  clearly  expressed  even  by  Graham. In  recent  years  the  Dutch
chemist,  Van't  Hoff,  has  develoi>ed  this  view  of  solutions  in  great  detail,  having  shown
(in  a  memoir  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Swedish  Academy  of  Science,  Fart  21,  No.  17,
*Liois  de  I'equilibre  chimique  dans  I'etat  dilue,  gazeux  ou  dissous,'  188(5),  that  for  dilute
solutions  the  osmotic  pressure  follows  the  same  laws  (of  Boyle,  Mariotte,  Gay-Lussac,
and  Avogadro-Gerhardt)  as  for  gases. The  osmotic  pressure  of  a  substance  dissolved  in
water  is  determined  by  means  of  membranes  which  allow  the  passage  of  water,  but  not
of  a  substance  dissolved  in  it,  through  them. This  property  is  found  in  animal  proto-
plasmic membranes  and  in  porouR  substances  covered  with  an  amorphous  precipitate,
such  as  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  copper  sulphate  on  potassium  ferrocyanide  (Pfeffer,
Traube). If,  for  instance,  a  one  p.c.  solution  of  sugar  be  placed  in  such  a  vessel,  which
is  then  closed  and  placed  in  water,  the  water  passes  through  the  walls  of  the  vessel  and
increases  the  pressure  by  50  mm.  of  the  barometric  column. If  the  pressure  be  artificially
increased  inside  the  vessel,  then  the  water  will  be  expelled  through  the  walls. De  Vries
found  a  convenient  means  of  determining  isotoni:"  s  ilntions  (those  presenting  a  similar
osmotic  pressure)  in  the  cells  of  plants. For  this  purpose  a  portion  of  the  soft  part  of
the  leaves  of  the  Tradescantis  discolor,  for  instance,  is  cut  away  and  moistened  with  the
■olntion  of  a  given  salt  and  of  a  given  strength. If  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  solution
taken  be  less  than  that  of  the  sap  contained  in  the  cells  they  will  change  their  form  or
thrink ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  osmotic  pressure  be  greater  than  that  of  the  sap,  then
'Ue  cells  will  expand,  as  can  easily  be  seen  under  the  microscope. By  altering  the
mount  of  the  different  salts  in  solution  it  is  possible  to  find  for  each  salt  the  strength
*  solution  at  which  the  cells  begin  to  swell,  and  at  which  they  will  consequently  have
equal  osmotic  pressure. As  it  increases  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  a  substanctt

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  65

In  the  consideration  of  the  process  of  solution,  besides  the  con-
ception of  diffusion,  another  fundamental  conception  is  necessary —
namely,  that  of  the  saturation  of  solutions,

diftsolved  per  100  parts  of  water,  it  is  possible,  knowing  the  osmotic  pressure  of  a  given  sab-
stance — for  instance,  sugar  at  various  degrees  of  concentration  of  solution — and  knowing
the  composition  of  isotonic  solutions  compared  with  sugar,  to  determine  the  osmotic
pressure  of  all  the  salts  investigated.  The  osmotic  pressure  of  dilute  solutions  determined
in  this  manner  directly  or  indirectly  (from  observations  made  by  Pfeffer  and  De  Vries)
was  shown  to  follow  the  same  laws  as  those  of  the  pressure  of  gases  ;  for  instance,  by
doubling  or  increasing  the  quantity  of  a  salt  (in  a  given  volume)  n  times,  the  pressure  is
doubled  or  increases  n  times.  So,  for  example,  in  a  solution  containing  one  part  of  sugar
per  100  parts  of  water  the  osmotic  pressure  (according  to  Pfefifer)  =  58*5  cm.  of  mercury,
if  2  parts  of  sugar =101'6,  if  4  parts  »  208*2  and  so  on,  which  proves  that  the  ratio  is  true
within  the  limits  of  experimental  error.  (2)  Different  substances  for  equal  strengths  of
solutions,  show  very  different  osmotic  pressures,  just  as  gases  for  equal  parts  by  weight
in  equal  volumes  show  different  tensions.  (3)  If,  for  a  given  dilute  solution  at  0°,  the
osmotic  pressure  equal  p°f  then  at  t°  it  will  be  greater  and  equal  to  p°  (1  +  0*00867^),  i.e.
it  increases  with  the  temperature  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  the  tension  of  gases
increases.  (4)  If  in  dilute  solutions  of  such  substances  as  do  not  conduct  an  electric
current  (for  instance,  sugar,  acetone,  and  many  other  organic  bodies)  the  substances  be
taken  in  the  ratio  of  their  molecular  weights  (expressed  by  their  formulsB,  see  Chapter
YII.),  then  not  only  will  the  osmotic  pressure  be  equal,  but  its  magnitude  will  be  deter-
mined by  that  tension  which  would  be  proper  to  the  vapours  of  the  given  substances
when  they  would  be  contained  in  the  space  occupied  by  the  solution,  just  as  the  tension
of  the  vapours  of  molecular  quantities  of  the  given  substances  will  be  equal,  and  deter-
mined by  the  laws  of  Gay-Lussac,  Mariotte,  and  Avogadro-Gerhardt.  Those  formulas
(Chapter  VII.,  Notes  28  and  24)  by  which  the  gaseous  state  of  matter  is  determined,  may
also  be  applied  in  the  present  case.  So,  for  example,  the  osmotic  pressure  jp,  in  centi-
metres of  mercury,  of  a  one  percent,  solution  of  sugar,  may  be  calculated  according  to  the

formula  for  gases :

Mi?  =s  6200  8  (273  +  t)j

where  M  is  the  molecular  weight,  a  the  weight  in  grams  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  vapour,
and  t  its  temperature.  For  sugar  M  =  842  (because  its  molecular  composition  is
C19H22O11).  The  specific  gravity  of  the  solution  of  sugar  is  1*008,  hence  the  weight  of
sugar  8  contained  in  a  1  per  cent,  solution  =  001008  gram.  The  observation  was  made
at  <  =  14°.  Hence,  according  to  the  formula,  we  find  p  «  52*2  centimetres.  And  experi-
ments carried  on  at  14°  gave  58*5  centimetres,  which  is  very  near  to  the  above.  (5)  For
the  solutions  of  salts,  acids,  and  similar  substances,  which  conduct  an  electric  current,
the  calculated  pressure  is  usually  (but  not  always  in  a  definite  or  multiple  number  of
times)  less  than  the  observed  by  i  times,  and  this  i  for  dilute  solutions  of  MgSO^  is  nearly
1,  for  C03=  1,  for  KCl,  NaCl,  KI,  KNO5  greater  than  1,  and  approximates  to  2,  for
BaCls,  MgClj,  K3CO3,  and  others  between  2  and  8,  for  HCl,  ILjSO^  NaNOs,  CaNjOg,  and
others  nearly  2  and  so  on.  It  should  be  remarked  that  the  above  deductions  are  only
applicable  (and  with  a  certain  degree  of  accuracy)  to  dilute  solutions,  and  in  this  respect
resemble  the  generalisations  of  Michel  and  Kraft  (see  Note  44).  Nevertheless,  the
arithmetical  relation  found  by  Van't  Hoff  between  the  formation  of  vapours  and  the
transition  into  dilute  solutions  forms  an  important  scientific  discovery,  which  should
facilitate  the  explanation  of  the  nature  of  solutions,  while  the  osmotic  pressure  of  solu-
tions already  forms  a  very  important  aspect  of  the  study  of  solutions.  In  this  respect  it
is  necessary  to  mention  that  Prof.  Konovaloff  (1891,  and  subsequently  others  also)
discovered  the  dependence  (and  it  may  be  a  sufficient  explanation)  of  the  osmotic
pressure  upon  the  differences  of  the  tensions  of  aqueous  vapours  and  aqueous  solutions ;
this,  however,  already  enters  into  a  special  province  of  physical  chemistry  (certain  data
are  giren  in  Note  49  and  following),  and  to  this  physical  side  of  the  question  also  belongs

VOL.  I.  F

66  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

Just  as  moist  air  may  be  diluted  with  anj  desired  quantity  of  dry
air,  so  also  an  indefinitely  large  quantity  of  a  liquid  solvent  may  be  taken,

one  of  the  extreme  consequenceB  of  the  resemblance  of  osmotic  pressure  to  gaseons
pressure,  which  is  that  the  concentration  of  a  uniform  solution  varies  in  parts  which  are
heated  or  cooled.  Soret  (1881)  indeed  observed  that  a  solution  of  copper  sulphate
containing  17  parts  of  the  salt  at  20°  only  contained  14  parts  after  heating  the  upper
portion  of  the  tube  to  80°  for  a  long  x^eriod  of  time.  This  aspect  of  solution,  which  is
now  being  very  carefully  and  fully  worked  out,  may  be  called  the  physical  side.  Its
other  aspect  is  purely  chemical,  for  solution  does  not  take  place  between  any  two  sub-
stances, but  requires  a  special  and  particular  attraction  or  affinity  between  them.  A
vapour  or  gas  permeates  any  other  vapour  or  gas,  but  a  salt  which  dissolves  in  water  may
not  be  in  the  least  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  is  quite  insoluble  in  mercury.  In  considering
solutions  as  a  manifestation  of  chemical  force  (and  of  chemical  energy),  it  must  be
acknowledged  that  they  are  here  developed  to  so  feeble  an  extent  that  the  definite
compounds  (that  is,  those  formed  according  to  the  law  of  multiple  proportions)  formed
between  water  and  a  soluble  substance  dissociate  even  at  the  ordinary  temperatore,
forming  a  homogeneous  systera — that  is,  one  in  which  both  the  compound  and  the  pro*
ducts  into  whicli  it  decompoHes  (water  and  the  aqueous  compound)  occur  in  a  liquid
state.  The  chief  difficulty  in  the  comprehension  of  solutions  depends  on  the  fact  that
the  mechanical  theory  of  the  structure  of  liquids  has  not  yet  been  so  fully  developed  as
the  theory  of  gases,  and  solutions  are  liquids.  The  conception  of  solutions  as  liquid
dissociated  definite  chemical  compounds  is  based  on  the  following  considerations :  (1)
that  there  exiHt  certain  undoubtedly  definite  chemical  crystallised  compounds  (such  as
H2SO4,  H2O ;  or  NaCl,  2H.p ;  or  CaCl,,  6H  ,0 ;  Ac.)  which  melt  on  a  certain  rise  of
temperature,  and  then  fonu  true  solutions ;  (2)  that  metallic  alloys  in  a  molten  condition
are  real  solutions,  but  on  cooling  they  often  give  entirely  distinct  and  definite  crystallised
compounds,  which  are  recoj^nised  by  the  properties  of  alloys ;  (3)  that  between  the  solvent
and  the  substance  dissolved  there  are  formed,  in  a  number  of  cases,  many  undoubtedly
definite  compounds,  such  as  comix)unds  with  water  of  crystallisation;  (4)  that  the
physical  properties  of  solutions,  and  especially  their  specific  gravities  (a  property  which
can  be  very  accurately  detenniued),  vary  with  a  change  in  composition,  and  in  such  a
manner  as  would  be  required  by  the  formation  of  one  or  more  definite  but  dissociating
compounds.  Thus,  for  example,  on  adding  water  to  fuming  sulphuric  acid  its  density  is
observed  to  decrease  until  it  attains  the  definite  composition  H0SO4,  or  SOj  +  ILjO,  when
the  specific  gravity  increases,  although  on  further  diluting  with  water  it  again  falls.
Moreover  (Mendeleeff,  llie  Investigation  of  Aqueous  Solutions  from  their  Specific
Gravities,  1887),  the  increase  in  specific  gravity  {ds),  varies  in  all  well-known  solutions
with  the  proportion  of  the  substance  dissolved  (dp),  and  this  dependence  can  be  expressed

(h
by  a  formula  (  - -  A  +  By>)  between  the  limits  of  definite  compounds  whose  existence

dp

in  solutions  must  be  admitted,  and  this  is  in  complete  accordance  with  the  dissociation

hjriwthesis. Thus,  for  instance,  from  H2S04  to  H^S04  +  H.20  (both  these  substances

ds
exist  as  definite  comjwunds  in  a  free  state),  the  fraction =  00729  —  0"000749»  (where

dp
p  is  the  percentage  amount  of  H.^SO^). For  alcohol  CoH^jO,  whose  aqueous  solutions
have  been  more  accurately  investigated  than  all  others,  the  definite  compound  C.2H^0  +
8H<20,  and  others  must  be  acknowledged  in  its  solutions.

The  two  as^iects  of  solution  above  mentioned,  and  the  hyiDotheses  which  have  as  yet
been  applied  to  the  examination  of  solutions,  although  they  have  somewhat  different
starting  points,  will  doubtless  in  time  lead  to  a  general  theory  of  solutions,  because  the
same  common  laws  govern  both  physical  and  chemical  iihenomena,  inasmuch  as  the
properties  and  motions  of  molecules,'  which  determine  physical  properties,  depend  on
the  motions  and  properties  of  atoms,  which  determine  chemical  reactions.  For  details
of  the  questions  dealing  with  theories  of  solution,  recourse  must  now  be  had  to  special
memoirs  and  to  works  on  theoretical  (physical)  chemistry;  for  this  subject  forms  one  of

ON  WATER  AND ITS  COMPOUNDS  67

and  yet  a  uniform  solution  will  be  obtained.  But  more  than  a  definite
quantity  of  aqueous  vapour  cannot  be  introduced  into  a  certain  volume
of  air  at  a  certain  temperature.  The  excess  above  the  point  of
saturation  will  remain  in  the  liquid  state.^®  The  relation  between
water  and  substances  dissolved  in  it  is  similar.  More  than  a  definite
quantity  of  a  substance  cannot,  at  a  certain  temperature,  dissolve  in  a
given  quantity  of  water  ;  the  excess  does  not  unite  with  the  water.
Just  as  air  or  a  gas  becomes  saturated  with  vapour,  so  water  becomes
saturated  with  a  substance  dissolved  in  it.  If  an  excess  of  a  substance
be  added  to  water  which  is  already  saturated  with  it,  it  will  remain  in
its  original  state,  and  will  not  diffuse  through  the  water.  The  quantity
of  a  substance  (either  by  volume  with  gases,  or  by  weight  with  solids
and  liquids)  which  is  capable  of  saturating  100  parts  of  water  is  called
the  co-efficient  of  solvhUity  or  the  sohcbility. In  100  grams  of  water

special  interest  at  the  present  epoch  of  the  development  of  our  science.  In  working  out
chiefly  the  chemical  side  of  solutions,  I  consider  it  to  be  necessary  to  reconcile  the  two
aspects  of  the  question  ;  this  seems  to  nic  to  be  all  the  more  possible,  as  tlie  physical  side  is
limited  to  dilute  solutions  only,  whilst  the  chemical  side  deals  mainly  with  strong  solutions.
*  A  system  of  (chemically  or  physically)  re-acting  substances  in  different  states  of
aggregation — for  instance,  some  solid,  others  liquid  or  gaseous— is  termed  a  hetero-
geneous system.  Up  to  now  it  is  only  systems  of  this  kind  which  can  be  subjected  to
detailed  examination  in  the  sense  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  matter.  Solutions  (i.e.
unsaturated  ones)  form  fluid  homogeneous  systems,  which  at  the  present  time  can  only
be  investigated  with  difliculty.

In  the  case  of  limited  solution  of  liquids  in  liquids,  the  difference  between  the  solvent
and  the  substance  dissolved  is  clearly  seen. The  former  (that  is,  the  solvent)  may  be
added  in  an  unlimited  quantity,  and  yet  the  solution  obtained  will  always  be  unifonn.
whilst  only  a  definite  saturating  proportion  of  the  substance  dissolved  can  be  taken.
We  will  take  water  and  common  (sulphuric)  ether. On  shaking  the  ether  with  the
water,  it  will  be  remarked  that  a  portion  of  it  dissolves  in  the  water. If  the  ether  be
taken  in  such  a  quantity  that  it  saturates  the  water  and  a  portion  of  it  remains  undis-
solved, then  this  remaining  portion  will  act  as  a  solvent,  and  water  will  diffuse  through
it  and  also  form  a  saturated  solution  of  water  in  the  ether  taken. Thus  two  saturated
solutions  will  be  obtained. One  solution  will  contain  ether  dissolved  in  water,  and  the
other  solution  will  contain  water  dissolved  in  ether. These  two  solutions  will  arrange
themselves  in  two  layers,  according  to  their  density  ;  the  ethereal  solution  of  water  will
be  on  the  top. If  the  upper  ethereal  solution  be  poured  off  from  the  aqueous  solution,
any  quantity  of  ether  may  be  added  to  it ;  this  shows  that  the  dissolving  substance  is
ether. If  water  be  added  to  it,  it  is  no  longer  dissolved  in  it ;  this  shows  that  water
saturates  the  ether — here  water  is  the  substance  dissolved. If  we  act  in  the  same
manner  with  the  lower  layer,  we  shall  find  that  water  is  the  solvent  and  ether  the  sub-
stance  dissolved. By  taking  different amounts  of ether  and  water,  the  degree  of
solubility  of  ether  in  water,  and  of  water  in  ether,  may  be  easily  determined. Water
approximately  dissolves  ^  of  its  volume  of  ether,  and  ether  dissolves  a  very  small  quan-
tity of  water. Let  us  now  imagine  that  the  liquid  poured  in  dissolves  a  considerable
amount  of  water,  and  that  water  dissolves  a  considerable  amount  of  the  liquid. Two
layers  could  not  be  formed,  because  the  saturated  solutions  would  resemble  each  other,
and  therefore  they  would  intennix  in  all  proportions. This  is,  consequently,  a  case  of
a  phenomenon  where  two  liquids  present  considerable  co-efficients  of  solubility  in  each
other,  but  where  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  these  co-efficients  are,  because  it  is  impos-
sible to  obtain  a  saturated  solution.

r  2

PHINCIPLBS  OF  CH

at  15",  there  can  be  dissolved  not  more  th(

salt. Consequently,  its  solubilitv  at  \5°  is  equal  to  35'S6.

grama  of  commM

"  The  BOlabilitj,
if  solubility,  of  «
Iftarminod  b;  vnri

ihe  uiluble  BubaCuice  uid  Si
rated  at  a  ^Ten  teniperatafB,M
the  qouitity  of  water
substuice  diBsolved u
mined by eTaporaticm,  deiieo

lijwer  part  of  the  ituid.  Hercnry
cna  \tv  poured  into  the  vide  tobe
through  thi«  funnel,  vhioh  ia
tlicrefore  made  of  ateel,  aa  Oopper
would  be  nffecled  bj  Uw  mei-
i-iirj'.  Tlie  upper  ring  A  ia  tm-
iiisliel  with  «.  corery,  which  am
U'  firmly  preBsed  down  cm  io  tlM
wiitc  tube,  and  hermetically  eloica
it  tiy  merLUH  of  an  indt»-rabbci
rin^.  Tlw  labe  r'r  cu  ba  i«iMd
.It  will.  Hud  BO  by  ponring  mircarT
in<n  the  tunnel  the  height  of  the
column  of  mercary.  which  pro-
dui:f^  presHure  inaide  the  *pp»-
rutUH,  can  be  iocrewied.  The
prcHKure  cnn  alw)  be  diminiKhed
nt will,  hy  letting  mercury  out

lube  r,  containing  the  gaa  Mid
Iiijuid  to  be  eiperiraented  on,  is
liliU'ed  inside  tbe  wide  lube.  Thia
lube  is  gradnated  in  milliiiMlrM

ON  WATER  AND  ITS COMPOUNDS  69

most  important  to  turn  attention  to  the  existence  of  the  solid  insolvhU
tmbstances  of  nature,  because  on  them  depends  the  shape  of  the
substances  of  the  earth's  surface,  and  of  plants  and  animals.  There
is  so  much  water  on  the  earth's  surface,  that  were  the  surface  of  sub-
stances formed  of  soluble  matters  it  would  constantly  change,  and

the  number  of  volumes  occupied  by  the  gas  and  liquid  dissolving  it  can  be  easily  calcu-
lated. This  tube  can  also  be  easily  removed  from  the  apparatus.  The  lower  portion  of  this
tube  when  removed  from  the  apparatus  is  shown  to  the  right  of  the  figure.  It  will  be  ob-
served that  its  lower  end  is  furnished  with  a  male  screw  6,  fitting  in  a  nut  a.  The  lower
surface  of  the  nut  a  is  covered  with  india-rubber,  so  that  on  screwing  up  the  tube  its
lower  end  presses  upon  the  india-rubber,  and  thus  hermetically  closes  the  whole  tube,  for
its  upper  end  is  fused  up.  The  nut  a  is  furnished  with  arms  c  c,  and  in  the  stand  /
there  are  corresponding  spaces,  so  that  when  the  screwed- up  internal  tube  is  fixed  into
stand  /,  the  arms  c  c  fix  into  these  spaces  cut  in  /.  This  enables  the  internal  tube  to  be
fixed  on  to  the  stand/.  When  the  internal  tube  is  fixed  in  the  stand,  the  wide  tube  is  put
into  its  right  position,  and  mercury  and  water  are  poured  into  the  space  between  the  two
tubes,  and  communication  is  oi)ened  between  the  inside  of  the  tube  e  and  the  mercury
between  the  interior  and  exterior  tubes.  This  is  done  by  either  revolving  the  interior
tube  e,  or  by  a  key  turning  the  nut  about  the  bottom  part  of/.  The  tube  e  is  filled  with
gas  and  water  as  follows :  the  tube  is  removed  from  the  apparatus,  filled  with  mercury,
and  the  gas  to  be  experimented  on  is  passed  into  it.  The  volume  of  the  gas  is  measured,
the  temperature  and  pressure  determined,  and  the  volume  it  would  occupy  at  0°  and
760  mm.  calculated.  A  known  volume  of  water  is  then  introduced  into  the  tube.  The
water  must  be  previously  boiled,  so  as  to  be  quite  freed  from  air  in  solution.  The  tube  is
then  closed  by  screwing  it  down  on  to  the  india-rubber  on  the  nut.  It  is  then  fixed  on  to
the  stand /,  mercury  and  water  are  poured  into  the  intervening  space  between  it  and  the
exterior  tube,  which  is  then  screwed  up  and  closed  by  the  cover  /;,  and  the  whole
apparatus  is  left  at  rest  for  some  time,  so  that  the  tube  e,  and  the  gas  in  it,  may  attain  the
same  temperature  as  that  of  the  surrounding  water,  which  is  marked  by  a  thermometer
k  tied  to  the  tube  e.  The  interior  tube  is  then  again  closed  by  turning  it  in  the  nut,
the  cover  p  again  shut,  and  the  whole  apparatus  is  shaken  in  order  that  the  gas  in  the
tube  e  may  entirely  saturate  the  water.  After  several  shakings,  the  tube  e  is  again
opened  by  turning  it  in  the  nut,  and  the  apparatus  is  left  at  rest  for  a  certain  time  ;  it  is
then  closed  and  again  shaken,  and  so  on  until  the  volume  of  gas  does  not  diminish  after
a  fresh  shaking — that  is,  until  saturation  ensues.  Observations  are  then  made  of  the
temperature,  the  height  of  the  mercury  m  the  interior  tube,  and  the  level  of  the  water  in
it,  and  also  of  the  level  of  the  mercury  and  water  in  the  exterior  tube.  All  these  data
are  necessary  in  order  to  calculate  the  pressure  imder  which  the  solution  of  the  gas  takes
place,  and  what  volume  of  gas  remains  undissolved,  and  also  the  quantity  of  water  which
ser\'os  as  the  solvent.  By  varying  the  temperi\ture  of  the  surrounding  water,  the  amount
of  gas  dissolved  at  various  temperatures  may  be  determined.  Bunseu,  Carius,  and
many  others  determined  the  solution  of  various  gases  in  water,  alcohol,  and  certain
other  liquids,  by  means  of  this  apparatus.  If  in  a  determination  of  this  kind  it  is  found
that  n  cubic  centimetres  of  water  at  a  pressure  h  dissolve  m  cubic  centimetres  of  a
given  gas,  measured  at  0*^  and  760  mm.,  when  the  temperature  under  which  solution
took  place  was  f°,  then  it  follows  that  at  the  temperature  t  the  co-efficient  of  solubility

of  the  gas  in  1  volume  of  the  liquid  will  be  equal  to  -  x  —  .

This  formula  is  verj-  clearly  understood  from  the  fact  that  the  co-efficient  of  solubility
of  gases  is  that  quantity  measured  at  0°  and  760  ram.,  which  is  absorbed  at  a  pressure
of  760  mm.  by  one  volume  of  a  liquid. If  n  cubic  centimetres  of  water  absorb  m  cubic

centimetres  of  a  gas,  then  one  cubic  centimetre  absorbs  -.  If c.c.  of  a  gas  are

?i  n

absorbed  under  a  pressure  of  h  mm.,  then,  according  to  the  law  of  the  variation  of

70

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

however  substantial  their  forms  might  be,  mountains,  river  banks  and
sea  shores,  plants  and  animals,  or  the  habitations  and  coverings  of  men,
could  not  exist  for  any  length  of  time.*^

Substances  which  are  easily  soluble  in  water  bear  a  certain  resem-
blance to  it. Thus  sugar  and  salt  in  many  of  their  superficial  features

solubility  of  a  gas  with  the  pressure,  there  would  be  dissolved,  under  a  pressure  of

760  mm.,  a  quantity  varying  in  the  same  ratio  to  - as 760  :  h. In determining  the

n

residual  volume  of  gas  its  moisture  (note  1)  must  be  taken  into  consideration.

Below  are  given  the  number  of  grams  of  several  substances  saturating  100  grams  of

water — that  is,  their  co-efficients  of  solubility  by  weight  at  three  different  temperatures: —

AtO«

(  Oxygen,  Oj

Gases i  Carbonic  anhydride,  COj  .

\  Ammonia,  NH3  ....

( Phenol,  C(,HeO

Liquids  ]  Amyl  alcohol,  C5H12O
V  Sulphuric  acid,  H2SO4
(  Gypsum,  CaS04  ,  2H,0 .

Alum,  AlKS.20g  .  I2H.2O  .

Anhydrous  Kodium  sulphate,  Na.jS04

Common  Salt,  NaCl
iNitre,  KNO5

Solids

n
TtStJo

Too
900

4*9

4-4

00

i

8-8

4-6

85-7

18-8

AtSQo

AtlOO«»

i(Aa

__

—

61-8

7-8

5*2

oo

2*9

—

00

oo

i

i

15*4

857-5

20

48

860

89-7

81-7 ;

2460

Sometimes  a  substance  is  so  slightly  soluble  that  it  may  be  considered  as  insoluble.
Many  Huch  substances  are  met  with  both  in  solids  and  liquids,  and  such  a  gas  as  oxygen,
although  it  does  dissolve,  does  so  in  so  small  a  proportion  by  weight  that  it  might  be
considered  us  zero  did  not  the  solubility  of  even  so  little  oxygen  play  an  important  part
in  nature  (an  in  the  respiration  of  fishes)  and  were  not  an  infinitesimal  quantity  of  a  gas
by  weight  80  easily  measured  by  volume.  The  sign  OO,  which  stands  on  a  line  with  sul-
phuric acid  in  the  above  table,  indicates  that  it  intermixes  with  water  in  all  proportions.
There  are  many  such  cases  among  liquids,  and  everjbody  knows, for  instance,  that  spirit
(absolute  alcohol)  can  Ik*  mixed  in  any  proportion  with  water.

"  Just  as  the  existence  must  be  admitted  of  substances  which  are  completely  un-
decomposable  (chemically)  at  tlie  ordinary  temperature— and  of  substances  which
are  entirely  non-volatile  at  such  a  temperature  (as  wcxkI  and  gold),  although  capable  of
decomposing  (wood)  or  volatilising  (gold)  at  a  higher  temperature — so  also  the  existence
must  be  admitted  of  substances  which  are  totally  insoluble  in  water  without  some  degree
of  change  in  their  state.  Although  mercury  is  partially  volatile  at  the  ordinary  tem-
iwrature,  then*  is  no  reason  to  think  that  it  and  other  metiils  are  soluble  in  water,  alcohol,
or  other  similar  liquids.  However,  mercury  forms  solutions,  as  it  dissolves  other  metals.
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  substances  found  in  nature  which  are  so  very
slightly  soluble  in  water,  that  in  ordinary  practice  they  may  be  considered  as  insoluble
(for  example,  barium  sulpluit*?).  For  the  comprehension  of  that  general  plan  according  to
which  a  change  of  stati'  of  substances  (combined  or  dissolved,  solid,  liquid,  or  gaseous)
takes  place,  it  is  very  important  to  make  a  distinction  at  this  boundary  line  (on  approach-
ing zero  of  decomjMisition,  volatility,  or  solubility)  between  an  insignificant  amount  and
zero,  but  the  preKent  nietluxls  of  research  and  the  data  at  our  disposal  at  the  present
time  only  just  touch  such  questions  (by  studying  the  electrical  conductivity  of  dilute
solutions  and  the  development  of  micro-organisms  in  them).  It  must  be  remarked,
l>eKides,  that  water  in  a  number  of  cases  dews  not  dissolve  a  substance  as  such,  but  acts
on  it  chemically  and  forms  a  soluble  substance.  Thus  glass  and  many  rocks,  especially
if  taken  as  powder,  are  chemically  changed  by  water,  but  are  not  directly  soluble  in  it.

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  71

remind  oue  of  ice.  Metals,  which  are  not  soluble  in  water,  have  no
points  in  common  with  it,  whilst  on  the  other  hand  they  dissolve  each
other  in  a  molten  st<ate,  forming  alloys,  just  as  oily  substances  dissolve
each  other ;  for  example,  tallow  is  soluble  in  petroleum  and  in  olive  oil,
although  they  are  all  insoluble  in  water.  From  this  it  is  evident  that
the  analogy  of  substances  forming  a  solution  plays  an  important  part,
and  as  aqueous  and  all  other  solutions  are  liquids,  there  is  good  reason
to  believe  tliat  in  the  process  of  solution  solid  and  gaseous  substances
change  in  a  physical  sense,  j^assiug  into  a  liquid  state.  These  con-
siderations elucidate  many  points  of  solution — as,  for  instance,  the
variation  of  the  co- efficient  of  solubility  with  the  temperature  and  the
evolution  or  absorption  of  heat  in  the  formation  of  solutions.

The  solubility — that  is,  the  quantity  of  a  substance  necessary  for
saturation — varies  with  tli/S  te7)iperature,  and,  further,  with  an  increase
in  temperature  the  solubility  of  solid  substances  generally  increases,  and
that  of  gases  decre€kses  ;  this  might  be  expected,  as  solid  substances  by
heating,  and  gases  by  cooling,  approach  to  a  liquid  or  dissolved  state. ^^
A  graphic  method  is  often  employed  to  express  the  variation  of  solu-
bility with  temperature.  On  the  axis  of  abscissae  or  on  a  horizontal
line,  temperatures  are  marked  out  and  perpendiculars  are  raised  corre-
sponding with  each  temperature,  whose  length  is  determined  by  the
solubility  of  the  salt  at  that  temperature  -expressing,  for  instance,  one
part  by  weight  of  a  salt  in  100  parts  of  water  by  one  unit  of  length,
such  as  a  millimetre.  By  joining  the  summits  of  the  perpendiculars,
a  curve  is  obtained  which  expresses  the  degree  of  solubility  at  different
temperatures.  For  solids,  the  curve  is  generally  an  ascending  one — i.e.
recedes  from  the  horizontal  line  with  the  rise  in  temperature.  These
curves  clearly  show  by  their  inclination  the  degree  of  rapidity  of  increase
in  solubility  with  the  temperature.  Having  determined  several  points
of  a  curve — that  is,  having  made  a  determination  of  the  solubility  for
several  temperatures  —  the  solubility  at  intermediary  temperatures  may
be  determined  from  the  form  of  the  curve  so  obtained  ;  in  this  way
the  empirical  law  of  solubility  may  be examined. "^^ The  results of

^  Beilby  (1883)  experimented  on  paraffin,  and  found  that  one  litre  of  solid  paraffin
at  21°  weighed  874  grams,  and  when  liquid,  at  its  melting-point  88°,  788  grams,  at  49^,
775  grams,  and  at  60^,  767  grams,  from  which  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  liquefied  paraffin
would  be  795*4  grams  at  21°  if  it  could  remain  liquid  at  that  t<.'mi)erature.  By  dissolving
solid  paraffin  in  lubricating  oil  at  21"  Beilby  found  that  7d5'()  grams  occupy  one  cubic
decimetre,  from  which  he  concluded  that  the  solution  contained  liquefied  paraffin.

^  Gay-Lussac  was  the  first  to  have  recourse  to  such  a  graphic  method  of  expressing
solubility,  and  he  considered,  in  accordance  with  the  general  opinion,  tliat  by  joining  up
the  summits  of  the  ordinates  in  one  harmoniouH  curve  it  is  possible  to  express  the  entire
change  of  solubility  with  the  temperature.  Now,  there  arc  many  reasons  for  doubting
the  accuracy  of  such  an  admission,  for  there  are  undoubtedly  critical  points  in  curves  of

72  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

research  have  shown  that  the  solubility  of  certain  salts — as,  for  example,
common  table  salt — varies  comparatively  little  with  the  temperature  ;
whilst  for  other  substances  the  solubility  increases  by  equal  amounts
for  equal  increments  of  temperature.  Thus,  for  example,  for  the
saturation  of  100  parts  of  water  by  potassium  chloride  there  is  required
at  0°,  29-2  parts,  at  20^,  347,  at  40^,  402,  at  60^  457  ;  and  so  on,
for  every  10°  the  solubility  increases  by  2*75  parts  by  weight  of  the
salt.  Therefore  the  solubility  of  the  potassium  chloride  in  water  may  be
expressed  by  a  direct  equation  :  *i =29*2  -f  0*275^,  where  a  represents  the
sol ubility  at  ^.  For  other  salts,  more  complicated  equations  are  required.
For  example,  for  nitre:  a=13-3  + 0*574^ +  0-01 71 7<«  +  0•0000036<^
which  shows  that  when  ^  =  0®  «  =  13-3,  when  t=zlO°  u=20'8,  and  when
^=100°  n=246  0.

Curves  of  solubility  give  the  means  of  estimating  the  amount  of
salt  separated  by  the  cooling  to  a  known  extent  of  a  solution  saturated

Bolubility  (for  example,  of  sodiam  sulphate,  aa  shown  farther  on),  and  it  may  be  that
definite  compounds  of  dissolved  substances  with  water,  in  decomposing  within  known
limits  of  temperature,  give  critical  points  more  often  than  would  be  imagined ;  it  may
even  be,  indeed,  that  instead  of  a  continuous  curve,  solubility  should  be  expressed — if
not  always,  then  not  unfrequently — by  straight  or  broken  lines.  According  to  Ditte,  the
solubility  of  sodiam  nitrate,  NaNOj,  is  expressed  by  the  following  figures  per  100  parts
of  water : —

0° 4° 10° 15° 21° 29° 86° 51° 68°

66*7 710 *  76'3 806 857  929 994 113'6 1261

In  my  opinion  (1881)  these  data  should  be  expressed  with  exactitude  by  a  s^*aight  line,
67*5 +  0*87/,  which  entirely  agrees  with  the  results  of  experiment.  According  to  this
the  figure  expressing  the  solubility  of  salt  at  0°  exactly  coincides  with  the  composition
of  a  definite  chemical  compound — NaNOs,  7H2O.  Tlie  experiments  made  by  Ditte
showed  that  all  saturated  solutions  between  0°  and  — 15*7°  have  such  a  composition,
and  tliat  at  the  latter  temperature  the  solution  completely  solidifies  into  one  homo-
geneous whole.  Between  0°  and  — 15°'7  the  solution  NaN037H.jO  does  not  defmsit
either  salt  or  ice.  Thus  the  solubility  of  sodium  nitrate  is  expressed  by  a  broken
straight  line.  In  recent  times  (1888)  Etard  discovered  a  similar  phenomenon
in  many  of  the  sulphates.  Brandes,  in  1880,  shows  a  diminution  in  solubility
below  100°  for  manganese  sulphate.  The  percentage  by  weight  {i.e.  per  100  parts
of  the  solution,  and  not  of  water)  of  saturation  for  ferrous  sulphate,  FeS04,  from
-  2®  to  +  65°  =  18*5  4-  0'8784<— that  is,  the  solubility  of  the  salt  increases.  The  solubility
remains  constant  from  65°  to  98°  (according  to  Brandes  tlie  solubility  then  increases ;
this  divergence  of  opinion  requires  proof),  and  from  98^  to  150°  it  falls  as  =104*85  —
0*6685^  Hence,  at  about  +156°  the  solubility  should  =0,  and  this  has  been  confirmed
by  exjieriment.  I  observe,  on  my  part,  that  Etard's  formula  gives  88'1  p.e.  of  salt  at
65°  and  888  p.c.  at  92°,  and  this  maximum  amount  of  salt  in  the  solution  very  nearly
corresponds  with  the  composition  FeS04,14H.jO,  which  requires  87'6  p.c.  From  what
has  been  said,  it  is  evident  that  the  data  concerning  solubility  require  a  new  method  of
investigation,  which  should  have  in  view  the  entire  scale  of  solubility — from  the  form-
ation of  completely  solidified  solutions  (cryohydrates,  which  we  shall  speak  of  presently)
to  the  separation  of  salts  from  their  solutions,  if  this  is  accomplished  at  a  higher  tem-
perature (for  manganese  and  cadmium  sulphates  there  is  an  entire  separation,  according
to  Etard),  or  to  the  formation  of  a  constant  solubility  (for  potassium  sulphate  the  sola-
ftility,  according  to  6tard,  remains  constant  from  168°  to  220°  and  equals  24*9  p.c.)
(8eo  Chapter  XIV.,  note  50,  solubiUty  of  CaClj.^

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOrNDS  73

at  a  given  temperature  For  instance,  if  200  parts  of  a  solution  of
potassium  chloride  in  water  saturated  at  a  temperature  of  60°  be  taken,
and  it  be  asked  how  much  of  the  salt  will  be  separated  by  cooling  the
solution  to  0^  if  its  solubility  at  60^=45-7  and  at  0^=29-2?  The
answer  is  obtained  in  the  following  manner :  At  60°  a  saturated
solution  contains  45*7  parts  of  potassium  chloride  per  100  parts  by
weight  of  water,  consequently  145*7  parts  by  weight  of  the  solution
contain  45*7  parts,  or,  by  proportion,  200  parts  by  weight  of  the
solution  contain  62'7  parts  of  the  salt.  The  amount  of  salt  remaining
in  solution  at  0°  is  calculated  as  follows  :  In  200  grams  taken  there
will  be  137*3  grams  of  water  ;  consequently,  this  amount  of  water  is
capable  of  holding  only  40*1  grams  of  the  salt,  and  therefore  in  lower-
ing the  temperature  from  60°  to  0°  there  should  separate  from  the
solution  62'7  — 40-1  =  22-6  grams  of  the  dissolved  salt.

The  difference  in  the  solubility  of  salts,  <fec.,  with  a  rise  or  fall  of
temperature  is  often  taken  advantage  of,  especially  in  technical  work,
for  the  separation  of  salts,  in  intermixture  from  each  other.  Thus  a
mixture  of  potassium  and  sodium  chlorides  (this  mixture  is  met  with  in
nature  at  Stassfurt)  is  separated  from  a  saturated  solution  by  subject-
ing it  alternately  to  boiling  (evaporation)  and  cooling.  The  sodium
chloride  separates  out  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  water  expelled
from  the  solution  by  boiling,  and  is  removed,  whilst  the  potassium
chloride  separates  out  on  cooling,  as  the  solubility  of  this  salt  rapidly
decreases  with  a  lowering  in  temperature.  Nitre,  sugar,  and  many
other  soluble  substances  are  purified  (refined)  in  a  similar  manner.

Although  in  the  majority  of  cases  the  solubility  of  solids  increases
with  the  temperature,  yet  there  are  some  solid  substances  whose
solubilities  decrease  on  heating.  Glauber's  salt,  or  sodium  sulphate,
forms  a  particularly  instructive  example  of  the  case  in  question.  If
this  salt  be  taken  in  an  ignited  state  (deprived  of  its  water  of
crystallisation),  then  its  solubility  in  100  parts  of  water  varies  with  the
temperature  in  the  following  manner  :  at  0°,  5  parts  of  the  salt  form  a
saturated  solution  ;  at  20°,  20  parts  of  the  salt,  at  33°  more  than  50
parts.  The  solubility,  as  will  be  seen,  increases  with  the  temperature,
as  is  the  case  with  nearly  all  salts  ;  Imt  starting  from  33°  it  suddenly
diminishes,  and  at  a  temperature  of  40°,  less  than  50  parts  of  the  salt
dissolve,  at  60°  only  45  parts  of  the  salt,  and  at  100°  about  43
parts  of  the  salt  in  100  parts  of  water.  This  phenomenon  may  l)e
traced  to  the  following  facts  :  Firstly,  that  this  salt  forms  various
compounds  with  water,  as  will  be  afterwards  explained  ;  secondly,
that  at  33°  the  compound  Na2SO4-|-10H2O  formed  from  the  solution
at  lower  temperatures,  melts  ;  and  thirdly,  that  on  evaporation  at  a

74  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

temperature  above  33°  an  anhydrous  salt,  Na2S04  separates  out.  It  will
be  seen  from  this  example  how  complicated  such  an  apparently  simple
phenomenon  as  solution  really  is  ;  and  all  data  concerning  solutions
lead  to  the  same  conclusion.  This  complexity  becomes  evident  in  inves-
tigating the  heat  of  solution.  If  solution  consisted  of  a  physical  change
only,  then  in  the  solution  of  gases  there  would  be  evolved — and  in  the
solution  of  solids,  there  would  be  absorbed— just  that  amount  of  heat
corresponding  to  the  change  of  state  ;  but  in  reality  a  large  amount  of
heat  is  always  evolved  in  solution,  depending  on  the  fact  that  in  the
process  of  solution  chemical  combination  takes  place  accompanied  by
an  evolution  of  heat.  Seventeen  grams  of  ammonia  (this  weight  cor-
responds with  its  formula  NH3),  in  passing  from  a  gaseous  into  a
liquid  state,  evolve  4,400  units  of  heat  (latent  heat) ;  that  is,  the
quantity  of  heat  necessary  to  raise  the  temperature  of  4,400  grams  of
water  1°.  The  same  quantity  of  ammonia,  in  dissolving  in  an  excess
of  water,  evolves  twice  as  much  heat — namely  8,800  units — showing
that  the  combination  with  water  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of
4,400  units  of  heat.  Further,  the  chief  part  of  this  heat  is  separated
in  dissolving  in  small  quantities  of  water,  so  that  17  grams  of  ammonia,
in  dissolving  in  18  grams  of  water  (this  weight  corresponds  with  its
composition  HjO),  evolve  7,535  units  of  heat,  and  therefore  the  for-
mation of  the  solution  NH3-I-H2O  evolves  3,135  units  of  heat  beyond
that  due  to  the  change  of  state.  As  in  the  solution  of  gases,  the  heat
of  liquefaction  (of  physical  change  of  state)  and  of  chemical  combination
with  water  are  both  positive  (H-),  therefore  in  the  solution  of  gases  in
water  a  heat  effect  is  always  observed.  This  phenomenon  is  different  in
the  solution  of  solid  substances,  because  their  passage  from  a  solid  to  a
liquid  state  is  accompanied  by  an  absorption  of  heat  (negative,  —  heat),
whilst  their  chemical  combination  with  water  is  accompanied  by  an
evolution  of  heat  ( +  heat)  ;  consequently,  their  sum  may  either  be  a
cooling  effect,  when  the  positive  (chemical)  portion  of  heat  is  less  than
the  negative  (physical),  or  it  may  be,  on  the  contrary,  a  heating  effect.
This  is  actually  the  case.  124  grams  of  sodium  thiosulphate  (employed
in  photography)  Na.2S203,5H20  in  melting  (at  48°)  absorbs  9,700  units
of  heat,  but  in  dissolving  in  a  large  quantity  of  water  at  the  ordinary
temperature  it  absorbs  5,700  units  of  heat,  which  shows  the  evolution
of  heat  (about  -h  4,000  units),  notwithstanding  the  cooling  effect
observed  in  the  process  of  solution,  in  the  act  of  the  chemical  com-
bination of  the  salt  with  water. ''^'' But  in  most  cases  solid  substances

"  The  latent  heat  of  fusion  is  determined  at  the  temi>erature  of  fusion,  whilst  solution
takes  place  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  one  must  think  that  at  this  temperature
the  latent  heat  would  be  diflferent,  just  as  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation  varies  with

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  75

in  dissolving  in  water  evolve  heat,  notwit^hstanding  the  passage  into  a
liquid  state,  which  indicates  so  considerable  an  evolution  of  (  +  )  heat

the  temperature  (see  Note  11).  Besides  which,  in  dissolving,  disintegration  of  the
particles  of  both  the  solvent  and  the  substance  dissolved  takes  place,  a  process  which  in
its  mechanical  aspect  resembles  evaporation,  and  therefore  must  consume  much  heat*
The  heat  emitted  in  the  solution  of  a  soUd  must  therefore  be  considered  (Personne)  as
composed  of  three  factors — (1)  positive,  the  eflfect  of  combination ;  (2)  negative,  the  effect
of  transference  into  a  liquid  state  ;  and  (8)  negative,  the  effect  of  disintegration.  In  the
solution  of  a  Uquid  by  a  liquid  the  second  factor  is  removed  ;  and  therefore,  if  the  heat
evolved  in  combination  is  greater  than  that  absorbed  in  disintegration  a  heating  effect  is
observed,  and  in  the  reverse  case  a  cooling  effect ;  and,  indeed,  sulphuric  acid,  alcohol,
and  many  liquids  evolve  heat  in  dissolving  in  each  other.  But  the  solution  of  chloroform
in  carbon  bisulphide  (Bussy  and  Binge t),  or  of  phenol  (or  aniline)  in  water  (Alexeeff),
produces  cold.  In  the  solution  of  a  small  quantity  of  water  in  acetic  acid  (Abasheff),  or
hydrocyanic  acid  (Bussy  and  Binget),  or  amyl  alcohol  (Alexdeff),  cold  is  produced,  whilst
in  the  solution  of  these  substances  in  an  excess  of  water  heat  is  evolved.

The  relation  existing  between  the  solubility  of  solid  bodies  and  the  heat  and  tempera-
ture of  fusion  and  solution  has  been  studied  by  many  investigators,  and  more  recently
(1898)  by  Schrikler,  who  states  that  in  the  solution  of  a  solid  body  in  a  solvent  which
does  not  act  chemically  upon  it,  a  very  simple  process  takes  place,  which  differs  but  little
from  the  intermixture  of  two  gases  which  do  not  react  chemically  ux>on  each  other.  The
following  relation  between  the  heat  of  solution  Q  and  the  heat  of  fusion  p  may  then  be

taken :  ^  =  ^  =  constant,  where  T,)  and  T  are  the  absolute  (from  —273^)  temperatures

of  fusion  and  saturation.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  naphthalene  the  calculated
and  observed  magnitudes  of  the  heat  of  solution  differ  but  slightly  from  each  other.

The  fullest  information  concerning  the  solution  of  liquids  in  liquids  has  been
gathered  by  W.  T.  Alexeeff  (1888-1885) ;  these  data  are,  however,  far  from  being
sufficient  to  solve  the  mass  of  problems  respecting  this  subject.  He  showed  that  two
liquids  which  dissolve  in  each  other,  intermix  together  in  all  proportions  at  a  certain
temperature.  Thus  the  solubility  of  phenol,  C^HeO,  in  water,  and  the  converse,  is
limited  up  to  70°,  whilst  above  this  temperature  they  intermix  in  all  proportions.  This
is  seen  from  the  following  figures,  where  p  is  the  percentage  amount  of  phenol  and  t
the  temperature  at  which  the  solution  becomes  turbid — that  is,  that  at  which  it  is
saturated  :—

p  =  712 10-20 15-81 26-15 2855 3670 4886 6115 7197
t  =  1°  45°  60°  67°  67°  67°  65°  53°  20°

It  is  exactly  the  same  with  the  solution  of  benzene,  aniline,  and  other  substances  in
molten  sulphur.  Alexeeff  discovered  a  similar  complete  intermixture  for  solutions  of
secondary  butyl  alcohol  in  water  at  about  107"  ;  at  lower  temperatures  the  solubility  is
not  only  limited,  but  between  50°  and  70°  it  is  at  its  minimum,  both  for  solutions  of  the
alcohol  in  water  and  for  water  in  the  alcohol ;  and  at  a  temperature  of  5°  both  solutions
exhibit  a  fresh  change  in  their  scale  of  solubility,  so  that  a  solution  of  the  alcohol  in
water  which  is  saturated  between  5°  and  40°  will  become  turbid  when  heated  to  60^.
In  the  solution  of  liquids  in  liquids,  Alexeeff  observed  a  lowering  in  temperature  (an
absorption  of  heat)  and  an  absence  of  change  in  specific  heat  (calculated  for  the  mixture)
much  more  frequently  than  ha<l  been  done  by  previous  observers.  As  regards  his  hypo-
thesis (in  the  sense  of  a  mechanical  and  not  a  chemical  representation  of  solutions)  that
substances  in  solution  preserve  their  physical  states  (as  gases,  liquids,  or  solids),  it  is
very  doubtful,  for  it  would  necessitate  admitting  the  presence  of  ice  in  water  or  its
vapour.

EVom  what  has  been  said  above,  it  will  be  clear  that  even  in  so  very  simple  a  case  as
solution,  it  is  impossible  to  calculate  the  heat  emitted  by  chemical  action  alone,  and  that
the  chemical  process  cannot  be  separated  from  the  physical  and  mechanical.

76  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

in  the  act  of  combination  with  water  that  it  exceeds  the  absorption  of
( — )  heat  dependent  on  the  passage  into  a  liquid  state,  Thus,  for
instance,  calcium  chloride,  CaCl2,  magnesium  sulphate,  MgS04,  and
many  other  salts  evolve  heat  in  dissolving  ;  for  example,  60  grams
of  magnesium  sulphate  evolve  about  10,000  units  of  heat.  Therefore,
in  the  solution  of  solid  bodies  either  a  cooling*^  or  a  heating^^  effect  is
produced,  according  to  the  difference  of  the  reacting  affinities.  When
they  are  considerable — that  is,  when  water  is  with  difficulty  separated
from  the  resultant  solution,  and  only  with  a  rise  of  temperature
(such  substances  absorb  water  vapour) — then  much  heat  is  evolved  in
the  process  of  solution,  just  as  in  many  reactions  of  direct  combination,
and  therefore  a  considerable  heating  of  the  solution  is  observed.  Of
such  a  kind,  for  instance,  is  the  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  (oil  of  vitriol
H2SO4),  and  of  caustic  soda  (NaHO),  <fec.,  in  water. ^^

Solution  is  a  reversible  reaction  ;  for,  if  the  water  be  expelled  from
a  solution,  the  substance  originally  taken  is  obtained  again.  But  it
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  expulsion  of  the  water  taken  for
solution  is  not  always  accomplished  with  equal  facility,  because  water
has  different  degrees  of  chemical  affinity  for  the  substance  dissolved.
Thus,  if  a  solution  of  sulphuric  acid,  which  mixes  with  water  in  all
proportions,  be  heated,  it  will  be  found  that  very  different  degrees  of
heat  are  required  to  expel  the  water. When  it  is  in  a  large  excess,

^'''  The  cooling  efTect  produced  in  the  solution  of  solids  (and  also  in  the  expansion  of
KaHCH  and  in  evaporation)  is  applied  to  the  jjroduction  of  low  temperatures.  Ammo-
nium nitrate  is  very  often  used  for  this  purpose ;  in  dissolving  in  water  it  absorbs  77
units  of  heat  [)er  ea<,>h  part  by  weight.  On  evaporating  the  solution  thus  formed,  the
solid  salt  is  rc-obtained.  The  application  of  the  various  freezing  mixtures  is  based  ou
the  same  principle.  Snow  or  broken  ice  frequently  enters  into  the  composition  of  these
mixtures,  advantage  being  taken  of  its  latent  heat  of  fusion  in  order  to  obtain  the
lowest  iwssible  temperature  (without  altering  the  pressure  or  employing  heat,  as  in  other
methods  of  obtaining  a  low  temperature).  For  laboratory  work  recourse  is  most  often
had  to  a  mixture  of  three  parts  of  snow  and  one  part  of  common  salt,  which  causes  the
temperature  to  fall  from  0^  to  —21°  C.  Potassium  thiocyanate,  KCNS,  mixed  with
water  (•}  by  weight  of  the  salt)  gives  a  still  lower  tem{)eratiire.  By  mixing  ten  parts  of
crvKtallised  calcium  chloride,  CaCl.^OH.^O,  with  seven  parts  of  snow,  the  temperature
may  even  fall  from  O''-'  to  —55'.

^  The  heat  which  is  evolved  in  solution,  or  even  in  the  dilution  of  solutions,  is  also
sometimes  made  use  of  in  practice.  Tims  caustic  soda  (NaHO),  in  dissolving  or  on  the
addition  of  water  to  a  strong  solution  of  it,  evolves  so  much  heat  that  it  can  replace  fuel.
In  a  steam  boiler,  which  has  been  previously  heated  to  tlie  boiling  {)oint,  another  boiler
is  placed  containing  caustic  soda,  and  the  exhaust  steam  is  made  to  pass  through  the
latter ;  the  formation  of  steam  then  goes  on  for  a  somewhat  long  period  of  time  without
any  other  heating. Norton  makes  use  of  this  for  smokeless  street  locomotives.

*"  The  temperatures  obtained  by  mixing  monohydrated  sulphuric  acid,  H^SOi,  with
different  quantities  of  water,  are  shown  on  the  lowest  cur\'e  in  fig.  17,  the  reUtive  pro
portions  of  both  substances  l>eing  expressed  in  percentages  by  weight  along  the  hori-
lODtal  axis. The  greatest  rise  of  temperature  is  149°. It  corresiwiids  with  the  greatest
«Tolution  of  heat  (given  on  the  middle  curve)  corresiwnding  with  a  definite  volume

^HwateriBgivenoGTat  a  tern perAtu re  slightly  above  100",  but  if  it  be  in H
^V  liut  B  small  proportion  there  is  such  an  affinity  betweeu  it  and  the ^M
sulphuric  acid  that  at  120",  150°,  200",  and  even  at  300°,  water  is  still H
retained by  the sulphuric  acid. The  bood  between the  remaining ^M
^^ quantity  n£  water  and  the  sulphuric  acid  is  evidently  stronger  than  the H
^L  bond  between  the  sulphuric  acid  and  the  excess  of  water. The  force H

^H  ao  feeble  an  attraction  that  the  properties  of  water— as,  forinBtance,  its ^M

^^ft  power  of  evaporation — are  but  very  tittle  changed,  and  ending  with ^M

^H  cases  of  strong  attraction  between  the  water  and  the  substance  dis- ^M

^F  solved  in  or  chemically  combined  with  it. In  consideration  of  the  very ^M

important significance of the  phenomena, and  of the  cases  of  the ^M

breaking  up  of  solutions  with  separation  of  water  or  of  the  substance ^|

dissolved  from  them,  we  shall  further  discuss  them  separately,  after ^|

(100  C.C.)  o(  the  Bolution  prodoced. The  top  carve  exiireasB*  Ihe  .legree  of  conlnKlion, H

tiKclion,  u  ilIko  the  greal^Ht  ri«e  of  tempemtan!,  corresponciB  nilh  tlie  fuimntian  iil  n ^|
teaiy,l™i*,  H..SO„2H.,0  (  -73'1  jw.  H.,SO,l,  Muuh  v.tj  likely  rpptHtH  itBcll  ii,  h  »ri„il«r H

1

Bi

1

■1

i

II

1

B9i

g

ni

■

ggl

1

9

Ro.l7.-Co
mJilDg

riwoti™

(MUer  in

rirt  (-iprtultii  tht  oDnlrKlinn,  nuHnUty  of  liwl.  unil  rl»M  of  tfmpenturc  iin>du«il  b) ^H
ml, Jiuric  KlJ  with  w.t«r. Pm«.U(«,  of  H^O.  Is  gl.ti.  .Uoiig  the  «i.  of  «l»l«c. H

aphnzic  w>a  ind  water. ^M

78  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

having  acquainted  ourselves  with  certain  peculiarities  of  the  solation
of  gases  and  of  solid  bodies.

The  solubility  of  gases,  which  is  usually  measured  by  the  volume
of  gas  ^^  (at  0®  and  760  ram.  pressure)  per  100  volumes  of  water,  varies
not  only  with  the  nature  of  the  gas  (and  also  of  the  solvent),  and
with  the  temperature,  but  also  with  the  pressure,  because  gases  them-
selves change  their  volume  considerably  with  the  pressure.  As  might
be  expected,  (1)  gases  which  are  easily  liquefied  (by  pressure  and  cold)
are  more  soluble  than  those  which  are  liquefied  with  difficulty.  Thus,
in  100  volumes  of  water  only  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  dissolve  at  0**
and  760  mm.,  three  volumes  of  carbonic  oxide,  four  volumes  of  oxygen,
etc.,  for  these  ai-e  gases  which  are  liquefied  with  difficulty  ;  whilst
there  dissolve  180  volumes  of  carbonic  anhydride,  130  of  nitrous  oxide,
and  437  of  sulphurous  anhydride,  for  these  are  gases  which  are  rather
easily  liquefied.  (2)  The  solubility  of  a  gas  is  diminished  by  heating,
which  is  easily  intelligible  from  what  has  been  said  previously —
the  elasticity  of  a  gas  becomes  greater,  it  is  removed  further  from
a  liquid  state.  Thus  100  volumes  of  water  at  0°  dissolve  2*5  volumes
of  air,  and  at  20°  only  1  7  volume.  For  this  reason  cold  water,  when
brought  into  a  warm  room,  parts  with  a  portion  of  the  gas  dissolved  in
it,*'*  (3)  The  quantity  of  the  gas  dissolved  varies  directly  with  the
pressui-e.  This  rule  is  called  the  latv  of  Henry  and  Dalton,  and  is
applicable  to  those  gases  which  are  little  soluble  in  water.  Therefore
a  gas  is  separated  from  its  solution  in  water  in  a  vacuum,  and  water
s*vtunited  with  a  gas  under  great  pressure  part«  with  it  if  the  pressure

^  If  ii  volume  of  >rHH  v  Ik»  measured  under  a  pressure  of  /j  mm.  of  mercury  (at  0-)
and  ttt  a  U»mi>erature  t^  Centij?rade,  then,  according  to  the  combined  laws  of  Boyle»
Mariotto,  and  of  Gay-Lusiuio,  its  volume  at  0^  and  760  mm.  will  equal  the  product  of  r
into  TtU)  divided  by  the  protluct  of  h  into  l  +  nf",  where  a  is  the  iH>-efKcient  of  expansion
of  jfasi's,  which  is  equal  to  000867.  The  weight  of  the  gas  will  be  equal  to  its  Yolome  at
0^  (Uid  760  mm.  multiplied  by  its  density  referred  to  air  and  by  the  weight  of  one  volome
of  air  at  0=^  and  760  ram.  The  weight  of  one  litre  of  air  under  these  conditions  being  =
ly^  gram.  If  the  density  of  the  gas  be  given  in  relation  to  hydrogen  this  must  be
divided  by  14  4  to  bring  it  in  relation  to  air.  If  the  gas  be  measured  when  saturated
witli  aiiueous  vapour,  then  it  must  be  reduced  to  the  volume  and  weight  of  the  gus  when
ary.  according  to  the  rules  given  in  Note  1.  If  the  pressure  be  determined  by  a  column
t  ^!^!^  hiring  a  temperature  /,  then  by  dividing  the  height  of  the  column  by
l^hO^m  the  corresponding  height  at  0=  is  obUined.  If  the  gas  be  enclosed  in  a
^«^mwludi  a  hqaid  sUnds  aK>re  the  level  of  the  mercurv-.  the  height  of  the  column  of
'AqQidbeuig  =  H  and  its  density  -  D,  then  the  gas  wiU  W  under  a  pressure  which
»1  *o  tha  bMometric  pressure  less  ^^^^,  where  18  50  is  the  density  of  mercury. By

J|*|*  f*«»i/i/y  of  a  gas  is  determineil,  and  its  obser>-ed  volume  reduced  to

■JWW*  or  to  p«rts  by  weight. The  physical  daU  ctnuvming  rapours  and

Tm?/*?!*^  ^P*  i»  »»g^t  in  dealing  with  and  measuring  gases. The  student

jP****««y  iuniliar  with  th«  calculations  relating  to  gases.

^t  *o  Bttiseii,  Winkl«r,  Timofeef!,  and  others,  100  vols,  of  water  under  a

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  79

be  diminished.  Thus  many  mineral  springs  are  saturated  underground
with  carbonic  anhydride  under  the  great  pressure  of  the  column  of
water  above  them.  On  coming  to  the  surface,  the  water  of  these  springs
boils  and  foams  on  giving  up  the  excess  of  dissolved  gas.  Sparkling
wines  and  aerated  waters  are  saturated  under  pressure  with  the  same
gas.  They  hold  the  gas  so  long  as  they  are  in  a  well-corked  vessel.
When  the  cork  is  removed  and  the  liquid  comes  in  contact  with  air  at
a  lower  pressure,  part  of  the  gas,  unable  to  remain  in  solution  at  a  lower
pressure,  is  separated  as  froth  with  the  hissing  sound  familiar  to  all.
It  must  be  remarked  that  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton  belongs  to  the
class  of  approximate  laws,  like  the  laws  of  gases  (Gay-Lussac's  and
Mariotte's)  and  many  others — that  is,  it  expresses  only  a  portion  of  a
complex  phenomenon,  the  limit  towards  which  the  phenomenon  aims.
The  matter  is  rendered  complicated  from  the  influence  of  the  degree  of
solubility  and  of  affinity  of  the  dissolved  gas  for  water.  Gases  which
are  little  soluble — for  instance,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  nitrogen  —follow
the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton  the  most  closely.  Carbonic  anhydride
exhibits  a  decided  deviation  from  the  law,  as  is  seen  from  the  determi-
nations of  Wroblewski  (1882).  He  showed  that  at  0°  a  cubic  centi-
metre of  water  absorbs  1  '8  cubic  centimetre  of  the  gas  under  a  pressure
of  one  atmosphere  ;  under  10  atmospheres,  16  cubic  centimetres  (and
not  18,  as  it  should  be  according  to  the  law)  ;  under  20  atmospheres,

pressure  of  one  atmosphere  absorb  the  following  volames  of  gas  (measured  at  0^  and
760  mm.) : —

128456  7  8  9  10  11

0° 4-82 2-85 215 1797 854 1805 4871 6886 54 104960 7'88
20° 810 1-54 1-88 901 282 670 2905 882-2 85 65400 4-71

1,  oxygen ;  2,  nitrogen  ;  8,  hydrogen ;  4,  carbonic  anhydride ;  5,  carbonic  oxide ;  6,  nitrous
oxide;  7,  hydrogen  sulphide;  8,  sulphurous  anhydride ;  9,  marsh  gas;  10,  ammonia;  11,
nitric  oxide.  The  decrease  of  solubility  with  a  rise  of  temperature  varies  for  different
gases ;  it  is  greater,  the  greater  the  molecular  weight  of  the  gas.  It  is  shown  by  calcula-
tion that  this  decrease  varies  (Winkler)  as  the  cube  root  of  the  molecular  weight  of  the
gas. This  is  seen  from  the  following  table  :

Decrease  of  solubility  per
20°  in  percent.

Cube  root  of  molecular  Ratio  between  decreaj«

weight  I and  cube  root  of  mol.  wt.

Hj  15-82

Nq  84-88

CO  84-44

NO  86-24

1-259  1217

8-087  11-80

8087  11-84

8107  11-66

Oi  86-55  8175  11-51

The  decrease  in  the  coefficient  of  absorption  with  the  temperature  must  be  connected
with  a  change  in  the  physical  proj^erties  of  the  water.  Winkler  (1891)  remarked  a  certain
relation  between  the  internal  friction  and  the  coefficient  of  absorption  at  various  tem-
peratures.

80  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

26*6  cubic  centimetres  (instead  of  36),  and  under  30  atmospheres^  33*7
cubic  centimetres.'*  However,  as  the  researches  of  Sechenoff  show,
the  absorption  of  carbonic  anhydride  within  certain  limits  of  change
of  pressure,  and  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  by  water— and  even  by
solutions  of  salts  which  are  not  chemically  changed  by  it,  or  do  not
form  compounds  with  it — very  closely  follows  the  law  of  Henry  and
Dalton,  so  that  the  chemical  bond  between  this  gas  and  water  is  so
feeble  that  the  breaking  up  of  the  solution  with  separation  of  the  gas
is  accomplished  by  a  decrease  of  pressure  alone.^-  The  case  is  different
if  a  considerable  affinity  exists  between  the  dissolved  gas  and  water.
Then  it  might  even  be  expected  that  the  gas  would  not  be  entirely
separated  from  water  in  a  vacuum,  as  should  be  the  case  with  gases
according  to  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton.  Such  gases —and,  in
general,  all  those  which  are  very  soluble— exhibit  a  distinct  deviation
from  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton.  As  examples,  ammonia  and  hydro-
chloric acid  gas  may  be  taken.  The  former  is  separated  by  boiling  and
decrease  of  pressure,  while  the  latter  is  not,  but  they  both  deviate  dis-
tinctlv  from  the  law.

PrMsnrein  mm.
of  toenrarv

100

500

1,000

1.500

Amm<mia  difisolveil

HnlTDchloric  acid

in  liii>  gnuns  of

gm$  .ibacthvl  in  IW

vmt«r  at  i»°

gnm«  of  wmttf  M  <F

Gnuus

Grmm^

38-0

65'7

69^

7b-3

1136

So-6

165-6

_

It  will  be  remarked,  for  instance,  from  this  table  that  whilst  the

^^  These  figures  show  that  the  co-efficient  of  solability  decieAses  with  an  increftw  of
pressure,  notwithstanding  that  the  carbonic  anhydride  approaches  a  liquid  state.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  liquefied  carbonic  anhvdride  does  not  intermix  with  water,  and  does  not
exhibit  a  rapid  increase  in  solubility  at  its  temperature  of  liquefaction.  This  indicates,
in  the  firal  place,  that  solution  does  not  consist  in  liquefaction,  and  in  the  second  place
thai  the  eolnbilitj  of  a  substance  is  determined  by  a  peculiar  attraction  of  water  for  the
diMolTing.  Wroblewski  even  considered  it  possible  to  admit  that  a  divaolved
ila  propertiet  as  a  gas.  This  he  deduced  from  experiments,  which  showed
l&e  nAe  of  difiusion  of  gases  in  a  solvent  is,  for  gases  of  different  densities,  inrersely
ioaal  lo  the  equare  roots  of  their  densities,  just  as  the  velocities  of  gaseous  mote-
ls Hole  M).  VTroblewski  showed  the  affinity  of  water,  H-^O,  for  carbonic
w  00^  fiEOm  the  fact  that  on  expanding  moist  com|>ressed  carbonic  anhydride
4  0^  «hte  a  preasure  of  10  atmospheres^  he  obtained  ^a  fall  in  temperature
ikattpaiudOD)  a  Teiy  unstable  definite  crystalline  comix^und,  CO« + SH^O.
HI  to  the  rwiarchee  of  Rosooe  and  his  collaborators,  anmionia  exhibits
4km  al  low  temperatures  from  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton,  whilst
H  ii  aBallt  it  would  appear  that  the  dissociating  influence  of  tern-
•^tioiMi;  that  is,  at  high  temperatures,  the  solutions  of  all
,Md  el  lower  lempavaturMi  there  will  in  all  cases  be  a  deviation

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  81

pressure  increased  10  times,  the  solubility  of  amraonia  only  increased
4i  times.

A  number  of  examples  of  such  cases  of  the  absorption  of  gases
by  liquids  might  be  cited  which  do  not  in  any  way,  even  approximately,
agree  with  the  laws  of  solubility.  Thus,  for  instance,  carbonic  anhy-
dride is  absorbed  by  a  solution  of  caustic  potash  in  water,  and  if
sufficient  caustic  potash  be  present  it  is  not  separated  from  the  solution
by  a  decrease  of  pressure.  This  is  a  case  of  more  intimate  chemical
combination.  A  correlation  less  completely  studied,  but  similar  and
clearly  chemical,  appears  in  certain  cases  of  the  solution  of  gases  in
water,  and  we  sliall  afterwards  find  an  example  of  this  in  the  solution
of  hydrogen  iodide  ;  but  we  will  first  stop  to  consider  a  remarkable
application  of  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton  ^^  in  the  case  of  the  solution
of  a  mixture  of  two  gases,  and  this  we  must  do  all  the  more  because
the  phenomena  which  there  take  place  cannot  be  foreseen  without  a
clear  theoretical  representation  of  the  nature  of  gases. ^^

55  The  ratio  between  the  pressure  and  the;  amount  of  gaa  dissolved  was  discovered  by
Henry  in  1805,  and  Dal  ton  in  1H07  pointed  out  the  adaptability  of  this  law  to  cases  of
gaseous  mixtures,  introducing  the  conception  of  partial  pressures  whicli  is  absolutely
necessary  for  a  right  comprehension  of  Dalton's  hiw.  The  concej>tion  of  partial  pressures
essentially  enters  into  that  of  the  diffusion  of  vapours  in  gases  (footnote  1) ;  for  the
pressure  of  damp  air  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  pressures  of  dry  air  and  of  the  aqueous
vapour  in  it,  and  it  is  admitted  as  a  corollary  to  Dalton's  law  that  evaporation  in  dry
air  takes  place  as  in  a  vacuum.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  remark  that  the  volume  of
a  mixture  of  two  gases  (or  vapours)  is  only  approximately  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  volumes
of  its  constituents  (the  same,  naturally,  also  refers  to  their  pressures)— that  is  to  say,  in
mixing  gases  a  change  of  volume  occurs,  which,  although  small,  is  quite  apparent  when
carefully  measured.  For  instance,  in  188.S  Brown  showed  that  on  mixing  various  volumes
of  sulphurous  anhydride  (SO.^)  with  carbonic  anhydride  (at  equal  pressures  of  760  mm.
and  equal  temperatures)  a  decrease  of  pressure  of  8'9  millimetres  of  mercury  was
observed.  The  possibility  of  a  chemical  action  in  similar  mixtures  is  evident  from  the
fact  that  equal  volumes  of  sulphurous  and  carbonic  anhydrides  at  —19^  form,  according
to  Pictet's  researches  in  1888,  a  liquid  which  may  be  regarded  as  an  unst:ible  chemical
compound,  or  a  solution  similar  to  that  given  when  sulphurous  anhydride  and  water
combine  to  an  unstable  chemical  whole.

5^  The  origin  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases  now  generally  accepted,  according  to
which  they  are  animated  by  a  rapid  progessive  motion,  is  very  ancient  (Bernouilli  and
others  in  the  last  century  had  already  developed  a  similar  representation),  but  it  was
only  generally  accepted  after  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  had  been  established,  and
after  the  work  of  Krtlnig  (1855),  and  especially  after  its  mathematical  side  Imd  been
worked  out  by  Clausius  and  Maxwell.  The  pressure,  elasticity,  diffusion,  and  internal
friction  of  gases,  the  laws  of  Boyle,  Mariotte,  and  of  Gay-Lussac  and  Avogadro- Gerhard t
are  not  only  explained  (deduced)  by  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  but  also  expressed  with
perfect  exactitude ;  thus,  for  example,  the  magnitude  of  the  hitemal  friction  of  different
gases  was  foretold  with  exactitude  by  Maxwell,  by  applying  the  theory  of  probal>ilities
to  the  impact  of  gaseous  particles.  The  kinetic  theory  of  gases  must  therefore  be
considered  as  one  of  the  most  brilliant  acquisitions  of  the  latter  half  of  the  present
century.  The  velocity  of  the  progressive  motion  of  the  particles  of  a  gas,  one  cubic
centimetre  of  which  weighs  d  grams,  is  found,  according  to  the  theory,  to  be  eqral  to
the  square  root  of  tlie  product  of  3pDg  divided  by  d,  where  p  is  the  pressure  under  which

YOL.  I.  G

82  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  law  of  partial  pressures  is  as  follows  : — The  solubility  of  gases
in  intermixture  with  each  other  does  not  depend  on  the  influence  of
the  total  pressure  acting  on  the  mixture,  but  on  the  influence  of  that
portion  of  the  total  pressui*e  which  is  due  to  the  volume  of  each  given
gas  in  the  mixture.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  oxygen  and  carbonic
anhydride  were  mixed  in  equal  volumes  and  exerted  a  pressure  of  760
millimetres,  then  water  would  dissolve  so  much  of  each  of  these  gases
as  would  be  dissolved  if  each  separately  exerted  a  pressure  of  half  an
atmosphere,  and  in  this  case,  at  0^  one  cubic  centimetre  of  water  would
dissolve  0*02  cubic  centimetre  of  oxygen  and  0*90  cubic  centimetre  of
carbonic  anhydride.  If  the  pressure  of  a  gaseous  mixture  equals  A,
and  in  n  volumes  of  the  mixture  there  be  a  volumes  of  a  given  gas,

d  is  determined  expressed  in  centimetres  of  the  mercury  column,  JD  the  weight  of  a  cubic
centimetre  of  qiercury  in  grams  (D  =  13*59,  j9  =  7C,  consequently  the  normal  preB8are  =
1,038  grams  on  a  sq.  cm.),  and  g  the  acceleration  of  gravity  in  centimetres  (^  =  980*5,
at  the  sea  level  and  long.  45° -98192  at  St.  Petersburg ;  in  general  it  varies  with  the
longitude  and  altitude  of  the  locality).  Therefore,  at  0*^  the  velocity  of  hydrogen  is  1,843,
and  of  oxygen  461,  metres  per  second.  This  is  the  average  velocity,  and  (according  to
Maxwell  and  others)  it  is  probable  that  the  velocities  of  individual  particles  are  different;
that  is,  they  occur  in,  as  it  were,  different  conditions  of  temperature,  which  it  is  very
important  to  take  into  consideration  in  investigating  many  phenomena  proper  to  matter.
It  is  evident  from  the  above  determination  of  the  velocity  of  gases,  that  different  gases
at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure  liave  average  velocities,  which  are  inversely  pro-
portional to  the  square  roots  of  their  densities;  this  is  also  shown  by  direct  experi-
ment  on  the  flow  of  gases  through  a  line  orifice,  or  through  a  porous  wall.  This  dis-
siviilar  velocity  of  fiow  for  different  gases  is  frequently  taken  advantage  of  in  chemical
researches  I'soo  Chap.  II.  and  also  Chap.  VII.)  in  order  to  separate  two  gases  having
different  densities  and  velocities.  Tlie  difference  of  the  velocity  of  flow  of  gases  also
determines  the  phenomenon  cited  in  the  following  footnote  for  demonstrating  the  exist-
ence of  an  internal  motion  in  gases.

If  for  a  certain  mass  of  a  gas  which  fully  and  exactly  follows  the  laws  of  Mariotte
and  Gay-Lussac  the  temperature  t  and  the  pressure  p  be  changed  simultaneoasly,  then
the  entire  change  would  be  expressed  by  the  equation  pv  =  C  (1  +  o^),  or,  what  is  the
same,  pv  -  liT,  where  T  =  t  +  273  and  C  and  B  are  constants  which  vary  not  only  with  the
units  taken  but  with  the  nature  of  the  gas  and  its  mass.  But  as  there  are  discrepancies
from  both  the  fundamental  laws  of  gases  (which  will  be  discussed  in  the  following
chapter),  and  as,  on  the  one  hand,  a  certain  attraction  between  the  gaseous  molecules
must  be  admitted,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  molecules  of  gases  themselves  must
occupy  a  }H)rtion  of  a  space,  hence  for  ordinary  gases,  within  any  considerable  variation
of  pressure  and  temperature,  recourse  should  be  had  to  Van  der  Waal's  formula —

{p  +  l,)(v-p)^liil-i-at)

where  a  is  the  true  co-efficient  of  expansion  of  gases.

Tlie  formula  of  Van  der  Waols  Las  aji  especially  important  significance  in  the  case
of  the  passage  of  a  gas  into  u  liquid  state,  because  the  fundamental  properties  of  both
gases  and  liquids  are  equally  well  expressed  by  it,  although  only  in  their  general
features.

The  further  development  df  the  questions  referring  to  the  subjects  tere  touched  on,
wliicli  are  of  esi)eeial  interest  for  the  theory  of  solutions,  must  be  l(X)ked  for  in  special
memoirs  and  works  on  theoretical  and  physical  chemistry.  A  small  part  of  this  subject
will  be  i>artially  considered  in  the  footnotes  of  the  following  chapter.

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  83

then  its  solution  will  proceed  as  though  this  gas  were  dissolved  under
a  pressure  - — . That  portion  of  the  pressure  under  influence  of

which  the  solution  proceeds  is  termed  the  *  partial '  pressure.

In  order  to  clearly  understand  the  cause  of  the  law  of  partial
pressures,  an  explanation  must  be  given  of  the  fundamental  properties
of  gases.  Gases  are  elastic  and  disperse  in  all  directions.  We  are
led  from  what  we  know  of  gases  to  the  assumption  that  these  funda-
mental properties  of  gases  are  due  to  a  rapid  progressive  motion,  in
all  directions,  which  is  proper  to  their  smallest  particles  (molecules).^'*
These  molecules  in  impinging  against  an  obstacle  produce  a  pressure.
The  greater  the  number  of  molecules  impinging  against  an  obstacle  in
a  given  time,  the  greater  the  pressure.  The  pressure  of  a  separate  gas
or  of  a  gaseous  mixture  depends  on  the  sum  of  the  pressures  of  all  the
molecules,  on  the  number  of  blows  in  a  unit  of  time  on  a  unit  of
surface,  and  on  the  mass  and  velocity  (or  the  vis  viva)  of  the  impinging
molecules.  The  nature  of  the  different  molecules  is  of  no  account  ;
the  obstacle  is  acted  on  by  a  jpressure  due  to  the  sum  of  their  vis  vii:a.
But,  in  a  chemical  action  such  as  the  solution  of  gases,  the  nature  of
the  impinging  molecules  plays,  on  the  contrary,  the  most  important
part.  In  impinging  against  a  liquid,  a  portion  of  the  gas  enters  into
the  liquid  itself,  and  is  held  by  it  so  long  as  other  gaseous  molecules
impinge  against  the  liquid— exert  a  pressure  on  it.  As  regards  the
solubility  of  a  given  gas,  for  the  number  of  blows  it  makes  on  the
surface  of  a  liquid,  it  is  immaterial  whether  other  molecules  of  gases

55  Although  the  actual  motion  of  gaseous  molecules,  which  is  accepted  by  the
kinetic  theory  of  gases,  cannot  be  seen,  yet  its  existence  may  be  rendered  evidf^nt  by
taking  advantage  of  the  difference  in  the  velocities  undoubtedly  belonging  to  diflfer.jnt
gaaes  which  are  of  different  densities  under  equal  pressures.  The  molecules  of  a
light  gas  must  move  more  rapidly  than  the  molecules  of  a  heavier  gas  in  order  to  pro-
duce the  same  pressure.  Let  us  take,  therefore,  two  gases — hydrogen  and  air ;  the
former  is  14*4  times  lighter  than  the  latter,  and  hence  the  molecules  of  hydrogen  must
move  almost  four  times  more  quickly  than  air  (more  exactly  38,  according  to  the  formula
given  in  the  preceding  footnote).  Consequently,  if  a  porous  cylinder  containing  air  is
introduced  into  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen,  then  in  a  given  time  the  volume  of  hydrogen
which  succeeds  in  entering  the  cylinder  will  be  greater  than  the  volume  of  air  leaving
the  cylinder,  and  therefore  the  pressure  inside  the  cylinder  will  rise  until  the  gaseo'n
mixture  (of  air  and  hydrogen)  attains  an  equal  density  both  inside  an  I  oi  tside  thn
cylinder.  If  now  the  experiment  be  reversed  and  air  surround  the  cylinder,  and
hydrogen  be  inside  the  cylinder,  then  more  gas  will  leave  the  cylinder  than  enters  it,  and
hence  the  pressure  inside  the  cylinder  will  be  diminished.  In  tliese  considerations  wo
have  replaced  the  idea  of  the  number  of  molecules  by  the  idea  of  volumes.  We  shall
learn  subsequently  that  equal  volumes  of  different  gases  contain  an  equal  numl>er  of
molecules  (the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt),  and  therefore  instead  of  speaking  of  the
number  of  molecules  we  can  speak  of  the  number  of  volumes.  If  the  cylinder  be  par-
tially inunersed  in  water  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  pressure  can  be  observed  directly,  and
the  experiment  consequently  rendered  self-evident

0%

84  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

impinge  side  by  side  with  it  or  not.  Hence,  the  solubility  of  a  given
gas  will  be  proportional,  not  to  the  total  pressure  of  a  gaseous  mixture,
but  to  that  portion  of  it  which  is  due  to  the  given  gas  separately.
Moreover,  the  saturation  of  a  liquid  by  a  gas  depends  on  the  fact  that
the  molecules  of  g  ises  that  have  entered  into  a  liquid  do  not  remain
at  rest  in  it,  although  they  enter  in  a  harmonious  kind  of  motion  with
the  molecules  of  the  liquid,  and  therefore  they  throw  themselves  otF
from  the  surface  of  the  liquid  (just  like  its  vapour  if  the  liquid  be
volatile).  If  in  a  unit  of  time  an  equal  number  of  molecules  penetrate
into  (leap  into)  a  liquid  and  leave  (or  leap  out  of)  a  liquid,  it  is
saturaled.  It  is  a  case  of  mobile  equilibrium,  and  not  of  rest.  There-
fore, if  the  pressure  be  diminished,  the  number  of  molecules  departing
from  the  liquid  will  exceed  the  number  of  molecules  entering  into  the
liquid,  and  a  fresh  state  of  mobile  equilibrium  only  takes  place  under  a
fresh  equality  of  the  number  of  molecules  departing  from  and  entering
into  the  liquid.  In  this  manner  the  main  features  of  the  solution  are
explained,  and  furthermore  of  that  special  (chemical)  attraction  (pene-
tration and  harmonious  motion)  of  a  gas  for  a  liquid,  which  determines
both  the  measure  of  solubility  and  the  degree  of  stability  of  the
solution  produced.

The  consequences  of  the  law  of  partial  pressures  are  exceedingly
numerous  and  important.  All  liquids  in  nature  are  in  contact  with  the
atmosphere,  which,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see  more  fully,  consists  of
an  intermixture  of  gases,  chiefly  four  in  number  — oxygen,  nitrogen,
carbonic  anhydride,  and  aqueous  vapour.  100  volumes  of  air  contain,
approximately,  78  volumes  of  nitrogen,  and  about  21  volumes  of
oxygen  ;  the  quantity  of  carbonic  anhydride,  by  volume,  does  not
exceed  0*05.  Under  ordinary  circumstances,  the  quantity  of  aqueous
vapour  is  much  greater  than  this,  but  it  varies  of  course  with  climatic
conditions.  We  conclude  from  these  numbers  that  the  solution  of
liitrogen  in  a  liquid  in  contact  with  the  atmosphere  will  proceed  under
a  partial  pressure  of  y„*l,  x760  mm.  if  the  atmospheric  pressure  equal
TOO  mm.  ;  similarly,  under  a  pressure  of  600  mm.  of  mercury,  the
solution  of  oxygen  will  proceed  under  a  partial  pressure  of  about
U>0  mu).,  and  the  solution  of  carbonic  anhydride  only  under  the  very
small  pressure  of  04  mm.  As,  however,  the  solubility  of  oxygen  in
water  is  twice  that  of  nitrogen,  the  ratio  of  O  to  N  dissolved  in  water
will  be  greater  tlian  the  ratio  in  air.  It  is  easy  to  calculate  what
quantity  of  each  of  the  giises  will  be  contained  in  water,  and  taking
the  simplest  case  we  will  calculate  what  quantity  of  oxygen,  nitrogen,
and  carbonic  anhydride  will  be  dissolved  from  air  having  the  above
composition  at  0°  and  760  mm.  pressure. Under  a  pressure  of  760  mm.

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  85

1  cubic  centimetre  of  water  dissolves  00203  cubic  centimetre  of  nitrogen

or  under  the  partial  pressure  of  600  mm.  it  will  dissolve  00203  x  5}!o>

or  0  0160  cubic  centimetre  ;  of  oxygen  004 11  x  i  J'",  or  00986  cubic  cen-

0*4
timetre  :  of  carbonic  anhydride  l"8x  .«,  or  000095  cubic  centimetre  :
'  "^  760

hence,  100  cubic  centimetres  of  water  will  contain  at  0^  altogether

2  55  cubic  centimetres  of  atmospheric  gases,  and  100  volumes  of  air
dissolved  in  water  will  contain  about  62  p.c.  of  nitrogen;  34  p.c.  of
oxygen*  and  4  p.c.  of  carbcmic  anhydride.  The  water  of  rivers,  wells,
etc.  usually  contiiins  more  carbonic  anhydride.  This  proceeds  from
the  oxidation  of  organic  substances  falling  into  the  water.  The  amount
of  oxygen,  however,  dissolved  in  water  appears  to  be  actually  about  ^
the  dissolved  gases,  whilst  air  cont^xins  only  !  of  it  by  volume.

According  to  the  law  of  partial  pressures,  whatever  gas  be  dissolved
in  water  will  be  expelled  from  the  solution  in  an  atmosphere  of  another
gas.  This  depends  on  the  fact  that  gases  dissolved  in  water  escape
from  it  in  a  vacuum,  because  the  pressure  is  nil.  An  atmosphere  of
another  gas  acts  like  a  vacuum  on  a  gas  dissolved  in  water.  Separation
then  proceeds,  because  the  molecules  of  the  dissolved  gas  no  longer
impinge  upon  the  liquid,  are  not  dissolved  in  it,  and  those  previously
held  in  solution  leave  the  liquid  in  virtue  of  their  elasticity.^'' For  the

^  Here  two  cases  occur ;  either  the  atmosphere  Kurrounding  the  solution  miy  he
limited,  or  it  may  he  projwrt  ion  ally  ho  vast  as  to  ho  unlimited,  like  the  earth's  atmo-
Hphere.  If  a  gaseous  solution  he  hrought  into  an  atmosphere  of  another  gas  which  is
limited — for  instance,  as  in  a  closed  vessel — then  a  portioii  of  the  gas  htJd  in  solution
will  be  expelled,  and  thus  pass  over  into  the  atjuosjihere  burrounding  the  solution,  and
will  produce  its  partial  pressure.  Let  us  imagine  that  water  saturated  with  carbonic
anhydride  at  0"^  and  under  the  ordinary  pressure  is  brought  into  an  atmosphere  of  a  gas
which  is  not  absorbed  by  water;  for  instance,  that  10  c.c.  of  an  aqueous  solution  of  car-
bonic anhydride  is  introduced  hito  a  vessel  holding  10  c.c.  of  such  a  gas.  The  solution
will  contain  18  c.c.  of  carbonic  anhydride.  The  expulsion  of  this  gas  proceeds  until  a
Btai3  of  equilibrium  is  arrived  at.  The  liquid  will  then  contain  a  certain  amount  of
carbonic  anhydride,  which  is  retained  under  the  partial  pressure  of  that  gas  which  has
been  expelled.  Now,  how  much  gas  will  remain  in  the  liquid  and  how  much  will  pass
over  into  the  surrounding  atmosphere  ?  In  order  to  solve  this  problem,  let  us  suppose
that  X  cubic  centimetres  of  carbonic  anhydride  are  retaine  1  in  the  solution.  It  is  evident
tliat  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  which  passed  over  into  the  surrounding  atmo-
Kphere  will  be  18  — x,  and  the  total  volume  of  gas  will  be  10  +  18  — x  or  28  — j*  cubic  centi-
metres. The  partial  pressure  under  which  the  carbonic  anhydride  is  then  dissolved  will
be  (supposing  that  the  common  pressure  remains  constant  the  whole  timej  equal  to

18  —  X

.  hence  there is  not  in solution 18  c.c. of  carbonic  anhydride (as  would be

2H-X

the case were the partial pressure equal to  the atmospheric pressure),  but only

18  ,  which  is  equal to  a*,  and  we  therefore  obtain the  equation 18  ^J*>

hence  j?  =  8'69.  Again,  where  the  atmosphere  into  which  the  gaseous  solution  is  intro-
duced is  not  only  that  of  another  gas  but  also  unlimited,  then  the  gas  dissolved  will,  on
pasaing  over  from  the  solution,  diffuse  into  this  atmosphere,  and  produce  an  infinitely

86  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

same  reason  a  gas  may  be  entirely  expelled  from  a  gaseous  solution  by
boiling — at  least,  in  many  cases  when  it  does  not  form  particularly
stable  compounds  with  water.  In  fact  the  surface  of  the  boiling  liquid
will  be  occupied  by  aqueous  vapour,  and  therefore  all  the  pressure
acting  on  the  gas  will  be  due  to  the  aqueous  vapour.  On  this  account,
the  partial  pressure  of  the  dissolved  gas  will  be  very  inconsiderable,  and
this  is  the  sole  reason  why  a  gas  se/mrates  from  a  solution  on  boiling
thfi  liquid  containing  it.  At  the  boiling  point  of  water  the  solubility
of  gases  in  water  is  still  sufficiently  great  for  a  considerable  quantity
of  a  gas  to  remain  in  solution.  The  gas  dissolved  in  the  liquid  is
carried  away,  together  with  the  aqueous  vapour  ;  if  boiling  be  con-
tinned  for  a  long  time,  all  the  gas  will  finally  be  separated."

It  is  evident  that  the  conception  of  the  partial  pressures  of  gases
should  be  applied  not  only  to  the  formations  of  solutions,  but  also  to  all
cases  of  chemical  action  of  gases.  Especially  numerous  are  its  appli-
cations to  the  physiology  of  respiration,  for  in  these  cases  it  is  only  the
oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  that  acts.^®

Binall  pressure  in  the  unlimited  atmosphere. Consequently,  no  gas  can  be  retained  in
solution  under  this  infinitely  small  pressure,  and  it  will  be  entirely  expelled  from  the
solution. For  this  reason  water  s:iturated  with  a  gas  which  is  not  contained  in  air,  will
ba  entirely  deprived  of  the  dissolved  gas  if  left  exposed  to  the  air. 'Water  also  passes
off  from  a  solution  into  the  atmosphere,  and  it  is  evident  that  there  might  be  such  a
case  as  a  constant  proportion  between  the  quantity  of  water  vaporised  and  the  quantity
of  a  gas  expelled  from  a  solution,  so  that  not  the  gas  alone,  but  the  entire  gafleoos  solu-
tion, would  pass  off. A  similar  case  is  exhibited  in  solutions  which  are  not  decomposed
by  heat  (such  as  those  of  hydrogen  cliloride  and  iodide),  as  will  afterwards  be  considered.
""  However,  in  those  cases  when  the  variation  of  the  co-efficient  of  solubility  with  the
temperature  is  not  sufficiently  great,  and  when  a  known  quantity  of  aquepos  vapour
and  of  the  gas  passes  off  from  a  solution  at  the  boiUng  point,  an  atmosphere  may  be
obtained  having  the  same  composition  as  the  liquid  itself. In  this  case  the  amount  of
gas  passing  over  into  such  an  atmosphere  will  not  be  greater  than  thai  held  by  the
liquid,  and  therefore  such  a  gaseous  solution  will  distil  over  unchanged. The  solution
will  then  represent,  like  a  solution  of  hydriodic  acid  in  water,  a  liqxiid  which  is  not
altered  by  distillation,  while  the  pressure  under  which  tliis  distillation  takes  place  re-
mains constant.  Thus  in  all  its  aspects  solution  presents  gradations  from  the  most  feeble
affinities  to  examples  of  intimate  chemical  combination. The  amount  of  heat  evolved  iu
the  solution  of  equal  volumes  of  different  gases  is  in  distinct  relation  with  these  variations
of  stability  and  solubility  of  different  gases. 22*3  litres  of  the  following  gases  (at  760
mm.  pressure)  evolve  the  following  number  of  (gram)  units  of  heat  in  dissolving  in  a
large  mass  of  water ;  carbonic  anhydride  5,600,  sulphurous  anhydride  7,700,  ammonia
6,800,  hydrochloric  acid  17,400,  and  hydriodic  acid  19,400. The  two  last-named  gases,
which  are  not  expelled  from  their  solution  by  boiling,  evolve  approximately  twice  as
noch  heat  as  gases  like  ammonia,  which  are  separated  from  their  solutions  by  boiling,
trfailal  gaaes  which  are  only  slightly  soluble  evolve  very  much  less  heat.

"  Amcmg  the  numerous  researches  concerning  this  subject,  certain  results  obtained

f  Paul  Bert  are  cited  in  Chapter  III.,  and  we  will  here  point  ont  that  Prof.  Sechenoff,

'  his  reiearehes  on  the  absorption  of gases  by  liquids,  very  fully  investigated  the

lffW"f»*-  of  the  solution  of  carbonic  anhydride  in solutions  of  various  salts,  and

mA  al  iBHiy  important  results,  which  showed  that,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  solution

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  87

The  solution  of  solids^  whilst  depending  only  in  a  small  measure  on
the  pressure  under  which  solution  takes  place  (because  solids  and
liquids  are  almost  incompressible),  is  very  clearly  dependent  on  the
temperature.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  solubility  of  solids  in
water  increases  with  the  temperature  ;  and  further,  the  rapidity  of
solution  increases  also.  The  latter  is  determined  by  the  rapidity  of
diffusion  of  the  solution  formed  into  the  remainder  of  the  water.  The
solution  of  a  solid  in  water,  although  it  is  as  with  gases,  a  physical
passage  into  a  liquid  state,  is  determined,  however,  by  its  chemical
affinity  for  water  ;  this  is  clearly  shown  from  the  fact  that  in  solution
there  occurs  a  diminution  in  volume,  a  change  in  the  boiling  point  of
water,  a  change  in  the  tension  of  its  vapour,  in  the  freezing  point,  and
in  many  similar  properties.  If  solution  were  a  physical,  and  not  a
chemical,  phenomenon,  it  would  naturally  be  accompanied  by  an
increase  and  not  by  a  diminution  of  volume,  because  generally  in
melting  a  solid  increases  in  volume  (its  density  diminishes).  Contraction
is  the  usual  phenomenon  accompanying  solution  and  takes  place  even
in  the  addition  of  solutions  to  water,^^  and  in  the  solution  of  liquids
in  water,^®  just  as  happens  in  the  combination  of  substances  when

of  carbonic  anhydride  in  BolutionB  of  salts  on  which  it  is  capable  of  acting  chemically  (for
example,  sodium  carbonate,  borax,  ordinary  sodium  phosphate),  tliere  is  not  only  an
increase  of  solubUity,  but  also  a  distinct  deviation  from  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton  ;
whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  that  solutions  of  salts  which  are  not  acted  on  by  carbonic
anhydride  (for  example,  the  chlorides,  nitrates,  and  sulphates)  absorb  less  of  it,  owing  to
the  '  competition  *  of  the  salt  already  dissolved,  and  follow  the  law  of  Henry  and  Dalton,
bnt  at  the  same  time  show  undoubted  signs  of  a  chemical  action  between  the  salt,  water,
and  <»rbonic  anhydride.  Sulphuric  acid  (whose  co-efficieni  of  absorption  is  92  vols,  per
100),  when  dUuted  with  water,  absorbs  less  and  less  carbonic  anhydride,  until  the  hydrate
H9S04,H20  (co-efF.  of  absorption  then  equals  66  vols.)  is  formed;  then  on  further
addition  of  water  the  solubility  again  rises  until  a  solution  of  100  p.c.  of  water  is
obtained.

^  Kremers  made  this  observation  in  tlie  following  simple  form : — He  took  a  narrow-
necked  flask,  with  a  mark  on  the  narrow  part  (like  that  on  a  litre  flask  which  is  used  for
accurately  measuring  liquids),  poured  water  into  it,  and  then  inserted  a  funnel,  having  a
fine  tnbe  which  reached  to  the  bottom  of  the  flask.  Through  this  funnel  he  carefully
ponred  a  solution  of  any  salt,  and  (having  removed  the  funnel)  allowed  the  liquid  to
attain  a  definite  temperature  (in  a  water  bath) ;  he  then  filled  the  flask  up  to  the  mark
with  water.  In  this  manner  two  layers  of  liquid  were  obtained,  the  heavy  saline  solution
below  and  water  above.  The  flask  was  then  shaken  in  order  to  accelerate  diffusion,  and
it  was  observed  that  the  volume  became  less  if  the  temperature  remained  constant.
This  can  be  proved  by  calculation,  if  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solutions  and  water  be
known.  Thus  at  15°  one  c.c.  of  a  20  p.c.  solution  of  common  salt  weighs  1*1500  gram,
hence  100  grams  occupy  a  volume  of  86*96  c.c.  As  the  sp.  gr.  of  water  at  15'^  =  0*99916,
therefore  100  grams  of  water  occupy  a  volume  of  100*08  c.c.  The  sum  of  the  volumes  is
187*04  C.C.  After  mixing,  200  grams  of  a  10  p.c.  solution  are  obtained.  Its  specific  gravity
is  1*0725  (at  15^  and  referred  to  water  at  its  maximum  density),  hence  the  200  grams
will  occnpy  a  volume  of  186*48  c.c. The  contraction  is  consequently  equal  to  0*56  c.c.

^  The  contractions  produced  in  the  case  of  the  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  in  water
are  shown  in  the  diagram  Fig.  17  (page  77). Their  maximum  is  10*1  c.o.  per  100  c.c.  of

88  PaiSCIPLlvS OF  CHEMISTRY

evidently  new  Bubstances  are  produced."  The  contraction  which  takes
place  in  solution  is,  however,  very  small,  a  fact  which  depends  on  the
small  compressibility  of  solids  and  liquids,  and  on  the  insignificance  of
the  compressing  for^e  acting  in  solution.''^  The  change  of  volume  which
takes  place  in  the  solution  of  solids  and  liquids,  or  the  alteration  in
specific  gravity  "  corresponding  with  it,  depeoils  on  peculiarities  of  the
dissolving  subitances,  and  of  water,  and,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  h  not
proportional  to  the  quantity  of  the  substance  disso'.ved,^' showing  the

the  solution  t(jnu«l.  A  mnxiinnm  contraction  o(  llS  al  a',  SIS  at  15°,  mnd  8*50  at  W.
taken  place  in  the  solutinn  o!  4<:  paiin  lir  weight  ot  aDhjdroas  alcohol  in  E4  paitH  of
water.  Tliia  t,i)nii1ics  tliat  if,  at  0-,  IS  parts  by  weight  of  alcohol  be  taken  per  S4  parte
by  weifiht  of  natcT,  tlien  thu  sum  ol  tlieir  separate  volomos  will  be  lOl'lG,  and  after

row  Imiil-i .)(  vti.uitf.'  o'  rflimpoBition,  pasiljr  I*  ima^ned  jn
itt.  Til-  r  TTii:liiM:(.i.  of  Michd  and  Kraft  is  paiticolarlj
IWll,  111!  il">  l>.i-i«  o(  their  incomplete  rvsearchea,  they
>f  th«  iipK'iHr  fiT.\\  itf  of  aoluiiona  waa  proportional  to  the
uliiini>  >><  II  •cliiii.Mi,  which  is  only  tme  for  deternunationi
ii-l  to  Iht'  •i-i'.-Liiil  ilf-cimal  place — ui  accarac;  iDSnOlcient
KiiH,  Aoeuratu  mriinirement*  do  not  cooflnn  a  jaopor-
II  many  oilwn«)wlv>nt>ohu  been  generaUyMMptad;

ON  WATER  AND ITS COMPOUNDS  89

existence  of  a  chemical  force  between  the  solvent  and  the  substance
dissolved  which  is  of  the  same  nature  as  in  all  other  forms  of  chemical
reaction.^*

The  feeble  development  of  the  chemical  affinities  acting  in  solutions
of  solids  becomes  evident  from  those  multifarious  methods  by  which

as,  for  example,  for  the  rotatory  power  (with  respect  to  the  plane  of  polarisation)  of  solu-
tions, and  for  their  capillarity,  &c.  Nevertheless,  snch  a  method  is  not  only  still  made
nse  of,  but  even  has  its  advantages  when  applied  to  solutions  within  a  limited  scope — as,
for  instance,  very  weak  solutions,  and  for  a  first  acquaintance  with  the  phenomena
accompanying  solution,  and  also  as  a  means  for  facilitating  the  application  of  miithe-
matical  analysis  to  the  investigation  of  the  phenomenon  of  solution.  Judging  by  the
results  obtained  in  my  researches  on  the  specific  gravity  of  solutions,  I  think  that  in
many  cases  it  would  be  nearer  the  truth  to  take  the  change  of  properties  as  proportional,
not  to  the  amount  of  a  substance  dissolved,  but  to  the  product  of  this  quantity  and  the
amount  of  water  in  which  it  is  dissolved ;  the  more  so  since  many  chemical  relations
vary  in  proportion  to  the  reacting  masses,  and  a  similar  ratio  has  been  established  for
many  phenomena  of  attniction  studied  bj  mechanics.  Tliis  product  is  easily  arrived  at
when  the  quantity  of  water  in  the  solutions  to  be  compared  is  constant,  as  is  shown  in
investigating  the  fall  of  temparature  in  the  formation  of  ice  («/?e  footnot-j  49,  p.  91 ).

*"*  All  the  different  forms  of  chemical  reaction  may  be  said  to  take  place  in  the  process
of  solution.  (1)  Combinations  between  the  solvent  and  the  substance  dissolved,  which
are  more  or  less  stable  (more  or  less  dissociated).  This  form  of  reaction  is  the  most
probable,  and  is  that  mo«t  often  observed.  ('2)  Reactions  of  suhstitution  or  of  double
ilecvfnpoaiiion  between  the  molecules.  Thus  it  may  be  supposed  that  in  tlie  solution  of
sal  ammoniac,  NH4CI,  the  action  of  water  produces  ammonia,  NH4HO,  and  hydrochloric
acid,  HCl,  which  are  dissolved  in  the  water  and  simultaneously  attrac:t  each  otlier.  As
these  solutions  and  many  others  do  indeed  exhibit  signs,  which  are  sonietinics  indis-
putable, of  similar  double  decompositions  (thus  solutions  of  sal-anmionia<;  yield  a  certain
amount  of  ammonia),  it  is  probable  that  this  form  of  reaction  is  more  often  met  with
than  is  generally  thought.  (3)  Reactions  of  isomerism  or  replacement  are  also  probably
met  with  in  solution,  all  the  more  as  here  molecules  of  different  kinds  come  into  intima*>e
contact,  and  it  is  very  likely  that  the  configuration  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecules  under
these  influences  is  somewhat  different  from  what  it  was  in  its  original  and  isolated
state.  One  is  led  to  this  supposition  especially  from  observations  made  on  solutions  of
substances  which  rotate  the  plane  of  polarisation  (and  observations  of  this  kind  are  very
sensitive  with  respect  to  the  atomic  structure  of  molecules),  because  they  show,  for
example  (according  to  Schneider,  1881),  that  strong  solutions  of  malic  acid  rotate  the
plane  of  polarisation  to  the  right,  whilst  its  ammonium  suits  in  all  degrees  of  concentra-
tion rotate  the  plane  of  polarisation  to  the  left.  (4)  Reactions  of  decomposition  under
the  influences  of  solution  are  not  only  rational  in  themselves,  but  have  in  recent  years
been  recognised  by  Arrhenius,  Ostwald,  and  othe^-s,  particularly  on  the  basis  of  electro-
lytic determinations.  If  a  portion  of  the  molecules  of  a  solution  occur  in  a  condition  of
decomposition,  the  other  portion  may  occur  in  a  yet  more  complex  state  of  combination,
just  as  the  velocity  of  the  motion  of  -different  gaseous  molecules  may  be  far  from  being
the  same  {9ee  Note  34,  p.  81).

It  is,  therefore,  very  probable  that  the  reactions  taking  place  in  solution  vary  both
qnantitatively  and  qualitatively  with  the  mass  of  water  in  the  solution,  and  the  great
difficulty  in  arriving  at  a  definite  conclusion  as  to  the  nature  of  the  chemical  relations
which  take  place  in  the  process  of  solution  will  be  understood,  and  if  besides  this
the  existence  of  a  physical  process,  like  the  sliding  between  and  interpenetration  of
two  homogeneous  liquids,  be  also  recognised  in  solution,  then  the  complexity  of  the
problem  as  to  the  actual  nature  of  solutions,  which  is  now  to  the  fore,  appears  in  its
true  light.  However,  the  efforts  which  are  now  being  applied  to  the  solution  of  this
problem  are  so  numerous  and  of  such  varied  aspect  that  they  will  afford  future

90  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

their  solutions  are  decomposedy  whether  they  be  saturated  or  not.  On
heating  (absorption  of  heat),  on  cooling,  and  by  internal  forces  alone,
aqueous  solutions  in  many  cases  separate  into  their  components  or  their
definite  compounds  with  water.  The  water  contained  in  solutions  is
removed  from  them  as  vapour,  or,  by  freezing,  in  the  form  of  ice,^^  but
the  tension  o/t/te  vapour  of  water  ^"^  held  in  solution  is  less  than  that  of
water  in  a  free  state,  and  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice  from
solutions  is  lower  than  0°.  Further,  both  the  diminution  of  vapour  ten-
sion and  the  lowering  of  the  freezing  point  proceed,  in  dilute  solutions,
almost  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  a  substance  dissolved.^^ Thus,  if

investigators  a  vast  mass  of  material  towards  the  construction  of  a  complete  theory
of  solution.

For  my  part,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  study  of  tiie  physical  properties  of  aolutiona
(and  especially  of  weak  ones)  which  now  obtains,  cannot  give  any  fundamental  and  com-
plete solution  of  the  problem  whatever  (although  it  should  add  much  to  both  the
provinces  of  physics  and  chemistry),  but  that,  parallel  with  it,  should  be  undertaken  the
btudy  of  the  influence  of  temperature,  and  especially  of  low  temperatures,  the  application
to  solutions  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat,  and  the  comparative  study  of  the  chemical
properties  of  solutions.  The  beginning  of  all  this  is  already  established,  but  it  is
impossible  to  consider  in  so  short  an  exposition  of  chemistry  the  farther  efforts  of  this
kind  which  have  been  made  up  to  the  present  date.

^'^  If  solutions  are  regarded  as  being  in  a  state  of  dissociation  (see  footnote  19,  p.  64)  it
would  be  expected  that  they  would  contain  free  molecules  of  water,  which  form  one  of  the
products  of  the  decomposition  of  those  definite  compounds  whose  formation  is  the  cause
of  solution.  In  separating  as  ice  or  vapour,  water  makes,  with  a  solution,  a  heteroge-
neouii  system  (made  up  of  substances  in  different  physical  states)  similar,  for  instance,
to  the  formation  of  a  precipitate  or  volatile  substance  in  reactions  of  double  decom-
position.

^7  If  the  substance  dissolved  is  non- volatile  (Hke  salt  or  sugar),  or  only  slightly  vola-
tile, then  the  whole  of  the  tension  of  the  vapour  g^ven  off  is  due  to  the  water,  but  if  a
solution  of  a  volatile  substance — for  instance,  a  gas  or  a  volatile  liquid — evaporates,  then
only  a  portion  of  the  pressure  belongs  to  the  water,  and  the  whole  pressure  obser\'ed
consists  of  the  sum  of  tlie  pressures  of  the  vapours  of  the  water  and  of  the  substance
dissolved.  The  majority  of  researches  bear  on  the  first  case,  which  will  be  spoken  of
presently,  and  the  observations  of  D.  P.  Konovaloff  (18H1)  refer  to  the  second  case.  He
showed  tliat  in  the  case  of  two  volatile  liquids,  mutually  soluble  in  each  other,  forming
two  layers  of  saturated  solutions  (for  example,  ether  and  water.  Note  20,  p.  67),  both  solu-
tions have  an  equal  vapour  tension  (in  the  case  in  point  the  tension  of  both  is  equal  to
431  mm.  of  mercury  at  19'8°).  Further,  he  found  that  for  solutions  which  are  formed
in  all  proportions,  the  tension  is  either  greater  (solutions  of  alcohol  and  water)  or  less
(solutions  of  formic  acid)  than  that  which  answers  to  tlie  rectilinear  change  (proportional
to  the  composition)  from  the  tension  of  water  to  the  tension  of  the  substance  dissolved  ;
thus,  the  tension,  for  example,  of  a  70  p.c.  solution  of  formic  acid  is  less,  at  all  tempera-
tures, than  the  tension  of  water  and  of  formic  acid  itself.  In  tliis  case  the  tension  of  a
solution  is  never  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  tensions  of  the  dissolving  liquids,  as  Regnault
already  showed  when  he  distinguished  this  case  from  that  in  which  a  mixture  of  liquids,
which  are  insoluble  in  each  other,  evaporates.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  a  mutual
action  occurs  in  solution,  which  diminishes  the  vapour  tensions  proper  to  the  individual
substances,  as  would  be  expected  on  the  supposition  of  the  formation  of  compounds  iu
solutions,  because  the  elasticity  then  always  diminishes.

^  This  amount  is  usually  expressed  by  the  weight  of  the  substance  dissolved  per
100  parts  by  weight  of  water. Probably  it  would  be  better  to  express  it  by  the  quantity  of

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  91

per  100  grams  o!  water  there  be  in  solution  1,  5,  10  grams  of  common
salt  (NaCl),  then  at  100°  the  vapour  tension  of  the  solutions  decreases
by  4,  21,  43  mm.  of  the  barometric  column,  against  760  mm.,  or  the
vapour  tension  of  water,  whilst  the  freezing  points  are  —  0*58°,  —  2*91°,
and  —6*10°  respectively. The  above  figures*^  are  almost  proportional

the  substance  in  a  definite  volume  of  the  solution — for  instance,  in  a  litre — or  by  the
ratios  of  the  number  of  molecules  of  water  and  of  the  substance  dissolved.

^  The  variation  of  the  vapour  tension  of  solutions  has  been  investigated  by  many.
The  best  known  researches  are  those  of  Wiillner  in  Germany  (1858-1860)  and  of  Tamman
in  Russia  (1887).  The  researches  on  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice  from  various
solutions  are  also  very  numerous;  Blagden  (1788),  RUdori!  (1861),  and  De  Coppet  (1871)
established  the  beginning,  but  this  kind  of  investigation  takes  its  chief  interest  from  the
work  of  Raoult,  begun  in  1882  on  aqueous  solutions,  and  afterwards  continued  for  solu-
tions in  various  other  easily  frozen  liquids — for  instance,  benzene,  CeH^  (melts  at  4*96°),
acetic  acid,  C2H|0-2  (16*75°),  and  others.  An  especially  important  interest  is  attached  to
these  cryosoopic  investigations  of  Raoult  in  France  on  the  depression  of  the  freezing
point,  because  he  took  solutions  of  many  well-known  carbon-compounds  and  discovered
a  simple  relation  between  the  molecular  weight  of  the  substances  and  the  temperature
of  crystallisation  of  the  solvent,  which  enabled  this  kind  of  research  to  be  applied  to  the
investigation  of  the  nature  of  substances.  We  shall  meet  with  the  application  of  this
method  later  on  {see  also  Chapter  VII.),  and  at  present  will  only  cite  the  deduction
arrived  at  from  these  results.  The  solution  of  one-hundredth  part  of  that  molecu'ar
gram  weight  which  corresponds  with  the  formula  of  a  substance  dissolved  (for  example,
NaCl  =  58*5,  C2Hy0  =  46,  &c.)  in  100  parls  of  a  solvent  lowers  the  freezing  point  of  its
solution  in  water  0185°,  in  benzene  0*49°,  and  in  acetic  acid  039°,  or  twice  as  much  as
with  water.  And  as  in  weak  solutions  the  depression  or  fall  of  freezing  point  is  propor-
tional to  the  amount  of  tlie  substance  dissolved,  it  follows  that  the  fall  of  freezing  point
for  all  other  solutions  may  be  calculated  from  this  rule.  So,  for  instance,  the  weight
which  corresponds  with  the  formula  of  acetone,  CjHeO  is  58  ;  a  solution  containing  2'4'2,
6*22,  and  12*35  g^ros  of  acetone  per  100  grams  of  water  forms  ice  (according  to  the
determinations  of  Beckmann)  at  0*770°,  1*930°,  and  3*820°,  and  these  figures  show  that
with  a  solution  containing  0*58  gram  of  acetone  per  100  of  water  the  fall  of  the  tempera-
ture of  the  formation  of  ice  will  be  0*185°,  0*180°,  and  0*179°.  It  must  be  remarked  that
the  law  of  proportionality  between  the  fall  of  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice,  and
the  composition  of  a  solution,  is  in  general  only  approximate,  and  is  only  applicable  to
weak  solutions  (Pickering  and  others).

We  will  here  remark  tliat  the  theoretical  interest  of  this  subject  was  strengthened
on  the  discovery  of  the  connection  existing  between  the  fall  of  tension,  the  fall  of  the
temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice,  of  osmotic  pressure  (Van't  Uoff,  Note  19),  and  of  the
electrical  conductivity  of  solutions,  and  we  will  therefore  supplement  what  we  have
already  said  on  the  subject  by  some  short  remarks  on  the  method  of  cryoscopic  investi-
gations, although  the  details  of  the  subject  form  the  subject  of  more. special  works  on
physical  chemistry  (such  as  Ostwald's  Lehrbuch  der  allgemeinen  Cheiniej  1891-1894,
2  vols.)

In  order  to  determine  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice  (or  of  crystallisation
of  other  solvents),  a  solution  of  known  strength  is  prepared  and  poured  into  a  cylindrical
vessel  surrounded  by  a  second  similar  vessel,  leaving  a  layer  of  air  between  the  two,  which,
being  a  bad  conductor,  prevents  any  rapid  change  of  temperature.  The  bulb  of  a  sensi-
tive and  corrected  thermometer  is  immersed  in  the  solution,  and  also  a  bent  platinum
wire  for  stirring  the  solution ;  the  whole  is  then  cooled  (by  immersing  the  apparatus  in
a  freezing  mixture),  and  the  temperature  at  which  ice  begins  to  separate  observed.  If
the  temperature  at  first  falls  slightly  lower,  it  nevertheless  becomes  constant  when  ice
begins  to  form.  By  then  allowing  the  liquid  to  get  just  warm,  and  again  observing  the
temperatore  of  the  formation  of  ice,  an  exact  determination  may  be  arrived  at. It  is  still

92  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

to  the  amounts  of  salt  in  solution  (1,  5,  and  10  per  100  of  water).
Furthermore,  it  has  been  shown  by  experiment  that  the  ratio  of  the

better  to  take  a  large  mass  of  solution,  and  induce  the  formation  of  the  first  crystals  by
dropping  a  small  lump  of  ice  into  the  solution  already  partially  over-cooled.  Tliis  only
imperceptibly  changes  the  composition  of  the  solution.  The  observation  should  be  made
at  tlie  ix)int  of  formation  of  only  a  very  small  amount  of  crystals,  as  otherwise  the
composition  of  tbc  solution  will  become  altered  from  their  separation.  Every  precaution
must  be  taken  to  prevent  the  access  of  moisture  to  the  interior  of  the  apparatus,  which
might  also  alter  the  composition  of  the  solution  or  properties  of  the  solvent  (for  instance,
when  using  acetic  acid).

With  respect  to  the  depression  of  dilute  solutions  it  is  known — (1)  That  the  depression
increases  in  almost  direct  proportion  to  the  amount  of  the  substance  in  solution  (always
per  100  parts  of  water),  for  example,  for  KCl  when  the  solution  contains  1  part  of  salt
(per  100  parts  of  water)  the  depression  =  0*45  ,  when  the  solution  contains  2  i)arts  of  salt
=  0*90*^,  with  10  parts  of  salt  =  44°.  (2)  The  greater  the  molecular  weight  expressed  by
the  formula  (see  Cliapier  VIL),  and  designated  by  M,  the  less,  under  other  similar  condi-
tions, will  be  the  depression  d,,  and  therefore  if  the  concentratitm  of  a  solution  (the
amount  by  weight  of  substance  dissolved  per  100  parts  of  water)  be  designated  by  />,  then

the  fraction  M-  or  the  molecular  depression  for  a  given  class  of  substances  « ill  be  a

P
constant  quantity ;  for  example,  in  the  case  of  methyl  alcohol  in  water  17*3,  for  acetone

about  180,  for  sugar  about  185.  (3)  In  general  the  molecular  depression  for  substances
whose  solutions  do  not  conduct  an  electric  current  is  about  185,  while  for  acids,  salts,
and  such  like  substances  whose  solutions  do  conduct  electricity,  it  is  i  times  greater ;  for
instance,  for  HCl,  KI,  HNO3,  KHO,  &c.,  about  8(5  (t  is  nearly  2),  for  borax  about  66,  and
so  on  where  i  varies  in  the  same  manner  as  it  does  in  the  case  of  the  osmotic  pressure  of
solutions  (Note  19).  (4)  Different  solvents  (water,  acetic  acid,  benzene,  d:c.)  have  each
their  corresponding  constants  of  molecular  depression  (which  have  a  certain  remote
connection  with  their  molecular  weight) ;  for  example,  for  acetic  acid  the  molecular
depression  is  about  39  and  not  19  (as  it  is  for  water),  for  benzeiic  49,  for  methyl  alcohol
about  17,  (^c.  (5)  If  the  molecular  weight  M  of  a  substance  be  unknown,  then  in  the
case  of  non-conductors  of  electricity  or  for  a  given  group,  it  may  be  found  by  determining
the  depression,  d,  for  a  given  concentration,  p ;  for  example,  in  the  case  of  peroxide  of
hydrogen,  which  is  a  non-conductor  of  electricity,  the  molecular  weight,  M,  was  found  to
be  nearly  34,  i.e.  equal  to  H2O.2.

Similar  results  have  also  been  found  for  the  fall  in  the  vapour  tension  of  solutions
(Note  51),  and  for  the  rise  of  their  boiling  points  (hence  these  data  may  also  serve  for
determining  the  molecular  weight  of  a  substance  in  solution,  as  is  shortly  described  in
Chapter  VII.,  Note  27''").  And  as  these  conclusions  are  also  applictible  in  the  case  of
osmotic  pressure  (Note  19),  and  a  variation  in  the  magnitude  of  /,  in  passing  from  solu-
tions which  do  not  c-onduct  an  electric  current  to  those  which  do  conduct  electricity  is
everywhere  remarked,  so  it  was  natural  to  here  seek  that  causal  connection  which  Arr-
henius  (1HH8),  Ostwald,  and  others  expected  to  find  in  the  supposition  that  a  portion  of
tlie  substance  of  the  electrolyte  is  already  decomposed  in  the  very  act  of  solution,  into
its  ions  (for  example,  NaCl  into  Na  and  CI),  or  into  the  atoms  of  those  individual  sub-
stances which  make  tlieir  appearance  in  electrolysis,  and  in  this  way  to  explain  the  fact
that  I  is  greater  for  those  bodies  which  conduct  an  electric  current.  We  will  not  consider
here  this  supitosition,  known  as  the  hypothesis  of  '  electrolytic  dissociation,*  not  only
because  it  wholly  belongs  to  that  special  branch — physical  chemistry,  and  gives  scarcely
any  help  towaids  explaining  the  chemical  relations  of  solutions  (particularly  their  passage
into  definite  compounds,  their  reactions,  and  their  very  formation),  but  also  because — (1)
all  the  above  diita  (for  constant  depression,  osmotic  pressure,  (V:c.)  only  refer  to  dilute
solutions,  and  are  not  a])plicable  to  strong  solutions ;  whilst  the  chemical  interest  in
strong  solutions  is  not  less  than  in  dUute  solutions,  and  the  transition  from  the  former
into  the  latter  is  consecutive  and  inevitable;  (2)  because  in  all  homogeneous  bodies

ON-  WATER  AND  ITS COMPOUNDS  93

diminution  of  vapour  tension  to  the  vapour  tension  of  water  at  different
temperatures  in  a  given  solution  is  an  almost  constant  quantity,'^^  and
that  for  every  (dilute)  solution  the  ratio  between  the  diminution  of  vapour
tension  and  of  the  freezing  point  is  also  a  tolerably  constant  quantity.*^^

(although  it  may  be  insoluble  and  not  an  electrolyte)  a  portion  of  the  atoms  may  be
supposed  (Clausius)  to  be  passmg  from  one  particle  to  another  (Chapter  X.,  Note  28),
and  as  it  were  dissociated,  but  there  are  no  reasons  for  believing  that  such  a  phenomenon
is  proper  to  the  solutions  of  electrolytes  only  ;  (3)  because  no  essential  mark  of  difference
is  observed  between  the  solution  of  electrolytes  and  non-conductors,  although  it  might  be
expected  there  would  be  according  to  Arrhenius'  hj-pothesis ;  (4)  because  it  is  most
reasonable  to  suppose  the  formation  of  new,  more  complex,  but  unstable  and  easily  disso-
ciated compounds  in  the  act  of  solution,  than  a  decomposition,  even  partial,  of  the
substances  taken  ;  (5)  because  if  Arrhenius'  hypothesis  be  accepted  it  becomes  necessary
to  admit  the  existence  in  solutions  of  free  ions,  like  the  atoms  CI  or  Na,  without  any
apparent  expenditure  of  the  energy  necessary  for  their  disruption,  and  if  in  this  case  it
can  be  explained  why  i  then  —2,  it  is  not  at  all  clear  why  solutions  of  MgSO^  give  i  =  1,
although  the  solution  does  conduct  an  electric  current ;  (6)  because  in  dilute  solutions,
the  approximative  proportionality  between  the  depression  and  concentration  may  be
recognised,  while  admitting  the  formation  of  hydrates,  with  as  much  right  as  in  admitting
the  solution  of  anhydrous  substances,  and  if  the  formation  of  hydrates  be  recognised  it
is  easier  to  admit  that  a  portion  of  these  hydrates  is  decomposed  than  to  accept  the
breaking-up  into  ions  ;  (7)  because  the  best  conductors  of  electricity  are  solutions  like  the
sulphates  in  which  it  is  necesstiry  to  recognise  the  formation  of  associated  systems  or
hydrates;  (H)  because  the  cause  of  electro-conductivity  can  be  sooner  looked  for  in  this
affinity  and  this  combination  of  the  substance  dissolved  with  the  solvent,  as  is  seen  from
the  fact,  that  (D.  P.  Konovaloff)  neither  aniline  nor  acetic  acid  alone  conduct  an  electric
current,  a  solution  of  aniline  in  water  conducts  it  badly  (and  here  tlie  affinity  is  very
small),  while  a  solution  of  aniline  in  acetic  acid  forms  a  goo<i  electrolyte,  in  which,  without
doubt,  chemical  forces  are  acting,  bringing  aniline,  like  ammonia,  into  combination  with
the  acetic  acid ;  which  is  evident  from  the  researches  mode  by  Prof.  Konovaloff  upon
mixtures  (8<^)lutions)  of  aniline  and  other  amines;  and,  lastly,  (9)  because  I,  together  with
many  of  the  chemists  of  the  present  day,  cannot  regard  the  hypothesis  of  electrol5rtic
dissociation  in  the  form  given  to  it  up  to  now  by  Arrhenius  and  Ostwald,  as  answering
to  the  sum  total  of  the  chemical  data  respecting  solutions  and  dissociation  in  general.
Thus,  although  I  consider  it  superfluous  to  discuss  further  the  evolution  of  the  above
theory  of  solutions,  still  I  tliink  that  it  would  be  most  useful  for  students  of  chemistry  to
consider  all  the  data  referring  to  tliis  subject,  which  can  be  found  in  the  Zeitschrift  fur
physikalische  Chemip,  1888-1H94.

^^  This  fact,  which  was  esttiblished  by  Gay-Lussac,  Pierson,  and  v.  Babo,  is  confirmed
by  the  latest  obser\ations,  and  enables  us  to  express  not  only  the  fall  of  tension  (p—p')

itself,  but  its  ratio  to  the  tension  of  water  (^^^  \ It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  the

absence  of  any  chemical  action,  the  fall  of  pressure  is  either  very  small,  or  does  not
exist  at  all  (note  33),  and  is  not  pro^Kirtional  to  the  quantity  of  the  sub>tance  added.  As
a  rule,  the  tension  is  then  equal,  according  to  the  law  of  Dalton,  to  the  sum  of  the
tensions  of  the  substances  taken.  Hence  liquids  which  are  insoluble  in  each  other  (for
example,  water  and  chloride  of  carbon)  present  a  tension  equal  to  the  sum  of  their  indi-
vidual tensions,  and  therefore  such  a  mixture  boils  at  a  lower  temperature  than  the  more
volatile  liquid  (Magnus,  Regnault).

*^  If,  in  the  example  of  common  salt,  the  fall  of  tension  be  divided  by  the  tension  of
water,  a  figure  is  obtained  which  is  nearly  105  times  less  than  the  magnitude  of  the  fall
of  temperature  of  formation  of  ice.  This  correlation  was  theoretically  deduced  by  Gold-
berg, on  the  basis  of  the  application  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat,  and  is  repeated  by
many  investigated  solutions.

94  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  diminution  of  the  vapour  tension  of  solutions  explains  the  rise
in  boiling  point  due  to  tha  solution  of  solid  non- volatile  bodies  in
water.  The  temperature  of  a  vapour  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  solu-
tion from  which  it  is  generated,  and  therefore  it  follows  that  the
aqueous  vapour  given  otF  from  a  solution  will  be  superheated.  A
saturated  solution  of  common  salt  boils  at  103*4°,  a  solution  of  335
parts  of  nitre  in  100  parts  of  water  at  1159^,  and  a  solution  of  325
parts  of  potassium  chloride  in  100  parts  of  water  at  179°,  if  the
temperature  of  ebullition  be  determined  by  immersing  the  thermometer
bulb  in  the  liquid  itself.  This  is  another  proof  of  the  bond  which
exists  between  water  and  the  substance  dissolved.  And  this  bond  is
seen  still  more  clearly  in  those  cases  (for  example,  in  the  solution  of
nitric  or  formic  acid  in  water)  where  the  solution  boils  at  a  higher
temperature  than  either  water  or  the  volatile  substance  dissolved  in  it.
For  this  reason  tho  solutions  of  certain  gases — for  instance,  hydriodic
or  hydrochloric  acid — boil  above  100°.

The  separation  of  ice  from  solutions  ^^  explains  both  the  phenome-
non, well  known  to  sailors,  that  the  ice  formed  from  salt  water  gives
fresh  water,  and  also  the  fact  that  by  freezing,  just  as  by  evaporation,
a  solution  is  obtained  which  is  richer  in  salts  than  before.  This  is
taken  advantage  of  in  cold  countries  for  obtaining  a  liquor  from  sea
water,  which  is  then  evaporated  for  the  extraction  of  salt.

On  the  removal  of  part  of  the  water  from  a  solution  (by  evaporation
or  the  separation  of  ice),  a  saturated  solution  should  be  obtained,  and
then  the  solid  substance  dissolved  should  separate  out.  Solutions  satu-
rated at  a  certain  temperature  should  also  separate  out  a  corresponding
portion  of  the  substance  dissolved  if  they  be  reduced,  by  cooling,"*^  to  a
temperature  at  which  the  water  can  no  longer  hold  the  former  quantity
of  the  substance  in  solution. If  this  separation,  by  cooling  a  saturated

**  Fritzsche  showed  that  solutions  of  certain  colouring  matters  yield  colourless  ice,
which  clearly  proves  the  passage  of  water  only  into  a  solid  state,  without  any  intermix-
ture of  the  substance  dissolved,  although  the  possibility  of  the  admixture  in  certain  other
cases  cannot  be  denied.

*5  As  the  solubility  of  certain  substances  (for  example,  coniine,  cerium  sulphate,  and
others)  decreases  with  a  rise  of  temperature  (between  certain  limits— see,  for  example,
note  24),  so  tliese  substances  do  not  separate  from  their  saturated  solutions  on  cooling
but  on  heat'ng.  Thus  a  solution  of  manganese  sulphate,  saturated  at  70°,  becomes  cloudy
on  further  heating.  The  point  at  which  a  substance  separates  from  its  solution  with  a
change  of  temperature  gives  an  easy  means  of  determining  the  co-efficient  of  solubility,
and  this  was  taken  advantage  of  by  Prof.  Alexeeff  for  determining  the  solubility  of  many
substances.  The  phenomenon  and  method  of  observation  are  here  essentially  the  same
as  in  tho  determination  of  the  tenii)erature  of  formation  of  ice.  If  a  solution  of  a  sub-
stance which  separates  out  on  heating  be  taken  (for  example,  the  sulphate  of  calcium
or  manganese),  then  at  a  certain  fall  of  temperature  ice  will  separate  out  from  it,  and  at
a  certain  rise  of  temperature  the  salt  will  separate  out. From  this  example,  and  from

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  95

solution  or  by  evaporation,  take  place  slowly,  crystals  of  the  substance
dissolved  are  in  many  cases  formed  ;  and  this  is  the  method  by  which
crystals  of  soluble  salts  are  usually  obtained.  Certain  solids  very
easily  separate  ou^  from  their  solutions  in  perfectly  formed  crystals,
which  may  attain  very  large  dimensions.  Such  are  nickel  sulphate,
alum^  sodium  carbonate,  chrome-alum,  copper  sulphate,  potassium  ferri-
cyanide,  and  a  whole  series  of  other  salts.  The  most  remarkable  circum-
stance in  this  is  that  many  solids  ia  separating  out  from  an  aqueous
solution  retain  a  portion  of  water,  forming  crystallised  solid  substances
which  contain  water.  A  portion  of  the  water  previously  in  the  solution
remains  in  the  separated  crystals.  The  water  which  is  thus  retained
is  called  the  uxiter  of  crystallisation.  Alum,  copper  sulphate,  Glauber's
salt,  and  magnesium  sulphate  contain  such  water,  but  neither  sal-
ammoniac,  table  salt,  nitre,  potassium  chlorate,  silver  nitrate,  nor
sugar,  contains  any  water  of  crystallisation.  One  and  the  same
substance  may  separate  out  from  a  solution  with  or  without  water
of  crystallisation,  according  to  the  temperature  at  which  the  crystals  are
formed.  Thus  common  salt  in  crystallising  from  its  solution  in  water
at  the  ordinary  or  at  a  higher  temperature  does  not  contain  water  of
crystallisation.  But  if  its  separation  from  the  solution  takes  place
at  a  low  temperature,  namely  below  —5°,  then  the  crystals  contain
38  parts  of  water  in  100  parts.  Crystals  of  the  same  substance  which
Separate  out  at  different  temperatures  may  contain  different  amounts
of  water  of  crystallisation.  This  proves  to  us  that  a  solid  dissolved  in
water  may  firm  various  compounds  with  it,  differing  in  their  properties
and  composition,  and  capable  of  appearing  in  a  solid  separate  form  like
many  ordinary  definite  compounds.  This  is  indicated  by  the  numerous
properties  and  phenomena  connected  with  solutions,  and  gives  reason
for  thinking  that  there  exist  in  solutions  themselves  such  compounds  of
the  substance  dissolved,  and  the  solvent  or  compounds  similar  to  them,
only  in  a  liquid  partly  decomposed  form.  Even  the  colour  of  solutions
may  often  confirm  this  opinion.  Copper  sulphate  forms  crystals  having
a  blue  colour  and  containing  water  of  crystallisation.  If  the  water  of
crystallisation  be  removed  by  heating  the  crystals  to  redness,  a  colour-
less anhydrous  substance  is  obtained  (a  white  powder).  From  thus  it
may  be  seen  that  the  blue  colour  belongs  to  the  compound  of  the  copper
salt  with  water.  Solutions  of  copper  sulphate  are  all  blue,  and  con-
sequently they  contain  a  compound  similar  to  the  compound  formed  by

general  considerations,  it  is  clear  that  the  separation  of  a  substance  dissolved  from  a
solution  should  present  a  certain  analogy  to  the  separation  of  ice  from  a  solution.  In
both  cases,  a  heterogeneous  system  of  a  solid  and  a  liquid  is  formed  from  a  homogeneous
(liquid)  system.

96  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

the  salt  with  its  water  of  crystallisation.  Crystals  of  cobalt  chloride
when  dissolved  in  an  anhydrous  liquid — like  alcohol,  for  instance — give
a  blue  solution,  but  when  tliey  are  dissolved  in  water  a  red  solution  is
obtained.  Crystals  from  the  aqueous  solution,  according  to  Professor
Potilitzin,  contain  six  times  as  much  water  (CoClajBHjO)  for  a  given
weight  of  the  salt,  as  those  violet  crystals  (CoCl2,H20)  which  are
formed  by  the  evaporation  of  an  alcoholic  solution.

That  solutions  contain  particular  compounds  with  water  is  further
shown  by  the  phenomena  of  supersaturated  solutions,  of  so-called  cryo-
hydrates,  of  solutions  of  certain  acids  having  constant  boiling  points,
and  the  properties  of  compounds  containing  water  of  crystallisation
whose  data  it  is  indispensable  to  keep  in  view  in  the  consideration  of
solutions.

Supersaturated  solutions  exhibit  the  following  phenomena  : — On
the  refrigeration  of  a  saturated  solution  of  certain  salts, •^'*  if  the  liquid
be  brought  under  certain  conditions,  the  excess  of  the  solid  may
sometimes  remain  in  solution  and  not  separate  out.  A  great  number
of  substances,  and  more  especially  sodium  sulphate,  NajSO^,  or
Glauber's  salt,  easily  form  supersaturated  solutions.  If  boiling  water
be  saturated  with  this  salt,  and  the  solution  be  poured  oft'  from  any
remaining  undissolved  salt,  and,  the  boiling  being  still  continued,  the
vessel  holding  the  solution  be  well  closed  by  cotton  wool,  or  by  fusing
up  the  vessel,  or  by  covering  the  solution  with  a  layer  of  oil,  then  it
will  be  found  that  this  saturated  solution  does  not  separate  out  any
Glauber's  salt  whatever  on  cooling  down  to  the  ordinary  or  even  to  a
much  lower  temperature  ;  although  without  the  above  precautions  a
salt  separates  out  on  cooling,  in  the  form  of  crystals,  which  contain
NajSO^lOH.^O — that  is,  180  parts  of  water  for  142  parts  of  anhydrous
salt.  The  supersaturated  solution  may  be  moved  about  or  shaken
inside  the  vessel  holding  it,  and  no  crystallisation  will  take  place  ;  the
salt  remains  in  the  solution  in  as  large  an  amount  as  at  a  higher  tempera-
ture. If  the  vessel  holding  the  supersaturated  solution  be  opened  and
a  crystal  of  Glauber's  salt  be  thrown  in,  crystallisation  suddenly  takes
place.^* A  considerable  rise  in  temperature  is  noticed  during  this

*'  Those  salts  which  separate  out  with  water  of  crystivllisation  and  pive  several
crystalh>hydrates  fomi  suiKirsatiirated  solutions  with  th3  greatest  facility,  and  the  phe-
nomenon is  much  more  common  than  was  previously  imagined.  The  first  data  were
given  in  the  last  centurj'  by  Loewitz,  in  St.  Petersburg.  Numerous  researches  have
proved  that  sup<'rsaturatod  solutions  do  not  differ  from  ordinary  solutions  in  any  of  their
essential  properties.  Tlie  variations  in  specific  gravity,  vapour  tension,  formation  of  ice,
&c.,  take  place  according  to  the  ordinarj^  laws.

*^  Inasmuch  as  air,  as  has  been  shown  by  direct  experiment,  contains,  although  in
very  small  (juantities,  minute  crjstals  of  saits,  and  among  them  sodium  sulphate,  air  can
bring  about  the  crystallisation  of  a  KUper-afttnrated  solution  of  sodium  sulphate  in  an  open

ON  WATER  AND ITS COMPOUNDS  97

rapid  separation  of  crystals,  which  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  salt,
previously  in  a  liquid  state,  passes  into  a  solid  state.  This  bears  some  re-
semblance to  the  fact  that  water  may  be' cooled  below  0°  (even  to  — 10®)
if  it  be  left  at  rest,  under  certain  circumstances,  and  evolves  heat  in
suddenly  crystallising.  Although  from  this  point  of  view  there  is  a
resemblance,  yet  in  reality  the  phenomenon  of  supersaturated  solutions
is  much  more  complicated.  Thus,  on  cooling,  a  saturated  solution  of
Glauber's  salt  deposits  crystals  containing  Na2S04,7H20,"'^  or  126  parts

vessel,  but  it  ban  no  effect  on  saturated  solutions  of  certain  other  salts ;  for  example,  lead
acetate.  According  to  the  observations  of  De  Boisbaudran,  Gemez,  and  others,  isomor-
phons  salts  (analogous  in  composition)  are  capable  of  inducing  crystallisation.  Thus,  a
sui>ersaturated  solution  of  nickel  sulphate  crystallises  by  contact  with  crystals  of  sul-
phates of  other  metals  analogous  to  it,  such  as  those  of  magnesium,  cobalt,  copper,  and
manganese.  The  crystallisation  of  a  supersaturated  solution,  set  up  by  the  contact  of
a  minute  crystal,  starts  from  it  in  rays  with  a  definite  velocity,  and  it  is  evident  that
the  crystals  as  they  form  propagate  the  crystallisation  in  definite  directions.  This
phenomenon  recalls  the  evolution  of  organisms  from  germs.  An  attraction  of  similar
molecules  ensues,  and  they  dispose  themselves  in  definite  similar  forms.

'^  At  the  present  time  a  view  is  very  generally  accepted,  which  regards  supersaturated
solutions  as  homogeneous  systems,  which  pass  into  heterogeneous  systems  (composed  of
a  liquid  and  a  solid  substance),  in  all  respects  exactly  resembling  the  passage  of  water
cooled  below  its  freezmg  point  into  ice  and  water,  or  the  passage  of  crystals  of  rhombic
sulphur  into  monoclinic  crystals,  and  of  the  monoclinic  crystals  into  rhombic.  Although
many  phenomena  of  su|)ersaturatiou  are  thus  clearly  understood,  yet  the  spontaneous  for-
mation of  the  unstable  hepta-hydrated  salt  (with  TH.^O),  in  the  place  of  the  more  stable
deca-hydrated  salt  (with  mol.  lOH^O),  indicates  a  property  of  a  saturated  solution  of
sodium  sulphate  which  obliges  one  to  admit  that  it  has  a  different  structure  from  an
ordinary  solution.  Stcherbacheff  asserts,  on  the  basis  of  his  researches,  that  a  solution
of  the  deca-hydrated  salt  gives,  on  evaporation,  without  the  aid  of  heat,  the  deca-hydrated
salt,  whilst  after  heating  above  88^  it  foi*ms  a  supersaturated  solution  and  the  hepta-
hydrated  salt.  But  in  order  that  this  view  should  be  accepted,  some  facts  must  be  dis-
coTered  distinguishing  solutions  (which  are,  according  to  this  view,  isomeric)  containing
the  hepta-hydrated  salt  from  those  containing  the  deca-hydrated  salt,  and  all  efforts  in  this
direction  (the  study  of  the  proi>erties  of  the  solutions)  have  given  negative  results.  As
some  crystallohydrates  of  salts  (alums,  sugar  of  lead,  calcium  chloride)  melt  straightway
(without  separating  out  anything),  whilst  others  (like  Na...SO4,10H2Oj  are  broken  up,
then  it  may  be  that  the  latter  are  only  in  a  state  of  equilibrium  at  a  higher  temperature
than  their  melting  point.  It  may  here  be  observed  that  in  melting  crystals  of  the  deca-
hydrated  salt,  there  is  formed,  besides  the  solid  anhydrous  salt,  a  saturated  solution
giving  the  hepta-hydrated  salt,  so  that  this  passage  from  the  deca-  to  the  hepta-hydrated
salt,  and  the  reverse,  takes  place  with  the  formation  of  the  anhydrous  (or,  it  may  be,
inono-hydrated)  salt.

Moreover,  supersaturation  (Potilitziu,  1889)  only  takes  phure  with  those  substances
which  are  capable  of  giving  several  modifications  or  several  crystallohydrates,  i.e.  super-
saturated solutions  separate  out,  besides  the  stable  normal  crystallohydrate,  hydrates
containing  less  water  and  also  the  anhydrous  salt.  This  degree  of  saturation  acts  upon
the  substance  dissolved  in  a  like  manner  to  heat.  Sulphate  of  nickel  in  a  solution  at
15^  to  20*^  separates  out  rhombic  crystals  with  TH^O,  at  30°  to  40°  cubical  crystals,  with
6HaO,  at  50°  to  70°  monoclinic  crystals,  also  containing  BH^O.  Crystals  of  the  same
composition  separate  out  from  supersaturated  solutions  at  one  temperature  (17°  to  19°),
but  at  different  degrees  of  saturation,  as  was  shown  by  Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran.  The
capacity  to  voluntarily  separate  out  slightly  hydrated  or  anhydrous  salts  by  the  intro-

VOL.  I.  H

98  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

of  water  per  142  parts  of  anhydrous  salt,  and  not  180  parts  of  water,
as  in  the  above-mentioned  salt.  The  crystals  containing  TH^O  are
distinguished  for  their  instability  ;  if  they  stand  in  contact  not  only
with  crystals  of  Na2SO4,10H2O,  but  with  many  other  substances,  they
immediately  become  opaque,  forming  a  mixture  of  anhydrous  and  deca-
hydrated  salts.  It  is  evident  that  between  water  and  a  soluble  sub-
stance there  may  be  established  different  kinds  of  greater  or  less  stable
equilibrium,  of  which  solutions  form  a  particular  case.*^

duction  of  a  crystal  into  the  Holution  is  common  to  all  8upersaturated  solations.  If  a
salt  forms  a  suixirsaturated  solution,  then  one  would  expect,  according  to  this  view,  that
it  should  exist  in  the  form  of  several  hydrates  or  in  several  modifications.  Thus
Potilitzin  concluded  that  chlorate  of  strontium,  which  easily  gives  supersaturated  solu-
tions, should  be  capable  of  forming  several  hydrates,  besides  the  anhydrous  salt  known ;
and  he  succeeded  in  discovering  the  existence  of  two  hydrates,  Sr(C103)38H2O  and
apparently  Sr(C10-,)2BH.jO.  Besides  this,  three  modifications  of  the  common  anhydrous
salt  were  obtained,  differing  from  each  other  in  their  crystalline  form.  One  modification
separated  out  in  the  form  of  rhombic  octaliedra,  another  in  oblique  plates,  and  a  third
in  long  brittle  prisms  or  plates.  Further  researches  showed  that  salts  which  are  not
capable  of  forming  supersaturated  solutions  such  as  the  bromates  of  calcium,  stiontium,
and  barium,  part  witli  their  water  of  hydration  with  difficulty  (they  crystallise  with
IH.jO),  and  decompose  very  slowly  in  a  vacuum  or  in  dry  air.  In  other  words  the
tension  of  dissociation  is  very  small  in  this  class  of  hydrates.  As  the  hydrates  charac-
terised by  a  small  dissociation  tension  are  incapable  of  givmg  supersaturated  solutions,
so  conversely  supersaturated  solutions  give  hydrates  whose  tension  of  dissociation  is
great  (Potilitzin,  1893).

*'  Emulsions,  like  milk,  are  composed  of  a  solution  of  glutmous  or  similar  substances,
or  of  oily  liquids  suspended  in  a  liquid  in  the  form  of  drops,  which  are  clearly  visible
under  a  microscope,  and  form  an  example  of  a  mechanical  formation  which  resembles
solution.  But  the  difference  from  solutions  is  here  evident.  There  are,  however,
solutions  which  approach  very  near  to  emulsions  in  the  facility  with  which  the  substance
dissolved  separates  from  them.  It  luis  long  been  known,  for  example,  that  a  particular
kind  of  Prussian  blue,  KFe2(CN)a,  dissolves  in  jmre  water,  but,  on  the  addition  of  the
smallest  quantity  of  either  of  a  number  of  salts,  it  coagulates  and  becomes  quite  in-
soluble. If  copper  sulphide  (CuS),  cadmium  sulphide  (CdS),  arsenic  sulphide  (As^Ss)
(the  exijeriments  with  these  substances  proceed  with  great  ease,  and  the  solution  ob-
tained is  comparatively  stable),  and  many  other  metallic  sulphides,  be  obtained  by  a
method  of  double  decomposition  (by  precipitating  salts  of  these  metals  by  hydrogen
sulphide),  and  be  then  carefully  washed  (by  allowing  the  precipitate  to  settle,  pouring  oflf
the  liquid,  and  again  adding  sulphuretted  hydrr)gen  water),  then,  as  was  shown  by
Schulze,  Spring,  Prost,  and  others,  the  previously  insoluble  sulphides  pass  into  trans-
parent (for  mercury,  lead,  and  silver,  reddish  brown;  for  copper  and  iron,  greenish
brown ;  for  cadmium  and  indium,  yellow  ;  and  for  zinc,  colourless)  solutions,  which  may
be  preserved  (the  weaker  they  are  the  longer  they  keep)  and  even  lioiled,  but  which,
nevertheless,  in  time  coagulate— that  is,  separate  in  an  insoluble  form,  and  then  some-
times become  crystalline  and  quite  incapable  of  re-dissolving.  Graham  and  others
observed  the  power  shown  by  colloids  {see  note  18)  of  forming  similar  hydrosoU  or  solu-
tions of  gelatinous  colloids,  and,  in  describing  alumina  and  silica,  we  shall  again  liave
occasion  to  speak  of  such  solutions.

In  the  existing  state  of  our  knowledge  concerning  solution,  such  solutions  may  be

loked  on  as  a  transition  between  emulsion  and  ordinary  solutions,  but  no  fundamental

■«Jf"Mnt  can  be  formed  about  them  until  a  study  has  been  made  of  their  relations  to

*"**y  aolutionB  (the  solutions  of  even  soluble  colloids  freeze  immediately  on  cooling

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  99

Solutions  of  salts  on  refrigeration  below  0°  deposit  ice  or  crystals
{which  then  frequently  contain  water  of  crystallisation)  of  the  salt
dissolved,  and  on  reaching  a  certain  degree  of  concentration  they
solidify  in  their  entire  mass.  These  solidified  masses  are  termed  cryo-
hydrates.  My  researches  on  solutions  of  common  salt  (1868)  showed
that  its  solution  solidities  when  it  reaches  a  composition  NaCl-flOHjO
(180  parts  of  water  per  58*5  parts  of  salt),  which  takes  place  at
about  —  23°.  The  solidified  solution  melts  at  the  same  temperature,
and  both  the  portion  melted  and  the  remainder  preserve  the  above
composition.  Guthrie  (1874-1876)  obtained  the  cryohydrates  of  many
salts,  and  he  showed  that  certain  of  them  are  formed  like  the  above  at
comparatively  low  temperatures,  whilst  others  (for  instance,  corrosive
sublimate,  alums,  potassium  chlorate,  and  various  colloids)  are  formed
on  a  slight  cooling,  to  —  2°  or  even  before.''^  In  the  case  of  common  salt,
the  cryohydrate  with  10  molecules  of  water,  and  in  the  case  of  sodium
nitrate,  the  cryohydrate"^^  with  7  molecules  of  water  (i.e,  126  parts
of  water  per  85  of  salt)  should  be  accepted  as  established  substances,
capable  of  passing  from  a  solid  to  a  liquid  state  and  conversely  ;  and
therefore  it  may  be  thought  that  in  cryohydrates  we  have  solutions
which  are  not  only  undecomposable  by  cold,  but  also  have  a  definite
•composition  which  would  present  a  fresh  case  of  definite  equilibrium
Tjetween  the  solvent  and  the  substance  dissolved.

The  formation  of  definite  but  unstable  compounds  in  the  process  of

below  0°,  and,  according  to  Guthrie,  do  not  fonu  cryohydrates),  and  to  supersaturated
solutions,  with  whicli  they  have  certain  points  in  common.

^  Offer  (1880)  concludes,  from  his  researches  on  cryohydrates,  that  they  are  simple
mixtures  of  ice  and  salts,  having  a  constant  melting  point,  just  as  there  are  alloys  having
a  constant  point  of  fusion,  and  solutions  of  liquids  with  a  constant  boiling  point  {see  note
»60).  This  does  not,  however,  explain  in  what  form  a  salt  is  contained,  for  instance,  in  the
cryohydrate  NaCl  +  lOH.^O.  At  temperatures  above  — 10^  common  salt  separates  out  in
anhydrous  crystals,  and  at  temperatures  near  —  10°,  in  combination  with  water  of
crystallisation,  NaCl  +  2H.20,  and,  therefore,  it  is  very  improbable  that  at  still  lower
temperatures  it  would  separate  without  water.  If  the  possibility  of  the  solidified  cryo-
liydrate  containing  NaCl  +  2H2O  and  ice  be  admitted,  then  it  is  not  clear  why  one  of
these  substances  does  not  melt  before  the  other.  If  alcohol  does  not  extract  water  from
Ihe  solid  mass,  leaving  the  salt  behind,  this  does  not  prove  the  presence  of  ice,  because
alcohol  also  takes  up  water  from  the  crystals  of  many  hydrated  substances  (for  instance,
from  NaCl  +  2H2O)  at  about  their  melting-points.  Besides  which,  a  simple  observation
■on  the  cryohydrate,  NaCl  +  lOH.^O,  shows  that  with  the  most  careful  cooling  it  does  not
on  the  addition  of  ice  deposit  ice,  which  would  occur  if  ice  were  formed  on  solidification
intermixed  with  the  salt.

I  may  add  with  regard  to  cryohydrates  that  many  of  the  solutions  of  acids  solidify
•completely  on  prolonged  cooling  (for  example,  H2SO4H.2O),  and  then  form  perfectly
•definite  compounds.  For  the  solutions  of  sulphuric  acid  (see  Chapter  XX.)  Pickering
obtained,  for  instance,  a  hydrate,  H.2SO44H2O  at  —  25^.  Hydrochloric,  nitric,  and  other
acids  also  give  similar  crj'stalliue  hydrates,  melting  at  low  temperatures  and  presenting
imany  similarities  with  the  crj-ohydrates.

»•  See  note  24.

113

100  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

solution  becomes  evident  from  the  phenomena  of  a  marked  decrease  of
vapour  tension,  or  from  the  rise  of  the  temperature  of  ebullition  whicb
occurs  in  the  solution  of  certain  volatile  liquids  and  gases  in  water.
As  an  example,  we  will  take  hydriodic  acid,  HI,  a  gas  which  liquefies^
giWng  a  liquid  which  boils  at  -  20^.  A  solution  of  it  containing  57
p.c.  of  hydriodic  acid  is  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  if  it  be  heated
the  hydriodic  acid  volatilises  together  with  the  water  in  the  same  pro-
portions as  they  occur  in  the  solution,  therefore  such  a  solution  may  be
distilled  unchanged.  The  solution  boils  at  a  higher  temperature  than
water,  at  127°.  A  portion  of  the  physical  properties  of  the  gas  and
water  have  in  this  case  already  disappeared — a  new  substance  is  formed,
which  has  its  definite  boiling  point.  To  put  it  more  correctly,  this  is.
not  the  temperature  of  ebullition,  but  the  temperature  at  which  the
compound  formed  decomposes,  forming  the  vapours  of  the  products  of
dissociation,  which,  on  cooling,  re-combine.  Should  a  less  amount  of
hydriodic  acid  be  dissolved  in  water  than  the  above,  then,  on  heating^
such  a  solution,  water  only  at  first  distils  over,  until  the  solution
attains  the  above-mentioned  composition ;  it  will  then  distil  over
unaltered.  If  more  hydriodic  acid  be  passed  into  such  a  solution  a
fresh  quantity  of  the  gas  will  dissolve,  but  it  passes  off  with  great
ease,  like  air  from  water.  It  must  not,  however,  be  thought  that  those
forees  which  determine  the  formation  of  ordinary  gaseous  solutions
play  no  part  whatever  in  the  formation  of  a  solution  having  a  definite
boiling  point  ;  that  they  do  react  is  shown  from  the  fact  that  such  con-
stant gaseous  solutions  vary  in  their  composition  under  different
pressures. *''^ It  is  not,  therefore,  at  every,  but  only  at  the  ordinary,

•^^  For  thi-N  reHNt^n  «tlie  waiit  of  entire  ct^nstancy  of  the  compos*itiou  of  constant  boil-
ing solutions  with  a  cliange  of  prestiure),  the  existence  of  definite  hydrates  formed  by
volatile  substances — for  instance,  by  hydrochloric  acid  and  water — is  frequently  denied.
It  is  generally  luxueil  as  follows  :  If  there  did  exist  a  constancy  of  composition,  then  it
would  be  unaltered  by  a  change  of  pressure. But  the  distillation  of  constant  boiling
hydrates  is  undoubte<lly  accomiMiiieil  (judging  by  the  vapi>ur  densities  determined  by
Bineau\  like  the  distillation  of  sal  anunoniac,  sulphuric  acid.  tVc,  by  a  complete  decom-
position of  the  original  comix>und — that  is,  these  substances  do  not  exist  in  a  state  of
vapour,  but  their  products  of  decomposition  (hydrochloric  acid  and  water)  are  gases  at
the  temperature  of  volatilisation,  which  dissolve  in  the  volatilised  and  condensed  liquids;
but  the  solubility  of  gases  in  liquids  depends  on  the  pressure,  and,  therefore,  the  com-
position of  constant  boiling  solutions  may,  and  even  ought  to,  vary  with  a  change  of
preasore,  and,  further,  the  smaller  the  pressure  and  the  lower  the  temperature  of  vola-
miMilaoii,  the  more  likely  is  a  true  compound  to  be  obtained. According  to  the  rese«urcke»
i  Boaooe  tatd  Dittmar  (lHo9>,  the  constant  boiling  si>lution  of  hyilrochloric  acid  proved
■**litain  18  p.c.  of  hydrochloric  acid  at  a  pressure  of  S  atmospheres,  ^  p.c.  at  1  atmo-
W^  and  SS  px.  at  ^  of  an  atmoaphere. On  i^siUng  air  through  the  solution  ontil
mifontkm  became  constant  [i.r.  forcing  the  excess  of  aquei^us  vapour  or  of  hydro-
Mid  to  p*ss  away with  tlie  airK  then acid  was  obtained  containing  about
IMP,  about  8S  pwc.  at  50^,  and  about  25  |v.c.  at  0- . From  this  it  is  seen  that
Im  fmmm  and  lowering  the  temperature  of  evaporation  one  arri\-es

ON  WATER  AND ITS COMPOUNDS  101

atmospheric  pressure  that  a  constant  boiling  solution  of  hydriodic  acid
will  contain  57  p.c.  of  the  gas.  At  another  pressure  the  proportion  of
water  and  hydriodic  acid  will  be  different.  It  varies,  however,  judging
from  observations  made  by  Roscoe,  very  little  for  considerable  variations
of  presi^ure.  This  variation  in  composition  directly  indicates  that
pressure  exerts  an  influence  on  the  formation  of  unstable  chemical
compounds  which  are  easily  dissociated  (with  formation  of  a  gas),  just
as  it  influences  the  solution  of  gases,  only  the  latter  is  influenced  to  a
more  considerable  degree  than  the  former. ***  Hydrochloric,  nitric,  and
other  acids  form  solutions  having  definite  hoiliny  ]x>intSj  like  that  of
hydriodic  acid.  They  show  further  the  common  property,  if  containing
but  a  small  proportion  of  water,  that  they  fume  in  air.  Strong  solu-
tions of  nitric,  hydrochloric,  hydriodic,  and  other  gases  are  even  termed

at  the  same  limit,  where  the  composition  should  be  taken  as  HCl  +  6H.^>0,  whicli  requires
25*26  p.c.  of  hydrochloric  acid. Fuming  hydrochloric  acid  contains  more  than  this.

In  the  case  already  considered,  as  in  the  case  of  formic  acid  in  the  researches  of
D.  P.  Konovaloff  (note  47),  the  constant  boiling  solution  corresponds  with  a  minimum
tension — that  is,  with  a  boiling  point  higher  than  that  of  either  of  the  component
elements.  But  there  is  another  case  of  constant  boiling  solutions  similar  to  the  case  of
the  solution  of  propyl  alcohol,  CsHgO,  when  a  solution,  undecomposed  by  distiUatioui
boils  at  a  lower  point  than  that  of  the  more  volatile  liquid.  However,  in  this  case  also,
if  there  be  solution,  the  possibility  of  the  formation  of  a  definite  compound  in  the  form
CsHgO  +  H.^O  cannot  be  denied,  and  the  tension  of  the  solution  is  not  equal  to  the  sum
of  tensions  of  the  components.  There  are  possible  cAses  of  constant  boiling  mixtures
even  when  there  is  no  solution  nor  any  loss  of  tension,  and  consequently  no  chemical
action,  since  the  amount  of  liquids  that  are  volatilised  is  determined  by  the  product  of
the  vapour  densities  into  their  vapour  tensions  (Wanklyn),  in  consequence  of  which
liquids  whose  boiling  |x>int  is  above  100° — for  instance,  turpentine  and  ethereal  oils  in
general — when  distilled  with  aqueous  vapour,  pass  over  at  a  temperature  below  100°.
Consequently,  it  is  not  in  the  constancy  of  composition  and  boiling  point  (temperature  of
decomposition)  that  evidence  of  a  distinct  chemical  action  is  to  be  found  in  the  above-
described  solutions  of  acids,  but  in  the  great  loss  of  tension,  which  completely  resembles
the  loss  of  tension  observed,  for  instance,  in  the  perfectly-definite  combinations  of  sub-
stances with  water  of  crystallisation  {see  later,  note  65).  Sulphuric  acid,  H0SO4,  as  we
shall  learn  later,  is  also  decomposed  by  distillation,  like  HCl  +  OH^O,  and  exhibits,  more-
over, all  the  signs  of  a  definite  chemical  compound.  The  study  of  the  variation  of  the
specific  gravities  of  solutions  as  de[>endent  on  their  composition  {see  note  19)  shows  that
phenomena  of  a  similar  kind,  although  of  different  dimensions,  Uike  place  in  the  forma-
tion of  both  H.^SOi  from  H.O  and  S0.-„  and  of  HCl  +  6H.^O  (or  of  aqueous  solutions
analogous  to  it)  from  HCl  and  H2O.

•^*  The  essence  of  the  matter  may  be  thus  rei^resented.  A  gaseous  or  easily  volatile
substance  A  forms  with  a  certain  quantity  of  water,  yiH.^O,  a  definite  complex  compound
^nH20,  which  is  stable  up  to  a  temperature  t°  higher  than  100^^  At  this  temperature
it  is  decomposed  into  two  substances,  A  +  H^O.  Both  boil  below  <°  at  the  ordinary
pressure,  and  therefore  at  f°  they  distil  over  and  re-combine  in  the  receiver.  But  if  a
part  of  the  substance -4 nHoO  is  decomposed  or  volatilised,  a  portion  of  the  undecomposed
liquid  still  remains  in  the  vessel,  which  can  jwirtially  dissolve  one  of  the  products  of
decomposition,  and  that  in  quantity  varying  with  the  pressure  and  temperature,  and
therefore  the  solution  at  a  constant  boiling  point  will  have  a  slightly  different  composi-
tion at  different  pressures.

102  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHE^IISTRY

*  fuming  acids.'  The  fuming  liquids  contain  a  definite  compound  whose
temperature  of  ebullition  (decomposition)  is  higher  than  100°,  and  con-
tain also  an  excess  of  the  volatile  substance  dissolved,  which  exhibits  a
capacity  to  combine  with  water  and  form  a  hydrate,  whose  vapour
tension  is  less  than  that  of  aqueous  vapour.  On  evaporating  in  air,
this  dissolved  substance  meets  the  atmospheric  moisture  and  forms  a
visible  vapour  (fumes)  with  it,  which  consists  of  the  above-mentioned
compound.  The  attraction  or  affinity  which  binds,  for  instance,
hydriodic  acid  with  water  is  evinced  not  only  in  the  evolution  of  heat
and  the  diminution  of  vapour  tension  (rise  of  boiling  pointy,  but  also
in  many  purely  chemical  relations.  Thus  hydriodic  acid  is  produced
from  iodine  and  hydrogen  sulphide  in  the  presence  of  water,  but  unless-
water  is  present  this  reaction  does  not  take  place.^^

Many  compounds  containing  water  of  crystallisation  are  solid  sub-
stances (when  melte<l  they  are  already  solutions — i.e.  liquids) ;  further-
more, they  are  capable  of  being  formed  from  solutions,  like  ice  or
aqueous  vapour.  They  may  be  called  crystallo  hydrates.  Inasmuch  as
the  direct  presence  of  ice  or  aqueous  vapour  cannot  be  admitted  in
solutions  (for  these  are  liquids),  although  the  presence  of  water  may
be,  so  also  there  is  no  basis  for  acknowledging  the  presence  in  solutions
of  crystallo  hydrates,  although  they  are  obtained  from  solutions  as
such.^*^  It  is  evident  that  such  substances  present  one  of  the  many
forms  of  equilibrium  between  water  and  a  substance  dissolved  in  it.
This  form,  however,  reminds  one,  in  all  respects,  of  solutions — that  is,,
aqueous  compounds  which  are  more  or  less  easily  decomposed,  with
separation  of  water  and  the  formation  of  a  less  aqueous  or  an  anhydrous
compound.  In  fact,  there  are  not  a  few  crystals  containing  water
which  lose  a  part  of  their  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  Of  such
a  kind,  for  instance,  are  the  crystals  of  soda,  or  sodium  carbonate^
which,  when  separated  from  an  aqueous  solution  at  the  ordinary
temperature,  are  quite  transparent  ;  but  when  left  exposed  to  air,  lose

'*'  For  solutions  of  liydrochloric  acid  in  water  there  are  still  greater  differences  in
reactions. For  instance,  strong  solutions  decompose  antimony  sulphide  (forming  hydro-
gen sulphide,  H.^S),  and  precipitate  common  salt  from  its  solutions,  whilst  weak  solntionB
do  not  act  thus.

**  Saperaat orated  solutions  give  an  excellent  proof  in  this  respect. Tlius  a  solution

of  copper  «o/pb«te  generally  crystallises  in  penta-hydrated  crj-stals,  CUSO4  +  5H^0,  and

ite  attarmted  »olation  gives  such  crystals  if  it  be  brought  into  contact  with  the  minutest

•••wte  aystw^  of  the  same  kind. But,  according  to  the  observations  of  Lecoq  de  Bois-

'**'^  *^«  <^:7yBtal  of  ferrous  sulphate  (an  isomorphous  salt,  see  note  55),  FeS04  +  VH^O,

^^*o  ^ saiarated  solution  of  copper  sulphate,  then  crystals  of  hept«-hyd rated  salt,

*^<I^^^  Are  obtained. It  is  evident  that  neither  the  penta-  nor  the  hepta-hydrated

^*^*':-i*^ed  •»  such  in  the  solution. The  solution  presents  its  own  particular  liquid

ON  WATEB  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  lOB

a  portion  of  their  water,  becoming  opaque,  and,  in  the  process,  lose
their  crystalline  appearance,  although  preserving  their  original  form.
This  process  of  the  separation  of  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature
is  termed  the  efflorescence  of  crystals.  EflSorescence  takes  place  more
rapidly  under  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump,  and  especially  at  a  gentle
heat.  This  breaking  up  of  a  crystal  is  dissociation  at  the  ordinary
temperature.  Solutions  are  decomposed  in  exactly  the  same  manner.®*
The  tension  of  the  aqueous  vapour  which  is  given  off  from  crystallo-
hydrates  is  naturally,  as  with  solutions,  less  than  the  vapour  tension  of
water  itself  ^^  at  the  same  temperature,  and  therefore  many  anhydrous
salts  which  are  capable  of  combining  with  water  absorb  aqueous  vapour

♦**  Effloreacence,  like  every  evaporation,  proceeds  from  the  surface.  In  the  interior  of
crystals  which  have  effloresced  there  is  usually  found  a  non-effloresced  mass,  so  that  the
majority  of  effloresced  crystals  of  washing  soda  show,  in  their  fracture,  a  transparent
nucleus  coated  by  an  effloresced,  opaque,  powdery  mass.  It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance
in  this  respect  that  efflorescence  proceeds  in  a  completely  regular  and  uniform  manner,
so  that  the  angles  and  planes  of  similar  crystallographic  character  effloresce  simul-
taneously, and  in  this  respect  the  crystalline  form  determines  those  parts  of  crystals
where  efflorescence  starts,  and  the  order  in  which  it  continues.  In  solutions  evaporation
also  proceeds  from  the  surface,  and  the  first  crystals  which  appear  on  its  reaching  the
required  degree  of  saturation  are  also  formed  at  the  surface.  After  falling  to  the  bottom
the  crystals  naturally  continue  to  grow  {see  Chapter  X.).

•^  According  to  Lescoeur  (1888),  at  100^  a  concentrated  solution  of  barium  hydroxide,
BaHjOo,  on  first  depositing  crystals  (with  +  H.,>0)  has  a  tension  of  about  630  mm.
(instead  of  760  mm.,  the  tension  of  water),  which  decreases  (because  the  solution  evapo-
rates) to  45  nmi.,  when  all  the  water  is  expelled  from  the  crystals,  BaH.^O.^  +  HjO,  which,
are  formed,  but  they  also  lose  water  (dissociate,  effloresce  at  100°),  leaving  the  hydroxide,
BaH.202,  which  is  perfectly  undecomposable  at  100° — that  is,  does  not  part  with  water.
At  78°  (the  tension  of  water  is  then  265  nun.)  a  solution,  containing  SSH.^O,  on  crystallis-
ing  has  a  tension  of  230  mm. ;  the  crystals,  BaH-^O.^  +  8H-,>0,  which  separate  out,  have  &
tension  of  160  mm. ;  on  losing  water  they  give  BaH.,0.2  +  H.^O.  This  substance  does  not
decompose  at  73°,  and  therefore  its  tension  =  0.  In  those  crystallohydrates  which
effloresce  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  the  tension  of  dissociation  nearly  approximates  tO'
that  of  the  aqueous  vapour,  as  Lescceur  (1891)  showed.  To  this  category  of  compounda
belong  B2O3  (3  +  X)  H.,0,  C.2O4H2  (2  +  x)  H.^O,  BaO  (9  +  x)  H.2O,  and  SrO  (9  +  x)  H.p.  And
a  still  greater  tension  is  possessed  by  Na-^SOilOHoO,  NaQCO.^lOH^O,  and  MgS04  (7  +  j:>
H^O.  Miiller-Erzbach  (1H84)  determines  the  tension  (with  reference  to  liquid  water)  by
placing  tubes  of  the  same  length  with  water  and  the  substances  experimented  with  in  a
desiccator,  the  rate  of  loss  of  water  giving  the  relative  tension.  Thus,  at  the  ordinary
temperature,  crystals  of  sodium  phosphate,  Na2HP04+  I2H2O,  present  a  tension  of  0*7
compared  with  water,  until  they  lose  5H2O,  then  0*4  until  they  lose  5H.2O  more,  and  on
losing  the  last  equivalent  of  water  the  tension  falls  to  0*04  compared  with  water.  It  is
clear  that  the  different  molecules  of  water  are  held  by  an  unequal  force.  Out  of  the  five
molecules  of  water  in  copper  sulphate  the  two  first  are  comparatively  easily  separated,
even  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (but  only  after  several  days  in  a  desiccator,  according
to  Latchinoff) ;  the  next  two  are  more  difficultly  separated,  and  the  last  equ'valent  is*
retained  even  at  100°.  This  is  another  indication  of  the  capacity  of  CuSO^  to  form  three
hydrates,  CuS045H20,  CuSOtSHjO,  and  CUSO4H2O.  The  researches  of  Andreae  on  the
tension  of  dissociation  of  hydrated  sulphate  of  copper  showed  (1891)  the  existence  of
three  provinces,  characterised  at  a  given  temperature  by  a  constant  tension :  (1)  between
3-5,  (2)  between  1-3,  and  lastly  (3)  between  0-1  molecule  of  water,  which  again  confirms
the  existence  of  three  hydrates  of  the  above  composition  for  this  salt.

104  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

from  moist  air  ;  that  is,  they  act  like  a  cold  body  on  which  water  is
deposited  from  steam.  It  is  od  this  that  the  desiccation  of  gases  is
t>ased,  and  it  must  further  be  remarked  in  this  respect  that  certain
substances — for  instance,  potassium  carbonate  (K^COj)  and  calcium
chloride  (CaClj)— not  only  absorb  the  waterneceasary  for  the  formation
of  a  solid  crystalline  compound,  but  also  give  solutions,  or  deliquesre,
as  it  is  termed,  in  moist  air.  Many  crystals  do  not  effloresce  in  the
least  at  the  ordinary  temperature  ;  for  example,  copper  sulphate,  which
may  be  preserved  for  an  indefinite  length  of  time  without  efflorescing,
but  when  placed  under  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump,  if  efflorescence  be
once  started,  it  goes  on  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  The  tempera-
ture at  which  the  complete  separation  of  water  from  crystals  takes
place  varies  considerably,  not  only  for  different  substances,  but  also  for
different  portions  of  the  contained  water.  Very  often  the  temperature
at  which  dissociation  begins  is  very  much  higher  than  the  boiling  point
of  water.  So,  for  example,  copper  sulphate,  which  contains  36  p.c.  of
water,  gives  up  ^S'8  p.c.  at  100%  and  the  remaining  quantity,  namely
7-2  p.c,  only  at  210'.  Alum,  out  of  the  45-5  p.c.  of  water  which  it
contains,  gives  up  18-9  p.c.  at  100",  17-7  p.c.  at  120',  7'7  p.c.  at  180°,
and  1  p.c.  at  260°  ;  it  only  loses  the  last  quantity  (1  p.c.)  at  its  tem-
perature of  decomposition.  These  examples  clearly  show  that  the
annexation  of  water  of  crystallisation  is  accompanied  by  a  rather  pro-
found, although,  in  comparison  with  instances  which  we  shall  consider
later,  still  inconsiderable,  change  of  its  properties.  In  certain  cases  the
water  of  crystallisation  is  only  given  off  when  the  solid  form  of  the
substance  is  destroyed  :  when  the  crystals  melt  on  heating.  The
crystals  are  then  said  to  melt  in  their  water  of  cry8t<illi»alion..  Further,
after  the  separation  of  the  water,  a  sobd  substance  remains  behind,  so
that  by  furtlifr  bpiitiiig  il.  acmiiri*>  a  uolid  form.  This  is  seen  most
!■  of  lead  01-  lead  acetate,  whicli  melt  in  their
of  crystallisation  at  a  temperature  of  5C'2>5°,  and  in  so  doing
a  to  lose  water.  On  reaching  a  teoipemture  of  100°  the  sugar  of
laving  I.>st  all  its  v-ntcv  :  and  then  at  a  temperature  of
Dlidifipil  siilf  ibgain  melts.*''**'*
timport/tnt  to  rocoj^nise  in  respect  to  the  water  of  crys-
i  its  ratio  to  the  <tuaiitit\  of  the  substance  with  which  it
1  constant  quantity. However  often  we  may

.(CjHAN»3H,0).».

-1u  Lt  K",  bat  re-Bolidifies  only  on  contact

1  It  luaj'  nmiftin  1i<(iii<l

I'vcu  kt  0°,  uiA  may  b«  used  tor  obtuning

iK'l.  the  latent  heat  of  fu«ian  ia  aboat  2S

hTidwrinff  the  h™i

of  •olatioD  SS  calories, Wben  melted  this

L^UndMct  11.0  V

upiir  giien  off  at  that  temperature  eqiuli

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  105

prepare  copper  sulphate,  we  shall  always  find  36*14  p.c.  of  water  in  its
<;rystal8,  and  these crystals  always  lose  four-fifths  of  their  water  at
100^,  and  one-fifth  of  the  whole  amount  of  the  water  contained  remains
in  the  crystals  at  100®,  and  is  only  expelled  from  them  at  a  temperature
of  about  240®. What  heus  been  said  about  crystals  of  copper  sulphate
refers  also  to  crystals  of  every  other  substance,  which  contain  water  of
crystallisation. It  is  impossible  in  any  of  these  cases  to  increase  either
the  relative  proportion  of  the  salt  or  of  the  water,  without  changing
the  homogeneity  of  the  substance. If  once  a  portion  of  the  water  be
lost — for  instance,  if  once  efflorescence  takes  place -a  mixture  is  ob-
tained, and  not  a  homogeneous  substance,  namely  a  mixture  of  a  sub-
stance deprived  of  water  with  a  substance  which  has  not  yet  lost  water
— i.e,  decomposition  has  already  commenced. This  constant  ratio  is
an  example  of  the  fact  that  in  chemical  compounds  the  quantity  of  the
component  parts  is  quite  definite  ;  that  is,  it  is  an  example  of  the  so-
called  definite  cJiemical  compounds. They  may  be  distinguished  from
solutions,  and  from  all  other  so-called  indefinite  chemical  compounds,
in  that  at  least  one,  and  sometimes  both,  of  the  component  parts  may
be  added  in  a  large  quantity  to  an  indefinite  chemical  compound,  with-
out destroying  its  homogeneity,  as  in  solutions,  whilst  it  is  impossible
to  add  any  one  of  the  component  parts  to  a  definite  chemical  compound
without destroying the homogeneity of the entire mass. Definite
chemical  compounds  only  decompose  at  a  certain  rise  in  temperature  ;
•on  a  lowering  in  temperature  they  do  not,  at  least  with  very  few  ex-
ceptions, yield  their  components  like  solutions  which  form  ice  or  com-
pounds  with  water  of  crystallisation. This  leads  to  the  assumption
that  solutions  contain  water  as  water,*'^  although  it  may  sometimes  be
in  a  very  small  quantity. Therefore  solutions  which  are  capable  of
solidifying  completely  (for  instance,  crystallo-hydrates  capable  of  melt-
ing) such  as  the  compound  of  84^  parts  of  sulphuric  acid,  HjSO^,  with
15^  parts  of  water,  H^O,  or  H2S04,H20  (or  H4SO5),  appear  as  true
•definite chemical compounds. If, then,  we  imagine  such  a  definite
compound  in  a  liquid  state,  and  admit  that  it  partially  decomposes  in
this  state,  sepai*ating  water — not  as  ice  or  vapour  (for  then  the  system
would be  heterogeneous, including substances in different  physical
states),  but  in  a  liquid  form,  when  the  system  will  be  homogeneous —

'^  Such  a  phenomenon  frequently  presentK  itself  in  purely  chemical  action.  For
instance,  let  a  liquid  Rubstance  A  give,  with  another  liquid  Kubstance  B,  under  the  condi-
tions of  an  experiment,  a  mere  minute  quantity  of  a  solid  or  gaseous  subHtance  C.  Thin
small  quantity  will  separate  out  (pass  away  from  the  Ki>here  of  action,  as  Berthollet
expressed  it),  and  the  remaining  masses  of  -4  and  B  will  again  give  C ;  consequently,
xmder  these  conditions  action  will  go  on  to  the  end.  Such,  it  seems  to  me,  is  the  action
in  solutions  when  they  yield  ice  or  vapour  indicating  the  presence  of  water.

106  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

we  shall  form  an  idea  of  a  solution  as  an  unstable,  dissociating  fluid
state  of  equilibrium  between  water  and  the  substance  dissolved.  More-
over, it  should  be  remarked  thatjudgingby  experiment,  many  substances
give  with  water  not  one  but  diverse  compounds,^^  which  is  seen  in  the
capacity  of  one  substance  to  form  with  water  many  various  cryatallo-
hydrates,  or  compounds  with  water  of  crystallisation,  showing  diverse
and  independent  properties.  From  these  considerations,  solutions^^
may  be  regarded  as  fluid,  unstable,  definite  chemical  compounds  in  a
state  o/ dissociation.^^

*^  Certain  Hubstances  ore  capable  of  forming  together  only  one  compound,  others
several,  and  the^e  of  the  most  varied  degrees  of  Ktability.  The  compounds  of  water  are
instances  of  this  kind.  In  solutions  the  existence  of  several  different  definite  compounds
must  be  acknowledged,  but  many  of  these  have  not  yet  been  obtained  in  a  free  state,  and
it  may  be  that  they  cannot  be  obtained  in  any  other  but  a  liquid  form — that  is,  dissolved ;
just  as  there  are  many  undoubted  definite  compounds  which  only  exist  in  one  physical
state.  Among  the  hydrates  such  instances  occur.  The  compound  COj  +  8HqO  {see  note
81),  according  to  Wroblewski,  only  occurs  in  a  solid  form.  Hydrates  like  H^S  +  I2H2O
(De  Forcrand  and  Villard),  HBr  +  H.20  (Roozeboom),  v&n  only  be  accepted  on  the  basia
of  a  decrease  of  tension,  but  present  themselves  as  ver}'^  transient  substances,  incapable
of  existing  in  a  stable  free  state.  Even  sulphuric  acid,  H2SO4,  itself,  which  undoubtedly
is  a  definite  compound,  fumes  in  a  liquid  form,  giving  off  the  anhydride,  SO5 — that  is,  it
exhibits  a  very  unstable  equilibrium.  The  crystallo-hydrates  of  chlorine,  Cla  +  SHaO,
of  hydrogen  sulphide,  H.^S  +  I'iH^O  (it  is  formed  at  0°,  and  is  completely  decomposed  at
+ 1°,  as  then  1  vol.  of  water  only  dissolves  4  vols,  of  hydrogen  sulphide,  while  at  0'1°  it
dissolves  about  100  vols.),  and  of  many  other  gases,  are  instances  of  hydrates  which  are
very  unstable.

*^  Of  such  a  kind  are  also  other  indefinite  chemical  compounds;  for  example,
metallic  alloys.  Tliese  are  solid  substances  or  solidified  solutions  of  metals.  They  also
contain  definite  conix)Ounds,  and  may  contain  an  excess  of  one  of  the  metals.  According
to  the  experiments  of  Laurie  (1888),  the  alloys  of  zinc  with  copper  in  respect  to  the  elec-
tromotive force  in  galvanic  batteries  behave  just  like  zinc  if  the  proportion  of  copper  in
the  alloy  does  not  exceed  a  certain  percentage — that  is,  witil  a  definite  compound  is
attained — for  in  that  case  particles  of  free  zinc  are  present ;  but  if  a  copper  surface  be
taken,  and  it  be  covered  by  only  one-thousandth  part  of  its  area  of  zinc,  then  only  the
zinc  will  act  in  a  galvanic  battery.

**  According  to  the  above  supposition,  the  condition  of  solutions  in  the  sense  ofHhe
kinetic  hypothesis  of  matter  (that  is,  on  the  supposition  of  an  internal  motion  of
molecules  and  atoms)  may  be  represented  in  the  following  form: — In  a  homogeneous
liquid — for  instance,  water — the  molecules  occur  in  a  certain  state  of,  although  mobile,
still  stable,  equilibrium.  When  a  substance  A  dissolves  in  water,  its  molecules  form  with
several  molecules  of  water,  systems  AnH.^O,  which  are  so  unstable  that  when  surrounded
by  molecules  of  water  they  decompose  and  re-form,  so  that  A  passes  from  one  mass  of
molecules  of  water  to  another,  and  the  molecules  of  water  which  were  at  this  moment  in
harmonious  motion  with  A  in  the  form  of  the  system  AnH^O,  in  the  next  instant
may  have  already  succee<led  in  getting  free.  The  addition  of  water  or  of  molecules  of  A
may  either  only  alter  the  number  of  free  molecules,  which  in  their  turn  enter  into  systems
AnH.tO,  or  they  may  introduce  conditions  for  tlie  iK)ssibility  of  building  up  new  systems
^mHoO,  where  m  is  either  greater  or  less  than  n.  If  in  the  solution  the  relation  of  the
molecules  be  the  same  as  in  the  system  il7nH.>0,  then  the  addition  of  fresh  molecules  of
water  or  of  A  would  be  followed  by  the  formation  of  new  molecules  .4  nH.^O.  The  relative
quantity,  stability,  and  composition  of  these  systems  or  definite  compounds  will  vary  in
one  or  another  solution. I  adopted  this  new  of  solutions  (1»87,  Pickering  subsequently

ON  WATER  AND  ITS  COMPOUNDS  107

In  regarding  solutions  from  this  point  of  view  they  come  under  the
head  of  those  definite  compounds  with  which  chemistry  is  mainly  con-
cerned.^®

We  saw  above  that  copper  sulphate  loses  four-fifths  of  its  water  at
100°  and  the  remainder  at  240.° This  means  that  there  are  two  defi-

pat  forward  a  similar  view)  after  a  most  intimate  study  of  the  variation  of  their  specific
gravities,  to  which  my  book,  cited  in  note  19,  is  devoted.  Definite  compounds,  AuiHqO
and  ilmiH^O,  existing  in  a  free — for  instance,  soHd — form,  may  in  certain  cases  be  held
in  solutions  in  a  dissociated  state  (although  but  partially) ;  they  are  similar  in  their
structure  to  those  definite  substances  which  are  formed  in  solutions,  but  it  is  not  necessar>'
to  assume  that  such  systems  as  Na^SO^  +  lOH-^O,  or  Na2S04  +  TH.^O,  or  Na^SO^,  are  con-
tained in  solutions.  The  comparatively  more  stable  systems  JtziH.jO  which  exist  in  a
free  state  and  change  their  physical  state  must  present,  although  within  certain  limits
of  temperature,  an  entirely  harmonious  kind  of  motion  of  A  with  n^H^O  ;  the  property
also  and  state  of  systems  AnH^O  and  AmH.fij  occurring  in  solutions,  is  that  they  are
in  a  liquid  form,  although  partially  dissociated.  Substances  A  i,  which  give  solutions,
are  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  they  can  form  such  unstable  systems  AnH.qOj-  but
besides  them  they  can  give  other  much  more  stable  systems  -^niHjO.  Thus  ethylene,
C.2H4,  in  dissolving  in  water,  probably  forms  a  system  C.2H4wH20,  which  easily  splits  up
into  C2H4  and  H2O,  but  it  also  gives  the  system  of  alcohol,  C^^K^jH-iO  or  CjHoO,  which
is  comparatively  stable.  Thus  oxygen  can  dissolve  in  water,  and  it  can  combine  with  it,
forming  peroxide  of  hydrogen.  Turpentine,  CioHig,  does  not  dissolve  in  water,  but  it
combines  with  it  as  a  comparatively  stable  hydrate.  In  other  words,  the  chemical  struc-
ture of  hydrates,  or  of  the  definite  compounds  which  are  contained  in  solutions,  is  dis-
tinguished not  only  by  its  original  peculiarities  but  also  by  a  diversity  of  stability.  A
similar  structure  to  hydrates  must  be  acknowledged  in  crystallo-hydrates.  On  melting
they  give  actual  (real)  solutions.  As  substances  which  give  crystallo-hydrates,  like  salts,
are  capable  of  forming  a  number  of  diverse  hydrates,  and  as  the  greater  the  number  of
molecules  of  water  (n)  they  (AnH^iO)  contain,  the  lower  is  the  temperature  of  their
formation,  and  as  the  more  easily  they  decompose  the  more  water  they  hold,  therefore,,
in  the  first  place,  the  isolation  of  hydrates  holding  much  water  existing  in  aqueous  solu-
tions may  be  soonest  looked  for  at  low  temperatures  (although,  perhaps,  in  certain  casea
they  cannot  exist  in  the  solid  state) ;  and,  secondly,  the  stability  also  of  such  higher
hydrates  will  be  at  a  minimum  under  the  ordinary  circumstances  of  the  occurrence  of
liquid  water.  Hence  a  further  more  detailed  investigation  of  cryohydrates  may  help  to
the  elucidation  of  the  nature  of  solutions.  But  it  may  be  foreseen  that  certain  cryo-
hydrates will,  like  metallic  alloys,  present  solidified  mixtures  of  ice  with  the  salts  them-
selves and  their  more  stable  hydrates,  and  others  will  be  definite  compounds.

'"  The  above  representation  of  solutions,  &c.,  considering  them  as  a  particular  state
of  definite  compounds,  excludes  the  independent  existence  of  indefinite  compounds ;
by  this  means  that  unity  of  chemical  conception  is  obtained  which  cannot  be  arrived
at  by  admitting  tlie  physico-mechanical  conception  of  indefinite  compounds.  The
gradual  transition  from  typical  solutions  (as  of  gases  in  water,  and  of  weak  saline
solutions)  to  sulphuric  acid,  and  from  it  and  its  definite,  but  yet  unstable  and  liquid,
compounds,  to  clearly  defined  compounds,  such  as  salts  and  their  crystallo-hydrates,
is  so  imperceptible,  that  in  denying  that  solutions  pertain  to  the  number  of  definite
but  dissociating  compounds,  we  risk  denying  the  definiteness  of  the  atomic  com-
lx>sition  of  such  substances  as  sulphuric  acid  or  of  molten  crystallo-hydrates.  I
repeat,  however,  that  for  the  present  the  theory  of  solutions  cannot  be  considered  as
firmly  established.  Tlie  above  opinion  about  them  is  nothing  more  than  a  hypothesis
which  endeavours  to  satisfy  those  comparatively  limited  data  which  we  have  for  the
present  about  solutions,  and  of  those  cases  of  their  transition  into  definite  compounds.
By  submitting  solutions  to  the  Daltonic  conception  of  atomism,  I  hope  that  we  may  not

108  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

nite  compounds  of  water  with  the  anhydrous  salt.  Washing  soda  or  car-
bonate of  sodium,  NaaCOg  separates  out  as  crystals,  NajCOgjlOHjO,
containing  62*9  p.c.  of  water  by  weight,  from  its  solutions  at  the
ordinary  temperature.  When  a  solution  of  the  same  salt  deposits
crystals  at  a  low  temperature,  about —  20°,  then  these  crystals  contain
71*8  parts  of  water  per  28*2  parts  of  anhydrous  salt.  Further,  the
•crystals  are  obtained  together  with  ice,  and  are  left  behind  when  it
melts.  If  ordinary  soda,  with  62*9  p.c.  of  water,  be  cautiously  melted
in  its  own  water  of  crystallisation,  there  remains  a  salt,  in  a  solid  state,
containing  only  14-5  p.c.  of  water,  and  a  liquid  is  obtained  which  con-
tains the  solution  of  a  salt  which  separates  out  crystals  at  34°,  which
contain  46  p.c.  of  water  and  do  not  effloresce  in  air.  Lastly,  if  a  super-
saturated solution  of  soda  be  prepared,  then  at  temperatures  below  8^
it  deposits  crystals  containing  54*3  p.c.  of  water.  Thus  as  many  as
five  compounds  of  anhydrous  soda  with  water  are  known  ;  and  they  are
dissimilar  in  their  properties  and  crystalline  form,  and  even  in  their
solubility.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  greatest  amount  o^  water  in
the  crystals  corresponds  with  a  temperature  of  —  20°,  and  the  smallest
to  the  highest  temperature.  There  is  apparently  no  relation  between
the  above  quantities  of  water  and  the  salts,  but  this  is  only  because  in
each  case  the  amount  of  water  and  anhydrous  salt  was  given  in  per-
centages ;  but  if  it  be  calculated  for  one  and  the  same  quantity  of
anhydrous  salt,  or  of  water,  a  great  regularity  will  be  observed  in  the
amounts  of  the  component  parts  in  all  these  compounds.  It  appears
that  for  106  parts  of  anhydrous  salt  in  the  crystals  separated  out  at
—  20°  there  are  270  parts  of  water  ;  in  the  crystals  obtained  at  15°  there
are  180  parts  of  water  ;  in  the  crystals  obtained  from  a  supersaturated
solution  126  parts,  in  the  crystals  which  separate  out  at  34°,  90  parts,
and  the  crystals  with  the  smallest  amount  of  water,  18  parts.  On
comparing  these  quantities  of  water  it  may  easily  be  seen  that  they  are
in  simple  proportion  to  each  other,  for  they  are  all  divisible  by  18,  and
are  in  the  ratio  15  :  10  :7  :5  :  1.  Naturally,  direct  experiment,
however  carefully  it  be  conducted,  is  hampered  with  errors,  but  taking
these  unavoidable  experimental  errors  into  consideration,  it  will  be
seen  that  for  a  given  quantity  of  an  anhydrous  substance  there  occur,
in  several  of  its  compounds  with  water,  quantities  of  water  which  are
in  very  simple  multiple  proportion. This  is  observed  in,  and  is  common

>nly  attain  to  a  general  hanuonious  chemical  doctrine,  but  also  that  new  motives  for
aveHtigation  and  research  will  appear  in  the  problem  of  solutions,  which  must  either
onfirm  the  proposed  theory  or  replace  it  by  another  fuller  and  truer  one ;  and  I  for  my
J«rt  cannot  consider  thih  to  be  the  case  with  any  of  the  other  present  doctrines  of  solu-
ions  (note  49).

ON  WATER  AND ITS  COMPOUNDS  10&

to,  all  definite  chemical  compounds  This  rule  is  calleo  the  law  of
multiple  proportions.  It  was  discovered  by  Dalton,  and  will  be  evolved
in  further  detail  subsequently  in  this  work.  For  the  present  wo
will  only  state  that  the  law  of  definite  composition  enables  the  com-
position of  substances  to  be  expressed  by  fomiulte,  and  the  law  of
multiple  proportions  permits  the  application  of  whole  numbers  as  co-
efficients of  the  symbols  of  the  elements  in  these  formulae.  Thus  the
formula  Na2C03,  IOH2O  shows  directly  that  in  this  cry stallo- hydrate
there  are  180  parts  of  water  to  106  parts  by  weight  of  the  anhydrous
salt,  because  the  formula  of  soda,  NajCOg,  directly  answers  to  a  weight
of  106,  and  the  formula  of  water  to  18  parts,  by  weight,  which  are  here
taken  10  times.

In  the  above  examples  of  the  combinations  of  water,  we  saw  the
gradually increasing  intensity of the bond between water  and a
substance  with  which  it  forms  a  homogeneous  compound. There  is  a
series  of  such  compounds  with  water,  in  which  the  water  is  held  with
very  great  force,  and  is  only  given  up  at  a  very  high  temperature,  and
sometimes  cannot  be  separated  by  any  degree  of  heat  without  the  entire
decomposition  of  the  substance. In  these  compounds  there  is  generally
no  outward  sign  whatever  of  their  containing  water. A  perfectly  new
substance  is  formed  from  an  anhydrous  substance  and  water,  in  which
sometimes  the  properties  of  neither  one  nor  the  other  substance  are
observable. In  the  majority  of  cases,  a  considerable  amount  of  heat  is
evolved  in  the  formation  of  such  compounds  with  water. Sometimes
the  heat  evolved  is  so  intense  that  a  red  heat  is  produced  and  light
is emitted. It  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at,  after  this,  that  stable
compounds  are  formed  by  such  a  combination. Their  decomposition
requires  great  heat  ;  a  large  amount  of  work  is  necessary  to  separate
them  into  their  component  parts. All  such  compounds  are  definite,
and,  generally,  completely  and  clearly  definite. The  number  of  such
definite  compounds  with  water  or  hydra tt>.^^  in  the  narrow  sense  of  the
word,  is  generally  inconsiderable  for  each  anhydrous  substance  ;  in  the
greater  number  of  cases,  there  is  formed  only  one  such  combination  of  a
substance  with  water,  one  hydrate,  having  so  great  a  stability. The
water  contained  in  these  compounds  is  often  called  water  oj  constitution
— i.e.  water  which  enters  into  the  structure  or  composition  of  the  given
substance. By  this  it  is  desired  to  express,  that  in  other  cases  the
molecules  of  water  are,  as  it  were,  separate  from  the  molecules  of  that
substance  with  which  it  is  combined. It  is  supposed  that  in  the  forma-
tion of  hydrates  this  water,  even  in  the  smallest  particles,  forms  one
complete whole  with the anhydrous substance. Many  examples  of
the formation  of  such  hydrates  might  be  cited. The  most  familiar

110  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

example  in  practice  is  the  hydrate  of  lime,  or  so-called  *  slaked '  lime.
Lime  is  prepared  by  burning  limestone,  by  which  the  carbonic  anhydride
is  expelled  from  it,  and  there  remains  a  white  stony  mass,  which  is
dense,  compact,  and  rather  tenacious.  Lime  is  usually  sold  in  this
form,  and  bears  the  name  of  *  quick  *  or  *  unslaked '  lime.  If  water  be
poured  over  such  lime,  a  great  rise  in  temperature  is  remarked  either
•directly,  or  after  a  certain  time.  The  whole  mass  becomes  hot,  part  of
the  water  is  evaporated,  the  stony  mass  in  absorbing  water  crumbles  into
powder,  and  if  the  water  be  taken  in  sufficient  quantity  and  the  lime
be  pure  and  well  burnt,  not  a  particle  of  the  original  stony  mass  is  left —
it  all  crumbles  into  powder.  If  the  water  be  in  excess,  then  naturally
a  portion  of  it  remains  and  forms  a  solution.  This  process  is  called
*  slaking '  lime.  Slaked  lime  is  used  in  practice  in  intermixture  with
sand  as  mortar.  Slaked  lime  is  a  definite  hydrate  of  lime.  If  it  is
dried  at  100°  it  retains  24'3  p.c.  of  water.  This  water  can  only  be
expelled  at  a  temperature  above  400°,  and  then  quicklime  is  re-obtained.
The  heat  evolved  in  the  combination  of  lime  with  water  is  so  intense
that  it  can  set  fire  to  wood,  sulphur,  gunpowder,  tkc.  Even  on  mixing
lime  with  ice  the  temperature  rises  to  100°.  If  lime  be  moistened  with  a
small  quantity  of  water  in  the  dark,  a  luminous  effect  is  observed.  But,
nevertheless,  water  may  still  be  separated  from  this  hydrate.^*  If
phosphorus  be  burnt  in  dry  air,  a  white  substance  called  *  phosphoric
Anhydride  ^  is  obtained.  It  combines  with  water  with  such  energy,  that
the  experiment  must  be  conducted  with  great  caution.  A  red  heat  is
produced  in  the  formation  of  the  compound,  and  it  is  impossible  to
separate  the  water  from  the  resultant  hydrate  at  any  temperature.
The  hydrate  formed  by  phosphoric  anhydride  is  a  substance  which  is
totally  undecomposable  into  its  original  component  parts  by  the  action
of  heat.  Almost  as  energetic  a  combination  occurs  when  sulphuric
anhydride,  SO3,  combines  with  water,  forming  its  hydrate,  sulphuric
acid,  H«S04.  In  both  cases  definite  compounds  are  produced,  but
the  latter  substance,  as  a  liquid,  and  capable  of  decomposition  by
heat,  forms  an  evident  link  with  solutions.  If  80  parts  of  sulphuric
anhydride  retain  18  parts  of  water,  this  water  cannot  be  separated  from
the  anhydride,  even  at  a  temperature  of  300°.  It  is  only  by  the
addition  of  phosphoric  anhydride,  or  by  a  series  of  chemical  transforma-
tions, that  this  water  can  be  separated  from  its  compound  with
sulphuric  anhydride. Oil  of  vitriol,  or  sulphuric  acid,  is  such  a  cora-

''  In  combining  with  water  one  part  by  weight  of  lime  evolves  245  units  of  heat.  A
high  temperature  is  obtained,  because  the  specific  heat  of  the  resulting  product  is  small.
Sodium  oxide,  Na^O,  in  reacting  on  water,  H2O,  and  forming  caustic  soda  (sodium
ihydroxide),  NaHO,  evolves  552  units  of  heat  for  each  part  by  weight  of  sodium  oxide.

ON  WATER  AND  ITS COMPOUNDS  111

pound.  If  a  larger  proportion  of  water  be  taken,  it  will  combine
with  the  H2SO4  ;  for  instance,  if  36  parts  of  water  per  80  parts  of
sulphuric  anhydride  be  taken,  a  compound  is  formed  which  crystallises
in  the  cold,  and  melts  at +  8°,  whilst  oil  of  vitriol  does  not  solidify  even
at— 30°.  If  still  more  water  be  taken,  the  oil  of  vitriol  will  dissolve  in
the  remaining  quantity  of  water.  An  evolution  of  heat  takes  place,
not  only  on  the  addition  of  the  water  of  constitution,  but  in  a  less
degree  on  further  additions  of  water.^^  And  therefore  there  is  no
distinct  boundary,  but  only  a  gradual  transition,  between  those
chemical  phenomena  which  are  expressed  in  the  formation  of  solutions
and  those  which  take  place  in  the  formation  of  the  most  stable
hyd  rates.  ^^

'*  The  diagram  given  in  note  28  bIiowr  the  evolution  of  heat  on  the  mixture  of
sulphuric  acid,  or  mono-hydrate  (H0SO4,  i.e.  SO- -1-  H._,0),  with  different  quantities  of  water
per  100  vols,  of  the  resultant  solution.  Every  98  grams  of  j-ulphuric  acid  (H.^SOi)  evolve,
on  the  addition  of  18  grams  of  water,  6,870  units  of  heat ;  with  twice  or  three  times  the
quantity  of  water  9,418  and  11,137  units  of  heat,  and  with  an  infinitely  large  quantity  of
water  17,860  units  of  heat,  according  to  the  determinations  of  Thomson.  He  also  showed
that  when  H^SOj  is  formed  from  SO.-  (  -ho)  and  H^O  (-18),  21,808  units  of  heat  are
evolved  per  98  parts  by  weight  of  the  resultant  sulphuric  acid.

^•^  Thus,  for  different  hydrates  the  stability  with  which  they  liold  water  is  very  dis-
similar. Certain  hydrates  hold  water  very  loosely,  and  in  combining  with  it  evf»lve  little
heat.  From  other  hydrates  the  water  cannot  be  separated  by  any  degree  of  heat,  even
if  they  are  formed  from  anhydrides  (i.e.  anhydrous  substances)  and  water  with  little
evolution  of  heat ;  for  instance,  acetic  anhydride  in  combining  with  water  evolves  an
inconsiderable  amount  of  heat,  but  the  water  cannot  then  be  exiHiUed  from  it.  If  the
hydrate  (acetic  acid)  formed  by  this  combination  be  strongly  heated  it  either  volatihses
without  change,  or  decomposes  into  new  substances,  but  it  does  not  again  yield  the  origi-
nal substances — i.e.,  the  anhydride  and  watt?r,  at  least  in  a  litjuid  form.  Here  is  an
instance  which  gives  the  reason  foi  calling  the  water  entering  into  the  composition  of  the
hydrate,  water  of  constitution.  Such,  for  example,  is  the  water  entering  into  the  so-
called  caustic  soda  or  sodium  hydroxide  (see  note  71).  But  there  are  hydrates  which
easily  part  with  tlieir  water ;  yet  this  water  cannot  be  considered  as  water  of  crystallisa-
tion, not  only  because  sometimes  such  hydrates  have  no  crystalline  form,  but  also  because,
in  perfectly  analogous  cases,  very  stable  hydrates  are  formed,  which  are  capable  of  parti-
cular kinds  of  chemical  reactions,  as  we  shall  subsequently  learn.  Sucli,  for  example,  is
the  unstable  hydrated  oxide  of  copper,  which  is  not  formed  from  water  and  oxide  of
copper,  but  which  is  obtained  just  like  far  more  stable  hydrates,  for  example,  the  hydrated
oxide  of  barium  BaHoO.i  equal  to  BaO  +  H.>0,  by  the  double  decomposition  of  the  solution
of  salts  with  alkalies.  In  a  word,  there  is  no  distinct  boundary  either  between  the  water
of  hydrates  and  of  cr>'stallisation,  or  between  solution  and  hydration.

It  must  be  observed  that  in  separating  from  an  aqueous  solution,  many  substances,
without  having  a  crystalline  form,  hold  water  in  the  same  unstable  state  as  in  crystals  ;
only  this  water  cannot  be  termed  *  water  of  crystallisation '  if  the  substance  which
separates  out  has  no  crystalline  form.  The  hydrates  of  alumina  and  silica  are  examples
of  such  unstable  hydrates.  If  these  substances  are  separated  from  an  aqueous  solution
by  a  chemical  process,  then  they  always  contain  water.  The  formation  of  a  new  chemical
compound  containing  water  is  here  particularly  evident,  for  alumina  and  silica  in  an
anhydrous  state  have  chemical  properties  differing  from  those  they  show  when  combined
with  water,  and  do  not  combine  directly  with  it.  The  entire  series  of  colloids  on  separ-
ating from  water  form  similar  compounds  with  it,  which  have  the  aspect  of  solid  gelatinous

112  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

We  have  thus  considered  many  aspects  and  degrees  of  combination
of  various  substances  with  water,  or  instances  of  the  compounds  of
water,  when  it  and  other  substances  form  new  homogeneous  substances,
which  in  this  case  will  evidently  be  complex — i.e.  made  up  of  different
substances — and  although  they  are  homogeneous,  yet  it  must  l>e
admitted  that  in  them  there  exist  those  component  parts  which  entered
into  their  composition,  inasmuch  as  these  parts  may  be  re-obtained  from
them.  It  must  not  be  imagined  that  water  really  exists  in  hydrate  of
lime,  any  more  than  that  ice  or  steam  exists  in  water.  When  we  say
that  water  occurs  in  the  composition  of  a  certain  hydrate,  we  only  wish
to  point  out  that  there  are  chemical  transformations  in  which  it  is
possible  to  obtain  that  hydrate  by  means  of  water,  and  other  transfor-
mations in  which  this  water  may  be  separated  out  from  the  hydrate.
This  is  all  simply  expressed  by  the  words,  that  water  enters  into  the
composition  of  this  hydrate.  If  a  hydrate  be  formed  by  feeble  bonds,
and  be  decomposed  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  be  a  liquid,
then  the  water  appears  as  one  of  the  products  of  dissociation,  and
this  gives  an  idea  of  what  solutions  are,  and  forms  the  fundamental
distinction  between  them  and  other  hydrates  in  which  the  water  is-
combined  with  greater  stability.

HubstanceH.  Water  in  held  in  a  coiiBiderable  quantity  in  Bolidified  glue  or  boiled  albumin.
It  cannot  be  expelled  from  them  by  pressure  ;  hence,  in  this  case  there  has  ensued  some
kind  of  combination  of  the  Kubstance  with  water.  Tliis  water,  however,  in  easily  separated
on  drying ;  but  not  the  whole  of  it,  a  portion  being  retained,  and  thiH  portion  in  considered
to  belong  to  the  hydrate,  althougli  in  this  case  it  is  very  difficult,  if  not  imi)OHsible,  to
obtain  definite  compounds.  The  absence  of  any  distinct  boundary  lines  between  solu-
tions, crystallo-hydrates,  and  ordinary  hydrates  above  referred  to,  is  very  clearly  seen  in
such  examples.

113

CHAPTER II

THE COMPOSITION OF WATER, HYDROGEN

The  question  now  arises,  Is  not  water  itself  a  compound  mibstance?
Cannot  it  be  formed  by  the  mutual  combination  of  some  component
parts  ?  Cannot  it  be  broken  up  into  its  component  parts  ?  There  can-
not be  the  least  doubt  that  if  it  does  split  up,  and  if  it  is  a  compound,
then  it  is  a  definite  one  characterised  by  the  stability  of  the  union
between  those  component  parts  from  which  it  is  formed.  From  the
fact  alone  that  water  passes  into  all  physical  states  as  a  homogeneous
whole,  without  in  the  least  varying  chemically  in  its  properties  and
without  splitting  up  into  its  component  parts  (neither  solutions  nor
many  hydrates  can  be  distilled — they  are  split  up),  we  must  conclude,
from  this  fact  alone,  that  if  water  is  a  compound  then  it  is  a  stable  and
definite  chemical  compound  capable  of  entering  into  many  other  com-
binations. Like  many  other  great  discoveries  in  the  province  of
chemistry,  it  is  to  the  end  of  the  last  century  that  we  are  indebted
for  the  important  discovery  that  water  is  not  a  simple  substance,  that
it  is  composed  of  two  substances  like  a  number  of  other  compound
substances.  This  was  proved  by  two  of  the  methods  by  which  the  com-
pound nature  of  bodies  may  be  directly  determined  ;  by  analysis
and  by  synthesis — that  is,  by  a  method  of  the  decomposition  of  water
into,  and  of  the  formation  of  water  from,  its  component  parts.  In  1781
Cavendish  first  obtained  water  by  burning  hydrogen  in  oxygen,  both  of
which  gases  were  already  known  to  him.  He  concluded  from  this  that
water  was  composed  of  two  substances.  But  he  did  not  make  more
accurate  experiments,  which  would  have  shown  the  relative  quantities
of  the  component  parts  in  water,  and  which  would  have  determined  its
complex  nature  with  certainty.  Although  his  experiments  were  the
first,  and  although  the  conclusion  he  drew  from  them  was  true,  yet  such
novel  ideas  as  the  complex  nature  of  water  are  not  easily  recognised  so
long  as  there  is  no  series  of  researches  which  entirely  and  indubitably
proves  the  truth  of  such  a  conclusion.  The  fundamental  experiments
which  proved  the  complexity  of  w^ater  by  the  method  of  synthesis,  and
VOL.  I.  1

114  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

of  its  formation  from  other  substances,  were  made  in  1789  by  Monge,
Lavoisier,  Fourcroy,  and  Vauquelin. They  obtained  four  ounces  of
water  by  burning  hydrogen,  and  found  that  water  consists  of  15  parts
of  hydrogen  and  85  parts  of  oxygen. It  was  also  proved  that  the
weight  of  water  formed  was  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the
component  parts  entering  into  its  composition  ;  consequently,  water  con-
tains all  the  matter  entering  into  oxygen  and  hydrogen. The  com-
plexity of  water  was  proved  in  this  manner  by  a  method  of  synthesis.
But  we  will  turn  to  its  analysis — i.e,  to  its  decomposition  into  its  com-
ponent parts. The  analysis  may  be  more  or  less  complete. Either
both component  parts  may  be  obtained  in  a  separate  state,  or  else
only  one  is  separated  and  the  other  is  converted  into  a  new  compound
in  which  its  amount  may  be  determined  by  weighing. This  will  be  a
reaction of substitution, such as  is  often taken advantage of for
analysis. The  first  analysis  of  water  was  thus  conducted  in  1784  by
Lavoisier  and  Meusnier. The  apparatus  they  arranged  consisted  of  a
glass  retort  containing  water  previously puriBed,  and  of  which  the
weight  had  been  determined. The  neck  of  the  retort  was  inserted  into
a  porcelain  tube,  placed  inside  an  oven,  and  heated  to  a  red  heat  by
charcoal. Iron  filings,  which  decompose  water  at  a  red  heat,  were
placed  inside  this  tube. The  end  of  the  tube  was  connected  with  a
worm,  for  condensing  any  water  which  might  pass  through  the  tube
undecomposed. This  condensed water was collected in a separate
flask. The  gas  formed  by  the  decomposition  was  collected  over  water
in  a  bell  jar. The  aqueous  vapour  in  passing  over  the  red-hot  iron  was
decomposed,  and  a gas  was  formed  from  it  whose weight  could be
determined from its  volume,  its  density  being  known. Besides  the
water  which  passed  through  the  tube  unaltered,  a  certain  quantity  of
water  disappeared  in  the  experiment,  and  this  quantity,  in  the  experi-
ments of  Lavoisier  and  Meusnier,  was  equal  to  the  weight  of  gas  which
was  collected  in  the  bell  jar  plus  the  increase  in  weight  of  the  iron
filings. Hence the  water was  decomposed into  a gas,  which was
collected  in  the  bell  jar,  and  a  substance,  which  combined  with  the
iron  ;  consequently,  it  is  composed  of  these  two  component  parts. This
was  the  first  analysis  of  water  ever  made  ;  but  here  only  one  (and  not
both)  of  the  gaseous  component  parts  of  water  was  collect^ed  separately.
Both  the  component  parts  of  water  can,  however,  be  simultaneously
obtained  in  a  free  state. For  this  purpose  the  decomposition  is  brought
alK)ut  by  a  galvanic  current  or  by  heat,  as  we  shall  learn  directly.*

*  The  first  experiments  of  the  syntlieKis  and  decomposition  of  water  did  not  afford,
however,  an  entirely  convincing  proof  tliat  water  was  composed  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen
only. Davy,  who  investigated  the  decom^wsition  of  water  by  the  galvanic  current,

THE COMPOSITION  OF  WATER, HYDROGEN  115

Water  is  a  bad  conductor  of  electricity — that  is,  pure  water  does
not  transmit  a  feeble  current ;  but  if  any  salt  or  acid  be  dissolved  in
it,  then  its  conductivity  increases,  and  on  the  passage  of  a  current
through  acidified  water  it  is  decomposed  into  its  component  parts.
Some  sulphuric  acid  is  generally  added  to  the  water.  By  immersing
platinum  plates  (electrodes)  in  this  water  (platinum  is  chosen  because
it  is  not  acted  on  by  acids,  whilst  many  other  metals  are  chemically
acted  on  by  acids),  and  connecting  them  with  a  galvanic  battery,  it
will  be  observed  that  bubbles  of  gas  appear  on  these  plates.  The  gas
which  separates  is  called  detonating  gas,^  because,  on  ignition,  it  very
easily  explodes.^  What  takes  place  is  as  follows  : — First,  the  water,
by  the  action  of  the  current,  is  decomposed  into  two  gases.  The
mixture  of  these  gases  forms  detonating  gas.  When  detonating  gas  is
brought  into  contact  with  an  incandescent  substance  —for  instance,  a
lighted  taper— the  gases  re-combine,  forming  water,  the  combination
being  accompanied  by  a  great  evolution  of  heat,  and  therefore  the
vapour  of  the  water  formed  expands  considerably,  which  it  does  very
rapidly,  and  as  a  consequence,  an  explosion  takes  place — that  is,  sound
and  increase  of  pressure,  and  atmospheric  disturbance,  as  in  the  ex-
plosion of  gunpowder.

In  order  to  discover  what  gases  are  obtained  by  the  decomposition
of  water,  the  gases  which  separate  at  each  electrode  must  be  collected
separately.  For  this  purpose  a  V-shaped  tube  is  taken  ;  one  of  its
ends  is  open  and  the  other  fused  up.  A  platinum  wire,  terminating
inside  the  tube  in  a  plate,  is  fused  into  the  closed  end  ;  the  closed  end

thought  for  a  long  time  that,  besides  the  gases,  aii  acid  and  alrall  were  also  obtained.
He  was  only  convinced  of  the  fact  that  water  contains  nothing  but  liydrogen  and  oxygen
by  a  long  series  of  researches,  which  showed  him  tliat  the  api>earance  of  an  acid  and
alkali  in  the  decomposition  of  water  proceeds  from  the  presence  of  impurities  (esi>ecially
from  the  presence  of  ammonium  nitrate)  in  water.  A  final  comprehension  of  tlie  com-
position of  water  is  obtained  from  the  accurate  determination  of  tlio  quantities  of  tlie
component  parts  which  enter  into  its  composition.  It  will  be  seen  from  this  how  many
data  are  necessary  for  provuig  the  composition  of  water  -  that  is,  of  the  transformations
of  which  it  is  cai>able.  What  has  been  said  of  water  refers  to  all  other  compounds ;  the
investigation  of  each  one,  the  entire  proof  of  its  compcsition,  can  only  be  obtained  by  the
accumulation  of  a  large  mass  of  data  referring  to  it.

'  This  gas  is  collected  in  a  voltameter.

3  In  order  to  observe  this  explosion  without  the  slightest  danger,  it  is  best  to  proceed
in  the  following  memner.  Some  soapy  water  is  prepared,  so  that  it  easily  forms  soap
bubbles,  and  it  is  poured  into  an  iron  trough.  In  this  water,  the  end  of  a  gas-conducting
tube  is  immersed.  This  tube  is  connected  with  any  suitable  apparatus,  in  which  deto-
nating gas  is  evolved.  Soap  bubbles,  full  of  this  gas,  are  then  formed.  If  the  apparatus
in  which  the  gas  is  produced  be  then  removed  (otherwise  the  explosion  might  travel  into
the  interior  of  the  apparatus),  and  a  lighted  taper  be  brought  to  the  soap  bubbles,  a  very
sharp  explosion  takes  place.  The  bubbles  should  be  small  to  avoid  any  danger ;  ten,
•each  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  suffice  to  give  a  sharp  report,  like  a  pistol  shot.

I  2

116  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

is  entirely  filled  with  water  ^  acidified  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  another
platinum  wire,  terminating  in  a  plate,  is  immersed  in  the  open  end.
If  a  current  from  a  galvanic  battery  be  now  passed  through  the  wires
an  evolution  of  gases  will  be  observed,  and  the  gas  which  is  obtained
in  the  open  branch  passes  into  the  air,  while  that  in  the  closed  branch
accumulates  above  the  water.  As  this  gas  accumulates  it  displaces  the
water,  which  continues  to  descend  in  the  closed  and  ascend  into  the
open  branch  of  the  tubes.  When  the  water,  in  this  way,  reaches  the
top  of  the  open  end,  the  passage  of  the  current  is  stopped,  and  the  gas
which  was  evolved  from  one  of  the  electrodes  only  is  obtained  in  the
apparatus.  By  this  means  it  is  easy  to  prove  that  a  particular  gas
appears  at  each  electrode.  If  the  closed  end  be  connected  with  the
negative  pole — i.e,  with  that  joined  to  the  zinc — then  the  gas  collected
in  the  apparatus  is  capable  of  burning.  This  may  be  demonstrated  by
the  following  experiment : — The  bent  tube  is  taken  off  the  stand,  and
its  open  end  stopped  up  with  the  thumb  and  inclined  in  such  a  manner
that  the  gas  passes  from  the  closed  to  the  open  end.  It  will  then  be
found,  on  applying  a  lighted  lamp  or  taper,  that  the  gas  bums.  This
combustible  gas  is  hydrogen.  If  the  same  experiment  be  carried  on
with  a  current  passing  in  the  opposite  direction — that  is,  if  the  closed
end  be  joined  up  with  the  positive  pole  {i.e.  with  the  carbon,  copper,
or  platinum),  then  the  gas  which  is  evolved  from  it  does  not  itself  bum,
but  it  supports  combustion  very  vigorously,  so  that  a  smouldering  taper
in  it  immediately  bursts  into  flame.  This  gas,  which  is  collected  at  the
anode  or  positive  pole,  is  oxygen^  which  is  obtained,  as  we  saw  before
(in  the  Introduction),  from  mercury  oxide  and  is  contained  in  air.

Thus  in  the  decomposition  of  water  oxygen  appears  at  the  positive
pole  and  hydrogen  at  the  negative  pole,'*^**  so  that  detonating  gas  will  be
a  mixture  of  both.  Hydrogen  bums  in  air  from  the  fact  that  in  doing
so  it  re-forms  water,  with  the  oxygen  of  the air. Detonating  gas

^  In  order  to  fill  the  tube  with  water,  it  is  turned  up,  so  that  the  closed  end  points
downwards  and  the  open  end  upwards,  and  water  acidified  with  sulphuric  acid  is  poured
into  it.

4  bu  Owing  to  the  gradual  but  steady  progress  made  during  the  last  twenty-five  yearn
in  the  production  of  an  electric  current  from  the  d3mamo  and  its  transmission  over  con-
siderable distances,  the  electrolytic  decomposition  of  many  compound  bodies  has  acquired
great  importance,  and  the  use  of  the  electric  current  is  making  its  way  into  many  chemical
manufactures. Hence,  Prof.  D.  A.  LachinofP's  proposal  to  obtain  hydrogen  and  oxygen
(both  of  which  have  many  applications)  by  means  of  electrolysis  (either  of  a  10  to  15  per  cent.
■ollitioti  of  caustic  soda  or  a  15  per  cent,  solution  of  sulphuric  acid)  may  find  a  practical
i^pplication,  at  all  events  in  the  future. In  general,  owing  to  their  simplicity,  electrolytic
"MlliodB  have  a  great  future,  but  as  yet,  so  long  as  the  production  of  an  electric  current
*iuuni  so  costly,  their  application  is  limited. And  for  this  reason,  although  certain  of
wtb  methods  are  mentioned  in  this  work,  they  are  not  specially  considered,  the  more
inoe  a  profitable  and  proper  use  of  the  electric  current  for  chemical  purposes  requires
tidi  <declro>techiiical  knowledge  which  beginners  cannot  be  assumed  to  have,  and

THE COMPOSITION  OF  WATER. HYDROGEN

117

explodes  from  the  fact  that  the  hydrogen  bums  in  the  oxygen  mixed

with  it. It  is  very  easy  to  measure  the  relative  quantities  of  one  and

the  other  gas  which  are  evolved  in  the  decomposition  of  water. For

this  purpose  a  funnel  is  taken,  whose  orifice

is  closed  by  a  cork  through  which  two  platinum

wires pass. These wires are connected

with  a  battery. Acidified  water  is  poured

into  the  funnel,  and  a  glass  cylinder  full  of

water  is  placed  over the  end  of each  wire

(fig.  18). On  passing  a  current,  hydrogen  and

oxygen  collect  in  these  cylinders,  and  it  will

easily  be  seen  that  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  are

evolved  for  every  one  volume  of  oxygen. This

signifies  that,  in  decon)posing,  water  gives  two

volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  \'olume  of  oxygen.

Water  is  also  decomposed  into  its  com- ig.?^. •  .  :_i.^-

ponent  parts  by  the  ncl'ion  of  heat.  At  the  pj^.  ^f^  D.winruoitiun  oi  mbi«
melting  point  of  silver  {960°),  and  in  its  ,1J, 'rmiii^"tli^  reiSi' hi^'
presence,  water  is  decomposed  and  the  oxygen  twmiiiMjviiUiniw.iibjiimgrn
absorbed  by  the  molten  silver,  which  dis-
solves it  80  long  as  it  is  liquid.  But  directly  the  silver  solidifies  the
oxygen  is  expelled  from  it.  However,  this  experiment  is  not  entirely
convincing  ',  it  might  be  thought  that  in  this  case  the  decomposition  of
the  water  did  not  proceed  from  the  action  of  heat,  but  from  the  action
of  the  silver  on  water^that  silver  decomposes  water,  taking  up  the
oxygen.  If  steam  be  passed  through  a  red-hot  tube,  whose  internal
temperature  attains  1,000°,  then  a  portion  ''  ai  the  water  decomposes
into  its  component  parts,  forming  detonating  gas.  But  on  passing
into  the  cooler  portions  of  the  apparatus  thi^  detonating  gas  again  re-
unites and  forms  water.  The  hydrt^en  and  oxygen  obtained  combine
together  at  a  tower  temperature.*  Apparently  the  problem  to  show
the  decomposability  of  water  at  high  temperatures — is  unattainable.

of  d

mieaJti

n  the

work.

^  Ah  water  iit  tomieil  by  the  couibiimtion  of  oiygea  anil  hydrogen,  with  h  considerable
evolution  of  heat,  and  aa  it  can  also  be  decompoiied,  this  reaolion  in  a  rKveraible  one
{itt  Intioductinn).  and  cuiiiequeiitly  at  a  high  t«IiipeniturB  the  decoin|H)Bition  of  water
cannot  be  coni|il«l«— it  is  limited  by  the  opposite  miction.  Strictly  apeakin).',  it  in
not  knomi  how  uinch  water  in  devonipom.'d  at  a  giren  teiii|>eratnre,  although  many  efloHx
(Bun«en,  and  uthcrn)  liave  been  made  in  various  directions  to  solve  thia  <|u«>tioii,  Xut
knowing  the  coefficient  of  e>|jainion,  and  the  api-titig  beat  of  gasea  at  such  high  len.-
peratores,  tenders  nil  calculations  {from  observations  of  the  pressare  on  eipioaioii)
donbtfoL

It  was  considered  as  such  Uefore  Henii  Sninte-Claiw;  Deville  (in
tiftiea)  introduced  tlie  conception  of  diaswiation  into  chemistry,  as  of I
a  change  of  chemical  state  resembling  evaporation,  if  decomposition  be  1
likened  to  boiling,  and  before  he  had  demonstrated  the  decoTnposability
of  water  by  the  action  of  heat  in  an  expecitoent  which  will  presently  t>e
described. In  order  to  demonstrate  clearly  the  dusociaiiou  of  water,
or  its  decompoaability  by  heat,  at  a  temperature  approaching  that  at ,
which  it  is  formed,  it  was  necessary  to  sei>amte  the  hydiwgen  from  the
oxygen  at  a  high  temperature,  without  allowing  the  mLxture  to  cool.
Deville  took advantage of  the difference between the densities  of
hydrogen  and  oxygen.

A  wide  porcelain  tube  p  (tig.  1 0)  is  placed  in  a  furnace,  which  o
be  raised  to  a  high  temperature  (it  should  be  heated  with  small  pieces (

of  good  coke). In  this  tube  there is  in^rt«d  a second  tube  t, of  1
omaller  diameter,  made  of  unglazed  earthenware  and  therefore  porous.

"  QruTC,  in  VW,  uliMrved  Ltutt  a  iiUtiuum  wire  lawiX  in  tliB  otj--l]yilro);flii  fl
Hut  in,  bjiving  luquireil  tbe  letnperature  of  Ihe  fonnntioa  of  water— uiil  havinic  tonatA
■  mollen  <irop  Kt  its  end  wliiuli  fell  into  water,  eTolre<l  detooating  gai—thitl  is,  deoom-
pOHed  wiLter.  It  tliemfore  follows  that  water  klrtady  deoompowii  nt  the  temptntniB  of
its  (orouitioii.  At  that  time,  tliii  formed  a  scientific  paradox ;  this  we  shall  Dnnral
only  with  the  develoioDeut  of  the  conceptions  of  diuocimtiou.  inlrodoced  into  a
by  Henri  SuDle-Ctaire  Deville,  in  ISST.  These  conceptions  fonu  an  importitDt  k\
in  (cienw,  and  tlieir  development  is  one  of  the  problems  of  modem  ohemiatry.  Tli»  I
esBCDOe  of  the  matter  is  that,  at  high  temperalurea,  water  exists  bnt  also  decompom,  T
jutt  u  a  volatile  liqnid,  at  a  certnin  tempeiuture,  exists  both  as  a  liqnid  sjid  as  ■  vapmn.  I
Kimilaily  as  n  volatile  liqnid  uturates  a.  space,  attaining  its  maiiniiun  te
the  products  ol  disaociitlioD  huve  their  nuuiiniDni  tension,  lUid  once  the
decompoHitiou  ceaaes,  jusl  H  evaporMion  ceases.  Under  like  wndilion*,  it  the  v
u  escape  (and  tlieretoie  ilH  pnrtial  preuare  be  diminished),  evaporatioi
MI  uIbu  it  tlu!  prudncta  of  decompoaition  be  removed,  decomposition
u«s.  These  simple  couceptiuns  of  dissociatioo  iutrodDce  inflnitely  varied  a
'e  shall  have  (K

THE COMPOSITION OF  AVATEE, HYDROGEN  119

The  ends  of  the  tube  are  luted  to  the  wide  tube,  and  two  tubes,  c  and
c',  are  inserted  into  the  ends,  as  shown  in  the  drawing.  With  this
arrangement  it  is  possible  for  a  gas  to  pass  into  the  annular  space  be-
tween the  walls  of  the  two  tubes,  from  whence  it  can  be  collected.
Steam  from  a  retort  or  flask  is  passed  through  the  tube  d,  into  the
inner  porous  tube  T.  This  steam  on  entering  the  red-hot  space  is  de-
composed into  hydrogen  and  oxygen.  The  densities  of  these  gases  are
very  different,  hydrogen  being  sixteen  times  lighter  than  oxygen.
light  gases,  as  we  saw  above,  penetrate  through  porous  surfaces  very
much  more  rapidly  than  denser  gases,  and  therefore  the  hydrogen
passes  through  the  pores  of  the  tube  into  the  annular  space  very  much
more  rapidly  than  the  oxygen.  The  hydrogen  which  separates  out  into
the  annular  space  can  only  be  collected  when  this  space  does  not
contain  any  oxygen.  If  any  air  remains  in  this  space,  then  the  hydro-
gen which  separates  out  will  combine  with  its  oxygen  and  form  water.
For  this  reason  a  gas  incapable  of  supporting  combustion — for  instance,
nitrogen  or  carbonic  anhydride — is  previously  passed  into  the  annular
space.  Thus  the  carbonic  anhydride  is  passed  th  rough  the  tube  c,  and
the  hydrogen,  separated  from  the  steam,  is  collected  through  the  tube  c',
and  will  be  partly  mixed  with  carbonic  anhydride.  A  certain  portion
of  the  carbonic  anhydride  will  penetrate  through  the  pores  of  the  un-
glazed  tube  into  the  interior  of  the  tube  t.  The  oxygen  will  remain
in  this  tube,  and  the  volume  of  the  remaining  oxygen  will  be  half  that
of  the  volume  of  hydrogen  which  separates  out  from  the  annular
space.®*'^*

The  decomposition  of  water  is  effected  much  more  easily  by  a
method  of  substitution,  taking  advantage  of  the  affinity  of  substances
for  the  oxygen  or  the  hydrogen  of  water. If  a  substance  be  added  to

to  return  to  them  very  often.  We  may  add  that  Grove  also  concluded  that  water  was
decomposed  at  a  white  heat,  from  the  fact  that  lie  obtained  detonating  gas  by  passing
steam  through  a  tube  with  a  wire  heated  strongly  by  an  electric  current,  and  also  by
passing  steam  over  molten  oxide  of  lead,  he  obtained,  on  the  one  hand,  litharge  ( =  oxide
of  l^kd  and  oxygen),  and  on  the  other,  metallic  lead  formed  by  the  action  of  hydrogen.

"  •»••  Part  of  the  oxygen  will  also  penetrate  through  the  i>ores  of  the  tube  ;  but,  as  was
said  before,  a  much  smaller  quantity  than  the  hydrogen,  and  as  the  density  of  oxygen  is
sixteen  times  greater  than  that  of  hydrogen,  the  volume  of  oxygen  which  passes  through
the  porous  walls  will  be  four  times  less  than  the  volume  of  hydrogen  (the  quantities  of
gases  passing  through  porous  walls  are  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  roots  of  their
densities).  The  oxygen  which  separates  out  into  the  annular  space  will  combine,  at  a
certain  fall  of  temperature,  with  the  hydrogen ;  but  as  each  volume  of  oxygen  only
requires  two  volumes  of  hydrogen,  whilst  at  least  four  volumes  of  hydrogen  will  pass
through  the  porous  walls  for  every  volume  of  oxygen  that  passes,  therefore,  part  of  the
hydrogen  will  remain  free,  and  can  be  collected  from  the  annular  space.  A  corresponding
quantity  of  oxygen  remaining  from  the  decomposition  of  the  water  can  be  collected  from
the  internal  tube.

120  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

water,  which  takes  up  the  oxygen  and  replaces  the  hydrogen— then  we
shall  obtain  the  latter  gas  from  the  water.  Thus  with  sodium,  water
gives  hydrogen,  and  with  chlorine,  which  takes  up  the  hydrogen,
oxygen  is  obtained.

Hydrogen  is  evolved  from  water  by  many  metals,  which  are  capable
of  forming  oxides  in  air — that  is,  which  are  capable  of  burning  or  com-
bining with  oxygen.  The  capacity  of  metals  for  combining  with
oxygen,  and  therefore  for  decomposing  water,  or  for  the  evolution  of
hydrogen,  is  very  dissimilar."  Among  metals,  potassium  and  sodium
exhibit  considerable  energy  in  this  respect. The  first  occurs  in  potash,

7  In  order  to  demonstrate  the  difference  of  the  affinity  of  oxygen  for  different
elements,  it  is  enough  to  compare  the  amounts  of  heats  which  arie  evolved  in  their  combi-
nation with  16  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen  ;  in  the  case  of  sodium  (when  Na.jO  is  formed,
or  46  parts  of  Na  combine  with  16  parts  of  oxygen,  according  to  Beketoff)  100,000  calories
(or  units  of  heat),  are  evolved,  for  hydrogen  (when  water,  H2O,  is  formed)  69,000  calories,
for  iron  (when  the  oxide  FeO  is  formed)  69,000,  and  if  the  oxide  Fe-jOs  is  forme<l,
64,000  calories,  for  zinc  (ZnO  is  formed)  86,000  calories,  for  lead  (when  PbO  is  formed)
51,000  calories,  for  copper  (when  CuO  is  formed)  88,000  calories,  and  for  mercury  (HgO
is  formed)  81,000  calories.

These  figures  cannot  correspond  directly  with  the  magnitude  of  the  affinities,  for  the
physical  and  mechanical  side  of  the  matter  is  very  different  in  the  different  cases.
Hydrogen  is  a  gas,  and,  in  combining  with  oxygen,  gives  a  liquid ;  consequently  it  changes
its  physical  state,  and,  in  doing  so,  evolves  heat.  But  zinc  and  copper  are  sohds,  and,
in  combining  with  oxygen,  give  solid  oxides.  The  oxygen,  previously  a  gas,  now  passes
into  a  solid  or  liquid  state,  and,  therefore,  also  must  have  given  up  its  store  of  heat  in
forming  oxides.  As  we  shall  afterwards  see,  the  degree  of  contraction  (and  conse-
quently of  mechanical  work)  was  different  in  the  different  cases,  and  therefore  the
figures  expressing  the  heat  of  combination  cannot  directly  depend  on  the  affinities,  on
the  loss  of  internal  energy  previously  in  the  elements.  Nevertheless,  the  figures  above
cited  correspond,  in  a  certain  degree,  with  the  order  in  which  the  elements  stand  in
respect  to  their  affinity  for  oxygen,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  the  mercurj'  oxide,
which  evolves  the  least  heat  (among  the  above  examples),  is  the  least  stable  is  easily
decomposed,  giving  up  its  oxygen ;  whilst  sodium,  the  formation  of  whose  oxide  is  accom-
panied by  the  greatest  evolution  of  heat,  is  able  to  decomiM)se  all  the  other  oxides,  takuig
up  tlieir  oxygen.  In  order  to  generalise  the  comiection  between  affinity  and  the  evolu-
tion and  the  absorption  of  heat,  which  is  evident  in  its  general  features,  and  was  firmly
established  by  the  researches  of  Favre  and  Silberman  (about  1840),  and  then  of  Thomsen
(in  Denmark)  and  Berthelot  (in  France),  many  investigators,  especially  the  one  last
mentioned,  established  the  law  of  mcLximum  xvorh.  This  states  that  only  those  chemical
reactions  take  place  of  their  own  accord  in  which  the  greatest  amount  of  chemical
(latent,  potential)  energy  is  transformed  into  heat.  But,  in  the  first  place,  we  are  not
able,  judging  from  what  has  been  said  above,  to  distinguish  that  heat  which  corresix>nds
with  x>urely  chemical  action  from  the  sum  total  of  the  heat  obser\'ed  in  a  reaction  (in  the
calorimeter) ;  in  the  second  place,  there  are  evidently  endothermal  reactions  wliidi
proceed  under  the  same  circumstances  as  exothermal  (carbon  bums  in  the  vapour  of
sulphur  with  absorption  of  heat,  whilst  in  oxygen  it  evolves  heat) ;  and,  in  the  third
place,  there  are  reversible  reactions,  which  when  taking  place  in  one  direction  evolve
heat,  and  when  taking  place  in  the  opposite  direction  absorb  it;  and,  therefore,  the
principle  of  maximum  work  in  its  elementary  form  is  not  supported  by  science.  But  the
subject  continues  to  be  developed,  and  will  probably  lead  to  a  general  law,  such  as
thermal  chemistry  does  not  at  present  ix)ssess.

THE COMPOSITION OF  AVATER, HYDROGEN  121

the  second  in  soda.  They  are  both  lighter  than  water,  soft,  and  easily
change  in  air.  By  bringing  one  or  the  other  of  them  in  contact  with
water  at  the  ordinary  temperature,®  a  quantity  of  hydrogen,  correspond-
ing with  the  amount  of  the  metal  taken,  may  be  directly  obtained.
One  gram  of  hydrogen,  occupying  a  volume  of  11*16  litres  at  0°  and
760  mm.,  is  evolved  from  every  39  grams  of  potassium,  or  23  grams  of
sodium.  The  phenomenon  may  be  observed  in  the  following  way  :  a
solution  of  sodium  in  mercury — or  *  sodium  amalgam,'  as  it  is  generally
called — is  poured  into  a  vessel  containing  water,  and  owing  to  its
weight  sinks  to  the  bottom  ;  the  sodium  held  in  the  mercury  then  acts
on  the  water  like  pure  sodium,  liberating  hydrogen.  The  mercury  does
not  act  here,  and  the  same  amount  of  it  as  was  taken  for  dissolving  the
sodium  is  obtained  in  the  residue.  The  hydrogen  is  evolved  gradually
in  the  form  of  bubbles,  which  pass  through  the  liquid.

Beyond  the  hydrogen  evolved  and  a  solid  substance,  which  remains
in  solution  (it  may  be  obtained  by  evaporating  the  resultant  solution)
no  other  products  are  here  obtained.  Consequently,  from  the  two  sub-
stances (water  and  sodium)  taken,  the  same  number  of  new  substances
(hydrogen  and  the  substance  dissolved  in  water)  have  been  obtained,
from  which  we  may  conclude  that  the  reaction  which  here  takes  place
is  a  reaction  of  double  decomposition  or  of  substitution.  The  resultant
solid  is  nothing  else  but  the  so-called  caustic  soda  (sodium  hy-
droxide), which  is  made  up  of  sodium,  oxygen,  and  half  of  the  hydrogen
contained  in  the  water.  Therefore,  the  substitution  took  place  between
the  hydrogen  and  the  sodium,  namely  half  of  the  hydrogen  in  the  water
was  replaced  by  the  sodium,  and  was  evolved  in  a  free  state.  Hence
the  reaction  which  takes  place  here  may  be  expressed  by  the  equation

^  U  a.  piece  of  metallic  Bodiuin  be  throwu  into  water,  it  floats  on  it  (owing  to  its  light-
ness), keeps  in  a  sUite  of  continual  motion  (owing  to  tlie  evolution  of  hydrogen  on
all  sides),  and  immediately  decomi^ses  the  water,  evolving  hydr<»gen,  which  can  be
lighted.  This  exi>eriment  may,  however,  lead  to  an  explosion  should  the  sodium  stick  to
the  walls  of  the  vessel,  and  begin  to  act  on  tlie  limited  mans  of  water  immediately  adjacent
to  it  (probably  in  this  case  NaHO  fonns  witli  Xa,  NhqO,  which  acts  on  the  water,  evolving
much  heat  and  rapidly  forming  steam),  and  the  exi^riment  should  therefore  be  carried
on  with  caution.  The  decomposition  of  water  by  so<lium  may  be  better  demonstrated,
and  with  greater  safety,  in  the  following  manner.  Into  a  glass  cylinder  filled  with  mer-
curj',  and  immersed  in  a  mercury  batli,  water  is  first  introduced,  which  will,  owing  to  its
lightness,  rise  to  the  top,  and  tlien  a  piece  of  sodium  wrupi>ed  in  pajjer  is  introduced  with
forceps  into  the  cylinder.  The  metal  rises  through  the  mercury  to  the  surface  of  the
water,  on  which  it  remains,  and  evolves  hydrogen,  which  collects  in  the  cylinder,  and
may  be  tested  after  the  exi^eriment  has  been  comi)leted.  Tlie  safest  method  of  making
this  experiment  is,  however,  as  follows.  The  sodium  (cleaned  from  the  naphtha  in  which
it  is  kept)  is  either  wrapi>ed  in  fine  coiii)er  gauze  and  held  by  forceps,  or  else  held  in
forceps  at  the  end  of  which  a  small  copi>er  cage  is  attached,  and  is  then  held  under
water.  The  evolution  of  hydrogen  goes  on  quietly,  and  it  mav  be  collected  in  a  bell
jar  and  then  lighted.

122  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

H20  +  Na=NaHO-f  H  ;  the  meaning  of  this  is  clear  from  what  has
already  been  said.^

Sodium  and  potassium  act  on  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature.
Other  heavier  metals  only  act  on  it  with  a  rise  of  temperature,  and
then  not  so  rapidly  or  vigorously.  Thus  magnesium  and  calcium  only
liberate  hydrogen  from  water  at  its  boiling  point,  and  zinc  and  iron
only  a  red  heat,  whilst  a  whole  series  of  heavy  metals,  such  as  copper,
lead,  mercury,  silver,  gold,  and  platinum,  do  not  in  the  least  decompose
water  at  any  temperature,  and  do  not  replace  its  hydrogen.

From  this  it  is  clear  that  hydrogen  may  be  obtained  by  the  decom-
position of  steam  by  the  action  of  iron  (or  zinc)  with  a  rise  of  tempera-
ture. The  experiment  is  conducted  in  the  following  manner  :  pieces
of  iron  (tilings,  nails,  Ac),  are  placed  in  a  porcelain  tube,  which  is  then
subjected  to  a  strong  heat  and  steam  passed  through  it. The  steam,

^  This  reaction  iu  vigorously  exothermal,  i.e.  it  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of
heat.  If  a  suflicient  quantity  of  water  be  taken  the  whole  of  the  sodium  hydroxide,  NaHO,
formed  is  dissolved,  and  about  42,500  units  of  heat  are  evolved  per  23  grams  of  sodium
taken.  As  -10  grams  of  sodium  hydroxide  are  produced,  and  they  in  dissolving,  judging
from  direct  experiment,  evolve  about  10,000  calories ;  therefore,  without  an  excess  of
water,  and  without  the  formation  of  a  solution,  the  reaction  would  evolve  about  32,500
calories.  We  shall  afterwards  learn  that  hydrogen  contains  in  its  smallest  isolable  par-
ticles H2  and  not  H,  and  therefore  it  follows  that  the  reaction  should  be  written  thus—
2Na  +  2H-jO  =  H.2  +  2NaHo,  and  it  then  corresponds  with  an  evolution  of  heat  of  +65,000
calories.  And  as  N.  X.  Beketoff  showed  that  Na^O,  or  anhydrous  oxide  of  sodium,  forms
the  hydrate,  or  sodimn  hydroxide  (caustic  soda),  2NaH0,  with  water,  evolving  about  86,500
calories,  therefore  the  reaction  2Na  +  H.2O  =  Hq  +  Na^O  corresponds  to  29,500  calories.
This  quantity  of  heat  is  less  than  that  which  is  evolved  in  combining  with  water,  in  the
formation  of  caustic  soda,  and  therefore  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  hydrate,  NaHO,
is  always  formed  and  not  the  anhydrous  substance  Na^^O.  That  such  a  conclusion,  which
tigrees  with  facts,  is  inevitable  is  also  seen  from  the  fact  that,  according  to  Beketoif,  the
anhydrous  sodium  oxide,  Na-^O,  acts  directly  on  hydrogen,  with  separation  of  sodium,
Na^O  +  H  —  NaHO  +  Na.  This  reaction  is  accompanied  by  an  evolution  of  heat  equal  to
about  8,000  calories,  because  Na-^O  +  HoO  gives,  as  we  saw,  85,500  calories  and  Na  +  HjO
evolves  82,500  calories.  However,  an  opposite  reaction  also  takes  place — NaHO  +  Na  =
Na.20  +  H  (both  with^he  aid  of  heat) — consequently,  in  this  case  heat  is  absorbed.  In
this  we  see  an  example  of  calorimetric  calculations  and  the  limited  application  of  the  law
of  maximum  work  for  the  general  phenomena  of  reversible  reactions,  to  which  the  case
just  considered  belongs.  But  it  must  be  remarked  that  all  reversible  reactions  evolve  or
absorb  but  little  heat,  and  the  reason  of  the  law  of  maximum  work,  not  being  universal*
must  first  of  all  be  looked  for  in  the  fact  that  we  have  no  means  of  separating  the  heat
which  corresponds  with  the  purely  chemical  process  from  the  sum  total  of  the  heat
observed,  and  an  the  structure  of  a  number  of  substances  is  altered  by  heat  and  also  by
contact,  we  can  scarcely  hope  tliat  the  time  approaches  when  such  a  distinction  will  be
possible.  A  heated  substance,  in  i3oint  of  fact,  has  no  longer  the  original  energy  of  its.
atoms  that  is,  the  act  of  heating  not  only  alters  the  store  of  motion  of  the  molecules
but  also  of  the  atoms  forming  the  molecules,  in  other  words,  it  makes  the  beginning  of  or
preparation  for  chemical  change.  From  this  it  must  be  concluded  that  thenno-chemistry,
or  the  study  of  the  heat  accompanying  chemical  transfonnations,  cannot  be  identified
with  chemical  mechanics.  Titer  mo-chemical  data  form  a  part  of  it,  but  they  alone  cannot
give  it.

THE COMPOSITION OF  WATER, HYDROGEN  12.^

•

coining  into  contact  with  the  iron,  gives  up  its  oxygen  to  it,  and  thus
the  hydrogen  is  set  free  and  passes  out  at  the  other  end  of  the  tube
together  with  undecomposed  steam.  This  method,  which  is  historically
very  significant,*®  is  practically  inconvenient,  as  it  requires  a  rather
high  temperature.  Further,  this  reaction,  as  a  reversible  one  (a  red-
hot  mass  of  iron  decomposes  a  current  of  steam,  forming  oxide  and
hydrogen  ;  and  a  mass  of  oxide  of  iron,  heated  to  redness  in  a  stream
of  hydrogen,  forms  iron  and  steam),  does  not  proceed  in  virtue  of  the
comparatively  small  difference  between  the  affinity  of  oxygen  for  iron
(or  zinc)  and  for  hydrogen,  but  only  because  the  hydrogen  escapes,  as-
it  is  formed,  in  virtue  of  its  elasticity.**  If  the  oxygen  compounds —
that  is,  the  oxides — which  are  obtained  from  the  iron  or  zinc,  be  able
to  pass  into  solution,  then  the  affinity  acting  in  solution  is  added,  and  the
reaction  may  become  non- reversible,  and  proceed  with  comparatively
much  greater  facility.'^ As  the  oxides  of  iron  and  zinc,  by  themselves

'**  The  compoHiiion  of  water,  as  we  saw  above,  was  determined  by  passing  steam  over
red-hot  iron ;  the  same  method  has  been  used  for  making  hydrogen  for  filling  balloons.
An  oxide  having  the  composition  Fe304  is  formed  in  the  reaction,  so  that  it  is  expressed
by  the  equation  8Fe  +  4H2O  =  Fe304  +  8H.

*^  The  reaction  between  iron  and  water  (note  10)  is  reversible.  By  heating  the  oxide
in  a  current  of  hydrogen,  water  and  iron  are  obtained.  From  this  it  folh)W8,  from  the
principle  of  chemical  equilibria,  that  if  iron  and  hydrogen  be  taken,  and  also  oxygen,  but
in  such  a  quantity  that  it  is  insufficient  for  combination  witli  both  substances,  then  it  will
divide  itself  between  the  two ;  part  of  it  will  combine  with  the  iron  and  the  other  part
with  the  hydrogen,  but  a  portion  of  both  will  remain  in  an  uncombined  state.

Therefore,  if  iron  and  water  be  placed  in  a  closed  space,  decomposition  of  the  water
will  proceed  on  heating  to  the  temperature  at  which  the  reaction  3Fe  +  4H^0  =  Fe504  +  8H
commences ;  but  it  ceases,  does  not  go  on  to  the  end,  because  the  conditions  for  a
reverse  reaction  are  attained,  and  a  state  of  equilibrium  will  ensue  after  the  decomi)08ition
oi  a  certain  quantity  of  water.  Here  again  {see  note  9)  the  reversibility  is  connected  with
the  small  heat  effect,  and  again  both  reactions  (direct  and  reverse)  proceed  at  a  red
heat.  But  if,  in  the  above-described  reaction,  the  hydrogen  escapes  as  it  is  evolved,  then
its  partial  pressure  does  not  increase  with  its  formation,  and  therefore  all  the  iron  can  be
oxidised  by  the  water.  In  this  we  see  the  elements  of  that  influence  of  mass  to  which  we
shall  have  occasion  to  return  later.  With  copper  and  lead  there  will  be  no  decomposition,
either  at  the  ordinary  or  at  a  high  temperature,  because  the  affinity  of  these  metals  for
c»xygen  is  much  less  than  that  of  hydrogen.

^*  In  general,  if  reversible  as  well  as  non- reversible  reactions  can  take  place  between
substances  acting  on  each  other,  then,  judging  by  our  present  knowledge,  the  non-
reversible reactions  take  place  in  the  majority  of  cases,  which  obliges  one  to  acknowledge
the  action,  in  this  case,  of  comparatively  strong  affinities.  The  reaction,  Zn  +  H.^SO^^
H2  +  ZnS04,  which  takes  place  in  solutions  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  is  scarcely  re-
versible under  these  conditions,  but  at  a  certain  high  temperature  it  becomes  reversible,
because  at  this  temperature  zinc  sulphate  and  sulphuric  acid  split  up,  and  the  action  must
take  place  between  the  water  and  »inc.  From  the  preceding  proix)Hition  results  proceed
which  are  in  some  cases  verified  by  ex|)eriment.  If  the  action  of  zinc  or  iron  on  a  solu-
tion of  sulphuric  acid  presents  a  non-reversible  reaction,  then  we  may  by  this  means
obtain  hydrogen  in  a  very  compressed  state,  and  compressed  hydrogen  will  not  act  on
solutions  of  sulphates  of  the  above-named  metals.  This  is  verified  in  reality  as  far  as  was
possible  in  the  experiments  to  keep  up  the  compression  or  pressure  of  the  hydrogen.

12i  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY'

insoluble  in  water,  are  capable  of  combining  with  (have  an  affinity  for)
acid  oxides  (as  we  shall  afterwards  fully  consider),  and  form  saline  and
soluble  substances,  with  acids,  or  hydrates  having  acid  properties,  hence
by  the  action  of  such  hydrates,  or  of  their  aqueous  solutions,'^  iron
and  zinc  are  able  to  liberate  hydrogen  with  great  ease  at  the  ordinary
temperature — that  is,  they  act  on  solutions  of  acids  just  as  sodium  acts
on  water  J  ^  Sulphuric  acid,  HgSO^,  is  usually  chosen  for  this  pui-pose  ;
the  hydrogen  is  displaced  from  it  by  many  metals  with  much  greater
facility  than  directly  from  water,  and  such  a  displacement  is  accompanied
by  the  evolution  of  a'large  amount  of  heat  J  "^ When  the  hydrogen  in

Those  metals  which  do  not  evolve  hydrogen  with  acids,  on  the  contrary,  should,  at  least
at  an  increase  oi  pressure,  be  displaced  by  hydrogen.  And  in  fact  Bruuner  showed  that
gaseous  hydrogen  displaces  platinum  and  palladium  from  the  aqueous  solutions  of
their  chlorine  compounds,  but  not  gold,  and  BeketofP  succeeded  in  showing  that  silver
and  mercury,  under  a  considerable  pressure,  are  separated  from  tlie  solutions  of  certain
of  their  compounds  by  means  of  hydrogen.  Reaction  already  commences  under  a  pres-
sure of  six  atmospheres,  if  a  weak  solution  of  silver  sulphate  be  taken  ;  with  a  stronger
solution  a  much  greater  pressure  is  required,  however,  for  the  separation  of  the  silver.

1^  For  the  same  reason,  many  metals  in  acting  on  solutions  of  the  alkahs  displace
hydrogen.  Aluminium  acts  particularly  clearly  in  this  respect,  because  itt^  oxide  gives  a
soluble  compound  with  alkalis.  For  the  same  reason  tin,  in  acting  on  hydrochloric  acid,
evolves  hydrogen,  and  silicon  does  the  same  with  hydrofluoric  acid.  It  is  evident  that
in  such  cases  the  sum  of  all  the  affinities  plays  a  part ;  for  instance,  taking  the  action  of
zinc  on  sulphuric  acid,  we  have  tlie  affinity  of  zinc  for  oxygen  (forming  zinc  oxide,  ZnO),
the  affinity  of  its  oxide  for  sulphuric  anhydride,  SO3  (forming  zinc  sulphate,  ZnSO^),  and
the  affinity  of  the  resultant  salt,  ZnSOi,  for  water.  It  is  only  the  first-named  affinity  tliat
acts  in  the  reaction  between  water  and  the  metal,  if  no  account  is  taken  of  those  forces
(of  a  physico- mechanical  character)  which  act  between  the  molecules  (for  instance,  the
cohesion  between  the  molecules  of  the  oxide)  and  those  forces  (of  a  chemical  character)
which  act  between  the  atoms  forming  the  molecule,  for  instance,  between  the  atoms  of
hydrogen  giving  the  molecule  H.2  containing  two  atoms.  I  consider  it  necessary  to
remark,  that  the  hypothesis  of  the  affinity  or  endeavour  of  heterogeneous  atoms  to  enter
into  a  common  system  and  in  harmonious  motion  (i.e.  to  form  a  compound  molecule)
must  inevitably  be  in  accordance  with  the  hypothesis  of  forces  including  homogeneous
atoms  to  form  complex  molecules  (for  instance,  Hj),  and  to  build  up  the  latter  into  solid
or  liquid  substances,  in  which  the  existence  of  an  attraction  between  the  homogeneous
particles  must  certainly  be  admitted.  Tlierefore,  those  forces  which  bring  about  solution
must  also  be  taken  into  consideration.  These  are  all  forces  of  one  and  the  same  series,
and  in  this  may  be  seen  the  great  difficulties  surrounding  the  study  of  molecular  mechanicK
and  its  province — chemical  mechanics.

^*  It  is  acknowledged  that  zinc  itself  acts  on  water,  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature,
bnt  that  the  action  is  confined  to  small  masses  and  only  proceeds  at  the  surface.  In
reality,  zinc,  in  the  form  of  a  very  fine  i)owder,  or  so-called  '  zinc  dust,'  is  capable  of
decomposing  water  with  the  formation  of  oxide  (liy^i*A^d)  &"d  hydrogen.  The  oxide
formed  acts  on  sulphuric  acid,  water  then  dissolves  the  salt  produced,  and  the  action
continues  l>ecause  one  of  the  products  of  the  action  of  water  on  zinc,  zinc  oxide,  is  removed
from  the  surface.  One  might  naturally  imagine  that  the  reaction  does  not  proceed
directly  between  the  metal  and  water,  but  between  the  metal  and  the  acid,  but  such  a
simple  representation,  wliich  we  shall  cite  afterwards,  hides  the  mechanism  of  the  reaction,
and  does  not  pennit  of  its  actual  complexity  being  seen.

'•'*  According  to  Thomsen  the  reaction  between  zinc  and  a  very  weak  solution  of
sulphuric  acid  evolves  about  38,000  calories  (zinc  sulphate  being  formed)  per  05  parts

rcOXPOSITlON OF  As^ATEfi, HilmOGBN

iulphnric  acid  is  replaced  by  a  luetAl,  a  substance  is  olitained  which  is
called  a  salt  of  sulphuric  acid  or  a  «ulphat«.  Tlius,  by  the  action  of  sine
on  sulphuric  acid,  hydrogen  and  zinc  sulphate  ZnSO^,'"''' are  obtained.
The  latt«r  is  a  solid  substaiK'e,  soluble  in  water.  In  order  that  the
action  of  the  metal  on  the  acid  should  go  on  regularly,  and  to  the  end,
it  is  necessary  that  the  acid  should  be  diluted  with  water,  which  dis-
solves the  salt  as  it  is  formed  ;  otherwise  the  salt  covers  the  metal,
and  hinders  the  acid  from  attai-kinu;  it.  Usually  the  acid  is  diluted
with  from  three  to  five  times  its  volume  of  water,  and  the  metal  is

ivered with this  solution. In order that  the metal should act

rapidly  on  the  acid,  it  should  present  a  lai'ge  surface,  so  that  a  maxi-

I mum  amount  of  the  reacting  substancea  may  come  into  contact  in  a

in  lime. For  this  purpose  the  zinc  is  used  as  strips  of  sheet  zinc,

n  the  granulated  form  (that  is.  zinc  which  has  been  poured  from  a

[  certain  height,  in  a  molten  state,  into  water). The  iron  should  be  in

(  the  form  of  wire,  nails,  tilings,  or  cuttings.

■  iiy  wnghi  dF  ziac  r  nnd  Sfl  pticte  by  weight  ot  iron — which  combine,  liko  CG  parts  hy
I  Waigbt  ot  unc,  with  10  porti  by  weight  ot  OEfgeu— evolTe  about  9G,D00  caloriea  (formin^r

I  BUlpbate.  FeSO,). PunLcelsns  obBKived  tba  aetion  ot  metbls  on  urida  in  the
WDth  century  ;  but  it  vaa  not  tuitii  tha  eighteenth  cental^  thnt  L^merj  determined

■  tfakt  the  gas  which  ia  evolved  in  this  action  is  a  particolar  one  which  difien  from  air
capable  ol  hnniiag. Even  Bujle  coiifosed  it  with  ait. Cavendiih  detsnniued  the

r  dnet  properties  ot  the  gia  discovered  by  Parscelaas.  At  Srat  it  was  called  '  influnmahle
'  i  later,  when  it  wa6  recognised  that  in  burning  it  gives  water,  it  wu  Railed  hjdmf^n,
m  the  Oreek  wnrdu  fnr  water  and  geuerstor.

■*"■  It,  when  the  kill ph uric  acid  is  poured  over  the  zinc,  tlie  evnintion  of  the  hydrogen
loeed  too  slowly,  it  maybe  greatly  accelerated  by  adding  h  bitmII  quantity  ot  a  solation
XCaSOiorPtCI,  to  thewid. The  reaKinof  this  is  riplained  in  Cbap.XVL.note  ID><K

The  usual  method  of  obtaining  hydrogen  is  as  follows  : — A  certain

I-  ■(juantity  of  granulated  zinc  is  put  into  a  double -nectcd,  or  Woulfe's,

1  bottle. Into  one  neck  ii  funnel  is  placed,  reaching  to  the  bottom  of

I  the  bottle,  so  tliat  the  liquid  poured  in  may  prevent  the  hydrogen  fiBni

«icftping  through  it. Tho  gas  escapes  through  a  special  gas  conducting

tuhe,  which  is  firmly  fixed,  by  a.  cork,  into  the  other  neck,  and  euda  in

a,  Wiiter  bath (fig.  20),  under  the  oriBce  of  a  glass cylinder  full  of

water.'^ If  sulphuric  acid  be  now  poured  into  the  Woulfe's  bottle  it

will  soon  be  seen  that  bubbles  of  a  gas  are  evolved,  which  is  hydrogen.

The  first  part  of  th;  gas evolvwl should  not  be  collected,  aa  it  is

raixeil with  the  air originally  in  the apparatus. This  precaution

eliould  be  taken  in  the  preparation  of  all  gases. Time  must  be  allowed

'"  As  Ubomtoty  eipnrimaiita  wJlU  gueeu  ruqnire  a  ccrtnin  preliniinnry  knowludge,  we

wiU  describe  tertnin  practical  mnthnilt  for  tlie  cottecliaii  and  pmparalion  of  giuei.

When  in  Uboratory  practli*  «u  iutermiltBnt  supply  of  hydrogaii  ( nr  otlier  gtts  which  ib

I evolved  without  the  aid  of  beat)  ia  Ti»qQired  the  apparatua  reprHaented  in  Itg.  SI  ia  thu

□nvenieui- It  conaiats  of  two  bottles,  having  oriflceH  at  the  bottom,  in  which

I oorki  with  tnbes  an  plated,  atid  these  tnliea  are  counected  b;  an  india-rabber  tabe

men  iarninheH  with  n  iipriiig  clampl. Zinc  la  placed  in  one  bottle,  and  dilate  aul.

jtburic  Hcid  ill  the  other. The  necli  of  the  tonuer  in  uloaed  by  a  cork,  which  is  fitted  with

e  GijDiiect^  with  euih

«  ljaii-cati<lucting  tulie  xith  a  utopcock.  U  the  two  buttles
<itber  and  the  ato|>coch  be  opened,  the  acid  wiU  flaw  lo  the
U  (be  atopoock  be  closed,  the  hydrogen  will  force  out  the  acid  from  Uie  bottle  containing
the  aiuc,  and  the  action  will  ceaie.  Or  the  veaeel  cautaining  the  acid  may  be  plaoed  at
a  lower  luTel  than  that  containing  the  liiic,  when  all  the  liquid  will  flow  into  it,  and  in
older  to  start  the  Mtion  the  acid  vesHel  may  be  placed  on  a  higher  level  than  the  other,
and  the  acid  will  flow  to  the  sine.  It  cuu  a[so  be  empluyeil  lor  collecting  gasee  (aa  an
ai|Hratoi  or  gasometer).

In  laboratory  practice,  howerer,  other  forma  of  apinLratuB  are  generally  employed  for

exhausting,  collecting,  and  holding  ganii. We  will  here  cite  tlie  lno«l  uinol  forma. An

r  usaally  consista  of  a  Teaael  tumiriied  with  a  iitopcock  at  the  bottom. A  Rtaal

uirh,  throogh  which  a  ghua  tabe  passes,  is  fixed  into  the  neck  of  tliis  Teswl. If  tho

veaael  be  filled  np  with  water  to  the  cork  and  the  bottom  stopcock  ie  opened,  then  ths

COMPO-SITION  I  IF  wStra'.-^Dllo'

I  for  the  gas  evolved  to  diaplaLe  all  the  air  from  the  apparatus,  otherwise
llD  testing  the  combustibility  of  the  hydrogen  an  expjoaian  niay  occur

i]AruU>r. IImi  tube  7  ^Imulil  tv  iiinrv  lluui  i2  fwl  li

i  througli  IliH  tnlie  b  most  lie  less  thui  tbe  unoaul  which  ciui  be  cArricHl  oR  by
I  ilw  tube  il.  Owin^  to  Ibin  the  water  in  the  tube  d  will  flow  Uiroagh  it  in  ci]rliiiilM'ii
■  alteRiBtiiig  with  cylinders  of  gus  which  will  be  that  curied  vsuj.  The  gHs  wliicli  i»  drawn
I  Ifamngb  may  be  coUeoled  from  the  end  of  the  tube  d,  bat  tbit  (arm  of  pomp  is  luiuUy
I  Amployed  where  tbe  air  or  E"  aKpirated  is  not  to  be  collected.  II  the  tnbe  d  is  of  cnn-
I  aidenble  leugth,  guy  40  tt.  or  more,  a  very  fur  racQiun  will  be  prodnred,  the  uaciuiit  of
EwludiiBvbown  by  the  gaBge  p;  it  i>  often  naed  (or  filtering  under  reduced  pr«Ha;

riilSCIPLES OF CHEJIISTRV

from  the  formation  of  detonating  gas  (the
with  the  hydrogen).'"

■Jiown  in  tliH  figun.  If  witter  be  npluved  by  iiiuri
greater  Ihiin  TOO  mm.,  the  impiruteir  may  be  cmpli
iDB.y  b«  extaauiited  (rcim  u  limitttil  apuce ;  (ur  ii

iiixtureof  the  oxygen  of  the

■«,  by  .

length  dF  the  tube  it  b«
It-paitili,  sad  all  the  air
"ctiiiB  ff  witli  It  bnllow i

Gaiholdcn  ue  ottea  Diwd  Ivr  talluetiiif;  mul  tmhiiuK  gnaes. Tbey  are  m»ie  of  glass

Lin  pUtu. The  anuiil  forui  le  shuwii  in  Hg.  33. The  lower  Tessel  B  is  mado

bermstieally  tiKht— ■'.<..  impeniouii  to  unnes— aud  in  filled  with  water. A  funnel is

II  several  BU]i|ii>nn|, The  vesiiel  B  oonunnnicaten  with

bottom  of  the  fnnnel  by  a  dtopoook  b  and
u  tube  a,  reaching  to  the  bottom  of  the
rewtel  S.  U  water  be  ponied  into  the
fannel  and  the  Htopcocks  it  uid  b  opened,
the  water  will  run  through  a,  and  the  air
(•wspe  from  the  Tesiwl  £  by  A.  A  glata
lube/ runs  up  the  side  of  the  veaRel  B,  with
the  top  and  bgt-

ond  si

a  the

X  first  fiUed '

KHH  the  ganholder  c

the  gaiiliolder  with  ■  ((as,  il

with  trater,  the  cacln  a,  b  aa

llie  nut  il  unvcrewed,  and  the  end  of  Iba

tube  uoiidiiuting  the  gu  from  the  apparKtna

ill  which  it  i«  geuerated  is  passed  inta  d.

Ab  the  gu  eiU  the  gasholder,  the  water

runs  out  nt  li. If  the  piessi

not  greater  than  the  atrndsj

aud  it  be  required  Ifl  collect  it  in  the  gaa-

hiilder,  then the  Hlopcock  e  is  pnt  into |

with  the  space  vontaininK
[he  gas,  Then,  haviog  opened  the  orifioe
rf,  the  gasholder  M^ts  like  an  aipirstor ;  the
gHs  will  pass  through  e,  and  the  water  ran
nut  at  il.  II  the  Cocke  btj  closed,  the  gas
collected  in  the  gasholder  may  be  easily
preserved  and  transported.  If  it  be  deoired
to  transfer  this  gas  into  another  resnl,
r.  the  cock  a  opened,  b  and  d  cloaed,  uid  the
^Ha^^e  in  the  aptisratus  being  greater  than  tha
e  of  the  water  poured  into  the  tonnel. If  it

run  thrDngh  a,  and  tha

gas  will  then  i«i»s  out  at  e,  owin

atmospherio  pressure,  due  to  t

be  required  to  fill  a  cylinder  or  tta'ak  with  the  gas,  it  is  filled

the  funnel,  and  tlie  stopcocks  6  and  o  opened. Tlien  water  mUl

gas  will  escape  from  the  gasholder  into  the  cylinder  through  b.

"  When  it  in  required  to  prepare  hydrogen  in  large  quontiUes  tor  filling  balloone,
copper  vessels  or  wooden  casks  lined  with  lead  are  employed  ;  tliey  are  filled  with  scmp
iron,  over  which  dilute  sulphuric  aoid  is  poured.  The  hydrogen  generated  from  a.  number
oloaskii  is  carried  tlimugh  lead  pipes  into  special  casks  containing  water  (in  order  lo  o*ol
the  gas)  and  lime  ( in  order  to  remove  acid  fames). To  avoid  loss  of  gas  all  the  joinla  OM

~e  hermetically  tight  with  cement  or  t«r. In  order  to  fill  his  gigantic  balloon  (of

uetree  capaoily),  (tiHord,  in  1878.  constructed  a  complicated  apporatns  lot

giving  a  oontinnous  supply  of  hydmgon,  In  which  a  miitnte  of  solphnrio  acid  and  water

kS  oontinually  run  into  vesBels  coiitainin(;  iron,  and  from  wliich  the  solution  ol  iron

continually  drawn  off. When  coal  gas,  extracted  from  cool,  ia

mploysd  for  filling  bsJIaons,  it  should  be  as  light,  oc  as  rich  in  hydrogen,  aa  possible.

THE COMPOSITION  OF  AVATER. HYDROGEX  129

Hydrogen,  besides  being  contained  in  water,  is  also  contained  in
many  other  substances/*^  and  may  be  obtained  from  them.  As  examples
of  this,  it  may  be  mentioned  (1)  that  a  mixture  of  formate  of  sodium,
CHNa02i  and  caustic  soda,  NaHO,  when  heated  to  redness,  forms
sodium  carbonate,  Na^COs,  and  hydrogen,  Hj  ;  ^^  (2)  that  a  number  of
organic  substances  are  decomposed  at  a  red  heat,  forming  hydrogen,
among  other  gases,  and  thus  it  is  that  hydrogen  is  contained  in  ordinary
coal  gas.

Charcoal  itself  liberates  hydrogen  from  steam  at  a  high  tempera-
ture ;  ^®  but  the  reaction  which  here  takes  place  is  distinguished  by  a
certain  complexity,  and  will  therefore  be  considered  later.

The  properties  of  hydroyen. — Hydrogen  presents  us  with  an  example
of  a  gas  which  at  first  sight  does  not  difier  from  air.  It  is  not  sur-
prising, therefore,  that  Paracelsus,  having  discovered  that  an  aeriform
substance  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  metals  on  sulphuric  acid,  did  not
determine  exactly  its  difference  from  air. In  fact,  hydrogen,  like  air,  is

For  this  reanon,  only  the  last  poutiouB  of  the  gas  coming  from  the  retorts  are  collected,
and,  besides  this,  it  is  then  Kometimes  parsed  through  red-hot  veHsels,  in  order  to
decompose  the  hydrocarbons  as  much  as  possible ;  charcoal  is  deposited  in  the  red-hot
vessels,  and  hydrogen  remains  as  gas.  Coal  gas  may  be  yet  further  enriched  in  hydro-
gen, and  consequently  rendered  lighter,  by  (mssing  it  over  an  ignited  mixture  of  cliarcoal
and  lime.

L.  Mond  (London)  proposes  to  manufacture  hydrogen  on  a  large  scale  from  water  gas
{see  infrOt  and  Chapters  VIII.  and  IX.),  which  contains  a  mixture  of  oxide  of  carbon  (CO)
and  hydrogen,  and  is  produced  by  the  action  of  steam  upon  incandescent  coke  (C  -h  H.^O
=  00  +  Hj).  He  destroys  the  oxide  of  carbon  by  converting  it  into  carbon  and  carbonic
anhydride  (flCO^C  +  CO-j),  which  is  easily  done  by  means  of  incandescent,  finely-divided
metaUic  nickel ;  the  carl)on  tben  remains  with  the  nickel,  from  which  it  may  be  removed
by  burning  it  in  air,  and  the  nickel  can  then  be  used  over  again  (see  Chapter  IX.,  Note
24  bis).  Tlie  CO3  formed  is  removed  from  the  hydrogen  by  passing  it  through  milk  of
lime.  This  process  should  apimrently  give  hydrogen  on  a  large  scale  more  economically
tlian  any  of  the  methods  hitherto  proposed.

'•  Of  the  metals,  only  a  very  few  combine  with  hydrogen  (for  example,  so<lium),
and  give  substances  which  are  easily  decomposed.  Of  the  non-metals,  the  halogens
(fluorine,  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine)  most  easily  form  hydrogen  compounds;  of  these
the  hydrogen  compound  of  chlorme,  and  still  more  that  of  fluorine,  is  stable,  whilst
those  of  bromine  and  iodine  are  easily  decomiH)sed,  especially  the  latter.  The  other
non-metals — for  instance,  sulphur,  carlwn,  and  phosx)horus — give  hydrogen  compounds
of  different  composition  and  properties,  but  they  are  all  less  stable  than  water.  Tlie
number  of  the  carbon  compounds  of  hydrogen  is  enormous,  but  there  are  very  few
among  them  which  are  not  decomposed,  with  separation  of  the  carbon  and  hydrogen,  at
^  red  heat.

*•  The  reaction  expressed  by  the  equation  CNaHO.,  +  NaHO  =  CNa205  +  H2  may  be
effected  in  a  glass  vessel,  like  the  decomix)sition  of  copper  carbonate  or  mercury  oxide
(»ctf  Introduction) ;  it  is  non-reversible,  and  takes  X'lace  without  the  presence  of  water,
and  therefore  Pictet  (nee  later)  made  use  of  it  to  obtain  hydrogen  under  great  pressure.

*  The  reaction  between  charcoal  and  suiierheated  steam  is  a  double  one — that  is,
there  may  be  formed  either  carbonic  oxide,  CO  (according  to  the  equation  HjO  +  C
=  Hj  +  CO),  or  carbonic  anhydride  CO.j  (according  to  the  e(]uation  2H.jO  +  G  -  2H.,i  -h  CO^),
and  the  resulting  mixture  is  calle<l  water-gas ;  we  shall  speak  of  it  in  Chax>ter  IX.

VOL.  I.  K

180  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHE>USTRY

colourless,  and  has  no  smell  ;^*  but  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with
its  properties  proves  it  to  be  entirely  different  from  air.  The  first  sign
which  distinguishes  hydrogen  from  air  is  its  combustibility.  This
property  is  so  easily  observed  that  it  is  the  one  to  which  recourse  is
usually  had  in  order  to  recognise  hydrogen,  if  it  is  evolved  in  a  re-
action, although  there,  are  many  other  combustible  gases.  But  before
speaking  of  the  combustibility  and  other  chemical  properties  of  hydro-
gen, we  will  first  describe  the  physical  properties  of  this  gas,  as  we
did  in  the  case  of  water.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  it  is  one  of  the
lightest  gases.^^  If  passed  into  the  bottom  of  a  flask  full  of  air,
hydrogen  will  not  remain  in  it,  but,  owing  to  its  lightness,  rapidly
escapes  and  mixes  with  the  atmosphere.  If,  however,  a  cylinder  whose
orifice  is  turned  downwards  be  filled  with  hydrogen,  it  will  not  escape,
or,  more  correctly,  it  will  only  slowly  mix  with  the  atmosphere.  This
may  be  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  a  lighted  taper  sets  fire  to  the
hydrogen  at  the  orifice  of  the  cylinder,  and  is  itself  extinguished  inside
the  cylinder.  Hence,  hydrogen,  being  itself  combustible,  does  not
support  combustion.  The  great  lightness  of  hydrogen  is  taken  advan-
tage of  for  balloons.  Ordinary  coal  gas,  which  is  often  also  used  for
the  same  purpose,  is  only  about  twice  as  light  as  air,  whilst  hydrogen  is

'1  Hydrogen  obtained  by  the  action  of  zinc  or  iron  on  sulpliuric  acid  generally  smells
of  hydrogen  solphide  (like  rotten  eggs),  which  it  contains  in  admixtore.  As  a  rule  such
hydrogen  is  not  so  pure  as  that  obtained  by  the  action  of  an  electric  current  or  of  sodium
on  water.  The  impurity  of  the  hydrogen  depends  on  the  impurities  contained  in  the
zinc,  or  iron,  and  sulphuric  acid,  and  on  secondary  reactions  which  take  place  simul-
taneously with  the  main  reaction.  Impure  hydrogen  may  be  easily  freed  from  the
impurities  it  contains :  some  of  them — namely,  those  having  acid  properties — are  absorbed
by  caustic  soda,  and  therefore  may  be  removed  by  passing  the  hydrogen  through  a  solu-
tion of  this  substance ;  another  series  of  impurities  is  absorbed  by  a  solution  of  mercuric
chloride ;  and,  lastly,  a  third  series  is  absorbed  by  a  solution  of  potassium  permanganate.
If  absolutely />f/r0  hydrogen  be  required,  it  is  sometimes  obtained  by  the  decomposition
of  water  (previously  boiled  to  expel  all  air,  and  mixed  with  pure  sulphuric  acid)  by  the
galvanic  current.  Only  the  gas  evolved  at  the  negative  electrode  is  collected.  Or  else,
an  apparatus  like  that  which  gives  detonating  gas  is  used,  tlie  positive  electrode,  however,
l>eing  immersed  under  mercury  containing  zinc  in  solution.  Tlie  oxygen  which  is  evolved
at  this  electrode  then  immediately,  at  the  moment  of  its  evolution,  combines  with  the
zinc,  and  this  compound  dissolves  in  the  sulphuric  acid  and  fonns  zinc  sulphate,  which
remains  in  solution,  and  therefore  the  hydrogen  generated  will  be  quite  free  from  oxygen.

*"  An  inverte<l  beaker  is  attached  to  one  tunn  of  the  beam  of  a  tolerably  sensitive
balance,  and  its  weight  counterpoised  by  weights  in  the  pan  attached  to  the  other  arm.
If  the  l)eaker  be  then  filled  with  hydrogen  it  rises,  owing  to  the  air  being  replaced  by
hydrogen.  Thus,  at  the  ordinary  temperature  of  a  room,  a  litre  of  air  weighs  about  1*2
gram,  and  on  replacing  the  air  by  hydrogen  a  decrease  in  weight  of  about  1  gram  i>er
litre  in  obtaintMl.  Moint  hydrogen  is  heavier  than  dry — for  aqueous  vapour  is  nine  times
heavier  than  hydrogen.  In  filling  balloons  it  is  usually  calculated  that  (it  being  impos-
sible U)  have  perfectly  dry  hydrogen  or  to  obtain  it  quite  free  from  air)  tlie  lifting  force
due  to  the  difference  between  the  weights  of  equal  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  air  is  equal
to  1  kilogram  (  =  1,IKH)  grams)  i>er  cubic  metre  (  =  1,000  litres).

THE  COMPOSITION OF  WATER, HYDROCJEN

131

14^  times  lighter  than  air.  A  very  simple  experiment  with  soap
bubbles  very  well  illustrates  the  application  of  hydrogen  for  filling
balloons.  Charles,  of  Paris,  showed  the  lightness  of  hydrogen  in  this
way,  and  constructed  a  balloon  filled  with  hydrogen  almost  simul-
taneously with  Montgolfier. One  litre  of  pure  and  dry  hydrogen^^  at

^*  The  density  of  hydrogen  in  relation  to  the  air  lias  been  repeatedly  determined  by
accurate  experiments.  The  first  determination,  made  by  Lavoisier,  was  not  very  exact ;
taking  the  density  of  air  as  unity,  he  obtained  0*0769  for  tluit  of  hydrogen — that  is,
hydrogen  as  thirteen  times  lighter  than  air.  More  accurate  determinations  are  due  to
Thoxnsen,  who  obtained  the  figure  0*0098 ;  Berzelius  and  Dulong,  who  obtained  0*0668  ;
and  Dumas  and  Boussingault,  who  obtained  0*06945.  Regnault,  and  more  recently  Le
Dae  (1892),  took  two  spheres  of  considerable  capacity,  which  contained  equal  volumes  of
air  (thus  avoiding  the  necessity  of  any  correction  for  weighing  them  in  air).  Both  spheres
were  attached  to  the  scale  pans  of  a  balance.  One  was  sealed  up,  and  the  other  first
weighed  empty  and  then  full  of  hydrogen.  Thus,  knowing  the  weight  of  the  hydrogen
filling  the  sphere,  and  the  capacity  of  the  sphere,  it  was  easy  to  find  the  weight  of  a  litre
of  hydrogen ;  and,  knowing  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  air  at  the  same  temperature  and
pressure,  it  was  easy  to  calculate  the  density  of  hydrogen.  Regnault,  by  these  experi-
ments, found  the  average  density  of  hydrogen  to  be  0*06926  in  relation  to  air ;  Le  Due,
0*06948  (with  a  possible  error  of  ±000001  j,  and  this  latter  figure  must  now  be  looked  upon
as  near  to  the  truth.

In  this  work  I  shall  always  refer  the  densities  of  all  gases  to  hydrogen,  and  not
to  air ;  I  will  therefore  give,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  dry  pure
hydrogen  in  grams  at  a  temperature  ^^  and  under  a  pressure  H  (measured  in  nn'llimetres
of  mercury  at  0°,  in  lat.  45°). The  weight  of  a  litre  of  hydrogen

=  008086  XX  ^  gram.

760 1  +  000367f

For  ai'ronauts  it  is  very  useful  to  know,  besides  this,  the  weight  of  the  air  at  different
heights,  and  I  therefore  insert  the  adjoining  table,  constructed  on  the  basis  of  Glaisher's
data,  for  the  temperature  and  moisture  of  the  atmospheric  stnita  in  clear  weather.  All
the  figures  are  given  in  the  metrical  system — 1,000  millimetres  =  39*37  inches,  l,0OO  kilo-
grams =2204*8375  lbs.,  1,000  cubic  metres-^  35,316*6  cubic  feet.  The  starting  temperature
at  the  earth's  surface  is  taken  as  =15^  C,  its  moisture  60  p.c,  pressure  760  millimetres.
The  pressures  are  taken  as  indicated  by  an  aneroid  barometer,  assumed  to  be  corrected
at  tlie  sea  level  and  at  lat.  45°.  If  the  height  above  the  level  of  the  sea  etjual  z  kilo-
metres, then  the  weight  of  1  cubic  metre  of  air  may  be  approximately  taken  as  122U  —
0*12r T O00377r*  kilogram.

l*n*^xmi

TviniK^rutun-

Mni-

.t  irr

Mdglit

Wrifirlit  of  tl

10  uir

760]

mm.

15^ C.

r,()

p.c.

0

un-tres

1222

kilos

700

110^  .,

64

>>

690

1141

'J

X

650

7-6°  „

64

» 1300

1073

i^

600

4-8°  „

63

1960

1003

S

550

+ 10'-  .,

«;2

2660

981

1 *<

500

- 2*4^^  „

58

3420

857

'1

450

- 5*8°  .,

52

4250

781

400

- 91°  .,

44

5170

703

5

350

-12-5°  .,

36

r,19()

624

300

-15-9°  .,

27

73W)

542

250

-19-2'  .,

18

V

8720

457

/'

Although  the  figures  in  this  table  are  calculated  with  every  possible  care  from  average
data,  yet  they  CiUi  only  be  taken  approximately,  for  in  every  septirate  case  the  condition^,
lM)th  at  the  earth's  siu-face  and  in  the  atmosphere,  will  differ  from  those  here  taken. In

k2

132  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

0^  and  760  mm.  pressure  weighs  0-08986  gram  ;  that  is,  hydrogen  is
almost  14^  (more  exactly,  14*39)  times  lighter  than  air.  It  is  the
lightest  of  all  gases.  The  small  density  of  hydrogen  determines  many
remarkable  properties  which  it  shows  ;  thus,  hydrogen  passes  exceed-
ingly rapidly  through  fine  orifices,  its  molecules  (Chapter  I.)  being
endued  with  the  greatest  velocity.^*  At  pressures  somewhat  higher
than  the  atmospheric  pressure,  all  other  gases  exhibit  a  greater
compressibility  and  co-efficient  of  expansion  than  they  should  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-Lussac  ;  whilst  hydrogen,  on
the  contrary,  is  compressed  to  a  less  degree  than  it  should  be  from
the  law  of  Mariotte,^'*  and  with  a  rise  of  pressure  it  expands  slightly

calculating  the  height  to  which  a  balloon  can  ascend,  it  is  evident  that  the  density  of  gan
in  relation  to  air  must  be  known.  This  density  for  ordinary  coal  gas  is  from  0*6  to  0'35,.
and  for  hydrogen  with  its  ordinary  contents  of  moisture  and  air  from  01  to  0'15.

Hence,  for  instance,  it  may  be  calculated  that  a  balloon  of  1,00()  cubic  metres  capacity
filled  with  pure  hydrogen,  and  weighing  (the  enYeloi)e,  tackle,  people,  and  l>alla8t)  727
kilograms,  will  only  ascend  to  a  height  of  about  4,250  metres.

**  If  a  cracked  flask  be  filled  with  hydrogen  and  its  neck  immersed  under  water  or
mercury,  then  the  liquid  will  rise  up  into  the  flask,  owing  to  the  hydrogen  passing
through  the  cracks  about  8'8  times  quicker  than  the  air  is  able  to  pass  through  these
cracks  into  the  flask.  The  same  ])henomenon  may  be  better  observed  if,  instead  of  a  flask,
a  tube  be  employed,  whose  end  is  closed  by  a  porous  substance,  such  as  graphite,  miglazed
earthenware,  or  a  gypsum  plate.

^  According  to  Boyle  and  Mariotte's  law,  for  a  given  gas  at  a  constant  temperature
the  volume  decreases  by  as  many  times  as  the  pressure  increases :  that  is,  this  law  requires
that  the  product  of  the  volume  v  and  the  pressure  p  for  a  given  gas  should  be  a  constant
quantity:  jp(;  =  C,  a  constant  quantity  which  does  not  var}' with  a  cliange  of  pressure.
Tliis  equation  does  very  nearly  and  exactly  express  the  observed  relation  between  the
volume  and  pressure,  but  only  within  comparatively  small  variations  of  pressure,  density,
and  volume.  If  these  variations  be  in  any  degree  considerable,  the  quantity  |>t*  proves
to  l>e  dependent  on  the  pressure,  and  it  either  increases  or  diminishes  with  an  increase
of  pressure.  In  the  former  case  the  compressibility  is  less  tlian  it  should  be  according
to  Mariotte's  law,  in  the  latter  case  it  is  greater.  We  will  call  the  flrst  case  a  positive
discrepancy  (because  then  d{pv)^{p)  is  greater  than  zero),  and  the  second  case  a
negative  discrepancy  (because  then  d(pv)  .'(Up)  is  less  than  zero).  Determinations  made
by  myself  (in  the  seventies),  M.  L.  Kirpicheff,  and  V.  A.  Hemilian  showed  that  all  known
gases  at  low  pressures — i.e.  when  considerably  rarefled — present  positive  discrepancies.
On  the  other  liand,  it  appears  from  the  researches  of  Cailletet,  Natterer,  and  Amagat  that
till  gases  under  great  pressures  (when  the  volume  obtained  is  500-1,000  times  less  than
under  the  atmospheric  pressure)  also  present  positive  discrepancies.  Thus  under  a  pres-
sure of  2,700  atmospheres  air  is  compressed,  not  2,700  times,  but  only  800,  and  hydrogen
1,000  times.  Hence  the  positive  kind  of  discrepancy  is,  so  to  say,  normal  to  gases.  And
this  it*  easily  intelligible.  If  a  gas  followed  Mariotte's  law,  or  if  it  were  compressed  to  a
greater  extent  than  is  shown  by  this  law,  then  under  great  pressures  it  would  attain  a
density  greater  than  tliat  of  solid  and  liquid  substances,  which  is  in  itself  improbable  and
even  impossible  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  solid  and  liquid  substances  arc  themselves  but
little  compressible.  For  instance,  a  cubic  centimetre  of  oxygen  at  0^  and  under  the  at-
mospheric pressure  weighs  about  0'0014  gram,  and  at  a  pressure  of  3,000  atmospheres
(this  pressure  is  attained  in  guns)  it  would,  if  it  followed  Mariotte's  law,  weigh  4'2  grams
— that  is,  would  be  about  four  times  heavier  than  water — and  at  a  pressure  of  10,000
atmospheres  it  would  be  heavier  than  mercury.  Besides  this,  positive  discrepancies  are
probable  because  the  molecules  of  a  gas  themselves  must  occupy  a  certain  volume.  Con-
sidering that  Mariotte's  law,  strictly  speaking,  applies  only  to  the  intermolecular  space,  wo

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATEK, HYDROGEN  133

less  than  at  the  atmosplieric  pressure.*^  However,  hydrogen,  like
air  and  many  other  gases  which  are  permanent  at  the  ordinary  tem-

cftn  nnderotaiid  tlie  necessity  of  ]X>Hitive  diHcrepancies.  If  we  designate  tlie  volnme  of  the
molecules  of  a  gas  by  b  (like  van  der  WaalH,  see  Chap.  I.,  Note  84),  then  it  must  be  expected
that  j)  (»  —  &)  =  C.  Hence  jw-C-^  bp,  which  expreftHes  a  positive  discrepancy.  SappoHing
that  for  hydrogen /7I7  =  1,000,  at  a  pressure  of  one  metre  of  mercury,  according  to  the  results
of  Regnault's,  Amagat's,  and  Natterer'a  experiments,  we  obtain  b  as  approximately  07  to  0*9.

Thus  the  increase  of  pv  with  the  increase  of  pressure  must  be  considered  as  the
normal  law  of  Hie  compressibility  of  gases.  Hydrogen  presents  such  a  positive  compres
Hibility  at  all  pressures,  for  it  presents  positive  discrepancies  from  Mariotte's  law,  accord-
ing to  Regnault,  at  all  pressures  above  the  atmospheric  pressure.  Hence  liydrogen  is,
so  to  say,  a  perfect  gas.  No  other  gas  behaves  so  simply  with  a  change  of  pressure.  All
other  gases  at  pressures  from  1  to  30  atmospheres  present  negative  discrepancies — tliat
is,  they  are  then  compressed  to  a  greater  degree  than  sliould  follow  from  Mariotte's  law,
as  was  shown  by  the  determinations  of  Regnault,  which  were  verified  when  repeated  by
myself  and  Boguzsky.  Thus,  for  example,  on  changing  the  pressure  from  4  to  20  metres
of  mercury — that  is,  on  increasing  tlie  pressure  five  times — the  volume  only  decreased
4*98  tmies  when  hydrogen  was  taken,  and  5*00  when  air  was  taken.

The  positive  discrepancies  from  the  law  at  low  pressures  ore  of  particular  interest,
and,  according  to  the  above-mentioned  determinations  made  by  myself,  Kirpicheif,
and  Hemiliaii,  and  verified  (by  two  methods)  by  K.  D.  Kraevitch  and  Prof.  Ramsay
(London,  1894),  they  are  projwr  to  all  gases  (even  to  those  which  are  easily  compressed
into  a  liquid  state,  such  as  carbonic  and  sulphurous  anhydrides).  These  discrepancies
approach  the  case  of  a  very  high  rarefaction  of  gases,  where  a  gas  is  near  to  a  condition  of
maximum  dispersion  of  its  molecules,  and  i)erhaps  presents  a  passage  towards  the  sub-
stance termed  * luminiferous  ether*  which  fills  up  interplanetary  and  interstellar  space.
If  we  suppose  that  gases  are  rarefiable  to  a  definite  limit  only,  having  attained  whii^h
they  (like  solids)  do  not  alter  in  volume  with  a  decrease  of  pressure,  then  on  the  one
hand  the  passage  of  the  atmosphere  at  its  upper  limits  into  a  homogeneous  ethereal
medium  becomes  comprehensible,  and  on  the  other  hand  it  would  be  expected  that  gases
would,  in  a  state  of  high  rarefaction  {i.e.  when  small  masnes  of  gases  occupy  large
volumes,  or  when  furthest  removed  from  a  li(]uid  state),  present  positive  discrepancies
from  Boyle  and  Mariotte's  law.  Our  present  acquaintance  with  this  province  of  highly
rarefied  gases  is  very  limited  (because  direct  measurements  are  exceedingly  difficult  to
make,  and  are  hampered  by  jxisMble  errors  of  experiment,  which  may  bt*  considerable),
and  its  further  development  in-omisesto  elucidate  much  in  resjiect  to  natural  phenomena.
To  the  three  states  of  matter  (solid,  liquid,  and  gaseous)  it  is  evident  a  fourth  must  yet
bft  added,  the  ethereal  or  ultra- gaseous  (as  Crookes  i)roi>osed),  understanding  by  this,
matter  in  its  highest  possible  state  of  rarefaction.

*'  The  law  of  Gay-Lussiic  states  that  all  gases  in  all  conditions  present  one  coefficient
of  expansion  0'00867 ;  that  is,  when  heate<l  from  0^  to  lOO"  they  expand  like  air;
namely,  a  thousand  volumes  of  a  gas  measured  at  0-'  will  occupy  liUM  volumes  at  100°.
Regnault,  about  iMwO,  showed  tliat  (lay-Lusstic's  law  is  not  entirely  correct,  and  that
different  gases,  and  also  one  and  the  sjime  gas  at  diflferent  pressures,  have  not  quite  the
same  coefficients  of  exiuinsion.  Thus  the  expansion  of  air  between  0^  and  100^  is  0'3C7
under  the  ordinary  pressure  of  one  atmosphere,  and  at  three  atmospheres  it  is  0'371,  the
expansion  of  hydrogen  is  0'8r»(i,  and  of  carbcmic  anhydride  0*37.  Regnault,  however,  did
not  directly  determine  the  change  of  volume  between  0**  and  100",  but  measured  the
variation  of  tension  witli  the  cliange  of  temperature ;  but  since  gases  do  not  entirely
follow  Mariotte's  law,  the  change  of  volume  cannot  be  directly  judged  by  tlie  variation
of  tension.  The  investigations  carried  on  by  myself  and  Kayander,  about  1H70,  showed
the  variation  of  volume  on  heating  from  0''-'  to  100-  under  a  constant  pressure.  These
investigations  confirmed  Regnault's  conclusion  that  Gay-Lussac's  law  is  not  entirely
correct,  and  further  showed  (1)  that  the  expansion  per  volume  from  0^  to  100^  under  a
pressure  of  one  atmosphere,  for  air  =0'3C8,  for  hydrogen  =0-3(57,  for  carbonic  anhydride
=  0*878,  for  hydrogen  bromide  --0'386,  «tc;  (2)  that  for  gases  which  are  more  eompros-

134  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

perature,  does  not  pass  into  a  liquid  state  under  a  very  considerable
pressure,^'  but  is  compressed  into  a  lesser  volume  than  would  follow

Bible  than  should  follow  from  Mariotte's  law  the  expansion  by  heat  increases  with  the
pressure — for  example,  for  air  at  a  pressure  of  three  and  a  half  atmospheres,  it  equals
0*371,  for  carbonic  anhydride  at  one  atmosphere  it  equals  0*878,  at  three  atmosphereH
0*889,  and  at  eight  atmospheres  0*418 ;  (8)  that  for  gases  which  are  less  compressible
than  should  follow  from  Mariotte's  law,  the  expansion  by  heat  decreases  with  an  increase  of
pressure — for  example,  for  hydrogen  at  one  atmosphere  0*867,  at  eight  atmospheres  0*869,
for  air  at  a  quarter  of  an  atmosphere  0*870,  at  one  atmosphere  0*868 ;  and  hydi-ogen  like
air  (and  all  gases)  is  less  compressed  at  low  pressures  than  should  follow  from  Mariotte's
law  [see  Note  25).  Hence,  hydrogen,  starting  from  zero  to  the  highest  pressures,  exhibits
a  gradually,  although  only  slightly,  varying  coefficient  of  expansion,  whilst  for  air  and
other  gases  at  the  atmospheric  and  higher  pressures,  the  coefficient  of  expansion
increases  with  the  increase  of  pressure,  so  long  as  their  compressibility  is  greater  than
should  follow  from  Mariotte's  law.  But  when  at  considerable  pressures,  this  kind  of
discrepancy  passes  into  the  normal  {see  Note  25),  then  the  coefficient  of  expansion  of  all
gases  decreases  with  an  increase  of  pressure,  as  is  seen  from  the  researches  of  Amagat.
The  difference  between  the  two  coefficients  of  expansion,  for  a  constant  pressure  and  for
a  constant  volume,  is  explained  by  these  relations.  Thus,  for  example,  for  air  at  a
pressure  of  one  atmosphere  the  true  coefficient  of  expansion  (the  volume  var^'ing  at  con-
stant pressure)  =0*00868  (according  to  Mendeleeff  and  Kayander)  and  the  variation  of
tension  (at  a  constant  volume,  according  to  Regnault)  =0*00867.

^  Pennanent  gases  are  those  which  cannot  be  liquefied  by  an  increase  of  pressure
alone.  With  a  rise  of  temperature,  all  gases  and  vapours  become  permanent  gase^.  As
we  shall  afterwards  learn,  carbonic  anhydride  becomes  a  permanent  gas  at  temperatures
above  81°,  and  at  lower  temperatures  it  has  a  maximum  tension,  and  may  be  liquefied
by  pressure  alone.

T?ie  liquefaction  of  gases,  accomplished  by  Faraday  {see  Ammonia,  Chapter  VI.)  and
others,  in  the  first  lialf  of  this  century,  showed  that  a  number  of  substances  arc  capable,
)ike  water,  of  taking  all  tliree  physical  states,  and  that  there  is  no  essential  difference
between  vapours  and  gases,  the  only  distinction  being  that  the  boiling  points  (or  the
temperature  at  which  the  tension  =  760  mm.)  of  liquids  lie  above  the  oi*dinary  tempera-
ture, and  those  of  liquefied  gases  below,  and  consequently  a  gas  is  a  superheated  vapour,
or  vai)Our  heated  above  the  boiling  iK>int,  or  removed  from  saturation,  rarefied,  having
a  lower  tension  than  that  maximum  which  is  proper  to  a  given  temi>erature  and  sub-
stance. We  will  here  cite  the  maximum  tensions  of  certain  liquids  and  gases  at  various
temperatures^  because  they  may  be  taken  advantage  of  for  obtaining  constant  tempera-
tures by  changing  the  pressure  at  which  boiling  or  the  formation  of  saturated  vapours
takes  place.  (I  may  remark  that  the  dependence  between  the  tension  of  the  saturated
vapours  of  various  substances  and  the  temperature  is  xevy  complex,  and  usually  requires
three  or  four  independent  constants,  which  vary  with  the  nature  of  the  substance,  und
are  found  from  the  dependence  of  the  tension  j^  on  the  temperature  t  given  by  experi-
ment ;  but  in  1892  K.  D.  Kraevitch  showed  tliat  this  dependence  is  determined  by  the
properties  of  a  substance,  such  as  its  density,  specific  heat,  and  latent  heat  of  eva|>ora-
tion.)  The  tenii>eratures  (according  to  the  air  thennometer)  are  placed  on  the  left,  and
the  tension  in  millimetres  of  mercurj*  (at  0*^)  on  the  right-lmnd  side  of  the  equations.
Carbon  bisulphide,  CS.-,  0°  =  127*9;  10^  =  198*5;  20'- =  298*1;  80 -=  481*0  ;  40' =  617*5;
500=8571.  Chlorobenzene,  CflHsCl,  70^  =  97*9;  80^  =  141*8;  90= -208*4  ;  100- --=  292*8 ;
110=  =  4020;  120=  =  542*8;  180°  =  719*0.  Aniline,  CgH^N,  150="  =  288*7;  16iP  =  3870;
170"^  =  515*6;  180^  =  677*2;  185"  =771*5.  Methyl  salicylate,  CgHaO-,  180=^  =  2i)4*4  ;  190^
-  880*9  ;  200  =  482*4  ;  210°  =  557*5  ;  220^  =  710*2 ;  224°  =  779*9.  Mercury,  Hg,  800'^  -  246  8  ;
310^  =  304*9;  820"  =  873*7;  330^=454*4;  840^  =  548*6;  850^-6580;  8.^>9- =  770*9.  Sul-
phur, S,  395  -  800  ;  423-  =  5CH) ;  443-  =  700 ;  452-  =  800 ;  459=  =  900.  These  figures  ( Ram-
say and  Young  I  s1k>w  the  i>ossibilitj'  of  obtaining  constant  temperatures  in  the  vaiwurm
of  boiling  liquids  by  altering  the  pressure.  We  may  add  the  following  boiling  points
under  a pressure  of  760  mm.  (according  to  the  air  thermometer  by  Collendar  and

THE COMPOSITION  OF  WATER, HYDROGEN  135

from  Mariotte's  law.*® From  this  it  may  be  concluded  that  the  abso-
lute boiling  point  of  hydrogen,  and  of  gases  resembling  it,^^  lies  very

Griffiths,  1891):  aniline,  184°  =  13;  naphthalene,  217°  =  94;  benzopheuoue,  805°  =  82;
mercury,  856® =76;  triphenyl-methane,  856°  =  44;  sulphur,  444°  =  58.  And  melting
points:  tin,  281*^  =  68;  bismuth,  269°  =  22;  lead,  327°  =  69;  and  zinc,  417°  =  57.  These
data  may  be  used  for  obtaining  a  constant  temperature  and  for  verifying  thermometers.
The  same  object  may  be  attained  by  the  melting  points  of  certain  saltn,  determined
according  to  the  air  thermometer  by  V.  Meyer  and  Riddle  (1898) :  NaCl,  851° ;  NaBr,
727°  ;  Nal,  650° ;  KCl,  760° ;  KBr,  715° ;  KI,  628° ;  K2CO5,  1045°  ;  NaaCOj,  1098°  ;
Na2B407,  878° ;  NaaS04, 848° ;  K2SO4, 1078°.  The  tension  of  liquefied  gases  is  expressed
in  atmospheres.  Sulphurous  anhydride,  SO.^,  —  30°  =04;  —  20°  =  0"6 ;  — 10^^  =  1 ;  0°  =  1  5 ;
+  10° -2-8;  20°  =  3-2;  30°  =  5-8.  Ammonia,  NHj,  -40°  =  07  ;  -30°  =  11;  -20°al-8;
-10° =2-8;  0°  =  4-2;  +10°«60;  20°  =  84.  Carbonic  anhydride,  CO.^,  -115°  =  0088;
-80°  =  1;  -70°  =  21;  -60°  =  8-9;  -50°=6-8;  -40°  =  10;  -20°  =  23;  0°  =  35;  +10°
=  46 ;  20°  «  58.  Nitrous  oxide,  N  .,0,  - 125°  =  0033  ;  -  92°  =  1 ;  -  80°  =  19 ;  -  50 '  =  76  ;
-«0°=a81;  0°  =  361;  +20^  =  553.  Ethylene,  CjH 4,  -140°  =  0033;  -180°  =  01;
-108°»1;  -40°  =  18;  -1°  =  42.  Air,  -191°  =  1;  -158°  =  14;  -140^  =  39.  Nitrogen,
Nj,  -208°  =  0086;  -193°  =  1;  -160°  =  14;  -146°  =  32.  The  methods  of  liquefying
gases  (by  pressure  and  cold)  will  be  described  under  ammonia,  nitrous  oxide,  sulphurous
anhydride,  and  in  later  footnotes.  We  will  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
evaporation  of  volatile  liquids,  under  various,  and  especially  under  low,  pressures,  gives
an  easy  means  for  obtaining  low  temperatures.  Thus  liquefied  carbonic  anhydride,  under
the  ordinary  pressure,  reduces  the  temperatui^  to  —80°,  and  when  it  evaporates  in  a
rarefied  atmosphere  (under  an  air-pump)  to  25  mm.  ( -  0*083  atmosphere)  the  tempera-
ture, judging  by  the  above-cited  figures,  falls  to  —115°  (Dewarj.  Even  the  evaporation
of  liquids  of  common  occurrence,  under  low  pressures  easily  attainable  with  an  air-pump,
may  produce  low  temperatures,  which  may  be  again  taken  advantage  of  for  obtaining
still  lower  temperatures.  Water  boiling  in  a  vacuum  becomes  cold,  and  under  a  pressure
of  less  tlian  4*5  mm.  it  freezes,  because  its  tension  at  0°  is  45  mm.  A  sufficiently  low
temperature  may  be  obtained  by  forcing  fine  streams  of  air  through  common  ether,  or
liquid  carbon  bisulphide,  CS._.,  or  methyl  chloride,  CH3CI,  and  other  similar  volatile
liquids.  In  the  adjoining  table  are  given,  for  certain  gases,  (1)  the  number  of  atmo-
spheres necessary  for  their  liquefaction  at  15%  and  (2)  the  boiling  points  of  the  resultant
liquids  under  a  pressure  of  760  mm.

C,H» N,0 CO, H,8 AsH^ NH, HCl CH.d C,X,  SO,

(I)  42  31  52  I(»  8  7  2.>  4  4  3

(8) -103'= -92' -8(J- -74= -58= -3H= -35^ -24° -21- -Id'

*  Natterer's  determinations  (1851-1854),  together  with  Araagat's  results  (1880-1888),
show  that  the  compressibility  of  hydrogen,  under  high  pressures,  may  be  expressed  by
the  following  figures  : —

100

00107

107

103

where  p  «  the  pressure  in  metres  of  mercurj-,  v  =  the  volume,  if  the  volume  taken  under
a  pressure  of  1  metre  —  1,  and  s  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  hydrogen  at  20°  in  gi'ams.  If
hydrogen  followed  Mariotte's  law,  then  under  a  pressure  of  2,500  metres,  one  litre  would
contain  not  85,  but  265  grams.  It  is  evident  from  the  above  figures  that  the  weight  of
a  litre  of  the  gas  approaches  a  limit  as  the  pressure  increases,  which  is  doubtless  the
density  of  the  gas  when  liquefied,  and  therefore  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  liquid  hydrogen
will  probably  be  near  100  gi'ams  (density  about  0*1,  being  less  than  that  of  all  other
liquids).

*  Cagniard  de  Latour,  on  heating  ether  in  a  closed  tube  to  about  190°,  observed  that
at  this  temperature  the  liquid  is  transformed  into  vapour  occupying  the  original  volume —
that  is,  having  the  same  density  as  the  liquid.  The  further  investigations  made  by  Drion
and  myself  showed  that  every  liquid  has  such  an  absolute  boiling  point,  above  which

p

—.

1

V

—

1

pv

—

1

8

=

Oil

1000

'2500

00019

0001.3

1-9

3-25

5S

85

136

TRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

much  below  the  ordinary  temperature  ;  that  is,  that  the  liquefaction  of

it  cannot  exist  as  a  liquid  and  is  transformed  into  a  dense  gas.  In  order  to  grasp  the  true
signification  of  this  absolute  boiling  temperature,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  liquid
state  is  characterised  by  a  cohesion  of  its  particles  which  does  not  exist  in  vapours  and
gases.  The  cohesion  of  liquids  is  expressed  in  their  capillary  phenomena  (the  breaks
in  a  column  of  liquid,  drop  formation,  and  rise  in  capillary  tubes,  &c.),  and  the  product  of
the  density  of  a  liquid  into  the  height  to  which  it  rises  in  a  capillary  tube  (of  a  definite
diameter)  may  serve  as  the  measure  of  the  magnitude  of  cohesion.  Thus,  in  a  tube  of
1  mm.  diameter,  water  at  15°  rises  (the  height  being  corrected  for  the  meniscus)  14*8  mm.,
and  ether  at  f °  to  a  height  5"35— 0'028  t°  mm.  The  cohesion  of  a  liquid  is  lessened  by
heating,  and  therefore  the  capillary  heights  are  also  diminished.  It  has  been  shown
by  experiment  that  this  decrement  is  proportional  to  the  temperature,  and  hence  by  the
aid  of  capillary  observations  we  are  able  to  form  an  idea  that  at  a  certain  rise  of
temperature  the  cohesion  may  become  =  0.  For  ether,  according  to  tlie  above  formula,
this  would  occur  at  191°.  If  the  cohesion  disappear  from  a  liquid  it  becomes  a  gas,
for  cohesion  is  the  only  point  of  difference  between  these  two  states.  A  liquid  in
evaporating  and  overcoming  the  force  of  cohesion  absorbs  heat.  Therefore,  the  absolute
boiling  point  was  defined  by  me  (1861)  as  that  temperature  at  which  (a)  a  liquid  cannot
exist  as  a  liquid,  but  forms  a  gas  which  cannot  pass  into  a  liquid  state  under  any  pres-
sure whatever ;  (6)  cohesion  =  0 ;  and  (c)  tlie  latent  heat  of  evaporation  =  0.

This  definition  was  but  little  known  until  Andrews  (1869)  explained  the  matter  from
another  aspect.  Starting  from  gases,  he  discovered  that  carbonic  anhydride  cannot
be  liquefied  by  any  degree  of  compression  at  temperatures  above  81°,  whilst  at  lower
temperatures  it  can  be  liquefied.  He  called  this  temperature  the  critical  temperature.
It  is  evident  that  it  is  the  same  as  the  absolute  boiling  point.  We  shall  afterwards
designate  it  by  tc.  At  low  temperatures  a  gas  which  is  subjected  to  a  pressure  greater
than  its  maximum  tension  (Note  27)  is  transformed  into  a  liquid,  which,  in  evaporating,
gives  a  saturated  vapour  possessing  this  maximum  tension  ;  wliilst  at  temperatures  above
ic  the  pressure  to  which  the  gas  is  subjected  may  increase  indefinitely.  However,  under
these  conditions  the  volume  of  the  gas  does  not  change  indefinitely  but  approaches  a
definite  limit  {see  Note  28) — that  is,  it  resembles  in  this  respect  a  liquid  or  a  solid  which
is  altered  but  little  in  volume  by  pressure.  The  volume  which  a  liquid  or  gas  occupies
at  tc  is  termed  the  critical  volume^  and  corresponds  with  the  critical  pressure^  which
we  will  designate  by  pc  and  express  in  atmospheres.  It  is  evident  from  what  has  been
said  that  the  discrepancies  from  Mariotte  and  Boyle's  law,  the  absolute  boiling  point,  the
density  in  liquid  and  compressed  gaseous  states,  and  the  properties  of  liquids,  must  all
be  intimately  connected  together.  We  will  consider  these  relations  in  one  of  the  follow-
ing notes.  At  present  we  will  supplement  the  above  observations  by  the  values  of  tc  and
pc  for  certain  liquids  and  gases  which  have  been  investigated  in  this  respect —

te

pc

tc

pc

N..

—

146^

33

CO

—

140°

39

o..

-  -

119^

50

CH^

—

100°

50

NO

—

93°

71

^^A

+

10°

51

CO2

■-•-

32°

77

NoO

-f

r>3°

75

C.2H2

+

37°

(>8

HCl

-f-

52°

86

H..0

-♦■

365°

200

CH,OH

■♦-

240°

79

C.H5OH

-f

243°

63

CH-COOH

—

322°

57

H..S

c.;n..
NH5
CH5C1

SO^

^'sHio

C4Hj,.0

CHCI3

CSj

CgHg

C6H,F

CflH.Cl

CaH-^Br

QH,I

-f  108^

-f  124°

+  131°

+  141°

+  155°

+  192°

+  193°

T  2(58°

+  278°

-¥  292^^

+  287°

+  360°

t  397°

-r-  448«

92
62
114
73
79
34
40
55
78
60
45
45
45
45

Young  and  Guy  (1891j  showed  tliat  tc  and  pc  clearly  depend  upon  the  composition
and  molecular  weight.

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER, HYDROGEN

137

this  gas  is  oiily  possible  at  low  temperatures,  and  under  great  pressures.***^
This  conclusion  was  verified  (1877)  by  the  experiments  of  Pictet  and
Cailletet.'* They  compressed  gases  at  a  very  low  temperature,  and

^  I  came  to  this  conclnsion  in  1870  {Ann.  Phys.  Chrni.  141,  (>2a).

^*  Pictet,  in  his  researches,  effected  tlie  direct  liquefaction  of  many  gases  wliich  tip  to
that  time  had  not  been  liquefied.  He  employed  the  apparatus  useil  for  the  manufacture
of  ice  on  a  large  scale,  employing  the  vaporisation  of  litjuid  sulphurous  anhydride,
which  may  be  liquefied  by  pressure  alone.  This  anhydride  is  a  gas  which  is  transfonned
into  A  liqoid  at  the  ordinary  temperature  under  a  pressm-e  of  several  atmospheres  (ae^
Note  27),  and  boils  at  —10^  at  the  ordinary  atmospheric  pressure.  This  liquid,  like  all
others,  boils  at  a  lower  temperature  under  a  diminished  pressure,  and  by  continually
pumping  out  the  gas  which  comes  off  by  means  of  a  i>o\verful  air-pump  its  boiling  (Ktint
falls  as  low  as  —75°.  Consequently,  if  on  the  one  hand  we  force  liquid  sulphurous
anhydride  into  a  vessel,  and  on  the  other  hand  pump  out  the  gas  from  the  same  vessel
by  powerful  air-pumps,  then  the  liquefied  gas  will  boil  in  the  vessel,  and  cause  the  tem-
perature in  it  to  fall  to  —75°.  If  a  second  vessel  is  placed  inside  this  vessel,  then  another
gaa  may  be  easily  liquefied  in  it  at  the  low  temi>erature  produced  by  the  boiling  liquid
sulphurous  anhydride.  Pictet  in  this  manner  easily  liquefied  carbonic  anhydride,  CO..
(at  —60'  under  a  pressure  of  from  four  to  six  atmosphere^).  This  gas  is  more  refractory
to  liquefaction  thaui  sulphurous  anhydride,  but  for  this  reasim  it  gives  on  evaporating  u
Htill  lower  temx)erature  than  can  be  attained  by  the  eva)>oration  of  sulphurous  anhydride.
A  temperature  of  —80^  may  be  obtained  by  the  evaporation  of  liquid  carbonic  anhydride  at
a  pressure  of  760  mm.,  and  in  an  atmosphere  rarefied  by  a  powerful  pump  the  temperature
falls  to  — 140°.  By  employing  !>uch  low  temperatures,  it  was  i>osKible,  with  the  aid  of
pressure,  to  liquefy  the  majority  of  the  other  gases.  It  is  evident  that  special  pump.**
which  are  capable  of  rarefying  gaNCs  are  necessary  to  reduce  the  pressure  in  the
chambers  in  wliich  the  sulphurous  and  carbonic  anhydride  boil ;  and  that,  in  order  t
re-condense  the  resultant  gases  into  liquids,  special  force  pumps  are  required  for  pumping
the  liquid  anhydrides  into  the  refrigerating  chamber.  Thus,  in  Pictet's  apparatus
(fig.  24),  the  carbonic  anhydride  was  licjnefied  by  the  aid  of  the  pumps  E  F,  which

¥ui.  21. — Gem-ral  ammgeuient  «f  the  appamtnis  enip'.oyeii  \t^  ri''t«*t  f'»r  lUinef\in(r  fra*^.

138  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

then  allowed  them  to  expand,  either  by  directly  decreasing  the  pressure
or  by  allowing  them  to  escape  into  the  air,  by  which  means  the  tem-
perature fell  still  lower,  and  then,  just  as  steam  when  rapidly  rarefied  ^'-^

compresse<l  the  gas  (at  a  pressure  of  i-S  atmospheres)  and  forced  it  iuto  tlie  tube  K,
vigorously  cooled  by  being  surrounded  by  boiling  liquid  sulphurous  anhydride,  which
was  condensed  in  the  tube  C  by  the  pump  B,  and  rarefied  by  the  pump  A.  The
liquefied  carbonic  anhydride  flowed  down  the  tube  K  into  tlie  tube  H,  in  which  it  was
subjected  to  a  low  pressure  by  the  pump  E,  and  thus  gave  a  very  low  temperature  of
about  —140^.  The  pump  E  carried  oflf  the  vapour  of  the  carbonic  anliydride,  and  con-
ducted it  to  the  pump  F,  by  which  it  was  again  liquefied.  Tlie  carbonic  anhydride  thus
mAfde  an  entire  circuit — that  is,  it  passed  from  a  rarefied  vapour  of  small  tension  and  low
temperature  into  a  compressed  and  cooled  gas,  which  was  transformed  into  a  liquid,  whicli
again  vaporised  and  produced  a  low  temperature.

Inside  the  wide  inclined  tube  H,  where  the  carbonic  acid  evaporated,  was  placed  a
second  and  narrow  tube  M  containing  hydrogen,  which  was  generated  in  the  vessel  L
from  a  mixture  of  sodium  formate  and  caustic  soda  (CHO,;Na  +  NaHO  =  Na.2C05  +  H.2).
This  mixture  gives  hydrogen  on  heating  the  vessel  L.  This  vessel  and  the  tube  M
were  niade  of  thick  copper,  and  could  withstand  great  pressures.  Tliey  were,  more-
over, hermetically  connected  together  and  closed  up.  Tims  the  hydrogen  which  was
evolved  had  no  outlet,  accumulated  in  a  limited  space,  and  its  pressure  increased  in
proportion  to  the  amount  of  it  evolved.  This  pressure  was  recorded  on  a  metallic  mano-
meter R  attached  to  the  end  of  the  tube  M.  As  the  hydrogen  in  this  tube  was  submitted
to  a  very  low  temperature  and  a  powerful  pressure,  all  the  necessary  conditions  were
present  for  its  liquefaction.  When  the  pressure  in  the  tube  H  became  steady — i.e.  when
the  temperature  had  fallen  to  — 140^  and  the  manometer  R  indicated  a  pressure  of  650
atmospheres  in  the  tube  M — then  this  pressure  did  not  rise  with  a  further  evolution  of
hydrogen  in  the  vessel  L.  This  ser^'ed  as  an  indication  that  the  tension  of  the  vapour  of
the  hydrogen  had  attained  a  maximum  corresponding  with  — 140'^,  and  that  consequently
all  the  excess  of  the  gas  was  condensed  to  a  liquid.  Pictet  convinced  himself  of  this
by  opening  the  cock  N,  when  the  liquid  hydrogen  rushe<l  out  from  the  orifice.  But,  on
leaving  a  sjmce  where  the  pressure  was  equal  to  650  atmospheres,  and  coming  into  contact
with  air  under  the  ordinary'  pressure,  the  liquid  or  |)owerfully  compressed  hydrogen
expanded,  began  to  boil,  absorbed  still  more  heat,  and  became  still  colder.  In  doing  so
a  portion  of  the  liquid  hydrogen,  according  to  Pictet,  passed  into  a  solid  state,  and  did
not  fall  in  drops  into  a  vessel  placed  under  the  outlet  N,  but  as  pieces  of  solid  matter,
which  struck  against  the  sides  of  the  vessel  like  shot  and  immediately  vaporised.
Thus,  although  it  was  impossible  to  see  and  keep  the  liquefied  hydrogen,  still  it  was
clear  tliat  it  passed  not  only  into  a  liquid,  but  also  into  a  solid  state.  Pictet  in  his  ex-
periments obtained  other  gases  which  had  not  previously  been  liquefied,  especially  oxygen
and  nitrogen,  in  a  liquid  and  solid  state.  Pictet  supposed  that  liquid  and  solid  hydrogen
has  the  properties  of  a  metal,  like  iron.

"  At  the  same  time  (1879)  as  Pictet  was  working  on  the  liquefaction  of  gases  in
Switzerland,  Cailletet,  in  Paris,  was  occupied  on  the  same  subject,  and  his  results,
although  not  so  convincing  as  Pictet's,  still  showed  that  the  majority  of  gases,  previously
nnhquefied,  were  capable  of  passing  into  a  liquid  state.  Cailletet  subjected  gases  to  a
pressure  of  several  hundred  atmospheres  in  narrow  thick-walled  glass  tubes  (fig.  25) ;  he
then  cooled  the  compressed  gas  as  far  as  possible  by  surrounding  it  with  a  freezing  mix-
ture ;  a  cock  was  then  rapidly  opened  for  the  outlet  of  mercury  from  the  tube  containing
the  gas,  which  consequently  mpidly  and  vigorously  expanded.  This  rapid  expansion  of
the  gas  would  produce  great  cold,  just  as  the  rapid  compression  of  a  gas  evolves  heat  and
causes  a  rise  in  temperature.  This  cold  was  produced  at  the  exi)ense  of  the  gas  itself,
for  in  rapidly  expanding  its  particles  were  not  able  to  absorb  heat  from  the  walls  of  the
tube,  and  in  cooling  a  [loi-tion  of  the  expanding  gas  was  ti*ansformed  into  liquid.  This
was  seen  from  the  fomuition  of  cloud-like  drops  like a  fog  which  rendered  the  gas

THE COMPOSITION Of WATElt, HYDBOGES

isy

deposits  liquid  water  in  the  form  of  a  fog,  hydrogen  in  expanding
forms  a  fog,  thus  indicating  its  passage  into  a  liquid  state.  But  as  yet
it  has  been  impossible  to  preserve  this  liquid,  even  for  a  short  time,
to  determine  its  properties,  notwithstanding  the  employment  of  a  tem-
perature of  —200°  and  a  pressure  of  200  atmospheres,^^  although  by

-ed  the  (lotMibilit]'  of  tlit  liqaclncti
thod  of  Cftilletet  alloWB  tlie  pasw
ruciliEt  utid  Hiiiiplicit)  than  Pictet

opaque. Tliun  Cailletet

iMtote  the  liquids,  Tlie  met
being  obseo'ed  with  greater  fi
a  verj-  complicated  and  eipeii

The  methods  of  Piutet  uikI  Cailletet  were  alterwiin
WroblevHki,  Dewar,  ai<d  other-.  In  nnler  to  obtain  a  >itill
ployed,  instead  of  carbonic  iicid(;a*,liqu  detlijleneirnitro
gen  and  oxygen,  whoxe  eraporatinn  at  1i>h  preHnureH  pr
duc«s  ■  much  lower  lemperatore  (to  -300  |  The]  bIho
improved  on  the  ^tlu>dH  ot  determinniK  '""^i  lo"'  teni
peratiureii,  bat  the  methodn  were  not  esKentiall)  attered
they  obtained  nitrogen  and  oxygen  in  a  liquid  and  nitrogen
even  in  a  solid,  state,  but  no  one  has  yet  Kuccetded  in  Heeing
hydrogen  in  a  liquid  (omi.

The  nioHt  illantrative  and  inttriirtui  results  lliecaDse
they  gave  the  iHwsibility  of  inuintaniiiig  a  len  Ion  tcni
pentore  and  the  liquefied  gan  eien  air  tor  u  length  of
time)  were  obtained  in  recent  yean.  In  Prof  Dtwar  lu  th>-
Boyal  Institution  of  London,  wliicli  it  gloriRed  hr  IhenunK-s
ot  Davy,  Faraday,  and  Tyndall  Dewar  uitli  tlie  aid  <  I
powerful  pumpn,  obtained  niauj  kilogram-  it[  oi\gen  ai  1
air  (the  boiling  point  under  the  atinosidienc  preHxuri
-  -IMV"}  ill  a  liquid  state  and  kept  them  in  Unit  atate  f  i
H  length  ot  tiui?  I>y  ineaim  ot  open,  glasi  lewieU  »itli
doable  irBllo  having  u  vacauin  lietaeen  them  nliuh  |  re
("ented  the  rap  dtrafre  fl t l>>og tie  p>n

sibility  ot  u ta g n I  w  te i>e t  re  de  tin.

ve«wl  tor  a  1 g  pen 1 t  t  Tl I  i Hed gen  1 1

air  can  be  poored  I  -el lo 11  d  uned

for  any  inv t  g  t  Tl  J  I  94 Pr  f Deiiur

allowed  tliat t  tl 1 t perat p  ixl  ced  b liquid
oxygen  mai  b ce Iwco |1 pi renc t  (bei'<nni^

wlt-lnminou f  ta  g  j  g ilo a

racanm)  and  fl si | t  1  gl  t fte be g  11 lated  :
turinatance  paratfa gl I > ]  po (  11'  than

at  the  ordin  rr  te pe t  Ino  lliat  solid tl greatly  alter  in  tlieir  ineclianical  )i[o.

pertieii,  i:c. 1 1  ud  tlie p|iurt t (IWIJ t  Prof  D  nar'n  of  swing  many  hocIi  eiperi-
inenta  in  whi  I pe  wl 'O  t g  [ d t  1  quiil  oxygen  were  employed,  and  in

(ollowiug  th ]  rogre ad icne 1 en 1 t«d  at  low  teinperaturtm.  it  i"  my  firm
iinprewioii  th  t  tl at  dy f ai pb«  t  Inr  temiieratures  Hhnuld  widen  tlie

Imriion  ot  natural  nciemv  an  inn<.lt  as  the  iui  eatigation  of  pbfnoineiia  inH<le  at  the
liigliest  temperatures  attained  in  tlie  voltaic  arc.

^■i  Tile  invest igaliniiH  of  S.  Wrohlewobi  in  Cruvow  give  reason  to  l>elievc  that  Pictet
could  not  Itave  ohtoineil  liquid  hydrogen  iu  the  interior  ut  his  apiHratus,  and  tlint  if  Iw
did  obtain  it,  it  oiuld  only  lisve  lieeii  at  tlie  inoment  of  its  outrusli  due  to  the  fall  in
tem[ieratuni  following  its  xudiUn  expansion.  Pictet  ca!eulate<l  that  he  obtained  a  tern.
peralure  of  -UlP,  but  in  reality  it  hardly  fell  below  — 19U-,  judging  from  the  latest
data  for  the  vaporisation  of  larbnnic  anhydride  nnder  low  pressure,  The  difference
liea  in  tlie  uwtluii)  of  iletenuiiiing  low  temiieratures. Judging  troiu  otlier  propcttie*  of

140  TRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

these  means  the  gases  of  the  atmosphere  may  be  kept  in  a  liquid  state
for  a  long  time.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  absolute  boiling  point
of  hydrogen  lies  lower  than  that  of  all  other  known  gases,  which  also
depends  on  the  extreme  lightness  of  hydrogen.^*

hydrogen  {see  Note  84),  one  would  think  that  its  absohite  boiling  point  lies  for  below
—  120°,  and  even  —140°  (according  to  the  calculation  of  Sarrau,  on  the  basis  of  its  com-
pressibility, at  —174°).  But  even  at  —200°  (if  the  methods  of  determining  such  low
temperatures  be  correct)  hydrogen  does  not  give  a  liquid  even  under  a  pressure  of  several
hundred  atmospheres.  How^ever,  on  expansion  a  fog  is  formed  and  a  liquid  state  attained,
but  the  liquid  does  not  separate.

5*  After  the  idea  of  the  absolute  temperature  of  ebullition  (/c.  Note  29)  had  been
worked  out  (about  1870),  and  its  connection  with  the  deviations  from  Mariotte*s  law
had  become  evident,  and  especially  after  the  liquefaction  of  permanent  gases,  general
attention  was  turned  to  the  development  of  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  the  gaseous
and  liquid  states  of  matter.  Some  investigators  directed  their  energies  to  the  further
study  of  vapours  (for  instance,  Ramsay  and  Young),  gases  (Amagat),  and  liquids
(Zaencheffsky,  Nadeschdin,  and  others),  especially  to  liquids  near  tc  and  pc ;  others
(Konovalof!  and  De  Heen)  endeavoured  to  discover  the  relation  between  liquids  under
ordinary  conditions  (removed  from  tc  and  pc)  and  gases,  whilst  a  third  class  of  investi-
gators (van  der  Waals,  Clausius,  and  others),  starting  from  the  generally-accepted
principles  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  and  the  kinetic  tlieory  of  gases,  and  assuming
in  gases  the  existence  of  those  forces  which  certainly  tict  in  liquids,  deduced  the
connection  between  the  properties  of  one  and  the  other.  It  would  be  out  of  place  in
an  elementary  handbook  like  the  present  to  enunciate  the  whole  mass  of  conclusions
arrived  at  by  this  method,  but  it  is  well  to  give  an  idea  of  the  results  of  van  der
Waols'  considerations,  for  they  explain  the  gradual  uninterrupted  passage  from  a  liquid
into  a  gaseous  state  in  the  simplest  manner,  and,  although  the  deduction  cannot  be
considered  as  complete  and  decisive  {see  Note  25),  nevertheless  it  penetrates  so  deeply
into  the  essence  of  the  matter  that  its  signification  is  not  only  reflected  in  a  great  number
of  physical  investigations,  but  also  in  the  province  of  chemistry',  where  instances  of  the
passage  of  substances  from  a  gaseous  to  a  liquid  state  are  so  common,  and  where  the
very  processes  of  dissociation,  decomposition,  and  combination  must  be  identified  with  a
change  of  physical  state  of  the  participating  substances,  wliich  has  been  elaborated  by
Gibbs,  Lavenig,  and  others.

For  a  given  qiiantiiy  (weight,  masp)  of  a  definite  substance^  its  state  is  expressed
by  three  variables  —  volume  r,  pressure  (elasticity,  tension)  p,  and  temi)erature  t.
Although  the  compressibility — [e.e.,  d{v)  d[p)] — of  liquids  is  small,  still  it  is  clearly  ex-
pressed, and  varies  not  only  with  the  nature  of  liquids  but  alsu  with  their  pressure  and
temperature  (at  tc  the  compressibility  of  liquids  is  very  considerable).  Although  gases,
According  to  Mariotte's  law,  with  small  variations  of  pressure,  are  uniformly  compressed,
nevertheless  the  dependence  of  their  volume  i;  on  ^  and  p  is  very  complex.  This  also
applies  to  the  coefficient  of  expansion  [^  —  div)  d{t\^  or  d(p)  d{t);,  which  also  varies  with
t  and  Pj  l)oth  for  gases  {see  Note  26),  and  for  liquids  (at  tc  it  is  ver>'  considerable,  and
often  exceeds  that  of  gases,  0*00807 1.  Hence,  the  equation  of  condition  must  include
three  variables,  i\  p,  and  t.  For  a  so-called  jMjrfect  (ideal)  gas,  or  for  inconsiderable
variations  of  density,  the  elementary  expression  pv  =  Bad  +  at),  or  pv~  R  (273  + 1\  should
be  accepted,  where  7?  is  a  constant  varying  with  the  mass  and  nature  of  a  gas,  as
expressing  this  dependence,  l>ecause  it  includes  in  itself  the  laws  of  Gay-Lussac  and
Mariotte,  for  at  a  constant  pressure  the  volume  varies  proportionally  to  1  +  at,  and  when
t  is  constant  the  product  of  tv  is  constant. In  its  simplest  form  the  equation  may  be

expressed  thus :

pvr^IiT;

where  T  denotes  what  is  termed  the  absolute  temi)erature,  or  the  ordinary  temperature
+  278  -that  is,  T  -  /  +  278.

THE COMPOSITIOX  OF  WATER, HYDROGEN  141

Although a  substance which  passes  with  great diflBculty  into  a
Hquid  state  by  the  action  of  physico- mechanical  forces,  hydrogen  loses

Starting  from  the  Hupi>oHition  of  the  existence  of  an  attraction  or  internal  pressure
(expressed  by  a)  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  density  (or  inversely  proportional  to
the  square  of  the  volume),  and  of  the  existence  of  a  real  volume  or  diminished  length
of  path  (expressed  by  b)  for  each  gaseous  molecule,  van  der  Waals  gives  for  gases  the
following  more  complex  equation  of  condition  : —

{p  +  "s)  {i'-0)-=l  +  OOOaOTf ;

if  at  0°  under  a  pressure  p  =  l  J  for  example,  under  the  atmospheric  pressure),  the  volume
(for  instance,  a  litre)  of  a  gas  or  vapour  he  taken  as  1,  and  therefore  v  and  b  he  expressed
by  the  same  units  as|>  and  a.  The  deviations  from  both  the  laws  of  Mariotte  and  Gay-
LussAc  are  expressed  by  the  above  equation.  Thus,  for  hydrogen  a  must  be  taken  a>
infinitely  small,  and  fc  =  000(>9,  judging  by  the  data  for  1,000  and  2,5CK)  metres  pressure
(Note  88).  For  other  permanent  gabes,  for  which  (Note  28)  I  showed  (about  1H70)  from
Regnault's  and  Natterer's  data,  a  decrement  of  pVj  followed  by  an  increment,  which  was
confirmed  (about  1880)  by  fresh  determinations  made  by  Amagat,  this  phenomena  may
lie  expressed  in  definite  niagnitudes  of  a  and  b  (although  van  der  Waals'  formula  is  not
applicable  in  the  case  of  very  small  pressures)  with  sufficient  accuracy  for  contemporary
requirements.  It  is  evident  that  van  der  Waals'  formula  can  also  express  the  difference
of  the  coeflBcients  of  expansion  of  gases  with  a  change  of  pressure,  and  according  to  the
methods  of  detennination  (Note  '20). Besides  this,  van  der  Waiils'  formula  shows  that

at  temperatures above 273  i —  Ij  only  one  actual  volume (gaseous) is ix>ssible,

whilst  at  lower  temperatures,  by  varying  the  pressure,  three  different  volumes — liquid
gaseous,  and  partly  liquid,  partly  saturated- vajwrous— are  possible. It  is  evident  that

- —  1  J. It  is
276 /

found  under  the  condition  that  all  three  possible  volumes  (the  three  roots  of  van  der

Waals' cubic  equation)  ai*e  then  similar  and  equal  (rr -86). The  pressure  in  this  case

(vc)  =  ^  ..  Tliese  ratios  between  the  constants  a  and  b  and  the  conditions  of  critical
"^  ' 27b'

state— i.e.  itc)  and  (  pr)— give  the  possibility  of  determining  the  one  magnitude  from  tlu*
other.  Thus  for  ether  (Note  21)  i,  (/r)^ll»8  ,  (7/^) -40,  hence  a  ^0-0307,  6 -=000533,  and
(re)  =  0*016.  That  mass  of  ether  which  at  a  pressure  of  one  atmosphere  at  0'  occupies
one  volume — for  instance,  a  litre — occupies,  according  to  the  above-mentioned  condition,
this  critical  volume.  And  as  the  density  of  the  vai>our  of  ether  compared  with  hydrogen
=  87,  and  a  litre  of  hydrogen  at  0'^  and  under  the  atmospheric  pressure  weighs  OOWUli
gram,  then  a  litre  of  ether  vaiK)ur  weighs  3'82  grams ;  therefore,  in  a  critical  state  (at
198°  and  40  atmospheres)  3-32  grams  occupy  0010  litre,  or  1(5  c.c. ;  therefore  1  gram
occupies  a  volume  of  about  5  c.c,  and  the  weight  of  1  c.c.  of  ether  will  then  be  0*21.
According  to  the  mvestigations  of  Ramsay  and  Young  (1887),  the  critical  volume  of  ether
was  approximately  such  at  al>out  the  absolute  l)oiling  point,  but  the  compressibility  of
the  liquid  is  so  great  that  the  slightest  change  of  pressure  or  temperature  has  a  consider-
able effect  on  the  volume.  But  the  investigations  of  the  above  savants  gave  another
indirect  demonstration  of  the  truth  of  van  der  Waals'  equation.  They  also  found  for
ether  that  the  isochords,  or  the  hues  of  equal  volumes  (if  both  /  and/»  vary),  are  generally
straight  lines.  Thus  the  volume  of  10  c.c.  for  1  gram  of  ether  corresponds  with  pressures
(expressed  in  metres  of  mercury)  equal  to  0-13o/  — 3'3  (for  example,  at  180°  the  pressure -
21  metres,  and  at  280°  it  =  84-5  metres).  Tlie  rectilinear  form  of  the  isochord  (when  f  =  a
constant  quantity)  is  a  direct  result  of  van  der  Waals'  fonnula.

When,  in  1888,  I  demonstrated  that  the  si)ecific  gravity  of  liquids  decreases  in  pro-
portion to  the  rise  of  temi)erature  rs,=^S,»— Kf  or  S/-S„  (1—KO J,  or  that  the  volumes
increase  in  inverse  proi»ortion  to  the  binomial  1-K/,  that  is,  V/- V„  (1  — K/)-i,  where  K

142  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

its  gaseous  state  (that  is,  its  elasticity,  or  the  physical  energy  of  its
molecules,  or  their  rapid  progressive  motion)  with  comparative  ease
under  the  influence  of  chemical  attraction,^^  which  is  not  only  shown
from  the  fact  that  hydrogen  and  oxygen  (two  permanent  gases)  form
liquid  water,  but  also  from  many  phenomena  of  the  absorption  of
hydrogen.

Hydrogen  is  vigorously  condensed  by  certain  solids  ;  for  example,
by  charcoal  and  by  spongy  platinum.  If  a  piece  of  freshly  ignited
charcoal  be  introduced  into  a  cylinder  full  of  hydrogen  standing  in  a
mercury  bath,  then  the  charcoal  absorbs  as  much  as  twice  its  volume
of  hydrogen.  Spongy  platinum  condenses  still  more  hydrogen.  But
jHtUadium,  a  grey  metal  which  occurs  with  platinum,  absorbs  more
hydrogen  than  any  other  metal.  Graham  showed  that  when  heated  to
a  red  heat  and  cooled  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen,  palladium  retains
as  much  as  600  volumes  of  hydrogen. When  once  absorbed  it  retains

is  the  moclaluH  of  expansion,  which  varies  with  the  nature  of  the  liquid,  then,  in  general,
not  only  does  a  connection  arise  between  gases  and  liquids  with  respect  to  a  change  of
volume,  but  also  it  would  appear  possible,  by  applying  van  der  Waals'  formula,  to  judge,
from  the  phenomena  of  the  expansion  of  liquids,  as  to  their  transition  into  vapour,  and
to  connect  together  all  the  principal  properties  of  liquids,  which  up  to  this  time  had
not  been  considered  to  be  in  direct  dependence.  Thus  Thorpe  and  Riicker  found  that
t2(^c)  +  S78  =  l/K,  where  K  is  the  modulus  of  expansion  in  the  above-mentioned  formula.
For  example,  the  expansion  of  ether  is  expressed  with  sufficient  accuracy  from  0°  to  100^
by  the  equation  S<  =  0-786  (l-0-00164f),  or  V<  =  1  (1-0001540,  where  000154  is  the
modulus  of  expansion,  and  therefore  {tc)  <^1SS°,  or  by  direct  observation  198°.  For
silicon  tetrachloride,  SiCl4,  the  modulus  equals  0*00186,  from  whence  (/c)  =  281°,  and
by  experiment  280°.  On  the  other  hand,  D.  P.  Konovalof!,  admitting  that  the  external
pressure  p  in  liquids  is  insignificant  when  compared  with  the  internal  (a  in  van  der
Waals'  formula),  and  that  the  work  in  the  expansion  of  liquids  is  proportional  to  their
temperature  (as  in  gases),  directly  deduced,  from  van  der  Waals'  formula,  the  above-
mentioned  formula  for  the  expansion  of  liquids,  V^-l  (1  — Kf  I,  and  also  the  magnitude
of  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation,  cohesion,  and  compressibility  under  i>ressure.  In  this
way  van  der  Waals'  formula  embraces  the  gaseous,  critical,  and  liquid  states  of  sub-
stances, and  shows  the  connection  between  them.  On  this  account,  although  van  der
Waals'  formula  cannot  be  considered  as  perfectly  general  and  accurate,  yet  it  is  nut  only
very  much  more  exact  than  pv  =  RTf  but  it  is  also  more  comprehensive,  because  it
applies  both  to  gases  and  liquids.  Further  research  will  naturally  give  a  closer  proximity
to  truth,  and  will  show  the  connection  between  composition  and  the  constants  (a  and  h);
but  a  great  scientific  progress  is  seen  in  this  form  of  the  equation  of  state.

Clausius  (in  1880),  taking  into  consideration  the  variability  of  a,  in  van  der  Waals'
formula,  with  the  temperature,  gave  the  following  equation  of  condition  : —

(^■^ru+o,.)'"-^'-"^-

T  {I'  +  c)^

Sarrau  applied  this  formula  to  Amagat's  data  for  hydrogen,  and  found  a  ~  00551,
c-  —0*00048, 6 -^0*00089,  and  therefore  calculated  its  abnolute  Innling  point  as  -  174^,  and
ipc)  ~  99  atmospheres.  But  as  similar  calculations  for  oxygen  ( — 105°),  nitrogen  ( — 124*^  I,
and  niarsli  gas  (  —  70')  gave  tc  higher  than  it  really  is,  the  absolute  boiling  ix)int  of  hydro-
gen must  lie  below  —174^'.

^  TluH  and  a  number  of  similar  cases  clearly  show  how  great  are  the  internal
chemical  forces  com^Mred  with  physical  and  mechanical  forces.

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER, HYDROGEN  143

the  hydrogen  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  only  parts  with  it  when
heated  to  a  red  heat.^^  This  capacity  of  certain  dense  metals  for  the
absorption  of  hydrogen  explains  the  property  of  hydrogen  of  passing
through  metallic  tubes. ^^  It  is  termed  occhision,  and  presents  a
similar  phenomenon  to  solution  ;  it  is  based  on  the  capacity  of  metals
of  forming  unstable  easily  dissociating  compounds'^^  with  hydrogen,
similar  to  those  which  salts  form  with  water.

At  the  ordinary  temperature  hydrogen  very  feebly  and  rarely  enters

*•  The  property  of  palladium  of  abrtorbirif;  hydrogen,  and  of  increasing  in  vohiine  iii
M>  doing,  may  be  easily  deuionKtriited  by  taking  a  nheet  of  palhuliuni  varnished  on  one
Hide,  and  nsing  it  as  a  catho<le.  Tlie  hydrogen  which  in  evolved  by  tlie  action  of  the
current  is  retained  by  the  unvarnished  surface,  as  a  consequence  of  which  the  sheet  curlH
up.  By  attaching  a  pointer  (for  instance,  a  quill)  to  the  end  of  the  sheet  this  l>ending
effect  is  rendered  strikingly  evident,  and  on  reversing  the  current  (when  oxygen  will  be
evolved  and  combine  with  the  absorbed  hydrogen,  fonning  waterl  it  may  be  shown  that
on  losing  the  hydrogen  the  palladitun  regains  its  original  form.

3'  Deville  discovered  that  iron  and  platinum  become  i)er\  ious  to  hydrogen  at  a  red
heat.  He  speaks  of  this  in  the  following  terms  : — '  The  permeability  of  such  homogeneous
substances  as  platinum  and  iron  is  quite  different  from  the  passage  of  gases  through
sucli  non-compact  substances  as  clay  and  graphite.  The  i)ermeability  of  mettils  dei)ends
on  their  expansion,  brought  about  by  heat,  and  proves  that  metals  and  alloys  luivo  a
certain  porosity.*  However,  Gndiam  proved  that  it  is  only  hydr<»gen  which  is  cii])Kble  of
passing  through  the  above-named  metals  in  this  maimer.  Oxygen,  nitrogen,  unimonia,
and  many  other  gases,  only  i>ass  through  in  extremely  minute  (juantities.  Gndiam
showed  that  at  a  re<l  heat  about  500  c.c.  of  hydrogen  ptiss  per  minute  tlirougli  a  ^urfivce
of  one  square  metre  of  platinum  1*1  mm.  thick,  but  that  with  other  gases  the  amount
transmitted  is  hanlly  jierceptible.  Indiarubber  has  the  same  ca^Micity  for  allowing  the
transference  of  hydrogen  through  its  substance  (aee  Chapter  III.},  but  at  the  ordinary
temperature  one  square  metre,  0'014  mm.  thick,  transmits  only  127  v.c  of  hydrogen  per
minute.  In  the  experiment  on  the  decomposition  of  water  by  heat  in  jwrous  tubes,  the
clay  tube  may  be  exchanged  for  a  platinum  one  with  advantiige.  (rraham  showed  that
by  placing  a  platinum  tube  containing  hydrogen  under  these  conditions,  and  surrounding
it  by  a  tube  containing  air,  the  transference  of  tlie  hydrogen  may  be  observed  by  the
decrease  of  pressure  in  the  platinum  tube.  In  one  hour  almost  all  the  hydrogen  (1)7  p.c.)
liod  passed  from  the  tube,  without  being  replaced  by  air.  It  is  evident  that  the  oiclusion
and  passage  of  hydrogen  through  metals  ca})able  of  occluding  it  are  not  (mly  intimately
connected  together,  but  are  dependent  on  the  capacity  of  metals  to  form  compounds  of
various  degrees  of  stability  with  hydrogen — like  salts  with  water.

•'•*  It  appeared  on  further  investigation  that  {lalladium  gives  a  definite  comiwund,
Pd^H  {see  further)  with  hydrogen  ;  but  what  was  most  instructive  was  the  investigation
of  sodium  hydride,  NtWjH,  which  clearly  showed  that  the  origin  and  pro|H'rties  of  such
compounds  are  in  entire  accordance  with  the  conceptions  of  diss<K-iation.

Since  hydrogen  is  a  gas  which  is  difficult  to  condense,  it  is  little  soluble  in  water  and
other  liquids.  At  0°  a  hundred  volumes  of  water  dissolve  1*9  volume  of  hydrogen,  and
alcohol  G*9  volumes  measured  at  0'^  and  700  mm.  Molten  iron  absorbs  hydrogen,  but  in
solidifying,  it  exjxjls  it.  The  solution  of  hydrogen  by  metals  is  to  a  certain  degree
baseil  on  its  affinity  for  metals,  and  must  l>e  likened  to  the  s<^)lution  of  metals  in  mercury
and  to  the  formation  of  alloys.  In  its  chemical  proi)erties  hydrogen,  as  we  shall  see
later,  has  much  of  a  metallic  character.  Pictet  (see  Note  'M )  ev«Mi  affirms  that  liquid
hydrogen  has  metidlic  properties.  The  metallic  projx»rties  of  hydrogen  are  aNo  evinced
in  the  fact  that  it  is  a  goo<l  conductor  of  heat,  which  is  not  the  raist?  with  oth«*r  gases
<  Magnus).

144  PRINCIPLES  OF  GHEMISTRV

into  chemical  reaction.  The  capacity  of  gaseous  hydi-ogen  for  reaction
becomes  evident  only  under  a  change  of  circumstances — by  compression,
heating,  or  the  action  of  light,  or  at  the  moment  of  its  evolution.
However,  under  these  circumst-ances  it  combines  directly  with  only  a
very  few  of  the  elements.  Hydrogen  combines  directly  with  oxygen,
sulphur,  carbon,  potassium,  and  certain  other  elements,  but  it  does
not  combine  directly  with  either  the  majority  (»f  the  metals  or  with
nitrogen,  phosphorus,  S:c.  Compounds  of  hydi-ogen  with  certain
elements  on  which  it  does  not  act  directly  are,  however,  known  ;  they
are  not  obtained  by  a  direct  method,  but  by  reactions  of  decomposi-
tion, or  of  double  decomposition,  of  other  hydrogen  compounds.  The
property  of  hydrogen  of  combining  with  oxygen  at  a  red  heat  deter-
mines its  combustibility.  We  have  already  seen  that  hydrogen  easily
takes  fire,  and  that  it  then  burns  with  a  pale — that  is,  non-luminous —
flame.^^  Hydrogen  does  not  combine  with  the  oxygen  of  the  atmo-
sphere at  the  ordinary  temperature  ;  but  this  combination  takes  place
at  a  red  heat,^®  and  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  much  heat.
The  product  of  this  combination  is  water — that  is,  a  compound  of
oxygen  and  hydrogen.  This  is  the  synthesis  of  irater^  and  we  have
already  noticed  its  analysis  or  decomposition  into  its  component  parts.
The  synth^is  of  water  may  be  very  easily  observed  if  a  cold  glass  bell
jar  be  placed  over  a  burning  hydrogen  flame,  and,  better  still,  if  the
hydrogen  flame  be  lighted  in  the  tul^e  of  a  condenser.  The  water  will
condense  in  drops  as  it  is  formed  on  the  walls  of  the  condenser  and
trickle  down.^*

^  If  it  be  desired  to  obtain  a  i>erfectly  colourless  hydrogen  flaine,  it  must  isHue  from
a  platinum  nozzle,  as  the  glass  end  of  a  gas-conducting  tube  imparts  a  yellow  tint  to  the
Home,  owing  to  the  presence  of  sodium  in  the  glass.

••®  Let  us  imagine  that  a  stream  of  hydrogen  passes  along  a  tube,  and  let  us  mentally
divide  this  stream  into  several  parts,  consecutively  passing  out  from  the  orifice  of  the
tube.  The  first  part  is  lighted— that  is,  brought  to  a  state  of  incandescence,  in  which
state  it  combines  with  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere.  A  considemble  amount  of  heat  is
evolved  in  the  combination.  The  heat  evolved  then,  so  to  say,  igm'tes  the  second  part  of
hydrogen  coming  frt^m  the  tube,  and,  therefore,  when  once  ignited,  the  hj'drogen  con-
tinues to  bum,  if  there  be  a  continual  supply  of  it,  and  if  the  atmosphere  in  which  it
bums  be  unlimited  and  contains  oxygen.

^>  The  combustibility  of  hydrogen  may  be  shown  by  the  direct  decomposition  of  water
by  sodium.  If  a  jwUet  of  sodium  be  thrown  into  a  vessel  containing  water,  it  floats  on
the  water  and  evolves  hydrogen,  which  may  be  lighted.  Tlie  presence  of  sodium  imparts
a  yellow  tint  to  the  flame.  If  potassium  be  taken,  the  hydrogen  bursts  into  flame  spon-
taneously, because  sufficient  heat  is  evolved  in  the  reaction  to  ignite  the  hydrogen.  The
flame  is  coloured  violet  by  the  potassium.  If  sodium  be  thrown  not  on  to  water,  but  on
to  an  acid,  it  will  evolve  more  heat,  and  the  hydrogen  will  then  also  burst  into  flame.
These  experiments  must  be  carrie<l  on  with  caution,  as,  sometimes  towards  the  end,  a
mass  of  sodium  oxide  (Note  8)  is  produced,  and  flies  about ;  it  is  therefore  best  to  cover
the  vessel  in  which  the  exi)eriment  is  carried  on.

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER, HYDROGEN  145

Light  does  not  aid  the  combination  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  so
that  a  mixture  of  these  two  gases  does  not  change  when  exposed  to  the
action  of  Hght ;  but  an  electric  spark  acts  just  like  a  flame,  and  this  is
taken  advantage  of  for  inflaming  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  or
detonating  gas,  inside  a  vessel,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  following
chapters.  As  hydrogen  (and  oxygen  also)  is  condensed  by  spongy
platinum,  by  which  a  rise  of  temperature  ensu(;s,  and  as  platinum  acts
by  contact  (Introduction),  therefore  hydrogen  also  combines  with
oxygen,  under  the  influence  of  platinum,  as  Dobereiner  showed.  If
spongy  platinum  be  thrown  into  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen,
an  explosion  takes  place.  If  a  mixture  of  the  gases  be  passed  over
spongy  platinum,  combination  also  ensues,  and  the  platinum  becomes
red-hot."

Although  gaseous  hydrogen  does  not  act  directly  *"*  on  many  sub-
stances, yet  in  a  iiaacent  state  reaction  often  takes  place.  Thus,  for
instance,  water  on  which  sodium  amalgam  is  acting  contains  hydrogen
in  a  nascent  state.  The  hydrogen  is  here  evolved  from  a  liquid,
and  at  the first moment  of its  formation  must  be  in  a  condensed

*-  This  property  of  npongy  platiiuiiu  is  made  iiHt*  of  in  the  hO-cjUled  hydrogen  cigar-
lighter.  It  consistH  of  a  glass  cylinder  or  beaker,  inside  which  there  is  a  small  lead  stand
(wliich  is  not  acted  on  by  sulpliuric  acid),  on  which  a  piece  of  zinc  is  laid.  This  zinc  is
covered  by  a  bell,  which  is  open  at  the  bottom  and  furnished  with  a  coi'k  at  the  top.
Salphuric  acid  is  poured  into  the  space  between  the  bell  and  the  sides  of  the  outer  glass
cylinder,  and  will  thus  compress  the  gas  in  the  bell.  If  the  cock  of  the  cylinder  \h*
opened  the  gas  will  escape  by  it,  and  will  be  replaced  by  the  acid,  wliich,  coming  into
coutact  with  the  zinc,  evolves  hydrogen,  and  it  will  escai)e  through  the  cock.  If  the
cock  be  closed,  then  the  hydrogen  evolved  will  increase  the  pressure  of  the  gas  in  the
bell,  and  thus  again  force  the  acid  into  the  space  between  the  l>ell  and  the  walls  of  the
outer  cylinder.  Thus  the  action  of  the  lU'id  on  the  zinc  nniy  be  stopped  or  started  at
will  by  opening  or  shutting  the  cock,  luid  consequently  a  stream  of  hydrogen  may  b«.'
always  turned  on.  Now,  if  a  piece  of  spongy  platinum  be  placed  in  this  stream,  the
hydrogen  will  take  hght,  because  the  spong>'  platinum  becomes  hot  in  condensnig  the
hydrogen  and  inflames  it.  The  considerable  rise  in  temperature  of  the  platinum  de])ends,
among  other  things,  on  the  fact  that  the  hydrogen  condens<>d  in  its  pores  comes  into
contact  with  previously  absorbed  and  condensed  atmospheric  oxygen,  with  which  hydro-
gen combines  with  great  facility  in  this  fr>rni.  In  this  manner  the  hydrogen  cigar-lighter
givea  a  stream  of  burning  hydrogen  when  the  cock  is  open.  In  order  that  it  should  work
regularly  it  is  necessary  that  the  spongy  platinum  should  be  quite  clean,  and  it  is  In* st
cmveloped  in  a  thin  sheet  of  platinum  foil,  which  protects  it  from  dust.  In  any  case,
after  some  time  it  will  be  necessary  to  clean  the  platinum,  which  may  be  easily  done  by
boiling  it  in  nitric  acid,  which  does  not  dissolve  the  platinum,  but  clears  it  of  all  dirt.
Thifi  imperfection  has  given  rise  to  several  other  forms,  in  which  an  electric  spark  is
made  to  pass  before  the  orifice  from  which  the  hydrogen  escaiMis.  This  is  arranged  in
Biich  a  manner  that  the  zinc  of  a  galvanic  element  is  immers<Hl  when  the  cock  is  turned,
or  a  small  coil  giving  a  spark  is  put  into  circuit  on  turning  the  hydrogen  on.

**  Under  conditions  similar  to  those  in  which  hydrogen  combines  witli  oxygen  it  is
also  capable  of  combining  with  chlorine.  A  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  chlorine  explodes
on  the  passage  of  an  electric  spark  through  it,  or  on  contact  with  an  incandescent  sul)-
stance,  and  also  in  the  presence  of  spongy  platinum  ;  but,  besides  this,  the  action  of  light

VOL.  I.  L

146  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

state."**  In  this  condition  it  is  capable  of  reacting  on  substances  on
which  it  does  not  act  in  a  gaseous  state.**  *»**  Reactions  of  substitution
or  displacement  of  metals  by  hydrogen  at  the  moment  of  its  formation
are  particularly  numerous.*'*

Metals,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  are  in  many  cases  able  to  replace
each  other  ;  they  also,  and  in  some  cases  still  more  easily,  replace  and
are  replaced  by  hydrogen.  We  have  already  seen  examples  of  this  in
the  formation  of  hydrogen  from  water,  sulphuric  acid,  &c. In  all  these

alone  is  enough  to  bring  about  the  combination  of  hydrogen  and  chlorine.  If  a  mixture
of  equal  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  chlorine  be  exposed  to  the  action  of  sunlight,  com-
plete combination  rapidly  ensues,  accompanied  by  a  report.  Hydrogen  does  not  combine
directly  with  carbon,  either  at  the  ordinary  temperature  or  by  the  action  of  heat  and
pressure.  But  if  an  electric  current  be  passed  through  carbon  electrodes  at  a  short
distance  from  each  other  (as  in  the  electric  light  or  voltaic  arc),  so  as  to  form  an  electric
arc  in  which  the  particles  of  carbon  are  carried  from  one  pole  to  the  other,  then,  in  the
intense  heat  to  which  the  carbon  is  subjected  in  this  case,  it  is  capable  of  combining
with  hydrogen.  A  gas  of  peculiar  smell  called  acetylene,  C.^.H^,  is  thus  fonned  from
carbon  and  hydrogen.

*"  There  is  another  explanation  of  the  facility  with  which  hydrogen  reacts  in  a  nat^ent
state.  We  shall  afterwards  learn  that  the  molecule  of  hydrogen  contains  two  atoms,  H.^,
but  there  are  elements  the  molecules  of  which  only  contain  one  atom — for  instance,
mercury.  Therefore,  every  reaction  of  gaseous  hydrogen  must  be  accompanied  by  the
disruption  of  that  bond  which  exists  between  the  atoms  forming  a  molecule.  At  the
moment  of  evolution,  however,  it  is  supposed  that  free  atoms  exist,  and  in  this  condition,
according  to  the  hypothesis,  act  energetically.  This  hypothesis  is  not  based  ujwn  facts,
and  the  idea  that  hydrogen  is  condensed  at  the  moment  of  its  evolution  is  more  natural,
and  is  in  accordance  with  the  fact  (Note  12)  that  compressed  hydrogen  displaces  palladium
and  silver  (Brunner,  Beketoff) — that  is,  acts  as  at  the  moment  of  its  liberation.

itbix  There  is  a  very  intimate  and  evident  relation  between  the  phenomena  which
take  place  in  the  action  of  spongy  platinum  and  the  phenomena  of  the  action  in  a  nascent
state.  The  combination  of  hydrogen  with  aldehyde  may  be  taken  as  an  example.  Alde-
hyde is  a  volatile  liciuid  with  an  aromatic  smell,  boiling  at  21°,  soluble  in  water,  and
absorbing  oxygen  from  the  atmosphere,  and  in  this  absorption  fonning  acetic  acid — the
Bubstance  which  is  found  in  ordinary  vinegar.  If  sodium  amalgam  be  thrown  into  an
aqueous  solution  of  aldehyde,  the  greater  part  of  the  hydrogen  evolved  combines  with
the  aldehyde,  fonning  alcohol — a  substance  also  soluble  in  water,  which  forms
the  principle  of  all  spirituous  liquors,  boils  at  78",  and  contains  the  same  amount  of
oxygen  and  carbon  as  aldehyde,  but  more  hydrogen.  The  comiK)sition  of  aldehvde  is
C^HiO,  that  of  alcohol  C.jHeO.

*^  When,  for  instance,  an  acid  and  zinc  are  added  to  a  salt  of  silver,  the  silver  is
reduced ;  but  this  may  be  explained  as  a  reaction  of  the  zinc,  and  not  of  the  hydrogen  at
the  moment  of  its  formation.  Tliere  are,  however,  examples  to  which  this  explanation
is  entirely  iuappli table  ;  thus,  for  instance,  hydrogen,  at  the  moment  of  its  liberation
easily  takes  up  oxygen  from  its  compounds  with  nitrogen  if  they  l>e  in  solution,  and
converts  the  nitrog«-n  into  its  hydrogen-compound.  Here  the  nitrogen  and  hydrogen,
BO  to  speak,  meet  at  the  moment  of  their  liberation,  and  in  this  state  combine  together.

It  is  evident  from  this  that  the  elastic  gaseous  state  of  hydrogen  fixes  the  limit  of  its
energy  :  prevents  it  fi-oni  entering  into  those  combinations  of  which  it  is  capable.  In  tlu»
nascent  state  we  have  hydrogen  which  is  not  in  a  gaseous  state,  and  its  action  is  then
much  more  energetic.  At  the  moment  of  evolution  that  heat,  which  would  be  latent  in
the  gaseous  hydn>gtMi,  is  transmitted  to  its  molecules,  and  consequently  they  arc  in  a
state  of  strain,  and  can  hence  lu-t  on  many  substances.

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER, HYDROaEN  147

cases  the  metals  sodium,  iron,  or  zinc  displace  the  hydrogen  which  occurs
in  these  compounds. Hydrogen  may  be  displaced  from  many  of  its
compounds  by  metals  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  it  is  displaced
from water ; so, for  example, hydrochloric acid, which  is  formed
dii*ectly  by  the  combination  of  hydrogen  with  chlorine,  gives  hydrogen
by  the  action  of  a  great many  metals,  just  as  sulphuric  acid  does.
Potassium  and  sodium  also  displace  hydrogen  from  its  compounds  with
nitrogen  ;  it  is  only  from  its  compounds  with  carl)on  that  hydrogen  is
not  displaced  by  metals. Hydrogen,  in  its turn,  is  able to replace
metals  ;  this  is  accomplished  most  easily  on  heating,  and  with  those
metals  which  do  not  themselves  displace  hydrogen. If  hydrogen  be
passed  over  the  compounds  of  many  metals  with  oxygen  at  a  red  heat,
it  takes  up the  oxygen from the metals and displaces  them  just
as  it  is  itself  displaced by  metals. If  hydrogen  be  passed  over  the
compound  of  oxygen  with  copper  at  a  red  heat,  then  metallic  copper
and  water  are  obtained — CuO  +  H.2=H20  +  Cu. This  kind  of  double
decomposition  is  called  reduction  with  respect  to  the  metal,  which  is
thus  reduced  to  a  metallic  state  from its  combination  with  oxygen.
But  it  must  be  recollected  that  all  metals  do  not  displace  hydrogen
from  its  compound  with  oxygen,  and,  conversely,  hydrogen  is  not  able
to  displace  all  metals  from  their  compounds  with  oxygen  ;  thus  it  does
not  displace  potassium, calcium, or  aluminium from its  compounds
with oxygen. If  the metals be arranged in the  following  series  :
K,  Na,  Ca,  Al  .  .  .  .  Fe,  Zn,  Hg  ....  Cu,  Pb,  Ag,  Au,  then  the
first  are  able  to  take  up  oxygen  from  water— that  is,  displace  hydrogen
-  -whilst  the  last  do  not  act  thus,  but  are,  on  the  contrary,  reduced
by  hydrogen — that  is,  have,  as  is  said,  a  less  affinity  for  oxygen  than
hydrogen,  whilst  potassium,  sodium,  and  calcium  have  more. This  is
also  expressed  by  the  amount  of  heat  evolved  in  the  act  of  combination
with  oxygen  {see  Note  7),  and  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  potassium  and
sodium  and  other  similar  metals  evolve  heat  in  decomposing  wat^r  ;  but
copper,  silver,  and  the  like  do  not  do  this,  because  in  combining  with
oxygen  they  evolve  less  heat  than  hydrogen  does,  and  therefore  it  hap-
pens that  when  liydrogen  reduces  these  metals  heat  is  evolved. Thus,
for  example,  if  16  grams  of  oxygen  combine  with  copper,  38,000  units
of heat are evolved  ;  and  when  10  grams  of oxygen  combine  with
hydrogen,  forming  water,  69,000  units  of  heat  are  evolved  ;  whilst  23
grams  of  sodium,  in  combining  vvith  KJ  grams  of  oxy^'en,  evolve  100,000
units  of  heat. This  example  clearly  shows that chemical reactions
which  proceed  directly  and  unaided  evolve  heat. Sodium  decomposes
water and hydrogen reduces copper, because they are txothfnncU

reactions,  or  those  which  evolve  heat  ;  copper  does  not  decompose  water,

l2

148  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

because  such  a  reaction  would  be  accompanied  by  an  absorption  (or
secretion)  of  heat,  or  belongs  to  the  class  of  endothermal  reactions  in
which  heat  is  absorbed  ;  and  such  reactions  do  not  generally  proceed
directly,  although  they  may  take  place  with  the  aid  of  energy  (electri-
cal, thermal,  <fec.)  borrowed  from  some  foreign  source.*^

The  reduction  of  metals  by  hydrogen  is  taken  advantage  of  for
determining  the  exact  composition  oficater  by  iveight.  Copper  oxide  is
usually  chosen  for  this  purpose.  It  is  heated  to  redness  in  hydrogen,
and  the  quantity  of  water  thus  formed  is  determined,  when  the  quantity
of  oxygen  which  occurs  in  it  is  found  from  the  loss  of  weight  of  the
copper  oxide.  The  copper  oxide  must  be  weighed  immediately  before
and  after  the  experiment.  The  difference  shows  the  weight  of  the
oxygen  which  entered  into  the  composition  of  the  water  formed.  In
this  manner  only  solids  have  to  be  weighed,  which  is  a  very  great  gain
in  the  accuracy  of  the  results  obtained."*^  Dulong  and  Berzelius  (1819)
were  the  first  to  determine  the  composition  of  water  by  this  method,
and  they  found  that  water  contains  88*91  of  oxygen  and  11*09  of
hydrogen  in  100  parts  by  weight,  or  8*008  parts  of  oxygen  per  one  part
of  hydrogen. Dumas  (1842)  improved  on  this  method,^^  and  found  that

^  Several  numerical  data  and  reflections  bearing  on  this  matter  ai*e  enumerated  in
Notes  7,  9,  and  11.  It  must  be  observed  that  the  action  of  iron  or  zinc  on  water  in  rever-
sible. But  the  reaction  CuO  +  H^  =  Cu  +  HgO  is  not  reversible ;  the  difference  between
the  degrees  of  affinity  is  very  great  in  this  case,  and,  therefore,  so  fur  as  is  at  present
known,  no  hydrogen  is  liberated  even  in  the  presence  of  a  large  excess  of  water.  It  is
to  be  further  remarked,  that  under  the  conditions  of  the  dissociation  of  water,  copper  is
not  oxidised  by  water,  l>ecause  the  oxide  of  copper  is  reduced  by  free  hydrogen.  If  a
definite  amount  of  a  metal  and  acid  be  taken  and  their  reaction  be  carried  on  in  a  closed
space,  then  the  evolution  of  hydrogen  will  cease,  when  its  tension  equals  that  at  wliich
compressed  hydrogen  displaces  the  metal.  The  result  depends  ujwn  the  nature  of  the
metal  and  the  strength  of  the  solution  of  acid.  Tammann  and  Nenist  (1892)  found  that
the  metals  stand  in  the  following  order  in  respect  to  this  limiting  tensidn  of  hydrogen  : —
Na,  Mg,  Zn,  Al,  Cd,  Fe,  Ni.

*^  This  determination  may  be  carried  on  in  an  apparatus  like  that  nientione<l  in
Note  IS  of  Chapter  I.

**  We  will  proceed  to  describe  Dumas'  method  and  results.  For  this  determination
pure  and  dry  copper  oxide  is  necessary.  Dumas  took  a  sufficient  cjuantity  of  cop])er
oxide  for  the  formation  of  50  grams  of  water  in  each  determination.  As  the  oxide  of
copper  was  weighed  before  and  after  the  experiment,  and  as  the  amount  of  oxygen  con-
tained in  water  was  determined  by  the  difference  between  these  weights,  it  was  essential
that  no  other  substance  besides  the  oxygen  forming  the  water  should  be  evolved  from
the  oxide  of  copiwr  during  its  ignition  in  hydrogen.  It  was  necessary',  also,  that  the
hydrogen  sliould  be  perfectly  pure,  and  free  not  only  from  traces  of  moisture,  but  from
any  other  impurities  which  might  dissolve  in  the  water  or  combine  with  the  copper  and
form  some  other  connwund  with  it.  The  bulb  containing  the  oxide  of  copper  (fig.  20),
which  was  heated  to  redness,  should  be  quite  free  from  air,  as  otlierwise  the  oxygen  in
the  air  might,  in  combining  with  the  hydrogen  passing  through  the  vessel,  form  water
in  addition  to  that  formed  by  the  oxygen  of  the  oxide  of  copper.  Tlie  water  fonned
should  be  entirely  absorbed  in  order  to  accurately  determine  its  qutuitity.  The
hydrogen  was  evolved  in  the  three-necked  bottle. The  sulphuric  aci<l,  for  acting  on  the

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  WATER,  EYDBOQEN

rtter  fontaina  1 2-r>7S  parts  of  hydrogen  per  100  part*  of  oxygen— that  is,
p890  parts  of  oxygen  per  i  part  of  liyilrogeii — and  tlierefoi-e  it  is  usually

vilredmllie

■neck. TWhjTlro-
■ -fciulfc's  bottle
M  throogh  U  tnbeis  in  wliich
" " o  Uie  bnib,  wliere
contact  with the
r  oxiiiE,  lurnin wnter.  Mid
I the niidd til metallic
die  watei  (ornicd  ie  mu-
ll the  Hecond  ba\b,  &ud
ng  off  i»  alnnrlied  iti  the
f  U  ta\x». Thi!

The huib  «

^^nd  after  the  expeHment. The

low  in  weight  shows  tlie  qntuitity
nt  Diygen  which  iintvred  iiilo  the
Dompoaition  of  Die  water  (armed,
latter  lieing
n  hjr  Ow  gun  in  weight  ot
m  kfaMctnag  apparatUB.

ck  of  the  three-neolted
I  tabe  ia  placed  dipiuag
leronrr.  Thin  HecreB  uh  u
7'TaIvfl  to  prevent  the  pna-
ilie  appu-fttOM  1*-
g  loo  great  from  the  rapid
1  of  hydrogen.  If  tlio
ote  to  any  conaider-
t,  the  onrreut  ot  guMS
n  would  be  very  rapid,
•  k  Oonwqiience,  the  hy-
II  would  not  be  perfectly
r  the water e ' '

'drogen,  evolved  by  zinc  and  sulphnrir  acid,  is  pnrified  by
finrt  through  a  tube  fnll  of  piecca  of  gloae  nioiatened  utith  a  nololioii  of
t« next through silver eolphale ; the  lead nitrate retu'iu eulphurellfd

150  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

accepted  that  tvater  contains  eight  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen  to  one  part
'  by  weight  0/  hydrogen. By  whatever  method  water  be  obtained,  it  will

hydrogen,  and  arseniuretted  hydrogen  is  retained  by  the tube  with  silver  sulphate.
Caustic  potash in  the  next U tube  retains  any  acid  which  might  come  over. The
two  following  tubes  are  filled with  lumps  of  dry  caustic  potash  in  order  to  absorb
any  carbonic  anhydride  and  moisture  which  the  hydrogen  might  contain. The  next  two
tubes,  to  remove  the  last  traces  of  moisture,  are  filled  with  phosphoric  anhydride,  mixed
with  lumps  of  pumice-stone. They  are  immersed  in  a  freezing  mixture. The  small
U  tube  contains  hygroscopic  lAbstances,  and  is  weighed  before  the  experiment :  this  is
in  order  to  know  whether  the  hydrogen  passing  through  still  retains  any  moisture. If  it
does  not,  then  the  weight  of  this  tube  will  not  vary  during  the  whole  experiment,  but
if  the  hydrogen  evolved  still  retains  moisture,  the  tube  will  increase  in  weight. The
copper  oxide  is  placed  in  the  bulb,  which,  previous  to  the  experiment,  is  dried  with  the
copper  oxide  for  a  long  pehod  of  time. The  air  is  then  exhausted  from  it,  in  order  to
weigh  the  oxide  of  copper  in  a  vacuum  and  to  avoid  the  need  of  a  correction  for  weigh-
ing  in  air. The  bulb  is  made  of  infusible  glass,  that  it  may  be  able  to  withstand  a
lengthy  (20  hours)  exposure  to  a  red  heat  without  changing  in  form. The  weighed  bulb
is  only  connected  with  the  purifying  apparatus  after  the  hydrogen  has  passed  through
for  a  long  time,  and  after  experiment  has  shown  that  the  hydrogen  passing  from  the
purifying  apparatus  is  pure  and  does  not  contain  any  air. On  passing  from  the  con-
densing bulb  the  gas  and  vajMur  enter  into  an  apparatus  for  absorbing  the  last  traces  of
moisture. The  first  U  tube  contains  pieces  of  ignited  potash,  the  second  and  third  tubes
phosphoric  anhydride  or  pumice-stone  moistened  with  sulphuric  acid. The  last  of  the
two  is  employed  for  determining  whether  all  the  moisture  is  absorbed,  and  is  therefore
weighed  separately. The  final  tube  only  serves  as  a  safety-tube  for  the  whole  apparatus,
in  order  that  the  external  moisture  should  not  penetrate  into  it. The  glass  cylinder
contains  sulphuric  acid,  tlirough  which  the  excess  of  hydrogen  passes ;  it  enables  the
rate  at  which  the  hydrogen  is  evolved  to  be  judged,  and  whether  its  amount  should  be
decreased  or  increased.

When  the  apparatus  is  fitted  up  it  must  be  seen  that  all  its  parts  are  hermetically
tight  before  commencing  the  experiment.  When  the  previously  weighed  imrts  are  con-
nected together  and  the  whole  apparatus  put  into  communication,  then  the  bulb  contain-
ing the  copper  oxide  is  heate<l  with  a  spirit  lamp  (reduction  does  not  take  place  without
the  aid  of  heat),  and  the  reduction  of  the  copper  oxide  then  takes  place,  and  water  is
formed.  When  nearly  all  the  copper  oxide  is  reduced  the  lamp  is  removed  and  the
apparatus  allowed  to  cool,  the  current  of  hydrogen  being  kept  up  all  the  time.  When
cool,  the  drawn-out  end  of  the  bulb  is  fused  up,  and  the  hydrogen  remaining  in  it  is
exhausted,  in  order  that  tlie  copper  may  be  again  weighed  in  a  vacuum.  The  absorbiiij;
apparatus  remains  full  of  hydrogen,  and  would  therefore  present  a  Ichh  weight  than  if  it
were  full  of  air,  as  it  was  before  the  experiment,  and  for  this  reason,  having  dist-onnected
the  copper  oxide  bulb,  a  current  of  dry  air  is  passed  through  it  until  tlie  gas  passing  from
the  glass  cylinder  ib  quite  free  from  hydrogen.  The  condensing  bulb  and  the  two  tubes
next  to  it  are  then  weighed,  in  order  to  determine  the  quantity  of  water  fonned.  Dumas
repeated  this  exiwrinicnt  many  times.  The  average  result  was  that  water  contains
1253*8  parts  of  hydrogen  i)er  10,000  parts  of  oxygen.  Making  a  correction  for  the  amount
of  air  contained  in  tlie  sulphuric  acid  employed  for  pro<lucing  the  hydrogen,  Dumas
obtained  the  average  figure  1251-5,  between  the  extremes  12472  and  1256'2.  Tliis
proves  that  per  1  part  of  hydrogen  water  contains  7*9904  parts  of  oxygen,  with  a  possible
error  of  not  more  tluin  .j^^,,  or  003,  in  the  amount  of  oxygen  per  1  part  of  hydrogen.

Erdmann  and  Marchand,  in  eight  determinations,  found  that  i>er  10,000  parts  of
oxygen  water  contains  an  average  of  1,252  parts  of  hydrogen,  with  a  difference  of  from
1,258.5  to  1,248-7  ;  lieuce  per  1  part  of  hydrogen  there  would  l>e  7*9952  of  oxygen,  with  an
error  of  at  least  0()5.

Keiser 1888),  in  America by employing palladium hydride, and by intro<lucing

THE  COMPOSITION  OF WATER, HYDROGEN  151

always  present  the  same  composition.  Whether  it  be  taken  from  nature
and  purified,  or  whether  it  be  obtained  from  hydrogen  by  oxidation,  or
whether  it  be  separated  from  any  of  its  compounds,  or  obtained  by  some
double  decomposition — it  will  in  every  case  contain  one  part  by  weight
of  hydrogen  and  eight  parts  of  oxygen.  This  is  because  water  is  a  definite
chemical  compound.  Detonating  gas,  from  which  it  may  be  formed,  is
a  simple  mixture  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  although  a  mixture  of  the
same  composition  as  water.  All  the  properties  of  both  constituent
gases  are  preserved  in  detonating  gas.  Either  one  or  the  other  gas
may  be  added  to  it  without  destroying  its  homogeneity.  The  funda-
mental properties  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  are  not  found  in  water,  and
neither  of  the  gases  can  be  directly  combined  with  it.  But  they  may  be
evolved  from  it.  In  the  formation  of  water  there  is  an  evolution  of  heat ;
for  the  decomposition  of  water  heat  is  required.  All  this  is  expressed
by  the  words.  Water  is  a  definite  cJiemical  compound  of  hydrogen  vnth
oxygen.  Taking  the  symbol  of  hydrogen,  H,  as  expressing  a  unit  quan-
tity by  weight  of  this  substance,  and  expressing  16  parts  by  weight
of  oxygen  by  O,  we  can  formulate  all  the  above  statements  by  the
chemical  symbol  of  water,  HgO.  As  only  definite  chemical  compounds
are  denoted  by  formulae,  having  denoted  the  formula  of  a  compound
substance  we  express  by  it  the  entire  series  of  properties  which
go  to  make  up  our  conception  of  a  definite  compound,  and  at  the
same  time  the  quantitative  composition  of  the  substance  by  weight.
Further,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  formuhe  express  the  volume  oi
the  gases  contained  in  a  substance.  Thus  the  formula  of  water  shows
that  it  contains  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen.
Besides  which,  we  shall  learn  that  the  formula  expresses  the  density  of
the  vapour  of  a  compound,  and  on  this  many  properties  of  substances
depend,  and,  as  we  shall  learn,  determine  the  quantities  of  the  bodies
entering  into  reactions.  This  vapour  density  we  shall  find  also  deter-
mines the  quantity  of  a  substance  entering  into  a  reaction.  Thus  the
letters  H,0  tell  the  chemist  the  entire  history  of  the  substance.  This
is  an  international  language,  which  endows  chemistry  with  a  simplicity,
clearness,  stability,  and  trustworthiness  founded  on  the  investigation
of  the  laws  of  nature.

various  fresh  precautions  for  obtaining  accurate  results,  found  the  com]>osition  of  water  to
be  15"95  parts  of  oxygen  per  2  of  hydrogen.

Certain  of  the  latest  determinations  of  the  composition  of  water,  as  also  those  made
by  Dumas,  always  give  less  than  8,  and  on  the  average  7*98,  of  oxygen  per  1  part  of
hydrc^en.  However,  not  one  of  these  figures  is  to  be  entirely  depended  on,  and  for
ordinary  accuracy  it  may  be  considered  that  0  =  1C  when  H«»l.

152  rRINCIPLES OF ('REMLSTRY

CHAPTER III

OXYGEN AND THE ClIIKP ASPECTS OF ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS

On  the  earth's  surface  thei-e  is  no  other  element  which  is  so  widely  dis-
tributed as  oxygen  in  its  various  compounds.'  It  makes  up  eight-ninths
of  the  weight  of  water,  which  occupies  the  greater  part  of  the  earth's
surface.  Nearly  all  earthy  substances  and  rocks  consist  of  compounds
of  oxygen  with  metals  and  other  elements.  Thus,  the  greater  part  of
sand  is  formed  of  silica,  SiOj,  which  contains  53  p.c.  of  oxygen  ;  clay
contains  water,  alumina  (formed  of  aluminium  and  oxygen),  and  silica.
It  may  be  considered  that  earthy  substances  and  rocks  contain  up  to
one- third  of  their  weight  of  oxygen  ;  animal  and  vegetable  substances
are  also  very  rich  in  oxygen.  Without  counting  the  water  present  in
them,  plants  contain  up  to  40,  and  animals  up  to  20  p.c.  by  weight  of
oxygen.  Thus,  oxygen  compounds  predominate  on  the  earth's  surface.
Besides  this,  a  portion  exists  in  a  free  state,  and  is  contained  in  admix-
ture with  nitrogen  in  the  atmosphere,  forming  about  one-fourth  of  its
mass,  or  one-fifth  of  its  volume.

Being  so  widely  distributed  in  nature,  oxygen  plays  a  very  im-
portant part  in  it,  for  a  number  of  the  phenomena  which  take  place
before  us  are  mainly  dependent  on  it.  Animals  breathe  air  in  order
to  obtain  only  oxygen  from  it,  the  oxygen  entering  into  their  respiratory
organs  (the  lungs  of  human  beings  and  animals,  the  gills  of  fishes,  and
the  trachae  of  insects)  ;  they,  so  to  say,  drink  in  air  in  order  to  absorb
the  oxygen.  The  oxygen  of  the  air  (or  dissolved  in  water)  passes
through  the  membranes  of  the  respiratory  organs  into  the  blood,  is
retained  in  it  by  the  blood  corpuscles,  is  transmitted  by  their  means
to  all  parts  of  the  body,  aids  their  transformations,  bringing  about
chemical  processes  in  them,  and  chiefly  extracting  carbon  from  them
in  the  form  of  carbonic  anhydride,  the  greater  part  of  which  passes
into  the  blood,  is  dissolved  by  it,  and  is  thrown  off  by  the  lungs  during

^  Ah  rt'fjards  the  interior  of  the  earth,  it  f»robably  coniainK  far  less  oxygen  com-
Xwiinds  than  the  snrfuce,  judging  by  the  accumuhited  evidences  of  the  eurtli's  origin,  of
meteorites,  of  the  earth's  density,  A'c.  (sre  Chapter  VIII.,  Note  5H,  and  Chapter  XXII, ,
Note  *2j.

OXYGEN  AND ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  15S

the  absorption  of  the  oxygen.  Thus,  in  the  process  of  respiration
carbonic  anhydride  (and  water)  is  given  off,  and  the  oxygen  of  the  air
absorbed,  by  which  means  the  blood  is  changed  from  a  red  venous
to  a  dark-red  arterial  blood.  The  cessation  of  this  ]^ocess  causes
death,  because  then  all  those  chemical  processes,  and  the  consequent
heat  and  work  which  the  oxygen  introduced  into  the  system  brought
about,  cease.  For  this  reason  suffocation  and  death  ensue  in  a  vacuum,
or  in  a  gas  which  does  not  contain  free  oxygen,  i.e.  which  does  not
support  combustion.  If  an  animal  be  placed  in  an  atmosphere  of  free
oxygen,  at  first  its  movements  are  very  active  and  a  general  invigoration
is  remarked,  but  a  reaction  soon  sets  in,  and  death  may  ensue.  The
oxygen  of  the  air  when  it  enters  the  lungs  is  diluted  with  four  volumes
of  nitrogen,  which  is  not  absorbed  into  the  system,  so  that  the  blood
absorbs  but  a  small  quantity  of  oxygen  from  the  air,  whilst  in  an
atmosphere  of  pure  oxygen  a  large  quantity  of  oxygen  would  be
absorbed,  and  would  produce  a  very  rapid  change  of  all  parts  of  the
organism,  and  destroy  it.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  be  under-
stood that  oxygen  may  be  employed  in  respiration,  at  any  rate  for  a
limited  time,  when  the  respiratory  organs  suffer  under  certain  forms  of
suffocation  and  impediment  to  breathing.^

The  combustion  of  organic  substances  —that  is,  substances  which
make  up  the  composition  of  plants  and  animals — proceeds  in  the  same
manner  as  the  combustion  of  many  inorganic  substances,  such  as
sulphur,  phosphorus,  iron,  ic,  from  the  combination  of  these  substances
with  oxygen,  as  was  described  in  the  Introduction.  The  decomposi-
tion, rotting,  and  similar  transformations  of  substances,  which  proceed
around  us,  are  also  very  often  dependent  on  the  action  of  the  oxygen
of  the  air,  and  also  reduce  it  from  a  free  to  a  combined  state. The

*  It  is  evident  that  tlie  partial  pressure  (see  Cliapter  I.)  acts  in  respiration.  The
researclies  of  Paul  Bert  sliowed  this  with  particular  clearness.  Under  a  pressure  of  one-
fifth  of  an  atmosphere  consisting  of  oxygen  only,  animals  and  human  beings  remain
under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  the  partial  pressure  of  oxygen,  but  organisms  cannot
support  air  rarefied  to  one-fifth,  for  then  the  partial  pressufe  of  the  oxygen  falls  to  one-
twenty-fifth  f)f  an  atmosphere.  Even  under  a  pressure  of  one-third  of  an  atmosphere  the
regular  life  of  hunuin  beings  is  impossible,  by  reason  of  the  impossibility  of  respiration
(because  of  the  decrease  of  solubility  of  oxygen  in  the  bloodj,  owing  to  the  small  partial
pressure  of  the  oxygen,  and  not  from  any  mechanical  effect  of  the  decrease  of  pressure.
Paul  Bert  illustrated  all  this  by  many  ex|ieriments,  some  of  which  he  conducted  on  him-
self. This  explains,  among  other  things,  the  discomfort  felt  in  the  ascent  of  high  moun-
tains or  in  balloons  when  the  height  reached  exceeds  eight  kilometres,  and  at  pressures
below  250  mm.  (Chapter  II,,  Note  28).  It  is  evident  that  an  artificial  atmosphere  haH
to  be  employed  in  the  ascent  to  great  heights,  just  as  in  submarine  work.  The  cure  by
compressed  and  rarefie<l  air  which  is  practised  in  certain  illnesses  is  based  partly  oi)
the  mechanical  lu-tion  of  the  change  of  pressure,  and  partly  on  the  alteration  in  the  partial
pressure  of  the  respired  oxygen.

154  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY^

majority  of  the  compounds  of  oxygen  are,  like  water,  very  stable,  and
do  not  give  up  their  oxygen  under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  nature.
As  these  processes  are  taking  place  everywhere,  it  might  be  expected
that  the  amount  of  free  oxygen  in  the  atmosphere  should  decrease,
and  this  decrease  should  proceed  somewhat  rapidly.  This  is,  in  fact,
observed  where  combustion  or  respiration  proceeds  in  a  closed  space.
Animals  suffocate  in  a  closed  space  because  in  consuming  the  oxygen
the  air  remains  unfit  for  respiration.  In  the  same  manner  combustion,
aft«r  a  time,  ceases  in  a  closed  space,  which  may  be  proved  by  a  very
simple  experiment.  An  ignited  substance — for  instance,  a  piece  of  burn-
ing sulphur — has  only  to  be  placed  in  a  glass  flask,  which  is  then  closed
with  a  stout  cork  to  prevent  the  access  of  the  external  air  ;  combus-
tion will  proceed  for  a  certain  time,  so  long  as  the  flask  contains  any
free  oxygen,  but  it  will  cease  when  the  oxygen  of  the  enclosed  air  has
combined  with  the  sulphur.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident
that  regularity  of  combustion  or  respiration  requires  a  constant  renewal
of  air— that  is,  that  the  burning  substance  or  respiring  animal  should
have  access  to  a  fresh  supply  of  oxygen.  This  is  attained  in  dwellings
by  having  many  windows,  outlets,  and  ventilators,  and  by  the  cun-ent
of  air  produced  by  fires  and  stoves.  As  regards  the  air  over  the  entire
earth's  surface  its  amount  of  oxygen  hardly  decreases,  because  in
nature  there  is  a  process  going  on  which  renews  the  supply  of  free
oxygen.  Plants^  or  rather  their  leaves,  during  daytime,^  under  the
influence  of  light,  absorb  carbonic  anhydride  CO2,  and  evolve  free  oxygen.
Thus  the  loss  of  oxygen  which  occurs  in  consequence  of  the  respiration
of  animals  and  of  combustion  is  made  good  by  plants.  If  a  leaf  be
placed  in  a  bell  jar  containing  water,  and  carbonic  anhydride  (because
this  gas  is  absorbed  and  oxygen  evolved  from  it  by  plants)  be  passed
into  the  bell,  and  the  whole  apparatus  placed  in  sunlight,  then
oxygen  will  accumulate  in  the  bell  jar.  This  experiment  was  first
made  by  Priestley  at  the  end  of  the  last  century.  Thus  the  life  of  plants
on  the  earth  not  only  serves  for  the  formation  of  food  for  animals,  but
also  for  keeping  up  a  constant  percentage  of  oxygen  in  the  atmosphere.
In  the  long  period  of  the  life  of  the  earth  an  equilibiium  has  been
attained  between  the  processes  absorbing  and  evolving  oxygen,  by
which  a  definite  quantity  of  free  oxygen  is  preserved  in  the  entire  mass
of  the  atmosphere.^

•'  At  night,  witliout  the  action  of  light,  without  the  absorption  of  that  energy  which  is
required  for  the  decompoKition  of  carbonic  anhydride  mto  free  oxygen  and  carbon  (which
is  retained  by  the  plants)  they  breathe  like  animalfl,  absorbing  oxygen  and  evolving
carbonic  anhydride.  This  process  also  goes  on  side  by  side  with  the  reverse  prtK'ess  in
the  daytime,  but  it  is  then  far  feebler  than  that  which  gives  oxygen.

*  The  earth's  surface  is  equal  to  about  510  million  square  kilometres,  and  the  mass  of

OXYGEN AND  ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  155

Oxygen  was  obtained  as  an  independent  gas  in  1774  by  Priestley  in
England  and  in  the  same  year  by  Scheele  in  Sweden,  but  its  nature  and
great  importance  were  only  perfectly  elucidated  by  Lavoisier.

Free  oxygen  may  be  obtained  by  one  or  other  method  from  all  the
substances  in  which  it  occurs.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  oxygen  of  many
substances  may  be  transferred  into  water,  from  which,  as  we  have
already  seen,  oxygen  may  be  obtained.*^  We  will  first  consider  the
methods  of  extracting  oxygen  from  air  as  being  a  substance  everywhere
distributed.  The  separation  of  oxygen  from  it  is,  however,  hampered
by  many  difficulties.

From  air,  which  contains  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  the
nitrogen  alone  cannot  be  removed,  because  it  has  no  inclination  to
combine  directly  or  readily  with  any  substance  ;  and  although  it  does
combine  with  certain  substances  (boron,  titanium),  these  substances
combine  simultaneously  with  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere.** However,

the  air  (at  a  pressure  of  760  mm.)  on  each  kilometre  of  surface  is  about  10^  thousand
niilhons  of  kilograms,  or  about  lOJ^  million  tons  ;  therefore  the  whole  weight  of  the  atmo-
sphere is  about  5,100  million  million  ( =  61  x  10*^)  tons.  Consequently  there  are  about
2  X  10'*  tons  of  free  oxygen  in  the  earth's  atmosphere.  Tlie  innumerable  series  of  pro-
cesses which  absorb  a  portion  of  this  oxygen  are  compensated  for  by  the  plant  processes.
Assuming  that  100  million  tons  of  vegetable  matter,  containing  40  p.c.  of  carbon,  formed
from  carbonic  acid,  are  produced  (and  the  same  process  proceeds  in  water)  iwr  year  on
the  100  million  square  kilometres  of  dry  land  (ten  tons  of  roots,  leaves,  stems,  &c.,  per
hectare,  or  ^^  of  a  square  kilometre),  we  find  that  the  plant  life  of  the  drj'  land  gives
about  100,000  tons  of  oxygen,  which  is  an  insignificant  fraction  of  the  entire  mass  of  the
oxygen  of  the  air.

*  The  extraction  of  oxygen  from  water  may  be  effected  by  two  processes :  either  by
the  decomposition  of  water  into  its  constituent  parts  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current
(Chapter  II.),  or  by  means  of  the  removal  of  the  hydrogen  from  water.  But,  as  we  have
seen  and  already  know,  hydrogen  enters  into  direct  combination  with  very  few  substtuices,
and  then  only  under  special  circumstances ;  whilst  oxygen,  as  we  shall  soon  learn,  com-
bines with  nearly  all  substances.  Only  gaseous  chlorine  (and,  especially,  fluorine)  is
capable  of  decomposing  water,  taking  up  the  hydrogen  from  it,  without  combining  with
the  oxygen.  Chlorine  is  soluble  in  water,  and  if  an  aqueous  s<.>lution  of  chlorine,  so-called
chlorine  water,  be  poured  into  a  flask,  and  this  fiask  be  inverted  in  a  basin  containing
the  same  chlorine  water,  then  we  shall  have  an  apparatus  by  means  of  which  oxygen  may  be
extracted  from  water.  At  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  in  the  dark,  chlorine  does  not
ivct  on  water,  or  only  acts  very  feebly ;  but  mider  the  action  of  direct  sunlight  chlorine
decomposes  water,  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen  The  chlorine  then  combines  with  the
hydrogen,  and  gives  hydrocldoric  acid,  which  dissolves  in  the  water,  and  therefore  free
oxygen  only  will  be  separated  from  the  liquid,  and  it  will  only  contain  a  small  quantity
of  clilorine  in  admixture,  which  can  be  easily  removed  by  passuig  the  gas  through  a
solution  of  caustic  potash.

'•  A  difference  in  the  physical  properties  of  both  gases  cannot  \ye  here  taken  advantage
of,  because  they  are  very  similar  in  this  respect.  Tims  the  density  of  oxygen  is  IB  times
and  of  nitrogen  14  times  greater  than  the  density  of  hydrogen,  and  therefore  i)orous
vessels  caimot  be  here  employed — the  difference  between  the  times  of  their  passage
through  a  porous  surface  would  be  too  insignificant.

Graham,  however,  succeeded  in  enriching  air  in  oxygen  by  passing  it  tlirough  india-
rubber. This  may  be  done  in  the  following  way  : — A  common  india-rubber  cushion,  ]

FRISCIPLEf OF CHEMlSTUy

oxygen  may  be  separated  froui  air  by  causing  it  to  combine  with  s
stances  which  may  be  easily  defompoaed  by  the  action  of  Iieat,  and,  in

(Fig.  37).  is  taken,  mi'l  ils  orifite  honnelk'nlly  connecled  with  an  nir-inunp,  or,  beltsr
Klill,  a.  mercury  iLHpiistoi  (the  Spreiigel  piinip  in  deBignated  by  Ilie  lettont  x,  c,  ej.  Wlif  n
am  «Bpir«tor  {Chapler  11.,  Note  !fll  Imh  paniped  ool  Ihe  air,  wliic^h  will  be  aeon  by  the
luHTunry  niniiing  out  in  iin  alniost  uninlemipled  stream,  uid  from  ita  utanding  apprOTi-
iit  llie  biiroiiietrir^lieiK'i ti  Clum  it  may  be  clearly obseTred  that  gns  piusea  throosb  the
ladia-mbber. ThiaigatMo  Men

Tbia

lUi

.ylio.

to hv about iS volumei
ojygeii  with  B7  volnmea  ol
trrtgeii,  niid  one  volume  of
bonic  anhydridegWhilBtordiiiaiy
air  contaJDH  only  SI  toIuidm

square  metre  of  indta-mbber
Borfaee  (of  tbe  iinnal  llnoknent)
pa««Bal»ul4l
per hour. T!

clearly  shows  that  India-nibber '
is  pemieable to  gases. This ^
may,  by  the  way,  bo  ob«enred
in  couinion toy  balloons  filted '
witli  eoal-gan. They  faU  atler J

riir  peuetrateii  into,  and  the  RM ]
from,theirinterior,  Ihrooghih* ]
nurface  uF  the  india-rnhber  of |
~~ whiL-li they are nude. Tl
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ rate  o!  the  pannage ol  gaB
^B^^^^^^^^B^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^I through  india-rubber  doM  ni

na  Mitchell  and  Graham  ahowed, ]
'■"'•  ^'■~\'™],ampV,e'K7L^^g'lHn'ai'i!^t!!i^!''''''"  "'"''' depend  ou  their  deniii

conaeqnently  its  permealulitf
i»  not  determined  by  oriflw*.  It  more  refterolilm.  djalysia-that  is,  the  i>enetraticia  |
of  liqniaa  throngh  colloid  narlaces.  Equal  rolnniea  ot  ganea  penetrate  throngh  india-
mbber  in  periodn  o(  time  whirh  are  related  lo  eavh  other  as  follows ;— carbonic  anhydride,
IINII  hydrogen,  atT;  oxygen,  SSa ;  marsh  gaa.  638  :  caitiouic  otide,  1,390 ;  nitrogen,  l.BES.
Hsniu)  nilrogeu  penetrates  more  slowly  than  oxygen,  and  carbonic  anhydride  mott
qnicUy  than  other  gaaee. 2'fi56  rolnmea  of  oiygen  and  IS'ESS  Tolunies  ot  oatbanie

OXYGEN  AND  ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  157

so  doing,  give  up  the  oxygen  absorbed — that  is,  by  making  use  of  re-
versible reactions.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere
may  be  made  to  oxidise  sulphurous  anhydride,  SOj  (by  passing  directly
over  ignited  spongy  platinum),  and  to  form  sulphuric  anhydride,  or
sulphur  trioxide,  SO3  ;  and  this  substance  (which  is  a  solid  and  volatile,
and  therefore  easily  separated  from  the  nitrogen  and  sulphurous
anhydride),  on  further  heating,  gives  oxygen  and  sulphurous  anhydride.
Caustic  soda  or  lime  extracts  (absorbs)  the  sulphurous  anhydride
from  this  mixture,  whilst  the  oxygen  is  not  absorbed,  and  thus  it  is
isolated  from  the  air.  On  a  large  scale  in  works,  as  we  shall  afterwards
see,  sulphurous  anhydride  is  transformed  into  hydrate  of  sulphuric
trioxide,  or  sulphuric  acid,  H2SO4  ;  if  this  is  allowed  to  drop  on  to
red-hot  flagstones,  water,  sulphurous  anhydride,  and  oxygen  are  obtained.
The  oxygen  is  easily  isolated  from  this  mixture  by  passing  the  gases
over  lime.  The  extraction  of  oxygen  from  oxide  of  mercury  (Priestley,
Lavoisier),  which  is  obtained  from  mercury  and  the  oxygen  of  the
atmosphere,  is  also  a  reversible  reaction  by  which  oxygen  may  be
obtained  from  the  atmosphei*e.  So  also,  by  passing  dry  air  through  a
red-hot  tube  containing  barium  oxide,  it  is  made  to  combine  with  the
oxygen  of  the  air.  In  this  reaction  the  so-called  barium  peroxide,
BaOj,  is  formed  from  the  barium  oxide,  BaO,  ?ind  at  a  higher  tempera-
ture the  former  evolves  the  absorbed  oxygen,  and  leaves  the  barium
oxide  originally  taken.'

anhydride  penetrate  in  the  same  time  us  one  volume  of  nitrogen.  By  multiplying  these
ration  by  the  amounts  of  these  gases  in  air,  we  obtain  figures  wliich  are  in  almost  the
same  proportion  as  the  volumes  of  tlie  gases  penetrating  from  air  through  india-rubber.
If  the  process  of  dialysis  be  repeated  on  the  air  which  has  already  passed  through  india-
mbber,  then  a  mixture  containing  65  p.c.  by  volume  of  oxygen  is  obtained.  It  may  l>e
thought  that  the  cause  of  this  phenomenon  is  the  absorj^tion  or  occlusion  (see  Chap.  II.,
Note  37)  of  gases  by  india-rubber  and  the  evolution  of  the  gas  dissolved  in  a  vacuun)  ;  and,
indeed,  india-rubber  does  absorb  gases,  especially  carbonic  anhydride,  (rrahani  calh'd  the
above  method  of  the  decomposition  of  air  atmolysis.

'  The  preparation  of  oxygen  by  thismethml,  which  is  due  to  Boussingault,  is  conducted
in  a  porcelain  tube,  which  is  placed  in  a  stove  heated  by  charcoal,  so  that  its  ends  project
beyond  the  stove.  Barium  oxide  (which  may  be  obtained  by  igniting  barium  nitrate,
previously  dried)  is  placed  in  the  tube,  one  end  of  which  is  connected  with  a  pair  of
bellows,  or  a  gas-holder,  for  keeping  up  a  current  of  air  through  it.  The  air  is  previously
passed  through  a  solution  of  ctiustic  ^wtash,  to  remove  all  tnices  of  carbonic  anhydride,
and  it  is  very  carefully  dried  (for  the  hydrate  BaH.iOj  does  not  give  the  peroxide).  At  a
dark-red  heat  (500-600°)  the  oxide  of  barium  absorbs  oxygen  from  the  air,  so  that  the  gas
leiivingthe  tube  consists  almost  entirely  of  nitrogen.  When  the  absorption  ceases,  the  air
will  pass  through  the  tube  unchanged,  which  may  be  recognised  from  the  fact  that  it  sup-
ports combustion.  The  barium  oxide  is  converted  into  peroxide  under  these  circumstances,
and  eleven  parts  of  barium  oxide  absorb  about  one  part  of  oxygen  by  weight.  Wlien  the
absorption  ceases,  one  end  of  the  tube  is  closed,  a  cork  with  a  gas-conducting  tube  is  fixed
into  the  other  end,  and  the  heat  of  the  stove  is  increased  to  a  bright-red  heat  (800'^).  At
this  temperature  the  barium  peroxide  gives  up  all  that  oxygen  which  it  acquired  at  a  dark-
red  heat — i.e.  about  one  part  by  weight  of  oxygen  is  evolved  from  twelve  parts  of  barium

158  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Oxygen  is  evolved  with  particular  ease  by  a  whole  series  of  unstable
oxygen  compounds,  of  which  we  shall  proceed  to  take  a  general  survey,
remarking  that  many  of  these  reactions,  although  not  all,  belong  to  the
number  of  reversible  reactions  ;  ®  so  that  in  order  to  obtain  many  of
these  substances  (for  instance,  potassium  chlorate)  rich  in  oxygen,
recourse  must  be  had  to  indirect  methods  (see  Introduction)  with
which  we  shall  become  acquainted  in  the  course  of  this  book.

1.  The  compounds  of  oxygen  with  certain  metals,  and  especially
with  the  so-called  noble  metals — that  is,  mercury,  silver,  gold,  and
platinum — having  once  been  obtained,  retain  their  oxygen  at  the  ordi-
nary temperature,  but  part  with  it  at  a  red  heat.  Tlie  compounds  are
solids,  generally  amorphous  and  infusible,  and  are  easily  decomposed  by
heat  into  the  metal  and  oxygen. We  have  seen  an  example  of  this  in

peroxide.  After  the  evolution  of  the  oxygen  there  remains  the  barium  oxide  which  was
originally  taken,  so  that  air  may  be  again  passed  over  it,  and  thus  the  preparation  of  oxygen
from  one  and  the  same  quantity  of  barium  oxide  may  be  repeated  many  times.  Oxygen
has  been  produced  one  hundred  times  from  one  mass  of  oxide  by  this  method  ;  all  the  ne-
cessary precautions  being  taken,  as  regards  the  temperature  of  the  mass  and  the  removal
of  moisture  and  carbonic  acid  from  the  air.  Unless  these  precautions  be  taken,  the  mass
of  oxide  soon  spoils.

As  oxygen  may  become  of  considerable  technical  use,  from  its  capacity  for  giving
high  temperatures  and  intense  light  in  the  combustion  of  substances,  its  preparation
directly  from  air  by  practical  methods  forms  a  problem  whose  solution  many  investi-
gators continue  to  work  at  up  to  the  present  day. The  most  practical  methods  are  those
of  Tessio  dn  Motay  and  Kassner. The  first  is  based  on  the  fact  that  a  mixture  of  equal
weights  of  manganese  peroxide  and  caustic  soda  at  an  incipient  red  heat  (about  i550'^)
absorbs  oxygen  from  air,  with  the  separation  of  water,  according  to  the  equation  MnO.j  +
2NaH0  +  0  — Na-iMnO^  +  HaO. If  superheated  steam,  at  a  temperature  of  about  450  \
be  then  passed  through  the  mixture,  the  manganese  peroxide  and  caustic  soda  originally
taken  are  regenerated,  and  the  oxygen  held  by  them  is  evolved,  according  to  the  reverse
equation  Na-|Mn04  +  H.jO  -  MnO^  +  2NaHO  +  O. This  mode  of  preparing  oxygen  may  be
repeated  for  an  infinite  number  of  times. The  oxygen  in  combining  liberates  water,  and
steam,  acting  on  the  resulttmt  substance,  evolves  oxygen. Hence  all  that  is  required  for
the  preparation  of  oxygen  by  this  method  is  fuel  and  the  alternate  cutting  of!  the  supply
of  air  and  steam. In  Kassner's  process  (1891)  a  mixture  of  oxide  of  lead  and  lime  (PbO  -\
2CaO)  i«  heated  to  redness  in  the  presence  of  air,  oxygen  is  then  absorbed  and  calcium
plumbate,  Ca.jPb04,  formed. The  latter  is  of  a  chocolate  colour,  and  on  further  heating
evolves  oxygen  and  gives  the  original  mixture  PbO  +  2CaO— that  is,  the  phenomenon  is
essentially  the  same  as  in  Boussingault's  process  (with  BaO),  but  according  to  Le  Chate-
lier  (189H)  the  dissociation  tension  of  the  oxygen  evolved  from  Ca.iPb04  is  less  than  with
BaO.^  at  equal  temperatures  ;  for  instance,  at  940°,  112  mm.  of  mercury  for  the  first,  and
for  the  latter  210  mm.  at  720^  and  670  mm.  at  790°,  while  for  Ca...Pb04  this  tension  is  only
reached  at  1.080°. However,  in  Kassner's  process  the  oxygen  is  absorbed  more  rapidly,
and  the  influence  of  the  presence  of  moisture  and  CO2  in  the  air  is  not  so  marked,  so  that
this  process,  like  that  of  Tessic  du  Motay,  deserves  consideration.

®  Even  the  decomix>siti<)n  of  manganese  peroxide  is  reversible,  and  it  may  be  re-
obtained  from  that  suboxide  (or  its  sjilts),  which  is  formed  in  the  evolution  of  oxygen
(Chap.  XI.,  Note  0).  The  coniiwunds  of  chromic  acid  containing  the  trioxide  CrO-  in
evolvinj;  oxygen  give  chromium  oxide,  Cr.O-,  but  they  re-form  the  salt  of  chromic  acid
when  heut<*d  to  redness  in  air  with  an  alkali.

OXYGEN  AND  ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  159

gpeaking  of  the  decomposition  of  mercury  oxide.  Priestley,"  in  1774,
obtained  pure  oxygen  for  the  first  time  by  heating  mercury  oxide  by
means  of  a  burning-glass,  and  clearly  showed  its  difference  from  air.
He  showed  its  characteristic  property  of  supporting  combustion  *  with
remarkable  vigour/  and  named  it  dephlogisticated  air.

2.  The  substances  called  jxiroxides  ^  evolve  oxygen  at  a  greater  or
less  heat  (and  also  by  the  action  of  many  acids).  They  usually  contain
metals  combined  with  a  large  quantity  of  oxygen.  Peroxides  are  the
highest  oxides  of  certain  metals  ;  those  metals  which  form  them  gene-
rally give  several  compounds  with  oxygen.  Those  of  the  lowest  degrees
of  oxidation,  containing  the  least  amount  of  oxygen,  are  generally  sub-
stances which  are  capable  of  easily  reacting  with  acids — for  instance,
with  sulphuric  acid.  Such  low  oxides  are  called  bases.  Peroxides
contain  more  oxygen  than  the  bases  formed  by  the  same  metals.  For
example,  lead  oxide  contains  7*1  parts  of  oxygen  in  100  parts,  and  is
basic,  but  lead  peroxide  contains  13*3  parts  of  oxygen  in  100  parts.
Manganese  peroxide  is  a  similar  substance,  and  is  a  solid  of  a  dark
colour,  which  occurs  in  nature.  It  is  employed  for  technical  purposes
under  the  name  of  black  oxide  of  manganese  (in  German,  *  Braunstein,'
the  pyrolusite  of  the  mineralogist).  Peroxides  are  able  to  evolve
oxygen  at  a  more  or  less  elevated  temperature.  They  do  not  then  part
with  all  their  oxygen,  but  with  only  a  portion  of  it,  and  are  converted
into  a  lower  oxide  or  base.  Thus,  for  example,  lead  peroxide,  on  heat-
ing, gives  oxygen  and  lead  oxide.  The  decomposition  of  this  peroxide
proceeds  tolerably  easily  on  heating,  even  in  a  glass  vessel,  but  manganese
peroxide  only  evolves  oxygen  at  a  strong  red  heat,  and  therefore  oxygen
can  only  be  obtained  from  it  in  iron,  or  other  metallic,  or  clay  vessels.
This  was  formerly  the  method  for  obtaining  oxygen.  Manganese
peroxide  only  parts  with  one-third  of  its  oxygen  (according  to  the
equation  3Mn0.2  =  Mn304-f  O.^),  whilst  two-thirds  remain  in  the  solid
substance  which  forms  the  residue  after  heating.  Metallic  peroxides
are  also  capable  of  evolving  oxygen  on  heating  with  sulphuric  acid.
They  then  evolve  just  that  amount  of  oxygen  which  is  in  excess  of
that  necessary  for  the  formation  of  the  base,  the  latter  reacting  on
the  sulphuric  acid  forming  a  compound  (salt)  with  it.  Thus  barium
peroxide,  when  heated  with  sulphuric  acid,  forms  oxygen  and  barium
oxide,  which  gives  a  compound  with  sulphuric  acid  termed  barium
sulphate  (BaO.,  -i-  H2804  =  BaSO,  -flloO  -hO).-'  ^Ih This  reaction  usually

^  We  shall  afterwanlM  sec  that  it  is  only  suhstances  like  hariuin  peroxide  (which
Kive  hydrogen  peroxide »  which  should  be  counted  as  true  iM»roxides,  and  that  MnO.,,  I*l)0.2»
X'c,  should  be  distinguinhed  from  them  (they  do  not  give  hydrogen  j)eroxide  with  acids),
and  therefore  it  is  Iwst  to  call  them  dioxides.

»bi«  Pen)xide  of  barium  also  gives  oxygen  at  the  ordinary  U'niperaturc  in  the  presence

IGO

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

proceeds  with  greater  ease  than  the  decomposition  of  peroxides  by  heat
alone.  For  the  purposes  of  experiment  powdered  manganese  peroxide  is
usually  taken  and  mixed  with  strong  sulphuric  acid  in  a  flask,  and  the
apparatus  set  up  as  shown  in  Fig.  28.  The  gas  which  is  evolved  is
passed  through  a  Woulfe's  bottle  containing  a  solution  of  caustic  potash,

Fio.  28.— Preparation  of  oxvKt'ii  from  lUHiiKiineflc  peroxide  and  sulpluirit'  tu-id. The  gas  evolved
is  iiajwe«l  tlmniKli  "  Woulfe's  bottle  containing  cau.stic  potu«li.

to  purify  it  from  carbonic  anhydride  and  chlorine,  which  accompany  the
evolution  of  oxygen  from  commercial  manganese  peroxide,  and  the  gas  is
not  collected  until  a  thin  smouldering  taper  placed  in  front  of  the  escape
orifice  bursts  into  flame,  which  shows  that  the  gas  coming  off" is  oxygen.
By  this  method  of  decomposition  of  the  manganese  peroxide  by  sul-

of  the  solutions  of  iiiauy  HubHtanceH  in  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation.  In  this  renpect  we
may  mention  that  Kassner  (1890)  proiwses  to  obtain  oxygen  for  laboratory  purposes  by
mixing  BaOj  with  FeKj(CN)e  (red  prussiate  of  potash,  Chapter  XXII.):  the  reaction
proceeds  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen  even  on  the  addition  of  a  very  snuill  quantity  of
water.  In  order  to  ensure  a  gradual  evolution  of  gas  the  author  pro)K>ses  to  introduce
both  substances  into  the  reaction,  little  by  little,  instead  of  lUl  at  once,  which  may  bo
done  with  the  following  arrangement  (Gavaloffsky) :  finely  powdered  peroxide  of  barium
is  placed  in  an  ordinary  flask  and  sufficient  water  is  added  to  fill  the  flask  one-third
full.  The  cork  closing  the  flask  has  three  holes;  (1)  for  the  gas-conducting  tube ;  (2)  for
a  rod  to  stir  the  BaO.. ;  and  (Hj  for  a  glass  rod  terminating  in  a  perforated  glass  vessel
containing  crystals  of  FeKs^CN)^.  When  it  is  desired  to  sttvrt  the  evolution  of  the
oxygen,  the  vessel  is  lowered  until  it  is  immersed  in  the  liquid  in  the  flask,  and  the  BaO.^
is  stirred  with  the  other  rod.  Tlie  reaction  proceeds  according  to  the  equation,  BaO.,>  +
*2FeK.-,(CN)o -  FeK4( CN)o  +  FeK,Ba(CN )« -r  O.^.  Tlie  double  salt,  FeBa-.,(CN ig,  crjsUlli^s
out  from  the  mother  liquor.  To  understand  the  course  of  the  reaction,  it  must  be  remem-
bered BaOj  is  of  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation,  and  that  it  parts  with  oxygen  and  gives  tlie
base  BaO  which  enters  into  the  complexsalt  FeK.^Ba(CN)6==  Fe(CN  j.^  +  2KCN  +  Ba(CN).„
and  this  latter  ■=  BaO  +  2HCN  -  H.,»0.  Moreover,  FeK5(CN)6  contains  the  salt  Fe^lCN)^
which  also  corresponds  to  the  higher  degree  of  oxidation  of  iron,  Fe.^Oj,  whilst  after  the
reaction  a  salt  is  obtained  which  contains  Fe(CN)3,  and  corresponds  to  the  lower  degree  of
oxidation,  FeO,  so  that  (in  tlie  presence  of  water)  oxygen  is  also  set  free  on  this  side  also,
i.e.  the  reaction  gives  lower  degrees  of  oxidation  and  oxygen.

OXYGEN  AND ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  161

phuric  acid  there  is  evolved,  not,  as  in  heating,  one- third,  but  one-half  of
the  oxygen  contained  in  the  peroxide  (Mn02  +  H2S04=MnS04-fH20
-f  O) — that  is,  from  50  grams  of  peroxide  about  7}  grams,  or  about  5^
litres,  of  oxygen,'*'  whilst  by  heating  only  about  3^  litres  are  obtained.
The  chemists  of  Lavoisier's  time  generally  obtained  oxygen  hy  heating
manganese  peroxide.  At  the  present  time  more  convenient  methods
are  known.

3.  A  third  source  to  which  recourse  may  l>e  had  for  obtaining
oxygen  is  represented  in  acids  and  safts  containing  much  oxygen,
which  are  capable,  by  parting  with  a  portion  or  all  of  their  oxygen,
of  being  converted  into  other  compounds  (lower  products  of  oxidation)
which  are  more  difficultly  decomposed.  These  acids  and  salts  (lik^
peroxides)  evolve  oxygen  either  on  heating  alone,  or  only  when  in  the
presence  of  some  other  substance.  Sulphuric  acid  may  be  taken  as  an
example  of  an  acid  which  is  decomposed  by  the  action  of  heat  alone,'*
for  it  breaks  up  at  a  red  heat  into  water,  sulphurous  anhydride,  and
oxygen,  as  was  mentioned  before.  Priestley,  in  1772,  and  Scheele,
somewhat  later,  obtained  oxygen  by  heating  nitre  to  a  red  heat.  The
best  examples  of  the  formation  of  oxygen  by  the  heating  of  salts  is
given  in  potassium  chlorate^  or  Berthollet's  salt,  so  called  after  the
French  chemist  who  discovered  it.  Potassium  chlorate  is  a  salt  com-
posed of  the  elements  potassium,  chlorine,  and  oxygen,  KCIO3.  It
occurs  as  transparent  colourless  plates,  is  soluble  in  water,  especially  in
hot  water,  and  resembles  common  table  salt  in  some  of  its  reactions  and
physical  propei-ties  ;  it  melts  on  heating,  and  in  melting  begins  to  decom-
pose, evolving  oxygen  gas.  This  decomposition  ends  in  all  the  oxygen
being  evolved  from  the  potassium  chlorate,  potassium  chloride  being
left  as  a  residue,  according  to  the  equation  KC103=KCl  +  03.'2 This

*®  Scheele,  in  17H5,  discovered  the  inetliod  of  ohtuiiiing  oxygen  Viy  treating  nianganene
peroxide  with  sulphuric  twid.

"  AH  acids  rich  in  oxygen,  and  eHpecitilly  those  wliose  elemejits  form  lower  oxides,
evolve  oxygen  either  directly  at  the  ordinairy  temperature  (for  instance,  ferric  acid),  or  on
heating  (nitric,  manganic,  chromic,  chloric,  and  others),  or  if  basic  lower  oxides  are
formed  from  them,  by  heating  with  sulphuric  »icid.  Thus  the  salts  of  chromic  acid  (for
example,  potassium  dichromatejK.^Cr.jO;)  give  oxygen  with  sulphuric  acidj;  first  (K)tassium
sulphate,  K.^S04,  is  formed,  and  tlien  the  chromic  acid  set  free  gives  a  sulphuric  acid  salt
of  the  lower  oxide,  Cr.^03.

*'  Tliis  reaction  is  not  reversible,  and  is  exothermal — that  is,  it  does  not  absorb  heat,
but,  on  the  contrary,  evolves  9,713  calories  i)er  molecular  weight  KCIO5,  equal  to  122
parts  of  salt  (according  to  the  determination  of  Thomsen,  who  burnt  hydrogen  in  a
calorimeter  either  alone  or  with  a  definite  quantity  of  potassium  chlorate  mixe<l  with
oxide  of  iron).  It  does  not  proceed  at  once,  but  first  forms  perchlorate,  KCIO^  {see
Chlorine  and  Potassium).  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  ix>taHsium  chloride  melts  at  7(><3^,
potassium  chlorate  at  859^,  and  iX)tasKiiun  i)erchlorate  at  610^.  (Concerning  the  decom-
position of  KCIO5,  see  Chapter  11.,  Note  47.)

VOL.  I.  M

162  , PKINXIPLES  OF  CHEMI.STRY

decompi^isition  proceeds  at  a  temperature  which  allows  of  its  l:>eing
conducted  in  a  glass  vessel.  However,  in  decomposing,  the  molten
potassium  chlorate  swells  up  and  boils,  and  gradually  solidifies,  so  the
evolution  of  the  oxygen  is  not  regular,  and  the  glass  vessel  may  crack.
In  order  to  overcome  this  inconvenience,  the  potassium  chlorate  is
crushed  and  mixed  with  a  powder  of  a  substance  which  is  infusible,
incapable  of  combining  with  the  oxygen  evolved,  and  is  a  good  conductor
of  heat.  Usually  it  is  mixed  with  manganese  peroxide.'^  The  decom-
position of  the  potassium  chlorate  is  then  considerably  facilitated,  and
proceeds  at  a  lower  temperature  (because  the  entire  mass  is  then  better
heated,  both  externally  and  internally),  without  swelling  up,  and  this
method  is  therefore  more  convenient  than  the  decomposition  of  the  salt
alone.  This  method  for  the  preparation  of  oxygen  is  very  convenient ;
it  is  generally  employed  when  a  small  quantity  of  oxygen  is  required.
Further,  potassium  chlorate  is  easily  obtained  pure,  and  it  evolves
much  oxygen.  100  grams  of  the  salt  give  as  much  as  39  grams,  or
30  litres,  of  oxygen.  This  method  is  so  simple  and  easy,*^  that  a
course  of  practical  chemistry  is  often  commenced  by  the  preparation
of  oxygen  by  this  method,  and  of  hydrogen  by  the  aid  of  zinc  and
sulphuric  acid,  since  by  means  of  these  gases  many  interesting  and
striking  experiments  may  be  performed.  •'^

A  solution  of  bleaching  powder^  which  contains  calcium  hypochlorite,
CaCljOj,  evolves  oxygen  on  gently  heating  when  a  small  quantity  of
certain  oxides  is  added — for  instance,  cobalt  oxide,  which  in  this  case
acts  by  contact  («ce  Introduction).  When  heated  by  itself,  a  solution
of  bleaching  powder  does  not  evolve  oxygen,  but  it  oxidises  the  cobalt
oxide  to  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation  ;  this  higher  oxide  of  cobalt  in
contact  with  the  bleaching  powder  decomposes  into  oxygen  and  lower

*'  Tlie  jwroxidc  cloeH  not  evolve  oxygen  in  this  case.  It  may  be  replaced  by  many
oxides — for  inHtance,  by  oxide  of  iron.  It  is  necessary  to  take  the  precaution  that  no
combustible  substances  (such  as  bits  of  pai>er,  splinters,  sulphur,  »fcc.)  fall  into  the  mix-
ture, as  they  might  cause  an  explosion.

' '  The  decomi)osition  of  a  mixture  of  fused  and  well-crushed  potassium  chlorate  with
lK)wdered  manganese  jwroxide  proceeds  at  so  low  a  temperature  (the  salt  does  not  melt)
that  it  may  be  effected  in  an  ordinary  glass  flask.  The  apparatus  is  arranged  in  the
Rame  manner  as  in  the  decomjwsition  of  mercury  oxide  (Introduction),  or  as  shown  in
the  last  drawing.  As  the  reaction  is  exothermal,  the  decomposition  of  potassium
chlorate  with  the  formation  of  oxygen  may  probably  be  accomplished,  under  certain
conditions  (for  example,  under  contact  action),  at  very  low  temperatures.  Substances
mixed  with  the  iKitassium  chlorate  probably  act  partially  in  this  manner.

**  Many  other  salts  evolve  oxygen  by  heat,  like  potassium  chlorate,  but  they  only
part  with  it  either  at  a  very  high  temperature  (for  instance,  common  nitre)  or  else
are  unsuited  for  use  on  ac'count  of .  their  cost  (potassium  manganate),  or  evolve  im-
pure oxygen  at  a  high  temperature  (zinc  sulphate  at  a  red  heat  gives  a  mixture  of
sulphurous  anhydride  and  oxygen),  and  are  not  therefore  used  in  practice.

OXYGEN  AND ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  163

oxidation  products,  and  the  resultant  lower  oxide  of  cobalt  with  bleach-
ing powder  again  gives  the  higher  oxide,  which  again  gives  up  its
oxygen,  and  so  on.*^  The  calcium  hypochlorite  is  here  decomposed
according  to  the  equation  CaCl202=CaCl2  4-02.  In  this  manner  a
small  quantity  of  cobalt  oxide '^  is  sufficient  for  the  decomposition  of  an
indefinitely  large  quantity  of  bleaching  powder.

The  properties  of  oxygen.^^ — It  is  a  permanent  gas — that  is,  it  can-
not be  liquefied  by  pressure  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  further,
is  only  liquefied  with  difficulty  (although  more  easily,  than  hydrogen)  at
temperatures  below  —  1 20°,  because  this  is  its  absolute  boiling  point.
As  its  critical  pressure  '^  is  about  50  atmospheres,  it  can  be  easily  lique-
fied under  pressures  greater  than  50  atmospheres  at  temperatures
below  — 120°. According  to  Dewar,  the  density  of  oxygen  in  a  critical

*^  Such  is,  ut  present,  the  only  possible  method  of  explaining  the  phenomenon  of
contact  action.  In  man)-  cases,  such  as  the  present  one,  it  is  supported  by  observations
based  on  facts.  Tlius,  for  instance,  it  is  known,  as  regards  oxygen,  that  often  two  sub-
stances rich  in  oxygen  retain  it  so  long  as  they  are  separate,  but  directly  they  come  into
contact  free  oxygen  is  evolved  from  both  of  tliem.  Thus,  an  aqueous  solution  of  hydro-
gen peroxide  (containing  twice  as  much  oxygen  as  water)  acts  in  this  manner  on  silver
oxide  (contiiining  silver  and  oxygen).  This  reaction  takes  place  at  the  ordinary  tempera-
ture, and  the  oxygen  is  evolved  from  both  compounds.  To  this  class  of  phenomena  may
be  also  referred  the  fact  that  a  mixture  of  barium  peroxide  and  potassium  manganate
with  water  and  sulphuric  acid  evolves  oxygen  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (Note  9  bis).
It  would  seem  that  the  essence  of  phenomena  of  this  kind  is  entirely  and  purely  a
property  of  contact ;  the  distribution  of  the  atoms  is  changed  by  contact,  and  if  the
equilibrium  be  unstable  it  is  destroyed.  This  is  more  especially  evident  in  the  case
of  those  substances  which  change  exothermally — that  is,  for  those  reactions  which  are
accomx>anied  by  an  evolution  of  heat.  The  decomjx>sition  CaCl202  =  CaCU  -H  O-i  belongs
to  this  class  (like  the  decomposition  of  potassium  chlorate).

1'  Generally  a  solution  of  bleaching  powder  is  alkaline  (contains  free  lime),  and
therefore,  a  solution  of  cobalt  chloride  is  tulded  directly  to  it,  by  which  means  the  oxide
of  cobalt  required  for  the  reaction  is  formed.

•*  It  must  be  remarked  that  in  all  the  reactions  above  mentioned  the  formation  of
oxygen  may  be  prevented  by  the  admixture  of  substances  capable  of  combining  with  it —
for  example,  charcoal,  many  carbon  (organic)  compounds,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  and
various  lower  oxidation  products,  Arc.  These  substances  absorb  the  oxygen  evolved, '
combine  with  it,  and  a  compound  containing  oxygen  is  formed.  Thus,  if  a  mixture  of
potassium  chlorate  and  charcoal  be  heated,  no  oxygen  is  obtained,  but  an  explosion
takes  place  from  the  rapid  formation  of  gases  resulting  from  the  combination  of  the
oxygen  of  the  ix)tassium  chlorate  with  the  charcoal  and  the  evolution  of  gaseous  C0.>.

The  oxygen  obtained  by  any  of  the  above-described  methods  is  rarely  pure.  It
generally  contains  aqueous  vajwur,  carbonic  anhydride,  and  very  often  small  traces  of
chlorine.  The  oxygen  may  be  freed  from  these  impurities  by  passing  it  tlirough  a  solu-
tion  of  caustic  potash,  and  by  drying  it.  If  the  potassium  chlorate  he  dry  and  pure,  it
gives  almost  pure  oxygen.  However,  if  the  oxygen  be  required  for  respiration  in  cases
of  sickness,  it  should  be  washed  by  passing  it  through  a  solution  of  caustic  alkali  and
through  water.  The  best  way  to  obtain  pure  oxygen  directly  is  to  take  i)otassium
perchlorat^;  (KCIO4),  which  can  be  well  purified  and  then  evolves  pure  oxygen  on
heating.

'^  With  regard  to  the  absolute  boiling  point,  critical  pressure,  and  the  critical  state
in  general,  see  Chapter  II.,  Notes  29  and  54.

H  2

164  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

state  is  0*65  (water=l),  but,  like  all  other  substances  in  this  state,'®  it
varies  considerably  in  density  with  a  change  of  pressure  and  tempera  •
ture,  and  therefore  many  investigators  who  made  their  observations
under  high  pressures  give  a  greater  density,  as  much  as  1*1.  Liquefied
oxygen  is  an  exceedingly  mobile  transparent  liquid,  with  a  faint  blue
tint  and  boiling  (tension =1  atmosphere)  about  —180°.  Oxygen,  like
all  gases,  is  transparent,  and  like  the  majority  of  gases,  colourless.  It
has  no  smell  or  taste,  which  is  evident  from  the  fact  of  its  being  a  com-
ponent of  air.  The  weight  of  one  litre  of  oxygen  gas  at  0°  and  760  mm.
pressure  is  1*4298  gram  ;  it  is  therefore  slightly  denser  than  air.
Its  density  in  respect  to  air=l*1056,  and  in  respect  to  hydroge^;i=16.'*
In  its  chemical  properties  oxygen  is  remarkable  from  the  fact  that
it  very  easily — and,  in  a  chemical  sense,  \dgorously — reacts  on  a  number
of  substances,  forming  oxygen  compounds.  However,  only  a  few
substances  and  mixtures  of  substances  (for  example,  phosphorus,  copper
with  ammonia,  decomposing  organic  matter,  aldehyde,  pyrogallol  with
an  alkali,  &c.)  combine  directly  with  oxygen  at  the  ordinary  tem-
perature, whilst  many  substances  easily  combine  with  oxygen  at  a  red
heat,  and  often  this  combination  presents  a  rapid  chemical  reaction
accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  a  large  quantity  of  heat.  Every
reaction  which  takes  place  rapidly,  if  it  be  accompanied  by  so  great  an
evolution  of  heat  as  to  produce  incandescence,  is  termed  cotnbtistion.
Thus  combustion  ensues  when  many  metals  are  plunged  into  chlorine,
or  oxide  of  sodium  or  barium  into  carbonic  anhydride,  or  when  a  spark
falls  on  gunpowder.  A  great  many  substances  are  combustible  in
oxygen,  and,  owing  to its presence,  in  air also. In  order  to  start

^  Judging  from  wliat  luis  been  said  in  Not^  5J4  of  the  last  t-luipter,  and  also  from  the
results  of  direct  observation,  it  is  evident  that  all  substances  in  a  critical  state  have
a  large  coefficient  of  expansion,  and  are  very  compressible.

*'  As  water  consists  of  1  volume  of  oxygen  and  2  volumes  of  hydrogen,  and
contains  16  i>artK  by  weight  of  oxygen  per  2  parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen,  it  therefore
follows  directly  that  oxygen  is  16  times  denser  than  hydrogen.  Conversely,  the  com-
position of  water  by  weight  may  be  deduced  from  the  densities  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen,
and  the  volumetric  composition  of  water.  This  method  of  mutual  and  reciprocal  correc-
tion strengthens  the  practical  data  of  the  exact  sciences,  whose  conclusions  require  the
greatest  possible  exactitude  and  variety  of  corrections.

It  must  be  observed  that  the  8i)ecific  heat  of  oxygen  at  constant  pressure  is  0"2175,
consequently  it  is  to  the  specific  heat  of  hydrogen  (JJ"409)  as  1  is  to  15'6.  Hence,  the
specific  heats  are  hiversely  proiM)rtional  to  the  weights  of  equal  volumes.  This  signifies
that  equal  volumes  of  both  gases  have  (nearly)  equal  specific  heats — that  is,  they  require
an  equal  quantity  of  heut  for  raising  their  temperature  by  1°.  We  shall  afterwards  con-
sider the  specific  heat  of  different  substances  more  fully  in  Chap.  XIV.

Oxygen,  like  the  majority  of  difficultly-liquefiable  gases,  is  but  slightly  soluble  in
water  and  other  liquids.  The  solubility  is  given  in  Note  30,  Chap.  I.  From  this  it  is
evident  that  water  standing  in  air  must  absorb — i.e.  dissolve — oxygen.  This  oxygen
serves  for  the  respiration  of  fishes.  Fishes  cannot  exist  in  lx)iled  water,  because  it  does
not  contain  the  oxygen  necessary  for  their  respiration  [see  Chap.  I.)

OXYGEN  AND  IT.S SALINE COMBINATIONS

165

combustion  it  is  generally  necessary  ^^  that  the  combustible  substance
should  be  brought  to  a  state  of  incandescence.  The  continuation  of  the
process  does  not  require  the  aid  of  fresh  external  heat,  because  sufficient
heat  *'  is  evolved  to  raise  the  temperature  of  the  remaining  parts  of  the
combustible  substance  to  the  required  degree.  Examples  of  this  are
familiar  to  all  from  every-day  experience.  Combustion  proceeds  in
oxygen  with  greater  rapidity,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  more  powerful
incandescence,  than  in  ordinary  air.  This  may  be  demonstrated  by  a
number  of  very  convincing  experiments.  If  a  piece  of  charcoal,
attached  to  a  wire  and  previously  brought  to  red-heat,  be  plunged  into
a  flask  full  of  oxygen,  it  burns  rapidly  at  a
white  heat—  i.e.  it  combines  with  the  oxy-
gen, forming  a  gaseous  product  of  combus-
tion called  carbonic  anhydride,  or  carbonic
acid  gas,  COg.  This  is  the  same  gas  that  is
evolved  in  the  act  of  respiration,  for  charcoal
is  one  of  the  substances  which  is  obtained  by
the  decomposition  of  all  organic  substances
which  contain  it,  and  in  the  process  of  re-
spiration part  of  the  constituents  of  the  body,
so  to  speak,  slowly  burn.  If  a  piece  of
burning  sulphur  be  placed  in  a  small  cup
attached  to  a  wire  and  introduced  into  a
flask  full  of  oxygen,  then  the  sulphur,  which  burns  in  air  with  a
very  feeble  flame,  burns  in  the  oxygen  with  a  violet  flame,  which,
although  pale,  is  much  larger  than  in  air.  If  the  sulphur  be  ex-
changed for  a  piece  of  phosphorus,^'  tlien,  unless  the  phosphorus  be
heated,  it  combines  very  slowly  with  the  oxygen  ;  but,  if  heated,
although  on  only  one  spot,  it  burns  with  an  exceedingly  brilliant  white
flame.  In  order  to  heat  the  phosphorus  inside  the  flask,  the  simplest
way  is  to  bring  a  red-hot  wire  into  contact  with  it.  Before  the  char-
coal can  burn,  it  must  be  brought  to  a  state  of  incandescence. Sulphur

**  CerUin  substances  (with  which  we  shall  afterwards  become  acquainted),  liowever,
ignite  spontaneously  in  air  ;  for  example,  impure  phosi)huretted  hydrogen,  silicon  hydride,
zinc  ethyl,  and  pyrophorus  (very  finely  divided  iron,  itc.)

^  If  so  little  heat  is  evolved  that  the  adjacent  jmrts  are  not  heated  to  the  temperature
of  combustion,  then  combustion  will  cease.

**  The  phosphorus  must  be  dry ;  it  is  usually  kept  in  water,  as  it  oxidises  in  air.  It
should  be  cut  under  water,  as  otherwise  the  freshly-cut  surface  oxidises.  It  most  be  dried
carefully  and  quickly  by  wTapphig  it  in  blotting-paper.  If  damp,  it  splutters  on  burning.
A  small  piece  should  be  taken,  as  otherwise  the  iron  spoon  will  melt.  In  this  and  the
other  exi>eriinents  on  combustion,  water  should  be  poured  over  the  bottom  of  the  vessel
containing  the  oxygen,  to  prevent  it  from  cracking.  The  cork  closing  the  vessel  should
not  fit  tightly,  in  order  to  allow  for  the  expansion  of  the  gas  due  to  the  heat  of  the
combustion.

Fio.  29.— Mode  of  bunung  huI-
phiir,  phosplionis,  sodium,  &c.,
in  oxygen.

PRIKCIW-ES  OF  CHEMlSTliY

aUo  will  not  bunt under 100°,  whilst  pbospborus  inflames  at  40*
Fhospliorus  which  has  been  alreadjf  lighted in  uir  cuunot  so  well  b
introduced  into  the  flask,  because  it  burns  very  rapidly  and  with
flame  in  air. If  a  small  tump  of  metallic  todium  he  put  in  a  small
made  of  lime,"  melted,  and  ifjuitcd,^*  it  burns  very  feebly  in  air.
if  burning  aodium  be  introduced  into  oxygen,  the  combustiun  is
vigorated  and  is  accompanied  by  a  brighter  yellow  flame. Metal
magneeium, whifh burns brightly  in air,  continues to burn
still greater  vigour  in  oxygen,  forming  a  white  powder,  which
compound  of  magnesium  with  oxygen  (magnesium  oxide

A  strip  of  iron  or  steel  does  not  hum  in

I  air,  but  an  iron  wire  or  steel  spring  nuiy

^S  be  easily  burnt  in  oxygen," The  combus-

^^^  tiouof  steel  or  iron  in  oxygen  is  not  accom-

^^^B Efl^H  panied  by  a  flame,  but  sparks  of  oxide  flyiu

^^^H I^^H  1'"  directions  from  the  burning  portions  trf'

In  order  to  demonstrate  by  experiment '1

the  comfiuilioH of  hydroyeii in  oxygen,  kJ

gas*condueting tube,  bent  ao  as  to  formV

ft convenient  jet, is led from  the  vessdil

evoK'ing  hydrogen. The  hydrogen  is  flrsfel

set  light  to  in  air,  and then  the  gas-con-  1

ducting  tube  is  let  down  into  a  flask  containing  oxygen. The  combus-  \

tion  in  oxygen  will  be  similar  to  that  in  air  ;  the  flame  remains  pal^  J

notwithstanding  the  fact  that  its  temperature  rises  considerably. It  ii

1,  JU.-  Mudent  biuuln^a

"  Inonter

is  heated  in  ll

will  mrlt  with  Bodiam  in  ntygen.
ipidly  lieiLl  the  lime  cmcihle  Htuloining  tb«  aodiiu
Hune  o!  it  blDW-pipo  deseribed  in  Chay.  Vm.

"  In  onler  to  burn  a  wfttch  qoing,  a  piece  of  tinder  (in  foipvT  wiaked  in  a  Bolntion  4I
nitre,  KoA  dried)  ih  attached  to  one  end.  The  tinder  it  lighted,  d
pltmged  into  the  oxygen,  The  hurntng  tinder  liealH  the  end  of  the  qiriiig,  the  heatai
piirt  burnn,  and  in  to  duitiK  lieats  the  torlher  portiaun  of  the  spring,  which  tlten  t>
coiiiplelel)'  if  Buflicient  oxygen  be  prenent.

"  Tlie  sparks  of  tusl  are  prodnced,  owing  to  the  fact  tliat  the  lolnme  of  the  OXidA'OJ

irvn  in  nearly  twice  that  of  the  Toliune  of  the  iron,  and  av  Hie  heat - -  - —

cienl  to  entirely  melt  Lhi-  oiide  or  the  iron,  the  particlea  must  be  torn  oB  and  flj  ■!

Bimtlar  sparkH  are  tormed  b  the  combnetion  of  iron,  in  other  »Bes  also. We  n

uuubnation  ot  iron  filings  in  the  Intmduclion. In  thenelding  of  iranuniUl  inmtplinten-  ^

fly  oS  in  all  diraclinna  and  burn  in  the  air,  as  it  aeen  from  the  iK-t  that  nrhilst  flin'ng

ttroogh  the  air  they  remain  red  hot,  and  also  becauae,  on  coohng,  they  are  aeeu  to  be  no

igariroD,  but  a  compound  of  it  with  oxygen. The  same  tiling  lake*  pla.*  wlien  (he

**«"  of  a  gun  ttrikea  agaitiat  t>M  Hint. Small  iieales  of  steel  are  heated  by  tlie  Wo-

n>  and  glow  and  bant  in  the  air. The  omibnstion  of  iron  is  still  better  seen  by  Inking

m  ■  Tory  fine  powder,  sneh  as  is  obtiiined  by  the  decomponition  of  eertaiu  of  its  com-

•••oa— for  int-taiico,  by  hciiting  Pnnwan  bine,  nt  by  the  rediictioi

OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE COMBINATIONS  167

instructive  to  remark  that  oxygen  may  burn  in  hydrogen,  just  as
hydrogen  in  oxygen.  In  order  to  show  the  combustion  of  oxygen  in
hydrogen,  a  tube  bent  vertically  upwards  and  ending  in  a  fine  orifice
is  attached  to  the  stopcock  of  a  gas-liolder  full  of  oxygen.  Two  wires,
placed  at  such  a  distance  from  each  other  as  to  allow  the  passage  of  a
constant  series  of  sparks  from  a  Ruhmkorff's  coil,  are  fixed  in  front  of
the  orifice  of  the  tube.  This  is  in  order  to  ignitfe  the  oxygen,  which  may
also  be  done  by  attaching  tinder  round  the  orifice,  and  burning  it.  When
the  wires  are  arranged  at  the  orifice  of  the  tube,  and  a  series  of  sparks
passes  between  them,  then  an  inverted  (because  of  the  lightness  of  the
hydrogen)  jar  full  of  hydrogen  is  placed  over  the  gas -conducting  tube.
When  the  jar  covers  the  orifice  of  the  gas-conducting  tube  (and  not
before,  as  otherwise  an  explosion  might  take  place)  the  cock  of  the  gaso-
meter is  opened,  and  the  oxygen  flows  into  the  hydrogen  and  is  set  light
to  by  the  sparks.  The  flame  obtained  is  similar  to  that  formed  by  the
combustion  of  hydrogen  in  oxygen. ^^  From  this  it  is  evident  that  the
flame  is  the  locality  where  the  oxygen  combines  with  the  hydrogen,
therefore  a  flame  of  burning  oxygen  can  be  obtained  as  well  as  a  flame
of  burning  hydrogen.

If,  instead  of  hydrogen,  any  other  combustible  gas  be  taken— for
example,  ordinary  coal  gas — then  the  phenomenon  of  combustion  will
be  exactly  the  same,  only  a  bright  flame  will  be  obtained,  and  the
products  of  combustion  wiU  be  difierent.  However,  as  coal  gas  con-
tains a  considerable  amount  of  free  and  combined  hydrogen,  it  will  also
form  a  considerable  quantity  of  water  in  its  combustion.

with  oxygen  by  hydrogen  ;  when  this  fine  p<.)W(ler  is  strewn  in  air,  it  bums  by  itself,  even
without  being  previously  heated  (it  forms  a  pyropliorus).  This  obviously  depends  on  the
fact  that  the  powder  of  iron  presents  a  larger  surface  of  contact  with  air  than  an  equal
weight  in  a  compact  form.

^  The  experiment  may  be  conducted  without  the  wires,  if  the  hydrogen  be  lighted  in
the  orifice  of  an  inverted  cylinder,  and  at  the  same  time  the  cylinder  be  brought  over  the
end  of  a  gas-conducting  tube  connected  with  a  gas-holder  containing  oxygen.  Thomsen's
method  may  be  adopted  for  a  lecture  experiment.  Two  glass  tubes,  with  platinmn  ends,
are  i>a88ed  through  orifices,  about  1-1^  centimetre  ai)art,  in  a  cork.  One  tube  is  con-
nected with  a  gas-holder  containing  oxygen,  and  the  other  with  a  gas-holder  full  of
hy<lrogen.  Having  turned  on  the  gases,  the  hydrogen  is  lighted,  and  a  conmion  lamp
glass,  tapering  towards  the  top,  is  placed  over  the  cork.  The  hydrogen  continues  to  bum
inside  the  lamp  glass,  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen.  If  the  current  of  oxygen  be  then
decreased  little  by  little,  a  point  is  reached  when,  owing  to  the  insufficient  supply  of
oxygen,  the  flame  of  the  hydrogen  increases  in  size,  disappears  for  several  moments,  and
then  reappears  at  the  tube  supplying  the  oxygen.  If  the  flow  of  oxygen  be  again  in-
creased, the  flame  reapiHjars  at  the  hydrogen  tube.  Thus  the  flame  nniy  be  made  to
api^ear  at  one  or  the  other  tube  at  will,  only  the  increase  or  decrease  of  the  current  of
gas  must  take  place  by  degrees  and  not  suddenly.  Further,  air  may  be  taken  instead  of
oxygen,  and  ordinary  coal-gas  instead  of  hydrogen,  and  it  will  then  be  shown  how  air
bums  in  an  atmosphere  of  coal-gas,  and  it  can  easily  be  proved  that  the  lamp  glass  is
full  of  a  gas  combustible  in  air,  because  it  may  be  lighted  at  the  top.

PKt.VCIPLK.'* 01' THEMISTKY  ^^^^^^^^

II  hydrogen  lie  niiKed  with  oxygen  in  the  pKiportion  m  which  thoy 1
fonii water— I.*-, if two volumes of hydrogen he tnken for  each I
volume  of  oxygen -then  the  iniKture  will  be  the  same  as  tliat  obtained
by  the  decomposition  of  w;it*r
by  a  giUvaniL-  current — delo- '
nating  gas.

We have already nietj-

the last chapter .
r>inbiiiation  of  theae ,
ir  their  explosion,  may
be brought about by the |
action of  an eleetric spark,
because  the  s]iiirk  heats  the
space  through  which  it  paases, ]
and ai'te consequently  in a

L-  similar  to  ignition  by .
s  of  contact  with  an  in-
candescent or burning sub-
stAncf  .'■'  *■■' Cavendish  miido
iliiscxperinient  on  the  ignition ,
of  detonating  giis,  at  the  end
of the last century, in the
apparatus  shown in fig.  31.
Ignition by the aid  of  the j
' electric  spark  is  convenient, *
, for the reason  that it  may «

then  be  brought  about  in  ft
; closed  vessel,  and  hence  che-  J
' mists  still  employ  this  method ]
when  it  is  required  to  ignite
a  mixtui'e  of  oxygen  with  a  combustible  gas  in  a  closed  vessel, Forthis
purpose,  especially  since  Bunsen's  time,'" an  p'ri/iimirlrr  is  employed.
It  consists  of  a  thick  glass  tube  graduated  along  its  length  in  milli-
metres (for  indicating  the  height  of  the  mercury  column),  and  calibrated  .
for  a  definite  volume  (weight  of  mercury). Two  platinum  wires

thriingli  i

E  Dia;  b«  Ukeit,  knd

tuiAetjxmx ;  in  tliiti  ruke  Ibm  win  Iw  i

je  finp  f  noiigh  to  l-fmjme  red  hot  liy  ii

o  bring  it  tti  n  abiU  »(  ii
»  will  inHkUie  il  tlie  wire
;•  of  tlis  rurrant.

a  gr»iX  nwny  alhtr  diSermt  fnrmii  ot  llp]llt^■tu^  soui«tiineB  deiigncil  tot'l
<iu>,  uc  nnipluyrd  in  the  luliontoiy  fnr  tlii<  investi^tiun  ol  |pu>eK.  D«tftilB4  J
of  Utv  maLhrtdK  ot  gas  AnaljAiii.  and  of  llie  AppvrAtutt  employed,  moil  b*l
I  wt'rhv  on  unitljIicAl  and  Applied  ubemtBtTy.

OXYGEN  AND  ITS SALIXE COMBINATIONS

169

fused  into  the  upper  closed  end  of  the  tube,  as  shown  in  fig.  32.^'  By
the  aid  of  the  eudiometer  we  may  not  only  determine  the  volumetric
composition  of  water, ^^  and  the  quantitative  contents  of  oxygen  in

'*  They  muBt  be  sealed  into  the  tube  in  such  a  manner  as  to  leave  no  ai)er-
ture  between  them  and  the  glass.  In  order  to  test  this,  the  eudiometer  is  filled
with  mercury,  and  its  open  end  inverted  into  mercury.  If  there  be  the
smallest  orifice  at  the  wires,  the  external  air  will  enter  into  the  cylinder  and
the  mercury  will  fall,  although  not  rapidly  if  the  orifice  be  very  fine.

'*  The  eudiometer  is  used  for  determining  the  comix)sition  of  combustible
gases.  A  detailed  account  of  gas  analysis  would  be  out  of  place  in  this  work
(see  Note  30),  but,  as  an  example,  we  will  give  a  short  description  of  the
determination  of  the  composition  of  water  by  the  eudiometer.

Pure  and  dry  oxygen  is  first  introduced  mto  the  eudiometer.  When  the
eudiometer  and  the  gas  in  it  acquire  the  temi)eruture  of  the  surrounding
atmosphere — which  is  recognised  by  the  fact  of  the  meniscus  of  the  mercury
not  altering  its  position  during  a  long  i>eriod  of  time  —then  the  heights  at
which  the  mercury  stands  in  the  eudiometer  and  in  the  bath  are  observed.
The  difference  (in  millimetres)  gives  the  height  of  the  colunni  of  mercurj-  in
tlie  eudiometer.  It  must  be  reduced  to  the  height  at  which  the  mercury
would  stand  at  0^  and  deducted  from  the  atmospheric  pressure,  in  order  to
find  the  pressure  under  which  the  oxygen  is  measured  {see  Chap.  I.  Note  29).
The  height  of  the  mercury  also  shows  the  volume  of  the  oxygen.  The  tem-
perature of  the  surrounding  atmosphere  and  the  heiglit  of  the  barometric
colunui  must  also  be  obser\'ed,  in  order  to  know  the  temperature  of  tlie
oxygen  and  the  atmospheric  pressure.  Wlien  the  volume  of  the  oxygen  has
been  measured,  pure  and  dry  hydrogen  is  iutro<luced  into  the  eudiometer,
and  the  volume  of  the  gases  in  the  eudiometer  again  measured.  Tliey  are
then  exploded.  This  is  done  by  a  Leyden  jar,  whose  outer  coating  is  con-
nected b)'  a  chain  with  one  wire,  so  that  a  spark  i)asses  when  the  other  wire,
fused  into  the  eudiometer,  is  touched  by  the  terminal  of  the  jar.  Or  else  an
electrophorus  is  used,  or,  better  still,  a  Ruhmkorff's  coil,  which  has  tlie
advantage  of  working  equally  well  in  damp  or  diy  air,  whilst  a  Leyden  jar
or  electrical  machine  does  not  act  in  damp  weather.  Further,  it  is  necessary
to  close  the  lower  orifice  of  the  eudiometer  before  the  ex])losion  (for  this
purpose  the  eudiometer,  which  is  fixed  in  a  stand,  is  firmly  pressed  down
from  above  on  to  a  piece  of  india-rubber  placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  bath),  as
otherwise  the  mercury  and  gas  would  be  thrown  out  of  the  apjtaratus  by  the
explosion.  It  must  also  be  remarked  that  to  ensure  complete  combustion
the  proportion  between  the  volumes  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  must  not  ex-
ceed  twelve  of  hydrogen  to  one  volume  of  oxygen,  or  fifteen  volumes  of
oxygen  to  one  volume  of  hydrogen,  because  no  explosion  will  take  place  if
one  of  the  gases  be  in  great  excess.  It  is  best  to  take  a  mixture  of  one  volume  of
hydrogen  with  several  volumes  of  oxygen.  The  combustion  will  then  be  complete.  It
is  evident  that  water  is  formed,  and  that  the  volume  (or  tension)  is  diminished  so  that
on  opening  the  end  of  the  eudiometer  the  mercurj'  will  rise  in  it.  But  the  tension  of  the
aqueous  vaiwur  is  now  added  to  the  tension  of  the  gas  remaining  after  the  explosion.
This  must  be  taken  into  account  (Chap.  I.  Note  1).  If  but  little  gas  remain,  the  water
which  is  formed  will  be  sufficient  for  its  saturation  with  aqueous  vapour.  This  may  be
learnt  from  the  fact  that  drops  of  water  ai-e  visible  on  the  sides  of  the  eudiometer  after
the  mercury  has  risen  in  it.  If  there  be  none,  a  certain  quantity  of  water  must  be  intro-
duced into  the  eudiometer.  Then  the  number  of  millimetres  expressing  the  pressure  of
the  va^xjur  corresixjnding  with  the  tenii)erature  of  the  exi^riment  must  be  subtracted
from  the  atmospheric  pressure  at  which  the  remaining  gas  is  measured,  otherwise  the
result  will  be  inaccurate  (Chap.  I.  Note  1).

This  is  essentially  the  method  of  the  determination  of  the  comi)osition  of  water  which

n

\z

e\

Yii..  3-'.
Ku<lioiiiot«'r

170  PKINriPLES  OF  (  HEMISTRY

air,'*'  but  also  make  a  nuiii>>er  of  experiments  explaining  the  phenome-
non of  combustion.

Thus,  for  example,  it  may  be  demonstrated,  by  the  aid  of  the
eudiometer,  that  for  the  ignition  of  detonating  gas,  a  ff^finit*-  t^-mjyerature
is  re<juired.  If  tlie  temperature  be  below  that  required,  combination
will  not  take  place,  but  if  at  any  spot  within  the  tul^e  it  rises  to  the
t<;mperature  ot  inflammation,  then  combination  will  ensue  at  th<at  spot,
and  evolve  enough  heat  for  the  ignition  of  the  adjacent  portions  of  the
deUinating  mixture.  If  to  1  volume  of  detonating  gas  there  be  added
10  volumes  of  oxygen,  or  4  volumes  of  hydrogen,  or  3  volumes  of
carl>onic  anhydride,  then  we  shall  not  obtain  an  explosion  by  passing
a  Kpirk  through  the  diluted  mixture.  This  depends  on  the  fact  that
the  temperature  falls  with  the  dilution  of  the  detonating  gas  ))y  another
gas,  Ixicause  the  heat  evolved  by  the  combination  of  the  small  quantity
of  hydrogen  and  oxygen  brought  to  incandescence  by  the  spark  is  not
only  transmitted  to  the  water  proceeding  from  the  combination,  but
also  to  the  foreign  substance  mixed  with  the  detonating  gas."**  The
necessity  of  a  definite  temperature  for  the  ignition  of  detonating  gas  is
also  seen  from  the  fact  that  pure  detonating  gas  explodes  in  the  presence
of  a  red -hot  iron  wire,  or  of  charcoal  heated  to  275°,  but  with  a  lower
degree  of  incandescence  there  is  not  any  explosion.  It  may  also  be
brought  about  by  i*apid  compression,  when,  as  is  known,  heat  is  evolved.**''

waH  nitulo  for  th«  first  tiuu*  by  Gay-LuKy%iic  and  Huinboklt  with  sufficient  accuracy.
Tlu'lr  il<'tcnninati(MiH  led  thcni  to  the  concluKion  that  water  consists  tif  two  volumes  of
hydroj^cn  (nion;  i-xactly  2()0»,  Le  Due  185>*2|,  and  one  volume  of  oxygen.  Every  time
they  t<»ok  a  greater  quantity  of  oxygen,  the  gan  remaining  after  the  explosion  was  oxygen.
When  they  took  an  excess  of  hydrogen,  the  remaining  gas  was  hydrogen  ;  and  when  the
oxygen  and  hydrogen  were  taken  in  exactly  the  alM)ve  })roportion,  neither  one  nor  the
other  renniined. The  com{M»Hition  of  water  was  thus  definiti^ly  confirmed.

•''■'  Concerning  this  application  of  the  eudiometer,  see  the  chapter  on  Nitrogen.  It  may
1)6  mentioned  an  illustrating  the  various  uses  of  the  eudiometer  that  Prof.  TimeniseelT
employed  nncruHcopically  Hunill  eudiometers  to  analyse  the  bubbles  of  gas  given  off  from
tlio  leaves  of  phuits.

'•'  Thus  \  volume  of  carlxinic  oxide,  an  equal  volume  of  marhh  gas,  two  volumes  of
liydrogen  chloride  or  n{  ammonia,  and  six  volumes  of  nitrogen  or  twelve  volumes  of  air
uddtKl  to  one  volume  of  detonating  ga»t,  prevent  its  explosion.

•^  If  the  compression  be  brought  al>out  slowly,  so  that  the  heat  evolved  sucireeds  in

jMHsing  to  the  surrounding  space,  then  the  combination  of  the  oxygen  and  hydrogen  dtws

not  t4iko  place,  even  when  the  mixture  is  com])ressed  by  150  times;  for  the  gast>s  are  not

li«Hie<l. If  i>aiM>r  soaked  with  a  solution  of  jdatinum  (in  aqua  regia)  iind  sal  ammoniac

be  burnt,  then  the  ash  obtained  contains  very  tinely-divide<l  ]>latinum,  and  in  this  form

il  in  beHt  fttto<l  for  igniting  hydrogen  and  detonating  gas. IMatinum  wire  re<]uires  to  be

htfttvd,  but  pUtinum  in  no  finely  divided  a  state  as  it  oi-curs  in  this  ash  inflames  liydro-

gm,  «Ten  at  —  :I0  '. Many  otiier  meUUs,  such  as  iiallailium  (175  ),  iridium,  and  gold,  act

ftth  *  ftlight  riiie  of  temiH>ratun*,  like  platinum  ;  but  mercury,  at  its  lM)iling  point,  dot»s

i  inlUroo  dotAUmting  gas,  although the slow formation of  water then  begins  at

I*. All  dat*  of  UuH  kind  show  that  the  explosion  of  detonating  gas  presents  one

tlw  nuuiy  CM«)ii  of  contiu*t  phenomena. This  conclusion  is  further  continnetl  by  the

OXYGEN AND ITS S.VLINE COMBINATIONS  171

Experiments  made in the eudiometer showed that  the ignition  of

researches  of  V.  Meyer  (1892).  He  showed  that  only  a  very  slow  formation  of  steam
begins  at  448°,  and  that  it  only  proceeds  more  rapidly  at  518^.  The  temperature  of  the
explosion  of  detonating  gas,  according  to  the  same  author,  varies  according  as  to  whether
the  explosion  is  produced  in  open  vessels  or  in  closed  tubes.  In  the  first  case  the  tem-
perature of  explosion  lies  between  580°-606°,  and  in  the  second  between  C80°-780^.
In  general  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  temperature  of  explosion  of  gaseous  mixtures  is
always  lower  in  closed  vessels  than  when  the  detonating  mixture  flows  freely  through
tubes.  According  to  Freyer  and  V.  Meyer,  the  following  gases  when  mixed  with  the
requisite  amount  of  oxygen  explode  at  the  following  tem^x^ratures  :

—

1
When  flowing  frwly

1

In  closed  vej«j<el8
530- -«CM^

H.. i

030^-730^

CH4

650^-730^ 1

606°-G50'

C^Hg

()00°-650'^

580"-606°

1 C,H4

006^-650^

530°-606°

' CO

650^-730^

650°-730°

1 H2S

315^-320°

250°-270°

Ho  +  Cl.i

430^-440^

240°-270°

The  velocity  of  the  transmission  of  explosion  in  gaseous  mixtures  is  as  characteristic
a  quantity  for  gaseous  systems  as  the  velocity  of  the  transmission  of  sound.  Berthelot
showed  that  tliis  velocity  depends  neither  upon  the  pressure  nor  upon  the  size  of  the
tubes  in  which  the  gaseous  mixture  is  contained,  nor  upon  the  material  out  of  which  the
tube  is  made.  Dixon  (1891)  determined  the  magnitude  of  these  velocities  for  various
mixtures,  and  his  results  proved  very  near  to  those  previously  given  by  Berthelot.  For
comparison  we  give  the  velocities  expressed  in  metres  per  second  :

H.+  O

2.821

H.  +  N.O

2,305

CH4  +  4O

2,322

C.>H.>  +  60

2,364

CaHj  +  oO

2,391

C..N2  +  4O

2,321

Dixon  Berthelot

2,810
2,284
2,287
2,210
2,482
2,195

The  addition  of  oxygen  to  detonating  gas  lowers  the  velocity  of  the  transmission  of

explosion  almost  as  much  as  the  introduction  of  nitrogen. An  excess  of  hydrogen  on  the

contrary  raises  the  velocity  of  transmission. It  is  remarked  that  the  explosion  of  mixtures

of  oxygen  with  marsh  gas,  ethylene  and  cyanogen  is  transmitted  more  quickly  if  the

oxygen  be  taken  in  such  a  proportion  that  the  carbon  should  bum-to  oxide  of  carbon,  i.e.

the  velocity  of  the  explosion  is  less  if  the  oxygen  be  taken  in  sufficient  quantity  to  form

carbonic  anhydride. Observations  upon  lijjuid  and  solid  explosives  (Berthelot)  show  that

in  this  case  the  velocity  of  transmission  of  explosion  is  dependent  upon  the  material  of

the  tube. Thus  the  explosion  of  liquid  iiitro-niethyl  ether  in  glass  tubes  travels  at  the

rate  (in  dependence  upon  the  diam.,  from  1  nim.-45  mm.)  of  from  1,890  to  2,482  metres,

and  in  tubes  of  Britannia  metal  (3  mm.  in  diam)  at  the  rate  of  1,230  metres. The  harder

the  tube  the  greater  the  velocity  of  transmission  of  explosion. The  following  are  the

velocities  for  certain  b<Klies  :

inc'tro"

Nitro-glycerine 1,300

Dynamite ..........  2,500

Nitro-mannite  7,700

Picric  acid 0,500

detounling gas teikes place at a teiiipt'iiitui-e betweeu 4.>0^ snd

The  combination  of  hydrogen  with  oxygen  is  accompaoied  by  the
evolution  of  ft  very  considerable  amount  of  heat  ;  according  to  the
determinations  of  Favi-i^  and  i'i/6ernu»«n,"  1  part  by  weight  i>f  hydro-

In  ciuM^lnaiaii  «e  mii;  «dil  Ihnl  MBUmd  mid  Le  Chutelier  ll»83)  obMrved  that  in  Uia
»]iluHon  of  a  mixture  of  1  volDioe  of  detnnnliM);  gas  witli  n  vuIiuueH  of  ui  iuert  j^as,  the
prsHBiire  in  Appraiinu(te]>'  M|aal  to  Oa-O-Dji  atuuHpheraB.

^  Flora  the  very  i.i>iauienceiiient  of  the  proinalgBilioii  of  the  idea  of  disHWiation,  jl
miglit  h&ve  been  imagined  thnt  revenible  reactiouB  of  combination  |tlie  formUion  of  Hj
tnd  O  belong*  to  this  unmber)  oommeiice at  tlie  niun^  tuinperature  us  that  at  which

in  begins. Aod  in

alwi

,t  4fiO-B60^,  when  deboDBting  giu  eiplodeit,  tlie  denut]'  of  aqneoui
vajwur  not  only  doen  not  rary  (and  it  hardly  varies  at  higher  toinpenitareii,  probably
bvcHnw  the  amount  of  the  prodnota  of  diaaoeiaUon  is  small),  but  there  nro  not,  as  far  aa
Ih  yet  known,  aoy  tracvii  of  dixBoi-iation ;  |-J)  that  under  the  inflaenro  of  contact  ihs  tem-
jienituie  at  which  combinaUon  takes  place  falls  even  to  the  ocdioaty  tetapemture.  when
'  water  and  Biniilar  cumjionndH  naturally  urc!  not  diseociated  uid,  jadgiuK  from  the  data
eonunonicaled  hy  D.  P.  KoiiovaloS  |Iiitrodnction,  Note  SB|  and  otber«,  it  In  impoaBlble  to
aseupe  the  phenomena  of  contact ;  all  vessels,  whether  of  metal  or  gLuis,  allow  the  sams
inflneuoH  as  apoiiKy  platinum,  although  to  a  much  less  degree.  The  phenomena  of
GuntBrl.  judging  from  a  reriew  of  Che  data  leterrtng  to
it,  must  be  eipeciaUy  sensitive  m  reactions  which  are
poworiliLyejothemiaLaiidlhe  esplosiou  of  detonatin^t

KKsii

>(  this  kinil.

ed  in  the  oomhaaUou  ol
a  knoMTt  weight  (for  instance,  1  gnunj  of  a  given  lul^.
stauve  is  determined  hy  Che  rise  in  teniperatuiv  of
nuter,  to  which  the  whole  ol  the  heat  evolved  in  tha
mmbubtion  is  transmitted.  A  caloriiiirler,  for  example
tliat  shown  iu  Og.  Kg,  is  euiployed  for  this  purpwe.  U
consists  of  a  thill  |in  order  that  it  may  abaoib  leal
lieati,  iwlished  (that  it  should  transuiii  a  niinimnin  at
heal)  metallic  vessel,  surrounded  hy  down  (c).  or  soma
other  bnd  conductor  of  liest.  and  all  outer  inelaUio
vessel.  This  is  necessary  in  order  that  the  least
possible  aniDont  of  heat  should  be  lost  from  the
veaselt :  nevertheless,  there  is  always  a  certain  losB,
whiHK  magnitude  is  determined  by  preliminiuy  experi-
ment I  l>y  taking  warm  water,  and  determhiing  ill  laU
1  temtwrature  after  u  definite  period  of  time)  ru  m
correction  for  the  results  of  observations.  The  Water
I-  U.  tavTea  ilnil  n  aiu  •  jiki-  to  which  the  heat  of  the  burning  substance  is  timna-
"■"I?^  .'"Ji'lf^' '  *  ""  '*"'  mitted  is  poured  into  the  vessel.  The  stirrer  g  allows
of  all  the  layers  ol  water  being  brought  to  the  saine
Ivmperatare,  and  the  thenuomeler  senTii  for  the  ilelerminatiiiu  of  the  tenipenitnra  of  thk
water.  The  heal  evolved  paaseu,  naturally,  not  to  the  wal«r  only,  bol  to  all  the  parts  ol
the  apparatuB.  The  quantity  of  water  corresponding  to  tlie  whole  amount  of  thoaa
nbJHtt  (the  vessels,  tubes.  &e.|  to  which  tlie  heat  is  traiisiuitted  is  previously  delsmuiwda
•nd  in  this  manner  another  most  unport«uC  eorreclinn  is  made  in  the  ealorimetric  deter-
minalious.  The  combustion  itself  is  carried  on  iu  Ihe  vessel  a.  The  ignited  subslanoe
is  introdnoed  through  the  Inhe  at  the  lop,  which  close*  tightly.  In  fig.  83  tbe  appantns
••  itmDged  for  the  combustion  of  a  gas,  introduced  by  n  tuW.  Tlie  oiygeu  reqaired  (or
ttie  omnbusliou  is  led  into  n  by  tlie  tube  r,  and  the  products  of  combualiou  either  re

OXYGEN  AND ITS  SALINE COMBINATIONS  173

gen  in  forming  water  evolves  34,462  units  of  heat.  Many  of  the  most
recent  determinations  are  very  close  to  this  figure,  so  that  it  may  be
taken  that  in  the  formation  of  18  parts  of  water  (HoO)  there  are  evolved
69 major  calories, or 69,000  units  of  heat.'*'* If  the  specific  heat  of

in  the  vessel  a  (if  liquid  or  solid),  or  encape  by  the  tube/  into  an  apparatus  in  tehich  theh*
quantity  and  properties  can  easily  be  determined.  Thus  the  heat  evolved  in  combustion
passes  to  the  walls  of  the  vessel  a,  and  to  the  gases  which  are  formed  in  it,  and  these
transmit  it  to  the  water  of  the  calorimeter.

**  This  quantity  of  heat  corresponds  with  the  formation  of  li<juid  water  at  the  ordinary
temperature  from  detonating  gas  at  the  same  temperature.  If  the  water  be  as  vapour
the  heat  evolved  =  58  major  calories ;  if  as  ice  =  704  major  calories.  A  portion  of  this
heat  is  due  to  the  fact  that  2  vols,  of  hydrogen  and  1  vol.  of  oxygen  give  2  vols,  of
aqueous  vapour — that  is  to  say,  contraction  ensues — and  this  evolves  heat.  This  quan-
tity of  heat  may  be  calculated,  but  it  cannot  be  said  how  much  is  expended  in  the
separation  of  the  atoms  of  oxygen  from  each  other,  and,  therefore,  strictly  speaking,  we
do  not  know  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  evolved  in  tlie  reaction  alone,  although  the
number  of  units  of  heat  evolved  in  the  combustion  of  detonating  gas  is  accurately
known.

The  construction  of  the  calorimeter  and  even  the  method  of  determination  vary
considerably  in  different  cases.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  nineties,  a  large  number  of
determinations  of  the  heat  of  combustion  have  been  conducted  in  closed  bombs  con-
taining compressed  oxygen.  The  greatest  number  of  calorimetric  determinations  were
made  by  Berthelot  and  Thomsen.  They  are  given  in  tlieir  works  Jissfii  dc  inecaitiqiie
ehimique  foiuUe  snr  la  tfirnnochiinif^,  by  M.  Berthelot,  1870  (2  vols.),  and  thermo-
chemiache  UntcrsuchungtHj  by  J.  Thomsen,  1886  (4  vols.)  The  most  important  methods
of  recent  thermochemistry,  and  all  the  trustworthy  results  of  experiment,  tu*e  given  in
Prof.  P.  P.  Louginin's  Description  of  the  Different  Modes  of  Deter  mini  n{f  the  Heat  of
Combustion  of  Organic  Compounds,  Moscow,  1894.  The  student  must  refer  to  works
on  theoretical  and  physical  chemistry  for  a  description  of  the  elements  and  methods
of  thermochemistry ^  into  the  details  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  enter  in  this  work.  One
of  the  originators  of  thermochemistry,  Hess,  was  a  member  of  the  St.  Petersburg
Academy  of  Sciences.  Since  1870  a  large  amount  of  research  has  been  carried  out  in
this  province  of  chemistry,  especially  in  France  and  Germany,  after  the  investigations
of  the  French  Academician,  Berthelot,  and  Professor  Thomsen,  of  Copenhagen.  Among
Russians,  Beketoff,  Louginin,  C'heltzoff,  Chroustchoff,  and  others  are  known  by  their
thermochemical  researches.  The  present  epoch  of  thermochemistry  must  be  considered
rather  as  a  collective  one,  wherein  the  material  of  facts  is  amassed,  and  the  first  conse-
quences ansing  from  them  are  noticed.  In  my  opinion  two  essentiiU  circumstances
prevent  the  possibility  of  deducing  any  exact  consequences,  of  import*ince  to  chemical
mechanics,  from  the  immense  store  of  thermochemical  data  already  collected:  (1)  The
majority  of  the  determinations  are  conducted  in  weak  aqueous  sohitions,  and,  the  heat
of  solution  being  known,  are  refen-ed  to  the  substances  in  solution  ;  yet  there  is  much
(Chapter  I.)  which  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  in  solution  water  does  not  play  the
simple  part  of  a  diluting  medium,  but  of  itself  acts  independently  in  a  chemical  sense
on  the  substance  dissolved.  (2)  Physical  and  mechanical  changes  (decrease  of  volume,
diffusion,  and  others)  invariably  proceed  side  by  side  with  chemical  changes,  and  for  the
present  it  is  impossible,  in  a  number  of  cases,  to  distinguish  the  thermal  effect  of  the  one
and  the  other  kind  of  change.  It  is  evident  that  the  one  kind  of  ihange  (chemical)  is
essentially  inseparable  and  incomprc'hensible  without  the  other  (mechanical  and  physi-
cal) ;  and  therefore  it  seems  to  me  that  thermochemical  data  will  only  acquire  their  true
meaning  when  the  connection  between  the  phenomena  of  both  kinds  (on  the  one  hand
chemical  and  atomic,  and  on  the  other  hand  mechanical  and  molecular  or  between
entire  masses)  is  explained  more  clearly  and  fully  than  is  at  present  the  case.  As  there
is  no  doabt  that  the  simple  mechanical  contact,  or  the  action  of  heat  alone,  on  sub-

174  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

aqueous  vapour  (0*48)  remained  constant  from  the  ordhiary  temperature
to  that  at  ivhich  the  combustion  o/  detonating  gas  takes  place  (but  there
is  now  no  doubt  that  it  increases),  were  the  combustion  concentrated
at  one  point^^  (but  it  occurs  in  the  whole  region  of  a  flame),  were  there
no  loss  from  radiation  and  heat  conduction,  and  did  dissociation  not
take  phice—  that  is,  did  not  a  state  of  equilibrium  between  the  hydrogen,
oxygen,  and  water  come  about  —  then  it  would  he  possible  to  calculate
the  temperature  of  the  flame  of  detoiiating  gas.  It  would  then  be  8,000°."*®
In  reality  it  is  very  much  lower,  but  it  is  nevertheless  higher  than  the
temperature  attained  in  furnaces  and  flames,  and  is  as  high  as  2,000^^.
The  explosion  of  detonating  gas  is  explained  by  this  high  temperature,
because  the  aqueous  vapour  formed  must  occupy  a  volume  at  least
5  times  gi*eater  than  that  occupied  by  the  detonating  gas  at  the  ordi-
nary temperature.  Detonating  gas  emits  a  sound,  not  only  as  a  con-
sequence of  the  commotion  which  occure  from  the  rapid  expansion  of
the  heated  vapour,  but  also  because  it  is  immediately  followed  by  a
cooling  effect,  the  conversion  of  the  vapour  into  water,  and  a  rapid
contraction.^*

Htances  sometimes  causes  an  evident  and  always  a  latent  (incipient)  chemical  change —
that  is,  a  different  distribation  or  motion  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecules — it  follows
that  purely  chemical  phenomena  are  inseparable  from  physical  and  mechanical  pheno-
mena. A  mechanical  change  may  be  imagined  without  a  physical  change,  and  a  physical
without  a  chemical  change,  but  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  a  chemical  change  without
a  physical  and  mechanical  one,  for  without  the  latter  we  should  not  be  able  to  recognise
the  former,  and  it  is  by  their  means  that  we  are  enabled  to  do  so.

•"^'^  The  flame,  or  locality  where  the  combustion  of  gases  and  vapours  takes  place,  is  a
complex  phenomenon,  'an  entire  factory,'  as  Faraday  says,  and  therefore  we  will  consider
flame  in  some  detail  in  one  of  the  following  notes.

••^  If  34,500  units  of  heat  are  evolved  in  the  combustion  of  1  part  of  hydrogen,  and
this  heat  is  transmitted  to  the  resulting  9  parts  by  weight  of  aqueous  vapour,  then  we
find  that,  taking  the  specific  heat  of  the  latter  as  0*475,  each  unit  of  heat  raises  the
temperature  of  1  part  by  weight  of  aqueous  vapour  2°1  and  9  parts  by  weight  ('2'l-r9)
0°*28  ;  hence  the  84,500  units  of  heat  raise  its  temperature  7,935^.  If  detonating  gas  is
converted  into  water  in  a  closed  space,  then  the  atjueous  vapour  formed  cannot  expand,
and  therefore,  in  calculating  the  temperature  of  combustion,  the  specific  heat  at  a  con-
stant volume  must  be  taken  into  consideration ;  for  atjueous  vapour  it  is  O'dC.  This
figure  gives  a  still  higher  temperature  for  the  flame.  In  reality  it  is  much  lower,  but  the
results  given  by  different  observers  are  very  contradictory  (from  1,700°  to  2,400°),  the
discrepancies  depending  on  the  fact  that  flames  of  different  sizes  are  cooled  by  radiation
to  a  different  degree,  but  mainly  on  the  fact  that  the  methods  and  apparatus  (pjTo-
meters)  for  the  determination  of  high  temperatures,  although  they  enable  relative
changes  of  temperature  to  be  judged,  are  of  little  use  for  determining  their  absolute
magnitude.  By  taking  the  temperature  of  the  flame  of  detonating  gas  as  2,000°,  I  give,
I  think,  the  average  of  the  most  trustworthy  determinations  and  calculations  based  upon
the  determination  of  the  variation  of  the  specific  heat  of  aqueous  vapour  and  other
gases  {see  Chapter  XLI.)

*>  It  is  evident  that  not  only  hydrogen,  but  every  other  combustible  gas,  will  give  an
explosive  mixture  with  oxygen.  For  this  reason  coal-gas  mixed  with  air  explodes  when
ihe  mixture  is  ignited. The  pressure  obtained  in  the  explosions  serves  as  the  motive

OXYGEN AND ITS SALINE COMBINATlONfi

175

Mixtures  of  hydrugen  and  of  various  other  g&sen  with  oxygen
are  taken  advantage  of  for  obtaining  high  temi>eraturea.  By  the
aid  of  such  high  temperatures  metAls  like  platinum  may  be  melted
on  a  large  scale,  which  cannot  be  performed  in  furnaces  heated  with
charcoal  and  fed  by  a  current  of  air.  Tlie  burner,  shown  in  fig.  34,  is
constructed  for  the  application  of  detonating  gas  to  the  purpose.  It
consists  of  two  brass  tubes,  one  fixed  inside  the  other,  as  shown  in  tlie
drawing.  The  internal  central  tube  C  C  conducts  oxygen,  and  the
outside,  enveloping,  tube  E'  E'  conducts
hydrogen.  Previous  to  their  egres.s  the
gases  do  not  mix  together,  so  that
there  can  be  no  explosion  inside  the
apparatus.  When  this  burner  is  in
use  C  ia  connected  witli  a  gas-holder
containing  oxygen,  and  E  with  a  gas-
holder containing  hydrogen  (or  some-
times coal-gas).  The  flow  of  the  gases
can  be  easily  regulated  by  the  stop-
cocks O  H.  The  flame  is  shortest  and
evolves  the  greatest  heat  when  the
gases  burning  are  in  the  proportion  of  y>^
1  volume  of  oxygen  to  2  volumes  of
hydrogen.  The  degree  of  heat  may  be
easily  judged  from  the  fact  that  a  thin
platinum  wire  placed  in  the  flame  of  a
properly  proportioned  mixture  easily
melts.  By  placing  the  burner  in  the
oritice  of  a  hollow  piece  of  lime,  a  crucible  A  B  is  obtained  in  which
the  platinum  may  l)e  e^tsily  melted,  even  in  large  quantities  if  the
current  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  be  sufficiently  great  (Deville).  The
flame  of  detonating  gas  may  also  be  used  for  illuminating  purposes.
It  is  by  itself  very  pale,  but  owing  to  its  high  temperature  it  may
serve  for  rendering  infusible  objects  incandescent,  and  at  the  very
high  temperature produced  by  the  detonating  gaa  the  incandescent

powrr  of

gns  fnffi»

].

1,  thi-  .-rtBe

advH

itageis  ta

kfn,  HO

ouly  of  tl.

pressn

duced  bv

heexplcio

n.bu

t  also  ot  that

cont

chtake

place  afte

the  exp

On  thiF<  i

bnwd  the

ruction  <>{  «

»hicli  Leiioir-B  m

foFinerl

Otlo's  i>

ov.  the  be

tin

oi.li. Tlie  e

.plo

on  ia  usually  [irudiiced  by  c

al-gati  ai

bat  of la

of coiiibUH

ble

benzeuej

re  ulw

em|.1oyed

in  place  o\

gBS

Chai>U.r  IX

1 I

Lenoir-t.

a  mistnre

.ir  is  [p,

ol  liy  men

»of

Rn»[b»  Iron.

iRuhmkorfTsa

il,  but

itl«iiiOBt,r

the  KBs*-

areiKm.cl

by  the  direct  net

ono

«  g.B  jet,

ot  by  <■

ntact  with

he  hot  H

176  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

substance  gives  a  most  intense  light.  For  this  purpose  lime,  mag-
nesia, or  oxide  of  zirconium  are  used,  as  they  are  not  fusible  at
the  very  high  temperature  evolved  by  the  detonating  gas.  A  small
cylinder  of  lime  placed  in  the  flame  of  detonating  gas,  if  regulated  to
the  required  point,  gives  a  very  brilliant  white  light,  which  was  at  one
time  proposed  for  illuminating  lighthouses.  At  present  in  the  majority
of  cases  the  electric  light,  owing  to  its  constancy  and  other  advantages,
has  replaced  it  for  this  purpose.  The  light  produced  by  the  incan-
descence of  lime  in  detonating  gas  is  called  the  Drummond  light  or
Ihnelight,

The  above  cases  form  examples  of  the  combustion  of  elements  in
oxygen,  but  exactly  similar  phenomena  are  observed  in  the  coinbustio7i
of  compounds.  So,  for  instance,  the  solid,  colourless,  shiny  substance,
naphthalene,  CioHy,  burns  in  the  air  with  a  smoky  flame,  whilst  in
oxygen  it  continues  to  burn  with  a  very  brilliant  flame.  Alcohol,  oil,
and  other  substances  burn  brilliantly  in  oxygen  on  conducting  the
oxygen  by  a  tube  to  the  flame  of  lamps  burning  these  substances.  A
high  temperature  is  thus  evolved,  which  is  sometimes  taken  advantage
of  in  chemical  practice.

In  order  to  understand  why  combustion  in  oxygen  proceeds  more
rapidly,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  more  intense  heat  effect,  than  com-
bustion in  air,  it  must  be  recollected  that  air  is  oxygen  dilute<l  with
nitrogen,  which  does  not  support  combustion,  and  therefore  fewer  par-
ticles of  oxygen  flow  to  the  surface  of  a  substance  burning  in  air  than
when  burning  in  pure  oxygen,  besides  which  the  reason  of  the  intensity
of  combustion  in  oxygen  is  the  high  temperature  acquired  by  the  sub-
stance burning  in  it.^^  *>**

41  bu  Lgtj  ijg  consider  as  au  example  the  combustion  of  sulphur  in  air  and  in  oxygen.
If  1  gram  of  sulphur  bums  in  air  or  oxygen  it  evolves  in  either  case  22.50  units  of  heat —
i  e.  evolves  sufficient  heat  for  heating  2,250  grams  of  water  1°  C. This  heat  is  first  of  all
transmitted  to  the  sulphurous  anhydride,  S0-,>,  formed  by  the  combination  of  sulphur
witli  oxygen. In  its  combustion  1  gram  of  sulphur  forms  2  grams  of  sulphurous  an-
hydride— i.e.  the  sulphur  combines  with  1  grain  of  oxygen. In  order  that  1  gram  of
sulphur  should  have  access  to  1  gram  of  oxygen  in  air,  it  is  necessary  that  8*4  grams
of  nitrogen  nhould  simultaneously  reach  the  sulphur,  because  air  contains  seventy-seven
parts  of  nitrogen  (by  weight)  per  twenty-three  parts  of  oxygen. Thus  in  the  combustion
of  1  gram  of  sulphur,  the  2,250  units  of  heat  are  transmitted  to  2  grams  of  sulphurous
oxide  and  to  at  least  3*4  grams  of  nitrogen. As  0*155  unit  of  heat  is  required  to  raise
1  gram  of  sulphurous  anhydride  1°  C,  therefore  2  grams  require  0*81  unit. So  also  8'i
grams  of  nitrogen  require  8*4  x  0*244  or  0*88  unit  of  heat,  and  therefore  in  order  to  raise
both  gases  1^  C.  0'81  +  0'88  or  1*14  unit  of  heat  is  required;  but  as  the  combustion  of
the  sulphur  evolves  2,250  units  of  heat,  therefore  the  gases  might  be  heated  (if  their

2250
8i>ecific-  heats  remained  constant)  to  or  1,074^  C. Tliat  is,  the  maximum  possible

1*14

temjverature  of  the  flame  of  the  sulphur  burning  in  air  will  be  1,074°  C. In  the  combus-
tion of  the  sulphur  in  oxygenthe  heat  evolved  (2,250  units)  can  only  pass  to  th^  2  grams

OXYGEN  AND  ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  177

Among  the  phenomena  accompanying  the  combustion  of  certain
substances,  the  phe^iomenon  of  Jlaine  attmcts  attention.  Sulphur,
phosphorus,  sodium,  magnesium,  naphthalene,  Jirc,  burn  like  hydrogen
with  a  flame,  whilst  in  the  combustion  of  other  substances  no  flame  is
observed,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  combustion  of  iron  and  of  charcoal.
The  appearance  of  flame  depends  on  the  capacity  of  the  combustible
substance  to  yield  gases  or  vapours  at  the  temperature  of  combustion.
At  the  temperature  of  combustion,  sulphur,  pliosphorus,  sodium,  and
naphthalene  pass  into  vapour,  whilst  wood,  alcohol,  oil,  ifec,  are  decom-
posed into  gaseous  and  vaporous  substances.  The  combustion  of  gases
and  vapours  forms  flames,  and  therefore  aflame  is  coinjwsed  of  tlie  hot
arid  incandescent  gases  and  vapours  produced  by  coinbustio7i.  It  may
easily  be  proved  that  the  flames  of  such  non-volatile  substances  as  wood
contain  volatile  and  combustible  substances  formed  from  them,  by
placing  a  tube  in  the  flame  connected  with  an  aspirator.  Besides  the
products  of  combustion,  combustible  gases  and  liquids,  previously  in  the
flame  as  vapours,  collect  in  the  aspirator.  For  this  experiment  to
succeed — i.e,  in  order  to  really  extract  combustible  gases  and  vapours
from  the  flame  -  it  is  necessary  that  the  suction  tube  should  be  placed
inside  the  flame.  The  combustible  gases  and  vapours  can  cmly  remain
unburnt  inside  the  flame,  for  at  the  surface  of  the  flame  they  come  into
contact  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air  and  burn.^^  Flames  are  of  different
degrees  of  brilliancy,  according  to  whether  solid  incandescent  particles
occur  in  the  combustible  gas  or  vapour,  or  not.  Incandescent  gases
and  vapours  emit  but  little  light  by  themselves,  and  therefore  give  a
paler  flame.^^ If  a  flame  does  not  contain  solid  particles  it  is  trans-.

of  sulphurous  anhydride,  and  tlierefore  the  liighcst  posKihle  temperature  of  the  flame  of

2250
the  sulphur  in  oxygen  will  be  =  "  '  or  7258"^.  In  the  name  nuinner  it  may  be  calcu-
lated that  the  temperature  of  charcoal  burning  in  air  cannot  exceed  2,700^,  while  in
oxygen  it  may  attain  10,100^  C.  For  this  reason  the  temperature  in  oxygen  will  always
be  higher  tlian  in  air,  although  (judging  from  what  has  been  said  resi>ecting  detonating
gas)  neither  one  temperature  nor  the  other  will  ever  approximate  to  the  theoretical
amount.

^'  Faraday  proved  this  by  a  very  convincing  ex^wrinient  on  a  candle  flame.  If  one
arm  of  a  bent  glaws  tube  be  placed  in  a  candle  flame  above  the  wick  in  the  dark  portion
of  the  flame,  then  the  productn  of  the  partial  combustion  of  the  stearin  will  pans  up  the
tube,  condense  in  the  other  ann,  and  collect  in  a  flask  placed  under  it  (fig.  H5)  as  heavy
white  fumes  wliich  bum  when  lighted.  If  the  tube  be  raided  into  the  upiwr  lumi-
nous jwrtion  of  the  flame,  then  a  dense  black  smoke  which  will  not  inflame  accumulates
in  the  flask.  Lastly,  if  the  tube  be  let  down  until  it  touches  the  wick,  then  little  but
stearic  acid  condenses  in  the  flask.

'^  All  transparent  substances  which  transmit  light  with  great  ease  (that  is,  which
absorb  but  little  light)  are  but  little  luminous  when  heated ;  so  also  ^nbsUuic's  which
absorb  but  few  heat  rays,  when  heated  transmit  few  rays  of  heat.

VOL.  T.  N

parent,  pule, nnd  emits  but little  light." The Sanies  uf bumin^l
alcuhul,  sulphur,  and  hydrogen  are  of  this  kind. A  pale  flame
rendered  luminous  by  placing  fine  particles  of  solid  matter  in  it.  Thus,
if  a.  very  line  piatinum wiit  l>e  placed  in  the  pale  flame  of  burning
alcohol  —or,  better  still,  of  hyrli-ogen  —the  flame  emits  a.  bright  light.
Tills is still better  i
by sifting the powder  oE'l
HE  incombustible  substance  I
such  as  line  sand,  into  the  J
Hame,  or  by  placing  Ei  bunch  1
of  asbestos threads  i
i^vciT  brilliant  flame  alwayftl
contains  some  kind  of  s
partii.'Ies,  or  at  least  sonm^
very dense vapour. The  J
rtiune of sodium burning  I
in  oxygen  has  a brilliantj
yellow colour, from thtfl
presence  of  particles  of  solid  1
sodium  oxide. The  flameV
of magnesium is  brilliant
fj'om  the  fact  that  in  burn-
ing it  forms  solid  magnesia,
which  becomes  white  hot, |
and  similarly  the  brillioROjr^
uinnTMi|»Tuuii<sii»ieiiiiiiiF.  ^^  ^^^  Drummoud  light  itl

due  to  the  heat  of  the  flauie  raising  tlie  solid  non-volatile  lime  to  b.1
state  of  incandescence.  The  flames  of  a  candle,  wood,  and  similar  sub*  I
stances  are  brilliant,  because  tliey  contain  particles  of  charcoal  or  soot,  I
It  is  not  the  flame  itself  which  is  luminous,  but  the  incandescent  a
it  contains.  These  particles  of  charcoal  which  occur  in  flames  may  bfl
easily  observed  by  introducing  a  cold  object,  like  a  kuife,  into  tbaB
flame.*'  The  particles  of  charcoal  burn  at  the  outer  surface  of  thai
flame  if  the  supply  of  air  be  sufficient,  but  if  the  supply  of  air— that  i%  J

«l«riinent  (o

*'  TliprH  iu,  however,  uo  iloutt  but  thul
pcenHurp  (ncporiliiig  to  tlit  experimeuU  ot  E
muse,  BH  Ihvy  beODtiie  dviiwr  tiuiy  apprmcli
g«s  vbeo  eiploded  under  [ireBsnw  iovbh  a  hril
*^  If  liyclrogen  gaa  lie  |iiuHid  tliron|^  ik
throoKh  beuzene  (the  beni»u«  luity  Im  [xnirBil  dinctly
n(Bd] — Chen  its  vtixiur  buniH  with  the  hjdrogei
B  till)  «8oll«]Jt  partiti™  of oarlKin  (soot)  becoi
introdiicpf) i»to  a  Iiydrogru  Sai

ry  heavy  dense  inpolirs  ov  |
ikland)  are  lumiunus  when
liquid  or  Bolid  atute. Thus  detoiwlin)

le  liquid  hydroctiilion — (or  ii

li  given  a. very  bright  fl
ineiMideMent.
.)-  be  emphi]^  lor  iUaniinaUll

OXYGEN  AND  ITS  3ALINE  COMBINATIONS

if  oxjrgen — lie  insufficient  for  their  cumbustion  the  flame  smokes,  1>ecauae
e  uncoiisuined  particles  of  charcoal  are  carried  oS  by  the  currertl  of

«In^«m«

le  winrate  tmrtn  mt,y  Ym  iliatingui'<hei1  witi
■p  flame  trhitlier  the  cuuibualible  vspouru  ot
IWg  iU  teinpecatute  is  atill  too  low  for  the  process  of  combuBtiou  to  tiike  place  in  it,
ia  (he  aptce  «Uicli  in  a,  <!imdle  uurrouuds  the  wiuk,  or  iu  a  gus  ;et  is  immedutely
I  the  oriflco  from  which  the  gm  escapee,  Xii  a  i-sndJe  the  coinbuntible  va]iann  aiul
vrhich  ue  formed  by  llie  action  of  heat  on  the  melted  titUow  or  stearia  rise  iu  the
Uld  are  heated  by  the  high  temperature  of  the  fUme.  By  the  aution  ol  the  faeut,
w  (cJid  or  liquid  Buhfllatice  is  here,  at  ia  otlier  cases,  deoomposud,  fomiing  productB  of
0'  dleliUaiion.  These  prodiuU  occur  iu  the  central  portion  of  the  tlame  of  a  candli-.
'M  it  from  the  oDtaide,  and  ie  not  able  to  intrrmi.
11  imrts  of  the  flanie  equally;  conseqaeiitly,
ptiau  of  the  flame  the  anioont  of  onygeu  will
■  greater  thnn  in  the  interior  jiortioua.  But.  owing  lii
sn,  the  Qiygeii,  of  courae  mixed  with  nitrogen,  flowing
In  the  oombuitible  BUbotancc.  does  finally  penetrate  In
!•  interior  ot  the  flume  (when  the  combustion  takes  pliu-E^
lir).  TheeombufllibleTapour<iandgi»Be*eombinp
Mtb  lUs  cnygen,  CTolve  a  considerable  amount  of  beni,  and
'iring  about  that  state  of  Tncandeacenee  which  is  bo  necesBar)'
both  tor  keeping  up  the  corabuBtion  and  also  for  the  uses  tii
which  the  flame  is  applied.  Fasaing  from  the  colder  enveliipu
oJ  ur  thrODgli  the  interior  ot  the  flalne,  to  tlie  source  o(  thf
Ktible  Tai>onra  Ifor  instanot^,  the  wick),  we  evidently
e  layers  of  higher  and  higher  temperature,  and
iswhichare  les»andleBshot,iDwhiDhtIiecoDibnH-
ia  lean  complete,  owing  to  the  limited  supply  of  oxygen,
Thaa  unbumt  products  of  the  decomposition  ot  organii-
n  tlie  interior  of  tlie  flanie.  Bat  there  is
rays  free  hydrogen  in  the  interior  ot  the  flanie,  eren  when
■»  introdDced  there,  or  whan  a  miituxe  of  hydrogen
IlkOd  oxygen  bomB,  becaose  the  temperature  evolved  in  the
eomlnution  ot  hydrogen  or  the  carbon  of  organic  luatter  is
■o  high  that  the  producls  of  combustion  are  themselves
partMlly  decomposed —that  is.  dissociated— at  this  tempera-
ture. Hence,  in  h  flame  a  portion  of  the  hydrogen  and  of
the  oxygen  which  might  rombiue  with  the  combnitible  sub-
slaDces  mait  always  be  present  in  a  free  ■lata'.  If  a  hydro-  ]
Mrbon  boms,  and  we  ima^^ne  that  a  portion  of  the  hydrogen
ia  in  a  free  atate,  then  a  portion  ol  the  carbou  ninst  also  occur
in  the  same  form  in  tlie  fhune,  because,  otiier  conditions
being  unchanged,  carbon  bums  after  hydrogen,  and  this
is  actually  observed  in  the  combustion
carbons.  Charcoal,  or  the  soot  of  a  coi
from  the  disaociation  ot  organic  BubstanccB  contained  in  the  flame.  The  majority  of
hydrocarbons,  especially  those  Hmtaining  mucli  carbon — tor  instance,  naphthalene —
bom,  even  in  oxygen,  with  separation  of  soot.  In  that  portion  of  the  flanie  where
the  hydrogen  bums  the  carbon  remains onburnt,  or  at  least  partly  a

H  hydro- In  the  palni

■  llM  carbon  which  causes  the  brfUian

which  I

if  the  flame. That  the  ii

of  the  flami

ntili  callable  of  combustion  may  be  proved  by  the  follow-
of  the  gasee  nay  be  withdrawn  by  an  aspirator  from

of  the  flame  ot  carbonic  oiide,  whicli  it  combustible  i

180  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  combination  of  various  substances  with  oxygen  may  not
present  any  signs  of  combustion —that  is,  the  temperature  may  rise
but  inconsiderably.  This  may  either  proceed  from  the  fact  that  the
reaction  of  the  substance  (for  example,  tin,  mercury,  lead  at  a  high
temperature,  or  a  mixture  of  pyrogallol  with  caustic  potash  at  the
ordinary  temperature)  evolves  but  little  heat,  or  that  the  heat
evolved  is  transmitted  to  good  conductors  of  heat,  like  metals,  or  that
the  combination  with  oxygen  takes  place  so  slowly  that  the  heat
evolved  succeeds  in  passing  to  the  surrounding  objects.  Combustion
is  only  a  particular,  intense,  and  evident  case  of combination with

this  purpose  Deville  passed  water  through  a  metallic  tube  having  a  fine  lateral  orifice,
which  is  placed  in  the  flame.  As  the  water  Howb  along  the  tube  portions  of  the  gases
of  the  flame  enter,  and,  passing  along  the  tube  alternately  with  cylinders  of  water,  are
carried  away  into  an  apparatus  where  they  can  be  investigated.  It  appears  that  all
portions  of  the  flame  obtained  by  the  combustion  of  a  mixture  of  carbonic  oxide  and
oxygen  contain  a  portion  of  this  mixture  still  unburnt.  Tlie  researches  of  Deville
and  Bunsen  showed  that  in  the  explosion  of  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  of  carbonic  oxide
with  oxygen  in  a  closed  space,  complete  combustion  does  not  ever  take  place  im-
mediately. If  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen  be  confined  in  a
closed  space,  then  on  explosion  the  pressure  does  not  attain  that  magnitude  which  it
would  were  there  immediate  and  complete  combustion.  It  may  be  calculated  that  the
pressure  should  attain  twenty-six  atmospheres.  In  reality,  it  does  not  exceed  nine  and  a
half  atmospheres.

Hence  the  admixture  of  the  products  of  combustion  with  an  explosive  mixture  pre-
vents the  combustion  of  the  remaining  mass,  although  capable  of  burning.  The  ad-
mixture of  carbonic  anhydride  prevents  carbonic  oxide  from  burning.  The  presence
of  any  other  foreign  gas  interferes  in  the  same  manner.  This  shows  that  every  portion
of  a  flame  must  contain  combustible,  burning,  and  already  burnt  substances — i.e.  oxygen,
carbon,  carbonic  oxide,  hydrogen,  hydrocarbons,  carbonic  anhydride,  and  water.  Con-
sequently, it  is  impossible  to  attain  instantaneous  complete  combustion,  and  this  is  one
of  the  reasons  of  the  phenomenon  of  flame.  A  certain  space  is  required,  and  the  tem-
perature must  be  unequal  in  different  parts  of  it.  In  this  space  different  quantities  of
the  component  parts  are  successively  subjected  to  combustion,  or  are  cooled  under  the
influence  of  adjacent  objects,  and  combustion  only  ends  where  the  flame  ends.  If  the
combustion  could  be  concentrated  at  one  sjwt,  then  the  temperature  would  be  incom-
parably higher  than  it  is  under  the  actual  circumstances.

The  various  regions  of  the  flame  have  formed  the  frecjuent  subject  of  experimental
research,  and  the  experiments  conducted  by  Smithells  and  Ingle  (1«9*2}  are  i)articularly
instructive;  they  show  that  the  reducing  (interior)  and  oxidising  (exterior)  portions  of
the  flame  of  a  burning  gas  may  be  divided  by  taking  a  Bunsen  burner  luid  surrounding
the  flame  of  the  gas  burnt  in  it,  by  another  wider  tube  (without  tlie  access  of  air  to  the
annular  space  or  allowing  only  a  small  current  of  air  to  pass),  when  a  gaseous  mixture,
containing  oxide  of  carbon  and  capable  of  further  combustion,  will  issue  from  this
enveloping  tube,  so  that  a  second  flame,  corres|>onding  to  the  exterior  (oxidising)  portion
of  an  ordinary  flame,  may  be  obtained  above  the  enveloping  tubo.  Tliis  division  of  the
flame  into  two  portions  is  particularly  clear  when  cyanogen  C.^N  j  is  burnt,  because  the
interior  i>ortion  (where  CO  is  chiefly  formed  according  to  tlie  equation  C.^N2  +  0.2  =
2C0  -^  No,  but  a  |)ortion  of  the  nitrogen  is  oxidise<l)  is  of  a  rose  colour,  while  the  exterior
portion  (where  the  CO  bums  into  CO^  at  the  exjiense  of  a  fresh  (|uantity  of  oxygen
and  of  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  proceeding  from  the  interior  j)ortionsj  is  of  a  bluish-grey
colour.

OXYGEN AND IT8 SALINE COMBINATIONS  181

oxygen.  Respiration  is  also  an  act  of  combination  with  oxygen  ;
it  also  serves,  like  combustion,  for  the  development  of  heat  by  those
chemical  processes  which  accompany  it  (the  transformation  of  oxygen
into  carbonic  anhydride).  Lavoisier  enunciated  this  in  the  lucid  ex-
pression, *  respiration  is  slow  combustion.'

Reactions  involving  slow  combination  of  substances  with  oxygen
are  termed  oxidatiotis.  Combination  of  this  kind  (and  also  combustion)
often  results  in  the  formation  of  acid  substances,  and  hence  the
name  oxygen  {Sauerstoff).  Combustion  is  only  rapid  oxidation.
Phosphorus,  iron,  and  wine  may  be  taken  as  examples  of  substances
which  slowly  oxidise  in  air  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  If  such  a
substance  be  left  in  contact  with  a  definite  volume  of  air  or  oxygen,  it
absorbs  the  oxygen  little  by  little,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  decrease  in
volume  of  the  gas.  This  slow  oxidation  is  not  often  accompanied  by
a  sensible  evolution  of  heat ;  an  evolution  of  heat  really  does  occur,  only
it  is  not  apparent  to  our  senses  owing  to  the  small  rise  in  temperatui'e
which  takes  place  ;  this  is  owing  to  the  slow  rate  of  the  reaction  and
to  the  transmission  of  the  heat  formed  as  radiant  heat,  <fcc.  Thus,  in
the  oxidation  of  wine  and  its  transformation  into  vinegar  by  the  usual
method  of  preparation  of  the  hitter,  tlie  heat  evolved  cannot  be  observed
because  it  extends  over  several  weeks,  but  in  the  so-called  rapid  process
of  the  manufacture  of  vinegar,  when  a  large  quantity  of  wine  is
comparatively  rapidly  oxidised,  the  evolution  of  heat  is  quite  appa-
rent.

Such  slow  processes  of  oxidation  are  always  taking  place  in  nature
by  the  action  of  the  atmosphere.  Dead  organisms  and  the  substances
obtained  from  them — such  as  bodies  of  animals,  wood,  wool,  grass,  cfcc. —
are  especially  subject  to  this  action.  They  rot  and  f/ecomjwse — that  is,
their  solid  matter  is  transformed  into  gases,  under  the  influence  of
moisture  and  atmospheric  oxygen,  and  generally  under  the  influence  of
other  organisms,  such  as  moulds,  wonns,  micro-organisms  (bacteria),
and  the  like.  These  are  processes  of  slow  combustion,  of  slow  com-
bination with  oxygen.  It  is  well  known  that  manure  rots  and
developes  heat,  that  stacks  of  damp  hay,  damp  flour,  straw,  <kc.,  become
heated  and  are  changed  in  the  process.^"  In  all  these  transformations
the  same  chief  products  of  combustion  are  formed  as  those  which  are
contained  in  smoke  ;  the  carbon  gives  carbonic  anhydride,  and  the
hydrogen  water.  Hence  these  processes  require  oxygen  just  like  com-
bustion. This  is  the  reason  why  the  entire  prevention  of  access  of

^  Cotton  waste  (used  in  factories  for  cleaning  machines  from  lubricating  oil)  sorked
in  oil  and  lying  in  heaps  is  self-combustible,  being  oxidised  by  the  air.

182  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

air  hinders  these  transformations,^®  and  an  increased  supply  of  air
accelerates  them.  The  mechanical  treatment  of  arable  lands  by  the
plough,  harrow,  and  other  similar  means  has  not  only  the  object  of
facilitating  the  spread  of  roots  in  the  ground,  and  of  making  the  soil
more  permeable  to  water,  but  it  also  serves  to  facilitate  the  access  of
the  air  to  the  component  parts  of  the  soil  ;  as  a  consequence  of  which
the  organic  remains  of  soil  rot — so  to  speak,  breathe  air  and  evolve
carbonic  anhydride.  One  acre  of  good  garden  land  in  the  course  of  a
summer  evolves  more  than  sixteen  tons  of  carbonic  anhydride.

It  is  not  only  vegetable  and  animal  substances  which  are  subject  to
slow  oxidation  in  the  presence  of  water.  Some  metals  even  rust  under
these  conditions.  Copper  very  easily  absorbs  oxygen  in  the  presence  of
acids.  Many  metallic  sulphides  (for  example,  pyrites)  are  very  easily
oxidised  with  access  of  air  and  moisture.  Thus  processes  of  slow
oxidation  proceed  throughout  nature.  However,  there  are  many  ele-
ments which  do  not  under  any  circumstances  combine  directly  with
gaseous  oxygen  :  nevertheless  their  compounds  witli  oxygen  may  be
obtained.  Platinum,  gold,  iridium,  chlorine,  and  iodine  are  examples
of  such  elements.  In  this  case  recourse  is  had  to  a  so-called  indirect
method — i.e,  the  given  substance  is  combined  with  another  element,
and  by  a  method  of  double  decomposition  this  element  is  replaced  by
oxygen.  Substances  which  do  not  directly  combine  with  oxygen,  but
form  compounds  with  it  by  an  indirect  method,  often  readily  lose
the  oxygen  which  they  had  absorbed  by  double  decomposition  or
at  the  moment  of  its  evolution.  Such,  for  example,  are  the  com-
pounds of  oxygen  with  chlorine,  nitrogen,  and  platinum,  which  evolve
oxygen  on  heating  that  is,  they  may  be  used  as  oxidising  agents.  In
this  rt'spect  oxklisiny  ayentSy  or  those  compounds  of  oxygen  which  are
employed  in  chemical  and  technical  practice  for  transferring  oxygen
to  other  substances,  are  especially  remarkable.  The  most  important
among  these  is  nitric  acid  or  aqua  fortis — a  substance  rich  in  oxygen,
and  capable  of  evolving  it  when  heated,  which  easily  oxidises  a  great
number  of  substances.  Thus  nearly  all  metals  and  organic  substances
containing  carbon  and  hydrogen  are  more  or  less  oxidised  when  heated

•*  When  it  is  desired  to  preserve  a  bupply  of  vegetable  aiid  animal  f<iod,  the  aecess  of
the  oxyj^en  of  tlie  utniospliere  (and  also  of  tlie  germs  of  organisniK  present  in  the  air)  is
often  prevented.  ^Vith  this  object  articles  of  food  are  often  kept  in  hermetically  closed
vesst«ls,  from  which  the  air  has  been  withdrawn;  vegetiibles  are  dried  and  soldered  up  while
hot  in  tin  lK)xes  ;  sardines  are  innnersed  in  oil,  Arc.  The  removal  ol  water  from  substances
is  also  sometimes  resorted  to  with  the  same  object  (the  dr>ing  of  hay,  com,  fruits), as  also
is  saturati«»n  with  substances  which  absorb  oxygen  (such  as  sulphurous  anhydride),  or
whiih  hinder  the  growth  of  organisms  forming  the  first  cause  of  putrefaction,  as  in
pnHe«.«.es  <»f  snmking.  embalming,  and  in  the  keeping  of  fishes  and  other  aninial  si^nri-
mens  in  sjurit,  iVc.

OXYGEN  AND  ITS SALINE ('03IBINATI0NS  183

with  nitric  acid.  If  strong  nitric  acid  be  taken,  and  a  piece  of  burning
charcoal  be  immersed  in  the  acid,  it  continues  to  burn.  Chromic  acid
acts  like  nitric  acid  ;  alcohol  burns  when  mixed  with  it.  Although
the  action  is  not  so  marked,  even  water  may  oxidise  with  its  oxygen.
Sodium  is  not  oxidised  in  perfectly  dry  oxygen  at  the  ordinary  tem-
perature, but  it  burns  very  easily  in  water  and  aqueous  vapour.
Charcoal  can  burn  in  carbonic  anhydride — a  product  of  combustion —
forming  carbonic  oxide.  Magnesium  burns  in  the  same  gas,  separating
carbon  from  it.  Speaking  generally,  combined  oxygen  can  pass  from
one  compound  to  another.

The  products  of  combustion  or  oxidation — and  in  general  the  definite
compounds  of  oxygen — are  termed  oxides.  Some  oxides  are  not  capable
of  combining  with  other  oxides— or  combine  with  only  a  few,  and  then
with  the  evolution  of  very  little  heat ;  others,  on  the  contrary,  enter
into  combination  with  very  many  other  oxides,  and  in  general  have
remarkable  chemical  energy.  The  oxides  incapable  of  combining  with
others,  or  only  showing  this  quality  in  a  small  degree,  are  termed
iiulifferent  oxides.  Such  are  the  peroxides,  of  which  mention  has  before
been  made.

The  class  of  oxides  capable  of  entering  into  mutual  combination
we  will  term  saliiie  oxides.  They  fall  into  two  chief  groups — at  least,
as  regards  the  most  extreme  members.  The  members  of  one  group
combine  with  the  members  of  the  other  group  with  particular  ease,
As  representative  of  one  group  may  be  taken  the  oxides  of  the  metals
magnesium,  sodium,  calcium,  kc.  Representatives  of  the  other  group
are  the  oxides  formed  by  the  non-metals,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  carbon.
Thus,  if  we  take  the  oxide  of  calcium,  or  lime,  and  bring  it  into
contact  with  oxides  of  the  second  group,  combination  very  readily
ensues.  For  instance,  if  we  mix  calcium  oxide  with  oxide  of  phos-
phorus they  combine  with  great  facility  and  with  the  evolution  of
much  heat.  If  we  pass  the  vapour  of  sulphuric  anhydride,  obtained
by  the  combination  of  sulphurous  oxide  with  oxygen,  over  pieces  of
lime  heated  to  redness,  the  sulphuric  anhydride  is  absorbed  by  the
lime  with  the  formation  of  a  substance  called  calcium  sulphate.  The
oxides  of  the  first  kind,  which  contain  metals,  are  termed  basic  oxides
or  bases.  Lime  is  a  familiar  example  of  this  class.  The  oxides  of  the
second  group,  which  are  capable  of  combining  with  the  bases,  are
termed  anhydrides  of  the  acids  or  acid  oxides.  Sulphuric  anhydride,
SO3,  may  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  latter  group.  It  is  a  compound
of  sulphur  with  oxygen  formed  not  directly  but  by  the  addition  of
a  fresh  quantity  of  oxygen  to  sulphurous  anhydride,  SO2,  by  passing
it  together  with  oxygen  over  incandescent  spongy  platinum. Carbonic

184  rUlNClPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

anhydride  (often  termed  *  carbonic  acid  *),  CO^,  phosphoric  anhydride,
sulphurous  anhydride,  are  all  acid  oxides,  for  they  can  combine  with
such  oxides  as  lime  or  calcium  oxide,  magnesia  or  magnesium  oxide,
MgO,  soda  or  sodium  oxide,  Na^O,  ttc.

If  a  given  element  form  but  one  basic  oxide,  it  is  termed  the  oxide  ;
for  example,  calcium  oxide,  magnesium  oxide,  potassium  oxide.  Some
indifferent  oxides  are  also  called  *  oxides  '  if  they  have  not  the  properties
of  peroxides,  and  at  the  same  time  do  not  show  the  properties  of  acid
anhydrides  —for  example,  carbonic  oxide,  of  which  mention  has  already
been  made.  If  an  element  forms  two  basic  oxides  (or  two  indifferent
oxides  not  having  the  cha meter istics  of  a  peroxide)  then  that  of  the
lower  degree  of  oxidation  is  called  a  suboxide — that  is,  suboxides  contain
less  oxygen  than  oxides.  Thus,  when  copper  is  heated  to  redness  in  a
furnace  it  increases  in  weight  and  absorbs  oxygen,  until  for  63  parts
of  copper  there  is  absorbed  not  more  than  8  parts  of  oxygen  by  weight,
forming  a  red  mass,  which  is  suboxide  of  copper  ;  but  if  the  roasting
be  prolonged,  and  the  draught  of  air  increased,  63  parts  of  copper
absorb  16  parts  of  oxygen,  and  form  black  oxide  of  copper.  Some-
times to  distinguish  between  the  degrees  of  oxidation  a  change  of
suffix  is  made  in  the  oxidised  element,  -ic  oxide  denoting  the  higher
degree  of  oxidation,  and  -ous  oxide  the  lower  degree.  Thus  ferrous
oxide  and  ferric  oxide  are  the  same  as  suboxide  of  iron  and  oxide  of
iron.  If  an  element  forms  one  anhydride  only,  then  it  is  named  by  an
adjective  formed  from  tlie  name  of  the  element  made  to  end  in  -ic  and
the  word  anhydride.  When  an  element  form.s  two  anhydrides,  then
the  suffixes  -ous  and  -ic  ai*e  used  to  distinguish  them  :  -ons  signify-
ing less  oxygen  than  -ic  ;  for  example,  sulphurous  and  sulphuric
anhydrides.^^  When  several  oxides  are  formed  from  the  same  element^
the prefixes ?/«?n, di,  tri,  tetra  are  used,  thus  :  chlorine monoxide,

■*•*  It  must  be  remarked  that  certain  elements  form  oxides  of  all  three  kinds— /.^•.
indifferent,  basic,  and  acid  ;  for  example,  manganese  forms  manganous  oxide,  manganic
oxide,  i)eroxide  of  manganese,  red  oxide  of  mangtuiese,  and  manganic  anhydride,  although
some  of  them  are  not  known  in  a  free  state  but  only  in  combination.  Tlie  basic  oxides
contain  less  oxygen  than  the  {peroxides,  and  the  peroxides  less  than  the  acid  anhydrides.
Thus  they  nmst  be  placed  in  the  following  general  nornuil  order  with  respect  to  the
amount  of  oxygen  entering  into  their  comi)osition— (1)  basic  oxides,  suboxides,  and
oxides;  (2)  peroxides;  (3)  acid  anliydrides.  The  majority  of  elements,  however,  do  not
give  all  three  kinds  of  oxides,  some  giving  only  one  degree  of  oxidation.  It  nmst  further
be  remarked  that  there  are  oxides  fonned  l>v  the  combination  of  acid  anhvdrides  with
basic  oxides,  or,  in  general,  of  oxides  with  oxides.  For  every  oxide  having  a  higher  and
a  lower  degree  of  oxidation,  it  might  be  said  that  the  intermediate  oxide  was  formed  by
the  combination  of  the  higher  with  the  lower  oxide.  But  this  is  not  true  in  all  cases —
for  instance,  when  the  oxide  under  consideration  fonns  a  whole  series  of  indeiKMident
compounds — for  oxides  which  are  really  fonned  by  the  combination  of  two  other  oxides
do  not  gi\e  such  independent  compounds,  but  in  many  cases  decompose  into  the  higher
and  lower  oxides.

OXYGEN AND ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  185

chlorine  dioxide,  chlorine  trioxide,  and  chlorine  tetroxide  or  chloric
anhydride.

The  oxides  themselves  rarely  undergo  chemical  transformations,  and
in  the  few  cases  where  they  are  subject  to  such  changes  a  particularly
important  part  is  played  by  their  combinations  with  water.  The
majority  of,  if  not  all,  basic  and  acid  oxides  combine  with  water,  either
by  a  direct  or  an  indirect  method  forming  hydrates — that  is,  compounds
which  split  up  into  water  and  an  oxide  of  the  same  kind  only.  It
is  well  known  that  many  substances  are  capable  of  combining  with
water.  Oxides  possess  this  property  in  the  highest  degree.  We  have
already  seen  examples  of  this  (Chapter  T.)  in  the  combination  of  lime,
and  of  sulphuric  and  phosphoric  anhydrides,  with  water.  The  resulting
combinations  are  basic  and  acid  hydrates.  Acid  hydrates  are  called
adds  because  they  have  an  acid  taste  when  dissolved  in  water  (or
saliva),  for  then  only  can  they  act  on  the  palate.  Vinegar,  for  example,
has  an  acid  taste  because  it  contains  acetic  acid  dissolved  in  water.
Sulphuric  acid,  to  which  we  have  frequently  referred,  because  it
is  the  acid  of  the  greatest  importance  both  in  practical  chemistry  and
for  its  technical  applications,  is  really  a  hydrate  formed  by  the  com-
bination of  sulphuric  anhydride  with  water.  Besides  their  acid  taste,
dissolved  acids  or  acid  hydrates  have  the  property  of  changing  the  blue
colour  of  certain  vegetable  dyes  to  red.  Of  these  dyes  litmus  is
particularly  remarkable  and  much  used.  It  is  the  blue  substance  ex-
tracted from  certain  lichens,  and  is  used  for  dyeing  tissues  blue  ;  it
gives  a  blue  infusion  with  water.  This  infusion,  on  the  addition  of  an
acid,  changes  froin  hhie  to  red/*^

^  Blotting  or  unsi/ed  luiper,  sonked  in  a  solution  of  litmus,  is  usutilly  employed  for
detecting  the  presence  of  acids.  This  i)ai>er  is  cut  into  strips,  and  is  called  test  paper  ;
when  dipi)ed  into  acid  it  immediately  turns  red.  This  is  a  most  sensitive  reaction,  and
nuiy  be  employed  for  testing  for  the  smallest  traces  of  acids.  If  10,000  j)arts  by  weight
of  water  be  mixed  with  1  part  of  sulj)huric  acid,  the  coloration  is  distinct,  and  it  is
even  i»erceptible  on  the  addition  of  ten  times  mr>re  water.  Certain  precaution^  must,
however,  be  taken  in  the  preparation  of  such  very  sensitive  litmus  paiwr.  Litmus  is
ftold  in  lumps.  Take,  say,  100  grams  of  it ;  iK)wder  it,  and  add  it  to  cold  pure  water  in
a  flask;  shake  and  decant  tiie  water.  RejH'at  this  three  times.  This  is  done  to  wash
away  easily-soluble  impurities,  esi)ecially  alkalis.  Transfer  the  washed  litmus  (it  is  washed
with  absolute  alcohol  to  remove  the  non-sensitive  reddish  colouring  matter)  to  a  flask,
and  pour  in  600  c.c.  of  water,  heat,  and  allow  the  hot  infusion  to  remain  for  w)me  hours
in  a  wann  place.  Then  filter,' and  divide  the  filtrate  into  two  parts.  Add  a  few  drops  of
nitric  ficid  to  one  portion,  so  that  a  faint  red  tinge  is  obtained,  and  then  mix  the  two
[wrtions.  Add  spirit  to  the  mixture,  and  keep  it  in  a  stoppered  bottle  (it  soon  spoils
if  left  open  to  the  air).  This  infusion  may  be  employed  directly  ;  it  re<ldens  in  the
presence  of  acids,  and  turns  blue  in  the  presence  of  alkalis.  If  evajKirated,  a  solid  mass
is  obtained  which  is  s«»luble  in  water,  and  may  be  kept  unchanged  for  any  length  of  time.
The  test  pajwr  nniy  be  prepared  as  follows : — Take  a  strong  infusion  of  litmus,  and  soak
blotting-pai>er  with  it  ;  dry  it,  and  cut  it  into  strips,  and  use  it  as  test-paper  for  acids.
For  the  detection  of  alkalis,  the  paper  must  be  soaked  in  a  solution  of  litmus  ^ust  red-

186  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Basic  oxides,  in  combining  with  water,  form  hydrate.:,  of  wliich,
however,  very  few  are  soluble  in  water.  Those  which  are  soluble  in
water  have  an  alkaline  taste  like  that  of  soap  or  of  water  in  which
wood  ashes  have  been  boiled,  and  are  called  alkalis.  Further,  alkalis
have  the  property  of  restoring  the  blue  colour  to  litmus  which  has  been
reddened  by  the  action  of  acids.  The  hydrates  of  the  oxides  of  sodium
and  potassium,  NaHO  and  KHO,  are  examples  of  basic  hydrates
easily  soluble  in  water.  They  are  true  alkalis,  and  are  termed  caustic ,
because  they  act  very  powerfully  on  the  skin  of  animals  and  plants.
Thus  NaHO  is  called  *  caustic '  soda.

The  saline  oxides  are  capable  of  combining  together  and  with
water.  Water  itself  is  an  oxide,  and  not  an  indifferent  one,  for  it  can,
as  we  have  seen,  combine  with  basic  and  acid  oxides  ;  it  is  a  represen-
tative of  a  whole  series  of  saline  oxides,  intermediate  oxides,  capable  of
combining  with  both  basic  and  acid  oxides.  There  are  many  such
oxides,  which,  like  water,  combine  with  basic  and  acid  anhydrides — for
instance,  the  oxides  of  aluminium  and  tin,  <fcc.  From  this  it  may  be
concluded  that  all  oxides  might  be  placed,  in  respect  to  their  capacity
for  combining  with  one  another,  in  one  uninterrupted  series,  at  one
extremity  of  which  would  stand  those  oxides  which  do  not  combine
with  the  bases — that  is,  the  alkalis — while  at  the  other  end  would  be
the  acid  oxides,  and  in  the  interval  those  oxides  which  combine  with
one  another  and  with  both  the  acid  and  basic  oxides.  The  further
apart  the  members  of  this  series  are,  the  more  stable  are  the  compounds
they  form  together,  the  more  energetically  do  they  act  on  each  other,
the  greater  the  quantity  of  heat  evolved  in  their  reaction,  and  the
more  marked  is  their  saline  chemical  character.

We  said  above  that  basic  and  acid  oxides  combine  together,  but
rarely  react  on  each  other  ;  this  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  majority
of  them  are  solids  or  gases — that  is,  they  occur  in  the  state  least  prone

dened  by  a  few  drops  of  acid  ;  if  too  much  acid  be  taken,  tlie  paiier  will  not  be  sensitive.
Such  acids  as  sulphuric  acid  colour  litniUK,  and  esi>ecially  its  infusion,  a  brick-red  colour,
whilst  more  feeble  acids,  such  as  carbonic,  give  a  faint  red-wine  tinge.  Test-paper  of  a
yellow  colour  is  also  employed  ;  it  is  dyed  by  an  infusion  of  turmeric  roots  in  spirit.  In
alkalis  it  turns  brown,  but  regains  its  origmal  hue  in  acids.  Many  blue  and  other  vege-
table colouring  matters  may  be  used  for  the  detection  of  acids  and  alkalis  ;  for  extunple,
infusions  of  cochineal,  violets,  log- wood,  itc.  Certain  artificially  j>repared  substances  and
dyes  nuiy  also  be  employed.  Tlius  rosolic  acid,  C^ioHigO^  and  phenolphthalein,  C.,>oHi40|
(it  is  used  in  an  alcoholic  solution,  and  is  not  suitable  for  tlie  detection  of  ammonia),
are  colourless  in  an  lund,  and  red  in  an  alkaline,  solution.  Cyanine  is  also  colourless  in
the  presence  of  acids,  and  gives  a  blue  coloration  with  idkalis.  Methyl-orange  (yellow
in  an  aqueous  soluticm)  is  not  altered  by  alkalis  but  becomes  pink  with  acids  (weak
acids  have  no  action),  il'c.  These  are  very  sensitive  tests.  Their  behaviour  in  resi)ect  to
various  acids,  alkalis,  and  salts  sometimes  give  the  means  of  distinguishing  substances
from  eatik  other.

OXYGEN  AND  ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  187

to  chemical  reaction.  The  gaseo-elastic  state  is  with  difficulty  destroyed,
because  it  necessitates  overcoming  the  elasticity  proper  to  the  gaseous
particles.  The  solid  state  is  characterised  by  the  immobility  of  its
particles  ;  whilst  chemical  action  requires  contact,  and  hence  a  dis-
placement and  mobility.  If  solid  oxides  be  heated,  and  especially  if
they  be  melted,  then  reaction  proceeds  with  great  ease.  But  such  a
change  of  state  tarely  occurs  in  nature  or  in  practice.  Only  in  a  few
furnace  processes  is  this  the  case.  For  example,  in  the  manufacture  of
glass,  the  oxides  contained  in  it  combine  together  in  a  molten  state.
But  when  oxides  combine  with  water,  and  especially  when  they  form
hydrates  soluble  in  water,  then  the  mobility  of  their  particles  increases
to  a  considerable  extent,  and  their  reaction  is  greatly  facilitated.  Re-
action then  takes  place  at  the  ordinary  temperature — easily  and  rapidly  ;
so  that  this  kind  of  reaction  belongs  to  the  class  of  those  which  take
place  with  unusual  facility,  and  are,  therefore,  very  often  taken  advan-
tage of  in  practice,  and  also  have  been  and  are  going  on  in  nature  at
every  step.  We  will  i:ow  consider  the  reactions  of  oxides  in  the  state
of  hydrates,  not  losing  sight  of  the  fact  that  water  is  itself  an  oxide
with  definite  properties,  and  has,  therefore,  no  little  influence  on  the
course  of  those  changes  in  which  it  takes  part.

If  we  tiike  a  definite  quantity  of  an  acid,  and  add  an  infusion  of
litmus  to  it,  it  turns  red  ;  the  addition  of  an  alkaline  solution  does  not
immediately  alter  the  red  colour  of  the  litmus,  but  on  adding  more  and
more  of  the  alkaline  solution  a  point  is  reached  when  the  red  colour
changes  to  violet,  and  then  the  further  addition  of  a  fresh  quantity  of
the  alkaline  solution  changes  the  colour  to  blue.  This  change  of  the
colour  of  the  litmus  is  a  consequence  of  the  formation  of  a  new  com-
pound. This  reaction  is  termed  the  .safnration  or  neutralisation  of
the  acid  by  the  Vjase,  or  vice  versa.  The  solution  in  which  the  acid
properties  of  the  acid  are  saturated  by  the  alkaline  properties  of  the
base  is  termed  a  nentral  solution.  Such  a  solution,  although  derived
from  the  mixture  of  a  base  with  an  acid,  does  not  exhibit  either
the  acid  or  basic  reaction  on  litmus,  yet  it  preserves  many  other
signs  of  the  acid  and  alkali.  It  is  observed  that  in  such  a  definite
admixture  of  an  acid  with  an  alkali,  besides  the  changes  in  the  colour
of  litmus  there  is  a  heating  eflfeot — I.e.  an  evolution  of  heat — which  is
alone  sufficient  to  prove  that  there  was  chemical  action.  And,  indeed,
if  the  resultant  violet  solution  be  evaporated,  there  separates  out,  not
the  acid  or  the  alkali  originally  taken,  but  a  substance  which  has
neither  acid  nor  alkaline  proj)erties,  but  is  usually  solid  and  crystal-
line, having  a  saline  appearance  ;  this  is  a  salt  in  the  chemical  sense  of
the  word. Hence  a  salt  is  derived  from  the  reaction of  an  acid  on

188  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

an  alkali,  in  a  certain  definite  proportion.  The  water  here  taken  for
solution  plays  no  other  part  than  merely  facilitating  the  progress  of
the  reaction.  This  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  the  anhydrides  of  the
acids  are  able  to  combine  with  basic  oxides,  and  give  the  same  salts  as
do  the  acids  with  the  alkalis  or  hydrates.  Hence,  a  salt  is  a  compound
of  definite  quantities  of  an  acid  with  an  alkali.  In  the  latter  reaction,
water  is  separated  out  if  the  substance  formed  be  the  same  as  is  pro-
duced by  the  combination  of  anhydrous  oxides  together.'*'  Examples
of  the  formation  of  salts  from  acids  and  bases  are  easily  observed,  and
are  very  often  applied  in  practice.  If  we  take,  for  instance,  insoluble
magnesium  oxide  (magnesia)  it  is  easily  dissolved  in  sulphuric  acid,  and
on  evaporation  gives  a  saline  substance,  bitter,  like  all  the  salts  of  mag-
nesium, and  familiar  to  all  under  the  name  of  Epsom  salts,  used  as  a
purgative.  If  a  solution  of  caustic  soda — which  is  obtained,  as  we  saw,
by  the  action  of  water  on  sodium  oxide — be  poured  into  a  flask  in  which
charcoal  has  been  burnt ;  or  if  carbonic  anhydride,  which  is  produced
under  so  many  circumstances,  be  passed  through  a  solution  of  caustic
soda,  then  sodium  carbonate  or  soda,  Na^COs,  is  obtained,  of  whii;h  we
have  spoken  several  times,  and  which  is  prepared  on  a  large  scale  and
often  used  in  manufactures.  This  reaction  is  expressed  by  the  equation,
2NaH0-f  C02=Na.^C03  +  Ef2^-  Thus,  the  various  bases  and  acids
form  an  innumerable  number  of  different  salts. '^'^ Salts  constitute  an

I

•'^'  That  water  really  is  separated  in  the  reaction  of  acid  on  alkaline  hydrates,  may  he
shown  by  taking  some  other  intermediate  hydrate — for  example,  alumina-  -instead  of
water.  Thus,  if  a  solution  of  alumina  in  sulphuric  acid  be  taken,  it  will  have,  like  the
acid,  an  acid  reaction,  and  will  therefore  colour  litmus  red.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  a
solution  of  alumina  in  an  alkali — say,  potash — be  taken,  it  will  have  an  alkaline
reaction,  and  will  turn  red  litmus  blue.  On  adding  the  alkaline  to  the  acid  solutitm
until  neither  an  alkaline  nor  an  acid  reaction  is  j)roduoed,  a  salt  is  formed,  consisting  of
sulphuric  anhydride  and  potassium  oxide.  In  this,  as  in  the  reaction  of  hydrates,  an
intermediate  oxide  is  separated  out — namely,  alumina.  Its  separation  will  be  verj*  evident
in  this  case,  as  alumina  is  insoluble  in  water.

^  Tlie  mutual  interaction  of  hydrates,  and  their  capacity  of  forming  salts,  may  be
taken  advantage  of  for  determining  the  character  of  those  hydrates  which  are  insoluble
in  water.  Let  us  imagine  that  a  given  hydrate,  whose  chemical  character  is  unknown,  is
insoluble  in  water.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to  test  its  reaction  on  litmus.  It  is  then
mixed  with  water,  and  an  acid — for  instance,  sulphuric  acid — is  added  to  the  mixture.  If
the  hydrate  tidcen  be  basic,  reaction  will  take  place,  either  directly  or  by  the  aid  of
heat,  with  the  formation  of  a  salt.  In  certain  cases,  the  resultant  salt  is  soluble  in
water,  and  tliis  will  at  once  show  that  combination  has  taken  place  between  the  in-
soluble basic  hydrate  and  the  acid,  with  the  formation  of  a  soluble  saline  substance.  In
those  cases  where  the  resultant  salt  is  insoluble,  still  the  water  loses  its  acid  reaction,
and  therefore  it  may  be  ascertained,  by  the  addition  of  an  acid,  whether  a  given  hydrate
has  a  basic  character,  like  the  hydrates  of  oxide  of  copper,  lead,  S:v.  If  the  acid  does
not  act  on  the  given  insoluble  hydrate  (at  any  temperature),  then  it  has  not  a  basic
chanuter,  and  it  should  be  testc^l  as  to  whether  it  has  an  acid  character.  This  is  done
by  taking  an  alkali,  instea<l  of  the  acid,  and  by  observing  whether  the  unknown  hydrate
then  diss*)lves,  or  whether  the  alkaline  reaction  disappears. Thus  it  may  be  proved  that

OXYGEN AND ITS  SALINE COMBINATIONS  189

example  of  definite  chemical  compounds,  and  both  in  the  history  and
practice  of  science  are  most  often  cited  as  confirming  the  conception  of
definite  chemical  compounds.  Indeed,  all  the  indications  of  a  definite
chemical  combination  are  clearly  seen  in  the  formation  and  properties
of  salts.  Thus,  they  are  produced  with  a  definite  proportion  of  oxides,
heat  is  evolved  in  their  formation,'*^  and  the  chemical  character  of  the
oxides  and  many  of  the  physical  properties  become  hidden  in  their  salts.
For  example,  when  gaseous  carbonic  anhydride  combines  with  a  base

hydrate  of  silica  in  acid,  because  it  dissolves  in  alkalin  and  not  in  ticids.  If  it  be  a  ease
of  an  insoluble  intermediate  hydrate,  then  it  will  be  observed  to  react  on  both  the  acid
and  alkali.  Hydrate  of  alumina  is  an  instance  in  question,  which  is  soluble  both  in
caustic  potash  and  in  sulphuric  acid.

The  degree  of  affinity  or  chemical  energy  proper  to  oxides  and  their  hydrates  is  very
dissimilar ;  some  extreme  members  of  the  series  possess  it  to  a  great  extent.  Wlieu
acting  on  each  other  they  evolve  a  large  quantity  of  heat,  and  when  acting  on  intermediate
hydrates  they  also  evolve  heat  to  a  considerable  degree,  as  we  saw  in  the  combination
of  lime  and  sulphuric  anhydride  with  water.  When  extreme  oxides  combine  they  form
stable  salts,  which  are  decomposed  with  difficulty,  and  often  show  characteristic  proper-
ties. The  compounds  of  the  intermediate  oxides  with  each  other,  or  even  with  basic
and  acid  oxides,  present  a  verj'  different  case.  However  much  aliunina  we  may  dissolve
in  sulphuric  acid,  we  caiuiot  saturate  the  acid  properties  of  the  sulphuric  acid,  the
resulting  solution  will  always  have  an  acid  reaction.  So  also,  whatever  quantity  of
alumina  is  dissolved  in  an  alkali,  the  resulting  solution  will  always  present  an  alkaline
reaction.

^  In  order  to  give  an  idea  of  the  quantity  of  heat  evolved  in  the  formation  of  salts
I  append  a  table  of  data  for  very  dilute  aqueous  solutiofis  of  acids  and  alkalis,  accord-
ing to  the  determinations  of  Berthelot  and  Thomsen.  The  figures  are  given  in  major
calories — that  is,  in  thousands  of  units  of  heat.  For  example,  41)  grams  of  sulphuric  acid,
H0SO4,  taken  in  a  dilute  aqueous  solution,  when  mixed  with  such  an  amount  of  a  weak
solution  of  caustic  soda,  NaHO,  that  a  neutral  salt  is  fonned  (when  all  the  hyflrogen  of
the  acid  is  replaced  by  the  sodium),  evolves  1.'>,H00  units  of  heat.

49  parts  of
H,S().

6:{  i)ftrt8
HNO,

of

40  parts  of

03  i>«irt8  of
HNO,

NaHO

. 15-8

13-7

MgO  .

. 15T>

13-8

KHO.

. 15-7

13H

FeO .

. 12-5

10-7  (?)

NH, .

. 14-5

12-5

ZnO .

. 11-7

9-8

CaO .

. 15-6

13-9

Fe.,0,

5-7

5-9

BaO .

. lH-4

13-9

Tliese  figures  cannot  be  considered  as  the  heat  of  neutralisation,  because  the  water
here  plays  an  important  part.  Thus,  for  instance,  sulphuric  iK'id  and  caustic  soda  in
dissolving  in  water  evolve  very  much  heat,  and  the  resultant  sixlium  sulphate  very  little ;
consequently,  the  amount  of  heat  evolved  in  an  anhydrous  combination  will  be  different
from  that  evolved  in  a  hydrated  combination.  Tliose  acids  which  are  not  energetic  in
combining  with  the  same  quantity  of  alkalis  required  for  the  formation  of  normal  salts
of  sulphuric  or  nitric  acids  always,  however,  give  less  heat.  For  instance,  with  caustic
so<la  :  carbonic  acid  gives  10-2,  hydrocyanic,  2*9,  hydrogen  sulphide,  8"9  major  calories.
And  as  feeble  bases  (for  example,  Fe.^05)  also  evolve  less  heat  than  those  which  are  more
powerful,  so  a  certain  general  correlation  between  thermochemical  datti  and  the  tlegree  of
affinity  shows  itself  here,  as  in  other  cases  {see  Chapter  II.,  Note  7) ;  this  does  not,  how-
ever, give  any  reaw>n  for  measuring  the  affinity  which  binds  the  elements  of  salts  by  the
heat  of  their  fonnation  in  dilute  solutions.  This  is  very  clearly  demonstrated  by  the
fact  that  water  is  able  to  decompose  many  salts,  and  is  separated  in  their  formation.

190  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

to  form  a  solid  salt,  the  elasticity  of  the  gas  quite  disappears  in  its
passage  into  the  salt.''*

Judging  from  the  above,  a  salt  is  a  compound  of  basic  and
acid  oxides,  or  the  result  of  the  action  of  hydrates  of  these  classes  on
each  other  with  separation  of  water.  But  salts  may  be  obtained  by
other  methods.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  basic  oxides  are  fonned
by  metals,  and  acid  oxides  usually  by  non-metals.  But  metals  and
non-metals  are  capable  of  combining  together,  and  a  salt  is  frequently
formed  by  the  oxidation  of  such  a  compound.  For  example,  iron  very
easily  combines  with  sulphur,  forming  iron  sulphide  FeS  (as  we  saw
in  the  Introduction)  ;  this  in  air,  and  especially  moist  air,  absorbs
oxygen,  with  the  formation  of  the  same  salt  FeS04,  that  may  be  obtained
by  the  combination  of  the  oxides  of  iron  and  sulphur,  or  of  the  hydrates
of  these  oxides.  Hence,  it  cannot  be  said  or  supposed  that  a  salt  has
the  properties  of  the  oxides,  or  must  necessarily  contain  two  kinds
of  oxides  in  itself.  The  derivation  of  salts  from  oxides  is  merely  one
of  the  methods  of  their  preparation.  We  saw,  for  instance,  that  in
sulphuric  acid  it  was  possible  to  replace  the  hydrogen  by  zinc,  and  that
by  this  means  zinc  sulphate  was  formed  ;  so  likewise  the  hydrogen
in  many  other  acids  may  be  replaced  by  zinc,  iron,  potassium,  sodium,
and  a  whole  series  of  similar  metals,  corresponding  salts  being
obtained.  The  hydrogen  of  the  acid,  in  all  these  cases,  is  exchanged
for  a  metal,  and  a  salt  is  obtained  from  the  hydrate.  Regarding  a
salt  from  this  point  of  view,  it  may  be  said  that  a  salt  is  an  acid  in
v'hich  hyrh'oifen  is  replaced  by  a  metal.  This  definition  shows  that  a
salt  and  an  acid  are  essentially  compounds  of  the  same  series,  with  the
difference  that  the  latter  contains  hydrogen  and  the  former  a  metal.
Such  a  definition  is  more  exact  than  the  first  definition  of  salts,
inasmuch  as  it  likewise  includes  those  acids  which  do  not  contain
oxygen,  and,  as  we  shall  afterwards  learn,  there  is  a  series  of  such  acids.
Such  elements  as  chlorine  and  bromine  form  compounds  with  hydrogen
in  which  the  hydrogen  may  be  replaced  by  a  metal,  forming  substances
which,  in  their  reactions  and  external  characters,  resemble  the  salts
formed  from  oxides. Table  salt,  NaCl,  is  an  example  of  this. It  may

*•  Ctirbonic  anliydrule  evolves  heat  in  dissolving  in  water.  The  Holution  easily  dis-
Bociates  and  evolves  carbonic  anhydride,  according  to  the  law  of  Henry  and  Daltou  {see
Chapter  I.)  In  dissolving  in  caustic  socla,  it  either  gives  a  normal  salt,  NaaCOs,
which  does  not  evolve  carbonic  aiiliydride,  or  an  acid  salt,  NaHC05,  which  easily  evolves
carbonic  anhydride  when  heated.  The  same  gas,  when  dissolved  in  solutions  of  salts,  acts
in  one  or  the  other  manner  (see  Chapter  II.,  Note  88).  Here  it  is  seen  what  a  successive
series  of  relations  exists  between  compounds  of  a  different  order,  between  substances  of
different  degrees  of  stability.  By  making  a  distinction  between  the  phenomena  of  solu-
tions and  chemical  compounds,  we  overlook  those  natural  transitions  which  in  reality
exist.

OXYGEN AND ITS SALINE COxMBINATIONS  191

be  obtained  by  the  replacement  of  hydrogen  in  hydrochloric  acid,  HCJ,
by  the  metal  sodium,  just  as  sulphate  of  sodium,  Na2S04,  may  be
obtained  by  the  replacement  of  hydrogen  in  sulphuric  acid,  H2SO4,  by
sodium.  The  exterior  appearance  of  the  resulting  products,  their
neutral  reaction,  and  even  their  saline  taste,  show  their  resemblance
to  one  another.

To  the  fundamental  properties  of  salts  yet  another  must  be  added —
namely,  that  they  are  more  or  less  fhcomiKtsed  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic
current.  The  results  of  this  decomposition  are  very  different  according
to  whether  the  salt  be  taken  in  a  fused  or  dissolved  state.  But  the  decom-
position may  generally  be  so  represented,  that  the  metal  appears  at  the
electro-negative  pole  or  cathode  (like  hydrogen  in  the  decomposition  of
water,  or  its  mixture  with  sulphuric  acid),  and  the  remaining  parts  of
the  salt  appear  at  the  electro- positive  pole  or  anode  (where  the  oxygen  of
water  appears).  If,  for  instance,  an  electric  current  acts  on  an  aqueous
solution  of  sodium  sulphate,  then  the  sodium  appears  at  the  negative
pole,  and  oxygen  and  the  anhydride  of  sulphuric  acid  at  the  positive
pole.  But  in  the  solution  itself  the  result  is  different,  for  sodium,  as
we  know,  decomposes  water  with  evolution  of  hydrogen,  forming
caustic  soda  ;  consequently  hydrogen  will  be  evolved,  and  caustic  soda
appear  at  the  negative  pole  :  while  at  the  positive  pole  the  sulphuric
anhydride  immediately  combines  with  water  and  forms  sulphuric  acid,
and  therefore  oxygen  will  be  evolved  and  sulphuric  acid  formed  round
this  pole.*'"'  In  other  cases,  when  the  metal  separated  is  not  able  to
decompose  water,  it  will  be  deposited  in  a  free  state.  Thus,  for  example,
in  the  decomposition  of  copper  sulphate,  copper  separates  out  at  the
cathode,  and  oxygen  and  sulphuric  acid  appear  at  the  anode,  and  if  a
copper  plate  be  attached  to  the  positive  pole,  then  the  oxygen  evolved
will  oxidise  the  copper,  and  the  oxide  of  copper  will  dissolve  and  be
deposited  at  the  negative  pole — that  is,  a  transfer  of  copper  from  the
positive  to  the  negative  pole  ensues.  The  galvanoplastic  art  (electro-
typing)  is  based  on  this  principle.''^  Therefore  the  most  radical  and
general  properties  of  salts  (including  also  such  salts  as  table  salt,  which

^  This  kind  of  decomposition  may  bo  euBily  observed  by  ix)uring  a  solution  of  smlium
sulphate  into  a  U-nhaped  tube  and  inserting  electrodes  in  the  two  branches.  If  the  solu-
tion be  coloured  with  an  infusion  of  litmus,  it  will  easily  be  seen  that  it  turns  blue  at  the
cathode,  owing  to  the  formation  of  sodium  hydroxide,  and  red  at  the  electro-positive
pole,  from  the  formation  of  sulphuric  acid.

^♦'  In  other  cases  the  decomposition  of  salts  by  the  electric  cun-ent  may  be  accom-
panied by  much  more  complex  results.  Thus,  when  the  metal  of  the  salt  is  capable  of  a
higher  degree  of  oxidation,  such  a  higher  oxide  may  be  formed  at  the  jwsitive  ix)le  by
the  oxygen  which  is  evolved  there.  This  takes  place,  for  instance,  in  the  decomposition
of  salts  of  silver  and  manganese  by  the  galvanic  current,  peroxides  of  these  metals
being  formed. Thus  in  the  electrolysis  of  a  solution  of  KCl,  KCIO3  is  formed,  and  of

192  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

contain  no  oxygen)  may  be  expressed  by  representing  the  salt  as
composed  of  a  metal  M  and  a  haloid  X — that  is,  by  expressing  the  salt
by  MX.  In  common  table  salt  the  metal  is  sodium,  and  the  haloid  an
elementary  body,  chlonne.  In  sodium  sulphate,  Na^SOi,  sodium  is
again  the  metal,  but  the  complex  group,  SO^,  is  the  haloid.  In  sulphate
of  copper,  CuSO^,  the  metal  is  copper  and  the  haloid  the  same  as  in
the  preceding  salt.  Such  a  representation  of  salts  expresses  with  great
simplicity  the  capacity  of  every  salt  to  enter  into  mline  double  decompo-
gitiona  with  other  salts ;  consisting  in  the  mutual  replacement  of  the
metals  in  the  salts.  This  exchange  of  their  metals  is  the  funda-
mental property  of  salts.  In  the  case  of  two  salts  with  different  metals
and  haloids,  which  are  in  solution  or  fusion,  or  in  any  other  manner
brought  into  contact,  the  metals  of  these  salts  will  always  partially
or  wholly  exchange  places.  If  we  designate  one  salt  by  MX,  and  the
other  by  NY,  then  we  either  partially  or  wholly  obtain  from  them  new
salts,  MY  and  NX.  Thus  we  saw  in  the  Introduction,  that  on  mixing
solutions  of  table  salt,  NaCl,  and  silver  nitrate,  AgNOg,  a  white
insoluble  precipitate  of  silver  chloride,  AgCl,  is  formed  and  a  new  salt,
sodium  nitrate,  NaNOs,  is  obtained  in  solution.  If  the  metals  of  salt«
exchange  placets  in  reactions  of  double  decomposition,  it  is  clear  that
metals  themselves,  taken  in  a  separate  state,  are  able  to  act  on  salts,  as
zinc  evolves  hydrogen  from  acids,  and  as  iron  separates  copper  from
copper  sulphate.  When,  to  what  extent,  and  which  metals  displace
each  other,  and  how  the  metals  are  distributeil  between  the  haloids,
will  l)e  discussed  in  Chapter  X.,  where  we  shall  Ije  guided  by  those
reflections  and  deductions  which  Berthollet  introduced  into  the  science
at  the  beginning  of  this  century.

Accortling  to  the  above  observations,  an  acid  is  nothing  more  than
a  salt  of  hydrogen.  Water  itself  may  be  looked  on  as  a  salt  in  which
the  hydrogen  is  combined  with  either  oxygen  or  the  aqueous  radicle,
OH  ;  water  will  then  be  HOH,  and  alkalis  or  basic  hydrates,  MOH.
The  group  OH,  or  the  aqueous  radicle,  otherwise  calle<l  hy(ho.^>yl,  may
be  looked  on  as  a  haloid  like  the  chlorine  in  table  salt,  not  only  because
the  element  CI  and  the  group  OH  very  often  change  places,  and  com-
bine with  one  and  the  same  element,  but  also  because  free  chlorine  is
very  similar  in  many  properties  and  reactions  to  peroxide  of  hydrogen,
which  is  the  same  in  composition  as  the  aqueous  radicle,  as  we  shall
afterwards  see  in  Chapter  IV. Alkalis  and  basic  hydrates  are  also

Hulphuric  acid  (orrfsiKnuling  to  SO5)  persulphuric  oxrid,  corresiwiuling  to  S./);.  But  all
the  pluMiomenu  us  yet  known  may  be  expressed  by  the  above  hiw — that  the  current
d«comix>seH  salts  into  metals,  which  appear  at  the  negative  jx^le,  iuid  into  the  remaining
component  parts,  which  appear  at  the  positive  pole.

OXYGEN  AND  ITS SALINE COMBINATIONS  193

salts  consisting  of  a  metal  and  hydroxy  1 — for  instance,  caustic  soda,
NaOH  ;  this  is  therefore  termed  sodium  hydroxide.  According  to  this
view,  acid  salts  are  those  in  which  a  portion  only  of  the  hydrogen  is
replaced  by  a  metal,  and  a  portion  of  the  hydrogen  of  the  acid  remains.
Thus  sulphuric  acid  (H2SO4)  not  only  gives  the  normal  salt  Na2S04,
with  sodium,  but  also  an  acid  salt,  NaHS04.  A  basic  salt  is  one  in
which  the  metal  is  combined  not  only  with  the  haloids  of  acids,  but
also  with  the  aqueous  radicle  of  basic  hydrates — for  example,  bismuth
gives  not  only  a  normal  salt  of  nitric  acid,  Bi(N03)g,  but  also  b<asic
salts  like  Bi(OH)2(N03).

As  basic  and  acid  salts  of  the  oxygen  acids  contain  hydrogen  and
oxygen,  they  are  able  to  part  with  these  as  water  and  to  give  anhydro-
salts,  which  it  is  evident  will  be  compounds  of  normal  salts  with
anhydrides  of  the  acids  or  with  bases.  Thus  the  above-mentioned  acid
sodium  sulphate  corresponds  with  the  anhydro-salt,  Na2S207,  equal  to
2NaHS04,  less  HjO.  The  loss  of  water  is  here,  and  frequently  in
other  cases,  brought  about  by  heat  alone,  and  thei-efore  such  salts  are
frequently  termed  pyro-salts — for  instance,  the  preceding  is  sodium
pyrosulphate  (NajSjOy),  or  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  normal  salt
Na2S04  +  sulphuric  anhydride,  SO3.  Double  salts  are  those  which
contain  either  two  metals,  KA1(S04)2,  or  two  haloids.''"

*^  Tlie  above-enunciated  geueraliKation  of  the  conception  of  salts  as  coniiwunds  of
the  metals  (simple,  or  compound  like  ammonium,  NH,),  with  the  haloids  (shnple,  like
chlorine,  or  compound,  like  cyanogen,  CN,  or  the  radicle  of  snlphnric  acid,  SO.1),  capable
of  entering  into  double  saline  decomposition,  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  general
data  respecting  salts,  was  only  formed  little  by  little  after  a  succession  of  most  varied
propositions  as  to  the  chemical  structure  of  salts.

Salts  belong  to  the  class  of  substances  wliich  have  been  known  since  verj*  early  times,
and  have  long  been  investigated  in  many  directions.  At  first,  however,  no  distinction
was  made  between  stilts,  acids,  and  bases.  Glauber  prepared  many  artificial  salts  during
tlie  latter  lialf  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Up  to  that  time  the  majority  of  salts  were
obtain€»d  from  natural  sources,  and  that  salt  which  we  have  referred  to  several  times —
namely,  sodium  sulphate — was  named  Cllauber's  salt  after  this  chemist.  Rouelle  dis-
tinguished normal,  acid,  and  basic  salts,  and  showed  their  a<*ti()ii  on  vegetable  dyes,  still
he  confounded  many  salts  with  acids  (even  now  every  aciil  salt  ouj^ht  to  be  regarded  as
an  acid,  because  it  contains  hydrogen,  which  may  be  rephwed  by  niet-ils — that  is,  it  is
the  hydrogen  of  an  ivcid).  Baunn'  disputed  Rouelle's  opinion  concerning  the  sulxlivision
of  salts,  contending  that  normal  salts  only  are  true  salts,  and  that  basic  salts  are  simple
mixtures  of  normal  salts  with  bases  and  acid  salts  with  attids,  considering  that  washing
alone  could  remove  the  base  or  acid  from  them.  Rouelle,  in  the  middle  oi  the  last  cen-
tury, however,  rendered  a  great  service  to  the  study  of  salts  and  the  diflFusion  of  know-
ledge resi>ecting  this  class  of  com{)ounds  in  his  attractive  lectur«'s.  He,  like  the  majority
of  the  chemists  of  that  perio<i,  did  not  employ  the  balance  in  hi>  re«^?ftrche8,  but  satisfied
himself  with  purely  qualitative  data.  The  first  quantitative  reM'arcJjes  on  salts  were
<!arried  on  alnrnt  this  time  by  Wenzel,  who  was  the  director  of  the  Freiburg  mines,  in
Saxony.  Wenzel  studied  the  double  deconqwsition  of  salts,  and  oliserved  that  in  the
double  decomiK)sition  of  neutral  salts  a  neutral  salt  wais  always  obtained.  He  proved,
by  a  methoil  of  weighing,  that  this  is  due  to  the fact  that  the  saturati<ni  of  a  given

VOL.  I.  0

194  PRINCIPLES  OF  CUEMISTKV

Inasmuch  as  oxygen  compounds  predominate  in  nature,  it  should  be
expected  from  what  has  l>een  said  above,  that  salts,  rather  than  acids

quantity  of  a  base  requires  such  relative  quantities  of  different  acids  as  are  capable  of
saturating  every  other  base.  Having  taken  two  neutral  salts — for  example,  sodium  sul-
phate and  calcium  nitrate — let  us  mix  tlieir  solutions  together.  Double  decomposition
takes  place,  because  calcium  sulphate  is  formed,  which  is  almost  insoluble.  However
much  we  might  add  of  each  of  the  salts,  the  neutral  reaction  will  still  be  preserved,
consequently  the  neutral  character  of  the  salts  is  not  destroyed  by  the  interchange  of
metals ;  that  is  to  say,  that  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid  which  saturate<l  the  sodium  is
sufficient  for  the  saturation  of  the  calcium,  and  that  amount  of  nitric  acid  which  satu-
rated the  calcium  is  enough  to  siiturate  the  sodium  contained  in  combination  with
sulphuri<;  acid  in  sodium  sulphate.  Wenzel  was  even  convinced  that  matter  does  not
disappear  in  nature,  and  on  this  principle  he  corrects,  in  his  Doctrine  of  Affinity^  the
results  of  his  experiments  when  he  found  that  he  obtained  less  than  he  htvd  origi-
nally taken.  Although  Wenzel  deduced  tlie  law  of  the  double  decomposition  of  salts
quite  correctly,  he  did  not  determine  those  quantities  in  which  acids  and  bases  act  on
eavch  other.  This  was  carrie<l  out  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  by  Richter.  He  deter-
mined the  quantities  by  weight  of  the  bases  which  saturate  acids  and  of  the  acids  which
sivturate  bases,  and  obtained  comparatively  correct  results,  although  his  conclusions
were  not  correct,  for  he  states  that  the  quantity  of  a  base  saturating  a  given  acid  varies
in  arithmetical  progression,  and  the  rjuantity  of  an  acid  .saturating  a  given  base  in  geo-
metrical progression.  Richter  studied  the  deposition  of  metals  from  their  salts  by  other
metals,  and  observed  that  the  neutral  reaction  of  the  solution  is  not  destroyed  by  this
exchange.  He  also  determined  the  quantities  by  weight  of  the  metals  replacing  one
another  in  salts.  He  showed  that  copper  displaces  silver  from  its  salt,  and  that  zinc
displaces  copper  and  a  whole  series  of  other  metals.  Those  (quantities  of  metals  which
were  capable  of  replacing  one  another  were  termed  equivalents.

Richter's  teaching  found  no  followers,  because,  although  he  fully  believed  in  the  dis-
coveries of  Lavoisier,  yet  he  still  held  to  the  phlogistic  reasonings  which  rendered  his
expositions  very  obscure.  The  works  of  the  Swediali  savant  Berzelius  freed  the  facts
discovered  by  Wenzel  and  Richter  from  the  obscurity  of  fonner  concei)tions,  and  led  to
their  being  explained  in  accordance  with  Lavoisier's  views,  and  in  the  sense  of  the  law
of  multiple  proportions  which  had  already  been  discovered  by  Dalton.  On  applying  to
salts  those  conclusions  which  Berzelius  arrived  at  by  a  whole  series  of  researches  of
remarkable  accuracy,  we  arrive  at  the  following  law  of  eiiuivalents — -one part  by  weight
of  hydrogen  in  an  acid  is  replaced  by  the  cori'esjtonding  equivalent  weight  of  any
metal ;  and,  therefore,  when  metals  replace  etu*h  other  their  weights  are  in  the  same
ratio  as  their  ecjuivalents.  Thus,  for  instance,  one  part  by  weiglit  of  hydrogen  is  replaced
by  23  parts  of  sodium,  89  ])arts  of  ix)tassium,  1*2  parts  of  magnesium,  20  parts  of  cal-
cium, 28  parts  of  iron,  108  parts  of  silver,  83  parts  of  zinc,  iVro. ;  and,  therefore,  if  zinc
replaces  silver,  then  88  parts  of  zinc  will  take  the  place  of  10m  parts  of  silver,  or  88  jnirts
of  zinc  will  be  substituted  by  28  parts  of  so<1ium,  A'c.

The  doctrine  of  equivalents  would  be  precise  and  simple  did  every  metal  only  give
one  oxide  or  ont?  salt.  It  is  rendere<l  complicated  from  the  fact  that  many  metals  form
s"verail  oxides,  and  consequently  offer  different  equivalents  in  tlieir  different  degrees  of
oxidation.  For  example,  there  are  oxides  containing  iron  in  which  its  equivalent  is
28 — this  is  in  the  salts  formed  by  the  suboxide ;  and  there  is  anotlier  series  of  salts
in  which  the  equivalent  of  iron  ecjuals  18^^ — whieh  contain  less  iron,  and  eons«^<|uently
more  oxygen,  and  corresj^md  with  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation — ferric  oxide.  It  is  true
that  the  former  salts  are  easily  formed  by  the  direct  action  of  metallic  iron  on  aci<ls,  jind
tlie  latter  only  by  a  further  oxidation  of  the  compound  fonne<l  already  ;  but  this  is  not
always  so.  In  the  case  of  copj)er,  mercury,  and  tin,  under  different  circnnistanci's,  salts
are  fornnMl  which  correspond  with  different  degrees  of  oxidation  of  these  metals,  and
many  metals  have  two  equivalents  in  their  different  salts — that  is,  in  salts  corrcsiK)nding

OXYGEN  AND ITS  SALINE COMBINATIONS  195

or  bases,  would  occur  most  frequently  in  nature,  for  these  latter  would
always  tend  to  combine  forming  salts,  especially  through  the  medium

with  the  different  degrees  of  oxidation.  Tims  it  iu  impossible  to  endow  ever}*  metal  with
one  definite  equivalent  weight.  Hence  the  conception  of  equivalents,  while  playing
an  important  part  from  an  historical  iwint  of  view,  appears,  with  a  fuller  study  of
chemistry,  to  be  but  subordinate  to  a  higher  conception,  with  which  we  shall  afterwards
become  acquainted.

The  fate  of  the  theoretical  views  of  chemistry  was  for  a  long  time  bound  up  with
the  history  of  salts.  The  clearest  representation  of  this  subject  dates  back  to  Lavoisier,
and  was  systematically  developed  by  Berzelius.  This  representation  is  called  the  binary
theory.  All  comjpounds,  and  especially  salts,  are  represented  as  consisting  of  two  parts.
Salts  are  represented  as  comi>oundK  of  u  basic  oxide  (a  base)  and  an  acid  (that  is,  an
anhydride  of  an  acid,  then  termed  an  acid),  whilst  hydrates  are  represented  as  com-
pounds of  anhydrous  oxides  with  water.  Such  an  expression  was  employed  not  only  to
denote  the  most  usual  method  of  formation  of  these  substances  (where  it  would  be  quite
true),  but  also  to  express  that  internal  distribution  of  the  elements  by  which  it  was
proposed  to  explain  all  the  properties  of  these  substances.  Coi>per  sulphate  was  sup-
posed to  contain  two  most  intimate  conqKjnent  parts — copper  oxide  and  sulphuric  anhy-
dride. This  is  an  hyi)othesis.  It  arose  from  the  so-called  electro-cJiemical  hypothesisy
which  supposed  the  two  component  parts  to  be  held  in  mutual  union,  because  one  com-
ponent (the  anhydride  of  the  acid)  has  electro- negative  properties,  and  the  other  (the
base  in  salts)  electro-positive.  The  two  i>arts  are  attracted  together,  like  substances
having  opposite  electrical  charges.  But  as  the  decomi)o8ition  of  salts  in  a  state  of  fusion
by  an  electric  current  always  gives  a  metal,  that  rei)resentation  of  the  constitution
and  decomiK>sition  of  salts  called  the  hytJrogen  theory  of  airids  is  nearer  the  truth  than
that  which  considers  salts  as  made  up  of  a  base  and  an  anhydride  of  an  acid.  But  the
hydrogen  theory  of  acids  is  also  a  binary  hypothesis,  and  does  not  contra<lict  the
electro-chemical  hypothesis,  but  is  rather  a  modification  of  it.  The  binary  theory  dates
from  Rouelle  and  Lavoisier,  the  electro-chenn'cal  aspect  was  zealously  developed  by
Berzelius,  and  the  hydrogen  theory  of  aci<ls  is  due  to  Davy  and  Liebig.

These  hypothetical  views  simplified  and  generalised  the  study  of  a  complicated
subject,  and  served  to  support  further  arguments,  but  when  salts  were  in  question  it
wao  equally  convenient  to  follow  one  or  the  other  of  these  hyi)otheses.  But  these
theories  were  brought  to  bear  on  all  other  substances,  on  all  conqwund  substances.
Those  holding  the  binary  and  electro-chemical  hypotheses  searched  for  two  anti-i)olar
component  parts,  and  endeavoured  to  express  the  process  of  chemical  reactions  by  electro-
chemical and  similar  differences.  If  zinc  replaces  hydrogen,  they  concluded  tliat  it  is
more  electro-positive  than  hydrogen,  whilst  they  forgot  that  hydrogen  may,  under  differtuit
circumstances,  displace  zinc — for  instance,  at  a  red  heat.  Chlorine  and  oxygen  were  con-
sidered as  being  of  opixjsite  polarity  to  hydrogen  because  they  easily  combine  witli  it,
nevertheless  both  are  cai)able  of  replacing  hydrogen,  and,  what  is  very  character-
istic, in  the  replacement  of  hydrogen  liy  chlorine  in  carbon  compomids  not  only  does  the
chemical  character  often  remain  unaltered,  but  even  the  external  form  may  remain
unclianged,  as  Ltiurent  and  Dunnis  demonstrate*!.  These  considerations  undermine  the
binary,  and  more  esiwcially  the  electro-chemical  theory.  An  explanation  of  known
reactions  then  began  to  be  sought  f<»r  n<»t  in  the  difference  of  the  polarity  of  the  different
substances,  but  in  the  joint  infiuences  of  all  tlie  elements  on  the  projierties  of  the  com-
pound formed. This  is  the  reverse  of  the  preceding  hyi)otliesis.

This*  reversal  was  not,  however,  limited  to  the  destruction  of  the  tottering  foundations
of  the  preceding  theory;  it  pro[K»sed  a  new  doctrine,  and  laid  the  foundation  for  the
modem  course  of  our  science.  This  doctrine  nuiy  be  termed  the  unitary  theory — that  is,
it  strictly  jicknowledges  the  joint  influences  of  the  elements  in  a  comimund  substance,
denies  tlm  existence  of  s«'[»arate  and  contrary  components  in  them,  regirds  copper
bulphate,  for  instance,  as  a  strictly  definite  compound  of  copi>er,  sulphur,  and  oxygen  ;

oii

196  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

of  the  all-pervading  water.  And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  salts  are  found
everywhere  in  nature.  They  occur  in  animals  and  plants,  although  in  but
small  quantity,  because,  as  forming  the  last  stage  of  chemical  reaction,
they  are  capable  of  only  a  few  chemical  transformations.  And  organisms
are  bodies  in  which  a  series  of  uninterrupted,  varied,  and  active
chemical  transformations  proceed,  whilst  salts,  which  only  enter  into
double  decompositions  between  each  other,  are  little  prone  to  such
changes.  But  organisms  always  contain  salts.  Thus,  for  instance,
bones  contain  calcium  phosphate,  the  juice  of  grapes  potassium  tarti-ate
(cream  of  tartar),  certain  lichens  calcium  oxalate,  and  the  shells  of
mollusca  calcium  carbonate,  &c.  As  regards  water  and  soil,  portions
of  the  earth  in  which  the  chemical  processes  are  less  active,  they  are
full  of  salts.  Thus  the  waters  of  the  oceans,  and  all  others  (Chap.  I.),
abound  in  salts,  and  in  the  soil,  in  the  rocks  of  the  earth's  crust,  in  the
upheaved  lavas,  and  in  the  falling  meteorites  the  salts  of  silicic  acid,
and  especially  its  double  salts,  predominate.  Saline  substances  also
make  up  the  composition  of  those  limestones  which  often  form  mountain
chains  and  whole  thicknesses  of  the  earth's  strata,  these  consisting  of
calcium  carbonate,  CaCOa.

Thus  we  have  seen  oxygen  in  a  free  state  and  in  various  compounds
of  different  degrees  of  stability,  from  the  unstable  salts,  like  Berthol-
let's  salt  and  nitre,  to  the  most  stable  silicon  compounds,  such  as  exist
in  granite.  We  saw  an  entirely  similar  gradation  of  stability  in  the
compounds  of  water  and  of  hydrogen.  In  all  its  aspects  oxygen,  as  an
element,  or  single  substance,  remains  the  same  however  varied  its
chemical  states,  just  as  a  substance  may  appear  in  many  different
physical  states  of  aggregation.  But  our  notion  of  the  immense  variety
of  the  chemical  states  in  which  oxygen  can  occur  would  not  be  corn-
then  Keeks  for  compounds  which  are  analogous  in  their  properticH,  an<l,  placing  them  side
by  side,  endeavourn  to  express  the  influence  of  each  element  in  determining  the  united
properties  of  its  comiK)nnd.  In  the  majority  of  cases  it  arrives  at  conclusions  similar  to
those  which  are  obtained  by  the  above-mentioned  hypotheses,  but  in  certain  Ki)ecial  cases
the  conclusions  of  the  unitary  theory  are  in  entire  opposition  to  those  of  the  binary  theory
and  its  corollaries.  Cases  of  this  kind  are  most  often  met  with  in  the  consideration  of
comiMuuulsof  a  more  complex  nature  than  salts,  especially  organic  c()nii>ounds  containing
hydrogen.  But  it  is  not  in  this  change  from  jui  artificial  to  a  natural  system,  impor-
tant  as  it  is,  that  the  chief  service  and  strength  of  the  unitarj-  doctrine  lies.  By  a  simple
review  of  the  vast  store  of  data  regarding  the  reactions  of  typical  substances,  it  succeeded
from  its  first  apjiearance  in  esUiblishing  a  new  luid  inii>ortant  law,  it  introiluced  a  new
conception  into  science — namely,  the  conception  of  molecules,  with  which  we  shall  soon
become  acquainted.  The  deduction  of  the  law  and  of  the  conception  of  molecules  has
been  verifie<l  by  facts  in  a  number  of  cases,  and  was  the  cause  of  the  majority  of  chemists
of  our  times  deserting  the  binarj-  theory  and  accepting  the  unitar\-  theory,  which  forms
the  basis  of  the  present  work.  Laurent  awl  (rerhordt  must  be  considered  as  the  founders
of  this  doi-'trine.

OXYGEN  AND  ITS  SALINE  COMBINATIONS  197

pletely  understood  if  we  did  not  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  it  in
the  form  in  which  it  occurs  in  ozone  and  peroxide  of  hydrogen.  In  these
it  is  most  active,  its  energy  seems  to  have  increased.  They  illusti*ate
fresh  aspects  of  chemical  correlations,  and  the  variety  of  the  forms  in
which  matter  can  appear  stand  out  clearly.  We  will  therefore  consider
these  two  subst-ances  somewhat  in  detail.

198  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

CHAPTER  IV

OZONE AND HYDROGEN PEROXIDE DALTON's LAW

Van  Marum,  during  the  last  century,  observed  that  oxygen  in  a  glass
tube,  when  subjected  to  the  action  of  a  series  of  electric  sparks,  acquired
a  peculiar  smell,  and  the  property  of  combining  with  mercury  at  the
ordinary  temperature.  This  was  afterwards  confirmed  by  a  number  of
fresh  experiments.  Even  in  the  simple  revolution  of  an  electrical
machine,  when  electricity  diffuses  into  the  air  or  passes  through  it,  the
peculiar  and  characteristic  smell  of  ozone,  proceeding  from  the  action
of  the  electricity  on  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere,  is  recognised.  In
1840  Prof.  Schonbein,  of  Basle,  turned  his  attention  to  this  odori-
ferous substance,  and  showed  that  it  is  also  formed,  with  the
oxygen  evolved  at  the  positive  pole,  in  the  decomposition  of  water
by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current ;  in  the  oxidation  of  phosphorus
in  damp  air,  and  also  in  the  oxidation  of  a  number  of  substances,
although  it  is  distinguished  for  its  instability  and  capacity  for  oxidis-
ing other  substances.  The  characteristic  smell  of  this  substance  gave
it  its  name,  from  the  Greek  ofw^  *I  emit  an  o<lour.'  Schonbein
pointed  out  that  ozo7ie  is  capable  of  oxidising  many  substances
on  which  oxygen  does  not  act  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  It
will  be  sufficient  to  point  out  for  instance  that  it  oxidises  silver,  mer-
cury, charcoal,  and  iron  with  great  energy  at  the  ordinary  temperature.
It  might  be  thought  that  ozone  was  some  new  compound  substance,  as
it  was  at  first  supposed  to  be  ;  but  cai-eful  ol>servations  made  in  this
direction  have  long  led  to  the  conclusion  that  ozone  is  nothing  but
oxygen  altered  in  its  properties.  This  is  most  strikingly  proved  by  the
complete  transformation  of  oxygen  containing  ozone  into  ordinary
oxygen  when  it  is  passed  through  a  tube  heated  to  250"^.  Further,  at
a  low  temperature  pure  oxygen  gives  ozone  when  electric  sparks  are
passed  through  it  (Marignac  and  De  la  Rive).  Hence  it  is  proved  both
by  synthesis  and  analysis  that  ozone  is  that  same  oxygen  w^ith  which  we
are  already  acquainted,  only  endow^ed  with  particular  properties  and  in
a  particular  state. However,  by  whatever  method  it  be  obtained,  the

OZONE  AND HYDROaEN  PEROXIDE  -1) ALTON'S  LAW 199

amount  of  it  contained  in  the  oxygen  is  inconsiderable,  generally  only  a
few  fractions  per  cent.,  rarely  2  per  ceiit.,  and  only  under  very  propiti-
ous circumstances  as  much  as  20  per  cent. The  reason  of  this  must  be
looked  for  first  in  the  fact  that  ozone  in  its  formation  from  oxygen
absorbs  heat. If  any  substance  be  burnt  in  a  calorimeter  at  the  expense
of  ozonised  oxygen,  then  more  heat  is  evolved  than  when  it  is  burnt  in
ordinary  oxygen,  and Berthelot  showed  that  this  difference  is  very
large — namely,  29,600  heat  units  correspond  with  every  forty-eight
parts  by  weight  of  ozone. This  signifies  that  the  transformation  of
forty-eight  parts  of  oxygen  into  ozone  is  accompanied  by  the  absorp-
tion of  this  quantity  of  heat,  and  that  the  reverse  process  evolves  this
cjuantity  of  heat. Therefore  the  passage  of  ozone  into  oxygen  should
take  place  easily  and  fully  (as  an  exothermal  reaction),  like  combustion  ;
and  this  is  prove<l  by  the  fact  that  at  250°  ozone  entirely  disappears,
forming  oxygen. Any  rise  of  temperature  may  thus  bring  about  the
breaking  up  of  ozone,  and  as  a  rise  of  temperature  takes  place  in  the
action  of  an  electrical  discharge,  there  are  in  an  electric  discharge  the
conditions  both  for  the  preparation  of  ozone  and  for  its  destruction.
Hence  it  is  clear  that  the  transformation  of  oxygen  into  ozone  as  a
reversible  reaction  has  a  limit  when  a  state  of  equilibrium  is  arrived  at
between  the  products  of  the  two  opposite  reactions,  that  the  phenomena
of  this  transformation  accord  with  the  'phenomena  of  dissociation,  and
that  a  fall  of  temperature  should  aid  the  formation  of  a  large  quantity
of  ozone.* Further,  it  is  evident,  from what  has  been  said,  that  the
best  way  of  preparing  ozone  is  not  by  electric  sparks,^  which  raise  the
temperature,  but  by  the  employment  of  a  continual  discharge  or  flow
of  electricity  —  that  is,  by  the  action  of  a  silent  dischanfe.^ For  this

•  This  conclusion,  deduced  by  iiie  as  far  back  aw  1H78  {Monitenr  Scieniijique)  by
conceiving  the  nioU'culoK  of  ozone  fsee  later)  as  more  conij»lex  than  those  of  oxyj^en,  ainl
ozone  as  containing  a  greater  (juaiitity  <>f  heat  than  oxygen,  has  been  proved  experi-
mentally by  the  researches  of  Mailfert  (IHHO),  who  showed  that  the  passage  of  u  silent
discharge  througli  a  litre  of  oxygen  at  0-  may  form  up  to  1-1  milligrams  of  ozone,  and  at
—  30°  up  to  GO  milligrams;  but  best  (»f  all  ijj  the  <leti'rmination«  of  Chapjmis  and  Haute-
feuille  (1K80),  who  found  that  at  a  temi)erature  of  25''  a  silent  discharge  converted  20
p.c.  of  oxygen  into  ozone,  whilst  at  20-  it  was  imjwssible  to  obtain  more  than  12  ]).c.,  and
at  100°  less  than  2  p.c.  of  ozone  was  f>btained.

*  A  series  of  electric  sparks  may  l>e  obtained  by  an  ordinary-  electrical  machine,
the  electrophorous  machines  of  Holtz  and  Tei>lofF,  iVc,  T^yden  jars,  RuhmkorfF  coils,  or
similar  means,  when  the  opposite  electricities  are  able  to  accumulate  at  the  terminals
of  conductors,  and  a  discharge  of  sut!ici«'nt  electricjd  intensity  passes  through  the  non-
conductors air  or  oxygen.

^  A  silent  discharge  is  such  a  combination  of  opjMisite  statical  (i>otential)  electricities
as  takes  place  ^generally  between  large  surfa<:es)  regularly,  without  sparks,  slowly,  and
quietly  las  in  the  disjwrsion  of  electricity  I.  The  disi-harge  is  only  luminous  in  the  dark  ;
there  is  no  observable  rise  of  trm|)erature,  and  therefore  a  larger  amount  of  ozone  is
formed. But,  nevertheless,  on  continuing  the  passtige  of  a  silent  discharge  through

)

rR!>'aPI,KS (If CHEMISTRY

reason  all  ozonumrs  (width  are  of  most  varied  constructiun),  or  Eomis  of  i
nppcvratus  for  the  pii?piiratii.in  of  ozone  from  oxygen  (or  air)  by  the  I
action  of  electricity,  now  usually  consist  of  sheets  of  metal  -for  in-
stance, tinfoil — or  a  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  mixed  with  i-hromlc  acid,
ikc.  separated  by  thin  glass  surfaces  placed  at  Ehort  distances  from  each
other,  and  between  which  the  oxygen  oi'  air  to  be  ozonised  is  introduced  ]
and  subjected  to  the  action  of  a  silent  discharge.'  Thus  in  Siemens'
apparatus  (tig.  37)  the  exterior  of  the  tube  «  and  the  interior  of  thej

I

Br

tube  b  c  are  coated  with  tinfoil  and  counect^l  with  the  poles  of  a  source  I
of  electricity  (with  the  terminals  of  a  Euhmkorffs  coil).  A  silent  dia-  J
charge  passes  through  the  thin  walls  of  the  glass  cylinders  a  and  &  r.J

onme  it  i»  deutroyed.  For  Ihe  ootiun  to  he  obsen^i^blv  n  Inrge  suHufi
CODWqnently  &  source  of  eleptcioity  lit  a  high  pntential.  For  thi>  r&
charge  it  best  pnidaced  by  u  Ruhiukorff  coil,  >.b  tlie  niosl  convonimt
H  ooHsiderttble  pol«iti»l  of  utaticMl  eleotricily  with  the  euiployiueiit  ol
leoble  onrreiit  of  a  Kulvanic  bftttecy.

'  V.  Babo'ii  apparalifi  vm  oae.  of  (he  finil  cronstraated  lor  ozonii>ii
at  *  aileul  diwbiugi^  (and  it  ih  hUU  aiie  of  the  best).  It  is  composed  ol  u  iiumbei  (tweot
and  morel  of  long,  Ihiu  uipiltnr;!'  gliwB  taben  clnaed  nl  oue  end.  A  plati
tending  along  thvir  wliole  len^b,  in  iiitrodoted  into  tbf  other  end  of  each
end  ic  then  fused  np  round  the  wire,  the  end  of  which  proUudei  outside  ttie  t
The  pTOtrnding  ends  of  the  wire*  uv  arruiged  alternately  in  two  sides  in  such  a,  m
that  on  one  nide  there  are  ten  rinsed  ends  and  ten  wires.  A  buuch  ol  anch  lubea  (toi^
ahould  make  a  bonoh  o(  not  ninrt<  than  1  cm.  diameter)  is  placed  in  a  glasx  (abe,  and
the  ends  of  the  nirea  are  connected  with  two  condncturs,  and  are  fused  to  the  ends  of  the
■nrrounding  (abe.  The  discharge  of  a  Rnhmkorfl  noil  is  pasaed  through  (hese  ends  ot
the  wires,  dnd  the  dry  air  «r  aiygen  lo  be  oaonised  is  passed  tlinmgh  tile  tnbe.  S-t
□IjEen  he  passed  tlirongki,  OEone  is  obtAined  in  large  quantities,  and
aitrogen,  whieh  are  partially  fonaed  wheu  air  is  ac(ed  on.  At  low  te
fonued  in  larxe  qnautities.  As  oione  acta  on  corks  and  india-rubber,  the  a^uaM
ihonld  be  made  entirely  ol  glass. With  ■  powerful  Bnhmkorff  coil  iind  tortj  tnbM  0

o  powerful  that  the  gas  whsu  iMssed  through  a  solution  ot  iodide  of  polM'  1
aium  not  unlf  aetii  the  iiidiue  tree,  but  even  oxidises  it  (o  pntassinni  iodate,  so  1'
fire  minuiea  the  gns^conducting  tnbe  is  choked  op  with  crystals  ot  the  insoluble  i

OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'8  LAW 201

over  all  their  surfaces,  and  consequently,  if  oxygen  be  passed  through
the  apparatus  by  the  tube  (/,  fused  into  the  side  of  a,  it  will  be  ozonised
in  the  annular  space  between  a  and  h  c.  The  ozonised  oxygen  escapes
by  the  tube  e,  and  may  be  introduced  into  any  other  apparatus.^

The  projyerties  of  ozone  obtained  by  such  a  method  **  distinguish  it
in  many  respects  from  oxygen.  Ozone  very  rapidly  decolorises  indigo^
litmus,  and  many  other  dyes  by  oxidising  them.  Silver  is  oxidised  by
it  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  whilst  oxygen  is  not  able  to  oxidise
silver  even  at  high  temperatures  ;  a  bright  silver  plate  rapidly  turns
black  (from  oxidation)  in  ozonised  oxygen.  It  is  rapidly  absorbed  by
mercury,  forming  oxide  ;  it  transforms  the  lower  oxides  into  higher —
for  instance,  sulphurous  anhydride  into  sulphuric,  nitrous  oxide  into
nitric,  arsenious  anhydride  (AS2O3)  into  arsenic  anhydride  (AsjOj)  kcJ
But  what  is  especially  charactenstic  in  ozone  is  the  decomposing  action

*  III  order  t<>  coimeot  the  ozoiiiser  with  any  other  apparatus  it  is  impossible  to  make
use  of  india-rubber,  mercury,  or  cements,  «Xre.,  becaut^e  they  are  tliemselves  acted  on  by,
and  act  on,  oztme.  All  i'onnections  nmst,  as  was  first  proposed  by  Brodie,be  liennetically
closed  by  sulphuric  acid,  which  is  not  acted  on  by  ozone.  Thus,  a  cork  is  passed  over
the  vertical  end  of  a  tube,  over  which  a  wide  tube  passes  so  that  the  end  of  the  first  tube
protrudes  alx)ve  the  cork  ;  mercurj*  is  first  poured  over  the  cork  (to  prevent  its  being
acted  on  by  the  wulphuric  ivcid),  and  then  sulphuric  acid  is  poured  over  the  mercur}'.
The  protnidinj?  end  of  the  first  tube  is  covered  by  the  lower  end  of  a  third  tube  immersed
in  the  sulpliuric  acid.

*'  Tlie  method  above  described  is  the  only  one  which  has  been  well  investigated.  The
tidmixture  of  nitrogen,  or  even  of  hydrogen,  and  especially  of  silicon  fluoride,  appears  to
aid  the  formation  and  preservation  of  ozone.  Amongst  other  methods  for  preparing
ozone  we  may  mention  the  following  : — 1.  In  the  action  of  oxygen  on  phosphorus  at  the
ordinary  temi)crature  a  portion  of  the  oxygen  is  converted  into  ozone.  At  the  ordinary
temperature  a  stick  of  phosphorus,  partially  immersed  in  water  and  partially  in  air  in  a
large  glass  vessel,  causes  the  air  to  acquire  the  odour  of  ozone.  It  must  further  be
remarked  that  if  the  air  be  left  for  long  in  contact  with  the  phosphorus,  or  without  the
presence  of  water,  the  ozone  formed  is  destroyed  by  the  phosphorus.  2.  By  the  action
of  sulphuric  acid  on  peroxide  of  barium.  If  the  latter  be  covere<l  with  strong  sulphuric
acid  (the  acid,  if  diluted  with  only  one-tenth  of  water,  does  not  give  ozone),  then  at  a  low
temj^rature  the  oxygen  evolved  contains  ozone,  and  in  much  greater  quantities  than
in  that  ozone  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  electric  sparks  or  phosphorus.  3.  Ozone  may
also  be  obtained  by  decomposing  strong  sulphuric  acid  by  potassium  nntnganate  h
pecially  with  the  addition  of  barium  peroxide.

^  Ozone  takes  up  the  hydrogen  from  hydrochloric  acid ;  chlorine  is  liberated,  and  can
dissolve  gold.  Iodine  is  directly  oxidised  by  ozone,  but  not  by  oxygen.  Ammonia,  NH3,
is  oxidised  by  ozone  into  ammonium  nitrite  (and  nitrate),  2NH5-h05  =  NH4N0.3  +  H.iO,
and  therefore  a  drop  of  ammonia,  on  falling  into  the  gas,  gives  a  thick  ^cloud  of
the  salts  formed.  Ozone  converts  lead  oxide  mUy  i>eroxide,  and  suboxide  of  thallium
(which  is  coloui'lcss)  into  oxide  (which  is  brown),  so  tliat  this  reaction  is  made  use  of  for
detecting  the  presence  of  ozone.  Leiul  sulphide,  PbS  (black),  is  converted  into  sul-
phate, PbSO|  (colourless),  by  ozone.  A  neutral  solution  of  mangjuiese  sulphate  gives  a
precipitate  of  manganese  iieroxide,  and  an  acid  solution  may  be  oxidised  into  peniian-
ganic  acid,  HMnO,.  With  respect  to  the  oxidising  acti(m  of  ozone  on  organic  sub-
stances, it  may  be  mentioned  that  with  ether,  CiHjyO,  ozone  gives  ethyl  peroxide,  which
is  cai>able  of  decomposing  with  explosion  (according  to  Berthelot),  and  is  decomposed  by
water  into  alcohol,  '2C,,HoO,  and  hydrogen  peroxide,  H.^O.^.

202  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTKY

it  exerts  oupotassium  iodide.  Oxygen  does  not  act  on  it,  but  ozone
passed  into  a  solution  of  potassium  iodide  liberate i  iodine,  whilst  the
potassium  is  obtained  as  caustic  potush,  which  remains  in  solution,
2KI  +  H20  +  0=2KHO  +  Ij.  As  the  presence  of  minute  traces  of  free
iodine  may  be  discovered  by  means  of  starch  paste,  with  which  it  forms
a  very  dark  blue- coloured  substance,  a  mixture  of  potassium  iodide  with
starch  paste  will  detect  the  presence  of  very  small  traces  of  ozone.'*
Ozone  is  destroyed  or  converted  into  ordinary  oxygen  not  only  by  heat,
but  also  by  long  keeping,  especially  in  the  presence  of  alkalis,  peroxide
of  manganese,  chlorine,  &c.

Hence  ozone,  although  it  has  the  same  coinposition  as  o.cygen^  differs
from  it  in  stability,  and  by  the  fact  that  it  oxidises  a  number  of  sub-
stances very  energetically  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  In  this  respect
ozone  resembles  the  oxygen  of  certain  unstable  compounds,  or  oxygen
at  the  moment  of  its  liberation.®  ^"

In  ordinary  oxygen  and  ozone  we  see  an  example  of  one  and  the
same  substance,  in  this  case  an  element,  appearing  in  two  states.  This
indicates  that  the  properties  of  a  substance,  and  even  of  an  element,
may  vary  without  its  composition  varying.  Very  many  such  cases
are  known.  Such  cases  of  a  chemical  transformation  which  determine
a  difference  in  the  properties  of  one  and  the  same  element  are  termed

*  Tliis  reaction  is  the  one  iiKually  made  use  of  for  detecting  the  presence  of  ozone.
In  the  majority  of  cases  paper  is  soaked  in  sohitions  of  potassium  iodide  and  starch-
Huch  ozonomvtricul  or  io<lised  starcli-paper  when  damp  turns  bhie  in  tlie  presence  of
ozone,  and  tlie  tint  obtained  varies  considerably,  according  to  the  length  of  time  it  is
exposed  and  to  the  amount  of  ozone  present.  The  amount  of  ozone  in  a  given  gas  may
even  to  a  certain  degree  be  judged  by  tlie  shade  of  colour  acquired  by  the  paper,  if  pre-
liminary tests  be  made.

Test-paper  for  ozone  is  prepared  in  the  following  manner : — One  gram  of  neutral
potassium  iodide  is  dissolved  in  100  grams  of  distilled  wat^r ;  10  grams  of  starch  are
then  shaken  up  in  the  solution,  and  the  mixture  is  boiled  until  the  starch  is  converted
into  a  jelly.  This  jelly  is  then  smeared  over  blotting-pai>er  and  left  to  dry.  It  must
always  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  colour  of  iodised  starch-pajwr  is  changed  not
only  by  the  action  of  ozone,  but  of  many  other  oxidisers ;  for  example,  by  the  oxides  of
nitrogen  (especially  NjO-)  and  hydrogen  peroxide.  Houzeau  pro]>osed  soaking  common
litmus-pap<'r  with  a  solution  (»f  potassium  iodide,  which  in  the  presence  of  iodine  would
turn  blue,  owing  to  the  fonnation  of  KHO.  In  order  to  determine  if  the  blue  colour  is
not  prwluced  by  an  alkali  (ammonia)  in  the  gas,  a  jxirtion  of  the  paper  is  not  soake<l  in
the  iKjtassium  iodide,  but  moistened  with  water;  this  jwrtion  will  then  also  turn  blue  if
ammonia  be  present.  A  reagent  for  distinguishing  ozone  from  hydrogen  peroxide  with
certainty  is  not  known,  and  therefore  these  substances  in  very  small  quantities  (for  in-
stance, in  the  atmosphere)  nniy  easily  be  confounded.  Until  recent  years  the  mistake
has  frequently  been  nnide  of  ascribing  the  alteration  of  iodised  starch-paper  in  the  air
to  the  presence  of  ozone;  at  the  present  time  thereis  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  most
often  due  to  the  presence  of  nitrous  acid  (Ilosva,  IHHD).

fi  M:.  Fluorine  (Chap.  XI.),  jicting  u}>on  water  at  the  ordinary-  temi>erature,  tukes  up
the  hydrogen,  and  evolves  the  oxygen  in  thefonn  of  ozone  (Moissan,  1H80),  and  therefore
the  rea<;tion  must  be  expressed  thus :—  SH^O  -»  8Fa  =  OHF  +  O.^.

OZONE AND HYDKOGEN PEROXIDE -DALTONS I^VW 203

cases  of  isomerism.  The  cause  of  isomerism  evidently  lies  deep  within
the  essential  conditions  of  a  substance,  and  its  investigation  has  already
led  to  a  number  of  results  of  unexpected  importance  and  of  immense
scientific  significance.  It  is  easy  to  understand  the  difference  between
substances  containing  different  elements  or  the  same  elements  in
different  proportions.  That  a  difference  should  exist  in  these  cases
necessarily  follows,  if,  as  our  knowledge  compels  us,  we  admit  that
there  is  a  radical  diffeience  in  the  simple  bodies  or  elements.  But
when  the  composition — i.e.  the  quality  and  quantity — of  the  elements
in  two  substances  is  the  same  and  yet  their  properties  are  different,
then  it  becomes  clear  that  the  conceptions  of  diverse  elements  and  of  the
varying  composition  of  compounds,  alone,  are  insufficient  for  the  expi-es-
sion  of  all  the  diversity  of  properties  of  matter  in  nature.  Something
else,  still  more  profound  and  internal  than  the  composition  of  sub-
stances, must,  judging  fi'om  isomerism,  deteimine  the  properties  and
transformation  of  substances.

On  what  are  the  isomerism  of  ozone  and  oxygen,  and  the  peculiari-
ties of  ozone,  dependent  ?  In  what,  besides  the  extra  store  of  energy,
which  is  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  ozone,  resides  the  cause  of  its
difference  from  oxygen  ?  These  questions  for  long  occupied  the  minds
of  investigators,  and  weie  the  motive  for  the  most  varied,  exact,  and
accurate  researches,  which  were  chiefly  directed  to  the  study  of  the
volumetric  relations  exhibited  by  ozone.  In  order  to  acquaint  the
reader  with  the  pi-evious  researches  of  this  kind,  I  cite  the  following
from  a  memoir  by  Sore t,  in  the  *  Transactions  of  the  French  Academy  of
Sciences '  for  1 S66  :•

*Our  present  knowledge  of  the  volumetric  relations  of  ozone  may  be
expressed  in  the  following  manner  :

'1.  *' Ordinary  oxygen  in  changing  into  ozone  under  the  action  of
electricity  shows  a  diminution  in  volume."  This  was  discovered  by
Andrews  and  Tait.

*  2.  '*In  acting  on  ozonised  oxygen  ^\it]l  potassium  iodide  and  other
substances  capable  of  being  oxidised,  we  destroy  the  ozone,  but  the
volume  of  the  gas  remains  unchanged."  For  the  researches  of  Andi-ews,
Soi-et,  V.  Babo,  and  others  showed  that  the  proportion  of  ozonised
oxygen  absoibed  by  the  potassium  iodide  is  ecjual  to  the  original  con-
traction of  volume  of  the  oxygen  that  is,  in  the  absorption  of  the  ozone
the  volume  of  the  gas  remains  unchanged.  From  this  it  miglit  l>e
imagined  that  ozone,  so  to  say,  does  not  occupy  any  space — is  indefi-
nitely dense.

*  3.  ''  By  the  action  of  heat  ozonised  oxygen  increases  in  volume,
and  is transformed into  ordinary  oxygen. This  increase  in  volume

204  PKlNCIPIiES  OF  CHEMISTRY

corresponds  with  the  quantity  of  ozonised  oxygen  which  is  given  up  to
the  potassium  iodide  in  its  decomposition  "  (the  same  observers).

•  4.  These  unquestionable  experimental  results  lead  to  the  conclusion
that  ozone  is  denser  than  oxygen,  and  that  in  its  oxidising  action  it
gives  off  that  portion  of  its  substance  to  which  is  due  its  extra  density
distinguishing  it  from  ordinary  oxygen.'

If  we  imagine  (says  Weltzien)  that  n  volumes  of  ozone  consist  of  71
volumes  of  oxygen  combined  with  m  volumes  of  the  same  substance,  and
that  ozone  in  oxidising  gives  up  m  volumes  of  oxygen  and  leaves  n
volumes  of  ordinary  oxygen  gas,  then  all  the  above  facts  can  be  ex-
plained ;  otherwise  it  must  be  supposed  that  ozone  is  infinitely  dense,
*Tn  order  to  determine  the  density  of  ozone  *  (we  again  cite  Soret)  *  re-
course cannot  be  had  to  the  direct  determination  of  the  weight  of  a  given
volume  of  the  gas,  because  ozone  cannot  be  obtained  in  a  pure  state. It  is
always  mixed  with  a  very  large  quantity  of  oxygen. It  was  necessary,
therefore,  to  have  recourse  to  such  substances  as  would  absorb  ozone
without  absorbing  oxygen  and  without  destroying  the  ozone. Then  the
density  might  be  deduced  from  the  decrease  of  volume  produced  in  the
gas  by  the  action  of  this  solvent  in  comparison  with  the  quantity  of
oxygen  given  up  to  potassium  iodide. Advantage  must  also  be  taken
of  the  determination  of  the  increase  of  volume  produced  by  the  action
of  heat  on  ozone,  if  the  volume  occupied  by  the  ozone  before  heating
be  known.' Soret  found  two  such  subsUmces,  turpentine and  oil  of
cinnamon. *  Ozone  disappears  in  the  presence  of  turpentine. This  is
accompanied  by  the  appeai-ance  of  a  dense  vapour,  which  fills  a  vessel
of  small  capacity  (0*14  litre)  to  such  an  extent  that  it  is  impenetrable
to  direct  solar-rays. On  leaving  the  vessel  at  rest,  it  is  observed  that
the  cloud  of  vapour  settles  ;  the  clearing  is  firet  remarked  at  the  upper
portion  of  the  vessel,  and  the  brilliant  colours  of  the  rainbow  ai*e  seen  on
the  edge  of  a  cloud  of  vapour.' Oil  of  cinnamon — that  is,  the  volatile  or
essential  oil  of  the  well-known  spice,  cinnamon— gives  under  similar
circumstances  the  same  kind  of  vapours,  but  they  are  much  less  volu-
minous. On  measuring  the  gaseous  volume  before  and  after  the  action
of  both  volatile  oils,  a  considerable  decrease  is  remarked. On  applying
all  the  necessary  corrections  (for  the  solubility  of  oxygen  in  the  oily
liquids  named  above,  for  the  tension  of  their  vapour,  for  the  change  of
pressure,  etc.)  and  making  a  series  of  comparative  determinations,  Soret
obtained  the  following  result  :  two  volumes  of  ozone  capable  of  being  dis-
solved, when  changed  to  ordinary  (by  heating  a  wire  to  a  red-heat  by  a
galvanic  current)  increase  by  one  volume. Hence  it  is  evident  that  in
the  formation  of  ozone  three  volumes  of  oxygen  give  two  volumes  of
ozone — that  is,  its  density  (i-ef erred  to  hydrogen) =24.

OZONE  AND HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'S  LAW 205

The  observations  and  determinations  of  Soret  showed  that  ozone
is  heavier  than  oxygen,  and  even  than  carbonic  anhydride  (because
ozonised  oxygen  passes  through  fine  orifices  more  slowly  than  oxygen
and  than  its  mixtures  with  carbonic  anhydride),  although  lighter  than
chlorine  (it  flows  more  rapidly  through  such  orifices  than  chlorine),  and
they  indicated  that  ozone  is  oiie  and  a  hcilf  times  denser  than  oxygen,
which  may  be  expressed  by  designating  a  molecule  of  oxygen  by  Oj
and  of  ozone  by  O3,  and  hence  ozone  OO2  is  comparable  with  compound
substances^  formed  by  oxygen,  as  for  instance  CO2,  SOj,  NO^,  etc.
This  explains  the  chief  differences  between  ozone  and  oxygen  and  the
cause  of  the  isomerism,  and  at  the  same  time  leads  one  to  expect  *®
that  ozone,  being  a  gas  which  is  denser  than  oxygen,  would  be  liquefied
much  more  easily.  This  was  actually  shown  to  be  the  case  in  1 880,  by
Chappuis  and  Hautefeuille  in  their  researches  on  the  physical  properties
of  ozone.  Its  boiling  point  under  a  pressure  of  760  mm.  is  alwut— 106°,
and  consequently  compressed  and  refrigerated  ozone  when  rapidly  ex-
panded forms  drops,  i.e.  is  liquefied. Liquid  and  compressed  ^'  ozone  is

*  Ozone  iH,  so  to  say,  an  oxide  of  oxygen,  junt  as  water  is  an  oxide  of  hydrogen.  Just
as  aqueous  vajwur  is  comiwsed  of  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  vohime  of  oxygen,
which  on  combining  condense  into  two  volumes  of  aqueous  vaiK)ur,  so  also  two  volumes
of  oxygen  are  combined  in  ozone  with  one  volume  of  oxygen  to  give  two  volumes  of
ozone.  In  the  action  of  ozone  on  different  substances  it  is  only  that  additional  ]X)rtion
of  its  molecule  by  which  it  differs  from  ordinary  oxygen  that  combines  with  other  bodies,
and  that  is  why,  under  these  circumstances,  the  volume  of  the  ozonised  oxygen  does  not
change.  Starting  with  two  volumes  of  ozone,  one-third  of  its  weight  is  parted  with,
and  two  volumes  of  oxygen  remain.

The  above  observations  of  Soret  on  the  capacity  of  turpentine  for  dissolving  ozone,
together  with  Schonbein's  reseairches  on  the  fomnition  of  ozone  in  the  oxidation  of  tur-
pentine and  of  similar  volatile  vegetable  oils  (entering  into  the  composition  of  perfumes),
also  explain  the  action  of  tliis  ethereal  oil  on  a  great  many  substances.  It  is  known  that
turpentine  oil,  when  mixed  with  numy  substances,  promotes  their  oxidation.  In  this
case  it  probably  not  only  itself  promotes  the  formation  of  ozone,  but  also  dissolves  ozone
from  the  atmosphere,  and  thus  a^?<iuires  the  property  of  oxidising  nuuiy  substances.  It
bleaches  linen  and  cork,  decolorises  indigo,  promotes  the  oxidation  and  hardening  of
lx)ile<1  linseed  oil,  itc.  These  proi^rties  of  turi)entine  oil  aire  made  use  of  in  practice.
Dirty  linen  and  many  stained  materials  are  easily  cleaned  by  turpentine,  not  only  because
it  dissolves  the  grease,  but  also  because  it  oxidises  it.  The  admixture  of  tuq)entine  with
drying  (boile<l)  oil,  oil-colours,  and  lacs  aids  their  rapid  drying  because  it  attrau-ts  ozone.
Various  oils  occurring  in  plants,  and  entering  into  the  comi>osition  of  i>erfumes  and
certain  scent  extracts,  also  act  as  oxidisers.  They  act  in  the  same  nuinneras  oil  of  tur-
pentine and  oil  of  cinnamon.  This  perhaps  explains  the  refreshing  influence  they  have
in  scents  and  other  similar  preparations,  and  alsf)  the  salubrity  of  the  air  of  pine  forests.
Water  upon  which  a  layer  of  turpentine  oil  has  been  poured  ticquires,  when  left  standing
in  the  light,  the  disinfecting  and  oxidising  pro|)erties  in  general  of  ozonisetl  turpentine
(is  this  due  to  the  formation  of  H->0.j  ?).

''^  The  densest,  most  complex,  and  heaviest  particles  of  matter  should,  und<'r  equal
conditions,  evidently  be  less  capable  of  pjissing  into  a  stjite  of  ga>^eou•«.  motion,  should
sooner  aittain  a  liipiid  stavte,  and  have  a  greater  cohesive  fon'e.

**  The  blue  colour  proper  to  ozone  may  be  seen  through  a  tube  one  metre  long,  filled
with  oxygen,  containing  10  p.c.  of  ozone.  The  density  of  liquid  (.zone  has  not,  so  far
as  I  am  aware,  been  determined.

206  PKIXCIPLES  or CHEMlfSTRY

blue.  In  dissolving  in  water  ozone  partly  passes  into  oxygen.  It
explodes  violently  when  suddenly  compressed  and  heated,  changing  into
ordinary  oxygen  and  evolving,  like  all  explosive  substances, '^  that  extra
heat  which  distinguishes  it  from  oxygen.

Thus,  judging  by  what  has  been  said  above,  ozone  should  l>e  formed
in  nature  not  only  in  the  many  processes  of  oxidation  which  go  on,  but
also  by  the  condensation  of  atmospheric  oxygen.  The  significance  of
ozone  in  natui-e  has  often  arrested  the  attention  of  observers.  There  is
a  series  of  ozoDometi'ical  observations  which  show  the  different  amounts
of  ozone  in  the  air  at  different  localities,  at  different  times  of  the  year,
and  under  diffei-ent  circumstances.  But  the  observations  made  in  this
direction  cannot  be  considered  as  sufficiently  exact,  because  the  methods
in  use  for  determining  ozone  were  not  quite  accurate.  It  is  however
indisputable  *•*  that  the  amount  of  ozone  in  the  atmosphere  is  subject  to
variation  ;  that  the  air  of  dwellings  contains  no  ozone  (it  disappears  in
oxidising  organic  matter)  ;  that  the  air  of  fields  and  forests  always  con-
tains ozone,  or  substances  (peroxide  of  hydrogen)  which  act  like  it  (on
iodised  starch  paper  tkc.)^^^^  ;  that  the  amount  of  ozone  increases  after
storms  ;  and  that  miasms,  <tc.,  are  destroyed  by  ozonising  the  atmo-
sphere. It  easily  oxidises  organic  substances,  and  miasms  are  produced
by  organic  substances  and  the  germs  of  organisms,  all  of  which  are  easily
changed  and  oxidised.  Indeed,  many  miasms— for  instance,  the  volatile
substance  of  decomposing  organisms — are  clearly  destroyed  or  changed
not  only  by  ozone,  but  also  by  many  other  powerfully  oxidising  substances,
such  as  chlorine  water,  potassium  permanganate,  and  the  like.**  All
that  is  now  known  respecting  the  presence  of  ozone  in  the  air  may  be

*-  All  explosive  bodies  ajid  mixtures  (jfunpowder,  detonating  gas,  Sec.)  evolve  heat  in
exploding — that  is,  the  reactions  which  aceonipany  explosions  are  exothermal.  In  this
inaiiner  ozone  in  decomposing  evolves  latent  heat,  although  generally  heat  is  absorbed
in  decomposition. This  shows  the  meaning  and  cause  of  explosion.

*5  In  Paris  it  has  been  found  that  the  further  from  the  centre  of  the  town  the  greater
the  amount  of  ozone  in  the  air.  The  reason  of  this  is  evident :  in  a  city  there  are  many
conditions  for  the  destruction  of  ozone.  This  in  why  we  distinguish  country  air  as  being
fresh.  In  spring  the  air  contains  more  ozone  than  in  autumn  ;  the  air  of  fields  more  than
the  air  of  towns.

ir.  bu  Tin.  (jufhtitui  of  the  presence  of  ozone  in  the  air  has  not  yet  been  fully  eluci-
date<l,a8  those  reacti(»ns  by  which  ozone  is  generally  detected  are  also  common  to  nitrous
acid  (and  its  annnonia  salt).  Ilosvay  de  Ilosva  (18«y),  in  order  to  exclude  the  influence
of  such  lM)dies,  iia^st-d  air  through  a  40  per  cent,  solution  of  caustic  soda,  and  then
through  a  '20  per  crnt,  ^^olution  of  sulphuric  acid  (these  solutions  <lo  not  destroy  ozone),
and  testeil  the  air  thus  [>urified  for  the  presence  of  ozone.  As  no  ozone  was  then
detecti'd  th»*  author  concludes  that  all  the  effects  which  were  formerly  a>.crib<'d  to  ozone
should  be  referred  to  nitrous  ivcid.  But  this  conclusion  requires  more  careful  verifica-
tion, sincf  th»'  researches  of  Prof.  Schonbein  on  the  presence  of  |>eroxidt^  of  hydrogen  in
the  utniosplu'n*.

'•  Tin-  oxi<lising  action  of  ozone  may  be  taken  advantage  of  for  technical  puri)Os«'s  ;
for  instanc<*,  for  destroying  colouring  matters. It  has  even  been  emph^yed  for  blea<-hing

OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALT0N*8  LAW 207

summed  up  in  the  following  words  :  A  small  quantity  of  an  oxidising
substance,  resembling  ozone  in  its  reactions,  has  undoubtedly  been
observed  and  determined  in  the  atmosphere,  especially  in  fresh  air,  for
instance  after  a  storm,  and  it  is  very  likely  that  this  substance  contains
a  mixture  of  such  oxidising  substances  as  ozone,  peroxide  of  hydrogen,
and  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen  (especially  nitrous  acid  and  its  ammonia
salt)  produced  from  the  elements  of  the  atmosphere  by  oxidation  and
by  the  action  of  electrical  discharges.

Thus  in  ozone  we  see  (1)  the  capacity  of  elements  (and  it  must  be
all  the  more  marked  in  compounds)  of  changing  in  properties  without
altering  in  composition  ;  this  is  termed  isomerism  ;  *'*  (2)  the  capacity
of  certain  elements  for  condensing  themselves  into  molecules  of  different
densities  ;  this  forms  a  special  case  of  isomerism  called  polymerism  ;
(3)  the  capacity  of  oxygen  for  appearing  in  a  still  moi'e  active  and
energetic  chemical  state  than  that  in  which  it  occurs  in  ordinary
gaseous  oxygen  ;  and  (4)  the  formation  of  unstable  equilibria,  or
chemical  states,  which  are  illustrated  both  by  the  ease  with  which
ozone  acts  as  an  oxidiser  and  by  its  capacity  for  decomposing  with
explosion.  **»

Hydrogen  peroxide, — Many  of  those  properties  which  we  have  seen
in  ozone  belong  also  to  a  peculiar  substance  containing  oxygen  and
hydrogen  and  called  hydrogen  peroxide  or  oxygenated  water.  This
substance  was  discovered  in  1818  by  Thcnai*d.  When  heated  it  is^
decomposed  into  watei-  and  oxygen,  evolving  as  much  oxygen  as  is
contained  in  the  water  remaining  after  the  decomposition.  That
portion  of  oxygen  by  which  hydrogen  peroxide  differs  from  water  be-
haves in  a  number  of  cases  just  like  the  active  oxygen  in  ozone,  which
distinguishes  it  from  ordinary  oxygen.  In  H^O.j,  and  in  O^,  one  atom
of  oxygen  acts  as  a  powerful  oxidiser,  and  on  separating  out  it
leaves  HjO  or  O.j,  which  do  not  act  so  energetically,  although  they
still  contain  oxygen.'"  Both  H^Oand  O-j  contain  the  oxygen  in  a  com-
pressed state,  so  to  speak,  and  when  freed  from  pressure  hy  the  forces
(internal)  of  the  elements  in  another  substance,  this  oxygen  is  easily
evolved,  and  therefore  acts  as  oxygen  does  at  the  niomentof  its  lil)eration.

tissues  and  for  tlu*  rapid  preparation  of  vinejjar,  tilthoU);li  these  methods  have  not  yet
received  wide  application.

**  Isomerism  in  elements  is  termed  allvtroitism.

'•■  A  number  «»f  substances  re->emble  ozone  in  one  or  other  of  these  resj^ects.  Thus
cyanogen,  C.jN.,>,  nitroj^en  cliloride,  X:c.,  decompose  with  an  explosion  and  evolution  of
beat.  Nitrous  anhydrid*-,  X_.Oj,  forms  a  blue  liquid  like  ozone,  and  in  a  nund>er  of  cases
oxidis(>s  like  oz(me.

'^  It  is  evident  tliat  tlu*re  is  a  want  of  words  here  for  distinjruishin>;  oxyvren,  O,  as  an
ultimate  element,  from  oxy«;»'n,  (.).,,  as  a  free  element.  The  latter  should  be  terme<i
oxygen  gas,  did  not  custom  and  the  length  of  the  expression  render  it  inconvenient.

208  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

Both  substances  in  decomposing,  with  the  separation  of  a  portion  of
their  oxygen,  evolve  heat,  whilst  decomposition  is  usually  accompanied
by  an  absorption  of  heat.

Hydrogen  peroxide  is  formed  under  many  circumstances  by  com-
bustion and  oxidation,  but  in  very  limited  quantities  ;  thus,  for  instance,
it  is  sufficient  to  shake  up  zinc  with  sulphuric  acid,  or  even  with  water,
to  observe  the  formation  of  a  cei-tain  quantity  of  hydrogen  peroxide  in
the  water. '^  From  this  cause,  probably,  a  series  of  diverse  oxidation
processes  are  accomplished  in  nature,  and  according  to  Prof.  Schone  of
Moscow,  hydrogen  peroxide  occurs  in  the  atmosphere,  although  in  vari-
able and  small  quantities,  and  probably  its  formation  is  connected  with
ozone,  with  which  it  has  much  in  common.  The  usual  mode  of  the
formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide,  and  the  method  by  which  it  may  be  in-
directly obtained,'^  is  by  the  double  decomposition  of  an  acid  and  the

'^  Schoiibein  states  that  the  formatiou  of  hydrogen  peroxide  is  to  be  remarked  in
every  oxidation  in  water  or  in  the  presence  of  aqueous  vapour.  According  to  Struve,
hydrogen  i)eroxide  is  contauied  in  snow  and  in  rain-water,  and  its  formation,  togetlier
with  ozone  and  ammonium  nitrate,  is  even  probable  in  tlie  processes  of  respiration  and
combustion.  A  solution  of  tin  in  mercury,  or  liquid  tin  amalgam,  when  shaken  up  in
w^ater  containing  sulphuric  acid,  produces  hydrogen  peroxide,  whilst  iron  under  the
same  circumstances  does  not  give  rise  to  its  formation.  The  presence  of  small  quantities
of  hydrogen  peroxide  in  these  and  similar  cases  is  recognised  by  many  reactions.
Amongst  them,  its  action  on  chromic  acid  in  the  presence  of  ether  is  very  characteristic.
Hydrogen  peroxide  converts  the  chromic  acid  into  a  higher  oxide,  Cr^O;,  which  is  of  a
dark-blue  colour  and  dissijlves  in  etlier.  This  ethereal  solution  is  to  a  certain  degree
stable,  and  therefore  the  presence  of  hydrogen  peroxide  may  be  recognised  by  mixing
the  liquid  to  be  tested  with  ether  and  adding  several  drops  of  a  solutitm  of  chromic  acid.
On  shaking  the  mixture  the  ether  dissolves  the  higher  oxide  of  chromium  which  is
fonned,  and -acquires  a  blue  colour.  The  formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide  in  the  combus-
tion and  oxidation  of  substances  containing  or  evolving  hydrogen  must  be  understood  in
the  light  of  the  conception,  to  be  considered  later,  of  molecules  ocoui)ying  equal  volumes
in  a  gaseous  state.  At  the  moment  of  its  evolution  a  molecule  H.>  combines  with  a  mole-
cule O.^,  and  gives  H2O2.  As  this  substance  is  unstable,  a  large  proportion  of  it  is
decom^wsed,  a  small  amount  only  remaining  unchanged.  If  it  is  (»btaine<l,  water  is  easily
formed  from  it ;  this  reaction  evolves  heat,  and  the  reverse  tu-tion  is  not  very  probable.
Direct  determinations  show  that  the  reaction  H.jOq  =  H^.O  +  0  evolves  22,000  heat  units.
From  this  it  will  be  understood  how  easy  is  the  decomposition  of  hydrogen  jieroxide,  as
well  as  the  fact  that  a  number  of  substances  which  are  not  directly  oxidised  by  oxygen
are  oxidised  by  hydrogen  jieroxide  and  by  ozone,  which  also  evolves  lieat  on  decomposi-
tion. Such  a  representation  of  the  origin  of  hydrogen  peroxide  lias  been  developed  by
me  since  1H70.  Recently  (1890)  Traube  has  pronounced  a  similar  opinion,  stating  that
Zn  under  the  action  of  water  and  air  gives,  besides  ZnH.^Oo,  also  H.jO...

'y  The  formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide  from  barium  peroxide  by  a  method  of  double
deconii>osition  is  an  instance  of  a  numl>er  of  indirect  methods  of  preparation.  A  sub-
stance \  does  not  combine  with  b,  but  a  b  is  obtained  from  a  c  in  its  action  on  B  D  (see
Introiluction)  when  c  i>  is  formed.  Water  does  not  combine  with  oxygen,  but  as  a  hydrate
of  acids  it  acts  on  the  compound  of  oxygen  with  barium  oxide,  because  this  oxide  gives  a
salt  with  an  acid  anhydride  ;  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  hydrogen  with  oxygen  does  not
directly  form  hydrogen  j^eroxide, but  when  combined  with  a  lialoid  (for  example,  chlorine),
under  the  action  of  barium  peroxide,  BaO.,,  it  leads  to  the  formation  of  a  salt  of  barium
and  HoOj- It  J«  to  be  remarked  that  the  passage  of  barium  oxide,  BaO,  into  the  i>eroxide.

OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— D ALTON'S  LAW 209

peroxides  of  certain  metals,  especially  those  of  potassium,  calcium,  and
barium,*®  We  saw  when  speaking  of  Oxygen  (Chap.  III.)  that  it  is  only
necessary  to  heat  the  anhydrous  oxide  of  barium  to  a  red  heat  in  a
current  of  air  or  oxygen  (or,  better  still,  to  heat  it  with  potassium
chlorate,  and  then  to  wash  away  the  potassium  chloride  formed)  to  ob-
tain peroxide  of  barium.^*  Barium  peroxide  gives  hydrogen  peroxide
by  the  action  of  acids  in  the  cold.'^*  The  process  of  decomposition  is
very  clear  in  this  case  ;  the  hydrogen  of  the  acid  replaces  the  barium
of  the  peroxide,  a  barium  salt  of  the  acid  being  formed,  while  the
hydrogen  peroxide  formed  in  the  reaction  !*emains  in  solution.  ^^

Ba02)  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  12,100  heat^units  per  10  parts  of  oxygen  by
weight  combined,  and  the  pasi»age  of  H.^>0  into  the  peroxide  H20<j  does  not  proceed
directly,  because  it  would  be  accompanied  by  the  absorption  of  22,000  units  of  heat  by
16  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen  combined.  Barium  peroxide,  in  acting  on  an  acid,  evidently
evolves  less  heat  than  the  oxide,  and  it  is  this  difference  of  heat  that  is  absorbed  in  the
hydrogen  peroxide.  Its  energy  is  obtained  from  that  evolved  in  the  formation  of  the
salt  of  barium.

^  Peroxides  of  lead  and  manganese,  and  other  analogous  peroxides  (see  Chax).  III.,
Note  9),  do  not  give  hydrogen  jieroxide  under  these  conditions,  but  yield  chlorine  with
hydrochloric  acid.

'^  The  impure  barium  peroxide  obtained  in  this  manner  may  be  easily  purified.  For
this  purpose  it  is  dissolved  in  a  dilute  solution  of  nitric  acid.  A  certain  quantity  of  an
insoluble  residue  always  remains,  from  which  the  solution  is  separated  by  filtration.
The  solution  will  contain  not  only  the  comixmnd  of  the  barium  peroxide,  but  also  a
compound  of  the  barium  oxide  itself,  a  certain  quantity  of  which  always  remains  uncom-
bined  with  oxygen.  The  acid  compounds  of  the  peroxide  and  oxide  of  barium  are  easily
distinguishable  by  their  stability.  The  peroxide  gives  an  unstable  compound,  and  the
oxide  a  stable  salt.  By  adding  an  aqueous  solution  of  barium  oxide  to  the  resultant
solution,  the  whole  of  the  peroxide  contained  in  the  solution  may  be  precix^itated  as  a
pure  aqueous  compound  (KouriloiT,  lb8i),  obtained  the  same  result  by  adding  an  excess
of  BaO.^).  The  first  portions  of  the  precipitate  will  consist  of  impurities — for  instance,
oxide  of  iron.  The  barium  peroxide  then  separates  out,  and  is  collected  on  a  filter
and  washed ;  it  fonns  a  substiuice  having  a  definite  composition,  Ba02,8H.20,  and  is  very
pure.  Pure  hydrogen  peroxide  should  always  be  prepared  from  such  purified  barium
peroxide.

^  In  the  cold,  strong  sulphuric  acid  with  barium  i)eroxide  gives  ozone ;  when  diluted
with  a  certain  amount  of  water  it  gives  oxygen  (see  Note  6),  and  hydrogen  iwroxide  is
only  obtained  by  the  action  of  very  weak  sulphuric  acid.  Hydrochloric,  hydrofluoric,
carbonic,  and  hydrosilicofluoric  acids,  and  others,  when  diluted  with  water  also  give
hydrogen  peroxide  with  barium  peroxide.  Professor  Schiine,  who  very  carefully  investi-
gated hydrogen  peroxide,  showed  that  it  is  formed  by  the  action  of  many  of  the  above-
mentioned  acids  on  barium  peroxide.  In  preparing  jieroxide  of  hydrogen  by  means  of
sulpliuric  acid,  the  solution  must  be  kept  cold.  A  solution  of  maximum  concentration
may  be  obtained  by  successive  treatments  with  sulphuric  acid  of  increasing  strength.
In  this  manner  a  solution  containing  2  to  3  grams  of  pure  peroxide  in  100  c.c.  of  water
may  be  obtained  (V.  Kouriloff  j.

'*  With  the  majority  of  acids,  that  salt  of  barium  which  is  formed  remains  in  solution ;
thus,  for  instance,  by  employing  hydrochloric  acid,  hydrogen  peroxide  and  barium  chloride
remain  in  solution.  Complicated  processes  would  be  required  to  obtain  pure  hydrogen
peroxide  from  such  a  solution.  It  is  much  more  convenient  to  take  advantage  of  the
action  of  carbonic  anhydride  on  the  pure  hydrate  of  barium  peroxide.  For  this  purpose
the  hydrate  is  stirred  up  in  water,  and  a  rapid  stream  of  earbomc  anh3rdride  is  passed

VOL.  I.  P

210  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  reaction  is  expressed  by  the  equation  BaOj  +  HaSO^rsH-^Oj
+  BaSO^.  It  is  best  to  take  a  weak  cold  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  and
to  almost  saturate  it  with  barium  peroxide,  so  that  a  small  excess  of  acid
remains  ;  insoluble  barium  sulphate  is  formed.  A  more  or  less  dilute
aqueous  solution  of  hydrogen  peroxide  is  obtained.  This  solution  may
be  concentrated  in  a  vacuum  over  sulphunc  acid.  In  this  way  the
water  may  even  be  entirely  evaporated  from  the  solution  of  the  hydro-
gen peroxide ;  only  in  this  case  it  is  necessary  to  work  at  a  low  tern-
perature,  and  not  to  keep  the  peroxide  for  long  in  the  rarefied  atmo-
sphere, as  otherwise  it  decomposes.*'  "■  A  solution  of  peroxide  of
hydrogen  (mixed  with  the  solution  of  a  salt  of  sodium  NaX)  is  used  for
bleaching  (especially  silk  and  wool)  on  a  large  scale,  and  is  now  usually
prepared  from  peroxide  of  sodium  NajOg  by  the  action  of  acids.  NagOj
+  2HX  =  2NaX  +  ll,fi^^\

When  pure,  hydrogen  peroxide  is  a  colourless  liquid,  without  smell,
and  having  a  very  unpleasant  t^ste— such  as  belongs  to  the  salts  of
many  metals — the  so-called  *  metallic  '  taste.  Water  stored  in  zinc  vessels
has  this  taste,  which  is  probably  due  to  its  containing  hydrogen  per-
oxide. The  tension  of  the  vapour  of  hydrogen  peroxide  is  less  than  that
of  aqueous  vapour  ;  this  enables  its  solutions  to  be  concentrated  in  a
vacuum.  The  specific  gravity  of  anhydrous  hydrogen  peroxide  is  1*455.
Hydrogen  peroxide  decomposes,  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen,  when
heated  even  to  20°.  But  the  more  dilute  its  aqueous  solution  the  more
stable  it  is.  Very  weak  solutions  may  be  distilled  without  decomposing
the  hydrogen  peroxide.  It  decolorises  solutions  of  litmus  and  turmeric,
and  acts  in  a  similar  manner  on  many  colouring  matters  of  organic
origin  (for  which  i-eason  it  is  employed  for  bleaching  tissues).*^^  *»*"*

Many  anhstaiices  d^ompose  hydrogen  peroxide,  forming  water  and
oxygen,  without  apparently  suffering  any  change. In  this  case  sub-

through  tlie  water.  Barium  carbonate,  insoluble  in  water,  is  formed,  and  the  hydrogen
peroxide  remains  in  solution,  so  that  it  may  be  separated  from  tlie  carbonate  l)y  filtering
only.  On  a  large  scale  hydrofluosilipic  acid  is  employed,  its  barium  salt  being  also
insoluble  in  water.

23  bu  Hydrogen  i>eroxide  may  be  extracted  from  very  dilute  Kt)lutions  by  means  of
ether,  which  dissolves  it,  and  when  mixed  with  it  the  hydrogen  i)eroxidc  may  even  be
distilled.  A  solution  of  hydrogen  peroxide  in  water  may  be  strengtheneil  by  ccwling  it  to
a  low  temperature,  when  the  water  crystallises  out — that  is,  is  converted  into  ice — whilst
the  hydrogen  peroxide  remains  in  solution,  as  it  only  freezes  at  very  low  temperatures.
It  must  be  observed  that  hydrogen  peroxide,  in  a  strong  solution  in  a  pure  stat<>,  is
exceedingly  unstable  even  at  the  ordinary  temi)erature,  and  therefore  it  nnist  be  presei  ved
in  vessels  always  kept  cold,  as  otherwise  it  evolves  oxygen  and  forms  water.

'*  Peroxide  of  sodium  (Chap.  XII.,  Note  49)  is  prepare<l  by  burning  sixlium  in  drj-  air.

M  »»N  Peroxide  of  hydrogen  should  apparently  find  an  industrial  application  in  the  arts,
for  instance,  (1)  as  a  bleaching  agent,  it  having  the  imiKirtant  advantage  over  chloride
of  lime,  SO.^,  <fec.,  of  not  acting  upon  the  material  under  treatment. It  may  be  use<I  for

OZONE AM) HYDKOGEN PEROXIDE -D ALTON  S LAW 211

stances  in  a  state  of  fine  division  show  a  much  quicker  action  than  com-
pact masses,  from  which  it  is  evident  that  the  action  is  here  based  on
contact  (see  Introduction).  It  is  sufficient  to  bring  hydrogen  peroxide
into  contact  with  charcoal,  gold,  the  peroxide  of  manganese  or  lead,  the
alkalis,  metallic  silver,  and  platinum,  to  bring  about  the  above  decom-
position.*'* Besides  which,  hydrogen  peroxide  forms  water  and  parts
with  its  oxygen  with  great  ease  to  a  number  of  substances  which  are
capable  of  being  oxidised  or  of  combining  with  oxygen,  and  in  this  re-
spect is  very  like  ozone  and  other  power/id  oxklisers.^^  To  the  class  of
contact  phenomena,  which  are  so  char.icteristic  of  hydrogen  peroxide  as  a
substance  which  is  unstable  and  easily  decomposable  with  the  evolution
of  heat,  must  1^  referred  the  following  -  that  in  the  presence  of  many
substances  containing  oxygen  it  evolves,  not  only  its  own  oxygen,  but
also  that  of  the  substances  which  are  brought  into  contact  with  it — that

bleacliing  feathers,  hair,  silk,  wool,  wockI,  il'c,  it  also  removes  stains  of  all  kinds,  gueh  as
wine,  ink,  and  fruit  stains;  (2)  it  destroys  bacteria  like  ozone  without  having  any  injurious
effect  upon  the  human  hfMly.  It  can  also  he  used  for  washing  all  kinds  of  w<muds,  for
purifying  the  air  in  the  sick  r<K)ni,  itc,  and  (3)  as  a  preserving  agent  for  jwttetl  meats,  &c.

^  As  the  result  of  careful  research,  certain  of  the  catalytic  or  contact  phenomena
have  been  subjected  to  exact  explanation,  whi«'h  shows  the  participation  of  a  substance
present  in  the  process  of  a  reaction,  whilst,  however,  it  does  not  alter  the  series  of  changes
proceeding  from  mechanical  actions  only.  Professor  Schijne,  of  the  Petroffsky  Actulemy,
has  already  explained  a  number  of  reactions  of  hydrogen  peroxide  which  previously  were
not  understood.  Thus,  for  instance,  he  showed  that  with  hydrogen  iK*roxide,  alkalis  give
peroxides  of  the  alkaline  metals,  which  combine  with  the  remaining  hydrogen  jwroxide,
forming  unstable  compounds  which  are  easily  decomposed,  and  therefore  alkalis  evince  a
deconnwsing  (catalytic)  influence  on  solutions  of  hydrogen  peroxide.  Ouly  acid  solutions
of  hydrogen  i>eroxide,  and  then  only  dilute  ones,  can  be  preserved  well.

'•'  Hydrogen  peroxide^  as  a  substance  containing  much  oxygen  inamely,  IC  parts  to
one  i>»irt  by  weight  of  hydrogen),  exhibits  many  oxidising  reactions.  Thus,  it  oxidises
arsenic,  converts  lime  into  calcium  peroxide,  the  oxides  of  zinc  and  copjier  into  peroxides;
it  parts  with  its  oxygen  to  many  sulphides,  converting  them  into  sulphates,  itc.  So,  for
example,  it  converts  black  lead  sulphide,  PbS,  into  white  leaxl  sulphate,  PbSO|,  copper
sulphide  into  copj)er  sulphate,  and  so  on.  The  restoration  of  old  oil  paintings  by  hydrogen
peroxide  is  based  on  this  action.  Oil  colours  are  usually  admixed  with  wliite  letul,  and  in
many  cases  the  colour  of  oil-jkiints  becomes  darker  in  process  of  time.'  This  is  partly
due  to  the  sulphuretted  hydrogen  contained  in  the  air,  which  acts  on  white  leatl,
fonning  lead  sulphide,  which  is  black.  The  intermixture  of  the  bhvck  colour  darkens  the
rest.  In  cleaning  a  picture  with  a  solution  of  hydrogen  peroxide, the  black  leal  sulphide
is  converted  into  white  sulphate,  and  the  colours  brighten  owing  to  the  disupjiearance
of  the  black  substance  which  previously  darkene<l  them.  Hydrogen  i>eroxide  oxidises
with  particular  energy-  substances  containing  hydrogen  and  capable  of  easily  parting
with  it  to  oxidising  substances.  Thus  it  decomposes  hydrio<lic  acid,  setting  the  iodine
free  and  converting  the  hydrogen  it  contains  into  water;  it  als<i  decom|»oses  sulphuretted
hydrogen  in  exactly  the  same  manner,  setting  the  sulphur  free.  Starch  paste  with
IMjtassiuni  iodide  is  not,  however,  tlirectly  coloured  by  peroxide  of  hydrogen  in  the  entire
absence  of  free  acids ;  but  the  addition  of  a  small  quantity  of  iron  sulphate  (green  vitriol)
or  of  lead  acetate  to  the  mixture  is  enough  to  entirely  blacken  the  paste.  This  is  a  very
Sensitive  reagent  (test)  for  jHToxide  of  hydrogen,  like  the  test  with  chromic  acid  and
ether  {see  Note  8).

1>2

212  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

is,  it  acts  in  a  reducing  manner.  It  behaves  thus  with  ozone,  the
oxides  of  silver,  mercuiy,  gold  and  platinum,  and  lead  peroxide.  The
oxygen  in  these  substances  is  not  stable,  and  therefore  the  feeble
influence  of  contact  is  enough  to  destroy  its  position.  Hydrogen  per-
oxide, especially  in  a  concentrated  form,  in  contact  with  these  substances,
evolves  an  immense  quantity  of  oxygen,  so  that  an  explosion  takes
place  and  an  exceedingly  powerful  evolution  of  heat  is  observed  if
hydrogen  peroxide  in  a  concentrated  form  be  made  to  drop  upon
these  substances  in  dry  powder.  Slow  decomposition  also  proceeds  in
dilute  solutions.*'^

Just  as  a  whole  series  of  metallic  compounds,  and  especially  the
oxides  and  their  hydrates,  correspond  with  water,  so  also  there  are
many  substances  analogous  to  hydrogen  peroxide.  Thus,  for  instance,
calcium  peroxide  is  related  to  hydrogen  peroxide  in  exactly  the  same
way  as  calcium  oxide  or  lime  is  related  to  water.  In  both  cases  the
hydrogen  is  replaced  by  a  metal — namely,  by  calcium.^'  ^*»  But  it  is
most  important  to  remark  that  the  nearest  approach  to  the  properties
of  hydrogen  peroxide  is  afforded  by  a  non -metallic  element,  chlorine  ;

^  To  explain  the  phenomenon,  an  hypothesis  has  been  put  forward  by  Brodie,  Clausius,
and  Schlinbein  whicli  supposes  ordinary  oxygen  to  be  an  electrically  neutral  substance,
composed,  ho  to  speak,  of  two  electrically  opposite  kinds  of  oxygen — positive  and  nega-
tive. It  is  supposed  that  hydrogen  peroxide  contains  one  kind  of  such  polar  oxygen,
whilst  in  the  oxides  of  the  above-named  metals  the  oxygen  is  of  opposite  ^lolarity.  It  in
supposed  that  in  the  oxides  of  the  metals  the  oxygen  is  electro-negative,  and  in  hydrogen
peroxide  electro-iwsitive,  and  that  on  the  mutual  contact  of  these  substances  ordinary
neutral  oxygen  is  evolved  as  a  consequence  of  the  mutual  attraction  of  the  oxygens  of
opI)Osite  polarity.  Bro<lie  admits  the  polarity  of  oxygen  in  combination,  but  not  in  an
uncombined  state,  whilst  SchJinbein  supposes  uncombined  oxygen  to  be  [wlar  also,  con-
Hidering  ozone  as  electro-negative  oxygen.  The  supposition  that  the  oxygen  of  ozone  is
different  from  that  of  hydrogen  i)eroxide  is  contradicted  by  the  fact  that  in  acting  on  barium
peroxide  strong  sulphuric  ticid  forms  ozone,  and  dilute  acid  forms  hydrogen  i>eroxide.

*'•'*•  It  should  be  mentioned  that  Schiloff  (1898)  on  taking  a  8  per  cent,  solution  of
H.^O.2,  adding  soda  to  it,  and  then  extracting  the  peroxide  of  hydrogen  from  the  mixture
by  shaking  it  with  ether,  obtained  a  CO  per  cent,  solution  of  HjO,.,  which,  although
perfectly  free  from  other  acids,  gave  a  distinctly  acid  reaction  with  litmus.  And  here
attention  should  first  of  all  be  turned  to  the  fact  that  the  i>eroxides  of  the  metals  eorrc-
s{)ond  to  H.jO.j,  like  salts  to  an  acid,  for  instance,  Na-^Oo  and  BaOj,  &c.  Furthermore,  it
must  be  remembered  that  O  is  an  analogue  of  S  (Chapters  XV.  and  XX.),  and  sulphur
gives  H.^S,  H.^SO-,  and  H.^,S04.  And  sulphurous  acid,  H._.SO-,  is  unstable  as  a  hydrate»
and  giv«»s  water  and  tht*  anhydride  SO.^-  If  the  sulphur  be  repliu*ed  by  oxygen,  then
instead  of  H  >S(.)3  and  SOj,  we  have  HoOOj  and  00,..  The  latter  is  ozone,  while  the  salt
K.jO^  (peroxide  of  ix»tassium)  corresiwnds  to  the  hydrate  HjO^  as  to  an  acid.  And
between  H  »0  and  H..O4  there  may  exist  intermediate  acid  comi>oundK,  the  first  of  which
would  be  H.jO,.,  in  which,  from  analogy  to  the  sulphur  compounds,  one  would  expect  acid
properties.  JJesides  which  we  may  mention  that  for  sulphur,  besides  H.jS  (which  is  a
feeble  acid),  H..S..,  H.jSj,  H.^S^  are  known.  Tims  in  nniny  resi>ects  HoOj  offers  points  of
res*»mblancj»  to  acid  comixninds,  and  as  regards  its  qualitative  (reactive)  analogies,  it  not
only  resembl  is  Na/X.,  BaO^i  iVc,  but  also  persulphuric  acid  HSO4  (to  which  the  an-
hydride SjOj  correH[N)nds)  and  Cu.jO;,  <fcc.,  which  will  be  subsequently  described.

OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— D ALTON'S  J.AW 213

its  action  on  colouring  matters,  its  capacity  for  oxidising,  and  for
evolving  oxygen  from  many  oxides,  is  analogous  to  that  exhibited  by
hydrogen  peroxide.  Even  the  very  formation  of  chlorine  is  closely
analogous  to  the  formation  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen ;  chlorine  is
obtained  from  manganese  peroxide,  MnOj,  and  hydrochloric  acid,  HCl,
and  hydrogen  peroxide  from  barium  peroxide,  BaOj,  and  the  same
acid.  The  result  in  one  case  is  essentially  water,  chlorine,  and
manganese  chloride  ;  and  in  the  other  case  barium  chloride  and  hydro-
gen peroxide  are  produced.  Hence  water -f  chlorine  corresponds  with
hydrogen  peroxide,  and  the  action  of  chlorine  in  the  presence  of  water
is  analogous  to  the  action  of  hydrogen  peroxide.  This  analogy  between
chlorine  and  hydrogen  peroxide  is  expressed  in  the  conception  of  an
aqueous  radicle,  which  (Chapter  III.)  has  been  already  mentioned.
Thi^  aq%ieou8  radicle  (or  hydroxy!)  is  that  which  is  left  from  water  if
it  be  imagined  as  deprived  of  half  of  its  hydrogen.  According  to  this
method  of  expression,  caustic  soda  will  be  a  compound  of  sodium  with
the  aqueous  radicle,  because  it  is  formed  from  water  with  the  evolution
of  half  the  hydrogen.  This  is  expressed  by  the  following  formula  :
water,  H.^O,  caustic  soda,  NaHO,  just  as  hydrochloric  acid  is  HCl  and
sodium  chloride  NaCl.  Hence  the  aqueous  radicle  HO  is  a  compound
radicle,  just  as  chlorine,  CI,  is  a  simple  radicle.  They  both  give  hydro-
gen compounds,  HHO,  water,  and  HCl,  hydrochloric  acid  ;  sodium
compounds,  NaHO  and  NaCl,  and  a  whole  series  of  analogous  com-
pounds. Free  chlorine  in  this  sense  will  be  CI  CI,  and  hydrogen
peroxide  HO  HO,  which  indeed  expresses  its  composition,  because  it
contains  twice  as  much  oxygen  as  water  does.^**

Thus  in  ozone  and  hydrogen  peroxide  we  see  examples  of  very
unstable,  easily  decomposable  (by  time,  spontaneously,  and  on  contact)
substances,  full  of  the  energy  necessary  for  change,^**  ^^»  capable  of  being
easily  reconstituted  (in  this  case  decomposing  with  the  evolution  of
heat)  ;  they  are  therefore  examples  of  unstahh  chemical  equilibria.  If
a  substance  exists,  it  signifies  that  it  already  presents  a  certain  form
of  equilibrium  between  those  elements  of  which  it  is  built  up. But

^  Tammaii  and  Currara  (189*2)  showed  by  detenuining  the  depresHion  (fall  of  the
temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice,  Chapters  I,  and  VII.)  that  the  molecule  of  peroxide
of  hydrogen  contains  H2O0,  and  not  HO  or  H3O5.

28  bu  Tlie  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen  and  chlorine  and  the  higher  oxides  of  manganese
are  also  formed  with  the  absf)rption  of  heat,  and  therefore,  like  hydrogen  peroxide,  act  in
a  powerfully  oxidising  manner,  luid  are  not  forme<l  by  the  same  metliods  as  the  majority
of  other  oxides.  It  is  evident  that,  being  endowed  with  a  richer  store  of  energy  (acquired
in  combination  or  by  ubsorpti<m  of  heat),  such  substances,  compared  with  others  jHwrer
in  energy,  will  exhibit  a  greater  diversity  of  cases  of  chemical  action  with  other  8uU»
BianceR.

214  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

chemical,  like  mechanical,  equilibria  exhibit  different  degrees  of  stability
or  solidity. '^^

Besides  this,  hydrogen  peroxide  presents  another  side  of  the
subject  which  is  not  less  important,  and  is  much  clearer  and  more
general.

Hydrogen  unites  with  oxygen  in  two  degrees  of  oxidation  :  water
or  hydrogen  oxide,  and  oxygenated  water  or  hydrogen  peroxide  ;  for  a
given  quantity  of  hydrogen,  the  peroxide  contains  twice  as  much  oxygen
as  does  water.  This  is  a  fresh  example  confirming  the  correctness  of
the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  to  which  we  have  already  referred  in
speaking  of  the  water  of  crystallisation  of  salts.  We  can  now  formu-
late this  law — the  I  air  of  multiple  proportionat.  If  two  substances  A  and
Ji  {either  simple  or  compound),  unite  togetJier  to  form  several  compoundsy
A„B„y  A,Jir  •  •  •  •)  then  having  expressed  the  compositions  of  all  tltese
compounds  in  such  a  way  that  the  quantity/  (by  weight  or  rolume)  of  one
of  the  comj)onent  parts  will  be  a  constant  quantity  A,  it  will  be  observed
tJuU  in  all  the  compouiids  AB^,  AB,,  ....  the  quantities  of  the  other
component  part,  B,  inll  always  be  in  commensurable  relation :  generally
in  simple  mtdtijile  jyroportion — that  is,  that  a:  b  .  .  .,  or  mn  is  to  r'q
as  whole  numbers,  for  instance  (w  2  :  3  or  3  :  4.  .  .  .

The  analysis  of  water  shows  that  in  100  parts  by  weight  it  contains
11*112  parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen  and  88 '888  of  oxygen,  and  the
analysis  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen  shows  that  it  contains  94-112  parts  of
oxygen  to  5*888  parts  of  hydrogen. In  this  the  analysis  is  expressed,

^  If  tin*  point  of  KUpiH)rt  of  a  body  lies  in  a  vertical  line  below  the  centre  of  gravity,
it  is  in  unstable  equilibrium.  If  the  centre  of  gravity  lies  below  the  jwint  of  supi>ort,
the  state  of  equilibrium  is  very  stable,  and  a  vibration  may  take  place  about  this  posi-
tion of  stable  equilibrium,  as  in  a  i)enduluin  or  balance,  when  finally  the  body  assumes
R  position  of  stable  e(iuilibrium.  But  if,  keeping  to  the  same  mechanical  example,
the  body  be  8upix)rted  not  on  a  point,  in  the  geometrical  sense  of  the  word,  but  on  a
small  plane,  then  the  state  of  unstable  equilibrium  may  be  presened,  unless  destroyed
by  external  influences.  Thus  a  man  stands  upright  8upi>orted  on  the  plane,  or  several
points  of  the  surfaces  of  his  feet,  having  the  centre  of  gravity  alx)ve  the  iM)ints  of  sup^wrt.
Vibration  is  then  jMwsible,  but  it  is  limited,  otherwise  on  passing  outside  the  limit  of
possible  equilibriimi  another  more  stable  position  is  attained  about  which  vibration
becomes  more  possible.  A  prism  immersed  in  water  nniy  have  several  more  or  less  stable
|>ositions  of  equilibrium.  The  same  is  also  tnie  with  the  at<mis  in  molecules.  Some
molecules  present  a  state  of  more  stable  equilibrium  than  others.  Hence  from  this  simple
comparison  it  will  be  at  once  evident  that  the  stability  of  molecules  may  vary  considerably,
that  one  and  the  same  elements,  taken  in  the  same  number,  may  give  isomerides  of  dif-
ferent stability,  and,  lastly,  that  there  may  exist  states  of  equilibria  which  are  so  unstable,
so  ephemeral,  that  they  will  only  arise  under  ]mrticularly  Hi)ecial  conditions-  such,  for
example,  us  certain  hydrates  mentione<l  in  the  first  cha])ter  {nee  NotesST,  07,  and  others).
And  if  in  ojie  case  the  instability  of  a  given  state  of  equilibrium  is  expressed  by  its
instability  with  a  change  of  temperature  or  i>hysical  state,  then  in  other  cases  it  is
expressed  Ijy  the  facility  with  which  it  decomposes  under  the  intiuence  of  contact  or  of
the  chemical  influence  of  other  substances.

OZONE AND HYDKOGKX PEKOXIDE— DALTON'.S  LAW 215

as  analyses  generally  are,  in  percentages  ;  that  is,  it  gives  the  amounts
of  the  elements  in  a  hundred  parts  by  weight  of  the  substance.  The
direct  comparison  of  tlie  percentage  compositions  of  water  and  hydro-
gen peroxide  does  not  give  any  simple  relation.  But  such  a  relation  is
immediately  apparent  if  we  calculate  the  composition  of  water  and  of
hydrogen  peroxide,  having  taken  either  the  quantity  of  oxygen  or  the
quantity  of  hydrogen  as  a  constant  quantity — for  insta-nce,  as  unity.
The  most  simple  proportions  show  that  in  water  there  are  contained
eight  parts  of  oxygen  to  one  part  of  hydrogen,  and  in  hydrogen  peroxide
sixteen  parts  of  oxygen  to  one  part  of  hydrogen  ;  or  one-eighth  part  of
hydrogen  in  water  and  one-sixteenth  part  of  hydrogen  in  hydrogen
peroxide  to  one  part  of  oxygen.  Naturally,  the  analysis  does  not  give
these  figures  with  absolute  exactness — it  gives  them  within  a  certain
degree  of  error  but  they  approximate,  as  the  error  diminishes,  to  that
limit  which  is  here  given.  The  comparison  of  the  quantities  of  hydro-
gen and  oxygen  in  the  two  substances  above  named,  taking  one  of  the
components  as  a  constant  quantity,  gives  an  example  of  the  application
of  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  because  water  contains  eight  parts
and  hydrogen  peroxide  sixteen  parts  of  oxygen  to  one  part  of  hydrogen,
and  these  figures  are  commensurable  and  are  in  the  simple  proportion  of
1  :  2.

An exactly similar  multiple proportion  is  observed  in  the  com-
position of  all  other  well- investigated  definite  chemical  compounds,'^

^  When,  fur  example,  iiiiy  element  forms  several  oxides,  they  are  subject  to  the  law
of  maltiple  proportionf.  For  a  given  quantity  of  the  non-metal  or  metal  the  qnantitien
of  oxygen  in  the  different  degrees  of  oxidation  will  stand  as  1  :  2,  or  as  1  :  8,  or  as  2  :  8»
or  as  2  :  7,  and  so  on.  Thus,  for  instance,  copper  combines  with  oxygen  in  at  least  two
proportions,  forming  the  oxides  found  in  nature,  and  called  the  suboxide  and  the  oxide
of  copper,  Cu.jO  and  CuO ;  the  oxide  contains  twice  as  much  oxygen  as  the  suboxide.
Lead  also  presents  two  degrees  of  oxidation,  the  oxide  and  peroxide,  and  in  the  latter
there  is  twice  as  much  oxygen  as  in  the  former,  PbO  and  PbO.^.  Wlien  a  base  and  an
acid  are  capable  of  forming  several  kinds  of  salts,  normal,  acid,  basic,  and  anhydro-,  it  is
found  that  they  also  clearly  exemplify  the  law  of  multiple  proportions.  Tliis  was  demon-
strated by  Wollaston  soon  after  the  discovery  of  the  law  in  question.  We  saw  in  the
first  chapter  that  salts  show  different  degrees  of  combination  with  water  of  crystallisation,
and  that  they  obey  the  law  of  multiple  proportions.  And,  more  than  this,  the  indefinite
chemical  com{K)unds  existing  as  solutions  may,  as  we  saw  in  the  same  chapter,  be  brought
under  the  law  of  nmltiple  proi)ortions  by  the  hypothesis  that  solutions  are  unstable
hydrates  formed  according  to  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  but  occurring  in  a  state  of
dissociation.  By  means  of  this  hypothesis  the  law  of  multiple  proix)rtions  becomes  still
more  general,  and  all  the  aspects  of  chemical  compounds  are  subject  to  it.  The  direction
of  the  whole  contemporary  state  of  chemistry  was  determined  by  the  discoveries  of
Ijavoisier  and  Dalton.  By  endeavouring  to  prove  that  in  s<:>luti(ms  we  have  nothing  else
than  the  liquid  i)roducts  c»f  the  dissociation  of  definite  hydrates,  it  is  my  aim  to  bring  also
this  category-  of  indefinite  c(uuiM)unds  under  the  general  principle  enunciated  by  Dalton ;
just  as  astronomers  have  discovered  a  proof  and  not  a  negation  of  the  laws  of  Newton  in
perturbations.

216  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

and  therefore  the  law  of  multiple  proportions  is  accepted  in  chemistry
as  the  starting  point  from  which  other  considerations  proceed.

The  law  of  multiple  proportions  was  discovered  at  the  beginning
of  this  century  by  John  Dalton,  of  Manchester,  in  investigating  the
compounds  of  carbon  with  hydrogen.  It  appeared  "That  two  gaseous
compounds  of  these  substances — marsh  gas,  CH^,  and  oleiiant  gas,
G2H4,  contain  for  one  and  the  same  quantity  of  hydrogen,  quantities
of  carbon  which  stand  in  multiple  proportion  ;  namely,  marsh  gas
contains  relatively  half  as  much  carbon  as  olefiant  gas.  Although  the
analysis  of  that  time  was  not  exact,  still  the  accuracy  of  this  law,
recognised  by  Dalton,  was  further  confirmed  by  more  accurate  investi-
gations. On  establishing  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  Dalton  gave
a  hypothetical  explanation  for  it.  This  explanation  is  based  on  the
atomic  theory  of  matter.  In  fact,  the  law  of  multiple  proportions  may
be  very  easily  understood  by  admitting  the  atomic  structure  of  matter.

The  essence  of  the  atomic  theory  is  that  matter  is  supposed  to  con-
sist of  an  agglomeration  of  small  and  indivisible  parts — atoms — which
do  not  fill  up  the  whole  space  occupied  by  a  substance,  but  stand  apart
from  each  other,  as  the  sun,  planets,  and  stars  do  not  fill  up  the  whole
space  of  the  universe,  but  are  at  a  distance  from  each  other.  The  form
and  properties  of  substances  are  determined  by  the  position  of  their
atoms  in  space  and  by  their  state  of  motion,  whilst  the  reactions  ac-
complished by  substances  are  understood  as  redistributions  of  the
relative  positions  of  atoms  and  changes  in  their  motion.  The  atomic
representation  of  matter  arose  in  very  ancient  times,^*  and  up  to  recent

31  LeucippUH,  DeniocritUK,  ami  eHiHK-ially  Lucretius,  in  tlie  cltiKKical  age»,  repre-
sented mutter  as  made  up  of  atoms — that  is,  of  parts  incapable  of  further  division.  The
geometrical  impossibility  of  such  an  admission,  as  well  as  the  conclusions  which  were
deduced  by  the  ancient  atomists  from  their  fundamental  propositions,  prevented  other
philosophers  from  following  them,  and  the  atomic  doctrine,  like  very  many  others,  lived,
without  being  ratified  by  fact,  in  tlie  imaginations  of  its  followers.  Between  the  present
atomic  theory  and  the  doctrine  of  the  above-named  ancient  philosophers  there  is
naturally  a  remote  historical  comiection,  as  between  the  doctrine  of  l^ythagoras  and
Copernicus,  but  they  are  essentially  different.  For  us  the  atom  is  indivisible,  not  in  the
geometrical  abstract  sense,  but  only  in  a  physical  and  chemical  sense.  It  would  be  better
to  call  the  atoms  indivisible  individuah.  Tl^e  (ireek  atom  — -  the  Latin  individual,  both
according  to  the  etymology  and  original  sense  of  the  words,  but  in  course  of  time  these  two
words  have  acquired  a  different  meaning.  The  individual  is  mechanically  and  geometrically
divisible,  and  only  indivisible  in  a  s])ecial  sense.  The  earth,  the  sun,  a  man  or  a  fly  are
individuals,  although  geometrically  divisible.  Thus  the  'atoms  *  of  contem^wrary  science,
indivisible  in  a  chemical  sense,  form  those  units  with  whicl\  we  are  concerned  in  the  in-
vestigation of  the  natural  phenomena  of  matter,  just  as  a  nnm  is  an  indivisible  unit  in
the  investigation  of  social  relations,  or  as  the  stars,  planets,  and  luminaries  serve  as  units  in
astronomy.  The  formaticm  of  the  vortex  hypothesis,  in  which,  as  we  shall  aften^'ards  see,
atoms  are  entire  whirls  mechanically  complex,  although  i)hysico-chemically  indivisible,
clearly  shows  that  the  scientific  men  of  our  time  in  holding  to  the  atomic  theory  have
only  borrowed  the  word  and  form  of  expression  from  the  ancient  philosophers,  and  not  the

OZONE  AND  HYDROGEN  PEROXIDE— DALTON'S  LAW 217

times  was  at  variance  with  the  dynamical  hypothesis,  which  considers
matter  as  only  a  manifestation  of  forces.  At  the  present  time,  how-
ever, the  majority  of  scientific men uphold  the  atomic hypothesis,

essence  of  their  atomic  doctrine.  It  is  erroneous  to  imagine  that  the  contemporary  con-
ceptions of  the  atomists  are  nothing  but  the  repetition  of  the  metaphysical  reasonings
of  the  ancients.  To  show  the  true  meaning  of  the  atomism  of  the  ancient  philosophers,  and
the  profound  difference  between  their  points  of  argument  and  tliose  of  contemporary
men  of  science,  I  cite  the  following  fundamental  propositions  of  Democritus  (b.c.  i70-
880)  as  the  best  expounder  of  the  atomic  doctrine  of  the  ancients : — (1)  Nothing  can
proceed  from  nothing,  nothing  that  exists  can  dinapi^ear  or  be  destroyed  (and  hence
matter),  and  every  change  only  consists  of  a  combination  or  separation.  (2)  Nothing  is
accidental,  there  is  a  reason  and  necessity  for  everything.  (8)  All  except  atoms  and
vacua  is  reason  and  not  existence.  (4)  The  atoms,  which  ore  infinite  in  number  and
form,  constitute  the  visible  universe  by  their  motion,  impact,  and  consequent  re-
volving motion.  (5)  The  variety  of  objects  depends  only  upon  a  difference  in  the
number,  form,  and  order  of  the  atoms  of  which  they  are  formed,  and  not  upon  a  quali-
tative difference  of  their  atoms,  which  only  act  upon  each  other  by  pressure  and  impact.
(6)  The  spirit,  like  fire,  consists  of  minute,  spherical,  smooth,  and  very  mobile  and  all-
penetrating  atoms,  whose  motion  forms  the  phenomenon  of  life.  These  Democritian,
chiefly  metaphysical,  principles  of  atomism  are  so  essentially  different  from  the  prin-
ciples of  the  present  atomic  doctrine,  which  is  exclusively  applied  to  explaining  the  phe-
nomena of  the  external  world,  that  it  may  be  useful  to  mention  the  essence  of  the
atomic  propositions  of  Boscovitch,  a  Slav  who  lived  in  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century,  and  who  is  regarded  as  the  founder  of  the  modem  atomic  doctrines  whicli,
however,  did  not  take  hold  ujwn  the  minds  of  scientific  men,  and  were  rarely  applied
prior  to  Dalton — i.e.  until  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  doctrine  of
Boscovitch  was  enunciated  by  him  in  1758-1764  in  his  ^  Philosophitc  naturaUs  theoria
reducta  ad  unicam  legem  virium  in  natura  existentium.*  Boscovitch  considers
matter  to  be  composed  of  atoms,  and  the  atoms  to  be  the  {wints  or  centres  of  forces  (just
as  the  stars  and  planets  may  be  considered  as  points  of  space),  acting  between  bodies  and
their  parts.  These  forces  vary  with  the  distance,  so  that  beyond  a  certain  very  small
distance  all  atoms,  and  hence  also  tlieir  aggregates,  are  attracted  according  to  Newton's
law,  but  at  less  distances,  there  alternate  wave-like  spheres  of  gradually  decreasing
attraction  and  increasing  (as  the  distance  decreases)  repulsion,  until  at  last  at  a  minimum
distance  only  the  repellent  action  remains.  Atoms,  therefore,  cannot  merge  into  each
other.  Consequently,  the  atoms  are  held  at  a  certain  distance  from  each  other,  and
therefore  occupy  space.  Boscovitch  compares  the  sphere  of  repulsion  surrounding  the
atoms  to  the  spheres  of  action  of  firing  of  a  detacliment  of  soldiers.  According
to  his  doctrine,  atoms  are  indestructible,  do  not  merge  into  each  other,  have  mass,
are  everlasting  and  mobile  under  the  action  of  the  forces  proper  to  them.  Maxwell
rightly  calls  this  hypothesis  the  *  extreme  '  among  those  existing  to  explain  matter,  but
many  aspects  of  Boscovitch's  doctrine  repeat  themselves  in  the  views  of  our  day,  with
this  essential  difference,  that  instead  of.  a  mathematical  point  furnished  with  the  pro-
l)erties  of  mass,  the  atoms  are  endowed  with  a  corporality,  just  as  the  stars  and  planets
are  corporal,  although  in  certain  aspects  of  their  interaction  they  may  be  regarded
as  mathematical  iK>ints.  In  my  opinion,  the  atomism  of  our  day  must  first  of  all
be  regarded  merely  as  a  convenient  method  for  the  investigation  of  ponderable
matter.  As  a  geometrician  in  reasoning  about  curves  represents  them  as  formed  of  a
succession  of  right  lines,  because  such  a  method  enables  him  to  analyse  the  subject
under  investigation,  so  the  scientific  man  applies  the  atcmiic  theory  as  a  method  of
analysing  the  phenomena  of  nature.  Naturally  there  are  i)eople  now,  as  in  ancient
times,  and  as  there  always  will  be,  who  apply  reality  to  imagination,  and  therefore
there  are  to  be  found  atomists  of  extreme  views ;  but  it  is  not  in  their  spirit  that  we
should  acknowledge  the  great  ser\'ices  rendered  by  the  atomic  doctrine  to  all  science,

218  PRINCIPLES  OF  CIIE3ILSTKY

although  the  present  conception  of  an  atom  is  quite  different  from  that
of  the  ancient  philosophers.  An  atom  at  the  present  day  is  regarded
rather  as  an  individual  or  unit  which  is  indivisible  by  physical'^  and
chemical  forces,  whilst  the  atom  of  the  ancients  was  actually  mechanically
and  geometrically  indivisible.  When  Dalton  ( 1 804)  discovered  the  law
of  multiple  proportions,  he  pronounced  himself  in  favour  of  the  atomic
doctrine,  because  it  enables  this  law  to  be  very  easily  understood.  If
the  divisibility  of  every  element  has  a  limit,  namely  the  atom,  then  the
atoms  of  elements  are  the  extreme  limits  of  all  divisibility,  and  if  they
differ  from  each  other  in  their  nature,  the  formation  of  a  compound
from  elementary  matter  must  consist  in  the  aggregation  of  several
different  atoms  into  one  whole  or  system  of  atoms,  now  termed
particles  or  molfcuUs,  As  atoms  can  only  combine  in  their  entire
masses,  it  is  evident  that  not  only  the  law  of  definite  composition,  but
also  that  of  multiple  proportions,  must  apply  to  the  combination  of
atoms  with  one  another ;  for  one  atom  of  a  substance  can  combine
with  one,  two,  or  three  atoms  of  another  substance,  or  in  general  one,
two,  three  atoms  of  one  substance  are  able  to  combine  with  one,  two,
or  three  atoms  of  another ;  this  being  the  essence  of  the  law  of
multiple  proportions.  Chemical  and  physical  data  are  very  well  ex-
plained by  the  aid  of  the  atomic  theory.  The  displacement  of  one
element  by  another  follows  the  law  of  equivalency.  In  this  case  one
or  several  atoms  of  a  given  element  take  the  place  of  one  or  several
atoms  of  another  element  in  its  compounds.  The  atoms  of  different
substances  can  be  mixed  together  in  the  same  sense  as  sand  can  be
mixed  with  clay.  They  do  not  unite  into  one  whole — i.e.  there  is  not
a  perfect  blending  in  the  one  or  other  case,  but  only  a  juxtaposition,  a
homogeneous  whole  being  formed  from  individual  parts.  This  is  the
first  and  most  simple  method  of  applying  the  atomic  theory  to  the  ex-
planation of  chemical  phenomena.'"^^

which,  while  it  has  been  essentially  independently  developed,  is,  if  it  be  desired  to
reduce  all  ideas  to  the  doctrines  of  the  ancients,  a  union  of  the  ancient  dynamical  and
atomic  doctrines.

5*  Drtlton  and  many  of  his  successors  distinguished  the  atoms  of  elements  and  com-
pounds, in  which  they  cleirly  -ivmbolised  the  difference  of  their  opinion  from  the  repre-
nentations  of  the  ancients.  Now  only  the  individuals  of  the  elements,  indivisible  by
physical  and  chemical  forces,  are  termed  atoms,  and  the  individuals  of  compounds  in-
divisible under  physical  changes  are  termed  molecules  ;  these  are  divisible  into  atoms  by
chemical  forces.

^  In  the  present  coiiditi<»n  of  science,  either  the  atomic  or  the  d^iiamical  hyiwtheais
is  inevitably  obli^tHl  to  admit  the  existence  of  an  invisible  and  imi>erceptible  motion  in
matter,  without  which  it  is  impossible  to  understand  either  light  or  heat,  or  gaseous
pressure,  or  any  of  the  mechanical,  physical,  or  chemical  phenomena.  The  ancients
wiw  vital  motion  in  animals  only,  but  to  us  the  smallest  particle  of  matter,  endued  with
vis  vivo,  or  energy  in  some  degree  or  other,  is  incomprehensible  without  self -existent

OZONE AND HYDROGEN PEROXIDE- DALTON'S  LAW 219

A  certain  iiumbei*  of  atoms  n  of  an  element  A  in  combining  with
several  atoms  in  of  another  element  B  give  a  compound  A„  B,«,  each

uiotiuii.  Thus  motion  has  l>eeoine  a  conception  inseparably  knit  with  the  conception
of  matter,  and  this  has  pre|>are<l  the  ground  for  the  reWval  of  the  dynamical  hypotheftia
of  the  constitution  of  matter.  In  the  atomic  theory  there  has  ariMen  that  ((eneralising
idea  bv  which  the  world  of  atoms  is  constructed,  like  the  universe  of  heavenly  bodies,
with  its  suns,  planets,  and  met^K)rs,  endued  with  everlasting  force  of  motion,  forming
molecules  as  the  heavenly  IwKlies  fonn  systems,  like  the  solar  system,  which  molecules
are  only  relatively  indivisible  in  the  same  way  as  the  planets  of  the  solar  system  are
inseparable,  and  stable  and  lasting  as  the  solar  system  is  lasting.  Such  a  representa-
tion, without  necessitating  the  absolute  indivisibility  of  atoms,  expresses  all  that  science
can  require  for  an  hyiiothetical  representation  of  the  constitution  of  matter.  In  closer
proximity  to  the  dynamical  hypothesis  of  the  constitution  of  matter  is  the  oft-times
revived  vortex  hypothcBis.  Descartes  first  endeavoured  to  raise  it ;  Helmholtz  and
Thomson  (Lonl  Kelvin)  gave  it  a  fuller  and  more  modern  fonn ;  many  scientific  men
applied  it  to  physics  and  chemistrj*.  The  idea  of  vortex  rings  serves  as  the  starting
point  of  this  hypotliesis ;  these  are  familiar  to  all  as  the  rings  of  tobacco  smoke,  and
may  be  artificially  obtained  by  givmg  a  sharp  blow  to  the  sides  of  a  cardboard  box
liaving  a  circular  orifict'  and  filled  with  smoke.  Phosphuretted  hydrogen,  as  we  sliall
see  later  on,  when  bubbling  from  water  always  gives  verj-  perfect  vortex  rings  in  a  still
atmosphere.  In  sucli  rings  it  is  easy  to  observe  a  constant  circular  motion  about  their
axes,  and  to  notice  the  stability  the  rings  possess  in  their  motion  of  translation.  This
unchangeable  mass,  endued  with  a  rapid  internal  motion,  is  likene<l  to  the  atom.  In  a
medium  deprived  of  friction,  such 'a  ring,  as  is  shown  by  theoretical  considerations  of  the
subject  from  a  mechanical  \>o\\\i  of  view,  would  be  perpetual  and  unchangeable.  The  rings
are  capable  of  gronping  together,  and  in  combining,  without  being  absolutely  indivisible,
remain  indivisible.  The  vortex  h3iK>thesis  has  been  established  ui  our  times,  but  it  has
not  been  fully  developed  ;  its  application  to  chemical  phenomena  is  not  clear,  although
not  impossible  ;  it  does  not  satisfy  a  doubt  in  respect  to  the  nature  of  the  s]>ace  existing
between  the  rings  (just  as  it  is  not  clear  what  exists  between  atoms,  and  between  tlie
planets),  neither  dot's  it  tell  us  what  is  the  nature  of  the  moving  substance  of  the  ring,
and  therefore  for  the  present  it  only  presents  the  genn  of  an  hypothetical  conception  of
the  constitution  of  matter;  consequently,  I  consider  that  it  would  be  suiwrfluous  to
speak  of  it  in  greater  detail.  However,  the  thoughts  of  investigators  are  now  (and
naturally  will  be  in  the  future),  as  they  were  in  the  time  of  Dalton,  often  turned  to  the
question  of  the  limitation  of  the  mechanical  division  of  matter,  and  the  atomists  liave
searcheil  for  an  answer  in  the  most  diverse  spheres  of  nature.  I  select  one  of  tlie
methods  attempted,  whit-h  does  not  in  any  way  refer  to  chemistry,  in  order  to  show  how
closely  all  the  provinces  of  natural  science  are  l)ound  together.  Wollaston  prop«>sed  the
investigation  of  the  atniosphrrc  of  the  heavenly  bodies  as  a  means  for  confirming  the
existence  of  atoms.  If  the  divisibility  of  matter  be  infinite,  then  air  must  extend
throughout  the  entire  s[nice  of  the  heavens  as  it  extends  all  over  the  earth  by  its  elasticity
and  diffusion.  If  the  infinite  divisibility  of  matter  be  admitted,  it  is  impossible  that  any
portion  of  the  \vh<ile  space  of  the  universe  can  be  entirely  void  of  the  component  parts  of
our  atmosphere.  But  if  matter  be  divisible  up  to  a  certain  limit  only — namely,  up  to  the
atom — then  there  can  exist  a  heavenly  lunly  void  of  an  atmosphere;  and  if  such  a  body
l)e  discovered,  it  would  serve  as  an  important  factor  for  the  acceptation  of  the  validity  of
the  at<nnic  dm'trine.  The  moon  has  long  l>een  considered  as  such  a  luminary  and  this
circumstance,  es|)ecially  from  its  prt>ximity  to  the  earth,  has  been  cit^d  as  the  best  proof
of  the  validity  of  the  atomic  doctrine.  This  pr(K)f  is  apparently  (Poisson)  deprived  of
some  of  its  force  from  the  possibility  of  the  transformation  of  the  component  i>arts  of
our  atmosphiTi*  into  a  solid  nr  liquid  stiite  at  immense  heights  alK)ve  the  earth's  surface,
whert*  the  tempcrnture  is  ex<'«»«*dingly  low  ;  but  a  series  of  researches  (Pouillet )  has  shown
that  the  tenii)cruture  of  the  heavenly  space  is  ccmiparatively  not  so  very  low,  and  is
attainable  by  experimental  means,  so  that  at  the  low  existing  pressure  the  liquefaction

220  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

molecule  of  which  wUl  contain  the  atoms  of  the  elements  A  and  B  in
this  ratio,  and  therefore  the  compound  will  present  a  definite  composition,

of  the  g*!i»r^  of  the  atmosphere  oumot  be  expected  even  on  the  moon. Therefore  the
abscrmx;  of  an  atmosphere  about  the  moon,  if  it  were  not  subject  to  doubt,  would  be
counted  as  a  forxrible  proof  of  the  atcnnic  theory. As  a  proof  of  the  absence  of  a  lunar
atmosphere,  it  is  cited  that  the  moon,  in  its  independent  motion  between  the  stars,  when
eclipsing  a  !^tar — that  is.  when  passing  between  the  eye  and  the  star — does  not  show  any
sogns  of  refraction  at  its  edge  ;  the  image  of  the  star  does  not  alter  its  position  in  the
heavens  on  a|^roaching  the  moon*s  surface,  consequently  there  is  no  atmosphere  on  tlie
moon's  surface  capable  of  refracting  the  rays  of  light. Such  is  the  conclusion  by  which
the  absence  of  a  lunar  atmosphere  is  acknowledged. But  this  conclusion  is  most  feeble,
and  there  are  even  facts  in  exact  contradiction  to  it,  by  which  the  existence  of  a  lunar
atmos{4iere  may  be  {ffoved. The  entire  surface  of  the  moon  is  covered  with  a  number  of
mountains,  having  in  the  majority  of  cases  the  conical  form  natural  to  volcanoes. The
volcanic  character  of  the  Innar  mountains  was  confirmed  in  October  1866,  when  a  change
was  observed  in  the  form  of  one  of  them  (the  crater  Linnea). These  mountains  must
be  on  the  edge  of  the  lunar  disc. Seen  in  profile,  they  screen  one  another  and  inter-
fere with  observations  on  the  surface  of  the  moon,  so  that  when  looking  at  the  edge  of
the  lunar  disc  we  are  obliged  to  make  our  observations  not  on  the  moon's  surface,  but
at  the  summits  of  the  lunar  mountains. These  mountains  are  higher  than  those  on
our  earth,  and  otmse«iuently  at  their  summits  the  lunar  atmosphere  must  be  exceedingly
rarefied  even  if  it  )¥>ssess  an  observable  density  at  the  surface. Knowing  the  mass  of
the  moc>n  to  be  eighty-two  times  less  than  the  nuiss  of  the  earth,  we  are  able  to  determine
apprckximately  that our atmosphere  at  the  moon's  surface  would  be  about  twenty-
eight  times  lighter  than  it  is  on  the  earth,  and  consequently  at  the  very  surface  of  the
moon  the  refraction  of  light  by  the  lunar  atmof^here  must  be  very  slight,  and  at  the
heights  of  the  lunar  mountains  it  must  be  imperceptible,  and  would  be  lost  within  the
limits  of  exi^erimental  error. Therefore  the  absence  of  refraction  of  light  at  the  edge  of
the  moonV  disc  cannot  yet  be  urged  in  favour  of  the  absence  of  a  lunar  atmosphere.
There  is  even  a  series  of  observations  obliging  us  to  admit  the  existence  of  this  atmo-
sphere. These  researches  are  due  to  Sir  John  Herschel. This  is  what  he  writes :  *  It  has
often  btvn  remurke*!  that  during'  the  eclipse  of  a  star  by  tlie  moon  there  occurs  a  peculiar
t^ptical  illusion  ;  ii  s«>ems  as  if  the  star  before  disappearing  passed  over  the  edge  of  the
nux^n  nnd  is  stvn  thn^ujrh  the  lunar  disc,  sometimes  for  a  rather  long  period  of  time. I
!ny>elf  lm\o  obs<'r\til  this  phenomenon,  and  it  has  been  witnessed  by  perfectly  trust-
worthy observers. I  ascribe  it  to  optical  illusion,  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  star
might  have  Uvn  stvn  on  the  lunar  disc  thrt^ugh  some  deep  ravine  on  the  moon.*  Geniller,
in  Belgium  a8:»<V.,  following  the  opinion  of  Cassini,  Eiler,  and  otliers,  gave  an  explana-
titm  of  this  phenomenon  :  he  ct^nsiders  it  due  to  the  refraction  of  light  in  the  valleys  of
the  lunar  mountains  which  txvur  on  the  edge  of  the  lunar  disc. In  fact,  although  these
valleys  do  not pn^vably  present  the  form  of  straight  nivines,  yet  it  may  sometimes
hapivn  th.*»i  the  lij;ht  of  a  star  is  st>  refracted  that  its  image  might  be  seen,  notwith-
standing: \hv  rtb^  lue  of  a  direi^t  path  for  the  light-rays. He  then  goes  on  to  remark
that  the  »h  n^.ty  of  the  lunar  atmosphere  must  be  variable  in  different  parts,  owing  to
lhe\er\  Un»^  uij:hts  on  the  nuxm. On  the  dark,  or  non- illuminated  portion,  owing  to
these  lonj;  night  x.  ^^  hidi  last  lhirlet>n  of  our  days  and  nights,  there  must  be  excessive  cold,
and  hence  a  den-er  utmospliere.  while,  on  the  contrary,  on  the  illtmiinated  portion  the
atnuwphti-e  mu>.t U*  nuuh  niort>  niretieil. This  variation  in  the  temperature  of  the
diffeivnt  luirts  of  the  uuhmi's  surface  explains  also  the  absence  of  clouds,  notwithstanding
the  iH>sMhle  pivst  noe  of  air  and  uquei.us  vaix^nr,  on  the  visible  portion  of  the  moon. The
pn»MMue  of  an  atmosphere  r^nind  the  sun  :uul  planets,  judging  from  astronomical  observa-
tions, may  Ih'  considereil  an  fnlly  provwl. On  Jupiter  and  Mars  even  bands  of  clouds
may  W  aistingui«she»l. Thus  the  atomic  dcvtrine,  admitting  a  finite  mechanical  divi-
sibility only,  nmst  Ih>,  a-»  yet  at  least,  only  ac-cepted  as  a  means,  similar  to  that  means
whiih  a  mathematician  eniploys  when  he  breaks  up  a  continuous  curvilinear  line  into  a

OZONE  AM) HYDROGEN PEROXIDE— lULTONS  LAW 221

expressed  by  the  formula  A„B,„,  where  A  and  B  are  the  weights  of  the
atoms  and  n  and  in  their  relative  number.  If  the  same  elements  A
and  B,  in  addition  to  A„B„,  also  yield  another  compound  A^B^,  then
by  expressing  the  composition  of  the  first  compound  by  A„,.B„^  (and  this
is  the  same  composition  as  A^B^),  and  of  the  second  compound  by
A,„B^„,  we  have  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  because  for  a  given
quantity  of  the  first  element,  A„„  there  occur  quantities  of  the  second
element  bearing  the  same  ratio  to  each  other  as  mr  is  to  qn  ;  and
as  m,  r,  7,  and  n  are  whole  numbei*s,  their  products  are  also  whole
numbers,  and  this  is  expressed  by  the  law  of  multiple  proportion.
Consequently  the  atomic  theory  is  in  accordance  with  and  evokes  the
first  laws  of  definite  chemical  compounds  :  the  law  of  definite  composi-
tion and  the  law  of  multiple  proportions.

So,  also,  is  the  relation  of  the  atomic  theory  to  the  third  law  of  de-
finite chemical  compounds,  the  law  of  reciprocaf  combining  weights^
which  is  as  follows  : — If  a  certain  weight  of  a  substance  C  combine
with  a  weight  a  of  a  substance  A,  and  with  a  weight  6  of  a  substance
B,  then,  also,  the  substances  A  and  B  will  combine  together  in  quanti-
ties a  and  h  (or  in  multiples  of  them).  This  should  be  the  case  from
the  conception  of  atoms.  Let  A,  B,  and  C  be  the  weights  of  the  atoms
of  the  three  substances,  and  for  simplicity  of  reasoning  suppose  that
combination  takes  place  between  single  atoms.  It  is  evident  that  if
the  substance  gives  AC  and  BC,  then  the  substances  A  and  B  will
give  a  compound  AB,  or  their  multiple,  A„B„,.  And  so  it  is  in  reality
in  nature.

Sulphur  combines  with  hydrogen  and  with  oxygen.  Sulphuretted
hydrogen  contains  thirty-two  parts  by  weight  of  sulphur  to  two  parts
by  weight  of  hydrogen  ;  this  is  expressed  by  the  formula  HoS.  Sul-
phur dioxide,  SO^,  contains  thirty-two  parts  of  sulphur  and  thirty-two
parts  of  oxygen,  and  therefore  we  conclude,  from  the  law  of  combining
weights,  that  oxygen  and  hydrogen  will  combine  in  the  proportion  of
two  parts  of  hydrogen  and  thirty-two  parts  of  oxygen,  or  multiple
numbers  of  them.  And  we  have  seen  this  to  be  the  case.  Bydrogen
peroxide  contains  thirty-two  parts  of  oxygen,  and  water  sixteen  parts,
to  two  paits  of  hydrogen  ;  and  so  it  is  in  all  other  cases.  This  con-
sequence of  the  atomic  theory  is  in  accordance  with  natui*e,  with  the
results  of  analysis,  and  is  one  of  the  most  important  laws  of  chemistry.
It  is  a  law,  because  it  indicates  the  relation  between  the  weights  of
substances entering into  chemical combination. Further,  it  is an

number  of  stniight  liiieH.  There  is  a  simplicity  of  representation  in  atoms,  but  there  iii
no  ubsohite  necessity  to  have  recourse  to  them.  The  conception  of  the  individuality  of
the  parts  of  matt(>r  exhibited  in  chemical  elements  only  is  necessary  and  trustworthy.

222  PRINCIPLES  OF  CUEMLSTRY

eminently  exact  law,  and  not  au  approximate  one.  The  law  of  com-
bining weights  is  a  law  of  nature,  and  by  no  means  an  hypothesis,  for
even  if  the  entire  theory  of  atoms  be  refuted,  still  the  laws  of  multiple
proportions  and  of  combining  weights  will  remain,  inasmuch  as  they
deal  with  facts.  They  may  be  guessed  at  from  the  sense  of  the  atomic
theory,  and  historically  the  law  of  combining  weights  is  intimately
■connected  with  this  theory  ;  but  they  are  not  identical,  but  only
connected,  with  it.  The  law  of  combining  weights  is  formulated  with
great  ease,  and  is  an  immediate  consequence  of  the  atomic  theory  ;
without  it,  it  is  even  difficult  to  understand.  Data  for  its  evolution
existed  previously,  but  it  was  not  formulated  until  those  data  were  in-
terpreted by  the  atomic  theory,  an  hypothesis  wliich  up  to  the  present
time  has  contradicted  neither  experiment  nor  fact,. and  is  useful  and
•of  general  application.  Such  is  the  nature  of  hypotheses.  They  are
indispensable  to  science  ;  they  bestow  an  order  and  simplicity  which
are  difficultly  attainable  without  their  aid.  The  whole  history  of
science  is  a  proof  of  this.  And  therefore  it  may  bo  truly  said  that  it
is  better  to  hold  to  an  hypothesis  which  may  afterwards  prove  untrue
than  to  have  none  at  all.  Hypotheses  facilitate  scientific  work  and
render  it  consistent.  In  the  search  for  truth,  like  the  plough  of  the
Jiusbandman,  they  help  forward  the  work  of  the  labouier.

223

CHAPTER V

NITROr.EN AND AIR

Gaseous  nitrogt'n  forms  about  four-fifths  (by  volume)  of  the  atmo-
sphere ;  consequently  the  air  contains  an  exceedingly  large  mass  of  it.
Whilst  entering  in  so  considerable  a  quantity  into  the  composition  of
air,  nitrogen  does  not  seem  to  play  any  active  part  in  the  atmosphere,
the  chemical  action  of  which  is  mainly  dependent  on  the  oxygen  it  con-
tains. But  this  is  not  an  entirely  correct  idea,  because  animal  life
cannot  exist  in  pure  oxygen,  in  which  animals  pass  into  an  abnormal
state  and  die ;  and  the  nitrogen  of  the  air,  although  slowly,  fonns
diverse  compounds,  many  of  which  play  a  most  important  part  in
nature,  especially  in  the  life  of  organisms.  However,  neither  plants  *
nor  animals  directly  absorb  the  nitrogen  of  the  air,  but  take  it  up
from  already  prepared  nitrogenous  compounds  ;  further,  plants  are
nourished  by  the  nitrogenous  substances  containeil  in  the  soil  and
water,  and  aninial«  by  the  nitrogenous  substances  contained  in  plants
and  in  other  animals.  Atmospheric  electricity  is  capable  of  aiding  the
passage  of  gaseous  nitrogen  into  nitrogenous  compounds,  as  we  shall
afterwards  see,  and  the  resultant  substances  are  carried  to  the  soil
by  rain,  where  they  serve  for  the  nourishment  of  plants.  Plentiful
harvests,  fine  crops  of  hay,  vigorous  growth  of  trees  other  conditions
Ixiing  equal  -  are  only  obtained  when  the  soil  contains  ready  jrrejiared
iiUrof/enoffs  componndsy  consisting  either  of  those  which  occur  in  air
and  water,  or  of  the  residues  of  the  decomposition  of  other  plants  or
animals  (as  in  manure).  The  nitrogenous  substances  contained  in
animals  have  their  origin  in  those  substances  which  are  formed  in
plants.  Thus  the  nitrogen  of  the  atmosphere  is  the  origin  of  all  the
nitrogenous  substances  occurring  in  animals  and  plants,  although  not
directly  so,  but  after  first  combining  with  the  other  elements  of  air.

The  nitrogenous  compounds  which  enter  into  thecomi>ositionof  plants
and  animals  are  of  primary  importance  ;  no  vegetable  or  animal  cell — that
is,  the  elementary  form  of  organism exists  without  contiiining  a  nitro-

»  See  Note  15  '»«'.

224  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

genous  substance,  and  moreover  organic  life  manifests  itself  primarily
in  these  nitrogenous  substances.  The  genns,  seeds,  and  those  pai-ts  by
which  cells  multiply  themselves  abound  in  nitrogenous  substances  ;  the
sum  total  of  the  phenomena  which  are  proper  to  organisms  depend
primarily  on  the  chemical  properties  of  the  nitrogenous  substances  which
enter  into  their  composition.  It  will  be  sufficient,  for  instance,  to  point
out  the  fact  that  vegetable  and  animal  organisms,  clearly  distinguish-
able as  such,  are  characterised  by  a  different  degree  of  energy  in  their
nature,  and  at  the  same  time  by  a  difference  in  the  amount  of  nitro-
genous substances  they  contain.  In  plants,  which  compared  with
animals  possess  but  little  activity,  being  incapable  of  independent
movement,  «fec.,  the  amount  of  nitrogen  is  very  much  less  than
in  animals,  whose  tissues  are  almost  exclusively  formed  of  nitro-
genous substances.  It  is  i*emarkable  that  the  nitrogenous  parts  of
plants,  chiefly  of  the  lower  orders,  sometimes  present  both  forms  and
properties  which  approach  to  those  of  animal  organisms  ;  for  example,
the  zoospores  of  seaweeds,  or  those  parts  by  means  of  which  the  latter
multiply  themselves.  These  zoospores  on  leaving  the  seaweed  in  many
respects  resemble  the  lower  orders  of  animal  life,  having,  like  the  latter,
the  property  of  moving.  They  also  approach  the  animal  kingdom  in
their  composition,  their  outer  coating  containing  nitrogenous  matter.
Directly  the  zoospore  Ijeconies  covered  with  that  non -nitrogenous  or
cellular  coating  which  is  proper  to  all  the  ordinary  cells  of  plants,  it
loses  all  resemblance  to  an  animal  organism  and  becomes  a  small  plant.
It  may  be  thought  from  this  that  the  cause  of  th^  difference  in  the
vital  processes  of  animals  and  plants  is  the  different  amount  of  nitroge-
nous substances  they  contain.  The  nitrogenous  substances  which  occur
in  plants  and  animals  appertain  to  a  series  of  exceedingly  complex
and  very  changeable  chemical  compounds  ;  their  elementary  composi-
tion alone  shows  this  ;  besides  nitrogen,  they  contain  carbon,  hydrogen,
oxygen,  and  sulphur.  Being  distinguished  by  a  very  great  instability
under  many  conditions  in  which  other  compounds  remain  unchanged,
these  substances  are  titted  for  those  perpetual  changes  which  form  the
first  condition  of  vital  activity.  These  complex  and  changeable  niti*o-
genous  substances  of  the  organism  are  called  jmtteid  substances.  The
white  of  eggs  is  a  familiar  example  of  such  a  substance.  They  are  also
contained  in  the  flesli  of  animals,  the  curdy  elements  of  milk,  the
glutinous  matter  of  wheat<»n  flour,  or  so-called  gluten,  which  fonns  the
chief  component  of  macaroni,  «fcc.

Nitrogen  occurs  in  the  earth's  crust,  in  compounds  eitlier  forming
the  remains  of  plants  and  animals,  or  derived  from  the  nitrogen  of  tlie
atmosphere  as  a  consequence  of  its  combination  with  the  other  com-

NITROGEN  AND  AIR  225

ponent  parts  of  the  air.  It  is  not  found  in  other  forms  in  the  earth's
crust ;  so  that  nitrogen  must  be  considered,  in  contradistinction  to
oxygen,  as  an  element  which  is  purely  superficial,  and  does  not  extend
to  the  depths  of  the  earth.*  *»**

Nitrogen  is  liberated  in  a  free  state  in  the  decomposition  of  the
nitrogeiwua  organic  substances  entering  into  the  composition  of
organisms — for  instance,  on  their  combustion.  All  organic  substances
bum  when  heated  to  redness  with  oxygen  (or  substances  readily  yield-
ing it,  such  as  oxide  of  copper)  ;  the  oxygen  combines  with  the  carbon,
sulphur,  and  hydrogen,  and  the  nitrogen  is  evolved  in  a  free  state,
because  at  a  high  temperature  it  does  not  form  any  stable  compound,
but  remains  uncombined.  Carbonic  anhydride  and  water  are  formed
from  the  carbon  and  hydrogen  respectively,  and  therefore  to  obtain  pure
nitrogen  it  is  necessary  to  remove  the  carbonic  anhydride  from  the
gaseous  product's  obtained.  This  may  be  done  very  easily  by  the  action
of  alkalis — for  instance,  caustic  soda.  The  amount  of  nitrogen  in
organic  substances  is  determined  by  a  method  founded  on  this.

It  is  also  very  easy  to  obtain  nitrogen  from  air,  because  oxygen
combines  with  many  substances.  Either  phosphorus  or  metallic  copper
is  usually  employed  for  removing  the  oxygen  from  air,  but,  naturally,
a  number  of  other  substances  may  also  be  used.  If  a  small  saucer  on
which  a  piece  of  phosphorus  is  laid  be  placed  on  a  cork  floating  on
water,  and  the  phosphorus  be  lighted,  and  the  whole  covered  with  a
glass  bell  jar,  then  the  air  under  the  jar  will  be  deprived  of  its  oxygen,
and  nitrogen  only  will  remain,  owing  to  which,  on  cooling,  the  water
will  rise  to  a  certain  extent  in  the  bell  jar.  The  same  object  (procuring
nitrogen  from  air)  is  attained  much  more  conveniently  and  perfectly
by  passing  air  through  a  red-hot  tube  containing  copper  filings.  At  a
red  heat,  metallic  copper  combines  with  oxygen  and  gives  a  black
powder  of  copper  oxide  If  the  layer  of  copper  be  sufficiently  long  and
the  current  of  air  slow,  all  the  oxygen  will  be  absorbed,  and  nitrogen
alone  will  pass  from  the  tube.^

1  bu  ^^  reoHon  why  there  are  no  other  nitrogenouR  subKtances  witliin  the  earth's
inafts  beyond  thoHe  which  have  come  there  witli  the  remainn  of  organismH,  and  from  the
air  with  rain- water,  muHt  be  looked  for  in  two  circumstanceB.  In  the  firHt  place,  in  the
instability  of  many  nitrogenous  compounds,  which  are  liable  to  break  up  with  the  forma-
tion of  gaseous  nitrogen ;  and  in  the  second  place  in  the  fact  that  the  salts  of  nitric  acid,
forming  the  product  of  the  action  of  air  on  many  nitrogenous  and  eKpecially  organic
conii)omid8,  are  very  soluble  in  water,  and  on  penetrating  into  the  depths  of  the  earth
(with  water)  give  up  their  oxygen.  Tlie  result  of  the  changes  of  the  nitrogenous  organic
substances  which  fall  into  the  earth  is  without  doubt  frequently,  if  not  invaiiably,  the
fonnation  of  gaseous  nitrogen.  Thus  the  gas  evolved  from  coal  always  contains  mucU
nitrogen  (together  with  marsh  gas,  carbonic  anhydride,  and  other  gases).

-  Copi>er  (best  as  turnings,  which  present  a  large  surface)  absorbs  oxygen,  forming
CuO,  at  the  ordinary  temperature  in  the  presence  of  solutions  of  acids,  or,  better  still,  in

VOL.  I.  Q

•2-jr,  rj:iN«  IPLXS  of  chi:mi>-ti:y

\':v-^r:.  uihyal-y  )^  prcKured  fpcun  ni&ny  of  its  c*nr,jK»»nidi  with
#...  .,y. .. tii,rl,  h'jfir:rjr  n .^  bui  the  licst  fitted  for  thi^  purpose  is  a  saline
j;.i\tjr ' .  y.taiLi.M:,  o:.  the  one  hand,  a  compound  of  nitixeen  with
f.>.v-«r:..  i*-rDied  T.iirou- anLvdride. N^O^ and on the other  hand
a.jj  .i  ..i.i-i.  yH  — :h'it  i^,  a  C'jiiJj«OTiii«i  of  nitrogen  viih  hrdix^en. Bv
Ij'ratiij;:  hM:\\  a  i:.:x'U!-*-,  \he  oxygen  of  the  nitrous  anhTdride  eomhines
witlj  the  \i\»'^T**2f:\.  of  tlir  ;i!iuMiinia.fonuing  water,  and  gaseous  nitrogen
is evoSe'l. L'NIi>-y.O:,=  "H/»-;-X,. Xitrogen is pniccred by
tijis  lueth'Kl  i::  th^  f'.'.l'.wini:  uianner  : — A  s<*lution  of  caustic  potash  is
^fAtur-a^.*"'  V.  irlj  li it  roil-  jiiJjydride,  by  which  means  potassium  nitrite  is
f'.ni.«-'i. r»ii  thf-  r-ther  liaii'l,  a  sc»lution  of  hydrochloric  acid  saturated
v.it}j  aii.ii'^jiii  IS  iivpaiv-i  :  a  saline substaiice called sal-ammoniac,
NJf /;:.  :-  xh-:-  foniiel  iii  the  solution. The  two  solutions  thus  pre-
j.:»'rrfj  ;f. iniA.-'l  to;/-thei  aii^l  heated. Reaction  takes  place  according
to  tl,e  c;  iuitioi;  KN^  ^  ^  NHX1  =  KC1  -^  iH.O  -f  X^. This  reaction
IM^r;fr«.'i>  iii  viitu-  ..f  the  fa.t  that  potassium  nitrite  and  ammonium
r  Ijlorio"  are  -^ilts  whi^.li.  ..n  ii:t-T.  hanging  their  metals,  give  potassium
i\\\(jv\'\*'  ;iiirl  aniinojiiujij  nitrite,  NH4Nr)j,  which  breaks  up  uito  water
and  nit!o;i:en. Tlii-  leriction  ']«»e5  not  take  place  without  the  aid  of
iM-ar,  Imt  it  jiroo^-ens  \viy  ea>ily  at  a  moderate  temperature. Of  the
resultant  ^ub^tan^f•s.  the  nitrogen  only  is  gaseous. Pure  nitrogen  may
lie  oKt;iii,rMl  \}\  drying'  the  nvsultant  gas  and  passing  it  through  a  solu-
tion of  sulphuric-  aeid  (to  absorb  a  certain  quantity  of  ammonia  which
j^  evolv«fl  in  the  reaction  ».*  ^'•

t),.  |,i.  .-.'.■  of  .1  .'.!iit,.,:i  ..f  aiiiiii-  iii.i,  \v]i.-i,  it  fonn-.  .i  blui-^h-violft  s<iIution  of  oxiile
i,\  «',|,j,«-.  M,  inni/ioTii.i.  Nitn.-.ii  >  vory  easily  pnxinvd  l.y  tin-  mi'tbod.  A  llask  ftlleti
V.  tl.  i<.|,|M-i  tiiiiiiiL'-  ;-']'. -••'1  w'Ah  11  ji.rk  fumishe*!  with  u  fimiiel  and  stopt»ock.  A
'.111?;.,-  .,}  .iriiiiioiii..  .-  p'.iiMr'l  int'i  lli..-  funiu.-l.  and  ciuir-t-d  ti>  dnip  slowly  upon  the
i't\t\>4 1.  If  :.i  tl,i;  -;iiin-  t.ini,'  .1  f.inn.nt  of  .lir  Im-  sl.iwly  pa•^>t•d  through  the  flask  ^fn.mi  a
t'.<  l.'.l'hi  ..  tlioii  .ill  ill"  "V'.^fiji  will  li<-  .iI^^oHxmI  fiv.ni  it  and  the  nitrogen  will  pass  fn»m
til* fl.i  k. It lif.uld  Im w.t-li«d  with  w.it«'r  to  niain  any  ammonia  that  may  be  carried

oft Wjtil jl.

■'  'I'Im  oxy;^<Mi  toiiipoiMKK  of  nitm^'.-n  'f«ir  <-xami>lf,  XX">,  XO.  NOj'i  are  decom^wsed
ill  .1  t*<\  lii-.il.  hy  tlM'iii-<*lv*'-.,  and  nndfrr  the  action  of  red-hot  copiH»r,  iron.  M>dium.  A'c.,
tln-v  ;'i\«'  up  tlwir  »ixy;;«'n  to  tin*  ni»'talK,  h'avin;^  the  nitrogen  fn*e.  According  to  Meyer
iiii'l  IjJin;.'*  r  (iKH.**!,  nitron-i  oxiije,  X,0,  de(:omiK>«ies  helow  IHX)',  although  not  iH>mx>letely.

'  f  liloniii*  iiiid  hn>niiii<'  (in  i-Xi-*--^^),  a?>  well  a-^  hleuching  iM>wd«T  i hypochlorites >,  take
n|i  llw  hsdrogen  from  ammonia,  NHj,  leaving  nitrogen.  Nitrogen  i^  ht'>t  procurenl  from
iimmoniii  hy  IIh*  at  t ion  of  a  solution  of  ^todium  hypijbromite  on  solid  sal-ammouiac.

• '•'■  lioid  Kayleigh  ni  iHlll,  when  determining  tlie  weight  of  a  volume  of  carefully
|inrifi'-d  nitrogen  liy  ui-ighing  it  in  one  and  the  same  globe,  found  that  the  ga>i  obtaiued
fioin  nir,  h\  thf  action  of  inc^andescent  copper  for  iron  or  by  removing  the  oxygen  by
fi-iTons  oxide)  was  iilway-.  .j,',„  heavier  than  the  nitrogen  obtained  from  its  com{x>unds,
for  ini«t,an«'<',  from  the  oxidi*  or  buboxide  <jf  nitrogen,  decomix»sed  by  incandescent  pul-
vi'iultiif  ii'in  or  fn»n»  tin*  anunonia  salt  of  nitrous  acid.  For  the  nitrogen  procured  from
uir,  h«-  iiblmiMMl,  at  0  and  7<5()l  mm.  pressure,  a  weight  =  2U10  grms.,  while  for  the
niliMgiMi  obtained from  its  comiKiundH,  2'2IM>  grms. This  difference  of  about  .^^\ii  could

NITROGEN  AND  AIR  227

Nitrogen  is  a  gaseou3  substance  which  does  not  differ  much  in
physical  properties  from  air  ;  its  density,  referred  to  hydrogen,  is
approximately  equal  to  1 4 — that  is,  it  is  slightly  lighter  than  air,  its
density  referred  to  air  being  0*972  ;  one  litre  of  nitrogen  weighs  1'257
gram.  Nitrogen  mixed  with  oxygen,  which  is  slightly  heavier  than
air,  forms  air.  It  is  a  gas  which,  like  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  is
liquefied  with  difficulty,  and  is  but  little  soluble  in  water  and  other
liquids.  Its  absolute  boiling  point '^  is  about  —  140°;  above  this
temperature  it  is  not  liquefiable  by  pressure,  and  at  lower  tempera-
tures it  remains  a  gas  at  a  pressure  of  50  atmospheres.  Liquid
nitrogen  boils  at  —  193°,  so  that  it  may  be  employed  as  a  source  of
great  cold.  At  about  —  203°,  in  vaporising  under  a  decrease  of  pres-
sure, nitrogen  solidifies  into  a  colourless  snow-like  mass.  Nitrogen
does  not  bum,'^*^**  does  not  support  combustion,  is  not  absorbed  by  any
of  the  reagents  used  in  gas  analysis,  at  least  at  the  ordinary  tempera-
ture— in  a  word,  it  presents  a  whole  series  of  negative  chemical
properties  ;  this  is  expressed  by  saying  that  this  element  has  no  energy
for  combination.  Although  it  is  capable  of  forming  compounds  both
with  oxygen  and  hydrogen  as  well  as  with  carbon,  yet  these  com-
pounds are  only  formed  under  particular  circumstances,  to  which  we
will  directly  turn  our  attention.  At  a  red  heat  nitrogen  combines
with  boron,  titanium,  and  silicon,  barium,  magnesium,  <S^c.,  forming
very  stable  nitrogenous  compounds,®  whose  properties  are  entirely
different  from  those  of  nitrogen  with  hydrogen,  oxygen  and  carbon.
However,  the  combination  of  nitrogen  with  carbon,  although  it  does
not  take  place  directly  between  the  elements  at  a  red  heat,  yet  proceeds
with  comparative  ease  by  heating  a  mixture  of  charcoal  with  an
alkaline  carbonate,  especially  potassium  carbonate  or  barium  carbonate,

not  be  explained  by  the  nitrogen  not  having  been  well  purified,  or  by  inaccuracy  of  ex-
periment, and  was  the  means  for  the  remarkable  discovery  of  the  presence  of  a  heavy
gas  in  air,  which  will  be  mentioned  in  Note  10  *•*".

*  See  Chapter  II.  Note  29.

»  t»u  See  Note  11  »>»«.

^  Tlie  combination  of  boron  with  nitrogen  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  suffi*
cient  heat  to  raise  the  mass  to  redness ;  titanium  combines  so  easily  with  nitrogen  that  it
is  difficult  to  obtain  it  free  from  that  element ;  magnesium  easily  absorbs  nitrogen  at  a
red  heat.  It  is  a  remarkable  and  instructive  fact  that  these  compounds  of  nitrogen  are
very  stable  and  non-volatile.  Carbon  (C  =  12)  with  nitrc^en  gives  cyanogen,  C^Nj,  which
is  gaseous  and  very  unstable,  and  whose  molecule  is  not  large,  whilst  boron  (B  =  11)
forms  a  nitrogenous  compound  which  is  solid,  non- volatile,  and  very  stable.  Its  compo-
sition, BN,  is  similar  to  that  of  cyanogen,  but  its  molecular  weight,  BnNtu  is
probably  greater.  Its  composition,  like  that  of  NjMgs,  NNaj,  NsHgs  and  of  many  of
tlie  metallic  nitrides,  corresponds  to  ammonia  with  the  substitution  of  all  its  hydrogen
by  a  metal.  In  my  opinion,  a  detailed  study  of  the  transformations  of  the  nitrides  now
known,  should  lead  to  the  discovery  of  many  facts  in  the  history  of  nitrogen.

Q2

228  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

to  redness,  carbo- nitrides  or  cyanides  of  the  metals  being  formed  ;  for
instance,  K^COg  -f  4C  +  N^  =  2KCN  +  3C0.7

Nitrogen  is  found  with  oxygen  in  the  air,  but  they  do  not  readily
combine.  Cavendish,  however,  in  the  last  century,  showed  that
nitrogen  combines  toith  oxygen  ufuler  the  injluence  of  a  series  of  electric
sparks.  Electric  sparks  in  passing  through  a  moist  ^  mixture  of  nitro-
gen and  oxygen  cause  these  elements  to  combine,  forming  reddish-
brown  fumes  of  oxides  of  nitrogen,®  which  form  nitric  acid,*"  NHO3.
The  presence  of  the  latter  is  easily  recognised,  not  only  from  its
reddening  litmus  paper,  but  also  from  its  acting  as  a  powerful  oxidiser
even  of  mercury. Conditions  similar  to  these  occur  in  nature,  during  a

^  This  reaction,  so  far  as  is  known,  doeH  not  proceed  beyond  a  certain  limit,  probably
because  cyanogen,  CN,  itself  breaks  ux>  into  carbon  and  nitrogen.

8  Fre'my  and  Becquerel  took  dry  air,  and  observ'ed  the  formation  of  brown  vaix)Qr8  of
oxides  of  nitrogen  on  the  passage  of  sparks.

'  If  a  mixture  of  one  volume  of  nitrogen  and  fourteen  volumes  of  hydrogen  be  burnt,
then  water  and  a  considerable  quantity  of  nitric  acid  are  formed.  It  may  be  partly  due
to  this  that  a  certain  quantity  of  nitric  acid  is  produced  in  the  slow  oxidation  of  nitro-
genous substances  in  an  excess  of  air.  This  is  especially  faicilitated  by  the  presence  of
an  alkali  with  which  the  nitric  acid  formed  can  combine.  If  a  galvanic  current  be  passed
through  water  containing  the  nitrogen  and  oxygen  of  the  air  in  solution,  then  the  hydro-
gen anid  oxygen  set  free  combine  with  the  nitrogen,  forming  ammonia  and  nitric  acid.

When  copper  is  oxidised  at  the  expense  of  the  air  at  the  ordinary  temperature  in  the
presence  of  ammonia,  oxygen  is  absorbed,  not  only  for  combination  with  the  copper,  but
also  for  the  formation  of  nitric  acid.

The  combination  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen,  even,  for  example,  by  the  action  of  electric
sparks,  is  not  accompanied  by  an  explosion  or  rapid  combination,  as  in  the  action  of  a
spark  on  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  This  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  heat  is
not  evolved  in  the  combination  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen,  but  is  absorbed — »in  expenditure
of  energy  is  required,  there  is  no  evolution  of  energy.  In  fact,  there  will  not  be  the
transmission  of  heat  from  particle  to  particle  which  occurs  in  tlie  explosion  of  deto-
nating gas.  Each  spark  will  aid  the  formation  of  a  certain  quantity  of  the  compound
of  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  but  will  not  excite  the  same  in  the  neighbouring  particles.  In
other  words,  the  combination  of  hydrogen  with  oxygen  is  an  exothermal  reaction,  and
the  combination  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen  an  endothermal  reaction.

A  condition  particularly  favourable  for  the  oxidation  of  nitrogen  is  the  explosion  of
detonating  gas  and  air  if  the  former  be  in  excess.  If  a  mixture  of  two  volumes  of
detonating  gas  and  one  volume  of  air  be  exploded,  then  one-tenth  of  the  air  is  converted
into  nitric  tu:id,  and  consequently  after  the  explosion  has  taken  place  there  remain  only
nine-tenths  of  the  volume  of  air  originally  taken.  If  a  large  ]>roportion  of  air  be  taken —
for  instance,  four  volumes  of  air  to  two  volumes  of  detonating  gas — then  the  tempera-
ture of  the  explosion  is  lowered,  the  volume  of  air  taken  remains  unchanged,  and  no
nitric  acid  is  formed.  This  gives  a  rule  to  be  observed  in  making  use  of  the  eudio-
meter— namely  tliat  to  weaken  the  force  of  the  explosion  not  less  than  an  equal  volume
of  air  should  be  added  to  the  explosive  mixture.  On  the  other  hand  a  large  excess  must
not  be  taken  as  no  explosion  would  then  ensue  {see  Chapter  III.  Note  84).  Probably  in
the  future  means  will  be  found  for  obtaining  compounds  of  nitrogen  on  a  large  industrial
scale  by  the  aid  of  electric  discharges,  and  by  making  use  of  the  inexhaustible  mass  of
nitrogen  in  the  atmosphere.

"^  In  reality  nitric  oxide,  NO,  is  first  forme*!,  but  with  oxygen  and  water  it  gives
(brown  fumes)  nitrous  anhydride,  which,  as  we  shall  afterwards  learn,  in  the  presence  of
water  and  oxygen  gives  nitric  acid.

NITROGEN  AND AIR  229

thunderstorm  or  in  other  electrical  discharges  which  take  place  in  the
atmosphere ;  whence  it  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  air  and  rain-water
always  contain  traces  of  nitric  and  nitrous  acids.  ^^  Besides  which
Crookes  (1892)  showed  that  under  certain  circumstances  and  when
electricity  of  high  potential  ^*  ^^*  passes  through  the  air,  the  com-
bination of  nitrogen  with  oxygen  is  accompanied  by  the  formation  of
a  true  flame.  This  was  also  observed  previously  (1880)  during  the
passage  of  electrical  discharges  through  the  air.

Further  observations  showed  that  under  the  influence  of  electrical
discharges,*^  silent  as  well  as  with  sparks,  nitrogen  is  able  to  enter  into
many  reactions  with  hydrogen  and  with  many  hydrocarbons  ;  although
these  reactions  cannot  be  effected  by  exposure  to  a  red  heat.  Thus,
for  instance,  a  series  of  electric  sparks  passed  through  a  mixture  of
nitrogen  and  hydrogen  causes  them  to  combine  and  /orm  ainmonia  **
or  nitrogen  hydride,  NH3,  composed  of  one  volume  of  nitrogen  and
three  volumes  of  hydrogen.  This  combination  is  limited  to  the  forma-
tion of  6  per  cent,  of  ammonia,  because  ammonia  is  decomposed,
although  not  entirely  (xVu)  ^7  electric  sparks.  This  signifies  that  under
the  influence  of  an  electrical  discharge  the  reaction  NH3  =  N  -h  3H
is  reversible,  consequently  it  is  a  dissociation,  and  in  it  a  state  of
equilibrium  is  arrived  at.  The  equilibrium  may  be  destroyed  by  the
addition  of  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid,  HCl,  because  with  ammonia  it
forms  a  solid  saline  compound,  sal-ammoniac,  NH4CI,  which  (being
formed  from  a  gaseous  mixture  of  3H,  N,  and  HCl)  fixes  the  ammonia.
The  remaining  mass  of  nitrogen  and  hydrogen,  under  the  action  of  the

<  ^  The  nitric  acid  contained  in  the  soil,  river  water  (Chapter  I.,  Note  2),  wells,  &c.,
proceeds  (like  carbonic  anhydride)  from  the  oxidation  of  organic  compounds  which  have
fallen  into  water,  soil,  &c.

'^  ^'*  Crookes  employed  a  current  of  15  amperes  and  65  volts,  and  passed  it  through
an  induction  coil  with  ii80  vibrations  per  second,  and  obtained  a  flame  between  the  poles
placed  at  a  distance  of  46  mm.  which  after  the  appearance  of  the  arc  and  flame  could
be  increaHed  to  200  mm. A  platinum  wire  fused  in  the  flame.

<'  This  property  of  nitrogen,  which  under  normal  conditions  is  inactive,  leads  to  the
idea  that  under  the  influence  of  an  electric  discharge  gaseous  nitrogen  changes  in  its
properties  ;  if  not  permanently  hke  oxygen  (electrolysed  oxygen  or  ozone  does  not  react
on  nitrogen,  according  to  Berthelot),  it  may  be  temporarily  at  the  moment  of  the  action
of  the  discharge,  just  as  some  substances  under  the  action  of  heat  are  permanently
affected  (that  is,  when  once  changed  remain  so — for  instance,  white  phoephorus  passes
into  re<1,  etc.),  whilst  others  are  only  temporarily  altered  (the  dissociation  of  S^  into  %^
or  of  sal-aimiioniac  into  ammonia  and  hydrochloric  acid).  Such  a  proposition  is  favoured
by  the  fact  that  nitrogen  gives  two  kinds  of  spectra,  ¥rith  which  we  shall  afterwards
become  acquainted.  It  may  be  that  the  molecules  N^  then  give  less  complex  molecules,
N  containing  one  atom,  or  fonn  a  complex  molecule  N3,  like  oxygen  in  passing  into
ozone.  Probably  under  a  silent  discharge  the  molecules  of  oxygen,  O2,  are  partly  decom-
posed and  the  indivi<lual  atoms  O  combine  with  O.^,  forming  ozone,  O5.

'■'•  This  reaction,  discovered  by  Chabrie  and  investigated  by  Thenard,  was  only  rightly
understood  when  Deville  applied  the  principles  of  dissociation  to  it.

I

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

sparks,  again  forma  ammonini,  and  in  tbis  manner  rolid  sal-amnu)r\
I  oblaiTied  to  the  end  by  tlie  aetion  of  a  series  of  electric  aj>arka  o
mixluTe  ofgaseoun  N,  Hj,  awl  HCl."  Berthelot  (1876)  showed  tlwt
under  the  action  of  a  silent  discharge  many  non-nitrogenous  ot^anic
substances  (benzene,  C^Hft,  cellulose  in  the  form  of  paper,  resin,
glucose,  CaHioOj,  and  others)  absorb  nitrogen  and  form  complex
nitrogenous  compounds,  which  are  capable,  like  albuminous  sub-
stances, of  evolving  their  nitrogen  as  aninmnia  when  heated  with
alkalis.'-''

By  such  indirect  methods  does  tbe  gaseous  nitrogen  of  tlie  atmo-
sphere  yield its primary  compounds,  in  which  form it  enters  into \
plants, and is  elaborated in them into complex albuminous sub-
stances.'"''' But,  starting  fn.im  a  given  i-onipound  o£  nitrogen  with

c<)t;1ene(BertlielDt)[e

1<  The  action  at  nitrogen  oi
ol  tbeae  gaeea  aaUm  the  indue:
^9CNH. This  reaction  cAunot  proceed  bejonil

"  Berthelot  succeenlully  umplojed  electricit;
meatH,  wliioli  fact  led  bim  to  think  th^t  iu  natnr
place  very,  frequently,  ■  psH  o(  the  cimiplei  iiiti
tlie  gaseoUH  nitrogen  of  the  air  by  this  metliocL

As  the  nitrogenoua  xubHtancRti  of  orgiuiixm
(organic  life  aumut  exiat  witlioat  theiu),  uid  ns
of  invigorating

iachftrge  gives  hydrocyanie  acid,  C]Hg+ Tfg
certain  limit  bedLDse  it  \»  reversible,
f  even  feeble  potential  in  theee  experl-
,  where  the  action  of  electricity  take!
genoaa  snbatanceR  may  proceed  from

piny  H

'  imiiortiint  pari

tlie  presence  ot  (ho
leqniied  by  plante),  the  qneetioD  of  the  taeana  ol  converting
Ibe  atmoBpheric  nitrogen  into  tbe  nitrogenana  mmpoonchi  of  tbe  eoil,  or  into  ainrniloili
niirvgan  capable  ot  being  abiiorbed  by  plants  aud  of  forming  complex  (albaminona)
Bnbelancee  in  tliem,  is  one  of  great  theoretical  and  practical  interest  The  aitiScial
(technical)  converHian  uf  the  ntmoapheric  uilrogeti  inta  nitrogenoUH  compuundB,  not-
withataDding  repeated  attemptB,  cannot  yet  be  canddereil  ae  fulfilled  in  a  practical
remnnerative  manner  although  its  posaibilily  iH  already  evident.  Electricity  will
probably  aid  in  eolviug  this  very  impurtuit  practical  problem.  When  the  theoretical  i
side  of  the  <tiiestion  ia  ftirtber  advanced,  then  without  doubt  an  advantagooue  mcaoa
trill  be  fatuid  tor  the  manufacture  ol  nitrogenous  sabatance^  from  the  nitrogen  of  the
air ;  and  this  ia  needed,  before  all,  for  the  agriculturist,  to  whom  nitrogenoua  lertiliaen
form  an  eipeniive  item,  and  are  more  important  than  all  other  manures.

One  thopsand  ton«  ot  farmyard  manure  do  not  generally  contain  more  than  toar  tone
ot  nitn^en  in  the  form  ot  complex  nitrogenoun  aubstancca,  and  this  uoaunt  of  nitrogen
la  contained  in  twenty  Ions  ot  ammonium  solphal^,  therefore  tlie  eHect  of  a  maagot
farmyard  mannre  in  respect  to  the  introduction  of  nitrogen'may  be  produced  by  junall
quantities  ot  artifldal  nitrogenous  fortiliaera  [tet  Note  IS  *!•),

IS  kii  Althongh  the  numerous,  and  as  tar  as  poasible  accurate  and  varied  ressarchea
made  in  the  phyaiology  ot  plants  have  proved  that  tbe  higher  forms  of  pUnts  are  not
otpable  ot  directly  abiorbing  the  nitrogen  of  the  atmosphere  and  converting  it  into  complex
albuminoaa  Bubilnnoes,  still  it  boa  been  long  and  repeatedly  obsarved  that  tbe  amount
of  nitrogenous  substances  in  tlie  aoil  is  increased  by  the  cultivation  of  plants  ot  tha '
bean  (legnminoDs!  family  sncli  as  pea,  acacia,  Ac. A  closer  study  ot  these  pluita  bu '
:tad  with  tbe  fortoatian  of  peculiar  nodular  swellings  in  thall
growth  of  peculiar  micro-organisms  {bacteria]  which  cohabit  Uie  am] <
roots,  and  are  cspable  ot  abaorbing  nitrogen  from  the  air,  i.r.  ol  converting  il
milated  nitrogen. This  branch  of  plant  phyiuologj,  which  forma  another  prod  I

NITROGEN  AND  AIR  231

hydrogen  or  oxygen,  we  may,  without  the  aid  of  organisms,  obtain,  as
will  afterwards  be  partially  indicated,  most  diverse  and  complex
nitrogenous  substances,  which  cannot  by  any  means  be  formed  directly
from  gaseous  nitrogen.  In  this  we  see  an  example  not  only  of  the
difference  between  an  element  in  the  free  state  and  an  intrinsic  element,
but  also  of  those  circuitous  or  indirect  methods  by  which  substances
are  formed  in  nature.  The  discovery,  prognostication,  and,  in  general,
the  study  of  such  indirect  methods  of  the  preparation  and  formation  of
substances  forms  one  of  the  existing  problems  of  chemistry.  From  the
fact  that  A  does  not  act  at  all  on  B,  it  must  not  be  concluded  that  a
compound  AB  is  not  to  be  formed.  The  substances  A  and  B  contain
atoms  which  occur  in  AB,  but  their  state  or  the  nature  of  their  motion
may  not  be  at  all  that  which  is  required  for  the  formation  of  AB,
and  in  this  substance  the  chemical  state  of  the  elements  may  be  as
different  as  the  state  of  the  atoms  of  oxygen  in  ozone  and  in  water.
Thus  free  nitrogen  is  inactive  ;  but  in  its  compounds  it  very  easily
enters  into  changes  and  is  distinguished  by  great  activity.  An  acquaint-
ance with  the  compounds  of  nitrogen  confirms  this.  But,  before
entering  on  this  subject,  let  us  consider  air  as  a  mass  containing  free
nitrogen.

Judging  from  what  has  been  already  stated,  it  will  be  evident  that
atmospheric  air  '^  contains  a  mixture  of  several  gases  and  vapours.
Some  of  them  are  met  with  in  it  in  nearly  constant  proportions,  whilst
others,  on  the  contrary,  are  very  variable  in  their  amount. The  chief

of  the  important  part  played  by  micro-organisms  in  nature,  cannot  be  discussed  in
this  work,  but  it  should  be  mentioned,  since  it  is  of  great  theoretical  and  practical
interest,  and,  moreover,  phenomena  of  this  kind,  which  have  recently  been  discovered,
promise  to  explain,  to  some  extent  at  least,  certain  of  the  complex  problems  concerning
the  derelopment  of  life  on  the  earth.

'*'  Under  the  name  of  atmospheric  air  the  chemist  and  physicist  understand  ordinary
air  containing  nitrogen  and  oxygen  only,  notwithstanding  that  the  other  component  parts
of  air  have  a  very  important  influence  on  the  liWng  matter  of  the  earth's  surface.  Tliat
air  is  so  represented  in  science  is  based  on  the  fact  that  only  the  two  components  above-
named  are  met  with  in  air  in  a  constant  quantity,  whilst  the  others  are  variable.  The
solid  impurities  may  be  separated  from  air  required  for  chemical  or  physical  research
by  simple  filtration  through  a  long  layer  of  cotton-wool  placed  in  a  tube.  Organic  im-
purities are  removed  by  passing  the  air  through  a  solution  of  potassium  permanganate.
The  carbonic  anhydride  contained  in  air  is  absorbed  by  alkalis — best  of  all,  soda-lime,
which  in  a  dry  state  in  porous  lumps  absorbs  it  with  exceeding  rapidity  and  complete-
ness. Aqueous  vapour  is  removed  by  passing  the  air  over  calcium  chloride,  strong  sul-
phuric acid,  or  pliosphoric  anhydride.  Air  thus  purified  is  accepted  as  containing  only
nitrogen  and  oxygen,  although  in  reality  it  still  contains  a  certain  quantity  of  hydrogen
and  liydrocarbons,  from  which  it  may  be  purified  by  passing  over  copper  oxide  heated  to
redness.  The  copper  oxide  then  oxidises  the  hydrogen  and  hydrocarbons — it  bums  them,
fonning  water  and  carbonic  anliydride,  which  may  be  removed  as  above  described.  When
it  is  said  that  in  t)ie  determination  of  the  density  of  gases  the  weight  of  air  is  taken  as
unity,  it  is  understood  to  be  such  air,  containing  only  nitrogen  and  oxygen.

232  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

component  parts  of  air,  placed  in  the  order  of  their  relative  amounts,
are  the  following  :  nitrogen, ^^  ^^^  oxygen,  aqueous  vapour,  carbonic
anhydride,  nitric  acid,  salts  of  ammonia,  oxides  of  nitrogen,  and  also
ozone,  hydrogen  peroxide,  and  complex  organic  nitrogenous  substances.
Besides  these,  air  genei-ally  contains  water,  as  spray,  drops,  and  snow,
and  particles  of  solids,  perhaps  of  cosmic  origin  in  certain  instances,
but  in  the  majority  of  cases  proceeding  from  the  mechanical  translation
of  solid  particles  from  one  locality  to  another  by  the  wind.  These  small
solid  and  liquid  particles  (having  a  large  surface  in  proportion  to  their
weight)  are  suspended  in  air  as  solid  matter  is  suspended  in  turbid  water ;
they  often  settle  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  but  the  air  is  never  entirely
free  from  them  because  they  are  never  in  a  state  of  complete  rest.
Then,  air  not  unfrequently  contains  incidental  traces  of  various  sub-
stances as  everyone  knows  by  experience.  These  incidental  substances
sometimes  belong  to  the  onler  of  those  which  act  injuriously,  the  germs
of  lower  organisms -for  instance  of  moulds — and  the  class  of  carriers
of  infectious  diseases.

In  the  air  of  the  various  countries  of  the  earth,  at  different  longi-
tudes and  at  different  altitudes  above  its  surface,  on  the  ocean  or  on  the
dry  land — in  a  word,  in  the  air  of  most  diverse  localities  of  the  earth  —
the  oxygen  and  nitrogen  are  found  everywhere  to  be  in  a  constant  ratio.
This  is,  moreover,  self-evident  from  the  fact  that  the  air  constantly
diffuses  (intermixes  by  virtue  of  the  internal  motion  of  the  gaseous
particles)  and  is  also  put  into  motion  and  intermixed  by  the  wind,  by
which  processes  it  is  equalised  in  its  composition  over  the  entire  surface
of  the  earth.  In  those  localities  where  the  air  is  subject  tu  change,
and  is  in  a  more  or  less  enclosed  space,  or,  at  any  rate,  in  an  un  ventilated
space,  it  may  alter  very  considerably  in  its  composition.  For  this
reason  the  air  in  dwellings,  cellars,  and  wells,  in  which  there  are
substances  absorbing  oxygen,  contains  less  of  this  gas,  whilst  the  air  on

mbi*  Xliaiiks  to  the  remarkable  discovery  made  in  the  summer  of  1894  l)y  Lord  Ray-
leigh  and  Prof.  Ramsay,  the  well-known  component  elements  of  air  must  now  l>e  supple-
mented by  1  p.c.  (by  volume)  of  a  heavy  gas  (density  about  19,  H  =  l),  inactive  like  nitro-
gen, which  wiis  discovered  in  the  researches  made  by  Lord  Rayleigh  on  the  density  of
nitrogen  as  mentioned  in  note  4  •''*.  Up  to  the  present  time  this  gas  has  l)een  always
determined  togetlier  with  nitrogen,  because  it  combines  with  neither  tlie  hydrogen  in
the  eudiometer  nor  with  the  copper  in  the  gravimetric  method  of  determining  the  coni-
|x>8ition  of  air,  and  therefore  has  always  remained  with  the  nitrogen.  It  has  been
possible  to  separate  it  frr)m  nitrogen  since  magnesium  absorbs  nitrogen  at  a  red  heat,
while  this  gas  remains  unabsorbed,  and  was  found  to  have  a  density  nearly  one  and  a
half  time  greater  than  that  of  nitrogen  (is  it  not  a  polymer  of  nitrogen,  S-?).  It  is  now
known  also  that  this  gas  gives  a  luminous  spectrum,  which  contains  the  briglit  blue  line
observed  in  the  spectrum  of  nitrogen.  Owing  to  the  fact  that  it  is  an  exceedingly  inert
substunce,  even  more  so  than  nitrogen,  it  has  been  termed  Argon.  Furtlier  reference
will  be  made  to  it  in  the  \piKMidix.

NITROGEN  AND  AIR  283

the  surface  of  standing  water,  which  abounds  in  the  lower  orders  of
plant  life  evolving  oxygen,  contains  an  excess  of  this  gas.*^  The
constant  composition  of  air  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  earth  has
been  proved  by  a  number  of  most  careful  researches.*®

The  analysis  of  air  is  effected  by  converting  the  oxygen  into  a  non-
gaseous compound,  so  as  to  separate  it  from  the  air. The  original

'^  As  a  further  proof  of  the  fact  that  certain  circumstances  may  change  the  com-
position of  air,  it  will  be  enough  to  point  out  that  the  air  contained  in  the  cavities  of
glaciers  contains  only  up  to  10  p.c,  of  oxygen.  This  depends  on  the  fact  that  at  low
temperatures  oxygen  is  much  more  soluble  in  snow-water  and  snow  than  nitrogen.  When
shaken  up  with  water  the  composition  of  air  should  change,  because  the  water  dissolves
unequal  quantities  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen.  We  have  already  seen  (Chapter  I.)  that
the  air  boiled  of!  from  water  saturated  at  about  0°  contains  about  thirty-five  volumes
of  oxygen  and  sixty-five  volumes  of  nitrogen,  and  we  have  considered  the  reason  of
this.

^^  The  analysis  of  air  by  weight  conducted  by  Dumas  and  Bonssingault  in  Paris,
which  they  repeated  many  times  between  April  27  and  Septt*mber  22, 1841,  under  various
coTiditions  of  weather,  showed  that  the  amount  by  weight  of  oxygen  only  varies  between
22*89  p.c.  and  2308  p.c,  the  average  amount  being  23'07  p.c.  Brunner,  at  Bern  in
Switzerland,  and  Bravais,  at  Faulhorn  in  the  Bernese  Alps,  at  a  height  of  two  kilometres
above  the  level  of  the  sea,  Mariguac  at  Geneva,  Lewy  at  Copenhagen,  and  Stas  at
Brussels,  have  analysed  the  air  by  the  same  methods,  and  found  that  its  comiMsition
does  not  exceed  the  limits  determined  for  Paris.  The  most  recent  determinations  (with
an  accuracy  of  ±0*05  p.c.)  confirm  the  conclusion  that  the  composition  of  the  atmosphere
i.!>  constant.

As  there  are  some  gromids  (which  will  be  mentioned  shortly)  for  considering  that  the
composition  of  the  air  at  great  altitudes  is  slightly  different  from  that  at  attainable
heights — namely,  tliat  it  is  richer  in  the  lighter  nitrogen — several  fragmentary  observations
made  at  Munich  (Jolly,  1880)  gave  reason  for  thinking  that  in  the  upward  currents  (that  is
in  the  region  of  miniumm  barometric  pressure  or  at  the  centres  of  meteorological  cyclones)
the  air  is  richer  in  oxygen  than  in  the  descending  currents  of  air  (in  the  regions  of  anti-
cyclones or  of  barometric  maxima) ;  but  more  carefully  conducted  observations  showed
this  supposition  to  be  incorrect.  Improved  methods  for  the  analysis  of  air  have  shown
that  certain  sliglit  variations  in  its  composition  do  actually  occur,  but  in  the  first  place
they  depend  on  incidental  local  influences  (on  the  passage  of  the  air  over  mountains
and  large  surfaces  of  water,  regions  of  forest  and  herbage,  and  the  like),  and  in  the
second  placet  are  limited  to  quantities  which  are  scarcely  distinguishable  from  possible
errors  in  the  analyses.  The  researches  made  by  Kreisler  in  Germany  (1885)  are  par-
ticularly convincing.

llie  considerations  which  lead  to  the  supposition  that  the  atmosphere  at  great  alti-
tudes contains  less  oxygen  than  at  the  surface  of  the  earth  are  based  on  the  law  of  par-
tial pressures  (Chapter  I.)  According  to  this  law,  the  equilibrium  of  the  oxygen  in
the  strata  of  the  atmosphere  is  not  dei)endent  on  the  equilibrium  of  the  nitrogen,  and
the  variation  hi  tlie  densities  of  both  gases  with  the  height  is  detennined  by  the  pressure
of  each  gas  separately.  Details  of  the  calculations  and  considerations  here  involved
are  contained  in  my  work  On  Barometric  LevellingSy  1876,  p.  48.

On  the  basis  of  the  law  of  partial  pressure  and  of  hypsometrical  formulae,  expressing
the  laws  of  the  variation  of  i)ressures  at  different  altitudes,  the  conclusion  may  be  deduced
that  at  the  upper  strata  of  the  atmosphere  the  proportion  of  the  nitrogen  with  respect
to  the  oxygen  increases,  but  the  increase  will  not  exceed  a  fraction  per  cent.,  even  at
altitudes  of  four  and  a  half  to  six  miles,  the  greatest  height  within  the  reach  of  m3n
cither  by  climbing  mountains  or  by  means  of  balloons.  This  conclusion  is  confinncd  by
the  analyses  of  air  collected  by  Welch  m  England  during  his  aeronautic  ascents.

234  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

volume  of  the  air  is  first  measured,  and  then  the  volume  of  the  re-
maining nitrogen.  The  quantity  of  oxygen  is  calculated  either  from
the  difference  between  these  volumes  or  by  the  weight  of  the  oxygen
compound  formed.  All  the  volumetric  measurements  have  to  be
corrected  for  pressure,  temperature,  and  moisture  (Chapters  I.  and  II.)
The  medium  employed  for  converting  the  oxygen  into  a  nou -gaseous
substance  should  enable  it  to  be  taken  up  from  the  nitrogen  to  the
very  end  without  evolving  any  gaseous  substance.  So,  for  instance,  ^^
a  mixture  of  pyrogallol,  CgHgOa,  with  a  solution  of  a  caustic  alkali
absorbs  oxygen  with  great  ease  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (the
solution  turns  black),  but  it  is  unsuited  for  accurate  analysis  because  it
requires  an  aqueous  solution  of  an  alkali,  and  it  alters  the  composition
of  the  air  by  acting  on  it  as  a  solvent.^®  However,  for  approximate
determinations  this  simple  method  gives  results  which  are  entirely
satisfactory.

The  determinations  in  a  eudiometer  (Chapter  III.)  give  more  exact
results,  if  all  the  necessary  corrections  for  changes  of  pressure,  tempera-
ture, and  moisture  be  taken  into  account.  This  determination  is
carried  out  essentially  as  follows  : — A  certain  amount  of  air  is  intro-
duced into  the  eudiometer,  and  its  volume  is  determined.  About  an
equal  volume  of  dry  hydrogen  is  then  passed  into  the  eudiometer,  and
the  volume  again  determined.  The  mixture  is  then  exploded,  in  the
way  described  for  the  determination  of  the  composition  of  water.  The
remaining  volume  of  the  gaseous  mixture  is  again  measured  ;  it  will  be
less  than  the  second  of  the  previously  measured  volumes.  Out  of  three
volumes  which  have  disappeared,  one  belonged  to  the  oxygen  and  two
to  the  hydrogen,  consequently  one-third  of  the  loss  of  volume  indicates
the  amount  of  oxygen  contained  in  the  air.^^

The  most  complete  method  for  the  analysis  of  air,  and  one  which  is

'*  The  complete  absorption  of  the  oxygen  may  be  attained  by  introducing  moist  phos-
phoms  into  a  definite  volume  of  air ;  the  occurrence  of  this  is  recogniKed  by  tlie  fact  of
the  phosphorus  becoming  non-luminous  in  the  dark.  Tlie  amount  of  oxygen  may  be
determined  by  measuring  the  volume  of  nitrogen  remaining.  This  method  however
cannot  give  accurate  results,  owing  to  a  portion  of  the  air  being  dissolved  in  the  water,
to  the  combination  of  some  of  the  nitrogen  with  oxygen  and  to  the  neceKsity  of  intro-
ducing and  withdrawing  the  phosphorus,  which  cannot  be  accomplislied  without
introducing  bubbles  of  air.

^  For  rapid  and  approximate  analyses  (technical  and  hygienic),  such  a  mixture  is
very  suitable  for  determining  the  amount  of  oxygen  in  mixtures  of  gases  from  which
the  substances  absorbed  by  alkalis  have  first  been  removed.  According  to  certain  ob-
servers, this  mixture  evolves  a  certain  (small)  quantity  of  carbonic  oxide  after  absorbing
oxygen.

**  Details  of  eudiometrical  analysis  must,  as  \n*as  pointed  out  in  Chap.  III.,  Note  32,
\ye  looked  for  in  works  on  analytical  chemistry.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  other
analytical  methods  mentioned  in  this  work.  They  are  only  described  for  the  puq)ose
of  showing  the  diversity  of  the  methods  of  chemical  research.

■  NITROGES  AKD  AI3t' '

accompanied  by  the  letu^t  amount  of  errui',  L-ousists  in  the  direct  weigh-
ing, as  faraa  is  possible,  of  the  owygen,  nitrogen,  wat«r,  and  carbonic
anhydride  contained  in  it.  For  tliia  pwrpose  the  fur  is  first  jiassed
tlirough  an  apparatus  for  retaining  the  moiature  and  carbonic  anhy-
dride (which  will  be  considered  presently),  and  is  then  led  through
a  tube  which  contains  shavings  of  metallic  copper  and  has  been  pre-
viously weighed.  A  long  layer  of  such  copper  heated  to  redness  absorbs
all  the  oxygen  from  the  air,  and  leaves  pure  nitrogen,  whose  weight  must
be  determinet). This  is  done  by  collecting  it  in  a  weighed  and  ex-

offb  the  T<

the  vBll«ifot«lf  bjweljihc. Th*  globe  B  «*■

^urbL  pumivA  uuLof  it,  and  it  ii  welghfld  flnpry, Tlv  EubcTmii-

jIieTfiuMllawdglHdniiptyDFAir.  It li hontol io a ohvi^vtl foniaop.

la  rad-bot,  Ib>  ManDoli  r  (imr  B)  li  iU^iIIt  opaai,  aod  fhe  air

omtalnlug  a  tolnnan  ol  poUili,  f.  i-onMlnlng  tthitiDiu  ukI  dImm

rbutii  nmoTe  tbe  enbonlc  iinbjdtUa  ftna  tbe  ilr,  uid  then  tliroosh  t  nd  r,

c  idd  (irliliA  hu  ben  pnrriouilir  bolM  to  etpd  dldOlnd  til}  and  ponina-

9  tha  noMon  troia  Ibi  air. The  puce  nlr  tbeii  gins  np  Ki  oxjgai  ta  tba

tbe  air  panfli  loto  T  the  itvpaock  R  ol  tba  Ktobe  B  ia  opiflial,  uid  ilj  baDovnca

_ — When  the  air  Maaw  W  fiow  in,  lb*  miircrla  nio  doied,  aud  tbe  Klobe  B

■iiu  (nbe  T  odghcd.  The  nliraga)  in  tben  pompal  oucol  tbo  tube  and  it  ti  wdKha]  agalB.
Tbe  [iKreu*  in  w^lit  d(  tbe  tube  about  the  aniomil  a(  ai>ireu.  uiil  tlia  liintnuee  of  tbE  teMmd
■ml  tbird  wdgUogs  ol  tbe  tube,  with  the  iuereue  [u  wdgbtnl  tbe  gtubc,f[iTO  tbe  welgbtul
tbeaitro^D.

eooIaUBSiB
atoBMrbrahi

Ihaustetl  globe,  while  the  amount  by  weight  of  oxygen  is  Bhown  by  the
increase  in  weight  of  the  tube  with  the  coppei'  after  the  experiment.
Air  free  from  moiature  and  carbonic  anliydride  ^*  contains  2095  to
qiu
ftfk
qOM
M«
:

"  Ait  itve  team  cu-boiile  luihyilride  iudiciitcH  oflec  expIoHion  tli«  t>resi

qnnutily  ul  curbouic  aiihydrida,  u  Dc  SaaatiUTti  remuhed,  and  itir  free

. ftfter  being  passed  orer  red-hot  copper  oxide,  appeant  mvariablj  tu  e

[ qiiantit; of  wuter, aa  BonaBinKaoll hsa obaened. Tbess obKeriatioiiB  lead  (a  Ih

Dn  tbiit  ait  alwajB  coiiUina  a  certain  qiiantitir  of  |;iu>«ons  tifdrocBrbons,  lik

a,  whiuh,  a>  we  ahall  afiemrda  le«ni,  is  btoIthI  Innu  the  eartb.  TDarabe»,  fti

I  !(■  Bmoadl,  however,  doea  itot  exceed  t  f«ir  htudredthi  per  Cent.

I

PRINCIPLES 01"  CHEMISTRY

patts  by  volume  of  oxygen  ;  the  mean  amount  of  oxygen  will
therefore  be  20-92  ±  00-t  j>ei-  cent.  Taking  the  density  of  air  =  1  and
of  oxygen  ^  I'lOS  and  nitrogen  0972  the  composition  of  ttirby  weight
will  be  23'12  per  cent,  of  oxygen  and  76-S8  per  cent,  of  nitrogen."

The  possibility  of  the  composition  of  air  being  altered  by  the  mere
action  of  a  solvent  ^f  ry  clearly  shows  that  the  component  parts  of  air
are  in  a  state  of  mixture,  in  which  any  gases  may  occur  ;  they  do  not
in  t]\i^  case  form  a  definite  compound,  although  the  composition  of  the
fttniospliere  does  appear  constant  under  ordinary  cmulitiont.. The  fact

mgli/.  '  tlinttlu'sppiinlnicBnBtflTiilwltboutniiiian.

that  its  composition  varies  under  different  conditions  confirms  the
truth  of  tins  conclusion,  and  therefore  the  constancy  of  the  composition
of  air  must  not  be  considered  aS  in  any  way  dependent  on  the  nature
of  tlie  gaaea  entering  into  its  composition,  hut  only  as  proceeding  from
cosmic  phenomena  co-opernliug  towards  this  constancy.  It  must  be
admitted,  therefore,  that  the  processes  evolving  oxygen,  and  chiefly  the
processes  of  the  respiration  of  plants,  are  of  e<]ua]  force  with  those
processes  which  absorb  oxygen  over  the  entire  surface  of  the  earth, *^

"  Tlie  uiaJyaes  of  air  Mv  Hecoinlmiiied  by  e
ition  atUiniiix  hundledthn  per  will. ;  the  av«
I  only  cocrect  to  the  fint  decinift)  piftce.
"  These  Bgurea  expreiw  the  i

j»l  ther

i[  air  from  a

:  the)  HI

«  within

ivemse  of  Ibe  n

»  In  Chupter  III.,  Note  4,

.[e  calcnlatiQu  is  made  Cor  the  delenniiii,1
[ihece ;  it  nuy  Eherefure  be  supposed  that  Iha •
nilt  vH)  (mm  time  to  time,  the  reUtion  between  ve({«tatioD  uid
oliygen  absorbing  pnic«Ei«H  chvigps;  but m  tha  atmospheru  oF  the  earth  can  hudly
hare  *  defiuiM  Limil  and  we  have  nJreiul)'  Men  (Chapter  IV.,  Note  DB)  that  there  aro '
ubserrations  canSmung  Ibiu,  it  fDlIciwii  that  oar  ittmoiiphere  should  vnry  in  its  o
)H>DHit  puts  with  the  entin  heari'Oly  apace,  and  therefore  it  mast  be  luppoeed  thai

in  the  composition  by  weight  of  tlie  air  can  only  take  pUce  eiceedinglr ]
slowlj,  and  in  a  manner  imperosptible  by  aKpeiiment,

NITROGEN  AND  AIR

287

Air  always  contains  more  or  less  moisture  ^^  and  carbonic  anhydride
produced  by  the  respiration  of  animals  and  the  combustion  of  carbon
and  carboniferous  compounds.  The  latter  shows  the  properties  of  an
acid  anhydride.  In  order  to  determine  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhy-
dride in  air,  substances  are  employed  which  absorb  it — namely,  alkalis
either  in  solution  or  solid.  A  solution  of  caustic  potash,  KHO,  is
poured  into  light  glass  vessels,  through
which  the  air  is  passed,  and  the  amount  of
carbonic  anhydride  is  determined  by  the
increase  in  weight  of  the  vessel.  But  it
is  best  to  take  a  solid  porous  alkaline
mass  such  as  soda-lime.'^  With  a  slow
current  of  air  a  layer  of  soda-lime  20  cm.
in  length  is  sufficient  to  completely  deprive
1  cubic  metre  of  air  of  the  carbonic  anhy-
dride it  contains.  A  series  of  tubes  con-
taining calcium  chloride  for  absorbing  the
moisture  *^  is  placed  before  the  apparatus
for  the  absorption  of  the  carbonic  anhy-
dride, and  a  measured  mass  of  air  is
passed  through  the  whole  apparatus  by  means  of  an  aspirator.  In
this  manner  the  determination  of  the  moisture  is  combined  with  the

Fi«i.  41.— Tube  for  the  absorption  of
carbonic  acid.  A  plug  ox  cotton
wool  is  placed  in  the  bulb  to  pre-
vent tlie  powder  of  »oda-lime  being
carried  off  by  the  gas.  The  tube
contaiuA  8uda-lime  and  chloride  of
calcium.

-*^  The  amount  of  moiBture  contained  in  the  air  in  coneidered  in  greater  detail
in  the  study  of  physicH  and  meteorology  and  the  subject  has  been  mentioned  above,
in  Chapter  I.,  Note  1,  where  the  methods  of  absorbing  moisture  from  gases  were  pointed
out.

^7  Soda-lime  is  prepared  in  the  following  manner: — Unslaked  lime  is  finely  powdered
and  mixed  with  a  slightly  warmed  and  very  strong  solution  of  caustic  soda.  Tlie  mixing
should  be  done  in  an  iron  dish,  and  the  materials' should  be  well  stirred  together  until  the
lime  begins  to  slake.  When  the  mass  becomes  hot,  it  boils,  swells  up,  and  solidifies,  form-
ing a  porous  mass  very  rich  in  alkali  and  capable  of  rapidly  absorbing  carbonic  anhydride.
A  lump  of  caustic  soda  or  potash  presents  a  mucli  smaller  surface  for  absorption  and  there-
fore acts  much  less  rapidly.  It  is  necessary  to  place  an  apparatus  for  absorbing  water  after
the  apparatus  for  absorbing  the  carbonic  anhydride,  because  the  alkali  in  absorbing  tlie
latter  gives  off  water.

^  It  is  evident  that  the  calcium  chloride  employed  for  absorbing  the  water  should  be
free  from  lime  or  oilier  alkalis  in  order  that  it  may  not  retain  carbonic  anhydride.  Such
calcium  chloride  may  be  prepared  in  the  following  manner :  A  perfectly  neutral  solution
of  calcium  chloride  is  prepared  from  lime  and  hydrochloric  acid ;  it  is  then  carefully
evaporated  first  on  a  water-bath  and  then  on  a  sand-bath.  When  the  solution  attains  a
certain  strength  a  scum  is  formed,  which  solidifies  at  the  surface.  Tliis  scum  is
collected,  and  will  be  found  to  be  free  from  caustic  alkalis.  It  is  necessary  in  any  case
to  test  it  before  use,  as  otherwise  a  large  error  may  be  introdnced  into  the  results,  owing
to  the  presence  of  free  alkali  (lime).  It  is  best  to  pass  carbonic  anhydrid<'  tlirough  the
tube  containhig  the  calcium  chloride  for  some  time  before  tlie  experiment,  in  order  to
saturate  any  free  alkali  that  may  remain  from  the  decomposition  of  a  ]N)rtion  of  the
calcium  chloride  by  water,  CaCl^  +  2H2O  =  CaOH.O  +  2HC1.

rCrPLES OF CnEMISTRV

CnbaorptioR  of  tlie carbonic anhydride. The  arrangement  shown  in
lj  fig.  38  is  such  a  combination.

The  amount  of  caclionic  anhydride  ^'  in  free  air  is  incomparably
I  more constanl  than the  amonnt  of  moisture. The  average  amount
3  of  dry  air ts approximately  0'03 volume^that is,
I  10,000  volumes  of  air  contain  abiiut  three  volumes  of  carbonic  anhy-
[  dride,  most  frequently  about  -J-g.'i  volumes. Aa  the  specific  gravity  of
f^  earbonic  anhydride  referred  to  air  ^  1-52,  it  follows  that  100  parts  by
'  weight  of  air  contain  O'Oiii  part  by  weight of carbonic anhydride.
►  This  quantity  varies  according  to  the  time  of  year  (more  in  winter),
the  altitude  above the  level  of  tbe  sea  (less  at  high  altitudes),  the
proximity  to  forests  and  fields  (les.s)  or  cities  (greater),  &c. But  the
variation  is  sRLall  and  rarely  exceeds  the  limits  of  2^  to  4  ten-thousandthfi
I by  volume.-'"' As  tliere  are  many  natuial  local  influences  which  either
,  increase  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  in  the  air  (respiration,  com-
bustion, decomposition,  volcanic  eruptions,  &c.),  or  diminish  it  (absorp-
tion by  plants  and  water),  the  reason  of  the  great  constancy  in  the
amount  of  this  gas  in  the  air  must  be  looked  for,  in  the  first  place,  in  the
fact  that  the  wind  mixes  the  atr  of  various  localities  together,  and,  in
the  .second  place,  in  the  fact  that  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  holding  car-
bonic acid  in  solntion,"  form  an  immense  reservoir  for  regulating  the
I amount  of this  gas in the  atmosphere. Immediately  the  partial

,m\  tu  speciul  metliods  when  the  determiniLtiau  uiily  UTtee  nnU;  iit  Che
earbcmic  anhydride  ol  the  oic.  For  iusUnw,  it  in  ahwrbed  by  ui  nlkivli  which  dues  uot
ooDtun  rau-boiules  (by  n  soluliuii  of  bsiyts  or  caustic  toda  mixed  with  buTtii).  uid  then
Um  cubonic  luihydride  ia  (]i[«lled  by  ui  McesB  ol  aa  uid,  and  its  uniount  determiued  by  the
Toliimb  giTtn  oS.  A  nLfiid  method  of  detorniining  CO^  (for  hygienic  purpoiiea]  is  given
hy  the  fiUI  ol  tension  pnidaced  by  Uie  introduction  ot  mi  ilkali  (the  uir  haying  been
etlhar  brought  to  dryneaa  or  sat  united  with  moisture).  Dr.  Schidloflnky's  KppmtnB  ie
l)jued  upon  this  principle.  The  qneetion  aa  to  theamount  of  oarbonic  anhydridepresent
ill  the  air  hat  been  submitted  to  many  i-olnminoni  and  exact  reMurches,  especially  thosv
ot  B«iut,  Sehloeung,  Hllnti,  and  A.ubin,  who  showed  tliat  tim  amonnt  is  not  anhjeut

I to  such  varinlions  as  at  first  announced  on  the  basis  of  incomplete  and  inmjfHoiMitlr

I •«  anile  determinalions.

"  It  is  a  diflerpnt  duh'  in  endowed  npaces,  in  dwellings,  cellars,  welbi,  caves,  and  mine*,
where  the  renewal  of  air  ih  impeiW.  Under  these  circumstances  Urg^  qauititiei  ol
Oaibonie  anhydride  may  accumulate.  In  cities,  where  there  are  many  cunditious  !or
the  evolution  ol  carbonic  anhydride  (reopiration,  decomposition,  comboHbioa),  ita
amonni  is  greater  than  in  free  air,  yet  even  in  still  weather  the  difference  does  not
often  exceed  one  len-tliouuuidth  (that  is,  ritrely  attains  i  instead  of  3'9  vola.  iu  lOOOO

as  in  fresh  water,  carbonic  acid  occurs  in  two  (orma,  direetly

and  combined  with  lime  ae  calcium  bicarbonate  (hard  iratere

much  carbonic  acid  in  this  lormf. The  tension  of  the  carbonic

with  the  temperalure,  and  its  amount  with  the  partial

I  vols,  ol  air|.
"  In  the  sen  a»  wbI
dieeoWed  in  the  watet
■omeliines  contain  ver;
anhydride  in  the  first  f
presturc.  and  that  m
ocperimenta  have  hIioi
ralatioae  are  diderenl  i

NITROGEN  AND  AIR  289

pressure  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  in  the  air  decreases,  the  water
evolves  it,  and  when  the  partial  pressure  increases,  it  absorbs  it,  and
thus  nature  supplies  the  conditions  for  a  natural  state  of  moving
equilibrium  in  this  as  in  so  many  other  instances.^^

Besides  nitrogen,  oxygen,  moisture,  and  carbonic  acid,  all  the  other
substances  occurring  in  air  are  found  in  infinitesimally  small  quantities
by  weight,  and  therefore  the  weight  of  a  cubic  measure  of  air  depends,
to  a  sensible  degree,  on  the  above-named  components  alone.  We  have
already  mentioned  that  at  0°  and  760  mm.  pressure  the  weight  of  a
cubic  litre  of  air  is  1*293  gram.  This  weight  varies  with  the  accelera-
tion of  gravity,  ^,  so  that  if  ^  be  expressed  in  metres  the  weight  of  a
litre  of  air,  e  =  ^  x  0'131844  gram.  For  St.  Petersburg  g  is  about
9*8188,  and  therefore  e  is  about  1*2946,^^  the  air  being  understood  to  be
dry  and  free  from  carbonic  anhydride.  Taking  the  amount  of  the
latter  as  003  per  100  volumes,  we  obtain  a  greater  weight ;  for  example,
for  St.  Petersburg  6  =  1*2948  instead  of  1*2946  gram.  The  weight
of  one  litre  of  moist  air  in  which  the  tension  ^^  of  the  aqueous
vapour  (partial  pressure)  ^/mm.,  at  a  pressure (total)  of  air  of  H

'*  In  studying  the  phenomena  of  nature  the  conclusion  is  arrived  at  that  the
universally  reigning  state  of  mobile  equilibrium  forms  the  chief  reason  for  that  harmonious
order  which  impresses  all  observers.  It  not  unfrequently  happens  that  we  do  not  see  the
causes  regulating  the  order  and  harmony ;  in  the  particular  instance  of  carbonic
anhydride,  it  is  a  striking  circumstance  that  in  the  first  instance  a  search  was  made
for  an  harmonious  and  strict  uniformity,  and  in  incidental  (insufficiently  accurate  and
fragmentary)  observations  conditions  were  even  found  for  concluding  it  to  be  absent.
When,  later,  the  rule  of  this  uniformity  was  confirmed,  then  the  causes  regulating
such  order  were  also  discovered.  The  researches  of  Schloesing  were  of  this  character.
Deville's  idea  of  the  dissociation  of  the  acid  carbonates  of  sea-water  is  suggested  in
them.  In  many  other  cases  also,  a  correct  interpretation  can  only  follow  from  a  detailed
investigation.

^  Tlie  difference  of  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  dry  air  (free  from  carbonic  anhydride)  at
0°  and  7C0  mm.,  at  different  longitudes  and  altitudes,  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  force
of  gravity  varies  under  these  conditions,  and  with  it  the  pressure  of  the  barometrical
column  also  varies.  This  is  treated  in  detail  in  my  works  On  the  Elasticity  of  Gases
and  On  Barometric  Levellings,  and  'The  Publications  of  the  Weights  and  Measures
Department '  {Journal  of  the  Biissian  Physico-Chemical  Society,  1894).

In  reality  the  weight  is  not  measured  in  absolute  units  of  weight  (in  pressure — refer
to  works  on  mechanics  and  physics),  but  in  relative  units  (grams,  scale  weights)  whose
mass  is  invariable,  and  therefore  the  variation  of  the  weight  of  the  weights  itself  with
the  change  of  gravity  must  not  be  here  taken  into  account,  for  we  are  here  deaUng  with
weights  proportional  to  masses,  since  with  a  change  of  locality  the  weight  of  the
weights  varies  as  the  weight  of  a  given  volume  of  air  does.  In  other  words :  the  mass  of
a  substance  always  remains  constant,  but  the  pressure  produced  by  it  varies  with  the-
acceleration  of  gravity :  the  gram,  pound,  and  other  units  of  weight  are  really  units  of
mass.

5*  Tlie  tension  of  the  aqueous  vapour  in  the  air  is  determined  by  hygrometers
and  other  similar  methods.  It  may  also  be  determined  by  analysis  {see  Chapter  I.^
Note  1).

240  PRINCIPJ^S OF  CHEMISTRY

millimetres,  at  a  temperature  t,  will  be  (i.e.,  if  at  0°  and  760  ram.  the

weight  of  dry  air  =e)  equal  ^  ^_^q.^.^q^  ^  x  "tJq^-'. Forin-

stance,  if  H  =  730  mm.,  t  =  20°,  and/=  10  mm.  (the  moisture  is  then
slightly  below  60  p.c),  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  air  at  St.  Petersburg
=  M527  gram.^**

The  presence  of  ammonia,  a  compound  of  nitrogen  and  hydrogen,
in  the  air,  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  all  acids  exposed  to  the  air  ab-
sorb ammonia  from  it  after  a  time.  De  Saussure  observed  that
aluminium  sulphate  is  converted  by  air  into  a  double  sulphate  of  am-
monium and  aluminium,  or  the  so-called  ammonia  alum.  Quantitative
determinations  have  shown  that  the  amount  of  ammonia  ^^  contained
in  air  varies  at  different  periods.  However,  it  may  be  accepted  that
100  cubic  metres  of  air  do  not  contain  less  than  1  or  more  than  5
milligrams  of  ammonia.  It  is  remarkable  that  mountain  air  contains
more  ammonia  than  the  air  of  valleys.  The  air  in  those  places  where
animal  substances  undergoing  change  are  accumulated,  and  especially
that  of  stables,  generally  contains  a  much  greater  quantity  of  this  gas.
This  is  the  reason  of  the  peculiar  pungent  smell  noticed  in  such  places.
Moreover  ammonia,  as  we  shall  learn  in  the  following  chapter,  com-
bines with  acids,  and  should  therefore  be  found  in  air  in  the  form  of
such  combinations,  since  air  contains  carbonic  and  nitric  acids.

The  presence  of  nitric  acid  in  air  is  proved  without  doubt  by  the
fact  that  rain-water  contains  an  appreciable  amount  of  it.

Further  (as  already  mentioned  in  Chapter  IV.),  air  contains  ozone

^  Forrapid  calculation  tlie  weight  of  a  litre  of  air  (in  a  room)  in  St.  Petersburg,  may
under  these  conditions  (H,  t,  and/)  be  obtained  by  the  formula  e  =  1-20671 +  0(M)16
[Hi  -  765  +  2*6  (18°  - 1°)]  where  H ,  =  H  -  0-88/.  In  determining  the  weight  of  small  and
heavy  objects  (cruciblesi  &c.  in  analysigf  and  in  determining  the  s^iecific  gravities
of  liquids,  &c.)  a  correction  may  be  introduced/or  the  loss  of  weight  in  the  air  of  the  room,
by  taking  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  air  displaced  as  1*2  gram,  and  consequently  0*0012  gram
for  every  cubic  centunetre.  But  if  gases  or,  in  general,  large  vessels  are  weighed,  and  the
weighings  require  to  be  accurate,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into  account  all  the  data  for  the
xletermi nation  of  the  density  of  the  air  (<,  H,  and  /),  because  sensitive  balances  can
determine  the  possible  variations  of  the  weight  of  air,  as  in  the  case  of  a  litre  the
weight  of  air  varies  in  centigrams,  even  at  a  constant  temi)erature,  with  variations  of  H
and  /.  Some  time  ago  (1859)  I  proposed  the  following  method  and  applied  it  for  this
pur^wse.  A  large  light  and  closed  vessel  is  taken,  and  its  volume  and  weight  in  a  vacuum
are  accurately  determined,  and  verified  from  time  to  time.  On  weighing  it  we  obtain
the  weight  in  air  of  a  given  density,  and  by  subtracting  this  weight  from  its  absolute
weight  and  dividing  by  its  volume  we  obtain  the  density  of  the  air.

^  Schloesing  studied  the  equilibrium  of  the  ammonia  of  the  atmos])here  and  of  th<»
rivers,  seas,  &c.,  and  showed  that  the  amount  of  the  gas  is  interchangeable  between  them.
The  ratio  Iwtween  the  amount  of  ammonia  in  a  cubic  metre  of  air  and  in  a  litre  of  water
at  0^- 0(H)4,  ut  10°  -0010,  at  25°^0-040  tol,  and  therefore  in  mUure  there  is  a  sUite
of  eqnilibrinni  in  the  amount  of  ammonia  in  the  atmosphere  and  waters.

NITROGEN  AND  AIR  241

and  hydrogen  peroxide  and  nitrous  acid  (and  its  ammonia  salt),  i.e.
substances  having  a  direct  oxidising  action  (for  instance,  upon  iodized
starch-paper),  but  they  are  present  in  very  small  quantities. ^^

Besides  substances  in  a  gaseous  or  vaporous  state, ^^  there  is  always
found  a  more  or  less  considerable  quantity  of  substances  which  are  not
known  in  a  state  of  vapour.  These  substances  are  present  in  the  air  as
dtist  If  a  linen  surface,  moistened  with  an  acid,  be  placed  in  perfectly
pure  air,  then  the  washings  are  found  to  contain  sodium,  calcium,  iron,
and  potassiura.^^  Linen  moistened  with  an  alkali  absorbs  carbonic,
sulphuric,  phosphoric,  and  hydrochloric  acids.  Further,  the  presence
of  organic  substances  in  air  has  been  proved  by  a  similar  experiment.
If  a  glass  globe  be  filled  with  ice  and  placed  in  a  room  where  are  a
number  of  people,  then  the  presence  of  organic  substances,  like  albu-
minous substances,  may  be  proved  in  the  water  which  condenses  on  the
surface  of  the  globe.  It  may  be  that  the  miasmas  causing  infection  in
marshy  localities,  hospitals,  and  in  certain  epidemic  illnesses  proceed
from  the  presence  of  such  substances  in  the  air  (and  especially  in  water,
which  contains  many  micro-organisms),  as  well  as  from  the  presence
of  germs  of  lower  organisms  in  the  air  as  a  minute  dust.  Pasteur
proved  the  existence  of  such  germs  in  the  air  by  the  following  experi-
ment : — He  placed  gun-cotton  (pyroxylin),  which  has  the  appearance
of  ordinary  cotton,  in  a  glass  tube.  Gun-cotton  is  soluble  in  a  mixture
of  ether  and  alcohol,  forming  the  so-called  collodion. A  current  of  air

^^  Whilst  formed  in  the  air  these  oxidising  substances  (N^Os,  ozone  and  hydrogen
peroxide)  at  the  same  time  rapidly  disappear  from  it  by  oxidising  those  substances  which
are  capable  of  being  oxidised.  Owing  to  this  instability  their  amounts  vary  considerably,
and,  as  would  be  expected,  they  are  met  with  to  an  appreciable  amount  in  pure  air,  whilst
their  amount  decreases  to  zero  in  tlie  air  of  cities,  and  especially  in  dwellings  where  there
is  a  maximum  of  subHtances  capable  of  oxidisation  and  a  minimum  of  conditions  for  the
formation  of  such  bodies.  There  is  a  causal  connection  between  the  amount  of  these
substances  present  in  the  air  and  its  purity — that  is,  the  amount  of  foreign  residues  of
organic  origin  liable  to  oxidation  present  in  the  air.  Wliere  there  is  much  of  such
residues  their  amount  must  be  small.  When  they  are  present  the  amount  of  organic
substances  must  be  small,  as  otlierwise  they  would  be  destroyed.  For  this  reason
efforts  have  been  made  to  apply  ozone  for  purifying  the  air  by  evolving  it  by  artificial
means  in  the  atmosphere  ;  for  instance,  by  passing  a  series  of  electrical  sparks  through
the  ventilating  pipes  conveying  air  into  a  building.  Air  thus  ozonised  destroys  by  oxidation
— that  is,  brings  about  the  combustion  of — the  organic  residues  present  in  the  air,  and
thus  will  serve  for  purifying  it.  For  these  reasons  the  air  of  cities  contains  less  ozone
and  such  like  oxidising  agents  than  country  air.  This  forms  the  distinguishing  feature
of  country  air.  However,  animal  life  cannot  exist  in  air  containing  a  compcuratively  large
amount  of  ozone.

^  Amongst  them  we  may  mention  iodine  and  alcohol,  C^H^O,  which  Miintz  found  to
be  always  present  in  air,  the  soil,  and  water,  although  in  minute  traces  only.

^  A  portion  of  the  atmospheric  dust  is  of  cosmic  origin  ;  this  is  undoubtedly  proved
by  the  fact  of  its  containing  metallic  iron  as  do  meteorites.  Nordenskiold  found  iron  iu
the  dust  covering  snow,  and  Tissandier  in  every  kind  of  air,  although  naturally  in  very
small  quantities.

VOL.  I.  E

242  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

was  passed  through  the  tube  for  a  long  period  of  time,  and  the  gun-
cotton  was  then  dissolved  in  a  mixture  of  ether  and  alcohol.  An
insoluble  residue  was  thus  obtained  which  actually  contained  the  germs
of  organisms,  as  was  shown  by  microscopical  observations,  and  by  their
capacity  to  develop  into  organisms  (mould,  *tc.)  under  favourable
conditions.  The  presence  of  these  germs  determines  the  property  of
air  of  bringing  about  the  processes  of  putrefaction  and  fermentation —
that  is  the  fundamental  alteration  of  organic  substances,  which  is
accompanied  by  an  entire  change  in  their  pi*operties.  The  appearance
of  lower  organisms,  both  vegetable  and  animal,  is  always  to  be  remarked
in  these  processes.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  process  of  fermentation,
when,  for  example,  wine  is  procured  from  the  sweet  juice  of  grapes,  a
sediment  separates  out  which  is  known  under  the  name  of  lees,  and
contains  peculiar  yeast  organisms.  Germs  are  required  before  these
organisms  can  appear.^®  They  are  floating  in  the  air,  and  fall  into  the
sweet  fermentable  liquid  from  it.  Finding  themselves  under  favourable
conditions,  the  germs  develop  into  organisms ;  they  are  nourished  at
the  expense  of  the  organic  substance,  and  during  growth  change  and
destroy  it,  and  bring  about  fermentation  and  putrefaction.  This  is
why,  for  instance,  the  juice  of  the  grape  when  contained  in  the  skin  of
the  fruit,  which  allows  access  of  the  air  but  is  impenetrable  to  the
germs,  does  not  ferment,  does  not  alter  so  long  as  the  skin  remains
intact.  This  is  also  the  reason  why  animal  substances  when  kept  from
the  access  of  air  may  be  preserved  for  a  great  length  of  time.  Preserved
foods  for  long  sea  voyages  are  kept  in  this  way.^ '  Hence  it  is  evident
that  however  infinitesimal  the  quantity  of  germs  carried  in  the  atmo-
sphere may  be,  still  they  have  an  immense  significance  in  nature. ^'-^

Thus  we  see  that  air  contains  a  great  variety  of  substtinces. The
nitrogen,  which  is  found  in  it  in  the  largest  quantity,  has  the  least

^  T\\e  idea  of  the  spoiiianeoUH  fprowth  of  organiKiuH  in  a  suitable  medium,  altliough
still  upheld  by  many,  has  since  tlie  work  of  Pasteur  and  liis  followers  (and  to  a  certain
extent  of  his  predecessors)  been  discarded,  because  it  has  been  proved  how,  when,  and
whence  (from  the  air,  water,  <tc.)  the  germs  appear ;  that  fermentation  as  well  as  infec-
tious diseases  cannot  take  place  without  them ;  and  chiefly  because  it  has  been  shown  that
any  change  accompanied  by  the  development  of  the  organisms  intrpduced  may  be  brought
about  at  will  by  the  introduction  of  the  germs  into  a  suitable  medium.

^'  In  further  confirmation  of  the  fact  that  putrefjiction  and  fermentation  depend  on
germs  carried  in  the  air,  we  may  cite  the  circumstance  that  poisonous  substances  de-
stroying the  life  of  organisms  stop  or  hinder  the  appearance  of  the. above  processes.
Air  which  has  been  heated  to  redness  or  passed  through  sulphuric  tu-id  no  longer  contains
the  germs  of  organisms,  and  loses  the  faculty  of  pro<lucing  feimentation  and  putrefaction.

*•  Their  presence  in  the  air  is  naturally  due  to  the  diffusion  of  germs  into  the  atmo-
sphere, and  owing  to  their  microscopical  dimensions,  they,  as  it  were,  hang  in  the  air  in
virtue  of  their  large  surfaces  compared  to  their  weight.  In  Paris  the  amount  of  dust
surtiK'nded  in  the  air  equals  from  6  (after  rain)  to  28  grams  per  1,000  cm.  of  air.

NITROGEN  AND  AIR  243

influence  on  tliose  processes  which  are  accomplished  by  the  action  of
air. The  oxygen,  which  is  met  with  in  a  lesser  quantity  than  the
nitrogen,  on  the  contrary  takes  a  very  important  part  in  a  number  of
rea.ctions  ; it  supports combustion and  respiration,  it brings  about
decomposition  and  every  process  of  slow  oxidation. The  part  played
by  the  moisture  of  air  is  well  known. The  carbonic  anhydride,  which
is  met  wi6h  in  still  smaller  quantities,  has  an  immense  significance  in
nature,  inasmuch  as  it  serves  for the  nourishment  of  plants. The
importance  of  the  ammonia  and  nitric  acid  is  very  great,  because  they  are
the  sources  of  the  nitrogenous  substances  comprising  an  indispensable
element  in  all  living  organisms. And,  lastly,  the  infinitesimal  quantity
of  germs  also  have  a  great  significance  in  a  number  of  processes. Thus
it  is  not  the  quantitative  but  the  qualitative  relations  of  the  component
parts  of  the  atmosphere  which  determine  its  importance  in  nature.^'

Air,  being  a  mixture  of  various  substances,  may  suffer  considerable
cluiiiges  in  consequence  of  incidental  circumstances.  It  is  particularly
necessary  to  remark  those  changes  in  the  composition  of  air  which  take
place  in  dwellings  and  in  various  localities  where  human  beings  have
to  remain  during  a  lengthy  period  of  time.  The  respiration  of  human
beings  and  animals  alters  the  air.  '^  A  similar  deterioration  of  air  is
produced  by  the  influence  of  decomposing  organic  substances,  and
especially  of  substances  burning  in  it.^*^ Hence  it  is  necessary  to  have

*^  We  see  similar  cases  everywhere.  For  example,  tl^e  predomimiting  mass  of  sand
and  clay  in  t)ie  soil  takes  Imrdly  any  chemical  part  in  the  economy  of  the  soil  in  respect
to  the  nourishment  of  plants.  The  plants  by  their  roots  search  for  substances  which  are
diffused  in  comparatively  smedl  quantities  in  the  soil.  If  a  large  quantity  of  these
nourishing  substances  are  removed,  then  the  plants  will  not  develop  in  the  soil,  just  as
animals  die  in  oxygen.

**  A  man  in  breathing  bums  about  10  grams  of  carbon  per  hour — that  is,  he  produces
about  88U  grams,  or  (as  1  cub.m.  of  carbonic  anhydride  weighs  about  2,CM)0  grams)  about
■^j  cm.  of  carbonic  anhydride.  The  air  coming  from  the  lungs  contains  4  p.c.  of  carbonic
anhydride  by  volume.  The  exhaled  air  acts  as  ti  direct  poison,  owing  to  this  gas  and  to
other  impurities.

*^  For  thi!=i  reason  candles,  lamps,  and  gas  change  the  composition  of  air  almost  in
the  same  way  as  respiration.  In  the  burning  of  1  kilogram  of  stearin  candles,  50  cubic
metres  of  air  are  changed  as  by  respiration — that  is,  4  p.c.  of  carbonic  anhydride  will  be
formed  in  this  volume  of  air.  The  respiration  of  animals  and  exhalations  from  their  skins,
and  especially  from  the  intestines  and  the  excrements  and  the  transfonnations  taking
place  in  them,  contaminate  the  air  to  a  still  greater  extent,  because  tliey  introduce  other
volatile  substances  besides  carbonic  anhydride  into  the  air.  At  the  same  time  that
carbonic  anhydride  is  formed  the  amomit  of  oxygen  in  the  air  decreases,  and  there  is
noticed  the  appearance  of  miasmata  which  occur  in  but  small  quantity,  but  which  are
noticeable  in  i>as)«ing  from  fresh  air  into  a  confined  space  full  of  such  adulterated  air.
Tlie  researches  of  Schmidt  and  Leblanc  and  others  show  that  even  with  20'C  p.c.  of
oxygen  (instead  of  20*9  p.c),  when  tlie  diminution  is  due  to  respiration,  air  becomes
noticeably  less  fit  for  respiration,  and  that  the  heavy  feeling  experienced  in  such  air
increases  with  a  lesser  i>ercentage  of  oxygen.  It  is  difficult  to  remain  for  a  few  minutes
in  air  containing  17'2  p.c.  of  oxygen. These  obserTations  were  chiefly  obtained  by

r2

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

regartl  to  the  purification  of  the  air  of  dweUings. The  rfinewal  of  t
the  replacing  of  respired  by  fi'esh  air,  is  t«rmed  '  ventilation,'  "■  and  the  |

<n  llie  ur  or  iliHi

il  differeut  depths  below  Uie  sarlwe. Ths  1

jf  theHtreii  mid  builiUngu  Full  of  people  aliio  proves  to  CDUtaLa  lean  aiygen;  :
fonnd  on  oii>^  occnuou  tliat  &t  the  end  of  a,  theetriuul  topreoenCstian  tho  oil  m  the  sum
contained  2«'TS  p^.  of  oxygen,  wliiUt  the  ail  nt  the  upper  pnti  of  the  theatre  oonUined
onl.T  aO'BC  p.c.  Tile  Bmnant  nF  citrlunic  uih;dnde  in  the  air  nuy  be  token  as  a  meainre
o(  itB  purity  (Pelteukofer).  When  it  reudiea  1  p.c,  it  is  very  difticuit  lor  liumui  being!
to  renuun  long  iu  such  ajr,  uid  it  is  □eceeur}'  to  net  up  a  vigoious  veotilutioD  loc  the
temoT*!  ol  the  tduKented  air.  In  aider  (4ikeep  the  nir  in  direltingt  in  ft  uniFomily  good
Etnle.  it  i«  neceHsar;  to  introduce  at  leUBt  10  cubic  metres  at  tresh  air  per  hour  per
person.  We  aaw  that  a  man  eihales  about  five-tveUths  at  a  cubic  metre  of  carbonic  anhf-
dride  |Hir  day.  Accurate  observationa  hAVe  shown  that  air  contamuig  one-tenth  p.c.  U
eth^ed  carbonio  anhydride  (and  conaeqnently  alao  a  conenponding  amount  of  the  Dllua
luhataucea  evolved  together  with  it)  is  not  telt  to  be  oppreBSive ;  and  theretore  the  B-mt,
twelfth  cubic  metreH  o(  oarbonic  anhydride  ahoold  be  dilated  with  420  cubic  n
freuh  tir  if  it  be  desired  to  lieep  not  more  than  nne-tentli  p.o.  (tiy  volume)  ot
anhydride  iu  the  air.  Hence  a  man  reijairon  t30  cubic  inetreii  at  air  per  day,  or
metrea  per  hour.  With  the  iutnidnctian  o[  only  IU  cubir  metres  ol  Ireidi  air  pe  _
the  amount  ot  carbonic  anhydride  may  reach  one-fif  tli  ]>.c.,  and  tlie  air  will  not  then  be  of
tlie  requiaite  trealmeaiL

"^  The  venlilalion  ol  inhabited  buildings  is  most  necesiary,  and  is  even  mdispenMblQ*
in  hoepibJa,  nchoolB,  and  similar  huildinga.  In  winter  it  is  carried  on  by  the  w
calorifiers  or  gtorea  lieating  the  air  before  it  enters.  The  best  Itind  of  calorifiarB
reopect  are  those  iu  which  the  tieah  cold  air  is  led  through  a  serieB  of  pipes  heated  bv
the  hot  gases  aomiug  from  a  stove.  In  veiitikitian,particDlarlydnrin^  wini
that  the  Incoming  air  shall  be  moist,  because  in  winter  the  amount  ot  moiBtnni  hi  the
air  is  very  small.  Ventilation,  besides  introducing  fresh  air  into  a  dwelling-place,  muat
also  withdraw  the  air  already  upoilt  by  respiration  and  otlier  causes — ^that  is,  it  is  necee-
fisry  to  construct  channels  tor  the  escape  of  the  bad  air.beaidenthosetor  the  introduction
ol  fresh  air.  In  ordioary  dwelhng- places,  where  not  many  people  are  congteealed,  the
ventilation  is  coudncted  by  natural  means,  in  the  heating  by  fires,  througll  crevicva,
windows,  and  various  orificex  in  walla,  doors,  and  windows.  In  mines,  lactones,  and  work-
rooms ventilation  is  ot  the  grealHst  importance.

AnimnI  vitality  may  still  coatinue  lor  a  period  ot  several  minutes  iu  air  containing  op
to  SO  p.c.  ol  carbonio  anhydride,  if  the  remaining  70  p.c.  consist  of  ordiuaryair;  but  i«^-
nitinn  ceaaes  after  a  certain  lime,  and  death  may  even  ensae.  The  flame  ot  a  candle
iB  very  easily  extinguished  in  an  atmoaphere  containing  from  G  lo  6  p.c.  of  carbonic  aahf-
dride,  bat  animal  vitality  can  be  sustained  in  it  for  a  souiewhat  long  time,  altboo^  tha
effect  of  aach  air  is  exceedingly  painful  even  to  the  lower  animals.  There  are  mines  in
wliich  a  lighted  candle  easily  goes  out  from  the  eicessot  carlmniu  anhydride,  bnt  iuwhieh

deadly  even  to  cold-blooded  animals.  The  air  in  the  galleries  of  a  mine  where  blasting
has  taken  place,  is  known  to  prodace  a  state  of  insensibility  resembling  thatprodoced  by
charcoal  fumes.  Deep  wells  and  vaults  not  untreqaently  ooutain  sunilar  substances,  and
their  atmosphere  olten  cauaea  suffocation.  The  atmonpheres  ot  such  places  cannot  be
tested  by  lowering  a  lighted  candle  into  it,  as  these  poisonous  gases  would  not  eitinguisli
the  flame.  Tliis  method  only  suiSces  to  indicate  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride.  I(
a  candle  keeps  alight,  it  signifies  that  there  ia  leas  than  0  p.p.  of  this  ga>.  In  doBbtlul
cases  it  is  beat  to  lower  a  dog  or  other  animal  into  the  air  to  be  tasted.  If  CO,  be  very
oarvrnllj  added  to  air,  the  flame  ut  a  candle  is  not  extinguished  (although  it  become*
very  mnch  amaller)  even  when  the  gas  amounts  to  13  p.c.  of  air.  Researches  nude  bj
V.  Clowes  |IB94)  show  that  the  flames  (in  every  case  J  in.  long)  of  different  combuatibla
^ttnguished  by  the  gradoal  addition  ot  different  percentages  ni  nitrogen  and

I

1

NITROGEN  AND AIR  *  245

removal  of  foreign  and  injurious  admixtures  from  the  air  is  called
*  disinfection. '  ^'^  The  accumulation  of  all  kinds  of  impurities  in  the
air  of  dwellings  and  cities  is  the  reason  why  the  air  of  mountains,
forests,  seas,  and  non- marshy  localities,  covered  with  vegetation  or  snow,
is  distinguished  for  its  freshness,  and,  in  all  respects,  beneficial  action .

carbonic  acid to  the  air;  tlie  percentage  sufficient  to  extinguish  the  flame  being  an

follows  (the  percentage  of  oxygen  is  given  in  parenthesis) :

p.c.  CO,  p.c.  N.

Absolute  alcohol 14  (18-1)  21  (16C)

Candle 14  (181)  22  (164)

Hydrogen 58  (  8*8)  70  (  6*8)

Coal  gas 83  (141)  46  (US)

Carbonic  oxide 24  (160)  28  (151)

Methane 10  (189)  17  (174)

The  flames  of  all  solid  and  liquid  substances  is  extinguished  by  almost  the  same  per-
centage of  COo  or  N2,  but  the  flames  of  different  gases  vary  in  this  resx)ect,  and  hydrogen
continues  to  bum  in  mixtures  which  are  far  poorer  in  oxygen  than  those  in  which  the
flames  of  other  combustible  gases  are  extinguished ;  the  flame  of  methane  CH4  is  the
most  easily  extinguished.  The  percentage  of  nitrogen  may  be  greater  than  that  of  COo.
This,  together  with  the  fact  that,  under  the  above  circumstances,  the  flame  of  a  gas
before  going  out  becomes  fainter  and  increases  in  size,  seems  to  indicate  that  the  chief
reason  for  the  extinction  of  the  flame  is  the  fall  in  its  temperature.

•7  Different  so-called  disinfectants  purify  the  air,  and  prevent  the  injurious  action  of
certain  of  its  components  by  changing  or  destroying  them.  Disinfection  is  especially
necessary  in  those  places  where  a  considerable  amount  of  volatile  substances  are
evolved  into  the  air,  and  where  organic  substances  are  decomposed ;  for  instance,
in  hospitals,  closets,  &c.  The  numerous  disinfectants  are  of  the  most  varied  natm'e.
They  may  be  divided  into  oxidising,  antiseptic,  and  absorbent  substances.  To  the
oxidising  substances  used  for  disinfection  belong  chlorine,  and  various  substances
evolving  it,  because  chlorine  in  the  presence  of  water  oxidises  the  majonty  of  organic
substances,  and  this  is  why  chlorine  is  used  as  a  disinfectant  for  Siberian  plagues.
Further,  to  this  class  belong  the  permanganates  of  the  alkalis  and  peroxide  of  hydrogen,
as  substances  easily  oxidising  matters  dissolved  in  water ;  these  salts  are  not  volatile
like  chlorine,  and  therefore  act  much  more  slowly,  and  in  a  much  more  limited  sphere.
Antiseptic  substances  are  tliose  which  convert  organic  substances  into  such  as  are  little
prone  to  change,  and  prevent  putrefaction  and  fermentation.  They  most  probably  kill
the  germs  of  organisms  occurring  in  miasmata.  The  most  important  of  these  substances
are  creosote  and  phenol  (carbolic  acid),  which  occur  in  tar,  and  act  in  preserving  smoked
meat.  Phenol  is  a  substance  little  soluble  in  water,  volatile,  oily,  and  having  the
cliaracteristic  smell  of  smoked  objects.  Its  action  on  animals  in  considerable  quantities
is  injurious,  but  in  small  quantities,  used  in  the  form  of  a  weak  solution,  it  prevents  the
change  of  animal  matter.  The  smell  of  privies,  which  depends  on  the  change  of  excre-
mental  matter,  may  be  easily  removed  by  means  of  chlorine  or  phenol.  Salicylic  acid,
thymol,  common  tar,  and  especially  its  solution  in  alkalis  as  proposed  by  Nensky,  &c.,
are  also  substances  having  the  same  property.  Absorbent  substances  are  of  no  less
importance,  especially  as  preventatives,  than  the  preceding  two  classes  of  disinfectants,
inasmuch  as  they  are  imiocuous.  They  are  those  substances  which  absorb  the  o<lori-
ferous  gases  and  vapours  emitted  during  putrefaction,  which  are  chiefly  ammonia,
sulphuretted  hydrogen,  and  other  volatile  compounds.  To  this  class  belong  cliarcoal,
certain  salts  of  iron,  gypsum,  salts  of  magnesia,  and  similar  substances,  as  well  as  peat,
mould,  and  clay.  Questions  of  disinfection  and  ventilation  appertain  to  the  most
serious  problems  of  common  life  and  hygiene.  These  questions  are  so  xast  that  we  are
here  able  only  to  give  a  short  outline  of  their  nature.

CHAPTER VI

TBB CX>MPOO»D8  OF

VITU HVDROr.EN AND  OXSGRR

In  the  laat  chapter  we  saw  that  nitrogen  does  not  directly  combiaQJ

with  hydrogen,  but  that  a  mixture  of  tliese  gases  in  the  presence  cfl

hydrochloric  acid  gas,  HCl,  i

-=J^ (tfc— ^^  T  forms amuionium chloride^  j

l|  fc,^™.  .  T-3^B;jT7i  '  NH,C1,  on  the  passage  of  aj

serieaof  electric  sparks.' Ii

aimiionium  chloride,  HCl  i

Qibined with NH„ con

sequently  N  with  Hj  fornift  1

am  m  on  ill.'' Almost all  tha  J

I'lfrofftrioiifi siibatancrf

j'laiits and animdit evolvel

ammonia  when  heated  with!

t^ri-.:^.  an  alkali. But  even  without  1

I). Tiw  the presence of an alkali  J

m™  ita'flwuL^toS  the  majority  of  nitrogenoagj

'  subgtancca,  whendecomposed-l

[  or heated with a limited  1

'  supply  of  ail',  evolve  their  I

nitrogen,  if  not  entirely,  ai  I

all  erents partially,  in  the  form  of  ammonia. When  animal  substances^

such  aa  skins,  bones,  fletih,  hair,  horns,  itc,  ai-e  heated  without  access  of  J

imilneu  oF  lUKllliCinn  r*

li  cwmplBtfld  Ihf  tnii  H  Ei  iipoiM,  b
■nkHdadlntnunr'kii  V. Tlie  iruf  U  1*  tben  oi
■tul  the  cylinden  an  chargn)  vltli  s  Fnsh  quantity  ol

probably  {rom  the  TSdaction  ot

Dnd  oil  the  utioii  of  thel^aKi-

eii  ut  the  lODmeDt  □!  its  eTOlutiou  on  the  nitric  (u:id  cot

tnliied  In  the  air  [Cloe.),  or  m

(he  fonniLtioii  o(  uunioiiium  n[trite,  wliiah  takes  place  under  manj  circu
evolution  of  rapoun  of  atntnonia  compomiilfl  is  somctimeE  obserrcd  in
vol«uio«s. Al  a  red  heat  nitrogeo  combines  direct!;  with  B  CaMg,  and  irith  many  ot
iiutala,  and  theae  compounda,  wbeu  heated  irith  a  cnnitir  alkali,  or  in  the  presei
valer,  giTe  ammauia  (me  Chapter  XIV.,  Note  11,  and  Chapter  XVII.,  Note  19).
are  exnmiilea  ol  the  indirect  combination  of  nitrogen  with  hydrogen.

*  If  a  silent  dischATge  or  a  seriee  of  electric  aparks  be  pasiwd  through  ■
ja  decoiniHised  into  nitrogeii  and  bydrogeu. Thin  ii  a  phenomenon  of

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  247

air  in  iron  retorts — they  undergo  what  is  termed  dry  distillation.  A
portion  of  the  resultant  substances  remains  in  the  retort  and  forms  a
carbonaceous  residue,  whilst  the  other  portion,  in  virtue  of  its  volatility,
escapes  through  the  tube  leading  from  the  retort.  The  vapours  given
off,  on  cooling,  form  a  liquid  which  separates  into  two  layers  ;  the  one,
which  is  oily,  is  composed  of  the  so-called  animal  oils  (oleum  animcde)  :
the  other,  an  aqueous  layer,  contains  a  solution  of  ammonia  salts.  If
this  solution  be  mixed  with  lime  and  heated,  the  lime  takes  up  the
elements  of  carbonic  acid  from  the  ammonia  salts,  and  ammonia  is
evolved  as  a  gas.^  In  ancient  times  ammonia  compounds  were
imported  into  Europe  from  Egypt,  where  they  were  prepared  from  the
soot  obtained  in  the  employment  of  camels'  dung  as  fuel  in  the  locality
of  the*  temple  of  Jupiter  Ammon  (in  Lybia),  and  therefore  the  salt
obtained  was  called  *  sal-ammoniacale,'  from  which  the  name  of  ammonia
is  derived.  At  the  present  time  ammonia  is  obtained  exclusively,  on  a
large  scale,  either  from  the  products  of  the  dry  distillation  of  animal  or

therefore,  a  series  of  sparks  do  not  totally  decompose  the  ammonia,  but  leave  a  certain
portion  ondecomposed.  One  volume  of  nitrogen  and  three  volumes  of  hydrogen  are
obtained  from  two  volumes  of  ammonia  decomposed.  Ramsay  and  Young  (1884)  investi-
gated the  decomposition  of  NHj  under  the  action  of  heat,  and  showed  that  at  SUO'^,  l^p.c.
is  decomposed,  at  600^  about  18  p.c,  at  800°  65  p.c,  but  these  results  were  hardly  free
from  the  influence  of 'contact.*  The prese^ice  of  free  ammonia — that  is,  ammonia  not
combined  with  acids — in  a  gas  or  aqueous  solution  may  be  recognised  by  its  characteristic
smell.  But  many  ammonia  salts  do  not  possess  this  smell.  However,  on  the  addition
of  an  alkali  (for  instance,  caustic  lime,  potash,  or  soda),  they  evolve  ammonia  gas,  especially
when  heated.  The  presence  of  ammonia  may  be  made  visible  by  introducing  a  sub-
stance moistened  with  strong  hydrochloric  acid  into  its  neighbourhood.  A  white  cloud,
or  visible  white  vapour,  then  makes  its  appearance.  This  depends  on  the  fact  that  both
ammonia  and  hydrochloric  acid  are  volatile,  and  on  coming  into  contact  with  each  other
produce  solid  sal-ammoniac,  NH4CI,  which  forms  a  cloud.  This  test  is  usually  made  by
dipping  a  glass  rod  into  hydrochloric  acid,  and  holding  it  over  the  vessel  from  which  the
ammonia  is  evolved.  With  small  amounts  of  ammonia  this  test  is,  however,  untrust-
worthy, as  the  white  vapour  is  scarcely  obser\'able.  In  this  case  it  is  best  to  take  paper
moistened  with  mercurous  nitrate,  HgNOs.  This  paper  turns  black  in  the  presence
of  ammonia,  owing  to  the  formation  of  a  black  compound  of  ammonia  with  mercurous
oxide.  The  smallest  traces  of  ammonia  (for  instance,  in  river  water)  may  }>e  detected
by  means  of  the  so-called  Nessler's  reagent,  containing  a  solution  of  mercuric  chloride
and  potassium  iodide,  which  forms  a  brown  coloration  or  precipitate  with  the  smallest
quantities  of  ammonia.  It  will  be  useful  here  to  give  the  thermo-chemical  data  (in
thousands  of  units  of  heat,  according  to  Thomsen),  or  the  quantities  of  heat  evolved  in
the  formation  of  ammonia  and  its  compounds  in  quantities  expressed  by  their  formalsB.
Tims,  for  instance,  (N  +  H3)  26*7  indicates  that  14  grams  of  nitrogen  in  combining  with
8  grams  of  hydrogen  develop  sufficient  heat  to  raise  the  temperature  of  26*7  kilograms  of
water  1°.  (NH3  +  nH...O)  8*4  (heat  of  solution);  (NH5,nH20  +  HCl,nH20)  12-8;
(N  -h  H4  +  CI)  90-6 ;  (NH-.  +  HCl)  419.

^  The  same  ammonia  water  is  obtained,  although  in  smaller  quantities,  in  the
dry  distillatix>n  of  plants  and  of  coal,  which  consists  of  the  remains  of  fossil  plants.
In  all  these  cases  the  ammonia  proceeds  from  the  destruction  of  the  complex  nitrogenous
substances  occurring  in  plants  and  animals.  The  ammonia  salts  employed  in  the  arts
are  prepared  by  this  method.

IICIl'LES OF CUEMIf

vegetable  refuse,  from  urine,  or  from  the  auimoniacal  liquors  collected  in
the  descructive  distillation  <.i£  coal  for  the  preparatimi  of  coal  gas.  This  '
aoniacal  liquor  is  placed  iu  a  retort  with  lime  and  heat«d  ;  the
bheii  evolved  together  with  steam. ^  In  the  nrts,  only  a
small  amount  of  ammonia  is  used  in  a  free  state-  that  is,  in  an  aqueous
solution  ;  the  greater  portion  of  it  is  conveiied  into  different  salts
having  technical  uses,  especially  sal-ammoniac,  NH^Ct,  and  ammonium
sulphate,  (NH,)jSO,, They  are  saline  substances  which  are  formed

y

EB  bv  til*  dry  (ilBtnjhUuD  ol  «m1.  nr  br
uid  pnuTBl  iDtA  thr  bi^Br  C",  i

In  iu Tht  Uqolil  li  ther^re  ttiBii  tluvwn  >wiij.

"ISoTmo

because  ammonia,  NH
Baits.  NH.X. Sal
hydrochloric  acid,
and  water.

It  i

bines  -with  all  acids,  HX,  forming  ammoni»  i

;,  NH,C],  is  a  compound  of  ammonia  with  \

.  prepared  by  passing  the  vapours  of  ammonia '

,bove  described,  from  nmmoniacal  liquor,  into

aqueous solution of  hydrochloric acid, and  on  evaporating  th4  j

obtained  in the  form of  soluble  crysttls*

solution  sat-ammoniac

•  The  technical  metliodii  for

'  Uauallj  these  cFjstalB
mponrB  of  siil-unmoDiac  ci
comm  inlo  the  market.

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  249

resembling  common  salt  in  appearance  and  properties.  Amtnonia  may
be  very  easily  prepared  from  this  sal-ammoniac,  NH4CI,  as  from  any
other  ammoniacal  salt,  by  heating  it  with  lime.  Calcium  hydroxide,
CaH202,  as  an  alkali  takes  up  the  acid  and  sets  free  the  ammonia,
forming  calcium  chloride,  according  to  the  equation  2NH4Cl  +  CaH202
=2H20  +  CaCl2  +  2NH3.  In  this  reaction  the  ammonia  is  evolved  as
a  gas.^

It  must  be  observed  that  all  the  complex  nitrogenous  substances  of
plants,  animals,  and  soils  are  decomposed  when  heated  with  an  excess
of  sulphuric  acid,  the  whole  of  their  nitrogen  being  converted  into
ammonium  sulphate,  from  which  it  may  be  liberated  by  treatment  with
an  excess  of  alkali.  This  reaction  is  so  complete  that  it  forms  the
basis  of  Kjeldahl's  method  for  estimating  the  amount  of  nitrogen  in  its
compounds.

Ammonia  is  a  colourless  gas,  resembling  those  with  which  we  are
alreiidy  acquainted  in  its  outward  appearance,  but  clearly  distinguishable
from  any  other  gas  by  its  very  characteristic  and  pungent  smell.  It
irritates  the  eyes,  and  it  is  positively  impossible  to  inhale  it.  Animals
die  in  it.  Its  density,  referred  to  hydrogen,  is  8*5  ;  hence  it  is  lighter
than  air. It  belongs  to  the  class  of  gases  which  are  easily  liquefied.^

*'  On  a  small  scale  ammonia  may  be  prepared  in  a  glass  flask  by  mixing  equal  parts
by  weight  of  slaked  lime  and  finely-powdered  sal-ammoniac,  the  neck  of  the  flask
being  connected  with  an  arrangement  for  drying  the  gas  obtained.  In  this  instance
neither  calcium  chloride  nor  sulphuric  acid  can  be  used  for  drying  the  gas,  since  both
these  substances  absorb  ammonia,  and  therefore  solid  caustic  potash,  which  is  capable  of
retaining  the  water,  is  employed.  The  gas-conducting  tube  leading  from  the  desiccating
apparatus  is  introduced  into  a  mercury^bath,  if  dry  gaseous  ammonia  be  required,  because
water  cannot  be  employed  in  collecting  ammonia  gas.  Ammonia  was  first  obtained  iu
this  dry  state  by  Priestley,  and  its  composition  was  investigated  by  BerthoUet  at  the  end
of  the  last  century.  Oxide  of  lead  mixed  with  sal-ammoniac  (Isambert)  evolves  ammonia
with  still  greater  ease  than  lime.  The  cause  and  process  of  the  decomposition  are  almost
the  same,  2PbO  +  2NH4Cl  =  Pb20Cl2  +  H.jO-J-2NH3.  Lt^ad  oxychloride  is  (probably)
formed.

^  This  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  its  absolute  boiling  i)oint  lies  at  about  -f- 180°  (Cliap-
tcr  II.,  Note  29).  It  may  therefore  be  liquefied  by  pressure  alone  at  the  ordinary,  and  even
at  much  higher  temperatures.  The  latent  heat  of  evaporation  of  17  parts  by  weight
of  ammonia  equals  4,400  units  of  heat,  and  hence  liquid  ammonia  may  be  employed
for  the  production  of  cold.  Strong  aqueous  solutions  of  ammonia,  which  in  parting  with
their  ammonia  act  iu  a  similar  manner,  are  not  unfreqnently  employed  for  this  purpose
Suppose  a  saturated  solution  of  ammonia  to  be  contained  in  a  closed  vessel  furnished  with
a  receiver.  If  the  ammoniacal  solution  be  heated,  the  ammonia,  with  a  smcdl  quantity
of  water,  will  pass  of!  from  the  solution,  and  in  accumulating  in  the  apparatus  will
produce  a  considerable  pressure,  and  will  therefore  liquefy  in  t)ie  cooler  portions  of  the
receiver.  Hence  liquid  ammonia  will  be  obtained  in  the  receiver.  The  heating  of  the
vessel  containing  the  aqueous  solution  of  ammonia  is  then  stopi)ed.  After  having  been
heated  it  contains  only  water,  or  a  solution  poor  in  ammonia.  When  once  it  begins  to  cool
the  ammonia  vapours  commence  dissolving  in  it,  the  space  becomes  rarefied,  and  a  rapid
vaporisation  of  the  liquefied  ammonia  left  in  the  receiver  takes  place. In  evaporating  in

Fftmday  employed  the  following  method  for  liquefj'ing  amoionia.
Ammonia  when  passed  over  dry  silver  chloride,  AgCI,  is  absorbed  by  it
1  considerable  extent,  especially  at  low  temperatures.* Tfae  solid

'eceiver  it  H-ill  mate  Llie  temiwrature  in  il  lo  laU  caiiBidurably.  Hnd  will  itself  pass  into
I  tho  nquoous  Bolutioii.  In  t>ie  cud,  tbe  BMiie  anuunniIu^al  nolution  as  aHgiunlly  tekva  ii>
I  le'Obtiunod.  thus,  in  thiti  caite,  on  beating  tbe  vsB«el  Ihe  preasare  iocreases  by  itseU,
iD  cooling  it  (liininishef.,  so  that  here  beat  itiiectlf  Teploo's  inechiuiic;al  irork.  This
I  in  tbe  principle  ul  the  simplest  lorms  of  Carrd"!  ite-inuking  maehtnrt,  ebowii  in  fig.  14.
H  Teasel  ntuile  of  boiler  plates  iulu  wbiDb  tbe  aiiLunited  solatiotj  of  aiiiinoma  ■■
L  poured ;  m  is  n  tabe  coudurling  ihe  unmonia  vapour  to  the  receiver  A.  All  part*  of
1  the  apparatus  should,  be  hemieticollf  joinefl  together,  ouil  should  be  able  to  witlistand
>  premire  reaehine  teu  etmospberes. The  apparatus  should  be  freed  from  air,  ivbidi

would  othemise  hinder  tbe  liquefootion  of  tbe  oniinODia. The  process  ie  carried  a
follows: — The  apparatus  m  first  so  inclined  that  any  liquid  remaining  in  A  may

]  C. Tbe  vessel  C  ut  then  placed  upon  a.  stove  F,  and  heated  until  the  tl
indicates  a  temperature  of  lUU"  C. During  this  time  tbe  ammonia  has  been  expelled  from
C,  and  ho*  liquefled  in  A. In  order  to  facilitate  the  liqaetaction,  tbe  receiver  A  olionld
immemed  in  a  tank  of  water  R  Wf  tlie  left-hand  drawing  in  fig.  U). After  abonl
t  on  boor,  when  it  may  he  supposed  that  the  ammonia  has  beea  expelled,  the  fin  ia
lemoved  from  under  C,  and  thi!<  is  now  immersed  in  tbe  tank  of  water  R. The  appantoa
epresented  in  this  position  in  the  right-hand  drawing  of  Qg.  44- The  liqneRed  ammonia
D evaporates,  and  passes  over into tho  water  in  C. This  eanses  the  Ivmpentuie '
\  to  (all  oonaidembly. Tile  eabstaneeto  be  refrigerated  ih  pW'ed  in  n  reasel  O,  in  Um ,
DjIindriL'al  space  inside  the  receiver  A. The  refrigeration  Is  also  kept  on  for  about  hi
Kn  hour,  and  with  an  apparatas  of  ordinary  dimenuons  (containing  about  two  UlrM {

unmonia  oolation),  five  kilograms  of  ioe  are  produced  by  tlin  consuuiptioD  ol  COM
kil«ti^am  of  GoaL  In  industrial  worka  more  complicated  types  of  CarriTs  machines  on
rmployed.

•  Below  IS'  (according  to  Inuubert),  the  compound  AgCl.SNH^  is  formed,  and  above
W  the  compound  9AgCl,SNH-,.  The  tension  ol  the  onmioniu  evolved  (rom  the  kt(«
lubstanoe  is  eqntd  to  the  atmospheric pressure  at  08°,  whilst for  AgCI,8NHg  &»

>A.

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  251

compound  AgCl^SNH.,  thus  obtained  is  introduced  into  a  bent  tube
(fig.  45),  whose  open  end  c  is  then  fused  up.  The  compound  is  then
slightly  heated  at  a,  and  the  ammonia  comes  off,
owing  to  the  easy  dissociation  of  the  compound.
The  other  end  of  the  tube  is  immersed  in  a  freez-
ing mixture.  The  pressure  of  the  gas  coming  off,
combined  with  the  low  temperature  at  one  end  of  F">.  45.— The  Uquefaction  of

,  •  1 -i  1  ammonia  in  a  thick  bent

the  tube,  causes  the  ammonia  evolved  to  condense glass  tube,  a  compomui

. ,  ,. .  , .  1  .  , i.  .. 11 . ^ ^1  11 ot  chloride  of  silver  and

into  a  liquid,  in  which  form  it  collects  at  the  cold ammonia  is  placeil  in  the

end  of  the  tube. If  the  heating  be  stopped,  the then  »eai©i  up.*
silver  chloride  again  absorbs  the  ammonia. In

this  manner  one  tube  may  serve  for  repeated  experiments.  Ammonia
may  also  be  liquefied  by  the  oixlinary  methods — that  is,  by  means  of
pumping  dry  ammonia  gas  into  a  refrigerated  space.  Liquefied
ammonia  is  a  colourless  and  very  mobile  liquid,^  whose  specific  gravity
at  0°  is  0-63  (E.  Andreeff).  At  the  temperature  (about  -  70°)  given  by
a  mixture  of  liquid  carbonic  anhydride  and  ether,  liquid  ammonia
crystallises,  and  in  this  form  its  odour  is  feeble,  because  at  so  low  a
temperatui-e  its  vapour  tension  is  very  inconsiderable.  The  boiling
point  (at  a  pressure  of  760  mm.)  of  liquid  ammonia  is  about  — 32°.
Hence  this  temperature  may  be  obtained  at  the  ordinary  pressure  by
the  evaporation  of  liquefied  ammonia.

Ammonia,  containing,  as  it  does,  much  hydrogen,  is  cajxible  of
combustion  ;  it  does  not,  however,  bum  steadily,  and  sometimes  not
at  all,  in  ordinary  atmospheric  air.  In  pure  oxygen  it  burns  with
a  greenish -yellow  flame,*®  forming  water,  whilst  the  nitrogen  set  free

pressures  are  equal  at  about  20°;  consequently,  at  higher  temperatures  it  is  greater
than  the  atmospheric  pressure,  whilst  at  lower  temperatures  the  ammonia  is  absorbed
and  forms  this  compound.  Consequently,  all  the  phenomena  of  dissociation  are  here
clearly  to  be  obser\'ed.  Joannis  and  Croisier  (1894)  investigated  similar  comitounds
with  AgBr,  Agl,  AgCN  and  AgNO.^,  and  found  that  they  all  give  definite  compounds
with  NH^,  for  instance  AgBr,8NH-,  2AgBr,3NH5  and  AgBr,2NH3 ;  they  are  all  colourless,
soUd  substances  which  decompose  under  the  atmospheric  pressure  at  +  8*5,  +  84°  and
+  51<5.

'  The  liquefaction  of  ammonia  may  be  accomplished  without  an  increase  of  pressure,
by  means  of  refrigeration  alone,  in  a  carefully  prepared  mixture  of  ice  and  calcium
chloride  (because  the  absolute  boiling  point  of  NH3  is  high,  about  +180°).  It  may  even
take  place  in  the  severe  frosts  of  a  Russian  winter.  The  application  of  liquid  ammonia
as  a  motive  power  for  engines  forms  a  problem  which  has  to  a  certain  extent  been  solved
by  tlie  French  engineer  Tellier.

*o  The  combustion  of  ammonia  in  osygen  may  be  effected  by  the  aid  of  platinum.
A  small  quantity  of  an  aqueous  solution  of  ammonia,  containing  about  20  p.c.  of  the  gas,
is  poured  into  a  wide-necked  beaker  of  about  one  litre  capacity.  A  gas-conducting  tube
about  10  mm.  in  diameter,  and  supplying  oxygen,  is  immersed  in  the  aqueous  solution  of
ammonia.  But  before  introducing  the  gas  an  incandescent  platinum  spiral  is  placed  in
the  beaker ;  the  ammonia  in  the  presence  of  the  platinum  is  oxidised  and  bums,  whilst
the  platinum  wire  becomes  still  more  incandescent. Tlie  solution  of  ammonia  is  heate*

252  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

gives  its  oxygen  compounds — that  is,  oxides  of  nitrogen.  The  decomposi-
tion of  ammonia  into  hydrogen  and  nitrogen  not  only  takes  place  at  a
red  heat  and  under  the  action  of  electric  sparks,  but  also  by  means  of
many  oxidising  substances  ;  for  instance,  by  passing  ammonia  through
a  tube  containing  red-hot  copper  oxide.  The  water  thus  formed  may
be  collected  by  substances  absorbing  it,  and  the  quantity  of  nitrogen
may  be  measured  in  a  gaseous  form,  and  thus  the  composition  of
ammonia  determined.  In  this  manner  it  is  very  easy  to  prove  that
ammonia  contains  3  parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen  to  14  parts  by
weight  of  nitrogen  ;  and,  by  volume,  3  vols,  of  hydrogen  and  1  vol .  of
nitrogen  form  2  vols,  of  ammonia.  ^  ^

Ammonia  is  capable  of  combining  with  a  number  of  substances,
forming,  like  water,  substances  of  various  degrees  of  stability.  It  is
more  soluble  than  any  of  the  gases  yet  described,  both  in  water  and  in
many  aqueous  solutions.  We  have  already  seen,  in  the  first  chapter,
that  one  volume  of  water,  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  dissolves  about
700  vols,  of  ammonia  gas.  The  great  solubility  of  ammonia  enables  it
to  be  always  kept  ready  for  use  in  the  form  of  an  aqueous  solution,'*-*

and  oxygen  pasBed  throagh  the  Holution.  The  oxygen,  as  it  bubbleu  of!  from  the  ammonia
Bclution,  carries  with  it  a  part  of  the  ammonia,  and  this  mixture  explodes  on  coming
into  contact  with  the  incandescent  platinum.  This  is  followed  by  a  certain  cooling
efTect,  owing  to  the  combustion  ceasing,  but  after  a  short  interval  this  is  renewed,  ho
that  one  feeble  explosion  follows  after  another.  During  the  period  of  oxidation  without
explosion,  white  vapours  of  ammonium  nitrite  and  red-brown  vapours  of  oxides  of  nitrogen
make  their  appearance,  while  during  the  explosion  there  is  complete  combustion  and
consequently  water  and  nitrogen  are  formed.

**  This  may  be  verified  by  their  densities.  Nitrogen  is  14  times  denser  than  hydro-
gen, and  ammonia  is  8^  times.  If  8  volumes  of  hydrogen  with  1  volume  of  nitrogen  gave
4  volumes  of  ammonia,  then  these  4  volumes  would  weigh  17  times  as  much  as  1  volume
of  hydrogen ;  consequently  1  volume  of  ammonia  would  be  4^  times  heavier  than  the
name  volume  of  hydrogen.  But  if  these  4  volumes  only  give  2  volumes  of  ammonia,
the  latter  will  be  bj^  times  as  dense  as  hydrogen,  which  is  found  to  be  actually  the
case.

1'  Aqueous  solutions  of  ammonia  are  ligliter  than  water,  and  at  15*^,  taking  water  at
4®  a  10,000,  their  specific  gravity,  as  dependent  on  j)y  or  the  percentage  amount  (by
weight)  of  ammonia,  is  given  by  the  expression  8  =  9,992  -  42-5ju  +  0  21j)^ ;  for  instance,  with
10  p.c.  8  =  9,5t<7.  If  t  represents  the  temperature  between  the  limits  of  + 10°  and  +  20^,  then
the  expression  (15— f)  (1*5  +  0'14^>)  must  be  added  to  the  formula  for  the  specific  gravity.
Solutions  contiiining  more  than  24  p.c.  have  not  been  sufficiently  investigated  in  respect
to  the  variation  of  their  siwcific  gravity.  It  is,  however,  easy  to  obtain  more  concentrated
solutions,  and  at  0^  solutions  approaching  NHs.H.^O  (48*0  p.c.  NH3)  in  their  comjKDsition,
and  of  sp.  gr.  085,  may  be  prepared.  But  such  solutions  give  up  the  bulk  of  their
ammonia  at  the  ordinary  tenii>erature,  so  that  Qiore  than  24  p.c.  NH5  is  rarely  contained
in  solution.  Ammoniaoul  solutions  containing  a  considerable  amount  of  ammonia  give
ice-like  crystals  which  seem  to  contain  ammonia  at  temperatures  furbelow  0^  (for  instance,
an  8  p.c.  solution  at  — 14  \  the  strongest  solutions  at  —  48^j.  The  whole  of  the  ammonia
may  be  exi>elled  from  a  solution  by  heating,  even  at  a  comparatively  low  temperature  ;
hence  on  heating  aqueous  solutions  containing  lunmonia  a  very  strong  solution  of
ammonia  is  obtained  in  the  distillate. Alcohol,  ether,  and  many  other  liquids  are  also

5^F  "MfKSi^N '^

OOK

which  ia  conimercially  known  as  e/iirits  of  hni-Uhnm,  Anmionin  water
ifl  continually  evolving  nraraoiiincal  vapour,  and  su  lias  tho  characteristic
smell  o£  ammonin  iiself.  It  is  a  very  characteristic  and  important  fact
that  ammonia  hiia  an  alkaline  reaction,  and  colours  litmus  paper  blue,
just  like  caustic  potash  or  Ume  ;  it  is  therefore  -sonietinies  called  caualio  •
ammonia  (volatile  alkali).  Acids  way  be  saturated  by  ammonia  water
or  gas  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  by  any  other  alkali.  In  this  procesa
ammonia  CO mbinea  dir^-ctly  with  acids,  and  this  forms  the  most  essential

unpoble  of  diasolring  iLminonia,  SolutioiiB  of  ununonin.  wLen  nposod  to  the  BtuiDSphen^
give  oO  a  part  Dt  tlieir  Auimoiiia  in  aocoidancu  with  the  1b>cb  oI  the  solution  o[  gascB  in
liijuidB,  nhiL-h  iri!  hare  already  caDsidered.  Bat  the  unmoniBCal  ulntioi
tims  ilbftotb  carbonif  auhydride  froni  the  air,  and  auimoniuni  carbonate  remnina  in  tho

SolatioiiBoF  ummoniAare  required  both  for  lalnrstorjr  and  (actorjoi
therefare  to  be  frequently  prepared.  For  this  purpoee  the  ■rmngement  thonn  in  &g.  U  ■
ia  employed  in  the  Uboratory.  In  vorha  the  same  arruigetiuint  is  uwd,  only  on  a  Uigsi
■csle  (with  earthenware  or  inetallia  veaeeU). Tlie  gag  is  prepared  ia  the  ret

i

ia  diaulved

iriience  it  i,  left  iiitu  tliti  twij.ueckcd  globe  A,  and  Uien  through  n  ner

bottlea,  B,  C,  D.  E. The  impuritieH  tpurting  over  collect  in  A,  and  the  e

in  B,  but  tlie  Kolntion  soon  biKameg  aatunt«d,  and  a  pnrer  Iwaahed)  unmooia  paaaes

over  into  the  following  venselb,  in  which  only  a  pure  aolation  ia  obtained. Tlie  bent

limnel  tnbe  in  tlie  retort  preserves  tlie  appaistus  from  the  poaaibility  both  of  the  prta-  I

•are  ol  the  gas  OTolTed  in  it  becoming  too  great  |when  the  gas  eacapes  throngh  it  ii

the  »ir),  and  alito  from  the  pieiaoce  incidentally  falling  too  low  |lor  inHtance,  owing  to  a. I

eooiling  effect,  or  from  the  reaction  stopping). If  this  takes  place,  the  air  passes  in

retort,  otherwise  the  liquid  from  B  would  be  drawn  into  A, The  safety  tabes  ii

Wonlle'a  bottle,  open  at  both  ends,  and  immersed  in  the  hquid,  serve  lor  the  same  parpoaaT-fl

Withont  them,  in  case  of  an  accidental  stoppage  in  the  eToIutinn  of  so  noluble  a  gas  x

ammonia,  the  solution  would  b«  nucked  from  one  vessel  to  anoti

into  D.  iCQ. In  order  tu  clearly  nee  the  necessity  for  aafety  t

it  mnal  be  remembered  tbattliogutcoiiiprFHiTe  in  the  intuHor

exceed  the  atmospheric  pressure  by  the  height  of  tho  num  c

throngh  which  the  gms  hw  to  pass.

the  culamiia  of  liquid

254  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

chemical  reaction  of  this  substance.  If  sulphurio,  nitric,  acetic,  or  any
other  acid  be  brought  into  contact  with  ammonia  it  absorbs  it,  and  in
so  doing  evolves  a  large  amount  of  heat  and  forms  a  compound  having
all  the  properties  of  a  salt.  Thus,  for  example,  sulphuric  acid,  HjSO,,
in  absorbing  ammonia,  forms  (on  evaporating  the  solution)  two  salts,
according  to  the  relative  quantities  of  ammonia  and  acid.  One  salt  is
formed  from  NH3  +  H2SO4,  and  consequently  has  the  composition
NH5SO4,  and  the  other  is  formed  from  iNHg-f  H2SO4,  and  its  com-
position is  therefore  N2H^S04.  The  former  has  an  acid  reaction  and  the
latter  a  neutral  reaction,  and  they  are  called  respectively  acid  ammonium
sulphate  (ammonium  hydrogen  sulphate),  and  normal  ammonium
sulphate,  or  simply  ammonium  sulphate.  The  same  takes  place  in  the
action  of  all  other  acids  ;  but  certain  of  them  are  able  to  form  normal
ammonium  saltsonly,  whilst  others  give  both  acid  and  normal  ammonium
salts.  This  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  acid  and  not  on  the  ammonia,
as  we  shall  afterwards  see.  Ammonium  salts  are  very  similar  in  appear-
ance and  in  many  of  their  properties  to  metallic  salts ;  for  instance,
sodium  chloride,  or  table  salt,  resembles  sal-ammoniac,  or  ammonium
chloride,  not  only  in  its  outward  appearance  but  even  in  crystalline
form,  in  its  property  of  giving  precipitates  with  silver  salts,  in  its  solu-
bility in  water,  and  in  its  evolving  hydrochloric  acid  when  heated  with,
sulphuric  acid — in  a  word,  a  most  perfect  analogy  is  to  be  remarked
in  an  entire  series  of  reactions.  An  analogy  in  composition  is  seen
if  sal-ammoniac,  NH4CI,  be  compared  with  table  salt,  NaCl  ;  and  the
ammonium  hydrogen  sulphate,  NH4HSO1,  with  the  sodium  hydrogen
sulphate,  NaHS04  ;  or  ammonium  nitrate,  NH4NO3,  with  sodium
nitrate,  NaNO^.*^  It  is  seen,  on  comparing  the  above  compounds,  that
the  part  which  sodium  takes  in  the  sodium  salts  is  played  in  ammonium
salts  by  a  group  NH4,  which  is  called  ammonium. If  table  salt  be

I'  The  analogy  between  the  ammonium  and  sodium  salts  might  seem  to  be  destrovei
by  the  fact  that  the  latter  are  formed  from  the  alkali  or  oxide  and  an  acid,  with  the  seim-
ration  of  water,  whilst  the  ammonium  baits  are  directly  formed  from  ammonia  and  an
acid,  without  the  separation  of  water ;  but  the  analogy  is  restored  if  we  compare  soda  to
ammonia  water,  and  liken  caustic  soda  to  a  compound  of  ammonia  with  water.  Then  the
very  preparation  of  ammonium  salts  from  such  a  hydrate  of  anunonia  will  completely  re-
semble the  preparation  of  sodium  salts  from  soda.  We  may  cite  as  an  example  the  action
of  hydrochloric  acid  on  both  substances.

NaHO  +  HCl

ScKlium  hydroxide Hydrochloric  acid

NH4HO  +  HCl

Ammonium  hydroxide Hydrochloric  acid

Just  as  in  soda  the  hydroxyl  or  aqueous  radicle  OH  is  replaced  by  chloiiiie,  so  it  is  in
ammonia  hvdrate.

H.,0

+ NaCl

Water

Table  salt

H.^0

+ NH4CI

Water

Sal-ammoniac

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN  255

called  'sodium  chloride/  then  sal-ammoniac  should  be  and  is  called
'  ammonium  chloride.'

The  hypothesis  that  ammoniacal  salt«  correspond  with  a  complex
metal  ammonium  bears  the  name  of  the  ammonium  tlieory.  It  was
enunciated  by  the  famous  Swedish  chemist  Berzelius  after  the  proposi-
tion made  by  Ampere.  The  analogy  admitted  between  ammonium  and
metals  is  probable,  owing  to  the  fact  that  mercury  is  able  to  form  an
amalgam  with  ammonium  similar  to  that  which  it  forms  with  sodium
or  many  other  metals .  The  only  difference  between  ammonium  amalgam
and  sodium  amalgam  consists  in  the  instability  of  the  ammonium,  which
easily  decomposes  into  ammonia  and  hydrogen  J  ^  Ammonium  amalgam
may  be  prepared  from  sodium  amalgam.  If  the  latter  be  shaken  up
with  a  strong  solution  of  sal-ammoniac,  the  mercury  swells  up  violently
and  loses  its  mobility  whilst  preserving  its  metallic  appearance.  In  so
doing,  the  mercury  dissolves  ammonium — that  is,  the  sodium  in  the
mercury  is  replaced  by the  ammonium,  and replaces  it  in the  sal-

II  Weyl  (1864)  by  subjecting  sodinni  to  the  action  of  ammonia  at  the  ordinary  tem-
perature and  under  considerable  presKures,  obtained  a  liquid,  which  was  subsequently
investigated  by  Joannis  (1889),  who  confirmed  the  results  obtained  by  Weyl.  At  0"^  and
the  atmospheric  pressure  the  composition  of  this  substance  ik  Na  +  S'SNH^.  The
removal  (at  0°)  of  ammonia  from  the  liquid  gives  a  solid  copper-red  body  having  the
composition  NHjNa.  The  determination  of  the  molecular  weight  of  this  substance  by
the  fall  of  the  tension  of  liquid  ammonia  gave  N2HoNa2.  It  is,  therefore,  free  ammonium
in  which  one  H  is  replaced  by  Na.  The  compound  with  potassium,  obtained  under  the
same  conditions,  proved  to  have  an  analogous  composition.  By  the  decomposition  of
NH-Na  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  Joannis  (1801)  obtained  hydrogen  and  sodium-
amide  NHoNa  in  small  colourless  crystals  which  were  soluble  in  water.  The  addition  of
liquid  ammonia  to  metallic  sodium  and  a  saturated  solution  of  sodium  chloride,  gives
NHsNa-jCl,  and  this  substance  is  sal-ammoniac,  in  which  H2  is  replaced  by  Na^.

If  pure  oxygen  be  passed  through  a  solution  of  these  compounds  in  ammonia  at  a
temperature  of  about  —  50°,  it  is  seen  that  the  gas  is  rapidly  absorbed.  The  liquid  gradu-
ally loses  its  dark  red  colour  and  becomes  lighter,  and  when  it  has  become  quite  colour-
less a  gelatinous  precipitate  is  thrown  down.  After  the  removal  of  the  ammonia,  this
precipitate  dissolves  easily  in  water  with  a  considerable  evolution  of  heat,  but  without
giving  off  any  gaseous  products.  The  composition  of  the  sodium  compound  thus  obtained
is  NH^Na^HO,  which  shows  that  it  is  a  hydrate  of  bisodium-ammonium.  Thus,  although
free  ammonium  has  not  been  obtained,  still  a  sodium  substitution  product  of  it  is  known
which  corresponds  to  it  as  a  salt  to  a  hydrate.  Ammonium  amalgam  was  originally
obtained  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  sodium  amalgam  (Davy) ;  namely,  a  piece  of  sal-
ammoniac  was  taken,  and  moistened  with  water  (in  order  to  render  it  a  conductor  of
electricity).  A  cavity  was  made  in  it,  into  which  mercury  was  poured,  and  it  was  laid  on
a  sheet  of  platinum  connected  with  the  positive  pole  of  a  galvanic  battery,  while  the
negative  pole  was  put  into  connection  with  the  mercury.  On  passing  a  current  the
mercury  increased  considerably  in  volume,  and  became  plastic,  whilst  preserving  its
metallic  appearance,  just  as  would  be  the  case  were  the  sal-ammoniac  replaced  by  a  lump
of  a  sodium  salt  or  of  many  other  metals.  In  the  analogous  decomp>ositi(>n  (^f  common
metallic  salts,  the  metal  contained  in  a  given  salt  separates  out  at  the  negative  pole,  im*
mersed  in  mercury,  by  which  the  metal  is  dissolved.  A  similar  phenomeuoii  is  observed
in  the  case  of  sal-ammoniac;  the  elements  of  ammonium,  NH4,  in  this  case  are  also
collected  in  the  mercury,  and  are  retained  by  it  for  a  certain  time.

256  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

ammoniac,  forming  sodium  chloride,  NH4Cl  +  HgNa=NaCl  +  HgNH4.
Naturally,  the  formation  of  ammonium  amalgam  does  not  entirely  prove
the  existence  of  ammonium  itself  in  a  separate  state  ;  but  it  shows  the
possibility  of  this  substance  existing,  and  its  analogy  with  the  metals,
because  only  metals  dissolve  in  mercury  .^^  Ammonium  amalgam  crystal-
lises in  cubes,  three  times  heavier  than  water  ;  it  is  only  stable  in  the
cold,  and  particularly  at  very  low  temperatures.  It  begins  to  decompose
at  the  ordinary  temperature,  evolving  ammonia  and  hydrogen  in  the
proportion  of  two  volumes  of  ammonia  and  one  volume  of  hydrogen,
NH4=NH3  +  H.  By  the  action  of  water,  ammonium  amalgam  gives
hydrogen  and  ammonia  water,  just  as  sodium  amalgam  gives  hydrogen
and  sodium  hydroxide  ;  and  therefore,  in  accordance  with  the  ammonium
theory,  ammonia  water  must  be  looked  on  as  containing  ammonium
hydroxide,  NH40H,^^  just  as  an  aqueous  solution  of  sodium  hydroxide,
contains  NaOH.  The  ammonium  hydroxide,  like  ammonium  itself,  is
an  unstable  substance,  which  easily  dissociates,  and  can  only  exist  in
a  free  state  at  low  temperatures.*^  Ordinary  solutions  of  ammonia
must  be  looked  on  as  the  products  of  the  dissociation  of  this  hydroxide,
inasmuch  as  NH40H=NH3  +  H20.

All  ammoniacal  salts  decomjwse  at  a  red  Ji^at  into  ammonia  and  an
acid,  which,  on  cooling  in  contact  with  each  other,  te  combine  together.
If  the  acid  be  non- volatile,  the  ammoniacal  salt,  when  heated,  evolves
the  ammonia,  leaving  the  non- volatile  acid  behind  ;  if  the  acid  be
volatile,  then,  on  heating,  both  the  acid  and  ammonia  volatilise  together,
and  on  cooling  re-combine  into  the  salt  which  originally  served  for  the
formation  of  their  vapours.*®

1*  We  may  mention,  however,  that  under  particular  conditions  hydrogen  is  also
capable  of  forming  an  amalgam  resembling  the  amalgam  of  ammonium.  If  an  amalgam
of  zinc  be  shaken  up  with  an  aqueous  solution  of  platinum  chloride,  without  access  of
air,  then  a  spongy  mass  is  formed  which  easily  decomposes,  with  the  evolution  of
hydrogen.

10  We  saw  above  that  the  solubility  of  ammonia  in  water  at  low  temperatures  attains
to  the  molecular  ratio  NH3  +  H.2O,  in  which  these  substances  are  contained  in  caustic
ammonia,  and  perhaps  it  may  be  possible  at  exceedingly  low  temperatures  to  obtain
ammonium  hydroxide,  NH4HO,  in  a  solid  form.  Regarding  solutions  as  dissociated
definite  compounds,  we  should  see  a  confirmation  of  this  view  in  the  property  shown  by
ammonia  of  being  extremely  soluble  in  water,  and  in  so  doing  of  approaching  to  the
limit  NH4HO.

1'  In  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  this  conclusion  we  may  cite  the  remarkable  fact
that  there  exist,  in  a  free  state  and  as  comparatively  stable  compounds,  a  series  of  alka-
line hydroxides,  NR4HO,  which  are  perfectly  analogous  to  ammonium  hydroxide,  and
present  a  striking  resemblance  to  it  and  to  sodium  hydroxide,  with  the  only  difference
that  the  hydrogen  in  NH4HO  is  replaced  by  complex  groups,  R^CH-,  C2H5,  «l'c.,  for
instance  N(C £[3)4110. Details  will  be  found  in  organic  chemistry.

1*  The  fact  that  ammoniacal  salts  are  decomposed  when  ignited,  and  not  simply
Boblimed,  may  be  proved  by  a  direct  experiment  with  sal-ammoniac,  NH4CI,  which  in  a
■tate  of  vapour  is  decomposed  into  ammonia,  NH5,  and  hydrochloric  acid,  HCl,  as  will

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  257

Ammonia  is  not  only  capable  of  combining  with  acids,  but  also
with  many  salts,  as  was  seen  from  its  forming  definite  compounds,
AgCl,3NH3  and  2AgCl,3NH3,  with  silver  chloride.  Just  as  ammonia
is  absorbed  by  various  oxygen  salts  of  the  metals,  so  also  is  it  absorbed
by  the  chlorine,  iodine,  and  bromine  compounds  of  many  metals,  and  in
so  doing  evolves  heat.  Certain  of  these  compounds  part  with  their
ammonia  even  when  left  exposed  to  the  air,  but  others  only  do  so  at  a
red  heat ;  many  give  up  their  ammonia  when  dissolved,  whilst  others
dissolve  without  decomposition,  and  when  evaporated  separate  from  their
solutions  unchanged.  All  these  facts  only  indicate  that  ammoniacal,
like  aqueous,  compounds  dissociate  with  greater  or  lesser  facility.*'-*
Certain  metallic  oxides  also  absorb  ammonia  and  ai*e  dissolved  in
ammonia  water.  Such  are,  for  instance,  the  oxides  of  zinc,  nickel,
copper,  and  many  others  ;  the  majority  of  such  compounds  are  unstable.
The  property  of  ammonia  of  combining  with  certain  oxides  explains
its  action  on  certain  metals.'^  By  reason  of  such  action,  copper  vessels
are  not  suitable  for  holding  liquids  containing  ammonia.  Iron  is  not
acted  on  by  such  liquids.

The  similarity  between  the  relation  of  ammonia  and  water  to  salts
and  other  substances  is  more  especially  marked  in  those  cases  in  which
the  salt  is  capable  of  combining  with  both  ammonia  and  water.  Take,
for  example,  copper  sulphate,  CUSO4.  As  we  saw  in  Chapter  I.,  it
gives  with  water  blue  crystals,  CuS04,5H20  ;  but  it  also  absorbs
ammonia  in  the  same  molecular  proportion,  forming  a  blue  substance,
CuS04,5NH3,  and  therefore  the  ammonia  combining  with  salts  may
be  termed  ammonia  of  cryatnllisation.

Such  are  the  reactions  of  camhination  proper  to  ammonia.  Let  us
now  turn  our  attention  to  the  reactions  of  substitution  proper  to  this
substance.  If  ammonia  be  passed  through  a  heated  tube  containing
metallic  sodium,  hydrogen  is evolved,  and  a compound is obtained

.  be  explained  in  the  following  chapter.  The  readiness  with  which  ammonium  salts  decom-
pose is  seen  from  the  fact  that  a  solution  of  ammonium  oxalate  is  decomposed  with  the
evolution  of  ammonia  even  at  —1°.  Dilute  solutions  of  ammonium  salts,  when  boiled,
give  aqu^>us  vapour  having  an  alkaline  reaction,  owing  to  the  presence  of  free  ammonia
given  off  from  the  salt.

^^  Isambert  studied  the  dissociation  of  ammoniacal  compounds,  as  we  have  seen  in
Note  8,  and  showed  that  at  low  temperatures  many  salts  are  able  to  combine  with  a
still  greater  amount  of  ammonia,  which  proves  an  entire  analogy  with  hydrates ;  and  as
in  this  case  it  is  easy  to  isolate  the  definite  compounds,  and  as  the  least  possible  tension
of  ammonia  is  greater  than  that  of  water,  therefore  the  ammoniacal  compounds  present
A  great  and  peculiar  interest,  as  a  means  for  explaining  the  nature  of  aqueous  solu-
tions and  as  a  confirmation  of  the  hyxx>thesis  of  the  formation  of  definite  compounds  in
them ;  for  these  reasons  we  shall  frequently  refer  to  these  compounds  in  the  further  ex-
position of  this  work.

*  Chapter  V.,  Note  2.

VOL.  I.  8

258  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

containing  ammonia  in  which  one  atom  of  liydrogen  is  rephiced  by  an  atom
of  sodium,  NH2Na(accordingtotheequationNH3-hNa  =  NH.^Na  +  H).
This  body  is  termed  sodium  amide.  We  shall  afterwards  see  that
iodine  and  chlorine  are  also  capable  of  directly  displacing  hydrogen  from
ammonia,  and  of  replacing  it.  In  fact,  the  hydrogen  of  ammonia  may
be  replaced  in  many  ways  by  different  elements.  If  in  this  replacement
NH.2  remains,  the  resultant  ^bstances  NH2R  are  called  amides,  whilst
the  substitution  products,  NHRg,  in  which  only  NH  remains,  are  called
imides,^^  ***■  and  those  in  which  none  of  the  ammoniacal  hydrogen
remains,  NR3,  are  known  as  nitrides.  Free  amidogen,  N.2H4,  is  now
known  in  a  state  of  hydration  under  the  name  of  hydrazine  ;  'Mt  com-

20  bin  Iniide,  NH,  has  not  been  obtained  in  a  free  staite,  but  its  hydrochloric  acid  suit,
NHHCl,  has  apparently  been  obtained  (1890)  by  Maumeui'  by  igrniting  the  double  bi-
chloride of  platinum  and  ammonium  chloride,  PtCliNHjCl  =  Pt  +  2HC1  +  NHHCl.  It  is
Holuble  in  water,  and  crystallines  from  its  solution  in  hexagonal  rhombic  prisms.  It  gives
a  double  salt  with  FeCls  of  the  composition  FeCljSNHHCl.  The  salt  NHHCl  is  similar
(isomeric)  with  the  first  possible  product  of  the  metalepsis  of  ammonia,  NH.jCl,  although
it  does  not  resemble  it  in  any  of  its  properties.

**  Free  amidogen  or  hydrazine,  N.^,H4,  or'iNHo,  was  prepared  by  Curtius  (lvS87)  by
means  of  ethyl  diazoacetate,  or  triazoacetic  acid.  Curtius  and  Jay  (1889)  showed  that
iriazoacetic  acid,  CHNj.COOH  (the  formula  should  be  tripled),  when  heated  with  water  or  a
mineral  acid,  gives  (quantitatively)  oxalic  acid  and  amidogen  (hydrazine),  CHN^-COOH
+  2H.20  a  C20^(OH)2  +  N.2H4 — i.e.  (empirically),  the  oxygen  of  the  water  replaces  the  nitro-
gen of  the  azoacetic  acid.  The  amidogen  is  thus  obtained  in  the  fonu  of  a  salt.  With
acids,  amidogen  forms  very  stable  salts  of  the  two  types  N.^H^HX  and  N.^H^HoXo,  as,
for  example,  with  HCl,  HjSOi,  &c.  These  salts  are  easily  crystallised ;  in  acid  solutions
they  act  as  powerful  reducing  agents,  evolving  nitrogen ;  when  ignited  they  are  decom-
posed into  ammoniacal  salts,  nitrogen,  and  hydrogen ;  with  nitrites  they  evolve  nitrogen.
The  sulphate  N2H4,H2804  is  sparingly  soluble  in  cold  water  (3  parts  in  100  of  water),
but  is  very  soluble  in  hot  water ;  its  specific  gravity  is  1JJ78,  it  fuses  at  251^  with  de-
composition. The  hydrochloride  NoH4,2HCl  crystallises  in  octahedra,  is  very  soluble
in  water,  but  not  in  alcohol ;  it  fuses  at  198*^,  evolving  hj'drogen  chloride  and  fonuing
the  salt  N2H4HCI;  when  rapidly  heated  it  decomposes  with  an  explosion  ;  with  platinic
chloride  it  immediately  evolves  nitrogen,  forming  platinous  chloride.  By  the  action  of
alkalis  the  salts  N2H4,2HX  give  hydrate  of  amidogeuy  N.2H4,H.20,  which  is  a  fuming
liquid  (specific  gravity  1*08),  boiling  at  119^,  almost  without  odour,  and  whose  aqueous
solution  corrodes  glass  and  indiarubber,  lias  an  alkaline  taste  and  i)oisonous  properties.
Tlie  reducing  capacities  of  the  hydrate  are  clearly  seen  from  the  fact  that  it  reduces  tiie
metals  platinum  and  silver  from  their  solutions.  With  mercuric  oxide  it  explo<les.  It
reacts  directly  with  the  aldehydes  RO,  forming  N,jR.f  and  water;  for  example,  with  benz-
aldehydes  it  gives  the  very  stable  insoluble  henzalazinc  (C,jH5CHN).^,  of  a  yellow  colour.
We  may  add  that  hydrazine  often  fonns  double  salts ;  for  example,  MgSO4N.2H4H.2SO4
or  KCIN0H4HCI,  and  that  it  is  also  formed  by  the  action  of  nitrous  acid  upon  aldeiiycle-
ammonia.  The  products  of  the  substitution  of  the  hydrogen  in  hydrazine  by  hydro-
carbon groups  R  (R^CH.v  C2H5,  CflHs,  d'c.)  were  obtained  before  hvdrazine  itself;  for
example,  NHKNHj,  NR^NH.^,  and  (NRH)2.

The  heat  of  solution  of  the  sulphuric  acid  salt  (1  part  in  200  and  300  parts  of  water
at  10  -8)  is  equal  to  -87  C.  According  to  Berthelot  and  Matigon  (1892),  the  heat  of
neutral  isiition  of  hydrazine  by  sulphuric  acid  is  +5*5  C.  and  by  hydrochloric  acid  +i32C.
Thus  hydrazine  is  a  very  feeble  base,  for  its  heat  of  saturation  is  not  only  lower  than
that  of  ammonia  (  +  124  C.  for  HCl),  but  even  l>elow  that  of  hydroxylamine  (  f  9*3  C.)
The  heat  of  formation  from  the  elements  of  hydrated  hydrazine —  95  C was  deduced

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN  259

bines  with  acids  and  resembles  ammonia  in  this  respect.  In  the  action
of  different  substances  on  ammonia  it  is  the  hydrogen  that  is  stibstituted,
whilst  the  nitrogen  remains  in  the  resultant  compound,  so  to  say,  un-
touched. The  same  phenomenon  is  to  be  observed  in  the  action  of
various  substances  on  water.  In  the  majority  of  cases  the  reactions
of  water  consist  in  the  liydrogen  being  evolved,  and  in  its  being
replaced  by  different  elements.  This  also  takes  place,  as  we  have  seen,
in  acids  in  which  the  hydrogen  is  easily  displaced  by  metals.  This
chemical  mobility  of  hydrogen  is  perhaps  connected  with  the  great
lightness  of  the  atoms  of  this  element.

In  practical  chemistry  ^^  ^^^  ammonia  is  often  employed,  not  only  for
saturating  acids,  but  also  for  effecting  reactions  of  double  decomposi-

from  the  heat  of  combustion,  determined  by  burning  N2H4H<2S04  in  a  calorimetric  bomb,
-f  127'7  C.  ThuB  hydrazine  is  an  endothermal  compound ;  its  passage  into  ammonia  by
the  combination  of  hydrogen  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  51*5  C.  In  the  presence
of  an  acid  these  figures  were  jjreater  by  + 14*4  C.  Hence  the  direct  converse  passage
from  ammonia  into  hydrazine  is  impossible.  As  regards  the  passage  of  hydroxylamine
into  hydrazine,  it  would  be  accom{)aiiied  by  the  evolution  of  heat  ( +  21 '5  C.)  in  an  aqueous
solution.

Amidogen  must  be  regarded  as  a  compound  which  stands  to  ammonia  in  the  same
relation  as  hydrogen  peroxide  stands  to  water.  Water,  H(OH),  gives,  according  to  the
law  of  substitution,  as  was  clearly  to  be  expected,  (OH)(OH) — that  is,  peroxide  of  hydro-
gen is  the  free  radicle  of  water  (hydroxyl).  So  also  ammonia,  H(NH2),  forms  hydrazine,
(NH2)(NH2) — that  is,  the  free  radicle  of  ammonia,  NH2,  or  amidogen.  In  the  case  of
phosphorus  a  similar  substance,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  has  long  been  known  under
the  name  of  liquid  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  P^H^.

11  bia  Xn  practice,  the  applications  of  ammouia^are  very  varied.  The  use  of  ammonia  as
a  stimulant,  in  the  forms  of  the  so-called  '  smelling  salts '  or  of  spirits  of  hartshorn,  in
cases  of  faintness,  &c.,  is  known  to  ever^'one.  The  volatile  carbonate  of  ammonium,  or  a
mixture  of  an  anunonium  salt  with  an  alkali,  is  also  employed  for  this  purpose.  Ammonia
also  produces  a  well-known  stimulating  effect  when  rubbed  on  the  skin,  for  which  reason
it  is  sometimes  employed  for  external  applications.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  well-known
volatile  salve  is  preparcnl  from  any  liquid  oil  shaken  up  with  a  solution  of  ammonia.  A
portion  of  the  oil  is  thus  transformed  into  a  soapy  substance.  The  solubility  of  greasy
substances  in  ammonia,  which  proceeds  from  the  formation  both  of  emulsions  and  soaps,
explains  its  use  in  extracting  grease  spots.  It  is  also  employed  as  an  external  application
for  stings  from  insects,  and  for  bites  from  poisonous  snakes,  and  in  general  in  medicine.
It  is  also  remarkable  that  in  cases  of  drunkenness  a  few  drops  of  ammonia  in  water  taken
internally  rapidly  renders  a  person  sober.  A  large  quantity  of  ammonia  is  used  in
dyeing,  either  for  the  solution  of  certain  dyes — for  example,  carmine — or  for  changing
the  tints  of  others,  or  else  for  neutralising  the  aciion  of  acids.  It  is  also  employed  in
the  manufacture  of  artificial  i>earls.  For  this  purpose  the  small  scales  of  a  peculiar
small  fish  are  mixed  with  ammonia,  and  the  liquid  so  obtained  is  blown  into  small  hollow
glasa  beads  shaped  like  pearls.

In  nature  and  the  arts,  however,  ammonium  salts,  and  not  free  ammonia,  are  most
frequently  employed.  In  this  form  a  portion  of  that  nitrogen  which  is  necessary  for  the
formation  of  albuminous  substances  is  supplied  to  plants.  Owing  to  this,  a  large
quantity  of  anmionium  sulphate  is  now  employed  as  a  fertilising  substance.  But  the  same
effect  may  be  produced  by  nitre,  or  by  animal  refuae,  which  in  decomposing  gives
ammonia. For  this  reason,  an  ammoniacal  (hydrogen)  r^  '^  ■utrodnced  into

the  soil  in  the  spring  wliich  will  be  converted  into  a  i  ^he  summer.

88

260  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTHY

tion  with  salts,  and  especially  for  separating  insoluble  basic  hydroxides
from  soluble  salts.  Let  MHO  stand  for  an  insoluble  basic  hydroxide
and  HX  for  an  acid.  The  salt  formed  by  them  will  have  a  composition
MHO  +  XH-HjO  =  MX.  If  aqueous  ammonia,  NH4OH,  be  added
to  a  solution  of  this  salt,  the  ammonia  will  change  places  with  the
metal  M,  and  thus  form  the  insoluble  basic  hydroxide,  or,  as  it  is  said,
give  a  precipitate.

MX  + NH4{0H) = NH,X + MHO

Salt  of  the  metal. Aqueous  ammonia. Ammonium  salt. Basic  liydnite.
In  solution  In  solution  In  solution  As  precipitate

Thus,  for  instance,  if  aqueous  ammonia  is  added  to  a  solution  of  a
salt  of  aluminium,  then  alumina  hydrate  is  separated  out  as  a  colourless
gelatinous  precipitate.^*

In  order  to  grasp  the  relation  between  ammonia  and  the  oxygen
compounds  of  nitrogen  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  the  general  law  of
sttbstitution,  applicable  to  all  cases  of  substitution  between  elements,*^
and  therefore  showing  what  may  be  the  cases  of  substitution  between
oxygen  and  hydrogen  as  component  parts  of  water.  The  law  of  sub-
stitution may  be  deduced  from  mechanical  principles  if  the  molecule  be
conceived  as  a  system  of  elementary  atoms  occurring  in  a  certain  chemical
and  mechanical  equilibrium.  By  likening  the  molecule  to  a  system  of
bodies  in  a  state  of  motion — for  instance,  to  the  sum  total  of  the  sun,
planets,  and  satellites,  existing  in  conditions  of  mobile  equilibrium-
then  we  should  expect  the  action  of  one  part,  in  this  system,  to  be
equal  and  opposite  to  the  other,  according  to  Newton's  third  law  of
mechanics.  Hence,  given  a  molecule  of  a  compound,  for  instance,
HgO,  NH3,  NaCl,  HCl,  <kc.,  its  every  two  parts  must  in  a  chemical  sense

**  As  certain  basic  hydrates  form  peculiar  compounds  with  ammonia,  in  some  cases
it  happens  that  the  first  portions  of  ammonia  added  to  a  solution  of  a  salt  produce  a  pre-
cipitate, whilst  the  addition  of  a  fresh  quantity  of  ammonia  disBolves  this  precipitate  if
the  ammoniacal  compound  of  the  base  be  soluble  in  water.  This,  for  example,  takes
place  with  the  copper  salts. But  alumina  does  not  dissolve  under  these  circumstances.

*3  When  the  element  chlorine,  as  we  shall  afterwards  more  fully  learn,  replaces  the
element  hydrogen,  the  reaction  by  which  such  an  exchanjje  is  accomplished  proceeds
as  a  substitution,  AH  +  CI2  =  ACl  +  HCl,  so  that  two  substances,  AH  and  chlorine,  react
on  each  other,  and  two  substances,  ACl  and  HCl,  are  formed ;  and  further,  two  molecules
react  on  each  other,  and  two  others  are  formed.  The  reaction  proceeds  very  easily,  but
the  substitution  of  one  element,  A^  by  another,  AT,  does  not  always  i)roceed  with  such
ease,  clearness,  or  simplicity.  The  substitution  between  oxygen  and  hydrogen  is  very
rarely  accomplished  by  the  reaction  of  the  free  elements,  but  the  substitution  between
these  elements,  one  for  another,  fonns  the  most  common  case  of  oxidation  and  reduction.
In  speaking  of  the  law  of  substitution,  I  have  in  view  the  substitution  of  the  elements
<me  by  another,  and  not  tlie  direct  reaction  of  substitution.  The  law  of  substitution
determines  the  cycle  of  the  combinations  of  a  given  element,  if  a  few  of  its  compounds
(for  instance,  the  hydrogen  compounds)  be  known.  A  development  of  the  conceptions
of  the  law  of  substitution  may  be  found  in  my  lecture  given  at  the  Royal  Institution  in
London,  1889.

COMPOUNDS OF  NITROGEN  AVITH  HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN 261

represent  two  things  somewhat  alike  in  force  and  properties,  and  therefore
every  ttvo  parts  into  which  a  molecule  of  a  comjxmnd  may  he  divided
are  capable  of  replcu*iny  each  other.  In  order  that  the  application  of
the  law  should  become  clear  it  is  evident  that  among  compounds  the
most  stable  should  be  chosen.  We  will  therefore  take  hydrochloric  acid
and  water  as  the  most  stable  compounds  of  hydrogen.**  According  to
the  above  law  of  substitution,  if  the  elements  H  and  CI  are  able  to
form  a  molecule,  HCl,  and  a  stable  one,  they  are  able  to  replace  each
other.  And,  indeed,  we  shall  afterwards  see  (Chapter  XI.)  that  in  a
number  of  instances  a  substitution  between  hydrogen  and  chlorine  can
take  place.  Given  RH,  then  RCl  is  possible,  because  HCl  exists  and
is  stable.  The  molecule  of  water,  HjO,  may  be  divided  in  two  ways,
because  it  contains  3  atoms  :  into  H  and  (HO)  on  the  one  hand,  and
into  Hj  and  O  on  the  other.  Consequently,  being  given  RH,  its
substitution  products  will  be  R(HO)  according  to  the  first  form,  and
RjO  according  to  the  second  ;  being  given  RHj,  its  corresponding
substitution  products  will  be  RH(OH),  R(0H)2,  RO,  (RH)20,  &c.
The  group  (OH)  is  the  same  hydroxyl  or  aqueous  radicle  which  we
have  already  mentioned  in  the  third  chapter  as  a  component  part  of
hydroxides  and  alkalis — for  instance,  Na(OH),  Ca(0H)2,  &c.  It  is
evident,  judging  from  H(HO)  and  HCl,  that  (OH)  can  be  substituted  by
CI,  because  both  are  replaceable  by  H ;  and  this  is  of  common  occurrence
in  chemistry,  because  metallic  chlorides —for  example,  NaCl  and  NH4CI
— correspond  with  hydroxides  of  the  alkalis  Na(OH)  or  NH4(0H).
In  hydrocarbons — for  instance,  C^Hg — the  hydrogen  is  replaceable  by
chlorine  and  by  hydroxyl.  Thus  ordinary  alcohol  is  C2H6,  in  which
one  atom  of  H  is  replaced  by  (OH) ;  that  is,  C2H5(OH).  It  is  evident
that  the  replacement  of  hydrogen  by  hydroxyl  essentially  forms  the
phenomenon  of  oxidation,  because  RH  gives  R(OH),  or  RHO.
Hydrogen  peroxide  may  in  this  sense  be  regarded  as  water  in  which  the
hydrogen  is  replaced  by  hydroxyl ;  H(OH)  gives  (0H)2  or  H2O2.  The
other  form  of  substitution — namely,  that  of  O  in  the  place  of  Hg — is
also  a  common  chemical  phenomenon.  Thus  alcohol,  CjHgO,  or
C2Hft(0H),  when  oxidising  in  the  air,  gives  acetic  acid,  C2H4O2,  or
C2H30(OH),  in  which  H2  is  replaced  by  O.

In  the  further  course  of  this  work  we  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to
the  law  of  substitution  for  explaining  many  chemical  phenomena  and
relations.

"  If  hydrogen  i^roxide  be  taken  as  a  starting  point,  then  still  higher  fonns  of  oxida-
tion than  those  corresponding  with  water  should  be  looked  for.  They  should  possess  the
properties  of  hydrogen  peroxide,  especially  that  of  parting  with  their  oxygen  with  ex-
treme ease  (even  by  contact).  Such  compounds  are  known.  Pernitric,  persulphuric,  and
similar  acids  present  these  properties,  as  we  -ibing  them.

262  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEM18TKY

We  will  now  apply  these  conceptions  to  ammonia  in  order  to  see  its
relation  to  the  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen.  It  is  evident  that  many
substances  should  be  obtainable  from  ammonia,  NH3,  or  aqueous
ammonia,  NH4(0H),  by  substituting  their  hydrogen  by  hydroxyl,  or  H2
by  oxygen.  And  such  is  the  case.  The  two  extreme  cases  of  such  sub-
stitatiou  will  be  as  follows  :  ( 1 )  One  atom  of  H  in  NH3  is  substituted  by
(OH),  and  NH2(0H)  is  produced.  Such  a  substance,  still  containing
much  hydrogen,  should  have  many  of  the  properties  of  ammonia.  It  is
known  under  the  name  of  hydroxyl aniiiie^'^'^  and,  in  fact,  is  capable,  like

**  The  compound  of  hydroxylamine  with  hydrochloric  acid  has  the  comix)sition
NH2(0H)HC1  =  NH4CIO — that  is,  it  is  as  it  were  oxidised  sal -ammoniac.  It  was  pre-
pared by  LoBsen  in  1865  by  the  action  of  tin  and  liydrochloric  acid  in  the  presence  of
water  on  a  substance  called  etliyl  nitrate,  in  which  case  tlie  hydro^'en  liberated  from  the
hydrochloric  acid  by  tlie  tin  acts  upon  the  elements  of  nitric  acid —

CaHs-NOs + 6H + HCl - NH4OCI  4  H.O + C.HsOH

Ethyl  nitrate Hydrogen  from  Hydroxylamine  +  HCl  Water  Alcohol

HCl  and  Sn

Thus  in  this  case  the  nitric  acid  is  deoxidised,  not  directly  into  nitrogen,  but  into  hydroxyl-
amine. Hydroxylamine  is  also  formed  by  passing  nitric  oxide,  NO,  into  a  mixture  of  tin
and  hydrochloric  acid — that  is,  by  the  action  of  the  hydrogen  evolved  on  the  nitric  oxide,
NO-»-8H  +  HCl  =  NH40Cl — and  in  many  other  cases.  According  to  Lossen's  metho<l.  a
mixture  of  80  parts  of  ethyl  nitrate,  120  pcurts  of  tin,  and  40  parts  of  a  solution  of  hydro-
chloric acid  of  sp.  gr.  106  are  taken.  After  a  certain  time  the  reaction  commences
Hpontaneously.  When  the  reaction  has  ceased  the  tin  is  separated  by  means  of  hydrogen
sulphide,  the  solution  is  evaporated,  and  a  large  amount  of  sal-ammoniac  is  thus  obtained
(owing  to  the  further  action  of  hydrogen  on  the  hydroxylamine  compound,  the  hydrogen
taking  up  oxygen  from  it  and  forming  water) ;  a  solution  ultimately  remains  containing
the  hydroxylamine  salt ;  this  salt  is  dissolved  in  anhydrous  alcohol  and  purified  by  the
addition  of  platinum  chloride,  whicli  precipitates  any  ammonium  salt  still  remaining  in
the  solution.  After  concentrating  the  alcoholic  solution  the  hydroxylamine  hydrochloride
separates  in  crystals.  This  substance  melts  at  about  150  ,  and  in  s(»  doing  decomiM>ses
into  nitrogen,  hydrogen  chloride,  water,  and  sal-ammoniac.  A  sulphuric  acid  com-
pound of  hydroxylamine  may  be  obtained  by  mixing  a  solution  of  the  above  ^ult
with  sulphuric  acid.  The  sulphate  is  also  soluble  in  water  like  the  hydrochloride ;
this  shows  that  hydroxylamine,  like  ammonia  itself,  forms  a  scries  of  salts  in  which  one
acid  may  be  substituted  for  another.  It  might  be  exi>ected  that  by  mixing  a  8tr(»ng
solution  of  a  hydroxylamine  salt  witli  a  solution  of  a  caustic;  alkali  hydroxylamine  itself
would  be  liberated,  just  as  an  ammonia  salt  under  thcM'  circumstances  evolves  ammonia;
but  the  liberated  hydroxylamine  is  immediately  decomi>oKed  with  the  fonnation  of  nitro-
gen and  ammonia  (and  probably  nitrous  oxide),  8NH-0-  NH- •  yH...O -r  Nj.  Dilute
solutions  give  the  same  reaction,  although  verj'  slowly,  but  by  de<'omi)osing  a  solution  of
the  sulphate  with  barium  hydroxide  a  certain  amount  of  hydroxylamine  is  obtained  in
solution  (it  is  partly  decomposed).  Hydroxylamine  in  aqueous  solution,  like  ammonia,
precipitates  basic  hydrates,  and  it  deoxidises  the  oxides  of  coppiT.  silver,  and  other
metals.  Free  hydroxylamine  was  obtained  by  Lobry  de  Bruyn  (IMDI).  It  is  a  solid,
colourless,  crystalline  substance,  without  odour,  which  do<»s  not  melt  below  *27'.  It  has
the  proiwrty  of  dissolving  metallic  salts;  for  instance,  so<liuni  chloride.  Hydroxylamine,
when  rapidly  heated  with  platinum,  deconiiwses  with  a  flash  and  the  f<»nnation  of  u
yellow  flame.  It  is  almost  insoluble  in  ordinary-  solvents  like  chloroform,  benzine,  acetic
ether,  and  carbon  bisuli>hide.  Its  aqueous  solutions  are  tolerably  stable,  contain  up  to
60  per  cent.  (sj).  gr.  \\T>  at  20'"),  and  may  be  kept  for  numy  we«*ks  witlumt  undergoing  unv
change.  Lobry  do  Bruyn  use<l  the  hydrochloric  salt  to  prei)are  pure  hydroxylamine.
The  salt  was  first  treated  with  so<lium  methylate  (CHjNaO),  and  then  metliyl  alcohol  was

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN WITH  HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN  268

ammonia,  of  giving  salts  with  acids ;  for  example,  with  hydrochloric
acid,  NH3(0H)C1 — which  is  a  substance  corresponding  to  sal-ammoniac,
in  which  one  atom  of  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  hydroxy  1.^*  ^" (2)  The

added  to  the  mixture.  The  precipitated  soiliuin  chloride  was  separated  from  the  Kolution
by  filtration.  (The  methyl  alcohol  is  added  to  prevent  the  precipitated  chloride  of  sodium
from  coating  the  insoluble  hydrochloric  Siilt  of  hydroxylamine.)  The  methyl  alcohol  was
driven  off  under  a  pressure  150-200  mm.,  and  after  extracting  a  further  portion  of  methyl
alcohol  by  ether  and  several  fractional  distillations,  a  solution  was  obtained  containing
70  per  cent,  of  free  hydroxylamine,  8  per  cent,  water,  9"9  per  cent,  cliloride  of  sodium,  and
12*1  per  cent,  of  the  hydrochloric  salt  of  hydroxylamine.  Pure  free  hydroxylamine,
NH5O,  is  obtained  by  distilling  under  a  pressure  of  GO  mm. ;  it  then  boils  at  70  %  and
solidifies  in  a  condenser  cooled  to  0^  in  the  form  of  long  needles.  It  melts  at  33^,  boils
at  58^  under  a  pressure  of  22  mm.,  and  lias  a  sp.  gr.  of  about  1-235  (Briihl).  Under  the
action  of  NaHO  it  gives  NH^,  and  NHO...  or  N.2O,  and  forms  nitric  acid  (Kolotoff,  1898)
under  the  action  of  oxidising  agents.  Hydroxylamine  is  obtained  in  a  great  number  of
cases,  for  instance  by  the  action  of  tin  on  dilute  nitric  acid,  and  also  by  the  action  of
zinc  on  ethyl  nitrate  and  dilute  hydrocldoric  acid,  &c.  The  relation  between  hydroxyl-
amine, NH.»(OH),  and  nitrous  acid,  NO(OH),  which  is  so  clear  in  the  sense  of  the  law  of
substitutions,  becomes  a  reality  in  those  cases  when  reducing  agents  act  on  salts  of
nitrous  acid.  Thus  Raschig  (1888)  proposed  the  following  method  for  the  preparation  of
the  hydroxylamine  sulphate.  A  mixture  of  strong  solutions  of  potassium  nitrite,  KNO.^,
and  hydroxide,  KHO,  in  molecular  proportions,  is  prepared  and  cooled.  An  excess  of
sulphurous  anhydride  is  then  passed  into  the  mixture,  and  the  solution  boiled  for  a  long
time.  A  mixture  of  the  sulphates  of  potassium  and  hydroxylamine  is  thus  obtained :
KN02  +  KHO  +  2SOo  +  2H.>0  =  NH,(OH),H2S04  +  K.jS04.  The  salts  may  be  separated
from  each  other  by  crj'stallisation.

**  •»*■  In  order  to  illustrate  the  application  of  the  law  of  substitution  to  a  given  case,
and  to  show  the  connection  between  ammonia  and  the  oxides  of  nitrogen,  let  us  consider
the  possible  products  of  an  oxygen  and  hydroxyl  substitution  in  caustic  ammonia,
NH4(0H).  It  is  evident  that  the  substitution  of  H  by  OH  can  give:  (1)  NH5(OH)2;
(2)  NH2(OH)3;  (3)  NH(0H)4;  and  (4)  N(0H)5.  They  should  all,  like  caustic  ammonia
itself,  easily  part  with  water  and  form  products  (hydroxylic)  of  the  oxidation  of  am-
monia. The  first  of  them  is  the  hydrate  of  hydroxylamine,  NH.2(0H)  +  H2O ;  the  second,
NH(OH).j  +  HjO  (and  also  the  substance  NH(OH).|  or  NH3O2),  containing,  as  it  does,
both  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  is  able  to  part  with  all  its  hydrogen  in  the  form  of  water
(which  could  not  be  done  by  the  first  product,  since  it  contained  too  little  oxygen),  forming,
as  the  ultimate  product,  2NH.j(OH)3— 5HoO  =  NoO — that  is,  it  corresi)onds  with  nitrous
oxide,  or  the  lower  degree  of  the  oxidation  of  nitrogen.  So,  also,  nitrous  anhydride
corresponds  with  the  third  of  the  above  products,  2NH(OH)4— 5H20  =  No03,  and  nitric
anhydride  with  the  fourth,  2N(OH)5  —  5H20^N._,05.  As,  in  these  three  equations,  two
molecules  of  the  substitution  products  (  — SH.^O)  are  taken,  it  is  also  possible  to  combine
two  different  products  in  one  equation.  For  instance,  the  third  and  fourth  products :
NH(OH)4  +  N(OH)5  — SHoO  corresponds  to  N2O4  or  2N0.,>,  that  is,  to  i)eroxide  of  nitrogen.
Thus  all  the  five  (see  later)  oxides  of  nitrogen,  N.^O,  NO,  N2O.-,,  NO2,  and  N2O5,  may  be
deduced  from  anmionia.  The  alx)ve  may  be  expressed  in  a  general  form  by  the  equation
(it  should  be  remarked  that  the  composition  of  all  the  substitution  products  of  caustic
ammonia  may  be  exi)ressed  by  NH5OJ,  —  «,  where  a  varies  between  0  and  4) :

NH505-„-fNH.O:,-t,-5H20-N205_(„^t„

where  a  +  6  can  evidently  be  not  greater  than  5;  when  a +  6  =  5  we  have  N2— nitrogen,
when  =  4  we  have  NjO  nitrous  oxide;  when  a  +  6  =  3  we  have  N2O2  or  NO -nitric  oxidf,
and  so  on  to  N2O5,  when  a  t  6  =  0.  Besides  which  it  is  evident  that  internnHliate  products
may  correspond  with  (and  hence  also  break-up  into)  different  starting  ixiints ;  for  iuHtance,
NjO  is  obtained  when  «-r6=^2,  and  this  may  occur  either  when  a  ■  0  (nitric  acid),  and
6-=  2  (hydroxylamine),  or  when  a^h  =  l  (the  third  of  the  above  substitution  pnuluctH).

264  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

other  extreme  case  of  substitution  is  that  given  by  amiiioniuni  hydroxid<%
NH4(0H),  when  the  whole  of  the  hydrogen  of  the  ammonium  is  re-
placed by  oxygen  ;  and,  as  ammonium  contains  4  atoms  of  hydrogen,
the  highest  oxygen  compound  should  be  N02(0H),  or  NHOa,  as  we
find  to  l)e  really  the  case,  for  NHO3  is  nitric  acid,  exhibiting  the
highest  degree  of  oxidation  of  nitrogen.^^  If  instead  of  the  two
extreme  aspects  of  substitution  we  take  an  intermediate  one,  we  o])tain
the  intermediate  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen.  For  instance,
N(OH);,  is  orthonitrous  acid,^^  to  which  corresponds  nitrous  acid,
NO(OH),  or  NHO2,  equal  to  N(0H)3— HgO,  and  nitrous  anhydride,
N203=2N(OH)3— SH.^O.  Thus  nitrogen  gives  a  series  of  oxygen
compounds,  which  we  will  proceed  to  describe.  We  will,  however,  first
show  by  two  examples  that  in  the  first  place  the  passage  of  ammonia
into  the  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen  up  to  nitric  acid,  as  well  as  the
converse  preparation  of  ammonia  (and  consequently  of  the  intt^rmediate
compounds  also)  from  nitric  acid,  are  reactions  which  proceed  directly
and  easily  under  many  circumstances,  and  in  the  second  plact?  tliat  the
above  general  principle  of  substitution  gives  the  possibility  of  under-
standing many,  at  first  sight  anex{>ected  and  complex,  relations  and
transformations,  such  as  the  preparation  of  hydro- nitrous  acid,  HN3.  In
nature  the  matter  is  complicated  by  a  number  of  influences  and  cir-

'*^  Nitric  acid  corresponds  with  the  anhydride  NjO^,  which  will  afterwardn  be  described,
but  which  must  be  regarded  as  the  highest  saline  oxide  of  nitrogen,  just  as  NtUjO  (tmd  tli<?
hydroxide  NaHO)  in  the  case  of  sodium,  although  sodium  fonns  a  peroxide  possessing  the
property  of  parting  with  its  oxygen  with  the  same  ease  as  hydrogen  peroxide,  if  not  on
heating,  at  all  events  in  reactions — for  instance,  with  acids.  So  also  nitric  acid  has  its
corresponding  peroxide,  which  may  be  called  pemitric  acid.  Its  composition  is  not  well
known — probably  NHO4 — so  that  its  corresiwnding  anhydride  would  be  N,,0;.  It  is
formed  by  the  action  of  a  silent  discharge  on  a  mixture  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen,  so  that
A  portion  of  its  oxygen  is  in  a  state  similar  to  that  in  ozone.  The  instability  of  this  sub-
stance (obtained  by  Hautefeuille,  Chappuis,  and  Berthelot),  which  easily  splits  up  with
the  formation  of  nitric  peroxide,  and  its  resemblance  to  persulphuric  acid,  which  we  shall
afterwards  describe,  will  permit  our  passing  over  the  consideratic^i  of  the  little  that  is
further  known  concerning  it.

^  PhosphoruH  (Chapter  XIX.)  gives  the  hydride  PHj,  corresponding  with  ammonia,
NH-,  and  forms  phosphorous  acid,  PH-.Os,  which  is  analogous  to  nitrous  acid,  just  as
phosphoric  acid  is  to  nitric  acid;  but  phosphoric  (or,  better,  ()rthoi)hosphoric)  acid,
PHjO,,  is  able  to  lose  water  and  give  pyro-  and  meta-phosphoric  acids.  The  latter  is
equal  to  tiie  ortho-acid  minub  water  =  PHO5,  and  therefore  nitric  acid,  NIK)-,  is  really
meta-nitric  acid.  So  also  nitrous  acid,  HNO.,>,  is  meta-nitrous  (anhydrous)  acid,  and  thus
the  ortho-acid  is  NH50.  =  N(0H)-,.  Hence  for  nitric  acid  we  should  expect  to  find,  b«'-
sides  the  ordinary  or  meta-nitric  acid,  HNO-(^iN,jO.^H.,.0),  and  ortho-nitric  acid,
H3N04(  =  iX2058H.,0),  an  intermediate  pyro-nitric  acid,  N.^.HjO;,  corresponding  to
pyrophosi)h(uic  acid,  P.^H^O;.  We  shall  see  (for  instance,  in  C'hai)ter  XVI.,  Note  21)
that  in  nitric  acid  there  is  indeed  an  inclination  of  the  ordinary  salts  (of  the  meta-acid),
MNO-,  to  combine  with  bases  MoO,  and  to  approximate  to  the  coniiw)siti(»n  of  ortho-
compounds  which  are  equal  to  meta-compound  a'.id  bases  (MNO- -  MoO M3NO,).

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN  265

cumstances,  but  in  the  law  the  relations  are  presented  in  their  simplest
aspect.

1.  It  is  easy  to  prove  the  possibility  of  the  oxidation  of  ammonia
into  nitric  acid  by  passing  a  mixture  of  ammonia  and  air  over  heated
spongy  platinum.  This  causes  the  oxidation  of  the  ammonia,  nitric
acid  being  formed,  which  partially  combines  with  the  excess  of
ammonia.

The  converse  passage  of  nitric  acid  into  ammonia  is  effected
by  the  action  of  hydrogen  at  the  moment  of  its  evolution.^^  Thus
metallic  aluminium,  evolving  hydrogen  from  a  solution  of  caustic  soda,
is  able  to  completely  convert  nitric  acid  added  to  the  mixture  (as  a  salt,
because  the  alkaH  gives  a  salt  with  the  nitric  acid)  into  ammonia,
NHO3  4-  8H=NH3  +  3H.A

2.  In  1890  Curtius  in  Germany  obtained  a  gaseous  substance  of  the
composition  HN3  (hydrogen  trinitride),  having  the  distinctive  properties
of  an  acid,  and  giving,  like  hydrochloric  acid,  salts  ;  for  example,  a,
sodium  salt,  NaN;j  ;  ammonium  salt,  NH|N3=N4H4  ;  barium  salt,
Ba(N3)2,  itc,  which  he  therefore  named  kydronitrous  acid,  JlN^i,^^  ****

^  The  formation  of  ammonia  is  observed  in  many  cases  of  oxidation  l>y  means  of
nitric  acid.  This  substance  is  even  fonned  in  the  action  of  nitric  acid  on  tin,  especially
if  dilute  acid  be  employed  in  the  cold.  A  still  more  considerable  amount  of  ammonia  is
obtained  if,  in  the  action  of  nitric  acid,  there  are  conditions  directly  tending  to  the  evolu-
tion of  hydrogen,  which  then  reduces  the  acid  to  ammonia;  for  instance,  in  the  action
of  zinc  on  a  mixture  of  nitric  and  sulphuric  acids.

»  bu  Curtius  started  with  benzoylliydrazine,  CgHsCONHNH^  (hydrazine,  see  Note
20  bU)_  (This  substance  i^  obtained  by  the  action  of  hydrated  hydrazine  on  the  com-
pound ether  of  benzoic  acid).  Benzoylhydrazine  under  the  actk>n  of  nitrous  acid  gives
benzoylazoimide  and  water :

CgHiCONHXH-.  +  NO.H^CeHjCOXj  :  2H.0.

Benzoylazoimide  when  treated  with  sodium  alcoholate  gives  the  sodium  salt  of  hydro-
nitrous  acid :

QH.CONj^  C.H.OXa  -  CcH.CO.C.H^  r-XaX^.

The  addition  of  ether  to  tlie  resultant  solution  precipitates  the  XaX^,  and  this  salt  when
treated  with  sulphuric  acid  gives  gaseous  hydronitrous  acid,  HX3.  It  has  an  acrid  smell,
and  is  easily  soluble  in  water.  The  acjueous  solution  exhibits  a  strongly  acid  reaction.
Metals  dissolve  in  this  solution  and  give  the  corresjMinding  salts.  With  hydronitrous
acid  gaseous  ammonia  fonns  a  white  cloud,  consisting  of  the  salt  of  ammonium,  NH4NS.
This  salt  separates  out  from  an  alcoholic  .solution  in  the  form  of  white  lustrous  scales.
The  salts  of  hydronitrous  acid  are  obtained  by  a  reaction  of  substitution  with  the  sodium
or  ammonium  salts.  In  this  manner  Curtius  obtained  and  studied  the  salts  of  silver
(AgX^),  mercury  (HgX^),  lead  (PbXo),  barium  (BaNg).  With  hydrazine,  N.JH4,  hydro-
nitrous acid  forms  saline  compounds  in  the  composition  of  which  there  are  one  or  two
particles  of  X^H  per  one  particle  of  hydrazine ;  thus  N5H5  and  X^Hg.  The  first  was
obtained  in  an  almost  pure  form.  It  crystallises  from  an  aqueous  solution  in  dense,
volatile,  lustrous  prisms  (up  to  1  in.  long),  which  fuse  at  50-^,  and  deliquesce  in  the  air;
from  a  solution  in  boiling  alcohol  it  separates  out  in  bright  crystalline  plates.  This  salt
X^H^,  has  the  same  empirical  c<»mposition,  XH,  as  the  ammonium  salt  of  hydronitrous

266  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTKY

The  extraordinary  composition  of  the  compound  (ammonia,  NH3,
contains  one  N  atom  and  three  H  atoms  ;  in  HN3,  on  the  contrary,  there
are  three  X  atoms  and  one  H  atom),  the  facile  decomposition  of  its  salts
with  an  explosion,  and  above  all  its  distinctly  acid  character  (an  aqueous
solution  shows  a  strong  acid  reaction  to  litmus),  not  only  indicated
the  importance  of  this  unexpected  discovery,  but  at  tirst  gave  ris^  to  some
perplexity  as  to  the  nature  of  the  isubstance  obtained,  for  the  relations
in  which  HN3  stood  to  other  simple  compounds  of  nitrogen  which  had
long  been  known  was  not  at  all  evident,  and  the  scientific  spirit
especially  requires  that  there  should  be  a  distinct  bond  between  every
innovation,  every  fresh  discovery,  and  that  which  is  already  firmly
established  and  known,  for  upon  this  basis  is  founded  that  apparently
paradoxical  union  in  science  of  a  conservative  stability  with  an
irresistible  and  never-ceasing  improvement.  This  missing  connection
between  the  newly  discovered  hydronitrous  acid,  HN3,  and  the  long
known  ammonia,  NH3,  and  nitric  acid,  HNO3,  may  be  found  in  the
law  of  substitution,  starting  from  the  well-known  properties  and
composition  of  nitric  acid  and  ammonia,  as  I  mentioned  in  the  '  Journal
of  the  Russian  Physico- Chemical  Society'  (1890).  The  essence  of  the
matter  lies  in  the  fact  that  to  the  hydrate  of  ammonium,  or  caustic
ammonia,  NH4OH,  there  should  correspond,  according  to  the  law  of
substitution,  an  ortho-nitric  acid  (see  Note  27),  H3N04=NO(OH)3,
which  equals  NH4(0H)  with  the  substitution  in  it  of  (a)  two  atoms  of
hydrogen  by  oxygen  (0  — Hg)  and  (b)  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  by  the
aqueous  radicle  (OH  — H).  Ordinary  or  meta-nitric  acid  is  merely
this  ortho- nitric  acifl  minus  water.  To  ortho-nitric  acid  there  should
correspond  the  ammoniacal  salts  :  mono-substituted,  H2NH4NO4  ;  bi-
substituted,  H(XH4)2N04  ;  and  tri-substituted,  (NH4)3N04.  These
salts,  containing  as  they  do  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  like  many  similar
ammoniacal salts (see, for instance.  Chapter IX. — Cyanides),  are

acid,  N4H4,  and  imide ;  but  their  molecules  and  structure  are  different.  Curtius  also
obtained  (1893)  hydronitrous  acid  by  passing  the  vapour  of  N.^O^  (evolved  by  the  action
of  HNO3  on  AsoO-J  into  a  solution  of  hydrazine,  N.^.H4.  Shnilarly  Angeli,  by  acting  upon  a
saturated  solution  of  silver  nitrite  with  a  strong  solution  of  hydrazine,  obtained  tlie
explosive  AgXs  in  the  form  of  a  precipitate,  and  this  reaction,  which  is  V>ascd  uiwn  the
equation  NoH4-r  XHO.j  =  HN3-r2HoO,  proceeds  so  easily  that  it  forms  an  exi)eriment
for  the  lecture  table.  A  thermal  investigation  of  hydronitrous  acid  by  Berthelot  and
Matignon  gave  the  following  figures  for  the  heat  of  solution  of  the  ammonium  salt
N3HNH5  (1  grm.  in  100  parts  of  water)  — 70HC.,  and  for  the  heait  of  neutralisati(m
by  barium  hydrate  -I  100  C,  and  by  ammonia  +82  C.  The  heat  of  combustion  of
N4H4(  !  1C8'8  C.  at  a  constant  vol.)  gives  the  heat  of  formation  of  the  suit  N4H4  (solid)  as
—  2o'ii  C.  and  (solution)  —  32*3  C;  this  explains  the  explosive  nature  of  this  compound.
In  its  heut  of  formation  from  the  elements  N3H=  -(»2'G  C,  this  comi)oun(l  differs  from
all  the  hydrogen  compounds  of  nitrogen  in  having  a  maximum  absorptrion  of  heat,  which
explains  its  instability.

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  UYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN 267

•

able  to  part  with  them  in  the  form  of  water.  Then  from  the  first
salt  we  have  H2NH4N04  —  4H20=N20  — nitrous  oxide,  and  from  the
second  H(NH4)2N04  — 4H20=HN3  — hydronitrous  acid,  and  from  the
third  (NH4)jN0  —  4H20=N4H4 — the  ammonium  salt  of  the  same  a,cid.
The  composition  of  HN3  should  be  thus  understood,  whilst  its  acid
properties  are  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  water  (4H2O)  from
H(NH4)2N04  is  formed  at  the  expense  of  the  hydrogen  of  the  ammonium
and  oxygen  of  the  nitric  acid,  so  that  there  remains  the  same  hydrogen
as  in  nitric  acid,  or  that  which  may  be  replaced  by  metals  and  give
salts.  Moreover,  nitrogen  undoubtedly  belongs  to  that  category  of
metalloids  which  give  acids,  like  chlorine  and  carbon,  and  therefore,
under  the  influence  of  three  of  its  atoms,  one  atom  of  hydrogen  acquires
those  properties  which  it  has  in  acids,  just  as  in  HCN  (hydrocyanic
acid)  the  hydrogen  has  received  these  properties  under  the  influence  of
the  carbon  and  nitrogen  (and  HN3  may  be  regarded  as  HCN  where  C
has  been  replaced  by  N.2).  Moreover,  Ijesides  explaining  the  com-
position and  acid  properties  of  HX3,  the  above  method  gives  the
possibility  of  foretelling  the  closeness  of  the  bond  between  hydronitrous
acid  and  nitrous  oxide,  for  N.^O  +  NH3=HN3H-H20.  This  reaction,
which  was  foreseen  from  the  above  considerations,  was  accomplislied  by
Wislicenus  (1892)  by  the  synthesis  of  the  sodium  salt,  by  taking  th
amide  of  sodium,  NHjNa  (obtained  by  heating  Na  in  a  current  of
NH3),  and  acting  uj)on  it  (whon  heated)  with  nitrous  oxide,  N.2O,
when  2NH2Na  +  N.,0  =  NaN3  +  NaHO  +  NHv  The  resultant  siilt,
NaN3,  gives  hydronitrous  acid  when  acted  upon  by  sulphuric  acid,
NaN3  +  H.^S04  =  NaHS04  +  HN3.  The  latter  gives,  with  the  corre-
sponding solutions  of  their  salts,  the  insoluble  (and  easily  exj)losive)
salts  of  silver,  AgNy  (insoluble,  like  AgCl  or  AgCN),  andlead,  Pb(N3)2.
The  compounds  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen  present  an  excellent
example  of  the  law  of  multiple  proiK)rtions,  l>eoause  they  contain,  for  14
parts  by  weight  of  nitrog«»n,  8,  IG,  24,  32,  and  40  parts  i*espectively  by
weight  of  oxygen. The  composition  of  these  compounds  is  as  follows  :  —

N.^O,  nitrous  oxide  ;  hydrate  NHO.
N./).2,  nitric  oxide,  NO.
N.^Oj,  nitrous  anhydride  ;  hydrate  NHO.^.
N2O4,  peroxide  of  nitrogen,  NO.j,
N2O5,  nitric  anhy<lride  ;  hydrate  NH()3.

Of  these  compounds,-^  nitrous  and  nitric  oxides,  iXM-oxide  of  niti'ogen,

-"'*  According  to  the  thennocliemioul  dfterminations  of  Favro,  Tliom»eii,  and  more
cspcciully  of  Bcrthelot,  it  follows  that,  in  the  fomiution  of  such  quantities  of  the  oxideH
f>f  nitrogen  as  expreitH  their  formulie,  if  ganeoaR  nitrogen  and  oxygen  be  taken  aa  the

268  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

and  nitric  acid,  NHO3,  ^^^  characterised  as  being  the  most  stable.  The
lower  oxides  J  when  coinintj  into  contact  with  the  higher,  may  (jive  the
intermediate  forms  ;  for  instance,  NO  and  NO2  form  N.2O3,  and  the
intermediate  oxides  may,  in  splitting  up,  give  a  higher  and  loicer  oxide.
So  N2O4  gives  N.jOj  and  N20r„  or,  in  the  presence  of  water,  their
hydrates.

We  have  already  seen  that,  under  certain  conditions,  nitrogen
combines  with  oxygen,  and  we  know  that  ammonia  may  be  oxidised.
In  these  cases  various  oxidation  products  of  nitrogen  are  formed,  but
in  the  presence  of  water  and  an  excess  of  oxygen  they  always  give
nitric  acid.  Nitric  acid,  as  corresponding  with  the  highest  oxide,  is
able,  in  deoxidising,  to  give  the  lower  oxides  ;  it  is  the  only  nitrogen
acid  whose  salts  occur  somewhat  widely  in  natui-e,  and  it  has  many
technical  uses,  for  which  reason  we  will  begin  with  it.

Nitric  acid,  NHO3,  ^^  likewise  known  as  aqua  fortis.  In  a  free
state  it  is  only  met  with  in  nature  in  small  quantities,  in  the  air  and
in  rain-water  after  storms  ;  but  even  in  the  atmosphere  nitric  acid  does
not  long  remain  free,  but  combines  with  ammonia,  traces  of  which  are
always  found  in  air.  On  falling  on  the  soil  and  into  running  water,
«kc.,  the  nitric  acid  everywhere  comes  into  contact  with  bases  (or  their
carbonates),  which  easily  act  on  it,  and  therefore  it  is  converted  into
the  nitrates  of  these  bases.  Hence  nitric  acid  is  always  met  with  in
the  form  of  salts  in  nature.  The  soluble  salts  of  nitric  acid  are  called
nitres.  This  name  is  derived  from  the  Latin  sal  nitri.  The  potassium
salt,  KNO3,  is  common  nitre,  and  the  sodium  salt,  NaNOg,  Chili  salt-
petre, or  cubic  nitre. Nitres  are  formed  in  the  soil  when  a  nitrogenous

Htarting  points,  and  if  the  compounds  formed  be  alHo  gaseous,  the  following  amounts
of  heat,  expressed  in  thousands  of  heat  units,  are  absorbed  (hence  a  minus  sign) : —

NoO l^iOi N2O3 N.p,

N,05

-21 -43 -22 -5

-1

-22 +21 +17 +4

The  difiference  is  given  in  the  lower  line. For  example,  if  Nj,  or  28  grams  of  nitrogen,
combine  with  O — that  is,  with  IG  grams  of  oxygen — then  21,000  units  of  heat  are  absorbed,
that  is,  sufficient  heat  to  raise  21,000  grams  of  water  tlirough  1°. Naturally,  direct
observations  are  impossible  in  this  case ;  but  if  charcoal,  phosphorus,  or  similar  sub-
stances are  burnt  both  in  nitrous  oxide  and  in  oxygen,  and  the  heat  evolved  is  observed
in  both  cases,  then  the  difference  (more  heat  will  be  evolved  in  burning  in  nitrous  oxide)
gives the  figures  required. If  X.^O.^,  by  combining  with 0..>,  gives  N.^O-i,  then,  as  is
seen  from  the  table,  heat  should  be  develoi)ed,  namely,  38,000  units  of  heat,  or  XO  +  O
=  19,000  units  of  heat. The  differences  given  in  the  table  show  that  the  maximum  absorp-
tion of  heat  corre8i)onds  with  nitric  oxide,  and  that  the  higher  oxides  are  formed  from  it
with  evolution  of  heat. If  liquid  nitric  acid,  NHO3,  were  decomposed  intr>  X  +  O5  +  H,
then  41,000  heat  units  would  be  required ;  that  is,  an  evolution  of  heat  takes  place  in  its
formation  from  the  gases. It  should  be  observed  that  the  formation  of  ammonia,  XH5.
from  the  gases  X  •  H3  evolves  12*2  thousand  heat  units.

COMPOUNDS OF  NITROGEN WITU HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN  269

substance  is  slowly  oxidised  in  the  presence  of  an  alkali  by  means  of
the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere.  In  nature  there  are  very  frequent
instances  of  such  oxidation.  For  this  reason  certain  soils  and  rubbish
heaps — for  instance,  lime  rubbish  (in  the  presence  of  a  base — lime) —
contain  a  more  or  less  considerable  amount  of  nitre.  One  of  these
nitres — sodium  nitrate — is  extracted  from  the  earth  in  large  quantities
in  Chili,  where  it  was  probably  formed  by  the  oxidation  of  animal
refuse.  This  kind  of  nitre  is  employed  in  practice  for  the  manufacture
of  nitric  acid  and  the  other  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen.  Nitric
acid  is  obtained  from  Chili  saltpetr*'  by  heating  it  with  snfplmric  acid.
The  hydrogen  of  the  sulphuric  acid  replaces  the  sodium  in  the  nitre.
The  sulphuric  acid  then  forms  either  an  acid  salt,  NaHS04,  or  a
normal  salt,  Na.2S04,  whilst  nitric  acid  is  formed  from  the  nitre  and
is  volatilised.  The  decomposition  is  expressed  by  the  equations  :
(1)  NraN03  +  H2S04  =  HN03  4-NaHSO„  if  the  acid  salt  be  formed,
and  (2)  2NaN03  +  H2S04=Na2S04  +  2HN03,  if  the  normal  sodium
sulphate  is  formed.  With  an  excess  of  sulphuric  acid,  at  a  moderate
heat,  and  at  the  commencement  of  the  reaction,  tlie  decomposition
proceeds  according  to  the  first  equation  ;  and  on  further  heating  with
a  sufficient  amount  of  nitre  according  to  the  second,  because  the  acid
salt  NaHS04  itself  acts  like  an  acid  (its  hydrogen  being  replaceable
as  in  acids),  according  to  the  equation  NaN03-|-XaHS04=Na2S04
+  HNO3.

The  sulphuric  acid,  as  it  is  said,  here  displaces  the  nitric  acid  from
its  compound  with  the  base.*-^^  **** Thus,  in  the  reaction  of  sulphuric

»bi«  This  often  gives  rise  to  the  supposition  that  sulphuric  acid  possesses  a  consider-
able degree  of  affinity  or  energy  compared  with  nitric  acid,  but  we  shall  afterwards  see
that  the  idea  of  the  relative  degree  of  affinity  of  acids  and  bases  is,  in  many  cases,
exceedingly  unbiassed;  it  need  not  be  accepted  so  long  as  it  is  possible  to  explain  the
observed  phenomena  without  admitting  any  supposition  whatever  of  the  degree  of  the
force  of  affinity,  because  the  latter  cannot  be  measured.  The  action  of  sulphuric  acid
upon  nitre  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  alone  that  the  resultant  nitric  acid  is  volatile.
The  nitric  acid  is  the  only  one  of  all  the  suV>stances  partaking  in  the  reaction  which  is
able  to  pass  into  vapour ;  it  alone  is  volatile,  while  the  remainder  are  non-volatile,  or,
more  strictly  speaking,  exceedingly  difficultly  volatile  substances.  Let  us  imagine  that
the  sulphuric  acid  is  only  able  to  set  free  a  small  quantity  of  nitric  acid  from  its  salt,
and  this  will  suffice  to  explain  the  decomposition  of  the  whole  of  the  nitre  by  the  sulphuric
acid,  because  once  the  nitric  acid  is  separated  it  passes  into  vapour  when  heated,  and
passes  away  from  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  remaining  substances;  then  the  free
sulphuric  acid  will  set  free  a  fresh  small  quantity  of  nitric  acid,  and  so  on  until  it  drives
off  the  entire  quantity.  It  is  evident  that,  in  this  explanation,  it  is  essential  that  the
sulphuric  acid  should  be  in  excess  (although  not  greatly)  throughout  the  reaction  •
according  to  the  equation  expressing  the  reaction,  98  parts  of  sulphuric  acid  are  required
per  85  parts  of  Chili  nitre ;  but  if  this  proportion  be  maintained  in  practice  the  nitric
acid  is  not  all  disengaged  by  the  sulphuric  acid ;  an  excess  of  the  latter  must  be  taken,
and  generally  80  parts  of  Chili  nitre  are  taken  per  98  parts  of  acid,  so  that  a  portion  of
the  sulphuric  acid  remains  free  to  the  verj'  end  of  the  reaction.

rEINCIPl.ES OF CHEMISTRY

a  nitre  there  is  formed  a  non- vol  a  tile  salt  of  sulphuric  acid,  which

a,  together  with  an  excess  of  this  acid,  in  the  distilling  apparatus,

I  and  nitric  acid,  which  is  converted  into  vapour,  and  may  be  condensed,

I  liquid  and  volatile  substance. On  a  sniall  scale,  this

\  reaction  niaj  be  curried  on  in  a  glass  retort  with  a  glass  condenser.

On  n  large  scale,  in  chemical  works,  the  process  is  exactly  similar,  only

f  iron  retorts  areempluywl  for  holding  the  mixture  of  nitre  and  sulphuric

CblU  Mllpeln  iind  n
a,  U  Dihl  lain  Ihe  _UF

.. lata  Li, T1i«  retort  fn  chiirgvd  wllb

19  iDled  on  with  d*}  nod  gyjium. A  cImj  ~-'—
pnrVBiit  cbe  nlbrid  uld  tmn  otrtodiag  lot

"  DoUecta  III  tbc  flr«t. Tli«  puRflt

,  acid,  and  earthenware  three-necked  bottles  are  used  instead  of  a  coa-
denser,'"  as  shown  in  tig.  47.

>"  IL  must  be-  obHcrveil  ttiat  sulphuric  acid,  at  leut  when  undiluted  160°  B«Uii^,
uormdiw  <M»i  iron  Willi  difficulty,  no  that  Lha  iLcid  iiuiy  be  lieoted  in  CMt-iron  nlorU.
KevurthelenH,  both  sulphuric  lUid  nitric  iwids  have  a  certain  action  on  «wl  iron,  and
Uierelore  thr  lMidclbUil1l^d  nill  coutain  traces  of  iron.  In  practice  Bodintn  nitnit«  (C
•ol^tref  is  Qiiully  eiuploycd  brOBUM  it  i<  cheaper,  but  in  the  Inboratorj  it  ia  bM
~  s  polcasiBm  nitrate,  b«*UBB  it  ie  purer  uid  does  not  froth  up  to  ninoh  M  ■odhun
rate  wlieii  heated  with  lulpliurlc  acid.  In  the  action  of  on  eiceiii  at  nDlpharic  aci
:e  and  nitric  acid  a  portion  of  the  latter  is  decompoaed,  fanning  lower  oxides  at
nitrogen,  which  ore  diBBolved  in  the  nitric  acid.  A  portion  of  the  Bulphnrio  acid  itaelf  ia
oIho  carried  orer  oe  spray  by  tlie  vapours  of  the  nitric  acid.  Hence  auJpharic  acid  m
aa  on  impurity  in  commercial  nitric  acid.  A  oettaiisamount  of  hydrochloric  acid  irill
oliM  be  lonnd  to  be  prOHint  in  jl,  because  sodium  chloride  in  genoroll;  found  as  on
purity  in  nitre,  and  under  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  it  forma  hydrochloric  add.  Coai-
laenual  acid  further  contains  a  ooDMdcrable  eioeu  of  water  above  that  necessary  (or  the

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN  271

Nitric  acid  so  obtained  always  contains  water.  It  is  extremely
difficult  to  deprive  it  of  all  the  admixed  water  without  destroying  a
portion  of  the  acid  itself  and  partially  converting  it  into  lower  oxides,
because  without  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  water  it  is  very  unstable.
When  rapidly  distilled  a  portion  is  decomposed,  and  there  are  obtained
free  oxygen  and  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen,  which,  together  with  the
water,  remain  in  solution  with  the  nitric  acid.  Therefore  it  is  necessary
to  work  with  great  care  in  order  to  obtain  a  pure  hydrate  of  nitric  acid,
HNO3,  and  especially  to  mix  the  nitric  acid  obtained  from  nitre,  as
above  described,  with  sulphuric  acid,  which  takes  up  the  water,  and  to
distil  it  at  the  lowest  possible  temperature — that  is,  by  placing  the
retort  holding  the  mixture  in  a  water  or  oil  bath  and  carefully  heating
it.  The  first  portion  of  the  nitric  acid  thus  distilled  boils  at  86°,  has  a
specific  gravity  at  15°  of  1-526,  and  solidifies  at  —50°  ;  it  is  very
unstable  at  higher  temperatures.  This  is  the  normal  hydrate,  HNO3,
which  corresponds  with  the  salts,  NMO3,  of  nitric  acid.  When  diluted
with  water  nitric  acid  presents  a  higher  boiling  point,  not  only  as
compared  with  tliat  of  the  nitric  acid  itself,  but  also  with  that  of  water  ;
so  that,  if  very  dilute  nitric  acid  be  distilled,  the  first  portions  passing
over  will  consist  of  almost  pure  water,  until  the  boiling  point  in  the
vapours  reaches  121°.  At  this  temperature  a  compound  of  nitric  acid
with  water,  containing  about  70  p.c.  of  nitric  acid,**'  distils  over ;  its

formation  of  the  hydrate,  because  water  is  fir«t  |x>nred  into  the  earthenware  vessels
employed  for  condensing  the  nitric  acid  in  order  to  facilitate  its  cooling  and  condensation.
Further,  the  acid  of  composition  HNO5  decomposes  with  great  ease,  with  the  evolu-
tion of  oxides  of  nitrogen.  Thus  the  commercial  acid  contains  a  great  number  of
impurities,  and  is  frequently  purified  in  the  following  manner: — Lead  nitrate  is  first
added  to  the  acid  because  it  forms  non-volatile  and  almost  insoluble  (precipitated)
substances  with  the  free  sulphuric  and  hydrochloric  acids,  and  liberates  nitric  acid  in  so
doing,  according  to  the  equations  Pb(N03)2  +  2HCl  =  PbCL  +  2NH03  and  Pb(N05),
+  H2S04  =  PbS04  +  2NHO.v  Potassium  chromate  is  then  added  to  the  impure  nitric  acid,l)y
which  means  oxygen  is  liberated  from  the  chromic  acid,  and  this  oxygen,  at  the  moment
of  its  evolution,  oxidises  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen  and  converts  them  into  nitric  acid.
A  pure  nitric  acid,  containing  no  impurities  other  than  water,  may  be  then  obtained  by
carefully  distilling  the  acid,  treated  as  above  described,  and  particularly  if  only  the
middle  portions  of  Uie  distillate  are  collecte<l.  Such  acid  should  give  no  precipitate,
either  with  a  solution  of  barium  chloride  (a  precipitate  shows  the  presence  of  sulphuric
acid)  or  with  a  solution  of  silver  nitrate  (a  precipitate  shows  the  presence  of  hydrochloric
acid),  nor  should  it,  after  being  diluted  with  water,  give  a  coloration  with  starch  con-
taining potassium  iodide  (a  coloration  shows  the  admixture  of  other  oxides  of  nitrogen).
The  oxides  of  nitrogen  may  be  most  easily  removed  from  impure  nitric  acid  by  heat-
ing for  a  certain  time  with  a  small  quantity  of  pure  charcoal.  By  the  action  of  nitric
acid  on  the  charcoal  carbonic  anhydride  is  evolved,  which  carries  off  the  lower  oxides  of
nitrogen.  On  redistilling,  pure  acid  is  obtained.  The  oxides  <)f  nitrogen  occurring  in
solution  may  also  be  removed  by  passing  air  through  the  nitric  acid.

51  Dalton,  Smith,  Bineau,  and  others  considered  tliat  the  hydrate  of  constant  boiling
point  (see  Chapter  I.,  Note  60)  for  nitric  acid  was  the  compound  2HN05,8H..,0,  but  Roscoe
showed  that  its  composition  changes  with  a  variation  of  the  pressure  and  tem|)erature

272  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

specific  gravity  at  15°  =  1*421.  If  the  solution  contain  less  than
25  p.c.  of  water,  then,  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solution  being  above
1*44,  HNO3  evaporates  off  and  fumes  in  the  air,  forming  the  above
hydrate,  whose  vapour  tension  is  less  than  that  of  water.  Such  solu-
tions form  fuming  nitric  acid.  On  distilling  it  gives  monohydrated
acid,^^  HNO3  ;  it  is  a  hydrate  boiling  at  121°,  so  that  it  is  obtained
from  both  weak  and  strong  solutions.  Fuming  nitric  acid,  under  the
action  not  only  of  organic  substances,  but  even  of  heat,  loses  a  portion
of  its  oxygen,  forming  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen,  which  impart  a  red-
hrown  colour  to  it ;  ^^  the  pure  acid  is  colourless.

under  which  the  diHtillation  proceeds.  Thus,  at  a  pressure  of  1  atmosphere  the  solution
of  constant  boihng  point  contains  68*0  p.c,  and  at  one-tenth  of  an  atmosphere  66*8  p.c.
Judging  from  what  has  been  said  concerning  sohitions  of  hydrocliloric  acid,  and  from  the
variation  of  specific  gravity,  I  tliink  that  the  comparatively  large  decrease  in  tlie
tensions  of  the  vapours  de|>ends  on  the  formation  of  a  hydrate,  NH05,2HoO  (  =  63'6  p.c).
Such  a  hydrate  may  be  expressed  by  X(HO)-„  that  is,  as  NH^fHO),  in  which  all  tlie
equivalents  of  hydrogen  are  replaced  by  hydroxyl.  The  constant  boiling  point  will
then  be  the  temperature  of  the  decomposition  of  this  hydrate.

The  variation  of  the  specific  gravity  at  15°  from  water  (p  —  0)  to  the  hydrate
NHO55H2O  (41-2  p.c.  HNO3)  is  expressed  by  s  -  9992  +  57-4;;  + 0*  10/?',  if  water  =  10  000  at
4°.  For  example,  when  2*  =  30  p.c,  «  =  11,860.  For  more  concentrated  solutions,  at  least,
the  above-mentioned  hydrate,  HN05,2H/jO,  must  be  taken,  up  to  which  the  specific  gravity
*  =  9570  +  84*18/)  — 0'240p';  but  perhaps  (since  the  results  of  observations  of  the  specific
gravity  of  the  solutions  are  not  in  sufficient  agreement  to  arrive  at  a  conclusion)  the
hydrate  HNO^jSHjO  should  be  recognised,  as  is  indicated  by  many  nitrates  (Al,  Mg,  Co,
&c.),  which  crystallise  with  this  amount  of  water  of  crystallisation.  From  HN05,2H.jO
to  HNO5  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solutions  (at  15=^)  s  =  10,652 +  0208p-016()p».  Tlie
hydrate  HNO32H.2O  is  recognised  by  Berthelot  on  the  basis  of  the  thermo-chemiciil
data  for  solutions  of  nitric  acid,  because  on  approaching  to  this  composition  there  is  a
rapid  change  in  the  amount  of  heat  evolved  by  mixing  nitric  acid  with  water.  Pickering
(1892)  by  refrigeration  obtained  the  crystalline  hydrates  :  HNO-^HjO,  melting  at  —87"
and  HNOjSHaO,  melting  at  — 18°.  A  more  detailed  study  of  the  reactions  of  hydrated
nitric  acid  would  no  doubt  show  the  existence  of  change  in  the  process  and  rapidity  of
reaction  in  appi*oaching  these  hydrates.

5*  The  normal  hydrate  HNO5,  corresponding  with  the  ordinary  suits,  may  be  termed
the  monohydrated  acid,  because  the  anhydride  N.^Oj  with  water  forms  this  normal  nitric
acid. In  this  sense  the  hydrate  HN05,2H.,.0  is  the  pentahydrated  acid.

55  For  technical  and  laboratory  puriwses  recourse  is  frequently  had  to  red  fuming
nitric  acid — that  is,  the  normal  nitric  acid,  HNO.-„  containing  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen
in  solution.  This  acid  is  prepared  by  decomposing  nitre  with  Imlf  its  weight  of  strong
sulphuric  acid,  or  by  distilling  nitric  acid  with  an  excess  of  suli)huric  acid.  The  normal
nitric  acid  is  first  obtained,  but  it  partially  decomix)ses,  and  gives  the  lower  oxidation
products  of  nitrogen,  which  are  dissolved  by  the  nitric  acid,  to  which  they  impart  its
usual  pale-brown  or  reddish  colour.  This  acid  fumes  in  the  air,  from  which  it  attracts
moisture,  forming  a  less  volatile  hydrate.  If  carbonic  anhydride  be  passed  through  the
red-brown  fuming  nitric  acid  for  a  long  i)eriod  of  time,  especially  if,  assisted  by  a
moderate  heat,  it  expels  all  the  lower  oxides,  and  leaves  a  colourless  acid  free  from  these
oxides.  It  is  necessary,  in  the  preparation  of  the  red  acid,  that  the  receivers  should  be
kept  quite  cool,  because  it  is  only  when  cold  that  nitric  acid  is  able  to  dissolve  a  large
proportion  of  the  oxides  of  nitrogen.  The  strong  red  fuming  acid  has  a  Bi>ecific  gravity
1*56  at  20°,  and  has  a  suffocating  smell  of  the  oxides  of  nitrogen.  When  the  red  acid  is
mixed  with  water  it  turns  green,  and  then  of  a  bluish  colour,  and  with  an  excess  of  water

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN WITH  HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN 273

Nitric  acid,  aR  an  acid  hydrate,  enters  into  reactions  of  double
decomposition  with  bases,  basic  hydrates  (alkaHs),  and  with  salts.  In  all
these  cases  a  salt  of  nitric  acid  is  obtained.  An  alkali  and  nitric  acid
give  water  and  a  salt ;  so,  also,  a  basic  oxide  with  nitric  acid  gives  a
salt  and  water;  for  instance,  lime,  CaO-h2HN03=Ca(N03)2  +  H20.
Many  of  these  salts  are  termed  nitres.^*  The  composition  of  the  ordinary
salts  of  nitric  acid  may  be  expressed  by  the  general  formula  M(N03)„,
where  M  indicates  a  metal  replacing  the  hydrogen  in  one  or  several
(n)  equivalents  of  nitric  acid.  We  shall  find  afterwards  that  the  atoms  M
of  metals  are  equivalent  to  one  (K,  Na,  Ag)  atom  of  hydrogen,  or  two
(Ca,  Mg,  Ba),  or  three  (Al,  In),  or,  in  general,  ?i  atoms  of  hydrogen.
The  salts  of  nitric  acid  are  especially  characterised  by  being  all  soluble
in  ivaler.^^  From  the  property  common  to  all  these  salts  of  entering
into  double  decompositions,  and  owing  to  the  volatility  of  nitric  acid,
they  evolve  nitric  acid  when  heated  with  sulphuric  acid.  They  all,  like
the  acid  itself,  are  capable  of  evolving  oxygen  when  heated,  and  con-
sequently of  acting  as  oxidising  substances ;  they  therefore,  for  instance,
deflagrate  with  ignited  carbon,  the  carbon  burning  at  the  expense  of
the  oxygen  of  the  salt  and  forming  gaseous  products  of  combustion. ^^

ultimately  becomes  colourless.  This  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  tlie  oxides  of  nitrogen  iu
the  presence  of  water  and  nitric  acid  are  changed,  and  give  coloured  solutions.

Marlcleffsky  (1802)  showed  that  the  green  solutions  contain  (besides  HNO.^)  HNOj
and  N.2O4,  whilst  the  blue  solutions  only  contain  HNO,.  {see  Note  48).

Tlie  action  of  red  fuming  nitric  acid  (or  a  mixture  with  sulphuric  acid)  is  in  many
cases  very  powerful  and  rapid,  and  it  sometimes  acts  differently  from  pure  nitric
avcid.  Thus  iron  becomes  covered  with  a  coating  of  oxides,  and  insoluble  in  acids ;  it
becomes,  as  is  said,  passive.  Thus  cliromic  acid  (and  potassium  dichromate)  gives  oxide
of  chromium  in  this  red  acid — that  is,  it  is  deoxidised.  This  is  owing  to  the  presence  of
the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen,  which  are  capable  of  being  oxidised — that  is,  of  passing  into
nitric  acid  like  the  higher  oxides.  Bat,  generally,  the  action  of  fuming  nitric  acid,  both
red  and  colourless,  is  powerfully  oxidising.

^*  Hydrogen  is  not  evolved  in  the  action  of  nitric  acid  (especially  strong)  on  metals,
even  with  those  metals  which  evolve  hydrogen  under  the  action  of  other  acids.  This  is
because  tlie  hydrogen  at  the  moment  of  its  separation  reduces  the  nitric  acid,  witli  forma-
tion of  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen,  as  we  sliall  afterwards  see.

^  Certain  basic  salts  of  nitric  acid,  however  (for  example,  the  basic  salt  of  bismuth),
are  insoluble  in  water ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  all  the  normal  salts  are  soluble,  and
this  forms  an  exceptional  phenomenon  among  acids,  because  all  the  ordinary  acids  form
insoluble  salts  with  one  or  another  base.  Thus,  for  sulphuric  acid  the  salts  of  barium,
lead,  &c.,  for  hydrochloric  acid  the  salts  of  silver,  &c.,  are  insoluble  in  water.  However,
the  normal  salts  of  acetic  and  certain  other  acids  are  all  soluble.

^'  Ammonium  tiitraie^  NHiNO.-,,  is  easily  obtained  by  adding  a  solution  of  am-
monia or  of  ammonium  carbonate  to  nitric  acid  until  it  becomes  neutral.  On  evapo-
rating this  solution,  crystals  of  the  salt  are  formed  which  contain  no  water  of  crystallisation.
It  crystallises  in  prisms  like  those  formed  by  common  nitre,  and  has  a  refreshing  taste ;
100  parts  of  water  at  t°  dissolve  54  +  0*61 1  parts  by  weight  of  the  salt.  It  is  soluble  in
alcohol,  melts  at  160°,  and  is  decomposed  at  about  180°,  forming  water  and  nitrous  oxide,
NH4NO5"  2H^.O  +  N,jO.  H  ammonium  nitrate  be  mixed  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  the
mixture  be  heated  to  about  the  boiling  point  of  water,  then  nitric  acid  is  evolved,  and

VOL.  I.  T

274  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

Nitric  iicid  also  enters  into  double  decompositions  with  a  number
of  hydrocarbons  not  in  any  way  possessing  alkaline  characters  and  not
reacting  with  other  acids.  Under  these  circumstances  the  nitric  acid
gives  water  and  a  new  substance  termed  a  nltm  compound.  The
chemical  character  of  the  nitro-compound  is  the  same  as  that  of  the
original  substance  ;  for  example,  if  an  indiffei-ent  substance  be  taken,
then  the  nitro- compound  obtained  from  it  will  also  l)e  indifferent  ;
if  an  acid  he.  taken,  then  an  acid  is  obtained  also.**^' *'^'*  Benzene,
Ct;H(i,  for  instance,  acts  according  to  the  equation  C^Hc  +  HNO3
ssHjO  +  C,,H;,N02.  Nitrobenzene  is  produced.  The  substance  taken,
Cf,FI,3,  is  a  liquid  hydrocarbon  haWnga  faint  tarry  smell,  boiling  at  80°,
and  lighter  than  water  ;  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid  nitrobenzene  is
obtained,  which  is  a  substance  boiling  at  about  21 0^  heavier  than  water,
and  having  an  almond-like  odour  :  it  is  employed  in  large  quantities
for  the  preparation  of  aniline  and  aniline  dyes."^' As  the  nitro-com-

aimnonium  hydrogen  Kulphate  remains  in  solution;  but  if  the  mixture  be  heated  rapidly
to  160^,  then  nitrous  oxide  is  evolved.  In  the  first  case  the  sulphuric  acid  takes  up
ammonia,  and  in  the  second  place  water.  Ammonium  nitrate  is  employed  in  practice  for
the  artificial  production  of  cold,  because  in  dissolving  in  water  it  lowers  the  temperature
very  considerably.  For  this  purpose  it  is  best  to  take  equal  parts  by  weight  of  the  salt
and  water.  The  salt  must  first  be  reduced  to  a  powder  and  thou  rapidly  stirred  up  in
the  water,  when  the  temperature  will  fall  from  +15°  to  —10°,  so  that  tlio  water  freezes.

Ammonium  nitrate  absorbs  ammonia,  with  which  it  forms  unstable  compounds
resembling  compounds  conttuning  water  of  crystallisation.  (Divers  1872,  Raoult  1873.)
At  -10°  NH4N03,2NH5  is  formed:  it  is  a  liquid  of  sp.  gr.  115,  which  loses  all  its
ammonia  under  the  influence  of  heat.  At  f  2«^  NH^NOjjNHj  is  fonued:  it  is  a  solid
which  easily  imrts  with  its  ammonia  when  heated,  especially  in  solution.

Troost  (1882)  investigated  the  tension  of  the  dissociation  of  the  compounds  formed^
and  came  to  the  conclusion  that  a  definite  compound  corresi>ouding  to  the  formula
2NH4NOr,3NH.^  is  formed,  because  the  tension  of  dissociation  reniuins  con-»tant  in  the
decomiwsition  of  such  a  compound  at  0°.  V.  Kouriloff  (1898),  liowever,  considers  that
the  constancy  of  the  tension  of  the  ammonia  evolved  is  due  to  the  decomi>ositioii  of  a
saturated  solution,  and  not  of  a  definite  comiwund.  During  deconiix>sition  the  system  is
coniiK>sed  of  a  liquid  and  a  solid;  the  tension  only  becomes  constant  from  the  moment
the  solid  falls  down.  The  composition  2NH4NO58NH3  corresi)onds  to  a  saturated
solution  at  0^,  and  the  solubility  of  NH4NO5  in  NH3  increases  with  a  rise  of  temperature.

.v.bu  This  is  explained  by  saying  that  in  true  nitro-compounds  the  residue  of  nitric
acid  NO...  takes  the  place  of  the  hydrogen  in  the  hydrocarbon  group.  For  example,  if
CjH^OH  l>e  given,  then  CeH4(N02)OH  will  be  a  true  nitrocompound  ha^  ing  the  radical
proiH^rties  of  C^H-.OH.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  NO..,  replace  the  hy«lrogen  of  the
arpieous  radicle  (C',3H50N0.2),  then  the  chemical  character  vuies,  us  in  the  passiige  of
KOH  into  KONO.^  (nitre)  {aee  Note  87  and  Organic  Chemistry).

''  Tlie  comiHmnd  ethers  of  nitric  acid  in  which  the  hydrog«Mi  of  ihv  a^iueous  radicle
(OH)  is  replaced  by  the  residue  of  nitric  acid  (NO.,,)  are  fre(|Uently  called  nitro-
comiK>unds.  But  in  their  chemical  character  they  differ  from  true  nitro-comix>undH
(for  details  sec  Organic  Chemistry)  and  do  not  burn  like  them.

The  action  of  nitric  acid  on  cellulose,  CeH,„0:i,  is  an  example.  This  substance,  which
forms  the  outer  coating  of  all  plant  cells,  occurs  in  an  almost  pure  state  in  cotton,  in
common  writing-paper,  and  in  flax,  d'c. ;  under  the  action  of  nitric  acid  it  fonns  water
and  nitrocellulose  (like  water  and  KNO3  from  KHO),  which,  although  it  has  the  same

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN WITH  HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN 275

pounds  contain  both  combustible  elements  (hydrogen  and  carbon),  as
well  as  oxygen  in  unstable  combination  with  nitrogen,  in  the  form  of
the  radicle  NO2  of  nitric  acid,  they  decompose  with  an  explosion  when
ignited  or  even  struck,  owing  to  the  pressure  of  the  vapours  and  gases
formed — free  nitrogen,  carbonic  anhydride,  CO2,  carbonic  oxide,  CO,  and
aqueous  vapour. In  the  explosion  of  nitro- compounds  '^  ^'^^  much  heat  is

appearance  as  the  cotton  originally  taken,  cUfferK  from  [t  entirely  in  properties.  It
explodes  when  struck,  bursts  into  flame  very  easily  under  the  action  of  sparks,  and  acts
like  gunpowder,  whence  its  name  of  pyroxylin,  or  gun-cotton.  The  composition  of
gun-cotton  is  CgHjNjOn  =  CqHioOs  +  8NH0-, - 8H.jO.  The  proportion  of  the  group  NO^
in  nitrocellulose  may  be  decreased  by  limiting  the  action  of  the  nitric  acid  and
compounds  obtained  with  different  properties;  for  instance,  the  (impure)  well-known
collodion  cotton,  containing  from  11  to  12  per  cent,  of  nitrogen,  and  pyrO'Collodion
( Mendeleeff,  1890),  containing  12*4  per  cent,  of  nitrogen.  Both  these  products  are  soluble  in
a  mixture  of  alcohol  and  ether  (in  collodion  a  portion  of  the  substance  is  soluble  in  alcohol),
and  the  solution  when  evaporated  gives  a  transparent  film,  which  is  insoluble  in  water.  A
solution  of  collodion  is  employed  in  medicine  for  covering  wounds,  and  in  wet-plate
photography  for  giving  on  glass  an  even  coating  of  a  substance  into  which  the  various
reagents  employed  in  the  process  are  introduced.  Extremely  fine  threads  (obtained  by
forcing  a  gelatinous  mixture  of  collodion,  ether,  and  alcohol  through  capillary  tubes  in
water)  of  collodion  form  artificial  silk.

57  bin  Xhe  property  i^ssessed  by  nitroglycerin  (occurring  in  dynamite),  nitrocellulose,
and  the  other  nitro-comjxmnds,  of  burning  witli  an  explosion,  and  their  employment  for
smokeless  powder  and  as  explosives  in  general,  dei)ends  on  the  reasons  in  virtue  of
which  a  mixture  of  nitre  and  charcoal  deflagnites  and  explodes  ;  in  both  cases  the
elements  of  the  nitric  acid  occurring  in  the  compound  are  decomposed,  the  oxygen  in
burning  unites  with  the  carbon,  and  the  nitrogen  is  set  free  ;  thus  a  very  large  volume
of  gaseous  substances  (nitrogen  and  oxides  of  carbon)  is  rapidly  formed  from  the  solid
substances  originally  taken.  These  gases  occupy  an  incomparably  larger  volume  than
the  original  snbstance,  and  therefore  produce  a  powerful  pressure  and  explosion.  It  is
evident  that  in  exploding  with  the  development  of  heat  (tliat  is,  in  decomposing,  not
with  the  absorption  of  energy,  as  is  generally  the  case,  but  with  the  evolution  of  energy)
the  nitro-compounds  form  stores  of  energj'  which  are  easily  set  free,  and  that  con-
sequently their  elements  occur  in  a  state  of  particularly  energetic  motion,  which  is
especially  strong  in  the  group  NO.^ :  this  group  is  common  to  aJl  nitro-compounds,  and
all  the  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen  are  unstable,  easily  decomposable,  and  (Note  29)
absorb  heat  in  their  formation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  nitro-compounds  are  instructive
as  an  example  and  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  elementn  and  groups  forming  compounds
are  united  in  definite  order  in  the  molecules  of  a  comiK)und.  A  blow,  concussion,  or
rise  of  temperature  is  necessary  to  bring  the  combustible  elements  C  and  H  into  the
most  intimate  contact  with  NOj,  and  to  distribute  the  elements  in  a  new  order  in  new
compounds.

As  regards  the  composition  of  the  nitro-compounds,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  hydrogen
of  a  given  substance  is  replaced  by  the  complex  group  NOj  of  the  nitric  acid.  The  same
is  obser>'ed  in  the  passage  of  alkalis  into  nitrates,  so  that  the  reactions  of  substitution  of
nitric  acid — tliat  is,  the  formation  of  salts  and  nitro-compounds — may  be  expressed  in
the  following  manner.  In  these  cases  the  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  the  so-called  radicle
of  nitric  acid  NO.^,  as  is  evident  from  the  following  table  :—

,  Caustic  potash . . .  KHO.  ( Glycerin C3H5H5O-.

1  Nitre K(NO,,)0.  '  Nitroglycerin  ....  C5H5(NO.j)30..

I  Hydrate  of  lime  . . .  CaHaO...  ( Phenol ......  CeHsOH.

'« Calcium  nitrate . . .  Cft(XO.^)P,..  t  Picric  »xcid C6H2(NOo)jOH,<fec.

The  difference between  the salts  f«»rmed by  nitric  acid  and  the  nitro-compounds

t2

276  •  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

evolved,  as  in  the  combustion  of  gunpowder  or  detonating  gas,  and  in
this  case  the  force  of  explosion  in  a  closed  space  is  great,  because  from
a  solid  or  liquid  nitro-compound  occupying  a  small  space  there  proceed
vapours  and  gases  whose  elasticity  is  great  not  only  from  the  small
space  in  which  they  are  formed,  but  owing  to  the  high  temperature
corresponding  to  the  combustion  of  the  nitro-compound.^**

If  the  vapour  of  nitric  acid  is  passed  through  an  even  moderately
heated  glass  tube,  the  formation  of  dark -brown  fumes  of  the  lower
oxides  of  nitrogen  and  the  separation  of  free  oxygen  may  be  observed,
2NH03=H20-f  2NO2  +  O.  The  decomposition  is  complete  at  a
white  heat— that  is,  nitrogen  is  formed,  2NH03=H204-N.2-f  O5.
Hence  it  is  easily  understood  that  nitric  acid  may  part  with  its  oxygen
to  a number of substances  capable  of  being  oxidised.^-* It  is  con-

conBists  in  the  fact  that  nitric  acid  is  very  easily  separated  from  the  salts  of  nitric  acid
by  means  of  sulphuric  acid  (that  is,  by  a  metho<l  of  double  saline  decomposition),  whilst
nitric  acid  is  not  displaced  by  sulphuric  acid  from  true  nitro-comiwunds;  for  instance,
nitrobenzene,  CeH^'NOj.  As  nitro-comiK>unds  are  formed  exclusively  from  hydrocarbons,
they  are  described  with  them  in  organic  chemistry.

The  group  NO-^  of  nitro-compounds  in  many  cases  (like  all  the  oxidised  compounds  of
nitrogen)  passes  into  the  ammonia  group  or  into  the  ammonia  radicle  NHo.  Tliis  requires
the  action  of  reducing  substances  evolving  hydrogen :  RNO.>  +  6H  =  RNHj  +  2H.>0.  Tlius
Zinin  converted  nitrobenzene,  CcHj-NO^,  into  aniline,  CeHiNK,,  by  the  action  of
hydrogen  sulphide.

Admitting  the  existence  of  the  group  NOj,  as  replacing  hydrogen  in  various
compounds,  then  nitric  acid  may  be  considered  as  water  in  which  half  the  hydrogen
is  replaced  by  the  radicle  of  nitric  acid.  In  this  sense  nitric  acid  is  nitro-water,
NO..».OH,  and  its  anhydride  dinitro-water,  (NO..,)oO.  In  'nitric  acid  the  radicle  of
nitric  acid  is  combined  with  hydroxyl,  just  as  in  nitrobenzene  it  is  combined  with  the
radicle  of  benzene.

It  should  here  be  remarked  that  the  group  NO3  may  be  recognised  in  the  salts  of
nitric  acid,  because  the  salts  have  the  composition  M(NO.-)„,  just  as  the  metallic  chlorides
have  the  composition  MClw.  But  the  group  NO;^  does  not  form  any  other  compounds
beyond  the  salts,  and  therefore  it  should  be  considered  as  liydroxyl,  HO,  in  which  H  is
replaced  by  NOo.

^  The  nitro-compounds  play  a  very  important  part  in  mining  and  artillery. Det*viled
accounts  of  them  must  be  looked  for  in special works, among which  the works of
A.  R.  Shuliachenke  and  T.  M.  Chelletsoff  occupy  an  imiwrtant  place  in  the  Russian
literature  on  this  subject,  although  historically  the  scientific  works  of  Abel  in  England
and  Berthelot  in  France  stand  pre-eminent. The  latter  elucidated  much  in  connection
with  explosive  compounds  by  a  series  of  both  experimental  and  theoretical  researches.
Among  explosives  a  particularly important  place from a  practical point  of  view is
occupied  by ordinary or  black  gunpowder (Chapter XIII., Note 16), fulminating
mercury  (Chapter  XVI.,  Note  26),  the  diflEerent  forms  of  gun-cotton  (Chapter  VI.,  Note  87)
and  nitro-glycerine  (Chapter  VIII.,  Note  45,  and  Chapter  XII.,  Note  33). The  latter
when mixed  with solid  pulverulent substances, like magnesia, tripoli, &€., forms
dynamite,  which  is  so  largely  used  in  quarries  and  mines  in  driving  tunnels,  tic. We
may  add  that  the  simplest  true  nitro-compound,  or  marsh  gas,  CH,,  in  which  all  the
hydrogens  are  replaced  by  NO3  groups  has  been  obtained  by  L.  N.  Shishkoflf,  C(N0.j)4,
as  well  as  nitroform,  CH(N0...)3.

5«  Nitric  acid  may  be  entirely  decomposed  by  passing  its  vapour  over  highly  incan-
descent copper,  because  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  Srst  fonne<1  give  up  their  oxygen  to  the

278  PRINCIPLES OF CJIEMLSTRY

of  nitric  acid,  and,  at  tlie  same  time,  one  of  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen.
The  resulting  salts  of  the  metals  are  soluble,  and  hence  it  is  said  that
nitric  acid  dissolves  nearly  all  metals.'*®  This  case  is  termed  the  solution
of  metals  by  acids,  although  it  is  not  a  case  of  simple  solution,  but  a  com-
plex chemical  change  of  the  substances  taken.  When  treated  with  this
acid,  those  metals  whose  oxides  do  not  combine  with  nitric  acid  yield
the  oxide  itself,  and  not  a  salt ;  for  example,  tin  acts  in  this  manner
on  nitric  acid,  forming  a  hydrated  oxide,  ShH^Os,  which  is  obtained  in
the  form  of  a  white  powder,  SnH-4NH03  =  H2Sn03-f  4N02  +  H.^O.
Silver  is  able  to  take  up  still  more  oxygen,  and  to  convert  a  large
portion  of  nitric  acid  into  nitrous  anhydride,  4rAg-h^)HN03
=  4AgN03  f  N203-f  SHjO.  Copper  takes  up  still  more  oxygen  from
nitric  acid,  converting  it  into  nitric  oxide,  and,  by  the  action  of  zinc,
nitric  acid  is  able  to  give  up  a  still  further  quantity  of  nitrogen,
forming  nitrous  oxide,  4Zn  +  10NHO3=4Zn(NO3).^  +  N2O4-5H2O.^>
Sometimes,  and  especially  with  dilute  solutions  of  nitric  acid,  the
deoxidation  proceeds  as  far  as  the  formation  of  hydroxylamine  and
ammonia,  and  sometimes  it  leads  to  the  formation  of  nitrogen  itself.
The  formation  of  one  or  other  nitrogenous  substance  from  nitric  acid  is

"^  The  applicatiou  of  this  acid  for  etching  copper  or  steel  in  engraving  is  based  on
this  fact.-  The  copper  is  covered  with  a  coating  of  wax,  resin,  itc.  (etching  ground),  on
which  nitric  acid  does  not  act,  and  then  the  ground  is  removed  in  certain  parts  with  a
needle,  and  the  whole  is  washed  in  nitric  acid.  The  parts  coated  remain  untouched,
whilst  the  uncovered  portions  are  eaten  into  by  the  acid.  Coi)per  plates  for  etchings,
aquatints,  &c.,  are  prepared  in  tliis  manner.

**  The  formation  of  such  complex  equations  as  the  above  often  presents  some  diffi-
culty to  the  beginner.  It  should  be  observed  that  if  the  reacting  and  resultant  sub-
stances be  known,  it  is  easy  to  form  an  equation  for  the  reaction.  Thus,  if  we  wish  to
form  an  equation  expressing  the  reaction  that  nitric  acid  acting  on  zinc  gives  nitrous
oxide,  NgO,  and  zinc  nitrate,  Zn(N03)2,  "^^  must  reason  as  follows : — Nitric  acid  coutain»
hydrogen, whilst  the  salt  and  nitrous  oxide  do  not;  hence  water  is  formed,  and  therefore
it  is  as  though  anhydrous  nitric  acid,  N.^O^,  were  acting.  For  its  conversion  into  nitrouH
oxide  it  parts  with  four  equivalents  of  oxygen,  and  lionce  it  is  able  to  oxidise  four  eijui-
valents  of  zinc  and  to  convert  it  into  zinc  oxide,  ZnO.  These  four  equivalents  of  zinc
oxide  require  for  their  conversion  into  the  salt  four  more  ecjuivalents  of  nitric  anhydride  ;
consequently  five  equivalents  in  all  of  tlie  latter  are  required,  or  ten  equivalents  of  nitric
acid.  Thus  ten  equivalents  of  nitric  acid  are  necessary  for  four  equivalents  of
zinc  in  order  to  express  the  reaction  in  whole  equivalents.  It  must  not  be  forgot t4.*n,
however,  that  there  are  very  few  such  reactions  which  can  be  entirely  expressed  by  simple
equations.  The  majority  of  equations  of  reactions  only  express  the  chief  and  ultimate
pro<luct8  of  reaction,  and  thus  none  of  the  three  jirec^eding  equations  exjjress  all  that
in  reality  occurs  in  the  action  of  metals  on  nitric  acid.  In  no  one  of  them  is  only  one
oxide  of  nitrogen  formed,  but  always  several  together  or  consecutively — one  after  the
other,  according  to  the  temperature  and  strength  of  the  acid.  And  this  is  easily  in-
telligible. The  resulting  oxide  is  itself  ca^mble  of  acting  on  metals  and  of  being
deoxidised,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  nitric  acid  it  may  change  the  acid  and  be  itself
changed.  The  equations  given  must  be  looked  on  as  a  systennitic  exjn-ession  of  the
main  features  of  reactions,  or  as  a  limit  towards  which  they  tend,  but  to  which  they
only  attain  in  the  absence  of  disturbing  influences.

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN WITH  HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN  271)

determined,  not  only  by  the  nature  of  the  reacting  substances,  but  also
by  the  relative  mass  of  water  and  nitric  acid,  and  also  by  the  temper-
ature and  pressure,  or  the  sum  total  of  the  conditions  of  reaction  ;  and
as  in  a  given  mixture  even  these  conditions  vary  (the  temperature  and
the  relative  mass  vary),  it  not  unfrequently  happens  that  a  mixture  of
different  products  of  the  deoxidation  of  nitric  acid  is  formed.

Thus  the  action  of  nitric  acid  on  metals  consists  in  their  being
oxidised,  whilst  the  acid  itself  is  converted,  according  to  the  temperat  ui-e,
concentration  in  which  it  is  taken,  and  the  nature  of  the  metal,  tfec,
into  lower  oxides,  annuonia,  or  even  into  nitrogen.**^  Many  compounds
are  oxidised  by  nitric  acid  like  metals  and  other  elements  ;  for  instance,
lower  oxides  are  converted  into  higher  oxides.  Thus,  arsenious  acid  is
converted  into  arsenic  acid,  suboxide  of  iron  into  oxide,  sulphurous
acid  into  sulphuric  acid,  the  sulphides  of  the  metals,  M-^S,  into  sulphates,
M2SO4,  &c.  ',  in  a  word,  nitric  acid  brings  about  oxidation,  its  oxygen
is  taken  up  and  transferred  to  many  other  substances.  Certain  sub-
stances are  oxidised  by  strong  nitric  acid  so  rapidly  and  with  so  great
an  evoluticm  of  heat  that  they  deflagrate  and  burst  into  flame.  Thus
turpentine,  CioH,c,  bursts  into  flame  when  poured  into  fuming  nitric
acid.  In  virtue  of  its  oxidising  property,  nitric  acid  retnoves  thn
hydrogen  from  many  substances.  Thus  it  decomposes  hydriodic  acid,
separating  the  iodine  and  forming  water  ;  and  if  fuming  nitric  acid  be
poured  into  a  fliisk  containing gaseous  hydriodic  acid,  then  a  rapid

*^  Montemjirtini  endeavours  to  show  that  the  proilucts  evolved  in  the  action  of  nitric
acid  uiK)n  metals  (and  their  amount)  is  in  direct  connection  with  both  the  concentration
of  the  acid  and  the  capacity  of  the  metals  to  decomi>ofle  water.  Those  metals  which
only  decompose  water  at  a  high  temperature  give,  under  the  action  of  nitric  acid,  NO..,
N0O4,  and  XO ;  wliilst  tliose  metals  which  decompose  water  at  a  lower  temi>erature  give,
besides  the  above  products,  X^O,  X,  and  XH^;  and,  lastly,  the  metals  which  decompose
water  at  the  ordinary'  temperature  also  evolve  hydrogen.  It  is  observed  that  concentrated
nitric  acid  oxidises  many  metals  with  much  greater  difficulty  than  when  diluted  with
water;  iron,  copper,  and  tin  are  very  easily  oxidised  by  dilute  nitric  acid,  but  remain
unaltered  under  the  influence  of  monohydrated  nitric  acid  or  of  the  jmre  hydrate  XHO5.
Nitric  acid  dilated  with  a  large  quantity  of  water  does  not  oxidise  copjjcr,  but  it  oxidises
tin  ;  dilute  nitric  acid  also  does  not  oxidise  either  silver  or  mercury;  but,  «>n  the  addition
of  nitrous  acid,  even  dilute  acid  acts  on  the  above  metals.  This  naturally  de{>ends  on
the  smaller  !>Uibility  of  nitrous  acid,  and  on  the  fact  that  after  the  tri^mmencement  of
the  action  the  nitric  acid  is  itself  converted  into  nitrous  acid,  which  continues  to  act  on  the
silver  and  mercury.  Veley  (Oxford  1H91)  made  detaileil  resetirches  on  the  action  of
nitric  acid  ui)on  Cu,  Hg,  and  Bi,  and  showed  that  nitric  acid  of  30  p.c.  strength  does
not  act  uiM>n  these  metals  at  the  ordinary  temi)erature  if  nitrous  acid  (traces  are  destroyed
V)y  urea)  and  oxidising  agents  such  as  H.^O.j.  KCIO3,  «fec.  be  entirely  absent;  but  in  t)ie
presence  of  even  a  small  amount  of  nitrous  acid  the  metals  fonn  nitrites,  which,  with
HXO-,  form  nitrates  and  the  oxides  of  nitrogen,  which  reform  the  nitrous  acid
necessary  for  starting  the  reaction,  because  the  reaction  2XO  +  HXO54  H.^.O-  SHXO.^  ih
reversible.  The  al>ove  metals  are  quickly  dissolved  in  a  1  p.c.  solution  of  nitrous  acid.
Moreover,  Veley  observed  that  nitric  acid  is  partially  converted  into  nitrous  acid  by
gaseous  hydrogen  in  the  presence  of  the  nitrates  of  Cu  and  Pb.

280  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

reaction  takes  place,  accompanied  by  flame  and  the  separation  of  >  iolet
vapours  of  iodine  and  brown  fumes  of  oxides  of  nitrogen.'*

As  nitric  acid  is  very  easily  decomposed  with  the  separation  of
oxygen,  it  was  for  a  long  time  supposed  that  it  was  not  capable  of
forming  the  corresponding  iiitric  anhydride,  N2O5  ;  but  Deville  first
and  subsequently  Weber  and  others,  discovered  the  methods  of  its  for-
mation. Deville  obtained  nitric  anhydride  by  decomposing  silver  nitrate
by  chlorine  under  the  influence  of  a  moderate  heat.  Chlorine  acts  on  the
above  salt  at  a  temperature  of  95^  (2AgN03  +  Cl.^  =  -2AgCl-|-N./J^  +  0),
and  when  once  the  reaction  is  started,  it  continues  by  itself  without
further  heating.  Brown  fumes  are  given  off*,  which  are  condensed  in  a
tube  surrounded  by  a  freezing- mixture.  A  portion  condenses  in  this
tube  and  a  portion  remains  in  a  gaseous  state.  The  latter  contains
free  oxygen.  A  crystalline  mass  and  a  liquid  substance  are  obtained  in
the  tube  ;  the  liquid  is  poured  off",  and  a  current  of  dry  carbonic  acid
gas  is  passed  through  the  apparatus  in  order  to  remove  all  traces  of
volatile  substances  (liquid  oxides  of  nitrogen)  adhering  to  the  crystals
of  nitric  anhydride.  These  form  a  voluminous  mass  of  rhombic  crystals
(density  1  '64),  which  sometimes  are  of  rather  large  size  ;  they  melt  at
about  30°  and  distil  at  about  47°.  In  distilling,  a  portion  of  the  sub-
stance is  decomposed.  With  water  these  crystals  give  nitric  acid.
Nitric  anhydride  is  also  obtained  by  the  action  of  phosphoric  anhydride,
P2O5,  on  cold  pure  nitric  acid  (below  0°).  During  the  very  careful
distillation  of  equal  parts  by  weight  of  these  two  substances  a  por-
tion of  the  acid  decomposes,  giving  a  liquid  compound,  H.^0,2N.^0-,
=N205,2HN03,  whilst  the  greater  part  of  the  nitric  acid  gives  the
anhydride  according  to  the  equation  2NH03  +  P20-,  =  2PHO;,-|- N.^.-.
On  heating,  nitric  anhydride  decomposes  with  an  explosion,  or  gradu-
ally, into  nitric  peroxide  and  oxygen,  N205=N.204-|-0.

Nitrogen  peroxide,  X.^O^,  and  nitrogen  dioxide,  NO.,,  express  one

*''  When  nitric  acid  acts  on  many  organic  substances  it  often  happens  that  not  only
is  hydrogen  removed,  but  also  oxygen  is  combined  ;  thus,  for  example,  nitric  acid  con-
verts toluene,  C7H8,  into  benzoic  acid,  C^'H.Q0.2.  In  certain  cases,  also,  a  portion  of  the
carbon  contained  in  an  organic  substance  bums  at  the  exi>enHe  of  the  oxyj^cn  of  the
nitric  acid.  So,  for  uistance,  phthalic  acid,  C8H^04,  is  obtained  from  naphthalene.  Cn^Hjj.
Thus  the  action  of  nitric  acid  on  the  hydrocarbons  is  often  most  complex ;  not  only  does
nitrification  take  place,  but  also  separation  of  carbon,  displacement  of  hydrogen,  and
combination  of  oxygen.  Tliere  are  few  organic  substances  which  can  withstand  the
action  of  nitric  acid,  and  it  causes  fundamental  changes  in  a  number  of  them.
It  leaves  a  yellow  stain  on  the  skin,  and  in  a  large  quantity  causes  a  wound  and  entirely
eats  away  the  membranes  of  the  body.  The  membranes  of  plants  are  eaten  into  with  the
greatest  ease  by  strong  nitric  acid  in  just  the  same  manner.  One  of  the  most  durable
blue  vegetable  dyes  employed  in  dyeing  tissues  is  iudigo  ;  yet  it  is  easily  cu)i verted  into
a  yellow  Kubstanee  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid,  and  small  traces  of  free  nitric  acid  may
be  recognised  by  this  means.

COMPOUNDS OF  NITKOGEN WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN 281

and  the  same  composition,  but  they  should  be  distinguished  like  ordinary
oxygen  and  ozone,  although  in  this  case  their  mutual  conversion  is
more  easily  eflfected  and  takes  place  on  vaporisation  ;  also,  O3  loses  heat
in  passing  into  O^,  whilst  N2O4  absorbs  heat  in  forming  NO.^.

Nitric  acid  in  acting  on  tin  and  on  many  organic  substances  (for
example,  starch)  gives  brown  vapours,  consisting  of  a  mixture  of  N2O3
and  NO.2.  A  purer  product  is  obtained  by  the  decomposition  of  lead
nitrate  by  heat,  Pb(N03)2=2N02  +  0  +  PbO,  when  non-volatile  lead
oxide,  oxygen  gas,  and  nitrogen  peroxide  are  formed.  The  latter  con-
denses, in  a  well-cooled  vessel,  to  a  brown  liquid,  which  boils  at  about
22°.  The  purest  peroxide  of  nitrogen,  solidifying  at  —  9°,  is  obtained
by  mixing  dry  oxygen  in  a  freezing- mixture  with  twice  its  volume
of  dry  nitric  oxide,  NO,  when  transparent  prisms  of  nitrogen  peroxide
are  formed  in  the  receiver  :  they  melt  into  a  colourless  liquid  at  about
— 10°.  When  the  temperature  of  the  receiver  is  above  —  9°,  the
crystals  melt,^*  and  at  0°  give  a  reddish  yellow  liquid,  like  that  ob-
tained in  the  decomposition  of  lead  nitrate.  The  vapours  of  nitrogen
peroxide  have  a  characteristic  odour,  and  at  the  ordinary  temperature
are  of  a  dark-brown  colour,  but  at  lower  temperatures  the  colour  of
the  vapour  is  much  fainter.  When  heated,  especially  above  50°,  the
colour  becomes  a  very  dark  brown,  so  that  the  vapours  almost  lose  their
transparency.

The  causes  of  these  peculiarities  of  nitrogen  peroxide  were  not
clearly  understood  until  Deville  and  Troost  determined  the  density
and  dissociation  of  the  vapour  of  this  substance  at  different  temperatures,
and  showed  that  the  density  varies.  If  the  density  be  referred  to  that
of  hydrogen  at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure,  then  it  is  found  to
vary  from  38  at  the  boiling  point,  or  about  27°,  to  23  at  135°,  after
which  the  density  remains  constant  up  to  those  high  temperatures  at
which  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  are  decomposed.  As  on  the  basis  of  the
laws  enunciated  in  the  following  chapter,  the  density  23  corresponds
with  the  compound  NO2  (because  the  weight  corresponding  with  this
molecular  formula=46,  and  the  density  referred  to  hydrogen  as  unity  is
equaltohalf  the  molecular  weight) ;  therefore  at  temperatures  above  135®
the  existence  of  nitrogen  dioxide  only  must  be  recognised.  It  is  this
gas which  is  of  a  brown  colour. At  a  lower  temperature  it  forms

■**  According  to  certain  investigations,  if  a  brown  liquid  is  formed  from  tlie  melted
crystals  by  heating  above  —9°,  then  they  no  longer  st^lidify  at  —10^,  probably  because  a
certain  amount  of  N.2O3  (and  oxygen)  is  formed,  and  this  substance  remains  liquid  at
—  80°,  or  it  uuvy  be  that  the  passage  from  2N0.j  into  N.^Oj  is  not  so  easily  accomplished
as  the  passage  from  N.JO4  into  2X0^.

Liquid  nitrogen  j^eroxide  (that  is,  a  mixture  of  NOj  and  X.2O4)  is  employed  in  admix-
ture with  hydrocarbons  as  an  explosive.

282  PKINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

nitrogen  peroxide,  N2O4,  whose  molecular  weight,  and  therefore  density,
is  twice  that  of  the  dioxide.  This  substance,  which  is  isomeric  with
nitrogen  dioxide,  as  ozone  is  isomeric  with  oxygen,  and  has  twice  as
great  a  vapour  density  (46  referred  to  hydrogen),  is  formed  in  greater
quantity  the  lower  the  temperature,  and  crystallises  at  — 10°.  The
reasons  both  of  the  variation  of  the  colour  of  the  gas  (N.2O4  gives
colourless  and  transparent  vapours,  whilst  those  of  NO^  are  brown  and
opaque)  and  the  variation  of  the  vapour  density  with  the  variation  of
temperature  are  thus  made^quite  clear  ;  and  as  at  the  boiling  point  a
density  38  was  obtained,  therefore  at  that  temperature  the  vapours
consist  of  a  mixture  of  79  parts  by  weight  of  N.2O4  with  21  parts  by
weight  of  NOj.^*'*  It  is  evident  that  a  decomposition  here  takes  place
the  peculiarity  of  which  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  product  of  decom-
position, NO2,  is  polymerised  (i.e,  becomes  denser,  combines  with  itself)
at  a  lower  temperature  ;  that  is,  the  reaction

is  a  reversible  reaction,  and  consequently  the  whole  phenomenon  re-
presents a  disifociation  in  a  homogeneous  gaseous  medium,  where  the
original  substance,  N2O4,  and  the  resultant,  NO2,  are  both  gases.  The
measure  of  dUsociatiaii  will  be  expressed  if  we  find  the  proportion
of  the  quantity  of  the  substance  decomposed  to  the  whole  amount  of
the  substance.  At  the  boiling  point,  therefore,  the  measure  of  the
decomposition  of  nitrogen  peroxide  will  be  21  p.c.  ;  at  135°  it  =  1,
and  at  10°  it  =  0  ;  that  is,  the  N2O4  is  not  then  decomposable.
Consequently  the  limits  of  dissociation  here  are  —  10°  and  135°  at
the atmospheric pressure."*® Within the limits  of these tempera-

**  Because  if  x  equal  tlie  amount  by  weight  of  N.^O^,  its  volume  will  -  j  46,  and  the
amount  of  NO3  will  =100— x,  and  consequently  its  volume  will  =(100— .r  I  23.  But  the
mixture,  having  a  density  38,  will  weigh  100;  consequently  its  volume  will  —100  3H.
Hence  xlAG  +  (100 - x):2H - 100, 88,  or  a;  =  700.

^•*'  The  phenomena  and  laws  of  dissociation,  which  we  shall  consider  only  in  particular
instances,  are  discussed  in  detail  in  works  on  theoretical  chemistry.  Nevertheless,  in
respect  to  nitrogen  i>eroxide,  as  an  historically  importtuit  example  of  dissociation  in  a
homogeneous  gaseous  medium,  we  will  cite  the  results  of  the  careful  investigations  (1H85-
1886)  of  E.  and  L.  Natunson,  who  determined  the  densities  under  various  conditions  of
temperature  and  pressure.  The  degree  of  dissociation,  expressed  a^^  above  (it  may  also  be
expressed  otherwise  —for  example,  by  the  ratio  of  the  quantity  of  substance  decomposed  to
that  unaltered),  proves  to  increase  at  all  temperatures  as  the  pressure  diminishes,  which
would  be  expected  for  a  homogeneous  gaseous  medium,  as  a  decreasing  j)ressure  aids
the  fomuition  of  the  lightest  product  of  dissociation  (that  having  the  least  density  or
largest  volume).  Tims,  in  the  Natansoiis'  ex{)eriments  the  degree  of  disifociation  at  0^  in-
creases  from  10  i).c.  to  30  p.c,  with  a  decrease  of  pressure  of  from  251  to  38 mm.;  at  VJl
it  increases  from  40  p.c.  to  93  p.c,  with  a  fall  of  pressure  of  from  40H  to  27  mm.,  and  at
100*^  it  increases  from  802  p.c  to997  p.c,  with  a  fall  of  pressure  of  from  732'.">  to  11*7  mm.
At  130'^  and  150^  the  decomposition  is  complete— that  is,  only  NO,,  remains  at  the  low

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  AVITH  HYDROCiKN AND OXYGEN 283

tures  the  vapours  of  nitrogen  peroxide  have  not  a  constant  density,  but,
on  the  other  hand,  above  and  below  these  limits  definite  substances  exist.
Thus  above  135**  N2O4  has  ceased  to  exist  and  NO2  alone  remains.  It
is  evident  that  at  the  ordinary  temperature  there  is  a  partially  dissociated
system  or  mixture  of  nitrogen  pei-oxide,  N2O4,  and  nitrogen  dioxide,
NOj.  In  the  bi*own  liquid  boiling  at  22°  probably  a  portion  of  the
N2O4  has  already  passed  into  NO2,  and  it  is  only  the  colourless  liquid
and  crystalline  substance  at  —10°  that  can  be  considered  as  pure
nitrogen  peroxide.*^

The  above  explains  the  action  of  nitrogen  peroxide  on  water  at  low
temperatures.  N2O4  then  acts  on  water  like  a  mixture  of  the  anhy-
drides of  nitrous  and  nitric  acids.  The  first,  N.2O3,  may  be  looked  on
as  water  in  which  each  of  the  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  the
radicle  NO,  while  in  the  second  each  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  the  radicle
NO2,  proper  to  nitric  acid  ;  and  in  nitrogen  peroxide  one  atom  of  the
hydrogen  of  water  is  replaced  by  NO  and  the  other  by  NOg,  as  is  seen

from  the  formulae —

H)(^. NO) ^^0|(). NO,U.
H)^^ NO)^' NOJ^^' NO.n'

or  H2O; N2O3; NA; N,0,.

In  fact,  nitrogen  peroxide  at  low  temperatures  gives  with  water  (ice)
both  nitric,  HNO3,  and  nitrous,  HNO.^,  acids.  The  latter,  as  we  shall
afterwards  see,  splits  up  into  water  and  the  anhydride,  N.^Og.  If,  how-
ever, warm  water  act  on  nitrogen  peroxide,  only  nitric  acid  and  mon-
oxide of  nitrogen  are  formed  :  3N02-|-H20=NO-f2NH03.

Although  NO2  is  not  decomposed  into  N  and  O  even  at  500°,
still  in  many  cases  it  acts  as  an  oxidising  agent.  Thus,  for  instance,
it  oxidises  mercury,  converting  it  into  mercurous  nitrate,  2N02  +  Hg

pressuren  (less  than  the  atmospheric)  at  which  tlie  Natuiisoiis  made  their  det-ermina-
tions;  but  it  is  probable  that  at  higher  pressures  (of  several  atmospheres)  molecules  of
N.2O4  would  still  be  formed,  and  it  would  be  exceedingly  interesting  to  trace  the  pheno-
mena under  the  conditions  of  botli  very  considerable  i>resKure8  and  of  relatively  large
volumes.

*^  Liquid  nitrogen  peroxide  is  said  by  Geuther  to  boil  at  2'2'^-26°,  and  to  have  a  sp.gr.
at  0°  — 1*194  and  at  15*^  =  1*474.  It  is  evident  that,  in  the  liquid  as  in  the  gaseous  state,
the  variation  of  density  with  the  temperature  depends,  not  only  on  physical,  but  also  on
chemical  changes,  as  the  amount  of  N2O4  decreases  and  the  unountof  NO.^  increases  with
the  temperature,  and  they  (as  i>olymeric  substances)  should  have  different  densities,  aft
we  find,  for  instance,  in  the  hydrocarbons  C5H1,,  and  Cj.JI.^o.

It  may  not  be  superfluous  to  mention  here  tliat  the  measurement  of  the  specific  heat
of  a  mixture  of  the  vapours  of  N.jOj  and  NO...  enabled  Berthelot  to  determine  that  the
transformation  of  2N0.2  into  N_,0|  is  accompanie<l  by  the  evolution  of  about  13,000  unitft
of  heat,  and  as  the  reaction  procee<l8  with  equal  facility  in  either  direction,  it  will  be
exothennal  in  the  one  direction  and  endothennal  in  the  other ;  and  this  clearly  demon-
strates the  possibility  of  reactions  taking  place  in  either  direction,  although,  as  a  rule,
reactions  evolving  heat  proceed  w^ith  greater  ease.

284  PKINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

=  HgN03  +  N0,  being  itself  deoxidised  into  nitric  oxide,  into  which
the  dioxide  in  many  other  instances  passes,  and  from  which  it  is
easily  formed.^®

Nitrous  aniiydridej  N.^Og,  corresponds^^  to  nitrous  acid,  NHO2,
which  forms  a  series  of  salts,  the  nitrites — for  example,  the  sodium  siilt
NaNO.^,  the  potassium  salt  KNO.^,  the  ammonium  salt  (NH4)N02,''^®
the  silver  salt  AgNOj,'*'  <fec.  Neither  the  anhydride  nor  the  hydrate
of  the  acid  is  known  in  a  perfectly  pure  state.  The  anhydride  has  only
been  obtained  as  a  very  unstable  substance,  and  has  not  yet  been  fully
investigated  ;  and  on  attempting  to  obtain  the  acid  NHOj  from  its
salts,  it  always  gives  water  and  the  anhydride,  whilst  the  latter,  as  an
intermediate  oxide,  partially  or  wholly  splits  up  into  NO4-NO.2.  But
the  salts  of  nitrous  acid  are  distinguished  for  their  great  stability.
Potassium  nitrate,  KNOg,  may  be  converted  into  potassium  nitrite  by

^  Nitric  acid  of  sp.  gr.  1'51  in  dissolving  nitrogen  peroxide  becomes  brown,  wliilst
nitric  acid  of  sp.  gr.  1'8*2  i»  coloured  greenish  blue,  and  acid  of  sp.  gr.  below  ri5  remains
coloarIe»8  after  absorbing  nitrogen  peroxide  (Note  83).

■*'  Nitrogen  peroxide  as  a  mixed  substance  has  no  corresponding  indei>endent  salts,
but  Sabatier  and  Senderens  (1892)  showed  that  under  certain  conditions  NO.^  combines
directly  with  some  metals — for  instance,  cop^wr  and  cobalt — forming  CU2NO.2  and  C0NO2
as  dark  brown  powders,  which  do  not,  however,  exhibit  the  reactions  of  salts.  Thus
by  passing  gaseous  nitrogen  dioxide  over  freshly  reduced  (from  the  oxides  by  heating
with  hydrogen)  copper  at  25"-30^',  Cu-^NO^i!*  directly  formed.  With  water  it  partly  gives
off  NO.2  and  partly  forms  nitrite  of  copper,  leaving  metallic  copper  and  its  suboxide.
The  nature  of  these  compounds  has  not  yet  been  sufhciently  investigate<l.

^  Ammonium  nitrite  may  be  easily  obtained  in  solution  by  a  similar  method  of  double
decomxK)sition  (for  instance,  of  the  barium  salt  with  ammonium  sulphate)  to  the  other
salts  of  nitrous  acid,  but  it  decomiwses  with  great  ease  when  evaporated,  with  evo-
lution of  gaseous  nitrogen,  as  already  mentioned  (Chapter  V.)  If  the  solution,  however,
be  evaporated  at  the  ordinary  temperature  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,  a  solid
saline  mass  is  obtained,  which  is  easily  decomi)osed  when  heated.  The  dry  salt  even
decomposes  with  an  explosion  when  struck,  or  when  heated  to  about  70° — NH^NOj
=  2H20-hN2.  It  is  also  formed  by, the  action  of  aqueous  ammonia  on  a  mixture  of  nitric
oxide  and  oxygen,  or  by  the  action  of  ozone  on  ammonia,  and  in  many  other  instances.
Zorensen  (1894)  prepared  NH4NO2  by  the  action  of  a  mixture  of  N.^Oj  and  other  oxides
of  nitrogen  on  lumps  of  ammonium  carbonate,  extracting  the  nitrite  of  annnonium
formed  with  absolute  alcohol,  and  precipitating  it  from  this  solution  by  ether.  This  salt
is  crystalline,  dissolves  in  water  with  absorption  of  heat,  and  attracts  moisture  from  the
air.  The  solid  salt  and  its  concentrated  solutions  decompose  with  an  explosion  when
heated  to  50''-80'^,  especially  in  the  presence  of  traces  of  foreign  acids.  Decomposition
also  proceeds  at  the  ordinary  temiwrature,  but  more  slowly  ;  and  in  order  to  preserve  the
salt  it  should  be  covered  with  a  layer  of  i)ure  dry  ether.

**  Silver  nitrite,  AgNOo,  is  obtained  as  a  very  slightly  soluble  substance,  as  a  preci-
pitate, on  mixing  solutions  of  silver  nitrate,  AgNOj,  and  potassium  nitrite,  KNO...  It
is  soluble  in  a  large  volume  of  water,  and  this  is  taken  advantage  of  to  free  it  from
silver  oxide,  which  is  also  present  in  the  precipitate,  owing  to  the  fact  that  i>otassiura
nitrite  always  contains  a  certain  amount  of  oxide,  which  with  water  gives  the  hydroxide,
forming  oxide  of  silver  with  silver  nitrate.  The  solution  of  silver  nitrite  gives,  by  double
decomfHisition  with  metallic  chlorides  ifor  instance,  barium  chloride),  insoluble  silver
chloride  and  the  nitrite  of  the  metal  taken  (in  this  case,  barium  nitrite,  BalNOjl.^).

COMPOUNDS OF  NITROCiEN WITH  HYDKOGEX  AND OXYGEN 285

depriving  it  of  a  portion  of  its  oxygen  ;  for  instance,  by  fusing  it  (at
not  too  high  a  temperature)  with  metals,  such  as  lead,  KNOg  +  Pb
=KN02  +  PbO.'^'  "»  The  resultant  salt  is  soluble  in  water,  whilst  the
oxide  of  lead  is  insoluble.  With  sulphuric  and  other  acids  the  solution
of  potassium  nitrite  "'-^  immediately  evolves  a  brown  gas,  nitrous  anhy-
dride :  2KN0j  +  H2S04=K.^S04  +  N-iOg  4-  H.,0.  The  same  gas  (N^Oa)
is  obtained  by  passing  nitric  oxide  at  0°  through  liquid  peroxide  of
nitrogen,*^^  or  by  heating  starch  with  nitric  acid  of  sp.  gr.  1  -3.  At  a
very  low  temperature  it  condenses  into  a  blue  liquid  lx>iling  below  0°,*^^
but  then  partially  decomposing  into  NO  +  NOa-  Nitrous  anhydride
possesses  a  remarkable  capacity  for  oxidising.  Ignited  bodies  bum  in  it,
nitric  acid  absorbs  it,  and  then  acquires  the  property  of  acting  on  silver
and  other  metals,  even  when  diluted.  Potasshnn  iodide  is  oxidised  by
this  gas  just  as  it  is  by  ozone  (and  by  peroxide  of  hydrogen,  chromic
and  other  acids,  but  not  by  dilute  nitric  acid  nor  by  sulphuric  acid),
with  the  separntion  of  iodin*\  This  iodine  may  })e  recognised  {see
Ozone,  Chapter  IV.)  by  its  turning  starch  blue.  Very  small  traces
of  nitrites  may  be  easily  detected  by  this  method.  If,  for  example,
starch  and  potassium  iodide  are  added  to  a  solution  of  potassium
nitrite  (at  first  there  will  be  no  change,  there  being  no  free  nitrous  acid),
and  then  sulphuric  acid  be  added,  the  nitrous  acid  (or  its  anhydride)
immediately  set  free  liberates  iodine,  which  produces  a  })lue  colour  with
the  starch.  Nitric  acid  does  not  act  in  this  manner,  but  in  the  presence
of  zinc  the  coloration  takes  place,  which  proves  the  formation  of
nitrous  acid in the  deoxidation  of nitric  acid.'^'* Nitrous  acid  acts

b\  bi^  Leroy  (1889)  obtained  KNO,.  by  mixing  powdered  KXO5  witli  BaS,  iguiting  the
mixture  in  a  crucible  and  wasliing  the  fnsed  salts  ;  BaS04  is  then  left  as  an  insoluble
residue,  and  KNOj  passes  into  solution  : iKNOj^  BaS-^  4KX0j-f  BaSOj.

^  Probably  potassium  nitrite,  KNOj,  when  strongly  heated,  especially  with  metallic
oxides,  evolves  N  and  O,  and  gives  iH)tassium  oxide,  K.,.0,  because  nitre  is  liable  to  such
a  decomi>osition ;  but  it  has,  as  yet,  been  but  little  investigated.

^•'  There  are  many  researches  which  letul  to  the  conclusion  that  the  reaction  N.2O-
=  NO.,.  -  XO  is  reversible,  i.e.  resembles  the  conversion  of  X.^O^  into  NO.,..  The  brown
colour  of  the  fumes  of  X'._,0-  is  due  to  the  formation  of  X0.>.

If  nitrogen  peroxide  be  cooled  to  -  20^,  and  half  its  weight  of  water  be  added  to  it  drop
by  drop,  then  the  peroxide  is  decomiM)sed,  as  we  have  already  said,  into  nitrous  and  nitric
acids ;  the  former  does  not  then  remain  as  a  hydrate,  but  straightway  passes  into  the
anhydride,  and,  hence,  if  the  resultant  litpiid  l)e  slightly  wanned  vapours  of  nitrous
anhydride,  NoO-,  are  evolvtHl,  and  condense  into  a  blue  litpiid,  as  Fritzsohe  showed.
This  method  of  preparing  nitrous  anhydride  apparently  gives  the  purest  product,  but  it
easily  disMX'iates,  forming  XO  and  XC).,  (and  therefore  also  nitric  acid  in  the  presence
ol  water).

*'  .\ccording  to  Thorpe.  XjO.-,  boils  at -r  18^.  According  to  (rinither,  at  i)  '5,  and  its
sp.  gr.  at  (V^^  1-449.

^5  In  its  oxidising  action  nitrous  anhydride  gives  nitric  oxide,  X.^,05  =  2X0  +  0.  Thus
its  analogy  to  ozone  becomes  still  more  marked,  because  in  ozone  it  is  only  one-third  of

286  PRIXCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

dii-ectly  on  ammonia,  forming  nitrogen  and  water,  HN02-hNH3
=  N,4-2H,0.'«

A8  nitrous  anhydride  easily  splits  up  into  NOj  +  NO,  so,  like  NOg,
with  warm  water  it  gives  nitric  acid  and  nitric  oxide,  according  to  the
equation  8X^03  + H/)=4NO  +  2yH03.

Being  in  a  lower  degree  of  oxidation  than  nitric  acid,  nitrous  acid
and  its  anhydride  are  oxidised  in  solutions  by  many  oxidising  substances
— for  example,  by  potassium  permanganate — into  nitric  acid.**^

Xitric  oxide,  XO. — This  permanent  gas''®  (that  is,  unliquefiable  by
pressure  without  the  aid  of  cold)  may  be  obtained  from  all  the  above-
described  compounds  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen.  The  deoxidation  of
nitric  acid  by  metals  is  the  usual  method  employed  for  its  preparation.
Dilute  nitric  acid  (sp.  gr.  1*18,  but  not  stronger,  as  then  N2O3  and
XO2  are  produced)  is  poured  into  a  flask  containing  metallic  copper.'**

the  oxygen  that  acts  iu  oxidising ;  from  O-,  there  is  obtained  O,  which  acts  as  an  oxidiser,
and  common  oxygen  O,..  In  a  physical  aspect  the  relation  between  N2O3  and  Oj  is
revealed  in  the  fact  that  both  substances  are  of  a  blue  colour  when  in  the  liqnid  state.

5*  This  reaction  is  taken  advantage  of  for  converting  the  amides,  NHjR  (where  R  is
an  element  or  a  complex  group)  into  hydroxides,  RHO.  In  this  case  XH.jR  -i-  NHOo  forms
2N  +  H2O  -r  RHO ;  NH...  i^  replaced  by  HO,  the  radicle  of  ammonia  by  the  radicle  of  water.
This  reaction  is  employed  for  transforming  many  nitrogenous  organic  substances  having
the  properties  of  amides  into  their  corresponding  hydroxides.  Thus  aniline,  CeHi'NH...
which  is  obtained  from  nitroI>enzene,  CyH;,'NO...  (Note  37),  is  converted  by  nitrous  anhy-
dride into  phenol,  CeH./OH,  which  occurs  in  the  creosote  extracted  from  coal  tar.  Thus
the  H  of  the  benzene  is  successively  replaced  by  XO^,  NH.^,  and  HO ;  a  method  which  is
suitable  for  other  cases  also.

*'  The  action  of  a  solution  of  ix)tassium  permanganate,  KMn04,  on  nitrous  acid  in
the  presence  of  sulphuric  acid  is  detennined  by  the  fact  that  the  higher  oxide  of  man-
ganese, Mn207,  contamed  in  the  i^ermanganate  is  converted  into  the  lower  oxide,  MnO,
which  as  a  base  forms  manganese  sulphate,  MnSO^,  and  the  oxygen  ser\'e8for  the  oxida-
tion of  the  X\.03  into  NjO;>,  or  its  hydrate.  As  the  solution  of  the  permanganate  is  of  a
red  colour,  whilst  that  of  manganese  sulphate  is  almost  colourless,  this  reaction  is  clearly
seen,  and  may  be  enii)loyed  for  the  detection  and  determination  of  nitrous  acid  and  its
salts.

M  The  absolute  boiling  point  = -IW^  {see  Chapter  II.,  Note  29).

*9  Kammerer  proposed  preparing  nitric  oxide,  NO,  by  [wuring  a  solution  of  sodium
nitrate  over  copi>er  shavings,  and  adding  sulphuric  acid  drop  by  drop.  The  oxidation  of
ferrous  salts  by  nitric  acid  also  gives  NO.  One  part  of  strong  hydrocliloric  acid  is  taken
and  iron  is  dissolve<l  in  it  (FeCl..),  and  then  an  equal  quantity  of  hydrochloric  acid  and
nitre  is  added  to  the  solution.  On  heating,  nitric  oxide  is  evolve<l.  In  the  presence  of
an  excess  of  sulphuric  acid  and  mercurj'  the  conversion  of  nitric  acid  into  nitric  oxide  is
complete  (that  is,  the  reaction  proceeds  to  the  end  and  the  nitric  oxide  is  obtained  without
other  prcwluctsl,  and  u|M»n  this  is  founded  one  of  the  metlio<ls  for  determining  nitric  acid
(in  nitrometers  of  various  kinds,  described  in  text- books  of  analjrtical  chemistry),  us  the
amomit  of  NO  can  be  easily  and  accurately  niea8ure<l  volumetrically.  The  amount  of
nitrogen  in  gun-cotton,  for  instance,  is  determined  by  dissolving  it  in  suli»liuric  acid.
Nitrous  acid  acts  in  the  same  manner.  Upon  this  property  Emich  (181)2)  founds  his
method  for  preparing  pure  NO.  He  pours  mercury  into  a  flask,  and  then  covers  it  with
sulphuric  ju'id,  in  which  a  certain  amount  of  NaNO^j  or  other  substance  correstx>nding
to  HNO,.  or  UNO-  has  been  dissolv€»d. Tl»e  evolution  of  NO  proceeds  at  the  ordinary

COMPOUNDS OF NITROGEX  WITH HYDROGEN AND OXYGEN 287

The  reaction  commences  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  Mercury  and
silver  also  give  nitric  oxide  with  nitric  acid.  In  these  reactions  with
metals  one  portion  of  the  nitric  acid  is  employed  in  the  oxidation  of  the
metal,  whilst  the  other,  and  by  far  the  greater,  portion  combines  with  the
metallic  oxide  so  obtained,  with  formation  of  the  nitrate  corresponding
with  the  metal  taken.  The  first  action  of  the  copper  on  the  nitric  acid
is  thus  expressed  by  the  equation

2NHO3  4-  3Cu=H,0  +  3CuO  +  2N0.

The  second  reaction  consists  in  the  formation  of  copper  nitrate —

6XHO3  4-  3CuO=3H20  +  3Cu(N03).,.

Nitric  oxide  is  a  colourless  gas  which  is  only  slightly  soluble  in
water  (.t'„  of  a  volume  at  the  ordinary  temperature).  Reactions  of
double  decomposition  in  which  nitric  oxide  readily  takes  part  are  not
known — that  is  to  say,  it  is  an  indifferent,  not  a  saline,  oxide.  Like
the  other  oxides  of  nitrogen,  it  is  decomposed  into  its  elements  at  a  red
heat  (starting  from  900°,  at  1,200°  60  percent,  give  N.^  and  2X3^31  but
complete  decomposition  into  N.2  and  O^  only  takes  place  at  the  melting
jKiint  of  platinum,  Emich  1892).  The  most  characteristic  property  of
nitric  oxide  is  its  capacity  for  directly  and  easily  combining  with  oxygen
(owing  to  the  evolution  of  heat  in  the  combination).  With  oxygen  it
forms  nitrous  anhydride  and  nitrogen  peroxide,  2NC)  +  0=N203^
2NO-|-02=2N02.  If  nitric  oxide  is  mixed  with  oxygen  and  imme-
diately shaken  up  with  caustic  potash,  it  is  almost  entirely  converted
into  potassium  nitrite  ;  whilst  after  a  certain  time,  when  the  formation
of  nitric  peroxide  has  already  commenced,  a  mixture  of  potassium  nitrite
and  nitrate  is  obtained.  If  oxygen  is  passed  into  a  bell  jar  filled  with  nitric
oxide,  brown  fumes  of  nitrous  anhydride  and  nitric  peroxide  are  formed,
even  in  the  absence  of  moisture  ;  these  in  the  presence  of  water  give,  a&
we  already  know,  nitric  acid  and  nitric  oxide,  so  that  in  the  presence  of
an  excess  of  water  and  oxygen  the  whole  of  the  nitric  oxide  is  easily  and
directly  converted  into  nitric  acid.  This  reaction  of  the  re-formation  of
nitric  acid  from  nitric  oxide,  air,  and  wat«r,  2NO-|-H20-|-03=2HN03,
is  frequently  made  use  of  in  practice.  The  experiment  showing  the
conversion  of  nitric  oxide  into  nitric  acid  is  very  striking  and  instructive.
As  the  intermixture  of  the  oxygen  with  the  oxide  of  nitrogen  proceeds,
the  nitric  acid  formed  dissolves  in  water,  and  if  an  excess  of  oxygen
has  not  been  added  the  whole  of  the  gas  (nitric  oxide),  being  converted

temperature,  being  more  nipid  us  the  surfaee  of  the  mercurj-  is  iiicrea»ecl  (if  uliakeii,  the
reaction  proceeds  verj'  rapidly).  If  the  gas  be  passed  over  KHO,  it  is  obtained  quite
pure,  because  KHO  doe«  not  act  uinm  NO  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (if  heated,  KNO^
and  N;.,0  or  X .  are  formed).

288  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

into  HNO3,  is  absorbed,  and  the  water  entirely  fills  the  bell  jar
previously  containing  the  gas/'"  It  is  evident  that  nitric  oxide  ^'^  in
combining  with  oxygen  has  a  strong  tendency  to  give  the  higher
types  of  nitrogen  compounds,  which  we  see  in  nitric  acid,  HNC),  or
N02(0H),  in  nitric  anhydride,  NjO^  or  (^O^)/^  '*^^^^  ^^  ammonium
chloride,  NH4CI.  If  X  stand  for  an  atom  of  liydrogen,  or  its
equivalents,  chlorine,  hydroxyl,  «kc.,  and  if  O,  which  is,  according  to
the  law  of  substitution,  equivalent  to  Hg,  be  indicated  by  X.>,  then  the
three  compounds  of  nitrogen  above  named  should  be  considered  as
compounds  of  the  type  or  form  NX 5.  For  example,  in  nitric  acid
X5=02  +  (OH),  where  02=X4,  and  OH=X  ;  whilst  nitric  oxide  is  a
compound  of  the  form  NX.2.  Hence  this  lower  form,  like  lower  forms
in  general,  strives  by  combination  to  attain  to  the  higher  forms  proper  to
the  compounds  of  a  given  element.  NX2  passes  consecutively  into  NX3
— namely,  into  N2O3  and  NHO2,  NX^  (for  instance  NO.^)  and  NX5.

As  the  decomposition  of  nitric  oxide  begins  at  temperatures  above
900°,  many  substances  bum  in  it ;  thus,  ignited  phosphorus  con-
tinues to  burn  in  nitric  oxide,  but  sulphur  and  charcoal  are  extinguished
in  it.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  heat  evolved  in  the  combustion
of  these  two  substances  is  insufficient  for  the  decomposition  of  the  nitric

^  This  tranHformatioii  of  the  permanent  gasew  nitric  oxide  and  oxyjjjen  into  liquid
nitric  acid  in  the  presence  of  water,  and  with  the  evolution  of  heat,  presents  a  most
Htriking  instance  of  liquefaction  produced  by  the  action  of  chemical  forces.  They  per-
form with  ease  the  work  which  physical  (cooling)  and  mechanical  (pressure)  forces  effect
with  difficulty.  In  this  the  motion,  wliich  is  so  distinctively  the  proi>erty  of  the  gaseous
molecules,  is  apparently  destroyed.  In  other  cases  of  chemical  action  it  is  apparently
created,  arising,  no  doubt,  from  latent  energy — that  is,  from  the  internal  motion  of  the
atoms  in  the  molecules.

♦'•^  Nitric  oxide  is  capable  of  entering  into  many  characteristic  combinations ;  it  is
absorbed  by  the  solutions  of  many  acids,  for  instance,  tartaric-,  acetic,  i>liosphoric,
sulphuric,  and  metallic  chlorides  (for  example,  SbCl^,  BiCl-,  iVc,  with  wiiich  it  forms
definite  compounds ;  Besson  1889j,  and  also  by  the  solutions  of  many  salts,  especially
those  formed  by  suboxide  of  iron  (for  instance,  feiTous  sulphate).  In  this  case  a  brown
compound  is  formed  which  is  exceedingly  unstable,  like  all  tiie  analogous  comiKJunds  of
nitric  oxide.  The  amount  of  nitric  oxide  combined  in  this  manner  is  in  atomic  pro-
portion with  the  amount  of  the  substance  taken;  thus  ferrous  sulphate,  FeSO,,  abst)rl)s
it  in  the  proi>ortion  of  NO  to  2FeS04.  Ammonia  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  a  caustic
alkali  on  the  resultant  compound,  because  the  oxygen  of  the  nitric  oxide  and  water  are
transferred  to  the  ferrous  oxide,  forming  ferric  oxide,  whilst  the  nitrogen  combines  with
the  hydrogen  of  the  water.  According  to  the  investigations  of  Gay  (1885),  the  compound
is  formed  with  the  evolution  of  a  large  quantity  of  heat,  and  is  easily  dissociated,  like  a
solution  of  ammonia  in  water.  It  is  evident  that  oxidising  substances  (for  exam})lo,
potassium  permanganate,  KMn04,  Note  57)  are  able  to  convert  it  into  nitric  acid.  If
the  presence  of  a  ra<licle  NO,.,  comix)sed  like  nitrogen  peroxide,  must  be  recognised  in
the  compounds  of  nitric  acid,  then  a  radicle  NO,  having  the  composition  of  nitric  oxide,
may  be  admitted  in  the  compomids  of  nitrous  acid.  Tlie  compounds  in  wliich  the  radicle
NO  is  recognised  arc  called  niiroso-componnda.  These  subsUinces  are  described  in
Prof.  Bunge's  work  (Kief,  IbGH).

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN WITH  HYDROGEN  AND OXYGEN 289

oxide,  whilst  the  heat  developed  by  burning  phosphorus  suffices  to  pro-
duce this  decomposition.  That  nitric  oxide  really  supports  combustion,
owing  to  its  being  decomposed  by  the  action  of  heat,  is  proved  by  the
fact  that  strongly  ignited  charcoal  continues  to  burn  in  the  same  nitric
oxide ''-^  in  which  a  feel)ly  incandescent  piece  of  charcoal  is  extin-
guished.

The  compounds  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen  which  we  have  so  far  con-
sidered may  all  be  prepare<l  from  nitric  oxide,  and  may  themselves  be
converted  into  it.  Thus  nitric  oxide  stands  in  intimatie  connection
with  them.^*''  The  passage  of  nitric  oxide  into  the  higher  degrees  of
oxidation  and  the  converse  reaction  is  employed  in  practice  as  a  means
for  traiisfirriny  the  oxygen  of  the  air  to  substances  capable  of  being
oxidised.  Starting  with  nitric  oxide,  it  may  easily  be  converted,  with
the  aid  of  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  and  water,  into  nitric  acid,
nitrous  anhydride,  and  nitric  peroxide,  and  by  their  means  employed  to
oxidise  other  substances.  In  this  oxidising  action  nitric  oxide  is  again
formed,  and  it  may  again  be  converted  into  nitric  acid,  and  so  on  con-
tinuously, if  only  oxygen  and  water  be  present.  Hence  the  fact,  which
at  first  appears  to  be  a  paradox,  that  by  means  of  a  small  quantity  of
nitric  oxide  in  the  presence  of  oxygen  and  water  it  is  possible  to  oxidise

"-*  A  mixture  of  nitric  oxide  and  hydrogen  is  inflammable.  If  a  mixture  of  tlie  two
gases  be  passed  over  spongy  platinum  the  nitrogen  and  hydrogen  even  combine,  forming
ammonia.  A  mixture  of  nitric  oxide  with  many  combustible  vapours  and  gases  is  very  in-
flammable. A  very  characteristic  flame  is  obtained  in  burning  a  mixture  of  nitric  oxide
und  the  vapour  of  the  combustible  carbon  bisulphide,  CS.^.  The  latter  substance  is  very
volatile,  so  that  it  is  suflicient  to  pass  the  nitric  oxide  through  a  layer  of  the  carbon  bisul-
])hide  (for  instance,  in  a  Woulfe*s  bottle)  in  order  that  the  gas  escaping  should  contain  a
considerable  amount  of  the  vapours  of  this  substance.  This  mixture  continues  to  bum
when  ignited,  and  the  flame  emits  a  large  quantity  of  the  so-called  ultra-violet  rays,
which  are  capable  of  inducing  chemical  combinations  and  decompositions,  and  therefore
the  flame  may  be  employed  in  photography  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  daylight  (magnesium
light  and  electric  light  have  the  same  property).  There  are  many  gases  (for  instance,
ammonia)  which  when  mixed  with  nitric  oxide  explode  in  a  eudiometer.

•^  The  oxides  of  nitrogen  naturally  do  not  proceed  directly  from  oxygen  tuid  nitrogen
by  contact  alone,  because  their  formation  is  accompanied  by  the  absorption  of  a  large
(luantity  of  heat,  for  [see  Note  29)  about  21,500  heat  units  are  absorbed  when  16
parts  of  oxygen  and  14  parts  of  nitrogen  combine ;  consequently  the  decomposition  of
nitric  oxide  into  oxygen  and  nitrogen  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  tliis  amount  of
heat ;  and  therefore  with  nitric  oxide,  as  with  all  explosive  substances  and  mixtures,  the
reaction  once  started  is  able  to  proceed  by  itself.  In  fact,  Berthelot  remarked  the  decom-
position of  nitric  oxide  in  the  explosion  of  fulminate  of  mercury.  This  decomposition
<loes  not  take  place  spontaneously ;  substances  even  bum  with  difficulty  in  nitric  oxide,
probably  becaus^e  a  certain  portion  of  the  nitric  oxide  in  decomposing  gives  oxygen,  which
-combines  with  another  portion  of  nitric  oxide,  and  forms  nitric  |)eroxide,  a  somewhat  more
stable  comi)ound  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen.  The  further  combinations  of  nitric  oxide  with
oxyg<'n  all  pro<*eed  with  the  evolution  of  heat,  and  take  place  spontaneously  by  contact
with  air  alone.  It  is  evident  from  these  examples  that  the  application  of  thermochemical
<lata  is  limited.

VOL.  I.  U

290  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMLSTKV

an  indefinitely  large  quantity  of  substances  which  cannot  be  directly
oxidised  either  by  the  action  of  the  atmospheric  oxygen  or  by  the
action  of  nitric  oxide  itself.  The  sulphurous  anhydride,  SO.^,  which
is  obtained  in  the  combustion  of  sulphur  and  in  roasting  many  metallic
sulphides  in  the  air  is  an  example  of  this  kind.  In  practice  this  gas
is  obtained  by  burning  sulphur  or  iron  pyrites,  the  latter  being  thereby
converted  into  oxide  of  iron  and  sulphurous  anhydride.  In  contact  with
the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  this  gas  does  not  pass  into  the  higher
degree  of  oxidation,  sulphuric  anhydride,  803,  and  if  it  does  form  sul-
phuric acid  with  water  and  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere,  SO2  -I-  HjO  +  O
=112804,  it  does  so  very  slowly.  With  nitric  acid  (and  especially  with
nitrous  acid,  but  not  with  nitrogen  peroxide)  and  water,  sulphurous
anhydride,  on  the  contrary,  very  easily  forms  sulphuric  acid,  and
especially  so  when  slightly  heated  (about  40^^),  the  nitric  acid  (or,  better
still,  nitrous  acid)  being  converted  into  nitric  oxide

3S02  +  2NH03  +  2H20=2H2S04  4-2N().

The  presence  of  water  is  absolutely  indispensable  here,  otherwise
sulphuric  anhydride  is  formed,  which  combines  with  the  oxides  of
nitrogen  (nitrous  ^mhydride),  forming  a  crystalline  substance  containing
oxides  of  nitrogen  {chamber  crystals^  which  will  be  described  in  Chapter
XX.)  Water  destroys  this  compound,  forming  sulphuiic  acid  and
separating  the  oxides  of  nitrogen.  The  water  must  be  taken  in  a
greater  quantity  than  that  required  for  the  formation  of  the  hydrate
H;iS04,  because  the  latter  absorbs  oxides  of  nitrogen.  With  an  excess
of  water,  however,  solution  does  not  take  place.  If,  in  the  above  re-
action, only  water,  sulphurous  anhydride,  and  nitric  or  nitrous  acid  be
taken  in  a  definite  quantity,  then  a  definite  (juantity  of  sulphuric  acid
and  nitric  oxide  will  be  formed,  according  to  the  preceding  equation  :  but
there  the  reaction  ends  and  the  excess  of  sulphurous  anhydride,  if  there
be  any,  will  remain  unchanged.  But  if  we  add  air  and  water,  then  the
nitric  oxide  will  unite  with  the  oxygen  to  form  nitrogen  peroxide,  and
the  latter  with  water  to  form  nitric  and  nitrous  acids,  v%hich  again  give
sulphuric  acid  from  a  fresh  quantity  of  sulphui-ous  anhydride.  Nitric
oxide  is  again  formed,  which  is  able  to  start  the  oxidation  afresh  if
there  be  sufficient  air.  Thus  it  is  possible  with  a  definite  quantity  of
nitric  oxide  to  convert  an  indefinitely  large  quantity  of  sulphurous
anhydride  into  sulphunc  acid,  water  and  oxygen  only  being  required.^'^

'•*  The  inntaiice  of  the  action  of  a  Biiiall  quantity  of  NO  in  indiicinj::  a  «lefinitt'
ehemij-al  reaction  lwtwe<'n  large  niasseH  (S02  +  O^HoO  =  H..SO4)  is  very  instructive,
because  the  particularn  relating  to  it  have  Xnmw  studied,  and  show  that  intennediat«'
forma  of  reaction  nniy  be  discovered  in  the  so-called  contact  or  catalytic  i)henoniena.
Tlie  essence  of  the  nuvtter  here  is  that  A  (  =  80.2)  reacts  upon  B  ( =  O  and  H.^0)  in  the  pre.

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEX  WJTH  HVDROGEX  AND  OXYGEN 291

This  may  be  easily  demonstrated  by  an  experiment  on  a  small  scale,  if

a  certain  quantity  of  nitric  oxide  be  first  introduced  into  a  flask,  and

sulphurous  anhydride,  steam,  and  oxygen  be  then  continually  passed  in.

Thus  the  above- described  reaction  may  be  expressed  in  the  following

manner : —

nSOa  +  nO  +  (n  f-  7n)}l.fi  +  ^0=nn^^0^,vill^0  +  NO

if  we  consider  only  the  original  substances  and  those  finally  formed.  In
this  way  a  definite  quantity  of  nitric  oxide  may  serve  for  the  conversion  of
an  indefinite  quantity  of  sulphurous  anhydride,  oxygen,  and  water  into
sulphuric  acid.  In  reality,  however,  there  is  a  limit  to  this,  because  air,
and  not  pure  oxygen,  is  employed  for  the  oxidation,  so  that  it  is  necessary
to  remove  the  nitrogen  of  the  air  and  to  introduce  a  fresh  quantity
of  air.  A  certain  quantity  of  nitric  oxide  will  pass  away  with  this
nitrogen,  and  will  in  this  way  be  lost.^'*^

The  preceding  series  of  changes  serve  as  the  basis  of  the  rtianu/aclure
of  sulphuric  acid  or  so  called  chamber  acid.  This  acid  is  prepared  on  a
very  large  scale  in  chemical  works  because  it  is  the  cheapest  acid  whose
action  can  be  applied  in  a  great  number  of  cases.  It  is  therefore  used
in  immense  quantities.

gence  of  C,  because  it  j^ives  BC,  a  Bubstaiice  which  forms  AB  with  A,  and  again  liberates
C.  Consequently  C  is  a  medium,  a  transferrinj^  substance,  without  which  the  reaction
does  not  proceed.  Many  similar  phenomena  may  be  found  in  other  departments  of  life.
Thus  the  merchant  is  an  indispensable  medium  between  the  producer  and  th')  consumer;
ex|)eriment  is  a  medium  between  the  phenomena  of  nature  and  the  cognisant  faculties,
and  language,  customs,  and  laws  are  media  which  are  as  necessary  for  the  exchanges
of  social  intercourse  as  nitric  oxide  for  thost*  between  sulphurous  anhydride  and  oxygen
and  water.

'•^  If  the  sulphurous  anhydride  be  prepared  by  roasting  iron  pyrites,  FeS.j,  then
each  equivalent  of  pyrites  (equivalent  of  iron,  56,  of  sulphur  3*2,  of  pjrrites  120)  requires
six  equivalents  of  oxygen  (that  is  06  parts)  for  the  conversion  of  its  sulphur  into  sul-
l)huric  acid  (for  fonuing  'iH.^SOi  with  water),  besides  1^  equivalents  (24  parts)  for  con-
verting the  iron  into  oxide,  Fe.^Oj',  hence  the  combustion  of  the  pyrites  for  the  formation
of  sulphuric  acid  and  ferric  oxide  requires  the  introduction  of  an  equal  weight  of  oxygen
(120  parts  of  oxygen  to  120  parts  of  pyrites),  or  five  times  its  weight  of  air,  whilst  four
parts  by  weight  of  nitrogen  will  remam  inactive,  and  in  the  removal  of  the  exhausted
air  will  carry  off  the  remaining  nitric  oxide.  If  not  all,  at  least  a  large  portion  of  the
nitric  oxide  may  be  collected  by  passing  the  escaping  air,  still  containing  some  oxygen,
through  substances  which  absorb  oxides  of  nitrogen.  Sulphuric  acid  itself  may  be  employed
for  this  purpose  if  it  be  used  in  the  form  of  the  hydrate  H.^S04,  or  containing  only  a
small  amount  of  water,  Ixjcause  such  sulphuric  acid  dissolves  the  oxides  of  nitrogen.
They  may  be  easily  expelled  from  this  solution  by  heating  or  by  dilution  with  water,  as
they  are  only  slightly  !>oluble  in  aqueous  sulphuric  acid.  Besides  which,  sulphurous
anhydride  acts  on  such  sulphuric  acid,  being  oxidisi>d  at  the  expense  of  the  nitrous  anhy-
dride, and  fonning  nitric  oxide  from  it,  which  again  enters  into  the  cycle  of  action.  For
this  reason  the  sulplmric  acid  which  has  absorbed  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  escaping  from
the  chambers  in  tlie  tower  K  (.tee  fig.  50)  is  le<l  back  into  the  first  chamlK*r,  where  it
comes  into  contact  with  sulphurous  anhydride,  by  which  means  the  oxides  of  nitrogen
are  reintroduced  into  the  reaction  which  proceeds  in  the  chambers.  This  is  the  use  of
the  towers  ((ray-Lussac's  and  Glover's)  which  are  erected  at  either  end  of  the  cliara1>ers.

u  2

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN 293

sulphurous  anhydride,  steam,  air.  and  nitric  acid,  or  some  oxide  of
nitrogen,  into  the  chambers.  The  sulphurous  anhydride  is  produced  by
burning  sulphur  or  iron  pyrites.  This  is  carried  on  in  the  furnace  with
four  hearths  to  the  left  of  the  drawing.  Air  is  led  into  the  chambers
and  furnace  through  orifices  in  the  furnace  doors.  The  current  of  air
and  oxygen  is  regulated  by  opening  or  closing  these  orifices  to  a  greater
or  less  extent.  The  ingoing  draught  in  the  chambers  is  brought  about
by  the  fact  that  heated  gases  and  vapours  pass  into  the  chambers,  whose
temperature  is  further  raised  by  the  reaction  itself,  and  also  by  the
remaining  nitrogen  being  continually  withdrawn  from  the  outlet  (above
the  tower  k)  by  a  tall  chimney  situated  near  the  chambers.  Nitric
acid  is  prepared  from  a  mixture  of  sulphuric  acid  and  Chili  saltpetre,
in  the  same  furnaces  in  which  the  sulphurous  anhydride  is  evolved  (or
in  special  furnaces).  Not  more  than  8  parts  of  nitre  are  taken  to  100
parts  of  sulphur  burnt.  On  leaving  the  furnace  the  vapours  of  nitric
acid  and  oxides  of  nitrogen  mixed  with  air  and  sulphurous  anhydride
first  pass  along  the  horizontal  tubes  T  into  the  receiver  b  b,  which  is
partially  cooled  by  water  flowing  in  on  the  right-hand  side  and  running
out  on  the  left  by  o,  in  order  to  reduce  the  temperature  of  the  gases  enter-
ing the  chamber.  The  gases  then  pass  up  a  tower  filled  with  coke,  and
shown  to  the  left  of  the  drawing.  In  this  tower  are  placed  lumps  of  coke
(the  residue  from  the  dry  distillation  of  coal),  over  which  sulphuric  acid
trickles  from  the  reservoir  M.  This  acid  has  absorbed  in  the  end  tower  k
the  oxides  of  nitrogen  escaping  from  the  chamber.  This  end  tower  is  also
filled  with  coke,  over  which  a  stream  of  strong  sulphuric  acid  trickles  from
the  reservoir  m'.  The  acid  spreads  over  the  coke,  and,  owing  to  the  large
surface  offered  by  the  latter,  absorbs  the  greater  part  of  the  oxides  of
nitrogen  escaping  from  the  chambers.  The  sulphuric  acid  in  passing
down  the  tower  becomes  saturated  with  the  oxides  of  nitrogen,  and
flows  out  at  h  into  a  special  receiver  (in  the  drawing  situated  by  the
side  of  the  furnaces),  from  which  it  is  forced  up  the  tubes  h'  h'  by  steam
pressure  into  the  reservoir  M,  situated  above  the  first  tower.  The  gases
passing  throtigh  this  tower  (hot)  from  the  furnace  on  coming  into  con-
tact with  the  sulphuric  acid  take  up  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  contained
in  it,  and  these  are  thus  returned  to  the  chamber  and  again  participate
in  the  reaction.  The  sulphuric  acid  left  after  their  extraction  flows
into  the  chambers.  Thus,  on  leaving  the  first  coke  tower  the  sulphurous
anhydride,  air,  and  vapours  of  nitric  acid  and  of  the  oxides  of  nitrogen
pass  through  the  upper  tube  m  into  the  chamber.  Here  they  come
into  contact  with  steam  introduced  by  lead  tubes  into  various  parts  of
the  chamber.  The  reaction  takes  place  in  the  presence  of  water,  the
sulphuric  acid  falls  to  the  bottom  of  the  chamlDer,  and  the  same  process

294  PRIN'CIPLES  OF CHEMLSTKY

takes  place  in  the  following  chambers  until  the  whole  of  the  sulphurous
anhydride  is  consumed.  A  somewhat  greater  proportion  of  air  tlian  is
strictly  necessary  is  passed  in,  in  order  that  no  sulphurous  anhydride
should  be  left  unaltered  for  want  of  sufficient  oxygen.  The  presence
of  an  excess  of  oxygen  is  shown  by  the  colour  of  the  gases  escaping
from  the  last  chamber.  If  they  be  of  a  pale  colour  it  indicates  an
insufficiency  of  air  (and  the  presence  of  sulphurous  anhydride),  as  other-
wise peroxide  of  nitn)gen  would  be  formed.  A  very  dark  colour  shows
an  excess  of  air,  which  is  also  disadvantageous,  because  it  increases  the
inevitable  loss  of  nitric  oxide  by  increasing  the  mass  of  escaping
.gases.^**

NitroVrS  oxidej  'S.fi,^^  is  similar  to  water  in  its  volumetric  composi-
tion. Two  volumes  of  nitrous  oxide  are  formed  from  two  volumes  of

**'*^  By  this  meanH  an  mncli  as  2,500,000  kilogramn  of  clmmber  acid,  containing  about
60  per  cent,  of  the  hydrate  H2SO4  and  abont  40  per  cent,  of  water,  may  be  manufactured
per  year  in  one  plant  of  5,000  cubic  metres  capacity  (without  Rtoi)page8).  This  process
has  been  brought  to  such  a  degree  of  perfection  that  as  much  as  800  parts  of  tlie  liydrate
H2SO4  are  obtained  from  100  parts  of  sulphur,  whilst  the  theoretical  amount  is  not
greater  than  806  parts.  The  acid  parts  with  its  excess  of  water  on  heating.  For  tluM
purpose  it  is  heated  in  lead  vessels.  However,  the  acid  containing  about  75  i>er  cent,  of
the  hydrate  (60"  Baume)  already  begins  to  act  on  the  lf»ad  when  heated,  and  therefore
the  further  removal  of  water  is  conducted  by  evaporating  in  glass  or  platinum  vessels,
as  will  be  described  in  Chapter  XX.  The  aqueous  acid  (50°  Baume)  obtained  in  the
chambers  is  termed  chamber  acid.  The  acid  concentrated  to  60°  Baume  is  more
generally  employed,  and  sometimes  the  hydrate  (66*^  Baume)  termed  vitriol  acid  is  also
used.  In  England  alone  more  than  1,000  million  kilograms  of  chamber  acid  are  produced
by  this  method.  The  formation  of  sulphuric  acid  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid  was  dis-
covered by  Drebbel,  and  the  first  lead  chamber  was  erected  by  Roebuck,  in  Scotland,  in
the  middle  of  the  last  century.  The  essence  of  the  process  was  only  brought  to  light  at
the  beginning  of  this  century,  when  many  improvements  were  introduced  into  practice.

*'"  If  the  hydrate  HNO3  corresponds  to  N2O4,  the  hydrate  HXO,  htjponitrous  ami,
corresponds  to  N2O,  and  in  this  sense  N.jO  is  hf/jxmitroiia  anhydritle.  Hyiwnitrous
acid,  corresponding  with  nitrous  oxide  (as  its  anhydride),  is  not  known  in  a  pure  state,
but  its  salts  (Divers)  are  known.  They  are  prepared  by  the  reduction  of  nitrous  (and
consequently  of  nitric)  salts  by  sodium  amalgam.  If  this  amalgum  be  added  to  a  cold
solution  of  an  alkaline  nitrite  until  the  evolution  of  gas  ceases,  and  the  excess  of  alkali
saturated  with  acetic  acid,  an  insoluble  yellow  precipittite  of  silver  hyi)onitrite,  NAgO,
will  be  obtained  on  adding  a  solution  of  silver  nitrate.  This  hyponitrite  is  insoluble  in
cold  acetic  acid,  and  decomposes  when  heated,  with  the  evolution  of  nitrous  oxide.  If
rapidly  heated  it  decomposes  with  an  explosion.  It  is  dissolved  unchanged  by  weak
mineral  acids,  whilst  the  stronger  acids  (for  example,  sulphuric  and  hydrochloric  acids)
deconiix)se  it,  with  the  evolution  of  nitrogen,  nitric  and  nitrous  acids  remaining  in  solution.
Among  the  other  salts  of  hyponitrous  acid,  HNO,  the  salts  of  lead,  copi>er,  and  mercury
are  insoluble  in  water.  Judging  by  the  lK>nd  Ijetween  hyponitrous  acid  and  the  other
comiW)unds  of  nitrogen,  there  is  reason  for  thinking  that  its  fonnula  should  be  dcmbled,
N.^H.iOj.  For  instance,  Thoune  (,1H1>3)  on  gradually  oxidisnig  hydroxylaniine,  NH.j(OH),
into  nitrous  acid,  NO(OH)  (Note  25),  by  means  of  an  alkaline  solution  of  KMn04,  first
obtained  liy}>onitrous  acid,  X...H.>Oo,  and  then  a  peculiar  intennediate  ucid,  N^.H.jOj,  which,
by  further  oxidation,  gave  nitrous  acid.  On  the  other  hand,  Wislicenns  (189H)  showed
that  in  the  a<'tion  of  the  sulphuric  acid  salt  of  hydroxylaniine  ui>on  nitrite  of  sodium,
there  is  formed,  besides,  nitrous  oxide  (according  to  V.  Meyer,  NH^OH^jSO,  1^  NaNO.^

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROOEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN 295

nitrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen,  which  may  be  shown  by  the  ordinary
method  for  the  analysis  of  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  (by  passing  them  over
red-hot  copper  or  sodium).  In  contradistinction  to  the  other  oxides  of
nitrogen,  it  is  not  directly  oxidised  by  oxygen,  but  it  may  be  obtained
from  the  higher  oxides  of  nitrogen  by  the  action  of  certain  deoxidising
substances  ;  thus,  for  example,  a  mixture  of  two  volumes  of  nitric  oxide
and  one  volume  of  sulphurous  anhydride  if  left  in  contact  with  water
and  spongy  platinum  is  converted  into  sulphuric  acid  and  nitrous  oxide,
2NO+S02  +  H20=H2S04-|-N20.  Nitric  acid,  also,  under  the  action
of  certain  metals — for  instance,  of  zinc  ^® — gives  nitrous  oxide,  although
in  this  case  mixed  with  nitric  oxide.  The  usual  method  of  preparing
nitrous  oxide  consists  in  the  decomposition  of  ammonium  nitrate  by  the
aid  of  heat,  because  in  this  case  only  water  and  nitrous  oxide  are  formeci,
NHjN03=2H20-hN.20  (a  mixture  of  NH4CI  and  KNO3  is  sometimes
taken).  The  decomposition  *»^  proceeds  very  easily  in  an  apparatus  like
that  used  for  the  preparation  of  ammonia  or  oxygen — that  is,  in  a
retort  or  flask  with  a  gas- conducting  tube.  The  decomposition  must,
however,  be  carried  on  carefully,  as  otherwise  nitrogen  is  formed  from
the  decomposition  of  the  nitrous  oxide.^"

-  NaHS04  +  2H...0 -r  N.O), a Kinall  liiiiouiit of  liyponitroos acid  which  may  be  precipitated
in  t}ie  form  of  the  nilver  salt ;  and  tliis  reaction  ib  most  simply  expressed  by  taking  the
doubled  formula  of  hyponitrous  acid,  NH.j(0H)  +  N0(0H)  =  H.^0  +  N.^H.p.2.  The  best
argument  in  favour  of  the  doubled  formula  is  tlie  property  jwssessed  by  hyponitrous  acid
of  forming  acid  salts,  HNaNoOo  (Zom).

According  to  Thoune,  the  following  are  the  properties  of  hyponitrous  acid.  When
liberated  from  the  ilry  silver  salt  by  the  action  of  dry  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  hyponitrous
acid  is  unstable,  and  easily  explodes  even  at  low  temperatures.  But  when  dissolved  in
water  (having  been  formed  by  the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  upon  tlie  silver  salt),  it  is
stable  even  when  boiled  with  dilute  acids  and  alkalis.  Tlie  solution  is  colourless  and
has  a  strongly  acid  reaction.  In  the  course  of  time,  however,  the  aqueous  solution  also
decomposes  into  nitrous  oxide  and  water.  The  complete  oxidation  by  permanganate  of
{)otash  proceeds  jiccording  to  the  following  equation:  GH.jN.^.Oa  +  SKMnO^  +  l'iH.^SO^
*  IOHNO5  +  4K...SO4  +  8MnS04  +  12H...0.  In  an  alkaline  solution,  KMn04  only  oxidises
hyponitrous  acid  into  nitrous  and  not  into  nitric  acid.  Nitrous  acid  has  a  decomposing
action  upon  hyponitrous  acid,  and  if  the  aqueous  w^lutions  of  the  two  acids  be  mixed  to-
gether they  immediately  give  off  oxides  of  nitrogen.  Hyponitrous  acid  does  not  liberate
CO.j  from  its  salts,  but  on  the  other  hand  it  is  not  displaced  by  CO.*.

'"*  It  is  remarkable  that  electro-deposited  copi>er  powder  gives  nitrous  oxide  with  a
10  p.c.  solution  of  nitric  acid,  whilst  onlinary  copper  gives  nitric  oxide.  It  is  here
evident  that  the  physical  and  mechanical  structure  of  the  substance  affects  the  course  of
the  reaction — that  is  to  say,  it  is  a  case  of  contact-action.

'■'^  This  decomposition  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  about  25,000  calories  per
molecular  quantity,  XH,NO-,  and  therefore  takes  place  with  ease,  and  sometimes  with
an  explosion.

'^  In  order  to  remove  any  nitric  oxide  tliat  might  be  present,  the  gas  obtained  is
I)ass^d  through  a  solution  of  ferrous  sulphate.  As  nitrous  oxide  is  very  soluble  in  cold
water  (at  0  ,  UK)  volumes  of  water  dissolve  130  volumes  of  N.O ;  at  20°,  07  volumes),  it
must  \>e  collec'ted  over  warm  water.  The  nitrous  oxide  is  much  more  soluble  than  nitric
oxide,  which  is  in  agreement  with  the  fact  that  nitrous  oxide  is  much  more  easily  liquefied

COMPOUNDS  OF  NITROGEN  WITH  HYDROGEN  AND  OXYGEN 297

As  it  is  liquefied  with  comparative  ease,  and  as  the  cold  produced  by  its
vaporisation  is  very  considerable,"*  it  (as  also  liquid  carbonic  an-
hydride) is  often  employed  in  investigations  requiring  a  low  tempera-
ture. Nitrous  oxide  forms  a  very  mobile,  colourless  liquid,  which  acts
on  the  skin,  and  is  incapable  in  a  cold  state  of  oxidising  either
metallic  potassium,  phosphorus,  or  carbon  ;  its  specific  gravity  is
slightly  less  than  that  of  water  (0°  =  0910,  10°  =  0856,  35°  =  060,
39°  =  0*45,  Villard,  1894).  When  evaporated  under  the  receiver  of  an
air-pump,  the  temperature  falls  to  —  100°,  and  the  liquid  solidifies
into  a  snow-like  mass,  and  partially  foi*ms  transparent  crystals.  Both
these  substances  are  solid  nitrous  oxide.  Mercury  is  immediately
solidified  in  contact  with  evaporating  liquid  nitrous  oxide.^'

When  introduced  into  the  respiratory  organs  (and  consequently
into  the  blood  also)  nitrous  oxide  produces  a  peculiar  kind  of  intoxica-
tion accompanied  by  spasmodic  movements,  and  hence  this  gas,
discovered  by  Priestley  in  1776,  received  the  name  of  Maughing  gas.'
On  a  prolonged  respiration  it  produces  a  state  of  insensibility  (it  is  an
anaesthetic  like  chloroform),  and  is  therefore  employed  in  dental  and
surgical  operations.

Nitrous  oxide  is  easily  decomposed  into  nitrogen  and  oxygen  by  the
action  of  heat,  or  a  series  of  electric  sparks  ;  and  this  explains  why  a
number  of  substances  which  cannot  burn  in  nitric  oxide  do  so  with
great  ease  in  nitrous  oxide.  In  fact,  when  nitric  oxide  gives  some
oxygen  on  decomposition,  this  oxygen  immediately  unites  with  a  fresh
portion  of  the  gas  to  form  nitric  peroxide,  whilst  nitrous  oxide  does
not  possess  this  capacity  for  further  combination  with  oxygen.^*  A
mixture of nitrous oxide with hydrogen explodes like detonating

HJderuble,  namel}'  (jiccording  to  Kegntiult),  at  +10'-' =  45  atinofiphereH,  at  ©""^ao  atmo-
HphereB,  at  —10^-29  atmospheres,  and  at  —20° -28  atinoHphereK.  It  boils  at  —92'^,
and  the  i)re«8ure  is  then  tlierefore  -■  1  atmosphere  isec  Chapter  II.,  Note  27).

'*  Liquid  nitrous  oxide,  in  vai)orisinjj  at  the  same  pressure  as  hquid  carbonic
anhydride,  gives  rise  to  ahnost  equal  or  even  shghtly  lower  temperatures.  Thus  at  a
pressure  of  25  mm.  carbonic  anhydride  gives  a  temperature  as  low  as  —115^,  and  nitrouH
oxide  of  —125'^  (Dewar).  The  similarity  of  these  properties  and  even  of  the  absolute
boiling  point  iCO,  -f  82  ",  N^O  4  8C")  is  all  the  more  remarkable  because  these  gases  have
the  siime  molecular  weight  -44  (Chapter  VII.)

'■'  A  very  characteristic  exi>eriment  of  simultaneous  combustion  and  intense  cold
may  Ix*  perfonned  by  means  of  li(|uid  nitrous  oxide ;  if  liquid  nitrous  oxide  be  poured
into  A  test  tul>e  containing  some  mercury  the  mercurj*  will  solidify,  and  if  a  piece
of  red-hot  charcoal  be  thrown  niM)U  the  -surface  of  the  nitrous  oxide  it  will  continue  to
burn  very  brilliantly,  giving  rise  to  a  high  temi>erature.

"•  In  the  following  chapter  we  shall  consider  the  volumetric  composition  of  the
oxides  of  nitrogen.  It  explains  the  difference  between  nitric  and  nitrous  oxide.
Nitrous  oxide  is  fonned  with  a  diminution  of  volumes  (contraction),  nitric  oxide  without
contraction,  its  volume  l>eing  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  volumes  of  the  nitrogen  and  oxygen
of  which  it  is  comiK)sed. By  oxidation,  if  it  could  be  directly  accomplished,  two  volumes  of

298  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHKMISTRV

^as,  gaseous  nitrogen  being  formed,  N.;04-H2=H20-f  Nj.  The
volume  of  the  remaining  nitrogen  is  equal  to  the  original  volume  of
nitrous  oxide,  and  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  hydrogen  entering  into
combination  with  the  oxygen  ;  hence  in  this  reaction  equal  volumes  of
nitrogen  and  hydrogen  replace  each  other.  Nitrous  oxide  is  also  very
easily  decomposed  by  red-hot  metals  ;  and  sulphur,  phosphorus,  and
charcoal  bum  in  it,  although  not  so  brilliantly  as  in  oxygen.  A  sub-
stance in  burning  in  nitrous  oxide  evolves  more  heat  than  an  equal
quantity  burning  in  oxygen  ;  which  most  clearly  shows  that  in  tlie
formation  of  nitrous  oxide  by  the  combination  of  nitrogen  with  oxygen
there  was  not  an  evolution  but  an  absorption  of  heat,  there  being  no
other  source  for  the  excess  of  heat  in  the  combustion  of  substances  in
nitrous  oxide  {see  Note  29).  If  a  given  volume  of  nitrous  oxide  l>e
decomposed  by  a  metal — for  instance,  sodium — then  there  remains,
after  cooling  and  total  decomposition,  a  volume  of  nitrogen,  exactly
equal  to  that  of  the  nitrous  oxide  taken  ;  consequently  the  oxygen  is,
so  to  say,  distributed  between  the  atoms  of  nitrogen  without  producing
An  increase  in  the  volume  of  the  nitrogen.

iiitrouH  oxide  and  one  volume  of  oxygen  would  not  give  three  but  four  volumerf  of  nitric
oxide.  These  facts  must  be  taken  into  consideration  in  comparing  the  caloiific  equi-
valents of  formation,  the  capacity  for  supporting  combustion,  and  other  proi>erties  of
nitrons  and  nitric  oxides,  \.jO  and  NO.

299

CHAPTER  VII

MOLECULES AND ATOMS. THE LAWS OP GAY-LUS8AC AND

AVOOADRO-GERHARDT

Hydrogen  combines  with  oxygen  in  the  proportion  of  two  volumes  to
one.  The  composition  by  volume  of  nitrous  o^ide  is  exactly  similar —
it  is  composed  of  two  volumes  of  nitrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen.
By  decomposing  ammonia  by  the  action  of  an  electric  spark  it  is  easy
to  prove  that  it  contains  one  volume  of  nitrogen  to  three  volumes  of
hydrogen.  So,  similarly,  it  is  found,  whenever  a  compound  is  decom-
posed and  the  volumes  of  the  gases  proceeding  from  it  are  measured,
that  the  volumes  of  the  gases  or  vapours  entering  into  combination
are  in  a  very  simple  prop<»rtion  to  one  another.  With  water,  nitrous
oxide,  ifec,  this  may  be  proved  by  direct  observation  ;  but  in  the  majority
of  cases,  and  especially  with  substances  which,  although  volatile-  that
is,  capable  of  passing  into  a  gaseous  (or  vaporous)  state— are  liquid  at
the  ordinary  temperature,  such  a  direct  method  of  observation  presents
many  difficulties.  But,  then,  if  the  densities  of  the  vapours  and  gases
be  known,  the  same  simplicity  in  their  ratio  is  shown  by  calculation.
The  volume  of  a  substance  is  proportional  to  its  weight,  and  inversely
proportional  to  its  density,  and  therefore  ))y  dividing  the  amount  by
weight  of  each  substance  entering  into  the  composition  of  a  compound
by  its  density  in  the  gaseous  or  vaporous  state  we  shall  obtain  factors
which  will  be  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  volumes  of  the  su))stances
entering into the composition  of  the  compound.^ So,  for  example,

•  If  t!it»  weight  he  indicated  by  P,  tlie  density  hy  D,  and  the  volume  by  V,  then

wliere  K  is  a  roefticient  depending  on  the  Hysteni  of  the  expressions  P,  D,  and  V.  If  D
be  the  weiglit  of  a  cubic  measure  of  a  substance  referred  to  the  weight  of  the  stvme
measure  of  water—  if,  as'in  the  metrical  system  (Chapter  I.,  Note  9),  the  cubic  measure  of
one  part  by  weiglit  of  water  be  taken  as  a  unit  of  volume— then  K-^  1.  But,  whatever  it
be,  it  is  cancelled  in  dealing  with  the  comparison  of  volumes,  because  ctmiparative  and  not
absolute  measures  of  volumes  are  taken.  In  this  diapter,  as  throughout  the  book,  tho
weight  P  is  given  in  gnuns  in  dealing  with  absolute  weights ;  and  if  comparative,  as  in

800  PRINCIPLE.s OF  CHEMISTKY

water  contains  eight  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen  to  one  part  by  weight
of  hydrogen,  and  their  densities  are  16  and  1,  consequently  their
volumes  (or  the  above-mentioned  factors)  are  1  and  i,  and  therefore
it  is  seen  without  direct  experiment  that  water  contains  two  volumes
of  hydrogen  for  every  one  volume  of  oxygen.  So  also,  knowing  that
nitric  oxide  contains  fourteen  parts  of  nitrogen  and  sixteen  parts  of
oxygen,  and  knowing  that  the  specific  gravities  of  these  last  two  gases  are
fourteen  and  sixteen,  we  find  that  the  volumes  in  which  nitrogen  and
oxygen  combine  for  the  formation  of  nitric  oxide  are  in  the  proportion
of  1  :  1.  We  will  cite  another  example.  In  the  last  chapter  we  saw
that  the  density  of  NO.^  only  becomes  constant  and  equal  to  twenty -
three  (referred  to  hydrogen)  above  135^,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  a  method
of  direct  observation  of  the  volumetric  composition  of  this  substance
would  be  very  difficult  at  so  high  a  temperature.  But  it  may  be
easily  calculated.  NO 2,  as  is  seen  from  its  formula  and  analysis,  contains
thirty-two  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen  to  fourteen  parts  by  weight  of
nitrogen,  forming  forty-six  parts  by  weight  of  NO.,,  and  knowing  the
densities  of  these  gases  we  find  that  one  volume  of  nitrogen  with  two
volumes  of  oxygen  gives  two  volumes  of  nitrogen  peroxide.  Thei*efore,
knowing  the  amounts  by  weight  of  the  substances  participating  in  a
reaction  or  forming  a  given  substance,  and  knowing  the  density  of  the
gas  or  vapour,^  the  volumetric  relations  of  the  substances  acting  in  a

the  expresKion  of  clieinieal  compoHition,  then  the  weight  of  an  atom  is  taken  us  unity.
The  density  of  gases,  D,  is  also  taken  in  reference  to  the  density  of  hydrogen,  and  the
volume  V  in  metrical  units  (cubic  centimetres),  if  it  be  a  matter  of  absolute  magnitudes
of  volumes,  and  if  it  be  a  matter  of  chemical  transformations — that  is,  of  relative  volumes
— then  the  volume  of  an  atom  of  hydrogen,  or  of  one  i)art  by  weight  of  hydrogen,  is  taken
an  unity,  and  all  volumes  are  expressed  according  to  these  units.

'  As  the  volumetric  relations  of  vapours  and  gases,  next  to  the  relatii^nsof  substances
by  weight,  form  the  most  important  province  of  chemistrj-,  and  a  most  important  means
for  the  attainment  of  chemical  conclusions,  and  inasmuch  as  these  volumetric  relations
are  determined  by  the  densities  of  gases  and  vapours,  necessarily  the  methods  of  deter-
mining the  densities  of  vajxiurs  (and  also  of  gases)  are  important  factors  in  chemical
research.  These  methods  are  describcMl  in  detail  in  works  on  physics  and  physical
and  analytical  chemistry,  and  therefore  we  here  only  touch  on  the  general  j)rinciples  of
the  subject.

If  we  know  the  weight  7>  and  volume  v,  occupied  by  the  vapour  of  a  given  substance
at  a  temperature  t  and  pressure  //,  then  its  density  may  be  directly  obtained  by  dividing
p  by  the  weight  of  a  volume  r  of  hydrogen  (if  the  density  be  expressed  according  to
hydrogen,  see  Chapter  II.,  Note  23)  at  t  and  //.  Hence,  the  methods  of  detennining  the
density  of  vapours  and  gases  are  based  on  the  determination  of  j>,  r,  t,  and  //.  The  two
last  data  (the  temiwrature  t  and  pressure  h)  are  given  by  the  thermometer  and  barometer
and  the  heights  of  mercury  or  other  liquid  confining  the  gas,  and  therefore  do  not
require  further  explanation.  It  ne«Hl  only  be  remarked  that :  (1)  In  the  case  of  easily
volatile  liquids  there  is  no  difticulty  in  procuring  a  bath  with  a  constant  temi>erature,
but  that  it  is  nevertheless  l>est  (esi»ecially  considering  the  inaccuracy  of  thennometers)
to  have  a  medium  of  absolutely  constant  temperature,  and  therefore  to  take  either  a
bath in  wliith  some substance is  melting — such as melting  ice  at 0 or  crj'stals  of

MOLEC'UMa AND  ATOMS

reiiotioii  or  eiiterinj;  inti)  the  composition  of  a  i*ompourid,  may  be  n
(leU^ruiined.

Ill  aceiiLte,  melting  i

Dented  with  in

,i>W«I,  t[]  pIlUV tllH  VeflB6l

r  u(  a  Ui|uid  bullUiK  >it  ■
r]Fllail4<  tempemtuce,  niii)  Icaowint;  the  iireHBure  onclerwhipli  it  ia  Uiiling.  to  iletemime
le  tetnperiiitiiie  q(  tlio  vapoor.  For  this  parpose  the  boiling  poiuts  of  w»ter  at  dilTisrent
preBSDr»ue  given  in  Chapter  I,,  Note  II,  aud  the  boiling  points nf  certain  etusily  procnnble
liqniilE  at  •arinnsprexaiires  are  given  ill  Chapter  U., Note  9T.  (3)  With  rvspeet  to  tempen-
tureH  above  UOO'^  (below  which  DLetT-nrial  therruometHra  may  be  conveniently  employ^),
I  thej  ore  moBt  aimply  obtained  eonitant  (lo  give  time  (o[  the  weight  and  volume  of  »'
■o  being  i>bwn-ed  in  a  givtin  spacv,  and  U>  alluw  that  vpace  to  attain  the  culcn-
lated  tempcratuie  tj  hy  ineaiiB  of  Hubetancea  boiling  at  a  high  tsmperstttre,  thu>,  tor
niil«nc«.  at  the  onliniiry  atmospheric  pressure  the  temperaturs  t  of  the  vapour  of
aiilphnc  is  about  llG-\  of  phosphorus  iHsntnenlpliide  SIH".  of  tin  chloride  eO«^,  of  cad-
'  un  TIt)°,  of  »tw  uao"  (according  to  Violle  and  olhern),  or  IIMD'  faccoiding  to  DeviUe),
(H)  The  indications  of  Uio  hydrogen  thermometer  mnat  be  considered  as  the  most
Dl  (but  aa  hydrogen  diffuses  through  incandescent  platinum,  nitrogen  is  usnally
euiplojed),  (1)  The  temperature  of  the  vapours  used  ai  the  bath  ahonld  in  every  oaae
be  tieveml  degrees  higher  than  the  boiling  point  of  the  liquid  whose  density  is  to  be
detutmined,  in  order  that  no  portion  should  remun  in  a  liquid  state.  Bat  even  in  this
caite,  aa  is  seen  from  the  example  of  nitric  peroxide  {Chapter  VI.),  the  vapour  denaity

onldv

e  the  la

Tipauaion  of  gases  and  vapours  absolutely  exact  (Chapter  II.,  Note  Ofl).
I  chemical  and  physical  nature  similar  to  that  vhich  we  saw  in  nitrip  peroxide  take
ilace  in  the  vapours,  the  mvn  interest  is  centred  in  eomtaitt  densities,  which  do  not
\-ary  with  t,  and  therelore  the  possible  effect  of  f  on  the  density  toust  always  be  kept
ind  in  having  recourse  to  this  means  of  investigation. 15}  Usually,  tor  the  sake  of
enience  of  obeerration,  the  vapour  density  is  determhied  at  the  atmoapheric  prea-
wbich  is  read  on  the  barometer ;  but  in  the  rase  of  subslances  which  ore  volati-
lised with  difHculty.  and  also  of  substances  which  decompose,  or,  in  general,  vary  at
temperatnres  near  tlieit  boiling  points,  it  is  best  or  even  indispensable  to  conduct  the  deter-
ilinn  at  low  pressaren,  whilnt  tor  Huhstiuices  which  decompose  at  low  presenres  the
' obserratioDs  have  to  be  conducted  under  a  mote  or  less  cou«derahly  increnaed  pressure.
, (0)  In  many  casea  it  is  convenient  to  determine  tlie  vapour  density  of  a  substance  in
ixture  with  other  gases,  and  consequently  under  the  partial  pressure,  which  may  l»
I caltalated  from  the  volume  of  the  mixture  and  that  of  the  intermixed  gas(«M  Chapter  I.,
Note  1). This  method  is  especially  important  tor  substances  which  ore  easily  decom-
posable, because,  as  shown  by  the  phenomena  of  dissociation,  a  Hubstance  is  able  to  remain
unchanged  in  the  ntmospbere  of  one  of  its  products  of  decomposition. Thna.  Wurti
determined  the  density  ot  phosphoric  chloride,  PCIj,  in  admixture  with  the  vapour  of
phosphorous  chloride,  PClj. (7)  It  is  evident,  from  the  example  ot  nitric  peroxide,  that
a  cluuige  of  pressure  may  alter  the  density  and  aid  decomposition,  and  therefore  identical
Its  ore  sometimes  obtained  (if  the  density  be  variablel  by  raising  1  and  lowering  Ji ;
[ but  it  the  denaity  does not vary  under  these  variable conditions (at least,  to  an
[lent  appreciably  exceeding  tlie  liimtsot  eiperimental  error),  (hen  this  cuiiirta  nt  density
[  -  indicates  the  gaitaut  and  incdn'nbfc  state  ot  a  substance. The  Uws  liereaf lei  laid  down
I leter  only  to  such  vapour  deasities. But  the  majority  of  volatile  substancea  show  such
istant  density  st  a  certain  degree  above  their  boiling  points  up  lo  the  starting  point
I  cl  decomposition. Thus,  tliu  density  of  a<|neoat  vapour  does  not  vary  tor  (  between
I  ihe  ordinary  temperature  and  ]noo°  (there  are  no  tmstworlhy  delerminatioiis  beyond
titis)  and  tor  pteaaures  varying  from  factions  ot  an  atmosphere  np  lo  wierol  atmo-
(pherea. If,  however,  the  density  doea  vary  considenJ>ly  with  a  variation  ot  h  and  (,
the  (act  may  serve  as  a  guide  tor  the  inveirttgation  of  the  chemical  changes  which  are
mdorgone  by  the  sobstonoe  in  a  state  of vaponr,  or  at  least  as  an  indication  ot  a
4niation  from  the  laws  ot  Boyle,  Mariotte,  and  Gay>LoBBBc

PItlKCirLES  OF  rflEMlSTllY

Sucli  un  itivestigatiou  {either  direct,  or  by  cAlculation  from  the  densi-
is  and  composition)  of  every  chemical  reaction,  resulting  in  the  forma-

wilh  ()■ In  cectniii  ctmes  the  wpuntion  ol  OBe  form  of  dvvialiuu  (torn  Ibe  atlier  nay  bn

Upkined  by  ■peoitil  bfixiUieseB.

With  respett  to  tbe  moBtii  of  dptermining: ;)  and  i',  with  <i  view  to  ""
^denalt;,  ice  may  diatinguiiih  Ihrec  chief  luethadii:  (u|  l>y  weigbt,  by  awH^rtBinuig  Uip
VireighL  of  a  definite  volume  of  Tapour;  l,b)  by  rolauie,  by  nieiutDriiig  the  volume  oi«Dpi«]
Ikbr  thevupoUT  of  u  definit<>  veieht  of  •  autnlniii^e ;  and  |c)  liy  iliFiiluceinriit. Thr  Imv

eiitially  volumetric,  because
id  by  the  v<

The  method  by  weight  la)  in  the  most  trustworthy  and  biBtnnealljr  imiiott«,Dt.  Dumat'
I  milhvii  ia  typlonl.  An  ordluai?  apherica]  h]ium  or  porceliJii  tm»1,  like  thou  *hawii
iclivoly  in  figs.  SU  and  BU,  is  l«keii,  aud  uii  eicesii  of  llie  >ub»liuiCB  to  be  eiperimeulBd
I  «^ii  is  iutroduoed  into  it.  The  vesjel  in  heuti-d  to  s  lemii*roiure  (  bijilier  than  the  boil-
I  Ing  point  ol  tlio  liquid :  thi>  gives  a  vapour  ichich  dinplnccs  llie  nir,  unii  fills  the  apbe-
I  tietl  space.  When  the  air  and  vapour  cease  cscnpinK  from  llie  sjihere,  it  ia  fused  op  or
;  aud  when  cool,  the  winght  of  the  viipnar  rvBiaitiin)j  in  tlie  tplieni
b  delcrmined  (either  by  direct  weighing  o(  the  vessel  with  the  vapour  and  intTodueins
*  'it  of  the  air  anil  n!  the  vapour  itnelf,  or  Iho
^(ni||ht  of  Oie  rokililiwd  sobatanw  U  determined  by  ckemirul  niethode),  and  the  Tnl«in«
f  the  vapour  at  (  and  the  barometric  prt<>»tire  h  are  then  caluulated.

Thr  vulunu'trif  method  ib)  orij^nally  employed  by  tlny-LussiK^  and  then  modified  bf
Iritmann  lUid  otlieTs  is  baled  on  the  principlB  that  a  weighed  quantity  of  the  liqnkl  («
b*  eiperiiiientad  witb  (plocvd  in  a  small  vIoktI  veisel,  wluoh  i»  sanletiuie^  fused  up  bofon

M()LECUIJi:S AND AT03IS

808

tion  of  definite  chemical  compounds,  shows  that  the  volumes  of  the  react-
ing substances  in  a  gaseous  or  vaporous  state  are  either  equal  or  are  in

Km.  54.  -  H<»fiimnn'-<  nppanitus  for
tletcniiiiiiiiK  vaiK)ur  ilensitie.K.  Tlic
intiTiial  tube,  nlMiiit  ono  metre  lon^;,
which  i*  CiiMhTnU'il  ami  gr:iiliuite«l.
is  filleil  with  uiomiry  and  iuvertdl
ill  a  moroiiry  l>iith.  A  small  IwttJt*
(ili'pictcl  in  Its  natural  size  on  the
h'tt)  containin;;a  weifdie*!  (jUHUtity
of  theliqui»l  wlHiHievapimrtlensity  ig
to  N'lloterminc*!,  is  introducod  iht^)
the  Torricellian  vacuum.  Stejim,
or  the  vaixmr  of  amyl  alcohol,  Ac,
i-*  i»a'*sc«l  throujfli  tlic  outer  tulx?,
an«i  hejits  the  internal  tub«»  to  the
tcnijier.iture  ^at  which  the  vohmM*
of  va|»our  is  uiesisurcl.

e

b

J^\ — AUEtrOS

h'Ui.  55.  Victor  Meyer* i»up|»aratuj«  for
ilctermining  vajwunlensitiej*.  The
tube  b  is  heute<l  in  the  vainmr  of
H  liqui«l  of  constant  lioilinff  point.
A  kI"'^"'  tul)e,  containin^ir  the  liquid
to  be  exp«Timeiit4^i  ujiou.  is  cauMil
to  fall  from  «/.  Tlie  air  (li«])laceil  i«
collectol  in  the  <'ylinder  »•,  in  the
troujfh/.

wei^^hin^,  uiul,  if  <iuite  full  of  tlie  liquid,  breaks  when  lieate<l  in  ii  vacuum)  is  intro-
duced into  a  jjraduated  cylinder  heated  to  /,  or  8inii)ly  into  a  Torricellian  vacuum,  an
shown  ill  fig.  54,  and  the  number  of  volumes  occupied  hy  the  vapour  noted  when  the
space  holdiii*;  it  is  heated  to  the  desired  temiHjrature  /.

llie  turf  hod  of  dinplaccmeui  (r)  proposed  hy  Victor  Meyer  is  based  on  the  fa<*t  that  a
spa<'c  />  is  licated  to  a  ccmstant  tempeniture  t  (by  the  surroundinjj  vajwura  of  a  liquid  of
constant  lM)ilin«;  [loint),  and  the  air  (or  other  gas  enclosed  in  this  s[mce)  is  allowed  t4>
attain  this  t<'nii>erature,  and  when  it  has  done  so  a  gla&s  bulb  containing  a  weighed  quan-

804  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

simple  multiple  proportion.'^ This  forms  the  first  law  of  those  discovered
by  Gay-Lussac, It  may  be  formulated  as  follows  :  I'he  amounts  of  sub-
stances  entering  into  cheinical  rpaction  occupy  imder  similar  physiccU
conditio7iSy  in  a  gaseous or  r>aporous  state j  equcU  or  simple multiple
volumes. This  law  refers  not  only  to  elements,  but  also  to  eompoaiids
entering  into  mutual  chemical  combination  ;  thus,  for  example,  one
volume  of  ammonia  gas  combines  with  one  volume  of  hydrogen  chloride.
For  in  the  formation  of  sal-ammoniac,  NH^Cl,  there  enter  into  reaction
17  parts  by  weight  of  ammonia,  NH3,  which  is  85  times  denser  than
hydrogen,  and  36*5  parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen  chloride,  whose  vapour
density  is  18*25  times  that  of  hydrogen,  as  has  been  proved  by  direct
experiment. By  dividing  the  weights  by  the  respective  densities  we
find  that  the  volume  of  ammonia,  NH3,  is  equal  to  two,  and  so  also  the
volume  of  hydrogen  chloride. Hence  the  volumes  of  the  compounds
which  here  combine  together  are  equal  to  each  other. Taking  into
consideration  that  the  law  of  Gay-Lussac  holds  good,  not  only  for
elements,  but  also  for  compounds,  it  should  be  expresse<l  as  follows  :
jSubstances  interact  with  one  another  in  commensurable  volumes  of  their
vapours.^

tity  of  the  Kubrttance  to  be  experimented  witli  in  dropped  into  the  space. Tlie  subHtance
is  immediately  converted  into  vajionr,  and  displaces  the  air  into  the  graduated  cylinder  e.
The  amount  of  this  air  is  calculated  from  its  volume,  and  hence  the  volume  at  /,  and
therefore  also  the  volume  occupied  by  the  vaiwur,  is  found. Tlie  general  arrangement,
of  the  apparatus  is  given  in  fig.  55.

^  Vapours  and  gases,  as  already  explained  in  the  second  chapter,  are  subject  to  the
same  laws,  which  are,  however,  only  approximate.  It  is  evident  that  for  the  deduction
of  the  laws  which  will  presently  be  enunciated  it  is  only  possible  to  take  into  consideration
a  iierfect  gaseous  state  (far  removed  from  the  liquid  state)  and  chemical  invariability  in
which  the  vapour  density  is  constant — that  is,  the  volume  of  a  given  gas  or  vapour
varies  like  a  volume  of  hydrogen,  air,  or  other  gas,  with  the  pressure  and  temperature.

It  is  necessary  to  make  this  statement  in  order  that  it  may  be  clearly  seen  that  the
laws  of  gaseous  volimies,  which  we  shall  describe  presently,  are  in  the  most  intimate
connection  with  the  laws  of  the  variations  of  volumes  with  pressure  and  temperature.
And  as  these  latter  laws  (Chapter  II.)  are  not  infallible,  but  only  approximately  exact,  the
same,  therefore,  applies  to  the  laws  about  to  be  described.  And  as  it  is  [x>S8ible  to  find
more  exact  laws  (a  second  approximation)  for  the  variation  of  v  with  p  and  t  (for  exaniple,
van  der  Waals'  formula,  Chapter  II.,  Note  33),  so  also  a  more  exact  expression  of  the
relation  between  the  composition  and  the  density  of  vapours  and  gases  is  al.so  possible.
But  to  prevent  any  doubt  arising  at  the  very  beginning  as  to  the  breiwlth  and  general
application  of  the  laws  of  volumes,  it  will  be  sufiicient  to  mention  that  the  density  of
such  gases  as  oxygen,  nitrogen,  and  carbonic  anhydride  is  already  knowai  to  remain
constant  (within  the  limits  of  experimental  error)  between  the  ordinary  temperature
and  a  white  heat ;  whilst,  judging  from  what  is  said  in  my  work  on  the  '  Tensiim  of  Gases '
(vol.  i.  p.  9),  it  may  be  said  that,  as  regards  pressure,  the  relative  density  remains  very
constant,  even  when  the  deviations  from  Mariotte's  law  are  very  considerable.  However,
in  this  respect  the  number  of  data  is  as  yet  too  small  to  arrive  at  an  exact  conclusion.

•*  We  must  recollect  that  this  law  is  only  approximate,  like  Boyle  and  Mariotte's  law,
and  thnt,  therefore,  like  the  latter,  a  more  exact  expression  may  be  found  for  the
•exceptions.

MOLECULES  AND  ATOMS  305

The  law  of  combining  volumes  and  the  law  of  multiple  proportion
were  discovered  independently  of  each  other — the  one  in  France  by
Gay-Lussac,  the  other  in  England  by  Dalton — almost  simultaneously.
In  the  language  of  the  atomic  hypothesis  it  may  be  said  that  atomic
quantities  of  elements  occupy  equal  or  multiple  volumes.

The  first  law  of  Gay-Lussac  expresses  the  relation  between  the
volumes  of  the  component  parts  of  a  compound.  Tjet  us  now  consider
the  relation  existing  between  the  volumes  of  the  component  parts  and
of  the  compounds  which  proceed  from  them.  This  may  sometimes  be
determined  by  direct  observation.  Thus  the  volume  occupied  by  water,
formed  by  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  volume  of  oxygen,  may  be
determined  by  the  aid  of  the  apparatus  shown  in  fig.  56.  The  long
glass  tul)e  is  closed  at  the  top  and  open  at  the  bottom,  which  is
immersed  in  a  cylinder  containing  mercury.  The  closed  end  is
furnished  with  wires  like  a  eudiometer.  The  tube  is  filled  with
mercury,  and  then  a  certain  volume  of  detonating  gas  is  introduced.
This  gas  is  obtained  from  the  decomposition  of  water,  and  therefore  in
every  three  volumes  contains  two  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  one  volume
of  oxygen.  The  tube  is  surrounded  by  a  second  and  wider  glass  tube,
and  the  vapour  of  a  substance  boiling  above  100^ — that  is,  whose  boiling
point  is  higher  than  that  of  water — is  passed  through  the  annular  space
between  them.  Amyl  alcohol,  whose  boiling  point  is  132°,  may  be
taken  for  this  purpose.  The  amyl  alcohol  is  boiled  in  the  vessel  to  the
right  hand  and  its  vapour  passed  between  the  walls  of  the  two  tubes.
In  the  case  of  amyl  alcohol  the  outer  glass  tube  should  be  connected  with
a  condenser  to  prevent  the  escape  into  the  air  of  the  unpleasant  smelling
vapour.  The  detonating  gas  is  thus  heated  up  to  a  temperature  of
132°.  When  its  volume  becomes  constant  it  is  measured,  the  height  of
the  column  of  mercury  in  the  tube  above  the  level  of  the  mercury  in  the
cylinder  being  noted.  Let  this  volume  equal  v  ;  it  will  therefore  con-
tain ^  V  of  oxygen  and  §  v  of  hydrogen.  The  current  of  vapour  is  then
stopped,  and  the  gas  exploded  ;  water  is  formed,  which  condenses  into
a  liquid.  The  volume  occupied  by  the  vapour  of  the  water  formed  has
now  to  bo  determined.  For  this  purpose  the  vapour  of  the  amyl  alcohol
is  again  passed  between  the  tubes,  and  thus  the  whole  of  the  water
formed  is  converted  into  vapour  at  the  same  temperature  as  that  at
which  the  detonating  gas  was  measured  ;  and  the  cylinder  of  mercury
being  raised  until  the  column  of  mercury  in  the  tube  stands  at  the  same
height  above  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in  the  cylinder  as  it  did  before
the  exi)losion,  it  is  found  that  the  volume  of  the  water  formed  is  equal
to  §  V — that  is,  it  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  the  hydrogen  contained

VOL.  I.  X

MOLECI'LES  AND  ATOMS  307

in  it.  Consequently  the  volumetric  composition  of  water  is  expressed
in  the  following  terms  :  Two  volumes  of  hydrogen  combine  with
one  volume  of  oxygen  to  form  two  volumes  of  aqueous  vapour.  For
substances  which  are  gaseous  at  tlie  ordinary  temperature,  this  direct
method  of  observation  is  sometimes  very  easily  conducted  ;  for
instance,  with  ammonia,  nitric  and  nitrous  oxides.  Thus  to  determine
the  composition  by  volume  of  nitrous  oxide,  the  above-described
apparatus  may  be  employed.  Nitrous  oxide  is  introduced  into  the
tube,  and  after  measuring  its  volume  electric  sparks  are  passed
through  the  gas  ;  it  is  then  found  that  two  volumes  of  nitrous  oxide
have  given  three  volumes  of  gases — namely,  two  volumes  of  nitrogen
and  one  volume  of  oxygen.  Consequently  the  composition  of  nitrous
oxide  is  similar  to  that  of  water  ;  two  volumes  of  nitrogen  and  one
volume  of  oxygen  give  two  volumes  of  nitrous  oxide.  By  decomposing
ammonia  it  is  found  to  be  composed  in  such  a  manner  that  two  volumes
give  <me  volume  of  nitrogen  and  three  volumes  of  hydrogen  ;  also  two
volumes  of  nitric  oxide  are  formed  by  the  union  of  one  volume  of  oxygen
with  one  volume  of  nitrogen.  The  same  relations  may  be  proved  by
calculation  from  the  vapour  densities,  as  was  described  a)x)ve.

Comparisons  of  various  results  made  by  the  aid  of  direct  c»bserva-
tions  or  calculation,  an  example  of  which  has  just  been  cited,  led  Gay-
Lussac  to  the  conclusion  that  the  robihi*i  of  a  compound  in  a  t/aseons  or
vaporous  state  is  always  in  simple  muUiple  proportion  to  the  vohnne
4tf  each  of  the  component  parts  of  nhich  it  is  formed  (and  consequently
to  the  sum  of  the  volumes  of  the  elements  of  which  it  is  formed).  This
is  the  second  law  of  (Jay-Lnssac  ;  it  extends  the  simplicity  of  the
volumetric  relations  to  compounds,  and  is  of  the  same  nature  as
that  presented  by  the  elements  entering  into  mutual  combination.
Hence  not  only  the  substances  forming  a  given  compound,  but  also
the  substances  forme<l,  exhibit  a  simple  relation  of  volume  when
measured  as  vapour  or  gas.^

When  a  compound  is  formed  from  two  or  mure  components,  there
may  or  may  not  be  a  contraction  ;  the  volume  of  the  reacting  substances
is  in  this  case  either  equal  to  or  greater  than  the  volume  of  the  resultant

^  This  second  law  of  voluinos  may  Ix*  considered  as  a  coiiKCMjuence  of  the  first  hiw.
The  firht  law  nM|uires  simple  ratios  betweeii  the  volumes  of  the  combining  sabstanceH  A
and  B.  A  substance  AJi  is  produced  by  their  combination.  It  may,  according  to  tlie
law  of  multiple  projwrtion,  combine,  not  only  with  substances  C,  1),  iVc,  but  als<^  with  --l
and  with  B.  In  this  new  combination  the  volunie  of  AB,  combining  with  tlie  volume  of
Ay  should  Iw  in  simple  multiple  proportion  with  the  volume  of  .1 ;  henct?  the  volume  of
the  compound  .17^  is  in  simple  pniix)rti«m  to  the  volume  of  its  component  part«i.  There-
fore (mly  one  law  of  volumes  need  l>e  accepte<l.  We  shall  afterwards  see  that  there  is  a
third  law  of  volumes  embracing  also  the  two  first  laws.

x2

808  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

compound.  The  reverse  is  naturally  observed  in  the  case  of  decom-
positions, when  from  one  substance  there  are  produced  several  of
simpler  nature.  Therefore  in  the  future  we  shall  term  coinbination
a  reaction  in  which  a  contraction  is  observed — that  is,  a  diminution  in
the  volume  of  the  component  bodies  in  a  state  of  vapour  or  gas  ;  and
we  shall  term  decomposition  a  reaction  in  which  an  expansion  is  pro-
duced ;  while  those  reactions  in  which  the  volumes  in  a  gaseous  or
vaporous  state  remain  constant  (the  volumes  being  naturally  com-
pared at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure)  we  shall  term  reactions
of  substitution  or  of  double  decomposition.  Thus  the  transition  of
oxygen  into  ozone  is  a  reaction  of  combination,  the  formation  of  nitrous
oxide  from  oxygen  and  nitrogen  will  also  be  a  combination,  the
formation  of  nitric  oxide  from  the  same  will  be  a  reaction  of  sub-
stitution, the  action  of  oxygen  on  nitric  oxide  a  combination,  and
so  on.

The  degree  of  contraction  produced  in  the  formation  of  chemical
compounds  not  unfrequently  leads  to  the  possibility  of  distinguishing
the  degree  of  change  which  takes  place  in  the  chemical  character  of
the  components  when  combined.  In  those  cases  in  which  a  contrac-
tion occurs,  the  properties  of  the  resultant  compound  are  very  dif-
ferent from  the  properties  of  the  substances  of  which  it  is  composed.
Thus  ammonia  bears  no  resemblance  in  its  physical  or  chemical  pro-
perties to  the  elements  from  which  it  is  derived ;  a  contraction  takes
place  in  a  state  of  vapour,  indicating  a  proximation  of  the  elennjjits  —
the  distance  between  the  atoms  is  diminished,  and  from  gaseous  sub-
stances there  is  formed  a  liquid  substance,  or  at  any  rate  one  which  is
easily  liquefied.  For  this  reason  nitrous  oxide  formed  by  the  conden-
sation of  two  permanent  gases  is  a  substance  which  is  somewhat  easily
converted  into  a  liquid  ',  again,  nitric  acid,  which  is  formed  from
elements  which  are  permanent  gases,  is  a  liquid,  whilst,  on  the  contrary,
nitric  oxide,  which  is  formed  without  contraction  and  is  decomposed
without  expansion,  remains  a  gas  which  is  as  difficult  to  liquefy  as
nitrogen  and  oxygen.  In  order  to  obt'iin  a  still  more  complete  idea  of
the  dependence  of  the  properties  of  a  compound  on  the  properties  of
the  component  substances,  it  is  further  necessary  to  know  the  quantity
of  heat  which  is  developed  in  the  formation  of  the  compound.  If  this
quantity  be  large— as,  for  example,  in  the  formation  of  water— then
the  amount  of  energy  in  the  resultant  compound  will  W  considerably
less  than  the  energy  of  the  elements  entering  into  its  composition  ;
whilst,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  amount  of  heat  evolved  in  the  formation
of  a  compound  be  small,  or  if  there  even  be  an  absorption  of  heat,  as
in  the  formation  of  nitrous  oxide,  then  the  energy  of  the  elements  is

MOLECULES  AND  ATOMS  309

not  destroyed,  or  is  only  altered  to  a  slight  extent  ;  hence,  notwith-
standing the  contraction  (compression)  involved  in  its  formation,
nitrous  oxide  supports  combustion.

The  preceding  laws  were  deduced  from  purely  experimental  and
empirical  data  and  as  such  evoke  further  consequences,  as  the  law  of
multiple  proportions  gave  rise  to  the  atomic  theory  and  the  law  of
equivalents  (Cliapter  IV.)  In  view  of  the  atomic  conception  of  the
constitution  of  substances,  the  question  naturally  arises  as  to  what,
then,  are  the  relative  volumes  proper  to  those  physically  indivisible
molecules  which  chemically  react  on  each  other  and  consist  of  the
atoms  of  elements.  The  simplest  possible  hypothesis  in  this  respect
would  be  that  the  volumes  of  the  molecules  of  substances  are  equal ;  or,
what  is  the  same  thing,  to  suppose  that  equal  volumes  of  vapours  and
gases  contain  an  equal  number  of  molecules.  This  proposition  was
first  enunciated  by  the  Italian  savant  Avogadro  in  1810.  It  was
also  admitted  by  the  French  physico- mathematician  Ampere  (1815)
for  the  sake  of  simplifying  all  kinds  of  physico-mathematical  concep-
tions respecting  gases.  But  Avogadro  and  Ampere *s  propositions  were
not  generally  received  in  science  until  Gerhardt  in  the  forties  had
applied  tiiem  to  the  generalisation  of  chemical  reactions,  and  had
< lemon strated,  by  aid  of  a  series  of  phenomena,  that  the  reactions  of
substances  actually  take  place  with  the  greatest  simplicity,  and  more
especially  that  such  reactions  take  place  between  those  quantities  of
substances  which  occupy  equal  volumes,  and  until  he  had  stated  the
hypothesis  in  an  exact  manner  and  deduced  the  consequences  that
necessarily  follow  from  it.  Following  Gerhardt,  Clausius,  in  the  fifti^,
placed  this  hypothesis  of  the  ecjuality  of  the  number  of  molecules  in
equal  volumes  of  gases  and  vapours  on  the  basis  of  the  kinetic  theory
of  gjises.  At  the  present  day  the  hypothesis  of  Avogadix)  and  Gerhardt
lies  at  the  basis  of  contemporary  physical,  mechanical,  and  chemical
conceptions  ;  the  consequences  arising  from  it  have  often  l)een  subject
to  doubt,  but  in  the  end  have  been  verifie<i  by  the  most  diverse  methods  ;
and  now,  when  all  efforts  to  refute  those  consequences  have  proved
fruitless,  the  hypothesis  must  be  considered  as  veriiied,^  and  the  law  of
Avogadro-Gerhardt  must  be  spoken  of  as  fundamental,  and  as  of  great
importance  for  the  comprehension  of  the  phenomena  of  nature. The

''  It  must  not  be  forj,'otteu  that  Newton's  law  of  ^avity  was  first  ii  hypothesis,  but  it
became  a  trustworthy,  perfect  tlieorj-,  and  ac(|uired  the  qualities  of  a  fundamental  law
owing  to  the  concord  between  its  deductions  and  actual  facts.  All  laws,  all  theories,  of
natural  phenomena,  are  at  first  hypotheses.  Some  are  rapidly  established  by  their  conse-
<|uences  exactly  agreeing  with  facts ;  others  only  take  r<K)t  by  slow  degrees  ;  and  there
are  many  which  are  destined  to  be  refuted  owing  to  their  consequences  being  found  t'->
be  at  variance  with  facts.

810  PKINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

law  may  now  be  formulated  from  two  points  of  view.  In  the  tirst  place^
from  a  physical  aspect  :  equal  vohimes  of  gases  (or  vapours)  at  equal  tem-
peratures and  pressures  contain  the  same  number  of  mofecules— or  of
particles  of  matter  which  are  neither  mechanically  nor  physically
divisible — previous  to  chemical  change.  In  the  second  place,  from  a
chemical  aspect,  the  same  law  may  be  expressed  thus  :  the  quantitus  of
substances  entetlyig  into  cliemical  reactions  occupy^  in  a  state  of  vapoitr^
equal  volumes.  For  our  purpose  the  chemical  aspect  is  the  most  im-
portant, and  therefore,  before  developing  the  law  and  its  consequences,
we  will  consider  the  chemical  phenomena  from  which  the  law  is  deduced
or  which  it  serves  to  explain.

When  two  isolated  substances  interact  with  each  other  dii*ectly  and
easily — as,  for  instance,  an  alkali  and  an  acid — then  it  is  found  that  the
reaction  is  accomplished  between  quantities  which  in  a  gaseous  state
occupy  equal  volumes.  Thus  ammonia,  NH3,  reacts  directly  with
hydrochloric  acid,  HCl,  forming  sal-ammoniac,  NH4CI,  and  in  this
case  the  17  parts  by  weight  of  ammonia  occupy  the  same  volume
as  the  36-5  parts  by  weight  of  hydrochloric  acid.^  Ethylene,
C2H4,  combines  with  chlorine,  Clj,  in  only  one  proportion,  forming
ethylene  dichloride,  CjH^Cl.j,  and  this  combination  proceeds  directly
and  with  great  facility,  the  re^icting  quantities  occupying  equal
volumes.  Chlorine  reacts  with  hydrogen  in  only  one  proportion^
forming  hydrochloric  acid,  HCl,  and  in  this  case  equal  volumes  in-
teract with  each  other.  If  an  equality  of  volumes  is  observed  in  cases
of  combination,  it  should  be  even  more  frecjuently  encountered  in
cases  of  decom posit i(m,  taking  place  in  substances  which  split  up  into
two  others.  Indeed,  acetic  iicid  breaks  up  into  mai*sh  gas,  CH„  and
carbonic  anhydride,  CO.j,  and  in  the  proportions  in  which  they  are
formed  from  acetic  acid  they  occupy  equal  volumes.  Also  front
phthalic  acid,  Cj^H^O^,  there  may  be  obtained  benzoic  acid,  C^H^O^.
and  carbonic  anhydride,  CO2,  and  as  all  the  elements  of  phthalic  acid
enter  into  the  composition  of  these  substances,  it  follows  that,  although

'  This  is  not  only  soen  from  the  alx>vo  calculations,  but  may  1)6  proved  by  experiment.

A  glass  tube,  divided  in  the  middle  by  a  stopcock,  is  taken  and  one  [wrtion  filled  with

dry  hydrogen  chloride  (the  di*yne8s  of  the  gases  is  verj'  necessan.',  because  ammonia

and  hydrogen  chloride  are  both  very  soluble  in  water,  so  that  a  small  trace  of  water

may  contain  a  large  amount  of  these  gases  in  solution)  and  the  other  with  dry  ammonia^

*»der  the  atmospheric  pressure. One  orifice  (for  instance,  of  that  portion  which  ei^ntains

'  ammonia)  is  firndy  closed,  and  the  other  is  immersed  under  mercury,  and  the  cock  is

n  opened. Solid  sal-amnjoniac  is  formed,  but  if  the  volume  of  one  gas  be  greater

n  that  of  the  other,  some  of  the  first  gas  will  renuiin. By  immersing  the  tube  in  the

■CHry  in  order  that  the  internal  pn*ssure  shall  equal  the  atmospheric  pressure,  it  may

ly  be  shown  that  the  volume  of  the  remaining  gas  is  e<iual  to  the  difference  between

W>lume8  of  the  two  portions  of the  tube,  and  that  this  remaining  gas  is  part  of

who..e  irolome  was  the  greater.

MOLECULES  AND  ATOMS  811

they  cannot  re-form  it  by  their  direct  action  on  each  other  (the  reaction
is  not  reversible),  still  they  form  the  direct  products  of  its  decomposition,
and  they  occupy  equal  volumes.  But  benzoic  acid,  CyH^jOj,  is  itself
composed  of  benzene,  C,jHf„  and  carbonic  anhydride,  COj,  whicli  also
occupy  equal  volumes/  There  is  an  immense  number  of  similar
examples  among  those  organic  substances  to  whose  study  Gerhardt
consecrated  his  whole  life  and  work,  and  he  did  not  allow  such  facts  as
these  to  escape  his  attention.  Still  more  frequently  in  the  phenomena
of  substitution,  when  two  substances  react  on  one  another,  and  two  are
produced  without  a  change  of  volume,  it  is  found  that  the  two  sub-
stances acting  on  each  other  occupy  equal  volumes  as  well  as  each  of
the  two  resultant  substances.  Thus,  in  general,  reactions  of  substi-
tution take  place  between  volatile  acids,  HX,  and  volatile  alcohols,
R(OH),  with  the  formation  of  ethereal  salts,  RX,  and  water,  H(OH),
and  the  volume  of  the  vapour  of  the  reacting  quantities,  HX,  R(OH),
and  RX,  is  the  same  ajv  that  of  water  H(OH),  whose  weight,  corre-
sponding with  the  formula,  18,  occupies  2  volumes,  if  1  part  by  weight
of  hydrogen  occupy  1  volume  and  the  density  of  aqueous  vapour
referred  to  hydrogen  is  9.  Such  general  examples,  of  which  there  are
many,^  show  that  the  reaction  of  equal  voluaies  forms  a  chemical
phenomenon  of  frequent  occurrence,  indicating  the  necessity  for
acknowledging  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt.

But  the  question  arises.  What  is  the  relation  of  volumes  if  the
reaction  of  two  substances  takes  place  in  more  than  one  proportion,  accord-
ing to  the  law  of  multiple  proportions  1  A  definite  answer  can  only  be
given  in  cases  which  have  been  very  thoroughly  studied.  Thus  chlorine,
in  acting  on  marsh  gas,  CH4,  forms  four  compounds,  CH3CI,  CH2CI.2,
CHCI3,  and  CCI4,  and  it  may  be  established  by  direct  experiment  that
the  substance  CH3CI  (methyl ic  chloride)  precedes  the  remaindei-,  and
that  the  latter  proceed  from  it  by  the  further  action  of  chlorine.  And
this  substance,  CH3CI,  is  formed  by  the  reaction  of  equal  volumes  of

*  Tjet  Us*  demonstrate  this  by  figures.  From  122  grauia  of  benzoic  acid  there  are
obtained  (a)  78  ^rams  of  benzene,  whose  density  referred  to  hydrogen  =  39,  hence  the
relative  volume  -  2 ;  and  ib)  44  grams  of  carbonic  anhydride,  whose  denuity  -  22,  and
hence  the  volume  =  2. It  is  the  same  in  otlier  cases.

^  A  large  number  of  such  generalised  reactions,  showing  reaction  by  equal
volumes,  occur  in  the  case  of  the  hydrocarbon  derivatives,  because  many  of  these  com-
pounds are  volatile.  The  reactions  of  alkalis  on  acids,  or  anhydrides  on  water,  &o.,
which  are  so  frequent  between  mineral  substances,  present  but  few  such  examples,
bei-ause  many  of  these  substances  are  not  volatile  and  their  vapour  densities  are
unknown.  But  essentially  the  same  is  seen  in  these  cases  also ;  for  instance,  sulphuric
acid,  H.^SOj,  breaks  up  into  the  anhydride,  SO3,  and  water,  H.^O,  which  exhibit  an  equality
i)f  volumes.  Let  us  take  another  example  where  three  substances  combine  in  equal
volumes :  carbonic  anhydride,  CO.,,,  ammonia,  NH-,  and  water,  H.jO  (the  volumes  of  all  are
equal  to  2),  form  acid  ammonium  carbonate,  (XH4)H('0-,.

812  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

marsh  gas,  CH^,  and  chlorine,  Clo,  according  to  the  equation  CH4  +  CI2
=  CH3CI  4-  HCl.  A  great  number  of  similar  cases  are  met  with
amongst  organic — that  is,  carbon — compounds.  Gerhard t  was  led  to
the  discovery  of  his  law  by  investigating  many  such  reactions,  and
by  observing  that  in  them  the  reaction  of  equal  volumes  precedes
all  others.

But  if  nitrogen  or  hydrogen  give  several  compounds  with  oxygen,
the  question  proposed  above  cannot  be  answered  with  complete  clear-
ness, because  the  successive  formations  of  the  different  combinations
cannot  be  so  strictly  defined.  It  may  be  supposed,  but  neither
definitely  afiirmed  nor  experimentally  confirmed,  that  nitrogen  and
oxygen  first  give  nitric  oxide,  NO,  and  only  subsequently  the  brown
vapours  N2O3  and  NOj.  Such  a  sequence  in  the  combination  of  nitro-
gen with  oxygen  can  only  be  supposed  on  the  basis  of  the  fact  that  NO
forms  N2O3  and  NO2  directly  with  oxygen.  If  it  be  admitted  that  NO
(and  not  NjO  or  NOj)  be  first  formed,  thei^  this  instance  would  also
confirm  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt,  because  nitric  oxide  contains
equal  volumes  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen.  80,  also,  it  may  be  admitted
that,  in  the  combination  of  hydrogen  with  oxygen,  hydrogen  peroxide
is  first  formed  (equal  volumes  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen),  whicli  is  de-
composed by  the  heat  evolved  into  water  and  oxygen.  This  explains
the  presence  of  traces  of  hydrogen  peroxide  (Chapter  IV.)  in  almost
all  cases  of  the  combustion  or  oxidation  of  hydrogenous  substances  ;  for
it  cannot  be  supposed  that  water  is  first  formed  and  then  the  per-
oxide of  hydrogen,  because  up  to  now  sucli  a  reaction  has  not  been
observed,  whilst  the  formation  of  H2O  from  H.^O.j  is  very  easily  re-
produced.*"

Thus  a  whole  series  of  phenomena  show  that  the  chemical  reaction
of  substances  actually  takes  place,  as  a  rule,  between  equal  volumes,
but  this  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  of  the  frequent  reaction  of  un-

'"  This  opinion  which  I  have  always  held  (Kinee  the  first  ftlilionH  of  tluH  work ),  as  to  the
primary  origin  of  hydropen  peroxide  and  of  the  formation  of  water  by  meanK  of  its
decon4>OKition,  has  in  latter  duyH  l>ecome  more  generally  aiccepted,  thainks  more  especially
to  the  work  of  Traul)e.  Probably  it  explains  most  simply  the  necessity  for  the  presence
of  traces  of  water  in  many  reiU'tions,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  explosion  of  carbonic  oxide
with  oxygen,  and  perhaps  the  theory  of  the  explosion  of  detonating  gas  itself  and  of  the
combustion  of  hydrogen  will  gain  in  clearness  and  tnith  if  we  take  into  consideration  the
preliminary  formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide  and  its  doconj  posit  ion.  We  may  here  pi>int
out  the  fact  that  Ettingen  <at  Dorpat,  IHhh\  observed  the  existence  of  currents  and
waves  in  the  exi)losion  of  detonating  gas  by  taking  photographs,  which  showed  the
periods  of  combustion  and  th<»  waves  of  explosion,  which  should  be  taken  into  c<»n-
sideration  in  the  tlH*(»ry  of  this  subject.  As  the  formation  of  H..0._.  from  O.;  and  H.,.
Cijrresponds  with  a  less  anjount  of  heat  than  the  formaticm  of  water  from  H.,.  and  O,  it
may  bi?  that  the  temperature  of  the  flame  of  detonating  gas  deiKMidson  the  pre-formation
of  hydrogen  jHjroxide.

MOLECULES  AND  ATOMS  313

equal  volumes,  although,  in  this  case,  it  is  often  possible  to  discover  a
pi-eceding  reaction  between  equal  volumes.^*

The  law  of  A vogadro- Gerhard t  may  also  be  easily  expressed  in  an
algebraical  form.  If  the  weight  of  a  molecule,  or  of  that  quantity  of  a
substance  which  enters  into  chemical  reaction  and  occupies  in  a  state

'  *  The  poBsibilitj  of  reactions  between  unequal  volumes,  notwithstanding  the  general
application  of  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt,  may,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  said
abo  ce,  depend  on  the  fact  that  the  participating  substances,  at  the  moment  of  reaction,
undergo  a  preliminary  modification,  decomposition,  isomeric  (polymeric)  transformation,
&c.  Thus,  if  N0.2  seems  to  proceed  from  N0O4,  if  0^  is  formed  from  O3,  and  the  converse,
then  it  cannot  be  denied  that  tlie  production  of  molecules  containing  only  one  atom  is
also  possible — for  instance,  of  oxygen — as  also  of  higher  polymeric  forms — as  the
molecule  N  from  N.2,  or  H-,  from  Hj.  In  this  manner  it  is  obviously  possible,  by  means
of  a  series  of  hypotheses,  to  explain  the  cases  of  the  formation  of  ammonia,  NH5,  from
3  vols,  of  hydrogen  and  1  vol.  of  nitrogen.  But  it  must  be  observed  that  perhaps  our
information  in  similar  instances  is,  as  yet,  far  from  being  complete.  If  hydrazine
or  diamide  N2H4  (Chapter  VI.  Note  20  '»'")  is  formed  and  the  imide  NoH.j  in  which  2  vols,
of  hydrogen  are  combined  with  2  vols,  of  nitrogen,  then  the  reaction  here  perhai)8  first
takes  place  between  equal  volumes.  If  it  be  shown  that  diamide  gives  nitrogen  and
ammonia  (SN.^H^  — N.2  +  4NH5)  under  the  action  of  sparks,  heat,  or  the  silent  discharge,
d'c,  then  it  will  be  possible  to  admit  that  it  is  formed  before  ammonia.  And  perhaps
the  still  less  stable  imide  N.^H^,  which  may  also  decompose  with  the  formation  of
ammonia,  is  produced  before  the  amide  N.JH4.

I  mention  this  to  show  that  the  fact  of  apparent  exceptions  existing  to  tlie  law  of
reactions  between  equal  volumes  does  not  prove  the  impossibility  of  their  being  included
under  the  law  on  further  study  of  the  subject.  Having  put  forward  a  certain  law  or  hypo-
thesis, consequences  must  be  deduced  from  it,  and  if  by  their  means  clearness  and  con-
sistency are  attained — and  especially,  if  by  their  means  that  which  could  not  otherwise  be
known  can  be  predicted — then  the  consequences  verify  the  hypothesis.  This  was  the  case
with  the  law  now  under  discussion.  The  mere  simplicity  of  the  deduction  of  the  weights
proper  to  the  atoms  of  the  elements,  or  the  mere  fact  that  having  admitted  the  law  it
follows  (as  will  afterwards  be  shown)  that  the  vis  viva  of  the  molecules  of  all  gases  is
a  constant  quantity,  is  quite  sufficient  reason  for  retaining  the  hypothesis,  if  not  for
believing  in  it  as  a  fact  beyond  doubt.  And  such  is  the  whole  doctrine  of  atoms.  And
since  by  the  acceptance  of  the  law  it  became  possible  to  foretell  even  the  properties  and
atomic  weights  of  elements  which  haA  not  yet  been  discovered,  and  these  predictions
afterwards  proved  to  be  in  agreement  with  the  actual  facts,  it  is  evident  that  the  law  of
Avogadro-Gerhardt  penetrates  deeply  into  the  nature  of  the  chemical  relation  of  sub-
stances. This  being  granted,  it  is  possible  at  tlie  present  time  to  exhibit  and  deduce  the
truth  under  consideration  in  many  ways,  and  in  every  case,  like  all  that  is  highest  in
science  (for  example,  the  laws  of  the  indestructibility  of  matter,  of  the  conservation  of
enerpy,  of  gravity,  cVc),  it  proves  to  be  not  an  empirical  conclusion  from  direct  observation
and  experiment,  not  a  direct  result  of  analysis,  but  a  creation,  or  instinctive  ^)enetration,
of  the  in<iuiring  mind,  guided  and  directed  by  experiment  and  observation — a  synthesis
of  which  the  exact  sciences  are  capable  equally  with  the  highest  forms  of  art.  Without
such  a  synthetical  process  of  reasoning,  science  would  only  be  a  mass  of  disconnected
results  of  arduous  lal>our,  and  would  not  be  distinguished  by  that  vitality  with  which
it  is  really  endowed  when  once  it  succeeds  in  attaining  a  synthesis,  or  concordance  of
outward  form  with  the  inner  natunt  of  things,  without  losing  sight  of  the  diversities
of  individual  parts  ;  in  short,  when  it  discovers  by  means  of  outward  phenomena,  which
are  tippureut  to  the  sense  of  touch,  to  observation,  and  to  the  common  mind,  the  internal
sign ificat ion  of  things -discovering  simplicity  in  complexity  and  uniformity  in  diversity.
And  this  is  the  highest  problem  of  science.

314  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTKV

of  vapour,  accoixling  to  the  law,  a  volume  equal  to  that  occupied  by  the

molecules  of  other  bodies,  be  indicated  by  the  letters  M , ,  Mg

or,  in  general,  M,  and  if  the  letters  D,,  D.^,  or,  in  general,  D,

stand  for  the  density  or  weight  of  a  given  volume  of  the  gases  or
vapours  of  the  corresponding  substances  under  certain  definite  con-
ditions of  temperature  and  pressure,  then  the  law  requires  that

b,  ■"  D2 ""D""

where  C  is  a  certain  constant. This  expression  shows  directly  that  the

volumes  corresponding  with  the  weights  M,,  M2 M,  are  equal

to  a  certain  constant,  because  the  volume  is  proportional  to  the  weight
and  inversely  proportional  to  the  density.  The  magnitude  of  C  is
naturally  conditioned  by  and  dependent  on  the  units  taken  for  the
expression  of  the  weights  of  the  molecules  and  the  densities.  The
weight  of  a  molecule  (equal  to  the  sum  of  th(3  atomic  weights  of
the  elements  forming  it)  is  usually  expressed  by  taking  the  weight
of  an  atom  of  hydrogen  as  unity,  and  hydrogen  is  now  also  chasen
as  the  unit  for  the  expression  of  the  densities  of  gases  and  vapours  ;
it  is  therefore  only  necessary  to  find  the  magnitude  of  the  constant
for  any  one  compound,  as  it  will  be  the  Siime  for  all  others.  Let  us
take  water.  Its  reacting  mass  is  expressed  (conditionally  and
relatively)  by  the  formula  or  molecule  H^O,  for  which  M=18,  if  H^l,
as  we  already  know  from  the  composition  of  water.  Its  vapour
density,  or  D,  compared  to  hydrogen  =  9,  and  consequently  for  water
C  =  2,  and  therefore  and  in  general  for  the  molecules  of  all  substances

I)"'

Consequently  the  weight  of  a  molecule  is  equal  to  twice  its  vapour
density  expressed  in  relation  to  hydrogen,  and  conveisely  the  density  0/
a  gas  is  equal  to  half  the  molecular  treiyht  referred  to  hydrotjen.

The  truth  of  this  may  be  seen  from  a  very  large  number  of
observed  vapour  densities  by  comparing  them  with  the  results  obtained
by  calculation.  As  an  illustration,  we  may  point  out  that  for  amniQnia,
NH3,  the  weight  of  the  molecule  or  quantity  of  the  reacting  sub-
stance, as  well  as  the  composition  and  weight  corresponding  with  the
formula,  is  expressed  by  the  figures  14  +  3  =  17.  Consequently  M  =  1 7.
Hence,  according  to  the  law,  D  =  8*5.  And  this  result  is  also  obtained
by  experiment.  The  density,  according  to  both  formula  and  experiment,
of  nitn»us  oxide,  Nj^'  i**  -->  ^^  nitric  acid  15,  and  of  nitric  peroxide  2.*^.
In  the  case  of  nitrous  anhydride,  N2O3,  as  a  substance  which  dissociates
*uto  NO  +  NO2,  the  density  should  vary  between  .*^S  (so  long  as  the

MOLECULES AND  ATOMS  315

N.^03  rem.ains  unchanged)  and  19  (when  NO  4-  NO2  is  obtained).
There  are  no  figures  of  constant  density  for  H^O.^,  NHO3,  ^2^4*  ^^^
many  similar  compounds  which  are  either  wholly  or  partially  decom-
posed in  passing  into  vapour.  Salts  and  similar  substances  either  have
no  vapour  density  because  they  do  not  pass  into  vapour  (for  instance,
potassium  nitrate,  KNO3)  without  decomposition,  or,  if  they  pass
into  vapour  without  decomposing,  their  vapour  density  is  obser%*ed
with  difficulty  only  at  very  high  temperatures.  The  practical  de-
termination of  the  vapour  density  at  these  high  temperatures  (for
example,  for  sodium  chloride,  ferrous  chloride,  stannous  chloride,  ckc.)
requires  special  methods  which  have  been  worked  out  by  Sainte-Claire
Deville,  Crafts,  Nilson  and  Pettersson,  Meyer,  Scott,  and  others.
Having  overcome  the  difficulties  of  experiment,  it  is  found  that  the
law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt  holds  good  for  such  salts  as  potassium
iodide,  beryllium  chloride,  aluminium  chloride,  ferrous  chloride,  &c. —
that  is,  the  density  obtained  by  experiment  proves  to  be  equal  to  half
the  molecular  weight — naturally  within  the  limits  of  experimental
error  or  of  possible  deviation  from  the  law.

Gerhardt  deduced  his  law  from  a  great  number  of  examples  of
volatile  carbon  compounds.  We  shall  become  acquainted  with  certain  of
them  in  the  following  chaptei-s  ;  their  entire  study,  from  the  complexity
of  the  subject,  and  from  long-established  custom,  forms  the  subject
of  a  special  branch  of  chemistry  termed  *  organic  '  chemistry.  With  all
these  substances  the  observed  and  calculated  densities  are  very  similar.

When  the  consequences  of  a  law  are  verified  by  a  great  number  of
observations,  it  should  be  considered  as  confirmed  by  experiment.  But
this  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  npjxirent  deviations. They  may

w

evidently  be  of  two  kinds  :  the  fraction may  be  found  to  be  either

greater  or  less  than  2 — that  is,  the  calculated  density  may  be  either

greater  or  less  than  the  obsei-ved  density. When  the  difference  between

the  results  of  experiment  and  calculation  falls  within  the  possible  errors

of  experiment  (for  example,  equal  to  hundredths  of  the  density),  or

within  a  possible  error  owing  to  the laws  of  gases  having  an  only

approximate  application  (as  is  seen  from  the  deviations,  for  instance,

M
from  the  law  of  Boyle  and  Mariotte),  then  the  fraction  - proves  but

slightly  different  from  2  (between  1*9  and  2*2),  and  such  cases
as  these  may  be  classed  among  those  which  ought  to  be  expected
from  the  nature  of  the  subject. It  is  a  different  matter  if  the  quotient

M

of be  several  times,  and  in  general  a  multiple,  greater  or  less  than  2.

816  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  application of  the  law  must  then  be explained  or  it  must  be
laid  aside,  because  the  laws  of  nature  admit  of  no  exceptions. We  will

M

therefore  take  two  such  cases,  and  first  one  in  which  the  quotient -

is  greater  than  2,  or  ttie  density  obtained  by  experiment  is  less  than  is

in  accordance  with  tlie  law.

It  must  be  admitted,  as  a  consequence  of  the  law  of  Avogadro-

Gerhardt,  that  there  is  a  decomposition  in  those  cases  where  the  volume

of  the vapour corresponding  with the  weight  of  the  amount  of  a

substance  entering  into  reaction  is  greater  than  the  volume  of  two

parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen. Suppose  the  density  of  the  vapour  of

water  to  be  determined  at  a  temperature  above  that  at  which  it  is

decomposed,  then,  if  not  all,  at  any  rate  a  large  proportion  of  the  water

will  be  decomposed  into  hydrogen  and  oxygen. The  density  of  such  a

mixture  of  gases,  or  of  detonating  gas,  will  be  less  than  that  of  aqueous

vapour  ; it will  be  equal  to  6  (compared  with  hydrogen),  because

1 volume of  oxygen weighs 16,  and 2 volumes of  hydrogen 2  ;

and, consequently, 3 volumes  of  detonating  gas weigh 18  and  1

volume  6,  while  the  density  of  aqueous  vapour  =  9. Hence,  if  the

density  of  aqueous  vapour  be  determined  after  its  decomposition,  the

M
quotient  _ would  be  found  to  be  3  and  not  2. This  phenomenon

might  be  considered  as  a  deviation  from  Gerhardt^s  law,  but  this  would
not  be  correct,  because  it  may  be  shown  by  means  of  diffusion  through
porous  substances,  as  described  in  Chapter  II.,  that  water  is  decomposed
at  such  high  temperatures.  In  the  case  of  water  itself  there  can
naturally  be  no  doubt,  because  its  vapour  density  agrees  with  the  law
at  all  temperatures  at  which  it  has  l>een  determined.*'^  But  there  are
many  substances  which  decompose  with  great  ease  directly  they  are
volatilised,  and  therefore  only  exist  as  solids  or  liquids,  and  not  in  a  state
of  vapour.  There  are,  for  example,  many  salts  of  this  kind,  besides  all
definite  solutions  having  a  constant  boiling  point,  all  the  compoiHids  of
ammonia— for  example,  all  ammonium  salts  kc.  Their  vapour
densities,  determined  by  Bineau,  Deville,  and  others,  show  that  they
do  not  agree  with  Gerhardt^s  law. Thus  the  vapour  density  of  sal-

'*  As  tlie  tlensity  of  aciiit^oiis  vapour  remains  constant  within  th«>  limits  of  oxj-KTi-
mental  accuracy,  even  at  1,(MM)  ,  when  <lissociation  has  certainly  commenced,  it  would
appear  that  only  a  very  small  amoinit  of  water  is  decomposed  at  these  temi>eratun»s-.
If  even  10  p.c.  of  water  were  <lecompos«»d.  the  density  would  be  8'57  and  the  quotient
M'D  -  2'1,  hut  at  tlie  \\\^\\  temi)eratures  here  concerned  the  error  of  experiment  is  not
great<'r  than  the  difference  h<?tween  this  (juantity  and  2.  And  prohaihly  at  LOOO""  the
di8W>ciati<»n  is  far  from  hein^  ecjual  to  10 p.c.  Hence  the  cariation  in  the  vapour  density
of  water  does  not  give  us  the  means  of  asecrtaining  the  amount  of  its  dissociation.

MOLECUL.VK  AND  ATOMS  317

nmnioniac,  NH4CI,  is  nearly  14  (compared  with  hydrogen),  whilst
its  molecular  weight  is  not  less  than  53*5,  whence  the  vapour
density  should  be  nearly  27,  according  to  the  law.  The  molecule
of  sal-ammoniac  cannot  be  less  than  NH4CI,  because  it  is  formed
from  the  molecules  NH3  and  HCl,  and  contains  single  atoms  of  nitro-
gen and  chlorine,  and  therefore  cannot  be  divided  ;  it  further  never
enters  into  reactions  with  the  molecules  of  other  substances  (for  instance,
potassium  hydroxide,  or  nitric  acid)  in  quantities  of  less  than  53*5
parts  by  weight,  &c. The  calculated  density  (about  27)  is  here  double

M

the  observed  density  (about  13*4)  ;  hence =4  and  not  2. For  this

reason  the  vapour  density  of  sal-ammoniac  for  a  long  time  served  as
an  argument  for  doubting  the  truth  of  the  law.  But  it  proved  other-
wise, after  the  matter  htid  been  fully  investigated.  The  low  density
depends  on  the  decomposition  of  sal-ammoniac,  on  volatilising,  into
ammonia  and  hydrogen  chloride.  The  observed  density  is  not  that  of
sal-ammoniac,  but  of  a  mixture  of  NH3  and  HCl,  which  should  be
nearly  14,  because  the  density  of  NH3=8*5  and  of  HC1=18*2,  and
therefore  the  density  of  their  mixture  (in  equal  volumes)  should  be  about
13*4.*'  The  actual  decomposition  of  the  vapours  of  sal-ammoniac  was
demonstrated  by  Pebal  and  Than  by  the  same  method  as  the  decom  •
position  of  water,  by  passing  the  vapour  of  sal-ammoniac  through  a
porous  substance.  The  experiment  demonstrating  the  decomposition
during  volatilisation  of  sal-ammoniac  may  be  made  very  easily,  and  is
a  very  instructive  point  in  the  history  of  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt>
because  without  its  aid  it  would  never  have  been  imagined  that  sal-
ammoniac  decomposed  in  volatilising,  as  this  decomposition  bears  all
the  signs  of  simple  sublimation  ;  consequently  the  knowledge  of  the
decomposition  itself  was  forestalled  by  the  law.  The  whole  aim
and  practical  use  of  the  discovery  of  the  laws  of  nature  consists  in,
and  is  shown  by,  the  fact  that  they  enable  the  unknown  to  be  foi-etold,
the  unobserved  to  be  foreseen.  The  arrangement  of  the  experiment
is  \msed  on  the  following  reasoning.'^  According  to  the  law  and  to
experiment,  the  density  of  ammonia,  NH3,  is  8i,  and  of  hydrochloric

'•'  TluH  expltiiiatioii  of  the  vapour  density  of  sal-ammoniac,  Hulphuric  aoid,  and
niinilar  Kubstances  whicli  decompowe  in  beinj;  distilled  was  tlie  most  natural  to  resort  to
as  s<M)n  as  the  application  of  the  law  (fi  Avogadro-(rerliardt  to  chemical  relatioiig  was
l)ej?un  ;  it  was,  for  instance,  j^iven  in  my  work  on  Spt'cijic  Volumes,  lH5(»,  p.  1M>.  The
formula,  M  I) -2,  which  was  applied  later  by  many  other  investigators,  had  already  been
made  um*  of  in  that  work.

'  •  Thi>  hejjinner  must  remcml>er  that  an  experiment  and  the  mode  in  which  it  is
carri«*d  <»ut  must  be  determined  by  the  principle  or  fact  which  it  is  intended  to  illustrate
and  not  rlt-e  vrrna,  jis  some  su]»|m>s»*. The  idea  which  det<>rmines  the  necessitv  of  an
experiment  is  the  chief  consideration.

318  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

acid,  HCl,  18|,  if  the  density  of  liydrogen  =  l. Consequently,  in  a
mixture  of  NH3  and  HCl,  the  amnionia  will  penetrate  much more
rapidly  through  a  porous  mass,  or  a  fine  orifice,  than  the  heavier  hydro-
chloric acid,  just  as  in  a  former  experiment  the  hydrogen  penetrated
more  rapidly  than  the  oxygen. Therefore,  if  the  vapour  of  sal  ammoniac
comes  into  contact  with  a  porous  mass,  the  ammonia  will  pass  through
it  in  greater  quantities  than  the  hydi*ochloric  acid,  and.  this  excess  of
ammonia  may  be  detected  by  means  of  moist  red  litmus  paper,  which
should  be  turned blue. If  the vapour of sal-ammoniac were not
decomposed,  it  would  pass  through  the  porous  mass  as  a  whole,  and  the
■colour  of  the  litmus  paper  would  not  be  altered,  because  sal-anmioniac
is  a  neutral  salt. Thus,  by  testing  with  litmus  the  substances  passing
through  the  porous  mass,  it  may  be  decided  whether  the  sal-ammoniac
is decomposed or not when passing into vapour. Sal-ammoniac
volatilises  at  so  modei-ate  a  temperature  that  the  experiment  may  be
conducted  in  a  glass  tube  heated  by means  of  a  lamp,  an  asbestos
plug  being  placed  near  the  centre  of  the  tube.^'' The  asbestos  forms
a  porous  mass,  which  is  unaltered  at  a  high  temperature. A  piece
of  dry sal-ammoniac is  placed at one side of  the asbestos plug,
and  is  heated  by  a  Bunsen  burner. The  vapours  formed  are  driven
by  a  current  of  air  forced  from  a  gasometer  or  bag  through  two  tubes
containing  pieces  of  moist  litmus  paper,  one  blue  and  one  red  paper  in
each. If  the  sal-ammoniac  be  heated,  then  the  ammonia  appears  on
the  opposite  side of the  asbestos  plug,  and  the  litmus  there  turns
.  blue. And  as  an  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid  remains  on  the  side  where
the sal-ammoniac is heated,  it turns the litmus  at  that  end red.
This proves that the sal-ammoniac, when converted into  vapour,
■splits  up  into  ammonia  and  hydrochloric  acid,  and  at  the  same  time
gives  an  instance  of  the  possibility  of  correctly  conjecturing  a  fact  on
the  basis  of  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt.^"'  ^^*

So  also  the  fact  of  a  decomposition  may  be  proved  in  the  other

instances  where proved  greatei* than 2,  and  hence  the  apparent

4leviations  appear  in  reality  as  an  excellent  proof  of  the  general  a})plica-
tion  and  significance  of  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt.

'•^  It  is  iiniH.)rtant  that  the  tiibcn,  aHhtstos,  rtiirl  sul-aiuinoniac  shoiil*!  ht*  dry,  as  othrr-
wise  the  moisture  retains  tlie  uinmonia  uii  I  hytTrogen  chloride.

Ij  b.j.  Baker  (1M04)  showcMl  that  the  decomposition  of  NH|C'l  in  the  act  <>f  vohitilisinj^
only  takes  place  in  the  presence  of  water,  traces  of  which  are  amply  suflicient,  but  that
in  tlie  total  absence  of  moisture  (attained  by  carefully  drying  with  P,.(>;,)  there  is  no
decomposition,  and  the  vapour  density  of  tlie  sal-ammoniac  is  found  to  b«'  normal,  i.r.y
nearly  *27.  It  is  not  yet  quite  clear  wlnit  part  the  trace  of  moisture  plays  here,  and  it
mist  be  presumed  that  the  phenomenon  belongs  to  the  category  of  electrical  and  conttict
jkhenomena,  whic'.i  have  not  yet  been  fully  explained  [are  Chapter  IX.,  Note  20).

MOLECULES AND  ATOMS  819

In  those  cases  where  the  quotient  t^  proves  to  be  less  than  2,  or

the  observed  density  greater  than  that  calculated,  by  a  multiple  number

of  times,  the  matter  is  evidently  more  simple,  and  the  fact  observed

only  indicates  that  the  weight  of  the  molecule  is  as  many  times  greater

as  that  taken  as  the  quotient  obtained  is  less  than  2. 8o,  for  instance,

in  the  case  of  ethylene,  whose  composition  is  expressed  by  CHg,  the

density  was  found  by  experiment  to  be  14,  and  in  the  case  of  amy-

lene,  whose  composition  is  also  CH^,  the  density  proved  to  be  35,  and

consequently  the  quotient  for  ethylene  •=  1,  and  for  amylene  =  s. If

the  molecular  weight  of  ethylene  be  taken,  not  as  14,  as  might  be

imagined  from  its  composition,  but  as  twice  as  great —namely,  as  28 —

and  for  amylene  as  five  times  greater —that  is  as  70 — then  the  molecular

composition  of  the  first  will  be  C.jH,,  and  of  the  second  CsHjo,  and  for

M
both  of  them -  will  be equal  to  2. This application  of  the  law,

which  at  first  sight  may  appear  perfectly  arbitrary,  is  nevertheless
strictly  correct,  because  the  amount  of  ethylene  which  reacts— for
example,  with  sulphuric  and  other  acids — is  not  equal  to  14,  but  to  28
parts  by  weight.  Thus  with  H.^S04,  Br.^,  or  HI,  ttc,  ethylene  com-
bines in  a  quantity  C.2H4,  and  amylene  in  a  quantity  C;,H,,„  and  not
CHj.  On  the  other  hand,  ethylene  is  a  gas  which  liquefies  with  diffi-
culty (absolute  boiling  point  =  -f  10°),  whilst  amylene  is  a  liquid  lioiling
at  35°  (absolute  boiling  point  =  -f  192°),  and  by  admitting  the  greater
density  of  the  molecules  of  amylene  (M  =  70)  its  difference  from  the
lighter molecules of ethylene  (M  =  2^)  becomes clear. Thus,  the

smaller  quotient  ^ is  (m indiratvni  of  pohjmerisatw)!^  as  the  larger

cjuotient  is  of  decomposition.  The  difference  between  the  densities  of
oxygen  and  ozone  is  a  case  in  point.

On  turning  to  the  elements,  it  is  found  in  certain  cases,  especially
with  metals— for  instance,  mercury,  zinc,  and  cadmium —that  that
weight  of  the  atoms  which  must  be  acknowledged  in  their  compounds
(of  which  mention  will  be  afterwards  made)  appears  to  be  also  the
molecular  weight.  Thus,  the  atomic  weight  of  mercury  must  be  taken
as  =  200,  but  the  vapour  density  =  100,  and  the  quotient  =  2.  Con-
sequently the  mohaile  of  mercnry  contains  one  atom^  Hg.  It  is  the  same
with  sodium,  cadmium,  and  zinc.  This  is  the  simplest  possible  molecule,
which  necessarily  is  only  possible  in  the  case  of  elements,  as  the  mole-
cule of  a  compound  must  contain  at  least  two  atoms.  However,  the
molecules  of  many  of  the  elements  prove  to  be  comj)lex — for  instance,
the  weight  of  an  atom  of  oxygen  =  16,  and  its  density  =  Ifi,  so  that  its

820  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

molecule  must  contain  two  atoms,  O2,  which  might  already  be  concluded
by  comparing  its  density  with  that  of  ozone,  whose  molecule  contains
O3  (Chapter  IV.)  So  also  the  molecule  of  hydrogen  equals  Hj,  of
chlorine  CI 2,  of  nitrogen  Ng,  ike.  If  chlorine  react  with  hydrogen,  the
volume  remains  unaltered  after  the  formation  of  hydrochloric  acid,
H2  +  CI2  =  HCl  4"  HCl.  It  is  a  case  of  substitution  between  the  one
and  the  other,  and  therefore  the  volumes  remain  constant.  There  are
elements  whose  molecules  are  much  more  complex — for  instance,  sulphur,
Sg — although,  by  heating,  the  density  is  reduced  to  a  third,  and  Sg  is
formed.  Judging  from  the  vapour  density  of  phosphorus  (D  =  62)
the  molecule  contains  four  atoms  P4.  Hence  many  elements  when
polymerised  appear  in  molecules  which  are  more  complex  than  the
simplest  possible.  In  carbon,  as  we  shall  afterwards  find,  a  very
complex  molecule  must  be  admitted,  as  otherwise  its  non- volatility  and
other  properties  cannot  be  understood.  And  if  compounds  are  de-
composed by  a  more  or  less  powerful  heat,  and  if  polymeric  substances
are  depolymerised  (that  is,  the  weight  of  the  molecule  diminishes)  by  a
rise  of  temperature,  as  N2O4  passes  into  NO2,  or  ozone,  O3,  into  ordinary
oxygen,  O2,  then  we  might  expect  to  find  the  splitting-up  of  the  com-
plex molecules  of  elements  into  the  simplest  molecule  containing  a
single  atom  only — that  is  to  say,  if  O2  be  obtained  from  O3,  then
the  formation  of  O  might  also  be  looked  for.  The  possibility  but  not
proof  of  such  a  proposition  is  indicated  by  the  vapour  of  iodine.  Its
normal  density  =  127  (Dumas,  Deville,  and  others),  which  corresi)onds
with  the  molecule  Ig.  At  temperatures  above  800°  (up  to  which  the
density  remains  almost  constant),  this  density  distinctly  decreases,  as
is  seen  from  the  verified  results  obtained  by  Victor  Meyer,  Crafts,  and
Troost.  At  the  ordinary  pressure  and  1,000°  it  is  about  100,  at
1,250°  about  80,  at  1,400°  about  75,  and  apparently  it  strives  to  reduce
itself  to  one-half — that  is,  to  63.  Under  a  reduced  pn^ssure  this
splitting-up,  or  depolynierisation,  of  iodine  vapour  actually  reaches
a  density  ""  of  66,  as  Crafts  demonstrated  by  reducing  the
pressure  to  100  mm.  and  raising  the  temperature  to  1,500°.  From  this
it  may  be  concluded  that  at  high  temperatures  and  low  pressures  the
molecule  I.^  gradually  passes  into  the  molecule  I  containing  one  atom
like  mercury,  and  that  something  similar  occurs  with  other  elements  at
a  considerable  rise  of  temperature,  which  tends  to  bring  about  the
disunion  of  compounds  and  the  decomposition  of  complex  molecules. ^^

^•'  Just  as  we  Haw  (Chai)tor  VI.  Note  4(5)  an  incrcaso  of  the  diswx'iation  «»f  N.,0,  and  the
formation  of  a  hirj^e  proixjrtion  of  XO.i,  with  a  decrease  of  pressure.  The  decomposition
of  I.^  into  T  !  I  is  a  similar  dissociation.

'♦  Although  at  first  tliere  appear«»d  to  he  a  similar  phenimienon  in  the  case  of
chlorine,  it  was  afterwards  proved  that  if  there  is  a  decrease  of  density  it  is  only  a  small

MOLECl'LES  AND ATOMS  321

Besides  these  cases  of  apparent  discrepancy  from  the  law  of
Avogadro-Gerhardt  there  is  yet  a  third,  which  is  the  last,  and  is  very
instructive.  In  the  investigation  of  separate  substances  they  have  to
be  isolated  in  the  purest  possible  fonn,  and  their  chemical  and  physical
properties,  and  among  them  the  vapour  density,  then  determined.
If  it  be  normal  —that  is,  if  D  =  M  '  2 — it  often  serves  as  a  proof
of  the  purity  of  the  substance,  i.e.  of  its  freedom  from  all  foreign
matter.  If  it  be  abnormal — that  is,  if  D  be  not  equal  to  M/ 2 — then  for
those  who  do  not  believe  in  the  law  it  appears  as  a  new  argument  against
it  and  nothing  more  ;  but  to  those  who  have  already  grasped  the  import-
ant significance  of  the  law  it  becomes  clear  that  there  is  some  error  in  the
observation,  or  that  the  density  was  determined  under  conditions  in
which  the  vapour  does  not  follow  the  laws  of  Boyle  or  Gay-Lussac,  or
else  that  the  substance  has  not  been  sufficiently  puritied,  and  contains
other  substances.  The  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt  in  that  case  furnishes
convincing  evidence  of  the  necessity  of  a  fresh  and  more  exact  research.
And  as  yet  the  causes  of  error  have  always  been  found.  There  are  not
a  few  examples  in  point  in  the  recent  history  of  chemistry.  We  will
cite  one  instance.  In  the  case  of  pyrosulphuryl  chloride,  S^OAC'lg,
M  =  215,  and  consequently  D  should  =  107*5,  instead  of  which  Ogier
and  others  obtained  53*8-  that  is,  a  density  half  as  great ;  and  further,
Ogier  (1882)  demonstrated  clearly  that  the  substance  is  not  dissociated
by  distillation  into  SO3  and  SOaCl.^,  or  any  other  two  products,  and

one. Ill  the  case  of  broiniue  it  is  not  much  greater,  and  ih  far  from  being  equal  to
that  for  iodine.

Ab  in  general  we  very  often  involuntarily  confuse  chemical  procesues  with  physical,
it  may  be  that  a  physical  process  of  change  in  the  coefficient  of  expansion  with  a  change
of  temi)erature  participates  with  a  change  in  molecular  weight,  and  partially,  if  not
wholly,  lU'counts  for  the  decrease  of  the  density  of  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine.  Tlius,
I  have  remarked  (Coniptes  Rendus,  1870)  that  the  coefficient  of  expansion  of  gases
increases  with  their  molecular  weight,  and  (Chapter  II.,  Note  '20)  the  results  of  direct
exiHjriment  show  the  coefficient  of  expansion  of  liydrobromic  acid  (M-  81)  to  be  0*00880
in8t-ea4l  of  0'008(>7,  which  is  that  of  hydrogen  (M  2j.  Hence,  in  the  case  of  the  vapour
of  i(Hline  (M  =  '2r>4)  a  very  large  coefficient  of  expansion  is  to  l^e  expected,  and  from  this
cause  alone  the  relative  density  would  fall.  As  tlie  molecule  of  chlorine  CI.,*  ia  lighter  ( ♦«:  71)
than  that  of  bromine  (  =  100),  which  is  lighter  than  that  of  iodine  (=>  254),  we  see  that
the  order  in  which  the  decompt)salnlity  of  the  vaptiurs  of  these  haloids  is  observed  corre-
siK)nds  with  the  ex|)ccte<l  rise  in  the  coefficient  of  expansion.  Taking  the  coefficient  of
ex[>ansion  of  irMline  vapour  as  0*004,  then  at  1,000-  its  density  would  be  110.  Tlierefore
the  dismwiation  of  i(Mline  nirtv  l>e  only  an  apparent  phenomenon.  However,  on  the  other
hand,  the  heavy  vainmr  of  mercurj*  (M  -200,  D  100)  scarcely  decreases  in  density  at
a  temperature  of  1,.'>00  (I)  U8,  according  to  Victor  Meyer) ;  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten
that  the  niolecule  of  meix-ury  contains  only  one  atom,  whilst  that  of  iodine  contains
two,  and  this  is  very  iniiM)rtant.  Questions  of  this  kind  which  are  difficult  to  decide  by
<'xperinieiital  methods  must  long  remain  without  a  certain  explanation,  owing  to  the
difficulty,  and  >»ometimes  impossibility,  of  distinguishing  between  physical  and  chemical
changes.

VOL. I.  Y

322  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

thas  the  abnormal  density  of  8^0 .^Cl^  remaineil  unexplained  until  D.  P.
Konovaloff  (1885)  showed  that  the  previous  investigators  were  working
with  a  mixture  (containing  SO3HCI),  and  that  pyrosulphuryl  chloride
has  a  normal  density  of  approximately  107.  Had  not  the  law  of
Avogadro-Gerhardt  served  as  a  guide,  the  impure  liquid  would  have
still  passed  as  pure  ;  the  more  so  since  the  determination  of  the  amount
of  chlorine  could  not  aid  in  the  discovery  of  the  impurity.  Thus,  by
following  a  true  law  of  nature  we  are  led  to  true  deductions.

All  cases  which  have  been  studied  confirm  the  law  of  Avogadro-
Gerhardt,  and  as  by  it  a  deduction  is  obtained,  from  the  deter-
mination of  the  vapour  density  (a  purely  physical  property),  as  to  the
weight  of  the  molecule  or  quantity  of  a  substance  entei-ing  into
chemical  reaction,  this  law  links  together  the  two  provinces  of  learn-
ing —physics  and  chemistry  -in  the  most  intimate  manner.  Besides
which,  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt  places  the  conceptions  of  nwle-
ciifes  and  atoms  on  a  firm  foundation,  which  was  previously  wanting.
Although  since  the  days  of  Dalton  it  had  become  evident  that  it  was
necessary  to  admit  the  existence  of  the  elementary  atom  (the  chemical
individual  indivisible  by  chemical  or  other  forces),  and  of  the  groups  of
atoms  (or  molecules)  of  compounds,  indivisible  by  mechanical  and  physi-
cal forces ;  still  the  relative  magnitude  of  the  molecule  and  atom  was  not
defined  with  sufficient  clearness.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  atomic  weight
of  oxygen  might  be  taken  as  8  or  16,  or  any  multiple  of  these  numbers,
and  nothing  indicated  a  reason  for  the  acceptation  of  one  rather  than
another  of  these  magnitudes;'®  whilst  as  regards  the  weights  of  the
molecules  of  elements  and  compounds  there  was  no  trustworthy  know-
ledge whatever.  With  the  establishment  of  (ierhardt's  law  the  idea  of
the  molecule  was  fully  defined,  as  well  as  the  relative  magnitude  of
the  elementary  atom.

The chemical particle or in<tl**cnle must fte ronsiflffffi as the

"*  And  HO  it  wart  in  the  fifticM.  Souk*  took  O  — 8,  others  ()  -  Hi,  AVater  in  the  firnt
vAtw  wonhl  be  HO  an<l  hy(lrojf«?n  jwroxide  HO.^,  and  in  the  s«'c<>n<l  cu'^i'.  as  is  now  jrene-
rully  accepted,  water  H.,0  and  hydroj^en  peroxide  H.^.O-  or  HO.  I>isaijriet  nicnt  and  con-
filHJon  reiKniwl.  In  1M(M)  thechemiHts  of  the  whole  worhl  met  at  Carlsnihe  for  the  puri^se
of  arriving  at  Honw  aj;reen»ent  and  uniformity  of  opinion.  T  was  present  at  tliis  Conj^ress,
and  well  rememlKir  how  jjreat  was  tlie  difference  of  opinion,  and  how  a  compromise  wah
advopatrd  with  great  acumen  by  many  Kcientificmen,  and  with  what  warmtli  tlie  followers
of  Gerhardt,  at  whow  head. stood  the  Italian  professor,  Canizzaro,  followed  up  the  con-
HO<|UenceH  <if  the  law  of  Avogadro.  In  the  spirit  of  scientific  freedom,  without  which
Mcionee  would  mak(>  no  i>rogresK,  and  would  renniin  [K'trified  as  in  the  middle  ages,  and
with  the  simultaneoUH  necesHity  of  scientific  cons<>rvatism,  witliout  which  the  niots  of
pftHt  Htudy  could  give  no  fruit,  a  compromise  was  not  arrived  at.  nor  on<:ht  it  to  have
been,  but  insUMid  of  it  truth,  in  the  form  of  the  law  of  A\opadro-fH'rhardt.  ie<'eived  by
meanH  of  the  Congress  a  wi<ler  development,  and  soon  afterwards  coiKpieved  all  minds.
*nien  the  new  so-calh'tl  (terhardt  atomic  weightH established tlu!nis<'l\t>^,  and  in  the

itipH  they  were  alrt*ady  in  general  use.

MOLECrLES  AND  ATOMS  323

quantity  of  a  substance  which  enters  into  chemical  reaction  with  other
molecules,  and  occupies  in  a  state  of  vapour  the  same  volume  as  two
parts  lyy  weight  of  hydrogen.

The  molecular  weight  (which  has  been  indicated  by  M)  of  a  sub-
stance is  determined  by  its  composition,  transformations,  and  vapour
density.

The  molecule  is  not  divisible  by  the  mechanical  and  physical
changes  of  substances,  but  in  chemical  reaction  it  is  either  altere<l  in
its  properties,  or  quantity,  or  structure,  or  in  the  nature  of  the  motion
of  its  parts.

An  agglomeration  of  molecules,  which  are  alike  in  all  chemical
respects,  makes  up  the  masses  of  homogeneous  substances  in  all
states.*^

Molecules  consist  of  atoms  in  a  certain  state  of  distribution  and
motion,  just  as  the  solar  system  '^^^  is  made  up  of  inseparable  parts
(the  sun,  planets,  satellites,  comets,  ckc.)  The  greater  the  number  of
atoms  in  a  molecule,  the  more  complex  is  the  resultant  substance.
The  equilibrium  between  the  dissimilar  atoms  may  be  more  or  less
stable,  and  may  for  this  reason  give  more  or  less  stable  substances.
Physical and mechanical  transformations  alter  the  velocity of the

'^  A  bubble  of  gan,  a  droj)  of  liquid,  or  the  smallest  crystal,  presents  an  agglomera-
tion of  a  number  of  molecules,  in  a  state  of  continual  motion  (like  the  stars  of  the  Milky
Way),  distributing  themselves  evenly  or  forming  new  systems.  If  the  aggregation  of  all
kinds  of  heterogeneous  molecules  be  possible  in  a  gaseous  state,  where  the  molecules
are  considerably  removed  from  each  other,  then  in  a  liquid  state,  where  they  are  already
close  together,  such  an  aggregation  becomes  iK>ssible  only  in  the  sense  of  the  mutual
reaction  between  them  which  results  from  their  chemical  attraction,  and  esju'cially  in
the  aptitude  of  heterogeneous  molecules  for  combining  together.  Solutions  and  other
so-called  indefinite  chemical  compounds  should  be  regarded  in  this  light.  According
to  the  principles  developed  in  this  work  we  should  regard  them  as  containing  both
the  compounds  of  the  heterogeneous  molecules  themselves  and  the  prmUu'ts  of  their
decomiKtsition,  as  in  jwroxide  of  nitrogen,  N.^.O.i  and  NO.^.  And  we  must  con?^ider  that
those  molecules  A,  which  at  a  given  moment  are  combined  with  B  in  AB,  will  in
the  following  moment  become  free  in  order  to  ivgain  enter  into  a  combined  form.  The
laws  of  chemical  equilibrium  proper  to  dissociated  systems  cannot  be  regarded  iu  any
other  light.

^  Tliis  strengthens  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  unity  and  hannony  of  type  of  all
creation  and  is  one  of  those  ideas  which  impress  themselves  on  man  in  all  ages,  and
give  rise  to  a  h<»i)e  of  arriving  in  time,  by  means  of  a  laborious  series  of  discoveriet*,
obser\ations,  experiments,  laws,  hyiwitheses,  and  theories,  at  a  comprehension  of  the
internal  and  invisible  structure  of  ccmorcte  substances  with  that  same  degree  of  clearness
•ind  exax-titude  which  has  been  attained  in  the  visible  structure  of  the  heavenly  lK)dies.
It  is  not  many  years  ago  since  tin*  law  of  Avi>gadro-Gerhardt  took  root  in  scien<'e.  It  is
within  the  memory  of  many  living  scientific  men,  and  of  mine  amongst  otluTs.  It  is  not
surprising,  therefore,  that  as  yet  little  ]>rogress  has  l>een  made  in  the  provin<*e  of
molecular  mechanics;  but  the  theory  of  gases  alone,  which  is  intimately  connecteii  with
the  conception  of  molecules,  shows  l)y  its  success  that  the  time  is  approaching  when  <mr

knowledge  of  the  internal  structure  of  matter  will  be  defined  and  established.

Y  1

824

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

motion  and  the  distances  l>etween  the  individual  molecules,  or  of  the
atoms  in  the  molecules,  or  of  their  sum  total,  but  they  do  not  alter  the
original  equilibrium  of  the  system  ;  whilst  chemical  changes,  on  the
other  hand,  alter  the  molecules  themselves,  that  is,  the  velocity  of
motion,  the  relative  distribution,  and  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the
atoms  in  the  molecules.

Afonitt  are  tlhe  smallest  quantities  or  chemically  indivisible  masses
of  the  elements  forming  the  molecules  of  elements  and  compounds.

Atoms  have  weight,  the  sum  of  their  weights  forms  the  weight  of
the  molecule,  and  the  sum  of  the  weights  of  the  molecules  forms  the
weight  of  masses,  and  is  the  cause  of  gravity,  and  of  all  the  phenomena
which  depend  on  the  mass  of  a  substance.

The  elements  are  characterised,  not  only  by  their  indejjendent  exist-
ence, their  incapacity  of  being  converted  into  each  other,  etc.,  but  also
by  the  weight  of  their  atoms.

Chemical  and  physical  properties  depend  on  the  weight,  compasi-
tion,  and  properties  of  the  molecules  forming  a  substance,  and  on  the
weight  and  properties  of  the  atoms  forming  the  molecules.

This  is  the  substance  of  those  principles  of  molecular  mechanics
which  lie  at  the  basis  of  all  contemporary  physical  and  chemical
constructions  since  the  establishment  of  the  law  of  Avogadro-
Gerhardt.  The  fecundity  of  the  principles  enunciated  is  seen  at
every  step  in  all  the  particular  cases  forming  the  present  store  of
chemical  data.  We  will  here  cite  a  few  examples  of  the  application  of
the  law.

As  the  weight  of  an  atom  must  be  understood  as  the  minimum
quantity  of  an  element  entering  into  the  composition  of  all  the  mole-
cules formed  by  it,  therefore,  in  order  to  find  the  weight  of  an  atom  of
oxygen,  let  us  take  the  molecules  of  those  of  its  torn  pounds  which  have
already  been  described,  together  with  the  molecules  of  certain  of  those
carbon  compounds  which  will  be  described  in  the  following  chapter  :

Moleriilur Amount  of

Molecular

Amount  of

Weijflit

Oxygen

H20

18

16

N20

44

16

NO

30

16

NO,

46

32

Weight

Oxygen

HNO3

G:^

48

CO

28

16

CO.,

44

32

The  numlx'r  of  substances  taken  might  be  considerably  increased,
but  the  result  would  be  the  same — that  is,  the  molecules  of  the  com-
pounds of  oxygen  would  never  be  found  to  contain  less  than  16  parts
by  weight  of  this  element,  but  alway.s  ?/16,  where  n  is  a  whole  numl>er.

MOLECULES  AND  ATOMS  325

The  molecular  weights  of  the  above  compounds  are  found  either  dii-ectly
from  the  density  of  their  vapour  or  gas,  or  from  their  reactions.  Thus,
the  vapour  density  of  nitric  acid  (as  a  substance  which  easily  decom-
poses a1>ove  its  boiling  point)  cannot  be  accurately  determined,  but  the
fact  of  its  containing  one  part  by  weight  of  hydrogen,  and  all  its  pro-
perties and  reactions,  indicate  the  above  molecular  compasition  and  no
other.  In  this  manner  it  is  very  easy  to  find  the  atomic  weight  of  all
the  elements,  knowing  the  molecular  weight  and  composition  of  their
compounds.  It  may,  for  instance,  be  easily  proved  that  less  than  nl2
parts  of  carbon  never  enters  into  the  molecules  of  carbon  compounds,
and  therefore  C  must  be  taken  as  12,  and  not  as  6  which  was  the  number
in  use  before  Gerhardt.  In  a  similar  manner  the  atomic  weights  now
accepted  for  the  elements  oxygen,  nitrogen,  carbon,  chlorine,  sulphur,  d:c.,
were  found  and  indubitably  established,  and  they  are  even  now  termed
the  Gerhardt  atomic  weights.  As  regards  the  metals,  many  of  which  do
not  give  a  single  volatile  compound,  we  shall  afterwards  see  that  there
are  also  methods  by  which  their  atomic  weights  maybe  established,  but
nevertheless  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt  is  here  also  ultimately
resorted  to,  in  order  to  remove  any  doubt  which  may  be  encountered.
Thus,  for  instance,  although  much  that  was  known  concerning  the
compounds  of  beryllium  necessitated  its  atomic  weight  being  taken  as
Be =9 — that  is,  the  oxide  as  BeO  and  the  chloride  BeCl.j — still  certain
analogies  gave  reason  for  considering  its  atomic  weight  to  be  Be=13*5,
in  which  case  its  oxide  would  be  expressed  by  the  composition  Be203,
and  the  chloride  Vjy  BeCls.'^*  It  was  then  found  that  the  vapour  density
of  beryllium  chloride  was  approximately  40,  when  it  became  quite  clear
that  its  molecular  weight  was  80,  and  as  this  satisfies  the  formula
BeCl2,  but  does  not  suit  the  formula  BeClg,  it  therefore  became  neces-
sary to  regard  the  atomic  weight  of  Be  as  9  and  not  as  13i.

-'  If  lit*  =  0,1111(1  beryllium  chloride  he  Bed,.,  tlieii  for  every  9  jiarts  nf  ben-lUum
there  are  71  parts  of  chlorine,  tiiid  the  molecular  weight  of  BeCU  -  80;  hence  the  vapour
density  should  he  40  or  »40.  If  Be  -  18r>,  and  beryllium  diloride  be  BeCl-,  then  to  18'5
of  beryllium  tliere  are  10rt*5  of  chlorine ;  hence  the  molecular  weight  would  be  120,  and
the  vaj)our  density  ♦W)  or  «rtO.  The  comixisition  is  evidently  tlie  same  in  both  caHen,
Wcause  0  :  71  "  135  •  106'5.  Thus,  if  the  symbol  of  an  element  designate  different
atomic  weigiits,  apparently  very  different  formulie  may  equally  well  express  both  the
percentage  comitosition  of  compounds,  and  those  i>ropertie8  which  are  required  by  the
laws  of  multiple  projwrtions  and  equivalents.  The  chemists  of  former  days  accurately
expressed  the  composition  of  substances,  and  accurately  applied  Dalton's  laws,  by
taking  H  1,  0  =  8,  C-6,  Si-  14,  tVc.  The  Gerhanlt  equivalents  are  also  satisfied  by
them,  l)ecauM.»  0  =  ir».  C  12,  Si  2H,  ^tc,  are  multiples  of  them.  The  choi<re  of  one  or
the  other  multiple  (]uantity  for  the  atomic  weight  is  impossible  without  a  firm  and  con-
crete cr)n('ei)tion  of  the  molecule  and  atom,  and  this  is  only  obtained  as  a  consequence  of
the  law  of  Avogadro-Cierhardt,  and  hence  the  nuMlern  atomic  weights  are  the  results
of  this  law  iKCf!  Note  2H).

326  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

With  the  establishment  of  a  true  coiicej)tion  of  molecules  and
atoms,  chemical  formuhe  became  dii-ect  expressions,  not  only  of  com-
position,*'** but  also  of  molecular  weight  or  vapour  density^  and  cimse-
quently  of  a  series  of  fundamental  chemical  and  physical  data,  inasmuch
as  a  number  of  the  properties  of  substances  are  dependent  on  theii-

**  The  percentage  amounts  of  the  eleineiits  contiiined  in  a  given  compound  may  be

calculated  from  its  formula  by  a  Himple  i>r<5^ortion. Thus,  for  example,  to  find the

percentage  amount  of  hydrogen  in  hydrochloric  acid  we  reason  as  follows : — HCl  bIiowk

that  hydrocliloric  acid  contains  35*5  of  chlorine  and  1  part  of  hydrogen. Hence,  in  JJ($*5

|)artB  of  hydrocliloric  acid  there  iu  1  part  by  weight  of  hydrogen,  consequently  100  partn

by  weight  of  hydrochloric  acid  will  contain  as  many  more  units  of  hydrogen  as  100  in

100
greater  than  S6'5;  therefore,  the  proportion  is  as  follows — x  : 1  ::  100  :  3t»*5  or  jr-,>_

s»  2*781).  Therefore  100  parts  of  hydrochloric  acid  contain  2-731)  inirts  of  hydrogen.  In
general,  when  it  is  required  to  transfer  a  formula  into  its  percentage  composition,  we
must  replace  the  symbols  by  their  corre8ix>nding  atomic  weights  and  find  their  sum,  and
knowing  the  amount  by  weight  of  a  given  element  in  it,  it  is  easy  by  proportion  to  find
the  amount  of  this  element  in  100  cr  any  other  quantity  of  p^xrts  by  weight.  If,  on  the
contrary,  it  be  required  to  find  the  formula  from  a  given  jjercentage  comiK)sition,  we  must
proceed  as  follows :  Divide  the  jiercentage  amount  of  each  element  entering  into  the
comix>sition  of  a  substance  by  its  atomic  weight,  and  comi)are  the  figures  thus  obtained
— they  should  be  in  simple  multiple  proportion  to  each  other.  Thus,  for  instance,
from  the  percentage  composition  of  hydrogen  peroxide,  5'8H  of  hydrogen  and  4)4'12  of
oxj'gen,  it  is  easy  to  find  its  fonnula;  it  is  only  necessary  to  divide  the  amount  of
hydrogen  by  unity  and  the  amount  of  oxygen  by  10.  The  numbers  5'8«  and  5'88  are
thus  obtained,  which  are  in  the  ratio  1  : 1,  which  means  that  in  hydrogen  {^leroxide  there
is  one  atom  of  hydrogen  to  one  atom  of  oxygen.

The  following  is  a  proof  of  the  practical  rule  given  above  that  to  Jiud  the  ratio  of  the
number  of  atoms  from  the  percentage  composition,  it  is  necessary  to  diride  the  per-
centage amounts  hy  the  atomic  weights  of  the  corresponding  substances,  and  to  find
the  ratio  which  these  numbers  bear  to  each  other.  Let  us  suppose  that  two  radicles
(simple  or  comiKmnd),  whose  symbols  and  combining  weights  are  A  and  B,  combine
together,  forming  a  comi>onnd  com|)osed  of  x  atoms  of  A  and  y  atoms  of  B.  Tlie
formula  of  the  substance  will  be  Aj-By.  From  this  formula  we  know  that  our  conii>ound
contains  xk  parts  by  weight  of  the  first  element,  and  //B  of  tlu;  second. In  100  parts  of

our  compound  there  will  be  (bv  proj)ortion) "'^' of  the  first  element,  and  "^

j-A  -  ya  xA  +  yn

of  the  second. Let  us  divide  th<»se  quantities,  expressing  the  i)ercentage  amounts  by  the

100  J*
C(>rre8lH)nding  combining  weights; we  then  obtain , for  the  first  element  and

xA+j/B

• -  for  the  sec(»nd  element. And  these  nunilK.»rs  are  in the  ratio  x  :  u — that  is,  in
j-A  +  i/B

the  ratio  of  the  number  of  atoms  of  the  two  substances.

It  may  be  further  t)bserved  that  even  the  verj-  language  or  nomenclature  of  chemistry

acquires  a  particular  clearness  and  conciseness  by  means  of  the  conception  of  molecules,

because  then  the  names  of  subst^mces  may  directly  indicate  their  comiwsition. Thus

the  tenn  'carbon  dioxide  '  tells  more  al)out  and  expresses  C0..>  better  than  carbonic  acid

gas,  or  even  carbonic  anhydride. Such  nomenclature  is  already  eniployed  by  many. But

expressing  the  eomjK>sition  without  an  indication  or  even  hint  as  to  the  i)roi)erties,  would

be  neglecting  the  advantageous  side  of  the  present  momenclature. Sulphur  dioxide,

80.^,  expresses  the  same  as  barium  dioxide,  BaO.j,  but  sulphurous  anhydride  indicates

the  acid  i)roperties  of  SOi. Probably  in  time  one  harmonious  chemical  language  will

succeed  in  embracing  both  advantages.

MOLECUI^S  AND  ATOMS  327

vapour  density,  or  molecular  weight and composition. The  vapour

M
density  D  = . For  instance,  the  formula  of  ethyl  ether  is  C4HJ0O,

corresponding  with  the  molecular  weight  74,  and  the  vapour  density
37,  which  is  the  fact.  Therefore,  the  density  of  vapours  and  gases  has
ceased  to  be  an  empirical  magnitude  obtained  by  experiment  only,
and  has  acquired  a  rational  meaning.  It  is  only  necessary  to  remember
that  2  grams  of  hydrogen,  or  the  molecular  weight  of  this  primary
gas  in  grams,  occupies,  at  0°  and  760  mm.  pressure,  a  volume  of  22*3
litres  (or  22,300  cubic  centimetres),  in  order  to  directly  determine  the
weights  of  cubical  measures  of  gases  and  vapours  from  their  formula;,
because  the  molecular  weights  in  grains  of  all  oilier  vapours  at  0°  and
760  mm.  occujyy  the  same  volume,  22*3  litres.  Thus,  for  example,  in  the
case  of  carbonic  anhydride,  COj,  the  molecular  weight  M=44,  hence  44
grams  of  carbonic  anhydride  at  0°  and  760  mm.  occupy  a  volume  of
22*3  litres— consequently,  a  litre  weighs  1*97  gram.  By  combining  the
laws  of  gases — Gay-Lussac's,  Mariotte's,  and  Avogadro-Gerhardt*s — we
obtain*^  a  general  formula  for  gases

6200.v(273  +  0=M;^
where  s  is  the  weight  in  grams  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  a  vapour  or  gas
at  a  temperature  t  and  pressure  p  (expressed  in  centimetres  of  mer-
cury) if  the  molecular  weight  of  the  gas=M.  Thus,  for  instance,  at
100°  and  760  millimetres  pressure  {i.e.  at  the  atmospheric  pressure)
the  weight  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  the  vapour  of  ether  (M=74)  is
«=:00024.'^*

^•^  Tliis  fonuulu  (which  is  given  in  my  work  on  '  The  Tension  of  GaseH,'  and  in  a
somewhat  modiiied  form  in  tlie  '  Comptes  Rendus,'  Feb.  1876)  iu  deduced  in  the  followmg
manner.  According  to  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt,  M  —  2D  for  all  gaseB,  where  M  ia
the  molecular  weight  and  D  the  density  referred  to  hydrogen.  But  it  is  equal  to  the
weight  So  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  a  gas  in  grams  at  0^  and  76  cm.  pressure,  divided  by
0'000089H,  for  this  is  the  weight  in  grams  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  hydrogen.  But  the
weight  s  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  u  gas  at  a  temperature  t  and  under  a  pressure  p
(in  centimetres)  is  equal  to  «,,;>  76  (l  +  oO-  Therefore,  tfo^«.76  (1  -•  at)p\  hence  D  —
76.a  (1  ^  at)  0-0000«98/a  whence  M  =  152«  (1  +  at)  00()00«y8/>,  which  gives  the  above  expres-
sion, because  1  o-273,  and  152  multiplied  by  273  and  divided  by  00000898  is  nearly  6200.
In  place  of  «,  m'v  may  be  taken,  where  m  is  the  weight  and  v  the  volume  of  a  vai>our.

-^  The  above  formula  may  be  directly  applied  in  order  to  ascertain  the  molecular
weight  from  the  data ;  weight  of  va]x)ur  m  grnis.,  its  volume  v  c.c,  pressure  p  cm.,  and
temperature  f  ^ ;  for  «  =  the  weight  of  vapour  wi,  divided  by  the  volume  r,  and  conse-
<iuently  M -^  6,200  m  (273  *  t)pv.  Therefore,  instead  of  the  formula  {see  Chapter  II.,
Note  34),  jor-^R(273-k-/).  where  R  varies  with  the  mass  and  nature  of  a  gas,  we  may
apply  the  fonnula  7n'  =  6,20O(;;»,M)  (273  +  /).  These  fomiulsB  simplify  the  calculations
ill  many  cases.  For  exani]>le,  required  the  volume  v  occupied  by  5  grms.  of  aqueous
vapour  at  a  t^'inperatnre  /  — 127^  and  under  a  pressure  p^l^  cm.  According  to  the
ffirmula  M  6,200  ///  (273f  Oi'^'i  we  find  that  r^  9,064  c.c,  as  in  the  case  of  water
M  =  18,  ///  in  this  instance  5  grms.  (These  formulte,  however,  like  the  laws  of  gases,
are  only  approximate.)

328  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTKY

As  the  molecules  of  many  elements  (hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen,
chlorine,  bromine,  sulphur — at  least  at  high  temperatures)  are  of  uni-
form composition,  the  formulae  of  the  compounds  formed  by  them
directly  indicate  the  composition  by  volume.  So,  for  example,  the
formula  HNO3  directly  shows  that  in  the  decomp>sition  of  nitric  acid
there  is  obtained  1  vol.  of  hydrogen,  1  vol.  of  nitn)gen,  and  3  vols,
of  oxygen.

And  since  a  great  number  of  mechanical,  physical,  and  chemical
properties  are  directly  dependent  on  the  elementary  and  volumetric
composition,  and  on  the  vapour  density,  the  accepted  system  of  atoms
and  molecules  gives  the  possibility  of  simplifying  a  number  of  most
complex  relations.  For  instance,  it  may  be  easily  demonstrated  that
the  vis  viva  of  thu  molecules  of  all  vajwnrs  and  f/anes  is  alike.  For
it  is  proved  by  mechanics  that  the  vis  viva  of  a  moA'ing  mass=i  wiv*,
where  m  is  the  mass  and  v  the  velocity.  For  a  molecule,  ///  =  M,  or
the  molecular  weight,  and  the  velocity  of  the  motion  of  gaseous
molecules=a  constant  which  we  will  designate  by  C,  divided  by  the

square  root  of  the  density  of  the  gas  '^•'*:=C '\/D,  and  as  D=M/2,
the  vis  viva  of  molecules =C'*^ — that  is,  a  constant  for  all  molecules.
Q.E.D.^  The  specilic  heat  of  gases  (Chapter  XIV.),  and  many  other
of  their  properties,  are  determined  by  their  density,  and  consequently
by  their  molecular  weight.  Gases  and  vapours  in  passing  into  a
liquid  state  evolve  the  so-called  latent  heat,  which  also  proves  to  be
in  connection  with  the  molecular  weight. The  observed  latent  heats

»  Chapter  I.,  Note  34.

^"^  Thf  velocity  of  the  transmission  of  sound  throuyh  (jases  ami  rapours  elost'ly
bears  on  this.  It  =  ^/  Kpg,D  (1  +  cU),  where  K  i«  the  ratio  between  the  two  8i>eoificheuts
(it  is  approximately  1 '4  for  gases  containing  two  atom s  in  u  molecule),  7>  the  pressure
of  the  gas  expressed  by  weight  (that  is,  the  pressure  expressed  by  the  height  of  u  column
of  mercury  multiplied  by  the  density  of  mercury),  g  the  acceleration  of  jjravity,  D  the
weight  of  a  cubic  measure  of  the  gas,  a  =  0*00867,  and  /  the  temperature.  Hence,  if  K
be  known,  and  as  D  can  be  found  from  the  composition  of  a  gas,  we  can  calculate  the
velocity  of  the  transmission  of  sound  in  that  gas.  Or  if  this  velocity  be  known,  we  can
find  K. The  relative  velocities  of  sound  in  two  gases  can  be  easily  determined  (Kundt).

If  a  horizontal  glass  tube  (about  1  metre  long  and  close<l  at  both  cnds>  l>e  full  of  a
gas,  and  be  finnly  fixed  at  its  middle  i)oint,  then  it  is  eaKV  to  bring  the  tul>e  and  gas  int<»
a  state  of  vibration,  by  rubbing  it  from  centre  to  end  with  a  damj)  clotli.  The  vibration  of
the  gas  is  easily  rendered  visible,  if  the  interior  of  the  tube  l>e  dusted  with  lycoiKxiiuni
(the  yellow  ix)wder-dust  or  si)ores  of  the  lycoi)odium  i>lant  is  often  empl«)yed  in  medicine),
Iwfore  the  gas  is  intnxluced  and  the  tube  fused  up.  Tlie  fine  lycoiKxlium  jKJwder  arranges
itself  in  patches,  whose  number  depends  on  the  velocity  of  M»und  in  the  gas.  If  there
l)e  10  pat-ches,  then  the  velocity  of  sound  in  the  gas  is  ten  tim«*K  'slower  than  in  glaH.s.  It
is  evident  that  this  is  an  easy  metluKl  of  comparing  the  velot.'ity  of  sound  in  gases.  It
has  been  demonstrated  by  ex])eriment  that  the  velocity  of  sound  in  oxygen  is  four  times
loss  than  in  hydrogen,  and  the  square  roots  of  the  densities  and  molecular  weights  of
hydrogpu  and  oxygen  stand  in  this  ratio.

MOLECULES  AND  ATOMS  329

of  carbon  bisulphide,  €82= 90,  of  ether,  C4H,„0,=94,  of  benzene,
C6H6,  =  109,  of  alcohol,  C2H6O,  =  200,  of  chloroform,  CHCl3,  =  67,
Ac,  show  the  amount  of  heat  expended  in  converting  one  part
by  weight  of  the  above  substances  into  vapour.  A  great  uniformity
is  observed  if  the  measure  of  this  heat  be  referred  to  the  weight  of  the
molecule.  For  carbon  bisulphide  the  formula  OS 2  expresses  a  weight
76,  hence  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation  referred  to  the  molecular
quantity  €82  =  76  x  9^=6,840,  for  ethenc=  9,656,  for  benzene =8,502,  for
alcohol=9,200,  for  chloroform  =  8,007,  for  water=9,620,  &c.  That  is,
for  molecular  quantities,  the  latent  heat  varies  comparatively  little,
from  7,000  to  10,000  heat  units,  whilst  for  equal  parts  by  weight  it
is  ten  times  greater  for  water  than  for  chloroform  and  many  other
substances.*^

Generalising  from  the  above,  the  weight  of  the  molecule  determines
the  properties  of  a  substance  independently  of  its  composition — i.e,  of
the  number  and  quality  of  the  atoms  entering  into  the  molecule —
whenever  the  substance  is  in  a  gaseous  state  (for  instance,  the  density
of  gases  and  vapours,  the  velocity  of  sound  in  them,  their  specific
heat,  <kc.),  or  passes  into  that  state,  as  we  see  in  the  latent  heat  of
evaporation.  This  is  intelligible  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  atomic
theory  in  its  present  form,  for,  besides  a  rapid  motion  proper  to  the
molecules  of  gaseous  bodies,  it  is  further  necessary  to  postulate  that
these  molecules  are  dispersed  in  space  (filled  throughout  with  the
luminiferous  ether)  like  the  heavenly  bodies  distributed  throughout
the  universe.  Here,  as  there,  it  is  only  the  degree  of  remt>val  (the  dis-
tance) and  the  masses  of  substances  which  take  eflfect,  while  those
peculiarities  of  a  substance  which  are  expressed  in  chemical  trans-
formations, and  only  come  into  action  on  near  approach  or  on  contact,
are  in  abeyance  by  reason  of  the  dispersal. Hence  it  is  at  once  obvious,

*^  If  the  conception  of  the  molecular  weights  of  substances  does  not  give  an  exact
law  when  applied  to  the  latent  heat  of  evaiwration,  at  all  events  it  brings  to  light  a
certain  nnifonnity  in  figures,  which  otherwise  only  rei>resent  the  simple  result  of  obser-
vation. Molecular  quantities  of  liquids  apjiear  to  expend  almost  equal  amounts  of  heat
in  their  evai)oration.  It  may  be  said  that  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation  of  molecular
quantities  is  approximately  constant,  because  the  vis  viva  of  the  motion  of  the  molecules
is,  as  we  saw  above,  a  constant  quantity. According  to  thenno-dynamics  the  latent  heat

f  1  278  lit)

of  evaporation  is  equal  to  -  {n'  - ") C,  13*51),  where  t  is  the  boiling  jioint,  n'  the

III  u  X

sjjecific  volume  (i.^.  the  volume  of  a  unit  of  weight)  of  the  vaix)ur,  and  n  the  specific
volume  of  the  liquid,  dp'iIT  the  variation  of  the  tension  witli  a  rise  of  temix-rature  per  1°,
and  13"H9  the  density  of  the  mercury  according  to  which  the  pressure  is  measured.  Thus
the  latent  heat  of  evaporatitm  increases  not  only  with  a  decrease  in  the  vajwrnr  density
(i.e.  the  molecular  weight),  but  also  with  an  increase  in  the  boiling  }K»iut,  and  therefore
depends  on  different  factors.

380  PKINC^IPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

in  the  first  place,  tliat  in  the  case  of  solids  and  liquids,  in  ^hich  the
molecules  are  closer  together  than  in  gases  and  vapours,  a  greater
complexity  is  to  be  expected,  i.e,  a  dependence  of  all  the  properties  not
only  upon  the  weight  of  the  molecule  but  also  upon  its  composition
and  quality,  or  upon  the  properties  of  the  individual  chemical  atoms
forming  the  molecule  ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  that,  in  the  case  of  a
small  number  of  molecules  of  any  substance  being  disseminated  through
a  mass  of  another  substance— •^ for  example,  in  the  formation  of  weak
(dilute)  solutions  (although  in  this  case  there  is  an  act  of  chemical
reaction — i.e.  a  combination,  decomposition,  or  substitution) — the  dis-
persed molecules  will  alter  the  properties  of  the  medium  in  which  they
are  dissolved,  almost  in  proportion  to  the  molecular  weight  and  almost
independently  of  their  composition.  The  greater  the  number  of  mole-
cules disseminated — i.e.  the  stronger  the  solution — the  more  clearly
defined  will  those  properties  become  which  depend  upon  the  composition
of  the  dissolved  substance  and  its  relation  to  the  molecules  of  the
solvent,  for  the  distribution  of  one  kind  of  molecules  in  the  sphere
of  attraction  of  others  cannot  but  be  influenced  by  their  mutual  chemical
reaction.  These  general  considerations  give  a  starting  point  for  ex-
plaining why,  since  the  appearance  of  Van't  Hoff's  memoir  (1886),  *The
Laws  of  Chemical  Equilibrium  in  a  Diffused  Gaseous  or  Liquid  State '
(itee  Chapter  I.,  Note  19),  it  has  been  found  more  and  more  that  dilute
(weak)  solutions  exhibit  such  variations  of  properties  as  depend  wholly
upon  the  weight  and  number  of  the  molecules  and  not  upon  their  com-
position, and  even  give  the  means  of  determining  the  weight  of  mole-
cules by  studying  the  variations  of  the  properties  of  a  solvent  on  the
introduction  of  a  small  quantity  of  a  substance  passing  into  solution.
Although  this  subject  has  been  already  partially  considered  in  the  first
chapter  (in  speaking  of  solutions),  and  properly  belongs  to  a  special
(physical)  branch  of  chemistry,  we  touch  upon  it  here  because  the
meaning  and  importance  of  molecular  weights  are  seen  in  it  in  a  new
and  peculiar  light,  and  because  it  gives  a  method  for  determining  them
whenever  it  is  possible  to  obtain  dilute  solutions.  Among  the  numerous
properties  of  dilute  solutions  which  have  been  investigated  (for  instance,
the  osmotic  pressure,  vapour  tension,  boiling  point,  internal  friction,
capillarity,  variation  with  change  of  temperature,  specific  heat,  electro-
conductivity,  index  of  refraction,  ttc.)  we  will  select  one  -the  *  depres-
sion '  or  fall  of  the  temperature  of  freezing  (Raoult's  cryoscopic  method),
not  only  l)eeause  this  method  has  been  the  most  studied,  but  also
because  it  is  the  most  easily  carried  out  and  most  frequently  applied
for  determining  the  weight  of  the  molecules  of  substances  in  solution,
although here, owing to the novelty of the subject there are

MOLECLLES  AND  ATOMS  331

also  many  experimental  discrepancies  which  cannot  as  yet  Ije  ex-
plained by  theory.  *^^^'**

r7  bit  The  osmotic  pressure,  vaiJour  tension  of  the  solvent,  and  several  other  means
applied  like  the  cryoscopie  method  to  dilute  solutions  for  determinuig  the  molecular
weight  of  a  substance  in  solutitm,  are  more  difficult  to  carry  out  in  practice,  and  only  the
method  of  determining  the  rise  of  the  boiling  point  of  dilute  solutions  can  from  its
facility  be  placed  parallel  with  the  cryoscopie  method,  to  wliich  it  bears  a  strong
resemblance,  as  in  both  the  solvent  changes  its  state  and  is  partially  separated.  In  the
boiling  point  method  it  passes  of!  in  the  form  of  a  vapour,  while  in  cryoscopie  deter-
minations it  separates  out  in  the  form  of  a  solid  body.

Van't Hoff,  starting from the second law  of thermo-dynamics,  showed  that  the

dependence  of  the  rise  of  pressure  {djt)  upon  a  rise  of  temperature  (dT)  is  determined  by

the  equation  dp  —  {kinp  .'2T')  d!Ty  where  k  is  the  latent  heat  of  evai>oration  of  the  solvent,

m  its  molecular  weight,  7>  the  tension  of  the  saturated  vapour  of  the  solvent  at  T,  and  T

the  absolute  temi)erature  (T  =  273  +  /),  while  Raoult  found  that  the  quantity  {p—p')  p

(Chapter  I.,  Note  50)  or  the  measure  of  the  relative  fall  of  tension  {p  the  tension  of  tlie

solvent  or  water,  and/>'  of  the  solution)  is  found  by  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  molecules,

n  of  the  substance  dissolved, and  N  of  the  solvent,  so  that  {p—p')  'p  —  Qn  /{fs  +n)  where

C  is  a  constant. With  very  dilute  solutions  j^ —ja'  may  be  taken  as  equal  to  djty  and  the

fraction  n  (N  +  n)  as  equal  to  n  N  (because  in  that  case  the  value  of  N  is  very  much

greater than n)^ and then, judging  from experiment, C is  nearly  unity — hence:

dp  'p  =  n  /S or  dp-np  N,  and  on  substituting this in the above  equation  we  have

{kmp  ,  2T*)  rfT  ^  np  N. Taking  a  weight  of  the  solvent  w.  N  =  100,  and  of  the  substance

dissolved  (per  100  of  the  solvent)  g,  where  q  evidently  =nM,  if  M  be  the  molecular

weight  of  the  substance  dissolved,  we  find  that  n  yi  =  qm  lOOM,  and  hence,  according  to

0'02  T'* a
the  preceding  equation,  we  have  M  ^  . -^^,  that  is,  by  taking  a  solution  of  q

gnus,  of  a  substance  in  100  grnis.  of  a  solvent,  and  determining  by  experiment  the  rise
of  the  boiling  ix>int  c/T,  we  find  the  molecular  weight  M  of  the  substance  dissolved,
because  the  fraction  002  T^  k  is  <for  a  given  pressure  and  solvent)  a  constant ;  for wa^r
.it  100-^  (T-878  )  when  A' -584  (Chapter  I.,  Note  11),  it  is  nearly  52, for  ether  nearly 21,
for  bisulphide  of  carbon  nearly  24,  for  alcohol  nearly  11*5,  (tc.  As  an  example,  we  will
cite  from  tlie  determinations  made  by  Professor  Sakurai,  of  Japan  (1898),  that  when
water  was  the  solvent  and  the  substance  dissolved,  corrosive  sublimate,  HgCl^,  was  taken
in  the  quantity  q  -^8*978  and  4*258  grms.,  the  rise  in  the  boiling  point  dT  was  =0^*179  and
0^084,  whence  M  =  261  and  208,  and  when  alcohol  was  the  solvent,  q  ^  10-873  and  8*765
and  rfT  =  0'=*471  and  0° -880,  whence  M  =  266  and  265,  whilst  the  actual  molecular  weight  of
corrosive  sublimate  —271,  which  is  very  near  to  that  given  by  this  method.  In  the
same  manner  for  aqueous  solutions  of  sugar  (M  =  842),  when  q  varied  from  14  to  2*4,  and
the  rise  of  the  boiling  point  from  0*^*21  to  0°085,  M  was  found  to  vary  between  389  and
3(»4.  For  solutions  of  iodine  I.,  in  ether,  the  molecular  weight  was  found  by  this  method
to  be  between  255  and  262,  and  1.2  =  254.  Sakurai  obtained  similar  results  (l)etween  247
and  262)  for  solutions  of  iodine  in  bisulphide  of  carbon.

We  will  here  remark  that  in  determining  M  (the  molecular  weight  of  the  substance
dissolved)  at  small  but  increasing  concentrations  (per  100  grms.  of  water),  the  results
obtained  by  Julio  Baroni  (1898;  show  that  the  value  of  M  found  by  the  formula  may
either  increase  or  decrease.  An  increase,  for  instance,  takes  place  in  aqueous  solutions
of  HgCl...  (from  255  to  884  instead  of  271),  KNO3  (57-6tt  instead  of  101),  AgNO^  (104-107
insteatl  of  170),  K..,S04  (5.'>-H9  instead  of  174),  sugar  (828-848  instead  of  842),  tVc.  On  the
contrary  the  calculated  value  of  M  decreases  as  the  concentration  increases,  for  solu-
tions of  KCl  (40-39  instead  of  74'5),  NaCl  (88-28  instead  of  58*5),  NaBr  (60-49  instead
of  10:J),  iVc.  In  this  case  (as  also  for  LiCl,  Nal,  C.>H.^NaO..»,  &c.)  the  value  of  i  (Chapter
I..  Note  49),  or  the  ratio  between  the  actual  molecular  weight  and  that  found  by  the
rise  of  the  boiling  point,  was  found  to  increase  with  the  concentration,  i.e.  to  be  greater
tlian  1,  and  to  differ  more  and  more  from  unity  as  the  strength  of  the  solution  becomes

332  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

If  100  gram-molecules  of  water,  i.e.  1,800  grms,  be  taken  and  n
gram -molecules  of  sugar,  C,2H220,|  ,i,e.  ^i  342  grms.,  be  dissolved  in

greater.  For  example,  according  to  Schlanip  (1894),  for  LiCl,  with  a  variation  of  from
I'l  to  67  grm.  LiCl  x>er  100  of  water,  i  varies  from  1'68  to  180.  But  for  Kubstancea
of  the  first  series  (HgCl-j,  <!tc.),  although  in  very  dilute  solutions  i  is  greater  than  1,
it  approximates  to  1  as  the  concentration  increases,  and  this  is  the  normal  phenomenon
for  solutions  which  do  not  conduct  an  electric  current,  as,  for  instance,  of  sugar.  And
with  certain  electrolytes,  such  as  HgCl.^,  MgS04,  <^c>  *  exhibits  a  similar  variation  ;
thus,  for  HgCL  the  value  of  M  is  found  to  vary  between  255  and  334 ;  that  is,  i  (as
the  molecular  weight  =  271)  varies  between  1*06  and  081.  Hence  I  do  not  believe  that
the  di£Ference  between  «  and  unity  (for  instance,  for  CaCl.^,  i  is  about  3,  for  KI  about  2,
and  decreases  with  the  concentration)  can  at  present  be  placed  at  the  basis  of  any
general  chemical  conclnsions,  and  it  requires  further  experimental  research.  Among
other  methods  by  which  the  value  of  t  is  now  determined  for  dilute  solutions  is  the
study  of  their  electroconductivity,  admitting  that  i  =  l  +  rt(A'  — 1),  where  a  —  the  ratio
of  the  molecular  conductiWty  to  the  limiting  conductivity  corresi.x>nding  to  an  infinitely
large  dilution  {see  Physical  Chemistry),  and  k  is  the  number  of  ions  into  which  the
substance  dissolved  can  split  up.  Without  entering  upon  a  criticism  of  this  method
of  determining  i,  I  wiU  only  remark  that  it  frequently  gives  values  of  i  very  close  to
those  found  by  the  depression  of  the  freezing  point  and  rise  of  the  boiling  point ;  but
that  this  accordance  of  results  is  sometimes  very  doubtful.  Thus  for  a  solution  contain-
ing 5*67  grmg.  CaCl.^  per  100  grms.  of  water,  i,  according  to  the  vajwur  tension  =  2'52,
according  to  the  boiling  point  =  271,  according  to  the  electroconductivity  =  2*28,  while
for  solutions  in  propyl  alcohol  (Schlamp  1894)  i  is  near  to  1'33.  In  a  word,  although
these  methods  of  determining  the  molecular  weight  of  substances  in  solution  show  an
undoubted  progress  in  the  general  chemical  principles  of  the  molecular  theory,  there  are
still  many  points  which  require  explanation.

"We  will  add  certain  general  relations  which  apply  to  these  problems.  Isotonic
(Chapter  I.,  Note  19)  solutions  exhibit  not  only  similar  osmotic  pressures,  but  also  the
same  vapour  tension,  boiling  point  and  freezing  tem'perature.  The  osmotic  pressure
bears  the  same  relation  to  the  fall  of  the  vapour  tension  as  the  sj^ecific  gravity  of  a
solution  does  to  the  specific  gravity  of  the  vapour  of  the  solvent.  The  general  formulie
underlying  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  influence  of  the  molecular  weight  ujwn  the;
proiHjrties  of  solutions  considered  above,  are  :  1.  Raoult  in  18H6-1JH90  showed  that

p-p' 100 M  . ,  ,,

■^ '^ .  . =  a  constajit  C

p  a m

where  J9  and  j/ are  the  vajMiur  tensions  of  the  s<jlvent  and  substance  dissohed,  «  the
amount  in  grms.  of  the  substance  dissolved  i>er  100  gnns.  of  solvent,  M  and  7h  the
molecular  weights  of  the  substance  dissolved  and  solvent.  2.  Kaoult  and  Recoura  in
1890  showed  that  the  constant  above  C  =  the  ratio  of  the  actual  vajKiur  density  d'  of
the  solvent  to  the  theoretical  density  d  calculated  according  to  the  molecular  weight.
This  deduction  may  now  be  considered  proved,  because  both  the  fall  of  tension  and  the
ratio  of  the  vapour  densities  d'  d  give,  for  water  1*03,  for  alcohol  102,  for  ether  1"04,  for
bisulphide  of  carbon  100,  for  l)enzene  1'02,  for  acetic  acid  103.  3.  By  applying  the
principles  of  thennodynaniics  and  calling  Lj  the  latent  heat  of  fusion  and  T^  the
absolute  ( =  t  +  273)  temiK'rature  of  fusion  of  the  solvent,  and  L-..  and  T,  the  corresponding
valucH  for  the  boiling  ]ioint.  Van't  Hoff  in  18H6-1890  deduceil : —

Depression  of  freezing  point  _  lio Tj^'

Rise  of  boiling  j)oint Li T/

AT  *a
Depressitm  of  freezing  jwint  =  _ '

L,M,

Rise  of  boiling  point  -  '^''^ '^"

Ii.;Mi

where  A 00198S  (or  nearly  «K>2  as  we  took  it  above),  <t  is  the  weight  in  grms.  of  the

MOU-XULES  AND ATOMS  33B

them,  then  the  depi-ession  c/,  or  fall  (counting  from  0^)  of  the  tempera-
ture of  the  funnatioii  of  ice  will  be  (according  to  Pickering)

7i  =  0 0010 0025 0100 0-250 1000
^/  =  0^ 0^0103 0^-0280 0°1115 0°-2758 1°-U12

which  sliows  that  for  high  degrees  of  dilution  (up  to  0*25  n)  d  ap-
proximately (estimating  the  possible  errors  of  experiment  at  ±0°*005)
=nMO,  because  then  rf=0°,  O^OllO,  0°-0275,  0°1100, 0°-2750,  P-1000,
and  the  difference  between  these  figures  and  the  results  of  experiment
for  very  dilute  solutions  is  less  than  the  possible  errors  of  expeiiment
(for  n  =  1  the  diflference  is  already  greater)  and  therefore  for  dilute
solutions  of  sugar  it  may  be  said  that  n  molecules  of  sugar  in  dis-
solving in  100  molecules  of  water  give  a  depression  of  about  \°'\  n.
Similar  datii  for  acetone  (Chapter  I.,  Note  49)  give  a  depression  of
P006  71  for  n  molecules  of  acetone  per  100  molecules  of  water.  And
in  general,  for  indiflferent  substances  (the  majority  of  organic  bodies)
the  depression  per  IOOH2O  is  nearly  nl°-l  to  nl°'0  (ether,  for  instance,
gives  the  hist  number),  and  consequently  in  dissolving  in  100  grms.  of
water  it  is  al)out  18°*0  n  to  19°'0  /i,  taking  this  rule  to  apply  to  the
case  of  a  small  number  of  w  (not  over  0*2  n).  If  instead  of  water,
other  liquid  or  fused  solvents  (for  example,  benzene,  acetic  acid,  ace-
tone, nitrobenzene  or  molten  naphthaline,  metals,  ttc.)  be  taken  and
in  the  proportion  of  100  molecules  of  the  solvent  to  n  molecules
of  a  dissolved  indifferent  (neither  acid  nor  saline)  substance,  then  the
depression  is  found  to  be  equal  to  from  0°'62  n  to  0°*65  n  and  in
general  Kit.  If  the  molecular  weight  of  the  solvent  =  7/1,  then  100
gram -molecules  will  weigh  100  m  grms.,  and  the  depression  will  be
approximately  (talking  0*63  ?i)  equal  to  m  0*63  n  degrees  for  n  molecules
of  the  substance  dissolved  in  100  grms.  of  the  solvent,  or  in  general  the
depression  for  100  grms.  of  a  given  solvent  =  hi  where  k  is  almost
a  constant  quantity  (for  water  nearly  18,  for  acetone  nearly  37,  S:c.)  for
all  dilute  solutions.  Thus,  having  found  a  convenient  solvent  for  a
given  substance  and  prepared  a  definite  (by  weight)  solution  (Lf.  know-
ing how  many  grms.  r  of  the  solvent  there  are  to  q  grms.  of  the
substance  dissolved)  and  having  determined  the  depression  d — i.e.  the
fjill  in  temperature  of  freezing  for  the  solvent  —it  is  possible  to  deter-
mine the  molecular  weight  of  the  substance  dissolved,  because  d  =  kn
where  d  is  found  by  exi)eriment  and  k  is  determined  by  the  nature
of  the  solvent,  and therefore  n  or  the number  of molecules  of  the

>ubstiiiico  (liHsolved  \MiT  100  grms.  of  the  solvent.  Mi  the  molecular  weight  of  the
(lissolvtMl  substaucv  (in  the  solution ),  and  M  the  molecular  weight  of  this  substance
uccordiiig  to  its  comjiosition  and  vapour  density,  then  /  -^  M  Mi.  The  exi^erimental  data
luul  theoretical  considerations  upon  which  these  formulfp  are  based  will  be  found  in  text-
books of  physical  and  theoretical  chemistry.

386  PK1NCIPLE8 OF  CHEMISTRY

are  wholly  dependent  upon  the  molecular  weight  and  not  upon  the  quality
of  a  substance,  and  that  this  gives  the  possibility  of  determining  the
weight  of  molecules  by  studying  these  properties  (for  instance,  the  vapour
density,  depression  of  the  freezing  point,  <kc.)  It  is  apparent  from  the
foregoing  that  the  physical  and  even  more  so  the  chemical  properties  of
homogeneous  substances,  more  especially  solid  and  liquid,  do  not  depend
exclusively  upon  the  weights  of  their  molecules,  but  that  many  are  in
definite  (see  Chapter  XV.)  dependence  upon  the  weights  of  the  atoms
of  the  elements  entering  into  their  composition,  and  are  determined  by
their  quantitative  and  individual  peculiarities.  Thus  the  density  of
solids  and  liquids  (as  will  afterwards  be  shown)  is  chiefly  determined
by  the  weights  of  the  atoms  of  the  elements  entering  into  their  composi-
tion, inasmuch  as  dense  elements  (in  a  free  state)  and  com]>ounds  are
only  met  with  among  substances  containing  elements  with  large  atomic
weights,  such  as  gold,  platinum,  and  uranium.  And  these  elements
themselves,  in  a  free  state,  are  the  heaviest  of  all  elements.  Substances
containing  such  light  elements  as  hydrogen,  carbon,  oxygen  and  nitrogen
(like  many  organic  substances)  never  have  a  high  specific  gravity  ;  in
the  majority  of  cases  it  scarcely  exceeds  that  of  water.  The  density
geneiully  decreases  with  the  increase  of  the  amount  of  hydrogen,  as  the
lightest  element,  and  a  substance  is  often  obtained  lighter  than  water.
The  refractive  power  of  substances  also  entirely  depends  on  the  com-
position and  the  properties  of  the  component  elements. ^^  ^'» The  history

»  bu  Witli  respect  to  the  optical  refractive  power  of  substuuces,  it  must  first  l>c
observed  that  the  coefficient  of  refraction  is  detennined  l>y  two  methods:  in)  either  all
the  data  are  referred  to  one  definite  ray — for  instance,  to  the  Fraunhofer  (Kodium)  line
D  of  the  solar  spectrum — that  is,  to  a  ray  of  definite  wave  length,  and  often  to  that  red
ray  (of  the  hydrogen  spectrum)  whose  wave  length  is  656  millionths  of  a  millimetre ;  (6)
or  Cauchy's  formula  is  used,  showing  the  relation  between  the  coefficient  of  refraction  and

dispersi(m  to  the  wave  length  m^A+ ^  where A  and  B  are two  constants  varying

for  every  substance  but  constant  for  all  rays  of  the  spectrum,  and  A  is  the  wave  h'ngth
of  that  ray  whose  coefficient  of  ref taction  is  n.  In  the  latter  method  the  investigation
usually  concerns  the  magnitudes  of  A,  which  are  independent  of  disinrsion.  "We  shall
afterwards  cite  the  dativ,  investigated  by  the  first  method,  by  which  (Gladstone,  Landolt,
and  others  established  the  conception  of  the  refraction  equivalent.  •

It  has  long  been  known  that  the  coefficient  of  refraction  n  for  a  given  substance
decreases  with  the  density  of  a  substance  D,  so  that  the  magnitude  (n-  \)  h-D  -  C  i^
almost  constant  for  ai  given  ray  (having  a  definite  wave  length)  and  for  a  given  subsUince.
This  constant  is  called  the  refractive  energy,  and  its  product  with  the  atomic  or  mole-
cular weight  of  a  substance  the  refraction  equivalent.  The  coefficient  of  refraction  of
oxygen  is  100021,  of  hydrogen  100014,  their  densities  (referred  to  water)  are  00()14rt
and  000<MM»,  and  their  atomic  weights,  0--16,  H  =  l ;  hence  their  refraction  equivalents
are  U  and  rr>.  Water  contains  H..,0,  consequently  the  sum  of  the  equivalents  of
refraction  is  (2x1-5)  -3  ('».  But  as  the  coefficient  of  refraction  of  water  1'381,
its  refraction  equivalent  -  r>l>r>H,  or  nearly  6.  C(mii>arison  shows  that,  approxi-
mately, the sum  of the refraction equivalents of the atoms  forming  conipounda

MOLECULES  AND  ATOMS  837

of  chemistry  presents  a  striking  example  in  point — Newton  foresaw
from  the  high  refractive  index  of  the  diamond  that  it  would  contain
a  combustible  substanc^  since  so  many  combustible  oils  have  a  high
refractive  power.  We  shall  afterwards  see  (Chapter  XV.)  that
many  of  those  properties  of  substances  which  are  in  direct  dependence
not  upon  the  weight  of  the  molecules  but  upon  their  composition,  or,  in
other  words,  upon  the  properties  and  quantities  of  the  elements  enter-
ing into  them,  stand  in  a  peculiar  (periodic)  dependence  upon  the
atomic  weight  of  the  elements  ;  that  is,  the  mass  (of  molecules  and
atoms),  proportional  to  the  weight,  determines  the  properties  of
substances  as  it  also  determines  (with  the  distance)  the  motions  of  the
heavenly  bodies.

(or  mixtares)  is  equal  to  tlie  refraction  equivalent  of  the  compound.  According  to  the
researches  of  Gladstone,  Landolt,  Hagen,  Briihl  and  others,  the  refraction  eqaiTalents  of
the  elements  are— H  =  1-3,  Li  =  8.8,  B  =  40,  C  =  50,  N  =  41  (in  its  highest  state  of  oxida-
tion, 5-8),  0=:  29,  F»  14,  Na=  48,  Mg  =  70,  Al«8-4,  Si  =  6-8,  P  =  18-8,  S  =  ]60,  Cl  =  99,
K  =  81,  Ca  =  10-4,  Mn  =  12-2,  Fe-120  (in  the  salts  of  its  higher  oxides,  201),  Co  =  108,
Cu  =  ll-6,  Zn-10-2,  As -15-4,  Bi  =  15-8,  Ag  =  15-7,  Cd  =  18C,  1-24-5,  Pt-260,  Hg  =  20-2,
Pb  =  24'8,  <tc.  The  refraction  equivalents  of  many  elements  could  only  be  calculated
from  the  solutions  of  their  compounds.  The  comimsition  of  a  solution  being  known  it  is
possible  to  calculate  the  refraction  equivalent  of  one  of  its  com].K>nent  parts,  those  for  all
its  other  components  being  known.  The  results  are  founded  on  the  acceptance  of  a  law
which  cannot  be  strictly  applied.  Nevertheless  the  representation  of  the  refraction
equivalents  gives  an  easy  means  for  directly,  although  only  approximately,  obtaining  the
coefficient  of  refraction  from  the  chemical  composition  of  a  substance.  For  instance,
the  composition  of  carbon  bisulphide  is  CS.>  =  76,  and  from  its  density,  1*27,  we  find  ita
coefficient  of  refraction  to  be  1*618  (because  the  refraction  equivalent  =5  +  2x16  =  87),
which  is  very  near  the  actual  figure.  It  is  evident  that  in  the  above  representation  com-
pounds  are  looked  on  as  simple  mixtures  of  atoms,  and  the  physical  properties  of  a  com-
pound as  the  sum  of  the  properties  present  in  the  elementary  atoms  forming  it.  If  this
representation  of  the  presence  of  simple  atoms  in  compounds  had  not  existed,  the  idea
of  combining  by  a  few  figures  a  whole  mass  of  data  relating  to  the  coefficient  of  refrac-
tion of  different  substances  could  hardly  have  arisen.  For  further  details  on  this  subject,
see  works  on  Physical  Chemistry.

VOL.  I.

838  PRINCIPLES  OF  CUEMISTRY

CHAPTER VIII

CARBON AND THE HYDROCARBONS

It  is  necessary  to  clearly  distinguish  between  the  two  closely-allied
terms,  charcoal  and  carbon.  Charcoal  is  well  known  to  everybody,
although  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  obtain  it  in  a  chemically  pure  state.
Pure  charcoal  is  a  simple,  insoluble,  infusible,  combustible  substance
produce<l  by  heating  organic  matter,  and  has  the  familiar  aspect  of  a
black  mass,  devoid  of  any  crystalline  structure,  and  completely  in-
soluble. Charcoal  is  a  substance  possessing  a  peculiar  combination  of
physical  and  chemical  properties.  This  substance,  whilst  in  a  state  of
ignition,  combines  directly  with  oxygen  ;  in  organic  substances  it  is
found  in  combination  with  hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  and  sulphur.
But  in  all  these  combinations  there  is  no  real  charcoal,  as  in  the  same
sense  there  is  no  ice  in  steam.  What  is  found  in  such  combinations  is
termed  *carlx>n' — that  is,  an  element  common  to  charcoal,  to  those
substances  which  can  be  formed  from  it,  and  also  to  those  substances
from  which  it  can  be  obtained.  Carbon  may  t^ke  the  form  of  char-
coal, but  occurs  also  as  diamond  and  as  graphite.  Truly  no  other
element  has  such  a  wide  terminology.  Oxygen  is  always  called
'oxygen,*  whether  it  is  in  a  free  gaseous  state,  or  in  the  form  of
ozdne,  or  oxygen  in  water,  or  in  nitric  acid  or  in  carbonic  anhydride.
But  here  there  is  some  confusion.  In  water  it  is  evident  that  there  is
no  oxygen  in  a  gaseous  form,  such  as  can  be  obtained  in  a  free  state,
no  oxygen  in  the  form  of  ozone,  but  a  substance  which  is  capable
of  producing  both  oxygen,  ozone,  and  water.  As  an  element,  oxygen
possesses  a  known  chemical  individuality,  and  an  influence  on  the
properties  of  those  combinations  into  which  it  enters.  Hydrogen  gas
is  a  substance  which  reacts  with  difficulty,  but  the  element  hydrogen
represents  in  its  combinations  an  easily  displaceable  component  part.
Carbon  may  be  considered  as  an  atom  of  carbon  matter,  and  charcoal
as  a  collection  of  such  atoms  forming  a  whole  substance,  or  mass  of
molecules  of  the  substance.  The  accepted  atomic  weight  of  carbon
is 12, l)ecause that is the least  quantity  of carbon which enters

CARBON  AND  THE HYDROCARBONS  839

into  combination  in  molecules  of  its  compounds  ;  but  the  weight  of
the  molecules  of  charcoal  is  probably  very  much  greater.  This  weight
remains  unknown  because  charcoal  is  capable  of  but  few  direct
reactions  and  those  only  at  a  high  temperature  (when  the  weight
of  its  molecules  probably  changes,  as  when  ozone  changes  into  oxygen),
and  it  does  not  turn  into  vapour.  Carbon  exists  in  nature,  both  in
a  free  and  combined  state,  in  most  varied  forms  and  aspects.  Carbon
in  a  free  state  is  found  in  at  least  three  different  forms,  as  charcoal,
graphite,  and  the  diamond.  In  a  combined  state  it  enters  into  the
composition  of  what  aro  called  organic  substances— a  multitude  of
substances  which  are  found  in  all  plants  and  animals.  It  exists
as  carbonic  anhydride  both  in  air  and  in  water,  and  in  the  soil
and  crust  of  the  earth  as  salts  of  carbonic  acid  and  as  organic
remains.

The  variety  of  the  substances  of  which  the  structure  of  plants  and
animals  is  built  up  is  familiar  to  all.  Wax,  oil,  turpentine,  and  tar,
cotton  and  albumin,  the  tissue  of  plants  and  the  muscular  fibro  of
animals,  vinegar  and  starch,  are  all  vegetable  and  animal  matters,  and
all carbon compounds.' The  class  of  carbon  compounds  is  so  vast

1  Wood  in  the  non-vital  part  of  ligneouH  planta :  the  vital  part  of  ordinary  trees  is
situated  between  the  bark  and  the  ligniu. Every  year  a  layer  of  lignin  is  deposited  on
tlii«  part  by  the  juices  which  are  absorbed  by  the  roots  and  drawn  up  by  the  leaves;  for
tliis  reason  the  age  of  trees  maybe  determined  by  the  number  of  lignin  layers  deposited.
The  woo<ly  mutter  consists  principally  of  fibrous  tissue  on  to  which  the  lignin  or  so-called
incrusting  matter  has  been  deposited. The  tissue  has  the  composition  CeHjoOj,  the
substance  deposited  on  it  contains  more  carbon  and  hydrogen  and  less  oxygen. This
matter  is  saturated  with  moisture  when  the  wood  is  in  a  fresh  state. Fresh  birch  wood
coutaiuh  alx>nt  81  p.c.  of  water,  lime  wood  47  p.c,  oak  35  p.c.,  pine  and  fir  about  87  p.c.
When  dried  in  the  air  the  wood  loses  a  considerable  quantity  of  water  and  not  more  than
19  p.c.  remains. By  artificial  means  tliis  loss  of  water  may  be  increased. If  water  be  driven
into  the  p<>i*es  of  wood  the  latter  becomes  heavier  than  water,  as  the  lignin  of  which  it  is
compose<l  has  a  density  of  about  1'6. One  cubic  centimetre  of  birch  wood  does  not
weigh  more than  OWl  gram,  fir  0*894,  lime  tree  0817,  poplar -705  when  in  a  fresli
state  ;  when  in  a  dry  state  birch  weighs  0G22,  pine  0*550,  fir  0-855,  lime  0*480,  guaiacum
1*842,  ebony  1*2*2<>. On  one  hectare  (2*7  acres)  of  woo<lland  the  yearly  growth  averages
the  amount  of  8,000  kilograms  (or  about  8  tons)  of  wood,  but  rarely  reaches  as  much  as
5,000  kilos. The  average  chemical  composition  of  wood  dried  in  air  may  be  expressed  as
follows :— Hygroscopic  water  15  p.c,  carbon  42  p.c,  hydrogen  5  p.c,  oxygen  and  nitrogen
37  p.c,  ash  1  p.c. Wood  parts  with  its  hygroscopic  water  at  150°,  and  decomposes  at
about  300',  giving  a  brown,  brittle,  so-called  red  charcoal ;  above  860^  black  charcoal  is
produced. As  the  hydrogen  contained  in  wood  requires  for  its  combustion  about  forty  ports
by  weight  of  oxygen,  which  is  present  to  the  amount  of  about  86  p.c,  all  that  bums  of
the  wood  is  the  carbon  which  it  contains,  100  parts  of  wood  only  giving  out  as  much  heat
as  forty  i»arts  of  charcoal,  and  therefore  it  would  be  far  more  profitable  to  use  charcoal  for
heating  }>un)oses  than  wood,  if  it  were  possible  to  obtain  it  in  such  quantities  as  corre-
spond with  its  i)ercentage  ratio— that  is  forty  parts  per  100  iHirts  of  wood. Generally,
however,  the  (juantity  pnxluced  is  far  less,  not  more  than  80  p.c,  because  part  of  the
carbon  is  given  off  as  gas,  tar,  (tc If  wood  has  to  be  transported  great  distances,  or  if

22

that  it  forms  a.  separate  branch  of  chemistry,  known  under  tlie  nam^j
of  organic  chemistry  that  is,  the  chemistry  of  carbon  compounds,  orJ
more  Gtrictly,  of  the  hydrocarbons  and  their  derivatives.

it  is  neoessaty  to  obt&iii  n  rtty  high  temperature  bj'  liuruiu{;  it,  llieii  tvan  i
BS  p.C.  □[  ('lurcUB.1  [rum  lOU  {lUla  o(  wood  timy  be  Bdvantsgeoua. Clinrcotl  (lioin  wood)  '
developH  on  burning  K,00n  heat  UOitii,  whilst  wood  dried  in  sir  Sotv  uat  deTeliip  more
than  2,800  units  of  h«il ;  theCBlore  seven  parts  of  charcoal  give  ax  muoh  husl  »  twetiljr
p«rt»  of  wood. As  reganle  the  temperature  of  coinboation,  it  i«  far  higher  with  ch»n»wl
Ihau  with  wood,  because  Iweul]!  partn  of  burning  wood  give,  besides  the  rarbouiv  anhjrdrida  ■_
which  is  also  formed  together  with  charcoal,  eleven  parts  of  water,  the  eiaporaiiui
which  requites  a  considerable  amouut  of  heat,

The  compositional  tliegrowiu);  parts  of  plants,  tlie  leaves,  young  branches,  ilunto.  S
differs  from  the  compOHitinn  of  the  wood  in  that  tliese  vital  parts  eontain  a  cd

Fill.  17.— Appntatus

»»r)-.

qouilit}  of  MP  which  coulaiiiH  much  nitrogenous  matter  (in  the  wood  itself  there  la
little},  luinenl  saltn,  ami  a  large  amoont  of  water.  Tnlriug.for  example,  the  comporitis
o(  clover  and  pasture  hay  in  the  green  and  dry  state;  in  100  parts  of  green
is  about  SO  pj^.  of  water  and  90  p.e,  of  dry  inutter,  in  whicli  there  are  abont  8'S  pari*  dil
nitrogenous  albuminous  matter,  about  9'5  ]iarls  of  soluble  and  abont  5  parts  of  ins  '
non -nitrogenous  matter,  and  sbont  3p.c.  of  ash.  In  dry  clover  or  elovot-hay  there  i«
IS  p.C.  ol water,  IS  p.c.  of  uitrogenous  matter,  and  T  p.C.  of  asii.  This  composition  ofl
grassy  substances  shows  that  they  are  capable  of  forming  the  same  sort  ol  cliareoal  ai
wood  itself.  It  also  shows  the  difference  of  nutritive  properties  eiisting  between  w<Mldil
and  the  eubstanres  mentioned.  These  latter  serve  as  food  for  animals,  becaoM  thi^l
coDtain  those  substances  which  are  cHpable  of  being  dissolved  (enteriuK  into  the  Um"
and  forming  the  body  of  animals ;  such  substances  are  proteids,  iitarch,  tlv.
remark  here  (hat  with  a  good  harvest  an  acre  of  land  givet  in  the  fonn  of  grnas  as  m
organic  substance  ai.  it  yields  in  the  form  ol  wood.

One  hundred  [Aatts  of  dry  Rood  ui«  capable  of  giving,  on  dry  distillatioi
95  p.C.  of  charcoal  and  10  p.c.  or  more  Ol  tar,  ID  p.c.  of  watery  liquid,  conlaini
acid  and  wood  spirit,  and  abont  AG  p.c.  of  gases,  which  may  be  u*ed  for  h
lighting  purposes,  beeanae  they  do  not  differ  from  ordinary  illnminating  gas,  »fci(A  M

CARBON  AND  THE  HYDROCARBONS  841

If  any  one  of  these  organic  compounds  be  strongly  heated  without  free
access  of  air — or,  better  still,  in  a  vacuum — it  decomposes  with  more  or
less  facility.  If  the  supply  of  air  be  insufficient,  or  the  temperature  be
too  low  for  combustion  (see  Chapter  Til.),  and  if  the  first  volatile  pro-
ducts of  transformation  of  the  organic  matter  are  subjected  to  conden-
sation (for  example,  if  the  door  of  a  stove  be  opened),  an  imperfect
combustion  takes  place,  and  smoke,  with  charcoal  or  soot,  is  formed.'^

indeed  be  obtained  from  wood.  As  wood-cbarcoal  and  tar  are  valuable  products,  in  some
oases  the  dry  distillation  of  wood  is  carried  on  principally  for  producing  them.  For  this
purpose  those  kinds  of  woods  are  particularly  advantageous  which  contain  resinous  sub-
Ktances,  especially  coniferous  trees,  such  as  fir,  pine,  &c. ;  birch,  oak,  and  ash  give  much
less  tar,  but  on  the  other  hand  they  yield  more  aqueous  liquor.  The  latter  is  used  for  the
manufacture  of  wood  spirit,  CH^O,  and  acetic  acid,  C2H4O.2.  In  such  cases,  the  dry  dis-
tillation is  carried  on  in  stills.  The  stills  are  nothing  more  than  horizontal  or  vertical
cylindrical  retorts,  made  of  boiler  plate,  heated  with  fuel  and  having  apertures  at
the  top  and  sometimes  also  at  the  bottom  for  the  exit  of  the  light  and  heavy  pro-
ducts of  distillation.  The  dry  distillation  of  wood  in  stoves  is  carried  on  in  two  ways,
either  by  burning  a  jwrtion  of  the  wood  inside  the  stove  in  order  to  submit  the  remainder
to  dry  distillation  by  means  of  the  heat  obtained  in  tliis  manner,  or  by  placing  the  wood
in  a  stove  the  thin  sides  of  which  are  surrounded  with  a  flue  leading  fr6m  the  fuel,
placed  in  a  space  below.

Tlie  first  method  does  not  give  such  a  large  amount  of  liquid  products  of  the  dry
distillation  as  the  latter.  In  the  latter  process  there  is  generally  an  outlet  below  for
emptying  out  the  charcoal  at  the  close  of  the  operation.  For  the  dry  distillation  of  100
parts  of  wood  from  forty  to  twenty  parts  of  fuel  are  used.

In  the  north  of  Russia  wood  is  so  plentiful  and  cheap  that  this  locality  is  admirably
fitted  to  become  the  centre  of  a  general  trade  in  the  products  of  its  dry  distillation.
Coal  (Note  6),  sea- weed,  turf,  animal  substances  (Chapter  YI.),  il'c,  are  also  submitted
to  the  process  of  dry  distillation.

^  The  result  of  imperfect  combustion  is  not  only  the  loss  of  a  part  of  the  fuel  and  the
production  of  smoke,  which  in  some  respects  is  inconvenient  and  injurious  to  health,  but
also  a  low  flame  temperature,  which  means  that  a  less  amount  of  heat  is  transmitted  to
the  object  heated.  Imperfect  combustion  is  not  only  always  accompanied  by  the  forma-
tion of  soot  or  unburnt  particles  of  charcoal,  but  also  by  that  of  carbonic  oxide,  CO,  in  the
smoke  (Chapter  IX.)  which  bums,  emitting  much  heat.  In  works  and  factories  where
large  quantities  of  fuel  are  consumed,  many  appliances  are  adopted  to  ensure  perfect  com-
bustion, and  to  combat  against  such  a  ruinous  practice  as  the  ini|)erfect  combustion  of
fuel.  The  most  effective  and  radical  means  consists  in  employing  combustible  gases
(producer  and  water  gases),  because  by  their  aid  perfect  combustion  can  be  easily
realise<l  without  a  loss  of  heat-producing  power  and  the  highest  temperature  can
be  reached.  When  solid  fuel  is  used  (such  as  coal,  wood,  and  turf),  imperfect  combustion
is  most  liable  to  occur  when  the  furnace  doors  are  opened  for  the  introduction  of  fresh
fuel.  The  step  furnace  may  often  prove  a  remedy  for  this  defect.  In  the  ordinary
furnace  fresh  fuel  is  placed  on  the  burning  fuel,  and  the  products  of  dry  distillation  of
the  fresh  fuel  have  to  bum  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  remaining  uncombined  with
the  burnt  fuel.  Imperfect  combustion  is  observed  in  this  case  also  from  the  fact  that
the  dry  distillation  and  evaporation  of  the  water  of  the  fresh  fuel  lying  on  the  top  of  that
burnt,  lowers  the  temperature  of  the  flame,  because  part  of  the  heat  becomes  latent*
On  this  account  a  large  amount  of  smoke  (imperfect  combustion)  is  observed  when  a  fresh
quantity  of  fuel  is  introduced  into  the  furnace.  This  may  be  obviate<l  by  constructing
the  furnace  (or  managing  the  stoking)  in  such  a  way  that  the  products  of  distillation  pass
through  the  red-hot  charcoal  remaining  from  the  burnt  fuel.  It  is  only  necessary  in
order  to  ensure  this  to  allow  a  sufficient  quantity  of  air  for  perfect  combustion. All  this

342  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  nature  of  the  phenomenon,  and  the  products  arising  from  it,  are  the
same  as  those  produced  by  heating  alone,  since  that  part  which  is  in  a
state  of  combustion  serves  to  heat  the  remainder  of  the  fuel.  The
decomposition  which  takes  place  on  heating  a  com{)Ound  composed  of
carbon,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen  is  as  follows  : — A  part  of  the  hydrogen
is  separated  in  a  gaseous  state,  anothei*  part  in  combination  with
oxygen,  and  a  third  part  separates  in  combination  with  carbon,  and
sometimes  in  combination  with  carbon  and  oxygen  in  the  form  of
gaseous  or  volatile  products,  or,  as  they  are  also  called,  the  products  of
dry  distillation.  If  the  vapours  of  these  products  are  passed  through
a  strongly  heated  tube,  they  are  changed  again  in  a  similar  manner
and  finally  resolve  themselves  into  hydrogen  and  charcoal.  Altogether
these  various  products  of  decomposition  contain  a  smaller  amount  of
carbon  than  the  original  organic  matter  ;  part  of  the  carbon  remains
in  a  free  state,  forming  charcoal.^  It  remains  in  that  space  where
the  decomposition  took  place,  in  the  shape  of  the  black,  infusible,
non-volatile  charcoal  familiar  to  all.  The  earthy  matter  and  all  non-
may  be  easily  attained  by  the  use  of  step  fire-bars.  The  fuel  is  fed  into  a  hopper  and
falls  on  to  the  fire-bars,  which  are  arranged  in  the  fonn  of  a  staircase.  The  burning
charcoal  is  below,  and  hence  the  flame  formed  by  the  fresh  fuel  is  heated  by  the  con^
tact  of  the  red-hot  burning  charcoal.  An  air  supply  through  the  fire  grate,  an  equal  dis-
tribution of  the  fuel  on  the  fire-bars  (otherwise  the  air  will  blow  tlirough  empty  spaces  and
lower  the  temperature),  a  proper  proportion  between  the  supply  of  air  and  the  chimney
draught,  and  a  perfect  admixture  of  air  with  the  flame  (without  an  undue  excess  of  air),
are  the  means  by  which  we  can  contend  against  the  imi>erfect  combustion  of  such  kinds
of  fuel  as  wood,  peat,  and  ordinary  (smoky)  coal.  Coke,  charcoal,  anthracite,  bum  with-
out smoke,  because  they  do  not  contain  hydrogenous  substances  which  furnish  the  pro-
ducts of  dry  distillation,  but  imperfect  combustion  may  occur  with  them  also ;  in  that
case  the  smoke  contains  carbonic  oxide.

^  Under  the  action  of  air,  organic  substances  are  cupiible  of  oxidising  to  such  an  extent
tliat  all  the  carbon  and  all  the  hydrogen  they'contain  will  be  transformed  into  carbonic  anhy-
dride and  water.  The  refuse  of  plants  and  that  of  animals  are  subjected  to  such  a  change
whether  they  slowly  decompose  and  putrefy,  or  rapidly  bum  with  direct  access  of  air.  But
if  the  supply  of  air  be  limited,  there  can  be  no  complete  transformation  into  water  and
carbonic  anhydride,  there  will  be  other  volatile  matters  (rich  in  hydrogen),  while  charcoal
must  remain  as  a  non- volatile  substance.  All  organic  substances  are  unstable,  they  do  not
rasist  heat,  and  change  even  at  ordinarj-  temperatures,  particularly  if  water  be  present.  It
lA  therefore  easy  to  understand  that  charcoal  may  in  many  cases  be  obtained  through  the
transformation  of  substances  entering  into  the  c<mip(»8ition  of  organisms,  but  that  it  is
never  found  in  a  pure  state.

However,  water  and  Carbonic  anhydride  are  not  the  only  products  separated  from
organic  substances.  Carlwn,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen  are  cai>able  of  giving  a  multitude  of
compounds ;  some  of  these  are  volatile  compounds,  gaseous,  soluble  in  water — they  are
carried  off  from  organic  matter,  undergoing  change  without  access  of  uir.  Others,  on  the
contrai7,  are  uon-volatile,  rich  in  carbon,  unaffected  by  heat  and  other  agents.  The  latter
remain  in  admixture  with  charcoal  in  the  place  where  the  decomi)ositi<m  takes  place ;  such,
for  exanii)le,  are  tarry  substances.  The  quantity  of  those  bo<lies  which  are  found  mixed
with  the  cliarcoal  is  very  varied,  and  depends  on  the  energj'  and  duration  of  the  decom-
posing agent. The  annexed  table  shows,  acconiing  to  the  data  of  Violette,  those  changes

CARBON  AND  THE  HYDROCARBONS  848

volatile  substances  (asli)  forming  a  part  of  the  organic  matter,  remain
behind  with  the  charcoal.  The  tar-like  substances,  which  require  a
high  temperature  in  order  to  decompose  them,  also  remain  mixed  with
charcoal.  If  a  volatile  organic  substance,  such  as  a  gaseous  compound
containing  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  be  t-aken,  the  carbon  separates  on
passing  the  vapour  through  a  tube  heated  to  a  high  temperature.
Organic  substances  when  burning  with  an  insufficient  supply  of  air
give  off  soot  -that  is,  charcoal — proceeding  from  carbon  compounds  in
a  state  of  vapour,  the  hydrogen  of  which  has,  by  combustion,  been
converted  into  water  ;  so,  for  instance,  turpentine,  naphthalene,  and
other  hydrocarbons  which  are  with  difficulty  decomposed  by  heat,  easily
yield  carbon  in  the  form  of  soot  during  combustion.  Chlorine  and
other  substances  which,  like  oxygen,  are  capable  of  taking  up  hydro-
gen, and  also  substances  which  are  capable  of  taking  up  water,  can
also  separate  carbon  from  (or  char)  most  organic  substances.

Wood  chai*coal  is  prepared  in  large  quantities  in  a  similar  manner
— that  is,  by  the  partial  combustion  of  wood.^ In  nature  a  similar

which  wood  undergoes  at  various  teinx>eratures  when  submittped  to  dr>'  distillation  by
means  of  superheated  steam  . —

I
III  luu  parts  of  the  residual  cliarcoiil  I

H  O  nn«l  N  Ash

61 46-8  01

41 18-4  0-6

2-8 lil  1-6

0-7 3-8  1-7

^  Tlie  object  of  producing  charcoal  from  wood  has  been  explained  in  Note  1.
Wood  charcoal  is  obtained  in  so-called  stacks  by  partially  burning  the  wood,  or  by
means  of  dry  distillation  (Note  1)  without  the  access  of  air.  It  is  principally  manu-
facture<l  for  metallurgical  i>rocesseK,  especially  for  smelting  and  forging  iron.  The
preparation  of  charcoal  in  stacks  has  one  advantage,  and  that  is  that  it  may  l>e  done
on  any  spot  in  the  forest.  But  in  this  way  all  the  products  of  dry  distillation  are  lost.
For  charcoal  burning,  a  pile  or  stack  is  generally  built,  in  which  the  logs  are  placed
close  together,  either  horizontally,  vertically,  or  inclined,  forming  a  stack  of  from  six
to  fifty  feet  in  diameter  and  even  larger.  Under  the  stack  are  several  horizontal  air
jMissages,  and  an  opening  in  the  middle  to  let  out  the  smoke.  The  surface  of  the  stack  is
covered  with  earth  and  sods  to  a  considerable  thickness,  especially  the  upi)er  port,  in
order  to  hinder  the  free  passtige  of  air  and  to  concentrate  the  heat  inside.  When  the
stack  is  kindled,  the  pile  begins  to  settle  down  by  degrees,  and  it  is  then  necessary  to
look  after  the  turf  casing  and  keep  it  in  repair.  As  the  combustion  spreads  throughout
the  whole  pile,  the  temperature  rises  and  real  dry  distillation  commences.  It  is  then
necessarj'  to  stop  the  air  holes,  in  order  as  much  as  possible  to  prevent  unnecessary  com-
bustion. The  nature  of  the  process  is,  that  part  of  the  fuel  bums  and  develops  the  heat
rfijuircd  for  subjecting  the  remainder  to  dry  distillation.  The  charring  is  stopped  when
the  products  of  dr>-  distillation,  which  are  emitted,  no  longer  bum  with  a  brilliant  flame,
but  the  pale  blue  flame  of  carlmnic  oxide  appears.  Dry  wood  in  stacks  yields  about  one-
fourth  of  its  weight  of  charcoaL

Tenip«?raturf

Rei<iilue
from  100  parts*
of  alder  wocxl

150
850^
1032
1500

1000
29-7
18-7
17-3

C
47-5
76«
81-9
950

s  of  carbonisation  of  vegetable  refuse  takes  place  in  its  tnuia-
formation  under  water,  as shown by  the  marshy  vegetation which'
forms  peat.'' In this manner  doubtless the  enormous masses
coal  were  formetl  "  which,  following  the  example  set  by  England,  £

uoh  richer  in  carbcni— otniel;,
state  ramtaim  about  70  p.a.  at  i
witlier  and  fall  to  the  ground  fom i
toiDccs  (lignHHis  tisime)  flrst  lami t

'  When  dead  vegetable  matter  undergc^ii  I
moisture  and  IcurerorganiiimB,  there  remains  ■  i
fatunna,  blaak  earth  or  mould. 100  parts  of  bnuios  hi  n
carbon. The  roota,  leaves,  and  sterna  of  plants  wl
a  Boil  rich  In  humua. The  non-vital  vegetdble  '

farovn  nutter  {ulmic  componndHl,  and  then  black  matter  (bumic  eubslaneea),  wluoh  >
both  insolnble  in  water;  after  (his  a  brown  aciil  in  produced,  which  is  solubls  in  WU
(apocrenic  acid),  and  laatly  a  colourless  acid  nlBOsolubleinwalar  (crenicacid). Alkali  di
solves  a  part  of  the  original  brown  and  black  substanceu,  romiinfi  solutions  of  a  brown  Unt ,
(nlmic  and  hutnic  acids)  which  sometimes  cvmmunicate  their  colour  to  springs  mid  riven. <
The  proportion  ol  humus  in  soil  generall;  has  a  direct  influence  on  its  fertilit;  ;  flntly,
becanse  putrefying  plants  develop  caibonio  anhydride  and  ammonia,  and  yield  the  aab- {
stances  forming  the  aslies  of  plants,  which  arc  necessary  to  vegetation ;  secondly,  bocaoae
humus  is  capable  of  attracting  the  moisture  of  the  air  and  of  absorbing  water  (twice  itt
Height]  and  in  this  way  keeps  the  soil  in  n  ilamp  cooditiou,  which  is  indispensahle  for '
nourishment;  thirdly,  humus  renders  the soil  porous,  and,  fourthly,  il
capable  of  absoibing  the  heat  ol  the  snn'a  raya. On  this  account  bla
most  reiutixkibli:  for  its  fertility. One  object  of  manuring  is  to  incieane  the  quantity  □( |
humus  in  the  noil,  and  any  easily  changeatitc  vegetable  or  any  animal  matter  (composts)
may  be  used. The  boundless  travlsof  black  earth  soil  in  Russia  are  capable  ol  bestowing
countless  wealth  on  tlie  country.  i

The  origin  and  extent  of  black  earth  soil  ore  treated  in  ilclail  in  Frulessor  Dokaa*-
chaeS's  works.

If  those  sabstonoea  which  produce  bumns  nndcrgo  decomposition  under  water,  leaa
iiarbonic  anliydride  is  formed,  a  yuiuitity  of  marsh  gsa,  CH„  is  evolvtd,  and  the  aolid
residue  foimg  on  acid  humna  found  in  great  <|uantities  in  marshy  places  and Called 'I
lieal. Peal is  especially  abundant  in the  lowlands  of Holland, Xortb r
Ireland,  and  Bavaria. In  Russia  it  is  likewise  found  in  large  quantities,  espeeiall}  b>  J
the  North- West  districts- The  old  hard  forms  of  peat  resemble  in  composition  and  pro,,
peities  brown  coitl;  the  newest  rormatioiia.  as  yet  unhardened  by  pressure,  (arm  vary
porons  masses  which  retain  traces  of  the  vegetable  matter  from  which  tliey  have  besB
formed. Dried  (and  sometimes  pressed)  pest  is  Used  ii«  fnel. The  composition  ol  p«B%
varies  considerably  with  the  locality  in  which  it  is  found. When  dried  in  air  it  doe*  IM>4
DonlaJn  less  than  16  p.c,  ol  water  and  S  p.c.  ol  ash  ;  the  remainder  coniiisis  of  4G  p-O.  ol
carbon,  4  pf .  of  hydrogen,  1  p.c.  of  nitrogen,  and  S8  p-c-  of  oxygen. Its  heating  p(
is  about  ei|uivateut  to  that  of  wood. The  brown  eartliy  varieties  of  coal  were  protN^lj '
formed  from  peat. lo  other  cases  they  have  a  marked  woody  stmcture,  and  are  tb<n |
known  as  lignites. The  composition  ol  the  brown  sorts  of  coal  rr
degree  that  of  peal — ^niLnioly,  in  a  dried  state  brown  coal  contunt
ol  carbon,  £  p.c.  of  liydrogen,  ^  p.c.  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  a
Russia  brown  coal  is  met  with  in  many  districts  near  Moscow.  L

IToula  and  Tver  and  the  neighboorhood ; it  is  very  usiuilly  used  its  fuel,  particnladf  1
when  found  in  thick  seama. Tlie  brown  coats  usually  bum  witli  a  flame  like  wood  ■
|nal,  and  are  akin  to  them  in  beating  power,  which  is  half  or  a  third  that  ol  the  b

IS  and  wood,  the  vegetation  ol  ptimKva)  seas  and  simikr  reluw  (
periods,  must  have  been  in  many  cases  subjeuteil  to  the  same  choi
undergo — that  is,  under  water  they  lormed  peat  and  lignites.  Such  lubitanoe*,  p(«>>l
■erved  or  a  long  time  underground,  subjected  to  the  action  of  water,  cumprened  by  thai
strata  formerl  abo^'e  them,  transformed  by  the  separation  of  theii

CARBON  AND  THE  HYDROCARBONS  345

now  utilised  everywhere  as  the  principal  material  for  heating  steam

comi)onent  p&rtH  (peat  and  lignites,  even  in  their  last  condition,  still  continue  to  evolve
nitrogen,  carbonic  anhydride,  and  marsli  gases)  form  coal.  Coal  is  a  dense  homogeneous
mass,  black,  with  an  oily  or  glassy  lustre,  or  more  rarely  dull  without  any  evident  vege-
table structure ;  this  distinguishes  it  in  api)earance  from  the  majority  of  lignites.  The
density  of  coal  (not  counting  the  admixture  of  p3rrites,  i^c.)  varies  from  1*25  (dry  bitu-
minous coal)  to  1*6  (anthracite,  flameless),  and  even  reaches  I'D  in  the  very  dense  variety
of  coal  found  in  the  Olonetzky  government  (termed  thungite),  which  according  to  the
investigations  of  Professor  InostrantzefiP*may  be  regarded  as  the  extreme  member  of  the
variouH  forms  of  coal.

In  order  to  explain  the  formation  of  coal  from  vegetable  matter,  Cagniard  de  la  Tour
enclosed  pieces  of  dried  wood  in  a  tube  and  heated  them  to  the  boiling  point  of  mercury,
when  the  wood  was  changed  into  a  semi-liquid  black  mass  from  which  a  substance
exceedingly  like  coal  separated.  In  this  manner  some  kinds  of  wood  formed  coal  which
on  being  heated  left  cedcing  coke,  others  non-caking;  precisely  as  we  find  with  the
natural  varieties  of  coal.  Violette  repeated  these  experiments  with  wood  dried  at  150°.
and  showed  that  when  wood  is  decomposed  in  this  way,  a  gas,  an  aqueous  liquor,  and  a
residue  are  formed.  The  latter  at  a  temperature  of  200*^  lias  the  properties  of  wood
charcoal  incompletely  burnt ;  at  800°  and  liigher  a  homogeneous  mass  like  coal  is  formed
which  at  840°  is  dense  and  without  cavities.  At  400°  the  residue  resembles  anthracite.
In  nature  probably  the  decomposition  was  in  rare  cases  effected  by  heat  alone ;  more
generally  it  was  effected  by  means  of  water  and  heat,  but  in  either  case  the  result  ought
to  be  almost  the  same.

The  average  composition  of  coal  compiled  from  many  analyses,  disregarding  the  ash,
is  as  follows :  84  parts  of  carbon,  5  x>Ai't8  of  hydrogen,  1  {)art  of  nitrogen,  8  parts  of
oxygen,  2  of  sulphur.  The  quantity  of  ash  is  on  an  average  5  ]).c.,  but  there  are  coals  which
contain  a  larger  quantity,  and  naturally  they  are  not  so  advantageous  for  use  as  fuel.
The  amount  of  water  does  not  usually  exceed  more  than  10  p.c.  The  anthracites  form
a  remarkable  variety  of  coals,  they  do  not  give  any  volatile  products,  or  but  a  very  small
amount,  as  they  contain  but  little  hydrogen  compared  to  oxygen.  In  the  average  com-
(Msition  of  coal  we  saw  that  for  5  parts  of  hydrogen  there  were  8  parts  of  oxygen  ;
therefore  4  parts  by  weight  of  the  hydrogen  are  capable  r)f  forming  hydrocarbons,  because
1  part  of  hydrogen  is  necessary  in  order  to  form  water  with  the  8  parts  of  oxygen.  These
4  parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen  can  convert  48  parts  of  carbon  into  volatile  products,
because  1  part  of  hydrogen  by  weight  in  these  substances  combines  with  12  parts  of
carbon.  The  anthracites  differ  essentially  from  this :  neglecting  the  ash,  their  average
composition  is  as  follows :  94  parts  of  carbon,  8  of  hydrogen,  and  8  of  oxygen  and
nitrogen.  According  to  the  analyses  of  A.  A.  Voskresensky,  the  Groushefifsky  anthracite
(Don  district)  contains:  C  =  98*8,  H  =  l*7,  ash  =  l"5.  Therefore  the  anthracites  contain
but  little  hydrogen  caimble  of  combining  with  the  carbon  to  form  hydrocarlxms  which
bum  with  a  flame.  Anthracites  are  the  oldest  forms  of  coal.  The  newest  and  least  trans-
formed coals,  which  resemble  some  of  the  brown  varieties,  are  the  dry  coals.  They  bum
with  a  flame  like  wood,  and  leave  a  coke  having  the  appearance  of  lumps  of  coal,  half
their  component  parts  being  absorbed  by  the  flame  (they  contain  much  hydrogen  and
oxygen).  The  remaining  varieties  of  coal  (gas  coal,  smithy  coal,  coking,  and  anthracite)
according  to  Griiner  in  all  respects  form  connecting  links  between  the  dry  coals  and
the  anthracites.  These  coals  bum  with  a  very  smoky  flame,  and  on  being  heated  leave
roArf ,  which  bears  the  same  relation  to  coal  that  charcoal  does  to  wood.  The  quantity  and
<iuality  of  coke  vary  considerably  with  the  different  sorts  of  coal  from  which  it  is
formed.  In  practice  coals  are  most  often  distinguished  by  the  properties  and  quantity
of  the  coke  which  they  give.  In  this  particular  the  so-called  bituminous  coals  are
especially  valuable,  as  even  the  slack  of  this  kind  gives  on  dry  distillation  large  spongy
masses  of  coke.  If  large  pieces  of  these  kinds  of  coal  are  subjected  to  dry  distillation,
they,  as  it  were,  melt,  flow  together,  and  form  caking  masses  of  coke.  Tlic  best  coking
coals  give  65  p.c.  of  dense  caking  coke. Such  coal  is  very  valuable  for  metallurgical

1:946

PHISCIPLES  OF  CHEJCSTRV

boilers,  and  in  general  for  all  purposes  of  heating  and  burning.'
Russia  possesses  many  ^'ery  ricb  coalfields,  amongst  which  the  Donetz
district  is  most  worthy  of  remark.'

During  the  imperfect  combustion  of  volatile  substances  containing

[lurpoueB  IviF  Note  a). Beniduq  cnke,  tlie  dry  diBtillntion  of  i^oul  jirocIueKs  gs«  (<rr  Inrther.  I

illnminating  gu,  p.  SSI).  coaU-tar  (wliU-li  gl«ee  tienieiie,  cubolir  acid,  Dsphtbaleiw,  Uf  1

tor  artiKcaiii  SBplialt,  iSc.l  and  also  an  aqnuonii  alli&lme  liqnar  {with  wood  and  lignites  ]

the  liquid  is  acid  tram  acetic  acid)  vliich  coittaim  ammoniDni  carbnnata  (»■  Note  B).  I

'  In  Englaiul  in  IBnO  the  output  of  uoal  tns  aa  mnch  an  <H  laillion  tons,  and  in  Utter  J

rear*  it  hao  ri»ni  la  about  IM  miUionn, Beiudei  thin  other  cuuntrie*  coutribute  BOO  1
million!!— Rnsnia  aboat  S  milliona. The  United  States  ot  AmeriDaconie  ueit  to  England

withanoBtpat  of  160  million  tenH,  then  Qenuanj  90  iiiillionB:  France  prodoces  but  .

littlv  (3S  millianiO.  and  taken  about  S  million  toua  fram  England. Thas  lh«  rarld  can.  '
BUnies  itboot  BM  million  tana  of  coal yearly. Beaides  household  purponeH.  Hwl t>
chiefly  uted  an  Fuel  for  steam-engineB. As  every  hotse-poirei  (- TD  kiliigrammetiea  per
Hwondl  ot  a  sleam-eugiue  eipeoda  on  the  average  more  than  3S  kjlogiams  in  S4  boani,

or  in  a  year  (counting  Btoppagesl  not  less  than  &  tona  per  horae-power,  and  there  are  not  i

Irsa  than  40  million  hone-power  nt  work in  the  worM,  the  conamnption  o!  coal  tor  |

uiutire-power  is  at  leaat  equal  to  hall  tlie  whole  piodaction. For  thia  leaiou  coal  i

urves  as  a  criterion  of  the  indnstrial development  of a  country. About  IS  p.c.  lit  .

dHil  is  uaed  (or  the  luanutactnre  of  cant  iron,  wrought  iron,  tlect,  and  articles  made  0(  J

■  The  principal  coal  beds  of  BuBHia  under  exploitation  are : The  Don  baain  (ISO
niilliiin  poods  pec  annom,  03  poods^l  ton),  the  Polish  basin  (Domlirovo  and  othera '
IW  million  poods  per  annum),  the  Toula  and  Riazanbedsol  the  Moscow  baain  lup  to I
Vi  milUou  |K>ods),  the  Unkl  baain  (10  niillioii  poods),  tlie  Caacasiiui  (Kvilwnl,  neuKulua),
Ibe  Khirjlua  steppes,  the  amithy  coal  basin  (Got.  of  Tomsk),  the  Sahaline,  Ac Tha |
Polisli  itnd  Moscow  basint  do  not  give  any  coking  coals. The  piesenoe  of  eierj  Tariety
ot  coal  (trom  tbe  dry  coal  near  LiHiohanEk  on  the  Donetz  to  the  anthracites  ot  tH« I
entire  ionth<eaat  baain),  the  great  abundance  of  excellent  metatlnrgical  coal  (coking,  lee i
Kotc  0)  in  the  weitem  part  ot  the  basin,  its  vast  extent  (as  mndi  as  aS.OOO  «i|.  TenM),
Uie  proximity  of  the  seams  to  the  surface  (the  sliafts  are  now  trom  90  to  IDO  tatluima *
deep,  and  in  England  and  Belginni  as  deep  as  BOO  latboms),  the  fertility  of  the  toil '
(black  earth  I.  the  proximity  of  the  sea  (abtmt  100  tersts  from  the  Sea  of  Azolfl  and  of i
tbe  rivers  Donetz.  Don,  and  Dnoipel,  tbe  moat  abundant  neama  of  excellent  iron  ore
iKonan  Mocila.  Krlvoj  Rog,  Boulin,  Arc.,  iec).  copper  ore,  meranry  ore  |near  Nikitovka, '
ill the Bakboioulh diitriet  of  the  Ekatennaslav  Got.),  and  other  ores,  the  riohesl ^
probably  hi  the  whole  world,  tlie  beds  of  rovk-talt  {near  tbe  Btations  of  the  Sloupka  and
Brianiorkal  the  excellent  day  of  all  kinds  (china.  Hre-clayf,  gjrpanni,  slate,  aandatooe,
and  other  tceallh  of  llif  Don  coal  baiiii.  give  complete  assocance  of  tbe  fact  that  with
the  growth  of  indnstrial  activity  in  BusKia  this  boonlifu)  land  of  the  CoHsacks  and  N«W
Unsnia  wiU  become  tlie  centre  of  tlie  mist  extensive productive eiitert>HMT,  not  tat
the  reqnirements  of  Rossia  akine,  bnl  <it  the  whole  world.  bMuuse  in  no  other  place  can
l>e  loniid  such  a  concentration  of  favourable  conditions. The  gtowtli  ot  enterpriaa  and I
knowledge,  liigether  with  the  extinction  of  the  fnreatn  which  compels  Rniwia  to  toateT i
Llis  pmduetiiin  of  coal,  will  help  to  bring  about  this  desired  result. England  with  a i
wliole  fleet  ot  merchant  vessels  exports  annually  about  9t  million  tons  of  coal.  th«  priM I
••f  which  is  higher  than  on  the  Dimetx  (wlMsre  a  pood  ol  worked  coal  cotts  leu  than  S j
imiiecks  on  the  average),  where  anthcM'itvs  and  seini-anthraoites  (like  Cardiff  at  MMtn J
Dual,  which  burns  without  smnkel  and  coking  and  metallurgical  coils  are  able  both  in I
quantity  and  quality  to  satisfy  tlie  most  favtidlous  reqairements  nt  the  industry  alnady  1
existing  and  rapidly  increasing  everywhere. The  coal  mines  ol  England  and  Belgiwn  J
are  apprsaohiog  a  state  of  eihaostion,  whilst  in  those  of  tbe  Don  bnain.  only  at  a  depUl  I
ot  100  lalbonH,  I,aOO,IKMl  million  poods  of  coal  lie  wailing  to  be  worked.  I

CARBON  AND  THE HYDROCARBONS  347

carbon  and  hydrogen,  the  hydrogen  and  part  of  the  carbon  first  burn,
and  the  remainder  of  the  carbon  forms  soot.  Tar,  pitch,  and  similar
substances  for  this  reason  burn  with  a  smoky  flame.  Thus  soot  is
finely-divided  charcoal  separated  during  the  imperfect  combustion  of
the  vapours  and  gases  of  carbonaceous  substances  rich  in  carbon.
Specially- prepared  soot  (lampblack)  is  very  largely  used  as  a  black
paint  and  a  large  quantity  goes  for  the  manufacture  of  printers'  ink.
It  is  prepared  by  burning  tar,  oil,  natufal  gas,  naphtha,  <fec.  The
quantity  of  organic  matter  remaining  undecomposed  in  the  charcoal
depends  on  the  temperature  to  which  it  has  been  submitted.  Charcoal
prepared  at  the  lowest  temperature  still  contains  a  considerable
quantity  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen— even  as  much  as  4  p.c.  of  hydrogen
and  20  p.c.  of  oxygen.  Such  charcoal  still  preserves  the  structure  of
the  substance  from  which  it  was  obtained.  Ordinary  charcoal,  for
instance,  in  which  the  sti-ucture  of  the  tree  is  still  visible,  is  of  this
kind.  On  submitting  it  to  further  heating,  a  fresh  quantity  of
hydrogen  with  carbon  and  oxygen  (in  the  form  of  gases  or  volatile
matter)  may  be  separated,  and  the  purest  charcoal  will  be  obtained  on
submitting  it  to  the  greatest  heat.^  If  it  be  required  to  prepare  pure
charcoal  from  soot  it  is  necessary  first  to  wash  it  with  alcohol  and
ether  in  order  to  remove  the  soluble  tarry  products,  and  then  submit
it  to  a  powerful  heat  to  drive  off  the  impurities  containing  hydrogen
and  oxygen.  Charcoal  however  when  completely  purified  does  not
change  in  appearance. Its  porosity,'^  bad  conducting  power  for  heat,

^  As  it  is  difficult  to  separate  from  the  cliarcoal  the  admixture  of  ash — that  is,  the
earthy  matter  contained  in  the  vegetable  substance  used  for  producing  charcoal — in  order
to  obtain  it  in  its  purest  condition  it  is  necessary  to  use  such  organic  substances  as  do
not  contain  any  ash,  for  example  completely  refined  or  purified  crystallised  sugar,
crystallised  tartaric  acid,  drc.

*®  The  cavities  in  charcoal  are  the  passages  through  which  those  volatile  products
formed  at  the  same  time  as  the  charcoal  have  passed.  The  degree  of  porosity  of  char-
coal varies  considerably,  and  has  a  technical  significance,  in  different  kinds  of  charcoal.
The  moat  porous  charcoal  is  very  light ;  a  cubic  metre  of  wood  cliarcoal  weighs  about
200  kilograms.  Many  of  the  properties  of  charcoal  which  depend  exclusively  on  its
porosity  are  shared  by  many  other  porous  substances,  and  vary  with  the  density  of  the
charcoal  and  depend  on  the  way  it  was  prepared.  The  property  which  charcoal  has  of
absorbing  gases,  liquids,  and  many  substances  in  solution,  is  a  case  in  ^joint.  Tlie
densest  kind  of  charcoal  is  formed  by  the  action  of  great  heat  on  sugar  and  other  fusible
substances.  The  lustrous  grey  dense  coke  formed  in  gas  retorts  is  also  of  this  character.
This  dense  coke  collects  on  the  internal  walls  of  the  retorts  subjected  to  great  heat,
and  is  produced  by  the  vaiwurs  and  gases  separated  from  the  heated  coal  in  the  retorts!
In  virtue  of  its  density  such  coke  becomes  a  good  conductor  of  the  galvanic  current
and  approaches  graphite.  It  is  principally  used  in  galvanic  batteries.  Coke,  or  the  char-
coal remainmg  from  the  imi>erfect  combustion  of  coal  and  tarrv  substances,  {»  also  but
slightly  porous,  briUiant,  does  not  soil  or  mark  pai)er,  is  den^e.  almost  devoid  of  the
faculty  of  reUining  liquids  and  solids,  and  does  not  absorb  gases.  The  light  sorts  of
cbaiooal  produced  from  charred  wood,  on  the  other  hand,  show  this  ab8ori>tive  i>ower  in

848  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

capability  of  absorbing  the  luminous  rays  (hence  its  blacliness  and
opacity),  and  many  other  qualities,  are  familiar  from  everyday  ex-
perience.^^ The  specific  gravity  of  charcoal  varies  from  1*4  to  1*9,  and
that  it  floats  on  water  is  due  to  the  air  contained  in  its  pores.  If
charcoal  is  reduced  to  a  powder  and  moistened  with  spirit,  it  imme-
diately sinks  in  water.  It  is  infusible  in  the  furnace  and  even  at  the
temperature  of  the  oxyhydrogen  flame.  In  the  heat  generated  by
means  of  a  powerful  galvanic  current  charcoal  only  softens  but  does  not
completely  melt,  and  on  cooling  it  is  found  to  have  undergone  a  com-
plete change  both  in  properties  and  appearance,  and  is  more  or  less
transformed  into  graphite.  The  physical  stability  of  charcoal  is
without  doubt  allied  to  its  chemical  stability.  It  is  evidently  a
substance  devoid  of  energy,  for  it  is  insoluble  in  all  known  liquids,

a  most  marked  degree.  This  property  is  particularly  developed  in  that  very  fine  and
friable  charcoal  prepared  by  heating  animal  substances  sucli  as  liides  and  bones.  The
absorptive  power  of  charcoal  for  gases  is  similar  to  the  condensation  of  gases  in  spouj?y
platinum.  Here  evidently  there  is  a  case  of  the  adherence  of  gases  to  a  solid,  precisely
as  liquids  have  the  property  of  adhering  to  various  solids.  One  volume  of  charcoal  will
absorb  the  following  volumes  of  gases  (charcoal  is  capable  of  absorbing  an  immense
amount  of  chlorine,  almost  equal  to  its  own  weight) : —

Buussure. ,
loxwood  Charcoal

Favre.
Cocoaiint  Charcoal

Heat  ouiitUHl
I  er  tmxnx  of  i?iis

NHj 90
C0.2 85

N.p 40 1
HCl 85

172
97
99

1«5

vols.

1>

4U4 units
158 „
1«9
274

The  quantity  of  gas  absorbed  by  the  charcoal  increases  with  the  pressure,  and  is
approximately  proiMjrtional  to  it.  The  quantity  of  heat  given  out  by  the  ab8ori>tion
nearly  approaches  that  set  free  on  dissolving,  or  passing  into  a  liquid  condition.

Charcoal  absorbs  not  only  gases,  but  a  number  of  other  substances.  For  instance,
alcohol  which  contains  disagreeably  smelling  fusel  oil,  on  being  mixed  with  charcoal  or
filtered  through  it,  loses  most  of  the  fusel  oil.  The  practice  of  filtering  substances
through  charcoal  in  order  to  get  rid  of  foreign  matters  is  often  applied  in  chemical  and
manufacturing  processes.  Oils,  spirits,  various  extracts,  and  vegetable  and  other  solu-
tions are  filtered  through  charcoal  in  order  to  purify  them.  The  bleaching  power  of
charcoal  maybe  tested  by  using  various  coloured  solutions — such  as  aniline  dyes,  litmus,
ike.  Charcoal,  which  has  absorbed  one  substance  to  saturation  is  still  capable  of
absorbing  certain  other  substances.  Animal  charcoal,  produced  in  a  very  finely-divided
state,  especially  by  heating  bones,  makes  the  best  sort  for  the  purjwses  of  absorption.
Bone  charcoal  is  used  in  large  quantities  in  sugar  works  for  filtering  syrups  and  all
saccharine  solutions,  in  order  to  purify  them,  not  only  from  colouring  and  odorous
matter,  but  also  from  the  lime  which  is  mixed  with  the  sjTups  in  order  to  render  them  less
unstable  during  lx>iling.  The  absori)tion  of  lime  by  animal  charcoal  depends,  in  all
probability,  in  a  great  degree  on  the  mineral  component  parts  of  bone  charcoal.

**  Charcoal  is  a  very  batl  conductor  of  heat,  and  therefore  forms  an  excellent
insulat^ir  or  packing  to  prevent  the  transmission  of  heat.  A  charcoal  lining  is  often  used
in  crucibles  for  heating  many  substances,  as  it  does  not  melt  and  resists  a  far  greater
heat  than  manv  other  substances.

CARBON  AND  THE HYDROCARBONS  349

and  at  an  ordinary  tevijyeratnre  does  not  combine  n-ith  anythhig ;  it
is  an  inactive  substance,  like  nitrogen. ^^  But  these  properties  of
charcoal  change  with  a  rise  of  temperature  ;  thus,  unlike  nitrogen,
charcoal,  at  a  high  temperature,  combines  directly  with  oxygen.
This  is  well  known,  as  charcoal  burns  in  air.  Indeed,  not  only  does
oxygen  combine  tvith  charcoal  at  a  red  heat,  but  sulphur,  hydrogen,
silicon,  and  also  iron  and  some  other  metals  ^*^''  do  so  at  a  very
high  temperature — that  is,  when  the  molecules  of  the  charcoal  have
reached  a  state  of  great  instability — whilst  at  ordinary  temperatures
neither  oxygen,  sulphur,  nor  metals  act  on  charcoal  in  any  way.
When  burning  in  oxygen,  charcoal  forms  carbonic  anhydride,  CO.^,
whilst  in  the  vapours  of  sulphur,  carbon  bisulphide,  CS,,  is  formed,
and  wrought  iron,  when  acted  on  by  carbon,  becomes  cast  iron.
At  the  great  heat  obtained  by  passing  the  galvanic  current  through
carl)on  electrodes,  charcoal  combines  with  hydrogen,  forming  acetylene,
C2H.2.  Charcoal  does  not  combine  directly  with  nitrogen,  but  in  the
presence  of  metals  and  alkaline  oxides,  nitrogen  is  absorl^ed,  forming
a  metallic  cyanide,  as,  for  instance,  potassium  cyanide,  KCN.
From  these  few  direct  combinations  which  charcoal  is  ca])able  of
entering  into,  may  be  derived  those  numerous  carl)onaceous  compounds
which  enter  into  the  composition  of  plants  and  animals,  and  can  be  thus
obtained  artificially. Certain  substances  containing  oxygen  give  up  a

**  The  unalterability  of  charcoal  under  the  action  of  atmospheric  ajreiicies.  which
produce  changes  in  the  majority  of  Htony  and  metalhc  substances,  in  often  made  use  of
in  practice.  For  example,  charcoal  is  frequently  strewn  in  boundary  ditches.  The
surface  of  wood  is  often  charred  to  render  it  durable  in  those  phices  wliere  the  soil  is
damp  and  wood  itself  would  soon  rot.  The  chambers  lor  in  some  works  towers)  through
which  acids  pass  (for  example,  sulphuric  and  hydrochloric)  in  order  to  bring  them  into
contact  with  gases  or  liquids,  are  filled  with  charcoal  or  coke,  because  at  ordinary'  tem-
peratures it  resists  the  action  of  even  the  strongest  acids.

i»  bis  Maquenne  (189*2)  discovered  that  carbon  is  capable  of  combining  with  the  alkali
metals.  A  20  p.c.  amalgam  of  the  metals  was  heated  to  a  red  heat  with  charcoal  ix)wder
in  a  stream  of  hydrogen.  The  comjwunds  so  obtained  possessed,  ufter  the  mercury  had
been  driven  off,  the  compositions  BaC..,  SrC,.,  CaC^.  All  these  compounds  reaict  with
water  forming  acetylene,  for  examx>le :

BaC,  -\-  2H..O  -  C.H..  h  Ba(  OH ) ..

Maquenne  proposes  the  barium  carbide  as  a  source  of  acetylene.  Ue  obtained  this
compound  by  heating  carbonate  of  barium,  magnesium  powder,  and  retort  carbon  in  a
Perreau  furnace  (BaCOj  +  8Mg  +  C  -  8MgO  +  BaC.'.j).  One  hundred  gi-anis  of  BaC'j  evolve
5,200  t<)  5,400  c.c.  of  acetylene,  mixed  with  about  2-8  p.c.  of  hydrogen.

The  relation  of  acetylene,  C.^H.^,  to  these  metallic  carbides  is  evident  from  the  fact
that  these  metals  (Ca,  Sr,  Ba)  replace  2  atoms  of  hydrogen,  and  therefore  C..Ba  corre*
sponds  to  C^H.^,  »o  that  they  may  be  regarded  as  mettillic  derivatives  of  acetylene.
Moissan  (1898)  obtaine<l  similar  carbides  directly  from  the  oxides  by  subjecting  them  to
the  action  of  the  voltaic  arc,  in  the  presence  of  carbon,  for  instance,  BaO  r  8C  ^-  CO  -f  C^Ba,
although  at  a  furnace  heat  carbon  lias  no  action  on  the  oxides  CaO,  BaO,  SrO.  Con-
cerning AI4C3,  see  Chapter  XVII.  Note  38.

^850  PRINCIPLI':S OF  CHEMlS']i{V

part  of  it  to  charcoal  at  a  relatively  low  temperature.  For  instance,
nitric  acid  when  boiled  with  charcoal  gives  carbonic  anhydride  and
nitric  peroxide.  Sulphuric  acid  is  reduced  to  sulphurous  anhydride
when  heated  with  carbon.  When  heated  to  redness  charcoal  ab-
sorbs oxygen  from  a  large  number  of  the  oxides.  Even  such  oxides
as  those  of  sodium  and  potassium,  when  heated  to  redness,  yield  their
oxygen  to  charcoal  although  they  do  not  part  with  it  to  hydrogen.
Only  a  few  of  the  oxides,  like  silica  (oxide  of  silicon)  and  lime  (calcium
oxide)  resist  the  reducing  action  of  charcoal.  Charcoal  is  capable  of
•changing  its  physical  condition  without  undergoing  any  alteration  in
its  essential  chemical  properties — that  is,  it  passes  into  isomeric  or  (iHo-
tropic  forms.  The  two  other  particular  forms  in  which  carbon  appears
are  the  diamond  and  graph  ite.  The  identity  of  composition  of  these  with
charcoal  is  proved  by  burning  an  equal  quantity  of  all  three  separately
in  oxygen  (at  a  very  high  temperature),  when  each  gives  the  same
quantity  of  carbonic  anhydride — namely,  12  parts  of  charcoal,  diamond,
or  graphite  in  a  pure  state,  yield  on  burning  44  parts  by  weight  of
•carbonic  anhydride.  The  physical  properties  present  a  marked  con-
trast ;  the  densest  sorts  of  charcoal  have  a  density  of  only  1  '9,  whilst
the  density  of  graphite  is  about  2*3,  and  that  of  the  diamond  3*5.  A
great  many  other  properties  depend  on  the  density,  for  instance  com-
bustibility. The  lighter  charcoal  is,  the  more  easily  it  bums  ;  graphite
burns  with  considerable  difficulty  even  in  oxygen,  and  the  diamond
bums  only  in  oxygen  and  at  a  very  high  temperature.  On  burning,
charcoal,  the  diamond,  and  graphite  develop  diffei-ent  quantities  of  heat.
One  part  by  weight  of  wood  charcoal  converted  by  burning  into
carbonic  anhydride  develops  8,080  heat  units  ;  dense  charcoal  scparate<l
in  gas  retorts  develops  8,050  heat  units  ;  natural  graphite,  7,800  heat
units  ;  and  the  diamond  7,770.  The  greater  the  density  the  less  the
heat  evolve<l  by  the  combustion  of  the  carbon.'-*

By  means  of  intense  heat  charcoal  may  be  transformed  into
graphite.  If  a  charcoal  rod  4  mm.  in  diameter  and  5  nnn.  long  be  enclosed
in  an  exhausted  receiver  and  the  current  from  000  Bunsens  elements,
placed  in  parallel  series  of 100, l)e  passed  throu<^h  it,  the  charcoal

*•"»  When  Hubjectf(l  to  preSBure,  eharcoid  lowes  lieat,  hence  tlie  ilensest  form  HtaiulK  t«)
the  le8K  dense  uk  a  solid  to  a  liquid,  or  as  a  compound  to  an  «.>leinent.  From  thiH  the
conclusion  may  ho  drawn  that  the  moleculcK  of  graphite  are  more  complex  tlian  those
of  charcoal,  and  thr>se  of  the  diamond  still  more  so.  The  Ki>ocifii:  heat  shows  the  same
variation,  and  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  the  increase<l  complexity  of  a  molecule  leads  to  a
diminution  of  the  Hi)eci fie  heat.  At  ordinary  temperatures  the  specific  heat  of  charcoal  is
0*24,  graphite  ()"2(),  the  diamond  0*147.  For  retort  carbon  1a'  Chatelier  (1893)  found  that
the  pnnluct  of  the  sp.  heat  and  atomic  weight  varies,  l>etw(>en  0  and  250  \  siccording  to
the  formula:  10*2  4  0-0077 ^  and  between  250  and  1000,  -  a-54  j  0  00240^  {see
Chapter  XIV.  Nt.te  41.

CARBON  AND  THE HYDROCARBONS  851

becomes  strongly  incandescent,  partially  volatilises,  and  is  depositee!  in
the  form  of  graphite.  If  sugar  be  placed  in  a  charcoal  crucible  and
a  powerful  galvanic  current  passed  through  it,  it  is  baked  into  a  mass
similar  to  graphite.  If  charcoal  be  mixed  with  wrought  iron  and
heated,  cast  iron  is  formed,  which  contains  as  much  as  five  per  cent,  of
charcoal.  If  molten  cast  iron  be  suddenly  chilled,  the  carbon  remains
in  combination  with  the  iron,  forming  so  called  white  cast  iron  ;  but  if
the  cooling  proceeds  slowly,  the  greater  part  of  the  carbon  separates
in  the  form  of  graphite,  and  if  such  cast  iron  (so  called  grey  cast
iron)  be  dissolved  in  acid,  the  carbon  remains  in  the  form  of  graphite.
Graphite  is  met  with  in  nature,  sometimes  in  the  form  of  large  com-
pact masses,  sometimes  permeating  rocky  formations  like  the  schists
or. slates,  and  in  fact  is  met  with  in  those  places  which,  in  all  proba-
bility, have  been  subjected  to  the  action  of  subterranean  heat.'^  The
graphite  -in  cast  iron,  and  sometimes  also  natural  graphite,  occasionally
appears  in  a  crystalline  form  in  the  shape  of  six-sided  plates,  but  more
often  it  occurs  as  a  compact  amorphous  mass  having  the  characteristic
properties  of  the  familiar  black-lead  pencil.**'

The  diamond  is  a  crystalline  and  transparent  form  of  carbon. It  is

^'  There  are  places  where  anthracite  gradually  changes  into  graphite  as  the  strata
sink.  I  myself  had  the  opportunity  of  observing  this  gradual  transformation  in  the
valley  of  Aosta.

'^  Pencils  are  made  of  graphite  worked  up  into  a  homogeneous  maf  s  by  disintegra-
ting, powdering,  and  cleansing  it  from  earthy  impurities ;  the  best  kinds  are  made  of
completely  homogeneous  graphite  sawn  up  into  the  requisite  sticks.  Graphite  is  found
in  many  places.  In  Russia  the  so-called  AliberofFsky  graphite  is  particularly  renowned ;
it  is  found  in  the  Altai  mountains  near  the  Chinese  frontier ;  in  many  places  in  Finland
and  likewise  on  the  banks  of  the  Little  Tungonska,  Sidoroff  also  found  a  considerable
quantity  of  graphite.  Wlien  mixed  with  clay,  graphite  is  used  for  making  crucibles  and
ix>t8  for  melting  metals.

Graphite,  like  most  forms  of  charcoal,  still  contains  a  certain  quantity  of  hydrogen,
oxygen,  and  ash,  so  that  in  its  natural  state  it  does  not  contain  more  than  98  p.c.  of
carbon.

In  practice,  graphite  is  purified  simply  by  washing  it  when  in  a  finely-ground  state,
by  which  means  the  bulk  of  the  earthy  matter  may  be  separated.  The  following  process,
proposed  by  Brodie,  consists  in  mixing  the  powdered  graphite  with  fj  part  of  its  weight
of  potassium  chlorate.  The  mixture  is  then  heated  with  twice  its  weight  of  strong
'  sulphuric  acid  until  no  more  odoriferous  gases  are  emitted ;  on  cooling,  the  mixture  is
thrown  into  water  and  washed ;  the  graphite  is  then  dried  and  heated  to  a  red  heat ;
after  this  it  shrinks  considerably  in  volume  and  forms  a  very  fine  powder,  which  is
then  washed.  By  acting  on  graphite  several  times  with  a  mixture  of  potassium  chlorate
and  nitric  acid  heated  up  to  60°,  Brodie  transformed  it  into  a  yellow  insoluble  acid
substance  which  he  called  graphitic  acid,  CnH405.  The  diamond  remains  unchanged
when  subjected  to  this  treatment,  whilst  amorphous  charcoal  is  completely  oxidised.
Availing  himself  of  this  possibility  of  distinguishing  graphite  from  the  diamond  or  amor-
phous charcoal,  Berthelot  showed  that  when  compounds  of  carbon  and  hydrogen  ore
decomposed  by  heat,  amorphous  charcoal  is  mainly  formed,  whilst  when  compounds  of
carbon  with  chlorine,  sulphur,  and  boron  are  decomposed,  graphite  is  principally
deposited.

852  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

of  rare  occurrence  in  nature,  and  is  found  in  the  alluvial  deposits  of
the  diamond  mines  of  Brazil,  India,  South  Africa,  &c.  It  has  also  been
found  in  meteorites.**^****  It  crystallises  in  octahedra,  dodecahedra,
cubes,  and  other  forms  of  the  regular  system.*^  The  efforts  which  have
been  made  to  produce  diamonds  artificially,  although  they  have  not  been
fruitless,  have  not  as  yet  led  to  the  production  of  large-sized  crystals,
because  those  means  by  which  crystals  are  generally  formed  are  in-
applicable to  carbon.  Indeed,  carbon  in  all  its  forms  being  insoluble
and  infusible  does  not  pass  into  a  liquid  condition  by  means  of  which
crystallisation  could  take  place.  Diamonds  have  several  times  been
successfully  produced  in  the  shape  of  minute  crystals  having  the
appearance  of  a  black  powder,  but  when  viewed  under  the  microscope
appearing  transparent,  and  possessing  that  hardness  which  is  the
peculiar  characteristic  of  the  diamond.  This  diamond  powder  is  de-
posited on  the  negative  electrode,  when  a  weak  galvanic  current  is
passed  through  liquid  chloride  of  carbon.'^****

Moissan  (Paris,  1893)  produced  diamonds  artificially  by  means  of
the  high  temperature  attained  in  the  electrical  furnace  *^  by  dissolving

15  bib  Diamonds  are  found  in  a  particular  denne  ro<vk,  known  by  tlie  name  of
itacolumnite,  and  are  dug  out  of  tlie  debris  produced  by  the  destruction  of  tlie
itacolumnite  by  water.  When  tlie  debris  is  washed  the  diamonds  remain  behind  ;  they
are  principally  found  in  Brazil,  in  the  provinces  of  Rio  and  Bahia,  and  at  the  Cai)e  of
Good  Hope.  The  debris  gives  the  black  or  amorphous  diamond,  carbonado,  and  the
ordinary  colourless  or  yellow^  translucent  diamond.  As  the  diamond  possesses  a  very
marked  cleavage,  the  first  o]>eration  consists  in  splitting  it,  and  then  roughly  and  finely
polishing  it  with  diamond  powder.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  Professors  P.  A.  LatchinofF
and  Erofeeflf  found  (1887)  diamond  powder  in  a  meteoric  stone  which  fell  in  the  Govern-
ment of  Penza,  in  the  district  of  Krasnoslobodsk,  near  the  settlement  of  Novo  Urei
(Sept.  10, 1880).  Up  to  that  time  charcoal  and  graphite  (a  sj)ecial  variety,  cliftonite)  had
been  found  in  meteorites  and  the  diamond  only  conjectured  to  occur  therein.  The  Novo
Urei  meteorite  was  comiH)sed  of  siliceous  matter  and  metallic  iron  (with  nickel)  like
many  other  meteorites.

*•'  Diamonds  are  sometimes  found  in  the  shape  of  small  balls,  and  in  that  case  it  is
impossible  to  cut  them  because  directly  the  surface  is  ground  or  broken  they  fall  into
minute  pieces.  Sometimes  minute  diamond  crystals  form  a  dense  mass  like  sugar,  and
this  is  generally  reduced  to  diamond  powder  and  used  for  grinding.  Some  known
varieties  of  the  diamond  are  almost  opaque  and  of  a  black  colour.  Such  diamonds  are
as  hanl  as  the  onlinary  ones,  and  are  useU  for  polishing  diamonds  and  other  precious
stones,  and  also  for  rock  boring  and  tunnelling.

lu  bu  Hannay,  in  1880,  obtained  diamonds  by  heating  a  mixture  of  heavy  liquid
hydrocarbons  (paraffin  oils)  with  magnesium  in  a  thick  iron  tube.  This  investigation,
however,  was  not  re|)eate<l.

'7  The  electrical  furnace  is  an  invention  of  recent  times,  and  gives  the  possibility  of
obtaining  a  tempenvture  of  8,500^  which  is  not  only  not  obtainable  in  ordinar>-  funiaces,
but  even  in  the  oxyhydrogen  flame,  whose  temperature  does  not  exceed  2,000°.  The  elec-
trical furnace  consists  of  two  pieces  of  lime,  laid  one  on  the  other.  A  cavity  is  made  in
the  lower  piece  for  the  reception  of  the  substance  to  be  melte<l  l>etween  two  thick
electrodes  of  dense  carbon.  On  passing  a  current  of  70  volts  and  460  amp^re8  a  tem-
perature of  3,000^  is  easily  obtained. At  a  temperature  of  2,600°  (100  amp4>res  and  40

K.cttrbon in molten cast iron, and  allowing the soluiion with an

leicess  ol carbon, to cool under  the  jMnverful  preasui-e  exerted  Ijy

npidly  cooling  the  metal.''  ^'^ K.  Chroustch off  attained  the  same  end

tby  luenna  of  silver,  which  dissolves  carbon  to  the  extent  of  G  p.c.

iiilyiln  Hi)  uifliitli  mell,  Uut  even  limv  ftiid  HMgnenia  (when  plared  in  th«  Hpiii»

n  tliH  cu'biin  electrodeH,  t.r

l.e(wlin|{. At  3,W0° lim

■Mdcinm partially  cepanten

«  and  pnrtially  Tiilatiliw,  aa  aim  doait  ulnminA
ncUyvoUtiliiHi:  the  nmjoritf  i>[  tbe  kibUIk  Ion
13  j^raphito,  v

«rbideB

At  sDcli  a  teui-

□  Kjinbdeau,  b(-twf

uverKely  gmiiliiti

perature  also  cast  iron  and  carbon  giTa  jfraphile,  while  accordini
1,01X1°  uid  0,000°  tlw  diaJDoiid  paBHs  into  entphite  and  couvei
diunoiKl,  ao  that  this  i>  a  kind  of  revenible  reactiou.

"  ■>'■  Uuiawui  Hrat  inreitigated  (he  Botution  ot  cuboii  in  ujolten  oietaJti  (and  the
(omuitioii  of  the  uiirbidesl  Hueh  as  mugDesinm,  (dninininm,  iron,  nuinganene,  chnrniium.
nranium,  ulver,  |jlatiuuui|  and  iiitican.  Al  tha  same  tinio  Friedel,  owing  to  the  diecovery
of  tbe  diamond  in  nieteoho  iron,  admitted  that  the  {ormation  o(  the  diamond  ia  deptin-
dent  upon  the  iuRnenoi  of  iron  and  snlphnr.  With  this  object,  that  is  to  obtain  thi>
diamond,  FriiKlvl  raaaed  snlphnr  to  react  npon  samples  ot  cast  iron  rich  in  carbon,  in  A
clneed  reseel  at  a  maiimnm  (emperatare  ol  MO",  and  after  diBKolving  the  iialpludetif  iron
formed,  lie  obtiiinBd  a  small  quantity  of  a  black  powder  which  icriilcbed  oorondam,  i.c.
diamond.  MaiHBan'B  experiments  IISBS)  were  more  sucoessful,  proliablj^  owing  to  hia
having  employed  tbe  electrical  famace-  If  iron  be  satarated  with  carbon  at  a  tem-
perature tietween  1,100'  and  8,000°,  then  at  1.100°-l,itOO^  a  minlute  of  mnorphona
earbon  and  graphite  is  formed,  while  at  8,001)°  graphite  alone  is  obtained  in  very
beautiful  crystals.  Thus  under,  these  conditions  tbe  diamond  is  not  formed,  and  it  can
only  be  obtained  if  tile  bigli  temperature  be  aided  by  powerful  pressures.  For  this
porpose  Hoissan  took  advantage  of  tite  pressure  produced  in  the  passage  of  a  mass  of
molten  cant  iron  from  a  liquid  into  a  solid  state.  He  first  melted  ISO-SOO  grams  of  iron
in  the  electrical  foruace,  and  quickly  introdaced  a  cylinder  of  carbon  into  tbe  molten
iron.  He  then  removed  Ibe  rmcible  with  tlie  molten  irou  from  the  faraocc  and  plunged
it  into  a  reservoir  containing  water.  After  treating  with  boiling  hydrochloric  acid,  three
rarieties  of  carbon  were  obtained:  (1)  a  snuill  amoont  of  graphite  (if  tbe  cooling  bo
rapid);  I  a)  carbon  of  a  chestnut  colour  in  very  fine  twisted  threads,  showing  that  it  had
been  subjected  to  a  very  high  pressure  (a  similar  variety  was  met  with  in  variona
Minples  of  the  Canon  Diabolo),  and  lastly  lt>|  an  inconsiderable  quantity  ot  an
exoeedjpg  dense  mass  which  was  freed  from  tlie  odmiitnre  of  the  lighter  modiflcatioDs
by  treatment  with  agua  regia,  snlpbaric  and  hydrofluoric  acids,  and  from  which  Moiasan,
by  meaits  of  hquid  bromolorni  (sp.  gr.  3000),  succeeded  in  separating  some  small  pieces,
baring  a  greater  density  thiui  bromofiirm,  which  scratched  the  mby  imd  had  the
properties  at  tbe  diamond.  Some  of  theae  pieces  were  black,  others  wore  transparent
and  retntcled  h^lit  strongly.  Tlie  dark  grey  tint  of  the  former  resembled  that  o(  the
black  diamonds  (carbonado!.  Their  density  was  between  a  and  H'S.  The  trenHparent
apocimens  bad  a  greasy  appearance  and  seemed  to  he,  as  it  were,  surrounded  hy  an
t_Hltelopc  of  carbon.  At  1,060^  they  did  not  bnrn  uutirely  in  a  current  ot  air,  no  that  tbe
IBperfectly  burnt  particles,  and  a  pecnliar  lorm  ot  grains  of  a  light  oehie  colour,
lined  their  crystalline  form.conld  be  eiamined  under  tbe  microscope.  Similar
>  remain  after  the  imperfect  Douilmstion  of  the  ordinaij  diauund.  Hoisnan
4ned  the  same  results  by  rapidly  woUng  in  a  stream  of  coal  gas  a  piece  of  cast  iron,
Urnkted  with  cartwn  obtained  from  sugar  aud  first  heated  to  8,000°.  In  this  instanoe
•  obbuned  small  crystals  of  diamonds.  K.  Cbronstcboft  showed  that  al  its  boiling
point  Hirer  disoolves  H  p.c.  d  carbon.  Thia  silver  was  rapidly  cooled,  so  that  a  at
VOL.  I.

354  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

at  a  high  temperature.  Kousseau,  for  the  same  purpose,  heated
carbide  of  calcium  in  the  electric  furnace.  There  is  no  doubt  that
all  these  investigators  obtained  the  diamond  as  a  transparent  body,
which  burnt  into  CO.^,  and  possessed  an  exceptional  hardness,  but  only
in  the  form  of  a  fine  powder.

Judging  from  the  fact  that  carbon  forms  a  number  of  gaseous  bodies
(carbonic  oxide,  carbonic  anhydride,  methane,  ethylene,  acetylene,  «tc.)
and  volatile  substances  (for  example,  many  hydrocarbons  and  their
most  simple  derivatives),  and  considering  that  the  atomic  weight  of
carbon,  C=12,  approaches  that  of  nitrogen,  N  =  14,  and  that  of  oxygen,
0=16,  and  that  the  compounds  CO  (carbonic  oxide)  and  NgCj  (cyanogen)
are  gases,  it  may  be  argued  that  if  carbon  formed  the  molecule  0.2,  like
No  and  Oj,  it  would  be  a  gas.  And  as'through  polymerism  or  the  com-
bination of  like  molecules  (as  Oj  passes  into  O3  or  NO^  into  NgO^)  the
temperatures  of  ebullition  and  fusion  rise  (which  is  particularly  clearly
proved  with  the  hydrocarbons  of  the  CnHj,,  series),  it  ought  to  be  con-
sidered that  the  molecules  of  charcoal^  yraphite^  and  the  diamond  are
very  complex^  seeing  that  they  are  insoluble,  non -volatile,  and  infusible.
Tlie  aptitude  which  the  atoms  of  carlx)n  show  for  combining  together
and  forming  complex  molecules  appears  in  all  carbon  compounds.
Among  the  volatile  compounds  of  carbon  many  are  well  known  the
molecules  of  which  contain  C5  .  .  .  Ck,  .  .  .  C.^,,  .  .  .  C30,  *kc.,  in
general  C„,  where  n  may  be  very  large,  and  in  none  of  the  other  ele-
ments is  this  faculty  of  complexity  so  developed  as  in  carbon.***  Up
to  the  present  time  there  are  no  grounds  for  determining  the  degree
of  polymerism  of  the  charcoal,  graphite,  or  diamond  molecules,  and  it
can  only  be  supposed  that  they  contain  C„  where  n  is  a  large  quantity.
Charcoal  and  those  complex  non- volatile  organic  substances  which
represent  the  gradual  transitions  to  charcoal  ^^  and  form  the  principal

fonned  on  the  surface  and  prevented  the  metal  expanding,  and  ko  produee<l  a  powerful
pressure.  A  portion  of  the  carbon  which  Keparaten  out  under  ili«'se  conditionn  exhibits
the  properties  of  tlie  diamond.

18  The  existence  of  a  molecule  Sg  is  known  (up  to  600^  1,  and  it  must  be  held  that  this
accounts  for  the  formation  of  liydrogen  i)er8ulphide,  H-^.S^.  Phosphorus  appears  in  the
molecule  P|  and  gives  PjH.j.  When  expounding  the  data  on  siwcific  heat  we  shall  have
occasion  to  return  to  the  question  of  the  complexity  of  the  carbon  molecule.

'®  The  hydrocarbons  jKJorin  hydrogen  and  containing  many  atoms  of  carlx>n,  like
ehrysene  and  carbopetrocene,  A'c,  CnVL.^n—mh  ^1*6  solids,  and  less  fusible  as  n  and  m
increase.  They  present  a  marked  approiich  to  the  properties  of  the  diamond.  And  in
proportion  to  the  diminution  of  the  water  in  the  carbohydrates  ('„H.2mOiM  -for  example
in  the  humic  comiK)und8  (Note  5) — the  transition  of  comjth'X  organic  substances  to
charcoal  is  very  evident.  That  residue  resembling  charcoal  and  graphite  which  is
obtained  by  the  separation  (by  means  of  copper  sulphate  and  so<linm  chloride)  of  iron
from  white  cast-iron  containing  carbon  chemically  combined  with  the  iron,  also  seems,
especially  after  the  researches  of  G.  A.  Zaboudsky,  to  be  a  complex  substance  containing

CARBON  AND  THE  HYDROCARBONS  355

solid  substances  of  organisms,  contain  a  store  or  accumulation  of
internal  power  in  the  form  of  the  energy  binding  the  atoms  into  complex
molecules.  When  charcoal  or  complex  compounds  of  carbon  burn,  the
energy  of  the  carbon  and  oxygen  is  turned  into  heat,  and  this  fact  is
taken  advantage  of  at  every  turn  for  the  generation  of  heat  from  f uel.^'^
No  other  two  elements  are  capable  of  combining  together  in
such  variety  as  carbon  and  hydrogen.  The  hydrocarbons  of  the
C,,Hj^  series  in  many  cases  differ  widely  from  each  other,  although
they  have  some  properties  in  common.  All  hydrocarbons,  whether
gaseous,  liquid  or  solid,  are  combustible  substances  sparingly  soluble  or
insoluble  in  water.  The  liquefied  gaseous  hydrocarbons,  as  well  as  those
which  are  liquid  at  ordinary  temperatures,  and  those  solid  hydrocarbons
which  have  been  liquefied  by  fusion,  have  the  appearance  and  property
of  oily  liquors,  more  or  less  viscid,  or  fluid. ^^  The  solid  hydrocarbons
more  or  less  resemble  wax  in  their  properties,  although  ordinary  oils

Cj.jH^O.-,.  The  endeavoars  which  have  been  directed  towards  determining  the  meaKure
of  complexity  of  the  molecules  of  charcoal,  graphite,  and  the  diamond  will  probably  at
some  fieriod  lead  to  the  solution  of  this  problem  and  will  most  likely  prove  that  the
various  forms  of  charcoal,  graphite,  and  the  diamond  contain  molecules  of  different  and
verj'  considerable  complexity.  The  constancy  of  the  grouping  of  benzene,  C^He,  and  the
wide  diffusion  and  facility  of  formation  of  the  carbohydrates  containing  C^  (for  example,
cellulose,  CgHioOs,  glucose,  CeHi^Og)  give  reason  for  thinking  that  the  group  Ce  is  the
first  and  simplest  of  those  possible  to  free  carbon,  and  it  may  be  hoped  that  some  time
or  other  it  may  be  possible  to  get  carbon  in  this  form.  Perhaps  in  the  diamond  there
may  be  found  such  a  relation  between  the  atoms  as  in  the  benzene  group,  and  in  charcoal
such  as  in  carbohydrates.

*  When  charcoal  bums,  the  complex  molecule  d  is  resolved  into  the  simple  mole-
cules »C0.2,  and  therefore  part  of  the  heat — probably  no  small  amount — is  expended  in
the  destruction  of  the  complex  molecule  Cm.  Perhaps  by  burning  the  most  complex
substances,  which  are  the  poorest  as  regards  hydrogen,  it  may  be  possible  to  form  an
idea  of  the  work  required  to  split  up  Cn  into  separate  atoms.

**  Tlie  viscosity,  or  degree  of  mobility,  of  liquids  is  determined  by  their  internal
friction.  It  is  estimated  by  passing  the  liquids  through  narrow  (capillary)  tubes,  the
mobile  liquids  passing  through  with  greater  facility  and  speed  than  the  viscid  ones.  The
viscosity  varies  with  the  temperature  and  nature  of  the  liquids,  and  in  the  case  of  solu-
tions changes  with  the  amount  of  the  substance  dissolved,  but  is  not  proportional  to  it.
So  that,  for  example,  with  alcohol  at  20°  the  viscosity  will  be  69,  and  for  a  5o  p.c.  solu-
tion 160,  the  viscosity  of  water  being  taken  as  100.  The  volume  of  the  liquid  which
I>asses  through  by  experiment  (Poiseuille)  and  theory  (Stokes)  is  proportional  to  the
time,  the  pressure,  and  the  fourth  power  of  the  diameter  of  the  (capillary)  tube,  and
inversely  proxx)rtional  to  the  length  of  the  tube ;  this  renders  it  possible  to  form  com-
I^arative  estimates  of  the  coefficients  of  internal  friction  and  viscosity.

As  the  complexity  of  the  molecules  of  hydrocarbons  and  their  derivatives  increases
by  the  addition  of  carbon  (or  CHo),  so  does  the  degree  of  viscosity  also  rise.  The  exten-
sive series  of  investigations  referring  to  this  subject  still  await  the  necessary  generalisa-
tion. That  connection  which  (already  partly  observed)  ought  to  exist  between  the
viscosity  and  the  other  physical  and  chemical  properties,  forces  us  to  conclude  that  the
magnitude  of  internal  friction  plays  an  important  part  in  molecular  mechanics.  In
investigating  organic  compounds  and  solutions,  similar  researches  ought  to  stand  loro*
most. Many  observations  have  already  been  made,  but  not  much  hat  *-

and  wax  generally  contain  oxygen  in  addition  to  curljon  and  hjdroget
but  in  relatively  small  proportion. There  nre  also  umiiy  hydrocarboni
«  hich  have  the  appearance  of  tai- — aa,  tor  instance,  nietacinnamene  a
gutta-percha. Those  liquid  hydmcarbons  which  boil  at  a  high  teuipem-l
ture  are  like  oils,  and  those  which  have  a  low  boiling  point  resemble  I
ether,  whilst  the  gaseous  hydrocarbons  in  many  of  their  propertiei
akin  to  hydrogen. All  this  tends  to  show  that  in  Iiydrocarbons  physi-
cally considered the properties of solid non-volatile cbtirconi arq
strongly  modified  and  hidden,  whilst  those  of  the  hydrogen  predominiita
All  hydi'ocarbons  are  neutral  sultstancea  (neither  basic  nor  acid),  1
under  certain conditious  they  enter  into  peculiar  reactions,
been  aeen  in  those  hydrogen  compounds  which  have  lieen  already  c<
sidered  (water,  nitric  acid,  ammonia)  that  the  hydrogen  in  almost  a
cases  enters  into  veaction,  being  displaced  by  metals. The  hydrogen  a
the  hydrocarbons,  it  may  !«;  said,  has  no  metallic  character  -that  is  to
say,  it  is  not  directly  ^'  displaced  by  metals,  even  by  such  as  Godiuni  and
potassium. On  the  application  of  more  or  less  heat  all  hydrocarbons
decompose  *'  forming  charcoal  and  hydi-ogen. The  majority  of  hydro*  I
carbimB  do  not  combine  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air  or  oxidise  at  (
nary  temperaturtHi,  but  under  the  action  of  nitric  acid  and  many  otheil
oxidising  substances  most  of  them  undergo  oxidation,  in  which  eitliq
a.  portion  of  the  hydrogen  and  carbon  is  separated,  or  the oxygen  I
enters  into  combination,  or  else  the  elements  of  hydrogen  peroxide  enter  J
into  combination  with  the  hydrocarbon.'* When  heate<:l  in  air,  hydro

with  them;  Ihe  bare  faclH  and  name  iiiechiuiii-dilKta exist,  but  their  rrlatipn  tatttakcoli
niecbwiiot  hux  not  beeD  eleftied  uii  in  the  requisite  di>^reci. It  b»e  nJteitdy  bi
froiD  exiBting  dat4  tliat  the  viacositj  at  the  Iflmperatuie  of  the  absolute  boiling  |i
heconie§  aa  Hm&ll  Ah  in  gAHfiH.

"  III  A  number  of  bydrocarbons  nnd  their  derivMives  ■
lor  the  liydrogen  may  be  attained  by  indirect  meann.  The  iiroperty  shown  by  acvtylct
CiH],  and  its  uiaJagues.  of  forming  metaUic  derivatives  ia  in  this  rentwct  partienlai!
ohancteiiBtic. Judging  from  the  fact  that  ci

kdd  anhydride  with  oxygen),  thoagh  comparatively  slightly  acid  (lor  CArbanie  (aid  bg
not  at  all  a  strong  acid  and  compoaitds  o[  chlorine  and  carbon,  even  CCl,,  a
posed  by  water  as  is  the  cose  with  pho«phoni»  chloride  and  even  ulicic  chloride  uid  be
chloride,  although  they  correspond  witji  kcids  ol  bat  little  energy),  one  might  expeot  tj
And  in  the  hydrogen  of  hydrocarbons  this  faculty  for  lieing  substitnted  by  melals- '  ~
motnllic  compounds  which  correspond  with  bydrocarhons  are  known  ni
organo-metallio  compounds. Such,  lor  instance.  ii>  Kinc  ethyl,  Zu|C,Hj),,  wliioh  O
spends  with  ethyl  hydride  or  ethane,  CgHg.  in  which  two  alomii  ol  hydrogen  have  b
oichonged  for  one  of  >inc.

^  Gaseons  and  volatile  hydrocarbons
labe.  When  hydrocarlioiis  are  decomji
^nerally  other  more  ^tnhle  liydrocarbotii
CgHi,  naphthalene.  (.',f,Mg,  Aic,

''  Wagner  (iUSH)  showed  that  when  t

rnipoae  when pasAed 1

•oogh ■

uturaled  hydrocarbons  ore  slmken  viUt'fl

('ARBON  AND  THE  HYDROa\RBONS  367

carbons  burn,  and,  according  to  the  amount  of  carbon  they  contain,
their  combustion  is  attended  more  or  less  with  a  separation  of  soot —
that  is,  finely  divided  charcoal — which  imparts  great  brilliancy  to  the
ilame,  and  on  this  account  many  of  them  are  used  for  the  pui*poses  of
illumination — as,  for  instance,  kerosene,  coal  gas,  oil  of  turpentine.
As  hydrocarbons  contain  reducing  elements  (that  is,  those  capable  of
combining  with  oxygen),  they  often  act  as  reducing  agents — as,  for
instance,  when  heated  with  oxide  of  copper,  they  burn,  forming  car-
bonic anhydride  and  water,  and  leave  metallic  copper.  Gerhardt  proved
that  all  hydrocarbons  contain  an  even  number  of  hydrogen  atoms.
Therefore,  the  general  formula  for  all  hydrocarbons  is  CJl^^  where
n  and  m  are  whole  numbers.  This  fact  is  known  as  the  law  of  even
numbers.  Hence,  the  simplest  possible  hydrocarbons  ought  to  be  :
CHa,  CH4,  CHft  .  .  .  CsHj,  C2H4,  CaH^,  CaHg  ...  but  they  do  not
all  exist,  since  the  quantity  of  H  which  can  combine  with'  a  certain
amount  of  carbon  is  limited,  as  we  shall  learn  directly.

Some  of  the  hydrocarbons  are  capable  of  combination,  whilst  others
do  not  show  that  power.  Those  which  contain  less  hydrogen  belong  to
the  former  category,  and  those  which,  for  a  given  quantity  of  carbon,
contain  the  maximum  amount  of  hydrogen,  belong  to  the  latter.  The
composition  of  those  last  mentioned  is  expressed  by  the  general  formula
C„H2«*2-  These  so-called  saturated  hydrocarhmis  are  incapable  of
combination. 2'  The  hydrocarbons  CH^,  CaHj^,  C.,H,o,  «fec.  .  .  do  not
exist.  Those  containing  the  maximum  amount  of  hydrogen  will  be
represented  by  CH^  (?i  =  1,  2?i  +  2  =  4),  CjHe  {n  =  2),  CgHg  (n  =  3),
C4H,,),  tkc.  This  may  be  termed  the  law  of  limits.  Placing  this  in
juxtaposition  with  the  law  of  even  numbers,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that
the  possible  hydrocarbons  can  be  ranged  in  series,  the  terms  of  which
maybe  expressed  by  the  general  formulce  C^Ha^^-i,  C^Ho,,,  C„H2„_2»
tkc.  .  . Those hydrocarbons  which belong  to  any  one  of  the  series

weuk  (1  p.c.)  solution  of  i)otasAium  permanganate,  KMnO^,  at  ordinary  temperatures,
they  form  glycols — for  example,  C.,,H4  yields  C.^H^Oj.

**  My  article  on  this  subject  appeared  in  the  Journal  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Academy
of  Sciences  in  18G1.  Up  to  that  time,  although  many  additive  combinations  with  hydro-
carbons and  their  derivatives  were  known,  they  had  not  been  generalised,  and  were  even
crmtinually  quoted  as  cases  of  substitution.  Tlius  the  combination  of  ethylene,  C.^H^,
with  chlorine,  CI.2,  was  often  regarded  as  a  formation  of  the  products  of  the  substitution
of  C2H5CI  and  HCl,  which  it  was  supposed  were  held  together  as  the  water  of  cr>'stallisa-
tion  is  in  salts.  Even  earlier  than  this  (1857,  Journal  of  the  Tetroffiky  Academy)  I
considered  similar  cases  as  true  compounds.  In  general,  according  to  the  law  of  limits,
an  unsaturated  hydrocarbon,  or  its  derivative,  on  combining  with  rXo,  gives  a  substance
which  is  saturated  or  else  approaching  the  limit.  The  investigations  of  Frankland
with  many  organo-metallic  coni[K)unds  clearly  showed  the  limit  in  the  case  of  metallic
compounds,  which  we  shall  constantly  refer  to  later  on.

858  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

expressible  by  a  general  formula  are  said  to  be  houohKjous  with  one
another.  Thus,  the  hydrocarbons  CH4,  Q^^^,  ^^sH,^,  C4H,,,,  Arc.  .  .
are  members  of  the  limiting  (saturated)  homologous  series  C^Hy,,^.^.
That  is,  the  difference  between  the  members  of  the  series  is  CHy.**'
Not  only  the  composition  but  also  the  properties  of  the  members  of
a  series  tend  to  classification  in  one  group.  For  instance,  the  members
of  the  series  C„H2„  +  2  *^  ^^f'  capable  of  forming  additive  compounds,
whilst  those  of  the  series  C„H2„  are  capable  of  combining  with  chlorine,
sulphuric  anhydride,  kc.  ;  and  the  members  of  the  C^Hj,,.,,  group,
belonging  to  the  coal  tar  series,  are  easily  nitrated  (give  nitro-compounds,
Chapter  VI.),  and  have  other  properties  in  common.  The  physical
properties  of  the  members  of  a  given  homologous  series  vary  in  some
such  manner  as  this  ;  the  boiling  point  generally  rises  and  the  internal
friction  increases  as  n  increases  ^^ — that  is,  with  an  increase  in  the
rtelative  amount  of  carbon  and  the  atomic  weight  ;  the  specific  gravity
also  regularly  changes  as  n  becomes  greater. *^^

Many  of  the  hydrocarbons  met  with  in  nature  are  the  proclucts  of
organisms,  and  do  not  belong  to  the  mineral  kingdom.  A  still  greater
number  are  produced  artificially. These  are  formed  by  what  is  termed

*^  The  conception  of  lioraology  has  been  applied  by  Gerhardt  to  all  organic  coni-
pounds  in  his  classical  work,  ^Traite  de  Chimie  Orgauique,'  finished  in  1855  (4  vols.),
in  which  he  divided  all  organic  compounds  inio  fatty  and  a ro7/m//c,  which  is  in  principle
still  adhered  to  at  the  present  time,  although  the  latter  are  more  often  called  benzene
derivatives,  on  account  of  the  fact  that  Kekule,  in  his  beautiful  investigations  on  the
structure  of  aromatic  compounds,  showed  the  presence  in  them  ail  of  the  ^benzcMie
nucleus,'  C^H^.

^  This  is  always  true  for  hydrocarbons,  but  for  derivatives  of  the  lower  honiologues  the
law  is  sometimes  different;  for  instance,  in  the  series  of  saturated  alcohols,  CnU.,.„^](OHi.
when  ?i  =  0,  we  obtain  water,  H(OH),  which  boils  at  100°,  and  whose  si)ecific  gravity  at
15°  =  0-9992;  when  fi  =  l,  wootl  spirit  CH3(0H),  which  boils  at  66°,  and  at  15^  has  a
specific  gravity  =  0*7964 ;  when  «  =  2,  ordinar>'  alcohol,  C..>H.'»(OH),  boiling  at  78^,  specific
gravity  at  15°  =  07936,  and  with  further  increase  of  CH.^  the  specific  gravity  increase's.
For  the  glycols  CnH-^n  (OH).^  the  phenomenon  of  a  similar  kind  is  still  more  striking  ;  at
first  the  temperature  of  the  boiling  point  and  the  density  increase,  and  then  for  higher
(more  complex)  members  of  the  series  diminish.  The  reason  for  this  phenomenon,  it  is
evident,  must  be  sought  for  in  the  influence  and  proi)erties  of  water,  and  that  strong
affinity  which,  acting  between  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  determines  many  of  the  exceptional
properties  of  water  (Cliapter  I.).

^^  As.  for  example,  in  the  saturated  series  of  hydrocarbons  ('„H,j„^.,,,  the  lowest
member  (n  -  0)  must  be  taken  as  hydrogen  H.^,  a  gas  which  (^c.  below  — 190^)  is  liquefied
with  great  difficulty,  and  when  in  a  liquid  state  has  doubtless  a  very  small  density.
Where  h^I,  2,  8,  the  hydrocarbons  CHt,  C^Hc,  CjH^j  are  gases,  more  and  more  readily
liquefiable.  The  temperature  of  the  absolute  boiling  iH)int  for  CH4=-100\  and  for
ethane  C.^H^,  and  in  the  higher  members  it  rises.  The  hydrocarbon  C,Hp„  liquefies  at
about  0^.  C.-.Hij  (there  are  several  isomers)  boils  at  from  +9°  (LvofT)  to  37^,  C,>H,4
from  5H to  78^,  Sec. Tlie  specific  gravities  in  a  liquid  state  at  15^  are : -

C:,Hi.j  CeHi4  C-Hirt  CjoH.^j  C„;H-|

0-63  0-60  0-70  0-75  0*8:

CARBON  AND  THE HYDROCARBONS  859

the  combination  of  residues.  For  instance,  if  a  mixture  of  the  vapours
of  hydrogen  sulphide  and  carbon  bisulphide  be  passed  through  a  tube
in  which  copper  is  heated,  this  latter  absorbs  the  sulphur  from  both
the  compounds,  and  the  liberated  carbon  and  hydrogen  combine  to
form  a  hydrocarbon,  methane.  If  carbon  be  combined  with  any  metal
and  this  compound  MC„  be  treated  with  an  acid  HX,  then  the
haloid  X  will  give  a  salt  with  the  metal  and  the  residual  carbon  and
hydrogen  will  give  a  hydrocarbon.  Thus  cast  iron  which  contains  a
compound  of  iron  and  carbon  gives  liquid  hydrocarbons  like  naphtha
under  the  action  of  acids.  If  a  mixture  of  bromo-benzene,  CgH.^Br,
and  ethyl  bromide,  CaH-jBr,  be  heated  with  metallic  sodium,  the
sodium  combines  with  the  bromine  of  both  compounds,  forming  sodium '
bromide,  NaBr.  From  the  first  combination  the  group  Cf^Hg  remains,
and  from  the  second  CjH-,.  Having  an  odd  number  of  hydrogen  atoms,
they,  in  virtue  of  the  law  of  even  numbers,  cannot  exist  alone,  and  there-
fore combine  together  forming  the  compound  CgHj.CjH^  or  C^Hn,
(ethylbenzene).  Hydrocarbons  are  also  produced  by  the  breaking  up
of  more  complex  organic  or  hydrocarbon  compounds,  especially  by  heat-
ing—that is,  by  dry  distillation.  For  instance,  gum-benzoin  contains
an  acid  called  benzoic  acid,  C7Hg02,  the  vapours  of  which,  when  passed
through  a  heated  tube,  split  up  into  carbonic  anhydride,  CO2,  and
benzene,  C^Hg.  Carl>on  and  hydrogen  only  unite  directly  in  one  ratio
of  combination — namely,  to  form  acetylene,  having  the  composition
C2H2,  which,  as  compared  with  other  hydrocarbons,  exhibits  a  very
great  stability  at  a  somewhat  high  temperature.^

^  If,  at  the  ordinary  temperatare  (assuming  therefore  that  the  water  formed  will  be
in  a  liquid  state)  a  gram  molecule  (20  grams)  of  acetylene,  C2H3,  be  burnt,  810  thousand
calories  will  be  emitted  (Thomsen),  and  as  12  grams  of  charcoal  produce  97  thousand
calories,  and  2  grams  of  hydrogen  69  thousand  calories,  it  follows  that,  if  the  hydrogen
and  carbon  of  the  acetylene  were  burnt  there  would  be  only  2x97  +  69,  or  268
thousand  calories  produced.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  acetylene  in  its  formation  absorbs
810-268,  or  47  thousand  calories.

For  considerations  relative  to  the  combustion  of  carbon  compounds,  we  will  first
enumerate  the  quantity  of  heat  separated  by  the  combustion  of  definite  chemical  carbon
compounds,  and  then  give  a  few  figures  bearing  on  the  kinds  of  fuel  used  in  practice.

For  molecular  quantities  in  perfect  combustion  the  following  amounts  of  heat  are
given  out  (when  gaseous  carbonic  anhydride  and  liquid  water  are  formed),  according  to
Thomsen's  data  (1)  for  gaseous  C„Hq„^<i'-  52-8  +  158-8n  thousand  calories;  (2)  for
CHH^fi:  lT7  +  l5Hln  thousand  calories;  (8)  according  to  Stohmann  (1888)  for  liquid
saturated  alcohols,  CnHsR+aO  :  11*8+  156-8n,  and  as  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation  =aboui
8-2+OOn,  in  a  gaseous  state,  200  +  150-9n;  (4)  for  monobasic  saturated  liquid  acids,
C„H.2„0.2:— 96-8+1 54-8w,  and  as  their  latent  heat  of  evaporation  is  about  50  +  l'2n,  in  a
gaseous  form,  about — 90  +  155^n;  (5)  for  solid  saturated  bibasic  acids,  CHH.2n-204:
—253-8+  152-6n,  if  they  are  expressed  as  C„Iip,CaH204,  then  51-4  +  152-6n  ;  (6)  for  ben-
zene and  its  liquid  homologues  (still  according  to  Stohmann)  C||H2n-A  : — 158*6 +  156*8«,
and  in  a  gaseous  form  about — 155+  157n;  (7)  for  the  gaseous  homologues  of  acetylene,
CmH^h-s  (according  to  Thomsen)— 5  + 157w. It  is  evident  from  the  preceding  figuies

I

k

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

There  U  one  substance  kuuwn  among  the  saturated  hydrocarbons  I
imposed  of  1  atom  of  carbon  and  4  atoms  of  hydrogen  ;  thje  i:
pound  containing  the  highest  pert^eiitage  of  hydrogen  (CH,  cootftins  j
25  per cent,  of  hydrogen),  and  at  the  same  time  it  is  the  only  hydro
carbon  whose  molecule  contains  but  a  single  atom  of  carbon. Thii
saturated hydrocarbon, CH,, is called inarfh  ijaa  or mrlita.
vegetable  or  animal  refuse  suffers  decomposition  in  a  space  where  the
air  has  not  free  access,  or  no  access  at  all,  then  the  decomposition  ia  ^
accompanied  with  the  formation  of  marsh  gas,  and  this  either  at  the
ordinary  temperature,  or  at  a  coniparatively  much  higherone. On  this  1
account  phinls,  when  deconiposing  under  water  in  tnnr»he»,  give  out  j
this  gas.^^^'' It  is  well known  that  if the  mud  in  boga  be  stirred ,
up,  the  act  is  accompanied  with  the  evolution  of  a  large  quantity  of
gas  bubbles  ;  these  may,  although slowly,  also  separate  of  their  own |

that  Ihe  group CIL,,  or  CHj  sabaLUuted  for  H,  on  barnin^
lEO  tbonwnd  cularies. Tliia  U  Jena  thui  thnl  gircn  (iiil  b;  C  -t-
tliousand;  the  renma  foe  this  diffurenr.'e  <it  nonld  be  still  grmtrr  i I  carbon  were  gueaos) I
IB  Uie  umouDt of  hetb  nepuaMd  daring  tbe  fomiation ai CHj, According  lo  Stoh-
nuin,  tor  deitTOglacow,  CaH].jOe,  it  in  OTfl-T;  lor  common  sd^iu,  C,.|H„0|,,  ISasTi  iat
oelluloM,  C,H,|,Oi,  n7N'0 ;  stiircb,  STT'G ;  dextrin,  6e0'9 ;  gl.rcal,  C.jHaOj,  3S1'T  ;  glycerioe,
aeT'9,  Ac The  beat  of  comboation  of  the  following  Eolida  (ileUrmiued  bf  Stohmunf  U ]
eiprened  por  unit  of  weight :  naphthaJene,  C',aHg,  9,631 ;  ure«,  CN.jU,0.  S,t6S ;  white  of  1
"Zg,  li.BTS;  dry  rye  bread,  i,li\:  whnten  breHd,  4,1103: tallow.  U.BflS;  batter,  U  ~
linwed  oil,  S,SaS. The  moat  complete  collection  ot  arithmetical  dotn  tor  the  he*
combaetion  will  be  foand  in  V.  F.  Longinin's  work.  '  DeBcripEion  o[  the  Vurioaa  Hel
of  Determining  the  Heats  of  Cornhnstion  of  Orgiuiic  Com|>ODndH '  IUobcuw.  ISIM).

The  numberot  units  ol  heat  given  ont  b;  unif  urci^Al  during  the  comiileLecombiuiiaa  |
and  cooling  of  the  following  ordinary  kinds  of  fuel  in  their  usual  sUte  of  drynM*  and  \
pnrity  are: — (1)  for  wood  chaicool. anthracite,  semi-anthmcile,  bitiuninons  cnol  utd  Ocka,  I
from  7,300  Co  8,300 ;  (S)  dry,  long  fiauiing  cools,  and  the  best  brown  cnolt.  from  6,300  to  J
fl,eO0^  (SI  perfectly  di7  wood,  8.500 1  hardly  dry.  3,UW  ;  <1)  perfectly  dry  peal,  belt  kind,  I
4,600  1  compressed  and  dried. 8,000;  (G|  petroleum  refase  and  similar  lignid  bydrooibOBi^il
abonb  11,000 ;  IS|  iUnminating  gsa  of  the  nrdinary  vompceition  |aboat  46  vols.  H,  40  folfc,'!
CH4,  G  vols.  CO,  and  G  vols.  N),  about  l'i,0O0;  (T|  prodooer  gas  (ler  next  Chapter),  et
ti^'"''*^g  3  vols,  carbonic  anhydride.  30  vols,  oubonio  oxide,  and  GH  vols,  nitrogen  for  otltf
part  by  teeigM  of  the  teholn  earhoi\  6b™(,  6,B00.  and  (or  one  part  by  weight  of  th«  gaa,
910,  nnita  at  beat ;  and  (S|  water  giia  [tee  next  chapter)  containing  4  vols,  carbonic  uihj-
dride.  §  vols,  N.j,  34  tnlii,  carbonic  oxide,  and  40  vols.  Hg.  tnt  one  part  by  weight  nl  tlM  I
carbon  consnmed  in  the  gnytrotor  10,000,  and  for  one  purl  by  weight  of  the  gu,  8,000  ^  I
uuilH  of  heat.  In  these  flgurea,  as  in  all  colorimelric  obwrvations,  the  water  produead  A
by  tlie  combustion  nl  the  loel  is  supposed  (u  be  liquid.  As  regardn  the  temperatnw  J
reocbed  by  the  Inel,  it  is  imporlaiit  to  remark  that  lur  solid  (nel  it  ia  inditipensablc  la, I
admit  <1a  eiienre  complete  combustion  |  twice  the  onionnl  of  air  rnqnired,  hut  liquid,  OV^a
pulverifed  fuel,  and  especially  gaeeons  Inel,  does  not  r<X|aire  an  excess  of  airj  tbereloAvl
a  kilogram  of  charcoal,  giving  8,000  anits  of  heat,  requires  abonl  34  kilograms  ot  air  Wl
kilogram*  of  ail  per  thousand  calories)  atid  a  kilogram  ol  producer  gas  reiiairea  onl/  V
077  kilogram  of  air  |0'85  kilo,  ot  air  per  1,000  calories),  I  kilogram  o
4-G  ot  air  (136  kilo,  of  air  per  1.000  colories).

"  1^  Manure  which  dccomposee  under  the  action of  bacttsria  gives  i>lt CO^  and I

CABBOS  ASD  THE HTDK0CABB0N8  361

L  accurd. The  gas  wliick  is  evolved  consists  principally  of  luitrsii  giui.^"

I  I£  woihI,  coal,  or  nmny  other  vegetable  ur  aiiimal  aubatatiL-es  are  decom-

[  posed  by  the  action  ofh'al  without  access  of  air — that  is,  are  subjectwl

I  to  dry  distillation— they,  in  addition  to  many  other  gaseous  piiiducts

L  of  deconi position  (carbonic anhydride,  hydrogen,  and various  other

iuljstances),  evolve  a  great  deal  uf  methane. Generally  the  goa  which

is  used  for  lighting  purposes  is  obtained  by  this  means  and  therefore

always  contains  marsh  gas,  mixed  with  dry  hydrogen  and  other  vapours

and  gases,  although  it  is  subsequently  purified  from  many  of  theui.^'

'*'  It  18  easj  to  L'ollecl  the  fjni  wUiuli  in  ei'oltal  in  nwriiliy  plu.*ee  if  n  ^liu«  Wttlc  bo
'  invifrted  in  tlw  nnter  and  u  funnel  pnC  into  it  Ibotb  filled  nith  waMif ;  if  ilie  mini  uf  the
I  bnltoDi  be  nov  sgitnted,  the  bubbles  nbicli  rise  nuj'  be  etulf  tuotilit  b;  tbu  invErted

r "  Ulamiiiatmg  gu  ia  genentll;  prep&red  by  boating  gut  coxl  [tre  Note  S|  in  oval

eylindricnl  lioriuiiital  ouit-iniD  or  clivj  retortti. Heveral  eudi  rvliirt*  BB  Iflg.  W)  are

dispoHed  id  the  famace  A,  and  heated  together, When  the  relortu  are  heated  to  a

red  heat,  lnmpB  of  coal  are  thrown  into  them,  and  they  are  tlien  vioiieil  witli  a  cloHely

fitting  cover. The  illastration  shown  the  tarnace,  witb  Rve  retorts. Cuke  |*M  Note  1,

drj  diatillatiou)  remaina  in  tbe  retortst  and  the  volatile  products  in  the  form  of  fapoora

and  gaeea  travel  along  tbe  pipe  d,  rising  from  each  ifitort. Theae  pipes  branch  above

the  stove,  and  communicate  with  the  receiver/ [hydraalic  main)  placed  above  the  furnace.

Those  prodacts  of  the  dry  distillation  which  moat  easily  pass  from  tbe  gsM«ous  into  the

liquid  and  solid  states  collect  in  the  hydraulic  main. From  the  hj'drn.alio  auun  the

fapDUra  und  gaites  travel  along  the  pipe  fl  and  the  series  of  vertical  pipes  j  (which  ore

eoinelimeB  cooled  by  water  Irickling  over  tbe  surface],  where  the  vapours  and  gases  cool

Iroiii  the  contact  ol  the  colder  inrface,  and  a  fresh  quantity  of  vapour  condenses. The

ooodeused  liquids  pass  from  the  pipes  g  and  J  and  into  the  troughs  H. These  troughs

L  ■Ivrnya  oontain  liquid  at  a  constant  level  (the  eicesa  Sowing  awayj  so  that  the  gaHcaniict

I  Ucape,  and  tbns  tliey  form,  as  it  is  termed,  a  hydraulic  jcuat. In  the  slate  in  whicli  it

P 'fcaveii  tlie  condensers  the  gas  consists  principally  of  the  following  vapnntH  aod  gases  :

V'lX)  Taponi  of  water.  (3)  anunoninm  cuiboiuite,  (3)  liqaid  hydrocarbons,  {*)  hydrogen  aal-

phidii,  B,&,  (G|  carbonic  anhydride,  CO^  iS)  carbonic  oiide,  CO.  |T|  sulphurous  aiiby

dride,  BO],  but  a  great  part  of  the  illuminating  gits  consists  oI  <H]  hydrogen,  (S)  inatiih

a,  (lo)olefiant  gaa,C,H„  and  other  gaseous  hydrocarbons. Thebydrocarbons  13,  B,  and

10),  tlie  hydrogen,  and  carboi

pouent  parts,  but  the  carbantc

dride,  as  well  as  the  vapnnrs

because  they  do  not  bom  (CO,,

or  else,  althoagb  capable  of  b

ring  combustion  anlphuroQa

ven  inhaled,  atid  spnilx  many

Ddncta,  tbe  gan  is  washed  wi

Ih  coke  continually  moistene

cupable  I
ihydride,  the  hydrogen  snlpbidu,  and  sulphurona  anliy.
'  ammonium  carbonate,  form  au  injurious  idmiitore,
).,)  and  lower  Che  tenipeiatuce  and  brilliancy  ol  the  flame,
ning  {for  eiaraple,  H.jS,  CS.,,  and  utbers),  tbey  give  out
jihydride  which  has  a  dissgrDcable  smell,  is  injurious
irronud  in  g  objects.  In  order  to  separate  the  iniorinne
water,  a  cylinder  (not  shown  in  the  illustration)  filled
with  wster  nerving  for  this  purpose.  The  water  coniiug
ootact  with  the  gas  dissolves  the  ammonium  carbonate  ;  hydrogen  sulphide,  car-
aabydride,  and  sulpburoas  anhydride,  being  only  partiy  soluble  iti  *rater,  have  to
(  rid  of  by  a  apeoial  means.  For  this  purpose  the  gas  is  passed  thmugb  moist  lime
her  alkaline  liqoiil,  as  tlie  above-mentioned  gases  have  aeid  properties  and  are
bre  retained  by  the  alkali.  In  tlie  caae  of  lime,  calcium  carbonate,  aulpliile  and
ide.  all  solid  sabstancvH.  ore  lonned.  It  is  necesaaiy  to  renew  the  porityijig
ial  as  its  absorbing  power  decreasea.  A  mixture  of  lime  and  aulphate  of  irun.
It,  oots  still  better,  because  the  latter,  with  lima,  Cs(HO)...  forma  ferrous  hydmiide,
tlHOVj  and  gypsum,  Va.^0,. The  suboiide  Ipartly  turning  into  oaidej  of  iron  absorbs

CAJiBOS ASH TH£ IIVDUdCAnUOXM

Ab  tlie  decORi)Misitiun  of  itxe  organic matter  which  forms  coal,  is  still
going  on  undergrouDcl,  the  evolution  of  large  (juantitiea  of  mnrsh  gas

i  aud  HjO,  uid  the  gypautn  relmius  t
imu  abiorbing  carbouic  aulij-dfidH  anil  salplinric  tmhydride, [In  Boglish
e  hydrated ferric  hydroiicli;  is  uneS  lor mmoviug hj'dragen aulphide.]

This  purification  of  the  gas  lakes  ploca  iu  ttie  apiiaiatDs  L,  wberv  (he  giu  pMiwit  throagh

perforated  tiajt  m,  covered  with  sowdiut  dukhI  with  lime  Hod  salphate  of  iron. It  ia

necFMarj  to  remark  tlut  in  the  moDiifacture  of  gati  it  la  indiepennble  to  draw  off  the
I vapoan  from  the  relorta,  so  that  thef  ahould  not  remain  there  long  lotherwiw  thi>

bydrocarboog  tcould  in  a  conaiderable  degree  be  reaolved  into  cluircaal  and  bydiogeni,

And  alao  to  Avoid  a  great  pretuiare  of  gas  in  tbp  apparatus,  otherwise  a  quantity  of  gn»
inch  BB  must  inevitably  exist  in  such  a  complicHted  amnge-

nwnt. For  thia  parpow  there  are  special  pomps  leihtnateTfi)  so  regulated  that  thay

only  pump  oil  the  qaantity  of  ga«  formed  (the  pump  is  unt  shown  in  the  Otustratiuul.

Tlif  pnrifled  ga*.  pusses  through  the  pipe  ii into  llie  gasometer  (gaaholderj  P,  a  dome

made  of  iron  plate. The  edges  of  the  dome  dip  into  wattr  poured  into  a  ring-ehapod

rliuinel  g.  in  which  the  aides  ol  Iha  doma  riae  and  fall. The  g«a  ii  collected  Id  this

liulder.  and  dititribuled  tu  its  destiuAlimi  by  pipeii  Hunmnnioiting  with  Che  pipe  o.iuuing

bom  the  dome. The  pressure  ol tfau  dome on  the  ga*

enitble* it.  on iasoing from a long pipe,  to penetrate
' through  the small aperture  of  the  burner. A hundred

kilagnuns  of  coal  gire  about  31)  to  80  cabrc  metres  of  gn:i,
I having  a  density  from  tour  to  nine  times  greater  than  that

0( hydrogen. A  cubic metre  (1,000  litretl  of hydrogen

weigba  about  8T  grams; therefore  100  kUogranis  ot  coal

I give  about  IS  kilogmnis  of  gas,  or  about  one-»ith  ot  itr

reight. Ulnminatiug  gao  is  generally  lighter  than  marsh

giui.  Ka  it  runtuitiH  »  vonsiderable  amount  of  hydrogen,  uid

a  only  heavier  than  mamb  gas  when  it  contains  much  ot

ihe  heavier hydrocarbon  s. Tliot  oleSant  giu,  C^Hj,  is

lourteen  times,  And  the  Tapoura  ot  beoiene  thiily'iiine

tiiuea,  heavier  than  hydrogen,  and  Ulnminating  gs.s  Homc-
I  Umes  vonlains  IR  p.c.  nl  its  volutne  of  them.  The  brilliaucy
,  ot  Ihe  HamH  of  the  gas  iocreaaea  with  the  quantity  ot
t  gas  and  similar  heavy  hydrocarbons,  as  it  then
IS  more  carbon  tor  a  given  volume  and  a  greater
T  of  carbon  particles  are  separated,  lias  nanally
IS  from  SS  to  no  p.c.  of  ita  volume  of  marsh  gas.  from

MO  to  SO  p.c.  ot  hydrogen,  from  tl  to  fi  p.c-  ot  carbonic  oiide.

trtxa  3  to  10  p.c,  heavy  hydrocarbons,  and  from  B  to  10  p.c.

of  nitrogen. Wood  gives  almost  the  same  sort  of  giu  bk

coal  and  almost  the  same  quantity,  bat  the  wood  gas  con-
tuns  a  great  deal  ot  carbonic  anhydride,  although  on  the

other  hand  there  is  an  almost  complete  absence  of  sal-

pbur  compounda. Tar,  oils,  naphtha,  and  such  malerials

faniiih  a  large quantity  of  good  illuminating  gas. An

ordinary  burner  of  S  to  13  randle-power  buTD*  S  to  0  cnbic  '

test  of  coal  gas  per  hoar,  but  only  1  cubic  foot  ot  naphtha

gaa. One  pood  ISfi  Ibi.  Eng.)  ol  naphtha  gives  500  cubic

feet  of  gu — that  in,  one  kilogram  of  naphtha  pnidaces  about

oti«  mhic  metre  of  giw. The  fonnatinn  of  (combustible  gas

by  htating  cial  was  discovered  iu  the  beginning  of  the  last

centiuj'.  but  only  pnt  into  practice  towards  the  end  by  Le-Bon  in  France  and  Murdoi

in  Enghuid. In  RDgUud.  Murdoch,  together  with  the  renowned  Watt,  bmlt  tlie  Or

gM  worlca  in  tSOB.

i

iwpific  Air  L%
it  the  trumpet-
DDthplece, (ml

.trouin"jrtW^
imlty  of  tlw  lidc

I

rjroquently  occurs  in  coal-miuea." Wlieii  mixed  witli  itir  ii  forma  t

I  explosive  mixture,  wbtch  forms  one  of  t.he  g rent  dangers  of  coiil  inining,

I'  tie  subterranean  work  has  always  to  be  curried  on  by  lamp-ligbt. This

r  danger  is,  however,  overcome  by  tlie  use  of  Humpliry  Davy's  safety

I'  latup.'-'' Sir  Huniphry  Davy  observed  that  on  introducing  a  piece  of  wire

I  gauze  into  a  Dame,  it  absorbs  so  much  beat  that  combustion  does  not

I  proceed  beyond  it  (the  uubumt  gases  which  pass  through  it  nniy  be

3a  the  other  side). In  accordance  with  this,  the  flame  of  the

Davy  lamp  is  Huri'ounded  with  a  thick  glass  (as  shown  in  the  drawing),

and  has  no  communication  whatever  wiih  the  explosive  mixture  except

through  a  wire gaaite  which  prevents  it  igniting  the  mixture  of  the

marsh-gas  issuing  from  the  coal  with  air. In  some  districts,  particularly

m  those  where  petroleum  is  found— as,  for  instance,  near  Baku,  where

'ft  temple  of  the  Indian  lire- worshippers  was  built,  and  in  Pennsylvania,

.and  other  places^ — marsh  gas  in  abundance  issues  from  the  earth,  and

1  used,  like  coal  gas,  for  the  purposes  of  lighting  and  warming."

Ill  pnwticb  illnminBliii);  gaa  is  not  aol;  Dsed  for

I ebeiiper  in  Ruasia),  bnt  also  as  the  motivu  (lOwer  fo

I  aboat  h&ll  ■  i^ubic  metre  per  borw-porer  per

for  liealiu){  pnrpoWB. Wliun  it  ia  nvceiiBar;  to  cuni

blowpipe  (G|;.  GUj  is  applied,  placing  the  end  in  the

tiglitiiig  (electrioitf  ami  keroMne  are
r  gas  eiigineii  [aee  p.  17K),  which  oun-
huor ;  ijiu  in  also  arei  in  UburatoriM
ientraW  the  heat,  eitlwr  the  otdiDuy
~  \i\ovf'mg  thiouKh  the  moutli-

I  piece;  or,  is  other  forma,  gaa  is  pasttecl  through  the  blowpipe;  when  a  large,  hot, imoke-
is  required  tar  heating  crnciblee  or  glaaa-blowing,  a  [uot-hlower  ia  used.  HikA
teraperalures,  which  are  often  mquirod  for  Inborator;  and  luuinfiMturing  pnrpoHea,  are
Huxit  eaeilf  attained  by  the  uite  of  gaseona  fuel  (illnminaling  gaa,  ptudacer  gas,  and
will  bp  treated  of  in  the  following  Phapterl,  became  complete  cotabna-
tian  may  be  ellecled  without  nn  accesa  of  air.  It  ia
evident  that  in  order  to  obtain  high  teiaperatam
lueaus  luual  be  taken  to  diminiali  the  loss  of  heal
by  radiation,  and  to  ooaaie  perfect  oombnation.

contains  a  good deal  uf  nitrogen,  some  caHxuue

itilation. It is best to  light  coal
ctric  lamps.

in  ioipiDied  form
■ing  figure,  is  naed
[or  lighting  coal  and  other  nunea  where  Domliiw-
tible  gas  ii  found.  The  wick  of  the  lamp  ia  Ml-
closed  in  a  thick  glaaa  cylinder which  ia  flmlj

beld i

holder.

-i cylinder  and  tlie  i
-  ^ dui'ta  o(  eombastion  puis  through  the  gaue,  and
_^ the air enten  throngh the spare between tb«
cylinder  and  the  wire  gaDie. To  enatire  RIMtw
cij.liLUip.  safety  the  lamp  eannot  be  opened  without  extin-

guishing the  flame.
''  In  PennaylvBuia  (beyond  the  Alleghany  niountaJn«l  uuuiy  of  the  olulto  aouk  lOr
Lpatrolenm  only  emitted  gaa,  but  many  naeful  applicationH  fur  it  were  touiiil  and  il  Waa

[MuJcri

CARBON  AND  THE  HYDROCARBONS  365

Tolerably  pure  marsh  gas  '*  may  be  obtained  by  heating  a  mixture  of  an
acetate  with  an  alkali.  Acetic  acid,  C2H402,  on  being  heated  is  decom-
posed into  marsh  gas  and  carbonic  anhydride,  C2H402=CH4-|-C02.

An  alkali — for  instance,  NaHO — gives  with  acetic  acid  a  salt,
C2H3Na02,  which  on  decomposition  retains  carbonic  anhydride,  form-
ing a  carbonate,  Na2C03,  and  marsh  gas  is  given  off :

C2H3Na02  +  NaHO=Na2C03  +  CH,

Marsh  gas  is  difficult  to  liquefy  ;  it  is  almost  insoluble  in  water,
and  is  without  taste  or  smell.  The  most  important  point  in  connection
with  its  chemical  reactions  is  that  it  does  not  combine  directly  with
anything,  whilst  the  other  hydrocarbons  which  contain  less  hydrogen
than  expressed  by  the  formula  C„H2„+2  *re  capable  of  combining  with
hydrogen,  chlorine,  certain  acids,  <fec.

If  the  law  of  substitution  gives  a  very  simple  explanation  of  the
formation  of  hydrogen  peroxide  as  a  compound  containing  two
aqueous  residues  (OH)  (OH),  then  on  the  basis  of  this  law  all  hydro-
carbons ought  to  be  derived  from  methane,  CH4,  as  being  the  simplest
hydrocarbon.^^  The  increase  in  complexity  of  a  molecule  of  methane
is  brought  about  by  the  faculty  of  mutual  combination  which  exists  in
the  atoms  of  carbon,  and,  as  a  consequence  of  the  most  detailed  study
of  the  subject,  much  that  might  have  been  foreseen  and  conjectured
from  the  law  of  substitution  has  been  actually  brought  about  in  such
a  manner  as  might  have  been  predicted,  and  although  this  subject
on  account  of  its  magnitude  really  belongs,  as  has  been  already  stated,
to  the  sphere  of  organic  chemistry,  it  has  been  alluded  to  here  in  order
to  show,  although  only  in  part,  the  best  investigated  example  of  the
application  of  the  law  of  substitution.  According  to  this  law,  a  mole-
cule of  methane,  CH4,  is  capable  of  undergoing  substitution  in  the  four
following  ways  :— (1)  Methyl  substitution,  when  the  radicle,  equivalent
to  hydrogen,  called  methyl  CH^,  replaces  hydrogen.  In  CH4  this
radicle  is  combined  with  H  and  therefore  can  replace  it,  as  (OH)
replaces  H  because  with  it  it  gives  water  ;  (2)  methylene  substitution^
or  the  exchange  between  H2and  CH2  (this  radicle  is  called  methylene),
is  founded  on  a  similar  division  of  the  molecule  CH4  into  two  equiva-

condacted  in  metallic  pii>es  to  works  hundreds  of  miles  distant,  principally  for  metal-
lurgical purposes.

^  The  purest  gas  is  prepared  by  mixing  the  liquid  substance  called  zinc  methyl,
Zn(CH3).2,  with  water,  when  the  following  reaction  occurs  :

Zn(CH5),.  +  2H0H  -  Zn(HO) .  +  -iCH-H.

*•  Methylene,  CH^,  does  not  exist.  When  attempts  are  made  to  obtain  it  (for
example,  by  removing  X.,,  from  CH,,X.,,),  C.^.H,  or  C'-H,j  are  produced— that  is  to  say,  it
undergoes  polymerisation.

866  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMI8TKY

lent  parts,  Hj  and  CH.2 ;  (3)  acetylene  substitution,  or  the  exchange
between  CH  on  the  one  hand  and  H3  on  the  other  ;  and  (4)  carbon
substitution — that  is,  the  substitution  of  H4  by  an  atom  of  carbon  C,
which  is  founded  on  the  law  of  substitution  just  as  is  the  methyl
substitution.  These  four  cases  of  substitution  render  it  possible  to
understand  the  principal  relations  of  the  hydrocarbons.  For  instance,
the  law  of  even  numbers  is  seen  from  the  fact  that  in  all  the  cases  of
substitution  mentioned  the  hydrogen  atoms  increase  or  decrease  by
an  even  number  ;  but  as  in  CH4  they  are  likewise  even,  it  follows  that
no  matter  how  many  substitutions  are  effected  there  will  always  be
obtained  an  even  number  of  hydrogen  atoms.  When  H  is  re-
placed by  CH3  there  is  an  increase  of  CH2  ;  when  Hj  is  replaced  by
CH.2  there  is  no  increase  of  hydrogen  ;  in  the  acetylene  substitution
CH  replaces  Hj,  therefore  there  is  an  increase  of  C  and  a  decrease  of
H2  ;  in  the  carbon  substitution  there  is  a  decrease  of  H4.  In  a  similar
way  the  law  of  limit  may  be  deduced  as  a  corollary  of  the  law  of
substitution.  For  the  largest  possible  quantity  of  hydrogen  is  intro-
duced by  the  methyl  substitution,  since  it  leads  to  the  addition
of  CHj  ;  starting  from  CH4  we  obtain  C2H,;,  CjH^,  and  in  general,
C„H.2„+.2>  ^^^  these  contain  the  greatest  possible  amount  of  hydrogen.
Unsaturated  hydrocarbons,  containing  less  hydrogen,  are  evidently
only  formed  when  the  increase  of  the  new  molecule  derived  from
methane  proceeds  from  one  of  the  other  forms  of  substitution.
When  the  methyl  substitution  alone  takes  place  in  methane,  CH4,
it  is  evident  that  the  saturated  hydrocarbon  formed  is  C2H,j  or
(CH3)  (CH3).^^  This  is  called  etluine.  By  means  of  the  methylene
substitution  alone,  ethylene^  C2H4,  or  (CH2)  (CH2)  may  be  directly
obtained from CH|, and by the acetylene substitution C2H2 or

^  Although  the  muthcxls  of  formation  and  the  reactiouH  conntHrtetl  with  hy<lnK\irbons
are  not  described  in  this  work,  because  they  are  dealt  with  in  orj^anic  cheniistn',  yet  in
order  to  clearly  show  the  mechanism  of  those  transformations  by  which  the  carbon
atoms  are  built  up  into  the  molecules  of  the  carbon  compounds,  we  liere  ^ive  a  general
example  of  reactions  of  this  kind.  From  marsh  gas,  CH4,  on  the  one  hand  the  substi-
tution f)f  chlorine  or  iodine,  CH3CI,  CH5I,  for  the  hydrogen  may  be  effected,  and  on  the
other  hand  such  metals  as  stKlium  may  be  substitute<l  for  the  hydrogen,  r.</.  CH-Niu
These  and  similar  prcxlucts  of  substitution  serve  as  a  means  of  obtaining  other  more
inmiplex  substances  from  given  carbon  compounds.  If  we  i>lace  the  two  above-named
products  of  substitution  of  marsh  gas  (metallic  and  lialoid)  in  mutual  contact,  the  metal
combines  with  the  halogen,  forming  a  very  stable  compound — nauncly,  common  stilt,
NaCl,  and  the  carbon  groups  which  were  in  combination  with  them  Kfi)arate  in  nmtual
combination,  as  shown  by  the  equation :

CH5CI  +  CHjNa  -  NaCl  +  C...Hc.

This  is  the  most  sniiplo  example  of  the  formation  of  a  complex  liydrocarbon  from  tliese
radicles.  The  cause  of  the  reaction  nmst  be  sought  for  in  the  projverty  which  the  haloid
<chlorin«0  und  so<lium  have  of  entering  into  mutual  combination.

CARBON  AND  THE  HYDROCARBONS  367

(CH)  (CH),  or  acetylene^  both the latter  being  unsaturated  hydro-
carbons. Thus  we  have  all  the  possible  hydrocarbons  with  two  atoms
of  carbon  in  the  molecule,  C2Hg,  ethane,  C2H4,  ethylene,  and  C2H2,
acetylene. But in  them,  according  to  the law  of  substitution, the
same forms of  substitution  may  be repeated — that is,  the  methyl,
methylene,  acetylene,  and  even  carbon  substitutions  (because  C2H^,  will
still  contain  hydrogen  when  C  replaces  H4)  and  therefore  further  sub-
stitutions will  serve  as  a  source  for  the  production  of  a  fresh  series  of
saturated  and  unsaturated  hydrocarbons,  containing  more  and  more
carbon  in  the  molecule  and,  in  the  case  of  the  acetylene  substitution
and  carbon  substitution,  containing  less  and  less  hydrogen. Thus  by
meaiis of  the laio  of  substitution we can  foresee  not  only  the  limit
^mH2„+2,  but  an  unlimited  number  of  unsaturated  hydrocarbons,  C^Ha,,,
^h^2h-2  .  .  •  •  C„H2{„_m)> where m  varies  from  0 to  n  — 1,^**  and
where  n  increases  indefinitely. From  these  facts  not  only  does  the
existence  of  a  multitude  of  polymeric  hydrocarbons,  difiering  in  mole-
cular weight,  become  intelligible,  but  it  is  also  seen  that  there  is  a  possi-
bility  of  cases  of  isomerism  with  the  same  molecular  weight. This
polymerism  so  common  to  hydrocarbon  compounds  is  already  apparent
in  the  first  unsaturated  series  C„H2„,  because  all  the  terms  of  this
series  C2H4, C3H6, C^Hg  ....  CsoH^-o  ....  have one and the
same  composition  CHj,  but  different  molecular  weights,  as  has  been
already  explained  in Chapter VII. The  differences in  the  vapour
density, boiling points, and melting points, of the quantities
entering  into  reactions, ^^  and  the  methods  of  preparation^^  also  so
clearly  tally  with  the  conception  of  polymerism,  that  this  example  will
always  be  the clearest  and most conclusive  for  the  illustration  of
polymerism  and  molecular  weight. Such  a  case  is  also  met  with  among
other  hydrocarbons. Thus  benzene, C^^H^, and cinnamene, C^Hg,
correspond with  the  composition  of  acetylene  or  to  a  compound  of
the  composition  CH.^* The  first  boils  at  81°,  the  second  at  144®;

•'•**  When  m  —  «  —  1,  we  have  the  Heries  CmH.j.  The  lowest  member  is  acetylene,  (2*^^.
Thene  are  hydrocarbons  containing  a  minimum  amount  of  hydrogen.

♦*  For  instance,  ethylene,  C.2H4,  combines  with  Br.i,  HI,  H.2SO4,  as  a  whole  molecule,
as  also  does  amylene,  C.'.H^o,  and,  in  general,  CaH.^n-

*®  For  instance,  ethylene  is  obtained  by  removing  the  water  from  ethyl  alcohol,
CoH5(OH),  and  amylene,  C.-.Hio,  from  amyl  alcohol,  C;,Hi|(OH),  or  in  general  dHjw,  from
C\H2»m(0H).

■**  Acetylene  and  its  polymerides  have  an  empirical  com]x>Kition  CH,  ethylene  and
its  homologues  (and  ixilymerides)  CH..,  etliane  CH3,  methane  CH|.  This  series  presents
a  good  example  of  the  law  of  multiple  proportions,  but  such  diverse  pro|>ortions  are  met
with  between  the  number  of  atoms  of  the  carbon  and  hydrogen  in  the  hydrocarbons
already  known  that  the  accuracy  of  Dalton'slaw  might  be  doubted.  Tlius  the  Hubstances
CsoHci  and  CjoHjy  differ  so  slightly  in  their  composition  by  weight  as  to  >>e  within  the
limits  of  ex])erimental  error,  but  their  reactions  and  properties  are  so  distinct  that  they

the  specific  gravity  of  the  first  is  0-899  ;  that,  of  the  set'ond,  0-925,  at
—that  is,  here  also  the  boiling  point  rises  with  the  increase  of
utolecular  weight,  and  so  also,  as  might  be  expected,  does  the  density.

Cases  of  isomerism  in  the  restricted  sense  of  the  word — that  is,  *
when  with  an  identity  of  composition  and  of  molecular  weight,  the I
properties  of  the  substances  are  different — are  very  nuniei-ous  iniong 1
the  hydrocarbons  and  their  derivatives. Such  cases  are  particularly
important for  tEie  coniprehenaioii of  molecular  structure and  they '
also,  like  the  polymerides,  may  be  predicted  from  the  above-mentioned
conceptions,  expressing  the  principles  of  the  structure  of  the  carbon
corapouniTs  '*  based  on  the  law  of  substitution. According  to  it,  for  '
example,  it  is  evident  that  there  can  be  no  isomerism  in  the  cases  of
the  saturated  hydrocarbons  CjH^  and  C^H,,  because  the  former  is
CU,,  in which methyl  has  taken  the place  of  H,  and  as  aU  the
hydrogen atoms  of methane must be supposed  to  have  the same
relation  to  the  carbon,  it  is  all  the  same  which  of  them  \ie  subjected |
to  the  methyl  substitution— the  resulting  product  can  only  be  ethane,
CHjCH}  ;  '^ the  same argument also applies in  the  case  of  pro-
pane, CHgCHjCHj,  where  one  oompound  only  can  be  imagined. It

jngai

liod  h

yard

beeii  brougbb  U

(ioaB  which  uv  qnite dear

Gerhudt.

"  The  foiicaption  of  the
Ihoae  tmions  and  correlatiouB
lime  limited  lo  Uie  represn

>n1.t.  Without  Dxltciii'B  hiw  ,:lie
ililiiin,  bnt  it  cnnnol  ninne  eip
jtidtirabond And piedicted  hy t

istiyc

inndB— that  is,  the  ei
the  TuolecnleB — wib
lobBtanotss  contoinud  complex  ndioleal

,  ethjl  C]Hj,  methyl  CH.i,  phenyl  CtH„  &c} ;  theu  about  the  yeu  IMO  llw  J
pbeuDmenu  ot  sabititutioti  mad  the  conespoiidpiice  of  the  ptodacts  ol  iiubHtitation  villi  tha  |
priraiiry  bodies  (naclei  and  types)  were  obterved,  hot  it  ttm  n
1800  and  later wheu  ou  the  one  luuid  the  teacliing;  ot  Gerhardt  about  molecule*  «
apreodiag,  and  on  the  other  hand  the niHterialR  hod  acvumnl

tnuiriormations  ol the  simplcBt  hydrosarbon  compouods,  that  conjecturcB began to  ]
appear  us  to  the  mutual  coiiaectioa  ol  tbe  Htome  of  carbon  is  tin

plex  hydrocarbon  coinpouuda.  Then  Kehul^and  &^  M.  BatlerofI  be^ii  to  tormulate  Vbm  |
coDUection  between  tbe  aepaiatu  atuma  of  carbuu.rettarditig  it  Maquadrivalen
Although  in  tbeir  metboda  of  eipressioii  and  in  Home  of  their  Tiews  they  differ  from  each  I
Other  and  alto  from  tbe  way  iu  which  tbe  aubject  in  treated  in  thiu  work,  yet  tbe  «■
of  the  matter— rmtoely,  tbe  comprelienBion  o!  the  caaaea  ot  iaoa
between  tbe  sefurate  atoma  of  carbon — reniaine  the  eaiae.  In  ni
from  the  year  ISTO.  there  appears  a  tendency  wbicb  from  year  I
oorer  the  actual  apacial  distribution  ol  the  atomB  in  the  moleouleH.  Thanks  to  Iba  4
endeavonra  ol  Le-Bel  (1B7*),  Van't  Hoff  (IH74),  and  Wialicenim  I1H87)  in  c
of  isDmeiiun— such  aa  the  eflect  of  different  inamerides  on  the  direction  '
ot  the  plane  nt  polarisation  of  li);ht—lhia  tendency  promiaea  mnch  fir  chemical  ni
but  the  detail*  of  the  Blill  imperfect  knowledge  in  relation  to  thin  matter  mast  be  ■
tor  in  special  works  devote  to  organic  chemistry.

"  Direct  eiperiment  allows  that  however  CHsX  is  prepared  (where  X  =  (oriarii
CI,  te.)  it  la  always  one  and  the  wme  aubstance. II.  for  eiuuple.  in  CXi,  X  ia

1  by  hy^ugen  until  CHjS  is  prodand,  or  in  CH,,  the  hydrogen  by  «

CARBON AND THE HYDROCARBONS  869

is  to  be  expected,  however,  that  there  should  be  two  butanes,  C4H,o,
and  this  is  actually  the  case.  In  one,  methyl  may  be  considered
AS  replacing  the  hydrogen  of  one  of  the  methyls,  CHjCHjCH-^CHj  ;
and in  the other CH3  may  be  considered  as substituted  for  H  in

CH2,  and  there  it  will  consist of CHjCHpTT^. The latter may

■J

also  be  regarded  Jis  methane  in  which  three  of  hydrogen  are  exchanged
•  for  three  of  methyl.  On  going  further  in  the  series  it  is  evident  that
the  numl)er  of  possible  isomerides  will  be  still  greater,  but  we  have
limited  ourselves  to  the  simplest  examples,  showing  the  possibility  and
actual  existence  of  isomerides.  C2H4  and  CH2CH2  are,  it  is  evident,
identical ;  but  there  ought  to  be,  and  are,  two  hydrocarbons  of  the
composition  C3H,;,  propylene  and  trimethylene  ;  the  first  is  ethylene,
CH2CH2,  in  which  one  atom  of  hydrogen  is  exchanged  for  methyl,
CH2CHCH3,  and  trimethylene  is  ethane,  CH3CH3,  with  the  substi-
tution of  methylene  for  two  hydrogen  atoms  from  two  methyl  groups —

CH
that  is,  prx^CHa,*^  where  the  methylene  introduced  is  united  to  both

the  atoms  of  carbon  in  CH3CH3.  It  is  evident  that  the  cause  of
isomerism  here  is,  on  the  one  hand,  the  difference  of  the  amount
of  hydrogen  in  union  with  the  particular  atoms  of  carbon,  and,  on  the
other,  the  different  connection  between  the  several  atoms  of  carbon.
In  the  first  case  they  may  be  said  to  be  chained  together  (more  usually
to  form  an  *  open  chain '),  and  in  the  second  case,  to  be  locked  together
(to  form  a  *  closed  chain '  or  *  ring ').  Here  also  it  is  easily  understood
that  on  increasing  the  quantity  of  carbon  atoms  the  number  of  possible
and  existing  isomerides  will  greatly  increase.  If,  at  the  same  time,
in  addition  to  the  substitution  of  one  of  the  radicles  of  methane  for
hydrogen  a  further  exchange  of  part  of  the  hydrogen  for  some  of
the  Other  groups  of  elements  X,  Y  .  .  .  .  occurs,  the  quantity  of
possible  isomerides  still  further  increases  in  a  considerable  degree.
For  instance,  there  are  even  two  possible  isomerides  for  the  derivatives
of  ethane,  C^H-s  •  i^  ^^^  atoms  of  the  hydrogen  be  exchanged  for  Xj,

ineanH  is  replaced  by  X,  or  elne,  for  instance,  if  CH5X  be  obtained  by  the  decomposition
of  more  complex  compoundH,  the  same  product  is  always  obtained.

This  was  shown  in  the  year  1860,  or  thereabout,  by  many  methods,  and  is  the  funda>
mental  conception  of  the  structure  of  hydrocarbon  compounds.  If  the  atoms  of  hydrogen
in  methyl  were  not  absolutely  identical  in  value  and  position  (as  they  are  not,  for  instance,
in  CH5CHXH.-,  or  CH5CH.5X),  then  there  would  be  as  many  different  forms  of  CH^X
as  there  were  diversities  in  the  atoms  of  hydrogen  in  CH4.  The  scope  of  this  work  does
not  i)ermit  of  a  more  detailed  account  of  this  matter.  It  is  given  in  works  on  organic
chemistry.

•  •  The  union  of  carbon  atoms  in  closed  chains  or  rings  was  first  ftnggeste<l  by  Kekult^
as  an  explanation  of  the  structure  and  isomerism  of  the  derivn lives  of  benzene,  C^H,.,
forming  aromatic  compounds  (Note  26).

VOL.  I.  B  B

870  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTliY

one  will  have  the  ethylene  structure,  CH2XCH.2X,  and  the  other  an
ethylidene  structure,  CH3CHX5J  ;  such  are,  for  instance,  ethylene
chloride,  CH^CICH.^CI,  and  ethylidene  chloride,  CH3CHCI2.  And  as
in  the  place  of  the  first  atom  of  hydrogen  not  only  metals  may  be  substi.
tuted,  but  CI,  Br,  I,  OH  (the  water  radicle),  NHj  (the  ammonia  radi-
cle), NO.2  (the  radicle  of  nitric  acid),  &c.,  so  also  in  exchange  for  two
atoms  of  hydrogen  O,  NH,  S,  Ac,  may  be  substituted  ;  hence  it  will
be  understood  that  the  quantity  of  isomerides  is  sometimes  very  great.  •
It  is  impossible  here  to  describe  how  the  isomerides  are  distinguished
from  each  other,  in  what  reactions  they  occur,  how  and  when  one
changes  into  another,  &c.  ;  for  this,  taken  together  with  the  descrip-
tion of  the  hydrocarbons  already  known,  and  their  derivatives,  forms  a
very  extensive  and  very  thoroughly  investigated  branch  of  chemistry,
called  organic  chemistry.  Enriched  with  a  mass  of  closely  observed
phenomena  and  strictly  deduced  generalisations,  this  branch  of
chemistry  has  been  treated  separately  for  the  rejuson  that  in  it  the
hydrocarbon  groups  are  subjected  to  transformations  which  are  not
met  with  in  such  quantity  in  dealing  with  any  of  the  other  elements
or  their  hydrogen  compounds.  It  was  important  for  us  to  show  that
notwithstanding  the  great  variety  of  the  hydrocarbons  and  their
products,'*'*  they  are  all  of  them  governed  by  the  law  of  substitution,
and  referring  our  readers  for  detailed  information  to  works  on  organic
chemistry,  we  will  limit  <iurselves  to  a  short  exposition  of  the  properties
of  the  two  simplest  unsaturated  hydrocarbons  :  ethylene,  CHgCH^,  and
acetylene,  CHCH,  and  a  short  acquaintance  with  petroleum  iis  the  natu-
ral sourc(»  of  a  mass  of  hydrocarbons. Ethylene,  or  olefiant  gas,  ^aH^,

*"*  The  following  are  the  most  generally  known  of  the  oxygenised  but  non-nitn.>-
^enouB  hydocarl>on  derivativeH.  (Ij  The  uIcoIioIh.  These  are  hydrocarbons  in  which
hydrogen  is  exchanged  for  hydroxyl  (OH).  The  Himplesl  of  these  is  methyl  alcohol,
CH-,(OH),  or  wood  spirit  obtained  by  the  dry  distillation  of  wood.  The  ctmunon  spiritsi
of  wine  or  ethyl  alcohol,  C.^H^iOH),  and  glycol,  C^HjOHl..,  corresixjnd  with  ethane.
Normal  propyl  alcohol,  CHjCH.^CH.^lOH),  and  isopropyl  alcohol,  CH..,CH(OH)CH5,  pro-
pylene-glycol, CjHeCOH).^,  and  glycerol,  C-.H^fOH)-  (which,  with  stearic  and  other  acids^
forms  fatty  substances),  correspond  with  propane,  CsH^j.  All  alcohols  are  capable  of  form-
ing water  and  ethereal  salts  with  acids,  just  as  alkalis  form  ordinary  salts.  (2)  Aldehydes
are  alcohols  minus  hydrogen;  for  instance,  acetaldehyde,  C\jH|0,  corresi>onds  with  ethyl
alcohol.  (W)  It  is  simplest  to  regard  organic  acids  as  hydrwarbons  in  which  hydn>gen
has  been  exchanged  for  carboxyl  (CO.>H),  as  will  be  explained  in  the  followhig  chapter.
There  are  a  nunil>er  of  intermeiliate  compounds ;  for  example,  the  aldehyde- alcohols,
alcohol-acids  lor  hydroxy-acids),  (tc.  Tlius  the  hydroxy-acids  are  hydrocarbons  in  which
some  of  the  hydrogen  has  been  replaced  by  hydroxyl,  and  some  by  carlwxyl ;  for
instance,  lactic  acid  corresiwnds  with  C.^.H^,  and  has  the  constitution  C^H^lOHHCO.^H).
If  to  these  products  we  a<ld  the  haloid  salts  (where  H  is  replaced  by  CI,  Br,  I),  the  nitro-
compounds containing  NOo  in  place  of  H,  the  amides,  cyanides,  ketones,  and  other  com-
I)ounds,  it  will  be  readily  seen  what  an  immense  number  of  organic  conii>ounds  there  are
and  what  a  variety  of  projH'rties  these  substances  have ;  this  we  set*  also  from  the  c<mi-
position  of  plants  and  aninuils.

CARBON  AND  TIIE  HYDROCARBONS  371

is  the  lowest  known  member  of  the  unsaturated  hydi*ocar}x>n  series  of
the  composition  C^  H.^,,.  As  in  composition  it  is  equal  to  two  molecules
of  marsh  gas  deprived  of  two  molecules  of  hydrogen,  it  is  evident  that
it  might  be,  and  it  actually  can  l)e,  produced,  although  but  in  small
quantities,  together  with  hydrogen,  by  heating  marsh  gas.  On  being
heated,  however,  olenant  gas  splits  up,  first  into  acetylene  and  methane
(3C2H4  =  2C.2H2  +  2CH|,  Lewes,  1894),  and  at  a  higher  tempera-
ture into  carbon  and  hydrogen  ;  and  ^therefore  in  those  cases  where
marsh  gas  is  produced  by  heating,  olefiant  gas,  hydrogen,  and  charcoal
will  iilso  be  formed,  although  only  in  small*quan titles.  The  lower  the
temperature  at  which  complex  organic  substances  are  heated,  the
greater  the  quantity  of  oletiant  gas  found  in  the  gases  given  ofl* ;  at  a
white  heat  it  is  entirely  decomposed  into  charcoal  and  marsh  gas.  If
coal,  wood,  and  more  particularly  petroleum,  tars,  and  fatty  substances,
are  subjected  to  dry  distillation,  they  give  off  illuminating  gas,  which
contains  more  or  less  olefiant  gas.

Olefiant  gas,  almost  free  from  other  gases,^^*  may  be  obtained  from
ordinary  alcohol  (if  possible,  free  from  water)  if  it  be  mixed  with  five
parts  of  strong  sulphuric  acid  and  the  mixture  heated  to  slightly  above
100°.  Under  these  conditions,  the  sulphuric  acid  removes  the  ele-
ments of  water  from  the  alcohol,  C.2H5(OH),  and  gives  olefiant  gas  ;
C^HgO  =  HjO  +  C2H4.  The  greater  molecular  weight  of  oletiant  gas
compared  with  marsh  gas  indicates  that  it  may  be  comparatively  easily
converted  into  a  liquid  by  means  of  pressure  or  great  cold  ;  this  may
be  effected,  for  example,  by  the  evaporation  of  liquid  nitrous  oxide.
Its  absolute  boiling  point  is  -»-  10°,  it  boils  at  —  103°  (1  atmosphere),
liquefies  at  0°,  at  a  pressure  of  43  atmospheres,  and  solidifies  at  —  160°.
Ethylene  is  colourless,  has  a  slight  ethereal  smell,  is  slightly  soluble  in
water,  and  somewhat  more  soluble  in  alcohol  and  in  ether  (in  five
volumes  of  spirit  and  six  volumes  of  ether).  *^

*•'•  Ethylene  bromide,  C.^H^Br^,  when  gently  lieate<l  in  alcoholic  solution  with  finely
divided  zinc,  yields  pure  ethylene,  the  zinc  merely  taking  up  the  bromine  (SabaneyefF).

*^  Ethylene  decomposes  Komewhat  easily  under  the  influence  of  the  electric  spark,
or  a  high  temperature.  In  this  case  the  volume  of  the  gas  formed  may  remain  the
same  when  olefiant  gas  is  decompose<l  into  carbon  and  marsh  gas,  or  may  increase  to
double  its  volume  when  hydrogen  and  carbon  are  formed,  C2H4  =  CH4  +  C  — '2C -f  2Ii2.
A  mixture  of  olefiant  gas  and  oxygen  is  highly  explosive ;  two  volumes  of  this  gas  require
six  volumes  of  oxygen  for  its  perfect  combustion.  The  eight  volumes  thus  taken  then
resolve  themselves  into  eight  volumes  of  the  products  of  combustion,  a  mixture  of  water
and  carbonic  anhydride,  C.;H|  +  80.j^2C0.2  +  2H20.  On  cooling  after  the  explosion
diminution  of  volume  occurs  l>ecause  the  water  becomes  liquid.  For  two  volumes  of  the
olefiant  gas  taken,  the  diminution  will  be  equal  to  four  volumes,  and  the  same  for  marsli
gas.  The  quantity  of  cirbonic  anhydride  formed  by  both  gases  is  not  the  same.  Two
volumes  of  marsh  gas  give  only  two  volumes  of  carbonic  anhydride,  and  two  volumes  of
ethylene  give  four  volumes  of  carbonic  anhydride.

BBS

872  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

Like  other  unsaturated  hydrocarbons,  oletiant  gas  readily  enters
into  combination  with  certain  substances,  such  juj  chlorine,  bromine,
iodine,  fuming  sulphuric  acid,  or  sulphuric  anhydride,  &c.  If  defiant
gas  be  sealed  up  with  a  small  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid  in  a  glass
vessel,  and  constantly  agitated  (as,  for  instance,  by  attaching  it  to  the
moving  part  of  a  machine),  the  prolonged  contact  and  ref)eated  mixing
causes  the  olefiant  gas,  little  by  little,  to  combine  with  the  sulphuric
acid,  forming  C2H4H2SO4.  If,  after  this  absorption,  the  sulphuric  acid
be  diluted  with  water  and  distilled,  alcohol  separates,  which  is  pnniuced
in  this  case  by  the  oletiantr  gas  combining  with  the  elements  of  water,
C2H4  +  HgO  =  CaHgO.  In  this  reaction  (Berthelot)  we  see  an  excellent
example  of  the  fact  that  if  a  given  substance,  like  olefiant  gas,  is  produced
by  the  decomposition  of  another,  then  in  the  reverse  way  this  substance,
entering  into  combination,  is  capable  of  forming  the  original  substance
— in  our  example,  alcohol.  In  combination  with  various  molecules,
X2,  ethylene  gives  sjiturated  compounds,  C2H4X2  or  CH.jXCHjX
(for  example,  C2H4C1.>),  which  correspond  with  ethane,  CH3CH3  or

Acetylene,  C2H2  =  CHCH,  is  a  gas  ;  it  was  first  prepared  by  Ber-
thelot (1857). It  has  a  very  pungent  smell,  is  characterivsed by  its
great  stability  under  the  action  of  heat,  and  is  obtained  as  the  only
product  of  the  direct  combinati(m  of  carbon  with  hydrogen  when  a
luminous  arc  (voltaic)  is  formed  between  carbon  electrodes. This  arc
contains  particles  of  carbon  passing  from  one  pole  to  th(}  other. If  the
carbons  be  surrounded  with  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen,  the  carbon  in
part  combines  with  the  hydrogen,  forming  C.^Ha.^^  ^''' Acetylene  may
be formed from olefiant gas if two atoms  of hydrogen  be  taken
from  it. This  may  be  efTected  in  the  following  way  :  the  olefiant  gas  is
first  made  to  combine  with  bromine,  giving  C.^H^Br.^  ;  from  this  the
hydrobromic acid  is  removed  by  means  of an  alcoholic solution of
caustic  potash,  leaving  the  volatile  product  C.,H;,Br  ;  and  from  this
yet  another  part  of  hydrobromic  acid  is  withdrawn  by  passing  it  through
anhydrous  alcohol  in  which  metallic  sodium  has  been  dissolved,  or  by
heating  it  with  a  strong  alcoholic  solution  of  caustic  p<jtash. Under
these  circumstiinces  (Berthelot,  Sawitsch,  Miasnikoff)  the  alkali  takes
up  the  hydrobromic  acid  from  C^H.^,, ,Br,  forming  C„ir,„  .,.

^*  The  homologues  of  ethylene,  C«Hom,  are  aUo  capable  of  dirert  coinl)iiiation  witli
halogens,  Arc,  but  with  variuus  degrees  of  facility.  The  composition  of  these  homologuei*
can  l)e  expresned  tlius:  (CH-)j(CH,,)e,  (CH)rCr,  where  the  sum  of  j-  •  c  is  always  an  even
number,  and  the  sum  of  x  +  *  i-  r  is  equal  to  half  the  sum  of  '.\jc  4  r,  whence  c  *2rs=  j- ;  by
this  means  the  iwasible  isomerides  are  determined.  For  example,  for  biitvleiies,  C4H^,
(CH:).(CH).^,  (CH3),>(CH.;)C,  (CH.^)  (CH.laCH,  and  (CH-i,  are  ix.ssible.

48  1)1*  See  also  method  '»f  preparing  C.^Hg  in  Note  VI  bis.

CARBON  AND THE HYDROCARBONS  378

Acetylene  is  also  produced  in  all  those  cases  where  organic  sub-
stances are  decomposed  by  the  action  of  a  liigh  temperature — for
example,  by  dry  distillation.  On  this  account  a  certain  quantity  is
always  found  in  coal  gas,  and  gives  to  it,  at  all  events  in  part,  its
peculiar  smell,  but  the  quantity  of  acetylene  in  coal  gas  is  very  small.
If  the  vapour  of  alcohol  be  passed  through  a  heated  tube  a  certain
quantity  of  acetylene  is  formed.  It  is  also  produced  by  the  imperfect
combustion  of  olefiant  and  marsh  gas — for  example,  if  the  flame  of
coal  gas  has  not  free  access  to  air.^'**  The  inner  part  of  every  flame
contains  gases  in  imperfect  combustion,  and  in  them  some  amount  of
acetylene.

Acetylene,  being  further  removed  than  ethylene  from  the  limit
C„H2„  +  2  o^  hydrocarbon  compounds,  has  a  still  greater  faculty  of  combi-
nation than  is  shown  by  olefiant  gas,  and  therefore  can  be  more  readily
separated  from  any  mixture  containing  it.  Actually,  acetylene  not
only  combines  with  one  and  two  molecules  of  I2,  HI,  H2SO4,  CI2,  Brj,

*

*fec.  .  .  .  (many  other  unsaturated  hydrocarbons  combine  with  them),
but  also  with  cuprous  chloiide,  CuCl,  forming  a  red  precipitate.  If  a
gaseous  mixture  containing  acetylene  be  passed  through  an  ammoniacal
solution  of  cuprous  chloride  (or  silver  nitrate),  the  other  gases  do  not
combine,  but  the  acetylene  gives  a  red  precipitate  (or  grey  with  silver),
which  detonates  when  struck  with  a  hammer.  This  red  precipitate
gives  off  acetylene  under  the  action  of  acids.  lu  this  manner  pure
acetylene  may  be  obtained.  Acetylene  and  its  homologues  also
readily  react  with  corrosive  sublimate,  HgCl2  (Koucheroff,  Favorsky).
Acetylene  burns  with  a  very  brilliant  flame,  which  is  accounted  for
by  the  comparatively  large  amount  of  carbon  it  contains."'^

The  formation  and  existence  in  nature  of  large  masses  of  petroleum
or  a  mixture  of  liquid  hydrocarlx)ns,  principally  of  the  series  C„H.^+.j
and  C^Hjw  is  in  many  respects  remarkable.'*^ In  some  mountainous

*^  This  is  easily  accomplishe<l  with  those  gas  burners  which  are  used  in  laboratories
and  mentioned  in  the  Introduction.  In  these  burners  the  gas  is  first  mixed  with  air  in  a
long  tube,  above  which  it  is  kindled.  But  if  it  be  lighted  inside  the  pipe  it  does  not
burn  completely,  but  forms  acetylene,  on  account  of  the  cooling  eflfect  of  the  walls  of  the
metallic  tube ;  this  is  detected  by  the  smell,  and  may  be  shown  by  passing  the  issuing
gas  (by  aid  of  an  aspirator)  into  an  ammoniacal  solution  of  cuprous  chloride.

^  Amongst  the  homologues  of  acetylene  CnH.^w-^,  the  lowest  is  C5H4;  allylene,
GH3CCH,  and  allene,  CH^CCH...,  are  known,  but  the  closed  structure,  CH.2(CH)2,  in
little  investigated.

*'  The  saturated  hydrocarbons  predominate  in  American  petroleum,  especially  in
its  more  volatile  parts ;  in  Baku  naphtha  the  hydrocarbons  of  the  composition  CnH2N  foim
the  main  part  (Lisenko,  Markovnikoff,  Beilstein)  but  doubtless  (Mendelceff)  it  alno  con-
tains saturated  ones,  CnHo/i  <,  •.>.  The  structure  of  the  naphtha  hydrocarl)ons  is  only  known
for  the  lower  homologues,  but  doubtless  the  distinction  between  the  hydrocarbons  of  the
Pennsylvanian  and  Baku  naphthas,  boiling  at  the  same  tem^jerature  (after  the  requiaite

874  PKINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

districts — as,  for  instance,  by  the  slopes  of  the  Caucasian  chain,  on
inclines  lying  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  range — an  oily  liquid  issues
from  the  earth  together  with  salt  water  and  hot  gases  (methane  and
others) ;  it  has  a  tarry  smell  and  dark  brown  colour,  and  is  lighter  than
water.  This  liquid  is  called  naphtha  or  rock  oil  (petroleum)  and  is
obtained  in  large  quantities  by  sinking  wells  and  deep  bore-holes  in
those  places  where  traces  of  naphtha  are  observed,  the  naphtha  being
sometimes  thrown  up  from  the  wells  in  fountains  of  considerable
height.'^*  The  evolution  of  naphtha  is  always  accompanied  by  salt
water  and  marsh  gas.  Naphtha  has  from  ancient  times  been  worked
in  Russia  in  the  Apsheron  peninsula  near  Baku,  and  is  also  now
worked  in  Burmah  (India),  in  Galicia  near  the  Carpathians,  and  in
America,  especially  in  Pennsylvania  and  Canada,  etc.  Naphtha  does
not  consist  of  one  definite  hydrocarbon,  but  of  a  mixture  of  several,
and  its  density,  external  appearance,  and  other  qualities  vary  with  the
amount  of  the  different  hydrocarbons  of  which  it  is  composed.  The
light  kinds  of  naphtha  have  a  specific  gravity  about  0*8  and  the  heavy
kinds  up  to  0*98.  The  former  are  very  mobile  liquids^  and  more  vola-
tile ;  the  latter  contain  less  of  the  volatile  hydrocarbons  and  are  less
mobile.  When  the  light  kinds  of  naphtha  are  distilled,  the  boiling
point  taken  in  the  vapours  constantly  changes,  beginning  at  0^  and
going  up  to  above  350°.  That  which  passes  over  first  is  a  very  mobile,
colourless  ethereal  liquid  (forming  gazolene,  ligroin,  benzol ine,  «fcc.),
from  which  the  hydrocarbons  whose  boiling  points  start  from  0°  may
be  extracted — namely,  the  hydrocarbons  C4H,,:,  C^H,^  (which  boils
at  30°),  C«H,4  (boils  at  62°),  C-H,,;  (boils  about  90°),  etc.  Those
fractions  of  the  naphtha  distillate  which  boil  above  130°,  and  contain
hydrocarbons  with  C.„  C,,,,  C,,,  <fcc.,  enter  into  the  composition  of  the

refinini;  by  retreated  fractional  diKiillation,  wliicli  can  he  very  conveniently  done  by
meanH  of  steam  rectification  —  that  in,  by  pasHing  the  steam  through  the  denK«
masH),  depends  not  only  on  the  predominance  of  Batiirated  hydrocarboiiH  in  the
former,  and  naphthenes,  ChHo„,  in  the  latter,  but  also  on  the  diversity  of  composition  and
structure  of  the  corresponding  portions  of  the  distillation.  Tlie  i>r(xhicts  of  the  Baku
naphtha  are  richer  in  carbon  (therefore  in  a  suitably  constrncted  lamp  they  ought  to  give
a  brighter  light),  they  are  of  greater  specific  gravity,  and  have  greater  intenuil  fricti«>n
(and  are  therefore  more  suitable  for  lubricating  matrhiner>-j  than  the  American  j^roduct**
collected  at  the  same  temperature.

^*  The  formation  of  naphtha  fountains  (which  burst  forth  after  the  higher  trlay  strata
covering  the  layers  of  sands  impregnate<l  with  naphtha  have  been  bored  tlirough)  is  with-
out doubt  caused  by  the  pressure  or  tension  of  the  combustible  hydrocarb<in  gases
which  accompany  the  naphtha,  and  are  soluble  in  it  under  pressure.  Sometimes  these
naplitha  fountains  reach  a  height  of  100  metres — for  instance,  the  fountain  of  1MH7  near
Baku.  Naphtha  fountains  generally  act  perirnlically  and  their  force  diminishes  with  the
lapse  of  time,  which  might  be  expected,  Iwcause  the  gases  which  cause  the  fountains  find
an  outlet,  as  the  naphtlia  issuing  from  the  b<»re-hole  carries  away  the  saml  wliicli  was
|>artially  choking  it  up.

CARBON  AND  THE HYDROCARBONS  375

oily  substance,  universaHy  used  for  lighting,  called  kerosene"  or  photo-
gen  or  photonaphthalene,  and  by  other  names.  The  specific  gravity
of  kerosene  is  from  0-78  to  0  84,  and  it  smells  like  naphtha.  Those
products  of  the  distillation  of  naphtha  which  pass  off  below  1 30°  and
have  a  specific  gravity  below  0*75,  enter  into  the  composition  of  light
petroleum  (benzoline,  Hgroin,  petroleum  spirit,  ikc.) ;  which  is  used  as
a  solvent  for  india-rubber,  for  removing  grease  spots,  itc.  Those  por-
tions of  naphtha  (which  can  only  be  distilled  without  change  by  means
of  superheated  steam,  otherwise  they  are  largely  decomposed)  which
boil  above  275°  and  up  to  300°  and  have  a  specific  gravity  higher
than  0*85,  form  an  excellent  oil,"^^  safe  as  regards  inflammability
(which  is  very  important  as  diminishing  the  risks  of  tire),  and  may  be
used  in  lamps  as  an  effective  substitute  for  kerosene.'*^  Those  portions
of  na'phtha  which  pass  over  at  a  still  higher  temperature  and  have  a
higher  specific  gravity  than  0*9,  which  are  found  in  abundance  (about
30  p. c.)  in  the  Baku  naphtha,  make  excellent  lubricating  or  machine
oils.  Naphtha  has  many  important  applications,  and  the  naphtha
industry  is  now  of  great  commercial  importance,  especially  as  naphtha

^  This  is  aHO-called  intermediate  oil  (between  keruncne  and  lubricating  oiln),  »olar  oil,
or  pyronaphtha.  LampH  are  already  being  manufactured  for  burning  it  but  Htill  require
improvement.  Above  all,  however,  it  requires  a  more  extended  market,  and  this  at
present  is  wanting,  owing  to  the  two  following  reasons :  (1)  Those  products  of  the  American
petroleum  which  are  the  most  widely  spread  and  almost  universally  consumed  contain
but  little  of  this  intermediate  oil,  and  what  there  is  is  divided  between  the  kerosene
and  the  lubricating  oils ;  (2)  the  Baku  naphtha,  which  is  capable  of  yielding  a  great
deal  (up  to  80  p.c)  of  intermediate  oil,  is  produced  in  enormous  quantities,  about
300  million  poods,  but  has  no  regular  markets  abroad,  and  for  the  consumption  in
Russia  (about  25  million  poo<ls  of  kerosene  per  annum)  and  for  the  limited  export
(60  million  pootls  per  annum)  into  Western  Europe  (by  the  Trans- Caucasian  Railway)
those  volatile  and  more  dangerous  parts  of  the  naphtha  which  enter  into  the  composition
of  the  American  petroleum  are  sufficient,  although  Baku  naphtha  yields  about  25  p.c.  of
such  kerosene.  For  tliis  reason  pyronaphtlia  is  not  manufactured  in  sufficient  (juantities,
and  the  whole  world  is  consuming  the  unsafe  kerosene.  When  a  i>ipe  line  has  been  laid
from  Baku  to  the  Black  Sea  (in  America  there  are*  many  which  carrj'  the  raw  naphtha  to
the  sea-shore,  where  it  is  made  into  kerosene  and  other  products)  then  tlie  whole  mass  of
the  Baku  naphtha  will  furnish  safe  illuminating  oils,  which  without  doubt  will  find  an
immense  application.  A  mixture  of  the  intermediate  oil  with  kerosene  or  Baku  oil  (spe-
cific gravity  0'84  to  0'85)  may  be  considered  (on  removing  the  benzoline)  to  be  the  best
illuminating  oil,  because  it  is  safe  (flashing  ix>int  from  iO°  to  60*^),  cheaper  (Baku  naphtha
gives  as  much  as  60  p.c.  of  Baku  oil),  and  burns  perfectly  well  in  lamps  differing
but  little  from  those  made  for  burning  American  kerosene  (unsafe,  flashing  point
20*=  to  30°).

*^  The  substitution  of  Baku  pyronaphtha,  or  intermediate  oil,  or  Baku  oil  {sre  Note
.58),  would  not  only  be  a  great  advantage  as  regards  safety  from  Are,  but  would  also
be  highly  economical.  A  ton  (62  poods)  of  American  crude  i>etroleum  costs  at  the
coast  considerably  more  than  24«.  (12  roubles),  and  yields  two- thirds  of  a  ton  of
kerosene  suitable  for  ordinary  lamps.  A  ton  of  raw  naphtha  in  Baku  costs  less  than
49.  (1  rouble  80  copecks),  and  with  a  pipe  line  to  the  shore  of  the  Black  Sea  would  not
cost  more  than  8  roubles,  or  1(^.  Moreover,  a  ton  of  Baku  naphtha  will  yield  as  much  as
two-thirds  of  a  ton  of  kerosene,  Baku  oil,  and  pyronaphtha  suitable  or  illuminating
purposes.

t  and  its  refuse  may  be  used  as  fuel.'^^  Whether  iiajilithFi  wub  formed
I  from  organic  matter  is  very  doubtful,  as  it  is  found  iu  the  most  ancient
Silurinn  strata  which  correspond  with  epochs  of  the  earth's  existence
yrbea  there  was  little  orgauic  matter  ;  it  could  not  penetrate  from  the  .
higher  to  the  lower  (mure  ancient)  strata  as  it  floats  on  water  (and
'  water  peneti'ates  through  all  strata).  It  therefore  tends  to  rise  to  the
surfuce  of  the  earth,  and  it  is  always  found  in  highlands  parallel  to  the
direction  of  the  mountains.^  Much  moi'e  probably  its  formation  may
be  attributed  to  the  action  of  water  penetrating  through  the  crevasses
formed  on  the  mountain  slopes  and  reaching  to  the  heart  of  the
earth,  to  that  kernel  of  heated  metallic  matter  which  must  be  accepted
as  existing  in  the  interior  of  the  earth.  And  as  meteoric  iron  often
contains  carbon  (like  cuat  iron),  so,  accepting  the  existence  of  suolt
carburetted  iron  at  unattainable  depths  in  the  interior  of  the  earth,  it  '
may  be  supposed  that  naphtha  was  pi-oduced  by  the  action  of  water
penetrating  through  the  crevices  of  the  strata  during  the  uphcax'al  of

"  Naphthtt  l>ns  beeii  applied
ou  aiwoiuit  ot  the  1
heroiene,  but  nltw
for  genend  consuiupti

bg  ptir|ir>apB  ou  K  lurgp  aoalo  in  RuHsiii,  nol  noly
nsphtlio  itself  uid  of  tlip  residue  [cum  the  prepunUoii  of '
the  productH  ot  all  the  Baka  uapbtlin  il«  not  find  an  outlnl f
N&phtba  itself  a,od  its  rsriouB  renidueH  [onn  exoellent  fuel.  1

stnoke  uud  gii-ing  a,  high temperature  (Btoel  and  iriin  iDftf  be  easilr  ]
melted  iu  tbe  flame). A  hundred  poodti  of  good  vobI  (tor  inattmce,  Don  coti)  oi
fuel  tor  heatiuK  Imiler*  are  equivalent  to  BU  cobic  teet  (aboul  ABO  poods)  of  dry  wood,
wbile  only  TO  pooda  of  naphtha  vritl  be  required;  and  moreoTer  there  in  no  need  (or
staking,  t»  the  liquid  can  be  readily  and  evenly  supplied  in  the  required  quoDlily. Ths
ecODOmic  and  other  qnestionK  relating  to  American  and  Baku  petroleums  have  beeu '
discosaed  more  in  detail  in  some  separOits  works  of  mine  (D, Mendeleeff): "'
Naphtha  Industry  of  PennaylTania  snil the CttueaauH," ISTO; (3)  'Where  to  BoUd (
Kaphtha  Works,-  1880 ;  |B)  '  On  the  Naphtha  Quehtioti,-  ISMS ;  (1)  '  The  Baku  NaphUia j
Questiou.'  1880  ;  (51  the  article  on  the  naphtW  inauatry  in  the  account  of  the  Bnasiut |
indoHlries  priuted  lor  the  Cliimgo  Eihibiticn.

>"  As  daring  the  process  of  the  dry  distillation  of  wood,  seaweed,  and  hi
table  dibrU,  aiid  also  when^fats  iite  decomposed  by  the  aotjou  ot  liest  (in  closed  Tesaels),  I
hydrocarbons  similar  to  those  of  naphtha  ore  formed,  it  niu  iiaturnl  tlut  this  (act  >hoiild  I
liHve  Iiean  turned  to  accomit  to  eipluD  the  foriuatiou  ot  the  latter.  But  the  hjpothaua
ii[  tiie  formalion  of  nupliths  from  vegetable  tlfbrin  iuevjtabl;  asaumeh  coal  to  be  tiia  |
chief  elemeut  ol  decoui)ioiiition.  and  naphtha  is  met  witli  iu  PciuiKylvania  lUid  Canada,  is
llie  Siluiian  am)  Devonian  strata,  which  do  not  contain  coel.  Mid  correspond  to  an  «pod
nut  abounding  in  organic  matter.  Coal  wan  frinned  friim  the  vegetable  illbrU  ot  Uia
Carbon iteront,  JuBSsic,  and  other  recent  strata,  bnt  judging  more  trciti
~  Mid  structure,  it  has  been  aubjecl«d  to  tile  wune  kind  of  decomposit
eould  bquid  hydrocarbons  have  been  thus  loniied  to  such  an  extent  as  w
It  we  ascribe  llie  derivation  of  naphtha  to  tbe  decomposition  of  ful  (adipose,  animal  lat)
we  encoonter  Uiree  almost  insuperable  difficulties :  (1|  Animal  reiUBinn  would  romuk
a  great  deal  of  nitrogenous  matter,  whilst  there  is  but  very  little  in  luiphtba;  (3)  the
enormous  quantity  of  naphtha  already  discovered  as  compared  with  the  insignificant
amount  of  fat  in  the  animal  carcase;  (8)  the  soureee  of  nsphtba  always  muning  parallel
to  mountain  chains  in  completely  inexplicable.  Being  sUuck  with  Ibis  last-mentioiHid
circumstance  in  Pennsylvania,  and  flnding  that  tbe  sources  in  tbe  CauvasnB  turround  the
whole  Caucasian  range  (Baku,  TiHi»,  Couria.  Kouban,  Tamau,  C.roznue,  Dagestan),  t
'eloped  in  IMTIi  Ibe  bj-[mthi-Kiri  o!  the  miHerol  origin 'of  naplilhu  upLiur.iled  further  oi

CARBON  AND  TUE  HYDROCARBONS  377

mountain  chains,'^'  because  water  with  iron  carbide  ought  to  give  iron
oxide  and  hydrocarbons.'^^  Direct  experiment  proves  that  the  so-called
spiegeleisen  (manganiferous  iron,  rich  in  chemically  combined  carbon)
when  treated with  acids  gives  liquid  hydrocarbons''''  which  in  com-

&^  During  the  upheaval  of  mountain  ranges  crevaRBes  would  be  formed  at  the  peaks
with  openings  upwards,  and  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  with  openings  downwards.
These  cracks  in  course  of  time  fill  up,  but  the  younger  the  mountains  the  fresher  the
cracks  (the  Alleghany  mountains  are,  without  doubt,  more  ancient  than  the  Caucasian,
which  were  formed  during  the  tertiary  epoch) ;  through  them  water  must  gain  access
d€»ep  into  the  recesses  of  the  earth  to  an  extent  that  could  not  occur  on  the  level  (on
plains).  Tlie  situation  of  naphtha  at  the  foot  of  mountain  chains  is  the  principal
argument  in  my  hy|K)thesis.

Another  fundamental  reason  is  the  consideration  of  the  mean  density  of  the  earth.
Cavendish,  Airy,  Comu,  Boys,  and  many  others  who  have  investigated  the  subject  by
various  methods,  found  that,  taking  water  =  1,  the  mean  density  of  the  earth  is  nearly
5*5.  As  at  the  surface  water  and  all  rocks  (sand,  clay,  limestone,  granite,  &c.)  have  a
density  less  than  8,  it  is  evident  (as  solid  substances  are  but  slightly  compressible  even
under  the  greatest  pressure)  that  inside  the  earth  there  are  substances  of  a  greater  density
— indeed,  not  less  than  7  or  8.  Wliat  conclusion,  then,  can  be  arrived  at  ?  Anything
heavy  contained  in  the  bosom  of  the  earth  must  be  distributed  not  only  on  its  surface,
but  throughout  the  whole  solar  system,  for  everything  tends  to  show  that  the  sun  and
planets  are  formed  from  the  same  material,  and  according  to  the  h3rpotheHiH  of  Laplace
and  Kant  it  is  most  probable,  and  indeed  must  necessarily  be  held,  that  the  earth  and
planets  are  but  fragments  of  the  solar  atmosphere,  which  have  had  time  to  cool  con-
siderably and  become  raasses  semi-liquid  inside  and  solid  outside,  forming  both  planets
and  satelhtes.  The  sun  amongst  other  heavy  elements  contains  a  great  deal  of  iron,
as  shown  by  spectrum  analysis.  There  is  also  much  of  it  in  an  oxidised  condition  on
the  surface  of  the  earth.  Meteoric  stones,  carried  as  fragmentary  planets  in  the  solar
system  and  sometimes  falling  upon  the  earth,  consisting  of  siliceous  rocks  similar  to  ter-
restrial ones,  often  contain  either  dense  mas.ses  of  iron  (for  example,  the  Pallosovo  iron
preserved  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Academy  of  Sciences)  or  granular  masses  (for  instance,
the  Okhansk  meteorite  of  1886).  It  is  therefore  possible  that  the  interior  of  the  earth
contains  much  iron  in  a  metallic  state.  This  might  be  anticipated  from  the  hypothesis
of  Laplace,  for  the  iron  must  have  been  compressed  into  a  liquid  at  that  period  when
the  other  component  parts  of  the  earth  were  still  strongly  heated,  and  oxides  of  iron
could  not  then  have  been  formed.  Tlie  iron  was  covered  with  slags  (mixtures  of  silicates
like  glass  fused  with  rocky  matter)  which  did  not  allow  it  to  burn  at  the  expense  of  the
oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  or  of  water,  just  at  that  time  when  the  temperature  of  the
earth  was  very  high.  Carbon  was  in  the  same  state;  its  oxides  were  also  capable  of
dissociation  (Deville);  it  is  also  but  slightly  volatile,  and  has  an  affinity  for  iron,  and  iron
carbide  is  found  in  meteoric  stones  (as  well  as  carbon  and  even  the  diamond).  Thus  the
supposition  of  the  existence  of  iron  carbides  in  the  interior  of  the  earth  was  derived  by
me  from  many  indications,  which  are  to  some  extent  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  granular
pieces  of  iron  have  been  found  in  some  basalts  (ancient  lava)  as  well  as  in  meteoric  stones.
The  occurrence  of  iron  in  contact  with  carbon  during  the  formation  of  the  earth  is  all
'the  more  probable  because  those  elements  predominate  in  nature  which  have  small
atomic  weights,  and  among  them  the  most  widely  diffused,  the  most  difficultly  fusible,
and  therefore  the  most  easily  condensed  (Chapter  XV.)  are  carl)on  and  iron.  They
passed  into  the  liquid  state  when  all  compounds  were  at  a  temperature  of  dissociation.

**  The  following  is  the  typical  equation  for  this  formation  :

8FemC«-f  4M,H.20  =  ?/iFe504  (magnetic  oxide)  +  C^wHsm  {see  Chapter  XVII.,  Note  88).

*•  Cloez  investigated  the  hydrocarbons  formed  when  cast-iron  is  dis-solved  in  hydro-
chloric acid,  and  found  CmH-,,m  an<J  others.  I  treated  crystalline  manganiferous  cast-iron
with  the  same  acid,  and  obtained  a  liquid  mixture  of  hydrocarbons  exactly  similar  to
natural  naphtha  in  taste,  smell,  and  reaction.

378  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

position,  appearance, and properties are completely identical with
naphtha.^®

•"^  Probably  naphtha  was  produced  during  the  upheaval  of  all  mountain  cliains,  but
only  in  some  caseH  were  the  conditions  favourable  to  its  being  prenerved  underground.
The  water  penetrating  below  formed  there  a  mixture  of  naphtha  and  watery  vapours,
and  this  mixture  issued  tlurongh  fissures  to  the  cold  parts  of  the  earth's  crust.  The
naphtha  vapours,  on  condensing,  formed  naphtha,  which,  if  there  were  no  obstacles,
appeared  on  the  surface  of  land  and  water.  Here  part  of  it  soaked  through  formations
{possibly  the  bituminous  slates,  schists,  dolomites,  (fcc,  were  thus  formed),  another  part
was  carried  away  on  the  water,  became  oxidised,  evaporated,  and  was  driven  to  the
shores  (the  Caucasian  naphtha  probably  in  this  way,  during  the  existence  of  the  Aralo-
Caspian  sea,  was  carried  as  far  as  the  Sisran  banks  of  the  Volga,  where  many  strata  are
impregnated  with  naphtha  and  products  of  its  oxidation  resembling  asphalt  and  pitch  i ;
a  great  {^lart  of  it  was  burnt  in  one  way  or  another- -  that  is,  gave  carbonic  anhydride  and
water.  If  the  mixture  of  vapours,  water,  and  naphtha  formed  inside  the  earth  had  no
free  outlet  to  the  surface,  it  nevertheless  would  find  its  way  through  fissures  to  the
superior  and  colder  strata,  and  there  become  condensed.  Some  of  the  formations  (clays)
which  do  not  absorb  naphtha  were  only  washed  away  by  the  warm  water,  and  formed
mud,  which  we  also  now  observe  issuing  from  the  earth  in  the  form  of  mud  volcanoes.
The  neighbourhood  of  Baku  and  the  whole  of  the  Caucasus  near  the  naphtha  dis-
tricts are  full  of  such  volcanoes,  which  from  time  to  time  are  in  a  state  of  eruption.  In
old  naphtha  beds  (such  as  the  Pennsylvanian)  even  these  blow-holes  are  closed,  and
the  mud  volcanoes  have  had  time  to  be  waslied  away.  The  naiphtha  and  the  gaseous
hydrocarbons  formed  with  it  under  the  pressure  of  the  overlying  earth  and  water  im-
pregnated the  hiyers  of  sand,  which  are  capable  of  absorbing  a  great  quantity  of  such
liquid,  and  if  above  this  there  were  strata  impermeable  to  naphtha  (dense,  clayey,  damp
strata)  the  naphtha  would  accumulate  in  them.  It  is  thus  j)reserved  from  remote  geo-
logical periotls  up  to  the  present  day,  compressed  and  dissolved  under  the  pressure  of
the  gases  which  burst  out  in  places  forming  naphtha  fountains.  If  this  be  granted,  it
may  l>e  thought  that  in  the  comparatively  new  (geologically  speaking)  mountain  chains,
such  as  the  Caucasian,  naphtha  is  even  now  being  formed.  Sucli  a  supixjsition  may
explain  the  remarkable  fact  that,  in  Pennsylvania,  localities  where  napht'ia  had  been
rapidly  worked  for  five  years  have  become  exhausted,  and  it  becomes  necessary  to  con-
stantly have  recourse  to  sinking  new  wells  in  fresh  places.  Thus,  from  the  year  iHoil,
the  workings  were  gradually  transferred  along  a  line  running  ptirallcl  to  the  Alleghanv
mountains  for  a  distance  of  more  than  200  miles,  whilst  in  Baku  the  industry  dates
from  time  immemorial  (the  Persians  worked  near  the  village  of  Ballaghana)  and  up  to  the
present  time  keeps  to  one  and  the  same  place.  The  amounts  of  the  Pennsylvanian  and
Baku  annual  outputs  are  at  present  equal — namely,  about  250  million  pfK)ds  (4  million
tons).  It  may  be  that  the  Baku  beds,  as  Wmg  of  more  recent  geological  fonnation,  are
not  so  exhaust<>d  by  nature  as  those  of  Pennsylvania,  and  perhaps  in  the  neighlMmrhood
of  Baku  naphtha  is  still  being  formed,  which  is  partially  indicated  by  the  continued
activity  of  the  mud  volcanoes.  As  many  varieties  of  naphtha  contain  in  solution  solid
slightly  volatile  hydrocarl)ons  like  paraffin  and  mineral  wax,  the  production  «)f  ozocerite,
or  moimtam  wax,  is  accounted  for  in  conjunction  with  the  formation  of  naphtha.
Ozocerite  is  found  in  Galicia,  also  in  the  neighbourho<Hl  of  Xovorossisk,  in  the  Caucasus,
and  on  the  islands  of  the  Caspian  Sea  (particularly  in  the  Chileken  and  Holy  Islands) ;
it  is  met  with  in  large  masses,  and  is  used  for  the  production  of  paraffin  and  ccreacnr,
for  the  manufacture  of  candles,  and  similar  purposes.

As  the  naphtha  treasures  of  the  Caucasus  have  hardly  be<'n  exploittnl  (near  Baku  and
near  Kouban  and  Grosnyi),  and  as  naphtha  finds  numerous  uses,  the  subject  presents
most  interesting  features  to  chemists  and  geologists,  and  is  worthy  of  the  close  attention
cf  practical  men.

CHAPTER IX

Carbonic  anhydride  (or  carbonic  acid  or  carbon  dioxide,  CO,)  was  t
first  of  all  gases  distinguished  from  atmospheric  air.  Paracelsus  a
Van  Helmont,  in  the  sixteenth  t.-«ntury,  knew  that  on  heutiiig  liniPBtone
a  particular  gns  separated,  which  is  also  formed  during  the  alcoholic
fermentation  of  saccharine  solutions  (for  uistance,  in  the  manufacture
of  wine) ;  they  knew  that  it  was  identical  with  the  gas  which  is  pro*
duced  b;  the  combustion  of  charcoal,  and  that  in  some  cases  it  is  fnun j  ,1

:^"*^5ii3^^53^H^*^

?tn.  O^DuiDv  and  SIn>'

aiJ>lecnidl»C)diCO  iNtuCO^foRDliK  DielalUc  DUiiptr. ThE  pDIu->i  <  K

rraln  Ok  lartHjnIs  iinliy<lrlilr. Tbiu,  knowinjr  tlie  iMgbC  ol  mrlm.  ...  .  ..r

[brranlUDEcarbiiDlvi  nnbiilrUnfbjr  willing  B.I.  J.  K  Mien  nii'l "  . iln-

.■uiiipn«Hlunoi«rlioiiiuan1iyilrtileiindlbcequiv»knluri'»rt»li  niHj  li.  .I.i.rm (.

in  nature.  In  course  of  time  it  was  found  that  this  gaK  is  nlisorbed  by
alkali,  forming  a  salt  which,  under  the  action  of  acid,  again  yields  this
same  gas.  Priestley  found  that  this  gas  exisbi  in  air,  and  Lavoisier
determined  its  formation  during  respiration,  combuHtion,  pulrefiH'lion,
and  during  the  redaction  of  the  oxides  of  metals  by  charcoal ;  h<i  dieter-
mined  its  composition,  and  showed  that  it  only  containa  oxygnn  and
carbon. Berzelius,  Dumaa  with  Stas,  and  Roscoe,  df^termined  Hm  com.

380  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

position,  showing  that  it  contains  twelve  parts  of  carbon  to  thirty-two  of
oxygen.  The  composition  by  volume  of  this  gas  is  determined  from  the
fact  that  during  the  combustion  of  charcoal  in  oxygen,  the  volume  remains
unchanged  ;  that  is  to  say,  carbonic  anhydride,  occupies  the  savie  volume
as  the  oxygen  which  it  cow /at  w^  -that  is,  the  atoms  of  the  carbon  are,
so  to  speak,  squeezed  in  between  the  atoms  of  the  oxygen.  O2  occupies
two  volumes  and  is  a  molecule  of  ordinary  oxygen ;  COj  likewise
occupies  two  volumes,  and  expresses  the  composition  and  molecular
weight  of  the  gas.  Carbonic  anhydride  exists  in  nature,  both  in  a  free
state  and  in  the  most  varied  compounds.  In  a  free  state  it  is  always
contained  (Chapter  V.)  in  the  air,  and  in  solution  is  in  all  kinds  of
water.  It  is  evolved  from  volcanoes,  from  mountain  fissures,  and  in
some  caves.  The  well-known  Dog  grotto,  near  Agnano  on  the  bay  of
Baise,  near  Naples,  furnishes  the  best  known  example  of  such  an  evolu-
tion. Similar  sources  of  carbonic  anhydride  are  also  found  in  other  places.
In  France,  for  instance,  there  is  a  well-known  poisonous  fountain  in
Auvergne.  It  is  a  round  hole,  surrounded  with  luxurious  vegetation
and  constantly  evolving  carbonic  anhydride.  In  the  woods  surrounding
the  Lacher  See  near  the  Rhine,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  extinct  vol-
canoes, there  is  a  depression  constantly  filled  with  this  same  gas.  The
insects  which  fly  to  this  place  perish,  animals  being  unable  to  breathe
this  gas.  The  birds  chasing  the  insects  also  die,  and  this  is  turned  to
profit  by  the  local  peasantry.  Many  mineral  springs  carry  into  the  air
enormous  quantities  of  this  gas.  Vichy  in  France,  Spriidel  in  Germany,
and  Narzan  in  Russia  (in  Kislovodsk  near  Piatigorsk)  are  known  for
their  carbonated  gaseous  waters.  Much  of  this  gas  is  also  evolved  in
mines,  cellars,  diggings,  and  wells.  People  descending  into  such  places
are  suffocated.  The  combustion,  putrefaction,  and  fermentation  of
organic  substiinces  give  rise  to  the  formation  of  carbonic  anhydride.
It  is  also  introduced  into  the  atmosphere  during  the  respiration  of
animal*^  at  all  times  and  during  the  respiration  of  plants  in  darkness
and  also  during  their  growth.  Very  simple  experiments  prove  the
formation  of  carbonic  anhydride  under  these  circumstances ;  thus,  for
example,  if  the  air  expelled  from*  the  lungs  be  passed  through  a  glass
tube  into  a  transparent  solution  of  lime  (or  baryta)  in  water  a  white
precipitate  will  socm  be  formed  consisting  of  an  insoluble  compound  of
lime  and  carbonic  anhydride.  By  allowing  the  seeds  of  plants  to  grow
under  a  bell  jar,  or  in  a  closed  vessel,  the  formation  of  carbonic  anhy-
dride may  be  similarly  confirmed.  By  confining  an  animal,  a  mouse,  for
instance,  under  a  bell  jar,  the  (juantity  of  carbonic  acid  which  it  evolves
may  l)e  exactly  determined,  and  it  will  be  found  to  be  many  grams  per
day  for  a  mouse. Such  experiments  on  the  respiration  of  animals  have

CDMPOL'SUS  or CARBON" WITH OXVllEK AXD XlTltiKUCN 381

been  also  made  with  great  t^xactitiide  with  large  animals,  such  as  men,
bulls,  sheep,  iic.  By  means  of  enormous  hermetically  closed  bell
receivers  and  the  analysis  of  the  gases  evolved  during  respirAtion  it  was
found  that  a  man  expels  about  900  grams  (more  than  two  pounds)  of
carbonic  anhydride  per  diem,  and  absorbs  during  this  time  700  grams  of
oxygen.'  It  must  be  remarked  that  the  carbonic  anhydride  of  the  air
constitutes  thefundamental  food  of  plants  (Chapters  III.,  V.,  and  VIII.)
Carbonic  anhydride  in  a  state  of  combination  with  a  variety  of  other
mbstauces  is  perhaps  even  more  widely  distributed  in  nature  than  in  a
free  state.  Some  of  these  subatanoes  are  very  stable  and  form  a  iargu
portion  of  the  earth's  crust.  For  instance,  limestones,  calcium  carbonate.
CaCOj,  were  formed  aa  precipitates  in  the  seas  existing  previously  on
le  earth  ;  this  is  proved  by  their  stratified  structure  and  the  number
remains  of  sea  animals  which  they  frequently  contain.  ChalV:,
lithographic  stone,  limestone,  marls  (a  mixture  of  limestone  and  clay),
d  many  other  rocks  are  examples  of  such  sedimentary  formations.

'  The  qiuuitiiy  at  cwbonic  w^id  )ia.i  pihalecl  by  a  nmn  during  thu  luejilyftior  hnnrs
uol  evenly  prndaoed;  during  the  night  more  oxygen  ia  Uken  in  than  dnting  the
daj  lb;  night,  in  tvelve  honra,  about  46U  grams),  and  more  carbonic  anhydride  in  wpo-
rated  by  day  than  daring  night-time  and  repose;  thua,  of  the  WO  grama  prodnced
dnring  the  twenty-rnnr  hsprs  about  3TS  ore  given  out  during  llie  night  and  G3S  by  day.
depends  on  the  formation  of  carbonic  anhydride  during  the  work  perfonned  by  t)ie
in  thp  day.  Eiery  movement  ia  the  result  of  «ame  change  of  matter,  lor
cannot  be  Belt'crmted  lin  accordance  with  the  la«  of  the  cnnnervutiun  of  energy).
Proportionally  to  the  amount  of  carbon  consum«d  on  ainoaiit  nf  enei};y  ie  atorsd  np  in
the  urganinn  and  ia  consunied  in  the  varione  iiiotemeDts  perfomieil  by  aoiniala.  This
iroved  by  the  fact  that  during  work  a  man  eihalea  RSG  grams  of  carbonic  anhydride
in  twelve  bonm  inHt«ad  of  »TB,  abaorbini;  the  name  atiioant  of  oxygen  oa  hrtont.  Alter
a  working  day  a  man  eiilialeH  by  night  almost  tlie  name  anionnt  ol  carbonic  anhydride
aa  after  a  day  of  reet,  so  tlial  during  ii  total  twenty-foor  honra  a  man  eilioles  (boat
900  grama  of  carbonic  anhydride  and  alraorbe  aboDt  8S0  grams  of  oxygen.  Tbere-
fore  dnring  work  the  change  of  matter  increaoeii.  The  carbon  expended  on  the  work
a  id>laiiied  from  the  food;  on  this  account  tfae  fond  ol  nnimala  ought  certainly  to
ontain  corbonaceoOB  aubstancea  capable  of  diaoolving  under  the  action  of  the  digcstlTB
fluidfl,  and  of  passing  into  the  blood,  or,  in  other  words,  capable  of  being  digested.  Snch
for  man  and  alt  other  onimola  ia  formed  of  vegetable  matter,  or  of  parts  of  other
animalo.  Tlie  Utter  iu  every  case  obtain  Uieir  carboiiaceoua  matter  from  plant*,  ia
hjcli  it  ia  formed  by  the  fioparation  of  the  carbon  from  the  carbonic  anhydride  token  up
during  the  day  by  the  respiration  ol  the  plants.  The  volume  ol  the  oxygen  exhaled  by
plants  ia  almost  eqnal  to  the  volume  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  ibaorbed  ;  that  is  to  e«y,
nearly  oil  the  oxygen  entering  into  the  plant  in  the  form  of  carbonic  anhydride  ia  libe-
rated in  a  free  stale,  whilst  tlie  carbon  from  the  carbonic  anhydride  remain*  in  the  plant.
At  the  oame  time  the  plant  absorbs  moisture  by  its  leaves  ajid  roots.  By  a  prooeae  which
ia  DUknowu  to  us,  this  absorbed  moisture  and  the  carbon  obtained  from  the  carbonjc  an-
hydride enter  inla  the  composition  of  the  plants  in  tlie  toim  »f  so-calleid  carbohydrates,
compoaing  ^e  greater  part  of  the  vegetable  tisaues,  aiareh  and  cellulose  nf  the  com-
poaition  C^HiuOji  being  representatives  of  them.  They  may  be  cnnsidcred  like  all  carbo-
hydrotes  as  compounds  of  carbon  and  water,  aC  ->  sk.,0.  In  this  way  a  eirculation  of
the  carbon  goes  on  in  nature  by  moans  of  vegetahlf  and  animal  cirganlama,  m  K'hieh
iduuigea  (he  priucripal  factor  is  the  carbonic  anhydride  of  the  air.

Oarliouates  wltli  various  other  bases  —such  as,  for  iufiLaiice,  magnesi^^  J

fernius  oxide,  ainc  oxide,  .tc. — ai-e  often  found  in  natui-e. The  shelU  of  |

niolluBcs  also  have  the  compositioii  CaCO,,  and  many  limestones  were  I

OKclusively  formed  from  the  sliells  of  minute  organisms. As  cartKinio  I

anhydride  (together  with  water)  U  produced  during  the  combustion  of  1
all  organic  coiiijKiuiids  in  a  stream  of  oxygen  or  by  heating  them  <
substances  which  readily  part  with  their  oxygen— for  instance,  with

copper  oxide  —this  method  is  employed  for  estimating  the  aniuunt  at  J

carbon  in  oi-ganic  compounds,  more  especially  as  the  CO^  can  be  ensily  |

collected  mid  the  amount  of  carbon  calculated  from  its  weight. For  |
this  purpose  a  liard  gliiss  tube,  closed  at  one  end.  is  tilleii  with  u
mixture  of  the  organic  aubfitunce  (about  0'2  gram)  and  copper  oxide.

The  open  end  of  the  tube  is  litted  with  a  cork  and  tube  containini;  J

calcium  chloride  for  absorbing  the  water  formed  by  the  oxidatioa  of4
the  BuliGtunce. This  tube  is  hermetically  connected  (by  u  cauutohoac^
tube)  with  potash  bulbs  or  other  weighing  .apparatus  (Chapter  V.)  con-
taining alkali  destined  to  absorb  the  carbonic  anhydride. Tlie
in  weight  of  this  apparatus  shows  the  amounts  of  carbonic  anhydrids i
formed  during  the  combustion  of  the  given  substance,  and  the  qnnntity
of  carlion  may  l)e  detennined  from  this,  because  three  pftrt«  of  cartKm
give  eleven  parts  of  carbonic  anhydride.

For  the  prefKiralion  of  carbonic  anhi/driiln  in  laboratoi-ies  and  often '
in  manufactories,  various  kinds  »f  calcium  carbonate  are  used,  being  J
treat«d  with  some  acid  ;  it  is,  however,  most  usual  to  employ  the  so-
called  muriatic  acid — that  is,  an  aqueous  solution  nf  hydrochloric  otid,
HGl -  )>ecause, in the first place, the snbstance formed, calcium
chloride.  CaCI,,  is  soluble  in  water  and  does  not.  liinder  the  furth«r

I

I

COMPOUNDS OF  CARBON WITH OXYGEN AND NITROGEN 383

action  of  the  acid  on  the  calcium  carbonate,  and  secondly  because,  as
we  shall  see  further  on,  muriatic  acid  is  a  common  product  of  chemical
works  and  one  of  the  cheapest.  For  calcium  carbonate,  either  limestone^
chalk,  or  marble  is  Used.-^

CaCOa  +  2HC1  =  CaCl^  +  H,0  +  CO,.

The  nature  of  the  reaction  in  this  case  is  the  same  as  in  the  decom-
position of  nitre  by  sulphuric  acid  ;  only  in  the  latter  case  a  hydrate  is
formed,  and  in  the  former  an  anhydride  of  the  acid,  because  the
hydrate,  carbonic  acid,  H2CO3,  is  unstable  and  as  soon  as  it  separates
decomposes  into  water  and  its  own  anhydride.  It  is  evident  from  the
explanation  of  the  cause  of  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on  nitre  that
not  every  acid  can  be  employed  for  obtaining  carbonic  anhydride  ;
namely,  those  will  not  set  it  fi*ce  which  chemically  are  but  slightly
energetic,  or  those  which  are  insoluble  in  water,  or  are  themselves  as
volatile  as  carbonic  anhydride.^  But  as  many  acids  are  soluble  in
water  and  are  less  \olatile  than  carbonic  anhydride,  the  latter  is
evolved  by  the  action  of  most  acids  on  its  salts,  and  this  reaction  takes
place  at  ordinary  temperatures.^

*  Other  acids  may  be  used  iuHtoa<l  of  liydrochloric  ;  for  instaiice,  lu-otic,  or  even
Hulphuric,  althoagh  this  latter  in  not  suitable,  becauKe  it  fonnK  aH  a  prcnluct  insoluble
calcium  sulphate  (gypsum)  which  surrounds  the  untouched  calcium^  carbonate,  and  thus
prevents  a  further  evolution  of  gas.  But  if  porous  limestone—  for  instance,  chalk — be
treated  with  sulphuric  acid  diluted  with  an  equal  volume  of  water,  the  liquid  is  absorbe<l
and  acting  on  the  mass  of  the  salt,  the  evolution  of  carbonic  anhydride  continues  evenly
for  a  long  time.  Instead  of  calcium  carbonate  other  carbonates  may  of  course  be  used  ;
for  instance,  washing-soda,  NaoC03,  which  is  often  chosen  when  it  is  required  to  produce
a  rapid  stream  of  carbonic  anhydride  (for  example,  for  liquefying  it).  But  natural
crystalline  magnesium  carbonate  and  similar  salts  are  with  difficulty  decomposed  by
hydrochloric  and  sulphuric  acids.  When  for  manufacturing  purposes — for  instance,  in
precipitating  lime  in  sugar-works — a  large  quantity  of  carbonic  acid  gas  is  required,  it
is  generally  obtained  by  burning  charcoal,  and  the  products  of  combustion,  rich  in
carbonic  anliydride,  are  pnm|)ed  into  the  liquid  containing  the  lime,  and  the  carbonic
anhydride  is  thus  absorbed.  Another  method  is  also  practised,  which  consists  in  using
the  carbonic  anhydride  separated  during  fermentation,  or  that  evolved  from  limekilns.
During  the  fermentation  of  sweet-wort,  grape-juice,  and  other  similar  saccharine  solu-
tions, the  glucose  CgHi-^Og  change/^  under  the  influence  of  the  yeast  organism,  forming
alcohol  (2C.^H^0),  and  carbonic  anhydride  (*2CO.^)  which  seixirates  in  the  form  of  gas;  if
the  fermentation  proceeds  in  closed  bottles  sparkling  wine  is  obtained.  When  carbonic
acid  gas  is  pre|)ared  for  saturating  water  and  other  beverages  it  is  necessary  to  Ude  it
in  a  pure  state.  Whilst  in  the  state  in  which  it  is  evolved  from  ordinary  limestones  by
the  aid  of  acids  it  contains,  besides  a  certain  quantity  of  acid,  the  organic  matters  of  the
limestone  ;  in  order  to  diminish  the  quantity  of  these  substances  the  densest  kinds  of
<1olomites  are  used,  which  conttiin  less  organic  matter,  and  the  gas  formed  is  passed
through  various  washing  apparatus,  and  then  through  a  solution  of  potassium  i)erman-
ganate,  which  absorbs  organic  matter  and  does  not  take  up  carbonic  anhydride.

'  Hyi)ocldorous  acid,  HCIO,  and  its  anliydride,  Cl^O,  do  not  displace  carbonic  acid,  and
hydrogen  sulphide  has  the  same  relation  to  carlxmic  acid  as  nitric  acid  to  hydriK-hloric —
an  excess  of  either  one  displaces  the  other.

•  Thus,  in  preparing  the  ordinary  effervescing  i>owders,  sodium  bicarbonate  (or  ad

'oah  the
Iter, ^fl

PltlSCO'LES  OF  CHEMlSTRy

For  the  prepM-ation  of  carlioiiic  anhydride  in  laboratories,  marble  jj
rally  used.  It  is  placed  in  a  Woulfe's  bottle  and  treated  with  hydrc
i^hlorio  acid  in  an  apparatus  similar  to  tlie  one  used  for  the  production
of  hydi-ogen.  The  gaa  evoh'ed  i^aiTies  away  through  the  tube  part  of
t,he  volatile  hydrochloric  acid,  and  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  wash  the
gas  by  passing  it  tfai'ough  another  Woulfe's  bottle  containing  water,
it  lie  necessary  to  obtain  dry  carbonic  anhydride,  it  must  be  |
through  chloride  of  calcium.'

Carbonic  anhydride  may  also  be  prepared  by  heating  many  of  th«
salts  of  carbonit)  acid  ;  for  instance,  by  heating  magneaiuru  carbonate,
MgCOj  (e.g.,  in  the  form  of  dolomite),  the  separation  is  easily  effected,
particularly  in  the  presence  of  the  vapours  of  water.  The  acid  salts
of  carbonic  acid  {for  instance,  NaHC'Oj,  .see  further  on)  readily  and
abundantly  give  carbonic  anhydride  when  heated.

Carbonic  anhydride  is  colourless,  has  a  slight  smell  and  a  faint
acid  taste  ;  its  density  in.  a  gaseous  state  is  twenty^two  times  as  great
as that  of  hydrogen,  because its molecular weight  is  forty  ■  four.  *

ir  tartaric  neid. In  it  ili^
hen  miiec]  iritli  water  tha
»miag  Into  solutinn. Th»
they  evolve  cubomc  Msid
^h  coutiiinH  oeetid  acid,  be
ing  copper  cM-botmW).  Sic,  curbmk
worthif  that  neither  bfilroehloiio
soid,  not  even  aolplmrio  acid  nor  acetic  acid,  acta  on  limeBtone  eicept  in  presence  ot
water. We  shaU  refer  to  thiH  later  on.

^  The  direct  DbBerratioiiB  made  (ISTfl)  b;  MeaiirB.  Bogoiuki  and  Sarander  lead  to  Iha
voneluaiun  that  the  qunntit)'  at  carhonic  anhydride  evolved  by  the  action  of  acids  On
inatble  (aa  honiogeneoDe  aa  posBiblel  is  direi:tlf  proiiortionHl  to  tlie  time  of  actioii,  IhB
extent  of  aarface,  and  the  degree  of  i^oncentration  of  the  acid,  and  inTersely  proportinunl
to  the  molecular  veight  of  the  acid.  If  the  lurince  of  a  piece  of  Carrara  uiarble  be  equal
to  one  decimetre,  the  time  ot  actiou  one  minute,  and  one  cubic  decimetre  or  litre  coutaiiw
one  gram  ot  hydrochloric  acid,  then  about  O-M  gram  of  carboiiiL'  anhydride  will  be
evolved.  If  the  litre  contain*  ii  gnuna  of  hydrochloric  acid,  then  by  eiperimeut  the
amount  will  be  nxO'Wi  of  oarbouic  anhydride.  Therefore,  if  the  litre  contaunn  SB'S
(^HCIl  gnuna,  about  O'TB  gram  of  c*rbonio  anhydride  (about  half  a.  litre)  would  he
eTolved  per  minute.  If  nitric  acid  or  hydrohrDiuia  acid  be  a«d  instead  of  hydroplilone,
then,  with  a  combining  proportion  ol  the  acid,  the  aanie  quantity  at  carbonic  anhydride
will  be  evolved;  thuB,  if  the  litre  oontninB  US  (■^HNOs)  Rrams  of  nitric  wnd,  at  Kl
(^UBr)  gruna  of  hydrobromic  acid,  the  quantity  of  carbonic  anhydride  evolved  will  still
Im  0*78  gram. Spring,  in  1890,  made  a  seriei  of  ainiiUi  determinntiona.

"  A«  carbonic  anhydride  ia  one  and  a  half  times  heavier  Ihau  air,  it  diffnws  with
difficatty,  and  therefore  does  not  eaiily  mix  with  air,  but  ainkii  in  it.  Thie  may  be  shown
in  various  waya;  fur  inttance,  tlie  gaa  may  be  carefully  poured  from  niw  vewiel  iuto  aiuither
conlaiuing  air.  If  o  lighted  taper  be  plunged  into  the  veanel  containing  carbonio  anhy-
dride it  is  extingui«bed,  and  then,  after  pouring  the  gas  into  the  otlur  cylinder,  it  win
bum  in  Llis  former  and  be  ettinguiBhett  in  the  latter.  If  a  cerlnin  qnantity  of  carbonie
anhydride  be  poured  into  a  vosbcI  containing  air,  and  soap-buhbiM  be  introduced,  tWy
will  only  sink  at  far  n*  the  stratum  where  the  almonphere  of  carbonic  anhydride  com-
menceii,  ■■  thia  hitter  is  heavier  than  the  map-bubblea  filled  with  nir. NatlUmtly,  kfl«C»

>dal  is  used,  and  n:

ii>ed  with

powdered

state  thene  powders  do  not  evulva  carbonic

anhydride

evolution  b.kei

•  place  briskly.  whi<

;h  iH  (tae  t

o  the  sobst

salts  ot  carboi

>ic  acid  mivy  be  nv

ogiiised  from  the  lat

with  a  l>i»ti>«

noise  when  treated

with  acidt

,. Itrineg

poared  upon  1

imestone,  marble.

malachite

(con  tain  inj

anhydride  is  B>

'olved  with  a  IdsHi

ng  noise.

It  is  note

COMPOUNDS OK  CARBON WITH OXYGEN AND NITROGEN 885

It  is  an  example  of  those  gaseous  substances  which  have  been
long  ago  transformed  into  all  the  three  states.  In  order  to  obtain
liquid  carbonic  anhydride,  the  gas  must  be  submitted  to  a  pres-
sure of  thirty-six  atmospheres  at  0°J  Its  absolute  boiling  point
=  +  32°.*  Liquid  carbonic  anhydride  is  colourless,  does  not  mix  with
water,  but  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  and  oils  ;  at  0°  its  specific  gravity
is  0-83.'*  w»  The  boiling  point  of  this  liquid  lies  at  -80°— that  is
to  say,  the  pressure  of  carbonic  acid  gas  at  that  temperature  does
not  exceed  that  of  the  atmosphere.  At  the  ordinary  temperature  the
liquid  remains  as  such  for  some  time  under  ordinary  pressure,  on
account  of  its  requiring  a  considerable  amount  of  heat  for  its
evaporation.  If  the  evaporation  takes  place  rapidly,  especially  if  the
liquid  issues  in  a  stream,  such  a  decrease  of  tempeiuture  occurs  that
a  {)art  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  is  transformed  into  a  solid  snowy
mass.  Water,  mercury,  and  many  other  liquids  freeze  on  coming  into
contact  with  snow-like  carbonic  anhydride.®  In  this  form  carbonic
anhydride  may  be  preserved  for  a  long  time  in  the  open  air,  because  it
requires  still  more  heat  to  turn  it  into  a  gas  than  when  in  a  liquid
state.-'  ^^'^

The  capacity  which  carbonic  anhydride  has  of  being  liquefied  stands

certain  lapse  of  time,  the  carbonic  auliydride  will  be  diffused  throughout  the  vessel,  and
fonii  a  uniform  mixture  with  the  air,  just  as  salt  in  water.

^  This  hquef action  was  first  observed  by  Faraday,  who  sealed  up  in  a  tube  a  mixture
of  a  carbonate  and  sulphuric  acid.  Afterwards  this  method  was  very  considerably  im-
proved by  Thilorier  and  Natterer,  whose  apparatus  is  given  in  Chapter  VI.  in  describ-
ing NqO.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  remark  that  the  preparation  of  liquid  carbonic
anhydride  requires  good  liquefying  apparatus,  constant  cooling,  and  a  rapid  preparation
of  large  masses  of  carbonic  anhydride.

^  Carbonic  anhydride,  liaving  the  same  molecular  weight  as  nitrous  oxide,  very  much
resembles  it  when  in  a  liquid  state.

8  bin  When  poured  into  a  tube,  wliich  is  tlien  sealed  up,  liquefied  carbonic  anhydride
v&xi  Yye  easily  preserved,  because  a  thick  tube  easily  supports  the  pressure  (about  50
utmosplieres)  exerted  by  the  li<iuid  at  the  ordinary  temperature.

•'  When  a  tine  stream  of  liquid  carbonic  anhydride  is  discluirged  into  a  closed  metallic
vessel,  about  one-third  of  its  mtvss  solidifies  and  the  remainder  evai)<>rates.  In  employing
solid  carl>onic  anhydride  for  making  experiments  at  low  tem|x>ratures,  it  is  best  to  use  it
mixed  with  ether,  othen^'ise  there  will  be  few  points  of  contact.  If  a  stream  of  air  be
blown  through  a  mixture  of  liquid  carbonic  anhydride  and  ether,  the  evairaration  proceeds
rajiidly,  and  grt^at  cold  is  obtained.  At  present  in  some  siwcial  manufactories  (and  for
making  artificial  mineral  waters)  carbonic  anhydride  is  liquefied  on  the  large  scale,  filled
into  wrought-iron  cylinders  provided  with  a  valve,  and  in  this  manner  it  can  be  trans-
|H.»rted  and  preserved  safely  for  a  long  time. It  is  use<l,  for  mstance,  in  breweries.

y  hi-  Solid  carbonic anhydride,  notwithstanding  its  very low temperature,  can  be
safely  placed  on  the  liand,  because  it  continually  evolves  gas  which  prevents  its  coming
into  actual  contact  with  the  skin,  but  if  a  piece  be  squeezed  between  the  fingers,  it  pro-
duces a  severe  frost  bite  similar  to  a  burn. If  the  snowlike  solid  be  mixed  with  ethe*'
semi-liquid  mass  is  obtained,  which  is  employed  for  artificial  refrigeration. This  mi
may  Iw  used  (or  liquefying  many  other  gases — such  as  chlorine,  m'trous  oxide,  h;?
.•^uli>hide,  ain<l  others. The  evaporati<m  of  such  a  mixture  pnK'€»eds with  ftf

VOL. I.

886  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

in  connection  with  its  considerable  sohibility  in  water^  alcohol,  and
other  liquids.  Its  solubility  in  water  has  been  already  spoken  of  in
the  first  chapter.  Carbonic  anhydride  is  still  more  soluble  in  alcohol
than  in  water,  nameiy  at  0^  one  volume  of  alcohol  dissolves  4*3  volumes
of  this  gas,  and  at  20°  2*9  volumes.

Aqueous  solutions  of  carbonic  anhydride,  under  a  pressure  of  several
atmospheres,  are  now  prepared  artificially,  because  water  saturated
with  this  gas  promotes  digestion  and  quenches  thirst.  For  this  pur-
pose the  carbonic  anhydride  is  pumped  by  means  of  a  force-pump  into
a  closed  vessel  containing  the  liquid,  and  then  bottled  ofiT,  taking
special  means  to  ensure  rapid  and  air-tight  corking.  Various  efler-
vescing  drinks  and  artificially  efl'ervescing  wines  are  thus  prepared.
The  presence  of  carbonic  anhydride  has  an  important  significance
in  nature,  because  by  its  means  water  acquires  the  property  of
decomposing  and  dissolving  many  substances  which  are  not  acted  on
by  pure  water ;  for  instance,  calcium  phosphates  and  carbonates  are
soluble  in  water  containing  carbonic  acid.  If  the  water  in  the
interior  of  the  earth  is  saturated  with  carbonic  acid  under  pressure,
the  quantity  of  calcium  carbonate  in  solution  may  reach  three  grams
per  litre,  and  on  issuing  at  the  suiface,  as  the  carbonic  anhydride
escapes,  the  calcium  carbonate  will  be  deposited.'"  Water  charged
with  carbonic  anhydride  brings  about  the  destruction  of  many  rocky
formations  by  removing  the  lime,*  alkali,  itc,  from  them.  This  procCvSS
has  been  going  on and continues on an enormous scale. Rocks

rapidity  under  the  receiver  of  an  air- pump,  an«l  conHecpiently  the  refrigeration  is  more
inteuHe.  By  this  means  many  gases  may  be  liijuefied  whicli  resist  other  methtxls —
namely,  olefiant  gas,  liydroc^ldoric  acid  gas,  and  otliers.  Liquid  carbonic  anliydride  in
this  case  congeals  in  the  tube  into  a  glassy  transparent  mass.  Pictet  availed  hiiuself  of
this  method  for  litjuefying  many  pernuinent  gases  (hcv  Chapter  II.)

BU'ekrodc,  by  compressing  solid  CO.^i  in  a  cylinder  by  means  of  a  piston,  obUiined  a
semi-transparent  stick,  which  contained  as  mucli  as  1"8  and  even  l'(J  gram  of  CO.^  tier
cubic  centimetre.  In  this  form  the  COj  slowly  evai>orated,  and  could  be  kept  fi>r  a  long
time.

*o  If  such  water  trickles  througli  crevices  and  enters  a  cavern,  the  evaix>ration  will
b?  slow,  and  therefore  in  those  places  from  whi<*h  the  water  drips  growths  of  calcium
c.irl>onat<*  will  l>e  formed,  just  like  the  icicles  formed  on  the  roof-gutters  in  winter-time.
Similar  conical  and  cylindrical  stony  growths  form  the  so-called  stalactites  or  i^eudants
hanging  from  above  and  stalagmites  formed  on  the  bottom  of  caves. Sometinien  these
two  kinds  meet  together,  forming  entire  columns  filluig  the  cave. Many  of  these  cave»
are  renuirkable  for  their  picturesqueness  ;  for  instance,  the  cave  of  Antii>»\ros,  in  the
Crrecian  Archiixdago. This  same  cause  also  forms  s|>ongy  masses  of  calcium  carbonate
in  those  jilivces  where  the  springs  c<mie  to  the  surface  of  the  earth. It  is  therefore  verv
evident  that  a  calcare«)ns  solution  is  sometimes  capable  of  [x^netrating  plants  and  fillinjr
the  whole  of  their  mass  with  calcium  carbonate. This  is  one  of  the  forms  of  l>etrifie<l
plants. Calcium  phosphate  in  solution  in  water  containing  carlnmic  acid  plays  an  im-
portant part  in  the  nourishment of  plants,  lu'i-ause  all  plants  contain  both  lime and
phosphoric  acid.

COMPOl'ND.S  OF CARBON WITH OXYGEN AND NITKOGEN 387

contain  silica  and  the  oxides  of  various  metals  ;  amongst  others,
the  oxides  of  aluminium,  calcium,  and  sodium.  Water  charged
with  carbonic  acid  dissolves  both  the  latter,  transforming  them  into
carbonates.  The  waters  of  the  ocean  ought,  as  the  evolution  of  the
carbonic  anhydride  proceeds,  to  precipitate  salts  of  lime  ;  these  are
actually  found  everywhere  on  the  surface  of  the  ground  in  those  places
whicli  previously  formed  the  bed  of  the  ocean.  The  presence  of  car-
bonic anhydride  in  solution  in  water  is  essential  to  the  nourishment
and  growth  of  wat«r  plants.

Although  carbonic  anhydride  is  soluble  in  water,  yet  no  definite
hydrate  is  formed  ;  * '  nevertheless  an  idea  of  the  composition  of  thi&
hydrate  may  be  formed  from  that  of  the  salts  of  carbonic  acid,  because
a  hydrate  is  nothing  but  a  salt  in  which  the  metal  is  replaced  by
hydrogen.  As  carbonic  anhydride  forms  salts  of  the  composition
K2CO3,  Na.^CHDg,  HNaCOg,  tfec,  therefore  carbonic  acid  ought  to  have
the  composition  H.2CO3 — that  is,  it  ought  to  contain  CO2  +  H.2O.
Whenever  this  substance  is  formed,  it  decomposes  into  its  component
parts — that  is,  into  water  and  carbonic  anhydride.  The  acid  properties
of  carbonic  anhydride  * '  ***"  are  demonstrated  by  its  being  directly  ab-
sorbed by  alkaline  solutions  and  forming  salts  with  them.  In  distinction
from  nitric,  HNO3,  and  similar  monobasic  acids  which  ^ith  univalent
metals  (exchanging  one  atom  for  one  atom  of  hydrogen)  give  salts  such
as  those  of  potassium,  sodium,  and  silver  containing  only  one  atom  of  the
metal  (NaNOg,  AgNO^),  and  with  bivalent  ''^  metals  (such  as  calcium,
barium,  lead)  salts  containing  two  acid  groups — for  example,  Ca(N03)2,
Pb(N03)2  -carbonic  acid,  H.2CO3,  is  hihasic^  that  is  contains  two  atoms
of  hydrogen  in  the  hydrate  or  two  atoms  of  univalent  metals  in  their
salts  :  for  example,  Na.2C03  is  washing  soda,  a  normal  salt ;  NaHCOg  is
the  bicarbonate,  an  acid  salt.  Therefore,  if  M'  be  a  univalent  metal,
its  carbonates  in  general  are  the  normal  carbonate  M'2C03  and  the

" '  The  cr>-8tallohydratts  CO.j,8H,0  of  Wroblewski  (Chapter  I.,  Note  07),  in  tlie  first
phice,  is  only  formed  under  sjiecial  conditions ;  in  the  second  place,  its  existence  still
requires  confinnation  ;  and  in  the  third  place,  it  does  not  correspond  with  that  hydrate
H.COs  which  should  occur,  judging  from  the  composition  of  the  salts.

n  >»*■  It  is  easy  to  demonstrate  the  acid  properties  of  carbonic  anhydride  by  taking  a
long  tube,  closed  at  one  end,  and  filling  it  with  this  gas ;  a  test-tube  is  then  filled  with  a
solution  of  an  alkali  (for  instance,  sodium  hydroxide),  which  is  then  poured  into  the  long
tube  and  the  oi^en  end  is  corked.  The  solution  is  then  well  shaken  in  the  tube,  and  the
corked  end  plunged  into  water.  If  the  cork  be  now  withdrawn  under  water,  the  water
will  till  the  tube.  The  vacuum  obtained  by  the  absorption  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  by
an  alkali  is  so  complete  that  even  an  electric  discharge  will  not  pass  through  it.  This
method  is  often  applied  to  produce  a  vacuum.

•*  The  reasons  for  distinguishing  the  uni-,  bi-,  tri-,  and  quadri-valent  metals  will  be
explained  hereafter  on  passing  from  the  univalent  metals  (Na,  K,  Li)  to  the  bivalent
(Mg.  Ca,  Ba),  Chapter  XIV.

c  c  2

388  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

acid  carbonate,  M'HCOa  ;  or  if  M"  be  a  bivalent  metal  (replacing  H.^)  its
normal  carbonate  will  be  M^'COj  ;  these  metals  do  not  usually  form  acid
salts,  as  we  shall  see  further  on.  The  bibasic  character  of  carbonic  acid
is  akin  to  that  of  sulphuric  acid,  H2S04,*^  but  the  latter,  in  distinction
from  the  former,  is  an  example  of  the  energetic  or  strong  acids  (such  as
nitric  or  hydrochloric),  whilst  in  carbonic  tacid  we  observe  but  feeble
development  of  the  acid  properties  ;  hence  carbonic  acid  must  be  con-
sidered a  weak  acid.  This  conception  must,  however,  be  taken  as  only
comparative,  as  up  to  this  time  theie  is  no  definitely  established  rule  for
measuring  the  energy  ^^  of  acids. The  feeble  acid  properties  of  carlx>nio

'^  Up  to  the  year  1840,  or  thereabout,  acids  were  not  distinguished  by  their  basicity.
Graham,  while  studying  phosphoric  acid,  H3PO4,  and  Liebig,  while  studying  many  organic
acids,  distinguished  mono-,  hi-,  and  tri-basic  acids,  (rerhardt  and  Laurent  geueralisetl
these  relations,  showing  that  this  distinction  extends  over  many  reactions  (for  instance,
to  the  faculty  of  bibasic  acids  of  forming  acid  salts  with  alkalis,  KHO  or  NaHO,  or  with
alcohols,  RHO,  Sic.) ;  but  now,  since  a  definite  conception  as  to  atoms  and  molecules
has  been  arrived  at,  the  basicity  of  an  acid  is  determined  by  the  number  0/
hydrogen  atomsy  contained  in  a  molecule  of  the  acid,  wliicli  cun  be  exchanged  for  metals.
If  carbonic  acid  forms  acid  salts,  NaHCOs,  and  normal  suits,  Na.,>CO-,  it  is  evident  that
the  hydrate  is  H.^CO,-;,  a  bibasic  acid.  Otherwise  it  is  at  present  impossible  to  account
for  the  composition  of  these  salts.  But  when  C  =  6  and  O  =  H  were  taken,  then  the  formula
CO2  expressed  the  composition,  but  not  the  molecular  weight,  of  carbonic  anhydride  ;  ami
the  composition  of  the  normal  salt  would  be  Na-^C.^O^  or  NaCO-,  therefore  carbonic  acid
might  have  been  considered  as  a  monobasic  acid.  Tlien  tlie  ivcid  salt  would  have  been
represented  by  NaC05,HC03.  Such  questions  were  the  cause  of  much  argument  and  dif-
ference of  opinion  among  chemists  about  forty  years  ago.  At  present  there  cannot  be  two
opinions  on  the  subject  if  the  law  of  Avogadro-Gerliardt  and  its  consequences  be  strictly
adhered  to.  It  may,  however,  be  observed  here  tliat  tlie  nionobasii'  acids  R(OH)  were
for  a  long  time  considered  to  be  incapable  of  l>eingdecom]K)sed  into  water  and  anhydride,
and  this  i>roperty  was  ascribed  to  the  bibasic  acids  R(OH)..  us  containing  the  elements
necessary  for  the  separation  of  the  molecule  of  water,  H.^.O.  Thus  H.^SOj  or  SOolOH).,.,
H.2CO5,  or  CO(OH)a,  and  other  bibasic  acids  decompose  into  an  anhydride,  RO,  and  water,
H.^O.  But  as  nitrous,  HNO^,  iodic,  HK).-„  hypochlorous,  HCIO,  and  other  monobasic
acids  easily  give  their  anhydrides  N.^Oj,  I.2O5,  Cl^O,  il'c,  that  method  of  distinguishing
the  basicity  of  acids,  although  it  fairly  well  satisfies  the  retjuirenients  of  organic  chemistr)',
cannot  be  considered  correct.  It  may  also  be  remarked  tlmt  up  to  the  present  time
not  one  of  the  bibasic  acids  has  l>een  found  to  have  the  faculty  of  being  distilled  without
being  decomi)osed  into  anhydride  and  water  (even  H.jSO,,  on  ]>eing  evai)onitt»d  »uid  dis-
tilled, gives  SO- +H.2O),  and  the  deconiix)sition  of  aoids  into  water  and  anhydride  prtv
ceeds  particularly  easily  in  dealing  with  feebly  energetic  acids,  such  as  carbonic,  nitrous,
l>oric,  and  hypochlorous.  Let  us  add  that  carbonic  acid,  us  a  hydrate  corresponding  to
marsh  gas,  C(  HO)4  =  CO2  •  2H.2O,  ought  to  be  tetrabasic.  But  in  g«MU'ral  it  does  not  form
such  salts.  Basic  salts,  however,  such  as  CuCO-CuO,  may  be  r<?gard<'d  in  this  Hense,
for  CCUjO^  corresiKmds  with  CH4O4,  as  Cu  corresi>on<ls  with  H...  Amongst  the
ethereal  salts  (alcoholic  derivatives)  of  carbonic  acid  corresponding  cases  are,  however,
observed;  for  instance,  ethylic  orthocarbonate,  C(C..,H5()),  (obtained  ])y  the  action  of
chloropicrin,  C(NO..)C'l-,  on  sodium  ethoxide,  C.^HjONa  ;  boiling  ptiint  158°;  specific
gravity,  ()-92l.  The  name  orthocarbouic  arid  for  C'H40|  is  taken  from  orthophosphoric
acid,  PH5O4,  which  corresiMMids  with  PH-  (see  Chapter  on  Plmsphonis).

"  Long  ago  endeavours  were  made  to  find  a  measure  of  nj^nify  of  acids  and  battes,
l>ecaus<'  some  of  tiie  acids,  such  as  sulphuric  or  nitric,  form  comparativ^dy  stable  salts,  de-

COMPOUNDS  OF  CAKBON WITH  OXYGEN AND NITROGEN 389

acid  may,  however,  be  judged  from  the  joint  evidence  of  many  properties.
With  such  energetic  alkalis  as  soda  and  potash,  carbonic  acid  forms
normal  salts,  soluble  in  water,  but  having  an  alkaline  reaction  and  in

composed  with  difficalty  by  heat  and  water,  whilst  others,  like  carbonic  and  hypochlorous
acids,  do  not  combine  with  feeble  bases,  and  with  most  of  the  other  bases  form  salts  whicli
are  easily  decomposed.  The  same  may  be  said  with  regard  to  bases,  among  which  those  of
potassium,  K^O,  sodium,  Na.,>0,  and  barium,  BaO,  may  serve  as  examples  of  the  most
powerful,  because  they  combine  with  the  most  feeble  acids  and  form  a  mass  of  salts  of
great  stability,  whilst  as  examples  of  the  feeblest  bases  alumina,  Al.^Os,  ^^  bismuth  oxide,
Bi.jO.-f,  may  be  taken,  because  they  form  salts  easily  decomposed  by  water  and  by  heat
if  the  acid  be  volatile.  Such  a  division  of  acids  and  bases  into  the  feeblest  and  most
]K>werful  is  justified  by  all  evidence  concerning  them,  and  is  quoted  in  this  work.  But
the  teaching  of  this  subject  in  certain  circles  has  acquired  quite  anew  tone,  which,  in  my
r>pinion,  cannot  be  accepted  without  certain  reservations  and  criticisms,  although  it  com-
prises many  interesting  features.  The  fact  is  that  Thomsen,  Oatwald,  and  others  proposed
to  express  the  measure  of  affinity  of  acids  to  bases  by  figures  drawn  from  data  of  the
measure  of  displacement  of  acids  in  aqueous  solutions,  judging  (1)  from  the  amount  of
heat  developed  by  mixing  a  solution  of  the  salt  with  a  solution  of  another  acid  (the
avidity  of  acids,  according  to  Thomsen);  (2)  from  the  change  of  the  volumes  accom-
)mnying  such  a  mutual  action  of  solutions  (Ostwald) ;  (8)  from  the  change  of  the
in4ex  of  refraction  of  solutions  (Ostwald),  &c.  Besides  this  there  are  many  other
methods  which  allow  us  to  form  an  opinion  about  the  distribution  of  bases  among
various  acids  in  aqueous  solutions.  Some  of  these  methods  will  be  described
hereafter.  It  ought,  however,  to  be  remarked  that  in  making  investigations  in  aqueous
solutions  the  affinity  to  water  is  generally  left  out  of  sight.  If  a  base  N,  combining
with  acids  X  and  Y  in  presence  of  them  both,  divides  in  such  a  way  that  one-
third  of  it  combines  with  X  and  two-thirds  with  Y,  a  conclusion  is  formed  that  the  affinity,
or  power  of  forming  salts,  of  the  acid  Y  is  twice  as  great  as  that  of  X.  But  the  presence
of  the  water  is  not  taken  into  account.  If  the  acid  X  has  an  affinity  for  water  and  for  N
it  will  be  distributed  between  them;  and  if  X  has  a  greater  affinity  for  water  than  Y,
then  less  of  X  will  combine  with  N  than  of  Y.  If,  in  addition  to  this,  the  acid  X  is
capable  of  forming  an  acid  salt  NX.^,  and  Y  is  not,  the  conclusion  of  the  relative  strength
of  X  and  Y  will  be  still  more  erroneous,  because  the  X  set  free  will  form  such  a  salt  on
the  addition  of  Y  to  NX.  We  shall  see  in  Chapter  X.  that  when  sulphuric  and  nitric
acids  in  weak  aqueous  solution  act  on  sodium,  they  are  distributed  exactly  in  this  way :
namely,  one-third  of  the  sodium  combines  with  the  sulphuric  and  two-thirds  with  the
nitric  acid ;  but,  in  my  opinion,  this  does  not  show  that  sulphuric  acid,  compared  with
nitric  acid,  possesses  but  half  the  degree  of  affinity  for  bases  like  soda,  and  only  demon-
strates the  greater  affinity  of  sulphuric  acid  for  water  compared  with  that  of  nitric  acid.
In  this  way  the  methods  of  studying  the  distribution  in  aqueous  solutions  probably  only
shows  the  difference  of  tlie  relation  of  the  acid  to  a  base  and  to  water.

In  view  of  these  considerations,  although  the  teaching  of  the  distribution  of  salt-
forming  elements  in  aqueous  solutions  is  an  object  of  great  and  independent  interest,  it
can  hardly  serve  to  determine  the  measure  of  affinity  between  bases  and  acids.  Similar
considerations  ought  to  be  kept  in  view  when  determining  the  energy  of  acids  by  means  of
the  electrical  conductivity  of  their  weak  solutions.  This  method,  proposed  by  Arrhenius
(1884),  and  applied  on  an  extensive  scale  by  Ostwald  (who  developed  it  in  great  detail  hi
his  Lehrhuch  d.  allgemeintn  Chemiey  v.  ii.,  1887),  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  the  re-
lation of  the  so-called  molecular  electrical-conductivity  of  weak  solutions  of  various'  acids
(I  I  coincides  with  the  relation  in  which  the  same  acids  stand  according  to  the  distribution,
(II)  found  by  one  of  the  above-mentioned  methods,  and  with  the  relation  deduced  for
them  from  observations  upon  the  velocity  of  reaction,  (III)  for  instance,  according  to  the
rate  of  the  splitting  up  of  an  ethereal  salt  (into  alcohol  and  acid),  or  from  the  rate  of  the  so-
called  inversion  of  sugar  —that  is,  its  transformation  into  glnooae — as  is  seen  by  comparing

890  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

many  cases  themselves  acting  as  alkalis. '  * The  acid  salts  of  these  alkalis,
NaHCOg  and  KHCO3,  have  a  neutral  reaction  on  litmus,  although  thej,
like  acids,  contain  hydrogen,  which  may  ])e  exchanged  for  metals. The
acid  salts  of  such  acids— as,  for  instance,  of  sulphuric  acid,  NaHS04 —
have  a  clearly  defined  acid  reaction,  and  therefore  carbonic  acid  is  un-
able to  neutralise  the  powerful  basic  properties  of  such  alkalis  as  potash
or  soda. Carbonic  acid  does  not  even  combine  at  all  with  feeble  liases,
such  as  alumina,  AI.2O3,  and  therefore  if  a  strong  solution  of  sodium
carbonate,  Na^COa,  be  added  to  a  strong  solution  of  aluminium  sulphate,
Al2(S04)3, although  according to  double  saline decompositions alu-
minium carbonate,  A1.2(C03)3,  ought  to  l^e  formed,  the  carbonic  acid
separates,  for  this  salt  splits  up  in  the  presence  of  water  into  aluminium
hydroxide  and  carbonic  anhydride  : Al2(C03)3  -f  SHgO  =  Al2(OH),;
+  3CO2. Thus  feeble  bases  are  unable  to  retain  carbonic  acid  even  at
ordinary  temperatures. For  the  same  reason,  in  the  case  of  bases  of
medium  energy,  although  they  form  carbonates,  the  latter  are  compara-
tively easily  decomposed  by  heating,  as  is  shown  by  the  decomposition  of
copper  carbonate,  CUCO3  {see  Introduction),  and  even  of  calcium  carbo-

the  annexed  figures,  in  which  the  energy  of  liydrochloric  acid  is  taken  as  equal to
100:-

I

II

III

Hydrochloric  acid,  HCl .

100

100

100

Hydrobromic  acid,  HBr  .

101

1)8

105

Nitric  acid,  HNO3 .

100

100

00

Sulplmric  acid,  H..>S04 .

«5

40

74

Fonnic  acid,  CH.^>0.>

•2

4

1

Acetic  acid,  CoH^O..*

1

'2

1

Oxahc  acid,  C..,H._.04

•20

'24

IH

Phosphoric  acid,  PH3O4  .

7

0

The  coincidence  of  these  figures,  obtained  by  so  many  various  methods,  presents  a
most  im}>ortant  and  instructive  relation  between  phenomena  of  different  kinds,  but  in  my
opinion  it  does  not  permit  us  to  assert  that  the  degree  of  affinity  existing  between  bases
and  various  acids  is  determined  by  all  these  various  methods,  because  the  influence  of  the
water  must  be  taken  into  consideration.  On  this  account,  until  the  theory  of  solution
is  more  thoroughly  worked  out,  this  subject  (which  for  the  present  ought  to  be  treated
of  in  special  treatises  on  chemical  mechanics)  must  be  treated  with  great  caution.
But  now  we  may  hope  to  decide  this  question  guided  by  a  study  of  the  rate  of  reaction,
the  influence  of  acids  and  bases  upon  indicators.  Arc,  all  of  which  are  treated  fully  in
works  on  physical  and  theoretical  clieniistry.

'•**  TIjus,  for  instance,  in  the  washing  of  fabrics  the  caustic  alkalis,  such  as  sodium
hydroxide,  in  weak  solutions,  act  in  removing  the  fatty  matter  just  in  the  same  way  as
carbonate  solutions;  for  instance,  a  solution  of  soda  crystals,  NdjCO^.  Soap  acts  in  the
same  way,  being  comi>osed  of  feeble  acids,  either  fatty  or  resinous,  combined  with  alkali.
On  this  account  all  such  substances  are  applied  in  manufacturing  processes,  and  ariHwer
etjually  well  in  practice  for  bleaching  and  washing  fabrics.  Soda  crystals  or  soap  are
preferred  to  caustic  alkali,  because  an  excess  of  the  latter  may  have  a  destructive  effect
on  the  fabrics.  It  nuiy  be  sup^Ktsed  that  in  aqueous  solutions  of  soap  or  Kotla
crystals,  part  of  the  base  will  fonn  caustic  alkali;  that  is  to  say,  the  water  will  compete
witli  the  weak  acids,  and  the  alkali  will  be  distributed  between  them  and  the  water.

COMPOUNDS  OF  CARBON  WITH  OXYGEN  AND  NITROGEN 391

nate,  CaCOa.  On\y  the  normal  (not  the  acid)  salts  of  such  powerful  bases
iis  potassium  and  sodium  are  capable  of  standing  a  red  heat  without
decomposition.  The  jicid  salts — for  instance,  XaHCOg — decompose
even  on  heating  their  solutions  (2NaHC03  =  Na^COg  +  H.^^)  +  COj),
evolving  carbonic  anhydride.  The  amount  of  heat  given  out  by  the
combination  of  carbonic  acid  with  bases  als<j  shows  its  feeble  acid
properties,  being  considerably  less  than  with  energetic  acids.  Thus
if  a  weak  solution  of  forty  grams  of  sodium  hydroxide  be  satu-
rated (up  to  the  formation  of  a  normal  salt)  with  sulphuric  or  nitric
acid  or  another  powerful  acid,  from  thirteen  to  fifteen  thousand
calories  are  given  out,  but  with  carbonic  acid  only  about  ten  thousand
calories.'**  The  majority  of  carbonates  are  insoluble  in  water,  and
therefore  such  solutions  as  sodium,  potassium,  or  ammonium  carbonates
form  in  solutions  of  most  other  salts,  MX  or  M'^Xj,  insoluble  pre-
cipitates of  carbonates,  M.2CO3  or  M^COg.  Thus  a  solution  of  barium
chloride  gives  with  sodium  carbonate  a  precipitate  of  barium  carbonate,
BaCOj.  For  this  reason  rocks,  especially  those  of  aqueous  origin,  very
often  contain  carbonates  ;  for  example,  calcium,  ferrous,  or  magnesium
carbonates,  &c.

Carbonic  anhydride-  -which,  like  water,  is  formed  with  the  develop-
ment of  a  large  amount  of  heat — is  very  stable.  Only  very  few  sub-
stances are  capable  of  depriving  it  of  its  oxygen.  However,  certain
metals,  such  as  magnesium,  potassium  and  the  like,  on  being  heated,  burn
in  it,  depositing  carbon  and  forming  oxides.  If  a  mixture  of  carbonic
anhydride  and  hydrogen  be  passed  through  a  heated  tube,  the  formation
of  water  and  carlK)nic  oxide  will  be  observed  ;  CO2  +  H.^  =  CO  4-  HjO.

^•'  Altlioagh  carbonic  acid  is  rcckoneil  among  the  feeble  acidw,  yet  there  are  evi-
dently many  others  Htill  feebler — for  instance,  prussic  acid,  hyx)oclilorou8  acid,  many
organic  acidn,  S:c.  Ba^es  like  alumina,  or  such  feeble  acids  as  silica,  when  in  combination
with  alkalis,  are  decomposed  in  aqueous  solutions  by  carbonic  acid,  but  on  fusion — that
is,  without  the  presence  of  water — they  displace  it,  which  clearly  shows  in  phenomena  of
this  kind  how  much  depends  upon  the  conditions  of  reaction  and  the  properties  of  the
substances  formed.  Tliese  relations,  which  at  first  sight  appear  complex,  may  be  best
understoo<1  if  we  represent  that  two  salts,  MX  and  NY,  in  general  always  give  more  or
less  of  two  other  salts,  MY  and  NX,  and  then  examine  the  proi>erties  of  the  derived  sub-
stances. Thus,  in  solution,  sodium  silicate,  Na.>Si05,  with  carbonic  anhydride  will  to  some
extent  form  sodium  carbonate  and  silica,  SiO^ ;  but  the  latter,  being  colloid,  separates,  and
the  remaining  mass  of  sodium  silicate  is  again  decomposed  by  carbonic  anhydride,  so  that
finally  silica  separates  and  s(xlium  carbonate  is  formed.  In  a  fused  state  the  case  is
different;  sodium  car)x>nate  will  react  with  silica  to  form  carbonic  anhydride  and  sodium
silicate,  but  the  carbonic  anhydride  will  l)e  separated  as  a  gau;,  and  therefore  in  the
residue  the  same  reaction  will  again  take  place,  and  ultimately  the  carbonic  anhydride  is
entirely  eliminated  and  sodium  silicate  remains.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  is  removed
from  the  sphere  of  the  reaction,  distribution  takes  place.  Therefore,  although  car-
bonic anhydride  is  a  feeble  acid,  still  not  for  this  reason,  but  only  in  virtue  of  its  gaseous
form,  do  all  soluble  acids  displace  it  in  saline  solutions  {Hcf  Chapter  X.)

^92  I'HISCIPLES  OF  CHEMJSTRV  H

but  only  ti  [Mirtion  of  the  curlionic  ncid  gtu  undergoes  this  change,  an^f
tlierefui'e  ihe  result  will  be  a,  mixture  of  carbonic  anhydride,  carboitfafl
oxide,  hydrogen,  and  water,  which  does  not  Buffer  further  change  und<iB
the  action  of  bent," Although,  like  water,  carbonic  anhydride  is  6k^
ceedingly  stablf ,  still  on  lieing  heated  it  partially  decomposes  into  caisrJ
bonic  oxide  and  oxygen. Deville  showed  that  sufh  is  the  ease  if  car-
lionic  anhydride  be  j)aBsed  through  a.  long  tulie  containing  pieces  of
jiorcelain  and  heated  to  1,300°. If  the  products  of  deiKimpositioi
namely,  the  earbonic  oxide  andoxygen^ — be  suddenly  cooled,  they  c
collected  separately,  although  they  partly  i-euuite  together. A  si
ilecompositian  of  carbonic  anhydride  into  carbonic  oxide  and  oxygc
takes  place on passing  a  series  of  electric  sparks through it I
instance,  in  the  eudiometer). Under  these  cunditions  an  increase  c
volume  occurs,  because  two  volumes  of  CO^  give  two  volumes  of  CO  ani
one  volume  of  0. Tlie  decomposition  reaches  a  certain  limit  (le.ss  thi
otie-third)  and  does not proceed further, so that the result
mixture of  carbonic  anhydride,  carbonic oxide,  and oxygen,  wbi
is  not  altered  in  composition  by  the  continued  action  of  the  «
This  is readily  underntowl, as it is  .i reversible reaction. '.
carbonic anhydride  be  remnveil,  then  the  mixture  explodes  w
spark  is  passed  and  forms  carbonic  anhydride.'^  '''* If  from  an  identic!

'  Hjdroi

KMrdE  artiiiii

n  to  onygen  in
t  nllltiit)'  u(  liydrogen  is  aligbtly  gteniei  thun  Uiul  of  cuboili.  bl
i^Use  doring  tlie  combuetion  of  hydncBrbouB  the  hydrogen  burns  Rnt.  Soms  u
thin  aimiUrity  ol  affinity  nwy  b«  tormF^d  by  the  [|D*iitity  ot  lieat  evolved.
Iiydregen,  H»  on  combining  with  an  Htom  of  oiyi^en,  0  =  10,  dert1o|M  an.DOO  1
it  the  water  (oiraed  be  coudensed  to  ■  liquid  stute.  II  tlie  water  Tenajna  in  lb
II  gna  (ateam)  Ibe  latent  heal  ot  evapotation  mOMt  be  aalitrucCed,  and  then  1)8,000  a
will  b«  developed.  Carbon,  C.  an  «  solid,  on  rombinin);  witli  0.,  =  8a  detelop  a)
UT.OOO  calories,  forniin);  Rawona  CO...  If  it  were  tcaaeoaa  like  hydrogen,  lo  ~
imntained  Cj  in  its  molefule.  mucli  mora  heat  wonld  be  developed,  and  j
by  other  subatunces,  whoie  moleenles  on  puioiBK  from  the  solid  to  the
ktfcte  abaocb  about  lU.nOO  to  15,000  catoriea,  it  mast  be  held  that  gniieoua  a
fomiing  gateouB  carbonir  anhydride  would  develop  not  lean  than  11
is.  appmximately  twice  as  mui-h  an  ia  developed  in  the  formation  o'
there  ia  twice  ai  nmch  oxygen  in  a  molecule  of  cuibonic  anhydride  .
water,  the  oxygen  developit  approiimately  the  aame  quantity  of  heat  on  combinii
hydrogen  a*  Hitli  oarbon.  That  ia  to  aaj,  that  liere  we  find  the  aune  cloae  aOi
Chapter  n.,  Note  TJ  determined  by  the  quantity  of  heat  aa  between  hydrogen,  K
iron.  For  thia  reason  here  also,  as  in  the  eiue  of  hydrogen  and  iron,  we  oagU  k
an  equal  dittribation  of  oxygen  between  hydrogen  and  carlfon,  if  tliey  ara  1
excels  compared  nitli  the  amount  of  oxygon :  but  if  there  be  an  excess  ol  carbcoi
decompoae  water,  whilst  an  eioensof  hydrogen  will  decompose  carbonic  anhydrida.  1
i(  llieee  pbenniiieDa  and  aimilor  ones  liave  been  explained  in  itmlaled  ci
llieory  of  the  whole  tubjecl  is  still  wanting  in  the  present  coiiditini,  of
ledge.

temperature  and

magnilude  of  the  dissociation

Dt  CO,  T

lith  tlie  tempeiatur'.'  i

COMPOUNDS OK  CARBON WITH OXYGEN  AND NITROGEN 39B

mixture  the  oxygen  (and  not  the  carbonic  anhydride)  be  removed,
and  a  series  of  sparks  be  again  passed,  the  decomposition  is  renewed,
and  terminates  with  the  complete  dissociation  of  the  carbonic
anhydride.  Phosphorus  is  used  in  order  to  efifect  the  complete  absorp-
tion of  the  oxygen.  In  these  examples  we  see  that  a  definite  mixture
of  changeable  substances  is  capable  of  arriving  at  a  state  of  stable
equilibrium,  destroyed,  however,  by  the  removal  of  one  of  the  sub-
stances composing  the  mixture.  This  is  one  of  the  instances  of  the
influence  of  mass.

Although  carbonic  anhydride  is  decomposed  on  heating,  yielding
oxygen,  it  is  nevertheless,  like  water,  an  unchangeable  substance  at
ordinary  temperatures.  Its  decomposition,  as  effecte<l  by  plants,  is
on  this  account  all  the  more  remarkable ;  in  this  case  the  whole
of  the  oxygen  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  is  separated  in  the  free
state.  The  mechanism  of  this  change  is  that  the  heat  and  light
absorbed  by  the  plants  are  expended  in  the  decomposition  of  the
carbonic  anhydride.  This  accounts  for  the  enormous  influence  of
temperature  and  light  on  the  growth  of  plants.  But  it  is  at  present
not  clearly  understood  how  this  takes  place,  or  by  what  separate  in-
termediate reactions  the  whole  process  of  decomposition  of  carbonic
anhydride  in  plants  into  oxygen  and  the  carbohydrates  (Note  1)
remaining  in  them,  takes  place.  It  is  known  that  sulphurous  anhy-
dride (in  many  ways  resembling  carbonic  anhydride)  under  the  action
of  light  (and  also  of  heat)  forms  sulphur  and  sulphuric  anhydride,  SO3,
and  in  the  presence  of  water,  sulphuric  acid.  But  no  similar  decompo-
sition has  been  obtained  directly  with  carbonic  anhydride,  although  it
forms  an  exceedingly  easily  decomposable  higher  oxide — percarbonic

decreases.  Deville  found  that  at  a  pressure  of  1  atmosphere  in  the  flame  of  carbonic
oxide  baming  in  oxygen,  about  40  per  cent,  of  the  CO.^  is  decomposed  wlien  the  tempera-
ture is  about  3,000^,  and  at  1,500°  less  than  1  x>er  cent.  (Krafts) ;  whilst  under  a  pressure
of  10  atmospheres  about  34  per  cent,  is  decomposed  at  8,})00°  (Mallard  and  Le  Chatelier).
It  follows  therefore  that,  under  ver}'  small  pressures,  tlie  dissociation  of  CO.^  will  be
considerable  even  at  comparatively  moderate  temperatures,  but  at  the  temperature  of
ordinary  furnaces  (about  1,000^)  even  under  the  small  partial  pressure  of  the  carbonic
acid,  there  are  only  small  traces  of  decomposition  which  may  be  neglected  in  a  practical
estimation  of  the  combustion  of  fuels.  We  may  here  cite  the  molecular  specific  heat  of
CO.,  (i.r.  the  amount  of  heat  required  to  raise  44  units  of  weight  of  CO.2  1°),  according
to  the  determinations  and  calculations  of  Mallard  and  Le  Chatelier,  for  a  constant
volume  Cv  =  6'26  +  00037^ ;  for  a  constant  pressure  Cp  =  Cv  ^^  2  (see  Chapter  XIV.,  Note  7),
i.e.  the  specific  heat  of  CO.^  increases  rapidly  with  a  rise  of  temperature  :  for  example,  at
0=*  (per  1  part  by  weight),  it  is,  at  a  constant  pressure  ^  01 88,  at  1,000°  -  0*272,  at  2,000°,
al>out  0'356.  A  i>erfectly  distinct  rise  of  the  specific  heat  (for  example,  at  2,000^,  0409),  is
given  by  a  comparison  of  observations  made  by  the  above-mention tKl  investigators  and  by
Berthelot  and  Vieille  (Koumakoffj.  The  cause  of  this  must  be  looked  for  in  dlKsociation.
T.  M.  Cheltzoff,  however,  considers  upon  the  basis  of  his  researches  upon  explosives  that
it  must  be  admitted  that  a  maximum  is  reached  at  a  certain  tenii>erature  (about  2,500°),
beyond  which  the  specific  heat  begins  to  fall.

■■  -  -

acid;'*  and perhaps  tlmt  is  the  reason the  oxygen sfipitrates. <  »n  J

the  otlier  hand,  it  is  known that  phmts  always  form  ami contain  J

I wganU  uniiln,  nnd  these  must  be  regarded  as  derivatives  of  carbonic  I

I acid,  as  is  seen  by  all  their  reactions,  of  which  we  will  shortly  treat,  J

For  this  reason  it  might  be  thought  that  the  carbonic  acid  absori>e<l  by  I

the  plants  iirst  forms  (according  to  Baeyer)  formic  aldehyde,  CH,0,  I

and  fronj  it  organic  acids,  and  that  these  latter  iii  their  tiual trails-  I

formation  form  all  tlie  other  complex  organic  substances  of  the  plauts.  I

Alany  organic  acids  are  fount!  in  plants  in  considerable  quaQlity  ;  for  I

inatiince,  tartaric  acid,  C,H|iOii,  found  in  grape-juice  and  in  the  acid  i

juice  of  many  plants  ;  malic  acid,  C,HbOs,  found  not  only  in  unripe  J

apples  but  in  still larger  quantities  in  mountain  ash  berries  ;  citrio  I

acid, C^H^O-, found  in  the  acid  Juice  of lemons,  in gooseberries,  I

cranbeiTies, &a.  ; oxalic acid, CgH^O,, found in  wood-sorrel and  I

many  other  plants. Sometimes  these  acids  exist  in  a  free  state  in  the  J

plants,  and  sonietiines  in  the  form  of  salts  ;  for  institnce,  tartaric  actd  I

is  met  with  in  gr»pes  us  the  salt  known  as  cream  of  tartar,  but  in  the  I

impure  state  called  argol,  or  tartar,  0,H,,KOr.. In  sorrel  we  find  the  1
so-called  salts  of  aorrel,  or  acid  potassium  oxalate,  C^HK(!>j. There  is

a  very  clear  connection  between  carbonic  anhydride  and  the  above-  \

mentioned oi'ganic acids— namely,  they  all,  under  one  cuiidition  or  I

another,  yield  carbonic  anhydride,  and  can  all  Ih;  foi'med  by  TiieaDS  of  it  J

from  substances  destitute  of  acid  properties. The  following  examples  J

afford  tiie  best  demonetration  of  this  fact  :  if  acetic  acid,  CjH,0„  the  I

acid  of  vinegar,  be  passed  in  the  form  of  vapour  through  a  heated  tube,  1

I"  Percarlmnit  Bckl,  H.^CO^  ( =  UfCO^  t  O)  i»  Buppoaed  by  A.  Bwh  ( ln»8 1  to  be  tonned  |
from  cu-bonic  urid  in  the  action  □[  ligbt  Dpon  plants,  (in  the  Mine  miuuier  At,  acomdCng  J
to  tbe  abovu  achenie,  BOlpharic  ncid  trom  BUlphncDaB)  niitli  tbe  {ormation  of  outnn,  J
wbiob  remuns  in  tbe  roroi  ot  brdmleg  of  eaihoo:  aU^-Oi  =  m,COi  +  CU,0.  This  J
mibiluice  CILjO  sipreBsee  the  (.'ompoaition  ol  fomuD  aldehyde  wbich,  occordiag  to.  1
Boe jer,  by  polymerisation  and  farther  changes,  gives  other  hydni1«s  of  carbon  and  tcnsu  I
the  fitHt  prodoct  which  n  formed  in  pUnts  (rom  CO.^.  And  Berthelut  (1873)  hod  klrMrdy,  J
at  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  penulpliDric  (Chapter  XX.)  and  pemitric  (Chaptmr  VL.  \
Note  !WJ  acids  pointed  oat  the  formation  of  tbe  unstable  percarbonic  oiibydrida,  COa.  1
TliUB,  notwithitonding  the  hypotbeticol  nature  ot  tlie  above  aquation,  it  in* j  be  oiltnittod  :l
all  the  more  as  it  eiplaiuB  tile  comparative  abundance  ol  peroxide  of  hydrogen  (SoldtlW,  M
Chapter  IV.}  in  the  air,  aud  this  alio  Bt  tlie  period  of  the  most  enet^Btio  growth  ot  I
plants  tin  July),  because  peicarbonic  acid  ohould  hke  all  peroiides  easily  giTe  TB^^M
Besides  ttbicb  Bach  (laM)  shoved  that,  in  tbe  first  ploee,  traces  of  lonniu  ^dahyd«]
and  oxidising  agents  (COj  or  H.jOg)  are  formed  under  the  -.imultaneous  actioo  ol  C^jl
nod  sunlight  upon  a  solution  sontainingasoltof  nranium  (which  isoi!dieed),iuid diethyl-  I
uiiline  (which  rencU  with  CH3O),  and  secDndly,  that  by  HubjectlnK  BoO.^  diabsD  Op  ia  1
water,  to  the  ootion  ot  *  *tream  ol  CO.,  in  the  void,  extracting  Inlw  in  the  e^)  nilJ^  J
etber,  and  then  adding  on  alcoholic  nolntion  ol  NaHO,  cryntalline  p1ate>  o!  a  ■odiiun  |
suit  may  lie  obtained,  which  with  water  eioWe  oxygen  and  leave  hoc]
lliey  nre  therefore  probably  tbe  per-oalt,  All  theits  duits  are  of  |jn
dewrve  further  veriflration  and  elaboration.

COMPOUNDS  OF  CARBON WITH OXY<iEN AND NITROGEN 895

it  splits  up  into  carbonic  anhydride  and  marsh  gas  =  CO2  +  CH4.  But
conversely  it  can  also  be  obtained  from  those  components  into  which  it
decomposes.  If  one  equivalent  of  hydrogen  in  marsh  gas  be  replaced
(by  indirect  means)  by  sodium,  and  the  compound  CH^Na  is  obtained,
this  directly  absorbs  carbonic  anhydride,  forming  a  salt  of  acetic  acid,
CHjNa  -+-  CO2  ^  CjHgNaOj  ;  from  this  acetic  acid  itself  may  be
easily  obtained.  Thus  acetic  acid  decomposes  into  marsh  gas  and
carbonic  anhydride,  and  conversely  is  obtainable  from  them.  The
hydrogen  of  marsh  gas  does  not,  like  that  in  acids,  show  the  property
of  being  directly  replaced  by  metals  ;  i.e.  CH4  does  not  show  any  acid
character  whatever,  but  on  combining  with  the  elements  of  carbonic
anhydride  it  acquires  the  properties  of  an  acid.  The  investigation  of
all  other  organic  acids  shows  similarly  that  their  acid  character  depends
on  their  containing  the  elements  of  carbonic  anhydride.  For  this
i*eason  there  is  no  organic  acid  containing  less  oxygen  in  its  molecule
than  there  is  in  carbonic  anhydride  ;  every  organic  acid  contains  in  its
molecule  at  least  two  atoms  of  oxygen.  In  order  to  express  the  rela-
tion between  carbonic  acid,  HgCOg,  and  organic  acids,  and  in  order  to
understand  the  reason  of  the  acidity  of  these  latter,  it  is  simplest  to
turn  to  that  law  of  substitution  which  shows  (Chapter  VI.)  the  rela-
tion between  the  hydrogen  and  oxygen  compounds  of  nitrogen,  and
permits  us  (Chapter  VIII.)  to  regard  all  hydrocarbons  as  derived
from  methane.  If  we  have  a  given  organic  compound.  A,  which
has  not  the  properties  of  an  acid,  but  contains  hydrogen  connected
to  carbon,  as  in  hydrocarbons,  then  ACO^  will  be  a  monobasic
organic  acid,  A2C0.2  a  bi basic,  A3C02  a  tribasic,  and  so  on — that  is,
each  molecule  of  CO^  transforms  one  atom  of  hydrogen  into  that
state  in  which  it  may  be  replaced  by  metals,  as  in  acids.  This
furnishes  a  direct  proof  that  in  organic  acids  it  is  necessary  to
recognise  the  group  HCOj,  or  carboxyl.  If  the  addition  of  CO.^  raises
the  basicity,  the  removal  of  CO2  lowers  it.  Thus  from  the  bibasic
oxalic  acid,  C2H2O4,  or  phthalic  acid,  C^H^O^,  ])y  eliminating  COj
(easily  effected  experimentally)  we  obtain  the  monobasic  formic  acid,
CH2O2,  or  l^enzoic  acid,  C-Hg02,  respectively.  The  nature  of  carboxyl
is  directly  explained  by  the  law  of  substitution.  Judging  from  what
has  been  stated  in  Chapters  VI.  and  VIII.  concerning  this  law,  it
is  evident  that  CO2  is  CH,  with  the  exchange  of  Hj  for  O2,  and  that
the  hydrate  of  carbonic  anhydride,  H2CO3,  is  C0(0H)2,  that  is,
methane,  in  which  two  parts  of  hydrogen  are  replaced  by  two  parts  of
the  water  radicle  (OH,  hydroxyl)  and  the  other  two  by  oxygen.
Therefore  the  group  C()(OH),  or  carboxyl,  HCO2,  is  a  part  of  carbonic
acid,  and  is  equivalent  to  (OH),  and therefore  also  to  H. That  is,  it

396  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

is  a  univalent  residue  of  carbonic  acid  capable  of  replacing  one  atom
of  hydrogen.  Carbonic  acid  itself  is  a  bibjisic  acid,  both  hydrogen
atoms  in  it  being  replaceable  by  metals,  therefore  carboxyl,  which  con-
tains one  of  the  hydrogen  atoms  of  carbonic  acid,  represents  a  group  in
which  the  hydrogen  is  exchangeable  for  metals.  And  therefore  if
1,  2  .  .  .11  atoms  of  non-metallic  hydrogen  are  exchanged  1,  2  .  .  .
n  times  for  carboxyl,  we  ought  to  obtain  1,  2  .  .  .  n-basic  acids.
Organic  adds  are  the  products  of  the  carboxyl  substitution  i?i
hydrocarbons.^'^  ^^^  If  in  the  saturated  hydrocarbons,  CnHjn+a,  one  part,
of  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  carboxyl,  the  monobasic  saturated  (or  fatty)
acids,  CnH2n  +  i(C02H),  will  be  obtained,  as,  for  instance,  formic  acid,
HCOjH,  acetic  acid,  CHjCOjH,  .  .  .  stearic  acid,  C ,71135  COjH,  «fec.
The  double  substitution  will  give  bibasic  acids,  CnH2n(C02H)(C02H)  ;
for  instance,  oxalic  acid  n  =  0,  malonic  acid  ?i  =  1,  succinic  acid  n  =  2,
«kc.  To  benzene,  CgH^,,  correspond  benzoic  acid,  C5H;,(C02H),  phthalic
acid  (and  its  isomerides),  CcH4(C02H)2,  up  to  mellitic  acid,  Cfi(CC)2H)g,
in  all  of  which  the  basicity  is  equal  to  the  number  of  carboxyl  groups.
As  many  isomerides  exist  in  hydrocarbons,  it  is  readily  understood  not
only  that  such  can  exist  also  in  organic  acids,  but  that  their  number
and  structure  may  be  foreseen.  This  complex  and  most  interesting
branch  of  chemistry  is  treated  separately  in  organic  chemistry.

Carbonic  Oxide. — This  gas  is  formed  whenever  the  combustion  of
organic  substances  takes place  in  the presence  of a  large  excess  of

18  bit  xf  CO-i  is  the  anhydride  of  a  bibasic  acid,  and  carboxyl  correKponds  witli  it,  re-
placing the  hydrogen  of  hydrocarbons,  and  giving  them  the  character  of  comparatively
feeble  acids,  then  SO3  is  the  anhydride  of  an  energetic  bibasic  a<jid,  and  sulphoxyly
S0.2(0H),  corresponds  with  it,  being  capable  of  replacing  the  hydrogen  of  hydrocarbons,
and  forming  comparatively  energetic  sulphur  oxyacida  (sulphonic  acids) ;  for  instance,
CrtH5(C00H),  benzoic  acid,  and  CgH^^.^SOjOH),  benzenesulphoiiic  acid,  are  derived  from
CeH<}.  As  the  exchange  of  H  for  methyl,  CH-,  is  equivalent  to  the  addition  of  CH_.,  the
exchange  of  carboxyl,  ^OOH,  is  e<iuivalent  to  the  addition  of  CO.. ;  so  the  exchange  of  H
for  Bolphoxyl  is  equivalent  to  the  addition  of  SO3.  The  latter  proceeds  directly,  for
instance:  CeHe+SO-.-CeHiiSO.OH).

As,  according  to  the  determinations  of  Thomsen,  the  heat  of  combustion  of  the  vapours
of  acids  RCO..  is  known  where  R  is  a  hydrocarbon,  and  tlie  heat  of  (combustion  of  the
hydrocarbons  R  tliemselves,  it  may  be  seen  that  the  formation  of  acids,  RCO.^,  from
R  +  CO...  is  always  ticcompanied  by  a  small  absorption  or  development  of  heat.  We  give
the  heats  of  combustion  in  thousands  of  calories,  referred  to  the  jnolecular  weights  of
the  substances : —

R  =  H._.  CH4  C._>H(j  C,;H,j

t>H-4  212  870  777

RCO..=  09  4  225  887*  7WJ

Thus  H.2  corresponds  with  formic  acid,  CH  >0,j ;  benzene,  CgH^,  with  benzoic  acid,  C7H0O  ..
The  data  for  the  latter  are  taken  from  Stohmann,  and  refer  to  the  solid  condition.  For
formic  acid  Stohmann  gives  the  heat  of  combustion  as  60,000  calories  in  a  liquid  state,
but  in  a  state  of  vapour,  tU'O  thonsand  units,  which  is  much  less  than  according  to
Thomsen.

or  CARBUS WITH OXVGEtT  1

im-aiiUeat'ent  chnrcual  ;  tlie  air  first  burna  the  carljon  intii  carbonic
anh;dri<le,  but  this  in  penetrating  through  the  re<I-hot  cimrcoat  ie
traiiafonned  into  carbonic  oxide,  CO.j  +  C  =5  2C0.  By  this  reaction
carlxinic  oxide  is  prepared  by  passing  carbonic  anhydride  through  char-
cohJ  at  a  red  heat.  It  may  he  separated  from  the  excess  of  carbonio
anhydride  by  paiisiiig  it  through  a  solutiun  of  alkali,  wjiich  does  not
absorb  carbonic  oxide.  Tliis  reduction  of  carbonic  anhydride  e.'iplainB
why  carbonic  oxide  is  formed  in  ordinary  clear  Hre^  where  the  incoming
air  passiie  over  a  large  surface  of  heated  coal.  A  blue  Hame  is  then
oliserveU  burning  ahuve  the  coal  :  this  ia  the  burning  carbonic  oxide.
When  charcoal  ia  burnt  in  stacks,  oi-  when  a  thick  layer  of  coal  is
burning  in  a  brazier,  and  under  many  similar  circumstances,  carbonic
oxide  is  also  formed.  In  metallurgical  processes,  for  instance  when
iron  is  amelted  from  the  ore,  very  often  the  same  process  of  cmiversion
of  carbonic  anhydride  into  carbonic  oxide  i^ccurs,  especially  if  the
combustion  of  the  coal  he  effected  in  high,  so-callc"!  blast,  funiaces  and
ovens,  where  the  air  etiters  at  the  lower  part  and  is  comjielled  to  pass
through  a  thick  layer  of  incandescent  coal.  In  this  way,  also,  com-
bustion with  llame  may  be  obtainetl  from  those  kinds  of  fuel  which
under  ordinary  conditions  bum  without  (lame  :  for  iiistnnce,  anthracite,

I^K coke,charcoa].  Heating  by  means

^^1  of  a  gas-producer — that  is, an

^^■Tftpparalus  producing  combustible

^^V  curbonic oxide from fuel — ij

^^ft  carried  on  in  the  aiinie  manner.'"

^^K In  transforming  one  part  of  char-

la  giu-prodac.^

ie<l  into  mflui

R  tthicli  ali-

di|^t  ile&BJty  ui<I  liuye  i
or  incumlrtuLible  AftmiAi
sorb  h«t)  ure  not  lu  oapable  i>(  KJving  u
bigh  temponitiire  in  onliimij  tumiii«» —
for  iiwlAtiH',  fir  caiiea,  peat,  the  lower
laaAt  of  cnU,  &'C- — tbe  ume  gu  i<  ob-
tkined  M  with  ths  Iwgt  kiiidii  of  co&l.
beaUH  the  w&t«t  ctniilHtiHen  on  cooliug,
and  the  uh«  urnl  esTtb)'  mslttic  remain

the  Kiu-ptadnc«r. Tho  conRtroctiou
prodtinr  i>  men  Irum  tlif  hc-

ipMiying  drkwiDg. Tlw  fuel  lien  ou

tire-fawp«  0,  the  air  enten  thiougb

n  ud  the  uh-hole  (drnwu  by  tlie

dtwigfal  nltheuliiiaiMy  ut  the  slave

I  moMM

<Ahy  a  bloH
la  at  vkItbh. The  x*

coal  into  carbonic  oxide  2,4:20  lieat<  units  Are  given  out,  and  on  burning  Ix
carbonic  anhydride  ^,080  heiit  units.  It  ia  evident  that  on  transforming'l
the  charcoal  first  into  carbunic  oxide  we  obtain  a  gas  which  in  bumin^a
is  capable  of  giving  out  5,6C0  heat  units  for  one  part  of  charcoal.  Thtvl
preparatory  transformation  of  fuel  into  carbonic  oxide,  or  produceri^
gas  containing  a  niixtui'e  of  carbonic  oxide  {about  ^  by  volume)  e
nitrogen  (|{  volume),  in  ruauy  coses  presents  most  important  advantages,  j
as  it  is  easy  to  completely  burn  gaseous  fuel  witliout  an  i
which  would  lower  the  temperature.^'*  In  staves  where  solid  fuel  isl
burnt  it  is  impossible  to  effect  the  complete  combustion  of  the  variousv
kinds  of  fuel  without  admitting  an  excess  of  air.  Gaseous  fuel,  such  as  I
carbonic  oxide,  is  easily  completely  mixed  with  air  and  burnt  without^
excess  of  it.  If,  in  addition  to  this,  the  air  and  gas  required  for  thel
combustion  be  previously  heated  by  means  of  the  heat  which  wouldfl
otherwise  be  uselessly  carried  olTin  the  products  of  combustion  (smoke)"  1
it  is  easy  to  reach  a  high  temperature,  so  high  (altout  1,{:!00°)  thatl
platinum  may  be  melted.  Huch  an  arrangement  is  known  as  n  ivgt't.
rative  furnani;.^*  By  means  of  this  process  not  only  may  the  htgliH
temperatures  indispensable  in  many  industries  be  obtained  (for  instance

with  a  vglve,  into  the  gne  liiniii  V. The  iclilltion  of  futi  ouflit  l-i  pram

w  to  prevent  the  genernited  gax  escaping;  lienee  the  gpiiee  A  i*  kept  filled  slth  the  «

Inutibla  nmteriitl  and  corered  with  n  lid.

">  An  eicem  ot  air  Imrers  tlie  tempenitnre  of  comhaation,  bemn!^  it  i
ittmit,  H  expl>iine<1  in  Chapter  in. In  ordinary  fnmacas  the  excesH  dI
(oar  times  greater  thun  the  quantity  rngnired  (or  perfect  cambaotioi
fnnuoee  [vith  flre.lMLra,  reflated  air  anpply,  and  correaponding  chimney  dmtrghtj  it  .
neceuafy  to  introdaue  twit^  as  much  air  aa  ia  neceeaary,  otherwise  the  amoke  conUd
inach  carbunic  oxide.

"  It  in  manulaetarifi  it  ii  necessary,  for  inatance,  to  maintain  the  tempenttue  in  ^
(umnce  at  1.000^,  the  flaiae  pasees  oat  at  this  or  a  higher  Iflmperatnre,  and  tiiemf
mach  fuel  ia  lost  in  the  smohe.  For  the  dranght  ot  the  chimney  n  temperature  of  IM
to  100°  is  aulHcient,  and  therefore  the  remaining  heat  onght  io  be  ntiliaed.  For  ti
purpose  the  flues  are  uuried  under  botlera  or  other  heating  apparatua.  1
heating  ot  the  air  is  the  best  means  of  ntilisation  when  a  high  temperature  isdesind  (aei

teSl).

"  Regenerative  tomar
IN60  in  many  indastries,  a
tially  in  obtaining  high  t
i-ombuttion  bum  the  funu

IS  were  introduced  by  the  Brothers  Siemens  about  Ihi
rl  mark  a  moat  iiii[>artant  prugreiis  in  tbe  Doe  o(  fuel,
tmperatnrea. The  principle  is  aa  follows: The  produot*  e
:e  are  led  into  n  fljamber,  I,  and  heat  up  the  i -  ■ - -
then  pnas  into  the  outlet  flue ;  when  the  britka  are  at  a  red  heat  the  product*  o(  «
buatioti  are  pnased  (by  altering  the  valvesf  into  another  adjoining  chamber,  II,  ■
requisite  tor  the  combastion  ot  the  generator  gaaea  is  passed  throagh  I. In  passing
aboul  the  inoandeacent  bricks  tlie  air  ia  heated,  and  the  bricks  are  cooled—that  m,
heal  of  the  amoke  is  retonied  into  the  tomace.  Thf<  air  ia  then  pasaefl  throagh  II,  aad  U
KMoke  through  I, The  regenerative  burners  tor  illnminating  gas  are  Founded
uune  principle,  the  prodncli  of  combuation  heat  tbe  incoming  air  and  gas,  the  I
tare  is  higher,  the  light  brighter,  and  on  wonomy  ot  gas  ia  effectvd.  Abnolnte  pi
in these  appliances  haa,  ol  ooutse,  not yet  been  attained; tnrthcr  improvenMnt  1
1 Bb'll  piMsible,  but  di»io('iation  impoaes  a  limit  becanse  at  a.  certain  hij

COMrol'NDS 01*  I'.UillON WITH o.NVdES ASI) KlTltOtiKS 301)

I, glftss- working,  steel -luettiug,  iic),  but  great  advanUige  also  "  in  gained
I M  regards  the  tiuantity  of  fuel,  because  tlie  tmnsuiission  of  heat  to  tho
I  object  to  be  heatecl,  other  conditions  being  equal,  is  detennined  by  the

'  fie  re  lice  of  t«in[ieratgreB.

The  transformation  cif  carbonic  anhydride,  by  means  of  charcoal,
i  into  carbonic  oxide  (C  +  CO^  =  CO  +  CO)  is  considered  a  reversible
\  reaction,  because  at  u  high  temperature  the  carl>onii.'  oxide  splits  up
I  into  CHrbon  and  carbonic  aniiydride,  aa  Sainte-Claire  Devillo  showed  by
I  using  the  method  of  the  'i-uld  and  hot  tu1>e.' Inside  a  tube  heated  in

I  furnace  another  thin  niet;Ulic  (silvered copper)  tulie  is  fittetl,  through
' *liiih a  constant stream  of  cold water flows. The  earboinc  oxide

coming  int"  conluct  with  the  heated  walls  of  the  exterior  tulw  forms

charcoal,  and  itii  minute  particles  settle  in  tho  form  uf  lampblack  on
iowei'  side  of  the  cold  tulie,  and,  since  they  are  cooled,  do not
I Act  further  on  the  oxygen  or  carbonic  anhydride  formed." A  series

I eombinfttiiitia  i\a  not  euaue,  pouible  temper&taree  being  limitcil  by  rcvern  rpactiimH.

I Here,  lU  iii  «  nurnber  oF  otiier  eaten,  the  ttulher  inveBtieotiun  of  tti>^  niulter  mast  prove
of  dir^'t  taIdc  from  a  practical  point  of  viev.

*^  AtSntniglitit  kppcnr*  absurd,  uHle*tB,iuiilparado(U]altuUi5«nMu1)'  one- third  of  the
heui  wbich  Inel  cui  develop,  by  taming  it  into  gnu.  AetD&Uythe  Hidvaiitage  in  ononnaDa,
HHpeciallT  for  producing  higb  tempera tiir*!fi,  as  it  already  Been  from  the  fact  that  fneU  rich
in  oxygen  ttor  instttnce,  wood)  when  dampftrc  imable.vrith  any  kind  of  hearth  whatever,  to
give  the  temperature  reqnired  (or gluMB- melting  arateel-caatin);,  whilst  in  tliegan-pnidiicer
llley  fumiiih  exactly  the  ARnte  gaa  aa  the  driest  and  moat  carbonaeeoua  Fael,  Id  order  to
andentand  the  priiicipie  whii-h  is  here  invoLved,  it  is  sufficient  to  rememlier  that  a  large
aiDDiuit  of  Ileal,  bnt  lutFing  a  low  teiuperatare,  is  in  many  canes  of  no  osa  irhatever.  We
Kre  unable  here  to  enter  Inlii  nil  the  deUilB  of  the  complicated  matter  of  the  application
til  fuel,  and  (ucUier  particnlsTB  ninsl  be  Bought  for  in  Npecinl  technical  lieatiwa.  The
iring  foolnulefi,  however,  contain  certain  fundamental  Rgurea  for  ciitculetioi:a  eon-

' eeming  combustiott,

"  The  Hrst  pn>dact  of  cambuatiun  of  clwrcoal  is  ali?aya  carbonit  atdjydride,  and  not
oarhunic  oiide.  This  is  Been  from  the  taot  (hat  witli  a.  Bfaallow  Isfer  of  charcoal  (les*
than  a  decimetre  if  the  chari.-iial  lie  closely  packed)  carlioDic  oxide  ii  not  formed  at  all.
It  ia  not  even  produced  with  a  ileep  layer  ut  charcoal  il  the  tomperatare  is  not  above  SI
and  the  cnmnl  of  air  or  oxygen  is  vury  slow.  With  a  rapid  current  of  air  tlie  charcoal
beoomeB  red-hot,  and  the  teuigierature  riaea,  and  then  carbonic  oiide  nppeura  (Liing  ISBH),
Brnel  (IH91)  found  that  lielow  UIIE°  Earbonic  oiide  is  alwayg  accompanied  by  CO^,  and
Ibst  Um  rormation  of  CO.,  begins  about  400°.  Naunanu  and  Fistor  detenmned  that  th
MocUoD  of  carbonic  anhydride  with  carbon  commences  at  about  6G0°,  and  that  betwee
water  and  carbon  at  about  S0()°.  At  the  latter  temperature  carbonic  anhydride  ia  formed,
and  only  with  a  rise  of  temperature  ia  carbonic  oude  formed  (Long)  from  the  action  of
the  carbonic  anhydride  on  the  carbon,  and  (roui  the  reaction  CO...  +  Hj  =  CO-t  H^.
Bathke  {ISSl)  showed  that  at  no  teaperatanj  wlmtevei  is  the  reaction  aeeipresBed  by  the
equation  CO] -H  C  •- 3C0.n  oomplete ;  a  part  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  remains,  and  tiODf;
tbttennined  that  at  about  1.000°  not  leas  than  8  p.c.  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  reuuune
nntialiafoTmed  into  carbonic  oiide,  even  alter  the  aotion  has  been  continued  For  sevarol
boon.  Tlie  endothemial  reactiona,  CTaHaO-CO,,  +  aHj.  and  CO -r  HjO  -  CO,  i  Hj.
an  jiul  OS  iucouipleW.  This  is  mode  clear  if'  we  uotn  that  on  tlie  one  hand  the
*]MTe-roentioned  reactions  are  nil  reversible,  and  therefore  lK>nnde<l  by  a  limit;  and,  on
Uia  other  luuid,  thnt  at  about  SOU"  oiygen  Iwgins  to  cunihinf  with  byilrogen  and  carbon,

400  rRlNOIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

of  electric  sparks  also  decomposes  carbonic  oxide  into  carbonic  anhydride
and  carbon,  and  if  the  carbonic  anhydride  be  removed  by  alkali  com-
plete decomposition  may  be  obtained  (Deville).'^^  ^''*  Aqueous  vapour,
which  is  so  similar  to  carbonic  anhydride  in  many  respects,  acts,  at  a
high  temperature,  on  charcoal  in  an  exactly  similar  way,  C  -h  H^O
=  H.2  4-  CO.  From  2  volumes  of  carbonic  anhydride  with  charcoal
4  volumes  of  carbonic  oxide  (2  molecules)  are  obtained,  and
precisely  the  same  from  2  volumes  of  water  vap<jur  with  charcoal
4  volumes  of  a  gas  consisting  of  hydrogen  and  carbonic  oxide  (Hj  -f  CO)
are  formed. This  mixture  of  combustible  gases  is  called  wat^r  gas,"^'^

and  also  that  the  lower  limits  of  dissociation  of  water,  carbonic  anhydride,  and  carbonic
oxide  lie  near  one  another  between  500°  and  1,200°.  For  water  and  carbonic  oxide  the
lower  limit  of  the  commencement  of  dissociation  is  unknown,  but  judging  from  the  pob-
lished  data  (according  to  Le  Chatelier,  188H)  that  of  carbonic  anhydride  may  be  taken
as  about  1,050°.  Even  at  about  200°  half  the  carbonic  anhydride  dissociates  if  the
pressure  be  small,  about  0*001  atmosphere.  At  the  atmospheric  pressure,  not  more  than
■0*05  p.c.  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  decomposes.  The  reason  of  the  influence  of  pressure
is  here  evidently  that  the  splitting  up  of  carbonic  anhydride  into  carbonic  oxide  and  oxygen
is  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  volume  (as  in  the  case  of  the  dissociation  of  nitric
peroxide.  See  Chapter  VI.,  Note  46).  As  in  stoves  and  lamps,  and  also  with  explosive
iiubstances,  the  temperature  is  not  higher  than  2,000^  to  2,500'^,  it  is  evident  that  although
the  partial  i)ressure  of  carbonic  anhydride  is  small,  still  its  dissociation  cannot  here  be
■considerable,  and  probably  does  not  exceed  5  p.c.

**  »»»*  Besides  which  L,  Mond  (18JK))  showed  that  tlie  powder  of  freshly  reduced
metallic  nickel  (obtained  by  heating  the  oxide  to  redness  in  a  stream  of  hydrogen)  is  able,*
when  heated  even  to  850'^,  to  completely  decompose  carbonic  oxide  into  COj  and  carbon,
which  remains  with  the  nickel  and  is  easily  removed  from  it  by  heating  in  a  stream  of
4iir.  Here  2CO-CO2  +  C.  It  should  be  remarked  that  heat  is  evolved  in  this  reaction
(Note  25),  and  therefore  that  the  influence  of  *  contact '  may  here  play  a  part.  Indeed,
this  reaction  must  be  classed  among  the  most  remarkable  instances  of  the  influence  of
contact,  esi)ecially  as  metals  analogous  to  Ni  (Fe  and  Co)  do  not  effect  this  reaction
{see  Chapter  II.,  Note  17).

**  A  molecular  weight  of  this  gas,  or  2  volumes  CO  (2H  grams),  on  combustion
•(forming  COj)  gives  out  l>8,()00  heat  units  (Thomsen  07,900  calories).  A  molecular  weight
of  hydrogen,  H.,  (or  2  volumes),  develops  on  burning  into  liquid  water  ()9,(H)0  lieat  units
(according  to  Thomsen  68,3<K)),  but  if  it  forms  aqueous  vaiwur  58,000  heat  units.  Char-
<M>al,  resolving  itself  by  combustion  into  the  molecular  (juantity  of  CO,,  (2  volunie!>i),
develops  97,000  heat  units.  From  the  data  furnished  by  theso  exothermal  reactions  it
follows:  (1)  that  the  oxidation  of  charcoal  into  carbonic  oxide  dt'velops  29,000 heat  units;
(2)  that  the  reaction  C  v CO, -'iCO  ahnorbs  89,000  heat  units;  (8)  C  +  H ..0  =  11.,  CO
absarhs  (if  the  water  be  in  a  stat*-  of  vapour)  29.000  calori^-s,  but  if  the  water  Ik*  litjuid
40,000  calories  (almost  as  much  as  C  -t  CO.>) ;  (4)  C  +  H.,0  CO..  -  2H,,  (i6«or6»  (if  the
water  bo  in  a  state  of  vainnir)  19,000  heat  units;  (5)  the  reaction  CO  +  HjO^  CO,.  H.,.
develops  10,000  heat  units  if  the  water  be  in  the  state  of  vaiK)nr  ;  and  (0)  the  decomix>si.
tion  cxpresst^l  by  the  equation  2CO-  C  +  CO..i(N()te  24  bis)  is  accompanied  by  the  evolu-
Hon  of  89,000  units  of  heat.

Hence  it  follows  that  2  volumes  of  CO  or  H .,  burning'  into  CO..  or  H,.0  develop
almost  tin*  same  amount  of  heat,  just  as  alsii  the  heat  efFects  corresiHinding  with  th«'
equations

c:  ^  H..0  -  CO  I  H...
C  +  c6,  -CO  I  C()
are  n»'arly  equal.

But  a<[ueou8  vupour  (and  only  when  strongly  superheated,  otherwise
it  cools  the  charcoal)  only  acts  on  charcoal  to  form  a  large  amount  of
carhonic  oxide  at  a  very  high  temperature  (at  which  carbonic  anhydride
dissociates)  ;  it  begins  ui  reAct  at  about  1300°,  formiuj;  carbonic
anhydride  according  to  the  equation  C  +  2HjO  =  COj  +  iH,.  Besides
this,  carbonic  oxide  on  splitting  up  forms  carbonic  anliydride,  and
therefore  water  gas  always  contains  a  mixture"'  in  which  hydrogen
predominates,  the  volume  of  carbonic  oxide  being  comparatively  less,

team  and  chucoal  at  a  vlii(«  iipaA,  contains  about  &0  p.c.
irbonic  oxide,  aboat  S  p.c-  of  carbonic  anhydride,  the
!  chucoal  unci  sir.  Compured  with  producer  gaa,  wliich
gas  much  richer  in  combastible  iDsttor,  and  therefore
in  of  the  greatest  atiHtJ^

•'  IFa/er  ffiw,  obtained  from
of  hydrogen,  kbonl  41  p.c.  of
remainder  being  nitrogen  from  t
cont4una  much  nitrogen,  thi«  ia
cupxble  of  giving  high  (cmpent

ifonic  anhydride  coaldbe  an  readily  obtained  in  as  ptirea  state  oa  water,  then  CO  might  be
lireporud  directly  from  CO.j  *  C,  and  iu  that  emr  the  utiliftatiou  of  tlie  heat  of  the  carbon
would  be  the  name  aa  in  water  gaK,  because  CO  evolvee  an  miuA  beat  oa  IL,,  and  erenmore
if  Ibe  temperature  of  the  Binoke  be  over  IDO ',  and  the  water  renuioiiintlie  form  of  vapour
(Note  3G).  But  prodacor  gas  cuntainn  a  large  proportion  of  nitrogen,  so  that  its  eSectire
temperature  ii  below  that  given  by  water  goa  ;  therefore  in  places  where  a  particularly
high  tamperatim  is  required  (for  instance,  for  lighting  by  means  of  ini;ande»cent  lime  or
magnesia,  or  for  steel  melting,  S:c.).  and  where  tbe  gaa  can  btt  easily  distributed  through
pipen,  water  gas  is  ■(  present  held  in  high  estimation,  but  when  (in  ordinary  furnaces,
ni-heating.  glaas-aeHiDg,  atid  other  tamaceitj  n  very  high  temperature  is  not  required,
and  there  is  no  need  to  convey  the  gas  in  pipen.  producer  gss'  is  geuer&lly  preferred  on
account  of  the  simplicity  of  its  preparation,  eBpecinlly  as  for  water  gaa  such  a  high
leinperatnro  is  required  tliat  the  plant  soon  becomes  damaged.

There  ace  nomerona  systemH  fur  making  waler  gua,  but  the  AmoHoan  {latent  of  T.  Love
is  geooially  uued.  The  gas  is  preimred  in  a  cylindrical  generator,  into  which  hot  air  is
introduced,  in  order  to  raise  the  coke  in  it  (o  u  white  heal.  The  products  of  combustioD
i>antaining  carbonic  oxide  are  atilised  for  saperheating  steam,  which  in  then  passed
over  the  white  hot  coke.  Water  gas,  or  »  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  carbonic  oxide,  in
thus  oblnined.

Water  gas  is  sometimes  called  '  thf  fuel  of  the  futurr,'  because  it  is  appUcable  to  oil
purposes,  develops  a  high  temperature,  and  is  therelore  available,  not  only  tor  domestio
and  industrial  nsea,  but  also  for  gaa-motorg  and  tor  lighting.  For  the  latter  purpose
platinum,  lime,  magnesia,  zirconia,  and  similar  anhstances  (oa  in  tbe  Drummond  light.
Chapter  III.),  are  rendered  incandescent  in  the  flame,  or  else  the  gas  is  rarbuTftttd —
tliat  is,  mixed  with  the  vapours  of  volatile  hydrocarbons  (generally  benzene  or  naphtha,
naphthalene,  or  simply  naplitlta  gas),  which  commDnicste  to  the  pale  flame  of  cstbonic
oxide  and  hydrogen  a  great  brilliancy,  owing  to  the  high  tempecatare  deielopcd  by  the
rombuation  of  the  non-luminous  gase«.  As  water  gas,  poBSeseuig  these  properties,  may
be  prepared  at  central  works  aiid  conveyed  in  pipes  to  the  consumers,  and  as  it  may  be
lirodacedfroin  any  kind  of  fuel,  aud  ought  to  be  much  cheaper  than  ordinary  gas,  it  may
ai  a  matter  ol  fact  be  expected  that  in  coarse  ol  lime  (when  experience  shall  have  deter-
mined the  cheapest  and  best  way  to  prepare  it)  it  will  uo(  only  supplant  ordinary  gon,  but
will  with  advantage  everywhere  rephice  the  ordinary  forms  ol  fuel,  which  in  many  roviiects
are  inconTenieot.  At  present  its  cdnsumptiou  spreads  iirincipally  for  lighting  purposes,
and  for  Dse  in  gas-engines  iiutead  of  ordinary  illuminating  gas.  In  some  cases  Dowkhi
gas  is  prepared  in  iirodncers.  This  is  a  mixture  of  water  and  producer  gases  obtained
liy  passing  >il«ani  into  an  ordiiuuy  producer  (Note  19),  when  (he  teini>enilure  ol  the
carbon  ban  become  sufficiently  high  lor  the  reoclion  C-t  RjOsCO  +  H.,,

VOL,  I.  D  K

402  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

wliilst  tMte  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  increases  as  the  temperature
of  the  reaction  decreases  (generally  it  is  more  than  3  per  cent.)

Metals  like  iron  and  zinc  which  at  a  red  heat  are  capable  of
decomposing  water  with  the  formation  of  hydrogen,  also  decompose
carbonic  anhydride  with  the  formation  of  carbonic  oxide  ;  so  both
the  ordinary  products  of  complete  combustion,  water  and  carbonic
anhydride,  are  very  similar  in  their  reactions,  and  we  shall  therefore
presently  compare  hydrogen  and  carbonic  oxide.  The  metallic  oxides
of  the  above-mentioned  metals,  when  reduced  by  charcoal,  also  give
carbonic  oxide.  Priestley  obtained  it  by  heating  charcoal  with  zinc
oxide.  As  free  carbonic  anhydride  may  be  transformed  into  carbonic
oxide,  so,  in  precisely  the  same  way,  may  that  carbonic  acid  which  is
in  a  state  of  combination  ;  hence,  if  magnesium  or  barium  carbo-
nates (MgCOg  or  BaCOs)  be  heated  to  redness  with  charcoal,  or  iron
or  zinc,  carbonic  oxide  will  be  produced — for  instance,  it  is  obtained  by
heating  an  intimate  mixture  of  9  parts  of  chalk  and  1  part  of  charcoal
in  a  clay  retort.

Many  organic  substances  ^^  on  being  heated,  or  under  the  action  of
various  agents,  yield  carbonic  oxide  ;  amongst  these  are  many  organic
or  carboxylic  acids.  The  simplest  are  formic  and  oxalic  acids.  Formic
acid,  CHjOg,  on  being  heated  to  200°,  easily  decomposes  into  carbonic
oxide  and  water,  CHjOa  =  00  +  H.^O.^^  ^**  Usually,  however,  car-
bonic oxide  is  prepared  in  laboratories,  not  from  formic  but  from  oxalic
acid,  C2H2O4,  the  more  so  as  formic  acid  is  itself  prepared  from  oxalic
acid.  The  latter  acid  is  easily  obtained  by  the  miction  of  nitric  acid  on
starch,  sugar,  &c.  ;  it  is  also  found  in  nature.  Oxalic  acid  is  easily
decomposed  by  heat ;  its  crystals  first  lose  water,  then  partly  volatilise,
but  the  greater  part  is  decomposed.  The  decomposition  is  of  the
following  nature  :  it  splits  up  into  water,  carbonic  oxide,  and  carbonic
anhydride,2s  C^H^O^  =  H2O  +  COj  -f  CO.  This  decomposition  is
generally  practically  eflfected  by  mixing  oxalic  acid  with  strong  sul-

^  The  so-called  yellow  prussiatc,  K.|FeC(jNe,  on  being  heated  with  ten  parts  of  strong
Hulphuric  acid  forms  a  considerable  quantity  of  very  pure  carbonic  oxide  quite  free  from
carbonic  anhydride..

^  ^^^  To  perform  this  reaction,  the  formic  acid  is  mixed  with  glycerine,  becaase  when
heated  alone  it  volatilises  much  below  its  temi)erature  of  decom^wsition.  When  heated
with  sulphuric  acid  the  salts  of  formic  acid  yield  carbonic  oxide.

^  The  decomposition  of  formic  and  oxalic  acids,  with  the  formation  of  carbonic  oxide,
considering  these  acids  as  carboxyl  derivatives,  may  be  explained  as  follows  : — The  first
is  H(COOH)  and  the  second  (C00H).2,  or  Ho  in  \*hich  one  or  both  halves  of  the  hydrogen
aire  exchanged  for  carboxyl;  therefore  they  are  equal  to  H..  +  COj  and  H3+2CO2;  but
H.J  reacts  with  CO2,  as  has  lH»en  stated  above,  forming  CO  and  H.^O.  From  this  it  is  also
ivident  that  oxalic  acid  on  losing  CO^  forms  formic  acid,  and  also  that  the  latter  may
prrneed  from  CO  +  H^O,  as  we  shall  see  further  on.

COMPOUNDS  OF  CAI^BOX  WITH  OXYGEN  AND NITROGEN 403

phuric  acid,  because  the  latter  assists  the  decomposition  by  taking  up
the  water.  On  heating  a  mixture  of  oxalic  and  sulphuric  acids  a
mixture  of  carbonic  oxide  and  carbonic  anhydride  is  evolved.  This
mixture  is  passed  through  a  solution  of  an  alkali  in  order  to  absorb
the  carbonic  anhydride,  whilst  the  carbonic  oxide  passes  on.^^  *'**

In  its  physical  projyerties  carbonic  oxide  resembles  nitrogen  ;  this
is  explained  by  the  equality  of  their  molecular  weights.  The  absence
of  colour  and  smell,  the  low  temperature  of  the  absolute  boiling  point,
—  140°  (nitrogen,  —  146®),  the  property  of  solidifying  at  —  200®
(nitrogen,  -  202°),  the  boiling  point  of  -  190°  (nitrogen,  -203°),
and  the  slight  solubility  (Chapter  I.,  Note  30),  of  carbonic  oxide  are
almost  the  same  as  in  those  of  nitrogen.  The  chemical  properties  of
both  gases  are,  however,  very  different,  and  in  these  carbonic  oxide
resembles  hydrogen.  Carbonic  oxide  bums  with  a  blue  flame,  giving
2  volumes  of  carbonic  anhydride  from  2  volumes  of  carbonic  oxide,  just
as  2  volumes  of  hydrogen  give  2  volumes  of  aqueous  vapour.  It
explodes  with  oxygen,  in  the  eudiometer,  like  hydrogen.*^  When
breathed  it  acts  as  a  strong  poison,  being  absorbed  by  the  blood  ;  ''*
this explains the action  of charcoal fumes, the products of the

******  Greshoff  (188«)  showed  that  with  a  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver,  iodoform,  CHI-„
forms  CO  according  to  the  equation  CHI5  +  SAgNO^  4  H.p  -  3AgI  +  3HNO3  +  CO.  The
reaction  is  immediate  and  is  complete.

®  It  is  remarkable  that,  according  to  tlie  investigations  of  Dixon,  perfectly  dry
carbonic  oxide  does  not  explode  with  oxygen  when  a  spark  of  low  intensity  is  used,  but
an  explosion  takes  place  if  there  is  the  slightest  admixture  of  moisture.  L.  Meyer,
however,  showed  that  sparks  of  an  electric  discharge  of  considerable  intensity  produce
an  explosion.  N.  N.  Beketoff  demonstrated  that  combustion  proceed)  and  spreads
slowly  unless  there  be  perfect  dryness.  I  think  that  this  may  be  explained  by  the  fact
that  water  with  carbonic  oxide  gives  carbonic  anhydride  and  hydrogen,  but  hydrogen
with  oxygen  gives  hydrogen  peroxide  (Chapter  VII.),  which  with  carbonic  oxide  fonns
carbonic  anhydride  and  water.  The  water,  therefore,  is  renewed,  and  again  serves  the
same  purpose.  But  it  may  be  that  here  it  is  necessary  to  acknowledge  a  simple  contact
influence.  After  Dixon  had  shown  the  influence  of  tnvces  of  moisture  upon  the  reaction
CO  +  O,  many  researches  were  made  of  a  similar  nature.  The  fullest  mvestigation  into
the  influence  of  moisture  u|)on  the  course  of  many  chemical  reactions  was  made  by  Baker
in  1894.  He  showed  that  with  perfect  dryness,  many  chemical  transformations  (for
example,  tlie  formation  of  ozone  from  oxygen,  the  deconi^wsition  of  AgO,  KCIO5  under
the  action  of  heat,  &c.)  proceeds  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  in  the  presence  of
moisture ;  but  that  in  many  cases  traces  of  moisture  have  an  evident  influence.  We  may
mention  the  following  instances :  (1)  Dry  SO5  does  not  act  upon  dry  CaO  or  CuO ;  (2)
l)erfectly  dry  sal-ammoniac  does  not  give  NH5  witli  dry  CaO,  but  simply  volatilises ;  (:3)
<lry  NO  and  Odo  not  react ;  (4)  perfectly  dry  NH3  and  HCl  do  not  combine ;  (5)  perfectly
dry  sal-ammoniac  does  not  dissociate  at  850^  (Chapter  VII.,  Note  15  bis) ;  and  (G)  perfectly
«lry  chlorine  does  not  act  upon  metals,  &c.

'^  Carbonic  oxide  is  very  rapid  in  its  action,  because  it  is  absorbed  by  the  blood  in
the  same  way  as  oxygen.  In  addition  to  this,  the  absorption  s|)ectrum  of  the  blood
<hanges  so  that  by  the  help  of  blood  it  is  easy  to  detect  the  slightest  traces  of  carbonic
oxide  in  the  air.  M.  A.  Kapoustin  found  that  lineeeil  oil  and  therefore  oil  paints,  are
capable  of  giving  off  carbonic  oxide  while  drying  (absorbing  oxygen).

404  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

incomplete  combustion  of  charcoal  and  other  carbonaceous  fue
Owing  to  its  faculty  of  combining  with  oxygen,  carbonic  oxide  acts
a  powerful  reducing  agent,  taking  up  the  oxygen  from  many  coinpouii<
at  a  red  heat,  and  being  itself  transfonned  into  carbonic  anhydrid
The  reducing  action  of  carbonic  oxide,  however,  is  (like  that  of  bydr
gen.  Chapter  II.)  naturally  confined  to  those  oxides  which  easily  pa
with  their  oxygen — as,  for  instance,  copper  oxide — whilst  the  oxid
of  magnesium  or  potassium  are  not  reduced.  Metallic  iron  itself
capable  of  reducing  carbonic  anhydride  to  carbonic  oxide,  just  as
liberates  the  hydrogen  from  water.  Copper,  which  does  not  decompo
water,  does  not  decompose  carbonic  oxide.  If  a  platinum  wire  heatc
to  300°,  or  spongy  platinum  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  be  plungi
into  a  mixture  of  carbonic  oxide  and  oxygen,  or  of  hydrogen  ai
oxygen,  the  mixture  explodes.  These  reactions  are  very  similar  1
those  peculiar  to  hydrogen.  The  following  important  distinctio:
however,  exists  between  them — namely  :  the  molecule  of  hydrogen
composed  of  H.^,  a  group  of  elements  divisible  into  two  like  part
whilst,  as  the  molecule  of  carbonic  oxide,  CO,  contains  unlike  atoms  <
carbon  and  oxygen,  in  none  of  its  reactions  of  combination  can  it  gii
two  molecules  of  matter  containing  its  elements.  This  is  particular]
noticeable  in  the  action  of  chlorine  on  hydrogen  and  on  carbonic  oxic
respectively  ;  with  the  former  chlorine  forms  hydrogen  chloride,  an
with  the  latter  it  produces  the  so-called  carbonyl  chloride,  COCI^
that  is  to  say,  the  molecule  of  hydrogen,  H2,  under  the  action  <
chlorine  divides,  forming  two  molecules  of  hydrochloric  acid,  whilst  th
molecule  of  carbonic  oxide  enters  in  its  entirety  into  the  molecule  of  eai
bonyl  chloride.  This  characterises  the  so-called  diatomic  or  bivalent  n
actions  of  radicles  or  residues.  H  is  a  inonatoniic  residue  or  radicl
like  K,  CI,  and  others,  whilst  carbonic  oxide,  CO,  is  an  indivisible  (ur
decomposable)  bivalent  radicle,  equivalent  to  H.2  and  not  to  H,  an
therefore  combining  with  X2  and  interchangeable  with  H2.  Th:
distinction  is  evident  from  the  annexed  comparison  :

HH,  hydrogen.  CO,  cjirlnmic  oxide.

HCl,  hydrochloric  acid.  COCl.^,  carbonyl  chloride.

HKO,  potiish.  CO(KO).2,  potassium  carbonate.

HNH2,  ammonia.  CO(NH.2)2i  urea.

HCH3,  methane.  C0(CH3).>,  acetone.

HHO,  water.  CO(HO)2,  carbonic  acid.

Such  monatomic  (univalent)  residues,  X,  as  H,  CI,  Na,  NOj,  NH^
CII3,  CO.2H  (carboxyl),  OH,  and  others,  in  accordance  with  the  la^
of  substitution,  combine  together,  forming  compounds,  XX'  ;  and  wit)

COMPOUNDS  OF  CARBON  WITH  OXYGEN  AND  NITKOGEN 405

oxygen,  or  in  general  with  diatomic  (bivalent)  residues,  Y — for  instance,
O,  CO,  CHj,  S,  Ca,  ifec.  forming  compounds  XX'Y  ;  but  diatomic
residues,  Y,  sometimes  capable  of  existing  separately  may  combine
together,  forming  YY'and  with  X2  or  XX',  as  we  see  from  the  transi-
tion of  CO  into  CO2  and  COCI2.  This  combining  power  of  carbonic
oxide  appears  in  many  of  its  reactions.  Thus  it  is  very  easily  ab-
sorbed by  cuprous  chloride,  CuCl,  dissolved  in  fuming  hydrochloric
acid,  forming  a  crystalline  compound,  COCu2Cl2,2H.20,  decomposable
by  water  ;  it  combines  directly  with  potassium  (at  90®),  forming
(KCO)^  •""  with  platinum  dichloride,  PtCl2,  with  chlorine,  CI2,  Ac.

But  the  most  remarkable  compounds  are  (1)  the  compound  of  CO
with  metallic  nickel,  a  colourless  volatile  liquid,  Ni(C0)4,  obtained  by
L.  Mond  (described  in  Chapter  XXII.)  and  (2)  the  compounds  of  car-
bonic oxide  with  the  alkalis,  for  instance  with  potassium  or  barium
hydroxide,  »fec. — although  it  is  not  directly  absorbed  by  them,  as  it  has
no  acid  properties.  Berthelot  (1861)  showed  that  potash  in  the  presence
of  water  is  capable  of  absorbing  carbonic  oxide,  but  the  absorption
takes  place  slowly,  little  by  little,  and  it  is  only  after  being  heated
for  many  hours  that  the  whole  of  the  carbonic  oxide  is  absorbed  by
the  potash.  The  salt  CHKOj  is  obtained  by  this  absorption  ;  it  cor-
responds with  an  acid  found  in  nature — namely,  the  simplest  organic
(carboxylic)  acid, /onnic  acid,  CH2O2.  It  can  be  extracted  from  the
potassium  salt  by  means  of  distillation  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,
just  as  nitric  acid  is  prepared  from  sodium  nitrate.  The  same  acid
is  found  in  ants  and  in  nettles  (when  the  stings  of  the  nettles  puncture
the  skin  they  break,  and  the  corrosive  formic  acid  enters  into  the
body) ;  it  is  also  obtained  during  the  action  of  oxidising  agents  on  many
organic  substances ;  it  is  formed  from  oxalic  acid,  and  under  many
conditions  splits  up  into  carbonic  oxide  and  water.  In  the  formation
of  formic  acid  from  carbonic  oxide  we  observe  an  example  of  the
synthesis  of  organic  compounds,  such  as  are  now  very  numerous,  and
are  treated  of  in  detail  in  works  on  organic  chemistry.

Formic  acid,  H(CH02),  carbonic  acid,  H0(CH02),  and  oxalic  acid,
(CH02)2,  ^^^  ^^^  simple  organic  or  carboxylic  acids,  R(CH02)  cor-

^1  The  molecule  of  metallic  potaHsium  (Scott,  1887),  like  that  of  mercury,  contains  only
one  atom,  and  it  is  probably  in  virtue  of  this  that  the  molecules  CO  and  K  combine  together.
But  as  in  the  majority  of  cases  potassium  acts  as  a  univalent  radicle,  the  polymeride
K.2C.2O.2  is  formed,  and  probably  KiqCioOjo,  because  products  containing  Cio  are  formed
by  the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid.  The  black  mass  formed  by  the  combination  of
carbonic  oxide  with  potassium  explodes  with  great  ease,  and  oxidises  in  the  air.  Although
Brodie,  Lerch,  and  Joannis  (who  obtained  it  in  1873  in  a  colourless  form  by  means  of
NH5K,  described  in  Chapter  VI.,  Note  14)  have  greatly  extended  our  knowledge  of  this
compound,  much  still  remains  unexplained.  It  probably  exists  in  various  polymeric  and
isomeric  forms,  having  the  composition  (KCO)n  ftnd  (NaCO)if.

406  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

responding  with  HH  and  HOH.  Commencing  with  carbonic  oxide,  CO,
the  formation  of  carboxylic  acids  is  clearly  seen  from  the  fact  that  CO  is
capable  of  combining  with  Xg,  that  is  of  forming  COX  g.  If,  for  instance,
one  X  is  an  aqueous  residue,  OH  (hydroxy  1),  and  the  other  X  is  hydrogen,
then  the  simplest  organic  acid — formic  acid,  H(COOH) — is  obtained.
As  all  hydrocarbons  (Chapter  VIII.)  correspond  with  the  simplest,  CH4,
so  al-  organic  acids  may  be  considered  to  proceed  from  formic  acid.

In  a  similar  way  it  is  easy  to  explain  the  relation  to  other  com-
pounds of  carbon  of  those  compounds  which  contain  nitrogen.  By
way  of  an  example,  we  will  take  one  of  the  carboxyl  acids,  R(C02H)^
where  R  is  a  hydrocarbon  radicle  (residue).  Such  an  acid,  like  all
others,  will  give  by  combination  with  NH3  an  ammoniacal  salt,
R(C02NH4).  This  salt  contains  the  elements  for  the  formation  of  two
molecules  of  water,  and  under  suitable  conditions  by  the  action  of
bodies  capable  of  taking  it  up,  water  may  in  fact  be  separated  from
R(C02NH4),  forming  by  the  loss  of  one  molecule  of  water,  amides^
RCONH2,  and  by  the  loss  of  two  molecules  of  water,  nifrilesy  RCN,
otherwise  known  as  cyanogen  cortipounds  or  cyanides,^^  If  all  the
carboxyl  acids  are  united  not  only  by  many  common  reactions  but
also  by  a  mutual  conversion  into  each  other  (an  instance  of  which
we  saw  above  in  the  conversion  of  oxalic  acid  into  formic  and  carbonic
acids)  one  would  expect  the  same  for  all  the  cyanogen  compounds  als<^».
The  common  character  of  their  reactions,  and  the  reciprocity  of  their
transformation,  were  long  ago  observed  by  Oay-Lussac,  who  recog-
nised a  common  group  or  radicle  (residue)  cyanogen,  CN,  in  all  of
them.  The  simplest  compounds  hyq  hydrocyanic  or  jmissic  acidy  HCN,
cyanic  acid,  OHCN,  and  free  cyanogen,  (CN).2,  which  correspond  to  the
three  simplest  carboxyl  acids  :  formic,  IICO.^H,  carbonic,  OHCO^H,
and  oxalic,  (C0.2H).2.  Cyanogen,  like  carboxyl,  is  evidently  a  mon-
atomic  residue  and  acid,  similar  to  chlorine.  As  regards  the  amides
RCONH.2,  corresponding  to  the  carboxyl  acids,  they  contain  the
ammoniacal  residue  XH^,  and  form  a  numerous  class  of  organic  com-
pounds met  with in  nature  and  obtained  in  many  ways,^^  but  not

5*  Tlie  connection  of  the  cyanogen  compounds  witli  the  rest  of  the  hydrocarbons  by
meanH  of  carboxyl  was  enunciated  by  me,  about  the  year  1801),  at  the  finst  Annual  Meeting
of  the  Russian  Naturalists.

^  Thus,  for  instance,  oxamide,  or  the  amide  of  oxalic  acid,  (CNHjO)^,  is  obtained  in
the  form  of  an  insoluble  precipitate  on  adding  a  solution  of  ammonia  to  an  alcoholic
solution  of  ethyl  oxalate,  (C0.2C..,H5)o,  which  is  formed  by  the  action  of  oxalic  acid  on
alcohol:  (CHO.)..,^  i2(C,H:,)OH  =  2H6H  + (COX^Hs)...  As  the  nearest  derivatives  of
ammonia,  the  amides  treated  with  alkalis  yield  ammonia  and  form  the  salt  of  the  acid.
The  nitrih's  do  not,  however,  give  similar  reivctions  so  readily.  Th»'  majority  of  amides
correspoiiding  to  acids  have  a  composition  RNH..,  and  therefore  recombine  with  water  with
great  ease  even  when  simply  boiled  with  it,  and  with  still  greater  facility  in  presence  of

COIVIPOUNDS  or  CARBON  WITH  OXYGEN  AND  NITROGEN 407

distinguished  by  such  characteristic  peculiarities  as  the  cyanogen  com-
pounds.

The  reactions  and  properties  of  the  amides  and  nitriles  of  the
organic  acids  are  described  in  detail  in  books  on  organic  chemistry  ;  we
win  liere  only  touch  upon  the  simplest  of  them,  and  to  clearly  explain
the  derivative  compounds  will  first  consider  the  ammoniacal  salts  and
amides  of  carbonic  acid.

As  carbonic  acid  is  bibasic,  its  ammonium  salts  ought  to  have  the
following  composition  :  acid  carbonate  of  ammonium,  H(NH4)C03,  and
normcU  carbonate^  (NH4)2C03  ;  they  represent  compounds  of  one  or
two  molecules  of  ammonia  with  carbonic  acid.  The  acid  salt  appears
in  the  form  of  a  non -odoriferous  and  (when  tested  with  litmus)  neutral
substance,  soluble  at  the  ordinary  temperature  in  six  parts  of  water,
insoluble  in  alcohol,  and  obtainable  in  a  crystalline  form  either  without
water  of  crystallisation  or  with  various  proportions  of  it.  If  an  aqueous
solution  of  ammonia  be  saturated  with  an  excess  of  carbonic  anhydride,
and  then  evaporated  over  sulphuric  acid  in  the  bell  jar  of  an  air-pump,
crystals  of  this  salt  are  separated.  Solutions  of  all  other  ammonium
carbonates,  when  evaporated  under  the  air-pump,  yield  crystals  of  this
salt.  A  solution  of  this  salt,  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  gives
off  carbonic  anhydride,  as  do  all  the  acid  salts  of  carbonic  acid  (for
instance,  NaHCOj),  and  at  38^  the  separation  of  carbonic  anhydride
takes  place  with  great  rapidity.  On  losing/  carbonic  anhydride  and
water,  the  acid  salt  is  converted  into  the  normal  salt,  2(NH4)HC03
^  HgO-f  CO2  -f  (NH4).2C03  ;  the  latter,  however,  decomposes  in  solu-
tion, and  can  therefore  only  be  obtained  in  crystals,  (NH4)2C02,H20,  at
low  temperatures,  and  from  solutions  containing  an  excess  of  ammonia
as  the  product  of  dissociation  of  this  salt :  (NH4)2C03  •=  NH3
-f-  (NH4)HC03. But  the  normal  salt,^^  according  to  the  general  type,  is

acidfl  or  alkaliu.  Under  the  action  of  alkalin  the  amides  natarully  give  off  ammonia,
through  the  combination  of  water  with  the  amide,  when  a  mil t  of  the  acid  from  which  the
amide  was  derived  is  formed  :  RNHo  +  KHO  =  RKO  +  NH5.

The  same  reaction  takes  place  with  acids,  only  an  ammoniacal  salt  of  the  acid  is  of
conrtie  formed  whilst  the  acid  held  in  ^the  amide  is  liberated:  RNH2  +  HCI  +  H.2O
RHO  +  NH4CI.

Thus  in  the  majority  of  cases  amides  easily  pass  into  ammoniacal  salts,  bat  they
differ  essentially  from  them.  No  ammoniacal  salt  sublimes  or  volatilises  unchanged,  and
generally  when  heated  it  gives  off  water  and  yields  an  amide,  whilst  many  amides  vola-
tilise without  alteration  and  frequently  are  volatile  crystalline  substances  which  may  bo
easily  sublimed;  Such,  for  instance,  are  the  amides  of  benzoic,  formic,  and  many
other  organic  acids.

*■*  The  acid  salt,  (NH4)HC0-,  on  losing  water  ought  to  form  the  carhamic  aciil^
OHfCNH.^O) ;  but  it  is  not  formed,  which  is  accounted  for  by  the  instability  of  the  acid
salt  itself.  Carbonic  anhydride  is  given  off  and  ammonia  is  produced,  which  gives
Ammonium  carbamate.

408  PRIN'CIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

capable  of  decomposing  tvith  separation  of  watery  and  foiming  amnionitim
carbamate,  NH40(CONH2)  =  (NH4)2C03  -  H^O  ; this  stiU  further
complicates  the  chemical transformations  of the  carbonates  of  am-
monium. It is in fact evident  that, by changing the  ratios of
water,  ammonia,  and  carbonic  acid,  various  interaiediate  salts  will  be
formed  containing  mixtures  or  combinations  of  those  mentioned  above.
Thus  the  ordinary  commercial  carbonate  of  ammonia  is  obtained  by
heating  a  mixture  of  chalk  and  sulphate  of  ammonia  (Chapter  VI.),  or
sal-ammoniac,  2NH4CI  +  CaCOg  =  CaCl.^  +  (NH4)2C03. The  normal
salt,  however,  through  loss  of  part  of  the  ammonia,  partly  forms  the
acid  salt,  and,  partly  through  loss  of  water,  forms  carbamate,  and  most
frequently  presents  the  composition  NH40(CONH2)  +  20H(C02NH4)
•=4NH3  +  3C0.2  +  2H2O. This  salt,  in  parting  under  various  con-
ditions with ammonia, carbonic anhydride, and water, does not
present  a  constant  composition,  and  ought  rather  to  be  regarded  as  a
mixture  of  acid  salt  and  amide  salt. The  latter  must  be  recognised  as
entering  into  the  composition  of  the  ordinary  carbonate  of  ammonia,
because  it  contains  less  water  than  is  required  for  the  normal or  acid
salt  f^  but  on  being  dissolved  in  water  this  salt  gives  a  mixture  of  acid
and  normal  salts.

Each  of  the  two  ammoniacal  salts  of  carbonic  acid  has  its  corre-
sponding amide.  That  of  the  acid  salt  should  be  acid,  if  the  water  given
off  takes  up  the  hydrogen  of  the  ammonia,  as  it  should  according  to  the
common  type  of  formation  of  the  amides,  so  that  OHCONH2,  or
carbamic  acid,  is  formed  from  OHCO3NH4.  This  acid  is  not  known  in
a  free  state,  but  its  corresponding  ammoniacal  salt  or  ammonium  car-
bamate is  known.  The  latter  is  easily  and  immediately  formed  by
mixing  2  volumes  of  dry  ammonia  with  1  volume  of  dry  carbonic  anhy-
dride, 2NH3  +  CO2  =  NH40(CONH2)  ;  it  is  a  solid  substance,  smells
strongly  of  ammonia,  attracts  moisture  from  the  air,  and  decomposes
completely  at  60°.  The  fact  of  this  decomposition  may  be  proved  ^  by
the  density  of  its  vapour,  which  =:  13  (H  =  1) ;  this  exactly  corresponds
with  the  density  of  a  mixture  of  2  volumes  of  ammonia  and  1  volume

3"^  In  tlie  normal  salt,  2NHt  +  CO.,  ^  H...0,  in  the  acid  salt,  XH3  +  CO.  +  H.O,  but  in  the
(!oniraercial  salt  only  2H2O  to  SCO.^-

''*'  Naumann  determined  the  following  dissociation  tensions  of  the  vapour  of  ammonium
carbamate  (in  millimetres  of  mercury) : —

-1(P  0=  +10°  20'^  80^  4(P  50°  60=^

5  12  30  02  124  248  470  770

Horstmann  and  Isambert  studied  the  tensions  corresponding  to  excess  of  NH-  or  CO^,
and  found,  as  might  have  been  expected,  that  with  such  excess  the  mass  of  the  salt
formed  (in  a  solid  state)  increases  and  the  decomposition  (transition  into  vapour)
decreases.

COMPOUNDS  OF  CARBON  WITH  OXYGEN  AND NITROGEN 409

.of  carbonic  anhydride.  It  is  easily  understood  that  such  a  combination
will  take  place  with  any  ammonium  carbonate  under  the  action  of  salts
which  take  up  the  water — for  instance,  sodium  or  potassium  car-
bonate ^^ — as  in  an  anhydrous  state  ammonia  and  carbonic  anhydride
only  form  one  compound,  C022NH3.^*  As  the  normal  ammonium  car-
bonate contains  two  ammonias,  and  as  the  amides  are  formed  with  the
separation  of  water  at  the  expense  of  the  hydrogen  of  the  ammonias,
so  this  salt  has  its  symmetrical  amide,  CO(NH2)2.  This  must  be  termed
carbamide.  It  is  identical  with  urea,  CN2H4O,  which,  contained  in  the
urine  (about  2  per  cent,  in  human  urine),  is  for  the  higher  animals
(especially  the  carnivorous)  the  ordinary  product  of  excretion ^^  and
oxidation  of  the  nitrogenous  substances  found  in  the  organism.  If
ammonium  carbamate  be  heated  to  140°  (in  a  sealed  tube,  Bazarofif),
or  if  carbonyl  chloride,  COCI2,  be  treated  with  ammonia  (Natanson),
urea  will  be  obtained,  which  shows  its  direct  connection  with  carbonic
acid — that  is,  the  presence  of  carbonic  acid  and  ammonia  in  it.  From
this  it  will  be  understoo<l  how  urea  during  the  putrefaction  of  urine  is
converted  into  ammonium  carbonate,  CN2H4O  -f  H2O  =  CO2  +  2NH3.
Thus  urea,  both  by  its  origin  and  decomposition,  is  an  amide  of
carbonic  acid.  Representing  as  it  does  ammonia  (two  molecules)  in
which  hydrogen  (two^  atoms)  is  replaced  by  the  bivalent  radicle  of
carbonic  acid,  urea  retains  the  property  of  ammonia  of  entering  into
combination,  with  acids  (thus  nitric  acid  forms  CN2H40,HN03),
with  bases  (for  instance,  with  mercury  oxide),  and  with  salts  (such
as  sodium  chloride,  ammonium  chloride),  but  containing  an  acid
residue  it  has  no  alkaline  properties.  It  is  soluble  in  water  without
change,  but  at  a  red  heat  loses  ammonia  and  forms  cyanic  acidy
CNHO,^^^**  which  is  a  nitrile  of  carbonic  acid — that  is  to  say,  is  a

^'  Calcium  chloride  enters  into  double  decomposition  with  ammonium  carbamate.
Acids  (for  instance,  sulphuric)  take  up  ammonia,  and  set  free  carbonic  anhydride;
whilst  alkalis  (such  as  potash)  take  up  carbonic  anhydride  and  set  free  ammonia,  and
therefore,  in  this  case  for  removing  water  only  sodium  or  potassium  carbonate  can  be
taken.  An  aqueous  solution  of  ammonium  carbamate  does  not  entirely  precipitate  a
solution  of  CaCLj,  probably  because  calcium  carbamate  is  soluble  in  water,  and  all  the
(NH5).2C0.2  is  not  converted  by  dissolving  into  the  normal  salt,  (NH40).jC03.

^  It  must  be  imagined  that  the  reaction  takes  place  at  first  between  equal  volumes
(Chapter  VII.) ;  but  then  carbamic  acid,  H0(CNH.20),  is  produced,  which,  as  an  acid,
immediately  combines  with  the  ammonia,  forming  NH40(CNH.20).

^  Urea  is  undoubtedly  a  product  of  the  oxidation  of  complex  nitrogenous  matters
(albumin)  of  the  animal  body.  It  is  found  in  the  blood.  It  is  absorbed  from  the  blood
by  the  kidneys.  A  man  excretes  about  30  grams  of  urea  per  day.  As  a  derivative  of
carbonic  anhydride,  into  which  it  is  readily  converted,  urea  is  in  a  sense  a  product  of
oxidation.

39  bu  itg  polymer,  CJN5H5O3,  is  formed  together  with  it.  Cyanic  acid  is  a  very
unstable,  easily  changeable  liquid,  while  cyanuric  acid  is  a  crystalline  solid  which  is  very
stable  at  the  ordinary  temperature.

410  PRIN'CIPLES  OF  CHEMLSTKY

cyanogen  compound,  corresponding  to  the  acid  ammonium  carl)onatey
OH(CNH40.2),  which  on  parting  with  2H2O  ought  to  form  cyanic  acid,
CNOH.  Liquid  cyanic  acid,  exceedingly  unstable  at  the  ordinary
temperatures,  gives  its  stable  solid  polymer  cyanuric  acid,  O3H3C3N3.
Both  have  the  same  composition,  and  they  pass  one  into  another  at
diflferent  temperatures.  If  crystals  of  cyanuric  acid  l)e  heated  to  a  tem-
perature, t°y  then  the  vapour  tension,  ;;,  in  millimetres  of  mercury
(Tr(K)st  and  Hautefeuille)  will  l)e  :

/. 160°, 170°, 200°, 250°, 300°, 350°
p. 56, 68, 130, 220, 430, 1,200

The  vapour  contains  cyanic  acid,  and,  if  it  l>e  rapidly  c<x)led,  it  con-
denses into  a  mobile  volatile  liquid  (specific  gravity  at  0°=1*14).  If
the  liquid  cyanic  acid  l>e  gradually  heated,  it  passes  into  a  new  amor-
phous polymeride  (cyamelide),  which,  on  l)eing  heated,  like  cyanuric
acid,  forms  vapours  of  cyanic  acid.  If  these  fumes  are  heated  above
150°  they  pass  directly  into  cyanuric  acid.  Thus  at  a  temperature  of
350°,  the  pressure  does  not  rise  alxjve  1,200  mm.  on  the  addition  of
vapours  of  cyanic  acid,  because  the  whole  excess  is  transformed  into
cyanuric  acid.  Hence,  the  alx»ve-mentioned  figures  give  the  tension  of
dissociation  of  cyanuric  acid,  or  the  greatest  pressure  which  the  vapours  of
HOCN  are  able  to  attain  at  a  given  temperature,  whilst  at  a  greater
pressure,  or  by  the  introduction  of  a  larger  mass  of  the  sul>stance  into  a
given  volume,  the  whole  of  the  excess  is  converted  into  cyanuric  acid.
The  properties  of  cyanic  acid  which  we  have  descrilied  were  principally
oliserved  by  Wbhler,  and  clearly  show  the  faculty  of  polymerisation  0/
cyanoijen  comixxnids.  This  is  observed  in  many  other  cyanogen  deriva-
tives, and  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  consequence  of  the  al)ove-mentioned
explanation  of  their  nature.  All  cyanogen  compounds  are  ammonium
salts,  R(CN  11402),  deprived  of  water,  'lH.fi  ;  therefore  the  molecules.
RCN,  ought  to  possess  the  faculty  of  combining  with  two  molecules  <.f
water  or  with  other  molecules  in  exchange  for  it  (for  instance,  with
HjS,  or  HCl,  or  211^,  etc.),  and  are  therefore  capable  of  combining  to-
gether. The  combination  of  molecules  of  the  same  kind  t<»  fonn  more
complex  ones  is  what  is  meant  by  polymerisation.*'*

•*•  JuKt  as  the  aldehydes  (such  aa  CjH,0)  are  alcoliols  (hke  C^.H^O)  which  have
lost  hydrogen  and  arc  also  capable  of  entering  into  conihinatiou  with  many  substances
and  of  polymerising,  fonning  slightly  volatile  ix)lymerides,  which  depolymerisi*
on  lieating.  Although  there  are  also  many  similar  phenomena  (for  instance,  the  trans-
formation of  yellow  into  red  phosphorus,  the  transition  of  cinnamene  into  metacinnamene.
d'c.}  of  polymerisation,  in  no  other  case  are  they  so  clearly  and  simply  expressed  as  in
cyanic  acid.  The  details  relating  to  this  must  be  sought  for  in  treatises  on  organic  and
tlu'oretical  cliemistry.  If  wc»  touch  on  certain  sides  of  this  question  it  is  principally  with
the  view  of  showing  the  phenomenon  of  polymerisation  by  typical  examples,  for  it  is  of  more
frequent  occurrence  than  was  formerly  supposed  among  compounds  of  several  elements.

COMPOUNDS  OF  CARBON  WITH  OXYGEN  AND  NITROGEN 411

Besides  being  a  substance  very  prone  to  fonn  polymerides,  cyanic  acid
presents  many  other  featui-es  of  interest,  expounded  in  greater  detail
in  organic  chemistry.  However  we  may  mention  here  the  production
of  the  cyanates  by  the  oxidation  of  the  metallic  cyanides.  Potassium
cyanate,  KCNO,  is  most  often  obtained  in  this  way.  Solutions  of
cyanates  by  the  addition  of  sulphuric  acid  yield  cyanic  acid,  which,
however,  immediately  decomposes  :  CNHO  +  H^C)  =  CO.2  -f-  NH3.  A
solution  of  ammonium  cyanate,  CN(NH4)0,  behaves  in  the  same
manner,  but  only  in  the  cold.  On  being  heated  it  completely  changes
because  it  is  transformed  into  urea.  The  composition  of  both  sub-
stances is  identical,  CN2H4O,  but  the  structure,  or  disposition  of,  and
connection  between,  the  elements  is  different :  in  the  ammonium
cyanate  one  atom  of  nitrogen  exists  in  the  form  of  cyanogen,  CN —
that  is,  united  with  carl)on— and  the  other  as  ammonium,  NH4,  but,
as  cyanic  acid  contains  the  hydroxyl  radicle  of  carbonic  acid,  OH(CN),
the  ammonium  in  this  salt  is  united  with  oxygen.  The  composition  of
this  salt  is  best  expressed  by  supposing  one  atom  of  the  hydrogen  in
water  to  bo  replaced  by  ammonium  and  the  other  by  cyanogen — i.e,
that  its  composition  is  not  symmetrical — whilst  in  urea  both  the
nitrogen  atoms  are  symmetrically  and  uniformly  disposed  as  regards
the  radicle  CO  of  carbonic  acid  :  CO(NH2)2.  For  this  reason,  urea  is
much  more  stable  than  ammonium  cyanate,  and  therefore  the  latter,
on  being  slightly  heated  in  solution,  is  converted  into  urea.  This
remarkable  isomeric  transformation  was  discovered  by  Wohler  in
1828.**  Formamide,  HCONH2,  and  ht/drocynnic  acidy  HON,  as  a
nitrile,  correspond  with  formic  acid,  HCOOH,  and  therefore  ammonium
formate,  HCOONH4,  and  formamide,  when  acted  on  by  heat  and  by
sul)stances  which  take  up  water  (phosphoric  anhydride)form  hydrocyanic
acid,  HON,  whilst,  under  many  conditions  (for  instance,  on  combining
with  hydrochloric  acid  in  presence  of  water),  this  hydrocyanic  acid  forms
formic  acid  and  ammonia.  Although  containing  hydrogen  in  the
presence  of  two  acid-forming  elements  — namely,  carlwin  and  nitrogen***

'*  It  has  an  important  hifltorical  interest,  more  e«pe<rirtlly  ah  at  that  time  such  an
ea»y  preparation  of  substances  occurring  in  organisms  without  the  aid  of  organic  life  was
quite  unexpected,  for  they  were  supposed  to  be  formed  under  the  influence  of  the  forces
acting  in  organisms,  and  without  the  latter  their  formation  was  considered  impossible.
And  in  addition  to  destroying  this  illusion,  the  easy  transition  of  NH,OCN  into  CO(NHo)i
is  the  best  example  of  the  i>assage  of  one  system  of  e<iuilibrium  of  atoms  into  another
more  stable  svsteni.

»*  If  ammonia  and  methane  (marsh  gas)  do  not  show  any  acid  properties,  that  is  in  all
probability  due  to  the  presence  of  a  large  amount  of  hydrogen  in  both ;  but  in  hydro-
cyanic acid  one  atom  of  hydrogen  is  under  the  influence  of  two  acid-forming  elements.
Acetylene,  C  >H...,  which  contains  but  little  hydrogen,  presents  a<'id  properties  in  certain
respects,  for  its  hydrogen  is  easily  replaced  by  metals.  Hydronitrous  acid,  HN3,
which  contains  little  hydrogen,  also  has  the  properties  of  an  acid.

m^  PRISCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTHY  |

I —hydrocyanic  udd  <.l(>es  nut  give  an  acid  i-caotion  wttli  litmus  (eyaiiio  1

[  auid lias very raurked  acid  properties) ; but it  _/t»rnw  xalfs, J/CjV,  j

I  thus  presenting  the  properties  of  a,  feehle  acid,  and  for  this  reason  is  I

I  called  an  acid. The  small  atuuuut  tif  energy  which  it  has  is  shown  I

I  by  the  fact  that  the  cyanides  of  the  alkali  metalfi  —  fur  in^itance,  potas-  I

I Bium cyanide (KHO  +  HCN  =  HjO  +  KCN)  in B..lutimi-have a  I

strongly  alkaline  reaction.'^ If  aiumoiiia  Iw  passed  nver  chiircoaj  at  I

, a red  heat,  especially  in the pi-esence  of  an alkali, »r if  gaseous  I

nitrogen be  passed through a mixture  of  charwa.! and an  alkali  I

^especially  p^itash,  KHO),  and  also  if  a  mixture  I'f  nitrogenous  organic  I

substances  and  alkali  be  heated  tji  a  red lie.it,  in  all  these  cases  the  j

I  alkali  metal  combines  with  the  carbon  and  nitmgen,  forming  a  metallic  |

L  cyanide,  MON — for  example,  KCN."^'' Potassium  cyanide  is  niucli  I

used  in  the  arta,  and  is  cibtained,  aa  alxive  state<l,  under  many  circum-  I

stances — as,  for  instance,  in  iron  smelting,  especially  with  the  asfiistance  I

of  wood  charcoal,  the  ash  of  which  contains  much  potash. The  nitrogen  I

of  the  air,  the  alkali  of  the  ash,  and  the  chai-coal  are  brought  into  1

contact  at  a  high  temperature  during  iron  smelting,  and  therefore,  I

under  these  conditions,  a  considerable  quantity  of  potassium  cyanide  J

is  formed. In  practice  it  is  ni;it  usual  to  pi-epare  potassium  cyanide  I

directly,  but  a  peculiar  compound  of  it  containing  potissium,  iron,  1

and  cyanogen. This  compound  is  potassium  ferrocyanide,  and  is  also

known as  ydlow  pi-u»»lace  of  poiiiKh. This saline substance (sw  J

Chapter  XXII)  has  the  composition  KjFeCijN,;  +  ^HjO, The  name  i

of  cyanogen  («i'nvus)  is  derived  fri>m  the  property  which  this  yellow  I

pruBsiate  possesses  of  forming,  with  a  solution  of  a  ferric  salt,  FeX],  J

I the  familiar  pigment  Prussian  blue. The  yellow  prussiate  is  manu-  \

I  *^  Solutiouu  ol  i'}rnnidea~For  inataucze,  thi»a  of  potSBsiaui  or  liHriuin — tta  decciD- I

I po»d  bj  cuboiiic  acid. Greu  the  corliouic  unlifilrids  of  llie  tjt  iktU  in  a  limilar  Way, I

and  toi  this  reason  tlieiie  solutionu  do  uoL  liuep,  becauiie,  iu  tlie  flnt  place,  tree  hydra-  a

Dj'aiiic  acid  itseU  decompaBeB  and  poljineiiBee,  and,  in  the  second  place,  with  alkaUas  1

liquids  it  forms  ammonia  and  formic  acid. Hydrocyanic  acid  does  not  liherate  cubonio  ■

aDhydride  from  aolutions  of  nodiam  or  potaasium  carbonates. But  a,  miitnre  of  aolatiooa I

of  potnasinin  carbonate  and  hydrocyanic  acid  yields  iMirlionii.'  anhydride  on  the  addttioii ■

ol  oxides  like  line  oitde,  mercuric  oiide,  Sit. TIiib  is  due  to  tlie  great  iacUnation  whinli I

the  cyanide*  exhibit  of  forming  double  salts. For  instance,  ZnK.,(CN)j  in  formed,  whieli I

is  a  aolable  double  salt,  I

IS  hH  Tlie  conversion  of  the  atmospheric  uitrogsn  into  i-juiogen  componnda,  aKhoggli I

. possible,  has  not  yet  been  carried  out  on  a  luge  scale,  and  one  of  the  prolilems  for  fntaWH

' research  should  be  the  diHcorery  of  a  practical  and  economical  means  of  couveitiiig  tin  9

L atmospheric  nitrogen  into  metallic  cyuiides.  not  only  becaoae  potasainm  cjanids  ham  m

I found  a  vast  and  important  Use  for  the  eitraction  of  gold  from  even  Uie  poorest  (hm,  Imt  ■

I more  specially  because  the  cyanides  fumiali  Uie  means  tor  effecting  tlie  synUMaia  el  \

I many  complex  carbon  compounds,  and  the  nitrogen  contained  in  cyanogen  eaailj  paana  J

I into  other  (ormn ol  combination such  as  unmonin,  which  is  of  great  importwiiMi  )&]

P  kgricnltDre,  I

COMPOUNDS  OF  CARBON  WITH  OXYGEN  AND  NITKOOEN 418

factured  on  a  large  scale,  aud  is  generally  used  as  the  source  of  the
other  cyanogen  compounds.

If  four  parts  of  yellow  prussiate  be  mixed  with  eight  parts  of  water
and  three  parts  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  the  mixture  l>e  heated,  it  decom-
poses, volatile  hydixKyanic  acid  separating.  This  was  obtained  for  the
first  time  by  Scheele  in  1 782,  but  it  was  only  known  to  him  in  solution.
In  1809  Ittner  prepared  anhydrous  prussic  acid,  and  in  1815  Gay-
Lussac  finally  settled  its  properties  and  showed  that  it  contains  only
hydrogen,  carl)on,  and  nitrogen,  CNH.  If  the  distillate  (a  weak  solu-
tion of  HON)  be  redistilled,  and  the  first  part  collected,  the  anhy-
drous acid  may  l)e  prepared  from  this  stronger  solution.  In  order  to  do
this,  pieces  of  calcium  chloride  are  added  to  the  concentrated  solution,
when  the  anhydrous  acid  floats  as  a  separate  layer,  l)ecause  it  is  not
soluble  in  an  aqueous  solution  of  calcium  chloride.  If  this  layer  be
then  distilled  over  a  new  portion  of  calcium  chloride  at  the  lowest
temperature  possible,  the  prussic  acid  may  l^e  obtained  completely  free
from  water.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  use  the  greatest  caution  in
work  of  this  kind,  l)ecause  prussic  acid,  besides  heing  extremely
poisonous,  is  exceedingly  volatile.***

Anhydrous  prussic  acid  is  a  very  mobile  and  volatile  liquid  ;  its
specific  gravity  is  0*697  at  18°  ;  at  lower  temperatures,  especially  when
mixed  with  a  small  quantity  of  water,  it  easily  congeals  ;  it  boils  at  26°,
and  therefore  very  easily  evaporates,  and  at  ordinary  temperatures
may  Ije  regarded  us  a  gas.  An  insignificant  amount,  when  inhaled  or
brought  into  contact  with  the  skin,  causes  death. It  is  soluble  in  a^l

^»  The  mixture  of  the  vapours  of  water  and  hydrocyanic  acid,  evolved  on  heating  yellow
pruBsiate  witli  sulphuric  acid,  may  be  passed  directly  through  vessels  or  tubes  filled  with
calcium  chloride.  Tliese  tubes  must  be  cooled,  because,  in  the  first  place,  hydrocyanic
acid  easily  changes  on  l>eing  heated,  and,  in  the  second  place,  the  calcium  chloride  when
warm  would  absorb  less  water.  The  mixture  of  hydrocyanic  acid  and  aqueous  vapour
on  passing  over  a  long  layer  of  calcium  cliloride  gives  up  water,  and  hydrocyanic  acid
alone  remains  in  the  vapour.  It  ought  to  be  cooled  as  carefully  as  possible  in  order  to
bring  it  into  a  liquid  condition.  The  method  which  Gay-Lussoc  employed  for  obtaining
pure  hydrocyanic  acid  consisted  in  the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  gas  on  mercuric
cyanide.  The  latter  may  be  obtained  in  a  pure  state  if  a  sclution  of  yellow  prussiate  be
boiled  with  a  solution  of  mercuric  nitrate,  filtered,  and  crystallised  by  cooling;  the
mercuric  cyanide  is  then  obtained  in  the  form  of  colourless  crj'stals,  Hg(CN}.^.

If  a  strong  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid  be  poured  upon  these  crystals,  and  the  mix-
ture of  vapours  evolved,  consisting  of  aqueous  vapour,  hydrochloric  acid,  and  hydrocyanic
acid,  be  passed  tlurough  a  tube  containing,  first,  marble  (for  absorbing  the  hydrochloric
acid),  and  then  lumps  of  calcium  chloride,  on  cooling  the  hydrocyanic  acid  will  be  con-
densed. In  order  to  obtain  the  latter  in  an  anhydrous  form,  the  decomposition
of  heated  mercury  cyanide  by  hydrogen  sulphide  may  be  made  UhO  of.  Here  the  sulphur
and  cyanogen  change  places,  and  hydrocyanic  acid  and  mercury  sulphide  are  formed :
Hg(CN)2  +  KiS  -  2HCN  +  HgS.

414  riilNCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

proportions  in  water,  alcohol,  and  ether  ;  weak  aqueous  solutions  are
used  in  medicine. ^'^

The  salts  MCN — for  instance,  potassium,  sodium,  ammonium — as
well  as  the  salts  M"(CN)2 — for  example,  barium,  calcium,  mercury — are
soluble  in  water,  but  the  cyanides  of  manganese,  zinc,  lead,  and  many
others  are  insoluble  in  water.  They  form  double  salts  with  potassium
cyanide  and  similar  metallic  cyanides,  an  example  of  which  we  will  con-
sider in  a  further  description  of  the  yellow  prussiate.  Not  only  are
some  of  the  double  salts  remarkable  for  their  constancy  and  comparative
stability,. but  so  also  are  the  soluble  salt  HgC2N2,  the  insoluble  silver
cyanide  AgCN,  and  even  potassium  cyanide  in  the  absence  of  water.
The  last  salt,^^  when  fused,  acts  as  a  reducing  agent  with  its  elements
K  and  C,  and  oxidises  when  fused  with  lead  oxide,  forming  potassium
cyanate,  KOCN,  which  establishes  the  connection  between  HON  and
OHCN — that  is,  between  the  nitriles  of  formic  and  carbonic  acids — and
this  connection  is  the  same  as  that  between  the  acids  themselves,  since
formic  acid,  on  oxidation,  yields  carbonic  acid.  Free  cyanogen,  (CX)^
or  CNCN,  corresponds  to  hydrocyanic  acid  in  the  same  manner  as  free
chlorine,  CI2  or  ClCl,  corresponds  to  hydrochloric  acid.  This  composition,
judging  from  what  has  been  already  stated,  exactly  expresses  that  of
the  nitrile  of  oxalic  acid,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  oxalate  of  ammonia
and  the  amide  corresponding  with  it  (oxamide.  Note  33),  on  being  heated
with  phosphoric  anhydride,  which  takes  up  the  water,  yield  cyanogen,
(CN)2. This  substance  is  also  produced  by  simply  heating  some  of  the

'^  A  weak  (up  to  2  p.c.)  aqueous  solution  of  hydrocyanic  acid  is  obtained  by  the  dis-
tillation of  certain  vegetable  Hubstances.  The  so-called  laurel  water  in  particular  enjoys
considerable  notoriety  from  its  containing  hydrocyanic  acid.  It  is  obtained  by  the
steeping  and  distillation  of  laurel  leaves.  A  similar  kind  of  water  is  formed  by  the
infusion  and  distillation  of  bitter  almonds.  It  is  well  known  that  bitter  almonds  are
poisonous,  and  have  a  peculiar  clmracteristic  taste.  This  bitter  taste  is  due  to  the
presence  of  a  certain  substance  called  amygdalin,  which  can  be  extracted  by  alcohol.
Tliis  amygdalin  decomposes  in  an  infusion  of  bruised  almonds,  forming  the  so-called
bitter  tilmond  oil,  glucose,  and  hydrocyanic  acid  :

C,.,H,7N0n

+

H.,0

•

CtHoO

+ CNH +

2QH„Oo

Amygdalin  in

Water

Bitter

Hydroi-yanic

Glucose

bitter  almonds

almtmd  oil

acid

If  after  this  the  infusion  of  bitter  almonds  be  distilled  with  water,  the  hydrocyanic  acid
and  the  volatile  bitter  almond  oil  are  carried  over  with  the  aqueous  vapour.  The  oil
is  insoluble  in  water,  or  only  sparingly  soluble,  while  the  hydrocyanic  acid  remains  as  an
aqueous  solution.  Bitter  almond  water  is  similar  to  laurel  water,  and  is  used  like  tht»
former  in  medicine,  naturally  only  in  small  quantities  because  any  considerable  amount
has  poisonous  effects.  Perfectly  pure  anliydrous  hydrocyanic  acid  keeps  without  change,
just  like  the  weak  solutions,  but  the  stnmg  solutions  only  keep  in  the  presence  of  other
acids.  In  tin*  presence  of  many  admixtures  these  solutions  easily  give  a  brown  polymeric
.substance,  which  is  also  formed  in  a  solution  of  i>otassium^ cyanide.
'•♦  This  salt  will  be  describtnl  in  Chapter  XIII.

COMPOUNDS  OF  CARBON  WITH  OXYGEN  AND  NITROGEN 415

metiillic  cyanides. Mercuric  cyanide  is  particularly  adapted  for  this
purpose,  Ijecause  it  is  easily  obtained  in  a  pure  state  and  is  then  very
stable. If  mercuric  cyanide  \ye  heated,  it  decomposes,  in  like  manner
to  mercury  oxide,  into  metallic  mercury  and  cyanogen  :  HgCgNj  =  Hg
+  C^Nj."*^ When  cyanogen  is  formed,  part  of  it  always  polymerises
into  a  dark  brown  insoluble  8ul)stance  called  paraci/anoyen,  capable  of
forming  cyanogen  when  heated  to  redness.^** Cyanogen  is  a  colourless,
poisonous  gas,  with  a  peculiar  smell  and  easily  condensed  by  cooling
into  a  colourless  liquid,  insoluble  in  water  and  having  a  specific  gravity
of  0*86. It  l)oils  atalx)ut  —21°,  and  therefore  cyanogen  may  be  easily
condensed  into  a  liquid  by  a  strong  freezing  mixture. At  — 35°  liquid
cyanogen  solidifies. The  gas  is  soluble  in  water  and in  alcohol  to  a
considera})le  extent — namely,  1  volume  of  water  absorl>s  as  much  as
4^  volumes,  and  alcohol  23  volumes. Cyanogen  resists  the  action  of
a  tolerably  high  temperature  without  decomposing,  })ut  under  the  action
of  the  electric  sparky  the  carbon  is  separated,  leaving  a  volume  of
nitrogen  equal  to  the  volume  of  the  gsis  taken. As  it  contains  carbon
it  bums,  and  the  colour  of  the  flame  is  reddish-violet,  which  is  due  to
the  presence  of  nitrogen,  all  compounds  of  which  impart  more  or  less
of  this  reddish-violet  hue  to  the  flame. During the  combustion of

•7  For  the  preparation  it  is  necessarj-  to  take  completely  dry  mercuric?  cyanide,  becaase
when  heated  in  the  presence  of  moisture  it  gives  ammonia,  carbonic  anhydride,  and
hydrocyanic  acid.  Instead  of  mercuric  cyanide,  a  mixture  of  perfectly  dry  yellow  pruB-
siate  and  mercuric  chloride  may  be  used,  then  double  decomposition  and  the  formation
of  mercuric  cyanide  take  place  in  the  retort.  Silver  cyanide  also  disengages  cyanogen,
on  being  heated.

■*^  Paracyanogen  is  a  brown  substance  (having  the  composition  of  cyanogen)  which
is  forme<l  during  the  preparation  of  cyanogen  by  all  methods,  and  remains  as  a  residue.
Silver  cyanide,  on  being  slightly  heated,  fuses,  and  on  being  further  heateil  evolves  a  gas ;
a  considerable  quantity  of  paracyanogen  remains  in  the  residue.  Here  it  is  remarkable
that  exactly  half  the  cyanogen  becomes  gaseous,  and  the  other  half  is  transformed  into
paracyanogen.  Metallic  silver  will  be  found  in  the  residue  with  the  paracyanogen ;  it
may  be  extracted  with  mercury  or  nitric  acid,  which  does  not  act  on  paracyanogen.  If
paracyanogen  be  heated  in  a  vacuum  it  decomposes,  forming  cyanogen ;  but  here  the
pressure  p  for  a  given  temperature  /  cannot  exceed  a  certain  limit,  so  that  the  pheno-
menon presents  all  the  external  appearance  of  a  physical  transformation  into  vapour ;
but,  nevertheless,  it  is  a  complete  change  in  the  nature  of  the  substance,  though
limited  by  the  pressure  of  tUsaociation,  as  we  saw  before  in  the  transformation  of
cyanuric  into  hydrocyanic  acid,  and  as  would  be  exi)ectcd  from  the  fundamental
principles  of  dissociation. Troost  and  Hautcfeuille  (1SG8)  found  that  for  paracyanogen,

/  =  530^  .-.81°  000"^  035^

;>  --- 90  143  •i9«  1,089  mm.

However,  even  at  550^  part  of  the  cyanogen  decomposes  into  carbon  and  nitrogen.
The  reverse  transition  of  cyanogen  into  imracyanogen  commences  at  350^,  and  at  000*^
proceeds  rapidly.  And  if  the  transition  of  the  first  kind  is  likene<l  to  evaporation,  then
the  reverse  transition,  or  jwlymerisation,  presents  a  likeness  to  the  transition  of  vapours
into  the  solid  state.

416  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

cyanogen,  carlnmic  anhydride  and  nitrogen  are  formed.  The  same
pnxlucts  are  obtained  in  the  eudiometer  with  oxygen  or  by  the  action
of  cyanogen  on  many  oxides  at  a  red  heat.

The  relation  of  cyanogen  to  the  metallic  cyanides  is  seen  not  only
in  the  fact  that  it  is  formed  from  mercuric  cyanide,  but  also  by  its
forming  cyanide  of  sodium  or  potassium  on  l>eing  heated  with  either  of
those  metals,  the  sodium  or  potassium  taking  fire  in  the  cyanogen.
On  heating  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  cyanogen  to  500°  (Berthelot),^^
or  under  the  action  of  the  silent  discharge  (Boilleau),  hydrocyanic
acid  is  formed,  so  that  the  reciprocity  of  the  transitions  does  not
leave  any  dou}>t  in  the  matter  that  all  the  nitriles  of  the  organic  acids
contain  cyanogen,  just  as  all  the  organic  acids  contain  carl30xyl  and
in  it  the  elements  of  carbonic  anhydride.  Besides  the  amides,  "^^  the
nitriles  (or  cyanogen  compounds,  RCN),  and  nitro-compounds  (con-
taining the  radicle  of  nitric  acid,  RNO.2),  there  are  a  great  number
of  other  substances  containing  at  the  same  time  carlx)n  and  nitrogen,
particulars  of  which  must  lie  s<jught  for  in  special  works  on  organic
chemistry.

^  Cyanogen  (like  chlorine)  is  absorbed  by  a  Holution  of  sodiam  hydroxide,  Rodium
cyanide  and  cyanate  being  produced :  C.^Nj  +  2NaH0  -^  XaCX  +  CNNaO  -f-  H.^O.  But  the
latter  salt  decompoees  relatively  easily,  and  moreover  part  of  the  cyanogen  liberated  by
heat  from  its  compounds  undergoes  a  more  complex  transformation.

^  If,  in  general,  com^ioundB  containing  the  radicle  NH.j  are  called  amides,  some  of  the
amines  ought  to  be  ranked  with  them ;  namely,  the  hydrocarbons  CnH.^m,  i"  which  jmrt  of
the  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  NHo ;  for  instance,  methylamine,  CH-NH2,  aniline,  CqHsNH^
&c.  In  general  the  amines  may  be  represented  as  ammonia  in  which  part  or  all  of  the
hydrogen  is  replaced  by  hydrocarbon  radicles — as,  for  example,  trimethylamine,  N(CH.-)5.
They,  like  ammonia,  combine  with  acids  and  form  crystalline  salts.  Analogous  substances
are  sometimes  met  with  in  nature,  and  bear  the  general  name  of  alkaloids;  such  are«
for  instance,  quinine  in  cinchona  bark,  nicotine  in  tobacco,  Arc.

417

CHAPTER X

SODIUM CHLOKIDE -BEKTHOLLET^S LAWS — HYDROCHLORIC ACID

Ix  the  preceding  chapters  we  have  l^ecome  acquainted  with  the  most
important  properties  of  the  four  elements,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen,
and  carbon.  They  are  sometimes  termed  the  organogens,  because  they
enter  into  the  composition  of  organic  substances.  Their  mutual  com-
binations may  serve  as  types  for  all  other  chemical  compounds — that  is,
they  present  the  same  atomic  relations  (types,  forms,  or  grades  of
combinations)  as those  in which the other  elements also combine

together.

Hydrogen,  HH,  or,  in  general,  HR.

Water, H^O, „ „ HgR.

Ammonia, H3N, „ „ H3R.

Marsh  gas, H^C, „ „ H4R.

One,  two,  three,  and  four  atoms  of  hydrogen  enter  into  these
molc'iules  for  one  atom  of  another  element.  No  compounds  of  one  atom
of  oxygen  with  three  or  four  atoms  of  hydrogen  are  known  ;  hence  the
atom  of  oxygen  does  not  possess  certain  properties  which  are  found  in
the  atoms  of  carlxon  and  nitrogen.

The  faculty  of  an  element  to  form  a  compound  of  definite  composi-
tion with  hydrogen  (or  an  element  analogous  to  it)  gives  the  possil)ility
of  foretelling  the  composition  of  many  other  of  its  compounds.  Thus,
if  we  know  that  an  element,  M,  combines  with  hydrogen,  forming,
by  preference,  a  gaseous  substance  such  as  HM,  but  not  forming
HjM,  H3M,  H„M„,  then  we  must  conclude,  on  the  basis  of  the  law  of
substitution,  that  this  element  will  give  compounds  MjO,  M3X,  MHO,
MH3C,  ike.  Chlorine  is  an  example  of  this  kind.  If  we  know  that
another  element,  R,  like  oxygen,  gives  with  hydrogen  a  molecule  HgR,
then  we  may  expect  that  it  will  form  compounds  similar  to  hydrogen
peroxide,  the  metallic  oxides,  carbonic  anhydride,  or  carlK)nic  oxide,
and  others.  Sulphur  is  an  instance  of  this  kind.  Hence  the  elements
may  be  classified  according  to  their  resemblance  to  hydrogen,  oxygen,
nitrogen,  and  carl)on,  and  in  conformity  with  this  analogy  it  is  possible

VOL.  I.  E  E

418

PRINCIPLEB  OF  CHEMISTRY

to  foretell,  if  tint  the  praperties  {(or  esample,  the  acidity  or  basii
lit  imy  rute  the  ct'iuposition,'  of  some  of  their  uompounda.  This
the  sniiBtance  of  the  i:oiiw/)fiiiiioJ'tli>-  valency  or  atumicili/i/lht  t'lmtenU,
Hydrogen  is  taken  as  the  representative  of  the  uoivalent  elements,
giving  compounds,  RH,  R(OH),  RA  RCl,  R3N,  R,C,  i-c.  Oxy(
in  that  form  in  which it  gives  water, ia  the  representative  of

'  Bab  it  is  impDWtiUe  to  foretell  all  the  camiiounds
Hlomieity  or  valency,  lieeanae  the  atomicitj  of  tlie  eleme
this  TUiafaility  i«  not  identical  for  diSerent  elementH.
tauUitude  of  oarboD  compoDcidscnTceBponding  with  then
CO  eithei  the  cnrbon  munt  be  taken  as  bivalent  or  the  d,
iiB  variable. Moreover,  carbon  ix  an  «ijunp1e  o(  i

i  byai

1

iriabie,  uid  forUiirn
In  COi,  COX,,  CHi.  luvl  1)k
,  the  C  is  qQodrivalent.  bat  in
□micity  of  oxygen  be  acconnt«l

a  greater  degree  than  moat  o[  tlie  other  elementa.  Nitrogen  in  NHj,  MKi(OH).
NjOj,  Hid  even  in  CNH,  moat  be  mnsidered  >a  trivalent,  but  in  NHtCI.  NO.,|OH),  mnd
in  all  their  corresponding  componndx  it  ia  neceHaarily  penta»leut.  In  NjO,  if  t!w
Htomicity  of  oxygen  "  3.  nitrogen  has  an  uneven  Klanii<.-ity  II,  8,  R),  wbilat  in  NO  it  ■•
bivalent.  It  aalphur  be  bivalent,  like  oiygeu.  in  many  nt  its  compoandn  ((or  (rurapl.s
U^,  SC^.  KHS,  &c.},  then  it  conid  nob  be  foreaain  from  this  thai  it  voDld  form  SOp
80s,  9Clt,  SOCI^  and  a  series  of  similar  compounds  in  which  iU  atomicity  muM  be
ouhoowledged  ns  gieater  than  3.  Thns  SO^  anlplmrons  anhydride,  has
iwints  in  common  with  CO.j,  and  it  carbon  be  ctnadrivaleut  then  the  S  b
(jDulrivalent.  Thereto™  the  principle  ot  atomicity  (valency)  o(  tbe  etemenia  a
considered  establislied  oa  the  baais  tor  the  stady  of  the  elements,  althongh  it  givoe
method  of  groflping  m&ny  analogies,  I  consider  the  tour  following  as  the  chief  1,
to  (uiknowledi^ng  tlie  atumicily  ot  the  ulementB  u  n  primarf  GouceptioD  tor  Uk  can-
Hideratien  ot  the  properties  ot  the  element* :  1.  Such  univalent  elements  aa  H.  CI.  Ac,
appeal  in  a  tree  state  as  molecales  Hj,  Clj,  Ae.,  and  arc  consequently  like  the  nnivaJmt
radialea  CH„  OH,  CO...II,  Sic.  which,  aa  migbb  be  expected,  appear  as  C,H»  0,Hb
CjOiH.j  (ethane,  bydrogen  peroxide,  oiulic  acid),  whilst  on  the  otber  band,  potsAsium
and  sodium  (perhaps  alaa  iodine  nl  a  high  temperature)  contain  only  one  atom.  K,  Xa.
in  (he  molecule  in  a  free  state.  Hence  it  lollowa  that/fwf  affitiitirt  may  uial.  Gnuiting
this,  nothing  prevents  the  asanmption  that  tree  affinities  exist  in  all  unaatarated  e
pounds;  for  example,  two  tree  affinitiea  in  NHj.  If  snch  instonvea  at  free  hUnitiaaj|
admitted,  tlien  all  the  possible  advantages  to  bv  gained  by  the  application  ol  ttie  dad
ot  atomicity  (viiJency)  ore  lost.  %.  Then  are  instances— for  example,  Na.jH— whera  ^
volent  elements  ore  combined  in  molecules  which  are  more  complei  than  Kg,  uid  K
raolecnles,  Rj,  R,,  &c.;  this  may  again  be  either  taken  aa  evidence  of  the  eiiiilena]  ol
free  atllnitiea,  or  else  necessitates  such  primary  univalent  elemunti  aa  sodinm  aui]
hydrogen  being  considered  as  variable  in  their  atomicity.  8.  The  periodic  system  of  thn
elements,  with  which  wo  shall  afterwards  become  accjaainted,  sliows  that  there  ia  »  law
or  rule  for  the  variation  ot  Ibe  forma  at  oxygen  and  hydrogen  compounds ;  ohior
univalent  witli  respect  to  hydrogen,  and  septavalent  with  respect  to  oxygen;
bivalent  to  hydrogen,  and  neiavalent  to  oxygen  ;  phoaphoms  is  trivalent  b
and  pentavalent  in  rc»peet  to  oxygen — tlie  sum  is  in  every  case  equal  to  S.  <
and  its  analogues  (for  example,  silieon)  ar«  quadrivalent  to  both  hydrogen  and  n
Hence  the  power  of  the  elements  to  change  their  uUmiicity  in  an  easentiaJ  part  o
nature,  and  therelore  constant  valency  cannot  be  coDuidered  *a
i.  Cryslalla-hydrates  (for  inatance,  NaCl,9H,0,  or  NaBr.aHjC
PtCl,.SKCl,Hj8iF„  *e.) " " "

idodfl^l

M>lUtioi

1  also)  di

T  saturated  and  li

iLdmlsaion  of  limits

aiilar  complex
n,to  the  capacity  not  only  of  the  olemen

limited  atomicity  of  the  elentenls  i
not  in  occordanae  with  tlie  nature  ot

SODIUM  CHLORIDE— BERTHOLLET'S  LAWS  419

bivalent  elements,  forming  RHj,  RO,  RCl*  RHCl,  R(0H)C1,  R(OH).^,
RjC,  RON,  «fec.  Nitrogen  in  ammonia  is  the  representative  of  the
trivalent  elements,  giving  compounds  RH3,  R2O3,  R(0H)3,  RCI3,  RN,
RHC,  &c.  In  carbon  are  exemplified  the  properties  of  the  quadrivalent
elements,  forming  RH4,  RO2,  R0(0H)2,  R(0H)4,  RHN,  RCI4,  RHCI3,
tkc.  We  meet  with  these  fonns  of  combinationy  or  degrees  of  union  of
atoms,  in  all  other  elements,  some  being  analogous  to  hydrogen,  others  to
oxygen,  and  others  to  nitrogen  or  to  carbon.  But  besides  these  quan-
titative analogies  or  resemblances,  which  are  foretold  by  the  law  of
substitution  (Chapter  VI.),  there  exist  among  the  elements  qualita-
tive analogies  and  relations  which  are  not  fully  seen  in  the  compounds
of  the  elements  which  have  l)een  considered,  but  are  most  distinctly
exhibited  in  the  formation  of  bases,  acids,  and  salts  of  different  types
and  properties.  Therefore,  for  a  complete  study  of  the  nature  of  the
elements  and  their  compounds  it  is  especially  important  to  liecome
acquainted  with  the  salts,  as  sul stances  of  a  peculiar  character,  and
with  the  corresponding  iicids  and  Imses.  Common  table  salt,  or  sodium
chloride,  NaCl,  may  in  every  respect  be  taken  as  a  type  of  salts  in
general,  and  we  will  therefore  pass  to  the  consideration  of  this  sub-
stance, and  of  hydrochloric  acid,  and  of  the  base  sodium  hydroxide,
formed  by  the  non-metal  chlorine  and  the  metal  sodium,  which  corre-
spond with  it.

Sodium  chloride,  NaCl,  the  familiar  table  salt,  occurs,  although
in  very  small  quantities,  in  all  the  primary  fonnatious  of  the  earth's
crust,*  from  which  it  is  washed  away  by  the  atmospheric  waters  ;  it  is
contained  in  small  quantities  in  all  waters  flowing  through  these  forma-
tions, and  is  in  this  manner  conveyed  to  the  oceans  and  seas.  The
immense  mass  of  salt  in  the  oceans  has  been  accumulated  by  this  process
from  the  remote  agas  of  the  earth's  creation,  l>ecause  the  water  has
evaporated  from  them  while  the  salt  has  remained  in  solution.  The  salt
of  sea  water  serves  as  the  source  not  only  for  its  direct  extraction,  but

'  The  primary  formations  are  thone  which  do  not  bear  any  diutinct  traces  of  having
been  deposited  from  water  (have  not  a  Htratified  formation  and  contain  no  remains  of
animal  or  vegetable  life),  occur  under  the  nedimentary  formations  of  the  earth,  and  are
everywhere  uniform  in  composition  and  structure,  the  latter  being  generally  distinctly
crystalline.  If  it  be  assumed  that  the  earth  was  originally  in  a  molten  condition,  the
first  primary  formations  are  those  which  formed  the  first  solid  crust  of  the  earth.  But
even  with  this  hypothesis  of  the  earth's  origin,  it  is  necessary  to  admit  that  the  first
afjueous  deposits  must  have  caused  a  change  in  the  original  crust  of  the  earth,  and
therefore  under  the  head  of  primary  formations  must  be  understood  the  most  ancient  of
the  pro<lucts  of  decomposition  (mostly  by  atmospheric,  aqueous,  and  organic  agency,  Ac),
from  which  all  the  rocks  and  substances  of  the  earth's  surface  have  arisen.  In  speaking
of  the  origin  of  one  or  another  substance,  we  can  only,  on  the  basis  of  facts,  descend  to
the  primary  formations,  of  which  granite,  gneiss,  and  trachyte  may  be  taken  as  examples.

K  K  2

420  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

also  for  the  formation  of  other  masses  of  workable  salt,  such  as  rock
salt,  and  of  saline  springs  and  lakes. ^***"'

The  extraction  of  salt  from  sea  ivater  is  carried  on  in  several  ways.
In  southern  climes,  especially  on  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean  and  the
Mediterranean  and  Black  Seas,  the  summer  heats  are  taken  advantage
of. A  convenient  low-lying  sea  shore  is  chosen,  and  a  whole  series  of
basins,  communicating  with  each  other,  are  constructed  along  it. The
upper  of  these  basins  are  filled  with  sea  water  by  pumping,  or  else
advantage  is  taken  of  high  tides. These  basins  are  sometimes  separated
from  the  sea  by  natural  sand- banks  (limans)  or  by  artificial  means,  and
in  spring  the  water  already  begins  to  evaporate  considerably. As  the
solution  becomes  more  concentrated,  it  is  run  into  the  succeeding  basins,
and  the  upper  ones  are  supplied  with  a  fresh  quantity  of  sea  water,  or
else  an  arrangement  is  made  ejiabling  the  salt  water  to  flow  by  degrees
through  the  series  of  basins. It  is  evident  that  the  beds  of  the  basins
should  be  as  far  as  possible  impervious  to  water,  and  for  this  purpose
they  are  made  of  beaten  clay. The  crystals  of  salt  begin  to  separate
out  when  the  concentration  attains  28  p.c.  of  salt  (which  corresponds
to  28°  of  Baum^'s  hydrometer). They  are  raked  off,  and  employed
for  all  those  purposes  to  which  table  salt  is  applicable. In  the  majority
of  cases  only  the  first  half  of  the  sodium  chloride  which  can  be  separated
from  the  sea  water  is  extracted,  because  the  second  half  has  a  bitter
taste  from  the  presence  of  magnesium  salts  which  separate  out  together
with  the  sodium  salt. But  in  certain  localities  -  as,  for  instance,  in  tlie
(?stuary  of  the  Rhone,  on  the  island  of  Camarga  ^ the  evaporation  is
carried  on  to  the  very  end,  in  order  to  obtain  those  magnesium  and
potassium  salts  which  separate  out  at  the  end  of  the  evaporation  of  sea
water. Various  salts  are  separated  from  sea  w^ater  in  its  evaporation.
From  100  parts  of  sea  water  there  separates  out,  by  natural  and  arti-
ficial evaporation,  about  one  part  of  tolerably  pure  table  salt  at  the
very  commencement  of  the  operation  ;  the  total  amount  held  in  solu-
tion being  about  2i  p.c. The  remaining  portion  separates  out  inter-

2  ^"  Chloride  of  sodium  lias  been  found  to  oecur  in  the  atmosphere  in  the  form  of  a
fine  dust;  in  the  lower  strata  it  is  present  in  larj,'er  quantities  than  in  the  ap})er,
so  that  the  rain  water  fallinj^j  on  mountains  contains  less  NaCl  tlian  that  falling  in
valleys.  Miintz  (1H})1)  found  that  a  litre  of  rain  water  collected  on  the  sammit  of
the  Pic  du  Midi  (2,«77  metres  above  the  sea  level)  contained  0-34  milligram  of  chloride
of  sodium,  while  a  litre  of  rain  collected  from  the  valley  contained  2-5-7'6  milligrams.

•'  The  extrtu'tion  of  the  potassium  salts  (or  so-called  sunmier  salts)  was  carried  on  at
tlie  Isle  of  Camarga  about  1W70,  when  I  had  occasion  to  visit  that  spot.  At  the  present
time  the  deposits  of  Stassfurt  provide  a  much  cheaper  salt,  owing  to  the  evaporation  and
separation  of  the  sjilt  being  carried  on  there  by  natural  means  and  only  requiring  a  ti«at-
meiit  and  refining,  which  is  also  necessary  in  addition  for  the  *  summer  salt'  obtained
from  sea- water.

SODIUM  CHLORIDE— BERTflOLLETS  LAWS  421

mixed  with  the  bitter  salts  of  magnesium  which,  owing  to  their  solu-
bility and  the  small  amount  in  which  they  are  present  (less  than
1  p.c),  only  separate  out,  in  the  first  crystallisations,  in  traces.
Gypsum,  or  calcium  sulphate,  CaS042H20,  because  of  its  sparing
solubility,  separates  together  with  or  even  before  the  table  salt.  When
about  half  of  the  latter  has  separated,  then  a  mixture  of  table  salt
and  magnesium  sulphate  separates  out,  and  on  still  further  evapora-
tion the  chlorides  of  potassium  and  magnesium  begin  to  separate
in  a  state  of  combination,  forming  the  double  salt  KMgCl3,6H20,
which  occurs  in  nature  as  cartwJlite,^  After  the  separation  of  this
salt  from  sea  water,  there  remains  a  mother  liquor  containing  a
large  amount  of  magnesium  chloride  in  admixture  with  various
other  salts.''  The  extraction  of  sea  salt  is  usually  carried  on  for  the
purpose  of  procuring  table  salt,  and  therefore  directly  it  begins  to
sepai-ate  mixed  with  a  considerable  proportion®  of  magnesium  salts
(when  it  acquires  a  bitter  taste)  the  remaining  liquor  is  run  back  into
the  sea.

The  same  process  which  Ls  employed  for  artificially  obtaining  salt
in  a  crystalline  form  from  sea  water  has  been  repeatedly  accomplished
during  the  geological  evolution  of  the  earth  on  a  gigantic  scale  ;  up-
heavals of  the  earth  have  cut  off  portions  of  the  sea  from  the  remainder
{as  the  Dead  Sea  was  formerly  a  part  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  Sea
of  Aral  of  the  Caspian),  and  their  water  has  evapoi*ated  and  formed
(if  the  mass  of  the  inflowing  fresh  water  were  less  than  that  of  the
mass  evaporated)  deposits  of  rock  salt.  It  is  always  accompanied  by
gypsum,  l:)ecause  the  latter  is  separated  from  sea  water  with  or  before
the  sodium  chloride. For  this  reason  rock  salt  may  always  be  looked  for

*  The  doable  salt  KCl,MgCl>  is  a  crj'Htjillohydrate  of  KCl  and  MgClo,  «iiid  is  only
formed  from  solutions  containing  an  excess  of  magnesium  chloride,  because  water  de-
composes this  doable  salt,  extracting  the  more  soluble  magnesium  chloride  from  it.

^  Owing  to  the  fundamental  proj^erty  of  salts  of  interchanging  their  metals,  it
cannot  be  said  that  sea  water  contains  this  or  that  salt,  but  only  that  it  contains  certain
amounts  of  certain  metals  M  (univalent  like  Na  and  K,  and  bivalent  like  Mg  and  Ca),  and
haloids  X  (univalent  like  CI,  Br,  and  bivalent  like  SO4,  CO5),  which  are  disposed  in
every  possible  kind  of  grouping ;  for  instance,  K  as  KCl,  KBr,  K^SO^,  Mg  as  MgClt,
MgBr.^,  MgS04,  and  so  on  for  all  tlie  other  metals.  In  evaporation  different  salts  separate
out  consecutively  only  because  they  reach  saturation.  A  proof  of  this  may  be  seen  in
the  fact  that  a  solution  of  a  mixture  of  sodium  chloride  and  magnesium  sulphate  (both
•of  which  salts  are  obtained  from  sea  water,  as  was  mentioned  above),  when  evaporated,
deposits  crystals  of  these  salts,  but  when  refrigerated  (if  the  solution  be  sufficiently
Haturated)  the  salt  NajS04,10HoO  is  first  deposited  because  it  is  the  first  to  arrive  at
saturation  at  low  temperatures.  Consequently  this  solution  contains  MgCl.j  and  Xa2S04,
besides  MgS04  and  NaCI. So  it  is  with  sea  water.

^  The  salt  extracted  from  water  is  piled  up  in  heaps  and  left  exxtosed  to  tlie  action  of
rain  water,  which  purifies  it,  owing  to  the  water  becoming  saturated  with  sodium  chloride
and  then  no  longer  dissolving  it,  but  washing  ont\he  impurities.

422  PRINCIPLES or  CHKM18TRY

in  those  localities  whore  there  are  deposits  of  gypsum.  But  inasmuch
as  the  gypsum  remains  on  the  spot  where  it  has  l)een  deposited  (as
it  is  a  sparingly  soluble  salt),  whilst  the  rock  salt  (as  one  which  is  verj-
soluble)  may  be  washed  away  by  rain  or  fresh  running  water,  it  may
sometimes  happen  that  although  gypsum  is  still  found  there  may  Vje
no  salt ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  where  there  is  rock  salt  there  will
always  be  gypsum.  As  the  geological  changes  of  the  Ciirth's  surface
are  still  proceeding  at  thepresent  day,  so  in  the  midst  of  the  dry  land
salt  lakes  are  met  with,  which  are  sometimes  scattered  over  vast  dis-
tricts formerly  c«>vered  by  seas  now  dried  up.  Such  is  the  origin  of
many  of  the  salt  lakes  about  the  lower  portions  of  the  Volga  and  in  the
Kirghiz  steppes,  where  at  a  geological  epoch  preceding  the  present  the
Aralo- Caspian  Sea  extended.  Such  are  the  Baskunchaksky  (in  the
Government  of  Astrakhan,  112  square  kilometres  superficial  area),  the
Eltonsky  (140  versts  from  the  left  bank  of  the  Volga,  and  200  square
kilometres  in  superficial  area),  and  upward  of  700  other  salt  lakes
lying  alKiut  the  lower  portions  of  the  Volga.  In  those  in  which  the
inflow  of  fresh  water  is  less  than  that  yearly  evaporated,  and  in  which
the  concentration  of  the  solution  has  reached  saturation,  the  »eif-
deposited  salt  is  found  already  deposited  on  their  beds,  or  is  l>eing  yearly
deposited  during  the  summer  months.  Certain  linians,  or  sea-side  lakes,
of  the  Azoff  Sea  are  essentially  of  the  same  character — as,  for  instance,
those  in  the  neighl)ourhood  of  Henichesk  and  Berdiansk.  The  saline
soils  of  certain  Central  Asian  steppes,  which  suffer  from  a  want  of
atmospheric  fresh  water,  are  of  the  same  origin.  Their  salt  originally
proceeded  from  the  salt  of  seas  which  previously  covered  these  localities,
and  has  not  yet  l)een  washed  away  by  fresh  water.  The  main  result  of
the  above- described  process  of  nature  is  the  formation  of  masses  of  rock
salt,  which  are,  however,  Ijeing  gradually  washed  away  by  the  subsoil
waters  flowing  in  their  neighbourhood,  and  afterwards  rising  t<»  the
surface  iji  certain  places  as  saline  s]yr{n{/s,  which  indicate  the  presence
of  masses  of  deposited  rock  salt  in  the  depths  of  the  earth.  If  the  sub-
soil water  flows  along  a  stratum  of  salt  for  a  suflicient  length  of  time  it
becomes  saturated  ;  but  in  flowing  in  its  further  course  along  an  im-
pervious stratum  (clay)  it  becomes  diluted  by  the  fresh  water  leaking
through  the  upper  soil,  and  therefore  the  greater  the  distance  i»f  a
saline  spring  from  the  deposit  of  rock  salt,  the  poorer  will  it  l>e  in
salt.  A  perfectly  saturated  brine,  however,  may  be  procured  from  the
ilepths  of  the  earth  by  means  of  bore-holes.  The  deposits  of  ri>ck  salt
themselves,  which  are  sometimes  hidden  at  great  depths  below  the
earth's  st  rata,  may  be  discovered  by  the  guidance  of  b(»re-holes  and  the
direction  of  the  strata  of  the  district. Dej>osits  of rock  salt,  alnrnt

SODIUM  CmX)RlDE-BERTHOLI.Ers  LAWS  423

•i5  metres  t}nck  and  20  metres lieli^w  tbe  surface,  wei-e  discovered  in  this
maiiiier  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Briaustckefilcy  and  X>elci>iii.>fl'k^,  in
the  Bakhtuut  district  <if  the  Giiveniiuent  of  Kkaterinoalav.  Lftrgi'
(|Ufintitiesi)f  iiiiiKt  exuellent  ruck  fsnlt  (ire  now  (since  1880)  nbtaiiied  ftrun
these  deposits,  whose  presence  was  indicated  liy  the  iieighbuuring  salt
springs  (near  Slnviansk  and  Bakhinut)  and  hy  bi ire-holes  whicli  had  i>eeii
sunk  in  these  locnlities  for  procuring  strong  (saturated)  lirines.  But
the  Stassfurt  depneits  nf  rock  salt  near  Magdelmrg  in  Germany  are
celebratetl  as  being  tlie  first  discovered  in  this  miinner,  and  fur  their
iiiiuiy  remarkable  [leculiaritips/  The  plentiful  diatriliution  nt  saline
springs  in  this  and  the  neighliouiiug  districts  suggested  the  presence
of  dejMjsits  of  rock  salt  in  the  vicinity.  Deep  bore-lioles  sunk  in
this  locality  did  in  fact  ^ve  a  richer  brine — even  quite  saturated
wiib  salt.  On  sinking'  to  a  still  greater  depth,  the  deposits  of  salt
iheiTiselves  were  at  last  arrived  at.  But  the  first  deposit  wliich  wiis
met  with  consisted  of  a  bitter  salt  unfit  for  consumption,  and  was
therefore  called  refuse  salt  (Alrra'iingfTh).  On  sinking  still  deeper  vast
beds  of  real  rock  salt  were  struck.  In  this  instance  the  presence  of
these  upper  strata  cont-aining  salts  of  potassium,  magnesium,  and
BiMlium  is  an  e.tcellent  proof  of  the  formation  of  rock  salt  from  sea  water.
It  is  very  evident  that  not  only  a  case  of  evaporation  to  the  end— as  far,
for  instance,  as  the  separation  of  carnallite — but  also  the  preservation
of  such  soluble  salts  as  separate  <iut  from  sea  water  after  the  aodiuni
chloride,  must  be  a  very  exceptional  phenomenon,  which  ia  not  repeated
in  all  deposits  of  rock  salt.  The  Stassfurl  deposits  therefore  are  of
particular  interest,  not  only  from  a  scientific  point  of  view,  but  also
liecause  they  form  a  rich  .source  of  pot^issiuni  salts  which  have  many
practical  uses.'  '''■

'  When  tile  Gennui  wi-ants  pointed  oat  the  euct  loc&tity  o(  the  Stuisfurt  salt
Iwda  und  (heir  depth  below  the  larisce,  cm  the  baaia  of  infommtioD  collected  fioui
vaTiona  qiUTtera  respecting'  bore-lialeii  and  the  directioa  of  the  strata,  and  when  the
boring*,  conducted  by  the  Clovemment,  slnicl  a  aalt-bed  which  was  bitter  and  nnilt
for  nse,  there  was  a  great  outcry  HgatnHt  seience,  and  the  doubtful  result  ereo  caused
the  ceiwttion  of  the  farther  work  of  deepening  the  sliofts.  It  reqnired  a  great
ellorl  to  pennade  the  GoTcrnment  to  continue  the  work.  Now,  when  the  pure  Bait
tncoutitereil  below  fonna  one  ol  the  important  ri«he«  of  Germany,  and  when  thoae
'  refuse  salts'  have  proved  to  lie  moHt  valuable  laBasource  of  potassium  and  nugnestDmJ,
we  should  se<*  iu  the  ntilistitinn  of  ihe  StassfurC  deposid  one  of  the  conqueats  uf  science
lor  the  oommon  welfare.

'  <>>■  Id  Western  Europe,  deposits  of  rock  salt  have  long  liecn  known  at  Wielicikn,
near  Cracow,  and  at  Cardona  in  Spain.  In  Basaia  the  following  deposits  are  known  i
la)  the  Taat  masses  of  rock  salt  la  square  kiloinetres  area  and  op  to  HO  metres  thick)
lying  directly  on  the  snrtaee  of  the  earth  at  Iletzky  Znstchit,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river
Ural,  in  the  Govemniciit  of  Orenburg ;  (6)  the  Chlngakaky  deposit,  MO  versta  from  the
river  Volga,  in  the  EnotaeSskj  district  ol  the  Qotemment  of  Astrakhan ;  (c)  the
Knlepinaky  fand  other)  deposits  (whose  IhicknefH  atlainn  15U  metres),  on  the  Araks,  in

is  not  caiTJetl  on  by  tlie  costly  consul  up  tioii  of  fuel,  but  by  the  cbeapi
method  of  evaporation  by  means  of  the  wind ,  For  tliis  purr
Botalled  grailuatora  are  i-onstructed  :  they  uonaist  of  long  anj  1
sheds,  which  (ire  sometimes  sevoml  Tersts  long,  and  generally  extend
in  ft  direction  at  right  nnglee  to  that  of  the  usual  coui-se  of  the  witid  in
the  district.  These  sheds  are  open  at  tlte  sides,  and  are  tilled  ^
brushwood  as  shown  in  fig,  64. Troughs,  a  b,  c  d,  into  which  Uie  a

n*k7  depodt  ii

SODIUM CHLORIDE— BERTHOLLETS LAWS  425

water  is  pumped,  run  along  the  top.  On  flowing  from  these  troughs,
through  the  openings,  a,  the  water  spreads  over  tlie  brushwood  and
distributes  itself  in  a  thin  layer  over  it,  so  that  it  presents  a  very  large
surface  for  evap<)ration,  in  consequence  of  which  it  rapidly  becomes
concentrated  in  warm  or  windy  weather.  After  trickling  over  the
brushwood,  the  solution  collects  in  a  reservoir  under  the  graduator,
whence  it  is  usually  pumped  up  by  the  pumps  p  p',  and  again  run  a
second  and  third  time  through  the  graduator,  until  the  solution  reaches
a  degree  of  concentration  at  which  it  becomes  profitable  to  extract
the  salt  by  direct  heating.  Generally  the  evaporation  in  the  graduator
is  not  carried  beyond  a  concentration  of  12  to  15  parts  of  salt  in
100  parts  of  solution.  Strong  natural  solutions  of  salt,  and  also  the
graduated  solutions,  are  evaporated  in  large  shallow  metallic  vessels,
which  are  either  heated  by  the  direct  action  of  the  flame  from  below
or  from  above.  These  vessels  are  made  of  boiler  plate,  and  are  called
salt-pans.  Various  means  are  employed  for  accelerating  the  evapora-
tion and  for  economising  fuel,  which  are  mainly  leased  on  an  artificial
draught  to  carry  off*  the  steam  as  it  is  formed,  and  on  subjecting  the
saline  solution  to  a  preliminary  heating  by  the  waste  heat  of  the  steam
and  furnace  gases.  Furthermore,  the  first  portions  of  the  salt  which
crystallise  out  in  the  salt-pans  are  invariably  contaminated  with  gypsum,
since  the  waters  of  saline  springs  always  contain  this  substance.  It  is
only  the  portions  of  the  salt  which  separate  later  that  are  distinguished
by  their  great  purity.  The  salt  is  ladled  out  as  it  is  deposited,  left  to
drain  on  inclined  tables  and  then  dried,  and  in  this  manner  the  so-
called  bay  salt  is  obtained.  Since  it  has  become  possible  to  discover
the  saline  deposits  themselves,  the  extraction  of  table  salt  from  the
water  of  saline  springs  by  evaporation,  which  previously  was  in  general
use,  has  begun  to  \ye  disused,  and  is  only  able  t<j  hold  its  ground  in
places  where  fuel  is  cheap.

In  order  U)  understand  the  full  importance  of  the  extraction  of
salt,  it  need  only  be  mentioned  that  on  the  average  20  lbs.  of  table  salt
are  ccmsumed  yearly  per  head  of  populati«m,  directly  in  f(K>d  or  for  cattle.
In  those  countries  where  c(»mmon  salt  is  employed  in  technical  pro-
cesses, and  especially  in  England,  almost  an  equal  quantity  is  consumed
in  the  production  of  substances  c(mtaining  chlorine  and  sodium,  and
especially  in  the  manufacture  of  washing  soda,  etc.,  and  of  chlorine
compounds  (bleaching  powder  and  hyrdochloric  acid).  The  yearly  pro-
duction of  salt  in  Europe  amounts  to  as  much  as  7i  million  tons.

Although  certain  lumps  of  rock  salt  and  ciystals  of  bay  salt  some-
times consist  of  almost  pure  sodium  chloride,  still  the  ordinary  com-
mercial salt  contains  various  impurities,  the  most  common  of  which  are

I

PB1NCIPLE3  OF  CHEMISTRY

;nmuiii  salU.  Tf  tlie  salt  lie  pure,  its  solution  gives  ni^  precipitAM^-l
1  acdium  ciirlmnate,  N»,CO,,  showing  tlie  al«ence  of  m:
salts,  liecause  miigneaium  cnriTonate,  MgCO^,  is  insoluble  in  water.
Book  stilt,  which  is  ground  for  use,  generally  contains  alsnn  ci'iisideralile
admixture  of  clay  and  Dthei"  insoluble  impurities."  l-'or  ordinary  use
the  bulk  of  the  salt  obtained  can  be  emplnyed  directly  without  further
puriticatiuii  ;  but  some  salts  are  purified  liy  solution  nnd  crystaUisatioii
of  the  solution  after  standing,  in  which  cose  the  evaporatiun  is  not  car-
ried tm  t'l  di-yness,  and  tlie  impurities  remain  in  the  mother  I uptor  or
in  the  sediment.  When  perfectly  pure  salt  is  required  for  chemical
purposes  it  is  best  obtained  as  follows;  a  saturated  solution  of  table
siilt  is  prepared,  and  hydrochloric  acid  gas  is  passed  through  it ;  this
precipitates  the  sodium  chloride  (wliicli  is  not  soluble  iii  a  strong  solu-
tion of  hydrochloric  acid),  while  the  impurities  remain  in  solution.  By
repeating  the  operation  and  fusing  the  salt  (when  adhering  bydro-J
chloric  acid  is  volatilised)  a  pure  salt  is  obtained,  wliich  in  again  n
crystallised  from  its  solution  by  evaporation,^  \

Pure  sodium thloride,  in well-deiined crystals (slowly  deposited
at  the  bottom  of  the  liquid)  or  in  compact  masses  (in  which  form  rock
Bolt  is  sometimes  met  with),  is  a  colourless  and  transparent  substance
resembling,  but  more  brittle  and less  hard  than,  glass.'" Common  J
salt  always  crystallises  in  the  cubic  system,  most  frequently  in  i^iAtWij
and  moi'e  rarely  in  octahedra. Large  transparent  cubes  of  commoi
salt,  having  edges  up  to  10 'centimetres  long,  are  sometimes  found  infl
masses  of  i-ock  salt" When  evapumted  in  the  open  the  salt  t

>  Tlie  (mcture  of  rock  suit  generollr  shows  the  preienre  of  uiterla}«rs  of  imparilttJ
which  are  wimntimeB  Tpry  inull  in  weight,  but  TiBible  owiiig  to  their  refraotian.
eicelleutly  laid  oat  salt  mineH  of  Biiaash 1  counted  <1H88|,  if  my  tnemoiy  do
deceive  me,  on  ui  nrengt  ten  interlajors  per  metre  of  thicknesB,  between  which  th*  ■■
was  in  Eenenl  yerj  pare,  and  in  plncea  qni  te  traDsparent. If  this  be  the  case,  thai
irimld  be  800  inberlaj-era  tor  the  wliole  thicknesii  (alionl  SG  metreiil  of  the  bed.
prubalily  oonespond  with  the  yearly  depoaition  of  the  >'alt. In  this  case  the  depo
would  have  extended  over  mom  than  ROO  yeam. This  shonld  lie  obnanable  <
day  in  lakes  where  the  salt  is  satDrsted  and  in  course  of  depotiitioii.

'  Hy  own  iareitigUitions  hare shown that not only  the enlpbateit,  bot alaft |
potaMium  salts,  are  entirely  removed  by  this  method.

>0  According  to  the  detemitnations  of  Klodt,  the  BHanak  rock  salt  withabun
pressure  of  H40  kiiogmms  pe^r  nqnare  i^enLinielre,  whilst  t;lass  witlistands  1,700  )■
In  this  respect  Halt  is  twice  im  secure  as  bricks,  and  therefore  iiamensu  loi
cutracted  from  onderKround  workings  with  imriett  safety,  without  haTin)
brickwork  tuppnrta.  merely  taking  adrantage  of  the  properties  of  the  eolt  ib

n  To  obtain  well-formed  crystals,  a  saturated  solution  in  mixed  with  ferric  ohlor
sevetiU  small  crystals  of  sodium  chloride  are  placed  nt  the  bottom,  and  the  *■
i«  sUawed  to  eTsporate  slowly  in  n  vessel  with  a  loose-flttiug  cover.  Octnliedral  e
are  obtained  by  the  addition  of  borax,  uies.  Ac,  to  the  solation.  Very  Hue  cryatala  •
formed  in  a  maRs  of  gelatinous  silica.

^^^^  SODlrM CULniilDK— KKRTHOLLET'f* LAWS

sepamtes  out  on  the  surface  "  as  cubes,  which  grow  on  to  each  othei-
in  the  form  o£  pjTaniiclul  square  funnels.  In  stUl  weather,  these
clusters  are  Me  to  support  themselves  on  the  aurfuce  nf  the  water  for
a  long  time,  and  Sometimes  go  on  iiicreosiug  tJ>  a  considerable  extent,
Imt  they  siiilc  directly  the  water  penetrutes  inside  theui.  Salt  fuses
to  a  colourlesa  liquid  (sp.  gr.  l'C02,  according  tu  Quincke)  at  8r>|°
(V.  Meyer);  if  pure  it  solidifies  to  a  Don -crystalline  mass,  and  if  impure
to  an  opa(|ue  mags  whose  surface  is  not  smooth  In  fusing,  sodium
chloride  commences  to  volatilise  (its  weight  decreases)  and  at  a  white
heat  it  volatilises  with  great  ease  and  completely  ;  but  at  the  ordinary
temperature  it  may,  like  all  ordinary  salts,  lie  considered  as  non-volatile,
although  as  yet  no  exact  experiments  have  been  made  in  this  direction.
A  saturated  '^  solution  of  table  salt  (containing  ^6'4  p.c.)  lias  at
the  ordinary  temperature  a  specific  gravity  of  ainut  1'2.  The  specific
gravity  of  the  crystals  ia  2167  (17°).  The  salt  which  separates  out
at  the  ordinary  and  higher  temperatures  contains  no  water  of  crystal-
lisation ;  " but if  the crystals  are  formed  at  a low temperature,

"  U  n  aoltitiou  of  Hodiutn  uhlon'ile  be  slowl;  Watedlrom  uliove,  where  the  vvaporatimi
ttken  pUce,  then  the  apper  lajei  nil!  beoome  uluntt^  before  (lie  lower  and  cooler
Uyem,  und  therefore  cryitalliution  will  begin  on  the  aurfue,  and  the  cryitalB  (irat  formed
will  floftt,  h&Ting  alio  dried  From  nbore,  on  the  sitrfAfe  until  the^  become  qaite  vokked.
Being  heavier  Uun  tb«  aolution  the  tryfltalo  ore  partiAlly  immersed  under  it,  end  the
(ollowin);  crjst&nisation,  ftlao  prcHxeding  on  the  sDrface,  vitl  only  form  cryaUls  itlone
the  Hide  of  the  origiDal  crjBtnlB.  A  lunnel  ie  formed  in  this  mftnoer.  It  wilt  be
borne  on  tlie  surfitce  like  ii  boat  (if  the  liquid  be  quiescent),  beckou  it  will  grow  more
tmrn  the  upper  edges.  We  can  thus  nndsoluid  thie  at  Snt  sight  Btrange  fimiMil  form
of  erjiiteUieBtioii  of  ult.  In  eipUuation  whj  the  crTstalliiation  under  the  above
condiiiooa  begine  at  the  aurtace  uid  not  at  tlie  lower  layera,  it  muat  be  mentioned  thM
the  apeciflc  gnvity  ot  •  crystal  of  aodium  chloride  =  3*1(1,  and  thut  ot  a  solution  sat nrated
at  115°  CKiiloins  SIl'T  p.v.  of  ealt  and  has  a  specific  graritf  at  S5<'  t°  of  l-SitOi-,  at  15'  a
Batnnttvd  »>lntion  tontoias  SSS  p.c,  of  salt  and  has  a  sp,  gc,  I'SOS  at  l^'^'l".  Hence  *
■olutian  aalorated  at  a  higher  tempemtare  i>  apecificoUy  lighter,  notwithstanding  the
greater  amount  of  salt  it  contains.  With  many  sabetoncviitiur/acecTT/ifafJua/i'oncannot
take  place  because  their  solubitily  inctewies  more  TBpidljr  with  the  Usmperatore  than  their
■pecificgruTitj  decreases.  In  this  cttsa  the  satarated  solution  will  always  be  in  the  lower
layers,  where  also  the  crystalUiuition  will  take  place.  Besides  which  it  maybe  added  that
as  acooeequence  of  the  properties  otwaler  and  solutions,  when  they  are  heated  from  aWve
(for  instance,  by  the  sun's  rays),  the  warmer  layers  being  the  lightest  remain  above,  whilst
when  heated  fniDi  below  they  rise  to  thu  top.  For  (his  reason  the  water  at  great  depthn
bvlov  Ibeautface  is  always  cold,  which  has  long  been  known.  These  ciroamstiuicea,  on  well
■It  those  observed  by  Boret  (Chapter  I.,  Note  10],  explain  the  great  diflerenucf  of  density
and  temperature,  and  in  the  amount  of  volts  held  in  the  oi.i!aii)<  at  different  latitudes  |in
polar  and  tropical  climes)  and  at  vnrioan  depths.

>'  By  combining  the  reenlts  of  Poggiole,  Miitler,  and  Komten  (they  are  evidently
more  oocarate  tl»n  those  of  Gay-Lussoc  and  others)  I  Found  that  t,  saturated  solution  at
t°,  from  ir^  to  1DH°,  contiuas  UyT-tOOaif-i-OiXIO-JC  gromi  of  salt  per  lOOgrnuisoF  water.
Thi»  tormnla  gives  a  solnbUity  at  U"  =  85*7  grams  (  =  30'J!  p,f.),  whilst  according  to  Kar-
sten  it  is  Sfiira.  Poggiale  H6'S,  and  Uilllet  ASa  grams.

"  Perfectly  pure  futrd  tolt  is  not  hygroscDpic,  according  to  Karsten,  whilst  the
cCTstoUised  salt,  even  when  qaite  pore,  attractai  oi  much  as  ITB  p.p.  of  water  from  moist

428  PRIN'CIPLES  OF  CHEMISTKY

especially  from  a  saturated  solution  cooled  to  —  12°,  then  they  present
a  prismatic  form,  and  contain  two  equivalents  of  water,  NaCI,2H20.
At  the  ordinary  temperature  these  crystals  split  up  into  sodium
chloride  and  its  solution.^'*  Unsaturated  solutions  of  table  salt  when
cooled  below^  0°  give  ^^  crystals  of  ice,  but  when  the  solution  has  a
composition  NaCljlOHgO  it  solidifies  completely  at  a  temperature  of

—  23°.  A  solution  of  table  salt  saturated  at  its  boiling  point  lx>ils  at
about  109°,  and  contains  about  42  parts  of  salt  per  100  parts  of  water.

Of  all  its  physical  properties  the  specific  gravity  of  solutions  of
sodium  chloride  is  the  one  which  has  l)een  the  most  fully  investigated.
A  comparison  of  all  the  existing  determinations  of  the  specific  graWty

air,  according  to  StaH.  (In  the  Briansk  mines,  where  the  temperature  throughout  the
whole  year  ia  about  + 10^,  it  may  be  observed,  as  Baron  Klodt  informed  me,  that  in  the
summer  during  damp  weather  the  walls  become  moist,  while  in  winter  they  are  dry).

If  the  salt  contain  impurities— such  as  magnesium  sulphate,  &c. — it  is  more  hygro-
scopic. If  it  contain  any  magnesium  chloride,  it  partially  deliquesces  in  a  damp  atmo-
sphere. The  crystalliued  and  not  perfectly  pure  salt]  decrepitates  when  heated,  owing  to
its  containing  water.  The  pure  salt,  and  also  the  transparent  rock  salt,  or  that  which
has  been  once  fused,  does  not  decrepitate.  Fused  sodium  chloride  shows  a  faint  alkaline
reaction  to  litmus,  which  has  been  noticed  by  many  observers,  and  is  due  to  the  presence
of  sodium  oxide  (probably  by  the  action  of  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere).  Accoi-ding
to  A.  Stcherbakoff  very  sensitive  litmus  (washed  in  alcohol  and  neutralised  with  oxalic
acid)  shows  an  alkaline  reaction  even  with  the  crystallised  salt.

It  may  be  observed  that  rock  salt  sometimes  contains  cavities  filled  with  a  colourless
liquid.  Cert»iin  kinds  of  rock  salt  emit  an  odour  like  that  of  hydrocarbons.  These
phenomena  have  as  yet  received  very  little  attention.

^^  By  cooling  a  solution  of  table  salt  saturated  at  the  ordinary  temperature  to  —  15°,
I  obtained  firHt  of  all  well-formed  tabular  (six-sided)  crystals,  which  when  wamied  to
the  ordinary  temperature  disintegrated  (with  the  separation  of  anhydrous  sodium
chloride),  and  tlien  prismatic  needles  up  to  20  mm.  long  were  formed  from  tlie  aime
solution.  I  have  not  yet  investigated  the  reason  of  the  difference  in  crystalline  form.
It  is  known  (Mitscherlich)  that  NaI,2H.20  also  crystallises  either  in  plates  or  prisms.
Sodium  bromide  also  cr^'stallises  with  2H.,,0  at  the  ordinary  temperature.

^•"'  Notwithstanding  the  great  simplicity  (Chapter  I.,  Note  49)  of  the  observations  on  the
formation  of  ice  from  solution,  still  even  for  sodium  chloride  they  cannot  yet  be  con-
sidered as  sufficiently  harmonious.  According  to  Blagden  and  Kaoult,  the  temperature
of  the  formation  of  ice  from  a  solution  containing  c  grams  of  salt  per  100  grams  of  water
=  —00c  to  c-^10,  according  to  Rosetti  =  —  0'64i)r  to  c-H?,  according  to  De  Coppet
(to  c-10)-=  -0-55  c  -  OOOCc^,  according  to  Karsten  (to  r  -  10)  - 0-762c  +  00084c»,  and
according  to  Guthrie  a  much  lower  figure.  By  taking  Rosetti's  figure  and  applying
the  rule  given  in  Chapter  1.,  Note  49  we  obtain —

2- 0049  X  ^"■'''  =  20r>.
18-5

Pickering  (1893)  gives  for  c -  1  - OOO.S,  for  c  =  2-l'220;  that  is  (c  up  to  ±1)  about

-  (0-600  +  0005c)c.

The  data  for  strong  solutions  are  not  less  contradictory.  Tliuswith  20  p.c.  of  salt,  icv
is  fonned  at  —14*4^  according  to  Karsten,  —17°  according  to  Guthrie,  — 17"0'^  according
to  De  Coppet.  Riidorff  states  that  for  strong  solutions  the  temperature  of  the  formation
of  ice  descends  in  proportion  to  the  contents  of  the  compound,  NaCl/iH.^O  (per  100  grams
of  water)  by  0^"342  ix?r  1  gram  of  salt,  and  De  Coppet  shows  that  there  is  no  proportion-
ality, in  a  strict  sense,  for  either  a  percentage  of  NaCl  or  of  NaCl,2H20.

0°

•p  =  5

10372

10

10768

15

11164

20

11568

30^

100°

10307

9922

10669

10278

11043

10652

11429

11043

SODIUM  CHLORIDE  -  BERTHOLLET'S  LAWS  429

of  solutions  of  NaCl  '^  at  15°  (in  vacuo,  taking  water  at  4°  as  10,000),

with  regard  to  p  (the  percentage  amount  of  the  salt  in  solution),  show

that  it  is  expressed  by  the  equation  S,.^  =  99916  +  7M7jp  -f-  0-2140;>^

For  instance,  for  a  solution 2OOH2O  -|-  NaCl,  in  which  case  ;?  =  1*6,

S,5  =  1'0106. It  is  seen  from  the  formula  that  the  addition  of  water

produces  a  contraction.  "* The  specific  gravity  *^  at  certain  temperatures

and  concentrations  in  vacuo  referred  to  water  at  4°  =  1 0,000  ^^  is  here

<(iven  for

15°

10353

10728

11107

11501

It  should  be  remarked  that  Baum^'s  hydrometer  is  graduated  V)y
taking  a  10  p.c.  solution  of  sodium  chloride  as  10°  on  the  scale,  and
therefore  it  gives  approximately  the  percentage  amount  of  the  salt  in  a

'^  A  collection  of  obsen-ations  on  the  Ki)ecifie  gravity  of  solutions  of  sodium  cliloride
is  given  in  my  work  cited  in  Chapter  I.,  Note  50.

Solutions  of  common  salt  have  also  been  frequently  investigated  us  regards  rate  of
(Uffuaion  (Chapter  L),  but  as  yet  there  are  no  complete  data  in  this  resi^ect.  It  may  be
mentioned  that  Graham  and  De  Vries  demonstrated  that  diffusion  in  gelatinous  masses
(for  instance,  gelatin  jelly,  or  gelatinous  silica)  proceeds  in  the  same  mamier  as  in  water,
which  may  probably  lead  to  a  convenient  and  accurate  method  for  the  investigation
of  the  phenomena  of  diflfusion.  N.  Umoflf  (Odessa,  1888)  investigated  the  diffusion  of
common  salt  by  means  of  glass  globules  of  definite  density.  Having  poured  water  into  a
cylinder  over  a  layer  of  a  solution  of  sodium  chloride,  he  observed  during  a  period  of
several  months  the  |X)sition  (height)  of  the  globules,  which  floated  U]>  higher  and  higher
as  the  salt  permeated  upwards.  Umoff  fomid  that  at  a  constant  temi>erature  the  dis-
tances of  the  globules  (that  is,  the  length  of  a  column  limited  by  layers  of  definite  con-
centration) remain  constant ;  that  at  a  given  moment  of  time  the  concentration,  7,  of
different  layers  situated  at  a  depth  z  is  expressed  by  the  equation  B  — K^  =  log.  (A  — 7),
where  A,  B,  and  K  are  constants ;  that  at  a  given  moment  the  rate  of  diffusion  of  the
different  layers  is  proportional  U)  their  depth,  d'c.

**•  If  .S'o  be  the  specific  gravity  of  water,  and  S  the  8i)ecific  gravity  of  a  solution  con-
taining/>  p.c.  of  salt,  then  by  mixing  equal  weights  of  water  and  the  solution,  we  shall
obtain  a  solution  containing  \^p  of  the  salt,  and  if  it  be  formed  without  contraction,  then  its

2 11

si>ecific  gravity  x  will  be  detennined  by  the  equation ,  —  - -f ^  .because  the  volume  is

X So S
equal  to  the  weight  divided  by  the  density. In  reality,  the  specific  gravity  is  always  found
to  be  greater  than  that  calculated  on  the  supposition  of  an  absence  of  contraction.

^*  Generally  the  specific  gravity  is  observed  by  weighing  in  air  and  dividing  the  weight
in  grams  by  the  volume  in  cubic  centimetres,  the  latter  being  found  from  the  weight  of
water  displaced,  divided  by  its  density  at  the  temperature  at  which  the  experiment  is  carried
out.  If  we  call  this  specific  gravity  5i,  then  as  a  cubic  centimetre  of  air  under  the  usual
conditions  weighs  about  ()(K)r2  gram,  the  sp.  gr.  in  a  vacuum  S  =  Si  -  OOOl'i  (.S'l-  1),
if  the  density  of  water  =  1.

*  If  the  sp.  gr.  S.i  be  found  directly  by  dividing  the  weight  of  a  solution  by  the
weight  of  water  at  tlu'  same  temperature  and  in  the  same  volume,  then  the  true  sp.  gr.
S  referred  to  water  ut  i  is  found  by  multiplying  S^  by  the  sp.  gr.  of  water  at  the  tem-
l)crature  of  observation.

430  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

solution. Common  salt  is  somewhat soluble  in  alcohol,** but it  is
insoluble  in  ether  and  in  oils.

Common  salt  gives  very  few  compounds  '-^^  (double  salts)  and  these
are  very  readily  decomposed :  it  is  also  decomposed  with  great  difficulty
and  its  dissociation  is  unknown.*^  But  it  is  easily  decomposed,  both
when  fused  and  in  solution,  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current.  If  the
dry  salt  be  fused  in  a  crucible  and  an  electric  current  be  passed  through
it  by  immersing  carbon  or  platinum  electrodes  in  it  (the  positive  elec-
trode is  made  of  carbon  and  the  negative  of  platinum  or  mercury),  it  is
decomposed :  the  suffocating  gas,  chlorine,  is  liberated  at  the  positive
pole  and  metallic  sodium  at  the  negative  pole.  Both  of  them  act  on  the
excess  of  water  at  the  moment  of  their  evolution  ;  the  sodium  evolves
hydrogen  and  forms  caustic  soda,  and  the  chlorine  evolves  <»xygen  and
forms  hydrochloric  acid,  and  therefore  on  passing  a  current  through  a
solution  of  common  salt  metallic  sodium  will  not  be  obtained — but
oxygen,  chlorine,  and  hydrochloric  acid  will  appear  at  the  positive
pole,  and  hydrogen  and  caustic  soda  at  the  negative  pole.*-*^  ^^^  Thus
salt,  like  other  salts,  is  decomposed  by  the  action  of  an  electric  current
into  a  metal  and  a  haloid  (Chapter  III.)  Naturally,  like  all  other
salts,  it  may  be  formed  from  the  corresponding  base  and  acid  with
the  separation  of  water.  In  fact  if  we  mix  caustic  soda  (base)
with  hydrochloric  acid  (acid),  table  salt  is  formed,  NaHO  -|-  HCl
=  NaCl  -t  nfi.

-*  According  to  Schiflf  100  grams  of  alcohol,  containing  ;>  p.c.  by  weight  of  C.,H,;0,
dissolves  at  15^ —

])  =  10  20  40  (U)  MO

28-5  22-6  13-2  nSJ  12  graniK  NaCl.

-'^  Amongut  the  double  milts  formed  by  sodium  chloride  that  obtained  by  Ditte  (1H70|
by  the  evaporation  of  the  solution  remaining  after  heating  sodium  iodate  with  hydro-
chloric a<^'id  until  chlorine  ceases  to  be  liberated,  is  a  remarkable  one.  Its  composition  is
NaI05,NaCl,14H..O.  Rammelsberg  obtained  a  similar  (}>erhaps  the  same)  salt  in  well-
formed  crj'stals  by  the  direct  reaction  of  both  salts.

^'  But  it  gives  sodium  in  the  flame  of  a  Bunsen's  burner  (nee  Sj^ei'trum  Analysis),
doubtless  under  the  reducing  action  of  the  elements  carbon  and  hydrogen.  In  the
presence  of  an  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid  in  the  flame  (when  the  stjdium  wcmld  form
sodium  chloride),  no  sodium  is  formed  in  the  Hame  and  the  salt  does  not  coinnianieate
its  usual  coloration.

-"•  '••*•  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  but  that  chloride  of  siKlium  is  also  decompoHetl  in
its  atjueous  solutions  with  the  separation  of  sodium,  and  that  it  does  not  simply  enter
into  double  decomposition  with  the  water  (NaCl  i  H.,,0  XallO  ^  HCl).  Tliis  is  8et.»»
from  the  fact  that  when  a  saturated  solution  of  NaCl  is  rapidly  decomposed  by  an  eU»ctric
current,  a  large  amount  of  chlorine  api>ears  at  the  anode  and  a  sodium  amalgam  forms
at  the  mercury  cathode,  which  acts  but  slowly  upon  the  strong  solution  of  Halt.
Castner's  process  for  tlie  electrolysis  of  brine  into  chlor'ne  and  caustic  s<Hltt  is  tin
application  of  this  metluwl  which  has  been  already  woiked  in  En<rliind  on  an  induKtrial
scale.

SODIUM  CHLORIDE  -BERTHOLLETS  LAWS  431

With  respect  to  the  double  decompositions  of  sodium  chloride  it
should  be  observed  that  they  are  most  varied,  and  serve  as  means
of  obtaining  nearly  all  the  other  compounds  of  sodium  and  chlorine.

The  double  decompositions  0/ sodium  chloride  are  almost  exclusively
based  on  the  possibility  of  the  metal  sodium  being  exchanged  for
hydrogen  and  other  metals.  But  neither  hydrogen  nor  any  other  metal
can  directly  displace  the  sodium  from  sodium  chloride.  This  would
result  in  the  separation  of  metallic  sodium,  which  itself  displaces
liydrogen  and  the  majority  of  other  metals  from  their  compounds,  and
is  not,  so  far  as  is  known,  ever  separated  by  them.  The  replacement
of  the  sodium  in  sodium  chloride  by  hydrogen  and  various  metals
can  only  take  place  by  the  transference  of  the  sodium  into  some
other  combination.  If  hydrogen  or  a  metal,  M,  be  combined  with  an
element  X,  then  the  double  decomposition  NaCl  +  MX  =  NaX  +  MCI
takes  place.  Such  double  decompositions  take  place  under  special
conditions,  sometimes  completely  and  sometimes  only  partially,  as
we  shall  endeavour  to  explain.  In  order  to  acquaint  ourselves  with
the  double  decompositions  of  sodium  chloride,  we  will  follow  the
methods  actually  employed  in  practice  to  procure  com})ounds  of
sodium  and  of  chlorine  from  common  salt.  Foi*  this  purpose  we
will  first  describe  the  treatment  of  sodium  chloride  with  sulphuric
jicid  for  the  preparation  of  hydrochloric  acid  and  sodium  sulphate.
We  will  then  describe  the  substances  obtained  from  hydrochloric  acid
and  sodium  sulphate.  Chlorine  itself,  and  nearly  all  the  compounds
of  this  element,  may  be  procured  from  hydrochloric  acid,  whilst  sodium
carbonate,  caustic  soda,  metallic  sodium  itself  and  all  its  compounds,
may  be  obtained  from  sodium  sulphate.

Even  in  the  animal  organism  salt  undergoes  similar  changes,
furnishing  the  sodium,  alkali,  and  hydrochloric  acid  wliich  take  part  in
the  processes  of  animal  life.

Its  necessity  as  a  constituent  in  the  food  both  of  human  beings  and
of  animals  becomes  evident  when  we  consider  that  both  hydrochloric
acid  and  salts  of  sodium  are  found  in  the  substances  which  ai-e  separated
out  from  the  blood  into  the  stomach  and  intestines.  S<Klium  salts
are  found  in  the  blood  and  in  the  bile  which  is  elal)orated  in  the
liver  and  acts  on  the  food  in  the  alimentary  canal,  whilst  hydro
chloric  acid  is  found  in  the  acid  juices  of  the  stomach.  Chlorides  of  the
metals  are  always  found  in  considerable  quantities  in  tlie  urint*,  and  if
they  are  excreted  they  must  be  replenished  in  the  organism  ;  and  for
the  replenishment  of  the  loss,  substances  containing  chlorine  compounds
must  be  taken  in  food.  Not  only  do  animals  ccmsunie  those  small
amounts  of  sodium  cliloride  which  are  foundin  drinking  water  or  in  plants

432  PHIXCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

or  other  animals,  but  experience  has  shown  that  many  wild  animals  travel
long  distances  in  search  of  salt  sprin^ajs,  and  that  domestic  animals
which  in  their  natural  condition  do  not  require  salt,  willingly  take
it,  and  that  the  functions  of  their  organisms  become  much  more  regular
from  their  doing  so.

Thf  (U'tion  of  Hu^phxiVic  acid  on  sodium  cldorid*', — If  sulphuric  acid
be  poured  over  common  salt,  then  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  as
Glauber  observed,  an  odorous  gas,  hydrochloric  acid,  is  evolved.  The
reaction  which  takes  place  consists  in  the  sodium  of  the  salt  and  the
hydrogen  of  the  sulphui  ic  acid  changing  places.

NaCl -f- H,S()4 = HCl + JNTaHSO,

Sodium  chloride  Sulphuric  acid  Hydrochloric  acid Acid  sodium  Rulphate

At  the  ordinary  temperature  this  reaction  is  not  complete,  but  soon
ceases.  When  the  mixture  is  heated,  the  decomposition  proceeds
until,  if  there  be  sufficient  salt  present,  all  the  sulphuric  acid  taken  is
converted  into  acid  sodium  sulphate.  Any  excess  of  acid  will  remain
unaltered.  If  2  molecules  of  sodium  chloride  (117  parts)  be  taken
per  molecule  of  sulphuric  acid  (98  parts),  then  <m  heating  the  mixture
to  a  moderate  temperature  only  one-half  (r)8'5)  of  the  salt  will  suffer
change.  Complete  decomposition,  after  which  neither  hydrogen  nor
chlorine  is  left  in  the  residue,  proceeds  (when  117  parts  of  table  salt
are  tiiken  per  9S  parts  of  sulphuric  acid)  af  a  red  h*'at  only, .Then —

2XaCl -f- H,SO, = 2HC1  + Na.,SO,

Tabh;  Hult  Suli>huric  acid  Hydrochloric  acid  Sodium  sulphate

This  double  decomposition  is  the  result  or  the  action  of  the  acid
salt,  NallSO,,  first  formed,  on  sodium  chloride,  for  the  acid  sjilt,
since  it  contains  hydrogen,  itself  acts  like  an  acid,  NaCl  +  NaHSO^
=  HCl  +  Na.^SO,,  Ry  adding  this  ecjuation  to  the  first  we  obtain
the  second,  which  expresses  the  ultimate  reaction.  Hence  in  the  al)ove
reaction,  non- volatile  or  sparingly  volatile  table  salt  and  spanngly
volatile  sulphuric  acid  are  taken,  and  as  the  result  of  their  reaction,
after  the  hydrogen  and  sodium  have  exchanged  places,  there  is  obtained
non-volatile  sodium  sulphate  and  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid.  The  fact
of  the  latt(»r  being  a  gaseous  substance  fonns  the  main  reason  for  the
reaction  pro<eeding  to  the  very  end.  The  mechanism  of  this  kind  of
d<>ul)le  decomposition,  and  the  cause  of  the  course  of  the  reaction,  are
exactly  thr  same  as  those  we  saw  in  the  decomposition  of  nitre
(Chapter  \'I.)  by  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid.  The  sulphuric  acid  in
each  case  displaces  the  other,  volatile,  acid.

SODIUM  CHL0HIDE-BBKTH0LLET8  LAW3  433

Not  ■iiily  in  tbese  two  instances,  but  in  every  inslAnee,  if  ti  volatile  acid
can  be  formed  by  the  substitution  of  the  hyiirogen  of  sulphuric  acid  for
a  metiil,  then  this  volatile  acid  will  be  formed.  From  this  it  may  be
concluded  that  the  volatility  of  the  acid  ahuuld  be  considered  as  the
cause  of  the  progress  of  the  reaction  ;  and  indeed)  if  the  acid  be  soluble
but  not  volatile,  or  if  the  reaction  take  place  in  an  enclosed  epace
where  the  resulting  acid  cannot  volatilise,  or  at  the  ordinary  tempera-
ture when  it  does  not  pass  into  the  state  of  elastic  vapour — then  the
decomposition  does  not  proceed  to  the  end,  but  only  up  to  a  certain
limit.  In  this  respect  the  explanations  given  at  the  beginning  of  this
century  by  the  French  chemist  Berthollet  in  his  work  '  Essai  de  Statique
Chimique '  are  very  important.  T/if  rloctrine  of  B'-rtholUt  starts  from
the  supposition  that  the  chemical  reaction  of  substances  is  determined
not  only  by  the  degrees  of  affinity  between  the  different  parts,  but  also
by  the  I'elative  masses  of  the  reacting  substances  and  by  those  physical
conditions  under  which  the  reaction  takes  place.  Two  .substances
containing  the  elements  MX  and  NY,  being  brought  into  contact
with  each  other,  form  by  double  decomposition  the  compounds  MY  and
NX  ;  but  the  formation  of  these  two  new  compounds  will  not  proceed
to  the  end  unless  one  of  them  is  removed  from  the  sphere  of  action.
But  it  can  only  be  removed  if  it  possesses  different  physical  properties
from  those  of  the  other  substances  which  are  present  with  it.  Either  it
must  be  a  gas  while  the  others  are  liquid  or  solid,  or  an  insoluble  solid
while  the  others  are  liquid  or  soluble.  The  relative  amounts  of  the
resultant  substances,  if  nothing  separates  out  from  their  intermixture,
depend  only  on  the  relative  quantities  of  the  substances  MX  and  NY,
and  upon  the  degrees  of  attraction  existing  between  the  elements  M,
N,  X,  and  Y  ;  but  however  great  their  mass  may  be,  and  however  con-
siderable the  attractions,  still  in  any  case  if  nothing  separates  out  from
the  sphere  of  action  the  decompasition  will  presently  cease,  a  state  of
equilibrium  will  be  established,  and  instead  of  two  there  will  remain  four
substances  in  the  mass  :  namely,  a  portion  of  the  original  bodies  MX  and
NY,  and  b  certain  quantity  of  the  newly  formed  substances  MY  and  NX,
if  it  be  assumed  that  neither  MN  or  XY  nor  any  other  substances
are  produced,  and  this  may  for  the  present"  be  admitted  in  the  case  of

"  If  MX  Hud  NY  repreBtBt  Uio  molecalea  o(  two  aalta,  and  if  there  be  iio  IhiTd
Mubilaner  present  (anch  na  nuter  in  a  aoltitiuii),  the  foimalion  of  XY  wodM  also  be
pouible:  (or  inHt&nce,  Djiuuigeti,  iodine,  ftc.  «re  capable  at  combiniDg  with  simple  haloidii,
aa  Tell  lU  with  the  complex  groups  which  in  ctirfaun  wltB  pUy  the  part  of  haloids.  Beijdes
which  the  iwll«  MX  and  NY  or  MY  with  NX  may  form  double  ults.  If  the  namber  or
molecule*  be  nueqnal,  or  if  the  valency  of  the  elemenCt  or  groapa  cunUined  in  them  ba
different,  aaiii  NaCl  »  HgSO,,  where  CI  is  a  univalent  haloid  and  SO,  i>j  bivalent,  then  IhB
matter  may  be  C0Diplicitt«d  by  the  lonnation  of  other  componnda  beaideti  M  Y  and  KX.  and
▼01-  I.  F  F

434  PRINCIPLES  OF  CIIEMISTRy

the  double  decomposition  of  Baits  in  which  M  and  N  are  metals  ai
X  and  Y  haloids.  As  the  ordinary  double  decomposition  here  consis
merely  in  the  exchange  of  metals,  the  above  simplification  is  applicabl
The  sum  total  of  existing  data  concerning  the  double  decomposition
salts  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  from  salts  MX  +  NY  there  alwa;
arises  a  certain  quantity  of  NX  and  MY,  as  should  be  the  ea
acconling  to  Berthollet's  doctrine.  A  portion  of  the  historical  da
concerning  this  subject  will  be  afterwards  mentioned,  but  we  will  ,
once  proceed  to  point  out  the  obserTationa  made  by  Spring  (1888)  whit
show  that  even  in  a  solid  stale  salts  are  subject  to  a  similar  int«rcha&j
of  metnls  if  in  a  condition  of  sufficiently  close  contact  (it  r«quir
time,  a  finely  divided  state,  and  intimate  mixture).  Spring  took  ti
noil -hygroscopic  salts,  potassium  nitrate,  KNOg,  and  well-dried  sodiu
acetati-,  C.jH3Na(^^,  and  left  a  mixture  of  their  powders  for  sever
months  in  a  desiccator.  An  interchange  of  metab  took  place,  as  wi
seen  from  the  fact  that  the  resultant  mass  rapidly  attracted  tl
moisture  of  the  air,  owing  to  the  formation  of  sodium  nitrate,  NaNO
and  potassium  acetate,  C^H^KO,,  both  of  which  are  highly  bygr
Bcopic,'^  bu

When  BerthoUet  enunciated  his  doctrine  the  present  views  of  aton
and  molecules  had  yet  to  be  developed,  and  it  is  now  necessary  to  sn)
mit  the  matter  to  examination  in  the  light  of  these  conceptions  ;  we  wj
therefui'e  consider  the  reaction  of  salts,  taking  M  and  N,  X  and  Y  i
equivalent  to  each  other— that  is,  as  capable  of  replacing  each  otht
'  in  toto,'  as  Na  or  K,  ^Ca  or  ^Mg  (bivalent  elements)  replace  hydrogei

And  since,  according  to  Berthollet's  doctrine,  when  iiiMX  of  oi
salt  comes  into  contact  with  itNY  of  another  salt,  a  certain  quontit
j;MY  and  xN'X  is  formed,  there  remains  in  —  .r  of  the  salt  MX,  an
n  -  a:  of  the  salt  NY.  If  m  be  greater  than  n,  then  the  maximal
interchange  could  lead  to  :f  ^  n,  whilst  from  the  salts  taken  thei
would  be  formed  liMY  +  nNX  +  (m  -  n)MX— that  is,  a  portion  ofoi;
only  of  the  salts  taken  would  remain  unchanged  because  the  reactio
could  only  proceed  between  nMX  and  iiNY. If  x  were  actually  eqni

wliL'uawilveiit  |iftrtiti|»(i-«  in  thaaction,  nndrapecinllj'  il  preRent  in  Urge  propaition,  U
ph.'iioineiia  niuil  i-videntlv  become  »till  more  complei ;  mid  this  is  acto&lly  the  ckm
imtiirc.  Hein'e  while  pldciiig  liefiirr  the  reader  ii  Pettnin  portion  of  the  eiisting  Bto
oF  kiic>»It><l(ce  coneeniin];  (he  phenomptia  nl  douhle  saline  decompoBitiona,  I  cknnot  co
eider  tbe  tlieury  ol  tlif  Hubject  ae  complete,  &nd  have  therefore  limited  m^Klf  to  ■  h
data,  tile  complrtinn  of  which  niDBt  be  sought  in  more  detailed  norka  on  the  nbject
Uieonitical  vhemixtrjr,  wttliout  losing  siglit  ol  what  has  bei-n  said  above.

It  hH  U'ben  the  mixture  of  potassium  nitrate  and  sodium  uretate  wan  healed  by  Sprii
to  lOn^  it  wuH  cumi>letel}'  fused  into  one  mass,  although  potassium  nitrate  fusen  at  aJ>o
SK"  allil  MHliom  nitrate  at  aboot  830".

SODIUM  CHLORIDE— BERTIIOLLET'S  LAWS  485

to  Hf  the  mass  of  the  salt  MX  would  not  have  any  influence  on  the
moduit  operatuli  of  the  reeu^tion,  which  is  equally  in  accordance  with
the  teaching  of  Bergmann,  who  supposed  double  reactions  to  be  inde-
pendent of  the  mass  and  determined  by  affinity  only.  If  M  had  more
affinity  for  X  than  for  Y,  and  N  more  affinity  for  Y  than  for  X,  then
according  to  Bergmann  there  would  be  no  decomposition  whatever,  and
X  would  equal  0.  If  the  affinity  of  M  for  Y  and  of  N  for  X  were  greater
than  those  in  the  original  grouping,  then  the  affinity  of  M  for  X  and  of  N
for  Y  would  be  overcome,  and,  according  to  Bergmann 's  doctrine,  complete
interchange  would  take  place — i,e.  x  would  equal  n.  According  to
Berthollet's  teaching,  a  distribution  of  M  and  N  between  X  and  Y  will
take  place  in  every  case,  not  only  in  proportion  to  the  degrees  of
affinity,  but  also  in  proportion  to  the  masses,  so  that  with  a  small  affinity
and  a  large  mass  the  same  action  can  be  produced  as  with  a  large  affinity
and  a  small  mass. Therefore,  (I)  a;  will  always  be  less  than  n  and

their  ratio  -  less  than  unity — that  is,  the  decomposition  will  be  ex-
pressed by  the  equation,  wiMX  -f  nNY  =  {in  —  a:)MX  4-  (w  --  a;)NY
4-  auMY  +  ajNX  ;  (2)  by  increasing  the  mass  r?i  we  increase  the  de-

composition — that  is,  we  increase  x  and  the  ratio  / .until with

\n  —  X)

an  infinitely  large  quantity  in  the  fraction  ' will  equal  I,  and  the  de-

fi

composition  will  be  complete,  however  small  the  affinities  uniting  MY
and  NX  may  be ;  and  (3)  if  w  =  n,  by  taking  MX  +  NY  or  MY  -f  NX
we  arrive  at  one  and  the  same  system  in  either  case  :  (n  —  x)  MX
4-  (n  —  a:)NY  +  ajMY  +  acNX.  These  direct  consequences  of  Ber-
thollet's  teaching  are  verified  by  experience.  Thus,  for  example,  a
mixture  of  solutions  of  sodium  nitrate  and  potassium  chloride  in  all
cases  has  entirely  the  same  properties  as  a  mixture  of  solutions  of
potassium  nitrate  and  sodium  chloride,  of  course  on  condition  that  the
mixed  solutions  are  of  identical  elementary  composition.  But  this
identity  of  properties  might  either  proceed  from  one  system  of  salts
passing  entirely  into  the  other  (Bergmann's  hypothesis)  in  conformity
with  the  predominating  affinities  (for  instance,  from  KCl  +  NaNOj
there  might  arise  KNO3  4-  NaCl,  if  it  be  admitted  that  the  affinities  of
the  elements  as  combined  in  the  latter  system  are  greater  than  in  the
former) ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  it  might  be  because  both  systems  by
the  interchange  of  a  portion  of  their  elements  give  one  and  the  same
state  of  equilibrium,  as  according  to  Berthollet^s  teaching.  Experi-
ment proves  the  latter  hypothesis  to  be  the  true  one.  But  before
citing  the  most  historically  important  experiments  verif3ring  BerthoUet's

r  ra

436  PRINXIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

doctrine,  we  must  stop  to  consider  the  conception  of  tJie  mass  of  tin
reacting  substances.  Berthollet  understood  by  mass  the  actual  rela
tive  quantity  of  a  substance  ;  but  now  it  is  impossible  to  understanc
this  term  otherwise  than  as  the  number  of  molecules,  for  they  act  a
chemical  units,  and  in  the  special  case  of  double  saline  decompositions  i
is  better  to  take  it  as  the  numl>er  of  equivalents.  Thus  in  the  reactioi
NaCl  +  H2SO4  the  salt  is  taken  in  one  equivalent  and  the  acid  k
two.  If  2XaCl  -f  H2SO4  act,  then  the  num}>er  of  equivalents  are  equal
and  so  on. The influence  of  mass  on  the  amount  of decomposition

-  forms  the  root  of  Berthollet*s  doctrine,  and  therefore  we  will  first  oi

!  n

\  all  turn  our  attention  to  the  establishment  of  this  principle  in  relation

I  to  the  double  decomposition  of  salts.

!  About  1840  H.  Rose  ^'^  showed  that  water  decomposes  metallic  sul-

\  phides  like  calcium  sulphide,  CaS,  forming hydrogen  sulphide,  H^,

I  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  affinity  of  hydrogen  sulphide,  as  an

acid,  for  lime,  CaHaOa,  as  a  Ixase,  causes  them  to  react  on  each  othen

forming  calcium  sulphide  and  water,  CaS  -f  2HaO. Furthermore,  Rose

showed  that  the  greater  the  amount  of  water  acting  on  the  calcium

■  sulphide,  the  more  complete  is  the  decomposition. The  results  of  this

reaction  are  evident  from  the  fact  that  the  hydrogen  sulphide  formed

may  be  expelled  from  the  solution  by  heating,  and  that  the  resulting

;  lime  is  sparingly  soluble  in  water. Rose  clearly  saw  from  this  that

such feeble  agents,  in  a chemical  sense,  as carbonic  anhydride  and

water,  by  acting  in  a  mass  and  for  long  periods  of  time  in  nature  on

,  the  durable  rocks,  which  resist  the  action  of  the  most  powerful  acids,

I  are  able  to  bring  a}x)ut  chemical  change — to  extract,  for  example,  from

I  rocks  the  Imses,  lime,  soda,  potash. The  influence  of  the  mass  of  water

on  antimonious  chloride,  bismuth  nitrate,  tkc,  is  essentially  of  the  same
i  character. These  substances  give  up  to  the  water  a  quantity  of  acid  which

1  is  greater  in  proportion  as  the  mass  <if  the  water  acting  on  them  is

greater.^'*  ****

t

'^  H.  RoHe  is  more  eHpecially  known  for  Iuh  having  carefully  studied  and  perfected
several  methodn  for  the  exact  cliemicul  analysiH  of  many  mineral  substances.  His  pre-
decessor in  this  branch  of  research  wan  Berzelius,  and  his  successor  Fresenius.

^  ^^*  Historically  the  influence  of  the  mass  of  water  was  the  first  welUobserved
phenomenon  in  support  of  BerthoUet'K  teaching,  and  it  should  not  now  be  forgotten.
In  double  decompositions  taking  place  in  dilute  solutions  where  the  mass  of  water  is
large,  its  influence,  notwithstanding  the  wetvkness  of  affinities,  must  be  great,  according
to  the  very  essence  of  Berthollet's  doctrine.

As  explaining  the  action  of  the  mass  of  water,  the  experiments  of  Pattison  Moir  (1879j
are  very  instructive.  These  experiments  demonstrate  that  the  decomposition  of  bismuth
chloride  is  the  more  complete  the  greater  the  relative  quantity  of  water,  and  the  less  the
mass  of  hydrochloric  a<nd  forming  one  of  the  pro<lucts  of  the  reaction.

SODIUM  CHLORIDE -BERTHOIXErS  LAWS  437

Barium  sulphate,  BaS04,  which  is  insoluble  in  water,  when  fused
with  sodium  carbonate,  Na^COa,  gives,  but  not  completely,  barium
carbonate,  BaCOs,  (also  insoluble),  and  sodium  sulphate,  Na2S04.  If  a
solution  of  sodium  carbonate  acts  on  precipitated  barium  sulphate,
the  same  decomposition  is  also  effected  (Dulong,  Rose),  but  it  is
restricted  by  a  limit  and  requires  time.  A  mixture  of  sodium  carbonate
and  sulphate  is  obtained  in  the  solution  and  a  mixture  of  barium  carbo-
nate and  sulphate  in  the  precipitate.  If  the  solution  be  decanted  off
and  a  fresh  solution  of  sodium  carbonate  be  poured  over  the  precipitate,
then  a  fresh  portion  of  the  barium  sulphate  passes  into  barium  carbonate,
and  so  by  increasing  the  mass  of  sodium  carbonate  it  is  possible  to
entirely  convert  the  barium  sulphate  into  barium  carbonate.  If  a
definite  quantity  of  sodium  sulphate  l^e  added  to  the  solution  of  sodium
carbonate,  then  the  latter  will  have  no  action  whatever  on
the  barium  sulphate,  because  then  a  system  in  equilibrium  deter-
mined by  the  reverse  action  of  the  sodium  sulphate  on  the  barium
carbonate  and  by  the  presence  of  both  sodium  carlK>nate  and  sulphate  in
the  solution,  is  at  once  arrived  at.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  mass  of
the  sodium  sulphate  in  the  solution  be  great,  then  the  barium  carbonate
is  reconverted  into  sulphate  until  a  definite  state  of  equilibrium  is
attained  between  the  two  opposite  reactions,  producing  barium  carbonate
by  the  action  of  the  sodium  carl)onate  and  barium  sulphate  by  the  action
of  the  sodium  sulphate.

Another  most  important  principle  of  Berthollet's  teaching  is
the  existence  of  a  limit  of  exchafige  decomposition^  or  the  attain-
ment  of  a  state  of  equUihrium,  In  this  respect  the  determinations  of
Malaguti  (1857)  are  historically  the  most  important.  He  took  a
mixture  of  solutions  of  equivalent  quantities  of  two  salts,  MX  and
NY,  and  judged  the  amount  of  the  resulting  exchange  from  the
composition  of  the  precipitate  produced  by  the  addition  of  alcohol.
When,  for  example,  zinc  sulphate  and  sodium  chloride  (ZnS04  and
2NaCl)  were  taken,  there  were  produced  by  exchange  Sfxlium  sul-
phate and  zinc  chloride.  A  mixture  of  zinc  sulphate  and  sodium
sulphate  was  precipitated  by  an  excess  of  alcohol,  and  it  appeared
from  the  composition  of  the  precipitate  that  72  per  cent,  of  the  salts
taken  had  been  decomposed.  When,  however,  a  mixture  of  solutions
of  sodium  sulphate  and  zinc  chloride  was  taken,  the  precipitate  pre-
sented the  same  composition  as  before — that  is,  about  28  per  cent,  of  the
salts  taken  had  been  subjected  to  decomposition.  In  a  similar  experi-
ment with  a  mixture  of  sodium  chloride  and  magnesium  sulphate,
2NaCl  -f  MgS04  or  MgCl.^  -h  ^^.^^O^,  about  half  of  the  metals  under-
went  the  decomposition,  which may  l)e  expressed by  the  equation

438  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

4NaCl  +  2MgS04  =  2NaCl  +  MgSO^  +  NaiS04  +  MgCl2  =  2Na^04  +
2MgCl2.  A  no  less  clear  limit  expressed  itself  in  another  of  Malaguti's
researches  when  he  investigated  the  above-mentioned  reversible  reactions
of  the  insoluble  salts  of  Imrium.  When,  for  example,  barium  carbonate
and  sodium  sulphate  (BaCOa  -f  Na.2S04)  were  taken,  then  about  72  per
cent,  of  the  salts  were  decomposed,  that  is,  were  converted  into  barium
sulphate  and  sodium  carlx)nate.  But  when  the  two  latter  salts  were
taken,  then  about  19  per  cent,  of  them  passed  into  barium  carbonate
and  sodium  sulphate.  Probably  the  end  of  the  reaction  was  not
reached  in  either  case,  l:>ecause  this  would  require  a  considerable  time
and  a  uniformity  of  conditions  attainable  with  difficulty.

Gladstone  (1855)  took  advantage  of  the  colour  of  solutions  of
different  ferric  salts  for  determining  the  measure  of  exchange  between
metals.  Thus  a  solution  of  ferric  thiocyanate  has  a  most  intense
red  colour,  and  by  making  a  comparison  between  the  colour  of  the
resulting  solutions  and  the  colour  of  solutions  of  known  strength
it  was  possible  to  judge  to  a  certain  degree  the  quantity  of  the
thiocyanate  formed.  This  colorimetric  method  of  determination  has
an  important  signiticance  as  being  the  first  in  which  a  method  was  ap-
plied for  determining  the  composition  of  a  solution  without  the  removal
of  any  of  its  component  parts.  When  Gladstone  took  equivalent  quanti-
ties of  ferric  nitrate  and  potassium  thiocyanate — Fe(N03)3  +  3KCNS
— only  13  per  cent,  of  the  salts  underwent  decomposition.  On
increasing  the  mass  of  the  latter  salt  the  quantity  of  ferric  thii>-
cyanate  formed  increased,  but  even  when  more  than  300  equivalents  of
potassium  thiocyanate  were  taken  a  portion  of  the  iron  still  remained
as  nitrate.  It  is  evident  that  the  affinity  acting  l)etween  Fe  and  NOj
and  between  K  and  CNS  on  the  one  hand,  is  greater  than  the  affinity
acting  between  Fe  and  CNS,  together  with  the  affinity  of  K  for  NO3,
on  the  other  hand.  The  investigation  of  the  variation  of  the  fluor-
escence of  quinine  sulphate,  as  well  as  the  variation  of  the  rotation  of
the  plane  of  polarisation  of  nicotine,  gave  in  the  hands  of  Gladstone
many  proofs  of  the  entire  ai)plicability  of  BerthoUet's  doctrine,  and  in
particular  demonstrated  the  influence  of  mass  which  forms  the  chief
distinctive  feature  of  the  teacliing  of  Berthollet,  teaching  little  appre-
ciated in  his  own  time.

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1860,  the  doctrine  of  the  limit  of
reaction  and  of  the  influence  of  mass  on  the  process  of  chemical  trans-
formations received  a  very  important  support  in  the  researches  of
Berthelot  and  P.  de  Saint-Gilles  on  the  formation  of  the  ethereal  salts
RX  from  the  alcohols  ROH  and  acids  HX,  when  water  is  also  formed.
This  conversion  is  essentially  very  similar  to  the  formation  of  salts,  but

SODIUM  CHLORIDE— BERTHOLLETS  I^WS  489

differs  in  that  it  proceeds  slowly  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  extend-
ing over  whole  years,  and  is  not  complete — that  is,  it  has  a  distinct
limit  determined  by  a  reverse  reaction  ;  thus  an  ethereal  salt  RX  with
water  gives  an  alcohol  ROH  and  an  acid  HX — up  to  that  limit
generally  corresponding  with  two-thirds  of  the  alcohol  taken,  if  the
action  proceed  between  molecular  quantities  of  alcohol  and  acid.  Thus
common  alcohol,  CjH^OH,  with  acetic  acid,  HC^HjO^,  gives  the  follow-
ing system  rapidly  when  heated,  or  slowly  at  the  ordinary  temperature,
ROH  +  HX  +  2RX  +  2H2O,  whether  we  start  from  3RH0  +  3HX
or  from  3RX  -f  SHjO.  The  process  and  completion  of  the  reaction  in
this  instance  are  very  easily  observed,  because  the  quantity  of  free
acid  is  easily  determined  from  the  amount  of  alkali  requisite  for  its
saturation,  as  neither  alcohol  nor  ethereal  salt  acts  on  litmus  or
other  reagent  for  acids.  Under  the  influence  of  an  increased  mass
of  alcohol  the  reaction  proceeds  further.  If  two  molecules  of  alcohol,
RHO,  be  taken  for  every  one  molecule  of  acetic  acid,  HX,  then  instead
of  66  p.c,  83  p.c.  of  the  acid  passes  into  ethereal  salt,  and  with  fifty
molecules  of  RHO  nearly  all  the  acid  is  etherised.  The  researches  of
Menschutkin  in  their  details  touched  on  many  important  aspects  of  the
same  subject,  such  as  the  influence  of  the  composition  of  the  alcohol
and  acid  on  the  limit  and  rate  of  exchange — but  these,  as  well  as  other
details,  must  be  looked  for  in  special  treatises  on  organic  and  theoretical
chemistry.  In  any  case  the  study  of  etheriflcation  has  supplied  chemical
mechanics  with  clear  and  valuable  data,  which  directly  confirm  the
two  fundamental  propositions  of  Berthollet  ;  the  influence  of  mass,
and  the  limit  of  reaction — that  is,  the  equilibrium  between  opposite
reactions.  The  study  of  numerous  instances  of  dissociation  which  we
have  already  touched  on,  and  shall  again  meet  with  on  several
occasions,  gave  the  same  results.  With  respect  to  double  saline
decompositions,  it  is  also  necessary  to  mention  the  researches  of
Wiedemann  on  the  decomposing  action  of  a  mass  of  water  on  the
ferric  salts,  which  could  be  determined  by  measuring  the  magnetism
•of  the  solutions,  because  the  ferric  oxide  (soluble  colloid)  set  free  by
the  water  is  less  magnetic  than  the  ferric  salts.

A  very  important  epoch  in  the  history  of  Berthollet's  doctrine  was
Attained  when,  in  1867,  the  Norwegian  chemists,  Guldberg  and  Waage,
expressed  it  as  an  algebraical  formula  They  defined  the  active  mass
as  the  number  of  molecules  contained  in  a  given  volume,  and  assumed,
as  follows  from  the  spirit  of  Berthollet's  teaching,  that  the  action  be-
tween the  substances  was  equal  to  the  product  of  the  masses  of  the
reacting  substances.  Hence  if  the  salts  MX  and  NY  be  taken  in
•equivalent  quantities  (m  =  1  and  n  =  1)  and  the  salts  MY  and  NX  are

440  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

not  added  to  the  mixture  but  proceed  from  it,  then  if  k  represent  the
coefHcient  of  the  rate  of  the  action  of  MX  on  NY  and  if  k*  represent
the  same  coefficient  for  the  pair  MY  and  NX,  then  we  shall  have  at
the  moment  when  the  decomposition  equals  x  a  measure  of  action  for
the  first  pair  :  k{\  —  x)  {\  -  x)  and  for  the  second  pair  k^xoc^  and  a
state  of  equilibrium  or  limit  will  be  reached  when  A:  ( 1  —  xY  ^  ks^^
whence  the  ratio  kkf  =  [a;/(l  —  a:)]*.  Therefore  in  the  case  of  the
action  of  alcohol  on  an  acid,  when  a;  =  §,  the  magnitude  k/k  =  4,
that  is,  the  reaction  of  the  alcohol  on  the  acid  is  four  times  as  fast  as
that  of  the  ethereal  salt  on  water.  If  the  ratio  kjk  be  known,  then
the  influence  of  inass  may  he  easily  determined  from  it.  Thus  if  instead
of  one  molecule  of  alcohol  two  be  taken,  then  the  equation  will  be
A^2  —  a;)  (1  —  x)  =  kxx^  whence  a;  =  0*85  or  85  percent.,  which  is  dose
to  the  result  of  experiment.  If  300  molecules  of  alcohol  be  taken,  then
X  proves  to  1>e  approximately  100  per  cent.,  which  is  also  found  to  be  the
case  by  experiment. ^^

But  it  is  impossible  to  subject  the  formation  of  salts  to  any  process
directly  analogous  to  that  which  is  so  conveniently  effected  in  etherifi-
cation. Many  efforts  have,  however,  been  made  to  solve  the  problem
of  the  measure of  reaction in  this  case  also. Thus,  for  example,
Khichinsky  (18G6),  Petrieff  (1885),  and  many  others  investigated  the
distribution  of  aictals  and  haloid  groups  in  the  case  of  one  metal  and
several  haloids  taken  in  excess,  as  acids  ;  or  conversely  with  an  excess
of  1)ases,  the  distribution  of  these  bases  with  relation  to  an  acid ;  in
cases  where  a  portion  of  the  substances  forms  a  precipitate  and  a
portion  remains  in  solution. But  such  complex  cases,  although  they  in
general  contimi  Berthollet's  teaching  (for  instance,  a  solution  of  silver
nitrate  gives  some silver  oxide with  lead  oxide,  and  a  solution  of
nitrate of lead precipitates some lead oxide under  the  action  of
silver  oxide,  as  Petrieff  demonstrated),  still,  owing  to  the  complexity
of  the  phenomena  (for  instance,  the  formation  of  basic  and  double  salts),
they  cannot give  simple  results. But  much  more  instructive  and
complete are  researches  like  those  made  by  Pattison Muir  (1876),
who  took  the  simple  case  of  the  precipitation  of  calcium  carbonate,
CaCO,,  from  the  mixture  of  solutions  of  calcium  chloride  and  sodium  or
potassium  carlx)nate,  and  found  in  this  case  that  not  only  was  the

*•'•  From  the  above  it  follows  that  an  excess  of  acid  should  influence  the  reaction  like
an  excesH  of  alcohol.  It  in  in  fact  shown  by  experiment  tliat  if  two  molecules  of
acetic  acid  be  taken  to  one  molecule  of  alcohol,  84  p.c.  of  alcohol  is  etherified.  If  with  a
large  prejKmderance  f)f  acid  or  of  alcohol  certain  discrepancies  are  observed,  their  cause
must  be  looked  for  in  the  incomplete  correspondence  of  the  cosditions  and  external
influences.

^^^^"  SODIOI CHLORIDE— ItEiaHOLLET'.S  LAWS

rate  of  uctiun  (fur  example,  in  the  caw  nf  U«CI,  +  NajCO,,  73  per
cent,  of  CaCO,  was  precipitated  in  five  ininut«a,  85  per  i-eiit.  in  thirty
minutes,  and  S>4  per  cent,  in  two  days)  determined  by  the  temperature,
reliitive  mass,  and  amount  of  water  (a  liirge  mass  of  water  decreases  the
rate),  but  that  the  limit  of  deconi  posit  ion  was  also  dependent  on  these
influences.  However,  even  in  researches  of  tliis  kind  the  conditions
of  reaction  are  complicated  by  the  non -uniformity  of  the  media,  inas-
much as  a  pfirtion  uf  thi^  substance  is  obtained  or  remains  iu  the  fomi  of
a  pretipitat*,  so  that  the  system  is  heterogeneous.  The  Jnvf litigation  of
double  saline  decompositions  offers  many  dilBeolties  which  cannot  be
considered  as  yet  entirely  overcome.  Although  many  efibrts  have  long
since  been  made,  the  majority  of  the  researches  were  carried  on  in
aqueous  solutions,  and  as  water  in  itself  a  !<aline  compound  and
able  to  couibine  with  salts  and  ent^i"  into  double  decomp<tsition  with
them,  such  reactions  taking  place  in  solutions  in  reality  present  very
complex  cases.'' In  this  sense  the  reaction  between  alcohols  and  acids

>'  Aguieuinp]etwomethodBniajbeni<!ntioue<l,T1iuniii«n'xnii<108twMdV  Thamiwii
(lUUU)  Bpiiliud  m  tliermD-cbeniicitl  method  to  exceedio);])'  dilute  solDtions  tcitlionl  taking
the  waiter  into  farther  CDniiidentiiin.  He  took  BoloUonij  of  ciiustii.'  mdn  couUining
lUOH.jU  per  NaHO,  and  Hnlphoric  acid  containing  iH.j^O,  4  ILIOHp.  In  order  thitt  these
solutions  may  be  miied  in  vachijuantilieB  thaC  atomic  proportions  ot  acid  and  alkali  would
act,  (or  fort;  grams  of  caastii:  soda  |nliicU  answers  to  its  eqaivalent)  there  should
be  employed  IB  grams  of  xulphuric  acid,  and  tlteo  4  iB,S89  heat  Dnits  would  be  evolred.
If  tlie  uormal  eodiuui  pulphato  bo  formed  be  mixed  with  n  t>quivaleL»ti4  of  Hulpbnne
acid,  a  certain  amoDnt  □(  heal  ih  ahflarbed.  nunelj  a  quantity  eqnal  to "  -  heal

nnitB.  An  equivalent  of  cauatic  eoda,  in  combining;  with  an  equivaleut  of  nitric  acid,
emlvea  + 13,617  atuta  of  heat,  and  the  aogmeiitatiini  of  the  amount  of  nitric  acid  entaila
•n  abaorption  of  heat  for  each  equiialsnt  e<iual  to  -S7unit>;  so  also  in  combiDing  with
hydrochloric  acids  ■*  1!),T40  heat  units  are  absorbed,  and  for  each  equivalent  of  hydro-
chloric acid  beyond  this  amount  there  are  alieorbed  ~SS  heat  unitn.  Thomsen  mixed
each  one  of  three  neutral  salt*,  ttodiuui  sulphate,  sodium  cbloride  and  eodium,  nitrate,
with  an  acid  which  it  not  contaiued  in  it ;  for  iuglonce,  he  mixed  a  solution  of  sodium
sulphate  with  a  solution  of  nitrio  acidaad  determined  the  number  of  heat  units  then
absorbed.  An  absorption  of  heat  ensued  becanse  a  normal  sail  wa»  taken  in  t)ie
flrst  instance,  and  tlie  mixture  of  all  the  above  normal  Holts  witli  acid  produce*  an
absorption  of  heat.  Hie  amount  of  heat  absorbed  enabled  him  lo  obtain  an  iusigbt  into
the  process  taldug  place  in  this  miiture,  for  Hulphnric  acid  added  to  sodiom  snjphale
absorbs  a  considerable  quantity  of  beat,  whilst  hydrocliloric  and  nitric  acidn  abvorb  a,
very  small  amount  of  heat  in  this  case.  By  mixing  an  equivHlent  of  sodium  nlphate
with  various  nnmberH  of  eiiaivalentsol  nitric  acid,  Thomiten  observed  thai  tlie  amnDOl  of
beat  absotUed  increawd  more  and  moreas  llie  amonnt  of  nitric  acid  wasincreaaed:  lliaa
when  HNO^  wan  tnken  per  (NajtiO,,  1,7S9  heat  naibt  were  absoibed  per  equivalent  of
iMdn  contained  in  the  sodium  anlphate.  Wlieu  twice  as  much  nitric  acid  was  taken,  9,0Sfl
Ileal  unilA,  and  when  three  times  as  much,  9,CGD  heat  units  were  absorbed.  Had  the
double  decomposition  been  complete  in  the  case  where  one  equivalent  of  nitric  acid  waa
t»ki:D  per  equivalent  of  Na^SO^,  then  according  to  calculation  from  similar  data  there
-boQld  have  been  absorlwd  ~  3.S8B  units  of  heat,  while  in  reality  only  -  I,7S3  unit*  were
Absorbed.  HvnceThomsen  concluded  that  adiuplaceuient  of  ouly  about  two-thirdaol  the
sulphuricacidltadlakenplace— that  is,  tlie  ratio  i  it'' lor  the  reaction  lN'a,SO,4HNOi

igtiificaii
iportani

in  coafiriu&tiaq
The  only  c

uid  NkNO]  f  IH.jSOh  IB  eqnal,  as  (or  ethereu!  laltB,  to  4. By  Ukiiig  Uiis  Sgate  nad  d

miltiug  tile  above  Bap]«iiitioii,  Thauibrn  found  Ui»t  lot  all  miitun'H  tit  aoda  w

acid,  uid  at  sodiuDi  iiitrate  with  salphuricucid,  tlia  UDoanta  of  heat  followed  GoIdbergM

Wiukge's  law ;  timt  is,  the  limit  at  decompoHitiau  reached  wae  greater  tlie  gmiler  ll

inuaa  nC  acid  added. The  raliitioii  iit  hjdrochlaric  to  aulphurii>  ivid

Theretors  the  reBearaheii  of  Thomsen  fulljr  toofinn  tha  l);potlies«  of  Ouldberg  •

WiiagB  and  the  doc!  " *~

iclndes bU inveHtigiitiun with the worda; (n) 'When eqtUTii
qnuititieB  ot  NaHO,  HNOj  |or  HC1|  uud  iU-SO,  nwct  m

iolotion,  then  two-thirda  □(  the  sodu,  vumliineH  witli  the  nitric  and  one-third  witb  ll
mlphoric  onid  ;  (b]  this  BabdiviBioii  repeuta  ititelt,  ffbether  the  soda  be  lAkeii
with  nitric  or  with  anlphnric  acid  ;  tri  and  therelore  nitric  acid  haa  doable  the  tende
to  nombine  with  tlie  ba8«  that  Hulptioric  iirid  has.  and  hence  in  an  aqucoUK  aolali
it  is  a  atruugor  uud  thui  the  latter.'

'It is  tliererure  iieceBSuy,'  TWmHcn nttenviirda  reniarkB.  '  tu  liaTi
indicating  the  tendencj  ot  an  acid  for  tlie  Hatnratiou  of  baaee. This
eipre^aed  b;  tlie  word  affinity,  liecnuee  by  tbia  term  is  most  often  onderatooil  that  In
which  it  ia  neceaaary  to  orercome  in  order  Ui  decompoae  a
partii. ThiH  force  should  therefore  be  meaBured  by  the  amount  of  wcub  or  heatemplof
tor  the  decoDipoeition  of  tlie  nDbatance. The  above- mentioned  phenamenoa  '
entirely  different  nature,'  and  Thonmen  introdacea  the  term  aridity,  by  which  he  di
nalee  the  tendency  of  adds  for  neatraliwition. '  Therefore  the  avidity  of  nitric  acid  «
respect  to  aoda  i*  twice  ae  great  w  the  avidity  of  BOlpharic  acid. An  exadly  ai
reanlt  ia  obtained  with  hydrochloric  acid,  an  tliat  ita  avidity  with  respect  tt
double  tlie  avidity  ai  sulpharic  ai^id. Eiperimentii  condocled  with  other  afids  aho«
that  not  one  ot  the  acids  investigated  \\aii  so  great  an  avidity  aa  nitric  acid
greater  avidity  than  sulphuric  acid,  otlicrs  less,  and  in  aome  instances  thi
The  reader  will  naturally  see  clearly  that  the  palh  choaen  by  Thomsen  d
worked  out,  for  hia  resDlta  concern  important  (jDeationa  of  chemiMry,  but  great  b
cannot  be  placed  iu  the  dedoctions  he  has  already  arrived  at,  becanae  great  o
ot  relations  is  to  be  seen in  the  very  method  of  his  investigation. It ia
important  to  turn  attention  to  the  fact  that  all  the  reactions  invesIiKated  ore
ot  double  decompoBition. In  them  h  and  B  do  not  combine  with  C  and  diatribote  tti
selves  according  to  their  affinity  or  avidity  for  combination,  but  reveraible  reuctioi
induced. UX  and  »Y(ii>-e  JAY  and  NX,  and  coDversely  ;  therefore  the  afBnity  or  a'
for  combination  is  not  here  directly  iletcrmined,  but  only  the  difference  i
offlaitieij  or  avidities. The  afBnity  ol  nitric  acid  not  only  tor  the  watei
but  also  tot  that  aerving  for  solution,  is  much  less  than  that  ot  aulphniic  acid, lliia  I
seen from  thermal  data. The  reaition >~,Oi-i-UjO  givee  +S,eOU  heat  unit*,  Mid  ll
Bulationol  tlioreaoltant  hydrate,  SN)IO:h  in  a  large  exoesa of  water  evolves  4  14,968  hi.
unite. The  formatioii  ot  SO^-I  H.,0  evolves -•  U1,B0B  boat  unitH,  and  the  aolotioB  ^
HgSO,  in  an  excess  uf  water  IT.MO— that  is,  solphuria  acid  giveamoro  heat  iu  both  <
The  interchange  between  Na,SO,  and  SHKO]  is  not  only  accomplished  at  the  ex
the  production  at  (laNOj,  bat  also  at  tlie  eipense  of  the  furtuation  ol  U.jSO„  h<
affinity  ot  sulphuric  acid  tor  water  plays  its  part  in  the phesomci
Therefore  in  determinations  like  those  made  by  Thomson  the  nab
medium  whioh  is  present  without  participating  in  the  process  ;  it  also  takes  part  ii
reaction. (Compare  Chapter  IX.,  Not ~

Whilst  retaining  essentially  the  methods  of  Thomsen,  Ostwald  (ISTU)  detemuned  ll
variation  of  the  sp,  gr.  (andatterwardEof  volnme),proceedingin  the  same  dilute  solutk

k

the  other,  and  arrived  at  m

tttheai

SODIUM CHLORIDE— BERTHOLLETS  L.\AV8  443

which  can  be  compared  with  these  reactions  for  simplicity  are  those
exchange decompositions  investigated by G. G. Gustavson, which

method  will  be  clearly  understood  from  an  example.  A  solution  of  caustic  soda  containing
an  almost  molecular  (40  grams)  weight  per  litre  had  a  specific  gravity  of  1*04051.  The
specific  gravities  of  solutions  of  equal  volume  and  equivalent  composition  of  sulphuric
and  nitric  acids  were  1*02970  and  1'03084  respectively.  On  mixing  the  solutions  of
NaHO  and  H2SO4  there  was  formed  a  solution  of  Na2S04  of  sp.  gr.  1:02959;  hence
there  ensued  a  decrease  of  specific  gravity  which  we  will  term  Q,  equal  to  1*04051
+ 1*02970-  2(1  02959) »  0*01108.  So  also  the  specific  gravity  after  mixture  of  the  solutions
of  NaHO  and  HNO5  was  1*02088,  and  therefore  Q  =  001869.  When  one  volume  of  the
solution  of  nitric  acid  was  added  to  two  volumes  of  the  solution  of  sodium  sulphate,  a
solution  of  sp.  gr.  1*02781  was  obtained,  and  therefore  the  resultant  decrease  of  sp.  gr.

Qi  =  2(102959)  + 108084  -  8(102781)  =  0*00659.

Had  there  been  no  chemical  reaction  between  the  salts,  then  according  to  Ostwald's
reasoning  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solutions  would  not  have  changed,  and  if  the  nitric
acid  had  entirely  displaced  the  sulphuric  acid  Q.^  would  be  =001869- 0*01108 =000766.
It  is  evident  that  a  portion  of  the  sulphuric  acid  was  displaced  by  the  nitric  acid.  But  the
measure  of  displacement  is  not  equal  to  the  ratio  between  Qi  and  Q2,  because  a  decrease
of  sp.  gr.  also  occurs  on  mixing  the  solution  of  sodium  sulphate  with  sulphuric  acid,
whilst  the  mixing  of  the  solutions  of  sodium  nitrate  and  nitric  acid  only  produces  a  slight
variation  of  sp.  gr.  which  falls  within  the  limits  of  experimental  error.  Ostwald  deduces
from  similar  data  the  same  conclusions  as  Thomsen,  and  thus  reconfirms  the  formula
deduced  by  Guldberg  and  Waage,  and  the  teaching  of  Berthollet.

The  participation  of  water  is  seen  still  more  clearly  in  the  methods  adopted  by
Ostwald  than  in  those  of  Thomsen,  because  in  tlie  saturation  of  solutions  of  acids  by
alkalis  (which  Kremers,  Reinhold,  and  others  had  previously  studied)  there  is  observed,
not  a  contraction,  as  might  have  been  expected  from  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  then
evolved,  but  an  expansion,  of  volume  (a  decrease  of  specific  gravity,  if  we  calculate  as
Ostwald  did  in  his  first  investigations).  Thus  by  mixing  1,880  grams  of  a  solution  of
sulphuric  acid  of  the  composition  SO3  +  lOOH^O,  occupying  a  volume  of  1,815  c.c,  with  a
corresponding  quantity  of  a  solution  2(NaHO  +  SH^O),  whose  volume  =1,798  c.c,  we
obtain  not  8,608  but  8,688  c.c,  an  expansion  of  25  c.c.  per  gram  molecule  of  the  resulting
salt,  NasS04.  It  is  the  same  in  other  cases.  Nitric  and  hydrochloric  acids  give  a  still
greater  expansion  than  sulphuric  acid,  and  potassium  hydroxide  than  sodium  hydroxide,
whilst  a  solution  of  ammonia  gives  a  contraction.  The  relation  to  water  must  be  con-
sidered as  the  cause  of  these  phenomena.  When  sodium  hydroxide  and  sulphuric  acid
dissolve  in  water  they  develop  heat  and  give  a  vigorous  contraction ;  the  water  is  sepa-
rated from  such  solutions  with  great  difficulty.  After  mutual  saturation  they  form  the
salt  Na2S04,  which  retains  the  water  but  feebly  and  evolves  but  little  heat  with  it,  i.e.,  in
other  words,  has  little  affinity  for  water.  In  the  saturation  of  sulphuric  acid  by  soda  the
water  is,  so  to  say,  displaced  from  a  stable  combination  and  passes  into  an  unstable  com-
bination ;  hence  an  expansion  (decrease  of  sp.  gr.)  takes  place.  It  is  not  the  reaction  of
the  acid  on  the  alkali,  but  the  reaction  of  water,  that  produces  the  phenomenon  by  which
Ostwald  desires  to  measure  the  degree  of  salt  formation.  The  water,  which  escaped
attention,  itself  has  affinity,  and  influences  those  phenomena  which  are  being  investigated.
Furthermore,  in  the  given  instance  its  influence  is  very  great  because  its  mass  is  large.
When  it  is  not  present,  or  only  present  in  small  quantities,  the  attraction  of  the  base  to  the
acid  leads  to  contraction,  and  not  expansion.  Na.^0  has  a  sp.  gr.  2*8,  hence  its  molecular
volume  =  22 ;  the  sp.  gr.  of  SOj  is  1*9  and  volume  41,  hence  the  sum  of  their  volumes  is  68 ;
for  NajS04  the  sp.  gr.  is  2*65  and  volume  58*6,  consequently  there  is  a  contraction  of  10  c.c.
per  gram-molecule  of  salt.  The  volume  of  H2S04  =  58-8,  that  of  2NaHO  =  87'4  ;  there  is
produced  2H3O,  volume  =  86,  +  NajS04,  volume  =  68*6.  There  react  90*7  c.c,  and  on  satu-
ration there  result  89*6  c.c. ;  consequently  contraction  again  ensues,  although  less,  and

444  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

take  place  between  CCI4  and  RBr„  on  the  one  hand,  aud  CBr4  anc
RC1„  on  the  other.  This  case  is  convenient  for  investigation  inas
much  as  the  RC1„  and  RBr„  taken  (such  as  BCI3,  SiCl4,  TiCl^,  POCl,
and  SnC]4)  belong  to  those  substances  which  are  decompoeed
by  water,  whilst  CCI4  and  CBr4  are  not  decomposed  by  water  ;  and
therefore,  by  heating,  for  instance,  a  mixture  of  CCI4  -f-  SiBr4  it  if
p<»ssible  to  arrive  at  a  conclusion  as  to  the  amount  of  interchange
by  treating  the  product  with  water,  which  decomposes  the  SiBr^  left
unchanged  and  the  SiCl4  formed  by  the  exchange,  and  therefore
by  determining  the  composition  of  the  product  acted  on  by  the  water
it  is  possible  to  form  a  conclusion  as  to  the  amount  of  decomposition.
The  mixture  was  always  formed  with  equivalent  quantities — ^for  in-
stance, 4BCI3  +  3CBr4.  It  appeared  that  there  was  no  exchange
whatever  on  simple  intermixture,  but  that  it  proceeded  slowly,
when  the  mixture  was  heated  (for  example,  with  the  mixture  above
mentioned  at  123°  4*86  per  cent,  of  CI  was  replaced  by  Br  after  14  days'

f  heating,  and  G*83  per  cent,  after  28  days,  and  10*12  per  cent, when

heated  at 150° for  60  days). A  limit  was  always  reached  which

1  corresponded  with that  of  the  complemental  system  ; in the  given

instance  the  system  4BBr3  -f  3CCI4. In  this  last  89*97  per  cent,  of

I  bromine  in  the  BBr3  was  replaced  by  chlorine  ;  that  is,  there  were

obtained  89*97  molecules  of  BCI3  and  there  remained  10*02  molecules

I  of  BBr3,  and  therefore  the  same  state  of  equilibrium  was  reached  as

that  given  by  the  system  4BCI3  -f  3CBr4.  Both  systems  gave  one  and
the  same  state  of  equilibrium  at  the  limit,  which  is  in  agreement  with

;  Berthollet's  doctrine.  2**

i  although  this  reaction  is  one  of  substitution  and  not  of  combination. Consequently  the

I  phenomena  studied  by  Ostwald  depend  but  Httle  on  the  measure  of  the  reaction  of  the

salts,  and  more  on  the  relations  of  the  dissolved  substances  to  water. In  substitutions,
I  for  instance  2NaN03  +  H2S04  =  2HN03  +  Na.2S04,  the  volumes  vary  but  slightly  :  in  the

'  above  example  they  are  2(388)  +  58*3  and  2(41*2)  +  586 ;  hence  181  volumes  act,  and  186

I  volumeK  are  produced. It  may  be  concluded,  therefore,  on  the  basis  of  what  has  be«n  said,

j  that  on  taking  water  into  conHideration  the  phenomena  studied  by  Thomsen  and  Ostwald

!  are  much  more  complex  than  they  at  first  appear,  and  that  this  method  can  scarcely

^  lead to a  correct  interi>retation  as  to  the  distribution  of  acids  between  bases. We

may  add that  P.  D.  Chroustcheflt (1890) introduced a  new  method  for  this class  of

research,  by  investigating  the  electro-conductivity  of  solutions  and  their  mixtures,  and

obtained  remarkable  results  (for  example,  that  hydrochloric  acid  almost  entirely  displaces

'  formic  acid  and  only  §  of  sulphuric  acid),  but  details  of  these  methods  must  be  looked

for  in  text-books  of  theoretical  chemistry.

**  G.  (r.  Gustavson's  researches,  which  were  conducted  in  the  laboratory  of  the
St.  Petersburg  University  in  1871-72,  are  among  the  first  in  which  the  measure  of
the  affinity  of  the  elements  for  the  halogens  is  recognised  with  perfect  clearness  in  the  limit
of  substitution  and  in  the  rate  of  reaction.  The  researches  conducted  by  A.  L.  Potilitcin
(of  which  mention  will  be  made  in  Chapter  XI.,  Note  66)  in  the  same  laboratory  touch  on
another  aspect  of  the  same  problem  which  has  not  yet  made  much  progress,  notwith-

SODIUM  OHLOBIUE-BEBTHOLLET'S  LAWS

Thus  we  now  find  ample  confirmation  fi-oin  various  (juartei-s  (or  the
following  rules  of  Bertbollet,  applying  them  to  double  saline  decom-
positions :  1.  From  two  salts  MX  and  NY  containing  difierent  haloids
and  Tnetala  there  result  from  their  reaction  two  others,  MY  and  NX,
but  such  B.  substitution  will  not  proce«d  to  the  end  unless  one  product
passes  from  the  sphere  of  action.  2.  This  reaction  is  limited  hy  the
existence  of  an  wjuilibrium  between  MX,  NY,  MY,  and  NX,  because  a
reverse  reaction  is  quite  as  possible  as  the  direct  reaction.  3.  This  limit
is  determined  both  by  thenieasureof  the  active  aftinities  and  by  the  rela-
tive masses  of  the  substances  as  measured  by  the  number  of  the  reacting
molecules.  4.  Other  conditions  being  constant,  the  chenjical  action  is
proportional  to  the  product  of  the  chemical  masses  in  action. ^^

Bt*ndiu;^  its  fnipoctuice  nad  t)iB  Fu't  tlist  the  theoretical  side  of  the  sobject  (thanka
egperiBllj  to  Gnldbeig  and  Vau't  HoB)  hnii  since  been  rapidly  pniihed  (orward.  II  the  re-
Hearchea  of  OasUrBOn  look  Bocoont  of  the  influence  of  masi,  and  were  more  fully
«a|iplied  with  data  cODeeminglvelodtieH  and  temtxratuces.  ttiey  would  be  vary  important,
beeanse  of  the  gnat  ugniflcance  which  tlie  caae  considered  has  for  the  ondoratanding  of
doable  saline  decompoeiliouB  in  the  almence  ol  water.

Forthemunv,  OnitavBOn  allowed  that  the  greater  the  alomie  weight  of  Ihe  elameut
(B,  Si,  Ti,  A«,  Sd)  mmblned  loilh  chloriTif  the  greater  the  amount  of  chlorine  replaced
hf  bromine  by  the  action  of  CBr,,  and  consequently  the  less  the  anioont  of  bromine
replaced  by  chlorine  by  the  action  of  CCLi  on  bromine  compounds. For  instance,  ti

chlorine  compounda  the  percentage  of  anbititution

i  the  limit}  is

lO-I

ia-5

IS'S

71-8

7TB

It  shonld  be  observsd,  however,  that  Thorpe,  on  the  basis  of  hin  experiroenU,  denies
the  nnivenality  of  this  conclusion.  I  may  mention  one  condusiou  wbicb  it  appears  to  me
may  be  drawn  from  the  above-cited  flgnres  of  OnstavBou,  if  they  are  snbaeqnenUj  verified
even  within  narrow  limits.  If  CBrfbe  heated  with  RCIi,  then  an  eichange  of  the  btomiDe
(or  chlorine  takes  ploee.  But  ohat  would  be  tlie  remit  it  it  were  mixed  with  CClj  ?
Jndgiug  by  the  magnitnile  of  Ihe  atonuc  weights,  B^ll,  C-IS,  Si'^as,  about  11  p.e.  of
the  cldorine  would  be  replaced  by  bromine.  But  to  what  does  tliis  point?  I  think  that
this  shows  the  existeni'e  of  a  motion  ot  the  stons  in  the  molecule.  The  miitnre  of  CCI^
and  CBr*  doea  not  remain  in  a  condition  of  static  eqnilibriom  ;  not  only  are  the  moleculeii
oontained  in  it  in  a  state  ol  motion,  but  also  the  atoms  in  the  molecules,  and  the  aboie
figniea  show  the  meaanre  of  their  translation  nnder  these  conditions.  The  bromine  in
the  CBr,  is,  unlhin  Ikr  liniil,  sabstituted  by  the  vhlirine  of  the  CCI4  in  a  qoantity  of
about  11  out  of  100:  thai  is,  a  portion  ol  the  atoms  ot  bromine  previously  to  this  moment
in  combination  with  one  atom  ot  carbon  pass  uvor  to  the  other  atom  of  carbon,  and  the
chlorine  passes  over  from  this  second  atom  ol  carbon  to  replace  it  Theretore.  also,  in
the  homogeneous  mass  CCl^  all  the  atoms  of  CI  do  not  remain  coosUntly  combined  with
the  same  atoms  of  carbon,  and  there  it  an  exc/iange  of  atom*  brlweiin  diferent  nule*
ealet  in  a  honcgeneoui  inedium  alto.  This  hypothesis  may  in  my  opinion  explain
certain  phenomena  of  dissociation,  but  tbot^h  menlinning  it  I  do  not  consider  it  worth
while  to  dwell  upon  it.  I  will  only  observB  that  a  similar  hypothesis  suggested  itself  to
roe  in  my  researches  on  solutions,  and  that  Pfaoudler  enunciated  an  essentially  similar
hypothesis,  and  in  recent  times  s  like  view  is  beginning  to  Qnd  favour  with  respect  to  thi^
eleclrolyais  of  saline  solutions.

»  Berthollet's  doctrin;  is  hardly  at  nil  aflertivl  in  principle  by  showing  that  there  are
eaaea  in  which  there  is  no  decomposition  betwet^n  Halts,  becanse  the  affinity  may  be  so

446  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Thus  if  the  salts  MX  and  NY  after  reaction  partly  formed  salts  MY
and  NX,  then  a  state  of  equilibrium  is  reached  and  the  reaction  ceases  ;
but  if  one  of  the  resultant  compounds,  in  virtue  of  its  physical  properties,
passes  from  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  remaining  substances,  then  the
reaction  will  continue.  This  exit  from  the  sphere  of  action  depends  on
the  physical  properties  of  the  substance  and  on  the  conditions  under
which  the  reaction  takes  place.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  salt  NX  may,
in  the  case  of  reaction  between  solutions,  separate  as  a  precipitate,
an  insoluble  substance,  while  the  other  three  substances  remain  in  solu-
tion,  or  it  may  pass  into  vapour,  and  in  this  manner  also  pass  away
from  the  sphere  of  action  of  the  remaining  substances.  Let  us  now
suppose  that  it  passes  away  in  some  form  or  other  from  the  sphere  of
action  of  the  remaining  substances — for  instance,  that  it  is  transformed
into  a  precipitate  or  vapour — then  a  fresh  reaction  will  set  in  and  a
re-formation  of  the  salt  NX.  If  this  be  removed,  then,  although  the
quantity  of  the  elements  N  and  X  in  the  mass  will  be  diminished,  still,
according  to  Berthollet's  law,  a  certain  amount  of  NX  should  be  again
formed.  When  this  substance  is  again  formed,  then,  owing  to  its
physical  properties,  it  will  again  pass  away ;  hence  the  reaction,
in  consequence  of  the  physical  properties  of  the  resultant  substances,  is
able  to  proceed  to  completion  notwithstanding  the  possible  weakness  of
the  attraction  existing  between  the  elements  entering  into  the  com-
position of  the  resultant  substance  NX.  Naturally,  if  the  resultant
substance  is  formed  of  elements  having  a  considerable  degree  of
affinity,  then  the  complete  decomposition  is  considerably  facilitated.

Such  a  representation  of  the  modus  ojyerandi  of  chemical  trans-
formations is  applicable  with  great  clearness  to  a  number  of  re-
actions studied  in  chemistry,  and,  what  is  especially  important,  the
application  of  this  aspect  of  Berthollet's  teaching  does  not  in  any  way
require  the  determination  of  the  measure  of  affinity  acting  between  the
substances  present. For  instance,  the  action  of  ammonia  on  solutions

email  that  even  a  large  mass  would  still  give  no  observable  displacements.  The  fanda-
mental  condition  for  the  application  of  BerthoUet's  doctrine,  as  well  as  Deville's  doctrine
of  dissociation,  lies  in  the  reversibility  of  reactions.  There  are  practically  irreversible
reactions  <for  instance,  CCl4  +  2H20  =  C0.2  +  4HCl),  just  as  there  are  non- volatile  sub-
stances. But  while  accepting  the  doctrine  of  reversible  reactions  and  retaining  the
theory  of  the  evaporation  of  liquids,  it  is  possible  to  admit  the  existence  of  non-volatile
substances,  and  in  just  the  same  way  of  reactions,  without  any  visible  conformity  to
Berthollet*s  doctrine.  This  doctrine  evidently  comes  nearer  than  the  opposite  doctrine
of  Bergmaun  to  solving  the  complex  problems  of  chemical  mechanics  for  the  snoceasfnl
solution  of  which  at  the  present  time  the  most  valuable  help  is  to  be  exx)ected  from  the
working  out  of  data  concerning  dissociation,  the  influence  of  mass,  and  the  equilibrium
and  velocity  of  reactions.  But  it  is  evident  that  from  this  |)oint  of  view  we  must  not
reganl  a  solvent  as  a  non>partioipant  space,  but  must  take  into  consideration  the
chemical  reactions  accompanying  solution,  or  else  bring  about  reactions  without  Bolotion.

SODIUM  CHLdRIDE— BERTHOLLET'S  LAWS  447

of  salts  ;  the  displacement,  by  its  means,  of  basic  hydrates  insoluble  in
water  ;  the  separation  of  volatile  nitric  acid  by  the  aid  of  non-volatile
sulphuric  acid,  as  well  as  the  decomposition  of  common  salt  by  means
of  sulphuric  acid,  when  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid  is  formed— may  be
taken  as  examples  of  reactions  which  proceed  to  the  end,  inasmuch  as
one  of  the  resultant  substances  is  entirely  removed  from  the  sphere  of
action,  but  they  in  no  way  indicate  the  measure  of  affinity.*®

As  a  proof  that  double  decompositions  like  the  above  are  actually
accomplished  in  the  sense  of  Berthollet's  doctrine,  the  fact  may  be  cited
that  common  salt  may  be  entirely  decomposed  by  nitric  acid,  and  nitre
may  l)e  completely  decomposed  by  hydrochloric  acid,  just  as  they  are
decomposed  by  sulphuric  acid  ;  but  this  only  takes  place  wjien,  in  the
first  instance,  an  excess  of  nitric  acid  is  taken,  and  in  the  second  instance,
an  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid,  for  a  given  quantity  of  the  sodium  salt,
and  when  the  resultant  acid  passes  off.  If  sodium  chloride  be  put  into
a  porcelain  evaporating  basin,  nitric  acid  added  to  it,  and  the  mix-
ture heated,  then  both  hydrochloric  and  nitric  acids  are  expelled  by
the  heat.  Thus  the  nitric  acid  partiall}'  -acts  on  the  sodium  chloride,
but 'on  heating,  as  both  acids  are  volatile,  they  are  both  converted  into

^  Common  salt  not  only  enters  into  double  decomposition  viith  acids  but  also  vnth
fvery  saXt.  However,  as  clearly  follows  from  Berthollet's  doctrine,  this  form  of  decom-
position will  only  in  a  few  cases  render  it  possible  for  new  metallic  chlorides  to  be  ob-
tained, because  the  decomposition  will  not  be  carried  on  to  the  end  unless  the  metallic
chloride  formed  separates  from  the  mass  of  the  active  substances.  Thus,  for  example,
if  A  solution  of  conuDon  salt  be  mixed  with  a  solution  of  magnesi\im  sulphate,  double
decomposition  ensues,  but  not  completely,  because  all  the  substances  remain  in  the  solu-
tion. Li  this  case  the  decomposition  must  result  in  the  formation  of  sodium  sulphate  and
magnesium  chloride,  substances  which  are  soluble  in  water ;  nothing  is  disengaged,  and
therefore  the  decomposition  2NaCl  +  MgS04  =  MgCl.,>  +  Na^S04  cannot  proceed  to  the  end.
However,  the  sodium  sulphate  formed  in  this  manner  may  be  separated  by  freezing  the
mixture.  The  complete  separation  of  the  sodium  sulphate  will  naturally  not  take  place,
owing  to  a  portion  of  the  salt  remaining  in  the  solution.  Nevertheless,  this  kind  of
decomposition  is  made  use  of  for  the  preparation  of  sodium  sulphate  from  the  residues
left  after  the  evaporation  of  sea-water,  which  contain  a  mixture  of  magnesium  sulphate
and  common  salt.  Such  a  mixture  is  found  at  Stassfurt  in  a  natural  form.  It  might  be
Haid  that  this  form  of  double  decomposition  is  only  accomplished  with  a  change  of  tem-
perature ;  but  this  would  not  be  true,  as  may  be  Concluded  from  other  analogous  cases.
Thus,  for  instance,  a  solution  of  copper  sulphate  is  of  a  blue  colour,  while  a  solution  of
copper  chloride  is  green.  If  we  mix  the  two  salts  together  the  green  tint  is  distinctly
viHible,  so  tliat  by  this  means  the  presence  of  the  copper  chloride  in  the  solution  of  cop])er
sulphate  is  clearly  seen.  If  now  we  add  a  solution  of  common  salt  to  a  solution  of  coj)]M>r
Mulphate,  a  green  coloration  is  obtained,  which  indicates  the  formation  of  copper  chloride.
Ill  this  instance  it  is  not  separated,  but  it  is  immediately  formed  on  the  addition  of
common  salt,  as  it  should  be  according  to  Berthollet's  doctrine.

The  complete  formation  of  a  metallic  chloride  from  common  wait  can  only  occur,
judging  from  the  above,  when  it  separates  from  the  sphere  of  action.  The  salts  of  si  her
are  instances  in  point,  because  the  silver  chloride  ib  insoluble  in  water;  and  therefore
if  we  add  a  solution  of  sodium  chloride  to  a  solution  of  a  silver  salt,  nilver  chloride  and
the  sodium  salt  of  that  acid  which  was  in  the  silver  salt  are  formed.

""^INCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

vapour  ;  nnd  therefore  the  residue  will  contain  a  mixture  of  a.  certain
quantity  of  the  Rodium  chloride  taken  and  of  the  sodium  nitrate  formed.
If  a  fresh  quantity  of  nitric  acid  l>e  then  added,  reaction  will  again  set
in,  a  certain  portion  of  hydrochloric  acid  is  agnio  evolved,  and  on  heat-
ing is  expelled  together  uith  nitric  acid.  If  this  be  repeated  sever*!
times,  it  is  possilile  to  expel  all  the  hydrochloric  acid,  and  to  obta
sodium  nitrat«  only  in  the  residue.  If,  on  the  cdotrary,
sodium  nitrate  and  udd  hydroohtorio  acid  to  tt  in  an  aqueous  aoluUoi^l
a  certain  quantity  of  the  hydrochloric  acid  displaces  a  portion  of  Ui«
nitric  acid,  and  on  heating  the  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid  passes  away
with  the  nitric  acid  formed.  On  repeating  this  process,  it  is  possible
to  displace  the  nitric  acid  with  an  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid,  just  ■  ~
it  was  possible  to  displace  the  hydrochloric  acid  by  an  excess  of  nitr
acid.  The  influence  of  the  nmss  of  the  aulwtance  in  action  and  1
influence  of  volatility  are  here  very  distinctly  seen.  Hence  it  may  he
affirmed  that  sulphuric  acid  does  not  displace  hydrochloric  acid
because  of  an  especially  high  degree  of  affinity,  but  that  this  reaction  is
only  carried  on  to  the  end  because  the  sulphuric  acid  is  not  vol*
whilst  the  hydrocldoric  acid  which  ia  fomied  is  volatile.

The  preparation  of  hydrochloric  acid  in  the  lalioratory  i
large  scale  is  liftsed  ujKin  these  data. In  the  first  instance,  j
of  sulphuric  acid  is  employed  iu  order  that  the  reaction  may  prs
easily at  a low temperature,  whilst on a large scale, when  {d
necessary  to  economise  e\ery  material,  equivalent  quantities  are  1
in  order  to  obtain  the  norTual  salt  NajBO,  and  not  the  acid  salt,  ■
would  re([uire  twice  as  much  acid. The  hydrochloric  acid  evoln
A  gas  which  i.s  very  soluble  in water. It  is  most  frequently  i
in  practice  in  this  state  of  .solution  undar  tho  name  of  miiriatie  a

ibtail^l

uUoi^^l
f  Uie

St  a^H
t  tl>9

'^1  The  apparatuB  shown  in  Gfi;.  ISlt-'hspter  VL,  Xok'  1'il  i»  getiersllyunplojeiiroTa
preparation  oC  small  qtiiintitie«  of  hydrochloric  acid.  Cnumoo  salt  is  placnlin  Ihrrc
Ihe  Rait  LB  gt^nerallT  previonaly  f  ased,  bb  it  otherwiBc  frotliB  ajid  boilu  over  in  Lhe  appHr&ta«-
When  the  BppaiataR  if  plooed  in  nrder  KUlpharic  aciil  miied  nith  walri  is  pound  iawn
the  thiitle  (uunel  into  llie  retart.  Strong  snlpharic  acid  (ab«tit  half  aa  mach  again  %t
the  weight  ot  the  salt)  is  DBuall]'  token,  and  it  ia  diluted  with  a  imall  qaantib;  of  wain
(halt)  if  it  be  deiired  to  retud  the  nctiaa,  u  in  using  strong  aulphurio  acid  the  acUon
immediatoly  beginn  with  great  ligonr.  Tlie  miitnre,  at  flrst  without  the  aid  of  heat  and
then  at  a  moderate  temperatnre  (iiiawater-bath),eYolveah)rdroohloria  acid.  CammeTcial
hrdrochloric  add  eontainB  many  impnritiei;  it  is  UBiially  pnrifiad  by  diatilUUon.  the
middle  portions  being  ooUeeted.  It  is  parifiul  (roia  lursenio  by  adding  FeCl,,  diatilliiif.
and  rejecting  the  first  third  of  the  distillate.  If  free  hv-dmchloric  acid  goa  be  ragolred,
it  ia  passed  throngh  a  vease!  contuning  strong  anlphnrir  iicid  to  dry  it,  and  ia  collected
over  ■  meraury  bath.

Phoipliorio  anhydride  absorbs  hydrogen  chloride  (Bailey  and  Fowlu,  ISUl
9FgO|  tflHC1^POCIs-(-3HPO.O  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  tbarefote  du  fka
cannot  be  dried  by  this  substance.

J

SODIUM  CHLOItrDE-HERniOLI,ET'.S  LAWS

449

In  chemical  works  tlie  decomposition  nf  sodium  rhloridehy  means  of
sul|)huric  acid  is  carried  on  on  a  very  large  scale,  chiefly  with  n  view  to
the  preparation  of  nonnal  sodium  sulphate,  the  hydrochlorje  acid  l>eing
a  hye-product.'^' ''''  The  funiace  employed  is  t«rmed  a  W'  t-filc' /uni'iff.
It  is  represented  in  fig.  65,  ami  comttRtii  of  the  following  two  jtarts  ;  the
pail  B  and  the  roost^T  C,  or  encluscd  space  built  up  of  large  bricks
a  and  enveloped  on  all  sides  by  the  smoke  and  flames  from  the  fire
giikte,  F.  Th*  ultimate  decomposition  of  the  salt  by  the  sulphuric
acid  is  accomplished  in  the  roaster.  But  the  first  decomposition
of  sodium  chloride  by  sulphuric  acid  does  not  require  so  high  a
t<<inperature  as  the  ultimate  decompasttion,  and  is  therefore  carried
on  in  the  front  and  cooler  portion,  B,  whose  bottom  ie  heated  liy  gbs
flues. When  the  rea^^tion  in  this  poi-tion  ceases  iind  the  evolution

of  hydrochloric  acid  stops,  then  the  mass,  which  cont^iins  about
half  of  the  Bodium  chloride  still  undecomposed,  and  the  sulphuric
mid  in  the  form  of  acid  Bodiuni  sulphate,  is  removed  from  B  and
ihrown  into  the  rooster  C,  where  the  action  is  completed.  Normal
sodium  sulphate,  which  we  shall  afterwards  describe,  remains  in  the
roaster.  It  is  employed  both  directly  in  the  manufacture  of  glass,  and
in  the  prepni-ation  of  other  sodium  compounds— for  instance,  in  the

>'  'I-  III  fhemiciil  wCFThh where  «ul|illDric  BCiil
•iiu|>to7ed,  117  porta  oF  aodiam  chloride  ure  Ukeu  to

p.,

WM

450  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

preparation  of  soda  ash,  as  will  afterwards  be  described.  For  the  present
we  will  only  turn  our  attention  to  the  hydrochloric  acid  evolved  in  B
and  C.

The  hydrochloric  acid  gas  evolved  is  subjected  to  condensation  by
dissolving  it  in  water.^*  If  the  apparatus  in  which  the  decomposition
is  accomplished  were  hermetically  closed,  and  only  presented  one  outlet,
then  the  escape  of  the  hydrochloric  acid  would  only  proceed  through
the  escape  pipe  intended  for  this  purpose.  But  as  it  is  impossible  tt>
construct  a  perfectly  hermetically  closed  furnace  of  this  kind,  it  is
necessary  to  increase  the  draught  by  artificial  means,  or  to  oblige  tlie
hydrochloric  acid  gas  to  pass  thn)ugh  those  arrangements  in  which  it  is
to  l)e  condensed.  This  is  done  by  connecting  the  ends  of  the  tubes
through  which  the  hydrochloric  acid  gas  escapes  from  the  furnace  with  high
chimneys,  where  a  strong  draught  is  set  up  from  the  combustion  of  the
fuel.  This  causes  a  current  of  hydrochloric  acid  gas  to  pass  through  the
absorbing  apparatus  in  a  definite  direction.  Here  it  encounters  a  cur-
rent of  water  flowing  in  the  opposite  direction,  by  which  it  is  absorbed.
It  is  not  customary  to  cause  the  Jicid  to  pass  through  the  water,  but
only  to  bring  it  into  contact  with  the  surface  of  the  water.  The  al:)6orp-
tion  apparatus  consists  of  large  earthenware  vessels  having  four  orifices,
two  above  and  two  lateral  ones  in  the  wide  central  portion  of  each
vessel.  The  upper  orifices  serve  for  connecting  the  vessels  together,
and  the  hydrochloric  acid  gas  escaping  from  the  furnace  passes  through
these  tubes. The  water  for  absorbing  the  acid  enters  at  the  upper,  and

'-'  As  in  works  whicli  treat  common  salt  in  order  to  obtain  sodium  sulphat^*^  the
hydrochloric  acid  is  sometimes  held  to  be  of  no  value,  it  might  be  allowed  to  e8cai)e  with
the  waste  furnace  gases  into  the  atmosphere,  which  would  greatly  injure  tlie  air  of
the  neighbourhood  and  destroy  all  vegetation.  In  all  countries,  therefore,  there  are  laws
forbidding  the  factories  to  proceed  in  this  manner,  and  requiring  the  absorption  of  the
hydrochloric  acid  by  water  at  the  works  themselves,  and  not  permitting  the  solution  to
be  run  into  rivers  and  streams,  whose  waters  it  would  spoil.  It  may  be  remarked  that
the  ab8ori)tion  of  hydrochloric  acid  presents  no  iiarticular  difficulties  (the  absorption  of
sulphurous  acid  is  much  more  difficult)  because  hydrochloric  acid  has  a  great  affinity  for
water  and  gives  a  hydrate  which  boils  above  100^.  Hence,  even  steam  and  hot  water,  as
well  as  weaker  solutions,  can  be  used  for  absorbing  the  acid.  However,  Warder  (1888)
showed  that  weak  solutions  of  composition  HoO-}-  /jHCI  when  boiled  (the  residue  will  be
almost  HC1,8H.>0)  evolve  (not  water  but)  a  solution  of  the  composition  H.20  +  445»*HC1 :
for  example,  on  distilling  HCl,10H.jO,  HC1,23H.>0  is  first  obtained  in  the  distillate.  As
the  strength  of  the  residue  becomes  greater,  so  also  does  that  of  the  distillate,  and  there-
fore in  order  to  completely  absorb  hydrochloric  acid  it  is  necessary  in  the  end  to  have
recourse  to  water.

As  in  Russia  the  manufacture  of  sodium  sulphate  from  sodium  chloride  has  not  vet
been  sufficiently  develoi)ed,  and  as  hydro<hloric  acid  is  required  for  many  technical  pur-
poses (for  instance,  for  the  preparation  of  zinc  chloride,  which  is  employed  for  soaking
railway  sleepers),  therefore  salt  is  often  treated  mainly  for  the  manufacture  of  hydnv-
chloric  acid.

SODIUM  CHMRIDE-BERTHOLLETS  LAWS  451

flows  out  from  the  lower,  vessel,  passing  through  the  lateral  orifices
in  the  vessels.  The  water  flows  from  the  chimney  towards  the  furnace
and  it  is  therefore  evident  that  the  outflowing  water  will  be  the  most
saturated  with  acid,  of  which  it  actually  contains  about  20  per  cent.
The  absorption  in  these  vessels  is  not  complete.  The  ultimate  absorp-
tion of  the  hydrochloric  acid  is  carried  on  in  the  so-called  coke  towers,
which  usually  consist  of  two  adjacent  chimneys.  A  lattice-work  of
bricks  is  laid  on  the  bottom  of  these  towers,  on  which  coke  is
piled  up  to  the  top  of  the  tower.  Water,  distributing  itself  over  the
coke,  trickles  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  tower,  and  in  so  doing  absorl)S
the  hydrochloric  acid  gas  rising  upwards.

Tt  will  be  readily  understood  that  hydrochloric  acid  may  be
obtained  from  all  other  metallic  chlorides.'^  It  is  frequently  formed
in  other  reactions,  many  of  which  we  shall  meet  with  in  the  further
course  of  this  work.  It  is,  for  instance,  formed  by  the  action  of
water  on  sulphur  chloride,  phosphorus  chloride,  antimony  chloride,  &c.

Hydrochloric  acid  is  a  colourless  gas  having  a  pungent  suflbcating
odour  and  an  acid  taste.  This  gas  fumes  in  air  and  attracts  moisture,
because  it  forms  vapour  containing  a  compound  of  hydrochloric  acid  and
water.  Hydrochloric  acid  is  liquefied  by  cold,  and  under  a  pressure  of
40  atmospheres,  into  a  colourless  liquid  of  sp.  gr.  0*908  at  0°,^*  boiling
point  —  35°  and  absolute  boiling  point  -f  52°.  We  have  already  seen
(Chapter  I.)  that  hydrochloric  acid  combines  very  energetically  vnth
water,  and  in  so  doing  evolves  a  considerable  amount  of  heat.  The
solution  saturated  in  the  cold  attains  a  density  1*23.  On  heating  such
a  solution  containing  about  45  parts  of  acid  per  100  parts,  the  hydro-

^'  Tims  the  metallic  chlorides,  which  are  decomposed  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  by
water,  Correspond  with  feeble  bases.  Such  are,  for  example,  MgClj,  AICI.15,  SbCls,  BiClj.
Tlie  decomposition  of  magnesium  chloride  (and  also  camallite)  by  sulphuric  acid  pro-
ceeds at  the  ordinary  temperature ;  water  decomposes  MgCl.2  to  the  extent  of  50  p.c.
when  aided  by  heat,  and  may  bf  employed  as  a  convenient  method  for  the  production
of  hydrochloric  acid.  Hydrochloric  acid  is  also  produced  })y  the  ignition  of  certain
metallic  chlorides  in  a  stream  of  hydrogen,  especially  of  those  metals  which  are  easily
reduced  and  difficultly  oxidised — for  instance,  silver  chloride.  Lead  chloride,  when
heated  to  redness  in  a  current  of  steam,  gives  hydrochloric  acid  and  lead  oxide.  The
multitude  of  the  cases  of  formation  of  hydrochloric  acid  are  understood  from  the
fact  that  it  is  a  substance  which  is  comparatively  very  stable,  resembling  water  in  this
respect,  and  even  most  probably  more  stable  than  water,  because,  at  a  high  temperature
and  even  under  the  action  of  light,  chlorine  decomposes  water,  with  the  formation  of
hydrochloric  acid.  The  combination  of  chlorine  and  hydrogen  also  proceeds  by  their
direct  action,  as  we  shall  afterwards  describe.

^  According  to  Ansdell  (18H0)  the  sp.  gr.  of  liquid  hychrochloric  acid  at  0°-()'908,  at
11-67°  =-0-854,  at  22'7°  -OBOR,  at  33=  - (»-748.  Hence  it  is  seen  that  the  expansion  of  this
liquid  is  greater  than  that  of  gases  (Chapter  II.,  Note  34).

o  o2

i  remains

Dittmk^fl
:ause  tb^^

*■  -  ■MlNt'lTLES OF  CHEMISTRY

chloric  acid  gas  is  expelled  with  only  a  slight  admixture  »f  squeonE
vapour.  But  it  is  impossible  to  entirely  separate  die  whole  of  the
hydrochloric  acid  from  the  water  by  this  means,  as  could  be  done  in
the  case  of  an  ammoniacal  solution.  The  temperature  required  fur  the
evolntion  of  the  gas  rises  and  roaches  H0°-111°,  and  after  this  remains
cotistani— that  is,  a  solution  huviug  a  conBtftnlbuiling point  it
(as  with  HNOj),  which,  however,  does  not  (Roscoe  aiid  Dittu
present  a  constant  composition  under  different  pressures,  because  t
hydrate  is  deooiuposed  in  distillutiou,  as  is  seen  from  the  detemiinAl
of  its  vapour  density  (Biuenu).  Judging  f rum  the  facts  (1)  that  with
decrease  of  the  pressure  under  which  the  distillation  proceeds  the
EK^ution  oi  constant  boiling  point  approaches  to  a  composition  of  25  p.c.
of  hydrochloric  acid,*'  (2)  that  by  passing  a  sti-eam  of  dry  air  through
a  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid  there  is  obtained  in  the  residue  a  solution
which  also  approaches  to  25  p.i;.  of  acid,  and  more  nearly  as  the  tenipen-
ture  falls,'"  (3)  that  many  of  the  propertiea  of  solutions  uf  hydrochloric
acid  vary  distinctly  according  as  they  cuntain  more  or  less  than  25  p.c.
of  hydrocldoric  atid  (for  instance,  antimonious  sulphide  gives  hydro-
gen sulphide  with  a  stronger  ncid,  but  is  not  acted  on  by  a  weaker
solution,  also  a  stranger  solution  fumes  in  the  air,  &c.),  and  (i)  that  the
composition  IICl,6HaO  correaponds  with  "J5-26  p.f,  HCJ  judging  frotu
all  these  datji,  and  also  from  the  loss  of  tension  wlitch  occurs  in  the
combination  of  hydrochloiic  acid  with  water,  it  may  be  said  that  th«y
form  a  definite  hydraie  of  the  composition  HCl,6HyO.  Besides  this
hydrate  there  exists  also  a  crystallo-hydrate,  HCl,2HjO,^'  which  is
formed  by  the  absorption  of  hydrochloric  acid  by  a  saturated  .solution
at  a  temperature  of  —  23". It  orystalUses  and  melts  at  —  18".^'

The  mean  specific  gravities  at  ITi",  taking  wat«r  at  its  maximum

^'  Aocordiug  to  RoactK!  niid  Dittnuir  al  u  prcBxare  of  thiM  atmosplierec  Ihe  wlntMui
at  uHiBtaiit  boiling  point  coDlainB  IS  [i.e.  of  hydrogen  oliloride,  ancl  at  b  preevure  of  oue-
Mnth  Btm(»|ihere  3S  p.c. Tbe  percvnlagi:  in  intennediato  at  medium  preunrBB.

5^  At  0°  as  p,o.,  at  100°  aO-7  p.p. ;  Roaeoe  and  Dittuwr.

"  Thin  ccyBta!lo-h];dnto  (obtiiiiiiid  lif  Pivrre  uid  I'ucbot,  <uid  investigaled  hy  Room-
boom)  ix  onalogaos  to  Ni.Cl,SH,0.  The  urfstal*  HCi,SH,0  at  -93"  Iinve  >  speeifii^
gravity  1'4G;  the  vapoctr  tendon  (a iidor  ^Bu»iiitioii)  of  the  solatiou  luving  a  coinpoaitiun
HCI,8H,0iit  -m''  =  760,at -lfl°-l,010,at  -ia°  =  l,0B7,  at  -17' =  1,119  mm.  of  mo^
Dury.  Id  a  aolid  «Ute  the  eryBtalto-hydratv  at  — 17'7°  haa  thi>  wine  teniion,  shilal  al
lowBT  temperatoren  it  is  much  leas:  a\  —24"  abont  IBO,  at  —19°  about  BBO  mm.  A
mixture  of  fomiug  hydrDchlorio  a*Ai  with  bdow  redaceij  the  temperataie  to  —  88''.  [f
■notber  equivalent  of  water  be  added  to  the  hydrate  HCI,3H]0  at  — 18°,  the  leiii|ie.rainn
of  BolidiflcatbD  fallB  to  -  SB*,  and  the  hydrate  HC1,BH,0  ia  formed  (PJclceiing.  lAKJ).

"  Awarding  to  BoBcoe  at 0°  one  ftinrrfrcrfgramaof  walecd  apreHniTrepfiDinillimatnB.
of  maronry)  dimiolves —

SODIUM  CHLORIDE— BERTHOLLErs  LAWS  458

density  (4°)  as  10,000,  for  solutions  containing/?  per  cent,  of  hydrogen

chloride  are —

p  S  p  S

5  10,242  25  11,266

10  10,490  30  11,522

15  10,744  35  11,773

20  11,001  40  11,997

The  formula >S'=  9,991-6 +  49•43;^-h0•0571/>^  up  to;?=25-26,  which
answers  to  the  hydrate  HC1,6H20  mentioned  above,  gives  the  specific
gravity. Above  this  percentage  ^  =  9,785-1  +  65-l()p  —  0-24()p*. The

At  a  pressure  of  760  millimetres  and  temperature  t^  one  hundred  grams  of  water
dissolves

i  =  0  8°  1G°  24°  40<»  60°

Grams  HCl  825  78-8  742  70*0  68*8  66-1

Roozeboom  (1886)  showed  that  at  t°  solutions  containing  c  grams  of  hydrogen  cliloride
per  100  grams  of  water  may  (with  the  variation  of  the  pressure  p)  be  formed  together
with  the  crj'stallo-hydrate  HC1,2H20:

t  =  -28°-8  -21°  -19°  -18°  -17°-7

c  - 84-2  86-8  92-6  984  101-4

p  = —  884  580  900  1,073  mm.

The  last  combination  answers  to  the  melted  cr}-stallo-hydrate  HC1,2H.^0,  which  spbts  up

at  temperatures  above  — 17°*7,  and  at  a  constant  atmospheric  i>re8sure  when  there  are  no

crystals —

t  ^  -24°  -21°  -18°  -10°  0°

c  =r 101-2  98-3  95-7  89-8  842

From  these  data  it  is  seen  that  the  hydrate  HCl/iH.^O  can  exist  in  a  liquid  state,  which
is  not  the  case  for  the  hydrates  of  carbonic  and  sulphurous  anliydrides,  chlorine,  &c.

According  to  Marignac,  the  specific  heat  c  of  a  solution  HCl  +  ^nH^O  (at  about  80°,
taking  the  specific  heat  of  water  =  1)  is  given  by  the  expression —

C(86-5  +  wil8) « 187;i  -  28-39  +  140  wi -268  wi-

if  w  be  not  less  than  6-25. For  example,  for  HCl  +  25H.2O, C « 0877.

According  to  Thomsen's  data,  the  amount  of  heat  Q,  expressed  in  thousands  of  calories,

evolved  in  the  solution  of  36*5  grams  of  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid  in  //iH.jO  or  18m  grams

of  water  is  equal  to —

m  = 2  4  10  50  400

Q  =  11-4 14-8 16-2 171 17*8

In  these  quantities  the  latent  heat  of  liquefaction  is  included,  which  must  be  taken
AS  5-9  thousand  calories  per  molecular  quantity  of  hydrogen  chloride.

The  researches  of  SchefTer  (1888)  on  the  rate  of  diffusion  (in  water)  of  solutions  of
hydrochloric  acid  show  that  tlie  coefficient  of  diffusion  k  decreases  with  the  amount  of
water  n,  if  the  composition  of  the  solution  is  HClwHoO  at  0° : —

n  -

5

6-9

9-8

14

271

129*5

A-  -

2-81

208

1-86

1-67

1-52

1-89

It  also  appears  that  strong  solutions  diffuse  more  rapidly  into  dilute  solutions  than
into  water.

.^.^.b^Mita

454  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

rise  of  specific  graWty  with  an  increase  of  percentage  (or  the  difierentiaJ

I reaches  a  maximum  at  alxmt  25  p.c.'^ The  intermediate  solution,

dp)

HCl,6HaO,  is  further  distinguished  by  the  foct  that  the  variation  ol
the  specific  gravity  with  the  variation  of  temperature  is  a  constant
quantity,  so  that  the  specific  gravity  of  this  solution  is  equal  to
11,352-7  (1  -  00004470,  where  0000447  is  the  coefficient  of  expansi<m
of  the  solution.^" In  the  case  of  more  dilute  solutions,  as  with  water,

the  specific  gravity  per  1°  (or  the  differential  -  J  rises  with  a  rise  of  tem-
perature.**

p= 0 5 10 15 20

5„-*Vi:.  = 7-2 23 38 52 64
.<,, -,930  =  341 42 50 59 67

Whilst  for  solutions  which  contain  a  greater  proportion  of  hydrogen
chloride  than  HCljOH^O,  these  coefficients  decrease  with  a  rise  d
temperature  ;  for  instance,  for  30  p.c.  of  hydrogen  chloride  So  —  <S,a
=  88  and  6',-,  —  '^'ao  =^'^  (according  to  Marignac*s  data).  In  the  ca«
of  HCljGHjO  these  differences  are  constant,  and  equal  76.

Thus the formation  of two definite  hydrates, HC1,2H.20 and

HCljGHjO, between  hydrochloric  acid  and  water may \ye accepted

upon  the  V)asis  of  many  facts. But  l)oth  of  them,  if  they  occur  in  8

liquid  state,  dissociate  with  great  facility  into  hydrogen  chloride  and

• water,  and  are  completely  decomposed  when  distilled.

All  solutions  of  hydrochloric  acid  present  the  properties  of  at
energetic  acid.  They  not  only  transform  blue  vegetable  colouring
matter  into  red,  and  disengage  carbonic  acid  gas  from  carbonates,  Ac.
but  they  also  entirely  saturate  bases,  even  such  energetic  ones  as  pot
ash,  lime,  etc. In  a  dry  state,  however,  hydrochloric  acid  does  not  alte

5^  If  it  be  admitted  that  the  maximum  of  the  diflfereiitial  corresponds  with  HC1»6BL,0
then  it  might  he  tliought  that  tlie  specific  gravity  Ik  expresse<l  by  a  parabola  of  the  thin
order;  hut  such  an  admission  does  not  give  expressionH  in  accordance  with  fact.  Thi
IK  all  more  fully  considered  in  my  work  mentioned  in  Chapter  I.,  Note  19.

»"  Ah  in  water,  tlu*  C(X'fiicient  of  expansion  (or  the  (piantity  k  in  the  expresftioi
Sf  -S„  kSof,  or  \i=l/{l-kt}  atUins  u  magnitude  0000447  at  about  4«°,  it  might  b
thought  that  at  48'  all  Kolutions  of  hydr(K*liloric  acid  would  have  the  same  coefiicieu'
of  expansion,  but  in  reality  this  is  not  the  case.  At  low  and  at  the  ordinary  temperatures
th<'  coeflftciont  of  eximnsion  of  aqueous  solutions  is  greater  than  that  of  wat«r,  am
in(-reas(>s  with  the  amount  of  substance  dissolve<l.

*'  The  figures  cit€*d  above  may  serx-e  for  the  direct  determination  of  the  variation  o
the  8p<*cific  gravity  of  solutions  of  hydrochloric  acid  with  the  temperature.  Thcu
knowing  that  at  15^  the  specific  gravity  of  a  10  p.c.  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid  =  10,49S
we  find  that  at  ^'  it  10,580- ^(218  +  0027/).  Whence  also  may  l>e  found  the  coefticien
of  expansion  (Note  40).

'^SODIUM  CHLORIDE— BERTHOLLETS  LAWS  455

vegetable  dyes,  and  does  not  effect  many  double  decompositions  which
easily  take  place  in  the  presence  of  water.  This  is  explained  by  the
fact  that  the  gaso-elastic  state  of  the  hydrochloric  acid  prevents  its
entering  into  reaction.  However,  incandescent  iron,  zinc,  sodium,  <fec.,
act  on  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid,  displacing  the  hydrogen  and  leaving
half  a  volume  of  hydrogen  for  each  volume  of  hydrochloric  acid  gas  ;
this  reaction  may  serve  for  determining  the  composition  of  hydrochloric
acid.  Combined  with  water  hydrochloric  acid  acts  as  an  acid
much  resembling  nitric  cu^id  ^^  in  its  energy  and  in  many  of  its  reactions  ;
however,  the  latter  contains  oxygen,  which  is  disengaged  with  great  ease,
and  so  very  frequently  acts  as  an  oxidiser,  which  hydrochloric  acid  is  not
capable  of  doing.  The  majority  of  metals  (even  those  which  do  not
displace  the  H  from  H2SO4,  but  which,  like  copper,  decompose  it  to  the
limit  of  SO.2)  displace  the  hydrogen  from  hydrochloric  acid.  Thus
hydrogen  is  disengaged  by  the  action  of  zinc,  and  even  of  copper  and
^jj^  42bis  Only  a  few  metals  withstand  its  action  ;  for  example,  gold
and  platinum.  Lead  in  compact  masses  is  only  acted  on  feebly,
l)ecause  the  lead  chloride  formed  is  insoluble  and  prevents  the  further
action  of  the  acid  on  the  metal.  The  same  is  to  be  remarked  with  re-
spect to  the  feeble  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  on  mercury  and  silver,
l)ecause  the  compounds  of  these  metals,  AgCl  and  HgCl,  are  insoluble
in  water.  Metallic  chlorides  are  not  only  formed  by  the  action  of
hydrochloric  acid  on  the  metals,  but  also  by  many  other  methods  ;  for
instance,  by  the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  on  the  carbonates,  oxides,
and  hydroxides,  and  also  by  the  action  of  chlorine  on  metals  and  certain
of  their  compounds.  Metallic  chlorides  have  a  composition  MCI ;  for
example,  NaCl,  KCl,  AgCl,  HgCl,  if  the  metal  replaces  hydrogen
equivalent  for  equivalent,  or,  as  it  Ls  said,  if  it  be  monatomic  or
univalent.  In  the  case  of  bivalent  metals,  they  have  a  composition
MCI2  ;  for  example,  CaCl^,  CuClj,  PbClj,  HgClj,  FeClj,  MnCL^.  The
composition  of  the  haloid  salts  of  other  metals  presents  a  further
variation  ;  for  example,  AICI3,  PtCl4,  «$rc.  Many  metals,  for  instance
Fe,  give  several  degrees  of  combination  with  chlorine  (FeCl2,FeCl3)
as  with  hydrogen.  In  their  composition  the  metallic  chlorides  differ
from  the  corresponding  oxides,  in  that  the  O  is  replaced  by  Cl^,  as  should
follow  from  the  law  of  sul>stitution,  because  oxygen  gives  OH2,  and  is

*'  Thus,  for  instance,  with  feeble  baseH  they  evolve  in  dilute  eolutions  (Chapter  III.,
Note  56)  almost  equal  amounts  of  heat ;  their  relation  to  sulphuric  acid  is  quite  identical.
They  both  form  fuming  solutions  as  well  as  hydrates ;  they  both  form  solutions  of  con-
stant  boiling  point.

49  bu  Pybalkin  (1891)  found  that  copier  begins  to  disengage  hydrogen  at  100°,  and
that  chloride  of  copper  begins  to  give  up  its  chlorine  to  hydrogen  gas  at  280° ;  for  silver
these  temperatures  are  117^  and  260^ — tliat  is,  there  is  less  difference  between  them.

1  WLlQll P

m other d
^k which  tj

^56  PRINCIPLES OF  CHBMISTR5

consequently bivalent,  whilst :;lili>r)ne  forms HCI,  aiid 'is tlierefoi
univalent. So,  for instance, femius  o\ide. KeO, i-<irrespon<l8 '
feiTous  chloride,  FeCl.^,  and  the  oxide  Pe,0,  with  ferric  chloride,  whi
is  also  seen  from  tlie oiigin of  tliese  cou)[>ouucls,  f<>r  Fi-Clj  is  t
tained  by  tho  a«tion  of  hydrochloric  acid  oti  ferrous  oxide  or  cnrhonat
and  FeClj  by  its  action  on  ferric  oxide. In  a  word,  all  tho  typioa
propertif«  of  acids  are  shown  liy  hydroihloric  add,  and  all  tlie  typi«i
properties  of  salts  in  the  raetallic  chloritlpa  derived  from  it. Acids  ai
salts  compoKed  like  HCI  and  M„Clj,.  without  any  oxygen  lieartbenai
of  haloid  siilts  :  for  instance,  HCI  is  a  haloid  acid,  NaCt  a  haloid  sal^
cblorina  a  halogen. The  capacity  of  hydrochloric  acid  to  give^  liy  il
action  on  IxLse.s,  MO,  a  metallic  chloride,  MClg,  and  wat«r,  is  limited  •
high  t«mperature8  by  the  reverse  reaction  MCl^  +  H^O  =  Mf  >  +  2HC3^
and  the  moi-e  prrpnounced  are  the  basic  properties  of  MO  the  feebler  &
the  reverse  action,  wliile  f  >r  feebler  bases  such  as  AljO,,  MgO,  &c^  t

i-everae  reaction  proceeds  with  ease. Metallic  chlorides  corresponc'

with  the  peroxides  either  do  not  exist,  or  are  easily  deoompueed  wit|
the  disengagement  of  chlorine.  Thus  there  is  do  compound  BaCt|
corresponding  with  the  peritxide  BaO^,  Metallic  chlorides  havi
the  general  aspect  of  saltK,  like  their  repi'e-sentative  sodium  chloride^
lire,  as  a  rule,  easily  fusible,  more  so  than  the  nxides  (for  instance,  CaOl
is  infusible  at  a  furnace  heat,  whilst  CaCl.^  is  easily  fused)  and  matiy
other  salts.  Under  the  action  of  heat  many  chlorides  ai-e  more  ataUife
than  the  oxides,  some  can  even  be  converted  into  vapour ;  thus  c
sive  sublimate,  HgClj,  is  particularly  volatile,  whilst  the  «ixida  HgQ
decomposes  at  a  red  heat.  Silver  chloride,  AgCl,  is  funble  i
is  decomposed  with  difficulty,  whilst  Ag^O  is  easily  decomposed.
majority  of  the  metallic  chlorides  are  soluble  in  water,  but  sil^-ai
chloride,  cuprous  chloride,  mercumus  chloride,  and  lead  chloride  *
sparingly  siJuble  in  water,  and  ai-e  therefore  easily  obtained  as  pi»-
cipitates  when  a  snlutinn  of  the  salts  of  these  metals  is  mixed  withk
BiilutioM  of  any  chloride  or  even  with  hydrochloric  acid.  The  meU
contained  in  a  haloid  salt  may  often  be  replaced  by  another  met&I,  o
even  by  hydrogen,  just  an  is  the  case  with  a  metal  in  an  oxide.  Thai
copper  displaces  mercury  frum  a  solution  uf  mercuric  chloride
HgCj  +  Cu  =  CuCl.j  +  Hg,  and  hydi-ogeoatared  heat  displaces  ulvcf
from  silver  chloride,  SAgCl  +  H,  =  Ag^  +  2HC1.  These,  and  a  «
series  of  similar  reactions,  form  the  typical  methods  of  double  i
decompositions.  The  measure  of  decomposition  and  the  conditions  u;
which  reactions  of  double  saline  decompositions  proceed  in  one  nr  in  thti
other  direction  are  determined  by  the  properties  of  the  componndg
which  take  part  in  the  reaction,  and  of  those  capable  of  formatioa  at  tl

SODIUM  CHLORIDE-BERTHOLLETS  LAWS  457

temperature,  «fec.,  as  was  shown  in  the  preceding  portions  of  this  chapter,
and  as  will  be  frequently  found  hereafter.

If  hydrochloric  acid  enters  into  double  decomposition  with  basic
oxides  and  their  hydrates,  this  is  only  due  to  its  acid  properties  ;  and
for  the  same  reason  it  rarely  enters  into  double  decomposition  with
acids  and  acid  anhydrides.  Sometimes,  however,  it  combines  with  the
latter,  as,  for  instance,  with  the  anhydride  of  sulphuric  acid,  forming
the  compound  SO3HCI  ;  and  in  other  cases  it  acts  on  acids,  giving  up
its  hydrogen  to  their  oxygen  and  forming  chlorine,  as  will  be  seen  in
the  following  chapter.

Hydrochloric  acid,  as  may  already  be  concluded  from  the  compo-
sition of  its  molecule,  belongs  to  the  monobasic  acids,  and  does  not,
therefore,  give  true  acid  salts  (like  HNaS04  or  HNaC03) ;  nevertheless
many  metallic  chlorides,  formed  from  poweiful  bases,  aYe  capable  of
combining  with  hydrochloric  acid,  just  as  they  combine  with  water^  or
with  ammonia,  or  as  they  give  double  salts.  Compounds  have  long
been  known  of  hydrochloric  acid  with  auric,  platinic,  and  antimonious
chlorides,  and  other  similar  metallic  chlorides  con-esponding  with  very
feeble  bases.  But  Berthelot,  Engel,  and  others  have  shown  that  the
capacity  of  HCl  for  combining  with  M„C1„,  is  much  more  frequently
encountered  than  was  previously  supposed.  Thus,  for  instance,  dry  hydro-
chloric acid  when  passed  into  a  solution  of  zinc  chloride  (containing  an
excess  of  the  salt)  gives  in  the  cold  (0°)  a  compound  HCl,ZnC1.2,2H20,
and  at  the  ordinary  temperature  HCl,2ZnC1.2f2H20,  just  as  it  is  able  at
low  temperatures  to  form  the  crystallo-hydrate  ZnCl2,3H20  (Engel,
1886)..  Similar  compoundsare  obtained  with  CdCl2,CuCl2,  HgCl2>F®2^6
Ac.  (Berthelot,  Ditte,  Cheltzoff,  Lachinoff,  and  others).  These  com-
pounds with  hydrochloric  acid  are  generally  more  soluble  in  water  than
the  metallic  chlorides  themselves,  so  that  whilst  hydrochloric  acid
decreases  the  solubility  of  M„C1,„,  corresponding  with  energetic  bases  (for
instance,  sodium  or  barium  chlorides),  it  increases  the  solubility  of  the
metallic  chlorides  corresponding  with  feeble  bases  (cadmium  chloiidet
ferric  chloride,  «tc.)  Silver  chloride,  which  is  insoluble  iii  water,  is  soluble
in  hydrochloric  acid.  Hydrochloric  acid  also  combines  with  certain  un-
saturated hydrocarbons  (for  instance,  with  turpentine,  C,oHig,2HCl)  and
their  derivatives.  S(d'ammo7iiaCy  or  ammonia  hydrochloride,  NH4CI
=  NH3,HC1,  also  belongs  to  this  class  of  ccmpounds.^^  If  hydrogen
chloride  gas  be  mixed  with  ammonia  gas  a  solid  compound  consisting

^  When  an  unsaturated  liydrocarbon,  or,  in  general,  an  unsaturated  compound
assimilates  to  itself  the  molecules  CI.>,  HCI,  SO5,  H.JSO4,  (i'c,  the  cause  of  the  reaction
is  most  simple.  As  nitrogen,  besides  the  type  NX5  to  which  NH5,  belongs,  gives  com-
pounds of  the type NX5— for example, NO..(OH) — the  formation  of the salts  of

of  equal  volumeB  of  eaoh  is  int mediately  formed.  The  same  coinJ
poand  IB  obtained  on  mixing  .solntionii  of  the  two  gases.  IttsalwH
produced  by  the  action  of  iiydrocbloric  acid  on  ammonium  cartmnatfu
Sal-ammoniau  is  usually  prepared,  in  pnictice,  by  the  last  method.*!
The  specitie  gravity  of  sal -ammoniac  is  1-35.  We  have  already  svtA
(Chapter  VI.)  that  sal-ammoniac,  like  all  uther  ammonium  salts,  easily
decomposes ;  for  instance,  by  volatdisatitm  with  alkalis,  and  even
partially  when  it«  iwlution  is  boiled.  Tlie  other  properties  and
reactions  of  sal-ammoniac,  especially  in  solution,  fully  recaJl
those  already  mentioned  in  speaking  of  sodium  chloride.  "Dius,
for  instance,  with  silver  nitrate  it  gives  a  precipitate  of  silver  chloride  ;
with  sulphurie  acid  it  gives  hydrochloric  acid  and  ammonium  stilpiutt
and  it  forms  double  salts  n'ith  certain  metallic  chlorides  and  otlit

iLUimouiDm  should  Iw  understood  iu tlila wuy. NH-,  g

uitpdble  of  giving  MX,-,. But  as  utamted  totnpoaudi — I

Ac. — ore alno cup&ble of uoiubiaation evou  between

tudeDytheeapacitjof  HCIalxoforconibiDatiaii. SO- con

HCl  and  the  unBaturat«d  hydiocnrhoiu. It  ie  impoasibli

formerly  sought  to  be  eBtshtisbed  betueen atomic and molecnlitt compotuid*,  aB

regudiDg,  lot  inaU»e«,  PCI^  ub  an  •kuma  compound  und  PClj  u  a  mulecaliU'  ana,  oo)

because  it  eAsily  xplitii  up  into  molecatea  PClj  and  CI,,

"  Bal-unmoniac  in  prepared  from  uniuoninm  carbonate,  obtained  inthedtydju
tion  of  nitrogenonii  NUbtiluices  (Chapter  VLj.  by  oaturating  the  resatUnt  aalatum
bydiochlorie  acid. A  eolution  of  Kal-Bmmoniiic  is  thus  ptodaoed,  whicb  ia  erapontsf
Hnd  in  the  reaidae  a  iiuihb  la  obtained  oontuining:  a  miitniv  of  variou*  other,  espetuU
tairj,  produute  of  dry  dintilliilion. The  sal-anunoniac  ia  generally  pnriSed  bj  subUnai
tion. For tiux purpose  iron  reHseU  ooveicd  with  TietniHphericaJ mebaUic cown
employed,  or  elae  aimplj  clay  orticibLeH  covered  by  other  cnjcihte^. The  upper  porl
or  head,  of  the  appuratuB  of  bbia  kind  will  imve  n  lowiv  teiii[iemture  tfaau  the  lower  pw
(ion,  wliiiih  ia  under  the  direct  Hction  of  the  ftome. The  eul-atnmoniao  volatiliaea  ndhM
heated,  and  setUeB  on  the  cooler  portiou  ol  the  apporatuti. It  in  thus  [reed  tmn
iinpniitiea,  and  is  obtoioed  as  a  <^ryatalline  eruHt,  generally  several  centiiuetrM  Uli
which  form  it  is  commonly  sold. The  solubility  of  iwl-BmmonJac  ritws  rapidly  with  Ik
tempernture:  at  0°.  100  parts  of  walar  dia«olve  about  38  parta  of  NH,C1,  at
no  parte,  and  at  the  ordinary  temperature  about  SS  parti. Thin it  sometij

lines  with  IL,0.aDd  alaow

"  The  Bolobitity  ol

a,Cl  froi

solutioi

!  other  saltn.

iniae  in  lUO  parte  of  water  (according  to  Allnard)  ia

8a■l^

ti-7a

78

A  saturated  Holution  boil  a  at  llG'"a, The  speti  He  gravity  at  tS°'4°  ol  sdulioia  of
ninmoniac  (water  1°^  10,000)  =9,9111 '6.  Sl*2Hp-0'08G;i',  where^  islbeamoDnl  by  wai
(if  ammonium  chloride  in  lUO  parts  ol  aululJoii. With  the  majority  of  mite  the  iittm
txul lis  dp  incrxasea,  but  here it decreaneg with the  increase  of  p. For  (anlike  Ik
noditun  and  potaasinm  salts)  a  solution  of  the  alkali  plm  a  mlution  of  acid  oOFapj
greater  tolame  than  that  of  the  resultant  aaimouinm  suit. In  tbe  soluCion  ot  aoA

chloride  a  coutractioD,  and  not  eipnnsion,  generally  take>  place. It  may
further  be  remarked  lliat  wlutionaof  (-bl-aiinuoniix'  have  an  acid  reaction  eveu  wtwn
prepared  from  the  salt  remaining  alter prolonged washing  of  the  sublimed  eah  with
(A,  BUberbalcoff),

459

CHAPTER  XI

THE HALOGENS  : CHLORINE, BROMINE, IODINE, AND FLUORINE

Although  hydrochloric  acid,  like  water,  is  one  of  the  most  stable
substances,  it  is  nevertheless  decomposed  not  only  by  the  action  of  a
galvanic  current,^  but  also  by  a  high  temperature.  Sainte-Claire  Deville
showed  that  decomposition  already  occurs  at  1,300°,  because  a  cold
tube  (as  with  CO,  Chapter  IX.)  covered  with  an  amalgam  of  silver  absorbs
€hlorine  from  hydrochloric  acid  in  a  red-hot  tube,  and  the  escaping
gas  contains  hydrogen.  Y.  Meyer  and  Langer  (1885)  observed  the  de-
composition of  hydrochloiic  acid  at  1,690^  in  a  platinum  vessel  ;  the
decomposition  in  this  instance  was  proved  not  only  from  the  fact
that  hydrogen  diffused  through  the  platinum  (p.  142),  owing  to  which
the  volume  was  diminished,  but  also  from  chlorine  being  obtained  in
the  residue  (the  hydrogen  chloride  was  mixed  with  nitrogen),  which
liberated  iodine  from  potassium  iodide.^  The  usual  method  for  the
preparation  of  chlorine  consists  in  the  abstraction  of  the  hydrogen  by
oxidising  agents.  ^  *>^*

^  The  decomposition  of  fused  sodium  chloride  by  an  electric  current  has  been  proposed
in  America  and  Rusnia  (N.  N.  BeketofF)  as  a  means  for  the  preparation  of  chlorine  and
sodium.  A  strong  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid  is  decomposed  into  equal  volumes  of
chlorine  and  hydrogen  by  the  action  of  an  electric  current.  If  sodium  chloride  and  lead
be  melted  in  a  crucible,  the  former  being  connected  with  the  cathode  and  a  carbon  anode
immersed  in  the  lead,  then  the  lead  dissolves  sodium  and  chlorine  is  disengaged  as  gas.
This  electrolytic  method  has  not  yet  been  practised  on  a  large  scale,  probably  because
gaseous  chlorine  has  not  many  applications,  and  because  of  the  difficulty  there  is  in
dealing  with  it.

*  To  obtain  so  high  a  temperature  (at  which  the  best  kinds  of  porcelain  soften)  Langer
and  Meyer  employed  the  dense  graphitoidal  carbon  from  gas  retorts,  and  a  powerful
blast.  They  determined  the  temperature  by  the  alteration  of  the  volume  of  nitrogen
in  the  platinum  vessel,  for  this  gas  does  not  permeate  through  platinum,  and  is  unaltered
by  heat.

1  bto  The  acid  properties  of  hydrochloric  acid  were  known  when  Lavoisier  pointed  out
the  formation  of  acids  by  the  combination  of  water  with  the  oxides  of  the  non-metals,
and  therefore  there  was  reason  for  thinking  that  hydrochloric  acid  was  formed  hy  the
combination  of  water  with  the  oxide  of  some  element.  Hence  when  Scheele  obtained
chlorine  by  the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  on  manganese  peroxide  he  considered  it  as
the  acid  contained  in  common  salt.  When  it  became  known  that  chlorine  gives  hydro-
chloric acid  with  hydrogen,  Lavoisier  and  Berthollet  supposed  it  to  be  a  compound  witli
oxjTgen  of  an  anhydride  contained  in  hydrochloric  acid. They  suppossd  that  hydro-

PRISCIPLES  (If  (CHEMISTRY

All  tMjuenus  Holutioti  of  hydrochloric  acid  is  generally  enaplnypd  fof
the  evolution  of  cliloriiie. The  hyrli'Ogeii  has  to  l>e  abstracted fruni^
the  hydrochloric  acid. Tliia  is  accomplished  by  nearly  all  oxidising
aubatancea,  and  eapecially  by  those  which  are  able  to  evolve  oiygeti  at
a  red  heat  {besides  baaef.,  such  as  mercury  and  silver  oxides,  which  are
able  to  give  salts  with  hydrogen  chloride) ;  for  example,  manganese
peroxide,  potassium  chlorate,  chromic  acid,  A-c. The  decompositiou
essentially  cotLsists  in  the  oxygen  of  the  oxidising  substance  displacing
the chl'irine froiu :?HC1, forming water, H,0, and setting tlia  I
chlorine free, UHCl  ■+  O  (disengaged by  the oxidising substaoc-ec
=  H,0  -f  Clj. Even  nitric  acid  partially  produces  a  like  reaction  £
bat  as  we  shall  afterwards  see its  action  is  more complicated,  t
it  is  therefore not  suitable for the preparation of  pure  chlorineJJl
But  other  oxidising  sulistances  which  do  not  give  any  other  Tnlat£
products  widi  liydi'ochloric  acid  may  be  employed  for  the  preparatioi
of  chlorine. Among  these  may  be  mentioned  : potassium  eh1orat«
acid  potassium  cbroinat«,  sodium  mangunate,  mitugnnese  peroxide,  JiOtM
Manganese  peroxide  is  I'ommonly  employed  in  the  laboratory,  and  a
a  large  scale,  for  the  pi-eparation  of  chlorine. The  chemical  pro
in  this  case  may  l>o  repretseuted  as  follows  :  an  exchange  takes  phir
between  4HC1  and  MnO,„  in  which  the  manganese  take.s  the  plot
of  the  four  atoms  of  hydrogen,  or  the  chlorine  and  oxygen  exchai
places — that  is,  MnCI^  and  2HjO  are  produced. The  chlorine  c
pound,  MnCli,  obtained  is  very unstable;  it  splits  up  into  chlorine^''
which  as  a  gas  passes  from  the  sphere  of  action,  and  a  lower  computiiMl
containing  less  chlorine  than  the  substance  tirst  formed,  which  remains
in  the  apparatus  in  which  the mixture is  heated,  MnCI,  ^MnCI.
+  CI,"'''*. The  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  requires  a  teraperatureq

chloric  acid  contained  water  uud  tlie  oiide  of  ii  particular  I'adii'l?,  und  llmt  chlorine  *
k  higher  degt«e  oF  oiidntioD  of  thin  radicUuiuniu  (from  the  L«tin  iwiiw  nt  bjrdt
■cid,  acidiim  miiriaticum). It  itbb  onl;  in IBll that  Ga;-I>OBaac  » '
Fruice  and  Davy  in  Engluid  arriied  at  the  conclusion  tluit  the  unhHtiuice  n1
Schenle  doeii  not  conlfiin  oxy^n,  nor  under  any  conditionn  ijive  water  iritk  hjd
and  Ihnt  there  in  no  water  in  hrdro'^hlorii:  ficid  gaB,and  therefore  concluded  thaldi
ie  an  elementary  substance. They  numt-d  it  'chlorine'  from  the  Oreek  ward  x^
tignitying  a  green  coloar,  becnaee  ol  the  peculiar colnur  by  w

^  ilDwerer.  nitric  acid  has  been  propoEedikfl  u  meone  for  obbiiiiinf^  chl[iTTae,1v
methods  which  hnve  the  drawhoch  of  bein^  very  coiu|dic

i  b\i  j],ju  reprewintatiaii  of  the  proceiH  of  the  reaction  is  the  most  natural. Hn
this  dccompoution  is  generally  re|ire»enled  as  i(  chlorine  gave  only  one  degree  ol  a

UnCl,,  and  therefore  directl;  renctB  in  the  following  n
llnO,  +  4HC1  =  HiiCI.^  +  aH.p  4-  CL»  in  which  oue  i
parMfde,  MnOj.  breaks  Dp,  an  it  were,  into  mongonout  oiida.  MnO,  a
which  react  with  hydrocbloric  acid,  the  mangnuonB  oxide  acting  upon  HCI  as  a.
firing  UnCI,  and  at  the  uune  time  aiEC\  +  0  =  H,0  +  CI.,. In  reah'ty,  a  laiitnro  oI  (h

■•THE HALOGENS

Hiiout  100°. In  the  laboratoi'y  the  preparatitm  o/clUorine  iscai'ried  on
ill  tissks,  iieated  over  a  water-lnth,  by  ai^tiug  on  manganese  peroxi(l«

und  liydrorbtririu  acid  doBH  give  ohlorine  r.1  n  led  heat,  uid  tllin  i-eiivtinn  ms}  tifo  l&ke

AU  the  oiidet.  of  imuigilneBe  (Hn,Oj,  MiiO»  HnOj,  Mn^O,),  willi  Uie  eiL-eptinn  n(  niui-
^niiODt^  axide,  MdO,  dimiigoge  clilorine  from  fiydnx^blonc  ftcid,  becBiue  mangiuioaH
cliloride.  MoCLj,  in  Uie  only  Minipaund  at  clilorLoe  uid  mangMieM  which  eiintn  an  a  stable
I'Oiiipotuiil,  tdl  the  higher  chloridoBot  mimguieee  being  anitablo  and  evolvuii!  iihloiitie.
Hence  ve  here  take  note  of  two  separate  clinnge* :  1 1)  an  exchange  between  otygen  and
r'hinrinp,  KoA  {%)  the  iniitability  of  the  hijilier  ohlorine  conipoundB.  A«  (weordlng  to  the
law  of  tiQb«titntion|  in  the  >ub«titDtioti  of  oxygen  by  chlorine,  CI,  takes  tlie  pUu  of  O,
Ihe  chlorine  campounda  will  contnin  mora  atflmn  than  tlie  iMHTeepondiug  oxygen
i-i-iapounds.  It  is  nut  xarpriauig,  therefore,  that  certain  of  the  chlorine  compoondB
v^rrexponding  irith  oxygen  oomponndfi  do  not  exist,  or  if  they  are  fonneil  »rs
vfry  iiiutiiible.  And  f ortbenoore,  en  Sitoni  of  oMotine  is  heavier  than  nn  atom  of  oxygen,
and  therefore  n  given  element  would  liave  to  ntain  a  large  mau  of  chlorine  if  in  the
hi);her  oxides  the  OKygeii  were  replaced  by  chlorine.  For  thi«  reason  eqaivalent  ooni-
ponnds  of  chlorine  do  not  eiiat  for  all  oxygen  componnds.  Uujiy  o[  tlie  former  nre
Immediately  deeompoeed,  wfaen  formed,  with  the  btoIdUod  of  chlorine,  Fram  this  it  i*
evident  th&t  there  ebonld  exist  snch  chlorine  componnds  as  wonid  evolve  chlorine  as
|ieroxides  evolve  oxygen,  and  indeed  a  large  number  of  anoh  componnds  are  known.
Amongst  tbem  may  be  mentioned  antimony  pentaohloride.  SbClj.  which  aplits  np  into
elilorine  and  antimony  trichloride  when  heated,  Cnpric  chloride,  eormponding  with
copper  oxide,  and  having  a  composition  CaCl^  similar  lo  CnO.  when  healed  pnits  with
hnit  its  chlorine,  just  ns  liarinm  peroxide  evolves  half  its  oxygen.  Thie  method  may
ei-en  be  taken  advantage  of  For  the  preparation  of  chlorine  and  cuprous  cfatoride,  CnCI.
Tht  hitter  attracts  oxygen  from  the  atmospliere,  and  in  «a  doing  is  converted  from  a
colonrlcES  substance  into  a  gieai  compound  whose  composition  is  CUiCV^.  With
hydiocbloric  acid  this  substance  gives  cnpnc  chloride  |Cn,,CU,0.t-lUCl^HnO  + 2CnCl,|.
whicb  has  only  to  be  dried  and  heated  in  order  again  to  obtain  chlorine.  Thus,  in  ■olntion,
and  at  the  ordinary  lemperotare,  tlio  compound  CnCl,;  is  stable,  but  when  heated  it
splits  np.  On  tliis  property  ii^  founded  Deacon's  process  lor  Che  preparation  of  chlorine
from  hydrochloric  acid  with  the  aid  of  air  and  copper  salts,  by  pasung  a  mixture  of  air  and
hydrochloric  acid  at  about  Ulf  over  bricks  Maturated  with  a  solution  of  a  copper  nslt
|a  mixlore  of  solutions  ol  CnSO^  and  Kii,SO,).  CiiCI.,  is  then  formed  by  llie  double
decomposition  al  the  salt  o(  copper  and  the  hydrochloric  acid;  the  CoCI,  liberates
chlorine,  and  the  CuCl  forms  CuiiCl.,0  with  the  oxygen  of  the  sir,  which  agun  gives  CuClj
with  SHCi,  and  so  on,

Hsgnesiuni  chloride,  whicli  in  obtained  from  sea-water,  carualltte,  ice,  may  serve  not
only  a«  a  means  for  the  preparation  of  hydnvhlorio  acid,  but  also  nt  ohlorine,  berause
its  basic  salt  (magnesinm  oiycUtoridel  when  heated  in  the  air  gives  magneoium  oxide  and
chlorine  (Weldon-Ferbiney'a  proceas,  lOHt).  Chlorine  is  now  prepared  on  a  large  scale
by  this  metliixl.  Several  new  methods  based  upon  this  reaction  have  been  proposed  for
l<nMnring  chlorine  Irom  the  bye-produuts  ol  other  chemical  procesoes.  Thus,  Lyte  and
'  Tattora  (ISPI)  obtained  up  to  HT  p-c  of  chlorine  from  CaCl.j  in  this  manner.  A  solu-
tion ot  CaCI,,  containing  a  certain  amount  of  common  salt,  is  evaporated  and  oxide  of
iiugneainm  added  to  it,  When  the  solution  attains  a  density  of  ItUlt  (at  15°),  it  is
treated  witli  carbonic  acid,  which  precipitates  carbonate  of  colciani,  while  chloride  ol
iiiBgneslnm  remains  iu  solution.  After  adding  ammoninm  chloride,  the  solution  is
evaporated  to  dryness  and  the  double  chhiriile  of  magnesium  and  ainmouiiun  formed  is
ignited,  which  drives  oft  tlie  chloride  ol  anunonium.  The  chloride  of  magnesium  which
remains  behind  isuaad  in  the  Weldon-Pocliiney  process.  The  De  Wilde-Reychler  (1804)
p>rocese  for  the  manufacture  of  chlorine  consists  in  pas^ng  alternate  currents  of  hot  air
and  hydrochloric  acid  gas  through  a  cylinder  containing  a  mixture  of  the  chlorides  of
magnesium  and  manganese. A  certain  amount  of  snlphalc  of  magneiiinm  wliiob  does

J

462  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

with  hydrochloric  acid  or  a  mixture  of  common  salt  and  sulphuric
-acid**  and  washing  the  gas  with  water  to  remove  hydrochloric  acid.*
Chlorine  cannot  be  collected  over  mercury,  because  it  combines  with
it  as  with  many  other  metals,  and  it  is  soluble  in  water  ;  however,  it
is  but  slightly  soluble  in  hot  water  or  brine.  Owing  to  its  great
weight,  chlorine  may  be  directly  collected  in  a  dry  vessel  by  carrying
the  gas-conducting  tube  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  The  chlorine
will  lie  in  a  heavy  layer  at  the  bottom  of  the  vessel,  displsLce  the  air,
and  the  extent  to  which  it  fills  the  vessel  may  l)e  followed  by  its  colour.**

not  participate  in  any  way  in  the  reaction,  is  added  to  tlie  mixtore  to  prevent  its  fusing.
The  reactions  may  be  expressed  by  the  following  equations:  (1)  BMgCl.j  +  SMnCl^  +  80
-  Mg^MnsOs  +  12CI ;  (2)  MgjMnjOs  +  IGHCl  -  SMgCl,  ^  SMnCl.  +  SHoO  +  4C1.  As  nitric
Acid  is  able  to  take  up  the  hydrogen  from  hydrochloric  acid,  a  heated  mixture  of  these
acids  is  also  employed  for  the  preparation  of  chlorine.  The  resultant  mixture  of  chlorine
and  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen  is  mixed  with  air  and  steam  which  regenerates  the  HNO;;,
while  the  chlorine  remains  as  a  gas  together  with  nitrogen,  in  which  form  it  is  quite
capable  of  bleaching,  forming  chloride  of  lime,  &c.  Besides  these,  Solvay  and  Moiid's
methods  of  preparing  chlorine  must  be  mentioned.  The  first  is  based  upon  the  recuition
CaCl.2  ^  SiO.^  +  O(air) -^  CaOSiOj  +  Clo,  the  second  on  the  action  of  the  oxygen  of  the  air
(heated)  upon  MgCl^  (and  certain  similar  chlorides)  MgClj  -f  O  -  MgO  +  CI.,..  The  remaining
MgO  is  treated  with  sal-ammoniac  to  re-form  MgCl.,  (MgO  +  2NH4CI  =  MgClj  -f  H.^O  +  2NH- >
and  the  resultant  NH.-,  again  converted  into  sal-ammoniac,  so  that  hydrochloric  acid
is  the  only  sobstance  consumed.  The  latter  processes  have  not  yet  found  much  appli-
cation.

'  The  following  proportions  are  accordingly  taken  by  weight :  5  parts  of  powdered  man-
ganese peroxide,  11  parts  of  salt  (best  fused,  to  prevent  its  frothing),  and  14  parts  of  sul-
phuric acid  previously  mixed  with  an  equal  volume  of  water.  The  mixture  is  heated  in  a
salt  bath,  so  as  to  obtain  a  temperature  above  100^.  The  corks  in  the  apparatus  must
be  soaked  in  paraflin  (otherwise  they  are  corrtxled  by  the  chlorine),  and  black  india-rubber
tubing  smeared  with  vtiseline  must  be  used,  and  not  vulcanised  rubl)er  (which  contains
sulphur,  and  becomes  brittle  under  the  action  of  the  chlorine).

The  reaction  which  proceeds  may  be  expressed  thus:  MnOo-f2NaCl -f  2H..SOj
=  MnS04-f  NiuSO,  f2H20  +  Cl.>.  The  method  of  preparation  of  CI.  from  manganese
peroxide  and  hydrochloric  acid  was  <liscovercd  by  Sclit-ele,  and  from  sodium  chloride  by
Berthollet.

*  Th«  reiiction  of  hydrochloric  acid  ni)on  blea<hin«;  powder  gives  chlorine  without
the  aid  of  h^at,  CaCl>0.2  +  4HCl  =  CaCl..,  +  2HjO-  aCl.,,,  and  is  therefore  also  used  for  the
preparation  of  chlorine.  This  reaction  is  very  violent  if  all  the  acid  be  added  at  once ;
it  should  be  i)oured  in  drop  by  drop  (Mernie,  Kiimmerer).  C.  Winkler  proposed  to  mix
bleaching  powder  with  one  quarter  of  burnt  and  powdered  gypsum,  and  having  dam|H:d
tlie  mixture  with  water,  to  press  and  cut  it  up  into  cnlx's  and  dry  at  the  ordinary
temperature.  These  cubes  can  be  used  for  the  preparation  of  chlorine  in  the  same
apparatus  as  that  used  for  the  evolution  of  hydrogen  and  carbonic  anhydride — the
disengagement  of  the  chlorine  proceeds  uniformly.

A  mixture  of  })otassiuni  dichromate  and  hydrochloric  acid  evolves  chlorine  perfectly
free  from  oxygen  (V.  Meyer  nnd  Tijinger).

"  Chlorine  is  manufactured  on  a  larf/r  scale  from  manganese  jwroxide  and  hydrochloric
acid.  It  is  most  conveniently  prepared  in  the  apparatus  shown  in  fig.  66,  which  con-
sists of  a  three- necked  earthenware  vessel  whose  central  orifice  is  the  largest.  A  clay
or  lead  funnel,  furnished  with  a  number  of  orifices,  is  placed  in  tlie  central  wide  neck
of  the  vessel.  Roughly-ground  lumps  of  natural  manganese  peroxide  are  placed  in  the
funnel,  which  is  then  closed  by  the  cover  N,  and  luted  with  clay. One  orifice  is  closetl

THE HALOGENS  468

Chlorine  la  a  if<i»  of  a  yellowisli  green  colour,  and  has  a  very
suflbcating  and  characteristic  odour. On  lowering  the  temperature  ti>

—  50°  or  increasing  the  pressure  to  six  atmospheres  (at  0")  chlorine
condenses^  into  a  liquid  which  has  a  yellowish -green  colour,  a
density  of  1'3,  and  boils  at  —  ^1°.  The  density  and  atomic  weight  of
chlorine  is  35'5  times  greater  than  that  of  hydrogen,  hence  the  molecule
contains  CI,*.  At  0°  one  volume  of  water  dissolves  about  1 J  volume
of  chlorine,  at  10°  about  3  volumes,  at  50°  again  Ij  volume." Such

by  a  clay  stopper,  uid  is  nned  for  tlie  intrnduction  of  the  liydrochlnric  *iu.'id  and
Hithdniral  of  the  reudueB.  The  chlorine  dinengkgeil  psHses  along  s  leaden  gaa-
condocting  lobe  placed  in  the  other  orifice, A row  of  the^e  ^

ve«Bela ia aurroanded  by  a waler-biitli to  e»«ure their  being  _^^  ^

unifonnly  heated. Manganese  chloride  in  Found  in  the  residoe.  V^ — ■  "

In  Weldan'ii  proceHs  lime  is  added  to  the  acid  Holotion  of  mnn-
ganeee  chloride-  A  double  decompoaition  takes  place,  reaalting
in  the  tormation  of  manganoaH  bydmiide  and  calciam  chloride.
When  the  iDaoluble  manganonn  hydroiide  has  settled,  a  farther
excess  of  milk  of  lime  in  ailded  (to  mnke  a  miitare
aMn(0H),  +  CaO  +  zCaCl„  which  ix  [ound  (o  be  the  best  propor-
tion, jadgiag  ^m  eiperiuient),  and  theu  air  in  forced  through
the  miitnre.  The  hydroxide  is  thm  converted  from  a  colourlesa  ^'J'lie*  jiirumld..,.
to  a  brown  sabstaace,  contairiing  peroxide,  MnO,,  and  oxide  of  cliliirliie  cm  n  large
manganese,  Mn,0].  This  i«  due  to  the  manganous  oxide  abwrb-  "'alL'-
ing  oxygen  from  the  air.  Under  the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  this  mixture  evolrei
chlorine,  because  of  all  the  componndH  of  chlorine  and  manganese  the  chloride  MnCtj
is  the  only  one  which  is  stable  (lee  Note  31.  Thnfl  one  and  the  same  maw  of  manganese
may  be  repeatedly  used  for  the  preparation  of  chlorine.  Tlie  same  reault  is  attained  in
other  ways. II  manganouH  oxide  be  subjected  to  the  action  of  oiidea  of  nitrogen  and  air

of  nitrogen  (which  are  again  niteii  in  the  procesiil  and  miuiganeae  peroxide,  which  is  (has
renewed  for  the  fre»h  evolution  of  chlorine.

'  Davy  and  Faraday  liquefied  chlorine  in  18^8  by  heating  the  cry etnllo- hydrate
CI.^H.O  in  a  bent  tube  (as  with  NHjl,  Burroqndfd  by  worni  water,  while  the  other  end  of
the  tnbe  was  immersed  ina  (reeling  iniiture.  Meselancondeniied  chlorine  in  freshly-burnt
charcoal  (placed  in  a  glass  tube),  which  when  cold  abeorbs  an  ei|Ual  weight  of  chlorine.
The  tube  was  then  fused  up,  the  bent  end  cooled,  and  the  charcoal  heated,  by  which
means  the  chlorine  was  eipelletl  from  the  charcoal,  and  the  prexHUre  increaned.

'  Judging  from  Ludwig'a  ob^Hirvntions  11868),  and  from  the  fact  that  the  coefficient  of
expansion  ol  gases increanes  with  tbeir  molecular  weight  (Chapter  IL,  Xote  26,  (or  hydrogen

-  0-Se7.  carbonic  anhydride  ^  0-3T3,  hydrogen  bromide  ■-  Oitett).  it  might  be  expected  that
the  expansion  of  chlorine  would  be  greater  than  that  o(  air  or  of  the  gaaes  compoeing  it.
V.  Meyer  and  Langer(IM<S)  having  remarked  thitt  at  1,400°  the  density  of  chlorine  (taking
its  expansion  as  equal  to  that  of  nitrogen)  =S!>.  consider  that  the  molecnlea  of  chlorine
iplit  Dp  and  partially  give  motecntes  CI.  but  it  might  be  maintained  that  the  decrease  in
density  observed  only  depends  on  the  increase  of  the  eoefflcient  of  expansion.

'  Investigations  on  the  solubility  o(  chlorine  in  water  (the  solutions  evolve  all  their
chlorine  on  boiling  and  passing  air  tlirough  them)  show  many  different  peculiarities.  First
Uay-Lussac,  and  subsequently  Pelonze,  determined  that  the  solubility  increases  between
0"  and  e^-lO"  ((rom  1}  to  3  vols,  of  chlorine  per  lOO  vols,  of  water  at  0^  up  to  3  to  3{  at  10°).
In  the  lollowing  note  we  shall  see  that  this  is  notdnelothcbreaking-upof  the  hydrate  a(
about  S°  (o  10°,  but  to  its  formation  below  9".  Roscoe  observed  an  increase  in  the  soln.
bility  of  chlorine  in  the  preMuce  of  hydrogen — even  in  the  dark, Berthel»t  determined

PKINCIPI^xS UF (JIIEJUSTRY

II  aolution  nf  chlorine  is  termed  '  chlorine  wtiter ; '  and  is  employed  i
H.  diluted  form  in  medicine  and  as  »  laboratory  reagent. It
pared  by  poAsiug  chlorine  through  a  series  of  Woulfes  bottles  (
an  inverted  retort  lille<l  with  water. Under  the  action  of  light,  cl
water  gives  oxygeu  and  hydrochloric  ucid. At  0°  n  saturated  solutin
of  chlorine  yields  a  crystallo-hydi-ate,  Cli,8Hj(),  which  easily  splits  up

0  chlorine  and  water  when  heated,  so  that  if  it  be  sealed  up  in  a  tube
and  heated  to  3:»°,  two  layers  of  licjiiid  are  formed — a  lower  stratom
<tf  chlorine  containing  a  small  qunntity  oE  water,  and  an  upper  strata
of  watet  containing  a  small  quantity  of  chlorir

Chlorine  explodes  -loit/i  hydroyeu,  if  a  mixtui-e  of  equal  x'olumes  t
expotted  \a  the  direct  action  uf  the  sun's  rays  ' '  or  brought  into  ci

All  increase  of  Boluliilitj'  with  the  prugrBas  iit  time, aeliiinbeiii  mjhI  otiici

in  watar,  fonniDg  hypouhloroun  and  hypocWorio  iicids,  (HC10+  HCI),

The  cquilibriam between ahlorine  and  steam  aa  gaaes  uid  betweai iFa,b>t,  |
chlorine,  ice,  Miil  the  Bc)hdorjBtalh>-hjdrat«of  chlorine  in  evidently  very  complex, t
(iuldberg(iaiQ)  ftud  othum  ijave  a  Lbeorj'  for  nimilBr  itfttefi  nl  eqailibriuiu,  vbioh  ws*
wsrdB  deTelopad  by  Roraeboom  |lft8T),  hut  it  nvould  bt  inopportnne  here  to  eoter  into
iletuila. It  vill  be  inffident  in  the  firel  place  to  mention  that  there  ii
(aeiKinliug  to  th»  theory  at  heat,  and  the  direct  obnervatiooB  of  lUmoBy  and  Youuk)  (1
the  viipour  bensioni  at  one  and  the  wine  temperature  are  different  for  the  liquid  ■
Holid  Htttes  of  sobatanceii ;  aecotidly,  to  mil  attention  to  the  following  note ;  Hud,  Uutj
lu  Btitte  that,  in  the  presence  of  the  cryntalki.hydnite,  water  between  d'-M  and -
Iwlteu  tlie  hydrate  sod  a  aolation  may  occur  tiiniultiuteoualy)  diutolrei  >  dillereDl  ai
nt  chlorine  than  it  doea  in  (lie  absencu  of  tha  cryBtallo-liydrate.

I"  According  to  Faraday's  data  the  hydrate  of  chlorine  contains  C1,,10H^,  bnt  B
l)omn(lSSS)  showed  that  it  ia  poorer  in  water  and  -C1^SH,0. At  flmt  anuU,  ■
uolourloM,  eryntals  are  obtiuned,  but  they  grudualty  form  (if  the  temperatnre  be  b
their  critical  point  W'l,  nbore  which  (hey  do  nut  exist)  large  yellow  crystala,  like  tt
pntasiium  cliromate. The  Bpeeifio  gravity  is  1'3B, The  hydrate  ia  lomwd  if  tl
more  chlorine  iu  a  solution  thau  it  is  able  to  dissolve  under  the  diasooiation
corresponding  with  a  giveii  temperature, /n  the  prrienee  of  the  Ai/ifrafe  the  pt
imouutof  chlorine  at  O'-OB.at  D°  =  0'0,  aud  at  B0=  =  l-82. At  temperatnres  bel
ijolubility  (determined  by  Ouy-Lossac  and  Pelouie,  wr  Note  6)  ia  dependent  on  th«  f<i
lion  of  the  hydrate; whilst  at  higher  temperatures  under  the  ordinary  (
Jiydrale  cannot  be  formed,  and  the  solubility  of  chlorine  fall*,  as  it  does  for  al
((JItapter  I.). If  the  crystoUo-hydrate  ia  not  formed,  then  below  V  the  sotnfailtty  b
the  same  mie  (6°  107  p.e.  CI,  0'' O'tfC  p.c). According  to  Rnoieboom.tlieohlarineai
by  the  hydrate  presents  Uie  following  tenaionaol  dissociation  :  atO°  =  aiSm
iktH°  =  eaO,atlD°^T0T,at  14°  =  l,<00mm. Iu  this  case  a  inrtion  ol  the  oryatollo-kj
remajnasolid. At  9'''B  the  tenaionof  dissociation  is  equal  It
ri  higher  pressnre  the  cryatallo-hydrate  may  form  at  t«m[
when  tbe  vapour  tension  of  the  hydrate  eijaals  the  teiisioi

that  the  eqailibrinm  which  is  established  is  on  the  one  liaiid  a  case  of  a  cooiplwt  k
li;aueoaE  system,  and  on  the  other  hand  a  vane  of the  solution  of  solid  a

with  spougy  pJatinuui,  or  a  strongly  heated  substance,  or  when  subjected
to  the  action  of  an  electric  spark.  The  explosion  in  this  case  takes  place
for  exactly  the  same  reasons — i.e.  the  evolution  of  heat  and  expansion  of
the  resultant  product— as  in  the  case  of  detonating  gas  (Chaptiu- III.)
Diffused  light  acts  in  the  same  way,  but  slowly,  whilst  direct  sunlight
causes  an  explosion.'* The  hydrochloric  acid  gas  produced  by  the

by  Draper,  Buuaeit,  aod  Roacoe.  Eleolric  or  mAgnesiuiu  light,  or  the  light  emJtl«d  by
the  combustion  o[  carbou  biiulpbide  in  nitric  oxide,  and  actinia  hght  in  genentl,  iwti  in
theume  manner  as  sunlight,  in  proportion  to  its  intensity.  At  tempcratnreabelow-la'
tight  no  longer  brings  nboat  reaction,  or  at  all  evrnta  doeit  not  give  an  eiploaion.  It  was
long  suppoued  that  chlorine  that  bad  been  nibjected  to  the  action  of  light  was  af  terward*
nble  to  act  on  hydrogen  in  the  dark,  bat  it  was  «hown  that  thia  only  take*  place  with
mniat  chlorine,  and  depends  on  the  tonnation  ol  oiideB  of  chlorine.  The  pteaence  of
Foreign  gaiea.  and  even  of  exceas  of  aUorine  or  of  hydrogen,  very  much  enfeebKa  the
etplosioB,  and  Ihetefore  the  experiment  ii  conducted  with  a  detonating  miiture
lirepanid  by  the  action  of  an  electric  cnrrent  on  a,  Btrong  solution  (sp.  gr.  I'lG}  of  hydro-
I'hfotio  acid,  in  which  case  the  walei  ia  not  decomposed— that  ia,  no  oxygen  becinncii
mixed  with  the  chlorine.

"  Tlie  quantity  of  chlorine  and  hydrogen  which  combiae  ii  proportional  to  theiutenuly
of  the  light— not  of  all  the  niya,  but  only  those  so-termed  chemical  (actinic)  rays  whicli
produce  chemical  action.  Hence  a  mixture  ol  chlorine  and  hydrogen,  wlien  eipoHid  to
the  action  of  light  In  vesaeU'ot  known  capacity  and  sarface,  may  be  employed  aa  an  aclino-
meUa — tliat  is,  as  a  meana  for  estimating  the  in  teniity  of  the  chemical  rays,  the  influence  of
the  heat  rayi  being  previously  destroyed,  which  »»;  be  done  by  passing  the  rayn  through
water.  InvestigationB  of  this  kind  (photu.chemical)  showed  that  chemical  action  is
chiefly  limited  to  the  violet  end  of  the  Bpectmin,  and  tliat  even  the  iuviaible  ultia-riolet
rays  produce  this  action.  A  colourless  gas  Hamecontains  no  chemicallyactive  raya;  the
flame  coloured  green  by  a  salt  of  copper  evinces  more  chemical  action  than  the  coloorless
flame,  but  the  flame  brightly  coloured  yellow  by  ealts  of  sodium  has  no  more  chemical
action  than  that  of  tbe  colourleBa  flame.

As  the  cliemical  action  of  light  becomes  evident  in  plants,  pliotography,  the  bleaching
of  tiasnes,  and  the  fading  of  colours  in  the  sunlight,  and  as  a  means  tor  studying  the
phenomenon  is  given  in  the  reaction  of  chlorine  on  bydrogeu,  lliis  subject  has  been  the
moat  fnlly  investigated  in  phoio-ehemiiln/.  The  researcbeB  of  Bunsen  and'Boacoe  in
the  fllties  and  siitist  are  the  mostcomplola  in  this  reapect.  Their  actinometeF  contains
hydrogen  end  chlorine,  and  ia  surronnded  by  a  solntion  o(  chlorine  in  water.  Tlie  hydro-
chloric acid  is  absorbed  as  it  forms,  and  therefore  the  variation  in  volume  indicates  the
progress  of  the  combination.  As  was  to  be  expected,  the  actiou  of  light  proved  to  be
proportional  to  the  time  of  exposure  and  intensity  of  the  light,  BO  that  it  was  possible  to
oonduct  detailed  photometrical  investigations  leepecting  the  time  of  day  and  season  of
tlie  year,  various  Bouicna  of  light,  ite  absorption,  ict.  This  subject  is  considered  in  detail
in  special  works,  and  we  only  atop  to  mention  one  circumstanoe,  that  a  small  quantity  of
a  foreign  gas  decnHues  the  action  of  light  j  (or  examphj,  jId  of  hydrogen  by  38  p-c,
j^Jn  of  oxygen  by  ID  p.c,  ^  of  chlorine  by  BO  p.c,  t:c.  According  to  tbe  researches  of
Klimenko  and  Fekaloros  (1880),  the  photo-cbemicol  alteration  of  chlorine  water  is
retarded  by  Iho  presence  of  traces  of  metallic  clilorides,  and  this  influence  varies  with
different  metals.

As  much  heat  is  evolved  in  the  reaction  of  chlorine  on  hydrogen,  and  as  this
reaction,  being  exothermal,  may  proceed  by  itself,  the  action  of  light  is  essentially  the
same  lu  that  of  heat — that  ii>,  it  brings  the  cUorine  and  hydrogen  into  the  condition
necessary  for  tbe  reaction — it,  as  we  may  say,  disturbs  the  original  eqoilibrium ;  this  is
the  work  done  by  the  laminous  energy.  It  seenu  lo  me  that  the  action  of  tight  on  the
■nixed  gases  ahould  be  imderstDod  in  this  sense,  as  Pringsheim  (18TT)  pointed  out.
VOL.  I.  H  H

466  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

reaction  of  chlorine  on  hydrogen  occupies  (at  the  original  <
and  pressure)  a  volume  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  original  volumes  ;  I
is,  a  reaction  of  substitution  here  takes  place  :  H,  +  CI*  ^  HCI  4-  I
In  this  reaction  twenty-two  thousand  heat  units  are  evolved  iw
part  by  weight  [1  gram]  of  hydrogen,'*

These  relations  show  that  the  affinity  of  chlorine  for  hydroge
very  great  and  analogous  to  the  affinity  between  hydrogen  and  oxyj
Thus  "  on  the  one  hand  by  passing  a  mixture  of  steam  and  chlo
through  a  red-hot  tube,  or  by  exposing  water  and  chlorine  to  the  i
light,  oxygen  is  disengaged,  whilst  on  the  other  hand,  as  ire  saw  ab
oxygen  in  many  cases  displaces  chlorine  from  its  compound  i
hydrogen,  and  therefore  the  reaction  H./>  +  Cl^  =  2HC1  +  O  belo
to  the  number  of  reversible  reactions,  and  hydrogen  will  distrib
itself  between  oxygen  and  chlorine.  This  determines  the  rela(
of  CI  to  substances  containing  hydrogen  and  its  reactions  in
presence  of  water,  to  which  we  shall  turn  our  attention  al
having  pointed  out  the  relation  of  chlorine  to  other  elements.

Many  metaig  when  brought  into  contact  with  chlorine  immediat
combine  with  it,  and  form  those  metallic  chlorides  which  correspt
with  hydrogen  chloride  and  with  the  oxide  of  the  metal  taken.  1
combination  may  proceed  rapidly  with  the  evolution  of  heat  i
light ;  that  is,  metals  are  able  to  bum  in  chlorine.  Thus,  for  exam]
sodium  '~'  burns  in  chlorine,  synthesisiug  common  salt.  Metals  in
form  of  powders  bum  without  the  aid  of  heat,  and  become  big
incandescent  in  the  process  ;  for  instance,  antimony,  which  is  a  mi
easily converted into  a powder.""' Even  such metals  as  gold  i

')  In  the  tomiHlioli  of  xMani  (trntn  one  |>art  by  nciglit  [1  Rram]  of  bydiOKen)  39,000
nnits  are  evolved.  The  lollowiiif!  are  the  qnanlitieB  of  heat  (thouBanda  of  aniU)  evoln
the  (onnation  ot  various  other  correaponding  compounds  of  oiyuen  and  of  chloTine  (I
Thomsen's,  and,  (or  "Stkfl,  BeketofTs  resalts) :

f2NaCl,  IHB;

CaCl.„

170;

HgCl,

ns;

9AgCi,  BB.

t Sa-fi.  lOU:

CO

lai;

HgO

ii;

Ag,0, «,

(aA»cij.i4S:

apci-

CCl,

aHCl.  U  (g«).

i  A»,0,.lKi;

P.0,

370;

CO.,

1)7;

H/),  K  (gM).

he  first  [our  eleineatu  tiic  f

rmation

f  thcci

oHne

-omponnd  givM  Un  i

with  tite  four

foil

wu>K  ti

e  format

on  of  th

oiyg

greater  amount  of  liemt.  The  first  four  cliloridea  are  true  xalta  formed  from  HCI  and
nride,  H'hitHt  the  renuindor  have  otiier  prnpertiea,  ns  in  Keen  from  the  (act  thai  thei
not  (ormal  (roiii  hyilruchloric  acid  and  the  oiicle.  but  f\\-e  hyrlrochloiic  acid  with  wal

II  ThiH  lias  been  alreadj  pointed  oat  in  Chapter  III.,  N'utif  B.

i»  Hoiliiiin  remains  onsltered  in  perfectly  dry  chlorine  at  the  ordinarj  tamperal
and  even  when  elitihtly  wanned  ;  but  the  coinhination  is  eiceodingly  violent  U  %  red  t

"■  An  inatructive  experiment  on  comhuslion  in  olilorine  maj  be  conducted  aa  folk
leaves  of  Dutch  metal  (used  instead  of  t(old  (or  gildiiigl  aia  placed  in  a  gUaa  glob*,  ai

THE  HALOGENS  467

platinum,  ^^  which  do  not  combine  direptly  with  oxygen  and  give  very
unstable  compounds  with  it,  unite  directly  with  chlorine  to  form
metallic  chlorides.  Either  chlorine  water  or  aqua  regia  may  be  em-
ployed for  this  purpose  instead  of  gaseous  chlorine.  These  dissolve
gold  and  platinum,  converting  them  into  metallic  chlorides.  Aqiia
regia  is  a  mixture  of  1  part  of  nitric  acid  with  2  to  3  parts  of  hydro-
chloric acid.  This  mixture  converts  into  soluble  chlorides  not  only
those  metals  which  are  acted  on  by  hydrochloric  and  nitric  acids,  but
also  gold  and  platinum,  which  are  insoluble  in  either  acid  separately.
This  action  of  aqua  regia  depends  on  the  fact  that  nitric  acid  in  act-
ing on  hydrochloric  acid  evolves  chlorine.  If  the  chlorine  evolved  be
transferred  to  a  metal,  then  a  fresh  quantity  is  formed  from  the
remaining  acids  and  also  combines  with  the  metal.  *^  Thus  the  aqua
regia  acts  by  virtue  of  the  chlorine  which  it  contains  and  disengages.

The  majority  of  Tton-metals  also  react  directly  on  chlorine ;  hot
sulphur  and  phosphorus  burn  in  it  and  combine  with  it  at  the  ordinary
temperature.  Only  nitrogen,  carbon,  and  oxygen  do  not  combine
directly  with  it.  The  chlorine  compounds  formed  by  the  non-metals —
for  instance,  phosphorus  trichloride,  PCI3,  and  sulphurous  chloride,
i^c,  do  not  have  the  properties  of  salts,  and,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see
more  fully,  correspond  to  acid  anhydrides  and  acids  ;  for  example,  PCI3
- to  phosphorous  acid,  P(0H)3  :

NaCl FeCL, SnCl4 PCI3 HCl
Na(HO) Fe(H0)2 Sn(H0)4 P(H0)3 H(HO)

XaK-condacting  tube  furnished  with  a  glaBs  cock  is  placed  in  the  cork  closing  it,  and  the
air  is  pumped  out  of  the  globe.  The  gas-conducting  tube  is  then  connected  with  a  vessel
containing  chlorine,  and  the  cock  opened ;  the  chlorine  rushes  in,  and  the  metallio  loaves
are  consumed.

"  The  behaviour  of  platinum  to  chlorine  at  a  high  temperature  (1,400°)  is  very
remarkable,  because  platinous  chloride,  PtCl.>,  is  then  formed,  whilst  this  substance  de-
composes at  a  much  lower  temperature  into  chlorine  and  platinum.  Hence,  when
chlorine  comes  into  contact  with  platinum  at  such  high  temperatures,  it  forms  fumes  of
platinous  chloride,  and  they  on  cooling  decompose,  with  the  liberation  of  platinum,  so
that  the  phenomenon  appears  to  be  dependent  on  the  volatility  of  platinum.  Deville
proved  the  formation  of  platinous  chloride  by  inserting  a  cold  tube  inside  a  red-hot  one
(as  in  the  experiment  on  carbonic  oxide).  However,  V.  Meyer  was  able  to  observe  the
density  of  chlorine  in  a  platinum  vessel  at  1,690°,  at  which  temperature  chlorine  does  not
exert  this  action  on  platinum,  or  at  least  only  to  an  insignificant  degree.

IS  When  left  exposed  to  the  air  aqua  regia  disengages  chlorine,  and  afterwards  it  no
longer  acts  on  gold.  Gay-Lussac,  in  explaining  the  action  of  aqua  regia,  showed  that
when  heated  it  evolves,  besides  chlorine,  the  vapours  of  two  chloranhydrides — that  of  nitric
acid,  NO.^Cl  (nitric  acid,  NOjOH,  in  which  HO  is  replaced  by  chlorine  ;  see  Chapter  on
Phosphorus),  and  that  of  nitrous  acid,  NOCl— but  these  do  not  act  on  gold.  The
formation  of  aqua  regia  may  therefore  be  expressed  by  4NHO5  +  8HC1= aNO.^Cl  +  2NOC1
+  eHjO + 2C\q.  The  formation  of  the  chlorides  NO.jCl  and  NOCl  is  explained  by  the  fact
that  the  nitric  acid  is  deoxidised,  gives  the  oxides  NO  and  NO^,  and  they  directly  combine
with  chlorine  to  form  the  above  anhydrides.

R  r2

468  PIIINCIPI.ES  Ob" CHKMISTUY

As  the  above- mentiniied  relation  in  composition — i.e.  aubstitntioi
CI  by  the  aqueous  residue — exists  between  many  chlorine  compon
and  their  corresponding  hydrates,  and  as  furthermore  some  (ai
hydrates  are  obtained  from  chlorine  compounds  by  the  action  of  wa
for  instance,

PClj + 3H,0 = P(HO), + 3HC1

PhoBphorus  n,  ,  PliDapliorons  Bydmchloric

trichloride  ^'^'  «cid  ticid

whilst other chlorine compounds are formed  from  hydroxides
hydrochloric  acid,  with  the  liljeration  of  water,  for  example,
NaHO + HCl = NaCl + H,0

we  endeavour  to  express  this  intimate  conuection  between  the  hydn
and  chlorine  compounds  by  calling  the  latter  tUdoranhydndea.
general  terms,  if  the  hydrate  be  basic,  then,

M(HO)  +  HCl  =  MCI + H,0

hfdrBle  + hydrochloric  nciil - ililoran hydride t  water

and  if  the  hydrate  ROH  lie  acid,  then,

Ra + H,0 = R{HO) +  HCl

ChloranhydriJe  + Huter --= hydrate + hydrochloric  mc\A

The  chloran hydrides  MCI  corresponding  to  the  bases  are  evidei
metallic  chlorides  or  salts  corresponding  to  HCl.  In  this  manne
distinct  equivalency  is  marked  between  the  compounds  of  chlorine  i
the  so-called  hydroxyl  radicle  (HOl,  which  is  also  expressed  in
analogy  existing  between  chlorine,  Clj,  and  hydrogen  peroxide,  (H(

As  regards  the  chloranhyd rides  corresponding  tx>  acids  and  n
metals,  they  bear  but  littlo  resemblance  to  metallic  salts.  They
nearly  all  volatile,  and  have  a  powerful  suffocating  smell  which  irriti
the  eyes  and  respiratory  urgans.  They  react  on  water  like  mt
anhydrides  of  the  acids,  with  the  evolution  of  heat  and  liberation
hydrochloric  acid,  forming  acid  hydrates.  For  this  reason  they  can
usually  be  obtained  from  hydrates — ^that  is,  acids — by  the  action
hydrochloric  acid,  as  in  that  case  water  would  be  formed  together  w
them,  and  water  decomposes  tliem,  converting  them  into  hydrates.  Th
are  many  intermediate  chlorine  compounds  between  true  saline  meta
chlorides  like  sodium  chloride  and  true  acid  chloranhydrides,  just
there  are  all  kinds  of  transitions  between  bases  and  aoids.  A
chloranhyd rides  are  not  only  obtained  from  chlorine  and  non-met
but  also  from  many  lower  oxides,  by  the  aid  of  chlorine.  Thtu,
example,  CO,  NO,  NO^,  SOj,  and  other  lower  oxidea  which  .
capable  of  combining  with oxygen  may  also  combine  with  a  cm

THE  HALOGENS  469

spending  quantity  of  chlorine.  Thus  COCI2,  NOCl,  NOjCl,  SOjClj,
ticc,  are  obtained.  They  correspond  with  the  hydrates  C0(0H)2,
NO(OH),  N02(0H),  S03(OH)2,  Jcc.,  and  to  the  anhyhrides  COj,
N2O3,  N2O5,  SO3,  &c.  Here  we  should  notice  two  aspects  of  the
matter  :  (1)  chlorine  combines  with  that  with  which  oxygen  is  able  to
combine,  because  it  is  in  many  respects  equally  if  not  more  energetic
than  oxygen  and  replaces  it  in  the  proportion  CP  :  O  ;  (2)  that  highest
limit  of  possible  combination  which  is  proper  to  a  given  element  or
grouping  of  elements  is  very  easily  and  often  attained  by  combination
with  chlorine.  If  phosphorus  gives  PCI3  and  PCI5,  it  is  evident  that
PCI5  is  the  higher  form  of  combination  compared  with  PCI3.  To  the
form  PQg,  or  in  general  PX3,  correspond  PH4I,  P0(0H)3,  POCI3,  &c.
If  chlorine  does  not  always  directly  give  compounds  of  the  highest
possible  forms  for  a  given  element,  then  generally  the  lower  forms
combine  with  it  in  order  to  reach  or  approach  the  limit.  This  is
particularly  clear  in  hydrocarbons,  where  we  see  the  limit  CnHj^^s
very  distinctly.  The  unsaturated  hydrocarbons  are  sometimes  able  to
combine  with  chlorine  with  the  greatest  ease  and  thus  reach  the  limit.
Thus  ethylene,  C2H4,  combines  with  CI  2,  forming  the  so-called  Dutch
liquid  or  ethylene  chloride,  C2H4CI2,  because  it  then  reaches  the  limit
C„X2„^2*  III  this  and  all  similar  cases  the  combined  chlorine  is  able  by
reactions  of  substitution  to  give  a  hydroxide  and  a  whole  series  of  other
derivatives.  Thus  a  hydroxide  called  glycol,  C2H4(OH)2,  is  obtained
from  C2H4CI2.

Chlorine  in  the  presence  of  wcUer  very  often  acts  directly  as  an
oxidisiiig  agent.  A  substance  A  combines  with  chlorine  and  gives,  for
example,  ACI2,  and  this  in  turn  a  hydroxide,  A(0H)2,  which  on  losing
water  forms  AO.  Here  the  chlorine  has  oxidised  the  substance  A.  This
frequently  happens  in  the  simultaneous  action  of  water  and  chlorine  :
A  +  H2O  +  CI2  =  2HC1  +  AO.  Examples  of  this  oxidising  action  of
chlorine  may  frequently  be  ol)served  both  in  practical  chemistry  and
technical  processes.  Thus,  for  instance,  chlorine  in  the  presence  of
water  oxidises  sulphur  and  metallic  sulphides.  In  this  case  the
sulphur  is  converted  into  sulphuric  sicid,  and  the  chlorine  into  hydro-
chloric acid,  or  a  metallic  chloride  if  a  metallic  sulphide  be  taken.  A
mixture  of  carbonic  oxide  and  chlorine  passed  into  water  gives  carbonic
anhydride  and  hydrochloric  acid.  Sulphurous  anhydride  is  oxidised
by  chlorine  in  the  presence  of  water  into  sulphuric  acid,  just  as  it  is
by  the  action  of  nitric  acid  :  SOj  -H  2H2O  +  CI2  =  H2SO4  +  2HC1.

The  oxidising  action  of  chlorine  in  the  presence  of  water  is  taken
advantage  of  in  pnictice  for  the  rapid  bleaching  of  tissues  and  fibres.
The  colouring  matter  of  the  fibres  is  altered  by  oxidation  and  con-

470  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

verted  into  a  colourless  substance,  but  the  chlorine  afterward
acts  on  the  tissue  itself.  Bleaching  by  means  of  chlorine  therefor
requires  a  certain  amount  of  technical  skill  in  order  that  the  chloriii
should  not  act  on  the  fibres  themselves,  but  that  its  action  should  h
limited  to  the  colouring  matter  only.  The  fibre  for  making  writiii
paper,  for  instance,  is  bleached  in  this  manner.  The  bleacfain
property  of  chlorine  was  discovered  by  Berthollet,  and  forms  a
important  acquisition  to  the  arts,  because  it  has  in  the  majority  c
cases  replaced  that  which  before  was  the  universal  method  of  bleacl
ing  -  namely,  exposure  to  the  sun  of  the  fabrics  damped  with  watei
which  is  still  employed  for  linens,  <kc.  Time  and  great  trouble,  an
therefore  money  also,  have  been  considerably  saved  by  this  change.*^

The  power  of  chlorine  for  combination  is  intimately  connected  wit
its  capacity  for  substitution,  because,  according  to  the  law  of  snbstiti
tion,  if  chlorine  combines  with  hydrogen,  then  it  also  replaces  hjdrogei
and  furthermore  the  combination  and  substitution  are  accomplished  i
the  same  quantities.  Therefore  the  atom  of  chlorine  which  combine
with  the  atom  of  hydrogen  is  also  able  to  rej)lace  the  atoni  of  hydrogti
We  mention  this  property  of  chlorine  not  only  because  it  illustrate
the  application  of  the  law  of  substitution  in  clear  and  historical]
important  examples,  but  more  especially  because  reactions  of  this  kin
explain  those  indirect  methods  of  the  formation  of  many  substanci
which  we  have  often  mentioned  and  to  which  recourse  is  had  in  mar
cases  in  chemistry.  Thus  clilorine  does  not  act  on  carbon,*®  oxyge:
or  nitrogen,  but  nevertheless  its  compounds  with  these  elements  ms
be  obtained  by  the  indirect  method  of  the  substitution  of  hydrogf
by  chlorine.

As  chlorine  easily  combines  with  hydrogen,  and  does  not  act  (
carbon,  it  decomposes  hydrocarbons  (and  many  of  their  derivatives)  .
a  high  temperature,  depriving  them  of  their  hydrogen  and  lil^eratii
the  carbon,  as,  for  example,  is  clearly  seen  when  a  lighted  candle
placed  in  a  vessel  containing  chlorine. The  flame  l^ecomes  smaller,  hi

'^  Ozone  ami  peroxide  of  hydrojjon  also  blenrli  tissues.  As  the  actiou  of  peroxide
hydrojjen  is  easily  controlled  by  takinfjf  a  weak  solution,  and  as  it  has  hardly  any  acti
upon  the  tissues  themselves,  it  is  replacing  chlorine  more  and  more  as  a  bleaching  agei
The  oxidising  property  of  cldorine  is  api)arent  in  destroying  the  majority  of  orgaz
tissues,  and  proves  fatal  to  organisms.  This  action  of  chlorine  is  taken  advantage  of
quarantine  htations.  But  the  simple  fumigation  by  clilorine  must  be  carried  on  wi
great  care  in  dwelling  places,  because  chlorine  disengaged  into  the  atmosphere  rendt
it  harmful  to  the  health.

^  A  certain  proi)ensity  of  carbon  to  attract  chlorine  is  evidenced  in  the  immen
absorjition  of  (;hlorine  by  charcoal  (Note  7),  but,  so  far  as  is  at  present  known  (if  I  *
not  mistaken,  no  one  Ims  tried  the  aid  of  light),  no  combination  takes  place  between  t
chlorine  and  carlK)n.

THE  HALOGENS  471

continaes  to  bum  for  a  certain  time,  a  large  amount  of  soot  is  obtained,
and  hydrochloric  acid  is  formed.  In  this  case  the  gaseous  and  incan-
descent substances  of  the  flame  are  decomposed  by  the  chlorine,  the
hydrogen  combines  with  it,  and  the  carbon  is  disengaged  as  soot.^^
This  action  of  chlorine  on  hydrocarbons,  kc,,  proceeds  otherwise  at
lower  temperatures,  as  we  will  now  consider.

A  very  important  epoch  in  the  history  of  chemistry  was  inaugurated
by  the  discovery  of  Dumas  and  Laurent  that  chlorine  is  able  to  displace
and  replace  hydrogen.  This  discovery  is  important  from  the  fact  that
chlorine  proved  to  be  an  element  which  combines  with  great  ease
simultaneously  with  both  the  hydrogen  and  the  element  with  which
the  hydrogen  was  combined.  This  clearly  proved  that  there  is  no
opposite  polarity  between  elements  forming  stable  compounds.  Chlorine
does  not  combine  with  hydrogen  because  it  has  opposite  properties,  as
Dumas  and  Laurent  stated  previously,  accounting  hydrogen  to  be
electro-positive  and  chlorine  electro- negative  ;  this  is  not  the  reason  of
their  combining  together,  for  the  same  chlorine  which  combines  with
hydrogen  is  also  able  to  replace  it  without  altering  many  of  the
properties  of  the  resultant  substance.  This  substitution  of  hydrogen
by  chlorine  is  termed  ineta^epins.  The  mechanism  of  this  substitution
is  very  constant.  If  we  take  a  hydrogen  compound,  preferably  a
hydrocarbon,  and  if  chlorine  acts  directly  on  it,  then  there  is  produced
on  the  one  hand  hydrochloric  acid  and  on  the  other  hand  a  compound
containing  chlorine  in  the  place  of  the  hydrogen — so  that  the  chlorine
divides  itself  into  two  equal  portions,  one  portion  is  evolved  as  hydro-
chloric acid,  and  the  other  portion  takes  the  place  of  the  hydrogen
thus  liberated.  Hence  this  metcUepns  is  always  accompanied  by  the
formation  of  hydrochlaric  acid.^^  The  scheme  of  the  process  is  as
follows :

C.H„X + CI, = C,H»_,C1X + HCl

Hydrocarbon  Free  chlorine  Product  of  metalepsis Hydrochloric  acid

Or,  in  general  terms—

RH + CI2 = RCl + HCl.

The  conditions  under  which  metalepsis  takes  place  are  also  very
constant. In  the  dark  chlorine  does  not  usually  act  on  hydrogen  com-

'i  The  same  reaction  takes  place  under  the  action  of  oxygen,  with  the  difference  that
it  bums  the  carbon,  which  chlorine  is  not  able  to  do.  If  chlorine  and  oxygen  compete
together  at  a  high  temperatore,  the  oxygen  will  unite  with  the  carbon,  and  the  chlorine
with  the  hydrogen.

**  This  division  of  chlorine  into  two  portions  may  at  the  same  time  be  taken  as  a  clear
confirmation  of  the  conception  of  molecules.  According  to  Avogadro-Gerhazdt's  law,  the
molecule  of  chlorine  (p.  810)  contains  two  atoms  of  this  substance ;  one  atom  replaces

hydrogen,  and  the  other  combines  with  it.

472  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

pounds,  but  the  action  commences  under  the  influence  of  light.  Hie
direct  action  of  the  sun's  rajs  is  particularly  propitious  to  metalepsis.
It  is-alst^  remarkable  that  the  presence  of  traces  of  certain  substances,''
especially  of  iodine,  aluminium  chloride,  antimony  chloride,  <jbc.,  promotes
the  action.  A  trace  of  iodine  added  to  the  substance  subjected  to
metalepsis  often  produces  the  same  effect  as  sunlight.  ^^

If  marsh  gas  be  mixed  with  chlorine  and  the  mixture  ignited,  then
the  hydrogen  is  entirely  taken  up  from  the  marsh  gas  and  hydrochloric
acid  and  carbon  formed,  but  there  is  no  metalepsis.*^  But  if  a
mixture  of  equal  volumes  of  chlorine  and  marsh  gas  be  exposed  to  the
action  of  diffused  light,  then  the  greenish  yellow  mixture  gradually
becomes  colourless,  and  hydrochloric  acid  and  the  first  product  of
metalepsis — namely,  methyl  chloride — are  formed  :

CH4 + CI2 = CH3CI +  HCl

Marsh  gan  Chlorine  Methyl  chloride  Hydrochloric  acid

The  volume  of  the  mixture  remains  unaltered.  The  methyl
chloride  wliich  is  formed  is  a  gas.  If  it  be  separated  from  the  hydro-
chloric acid  (it  is  soluble  in  acetic  acid,  in  which  hydrochloric  acid  is  bat
sparingly  soluble)  and  be  again  mixed  with  chlorine,  then  it  maybe

^'  Sach  carriers  or  media  for  the  transference  of  chlorine  and  the  halogens  in  generml
were  long  known  to  exist  in  iodine  and  antimonious  chloride,  and  have  been  most  folly
studied  by  Gustavson  and  Friedel,  of  the  Petro£Fsky  Academy — the  former  with  respect
to  aluminium  bromide,  and  the  latter  with  respect  to  aluminium  chloride.  Gast*T8oa
showed  that  if  a  trace  of  metallic  aluminium  be  dissolved  in  bromine  (it  floats  on  bromine,
and  when  combination  takes  place  much  heat  and  light  are  evolved),  the  latter  becomes
endowed  with  the  property  of  entering  into  metalepsis,  whidi  it  is  not  able  to  do  of  its
c>wn  accord.  Wlien  pure,  for  instance,  it  acts  very  slowly  on  benzene,  C^He,  but  in  the
presence  of  a  trace  of  aluminium  bromide  the  reaction  proceeds  violently  and  easily,  so
that  each  drop  of  the  hydrocarbon  gives  a  mass  of  hydrobromic  acid,  and  of  the  product
of  metalepsis.  Gustavson  showed  that  the  modus  operandi  of  this  instmctiye  reaction
is  based  on  tlie  proi)erty  of  aluminium  bromide  to  enter  into  combination  with  hydro-
carbons and  their  derivatives.  The  details  of  this  and  all  researches  concerning  the
metalepsis  of  the  hydrocarbons  must  be  looked  for  in  works  on  organic  chemistry.

^*  As  small  admixtures  of  iodine,  aluminium  bromide,  d'c,  aid  the  metalepsis  of  large
quantities  of  a  substance,  just  as  nitric  oxide  aids  the  reaction  of  sulphorons  anhydride
on  oxygen  and  water,  so  the  principle  is  essentially  the  same  in  both  cases.  Effects  of  this
kind  ^which  should  also  be  explained  by  a  chemical  reaction  proceeding  at  the  surfaces)
only  differ  from  true  contact  phenomena  in  that  the  latter  are  produced  by  solid  bodies
and  are  accomplisiied  at  their  surfaces,  whilst  in  the  former  all  is  in  solution.  Probably
the  liction  of  iodine  is  founded  on  the  formation  of  iodine  chloride,  which  reacts  nkoie
easily  than  chlorine.

^  Metalepsis  belongs  to  the  number  of  delicate  reactions — if  it  maybe  so  expressed

as  compared  with  the  energetic  reaction  of  combustion.  Many  cases  of  substitution  are
of  this  kind.  Reactions  of  metalepsis  are  accompanied  by  an  evolution  of  heat,  but  in  a
less  quantity  than  that  evolved  in  the  formation  of  the  resulting  quantity  of  the  halogen
acids.  Thus  the  reaction  C.^H^  +  Cl.>  =  C-.H^Cl  +  HCl,  acconling  to  the  data  given  by
Thonisen,  evolves  about  '20,(MH)  heat  units,  whilst  the  fonnation  of  hydrochloric  acid
evolves  22,000  units.

THE  HALOGENS  478

subjected  to  a  further  metalepsical  substitution — the  second  atom  of
hydrogen  may  be  substituted  by  chlorine,  and  a  liquid  substance,
CH3CI21  called  methylene  chloride,  wUl  be  obtained.  In  the  same
manner  the  substitution  may  be  carried  on  still  further,  and  CHCI3,
or  chloroform,  and  lastly  carbon  tetrachloride,  CCI4,  i^ill  be  produced.
Of  these  substances  the  best  known  is  chloroform,  owing  to  its  being
formed  from  many  organic  substances  (by  the  action  of  bleaching
powder)  and  to  its  being  used  in  medicine  as  an  anaesthetic  ;  chloroform
boils  at  62°  and  carbon  tetrachloride  at  78°.  They  are  both  colourless
odoriferous  liquids,  heavier  than  water.  The  progressive  substitution
of  hydrogen  by  chlorine  is  thus  evident,  and  it  can  be  clearly  seen  that
the  double  decompositions  are  accomplished  between  molecular  quanti-
ties of  the  substance  -  -that  is,  between  equal  volumes  in  a  gaseous  state.

Carbon  tetrachloride^  which  is  obtained  by  the  metalepsis  of  marsh
gas,  cannot  be  obtained  directly  from  chlorine  and  carbon,  but  it  may  be
obtained  from  certain  compounds  of  carbon — for  instance,  from  carbon
bisulphide — if  its  vapour  mixed  with  chlorine  be  passed  through  a
red-hot  tube.  Both  the  sulphur  and  carbon  then  combine  with  the
chlorine.  It  is  evident  that  by  ultimate  metalepsis  a  corresponding
carbon  chloride  may  be  obtained  from  any  hydrocarbon— indeed,  the
number  of  chlorides  of  carbon  C„Cl2^  already  known  is  very  large.

As  a  rule,  the  fundamental  chemical  characters  of  hydrocarbons  are
not  changed  by  metalepsis  ;  that  is,  if  a  neutral  substance  be  taken,  then
the  product  of  metalepsis  is  also  a  neutral  substance,  or  if  an  acid  be
taken  the  product  of  metalepsis  also  has  acid  properties.  Even  the
crystalline  form  not  unfrequently  remains  unaltered  after  metalepsis.
The  metalepsis  of  acetic  acid,  CH3'C00H,  is  historically  the  most
important.  It  contains  three  of  the  atoms  of  the  hydrogen  of  marsh
gas,  the  fourth  being  replaced  by  carboxyl,  and  therefore  by  the  action
of  chlorine  it  gives  three  products  of  metalepsis  (according  to  the  amount
of  the  chlorine  and  conditions  under  which  the  reaction  takes  place),
mono-,  di-,  and  trichloracetic  acids— CH2CICOOH,  CHCla'COOH,  and
CCla'COOH  ;  they  are  all,  like  acetic  acid,  monobasic.  The  resulting
products  of  metalepsis,  in  containing  an  element  which  so  easily  acts
on  metals  as  chlorine,  possess  the  possibility  of  attaining  a  further  com-
plexity of  molecules  of  which  the  original  hydrocarbon  is  often  in  no
way  capable.  Thus  on  treating  with  an  alkali  (or  first  with  a  salt  and
then  with  an  alkali,  or  with  a  basic  oxide  and  water,  <kc.)  the  chlorine
forms  a  salt  with  its  metal,  and  the  hydroxyl  radicle  takes  the  place  of
the  chlorine — for  example,  CHa'OH  is  obtained  from  CH3CI.  By  the
action  of  metallic  derivatives  of  hydrocarl)ons  — f or  example,  CHjNa —
the  chlorine  also  gives  a  salt,  and  the  hydrocarbon  radicle — for  instance.

474  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

CH3 — takes  the  place  of  the  chlorine.  In  this,  or  in  a  similar  manner,
CHg-CHg,  or  CjHr,  is  obtained  from CH3CI  and CgHjCHa  from  CgH^..
The  products  of  metalepsis  also  often  react  on  ammonia,  forming  hydro-
chloric acid  (and  thence  NH4CI)  and  an  amide  ;  that  is,  the  product  of
metalepsis,  with  the  ammonia  radicle  NH2,  &€.  in  the  place  of  chlorine.
Thus  by  means  of  metalepsical  substitution  methods  were  found  in
chemistry  for  an  artificial  and  general  means  of  the  formation  of  com-
plex carbon  compounds  from  more  simple  compounds  which  are  often
totally  incapable  of  direct  reaction.  Besides  which,  this  key  opened
the  doors  of  that  secret  edifice  of  complex  organic  compounds  into
which  man  had  up  to  then  feared  to  enter,  supposing  the  hydrocarbon
elements  to  be  united  only  under  the  influence  of  those  -mystic  forces
acting  in  organisms. ^^

It  is  not  only  hydrocarbons  which  are  subject  to  metalepsis.
Certain  other  hydrogen  compounds,  under  the  action  of  chlorine,  also
give  corresponding  chlorine  derivatives  in  exactly  the  same  manner ;
for  instance,  ammonia,  caustic  potash,  caustic  lime,  and  a  whole  series
of  alkaline  substances.  ^^  In  fact,  just  as  the  hydrogen  in  marsh  gas
can  be  replaced  by  chlorine  and  form  methyl  chloride,  so  the  hydrogen
in caustic potash, KHO,  ammonia, NH3, and calcium hydroxide,

^^  With  the  predominance  of  the  representation  of  compound  radicles  (this  doctrine
dates  from  Lavoisier  and  Gay-Lussac)  in  organic  chemistry,  it  was  a  very  important
moment  in  its  history  when  it  became  poHsible  to  gain  an  insight  into  the  structure  of
the  radicles  themselves.  It  was  clear,  for  instance,  that  etiiyl,  C.2H5,  or  the  radicle  tif
conmion  alcohol,  C.^Hs'OH,  passes,  without  changing,  into  a  number  of  ethyl  derivatives,
but  its  relation  to  the  still  simpler  hydrocarbons  was  not  clear,  and  occupied  the  attention
of  science  in  the  '  forties '  and  'fifties.'  Having  obtained  ethyl  hydride,  C2H5H  =  C.»He,  it
was  looked  on  as  contaitiing  the  same  ethyl,  just  as  methyl  hydride,  CH^^CHsH,  was
considered  as  existing  in  methane.  Having  obtained  free  methyl,  CH5CH5=C2H^  from
it,  it  was  considered  as  a  derivative  of  methyl  alcohol,  CH5OH,  and  as  only  isomeric  with
ethyl  hydride.  By  means  of  the  products  of  metalepsis  it  was  proved  that  this  is  not  a
case  of  isomerism  but  of  strict  identity,  and  it  therefore  became  clear  that  ethyl  is
methylated  methyl,  C.Hs^CHoCH^.  In  its  time  a  still  greater  impetus  waas  given  by
the  study  of  the  reactions  of  monochloracetic  acid,  CH.2CIGOOH,  or  CO(CH2Cl)(OH>.
It  appeared  that  metalepsical  chlorine,  like  the  chlorine  of  chloranhydrides — for  instance,
of  methyl  chloride,  CH-,C1,  or  ethyl  chloride,  CoHr.Cl— is  capable  of  substitation ;  for
example,  glyc^llic  acid,  CHo(OH)(CO,H),  or  CO(CH..OH)(OH),  was  obtained  from  it,  and
it  appeared  that  the  OH  in  the  group  CH...(OH)  reacted  like  that  in  alcohols,  and  it
became  clear,  therefore,  that  it  was  necessary  to  examine  the  radicles  themselves  by
analysing  them  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  bonds  connecting  the  constituent  atoms.
Whence  arose  the  present  doctrine  of  the  structure  of  the  carbon  compounds.  {S*f
Chapter  VIII.,  Note  42.)

*'  By  including  many  instances  of  the  action  of  chlorine  under  metalepsis  we  not
only  explain  the  indirect  formation  of  CCA^,  "SCU,,  and  C1.>0  by  one  method,  but  we  also
arrive  at  the  fact  that  the  reactions  of  the  metalepsis  of  the  hydrocarbons  lose  tlwtt
exclusivenesK  which  was  ofttm  ascribed  to  them.  Also  by  subjecting  the  chemical  repre-
sentations to  the  law  of  substitution  we  may  foretell  metalepsis  as  a  particular  case  of  *
general  law.

THE  HALOGENS  475

CaHaOj  or  Ca(0H)2,  may  be  replaced  by  chlorine  and  give  potassium
hypochlorite,  KCIO,  calcium  hypochlorite,  CaCl202,  and  the  so-called
chloride  of  nitrogen,  NCI3.  For  not  only  is  thecorrelatiofi  in  composition
the  same  as  in  the  substitution  in  marsh  gas,  but  the  whole  mechanism
of  the  reaction  is  the  same.  Here  also  two  atoms  of  chlorine  act :
one  takes  the  place  of  the  hydrogen  whilst  the  other  is  evolved  as
hydrochloric  acid,  only  in  the  former  case  the  hydrochloric  acid  evolved
remained  free,  and  in  the  latter,  in  presence  of  alkaline  substances,
it  reacts  on  them.  Thus,  in  the  action  of  chlorine  on  caustic
potash,  the  hydrochloric  acid  formed  acts  on  another  quantity  of  caustic
potash  and  gives  potassium  chloride  and  water,  and  therefore  not  only
KHO  +  CI2  =  HCl  +  KCIO,  but  also  KHO  +  HCl  =  H2O  +  KCl,
and  the  result  of  both  simultaneous  phases  will  be  2KH0  +  CI 2
=  H2O  +  KCl  +  KCIO.  We  will  here  discuss  certain  special
cases.

The  action  of  chlorine  on  ammonia  may  either  result  in  the  entire
breaking  up  of  the  ammonia,  with  the  evolution  of  gaseous  nitrogen,
or  in  a  product  of  metalepsis  (as  with  CH4).  With  an  excess  of
chlorine  and  the  aid  of  heat  the  ammonia  is  decomposed,  with  the
disengagement  of  free  nitrogen."-^'*  This  reaction  evidently  results
in  the  formation  of  sal-ammoniac,  8NH3  +  3CI2  =  6NH4CI  +  Nj.
But  if  the  ammonium  salt  be  in  excess,  then  the  reaction  takes  the
direction  of  the  replacement  of  the  hydrogen  in  the  ammohia  by  chlorine.
The  principal i-esult is that NH3  +  SClg forms NClj  -f  3HC1.''»

^  This  may  be  taken  advantage  of  in  the  preparation  of  nitrogen.  If  a  large  exceHH
of  chlorine  water  be  poured  into  a  beaker,  and  a  small  quantity  of  a  solution  of  ammonia
be  added,  then,  after  shaking,  nitrogen  is  evoWed.  11  chlorine  act  on  a  dilute  solution
of  ammonia,  the  volume  of  nitrogen  does  not  correspond  with  the  volume  of  the
chlorine  taken,  because  ammonium  hypoclilorite  is  formed.  If  ammonia  gas  be  passed
through  a  fine  orifice  into  a  vessel  containing  chlorine,  the  reaction  of  the  formation
of  nitrc^en  is  accompanied  by  the  emission  of  light  and  the  appearance  of  a  cloud  of  sal-
ammoniac. In  all  these  instances  an  excess  of  chlorine  must  be  present.

^  The  hydrochloric  acid  formed  combines  with  ammonia,  and  therefore  the  final  result
is  4NH5  +  8Cl3=NCl3  +  8NH4Cl.  For  this  reason,  more  ammonia  must  enter  into  the
reaction,  but  the  metalepsical  reaction  in  reality  only  takes  place  with  an  excess  of
ammonia  or  its  salt.  If  bubbles  of  chlorine  be  passed  through  a  fine  tube  into  a  vessel
containing  ammonia  gas,  each  bubble  gives  rise  to  an  explosion.  If,  however,
chlorine  be  passed  into  a  solution  of  ammonia,  the  reaction  at  first  brings  about
the  formation  of  nitrogen,  because  chloride  of  nitrogen  acts  on  ammonia  like  chlorine.
But  when  sal-ammoniac  has  begun  to  form,  then  the  reaction  directs  itself  towards
the  formation  of  chloride  of  nitrogen.  The  first  action  of  chlorine  on  a  solution  of
sal-ammoniac  always  causes  the  formation  of  chloride  of  nitrogen,  which  then  reacts  on
ammonia  thus:  NCl3  +  4NH5  =  N.j  +  3NH|Cl.  Tlierefore,  so  long  as  the  liquid  is  alka-
line from  the  presence  of  ammonia  the  chief  product  will  be  nitrogen.  The  reaction
NH4Cl  +  8Cl.j  =  NCl3  +  4HCl  is  reversible;  with  a  dilute  solution  it  proceeds  in  the  above-
described  direction  (perhaps  owing  to  the  affinity  of  the  hydrochloric  acid  for  the  excess
of  water),  but  with  a  strong  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid  it  takes  the  opposite  direction

EINCIPLE-S Ol' CHEMISTKV

The  resulting  product  ot  metaltpsis,  or  chloride  of  nitrogen,  N)
discovered  by  Dulong,  ih  a  liquid  iiaviiig  the  property  of  decomposing^
with  excessive  ease  not  only  when  heiited,  but  even  uoder  the  action
of  mechanical  influences,  aa  by  a  blow  or  by  uoulact  with  certain  solid
substances.  The  explosion  which  accompanies  the  decomposition  is  dai
to  the  fact  that  tlie  liquid  chlorides  of  nitrogen  gives  guseous  produi
nitrogen  and  chlorine.'^'  '''■

(probuhlj'  by  ti

\  <A  the  a:

iiitj  ot  liydiopliloric  »eid  Inr

»ae  ol  equilibrium  betweeu  umnonik,  hydrochtoric
chlorins,  WHiter,  and  phloride  of  nitrogen  which  has  not  jet  b«en  inveslignlsd. Thu

ution  NClj-(-4HC1-NH,Cl  +  SC1.j  enabled  Derille  and  Hunteteailla  to  detemune

campoflition  of  ohloride  of  nitrogen. WliEn  Hlinrlj'  deconipoHed  by  mtter,  chlorida  of
nitrogen given,  like n chloranbydride,  nitroiiH kcid or iM anhydride,  KNClx  +  SH^
^  N9OS  +  6UCI. From  these  obeervationB  it  is  evident  that  clJoride  of  nitropm
p-eat  ehemiml  inteient.  nhiuh  is  strengthened  by  its  analogy  with  trichlorida
lihorna. The  lesearchon  o[  F.  F.  Selivaiioff  (1MB1-D4)  pn>re  that  MOs  may  be  :
as  an  animomum  derivatiTeof  hypochlorous  add. Chic

dilute  aulpburic  acid  in  (he  toUoving  inanner ;  NClj  -)-  BHjO  +  U3SO,  ^  NOiHSO*  +  8H(
This  reaction  ia  rerersible  and  ia  only  complete  irheu  Home  Bobatani
HCIO  (toe  iiiHtanue,  sncciniiuide)  or  decompoBiug  it,  ii>  added  to  the  liiioid.  TUa
eaaily  underBtood  from  the  tact  thnt  hypoeliloroas  acid  itself,  HCIO,  may.  aooordinj  b
the  view  held  in  tliin  book,  be  regarded  ah  the  product  ot  the  metalepsia  ot  water,  and
conaequentiy  bears  Llie  name  reUtion  to  NCI,  as  H^O  doea  to  NH,,  or  u  BHO  ta
RNH„  R,NU,  and  HjN— tliat  ia  to  eay,  NCI3  correaponds  as  an  ammoniom  derivstiiv  bi
CIOH  and  CI]  in  eiacUy  the  same  manner  an  Mlj  correepondi  to  ROH  and  S^  Hw
connection  of  NClj  and  otliei  eimilar  eiptoBive  cbJoro-nitcogen  compoanda  (called
ehloryl  mmpounda  by  HeliTanoft ;  lor  einmple,  the  C.jHsXCl,  ot  Wurti  ia  chloryl  eth^-
amine),  eueb  as  NRCl.  (as  h'CH.Cl,),  and  NR^CI  (for  instance,  N(CHsCO}HCl,  chlorrt
acetamide,  and  N(C.,Hj).jCl,  Ehloryl  dietbylamlne)  with  HCIO  ia  evident  from  t'
that  under  certain  circnmstauces  these  campoundn  give  hypochloroDs  acid,  with  wi
instance,  NR,CI  +  U,0^NIt,H  +  HC10,<uid  freqaently  act  (like  NCIj  and  HaO,
in  an  oxidising  and  chloridiaing  manner.  Wf  may  take  cliloryl  soceinimide,  CtHt|CD)^
(or  example.  It  was  obtained  by  Bender  by  the  action  iif  HCIO  upon  a
CiH,|CO)aNH,  and  i«  decomposed  by  wot«c  with  the  rc-fninmlion  o(  amide  and  H
(the  reaction  ie  reversible).  Selivanoff  obtained,  investijjaljxl,  and  clsawfied  n
the  componnds  NR,C1  and  NBCI..,  where  B  is  a  residue  uf  organ
ohowed  their  distinction  from  the  cliloran  hydrides,  and  tlius  supplemented  the  h
clilnridc  at  nitrogen,  which  is  the  simplest  of  the  amides  contaiiiing  chlorine,  NRj,  w'
R  iH  lolly  sabetituled  by  clilorine.

"  ''<■  In  preparing  TICIj  every  precaution  must  be  used  lo  guard  against  an  1
and  care  slioald  be  takvn  that  the  NCIj  remains  under  a  Liyer  of  water. Whi

because  it  may  be  a  caw  ot  the  (ormatiou  ol  such  prodncte  and  a  very  dangerooa
may  ensue.  The  liquid  product  of  tlie  metalepais  of  ammonia  may  be  moat  ■
pared  in  the  form  uf  iimaU  drops  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current  on  a  alighU;  w

I

LB  then  evolved  at

e  [wle,  and  this  d

ia  gradually  forms  the  product  ol  metidepus  which  A
rried np  by  the  gael.  and  if  ■  layer

pourod  on  to  it  these  nmall  ilropa,  on  coming  into  contact  with  the  turpentine, givB  b
eiplosions,  which  are  in  no  way  dangerous  owing  to  the  small  mae
formed. Drops of  chloride  ot  uttrogen may willi  great  <:autior
iniextigation  in  the  following  manner. The  neck  ot  a  luiuugl  is  immersed  in  a  ta
taining  mercury,  and  first  a  saturated  aulntian  ot  nimmoii  Milt  is  poured  ioto  tb

THE  H.UOGES8  477

Chloride  of  nitrogen  la  a  yyllow  oily  liijuid  i)f  sp.  gr.  ]'6-*),  whicli
boils  at  71°,  and  breaks  up  into  N  +  Clj  at  i)7°.  The  contact  "f
phosphorus,  turpentine,  indin-ruhlwr,  &c.  causes  an  explosion,  wliiuh
is  aoiiietiiQes  so  violent  that  a  small  dri>p  will  pierce  through  a  thick
board.  Tlie  great  ease  with  which  chloride  of  nitntgen  decomposes  ia
dependent  upon  the  fact  that  it  ia  formed  with  an  absorption  oi  heat,
which  it  evolves  when  decoinpa'ied,  to  the  amount  of  about  38,000  heat
units  for  NCI3,  as  Deville  and  Hautefeuille  determined.

Chlorine,  when  absorbed  by  a  solution  of  caustic  soda  (and  also  of
other  alkalis)  at  the  ordinary  t^-mperature,  causes  the  replacement  of
the  hydrogen  in  the  caustic  soda  by  the  chlorine,  with  the  formation
of  aodinm  chloride  by  the  hydriichloric  acid,  so  that  the  reaction
may  be  represented  in  two  phases,  as  descrilted  above.  In  this
manner,  sodium  hypochlorite",  NaCIO,  and  sodium  chloride  are  simul-
taneously foiTued  ;  2NaHf>  +  CI3  =  NaCl  +  NaClO  +  H.,().  The
resultant  solution  contains  NaCIO  and  is  termed '  eau  de  Javelle.'  An
exactly  similar  reaction  takes  place  when  chlorine  is  passed  over  dry
hydrate  of  lime  at  the  oi-dinary  temperature :  2Ca(H0)^  +  SCIj
=  CaCljOj  -f  CaCl.j  +  2H.jO.  A  mixture  of  the  product  of  metalepds
with  calcium  chloride  is  obtained.  This  mixture  is  employed  in  practice
on  a  large  scale,  and  is  termed  '  bleflchirg  powder,'  owing  to  its  acting,
especially  when  mixed  with  acids,  as  a  bleaching  agent  on  tissues,  so
that  it  resembles  chlorine  in  this  respect.  It  is  howe\er  preferable
to  chlorine,  because  the  destructive  action  of  the  chlorine  can  be
moderated  in  this  case,  and  because  it  is  much  more  convenient  to  deal
with  a  solid  substance  than  with  gaseous  chlorine.  Bleaching  powder
is  also  called  rA/ojwfc  0/  lime,  because  it  is  obtained  from  chlorine
and hydrate of  lime, and contains  ^'' both these substances, It

nnd  itboTC  it  t.  •oltitioii  nf  ul
poHBed through the  aulutioii

^  QuicklimB,  CaO  (or  oiilciiuii  cftrbounle,  CaCO^).  due*  iiol  ftbMn-b  chlorini!  when  cold,
but  »t  •  red  heat,  in  ■  current  of  chlorine,  it  foTms  cnlciain  chloride,  »itli  the  eyolation
o[  oxygen.  (This  ww  confirmed  in  18t>S  by  Wells,  at  OitoH.)  This  teMtioncoireapond*
with  the  decomposing  action  of  chlorine  on  methane,  ammouia,  and  water.  Slaked  lime
{caiciom  Itydroiide,  CaHjO.;)  also,  wlien  dry,  does  not  nbaorb  chlorine  at  100°,  The
kbsorption  proceeds  at  thu  ordinary  temperature  (below  W),  The  dry  mass  thai  ob-
tained contains  not  less  than  three  eqaiialentH  of  eolcitun  hTdroxide  to  lour  ei)uivalents
of  chloHne,  u  that  itn  composition  is  [Ca(HO)^Cl,.  In  all  probability  a  simple  absorp-
tion nl  chlorine  by  the  lime  at  tint  takes  place  in  Uiia  case,  as  may  be  Men  from  the  fact
tliat  even  carbonic  anhydride,  when  acting  on  the  dry  mass  obtained  u  above,  disengages
nil  the  chlorine  from  it,  leaving  only  iialcinm  carhonate,  But  if  the  bleacbiog  powder  be
obtained  by  a  wet  method,  or  it  it  be  dissolTed  in  water  {in  which  it  is  rery  solaUe),  and
carbonic  anhydride  be  passed  into  it,  then  chlorine  is  no  longer  disengaged,  hut  chlorine
oiide,  CLjO,  and  only  hall  of  the  chlorine  is  cuurerled  into  this  oxide,  while  the  other  halt
remains  in  Uie  liquid  as  calcium  diliirida. From  tins  it  may  be  inferred  tliat  ealmom

PRINCIPLES  OF  CI

iiiH.y  be  prepared  in  the  laltoratory  liy  passing  a  current  of  chl
through  ft  t-okl  mixture  of  water  and  lime  (milk  of  lime).  The  mixl
must  lie  kept  cold,  as  otherwise  3Ca(CKJ)j  posses  into  2CaCI,
+  Ca(C103)j,  111  the  manufacture  of  iilencbing  jiowder  in  bi^
quantities  at  cheiuit'al  works,  the  purest  pos»ilile  slakwl  lime
and  laid  in  a  thin  layer  in  iar^e  flat  chanilfers,  M  (whoae  walls
made  of  Yorkshire  flags  or  tarred  wood,  dm  which  chlorine  bas
action),  and  into  which  chloriiie  gaa  is  introduced  by  lead  tu^iee.
distriiiutioii  of  the  plant  is  shown  in  the  annexed  drawing  (fig,  6J).

i

The pi-oducts  of  the  metalepsis  of  alkaline  hydi-ates,  NaClO  ■
Ca(C10)j,  which  are  present  in  solutions  of  '  Javelle  salt '  and  blenolii

*at«c  DD  blu

s  proved  loll

I'liloride  is  (urmed  by  tlie  iiction  nl

llie  ciue  by  the  fitcC  that  aaail  qnantitiea  ot  water  uxlnut  i

catciam  chloride  front  hlencliing  [lowder. If  a,  large  qanutitf  ol

powder  on  eiress  of  colciom  liydmniite  retntiiia.  a  portion  of  whicli  is  not  mibjectod  t

change. The  Action  of  tlio  wiUtr  Dwy  be  expreenod  by  the  following  lonnulw  :  Ftaatt

dry  muBB  Cil,(HO)oCI,  th«re  is  formed  lime,  Ca(HO),.  cnlciuro  chloride,  C>Ct»  udi

»aUne  flubstance,  Cii(C10)j. CojHjOaClj-CaHjO,-*  CBCljO,  +  CaCl.,  +  2H,0. ~

Bolting  BubslwuieH  u^  not  eqiully  nolablc;  water  first  o

which  i>  the  mwC  solnble,  tbeu  the  aomponiid  Cit(ClO),  and  uttimklel;  calcium  hyi

it  left. A  mixture  ot  caldnm  chloride  and  hypouhlorite  iximeB  into  ■olation. Chi  r

ration  there  remaina  CatOjC^BHgO. The  dry  bleaohing  powder  does  not  alxKvb  n

chlorinei  bntthe  eolntion  iaable  to  ahBorbit  in  BOnaidenible  qnantity. If  the  liqaid  b

boiled,  ■  considerable  amonnt  of  chlnrine  mnnonde  is  erolvei). After  thi* c*Inm

chloride  alone  remains  in  aotation,  and  tlie  deoompoaitinn  may  be  f  Jpre«ed  u  (ollo««

CaCl,-t-CnC1.0,+  aCL,  =  aCaCL,4--JCl,0. Cldoriue  inonoiide  may  he  prepaMd  in  II

tt  iH  soiuetimee  said  that  bleachinf;  powder  conl«ina  a  aubstauce,  Ca{OH)tCli,  ll
calcium  paroiide,CaO.„iuwliieh  one  atom  of  tnygan  ia  replaced  by  (OH)„i
by  CI..;  but,  jadginK  from  what  has  been  wiid  above,  this  can  only  be  the  O

D  being kept  for  aome  time,  bleaching  powder

oTdnUonot  oxygen  (becauite  CaCl^Oj  =  CaClj -4- 0»  ut  p.  ISH);  the  ai

docompoMa,  wiUt  t

THE  HALOGENS  479

powder  (they  are  not  obtained  free  from  metaUic  chlorides),  most  be
counted  as  salts,  because  their  metals  are  capable  of  substitution.  But
the  hydrate  HCiO  corresponding  with  these  salts,  or  hypochloroiis
arid,  is  not  obtained  in  a  free  or  pure  state,  for  two  reasons  :  in  the
hrst  place,  because  this  hydrate,  as  a  very  feeble  acid,  splits  up  (like
H2CO3  or  HNO3)  into  water  and  the  anhydride,  or  chlorine  inonoxide,
CL^O  =:  2HC10  —  H2O  ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  because,  in  a  number
of  instances,  it  evolves  oxygen  with  great  facility,  forming  hydrochloric
acid  :  HCIO  =  HCl  +  O.  Both  hypochlorous  acid  and  chlorine
monoxide  may  be  regarded  as  products  of  the  metalepsis  of  water,
l)ecause  HOH  corresponds  with  ClOH  and  ClOCl.  Hence  in  many
instances  bleaching  salts  (a  mixture  of  hypochlorites  and  chlol-ideiS)
break  up,  with  the  evolution  of  (1)  chlorine,  under  the  action  of  an
excess  of  a  powerful  acid  capable  of  evolving  hydrochloric  acid  from
sodium  or  calcium  chlorides,  and  tliis  takes  place  most  simply  under
the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  itself,  because  (p.  462)  NaCl  4-  NaClO
-h  3HC1  =  2NaCl  +  HCl  +  Clg  +  H^O  ;  (2)  dxygen,  as  we  Saw  in
Chaptet  III. — The  bleaching  properties  and,  in  general,  oxidising  act  ion
of  bleaching  salts  is  based  on  this  evolution  of  oxygen  (or  chlorine)  ;
oxygen  is  also  disengaged  on  heating  the  dry  salts — for  instance,
NaCl  +  NaClO  =  2NaCl  4-  O  ;  (3)  and,  lastly,  chlorhie  monoxiile,
which  contains  both  chlorine  and  oxygen.  Thus,  if  a  little  sulphuric,
nitric,  or  similar  acid  (not  enough  to  liberate  hydrochloric  acid
from  tho  CaCl.2)  be  added  to  a  solution  o£  a  bleaching  salt  (which
has  an  alkaline  reaction,  owing  either  to  an  excess  of  alkali  or
to  the  feeble  acid  properties  of  HCIO),  then  the  hypochlorous  acid  set
free  gives  water  and  chlorine  monoxide.  If  carbonic  anhydride  (or
boracic  or  a  similar  very  feeble  acid)  act  on  the  solution  of  a  bleaching
salt,  then  hydrochloric  acid  is  not  evolved  from  the  sodium  or  calcium
chlorides,  but  the  hypochlorous  acid  is  displaced  and  gives  chlorine
monoxide,^*  because  hypochlorous  acid  is  one  of  the  most  feeble  acids.
Another  method  for  the  preparation  of  chlorine  monoxide  is  based
on  these  feeble  acid  properties  of  hypochlorous  acid.  Zinc  oxide  and
mercury  oxide,  under  the  action  of  chlorine  in  the  presence  of  water,
do  not  give  a  salt  of  hypochlorous  acid,  but  form  a  chloride  and
hypochlorous  acid,  which  fact shows the  incapacity  of  this  acid  to

^>  For  this  reason  it  is  necessary  that  in  the  preparation  of  bleaching  powder  the  chlorine
should  be  free  from  hydrochloric  acid,  and  even  the  lime  from  calcium  chloride.  An
exc<*sH  of  chlorine,  in  acting  on  a  solution  of  bleaching  powder,  may  also  give  chlorine-
monoxide,  because  calcium  carbonate  also  gives  chlorine  monoxide  under  the  action  of
chlorine.  This  reaction  may  be  brought  about  by  treating  freshly  precipitated  calcium
carbonate  with  a  stream  of  chlorine  in  water :  2C1.2  -f  CaC05= CO.j  +  CaCl.^  +  Cl^O.  From
this  we  may  conclude  that,  although  carbonic  anhydride  displaces  hypochlorous  anhy-
dride, it  may  be  itself  displaced  by  an  excess  of  the  latter.

480  PRINCIPLES  OF  CUEMISTBV

combine  with  the  bases  mentioned.  Therefore,  if  suub  oxides  aa  those  of
zinc  or  tnercaiy  be  shakes  up  in  water,  and  chlonne  be  passed  throagh
the  turbid  liquid,''  a  reitction  occurs  which  may  Itc  expressed  in.  che
following  manner  :  2HgO  +  2CIj  =  Hg.^OClj  +  CI  ,0.  In  this  case,  a
compound  of  mercury  oxide  with  mercury  chhiride,  or  the  so-called
mercury  oxychloride,  is  obtained  :  Hgj<Xi1j  =  HgO  4  HgClj.  Tin's  i'
insoluble  in  water,  and  in  not  n,fiect(<d  by  hypochlorous  anhydride,  so
that  the  solution  will  contain  hypochlorous  acid  only,  but  the  greater
part  of  it  splits  up  into  the  anhydride  and  water.'*  ^''

Chlorine  monoxide,  which  corresponds  to  bleaching  and  hypi-
chlorfius  salts,  containing  as  it  does  the  two  elements  oxygen  and
chlorine,  forms  a  characteristii^  example  of  a  compound  of  clemeuts
which,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  act  chemically  in  an  analogous  munner.
Chlorine  monoxide,  as  prepared  from  an  aqueous  solution  by  the
abstraction  of  water  or  by  the  action  of  dry  chlorine  on  cold  ntereury
oxide,  is,  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  a  gas  or  vapour  which  con-
denses into  a  red  liquid  boiling  at  +  20°  and  giving  a  vapour  whose
density  (43  referred  to  hydrogen)  shows  that  '2  vols,  of  chlorine  anil
1  vol.  of  oxygen  give  2  vols,  of  chlorine  monoxide.  In  an  anhydnrai
form  the  gas  or  liquid  easily  explodes,  splitting  up  into  chlorine  aitd
oxygen,  Thi.s  explosiveness  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  heat  is
evotved  in  the  decomposition  tJi  the  amount  of  about  l.'i,000  heat  units
for  CIjO.^' The  explosion  may  fveii  take  pliwe  spontaneously,  and  a

^  Dry  red  merfory  'Hiie  itcW  on  chlorine,  loniiiuK  dry  bypovUnr
(cbluritiB  moiioiitle)  (BftUnll :  wlien  miaed  with  wMer,  rei]  mercury  oxide  acti  torbljd
chlorine,  lUitl  nrliHii  CreaUy  precipitated  it  bvhIvvb  oi<f|{en  and  chlorine.  An  oxjdaj
nierrury  whicli  cHsily  &nd  ■htuidiuitlj'  evolveii  chlorine  monoxide  nndet  tha  aatiMlV
chlorine  in  the  {iiettence  of  witter  may  be  prepxred  oe  IoIIuvb:  the  oxide  ct  n
precipitated  from  a  mercuric  wit  by  an  kllmli,  ia  lieateil  to  300°  oiid  cooled  (PcIoom).  j

k  ult,  HCIO,  he  added  to  a  dilution  ot  roerciitic  mU,  HgX„  '

because  the  hyfoctilnrite  in  decompoud.

"'■'■  A  golutiou  o[  hyiKKhlorouB  udtydride  if  (Lino  obtained  by  the  action  ot  clikirine
ou  many  aalte  ;  tor  example,  in  the  action  oF  ohlorine  on  a  lolatiDn  ol  lUdiDia  talpluU
the  follawiniE  reaction  takes  place:  Na^i30,  +  H.,O  +  CL,^NaCl  +  HC10  +  NaHSO^  Uen
the  hypochlorouH  ooid  is  formed,  togetber  with  HCl,  at  the  etpenie  of  chlorine  %ni
mOer,  for  C'L,  -1^  11,0  =  HCl  *  HCIO.  If  the  cryBlalluhydisle  of  chlorine  be  mixed  with
mercury  oxide,  the  hydrochloric  acid  formed  in  tlie  reaction  giveH  mnrcnry  chlondr.
and  hypoohlamni)  acid  remoina  in  solutiou.  A  dilute  aolotion  of  hypocblorou*  orii)
or  chlorine  monoxide  may  be  coucenbrsted  by  dialillatiou,  and  if  a  BDbBt«ace  wbirh
taken  Dp  water  (wibhoat  destroyiux  the  acid)— (or  iniitaiice,  calcium  nitrate — I>e  addfd
to  the  stronger  solution,  then  the  anhydride  of  hypocblorooa  acid— i.e.  chlorine  mon-
oxide— is  diBiDgaged,

^  Alt  eiploaive  substances  are  of  this  kind — oione,  hydrogen  peronde.  chlori>l<  "'
nitrogen,  nitro-compouDdii,  &c.  Hence  they  cannot  be  (onned  directly  trom  the  el«inent>
or  tbeir  simplest  compounds,  but,  on  tho  rontraiy,  decompose  into  tbem.  In  ■  lirguvl
slate  chlorine  monoxide  explodes  eTed  on  contact  with  powdery  subslanc«a,  or  wh<ni
rapidlysgitftted— for  instance,  il  a  Sle  be  nwpedorer  the  vessel  in  which  it  i>  contained

THE  HALOGENS  481

in  the  presence  of  many  oxidisable  substances  (for  instance,  sulphur,
organic  compounds,  d^.),  but  the  solution,  although  unstable  and
showing  a  strong  oxidising  tendency,  does  not  explode.^  It  is  evident
that  the  presence  of  hypochlorous  acid,  HCIO,  may  be  assumed  in  an
aqueous  solution  of  Cl^O,  since  ClaO  +  HjO  =  2HC10.

Hypochlorous  acid,  its  salts,  and  chlorine  monoxide  serve  as  a
transition  between  hydrochloric  acid,  chlorides,  and  chlorine,  and  a
whole  series  of  compounds  containing  the  same  elements  combined
with  a  still  greater  quantity  of  oxygen.  The  higher  oxides  of  chlorine,
as  their  origin  indicates,  are  closely  connected  with  hypochlorous  acid
and  its  salts  :

C13,

NaCl,

HCl,

hydrochloric  acid,

C120,

NaClO,

HCIO,

hypochlorous  acid.

C1203,

NaClOa,

HaOj,

chlorous  acid.'-"*

C1,0„

NaClOa,

HClOg,

chloric  acid.

C1207,

NaC104,

HCIO4,

perchloric  acid.

When  heated,  solutions  of  hypochlorites  undergo  a  remarkable
change.  Themselves  so  unstable,  they,  without  any  further  addition,
yield  two  fresh  salts  which  are  both  much  more  stable ;  one  contains
more  oxygen  than  MClO,  the  other  contains  none  at  all.

3MC10  =  MaOa  +  2MC1

hypochlorite chlorate  chloride

^*  A  solution  of  chlorine  monoxide,  or  hypochlorous  acid,  does  not  explode,  owing  to
the  presence  of  the  mass  of  water.  In  dissolving,  chlorine  monoxide  evolves  about  9,000
heat  units,  so  that  its  store  of  heat  becomes  less.

The  capacity  of  hypochlorous  acid  (studied  by  Carius  and  others)  for  entering  into  com-
bination with  the  unsaturated  hydrocarbons  is  very  often  taken  advantage  of  in  organic
chemistry. Thus  its  solution  absorbs  ethylene,  forming  the  chlorhydrin  GgH^ClOH.

The  oxidising  action  of  hypochlorous  acid  and  its  salts  is  not  only  applied  to  bleaching
but  also  to  many  reactions  of  oxidation.  Thus  it  converts  the  lower  oxides  of  manganese
into  the  peroxide.

'"^  Chlorous  acidy  HCIO^  (according  to  the  data  given  by  Millon,  Brandau,  and
others)  in  many  respects  resembles  hypochlorous  acid,  HCIO,  whilst  they  both  differ  from
chloric  and  perchloric  acids  in  their  degree  of  stability,  which  is  expressed,  for  instance,
in  their  bleaching  properties ;  the  two  higher  acidsido  not  bleach,  but  both  the  lower
ones  do  so  (oxidise  at  the  ordinary  temperature).  On  the  other  hand,  chlorous  acid  is
analogous  to  nitrous  acid,  HNO^.  The  anhydride  of  chlorous  acid,  CI2O5,  is  not  known
in  a  pure  state,  but  it  probably  occurs  in  admixture  with  chlorine  dioxide,  ClO^,  which  is
obtained  by  the  action  of  nitric  and  sulphuric  acids  on  a  mixture  of  potassium  chlorate
with  such  reducing  substances  as  nitric  oxide,  arsenious  oxide,  sugar,  &c.  All  that  is  at
present  known  is  that  pure  chlorine  dioxide  ClO.j  {see  Notes  89-48)  is  gradually  converted
into  a  mixture  of-hypochlorous  and  chlorous  acids  under  the  action  of  water  (and  alkalis) ;
that  is,  it  acts  like  nitric  peroxide,  NOj  (giving  HNO3  and  HNO..>),  or  as  a  mixed  anhy-
dride, 2C102  +  H,0  =  HC105  +  HC10.».  The  silver  salt,  AgClO^,  is  sparingly  soluble  in
water.  The  investigations  of  GarzaroUi-Thumlackh  and  others  seem  to  show  that  the
anhydride  Cl^Oj  does  not  exist  in  a  free  state.

VOL,  I.  II

482

PBISCIPLES OF (JJIEMISTHV

Part  of  the  salt— namely,  two-thirds  of  it— parts  with  its  oxygw
order  to  oxidise  the  remaining  third.**  From  an  intermediate  i
stance,  RX,  two  extremps,  R  and  RX^,  are  formed,  ju3t  as  niti
anhydride  spHta  up  into  nitric  oxide  and  nitric  anhydride  (or  ni
acid).  The  resulting  salt,  MClOj,  corresponds  with  chloric  acid
potasBium  chlorate,  KCIO,.  It  is  evident  that  a  siniilar  salt  maj
obtained  dii'potly  hy  the  nctinn  of  chlorine  on  an  alkali  if  its  a
tion  be  heated,  because  RCIO  will  be  first  formed,  and  then  RCI
for  example,  6KH0  +  301^  =  KCIO,  +  3KCI  +  SH.^O.  Chior
are  bo  prepared  ;  for  instance,  /lolnasium  rJihrnte,  which  is  ea
separuted  from  potassium  chloride,  being  sparingly  soluble  in  i
water."

^  Bj-drot^hloric  usid,  which  in  an  exMitple  of  fompounda  at  Uiii  kind,  i*  ■  i
nted  aabetuice  which  does  not  -combine  diiecUy  with  oxygen,  Imt  in  which,  nerertbe
■  consiilerttble  qnsntity  of  oiygen  may  be  in.ierted  between  the  eleioenln  [ormin
The  wime  may  bo  obaerved  in  a  namber  □(  other  cHHen.  Thni  oxygen  ma;  be  u
or  imterled  between  the  elements,  sometimee  in  eonuderable  qniuititieB,  in  the  ulor
faydrocu-boaB :  for  instuire,  in  CjHg,  three  iitom*  o(  Diyi[en  prodace  >.n  sleohnl.  glyi
nr  glyL-erol.  CjHslOtll].  We  shrUI  meet  with  similnt  eiuuplei  herea/t«r.  Thi
p!D(iraJly  explained  by  regarding  niygen  M  a  bivalent  element — that  is,  ««  csfiiH
cjombiaitlg  with  two  different  elementii,  sDch  aa  chlorine,  hydrogen.  &c.  On  the  bac
this  view,  it  may  be  inaerted  between  each  pair  of  combined  elemeutn ;  the  oxygen
then  be  combined  with  one  of  the  elements  by  one  of  ite  atHnttiea  and  with  the  o
element  by  ita  otiier  affinity.  Thie  view  does  not.  however,  expreu  the  entire  t
of  the  nutter,  even  when  applied  to  the  componnda  of  chlorine.  Hypochlomoa  i
HOCl— that  is  hydrochloric  acid  in  whioh  one  atom  of  oxygen  ia  inaerted-~^ie,  w  n  1
already  tteen,  a  nabsdince  of  small  atability ;  it  might  therefore  be  expectnd  thai  no
addition  of  a  frSHli  quantity  of  oxygen,  a  still  less  stable  substance  wnnid  be  nbtai
because,  according  to  the  sbove  view,  the  chlorine  Mid  hydrogen,  vhich  form  urn
stable  compound  together,  are  then  still  further  removed  from  each  other.  But  itaff
that  chloric  and  perchloric  acid,  HCIO,  and  HCIO,.  are  much  more  stable  subdu
Farthermore.  the  addition  of  oxygen  has  also  its  limit,  it  can  only  be  added  to  a  cd
extent.  It  the  above  representation  were  tme  and  not  merely  liypothetiod,  t
would  be  no  limit  to  the  combination  of  oxygen,  and  the  more  it  entered  into  one  oontini
chun  the  more  unstable  would  he  the  resultant  eomponnd.  But  not  more  than
atoms  of  oxygen  can  be  added  to  hydrogen  sulphide,  nor  to  hydrochloric  acid,  nn
hydrogen  phosphide.  Tins  peculiarity  must  lie  in  the  properties  of  oxygen  itaelf ;
atoms  of  oxygen  seem  to  have  the  power  of  forming  a  hind  of  radicle  which  retains
or  several  atoms  of  various  other  sabstanoes— for  example,  chlorine  and  hydn
hydrogen  and  sulphur,  sodium  and  manganese,  phosphorus  and  raetala,  tie,,  fan
comparatively  stable  compounds,  NaClO,,  Na,30„  NaHnO ,.  Na^O„  &c.  See  CbapH
Hole  1  and  Chapter  XV.

>*  It  chlorine  be  passed  through  a  rol/l  solution  of  potash,  a  bleaehing  compo
potassiam  chloride  and  hypochlorite,  KCl  +  KCIO,  is  formed,  but  if  it  be  pawaed  Uui
a  hoi  solution  potassium  chlorate  is  formed.  As  this  is  sparingly  solable  in  w^
chokes  the  gas-conducting  tube,  which  should  therefore  be  widened  ont  at  tlie  ntj.

Potassiom  chlorate  is  usually  obtained  on  a  large  scale  from  calciura  cUor»ta,  w
ia  prepared  by  passing  chlorine  (as  long  as  it  is  absorbed)  into  water  containing  lime.
mixture  being  kept  warm.  A  mixture  of  calcium  chlorate  and  chloride  is  thna  tat
in  the  solution.  Potassium  chloride  is  then  added  to  the  worm  solution,  and  on  coo
a  precipitate  of  potassium  chlorate  is  formed  as  a  substance  which  is  sparingly  -"li-i-i

THE  HALOGENS

If  dilute  sulphuric  acid  be  added  to  a  solution  of  potassium  chlorate,
chioric  Mid  ia  liberated,  but  it  cannot  be  separated  by  diatilla-
tion,  as  it  is  decomposed  in  the  process.  To  obtain  the  free  acid,
Bulphnric  acid  roust  be  added  to  a  solution  o!  barium  chlorate.'"  The
sulphuric  acid  gives  a  precipitate  of  barium  sulphate,  and  free  chloric
acid  remains  in  solution.  The  solution  may  be  evaporated  undci'
the  receiver  of  an  air-pump.  This  solution  is  colourless,  has  no
smell,  and  acts  as  a  powerful  acid  (it  neutralises  sodium  hydroxide,
decompoees  sodium  carbonate,  gives  hydrogen  with  zinc,  Jtc.)  ;  -when
heated  above  40°,  however,  it  decomposes,  farming  chlorine,  oxygen,
and  perchloric  acid  :  4HC10a  =  2HCI0,  +  H/J  +  CI.,  +  O,.  In  a
concentrated  condition  the  acid  acts  as  an  exceedingly  energetic
oxidiser,  so  that  organic  substances  brought  into  contact  with  it  burst
into  flame.  Iodine,  sulphurous  acid,  and  similar  oxidisable  substances
form  higher  oxidation  products  and  i-educe  the  chloric  acid  to  hydro-
chloric acid. Hydrochloric  acid  gas  gives  chlorine  with  chloric  acid

pdIiI  wuWf,  especially  iu  tlie  preBonee  ot  other  Halts.  The  double  clecampoaition  taking
place  is  C»(C10j)j  +  SKCI  =  CaClj  4.  aKClOj.  On  a  small  aale  in  the  klmmlory  potustmn
EhloiBte  is  beat  prepared  (rom  a  strong  solution  ot  blenching  powder  bj  pUHing  chlorine
Uiiongh  it  and  then  adding  potassium  chloride.  KClO^'is  alwnjn  fanned  by  the  action
of  UD  electric  current  on  s  solution  ot  KCl,  especially  at  Sa°  (Hiiasserminn  and  Xaschotd.
imt),  so  that  tbi*  method  is  now  used  on  a  large  scale.

PotsssinED  chlorate  ciyatallises  easily  in  large  colourless  tabular  crystals.  Its  loiu.
bilityin  ino  ptrts  ot  water  at  0°=3  parts,  20° —S  parts,  10° '^U  parts,  6U°  =  25  parU,
B0°  =  40  parts.  For  comparison  we  will  cite  the  following  figures  showing  the  solubility
of  potoiisiam  chloride  and  perclilorute  in  100  parts  of  water:  potaasinm  chloride  at  0°  =  2H
parts.  20"  =  S6  parts.  10"  =  40  parts,  100"- B7  parts  I  potaaaioin  perchlorate  at  0°  about
1  part,  90°  about  1]  part,  IIHI'^  about  18  patU.  When  heated,  potasainm  cblorate  mtlts
(the  melting  pointhai  been  given  ai  Inmi  S35°-STC°;  secording  to  the  latest  determination
by  Camelley.  BBB")  and  deeompoBes  with  the  erolatiou  nf  oxygon,  potassium  perchlorate
being  at  first  formed,  a*  will  aftenrards  be  doscribed  (ire  Note  <T|.  A  mixture  oj
potasaimu  chlorate  and  nitric  and  hydrochloric  acids  effects  oxidation  and  chlorination
in  BolntiiHin.  It  deflagrates  when  thrown  npon  incandescent  carbon,  and  when  miiod
with  Bulphar  {^  by  weight)  it  ignites  it  on  being  stmck.  in  which  case  an  explosion
takes  place.  The  same  occurs  nith  ouuiy  metallic  salphides  and  organic  substances.
Sncbmi*lnrva  are  also  ignited  by  s  drop  ot  sulphuric  acid.  All  these  e9ecta  are  due  to  the
large  amount  of  oxygen  contained  in  potassium  chlorate,  and  to  the  ease  with  which  it
is  eroWed.  A  mixture  of  two  parts  ot  potassium  chlorate,  one  part  of  sugar,  and  one
part  of  yellow  pruKsiate  of  potash  acts  like  gunpowder,  hut  barns  loo  rapidly,  and
therefore  burstt  the  guns,  and  it  also  has  a  very  strong  oddising  octioa  on  their  metal.
The  Bodiam  salt,  NaClOn,  is  much  more  soluble  than  the  potassium  salt,  and  it  t«
therefore  more  diffloult  to  free  it  from  sodium  chloride,  Jlc.  The  boriiun  salt  ia  also
more  aolable  than  the  potassium  salt ;  D°  =  S4  ports.  30°  =  ST  ports,  S0°  =  08  ports  ot  salt
per  100  ot  water.

"  Barium  chlorate,  Ba(CIOj)i,H.jO,  is  prepared  in  the  following  way  :  impure  chloric
acid  is  first  prepaxed  and  saturated  with  baryta,  ajid  the  barium  salt  purified  by  cryslat-
lisation.  The  impure  free  chloric  acid  ia  obtained  by  converting  the  potassium  in  potas-
sium chlorate  into  an  insoluble  salt.  This  is  doo«  by  adding  tottaHc  or  hydrofluoailicic
acid  loa  solution  of  potaesintn  chlorate,  beouse  potassium  tartrate  and  potassinm  silioo-
flnoride  are  very  sparingly  soluble  in  water. Chloric  acid  ia  easily  soluble  in  water.

PRINCII'LES  OF  CHEMrsTRY

(and  cousequently  with  ECIO^  also)  acting  iti  the  same  manner  &i  it
aeU  on  the  lower  acida  :  HClOj  +  6HC1  =  3Hjl>  +  3C1,.

By  cautiously  acting  on  potassium  chlorate  with  sulphuric  acid,  tiK
tOoxidf  (chforic  }mroxiiic),  CIO^,*"  is  obtained  {Davy,  Millon).  This  ^
is  easily  licjuefied  in  a  freezing  mixture,  and  boils  at  +  10^.  Tlir
vapour  density  (about  35  if  H  =:  1)  ahows  that  the  molecule  of  t^
auhBtance  is  CIO.^.'"  In  a  giiseous  or  liquid  stnte  it  very  easilv  explodB
(for  instance,  at  CO",  or  by  contact  with  oi^iiic  compounds  or  dnclt
divided  substances,  Jic),  forming  Ct  and  0„  and  in  many  instancn"
therefore  it  acts  as  an  oxidising  agent,  although  (tike  nitric  peroxittel
it  may  itself  be  further  oxidised.  ^^  In  dissolving  in  water  or  kllulit
chloric  peroxide  gives  chlornua  and  hypothlorous  acids  -2ClO,  +  2KH0
=  KClOj  +  KCIO,  +  HjO  -and  therefore,  like  nitric  peronit.
the  dioxide  may  ^w  regarded  as  an  intermediate  oxide  between  Uw
(unknown)  anhydrides  of  chlorous  and  chloric  acids  :  4CIOy

+  ci,o,.-"

As  the  salts  of  chloric-  acid,  HCIO,,  are  produced  hy  the  Bplittil|
up  of  the  salts  of  hypochlorous  acid,  so  in  the  same  way  the  a ~

"  To  preiHire  ClOj  100  grama  of  anSphuric  moid  ue  cooled  in  a  miiliue  of
AaLl,  mud  15  grams  of  powdorod  potAtMUDiu  cblorat«are  gradnally  added  to  the  ac>d,«fal
IK  then  carefully  diBtllled  at  30°  to  4(1=',  the  Taponr  given  off  being  oondviMd  kl
freezing  iniilura.  PotaaHium  perchtonile  ia  tlien  formed:  8KC10s  +  aH,S0,>lI
+  KC10,  +  9C10,-I-H,0.  The  reaction  may  lesolt  in  an  eiptosion.  C«lTert  Bad
obtained  chloric  paroiide  inthoDt  Lbu  liiaal  danger  by  liealing  *,  mixttuw  ut
acid  and  potSBBinin  chlorate  in  a  teat  tube  in  a  water-bath.  In  this  em^  IKCXIb  '
+  eC,H]0,aH,O^aC2lIK0,  +  aC0i  +  9CIO]-i-8H,O.  fbe  reaction  instill  tartlm  baiB-
tated  by  the  addition  of  a  amall  quantity  of  aolphnric  aoid-  If  a  nolntion  of  HC1  wM
npon  KClOj  at  the  ordinary  temperutun,  u  mixlnre  of  CL  and  CIO.,  ia  tormad,  bal  if  IW
tampenitDre  be  raised  to  H0°  the  greater  part  of  the  CtOg  deKompoHea,  imA  when  paaal
through  a  hot  solation  ol  MnCig  it  oiidisea  it.  Ooocb  and  Kreider  proposed  |I8M)  l>
employ  this  method  for  preparing  small  quantities  of  chlorine  in  the  labonttorj.

*°  By  analog;  xith  nitric  peroxide  it  oiight  be  expected  that  at  low  temporkMuvi  a
doubling  oF  the  moleoale  into  Cl,0,  would  take  place,  an  Ui?  r«u'tii>ns  ol  CIO,  poiM  W
iU  being  a  mixed  anhydride  of  HCIO]  and  UCIO].

*'  Owing  to  the  formation  of  this  chlorine  dioxide,  a  mixture  of  polABsiaai  oUindt
and  sugar  ia  ignited  by,  a  drop  of  snlphutie  acid.  This  property  was  tonaerly  vuii
oae  at  for  mailing  niatubea,  and  ia  now  sometimes  emploiied  for  Betting  (ire  to  •sploBi*
charges  bjr  means  of  on  ornuigcmeDt  in  which  the  acid  is  caused  to  fall  on  ths  niibDr
at  the  moment  required.  An  interesting  eiperiment  on  the  Dombostion  of  pbaqdum
under  water  may  be  conducted  with  cblorine  dioxide.  Pieora  of  phoaphonni  and  li
potassium  chlorate  are  placed  under  water,  and  mlphoric  acid  la  pour^  tm  to  Ibia
(tliroagh  a  long  (unnel) ;  the  phosphorus  then  burns  at  the  expense  ot  tba  chlnw
diolide.

*'  Polasniam  permanganate  oxidises  chlorine  dioxide  into  chloric  acid  (Ftiist).

'^  Tlie  eui^orine  obtained  by  Davy  bj  gently  healing  pntassiom  chlorat*  with  fajA*

Iuldoric  acid  is  (Pobal)  a  mixture  of  chlorine  dioxide  and  free  chlorine.  Tha  liqoid  Mik^|
gMeoDs  clilorine  oxide  (Note  8G),  whicli  Millon  considered  to  be  ClgOj,  prob^blj  coaM^^I
a  mixtun  of  CtOf  (rapoDi  density  BS),  Cl,Oj  (whose  vapour  density  ahoald  ha  WhS^^I
oblorine  (vapour  denitity  3S'S),  sinoe  its  vaponr  density  was  detennined  to  ba  abaat  Mlt^^l

THE  HALOGENS  485

perchloric  acid,  HCIO4,  are  produced  from  the  salts  of  chloric  acid,
HCIO3.  But  this  is  the  highest  form  of  the  oxidation  of  HCl.  Perchloric
acid,  HCIO4,  is  the  most  stable  of  all  the  acids  of  chlorine.  When
fused  potassium  chlorate  begins  to  swell  up  and  solidify,  after  having
parted  with  one-third  of  its  oxygen,  potassium  chloride  and  potassium
perchlorate  have  been  formed  according  to  the  equation  2KCIO3
=KC104  +  KCl  4-  O2.

The  formation  of  this  salt  is  easily  observed  in  the  preparation
of  oxygen  from  potassium  chlorate,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  potas-
sium perchlorate  fuses  with  greater  difficulty  than  the  chlorate,  and
therefore  appears  in  the  molten  salt  as  solid  grains  (see  Chapter  III.
Note  12).  Under  the  action  of  certain  acids — for  instance,  sulphuric
and  nitric—  potassium  chlorate  also  gives  potassium  perchlorate.  This
latter  may  be  easily  purified,  because  it  is  but  sparingly  soluble  in  water,
although  all  the  other  salts  of  perchloric  acid  are  very  soluble  and  even
deliquesce  in  the  air.  The  perchlorates,  although  they  contain  more
oxygen  than  the  chlorates,  are  decomposed  with  greater  difficulty,  and
even  when  thrown  on  ignited  charcoal  give  a  much  feebler  deflagration
than  the  chlorates.  Sulphuric  acid  (at  a  temperature  not  below  100^)
evolves  volatile  and  to  a  certain  extent  stable  perchloric  acid  from
potassium  perchlorate.  Neither  sulphuric  nor  any  other  acid  will
further  decompose  perchloric  acid  as  it  decomposes  chloric  acid.  Of
all  the  acids  of  chlorine,  perchloric  acid  alone  can  be  distilled.^^  The
pure  hydrate  HCIO4  *''  is  a  colourless  and  exceedingly  caustic  substance

^'  If  a  solution  of  cliloric  acid,  HClOj,  be  first  concentrated  oyer  sulphuric  acid  under
the  receiver  of  an  air-pump  and  afterwards  distilled,  chlorine  and  oxygen  are  evolved
and  perchloric  acid  is  formed:  4HC103  =  2HC104+ Cl^+SO  +  H^O.  Roscoe  accordingly
decomposed  directly  a  solution  of  potassium  chlorate  by  hydrofluosilicic  acid,  decanted
it  from  the  precipitate  of  ix>taH8ium  silicofluoride,  K^SiF^,  concentrated  the  solution  of
chloric  acid,  and  then  distilled  it,  perchloric  acid  being  then  obtained  {»ee  following  foot-
note). That  chloric  acid  is  capable  of  iMissing  into  perchloric  acid  is  also  seen  from  the
fact  that  potasHium  permanganate  is  decolorised,  although  slowly,  by  the  action  of  a
solution  of  chloric  acid.  On  decomposing  a  solution  of  potassium  chlorate  by  the  action
of  an  electric  current,  {lotassium  perchlorate  is  obtained  at  the  positive  electrode  (where
the  oxygen  is  evolved).  Perchloric  acid  is  also  formed  by  the  action  of  an  electric  current
on  solutions  of  chlorine  and  chlorine  monoxide.  Perchloric  acid  was  obtained  by  Count
Stadion  and  afterwards  by  Serullas,  and  was  studied  by  Roscoe  and  others.

'^  Perchloric  acid,  which  is  obtained  in  a  free  state  by  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on
its  salts,  may  be  separated  from  a  solution  very  easily  by  distillation,  being  volatile,
although  it  is  partially  decomposed  by  distillation.  The  solution  obtained  after  distilla-
tion may  be  concentrated  by  evaporation  in  open  vessels.  In  the  distillation  the  solution
reaches  a  temperature  of  200*^,  and  then  a  very  constant  liquid  hydrate  of  the  composi-
tion HC104,2H.)0  is  obtained  in  the  distillate.  If  this  hydrate  be  mixed  with  sulphuric
.acid,  it  begins  to  decompose  at  100°,  but  nevertheless  a  portion  of  the  acid  passes  over
into  the  receiver  without  decomposing,  forming  a  crystalline  hydrate  HClO^jH^O  which
melts  at  50°.  On  carefully  heating  this  hydrate  it  breaks  up  into  perchloric  acid,  which
•distils  over  below  100°,  and  into  the  liquid  hydrate  Ha04,aH.jO. The  acid  HCIO4  may

486  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

which  fumes  in  the  air  and  has  a  specific  gravity  1-78  at  15^  (aome-
times,  after  being  kept  for  some  time,  it  decomposes  with  a  violent  ex-
plosion). It  explodes  violently  when  brought  into  contact  with  charcoal,
paper,  wood,  and  other  organic  substances.  If  a  small  quantity  of
water  be  added  to  this  hydrate,  and  it  be  cooled,  a  crystallo-hydnte,
C1H04,H20,  separates  out.  This  is  much  more  stable,  but  the  liquid
hydrate  HC104,2H20  is  still  more  so.  The  acid  dissolves  in  water  in
all  proportions,  and  its  solutions  are  distinguished  for  their  stability.^
When  ignited  both  the  acid  and  its  salts  are  decomposed,  with  the
evolution  of  oxygen.**^

also  be  obtained  by  adding  one-fourth  part  of  strong  sulphuric  acid  to  potassiiun  chkmte,
carefully  distilling  and  subjecting  the  crystals  of  the  hydrate  HC104,H2O  obtained  in
the  distillate  to  a  fresh  distillation.  Perchloric  acid,  HCIO4,  itself  does  not  distfl,  and
is  decomposed  on  distillation  until  the  more  stable  hydrate  HC104,H20  is  formed ;  this
decomposes  into  HCIO4  and  HC104,2H.jO,  which  latter  hydrate  distils  without  decon-
position.  This  forms  an  excellent  example  of  the  influence  of  water  on  stability,  and  of
the  property  of  chlorine  of  giving  compoimds  of  the  tyx)e  CIX7,  of  which  all  the  abors
hydrates,  C105(0H),  C102(OH)5,  and  C10(0H)5,  are  members.  Probably  farther  re-
search  will  lead  to  the  discoverj'  of  a  hydrate  C1(0H)7.

46  According  to  Roscoe  the  specific  gravity  of  perchloric  acid  =1*782  and  of  the
hydrate  HC104,H20  in  a  liquid  state  (50°)  1*811 ;  hence  a  considerable  contraction  takes
place  in  the  combination  of  HCIO4  with  HoO.

^^  The  decomposition  of  salts  analogous  to  potassium  chlorate  has  been  more  folly
studied  in  recent  years  by  Potilitzin  and  P.  Frankland.  Professor  Potilitzin,  by  de*
composing,  for  example,  lithium  chlorate  LiClOj,  found  (from  the  quantity  of  lithium
chloride  and  oxygen)  that  at  first  the  decomposition  of  the  fused  salt  (368P)  takes  place
according  to  the  equation,  dLiC105  =  2LiCl  +  LiC104  +  50,  and  that  towards  the  end  the
remaining  salt  is  decomposed  thus:  5LiClO3ai4LiCl  +  LiClO4  +  10O.  The  phenomeiM
obser>'ed  by  Potilitzin  obliged  him  to  admit  that  lithium  perchlorate  is  capable  of  decom-
posing simultaneously  with  lithium  chlorate,  with  the  formation  of  the  latter  salt  and
oxygen  ;  and  this  was  confirmed  by  direct  experiment,  which  showed  that  lithium  chlcNrate
is  always  formed  in  the  decomposition  of  the  perchlorate.  Potilitzin  drew  particnkr
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  dccomiK>sition  of  potassium  chlorate  and  of  Halts  analogous
to  it,  although  exothermal  (Chapter  III.,  Note  12),  not  only  does  not  proceed  spon-
taneously, but  requires  time  and  a  rise  of  temperature  in  order  to  attain  completion,
which  again  shows  that  chemical  equilibria  are  not  determined  by  the  heat  eflfectM  of  le*
actionn  only.

P.  Frankland  and  J.  Ding^vall  (18«7)  showed  that  at  448°  (in  the  vapour  of  sulphor)
u  mixture  of  potassium  chlorate  and  ix>wdered  glass  iH  decomposed  almost  in  accordance
witli  the  equation  2KCIO3-  KCIO4  +  KCl  +  0,j,  whilst  the  salt  by  itself  evolves  about  half
as  much  oxygen,  in  accordance  with  the  equation,  8KC103  =  5KC104  +  8KCl-f2O.2.  The
<l(H'oniix>siti()n  of  potassium  perchlorate  in  admixture  with  manganese  peroxide  proceed!
to  completion,  KCIO4  -  KCl  -r-  20.,.  But  in  decomposing  by  itself  the  salt  at  first  gives
potassium  chlorate,  approximately  according  to  the  equation  7KCIO4  =  2KCIO5  +  $KCl
+  llOj.  Thus  there  is  now  no  doubt  that  when  potassium  chlorate  is  heated,  the  per*
chlorate  is  formed,  and  that  this  salt,  in  decomposing  with  evolution  of  oxygen
gives  the  former  salt.

In  the  decomposition  of  barium  hypochlorite,  50  per  cent,  of  the  whole  amooiit
into  chlorate,  in  the  decomposition  of  strontium  hj-pochlorite  (Potilitzin,  1890)  12-5  vet
c<»nt.,  and  of  calcium  hypochlorite  al>out  25  per  cent.  Besides  which  Potilitzin  shov^
that  the  decomposition  of  the  liN-pochlorites  and  also  of  the  chlorates  is  always  aoooin*
panied  by  the  formation  of  a  certain  quantity  of  the  oxides  and  by  the  evolotioii  of

J

THE  HALOGENS  487

On  comparing  chlorine  as  an  element  not  only  with  nitrogen  and
carbon  but  with  all  the  other  non-metallic  elements  (chlorine  has  so  little
analogy  with  the  metals  that  a  comparison  with  them  would  be  super-
fluous), we  find  in  it  the  following  fundamental  properties  of  the  haLogena
or  salt-producers.  With  metals  chlorine  gives  salts  (such  as  sodium
chloride,  &c.)  ;  with  hydrogen  a  very  energetic  and  monobasic  acid  HGl,
and  the  same  quantity  of  chlorine  is  able  by  metalepsis  to  replace  the
hydrogen  ;  with  oxygen  it  forms  unstable  oxides  of  an  acid  character.
These  properties  of  chlorine  are  possessed  by  three  other  elements,
bromine,  iodine,  and  fluorine.  They  are  members  of  one  natural  family.
Each  representative  has  its  peculiarities,  its  individual  properties  and
points  of  distinction,  in  combination  and  in  the  free  state — otherwise  they
would  not  be  independent  elements  ;  but  the  repetition  in  all  of  them
of  the  same  chief  characteristics  of  the  family  enables  one  more  quickly
to  grasp  all  their  various  properties  and  to  classify  the  elements  them-
selves.

In  order  to  have  a  guiding  thread  in  forming  comparisons  between
the  elements,  attention  must  however  be  turned  not  only  to  their  points
of  resemblance  but  also  to  those  of  their  properties  and  characters  in
which  they  differ  most  from  each  other.  And  the  atomic  weights  of
the  elements  must  be  considered  as  their  most  elementary  property,  since
this  is  a  quantity  which  is  most  firmly  established,  and  must  be  taken
account  of  in  all  the  reactions  of  the  element.  The  halogens  have  the
following  atomic  weights —

F  =  19, 01  =  35-5, Br  =  80, 1  =  127.

All  the  properties,  physical  and  chemical,  of  the  elements  and  their
corresponding  compounds  must  evidently  be  in  a  certain  dependence

chlorine,  the  chlorine  being  displaced  by  the  oxygen  disengaged.  Spring  and  Prost
(1889)  represent  the  evolution  of  oxygen  from  KC10.<{  as  due  to  the  salt  first  splitting  up
into  base  and  anhydride,  thus  (1)  2MCIO5 - M-^O  +  Cip* ;  (2)  Cl206=Cl2  +  05;  and  (8)
MaO  +  Cl  =  2MCl  +  0.

I  may  further  remark  that  the  decomposition  of  potassium  chlorate  as  a  reaction
evolving  heat  easily  lends  itself  for  this  very  reason  to  the  contact  action  of  manganese
peroxide  and  other  similar  admixtures;  for  such  very  feeble  influences  as  those  of
contact  may  become  evident  eitlier  in  those  cases  (for  instance,  detonating  gas,
hydrogen  peroxide,  &c.),  when  the  reaction  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  heat,  or
when  (for  instance,  H^i  +  Ij,  Sec.)  little  heat  is  absorbed  or  evolved.  In  these  cases  it  is
evident  that  the  existing  equilibrium  is  not  very  stable,  and  that  a  small  alteration  in  the
conditions  at  the  surfaces  of  contact  may  su£Sce  to  upset  it.  In  order  to  conceive  the
modus  operandi  of  contact  phenomena,  it  is  enough  to  imagine,  for  instance,  that  a  the
surface  of  contact  the  movement  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecules  changes  from  a  circular
to  an  elliptical  path.  Momentary  and  transitory  compounds  may  be  formed,  but  their
formation  cannot  affect  the  explanation  of  the  phenomena.

488  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

on  this  fundamental  point,  if  the  grouping  in  one  family  be  naturaL^'  ^*
And  we  find  in  reality  that,  for  instance,  the  properties  of  bromine,
whose  atomic  weight  is  almost  the  mean  between  those  of  iodine  and
chlorine,  occupy  a  mean  position  between  those  of  these  two  elements.
The  second  measurable  property  of  the  elements  is  their  equivalence  or
their  capacity  for  forming  compounds  of  definite  forms.  Thus  carbou
or  nitrogen  in  this  respect  differs  widely  from  the  halogens.  Although
the  form  CIO 3  corresponds  with  NO2  and  CO,,  yet  the  last  is  the
highest  oxide  of  carbon,  whilst  that  of  nitrogen  is  NjO^,  and  for  chlorine,
if  there  were  an  anhydride  of  perchloric  acid,  its  composition  would
be  CI2O7,  which  is  quite  different  from  that  of  carbon.  In  respect  to
the  forms  of  their  compounds  the  halogens,  like  all  elements  of  one
family  or  group,  are  perfectly  analogous  to  each  other,  as  is  seen  from
their  hydrogen  compounds  :

HF,  HCl,  HBr,  HI.

Their  oxygen  compounds  exhibit  a  similar  analogy.  Only  fluorine
does  not  give  any  oxygen  compounds.  The  iodine  and  bromine  com-
pounds corresponding  with  HCIO3  and  HCIO4  are  HBrOj  and  HBrO|,
HIOj  and  HIO4.  ^^  comparing  the  properties  of  these  acids  we
can  even  predict  that  fluorine  will  not  form  any  oxygen  compound.
For  iodine  is  easily  oxidised — for  instance,  by  nitric  acid — whilst
chlorine  is  not  directly  oxidised.  The  oxygen  acids  of  iodine  are  com-
paratively more  stable  than  those  of  chlorine  ;  and,  generally  speaking,
the  affinity  of  iodine  for  oxygen  is  much  greater  than  that  of  chlorine.
Here  also  bromine  occupies  an  intennediate  position.  In  fluorine
we  may  therefore  expect  a  still  smaller  affinity  for  oxygen  than  in
chlorine — and  up  to  now  it  has  not  been  combined  with  oxygen.  If  any
oxygen  compounds  of  fluorine  should  be  obtained,  they  will  naturally  be
exceedingly  unstable.  The  relation  of  these  elements  to  hydrogen  is  the
reverse  of  the  above.  Fluorine  has  so  great  an  affinity  for  hydrogen
that  it  decomposes  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature ;  whilst  iodine

^'  ^»«  See,  for  example  tlie  melting  point  of  NaCl,  NaBr,  Nal  in  Chapter  II.  Note  i7.
According  to  F.  Freyer  and  V.  Meyer  (1892),  the  following  are  the  boiling  points  of  some
of  the  correnponding  conipoundK  of  chlorine  luul  bromine  :

BC13

SiClj

170
59°

BBr^
SiBr4

90°

PCI.-,

70"

PBr,

175°

SbCl,

228-

SbBrj

276°

BiClj

447°

BiBr,

468°

SnCl4

CAW

SnBr4

619°

ZnClo

780°

ZnBr.,

650°

ThuB  for  all  the  more  volatile  compounds  the  replacement  of  chlorine  by  bromine
raises  the  boiling  point,  but  in  the  case  of  ZnX.^  it  lowers  it  (Chapter  XV.  Note  19).

THE  HALOGENS  489

has  so  little  affinity  for  hydrogen  that  hydriodic  acid,  HI,  is  formed
with  difficulty,  is  easily  decomposed,  and  acts  as  a  reducing  agent  in
a  number  of  cases.

From  the  form  of  their  compounds  the  halogens  are  univaletU
elements  with  respect  to  hydrogen  and  septivalent  with  respect  to
oxygen,  N  being  trivalent  to  hydrogen  (it  gives  NH3)  and  quinquivalent
to  oxygen  (it  gives  N2O5),  and  C  being  quadrivalent  to  both  H  and  O
as  it  forms  0114  and  COj.  And  as  not  only  their  oxygen  compounds,
but  also  their  hydrogen  compounds,  have  acid  properties,  the  halogens
are  elements  of  an  exclusively  acid  character.  Such  metals  as  sodium,
potassium,  barium  only  give  basic  oxides.  In  the  case  of  nitrogen,
although  it  forms  acid  oxides,  still  in  ammonia  we  find  that  capacity  to
give  an  alkali  with  hydrogen  which  indicates  a  less  distinctly  acid
character  than  in  the  halogens.  In  no  other  elements  is  the  acid-
giving  property  so  strongly  developed  as  in  the  halogens.

In  describing  certain  peculiarities  characterising  the  halogens,  we
shall  at  every  step  encounter  a  confirmation  of  the  above-mentioned
general  relations.

As  fluorine  decomposes  water  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen,
Fj  +  H2O  =  2HF  +  O,  for  a  long  time  all  efforts  to  obtain  it  in  free
state  by  means  of  methods  similar  to  those  for  the  preparation  of
chlorine  proved  fruitless.^  ^  Thus  by  the  action  of  hydrofluoric  acid
on  manganese  peroxide,  or  by  decomposing  a  solution  of  hydrofluoric
acid  by  an  electric  current,  either  oxygen  or  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and
fluorine  were  obtained  instead  of  fluorine.  Probably  a  certain  quantity
of  fluorine  **  ****  was  set  free  by  the  action  of  oxygen  or  an  electric
current  on  incandescent  and  fused  calcium  fluoride,  but  at  a  high
temperature  fluorine  acts  even  on  platinum,  and  therefore  it  was  not
obtained.  When  chlorine  acted  on  silver  fluoride,  AgF,  in  a  vessel  of
natural  fluor  spar,  CaFj,  fluorine  was  also  liberated  ;  but  it  was  mixed

^  Even  before  free  fluorine  was  obtained  (1886)  it  was  evident  from  experience  gained
in  the  efforts  made  to  obtain  it,  and  from  analogy,  that  it  would  decompose  water  {aea
first  Russian  edition  of  the  Principles  of  Chemistry).

^  ^**  It  is  most  likely  that  in  thin  experiment  of  Fremy's,  which  corresponds  with  tlie
action  of  oxygen  on  calcium  chloride,  fluorine  was  set  free,  but  that  a  converse  reaction
also  proceeded,  CaO  +  Fj  =  CaF.^  +  O — that  is,  the  calcium  distributed  itself  between  the
oxygen  and  fluorine.  MnF4,  which  is  capable  of  splitting  up  into  BfnF^  and  F^,  is  without
doubt  formed  by  the  action  of  a  strong  solution  of  hydrofluoric  acid  on  manganese  per-
oxide, but  under  the  action  of  water  the  fluorine  gives  hydrofluoric  acid,  and  probably
this  is  aided  by  the  affinity  of  the  manganese  fluoride  and  hydrofluoric  acid.  In  all  the
attempts  made  (by  Davy,  Knox,  Louget,  Fremy,  Gore,  and  others)  to  decompose  fluorides
(those  of  lead,  silver,  calcium,  and  others)  by  chlorine,  there  were  doubtless  also  cases
of  distribution,  a  portion  of  the  metal  combined  with  chlorine  and  a  portion  of  the  fluorine
was  evolved ;  but  it  is  improbable  that  any  decisive  results  were  obtained.  Fremy  probably
obtained  fluorine,  but  not  in  a  pure  state.

I

with  chlorine,  and  it  vras  impos.'silile  to  study  the  properties
resultant  gas. Braunev  (t^SI)  nlso  iibtainedfluonue  by  igniting
Huoiide,  3CeF,  =  2CeFa  +  F^  ;  but  this,  like  uU precediug effm
only  showed  fluorine  to be a  gas  which decoiupc^eB watpr,
capable  of  acting  in  a  number  >>f  instances  like  chlorine,  but  gai
possibility  of t'estiiig its properties. It was evident that it
necessary  to  avoid  as  far  as  possible  the  presence  oi  wat«r  and  a  risfl'
temperature;  this  Moissan  succeeded  in  doing  in  1886. He  di
posed  anhydrous  hydrofluoric  acid,  liquefied  at  a  t«mperature  of  —  2$*
and contained in a U-shaped  tulje  (to  which a small  quantity  of
potassium  fluoride  had  been  added  to  make  it  a  better  conductur),  by
the  action  of  a  powerful  electric  current  (twenty  Bunseo's  ele^menU  in
series). Hydrogen  was  then  evolved  at  the  negative  pole,  and  flui
appeared  at  tbe  positive  pole  (of  iridium  platinum)  as  a  pale  green  a
wjiich  decomposed  water  with  the  formation  of  ozone  and  hydrofluoi
acid,  and  combined  directly  with  silicmi  (forming  silicon  fluoride,  SiF,
lioron  (forming  BFj),  sulphur,  &c. Its  density  (H  =  1)  is  18,  so
its  molecule  is  F.,. But  the  action  of  Huoiine  on  metals  at  the  ordii
temperature is  comparatively feeljle, because the metallic fliiori<
formed  coats  the  remaining  mass  of  the  metals  ;  it  is,  howevi
pletely  absorbed  by  iron. Hydrocarbons  (such  as  naphtha),  aloohol,
Ac,,  immediately  absorb  fluorine,  with  the  formation  of  hydrofluoric
acid. Fluorine  when  mixed  with hydrogen can ea.sily  be  mode  to
explode  violently,  forming  hydrofluoric  acid.'"

In  1894,  Braunev  nbtained  fluorine  directly  by  igniting  the  ejwi

"  AccordinK  lo  Unismi,  llnarine  is  disviigaged  bj  Uie  nc
1111  tuned  hydrogen  potHHniam  Haoride,  RHF^. The  prasent  «

JH  BDch  thai  the  knowledge  of  lliu  propAttiuo  uf  tin  elemeiil  is  mucfa  more  gmtttaX  Uaa
th<^  knowledge  of  the  tree  element  iCHulJ.  U  is  nwtol  Hiid  MtiBtictor)-  to  leam  Uut
even  Hnorine  ia  the  free  state  has  not  aui'ceuded  in  eluding  eiperiment  luid  reaai^
thul  the  effoita  to  iaoUte  it  have  been  crowned  with  anccesB,  but  the  nun  tofl  d
chemiuJ  data  conceniing  fluiirine  iw  ui  element  jfainE  bnt  little  b;  this  achievement.  Ih*
fpiin  will,  boweter,  be  augmented  il  it  be  now  posaible  to  Hubject  fluorine  I
lii-e  atudy  in  relation  to  oxygen  and  cliloriae.  There  ia  particular  iutereat
niena  of  tbe  diatribation  of  fluorine  and  oxygen,  or  fluorine  and  chlorine,  competinif
dirrereat  cundiliona  and  relationi.  We  way  add  that  Hoiwan  |lSti3)  found  tK>
fluorine  decompoKS  H.,S,  HCI,  HBr.  CS.„  und  CN'H  with  a  fluhj  it  doea
0„  N.fl  CO.  and  CO, ;  Mg,  Al,  Ag,  and  Ni.  when  heated,  hum  in  it,  as  .lao  do  S,  Se  J  (I
PFb) ;  it  reacts  upon  H,  even  in  the  dark,  with  the  evutntton  of  See'OU  uni
a  temperature  of  —  9fi°,  F^  still  retains  its  gaseouB  state.  Sool  andoubou
not  the  diamond)  when  healed  in  gaaeouB  fluorine  (onu  fluoride  of  carbarn.
(Hoisuui,  1S90) ;  this  compound  is  alio  farmed  at  300°  by  Ibi  '  "  '
L'Cl,  and  AgF ;  it  is  a  gas  which  liqueaes  at  10°  under  a  pressure  of  G  nbuospli
Withnii  alcoholic  solution  otKHO,CF,givesK.,COj,acoirdiiigto  the  ennationCF.-^CKHO
-  K.jCOs+  IKF  +  SHjO.  CF,  ia  not  soluble  in  wnter,  bnl  it  is  oaaUy  soluble  in  CCl,  anii
alcohol.

1

THE  HALOOENS

formed  "•■*■  doul.lc  lead  salt  HF,;iKF,PbF„  whicli  first,  at  230°,
deconipoBeB  with  the  e%'olutioii  of  HF,  and  then  spliu  up  fonuiDg
3KF,PbFj  and  fluorine  Fj,  whicli  is  recognised  by  the  fact  that  it
iilierates  iodine  from  KI  and  easily  coinhinea  with  silicon,  forming
HiF,.  This  method  gii'es  chemicaUy  pure  fluorine,  and  is  based  upon
the  breaking  up  of  the  higher  compound-  tetrafluoride  of  lead,  PbFj,
cuiTesponding  to  PliO...,  into  free  Huorine,  Fj,  and  the  lower  more
BtalJe  foi-m— bifluoride  of  lead,  PliF^,  which  corresponds  to  PbO  ;  that
is,  this  method  resembles  the  ordinary  meth')d  of  obtaining  chlorine
by  means  of  Mn()},  as  MnOI,  here  breaks  up  into  MnClg  and
chlorine,  just  as  PbF,  splits  up  into  PbF^  and  fluorine.

Among  the  compounds  of  fluorine,  calcium  fluoride,  CaF^,  is  some-
what widely  distribute<l  in  nature  as  fluor  spar,''"  whilst  cryolUe,  or
aiuniiniumsodiumfluoridi>,NajAIF,|,  is  found  morerarely{inlarge  masses
in  Greenland),  Cryolite,  like  8uor  spar,  is  also  insoluble  in  water,  and
gives  bydrofluorii.'  acid  with  sulphuric  acid.  Small  quantities  of  fluorine
have  also  in  a  number  of  citses  been  found  in  the  bodies  of  animals,  in
the  blood,  urine,  and  lionea.  If  fluorides  oic^ur  in  the  bodies  of  animals,
they  must  have  been  introduced  in  foMl,  and  must  OL'cur  in  plants  aiid  in
water.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact  river,  and  especially  sea,  wator  always
contains  a  certain,  although  small,  quantity  of  fluorine  fompounds.

Hydrofluoric  acid,  HF,  cannot  l)e  obtained  from  fluor  spar  in  glass
retorts,  because  gla.i8  Li  acted  on  by  and destroys the acid. It is

"'  '•'•  T.  Kikolukin  \in»!.)  und  Bubseqaeutly  Kriedrich  und  CUuxen  obtaioed  FbCI,
lUid  K  doable  KDUnoiiiuni  -uilt  ot  tebnuhloridB  of  lead  iBtuTtiDg  tiom  the  binoxide),
PtjCI,aNH(C1 :  Hatuhiiimii  und  P.illi>rd  obUined  A  HiniUu  ult  of  uelic  uid  (189S)
ronespondiiiK  to  PbXi  by  Ireatiog  red  Imd  with  atroiig  iwetio  tciA ;  tbe  compodlioD  ol
litis  Hilt  is  Pb(CjHjO.,|, ;  it  mvlU  (uid  decompowa)  at  kboDt  175°.  Braaner  \\Wit
Dbl&Luud  ■  salt  correapondiiig  to  tetraflnoride  of  leiul,  PbFj.  and  the  acid  uum-npoiidiiig
to  it,  H^bP,.  For  eiunple.  by  treating  potknsiuni  pliunbate  (Chapter  XVIU.  Note  Sn)
with  atroiig  HF.  aud  Aim  tlie  ubove-uientioned  tetra-acetat<!  with  u  dilution  ul  KHFj,
Branuer  oblained  cryitailine  HK^PhFa — i.e.  the  salt  from  which  he  obtaiped  fluorine.

"  It  is  called  spar  becauu  it  very  frequent]}  oocars  as  tryatals  ol  a  dearly  laminar
Btrnctnre,  and  ii  therefore  eanily  H|i]itcip  into  pie>ceB  bonniled  by  planes.  It  is  called  fluor
■par  becatue  irbeu  used  a>  a  flui  it  reuderv  ores  tDsible.  owing  to  its  reaclin);  with  hJUi-h,
8iO,~9i;aF.,^JCa04-»iF,:  the  silicon  fluoride  eicapea  a«  a  gaa  and  the  lime  combines
with  a  fortber quantity  □!  liiliua.  and  gires  a  vitreonsslat;.  Fluorspar  uikutb  in  mineral
veins  and  rocks,  aometimeH  in  cousiderable  qnantities.  It  always  crystallises  in  the  cubic
Bj'item,  sometimes  in  very  large  neiui.Eransparent  oubjc  crystals,  which  are  colonrlesN  or
of  different  colourH,  It  is  insoluble  iu  water.  It  melts  under  the  aelian  ol  heat,  and
oryslalliaea  on  cooling.  The  apei-itii?  gravity  is  S'l.  When  slsam  ■■  passed  over  incan-
descent Huor  spar,  lime  and  bydrofluoric  acid  ar«  formed :  CaF.,  +  11,0  =  CaO -- 3HP,  A
double  deoomposition  in  aUo  easily  produced  by  fusing  fluor  spar  with  sodium  or  potaisinm
hydnuides,  or  potash,  oT  even  with  their  carbonatei :  the  fluorine  tlxen  pauses  oM'r  to  the
IKitaeaium  or  sodium,  and  tlie  oxygen  to  tlie  calcium.  In  adntions— for  example,
L'a|NO]).,->dKF  =  CaF,  (precipiUtel-^SKNOs  (in  solo  lion  I -tlie  formation  ol  calcium
fluoride  lakes  place,  owing  to  At  lery  sparing  solubility.  36,000  i»rli  of  water  dissolve
one  part  uf  fluor  stNir,

492  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

prepared  in  lead  vessels,  and  when  it  is  required  pure,  in  platinum
vessels,  because  lead  also  acts  on  hydrofluoric  acid,  although  only  very
feebly  on  the  surface,  and  when  once  a  coating  of  fluoride  and  sulphate
of  lead  is  formed  no  further  action  takes  place.  Powdered  fluor  spar
and  sulphuric  acid  evolve  hydrofluoric  acid  (which  fumes  in  the  air)
even'at  the  ordinary  temperature,  CaFj  4-  H2SO4  =  CaS04  +  2HF.  At
130®  fluor  spar  is  completely  decomposed  by  sulphuric  acid.  The  acid  is
then  evolved  as  vapour,  which  may  be  condensed  by  a  freezing  mixture
into  an  anhydrous  acid.  The  condensation  is  aided  by  pouring  water
into  the  receiver  of  the  condenser,  as  the  acid  is  easily  soluble  in  cold
water.

In  the  liquid  anhydrous  form  hydrofluoric  acid  boils  at  +  19®,  and  its
specific  gravity  at  1 2*8°  =  0*9849.^^  It  dissolves  in  water  with  the  evo-
lution of  a  considerable  amount  of  heat,  and  gives  a  solution  of  constant
boiling  point  which  distils  over  at  120°  ;  showing  that  the  acid  is  able  to
combine  with  water.  The  specific  gravity  of  the  compound  is  1*15,  and
its  composition  HF,2H20.**  With  an  excess  of  water  a  dilate  solu-
tion distils  over  first.  The  aqueous  solution  and  the  acid  itself  must
be  kept  in  platinum  vessels,  but  the  dilute  acid  may  be  conveniently
preserved  in  vessels  made  of  various  organic  materials,  such  as  gutta-
percha, or  even  in  glass  vessels  having  an  interior  coating  of  paraffin.
Hydrofluoric  acid  does  not  act  on  hydrocarbons  and  many  other  sub-
stances, but  it  acts  in  a  highly  corrosive  manner  on  metals,  glass,  porce-
lain, and  the  majority  of  rock  substances. ^^ It  also  attacks  the  skin,

^'  According  to  Gore.  Freniy  obtained  aiiliydrous  hydrofluoric  acid  by  decoinpoftin);
lead  fluoride  at  a  red  heat,  by  hydrogen,  or  by  heating  the  double  salt  HKF.j,  which
easily  crystalliBes  (in  cubes)  from  a  solution  of  hydrofluoric  ucid,  half  of  which  has  heaii
saturated  with  potassium  hydroxide. Its  vapour  density  corresponds  to  the  formula  HP.

**  This  composition  corresponds  to  tlie  crystallo-liydrate  HC1,2H.20.  All  the  proptrr-
ties  of  hydrofluoric  acid  recall  those  of  hydrochloric  acid,  and  therefore  the  com-
parative ease  with  which  hydrofluoric  acid  is  liquefied  (it  boils  at  +19°,  hydrochloric
acid  at  —35°)  must  be  explained  by  a  polymerisation  taking  place  at  low  iemperaturtMS
as  will  be  afterwards  explained,  H.^F.,.,  being  formed,  and  therefore  in  a  liquid  state  it
differs  from  hydrocliloric  acid,  in  which  a  phenomenon  of  a  similar  kind  has  not  yet  be«*n
obnerved.

^  Tlie  corrosive  action  of  hydrofluoric  lU'id  on  gla»>s  and  similar  siliceous  compoundti
is  based  upon  the  fact  that  it  acts  on  silica,  SiOo,  as  we  shall  consider  more  fully  in
descnbing  that  compound,  forming  gaseous  silicon  fluoride,  Si0.2  +  4HF  =  SiF4-f  2H-0.
Silica,  on  the  other  liand,  forms  the  binding  (acid)  element  of  glass  and  of  the  mass  of
mineral  substances  forming  the  salts  of  silica.  When  it  is  removed  the  cohesion  is  de>
stroyed.  This  is  made  use  of  in  the  arts,  and  in  the  laboratory,  for  etching  designs  and
scales,  &c.,  on  glass.  In  engraving  on  glass  the  surface  is  covered  with  a  varnish  com-
posed of  four  parts  of  wax  and  one  part  of  turjientine.  This  varnish  is  not  acted  on  by
hydrofluoric  ac-id,  and  it  is  soft  enough  to  allow  of  designs  l>eing  drawn  upon  it  whose  liiie«
lay  bare  the  glass.  The  drawing  is  made  with  a  steel  point,  and  the  glass  is  afterwaxdn
laid  in  a  lead  trough  in  which  a  mixture  of  fluor  spur  and  sulphuric  acid  is  placed.  The
Bulphuric  acid  must  be  used  in  considerable  excess,  us  otherwise  transparent  lines

THE HALOGENS  493

and  is  distinguished  by  its  poisonous  properties,  so  that  in  working  with
the  acid  a  strong  draught  must  be  kept  up,  to  prevent  the  possibility  of
the  fumes  being  inhaled.  The  non-metals  do  not  act  on  hydrofluoric
acid,  but  all  metals — with  the  exception  of  mercury,  silver,  gold,  and
platinum,  and,  to  a  certain  degree,  lead — decompose  it  with  the  evolution
of  hydrogen.  With  bases  it  gives  directly  metallic  fluoridesj  and
behaves  in  many  respects  like  hydrochloric  acid.  There  are,  however,
several  distinct  individual  differences,  which  are  furthermore  much
greater  than  those  between  hydrochloric,  hydrobromic,  and  hydriodic
acids.  Thus  the  silver  compounds  of  the  latter  are  insoluble  in  water,
whilst  silver  fluoride  is  soluble.  Calcium  fluoride,  on  the  contrary,  is
insoluble  in  water,  whilst  calcium  chloride,  bromide,  and  iodide  are  nut
only  soluble,  but  attract  water  with  great  energy.  Neither  hydro-
chloric, hydrobromic,  nor  hydriodic  acid  acts  on  sand  and  glass,  whilst
hydrofluoric  acid  corrodes  them,  forming  gaseous  silicon  fluoride.  The
other  halogen  acids  only  form  normal  salts,  KCl,  NaCl,  with  Na  or  K,
whilst  hydrofluoric  acid  gives  acid  salts,  for  instance  HKF2  (and  by
dissolving  KF  in  Hquid  HF,  KHF22HF  is  obtained).  This  latter
property  is  in  close  connection  with  the  fact  that  at  the  ordinary
temperature  the  vapour  density  of  hydrofluoric  acid  is  nearly  20,  which
corresponds  with  a  formula  H2F2,  as  MaUet  (1881)  showed  ;  but  a
depolymerisation  occurs  with  a  rise  of  temperature,  and  the  density
approaches  10,  which  answers  to  the  formula  HF.*^^

The  analogy  between  chlorine  and  the  other  two  halogens,  bromine
and  iodine,  is  much  more  perfect.  Not  only  have  their  hydrates  or
halogen  acids  much  in  common,  but  they  themselves  resemble  chlorine
in many  respects,'^*  and  even the  properties  of the corresponding

obtained  (owing  to  the  formation  of  hydroflaosilicic  acid).  After  being  exposed  for  some
time,  the  varnish  is  removed  (melted)  and  the  design  drawn  by  the  steel  point  is  found
reproduced  in  dull  lines.  The  drawing  may  be  also  made  by  the  direct  application  of  a
mixture  of  a  silicofluoride  and  sulphuric  acid,  which  forms  hydrofluoric  acid.

^>  Mallet  (1881)  determined  the  density  at  80°  and  100°,  previous  to  which  Gore
(1869)  had  determined  the  vapour  density  at  100°,  whilst  Thorpe  and  Hambly  (1888)
mode  fourteen  determinations  between  26°  and  88°,  and  showed  that  within  this  limit  of
temperature  the  densiiygradually  diminishes,  just  like  the  vapour  of  acetic  acid,  nitrogen
dioxide,  and  others.  The  tendency  of  HF  to  polymerise  into  H^F.^  is  probably  connected
with  the  property  of  many  fluorides  of  forming  acid  salts — for  example,  KHF.2  and
H.>SiFe.  We  saw  above  that  HCl  has  the  same  property  (forming,  for  instance,  H^^PtCle,
it'c,  p.  457),  and  hence  this  property  of  hydrofluoric  acid  does  not  stand  isolated  from  the
properties  of  the  other  halogens.

^  For  instance,  the  experiment  with  Dutch  metal  foil  (Note  16)  may  be  niade  with
bromine  just  as  well  as  with  chlorine.  A  very  instructive  experiment  on  tlie  direct  com-
bination of  the  halogens  with  metals  may  be  made  by  throwing  a  small  piece  (a  shaving)
of  aluminium  into  a  vessel  containing  liquid  bromine ;  the  aluminium,  being  lighter,  floats
on  the  bromine,  and  after  a  certain  time  reaction  sets  in  accompanied  by  the  evolution
of  heat,  light,  and  fumes  of  bromine. The  incandescent  piece  of  metal  moves  rapidly

494  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

metallic  compounds  of  bromine  and  iodine  are  very  much  alike.  Thus,
the  chlorides,  bromides,  and  iodides  of  s(Klium  and  potassium  crystallise
in  the  cubic  system,  and  are  soluble  in  water  ;  the  chlorides  of  calcium,
aluminium,  magnesium,  and  barium  are  just  as  soluble  in  vrater  as  the
bromides  and  iodides  of  these  metals.  The  iodides  and  bromides  of
silver  and  lead  are  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  like^he  chlorides  of
these  metals.  The  oxygen  compounds  of  bromine  and  iodine  also
present  a  very  strong  analogy  to  the  corresponding  compounds  of
chlorine.  A  hypobromous  acid  is  known  corresponding  with  hjrpo-
chlorous  acid.  The  salts  of  this  acid  have  the  same  bleaching  property
as  the  salts  of  hypochlorous  acid.  Iodine  was  discovered  in  1811  by
Courtois  in  kelp,  and  was  shortly  afterwards  investigated  by  Clement,
Gay-Lussac,  and  Davy.  Bromine  was  discovered  in  1826  by  Balard
in  the  mother  liquor  of  sea  water.

Bromine  and  iodine,  like  chlorine,  occur  in  sea  water  in  combina-
tion with  metals.  However,  the  amount  of  bromides,  and  especially
of  iodides,  in  sea  water  is  so  small  that  their  presence  can  only  be
discovered  by  means  of  sensitive  reactions."^  In  the  extraction  of  salt
from  sea  water  the  bromides  remain  in  the  mother  liquor.  Iodine  and
bromine  also  occur  combined  with  silver,  in  admixture  with  silver
chloride,  as  a  rare  ore  which  is  mainly  found  in  America. Certain

over  the  surface  of  the  bromine  in  which  the  resultant  aluminium  bromide  dissolTes.
For  the  sake  of  comparison  we  will  proceed  to  cite  several  thermochemical  d*ta  (Thorn-
sen)  for  analogous  actions  of  (1)  chlorine,  (2)  bromine,  and  (8)  iodine,  with  respect  to
metals ;  the  halogen  being  expressed  by  the  symbol  X,  and  the  plus  sign  connecting  the
reacting  substances.  All  the  figures  are  given  in  thousands  of  calories,  and  refer  to
molecular  quantities  in  grams  and  to  the  ordinary  temi»erature : —

1

2

3

Ko r-  A.J

211

191

100

Na.»  +  X.2

195

172

188

Ag,'+X,

59

45

28

Hg2  +  X,

K3

08

48

Hg^Xo

«8

51

34

Ca  +X.2

170

141

—

Ba  +X.i

195

170

—

Zn  +X.2

97

70

49

Pb  +X2

88

04

40

Al +X..

101

120

70

We  may  remark  that  the  latent  heat  of  vaporisation  of  the  molecular  weight  Br«  is  about
7"2,  and  of  iodine  O'O  thousand  heat  units,  whilst  the  latent  heat  of  fusion  of  Br«  is  about
O'B,  and  of  I^  about  80  thousand  heat  units.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  the  difference
between  the  amounts  of  heat  evolved  does  not  depend  on  the  difference  in  physical  atale
For  instance,  tlie  vapour  of  iodine  in  combining  with  Zn  to  form  Znlj  would  give
48  +  8+8,  or  about  sixty  thousand  heat  units,  or  1^  times  less  than  Zn  -«-  CI2.

*♦'  One  litre  of  sea-water  contains  about  20  grams  of  chlorine,  and  about  0*07  n»m
of  bromine. The  Dead  Sea  contains  about  ten  times  as  much  bromine.

mioeral  waters  (those  of  Kreuznach  antl  Staro-rossiisk)  contain  metallic
bromides  iind  iociirles,  ttlways  in  admixture  with  an  exceaa  of  sodium
chloride.  Those  upper  strata  of  the  .Stassfurt  rock  salt  (Chapter  X,)
which  are  a  source  of  potassium  salts  also  contain  metallic  bromides,'''
which  collect  in  the  mother  liquors  left  after  the  crystallisation  of  the
potassium  salts  ;  and  this  now  forma  the  chief  source  (together  with
certain  American  springs)  of  the  liromine  in  common  use.  Bromine
may  be  easily  liberated  from  a  mixtura  of  bromides  and  chlorides,
owing  to  the  fact  that  chlorine  displaces  bromine  from  its  compounds
with  sodium,  magnesium,  calcium,  ic.  A  colourless  s^ilution  of
bromides  and  chlorides  turns  an  orange  colour  after  the  passage  of
chlorine,  owing  to  the  disengagement  of  bromine.''''  Bromine  may  lie
extracted  on  a  large  scale  by  a  similar  method,  but  it  is  simpler  to  add
a  small  quantity  of  manganese  peroxide  and  sulphuric  acid  to  the
mother  liquid  direct.  This  sets  free  a  portion  of  the  chlorine,  and  this
chlorine  liberates  the  bromine.

Bromine  is  a  dark  frrofcii  liquid,  giving  brown  fumes,  and  having  a
poisonous  suffocating  smell,  whence  its  name  (from  the  Greek  ppSifiM^,
signifying  eril  smelling).  The  vapour  density  of  bromine  shows  that
its  molecule  is  Br.^.  In  the  coUl  bromine  freezes  into  brown.-grey  scales
like  iodine.  The  melting  point  of  pure  bromine  is  — 7'''05.™  Tlie
density  of  liquid  bromide  at  0°  is  3'L.S7,  and  at  15°  about  .t'O.  The
boiling  point  of  bi-omine  b  about  J8°'7,  Bromine,  like  chlorine,  is
soluble  in  water ;  1  part  of  bromine  at  a"  requires  27  parts  of  water,
and  at  13°  29  parts  of  water. The  aqueous  solution  of  bromine  is  of

>'  Bat  thnre  ii  no  iodine  in  Stiuinfurt  u-atniJIils.

^  Tlie  chlorine  mast  not,  Lowever,  \>e  in  Inrge  eicesfi.  ns  otherwise  Uie  brotniiiu
would  contun  chlorine.  CommerciiJ  bromine  not  nnTreqiunllf  ooutung  cblorine,  u
bromine  chloride ;  thin  ii  more  soluble  in  water  Uiaii  bromine,  from  which  it  maj  thnx
be  freed.  To  obtain  pure  bromioe  tlie  commercial  bromine  is  wubed  with  water,  dried
by  8nl}iharic  ikcid,  and  distilled,  the  portion  coming  over  mi.  SS°  being  oolleded ;  tlie
greater  put  Is  then  converted  into  potasniam  bromide  and  dinsolved,  and  the  remainder
is  added  to  the  solution  in  order  to  separnte  iodine,  which  in  remored  by  sbftking  with
oarboo  bisolpltide.  By  heating  the  potASKioni  bromide  thus  obtained  with  manganese
peroxide  and  snlphurie  acid,  bromine  is  obtained  quite  Free  trom  iodine,  which,  however,
is  not  present  in  certain  kinds  of  commercial  bromine  (the  Stasefnrt,  tor  instance).  By
treatment  with  potash,  the  bromine  in  then  converted  into  a  mixture  at  potauiom
bromide  and  bromate,  and  the  miitnre  ^which  is  in  the  proportion  given  in  the  equation)
is  distilled  with  inlphnric  add.  bromine  being  then  evolved;  GKB[+KBrOs^«H,80t
^SSHSO,-<-SH^4-BBr.,.  After  dionolving  th«  bromine  in  a  strong  solution  of  colcitun
bromide  and  precipitating  with  an  excess  of  water,  it  loien  »\\  the  chlorine  it  contained,
because  chlorine  forms  calcium  chloride  with  CaBr.,.

*  There  has  long  existed  a  ditleresce  of  opinion  as  to  the  melting  point  ol  pure
bromine.  By  some  inveatigalors  (Eegnault,  Pierre)  it  was  given  aa  between  —7°  and  —8°,
and  by  othen  (Balord,  Liebig,  Quincke.  Baumhuuer)  ubetween  -aO°and  — as°.  There
in  now  nn  donbt,  thanks  more  especially  to  the  researches  of  Ramsay  and  Young  (188S),
that  pure  bromine  melts  at  about  -7°. This  tlgnre  is  not  only  established  by  direct  ex.

L

496  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

an  orange  colour,  and  when  cooled  to  —2°  jdelds  crystals  contuning
10  molecules  of  water  to  1  molecule  of  bromine.^  Alcohol  disaolves  a
greater  quantity  of  bromine,  and  ether  a  still  greater  amoimt.  Bat
after  a  certain  time  products  of  the  action  of  the  bromine  on  these
organic  substances  are  formed  in  the  solutions.  Aqueous  aolutioiis  ol
the  bromides  also  absorb  a  large  amount  of  bromine.

With  respect  to  iodine^  it  is  almost  exclusively  extracted  from  the
mother  liquors  after  the  crystallisation  of  natural  sodium  nitrate  (Chili
saltpetre)  and  from  the  ashes  of  the  sea  weed  cast  upon  the  shores  ol
France,  Great  Britain,  and  Spain,  sometimes  in  considerable  qoantitaes,
by  the  high  tides. The  majority  of  these  sea- weeds  are  of  the  genera
Fuciis,  Laminariay  «Src. The  fused  ashes  of  these  sea- weeds  are  called
'kelp'  in  Scotland  and  Warech'  in  Normandy. A  somewhat  con-
siderable quantity  of  iodine  is  contained  in  these  sea-weeds. After

I)eriznent  (Van  der  Plaats  confirmed  it),  but  also  by  means  of  the  determination  of  the
vapour  tensions. For  solid  bromine  the  vapour  tension  p  in  mm.  at  t  was  foond  to  be~

p  - 20 25
t= -16°-6 -14°

80
_12«

85
-10®

40

-  8-6°

46  nun.

-  7*»

For  liquid  bromine —

p= 50 100
t=  -V-0 + 8°-2

200
28°-4

400
40°-4

000
51«-9

760  mm.
68°-7

These  curves  intersect  at  —  7^*05.  Besides  which,  in  comparing  the  vapour  tension  of
many  liquids  (for  example,  those  given  in  Chapter  II.,  Note  27),  Ramsay  and  Young
observed  that  the  ratio  of  the  absolute  temperatures  {t  +  278)  corresponding  with  equal
tension  varies  for  every  pair  of  substances  in  rectilinear  proportion  in  dependence  upon  1,
and,  therefore,  for  the  above  pressure  p,  Ramsay  and  Young  determined  the  ratio  of
/  +  278  for  water  and  bromine,  and  found  that  the  straight  lines  expressing  these  ration  •
for  liquid  and  solid  bromine  intersect  also  at  7°'05 ;  thus,  for  example,  for  solid  bromine—

p=  20  25  80 85 40  45

278 +  f  ^  256-4  259  261  268  264*6  aS6

278 +  f'-  295-8  299  8021  8048  807*2  809*8

f  - 1152 1154 1157 1159 1161  1-168

where  t'  indicates  the  temperature  of  water  corresponding  with  a  vapour  tension  p,  and
where  c  is  the  ratio  of  278  +  /'  to  278  +  /.  The  magnitude  of  c  is  evidently  expressed  with
great  accuracy  by  the  straight  line  c  =  1*1708  +  O'OOllf .  In  exactly  the  same  way  we  find
the  ratio  for  liquid  bromine  and  water  to  be  Ci  =  1*1585 +  0*00057/.  The  intersection  of
these  straight  lines  in  fact  corresponds  with  —  7°*06,  which  again  confirms  the  meltiiw
point  given  above  for  bromine.  In  this  manner  it  is  possible  with  the  existing  store  ol
data  to  accurately  establish  and  verify  the  melting  point  of  substances.  Ramsay  and  *
Young  established  the  thermal  constants  of  iodine  by  exactly  the  same  method.

•^  The  observations  made  by  Paterno  and  Nasini  (by  Raoult's  method.  Chapter  L
Note  49)  on  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice  (  — 1"*115,  with  1*891  gram  of  hiomine
in  100  grams  of  water)  in  an  aqueous  solution  of  bromine,  showed  that  bromine  is  contained
in  solutions  as  the  molecule  Br.^.  Similar  experiments  conducted  on  iodine  (Ellobonkoff
1889  and  Beckmann  1890)  sliow  that  in  solution  the  molecule  is  I^.

B.  Roozeboom  investigated  the  hydrate  of  bromine  as  completely  as  the  hydiate  of
chlorine  (Notes  9,  10). The  temperature  of  the  complete  decomposition  of  the  hydrate  ii
'  rr'2 ;  the  density  of  Br.j  lOH^O  =  1*49.

THE HALOGENS  497

being  burnt  (or  subjected  to  dry  distillation)  an  ash  is  left  which
chiefly  contains  salts  of  potassium,  sodium,  and  calcium.  The  metals
occur  in  the  sea- weed  as  salts  of  organic  acids.  On  being  burnt  these
organic  salts  are  decomposed,  forming  carbonates  of  potassium  and
sodium.  Hence,  sodium  carbonate  is  found  in  the  ash  of  sea  plants.
The  ash  is  dissolved  in  hot  water,  and  on  evaporation  sodium  car-
bonate and  other  salts  separate,  but  a  portion  of  the  substances
remains  in  solution.  These  mother  Uquors  left  after  the  separation  of
the  sodium  carbonate  contain  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine  in  combi-
nation with  metak,  the  chlorine  and  iodine  being  in  excess  of  the  bromine
13,000  kilos  of  kelp  give  about  1,000  kilos  of  sodium  carbonate  and
15  kilos  of  iodine.

The  liberation  of  the  iodine  from  the  mother  liquor  is  effected  with
comparative  ease,  because  chlorine  disengages  iodine  from  potassium
iodide  and  its  other  combinations  with  the  metals.  Not  only  chlorine,
but  also  sulphuric  acid,  liberates  iodine  from  sodium  iodide.  Sulphuric
acid,  in  acting  on  an  iodide,  sets  hydriodic  acid  free,  but  the  latter
easily  decomposes,  especially  in  the  presence  of  substances  capable  of
evolving  oxygen,  such  as  chromic  acid,  nitrous  acid,  and  even  ferric
salts.^*  Owing  to  its  sparing  solubility  in  water,  the  iodine  liberated
separates  as  a  precipitate.  To  obtain  pure  iodine  it  is  sufficient  to
distil  it,  and  neglect  the  first  and  last  portions  of  the  distillate,  the
middle  portion  only  being  collected.  Iodine  passes  directly  from  a  state
of  vapour  into  a  crystalline  form,  and  settles  on  the  cool  portions  of  the

'^^  In  general,  SHI  +  0  =  1^  +  H.jO,  if  the  oxygen  proceed  from  a  HubHtance  from  which
it  is  easily  evolved. For  this  reason  compoonds  corresponding  with  the  higher  stages  of
oxidation  or  chlorination  frequently  give  a  lower  stage  when  treated  with  hydriodic  acid.
Ferric  oxide,  FeaOs,  is  a  higher  oxide,  and  ferrous  oxide,  FeO,  a  lower  oxide ;  the  former
corresponds  with  FeXs,  and  the  latter  with  FeX^,  and  this  passage  from  the  higher  to  the
lower  takes  place  under  the  action  of  hydriodic  acid. Thus  hydrogen  peroxide  and
oasone  (Chapter  IV.)  are  able  to  liberate  iodine  from  hydriodic  acid. Compounds  of  copper
oxide,  CuO  or  CuX^,  give  compounds  of  the  suboxide  Cu^O,  or  CuX.  Even  sulphuric  acid,
which  corresponds  to  the  higher  stage  S0.-„  is  able  to  act  thus,  forming  the  lower  oxide
SO9. The  liberation  of  iodine  from  hydriodic  acid  proceeds  with  still  greater  ease  under
the  action  of  substances  capable  of  dinengaging  oxygen. In  practice,  many  methods
are  employed  for  liberating  iodine  from  acid  liquids  containing,  for  example,  sulphuric
add  and  hydriodic  acid. The  higher  oxides  of  nitrogen  are  most  commonly  used ;  they
then  pass  into  nitric  oxide. Iodine  may  even  be  disengaged  from  hydriodic  acid  by  the
action  of  iodic  acid,  &c. But  there  is  a  limit  in  these  reactions  of  the  oxidation  of  hydri-
odic acid  because,  under  certain  conditions,  especially  in  dilute  solutions,  the  iodine
■et  free  is  itself  able  to  act  as  an  oxidising  agent — that  is,  it  exhibits  the  character
of  chlorine,  and  of  the  halogens  in  general,  to  which  we  sliall  again  have  occasion  to
refer. In  Chili,  where  a  large  quantity  of  iodine  is  extracted  in  the  manufacture  of  Chili
nitre,  which  contains  NalOs,  it  is  mixed  with  the  acid  and  normal  sulphites  of  sodium
in  solution ;  the  iodine  is  then  precipitated  according  to  the  equation  'iNalOs  +  SNa<|SOs
+  2NaHS03  =  6Na2S04  -*- 1 ^  +  H.2O. The  iodine  thus  obtained  is  purified  by  sublimation.

VOL.  I.  K  K

498  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY'

apparatus  in  tabular  crystals,  having  a  black  grey  colour  and  metallic
lustre.**^

The  specific  gravity  of  the  crystals  of  iodine  is  4*95. It  melts  at
114°  and  boils  at  184°. Its  vapour  is  formed  at  a  much  lower  tempera-
ture, and  is  of  a  violet  colour,  whence  iodine  receives  its  name  (toci&fs
violet). The  smell  of  iodine  recalls  the  characteristic  smell  of  hypo-
chlorous  acid  ;  it  has  a  sharp  sour  taste. It  destroys  the  skin  and  organs
of  the  body,  and  is  therefore  frequently  employed  for  cauterising  and  as
an  irritant  for  the  skin. In  small  quantities  it  turns  the  skin  brown,
but  the  coloration  disappears  after  a  certain  time,  partly  owing  to  the
volatility  of  the  iodine. Water  dissolves  only  xoW  part  of  iodine. A
brown  solution  is  thus  obtained,  which  bleaches,  but  much  more  feebly
than  bromine  and  chlorine. Water  which  contains  salts,  and  especially
iodides,  in  solution  dissolves  iodine  in  considerable  quantities,  and  the
resultant  solution  is  of  a  dark  brown  colour. Pure  alcohol  dissolves  a
small  amount  of  iodine,  and  in  so  doing  acquires  a  brown  colour,  but
the  solubility  of  iodine  is  considerably  increased  by  the  presence  of  a
small  quantity  of  an  iodine  compound — for  instance,  ethyl  iodide — in
the  alcohol. ^^ Ether  dissolves  a  larger  amount  of  i<xline  than  alcohol ;
but  iodine  is  particularly  soluble  in  liquid  hydrocarbons,  in  carbon  bi-
sulphide, and  in  chloroform. A  small quantity  of iodine  dissolved
in carbon  bisulphide  tints  it  rose-colour,  but  in  a  somewhat lai^
amount  it  gives  a  violet  colour. Chloroform  (quite  free  from  alcohol)
is  also  tinted  rose  colour  by  a  small  amount  of  iodine. This  gives  an
easy  means  for  detecting  the  presence  of  free  iodine  in  small  quantities.
The blue coloration  which  free iodine gives with starch may  also,
tus  has  already  been  frequently  mentioned  (see  Chapter  IV.),  serve  for
the  detection  of  iodine.

If  we  compare  the  four  elements,  fluorine,  chlorine,  bromine,  and
iodine,  we  see  in  them  an  example  of  analogous  substances  which
arrange  themselves  by  their  physical  properties  in  the  same  order  as

^^  For  the  final  purification  of  iodine,  Stas  dissolved  it  in  a  strong  solution  of
potaHHium  iiwlide,  and  precipitated  it  by  the  addition  of  water  [see  Note  58).

♦'•''  Tlie  solubility  of  iodine  in  solutions  containing  iodides,  and  compounds  of  iodine
in  general,  may  serve,  on  the  one  hand,  as  an  indication  that  solution  is  due  to  a  similantr
between  the  solvent  and  dis8<.>lved  substance,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  as  an  indirect  inoof
of  that  view  as  to  s<ilutions  which  was  cited  in  Chapter  I.,  because  in  many  instances  on-
stable  highly  iodised  comiwunds,  resembling  crystal lo-hydrates,  have  been  obtained  fn»
such  solutions.  Thus  iodide  of  tetramethylammonium,  N(CH3)iI,  combines  with  I.,  and  L.
Even  a  solution  of  iodine  in  a  saturated  solution  of  potassium  iodide  presents  indication^
of  the  formation  of  a  definite  compound  KI.-,.  Thus,  an  alcoholic  solution  of  KI5  dt«»
not  give  up  iodine  to  carbon  bisulphide,  although  this  solvent  takes  up  iodine  from  an
alcoholic  solution  of  imline  itself  (Girault,  tTorgensen,  and  others).  The  instability  of  the**
compounds  resemblbs  the  in<<tability  of  many  cry stallo- hydrates,  for  iustancA  of  HC1,2HjCK

THE  HALOGENS  499

they  stand  in  respect  to  their  atomic  and  molecalar  weights.  If  the
weight  of  the  molecule  be  large,  the  substance  has  a  higher  specific
gravity,  a  higher  melting  and  boiling  point,  and  a  whole  series  of  pro-
perties depending  on  this  difference  in  its  fundamental  properties.
Chlorine  in  a  free  state  boils  at  about  —35°,  bromine  boils  at  60°,  and
iodine  only  above  180°,  According  to  A vogadro- Gerhard t's  law,  the
vapour  densities  of  these  elements  in  a  gaseous  state  are  proportional
to  their  atomic  weights,  and  here,  at  all  events  approximately,  the
densities  in  a  Uquid  (or  solid)  state  are  also  almost  in  the  ratio  of  their
atomic  weights.  Dividing  the  atomic  weight  of  chlorine  (35 '5)  by  its
specific  gravity  in  a  liquid  state  (1*3),  we  obtain  a  volume  =  27,  for
bromine  (80/3-1)  26,  and  for  iodine  also  (127/4-9)  26.«<

The  metallic  bromides  and  iodides  are  in  the  majority  of  cases,  in  most
respects  analogous  to  the  corresponding  chlorides,^"*  but  chlorine  displaces
the  bromine  and  iodine  from  them,  and  bromine  Uberates  iodine  from
iodides,  which  is  taken  advantage  of  in  the  preparation  of  these  halogens.
However,  the  rasearches  of  Potilitzin  showed  that  a  reverse  displace-
ment of  chlorine  by  bromine  may  occur  both  in  solutions  and  in
ignited  metallic  chlorides  in  an  atmosphere  of  bromine  vapour — that  is,
a  distribution  of  the  metal  (according  to  Berthollet*s  doctrine)  takes
place  between  the  halogens,  although  however  the  larger  portion  still
unites  with  the  chlorine,  which  shows  its  greater  affinity  for  metals  as
compared  with  that  of  bromine  and  iodine.^^ The  latter,  however,

*''^  The  equality  of  the  atomic  volumes  of  the  halogens  themselves  is  all  the  more
remarkable  because  in  all  the  halogen  compounds  the  volume  augments  with  the  substi-
tution of  fluorine  by  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine.  Thus,  for  example,  the  volume  of
sodium  fluoride  (obtained  by  dividing  the  weight  expressed  by  its  formula  by  its  specific
gravity)  is  about  15,  of  sodium  chloride  27,  of  sodium  bromide  32,  and  of  sodium  iodide  41.
The  volume  of  silicon  chloroform,  SiHClj,  is  82,  and  those  of  the  corresponding  bromine
and  iodine  compounds  are  108  and  122  respectively.  Tlie  same  difference  also  exists
in  solutions;  for  example,  XaCl  +  200HQO  has  a  sp.  gr.  (at  15^  i°)  of  I'OIOO,  consequently
the  volume  of  the  solution  8,658*5/1*0106  =  8,G20,  hence  the  volume  of  sodium  chloride  in
solution  =:8,620— 8,608  (this  is  the  volume  of  200  HoO)  =  17,  and  in  similar  solutions,
NaBr  =  26  and  Nal  =  85.

'^  But  the  density  (and  also  molecular  volume,  Note  64)  of  a  bromine  oompound  is
always  greater  than  that  of  a  chlorine  comptound,  whilst  that  of  an  iodine  compound
is  still  greater.  The  order  is  the  same  in  many  other  respects.  For  example,  an  iodine
compound  has  a  higher  boiling  point  than  a  bromine  compound,  &c.

^^  A.  L.  Potilitzin  showed  that  in  heating  various  metallic  chlorides  in  a  closed  tube,
with  an  equivalent  quantity  of  bromine,  a  distribution  of  the  metal  between  the  halogens
always  occurs,  and  that  the  amounts  of  chlorine  replaced  by  the  bromine  in  the  ultimate
product  are  proxK>rtional  to  the  atomic  weights  of  the  metals  taken  and  inversely  propor-
tional to  their  equivalence.  Tims,  if  NaCl  +  Br  be  taken,  then  out  of  100  parts  of
chlorine,  5*54  are  replaced  by  the  bromine,  whilst  with  AgCl  +  Br  27*28  parts  are
replaced.  These  figures  are  in  the  ratio  1  :  4'9,  and  the  atomic  weights  Na :  Ag  =  l :  4*7.
In  general  terms,  if  a  chloride  MCU  be  taken,  it  gives  with  nBr  a  percentage  sub-
stitution a4M'n',  where  M  is  the  atomic  weight  of  tlie  metal. This  law  was  deduced

kk2

t

500  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

sometimes  behave  with  respect  to  metallic  oxides  in  exactly  the  same
manner  as  chlorine.  Gay-Lussac,  by  igniting  potassium  carbonate  in
iodine  vapour,  obtained  (as  with  chlorine)  an  evolution  of  oxygen  and
carbonic  anhydride,  K2CO3  -f  I2  =  2KT  -h  COj  -f  O,  only  the  reac-
tions between  the  halogens  and  oxygen  are  more  easily  reversible  with
bromine  and  iodine  than  with  chlorine.  Thus,  at  a  red  heat  oxygen
displaces  iodine  from  barium  iodide.  Aluminium  iodide  bums  in
a  current  of  oxygen  (Deville  and  Troost),  and  a  similar,  althoiigh
not  so  clearly  marked,  relation  exists  for  aluminium  chloride,  and  shows
that  the  halogens  have  a  distinctly  smaller  affinity  for  those  metals
which  only  form  feeble  bases.  This  is  still  more  the  case  with
the  non.  metals,  which  form  acids  and  evolve  much  more  heat  with
oxygen  than  with  the  halogens  (Note  13).  But  in  all  these  instances
the  affinity  (and  amount  of  heat  evolved)  of  iodine  and  bromine  is  lea
than  that  of  chlorine,  probably  because  the  atomic  weights  are  greater.

from  observations  on  the  elilorides  of  Li,  K,  Na,  Ag  (n=l),  Ca,  Sr,  Ba,  Co,  Ni,  Hg,  Pb
in  =  2),  Bi  (n  =  8),  Sn  (n = 4),  and  Fe,  ( /*  -  C).

In  these  determinations  of  Potilitzin  we  see  not  only  a  brilliant  oonfinnatioo  of
Berthollet's  doctrine,  but  also  the  first  effort  to  directly  determine  the  affimties  of
elements  by  means  of  displacement.  The  chief  object  of  these  researches  consisted  is
proving  whether  a  displacement  occurs  in  those  cases  where  heat  is  aJbsorbed  and  is
this  instance  it  should  be  absorbed,  because  the  formation  of  all  metallic  bromides  it
attended  with  the  evolution  of  less  heat  than  that  of  the  chlorides,  as  is  seen  by  tbt
figures  given  in  Note  55.

If  the  mass  of  the  bromine  be  increased,  then  the  amount  of  chlorine  displaced  alao
increases.  For  example,  if  masses  of  bromine  of  1  and  4  equivalents  act  on  a  molecule
of  sodium  chloride,  then  the  percentages  of  the  chlorine  displaced  will  be  6*06  ptc  and
12*46  p.c. ;  in  the  action  of  1,  4,  25,  and  100  molecules  of  bromine  on  a  molecnle  of
barium  chloride,  there  will  be  displaced  7H,  170,  350,  and  45 0  p.c.  of  chlorine.  If
an  equivalent  quantity  of  hydrocliloric  acid  act  on  metallic  bromides  in  c]of«ed  tubes,
and  in  the  absence  of  water  at  a  temperature  of  300',  then  the  percentages  of  the  sob-
stitution  of  the  bromine  by  the  chlorine  in  tlie  double  decomposition  taking  place  betwces
univalent  metals  are  inversely  proiKivtional  to  their  atomic  weights.  For  example,
NaBr  +  HCl  gives  at  the  limit  21  p.c.  of  displacement,  KCl  12  p.c.  and  AgCl  41  px.
Essentially  tlie  same  action  takes  place  in  an  aqueous  solution,  although  the  phenomenon
is  complicated  by  the  participation  of  the  water.  The  reactions  proceed  spontaneoaslv  is
one  or  the  other  direction  at  the  ordinary  temperature  but  at  different  rates.  In  the
action  of  a  dilute  solution  (1  equivalent  j^r  5  litres)  of  sodium  chloride  on  sUver  bromide
at  the  ordinary  temperature  the  amount  of  bromine  replaced  in  six  and  a  half  day*  i»
2*07  p.c,  and  with  potassium  chloride  1*5  p.c.  With  an  excess  of  the  chloride  the  mag-
nitude of  the  substitution  increases.  These  conversions  also  proceed  with  the  absorptioo
of  heat.  The  reverse  reactions  evolving  heat  proceed  incomparably  more  rapidly,  baft
also  to  a  certain  limit ;  for  example,  in  the  reaction  AgCl  -f  RBr  the  following  percentsces
of  silver  bromide  are  formed  in  different  times :

90  lao

W-21

1)5-49  _

That  is,  the  conversions  which  are  accompanied  by  an  evolution of heat  prxKeed
with  very  much  greater  rapidity  than  the  reverse  conversions.

hours

2

3

22

K

79-82

87-4

S8-22

Na

88-63

!M)-74

ja-70

THE HALOGENS  501

The  smaller  store  of  energy  in  iodine  and  bromine  is  seen  stiU  more
clearly  in  the  relation  of  the  halogens  to  hydrogen.  In  a  gaseous  state
they  aU  enter,  with  more  or  less  ease,  into  direct  combination  with
gaseous  hydrogen — for  example,  in  the  presence  of  spongy  platinum,
forming  halogen  acids,  HX — but  the  latter  are  far  from  being  equally
stable  ;  hydrogen  chloride  is  the  most  stable,  hydrogen  iodide  the  least
so,  and  hydrogen  bromide  occupies  an  intermediate  position .  A  very
high  temperature  is  required  to  decompose  hydrogen  chloride  even  par-
tially, whilst  hydrogen  iodide  is  decomposed  by  light  even  at  the
ordinary  temperature  and  very  easily  by  a  red  heat.  Hence  the  reaction
I2  +  H2  =  HI  +  HI  is  very  easily  reversible,  and  consequently  has  a
limit,  and  hydrogen  iodide  easily  dissociates.^^  Judging  by  the  direct
measurement  of  the  heat  evolved  (22,000  heat  units)  in  the  formation
of  HCl,  the  conversion  of  2HC1  into  H2  +  Cl^  requires  the  expenditure

^  The  dissociation  of  hydriodic  acid  has  been  studied  in  detail  by  Hautefenille  and
Lemoine,  from  whose  researches  we  extract  the  following  information.  The  decom-
position of  hydriodic  acid  is  decided,  bat  proceeds  slowly  at  180^  ;  the  rate  and  limit  of
decomposition  increase  with  a  rise  of  temperature.  The  reverse  action — ^that  is,  L|  +  H.^
=  2HI — ^proceeds  not  only  under  the  influence  of  spongy  platinum  (Corenwinder),
which  also  accelerates  the  decomposition  of  hydriodic  acid,  but  also  by  itself,  although
slowly.  The  limit  of  the  reverse  reaction  remains  the  same  with  or  without  spongy
platinum.  An  increase  of  pressure  has  a  very  powerful  accelerative  effect  on  the
rate  of  formation  of  hydriodic  acid,  and  therefore  spongy  platinum  by  condensing
gases  has  the  same  effect  as  increase  of  pressure.  At  the  atmospheric  pressure  the
decomposition  of  hydriodic  acid  reaches  the  limit  at  250°  in  several  months,  and  at
440^  in  several  hours.  The  limit  at  250*^  is  about  18  p.c.  of  decomposition — that  is,
,  out  of  100  parts  of  hydrogen  previously  combined  in  hydriodic  acid,  about  18  p.c.  may
be  disengaged  at  this  temperature  (this  hydrogen  may  be  easily  measured,  and  the
measure  of  dissociation  determined),  but  not  more ;  the  limit  at  440°  is  about  26  p.c.
If  the  pressure  under  which  2HI  passes  into  H<}  + 1^  be  4^  atmospheres,  then  the  limit  is
84  p.c. ;  under  a  pressure  of  \  atmosphere  the  limit  is  29  p.c.  The  small  influence  of
pressure  on  the  dissociation  of  hydriodic  acid  (compared  with  N2O4,  Chapter  VI.  Note  46)
is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  reaction  2HI  =  l2  +  H2  is  not  accompanied  by  a  change  of
volume.  In  order  to  show  the  influence  of  time,  we  will  cite  the  following  figures
referring  to  850°:  (1)  Reaction  H.^  +  L^;  after  8  hours,  88  p.c.  of  hydrogen  remained  free ;
8  hours,  69  p.c;  84  hours,  48  p.c;  76  hours,  29  p.c;  and  827  hours,  18'5  p.c  (2)  The
reverse  decomposition  of  2HI ;  after  9  hours,  8  p.c.  of  hydrogen  was  set  free,  and  after
250  hours  18'6  p.c — that  iH,  the  limit  was  reached.  The  addition  of  extraneous
hydrogen  diminishes  the  limit  of  the  reaction  of  decomposition,  or  increases  the
formation  of  hydriodic  acid  from  iodine  and  hydrogen,  as  would  be  expected  from
Berthollet's  doctrine  (Chapter  X.).  Thus  at  440°  26  p.c.  of  hydriodic  acid  is  decomposed
if  there  be  no  admixture  of  hydrogen,  while  if  H(|  be  added,  then  at  the  limit  only  half
as  large  a  mass  of  HI  is  decomposed.  Therefore,  if  an  infinite  mass  of  hydrogen  bi>
added  there  will  be  no  decomposition  of  the  hydriodic  acid.  Light  aids  the  decomposition
of  hydriodic  acid  very  powerfully.  At  the  ordinary  temperature  80  p.c.  is  decom]x)sed
under  tlie  influence  of  light,  whilst  under  the  influence  of  heat  alone  this  limit  corre-
sponds with  a  very  high  temperature.  The  distinct  action  of  light,  spongy  platinum,  and
of  impurities  in  glass  (especially  of  sodium  sulphate,  which  decomposes  hydriodic  acid),  not
only  render  the  investigations  difficult,  but  also  show  that  in  reactions  like  2HI  =  I-^  '■  Hj,
which  are  accompanied  by  slight  heat  effects,  all  foreign  and  feeble  influences  may  strongly
affect  the  progress  of  the  action  (Note  47).

502  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

of  44,000  heat  units.  The  decomposition  of  2HBr  into  Hj  +  Br,
only  requires,  if  the  bromine  be  obtained  in  a  gaseous  state,  a  con-
sumption of  about  24,000  units,  whilst  in  the  decomposition  of  2HI
into  Ha  +  I2  as  vapour  about  3,000  heat  units  are  evolved ;  *•
these  facts,  without  doubt,  stand  in  causal  connection  ^vith  the  great
stability  of  hydrogen  chloride,  the  easy  decomposability  of  hydrogen
iodide,  and  the  intermediate  properties  of  hydrogen  bromide.  From
this  it  would  be  expected  that  chlorine  is  capable  of  decomposing  water
with  the  evolution  of  oxygen,  whilst  iodine  has  not  the  energy  to
produce  this  disengagement,^^  although  it  is  able  to  liberate  the  oxygen
from  the  oxides  of  potassium  and  sodium,  the  affinity  of  these  metals  for
the  halogens  Ijeing  very  considerable.  For  this  reason  oxygen,  especially
in  compounds  from  which  it  can  be  evolved  readily  (for  instance,  CIHO,
CrOg,  etc.),  easily  decomposes  hydrogen  iodide.  A  mixture  of  hydrogen
iodide  and  oxygen  burns  in  the  presence  of  an  ignited  substance,  forming
water  and  iodine.  Drops  of  nitric  acid  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen
iodide  cause  the  disengagement  of  violet  fumes  of  iodine  and  brown
fumes  of  nitric  peroxide.  In  the  presence  of  alkalis  and  an  excess  of
water,  however,  iodine  is  able  to  effect  oxidation  like  chlorine — that  ib,

^  Tlie  thermal  determinations  of  Thomsen  (at  18"^)  gave  in  thousands  of  oalones,
Cl  +  H=  +22,  HCl  +  Aq  (that  is,  on  diHsolving  HCl  in  a  large  amount  of  water)  =  +17*3,
and  therefore  H  -+  CI  +  Aq  =  +  89*8.  In  taking  molecules,  all  these  figures  must  be
doubled.  Br  +  H=+8-4;  HBr  +  Aq  =  19y;  H  +  Br+ Aq= +28-8.  According  to  Ber-
thelot  7"2  are  required  for  the  vaporisation  of  Br^,  hence  Br.,.  +  H.2=  16*8-i- T-fim -i-Jl,
if  Br.j  be  taken  aH  vapour  for  comparison  with  CL.  H  +  I=-6'0,  HI  +  Aq»Hrt;
H  - 1  -r  Aq  =  + 182,  and,  according  to  Berthelot,  the  heat  of  fusion  of  L^  =  3-0,  and  oi
vaiK)riHation  (i'O  thousand  heat  units,  and  therefore  I.^-^-  H.^^  ~ 2(6*0)  +  8  +  6 ■»  --8*0,  if  the
iodine  be  taken  as  vapour.  Berthelot,  on  the  basis  of  his  detenu inat ions,  gives,  however,
+  08  thousand  heat  units.  Simihir  contradictory  results  are  often  met  with  in  thenno-
chemistry  owing  to  the  imiHirfection  of  the  existing  methods,  and  particolarly  the
necessity  of  dej^ending  on  indirect  methods  for  obtaining  the  fundamental  figures.  Thus
Thomsen  decon)i)08ed  a  dilute  solution  of  iwtassium  iodide  by  gaseous  chlorine ;  the
reaction  gave  4  2(V2,  whence,  having  first  determined  the  heat  effects  of  the  reactioiis
KHO  4  HCl,  KHO  4  HI  and  CI  -f  H  in  aqueous  solutions,  it  was  possible  to  find  H  -f  I  -r  Aq ;
tlien,  knowing  HI  +  Aq,  to  find  1  -  H.  It  is  evident  that  unavoidable  errors  may
accumulate.

"^  One  can  believe,  however,  on  the  basis  of  Berthollet's  doctrine,  and  the  obaer-
vations  of  Potililzin  (Note  0(5),  that  a  certain  slow  decomposition  of  water  by  iodine
takes  place.  On  this  view  tlie  observations  of  Dossios  and  Weith  on  the  fact  thai  the
solubility  of  iodine  in  water  increases  after  the  lapse  of  several  months  will  be  comprehen-
sible. Hydriodic  tu'id  is  tlien  formed,  and  it  increases  the  solubility.  If  the  iodine  be
extracted  from  such  a  solution  by  carbon  bisulphide,  then,  as  the  authors  showed,  after
the  a(;tion  of  nitrous  anhydride  iinline  may  be  again  det<*cted  in  the  solution  by  means  of
starch.  It  can  easily  Ik?  understtHKl  that  a  number  of  similar  rctictions,  requiring  much
time  and  taking  place  in  small  (|uantities,  have  up  to  now  eluded  the  attention  of  inves-
tigators, who  even  still  doubt  the  universal  application  of  Berthollet's  doctrine,  or  odIt
see  the  thennochemieal  side  of  reactions,  or  else  neglect  to  pay  attention  to  the  element
of  time  and  the  influence  of  mass.

THE  HALOGENS  508

it  decomposes  water  ;  the  action  is  here  aided  by  the  affinity  of  hydrogen
iodide  for  the  alkali  and  water,  just  as  sulphuric  acid  helps  zinc  to  decom-
pose water.  But  the  relative  instability  of  hydriodic  acid  is  best  seen  in
comparing  the  acids  in  a  gaseous  state.  If  the  halogen  acids  be  dissolved
in  water,  they  evolve  so  much  heat  that  they  approach  much  nearer
to  each  other  in  properties.  This  is  seen  from  thermocheraical  dat-a,
for  in  the  formation  of  HX  in  solution  (in  a  large  excess  of  water)
iromthe  gaseous  elements  there  is  evolved  for  HCl  39,000,  for  HBr  32,000,
and  for  HI  18,000  heat  units  J®  But  it  is  especially  evident  from
the  fact  that  solutions  of  hydrogen  bromide  and  iodide  in  water  have
many  points  in  common  with  solutions  of  hydrogen  chloride,  both  in
their  capacity  to  form  hydrates  and  fuming  solutions  of  constant  boiling
point,  and  in  their  capacity  to  form  haloid  salts,  &c.  by  reacting  on
bases.

In  consequence  of  what  has  been  said  above,  it  follows  that  hydro-
hromic  and  hydriodic  oA^ids^  being  substances  which  are  but  slightly
stable,  cannot  be  evolved  in  a  gaseous  state  under  many  of  those  condi-
tions under  which  hydrochloric  acid  is  formed.  Thus  if  sulphuric  acid
in  solution  acts  on  sodium  iodide,  all  the  same  phenomena  take  place
as  with  sodium  chloride  (a  portion  of  the  sodium  iodide  gives  hydri-
odic acid,  and  all  remains  in  solution),  but  if  sodium  iodide  be  mixed
with  strong  sulphuric  acid,  then  the  oxygen  of  the  latter  decomposes
the  hydriodic  acid  set  free,  with  liberation  of  iodine,  H2SO4  +  2HI
=  2H2O  -f  SO2  +  I2.  This  reaction  takes  place  in  the  reverse  direction
in  the  presence,  of  a  large  quantity  of  water  (2,000  parts  of  water  per
1  part  of  SO2),  in  which  case  not  only  the  affinity  of  hydriodic  acid  for
water  is  brought  to  light  but  also  the  action  of  water  in  directing  chemi-
cal reactions  in  which  it  participates.^^  Therefore,  with  a  halogen  salt,
it  is  easy  to  obtain  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid  by  the  action  of  sulphuric
acid,  but  neither  hydrobromic  nor  hydriodic  acid  can  be  so  obtained  in
the  free  state  (as  gases).^^  Other  methods  have  to  be  resorted  to  for  their
preparation,  and  recourse  must  not  be  had  to  compounds  of  oxygen,  which
are  so  easily  able  to  destroy  these  acids.  Therefore  hydrogen  sulphide,
phosphorus,  <&c.,  which  themselves  easily  take  up  oxygen,  are  introduced
as  means  for  the  conversion  of  bromine  and  iodine  into  hydrobromic  and
hydriodic  acids  in  the  presence  of  water.  For  example,  in  the  action  of
phosphorus  the  essence  of  the  matter  is  that  the  oxygen  of  the  water  goes

^0  On  the  basis  of  the  data  in  Note  68.

^  A  nnmber  of  similar  cases  confirm  what  has  been  said  in  Chapter  X.

7*  This  is  prevented  by  the  reducibility  of  sulphuric  acid.  If  volatile  acids  be  taken
they  pass  over,  together  with  the  hydrobromic  and  hydriodic  acids,  when  distilled;
whilst  many  non -volatile  acids  which  are  not  reduced  by  hydrobromic  and  hydriodio
acids  only  act  feebly  (like  phosphoric  acid),  or  do  not  act  at  all  Oike  boric  acid).

504  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISlTtY

to  the  phosphorus,  and  the  union  of  the  remaining  elements  leads  to  the
formation  of  hydrobromicorhydriodicacid ;  but  the  matter  is  complicated
by  the  reversibility  of  the  reaction,  the  affinity  for  water,  and  other
circumstances  which  are  understood  by  following  Berthollet's  doctrine.
Chlorine  (and  bromine  also)  directly  decomposes  hydrogen  sulphide^
forming  hydrochloric  acid  and  liberating  sulphur,  both  in  a  gaseous  fonn
and  in  solutions,  whilst  iodine  only  decomposes  hydrogen  sulphide  in
weak  solutions,  when  its  affinity  for  hydrogen  is  aided  by  the  affinity  of
hydrogen  iodide  for  water.  In  a  gaseous  state  iodine  does  not  act
on  hydrogen  sulphide, ^^  whilst  sulphur  is  able  to  decompose  gaseont
hydriodic  acid,  forming  hydrogen  sulphide  and  a  compound  of  sulphur
and  iodine  which  with  water  forms  hydriodic  acid.'^'*

If  hydrogen  sulphide  be  passed  through  water  containing  iodine,  the
reaction  HjS  +  13  =  2HI  -|-  S  proceeds  so  long  as  the  solution  is
dilute,  but  when  the  mass  of  free  HI  increases  the  reaction  st<^
because  the  iodine  then  passes  into  solution.  A  solution  having  a
composition  approximating  to  2HI  +  41)  +  QH^O  (according  to
Bineau)  does  not  react  with  H^S,  notwithstanding  the  quantity  of  free
iodine.  •  Therefore  only  weak  solutions  of  hydriodic  acid  can  be
obtained  by  passing  hydrogen  sulphide  into  water  with  iodine.^*  **•

To  obtain  ^'^  gaseous  hydrobromic  and  hydriodic  acids  it  is  most

7*^  Tliis  is  Id  agreement  with  the  thermochemical  data,  because  if  all  the  aob«taiic6»
be  taken  in  the  gaseous  state  (for  sulphur  the  heat  of  fusion  is  0*8,  and  the  beat  of
vaporisation  2'8)  we  have  Ho  +  S  =  4'7;  H.2  +  Cl,j-44;  H..  +  Br3  =  a4,  and  H^  +  I,=
—  8  thouMind  heat  units  ;  hence  the  formation  of  HoS  gives  leas  heat  than  that  of  HCl  ani
HBr,  but  more  than  that  of  HI.  In  dilute  solutions  H2  +  S  + Aq  — 9'8,  and  oonfteqaentlj
less  than  the  formation  of  all  the  halogen  acids,  as  HaS  evolves  but  little  heat  with
water,  and  therefore  in  dilute  solutions  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine  decompote
hydrogen  sulphide.

7^  Here  there  are  three  elements,  hydrogen,  sulphur,  and  iodine,  each  pair  of  which
is  able  to  form  a  comiwund,  HI,  H.^.S,  and  SI,  besides  which  the  latter  may  unite  in
various  proportions.  Tlje  complexity  of  chemical  mechanics  is  seen  in  such  examples  u
these.  It  is  evident  that  only  the  study  of  the  simplest  cases  can  give  the  key  to  Ike
more  complex  problems,  and  on  the  other  hand  it  is  evident  from  the  examples  cited  in
the  last  pages  that,  without  penetrating  into  the  conditions  of  chemical  eqailibria,  il
would  be  impossible  to  explain  chemical  phenomena.  By  following  the  footstep*  of
Berthollet  the  possibility  of  unravelling  the  problems  will  be  reached ;  bat  work  in
this  direction  has  only  been  bi>gun  during  the  last  ten  years,  and  much  remains  to  be
done  in  collecting  experimental  niat<>rial,  for  which  occasions  present  themselvrs
at  everj'  step.  In  siwaking  of  the  halogens  I  wished  to  turn  the  reader's  attention  U>
problems  of  this  kind.

71  h\*  xhe  same  essentially  takes  place  when  sulphurous  anhydride,  in  a  dilate  »oln-
tion.  gives  hydri(Hlic  acid  and  sulphuric  acid  with  iodine.  On  concentration  a  reverse
reaction  takes  j)lace.  The  equilibrated  syst«'nis  and  the  part  played  by  water  ai«  every-
where distinctly  seen.

7&  Metho<ls  of  formation  and  preparation  are  nothing  more  than  particular  cases  of
chemical  reaction.  If  the  knowledge  of  chemical  mechanics  were  more  exact  and  com-
plete than  it  now  is  it  would  l)e  possible  to  foretell  all  cases  of  preparati<m  tcith  etfry

THE  HALOGENS  506

convenient  to  take  advantage  of  the  reactions  between  phosphorus,
the  halogens,  and  water,  the  latter  being  present  in  small  quantity
(otherwise  the  halogen  acids  formed  are  dissolved  by  it) ;  the
halogen  is  gradually  added  to  the  phosphorus  moistened  with  water.
Thus  if  red  phosphorus  be  placed  in  a  flask  and  moistened  with
water,  and  bromine  l)e  added  drop  by  drop  (from  a  tap  funnel),  hydro-
bromic acid is  abundantly  and  uniformly  disengagedJ^ Hydrogen

detail  (of  the  quantity  of  water,  temperature,  pressure,  mass,  &c.)  The  stady  of
practical  methods  of  preparation  is  therefore  one  of  the  paths  for  the  study  of  chemical
mechanics.  The  reaction  of  iodine  on  phosphorus  and  water  is  a  ca*ie  like  that  men-
tioned in  Note  74,  and  the  matter  is  here  further  complicated  by  the  possibility  of  the
formation  of  the  compound  PHj  with  HI,  as  well  as  the  production  of  PIj,  PI5,  and  the
affinity  of  hydriodic  acid  and  the  acids  of  phosphorus  for  water.  The  theoretical
interest  of  equilibria  in  all  their  complexity  is  naturally  very  great,  but  it  falls  into  the
background  in  presence  of  the  primary  interest  of  discovering  practical  methods  for  the
isolation  of  substances,  and  the  means  of  employing  them  for  the  requirements  of  man.
It  is  only  after  the  satisfaction  of  these  requirements  that  interests  of  the  other  order
arise,  which  in  their  turn  muftt  exert  an  influence  on  the  former.  For  these  reasons,
whilst  considering  it  opportune  to  point  out  the  theoretical  interest  of  chemical
equilibria,  the  chief  attention  of  the  reader  is  directed  in  this  work  to  questions  of
practical  importance.

76  Hydrobromic  acid  is  also  obtained  by  the  action  of  bromine  on  paraffin  heated
to  180°.  Gustavson  proposed  to  prepare  it  by  the  action  of  bromine  (best  added  in
drops  together  with  traces  of  aluminium  bromide)  on  anthracene  (a  solid  hydrocarbon
from  coal  tar).  Balard  prepared  it  by  passing  bromine  Tai>our  over  moist  pieces  of
common  phosphorus.  Tlie  liquid  tribromide  of  phosphorus,  directly  obtained  from
phosphorus  and  bromine,  also  gives  hydrobromic  acid  when  treated  with  water.  Bro*
mide  of  potassium  or  sodium,  when  treated  with  sulphuric  acid  in  the  presence  of
phosphorus,  also  gives  hydrobromic  acid,  but  hydriodic  acid  is  decomposed  by  this
method.  In  order  to  free  hydrobromic  acid  from  bromine  vapour  it  is  passed  over  moist
phosphorus  and  dried  either  by  phosphoric  anhydride  or  calcium  bromide  (calcium
chloride  cannot  be  used,  as  hydrochloric  acid  would  be  formed).  Neither  hydrobromic
nor  hydriodic  acids  can  be  collected  over  mercury,  on  which  they  act,  but  they
may  be  directly  collected  in  a  dry  vessel  by  leading  the  gas-conducting  tube  to  the
bottom  of  the  vessel,  both  gases  being  much  heavier  than  air.  Merz  and  Holtzmann
(1889)  propose  to  prepare  HBr  directly  from  bromine  and  hydrogen.  For  this  purpose
pure  dry  hydrogen  is  passed  through  a  flask  containing  boiling  bromine.  The  mixture
of  gas  and  vapour  then  passes  through  a  tube  provided  with  one  or  two  bulbs,  which
is  heated  moderately  in  the  middle.  Hydrobromic  acid  is  formed  with  a  series  of  flashes
at  the  part  heated.  The  resultant  HBr,  together  with  traces  of  bromine,  passes  into  a
Woulfe's  bottle  into  which  hydrogen  is  also  introduced,  and  the  mixture  is  then  carried
tlirongh  another  heated  tube,  after  which  it  is  passed  through  water  which  dissolves  the
hydrobromic  acid.  According  to  the  method  proposed  by  Newth  (1892)  a  mixture  of
bromine  and  hydrogen  is  led  through  a  tube  containing  a  platinum  spiral,  which  is
heated  to  redness  after  the  air  has  been  displaced  from  the  tube.  If  the  vessel  con-
taining the  bromine  be  kept  at  60°,  the  hydrogen  takes  up  almost  the  theoretical  amount
of  bromine  required  for  the  formation  of  HBr.  Although  the  flame  which  appears  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  platinum  spiral  does  not  penetrate  into  the  vessel  containing  the
brr)mine,  still,  for  safety,  a  tube  filled  witli  cotton  wool  may  be  interi)Osed.

Hydriodic  acid  is  obtained  in  the  same  manner  as  hydrobromic.  The  iodine  is  heated
in  a  small  flask,  and  its  vapour  is  carried  over  by  hydrogen  into  a  strongly  heated  tube*
The  gas  passing  from  the  tube  is  found  to  contain  a  considerable  amount  of  HI,  together
with  some  free  iodine. At  a  low  red  heat  about  17  p.c  of  the  iodine  vapour  enters

506  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

iodide  is  prepared  by  adding  1  part  of  common  (yellow)  dry  phosphorus
to  10  parts  of  dry  iodine  in  a  glass  flask.  On  shaking  the  flask,
union  proceeds  quietly  between  them  (light  and  heat  being  evolved),
and  when  the  mass  of  iodide  of  phosphorus  which  is  formed  has
cooled,  water  is  added  drop  by  drop  (from  a  tap  funnel)  and  hydrogen
iodide  is  evolved  dii*ectly  without  the  aid  of  heat.  These  methods  of
preparation  will  be  at  once  understood  when  it  is  remembered  (p.  468)
that  phosphorus  chloride  gives  hydrogen  chloride  with  "water.  It  is
exactly  the  same  here — the  oxygen  of  the  water  passes  over  to  the
phosphorus,  and  the  hydrogen  to  the  iodine,  thus,  PI3  -f  3H,0
=  PH3O3  +  3HI.77

In  a  gaseous  form  hydrobromic  and  hydriodic  acids  are  closely
analogous  to  hydrochloric  acid  ;  they  are  liquefied  by  pressure  and  cold,
they  fume  in  the  air,  form  solutions  and  hydrates,  of  constant  boiling
point,  and  react  on  metals,  oxides  and  salts,  dsc7^ Only  the  relatively

into  combination ;  at  a  higher  temperature,  78  p.c.  to  79  p.c. ;  and  at  a  strong  heat
about  82  p.c.

^^  But  generally  more  phosphorus  is  taken  than  is  required  for  the  formation  of
Pis,  because  otherwise  a  portion  of  the  iodine  distils  over.  If  less  than  one-tenth  part
of  iodine  be  taken,  much  phosphonium  iodide,  PH4I,  is  formed.  This  proportion
was  established  by  Gay-Lussac  and  Kolbe.  Hydriodic  acid  is  also  prepared  in  many
other  ways.  Bannoff  dissolves  two  parts  of  iodine  in  one  part  of  a  previoasly  prepand
strong  (sp.  gr.  1*67)  solution  of  hydriodic  acid,  and  pours  it  on  to  red  phosphoms  in  a
retort.  Personne  takes  a  mixture  of  fifteen  parts  of  water,  ten  of  iodine,  and  one  of  red
phosphorus,  which,  when  heated,  disengages  hydriodic  acid  mixed  with  iodine  vaponr ;  the
latter  is  removed  by  passing  it  over  moist  phosphorus  (Note  76).  It  must  be  remembered
however  that  reverse  reaction  (Oppenheim)  may  t^ake  place  between  the  hydriodic  acid
and  phosi>horus,  in  which  the  compounds  PH4I  and  PIo  are  formed.

It  should  be  observed  that  the  reaction  between  phosphorus,  iodine  and  water
must  be  carried  out  in  the  above  proportions  and  with  caution,  as  they  may  react  with
explosion.  With  red  phoHphoriis  the  reaction  proceeds  quietly,  but  nevertheless  requires
care.

L.  Meyer  showed  that  witli  an  excess  of  iodine  the  reaction  proceeds  without  the
formation  of  bye-products  (PH4I),  according  to  the  equation  P  +  61  +  "iH.jO  =  PH3O4  +  6H1.
For  this  purpose  100  grams  of  iodine  and  10  grams  of  water  are  placed  in  a  retort,  and  a
paHte  of  5  grams  of  red  phoHphoruy  and  10  grams  of  water  is  added  little  by  little  (at  first
with  great  care).  Tlie  hydriodic  ueid  may  be  obtained  free  from  iodine  by  directing  the
neck  of  the  retort  upwards  and  causing  the  gas  to  pass  through  a  sliallow  layer  of  water
(respecting  tlie  formation  of  HI,  see  also  Note  75).

'**  The  specific  gravities  of  their  Polutions  as  deduced  by  me  on  the  basis  of  Toptue
and  Berthelot's  determinations  for  15^, 4*^  are  as  follows: —

10

20

80

40

50

60  p.c.

HBr

1071

115(5

1-258

1-874

1-505

1*650

HI

1075

1164

1-267

1-899

1-567

1-769

Hydrobromic  acid  forms  two  hydrates,  HBr,2H.,0  and  HBr,HoO,  which  have  been
studied  by  Roozeboom  with  as  much  completeness  as  the  hydrate  of  hydrochloric  acid
^Chapter  X.  Note  87).

With  metallic  silver,  solutions  of  hydriodic  acid  give  hydrogen  with  great  ease,
forming  silver  ioilide. Mercury,  lead,  and  other  metals  act  in  a  similar  manner.

THE HALOGENS  507

easy  decomposability  of  hydrobromic  acid,  and  especially  of  hydriodic
acid,  clearly  distinguish  these  acids  from  hydrochloric  acid.  For  this
reason,  hydriodic  acid  acts  in  a  number  of  cases  as  a  deoxidiser  or
reducer,  and  frequently  even  serves  as  a  means  for  the  transference  of
hydrogen.  Thus  Berthelot,  Baeyer,  Wreden,  and  others,  by  heating
unsaturated  hydrocarbons  in  a  solution  of  hydriodic  acid,  obtained  their
compounds  with  hydrogen  nearer  to  the  limit  C^H2„+2  or  even  the
saturated  compounds.  For  example,  benzene,  C^Hg,  when  heated  in  a
closed  tube  with  a  strong  solution  of  hydiiodic  acid,  gives  hexylene,
CgH|2«  The  easy  decomposability  of  hydriodic  acid  accounts  for  the
fact  that  iodine  does  not  act  by  metalepsis  on  hydrocarbons,  for  the
hydrogen  iodide  liberated  with  the  product  of  metalepsis,  RI,  formed,
gives  iodine  and  the  hydrogen  compound,  KH,  l>ack  again.  And  there-
fore,  to  obtain  the  products  of  iodine  substitution,  either  iodic  acid,  HIO3
(Kekule),  or  mercury  oxide,  HgO  (Weselsky),  is  added,  as  they  imme-
diately react  on  the  hydrogen  iodide,  thus  :  HTO3  -f  SHI  =  3H2O  -f  SIj,
or,  HgO  +  2HI  =  Hgia  -f-  HgO.  From  these  considerations  it  wiU
be  readily  understood  that  iodine  acts  like  chlorine  (or  bromine)
on  ammonia  and  sodium  hydroxide,  for  in  these  cases  the  hydriodic
acid  produced  forms  NH4I  and  Nal.  With  tincture  of  iodine
or  even  the  solid  element,  a  solution  of  ammonia  immediately  forms
a  highly-explosive  solid  black  product  of  metalepsis,  NHIj,  generally
known  as  iodide  of  nitrogen,  although  it  still  contains  hydrogen
(this  was  proved  beyond  doubt  by  Szuhay  1893),  which  may  be
replaced  by  silver  (with  the  formation  of  NAglg)  :  3NH3  -h  2I2
=  2NH4I  H-  NHI2.  However,  the  composition  of  the  last  product  is
variable,  and  with  an  excess  of  water  NT;,  seems  to  be  formed.  Iodide
of  nitrogen  is  just as  explosive as nitrogen chloride.^®  ^** In the

78  bu  Iodide  of  nitrogen,  NHLj  is  obtained  as  a  brown  pulverulent  precipitate  on  adding
a  solution  of  iodine  (in  alcohol,  for  instance)  to  a  solution  of  ammonia.  If  it  be  collected
on  a  filter- paper,  it  does  not  decompose  so  long  as  the  precipitate  is  moist ;  but  when  dry
it  explodes  violently,  so  that  it  can  only  be  experimented  upon  in  small  quantities.
Usually  the  filter-paper  is  torn  into  bits  while  moist,  and  the  pieces  laid  upon  a  brick ;
on  drying  an  explosion  proceeds  not  only  from  friction  or  a  blow,  but  even  spontaneously.
The  more  dilute  the  solution  of  ammonia,  the  greater  is  the  amount  of  iodine  required
for  the  formation  of  the  precipitate  of  NHI.,>.  A  low  temperature  facilitates  its  formation.
NHL2  dissolves  in  ammonia  water,  and  when  heated  the  solution  forms  HIO3  and  iodine.
With  KI,  iodide  of  nitrogen  gives  iodine,  NH5  and  KHO.  These  reactions  (Selivanoff)
are  explained  by  the  formation  of  HIO  from  NHI.  +  2HoO  =  NH5+2HIO — and  then
KI -I- HIO  S3  L^  +  KHO.  Selivanoflf  {see  Note  20)  usually  observed  a  temporary  for-
mation of  hypoiodous  acid,  HIO,  in  the  reaction  of  ammonia  upon  iodine,  so  that
here  the  formation  of  NHL,  is  preceded  by  that  of  HIO — i.e.  first  I^  +  H.^O  -  HIO  +  HI,
and  then  not  only  the  HI  combines  with  NH3,  but  also  2HI0  r  NH5  =  NHI.^  +  2H,jO.
With  dilute  sulphuric  acid  iodide  of  nitrogen  (like  XCI3)  forms  hyx)oiodous  acid,  but  it
immediately  passes  into  iodic  acid,  as  is  expressed  by  the  equation  5HIO  =  2l.,>+HIOs
4  2H...O  (first  8HI0  =  HIO.-,  +  2HI,  and  then  HI  -r  HIO  -  I...  -  H.,0). Moreover,  Selivanoff

508  PRINCIPI.ES  OF  CHEMISTRY

action  of  iodine  on  solium  hydroxide  no  bleaching  compound  is  formed
(whilst  bromine  gives  one),  but  a  direct  reaction  is  always  acoomplisbed
with  the  formation  of  aniodate,  6NaH0  +  Slj  =  5NaI  +  3H,0  +  NalOj
(Gay-Lussac).  Solutions  of  other  alkalis,  and  even  a  mixture  of  water
and  oxide  of  mercury,  act  in  the  same  manner.^^  This  direct  formation
of  iodic  acid,  HIO3  =  I02(0H),  shows  the  propensity  of  iodine  to  give
compounds  of  the  type  IX  5.  Indeed,  this  capacity  of  iodine  to  form
compounds  of  a  high  type  emphasises  itself  in  many  ways.  But  it  is
most  important  to  turn  attention  to  the  fact  that  iodic  acid  is  easfly
and  directly  formed  by  the  action  of  oxidising  substances  on  iodine.
Thus,  for  instance,  strong  nitric  acid  directly  converts  iodine  into
iodic  acid,  whilst  it  has  no  oxidising  action  on  chlorine. ^^  ^^  This
shows  a  greater  affinity  in  iodine  for  oxygen  than  in  chlorine,  and  this
conclusion  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  iodine  displaces  chlorine  from

found  that  iodide  of  nitrogen,  NHIq,  dissolves  in  an  excess  of  ammonia  water,  and  that
with  potassium  iodide  the  solution  gives  the  reaction  for  hypoiodous  acid  (the  evolatioii
of  iodine  in  an  alkaline  solution).  This  shows  that  HIO  participates  in  the  formation
and  decomposition  of  NHI2,  and  therefore  the  condition  of  the  iodine  (its  metaleptic
position)  in  them  is  analogous,  and  differs  from  the  condition  of  the  halogens  in  the
haloid-anhydrides  (for  instance,  NO^Cl).  The  latter  are  tolerably  stable,  while  (the
haloid  being  designated  by  X)  NHX^,  NX5,  XOH,  RXO  («ef  Chapter  XHI.  Note  48),  &c^
are  unstable,  easily  decomposed  with  the  evolution  of  heat,  and,  under  the  action  ci
water,  the  haloid  is  easily  replaced  by  hydrogen  (Selivanoff),  as  would  be  expected  in
true  products  of  metalepsis.

^^  Hypoiodous  acid,  UIO,  is  not  known,  but  organic  compounds,  RIO,  of  this  type
are  known.  To  illustrate  the  peculiarities  of  their  proi>ertie8  we  will  mention  one
of  these  compounds,  namely,  iodosobeuzol,  CgH^IO.  This  substance  was  obtained
by  Willgerodt  (189*2),  and  also  by  V.  Meyer,  Wachter,  and  Askenasy,  by  the  action
of  caustic  alkalis  upon  phenoldiiodochloride,  CeHsICl^  (according  to  the  equation,
CcHjIGl,.  +  2M0H  -  CeHjIO  +  2MC1  r  H.^0).  lodosobenzol  is  an  amorphous  yellow  sub-
stance, whose  melting  point  could  cot  be  determined  because  it  explodes  at  210°,
decomposing  with  the  evolution  of  iodine  vapour.  This  substance  dissolves  in  hot  water
and  alcohol,  but  is  not  soluble  in  the  majority  of  otlier  neutral  organic  solvents.  If
acids  do  not  oxidise  CeHjIO,  they  give  saline  compounds  in  which  iodosobenzol  appean»
as  a  basic  oxide  of  a  diatomic  metal,  CgH^I.  Thus,  for  instance,  when  an  acetic  acid
solution  of  io<losobcnzoI  is  treated  with  a  solution  of  nitric  acid,  it  gives  large  monoclinic
crystals  of  a  nitric  acid  stilt  having  the  composition  CgH5l(N03).^  (like  Ca(N05)-).
In  appearing  as  the  analogue  of  basic  oxides,  iodosobenzol  displaces  iodine  from  potassium
iodide  (in  a  solution  acidulated  with  acetic  or  hydrochloric  acid) — i.e.  it  acts  with  its
oxygen  like  HCIO.  The  action  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen,  chromic  acid,  and  other  similar
oxidising  agents  gives  iodoxybenzol,  CgHjIO.^,  which  is  a  neutral  substance — i.^.  incapable
of  giving  salts  with  acids  (compare  Chapter  XIll.  Note  43).

70  ».b  The  oxidation  of  iodine  by  strong  nitric  acid  was  discovered  by  Connell ;  Millon
bowed  that  it  is  effected,  although  more  slowly,  by  the  action  of  the  hydrates  of  nitric
acid  up  U)  HN03,HjO,  but  tliat  the  solution  HN0-,2H.,0,  and  weaker  solutions,  do  not
oxidise,  but  simply  dissolve,  iodine.  The  participation  of  water  in  reactions  is  seen  in
tliis  instance.  It  is  also  seen,  for  example,  in  the  fivct  that  dry  ammonia  combines
directly  with  iodine — for  instance,  at  O-*  forming  the  coniiK)und  I.^i.-lNHj — whilst  iodide  of
nitrogen  is  (»nly  formed  in  presence  of  water.

THE HALOGENS  509

its  oxygen  acids, ^^  and  that  in  the  presence  of  water  chlorine  oxidises
iodine.^*  Even  ozone  or  a  silent  discharge  passed  through  a  mixture  of
oxygen  and  iodine  vapour  is  able  to  directly  oxidise  iodine  ^^  into  iodic
acid.  It  is  disengaged  from  solutions  as  a  hydrate,  HIO3,  which  loses
water  at  170^  and  gives  an  anhydride,  I2O5.  Both  these  substances
are  crystalline  (sp.  gr.  I2O5  5-037,  HIO3  4-869  at  0**),  colourless  and
soluble  in  water ;  ^^  both  decompose  at  a  red  heat  into  iodine  and  oxygen,
are  in  many  cases  powerfully  oxidising — for  instance,  they  oxidise  sul-
phurous anhydride,  hydrogen  sulphide,  carbonic  oxide,  &c, — form
chloride  of  iodine  and  water  with  hydrochloric  acid,  and  with  bases
form  salts,  not  only  normal  MIO3,  but  also  acid ;  for  example,
KIOjHIOs,  KI032HI03.«3  w»  With  hydriodic  acid  iodic  acid  imme-
diately reacts,  disengaging  iodine,  HIO3  4-  5HI  =  SHjO  -f-  31^,

^  Bromine  also  displaces  chlorine — for  instance,  from  chloric  acid,  directly  forming
bromic  acid.  If  a  solution  of  potassinm  chlorate  be  taken  (75  parts  per  400  parts  of
water),  and  iodine  be  added  to  it  (80  parts),  and  then  a  small  quantity  of  nitric  acidi
chlorine  is  disengaged  on  boiling,  and  potassium  iodate  is  formed  in  the  solution.  In
this  instance  the  nitric  acid  first  evolves  a  certain  portion  of  the  chloric  acid,  and  the
latter,  with  the  iodine,  evolves  chlorine.  The  iodic  acid  thus  formed  acts  on  a  further
quantity  of  the  potassium  chlorate,  sets  a  portion  of  the  chloric  acid  free,  and  in  this
manner  the  action  is  kept  up.  Potilitzin  (1887)  remarked,  however,  that  not  only  do
bromine  and  iodine  displace  the  chlorine  from  chloric  acid  and  potassium  chlorate,  but
also  chlorine  displaces  bromine  from  sodium  bromate,  and,  furthermore,  the  reaction  does
not  proceed  as  a  direct  substitution  of  the  halogens,  but  is  accompanied  by  the  formation
of  free  acids ;  for  example,  SNaClOj  +  SBrj  +  SUP  =  5NaBr  +  6HCIO3  +  HBrOj.

^1  If  iodine  be  stirred  up  in  water,  and  chlorine  passed  through  the  mixture,  the  iodine
is  dissolved ;  the  liquid  becomes  colourless,  and  contains,  according  to  the  relative
amounts  of  water  and  chlorine,  either  IHCl^,  or  ICI3,  or  HIO3.  If  there  be  a  small  amount
of  water,  then  the  iodic  acid  may  separate  out  directly  as  crystals,  but  a  complete  con-
version (Bomemann)  only  occurs  when  not  less  than  ten  parts  of  water  are  taken  to
one  part  of  iodine—ICl  ^  8H.jO  +  2CI2  =  IHO3  +  5HC1.

^  Schonebein  and  Ogier  proved  this.  Ogier  found  that  at  45°  ozone  immediately
oxidises  iodine  vapour,  forming  first  of  all  the  oxide  I-^Oj,  which  is  decomposed  by  water
or  on  heating  into  iodic  anhydride  and  iodine.  Iodic  acid  is  formed  at  the  positive  pole
when  a  solution  of  hydriodic  acid  is  decomposed  by  a  galvanic  current  (Riche).  It  is
also  formed  in  the  combustion  of  hydrogen  mixed  with  a  small  quantity  of  hydriodic  acid
(Salet).

^  Kammerer  showed  that  a  solution  of  sp.  gr.  2*127  at  14*^,  containing  2HIO3,0H.2O,
solidified  completely  in  the  cold.  On  comparing  solutions  HI  +  /nH'^O  with  HIO3  '^  fnH-iOy
we  find  that  the  specific  gravity  increases  but  the  volume  decreases,  whilst  in  the
passage  of  solutions  HCl  +  inlLjO  to  HCIO3  +  mH.^O  both  the  sx>ecific  gravity  and  the
volume  increase,  which  is  also  observed  in  certain  other  cases  (for  example,  H3PO-  and
HsPOJ.

^  ^**  Ditte  (1890)  obtained  many  iodates  of  great  variety.  A  neutral  salt,  2(LiI03)H.20,
is  obtained  by  saturating  a  solution  of  lithia  with  iodic  acid.  There  is  an  analogous
ammonium  salt,  2(NH4l03)H20.  He  also  obtained  hydrates  of  a  more  complex  com-
position, such  as  6(NH4lOs)H20  and  6(NH4lOs)2H<20.  Salts  of  the  alkaline  earths,
Ba(I03)2H20  and  Sr(I03)2HjO,  may  be  obtained  by  a  reaction  of  double  decomposition
from  the  normal  salts  of  the  type  2(MeI03)H.20.  When  evaporated  at  70°  to  B0°  with
nitric  acid  these  salts  lose  water.  A  mixture  of  solutions  of  nitrate  of  zinc  and  an
alkaline  iodate  precipitates  Zn(I03)22H20. An  anhydrous  salt  is  thrown  out  if  nitric

"RISCIPLES  OK  CH:

As  with  chlorine,  ao  with  iodine,  a  jteriodic  aciff,  IIIO,,  is  /om
This  acid  is  produced  in  the  fona  of  its  salts,  by  the  action  of  chloi
on  alkaline  solutions  of  iodates,  and  also  by  the  action  ot  iodine  on
chloric  aind."'  It  crystallises  from  solutions  as  a  hydrate  coutaining
SHjO  (corresponding  with  HC10j,-2H/)),  but  as  it  forms  salts  con-
taining up  to  5  atoms  of  metals,  tlna  water  must  be  count«d  as  wat«r
of  constitution.  Therefore  IO(OH)5  =  HT0j,3H,0  corresponds  with
the  highest  form  of  halogen  compounds,  IX;. "'^ In  deconiposiug  fit

acid  be  added  to  tlie  AoLntiouB.  AnidogauB  saltfl  of  CAdmimn,  silver,  and  Co
coiDinDndB  o(  tbe  type  3Me'10,lNHi  anil  Ms"(I03).j4N'II-,  with  gue<ius  maaoi
unil  Ue"  being  elements  ot  the  finit  (kg)  and  uwonii  |Cd,  Zn.  Cul  iroDpa).

gu6h  u  Zn(IO,),(NH^)JO,  Cd[IO,),.(XH,).,0.  Copper  giwa  CtiaO.,)^4<?(H.J,0  I
Ca(IOj),(NH4),0.  Thene  Baits  majbe  reguded  as  rotnpouii<U  of  I,Os,  ud  MeO
(NH,),/);  for  example,  Zna03),|NH,),O  may  be  regarded  as  ZdO|  !4Ili)vOL^j,  M
darired  from  Uia  hydrate,  Ifl^'iS^O  =  a(HIOs)H,0.

adlnui  iodate  bemiied  vith  aiolutjonof  eodinm  h^-droxlde.  boftted,  mad
rough  the  wlntion,  a  sparingly  solnble  salt  separates  onl»  whidi
Hliu  auid,  anil  has  tlie  composition  Na4l,0»,3H.iO.

eNaHO-aNalOj  +  lCUiNaCl  +  NVsOB  +  aHjO.
This  eomponnd  U  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  bnl  diasolvea  easily  in  i
■tdntion  of  nitrio  add. If  silver  nitrate  be  added  to  this  solution  •  precipitate  ia
which  contains  (be  cotroBponding  compound  ot  silver,  Ag,I;Op,HH]0. If  this
soluble  silver  compound  be  dissolved  in  hot  uitrit  aoid,  orange  cryHtaU  of  a  «
the  eompositioD  A11IO4  separate  on  evaporation. This  salt  is  formeil  Irom  the  i
by  Ihe  nitric  acid  Mking  op  silver  oxide— Al[,IJOB-^  3HN0s  =  9AgNO3*aAgIO.
The  silver  salt  is  decoiDposed  by  water,  with  tbe  re-formatiiHi  of  tlie  pre«c
whiltit  iodic  acid  remnins  in  nolntian —

4Agio, + H,o = Ag,ijOo  +  amo,.

The  structure  of  the  first  of  these  salts.  Natl^O^SHjO,  presents  iUelt  in
lomi  if  the  water  ol  crystallisutioti  is  regarded  an  an  intet(ral  portion  ot  the
tormnla  is  then  divided  iu  two,  and  takes  the  tonn  ot  IO[OH)s<ONa),— that  ia,  i
to  the  type  tOXj,  or  IS;,  like  AglOj  which  is  lOjIOAg). The  nunposilion  of
saltH  of  periodic acids  are  expressed by  this type IX;. Kinunins  (IBSO)  relee
the  baits  ot  periodic  acid  Co  four  types— the  ineta<«altK  of  HIO4  (salts  of  A^  Co.
the  meBo-saltsot  HjIOa  (PbH,  Ag^H,  CdH),  the  para-salts  of  HjIOg  (Na^Hi,  Nm^B^,
the  di-salts  of  H^LiOg  iK,,  Ag^,  Ni,|. The  three  first  are  direct  compoandt  of  t*
IX;,  uaiuely.  lOs(OU),  IO,(OH|-,  and  lO(OH),.  and the last  are  tjpe«  ot  di
salts,  which  correspond  with  tbe  type  of  the  meso-salts,  as  pyrofdiosphoric  salt
spond  with  orthophosphoric  salts— i.e.  aHjIOs-HiO^H^LiOg.

"^  Periodic  acid,  discovered  by  Magnus  and  AmmennUller,  and  whose  sal
atterwardB  studied  by  tiangJois,  Rammelsberg,  and  Taany  others,  presents  on  eiam
hydrates  in  which  it  is  evident  that  there  is  not  that  distinction  between  the  wa
hydration  and  of  ery«tallisation  which  was  at  first  considered  to  be  so  clear.  In  HCIO,
the  water,  9HgO,  is  not  displaced  by  bases,  and  must  be  regarded  as  water  at
tion,  whilst  in  HlO^SHjO  it  must  be  regarded  as  water  of  hydretioo. We  sluUl
wards  see  that  the eyeteni  of tbe  elements  obliges  us  to  consider  the  halo)
substances  giving  a  highest  saline  type,  <7X;,  where  G  signifies  a  halogen,  aod  X
fO^JC,),  OH,  and  other  like  elements. Tbe  hydrate  lOIOHJicarrespouding  wJU
of  the  salts  of  periodic  acid  (for  example,  the  salts  of  barium,  strontium,  mercut^)  di

[it  exhaust  all  the  possible  forma.  It  is  evident  that  variouN  other  pyro-,i

re  poauble  by  tbe  loss  ot  water,  as  w
teid,  and  as  was  pcnuted  out  in  the  preoeding  ni

m  fully  explained  in  speaking  of  p]

-,*t,f.

THE  HALOGENS  511

200®)  or  acting  aa  an  oxidiser,  periodic  acid  first  gives  iodic  acid,  but  it
may  also  be  ultimately  decomposed.

Compounds  formed  between  chlorine  and  iodine  must  be  classed
among  the  most  interesting  halogen  bodies.^^  These  elements  com-
bine together  directly  with  evolution  of  heat,  and  form  iodine
fnonochloruie,  ICl,  or  iodine  tricldoride,  IClg.^"  As  water  reacts  on
these  substances,  forming  iodic  acid  and  iodine,  they  have  to  be  pre-
pared from  dry  iodine  and  chlorine. ^^  Both  substances  are  formed  in  a
number  of  reactions  ;  for  example,  by  the  action  of  aqua  regia  on  iodine,
of  chlorine  on  hydriodic  acid,  of  hydrochloric  acid  on  periodic  acid,  of
iodine  on  potassium  chlorate  (with  the  aid  of  heat,  &c,)  Trapp  obtained
iodine  monochloride,  in  beautiful  red  crystals,  by  passing  a  rapid
current  of  chlorine  into  molten  iodine.  The  monochloride  then  distils
over  and solidifies,  melting  at 27®. By  passing  chlorine  over  the

®"  With  respect  to  hydrogen,  oxygen,  chlorine,  and  other  elements,  bromine  occupies
an  intermediate  position  between  chlorine  and  iodine,  and  therefore  there  is  no  particular
need  for  considering  at  length  the  compounds  of  bromine.  This  is  the  great  advantage
of  a  natural  grouping  of  the  elements.

^  They  were  both  obtained  by  Gay-Lussac  and  many  others.  Recent  data  respect-
ing iodine  monochloride,  ICl,  entirely  confirm  the  numerous  observations  of  Trapp
(1854),  and  even  confirm  his  statement  as  to  the  existence  of  two  isomeric  (liquid  and
crystalline)  forms  (Stortenbeker).  With  a  small  excess  of  iodine,  iodine  monochloride
remains  liquid,  but  in  the  presence  of  traces  of  iodine  trichloride  it  easily  crystallises.
Tanatar  (1898)  showed  that  of  the  two  modifications  of  ICl,  one  is  stable,  and  melts  at
27°  ;  while  the  other,  which  easily  passes  into  the  first,  and  is  formed  in  the  absence  of  ICI3,
melts  at  14°.  Schiitzenberger  amplified  the  data  concerning  the  action  of  water  on  the
chlorides  (Note  88),  and  Christomanos  gave  the  fullest  data  regarding  the  trichloride.

After  being  kept  for  some  time,  the  liquid  monochloride  of  iodine  yields  red  deliques-
cent octahedra,  having  the  composition  ICI4,  which  are  therefore  formed  from  the  mono-
chloride with  the  liberation  of  free  iodine,  which  dissolves  in  the  remaining  quantity  of  the
monochloride.  This  substance,  however,  judging  by  certain  observations,  is  impure  iodine
trichloride.  If  1  part  of  iodine  be  stirred  up  in  20  parts  of  water,  and  chlorine  be  passed
through  the  liquid,  then  all  the  iodine  is  dissolved,  and  a  colourless  liquid  is  ultimately
obtained  which  contains  a  certain  proportion  of  chlorine,  because  tliis  compound  gives  a
metallic  cliloride  and  iodate  with  alkalis  without  evolving  any  free  iodine :  ICI5  +  6KHO
=  5KC1 -H  KIO3  4- 8H2O.  The  existence  of  a  pentachloride  ICI5  is,  however,  denied,
because  this  substance  has  not  been  obtained  in  a  free  state.

Stortenbeker  (1888)  mvestigated  the  equilibrium  of  the  system  containing  the  mole-
cules I2,  ICl,  ICI3,  and  CI2,  in  the  same  way  that  Boozeboom  (Chapter  X.  Note  88)  examined
the  equilibrium  of  the  molecules  HCl,  HC1,2H30,  and  H^O.  He  found  that  iodine
monochloride  appears  in  two  states,  one  (the  ordinary)  is  stable  and  melts  at  27°'2,  whilst
the  other  is  obtained  by  rapid  cooling,  and  molts  at  18^*9,  and  easily  passes  into  the
first  form.  Iodine  trichloride  melts  at  101°  only  in  a  closed  tube  under  a  pressure  of  16
atmospheres.

^  By  the  action  of  water  on  iodine  monochloride  and  trichloride  a  compound  IHCI2
is  obtained,  which  does  not  seem  to  be  altered  by  water.  Besides  this  comi>ound,  iodine
and  iodic  acid  are  always  formed,  lOICl  -H  8H3O  =  HIO5  +  5IHCI2  +  21-2 ;  and  in  this  respect
iodine  trichloride  may  be  regarded  as  a  mixture,  ICl  +  ICI5  =  2ICI5,  but  ICI5-1-8H.2O
-  IHO5  +  5HC1 ;  hence  iodic  acid,'  iodine,  the  compound  IHCl-^,  and  hydrochloric  acid
are  also  formed  by  the  action  of  water.

512  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

•crystals  of  the  monochloride,  it  is  easy  to  obtain  iodine  trichloride  in
orange  crystals,  which  melt  at  34°  and  volatilise  at  47^,  but  in  so  doing
decompose  (into  Clj  and  ClI).  The  chemical  properties  of  these
chlorides  entirely  resemble  those  of  chlorine  and  iodine,  as  would  be
expected,  because,  in  this  instance,  a  combination  of  similar  substances
has  taken  place  as  in  the  formation  of  solutions  or  aUojs.  Thus,  for
instance,  the  unsaturated  hydrocarbons  (for  example,  C2H4),  which
are  capable  of  directly  combining  with  chlorine  and  iodine,  also  directly
combine  with  iodine  monochloride.

513

CHAPTER  XII

SODIUM

TuK  neutral  salt,  sodium  sulphate,  Na2S04,  obtained  when  a  mixture  of
sulphuric  acid  and  common  salt  is  strongly  heated  (Chapter  X.),*  forms
a  colourless  saline  mass  consisting  of  fine  crystals,  soluble  m  water.  It
is  the  product  of  many  other  double  decompositions,  sometimes  carried
out  on  a  large  scale  ;  for  example,  when  ammonium  sulphate  is
heated  with  common  salt,  in  which  case  the  sal-ammoniac  is  volatilised,
&c.  A  similar  decomposition  also  takes  place  when,  for  instance,  a
mixture  of  lead  sulphate  and  common  salt  is  heated  ;  this  mixture
easily  fuses,  and  if  the  temperature  be  further  raised  heavy  vapours  of
lead  chloride  appear.  When  the  disengagement  of  these  vapours  ceases,
the  remaining  mass,  on  being  treated  with  water,  yields  a  solution  of
sodium  sulphate  mixed  with  a  solution  of  undecomposed  common  salt.
A  considerable  quantity,  however,  of  the  lead  sulphate  remains  un-
changed during  this  reaction,  PbS04  +  2NaCl  =PbCl2  4-  Na2S04,  the
vapours  will  contain  lead  chloride,  and  the  residue  will  contain  the  mix-
ture of  the  three  remaining  salts.  The  cause  and  nature  of  the  reaction
are  just  the  same  as  were  pointed  out  when  considering  the  action  of
sulphuric  acid  upon  NaCl.  Here  too  it  may  be  shown  that  the  double
decompasition  is  determined  by  the  removal  of  PbClg  from  the  sphere  of
the  action  of  the  remaining  substances.  This  is  seen  from  the  fact  that
sodium  sulphate,  on  being  dissolved  in  water  and  mixed  with  a  solution
of  any  lead  salt  (and  even  with  a  solution  of  lead  chloride,  although
this  latter  is  but  sparingly  soluble  in  water),  immediately  gives  a  white
precipitate  of  lead  sulphate.  In  this  case  the  lead  takes  up  the
elements  of  sulphuric  acid  from  the  sodium  sulphate  iti  the  solutions.

*  Whilst  describing  in  some  detail  the  properties  of  sodium  chloride,  hydrochloric  acid,
und  sodium  sulphate,  I  wish  to  impart,  by  separate  examples,  an  idea  of  the  properties
of  saline  substances,  but  the  dimensions  of  this  work  and  its  purpose  and  aim  do  not
permit  of  entering  into  particulars  concerning  every  salt,  acid,  or  other  substance.  Tlie
fundamental  object  of  this  work — an  account  of  the  characteristics  of  the  elements
and  an  acquaintance  with  the  forces  acting  between  atoms — has  nothing  to  gain  from
the  multiplication  of  the  number  of  as  yet  ungeneralised  properties  and  relations.

VOL.  I.  L  L

514  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

On  heating,  the  reverse  phenomenon  is  observed.  The  reaction  in  the
solution  depends  upon  the  insolubility  of  the  lead  sulphate,  and  the
decomposition  which  takes  place  on  heating  is  due  to  the  volatilitj
of  the  lead  chloride.  Silver  sulphate,  Ag2S04,  in  solution  with  common
salt,  gives  silver  chloride,  because  the  latter  is  insoluble  in  water,
Ag2S04  +  2NaCl  =  Na2S04  -I-  2AgCl.  Sodium  carbonate,  mixed  in
solution  with  the  sulphates  of  iron,  copper,  manganese,  magnesium,  <tc.,
gives  in  solution  sodium  sulphate,  and  in  the  precipitate  a  carbonate
of  the  corresponding  metal,  because  these  salts  of  carbonic  acid
are  insoluble  in  water  ;  for  instance,  MgS04  4-  Na2C03  =  NajSO,
4-  MgCO,,.  In  precisely  the  same  way  sodium  hydroxide  acts  on
solutions  of  the  majority  of  the  salts  of  sulphuric  acid  containing
metals,  the  hydroxides  of  which  are  insoluble  in  water — for  instance,
CUSO4  4-  2NaH0  =  Ou(HO)2  +  Na.2S04.  Sulphate  of  magnesium,
MgS04,  on  being  mixed  in  solution  with  common  salt,  forms,  although
not  completely,  chloride  of  magnesium,  and  sodium  sulphate.  On  cool-
ing the  mixture  of  such  (concentrated)  solutions  sodium  sulphate  ii
deposited,  as  was  shown  in  Chapter  X.  This  is  made  use  of  for  prepar-
ing it  on  the  large  scale  in  works  where  sea- water  is  treated.  In  this
case,  on  cooling,  the  reaction  2XaCl  +  MgS04  ^  MgCl.^  -f-  Na^S04
takes  place.

Thus  where  sulphates  and  salts  of  sodium  are  in  contact,  it  may
be  expected  that  sodium  sulphate  will  be  formed  and  separated  if
the  conditions  are  favourable  ;  for  this  reason  it  is  not  surprising
that  sodium  sulphate  is  often  found  in  the  native  state.  Some  of  the
springs  and  salt  lakes  in  the  steppes  beyond  the  Volga,  and  in  the
Caucasus,  contain  a  considerable  quantity  of  sodium  sulphate,  and  yield
it  by  simple  evaporation  of  the  solutions.  Beds  of  this  salt  are  also
met  with  ;  thus  at  a  depth  of  only  5  feet,  about  38  versts  to  the
east  of  Tiflis,  at  the  foot  of  the  range  of  the  *  Wolfs  mane '  (Voltchia
griva)  mountains,  a  deep  stratum  of  very  pure  Glauber's  salt,
Na2SO,,10H2O,  has  been  found. '^  A  layer  two  metres  thick  of  the
same  salt  lies  at  the  bottom  of  several  lakes  (an  area  of  alx>ut  10
square  kilometres)  in  the  Koubaii  district  near  Batalpaschinsk,  and
here  its  working  has  been  commenced  (1887).  In  Spain,  near  Arangoolx
and  in  many  parts  of  the  Western  States  of  North  America,  mineral
sodium  sulphate  has  likewise  been  found,  and  is  already  being  worked.

The  methods  of  obtaining  salts  by  means  of  double  decomposition

2  Anhydrous  (ignited)  sodium  sulphate,  Xa2S04,  is  known  in  trade  as 'sulphate'
or  salt-cake,  in  niinemlogj'  thrnardUe.  Crystalline  decahydrated  salt  is  termed  in
mineralogy  mirabilite,  and  in  tratle  Glauber's  salt.  On  fusing  it,  the  monohydrate
Na^SO^H^O  is  obtained,  together  with  a  supersaturated  solution.

SODIUM  5lS

from  others  already  prepared  are  so  general,  that  in  describing  a  given
salt  there  is  no  necessity  to  enumerate  the  cases  hitherto  observed  of
its  being  formed  through  various  double  decompositions.^  The  possi-
bility of  this  occurrence  ought  to  l>e  foreseen  according  to  Berthollet's
doctrine  from  the  properties  of  the  salt  in  question.  On  this  account
it  is  important  to  know  the  properties  of  salts  ;  all  the  more  so  because
up  to  the  present  time  those  very  propertie3  (solubility,  formation  of
crystallo- hydrates,  volatility,  &c.)  which  may  be  made  use  of  for  sepa-
rating them  from  other  salts  have  not  been  generalised.^  These  pro-
perties as  yet  remain  subjects  for  investigation,  and  are  rarely  to
be  foreseen.  The  crystallo-hydrate  of  the  normal  sodium  sulphate,
Na2SO4,10H2O,  very  easily  parts  with  water,  and  may  be  obtained
in  an  anhydrous  state  if  it  be  carefully  heated  until  the  weight  re-
mains constant ;  but  if  heated  further,  it  partly  loses  the  elements  of
sulphuric  anhydride.  The  normal  salt  fuses  at  843°  (red  heat),  and
volatilises  to  a  slight  extent  when  very  strongly  heated,  in  which  case  it
naturally  decomposes  with  tlie  evolution  of  SO3.  At  0°  100  parts  of
water  dissolve  5  parts  of  the  anhydrous  salt,  at  10°  9  parts,  at  20°  19*4,
at  30°  40,  and  at  34°  55  parts,  the  same  being  the  case  in  the  presence  of
an  excess  of  crystals  of  Na2SO4,10H2O.  '*  At  34°  the  latter  fuses,  and  the
solubility  decreases  at  higher  temperatures.^  A  concentrated  solution
at  84°  has  a  composition nearly  approaching  to  Na2S04  -f-  HHjO,

'  The  salts  may  be  obtained  not  only  by  methods  of  substitution  of  various  kinds,  but
also  by  many  other  combinations.  Thus  sodium  sulphate  may  be  formed  from  sodium
oxide  and  sulphuric  anhydride,  by  oxidising  sodium  sulphide,  Na^S,  or  sodium  sulphite,
Na^SOs,  d'c.  When  sodium  chloride  is  heated  in  a  mixture  of  the  vapours  of  water,  air,
and  sulphurous  anhydride,  sodium  sulphate  is  formed.  According  to  this  method  (patented
by  Hargreaves  and  Robinson),  sodium  sulphate,  Na2S04,  is  obtained  from  NaCl  without  the
preliminary  manufacture  of  H.2SO4.  Lumps  of  NaCl  pressed  into  bricks  are  loosely  packed
into  a  cylinder  and  subjected,  at  a  red  heat,  to  the  action  of  steam,  air  and  SO^'  Under
tliese  conditions,  HCl,  sulphate,  and  a  certain  amount  of  unaltered  NaCl  are  obtained.
This  mixture  is  converted  into  soda  by  Gossage's  process  (ner  Note  15»  and  may  have
some  practical  value.

*  Many  observations  have  been  made,  but  little  general  information  1ms  been  obtained
from  particular  cases.  In  addition  to  which,  the  properties  of  a  given  salt  are  changed
by  the  presence  of  other  salts.  This  takes  place  not  only  in  virtue  of  mutual  decomposi-
tion or  formation  of  double  salts  capable  of  separate  existence,  but  is  determined  by  the
influence  which  some  salts  exert  on  others,  or  by  forces  similar  to  those  which  act  during
solution.  Here  notaing  has  been  generalised  to  that  extent  which  would  render  it
possible  to  predict  without  previous  investigation,  if  there  be  no  close  analogy  to  help
us.  Let  UB  state  one  of  these  numerous  cases:  100  parts  of  water  at  20^  dissolve
34  parts  of  potassium  nitrate  but  on  the  addition  of  sodium  nitrate  the  solubility  of
potassium  nitrate  increases  to  48  parts  in  10  of  water  (Camelley  and  Thomson).  In
j^enoral,  in  all  cases  of  which  there  are  accurate  observations  it  appears  that  the
presence  of  foreign  salts  changes  the  properties  of  any  given  salt.

*  The  information  concerning  solubility  (Chapter  I.)  is  given  according  to  the  deter-
minations of  Gay-Lussac,  Ijovell,  and  Mulder.

*•  In  Chapter  I.,  Note  24,  we  have  already  seen  that  with  many  other  sulphates  the

LL  2

B16  PRIXCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

and  the  decahydrated  salt  contains  78-9  of  the  anhydroub  salt
l)ined  with  100  parts  of  water.  From  the  above  figures  it  is  Men
the  decahydrated  salt  cannot  fuse  without  decompoeiD^/  likeh^dn
chlorine,  Cl^SH^O  (Chapter  XI.,  Note  10).  Not  only  the  fused
hydrated  salt,  but  also  the  concentrated  solutioti  at  34°  (not  all  at
but  gradually),  yields  the  monohydrated  salt,  Nbi80«,H,0.  The  b
hydrated  salt,  NajS04,7HgO,  also  splits  up,  even  at  low  tempent
with  the  formation  of  this  monohydrated  salt,  and  therefore  fron
the  solubility  can  be  given  only  for  the  latter.  For  100  parts  of  i
this  is  as  follows  :  at  40°  48-8,  at  50°  46-7,  at  80°  43-7,  at  100'
parts  of  the  anhydrous  salt.  If  the  decahydrated  aalt  be  fused,
the  solution  allowed  to  coo)  in  the  presence  of  the  monohydi
salt,  then  at  vIO"  50-4  parts  of  anhydrous  salt  are  retained  in  the  i
lion,  and  at  20°  r)2-8  parts.  Hence,  with  respect  to  the  anhydrooi
monohydrated  salts,  the  solubility  is  identical,  and  falls  with  inci
ing  tempetnture,  whilst  with  respect  to decahyd rated  salt,  thesolub
rises  with  increasing  temperature. So  tliat  if  in  contact  with  a  solu

solubilitj'  olHucleiTeaiwsiJltirai.'ectttiii  leiuperature  ia  ptuaed.  OyiHaiii,.CsB04,(lUtO.
uid  inany  otlier  compounds  preseiil  uuth  a  pbenomenon.  An  obBervilion  of  TildcD's  (
in  most  inntractive  ;  1ih  Bhoued  thiLt  on  raUing  the  tempentare  (in  (closed  vpsaeU) :
I'lO*'  the  Holnbility  of  aodiom  sulphate  again  begins  to  incieaae.  At  100°  100  pi
witter  dissolve  about  49  piuU  of  afiliydrous  salt,  at  110°  13  parts,  at  leo^  13  pu
IBO'  44  iiarts,  at  asu"  411  par(«,  A.-cording  toEtard  (1892)  llie  aolnbilitj  of  SOpai
Na^SOj  ill  lOH  of  solution  (or  43  per  100  of  water)  corresponds  to  80°,  uid  above  9M
Holuhility  again  fnlls,  and  very  rapidly,  m  tliatat  B30°  the  solation  contiuiis  13  per
Holutiun  liilwat  14  per  100  ot  waterl  uiid  a  tortlier  rise  ol  temperalore  is  folloirnj
furtlier  <lc|iosilioii  o(  the  *»lt.  It  is  evident  that  the  plienoin^uon  ot  ntumtion,  <
mined  by  Ihe  presence  uf  nn  ei;eeiw  of  the  disaolred  substance,  is  verj-  coniiilei
therefore  Ibat  lor  the  tlieory  of  sululioiia  considered  as  liquid  indefinite  cbrmical
ponnds,  many  uaefal  statementM  can  liardly  be  given.

'  Already  referred  to  in  Chapter  I.,  Note  EB.

The  example  of  noilioni  sulphate  is  bistorically  very  important  for  tlie  tUrarj-  of
tions.  XotH'itliataiiding  the  number  of  investigations  whicli  have  been  made,  it  ir
insufficiently  iitodied,  especially  from  the  point  of  llie  vaponr  leiiaion  of  Kotutium
crysUillo-liydrales,  so  that  those  processes  cannot  be  applied  to  it  wbicli  Guld
Roo7i>U>om.  ^'an't  Hofl,  uiid  others  applied  to  aolutionsand  cr7'stallo-hyd»l«H.  H.
aim  be  most  important  to  investigate  t)ie  influence  of  pressure  on  the  various  phenoi
corrpspiinding  »itb  the  combinations  of  water  am)  sodium  sulphate,  because  wbencr;
are  seimraled — (or  instance,  of  the  decaliydrated  salt — an  increase  of  volume  take*  f
as  tan  lie  Keen  from  tlie  following  datii :— the  sp.  gr.  of  the  anhydrous  salt  ii  2-66>
of  the  deeahydratt'd  salt  -  MO,  but  the  sp.  gr.  of  solutions  at  16^,  l°^9,»»a  +  WSp  r  0
•here  p  represents  the  iiereentagc  of  anbydrooa  salt  in  the  solution,  and  the  ap.  i
water  at  4-  ^  lO.Omi.  Hence  for  solutions  containing  30  p.e.  of  anhydroiu  Halt  the  h]
E--l'ln!IG:  therefore  the  volume  of  lUU  grams  of  this  solution  c^tUt'Scc,  and  the  volui
anhj-drons  salt  contained  in  it  is  equal  to  30  a  00,  or  -  76  c.c,  and  the  volume  of  i
^WI-1  c.c.  Therefuri'.  the  solution,  on  dvcompohiiig  into  anhydiODS  salt  aud  w
iiicreHSFs  in  volume  Ifnim  KH-H  to  870) ;  but  in  the  same  way  888  c.c.  of  30  p.c.  Bolt
are  formed  from  {45' 4  1'4II  )  31 1  c.c.  of  tbe  decahydrutvd  salt,  and  510  cc.  of  wal
tlut  ia  to  say,  (hat  during  the  furmation  of  a  wilation  from  Hii'T  c.c,  HS'H  co.  an  f<>m

SODIUM  617

of  sodium  sulphate  there  are  only  crystals  of  that  heptahydrated  salt
(Chapter  1.,  Note  54),  Na2S04,7H20,  which  is  formed  from  saturated
solutions,  then  saturation  sets  in  when  the  solution  has  the  follow-
ing composition  per  100  parts  of  salt :  at  0°  196,  at  10°  305,  at  20'
44-7,  and  at  25°  52*9  parts  of  anhydrous  salt.  Above  27°  the
heptahydrated  salt,  like  the  decahydrated  salt  at  34°,  splits  up
into  the  monohydrated  salt  and  a  saturated  solution.  Thus  sodium
sulphate  has  three  curves  of  solubility  :  one  forNa2S04,7H20  (fromO'
to  26°),  one  for  Na2SO4,10H2O  (from  0°  to  34°),  and  one  for
Na2S04,H20  (a  descending  curve  beginning  at  26°),  because  there  are
three  of  these  crystallo-hydrates,  and  the  solubility  of  a  substance
only  depends  upon  the  particular  condition  of  that  portion  of  it  which
has  separated  from  the  solution  or  is  present  in  excess.  *

Thus  solutions  of  sodium  sulphate  may  give  crystallo-hydrates  of
three  kinds  on  cooling  the  saturated  solution  :  the  unstable  hepta-
hydrated salt  is  obtained  at  temperatures  below  26°,  the  decahydrated
salt  forms  under  ordinary  conditions  at  temperatures  below  34°,  and
the  monohydrated  salt  at  temperatures  above  34°.  Both  the  latter
crystallo-hydrates  present  a  stable  state  of  equilibrium,  and  the  hepta-
hydrated salt  decomposes  into  them,  probably  according  to  the  equa-
tion 3Na2S04,7H20  =  2Na2SO4,10H2O  +  Na2S04,H20.  The  ordinary
decahydrated  salt  is  called  Glauber's  salt.  All  forms  of  these  crystallo-
hydrates  lose  their  water  entirely,  and  give  the  anhydrous  salt  when
dried  over  sulphuric  acid.^

Sodium  sulphate,  Na2S04,  only  enters  into  a  few  reactions  of  com-
bination  with  other  salts,  and  chiefly  with  salts  of  the  same  acid
forming  double  sulphates. Thus,  for  example,  if  a  solution  of  sodium

^  From  this  example  it  is  evident  the  solution  remains  unaltered  until  from  the
contact  of  a  solid  it  becomes  either  saturated  or  supersaturated,  crystallisation  being
determined  by  tlie  attraction  to  a  solid,  as  the  plienomenon  of  supersaturation  clearly
demonstrates.  This  partially  explains  cei*tain  apparently  contnidictor\'  determinations
of  solubility.  The  best  investigated  example  of  such  complex  relations  is  cited  in
Cliapter  XIV.,  Note  50  (for  CaCl.).

^  Acconling  to  Pickering's  experiments  (1886),  the  molecular  weight  in  grams  (that
is,  1-12  grams)  of  anhydrous  sodium  sulphate,  on  being  dissolved  in  a  large  mass  of  water,
at  0^  absorbs  (hence  the  -  sign)  -  1,100  heat  miits,  at  10^-700,  at  16° -275,  at  aO**
gives  out  -1-  25,  at  25^  +  300  calories.  For  the  decaliydrated  salt,  Na4SO4,10lI,O,
5° -4,225, 10° -4,000, 16^-3,570,  20° -8,160,  25°-2,775.  Hence  (just  as  in  Chapter  I.,
Note  50)  the  heat  of  the  combination  NajS04,10HiO  at  5**= +8,125,  10°= +8,260,
20'  -  +  8,200,  and  25°=  +  8,050.

It  is  evident  that  the  decahydrated  salt  dissolving  in  water  gives  a  decrease  of  temi>era-
ture.  Solutions  in  hydrochloric  acid  give  a  still  greater  decrease,  because  they  contain
the  water  of  crystallisation  in  a  solid  state — that  is,  like  ice — and  this  on  melting  absorbs
heat.  A  mixture  of  15  parts  of  Na2SO4,10H2O  and  12  parts  of  strong  hydrochloric  acid
pro<luces  sufficient  cold  to  freeze  water.  During  the  treatment  with  hydrochloric  acid
a  certain  quantity  of  sodium  chloride  is  formed.

518  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

sulphate  lie  mixed  with  a  solution  of  aluminiam,  magnesium,  <>r  ferr^
sulphate,  it  gires  crystals  of  a  doable  salt  when  evaporated.  Sulphi
acid  itself  forms  a  compound  with  aodium  sulphate,  which  is  ezac
like  these  double  salts.  It  is  formed  with  great  ease  when  sodi
sulphate  is  dissolved  in  sulphuric  acid  and  the  soluticHi  ev^K>rat
On  evaporation,  crystals  of  the  acid  salt  separate,  XajSO^  +  H^
=  2NaHS04.  This  separates  from  hot  solutions,  whilst  the  crysta
hydrate,  XaHS<^)4,H20,*®  separates  from  cold  solutions.  The  crys<
when  expi^ised  to  damp  air  decompose  into  H^SO^,  which  deliquesi
and  Na^SOi  (Graham,  Rose) ;  alcohol  also  extracts  solphuric  acid  fr
the  acid  salt.  This  shows  the  feeble  force  which  holds  the  sulphi
acid  to  the  sodium  sulphate.**  Both  acid  sodium  sulphate  and
mixtures  of  the  normal  salt  and  sulphuric  acid  lose  water  when  heat
and  are  converted  into  sodium  pyrosulphate^  Na^S^O^,  at  a  low  i
heat.**  *'■"  This  anhydrous  salt,  at  a  bright  i*ed  heat,  parts  with  t
elements  of  sulphuiic  anhydride,  the  normal  sodium  sulphate  remain!
behind—  Xa^SgO-  =  Na2S04  +  SO3.  From  this  it  is  seen  that  \
normal  salt  is  able  to  combine  with  water,  with  other  sulphates,  a
with  sulphuric  anhydride  or  acid,  «fcc.

Sodium  sulphate  may  by  double  decomposition  be  converted  ii
a  sodium  salt  of  any  other  acid,  by  means  of  heat  and  taking  advanta
of  the  volatility,  <»r  by  means  of  solution  and  taking  advantage  of  t
different  degi*ee  of  solubility  of  the  different  salts.  Thus,  for  instam
owing  Ui  the  insolubility  of  barium  sulphate,  sodium  hydroxide
caustic  soda  may  be  prepared  from  sodium  sulphate,  if  barium  hydroxi
b<»  added  to  its  solution,  Na^SO,  -^  Ba(HO).^  =  BaSO^  -f  2NaH
And  by  taking  any  salt  of  barium,  BaX.^,  the  corresponding  salt
sodium  may  be  obtained,  Xa^SO.,  +  BaX.^  =  BaS04  -h  2NaX. Bariu

^^  The  very  larj^e  and  well-fonned  ciystals  of  this  salt  resemble  the  liTdn
H.2S04,H.'0,  or  S0(0II)4.  In  general  the  replacement  of  hydrogen  by  sodiuni  modif
many  of  the  properties  of  acids  less  than  its  replacement  by  other  metals.  Thi^  m«
probably  depends  on  the  volumes  being  nearly  equal.

*^  In  solution  (Berthelot)  the  acid  salt  in  all  probability  deeoin}x>8es  moKt  in  t
f^roatcst  mass  of  water.  The  specific  gravity  (according  to  the  determinations
Marignac)  of  solutions  at  1504^ -9,992 +  77-92^J  +  0-231i)*  {see  Note  7).  From  tht!
figures,  and  from  the  si)ecilic  gravities  of  sulphuric  acid,  it  is  evident  that  on  mixu
solutions  of  this  acid  and  sodium  sulphate  expansion  will  always  take  place;  f
instance,  H,^S04  +  25H.jO  with  Na,^S04  +  25H20  increases  from  483  volumes  to  486.
addition  t(i  which,  in  weak  solutions  heat  is  absorbed,  as  shown  in  Chapter  X.,  Note  S
Nevertlu'h'HK,  even  more  acid  salts  maybe  formed  and  obtained  in  a  crystalline  fon
For  inHtance,  <in  cooling  a  solution  of  1  part  of  sodium  sulphate  in  7  i>arts  of  Btilphoi
acid,  cryHtals  of  the  composition  NaHS04,HoS04  are  separated  (Schultz,  1868).  Tli
componn«l  fuses  at  about  100^  ;  the  ordinarj-  acid  salt,  NaHS04,  at  149".

'*  '•'■•  On  <lecieasing  tlie  pressure,  sodium  hydrogen  sulphate,  NaHS04,  dissociat
much  more  easily  tlum  at  the  ordinary  pressure;  it  Iom's  water  and  forms  the  p\T»>!jo
phati',  Na^S^O;  ;  this  reaction  is  utilist'd  in  chemical  works.

SODIUM  519

sulphate  thus  formed,  being  a  very  sparingly-soluble  salt,  is  obtained
a  precipitate,  whilst  the  sodium  hydroxide,  or  salt,  NaX,  is  obtained  in
solution,  because  all  salts  of  sodium  are  soluble,  BerthoUet's  doctrine
permits  all  such  cases  to  be  foreseen.

The  reactions  of  decomposition  of  sodium  sulphate  are  above  all
noticeable  by  the  separation  of  oxygen.  Sodium  sulphate  by  itself  is
very  stable,  and  it  is  only  at  a  temperature  sufficient  to  melt  iron  that  it
is  possible  to  separate  the  elements  SO3  from  it,  and  then  only  partially.
However,  the  oxygen  may  be  separated  from  sodium  sulphate,  as  from
all  other  sulphates,  by  means  of  many  substances  which  are  able  to
combine  with  oxygen,  such  as  charcoal  and  sulphur,  but  hydrogen  is
not  able  to  produce  this  action.  If  sodium  sulphate  be  heated  with
charcoal,  then  carbonic  oxide  and  anhydride  are  evolved,  and  there  is
produced,  according  to  the  circumstances,  either  the  lower  oxygen
compound,  sodium  sulphite,  Na2S03  (for  instance,  in  the  formation
of  glass)  ;  or  else  the  decomposition  proceeds  further,  and  sodium
sulphide,  Na^S,  is  formed,  according  to  the  equation  Na2S04  +  2C
=  2CO2  +  NaaS.

On  the  basis  of  this  reaction  the  greater  part  of  the  sulphate  of
sodium  prepared  at  chemical  works  is  converted  into  soda  a^h — that  is,
sodium  carbonate,  NaaCOs,  which  is  used  for  many  purposes.  In  the
form  of  carbonates,  the  metallic  oxides  behave  in  many  cases  just  as
they  do  in  the  state  of  oxides  or  hydroxides,  owing  to  the  feeble  acid
properties  of  carbonic  acid.  However,  the  majority  of  the  salts  of
carbonic  acid  are  insoluble,  whilst  sodium  carbonate  is  one  of  the  few
soluble  salts  of  this  acid,  and  therefore  reacts  with  facility.  Hence
sodium  carbonate  is  employed  for  many  purposes,  in  which  its  alkaline
properties  come  into  play.  Thus,  even  under  the  action  of  feeble
organic  acids  it  immediately  parts  with  its  carbonic  acid,  and  gives
a  sodium  salt  of  the  acid  taken.  Its  solutions  exhibit  an  alkaline
reaction  on  litmus.  It  aids  the  passage  of  certain  organic  substances
(tar,  acids)  into  solution,  and  is  therefore  used,  like  caustic  alkalis  and
soap  (which  latter  also  acts  by  virtue  of  the  alkali  it  contains),  for
the  removal  of  certain  organic  substances,  especially  in  bleaching
cotton  and  similar  fabrics.  Besides  which  a  considerable  quantity
of  sodium  carbonate  is  used  for  the  preparation  of  sodium  hydroxide
or  caustic  soda,  which  has  also  a  very  wide  application.  In  large
chemical  works  where  sodium  carbonate  is  manufactured  from  Na.^SO^,
it  is  usual  first  to  manufacture  sulphuric  acid,  and  then  by  its  aid  to
convert  common  salt  into  sodium  sulphate,  and  lastly  to  convert  the
sodium  sulphate  thus  obtained  into  carbonate  and  caustic  soda.  Hence
these  works  prepare  both  alkaline  substances  (soda  ash  and  caustic

520  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

soda)  and  acid  substances  (sulphuric  and  hydrochloric  acids),  the  t
classes  of  chemical  products  which  are  distinguished  for  the  great
energy  of  their  reactions  and  are  therefore  most  frequently  appli
to  technical  purposes.  Factories  manufacturing  soda  are  genera
called  alkali  works.

The  process  of  the  conversion  of  sodium  sulphate  into  sodii
carbonate  consists  in  strongly  heating  a  mixture  of  the  sulphate  wi
charcoal  and  calcium  carbonate.  The  following  reactions  then  ta
place  :  the  sodium  sulphate  is  first  deoxidised  by  the  charcoal,  formi
sodium  sulphide  and  carbonic  anhydride,  Na2S04  4-  2C  =  Na2S-|-2C(
The  sodium  sulphide  thus  formed  then  enters  into  double  decompositi
with  the  calcium  carbonate  taken,  and  gives  calcium  sulphide  aj
sodium  carbonate,  NagS  +  CaCOg  =  Na-^COj  -f  CaS.

Besides  which,  under  the  action  of  the  heat,  a  portion  of  the  exoe
of  calcium  carlK)nate  is  decomposed  into  lime  and  carbonic  anhydrid
CaCO-j  =  CaC)  4-  CO.^,  and  the  carbonic  anhydride  with  the  excess
charcoal  forms  carbon  monoxide,  which  towards  the  end  of  the  oper
tion  shows  itself  by  the  appearance  of  a  blue  flame.  Thus  fromja  ma
containing  sodium  sulphate  we  obtain  a  mass  which  includes  sodiu
carbonate,  calcium  sulphide,  and  calcium  oxide,  but  none  of  the  sodiu
sulphide  which  was  formed  on  first  heating  the  mixture.  The  enti
process,  which  proceeds  at  a  high  temperature,  may  be  expressed  I
a  combination  (»f  the  three  above-mentioned  formulae,  if  it  be  i>ai
sidered  that  the  product  contains  one  equivalent  of  calcium  oxide  i
two  equivalents  of  calcium  sulphide.'*  The  sum  of  the  reactioi
may  then  l)e  expressed  thus  :  2Na.^S04  -f  aCaCOg  +90  =  2NaiCC
-h  CaO,2Ca8  -h  lOCO.  Indeed,  the  quantities  in  which  the  substano
are  mixed  together  at  chemical  works  approaches  to  the  proportion  r
quired  by  this  e(|uation.  The  entire  process  of  decomposition  is  carn<
on  in  reverberatory  furivaces,  into  which  a  mixture  of  1,000  parts  <
sodium  sulphate,  1,040  parts  of  calcium  carbonate  (as  a  somewhi
porous  limestone),  and  500  parts  of  small  coal  is  introduced  from  aboT<
This  mixture  is  first  heated  in  the  portion  of  the  furnace which :

'-  Cali'iuni  snlphid*',  ('»iS,  like  many  metallic  Hulplii<les  which  are  soluble  in  water,
decom|X)sefl  by  it  (Chapter  X.>,  CaS  •  H.jO  =  ChO  + H2S,  becauHe  hydrogen  snlphk
is  A  very  feehlt*  a<i(l.  If  calcium  siiliihide  Ih;  acted  on  by  a  large  mane  of  water,  lime  mi
b«*  precipitati'd,  and  a  state  of  etjuilibrium  will  be  reached,  when  the  Bystem  CaO--  2C«
remains  unehan^jed.  Tiime,  IxMn*,'  a  [iroduct  of  the  action  of  water  on  CaS,  limits  th
action.  Therefore,  if  in  blaek  ash  the  lime  were  not  in  cxcens,  a  part  of  the  Hii]plu<
wouhl  1><*  in  solution  (actually  there  is  hut  very  little).  In  this  manner  in  the  mani
factnre  of  sodium  carhonaU*  the  conditions  of  equilibrium  which  enter  into  cloub
decom])ositions  have  l)een  made  use  of  (nee  ahorr),  and  the  aim  is  to  form  direetlv  t>
tinchan^eable  ]n*o<luct  CjiO,'2CaS.  This  was  first  regarded  as  a  special  inRoluhl
compound,  but  there  is  no  evidence  of  its  indei>endent  existence.

furthest  renioveil  from  the  firp-grate  ;  it  is  then  brought  to  the  purtinti

netii^st  to tht- firf-i.T.T.ti"', wlinn it 13 stirred during heating. The

P,  V.dom  101  (tlning  Mid  brlngliig  lb»mw>'taw»nl«  t _
rvA  of  tin  uinniUiui  the  mnlfdiel  nun  )•  vlurgci]  Uilo  trtnia

juirtialiy  fu.sctl  urnss  obtained  at  the  end  of  the  process  is  cooled,  aad
tbeu  subjected  to  methodical  lixiviation  '^  to  extract  the  sodium  car-

'=  ifr(*od.Vn/  lU

riaHf»

U  the  eilnc

ion

bjm™,

of  water

r  >  •oluble

(romlhe

noa.  coi.t«iii

DBit.

It  ia  i-uried

□  uuatK

Obtoio  WB.k«J«««l

MluUona,

1  Ik  nav  Ilut  tbe  nmiduo  ahull  d

o(  tlieid

ble  BullBM

.ce. This

iimbltfu.  1

prK:t«11)-

.»nj  in,la

stries. It

lr>  exlnmt

(rom  Uie

T>AH>idll  tW

'[■h

-  is  ™«lj

e)r<!c;l«d  i

■rater  l>u  fl

r>t  po«re,l

iiuai,  the  ttiong  Koltttiou  thus  ofatameil  decunlpd,  tlteii  water  attain  gioDrad
bring  alloni'il  for  it  to  act,  then  Bgain  deuuited,  and  so  on  nutil  tmsli
m  not  take  ii|i  anytbJDg.  Bnt  then  flnallf  nDi^b  ireak  wilatioDa  are  obtained
mkl  be  verj'  diwulviaDtaKBatli  to  evaporate  Dieui.  This  ia  avoided  b;  pomring
but  water  ilMlinml  for  tbe  litiviation,  not  onto  llio  Ireiib  uaaa,  bat  Dpon  a

Wnatf,  till'  mixture  of  calcium  oxide  anil  sulphide  forming  the  ac>-ca]

'  Boda  waste  '  or  '  alkali  waste,'  '*

which  hiuBlreadybiHiii  HulijecWd  to  a  Bt«t  lixiviatiou  b;  weak  nolatioiuh.  IttUU*««]
Fredi  w&ter  )[ive«  *  weak  solution.  Tbu  ■trong  eolation  whii^  gnes  to  Ilia  evKpon
pan  flows  trum  tliiiM  iwrtfi  of  (he  uptxinitai  which  oonUin  the  fmali,  &«  ynl  unlixiTu
mawi,  und  (bus  in  tiit  hitter  p«.rts  the  weak  idkah  lonneil  in  tlw  oilier  imMk  of
apiuratUH  becomes  sutarated  a»  f ar  lU  iwonihle  with  the  soluble  substiutoe.  CJvuii
Heveni  iuteiconimauicatiug  venMlii  ire  roDiilruuled  (BLuidiiii;  at  the  aaiue  level)
which  ill  tum  the  fraah  mmt  is  cluUK«d  whitli  is  iDl«Dde>d  lor  liiiviktion ;  Uie  wab
inontd  in.  the  alkali  drawu  oil,  aud  the  liiiiiatdd  residue  lemoTed.  The  illnsla
njirvBeiits  such  an  appftratus,  conxiHtiiig  of  taar  comma Dirating  V£«spla.  The  ■
poured  into  one  of  thetn  flows  throogh  the  two  nearest  nnd  issuea  [rom  the  third.
treHh  mans  being  phwed  in  one  of  Uiese  boxes  or  loaseU,  the  elreani  of  iHtBT  pi*
through  the  apparatns  is  directed  in  ench  a  manner  an  to  finally  issue  fmoi  Uu«  vevatil
taining  the  treth  unliiiviateJ  mass.  Tlie  fresh  water  is  udd^  to  the  rewel  oontai
the  materiul  whieh  has  been  almost  sompletely  eidiaasl«I.  PuHingr  tfamogli  this  «
it  is  conveyed  by  the  pipe  (sjphon  pasainK  from  the  bottom  of  the  flrat  box  to  the  ta
the  suuondl  communicating  with  the  second ;  it  finally  passes  (also  thnnigh  >  aft
))ipe|  into  the  boi  (the  third)  oontuning  the  fresh  oiaterial.  The  water  will  sxtraol
that  is  fioluble  in  the  first  Tessel.  kaving  only  ui  insolnbla  pesidae.  Thin  reMel  ia  I
rvadj  to  be  emptied,  and  refilled  witli  Iresh  material.  The  lerels  of  the  liqnida  in
nrions  ressels  will  natorally  be  dillereut,  iu  couMquence  of  the  variouB  ntrengtlu  al
Bolntionii  which  the;  contain.

It  must  not,  however,  be  thought  that  sodium  carbonate  alone  posses  into  theaolnt
there  is  also  a  good  deal  of  caustic  soda  with  it,  [ormed  by  the  action  of  Unw  «B
carbonate  of  sodium,  and  there  are  also  certain  sodiaoi  anlphar  componndB  with  *l
we  shall  portly  become  aci^DainLed  hereafter.  The  sodiom  carbonate,  thprefora,  ia
obtained  in  n  very  pure  state.  The  solution  is  concentrnted  by  evaporation,  Thi
conducted  by  means  of  the  waste  heat  (mm  the  soda  furnaces,  togutber  with  tha
the  gases  given  nil.  The  process  in  the  doda  fnniaces  can  only  be  carriwl  mi  kt  »  1
tomperBture,  and  tlierelore  the  amoVe  and  gases  issoinK  (rom  tliem  are  oeci-BaBrily  1
hot.  If  the  heat  they  contain  was  not  made  use  of  there  would  be  ■  grekt  WMIi
fuel ;  t-onsei|aant]y  in  immediate  proximity  to  Uiese  farnoces  there  ia  iJeiietaUy  »  n
of  pans  (IT  evaporating  boitern,  under  which  the  gases  pma,  and  into  which  lb*  iJ
•otution  i*  inured.  On  evaporating  the  solntion,  first  ol  alt  the  nndecoiniioacd  aod
snipliute  separates,  then  tlio  sodium  carbonate  or  soda  crystals.  These  Frystftls  aa  I
separate  are  raked  out  and  placed  on  planks,  where  the  liquid  drains  sway  trou  tli
Caustic  soda  remains  in  the  residue,  and  also  any  sodium  chloridK  which  was
deeomposed  in  the  foregoing  process.

Fart  ol  the  sodium  carbonate  ia  recryalallised  iu  order  to  purify  it  more  thaioo);
In  order  to  do  this  a  saturated  aolntion  is  left  to  crystallise  at  h  tempemture  below
in  a  oorrent  ol  air,  in  order  to  promote  the  separatiou  of  the  water  voponr.  The  U
tiannporent  cryst^s  (efllorescent  in  ur)  of  Na2COi.lDH/)  are  then  formed  whicli  h
already  been  spoken  of  (Chapter  L).

'  >  The  whole  ol  the  snlpbur  used  in  the  production  of  the  sulphuric  acid  employei
decomposing  the  common  salt  is  contained  in  this  residue.  This  is  the  graal  bar
and  eipenae  ol  the  soda  works  which  use  Lel>liLnc'H  method.  As  an  inMructlra  tiSMI
from  a  chemical  pomt  of  riew,  it  is  worth  while  mentioning  here  two  oi  the  tmj
methods  of  rocoTering  the  sulpliur  Irom  the  soda  waste.  Chiuice's  process  ia  triwiii
aiapter  XS.,  Note  0.

Kynaiton  (IBSB)  tre&ts  the soda  waste  with  a  sotntion  (sp.  gr.  1-21)  at  maBOM

.«Aloride, which disengages sulphuretted hydrogfii : CaB'f  MgCI,  +  aH]0  —  Oi

ltg(OH)i->  HiSi Sulphurous  anhydride  is  pnased  through  the  residw- in  order  la  fk

insoluble calcium  sulphite  : Cana'Mg(OH|,*  sa,.=C«Snif  MgCI,+|l^/j

SODIUM  528

The  above-mentioned  process  for  making  soda  was  discovered  in  the
year  1808  by  the  French  doctor  Leblanc,  and  is  known  as  the  Leblanc
process.  The  particulars  of  the  discovery  are  somewhat  remarkable.
Sodium  carbonate,  having  a  considerable  application  in  industry,  was
for  a  long  time  prepared  exclusively  from  the  ash  of  marine  plants
(Chapter  XI.,  page  497).  Even  up  to  the  present  time  this  process  is
carried  on  in  Normandy.  In  France,  where  for  a  long  time  the  manu-
facture of  large  quantities  of  soap  (so-called  Marseilles  soap)  and  various
fabrics  required  a  large  amount  of  soda,  the  quantity  prepared  at  the
coast  was  insufficient  to  meet  the  demand.  For  this  reason  during
the  wars  at  the  beginning  of  the  century,  when  the  import  of  foreign
goods  into  France  was  interdicted,  the  want  of  sodium  carbonate  was  felt.
The  French  Academy  offered  a  prize  for  the  discovery  of  a  profitable
method  of  preparing  it  from  common  salt.  Leblanc  then  proposed  the
above-mentioned  process,  which  is  remarkable  for  its  great  simplicity.^*

solution  of  magnesium  chloride  obtained  iH  again  used,  and  the  washed  calcium  sulphite
is  brought  into  contact  at  a  low  temperature  with  hydrochloric  acid  (a  weak  aqueous
solution)  and  hydrogen  sulphide,  the  whole  of  the  sulphur  then  separating :

CaSOj  +  2H.iS+2HCl  =  CaCl^  +  3H..,0  -r  3S.

But most  efiforts have been directed towards avoiding the formation  of soda
waste.

*^  Among  the  drawbacks  of  the  Leblanc  process  are  the  accumulation  of  'soda
waste'  (Note  14)  owing  to  the  impossibility  at  the  comparatively  low  price  of  sulphur
(especially  in  the  form  of  pyrites)  of  finding  employment  for  the  sulphur  and  sulphur
compounds  for  which  this  waste  is  sometimes  treated,  and  also  the  insufficient  purity
of  the  sodium  carbonate  for  many  purposes.  The  advantages  of  the  Leblanc  process,
besides  its  simplicity  and  cheapness,  are  that  almost  the  whole  of  the  acids  obtained
as  bye-products  have  a  commercial  value;  for  chlorine  and  bleaching  powder  are
produced  from  the  large  amount  of  hydrochloric  acid  which  appears  as  a  bye-product ;
caustic  soda  also  is  very  easily  made,  and  the  demand  for  it  increases  ever}*  year.
In  those  places  where  salt,  pyrites,  charcoal,  and  limestone  (the  materials  required
for  alkali  works)  are  found  side  by  side — as,  for  instance,  in  the  Ural  or  Don
districts — conditions  are  favourable  to  the  development  of  the  manufacture  of  sodium
carbonate  on  an  enormous  scale ;  and  where,  as  in  the  Caucasus,  sodium  sulphate
occurs  naturally,  the  conditions  are  still  more  favourable.  A  large  amount,  however*
of  the  latter  salt,  even^from  soda  works,  is  used  in  making  glass.  The  most  important
Boda  works,  as  regards  the  quantity  of  products  obtained  from  them,  are  the  English
works.

As  an  example  of  the  other  numerous  and  varied  methods  of  manufacturing  soda
from  sodium  chloride,  the  following  may  be  mentioned :  Sodium  chloride  is  decom-
IKised  by  oxide  of  lead,  PbO,  forming  lead  chloride  and  sodium  oxide,  which,  with  carbonic
anhydride,  yields  sodium  carbonate  (Scheele's  process).  In  Comu's  method  soilium
chloride  is  treated  with  lime,  and  then  exposed  to  the  air,  when  it  yields  a  small
quantity  of  sodium  carbonate.  In  E.  Kopp's  process  sodium  sulphate  (125  parts)  is  mixed
with  oxide  of  iron  (80  parts)  and  charcoal  (55  parts),  and  the  mixture  is  heated  in  reverbe-
ratory  furnaces.  TLorv  a  compound,  Na^FciSj,  is  formed,  which  is  insoluble  in  water
absorbs  oxygen  and  curbonic  unhydrido,  and  then  forms  sodium  carbonate  and  ferroos
sulphide  ; this when roasted gives  sulphurous  anhydride,  the  indispensable  material

524  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

Of  all  other  induEtiial  processes  for  manufacturing  sodiaiii  carboi
the  mmnonw  jiroceait  is  the  moat  worthy  of  mention.'*  In  this
vapours  of  iimmonia,  and  then  an  excess  of  carbonic  anhydride,
directly  introduced  intj>  a  concentrated  solution  of  sodium  chlcMid
order  to  form  the  acid  ftnuiioniura  carbonate,  XH|!HCOj.  Then
means  of  the  double  saline  deoomposition  of  this  salt,  sodium  chlorii
decomposed,  and  in  virtue  of  its  slight  solubility  acid  sodium  carboi
NaHCOj,  is  precipitated  and  ammonium  chloride,  NH^Cl,  is  obta
in  solution  (with  a  portion  of  the  sodium  chloride  and  acid  soc
carbonatp).  The  reaction  proceeds  in  the  solution  owing  to  the  spa
solubility  of  the  NaHCOj  according  to  the  e<|uatlon  NaCl  +  NH,H
=  NHjCI  +  NhHCO:,.  The  ammonia  is  recovered  ft^m  the  sols
by  heating  with  lime  or  magnesia,"'  ^''  and  the  precipitated  acid  sod
carbonate  is  converted  into  the  normal  salt  by  heating.  It  is
obtained  in  a  very  pure  state."

for  the  iiiuiiufHcture  i>F  auLphiirio  lujjil,  ujid  teirw  cts^iile  whk'b  in  again  xtnad  in
proctii4H.  lu  Grant^H  metliod  bodimu  >iulphat«  is  tninfifunned  jkito  Hodiuiu  naJphidc
tlie  Utter  io  devniiipoxcil  It;  a  Btreajti  of  ciLrbonie  uihydride  aiid  steam,  when  hydi
8iilphi<le  in  (liiien(!«Ke'l  i™^  sodium  cftrlmnate  fnriiied.  Gossage  preparen  Na,S
NajSO,  (hy  heating  it  witli  caibon),  dinHolres  it  in  wal«r  aiiil  siibJKts  the  mlation  t
action  of  an  cxceso  of  CO,  in  coke  towi^rH,  thus  obliiining  H,S  (a  gas  which  give!
under  perfect  combuation,  or  snlpliar  when  ineonipleteljr  bomt,  Chapter  XX.,  Note  «
bicarboniLte  of  sodium  ;  N«.S  -f  'JCO^  +  iaH,0  =  H.,S  +  'iHSt.CO-^.  The  latter  Kires  eodi
CO.j  wlien  ignited.  Tliisproceiis  quite  eliminateH  the  (orroation  of  soda-waste  (are  Xc
and  sliould  in  my  opinion  be  Huitable  for  the  treatment  of  native  Na^SO^,  lik«
which  is  tiinnd  in  tlie  Caucnsofi,  all  the  more  HJnce  H.>S  gives  snlphnr  sa  a  liye-prodi
Repeated  cfforln  Iiatc  been  iiutile  in  recent  (lines  tii  iibtnin  soda  (and  chloriiH
Chaiilerll..  N'litel)  from  stninRsolutioimnr  salt  (ClmplvrX,  Note  lis  biej  by  the  a<
ot  an  elerlric  enmnl.  bnt  Dntil  now  tliese  metlinls  have  not  been  worked  oat  aufficit
lor  practi<*al  use,  probnbly  partly  owin](  to  the  c*  mi  plicated  apparatus  needed,  and
tact  that  Ibe  chlorine  given  oft  al  Ibe  inode  nirrales  the  electrodes  and  vouteU  and
but  a  limited  industrial  aiiplii-ali<ui. We  may  menlion  (hat  aii-ording  to  Heaiprl  (I

are  {usHeil  llimugb  u  Nitnrated  solution  of  N'al'l.

Hoilium  carWiite  may  likewise  he  oblainul  from  cryolite  (Chapter  XVII.,  Note
the  metliod  of  treiitiiig  this  will  be  mentiuni-d  under  .Mominium.

'«  Tliis  proce™  (tliairter  XVII.)  was  Hr-l  i«intr.t  out  by  Torek,  worked  oul
Scliloesing,  uihI  Hiially  npt>lM  iiiduslnally  by  Kolvay.  Tin-  lirst  illMSllarge  widafacb
ereeted  in  Rusuin  for  norking  lliis  pmceHH  arc  en  tin-  Ijaukii  of  the  Kama  st  Bereu
near  OusiJia,  ami  Ivlong  to  Lubimofl.  But  Hu-siu,  wliicli  "till  impi>rtB  from  abra
largu  quantity  of  bleaching  inwder  and  exportr  ii  laryi'  amount  of  manganese  ore,  ■
of  all  reiiuires  works  carrying  on  the  Leblane  iiriK'i-as.  In  IHUU  ii  factory  of  tliia  kind
erecleil  hy  V.  K.  Ooslikoft,  on  Ibe  Kama,  near  Elagonbi.

1*  I'l-  Moiid  Iscc  C'ha|iter  XI..  Mote  S  Ihk)  separates  the  .NH,C1  from  the  rexidud  .
tions  by  cisiling  (Cliajiler  X..  Note  44) ;  ignit«'s  tlie  aul-ununoniac  and  jMuues  tlie  vaj
over  »gU,  and  so  ru-obtains  tlie  XH;  and  forms  HgCl :  the  former  goes  buk  for
manufactun-  of  soda,  while  tlie  latter  in  employol  either  for  nuking  HCl  or  CU

" ~  - - Ji(,.A)(.inci1,  anbydrci'ut.)  is  rarely  pure;  the  crj-HtallinUl  nv

SODIUM  625

Sodium  carbonate,  like  sodium  sulphate,  loses  all  its  water  on
l>eing  heated,  and  when  anhydrous  fuses  at  a  bright- red  heat  (1098^).
A  small  quantity  of  sodium  carbonate  placed  in  the  loop  of  a  platinum
wire  volatilises  in  the  heat  of  a  gas  flame,  and  therefoi*e  in  the  furnaces
of  glass  works  part  of  the  soda  is  always  transformed  into  the  condition
of  vapour.  Sodium  carbonate  resembles  sodium  sulphate  in  its  relation
to  water.  I  ^  Here  also  the  greatest  solubility  is  at  the  temperature  of
37°  ;  both  salts,  on  crystallising  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  combine
with  ten  molecules  of  water,  and  such  crystals  of  soda,  like  crystals  of
Glauber's  salt,  fuse  at  34°.  Sodium  carbonate  also  forms  a  super-
saturated solution,  and,  according  to  the  conditions,  gives  various  com  -
binations  with  water  of  crystallisation  (mentioned  on  page  108),  kc.

At  a  red  heat  superheated  steam  liberates  carbonic  anhydride  from
sodium  carbonate  and  forms  caustic  £oda,  Na^COs  +  H^O  =  2NaH0
-h  CO.^.  Here  the  carbonic  anhydride  is  replaced  by  water  ;  this  depends
on  the  feebly  acid  character  of  carbonic  anhydride.  By  direct  heatings
sodium  carbonate  is  only  slightly  decomposed  into  sodium  oxide  and
carbonic  anhydride ;  thus,  when  sodium  carbonate  is  fused,  about
1  per  cent,  of  carbonic  anhydride  is  disengaged.'-*  The  carbonates  of
many  other  metals — for  instance,  of  calcium,  copper,  magnesium,  iron^
6ic, — on  being  heated  lose  all  their  carbonic  anhydride. This  shows

cold  water,  and  then  shake  np  with  a  strong  solution  of  ammonia,  ix)ur  off  the  residue^
and  heat. The  impurities  will  then  remain  in  the  mother  liquors,  &c.

Some  numerical  data  may  be  given  for  sodium  carbonate.  The  specific  gravity  of  the
anhydrous  salt  is  2*48,  that  of  the  decahydrated  salt  1*40.  Two  varieties  are  known  of
the  heptahydrated  salt  (Luwel,  Marignac,  Rammelsberg),  which  are  formed  together  by
allowing  a  saturated  solution  to  cool  under  a  layer  of  alcohol ;  the  one  is  less  stable  (like
the  corresponding  sulphate)  and  at  0°  has  a  solubility  of  82  parts  (of  anhydrous  salt)  in  100
water ;  the  other  is  more  stable,  and  its  solubility  20  parts  (of  anhydrous  salt)  per  100  of
water.  The  solubility  of  the  decahydrated  salt  in  100  water  =  at  0°,  70 ;  at  20^,  21*7 ;  at
80"=,  87-2  parts  (of  anhydrous  salt).  At  80°  the  solubility  is  only  461,  at  90^  457,  at  100°,
45*4  [>arts  (of  anhydrous  salt).  That  is,  it  falls  as  the  temperature  rises,  like  Na^SO|.
Tlie  specific  gra>'ity  (Note  7)  of  the  solutions  of  sodium  carbonate,  according  to  tlie  data
of  Gerlach  and  Kohlrausch,  at  15^,4°  is  expressed  by  the  formula,  «  =  9,992 +  104*5/)
+  0*165/;'.  Weak  solutions  occupy  a  volume  not  only  less  than  the  sum  of  the  volumes
of  the  anhydrous  salt  and  the  water,  but  even  less  than  the  water  contained  in  them.  For
instance,  1,000  grams  of  a  1  p.c.  solution  occupy  (at  15°)  a  volume  of  990*4  c.c.  («p.  gr.
1*0097),  but  contain  990  grams  of  water,  occupying  at  15°  a  volume  of  990*8  c.c.  A
similar  case,  which  is  comparatively  rare  occurs  also  with  sodium  hydroxide,  in  those
dilute  solutions  for  which  the  factor  A  is  greater  than  100  if  the  sp.  gr.  of  water  at  4°  =
100,000,  and  if  the  sp.  gr.  of  the  solution  be  expressed  by  the  formula  5=5?+  Ap-\-Bj)*y
where  »S'o  is  the  specific  gravity  of  the  water.  For  6  p.c.  the  sp.  gr.  15°/4°  =  1*0520 ;  for  10
p.c.  11057;  for  15  p.c.  1*1608.  Tlie  changes  in  the  sp.  gr.  with  the  temperature  are
here  almost  the  same  as  with  solutions  of  sodium  chloride  with  an  equal  value  of  p.

"^  The  resemblance  is  so  great  that,  notwithstanding  the  difference  in  the  molecular
composition  of  Na2S04  and  Na^COj,  they  ought  (o  be  classed  under  the  type  (NaO).jR,
where  R  =  SOj  or  CO. Many  other  sodium  salts  also  contain  10  mol.  H.^.O.

*^  According  to  the  observations  of  Pickering.  According  to  Roie,  when  solutions  of
sodium  carbonate  are  boiled  a  certain  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  is  disengaged.

526  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

the  considerable  basic  energy  which  sodium  possesses.  With  the
soluble  salts  of  most  metals,  sodium  carbonate  gives  precipitates
either  of  insoluble  carbonates  of  the  metals,  or  else  of  the  hydroxides
(in  this  latter  case  carbonic  anhydride  is  disengaged) ;  for  in-
stance, with  barium  salts  it  precipitates  an  insoluble  barium  car-
bonate (BaClj  4-  Na^COa  =  2XaCl  +  BaCO^)  and  with  the  aluminium
salts  it  precipitates  aluminium  hydroxide,  carbonic  anhydride  being
disengaged  :  SNa^COa  +  Al2(S04)3  +  SH^O  =  3Na2S04  +  2A1(0H)3
-h  3 CO .2-  Sodium  carbonate,  like  all  the  salts  of  carbonic  acid,  evolTei
carbonic  anhydride  on  treatment  with  all  acids  which  are  to  any  extent
energetic.  But  if  an  acid  diluted  with  water  be  gradually  added  to  a
solution  of  sodium  carbonate,  at  first  such  an  evolution  does  not  take
place,  because  the  excess  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  forms  acid  sodium
carbonate  (sodium  bicarbonate),  NaHCOg.^^  The  acid  sodium
carbonate  is  an  unstable  salt.  Not  only  when  heated  alone,  but  even
on  being  slightly  heated  in  solution,  and  also  at  the  ordinary
temperature  in  damp  air,  it  loses  carbonic  anhydride  and  forms  the
normal  salt.  And  at  the  same  time  it  is  easy  to  obtain  it  in  a  pure
crystalline  form,  if  a  strong  solution  of  sodium  carbonate  be  cooled  and
a  stream  of  carbonic  anhydride  gas  passed  through  it.  The  acid  salt
is less soluble in  water than the  normal,^!  and  therefore  a  stron*'

'^  The  compoHition  of  this  salt,  however,  may  be  alno  represented  as  a  combmatioii
of  carbonic  acid,  HqCO^,  with the  normal  salt,  Na-iCO-,,  just  as  the  latter  also  com-
bines with  water. Such  a  combination  is  all  the  more  likely  because  (1)  there  exisi«
another salt,  Na.jCO.-„2NaHC03,2H.20  (sodium sesquicarbonate), obtained bv coolii^
a boiling solution of sodium bicarbonate,  or  by mixing this  salt with the norauU
salt; but the  formula  of this  salt  cannot be derived  from  that  of normal  carbonic
acid,  as  the  formula  of the  bicarbonate  can. At the  same  time the sesqui-salt  lus
all  the  j)roperties  of  a  definite  compoiuid ; it  crystallises  in  transparent  crystals,  has
a  constant  composition, its solubility  (at  0^  in  100  of  water,  1*2'6  of  anhydrous  salt)
differs  from  the  solubility  of the  normal  and  acid  salts ; it is found  in nature, and
is  known  ])y  the  names  of  tromi  and  iirno. The  observations  of  Watts  and  Richards
showed  (1K86)  that  on  pouring  a  strong  solution  of  the  acid  salt  into  a  solation  of  the
normal  salt  saturated  by  heating,  crj'stals  of  the  salt  NaHC03,Na2CO3,2HDjO  may  be
easily  obtained,  as  long  as  the  temperature  is  above  35-^. The  natural  urao  (Boussinganit)
has,  according  to  Laurent,  the  same  composition. This  salt  it  very  stable in  air,  and
may  be  used  for  purifying  sodium  carbonate  on  the  large  scale. Such  compounds  have
been  little  studied  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  although  particularly  interesting,  since
in  all  probability  they  correspond  with  ortho-carbonic  acid,  C(0H)4,  and  at  the  same  time
correspond  with  double  salts  like  astrachanite  (Chapter  XIV.,  Note  25). (2)  Water  of
crystallisation  does  not  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  crystals  of  the  acid  salt,  so  that  on
its  formation  (occurring  only  at  low  temperatures,  as  in  the  formation  of  crystalline  com-
pounds with  water)  the  water  of  crystallisation  of  the  normal  salt  separates  and  the  water
is,  as  it  were,  rei)laced  by  the  elements  of  carbonic  ivcid. If  anhydrous  sodium  carbonate
bo  mixed  with  the  amount  of  water  requisite  for  the  formation  of  NajCOsHjO,  this  salt
will,  when  [M)wdered,  absorb  COj  as  easily  at  the  ordinary  temperature  as  it  does  water.
^>  100  i)arts  of  water  at  0*^  dissolve  7  parts  of  the  acid  salt,  which  corresponds  with
4*8  parts  of  the  anhydrous  normal  salt,  but  at  0^  100  parts  of  water  dissolve  7  parts  of

SODIUM  527

solution  of  the  latter  gives  crystals  of  the  acid  salt  if  carbonic
anhydride  be  passed  through  it.  The  acid  salt  may  be  yet  more
conveniently  formed  from  effloresced  crystals  of  sodium  carbonate,
which,  on  l)eing  ccmsiderahly  heated,  very  easily  absorb  carbonic  anhy-
dride.^* The  acid  salt  crystallises  well,  but  not,  however,  in  such  large
crystals  as  the  normal  salt ;  it  has  a  brackish  and  not  an  alkaline  taste
like  that  of  the  normal  salt ;  its  reaction  is  feebly  alkaline,  nearly  neutral.
At  70°  its  soluticm  l)egins  to  lose  carbonic  anhydride,  and  on  Ixiiling  the
evolution  liecomes  very  abundant.  From  the  preceding  remarks  it  is
clear  that  in  most  reactions  this  salt,  especially  when  heated,  acts
similarly  to  the  normal  salt,  but  has,  naturally,  some  distinction  from
it.  Thus,  for  example,  if  a  solution  of  sodium  carbonate  be  added  to  a
normal  magnesium  salt,  a  turbidity  (precipitate)  is  formed  of  magnesium
carlHjnate.  MgCO.,.  No  such  precipitate  is  formed  by  the  acid  salt,
because  magnesium  carbonate  is  soluble  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of
carl)onic  anhydride.

Sodium  carlx)nate  is  used  for  the  preparation  of  caustic  soda^^ —
thitt  is,  the  hydrate  of  sodium  oxide,  or  the  alkali  which  corresponds
to  sodium.  For  this  purpose  the  action  of  lime  on  a  solution  of
sodium  carl)onate  is  generally  made  use  of.  The  process  is  as  follows  :
a  weak,  generally  10  per  cent.,  solution  of  sodium  carbonate  is  ttiken,**

the  latter.  Tlie  Holubility  of  the  bi-  or  acid  salt  varieH  with  conHidenible  regularity;
100  partK  of  water  diHHolveH  at  15*^  9  parts  of  the  HtUt,  at  80°  11  parts.

The  ammonium,  and  more  especially  the  calcium,  salt,  is  much  more  soluble  in  water.
The  ammonia  procens  (see  p.  524)  is  founded  upon  this.  Ammonium  bicarbonate  (acid
carbonate)  at  0  has  a  solubility  of  12  parts  in  100  water,  at  30°  of  27  parts.  The  solu-
bility therefore  increases  very  rapidly  with  the  temperature.  And  its  saturated  solution
is  more  stable  than  a  solution  of  sodium  bicarbonate.  In  fact,  saturated  solutions  of
these  salts  have  a  {^seous  tension  like  that  of  a  mixture  of  carbonic  anhydride  and  water^
namely,  at  15'  and  at  50°,  for  the  sodium  salt  120  and  750  millimetres,  for  the  ammonium
salt  120  and  568  millimetres.  These  data  are  of  great  imi)ortance  in  understanding  the
phenomena  connected  with  the  ammonia  process.  They  indicate  that  with  an  increased
pressure  the  formation  of  the  sodium  Halt  ought  to  increase  if  there  be  an  excess  of  ammo-
nium salt.

**  Crystalline  so<lium  carbonate  (broken  into  lumps)  also  absorbs  carbonic  anhyd|ide,
but  the  water  containe<l  in  the  crystals  is  then  disengaged :  Na.^C03,10H.^O  +  COj
=  Na-jCOs,  H.jCO.-,  +  9H.jO,and  dissolves  part  of  the  carbonate ;  therefore  part  of  the  sodium
carbonate  passes  into  solution  together  with  all  the  impurities.  When  it  is  required  to
avoid  the  formation  of  this  solution,  a  mixture  of  ignited  and  crystalline  sodium  carbonate
is  taken.  Sodium  bicarbonate  is  prepared  chiefly  for  medicinal  use,  and  is  then  often
termed  carbonate  of  soda ^  also,  for  instance,  in  the  so-called  soda  powders,  for  preparing
certain  artificial  mineral  waters,  for  the  manufacture  of  digestive  lozenges  like  those
made  at  Essentuki,  Vichy,  Arc.

^  In  chemistrj',  sodium  oxide  is  terme<l '  soda,*  which  word  must  be  carefully  distin*
guished  from  the  word  sodium,  meaning  the  metal.

'^  With  a  small  (quantity  of  water,  the  reaction  either  does  not  take  place,  or  even
proceeds  in  the  reverse  way— that  is,  sodium  and  potassium  hydroxides  remove  carbonic
iinhydri<le  from  calcium  carbonate  (Liebig,  Watson,  Mitscherlich,  and  otlicrs). The  in-

528  PRISflPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

and  l>oiled  in  a  cast-iron,  wi-oujjht-iron,  or  silver  boiler  (sodium  hj
ide  does  not  act  on  the.se  luetals),  and  lime  is  added,  little  by
during  the  lioiling.  This  latter  is  soluble  in  water,  although  bu
slightly.  The  clear  solntion  becomes  turbid  on  the  addition  of  th
because  a  precipitate  is  formed  ;  thia  precipitate  coasists  of  ct
carbonate,  almost  insoluble  in  water,  whilst  caustic  soda  is  forme
remains  in  solution.  The  decomposition  is  effected  according  <
equation  :  Na.jCOj  +  Ca(HO)a  =  CaCOj  +  2NaHO.  On  coolln
solution  the  calcium  carI>onate  easily  settles  as  a  precipitate,  an
clear  solution  or  alkali  al>ot'e  it  contains  the  easily  soluble  sc
hydroxide  formed  in  the  reaction. ^^  After  the  necessary  quant
lime  has  been  added,  the  solution  is  allowed  to  stand,  and  ia
decanted  off  and  evaporated  in  cast  or  wrought  iron  boilers,  or  in  i
pans  if  a  perfectly  pure  product  is  required.^*' The  evaporation  ct

flui^iici.'  ill  tlie  mass  of  water  i^  evi<leut.  According  to  Oeriiertit,  lionever,  i
•olulioiiB  of  Bodium  carbonate  ure  ilrt-omposod  by  lime,  which  ia  verj-  interesting  ii
firmed  by  further  inreatigatioii.

-^  Ab  lonK  nu  ODy  uudeconi|Hi>.vd  soditini  curbonate  reraaiuH  in  solution,  i
of  Bcid  kdded  to  the  Bolutioii  diHeiiKagvi  carbonic  anhydride,  and  the  aolution  sttei
tion  gireii  a  white  pr«cipiUte  with  a  butiuui  salt  aoluble  in  acida.  ahnwiiiK  the  pieaa
a  carbonate  in  iiolulion  (if  there  be  xtilphnte  present,  it  alw  fonun  a  white  preci^
but  tliia  is  insoluble  in  ocidsi.  For  tlie  itecompofiition  of  sodium  carbonnte.  milk  o:
— tliat  ia,  slaked  stime  suapended  in  water — is  employed.  Forinerly  pure  Hodium  by
ide  was  prepared  taccordiu);  to  BertlioUet'H  proceitH)  by  iliutolvin);  the  impure  snbitoi
alcohol  (audium  carbonate  and  anlphate  are  not  aoluble),  but  now  that  metallic  aodioi
become  cheap  and  is  purifled  by  dislillntioii,  purf  caiiitic  loda  is  prepared  by  utii
a  small  (jaantity  of  water  witli  Hodiuin.  Perfectly  pare  sodium  hydroxide  may  al
obtained  by  atlowiuK  strong  Kolulionn  Ui  crjBtallise  (in  the  eoldl  iNote  37).

Inalkati  works  where  the  Leblanc  process  is  UAcd,CAaAtic  soda  is  prepared  direcUy
the  alkali  reaiainin);  in  the  mother  li<|uorii  after  the  separation  of  the  lodiam  c»rb<
by  evaporation  INote  UV  It  e:icess  ot  lime  and  charcoal  liare  been  used,  niurll  »
hydroxide  maybe  <.btaine<l.  After  the  rcnn>val  as  mncli  as  possible  of  tlie  todiuin  cu
ale,  a  red  liquiil  (frrmi  iron  oiide|  is  left,  containing  aodinm  hydroxide  mixed  with
pounda  of  suliJinr  and  of  cyanogen  (bcc  (.'hapter  IX.)  and  also  containing  iron.  Thi
alkali  is  evaporated  and  air  ia  blown  tlirciufch  it,  which  oxidises  the  impurities  (for
puriKise  somelimei  aoilinm  nitralc  i«  adiled,  or  bleatbing  |iowder,  A'C-I  and  leavea  I
caustic  soila.  The  fused  mass  is  alloweil  to  settle  in  order  lo  separate  the  feimgi
precipitate,  and  poured  into  iron  dnims,  where  the  soil ium  hydroxide  solidifiea.  I
cauxlic  soda  contains  about  10  p.c.  of  nator  in  excess  and  some  saline  impurities,
when  properly  miuiufaclure'l  is  ahnust  free  from  carbonate  and  from  iron.  The  gn
part  of  (be  caustic  soila,  wliich  forms  ^important  an  article  of  commerce,  is  mtmotact

^  Luwig  gave  a  method  of  preparing  sodium  hydroxide  from  sodium  carbonat
heating  it  to  a  dull  reil  heat  wiili  an  excess  of  ferric  oxide.  Carbonic  anhydride  is  g
olT,  and  warm  water  extracts  tlie  can-tic  soda  from  the  remaining  mass. This  r«ac

to  tlmt  of  ferric  oiido  on  the  de.r,mp>hilion  of  potassium  chlorate.  The  re
of  this  may  be  that  a  small  quantity  uf  tlie  soilinm  carbonate  enters  into  double  del
ponition  with  the  ferric  oxide,  and  the  ferric  carbonate  pivduced  it  deoompoaed
carbonic  aidiydride  and  ferric  oxide,  tlie  action  of  which  i*  renewed. 3imUkr  ezpl

SODIUM  529

be  conducted  in  china,  glass,  or  similar  vessels,  l)ecause  caustic  soda
attacks  these  materials,  although  but  slightly.  The  solution  does  not
crystallise  on  evaporation,  because  the  solubility  of  caustic  soda  when
hot  is  very  great,  but  crystals  containing  water  of  crystallisation  may
})e  obtained  by  cooling.  If  the  evaporation  of  the  alkali  be  conducted
until  the  specific  gravity  reaches  1*38,  and  the  liquid  is  then  cooled
to  0°,  transparent  crystals  appear  containing  2NaHO,7H20;  they
fuse  at  4-  6°.'^  If  the  evaporation  be  conducted  so  long  as  water  is  dis-
engaged, which  requires  a  considerable  amount  of  heat,  then,  on  cooling,
the  hydroxide,  NaHO,  solidifies  in  a  semi-transparent  crystalline  mass,'^
which  eagerly  al)6orbs  moisture  and  carbonic  anhydride  from  the  air.'*
Its  specific  gravity  is  2*13  ;^®  it  is  easily  soluble  in  water,  with  disen-
gagement of  a  considerable  quantity  of  heat.^*  A  saturated  solution
at  the  ordinary  temperature  has  a  specific  gravity  of  about  1*5,  contains
alx)ut  45  per  cent,  of  sodium  hydroxide,  and  boils  at  1 30°  ;  at  55°  water
dissolves  an  equal  weight  of  it.^' Caustic  soda  is  not  only  soluble  in

tioiis  expressing  tlie  reason  for  a  reaction  really  add  but  little  to  that  elementary  con-
ception of  contact  which,  according  to  my  opinion,  conflicts  in  the  change  of  motion  of  the
atoms  in  the  molecules  under  the  influence  of  the  substance  in  contact.  In  order  to
represent  tliis  clearly  it  is  sufficient,  for  instance,  to  imagine  that  in  the  sodium  carbonate
the  elements  CO2  move  in  a  circle  round  tlie  elements  Na^^O,  but  at  the  points  of  contact
with  Fe.20s  the  motion  becomes  elliptic  with  a  long  axis,  and  at  some  distance  from  Na20
the  elements  of  CO2  are  parted,  not  having  the  faculty  of  attaching  themselves  to  FcjOs.

^  By  allowing  strong  solutions  of  sodium  hydroxide  to  crystallise  in  the  cold,
impurities — such  as,  for  instance,  sodium  sulphate — may  be  separated  from  them.  The
fusetl  crystallo-hydrate  2NaHO,7H.^O  forms  a  solution  having  a  specific  gravity  of  1*405
(Hermes).  The  crystals  on  dissolving  in  water  produce  cold,  while  NaHO  produces
heat. Besides  which  Pickering  obtained  hydrates  with  1,  2,  4,  6,  and  7  H-^O.

^  In  solid  caustic  soda  there  is  generally  an  excess  of  water  beyond  that  required  by
the  formula  NaHO.  The  caustic  soda  used  in  laboratories  is  generally  cast  in  sticks,
which  are  broken  into  pieces.  It  must  be  preserved  in  carefully  closed  vessels,  because
it  absorbs  water  and  carbonic  anhydride  from  the  air.

.^  By  the  way  it  changes  in  air  it  is  easy  to  distinguish  caustic  soda  from  caustic
potash,  which  in  general  resembles  it.  Both  alkalis  absorb  water  aind  carbonic  anliydride
from  the  air,  but  caustic  potash  forms  a  deliquescent  mass  of  potassium  carbonate,  whilst
caustic  soda  forms  a  dry  powder  of  efflorescent  salt.

•'•^  As  the  molecular  weight  of  NaHO  ^40,  the  volume  of  its  molecule  =40,2'13  =  18'5,
which  very  nearly  approaches  the  volume  of  a  molecule  of  water.  The  same  rule  applies
to  the  compounds  of  sodium  in  general — for  instance,  its  salts  have  a  molecular  volume
approaching  the  volume  of  the  acids  from  which  they  are  derived.

'*  The  molecular  quantity  of  sodium  hydroxide  (40  grams),  on  being  dissolved  in  a
large  mass  (200  gram  molecules)  of  water,  develops,  according  to  Bertbelot  9,780,  and
according  to  Thomsen  9,940,  heat-units,  but  at  100°  about  18,000  (Berthelot).  Solutions
of  NaHO  +  ^{H^O,  on  being  mixed  with  water,  evolve  heat  if  they  contain  less  thanCHjO,
but  if  more  they  absorb  heat.

^''  Tlie  specific  gravity  of  solutions  of  sodium  hydroxide  at  15°/  4°  is  given  in  the  short
table  below : —

NaHO,  p.c. . 5  10  15  20  80  40

Sp.gr. . . . 1057 1118 1169 1*224 1*881 1*486

VOL.  I.  MM

680  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

water  but  in  alcohol,  and  even  in  ether.  Dilute  solutions  of  sodiom
hydroxide  produce  a  soapy  feeling  on  the  skin  because  the  active  hue
of  soap  consists  of  caustic  soda.^^  Strong  solutions  have  a  oorrodii^
action.

The  chemical  reactuyns  of  sodium  hydroxide  serve  as  a  type  for  those
of  a  whole  class  of  alkalis — that  is,  of  soluble  basic  hydroxides^  MOH.
The  solution  of  sodium  hydroxide  is  a  very  caustic  liquid — that  is  to  say,
it  acts  in  a  destructive  way  on  most  substances,  for  instance  on  mofi
organic  tissues — hence  caustic  soda,  like  all  soluble  alkalis,  is  a  poison-
ous substance ;  acids,  for  example  hydrochloric,  serve  as  antidotes.
The  action  of  caustic  soda  on  lx)ne8,  fat,  starch,  and  similar  vegetable
and  animal  substances  explains  its  action  on  organisms.  Thus  bones,
when  plunged  into  a  weak  solution  of  caustic  soda,  fall  to  powder,^

1,000  grams  of  a  5  p.c.  solution  occupies  a  volume  of  946  c.c. ;  that  is,  less  tft^n  the  w%tei
serving  to  make  the  solution  (see  Note  18).

^  Sodium  hydroxide  and  some  other  alkalis  are  capable  of  hydrolyaing — sapcmifying,
as  it  is  termed — the  compounds  of  acids  with  alcohols.  If  RHO  (or  R(HO)j,)  represent  tb^
composition  of  an  alcohol — that  is,  of  the  hydroxide  of  a  hydrocarbon  radicle — and  QHO
an  acid,  then  the  compomid  of  the  acid  with  the  alcohol  or  ethereal  salt  of  the  giren  add
will  have  the  composition  RQO.  Ethereal  salts,  therefore,  present  a  likeness  to
metallic  salts,  just  as  alcohols  resemble  basic  hydroxides.  Sodiam  hydxoxide  acis  on
ethereal  salts  in  the  same  way  that  it  acts  on  the  majority  of  metallic  salts — namely,  it
liberates  alcohol,  and  forms  the  sodium  salt  of  that  acid  which  was  in  the  ethereal  salt
The  reaction  takes  place  in  the  following  way : —

+ RHO
Alcohol

RQO

+

NaHO

NaQO

Ethereal

Caustic

Sodium

shU

soda

salt

Such  a  decomposition  is  termed  saponification  ;  similar  reactions  were  known  very  long
ago  for  the  ethereal  salts  corresponding  with  glycerin,  C5H5(OH)-,  (Chapter  IX.),  found
in  animals  and  plants,  and  composing  what  are  called  fats  or  oils.  Caastic  soda,
acting  on  fat  and  oil,  forms  glycerin,  and  sodium  salts  of  those  acids  which  were  in
union  with  the  glycerin  in  the  fat,  as  Chevreul  showed  at  the  beginning  of  this  centurr.
The  sodium  salts  of  the  fatty  acids  are  commonly  known  as  soaps.  That  is  to  sav.
soap  is  made  from  fat  and  caustic  soda,  glycerin  being  separated  and  a  sodium  salt  or
soap  formed.  As  glycerin  is  usually  found  in  union  with  certain  acids,  so  also  are  the
sodium  salts  of  the  same  acids  found  in  soap.  The  greater  part  of  the  acids  found  in
conjunction  with  glycerin  in  fats  are  the  solid  palmitic  and  stearic  acids,  Ci^jjQ^  and
CigHjgO.^,  and  the  liquid  oleic  acid,  CjgHj^Oj.  In  preparing  soap^  tho  fatty  substances
are  mixed  with  a  solution  of  caustic  soda  until  an  emulsion  is  formed ;  the  proper
quantity  of  caustic  soda  is  then  added  in  order  to  produce  saponification  on  heating,
the  soap  being  separated  from  the  solution  either  by  means  of  an  excess  of  canstic  so^
or  else  by  common  salt,  which  displaces  the  soap  from  the  aqueous  solution  (salt  water
does  not  dissolve  soap,  neither  does  it  form  a  lather).  Water  acting  on  soap  parUy
decomposes  it  (because  the  acids  of  the  soap  are  feeble),  and  the  alkali  set  free  acts
during  the  application  of  soap.  Hence  it  may  be  replaced  by  a  very  feeble  alkah.
Strong  solutions  of  alkali  corrode  the  skin  and  tissues.  They  are  not  formed  from  soap,
because  the  reaction  is  reversible,  and  the  alkali  is  only  set  free  by  the  excess  of  water.
Tims  we  see  how  the  teaching  of  Berthollet  renders  it  possible  to  understand  many
plienomona  which  occur  in  every -day  experience  {see  Chapter  IX.,  Note  16).

-'^'  On  this  is  founded  the  process  of  Henkoff  and  Engelhardt  for  treating  bones.

SODIUM  681

and  evolve  a  smell  of  ammonia,  owing  to  the  caustic  soda  changing
the  gelatinous  organic  substance  of  the  bones  (which  contains  carbon,
hydrogen,  nitrogen,  oxygen,  and  sulphur,  like  al])umin),  dissolving  it
and  in  part  destroying  it,  whence  ammonia  is  disengaged.  Fats,  tallow,
and  oils  become  saponified  by  a  solution  of  caustic  soda — that  is  to
say,  they  form  with  it  soaps  soluble  in  water,  or  sodium  salts  of  the
organic  acids  contained  in  the  fats.*'*''^  The  most  characteristic  reactions
of  sodium  hydroxide  are  determined  by  the  fact  that  it  satuniUs  a!l
cu^ids,  forming  softs  with  them,  which  are  almost  all  soluble  in  water,  and
in  this  respect  caustic  soda  is  as  characteristic  amongst  the  bases  as
nitric  acid  is  among  the  acids.  It  is  impossible  to  detect  sodium  by
means  of  the  formation  of  precipitates  of  insoluble  sodium  salts,  as  may
be  done  with  other  metals,  many  of  whose  salts  are  but  slightly  soluble.
The  powerful  alkaline  properties  of  caustic  soda  determine  its  capacity
for  combining  with  even  the  feeblest  acids,  its  property  of  disengaging
ammonia  from  ammonium  salts,  its  faculty  of  forming  precipitates  from
solutions  of  salts  whose  bases  are  insoluble  in  water,  &c.  If  a  solution
of  the  salt  of  almost  any  metal  be  mixed  with  caustic  soda,  then  a
soluble  sodium  salt  will  be  formed,  and  an  insoluble  hydroxide  of  the
metal  will  be  separated — for  instance,  copper  nitrate  yields  copper
hydroxide,  Cu(N03).,  +  2NaH0  =  Cu(H0)2  +  2Na]S03.  Even  many
botsic  oxides  precipitated  by  caustic  soda  are  capable  of  combining  with
it  and  forming  soluble  compounds,  and  therefore  caustic  soda  in  the
presence  of  salts  of  such  metals  first  forms  a  precipitate  of  hydroxide,
and  then,  emplr»yed  in  excess,  dissolves  this  precipitate.  This  pheno-
menon occurs,  for  example,  when  caustic  soda  is  added  to  the  salts  of
aluminium.  This  shows  the  property  of  such  an  alkali  as  caustic  soda
of  combining  not  only  with  acids,  but  also  with  feeble  basic  oxides.  For
this  reason  caustic  soda  acts  on  most  eleinerUs  which  are  capable  of  form-
ing acids  or  oxides  similar  to  them  ;  thus  the  metal  aluminium  gives
hydrogen  with  caustic  soda  in  consequence  of  the  formation  of  alumina,
which  combines  with  the  caustic  soda — that  is,  in  this  case,  the  caustic
alkali  acts  on  the  metal  just  as  sulphuric  acid  does  on  Fe  or  Zn.  If
caustic  soda  acts  in  this  manner  on  a  metalloid  capable  of  combining
with  the  hydrogen  evolved  (aluminium  does  not  give  a  compound  with
hydrogen),  then  it  forme  such  a  hydrogen  compound.  Thus,  for  instance,
phosphorus  acts  in  this  way  on  caustic  soda,  yielding  hydrogen  phos-
phide. When  the  hydrogen  compound  disengaged  is  capable  of  combin-

The  bones  are  mixed  with  athes,  lime,  and  water;  it  it  true  that  in  this  case  more
potasaiom  hydroxide  than  sodium  hydroxide  is  formed,  but  their  action  ia  almost
identical.

^  As  explained  in  Note  88.

MM  2

532  PKINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

ing  with  the  alkali,  then,  naturally,  a  salt  of  the  corresponding  acid  is
formed.  For  example,  chlorine  and  sulphur  act  in  this  way  on  caustic
soda.  Chlorine,  with  the  hydrogen  of  the  caustic  soda,  forms  hydrochloric
acid,  and  the  latter  forms  common  salt  with  the  sodium  hydroxide,
whilst  the  other  atom  in  the  molecule  of  chlorine,  Cl^,  takes  the  place
of  the  hydrogen,  and  forms  the  hypochlorite,  NaClO.  In  the  same  way,
by  the  action  of  sodium  hydroxide  on  sulphur,  hydrogen  sulphide  is
formed,  which  acts  on  the  soda  forming  sodium  aidphidey  in  addition  to
which  sodium  thiosulphate  is  formed  {see  Chapter  XX.)  By  virtue  of
such  reactions,  sodium  hydroxide  acts  on  many  metals  and  non-metak
Such  action  is  often  accelerated  by  the  presence  of  the  oxygen  of  the
air,  as  by  this  means  the  formation  of  acids  and  oxides  rich  in  oxygen
is  facilitated.  Thus  many  metals  and  their  lower  oxides,  in  the  presence
of  an  alkali,  absorb  oxygen  and  form  acids.  Even  manganese  peroxide,
when  mixed  with  caustic  soda,  is  capable  of  absorljing  the  oxygen  of
the  air,  and  forming  sodium  manganate.  Organic  acids  when  heated
with  caustic  soda  give  up  to  it  the  elements  of  carbonic  anhydride,
forming  sodium  carbonate,  and  separating  that  hydit>carbon  group
which  exists,  in  combination  with  carl)onic  anhydride,  in  the  orgimic
acid.

Thus  sodium  hydroxide,  like  the  soluble  alkalis  in  general,  ranks
amongst  the  most  active  substances  in  the  chemical  sense  of  the  tenUf
and  but  few  substances  are  capable  of  resisting  it.  Even  siliceous  rocks,
as  we  shall  see  further  on,  are  transformed  by  it,  forming  when  fused
with  it  vitreous  slags.  Sodium  hydroxide  (like  ammonium  and  potassium
hydroxides),  as  a  typical  example  of  the  basic  hydrates,  in  distinction
from  many  other  basic  oxides,  easily  form>i  acid  salts  with  acids  (for
instance,  NaHS04,  NaHCOa),  and  does  not  form  any  basic  salts  at
all  ;  whilst  many  less  energetic  bases,  such  as  the  oxides  of  copper
and  lead,  easily  form  basic  salts,  but  acid  salts  only  with  difficulty.
This  capability  of  forming  acid  salts,  particularly  with  poly  basic
acids,  may  be  explained  by  the  energetic  basic  properties  of  sodium
hydroxide,  contrasted  with  the  small  development  of  these  properties
in  the  bases  which  easily  form  basic  salts.  An  energetic  base  is
capable  of  retaining  a  considerable  quantity  of  acid,  which  a  slightly
energetic  base  would  not  have  the  power  of  doing.  Also,  as  will  be
shown  in  the  subsequent  chapters,  sodium  belongs  to  the  univalent
metals,  being  exchangeable  for  hydrogen  atom  for  atom — that  is,
amongst  metals  sodium  may,  like  chlorine  amongst  the  non-metals,  serve
as  the  representative  of  the  univalent  properties.  Most  of  the  elements
which  are  not  capable  of  forming  acid  salts  are  bivalent.  Whence
it  may  be  understood  that  in  a  bi basic  acid — for  instance,  carbonic.

SODIUM  538

HjCOg,  or  sulphuric,  H.2SO4 — the  hydrogen  may  be  exchanged,  atom

for  atom,  for  sodium,  and yield an  acid  salt  by  means  of  the  first

substitution,  and  a  normal  salt  by  means  of  the  second — for  instance,

NaHS04,  and  Na2S04,  whilst  such  bivalent  metals  as  calcium  and

barium  do not  form  acid  salts  because one  of  their  atoms  at  once

takes  the  place  of  both  hydrogen  atoms,  forming,  for  example,  CaCOs
and  CaS04.3'^WH

We  have  seen  the  transformation  of  common  salt  into  sodium
sulphate,  of  this  latter  into  sodium  carbonate,  and  of  sodium  carbonate
into  caustic  soda.  Lavoisier  still  regarded  sodium  hydroxide  as  an
element,  because  he  was  unacquainted  with  its  decomposition  with  the
formation  of  metallic  sodium,  which  separates  the  hydrogen  from  water,
reforming  caustic  soda.

The  preparation  of  metallic  sodium  was  one  of  the  greatest  dis-
coveries in  chemistry,  not  only  because  through  it  the  conception  of
elements  became  broader  and  more  correct,  but  especially  because  in
sodium,  chemical  properties  were  observed  which  were  but  feebly  shown
in  the  other  metals  more  familiarly  known.  This  discovery  was  made
in  1807  by  the  English  chemist  Davy  by  means  of  the  galvanic
current.  By  connecting  with  the  positive  pole  (of  copper  or  carbon)
a  piece  of  caustic  soda  (moistened  in  order  to  obtain  electrical  con-
ductivity), and  boring  a  hole  in  it  filled  with  mercury  connected  with
the  negative  pole  of  a  strong  Volta's  pile,  Davy  observed  that  on  passing
the  current  a  peculiar  metal  dissolved  in  the  mercury,  less  volatile
than  mercury,  and  capable  of  decomposing  water,  again  forming
caustic  soda.  In  this  way  (by  analysis  and  synthesis)  Davy  demon-
strated the  compound  nature  of  alkalis.  On  being  decomposed  by  the
galvanic  current,  caustic  soda  disengages  hydrogen  and  sodium  at  the

^  *>*'  It  might  be  expected,  from  what  has  been  mentioned  above,  that  bivalent  metals
would  easily  form  acid  salts  with  acids  containing  more  than  two  atoms  of  hydrogen — for
instance,  with  tribasic  acids,  such  as  phosphoric  acid,  H5PO4— and  actually  such  salts  do
exist ;  but  all  such  relations  are  complicated  by  the  fact  that  the  character  of  the  base
very  often  changes  and  becomes  weakened  with  the  increase  of  valency  and  the  change
of  atomic  weight ;  the  feebler  bases  (like  silver  oxide),  although  corresponding  with
univalent  metals,  do  not  form  acid  salts,  while  the  feeblest  bases  (CuO,  PbO,  <fec.)  easily
form  basic  salts,  and  notwithstanding  their  valency  do  not  form  acid  salts  which  are  in
any  degree  stable — that  is,  which  are  undecomposable  by  water.  Basic  and  acid  salts
ought  to  be  regarded  rather  as  compomids  similar  to  cry stallo- hydrates,  because  such
acids  as  sulphuric  form  with  sodium  not  only  an  acid  and  a  normal  salt,  as  might  be  ex-
{lected  from  the  valency  uf  sodium,  but  also  salts  containing  a  greater  quantity  of  acid.
In  sodium  sesquicarbonate  we  saw  an  example  of  such  comfmunds.  Taking  all  this  into
consideration,  we  must  say  that  the  proi>erty  of  more  or  less  easily  forming  acid  salts
depends  more  ui>on  the  energy  of  the  base  than  xx\\o\\  its  valency,  and  the  best  statement
is  that  the  capacitij  of  a  base  for  forming  ncid  aud  basic  aolU  is  characteristic  ^^Vi^t
as  the  faculty  of  forming't-omiwunds  with  hydrogen  is  characteristic  of  elements.

584  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

negative  pole  and  oxygen  at  the  positive  pole. Davy  showed  that  the
metal  formed  volatilises  at  a  red  heat,  and  this  is  its  raost  important
physical  property  in  relation  to  its  extraction,  all  later  methods  being
founded  on  it. Besides  this  Davy  observed  that  sodium  easily  oxidises,
its  vapour  taking  fire  in  air,  and  the  latter  circumstance was  for  a
long time an obstacle to  the  easy  preparation  of this  metaL The
properties  of  sodium  were  subsequently  more  thoroughly  investigated
by  Gay-Lussac  and  Th^nard,  who  observed  that  metallic  iron  at  a  high
temperature  was  capable  of  reducing  caustic  soda  to  sodium. ^^ BrunDcr
latterly discovered that not  only iron, but  also  charcoal, has  this
property,  although  hydrogen  has  not.-'*'^ But  still  the  methods  of  ex-
tracting sodium  were  very  troublesome,  and  consequently  it  was  a  gr«it
rarity. The  principal  obstacle  to  its  production  was  that  an  endeavoar
was  made  to  condense  the  easily -oxidising  vapours  of  sodium  in  vacuo
in  complicated  apparatus. For  this  reason,  when  Donny  and  Maresca,
having  thoroughly  studied  the  matter,  constructed  a  specially  simple
condenser,  the  production  of  sodium  was  much  facilitated. Further-
more, in  practice the most  important  epoch in the  history of  the
production  of  sodium  is  comprised  in  the  investigation  of  Sainte-Claire
Seville,  who  avoided  the  complex  methods  in  vogue  up  to  that  time,
and  furnished  those  simple  means  by  which  the  production  of  sodium  is
now  rendered  feasible  in  chemical  works.

For  the  production  of  sodium  according  to  Deville's  method,  a
mixture  of  anhydrous  sodium  carbonate  (7  parts),  charcoal  (two  parts),
and  lime  or  chalk  (7  pai-ts)  is  heated.  This  latter  ingredient  is  only
added  in  order  that  the  sodium  carbonate,  on  fusing,  shall  not  separate

^''  Deville  Hupix)se8  that  sucli  a  decomposition  of  sodium  hydroxide  by  metallic  iron
depends  solely  on  the  dissociation  of  the  alkali  at  a  white  heat  into  sodium,  hydjx^iL
and  oxygen.  Here  the  part  played  hy  the  iron  is  only  that  it  retains  the  oxygen  formed.
otherwise  the  decomiwaed  elements  would  again  reunite  upon  cooling,  as  in  other  case*
of  dissociation.  If  it  be  8Uj)po8ed  that  the  temperature  at  the  commencement  of  the  dis-
sociation of  the  iron  oxides  is  higher  than  that  of  sodium  oxide,  then  the  decompoedtion
may  be  explained  by  Deville's  hypothesis.  Deville  demonstrates  hisviews  by  the  follow-
ing experiment  : — An  iron  bottle,  filled  with  iron  borings,  was  heated  in  such  a  way  that
the  upi^er  part  became  red  hot,  the  lower  pivrt  remaining  cooler ;  sodium  hydroxide  wa*
introduced  into  the  upper  part.  The  decomposition  was  then  effected — that  is,  sodium
vapours  were  produced  (this  exi>eriment  was  really  performed  with  potasaium  hydroxide}.
On  opening  the  bottle  it  was  found  that  the  iron  in  the  upper  part  was  not  oxidised.
but  only  that  in  the  lower  part.  This  may  be  explained  by  the  decomposition  of  the
alkali  into  sodium,  hydrogen,  and  oxygen  taking  place  in  the  upper  part,  whilst  the  iron
in  the  lower  i>art  absorbed  the  oxygen  set  free.  If  the  whole  bottle  be  subjected  to  the
same  moderate  heat  as  the  lower  extremity,  no  metallic  vapours  are  formed.  In  ^^i**
case,  according  to  the  hyjiothesis,  the  temperature  is  insufficient  for  the  dissociation  of
the  sodium  hydroxide.

•'•'  It  has  been  previously  remarked  (Chapter  II.  Note  V)  that  BeketofT  shoved
the  displacement  of  sodium  by  hydrogen,  not  from  sodium  hydroxide  but  from  the  oxide
Na-jO ;  then,  however,  only  one  half  is  <lis])laced,  with  the  formation  of  NaHO.

fnjtii  the  (;harL-oal.^*  The  chalk  un  being  Keatetl  luses  cartxinic  anhy-
dride, leaving  infusible  limy,  which  is  permeated  by  the  sodiuDi
carbonate  and  forms  a  thick  ina^  in  which  the  churcoal  is  iutiniatetj'
mixed  with  the  BOilium  carboaate.  When  the  chai-coal  is  heated  with
the  Bodtuiii  carlniaate,  at  a  white  heat,  carbonic  oxide  ix))d  vapours  of
■odium  are  disengaged,  according  to  the  equation  :
Na^COa  +  liC  =  Na,  +  3C0

On  cooling  the  vapours  and  guscs  tlisengaged,  the  vapours  condense
into  molten  metal  (m  tins  form  endmm  doe-a  not  easily  oxidise,  whilst
in  vapour  it  burns)  utitl  the  caibonic  oxide  renmuiB  as  gas.

In  soihuni  works  nil iron lulu il  lui itiuttt  long  and  a  dei'imetrr

in  diameter,  is  made  out  of  boiler  'plate  The  pipe  is  luted  into  a
furnace  having  a  strong  draught,  capable  of  giving  a  high  temperature,
fcnd  the  tube  is  charged  with  the  mixture  required  for  the  preparation
of  sodium.  One  end  of  the  tul>e  is  closed  with  a  cast-iron  stopper  A
with  clay  luting,  and  the  other  with  the  cast-iron  stopper  C  provided

"  Sinn  the  (^li»e  o(  the  eiglitiE^  in  Euttluid,  where  the  pre|ianitioii  o(  (odixui  ia  nl
pKBcnt  Mkrried  out  on  a  luye  cotniueTciiil  tc&le  ^{rom  ISGO  to  1870  U  wim  obIj
nunntactured  iii  &  lew  worlin  in  France),  il  luu  been  the  pnclice  to  *dd  to  DeviUs'i
miitare  iron,  <ir  iron  oxide  which  with  the  cbarcool  give*  metallic  and  earbarstted  irm,
which  «till  further  facilitates  the  decoinpo«itii)ti.  At  prenent  a  kilogram  of  Bodiiud  m&y
be  pnrthaMd  for  about  the  tuuue  sum  12  -I  ae  a.  gram  ca«t  thirty  yean  age.  Ca«tner,  in
EngUnd,  ereatiT  imprntud  the  manatacture  of  Eodium  in  laif^  quaiiliLiet,  and  so
cheapened  it  m  k  redncinu  agent  in  the  preparation  of  metallic  alominiuni.  He  heated
n  mixture  ol  U  parts  of  NiiHO,  «nd  7  part*  of  carbide  of  iron  in  large  iron  retort*
it  1.000°  mai  obUiutd  ubont  «i  puis  of  metnUie  wilinm.  Tlie  reaction  proceedj
more  eiatly  than  with  carbon  or  iron  alone,  and  the  deconiposttitm  o  the  NaHO  proceed*
aecoiding  to  the  equation:  SNaHO -r  C  =  M&,COj  1 3H  «  No.  Snbwiiiiflntljr,  in  1891,
alamininm  na  prepared  by  electrolysis  (k«  Qiaiilvr  XVII.),  uid  metallic  wdium  Found

PRINCirLE.S OF CHEMISTRY  ^^^^^

with  an  aperture.  On  heating,  first  of  all  the  moisture  contain
the  various  substauces  is  given  off,  then  carbonic  anhydride  &n
products  of  tlie  dry  distillation  of  the  charcoal,  then  the  Iatt«r  I
to  act  on  the  sotlium  carbonate,  and  cm
oxidR  and  vapours  of  sodium  appear.  It  i
to  observe  the  appearance  of  the  latter,  he
on  issuing  from  the  aperture  in  the  atop
they  take  fire  sjiontaneously  and  burn  »
very  bright  yellow  (lame.  A  pipe  is  the
troduced  into  the  aperture  C,  compellin
vapours  and  gases  formed  to  pass  throng
condenser  B.  Tliis  condenser  consists  o
square  cast-iron  trays,  A  and  A',  fig.  71,
wide  edges  (irmly  screwed  together.  Bei
these  two  trays  there  is  a  space  in  which  the  condensation  <i
vapours  of  sodium  is  effected,  the  thin  metallic  walls  of  the  oond
being  cooled  hy  the  air  but  remaining  hot  enough  to  presem
sodium  in  a  liquid  state,  so  that  it  iloes  not  choke  the  apparatni
continually  flows  from  it.  The  vapours  of  so<!ium,  condensing  i
cooler,  flow  in  the  shape  of  liquid  metal  into  a  vessel  containing
i-volatile  naphtha  or  hydi'ocarbon. This  is  used  in  order  to  pr

the  sodium  oxidising  as  it  issues  from  the  com
high  tempei-ature.  In  order  to  obtain  sodium  i
necessary  to  distil  it  once  more,  which  may  evei
retorts,  but  the  distillation  must  be  conducted  in
on  which  sodium  does  not  act,  for  instance  in
carbonic anhydride is not  applicable,  because

lenser  at  a  somi
if  a  pure  tjualit;
^  be  done  in  por
a  sti-eam  of  aoni
a.  stream  of  nitr
partiall;

uompoaea  it,  absorbing  oxygen  from  it.  Although  the  above  desi
methods  of  preparing  sn<liura  by  chemical- means  have  proved  ven
venient  in  practice,  still  it  la  now  (since  1893)  found  profital
England  to  obtain  it  (to  the  amount  of  several  tons  a  week)  by  I
classical  method,  i.r.  by  the  action  of  an  electric  current  ata  model
liigh  temperature,  because  the  means  for  producing  an  electric  ct
(by  motors  and  dynamos)  now  render  this  quite  feasible.  This  m
r^arded  as  a  sign  that  in  process  of  time  many  other  technical  me
for  producing  I'ariuus  sul>stnncc8  by  •htomposition  may  be  prof
carried  on  by  eleotrolysis.

Pure  sodium  is  a  lustrous  metal,  white  as  silver,  soft  as  wa
becomes  brittle  in  the  cold. In  ordinary  moist  air  it  quickly  tan

two  Dew  UBOB :  (1)  lot  tlie  mitiintaottire  ol  pi
in  bleuhiDg  workn,  and  (3)  in  the  miuiaraci
yellow  pruuiUo  ((Jlmptei  XIII.,  SoV,  la).

SODIUM  537

and  becomes  covered  with  a  film  of  hydroxide,  XaHO,  formed  at  the
expense  of  the  water  in  the  air.  In  perfectly  dry  air  sodium  retains
its  lustre  for  an  indefinite  time.  Its  density  at  the  ordinary  tempera-
ture is  equal  to  0*98,  so  that  it  is  lighter  than  water  ;  it  fuses  very
easily  at  a  temperature  of  95°,  and  distils  at  a  bright  red  heat  (742^*
according  to  Perman,  1889).  Scott  (1887)  determined  the  density  of
sodium  vapour  and  found  it  to  be  nearly  12  (if  H  =  1).  This  shows  that
its  molecule  contains  one  atom  (like  mercury  and  cadmium)  Na.****  *>*•  It
forms  alloys  with  most  metals,  combining  with  them,  heat  being  some-
times evolved  and  sometimes  absorbed.  Thus,  if  sodium  (having  a  clean
surface)  be  thrown  into  mercury,  especially  when  heated,  there  is  a  flash,
and  such  a  considerable  amount  of  heat  is  evolved  that  part  of  the
mercury  is  transformed  into  vapour.^®  Compounds  or  solutions  of
sodium  in  mercury,  or  amalgams  of  sodium,  even  when  containing
2  parts  of  sodium  to  100  parts  of  mercury,  are  solids.  Only  those
amalgams  which  are  the  very  poorest  in  sodium  are  liquid.  Such  alloys
of  sodium  with  mercury  are  often  used  instead  of  sodium  in  chemical
investigations,  because  in  combination  with  mercury  sodium  is  not
easily  acted  on  by  air,  and  is  heavier  than  water,  and  therefore  more
convenient  to  handle,  whilst  at  the  same  time  it  retains  the  principal
properties  of  sodium,^®  for  instance  it  decomposes  water,  forming
NaHO.

It  is  easy  to  form  an  alloy  of  mercury  and  sodium  having  a  crystal-
line structure,  and  a  definite  atomic  composition,  NaHgr,.  The  alloy  of
sodium  with  hydrogen  or  sodium  hydride^  Na2H,  which  has  the  external

i8  bis  TIlis  is  also  hIiowii  by  the  fall  in  the  temperature  of  solidification  of  tin  produced
by  the  addition  of  sodiuni  (and  also  Al  and  Zn). Heycock  and  Neville  (1H89).

''^  By  dissolving  sodium  amalgams  in  water  and  acids,  and  deducting  the  heat  of
solution  of  the  sodium,  Berthelot  found  that /or  each  atom  of  the  sodium  in  amalgams
containing  a  larger  amount  of  mercury  than  NaHgs,  the  amount  of  heat  evolved  increases,
after  which  the  heat  of  formation  falls,  and  the  heat  evolved  decreases.  In  the  formation
of  NaHgj  about  18,500  calories  are  evolved  ;  when  NaHgj  is  fortiled,  about  14,000  ;  and
for  NaHg  about  10,000  calories.  Kraft  regarded  the  definite  crystalline  amalgam  as
having  the  comiK)bition  of  NaHgg,  but  at  the  present  time,  in  accordance  with  Grimaldi's
results,  it  is  thought  to  be  NaHgs.  A  similar  amalgam  is  very  easily  obtained  if  a
8  p.c.  amalgam  be  left  several  days  in  a  solution  of  sodium  hydroxide  until  a  crystalline
mass  is  formed,  from  which  the  mercury  may  be  removed  by  strongly  pressing  in  chamois
leather.  This  amalgam  with  a  solution  of  potassium  hydroxide  forms  a  potassium
amalgam,  KHgiQ.  It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  the  latent  heat  of  fusion  (of  atomic
quantities)  of  Hg=^360(Personne),  Na  -  730  (Joannis),  and  K  =  610  calories  (Joannis).

^  Alloys  are  so  similar  to  solutions  (exhibiting  such  complete  parallelism  in  projwr-
ties)  that  they  are  included  in  the  same  class  of  so-called  indefinite  connx)unds.  But 'in
alloys,  as  substances  passing  from  the  liquid  to  the  solid  state,  it  is  easier  to  discover  the
formation  of  definite  chemical  compounds.  Besides  the  alloys  of  Xa  with  Hg,  those  with
tin  (Bailey  1802  found  Na^Sn),  lead  (NaPb),  bismuth  (NajBi),  ilc.  (Joannis  181)2  and  others)
have  been  investigate<l.

538

PRISCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

appearance  uf  a  nietal,"  is  a  most  instructive  example  of  the  chnri
ietics  of  alloys.  At  the  ordinary  temperature  sodiaro  does  not  a
hydrogen,  but  from  300"  to  421°  the  absorption  takes  place  a
ordinary  pressure  (and  at  an  increased  pressure  even  at  higher
peratnres),  as  shown  by  Troost  and  Hautefeuille  (1874).  One  vt
of  sodium  absorbs  as  much  as  238  volumes  of  hydrogen.  The  i
increases  in  volume,  and  when  once  formed  the  alloy  can  be  presi
for  some  time '  without  change  at  the  ordinary  temperature,
appearance  of  sodium  hydride  resembles  that  of  sodium  itself ;
as  soft  as  this  latter,  when  heated  it  l>ecou)efi  brittle,  and  decom
above  300°,  evolving  hydrogen.  In  this  decomposition  all  the  pi
meua  of  dissociation  are  very  clearly  shown — that  Is,  the  hyd;
gaa  evolved  has  a  definite  tension  '*  corresponding  with  each  de
temperature.  This  confirms  the  fact  that  the  formation  of  subet
capable  of  dissociation  can  only  be  accomplished  within  the  dissoci
limits.  Sodium  hydride  melts  more  easily  than  sodium  itself,  and
does  not  undergo  decomposition  if  it  is  iu  an  atmosphere  of  hydr
It  oxidises  easily  in  air,  but  not  so  easily  as  potassium  hydride.
chemical  reactions  of  sodium  are  retained  in  its  hydride,  and,  if  w«
BO  express  it,  they  are  even  increased  by  the  addition  of  hydrogen
all  events,  in  the  properties  of  sodium  hydride  '*  we  see  other  prop
than  in  such  hydrogen  compounds  as  HCl,  H^O,  HjN,  H^C,  or
in  the  gaseous  metallic  hydrides  AsH^,  TeH^.  Platinum,  pallai
nickel,  and  iron,  in  alksorbing  hydrogen  form  compounds  in  1
hydrogen  is  in  a  similar  state.  In  tliem,  as  in  sodium  hydridi
hydrogen  is  compressed,  absorbed,  occluded  (Chapter  11.)  ^^w-"

(or  K.,H

1100

1'  In  (■•■iiiTul,  during  thu  (oniialion  of  alloy"  tlic  voIuhick  charge  very  nlightl
Ihercfcirc!  from  tlic  volums  of  NiLjH  nlnie  idea  miiy  be  lormed  of  the  voln
IifcliciKcii  ill  a  Kolid  or  liqiiUI  stale.  Even  An-Iiiiiiedta  conclnded  that  there  Wk
ill  ftii  ulliiy  oF  copjivr  and  gold  by  reason  of  [Ih  volDitie  and  <tensity.  Froin  Uie  tsi
the  deiiMity  ol  Nii.,H  in  cqnal  to  O'SSO,  it  uwy  l>e  neen  that  the  i-olame  of  47  grui
griun  molecDlc)  of  (hiv  rompound  ^  J9'0  c.e.  Tlie  vohmie  of  45  grunx  ot  wHliiu:
tuincd  in  the  Na.jH  (tlie  ilcnHity  under  tlie  Hinie  c'inilitioiis  beiug  0-ST)  it  eqiud  t
c.r.  Therefore  tlie  volnnie  of  1  griiiti  ol  hydrogrii  in  XikjU  in  equal  to  I'S  c.c,  and
qiionlly  the  deimity  of  metallic  hydrogen,  or  the  Meiglit  of  1  ce.,  approuliea  O-e
Thin  ili'iiKity  is  also  |>roper  to  tlie  hydrogen  alloyed  with  potasBinin  and  paMi
Judging  from  the  wimty  information  wbiuh  ih  at  |m'~t-iit  nvHihible,  liquid  bydrogei
JtH  abwdnle  boiling  iwint  (Chapter  II.)  hax  a  inuvb  lootpr  density.

u  >>>•  We  may  remark  that  at  low  temperwtlireK  >'a  absorbx  XH.iUid  forms  (St
{$rr  Chapter  VI.,  Note  14) ;  tbia  mbatance  abaorbt  CO  and  gires  (NaCO)D  (Cli«pt<
Ncita  811,  allbongli  by  itself  Nn  doea  not  i-omtiin"  dinvtiy  nilh  CO  (bnt  K  dneiit.

SODIUM  589

The  most  important  chemical  property  of  sodium  is  its  power  of
easily  decomposing  water  and  evolving  hydrogen  from  the  majority  of
the  hydrogen  compounds,  and  especially  from  all  acids,  and  hydrates
in^  which  hydroxyl  must  be  recognised.  This  depends  on  its  power  of
combining  with  the  elements  which  are  in  combination  with  the
hydrogen.  We  already  know  that  sodium  disengages  hydrogen,  not
only  from  water,  hydrochloric  acid,**^  and  all  other  acids,  but  also  from
ammonia,^^  *»•  with  the  formation  of  sodamide  NH^Na,  although  it
does  not  displace  hydrogen  from  the  hydrocarbons.**^ Sodium  bums

^>  H.  A.  Schmidt  remarked  that  perfectly  dry  liydrogen  chloride  is  decomposed
with  great  difficulty  by  sodiom,  although  the  decomposition  proceeds  easily  with  potas-
sium and  with  sodium  in  moist  hydrogen  chloride.  Wanklyn  also  remarked  that  sodium
bums  with  great  difficulty  in  dr>'  clilorine.  Probably  these  facts  are  related  to  other
phenomena  observed  by  Dixon,  who  found  that  perfectly  dry  carbonic  oxide  does  not
explode  with  oxygen  on  passing  an  electric  spark.

*••'''•  Sodamide,  NH.>Na,  (Chapter  IV.,  Note  141,  discovere<l  by  Gay-Lussac  and
Th(>nard,  has  formed  the  object  of  repeated  research,  but  has  been  most  fully  investigated
by  A.  W.  Titherley  (1894).  Until  recently  the  following  was  all  that  was  known  about
this  compound : —

By  heating  sodium  in  drj*  ammonia,  Gay-LusMU-  and  Tlu'nard  obtained  an  olive-
green,  easily- fusible  mass,  sodamide ^  NH^Na,  hydrogen  being  separated.  This  substance
with  water  forms  sodium  hydroxide  and  ammonia ;  witli  carVumic  oxide,  CO,  it  forms
sodium  cyanide,  NaCN,  and  water,  H._iO ;  and  with  dry  hydrogen  chloride  it'fonns  sodiom
and  ammonium  chlorides.  These  and  other  reactions  of  sodamide  show  tliat  the  metal
in  it  pre8er\-e8  its  energetic  properties  in  reaction,  and  that  this  compound  of  sodium  is
more  stable  than  the  corres|X)nding  chlorine  amide.  When  heated,  sodamide,  NHjNa,
only  partially  decomposes,  with  evolution  of  hydrogen,  the  principal  part  of  it  giving
ammonia  and  sodium  nitride,  Na-N,  according  to  the  equation  .SNH.2Na  =  2NH3  +  NNa^.
The  latter  is  an  almost  black  ]>owdery  mass,  decoin]X)Hed  by  water  into  ammonia  and
sodium  hydroxide.

Titherley's  researches  added  the  following  data : —

Iron  or  silver  vessels  should  be  used  in  preparing  this  body,  because  glass  and
porcelain  are  corro<led  at  300^-4(KP,  at  which  temperature  ammonia  gas  acts  upon
sodium  and  forms  the  amide  with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen.  The  reaction  proceeds
slowly,  but  is  complete  if  there  In?  an  excess  of  NH-.  Pure  NH.^.Na  is  colourless  (its
colouration  is  due  to  various  impurities!,  semi-transparent,  k]iows  traces  of  crystallisation,
has  a  conchoidal  fracture,  and  melts  at  145*^.  Judging  from  tl»e  increase  in  weight  of
the  sodium  and  the  quantity  of  hydrogen  which  is  diK-ngaged.  the  composition  of  the
amide  is  exactly  NH..>Na.  It  partially  volatilises  (sublinH><<)  in  vacuo  at  200^^,  and  breaks
up  into  2Na  +  N.*  +  2H.^,  at  SOC.  Tlie  same  amide  is  fonned  when  oxide  of  sodium  is
heated  in  NH5:  NaoO  +  2NH- -  2NaH..,N -f  H..0.  NaHO  i-<  also  formed  to  some  extent
by  the  resultant  H.^O.  Potassium  and  lithium  form  similar  amides.  With  water,
alcohol,  and  acids,  NHjNa  gives  NH3  and  NaHO,  which  react  further.  Anhydrous  CaO
absorbs  NH^Na  when  heat€^d  without  decomposing  it.  When  sodamide  is  heated  with
SiO.^,  NH5  is  disengaged,  and  silicon  nitride  formed.  It  acts  still  more  readily  upon
boric  anhydride  when  heated  with  it:  2NH..,Na -^  B.p-  'iBN  -  2NaH0  +  H.p.  When
slightly  heated,  NH...Xa -1-  NOCl  --  NaCl  +  N... -f  H..0  ( NHNa.  and  NNaj  are  apparently  not
formed  at  a  higher  temperature).  The  halogen  organic  compounds  react  with  the  aid
of  heat,  but  with  so  much  energy  that  the  reaction  frequently  leads  to  the  ultimate  de-
struction of  the  organic  groups  and  prwluction  of  carbon.

**  As  sodium  does  not  displace  hydrogen  from  tlie  hydrocarl>ons,  it  may  he prcBerved
in  liquid  hydrocarbons.  Naphtha  is  generally  used  for  this  purxx>se,  as  it  consists  of  a
mixture  of  various  liquid  hydrocarbons.  However,  in  naphtlia  s<xlium  usually  becomes
coated  with  a  crust  composed  of  matter  produced  by  the  action  of  the  sodiom  on  certain

540  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

both  in  chlorine  and  in  oxygen,  evolving  much  heat.  These  properties
are  closely  connected  with  its  power  of  taking  up  oxygen,  chlorine,
and  similar  elements  from  most  of  their  compounds.  Just  as  it  removes
the  oxygen  from  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  and  from  carbonic  anhydride,  so
also  does  it  decompose  the  majority  of  oxides  at  definite  temperatures.
Here  the  action  is  essentially  the  same  as  in  the  decomposition  of
water.  Thus,  for  instance,  when  acting  on  magnesium  chloride  the
sodium  displaces  the  magnesium,  and  when  acting  on  aluminium  chloride
it  displaces  metallic  aluminium.  Sulphur,  phosphorus,  arsenic  and  a
whole  series  of  other  elements,  also  combine  with  sodium. ^^

With  oxygen  sodium  unites  in  three  degrees  of  combination,  forming
a  suboxide  Na40,^''  **"  an  oxide,  Na^O,  and  a  peroxide,  NaO.  They  are
thus  termed  because  NajO  is  a  stable  basic  oxide  (with  i^ater  it  forms
a  basic  hydroxide),  whilst  Xa40  and  NaO  do  not  form  corresponding
saline  hydrates  and  salts.  The  suboxide  is  a  grey  inflammable  substance
which  easily  decomposes  water,  disengaging  hydrc^n  ;  it  is  formed
by  the  slow  oxidation  of  sodium  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  The
peroxide  is  a  greenish  yellow  substance,  fusing  at  a  bright  red  heat ;  it
is  produced  by  burning  sodium  in  an  excess  of  oxygen,  and  it  yields
oxygen  when  treated  with  water  :

Suboxide  :  Na^O +  SHaO  =  4NaH0  +  H^^^
Oxide  :  NajO -f  HjO =  2NaH0  ^^

Peroxide  :  Na^O.,  +  HjO =  2NaH0  +  O  ^^

of  the  Hubstunces  contamed  in  the  mixture  composing  naphtha.  In  order  that  sodiam
may  retain  its  lustre  in  naplitha,  secondary  octyl  alcohol  is  added.  (This  alcohol  is
obtained  by  distilling  castor  oil  with  caustic  potash.)  Sodium  keeps  well  in  a  mixtor?
of  pure  benzene  and  paraffin.

"•  If  sodium  does  not  directly  displace  the  hydrogen  in  hydrocarbons,  still  by  indirect
means  compounds  may  be  obtained  which  conttiin  sodium  and  hydrocarbon  groups
Some  of  these  compounds  have  been  produced,  although  not  in  a  pure  state.  Thus,  for
instance,  zinc  ethyl,  Zn  {C.^>H5)o,  when  treated  with  sodium,  loses  zinc  and  forms  sodium
ethyl,  C  JIsNa,  but  this  decomposition  is  not  complete,  and  the  compound  formed  cannot
be  hei)arated  by  distillation  from  the  remaining  zinc  ethyl.  In  this  compomid  the
energy  of  the  so<lium  is  clearly  manifest,  for  it  reacts  with  substances  containing  haloids
oxygen,  il'c,  and  directly  absorbs  carbonic  anhydride,  forming  a  salt  of  a  carboxyUc  acid
(propionic).

^*'  •''"  It  is  even  doubtful  whether  the  suboxide  exists  {see  Note  47).

^^  A  compound,  Xa^Cl,  which  corresponds  with  the  suboxide,  is  apparently  formed
when  a  galvanic  current  is  passed  through  fused  common  salt ;  the  sodium  liberated
dissolves  in  the  common  salt,  and  does  not  separate  from  the  compound  either  on
cooling  or  on  treatment  with  mercury.  It  is  therefore  supposed  to  be  Na^Cl ;  the
more  so  as  the  mass  obtained  gives  hydrogen  when  treated  with  water :  Nju^Cl  +  H^O
H  •  XallO-i  NaCl,  that  is,  it  acts  like  suboxide  of  sodium.  If  Na.;Cl  really  exists  as  «
salt,  then  th«3  corrchponding  base  Na,0,  according  to  the  rule  with  other  bases  of  tlrf
roni|M>sition  MtO,  ought  to  bo  called  a  quatvniaiT  oxide.  According  to  certain  evidence,
a  suboxide  is  formed  when  thin  sheets  or  fine  drops  of  sodium  slowly  oxidise  in  moist  air.

'^  According  to  observations  easily  made,  sodium  when  fused  in  air  oxidises  but  does
not  burn,  the  combustion  only  commencing  with  the  formation  of  vaiK)ur — that  ia,  when

SODIUM  541

All  three  oxides  form  sodium  hydroxide  with  water,  but  only  the
oxide  NajO  is  directly  transformed  into  a  hydrate.  The  other  oxides
liberate  either  hydrogen  or  oxygen  ;  they  also  present  a  similar  dis-
tinction with  reference  to  many  other  agents.  Thus  carbonic  anhydride
combines  directly  with  the  oxide  Na^O,  which  when  heated  in  the  gas
burns,  forming  sodium  carbonate,  whilst  the  peroxide  yields  oxygen  in
addition.  When  treated  with  acids,  sodium  and  all  its  oxides  only
form  the  salts  corresponding  with  sodium  oxide — that  is,  of  the  formula  or
type  NaX. Thus  the  oxide  of  sodium,  Na.jO,  is  the  only  salt-forming

considerably  heated.  Davy  and  Karsten  obtained  tlie  oxides  of  x>ota»Hiam,  K.^O,  and  of
sodium,  Na.,.0,  by  heating  the  metals  with  their  hydroxides,  whence  NaHO  +  Na  -  Na.20  +  H,
but  N.  N.  Beketoff  failed  to  obtain  oxides  by  thit*  means.  He  prepared  them  by  directly
if^niting  the  metals  in  dry  air,  and  afterwards  heating  with  the  metal  in  order  to  destroy
any  i>eroxide.  The  oxide  produced,  Na^O,  when  heated  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen,
gav«'  a  mixture  of  sodium  and  its  hydroxide  :  Na^O  +  H  -  NaHO  t-  Na  {see  Cliapter  IL,
Note  9).  If  both  the  observ'atious  mentioned  arc  accurate,  then  the  reaction  is  reversible.
Sodium  oxide  ought  to  be  formed  during  the  decomposition  of  sodium  carbonate  by  oxide
of  iron  {see  Note  26),  and  during  the  decomposition  of  sodium  nitrite.  According  to
Karsten,  its  specific  gravity  is  2'8,  according  to  Beketoff  2JJ.  The  diflRculty  in  obtaining
it  is  owing  to  an  excess  of  sodium  forming  the  suboxide,  and  an  excess  of  oxygen  the
IKToxide.  Tlie  grey  colour  peculiar  to  the  sul>oxid(.*  and  oxide  perhaps  shows  that  they
contain  met»illic  sodium.  In  addition  to  this,  in  the  presence  of  water  it  may  contain
sodium  hydride  and  NaHO.

*®  Of  the  oxides  of  sodium,  that  easiest  to  form  is  the  peroxide,  NaO  or  Na.202 ;  this
is  obtained  when  sodium  is  burnt  in  an  excess  of  oxygen.  If  NaNOs  be  melted,  it  gives
Na.,.02  with  metallic  Na.  In  a  fused  state  the  peroxide  is  reddish  yellow,  but  it  becomes
almost  colourless  when  cold.  When  heated  with  iodine  vapour,  it  loses  oxygen :  Na202  +  Ij
-Na-jOI^+O.  The  compound  Na^OI^  is  akin  to  the  comiX)und  CU2OCI2  obtained  by
oxidising  CuCl.  This  reaction  is  one  of  the  few  in  which  iodine  directly  displaces
oxyji:en.  Tlie  substance  Na^OI^  is  soluble  in  water,  and  when  acidified  gives  free  iodine
and  a  sodium  salt.  Carbonic  oxide  is  absorbed  by  heated  sodium  peroxide  with  formation
of  sodium  carbonate  :  Na^COs  =  Na-^Oj  +  CO,  whilst  carbonic  anhydride  liberates  oxygen
from  it.  "With  nitrous  oxide  it  reacts  thus:  Na^O^  +  2N.2O  =  2NaN0.2  +  No ;  with  nitric
oxide  it  combines  directly,  forming  sodium  nitrite,  NaO  4  NO  =  NaNO.^.  Sodium  peroxide,
when  treated  with  water,  does  not  give  hydrogen  i)eroxide,  because  the  latter  in  the
presence  of  the  alkali  formed  (Na202  +  2HoO  =  2NaHO  +  HoO^.)  decomposes  into  water
and  oxygen.  In  the  presence  of  dilute  sulphuric  acid  it  forms  H.^O.^  (Na202  +  H2S04
^  Na-jSO^  -?-  HoO.>).  Peroxide  of  sodium  is  now  prepared  on  a  large  scale  (by  thefaction  of  air
upon  Naat  300=)  for  bleaching  wool,  silk  <fec.  (when  it  a<^ts  in  virtue  of  tlie  H2O2  formed).
The  oxidising  properties  of  Na.202  under  the  action  of  heat  are  seen,  for  instance,  in  the
fact  that  when  heated  with  I  it  forms  sodium  iodato  ;  with  PbO,  Na2Pb05 ;  with  pyrites,
sulphates,  itc.  When  peroxide  of  sodium  comes  into  contact  with  water,  it  evolves  much
heat,  forming  HoOa,  and  decomposing  with  the  disengagement  of  oxygen ;  but,  as  a  rule,
there  is  no  explosion.  But  if  Na202  be  placed  in  contact  with  organic  matter,  such  as
sawdust,  cotton,  «tc.,  it  gives  a  violent  explosion  when  heated,  ignited,  or  acted  on  by
water.  Peroxide  of  sodium  forms  an  excellent  oxidising  agent  for  the  prei>aration  of  the
higher  product  of  oxidation  of  Mn,  Cr,  W,  &c.,  and  also  for  oxidising  the  metallic
sulphides.  It  should  therefore  find  many  applications  in  chemical  analysis.  To  prepare
Na20..  on  a  large  scale,  Castner  melts  Na  in  an  aluminium  vessel,  and  at  800°  passes
first  air  deprived  of  a  portion  of  its  oxygen  (having  been  already  once  used),  and  then
ordinary  dry  air  over  it.

542  PBIXCIPLErt  OF  CHEMISTRY

Mv/f  of  this  metal,  as  wat^i-  is  in  the  case  of  hydrogen.  Altbooj
pen>xid«  H,Oi  is  derived  from  hydrogen,  and  Xa^O,  from  ac
yet  there  are  no  corresponding  salts  known,  and  if  they  are  f
tliey  are  probably  as  anstaMe  as  hydrogen  peroxide.  Although  <
forma  carbonic  oxide,  CO,  still  it  has  only  one  salt-forming  o:
carbonic  anhydride,  COj.  Nitrogen  and  chlorine  bo^i  give  s
salt-forming  oxides  and  types  of  salts.  Bat  of  the  oxides  of  nifc
NO  and  NO,  do  not  fwm  salts,  as  do  N,0„  N,0„  and  N,Os,  alt
N)0,  does  not  form  qiecial  salts,  and  N,Oj  corresponds  wii
highest  form  of  the  saline  compoonds  of  nitrogen.  Sach  distin
between  tbe  elements,  according  to  their  power  of  giving  one  or  ■
saline  forms,  U  a  radical  property  of  no  less  importance  than  th<
or  acid  properties  of  their  oxides.  Sodium  aa  a  typit^  meta
not  form  any  acid  oxides,  whilst  chlorine,  as  a  typical  non-metai
not  form  bases  with  oxygeu.  Ther^ore  sodium  as  an  element  n
thus  characterised  :  it  forms  one  very  stable  salt-forming  oxide,  '.
having  powerful  basic  properties,  and  its  salts  are  of  the  g
formula,  NaX,  thereforo  in  its  compounds  it  is,  like  hydrogen,  a
and  univalent  element.

On  comparing  sodium  and  its  anali^ues,  which  will  be  describee
with  other  metallic  elements,  it  will  be  seen  that  these  prop
togeUier  with  the  relative  lightness  of  the  metal  itaelf  and  its
pounds,  and  the  magnitude  of  its  atomic  weight  comprise  the
essential  properties  of  this  element,  clearly  distinguishing  it
others,  and  enabling  us  easily  to  recognise  its  analogues.

548

CHAPTER  XIII

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, CESIUM, AND LITHIUM. SPECTRUM ANALYSIS

Just  as  the  series  of  halogens,  fluorine,  bromine  and  iodine  correspond
with  the  chlorine  contained  in  common  salt,  so  also  there  exists  a  cor-
responding series  of  elements  :  lithium,  Li  ^  7,  potassium,  K  =  39,
rubidium,  Rb  =  85,  and  ctesium,  Cs  =  133,  which  are  analogous  to  the
sodium  in  common  salt.  These  elements  bear  as  great  a  resemblance
to  sodium,  Na  =  23,  as  fluorine,  F  =  19,  bromine,  Br  =  80,  and  iodine,
I  =s  127,  do  to  chlorine,  CI  =  36-5.  Indeed,  in  a  free  state,  these
elements,  like  sodium,  are  soft  metals  which  rapidly  oxidise  in  moist
air  and  decompose  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  forming  soluble
hydroxides  having  clearly-defined  basic  properties  and  the  composition
IIHO,  like  that  of  caustic  soda.  The  resemblance  between  these  metals
is  sometimes  seen  with  striking  clearness,  especiaUy  in  compounds  such
as  salts.  ^  The  corresponding  salts  of  nitric,  sulphuric,  carbonic,  and
nearly  all  acids  with  these  metals  have  many  points  in  common.  The
metals  which  resemble  sodium  so  much  in  their  reactions  are  termed
the  rtietah  of  the  alkalis,

>  Tutton'sresearches  (1894)  upon  the  analogy  of  the  crj-stalline  forms  of  K2804»Rb2S04

and  CS4SO4  may  be  taken  as  a  tyincal  example  of  the  comparison  of  analogous  compocmds.

We  cite  the  following  data  from  these  excellent  researches :  the  sp.  gr.  at  20^/4°  of  K2SO4

is  2-6688  of  Rb2S04,  8*6118,  and  of  C83SO4, 4*2484. The  coefficient  of  cubical  expansion

(the  mean  between  20°  and  60°)  for  the  K  salt  is  0*0058,  for  the  Rb  salt  0*0052,  for  the

Cs  salt  0*0051. The  linear  expansion  (the  maximum  for  the  vertical  axis)  along  the  axis

of  crystallisation  is  the  same  for  all  three  salts,  within  the  limits  of  experimental  error.

The  replacement  of  potassium  by  rubidium  causes  the  distance  between  the  centres  of

the  molecules  in  the  direction  of  the  three  axes  of  crystallisation  to  increase  equally,  and

less  than  with  the  replacement  of  rubidium  by  cesium. The  index  of  refraction  for  all

rays  and  for  every  crystalline  path  (direction)  is  greater  for  the  rubidium  salt  than  for

the potassium  salt,  and  less  than  for  the  caesium  salt,  and  the  differences  axe  nearly  in

the  ratio  2  :  6. The  lengths  of  the  rhombic  crystiJline  axes  for  K3SO4  are  in  the  ratio

0*6727  :  1  :  0*7418,  for  Rb5804,  0*5728  :  1  :  0*7485,  and  for  CS2SO4,  0*6712  :  1  :  0*7521.

The  development  of  the  basic  and  brachy-pinacoids  gradually  increases  in  passing  from

K  to  Rb  and  Cs. The  optical  properties  also  follow  the  same  order  both  at  the  ordinary

and  at  a  higher  temperature. Tutton  draws  the  general  conclusion  that  the  oryatallo-

graphic  properties  of  the  isomorphic  rhombic  sulphates  R2SO4  are  a  fimction  of  tlie

atomic  weight  of  the  metals  contained  in  them  (tee  Chapter  XY.) Such  researches  as

tliese  should  do  much  towards  hastening  the  establishment  of  a  true  molecular  mechanics

of  physico-chemical  phenomena.

544  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMLSTRY

Among  the  metals  of  the  alkalis,  the  most  widely distributed  in
nature,  after  sodium,  is  potassium. Like  sodium,  it  does  not  appear
either  in  a  free  state  or  as  oxide  or  hydroxide,  but  in  the  form  of  salt«,
which  present  much  in  common  with  the  salts  of  sodium  in  the  manner
of  their  occurrence. The  compounds  of  potassium  and  sodium  in  the
earth's  crust  occur  as  mineral  compounds  of  silica. With  silica,  SiO*,
potassium  oxide,  like  sodium  oxide,  forms  saline  mineral substances
resembling  glass. If other  oxides,  such  as  lime, CaO, and  alumina,
AI.2O3,  combine with  these compounds,  glass is formed,  a vitreous
stony  mass,  distinguished  by  its  great  stability,  and  its very  slight
variation  under  the  action  of  water. It  is  such  complex  silicious  com-
pounds as  these  which  contain  potash  (potassium  oxide),  KgO,  or  soda
(sodium  oxide),  Na.^O,  and  sometimes  both  together,  silica,  SiO.>,  lime,
CaO,  alumina,  AI2O3,  and  other  oxides,  that  form  the  chief  mass  of
rocks,  out  of  which,  judging  by  the  direction  of  the  strata,  the  chief
mass  of  the  accessible  crust  (envelope)  of  the  earth  is  made  up. The
primary  rocks,  like  granite,  porphyry,  (fee.,'*'*"  are  formed  of  such  crystal-
line silicious  rocks  as  these. The  oxides  entering  into  the  composition
of  these  rocks  do  not  form  a  homogeneous  amorphous  mass  like  glass,
but  are  distributed  in  a  series  of  peculiar,  and  in  the  majority  of  cases
crystalline,  compounds,  into  which  the  primary  rocks  may  be  divided.
Thus  a  felspar  (orthoclase)  in  granite  contains  from  8  to  1 5  per  cent,  of
potassium,  whilst  another  variety  (plagioclase)  which also occurs  in
granite  contains  1*2  to  6  per  cent,  of  potassium,  and  6  to 12  per  cent
of  sodium. The  mica  in  granite  contains  3  to  10  per  cent,  of  potassium.
As already mentioned, and further explained in Chapter XVII.
the  friable,  crumbling,  and  stratified formations  which  in  our  times
cover  a  large  part  of  the  earth's  surface  have  been  formed  from  these
primary  rocks  by  the  action  of  the  atmosphere  and  of  water  containing
carbonic  acid. It  is  evident that  in  the  chemical  alteration  of the
primary  rocks  by  the  action  of  water,  the  compounds  of  potassium  as
well  as  the  compounds  of sodium,  must  have  been  dissolved by  the
water  (as  they  are  soluble  in  water),  and  that  therefore  the  compounds
of  potassium  must  be  accumulated  together  with  those  of  sodium  in  sea
water. And  indeed  compounds  of  potassium  are  always  found  in  sea
ivater,  as we  have  already  pointed  out  (Chapters  I.  and  X.). This
forms  one  of  the  sources  from  which  they  are  extracted. After  the
evaporation  of  sea  water,  there  remains  a  mother  liquor,  which  contains
potassium  chloride  and  a  large  proportion  of  magnesium  chloride. On
cooling  this  solution  crystals  separate  out  which  contain  chlorides  of
magnesium  and  potassium. A  double  salt  of  this  kind,  called  carnal/iff

1  bis  The  origin  of  the  primary  rocks  has  been  mentioned  in  Chapter  X.,  Note  2,

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, CESIUM, AND  LITHIUM  545

KMgClijGH.jO,  occurs  at  Stassfurt.  This  carnallite^  is  now  eni-
ployed  as  a  material  for  the  extraction  of  potassium  chloride,  and  of  all
the  compounds  of  this  element.^  Besides  which,  potassium  chloride
itself  is  sometimes  found  at  Stassfurt  as  sylvine?^^^ By  a  method  of

-  Carnallitc  belongs  to  tlie  number  of  double  salts  which  are  directly  decomposed  by
water,  and  it  only  crystaUises  from  solutions  which  contain  an  excess  of  magnesium
chloride.  It  may  be  prepared  artificially  by  mixing  strong  solutions  of  potassium  and
magnesium  chlorides,  when  colourless  crystals  of  sp.  gr.  1'60  separate,  whilst  the  Stass-
furt salt  is  usually  of  a  reddish  tint,  owing  to  traces  of  iron.  At  the  ordinary  temperature
sixty-five  parts  of  carnalliU>  are  soluble  in  one  hundred  parts  of  water  in  the  presence  of
an  excess  of  the  salt.  It  deliquescen  in  the  air,  forming  a  solution  of  magnesium  chloride
and  leaving  i)otasHium  chloride.  The  quantity  of  caniallite  produced  at  Stassfurt  is  now
as  much  as  104),00()  tons  a  year.

'•  The  method  of  separating  sodium  chloride  from  potassium  chloride  has  been  de-
scribed in  Chapter  I.  On  evaiX)ration  of  a  mixture  of  the  saturated  solutions,  sodium
chloride  separates;  and  then,  on  cooling,  ix>tassium  chloride  separates,  owing  to  the
difference  of  rate  of  variation  of  their  solubilities  with  the  temperature.  The  following
are  the  most  trustworthy  figures  for  the  solubility  ol  potaMiuni  chloride  in  one  hundred
parts  of  water  (for  sodium  chloride,  sec  Chapter  X.,  Note  13) : —

10^  20-  40=^  60=-  100°

8-2  «r)  40  46  57

When  mixed  with  solutions  of  other  Siilts  the  solubility  of  potassium  chloride  naturally
varies,  but  not  to  any  great  extent.

5  bu  The  sjwcific  gravity  of  the  solid  salt  is  1*9^ — that  is,  less  than  that  of  sodium
chloride.  All  the  salts  of  scnlium  are  si)ecifically  heavier  than  the  corresi>onding  salts  of
ix>tassium,  as  are  also  their  solutions  for  equal  percentage  compositions.  If  the  specific
gravity  of  water  at  4'-  --- 10,000,  then  at  15^  the  specific  gravity  of  a  solution  of  p  p.c.
potassium  chloride  -  9,002  4^  Oli-JO 7;  -  0-226^*,  and  therefore  for  10  p.c.  ^10647,  20  p.c.
'^  11348,  &c.

Potassium  chloride  combines  witli  iodine  trichloride  to  form  a  compound  KCl  +  ICI3
=  KICI4,  which  has  a  yellow  colour,  is  fusible,  loses  iodine  trichloride  at  a  red  heat,
and  gives  potassium  iodate  and  hydrochloric  acid  with  water.  It  is  not  only  formed  by
direct  combination,  but  also  by  many  other  methods ;  for  instance,  by  i)as8ing  chlorine
into  a  solution  of  jwtassium  iodide  so  long  as  the  gas  is  absorbed,  KI  t  2CI2  =  KCljICl^.
Potassium  iodide,  when  treated  with  i)otassium  chlorate  and  strong  hydrochloric  acid,
also  gives  this  compound ;  another  method  for  its  formation  is  given  by  the  etjuatioii
KCIO3  +  I4  CHC1  =  KC1,IC1-  +  8CI  +  3H20.  This  is  a  kind  of  salt  corresponding  with
KIO2  (unknown)  in  which  the  oxygen  is  replaced  by  chlorine.  If  valency  Iw  taken  as
the  starting-point  in  the  study  of  chemical  comiK)unds,  and  the  elements  considered  as
liaving  a  constant  atomicity  (number  of  bonds)— that  is,  if  K,  CI,  and  I  be  taken  as
univalent  elements — then  it  is  iniiH)ssible  to  explain  the  formation  of  such  a  compound
because,  according  to  this  view,  univalent  elements  are  only  able  to  form  dual  coni-
IK>unds  with  each  other;  such  as,  KCl,  ClI,  KI,  Jtc,  whilst  here  they  are  grouped
together  in  the  molecule  KI('l4.  Wells,  Wheeler,  and  Penfield  (1892)  obtained  a  large
numl>er  of  such  poly-haloi«l  sjiUm.  They  may  all  be  divided  into  two  large  classes :
the  tri-haloid  and  the  penta-haloid  salts.  They  have  been  obtained  not  only  for  K
but  also  for  Rb  and  Cs,  and  i)artially  also  for  Na  and  Li.  The  general  method  of  their
formation  consists  in  dissolving  the  ordinary'  halogen  salt  of  the  metal  in  water,  and
treating  it  with  the  requisite  amount  of  free  halogen.  The  poly-haloid  salt  separates
out  after  evaiK)rating  the  solution  at  a  more  or  less  low  temperature.  In  this  manner,
among  the  tri-haloid  salts,  may  be  <»l)tained  :  KI3,  KBr^I,  KCI.2I,  and  the  corresi)onding
salts  of  rubidium  and  cu'sium,  for  instance,  Csl-,  CsBrl.^,  CsBr^I,  CsClBrI  CsCloI,
CsBr^,  CsClBr.j,  CsCl.^Br,  and  in  general  MX3  where  X  is  a  halogen. The  colour  of  the

VOL.  I.  N  X

546  PEINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

double  saline  decomposition,  the  chloride  of  potassium  may  be  convt
iuto  all  the  other  potasGium  snlte,*  some  of  whiuh  are  of  practical
The  potassium  saltij  have,  however,  their  greatest  importance  a
indispensable  coaiponent  of  the  food  of  plants.''

The  priniary  rocks  contain  an  almost  equal  proportion  of  potasi
and  sodium.  But  in  sea  water  the  compounds  o£  the  latter  metal
dominate.  It  may  be  asked,  what  became  of  the  compounds  of  p
sium  in  the  disintegration  of  the  primary  rocks,  if  so  siuall  a  qoai
went  to  the  sea  water  J  They  remained  with  the  other  productd  o
decomposition  of  the  primary  rocks.  When  granite  or  any  (
similar  rock  formation  is  disintegrated,  there  are  formed,  besida
soluble  substances,  also  insoluble  substances — sand  and  fineljr-dii
clay,  containing  water,  alumina,  and  silica.  This  clay  is  carried  i
by  the  water,  and  is  then  deposited  in  strata.  It,  aud  espec
its  admixture  with  vegetable  remains,  retain  compounds  of  potaa
in  a  greater  quantity  than  those  of  sodium.  This  has  been  pi
with  absolute  certainty  to  be  the  case,  and  is  due  tu  the  abtor
poicer  of  tiie  soil.  If  a  dilute  solution  of  a  potassium  compoun
filtered  through  common  mould  used  for  growing  plants,  contai
clay  and  the  remains  of  vegetable  decomposition,  this  mould  wi

CTj'ntaU  VBjries  according  to  the  halogen,  tliUN  Calj  in  block,  CrBr-;  yellowish  n-d.C
reddish  brown,  C-Brjl  red,  CsCljBr  yellow.  The  negium  mltn  arc  the  mo-t  «Wd<
UiOde  of  potAlmium  least  bo,  as  also  those  which  contain  Br  e,nd  I  scpar&tely  or  togi
forceeeinm  no  com  pound  a  containing  CI  and  I  were  obtained,  ^e  pentn-haJoid  salb
a  xmaller  class;  among  these  salte  potaxsium  forms  KCl^I,  rubidiom  EtbCl^I.  a
Cals,  CsBr,  CsCl,I,  lithium  LiCl(I  |with  4H.jO)  and  sodium  NaCl  J  (with  aH.O).
most  stable  are  thou  salts  coutainiiig  the  metal  with  the  greatest  atomic  Height — ci
(fee  Chapter  XI.,  Note  63).

'  It  ia  possible  to  eitract  the  compounds  of  potassium  directly  from  the  pr
rocks  which  arc  so  wideiy  distributed  over  tlie  earth's  surface  and  so  abDndant  in
localities.  From  a  chemical  point  ol  view  this  problem  presents  no  difBcalty ;  f
atance,  by  tusinn  powdereil  orlhiiclane  with  lime  and  fluor  spar  (Ward's  method
then  extracting  the  alkali  witli  water  (on  fusion  the  silica  givett  on  ineoluble
pound  with  lime),  or  by  treating  the  orthoclase  with  IiydroBuoric  acid  (in  whici
silicon  fluoride  is  cvolred  as  a  gas)  it  is  iiosHible  to  transfer  the  alkali  of  the  ortb
to  an  aqauouH  solution,  and  to  separate  it  In  Ihia  manner  from  the  other  inaoloble  a
Howcrer,  as  yet  there  i»  no  pruBl  in,  nor  necessity  for,  recourse  to  this  treatmi
caniallite  and  ]«taHhtonii  abundant  materials  for  the  eitractionof  potassiuui  comp
by  cheaper  metliods.  Furthermore,  the  salts  of  potassium  are  now  in  the  majoi
chi-mical  reactions  rciiliiced  by  salts  of  sodium,  especially  since  the  preparation  of  si
cerhonatv  has  been  facilitated  by  the  Leblanc  process.  Tlic  replacement  of  pots
compounds  by  sodium  compounds  not  only  baa  the  tulrantagc  that  the  salts  o(  •
are  in  general  cheaper  than  those  of  iMtusHium,  but  also  that  a  smaller  qoontil
sodium  salt  is  needed  for  a  giren  reacliiMi  than  ol  a  potassium  salt,  becaase  the  co
ini;  wcIeU  of  soilium  (38)  is  less  than  Lliat  of  |>oUis>.ium  (89).

s  It  has  been  shown  by  direct  cii>eri incut  on  the  cultivation  o(  plants  in  arl
soiIh  and  in  sr'hitions  that  under  conditions  liihyucal,  chemical,  and  physiolotcJcal)
u'im.-  identical  pluntt  are  able  to  thrive  and  becnnic  folly  developed  in  the  entire  at
of  sodium  salla,  but  that  their  development  is  impossible  without  potasaiDm  uJta.

POTASSIl^, RUBIDIUM, CAESIUM, AND  LITHIU:vr  547

found  to  have  retained  a  somewhat  considerable  percentage  of  the
potassium  compounds.  If  a  salt  of  potassium  be  taken,  then  during
the  filtration  an  equivalent  quantity  of  a  salt  of  calcium— which  is  also
found,  as  a  rule,  in  soils — is  set  free.  Such  a  process  of  filtration
through  finely  divided  earthy  substances  proceeds  in  nature,  and  the
compounds  of  po.tassium  are  everywhere  retained  by  the  friable  eartli
in  considerable  quantity.  This  explains  the  presence  of  so  small  an
amount  of  potassium  salts  in  the  water  of  rivers,  lakes,  streams,  and
oceans,  where  the  lime  and  soda  have  accumulated.  The  compounds  of
potassium  retained  by  the  friable  mass  of  the  earth  are  absorbed  as  an
aqueous  solution  by  the  roots  of  plants.  Plants,  as  everyone  knows,
Avhen  burnt  leave  an  ash,  and  this  ash,  besides  various  other  substances,
without  exception  contains  compounds  of  potassium.  Many  land
plants  contain  a  very  small  amount  of  sodium  compounds,^  whilst
potassium  and  its  compounds  occur  in  all  kinds  of  vegetable  ash.
Among  the  generally  cultivated  plants,  grass,  potatoes,  the  turnip,
^nd  buckwheat  are  particularly  rich  in  potassium  compounds.  The
Ash  of  plants,  and  especially  of  herbaceous  plants,  buckwheat  straw,
sunflower  and  potato  leaves  are  used  in  practice  for  the  extraction  of
potassium  compounds.  There  is  no  doubt  that  potassium  occurs  in  the
plants  themselves  in  the  form -of  complex  compounds,  and  often  as  salts
of  organic  acids.  In  certain  cases  such  salts  of  potassium  are  even
•extracted  from  the  juice  of  plants.  Thus,  sorrel  and  oxalis,  for  example,
contain  in  their  juices  the  acid  oxalate  of  potassium,  C2HKO4,  which  is
employed  for  removing  ink  stains.  Grape  juice  contains  the  so-called
-cream  of  tartar,  which  is  the  acid  tartrate  of  potassium,  QJl^O^J

''*  If  herbaceous  plants  contain  much  sodium  salts,  it  is  evident  tliat  these  salts  mainly
•come  from  the  sodium  compounds  in  the  water  absorbed  by  the  plants.

"^  As  plants  always  contain  mineral  substances  and  cannot  thrive  in  a  medium  which
does  not  contain  them,  more  especially  in  one  which  is  free  from  the  salts  of  the  four
basic  oxides,  K2O,  CaO,  MgO,  and  Fe.^O.^,  and  of  the  four  acid  oxides,  CO.^,  NjOj,
P.^05,  and  SO3,  and  as  the  amount  of  ash-forming  substances  in  plants  is  small,  the
question  inevitably  arises  as  to  what  peurt  these  play  in  the  development  of  plants.
With  the  existing  chemical  data  only  one  answer  is  possible  to  this  question,  and  it  is
still  only  a  hypothesis.  This  answer  was  particularly  clearly  expressed  by  Professor
Gustavson  of  the  PetrofiFsky  Agricultural  Academy.  Starting  from  the  fact  (Chapter
XI.,  Note  55)  that  a  small  quantity  of  aluminium  renders  possible  or  facilitates  the
reaction  of  bromine  on  hydrocarbons  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  it  is  easy  to  arrive  at
the  conclusion,  which  is  very  probable  and  in  accordance  with  many  data  respecting  the
reactions  of  organic  compounds,  that  the  addition  of  mineral  substances  to  organic  com-
pounds lowers  the  temperature  of  reaction  and  in  general  facilitates  chemical  reactions
in  plants,  and  thus  aids  the  convernion  of  the  most  simple  nourishing  substances  into  the
complex  component  parts  of  the  plant  organism.  The  province  of  chemical  reactions
pro<!e€Hling  in  organic  substances  in  the  presence  of  a  small  quantity  of  mineral  substances
has  us  yet  been  but  little  investigated,  although  there  are  already  several  disconnected
data  concerning  reactions  of  this  kind,  and  although  a  great  deal  is  known  w^ith  regard
to  such  reactions  among  inorganic  compounds. The  essence  of  the  matter  may  be  ex-

X  N  2

648  PBXSCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

This  silt  alsio  separates  as  ji  sediment  from  wine.  When  the
containing  one  or  more  of  the  salts  of  potassium,  are  bun
carbonaceous  matter  is  oxidiBed,  and  in  consequence  the  pot&sf
obtained  in  the  ash  aa  carbonate,  KjCO,,  which  is  generally
as  putasheg.  Hence  potashes  occur  ready  prepared  in  the
plants,  and  therefore  the  aah  of  land  plants  is  employed  as  a
for  the  extraction  of  potassium  compounds.  Pota.ssium  carbo!
extracted  by  hxiviating the  aali with  water.' Potassium  car

presBed  thiin — two  anbatanceK,  A  lOid  B,  ilo  i

bnt  the  addition  of  a  aniiill  qunntily  of  a.  llii

thereactionot  AoiiB,  becaueeAcombireanithC,  formingAC,  and  B  rpscU  on

compound,  which  hns  a  differKnt  Htore  of  chemical  energy,  forming  the  cnmpoan

its  produotB,  and  setting  C  free  again  or  retaining  it.

It  may  here  be  remarked  that  all  the  mineral  aubstaoces  neceasary  for  plant
enumerated  at  the  begiuuing  of  the  note)  are  the  highest  saline  c-ompoiuula
elements,  that  they  cuter  into  the  plants  as  salts,  that  the  lower  forms  of  oxidatifl
■ame  elements  {lor  instance,  Buli>hitea  and  phosphites)  are  harmful  to  plants  (poi
and  that  strong  Hulutiona  of  the  salts  assimilated  by  plants  Ithcir  osmotic  pream
great  and  contracting  tlie  cells,  as  De  Vries  showed,  (»«  Chapter  L,  Note  19|  i
do  not  enter  into  the  plants  but  kill  tliem  Ipoimn  them)

Besides  which,  it  will  lie  underHtood  from  tlie  precedmg  paragraph  thiit  tfat>
potassium  may  become  exhausted  from  the  noil  by  long  cultivation,  and  that  tbi
therefore  be  cases  when  the  direct  fertilisation  by  Baits  of  poUssium  may  be  pri
Bnt  manure  nud  animal  excrements.  asheB,  and,  in  general,  nearly  all  rprnw  whi
serve  for  fertiliKing  the  soil,  contain  a  considerable  quantity  of  potassinm  Hkl
therefore,  a.'  regards  thu  natural  salts  of  potasaiura  (SlaBsfurtI,  and  <>Hpecia]l,v  pol
sulphalfl!,  it  the)  often  improve  the  crops,  it  is  in  all  probability  dne  to  their
on  the  properties  of  the  soil.  The  agriculturist  cannot  therefore  be  advjsed
potaBsinm  salts,  without  making  siiecial  experiments  showing  the  adranta^  of
fertiliser  on  a  ^iveii  kind  of  noil  and  phint.

Thi-  animal  bodyalBocontuinspot«siunmcom|>i<uncl»,  which  is  natural,  Rtncet
consume  plants.  For  example,  milk,  and  esi>ecially  hnman  milk,  contains  a  somcwt
siderable  ijuantity  of  potassium  componiulH.  Cow's  niilk,  however,  doeanot  contai
potassium  salt.  Sodium  cnni|inundH  generally  predominate  in  the  bodies  of  animal
excrement  of  animalH,  nnd  especially  of  hertnvarouH  animals,  on  tlie  contrary,  oft
Uins  a  large  |>ropartion  of  potassium  salts.  Tlius  sliecp's  dung  is  rich  in  them.
washing  slieep'a  wool  salts  of  potassium  pass  into  the  water.

The  asli  of  tree  Btwnn,  as  the  already  dormant  portion  of  the  plant  fChaptei
Note  1),  cnntikins  litllc  ]H>tash.  For  tlie  extraction  nl  |<otash,  which  was  foniM^rly
on  extensively  in  the  east  ot  Russia  lU-lore  the  discovery  of  the  Rtassfart  hsUi.  I
of  grasses,  and  the  i.'iTen  portions  of  piital-ies,  bnckwheat,  4c..  are  taken  and  i
with  water  (lixiviated i,  tin-  solnlii-n  is  eiaporalc<l,  and  the  residue  ignited  in  oi
destroy  the  organic  mnltiT  prcscnl  in  llie  extract.  Tlie  residue  thus  obtained  i
jHised  of  raw  potash.  It  is  refined  by  a  second  dissolution  in  a  small  quantity  of
tor  the  polnsh  itself  is  very  soluhlc  in  wnti-T,  whilst  the  impurities  arc  sparingly  s
The  solution  thus  olilained  t»  ngiiin  cvnpiir»ti'd,  and  the  residue  ignited  an
potai'h  is  then  calleil  refined  |>ot^^Jl,  or  iienrlash.  This  method  of  troatment
give  cluqiiically  pure  isitassium  carbonale.  A  certain  amount  of  inipurities  r
To  obtain  chcmiciilly  pure  potassium  carbonate,  some  other  salt  of  potassium  is
rally  tiikcii  and  pnrilliil  by  cryslalliKktion.  Fotossiuni  rarlwnate  crystalliMoK  wit
cully,  flTid  it. iiim.-l  thcrefiire  be  piiriiieil  by  this  means.  whiM  other  Enlt».  such
taitr.iti',  ai'iil  r.irUnnile.  sulphate,  or  nitrate,  Ac,  eryatallisc  easily  and  may  tli
dir'-clly  piirined. Tlu>  tartrate  is  most  frequently  employed,  since  it  is  prepared  in

POTASSIUM. RUBIDIUM, CESIUM, AND  LITHIUM  549

may  also  be  obtained  from  the  chloride  by  a  method  similar  to  that  by
which  sodium  carbonate  is  pi*epared  from  sodium  chloride.^  ***"  There  is  no
dithculty  in  obtaining  any  salt  of  potassium — for  example,  the  sulphate,®

quiintitieK  (as  a  sediment  from  wine)  for  medicinal  ase  under  the  name  of  cream  of  tartar.
When  ignited  without  accesH  of  air,  it  leaves  a  mixture  of  charcoal  and  potassium
carhonate.  The  charcoal  ho  obtained  being  in  a  finely-divided  condition,  the  mixture
(called  *  black  flux '),  is  sometimes  used  for  reducing  metals  from  their  oxides  with  the
aid  of  heat.  A  certain  quantity  of  nitre  is  added  to  bum  the  charcoal  formed  by
heating  the  cream  of  tartar.  PotaHsium  carbonate  tlms  prepared  is  further  purified  by
converting  it  into  the  acid  salt,  by  passing  a  current  of  carbonic  anhydride  through
a  strong  solution.  KHCO5  i^  then  formed,  which  is  less  soluble  than  the  normal  salt
(as  is  also  the  case  with  the  corresponding  sodium  salts),  and  therefore  crystals  of  the
acid  salt  separate  from  the  solution  on  cooling.  When  ignited,  they  part  with  their
water  and  carbonic  anhydride,  and  pure  potassium  carbonate  remains  behind.  The
physical  properties  of  potassium  carbonate  distinguish  it  sufficiently  from  sodium
carbonate ;  it  is  obtained  from  solutions  as  a  powdery  white  mass,  having  an  alkaline
taste  and  reaction,  and,  as  a  rule,  shows  only  traces  of  crystallisation.  It  also  attracts
the  moisture  of  the  air  with  great  energy.  The  crystals  do  not  contain  water,  but
absorb  it  from  the  air,  deliquescing  into  a  saturate<l  solution.  It  melts  at  a  red  heat
(1045^),  and  at  a  still  higher  temjjerature  is  even  converted  into  vapour,  as  luis  been
observed  at  glass  works  where  it  is  employed.  It  is  very  soluble.  At  the  ordinary
temi)erature,  water  dissolves  an  equal  weight  of  the  salt.  Crystals  containing  two
equivalents  of  water  separate  from  such  a  saturated  solution  when  strongly  cooled  (Morel
obtained  KjCOjBH.iO  in  well-formed  crystals  at  -r  10'^).  There  is  no  necessity  to  de-
scril>e  its  reactions,  because  they  are  all  analogous  to  those  of  sodium  carbonate.  When
manufactured  sodium  carbonate  was  but  little  known,  the  consumption  of  potassium
carbonate  was  very  considerable,  and  even  now  washing  soda  is  frequently  replaced
for  household  purposes  by  'ley'— /.e.  an  aqueous  solution  obtained  from  ashes.
It  contams  potassium  carbonate,  which  acts  like  the  sodium  salt  in  washing  tissues,
linen,  &c.

A  mixture  of  potassium  and  sodium  carbonates  fuses  with  much  greater  ease  than  the
separate  salts,  and  a  mixture  of  their  solutions  gives  well-cr}'stallised  salts — for  instance
(Marguerite's  salt),  K-jCOsjfiH-jOj'iNaoCOjjCHoO.  Crystallisation  also  occurs  in  other
multiple  proportions  of  K  and  Na  (in  the  above  case  1 :  2,  but  1 :  1  and  1 :  8  are  known),
and  always  with  6  mol.  H.^O.  This  is  evidently  a  combination  by  fumUarttijy  as  in  alloys,
solutions,  &c.

^  ''•"  Al)Out  25,000  tons  of  potash  annually  are  now  prepared  from  KCl  by  this  method
at  Stassfurt.

'  Potassium  sulphatey  K.^,S04,  crystalli&es  from  its  solutions  in  aui  anhydrous  condi-
tion, in  which  respect  it  differs  from  the  corresponding  sodium  salt,  just  as  potassium  car-
bonate differs  from  so<lium  carbonate.  In  general,  it  must  be  observed  that  the  majority
of  sodium  salts  combine  more  easily  witli  water  of  crystalhsation  than  the  potassium
salts.  The  solubility  of  potassium  sulpluite  does  not  show  the  same  pecuUarities  as  that
of  sodium  sulphate,  because  it  does  not  combine  with  water  of  crystallisation ;  at  the
ordinary  temperature  100  parts  of  water  dissolve  al>out  10  parts  of  the  salt,  at  0°  8*3
.parts,  and  at  100°  about  20  parts.  The  acid  sulphate^  KHSO4,  obtained  easily  by
heating  crystals  of  the  normal  salt  with  sulphuric  acid,  is  frequently  employed  in
chemical  practice.  On  heating  the  mixture  of  tu'id  and  salt,  fumes  of  sulphuric  acid  are
at  first  given  off;  when  they  cease  to  be  evolved,  the  acid  salt  is  contained  in  the  residue.
At  a  higher  temperature  (of  above  000'^)  the  acid  salt  parts  with  all  tlie  acid  contained  in
it,  the  normal  salt  being  re-fonned.  The  definite  composition  of  this  acid  salt,  and  the
ease  with  which  it  deconiiwses,  render  it  exceedingly  valuable  for  certain  chemical  trans-
formations accomplished  by  means  of  sulphuric  acid  at  a  high  temi)eniture,  because  it  is
possible  to  take,  in  the  fonn  of  this  salt,  a  strictly  definite  (quantity  of  sulplmric  acid,

550  PRIXCIPLE3  OF  CHKMISTRY

bromide,  and  iodide  '" — by  the  action  of  the  correspODding  acid  on
and  especially  on  the  carbonate,  whilst  the  hydroxide,  catislif  pol
KHO,  which  b  in  many  respects  analogous  to  caustic  soda,  is  easily

uid  to  ct,ase  it  lo  lu^t  od  a  given  snbstann  at  a  liigh  tompentore,  vhich  it  i^  <
nec^Hury  to  do,  inort  et-peciaU}'  in  cbriuiciil  kualj-gis.  In  this  case,  the  Bcid  ~al1
in  exactly  the  name  mannei  as  iiDlphtiric  aeid  itwlf,  bat  the  latter  is  tiwffirivi
temperatures  above  lOO'-*,  because  il  all  evaporstei,  while  at  that  t^mperatore  the
salt  ntill  remains  in  a  fased  statr,  and  acts  with  the  elements  of  snJpbDric  acid  oi
iiabatance  taken.  Hence  by  its  means  the  boiling-point  of  BDlpfaanc  acid  is  n
ThoH  tbe  acid  potansium  sulphate  is  eniploi-ed.  where  For  eonveraion  of  certain  01
such  as  (buse  of  iron,  alnmininm,  and  chroniiani,  into  salts,  ■ high temperata

Weber,  by  healing  potassium  sulphate  with  an  eieess  of  salpfanric  acid  al
obaerk'ed  the  formation  of  a  lower  stratum,  which  was  fnnnd  to  contain  a  definite
pound  containing  eight  equivalents  of  SO3  per  equivalent  of  K.,0.  The  sal
Tubidium,  cusinm.  and  tlialtiuni  give  a  similar  reaolt,  but  those  ol  wxliora  and  lit
do  not. (Sec  Note  1.1

'"  Tlie  bnimid'  and  iodide  of  potassium  are  nsed,  like  the  corresponding  hi
compounds,  in  medicine  and  i>hutography.  Potassinni  iodide  ia  easily  obtained  in  a
state  by  satumting  a  solution  of  hyilriodic  acid  with  caustic  potash.  In  practice,
erer,  this  method  is  rarely  hud  refoursc  to,  other  more  simple  procesaes  being
ployed  although  Ihej-  do  not  give  so  pure  a  product.  They  aim  at  tbe  direct  rorm
M  hydriodic  acid  in  the  liquid  in  the  preseuee  of  potassium  hydroxide  or  earbr
Tlina  iodine  is  thrown  into  a  Holutioti  of  pure  polaah,  and  hydrogen  sulphide  p<
through  tho  mixture,  the  iodine  being  thus  converted  into  hydriodic  acid.  Or  a  sol
ia  prepared  from  pbosplioras,  iodine,  and  nater,  containing  hydriodic  and  phoHphoric
lime  is  then  added  to  this  Milution,  when  calcinm  iodide  is  obtained  in  Bololion
calcium  pliospluite  as  a  precipitate.  Tlie  solution  of  calcinm  iodide  gives,  with  potaa
oarlKinntc,  insoluble  calcium  cnrlionate  and  a  wlution  of  potaiisiom  iodide.  It  iodi
addi^  to  a  slightly-heated  solution  olcaubtic  potash  Ifree  from  carbonate? — that  iiklr
pieiiared).  so  Inn^  as  the  solnlion  ii*  not  colonrc<l  from  the  prettence  of  an  eicei
iodine,  there  is  (oriued  (as  in  the  action  of  chlorine  on  a  solution  of  cauntir  pota
miiitun-  of  potonsium  iodide  and  iodule.  On  evngwrating  the  wlutioii  tlins  ohtaine*
igniting  thu  reHidoe,  the  iodatc  is  destroynl  and  converted  into  iodide,  the  oxygen  I
diaengaged,  and  tH'tassinni  iodide  only  is  h>ft  behind.  On  dissolving  the  reaJdne  in  1
and  Ur'U  evaporating,  cuIhl-iU  crystals  ot  the  nnliydrouii  aalt  are  obtained,  wbicl
aoliible  ill  water  and  alcohol,  and  on  tusinn  give  an  alkatinu  reaction,  owing  to  the  tact
when  ignited  a  tnrtion  of  tlie  salt  ilecomposes,  forming  potassitini  oxide.  Tlie  nr
■alt  may  lie  obtained  b]r  atbliiig  hydriodic  acid  to  Uiin  alkaline  salt  until  it  gin
aciil  reaction.  It  is  best  to  add  some  fiwly-divided  charcoal  to  the  niiTttire  of  i<
■ml  iodide  bi'Cciri^igiiilingit.asthisfacilitnteHtheevoluticinof  tbe  oxygon  from  tlie  in
The  iodatc  may  also  be  converted  into  itidiile  hy  tlie  action  of  certain  reducing  ag
BUcli  as  zinc  amalgam,  which  when  boiled  with  a  solution  containing  ati  iodato  con
it  into  iiKlide.  Potassium  iodide  may  alwi  U-  |.re|nred  by  iniiing  a  solution  of  fei
iodide  (it  ix  iH-vt  if  the  solntiun  contahi  an  excess  of  inlinel  and  potassium  carbnnai
which  case  ferrons  carbonate  FeCO.v  is  precipitati-d  (with  an  excess  ot  iodine  the
oipilatu  is  granular,  ami  contains  a  coinjiound  of  the  suboxide  and  oxide  ot  iron),  i
potassium  iisliile  remains  in  solution. Fi-rrous  imlidi',  Fel.,.  is  obtainftd  bj  the  d

(by34*J,  when  it  diasoli-es  in  wuU'r.  100  pari- of  the  Halt  dissolve  in  78-5  iiarts  of  wat
tS-.1>.  in  Tl)  imrts  nt  It*,  whilst  the  saturiittil  xohilioii  which  lioils  al  120°  contains
parts  of  salt  |H'r  K  parts  of  water. Solutions  of  |i«tahsinm  iodide  dissolve  a  eonsidei

aontain  m  imtassium  iodide  (ur  Note  H  bis  and  t'ha{iter  XL,  Note  64).

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, CESIUM,  AND  LITHIUM  561

tained  by  means  of  lime  in  exactly  the  same  manner  in  which  sodium
hydroxide  is  prepared  from  sodium  carbonate.*^  Therefore,  in  order  to
complete  our  knowledge  of  the  alkali  metals,  we  will  only  describe  two
salts  of  potassium  which  are  of  practical  importance,  and  whose
analogues  have  not  been  described  in  the  preceding  chapter,  potassium
cyanide  and  potassium  nitrate.

PotanHium  cyanide^  which  presents  in  its  chemical  relations  a  certain
analogy  with  the  halogen  sa-lts  of  potassium,  is  not  only  formed  accord-
ing to  the  equation,  KHO  -f  HCX  =  HgO  -f-  KCN,  but  also  when-
ever a  nitrogenous  carbon  compound — for  instance,  animal  matter — is
heated  in  the  presence  of  metallic  potassium,  or  of  a  compound  of
potassium,  and  even  when  a  mixture  of  potash  and  carbon  is  heated  in
a  stream  of  nitrogen.  Potassium  cyanide  is  obtained  from  yellow
prussiate,  which  has  been  already  mentioned  in  Chapter  IX.,  and
whose  preparation  on  a  large  scale  will  be  described  in  Chapter  XXII.
If  the  yellow  prussiate  be  ground  to  a  powder  and  dried,  so  that  it  loses
its  water  of  crystallisation,  it  then  melts  at  a  red  heat,  and  decomposes
into  carbide  of  iron,  nitrogen,  and  potassium  cyanide,  FeK4CgNg
=  4KCN  +  FeC.2  +  Ng.  After  the  decomposition  it  is  found  that  the
yfellow  salt  has  been  converted  into  a  white  mass  of  potassium  cyanide.
The  carbide  of  iron  formed  collects  at  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  If
the  mass  thus  obtained  be  treated  with  water,  the  potassium  cyanide
is  partially  decomposed  by  the  water,  but  if  it  be  treated  with  alcohol,
then  the  cyanide  is  dissolved,  and  on  cooling  separates  in  a  crystalline
form.^^ A solution  of  potassium  cyanide has  a  powerfully  alkaline

"  Caustic  potash  is  not  only  formed  by  the  action  of  lime  on  dilute  solutions  of
potassium  carbonate  (Hr>  sodium  hydroxide  is  prepared  from  sodium  carbonate),  but
by  igniting  potassium  nitrate  with  finely-divided  copper  {sec  Note  15),  and  also  by  mixing
solutions  of  potassium  sulphatc>  (or  even  of  alum,  KAlS^Og)  and  barium  hydroxide,
BaH'^Oj.  It  is  sometimes  purified  by  dissolving  it  in  alcohol  (the  impurities,  for  example,
potassium  sulphate  and  carlx)nate,  are  not  dissolved)  and  then  evaporating  the  alcohol.

The  specific  gi'avity  of  potassium  hydroxide  is  204,  but  that  of  its  solutions  {see
Chapter  XII.,  Note  18)  at  15°  S-  9,902  +  00- 4j>  I  02Hp*  (here;>»  is  +,and  for  sodium
hydroxide  it  is— ).  Strong  solutions,  when  cw)led,  yield  a  crjstallo-hydrate,  KHO,4H.20,
which  dissolves  in  water,  producing  cold  (like  2NaHO,7H.jO),  whilst  potassium  hydroxide
in  solution  develops  a  considerabU'  amount  of  heat.

^*  When  the  yellow  prussiate  is  heated  to  re<lness,  all  the  cyanogen  which  was  in
combination  with  the  iron  i>  decomjwsed  into  nitrogen,  which  is  evolved  as  gas,  and
carbon,  which  combines  with  the  iron.  In  order  to  avoid  this,  potassium  carbonate  is
added  to  the  j-ellow  prussiute  while  it  is  being  fused.  A  mixture  of  8  parts  of  anhydrous
yellow  prussiate  and  3  parts  of  ]»ure  potassium  carbonate  is  generally  taken.  Double
decomposition  then  takes  plaue,  resulting  in  the  formation  of  ferrous  carbonate  and
potassium  cyanide.  But  by  this  method,  as  by  the  first,  a  pure  salt  is  not  obtained,
because  a  portion  of  the  jxitassium  cyanide  is  oxidised  at  the  expense  of  the  iron
carbonate  and  fonns  potassium  cyanate,  FeCO-,- KCN-^CO.>-f  Fe  + KCNO ;  and  the
potassium  cyanide  \ery  easily  forms  oxide,  which  acts  on  the  sides  of  the  vessel  in
which  the  mixture  is  heated  <to  avoid  this  iron  vess«»ls  should  be  used). By  adding

action  of  a

and  potnss
ducing  1
powerful  re<lu<
cyanide  of  givi
by  the  fact  thai

552  PBUiCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

reaction,  a  smell  lite  that  of  bitter  almoodB,  peculiar  to  prussir  a
and  acta  as  a  most  powerful  poison.  Althocgh  exceedingly  st
in  A  fused  state,  potassium  cyanide  easily  changes  when  in  sola)
PruBsic  acid  is  so  very  feebly  energetic  that  even  water  decomp
potassium  cyanide.  A  solution  of  the  salt,  even  without  ac-cess  of
easily  tarns  brown  and  decomposes,  and  when  heated  evolves  amni
and  forms  potassium  formate  ;  this  is  easily  comprehensible  from
representation  of  the  cyanogen  coraponnds  which  was  developer
Chapter  IX.,  KCX  +  2H.j()  =  CHKO.,  +  XH^.  Furthermore
carlxmic  anhy<lride  acts  on  potassium  cyanide  with  evolution  of  pn
acid,  and  as  potassium  cyanate,  which  is  also  unstable,  is  formed  bj
wilt  be  easily  seen  that  solutions  of  potassium  cva
unstable.  Potassium  cytmide,  containing  as  it  does  cai
I,  is  a  substance  which  can  net  in  a  very  vigorouslj
especially  when  fuseil  ;  it  is  therefore  used  )
ig  agent  at  a  red  heat.'^  The  property  of  potaa
iiig  double  salts  with  other  cyanides  is  very  clearly  sfa
letals  dissolve  in  a  solution  of  potassium  cyai
with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen.  For  example,  iron,  copper,  and
act  in  this  manner. Thus—

4KCX  +  2HgO  +  Zn=K5ZnC,X,  +  2KHO  +  H,

one  iiiirl  of  I'hurconl  poBiler  lo  tlie  niiitnru  iif  M  Imrtn  ii(  Hiilijilmus  yvllnw  pmnHJat
S  Iiarts  of  potHHniuin  t-iLrboniito  a  nms"  is  iibtuiui'il  wliicli  i'  tree  from  cyniiaU-.  be
tlie  curboii  iibsorliH  llie  iiivgen,  Imt  in  that  ('mw  il  in  iiii|KiHKiliIe  to  oblaiii  a  c-nloi
potuiuiuin  ryliiiiJu  by  simi>lp  faoioii,  hUIidukIi  IIiIk  uiuy  Iw  rAniXy  dime  l>y  ilinHulviiif
ak-uhnl.  Cyaniile  iif  pitanwDiii  niaT  hImi  be  obloitiiil  Irnrn  pntiuiitiuin  tfiiix.-j-aiiaU'. '
Ur(mne.lfriin>inini<iniuiiil1iincTiiiiHt<!>i1>tiiiiin1l>yt1u'iu-tiniiof  amniiiiiiaiiiKnil.iKii]
of  entlioii  laef  wiwks  iipnii  Orjtaiiii'  Clu'iiiislryl. I'lrtiiisiuin  ryuiiide  in  now  im-pu

qnaiititiei  tlip  HCtinn  of  the  nxvRt^n  of  the  Hir  i^  liniitnl.  unj  with  (treat  i-nre  the  ope
niHy  be  Huvi'PKHtully  ciindueteil,  anil  llKTHfore,  mi  ii  liirge  wale,  very  puri'  luili  is
times  ribtiiiiiiil. Wlieii  Hlowly  eoolcd.  tlif  (imeil  bhU  BiiHiraleit  in  ciibiFH]  cryHUl

l>un'  KCN  i*  obUiiiuH  by  p.is^inj-  C\I1  b«h  into  iii.  iil<.-<ili.>lif  nolniion  of  KHO.

from  ilsnres.iHWiiiKreiJailil  by  Ik  mlxlurelRod-lerHnrl  (iasshilier,  IBOai  nf  KCJ
SsCN,  iTTviiamt  by  bcnthit!  ixunlpnil  and  dri.-d  yellow  pni«i«le  with  metallic  kh
K,Fel('SisJ^aXu-4Kt'N^aNaC;)  '  tV.  Thin  melboil  nff.T-  two  advantoef  a  ni^
above  nlethoda ;  tl)  tbe  whole  nf  (he  I'yaniile  in  obtained,  and  doe*  not  ilet-oinpoai
the  fonnntion  of  N., ;  and  IS]  no  eynnaleH  are  formed,  at  U  the  ease  when  »rboa
pnti.«l.  i->  heuliil  with  Uie  |irusi.iiite.

I'  A  considerable  i|nantily  of  |<ntn'-~inm  <  ynnidc  in  n<^ed  in  the  nrtf.  more  xMrtic
for  tli>'  i>re|>aralion  of  melallie  M>lii'i.<ii~  whii  )i  iiri'  d>'c'omi>os.-.I  hy  the  action  of  a  en

alkiili

le  fa<'l

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, CESIUM, AND  LITHIUM  553

Gold  and  silver  are  soluble  in  potassium  cyanide  in  the  presence  of
air,  in  which  eas\^  the  hydrogen,  which  would  otherwise  be  evolved  in
the  reaction,  combines  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  forming  water  (Eissler,
MacLaurin,  1893),  for  example,  4Au  +  4KCN  +  0  +  H.^C )  =  2AuKC.^N2
+  2KH(),  which  is  taken  advantage  of  for  extracting  gold  from  its
ores  (Chapter  XXIV.).'^  *>*"*  Platinum,  mercury,  and  tin  are  not  dis-
solved in  a  solution  of  potassium  cyanide,  even  with  access  of  air.

Pofasshtm  nitrale^  or  common  nitre  or  salijyetre,  KNO3,  is  chiefly
used  as  a  component  part  of  gunpowder,  in  which  it  cannot  be  replaced
by  the  sodium  salt,  because  the  latter  is  deliquescent.  Tt  is  necessary
that  the  nitre  in  gunpowder  should  be  perfectly  pure,  as  even  small
traces  of  sodium,  magnesium,  and  calcium  salts,  especially  chlorides,
render  the  nitre  and  the  gunpowder  capable  of  attracting  moisture
Nitre  may  easily  be  obtained  pure,  owing  to  its  great  disposition  to
form  crystals  both  large  and  small,  which  aids  its  separation  from  other
salts.  The  considerable  differences  between  the  solubility  of  nitre  at
different  temperatures  aids  this  crystallisation.  A  solution  of  nitre
saturated  at  its  boiling  point  (116°)  contains  335  parts  of  nitre  to  100
parts  of  water,  whilst  at  the  ordinary  temperature— for  instance,  20° —
the  solution  is  only  able  to  retain  32  parts  of  the  salt.  Therefore,  in
the  preparation  and  refining  of  nitre,  its  solution,  saturated  at  the
boiling  point,  is  coole<l,  and  nearly  all  the  nitre  is  obtained  in  the  form
of  crystals.  If  the  solution  be  quietly  and  slowly  cooled  in  large
quantities  then  large  crystals  are  formed,  but  if  it  be  rapidly  cooled  and
agitated  then  small  crystals  are  obtained.  In  this  manner,  if  not  all,
at  all  events  the  majority,  of  the  impurities  present  in  small  quantities
remain  in  the  mother  liquor.  If  an  unsaturated  solution  of  nitre  be
rapidly  coole<l,  so  as  to  prevent  the  formation  of  large  crystals  (in  whose
crevices  the  mother  liquor,  toijjether  with  the  impurities,  would  remain),
the  very  minute  crystals  of  nitre  known  as  saltpetre  flour  are  obtained.

Common  nitre  occurs  in  nature,  but  only  in  small  quantities  in
admixture  with  other  nitnvtes,  and  especially  with  sodium,  magnesium,
and  calcium  nitrates.  Such  a  mixture  of  salts  of  nitric  acid  is  formed
in  nature  in  fertile  earth,  and  in  those  localities  where,  as  in  the  mif^
nitrogenous  organic  remains  are  decompose<l  in  the  presence  of  alkalis
or  alkaline  bases  with  free  access  of  air.  This  method  of  the  formation
of  nitrates  requires  moisture,  besides  the  free  access  of  air,  and  takes
place  principally  during  warm  weather.*^ In  warm  countries,  and  in

IS  hu  \  (lilnt<>  solution  of  KC'N  is  taken,  not  containing  more  than  1  per  cent,  KCN.
MacLaurin  explains  this  by  tlie  fact  that  «trong  solutions  dissolve  goM  less  rapidly,  owing
to  their  dissolving  less  air,  whose  oxygen  is  necesmir}'  for  the  reaction.

'•  Besides  which  Schloessing  and  Miintz,  by  employing  ^-imi]ar  metlKxls  to  Pasteur,
Khowed  that  the  formation  of  nitre  in  the  decomiKtsition  of  nitrogenouH  subRtances  ih

554  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

temperate  climates  during  the  summer  months,  fertile  soils  produce  a
small  quantity  of  nitre. In  tliis  respect  India  is  especially  known  as
affording  a  considerable  supply  of  nitre  extracted  from  the  soil. The
nitre-bearing  soil  after  the  rainy  season  sometimes  becomes covered
during  the  summer  with  crystals  of  nitre,  formed  by  the  evaporation
of  the  water  in  which  it  was  previously  dissolved. This  soil  is  col-
lected, subjected  to  repeated  lixiviations,  and  treated  for  nitre  as  will
l>e  presently  described. In  temperate  climates  nitrates  are  obtained
from  the  lime  rubbish  of  demolished  buildings  which  have  stood  for
many  years,  and  especially  from  those  portions  which  have  been  in  con-
tact with  the  ground. The  conditions  there  are  very  favourable  for
the  formation  of  nitre,  because  the  lime  used  as  a  cement  in  buildings
contains  the  base  necessary  for  the  formation  of  nitrates, while  the
excrement,  urine,  and  animal  refuse  are  sources  of  nitrogen. By  the
methodical  lixiviation  of  this  kind  of  rubbish  a  solution  of  nitrogenous
salts  is  formed  similar  to  that  obtained  by  the  lixiviation  of fertile
soil. A  similar  solution  is  also  obtained  by  the  lixiviation  of  the  so ,
called  nitre  plantations. They  are  composed  of  manure  interlaid  with
brush-wood,  and strewn over with ashes,  lime,  and other alkaUne
rubbish. These  nitre  plantations  are  set  up  in  those  localities  where
the  manure  is  not  required for  the  fertilisation  of the soil,  as,  for
example,  in  the  south-eastern  *  black  earth'  Governments  of  Russia.
The  same  process  of  oxidation  of  nitrogenous  matter  freely  exposed  to
air  and  moisture  during  the  warm  season  in  the  presence  of  alkalis
takes  place  in  nitre  plantations  as in  fertile  soil  and  in  the  walls  of
buildings. From all  these  sources  there  is  obtained  a  solution  con-
taining various  salts  of  nitric  acid  mixed  with  soluble  organic  matter.
The  simplest  method  of  treating  this  impure  solution of  nitre  is  to
add a solution of  potassium  carbonate,  or to simply  treat  it with
ashes  containing  this  substance. The  potassium  carbonate  entei-s  into
double  decomposition  with  the  calcium  and  magnesium  salts,  forminj;
insoluble  carbonates  of  these  bases  and  leaving  the  nitre  in  solution.
Thus, for  instance, K.^COg  -f-  Ca(N03)2  =  2KNO3  4-  QvlCO^, Both
calcium  and  magnesium  carbonates  are  insoluble,  and  therefore  after
treatment  with potassium  carbonate  the  solution  no  longer  contains
salts  of these  metals  but only  the salts of sodium and poUissium
together with oi-ganic matter. The latter partially separates on
heating  in  an  insoluble  form,  and  is  entirely  destroyed  by  heating  the
nitre  to  a  low  red  heat. The  nitre  thus  obtained  is  easily  purified  by

accomplished  by  tlie  aid  of  peculijir  mitTO-orj^anisins  (forineiits),  without  wliioh  the
siiuultaiH'ouK  jK'tiou  of  the  other  necessary  conditions  (alkalis,  moisture,  a  ten\|)erature
of  JJ7\  air,  and  nitrogenous  substances)  cannot  pive  nitre.

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, C-ESIUM,  AND  LITHIU3I  555

repeated  crystallisation.  The  greater  part  of  the  nitre  used  for
making  gunpowder  is  now  obtained  from  the  sodium  salt  Chili  salt-
petre or  cubic  nitro^  which  occurs  in  nature,  as  already  mentioned.
The  conversion  of  this  salt  into  common  nitre  is  also  carried  on  by
means  of  a  double  decomposition.  This  is  done  either  by  adding
potassium  carbonate  (when,  on  mixing  the  strong  and  hot  solutions,
sodium  carbonate  is  directly  obtained  as  a  precipitate),  or,  as  is  now
most  frequent,  potassium  chloride.  When  a  mixture  of  strong  solu-
tions of  potassium  chloride  and  sodium  nitrate  is  evaporated,  sodium
chloride  first  separates,  because  this  salt,  which  is  formed  by  the
double  decomposition  KCI  +  NaNO,  =  KNO3  +  NaCl,  is  almost
e<|ually  soluble  in  hot  and  cold  water ;  on  cooling,  therefore,  a  large
amount  of  potassium  nitrate  separates  from  the  saturated  solution,
while  the  sodium  chloride  remains  dissolved.  The  nitre  is  ultimately
purified  by  recrystallisation  and  by  washing  with  a  saturated  solu-
tion of  nitre,  which  cannot  dissolve  a  further  quantity  of  nitre  but  only
the  impurities.

Nitre  is  a  colourless  salt  having  a  peculiar  cool  taste.  It  crystal-
lises easily  in  long  striated  six-sided  rhombic  prisms  terminating  in
rhombic  pyramids.  Its  ci-ystals  (sp.  gr.  1*93)  do  not  contiiin  water,  but
their  cavities  generally  contain  a  certain  quantity  of  the  solution  from
which  they  have  crystallised.  For  this  reason  in  refining  nitre,  the
production  of  large  crystals  is  prevented,  saltpetre  flour  being  prepared.
At  a  low  red  heat  (339°)  nitre  melts  to  a  colourless  liquid. '*  *»**
Potassium  nitrate  at  the  ordinary  temperature  and  in  a  solid  form  is
inactive  and  stable,  but  at  a  high  temperature  it  acts  as  a  powerful
oxifiistHf/  agent,  giving  up  a  considerable  amount  of  oxygen  to  substances

1 »  bu  Before  fusing,  the  crystalH  of  ijotassium  nitrate  change  their  form,  and  take  the
same  form  as  sodium  nitrate — that  iw,  they  chanj<ft  into  rhombohedra.  Nitre  crystal-
lises from  hot  solutions,  and  in  general  under  the  influence  of  a  rise  of  temperature,  in  a
different  form  from  that  given  at  the  ordinary  or  lower  temperatures.  Fused  nitre  solidi-
fies to  a  radiated  crystalline  rn^ss ;  but  it  does  not  exhibit  this  structure  if  metallic
chlorides  be  present,  so  that  this  methwl  may  be  taken  advantage  of  to  determine  the
degree  of  purity  of  nitre.

Camelley  and  Thomson  (1888)  determined  the  fusing  point  of  mixtures  of  |)otaHsium
and  sodium  nitrates.  The  first  salt  fuses  at  339^  and  the  second  at  816'',  and  if  p  be
the  percentage  amount  of  potassium  nitrate,  then  the  results  obtaine<l  were —

p 10

•20

30

40

50

GO

70

80

90

i>J»8'J

♦283

•208^

242'^

231

231

242-

284

300

which  confirms  Shaff^^otsch's  observation  (18u7)  that  the  lowest  fusing  point  (about  231^)
is  given  by  mixing  molecular  quantities  i p=^TA''^)  of  the  salts — that  is,  in  the  formation
of  the  alloy,  KN05,NaN03.

A  somewhat  similar  result  was  discovered  bv  the  same  obseners  for  the  solubility  of
mixtures  of  these  salts  at  20^  in  100  parts  of  water.  Thus,  if  }>  ^v  the  weight  of  potas-
sium nitrate  mixed  with  100— /»  parts  by  weight  of  sodium  nitrate  taken  for  Bolution,

556  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

mixed  with  it.'*  When  thrown  on  to  incandescent  charcoal  it  brinirs
about  its  rapid  combustion,  and  a  mechanical  mixture  of  pt^wdered
charcoal  and  nitre  ignites  when  brought  into  contact  with  a  red-hot
substance,  and  continues  to  burn  by  itself.  la  this  action,  idtrogen
is  evolved,  and  the  oxygen  oxidises  the  charcoal,  in  consequence  of
which  potassium  carbonate  and  carbonic  anhydride  are  formed :
4KNO3  +  5C  =  2K2CO3  +  3CO2  -f  2N2.  This  phenomenon  depends  on
the  fact  that  oxygen  in  combining  with  carbon  evolves  more  heat  than
it  does  in  combining  with  nitrogen.  Hence,  when  once  the  combustion
has  been  started  at  the  expense  of  the  nitre,  it  is  able  to  go  on  without
requiring  the  aid  of  external  heat.  A  similar  oxidation  or  combustion  at
the  expense  of  the  contained  oxygen  takes  place  when  nitre  is  heated
with  different  combustible  substances.  If  a  mixture  of  sulphur  and
nitre  be  thrown  upon  a  red-hot  surface,  the  sulphur  bums,  forming
potassium  sulphate  and  sulphurous  anhydride.  In  this  case,  also,  the
nitrogen  of  the  nitre  is  evolved  as  gas  :  2KN03-f  2S  =  K.^S04+N3
-t-SOg.  A  similar  phenomenon  occurs  when  nitre  is  heated  with
many  metals.  Tlie  oxidation  of  those  metals  which  are  able  to  form
acid  oxides  with  an  excess  of  oxygen  is  especially  remarkable.  In
this  case  they  remain  in  combination  with  potassium  oxide  as  potassium
salts.  Manganese,  antimony,  arsenic,  iron,  chromium,  ckc.  are  in-
stances of  this  kind.  These  elements,  like  carbon  and  sulphur,  displace
free  nitrogen.  The  lower  oxides  of  these  metals  when  fused  with  nitre
pass  into  the  higher  oxides.  Organic  substances  are  also  oxidised
when  heated  with  !iitr(» — that  is,  they  burn  at  the  expense  of  the  nitre.
It  will  be  readily  understood  from  this  that  nitre  is  frequently  used  in
practical  chemistry  and  the  arts  as  an  oxidising  agent  at  high  temper-

and  c  be  tlie  quantity  of  tlic  mixed  salts  wliicli  dissolves  in  100,  tlie  soluhilitv  of  sodium
nitrate  being  85,  and  of  iK)tassiuni  nitrate  34,  partH  in  100  parts  of  water,  llien

\)= 10

20

80

40

50

60

70

SO

90

C--110

130

13(5

13H

10<>

Hi

73

54

41

Tlie  nniximuni  solubility  i)roved  not  to  corres[M)nd  with  tlie  most  fusible  mixture  but
to  one  much  richer  in  sodium  nitrate.

Both  these  i>henoniena  show  that  in  homogeneous  liipiid  mixtures  the  cht^mical  forces
that  act  between  substances  are  the  siinie  as  those  that  determine  the  molecular  wei^ti
of  substances,  even  when  the  mixture  consists  of  such  analogous  substances  as  pot«fi-
sium  and  sodium  nitrates,  between  which  there  is  no  direct  chemical  interchange.  It  is
instructive  to  note  also  that  the  maximum  solubility  does  not  eorresiM>nd  with  the  mini-
mum fusing  point,  which  naturally  depends  on  the  fact  that  in  solution  a  third  substancvf,
namely  water,  plays  a  part,  although  an  attraction  between  the  salts*,  like  that  which
exists  between  sodium  and  potassium  carbonates  (Note  H),  also  jiartially  acts.

'^  Fused  nitre,  with  a  further  rise  of  temperature,  disengages  oxygen  an<l  then  Ditr»>
gen.  The  nitrite  KNO.  is  first  formed  and  then  potassium  oxide.  Tlie  admixture  of
certain  metals — for  example,  of  finely-divided  cojtper— aids  the  last  decomposition.  Tbe
oxygen  in  this  case  naturally  passes  over  to  the  metal.

J

rOTASSlL'M, RUBIDIUM, C-ESIUM, AND  LITHIUM  557

atures.  Its  application  in  gunpowder  is  based  on  this  property  ;  gun-
powder consists  of  a  mechanical  mixture  of  finely-ground  sulphur,  nitre,
and  charcoal.  The  relative  proportion  of  these  substances  varies  accord-
ing to  the  destination  of  the  powder  and  to  the  kind  of  charcoal  employed
(a  friable,  incompletely-burnt  charcoal,  containing  therefore  hydrogen
and  oxygen,  is  employed).  Gases  are  formed  in  its  combustion,  chiefly
nitrogen  and  carbonic  anhydride,  which  create  a  considerable  pressure
if  their  escape  be  in  any  way  impeded.  This  action  of  gunpowder
maybe  expressed  by  the  equation  :  2KNO3  -f  3C  -h  S  =  K^S  +  SCOa  +  ^2-
It  is  found  by  this  equation  that  gunpowder  should  contain  thirty-
six  parts  of  charcoal  (13*3  p.c),  and  thirty-two  parts  (11*9  p.c.)  of  sul-
phur, to  202  parts  (74*8  p.c.)  of  nitre,  which  is  very  near  to  its  actual
composition.^®

^•'  In  China,  wliere  the  manufacture  of  gunpowder  has  long  been  carried  on,  75*7  parts
of  nitre,  14*4  of  charcoal,  and  9*9  of  sulphur  arc  used.  Ordinary  powder  for  sporting
purposes  contains  80  parts  of  nitre,  VI  of  cliarcoal,  and  8  of  sulphur,  whilst  the  gunpowder
used  in  heavy  ordnance  contains  75  of  nitre,  15  of  charcoal,  and  10  of  sulphur.  Gun-
powder explodes  when  heated  to  300^,  when  struck,  or  by  contact  with  a  spark.  A
compact  or  finely-divided  mass  of  gunpowder  boms  slowly  and  has  but  little  disruptive
action,  because  it  bums  gradually.  To  act  properly  the  gunpowder  must  have  a  definite
rate  of  combustion,  so  that  the  pressure  should  increase  during  the  passage  of  the
projectile  along  the  barrel  of  the  fire-arm.  Tliis  is  done  by  making  the  powder  in  large
granules  or  in  the  sliape  of  six-sided  prisms  with  holes  tlirough  them  (prismatic
powder).

The  products  of  combustion  are  of  two  kinds :  (1)  gases  which  produce  the  pressure
and  are  the cause  of  the  dynamical  action of  gunpowder,  and  (2)  a solid residue,
usually  of  a  black  colour  mving  to  its  containing  unbumt  particles  of  charcoal. Besides
charcoal,  the  residue  generally  contains  [K>ttissium  sulphide,  KqS,  and  a  whole  series  of
other  salts — for  instance,  carbonate  and  sulphate. It  is  apparent  from  this  that  the
combustion  of  gunpowder  is  not  so  simple  as  it  ap[>ears  to  be  from  the  above  formula,  and
hence  the  weight  of  the  residue  is  also  greater  than  indicated  by  that  formula. According
to  the  formula,  270  parts  of  gunpowder  give  110  parts  of  residue — that  is,  100  parts  of
powder  give  37*4  parts  of  residue,  K._,S,  whilst  in  reality  the  weight  of  the  residue  varies
from  40  p.c.  {o  70  p.c.  (generally  52  p.c). This  difference  dejiends  on  the  fact  that  so
much  oxj'gen  (of  the  nitre)  remains  in  the  residue,  and  it  is  evident  that  if  the  residue
varies  the  composition  of  the  gases  evolve<l  by  the  powder  will  vary  also,  and  therefore
tlie  entire  process  will  be  different  in  different  cases. The  difference  in  the  composition
of  the  gases  and  residue  dei>ends,  us  the  researches  of  Gay-Lussac,  Shishkoff  and  Bun-
sen,  Nobel  and  Abel,  Federoff,  Debu^,  «tc.,  show,  on  the  conditions  under  which  the
combustion  of  the  powder  proceeds. When  gunpowder  bums  in  an  open  space,  the
gaseous  products  which  are  formed  do  not  remain  in  contact  with  the  residue,  and  then
a  considerable  [wrtion  of  the  charcf)al  entering into  the composition  of  the  powder
remains  unbumt,  because  the  charcoal  bums  after  the  sulphur  at  the  expense  of  the
oxygen  of  the  nitre. In  this  extreme  case  the  commencement  of  the  combustion  of  the
gunpowder  may  be  expressed  by  the  e<iuation,  2KNO5-  3C  +  8  -  2C  +  KjSO^  ^  CO...  +  N...
The  residue  in  a  blank  cartridge  often  consists  of  a  mixture  of  C,  K2SO,,  K3CO5,  and
K2S  ,0-,. If  the  combustion  of  the  guni>owder  be  impeded — if  it  take  place  in  a  cartridge
in  the  barrel  of  a  gun — the  quantity  of  ]M>tassium  sulphate  will  first  be  diminished,  then
the  amount  of  sulphite,  whilst  the  amount  of  carbonic  anhydride  in  the  gases  and  the
amount  of  potassium  sulphide  in  th«»  residue  will  increase. The  quantity  of  charcoal
entt'ring  into  the  action  will  tlu-n  W  alM»  iiicreasi'd,  and  hence  the  amotmt  in  the  residue

558  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

MetaVic  jwta^sium  was  obtained  like  sodium  ;  first  by  the  action  of
a  galvanic  current,  then  by  reduction  of  the  hydroxide  by  means  of
metallic  iron,  and  lastly,  by  the  action  of  charcoal  on  the  carbonate  at
a  high  temperature.  The  behaviour  of  metallic  potassium  differs,  how-
ever, from  that  of  sodium,  because  it  easily  combines  with  carbonic
oxide,  forming  an  explosive  and  inflammable  mass  J  ^

Potassium  is  quite  as  volatile  as  sodium,  if  not  more  so.  At  the
ordinary  temperature  potassium  is  even  softer  than  sodium  ;  its  freshlj-
cut  surfaces  present  a  whiter  colour  than  sodium,  but,  like  the  latter,
and  with  even  greater  ease,  it  oxidises  in  moist  air.  It  is  brittle  at  low
temperatures,  but  is  quite  soft  at  25°,  and  melts  at  58®.  At  a  low  red
heat  (667°,  Perkin)  it  distils  without  change,  forming  a  green  vaptmr,
whose  density,'®  according  to  A.  Scott  (1887),  is  equal  to  19  (if  that  of

will  decrease.  Under  these  circumstances  the  weight  of  the  residue  will  be  less— for
example,  4KXO5  f  48  =  K2SO4  +  8K.jS  -  4C0o.  Besides  which,  carbonic  oxide  lias  hetn
found  in  the  ga»es,  and  potassium  bisulphide,  K^So,  in  the  residue  of  gunpowder.  The
amount  of  potassium  sulphide,  KoS,  increases  with  the  completeness  of  the  combofiiiniL
and  is  formed  in  the  residue  at  the  expense  of  the  potassium  sulphite.  In  recent  times
the  knowledge  of  the  action  of  gunpowder  and  other  explosives  has  made  much  profp^&ss,
and  has  developed  injbo  a  vast  province  of  artillery  science,  which,  grnided  by  tb«
discoveries  of  chemistry,  has  worked  out  a  *  smokeless  powder '  which  bums  without
leaving  a  residue,  and  does  not  therefore  give  any  '  powder  smoke  '  (to  hinder  the  rapidity
of  firing  and  aiming),  and  at  the  same  time  disengages  a  greater  volume  of  gas  and  con
yequently  gives  (under  proper  conditions  of  combustion)  the  possibility  of  communi-
cating to  the  charge  a  greater  initial  velocity,  and  therefore  greater  distance,  forte,
and  accuracy  of  aim.  Such  '  smokeless  powder '  is  prepared  either  from  the  varieties  d
nitro-ceUulose  (Chapter  VI.,  Note  87)  or  from  a  mixture  of  them  with  nitro- glycerine
{ibid).  In  burning  they  give,  besides  steam  and  nitrogen,  generally  a  large  amotmt  of
oxide  of  carbon  (this  is  a  verj'  serious  drawback  in  all  the  present  forms  of  8mokel«s>
powder,  because  carbonic  oxide  is  poisonous),  and  also  CO^,  H2,  Src.

'*  The  substances  obtained  in  this  case  are  mentioned  in  Chapter  IX.,  Note  31.

'8  A.  Scott  (1887)deteiTnined  the  vapour  denwties  of  many  of  the  alkali  elements  and
their  comix»unds  in  a  platinum  vessel  heated  in  a  furnace  and  previously  fill^  with  nitro-
{ijen.  But  these,  the  first  data  concerning  a  subject  of  great  importance,  have  not  vet
been  sufficiently  fully  described,  nor  have  they  received  as  much  attention  as  could  he
desired.  Taking  the  density  of  hydrogen  as  unity,  Scott  found  the  vaponr  densities  of
th«!  following  substances  to  be —

Na

12-75  (11-5).

KI

92  (84).

K

19 (19-5).

RbCl

70  (♦JO).

CsCl

H9-r> (H4-2).

Csl

133  (130).

FeClj

(\H

AgCi

80  (71-7)

In  bnukets  art;  ^'iven  the  densities  corresponding  with  the  formulap,  according  to
Avogadro  Oerhardt's  law.  Tliis  figure  is  not  given  for  FeCl-,  because  in  all  probabilitT
under  these  conditions  (the  temperature  at  which  it  was  determined)  a  portion  of  the
FeCl.^  was  dctH)nip<)sed.  If  it  was  not  deconipose<l,  then  a  density  81  wonld  correspond
witli  the  formula  FeCls,  and  if  the  decomposition  were  Fe^Cl6  =  2FeCl2-f  Cl.^,  then  the
density  should  be  54.  With  regard  to  the  silver  chloride,  there  is  reason  to  think  thai
the  platinum  decomposed  this  salt.  The  majority  of  Scott's  results  so  closely  corrcMionti
with  the  formula;  that  a  better  concord  cannot  be  expected  in  such  determination^^
y.  Meyer  (1887)  gives  93  as  the  density  of  KI.

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM. CJESIUM,  AND  LITHIUM  569

fiydrogen  =  1 ).  This  shows  that  the  molecule  of  potassium  (like  that
of  sodium,  mercury,  and  zinc)  contains  but  one  atom.  This  is  also  the
case  with  many  other  metals,  judging  by  i^ecent  researches.*®  The
specific  gravity  of  potassium  at  15°  is  0*87,  and  is  therefore  less  than
that  of  sodium,  as  is  also  the  case  with  all  its  compounds. ^^  Potassium
decomposes  water  with  great  ease  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  evolving
45,000  heat  units  per  atomic  weight  in  grams.  The  heat  evolved  is
sufficient  to  inflame  the  hydrogen,  the  flame  being  coloured  violet  from
the  presence  of  particles  of  potassium.**

With  i*egard  to  the  relation  of  potassium  to  hydrogen  and  oxygen,
it  is  closely  analogous  to  sodium  in  this  respect.  Thus,  with  hydrogen
it  forms  potassium  hydride,  KgH  (between  200°  and  411°),  and  with
oxygen  it  gives  a  suboxide  K^O,  oxide  KjO,  and  peroxide,  only  more
oxygen  enters  into  the  composition  of  the  latter  than  in  sodium  per-
oxide ;  potassium  peroxide  contains  KOj,  but  it  is  probable  that  in  the
combustion  of  potassium  an  opde  KO  is  also  formed.  Potassium,
like  sodium,  is  soluble  in  mercury.'*  In  a  word,  the  relation  between
sodium  and  potassium  is  as  close  as  that  between  chlorine  and  bromine,
or,  better  still,  between  fluorine  and  chlorine,  as  the  atomic  weight  of

^^  The  molecules  of  iion-metalB  ore  more  complex — for  instance,  Hj,  O5,  CU,  Arc.  But
arsenic,  whose  superficial  appearance  recalls  that  of  metals,  but  whose  chemical  proper-
ties approach  more  nearly  to  the  non-metals,  has  a  complex  molecule  containing  A84.

^  As  the  atomic  weight  of  x>otassium  is  greater  tlian  that  of  sodium,  the  volumes
of  the  molecules,  or  the  quotients  of  the  molecular  weight  by  the  specific  gravity,  for
l>otassium  compounds  are  greater  than  those  of  sodium'  compounds,  because  both  the
denominator  and  numerator  of  the  fraction  increase.  We  cite  for  comparison  the  volumes
of  tlie  corresponding  compounds —

Na24 NaHOlS NaCl  28 NaNOs  37 Na2S04  64
K 45 KHO 27 KCl 39 KNO3 48 KjSO^ CO

*)  The  same  precautions  must  be  taken  in  decomposing  water  by  potassium  as  have
to  be  observed  with  sodium  (Chapter  II.,  Note  8).

It  must  be  observed  that  potassium  decomposes  carbonic  anhydride  and  carbonic
oxide  when  heated,  the  carbon  being  liberated  and  the  oxygen  taken  up  by  the  metal,
whilst  on  the  other  hand  charcoal  takes  up  oxygen  from  potassium,  as  is  seen  from  the
preparation  of  potassium  by  heating  potash  with  charcoal,  hence  the  reaction  KjO  +  C
=  Ko  +  CO  is  reversible  and  the  relation  is  the  same  in  this  case  as  between  hydrogen
and  zinc.

*^  Potassiu  m  forms  alloys  with  aodiu  m  in  all  proportions.  The  alloys  containing  1  and
8  equivalents  of  jMtassium  to  one  equivalent  of  sodium  are  liquidsy  like  mercury  at  the
ordinary  temperature.  Joannis,  by  determining  the  amount  of  heat  developed  by  these
alloys  in  decomposing  water,  found  the  evolution  for  Na^K,  NaK,  NaK2,  and  NaKs  to  be
44'5,  44*1,  48*8  and  44*4  thousand  heat  units  respectively  (for  Na  42'C  and  for  K  45'4).
The  formation  of  the  alloy  NaK-j  is  therefore  accompanied  by  the  development  of  heat,
whilst  the  other  alloys  may  be  regarded  as  solutions  of  potassium  or  sodium  in  this  alloy.
In  any  case  a  fall  of  the  temperature  of  fusion  is  evident  in  this  instance  as  in  the  alloys
of  nitre  (Note  141.  The  liquid  alloy  NaK^  is  now  used  for  filling  thermometers  employed
for  temperatures  above  860°,  when  mercury  boils.

560  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

sodium,  23,  is  as  much  greater  than  that  of  fluorine, 19,  as  that  of
potassium,  39,  is  greater  than  that  of  chlorine,  35*5.

The  resemblance  between  potajsium  and  sodium is  so  great  that
their  compounds  can  only  be  easily  distinguished  in  the  form  of  certain
of  their  salts. For  instance,  the  acid  potassium tartrate, C4H5KO6
(cream  of  tartar),  is  distinguished  by  its  sparing  solubility  in  water  and
in  alcohol,  and  in  a  solution  of  tartaric  acid,  whilst  the  corresponding
sodium  salt  is  easily  soluble. Therefore,  if  a  solution  of  tartaric  acid
be  added  in  considerable  excess  to  the  solutions  of the  majority  of
potassium salts,  a precipitate of  the  sparingly -soluble acid salt  is
formed,  which  does  not  occur  with  salts  of  sodium. The  chlorides  KCl
and  NaCl  in  solutions  easily  give  double  salts  K-^PtCle  ^^^  Na^PtCl^
with  platinic  chloride,  PtCl4,  and  the  solubility  of  these  salts  is  very
different,  especially  in  a  mixture  of  alcohol  and  ether. The  sodium  salt
is  easily  soluble,  whilst  the  potassium  salt  is  insoluble  or  almost  so,  and
therefore  the  reliction  with  platinic  chloride  is  that  most  often  used
for  the  separation  of  potassium  from  sodium,  as  is  more  fully  described
in  works  on  analytical  chemistry.

It  is  possible  to  discover  the  least  traces  of  these  metals  in  admix-
ture together,  by  means  of  their  property  of  imparting  different  colours
to  aflame.  The  presence  of  a  salt  of  sodium  in  a  flame  is  recognised
by  a  brilliant  yellow  coloration,  and  a  pure  potassium  salt  colours  a
colourless  flame  violet.  However,  in  the  presence  of  a  sodium  salt
the  pale  violet  coloration  given  by  a  potassium  salt  is  quite  undistin-
guishable,  and  it  is  at  lirst  sight  impossible  in  this  case  to  discover  the
potassium  salt  in  the  presence  of  that  of  sodium.  But  by  decomposing
the  light  given  by  a  flame  coloured  by  these  metals  or  a  mixture  of
them,  by  means  of  a  prism,  they  are  both  easily  distinguishable,  because
the  yellow  light  emitted  by  the  so<lium  salt  depends  on  a  group  of  light
rays  having  a  definite  index  of  refraction  which  corresponds  with  the
yellow  portion  of  the  solar  spectrum,  having  the  index  of  refraction
of  the  Fraunhofer  line  (strictly  speaking,  group  of  lines)  D,  whilst  the
8;ilts  of  potassium  give  a  light  from  which  these  rays  are  entirely  absent,
but  which  contain  rays  of  a  red  and  violet  colour.  Therefore,  if  a
potfissium  salt  occur  in  a  flame,  on  decomposing  the  light  (after  passing
it  through  a  narrow  slit)  by  means  of  a  prism,  there  will  be  seen  reti
and  violet  bands  of  light  situated  at  a  considerable  distance  from  each
other  ;  whilst  if  a  sodium  salt  be  present  a  yellow  line  will  also  appear.
If  both  metals  simultaneously  occur  in  a  flame  and  emit  light,  the
spectrum  lines  corresponding  to  the  potassium  and  the  sodium  will
appear  simultaneously.

For  convenieDCe  in  carrying  on  this  kind  of  testing,  tpectroMOpe*
(6g.  72)  are  constructed,"*  cousistiag  of  a  refrautiag  pi'iain  and  three
tubes  placed  in  the  plane  of  the  refracting  angle  of  the  prism.  One
of  the  tubes,  C,  has  a  vertical  slit  at  the  end,  giving  access  to  the  light
to  be  tested,  which  then  passes  into  the  tube  (collimator),  containing  a
lens  which  gives  the  rays  a  parallel  direction.  The  rays  of  light  Laving
passed  through  tbeslit,an(i  havingbecoaie  parallel,  are  refractedand  dis-
persed in  the  prism,  and  the  spectrum  formeil  is  observed  through  the
eye-piece  of  the  other  tele-
scope D.  The  third  tube
I)  contains  a  horizontal
transparent  acaJe  (at  the
outer  end)  which  is
divided  into  equal  divi-
sions. The  light  from  a
source  such  as  a  gas
burner  or  candle  placed
before  this  tube,  passes
through  the  scale,  and
is  reflected  on  that  face
of  the  prism  which  stamls
before  the  telescope  I  '■.
so  that  the  imagi;  ol
the  scale  is  seen  througii
this  telescope  simul-
taneously with  the  spec-
trum given  by  the  rays
passing  through  the
slit  of  the  tube  C.  In
this  manner  the  image  of  the  scale  and  the  spectrum  given  by  the
souive  of  light  under  investigation  are  seen  simultaneously. If  the

"  For  Mcoiate  meaaureraoiita  uiiJ  dompuratini  rnoBiirched  mntB  toniplicsted  spet-
tco«oopeB  are  lequired  which  giio  a  gretAer  disponiou.  lUid  are  fnmijihiHl  for  this
purpcxe  with  UTenl  priama — (or  eiuuplu,  '">  Bruiming's  apeutrotcmMj  Che  hght  paiisna
through  aii  piiBma,  and  then,  having  undergono  an  internal  total  reHection,  paiHii
through  the  upper  portion  ol  the  tame  six  priamB,  and  again  bf  an  ictenuU  total  refleo-
lioQ  pauea  into  the  ocnlai  tabe.  With  such  a  powerlul  diapersion  the  relatiie  poiitioa
of  the  apectral  lines  ma;  he  detsrinined  with  l>ocurH^f .  Foi  Ibo  abeolnte  and  exact
detenninatian  of  the  waia  lengths  it  ia  particnlarl;  important  that  the  spectroscope
should  be  famislied  vith  diffraction  gratings.  The  coDstruction  of  apecttotcopes  des-
tined for  special  porposea  <(or  eiampte,  for  inrestigating  the  light  of  ttuni,  or  for  deter-
mining the  ftbaorption  apectra  in  microscopic  preparations,  leu.)  ia  viceedinglf  varied.
Detaila  of  the  subject  must  b«  looked  for  in  works  on  physics  and  on  spectrum  utalysU.
Among  the  latter  the  best  known  tor  their  eompl«(eneiis  and  merit  are  those  of  Roscnv,
Kajscr,  Vogel,  and  Lscoq  de  Boinbandian.
VOL.  I.

I

562  PKINX'IPLES OF CHEMISTRY

bud's  r&yB  be  directed  through  the  slit  of  the  tabe  C,  then  i
server  looking  through  the  eye-pieoe  of  B  will  see  the  solar  qx
and  (if  the  aperture  of  the  elit  be  narrow  and  the  apparat
rectly  adjusted)  the  dark  Fraunhofer  lines  in  it.*<  Bms
xpectroscopes  are  usually  no  adjusted  that  (looking  through
violet  portion  of  the  spectrum  is  seen  to  the  right  and  the  red
to  the  left,  and  the  Fraunhofer  line  D  (in  the  bright  yellow  pm
the  spectrum)  is  sitoat«d  on  the  50th  division  d  the  scale. *^
light  emitted  by  an  incandescent  solid — for  example,  the  I>ra:
light  —be  passed  through  the  spectroscope,  then  all  the  colonn
solar  spectrum  are  seen,  but  not  the  Fraunhofer  lines.  To  •
the  result  given  by  a  flame  coloured  by  various  salts  a  Bum
burner  (or  the  pale  flame  of  hydn^n  gas  issuing  from  a  pL
ori6ce)giving80  pale  a  Same  that  its  spectrum  will  be  practically  ir
is  placed  before  the  slit.  If  any  compound  of  sodium  be  placed
flame  of  the  gas  burner  (for  which  purpose  a  platinum  wire  on  whi
sodium  chloride  is  fused  is  fixed  to  the  stand),  then  the  flume  is  ct
yellow,  and  on  looking  through  the  spectroscope  the  observer  wi
bright  j/elhtf  line  falling  upon  the  .^Oth  division  of  the  scale,  wl
seen  together  with  the  spectrum  in  the  telescope.  No  yelloi
of  other  refractive  indei,  nor  any  rays  of  any  other  coloar,  ■
seen,  and,  therefore,  the  spectrum  corresponding  with  sodinu
pounds  consists  of  yellow  rays  of  that  index  of  refraction  irbicb
to  the  Fraunhofer  (black)  line  D  of  the  solar  spectrum.  If  a  pot
salt  be  introduced  into  the  flame  instead  of  a  sodium  salt,  th'
l>ands  will  he  seen  which  are  much  feebler  than  the  bright  i
band— namely,  one  red  line  near  the  Fraunhofer  line  A  and  a
violet  line. Besides  which,  a  pale,  almost  continuous,  spectrum

"  Tlif  iirriiii|iriii<Tit  of  all  Uic  parts  of  tlie  Bpiimaluii  soastncive  thecleuvHt
visirin  unci  iici'iirary  nf  olisfinntifiii  muHt  eTiiieiitlj-  prm*de  every  kind  of  Hptvi
iletc  nil  ill  lit  lull,  DutailH  couceniinc  the  practical  uae  oF  the  HpectroHcope
look<'<l  for  III  hpiHial  wnrko  on  tlie  suhject.  In  thiy  trea  ise  the  reader  is  aup
liavi)  a  '■criiiiii  kimwlixijt*'  it  tlie  phy«iciil  <lata  reapectiii([  the  refraction  of  lighl
iliB|i.TKicin  uiui  iliffMction,  and  tlie  theiirj-  of  light,  wliicli  allows  of  the  detrri
..r  th..  hiiKth  or  the  wavei  oF  light  in  abnoliite  measure  mi  the  bnais  „{  nb«

''  111  <iriler  til  t[ivc  an  iilen  of  the  hizc  of  the  scale,  we  may  obnerve
iircliiiiirj  •.(■■(■triiin  extemls  from  the  leto  of  (lie  scale  [where  the  red  portion  ia
m  th.-  I7111I1  division  {where  tire  end  of  the  visilile  violet  portion  of  the  ape
'.itiiiit'^il  I.  ami  iliiil  the  Fniuiilinfer  line  A  (the  extreme  prominent  line  in  the
ie»)i:.nds»itli  the  17lh  ilitinion  i.t  the  scah' ;  the  Kniiniliofer  line  Flat  the  b«r

Ui..  l.li.f, ir  till'  u'ri'en  n.lourl  is  siliiaU'd  on  llie  Wrtli  division,  and  the  line  <J,

'h'lrly .« ill  the  heginning  of  !!»■  violet  imrtion  "I  llie  B|i«ctrum,  oorreBponds

1-J7ih  division  i<(  the  srale.

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, CiESIUM, AND  LITHIUM  568

observed  in  the  central  portions  of  the  scale.  If  a  mixture  of  sodium
and  potassium  salts  be  now  introduced  into  the  flame,  three  lines
will  be  seen  simultaneously — namely,  the  red  and  pale  violet  lines  of
potassium  and  the  yellow  line  of  sodium.  In  this  manner  it  is  possible,
by  the  aid  of  the  spectroscope,  to  determine  the  relation  between  the
spectra  of  metals  and  known  portions  of  the  solar  spectrum.  The  con  -
tinuity  of  the  latter  is  interrupted  by  dark  lines  (that  is,  by  an  absence
of  light  of  a  definite  index  of  refraction),  termed  the  Fraunhofer  lines
of  the  solar  spectrum.  It  has  been  shown  by  careful  observations  (by
Fraunhofer,  Brewster,  Foucault,  Angstrom,  Kirchhoff,  Comu,  Lockyer,
Dewar,  and  others)  that  there  exists  an  exact  agreement  between  the
spectra  of  certain  metah  and  certain  of  the  Fraunhofer  lines.  Thus  the
bright  yellow  sodium  line  exactly  corresponds  with  the  dark  Fraun-
hofer line  D  of  the  solar  spectrum.  A  similar  agreement  is  observed
in  the  case  of  many  other  metals.  This  is  not  an  approximate  or  chance
correlation.  In  fact,  if  a  spectroscope  having  a  large  number  of  re-
fracting prisms  and  a  high  magnifying  power  be  used,  it  is  seen
that  the  dark  line  D  of  the  solar  spectrum  consists  of  an  entire  system
of  closely  adjacent  but  definitely  situated  fine  and  wide  (sharp,  distinct)
dark  lines, ^  and  an  exactly  similar  group  of  bright  lines  is  obtained
when  the  yellow  sodium  line  is  examined  through  the  same  apparatus,
so  that  each  bright  sodium  line  exactly  corresponds  with  a  dark  line  in
the  solar  spectrum. '-^^  *>'*  This  conformity  of  the  bright  lines  formed  by
sodium  with  the  dark  lines  of  the  solar  spectrum  cannot  be  accidental.
This  conclusion  is  further  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  bright  lines
of  other  metals  correspond  with  dark  lines  of  the  solar  spectrum.
Thus,  for  example,  a  series  of  sparks  passing  between  the  iron  electrodes
of  a  Buhmkorff  coil  gives  450  very  distinct  lines  characterising  this
metal.  All  these  450  bright  lines,  constituting  the  whole  spectrum  corre-
sponding with  iron,  are  repeated,  as  Kirchhofi*  showed,  in  the  solar
spectrum  as  dark  Fraunhofer  lines  which  occur  in  exactly  the  same  situa-
tions as  the  bright  lines  in  the  iron  spectrum,  just  as  the  sodium  lines
correspond  with  the  band  D  in  the  solar  spectrum.  Many  observers
have  in  this  manner  studied  the  soUr  spectrum  and  the  spectra  of
different  metals  simultaneously,  and  discovered  in  the  former  lines  which

*^  The  two  moBt  distinct  lines  of  D,  or  of  sodium,  have  waye-lengths  of  580*5  and  588*9
millionths  of  a  milliinetc>r,  besides  which  fainter  and  fainter  lines  are  seen  whose  wave-
lengths in  millionths  of  a  millimeter  are  588*7  and  588*1,616*0  and  615*4,  515*5  and  515*2,
408*8  and  408*2,  Arc,  according  to  Liveing  and  Dewar.

*^  ^^  In  the  ordinary  Hpoctroscopes  which  are  usuaUj  employed  in  chemical  research,
one  yellow  band,  which  doofi  not  split  up  into  thinner  lines,  is  seen  instead  of  the  system
of  sodium  lines,  owing  to  the  small  dispersive  power  of  the  prism  and  the  width  of  the
slit  of  the  object  tube.

o  o  2

564  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

correspond  not  only  with  sodium  and  iron,  but  also  with  m&n
metals.^  The  spectra  of  such  elements  as  hydrogen,  oxygen,  ni
and  other  gases  niay  be  observed  in  the  so-called  Geiealer'a  tuba
is,  in  glass  tubes  containing  rarefied  gases,  through  which  the  dii
of  a  RuhmkorCTs  coil  is  passed.  Thus  hydrogen  gives  a  spectral
posed  of  three  lines — a  red  line  corresponding  with  the  Fraunho:
C,  a  green  line  corresponding  with  the  line  F,  and  a  violet  line
sponding  with  one  of  the  lines  between  G  and  H.  Of  these  n
red  is  the  brightest,  and  therefore  the  general  colour  of  In
hydrogen  {with  »n  electric  discbarge  through  a  Ueissler  tube)  is  r
The  correlation  of  the  Fiaunhofer  lines  with  the  spectra  of
depends  on  the  phenomenon  of  the  so-called  reversal  of  the  spectrun
phenomenon  consists  in  this,  that  instead  of  the  bright  spectm
responding  with  a  metal,  under  certain  circumstances  a  simila

"  The  moBt  aeeurate  inveBtigations  nude  in  this  respect  are  curied  on  witl
obtainol  by  diOnction.becauxe  in  this  cane  the  poiiitionof  (he  dark  and  bright  U
not  depend  on  the  index  oi  retractiuD  of  the  material  ol  the  piiiiin,  nor  on  the  d.

power  of  the  apparatas. The  best— that  is,  tlie  moBt  ^nenil  and  accorat* m

expreaaing  the  reaiilts  of  niich  delerminatioiis  con)ii»t«  in  detennlning  the  lengU

thii  the  fraction  of  1  divided  by  the  aquaie  of  the  wave-length  ie  giveu.)  We  wil]
tliia  icave-length  in  milUoiiih  parU  of  a  millimelre  (the  ten- millionth  parts  an
doubtful,  and  (all  wiUiiu  the  liiuitB  of  error).  In  order  to  illastrate  the  ralation
the  waTe-lengthH  and  the  positions  of  the  linen  of  the  gpectrom,  we  will  cite  th
lengths  rorreiiponding  irith  the  chief  Fraunhofer  lines  and  colonrs  ot  tfan  npectr
Pmunhofer  hue  ABC  D  EbP  G

Wave-length . 7BI0  087-5  Boe-li  5S9-5-JfWU  ,-.37-8 olST 4««-5 ISIO
Colour .  rS  ^~^^^^  yellow green  b|n^

IH  the  following  table  are  given  tlie  .eaci-Ungtht  of  Uie  light  rays  {the  loQi
most  diutinct,  tee  later)  for  certain  elements,  those  in  black  tjrpe  being  the  mo*i
defined  and  distinct  lines,  which  are  easily  obtained  either  in  the  Rikme  of  a  E
burner,  or  in  Geiasler's  tnbes,  or  in  general,  by  an  electric  discharge.  These  lia
to  Iho  elements  (the  lines  ot  compounds  are  different,  as  will  be  afterwaida  ex
but  ninny  coni|>oundi  arc  decomposed  by  the  flame  or  by  an  electric  dischan
moreover  to  the  elements  in  an  incandescent  and  rarefied  gkseouB  atate,
spectre  Hometimes  vary  considerably  with  a  variation  ol  temperature  and  preasoi

It  may  be  mentioned  that  the  ml  colour  corresponds  with  lines  having  a  iraii
of  from  TOO  (witli  a  greater  wave-length  the  lines  are  hardly  visible,  and  an  oltn
860,  the  urange  from  650  to  590,  tlie  ^tUavi  from  500  to  B20,  tlie  green  trom  630
the  hUf  from  400  to  120,  and  tlie  viuM  from  420  to  880  millionth  parts  of  a  mil
Beyond  380  the  lines  are  scarcely  visible,  and  belong  to  the  oltra-violet.  Few
Hoissan  found  as  many  as  1»  bright  lines  from  744  to  638.

In  the  table  (p.  BSE)  which  is  arranged  in  conformity  with  the  image  of  the  apecl
it  is  seen  (the  rod  lines  on  tlie  left-hand  and  the  violet  on  the  right-hand  Hide),tfa(
in  black  type  correspond  with  line*  which  are  so  bright  and  distinctly  visible  ttuit  tt
easily  be  made  use  of.  both  in  determining  the  relation  between  the  diviBJons  of  tl
and  the  wave- lengths,  and  in  determining  the  admiitureof  a  given  element  with  a
Brackets  join  those  lines  between  which  several  other  lines  are  cleai-lj  viaiblt
dispersive  power  ot  the  spectroscope  permits  diatingnishing  the  neighbotuing  Un

POTASSIUM, RIKIDIUM. CAaiUM. AND LITHIl'M  566

spectrum  ia  the  form  of  Frannhofer  lines  may  be  obtained,  as  will  be
explained  directly. In  order  to  clearly  understand  the  phenomenon  of

tlie  oidiniuy  laborBtory  8pKtni«('0]>*fB
with  ons  prism,  even  n-itU  all  poHxiblv
pruciiiion  ot  urningenieiit  nnd  with  a
brillikncf  of  light  petoiittiuK  tlie
obHsmittona  being  made  with  ■  very
BiuTow  rtiierturB,thehii  Mwhow  vave-
teiiKthH  uiily  differ  by  i-i  niillianths
ot  a  miUinietrp,  ata  hlmruil  iJigDther
»nd  with  ft  iriile  ai-erture  u  series  of
IIdui  diSering  hj  even  »k  niurli  u
811  milliantJiH  of  A  niilliinetrp  itppi^u
•u.  one  wide  line.  With  a  t.iiit  light
(that in, with a  amall  tjUHiitity of

oiily  the  moBt  Onlliaul  linv-  are
clearly  lisible.  The  Init^lk  <■!  the
UneB  does  not  bIksjs  *.jrrv»pond
with  their  brilliancf.  Aceording  to
Liwkyer  lliis  lent'lh  w  detennined
by  placing  ttiH  carbon  electrodes
(between  whicb  the  iocaiideBcent
vapoora  of  the  metali'  are  formed).
not  lioriaontaliy  to  tliu  slit  las  they
are  Eenemilv  ploi-ed,  to  give  more
light),  but  vrtjinlly  to  it.  Then
certain  lines  appear  long  and  othero
■hort.  As  a  role  (Lockyer,  Elewar,
Coma),  the  longest  lines  are  those
with  which  it  ia  easiest  to  obtain
revenad  spectra  (tee  later).  Conse-
qoentlf,  theee  lines  are  tlie  jmoal
eharacteriBtic.  Only  the  loiigeot  and
moat  brilliant  are  given  in  oar  table*
-which  ia  composed  on  the  baai*  ot
a  collection  of  Iha  data  at  out  diii-
poaal  for  bright  ipectra  of  the  iii-
aindttcmtaitJ  rarefit'l  vapovnof
Ihe  elemenlt.  Ai  the  apectra  change
with  jcreat  variations  of  teroperatnrc
and  vapour  density  (the  taint  lines
become  briDiant  whilst  tlie  bright
lines  -ftometimea  dinappear).  which  ia
paiticolarly  dear  from  Ciainician'a
rMeaicbee  on  tbo  halogenn,  until
tlie  method  of  observation  and  the
tlieory  of  the  mbject  an  enlarged,
patticolar  Ihaorelical  inipi>rtance
ahonld  not  be  given  tothe  wave-lengths
showing  the  maiimnin  brilliancy.
which  only  posaesa  a  practical
■igniflcance  in  the  common  methods
of apectroecopio observation  i. In

»^' s  1  1  r  1  1  1 1 1  1  1  a  1  1  H  1

ij !  :5i| 1  1  '  1^  i| '  M  '  1  1  1

R '  1  1  tig 1  1  M  1  '  1

" £!■  '^ilifi- 1  1  1  1  M  ijl

& 1 1 1  li M 1 1 1  igi  1 1

<3 1 1  1  1  lg|l  M  1  1  Igl  1  1  1  11

5 : MM  i£g^5i  Mini M

*  .  i'i|iiiaiiiiil6iir

S 1 Mil§i58ll55l  11  15111

B ii;iS»liiiMi_5ijjlj_

3 ii'i'iiiiiii '

S 1  ■  iSi  II  iiljSI.  Ill  1^
* ■SiSliiiiijl

,3.1  iS'SiS 1  1  1  iSSisiSa
a iiiiili|3i.i|:i|s^

s iiiisiiiiiiisiiiiM

a iii5S_iSiiiiLi±iiiiS_

' $ < 1  1  1  i  M  1  II  M  1  1  1  1  lSl§l

\ S 1111= igH  Igl  1  II  171

1 H INI' iSsIji  1 1  J  '  1^

\s i',3iiir'"si.Miii

!« iisilllMMlJ.

1  -^  ' I'HSiSSfili  131  1=111

!« iiiS'"JSSSSS3Siiii

=  i  ississi  1331 1 1

0- IIM|M3Sl_jllji'_l_ll_

1  ■■ '  I'liiiinii'SsSS'iii

666  PBINCIPLES  OF  CBEMISTHY

reversed  spectra,  it  most  be  kaown  that  when  light  passes  tbi
cert&in  transparent  substances  these  sabstances  retain  rays  of  a  ct
refrangibility.  The  colour  of  solutions  is  a  proof  of  this.  Light '
ban  passed  through  a  yelloir  solution  of  a  uranium  salt  contaji
vinlet  rays,  and  after  having  passed  through  a  red  solation  of  i
manganate,  does  not  contain  many  rays  in  the  yellow,  hlae,  and
portions  of  the  spectrum.  Solutions  of  copper  salts  absorb  neai
red  rays.  Sometimes  colourless  solutions  also  absorb  rays  of  a
definite  refractive  indexes,  and  give  ahaorption  spectra.  Thus
tions  uf  salts  »f  didymium  absorb  rays  of  a  certain  refrangil
and  therefore  an  impression  of  black  lines  is  received,'^  as  shoi
tig.  73. Many  vapours  (iodine)  and  gases  (nitric  peroxide)  give  si

Fiu.  71.— Atmiiillaii  aimlrum  {Uvi

Spectra.  Light  which  has  passed  through  a  deep  layer  of  aqi
vapour,  oxygen,  or  nitrogen  alsu  gives  an  absorption  spectrum.
this  reason  the  peculiar  (winter)  dark  lines  discovered  by  Brewst«
observed  in  sunlight,  especially  in  tlie  evening  and  morning,  whe
sun's  rays  pass  through  the  atnii >!tphere  (containing  these  substa
by  n,  l.mger  path  than  at  mid  day. It  is  evident  that  the  Frnun

geiiKrHl  till-  Biwctrn  of  nieWl^  AXr  9iiii|iler  than  thosK  »(  tlit  luilc^ena,  and  the  latl
varinlile;  nt  lUi  iiicreaued  iiTeatmre  hII  Hpectrni  linen  become  broader.

*!  The  metbod  ot  observing  HbHOrption  Npectra  coneiatH  in  taking  &  conti
HpeL'truin  ol  while  light  (one  wliich  doOK  not  show  either  dark  lines  or  panic
bright  luminona  bands — for  instance,  the  liglit  of  a  cauntle,  lamp,  or  other  source),
callimutor  {that  is,  the  tube  with  tlie  Mlit)  is  directed  toRdrds  this  ligbt,  uid  then  i
colours  of  the  spectrum  are  vinible  in  tbe  ocular  tube.  A  tnuispitrent  kbsa
nie<lium— for  instance,  a  solution  or  tube  conUining  a  gss— is  then  placed  betWH
source  o[  light  and  the  ap|iaratus  (or  nnyvihere  inside  the  apparatus  itself  in  the  p
the  riiyn).  In  this  case  either  the  entire  spectrum  is  uniform!)'  fainter,  or  abso
baiici"  appear  on  the  brifibt  field  of  the  continuous  spectrum  in  definite  positions
it.  Tliese  banils  have  different  lengths  and  positions,  and  distinctness  and  intern
absorption,  according  to  tbe  properties  of  the  absorptive  medium.  Lake  the  Inn
■pectra  given  by  incandescent  gases  and  vapours,  tbe  absorption  npectra  of  ■  nam
snbntances  hare  already  been  studied,  and  some  with  great  precision — an,  for  eia
the  spectrum  of  the  brown  vapours  of  nitrogen  dioxide  by  Hasselberg  (at  PnU
the  spectra  of  coloarinj;  matters  |Eder  and  others),  especially  of  thou  applied  to  a

"  POTASSIUM, Hl'mDlUM.  CESIUM. AND  tlTHiUfi

lines  niAjf  be  ascriliecl  to  tli<?  nliHOiptJon  of  cei-Utin  ruys  'if  ]i;,'ht  ia  ita
passage  from  the  luniinouB  mass  uf  the  suu  to  the  earth.  The  remark-
able progre-ss  made  in  all  spectroscopic  resfarcli  dat^s  frnuj  the  iii-
Testigations  made  by  Kiri:hiioff'(lS^i9)im  the  relation  betweeji  abstirptiou
spectra  and  the  spectra  <>£  luminous  incandescent  gases.  It  liiul  already
been  "bseri'ed  long  befoi-e  (by  Frawnhofer,  Foucault,  Angstrom)  that
the  Lriglit  spectrum  of  the  sodium  Dame  gives  two  bright  lines  which
are  in  exactly  the  samp  position  as  two  black  lines  known  iis  D  in
the  solar  spectrum,  wliich  evidently  belong  to  an  absorptiim  spectrum.
When  KirchhoS'  caused  diffused  sunlight  tn  fall  upon  the  slit  of  a
spectroscope,  and  placed  a  aodiuiu  dame  before  it,  a  perfect  super-
position was  observe*) — the  bright  siMlium  lines  completely  covered
the  black  lines  Dof  the  solar  spectrum.  When  further  the  cimtinuous
spectrum  of  n  Drummoud  light  showed  the  black  line  Xl  on  placing
a  sodinm  flame  between  it  and  the  slit  of  the  spectroscope— that
is,  when  the  Frauuhofer  liae  of  the  sular  spectrum  was  artificially  pro-
duced^thenthei'e  WHS  no  doubt  that  ii«  appearance  in  the  solar  spectrum
was  due  to  the  light  passing  somewhere  through  incandescent  vapours
of  sodium. Hence  a  new  theoiy  of  r^vrrsed  »ptetra  '*  anjae — that  U,

c^Lroui&tic  photogmphy,  liife  flp«ctnLof  Lkioil,  c:bJairop}iy]l  (the  j(re«iicaiiHtitUL'iitul  leav^B),
uid  other  similiu  uubetajiDca,  &i]  the  more  cu-efnl!;  sn  hy  Uie  aid  of  xhta  spectra  the
preHmce  u[  tliew  tubiliuicei  nu;  be  diicorered  in  imia]]  (|iuiititi»  («veD  in  miCTOKOplMl
qauitities,  by  tli*  nirl  nl  (.pecinl  upplinncci  i>ti  the  microscopcj,  ADi  tbe  ehuigea  Vbej
undergo  inveiti^ted.

Tile ubsoTption lipectra.  ohlained lit the ordiiioiy teniperAtun- niirl proper U\

lor  tlio  KeDemJ  tb<f<try  tif  Hpecttoacoiiy,  mid  tor  gainiiiK  an  iuiigbt  into  tlit  ilrnctnie  ol
enbKlwicen.  The  iDveatigitlion  of  liiIuhtIdk  mstteiii  baa  already  Uiown  that  in  cerlaio
rasea  a  deGoite  chsnge  of  r/oupDailion  and  Htmcturp  eiiluilB  not  on];  a  dcfiiiilv
change  of  t)ie  colnnrii  hnt  iJki  a  dilipliuieDimt  ol  th«  abaorption  bauds  b;  a  deSuite

*»  A  nanibei  o(  uethoda  liave  been  invented  to  dtuiinislnitH  tbe  reversibility  of
qwclm  \  •iniing  these  methodii  ne  will  oile  Iwo  wliii'Ii  im  vety  euily  curled  ont.  In
Bnniuni'a  meUiod  aodioin  ebloride  ia  put  into  an  appajwtua  (or  evolving  hydrogen  (tbe
■prmj  of  the  ult  ia  Ibm  curied  oil  by  the  hydrogen  and  oolotm  the  flame  with  the

568  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTBY

of  the  relation  between  the  waves  of  light  emitted  and  absorbed  bj  a
substance  under  given  conditions  of  temperature  ;  this  is  expresied
by  KirchhofTs  law,  discovered  by  a  careful  analysis  of  the  phenomena.
This  law  may  be  formulated  in  an  elementary  way  as  follows :  At  a
given  temperature  the  relation  between  the  intensity  of  the  light  emitted
(of  a  definite  wave-length)  and  the  absorptive  capacity  -with  respect  to  the
same  colour  (of  the  same  wave-length)  is  a  constant  quantity.^  As  a
black  dull  surface  emits  and  also  absorbs  a  considerable  quantity  of  heat
rays  whilst  a  polished  metallic  surface  both  absorbs  and  emits  but  few,
so  a  flame  coloured  by  sodium  emits  a  considerable  quantity  of  yelluv
rays  of  a  definite  refrangibility,  and  has  the  property  of  absorbing  a
considerable  quantity  of  the  rays  of  the  same  refractive  index.  In
general,  the  medium  which  emits  definite  rays  also  absorbs  them.

Thus  the  bright  spectral  rays  characteristic  of  a  given  metal  may
be  reversed — that  is,  converted  into  dark  lines — ^by  passing  light  which
gives  a  continuous  spectrum  through  a  space  containing  the  heated
vapours  of  the  given  metal.  A  similar  phenomenon  to  that  thus  arti-
ficially produced  is  observed  in  sunlight,  which  shows  dark  lines
characteristic  of  known  metals — that  is,  the  Fraunhofer  lines  form  an
absorption  spectrum  or  depend  on  a  reversed  spectrum  ;  it  being  pre-
supposed that  the  sun  itself,  like  all  known  sources  of  artificial  light,
gives  a  continuous  spectrum  without  Fraunhofer  lines.*^ We most

yellow  sodium  colour),  and  the  hydrogen  is  ignited  in  two  burners — in  one  large  one
with  a  wide  flame  giving  a  bright  yellow  sodium  light,  and  in  another  with  a  small  fine
orifice  whose  flame  is  pale  :  this  flame  will  throw  a  dark  patch  on  the  lajrge  bright  fl^m*
In  Ladoffsky's  method  the  front  tube  (p.  561)  is  unscrewed  from  a  spectroscope  directed
towards  the  light  of  a  lamp  (a  continuous  spectrum),  and  the  flame  of  a  spirit  l^np
coloured  by  a  small  quantity  of  NaCl  is  placed  between  the  tube  and  the  prism  ;  a  bUc^
band  corresponding  to  sodium  w^ill  then  be  seen  on  looking  through  the  ocular  tabe.
This  experiment  is  always  successful  if  only  there  be  the  requisite  relation  between  the
strength  of  light  of  the  two  lamps.

^  The  absorptive  capacity  is  the  relation  between  the  intensity  of  the  light  {of  4
given  wave-leugth)  falling  upon  and  retained  by  a  substance.  Bnusen  and  Roficoe
showed  by  direct  experiment  that  this  ratio  is  a  constant  quantity  for  eTery  sabstanc^.
If  A  stand  for  this  ratio  for  a  given  substance  at  a  given  temperature — for  instance  for
a  flame  coloured  by  sodium— and  E  be  the  intensity  of  the  light  of  the  same  wave-length
emitted  at  the  same  temperature  by  the  same  substance,  then  Kirchhoff's  law,  the  ex-
planation and  deduction  of  which  must  be  looked  for  in  text-books  of  physics,  states  tK^t
the  fraction  A  E  i^  a  constant  quantity  depending  on  the  nature  of  a  substance  (as  A
depends  on  it)  and  determined  by  the  temperature  and  wave-length.

'1  Heated  metals  begin  to  emit  light  (only  visible  in  the  dark)  at  about  430^  (vary-
ing with  tlie  metal).  On  further  heating,  solids  flrst  emit  red,  then  yellow,  and  lastly
white  light.  Compressed  or  heavy  gases  [see  Chapter  III.,  Note  44),  when  strongly  heated,
also  emit  white  light.  Heated  liquids  (for  example,  molten  steel  or  platinum)  also  girt
a  white  compound  light.  This  is  readily  understood.  In  a  dense  mass  of  matter  Ihe
oollisions  of  the  molecules  and  atoms  are  so  frequent  that  waves  of  only  a  few  definits
lengths  cannot  appear ;  the  reverse  is  possible  in  rarefied  gases  or  vapours.

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, CJESIUM, AND  LITHIUM  669

imagine  that  the  sun,  owing  to  the  high  temperature  which  is  proper  to  it,
emits  a  brilliant  light  which  gives  a  continuous  spectrum,  and  that  this
light,  before  reaching  our  eyes,  passes  through  a  space  full  of  the  vapours
of  different  metals  and  their  compounds.  As  the  earth's  atmosphere  ^'
contains  very  little,  or  no,  metallic  vapours,  and  as  they  cannot  be  sup-
posed to  exist  in  the  celestial  space,^^*»*»  the  only  place  in  which
the  existence  of  such  vapours  can  be  admitted  is  in  the  atmosphere
surrounding  the  sun  itself.  As  the  cause  of  the  sun's  luminosity  must
be  looked  for  in  its  high  temperature,  the  existence  of  an  atmosphere
containing  metallic  vapours  is  readily  understood,  because  at  that
high  temperature  such  metals  as  sodium,  and  even  iron,  are  sepa-
rated from  their  compounds  and  converted  into  vapour.  The  sun  must
be  imagined  as  surrounded  by  an  atmosphei*e  of  incandescent  vaporous
and  gaseous  matter, ^^  including  those  elements  whose  reversed  spectra
correspond  with  the  Fraunhofer  lines— namely,  sodium,  iron,  hydrogen,
lithium,  calcium,  magnesium,  &c.  Thus  in  spectrum  analysis  we  find
a  means  of  determining  the  composition  of  the  inaccessible  heavenly
luminaries,  and  much  has  been  done  in  this  respect  since  Kirchhoff's
theory  was  formulated.  By  observations  on  the  spectra  of  many
heavenly  bodies,  changes  have  been  discovered  going  on  in  them,^  and

'^  Brewster,  as  is  mentioned  above,  first  distinguished  the  atmospheric,  cosmical
Fraanhofer  lines  from  the  solar  lines.  Janssen  showed  that  the  spectrum  of  the  atmo-
sphere contains  lines  which  depend  on  the  absorption  produced  by  aqueous  vapour.
Egoreff,  Olszewski,  Janssen,  and  Liveing  and  Dewar  showed  by  a  series  of  experiments
that  the  oxygen  of  tlie  atmosphere  gives  rise  to  certain  lines  of  the  solar  spectrum,
especially  the  line  A.  Liveing  and  Dewar  took  a  layer  of  165  cm.  of  oxygen  compressed
under  a  pressure  of  85  atmospheres,  and  determined  its  absorption  sp^;trum,  and  found
that,  besides  the  Fraunhofer  lines  A  and  B,  it  contained  the  following  groups :  630-622,
6S1-568,  585,  480-475. The  same  lines  were  found  for  liquid  oxygen.

52  bu  l^the  material  of  the  whole  heavenly  space  formed  the  absorbent  medium,  the
spectra  of  the  stars  would  be  the  same  as  the  solar  spectrum  ;  but  Huyghens,  Ijockyer,
and  others  showed  not  only  that  this  is  the  case  for  only  a  few  stars,  but  that  the
majority  of  stars  give  spectra  of  a  different  chareu^ter  with  dark  and  bright  lines  and
bands.

^  Eruptions,  like  our  volcanic  eruptions,  but  on  an  incomparably  larger  scale,  are  of
fr.'quent  occurrence  on  the  sun.  They  are  seen  as  protuberances  visible  during  a  total
ecli{Mse  of  the  sun,  in  the  form  of  vaporous  masses  on  the  edge  of  the  solar  disc  and
emitting  a  faint  light.  These  protuberances  of  the  sun  are  now  observed  at  all  times  by
m  /ans  of  the  spectroscope  (Lockyer's  method),  because  they  contain  luminous  vapours
(giving  bright  lines)  of  hydrc^en  and  other  elements.

^  The  great  interest  and  vastness  of  astro-physical  observations  concerning  the  sun,
comets,  stars,  nebulae,  «S:c.,  render  this  new  province  of  natural  science  very  important,
and  necessitate  referring  the  reader  to  special  works  on  the  subject.

The  most  important  astro-physical  data  since  the  time  of  Kellner  are  those  referring
to  the  diaplacemeni  of  tlie  lines  of  the  spectrum.  Just  as  a  musical  note  changes  its
pitch  with  the  approach  or  withdrawal  of  the  resonant  object  or  the  ear,  so  the  pitch  of
the  luminous  note  or  wave-length  of  the  light  varies  if  the  lominous  (or  absorbent)  vapour
and  the  earth  from  which  we  observe  it  i^ppvoadi  or  vsesdt  fron  6Mh  other ;  this

570

PHINCIPLES  OF

muiy  of  the  elements  known  to  ua  htive  been  found  with  certaii
them.^  From  this  it  must  be  coni^luded  thattbe  sikme  eleuieuU  i
exist  on  the  earth  occur  throughout  the  whole  uuiverse,  luid  th
that  degree  of  heat  which  is  proper  to  the  sun  those  simple  sabst
which  we  accept  as  the  elements  in  chemistry  are  still  undeoom]
and  remain  unchanged.  A  high  t«mpemture  foruis  one  of
Gonditiiins  under  which  coinpouiidis  most  easily  decompose ;
if  sodium  or  a  similar  element  were  a  compound,  in  all  probk
it  would  l>e  decomposed  into  component  parts  at  tlie  high  tM
ature  of  the  sun.  This  may  indeed  be  concluded  from  tho  fael
in  ordinary  spectroscopic  experiments  the  spectra  obtruded
belong  to  the  metals  and  not  to  the  compounds  taken  ;  this  dei
on  the  decomposition  of  these  compounds  in  the  heat  of  the  dame

eijireiMit  iliieU  iu  n  niiible  dispUcemeut  ■>[  llie  spet'lnU  lines.  Thp  soliu  emtitioti
pre  broken  linea  in  the  apeclnuD,  beoitDfte  th«  rapidly  moving  emptivp  nuwac*  of  i
and  gBsen  eitlwr  travel  in  the  direction  ot  tlie  uyt  or  lull  buck  loWArHn  tha  MUb
oaitli  IraTeU  with  the  bdIiu  n^Ateiii  umong  the  ■taia.  »  it  ■•  pwalble  lo  da^nu
direction  and  velocity  vitfa  which  the  BUn  travels  in  sptm  l*J  the  ditipJiuiimMnl
Bpectral  lines  and  light  ol  the  stars. The  clianges  proceeding  on  Ihv  son  m  **-

meuia  of  the  spectroacope. For  this  pnrpniie.  man;  epeuisl  aatrO^jili^Bickt  otMara
now  exist  vhere  these  iniefltigutionH  are  carried  on.

Wo  mt,y  remark  that  if  tlie  observer  or  luminiros  nljjeet  nnjves viih  *  v

At>,thei

re-length  is

velocit;  ot  light,  Thus  Tolon,  Hnyghens,  and  others  |>rove>d  tlutt  lli«  wUa  AUi
■ppiiMMjieH  (he  volar  «;etem  with  ■  vdoeity  of  50  kilmnetres  per  aec'iiMl,  whit*  Ar
is  receding  with  a  velocity  of  45  liilnmetreB.  The  majorit;  of  sUm  give  ^  d
hydrogBii  apectrum,  henidcB  which  oobul*  Jiu)  give  the  speetrnin  of  nitfyigmi.  L
duse*  the  stars  from  tboir  Bpeotra,  according  to  their  period  of  fornuilion,  atiowii
eome  stus  ore  in  a  period  of  increwiuK  temperature  (of  lornuttiou  or  ^p«a
whilst  iitbers  are  iu  a  period  uf  ouliug.  Altogether,  bi  the  utra-pfaitaio»|  jm  n|j
ot the  Biicctni  of  beaveiily  bodies  wr  Hiid  one  of  the  luoitt  interesting  nubjcsla  of

»  Bpeetmm  anslyus  has  proved  the  indubitable  eiiiitvniie  in  Lite  ann  uid  ■tai
uimiber  of  elements  known  in  chemislry.  Hnj-gbens.  Suochi,  Lockyfir,  luiti  ollwa
tarnished  »  large  emoont  otmaterial  upon  this  snhject.  A  coinpilation  ol  k
information  on  it  lias  been  given  by  Prof.  S.  A.  Kleiber,  in  tbe  Hoanutl  i
Bnssian  Phrsico-chemical  Bociet;  foi  laSG  (vol.  iviji.  p.  IIG).  Beude*  wlucli.  n  p
element  called  helinmjus  been  diwovereid,  which  is  charocteiiBed  by  a  1Ib«  (vImm
length  is  58T'E,  sitoalod  near  D),  which  is  men  very  brightly  in  llie  |iroje<:Ucini
tnberuiceH)  and  spots  ol  llie  nun.  but  wliicli  does  not  belong  to  any  known  elenut

is  not  re|>rodiicibIe  as  a  reversed,  dork  line. This  may  be  a  right  concloajoai ilui

My,  it  is  possible  that  on  element  may  be  discovered  to  which  the  spectrtun  ol  |

corresponds — bnl  it  may  be  that  the  helium  line  belongs  to  one  of  the  known  Hi

beoause  spectra  vary  in  the  brilliancy  and  position  of  their  line*  with oliaai

temperature  and  pressure. Thus,  for  initancc.  Lwkyer  eonid  only  sm  tlw  |iB»  .

very  end  of  the  calcium  epoctmm,  at  compomtively  low  tempemtDres,  wkQ

M  Bit?  uud  sua  appear  at  a  higher  temperatare.  and  ut  s  still  lilglier  ti

I line  19S  becomes  quite  invisible.

1

parAssiuM,

coniiuon  salt  he  introduced  into  the  flame  of  n  ^as-bumer,  a  portion  of
it  is  decomposed,  tirat  forming,  in  all  probability,  with  water,  hydro-
chloric acid  and  sodium  hydroxide,  and  the  latt«r  then  becoming  partially
decomposed  by  the  hydrocarbons,  giving  metallic  sodium,  whose  incan-
descent vapour  emits  light  of  a  detinite  refrangibility.  This  conclusion
is  aiTived  at  from  the  following  experiment : — If  hydrochloric  acid  gas
be  introduced  into  a  flame  coloured  l^y  sodium  it  is  observed  that  the
sodium  spectrum  tlisappears,  owing  ttt  the  fact  that  metallic  sodium
cannot  remain  in  the  tiame  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  hydrochloric
acid.  The  same  tiling  takes  place  on  the  addition  of  sal-ammoniac,
which  in  the  heat  of  the  flame  gives  hydrochloric  acid.  If  u  porcelain
tube  containing  sodium  chloride  (or  sodium  hydroxide  or  carixmate),  and
closed  at  both  ends  by  glass  plates,  l>e  so  powerfully  heated  that  the
salt  voliitilisLis,  then  the  Botiiuiii  spectrum  is  not  observable  ;  but  if  the

salt  be  replaced  by  sodium,  then  either  the  bright  line  or  the  absorp-
tion spectra  is  ohtaineil,  according  to  whether  the  light  emitted  by  the
incandescent  vapour  be  observed,  or  light  passing  through  the
tulje.  Thus  the  above  spectrum  ie  not  given  by  sodium  rhloride  or
o'tie['  sodium  compound,  but  is  proper  to  the  metal  sodium  itself.  This
IS  also  the  case  with  other  analogous  metals.  The  chlorides  and  other
halogen  coinjioutuh  of  barium,  calcium,  copper,  dtc,  give  independent
spectra  which  differ  from  those  of  the  metals.  If  barium  chloride  be
introduced  into  n  Uame,  it  gives  a  mixed  spectrum  belonging  to  metallic
barium  and  liariuui  chloride.  If  besides  barium  chloride,  hydrochloric
acid  or  sal-ammoniac  be  introduced  into  the  flame,  then  the  spectrum
of  the  metal  disappears,  and  that  of  the  chloride  remains,  which  difl'ers
distinctly  from  the  spectrum  of  barium  fluoride,  barium  bromide,  or
barium  iodide. A  certain  common  resemblance  and  cei-tain  <:

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

lines  are  obsert  ed  in  the  epeclra  of  two  dififerent  compounds  of  one  «
the  Bame  element  obtained  in  the  above -described  manner,  and  aUo  i|
the  spectruui  of  the  metal,  but  they  all  liave  their  peculiarities,
independent  spectra  of  the  conipounds  of  copper  ai-e  easily  obs
(tig,  75), Thus  certain  compounds  which  exist  in  n  state  o£  vopo
are luminous  at  a  high  tenipet-ature,  give  their  independent  apecbn
tn  the  majority  of  case.s  the  spectra  of  compounds  are  coui]>osed  ^
indistinct  luminous  lines  and  complete  bright  bands,  wltilst  metal
elements  generally  give  a  few  clearly -defined  spectral  lines.** There  ■

'-  SpectroscDvir  oli»ennti.>ii8  iiri-  still  lurtlier  eonipli.-uteci  by  Iha  fact  tli>l
ll)«  »wu«  sabntaiice  (tivea  diHerent  spectr*  at  diffHreiit  leniperitures.  Thi&  U  e
Ihii  cnM  with  gaae«  whose  apectn  are  oblaiiiFd  by  «d  eBiKtrti.-  diachaTgi-  id  talaA
Flllcker,  WtlUner,  Sdiuster,  uid  other*  showed  tbkt  aV  low  tempeistnpoB  uid  prw-
sniva  the  apectra  of  iodine,  aulphur,  ititrogeti.  oiygHn,  itc.  luv  quite  different  troDi  Uv
spectra  of  the  same  eleiuentn  at  high  temperatureii  uid  pressnms.  This  maj-  lilliB
depend  on  the  fact  tliat  the  elements  change  their  molecular  straclnre  wMi  a  chwigr  <J
lempetature,  just  as  oione  ia  conTected  iato  oxygen  (tor  inabuuw,  from  N,  molecolM  ui
ohtuued  contiuning  only  one  atom  of  nitrogen),  or  else  it  mnj  !»  bacanse  at  low  lempn-
ture  certain  rayn  hare  a  greater  relative  Entenaity  than  thow  nhich  appear  at  bi^n  Ira
peratnnta.  II  ne  sniipixe  that  the  molecules  ol  a  ga«  are  in  amtiunal  "■'■■■"ti.  woii  >
Telocity  dependunt  on  the  temperature,  then  il  must  l»  admitted  that  they  otteti  alrikr
agaioBt  each  other  and  i^baond.  and  thue  commnnicate  peculiar  motious  to  each  otte
•  supposed  ether,  which  e:(

r,t  the  I

T  ^

aity  or  a

hese  circD

natancBB. It  h

Imt  gaWB

an  at  be  Frequent

pectruin  o

n  tlie  paaaoKe  ot

the  diOerence  of  the  spectiB  u
\  been  aliown  by  direct  «
iresBore,  when  the  caUiaion
and  varied,  exhibit  &  mntv  ctiDi|itii
ui  slectric  spark  thnji  raceOad  (aa*,
and  that  even  a  continuous  Hpeclnun  appears. In  ordeir  In  alu*

under  whicli  it  ptoceeda,  it  may  lie  mentioned  that  firlaarrrf
sDlphste  fuaed  on  h  platinum  wire  gives,  on  the  paaaa^  ol  a  torn
of  «parka,  a  distinct  syatem  o[  hnes,  WB-G7B,  whilit  irluin  a  wiia*
ot  sparks  is  patised  Ihroogh  a  aalutiun  ol  this  salt  thia  systeni  at
lines  ia  Faint,  and  when  Hoacoe  and  Schuster  obatiivvd  the  abwnf
lion  spectruin  oF  the  vapour  ot  metallic  potaaaiani  (which  ia  gr««i>
they  remarked  anomberoF  linen  oF  the  same  intenaity  ae  the  abm
system  in  the  red,  orange,  and  yellow  portions.

The  spectra  ot  aolutions  are  beat  obeerred  by  meana  ot  Ltn^
de  Bui«liandran's  arrangement,  nhown  in  fig.  TS. A  Iwnt  fajalUiT
tube.  D  F,  inside  which  a  platinum  wire,  A  n  {from  0-8  to  tt-I  bbi
I  I-  \.-;ii.l  "( in  diameter)  is  faaed,  is immoraed in  a  narrow  oylinder.  C  *■

tr'uui''il  i'll'tBiimriri "''''^h  It  IB  firmly  held  by  a  corkl. The  projeotii^; «ud,  ■.  d
lu  mhitiiHi.  the  wire  is  covered by  a  Hue  capillary tube, d,  which  exliiadi

1-3  mm.  beyond  the wire. Another  strwght  CApiUary  Uik^  L
with  a  platinum  wire,  B  b,  about  1  miu.  in  diamelar  (■  Sue'  "ii^  aoon  bc>FaiBVi
ia  held  (bj  a  cork  or  in  a  atandj  above  the  end  ot  the  tube,  U. If  thai win
now  connected  with the pnsitive.  and the  wire B with  the  negalin
Buhmkortre  coil  (it  the  wires  be  connected  in  the  opposite  arder,  the  e[
obtained),  a  uritM  ol  spwka  rapidly  Following  each  other  al^ear  between  a  uul  t,  i^

m

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, CJESIUM. AND  LITHIUM  678

no  reason  for  supposing  that  the  spectrum  of  a  compound  is  equal  to
the  sum  of  the  spectra  of  its  elements — that  is,  every  compound  which
is  not  decomposed  by  heat  has  its  own  proper  speciruin.  This  is  best
proved  by  absorption  spectra,  which  are  essentially  only  reversed  spectra
observed  at  low  temperatures.  If  every  salt  of  sodium,  lithium,  and
potassium  gives  one  and  the  same  spectrum,  this  must  be  ascribed
to  the  presence  in  the  flame  of  the  free  metals  liberated  by  the
decomposition  of  their  salts.  Therefore  the  phe^wmeiia  of  the  spectrum
are  determitved  by  molecideSy  and  not  by  atoms  —that  is,  the  molecules
of  the  metal  sodium,  and  not  its  atoms,  produce  those  particular
vibrations  which  determine  the  spectrum  of  a  sodium  salt.  Where
there  is  no  free  metallic  sodium  there  is  no  sodium  spectrum.

Spectrum  analysis  has  not  only  endowed  science  with  a  knowledge
of  the  composition  of  distant  heavenly  bodies  (of  the  sun,  stars,
nebula?,  comets,  dsc),  but  has  also  given  a  new  method  for  study-
ing the  matter  of  the  earth's  surface.  With  its  help  Bunsen  discovered
two  new  elements  behmging  to  the  group  of  the  alkali  metals,  and
thallium,  indium,  and  gallium  were  afterwards  discovered  by  the  same
means.  The  spectroscope  is  employed  in  the  study  of  rare  metals
(which  in  solution  often  give  distinct  absorption  spectra),  of  dyes,
and  of  many  organic  substances,  <kc.'^  With  respect  to  the  metals
which are  analogous  to sodium,  they  all  give similar  very  volatile

their  light  may  be  examined  by  placing  the  apparatas  in  front  of  the  nlit  of  a  spectro-
scope. The  variations  to  which  a  spectrum  is  liable  may  easily  be  ob8er\-ed  by  increasing
the  distance  between  the  wires,  altering  the  direction  of  the  current  or  strength  of  the
solution,  &c.

^f  The  importance  of  the  spectroscope  for  the  purpose  of  chemical  research  was
already  shown  by  Gladstone  in  1856,  but  it  did  not  become  an  accessor}'  to  the  laboratory
until  after  the  discoveries  of  Kirchhoff  and  Bunsen.  It  may  be  hoped  that  in  time
spectroscopic  researches  will  meet  certain  wants  of  the  theoretical  (philosophical)
side  of  chemistry,  but  as  yet  all  that  lias  been  done  in  this  respect  can  only  be  regarded
as  attempts  which  have  not  yet  led  to  any  trustworthy  conclusions.  Thus  many  investi-
gators, by  collating  the  wave-lengths  of  all  the  light  vibrations  excited  by  a  given  element
endeavour  to  find  the  law  governing  their  mutual  relations ;  others  (especially  Hartley
and  Ciamician),  by  comparing  the  spectra  of  analogous  elements  (for  instance,  chlorine
bromine,  and  iodine),  have  succeeded  in  noticing  definite  features  of  resemblance  in
them,  whilst  others  (Griinwald)  search  for  relations  between  the  spectra  of  compounds
and  their  component  elements,  drc. ;  but — owing  to  the  multiplicity  of  the  spectral  lines
proper  to  many  elements,  and  (especially  in  the  ultra-red  and  ultra-violet  ends  of  the
spectrum)  the  existence  of  lines  which  are  undistinguishable  owing  to  their  faintness
and  also  owing  to  the  comparative  novelty  of  spectroscopic  research — this  subject  cannot
be  considered  as  in  any  way  perfected.  Nevertheless,  in  certain  instances  there  is
evidently  some  relationship  between  the  wave-lengths  of  all  the  spectral  lines  formed  by
a  given  element.  Thus,  in  the  hydrogen  spectrum  the  wave-length  =804*542  7n',(m'— 4)
if  m  varies  as  a  series  of  whole  numbers  from  8  to  15  (Walmer,  Hagebach,  and  others).
For  example,  when  m  =  8,  the  wave-length  of  one  of  the  brightest  lines  of  the  hydrogen
spectrum  is  obtained  (656*2),  when  m  =  7,  one  of  the  visible  violet  lines  (896*8),  and  when
m  is  greater  than  9,  the  ultra-violet  lines  of  the  hydrogen  spectrum.

574  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

salts  and  such  very  characteristic  spectra  that  the  least  traces  of
them  ^^  are  discovered  with  great  ease  by  means  of  the  spectroscope.
For  instance,  lithium  gives  a  very  brilliant  red  coloration  to  a  flame
and  a  very  bright  red  spectral  line  (wave-length,  670  millionths  mm.),
which  indicates  the  presence  of  this  metal  in  admixture  with  componiKL
of  other  alkali  metals.

Lithium,  Li,  is,  like  potassium  and  sodium,  somewhat  iHridely  spread
in  siliceous  rocks,  but  only  occurs  in  small  quantities  and  as  mere  traces
in  considerable  masses  of  potassium  and  sodium  salts.  Only  a  very
few  rather  rare  minerals  contain  more  than  traces  of  it,^^  for  example,
spodumene  and  lithia  mica.  Many  compounds  of  lithium  are  in  all
respects  closely  analogous  to  the  corresponding  compounds  of  sodium

^  In  order  to  show  the  degree  of  Rensitiveness  of  Bpectroscopic  reactions  the
following  observation  of  Dr.  Bence  Jones  may  be  cited:  If  a  solution  of  3  grains  of
a  lithium  salt  be  injected  ander  the  skin  of  a  gainea-pig,  after  the  lapse  of  fcmr
minutes,  lithium  can  be  discovered  in  the  bile  and  liquids  of  the  eye,  and,  after  ten
minutes,  in  all  parts  of  the  animal.

*"  Thus  spodumene  contains  up  to  6  p.c.  of  lithium  oxide,  and  petolitr.,  and  lepidolite
or  lithia  mica,  about  8  p.c.  of  lithium  oxide.  This  mica  is  met  with  in  certain  granites
in  a  somewhat  considerable  quantity,  and  is  therefore  most  frequently  employed  for  the
preparation  of  lithium  compounds.  The  treatment  of  lepidolite  is  carried  on  on  a  large
scale,  because  certain  salts  of  lithium  are  employed  in  medicine  as  a  remedy  for  certain
diseases  (stone,  gouty  affections),  as  they  have  the  power  of  dissolving  the  inaoluUe
uric  acid  which  is  then  deposited.  Lepidolite,  which  is  unacted  on  by  acids  in  its
natural  state,  decomposes  under  the  action  of  strong  hydrochloric  acid  after  it  has  be«o
fused.  After  being  subjected  to  the  action  of  the  hydrochloric  acid  for  several  honrs  all
the  silica  is  obtained  in  an  insoluble  form,  whilst  the  metallic  oxides  pass  into  solnUoo
as  chlorides.  This  solution  is  mixed  with  nitric  acid  to  convert  the  ferrous  salts  into
ferric,  and  sodium  carbonate  is  then  added  until  the  liquid  becomes  neutral,  bv  which
means  a  precipitate  is  formed  of  the  oxides  of  iron,  alumina,  magnesia,  drc,  as  insoluble
oxides  and  carbonates.  The  solution  (with  an  excess  of  water)  then  contains  the  chlor-
ides of  the  alkaline  metals  KCl,  NaCl,  LiCl,  which  do  not  give  a  precipitate  with
sodium  carbonate  in  a  dilute  solution.  It  is  then  evap>orated,  and  a  strong  solution  of
sodium  carbonate  added.  This  precipitates  lithium  carbonate,  which,  although  soluble
in  water,  is  much  less  so  than  sodium  carbonate,  and  therefore  the  latter  precipitates
lithium  from  strong  solutions  as  carbonate,  2LiCl  +  Na-jCO-,  =  2NaCl  +  LijCOj.  Lithium
carbonate,  which  resembles  sodium  carbonate  in  many  respects,  is  a  substance  which  is
very  slightly  soluble  in  cold  water  and  is  only  moderately  soluble  in  boiling  water.  In
this  respect  lithium  forms  a  transition  between  the  metals  of  the  alkalis  and  other
metals,  especially  those  of  the  alkaline  earths  (magnesium,  barium),  whose  carbo-
nates are  only  sparingly  soluble.  Oxide  of  lithium,  Li20,  may  be  obtained  by  heating
lithium  carbonate  with  charcoal. Lithium  oxide  in  dissolving  gives  (per  gram-niolecole)

26,000  heat  units ;  but  the  combination  of  Li<2  with  O  evolves  140,000  calories that  is,

more  than  No-^.O  (100,000  calories)  and  K-^O  (97,000  calories),  as  shown  by  Heketoff  (1887V
Oeuvrard  (1892)  heated  lithium  to  redness  in  nitrogen,  and  observed  the  absorption  of
N  and  formation  of  Li.^N,  like  Na-N  {see  Chapter  XII.  Note  50).

LiCl,  LiBr,  and  Lil  form  crystallo-hydrates  with  H.^O,  2H2O,  and  8H^O.  As  a  rule
LiBr2H20  crj-stallises  out,  but  Bogonxlsky  (1894)  showed  that  a  solution  containing
LiBr -h  3'7H20,  cooled  to  —02°,  separates  out  crystals  LiBrSH^O,  which  decompose  at  -f  4'
with  the  separation  of  H.^O.  LiF  is  but  slightly  soluble  (in  800  parts)  in  water  (and  still
less  so  in  a  solution  of  NHiF).

POTASSIUM,  RUBIDIUM, CiESIUM, AND  LITHIUM  576

and  potassium  ;  but  the  carbonate  is  sparingly  soluble  in  cold  water,
which  fact  is  taken  advantage  of  for  separating  lithium  from  potassium
and  sodium.  This  salt,  Li2C03,  is  easily  converted  into  the  other
compounds  of  lithium.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  lithium  hydroxide,
LiHO,  is  obtained  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  caustic  soda,  by  the
action  of  lime  on  the  carbonate,  and  it  is  soluble  in  water  and
ciystallises  (from  its  solution  in  alcohol)  as  LiH0,H20.  Metallic
lithium  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current  on  fused
lithium  chloride  ;  for  this  purpose  a  cast-iron  crucible,  furnished
with  a  stout  cover,  is  filled  with  lithium  chloride,  heated  until  the
latter  fuses,  and  a  strong  galvanic  current  is  then  passed  through  the
molten  mass. The  positive  pole  (fig.  77)  ji ,

consists  of  a  dense  carbon  rod  C  (sur-
rounded by  a  porcelain  tube  P  fixed  in  an
iron  tube  BB),  and  the  negative  pole  of
an  iron  wire,  on  which  the  metal  is
deposited  after  the  current  has  passed
through  the  molten  mass  for  a  certain
length  of  time.  Chlorine  is  evolved  at  the
positive  pole.  When  a  somewhat  consider-
able quantity  of  the  metal  has  accumulated

. ,  • 'x  • -xi.  J  xi_  X 1  • F^o.  77. — Preparation  of  lithium  by  the

on  the  wire  it  is  Wltnarawn,  the  metal  is action  of  n  galvanic  current  on  fused
n.j«  •,  J .1  •  . •  lithium  chloride.

collected  from  it,  and  the  experiment  is

then  carried  on  as  before.'^  ^*»  Lithium  is  the  lightest  of  all  metals,  its
specific  gravity  is  0*59,  owing  to  which  it  floats  even  on  naphtha  ;  it
melts  at  180°,  but  does  not  volatilise  at  a  red  heat.  Its  appearance
recalls  that  of  sodium,  and,  like  it,  it  has  a  yellow  tint.  At  200°
it  bums  in  air  with  a  very  bright  flame,  forming  lithium  oxide.  In
decomposing  water  it  does  not  ignite  the  hydrogen.  The  characteristic
test  for  lithium  compounds  is  the  red  coloration  which  they  impart  to
a  colourless  flame.*®

Bunsen  in  1860  tried  to  determine  by  means  of  the  spectroscope

so  bb  Guntz  (1898)  recommends  adding  KCl  to  the  LiCl  in  preparing  Li  by  this
method,  and  to  act  with  a  current  of  10  amperes  at  20  volts,  and  not  to  heat  above  450®,
so  as  to  avoid  the  formation  of  Li.^Cl.

^  In  determining  the  presence  of  lithium  in  a  given  compound,  it  is  best  to  treat  the
material  under  investigation  with  acid  (in  the  case  of  mineral  silicon  compounds  hydro-
fluoric acid  must  be  taken),  and  to  treat  the  residue  with  sulphuric  acid,  evaporate  to
dryness,  and  extract  with  alcohol,  which  dissolves  a  certain  amount  of  the  lithium
sulphate.  It  is  easy  to  discover  lithium  in  such  an  alcoholic  solution  by  means  of  the
coloration  imparted  to  the  flame  on  burning  it,  and  in  case  of  doubt  by  investigating  its
light  in  a  spectroscope,  because  lithium  gives  a  red  line,  which  is  very  characteristic  and
is  found  as  a  dark  line  in  the  solar  spectrum.  Lithium  was  first  discovered  in  1817  in
petolite  by  Arf vedson.

576  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

whether  any  other  as  yet  unknown  metals  might  not  occur  in  different
natural  products  together  with  lithium,  potassium,  and  sodium,  and  he
soon  discovere<l  two  new  alkali  metals  showing  independent  spectra.
They  are  named  after  the  characteristic  coloration  which  they  impart  to
the  flame.  One  which  gives  a  red  and  violet  band  is  named  rubidium,
from  ruhidius  (dark  rod),  and  the  other  is  called  ccesium^  because  it
colours  a  pale  flame  sky  blue,  which  depends  on  its  containing  bright
blue  rays,  which  appear  in  the  spectrum  of  csesium  as  two  blue  bands
(table  on  p.  565).  Both  metals  accompany  sodium,  potassium,  and
lithium,  but  in  small  quantities ;  rubidium  occurs  in  larger  quantity
than  caesium.  The  amount  of  the  oxides  of  csesium  and  rubidium  in
lepidolite  does  not  generally  exceed  one-half  per  cent.  Rubidium  has  alao
been  found  in  the  ashes  of  many  plants,  while  the  Stassfurt  camallite
(the  mother- liquor  obtained  after  having  been  treated  for  KCl)  forms
an  abundant  source  for  rubidium  and  also  partly  for  csesiam.
Rubidium  also  occurs,  although  in  vei*y  small  quantities,  in  the  majority
of  mineral  waters.  In  a  very  few  cases  ciesium  is  not  accompanied  by
rubidium  ;  thus,  in  a  certain  granite  on  the  Isle  of  Elba,  csesium  has
been  discovered,  but  not  rubidium.  This  granite  contains  a  very  rare
mineral  caMedpoUuXy  which  contains  as  much  as  34  per  cent,  of  csesium
oxide.  Guided  by  the  spectroscope,  and  aided  by  the  fact  that  the
double  salts  of  platinic  chloride  and  rubidium  and  csesium  chlorides
are  still  less  soluble  in  water  than  the  corresponding  potassium  salt,
KiPtClg,^*  Bunsen  succeeded  in  separating  both  metais  from  each
other  and  from  potassium,  and  demonstrated  the  great  resemblance

'  Tlie  salts  of  the  majority  of  metals  are  precipitated  as  carbonates  on  the  addition
of  ammonium  carbonate — for  instance,  the  salts  of  calcium,  iron,  «Src.  The  alkalis  whose
carbonates  are  soluble  are  not,  however,  precipitated  in  this  case.  On  evaporating  the
resultant  solution  and  igniting  the  residue  (to  remove  the  ammonium  salts),  we  obtaio
salts  of  the  alkali  metals.  They  may  be  separated  by  adding  hydrocliloric  acid  together
with  a  solution  of  platinic  chloride.  The  chlorides  of  lithium  and  sodium  ^ve  easily  soluble
double  salts  with  platinic  chloride,  whilst  the  chlorides  of  potassium,  rubidium,  and
caesium  form  double  salts  which  are  sparingly  soluble.  A  hundred  parts  of  wat«r  at
0°  dissolve  0*74  part  of  the  potassium  platinochloride  ;  the  corresponding  rubidimn
platinochloride  is  only  dissolved  to  the  amount  of  0-134  part,  and  the  caeaiam  sah,
0024  part;  at  100*^  518  parts  of  potassium  platinochloride,  K.,>PtCl^,  ar«  dissolved,
0*634  part  of  rubidium  platinochloride,  and  0177  part  of  csesium  platinochloride.
From  this  it  is  clear  how  the  salts  of  rubidium  and  caesium  may  be  isolated.  The
separation  of  caesium  from  rubidium  by  this  method  is  very  tedious.  It  can  be  better
effected  by  taking  advantage  of  the  difference  of  the  solubility  of  tlieir  carbonates  in
alcohol;  c«.>sium  carbonate,  CS2CO3,  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  whilst  the  corresponding  uhi
of  rubidium  and  potassium  are  almost  insoluble.  Setterberg  separated  tlieae  metals  u
alumft,  but  the  best  method,  that  given  by  Scharples,  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  froo
a  mixture  of  the  chlorides  of  potassium,  sodium,  ctesium,  and  rubidium  in  the  nt-
sence  of  hydrochloric  acid,  stannic  cliloride  precipitates  a  double  salt  of  cesium  whicb
is  very  slightly  soluble.  The  salts  of  Rb  and  Cs  are  closely  analogous  to  those  <d
potassium.

POTASSIUM, RUBIDIUM, CESIUM, AND L1TII1U3I  577

they  bear  to  each  other.  The  isolated  metals,^ ^  rubidium  and  caesium,
have  respectively  the  sf)ecific  gravities  1*52  and  2*366,  and  melting
points  39®  and  27°  as  N.N.  Beketoff  showed  (1894),  he  having  obtained
caesium  by  heating  CsAlOj  with  Mg  (*'^  *>*»).

Judging  by  the  properties  of  the  free  metals,  and  of  their  corre-
sponding and  even  very  complex  compounds,  lithium,  sodium,  poteus-
sium,  rubidium,  and  ciesium  present  an  indubitable  chemical  resem-
blance. The  fact  that  the  metals  easily  decompose  water,  and  that  their

*'  Buuseu  obtained  rubidium  by  distilling  a  mixture  of  the  tartrate  with  soot,  and
Beketoff  (1888)  by  heating  the  hydroxide  with  aluminium,  2RbH0  +  Al  =  RbAlO.,  +  H^  +  Rb.
By  the  action  of  85  grams  of  rubidium  on  water,  94,000  heat  units  are  evolved.  Setterberg
obtained  caesium  (1882)  by  the  electrolysis  of  a  fused  mixture  of  cyanide  of  caesium  and
of  barium.  Winkler  (1890)  showed  that  metallic  mi^^nesium  reduces  the  hydrates  and
carbonates  of  Rb  and  Cs  like  the  other  alkaline  metals.  N.  N.  Beketoff  obtained  them
with  aluminium  (see  following  note).

43  bb  Beketoff  (1888)  showed  that  metallic  aluminium  reduces  the  hydrates  of  the
alkaline  metals  at  a  red  heat  (they  should  be  perfectly  dry)  with  the  formation  of
aluminates  (Chapter  XVII.),  RAIO^— for  example,  2KH0  +  A1  =  KA10.,,  +  K  +  H2.  It  is
evident  that  in  this  case  only  half  of  the  alkaline  metal  is  obtained  free.  On  the  other
hand,  K.  Winkler  (1889)  showed  that  magnesium  powder  is  also  able  to  reduce  the
alkaline  metals  from  their  hydrates  and  carbonates.  N.  N.  Beketoff  and  Tscherbacheff
(1894)  prepared  caesium  upon  this  principle  by  heating  its  aluminate  CsAlO.^  with
magnesium  powder.  In  this  case  aluminate  of  magnesium  is  formed,  and  the  whole  of
the  ccpsium  is  obtained  as  metal :  SCsAlOo -!-  Mg  =  MgO AI2O5  +  2C8.  A  certain  excess  of
almuina  was  taken  (in  order  to  obtain  a  less  hygroscopic  mass  of  aluminate),  and
magnesium  powder  (in  order  to  decompose  the  last  traces  of  water) ;  the  CSAIO2  was
prepared  by  the  precipitation  of  caesium  alums  by  caustic  baryta,  and  evaporating  the
resultant  solution.  We  may  add  that  N.  N.  Beketoff  (1887)  prepared  oxide  of  potassium,
K...0,  by  heating  the  peroxide,  KO,  in  the  vapour  of  potassium  (disengaged  from  its  alloy
with  silver),  and  showed  that  in  dissolving  in  an  excess  of  water  it  evolves  (for  the  above-
given  molecular  weight)  67,400  calories  (while  '2KH0  in  dissolving  in  water  evolvep
24,9*20  cal. ;  so  that  KoO  +  H.^O  gives  42,480  cal.),  whence  (knowing  that  Ka-»-0  +  H.^O  in
an  excess  of  water  evolves  164,500)  it  follows  that  K^  +  O  evolves  97,100  cal.  This  quantity
is  somewhat  less  than  that  (100,260  cal.)  which  corresponds  to  sodium,  and  the  energy  of
the  action  of  potassium  upon  water  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  K.2O  evolves  more  heat
than  Na.>0  in  combining  with  water  {see  Chapter  II.  Note  9).  Just  as  hydrogen  displaces
half  the  Na  from  Na-jO  forming  NaHO,  so  also  N.  N.  Beketoff  found  from  experiment
and  thermo-chemical  reasonings  that  hydrogen  displaces  half  the  potassium  from  K2O,
forming  KHO  and  evolving  7,190  cfdories.  Oxide  of  lithium,  LisO,  which  is  easily
formed  by  igniting  Li2C05  with  carbon  (when  1^2^  +  200  is  formed),  disengages
26,000  cuIk.  with  an  excess  of  water,  while  the  reaction  Liq  +  O  gives  114,000  cals.  and
the  rejwtion  Li2-^H20  gives  only  13,000  cals.,  and  metallic  lithium  cannot  be  liberated
from  oxide  of  lithium  with  hydrogen  (nor  with  carbon).  Thus  in  the  series  Id,  Na,  K,
the  formation  of  R^O  gives  most  heat  with  Li  and  least  with  K,  while  the  formation  of
RCl  evolves  most  heat  with  K  (105,000  cals.)  and  least  of  all  with  Li  (98,500  cals.).
Rubidium,  in  forming  R^O,  gives  94,000  cals.  (Beketoff).  Caesium,  in  acting  upon  an
excess  of  water,  evolves  51,500  cals.,  and  the  reaction  Cs2  +  O  evolves  about  100,000  cals.
— i.e.  more  than  K  and  Rb,  and  almost  as  much  as  Na — and  oxide  of  caesium  reacts
with  hydrogen  (according  to  the  equation  C82O  +  H  ^  CsHO  +  Cs)  more  easily  than  any
of  the  oxides  of  the  alkali  metals,  and  this  reaction  takes  place  at  the  ordinary  tem-
perature (the  hydrogen  is  absorbed),  as  Beketoff  showed  (189H).  He  also  obtained  a
mixc'd  Oxide,  AgCsO,  which  was  easily  formed  in  the  presence  of  silver,  and  absorbed
hydrogen  with  the  formation  of  CsHO.

VOL.  I.  P  P

578  PRIISCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTKY

hydroxides  RHO  and  carbonates  R2C^3  ^^^  soluble  in  water,  whilst  the
hydroxides  and  carbonates  of  nearly  all  other  metals  are  insoluble,  shows
that  these  metals  form  a  natural  group  of  alkali  tnetals.  The  halogens
and  the  alkali  metals  form,  by  their  character,  the  two  extremes  of  the
elements.  Many  of  the  other  elements  are  metals  approaching  the
alkali  metals,  both  in  their  capacity  of  forming  salts  and  in  not  forming
acid  compounds,  but  are  not  so  energetic  as  the  alkali  metals,  that  is,
they  form  less  energetic  bases.  Such  are  the  common  metals,  silver,
iron,  copper,  «fec.  Some  other  elements,  in  the  character  of  their  com-
pounds, approach  the  halogens,  and,  like  them,  combine  with  hydrogai,
but  these  compounds  do  not  show  the  energetic  property  of  the  halogeji
acids  ;  in  a  free  state  they  easily  combine  with  metals,  but  they  do  nf»t
then  form  such  saline  compounds  as  the  halogens  do — in  a  word,  the
halogen  properties  are  less  sharply  defined  in  them  than  in  the  halogens
themselves.  Sulphur,  phosphorus,  arsenic,  <fec.  belong  to  this  order
of  elements.  The  clearest  distinction  of  the  properties  of  the  halogens
and  alkali  metals  is  expressed  in  the  fact  that  the  former  give  adds
and  do  not  form  bases,  whilst  the  latter,  on  the  contrary,  only  give
bases.  The  first  are  true  a^id  elements,  the  latter  clearly -defined  bask
or  7fietallic  elements.  On  combining  together,  the  halogens  form,  in  a
chemical  sense,  unstable  compounds,  and  the  alkali  metals  alloys  in
which  the  character  of  the  metals  remains  unaltered,  just  as  in  the
compound  ICl  the  character  of  the  halogens  remains  undisguised  ;  thus
both  classes  of  elements  on  combining  with  members  of  their  own  class
form  non- characteristic  compounds,  which  have  the  properties  of  their
components.  On  the  other  hand,  the  halogens  on  combining  with  the
alkali  metals  form  compounds  which  are,  in  all  respects,  stable,  and  in
wliich  the  original  characters  of  the  halogens  and  alkali  metals  have
entirely  disappeared.  The  formation  of  such  compounds  is  accompanied
by  evolution  of  a  large  amount  of  heat,  and  by  an  entire  change  of  both
the  physical  and  chemical  properties  of  the  substances  originally  taken.
The  alloy  of  sodium  and  potassium,  although  liquid  at  the  ordinary
temperature,  is  perfectly  metallic,  like  both  its  components.  The
compound  of  sodium  and  chlorine  has  neither  the  appearance  nor  the
properties  of  the  original  elements  ;  sodium  chloride  melts  at  a  hi*»her
temperature,  and  is  more  difficultly  volatile,  than  either  sodium  or
chlorine.

With  all  these  qualitative  differences  there  is,  however,  an  important
quantitative  resembUmce  between  the  halogens  and  the  alkali  inetaU.
This  resemblance  is  clearly  expressed  by  stating  that  both  orders  of
elements  belong  to  those  which  are  univalent  with  respect  to  hydroiren.
Tt  is thus correct to  say  that  both  the  above-named  orders  of  ele-

i

POTASSIUM, RUBIDItJM, CiESIUM, AND  LITHIUM  579

ments  replace  hydrogen  atom  for  atom.  Chlorine  is  able  to  take  the
place  of  hydrogen  by  metalepsis,  and  the  alkali  metals  take  the  place
of  hydrogen  in  water  and  acids.  As  it  is  possible  to  consecutively  re-
place every  equivalent  of  hydrogen  in  a  hydrocarbon  by  chlorine,  so  it
is  possible  in  an  acid  containing  several  equivalents  of  hydrogen  to
replace  the  hydrogen  consecutively  ec^uivalent  after  e(|uivalent  by
an  alkali  metal  ;  hence  an  atom  of  these  elements  is  analogous  to  an
atom  of  hydrogen,  which  is  taken,  in  all  cases,  as  the  unit  for  the
comparison  of  the  other  elements.  Tn  ammonia,  and  in  water,  chlorine
and  sodium  are  able  to  bring  about  a  direct  replacement.  According
to  the  law  of  substitution,  the  formation  of  sodium  chloride,  NaCl,
at  once  shows  the  equivalence  of  the  atoms  of  the  alkali  metals  and  the
halogens.  The  halogens  and  hydrogen  and  the  alkali  metals  combine
with  such  elements  as  oxygen,  and  it  is  easily  proved  that  in  such  com-
pounds one  atom  of  oxygen  is  able  to  retain  two  atoms  of  the  halogens,
of  hydrogen,  and  of  the  alkali  metals.  For  this  purpose  it  is  enough  to
compare  the  compounds  KHO,  K-^O,  HCIO,  and  CI2O,  with  water.  It
must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  the  halogens  give,  with  oxygen,
besides  compounds  of  the  type  R.^^*  higher  acid  grades  of  oxidation,
which  the  alkali  metals  and  hydrogen  are  not  capable  of  forming.  We
shall  soon  see  that  these  relations  are  also  subject  to  a  special  law,
showing  a  gradual  transition  of  the  properties  of  the  elements  from
the  alkali  metals  to  the  halogens.^**

The  atomic  weights  of  the  alkali  metals,  lithium  7,  sodium  23,
potassium  39,  rubidium  85,  and  caesium  133,  show  that  here,  as  in  the
class  of  halogens,  the  elements  may  be  arranged  according  to  their
atomic  weights  in  order  to  compare  the  properties  of  the  analogous
compounds  of  the  members  of  this  group.  Thus,  for  example,  the
platinochlorides  of lithium and  sodium  are  soluble  in  water  3 those

•*''  We  limy  here  obtjerve  that  the  halogenK,  and  especially  iodine,  may  play  the  part
of  metals  (henco  iodine  is  more  easily  replaced  by  metals  than  the  other  halogens,  and  it
approaches  nearer  to  the  metals  in  its  physical  properties  than  the  other  halogens).
Schiitzenberger  obtained  a  compound  C.2H30(OCll,  which  he  called  chl(»rine  acetate,  by
acting  on  acetic  anhydride,  (C.jHsO.jO,  with  chlorine  monoxide,  Cl.^0.  With  iodine  this
compound  gives  off  chlorine  and  forms  iodine  acetate,  C.^>H50(0I),  which  also  is  fonned
by  the  action  of  it^ine  chloride  tm  sodium  acetate,  C.2H30(ONa).  Tlies«  compounds  are
evidently  nothing  else  than  mixed  anhydrides  of  hypochlorons  and  hypoio<lou8  acids,  or
the  products  of  the  substitution  of  hydrogen  in  RHO  by  a  halogen  (see  Chapter  XL,
Notes  29  and  78  bis).  Such  compounds  are  ver\'  unstable,  decompose  with  an  explosion
when  htMited,  and  are  changed  by  the  action  of  water  and  of  many  other  reagents,  which
is  in  accordance  with  tlie  fact  that  they  contain  very  closely  allied  elements,  as  does  CI/)
itself,  or  ICl  or  KXa.  By  the  action  of  chlorine  monoxide  on  a  mixture  of  iodine  aixl
acetic  anhydride,  Scliiitzenbergcr  also  obtained  the  compound  I{C.2U-0..»)3i  which  is
analogous  to  ICl-,  because  the  group  CaH-O^  '**'  ^*k^*  ^  h  »i  halogen,  forming  salts  with
the  metals. Similar  properties  are  found  in  iodosobenzene  (Chapter  XL,  Note  79i.

580

PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

of  potassium,  mbidiuin,  and  ctesium  sparinglf  soluble,  and  th
the  atomic  weight  of  the  metal  the  less  soluble  is  the  salt.
caseB  the  reverse  is  observed — the  greater  the  atomic  weight
soluble  are  the  corresponding  salts.  The  vaiiation  of  prxipei
the  variation  in  atomic  weights  even  shows  itself  in  the  meti
selves  ;  thus  lithium  volatilises  with  difficulty,  whilst  sodium  iii
by  distillation,  potassium  volatilises  more  easily  than  sod
rubidium  and  ctesium  as  we  htive  leen,  are  still  more  volatile.

581

CHAPTER  XIV

THE VALENCY AND SPECIFIC HEAT OF THE METALS. MA(;NESIUM.
CALCIUM, STROXTIUM, BARIUM, AND BERYLLIUM

It  is  easy  by  investigating  the  composition  of  corresponding  com-
pounds, to  establish  the  equivalent  tveighU  of  the  metals  compared  with
hydrogen — that  is,  the  quantity  which  replaces  one  part  by  weight  of
hydrogen.  If  a  metal  decomposes  acids  directly,  with  the  evolution  of
hydrogen,  the  equivalent  weight  of  the  metal  may  be  determined
by  taking  a  definite  weight  of  it  and  measuring  the  volume  of  hydrogen
evolved  by  its  action  on  an  excess  of  acid  ;  it  is  then  easy  to  calculate
the  weight  of  the  hydrogen  from  its  volume.*  The  same  result  may  be
arrived  at  by  determining  the  composition  of  the  normal  salts  of  the
metal ;  for  instance,  by  finding  tho  weight  of  metal  which  combines
with  35*5  parts  of  chlorine  or  80  parts  of  bromine.^  The  equivalent  of
a  metal  may  be  also  ascertained  by  simultaneously  {i.e.  in  one  circuit)
decomposing  an  acid  and  a  fused  salt  of  a  given  metal  by  an  electric
current  and  determining  the  relation  between  the  amounts  of  hydrogen
and  metal  separated,  because,  according  to  Faraday's  law,  electrolytes
(conductors  of  the  second  order)  are  always  decomposed  in  equivalent
quantities.*  **" The  equivalent  of  a  metal  may  even  be  found  by  simply

*  Under  favourable  cireumBtancef*  (by  tiikiiig  all  the  reqaisite  precttutions),  the  weight
of  the  equivalent  may  be  accurately  detenuincd  by  this  method.  Thus  Reynolds  and
Rtimsay  (1««7)  determined  the  equivalent  of  zinc  to  be  82'7  by  this  method  (from  the
average  of  29  exi)erimeut8),  whilst  by  other  methods  it  lias  been  fixed  (by  different
obseners)  between  82'55  and  33'95.

The  differences  in  their  equivalents  may  be  demonstrated  by  taking  equal  weights  of
different  metals,  tuid  collecting  the  hydrogen  evolved  by  them  (under  the  action  of  an
acid  or  alkali).

*  Tlie  most  accurate  determinations  of  this  kind  were  carried  on  by  Stas,  and  will  l»e
described  in  Chapter  XXIV.

-  •^i"  The  lunount  of  electricity  in  one  coulomb  according  to  the  present  nomen-
clature of  electrical  units  (see  Works  on  Physics  and  Electro-technology)  disengages
000001086  gram  of  hydrogen,  000112  gram  of  silver,  00008268  gram  of  copper  from  tlie
salts  of  the  oxide,  and  0 '0006526  gram  from  the  salts  of  the  suboxide,  fee.  These  amounts
stand  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  equivalents,  i.e.  as  the  quantities  replaced  by  one  part  by
weight  of  hydrogen,  llie  intimate  bond  which  is  becoming  more  and  more  marked
existing  between  the  electrolytic  and  purely  chemical  relations  of  substances  (especially
in  solutions)  and  the  application  of  electrolysis  to  the  preparation  of  numerous  substanc«>s

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTKY ^^^^^^

(Ictenniniiig  the  relation  between  its  weight  and  tli»t  of  its
giving  oxide,  as  by  this  we  know  the  quantity  of  the  meud
combines  with  ti  parts  by  weight  of  oxygen,  and  this  will  h
equivalent,  because  8  parts  of  oxygen  combine  with  1  part  by  wm
hydrogen,  fine  method  is  verified  by  another,  and  nil  the  pni
for  the  accurate  determination  of  equivalents  require  the  greatee
to  avoid  the  absorption  of  moisture,  farther  oxidation,  roU
and  other  accidental  inHuetices  which  affect  exaot  weighings,
description  of  the  methods  necessary  for  the  attainment  of
results  belongs  to  the  province  of  analytical  chemistry,

lalent  metaSs,  like  those  of  the  alkalis,  the  weight  i
e4]uivalent  is  ei|ual  to  the  weight  of  the  atom.  For  bivalent  i
the  atomic  weight  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  two  equivalents,  forn-'
metals  it  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  ii  equivalents.  Thus  alnmi
Al  =  2T,  is  trivalent,  that  is,  its  equivalent  =  'J  ;  magnesium,  Jdg
is  bivalent,  and  its  equivalent  =  1 2.  Therefore,  if  potassiara  or  «
or  in  general  a  univalent  metal,  M,  give  compounds  MjO,  1
MCI,  MNOg,  M.jSO„  ic,  and  in  genera!  MX,  then  for  br
metals  like  magnesium  or  calcium  the  corresponding  conif
will  be  MgO,  Mg(HO)5,  MgCl:,,  Mg(NU,)„  MgSO,,  Ac,  or  in  g
MX,.

By  what  are  we  to  be  guided  in  ascribing  to  some  metah
valency  and  to  others  bi-,  ter-,  quadri-,.  .  .  «. valency  ?  What  o
us  to  make  thia  difference  1  Why  are  not  all  raetab  given  the
valency — for  instance,  why  is  not  magnesium  considered  as  uiuvi

on  n  lurge  BCHle,  higetlier  witli  the  viniilayirieiit  uf  tlvctricity  I
tempenituren,  i:t,,  maltm  me  rejfret  thut  Ibu  jilim  and  dimciisioaB  of  Uiis  book.  •
impoaeihiiitr  of  ginng  >  concise  and  objectire  expoeition  of  the  neoesHiU]:  el«c!tiia
[irevent  my  entering  upon  thin  province  u!  knowleilgc,  although  I  — Tnnirti
duty  lo  Hcammend  iti  Htud;  to  nil  those  wlio  deaira  to  lake  port  in  the  farther  i

There  i*  only  one  side  of  the  iiuhject  rtiupocttug  the  din^ct  corrclBtio:
lick)  datu  wid eleiAro-iuotivB foroe,  which I  think  Tigh
juMiSes  the  general  concoplion,  ununinated  bj  Fantda;,  that  the  galrtuite  miniH
aapect  ol  the  trumfereucu  of  chemiuol  uioUon  or  nractioii  along  the  niouliicton.

From  experiments  coDdacted  bf  Favre,  Thonueu.  Garni,  Berthelot,  CImUi
olhere,  upon  the  amoDnt  of  beat  eivilved  in  s  dowd  circuit,  it  follows  thav  tha
motive  (oTCH  of  the  curroat  or  its  capacity  to  do  a  certain  work,  E,  it  proportioMi
whole  amoont  of  boat,  Q.  disengaged  by  tlie  reactiou  [orining  the  AOiinse  ol  th»  <
If  E  be  expreiLiicd  in  volts,  and  Q  in  thoUBanda  of  uni(>  ol  heat  refenvd  to  vqi
wei^li,thenE  =  0'Ot30Q. For  eumple  in a  DanielU  batter;  E-1'U»  both  hj

It  aud  theory,  bccaOH  in  it  there  lakes  place  the  decompoaition  of  CaSOj  ioto
logetlier  with  the  lamiation  of  Zn  +  0  and  KuO-i-SOjAq,  and  Iheae  iDoclinDs  eon
to  Q^SE'DO  tbouaond  unttn  of  heat.  So  lUao  in  all  other  pcimar;  batteriea  (p.^.  Bt
Foggandorfl'it,  A«.)  and  aemndary  ones  (Im  instwice,  those  acting  acconlioit
'  itiPb  +  H-jSO( -I- PbO^aaCholtiofl  allowed]  E  =  lll>tg«g.

1

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OK  THE  METALS 588

If  this  be  done,  taking  Mg  =12  (and  not  24  as  now),  not  only  is
a  simplicity  of  expression  of  the  composition  of  all  the  compounds  of
magnesium  attained,  but  we  also  gain  the  advantage  that  their  com-
position will  be  the  same  as  those  of  the  corresponding  compounds  of
sodium  and  potassium.  These  combinations  were  so  expressed  formerly
-why  has  this  since  been  changed  ?

These  questions  could  only  be  answered  after  the  establishment  of
the  idea  of  multiples  of  the  atomic  weights  as  the  minimum  quantities
of  certain  elements  combining  with  others  to  form  compounds — in
a  word,  since  the  time  of  the  establishment  of  Avogadro-Gerhardt's  law
(Chapter  VII.).  By  taking  such  an  element  as  arsenic,  which  has
many  volatile  compounds,  it  is  easy  to  determine  the  density  of  these
compounds,  and  therefore  to  establish  their  molecular  weights,  and
hence  to  iind  the  indubitable  atomic  weight,  exactly  as  for  oxygen,
nitrogen,  chlorine,  carbon,  <fec.  It  appears  that  As  =  75,  and  its  com-
pounds correspond,  like  the  compounds  of  nitrogen,  with,  the  forms
AsXa,  and  AsX^  ;  for  example,  AsHg,  AsClg,  AsFlr,,  As.^Oj,  «fec.  It  is
evident  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  a  metal  (or  rather  element)  of
two  valencies,  which  moreover  is  never  univalent,  but  tri-  or  quinqui-
valent. This  example  alone  is  sufficient  for  the  recognition  of  the
existence  of  polyvalent  atoms  among  the  metals.  And  as  antimony
and  bismuth  are  closely  analogous  to  at*senic  in  all  their  compounds,
(just  as  potassium  is  analogous  to  rubidium  and  ciesium)  ;  so,
although  very  few  volatile  compounds  of  bismuth  are  known,  it  was
necessiiry  to  ascribe  to  them  formula?  corresponding  with  those  ascribed
to  arsenic.

As  we  shall  see  in  describing  them,  there  are  also  many  analogous
metals  among  the  bivalent  elements,  some  of  which  also  give  volatile
compounds.  For  example,  zinc,  which  is  itself  volatile,  gives  several
volatile  compounds  (for  instance,  zinc  ethyl,  ZnC4H,i„  which  boils  at
118°,  vapour  density  =  61*3),  and  in  the  molecules  of  all  the^e  com-
pounds there  is  never  less  than  65  parts  of  zinc,  which  is  equivalent  to
H2,  because  65  parts  of  zinc  displace  2  parts  by  weight  of  hydrogen  ;  so
that  zinc  is  just  such  an  example  of  the  bivalent  metals  as  oxygen,
whose  equivalent  =  8  (because  Hg  is  replaced  by  O  :=  16),  is  a  repre-
sentative of  the  bivalent  elements,  or  as  arsenic  is  of  the  tri-  and
quinqui-valent  elements.  And,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  magnesium
is  in  many  respects  closely  analogous  to  zinc,  which  fact  obliges  us  to
regard  magnesium  as  a  bivalent  metal.

Such  metals  as  mercury  and  copper,  which  are  able  to  give  not  one
but  two  bases,  are  of  particular  importance  for  distinguishing  univalent
and  bivalent  metals. Thus  copper  gives  the  suboxide  Cu^O  and  the

S84

PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTBY

oxide  CuO -that  is,  the  compounds  CuX  corresponding  with  the
oxide  are  aii&logous  (in  the  quantitative  relations,  by  theircoiuposi
to  NaX  or  AgX,  and  the  compounds  of  the  oxide  CuX^,  to  il
ZnX;,  and  in  general  to  the  bivalent  metals.  It  is  clear  that  in
examples  we  must  make  a  distinction  between  ataniic  weights
eiiuivalents.

In  this  mauuer  the  valency,  that  is,  the  number  of  enjuiva
entering  into  the  atom  of  the  metals  may  in  many  cases  be  estabi
by  means  of  comparatively  few  volatile  metallic  compounds,
the  aid  of  a  search  into  their  analogies  (concerning  which  see  Ch
XV".)-  ^''^  ^"'  o/specijtc  heats  disoovered  by  Dulong  and  Petii
frequently  been  applied  to  the  same  purpose  ^  in  the  history  of  chem
especially  since  the  development  given  to  this  law  by  the  research
Kegnnult,  and  since  Oannizzaro  (Ifi60)  showed  the  agreement  bet
the  deductions  of  this  law  and  the  consequences  arising  from  Avc^
Gerhai-dt's  law.

Dulong  and  Petit,  having  determined  the  specific  heat  of  a  nu
of  solid  elementary  substances,  observed  that  as  the  atomic  weigt
the  elements  increase,  their  specific  heats  deci-ease,  and  that  thf  pr

^Tho  cliirf  uiesiis  liy  kIucIi  »f  detenniiic  llii'  vnlencv  of  thi>  elciii(.-nth.  ui
lixuHiplu  u[  tlie  v<[uivuliMit  xhould  be  u«cri1>c(l  to  the  Htnm,  nrv :  111  The  law  of  Avo
(icrhuritt.  Tliii  uictliud  ih  the  inmt  eeiieml  uiid  tni<itnorthy,  and  ha»  ulrewl;
Hpplivd  (o  H  fretA  number  of  elements.  (3)  The  diflerent  gndeK  of  uiidation  tni
iw>iiior|>liiHiii  LIT  aiinloicy  in  general ;  tor  example,  Fe^SO  becauw  the  Hnboxide  II
niide)  ih  iMoiiii>r|>]ioas  with  maRneHiniii  oiiile,  &c.,  unil  the  oxide  iferric  nitde)  lm
liidf  KH  mocli  Kxygcu  ti^oiu  iiti  tlie  KUlwxiile.  Berzeliun,  J[Bri)riiu.-.  uiid  otherB  ti>r<k  i
t.1)^  ol  thiH  iiipthnil  lur  deti'miiiiiiiK  the  coiitpOHiticiirol  llir  rmniiDUiiilK  o(  itiHiiy  <.U'i
(HI  Tlie  x|>et'ilio  heat,  accurdini;  tu  Dnluni;  uiid  Fetifn  law.  Bet^nnult,  iLiid  niurt-  e^|•
Cutiniizum,  iiM-d  tliii  iiirthnd  to  distiuguifh  niiivaleiil  Imiii  Liialent  metals,  i
IKTuAw  Uiw lur.' Cluititer XV.)  Im«  mn-cd  a«  n  iiieati»  for  the  det«nninali..ii

scKndiuiii,  .LU(] geniianiam. The  correction  of  Uie results  nl  one  method bv

iietlKic!.
It  «ill  b(

.<-]]  tc

llBtR

notliuds,  trip

^iallyrronitbe
maxuitade  uf
y  poiii

o[  tliohc  ]>hvnicii1  propeniex  which  are  clei
lor  eqiiivnieiili  or  ol  Uie  moleeale,  inuy

inxliinc.',  thnt  even  the  specitlc  gravity '»(  wlutiima  of  tlic  metallic  chlor
for  lhi^^  puqioAe.  ThuH,  if  beryllium  be  taken  aH  trivnlent— Ibat  in.  it  tlie  eiiniposi
its  cliloride  be  taken  as  BeCI,  lor  a  polj-meride  of  ill.  then  the  xpeoifle  grai
Boliition-  of  beryllium  chloHde  will  not  fit  into  the  nerieK  ,>(  the  other  metallie  clil
Bill  1a'  Bscribing  to  it  an  atomic  weijjht  Be .-  7.  or  l4ikiii|t  Be  ua  bivaleiit,  ojid  the  c>i
(uin.ll  its  chloride  ns  Bet'lj,  we  nnivc  nt  the  general  ml.' given  in  rhapler  VII.,  N
Tlius  W.  O.  Bnrdakoff  detemiin<.il  in  inv  laborutory  tliHt  the  i^pet-ific  ),'rHviIy  at
ol  Ih.'  wilution  BeCl. +  aOOH.jO  -101  UN-  -ilmt  is,  Krrater  than  the  corTe.|iondinB  h
KCI  .  aiM)H.jOl-ll)12l),iindles»  than  the  dilution  M(,-(.-|,i-3CI0HiO(  =  loa08),  aa
follow  from  the  niagnilnde  of  the  nioleiiilnr  weight  liefl;-  SU.  since  )v01  =  Tl
Mg(.'l.j  -1)3.

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 585

of  the  specific  heat  Q  into  tfie  atomic  ioeiylU  A  is  an  almost  constant
quantity.  This  means  that  to  bring  difiei'ent  elements  into  a  known
thermal  state  an  equal  amount  of  work  is  required  if  atomic  quantities
of  the  elements  are  taken  ;  that  is,  the  amounts  of  heat  expended  in
heating  equal  quantities  by  weight  of  the  elements  are  far  from  equal,
but  are  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  atomic  weights.  For  thermal
changes  the  atom  is  a  unit  ;  all  atoms,  notwithstanding  the  difference
of  weight  and  nature,  are  equal.  This  is  the  simplest  expression  of  the
fact  disctovered  by  Dulong  and  Petit.  The  specific  heat  measures  that
quantity  of  heat  which  is  required  to  raise  the  temperature  of  one  unit
of  weiffht  of  a  substance  by  one  degree.  Tf  the  magnitude  of  the
specific  heat  of  elements  be  multiplied  by  the  atomic  weight,  then  we
obtain  the  atomic  heat  -that  is,  the  amount  of  heat  required  to  raise
the  temperature  of  the  atomic  weight  of  an  element  by  one  degree.  It
is  these  products  which  for  the  majority  of  the  elements  prove  to  be
approximately,  if  not  quite,  identical.  A  complete  identity  cannot  be
expected,  because  the  specific  heat  of  one  and  the  same  substance
varies  with  the  temperature,  with  its  passage  from  one  state  into
another,  and  frequently  with  even  a  simple  mechanical  change  of
density  (for  instance  by  hammering),  not  to  speak  of  allotropic  changes,
<fec. We  will  cite  several  figures  *  proving  the  truth  of  the  conclu-

•  Tlie  specific  heatH  here  given  refer  to  diflfereiit  limits  of  temperature,  but  in  the
majority  of  cases  between  0^  and  100'^ ;  only  in  the  case  of  bromine  the  specific  heat  is
token  (for  the  solid  state)  at  a  temperature  below  —7^,  according  to  Regnault's  deter-
mination. The  variation  of  the  specific  heat  with  a  change  of  temperature  is  a
very  complex  phenomenon,  the  consideration  of  which  I  think  would  here  be  out  of  place.
I  will  only  cite  a  few  figures  as  an  example.  According  to  Bystrom,  the  specific  heat  of
iron  at  0°  =  01116,  at  100°  =  01114,  at  200--()llW,  at  800=^01267,  and  at  1,400'^
-  0*4081.  Between  these  last  limits  of  temperature  a  change  takes  place  in  iron  (a  spon-
ttmeous  heating,  recalencence\  as  we  shall  see  in  Chapter  XXII.  For  (}uartz  SiO.,»
Pionchon  gives  Q  =  01787-f  894/10— •-27/-10-9  up  to  400*^,  for  metallic  aluminium
(Richards,  1892)  at  0^  0222,  at  20^  0224,  at  100^  0'232 ;  consequently,  as  a  rule,
the  specific  heat  varies  slightly  with  the  temperature.  Still  more  remarkable  are
H.  E.  Weber's  observations  on  the  great  variation  of  the  siwcific  heat  of  charcoal,  the

diamond  and  boron :

0^  100°  200^  600=  JHK)'

Wood  charcoal  01 5  0-23  0-29  044  046

Diamond  010  019  022  044  045

Boron  022  029  OSo  —  —

These  determinations,  which  have  been  verified  by  Dewar,  Le  Chatelier  (Chapter  YIII.,
Note  18),  Moissan,  and  Gauthier,  the  latter  finding  for  lx>ron  AQ  =  6at  400^,  arc  of  especial
importance  as  confirming  the  universality  of  Dulong  and  Petit's  law,  because  the
elements  mentioned  above  form  exceptions  to  the  general  rule  when  the  mean  specific
heat  is  taken  for  temperatures  between  0"  and  100°.  Thus  in  the  case  of  the  diamond
the  product  of  A x  Q  at  0'-'-l-2,  and  for  boron  =24.  But  if  we  take  the  specific  heat
towards  which  there  is  evidently  a  tendency  with  a  rise  of  temi>erature,  we  obtain
a  product  approaching  to  6  as  with  other  eh^nients.  Thus  with  the  diamond  and
charcoal,  it  is  evident  that  tlie  specific  heat  tends  towards  0*47,  which  multipled  by  12

PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

s  arrived  (it  by  Dalong  and  Petit  with  respect  to  solid  eleine)

Q  =

0-94OH

AQ  =

6-59

F«

A  =

56

Q  =

O'US

AQ  =

Cr-27

P.i

A  =

106

Q  =

0'0r>9:>

AQ  =

6-28

PI

A  =

19G

Q  =

0-032  r>

AQ  =

6-37

0'29;t4
6-76

0-093
5-86

0-245

5-88

0-093
6-04

0-20;]

C26

198  200  206

00324  0-0333  0031?

6-41  666  6-49

It  is  seen  from  this  that  the  product  of  the  specific  heat  o
element  into  the  atomic  weiglit  is  an  almost  constaut  qnai
which  is  nearly  6.  Hence  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  va
hy  the  specific  heats  of  the  metals.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  sp
heats  of  lithium,  sodium,  and  potassium  convince  us  of  the  fact
their  atomic  weightij  are indeed those  which  we chose,  becaus

atteiitinn  t<i  the  fact  tlmt  Ii>r  aolid  plcmentB  luviii^'  n  nvaM  atomic  n-eiehl,  the  e
beet  rariui  cinHidi-nilily  if  wu  take  tliir  merage  Hgutea  for  Ifl^mperHturt's  O'  to  low-

lik

AQ- «-K  3H  ■i-li  ai

It  is  tlifivfon.'  clear  lliat  thi'  specific  lieut  of  berjlliuni  iletenniued  at  a  low  t«aipe
Fuunnt  serve  tor  txtAbliHliiiiK  its  atomicit}'.  On  the  other  hand,  the  low  atomic  h
charciial,  gruphitv,  and  tlie  <1iainond,  boron.  &(:.,  may  perbapH  depend  oii  the  com[
of  the  molcculcB  of  these  elementH.  Tlio  nece«i)ity  for  acknowledging  n  grce-t  com[
of  the  mo1ecll1<-^<  of  carbon  wan  explnined  in  Chuiiter  VIII.  In  the  caw  aS  sulphi
moWiile  crmtaiiiB  ul  Itatit  Stand  itB  atomic  beat  .-Hd>  0163  =  3-^3,  ohich  in  dial
below  the  iiorniul.  If  u  large  number  of  atoms  of  carbon  ere  contained  in  the  mo
of  charcoal,  this  would  to  a  certain  extent  account  for  its  comparatively  small  ■
heat.  With  resiiect  to  the  specific  heat  of  comiwundx,  it  will  not  be  out  of  pL
mention  here  the  conclusion  arrived  at  by  Kopp,  that  the  molecular  heat  (that
prodwl  of  MQI  may  be  looked  on  an  the  sum  of  Ibe  atomic  beatx  of  its  comi
elementa;  but  nn  Ibis  rule  ia  not  "general  one,  and  can  only  be  applied  to  give  an  ap
male  entiniute  of  tbc  siwcilic  lieetM  o(  iiulRteiices,  I  do  not  tbink  it  neeessuty  to  g.
thedcteilsot  the  conclusioiiH  described  in  Liebiu'n  ■  Annalen  Suppknient-Baod,'
which  induditi  a  Dumber  of  delerminatioiu  made  by  Kopp.

THE VALENCY AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 587

multiplying  the  specific  heats  found  by  experiment  by  the  correspond-
ing atomic  weights  we  obtain  the  following  figures  :  Li,  6*59,  Na,  6*75
and  K,  6*47.  Of  the  alkaline  earth  metals  the  specific  heats  have  been
determined  :  of  magnesium  =  0*245  (Regnault  and  Kopp),  of  calcium
—  0*170  (Bunsen),  and  of  barium  =  0*05  (Mendel^tF;.  If  the  same
composition  ])e  ascribed  to  the  compounds  of  magnesium  as  to  the
cori*esponding  compounds  of  potassium,  then  the  equivalent  of  mag-
nesium will  be  equal  to  12.  On  multiplying  this  atomic  weight  by  the
specific  heiit  of  magnesium,  we  obtain  a  figure  2*94,  which  is  half  that
which  is  given  by  the  other  solid  elements  and  therefore  the  atomic
wei(;:ht  of  magnesium  must  be  taken  as  equal  to  24  and  not  to  12.
Then  the  atomic  heat  of  magnesium  =  24  x  0*245  =~  5*9  ;  for  calcium,
giving  its  comi)Ounds  a  composition  CaX2 — for  example  CaCl2,  CaS04,
CaO  (Ca  =  40)  — we  obtain  an  atomic  heat  =  40  x  0*17  =  6*8,  and  for
barium  it  is  equal  to  137  x  0*05  =  6*8  ;  that  is,  they  must  be  counted
as  bivalent,  or  that  their  atom  replaces  H2,  Naj,  or  K2.  This  con-
clusion may  l>e  confirmed  by  a  method  of  analogy,  as  we  shall  afterwards
see.  The  application  of  the  principle  of  specific  heats  to  the  determi-
nation of  the  magnitudes  of  the  atomic  weights  of  those  metals,  the
magnitude  of  whose  atomic  weights  could  not  be  determined  by
Avogadro-Gerhardt^s  law,  was  made  about  1800  by  the  Italian  pio-
fessor  Cannizzaro.

Exactly  the  same  conclusions  respecting  the  bi  valence  of  magnesium
and  its  analogues  are  obtained  by  comparing  the  specific  heats  of  their
compounds,  espec^ially  of  the  halogen  compounds  as  the  most  simple,
with  the  specific  heats  of  the  corresponding  alkali  compounds.  Thus,
for  instance^  the  specific  heats  of  magnesium  and  calcium  chlorides,
MgCl2  and  CaCl2,  are  0*194  and  0*164,  and  of  sodium  and  potassium
chlorides,  NaCl  and  KCl,  0*214  and  0*172,  and  therefore  their  molecular
heats  (or  the  products  QM,  where  M  is  the  weight  of  the  molecule)  are
18*4  and  18**2,  12*5  and  12*8,  and  hence  the  atomic  heats  (or  the
quotient  of  QM  by  the  number  of  atoms)  are  all  nearly  6,  as  with  the
elements.  Whilst  if,  instead  of  the  actual  atomic  weights  Mg  =  24
and  Ca  =  40,  their  equivalents  12  and  20  be  taken,  then  the  atomic
heats  of  the  chlorides  of  magnesium  and  calcium  would  l>e  about  4*6,
whilst  those  of  potassium  and  sodium  chlorides  are  about  6*3.''* We

*  It  must  be  reniaiked  that  in  the  case  of  oxygen  (and  also  hydrogen  and  carbon)
compounds  the  quotient  of  MQ  w,  where  w  is  the  number  of  atoms  in  the  molecule,  is
always  less  than  C  for  solids;  for  example,  for  MgO-50,  CuO  =51,  Mn0.2  =  4*6,  ice
(Q  -  0*504)  -  3,  SiOj  -  8"5,  Arc.  At  present  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  this  depends
on  the  smaller  siwcific  heat  of  the  atom  of  oxygen  in  its  solid  comix)unds  (Kopp,  Note  4)
or  on  some  other  cause  ;  but,  nevertheless,  taking  into  ac<;ount  this  decrease  depending
on  the  presence  of  oxygen,  a  reflection  of  the  atomicity  of  the  elements  may  to  a  certain

I  \l

uiii;<ii

588  PRISCIPLE3  OF CHEMISTRY

must  lemark,  however,  that  as  the  specific  heat  or  the  amount  of
require<I  to  raise  the  temperature  of  a  iinit  of  weight  cue  degree

Fil«nt  bo  aeeli  in  thu  specific
MQ^2aS,  unii  tlierefore  tin
nugnesiam  oxUle,  MgO.  Bui
lUKgiiKiiiii — that  is,  il  ajmiiiniii
S'T,  which  in  much  lene. In

,nd  of  analagoUH  cliemi
lun;  invnitigiiUiTH  have
ilgSOj-iJTO  Biid  ZnSOj^aaO.  *o.

«  It  W  be  the  unKjunt  o(  heat  containwl  ii
,  luid  ,m  the  amount  eipended  in  heating
}^dVI  (Mixi!(|.  Thi- specific  heat  not  only
it  tliv  luolecules  of  a  substance,  but  nlxo  with  the  tempei
.ta(«  nt  H  subNtance.  Even  for  gasen  the  ^  ariation  ut  Q  wi
t  is  wen  from  the  experimentii  of  Reguault  mid  Wiedoni
arbouic  anhyilride  at  U^^U'lU,  at  1UU°  ^ 0*22,  and  at  300.
he  Bi>ei'ilic  heat  of  peruinnwit  gaaen  witli  llie  temperature

It  X<i'n  =  i-6.  which  is  neuly  that
scribe  the  same  composition  to  alum
xiimled  as  divalent— we  should  obtain
in compounds  of  identical  ktoiuic  ca

uiasB  m  of  a  substauce  at  a  tem]*
from  t  to  t  +  dt,  then  the  specifi
ieiiwith  the  compoaition  and  com|

n  that  the  speciG
■31.  But  Uie  va
as  far  u«  we  knoi

coriling  to  Mallard  aud  Le  ChatelicI

If  ~ ^'

the  molccalar  weight

!=,  wber.
heatol

r  instance,  for  O.,.  M  ^Si).  Therefore  the  i
Lvntuin  two  atoms  in  the  molecule  |H^»  O...  y,.  CO,  tx
may  W,  x»  is  shown  br  ex]ierinient,  taken  as  not  i-ar)'ing  with  the  t«n]|ieratniv
conKtancy  of  the  Hpccific  heat  of  perfect  gases  forme  one  of  the  fnodamental  propn
of  the  whole  tlieory  of  heat  and  on  itile|>endx  the  determination  of  tt^mperaturesby
of  gas-thennomcterB  tonlaiiiiiig  hydrogen,  nitrogen,  or  air.  Le  Chutelitr  I  ItWTl,
basis  of  existing  determination b,  concludes  that  the  molecular  lieat— that
product  MQ— of  all  gases  varies  in  proportion  to  the  teiuperalDre,  aiid  tends  to  I
eigual  (-(I'M)  at  the  temperature  of  absolute  seru  (that  is.  at  ^aTtf^l;  and  thi
MQ^UH-t-dtarU  I  f),  wlierea  is  a  constant  quantity  which  increaaes  with  the  com;
of  the  itHseouH  molecule  aiul  Q  iH  the  speciHc  heat  of  the  gos  under  a  conntant  pr

It  KB"fs  I'

„.Mg-.

-Ulal

:t|CliaplerIX.,  Notel?'''-!.  As  i
liquidH  IKS  wc  as  the  vapours  fonn(>il  liy  thcnil.  llie  s|iecilic  heat  always  rise-  wi
U-mlK-ratun.'.  Tlm^^  forbenzene  itcquakO-Atl- (I UOllt.  R.  Schiff  (l»H7)~>.liowe<1  ll
Viiriution  I'l  the  siwcific  heal  o(  many  orgaiiic  liquids  is  piop>rtioniiJ  In  the  chi
liuiiwraturi'  las  in  llie  ease  of  gases,  Bi-uonling  to  Le  L'hutelierl,  anil  reduceil
VII rill ti;>iis  inli>  di'iH'iidi'nce  with  their  coTiiiHndUon  and  absolute  buQiuK  point.  It
]irobub1e  that  the  theory  of  liquids  Kill  nnike  use  of  tbexe  Miinplc  relations  which
the  ■iinplicity  i<f  the  variation  of  tlie  siivcific  gravity  (Chapter  II.,  Note  ati,  ro!
uiid  other  properties  of  liquids  with  the  teinjH'rature.  They  are  all  expreHiwd
linear  function  of  the  temperature,  i(  -f  bt,  with  the  same  degree  of  praximiti'  as  the  pi
of  gases  is  expressed  by  tliu  equali<m}ii'  =  n/.

Ah  reganls  the  relation  between  the  K|>ri-ilie  heats  of  liquiils  (ur  of  M>lids)  ajid  <
vapours,  the  s|>ecific  heat  of  the  viiwnr  (and  also  of  the  solid)  is  always  less  tha
of  the  liquid.  For  example,  beniene  vapour  0  33,  liquid  iyW ;  chloroform  vapoo
liquid  (1-33 ;  steam  0175,  liquid  water  1-0.  But  the  complexity  of  the  relations
ing  i»  siwcitit  heal  is  -Hfii  troni  tiie  fai't  Ihat  the  specific  beat  of  ice ^0503
than  that  of  liquid  vfuter.  According  to  Segnault.  in  the  cabe  of  brouiine  the  i
heat  of  Ihe  vapour  ^  U'USii  nl  (l.'iO'-),  of  the  liquid-II'llIT  (at  30^),  and  of  wilid  b
-  O'UHi  (at  -l-'i  ).  The  sjiecilic  heat  of  solid  benzoic  acid  (aci'ording  to  experime
calculation,  lli'ss,  IHtW)  1>etween  0^  and  IIW  is  0H1,  and  of  liquid  beiiEoic  iici
One  of  the  problems  of  tlie  present  day  is  the  ei|>laiiiition  of  those  ciiinplei  re
which  eiii-t  lietween  the  composilioii  and  such  properties  as  specific  beat,  tat«n
expansion  by  heat,  compression,  internal  friction,  cohesion,  nnd  so  forth. Tb

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 589

complex  quantity  -including  not  only  the  increase  of  the  energy  of  a
substance  with  its  rise  in  temperature,  but  also  the  external  work  of
expansion' and the internal work accomplished in the molecules

only  be  connected  by  a  complete  theory  of  liquids,  which  may  now  soon  be  expected,
more  eKi>ecially  aK  man}*  sides  of  the  subject  have  already  been  partially  explained.

"^  According  to  the  above  reasons  the  quantity  of  heat,  Q,  required  to  raise  the  tem-
perature of  one  part  by  weight  of  a  Hubstance  by  one  degree  may  be  expressed  by  the
sum  Q  ~  K  +  6  +  D,  where  K  is  the  heat  acrtually  expended  in  heating  the  substance,  or
what  is  termed  the  absolute  specific  heat,  B  the  amount  of  heat  expended  in  the
internal  work  accomplished  with  the  rise  of  temperature,  and  D  the  amount  of  heat  ex-
pended in  external  work.  In  the  case  of  gases  the  last  quantity  may  be  easily  deter-
mined, knowing  their  coefficient  of  expansion,  which  is  approximately  =0'00368.  By
applying  to  this  case  the  same  argument  given  at  the  end  of  Note  11,  Chapter  I.,  we  find
that  one  cubic  metre  of  a  gas  heated  1^  produces  an  external  work  of  10333  x  0*00868,
r)r  3802  kilogrammetres,  on  which  88*02. '424  or  0*0897  heat  units  are  expended.  This  is
the  heat  expended  for  the  external  work  produced  by  one  cubic  metre  of  a  gas,  but  the
specific  heat  refers  to  units  of  weight,  and  therefore  it  is  necessary  in  order  to  know  D
to  reduce  the  above  quantity  to  a  unit  of  weight.  One  cubic  metre  of  hydrogen  at  0*^
and  700  mm.  pressure  weighs  0*0896  kilo,  a  gas  of  molecular  weight  M  has  a  density
M  2,  consequently  a  cubic  metre  weighs  (at  O'^  and  760  ram.)  0'0448M  kilo,  and  therefore
1  kilogram  of  the  gas  occupies  a  volume  1  0'044hM  cubic  metres,  and  hence  the  external
work  D  in  the  heating  of  1  kilo  of  the  given  gas  through  1'^  =  00890  00448M,  or  D  =  2'M.

Taking  the  magnitude  of  the  internal  work  B  for  gases  as  negligeable  if  permanent  gases
are  taken,  and  therefore  supposing  B  =  0,  we  find  the  specific  heat  of  gases  at  a  constant
pressure  Q  =  K  +  2  M,  where  K  is  the  specific  heat  at  a  constant  volume,  or  the  true
specific  heat,  and  M  the  molecular  weight.  Hence  K  =  Q  — 2  BI.  The  magnitude  of  the
specific  heat  Q  is  given  by  direct  experiment.  According  to  Regnault's  experiments,  for
oxygen  it  -  0*2175,  for  hydrogen  3*405,  for  nitr<^en  0*2488 ;  the  molecular  weights  of
these  gases  are  32,  2,  and  28,  and  therefore  for  oxygen  K  =  0*2175 -0*0625  =  0*1550,
for  hydrogen  K- 3*4050 -1*000  =  2*4050,  and  for  nitrogen  K  =  0*2438 -0*0714  =  01724.
These  true  specific  heats  of  elements  arc  in  inverse  proportion  to  their  atomic  weights —
tliat  is,  their  product  by  the  atomic  weight  is  a  constant  quantity.  In  fact,  for  oxygen
this  product  =  0155x16  =  2*48,  for  hydrogen  2*40,  for  nitrogen  0*7724x14  =  2*414,  and
therefore  if  A  stand  for  the  atomic  weight  we  obtain  the  expression  K  x  A  =  a  constant,
which  may  be  taken  as  2*45.  This  is  the  true  expression  of  Dulong  and  Petit's  law,
because  K  is  the  true  specific  heat  and  A  the  weight  of  the  atom.  It  should  be  remarked,
moreover,  that  the  product  of  the  observed  specific  heat  Q  into  A  is  also  a  constant
quantity  (for  oxygen  =  3*48,  for  hydrogen  =  3*40),  because  the  external  work  D  is  also
inversely  proportional  to  the  atomic  weight.

In  the  case  of  gases  we  distinguish  the  specific  lieat  at  a  constant  pressure  c'  (we
designated  this  quantity  above  by  Q),  and  at  a  constant  volume  c.  It  is  evident  that
the  relation  between  the  two  specific  heats,  k,  judging  from  the  above,  is  the  ratio  of  Q
to  K,  or  equal  to  the  ratio  of  2*45/1  +  2  to  2*45/i.  When  u-1  this  ratio  A*  =  1*8  ;  when
n  -  2,  A*  -  1*4,  when  n  =  3,  A*  =  1*3,  and  with  an  exceedingly  large  number  »,  of  atoms  in  the
molecule,  Ar  — 1.  That  is,  the  ratio  between  the  specific  heats  decreases  from  1*8  to  1*0
as  the  number  of  atoms,  ;i,  contained  in  the  molecule  increases.  Tliis  deduction  is
verified  to  a  certain  extent  by  direct  experiment.  For  such  gases  as  hydrogen,  oxygen,
nitrogen,  carbonic  oxide,  air,  and  others  in  which  n  =  2,  the  magnitude  of  A*  is  determined
by  methods  describe<l  in  works  on  physics  (for  example,  by  the  change  of  temperature
witli  an  alteration  of  pressure,  by  the  velocity  of  sound,  Arc.)  and  is  found  in  reality  to
be  nearly  1*4,  and  for  such  gases  as  carbonic  anhydride,  nitric  dioxide,  and  others  it  is
nearly  1*3.  Kundt  and  Warburg  (1H75),  by  means  of  the  approximate  method  mentioned
in  Note  29,  Chapter  VII.,  determined  k  for  mercurj-  vapour  when  «  =  1,  and  found  it  to
be  =l*ri7 —  that  is,  a  larger  quantity  than  for  air,  as  would  be  expecte<l  from  the  above.

It  may  be  admitted  that  the  true  atomic  heat  of  gases  -  2*43,  only  under  the  condition

PBtNCIPLBS  OF  CHEMISTRY

causing  ihein  to  dewimpoae  according  to  the  rise  of  t«ui|ien(c
therefore  it  is  iiii|M>BsibI«  to  expect  in  the  niaguitude  of  the  specifi
the  greut  simplicity  of  relation  to  composition  which  we  see,  foruu
in  the  ileneity  of  gnseous  suhstanccs.  Hence,  althoufjh  the  specifii
is  one  of  the  important  means  for  determining  the  ntotnicity  <
elements,  still  the  mainstay  for  a  true  judgment  of  atoniicity  il
given  by  Avogadro-Gerhardt's  law,  i.r.  this  other  method  can  a
ftcceeaory  or  prolimiuaiy,  and  when  po^ible  recourse  should  1
the  determination  of  the  vaiiour  density.

Among  the  bivalent  metals  the  first  place,  with  i
distribution  in  nature,  is  occupied  by  iiiat/ufsimii  and  co/omm
sodium  and  potassium  stand  first  amongst  the  univalent  metets,
relution  which  exists  between  the  atomic  weights  of  these  four  t
von£rms  the  nbove  comparison.  In  fact,  the  combining  w«ag
magnesium  is  equal  to  34,  and  of  calcium  40  ;  wliilst  the  ooaA
weights  of  sodium  and  {lotassium  are  23  and  39 — that  is,  the

Uut  they  ue  disUnt  from  n  llqniil  stale,  uiiil  du  nol  utiilergo  a  dierniis]  rtumgi
heated — thai  in,  when  no  interunl  warh  in  pn>davcd  iu  tbem  |B=n).  Xliflratoi
work  may  to  a  oertiun  extent  bejndged  bjthe  obwrved  specific  hoat.  Iliiu.for  is
for  clilurinefQ^ 0-19,  Regnsiilt ;  11:^1-89,  accordiDg  ta  Straker  and  M>uttn.»nd  tb
K  =  (HI9,  MK'=e-4),  the  aeamic  heat  (S-3)  ia  much  greater  than  for  other  kmh  coW
two  stonia  in  a  molwole,  and  £1  moat  lie  iiHHiiinod,  therefore,  thai  vbpii  it  is  hcatx
great  internal  work  in  accumpliBhed.

In  older  to  geDFralise  the  taclH  Lvneerning  lh«  upei^itii.*  heat  ut  kowm  voi  m
uiipoara  to  me  possible  to  accept  the  lollawing  general  propuntioD :  the  afomt
(tliat  is,  AQ  orQH/K,  *here  Uistlie  moleculiu  weight  and  n  the  number  of  UoloM
•tmalUr  (in  lolid*  it  attains  its  highest  value  6'S  and  in  ^ses  S'l},  Ihe  inore  compl
taoUculf  (i.e.  thf  grmtrr  the  luimhrT  |n)  of  iitomt  farming  il)andto  mueh  *mall
In  a  cirrlain  point  |in  similu  physicAl  itiitesj  the  imiitler  Ihn  tiuvix  aluntie  loftgK

'  Ab  an  eianple.  it  will  be  siilSuieiil  to  refer  U>  tbn  speuidi:  heat  of  nitngon  tod
NjOt,  which,  when  heated,  gratlually  paoses  into  NO] — that  ia,  cheminal  woA  tt  i
n  heat.  Speaking  generally,  spesifle  haot  ts  •  a«
i[nantit7,  in  which  it  is  dear  thSit  thermal  data  {for<insta]u«,  the  boat  of  rMeliaB|
•'annot  give  an  idea  eitlicr  ol  chemical  or  of  plijraical  cbaugea  indiTlittiallj.  bat  i
depend  on  an  anaoaation  al  the  o
to  f,  it  caunnt  bat  suffer  a  eheniical  change  (that  is,  the  state  ot  the  aluniia  in  tb*
culea  changes  more  or  lesa  in  one  iray  or  another)  il  disaociataon  set*  in  at  &  ta
,  Even  in  the  cose  ot  the  elements  whose  molecules  contain  oulj  ofw
hemi»i  change  is  ponible  with  a  rise  of  temperature,  beaiaiie  mum  I
in  cbemieaJ  reactions  than  that  quantity  which  participates  in  purely  pi
One  gram  of  hydrogen  (specific  heat  ^  3*4  at  a  constant  preaanre)  coaliid
temperature  of  abaolate  aero  will  evolve  altogether  ahoat  one  tbauund  uuito  ol
K  grama  ot  oxygen  half  this  amount,  whilst  in  combining  together  tlicy  evolve
rnmiatioii  ot  D  grama  of  water  more  than  thirty  times  as  much  heat.  Heuce  tfat
of  chemical  energy  tthal  is,  of  Uie  motion  of  the  atoms,  vortai,  or  otherl  is  nioob  a
than  Uie  pliybical  store  proper  to  the  molscnlee.  but  it  ia  thv  change  anoomplMli
Uie  former  that  is  the  i-anse  ot  chemioal  transformations.  Here  we  eridmUj  la«
those  Uuiila  of  etisling  knowledge  beyond  whiah  the  te(ii.'hiiig  of  acignm  doas  »
allow  ua  t>i  [wiui. Many  new  xcieiitific  discoveries  have  still  to  b«  miwle  fa

'•'-^

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC HEAT  OF  THE METALS 591

are  one  unit  less  than  the  former.^  They  all  belong  to  the  number  of
lifjht  metals,  as  they  have  but  a  small  specific  gravity,  in  which  respect
they  diflfer  from  the  ordinary,  generally  known  heavy,  or  ore,  metals  (for
instance,  iron,  copper,  silver,  and  lead),  which  are  distinguished  by  a
mucli  greater  specific  gravity.  There  is  no  doubt  that  their  low  specific
gravity  has  a  significance,  not  only  as  a  simple  point  of  distinction,  but
also  as  a  property  which  determines  the  fundamental  properties  of  these
metals.  Indeed,  all  the  light  metals  have  a  series  of  points  of  resem-
blance with  the  metals  of  the  alkalis  ;  thus  both  magnesium  and
calcium,  like  the  metals  of  the  alkalis,  decompose  water  (without  the
addition  of  acids),  although  not  so  easily  as  th^  latter  metals.  The
process  of  the  decomposition  is  essentially  one  and  the  same  ;  for
example,  Ca  -f  2H.2O  =  CaHjO^  -h  H.^ — that  is,  hydrogen  is  liberated
and  a  hydroxide  of  the  metal  formed.  These  hydroxides  are  bases
which  neutralise  nearly  all  acids.  However,  the  hydroxides  RH^Oj  of
calcium  and  magnesium  are  in  no  respect  so  energetic  as  the  hydroxides
of  the  true  metals  of  the  alkalis  ;  thus  when  heated  they  lose  water,
are  not  so  soluble,  develop  less  heat  with  acids,  and  form  various  salts,
which  are  le.ss  stable  and  more  easily  decomposed  by  heat  than  the
corresponding  salts  of  sodium  and  potassium.  Thus  calcium  and
magnesium  carbonates  easily  part  with  carbonic  anhydride  when
ignited  ;  the  nitrates  are  also  very  easily  decomposed  by  heat,  calcium
and  magnesium  oxides,  CaO  and  MgO,  being  left  behind.  The  chlorides
of  magnesium  and  calcium,  when  heated  with  water,  evolve  hydrogen
chloride,  forming  the  corresponding  hydroxides,  and  when  ignited  the
oxides  themselves.  All  these  points  are  evidence  of  a  weakening  of  the
alkaline  properties.

These  metals  have  been  termed  the  metals  of  the  alkalirie  earths,
because  they,  like  the  alkali  metals,  form  energetic  bases.  They  are
called  alkaline  earths  because  they  are  met  with  in  nature  in  a  state  of
combination,  forming  the  insoluble  mass  of  the  earth,  and  because  as
oxides,  RO,  they  themselves  have  an  earthy  appearance.  Not  a  few
salts  of  these  metals  are  known  which  are  insoluble  in  water,  whilst
the  corresponding  salts  of  the  alkali  metals  are  generally  soluble — for
example,  the  carbonates,  phosphates,  borates,  and  other  salts  of  the
alkaline  earth  metals  are  nearly  insoluble.  This  enables  us  to  separate
the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  from  the  metals  of  the  alkalis.  For
this  purpose  a  solution  of  ammonium  carbonate  is  added  to  a  mixed
solution  of  salts  of  both  kinds  of  metals,  when  by  a  double  decomposition
the  insoluble  carbonates  of  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  are  formed

^  As  if  NaH-Mg and  KH-Ca,  which  iH  in  accordance  with  their  valency. KH
includeH  two  monovalent  elements,  and  is  ft  bivalent  group  like  Ca.

592  PHISCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

and  fall  as  a.  precipitate,  whilst  the  metals  of  the  altcalis  rem
solution  :  RX,  +  NajCOj  =  RCO3  +  2NaX.

We  may  hei-e  remark  that  the  oxides  of  the  metals  of  the  al
earths  are  frequently  called  by  special  names  :  MgO  is  called  ma
or  bitter  earth  ;  OaO,  lime  ;  SrO,  strontia  ;  and  BaO,  baryta.

In  the  primary  rocks  the  oxides  of  calcium  aod  magnesiu
combined  with  silica,  sometimes  in  variable  i^uantititss,  so  that  ii
cases  the  lime  predominates  au(l  in  other  cases  thema^esium.  Tl
oxides,  being  analogous  to  each  other,  replace  each  other  in  eqai
({uantities.  The  various  forms  of  augite,  hornblende,  or  amphiM
of  simitar  minerals,  which  enter  into  the  composition  of  nearly  all
t-ontain  lime  and  magnesia  and  silica.  The  majority  of  the  pr
rocks  also  contain  alumina,  potash,  and  soda.  These  rocks,
the  action  of  water  (containing  carbonic  acid)  and  air,  give  uf
imd  magiieaia  to  the  water,  and  therefore  they  are  contaiaed
kinds  of  water.andespecially  insea-water.  The  carbotuiUs  CaCC
MgCOj,  fi'equently  met  with  in  nature,  art  loluble  in  an  exe
water  saturated  with  carbonie  aiiliydride,'*'  and  therefore  many  ni
waters  contain  these  salt»,  and  are  able  to  yield  them  when  evapo
However,  one  kilogram  of  water  saturated  with  (»rbonic  anhj
does  not  dissolve  mure  than  three  grams  of  calcium  carbonate,
gradually  expelling  the  carbonic  anhydride  from  such  water,  a
soluble  precipitate  of  calcium  carbonate  separates  out.  It  may
dently  he  stated  that  the  formation  of  the  very  widely  distrii
strata  of  calcium  and  magnesium  carbonates  was  of  this  nature,  be
these  strata  are  of  a  sedimentary  character^that  is,  such  as  1
be  exhibited  by  a  gradually  accumulating  deposit  on  the  botto
the  sea,  and,  moreover,  frequently  containing  the  remains  of  m
plants,  and  animals,  shells,  ttc.  It  is  very  probable  that  the  pre
of  thes<^  organisms  in  the  sea  has  played  the  chief  part  in  the
cipitation  of  the  carbonates  from  the  sea  water,  because  the  [
absorb  0<  Vj,  and  many  of  the  organisuis  CaCOj,  and  after  death
deposits  of  carbonate  of  lime  ;  for  instance,  chalk,  which  is  a
entirely  composed  of  the  minute  remains  of  the  calcareous  shiel
such  organisms.  These  deposits  of  calcium  and  magnesium  carbo
are  the  most  important  sources  of  these  metals.  Lime  generally
dominates,  beciiuse  it  is  present  in  rocks  and  running  water  in  gt
ijunntity  than  magnesia,  anil  in  this  cose  these  sedimentary  rock

'•  Sociiniu  ciiriKiiiiile  and  other  curlBHintes  of  tlit  (ilkHlii  \/;i\e  uid  Halts  which  h
Holiil'lc  tliHii  till!  nnrniiil;  here,  on  tlii-  coixtmry,  with  an  eiifnn  of  c&rbonic  knliydi
Mil  io  tunned  wliich  in  more  aniable  tliitn  t)ie  norinal.  but  tliiK  acid  aalb  ie  mor^  aa
tlinii  Kodiam  hfilmtten  carbonate,  NaHCOj.

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 593

termed  limestotie.  Some  common  flagstones  used  for  paving,  «fec.,  and
chalk  may  be  taken  as  examples  of  this  kind  of  formation.  Those
limestones  in  which  a  considerable  portion  of  the  calcium  is  replaced  by
magnesium  are  termed  dolomites.  The  dolomites  are  distinguished  by
their  hardness,  and  by  their  not  parting  with  the  whole  of  their  car-
bonic anhydride  so  easily  as  the  limestones  under  the  action  of  acids.
Dolomites  ^*  sometimes  contain  an  equal  numberof  molecules  of  calcium
carbonate  and  magnesium  carbonate,  and  they  also  sometimes  appear
in  a  crystalline  form,  which  is  easily  intelligible,  because  calcium  car-
bonate itself  is  exceedingly  common  in  this  form  in  nature,  and  is  then
known  as  calc  spar,  whilst  natural  crystalline  magnesium  carbonate  is
termed  t/iagnesite.  The  formation  of  the  crystalline  varieties  of  the
insoluble  carbonates  is  explained  by  the  possibility  of  a  slow  deposition
from  solutions  containing  carbonic  acid.  Besides  which  (Chapter  X.)
calcium  and  magnesium  sulphates  are  obtained  ivom  sea  water,  and
therefore  they  are  met  with  both  as  deposits  and  in  springs.  It  must
be  observed  that  magnesium  is  held  in  considerable  quantities  in
sea  water,  because  the  sulphate  and  chloride  of  magnesium  are  very
soluble  in  water,  whilst  calcium  sulphate  is  but  little  soluble,  and  is
used  in  the  formation  of  shells  ;  and  thei'efore  if  the  occurrence  of  con-
siderable deposits  of  magnesium  sulphate  cannot  be  expected  in  nature
still,  on  the  other  hand,  one  would  expect  (and  tiiey  do  actually  occur)
large  masses  of  calcium  sulphate  or  gypaum^  CaS04,2H.20.  Gypsum
sometimes  forms  strata  of  immense  size,  which  extend  over  many
hectometres — for  example,  in  Russia  on  the  Volga,  and  in  the  Donetz
and  Baltic  provinces.

Lime  and  magnesia  also,  but  in  much  smaller  quantities  (only  to
the  amount  of  several  fractions  of  a  per  cent,  and  rarely  more),  enter
into  the  composition  of  every  fertile  soil,  and  without  these  bases  the
soil  is  unable  to  support  vegetation.  Lime  is  particularly  important
in  this  respect,  and  its  presence  in  a  larger  quantity  generally  improves
the  harvest,  although  purely  calcareous  soils  are  as  a  rule  infertile.
For  this  reason  the  soil  is  fertilised  l)0th  with  lime  ^'^  itself  and  with

^^  The  formation  of  dolomite  may  be  explained,  if  only  we  imagine  that  a  solution  of
a  magneBiom  salt  acts  on  calcium  carbonate.  Magnosium  carbonate  may  be  formed
by  double  decompoKition,  and  it  mu»t  be  Hupposed  that  this  process  ceases  at  a  certain
limit  (Chapter  XII.),  when  we  shall  obtain  a  mixture  of  the  carbonates  of  calcium
and  magnesium.  Haitinger  heated  a  mixture  of  calcium  carbonate,  CaCOs,  with  a  solu-
tion of  an  equivalent  quantity  of  magnesium  sulphate,  MgS04,  in  a  closed  tube  at  200  ^
and  then  a  portion  of  the  magnesia  actually  i>aHsed  into  the  state  of  magnesium  car-
bonate, MgCOs,  and  a  portion  of  the  lime  was  converted  into  gypsum,  CaS04.  Lubavin
(1«»2)  showed  that  MgCO:,  is  more  soluble  than  CaCOs  in  salt  water,  which  is  of  some
significance  in  explaining  the  composition  of  sea  water.

*-  The  undoubted  action  of  lime  in  increasing  the  fertility  of  hoils — if  not  in  every

VOL.  I.  Q  Q

sriPI.ES  OF  CHEMISTRY ^^^^"

marl — that  is,  with  cUj  mixed  with  a,  certain  quantity  of  caleii
bonate,  strata  of  which  are  found  nearly  evervwhei-e.

From  the  soil  the  lime  and  magnesia  (in  a  smaller  quantit
into  the  suljatance  of  plants,  where  they  occur  as  salts.  C«
these  salts  separate  in  the  interior  of  plants  in  a  prystalline  for
example,  cnlciuiu  oxalate.  The  linie  occurring  in  plnnts  serves
source  for  the  formation  of  the  various  calcareous  secretions  wl
so  common  in  animalu  of  all  classes.  The  boae-s  of  the  highest
orders,  the  shells  of  mollusca,  the  coveringof  the  sea-urchin,  and
solid  secretions  of  sea  animals,  contain  calcium  salts  ;  oaiiielv,  th
m^nly  calcium  carbonate,  and  the  bones  mainly  calcium  pho
Certain  limestones  are  almost  entirely  formed  of  such  di
Odessa  is  situated  on  a  limestone  of  tins  kiud,  composed  of
Thus  magnesium  and  calcium  occur  throughout  the  entire  n
nature,  hut  calcium  predciminates.

As  lime  and  oingnesia  form  bases  which  are  tti  maDy  r
itiialogouB,  they  were  not  distinguished  from  each  other  for
time.  Magnesia  was  obtained  for  the  lirst  time  in  the  Mvet
century  from  Italy,  and  used  as  a  medicine  ;  and  it  was  only
last  century  that  Black.  Bergmann,  and  nthera  distinguished  mi
from  lime.

Metallic-  inagnp&ium  (and  calcium  also)  is  not  obtained  bv  h
magnesium  oxide  or  the  carbonate  with  charcoal,  as  the  alkali
are  obtained,'^  but  is  liberated  by  the  action  of  a  galranic  c
on  fused  magnesium  ohioride  (best  mixed  with  potassinin  chic
Davy  and  Bussy  obtained  metallic  magnesium  by  acting  on  tna^

OH,  at  all  erentH.  witli  oriliDarjr  enilh  wliicli  Iiktb  Iuk);  bwn  iinil*T  o

no  muuli  on  the  ne«d  of  plants  Tor  Uit>  liuu  itsolF  ny  au  tl

uhuiges  which  it  pruduceg  in  (hi-  soil,  bb  >  iiutiealu'lf  powerful  bass  iritioli  i

ftlteration  of  the  minentl  snd  organic  element!  of  the  noil.

>^  Sodium  uid  poliwBiam  ool;  deoompow  mngnwium  oiide  tX  t,  while  h«al  •
feebly,  prnlxibl;  lor  two  reBBOnii.  In  the  firot  place,  bwBDse  tlie  reuiion  X(-i'l
tops  more  heat  (nhont  140  tbou«uid  citloneB)  tliui  K,  4-0  or  K»,-i'0  (kbool  100  ll
caloneii) :  uid,  in  the  eMOnd  plsci-,  becauae  mBgneaja  is  not  fusible  M  Uw  Im
furnace  uid  cannot  act  on  tlie  diarcoal,  aoditun,  or  polaatinm — that  is,  it  ilo**  n
into  that  mobile  Mate  whicli  i<  neceeurjr  for  reection.  The  Ant  reaaan  tlmn
Hofficient  to  exi^in  the  abwiice  of  the  reaction  between  charcoal  and  ma^nUt,  I
iron  Mid  charcoal  in  cambinisg  with  oiygen  evolve  less  beat  than  aadium  or  pod
^t,  nevettheleu,  they  caa  diaplace  them.  With  respect  to  magneeinui  ohlorida
(in  aodiani  and  pntaminin,  nnt  onlybecaDBe  their  combination  with  ebloTin*  CToln
heal  than  the  combination  of  chlorine  and  magneaiom  (Mg  +  CI^  ^vm  ISO  aii4  N,
uhont  19S  thouuuid  calories),  bat  also  bet'BUU!  a  (nnion.  both  of  thi-  nia^niPHium  e
and  ol  the  douhle  ealt,  takes  place  under  the  action  of  heat.  It  ■■  pmbabla,  hi
IhaterereriwrBaciion  will  take  place.  A  reveme  reaction  might  probahlj  tw  npaet
Winkler  (1H90|  ehowed  that  Hg  redDCe*  the  oiidea  of  the  alkali  metal*  IChaptcr
Note  (9).

THE VALBKCr  AND  SPEClIflC  HEAT  OF  THE  MBTALS 595

chloride  with  the  vapours  oi  potassium.  At  the  pressnt  time(DeviI1e'3
process)  magnesium  Is  prepared  in  rather  considerable  quantities  hy  a
liiniilar  procoss,  only  the  potissiuni  is  replaced  by  sodium.  Anhydrous
tn^gnesiuin  chloride,  together  with  sodium  chloride  and  calcium  lluoride,
is  fused  in  a  close  crucible.  The  latter  substances  only  serve  to  facili-
tate the  formation  of  a  fusible  mass  before  and  after  the  reaction,  which
is  indispensable  in  order  to  prevent  the  access  and  action  of  air.  One
purl  of  finely  divided  sodium  to  five  parts  of  magnesium  chloride  is
thrown  into  the  strongly  heated  molten  mass,  and  after  stirring  the
reaction  proceeds  very  quickly,  and  magnesium  separates,  MgCI^  +  Na^
^  Mg  +  '2NaCI.  In  working  on  a  large  scale,  the  powdery  metallic
magnesium  \»  then  subjected  to  distillation  at  a  white  heat.  The  dis-
tillation of  the  magnesium  is  necessary,  because  the  undistilled  metal  is
not  homogeneous  "  and  burns  unevenly  :  the  metal  is  prepared  for  the
purpose  of  illumination.  Uagnesium  is  a  white  metal,  likp  silver  ;  it
is  not  soft  like  the  alkali  metals,  but  is,  on  the  contrary,  hard  like  the
majority  of  the  ordinary  metals.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that  it
melts  at  a  somewhat  high  temperature  —namely,  about  SOO" — and  boils
at  about  1000".  It  is  nialleahle  and  ductile,  like  the  generality  of
metals,  so  that  it  can  be  drawn  into  wires  and  rolled  into  ribbon  ;  itis
most  frequently  used  for  lighting  purposes  in  the  latter  form.  Unlike
the  alkali  metals,  magnesium  does  not  decompose  the  atmospheric
moisture  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  ho  tliat  it  is  almost  unacted  on
by  air  ;  it  is  not  even  acted  on  by  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature,
so  that  it  may  lie  washed  to  free  it  from  sodium  chloride.  Mngnesium
oidy  decomposes  wat«r  with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen  at  the  Iwiling
point  of  water,'"'  and  more  rapidly  at  still  higher  temperatures.  This
is  explained  by  the  fact  that  in  decomposing  water  magnesium  forms
an  insoluble  hydroxide,  MgH/1^,  which  covers  the  metal  and  hinders
the  further  action  of  the  water.  Magnesium  easily  displaces  hydn^n
from  acids,  foi-ming  magnesium  salts.  When  ignited  it  humg,  not  only
in  oxygen  but  in  air  (and  even  in  carbonic  aidiydridej,  forming  a  whit«
powder  of  magnesium  oxide,  or  magnesia  ;  in  burning  it  emits  n  white
and  exceedingly  bri/liant  light.  The  strength  of  this  light  naturally
depends  on  the  fact  that  magnesium  (24  parts  by  weight)  in  burning

(Devillu  und  Cftron),  MgjK-i — tlial  Ib,  ■  pmdaat  of  tubstitDCion  of  unmoiuii  vrhiuli  i<
diracU;  furmed  (as  is  sasilir  ihovu  by  eiperiment)  tihen  magne-iiam  is  heated  in  nilrogtui.
It  U  s  jrellowiidi  green  povder.  which  giyet  tmniaiii*  itnd  magneaia  with  wiiter,  and
eyuiogcn  when  h«t?d  with  urbonic  uihydhde.  PulikoOiky  (IBOS)  aboved  that  HgjK..
in  raitilf  focmed  and  is  tbb  sole  produi^t  wlwu  Mg  is  heftted  to  rednen  iu  a  cairenlotNIIj.
PcriMtly  pure  magneiimn  ma)'  be  obtained  bj  the  action  o(  a  galvanje  onmiiit.

'•  Hydrogen  pen>»ide  (WBlUieii)  diwolyp*  m»gne*iuni. The  reution  hu  not  bpi-n
inraatigated.

596  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Evolves  about  140  thonsand  heat  units,  and  that  the  product  t
bustion,  MgO,  is  infusible  by  heat ;  so  that  the  vapour  of  the  I
magnesium  contains  an  ignited  powder  of  non-volatile  and  ii
magnesia,  and  consequently  presents  all  the  conditions  for  tl
dnction  of  a  brilliant  light.  The  light  emitted  by  burning;  mag
contains  many  rays  which  act  chemically,  and  are  situated  in  th
and  ultra-violet  parts  of  the  spectrum.  For  this  reason  I
magnesium  may  be  employed  for  producing  photogr&pbic  image*

Owing  to  its  great  affinity  for  oxygen,  magnesium  rtdueei
metals  (zinc,  iron,  bismuth,  antimony,  cadmium,  tin,  lead,  copper,
and  others)  from  solutions  of  their  salts  at  the  ordinary  tempen
and  at  a  red  heat  finely  divided  mngnesium  takes  up  the  oxyge
^ica,  alumina,  boric  anhydride,  >i:c.  ;  so  that  silicon  and
elements  may  be  obtained  by  directly  heating  a  mixture  of  po'
silica  and  magnesium  in  an  infusible  gloss  tube.'^

The  affinity  of  magnesium  for  the  halogens  is  much  more
than  for  oxygen,''-'  as  is  at  once  evident  from  the  fact  that  a  »
of  iodine  acts  feebly  on  magnesium  \  still  magnesium  bums
vapours  of  iodine,  bromine,  and  chlorine.  The  character  of  magi
is  also  seen  in  the  fact  that  all  its  salts,  especially  In  the  pi
of  water,  are  decomposable  at  a  comparatively  moderate  te;
ture,  the  elements  of  the  acid  being  evolved,  and  the  magi
oxide,  which  is  non-volatile  and  unchangeable  by  beat,  bein
This  naturally  refers  to  those  acids  which  are  themsehes  vols
by  heat.  Even  magnesium  sulphate  is  completely  deconipoi
the  temperature  at  which  iron  melts,  oxide  of  magnesium  rem
behind. This decomposition of magnesium  salts  by  heat pi

'"  A  hpctiftl  ionn  of  Hp|mriitu»  ia  usfd  for  burning  magneaium. Il  jm  a  cIi

H'ound.  Tilt  wire  is  subjected  to  n  unilomi  unwinding  ajid  burning  an  Uie
routes,  niitl  in  tliia  mminvr  Mie  conibustiou  niay  continue  unitorm  for  a  certa
Till'  Haniv  is  ntUinett  in  special  luin|iii,  b;  causing  a  mixture  of  suid  and  Suely
mugncsiiim  ti>  fall  froiu  a  funnel- ii1iH|ied  reiiervoir  on  to  the  Hune.  In  pholograi
Ih'sI  til  blow  finvljr  divided  uingneMium  into  a  colourless  Ispirit  or  gas)  Hame,
iiiBtantsncous  photography  to  light  u  cartridRe  of  a  niiiture  of  magnesiuiu  and  ■
nt  iHitHHi-iiini  b)-  means  uf  ii  s\m\  from  a  RubmkorfTii  coil  (U.  HendeliielT.  1KH9).

■''  According  to  Ibc  obHen'Btinnn  ol  Haack,  Comnille,  Biittger,  anil  others,
duclioii  by  bent  nietitioned  further  on  was  iKiiiited  out  b;  Geutlier,  Phiimoii,  Pi

■s  TliiHactiou  of  metallic  magnesium  in  all  probabilit]- depends,  although  oulv|
(atf  Note  1»),  on  its  v.datility,  auil  on  the  fact  that,  in  combinmg  with  a  given  q'o,
oxygeii,  it  erolves  more  heat  than  aluniiniani,  nilicon.  pota«siam,  and  other  elem.

>■  Davy,  on  healing  mnpicsi'i  in  clilorine,  concluded  tliat  tliere  wae  a  coiupl.
atitution,  In-cnnKG  the  volume  of  tbe  oxygen  uno  half  the  volnmc  of  the  clilorii
iwoliille,  however,  that  owing  to  the  formation  of  chlorine  oiide  (Chapter  XI..  :
lliG  decompmiition  is  not  com],lele  and  ii-  limited  by  a  reveme  reaction.

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 597

much  more  easily  than  that  of  calcium  salts.  For  example,  mag-
nesium carlK)nate  is  totally  decomposed  at  170^,  magnesium  oxide
being  left  behind.  This  magnesia,  or  inagiiesium  oxide,  is  met  with
both  in  an  anhydrous  and  hydrated  state  in  nature  (the  anhydrous
magnesia  as  the  mineral  jfericlase,  MgO,  and  the  hydrated  magnesia
as  hrucite,  MgH^O.^).  Magnesia  is  a  well-known  medicine  (calcined
magnesia — magnesia  ttsta).  It  is  a  white,  extremely  fine,  and  very
voluminous  powder,  of  specific  gravity  3*4  ;  it  is  infusible  by  heat,  and
only  shrinks  or  shrivels  in  an  oxyhydrogen  flame.  After  long  contact
the  anhydrous  magnesia  combines  with  water,  although  very  slowly,
forming  the  hydroxide  Mg(HO).,,  which,  however,  parts  with  its
water  with  great  ease  when  heated  even  below  a  red  heat,  and  again
yields  anhydrous  magnesia.  This  hydroxide  is  obtained  directly  as
a  gelatinous  amorphous  substance  wlien  a  soluble  alkali  is  mixed  with
a  solution  of  any  magnesium  salt,  MgCl2  +  2KHO  =  Mg(HO)2-h2KCl.
This  decomposition  is  complete,  and  nearly  all  the  magnesium
passes  into  the  precipitate  ;  and  this  clearly  shows  the  almost  perfect
insolubility  of  magnesia  in  water.  Water  dissolves  a  scarcely  per-
ceptible quantity  of  magnesium  hydroxide — namely,  one  part  is  dis-
solved by  55,000  parts  of  water.  Such  a  solution,  however,  has
an  alkaline  reaction,  and  gives,  with  a  salt  of  phosphoric  acid,  a
precipitate  of  magnesium  phosphate,  which  is  still  more  insoluble.
Magnesia  is  not  only  dissolved  by  acids,  forming  salts,  but  it  also  dis-
places certain  other  bases — for  example,  ammonia  from  ammonium
salts  when  boiled  ;  and  the  hydroxide  also  absorbs  carbonic  anhy-
dride from  the  air.  The  magnesium  salts,  like  those  of  calcium,  potas-
sium, and  sodium,  are  colourless  if  they  are  formed  from  colourless
acids.  Those  which  are  soluble  have  a  bitter  taste,  whence  magnesia
has  l)een  termed  bitter -earth.  In  comparison  with  the  alkalis  magnesia
is  a  feeble  base,  inasmuch  as  it  forms  somewhat  unstable  salts,  easily
gives  basic  salts,  forms  acid  salts  with  difficulty,  and  is  able  to  give
double  salts  with  the  salts  of  the  alkalis,  which  facts  are  characteristic
of  feeble  bases,  as  we  shall  see  in  becoming  acquainted  with  the  diflferent
metals.

The  power  of  magnesium  salts  to  form  double  and  basic  salts  is^
very  frequently  shown  in  reactions,  and  is  specially  marked  as  re-
gards ammonium  salts.  If  saturated  solutions  of  magnesium  and
ammonium  sulphates  are  mixed  together,  a  crystalline  double  salt ,
Mg(NH,)2(S04)2,6H.20,2® is immediately precipitated. A strong

^  Even  a  Bolutioii  of  ammonium  chloride  gives  this  raU  with  magnesium  sulphate.;
Its  sp.  gr.  is  172;  100  parts  of  water  at  0^  dissolve  9,  at  20^  17*0  jMirts  of  the  anhydroua.
salt. At  about  130^  it  loses  all  its  water.

PRINCIPLES OF  fHE

Bolution  of  on li nary  ammonium  (.-arbonate  dissolve*  magtu
oxide  or  carbonate,  and  precipitates  crystals  of  a  double
Mg{NH,MC03).j,4H,0,  from  wbieh  water  extra^te  the  axama
carbonate.  With  an  excess  of  an  ammonium  saJt  the  double  Bait  j
into  solution,''  and  therefore  if  a  solution  contain  a  luagnesiua
and  an  excess  of  an  ammonium  salt — int  instance,  sal-ammon
then  sodium  carbonate  will  no  longer  prei-ipitate  macrDesium  carbo
A  mixture  of  solutions  of  tnagnesium  and  ammoDium  chloride
evaporntiDU  or  refrigeration,  gives  a  double  salt,  Mg(NH,)CIi,6B
The  salts  of  potassium,  like  those  of  ammonium,  are  able  to  entei
combination  with  the  magnesium  salts.''  For  instance,  the  di
salt,  MgKCl3,6H,0,  which  is  known  as  tarnallitf,"  and  occurs  ii
salt  mines  of  Stassfurt,  may  be  foniied  by  freezing  a  &sturat«d  sol'
of  potassium  chloride  with  an  excess  of  magnesium  chloride.  A
rated  solution  of  magnesium  sulphate  dissolves  potassium  sulphate
solid  magnesium  sulphate  is  soluble  in  a  saturate<I  solution  of  potas
sulphate.  A  double  salt,  K,Mg(SOj,,6H„0,  which  clotely  reaei
the  above-mentioned  auimonium  salt,  crystallises  from  these  solntk

"  ThU  in  ui  euniple  of  oquilibrium  aaid  of  the  inSuence  ol  bibjis  ;  the  double
deuompofled  by  wuter,  but  if  inatead  of  water  we  tikJte  n  ttolutiau  <if  (bat  iwiufale  part
is  [onoed  in  the  decompoBitioti  of  the  double  salt,  then  the  latter  dingo)  ns  ••  ■  ab

"  If  an  exoeaii  ot  unmonia  be  added  to  a  wilution  ol  magneaiutn  vhlnHdo,  on)
the  mngneBium  m  thrown  down  in  the  precipitate,  dMgCL  -•  3NH,.OH  ^  Kg
■i-M){.NH(as-i-NH,Cl.  A  Bolation  of  Hramoniam  chloride  nwcU  with  magnMUL,  an
ammonia  and  forming  a  Bolution  of  the  same  «alt,  MgO-*  BNM,C1  =  MgNH.CI,-

+aNH,.

AmanBthedaub1eHalteofaminomumuiclmitgue^Qtn,thephoiiphate,  HgNHjPO(,l
]■  almost  insoluble  in  water  {DOT  grain  ia  soluble  'm  ■  litreli  even  in  the  prwaa
ommuniiu  MBgneeia  is  very  fj^quently  precipitated  as  Ihia  sail  tmm  solutioni  in
it  in  held  by  aounoiiiuDi  Halts.  An  lime  is  not  retained  in  soluUoii  by  the  preasa
amtuuniain  aalts.  but  is  precipitated  neverthelesn  by  sodiam  cauhonalf,  &c.,  il  it
easy  to  separatti  calcium  from  magnesium  by  taking  advantage  of  tbeite  piopertieai

B  In  order  to  see  the  nature  and  caase  of  formation  of  double  HiJta.  it  ia  maS
(although  this  does  not  embrace  the  whole  essence  of  the  matter)  lo  musider  that  •
the  melola  at  such  KaltB  (for  iustance,  potassinm)  easily  gives  acid  seJts.  and  tlic
(in  Ihie  inntanoe,  mogiiesium)  basic  salts ;  the  properties  of  diatinctly  baaic  elemanl
dotniDato  in  the  former,  whilst  in  the  latter  these  propertios  are  enfeeUed.  an
satta  formed  by  them  bear  the  character  of  acids — for  example,  the  salt*  of  kltun
or  ma^esium  act  in  many  cases  tike  acids.  By  their  mutual  combioatiou  Hum
oppiisite  propertiea  of  the  suits  are  both  satisfied.

"  Camallite  haa  been  mentioned  in  Chapter  X.INote  4)  and  in  Chaptrr  XIII.  :
deposiU  also  contain  much  kainite.  KMgCllSO,l,SH,0  (ap.  gr.  2-18  :  lOU  |urts  at
disBolve  T9-e  parts  at  18°).  Tliia  double  salt  contains  two  metals  and  two  haloida.
(1889)  also  obtained  a  bromide  corresponding  to  earnallite.

"  The  component  parts  ol  certain  double  salts  diffuse  at  dillerent  ratea.  and  a
diflused  solution  contains  a  different  proportion  of  the  component  salts  thai
solution  taken  of  the  double  valt,  it  shows  that  such  Balls  ore  docomposed  b;  i
According  to  RUdorff,  the  double  salts,  like  camalUte,  HgK3(80t)^eH,0,  and  tha  ^
all  belong  to  this  order  (1SS8). But  auefa  saJte  as  Caitar  emetio,  the  double  —  rlalM

THE  VALENCY  ASD  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS

The  nearest  analogues  of  magnesium  are  able  to  give  exactly  similar
double  galls,  both  in  crystalline  form  (mODocliiiiu  system)  and  coiu-

donblfl  cyuudes  are  not  aepKfiUtfd  bj  diSDHion,  which  in  at]  probability  depends  both  on
the  reUtive  mts  oF  the  dillaBion  of  tiie  component  «Blta  and  on  the  il^Kne  of  affinity
Beting  between  Lhetn.  Thu»  complex  Btateii  of  equilibcinm  whieh  eii«t  between  wiLler,
theindividiulwlUMXiuiilNy.  uidtheiloable  wit  DCfXY.have  been  alreadjportially
Ukaiyved  (oh  will  Iw  shewn  hereafter)  in  tliat  cow  vhtsn  the  •yslem  ie  heteiogeneoas
(that  IB,  when  wmething  acparat«H  out  in  a  Holid  Mate  from  the  liquid  Bolation),  bat  in
the  caae  of  equilibria  in  a  bomogeneoiu  liquid  medium  (in  a  nolntionl  the  phenomenon  ia
not  BO  clear,  because  it  coDuemn  that  rery  theory  of  aulutian  which  cannol  yet  be
considered  u  eitabliihed  (Chapter  L,  Note  O.uid  others).  Ai>  rsgsnlii  tlie  hoterogensoDR
decompoaition  of  double  aalta,  it  hag  long  been  known  that  eavh  t»3U  ■■>  camallite  and
KtHg(BO,),  gtie  Dp  (he  more  soluble  ult  if  an  iuaufficieot  qnantity  of  water  for  Ibeii
complete  salalion  be  taken.  The  complete  saturation  of  100  parts  of  water  requireii  at
ff'  ll'l,  at  vy  SS.  and  at  00°  SO-3  puts  of  Uiv  latter  double  e^t  luihydruiu),  while  100
parti  of  water  diHsolve  ST  piirte  of  magueHium  luipbate  st  0°,  Bit  parts  at  20°,  and  55
parts  at  00°,  ol  the  anhydrona  salt  takea.  Of  all  the  BtateB  of  equilibliom  exhibited  bj
double  iiallii  the  mont  fully  investigated  as  yet  is  the  system  containing  water,  eodiom
solphute,  magnesium  sulphate,  and  tlieir  donble  salt,  NajHg(50,)-,  which  cryitallisea
with  4  and  fl  mol.  OHt.  The  first  crystoUo-hydnite,  MgN%l  90,l~,4H,p,  occurs  at
Btseiifurt,  and  ta  a  sedimentary  deposit  in  many  of  the  «alt  lakes  near  Aatrakluui,  snd  is
therefore  called  aitrakhanile.  The  gpectfic  gravity  of  the  monodiuic  priemn  of  thia  salt
isa'Sa.  Itthii«alt,inaflnelydividedstBte,bemiiHl  with  the neceauiuy  quantity  of  water
(Mwording  to  the  equation  MgMaitB04)„4H,0+  ltlHaO^Na,SO„iaH.:0-t  MgS04,7H,0},
the  mixture  wlidifles  like  plaster  of  Pari*  into  a  homogeaeons  uiaas  if  the  tcmperatan
be  belov  Xi"  iVan't  Hot!  und  Tan  Deventer.  1S86;  Bahhuis  Roouboom,  ISS?) ;  bat
if  the  temperature  be  above  this  traniilion-pnial  the  water  and  double  Kalt  di>
not  react  nn  each  other:  that  is,  they  do  not  solidify  or  give  a  mixture  of  aodinm
and  ntagnesioRi  sulphates.  If  a  mixture  (in  equivalent  quantitiet)  of  solutions  of  these
salts  be  evHporaled,  and  ciystals  of  astrakluuiite  and  of  the  individual  salta  capable  ol
proceeding  from  it  be  ndded  to  the  concentrated  solution  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  a
■Dpersatnrated  solution,  then  at  temperatureo  above  33'^  astiokhaiiitc  is  eiclnsively
formed  (this  is  the  method  ol  its  production!,  bnt  at  lower  temperatures  the  indiTldnal
(alts  ore  alone  produced.  If  equivalent  amounts  of  Glauber's  salt  and  raogneaiiun
sulphate  be  mixed  together  in  a  solid  slate,  there  is  no  change  at  temperatorea  below
S3°,  bnt  at  higher  tempentnres  astrakhanite  and  water  are  formed.  The  volume
occupied  by  Xa,SO„10H.iO  in  grams  =833/1  IB ^£90-6  cubic  centimetres  and  by
HgSOi,TH^  =  346  1*S8^11fl-4e.c.:  hence  their  mixture  iueigoiTalentqaan  titles  oouupies  a
volume  ol  SMl'U  ce.  The  volume  of  astrakhanite  =  831, 3^  =  ISO-fi  c.c,  and  the  volume  of
18U]0  ^  aSl  c.c,  hence  tlieir  snin  ^  B80'E  cc.  and  therefore  it  is  easy  to  follow  the  Inrmstiun
of  the  BstTakhanite  in  a  suitable  apparatus  (a  kind  of  thermometer  containing  oil  ami  a
powdered  uuxtnre  of  sodioui  and  magnesium  snlphatesl,  and  to  nee  by  the  variation  in
volmue  that  below  32°  it  remains  unchanged,  and  at  higlier  teniperatureii  proceeds  the
more  quickly  the  higher  the  temperature.  At  tbe  transition  temperature  the  iwlabilitj
of  astrakhanite  and  of  the  mixture  of  the  component  salta  is  one  and  the  some,  whilst  at
higher  temperatures  a  solution  which  is  saturated  for  a  mixture  ol  the  individual  salta
would  be  supersaturated  for  aatrakhanite,  and  at  lower  temperatures  tbe  solution  of
astrakhanite  will  be  supersaturated  for  the  component  salts,  as  faas  been  shown  with
especial  detail  by  Karsten,  Deacon,  and  others,  Kooxeboom  showed  that  there  are  two
limits  to  the  composition  of  the  solutions  which  can  exist  lor  a  donble  salt;  these  limits
are  respectively  obtained  by  dissolving  a  mixture  of  the  donble  salt  with  each  of  Its
component  simple  salts.  Van't  Uoft  demonstrated,  besides  this,  that  the  tendency
towards  the  formation  ol  double  (olts  has  a  distinct  iofiuence  on  the  progress  of  donble
decomposition,  for  at  temperatures  above  Bl°  the  mixture  9MgSO,.TH,0  +  SNaCI
pasHB  into  HRNa,(SO,MH,0  +  HgCl„CH,0  +  tH,0,  whilst  below  81°  there  is  not  thia

600  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

position ;  they,  like  this  salt  (see  Chapter  XV.),  are  easily  able  (at  140')
to  part  with  all  their  water  of  crystallisation,  and  correspond  with
the  salts  of  sulphuric  acid,  whose  type  may  be  taken  as  mn^n^sivm
sulphate^  MgSC)4.^^  It  occurs  at  Stassfurt  as  kieserite,  MgSO4,H,0,
and  generally  separates  from  solutions  as  a  heptahydrated  salt,
MgS04,7H20,  and  from  supersaturated  solutions  as  a  hexahydrat«d
salt,  MgSOjjGHgO  ;  at  temperatures  below  0°  it  crystallises  out  as  a
dodecahyd rated  salt,  MgS04,12H20,  and  a  solution  of  the  com-
position MgSC>,,2H20  solidifies  completely  at  —5®.*^ Thus  between

doable  decoiiii>ositioii,  but  it  proceeds  in  the  opposite  direction,  as  may  be  demonMrate^
by  the  above-described  methods.  Van  der  Heyd  obtained  a  potassium  a!»trakhAnn<e,
K.2S04MgSO|,4H.jO,  from  solutions  of  the  component  salts  at  100°.

From  these  experiments  on  double  salts  we  see  that  there  is  as  close  a  dependence
between  the  temperature  and  the  formation  of  substances  as  there  is  betwet* n  th<r
temperature  and  a  change  of  state.  It  is  a  case  of  Deville's  principles  of  dis.^<viation.
extended  in  the  direction  of  the  passage  of  a  solid  into  a  liquid.  On  the  oiher
hand,  we  see  here  how  essential  a  rdle  water  plays  in  the  formation  of  coni|ioandii>.
and  how  the  afhnity  for  water  of  crystallisation  is  essentially  analosou<i>  to  thiie
afifinity  between  salts,  and  hence  also  to  the  affinity  of  acids  for  bases,  because  tl«"
formation  of  double  salts  does  not  differ  in  any  essential  point  (except  the  de^rree  of
affinity — that  is,  from  a  quantitative  aspect)  from  the  formation  of  salts  themselves*.
When  sodium  hydroxide  with  nitric  acid  gives  sodium  nitrate  and  water  the  plieaomen^m
is  essentially  the  same  as  in  the  formation  of  astrakhanite  from  the  salts  Na.>SO4.10H.O
and  MgS04,7H20. Water  is  disengaged  in  both  cases,  and  hence  the  volumes  are  allt^red.

*'•  This  salt,  and  esi>ecially  its  crystallo-hydrate  with  TH^O,  is  generally  known  as
Epsom  salts.  It  has  long  been  used  as  a  purgative.  It  is  easily  obtained  from  nia^nesiA
and  sulphuric  acid,  and  it  separates  on  the  evaporation  of  sea  water  and  of  many  sialine
springs.  When  carbonic  anhydride  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on
magnesite,  magnesium  sulphate  remains  in  solution.  When  dolomite — that  in.  a  mixture
of  magnesium  and  calcium  carbonates — is  subjected  to  the  action  of  a  solution  of  hvdrt>-
chloric  acid  until  about  half  of  the  salt  remains,  the  calcium  carbonate  is  mostlv  dis-
solved and  magnesium  carbonate  is  left,  which  by  treatment  with  sulphuric  acid  give-*  a
solution  of  niagnt':>iuni  sulphate.

-'  The  anhydrous  wilt,  MgSOj  (sp.  gr.  2-61),  attracts  moisture  (7  mol.  H.»0)  fn»m
moist  air;  when  heated  in  steam  or  hydrogen  chloride  it  gives  sulphuric  acid,  and  when
heated  with  carbon  it  is  decomposed  according  to  the  equation  2MgS04  -f  C  ~  2S0.2  +  CO>
+  2MgO.  The  nionohydrated  salt  (kieserite),  MgSO^.H.p  (sp.  gr.  2-r>(i),  dissolves  in
water  with  difficulty  ;  it  is  formed  by  heating  the  other  crystallo- hydrates  to  135".
The  hexahydrated  salt  is  dimori)hous.  If  a  solution,  saturated  at  the  l>oiliiig. point,
l)e  prepared,  and  cooled  without  access  of  crystals  of  the  heptahydrate<1  salt,  then
MgSO|,6HjO  crystallises  out  in  vwnoch'iiic  prisms  (Loewel,  Marignac),  which  are  quite
as  unstable  as  the  salt,  Na2S04,7HoO ;  but  if  prismatic  crjstals  of  the  cubic  svstem
of  the  cop|>er-nickel  salts  of  the  conq^sition  MS04,6H20  be  added,  then  crystals  of
MgSO4,0H  ,0  are  deposited  on  them  as  prisms  of  the  cubic  system  (Lecoq  de  Boi^baa-
dran).  The  connnon  crystallo-hydnite,  MgSO, ,711.20,  Epsom  salts,  l)elong8  to  the  rhoinhic
system,  and  is  obtained  by  crystallisation  below  80°.  Its  specific  gravity  is  1*69.  In  s
vacuum,  or  at  100  ,  it  loses  nH^O,  at  132°  CH.2O,  and  at  210°  all  the  7H.2O  (Crraham).  If
crystals  of  ferrous  or  cobaltic  sulphate  be  placed  in  a  saturated  solution,  hexagonal
crystals  of  the  heptahydrated  salt  are  formed  (Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran) ;  they  present  uv
unstable  state  of  e(juilibrium,  and  soon  l>ecome  cloudy,  probably  owing  to  their  tran»>
formation  into  the  more  stable  common  form.  Fritzsche,  by  cooling  saturated  solutions
below  0°,  obtaine«l  a  mixture  of  cr>'stals  of  ice  and  of  a  dodecahydratftd  salt»  which  easilr

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 601

water  and  magnesium  sulphate  there  may  exist  several  definite  and
more  or  less  stable  degrees  of  equilibrium  ;  the  double  salt
MgS04K2SO^,6H.20  may  be  regarded  as  one  of  these  equilibrated
systems,  the  more  so  since  it  contains  GH.^O,  whilst  MgS04  forms  its
most  stable  system  with  7H.2O,  and  the  double  salt  may  be  considered
as  this  crystallo-hydrate  in  which  one  molecule  of  water  is  replaced
by  the  molecule  K.^SOj.^**

Tlte  power  of foinni rig  bamc  salts  is  a  very  remarkable  peculiarity
of  magnesia  and  other  feeble  bases,  and  especially  of  those  corre-
sponding with  polyvalent  metals.  The  very  powerful  bases  corre-
sponding with  univalent  metals — like  potassium  and  sodium do  not

fonn  basic  salts,  and,  indeed,  are  more  prone  to  give  acid  salts,  whilst,
magnesium  easily  and  frequently  forms  basic  salts,  especially  with  feeble
acids,  although  there  are  some  oxides — as,  for  example,  copper  and
lead  oxides — which  still  more  frequently  give  basic  salts.  If  a  cold
solution  of  magnesium  sulphate  be  mixed  with  a  solution  of  sodium
carbonate  there is  formed a gelatinous precipitate  of  a  basic  salt,

split  up  at  temperatures  above  U^.  Giitlirio  showe<l  that  dilute  solutiouH  of  magnesium
Kulphate^  wlien  refrigerated,  se^Mrate  ice  until  the  Kolution  attains  a  composition
M<;S04,24H20,  which  will  completely  freeze  into  a  crj'stallo-hydrate  at  —5*8'^.  Acconling
to  Coppet  and  Riidorff,  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice  falls  by  0*078^  for  every
jwrt  by  weight  of  the  heptahydrated  salt  per  100  of  water.  This  figure  gives  (Chapter  I.,
Note  49)  1-1  for  both  the  heptaliydrated  and  the  anhydrous  salt,  from  which  it  is  e\ndeiit
that  it  is  impossible  to  judge  the  stut«  of  combination  in  which  a  dissolved  substance
ocours  by  the  temperature  of  the  formation  of  ice.

The  solubility  of  the  different  crystallo-hydrates  of  magpiesiuin  sulphate,  according  to
Loewel,  also  varies,  like  those  of  sodium  sulphate  or  carbonate  [see  Chapti*r  XII.,  Notes
7  and  18).  At  0°  100  parts  of  water  dissolves  40*75  MgS04  in  the  presence  of  the  hexa-
hyd rated  salt,  84*67  MgSOi  in  the  presence  of  the  hexagonal  heptahydrated  salt,  and
only  26  |>artR  of  MgS04  in  the  presence  of  the  ordinary  heptahydrated  salt— tliat  is,
solutions  giving  the  remaining  cryatallo-hj'drates  will  be  supersaturated  for  the  ordinary
heptahydrated  salt.

All  this  shows  how  many  diverse  aspects  of  more  or  less  stable  equilibria  may  exist
between  water  and  a  substance  dissolved  in  it ;  this  lias  already  been  enlarged  on  in
Chapter  I.

Carefully  purified  magnesium  sulphate  in  its  acjuoous  solution  gives,  according  to
StcherbakofF,  an  alkaline  reaction  with  litmus,  and  an  acid  reaction  with  phenol-
phthalein.

The  specific  gravity  of  solutions  of  certain  salts  of  magnesium  and  calcium  reduced
to  15^  4 '  (see  my  work  cited.  Chapter  I.,  Note  19),  are,  if  water  at  4°  - 10,000,

MgS04  :  «  -  9,992  4  99*89/?  >■  0*568p»
MgCL  :  «  =  9,992 +  81-81y>  +  0*872p»
CaCl. :  «- 9,992  + 80*24/) +  0*476/>»

*  Graham  even  distinguished  the  last  equivalent  of  the  water  of  crystallisation  oF'
the  heptahydrated  salt  as  that  which  is  replaced  by  other  salts,  pointing  out  that  double
salts  like  MgK2(S04^  .,BH  .O  lose  all  their  water  at  135'^,  whilst  MgS04,7H.,0  only  parts
with  6H.2O.

I

PRINCIPLES OF  CJIEM

Mg(HO}„4MgC03/JH]0  ;  bat  all  the  magnesia  is  not  precipitat«d  i
this  case,  as  &  portion  of  it  reitiains  ia  solution  as  an  acid  double  s)
If  sodium  carbonate  Ije  added  to  a. boiling solutiou of mi
sulphate  a  precipitate  of  a  still  more  basic  salt  is formed,
+  4Na,C03  +  4H,0  =  4NajS0,  +  CO,  +  Mg(OH)„3MgCO„,
This  basic  salt  forms  the  ordinary  drug  itmgnc»ia  {magtiexia  al
the  form  of  light  porous  lumps. Other  basic  salts  are  formed  i
certain  moditications  of  temperature  and  conditions  of  deconip
But the luirmitl  saJl, MgCO^,  which  occurs  in  nature  as  ma^eatte
in the form of  rhombohedra of  specific gravity 3"056, catuiot b»
obtained  by  such  a  method  of  pre«ipitation. In  fact,  the  formation  at
the  diffei-eot  basic  salts  shows  the  power  of  water  to  decoropoae  the
normal  salt. It  is  possible,  however,  to  obtain  this  snlt Itotb  in  an
anhydrous  and  hydrated  state. A  sijlution  of  magnesium  carbooAte  to
water  containing  carbonic  acid  in  taken  for  this  purpose. The  reason
for  this  is  easily  understood — carbonic  anhydride  is  one  of  the  pro-
ducts of  the  decomposition  of  magnesium  carbonate  in  the  pre«enoe  of
water. If  this  solution  be  left  to  evaporate  spontaneously  the  oomwl
salt  separates  in  a  hyclnited  fonn,  but  in  the  evaporation  of  a  faeNUMl
solutiou,  through  which  a  stream  of  carbonic  anhydride  ia  paaaed,  the
anhydrous  salt  is  formed  as  a  crystalline  mass,  which  reniiiius  (maltend  m
in  the  air,  like  the  natural  mineral.'^" The  decomp(»injg  iuflnence  oBH
water  on  the  salts  of  magnesium,  which  is  directly  dependent  od  thifl
feeble  basic  properties  of  magnesia,'"  is  most  clearly  seen  iu  inoffnts^iHtH  ■
chloride,  MgCI^. This  salt  is  contained^'  in  the  last  mother- liquors  of
the  evajioration  of  sea-water. On  cooling  a  sufficiently  conceDtntl«d
solution,  the  cryatallo- hydrate,  MgCl.j,tiHjO,  separates  ;  **  but  if  i

"  The  crfiLnlliue  forni  nf  the  anhjdrans  ult  obt
u  Ibat  of  the  natnraJ  salt. The  lonnec  eiybs  rhooibohBdrii,  like  Uiose  it
cubonate  a]ip(Aru  as  csle  Epor,  wliilst  Uie  nati
IhoBv  sometimex  preMntei)  by  the  aiuiio  cnrbunate  bh  snigonite,  uthivh  will  aluiTtlyH
deu;Hb«d.

^  HagneHium  Buli>hitti^  enUrrs  intu  certain  roactiona  which  ale  propei  to  salpliBI
•cid  itself  ThuK,  for  iuatiuicv,  it  a  ciiFefiiUy  prppu^  mixture  of  equivaleol  qiuuititil
o£  hj3rated  magupBinm  sulphute  and  nodimn  t-moride  be  heated  to  redne«i,  t"
tion  of  hydrachlDric  ai'id  it  observed  jail  bb  iu  the  actioii  ol  sulphuric  aoid  aa
suit,  MgSOt  -rSNaCl  +  H]0  =  Ne.,804-l-H^-^  SHCl.  Usgnisinni  Bolphatc  .
similar  manner  on  nitral«B,  with  the  evolution  of  nitric  acid.  A  uiiitare  o:
GcmmoD  unit  and  manganeao  peroxide  |[iveB  chlorine.  Sulphuric  acid  is  h
1  BUlphalo  iu  galvKDic  batterieB-

n  which  a

Meidinger  battery. In  tl
uioiJarity  of  the  reimi

above-mentioned  n

I  of  acidB  and  aalts,  enpeoially  of  »ilt«  which  ct

«-watei  contajna  many  saltB,  MCI  and  UgX^  it  followe.  acootding  4o  t
thoUet'a  teaching,  that  HgCl.j  in  ulao  present.

~ >■  the  cryBUllu-hydiateB  of  the  Baits  of  sodium  often  contain  lOUtO,  ■
ktlie  Mlta  ol  uiagneainui  contain  eH,0.

further  heat«d  (above  10G°)  to  remove  the  wat«r,  then  liyilrochloiic
acid  passes  otf  together  with  the  Sutter,  so  that  there  ultiiuately  remains
magnesia  with  a  small  quantity  of  magoeBiuiii  chloride.''  From  what
has  been  said  it  is  evident  that  anhydrous  luugneaiuni  chloride  cannot
be  ohtainetl  by  simple  evaporution.  But  if  aal'timmoniiLC  or  SodiuDt
chloridt;  be  added  to  a  solution  of  magnesium  chloride,  then  the  evolu-
tion of  liydrochloric  acid  does  not  take  place,  and  after  complete
evaporation  the  residue  is  perfectly  Koluble  in  water.  This  renders  it
possible  to  obtain  anhydrous  magnesium  chloride  from  its  itqueous
eotution.  Indeed  the  mixture  with  sal-ammoniac  (in  excess)  may  be
drie<l  (the  residue  consists  of  an  anhydrous  double  salt,  MgClj,'2NHjCl)
and  then  ignited  (JGO°),  when  the  sal  Ammoniac  is  converted  into
vapour  and  a  fused  mass  of  anhydrous  magnesium  chloride  remains
behind.  The  anhydrous  chloride  evolves  a  very  coDsiderable  amount  of
heat  on  the  addition  of  water,  which  shows  the  great  affinity  the  salt
has  for  water.^  Anhydrous  magnesium  chluride  is  not  only  obtained
by  the  above  method,  but  is  also  formed  by  the  direct  combination  of
chlorine  and  magnesium,  and  by  the  action  of  chlorine  on  magnesium
oxide,  oxygen  being  evolved  ;  this  proceeds  still  more  easily  iy  lieating
vuufjiesia  icilii  charcoal  in  a  stream  o/'  chlorine,  when  the  charcoal  serves
to  take  up  the  oxygen.  This  latter  method  is  also  employed  for  the  pre-
paration of  chlorides  which  are  formed  in  an  anhydrous  condition  with
still  gre-aterdifficultythan  magnesium  chloride.  Anhydrous  mat,'ne3ium
chloride  forms  a  colourless,  transparent  mass,  composed  of  flexible
crystalline  plates  of  a  pearly  lustif.  It  fusef^  at  a  low  i-eil  heat  (708°)
into  a  colourless  liquid,  remains  unchanged  in  a  dry  stale,  but  under
the  action  of  moisture  is  partially  decomposed  even  at  the  ordinary
temperature,  with  formation  of  hydrochloric  aoJd.  When  heated  in  the
presence  of  oxygen  (air)  it  gives  chlorine  and  the  basic  salt,  which

"  Tbia  decomposition  ii  most  nimply  dcfiocd  its  thvresultofthetworevenw  reactions,
MgCli  '  H.jO  ^  HgO  +  SHCl  uid  MgO  ~  UICl  =  MgCl,  f  H,0,  or  as  a  distribution
between  0  uid  CL,  on  the  one  fasnd  and  Bj  anA  Hg  on  the  other.  rWith  O,  U^agires
Chlorioe,  ire  Chapter  X.,  Note  SS.  uid  Chnptor  II.,  Note  3">  and  others,  where  the
' r  that,  according  to

B  then  deK
I  converts  the  i
,s  the  mBgnaeium  chloride  ir

ol  MgCl,  I
Berthollet's  doctrine,  the  mass  of  the  hjdrochlor
into  chloride,  and  the  mass  of  the  vater  convert

The  eryslaUo-hjdrate,  HgCI„eU.jO,  forms  the  limit  of  the  Tevenibtlily.
mediate  state  ol  equilibrium  may  ciist  in  the  form  of  basic  ealta.  On  mixing  ignited
magnesia  with  a  solution  of  magnesium  chloride  of  specific  gravity  about  1*3,  a  solid
mass  is  obUined  which  is  scsrcely  decomposed  by  water  at  the  ordinary  temperaliire
(*M  Chapter  XVI.,  Note  1).  A  similar  means  is  employed  lor  cementing  sawdust  ii.h)
a  solid  mass,  called  oylolite,  nued  for  flooring,  *c.

We  may  remark  that  MgBri  cry^Ulliaes  not  only  witli  OH,0  Itempemlure  ol  fusion
163° ).  but  alw  with  10H,O  Iteniperatnre  of  tusion  -i- 13°.  (ormed  at  -  IS". PanGluS.  iap4).

"  Acoording  to  Tbomsen,  the  combination  ol  MgCl,  with  flH,0  evolves  88,000  calories,
•ud  its  solDlioD  in  an  oiceu  ol  water  MMO-

604  PKINCIPLES  OF  CHE3IISTRY

is  formed  with  even  greater  facility  under  the  action  of  heat  in  the
presence  of  steam,  when  HCl  is  formed,  according  to  the  equation
2MgCl2  +  H,0  =  MgOMgCLi  +  2HCL3*  Ws

Calcium  (or  the  metal  of  lime)  and  its  compounds  in  many  respects
present  a  great  resemblance  to  magnesium  compounds,  but  are  also
clearly  distinguished  from  them  by  many  properties.^*  In  general,
calcium  stands  to  magnesium  in  the  same  relation  as  potassium  occupies
in  respect  to  sodium.  Davy  obtained  metallic  calcium,  like  potassium,
as  an  amalgam  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current ;  hut  neither
charcoal  nor  iron  decomposes  calcium  oxide,  and  even  sodium  decom-
poses calcium  chloride  ^^  with  difficulty.  But  a  galvanic  current  easily
decomposes  calcium  chloride,  and  metallic  sodium  somewhat  easily
decomposes  calcium  iodide  when  heated.  As  in  the  case  of  hydrogen,
potassium,  and  magnesium,  the  affinity  of  iodine  for  calcium  is  feebler
than  that  of  chlorine  (and  oxygen),  and  therefore  it  is  not  surprisin<^
that  calcium  iodide  may  be  subjected  to  that  decomposition,  which  the
chloride  and  oxide  undergo  with  difficulty.^"  Metallic  calcium  is  of  a
yellow  colour,  and  has  a  considerable  lustre,  which  it  preserves  in
dry  air.  Its  specific  gravity  is  1*58.  Calcium  is  distinguished  by
its  great  ductility  ;  it  melts  at  a  red  heat  and  then  burns  in  the  air
with  a  very  brilliant  flame  ;  the  brilliancy  is  due  to  the  formation  of
finely  divided  infusible  calcium  oxide.  Judging  from  the  fact  that
calcium  in  l)urning  gives  a  very  large  flame,  it  is  probable that  this

.">»  hu  H(.'nce  MgClj  may  be  employed  for  the  preparation  of  chlorine  and  hydrtx'hloric
a<'id  (Chapters  X.  and  XI.).  In  general  magnesium  chloride,  which  is  obtained  in  large
quantities  from  sea  water  and  Stassfurt  camallite,  may  find  numerous  practical  uses,

•"•^  Tliere  are  many  other  methoils  of  separating  calcium  from  magnesium  besides  that
mentioned  above  (Note  22).  Among  them  it  will  be  sufllicient  to  mention  the  behaviour
of  these  bases  towards  a  solution  of  sugar;  hydrated  lime  is  exceedingly  soluble  in  an
aqueous  soinf ion  o/«?/^r/r,  whilst  magnesia  is  but  little  soluble.  All  the  lime  may  be
extracted  from  dolomite  by  burning  it,  slaking  the  mixture  of  oxides  thus  obttiined.  and
adding  a  10  p.c.  solution  of  sugar.  Carbonic  anhydride  precix>itates  calcium  carb<^]iate
from  this  solution.  The  addition  of  sugar  (molasses)  to  the  lime  used  for  building
purposes  powerfully  increases  the  binding  iwwer  of  the  mortar,  as  I  have  myself  found.
I  have  been  told  that  in  the  East  (India,  Japan)  the  addition  of  sugar  to  cement  lias  long
been  practised.

'"'  Moreover  Caron  obtained  an  alloy  of  calcium  and  zinc  by  fusing  calcium  cliloride
with  zinc  and  &<Klium.  The  zinc  distilled  from  this  alloy  at  a  white  heat,  leaving^  calcium
behind  (Note  .KM.

5^  Calcium  iodidt?  may  be  prepared  by  saturating  lime  with  hydriodic  acid.  It  is  a  very
soluble  salt  (at  20'  one  part  of  the  salt  requires  049  part  and  at  43°  0*85  part  of  water
for  solution),  is  deli<iuescent  in  the  air,  and  resembles  calciimi  chloride  in  many  respects.
It  changes  but  little  when  evaporated,  and  like  calcium  chloride  fuses  when  heatecl,  and
therefore  all  the  water  may  be  driven  off  by  heat.  If  anhydrous  calcium  iodide  be  heated
with  an  equivalent  quantity  of  sodium  in  a  closeh*  covered  iron  crucible,  sodium  iodide
and  metallic  calcium  are  fonned  (Lies-Bodart).  Dumas  advises  carrying  on  this
reaction  in  a  closed  space  under  pressure.

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 605

metal  is  volatile.  Calcium  decomposes  water  at  the  ordinary  tern-
pei-ature,  and  is  oxidised  in  moist  air,  but  not  so  rapidly  as  sodium.
In  burning,  it  gives  its  oxide  or  litne,  CaO,  a  substance  which  is
familiar  to  every  one,  and  of  which  we  have  already  frequently  had
occasion  to  speak.  This  oxide  is  not  met  with  in  nature  in  a  free
state,  because  it  is  an  energetic  base  which  everywhere  encounters  acid
substances  forming  salts  with  them.  It  is  generally  combined  with
silica,  or  occurs  as  calcium  carbonate  or  sulphate.  The  carbonate
and  nitrate  are  decomposed,  at  a  red  heat,  with  the  formation  of  lime^
As  a  rule,  the  carbonate,  which  is  so  frequently  met  with  in  nature,
serves  as  the  source  of  the  calcium  oxide,  both  commercial  and  pure.
When  heated,  calcium  carbonate  dissociates  :  CaCOasCaO  +  COj.
In  practice  the  decomposition  is  conducted  at  a  bright  rod  heat,  in  the
presence  of  steam,  or  a  current  of  a  foreign  gas,  in  heaps  or  in  special
kilns.^®

Calcium  oxide — that  is,  quicklime — is  a substance  (sp.  gr.  3*15)

•'*"*  Kilns  which  act  either  iiiteniiittently  or  continuously  are  built  for  this  puri)08o.
Those  of  the  first  kind  are  filled  with  alternate  layers  of  fuel  and  limestone;  tlie
fuel  is  lighted,  and  the  heat  developed  by  its  combustion  serves  for  decomposing  the
limestone.  When  the  process  is  completed  the  kiln  is  allowed  to  cool  somewhat,  the  lime
raked  out,  and  the  same  process  repeated.  In  the  continuously  acting  furnaces,  con-
structed like  that  shown  in  fig.  78,  the  kiln  itself  only  conttiins  limestone,  and  there  are
lateral  hearths  for  burning  the  fuel,  whose  flame  passes  througli  the  limestone  and
serves  for  its  decomposition.  Such  furnaces  are  able  to  work  continuously,  because  the
unburn t  limestone  may  be  charged  from  above  and  tlie  burnt  lime  raked  out  from  bi*low.
It  is  not  every  limestone  that  is  suitable  for  the  preparation  of  lime,  because  many
contain  impurities,  principally  clay,  dolomite,  and  sand.  Such  limestones  when  burnt
either  fuse  partially  or  give  an  impure  lime,  called  poor  lime  in  distinction  from  that
obtained  from  purer  limestone,  which  is  called  rich  lime.  The  latter  kind  is  charac-
terised by  its  disintegrating  into  a  fine  powder  when  treated  with  water,  and  ia
suitable  for  the  majority  of  uses  to  which  lime  is  applied,  and  for  which  the  poor  lime
is  sometimes  quite  unfit.  However,  certain  kinds  of  i)oor  lime  (as  we  shall  see  in
Chapter  XVIIL,  Note  25)  are  used  in  the  preparation  of  hydraulic  cements,  which
solidify  into  a  hard  mass  under  water.

In  order  to  obtain  perfectly  pure  lime  it  is  necessary  to  take  the  purest  possible
materials.  In  the  laboratory,  marble  or  shells  are  used  for  this  purpose  as  a  pure  form
of  calcium  carbonate.  They  are  first  burnt  in  a  furnace,  then  put  in  a  crucible  and
moistened  with  a  small  quantity  of  water,  and  finally  strongly  ignited,  by  which
means  a  pure  lime  is  obtained.  Pure  lime  may  be  more  rapidly  prepared  by  taking
calcium  nitrate,  CaN.^Oe,  which  is  easily  obtained  by  dissolving  limestone  in  nitric  acid.
The  solution  obtained  is  boiled  with  a  small  quantity  of  lime  in  order  to  precipitate  the
foreign  oxides  which  are  insoluble  in  water.  The  oxides  of  iron,  aluminium,  <&c.,  are
precipitated  by  this  means.  The  salt  is  then  cr^'stallised  and  ignited :  CaN-^Oe
CaO  t  2N0...  +  O.

In  the  decomposition  of  calcium  carbonate  the  lime  preserves  the  form  of  the  lumps
subjected  to  ignition ;  thisisoneof  the  signs  distinguishing  quicklime  when  it  is  freshly
burnt  and  unaltered  by  air.  It  attracts  moisture  from  the  air  and  then  disintegrates
to  a  powder;  if  left  long  exposed  in  the  air,  it  also  attracts  carbonic  anhydride  and
increases  in  volume ;  it  does  not  entirely  i>ass  into  carbonate,  but  forms  a  compound  of
the  latter  with  caustic  lime.

606

PRINCIPLES OV  CHEMISTHY

which  is  unatTected  by  heat,'"  and  may  therefore  serre  as  k  6re
redsting  material,  iind  was  employed  by  Deville  for  the  coostraction
nf  furnaces  in  which  pUtinum  wits  melted,  and  silver  volatilised  hy  thr
action  of  the  hfiat  evolved  by  the  combustion  of  detonating  goe.  The
liydrated  lime,  slaked  lime,  or  calcium  hydroxide,  CaH^O,  (specifir
gravity  2'07)  is  a  most  common  alkaline  sobstance,  employed  largdy

ia  building  for  making  mortars  or  cements,  in  which  case  ita  bin
ing  property  is  mainly  due  to  the  Absorption  of  carbonif  anhydridew**

\

»  Lime,  wheu  raiswi  to  ■  wliile  lieit
in  chlQrilu  it  kivch  alt  oIfj;«i.  liulphu
klMorbed  by  it.

*°  The  greater  quantity  of  liine  i>  uk-iI  in  making  morlAf  lor  binding  brlolra  r
together,  in  the  lorni  of  (iin<<  or  fmmt,  or  the  Bo-cBlli>d  tialii-d  limf.  Fur  tlliB
llie  linii^  is  mvsfA  with  wAter  aiitl  Mnd,  wliioh  Mrvei  to  wpitrate  llie  partidas

1

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 607

Lime,  like  other  alkalis,  acts  on  many  animal  and  vegetable  sub-
stances, and  for  this  reason  has  many  practical  uses—  for  example,
for  removing  fats,  and  in  agriculture  for  accelerating  the  decom-
position of  organic  substances  in  the  so-called  composts  or  accumu-
lations of  vegetable  and  animal  remains  used  for  fertilising  land.
Calcium  hydroxide  easily  loses  its  water  at  a  moderate  heat  (530°),
but  it  does  not  part  with  water  at  100°.  When  mixed  with  water,
lime  forms  a  pasty  mass  known  as  alaJced  lime  and  in  a  more
dilute  form  as  milk  of  limey  because  when  shaken  up  in  water  it
remains  suspended  in  it  for  a  long  time  and  presents  the  appearance
of  a  milky  liquid.  But,  besides  this,  lime  is  directly  soluble  in  water,
not  to  any  considerable  extent,  but  still  in  such  a  quantity  that  lime
irater  is  precipitated  by  carbonic  anhydride,  and  has  clearly  dis-
tinguishable alkaline  properties.  One  part  of  lime  requires  at  the
ordinary  temperature  about  800  parts  of  water  for  solution.  At  100°
it  requires  about  1500  parts  of  water,  and  therefore  lime-water
l)ecomes  cloudy  when  boiled.  If  lime-water  be  evaporated  in  a
vacuum,  calcium  hydroxide  separates  in  six-sided  crystals'*'  If
lime-water  be  mixed  with  hydrogen  peroxide  minute  crystals  of
calcium  peroxide,  Ca02,8H20,  separate  ;  this  compound  is  very  un-
stable and,  like  barium  peroxide,  is  decomposed  by  heat.  Lime,  as  a
powerful  base,  combines  with  all  acids,  and  in  this  respect  presents  a
transition  from  the  true  alkalis  to  magnesia. Many  of  the  salts  of

from  each  other.  If  only  lime  paste  were  pat  between  two  bricks  they  would  not  hold
firmly  together,  because  after  the  water  had  evaporated  the  lime  would  occupy  a  smaller
space  than  before,  and  therefore  cracks  and  powder  would  form  in  its  mass,  so  that  it  would
not  at  all  produce  that  complete  cementation  of  the  bricks  which  it  is  desired  to  attain.
Pieces  of  stone — that  is,  sand — mixed  with  the  lime  hinder  this  process  of  disintegration,
because  the  lime  binds  together  the  individual  grains  of  sand  mixed  with  it,  and  forms
one  concrete  mass,  in  consequence  of  a  process  which  proceeds  after  the  desiccation  or
removal  of  the  water.  The  process  of  the  solidification  of  lime,  taken  as  slaked  lime,
consists  first  in  the  direct  evaporation  of  the  water  and  crystallisation  of  the  hydrate,  so
that  the  lime  binds  the  stones  and  sand  mixed  with  it,  just  as  glue  binds  two  pieces  of
wood.  But  this  preliminary  binding  action  of  lime  is  feeble  (as  is  seen  by  direct  experi*
uient)  unless  there  be  further  alteration  of  the  lime  leading  to  the  formation  of  carbonates,
silicates,  and  other  salts  of  calcium  which  are  distinguished  by  their  great  cohesiveness.
With  the  progress  of  time  the  cement  is  partially  subjected  to  the  action  of  the  carbonic
anhydride  in  the  air,  owing  to  which  calcium  carbonate  is  formed,  but  not  more  than  half
the  lime  is  thus  converted  into  carbonate.  Besides  which,  the  lime  partially  acts  on  the
silica  of  the  bricks,  and  it  is  owing  to  these  new  combinations  simultaneously  forming
in  the  cement  that  it'gradually  becomes  stronger  and  stronger.  Hence  the  binding  action
of  the  lime  becomes  stronger  with  the  lapse  of  time.  This  is  the  reason  (and  not,  as  is
sometimes  said,  because  the  ancients  knew  how  to  build  stronger  than  we  do)  why  build-
ings which  have  stood  for  centuries  possess  a  very  strongly  binding  cement.  Hydraulic
cements  will  l)e  described  later  (Chapter  XVIII.,  Note  25).

"  Professor  Glinka  measured  the  transparent  bright  crystals  of  calcium  hydroxide
which  are  formed  in  common  hydraulic  (Portland)  cement.

608  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

calcium  (the  carbonate,  phosphate,  borate,  and  oxalate)  are  insoluble
in  water ;  besides  which  the  sulphate  is  only  sparingly  soluble.  As
a  more  energetic  base  than  magnesia,  lime  forms  salts,  CaX2,  whicii
are  distinguished  by  their  stability  in  comparison  with  the  salts
MgXj ;  neither  does  lime  so  easily  form  basic  and  double  salts  as
magnesia.

Anhydrous  lime  does  not  absorb  dry  carbonic  anhydride  at  the
ordinary  temperature.  This  was  already  known  by  Scheele,  and  Prof.
Schuliachenko  showed  that  there  is  no  absorption  even  at  360®.  It
only  proceeds  at  a  red  heat,**  and  then  only  leads  to  the  formation
of  a  mixture  of  calcium  oxide  and  carbonate  (Rose).  But  if  the
lime  be  slaked  or  dissolved,  the  absorption  of  carbonic  anhydride
proceeds  rapidly  and  completely.  These  phenomena  are  connected
with  the  dissociation  of  ccUcium  carbonate^  studied  by  Debray  (1867)
under  the  influence  of  the  conceptions  of  dissociation  introduced
into  science  by  Henri  Saint-Claire  Deville.  Just  as  there  is  no
vapour  tension  for  non- volatile  substances,  so  there  is  no  dissociation
tension  of  carbonic  anhydride  for  calcium  carbonate  at  the  ordinary

^-  The  act  of  heating  brings  the  substance  into  that  state  of  internal  motion  which  i<
required  for  reaction.  It  should  be  considered  that  by  the  act  of  heating  not  only  is  the
bond  between  tlie  parts,  or  cohesion  of  the  molecules,  altered  (generally  diminifihedi,
not  only  is  the  motion  or  store  of  energy  of  the  whole  molecule  increased,  but  also  that  id
all  probability  the  motion  of  the  atoms  themselves  in  molecules  undergoes  a  change.  The
same  kind  of  change  is  accomplished  by  the  act  of  solution,  or  of  combination  in  general,
judging  from  the  fact  that  a  dissiolved  or  combined  substance — for  instance,  lime  with
water — reacts  on  carbonic  anhydride  as  it  does  under  the  action  of  heat.  For  the
comprehension  of  chemical  phenomena  it  is  exceedingly  useful  to  recognise  clearly  tlii>
parallelism.  Rose's  observation  on  the  formation  (by  the  slow^  diffusion  of  solutions  of
calcium  chloride  and  sodium  carbonate)  of  aragonite  from  dilute,  and  of  calc  spar  from
strong,  solutions  is  easily  understood  from  this  point  of  view.  As  aragonite  is  alwavs
formed  from  hot  solutions,  it  appears  that  dilution  with  water  acts  like  heat.  The  following
experiment  of  Kiihlmann  is  particularly  instructive  in  this  sense.  Anhydrous  (perfectly
dry)  barium  oxide  does  not  react  with  monohydrated  sulphuric  acid,  H^SO^  (containing
neither  free  water  nor  anhydride,  SO3).  But  if  either  an  incandescent  object  or  a  moist
substance  is  brouglit  into  contact  with  the  mixture  a  violent  reaction  immediately  begins
(it  is  essentially  the  same  as  combustion),  and  the  whole  mass  reacts.

The  influence  of  solution  on  the  process  of  reaction  is  instructively  illustrated  by  the
following  experiment.  Lime,  or  barium  oxide,  is  placed  in  a  flask  or  retort  having  an
upper  orifice  and  connected  with  a  tube  immersed  in  mercury.  A  funnel  furnished  with
a  stopcock  and  filled  with  water  is  fixed  into  the  upper  orifice  of  the  retort,  \rhich  is  then
filled  with  dry  carbonic  anhydride.  There  is  no  absorption.  When  a  const^tnt  tem-
perature is  arrived  at,  the  unslaked  oxide  is  made  to  absorb  all  the  carbonic  anhydridf
by  carefully  admitting  water.  A  vacuum  is  formed,  as  is  seen  by  the  mercury  risinj;
in  the  neck  of  the  retort.  With  water  the  absorption  "goes  on  to  the  end,  whilst  undt* r
the  action  of  heat  there  remains  the  dissociating  tension  of  the  carbonic  anhydridt .
Furthermore,  we  here  see  that,  with  a  certain  resemblance,  there  is  alao  a  distinctior.
depending  on  the  fact  that  at  low  temperatures  calcium  carbonate  does  not  diiiisociat^:
this  determines  the  complete  absorption  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  in  the  aqueoa'^
solution.

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 609

temperature.  Just  as  every  volatile  substance  has  a  maximum  possible
vapour  tension  for  every  temperature,  so  also  calcium  carbonate  has
its  corresponding  dissociation  tension  ;  this  at  770°  (the  boiling  point
of  cadmium)  is  about  S5  mm.  (of  the  mercury  column),  and  at  930°  (the
boiling  point  of  Zn)  it  is  about  520  mm.  As,  if  the  tension  be  greater,
there  will  be  no  evaporation,  so  also  there  will  be  no  decomposition.
Debray  took  crystals  of  calc  spar,  and  could  not  observe  the  least  change
in  them  at  the  boiling  point  of  zinc  (930°)  in  an  atmosphere  of  carbonic
anhydride  taken  at  the  atmospheric  pressure  (760  mm.),  whilst  on  the
other  hand  calcium  carbonate  may  be  completely  decomposed  at  a
much  lower  temperature  if  the  tension  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  be
kept  below  the  dissociation  tension,  which  may  be  done  either  by
directly  pumping  away  the  gas  with  an  air-pump,  or  by  mixing  it  with
some  other  gas — that  is,  by  diminishing  the  partial  pressure  of  the
carbonic  anhydride,^^  just  as  an  object  may  be  dried  at  the  ordinary
temperature  by  removing  the  aqueous  vapour  or  by  carrying  it  off  in
a  stream  of  another  gas.  Thus  it  is  possible  to  obtain  calcium  carbon-
ate from  lime  and  carbonic  anhydride  at  a  certain  temperature  above
that  at  which  dissociation  begins,  and  conversely  to  decompose  calcium
carbonate  at  the  same  temperature  into  lime  and  carbonic-  anhydride.^^
At  the  ordinary  temperature  the  reaction  of  the  first  order  (combi-
nation) cannot  proceed  because  the  second  (decomposition,  dissociation)

^  Experience  has  shown  that  by  moistening  partially-bamt  lime  with  water  and  re-
heating it,  it  is  easy  to  drive  off  the  last  traces  of  carbonic  anhydride  from  it,  and  that,
in  general,  by  blowing  air  or  steam  through  the  lime,  and  even  by  osing  moist  fuel,  it  is
possible  to  accelerate  the  decomposition  of  the  calcium  carbonate.  The  partial  pressure
is  decreased  by  these  means.

**  Before  Uie  introduction  of  Deville*8  theory  of  dissociation,  the  modus  operandi  of
decompositions  like  that  under  consideration  was  understood  in  the  sense  that  decompo-
sition starts  at  a  certain  temperature,  and  that  it  is  accelerated  by  a  rise  of  temperature,
but  it  was  not  considered  possible  that  combination  could  proceed  at  the  same  temperature
as  that  at  which  decomposition  goes  on.  Berthollet  and  De\'ille  introduced  the  conception
of  equilibrium  into  chemical  science,  and  elucidated  the  question  of  reversible  reactions.
Naturally  the  subject  is  still  far  from  being  clear — the  questions  of  the  rate  and  complete-
ness of  reaction,  of  contact,  &c.,  still  intrude  themselves — but  an  important  step  has
been  made  in  chemical  mechanics,  and  we  have  started  on  a  new  path  which  promises
further  progress,  towards  which  much  has  been  done  not  only  by  Deville  himself,  but  more
especially  by  the  French  chemists  Debray,  Troost,  Lemoine,  Hautefeuille,  Le  Chatelier,
and  others.  Among  other  things  those  investigators  have  shown  the  close  resemblance
between  the  phenomena  of  evaporation  and  dissociation,  and  pointed  out  thai  the  amount
of  heat  absorbed  by  a  dissociating  substance  may  be  calculated  according  to  the  law  of
the  variation  of  dissociation-pressure,  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  it  is  possible  to
calculate  the  latent  heat  of  the  evaporation  of  water,  knowing  the  variation  of  the  tension
with  the  temperature,  on  the  basis  of  the  second  law  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat.
Details  of  this  subject  must  be  looked  for  in  special  works  on  physical  chemistry.  One
and  the  tame  conception  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  ia  applicable  to  dissociation
and  evaporation,

VOL.  I.  R  R

I

PRISCII'LEy OF CHEMISTRY

cannot  take  place,  ami  thus  all  the  most  ioiportant  phenomena  with  in
spect  to  the  behaviour  of  lime  towards  carbonic  anlij'dride  are  explkiud
by  starting  from  one  common  basis.*'

Calcium  earbonule,  CaCtJ^,  is  sometimes  met  with  in  nature
crystalline  form,  and  it  fonns  an  example  of  the  phenomenon  t«tn^
dimorphimn — that  ia,  it  appeKrs  in  two  crystalline  forms.  When  it
exhibits  combinations  of  forms  belongijig  to  the  hexagonal  sy&t^m  iiii-
sided  prisms,  rhombohedra,  itc.)  it  is  called  cah-  t/xit;  Calc  spar  hua
Bpecitic  gravity  of  2*7,  and  is  further  characterised  by  a  distinct  el«'
age  along  the  planes  of  the  fundamental  rhom1>ohedroa  having  an  u^
of  105^  Perfectly  transparent  Iceland  spar  presents  a  clear  exampto
of  double  refraction  (for  which  i-ea!)ou  it  ia  frequently  eniployetl
physical  apparatus).  The  other  form  of  calcium  carbonate  ocean  !■
crystals  belonging  to  the  rhombic  system,  and  it  is  then  called  art
i/e  ;  its  specific  gravity  ia  30.  If  calcium  carbonate  be  artifidally
produced  by  slow  crystal  Uaation  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  it  appntrt
in  the  rhomliohedral  form,  but  if  the  crystallisation  be  aided  by  lient  H
then  appears  as  aragonite.  It  may  therefore  be  supposed  that  calu  sftt
presents  the  form  correaponding  with  a  low  temperature,  and  anigoiute
with  a  higher  temperature  during  crystallisation."'

"  But  tlw  question  hb  to  the  [nmuition  of  u.  b&aic  c&lcium  cuiuiinle  with  •  sim  tf
tempemtim  Btill  [eDiuDB  nndiicidnl.  The  presence  ol  Hater  comlilintleBiiU  Uie  nJi
between  lime  nnd  corboaic  onhyilride,  all  the  more  hb  the  ^lisleiice  at  itn  sttn
between  cateiam  cnrbonate  and  mler  is  «een  from  ite  being  able  to  givt  a  crj/iialle'
hydraie,  CbCOj,EH,0  (Felonie),  which  cryHtulliaes  in  rhombic  imimie  uf  sp.  gr.  i
I'lT  and  lOBes  iCb  water  at  30°.  Theae  cryntalii  are  obtained  when  a  tolulioa  o(  lin
sugar  and  water  i>  left  lonij  exposed  ta  the  ftii  and  ilowlj  attracts  carluuic  aahfJiidB
(torn  it.  and  alsif  hf  the  evaporation  of  such  a,  eolation  at  a  lemperaturE  tJ  aboBl  I^.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  probable  that  an  atid  ialt,CiM,^COiip  ia  Formed  in  an  aqasuaa
eolation,  not  onlj'  beenuse  water  containing  carbonic  acid  diwiolves  caloiatn  oubonaH
but  more  especially  in  view  o(  the  leaearches  of  Schloeiin^  ll^^l^l^  which  showal  ~
at  16°  n  litre  of  water  in  an  atmoaphere  -of  carbonic  anhydride  (piesmre  0-aS4  al
apbere)  diBaolvea  l-OSO  gram  of  calcium  carbonate  and  1'77S  gnon  iit  carbonic  atikyiei^
which  correspond*  with  the  [ortnation  of  calcium  hydrogen  carbonate,  and  tbe  (nil
of  carbonic  anhydride  iu  the  mmBiniiig  water.  Cam  showed  that  a  litre  of  watat  ia
to  dismlve  ta  much  aa  S  grama  of  caJcium  carbonal«  if  the  presauie  tie  incmiaed  lo  I
more  altnoapherea.  The  calcium  carbonate  ia  precipitated  when  the  carbonio  anhjrdtida
posaes  o9  in  the  air  or  in  a  current  of  another  gas ;  thia  aleo  takes  place  in  many  oalnial
apiiogs.  Tnfa,  Htalactites,  and  utlier  like  formations  from  waters  coutaining  wji  ~
carbonate  and  carbonic  acid  iu  solution  are  formed  in  this  manner.  The  solabillljd
calcium  carbonate  itself  at  Lbe  ordinary  temperature  does  not  ereeed  1^  niillif^twn*  h^
litre  of  water.

*''  Dimorphous  l)odiea  difler  from  Lroe  iaomers  and  polymers  in  tliat  Urn;  do  m4
differ  in  their  chemical  reactions,  which  ore  determined  by  a  difference  in  lbe  diati
tiun  (motion)  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecules,  and  therefore  dimDrtihiaA  ia  Tui
OAcribed  to  a  difference  iu  the  distribution  of  similar  molecule),  building  Dp  »  i  ij  alhl.
Although  audi  a  hypotheais  is  quite  admissible  in  the  apirit  of  the  atomic  and  raaJa)
tlieory,  yet.  as  in  each  a  redistribution  of  the  molecules  a  perfeol  conserviatiaa  ol  Mw.
diitribnliun  of  the  atoma  iu  them  canuot  be  imagined,  and  in  eier;  effort  of  cbiM

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 611

Calcium  sulphate  in  combination  with  two  equivalents  of  water,
CaS04,2H20,  is  very  widely  distributed  in  nature,  and  is  known  as
gypsum.  Gypsum  loses  one  and  a  half  and  two  equivalents  of  water  at
a  moderate  temperature, ''^  and  anhydrous  or  burnt  gypsum  is  then
obtained,  which  is  also  known  as  plaster  of  Paris,  and  is  employed  in
large  quantities  for  modelling.^^  This  use  depends  on  the  fact  that
burnt  and  finely -divided  and  sifted  gypsum  forms  a  paste  when  mixed
with  water  ;  after  a  certain  time  this  paste  becomes  slightly  heated  and
solidifies,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  anhydrous  calcium  sulphate,  CaS04,
again  combines  with  water.  When  the  plaster  of  Paris  and  water  are
first  made  into  a  paste  they  form  a  mechanical  mixture,  but  when  the
mass  solidifies,  then  a  compound  of  the  calcium  sulphate  with  two
molecules  of  water  is  produced  ;  and  this  may  be  regarded  as  derived
from  S(OH),j  by  the  substitution  of  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  by  one  atom
of  bivalent  calcium.  Natural  gypsum  sometimes  appears  as  perfectly
colourless,  or  variegated,  marble-like,  masses,  and  sometimes  in  perfectly
colourless  crystals,  selenite^  of  specific  gravity  2*33.  The  semi-trans-
parent gypsum,  or  alabaster,  is  often  carved  into  small  statues. Besides

reaction  there  must  take  place  a  certain  motion  among  the  atoms ;  so  in  my  opinion  there
is  no  firm  basis  for  distinguishing  dimorpliism  from  the  general  conception  of  isomerism,
under  which  the  cases  of  those  organic  bodies  which  are  dextro  and  laevo  rotatory  (with
respect  to  polarised  light)  have  recently  been  brought  with  such  brilliant  success.  When
calcium  carbonate  separates  out  from  solutions,  it  has  at  first  a  gelatinous  apf^earance,
which  leads  to  the  supposition  that  this  salt  appears  in  a  colloidal  state.  It  only  crys-
tallises with  the  progress  of  time.  The  colloidal  state  of  calcium  carbonate  is  par-
ticularly clear  from  the  following  observations  made  by  Prof.  Famintzin,  who  showed
that  when  it  separates  from  solutions  it  is  obtained  under  certain  conditions  in  the  form
of  grains  having  tlie  peculiar  paste-like  structure  proper  to  starch,  which  fact  has  not
only  an  independent  interest,  but  presents  an  example  of  a  mineral  substance  being
obtained  in  a  form  until  then  only  known  in  the  organic  substances  elaborated  in  plants.
This  shows  that  the  forms  (cells,  vessels,  &c.)  in  which  vegetable  and  animal  pubstances
occur  in  organisms  do  not  present  in  themselves  anything  peculiar  to  organisms,  but  are
only  the  result  of  those  particular  conditions  in  which  these  substances  are  formed.
Traube  and  afterwards  Monnier  and  Vogt  (1882)  obtained  formations  which,  under  the
microscope,  were  in  every  respect  identical  in  appearance  with  vegetable  cells,  by  means
of  a  similar  slow  formation  of  precipitates  (by  reacting  on  sulphates  of  different  metals
with  sodium  silicate  or  carl>onate).

*'  According  to  Le  Chatelier  (1888),  IIH.^O  is  lost  at  120°— that  is,  HaO,2CaS04  is
formed,  but  at  l'J4'^  all  the  water  is  expelled.  According  to  Shenstone  and  Cundall
(1H88)  gyi>sum  l>eginH  to  lose  water  at  70^  in  dry  air.  The  semi-hydrated  compound
H.^O,2CuSC)4  is  also  formed  when  g>'psum  is  heated  with  water  in  a  closed  vessel  at
150-  (Hopiie-Seyler).

***  For  stucco-work  it  is  usual  to  add  lime  and  sand,  as  the  mass  is  then  harder  and
does  not  solidify  so  ({uickly.  For  imitating  marble,  glue  is  added  to  the  plaster,  and  the
mass  is  polished  when  thoroughly  dry.  Re  burnt  gypsum  cannot  be  used  over  again,  as
that  which  has  once  solidified  is,  like  the  natural  anhydride,  not  able  to  recombine  with
water.  It  is  evident  that  the  structure  of  the  molecules  in  the  crystallised  mass,  or  in
gen<*rHl  in  any  dense  mass,  exerts  an  influence  on  the  chemical  action,  which  is  more
)>articularly  evident  in  metals  in  their  different  forms  (powder,  crystalline,  rolled,  &c.)

BB8

I

612  PBINCIPLE3  OF  CHEMISTRY

which  ftnanhydrons  calcinm  sulphate,  GaSO^,  called  anAj/drite  (tp
gravity  2-97),  oooun  in  aatare.  It  aometimes  occurs  along  with  gyp
It  is  no  longer  capable  of  combining  directly  with  water,  &nd  d
in  this  respect  from  the  anhydrous  salt  obtained  by  gently  i
ing  gypsum.  If  gypsam  be  very  strongly  heated  it  shrinks  and
its  power  of  combining  with  water."*^  One  part  of  calcinm  snl]
reqniresat  0°  525  parts  of  water  for  solution,  at  38°  466  p&rts,  and  at
571  parts  of  water.  Themaximntn  solnbility  of  gypsum  is  ataboa
which  is  nearly  the  same  temperature  as  that  at  which  sodinm  snlj
is  moat  soluble.*^

As  time  is  a  more  energetic  base  than  magnesia,  so  oo/rtum  eML
CaClj,  is  not  so  easily  decomposed  by  water,  and  its  solnttons
disengage  a  small  quantity  of  hydrochloric  acid  when  evaporatol
when  the  evaporation  is  conducted  in  a  stream  of  hydrochloric  a<
easily  gives  an  onhydrotis  salt  which  fuses  at  719°  ;  otherwii
aqueous  solution  yields  a  cry stallo- hydrate,  CaClt,6H,0,  which  :
at  30°. »

*"  '•"  According  to  MacColeb,  gypuun  dehTdnted  at  900°  lua  B  specific  f
3'S7T,  Mid  heated  to  its  point  of  fuajou,  a-6E4.  Potilitciii  (1804)  kIbo  admlta  ll
abo^e-namod  modificatioaa  of  ukhfdrouB  gypaam,  vhich,  moreover,  idwmya  contft
»eini-h;dr»t«d  hydrate  (Nate  47),  and  he  explaina  bj  their  relation  to  wat<
phenomena  obsened  in  the  solidificAlion  ot  a  miitore  of  bnmt  gypaoin  tmd  water.

**  Aa  Harignac  ehowed,  gypaiun,  especially  vlien  deaicated  at  190°,  eaulygivea
utiinl«d  lolDtions  with  respect  to  CaSOt.SH^,  which  contain  aa  much  aa  1  (
CaSO,  to  110  parts  of  water.  Boding  dilute  hydrochloric  acid  dia«>lvM  gj
formiag  calcium  chloride.  The  behaiionr  ol  gypsum  towards  the  klkaJine  earin
has  been  described  in  Chapter  X.  Alcohol  precipitates  gypsum  from  ita  aq
solutions,  because,  like  the  sulphates  in  genenl,  it  ia  sparingly  soluble  in  a]
Gypsum,  like  all  the  sulphates,  when  heated  with  charcoal,  gives  up  its  oxygen,  fo
Uie  sulphide,  Ca3.

Calcium  sulphate,  like  magnesium  sulphate,  Is  capable  ol  forming  double  salt
with  difficulty,  and  they  are  chemiDolly  less  stable.  They  contain,  as  is  bI»ayB  thi
with  double  ealta,  less  water  of  crystallisation  thao  the  component  salts.  Rose.  S
and  others  obtained  the  salt  CaKj(90()],UgO  ;  a  miiture  of  gypsom  with  an  equii
amount  of  potassium  sulphate  and  water  solidifies  into  a  homogeneoDS  mbaa.  tVil
obtained  the  correspondiiig  sodium  salt  in  a  hydrated  and  anhydrous  atal«,  by  hea
mixture  ol  gypsum  with  a  saturated  solution  of  sodium  sulphate.  The  aohydiOD
occurs  in  nature  as  ^faiibfrifp.  Fritzsche  also  obtained  ^gfutn/e,  Na)Ca(COi>,,l
by  pouring  a  saturated  solution  of  sodium  carbonate  on  to  freshly -precipitated  ca
GorboDote.  Calcium  also  forma  basic  salts,  bat  only  a,  few.  Veeren  (1893)  obt
Ca(NO,),Ca(OH)„9iH,0  by  leaving  powdered  caustic  lime  in  a  saturated  aolati
Ca(NO]),  until  it  solidified. This  salt  is  decomposed  by  water.

■■*  Calcium  eldoride  baa  s  specific  gravity  a-30,  or,  when  fused,  81*,  and  the  sp.
the  crystallised  salt  CaCli,alL,0  is  1'69,  It  the  volume  of  the  crystals  at  0°  ^  1,  tl
S9°  it  is  1030,  and  the  volume  ol  the  fused  mass  at  the  seme  temperatnte  is  I'llB  (1
(specific  gravity  of  solutions,  tee  Note  a7|.  The  solution  containing  50  pj.  C«CI,
St  1BD°,  TO  p.c,  at  158^  Superheated  steam  decomposes  calcium  chloride  with  mon
colly  than  mngneaium  chloride  and  with  greater  ease  than  barinm  chloride  (Kuhnl
Sodium  does  not  decompose  Insed  calcium  cliloride  even  on  prolonged  hekting
Bodart),  bat  on  alloy  ot  sodium  with  linc,  lead,  and  bismuth  decompoan  it,  tonaii

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 618

Just  as  for  potassium,  K  s  39  (and  sodium,  Na  ^  23),  there  are
the  near  analogues,  Rb  s  85  and  Cs  =s  133,  and  also  another,  Li  i=  7,  so

alloy  of  calcium  with  one  of  the  above-named  metals  (Caron).  The  sine  alloy  may  be
obtained  with  as  much  as  15  p.e.  of  calcium.  Calcium  chloride  is  soluble  in  alcohol  and
absorbs  ammonia.

A  gram  molecular  weight  of  calcium  chloride  in  dissolTing  in  an  excess  of  water
evolves  18,728  calories,  and  in  dissolving  in  alcohol  17,666  units  of  heat,  according  tq
Pickering.

Rooseboom  made  detailed  researches  on  the  crjrstallo-hydrates  of  calcium  chloride
(1889),  and  found  that  CaCl3,6H<|0  melts  at  80^%  and  is  formed  at  low  temperatures  from
solutions  containing  not  more  than  108  parts  of  calcium  chloride  per  100  parts  of  water ;
if  the  amount  of  salt  (always  to  100  parts  of  water)  reaches  120  parts,  then  tabular
crystals  of  CaCl2,4H30/3  are  formed,  which  at  temperatures  above  88'4°  are  converted
into  the  crystallo- hydrates  CaCl^ySH^O,  whilst  at  temperatures  below  IBP  the  $  variety
passes  into  the  more  stable  CaC1^4H30a,  which  process  is  aided  by  mechanical  friction.
Hence,  as  is  the  case  with  magnesium  sulphate  (Note  S7),  one  and  the  same  crystallo«
hydrate  appears  in  two  forms — the  /3,  which  is  easily  produced  but  is  unstable,  and
the  o,  which  is  stable.  The  solubility  of  the  above-mentioned  hydrates  of  chloride
of  calcium,  or  amount  of  calcium  chloride  per  100  parts  of  water,  is  as  follows : —

0°

20*^

80°

4(f>

60°

CaCl^jGHaO

60

76

100

(102-8)

CaCl^,4H20a

—

90

101

117,

(164-2)

CaCl„4HaO/3

—

104

114

—  i

CaCl2,2H.20

—

—

(808*8)

128

187

The  amount  of  calcium  chloride  to  100  parts  of  water  in  the  crystallo-hydrate  is
given  in  brackets.  The  point  of  intersection  of  the  curves  of  solubility  lies  at  about
80°  for  the  first  two  salts  and  about  45°  for  the  salts  with  4H9O  and  2HqO.  The  crystals
CaCl3,2H20  may,  however,  be  obtained  (Ditte)  at  the  ordinary  temperature  from  solu-
tions containing  hydroc^oric  acid.  The  vapour  tension  of  this  crystallo-hydrate  equals
the  atmospheric  at  166^,  and  therefore  the  crystals  may  be  dried  in  an  atmosphere  of
steam  and  obtained  without  a  mother  liquor,  whose  vapour  tension  is  greater.  This
crystallo-hydrate  decomposes  at  about  176°  into  CaCl^tHgO  and  a  solution ;  this  is  easfly
brought  about  in  a  closed  vessel  when  the  pressure  is  greater  than  the  atmosphere.
This  crystallo-hydrate  is  destroyed  at  temperatures  above  260°,  anhydrous  csJcium
chloride  being  formed.

N^lecting  the  unstable  modification  CaCl2,4H20/3,  we  will  give  the  temperatures  t  at
which  the  passage  of  one  hydrate  into  another  takes  place  and  at  which  the  solution
CaClj  +  nHjO,  the  two  solids  A  and  B  and  aqueous  vapour,  whose  tension  is  given  as  p
in  millimetres,  are  able  to  exist  together  in  stable  equilibrium,  according  to  Roozeboom's
determinatioHH :

t

n

A

B

P

-65°

14-5

ice

CACit,eiHqO

0

+  29-8°

61

CaCl2,6HaO

CaCl2,4H.20

6-8

45-8°

4-7

CaCl2,4H90

CaCl<„2H({0

11-8

175-5°

21

CaCl^2H20

CaCl5,H40

842

260°

1-8

CaCl2,H.p

CaCla

Several  atmospheres

«  Solutions  of  calcium  chloride  may  ser^-e  as  a  convenient  example  for  the  study  of  the
pupersaturated  state,  which  in  this  case  easily  occurs,  because  different  hydrates  are
formed.  Thus  at  25^  solutions  containing  more  than  88  parts  of  anhydrous  calcium
chloride  per  100  of  water  will  be  supersaturated  for  the  hydrate  CaCl^eH^O.

On  the  other  hand,  Hammerl  showed  that  solutions  of  calcium  chloride,  when  frozen^
deposit  ice  if  they  contain  less  than  48  parts  of  salt  per  100  of  water,  and  if  more  the

614  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

in  exactly  the  same  manner  for  calcium,  Ca  =  40  (and  magnesium,
Mg  =  24),  there  is  another  analogue  of  lighter  atomic  weight,
beryllium,  Be  =  9,  besides  the  near  analogues  strontium,  Sr  i=  87,  and
barium,  Ba  =  137.  As  rubidium  and  caesium  are  more  rarely  met
with  in  nature  than  potassium,  so  also  strontium  and  barium  are  rarer
than  calcium  (in  the  same  way  that  bromine  and  iodine  are  rarer  than
chlorine).  Since  they  exhibit  many  points  of  resemblance  with  calciom,
strontium  and  barium  may  be  characterised  after  a  very  short  acquain-
tance with  their  chief  compounds  ;  this  shows  the  important  advantages
gained  by  distributing  the  elements  according  to  their  natural  groups,
to  which  matter  we  shall  turn  our  attention  in  the  next  chapter.

Among  the  compounds  of  barium  met  with  in  nature  the  commonest
is  the  sulphate^  BaS04,  which  forms  anhydrous  crystals  of  the  rhombic
system,  which  are  identical  in  their  crystalline  form  with  anhydrite,
and  generally  occur  as  transparent  and  semi-transparent  masses  of
tabular  crystals  having  a  high  specific  gravity,  namely  4*45,  for  which
reason  this  salt  bears  the  name  of  heavy  spar  or  barytes.  Analogoas  to
it  is  celestine,  SrSOi,  which  is,  however,  more  rarely  met  with.  Heavy
spar  frequently  forms  the  gangue  separated  on  dressing  metallic  ores
from  the  vein  stuff;  this  mineral  is  the  source  of  all  other  barium
compounds ;  for  the  carbonate,  although  more  easily  transformed
into  the  other  compounds  (because  acids  act  directly  on  it,  evolving
carbonic  anhydride),  is  a  comparatively  rare  mineral  (BaCX)3  forms
the  mineral  witherite ;  SrCOg,  strorUianite ;  both  are  rare,  the
latter  is  found  at  Etna).  The  treatment  of  barium  sulphate  is
rendered  difficult  from  the  fact  that  it  is  insoluble  both  in  water  and
acids,  and  has  therefore  to  be  treated  by  a  method  of  reduction.^'
Like  sodium  sulphate  and  calcium  sulphate,  heavy  spar  when  heated
with  charcoal  parts  with  its  oxygen  and  forms  barium  sulphide,  Bai!»,
For  this  purpose  a  pasty  mixture  of  powdered  heavy  spar,  charcoal,
and  tar  is  subjected  to  the  action  of  a  strong  heat,  when  BaSO|
-f  4C=BaS-f4CO.  The  residue  is  then  treated  with  water,  in  which
the  barium  sulphide  is  soluble.^^ When  boiled  with  hydrochloric  acid,

crystallo-hydrate  CaCl^jBH^O  separates,  and  that  a  solution  of  the  above  composition
(CaCla,14H.20  requires  44*0  parts  calcium  chloride  per  100  of  water)  solidifies  as  a  crvo-
hydrate  at  about  —55°.

^^  The  action  of  barium  sulphate  on  sodium  and  potassium  carbonates  is  giTen  on
p.  487.

^*  Barium  sulphide  is  decomposed  by  water,  BaS  +  2H20  =  H2S  +  Ba(OH)^  (the  r««(^
tion  is  reversible),  but  both  substances  are  soluble  in  water,  and  their  separation  is  con^
plicated  by  the  fact  that  barium  sulphide  absorbs  oxygen  and  gives  insoluble  barioxa
sulphate.  The  hydrogen  sulphide  is  sometimes  removed  from  the  solution  by  boiling
with  the  oxides  of  copper  or  zinc.  If  sugar  be  added  to  a  solution  of  bariom  salnhid«^
barium saccharate is  precipitated on heating  ; it  is  decomposed  by carbonic  anby*

THE  VALKNCY  AND  SPECIFIC HEAT  OF  THE METALS 615

l)ariain  chloride,  BaCl.^,  is  obtained  in  solution,  and  the  sulphur  is  dis-
engaged as  gaseous  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  BaS  +  SHClssBaClj  +  H^S.
In  this  manner  barium  sulphate  is  converted  into  barium  chloride, "^^
and  the  latter  by  double .  decomposition  with  strong  nitric  acid  or
nitre  gives  the  less  soluble  barium  nitrate,  Ba(N03)2,**  ^^  ^i*^  sodium

dride,  so  that  barium  carbonate  is  formed.  An  equivalent  mixture  of  sodium  sulphate
with  barium  or  strontium  sulphates  when  ignited  with  charcoal  gives  a  mixture  of
sodium  sulphide  and  barium  or  strontium  sulphide,  and  if  this  mixture  be  dissolved  in
water  and  the  solution  evaporated,  barium  or  strontium  hydroxide  crystallises  out
on  cooling,  and  sodium  hydrosulphide,  NaHS,  is  obtained  in  solution.  The  hydroxides
BaH20a  and  SrH-^O.^  are  prepared  on  a  large  scale,  being  applied  to  many  reactions ;  for
example,  strontium  hydroxide  is  prepared  for  sugar  works  for  extracting  crystallisable
sugar  from  molasses.

We  may  remark  that  Boussingault,  by  igniting  barium  sulphate  in  hydrochloric  acid
gas,  obtained  a  complete  decomposition,  with  the  formation  of  barium  chloride.  Attention
should  also  be  turned  to  the  fact  that  Gronven,  by  heating  a  mixture  of  charcoal  and
fitrontinm  sulphate  with  magnesium  and  potassium  sulphates,  showed  the  easy  decom-
posability  depending  on  the  formation  of  double  salts,  such  as  SrSjKjS,  which  are  easily
soluble  in  water,  and  give  a  precipitate  af  strontium  carbonate  with  carbonic  anhydride.
In  such  examples  as  these  we  see  that  the  force  which  binds  double  salts  may  play  a  part
in  directing  the  course  of  reactions,  and  the  number  of  double  salts  of  silica  on  the  earth's
aurface  shows  that  nature  takes  advantage  of  these  forces  in  her  chemical  processes.  It
is  worthy  of  remark  that  Buchner  (1898),  by  mixing  a  40  per  cent,  solution  of  barium
acetate  with  a  60  per  cent,  solution  of  sulphate  of  alumina,  obtained  a  thick  glutinous
mass,  which  only  gave  a  precipitate  of  BaS04  after  being  diluted  with  water.

^  Barium  sulphate  is  sometimes  converted  into  barium  chloride  in  the  following
manner:  finely-ground  barium  sulphate  is  heated  with  coal  and  manganese  chloride
(the  residue  from  the  manufacture  of  chlorine).  The  mass  becomes  semi-liquid,
and  when  it  evolves  carbonic  oxide  the  heating  is  stopped.  The  following  double  decom-
positions proceed  during  this  operation  :  first  the  carbon  takes  up  the  oxygen  from  the
barium  sulphate,  and  gives  sulphide,  BaS,  which  enters  into  double  decomposition  with
the  chloride  of  manganese,  MnCla,  forming  manganese  sulphide,  MnS,  which  is  insoluble
in  water,  and  soluble  barium  chloride.  This  solution  is  easily  obtained  pure  because
many  foreign  impurities,  such  as  iron,  remain  in  the  insoluble  portion  with  the  man-
ganese. The  solution  of  barium  chloride  is  chiefly  used  for  the  preparation  of  barium
sulphate,  which  is  precipitated  by  sulphuric  acid,  by  which  means  barium  sulphate  is
re-formed  as  a  powder.  This  salt  is  characterised  by  the  fact  that  it  is  unacted  on  by
the  majority  of  cliemical  reagents,  is  insoluble  in  water,  and  is  not  dissolved  by  acids.
Owing  to  this,  artificial  barium  sulphate  forms  a  permanent  white  paint  which  is  used
instead  of  (and  mixed  with)  white  lead,  and  has  been  termed  *  blanc  fix^ '  or  '  permanent
white.'

The  solution  of  one  part  of  calcium  chloride  at  20^'  requires  1'86  part  of  water,  the
solution  of  one  part  of  strontium  chloride  requires  1*88  part  of  water  at  the  same  tem-
perature, and  the  solution  of  barium  chloride  2'88  parts  of  water.  The  solubility  of  the
bromides  and  iodides  varies  in  the  same  proportion.  The  chlorides  of  barium  and  stron-
tium crystallise  out  from  solution  with  great  ease  in  combination  with  water ;  they  form
BaCl.^,2H20  and  SrClj.eHsO.  The  latter  (which  separates  out  at  40°)  resembles  the
salts  of  Ca  and  Mg  in  composition,  and  Etard  (1892)  obtained  SrCl2,2H90  from  solutions
at  90-1  do  ^.  We  may  also  observe  that  the  crystallo-hydrates  BaBr^jH^O  and  Bal^jTH^O
are  known.

^*  The  nitrates  Sr(N03).2  (in  the  cold  its  solutions  give  a  crystallo-hydrate  containing
4IL2O)  and  Ba(N03)3  are  so  very  sparingly  soluble  in  water  that  they  separate  in  consider-
able quantities  when  a  solution  of  sodium  nitrate  is  added  to  a  strong  solution  of  either

616  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

carbonate  a  precipitate  of  barium  carbonate,  BaCO^.  Both  these  salts
are  able  to  give  barium  oxide^  or  baryta^  BaO,  and  the  hydroxide,
Ba(H0)2,  which  differs  from  lime  by  its  great  solubility  in  water,^
and  by  the  ease  with  which  it  forms  a  crystallo-hydrate,  BaHsOsjSH^O,
from  its  solutions.  Owing  to  its  solubility,  baryta  is  frequentlj
employed  in  manufactures  and  in  practical  chemistry  as  an  alkali
which  has  the  very  important  property  that  it  may  be  always  entirely
removed  from  solution  by  the  addition  of  sulphuric  acid,  which  entirely
separates  it  as  the  insoluble  barium  sulphate,  BaS04.  It  may  also  be
removed  whilst  it  remains  in  an  alkaline  state  (for  example,  the
excess  which  may  remain  when  it  is  used  for  saturating  acids)  by
means  of  carbonic  anhydride,  which  also  completely  precipitates  baryta
as  a  sparingly  soluble,  colourless,  and  powdery  carbonate.  Both  these
reactions  show  that  baryta  has  such  properties  as  would  very  greatly
extend  its  use  were  its  compounds  as  widely  distributed  as  those  of
sodium  and  calcium,  and  were  its  soluble  compounds  not  poisoDOOs.
Barium  nitrate  is  directly  decomposed  by  the  action  of  heat,  bariom
oxide  being  left  behind.  The  same  takes  place  with  barium  car-
bonate, especially  that  form  of  it  precipitated  from  solutions,  and
when  mixed  with  charcoal  or  ignited  in  an  atmosphere  of  steam.
Barium  oxide  combines  with  water  with  the  development  of  a  laige
amount  of  heat,  and  the  resultant  hydroxide  is  very  stable  in  its  reten-
tion of  the  water,  although  it  parts  with  it  when  strongly  ignited. •^'^''^
With  oxygen  the  anhydrous  oxide  gives, as  already  mentioned  in

barium  or  strontium  chloride.  They  areobtained  by  the  action  of  nitric  acid  on  the  carbon-
ates or  oxides.  100  parts  of  water  at  15°  dissolve  6'6  parts  of  strontium  nitrate  and  8  i
parts  of  barium  nitrate,  whilst  more  than  800  parts  of  calcium  nitrate  are  soluble  at  the
same  temperature.  Strontium  nitrate  communicates  a  crimson  coloration  to  the  flame  of
burning  substances,  and  is  therefore  frequently  used  for  Bengal  fire,  fireworks,  and  signal
lights,  for  which  purpose  the  salts  of  lithium  are  still  better  fitted.  Calcium  nitrate  is
exceedingly  hygroscopic.  Barium  nitrate,  on  the  contrary,  does  not  ahow  this  property
in  the  least  degree,  and  in  this  respect  it  resembles  potassium  nitrate,  and  is  therefore
used  instead  of  the  latter  for  the  preparation  of  a  gunpowder  which  is  called  *  saxifragin
powder '  (76  parts  of  barium  nitrate,  2  parts  of  nitre,  and  22  parts  of  charcoal).

**  Tlie  dissociation  of  the  crystallo-hydrate  of  baryta  is  given  in  Chapter  I.,  Note  65.
100  parts  of  water  dissolve

0^  20°  40°  60°  80°

BaO  1-5  3-5  74  18-8  90*8

SrO  0-8  0-7  1-4  8  9

Supersaturated  solutions  are  easily  fonned.

The  anhydrous  oxide  BaO  fuses  in  the  oxyhydrogen  flame.  When  ignited  in  the
vapour  of  potassium,  the  latter  takes  up  the  oxygen  ;  whilst  in  chlorine,  oxygen  is  sepa-
rated and  barium  chloride  formed.

55  bu  Brugellmann,  by  heating  BaH202  in  a  graphite  or  clay  crucible,  obtained  BaO
in  needles,  sp.  gr.  5*32,  and  by  heating  in  a  platinum  crucible — in  crystals  belonging  to

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 617

Chapters  III.  and  IV.,  a  peroxide,  BaO^.^  Neither  calcium  nor
strontium  oxides  are  able  to  give  such  a  peroxide  directly,  but  they
form  peroxides  under  the  action  of  hydrogen  peroxide.

Barium  oxide  is  decomposed  when  heated  with  potassium ;  fused
barium  chloride  is  decomposed,  as  Davy  showed,  by  the  action  of  a
galvanic  current,  forming  metallic  barium  ;  and  Crookes  (1862)  obtained
an  amalgam  of  barium  from  which  the  mercury  could  easily  be  driven
off,  by  heating  sodium  amalgam  in  a  saturated  solution  of  barium
chloride.  Strontium  is  obtained  by  the  same  processes.  Both  metals
are  soluble  in  mercury,  and  seem  to  be  non- volatile  or  only  very  slightly
volatile.  They  are  both  heavier  than  water;  the  specific  gravity
of  barium  is  3*6,  and  of  strontium  2*5.  They  both  decompose  water  at
the  ordinary  temperature,  like  the  metals  of  the  alkalis.

Barium  and  strontium  as  saline  elements  are  characterised  by  their
powerful  basic  properties,  so  that  they  form  acid  salts  with  difficulty,
and  scarcely  form  basic  salts.  On  comparing  them  together  and  with
calcium,  it  is  evident  that  the  alkaline  properties  in  this  group  (as  in
the  group  potassium,  rubidium,  caesium)  increase  with  the  atomic
weight,  and  this  succession  clearly  shows  itself  in  many  of  their  corre-
sponding compounds.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  solubility  of  the
hydroxides  RH^O,  and  the  specific  gravity^^  rise  in  passing  from
calcium  to  strontium  and  barium,  while  the  solubility  of  the  sulphates

tho  cabical  system,  sp.  gr.  5*74. SrO  is  obtained  in  the  latter  form  from  the  nitrate.
The  following  are  tlie  specific  gravities  of  the  oxides  from  different  sources : —

MgO

CaO

SrO

from  RN,Oe

3*38

8-26

4*76

„ RCO3

8-48

8*26

4-45

„ BHjO-j

8*41

8*25

4-67

^^  The  property  of  barium  oxide  of  absorbing  oxygen  when  heated,  and  giving  tlie
peroxide,  BaO.^,  is  very  characteristic  for  this  oxide  {see  Chapter  m.,  Note  7).  It  only
belongs  to  the  anhydrous  oxide.  The  hydroxide  does  not  absorb  oxygen.  Peroxides  of
calcium  and  strontium  may  be  obtained  by  means  of  hydrogen  peroxide.  Barium  per-
oxide is  insoluble  in  water,  but  is  able  to  form  a  hydrate  with  it,  and  also  to  combine
with  hydrogen  peroxide,  forming  a  very  unstable  compound  having  the  composition
BaH404  (obtained  by  Professor  Schone),  which  in  course  of  time  evolves  oxygen  (Chap-
ter IV.,  Note  21).

^  Even  in  solutions  a  gradual  progression  in  the  increase  of  the  specific  gravity  shows
itself,  not  only  for  equivalent  solutions  (for  instance,  BCI3  +  2OOH3O),  but  even  with  an
equal  percentage  composition,  as  is  seen  from  the  curves  giving  the  specific  gravity
(water  4^  =  10,000)  at  15°  (for  barium  chloride,  according  to  Bourdiakolfs  determina-
tions) :

BeCla  :  8  =  9,992  +  67-21p  +  0111i>»

CaClj  :  S  =  9,992  +  80-24i»  +  0-476p»

SrCla  :  S  =  9,992 +85-67p  +  0-788p»

BaCl, :  S  =  9,992  +  86'66p  +  0-818p'

618  -  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

decreases, '"^^  and  therefore  in  the  case  of  magnesium  and  berylliam,  as
metals  whose  atomic  weights  are  still  less,  we  should  expect  the  soln-
bility  of  the  sulphates  to  be  greater,  and  this  is  in  reality  the  case.

Just  as  in  the  series  of  the  alkali  metals  we  saw  the  metals  potas-
sium, rubidium,  and  caesium  approaching  near  to  each  other  in  their
properties,  and  allied  to  them  two  metals  having  smaller  combining
weights — namely,  sodium,  and  the  lightest  of  all,  lithium,  which  all
exhibited  certain  peculiar  characteristic  properties — ^so  also  in  the  case
of  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  we  find,  besides  calcium,  barium,
and  strontium,  the  metal  magnesium  and  also  heryllium  or  glucinunu
In  respect  to  the  magnitude  of  its  atomic  weight,  this  last  occupies  the
same  position  in  the  series  of  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  as  lithium
does  in  the  series  of  the  alkali  metals,  for  the  combining  weight  of
beryllium.  Be  or  Gl=9. This  combining  weight  is  greater  than  that
of  lithium  (7),  as  the  combining  weight  of  magnesium  (24)  is  greater
than  that  of  sodium  (23),  and  as  tliat  of  calcium  (40)  is  greater  than
that  of  potassium  (39),  kc,^^ Beryllium  was  so  named  because  it  occurs
in  the  mineral beryl. The  metal is  also  called  glucinum  (from  the
Greek  word  yXvicvs,  *  sweet '),  because  its  salts  have  a  sweet  taste. It
occurs  in  beryl,  aquamarine,  the  emerald,  and  other  minerals,  which
are  generally  of  a  green  colour ;  they  are  sometimes  found  in  consider*
able  masses,  but  as  a  rule  are  comparatively  rare  and,  as  transparent
crystals,  form  precious  stones. The  composition  of  beryl  and  of  the
emerald  is  as  follows  :  Al203,3BeO,6Si02. The  Siberian  and  Brazilian
beryls  are  the  best  known. The  specific  gravity  of  beryl  is  about  2*7.
Beryllium  oxide,  from  the  feebleness  of  its  basic  properties,  presents

^  One  part  of  calcium  sulphate  at  the  ordinary  temperature  requires  about  500  part&^
of  water  for  solution,  strontium  sulphate  about  7,000  parts,  baxium  sulphate^about  4O0,0lX)
parts,  whilst  beryllium  sulphate  is  easily  soluble  in  water.

^^  We  refer  beryllium  to  the  class  of  the  bivalent  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths — that
is,  we  ascribe  to  its  oxide  the  formula  BeO,  and  do  not  consider  it  as  trivalent  (Be  =  13'5,
Chapter  VIL,  Note  21),  although  that  view  has  been  upheld  by  many  chemists. The  true
atomic  composition  of  beryllium  oxide  was  first  given  by  the  Russian  chemist,  Avde«ff
(1819),  in  his  researches  on  the  compounds  of  this  metal.  He  compared  the  compoandsof
beryllium  to  those  of  magnesium,  and  refuted  the  notion  prevalent  at  the  time,  of  the
resemblance  between  the  oxides  of  beryllium  and  aluminium,  by  proving  that  beryllium
Bulpliate  presents  a  greater  resemblance  to  magnesium  sulphate  than  to aluminium
sulphate. It  was  especially  noticed  that  the  analogues  of  alumina  give  alums,  whilst
beryllium  oxide,  although  it  is  a  feeble  base,  easily  giving,  like  magnesia,  basic  and
double  salts,  does  not  form  true  alums. The  establishment  of  the  periodic  system  of  the
elements (1869), considered in the following  chapter, immediately indicated that
Avd^eff's view corresponded with the truth — that is, that beryllium is bivalent,
which  therefore ueceHsitated  the  denial  of  its  trivalency. This  scientific  controversv
resulted  in  tt  long  series  of  researches  (1870-80)  concerning  this  element,  and  endc«d in
Nilson  and  Pettersson — two  of  the  chief  advocates  of  the  trivalency  of  beryllium — deter-
mining the  vapour  density  of  BeCl2 (=40, Chapter  VII., Note  21),  which  gave an
undoubted  proof  of  its  bivalency  {see  also  Note  3).

THE VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 619

an  analogy  to  aluminiam  oxide  in  the  same  way  that  lithium  oxide  is
analogous  to  magnesium  oxide.^^  Owing  to  its  rare  occurrence  in  nature,
to  the  absence  of  any  especially  distinct  individual  properties,  and  to
the  possibility  of  foretelling  them  to  a  certain  extent  on  the  basis  of  the
periodic  system  of  the  elements  given  in  the  following  chapter,  and
owing  to  the  brevity  of  this  treatise,  we  will  not  discuss  at  any  length
the  compounds  of  beryllium,  and  will  only  observe  that  their
individuality  was  pointed  out  in  1798  by  Vauquelin,  and  that
metaUic  beryllium  was  obtained  by  Wohler  and  Bussy.  Wohler
obtained  metallic  beryllium  (like  magnesium)  by  acting  on  beryllium
chloride,  BeCls,  with  potassium  (it  is  best  prepared  by  fusing
K2BeF4  with  Na).  Metallic  beryllium  has  a  specific  gravity  1*64
(Nilson  and  Pettersson).  It  is  very  infusible,  melting  at  nearly
the  same  temperature  as  silver,  which  it  resembles  in  its  white
colour  and  lustre.  It  is  characterised  by  the  fact  that  it  is  very  diffi*
cultly  oxidised,  and  even  in  the  oxidising  flame  of  the  blowpipe  is  only
superficially  covered  by  a  coating  of  oxide ;  it  does  not  bum  in  pure
oxygen,  and  does  not  decompose  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature  or

*'^  Berylliam  oxide,  like  aluminiam  oxide,  is  precipitated  from  solations  of  its  salts
by  alkalis  as  a  gelatinous  hydroxide,  BeH.^O.^,  which,  like  alamina,  is  soluble  in  an  excess
of  caustic  potash  or  soda.  This  reaction  may  be  taken  advantage  of  for  distinguishing
and  separating  beryllium  from  aluminium,  because  when  the  alkaline  solution  is  diluted
with  water  and  boiled,  beryllium  hydroxide  is  precipitated,  whilst  the  alumina  remains
in  solution.  The  solubility  of  the  beryllium  oxide  at  once  clearly  indicates  its  feeble
basic  properties,  and,  as  it  were,  separates  this  oxide  from  the  class  of  the  alkaline  earths.
But  on  arranging  the  oxides  of  the  above-described  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  accord*
ing  to  their  decreasing  atomic  weights  we  have  the  series

BaO,  SrO,  CaO,  MgO,  BeO,

in  which  the  basic  properties  and  solubility  of  the  oxides  consecutively  and  distinctly
decrease  until  we  reach  a  point  when,  had  we  not  known  of  the  existence  of  the  beryllium
oxide,  we  should  expect  to  find  in  its  place  an  oxide  insoluble  in  water  and  of  feeble  basic
properties.  If  an  alcoholic  solution  of  caustic  potash  be  saturated  with  the  hydrate  of
BeO,  and  evaporated  under  the  receiver  of  an  air  pump,  it  forms  silky  crystals  BeKjOj.

Another  cliaracteristic  of  the  salts  of  beryllium  is  that  they  give  with  aqueous  am-
monia a  gelatinous  precipitate  which  is  soluble  in  an  excess  of  ammonium  carbonate
like  the  precipitate  of  magnesia;  in  this  beryllium  oxide  differs  from  the  oxide  of
aluminium.  Beryllium  oxide  easily  forms  a  carbonate  which  is  insoluble  in  water,  and
resembles  magnesium  carbonate  in  many  respects.  Beryllium  sulphate  is  distinguished
by  its  considerable  solubility  in  water— thus,  at  the  ordinary  temperature  it  dissolves
in  an  equal  weight  of  water ;  it  crystallises  out  from  its  solutions  in  well-formed  crystals,
which  do  not  change  in  the  air,  and  contain  BeS04,4H20.  When  ignited  it  leaves
beryllium  oxide,  but  this  oxide,  after  prolonged  ignition,  is  re-dissolved  by  sulphuric  acid,
whilst  aluminium  sulphate,  after  a  similar  treatment,  leaves  aluminium  oxide,  which  is
no  longer  soluble  in  acids.  With  a  few  exceptions,  the  salts  of  beryllium  crystallise  with
great  difficulty,  and  to  a  considerable  extent  resemble  the  salts  of  magnesium ;  thus,  for
instance,  beryllium  chloride  is  analogous  to  magnesium  chloride.  It  is  volatile  in  an
anhydrous  state,  and  in  a  hydrated  state  it  decomposes,  with  the  f  volution  of  hydro-
chloric  acid.

620  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

at  a  red  heat,  but  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid  is  decomposed  by  it  when
slightly  heated,  with  evolution  of  hydrogen  and  development  of  a  con-
siderable amount  of  heat.  Even  dilute  hydrochloric  acid  acts  in  the
same  maimer  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  Beryllium  also  acts  easily
on  sulphuric  acid,  but  it  is  remarkable  that  neither  dilute  nor  strong
nitric  acid  acts  on  beryllium,  which  seems  especially  able  to  resist
oxidising  agents.  Potassium  hydroxide  acts  on  beryllium  as  on
aluminium,  hydrogen  being  disengaged  and  the  metal  dissolved,  but
ammonia  has  no  action  on  it.  These  properties  of  metallic  beryllium
seem  to  isolate  it  from  the  series  of  the  other  metals  described  in  this
chapter,  but  if  we  compare  the  properties  of  calcium,  magnesium,  and
beryllium  we  shall  see  that  magnesium  occupies  a  position  intermediate
between  the  other  two.  Whilst  calcium  decomposes  water  with  great
ease,  magnesium  does  so  with  difficulty,  and  beryllium  not  at  all.  The
peculiarities  of  beryllium  among  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  recall
the  fact  that  in  the  series  of  the  halogens  we  saw  that  fluorine  difiered
from  the  other  halogens  in  many  of  its  properties  and  had  the  smallest
atomic  weight. ,  The  same  is  the  case  with  regard  to  beryllium  among
the  other  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths.

In  addition  to  the  above  characteristics  of  the  compounds  of  the
metals  of  the  alkaline  earths,  we  must  add  that  they,  like  the
alkali  metals,  combine  with  nitrogen  and  hydrogen,  and  while  sodium
nitride  (obtained  by  igniting  the  amide  of  sodium,  Chapter  XII.,
N'ote  44  bis)  and  lithium  nitride  (obtained by  heating  lithium  in  nitrogen,
Chapter  XIII.,  Note  39)  have  the  composition  R3N,  so  the  nitrides
of  magnesium  (Note  14),  calcium,  strontium,  and  barium  have  the
composition  KsNj,  for  example,  BagN^,  as  might  be  expected  from  the
diatomicity  of  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  and  from  the  relation  of
the  nitrides  to  ammonia,  which  is  obtained  from  all  of  these  compounds
by  the  action  of  water.  The  nitrides  of  Ca,  Sr,  and  Ba  are  formed
directly  (Maquenne,  1892)  by  heating  the  metals  in  nitrogen.  They  all
have  the  appearance  of  an  amorphous  powder  of  dark  colour ;  as
regards  their  reactions,  it  is  known  that  besides  disengaging  ammonia
with  water,  they  form  cyanides  when  heated  with  carbonic  oxide  ;  for
instance,  BagNj  4-  2C0  =  Ba(CN)2  +  2BaO.«»

The  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths,  just  like  Na  and  K,  absorb
hydrogen  under  certain  conditions,  and  form  pulverulent  easily  oxidis-
able  metallic  hydrides,  whose  composition  corresponds  exactly  to  that
of  NaaH  and  K^H,  with  the  substitution  of  K2  and  Na^  by  the  atoms

''^  Thus  in  the  nitrides  of  the  metals  we  have  substances  by  meana  of  which  we  can
easily  obtain  from  the  nitrogen  of  the  air,  not  only  ammonia,  but  also  with  the  aid  i>f
CO,  by  synthesis,  a  whole  series  of  complex  carbon  and  nitrogen  compoiind».

THE  VALENCY  AND  SPECIFIC  HEAT  OF  THE  METALS 621

Be,  Mg,  Ca,  Sr,  and  Ba.  The  hydrides  of  the  metals  of  the  alkaline
earths  were  discovered  by  C.  Winkler  (1891)  in  investigating  the
reducibility  of  these  metals  by  magnesium.  In  reducing  their  oxides
by  heating  them  with  magnesium  powder  in  a  stream  of  hydrogen,
Winkler  observed  that  the  hydrogen  was  absorbed  (but  very  slowly),  i,e,
at  the  moment  of  their  separation  all  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths
combine  with  hydrogen.  This  absorptive  power  increases  in  passing
from  Be  to  Mg,  Ca,  Sr,  and  Ba,  and  the  resultant  hydrides  retain  the
combined  hydrogen  ^^  when  heated,  so  that  these  hydrides  are  distin-
guished for  their  considerable  stability  under  heat,  but  they  oxidise
very  easily.^'

Thus  the  analogies  and  correlation  of  the  metals  of  these  two  groups
are  now  clearly  marked,  not  only  in  their  behaviour  towards  oxygen,
chlorine,  acids,  <S^.,  but  also  in  their  capability  of  combining  with
nitrogen  and  hydrogen.

*^  As  the  hydrides  of  calcium,  magnesium,  Sec  are  very  stable  under  the  action  of
heat,  and  these  metals  and  hydrogen  occur  in  the  sun,  it  is  likely  that  the  formation  of
their  hydrides  may  take  place  there.  (Private  communication  from  Prof.  Winkler,  1894.)
It  is  probable  that  in  the  free  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  hitherto  obtained  a  portion
was  frequently  in  combination  with  nitrogen  and  hydrogen.

^  Thus,  for  instance,  a  mixture  of  56  parts  of  CaO  and  24  pcui>s  of  magnesium  powder
is  heated  in  an  iron  pipe  (placed  over  a  row  of  gas  burners  as  in  the  combustion  furnace
used  for  organic  analysis)  in  a  stream  of  hydrogen.  After  being  heated  for  \  hour  the
mixture  is  found  to  absorb  hydrogen  (it  no  longer  passes  over  the  mixture,  but  is  retained
by  it).  The  product,  which  is  light  grey,  and  slightly  coherent,  disengages  a  mass  of
hydrogen  when  water  is  poured  over  it,  and  bums  when  heated  in  air.  The  resultant
mass  contains  88  per  cent.  CaH,  about  28  per  cent.  CaO,  and  about  88  per  cent.  MgO.
Neither  CaH  nor  any  other  MH  has  yet  been  obtained  in  a  pure  state.

The  acetylene  derivatives  of  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  C^M  (Chapter  VIII.,
Note  12  bis),  for  instance,  C.^Ba,  obtained  by  Maquenne  and  Moissan,  belong  to  the  same
class  of  analogous  compounds.  It  must  here  be  remarked  that  the  oxides  MO  of  the
metals  of  the  alkaline  earths,  although  not  reducible  by  carbon  at  a  furnace  heat,  yet
under  the  action  of  the  heat  attained  in  electrical  furnaces,  not  only  give  up  their  oxygen
to  carbon  (probably  partly  owing  to  the  action  of  the  current),  but  also  combine  with  car-
bon. The  resultant  compounds,  C2M,  evolve  acetylene,  C2H3,  with  HCl,  just  as  N2M3
give  ammonia.  We  may  remark  moreover  that  the  series  of  compounds  of  the  metals  of
the  alkaline  earths  with  hydrogen,  nitrogen  and  carbon  is  a  discovery  of  recent  years,  and
that  probably  further  researcli  will  give  rise  to  similar  unexpected  compounds,  and  by
extending  our  knowledge  of  their  reactions  prove  to  be  of  great  interest.

END OP THE FIRST  VOLUME
