THE PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY, VOL. 2
Dmitri Mendeleev (1834-1907)
Translated from the Russian (6th edition) by George Kamensky; edited by T. A. Lawson. London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1897. Vol. 2 of 2.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier principleschemi01lawsgoog.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

VOL.  II.

All rigbti reserTed

\

THE

PRLWIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

By D.  MENDELEEFF

TRAKSLATED  FROM  THE  RUSSIAN  (SIXTH  EDITION)  BV

GEORGE KAMENSKY, A.R.S.M.

OP  THE  IMPKltlAL  MINT,  sn*  PETERHBUUG  ;  MRMBEK  OF  TUK  RUSHIAX  PHYSICO-CHKMKAL  StKIKTY

EDITED  BY

T.  A.  LAWSON,  B.Sc.  Ph.D.

EZAMINEIt IN  COAI^TAK PlloUUCTS  T«»  THF.  CllT AXD  GUIM>S  OF I.ONlM)N IXSTniTrK

FKLrx»W  OF  THE  IXHTITCTK  OF  CHEMbiTUY

>■-.*»  »  •

IN TWO VOLUMES

VOLUME  11.

LONGMANS, GEEEN, AND CO.

39 PATEBNOSTEB BOW, LONDON
NEW  YOBK  AND  BOMBAY

1897

All rights reserved

• • • •

«

•*•

•  •• •

•  •

• • •

•• •••

• •

••I

•  •• •

• •  .

•  •  •

• •

* • •

>  ••• :

• • •

• •

• t

•  •  •

•  •  •

CONTENTS

OF

THE SECOND  VOLUME

TABLE OF  THE PERIODICITY OF  THE ELEMENTS  . to  face  Htlc  page

CHAITEB  I'AOE

XV. THE  OROUPINO  OF  THE ELEMENTS AND THE PERIODir LAW  .  1

XVI. ZINC, CADMIUM,  AND MERCURY .  .89

XVn. BORON,  ALUMINIUM,  AND THE ANALOGOUS METALS OF THE THIRD

GROUP  .  .  .  .  .  . . 60

XVIII.  SILICON AND THE OTHER ELEMENTS OF THE FOURTH GROUP .  09

XIX.  PHOSPHORUS AND THE OTHER  ELEMENTS OF  THE FIFTH GROUP  .  149

XX.  SULPHUR, SELENIUM, AND TELLURIUM ....  200

XXI.  CHROMIUM,  MOLYBDENUM, TUNGSTEN, URANIUM, AND MANGANESE  276

XXU.  IRON, COBALT, AND NICKEL . . . . . .  817

XXin.  THE PIJITINUM METALS ......  869

XXIV. COPPER, SILVER, AND GOLD .  .  . . 898

▲PPKXDIX

I. AN ATTEMPT TO APPLY TO CHEMISTRY ONE OF THE PRINCIPLES

OF NEWTON'S NATURAL PHILOSOPHY .... 458
II. THE PERIODIC LAW OF THE CHEMICAL ELEMENTS (THE FAKADAY

lecture)  .  .  .  .  . . 471

in. ARGON, A NEW CONSTITUENT OF THE ATMOSPHERE  .491

INDEX OF  AUTHORITIES  .  .  . . 501

SUBJECT INDEX .  .  . .510

5125.'^

PEINCIPLES OF CHEMISTEY

CHAPTER  XV

THE  GROUPING  OP  THE  ELEMENTS  AND  THE  PERIODIC  LAW

It  is  seen  from  the  examples  given  in  the  preceding  chapters  that  the
sum  of  the  data  concerning  the  chemical  transformations  proper  to  the
elements  (for  instance,  with  respect  to  the  formation  of  acids,  salts,
and  other  compounds  having  definite  properties)  is  insufficient  for
accurately  determining  the  relationship  of  the  elements,  inasmuch
as  this  may  be  many-sided.  Thus,  lithium  and  barium  are  in
some  respects  analogous  to  sodium  and  potassium,  and  in  others  to
magnesium  and  calcium.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  for  a  com-
plete judgment  it  is  necessary  to  have,  not  only  qualitative,  but  also
quantitative,  exact  and  measurable,  data.  When  a  property  can  be
measured  it  ceases  to  be  vague,  and  becomes  quantitative  instead  of
merely  qualitative.

Among  these  measurable  properties  of  the  elements,  or  of  their
corresponding  compounds,  are  :  (a)  isomorphism,  or  the  analogy  of
crystalline  forms  ;  and,  connected  with  it,  the  power  to  form  crystalline
mixtures  which  are  isomorphous ;  (b)  the  relation  of  the  volumes  of
analogous  compounds  of  the  elements  ;  (c)  the  composition  of  their
saline  compounds  ;  and  {d)  the  relation  of  the  atomic  weights  of  the
elements.  In  this  chapter  we  shall  briefly  consider  these  four  aspects
of  the  matter,  which  are  exceedingly  important  for  a  natural  and
fruitful  grouping  of  the  elements,  facilitating,  not  only  a  general
acquaintance  with  them,  but  also  their  detailed  study.

Historically  the  first,  and  an  important  and  convincing,  method  for
finding  a  relationship  between  the  compounds  of  two  different  elements
is  by  isomorphism.  This  conception  was  introduced  into  chemistry
by  Mitscherlich  (in  1820),  who  demonstrated  that  the  corresponding
salts  of  arsenic  acid,  H3ASO4,  and  phosphoric  acid,  H3PO4,  crystallise

VOL. II.  B

-2_

2  PKINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

with  an  equal  quantity  of  water,  show  an  exceedingly  close  resemblance
in  crystalline  form  (as  regards  the  angles  of  their  faces  and  axes),  and
are  able  to  crystaUise  together  from  solutions,  forming  crystals  con-
taining a  mixture  of  the  isomorphous  compounds.  Isomorphous  sub-
tances  are  those  which,  with  an  equal  number  of  atoms  in  their
molecules,  present  an  analogy  in  their  chemical  reactions,  a  close
resemblance  in  their  properties,  and  a  similar  or  very  nearly  similar
crystalline  form  :  they  often  contain  certain  elements  in  common,  from
which  it  is  to  be  concluded  that  the  remaining  elements  (as  in  the
preceding  example  of  As  and  P)  are  analogous  to  each  other.  And
inasmuch  as  crystalline  forms  are  capable  of  exact  measurement,
the  external  form,  or  the  relation  of  the  molecules  which  causes
their  grouping  into  a  crystalline  form,  is  evidently  as  great  a  help  in
judging  of  the  internal  forces  acting  between  the  atoms  as  a  comparison
of  reactions,  vapour  densities,  and  other  like  relations.  We  have
already  seen  examples  of  this  in  the  preceding  pages.*  It  will  be
sufficient  to  call  to  mind  that  the  compounds  of  the  alkali  metals
with  the  halogens  RX,  in  a  crystalline  form,  all  belong  to  the  cubic
system  and  crystallise  in  octahedra  or  cubes — for  example,  sodium
chloride,  potassium  chloride,  potassium  iodide,  rubidium  chloride,  &c.
The  nitrates  of  rubidium  and  ctesium  appear  in  anhydrous  crystals  of
the  same  form  as  potassium  nitrate.  The  carbonates  of  the  metals  of
the  alkaline  earths  are  isomorphous  with  calcium  carbonate — that  is,
they  either  appear  in  forms  like  calc  spar  or  in  the  rhombic  system
in  crystals  analogous  to  aragonite.**>*«  Furthermore,  sodium  nitrate
crystallises  in  rhombohedra,  closely  resembling  the  rhombohedra  of  calc
spar  (calcium  carbonate),  CaC03,  whilst  potassium  nitrate  appears  in  the
same  form  as  aragonite,  CaCO.,,  and  the  number  of  atoms  in  both  kinds
of  salts  is  the  same :  they  all  contain  one  atom  of  a  metal  (K,  Na,  Ca),  one
atom  of  a  non-metal  (C,  N),  and  three  atoms  of  oxygen.  The  analogy
of  form  evidently  coincides  with  an  analogy  of  atomic  composition.
But,  as  we  have  learnt  from  the  previous  description  of  these  salts,  there
is  not  any  close  resemblance  in  their  properties.  It  is  evident  that  calcium
carbonate  approaches  more  nearly  to  magnesium  carbonate  than  to  sodium
nitnite,  although  their  crystalline  forms  are  all  equally  alike. Isomor-

'  For  instance  the  analog}'  of  the  sulphates  of  K,  Rb,  and  Cs  (Chapter  XIII.,  Notel).

I  bu  xiic  crystalline  fonns  of  aragonite,  strontianite,  and  witherite  belong  to  the
rhombic  Hysteni ;  the  angle  of  the  prism  of  CaCO-,  is  116°  10',  of  SrCO-  117°  19',  and  of
BaCO.-,  118°  30'.  On  the  other  hand  the  crystalline  forms  of  calc  spar,  magnesite,  and
calamine,  wliich  resemble  each  other  quite  as  closely,  belong  to  the  rhombohedral  system,
with  the  angle  of  the  rhombohedra  for  CaCO.-  105"  8',  MgCO.,  107°  10',  and  ZnCO.,
107^  40'.  From  this  comparison  it  is  at  once  evident  that  zinc  is  more  closely  allied
to  magnesium  than  magnesium  to  calcium.

GROTTHNG  OF  THE  ELEMRNT9  AND  THE  PEHIODIC  LVW 3

phouB  Bubstnnces  which  nre  prefectly  analogous  to  each  other  jire  not
only  chBracteriaed  by  a  close  resemblance  cif  fonii  (homeomurphisin),  but
also  by  the  faculty  of  entei'iug  into  analogous  reactions,  which  is  not  tlie
uaae  with  RNOj  and  IlCOj.  The  most  important  and  direct  method  of
reoognising  perfect  isomoi^phism — that  is,  the  absolute  analogy  of  two
compounds— is  given  by  that  property  of  analogous  wmipounila  of
separating  from  solutions  in  /lOiswg'-rMOni  ciyatnlg,  containing  l/it
miint  i-aried  /'roportioiis  of  the  analogous  aubstancea  which  enter
into  their  composition.  These  quantities  do  not  seem  to  l>e  in
dependence  on  the  molecular  or  atomic  weights,  and  if  they  are
governed  by  any  laws  they  must  be  analogous  to  those  which  apply  to
ladetinite  chemical  compounds.^  This  will  be  clear  from  the  follow-
examples.  Potassium  chloride  and  potassium  nitrate  are  not
isomorphous  witli  each  other,  and  are  in  an  atomic  sense  composed
different  manner.  If  these  salts  be  mixed  in  a  solution  and
the  solution  be  evaporated,  independi-nt  crystals  of  the  two  salts  will
separate,  each  in  that  crystalline  form  which  is  pniper  to  it.  The
crystals  will  not  contain  a  mixture  of  the  two  salts.  But  if  we
mix  the  solutions  of  two  isiimorphous  salts  together,  then,  under
certain  circum-stances,  crystals  will  be  obtained  which  contain  both
these  substances.  However,  this  cannot  be  taken  as  an  absolute  rule,
for  if  we  take  a  soiutinn  saturated  at  a  high  temperature  with  a
niixture  of  potassium  and  sodium  chlorides,  then  on  evaporation  sodium
chloride  only  will  separate,  and  on  cooling  only  potassium  chloride.

'  Solutions tanUHbthevonimaiii^nlvxaiupkiiofindeBnitechDmii^inraipoundii.  Buttlia
laonuiTpliDna  mixtarea  whii:b  Ate  m  coaaaoa  Aitiuag  the  pryHtalliiie  coiupuDnils  of  ailiciL
touniag  the  cnut  of  the  earth,  as  well  as  olloye,  which  uc  so  importuit  in  the  npplk-n-
tion  ol  DiBlttU  tothearta,  tra  iU>o  instuicea  oF  inde finite oomponndB,  Andil  in  Chapleil.,
and  in  nua;  nllier  iiortiona  of  thin  work,  it  Imx  been  necewory  to  itdmit  the  pretence
of  ilcHnite  eompouada  (in  ■  state  oF  diswiciatiou)  in  solutions,  the  atime  npplieii  with
ernt  grester  lurce  to  iBomnrpbonB  mixtarea  bad  ftUoyx.  For  this  reason  in  mun;  pluea
in  tlita  wutk  I  refer  to  facts  wltich  compel  ns  to  recognise  the  eiiBteurre  of  definite
themicKl  componnda  in  all  iK>nior[dions  mlitures  and  alloys.  This  view  of  mine  (which
ilalM  frmo  the  aixtieii)  npon  iaamorphons  miitnrea  findan  partioDlorl; cleat oonflrmation
in  B.  RooEeboom's  reaearches  (IS03I  npon  the  aolnhility  and  cryatajhsing  capacity  ot
miitoms  ol  the  chlorates  of  potaisinm  and  thBllinm,  KCIO.i,  and  T1C10„.  He  showed
tliat  when  a  eolation  contains  different  amoonta  of  these  salta,  it  depoaiti  eryatala  cod-
laining  either  an  eiceaa  of  the  first  salt,  Irom  OB  p.c.  to  100  p.c.,  or  an  eiceaa  of  the  second
salt,  tram  M-T  U IIW  p.c. ;  thai  ii,  in  the  crystalline  form,  either  the  Grat  salt  saturates  the
■Mondorthe  second  the  liial,  just  as  in  the  aolntion  of  ether  in  water  (Chapter  L) ;  more-
over, tlH-snlabiUty  of  the  miitnna  containing  30 'S  and  98  pj^.KClOj  is  similar,  jnat  as  the
rapnOT  tension  ot  a  aatnrated  Halation  of  water  in  ether  is  equal  to  tliat  of  a  aaturated
wilntinn  of  ether  m  water  (Chapter  I..  Xole  4Tf ,  Bat  jnat  as  there  are  solutions  miscible
in  all  {iroporliona,  so  also  certain  iaoinorphoUB  bodies  can  be  present  in  crystals  in
all  iKHsible  proportions  of  their  i-ompcincnt  parts.  Van  't  Hoff  calls  bucIi  systems  '  solid
wlalioQH.*  These  views  were  anhsnqoently  elabornlod  by  Nomst  (18M),and  Wilt  (ISOl)
applied  Uiem  in  eiplainJnic  the  plienomena  observed  in  the  coloration  of  tissaeo.

4  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Tlie  first  will  contain  very  little  potassium  chloride,  and  the  latter
very  little  sodium  chloride.'  But  if  we  take,  for  example,  a  mixture
of  solutions  of  magnesium  sulphate  and  zinc  sulphate,  they  cannot
be  sepai-ated  from  each  other  by  evaporating  the  mixture,  notwith-
standing the  rather  considerable  difference  in  the  solubility  of  these
salts.  Again,  the  isomorphous  salts,  magnesium  carbonate,  and  calcium
carbonate  are  found  together— that  is,  in  one  crystal — in  nature.
The  angle  of  the  rhombohedron  of  these  magnesia-lime  spars  is  inter-
mediate between  the  angles  proper  to  the  two  spars  individually  (for  cal-
cium carbonate,  the  angle  of  the  rhombohedron  is  105°  8' ;  magnesium
carbonate,  107°  30' ;  CaMg(C03)2, 106°  10).  Certain  of  these  isomor-
phous mixtures  of  calcand  magnesia  spars  appear  in  well-formed  crystals,
and  in  this  case  there  not  unfrequently  exists  a  simple  molecular  pro-
portion of  strictly  definite  chemical  combination  between  the  component
salts— for  instance,  CaCOgjMgCOj — whilst  in  other  cases,  especially  in
the  absence  of  distinct  crystallisation  (in  dolomites),  no  such  simple
molecular  proportion  is  observable:  this  is  also  the  case  in  many
artificially  prepared  isomorphous  mixtures.  The  microscopical  and
cry stallo  optical  researches  of  Professor  Inostrantzoff  and  others
show  that  in  many  cases  there  is  really  a  mechanical,  although  micro-
scopically minute,  juxtaposition  in  one  whole  of  the  heterogeneous
crystals  of  calcium  carbonate  (double  refracting)  and  of  the  compound
CaMgC20(,.  If  we  suppose  the  adjacent  parts  to  l)e  microscopically
small  (on  the  l)asis  of  the  researches  of  Mallard,  Weruboff,  and  others),
we  obtain  an  idea  of  isomorphous  mixtures.  A  formula  of  the  follow-
ing kind  is  given  to  isomorphous  mixtures  :  for  instance,  for  spars,
RCO3,  where  R=Mg,  Ca,  and  where  it  may  be  Fe,Mn  .  .  .,  &c.  This
means  that  the  Ca  is  partially  replaced  by  Mg  or  another  metal.
Alums  form  a  common example of  the separation of isomorphous

^  The  cause  of  the  difference  which  is  observed  in  different  compounds  of  the  same
type,  with  respect  to  their  property  of  forming  isomorphous  mixtures,  must  not  be  looked
for  in  the  difference  of  their  volumetric  composition,  as  many  investigators,  including
Kopp,  affirm.  The  molecular  volumes  (found  by  dividing  the  molecular  weight  by  the
density)  of  tliose  isomorphous  substances  which  do  give  intermixtures  are  not  nearer  to
each  other  than  the  volumes  of  those  which  do  not  give  mixtures ;  for  example,  for  mag-
nesium carbonate  the  combining  weight  is  84,  density  3'06,  and  volume  therefore  27  ;  for
calcium  carbonate  in  the  form  of  calc  spar  the  volume  is  37,  and  in  the  form  of  arago-
nite  83 ;  for  strontium  carbonate  41,  for  barium  carbonate  40 ;  that  is,  the  volume  of
these  closely  allied  isomorphous  substances  increases  with  the  combining  weight.  The
same  is  observed  if  we  compare  sodium  chloride  (molecular  volume  =  27)  with  potassium
chloride  (volume  -^  37),  or  sodium  sulphate  (volume  =  55)  with  potassium  sulphate
(volume  =  00).  or  sodium  nitrate  39  with  iK)tassium  nitrate  48,  although  the  latter  are
less  capable  of  giving  isomorphous  mixtures  than  the  former.  It  is  evident  that  the
cause  of  isomorphism  cannot  be  explained  by  an  approximation  in  molecular  volumes.
It  is  more  likely  that,  given  a  similarity  in  form  and  composition,  the  faculty  to  give
isomorphous  mixtures  is  connected  with  t)ie  laws  and  degree  of  solubility.

OROHPINO  OF  THE  ELEMESTS  AKD  THE  PBBIODIC  LAW 6

mixtures  from  solutiona.  They  are  double  sulphates  (or  selenifttes)
of  alumiuft  (or  oxides  isomorphoua  with  it)  and  the  alkalis,  which
crystallise  in  well-formed  crystals.  Tf  nluminium  sulphate  lie  mixed
with  potassium  sidphate,  an  aJtiin  i^eparates,  having  the  composi-
tiou  KA)^:,0|,,l2H.}O.  If  sodium  sulphate  or  ammonium  :iulpiiute,  oi-
rubidium  (or  thallium)  sulphate  l)e  used,  we  obtain  iilums  haviog  the
cmposition  RAlS.jO„12HjO.  Not  only  do  tliey  all  crystallise  in  the
cubic  system,  but  tliey  also  contain  an  equal  atomic  ijuaotity  of  water
"f  crystiiUisation  (I2H5O).  Besidos  which,  if  wo  mix  solutioDs  of  the
potassium  and  ammonium  {NH,AIS^0„12H.^0)  alums  together,  then
the  crystals  which  sopaj'at«  will  coutnin  various  proportions  of  the
alkalis  takeu,  and  separate  crystals  of  the  alums  of  one  or  the  other
kind  will  not  be  obtained,  but  each  separate  crystal  will  contain  both
potassium  and  ammonium.  Nor  is  this  all  ;  if  we  take  a  crystil  of  n
potassium  aluiu  and  immerse  it  in  a  solution  capable  of  yielding
ammonia  alum,  the  crystal  of  the  potash  alum  will  continue  to
grow  and  increase  in  size  in  this  solution — that  is,  a  layer  of  the
ammonia  or  other  alum  will  deposit  itself  upon  the  planes  bounding
the  crystal  of  the  potash  alum ,  This  is  very  distinctly  seen  if  a  colour-
less crystal  of  a  common  alum  Ije  immersed  in  a  saturated  vinlet  solu-
tion of  chrome  alum,  KCrSjOa,12H.jO,  which  then  deposits  itself  in  a
\iolet  layer  over  the  colourless  crystal  of  the  alumina  alum,  as  was
olwerved  even  before  Mitscherlicli  noticed  it.  If  this  crystal  be  then
immersed  in  a  solution  of  an  alumina  alum,  a  layer  <if  this  salt  will
form  over  the  layer  of  chrome  aluui,  so  that  one  alum  is  able  to  incite
the  growth  of  the  other.  If  the  deposition  proceed  simultaneously,  the
resultant  intermixture  may  l>e  minute  and  inseparable,  but  its  nature  is
understood  from  the  precetling  experiments  ;  the  attracti\'e  force  of
crystallisation  of  isomorpbous  substances  is  so  nearly  equal  that  the
attractive  power  of  an  isoraorphous  substance  induces  a  crystalline  super-
stmcture  exactly  the  same  as  would  be  prtjduced  by  the  attractive  force
of  like  crystalline  particles.  Fi-om  thisit  is  evident  that  one  isomorphous
substance  may  iiidiice  t!ip  cryBiaVisatton  •  of  another.  Such  a  phenomenon
expl&ins,  on  the  one  hand,  the  aggregation  of  different  isomoiphous
subGt&Dces  in  one  crystal,  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  it  .serves  as  a  most
exact  indication  of  the  nearness  liotb  of  the  molecular  composition  of
isomorpbous  aulistanc^es  and  of  those  forces  which  are  proper  to  the
elements  which  distinguish  the  isomorpbous  substances.  Thus,  for
example,  ferrous  sulphate  or  green  vitriol  crystallises  in  the  nionoclinic

*  A  t'btmomenoa  ot  n  nimilsr  kini^  \n  ^liown  lor  nugneainin  sulphate  in  Not<<  i^  iit  tbe

Lktt  cbaptn. In  tbe  anme  eiuaple  ne eoe what  a  rrompUcation  lh<>  phenomena  ol

' '  a  may  iiittoduce  when  the  tunai  of  atujcigous  compoundH  are  compSHd.

6  PBINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

system  and  contains  seven  molecules  of  water,  FeS04,7Hi;0,  whilst
copper  vitriol  crystallises  with  five  molecules  of  water  in  the  triclinic
system,  CuS04,5H20  ;  nevertheless,  it  may  be  easily  proved  that  both
salts  are  perfectly  isomorphous  ;  that  they  are  able  to  appear  in  identi-
cally the  same  forms  and  with  an  equal  molecular  amount  of  water.
For  instance,  Marignac,  by  evaporating  a  mixture  of  sulphuric  acid
and  ferrous  sulphate  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,  first  obtained
crystals  of  the  hepta-hyd rated  salt,  and  then  of  the  penta-hydrated
salt  FeS04,5H20,  which  were  perfectly  similar  to  the  crystals  of  copper
sulphate.  Furthermore,  Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran,  by  immersing  crystals
of  FeS04,7H20  in  a  supersaturated  solution  of  copper  sulphate,  caused
the  latter  to  deposit  in  the  same  form  as  ferrous  sulphate,  in  crystals
of  the  monoclinic  system,  CuS04,7H20.

Hence  it  is  evident  that  isomorphism — that  is,  the  analogy  of  forms
and  the  property  of  inducing  crystallisation — may  ser\e  as  a  means  for
the  discovery  of  analogies  in  molecular  composition .  We  will  take  an
example  in  order  to  render  this  clear.  If,  instead  of  aluminium  sul-
phate, we  add  magnesium  sulphate  to  potassium  sulphate,  then,  on
evaporating  the  solution,  the  double  salt  K2MgS208,6H20  (Chap-
ter XIY.,  Note  28)  separates  instead  of  an  alum,  and  the  ratio  of
the  component  parts  (in  alums  one  atom  of  potassium  per  2SO4,  and
here  two  atoms)  and  the  amount  of  water  of  crystallisation  (in  alums
12,  and  here  6  equivalents  per  2SO4)  are  quite  different;  nor  is  this
double  salt  in  any  way  isomorphous  with  the  alums,  nor  capable  of
forming  an  isomorphous  crystalline  mixture  with  them,  nor  does  the
one  salt  provoke  the  crystallisation  of  the  other.  From  this  we
must  conclude  that  although  alumina  and  magnesia,  or  aluminium
and  magnesium,  resemble  each  other,  they  are  not  isomorphous,
and  that  although  they  give  partially  similar  double  salts,  these  salts
are  not  analogous  to  each  other.  And  this  is  expressed  in  their
chemical  formulae  by  the  fact  that  the  number  of  atoms  in  alumina  or
aluminium  oxide,  AI2O3,  is  different  from  the  number  in  magnesia,  MgO.
Aluminium  is  trivalent  and  magnesium  bivalent.  Thus,  having  obtained
a  double  salt  from  a  given  metal,  it  is  possible  to  judge  of  the  analogy
of  the  given  metal  with  aluminium  or  with  magnesium,  or  of  the
absence  of  such  an  analogy,  from  the  composition  and  form  of  this
salt.  Thus  zinc,  for  example,  does  not  form  alums,  but  forms  a  double
salt  with  potassium  sulphate,  which  has  a  composition  exactly  like  that
of  the  corresponding  salt  of  magnesium.  It  is  often  possible  to  dis-
tinguish the  bivalent  metals  analogous  to  magnesium  or  calcium  from
the  trivalent  metiils,  like  aluminium,  by  such  a  method.  Further-
more, the  specific  heat  and  vapour  density  serve  as  guides. There  are

OHOUPING  OF  THE  ELEMENTS  AND  THE  PKRIODic  LAW

also  indirect  proofs.  Thiu  iron  gives  ferroua  compounds,  FeXj,  which
are  Lsomorphous  with  the  compounds  of  magneBiom,  and  ferric
ooinpoonds,  FeXj,  which  are  isomorphous  with  the  compounds  of
aluminium  ;  in  thia  inatance  the  relutive  composition  is  directly
determined  iiy  analysis,  Iwcause,  for  a  given  amouut  of  iron,  FeCl.j
only  contains  two-thirds  of  the  amount  of  chlorine  which  occurs  in
FeClj,  and  the  composition  of  the  eorrespondinj;  oxygen  eoiiipounds,
!.'■.  of  ferrous  oxide,  FeO,  and  ferric  oxide,  Fe^Oj,  clearly  indicates
the  analog}-  of  the  ferrous  oxide  with  Mgt)  and  of  the  ferric  oxide

with  AI^O:,,

Thus  in  the  building  up  of  similar  raoieculea  in  crystalline  forms  we
see  one  of  the  numerous  means  for  judging  of  the  internal  world  of
molecules  and  atoms,  and  one  of  the  weapons  for  conquests  in  the
invisible  world  of  molecular  mechanics  which  forms  the  main  object  of
physico-chemical  knowledge. This  method  "  has  more  than  once  been

'  The  property  iii

ioliita  fit  ocnurriiig  iu  re^nlu^  crystallitie  forme — the  cwcarrence  of
e  e&rth'a  cnmb  in  tliew  forma — and  thoiU!  geometrictd  snd  simple
fomuhttoD  of  cryflt&lb  loug  ago  atLrocLocl  the  a-ltuntion  of  the  untu-
3  crjrBtslliiui  form  is,  without  doabt,  the  expresHiou  of  the  relnlion
m  whicb  tbe  atomti  occnr  in  the  molecDlea,  uoil  ia  whivh  the  maleculeii  occur  iu  the  miLas,
of  a  BuhsUnce,  CrystulliMtion  ia  determiued  by  the  distribution  of  the  molvcoles  along
the  direction  of  greute^t cohesion,  and  thererore  thobe  forces  must  t>ke  purt  in  the

on  the  forces  binding  the  atomH  together  in  the  inoSecoles,  &  very  dose  connac-
tton  mast  exiat  betveen  the  atomic  comiioBitiou  and  the  diatributiou  oF  the  atume
in  the  molecule  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  crystulline  form  of  a  anbatiuiDe  un  the
other  band ;  and  hence  an  iuaigbt  into  the  vom|)oeition  may  be  arrived  at  from  the
cryahilhne  form.  Sach  is  the  elemaulHry  and  apriori  iiles  which  lies  at  the  baae  of  all
reHorches  into  the  conai-ctiim  tmtoKKn  ctrmposiiion  aniJ  cri/tfalline  form.  H»(ly  in
IHll  eatabhahed  the  following  fundivmental  law,  which  haa  been  vrorked  out  hy  later
invesCigatora :  That  the  fundainentiU  cry«talUiifl  form  for  a  given  cliemical  compound  ia
ccoatant  (only  the  combinationa  vary),  and  that  witLa  change  o(  compoaition  the  crystal-
tine  (omi  alao  chongea,  naturally  with  the  exception  of  aoch  limitbig  forms  as  the  cube.
rtgnlar  octahedron,  iic,  which  niay  belong  to  varioua  sabatnncos  of  the  regular  ayateoi.
The  fundamental  torra  is  determined  by  the  angles  of  cortnin  luDdamental  geometric
forma  {pritona,  pyramida,  rhomlnhedra),  or  the  ratio  of  the  cryaCalline  axes,  and  ia  con-
nected with  the  optical  and  many  other  proportiea  o(  cryatala.  Since  the  eatabliahmpnt
of  thia  law  the  deacriplion  of  definite  compouadn  in  a  aoUd  state  is  accompanied  by  a
dmcription  (meaauremeut)  of  ita  cryatala,  nbicli  forma  an  invariable,  deRnite,  and
tDBaanrsble  character.  Tlie  moat  uaportant  epocbu  in  the  further  history  of  this  qaeation
were  made  by  the  following  diaooveries : — Kl«.proth,  Vauquelin,  and  others  showed  that
angonite  hoa  the  lanie  compoaition  aa  catc  apar.  whilat  the  former  belonga  to  the
rfiombic  and  the  latter  to  the  hexagonal  ayatem. Haliy  at  Qrat  considered  that  the  com-

Thia  ia  dimorphism  iate  Chapter  XIV.,  Note  i6).  Bendant,  Frankeuheim,  Laurent,  and
Dthsra  fonnd  that  the  forma  of  the  two  nitna,  KNOj  and  NaNOj,  exactly  correspond
with  Ibe  forma  of  aragonite  and  calc  spar  ;  that  they  are  able,  moreover,  to  pasn  from
one  loim  into  another ;  and  that  the  difference)  of  the  lormB  is  accoEapanied  by  a  amall
altflraUon  of  the  angles,  lor  tlie  angle  of  the  priamsof  potaaaiam  nitrate  and  aragonite
',  and  of  aodinm  nitrate  and  calc  spar,  130° ; and  therefore  dimorphism,  or  tlie

.•- I -v-

/

*.,... ....

"■  ..I.I ^

• -A

i_  '

• "... .«. .

»■  — *..-.  .  ^"

' ..; ■■ .-. Mj-.

.  t ....

'.»!  '*

"•  .^».. ..»■.

. .  ...- .  ..  ■■■ I J*  ■..!■•■«. tZ..

' '. :.:'. J- .-■ •.''.'] .7.  KA>  -<  ».  ;

»• 'I I' ' '.f.- 'i.  .::.  .  ::r.  :. '.. N.  I  O-.li'H.n.

•!  i.'.j  :  • ■ l'..'»  .1"JI  /».  1  ■ : '■:  ;•.  i -■.■■■.. J  :-■  :l:t -«i!»**
.■•■■'.' I .-t..''.'./.  •  f  '  '  : r ..i":'ii.- i:.'i  .1 .':'-.ir:>--  I'f  i.i'rn'-
'■ ' •  'I I.. . ',*i.it .  .:■.  .:. ••-.■- i!,]_'}it .ii-i*.iS :■■ \: in-rffi  llv

■ •  •  •

I'f 'II.. I ■  i.f ../'.i .'.■I f;in'i.ii:.i-i.t.il  firm-  :» .i r»Itit:\t-  ■.il*-:!'

I • • 'i.ii» .. II «  i.'.i.f.ii  f  I if |iri  ii«-r*:i— .i'.mI nili-Tijul rflat:i>ii

■ '  '  ■  ■ ■  ' ■■.11. J.'. •  •  I.  f 'iiiiif  •  *i 'I w  f|i .1 ii-«-iiji>l.iiii>- •'!" U»nii. Tbu<*.

' « ■  [ • I...  ..  ■ ';  '» .i.'l .'.I'lr M  O ;u'-  fii'«jij'-iill>  (••uii«l  ill i:i.iny  |iyrii\i-iH'-.

I  .|i I- .  I.  .  I I ...iM.iiij -i,!.! ;i|,.| ;.'ii*-i;i •>!;_'<). T.iO. Fi-( ). MnOl.

'  •.•'.-I I 'I If*  III. If. I .iiiil III  III. itlni , •-ii(|f.i\riiir«'(l til •■\i>].i!ii -IK  h ii)-tini('«>s

\.  ■  f  i-fi'.' f  I  !• .•  •  ii.-i /.liitn- i.il.ii;'  lli.il \I;0 III. I'. )m- r«']il.iri'(l  )iy:»II;<> fi.ir  t'N;imi)l»',
'I- ■■ '■'! «  1(1  III. 1. 1  1^  » ti. \| It iiri ihi- .i|ii|i)ii]Mi]i>-. t;ili-\ ;'li«l «-n I'll. A

I'll-  I.. I.' I  irii I  Mil  I '.f  Mil i.nli  i-  III-  .iilijfit  t'»  (liiulit,  li'-c'iiii:'!- iiiiiny  (if  tlu>

iiiii I 11..1.11I ■■  li.i  li I  I 1 1| .1 til'- >>.i i-. fill- \]\f I'stalili-liiiH-nt "f iKiluiH-ric

•  ••iiii'ij) II .ill |.iiil>  iiiilii  ■. III! Imiyir I'H-  •  III llnii'  ori^iiiiil rMiii|wi>;ii  jun.  l*iil uni-

''  Iiii. Ill  I  II .illiiiil iiiiili  I ihf iiitliii-iM  •■  iif  -filiitiiiii-^  wliicli liiivr  cdiui' >iiti>  ( iinttut

OROtJPING  OF  THE  ZLBMEKTS AND  TSE  PEHlODlr LAW

crystalline  muitures  can  1>e  experimentally  verified,  this  method  is  a
numerical  and  meaaarable  one,  and  in  no  sense  nrbitrai'y.

There  in,  hoyrerft,  no  <loubt  oF  tbe  eiistencH  of  a  wliule  iterieii  u(  tutunil  and  urtificfaJ
hometiinoriilia,  wliioli  differ  (rtim  encljaUioi  by  utomic  amoonts  of  wntBr,  ailica,  and  Home
athrr  cnmpoiienl  putt.  Thus,  Thonmen  (1BT4)  showed  a  very  HlHkiog  uubaDiw.  Tbe
metallic  chloiidei,  BCI|,  oftsn  otTBtaJliae  n-itb  vater,  uod  tliey  do  not  then  contain  leas
tbaii  one  molecule  of  wmtor  per  atom  of  chlorine.  The  moHt  familiiir  represuutatice  ut
the  order  RClfSafi  in  BaCL^^HiO,  ohich  orystalliiies  in  the  ihambic  ajBleni.  Bniioin
brnmide,  BuBt^^R-fl,  uid  cop[Hsr  chloride,  CuCl„SIL,0.  have  neorlf  th«  aame  forms
putusiani  iodBl«,KIO, ;  potasainiD  chlonte,  KCIO,  ;  potaasium  pennuiguuiLe,  KMiiO|:
barinm  aalphnlv,  BoSO^ ;  cnlciam  snlplute,  CaSOi ;  widium  nulpbate,  Na-jSO^ ;  buiaiii
lomule,  BkC,H,0„  and  olhers  bare  almost  the  siuue  ciystalline  fornj  (uf  tbe  rhombic
■ysteml.  P&rmllel  with  this  serisi  is  that  of  the  metallic  chlorides  containing  H(;l,,4H]0,
of  the  sulphates  of  the  compoutiou  RSOt,EU.,0,  nod  the  tormateg  RC^IL^i.alLiO.
These  eomponnds  belong  lo  Lhe  monoclinic  Bfstviii,  have  a  close  reaembianee  of  form,  and
diflcr  from  the  first  series  by  coBtaining  two  mor-e  molecules  of  water.  The  addition  of  two
morv  molMules  of  water  in  all  the  above  sertea  also  f^vesfonnflot  the  monoclinio  system
ckwely  toaombling  each  other;  for  eiampte,  NiCl^eHiO  and  MiiSO„lIl,0.  Hence  we
•er  that  not  ooly  ia  RClj,aR,0  analogous  in  torm  to  BSD,  and  BC^KjO^,  bat  that  their
(umpouuds  with  SHgO  and  with  «]L,0  also  uihibit  rloaely  analogoun  forms.  From  these
eialuliles  it  ia  evident  that  tbe  eauditioBS  which  determine  a  given  form  maybe  repeated
not  aiil;  in  the  presence  of  ao  isomorphoua  eictiauge — that  is,  with  an  equal  number  of
uiDias  in  Uie  molecule— hot  also  iu  the  preaenc«  uf  an  uneqoal  nnmber  when  there  are
pcfoliar  aiid  as  yet  ongeneraliaed  relations  in  composition.  Thus  ZnO  aad  AL,Oj
elhibit  a  eloae  analogy  of  form.  Both  oiidea  belong  to  the  rhomhohedral  system,  and
the  angle  beliWeeD  tlia  pyramid  and  the  lemiinBl  plane  of  the  Aral  is  118"  7',  and  of  tbe
aecnnd  118°  40'.  Alnuiina,  Al/)],  is  alao  analoguaB  in  form  to  SiOg,  and  we  aliall  see
that  Ibeae  analogieB  of  form  are  conjoined  Willi  a  certain  analogy  in  properties.  It  ia
not  Huvrising,  therefore,  that  in  the  complex  molecule  of  a  ailiceoiu  componiid  it  is
soneUmes  poHible  to  replace  SiO,  by  meana  of  AlgOj.  as  Scheerer  admits.  The  oxides
Cn,0,  HgO.  KiO,  Te,0,.  CeO,.  crystallise  in  the  regular  system,  although  they  are  of
T«y  diSerent  alomic  structure.  Marignao  demonstrated  tbe  perfect  analogy  of  the
funns  of  KiZrFi  and  CaCOj,  and  tbe  former  ia  even  diniorpboas,  like  tbe  caluiom  car-
bonate. The  same  salt  is  isomorphous  with  lUKbOF,  and  R.;WO,Fj,  where  R  ia  an
alkali  metal.  There  is  an  equivalency  between  CaCOs  and  K.,ZrFa,  becauae  S.,  ia
equiralenl  Co  Ca,  C  to  Zr,  and  Fg  lo  O3,  and  with  the  isomorpUism  of  the  other  two  aalta
we  find  besides  an  equal  contents  of  the  alkali  metal — an  eqnal  nnmber  of  aloroe
on  the  one  hand  and  an  analogy  to  the  properties  of  K^ZrFe  on  the  other.  The  loug-
known  isomorphism  of  ttie  correiqwiiding  compciunds  of  potnseium  and  ammonium,  KX
and  NH^,  may  be  taken  a«  the  airoplest  eiam  pie  of  the  fact  Uiat  an  analogy  of  form
shows  itsell  with  an  analogy  ol  chemical  reaction  even  withont  an  eqnality  in  atomic
Therefore  the  ultimate  progresa  of  tbe  entire  doctrine  of  the  correlation
IU  and  cryntalliiie  forms  will  only  bo  arrived  at  with  the  accumnlation  of  a
it  Dauber  uf  tacts  collected  on  a  plan  comsponding  with  the  problems  which
hi9«  pieeent  themaelvES.  The  first  steps  have  already  been  niaile.  The  researches  of
tb>  nsnera  riivanl,  HnrigDao,  on  the  ci^atalline  form  and  composition  of  umny  of  the
dooble  flnoHdet,  and  the  work  of  WymboS  on  the  ferricyanidea  and  other  compounds,
ve  partiFnlBrly  important  in  this  respect.  It  ia  already  evident  that,  with  a  definite
dung*  of  composition,  certain  angles  ramain  conatant,  notwithatanding  that  others  are
•abject  to  alteration.  Such  an  instance  of  Che  relation  of  forms  was  observed  by
tiaitrent,  aod  named  by  him  hemitHurjihitm  (an  anomalous  term)  when  the  analogy  is
liniilad  to  certain  angles,  and  pammorphiim  when  the  (ormn  in  genend  approach  each
[>  diflHreiit  ayalema. So,  for  example,  tlif  uiigle  of  the  planes  of  a

10  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  regularity  and  simplicity  expressed  by  the  exact  laws  of  crystal-
line form  repeat  themselves  in  the  aggregation  of  the  atoms  to  form
molecules.  Here,  as  there,  there  are  but  few  fo^ms  which  are  essen-
tially different,  and  their  apparent  diversity  reduces  itself  to  a  few
fundamental  differences  of  type.  There  the  molecules  aggregate
themselves  into  crystalline  forms  ;  here,  the  atoms  aggregate  them-
selves into  molecular  forms  or  into  the  types  of  compounds.  In  both
cases  the  fundamental  crystalline  or  molecular  forms  are  liable  to
variations,  conjunctions,  and  combinations.  If  we  know  that  potassium
gives  compounds  of  the  fundamental  type  KX,  where  X  is  a  univalent
element  (which  combines  with  one  atom  of  hydrogen,  and  is,  according
to  the  law  of  substitution,  able  to  replace  it),  then  we  know  the  com-
position of  its  compounds  :  KjO,  KHO,  KCl,  NHjK,  KNO3,  K^SO^,
KHSO4,  K2Mg  (804)2,61120,  &c.  All  the  possible  derivative  crystal-
line forms  are  not  known.  So  also  all  the  atomic  combinations  are  not
known  for  every  element. Thus  in  the  case  of  potassium,  KCH3,  K3P,

rhombohedron  ma}-  be  greater  or  less  than  90*^,  and  therefore  such  acute  and  obtuse
rhombohedra  may  closely  approximate  to  the  cube.  Hausmannite,  Mn304,  belongs  to
the  tetragonal  system,  and  the  planes  of  its  pyramid  are  inclined  at  an  angle  of  about
118°,  whilst  magnetic  iron  ore,  Fe504,  which  resembles  hausmannite  in  many  respects,
appears  in  regular  octahedra — that  is,  the  pyramidal  planes  are  inclined  at  an  angle  of
109°  28'.  This  is  an  example  of  paramorphism  ;  the  systems  are  different,  the  composi-
tions are  analogous,  and  there  is  a  certain  resemblance  in  form.  Hemimorphism  has
been  found  in  many  instances  of  saline  and  other  substitutions.  Thus,  Laurent  demon-
strated, and  Hintze  confirmed  (1878),  that  naphthalene  derivatives  of  analogous  compo-
sition are  hemimorphous.  Nickles  (1849)  showed  that  in  ethylene  sulphate  the  angle  of
the  prism  is  125"  26',  and  in  the  nitrate  of  the  same  radicle  126°  95'.  Tlie  angle  of  the
prism  of  methylamine  oxalate  is  181°  20',  and  of  fluoride,  which  is  very  different  in  com-
position from  the  former,  the  angle  is  182°.  Groth  (1870)  endeavoured  to  indicate  in
general  what  kinds  of  change  of  form  proceed  with  the  substitution  of  hydrogen  by
various  other  elements  and  groups,  and  he  observed  a  regularity  which  he  termed
morphotropy.  The  following  examples  show  that  morphotropy  recalls  the  hemimorphism
of  Laurent.  Benzene, CeH^, rhombic  system,  ratio  of  the  axes  0891  :  1  :  0*799.  Phenol,
CeH5(0H),  and  resorcinol,  CeH4(OH).2,  also  rhombic  system,  but  the  ratio  of  one  axis  is
changed — thus,  in  resorcinol,  0*910  :  1  :  0*540  ;  that  is,  a  portion  of  the  crystalline  struc-
ture in  one  direction  is  the  same,  but  in  the  other  direction  it  is  changed,  whilst  in  the
rhombic  system  dinitrophenol,  CoH3(N02).^(OH)  =  0*883  :  1  :  0*758;  trinitrophenol  (picric
acid),  CoH.2(NO).-.(OH)  =  0*987  :  1  :  0*974 ;  and  the  potassium  salt  =  0*942  :  1  :  1*854.
Here  the  ratio  of  the  first  axis  is  preseri'^ed — that  is,  certain  angles  remain  constant,
and  the  chemical  proximity  of  the  composition  of  these  bodies  is  undoubted.  Laurent
compares  hemimorphism  with  architectural  style.  Thus,  Gothic  cathedrals  differ  in  many
respects,  but  there  is  an  analogy  expressed  both  in  the  sura  total  of  their  common
relations  and  in  certain  details — for  example,  in  the  windows.  It  is  evident  that  we  may
expect  many  fruitful  results  for  molecular  mechanics  (which  forms  a  problem  common  to
many  provinces  of  natural  science)  from  the  further  elaboration  of  the  data  concerning
those  variations  which  take  place  in  crystalline  form  when  the  composition  of  a  substance
is  subjected  to  a  known  change,  and  therefore  I  consider  it  useful  to  point  out  to  the
student  of  science  seeking  for  matter  for  independent  scientific  research  this  vast  field  for
work  which  is  presented  by  the  correlation  of  form  and  composition.  The  geometrical  regu-
larity and  varied  beauty  of  crystalline  forms  offer  no  small  attraction  to  research  of  this  kind.

OHOUPmO  OF  THE  ELEKElTrS  ABD  THE  PEBIODIO  LAW 11
KjPt, and  other  like  compounds  which  exist  for  hydrogen  or  chlo-

Only  a  few  fundamental  types  exist  for  the  building  up  of  atoms

into  molecules,  and  the  majority  of  them  are  already  known  to  ua.  If
X  stJind  for  a  oaivnleiit  element,  and  R  for  an  element  combined  with
it,  then  eight  ntoniie  types  may  he  obBerveti  t  —

RX,  RX,,  RXj.  RX„  RX5,  RXj,  RX;,  RX,.

Let  X  by  chlorine  or  hydrogen.  Then  as  esamples  of  the  first  type
we  have  :  H^,  Clj,  HCl,  KCl,  NaCl,  ic.  The  compouiida  of  oxygen  or
calcium  may  serve  as  examples  of  the  type  RX,  :  OHj,  001^,  OHCl,
CaO,  Ca(OH)„  CaClj,  ic.  For  the  third  typo  RXj  we  know  ths
npreaentative  NH;,  and  the  corresponding  compounds  X3O3,  N'O(OH),
NO(OK),  PCI3,  PA,  PH,,  SbH,,  SbjO,,  B.Oj,  BClj,  Al.O,,  ic.
The  type  RX,  is  known  among  the  hydrogen  compounds.  Marsh  gas,
CH,,  and  its  corresponding  saturate<l  hydrocarbons,  C„H.jn,«  are  the
beat  representatives.  Also  CH^CI,  CC1„  SiCl,,  SnCl,,  SnO„  CO.j,  SiOj.
nnd  a  whole  series  of  other  compounds  come  under  this  class.  The  type
RX,.^  h^  also  already  familiar  to  us,  but  there  are  no  purely  hydrogen
compounds  among  its  representatives.  Sal-ammoniac,  NH,CI,  and
the  corresponding  NH^(OH),  NO,(OH),  C10.,(0K),  as  well  as  PC1.„
PtX^lj,  &c.,  are  representatives  of  this  type.  In  the  higher  types  also
there  are  no  hydrogen  compounds,  hat  in  the  type  RXg  there  is
the  chlorine  compound  WClg.  However,  there  are  many  oxygen  com-
pounds, and  among  theiu  SO^  is  the  beet  known  representative.  To  this
class  also  Ijeloi.g  SO.j(r)H)s,  SO^Clj,  SOj(OH)Cl,  CrO^,  Ac,  all  of  an
acid  character.  Of  the  higher  typea  there  are  in  general  only  oxygen
and  acid  representatives.  The  type  RX,  we  know  i^  perchloric  acid,
C'IO,(OH},  and  potassium  permanganate,  Mn<^3(0K)f  Is  also  a  member,
The  type  RX^  in  a  free  state  is  I'cry  rare ;  oamic  atdiydride,  Oa(.),,  is
the  best  known  representative  of  it.''

"  Tht,  etill  Qlore  cuni|>leii  combiniLticniK— «litt:li  aru  so  clenily  eipreased  in  Iho
FtjiMllo-hjilnibeB,  doable  wlW,  and  Hiniilu  componndB— Although  l]iey  miiy  bu  regarded
•s  independent,  are^  however,  moat  eiuilj  nndi^iatood  with  our  present  knowledge
lu  ncKTBg^tionB  of  whole  molecnleii  to  which  there  are  uo  corresponding  double  com-
ponnds,  contaiubg  one  atom  of  iin  element  H  mid  many  atomit  of  other  elements  RX>.
He  abore  Ijpea  embrace  all  csBen  oF  diiect  combinations  ot  stoma,  and  the  toimnla
HgSOfiTHjO  caonot,  nilbont  violaliug  icuown  facts,  be  directly  deduced  from  the  typea
MgX.  or  SX„  whilBt  the  fomiuU  MgSO,  corresponds  both  with  the  type  of  the
nwgnenam  compoDiidB  MgXg  and  with  the  type  ol  the  sulphur  oonipoundB  UOjX,,  or  in
genettLl  SX«,  where  X^  is  replaced  by  |OH)i,  witli  the  subBtitulJon  in  this  case  Ot  Hg  by
the  atom  Ug.  which  always  repiaces  H,.  However,  it  must  be  renwrked  Uiat  the
Dodinm  cijstullo- hydrates  often  oontaJu  10H,0,  the  magnesiom  cryslallo. hydrates  0  and
;ll<0,  and  Uiat  the  type  PtM^g  is  proper  to  the  donble  salts  ot  platinnm,  g!e.  With
'sTelopmont  of  oor  knowledge  eonceming  CTyslollo-hyilniti's,  double  «all«.

12  PEINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

The  four  lower  types  RX,  RX2,  RXg,  and  RX4  are  met  with  in
compounds  of  the  elements  R  with  chlorine  and  oxygen,  and  also  in
their  compounds  with  hydrogen,  whilst  the  four  higher  types  only
appear  for  such  acid  compounds  as  are  formed  by  chlorine,  oxygen,  and
similar  elements.

Among  the  oxygen  compounds  the  saline  oxides  which  are  capable
of  forming  salts  either  through  the  function  of  a  base  or  through  the
function  of  an  acid  anhydride  attract  the  greatest  interest  in  every
respect.  Certain  elements,  like  calcium  and  magnesium,  only  give  one
saline  oxide-  -for  example,  MgO,  corresponding  with  the  type  MgX^.
But  the  majority  of  the  elements  appear  in  several  such  forms.  Thus
copper  gives  CuX  and  CuXg,  or  CugO  and  CuO.  If  an  element  R
gives  a  higher  type  RX„,  then  there  often  also  exist,  as  if  by  symmetry,
lower  types,  RX,^.^,  RX„_4,  and  in  general  such  types  as  differ  from
RX„  by  an  even  number  of  X.  Thus  in  the  case  of  sulphur  the
types  JSXg,  SX4,  and  SXg  are  known — for  example  SH2,  SOg,  and
SO3.  The  last  type  is  the  highest,  SX,j.  The  types  SX5  and  SX3  do
not  exist.  But  even  and  uneven  types  sometimes  appear  for  one
and  the  sfime  element.  Thus  the  types  RX  and  RX2  are  known  for
copper  and  mercury.

Among  the  salhie  oxides  only  the  eight  tyj)€8  enumerated  below
are  known  to  exist.  They  determine  the  possible  formulae  of  the  com-
pounds of  the  elements,  if  it  be  taken  into  consideration  that  an
element  which  gives  a  certain  type  of  combination  may  also  give
lower  types.  For  this  reason  the  rare  type  of  the  suboxides  or
quaternary  oxides  R4O  (for  instance,  Ag40,  AgjCl)  is  not  characteris-

alloyH,  solutions,  &c.,  iu  the  chemical  sense  of  feeble  compounds  (that  is,  such  as  are
easily  destroyed  by  feeble  chemical  influences)  it  will  proj^ably  be  possible  to  arrive  at  a
perfect  generalisation  for  them.  For  a  long  time  these  subjects  were  only  studied  by  tlie
way  or  by  chance ;  our  knowledge  of  them  is  accidental  and  destitute  of  system,  and  there-
fore it  is  impossible  to  expect  as  yet  any  generalisation  as  to  their  nature.  The  days  of
Gerhardt  are  not  long  past  when  only  three  types  were  recognised  :  RX,  RX^,  and  RX-, ;
the  tj'pe  RX4  was  afterwards  added  (by  Cooper,  Kekulo,  Butleroff,  and  others),  mainly  for
the  purpose  of  generalising  the  data  respecting  the  carbon  compounds.  And  indeed  many
are  still  satisfied  with  these  types,  and  derive  the  liigher  types  from  them  ;  for  instance,
RX^  from  RX3 — as,  for  example,  POCI5  from  PCl,-^,  considering  the  oxygen  to  be  bound
both  to  the  chlorine  (as  in  HCIO)  and  to  the  phosphorus.  But  the  time  has  now  arrived
when  it  is  clearly  seen  that  the  forms  RX,  RXj,  RX5,  and  RX|  do  not  exhaust  the  whole
variety  of  phenomena.  The  revolution  became  evident  when  Wurtz  showed  that  PCI5  is
not  a  coiniK)und  of  PCI5  +  Cl.j  (although  it  may  decompose  into  them),  but  a  whole
molecule  capable  of  passing  into  vaix)ur,  PCI5  like  PF^  and  SiF4.  The  time  for  tlie
recognition  of  types  even  higher  than  RXg  is  in  my  opinion  in  the  future ;  that  it  will
come,  we  can  already  see  in  the  fact  that  oxalic  acid,  C.2Ho04,  gives  a  crystallo-
hydrate  with  2H  jO ;  but  it  may  be  referred  to  the  type  CH  „  or  rather  to  the  t3ri)€  of
(>thane,  C2H<j,  in  which  all  the  atoms  of  hydrogen  are  replaced  by  hydroxyl,  C0H2O42H2O
-  C..(0H)6  {see  Chapter  XXII.,  Note  35).*

GROUPING  OF  THE  ELEMENTS  AND  THE  PERIODIC  L.VW 13

tic  ;  it  is  always  accompanied  by  one  of  the  higher  grades  of  oxidation,
and  the  compounds  of  this  type  are  distinguished  by  their  great
chemical  instability,  and  split  up  into  an  element  and  the  higher  com-
pound (for  instance,  Ag40=2Ag-f  AggO).  Many  elements,  moreover,
form  transition  oxides  whose  composition  is  intermediate,  which  are
able,  like  NjO^,  to  split  up  into  the  lower  and  higher  oxides.  Thus
iron  gives  magnetic  oxide,  Fe304,  which  is  in  all  respects  (by  its  re-
actions) a  compound  of  the  suboxide  FeO  with  the  oxide  FegOg.  The
independent  and  more  or  less  stable  saline  compounds  correspond  with
the  following  eight  types  : —

R2O  ; salts  RX,  hydroxides  ROH. Generally  basic  like  K^O,  NagC),
HgjO,  Ag20,  Cu^O  ;  if  there  are  acid  oxides  of  this  composition  they
are  very  rare,  are  only  formed  by  distinctly  acid  elements,  and  even
then  have  only  feeble  acid  properties  ;  for  example,  CljO  and  N^O.
R2O2  or  RO  ;  salts  RXj,  hydroxides  R(0H).2. The  most  simple  basic
salts  R2OX2  orR(OH)X  ;  for  instance,  the  chloride  Zn20Cl2  ;  also
an  almost  exclusively  basic  type  ;  but  the  basic  properties  are  more
feebly  developed  than  in  the  preceding  type. For  example,  CaO
MgO,  BaO,  PbO,  FeO,  MnO,  <fec.
R2O3  ;  salts  RX3,  hydroxides  R(0H)3,  RO(OH),  the  most  simple  basic
salts  ROX,  R(0H)X3. The  bases  are  feeble,  like  ALpg,  FegOa,
TI2O3,  Sb203. The  acid  properties  are  also  feebly  developed  ;  for
instance,  in  B2O3  ;  but  with  the  non-metals  the  properties  of  acids
are  already  clear  ;  for  instance,  P2O3,  P(0H)3.
R2O4  or  RO2  ;  salts  RX4  or  ROX2,  hydroxides  R(0H)4,  R0(0H)2.
Rarely  bases  (feeble),  like  Zr02,  Pt02 ;  more  often  acid  oxides  ;
but  the  acid  properties  are in  general  feeble,  as  in  C()2, SO2,
SnOj. Many  intermediate  oxides  appear  in  this  and  the  preceding
and  foUowing  types.
R2O.., ; salts  principally of the types ROX3, R()2X, R0(0H)3,
R02(0H), rarely RX^. The basic character (X, a halogen,
simple  or  complex  ;  for  instance,  NO3,  CI,  &c.)  is  feeble  ;  the  acid
character  predominates,  as  is  seen  in  N2O5,  P2O5,  CI2O.5  ;  then
X=OH,  OK,  *kc.,  for  example  N02(0K).
B^-fifi  or  RO3  ; salts  and hydroxides  generally  of the  type  RO2X2,
R02(OH)2. Oxides  of  an  acid  character,  as  SO^,  CrOg,  MnOy.
Basic  properties  rare  and  feebly  developed  as  in  UO3.
R2O7 ;  salts  of  the  form  RO3X,  R03(0H),  acid  oxides  ;  for  instance,
CI2O7,  MnjO;. Basic  properties  as  feebly  developed  as  the  acid
properties  in  the  oxides  R2O.
R20y  or RO4. A very  rare type,  and only known in C)s()4 and
RUO4.

14  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

It  is  evident  from  the  circamstance  that  in  all  the  higher  types
the  acid  hydroxides  (for  example,  HCIO4,  H2SO4,  H3PO4)  and  salts
with  a  single  atom of  one  element  contain,  like  the  higher  saline
type RO4,  not  more  than  four  atoms  of  oxygen  ;  that  the  formation
of  the  saline  oxides  is  governed  hy  a  certain  common  principle  which
is  best  looked  for  in  the  fundamental  properties  of oxygen,  and  in
general  of  the  most  simple compounds. The  hydrate  of  the  oxide
RO2  is  of  the  higher  type  RO22H2O  =  RH4O4  =  R(H0)4. Such,
for  example,  is  the  hydrate  of silica and the salts (orthosilicates)
corresponding  with  it,  Si(M0)4. The  oxide  R20.r, corresponds with
the  hydrate RaOfiSHjO  =  2RH3O4  =  2RO(OH)3. Such is ortho-
phosphoric acid, PH3O3. The hydrate of the oxide RO3 is
R03H20=RH204=:R02(OH)2 — ^for  instance, sulphuric  acid. Tho
hydrate corresponding to R2O7 is evidently RH0=R03(0H) —
for example, perchloric acid. Here, besides containing O4, it
must  further  be  remarked  that  tlie  amount  of  hydrogen  in  the  hydrate
is  equal  to  the  am^ount  of  hydrogen  in  the  hydrogen  compound. Thus
silicon  gives  SiH4  and  SiH404,  phosphorus  PH3  and  PH3O4,  sulphur
SH2 and  SH2O4, chlorine  CIH  and  CIHO4. This, if  it  does not
explain, at  least connects  in  a harmonious  and general  system  the
fact  that  the  elements  are  capable  of  combining  tvith  a  greater  amount  of
oxygen,  tJie  less  tlie  amotcnt  of  hydrogen  which  they  are  able  to  retain.
In -this  the  key  to  the  comprehension  of  all  further  deductions  must  be
looked  for,  and  we  will  therefore  formulate  this  rule  in  genei'al  terms.
An  element  R  gives  a  hydrogen  compound  RH,„  the  hydrate  of  its
higher  oxide  will  be  RH„04,  and  therefore  the  higher  oxide  will  contain
2RH„04  — nH20=R20^_„. For  example,  chlorine  gives  CIH,  hydrate
CIHO4, and the  higher  oxide  CI2O7. Carbon  gives  CH4  and  COj.
So  also,  SiOj  and  SiH4  are  the  higher  compounds of silicon with
hydrogen  and  oxygen,  like  COj  and  CH4. Here  the  amounts  of  oxygen
and  hydrogen  are  equivalent. Nitrogen  combines  with  a  large  amount
of  oxygen,  forming  N2O5,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  with  a  small  quantity
of  hydrogen  in  NH3. The  sum  of  the  equivalents  of  hydrogen  and
oxygen, occurring in  combination with  an atom  of nitrogen,  is,  as
always  in  the  higher  types,  equal  to  eight. It  is  the  same  with  the
other elements which combine  with hydrogen  and oxygen. Thus
sulphur  gives  SO3  ;  consequently,  six  equivalents  of  oxygen  fall  to  an
atom  of  sulphur,  and  in  SHg  two  equivalents  of  hydrogen. The  sum
is  again  equal  to  eight. The  relation  between  CI2O7  and  CIH  is  the
same. This  shows  that  the  property  of  elements  of  combining  with
such different elements  as  oxygen  and  hydrogen is  subject  to  one

OROITPISO  OF  THE  ELEMENTS AND THE PERIODIC MW IS

common  Inw,  which  is  also  formulated  in  the  eysteoi  of  the  elements
presently  to  bo  described^

In  the  preceding  we  see  not  only  the  regularity  and  simplicity
which  govern  the  formation  and  properties  of  the  oxides  and  of  all  the
compounds  of  the  elements,  but  also  a  fresh  and  e^xact  means  for
recognising  the  analogy  of  elements.  Analogous  elements  give  com-
pounds of  analogous  types,  both  higher  and  lower.  If  C(  Ij  and  SO,  are
two  gases  which  closely  resemble  each  other  both  in  their  physical  and
chemical  properties,  the  reason  of  this  must  be  looked  for  not  in  an
analogy  of  sulphur  and  carbon,  but  in  that  identity  of  the  type
of  combination,  RX^,  which  both  oxides  assume,  and  in  that  in-
fluence which  a  large  mass  of  oxygen  always  exei'ts  on  the  properties
of  its  coQipounds.  In  fact,  there  is  little  resemblance  between  carbon
and  sulphur,  as  is  seen  not  only  from  the  fact  that  CO.j  is  the  /liyher
Jirrnt  of  oxidation,  whilst  SO^  is  able  to  further  oxidise  into  8O3,  but
also  from  the  fact  that  all  the  other  compounds — for  example,  SH.,  and
CH„  SClj  and  CC1„  .fee.— are  entirely  unUke  both  in  type  and  in
chemical  properties.  This  absence  of  analogy  in  carbon  and  sulphur
is  especially  clearly  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  highest  saline  oxides
are  of  diB'erent  composition,  CO,  for  carbon,  and  SO3  for  sulphur. In

'  Tils  hfdro|{Hn  coni|>oundii.  RiH,  in  uqaivulencj'  correspond  wilb  thu  type  o(  tfao
eDlxiudu*.  KiO,  Fklliuliun],  sodium,  und  patawijuni  giie  BQcb.  hyiirugHn  compoundB,
uid  it  w.  worthy  of  remnrk  that  Kccording  to  the  periodic  eystrm  theae  elemeiitg  Btimd
neu  to  well  oUii-T,  uid  that  in  thow  groups  where  the  h jdmgen  componudH  R.H  appear,
lh«  qtuteniAry  oxideB  R4O  ore  hIh)  preBCat.

Kot  wishinf;  lo  complicate  the  explaoation,  I  here  only  tuacli  on  the  geDeTuI  teatures
of  the  relation  between  the  hydciLlea  and  oiideu  and  dI  the  oiid«>i  iLDigog  themaelrei.
Thtu,  for  inntunee,  the  conceptioD  ot  the  ortho-atida  and  of  the  noruial  iHiidB  will  be
cunsideisl  in  speaking  of  phospharic  and  phoaplioroos  acids.

Ai  in  Uie  [nrther  explaiiation  of  the  periodic  law  only  those  oxideri  which  give  salts
■ill  be  considered.  I  think  it  will  not  be  supeFfluooB  to  mention  here  tUe  Following  Fai'ts
relatire  to  the  peioiideB.  Of  the  ]irrozid«)  corresponding  with  hydrogen  peroxide,  the
loUowing  are  at  present  Iroown :  H^O.j,  MagOj,  S.jOr  (as  HSO,  ?),  K.|0„  K^O,,  CaO^
TiOv  Cr^,  CoO^?),  ZuO,.  RhjO,,,  SrO,,  AgjOa,  CdOi,  CgO,,  Ca,0.j,  BaO^  M05O;,
UuO],  W^.  UOi.  It  is  probable  that  the  number  of  peroiides  will  morenw  with
(nrtbcT  inreBtigalion.  A  [leriodicity  is  seen  in  those  non  known,  tor  the  elements
(eierpting  Li)  ot  the  first  group,  which  give  R,0,  form  peroxides,  and  then  Uie  elements
of  the  sixth  group  seem  also  to  be  particularly  inclined  to  form  peroxides,  RjO, ;  bat  at
preMtDt  it  is  Iflo  early,  in  mj  Dpinion.  to  enter  upon  a  generalisation  of  this  subject,  not
only  because  it  in  a  new  and  bat  little  atudied  matter  (not  investigated  for  all  the
elHiBenta),  bat  aim.  and  niore  eipecially,  because  in  many  instances  only  the  hydrate!
ore  known— for  ianUnce,  Ho.jH^g — and  they  perhaps  lire  only  compunnds  of  peniiide
of  hydrogen —lor  example.  Mo^H^O^  -  aUoOj  -i-  HgOj — (iace  Prof,  aohiine  has  shown  tliat
H.,0,  and  BaO^  posaeu  the  property  of  comtiiiiiDg  together  and  with  other  oxides.
yavcrtbeless,  I  hare,  in  the  general  table  expressing  the  periodic  properties  of  Hie
eleiDentfl,  endeavotirefl  to  bqui  up  tlie  data  respecting  all  the  kuuwn  peroxide  compoundB
wIkiso  characteristic  pto|>erty  it  seen  in  their  capability  to  form eroxide  of  hydrogen

16  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Chapter  VIII. we considered  the  limit to which  carbon tends in
its  compounds,  and  in  a  similar  manner  there  is  for  every  element  in
its  compounds  a  tendency  to  attain  a  certain  highest  limit  RX„. This
view  was  particularly  developed  in  the  middle  of  the  present  century
by  Frankland  in  studying  the  metallo-organic  compounds,  i.e.  those  in
which  X  is  wholly  or  partially  a  hydrocarbon  radicle ;  for instance,
X=CH3  or  C2H5  ttc. Thus,  for  example,  antimony,  Sb  (Chapter  XIX.)
gives, with  chlorine,  compounds  SbCl  and  SbCl.-,  and  corresponding
oxygen  compounds  SbgOg  and  SbgOs,  whilst  under  the  action  of  CH3I,
C2H3I,  or in  general  EI  (where  E  is  a  hydrocarbon  radicle  of  the
paraflin series), upon antimony  or  its  alloy  with  sodium  there  are
formed SbE3  (for  example,  Sb(CH3)3,  boiling  at  about  81°),  which,
corresponding  to  the  lower  form  of  combination  SbXg, are  able  to
combine  further  with  EI,  or  CI.2,  or  O,  and  to  form  compounds  of  the
limiting  type  SbXs ;  for  example,  SbE4Cl  corresponding  to  NH4CI  with
the  substitution  of nitrogen  by  antimony,  and  of hydrogen  by  the
hydrocarbon  radicle. The  elements  which  are  most  chemically  analogous
are  characterised  by  the  fact  of  their  giving  compounds  of  similar  form
RX,,. The  halogens  which  are  analogous  give  both  higher  and  lower
compounds. So  also  do  the  metals  of  the  alkalis  and  of  the  alkaline
earths. And  we  saw  that  this  analogy  extends  to  the  composition  and
properties  of  the  nitrogen  and  hydrogen  compounds  of  these  metals,
which is best  seen  in  the  salts. Many  such  groups  of  analogous
elements  have  long  been  known. Thus  there  are  analogues  of  oxygen,
nitrogen,  and  carbon,  and  we  shall  meet  with  many  such  groups. But
an  acquaintance  with  them  inevitably  leads to  the questions, what
is  the  cause  of analogy  and  what  is the  relation  of one  group  to
another  ? If  these  questions  remain  unanswered,  it  is  easy  to  fall  into
error  in  the  formation  of  the  groups,  because  tlie  notions  of  the  degree
of  analogy  will  always  be  relative,  and  will  not  present  any  accuracy
or distinctnesss. Thus lithium is analogous in some respects to
potassium and  in others to magnesium  ;  beryllium  is analogous  to
both  aluminium  and  magnesium. Thallium,  as  we  shall  afterwards
see  and as  was observed  on  its discovery,  has much kinship with
lead  and  mercury,  but  some  of  its  properties  appertain  to  lithium  and
potassium. Naturally,  where  it  is  impossible  to  make  measurements
one  is  reluctantly  obliged to limit oneself to  approximate  compari-
sons, founded  on  apparent  signs  which  are  not  distinct  and  are  wanting
in  exactitude. But  in  the  elements  there  is  one  accurately  measurable
property,  which  is  subject  to  no  doubt — namely,  that  property  which  is
expressed  in  their  atomic  weights. Its  magnitude  indicates  the  rela-
tive mass  of  the  atom,  or,  if  we  avoid  the  conception  of  the  atom,  its

magnitude  nhows  the  relation  Iwtw
mid  independent  individuals  or  elemenb
ing  of  nil  exact  data  about  the  phenoim
stance  is  that  property  on  which  all  it
dependent,  Ijecnnee  they  are  all  deteri

.  EoFTuing  the  oheniical
And  according  to  the  teach-
la  of  natui-e,  the  mass  of  a  sub-
remaining  properties  must  be
.iiied  by  similar  couditiuns  or

liy  (hose  forces  which  act  in  the  weight  of  a  substance,  and  this  is
ilirectly  proportional  to  its  mass.  Therefore  it  is  most  natural  to  seek
for  a  dependence  between  the  properties  and  analogies  of  the  elements
on  the  one  hand  and  their  atomic  weights  on  tlie  other.

This  is  the fundamental idea  which  leads  lu  arra-tiging all iki-
fcording  to  their  nComiv  fiviy/i/ii. A  periodic  repetition  of  pro-

faniili

s  then  i
withe*

lediately  observed  in
mples  of  this  :_

the  elements. We  are  already

Mg=21,

Ca=40,

Ba=I37.

Th«  essence  of  tiie  matter  is  seen  in  these  groups.  The  halogens
have  smaller  atomic  weights  than  the  alkali  metals,  and  the  tatter
than  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  ea.rths.  Therefore,  i/  all  the  elemenfx
hf  arraityrfl  lit  lite  onUr  of  their  atonue  weii/hln,  a  friodtc  repetit'mv
of  properlicn  U  (Atainnd.  This  is  expreased  by  the  law  of  periodicity  ;
the  pruperlifn  of  ihf,  clsmenta,  an  iifJl  ae  thf  forma  aiid  pmpertife
of  their  cotnjmuiide,  are  in  periodic  dependence  or  {expreaeing  otir-
eelvtt  algehraiealli/)  form  a  periodic  fitncUon  of  the  atomic  weighU  of
the  element/i.^ Table  I.  of  the  periodic  ayatem  of  the  elements,  which  is

*  The  petHodiv  la
fortn  u  tina  giveu  in
In  Ujin^  ool  Um  bcc

Lwl  tlie  perioilic  iiyBteiu  ol  tlie  elemBiitH  Hpiwiitcd  in  Uie  laane
e  fiiBl  sdition  ot  this  work,  began  in  I8a»  uhI  flnished  in  IHTI.

riiliLtionB.  At  the  beginning  of  IHOS  I  cliBtribnW  unong  many
chemiito  a.  pMnplilet  imtiUed  '  An  Attempted  t^jstem  dI  tlia  Elemunta,  baHed  on  their
Alonug  Weights  sad  CbemicuJ  Ajulugie*,'  auA  at  the  Mnruh  meatiug  of  the  Russian
Cbemieul  Socirty ,  IHBll,  I  uommnnicated  a.  paper  '  On  the  Correlntion  ot  the  Pro|icrties  and
Atoniic  Weight*  ot  the  Eli^ments.'  The  anbolance  of  this  paper  ia  embraced  in  the  follow-
ing concladona  ^  |1)  The  elemeuU,  if  arraugedaccordingtotheiialAmicweifthte,  exhibit  an
eiidant  prriodicity  Ot  ptopertiea.  (9)  Elements  whiah  are  aimilai  aa  regards  their
chemical  properties  have  aUunic  weigbta  wbieli  are  either  ot  neailf  tlie  name  mine
lpl»tinnm.iridiam,o«niimi)or  whioh  inureaae  regnlarly  (e.  j.  polassinm,  rubidium,  oBaiuml,
|SJ  Tlie  arrangement  ol  the  elementa  or  of  groups  of  elements  in  (be  urJer  ot  their
aumiie  weighU  oorrespondB  with  their  so-called  tialeni-Ki. (4)  The  element!,  wliicli  are

of  small  atomic  weight  are  charactvrised  bj  sliarplj  defined  pmperties.  Thpy  are
Uuaxfore  typical  elements.  (5)  The  magniliije  ot  the  atomic  weight  datermines  the
cbamter  ot  an  dement, (B)  The  disoovery  of  many  yet  onknown  elements  may  be

eipwlHl, Fur  instMtce,  elements  analogous  i
weight*  would  be  between  (IB  and  75. (7)  The  atomic  *
id  nt  a  knavrledge  of  those  o

wlio)

atom

18  PRlNCIPIxES  OF  CHEMISTRY

placed  at  the  very  beginning  of  this  book,  is  designed  to  illustrate
this  law.  It  is  arranged  in  conformity  with  the  eight  types  of
oxides  described  in  the  preceding  pages,  and  those  elements  which  give
the  oxides,  R2O  and  consequently  salts  RX,  form  the  1st  group  ;  the
elements  giving  R2O2  or  RO  as  their  highest  grade  of  oxidation  belong
to  the  2nd  group  ;  those  giving  R2O3  as  their  highest  oxides  form  the
3rd  group,  and  so  on  ;  whilst  the  elements  of  all  the  groups  which  are
nearest  in  their  atomic  weights  are  arranged  in  series  from  1  to  12.
The  even  and  uneven  series  of  the  same  groups  present  the  same  forms
and  limits,  but  differ  in  their  properties,  and  therefore  two  contiguous
series,  one  even  and  the  other  uneven — for  instance,  the  4th  and  5th —
form  a  period.  Hence  the  elements  of  the  4th,  6th,  8th,  10th,  and  12th,
or  of  the  3rd,  5th,  7th,  9th,  and  11th,  series  form  analogues,  like  the
halogens,  the  alkali  metals,  Jzc. The  conjunction  of  two  series,  one  even

the  combining  weight  of  tellurium  must  lie  between  128  and  126,  and  cannot  be  128.
(8)  Certain  characteristic  properties  of  the  elements  can  be  foretold  from  their  atomic
weights.

The  entire  periodic  law  is  included  in  these  lines.  In  the  series  of  subsequent  papers
(1870-72,  for  example,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Russian  Chemical  Society,  of  the
Moscow  Meeting  of  Naturalists,  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Academy,  and  Liebig's  Annalen)  on
the  name  subject  we  only  find  applications  of  the  same  principles,  which  were  afterwards
confirmed  by  the  labours  of  Roscoe,  Carnelley,  Thorj^e,  and  others  in  England ;  of  Ram-
melsberg  (cerium  and  uranium),  L.  Meyer  (the  specific  volumes  of  the  elements),
Zimmermann  (uranium),  and  more  especially  of  C.  Winkler  (who  discovered  germanium,
and  showed  its  identity  with  ekasilicon),  and  others  in  Germany ;  of  Lecoq  de  Bois-
baudran  in  France  (the  discoverer  of  gallium  =  ekaaluminium) ;  of  Cleve  (the  atomic
weights  of  the  cerium  metals),  Nilson  (discoverer  of  scandium  =  ekaboron),  and  Nilson
and  Pettersson  (determination  of  the  vapour  density  of  berj'llium  chloride)  in  Sweden ;
and  of  Brauner  (who  investigated  cerium,  and  determined  the  combining  weight  of
tellurium  =  125)  in  Austria,  and  Piccini  in  Italy.

I  consider  it  necessary  to  state  that,  in  arranging  the  i)eriodic  system  of  the  elements,
I  made  use  of  the  previous  researches  of  Dumas,  Gladstone,  Pettenkofer,  Kremers,  and
Lenssen  on  the  atomic  weights  of  related  elements,  but  I  was  not  acquainted  with  the
works  preceding  mine  of  De  Chancourtois  {vis  tellurique,  or  the  spiral  of  the  elements
according  to  their  properties  and  equivalents)  in  Fnuice,  and  of  J.  Newlands  (Law  of
Octaves — for  instance,  H,  F,  CI,  Co,  Br,  Pd,  I,  Pt  form  the  first  octave,  and  O,  S,  Fe,
Se,  Rh,  Te,  Au,  Th  the  last)  in  England,  although  certain  germs  of  the  periodic  law  are
to  be  seen  in  these  works.  With  regard  to  the  work  of  Frof.  Lothar  Meyer  respecting
the  periodic  law  (Notes  12  and  18),  it  is  e%ndent,  judging  from  the  method  of  investi-
gation, and  from  his  statement  (Liebig's  Annalvu,  Suj)t.  Band  7,  1870,  854),  at  the  very
commencement  of  which  he  cites  my  paper  of  1869  above  mentioned,  that  he  accepted
the  periodic  law  in  the  form  which  I  proposed.

In  concluding  tliis  hietorical  statement  I  consider  it  well  to  observe  that  no  law
of  nature,  however  general,  has  been  established  all  at  once ;  its  recognition  is  always
preceded  by  many  hints ;  the  establishment  of  a  law,  however,  does  not  take  place  when
its  significance  is  recognised,  but  only  when  it  has  been  confirmed  by  ex|)eriment,  which
the  man  of  science  must  consider  as  the  only  proof  of  the  correctness  of  his  conjectures
and  opinions.  I  therefore,  for  my  part,  look  upon  Roscoe,  De  Boisbaudran,  Nilgon,
Winkler,  Brauner,  Carnelley,  Thorpe,  and  others  who  verified  the  adaptability  of  the
periodic  law  to  chemical  facts,  as  tho  true  founders  of  the  i>eriodic  law,  the  further  dr-
velopment  of  which  still  awaits  fresh  workers.

GROUPING  OF  THE  ELEMENTS  AND  THE  PERIODIC LAW 19

and  one  contiguous  uneven  series,  thus  forms  one  large  period.  These
periods,  beginning  with  the  alkali  metals,  end  with  the  halogens.  The
elements  of  the  first  two  series  have  the  lowest  aUmiic  weights,  and  in
consequence  of  this  very  circumstance,  although  they  bear  the  general
properties  of  a  group,  they  still  show  many  peculiar  and  independent
properties.^  Thus  fluorine,  as  we  know,  differs  in  many  points  from
the  other  halogens,  and  lithium  from  the  other  alkali  metals,  and
so  on.  These  lightest  elements  may  be  termed  fi/jncal  elettienfs.  They
include —

H.

Li,  Be,  B,  C,  N,  O,  F.
Na,  Mg

In  the  annexed  table  all  the  I'emaining  elements  are  arranged,  not
in  groups  and  series,  but  according/  to  2)eriodii.  In  order  to  under-
stand the  essence  of  the  matter,  it  must  be  remembered  that  here  the
atomic  weight  gradually  increases  along  a  given  line  ;  for  instance,  in
the  line  commencing  with  K=39  and  ending  with  Br=80,  the  inter-
mediate elements  have  intermediate  atomic  weights,  as  is  clearly  seen
in  Table  III.,  where  the  elements  stand  in  the  order  of  their  atomic
weights.

I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII.  I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII.

ErenSeries.  Mg Al Si P S CI

K Ca Sc  Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br
Rb  Sr  Y Zr  Nb  Mo  —  Ru  Rh  Pd  Ag  Cd In Sii Sb Te I

CsBaLaCeDi? — _^__-

Yb  —  Ta W  — Os Ir Pt  Au  Hg Tl Pb Bi  —

Th — U  • -,- —

Uneven  Senes.

The  same  degree  of  analogy  that  we  know  to  exist  between  potassium,
rubidium,  and  caesium  ;  or  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine  ;  or  calcium,
strontium,  and  barium,  also  exists  between  the  elements  of  the  other
vertical  columns.  Thus,  for  example,  zinc,  cadmium,  and  mercury,
which  are  described  in  the  following  chapter,  present  a  very  close
analogy  with  magnesium. For  a  true  comprehension  of  the  matter  '"  it

*  This  reBcmbles  the  fact,  well  known  to  those  liaving  an  acquaintuTice  with  organic
chemistry,  that  in  a  series  of  homolognes  (Chapter  VIII.)  the  first  meniberH,  in  which
there  is  the  least  carbon,  although  showing  the  general  properties  of  the  homologous
series,  still  present  certain  distinct  peculiarities.

*®  Besides  arranging  the  elements  {a)  in  a  successive  order  according  to  their  atomic
weights,  with  indication  of  their  analogies  by  showing  some  of  the  properties — for
instance,  their  i)Ower  of  giving  one  or  another  fonu  of  combmation — both  of  the  elements
and  of  their  compounds  (as  is  done  in  Table  III.  and  in  the  table  on  p.  30),  (6)  accord-
ing to  periods  (as  in  Table  I.  at  the  conunencement  of  volume  I.  after  the  j)refaoe),
and  (c)  according  to  groups  and  series  or  small  periods  (as  in  the  same  tables),  I  am

20  TRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

is  very  important  to  see  that  all  the  aspects  of  the  distribution
of  the  elements  according  to  theii*  atomic  weights  essentially  express

acquainted  with  the  following  methods  of  expressing  the  periodic  relations  of  the  elements :
(1)  By  a  curve  drawn  through  points  obtained  in  the  following  manner:  The  elements
are  arranged  along  the  horizontal  axis  as  abscissie  at  distances  from  zero  proportional  to
their  atomic  weights,  whilst  the  values  for  all  the  elements  of  some  property — for  example,
the  specific  volumes  or  tint  melting  points,  are  expressed  by  the  ordinates.  This  method,
although  graphic,  has  the  theoretical  disadvantage  that  it  does  not  in  any  way  indicate
the  existence  of  a  limited  and  definite  number  of  elements  in  each  period.  There  is
nothing,  for  instance,  in  this  method  of  expressing  the  law  of  iieriodicity  to  show  that
between  magnesium  and  aluminium  there  can  be  no  other  element  with  an  atomic  weight
of,  say,  25,  atomic  volume  13,  and  in  general  having  properties  intermediate  between  those
of  these  two  elements.  The  actual  periodic  law  does  not  correspond  with  a  continuous
change  of  properties,  with  a  continuous  variation  of  atomic  weight — in  a  word,  it  does
not  express  an  uninterrupted  function — and  as  the  law  is  purely  chemical,  starting  from
the  conception  of  atoms  and  molecules  which  combine  in  multiple  proportions,  with
intervals  (not  contmuously),  it  above  all  depends  on  there  being  but  few  types  of  com-
pounds, which  are  arithmetically  simple,  repeat  themselves,  and  offer  no  uninterrupted
transitions,  so  that  each  period  can  only  contain  a  definite  number  of  members.
For  this  reason  there  can  be  no  other  elements  between  magnesium,  which  gives  the
chloride  MgCl.2,  and  aluminium,  which  forms  AIX5 ;  there  is  a  break  in  the  continuity,
according  to  the  law  of  multiple  proportions.  The  periodic  law  ought  not,  therefore,  to
be  expressed  by  geometrical  figures  in  which  continuity  is  always  understood.  Owing  to
these  considerations  I  never  liave  and  never  will  express  the  i^eriodic  relations  of  the
elements  by  any  geometrical  figures.  (2)  By  a  plane  spiral.  Radii  are  traced  from  a
centre,  proportional  to  the  atomic  weights  ;  analogous  elements  lie  along  one  radius,  and
the  points  of  intersection  are  arranged  in  a  spiral.  This  method,  adopted  by  De
Chancourtois,  Baumgauer,  E.  Huth,  and  others,  has  many  of  the  imperfections  of  the
preceding,  although  it  removes  the  indefiniteness  as  to  the  number  of  elements  in  a  period.
It  is  merely  an  attempt  to  reduce  the  complex  relations  to  a  simple  graphic  represen-
tation, since  the  equation  to  the  spiral  and  the  number  of  radii  are  not  dependent  upon
anything.  (3)  By  the  lines  of  atomicity,  either  parallel,  as  in  Reynolds's  and  the  Rev.
S.  Haughton's  method,  or  as  in  Crookes's  niethcul,  arranged  to  the  right  and  left  of  an
axis,  along  which  tlie  magnitudes  of  the  atomic  weights  are  counted,  and  the  position
of  the  elements  marked  off,  on  the  one  side  the  members  of  the  even  series  (para-
magnetic, like  oxygen,  potassium,  iron),  and  on  the  other  side  the  members  of  the
uneven  series  (diamagnetic,  like  sulphur,  chlorine,  zinc,  and  mercury).  On  joining  up
these  points  a  periodic  cur\'e  is  obtained,  compared  by  Crookes  to  the  oscillations  of  a
pendulum,  and,  according  to  Haughton,  representing  a  cubical  cur\'e.  This  method
would  be  very  graphic  did  it  not  require,  for  instance,  that  sulphur  should  be  con-
sidered as  bivalent  and  manganese  as  univalent,  although  neither  of  these  elements  gives
stable  derivatives  of  these  natures,  and  although  the  one  is  taken  on  the  basis  of  the
lowest  possible  compound  SX.^.,  and  the  other  of  the  highest,  because  manganese  can  be
referred  to  the  univalent  elements  only  by  the  analogy  of  KMn04  to  KCIO4.  Further-
more, Reynolds  and  Crookes  place  hydrogen,  iron,  nickel,  cobalt,  and  others  outside  the
axis  of  atomicity,  and  consider  uranium  as  bivalent  without  the  least  foundation.  (4)
Rantshef!  endeavoured  to  classify  the  elements  in  their  periodic  relations  by  a  system
dependent  on  solid  geometry.  He  conununicated  this  mode  of  expression  to  the  Russian
Chemical  Society,  but  his  conmiunication,  which  is  apparently  not  void  of  interest,
has  not  yet  appeared  in  print.  (5)  By  algebraic  form ulce :  for  example,  E.  J.  Mills
(1886)  endeavours  to  express  all  the  atomic  weights  by  the  logarithmic  function
A  ^  15  (n  01)3750.  i"  which  the  variables  n  and  t  are  whole  numbers.  For  instance,  for
oxygen  n  -2,  t-  l;  hence  A  ^  15*94  ;  for  antimony  n  =  9,  ^  =  0  ;  whence  A  =  120,  and  so  on.
J?  varies  from  1  to  10  and  t  from  0  to  59.  The  analogues  are  hardly  distinguishable  by
this  methnd  :  thus  for  chlorine  the  magnitudes  of  71  and  t  are  8  and  7 ;  for  bromine  6  and  <» ;

GR0UPIS6 OV  THE ELEMENTS  AJtD  THE PERIODIC LAW 21

one  and  the  aaine  fandamental  fhiu^nilfHCK— periodic  jiropertien.' '  The
following  points  then  must  be  reinnrked  iu  it.

Im  indint-  9  uid  9 ;  lor  potuauiuui  S  mid  14 ;  loc  ruliiiJiaiii  S  uiid  1(4 ;  lor  cteaiitm  H  uid  30  ;
bnt  >  cBitatn  legnlitritj  iw«na  tn  iie  BhOH-n.  (fl)  A  more  nutariU  inHtliod  ol  HipreBsing
the  itcpewlence  ol  the  propertie*  of  elemoiilB  on  LUeir  Ktnmie  neighla  is  abtitinud  by
(rijionomrln>(i(/unc(ioni,becaau  this  dependence  iKperindii-lIke  tlw  fnnctioDBol  tri^o-
nLRDBlriukl  lines,  NidtliereloraRidWrg  in  Sweden  (Laud,  IHSG)  KndF.  Fluritzky  in  Ba«aiik
(Koian,  1887)  lutve  lUlopted  n  siniiUr  melliod  oF  expreesion,  which  muat  bu  uooBidered
w  woithir  nl  beinK  worked  oat,  Although  it  does  not  express  the  absence  o(  intermediate

most  imiiortuit  part  ot  the  matter.  (T|  Tlie  investigations  ol  B.  N.  Tuhitoh^riti  (18BB,
Jnuniai  of  tkr.  Ruui>iH  Phynlrat  and  Chfiiiical  Soeietij)  hna  the  first  uflort  in  the
tstt«r  dtiectioii.  He  ciirelnll;  studied  tlie  alhnli  metals,  and  discoTered  (he  fDlloffisg
simple  relation  between  their  iituniii:volnnieE:theji:aji  all  be  expresBBd  by  A  (d-D'OiSHAn),
where  A  is  the  atomic  weight  uid  n^l  for  licluuin  and  sodium,  )  for  iwUsBium,  |  fur
mbidiom.  and  \  tor  cierfnni.  If  n  always  ^  3.  then  the  voluiue  ol  tlio  atom  would
become  lero  at  A^  16 J,  and  wonld  reach  its  maximum  wben  A^9BJ,  nud  the  density

the  atomic  weightfi  of  tJie  alkali  metals  to  those  of  the  other  elements,  odolso  the  atomicity
iUelf,  Trbitoh^rin  supposes  all  atoms  to  be  tinilt  up  of  a  primary  nutter;  he  con-
Kiden  tfae  relation  of  the  central  to  the  peripberii^  mass,  and.  gnided  by  mechanical  prin-
riple*,  dednees  many  ol  the  properties  of  the  atoms  from  the  reAction  of  the  internal  and
losriidieric  i»rtm  ol  each  atom.  This  endeavour  offers  many  interesting  points,  bnt  it
admits  llie  liypotbesis  ol  the  building  up  of  all  tlie  eleineuts  froin  one  primary  matter,
and  ol  Uie  present  time  snub  an  hyjuthesis  has  not  the  least  support  eitlier  in  theory  or
in  fact.  Besides  which  the  starting-point  of  tlie  theory  ia  tlie  specille  gravity  of  the
metals  at  a  detinite  temperature  (it  is  not  known  how  the  above  ralalion  would  appear
ol  other  lemperatnrBs).  and  tlie  specific  gravity  varies  even  under  mechanical  inBuencea.
L.  Hngo  IIWII  endeavoured  to  represent  the  atomic  weights  of  Li,  Na,  K,  Hb.  and  Ct
liy  gnunelrieol  figures — lor  instance,  Li <:=  7  represents  a  central  atom-  1  and  sii  atoms  on
the  us  terminals  of  on  octahedron  ;  No,  is  oltttuiied  by  applying  two  sncli  atoms  on  each
•dge  ol  an  octahedron,  and  so  an.  It  is  evident  Uint  sDch  methods  con  odd  nothing  new
to  our  data  respecting  tlie  atomic  weigliln  of  analogous  elements.

"  Many  natural  phenomena  exhibit  a  dvpendenue  of  n  periodic  uharscter.  Thus  the
phenomena  of  day  and  night  and  of  tlie  neasons  »f  the  year,  and  vibrations  of  all  kinds,
exhibit  variations  nf  a  periodic  ehameler  in  di'iiendenco  ou  time  and  B|iace.  But  in
ordinary  periodic  lunctions  one  variable  varies  (continuously,  wldlst  the  other  increases
to  a  limit,  then  ■  period  ol  decrease  begins,  and  liaviog  In  turn  reaehed  its  limit  a  period
ol  iiicnsoac  again  begina.  It  ia  otberw  ise  in  tlie  iwriodic  lunctinn  ol  the  elements.  Were
the  mam  of  tlie  eleiiienta  does  not  increase  oontinuonsly,  bnt  abruptly,  by  steps,  oh  from
magDesinm  to  alamiuiunl.  3o  also  the  valency  m  atomicity  leaps  directly  from  I  to  3  to
8.  Ac-,  without  intermediate  iinontities,  and  in  my  opinion  it  is  Iheite  properties  which
ar>  the  mint  iiuiurtont,  and  it  i-^  Llir-ir  luriuilii^ity  nbtcli  forms  the  substance  of  the
pcriodio  Uw.  Iteipre*st6  Ihf  jirf/it-rlii-a  uf  tlie  mat  clemeittt,  and  not  of  what  maybe
termed  their  roonifestationa  visiimlly  knuwn  la  us.  The  nUnmnl  properties  of  elemenliP
anil  compounds  are  in  perioilic  dcj-cudunce  on  tlie  atomic  weight  of  liie  element!  only
because  these  etleRinl  [miperties  are  Iheiiiselvea  the  result  of  the  properties  of  the  real  ele-
mtnta  which  unite  to  lorui  the  *  free '  elements  and  the  compounds.  To  explain  and  eipresH
the  periodic  law  is  to  explain  and  express  tlie  cause  of  tlie  law  of  multiple  proportions,  of
the  diltcrcQue  ol  the  elements,  and  tiie  variation  of  their  atomieity,  and  at  the  same  Ume
Iu  undenlanil  what  mass  and  gravitation  are,  la  luy  opinion  this  is  still  premature.  But
jDst  as  witliont  knowing  the  cause  of  gravitation  it  is  pos«bl«  to  inoke  use  of  the  law  of
gmiity,  BO  tor  the  aimsol  chemistry  it  is  possible  to  take  advantage  ol  the  laws  diseovvreil
by  AsiUiiatry  witliout  being  able  to  explain  their  causes. The  above- meutioaod  pecu-

~  Vol  the  lawsol  tbeniintry  respt^-ting  deliiiitt  coinpoundi  and  tbr  iiliimic  wt-igbts

22  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

1.  The  composition  of  the  higher  oxygen  compounds  is  determined
by  the  groups  :  the  first  group  gives  Ra^i  *^^^  second  R2O2  or  RO,
the  third  R2O3,  ttc.  There  are  eight  types  of  oxides  and  therefore
eight  groups.  Two  groups  give  a  period,  and  the  same  type  of  oxide
is  met  with  twice  in  a  period.  For  example,  in  the  period  beginning
with  potassium,  oxides  of  the  composition  RO  are  formed  by  calcium
and  zinc,  and  of  the  composition  RO3  by  molybdenum  and  tellurium.
The  oxides  of  the  even  series,  of  the  same  type,  have  stronger  basic
properties  than  the  oxides  of  the  uneven  series,  and  the  latter  as  a
rule  are  endowed  with  an  acid  character.  Therefore  the  elements
which  exclusively  give  bases,  like  the  alkali  metals,  will  be  found  at  the
commencement  of  the  period,  whilst  such  purely  acid  elements  as  the
halogens  will  be  at  the  end  of  the  period.  The  interval  will  be  occu-
pied by  intermediate  elements,  whose  character  and  properties  we  shall
afterwards  describe.  It  must  be  observed  that  the  acid  character  is
chiefly  proper  to  the  elements  with  small  atomic  weights  in  the  uneven

leads  one  in  tliink  that  the  time  has  not  yet  come  for  tlieir  full  explanation,  and  I  do  not
think  that  it  will  come  l)efore  the  explanation  of  »uch  a  primary  law  of  nature  as  the  law
of  gravity.

It  will  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  turn  our  attention  to  the  many-sided  correlation
existing  between  the  undecomposable  elements  and  the  eompounil  carbon  radicUs^
which  has  long  been  remarked  (Pettenkofer,  Dumas,  and  others),  and  reconsidered  in
recent  times  by  Oarnelley  (18«(>),  and  most  origiimlly  in  Pelopidas's  work  (1888)  on  the
principles  of  the  perirxlic  system.  Pelopidas  compares  the  series  containing  eight  hydro-
carbon nuliclcH,  CH..,/  ^  I,  C„H,>«  itc.for  instance,  CeH,-,,  C^H,o,  CeHn,  C(}H,,»,  CeHp,  CgHs,
C^Hy,  and  C,iH,, — with  the  series  of  the  elements  arranged  in  eight  groups.  The  analogy
is  particularly  clear  owing  to  the  property  of  C«H.j''*j  to  combine  with  X,  thus  reaching
saturation,  and  of  the  foUowing  members  with  Xo,  X-  .  .  .  Xg,  and  especially  because  these
are  followed  by  an  aromatic  radicle — for  example,  C^H^ — in  which,  as  is  well  known,  many
of  the  properties  of  the  saturated  radicle  C,;Hi3  are  repeated,  and  in  particular  the  power
of  forming  a  univalent  radicle  again  appears.  Pelopidas  shows  a  confirmation  of  the
parallel  in  the  property  of  the  above  radicles  of  giving  oxygen  compounds  corresponding
with  the  groups  in  the  periodic  system.  Thus  the  hydrocarbon  radicles  of  the  first  group
— for  instance,  C'eH,-  or  C\;H-, — give  oxides  of  the  fonn  R^O  and  hydroxides  RHO,  like  the
metals  of  the  alkalis  ;  and  in  the  third  group  they  fonn  oxides  R^.O^  and  hydrates  RO^H.
For  example,  in  the  series  CH- the  corresponding  compounds  of  the  third  group  will  bo  the
oxide  (CH)203  or  C.^H.^O- — that  is,  formic  anhydride  and  hydrate,  CHO.jH,  or  fomiic  acid.
In  the  sixth  group,  witii  a  composition  of  C>,  the  oxide  RO5  will  be  CoO-„  and  hydrate
C.>H.204 — that  is,  also  a  bibasic  acid  (oxalic)  resembling  sulphuric,  among  the  inorganic
acids.  After  applying  his  views  to  a  number  of  organic  compounds,  Pelopidas  dwells
more  particularly  on  the  radicles  corresi>onding  with  ammonium.

With  resiKjct  to  this  remarkable  parallelism,  it  must  above  all  be  ob8er\'ed  tliat  in  the
elements  the  atomic  weight  increases  in  passing  to  contiguous  members  of  a  higher
valency,  whilst  here  it  decreases,  which  should  indicate  that  the  periodic  variability  of
elements  and  compounds  is  subject  to  some  higher  law  whose  nature,  and  still  more
whose  cause,  cannot  at  present  be  determined.  It  is  probably  based  on  the  fundamental
principles  of  the  internal  mechanics  of  the  atoms  and  molecules,  and  as  the  periodic  law
has  only  been  generally  recognised  for  a  few  years  it  is  not  surprising  that  any  further
progress  towards  it^  exi>lanation  can  only  be  looked  for  in  the  development  of  facts
touching  on  this  subject.

OKOUPIKS  OF  THE  EI.EMESTS  AND  TlIE  PERIODIC  LAW 28

lories,  whilst  the  baaic  character  is  exhibited  by  the  heaviei-  elementa
in  the  even  series.  Hence  elements  which  give  acids  chiefly  preduminate
iimong  the  lightest  (typical)  elements,  especially  in  the  last  groups  ;
whilst  tlie  heaviest  elements,  even  in  the  last  groups  (for  instance,
thiUliuni,  ui-ftniuni)  have  a  basic  character.  Thus  the  basic  and  acid
characters  of  the  higher  oxides  aie  determined  (i)  by  the  type  of  oxide,
(ft)  by  the  even  or  uneven  senes,  and  (c)  by  the  atomic  wpight."''"
The  groups  are  indicated  by  Roman  nnmerals  from  I.  to  Ylll.

2.  Tlii^  hyitrogen  coni/ioiiiif/s  being  volatile  or  gaseous  eubstances
which  are  prone  to  reaction — such  as  HCI,  HjO,  HjN,  ami  H^C  '^
are  only  fonned  by  the  elements  of  the  uneven  series  and  higher  givjups
giving  oxides  of  the  forms  RjO,„  ROj,  RaO,,  and  RO^.

3.  If  an  element  gives  a  hydrogen  compound,  RX,„,  it  forms  an
vrgaivt-nielalliv  cof/yjoitiM^of  the  same  composition,  where  X:=C„H^.., ;
that  is,  X  is  the  radicle  of  a  saturated  hydi'ocarlHin.  The  elements  of
the  uneven  aeries,  which  are  incapable  of  giving  hydrogen  compounds,
and  give  oxides  of  the  forms  RX,  EX„  RX^,  also  give  organo-
metallic  conipounda  of  this  form  proper  to  the  higher  oxides. Thus

■eNob

Ukr  HjO,,  I

SjOj  (C'imptep  XS.).

tibi.  Xtue  peroiiden  I
mntiiKed  wilh  Irue  uliiie  aiiileH  even  il  Ihe  hitter  «jntinu  mucli  oiygen  (for  lUBtancB,
NtO),  CrOj,  Ac)  althoDgh  one  and  (he  ntUer  ettrilf  oaidiHi. The  difference  betwteti  them

peTDJtidH  c<ofreapond  id  tlieir  renctionfl  luid  origin  to  peruiide  of  tiydrugeu-  This  in
clMri J  »ini  in  the  difference  between  Ka/)  uid  Na,0,  ICfaitiitBr  XII.).  Theiefon!  the
penmden  should  also  have  their  periodioitj.  A.11  element  R,  giving  ■  higlienl  degree  ol
otubtioo,  It,Oii,initygiTebothB](>irHrdegreeDf  □xi(Ulioii,It.jOu-n{<r]ien>  ni  is  evidentlf
lew  tlutn  n),  and  peroiideB,  RaO,  .  „  RjO.  ,  j,or  even  more  oxjgen.  This  clue  of  oildeii,
lo  vhich  •ttention  has  only  recenll}'  been  tamed  (Bertlirlol.  Fin^ini,  ttc),  majr  perhap*
on  (nrtlMr  stndf  give  the  poasibilit y  ut  genemliBiDg  the  capabilitjot  the  elemiintB  to  give
anfll*b1e  complex  higher  fornix  of  combination,  Bach  a%  doable  ^tH,  and  in  my  o|H»iou
Hliaald  in  the  Eiesr  future  be  the  field  of  new  and  important  dittcoverieb-  And  in  cuntem-
ponuy  Gh«mistr7,  haIIe,  mdiue  oxide^  hjdrogen  compooads,  and  other  comhiuntionN  of
Uia  elenwlita  corresponding  to  them  canitlitate  an  important  and  veij  complex  prublem
tnr  guiereliaatioD.  wliich  in  »(iiified  by  the  periodic  Uw  in  its  preieut  form,  lo  whii^h  it
hat  riien  tnuu  ita'ftnt  «talc,  iu  which  it  gave  the  means  of  (oreiieeing  [ate  later  un)  the
eiitlence  of  ouknoWD  clenienta  (Ga,  Sc,  and  Oe),  their  pTop*!rtie»,  und  many  deUils
r«>l>ecling  their  oompoaaihi.  Dntil  tboHe  imiiruvements  iu  the  perkidii;  lybtvm  wbicii
luve  been  proposed  by  Prof.  PUvitmlty  (of  Kuaui)  and  Pi'of.  Hanierath  (of  Conloba,  in
the  Algentine  Bepublic).  Ugo  Alvisi  (Italy),  and  others  give  aimilai  pmt'IicHl  results,  I
think  it  onneceuary  lo  diacasn  (hem  further.

"  The  hydridea  generalised  by  the  periodic  taw  are  those  Lo  which  metMllo-organic
fynnpotmdsHirreripaud.  and  they  ate  Ibemselves  either  volatile  or  gaseous.  The  hydrogen
compDondB  like  KsfiH,  BaH,  Hv.  are  dislinKniahed  by  other  jiguE.  They  reseuibie
alloys.  They  show  {tee  end  of  knt  chapter)  a  vyslemstic  bamiony,  hat  they  evidently
•liDuld  not  Ih>  cnnlased  with  true  hydrides,  any  more  tlwn  peroxides  with  ealine  oiideit.
Mareover.  mcb  hydrides  lisTd,  like  the  {leriiiideH,  only  recently  htien  subjected  to
naeuch,  and  have  been  hot  little  stodied.  The  best  known  nt  these  c<>m[H>unds  are
le  lOth  eolumn  of  Table  III.,  nnd  it  oill  be  teen  tliat  they  already  exhibit  ■

given  in

gt  of  propettii

>and

compomtim

24  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

zinc  forma  the  oxide  ZnO,  salts  ZnXg,  and  zinc  ethyl  Zn(C.2H.^^)2.  The
elements  of  the  even  series  do  not  seem  to  form  organo-metallic  com-
pounds at  all ;  at  least  all  efforts  for  their  preparation  have  as  yet
been  fruitless — for  instance,  in  the  case  of  titanium,  zirconium,  or
iron.

4.  The  atomic  weights  of  elements  belonging  to  contiguous  periods
differ  approximately  by  45;  for  example,  K<Rb,  Cr<Mo,  Br.  I.
But  the  elements  of  the  typical  series  show  much  smaller  differences.
Thus  the  difference  between  the  atomic  weights  of  Li,  Na,  and  K,
between  Ca,  Mg,  and  Be,  between  Si  and  C,  between  S  and  O,  and
between  CI  and  F,  is  16.  As  a  rule,  there  is  a  greater  difference
between  the  atomic  weights  of  two  elements  of  one  group  and  belong-
ing to  two  neighbouring  series  (Ti  — Si  =  V  — P  =  Cr— S  =  Mn  — CI
=  Nb  — As,  &c.  =  20) ;  and  this  difference  attains  a  maximum  with  the
heaviest  elements  (for  example,  Th  — Pb  =  26,  Bi— Ta  =  26,  Ba  — Cd
=  25,  tkc).  Furthermore,  the  difference  between  the  atomic  weights
of  the  elements  of  even  and  uneven  series  also  increases.  In  fact,  the
differences  between  Na  and  K,  Mg  and  Ca,  Si  and  Ti,  are  less  abrupt
than  those  between  Pb  and  Th,  Ta  and  Bi,  Cd  and  Ba,  tfcc.  Thus  even
in  the  magnitude  of  the  differences  of  the  atomic  weights  of  analogous
elements  there  is  observable  a  certain  connection  with  the  gradation  of
their  properties. '^  *»**

5.  According  to  the  periodic  system  every  element  occupies  a  cer-
tain position,  determined  by  the  group  (indicated  in  Roman  numerals)
and  series  (Arabic  numerals)  in  which  it  occurs.  These  indicate  the
atomic  weight,  the  analogues,  properties,  and  type  of  the  higher  oxide,
and  of  the  hydrogen  and  other  compounds — in  a  word,  all  the  chief
quantitative  and  qualitative  features  of  an  element,  although  there  yet
remain  a  whole  series  of  further  details  and  peculiarities  whose  cause

i»  bi»  The  relation  between  the  atomic  weights,  and  especially  the  difference  =  16,  was
observed  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  decades  of  this  century  by  Dumas,  Pettenkofer,  L.  Meyer,
and  others.  Thus  Lothar  Meyer  in  1864,  following  Dumas  and  others,  grouped  together
the  tetravalent  elements  carbon  and  silicon ;  the  trivalent  elements  nitrogen,  phosphoms,
arsenic,  antimony,  and  bismuth ;  the  bivalent  oxygen,  sulphur,  selenium,  and  tellariam ;
the  univalent  fluorine,  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine ;  the  univalent  metals  lithium,
sodium,  potassium,  rubidiimi,  caesium,  and  thallium,  and  the  bivalent  metals  beryllium,
magnesium,  strontium  and  barium — observing  that  in  the  first  the  difference  is,  in  general
=  16,  in  the  second  about  =  46,  and  the  last  about  =  87-90.  The  first  germs  of  the  periodic
law  are  visible  in  such  observations  as  these.  Since  its  establishment  this  subject  has  been
most  fully  worked  out  by  Ridberg  (Note  10),  who  observed  a  i)erio<licity  in  the  variation  of
the  differences  between  the  atomic  weights  of  two  contiguous  elements,  and  its  relation  to
their  atomicity.  A.  Bazaroff  (1887)  investigated  the  same  subject,  taking,  not  the  arith-
metical differences  of  contiguous  and  analogous  elements,  but  the  ratio  of  their  atomic
weights ;  and  he  also  observed  that  this  ratio  alternately  rises  and  falls  with  the  rise  of
the  atomic  weights.  I  will  here  remark  that  the  relation  of  the  eighth  group  to  the  others
will  be  considered  at  the  end  of  tliis  work  in  Chapter  XXII.

GROUPIHO  OF  TMB  EI.BMENTS  AND  THE  PEHIODIC  LAW SS

shonld  perhaps  be  looked  for  in  biiirII  difftrptices  of  the  atomic  weights.
If  in  a  certain  group  there  oouur  elements,  K  ,  R,,,  R,,,  and  if  in  that
series  whieb  contAiiis  one  of  these  elements,  for  instaoue  R;,,  an
element  Qj  precedes  it  and  an  element  Tj  Hucceeds  it,  then  the  pro-
perties of  R,  are  determined  hj-  the  properties  itf  R,,  Rj.  Q.^,  and  T.^.
Tlius,  for  instanee,  the  atomic  weight  of  Rj  =  j(Ri +  R.,+Q.i  +  Tj).
For  example,  Belenium  iiccurs  iti  the  samegroup  as  sulphur,  S  =:  '-^'2,  and
t«lluriuiti,  Te  =  125,  and,  in  the  7th  s«ries  As  =^7^  stands  before  it  and
Br  =80  after  it.  Hence  the  atomic  weight  of  selenium  should  he
}(.12  +  l2.5+7.5+H0)=  78,  which  is  near  to  the  truth.  Other  proper-
ties of  selenium  may  also  be  determined  in  this  manner.  For  example,
arsenic  forms  H, As,  bi-umiue  gives  MBr,  and  it  isevident  that  selenium,
which  stands  between  them,  should  form  HjSe,  with  properties  in-
termediate between  those  <iE  H^As  and  HBr.  Even  the  physical
properties  of  selenium  and  its  compou  nds,  not  to  speak  of  their  composi-
tion, being  deteniiined  by  the  group  i  n  which  it  occurs,  may  be  foreseen
with  a  ctuseapproachtu  reality  from  the  properties  of  sulphur,  tellurium,
arsenic,  and  bromine.  In  tliin  inaimj:r  it  i*  jhiskUiIk  tu /orHetl  the  pro-
jit^fieg  of  atill  unknown  fli-mfiits.  For  instance  in  the  position  IV,  5—
that  is,  in  the  IVth  group  and  5th  series — an  element  is  still  wanting.
These  unknown  elem(^tit«  may  be  named  after  the  preceding  known  ele-
uieDt  "f  the  same  group  by  adding  to  the  tii-st  syllable  (he  prefix  rin-,
which  means  one  in  Sanskrit.  The  element  IV,  -'5,  follows  after  IV,  3,
and  this  latter  position  lieing  occupied  by  silicon,  we  call  the  un-
known element  ekasilicon  and  its  symitol  Es.  Tlie  following  are
the  projwrties  which  this  element  should  have  on  the  basis  of  the
known  properties  of  silicon,  tin,  zinc,  and  arsenic.  Its  atomif  weight
is  nearly  73,  higher  oxide  EsO,;,  lower  oxide  EsO,  compounds  of  the
general  form  EsX,,  and  chemically  unstable  lower  compounds  of  the
fonn  EsXj.  Es  gives  volatile  organo- metallic  compounds-  for  instance,
Es(CHa)„  Es(CH3)3C!,  and  EstC^H^).,  which  boil  at  about  160°,  &<:.  ;
also  a  volatile  and  liquid  chloride,  'E.&Cl^,  boiling  at  about  tlO"  and  of
specitic  gravity  alwut  I'D.  EsO^  will  be  the  anhydride  of  a  feeble  col-
loidal acid,  metallic  Es  will  be  rather  easily  obtainable  from  the  nxides
and  from  KjEsF^  by  reduction,  EsS,  will  i«semble  SnS,  and  Si8„  and
will  pi-obably  be  soluble  in  amuionium  sulphide  ;  the  specilie  gravity
of  Es  will  be  about  5-5,  EsO^  will  have  a  density  of  about  4-7,  &c.
Such  a  prediction  of  the  properties  of  ekasilicim  was  made  by  tue  in
1C71,  on  the  basis  of  the  properties  of  the  elements  analogous  to  ii :
IV, ;),  =  Si,  IV,  7  =  Sn.  and  also  II,  5  =  Zn  and  V,  ft  =  As.  And  now
that  this  element  has  been  discovered  by  C.  Winkler,  of  Freiberg,  it
■  been  found  that  its  actufd  properties  entirely  correspond  with  those

26  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTKY

which  were  foretold.'^  In  this  we  see  a  most  important  confirmation
of  the  truth  of  the  periodic  law.  This  element  is  now  called  ger-
manium, Ge  (see  Chapter  XVIII.)  It  is  not  the  only  one  that  has  been
predicted  by  the  periodic  law.  ^  ^  We  shall  see  in  describing  the  elements
of  the  third  group  that  properties  were  foretold  of  an  element  eka-
aluminium,  III,  5,  El  =  68,  and  were  afterwards  verified  when  the
metal  termed  *  gallium  *  was  discovered  by  De  Boisbaudran.  So  also  the
properties  of  scandium  corresponded  with  those  predicted  for  ekaboron,
according  to  NilsonJ''

•^  The  laws  of  nature  admit  of  no  exceptions,  and  in  tliis  they  clearly  differ  from
such  rules  and  maxims  as  are  found  in  (grammar,  and  other  inventions,  methods,  and
relations  of  man's  creation.  The  confirmation  of  a  law  is  only  possible  by  deducing
consequences  from  it,  such  as  could  not  possibly  be  foreseen  without  it,  and  by  verifying
those  consequences  by  experiment  and  further  proofs.  Therefore,  when  I  conceived  the
periodic  law,  I  (1869-1871,  Note  9)  deduced  such  logical  consequences  from  it  as  could
serve  to  show  whetlier  it  were  true  or  not.  Among  them  was  the  prediction  of  tlie
properties  of  undiscovered  elements  and  the  correction  of  the  atomic  weights  of  many,
and  at  that  time  little  known,  elements.  Thus  uranium  was  considered  as  trivalent,
U  =  120  ;  but  as  such  it  did  not  correspond  with  the  periodic  law.  I  therefore  pro^xtsed  to
double  its  atomic  weight — U  =  240,  and  the  researches  of  Roscoe,  Ziumiermann,  and  others
justified  this  alteration  (Chapter  XXI.).  It  was  the  same  with  cerium  (Chapter  XVm.)
whose  atomic  weight  it  was  necessary  to  change  according  to  the  periodic  law.  I  therefore
determined  its  specific  heat,  and  the  result  I  obtained  was  verified  by  the  new  deter-
minations of  Hillebrand.  I  then  corrected  certain  formulae  of  the  cerium  com{)ounds,
and  the  researches  of  Rainmelsberg,  Brauner,  Cleve,  and  others  verified  the  proposed
alteration.  It  was  necessary  to  do  one  or  the  other — either  to  consider  the  periodic  law
as  completely  true,  and  as  forming  a  new  instrument  in  chemical  research,  or  to  refute  it.
Acknowledging  tlie  method  of  experiment  to  be  the  only  true  one,  I  myself  verified  what
I  could,  and  gave  every  one  the  possibility  of  proving  or  confirming  the  law,  and  did  not
think,  like  L.  Meyer  (Liebig's  Annalen,  Supt.  Band  7,  1870,  304),  when  writing  about  the
periodic  law  that  '  it  would  be  rash  to  change  the  accepted  atomic  weights  on  the  basis  of
so  uncertain  a  starting-point.*  (*  Es  wiirde  voreilig  sein,auf  so  unsichere  Anhaltspunkte
hin  eine  Aenderung  der  bisher  angenommenen  Atonigewichte  vorzunehmen.')  In  my
opinion,  the  basis  offered  by  the  periodic  law  had  to  be  verified  or  refuted,  and  experiment
in  ever}'  case  verified  it.  The  starting-point  then  became  general.  No  law  of  nature  can
be  established  without  such  a  method  of  testing  it.  Neither  De  Chancourtois,  to  whom
the  French  ascribe  the  discovery  of  the  periwlic  law,  nor  Newlands,  who  is  put  forward  by
the  English,  nor  L.  Meyer,  who  is  now  cited  by  many  as  its  founder,  ventured  to  foretell
^c  properties  of  imdiscovered  elements,  or  to  alter  the  *  accepted  atomic  weights,'  or,  in
general,  to  regard  the  periodic  law  as  a  new,  strictly  established  law  of  nature,  as  I  did
from  the  very  beginning  (1809).

**  When  in  1871  I  wrote  a  paper  on  the  application  of  the  periodic  law  to  the  deter-
mination of  the  properties  of  hitherto  undiscoveredjelements,  I  did  not  think  I  should  Uve
to  see  the  verification  of  this  consequence  of  the  law,  but  such  was  to  be  the  case.  Three
elements  were  described — ekaboron,  ekaaluminium,  and  ekasilicon — and  now,  after  the
lapse  of  twenty  years,  I  have  ha<l  the  great  pleasure  of  seeing  them  discovered  and
named  Gallium,  Scandium,  and  Germanium,  after  those  three  countries  where  the  rare
minerals  containing  them  are  found,  and  where  they  were  discovered.  For  my  part  I
regard  L.  de  Boisbaudran,  Nilson,  and  Winkler,  who  discovered  these  elements,  as  the  true
corroborators  of  th«'  perio<lic  law.  Without  them  it  would  not  have  been  accepted  to  the
extent  it  now  is.

'*  Taking  indium,  which  occurs  together  with  zinc,  as  our  example,  we  will  show  the
principle  of  the  metho<l  employed. The  equivalent  of  indium  to  hydrogen  in  its  oxide  is

Bbroupino  of  the  elembsts  and  the  periodic  law 27

W'i.  As  a  tme  law  of  nature  is  one  to  which  there  nre  no  exceptions,
En«  periodic  dependence  of  the  projierlies  on  the  atomic  weights
of  the  elements  gives  a  neiv  meana  for  determining  by  the  er/iiiva-
letU  Ihf  atomic  weig/if  or  atomicity  of  imperfectly  investigated  but
known  elements,  for  which  no  other  means  could  as  yet  be  applied
for  determining  the  true  atomic  weight.  At  the  time  (1860)  when  the
periodic  law  was  first  proposed  there  were  several  such  elements.  It
tlius  became  possible  to  learn  their  true  atomic  weights,  and  thrse  were
vprilied  by  later  researches.  Among  the  elements  thus  concerned  were
indium,  uranium,  cerium,  yttrium,  atid  others.'''

7.  The  periofiic  variiibility  nf  the  properties  of  the  eiemeuts  in
dependence  on  their  masses  presents  a  distinction  from  other  kinds
of  periodic-  dependente  (as,  for  exnmple,  the  sines  of  angles  vary
periodically  and  successively  with  the  growth  of  the  angles,  or  the
temperature  of  the  atmospbei-e  with  the  course  of  time),  in  that  the
weights  of  the  atoms  do  not  increase  gradually,  but  by  leap2  ;  that  is,
according  to  Dalian's  law  of  multiple  proportions,  there  not  only  are
not,  but  there  cannot  be,  any  transitiveor  intermediate  elements  between

ST'I— tlwt  is,  if  we  SDppow  it),  couipovit
llwoiiidcoriDdiuuiisIii,0.  Thoatomic
lent — UiM  i*.  indium  wu  considered  (a

u  to  be  like  that  at  water :  tlieu  In^ST'T,  und
light  of  iudiam  WHe  lakeu  an  double  the  ttqaivn-
9  ■  ^iviUent  elemeut — tnd  In-3  >  ST'T^TSl,
U  iodiuiD  ouly  roimed  ui  oiide,  RO,  it  ahonld  bo  placed  in  group  II.  But  in  Ilii»
cue  it  appcon  tli»t  there  woald  be  no  place  £or  indium  in  tlie  nj-stam  of  the  elemeiils,
becmiH  the  potitiona  II.,  G  ^  Zn  ~  CS  and  II..  U  -  St  —  M7  were  wlreMly  uccupied  by
Iraon  olenieDta.  and  according  to  the  periodic  law  an  element  with  an  atomic  weiglit  TB
tonld  not  be  bitalenl.  An  iifitlier  the  Tapour  denaity  nor  the  specific  heai,  aot  even  tlie
itomorpbiam  (the  wJls  ol  inclitun  cryatalliie  vith  great  diflicaltyj  of  the  eoinpoandii  of
indium  were  known,  tliere  won  nn  reaeon  tor  conuiderinK  it  lo  b«  a  bivAlent  utetnl.  uml
Uicnture  it  might  b«  regarded  an  trivalvnt,  quadriTalent,  d'c.  IF  it  be  trivfilent.  Ihm
Ia  =  3-iST'T  =  ns,  and  the  uampontion  ol  the  oxide  is  In^Oj,  and  of  ilH  nails  litX;.  Iti
lliu  nue  it  al  aunt  tuiU  into  ila  place  in  the  syateni,  namely,  in  group  QI.  and  Ttli
wriiH.  betwean  Cd-llU  and  So^lia,  na  an  analogue  of  alnmininm  or  dTialDmiiilnni
Idvi  =:  fl  in  Uaiukrit).  All  tlie  propertien  obwrred  in  indium  coireapond  with  lhif>
poailiim;  tut  example,  tlie  denuty,  eadraiom  -  8*6,  indiom  =  T'4,  tin  —  T3;  the  bonic
ivupertisa  uf  llie  oiidee  CdO.  IHijO^  SnOy,  sui^ceiuirel;  vary,  SQ  tliat  the  propertiea  of
In^Oj  an  iDlcnnediate  between  thowi  of  CdO  and  SuO.j  or  Cd^.,  and  SujOi.  That
■ndioui  belungv  lo  group  QI.  lutnbeenconHmied  by  tbedetermiuation  of  itsspeciliL'  heat,
(I>'0fi7  according  to  Bun»en,  and  OOGS  according  to  me)  and  also  by  the  fact  that  indium
fonna  alnma  bke  alumininm.  and  therefore  belongs  lu  the  nune  group.

Hie  aame  kind  of  conaiderationa  nuceaaitatsd  Inking  the  alomic  weight  of  titoailim
•»  nearly  18,  and  not  aa  GS,  the  Hgure  deriTSd  (roui  many  analysea.  And  bath  tlieiie
correctiona,  made  on  tlie  baaiaof  the  law,  hare  now  been  contirmed.  for  Thorpe  found,  by
a  ««ne«  of  tiareful  experinumta,  the  atomic  weight  of  titanium  to  be  that  foreseen  by  the
periodic  law.  Kotsithatanding  that  previooH  aiulyaes  gave  Os^lIM-T,  Ir^IDH,  aad
P1  =  18T,  tlie  periodic  law  ahowe,  aa  I  remarked  in  ISTl,  that  the  atomic  weighU  should
rise  from  twminm  lo  platinnm  and  gold,  and  not  fall.  Many  recent  reuearchea,  and
eapecially  thoee  of  Senbert,  have  Inlly  verified  thin  alatement,  baaed  <in  the  law.  Thaa  a
brtw  law  of  nature  anticipates  facte,  toretella  magiiitudea,  giiea  o  hold  an  nature,  and
11  the  nielhoda  of  researth,  4c.

«a. _

•■ "V

»-*- v-^L

• ^

-.JL"

■  ■

'.  .  -1.  ..

-  ■•  ^-w Wi-' '*1*

m

". :;r  >.i:.?e  of
.": ::io  ■.■h».M:iicaI

GROUPIKG  OF  THE ELEMENTS AND THE PERIODIC LAW 29

elements  are  perfectly  independent  and  individunl,  iiiGtead  of  this  idea
of  the  nature  of  the  elements,  tlie  notion  of  the  dependence  of  tlieii-  pro-
perties upon  l/fir  moKs  must  now  be  estaWished  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  sub-
jection of  the  individuahty  of  the  elements  to  a  common  higher  prin-
ciple whicli  evint-es  itself  in  gravity  and  in  all  physico-chemical  pheno-
mena. Many  chemical  deductiouB  then  acquire  a  new  sense  and  signi-
ficance, and  a  regularity  is  oliserved  where  it  would  otherwise  escape
attention.  This  is  more  particularly  a,pparenl  in  the  physical  proper-
ties, to  the  consideration  of  which  we  shall  afterwards  tui'n,  and  we
will  now  point  out  that  Gustavson  first  (Chapter  X.,  Note  26)  and
subsequently  Fotilitzin  (Chapter  XL,  Kote  06)  demonstrated  the  direct
dependence  of  the  reactive  power  on  the  atomic  weigiit  and  that  funda-
mental pi-opei-ty  which  is  expressed  in  the  fornis  of  their  compounds,
whilst  hi  a  number  of  other  cases  the  purely  chemical  illations  of  ele-
ments proved  to  Iw  in  connection  with  their  periodic  properties.  As
a  case  in  point,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  Carnelley  remarked  a  depen-
dence of  the  decompoaability  of  the  hydrates  on  the  pasition  of  the
elements  in  the  [teriodic  system  ;  whibt  L.  Meyer,  Willgerodt,  and
others  established  a  connection  between  the  atomic  weight  or  the
position  of  the  elements  in  the  periodic  system  and  their  property  of
serving  as  media  iu  the  transference  of  the  halogens  to  the  hydro-
carbons."' Bailey  pointed  out  a  periodicity  in  the  stability  (under  the
action  of  heat)  of  the  oxides,  namely  ;  (a)  in  the  even  series  (foj-
instance,  CrO^,  Motlj,  WOj,  and  VO^)  the  higher  oxides  of  a  given
group  decompose  with  greater  ease  the  smaller  the  atomic  weight,
while  in  the  uneven  series  (for  example,  COj,  GeOj,  SnOj,  and  PbO.^)
the  contrary  is  the  case  ;  and  (i)  the  stability  of  the  higher  saline
oxides  in  the  even  series  (as  hi  the  fourth  series  from  KjO  to
Mn,Oj)  decreases  in  passing  from  the  lower  to  the  higher  groups,
while  in  the  uneven  series  it  increases  from  the  Ist  to  the  IVth  group,
and  then  falls  from  the  IVth  to  the  Vlltli  ;  for  instance,  in  the  series

<"  Me^vi.  WUIgerodt,  sad  utbero,  guided  l>y  tbe  fiub  iWl  (iii»tu>>ii»i  and  Frietl^l  Imd
renmrked  (hit  meUJepiiiii  rapidly  p«>i.t«da  in  tliu  prenence  ot  uluminiuiu,  inie»tigiiU)d
the  itctuui  of  neiuljr  nill  (he  elemcnta  Ln  tliin  respect.  For  examijle,  they  took  beniene,
lulded  UiB  KieUlB  to  be  oipenmdntod  on  tu  it,  luad  puased  chloriue  Ihrougb  tbe  liqaid  iii
diSawid  ligbL  When,  lor  iastiiDCo,  Hodium,  iHitiusiuni.  barium,  &c.  «re  taken,  there  in
DO  iKtinn  un  the  bemene:  that  is,  byilnxxhlorio  iwid  is  not  diseogaKed;  bat  it  oloniiiiiDii).
Kidd,  or,  in  genenl,  ituy  metkl  tiBving  Uus  power  ot  niding  chloriiiBtioit  (Halogen-
■Ibertniger)  in  employed,  then  the  action  i*  clewly  seen  tram  tbe  volumeE  of  hydro-
chloric acid  etolfed  lenpei.'ially  it  the  metallic  alilonde  lonned  h  soluble  in  Wnnime).
Thnii.  in  gmnii  I.,  and  id  tieneral  nmong  tlie  eveu  nnd  light  eUnieiitH,  there  are  nunc
LOfioblv  of  mn'ing  on  nffBUtH  of  metale]>»i>-,  but  aluminium,  gallinm,  indium,  uibmioDy,
IcUnriuni,  and  iodine,  which  are  contiguoua  members  in  the  periodic  syBtcm,  arc  excellent
Bra)  of  tbti  halogen ».

-. -r/.-r. >:.M. ^ib.O,, TeO^, IJK
. ■ ■•  i  ■ :  -  .  : . ■'  : ::.  I :>'•»!• a  <lef»»'nilenct*  Ixitween

: ' J  _  -.^-^i:!.  a::«l  tht^ir  (K)sitii>]i  in  the

- -  . ■- 7.  - jr^.i'r'"  "he  att«>ntion  paid  lo

■  - . .  >t:  .  : •  -.r.r-  z:*y.\  touncl  lietween  the

-  y»:.v>- : a:.  .I'lirous  sul»st;ineos  and

:  ^  Tt- :  :lir  o:.:i5titueiit  elements  and

' ■■ . ?;■"-■  F'r^idr*.  since the  peri^^iio

- '  "■-  :*■  ■**:'>*>•:.  I'.-anv  tacts  liave  lK*en

m

*  ,  • -^ -w :. y  >:•„:' I  i-.irs  lietwt'on Sn  and

" ,  -...'■.■'  rrv.  pr»  viously  observed.

•  -  -  -  > .-.  ■>  •.■>:ice  or  the  pericKlic  hiw.

1  :- ':.:.. wr se**  th.it tlie  most

■■ r^ vr^ ::.  se  with  >mall  atomic

• -  -  ^ - -  ^ "-^■r ■  !v:i>:.t'» vxrlusively  pre-

^- \v^- :.. 'orhc'jf  small  mass  facih-
-•  - ^  "  .-^ ■  -;:>r  to 'rjtmisuis. Poluta

m

>> ^  ' V .» V-^r.:  • AT. : 'Tl'.er^  even  fli&covervfl

- ^ . ..  :•;■ f  >.»'.:>  :i:;il  other  re-
- -  '  ■ -■.■.■■.-"'.  :::  :i  e  perioiHi-  svatem

^" ■  ^-  . - ". •/.•>:.  \ir«.'rertif^  must  Ih'

-  .: .-.-:=..>».  i.-.  on tlie  i[uality

-  :  - ". - :.' :!.-■:.  .\"->'i  a  ilepend-

;•:.•■.-• r*.v!:'.tr:;:s mu-t be

«:::>::o .i:>:r:bution. We

> * -  T ■ tv.rtr.er exposition  ot

; " ■  ' • :rsr'\'S with  citini:

■"" *  ' .  ;. ' ".  '..-^ ■•!  th»-  mai:nctic

' ^ ■  ^  - •,,-•. ..;■•;, u  i'V  rhem in  the

"; '  ■ " •*•-".■'.■ v"- :..-:.:>  or  t!ie r-u

■  • ■  • ■  •• • » I  ' k

.  - i"«  : I  »■■  ::■.
>  ;■■.  ::•:  i  'i  y  :i.i-

• .  ■ ;  ■  -  ■ •■ .  ; .  ^

.  ■  '■  '' • ■■■>

■  v.-  '  ■  V •  -.1

GROUPING OF  THE  ELEMENTS  AND  THE PERIODIC  LAW 81

series  (beginning  with  Hthiura,  potassium,  rubidium,  caesium)  belong
to  the  number  of  magnetic  (paramagnetic)  substances  ;  for  example,
according  to  Faraday  and  others,*^*'^^  C,  N,  O,  K,  Ti,  Cr,  Mn,  Fe,  Co,
Xi,  Ce,  are  magnetic  ;  and  the  elements  of  the  uneven  series  are
diaviagneiic,  H,  Na,  Si,  P,  S,  CI,  Cu,  Zn,  As,  Se,  Br,  Ag,  Cd,  Sn,  Sb,
T,  Au,  Hg,  Tl,  Pb,  Bi.

Carnelley  also  showed  that  the  melting-point  of  elements  varies
periodically,  as  is  seen  by  the  figures  in  Table  III.  (nineteenth  column),***
where  all  the  most  trustworthy  data  are  collected,  and  predominance
is  given  to  those  having  maximum  and  minimum  values.*®

17  III!  The  relation  of  certain  elements  (for  instance,  the  analogues  of  Pt)  among
diamagnetic  and  peuramagnetic  bodies  is  sometimes  doubtful  (probably  partly  owing  to
the  imperfect  purity  of  the  reagents  under  investigation).  This  subject  has  been  studied
in  some  detail  by  Bachmetieff  in  1889.

^*  It  is  evident  that  man}*  of  the  figures,  especially  those  exceeding  1000°,  have  been
determined  with  but  little  exactitude,  and  «ome,  placed  in  Table  III.  with  the  sig^  (?),  I
have  only  given  on  the  basis  of  rough  and  comparative  determinations,  calculated  from
the  melting-points  of  silver  and  platinum,  now  established  by  many  observers.  In
Table  III.,  besides  the  large  periods  whose  maxima  correspond  with  carbon,  silicon,
titanium,  ruthenium  (?),  and  osmium  (?),  there  are  also  small  periods  in  the  melting-
{K)ints,  and  their  maxima  correspond  with  sulphur,  arsenic,  antimony.  The  minima
correspond  with  the  halogens  and  metals  of  the  alkalis.  A  distinct  periodicity  is  also
seen  in  taking  the  coefficients  of  linear  expansion  (chiefly  according  to  Fizeau) ;  for
instance,  in  the  vertical  series  (according  to  the  magnitude  of  the  atomic  weight),  Fe,
Co,  Ni,  Cn,  the  linear  expansion  in  millionths  of  an  inch  =12, 18,  17,  and  29;  for  Rh,
Pd,  Ag,  Cd,  In,  Sn,  and  Sb  the  coefficients  are  8,  12,  19,  81,  46,  26,  and  12,  so  that  a
maximum  is  reached  at  In.  In  the  series  Ir  (7),  Pt  (6),  Au  (14),  Hg  (60),  Tl  (31),  Pb  (29),
and  Bi  (14),  the  maximum  is  at  Hg  and  the  minimum  at  Pt.  Haoul  Pictet  expressed
this  connection  by  the  fact  that  he  found  the  product  a{t  +  ^12)\/A  d  to  be  nearly
constant  for  all  elements  in  the  free  state,  and  nearly  equal  to  0045,  and  being  the  co-
efficient of  linear  expansion,  t  -»-  278,  the  melting-point  calculated  from  the  absolute  zero
(  —  273^-'),  and  ij^  d^  the  mean  distance  between  the  atoms,  if  A  is  the  atomic  weight  and
d  the  sp-  gr.  of  an  element.  Although  the  above  product  is  not  strictly  constant,  never,
theless  Pictet'smle  gives  an  idea  of  the  bond  between  magnitudes  which  ought  to  have
a  certain  connection  with  each  other.  De  Heen,  Nadeschdin,  and  others  also  studied
this  dependence,  but  their  deductions  do  not  give  a  general  and  extict  law.

**  Carnelley  found  a  similar  dependence  in  comparing  the  melting-points  of  the
metallic  chlorides,  many  of  which  he  redetermined  for  this  purpose.  The  melting-points
<aiid  boiling-points,  in  brackets)  of  the  following  chlorides  are  known,  and  a  certain
regularity  is  seen  to  exist  in  them,  although  the  number  (and  degree  of  jiccuracy)  of
the  data  is  insufficient  for  a  generalisation : —

LiCl  598°

BeCl.2  600=

BCI3  -20^^

NaCl  772°

MgCl.2  708°

AICI5  187''

KCl  734°

CaCl^  719°

ScCl.,  ?

f  CuCl  434°

ZnCl.j  262^

GaCl.:^  76°

(993°)

(680")

(217^^)

AgCl  451°

CdCl^j  541^

InClj  ?

rTlCl427°
1  713")

PbCl>  498^

BiClj  227°

fnoH'^)

We  will  also  enumerate  the  foUcjwing  data  given  by  Carnelley,  which  are  interesting  for

32  PltlNOIPLEa  OF  CHEStlSTKY

Tbere  is  nu  doubt  that  many  other  physical  properties  will,  when
further  studied,  also  prore  to  be  in  periodic  dependence  on  the  atomic

oompariBoni  HCI -112°  |-l<ia"|;  KbCnur,  SrClj^afi".  CaCl  SHI",  BuCl,  BBO°,  BbClj

78=  laaa"),  TdCij  am*"  (337°),  ici  ar,  HrCI.j  dtw  (3om=),  FeCi,  aou",  Nbcij  iw  (bjo''),

TaClj  311°  Itii").  WCl,  lflU°.  Tbe  imrltLine-poiutg  of  tlie  bromideB  uad  iodidsa  »»
higher  or  lower  thau  thoHe  of  the  ix>TTeHpc)ndiag  L^hloride^,  ncc»rdliig  ta  lUe  uWmio
weight  of  the  element  uid  nnmlier  of  atoms  o(  the  hklogen,  as  is  seen  (roio  the  following
euunples :— 1.  KCl  734",  SBr  nan°,  KI  IS34';  3.  AftCI  ^St".  AgBr  1^7",  Agl  537":
8,  PhCI,  *0S'  IlKKi^l,  PbBr.,  4l)U''  (Mfil-J,  Pbl,  Ssa"  ((Wfl") ;  4.  SnCl,  l«low  -it0"lll»^|.
3nBr,  ao^  |a01°|, SnI,  US"  |9»E)  I*<t  Cha-ptel  II.  N'ote  3T, and  Chapter  XL Note

lanrie  (l^^J  i(J»  obiiecved  a  periodicity  in  tlie  quaiUUff  of  heat  developed  in  the
tnrmntlna  dI  \\k  dtlerideH,  hromiden,  und  iudides  |tl);.  T9),  m  ia  neen  from  the  following
figiircH,  where  the  heat  developed  iu  eipreued  in  thouuAuds  ef  calories,  awl  relerred  to  a
molaenh)  of  cblonne,  CI,.  «i  that  the  heat  of  formation  of  KC1  is  dnabled.  and  that  of
SnCl(ha1>ed,  d.-c,:  Ma  195  (Ag  BH,  An  IS),  Hg  Ul  (Zn  97.  Cd  93,  Hg  OS).  Al  117,  Si  70
(Sn  611,  K  ail  iLi  1871,  C.i  ITfl  I'Sr  1«,  Biu  Iflli,  ivhfnce  it  I"  st^ti,  Hint  tli,>  i!ri-ftle»l

amonnt  of  heat  is  evolTed  bj-  the me

tails  from  them  to  the  halogenii,  whic

Bictwrdiion,  by  comparing  the  healb  of  foimation  of  the  fluorides  also  come  to  the

conclnsion  that  tbey  are  in  periodic  dei>enden<*  tipou  tbe  atomio  weights  of  tile  camhiDcd

elemaiita.

In  Uiis  respect  it  may  not  he  auperfluooa  tu  waiark  (1)  thnt  TbomBeu,  wliose  reanlls
I  have  employed  above,  observed  a  currelatiou  in  the  calorific  eiiuivalentM  of  anaiogoaa
eleinentu,  altliough  be  did  not  remart  their  periiKhc  variation ;  \t)  that  the  dniforoiilj
of  many  thennochemical  deductiuUB  mnvt  gain  i^onBideiahly  by  the  appliiation  of  the
periodii'  law,  which  evidently  repeats  itself  iu  caloriinetric  dsta;  and  if  Cheae  data  fre-
quently lead  to  Irne  forecasts,  thin  is  dne  to  the  periodicity  of  tlie  thermal  mi  well  as  of
many  other  properties,  as  Lanrie  remarJiBd  ;  and  <3)  that  Uie  lieat  of  formation  of  tbe
oiides  is  sIho  subject  In  a  periodic  depuudenue  which  differs  from  that  of  the  heal  of
lotmation  of  the  chlorides,  in  Ibat  the  greatest  quantity  eorresponds  with  tlie  bivalent
L- iDelali  of  the  alkaline  earlhs  {magnesium,  caltinm,  stroutinm,  bariam),  and  not  with  the
^nleat  nutals  ol  tbe  alkalis,  aa  is  the  case  with  chlorine,  bromine,  and  ic

[,  and  iodine.  .^j^^J

M

SROUPINO OF  THE BLEMENT8 AND  THB  PERIODIC LAW 38

weights,"  •■'*  but  at  present  only  a  few  are  known  with  any  ciimplete-
ness,  and  we  will  only  refer  tti  the  one  which  is  the  most  eiLsily  and
frequently  determined — namely,  the  uppcific  grarity  in  a  solid  and
liquid  state,  the  more  especially  as  its  connection  with  the  chemical
I>roperties  ami  relations  of  substances  is  shown  at  every  step.  Thus,
for  instADce,  of  nil  the  mettils  those  of  the  alkalis,  and  of  all  the  non-
nielnU  the  halogens,  are  the  most  energetic  in  their  reactions,  and  they
have  the  lowest  specific  gravity  iimong  the  adjiioent  elenientB,  us  is  seen
in  Table  III.,  column  17.  Such  are  sodium,  potassium,  rubidium,
ctesium  among  the  metals,  and  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine  among  the
non-metals  :  and  as  such  less  energetic  metals  as  iridium,  platinum,
and  gold  {and  even  charcoal  or  the  diamond)  have  the  highest  speciiic
gravity  among  the  elements  near  to  them  in  atomic  weight ;  therefore
the  degree  of  the  condensation  of  matter  evidently  influences  the
course  of  the  transformations  proper  to  a  Bultstance,  and  furthermore
this  dependence  on  the  atomic  weight,  although  very  complex,  is  of  a,
clearly  poriodie  character.  In  order  to  account  for  this  to  some  extent,
it  may  be  imagined  that  the  lightest  elements  are  porous,  and,  like  a
sponge^  ai«  easily  penetrated  by  other  substances,  whilst  the  heavier
elements  are  more  compressed,  and  give  way  with  difficulty  to  the
insertion  of  other  elements.  These  relations  are  best  understood  when,
instead  of  the  specific  gravities  referring  to  a  unit  of  volume,'"*  the
(ihiinic  viAiimr-g  of  the  e/evKnU  -that  is,  the  quotient  A  Id  iii  the  atomic

cirraraatwiae  ih  probabl]'  connected  with  the  loft  tluit  v  Moriue.  bromiue.  >nd  iodine  »re
aniiKlent  sJwmentii,  and  oijgen  liivalHiit  (vompuFE,  tor  juiilance.  Cbuptei  XI.,  Nate  IS.
Chapter  XXH.,  Note  40,  Cluiiter  XXVI.,  Note  28  "'•.  «c.)  '

Kejrier  (1809).  id  mvsBtig&tiiig  the  npecln,  or  the  BDisli  metalx  and  meUU  of  Uie
■UmlitM  ekrthii,  came  to  the  coacluuon  that  in  thU  renpect  alao  tliere  is  a  regulorily  nl
a  penoiUF  ohamoter  in  dependencu  Dpon  tlie  atomio  weights.  Probahly  a  ulwier  aud
syitvuutie  stady  of  many  of  the  properties  of  the  elementH  and  at  coin|i]ex  and  iuui|ih>
bmliet  farmed  bj  them  will  more  and  more  frequently  lead  to  simitar  conclauons,  and  In
extending  the  range  of  application  o(  the  periodic  lav.

IV  kK  Probably,  besides  thermo-chemical  data  (Nntel9),the  refnclive  index,  utheaion,
dactilily,  and  limilar  propettl«B  of  pommponding  tomponnds  or  of  the  elements  thom-
leliea  will  be  fonnd  to  eihibit  a  degiendence  of  the  magnitude  ol  the  atomic  weight  upon
Um)  periodic  law.

"  Having  ocoDpied  myself  since  Ibo  Hftie*  (my  diasertatioo  (or  the  degree  of  M.A.
omoeriied  Ihe  specific  rolamee.  and  is  printeil  in  jiart  in  the  J?uaiian  Mining  Journal
lot  ISSD)  with  the  problems  concerning  the  relations  tietween  the  «peoiGc  graTilieH  and
mlomea,  and  the  chemical  compositionu  ut  snbstances,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the
dirert  inTestigation  of  specific  gravitieH  given  esaentially  the  same  results  as  the
hmatigation  o(  (pecifio  Tolnmea,  only  that  th«  latter  are  more  graphic.  Table  IIL  of
Ihe  periodic  pniperties  of  the  elemeiil>  clearly  illDstrates  this.  Thus,  for  those  members
whose  volame  is  the  greatest  amouK  the  contiguons  elemeuls.the  speciGa  gravity  is  least
— that  is.  the  periodic  variation  of  Iwth  properties  is  equally  evident.  In  [Hssing,  tor
T  to  iodine  we  hnve  a  successive  deorease  of  speciiic  gnirit;  and  suc-
specific  volame.  The  periodic  allematton  ol  the  rise  and  (all  of  the
;TOL.  II.  D

^^^Etoi

34  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTKY

weight  A  by  the  specific  gravity  d-  are  taken  for  comparison.  As,
according  to  the  entire  sense  of  the  atomic  theory,  the  actual  matter
of  a  substance  does  not  fill  up  its  whole  cubical  contents,  but  is  sur-
rounded by  a  medium  (ethereal,  as  is  generally  imagined),  like  the  stars
and  planets  which  travel  in  the  space  of  the  heavens  and  fill  it,  with
greater  or  less  intervals,  so  the  quotient  A'd  only  expresses  the  mean
volume  corresponding  to  the  sphere  of  the  atoms,  and  therefore  ^  A  d
is  the  vfiean  distance  between  the  centres  of  the  atoms.  For  compounds
whose  molecules  weigh  J/,  the  mean  magnitude  of  the  atomic  volume  is
obtained  by  dividing  the  mean  molecular  volume  MJd  by  the  number
of  atoms  n  in  the  molecule.^*  The  above  relations  may  easily  be
expressed  from  this  point  of  view  by  comparing  the  atomic  volumes.
Those  comparatively  light  elements  which  easily  and  frequently  enter
into  reaction  have  the  greatest  atomic  volumes  :  sodium  23,  potassium
45,  rubidium  57,  caesium  71,  and  the  halogens  about  27  ;  whilst  with
those  elements  which  enter  into  reaction  with  difficulty,  the  mean  atomic
volume  is  small  ;  for  carbon  in  the  form  of  a  diamond  if  is  less  than
4,  as  charcoal  about  G,  for  nickel  and  cobalt  less  than  7,  for  iridium
and  platinum  about  9.  The  remaining  elements  having  atomic  weights
and  properties  intermediate  between  those  elements  mentioned  above
have  also  intermediate  atomic  volumes.  Therefore  the  specific  gravities
and  specific  volumes  of  solids  and  liquids  stand  in  periodic  dependence
on  the  atomic  iveights^  as  is  seen  in  Table  III.,  where  both  A  (the
atomic  weight)  and  d  (the  specific  gravity),  and  A  jd  (specific  volumes
of  the  atoms)  are  given  (column  18).

Thus  we  find  that  in  the  large  periods  beginning  with  lithium,
sodium,  potassium,  rubidium,  cjvsium,  and  ending  with  fluorine,  chlorine,
bromine,  iodine,  the  extreme  members  (energetic  elements)  have  a
small  density  and  large  volume,  whilst  the  intermediate  substances
gnidually  increase  in  density  and  decrease  in  volume— that  is,  as  the
atomic  weight  increases  the  density  rises  and  falls,  again  rises  and  falls,

Hpocific  gravity  and  specific  volume  of  the  free  elements  was  communicated  by  me  in
AugUHt  1809  to  the  Mohcow  Meeting  of  Russian  Naturalists.  In  the  following  year  (1870)
L.  Meyer'rt  pai)er  appeared,  which  also  dealt  with  the  specific  volume  of  the  elementn.

^'  In  my  opinion  the  mean  volume  of  the  atoms  of  compounds  deserves  more  atten-
tion than  has  yet  been  paid  to  it.  I  may  point  out,  for  instance,  that  for  feebly  energetic
oxides  the  mean  volume  of  the  atom  is  generally  nearly  7 ;  for  example,  the  oxides  SiO^,
Sc.^O-.  TiO.„  V  .Oj,  art  well  as  ZnO,  Ga^O-,  CeO,.,  ZK),,.  In.O.v  «»0j,  Sb.Oi,  <^'<'-,  whilst
the  mean  volume  of  the  atom  of  the  alkali  and  acid  oxides  is  greater  than  7.  Thus  we
find  in  the  magnitudes  of  the  mean  volumes  of  the  atom  in  oxides  and  salts  both  a
|M?rio<Iic  variation  and  a  connection  with  their  energy  of  essentially  the  same  (*haracter
as  cK'Curs  in  ♦hp  case  of  the  free  elements.

GROUPINCr  OF  THE ELEMENTS  AND  THE  PERIODIC LAW 35

and  so  on.  Furthermore,  the  energy  decreases  as  the  density  rises,  and
the  greatest  density  is  proper  to  the  atomically  heaviest  and  least
energetic  elements  ;  for  example,  Os,  Ir,  Pt,  Au,  U.

In  order  to  explain  the  relation  between  the  volumes  of  the  ele-
ments and  of  their  compounds,  the  densities  (column  S)  and  volumes
(column  'SI  Is)  of  some  of  the  higher  saline  oxides  arranged  in  the  same
order  as  in  the  ease  of  the  elements  are  given  on  p.  36.  For  con-
venience of  comparison  the  volumes  of  the  oxides  are  all  calculated
per  two  atoms  of  an  element  combined  with  oxygen.  For  example,
the  density  of  Al2O3=4-0,  weight  Al2O3=I02,  volume  Al203  =  25*5.
Whence,  knowing  the  volume  of  aluminium  to  be  11,  it  is  at  once  seen
that  in  the  formation  of  aluminium  oxide,  22  volumes  of  it  give  25*5
volumes  of  oxide.  A  distinct  periodicity  may  also  be  ol)served  with
respect  to  the  specific  gravities  and  volumes  of  the  higher  saline  oxides.
Thus  in  each  period,  beginning  with  the  alkali  metals,  the  specific
gravity  of  the  oxides  first  rises,  reaches  a  maximum,  and  then  falls  on
passing  to  the  acid  oxides,  and  again  becomes  a  minimum  about  the
halogens.  But  it  is  especially  important  to  call  attention  to  the  fact
that  the  volume  of  the  alkali  oxides  is  less  than  that  of  the  metal  con-
tained in  them,  which  is  also  expressed  in  the  last  column,  gi\'ing  this
difference  for  each  atom  of  oxygen. ^'^  Thus  2  atoms  of  sodium,  or
46  volumes,  give  24  volumes  of  Na.^O,  and  about  37  volumes  of  2NaH0
— that  is,  the  oxygen  and  hydrogen  in  distributing  themselves  in  the
medium  of  sodium  have  not  only  not  increased  the  distance  between
its  ^toms,  but  have  brought  them  nearer  together,  have  drawn  them
together  by  the  force  of  their  great  affinity,  by  reason,  it  may  be
presumed,  of  the  small  mutual  attraction  of  the  atoms  of  sodium.
Such  metals  as  aluminium  and  zinc,  in  combining  with  oxygen  and
forming  oxides  of  feeble  salt-forming  capacity,  hardly  vary  in  volume,
but  the  common  metals  and  non-metals,  and  especially  those  forming
acid  oxides,  always  give  an  increased  volume  when  oxidised — that  is,
the  atoms  are  set  further  apart  in  order  to  make  room  for  the  oxygen.
The  oxygen  in  them  does  not  compress  the  molecule  as  in  the  alkalis  ;
it  is  therefore  comparatively  easily  disengaged.

~  The  volame  of  oxygen  (judging  by  tlie  table  on  p.  36)  is  evidently  u  variable  quan-
tity, forming  a  distinctly  periodic  function  of  the  atomic  weight  and  type  of  the  oxide,  and
therefore  the  efforts  which  were  formerly  made  to  find  the  volume  of  the  atom  of  oxygen
in  t)ie  volumes  of  its  compounds  may  be  considered  to  be  futile.  But  since  a  distinct  con-
traction takes  place  in  the  formation  of  oxides,  and  the  volume  of  an  oxide  is  frecjuently
le*»«  than  the  volume  in  the  free  state  of  the  element  contained  in  it,  it  might  be  surmised
that  the  volume  of  oxygen  in  a  free  state  is  about  15,  and  therefore  the  specific  gravity
of  Holid  oxygen  in  a  free  state  would  be  about  0'9.

d3

36

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

H2O
Li^O
BegO.^
B2O3

N,0,

Na^O

Mg,0,

AI2O3

P2O.,
S2O,
CI/),

K2O
Ca./).,

SC2O,

Ti^C),

V2O,

Cr^O,

CuaO

ZnaOa

GaaOg

Ge204

A82O.,

Sr20.^

Y2O3
ZfjO,

MoO,,
AgaO
CdaOg

SbaO,
TeOc

Ba202

TaaO-,

W,0,

Hg^O,

Pb,(),

ThjO,

s

M/«

Volume  of  Oxygen

10

18

1- 22

20

15

- 9

3-06

16

+ 2-6

1-8

39

4- 10-0

1-6

55

+ 10-6

1-64

66

?+ 4

2-6

24

- 22

3-5

23

- 4-5

4  0

26

+ 1-3

2-65

45

+ 5-2

2-39

59

+ 6-2

1-96

82

+ 8-7

?l-92

95

+ 6

2-7

35

- 35

3-25

34

- 8

3-86

35

? 0

4-2

38

+ 3

3-49

52

+ 6-7

2-74

73

+ 9-5

5-9

24

4- 9-6

5-7

23

+ 4-8

?5-l

36

-h 4

4-7

44

+ 4-5

4-1

56

+ 60

4-7

44

- 13

50

45

?- 2

5-5

44

0

4-7

57

+ 6

4-4

65

+ 6-8

7-5

31

+ 11

8-0

32

+ 3

7-18

38

+ 2-7

7-0

43

+ 2-7

6-5

49

+ 2-6

51

68

+ 4-7

in

52

-  10

6-5

50

+ 1

6-74

50

+ 2

7-5

59

4- 4-6

6-8

68

4- 8-2

IM

39

4- 4-5

8-9

53

4- 4-2

9-86

54

4- 2

«soi:pma  op  the  elements  and  the  periobk;  law 37

i  the  volumes  of  the  chlorides,  orgtuto-metnllic  mid  all  ntLer
^responding  compounds,  also  vary  m  a.  like  periodic  BUcce«Gion  with  a
change  of  elements,  it  is  evidently  possible  to  indicate  the  properties
of  substances  yet  uuinvestigated  by  e.yperiniental  means,  and  even  those
of  yet  undiscovered  elements.  It  was  possible  by  following  this  method
to  foretell,  on  the  basis  of  the  periodic  law,  many  of  the  properties  of
sc-andiuni,  gallium,  and  germanium,  which  were  verilied  with  great
accuracy  after  these  metals  had  been  discovered.''^  The  periodic  law,
therefore,  has  not  only  embraced  the  mutual  relations  of  the  elements
and  expressed  their  analogy,  but  has  also  to  a  eertjiin  extent  subjected
to  law  the  doctrine  "f  the  types  nf  the  ciimpouuds  formed  by  the
Hemente  ;  it  has  enabled  us  to  see  a  i-egularity  in  the  variation  of
all  chemical  and  physical  properties  of  elements  and  conipuumls,  and
has  rendered  it  possilile  to  foret«ll  the  properties  of  elements  and
compounds  yet  uninvestigated  by  experimental  means  ;  thus  it  has
prepared  the  ground  for  the  building  up  of  atomic  and  molecular
mechanics.^'

^  Ae  an  eunijile  we  wiU  tnke  iniliuoi  oxide.  ln-jO;].  lU  ep.  tpr,  nnd  ip,  vol.  ulioiild  W
the  mean  of  thow  of  cadmium  oxide,  Cd.jO,.  <uid  Btaonic  oxide,  SiljOj,  iu  indiam  sUiicle
beUireii  cadmium  and  till.  Tims  in  Ihe  sereiitieg  it  was  ulrundy  evideol  llut  the  volnmu
111  iDdinm  oiide  ihould  be  abont  38.  and  ilt  sp.  gr.  about  1%  which  was  oonfirmed  by  tliH

I  at  Mth

D  I8B0.

>■  As  the  distance  between,  unit  the  volameB  ol,  Ihe  moleoalee  and  ■toma  of  Bolidn
and  liquids  certaiol)'  enter  into  the  dttn  [or  the  tolnlion  of  the  probleinB  of  mnlecnlu
meehanjo,  which  as  jet  have  only  been  workril  out  to  any  extent  for  Ihe  KiweODB  nt&te,
the  atody  of  the  specific  gravity  ol  totidn,  *nd  eiipecially  of  liquids.  Ii&s  long  hod  sn  en-
tMiiiTe  litenbnre.  With  respect  to  «olid«,  however,  a  Rreat  diffieulty  is  met  with,  ovini;
to  the  gpecilic  gravity  varying  not  only  with  a  change  of  iflouierit  Htute  (fur  example,  for
olicain  the  form  of  qnarti  =!'()5.  taiA  in  tridyimle  =S^)  but  also  directly  under  me-
chanical  pressnn  (for  example,  in  a  r^yttaUine,  coat,  and  forged  iDetid)|  und  even  with
the  extent  to  which  they  are  powdered,  >to.,  winch  influences  are  impemeptihle  in  liquids.
Compare  Chapter  XR'..  N.ite  05  !■'■.

Wiibont  Kuing  into  further  detnila.  we  nujr  odd  to  what  hae  been  said  abovp  that  the
<vuce|>tioii  ol  apeciSc  volainea  and  atonuo  dislanoes  hat,  formed  the  subject  of  a  Urge
number  of  re«Biuclw»,  but  us  yet  it  is  oidy  possible  to  lay  dovrn  a  few  general iaations  given
by  Dnmas.  Kupp,  nod  others,  which  are  mentioned  and  ainpliGed  by  me  in  my  work  aite<l
in  Kote  «l.  and  in  my  memoir*  on  tluK  subject.

1.  Auitlugoiia  Fompoundtand  their  itomorfihs  hiiverreqneutlyapproimiateljr  the  same
mulecular  voloneH.

3,  Other  compoonds.  analogous  in  thoir  propertieH,  exhibit  moteeular  rohuneii  which
inimaiie  with  the  nuilecnlu  weight.

3.  When  a  cODttuction  titkeii  place  in  combination  iu  a  gmieaus  slaUi,  then  contraction
is  in  the  majority  of  instance!  also  to  be  observed  in  the  uolid  or  liquid  state — that  is,
the  sum  of  tile  ToliimeH  ol  the  veocting  substances  jh  greater  tluin  tlie  volume  of  the
resnilant  substance  or  HUbstonces.

»  to  that  whicK  occurs  in  eonibinHt.
E.  In  subetitnUon  (when  the  volumee  in  H  state  ol  vapour  do  n.ii  vary)  a  vei
lungi'  of  volume  generally  lake"  place — that  is,  the  aura  of  the  volumes  of  the  i
is  almost  equal  to  the  sum  ut  the  ivsnllant  iiabsUinceti.

38  PRI^X'IPLES OF  CHEMLSTKY

6.  Hence  it  isinipossible  to  judge  the  volume  of  the  coinix)nent  hubsttinces  from  the
volume  of  a  compound,  although  it  is  poHsible  to  do  so  from  the  product  of  substitution.

7.  The  replacement  of  Ho  by  sodium,  Na.>,  and  by  barium,  Ba,  an  well  as  the  replace-
ment of  SO4  by  Clo,  scarcely  changes  the  volume,  but  the  volume  increases  with  the
replacement  of  Na  by  K,  and  decreases  with  the  replacement  of  H.  by  Li 2,  Cu,  and  Mg.

8.  There  in  no  need  for  comparing  volumes  in  a  solid  and  liquid  state  at  the  so-
called  corresponding  temperatures — that  is,  at  temperatures  at  which  the  vaix)ur  tension
is  equal  in  each  case.  The  comparison  of  voliunes  at  the  ordinary  temperature  is  suffi-
cient  for  finding  a  regularity  in  the  relations  of  volumes  (tliis  deduction  was  developed
with  particular  detail  by  me  in  1856).

•9.  Many  investigators  (Perseau,  Schroder,  Lowig,  Playfair  and  Joule,  Baudrimont,
Einhardt)  have  sought  in  vain  for  a  multiple  proportion  in  the  specific  volumes  of  solids
and  liquids.

10.  The  truth  of  the  above  is  seen  very  clearly  in  comparing  the  volumes  of  poljnneric
substances.  The  volumes  of  their  molecules  are  equal  in  a  state  of  vapour,  but  are  very
different  in  a  solid  and  liquid  state,  as  is  seen  from  the  close  resemblance  of  the  specific
gravities  of  polymeric  substances.  But  as  a  rule  the  more  complex  polymerides  are
denser  than  the  simpler.

11.  We  know  that  the  hydroxides  of  light  metals  have  generally  a  smaller  volume
than  the  metals,  whilst  tliat  of  magnesium  hydroxide  is  considerably  greater,  which  is
explained  by  the  stability  of  the  former  and  instability  of  the  latter.  In  proof  of  tliis  we
may  cite,  besides  the  volumes  of  the  true  alkali  metals,  the  volume  of^  barium  (86)  which
is  greater  than  that  of  its  stable  hydroxide  (sp.  gr.  4*5,  sp.  vol.  80).  The  volumes  of  the
salts  of  magnesium  and  calcium  are  greater  than  the  volume  of  the  metal,  with  tlie
single  exception  of  the  fluoride  of  calcium.  With  the  heavy  metals  the  volume  of  the
compound  is  always  greater  than  the  volume  of  the  metal,  and,  moreover,  for  such  com-
pounds as  silver  iodide,  Agl  (rf  =  5'7),  and  mercuric  iodide,  Hgl-j (f/  =  62,  and  the  volumes
of  the  compounds  -41  and  78),  the  volume  of  the  compound  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  the
volumes  of  the  component  elements.  Thus  the  sum  of  the  volumes  Ag  + 1  =  86,  and  the
volume  of  Agl  ^41.  This  stands  out  with  particular  clearness  on  comparing  the  volumes
K  + 1  =  71  with  the  volume  of  KT,  which  is  equal  to  54,  because  its  density  =  8*06.

12.  In  such  combinations,  between  solids  and  liquids,  as  solutions,  alloys,  isomorphous
mixtures,  and  similar  feeble  chemical  compounds,  the  sum  of  the  reacting  substances  is
always  very  nearly  that  of  the  resulting  substance,  but  here  the  volume  is  either  slightly
larger  or  smaller  than  the  original;  speaking  generally,  the  amount  of  contraction
depends  on  the  force  of  afiinity  acting  between  the  combining  substances.  I  may  here
observe  that  the  present  data  respectuig  the  specific  volumes  of  solid  and  liquid  bodies
deserve  a  fresh  and  full  elaboration  to  explain  many  contradictory  statements  which
have  accumulated  on  this  subject.

39

CHAPTER XVI

ZINC, CADMIUM, AND MERCURY

These  three  metals  give,  like  magnesium,  oxides  R(),  which  form
feebly  energetic  bases,  and  like  magnesium  they  are  volatile.  The
volatility  increases  with  the  atomic  weight.  Magnesium  can  be  dis
tilled  at  a  white  heat,  zinc  at  a  temperature  of  about  930°,  cadmium
about  770°,  and  mercury  about  35P.  Their  oxides,  RO,  are  more
easily  reducible  than  magnesia,  and  mercuric  oxide  is  the  most  easily
reducible.  The  properties  of  their  salts  RX.^  are  very  similar  to
the  properties  of  MgXg.  Their  solubility,  power  of  forming  double
and  basic  salts,  and  many  other  qualities  are  in  many  respects  identical
with  those  of  MgXg.  The  greater  or  less  ease  with  which  they  are
oxidised,  the  instability  of  their  compounds,  the  density  of  the  metals
and  their  compounds,  their  scarcity  in  nature,  and  many  other  properties
gradually  change  with  the  increase  of  atomic  weight,  as  might  be
expected  from  the  periodicity  of  the  elements.  Their  principal  charac-
teristics, as  contrasted  with  magnesium,  find  a  general  expression  in  the
fact  that  zinc,  cadmium,  and  mercury  are  heavy  metals.

Zinc  stands  nearest  to  magnesium  in  atomic  weight  and  in  pro-
perties. Thus  zinc  sulphate,  or  white  vitriol,  easily  crystallises  with
seven  molecules  of  water,  ZnS04,7H20.  It  is  isomorphous  with  Epsom
salts,  and  parts  with  difficulty  with  the  last  molecule  of  water  ;  it
forms  double  salts — for  instance,  ZnK2(S04).2,6H20 — exactly  as  mag-
nesium sulphate  does.  * Zinc  oxide,  ZnO,  is  a  white  powder,  almost  in-

*  Zinc  sulphate  is  often  obtained  as  a  by-product — for  instance,  in  the  action  of
galvanic  batteries  containing  zinc  and  sulphuric  acid.  When  the  anhydrous  salt  is  heated
it  forms  zinc  oxide,  sulphurous  anhydride,  and  oxygen.  Tlie  solubility  in  100  parts  of
water  at  0°  =  48,  20°  =  53,  40°  =  63^,  60°  =  74,  80°  ^84^,  100°  =  95  parts  of  anhydrous  zinc
Kulphate — that  is  to  say,  it  is  closely  expressed  by  the  formula  43  +  0'52t.

An  admixture  of  iron  is  often  found  in  ordinary  sulphate  of  zinc  in  the  form  of  ferrous
sulphate,  FeS04,  isomorphous  with  the  zmc  sulphate.  In  order  to  separate  it,  chlorine  is
passed  through  the  solution  of  the  impure  salt  (when  the  ferrous  salt  is  convert<nl  into
ferric),  the  solution  is  then  boiled,  and  zinc  oxide  is  afterwards  added,  which,  after  some
time  has  elapsed,  precipitates  all  the  ferric  oxide.  Ferric  oxide  of  the  form  Rj^o  >^  ^dis-
placed by  zinc  oxide  of  the  form  RO.

40  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

soluble  in  water,^  like  magnesia,  from  which,  however,  it  is  distinguished
by  its  solubility  in  solutions  of  sodium  and  potassium  hydroxides.  ^
Zinc chloride  * is decomposed by  water,  combines  with  ammonium

^  Zinc  oxide  is  obtained  both  by  the  conibuntion  and  oxidation  of  zinc,  and  by  the
ignition  of  some  of  its  salts — for  instance,  those  of  carbonic  and  nitric  acids;  it  is  likewise
precipitated  by  alkalis  from  a  solution  of  ZnX.^  in  the  fonu  of  a  gelatinous  hydroxide.
The  oxide  produced  by  roasting  zinc  blende  (by  burning  in  the  air,  when  the  sulphur  is
converted  into  sulphurous  anhydride)  contains  various  impurities.  For  purification,  the
oxide  is  mixed  with  water,  and  the  sulphurous  anhydride  formed  by  roasting  the  blende
is  passed  through  it.  Zinc  bisulphite,  ZnS03,H2S07„  then  passes  into  solution.  If  a
Holntion  of  this  salt  be  evaporated,  and  the  residue  ignited,  zinc  oxide,  free  from  many
of  its  impurities,  will  remain.  Zinc  oxide  is  a  light  white  powder,  used  as  a  paint  instead
of  white  lead ;  the  basic  salt,  corresponding  with  magnesia  alba,  is  used  for  the  same
purpose.  V.  Konriloff  (1890)  by  boiling  the  hydrate  of  the  oxide  with  a  8  p.c.  solution  of
peroxide  of  hydrogen  obtained  ZnaH.204  or  the  hydrate  of  the  peroxide  ( =  Zn02ZnH202
or  a  compound  of  2ZnO  with  H.^Oo),  which  did  not  part  with  its  oxygen  at  100-,  but
only  above  120°.  Cadmium  gives  a  similar  compound  of  a  yellow  colour.  Magnesium,
although  it  does  fonu  such  a  compound,  does  so  with  great  difficulty.

'  For  the  solution  of  one  part  of  the  oxide  55,400  parts  of  water  are  required.  Never-
theless, even  in  such  a  weak  solution,  zinc  oxide  (hydroxide,  ZnH^Oj)  changes  the  colour
of  red  litmus  paper.  Zinc  oxide  is  obtained  in  the  wet  way  by  adding  an  alkali  hydrox-
ide to  a  solution  of  a  zinc  salt — for  instance:  ZnS04  +  2HKO="K.2S04  +  ZnH202.  The
gelatinous  precipitate  of  zinc  hydroxide  is  soluble  in  an  excess  of  alkali,  which  clearly
distinguishes  it  from  magnesia.  This  solubility  of  zinc  hydroxide  in  alkalis  is  due  to  the
power  of  zinc  oxide  to  form  a  compound,  although  an  unstable  one,  with  alkalis — that  is
to  say,  points  to  the  fact  tliat  zinc  oxide  already  partly  belongs  to  the  intermediate  oxides.
The  oxides  of  the  metals  above  mentioned  (except  BeO)  do  not  show  this  property.  The
property  which  metallic  zinc  itself  lias  of  dissolving  in  caustic  alkali  with  the  disengage-
ment of  hydrogen  (the  solution  is  facilitated  by  contact  with  platinum  or  iron)  depends
on  the  formation  of  such  a  compound  of  the  oxides  of  zinc  and  the  alkali  metals.  The
solution  of  zinc  hydroxide,  ZnH.^O.^,  in  potash  (in  a  strong  solution),  proceeds  when  these
hydrates  are  taken  in  proportion  to  ZnH.jOa  +  KHO.  If  such  a  solution  be  evaporated  to
dryness,  water  extracts  only  caustic  potash  from  the  fused  residue.  When  a  solution  of
zinc  hydroxide  in  strong  alkali  is  mixed  with  a  large  mass  of  water,  nearly  all  the  oxide
of  zinc  is  precipitated ;  and,  therefore,  in  weak  solutions,  a  large  quantity  of  the  alkali  is
required  to  effect  solution,  which  points  to  the  decomposition  of  the  zinc-alkali  compounds
by  water.  If  strong  alcohol  be  added  to  a  solution  of  zinc  oxide  in  sodium  hydroxide,
the  crystallo-hydrate,  2Zn(OH)(ONa),7H20,  separates.

^  Zinc  chloride^  ZnCla,  is  generally  employed  in  the  arts  in  the  form  of  a  solution  ob-
tained by  dissolving  zinc  in  hydrochloric  acid.  This  solution  is  used  for  soldering  metals,
impregnating  wood,  &c.  The  reason  why  it  is  thus  employed  may  be  understood  foom  its
properties.  When  evaporated  it  first  parts  with  its  water  of  crystallisation  ;  on  being
further  heated,  however,  it  loses  all  traces  of  water,  and  forms  an  oily  mass  of  anhydrous
salt  which  solidifies  on  cooling.  This  substance  melts  at  250°,  commences  to  vola-
tilise at  about  400^,  and  boils  at  780°.  The  soldering  of  metals— that  is,  the  iniro-
duction  of  an  easily  fusible  metal  between  two  contiguous  metallic  objects — is  hindered
by  any  film  of  oxide  upon  them ;  and,  as  heated  metals  easily  oxidise,  they  are  naturally
difficult  to  Holder.  Zinc  chloride  is  used  to  prevent  the  oxidation.  It  fuses  on  being
lieated,  and,  covering  the  metal  with  an  oily  coating,  prevents  contact  with  the  air;
but  even  if  any  oxide  has  formed,  the  free  hydrochloric  acid  generally  existing  in  the
zinc  t;)iloride  solution  dissolves  it,  and  in  this  way  the  metallic  surface  of  the  metals
to  be  soldered  is  preserved  fit  for  the  adhesion  of  the  liquid  solder,  which,  on
cooling,  binds  the  objects  together.  Much  zinc  chloride  is  used  also  for  steeping
woo«l (telegraph-posts  and railway- sleepers) in order  to preser\'e it  from  decaying

ZISC.  CADMIUM.  AND  ItEBCUBY  41

cliloriiie,  |>otaa3iuui  chloride,  &c.,  just  like  miignesiuni  chloridi?,  forms
an  oxy chloride,  and  also  combineH  with  nine  oxide, ^ '''"

Zinc,  like  muti;  heavy  metals,  in  often /on  )ui  in  nnlnrv  in  eamliina-

quickly;  thi>  pnwrvatjve  Action  i*  in  i>l)  .
chuu-tFrof  tior  vulU  (corroBive  anbliiiiAte  ii
tgieat  to preHTife vrood hum decu)').  since

Thu  Bpecific  KUtvity  ol  wilulions  oontainin
follows :

>ility  uiitinlf  tlue  to  tliu  pQiButinaB
more  puisODOiiB,  lUid  a  still  bettor
.jt ia  iMe ia tlie uction of lower

The  lut  line  shows  the  chMge  of  Bpecific  gravity  lor  l°in  ten-thoUHUirlth  paxtn  for  lem-
pentarea  near  1S°.  More  Accurate  deterraiiutioiis  of  Cheltiofl,  peneiiitlly  eatnmuuiciit«d
lit  him,  Iwl  biiii  to  vouclnde  that  nolutions  of  tine  I'hloride  rollow  the  snme  lawn  >a  the
ulnli.nui  uf  unlpbnric  luiid,  wliiuh  will  be  coneidcred  in  Chtptu  XX. :  (1)  from  H,0  to
ZdCI»]WIL|U  .-fti  +  ltt'BBji  +  UlTWyi  (2)  Irom  thonee  to  /,uCl*ioH,,0  .-au+98-tl»p
-Otnal^:  tS|  thenos«>ZnCI„aBHjOi-114l*l-5-»96'W(^-lS-8B|-HClB07(;i-16-8B)'i
U)  lbaiueloZuCl„loa,Oa^l9aia-l  +  l<M-8aip-2S'ail4-<l'T!Hnl<j'~^1'^l)'':  |5)  thence
lo  j>>^S5  p.c.  (^  11600-8  + 14098  (}>-4Si)S)-i-l-l»aG  {/•- ta06).' vbem  i  ii  tlio  siieuific
KTBiitj  nl  the  solution  at  15°.  conUining  ji  p.c.  of  ZnCl.j  by  weight,  takini;  water  at
V>  =  V)auO,  and  where  So^SOSltt  (qncific  graiity  of  water  at  15").  Tlie  c^orapound  of
line  diloridH  with  hjdrochloriu  acid haa  been  mentioned  in  Vol.  I.  Chnpler  X.

Ziuc  chluride  has  a  great  affinity  for  water;  it  in  not  only  eolnbie  in  it,  bat  in  ulcoliol.
and  oD  being  diasolved  in  watflr  becuinea  L-omuderably  healed,  like  magneBium  and
calduiu  chloiidea.  Zinc  chloriili]  is  capable  of  taking  up  water,  not  only  in  a  tree  state,
Iml  aim  in  chemiud  combinstioD  with  many  aubstanceij.  Tha«,  for  instance,  it  in
med  in  organic  reaearchas  for  removing  the  elements  of  water  from  luauy  of  the  orgwiic

•  '■'■  When  miied  with  eioo  o»ide  it  forms,  with  remarkable  ease,  a  vtry  hard  masa  of
DDc  uiychloride,  which  ia  ^iplied  in  the  aria;  for  instani-e,  in  piiintiujj,  to  raaist  the
action  of  waltfr,  or  (or  ccmcDttng  such  objects  aa  are  destined  to  remain  in  water.  Zinc
BTych]DTide,ZnCli,HZnU,9H,0(^Zii20cC3ZnH^,),  ia  aleo  (ormol  fnun  a  solution  ol
tine  chloride  by  the  sotion  of  a  small  quantity  ol  auinionia  nn  it  after  lieuCiog  the  pre-
citnlota  obtained  with  the  liquid  for  a  conaiderable  time ;  the  admiiture  of  aramonium
■alta  with  a  mixture  of  a  strong  aolntiun  of  sine  chloride  with  its  oxide  nuiko  a  similur
maat.  which  does  not  solidify  eo  rapidly,  and  is  therefore  more  useful  for  some  purposes.
Hointare  and  cold  do  not  change  the  hardened  mans  of  oiychloride.  and  it  also  reaista
the  action  of  mimy  acids,  and  a  temperature  of  ilOlP,  which  makes  it  a  useful  cement  for
many  pnrpuaee.  A  aulation  of  magnesiom  ohloride  with  magneslam  oiide  forms  a
■inilai  oiychloriite.  The  mass  solidifies  best  when  there  are  equal  quantities  by  weight
of  one  in  the  chloride  and  oiide,  and  Iherefoie  when  it  has  the  cumpositioii  Zn^OCls
In  {mpanni;  luch  a  cement,  natncully  vac  otide  alone  may  betaken,  and  the  requisite
quantity  of  hydrochloric  acid  added  to  it.  The  capacity  of  ZoClu  to  i-nmbine  with  water,
ZsO,  and  HCl  land  also  with  other  metallic  ehloridesl  indicates  its  property  to  Himbine
will)  raulecoJea  of  otbnr  substances,  and  tlierefoTe  its  compounds  with  NU,v  and  especially
a  cODipmuid.  ZnCl,aNU],  similar  t^  saJ-amin»uiac,  might  be  eipectetl  (i.e.  aNU,CI,  in
wbivb  H,  IS  replaced  by  Zn|.  And  indeed  it  has  lou^  been  known  tluit  ZnCl^  absorbs
anuiionia  aiid  gires  solid  subataucea  capable  of  disHOciating  with  tlie  diseugattetuent  of
NHs.  Amoug  these  com|)OBnds  Imunbert  and  V.  Kouriloff  |IH94)  obtained  ZnCl^NUji
ZiiLV^Hj,  ZnCLjSNH:^  and  ZnCt.NHj.  llie  dissociation  tension  of  the  two  laat-
awntioned  componnds  at  91B°  is  equal  to  lH'i!  mm.  and  il'V  mm.  CdCl.j  also  forms
' ~  " 'ithNHj  (Kouriloff,  ISM).

42  PK1>"C1PLES  OF  CHEMl^TitY

Hon  tril/i  tiilphuTf  ioraiiag  the  so-called  =tHcU«n«/e,''ZaS.  It  sometimes
occuri  in  Urge  mosses,  often  crj'stallised  in  cabes ;  it  is  frequently
translucent,  and  has  a  metallic  lustre,  althougfa  this  is  not  so  clearly
dereloped  as  in  manj  other  metallic  sulphides  with  widch  we  shall  here-
after become  acquainted.  The  ores  of  zinc  also  comprise  the  carbonate,
m/rtijitiM,  and  silicate,  giliceous  ealamitie.

Metallic  zinc  (spelter)  li  most  frequently  obtained  from  the  ores
containing  the  carl>onate'' — -that  is,  from  calamine,  which  is  sometimes
found  in  thick  veins  i  for  instance,  in
Poland,  Galicia,  in  some  places  on  the
banks  of  the  Rhine,  and  in  considerable
masses  in  Belgium  and  England.  In
Russia  beds  of  zinc  ore  are  met  with  in
Poland  and  the  Caucasus,  but  the  output
is  small.  In  Sweden,  as  early  as  the
fifteenth  century,  calamine  was  worked
up  into  an  alloy  of  zinc  and  copper  (brass),
and  Paracelsus  produced  zinc  from  c«Ia-
mine  ;  but  the  terhnical  production  of  the
metal  itself,  long  ago  practised  in  China,
only  commenced  in  Europe  in  1807 — in
Belgium,  when  the  Abbe  Donnet  discovered
that  zinc  was  volatile.  From  that  time
the  production  increased  until  it  is  now  about  150  million  kilograms  in
Uermnny  aloue.

The  reduction  of  metallic  ziuc  from  its  ores  is  based  on  the  fact  that
zinc  oxide '  is  easily  reduced  by  charcooj at  a  red heat  : ZnO  -l-  C

^  T1ii»  iiiiiii-nil  lino  1>e<^ii  given  the  naiiu.-  of  '  tuuk-ort.'  on  uccuuiit  uf  its  li»Tiug  the
H|>IiriLrajii'«  IconHiileiiible  dennitr,  4'IMI,  Ac.)  ot  urdmary  nietallu-  onu ;  it  deoeivcnl  the
titxt  luini^rii,  becanw  it  did  nut,  like  otlier  ores,  give  metiil  when  simply  T(i*ial«d  in  airutd
fused  with  plmmwl.  The  while  ziuo  oxide,  (ornied  hy  burning  the  vapours  ot  zinc,  was
uIm>  culled  '  uihil  alhnni,'  or '  while  nothing.'  on  accoout  ot  itn  hglitnesu.

''  It  may  In  here  nieiitiiined  thai  by  the  word  ore  in  meant  a  hard,  heavy  aub«Unve
dug  out  lit  lliL-  earth,  which  Ih  uneil  in  metallurgical  workn  tor  obtaining  the  aaual  heavy
nietalK  lung  known  and  used.  The  natural  compound;!  of  sodium,  or  magneHiimi,  are
nut  oalleil  orcK,  bemniie  niagne»iuni  und  nodiuni  have  not  been  long  obtainable  in  quui-
lity.  Tlie  heavy  uietala,  thooe  which  are  eoxily  reduced  luid  do  nut  eaHily  oiMiHe,  are
exi-luHively  Ihiiw  which  Bredireclly  applied  in  manutHctnreH.  Oreseitlier  contain  Ihe  metola
thi'DiHelvea  (for  hiHtance,  oick  ot  xilver  or  biMnnthi,  and  the  nietols  are  tlien  Haid  to  be  in  il
native  Ktatr,  iv  eW  tlieir  HUli>hur  ci>in|K)uudi>  [blende,  murk-or«,  giyrites— uh.  tor  example,
galena,  I'bM ;  line  blende.  ZnH  ;  co|.per  iiyritcH,  CuFeiij  or  oxideH  [hm  the  ores  ot  iron),  or
KaltH  (cahiniilie,  to  m  Unco)  £m  in  incomparably  rarer  than  laagneBiani,  and  in  onlv
wi'U  known  lircau»e  t  tran  (  n  ed  trom  itn  occk  into  a  metal  whith  finds  direct  am  in
many  btanclniH f  ndu  try

'  Ureii,  when  Iraclcd  from  tl  earth  by  the  miners,  uro  ottrn  enriched  by  sorting.
wavliing,  and  oti meilui  Kal iierations. The  sulphurons  ores  (and  likewise  others)

ZISC.  OADSnUM.  AHD  MERCUBV  43

^  y.n  +  Cr).  The  xinc  tlius  obtamed  is  io  a  finely  divided  btat«  and
inipnra,  being  tiiixeil  with  otlier  luetuls  reduced  with  it,  but  the  grenter
portiou  ifi  eo-uvrrted  into  vajiour,  from  which  it  easily  passes  into  ii
liquid  or  solid  state.  The  reduction  and  distillation  are  carried  on  in
e«rthenware  retorts,  filled  with  a.  ukixture  of  the  divided  ore  and
charcouL  The  vapours  of  zinc  and  gases  formed  during  the  reaction
esca|)e  by  means  of  a  pipe  leading  downwards,  and  arc  led  to  a  cliaial>ei'
where  the  vapours  are  cooled.  By  this  means  they  do  not  come  into
coubu't  with  the  air,  because  the  neck  of  the  retort  is  tilled  with
gaseous  carbonic  oxide,  and  therefore  the  zinc  does  not  oxidise  ;  other-
wise its  vapour  would  burn  in  the  air"  '''■  The  vapours  of  zinc,  enter-
ing into  the  cooling  chamber,  condense  into  white  zinc  powder  or  ainc
dust.  When  the  neck  of  the  retort  is  heateil  the  zinc  is  obtained  in
u  liquid  state,  and  is  cast  into  platen,  in  whii.'h  forui  it  is  generally
sold.

Commercial  zinc  is  generally  impure,  containing  a  mixture  of  lead,
|iarticles  of  carbon,  iron,  and  other  metals  carried  over  with  the  vapours,
although  they  are  not  volatile  at  a  temperature  approaching  1000°.  If
it  be  required  to  obtain  pure  zinc  from  the  commercial  article,  it  is  sub-
j«Nrted  to  a  furtlier  distillation  in  a  crucible  with  a  pipe  passing  through
the  bottom,  the  vapours  formed  by  the  heated  zinc  only  having  exit
tltrough  the  pipe  cemented  into  the  bottom  of  the  ciiicible.  Passing
through  this  pipe,  the  vapours  condense  to  a  liquid,  which  is  collected
in  a  receiver,  Zinc  thus  purified  is  generally  re-melted  and  cast  into
rods,  and  in  this  form  is  often  used  for  physical  and  chemical  researches
where  a  pure  article  is  required.*

■R  llieu  geoenilij'  ro<ii.l«l.  Boaiiliug  an  ore  meant  heating  it  to  rediiean  in  air.  T\ie
nlphnr  then  hnrna,  uhI  paases  off  in  the  tonn  of  BulpUuTOUB  anh.vdride.  SO,,  and  thu
metkl  oiidiBeti.  The  ruanting  is  curcied  on  in  ucder  to  obtain  an  oxide  instead  at  ■
mlptnu'  comi>oiuid,  the  oxidt  beiiig  redntilJc  by  charcoal.  Tlimie  niBtliod^  introduced
i^e*  ago,  ate  met  with  in  uearly  wM  metollatgical  worka  Tot  jiracticaUr  oil  oreit.  For
this  »B8on  the  preparatory  treutment  of  zinc  blende  fuminhex  ziuu  oxide  ^  tlu6  ia  already

*  *^  With  TBTy  impure  orei,  especially  audi  nt  contain  le»d  \S^^  otUm  ■ccompanien
DOC),  (he  lapDur  of  tlie  reduced  zinc  ii  allowed  to  pa>s  directly  into  the  air.  It  bncna
and  ghtea  ZnO,  nhich  ■»  aaed  as  a  jugmenl.

■  Tbi>  IJuc,  ailhouKli  l>uu<i|>eneDDi<,  still  contokius  certain  iinpuritiek,  to  remove  whicli
it  ia  neceukry  l«  ptepue  winieaall  of  line  in  a  pare  atate  and  traaafonn  it  into  carbonate'
■hicb  latter  i«  theu  diatilled  vith  chareooJ ;  aDd,na  thin  abeetaot  ainc  can  only  be  obtained
from  very  pore  metal,  tbey  are  frequently  made  use  of  in  caaea  vhere  pore  aiiic  ii  required.
Id  ard*r  to  remove  the  arsenic  from  linu,  it  was  proposed  to  melt  it  and  mix  it  witli
aohydroiia  ma^eaiuui  chloride,  by  wbidi  lueaiis  vaponra  of  zinc  chloride  and  araenic
ttUuride  are  lurnied,  Perfeetly  pure  zinc  ■«  nude  <V-  Meyer  andothen>»byd>icDni|Hniing.
hy  means  of  tlie  galvanic  cnrrent.  a  aolation  of  zinc  sulphate  to  wliich  an  eicesa  ot
aaBWiuB  lia.  been  added.  The  line  need  t>ir  Maiah's  arsenic  text  (Cliapler  XrX.)  i>
^^H^  ttoni  A.  by  luaing  it  with  KKO,  and  llien  with  ZnCl...  .

44  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Metallic  zinc  has  a  bluish- white  colour  ;  its  lustre,  compared  with
many  other  metals,  is  insignificant.  When  cast  it  exhibits  a  crystalline
structure.  Its  specific  gravity  is  about  7 — that  is,  varies  from  6*8
to  7*2,  according  to  the  degree  of  compression  (by  forging,  rolling,  &c.)
to  which  it  has  been  subjected.  It  is  very  ductile,  considering  its
hardness.  For  this  reason  it  chokes  up  files  when  being  worked.  Its
malleability  is  considerable  when  pure,  but  in  the  ordinary  impure  con-
dition in  which  it  is  sold,  it  is  impossible  to  roll  it  at  the  ordinary
temperature,  as  it  easily  breaks.  At  a  temperature  of  100°,  however,
it  easily  undergoes  such  operations,  and  can  then  be  drawn  into  wire
or  rolled  into  sheets.  If  heated  further  it  again  becomes  brittle,  and
at  200°  may  be  even  crushed  into  powder,  so  completely  does  it  lose
its  molecular  cohesion. It  melts  at  418°,  and  distils  at  930°.

Zinc  does  not  undergo  any  change  in  the  atmosphere.  Even  in
veiy  damp  air  it  only  becomes  slowly  coated  with  a  very  thin  white
coating  of  oxide.  For  this  reason  it  is  available  for  all  objects  which
are  only  in  contact  with  air.  Therefore  sheet  zinc  may  be  used  for
roofing  and  many  other  purposes.^  This  great  unchangeability  of  zinc
in  the  air  shows  its  slight,  energy  with  regard  to  oxygen  compared
with  the  metals  already  mentioned,  which  ai-e  capable  of  reducing  zinc
from  solutions.  But  zinc  plays  this  part  with  regard  to  the  remaining
metals — for  example,  it  reduces  salts  of  lead,  copper,  mercury,  Ac
Although  zinc  is  an  almost  unoxidisable  metal  at  the  ordinary
temperature,  it  burns  in  the  air  on  being  heated,  particularly  when
in  the  form  of  shavings  or  in  the  condition  of  vapour.  At  the
ordinary  temperature  zinc  does  not  decompose  water — at  any  rate,  if
the  metal  be  in  a  dense  mass.  But  even  at  a  temperature  of  100°  zinc
begins  little  by  little  to  decompose  water  ;  it  easily  displaces  the
hydrogen  of  acids  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  of  alkalis  on
being  hejited.

In  this  respect  the  action  of  zinc  varies  a  great  deal  with  the
degree  of  its  purity.  Weak  sulphuric  acid  (corresponding  with  the
composition  H2S04,8H20)  at  the  ordinary  temperature  does  not  act  at
all  on  chemically  pure  zinc,  and  even  a  stronger  solution  acts  very
slowly.  If  the  temperature  be  raised,  and  particularly  if  the  zinc  be
previously  slightly  heated,  so  as  to  cover  the  surface  with  a  film  of
oxide,  chemically  pure  zinc  acts  on  sulphuric  acid.  Thus,  for  example,
one  cubic  centimetre  of  zinc  in  sulphuric  acid  having  a  composition

'  Coniiceti  and  other  arcliitectural  ornumentH,  remarkable  for  their  lightness  and
beauty,  are  Htam^ieil  out  of  Mheet  zinc.  Zinc-roofing  <loe8  not  require  painting,  but  it
melts  during  a  couflagratioii,  and  even  burns  at  a  strong  heat.  Many  iron  vessels,  (*t:c.,
are  covered  witli  zinc  ('  galvanised ')  in  order  to  prevent  them  from  rusting.

ZmC.  CADMIUM.  AMD  MERCUBY

H.iSO,,6HjO  ftt  the  ordinary  temperature  in  two  hour.-,  only  dissolves
Ui  the  extern  o£  0-018  gram,  and  at  a  i  temperature  of  100°  about
35  grams.  If  we  coinpsre  this  slow  action  witli  that  rapid  evolution
lit  hydrogen  whicli  ucuurs  in  the  case  of  commercial  zinc,  we  see  that
the  influence  of  tliose  inipuiities  in  the  zinc  is  very  great.  Every
particle  of  charcoal  or  iron  introduced  into  the  masB  of  the  zinc,  and
likewise  the  connection  of  the  zinc  with  a  piece  of  another  electro-
n^nlive  metal,  assists  such  a  di.ssolution.  The  slowness  of  the  action
of  sulphuric  acid  on  pure  ^inc  (and  likewise  on  amatganiiited  zinc)  may
also  be  explained  hy  the  fact  that  a  layer  of  hydrogen  ''^  collects  on
the  surface  of  the  metal,  preventing  contact  between  the  acid  anil  the

The  action  of  zinc  on  acids,  and  the  consequent  formation  of  /inc

'•  Veer™  (18fll)  proved  this  by  limple  eipeti  ment",  fiuiling  tliiil  invneuo  [lie  unliitioii
proceed!  tut  more  rapidly  (or  both  pure  uid  coniinercial  sine,  and  Btlll  more  tnpidly  in
the  preience  of  oiidi«ing  agents  (which  absorb  thu  hf dtogon]  like  CrOj  luid  HjOf,

<"'■■  The  addition  of  cupric  sulphate,  or,  better  still,  a  few  drup»  ntpUtinie  ohioriile
(the  metals  become  rednred).  to  the  sulphnrio  aoid  greatl)'  accelemte^  the  evalntian  of  tlie
hjdrDgen,  becanee  io  this  cane,  ax  with  commercial  lioo,  gulTiinic  couples  are  lonned
loeallj  bjr  tha  copper  or  platinum  mid  the  tini;,  uuder  the  influence  of  which  the  liiic
npi^l;  iliuolvea.  Tlie  action  ol  aoids  od  metsJIic  liuc  of  vnrionv  Uetrrees  of  purity  ha^
been  the  mbject  of  misny  inveBtigatioat,  particularly  important  with  reference  to  the
application  of  nnc  in  galranic  batteiies.  whilst  some  iuTestigatiuna  hare  direct  signifl-
eance  (or  chemical  mechanics,  althoagb  from  many  points  of  view  the  loatter  is  not
cltiu. I  consider  It  nBetu]  [o  mention  certain  of  these  investigation  s.

Calrert  and  Johnson  made  the  following  serios  of  obserrations  on  the  actinn  of  nal-
phunc  acid  of  vahoaa  detfrees  of  concentration  on  2  grama  of  pare  lini  daring  two  hours.
In  (be  cold  the  concentmted  acid,  HjSOi.  does  not  act,  Hj30t,aH,0  dismlres  about
O'OM  gram,  but  principally  forms  hydrogen  sulphide,  which  is  obtained  also  when  the
dilutioa  reaches  HiSO„7H]0,  vhen  Q'035  gram  of  line  is  disHolved.  When  largely
dilated  with  water,  pure  hydrogen  begins  to  be  disengaged.  H.jSO,,aH]0  at  1S0°  giTci.
a  mixture  of  hydrogen  sulphide  and  sulphurous  anhydride  dissolving  OlM  gram  of  i^iiic.

Boochordat  showed  that  if  in  a  vessel  made  of  gla*i  or  sulphur  dilute  sBlphuric  acid
acliog  oo  a  {ueueot  line  liberate*  one  port  of  hydrogen,  then  the  snme  iR-id  with  the  tiami-
piece  of  zinc  in  the  tame  time  vill  liberate  4  parts  of  hydrogen  if  the  vessel  he  made  ol
Ud— that  ie.  ziiiE  fotUBa  galvanic  couplB  with  tiu;  in  a  leaden  vessel  9  parts  of  hydrogen
an  eet  bee,  with  a  vesael  uf  antimony  or  biemlhth  IB  parts,  silver  or  platinam  SH  partb.
copper  SO  parts,  iron  4S  parts.  II  a  salt  of  platinam  be  added  to  the  dilate  sulphurii'
odd  (1  port  of  acid  and  13  parte  of  water),HillDn  determiuod  that  the  rapidit)'  of  th>'
action  on  the  line  ia  increased  149  times,  and  by  the  addition  of  copper  sujphate  is  reu-
dcnid  45  times  greater  than  the  action  of  pure  solphnric  acid.  The  salts  which  an-
aiUeid  are  redooed  to  metals  bjthe  line,  their  contact  serving  to  promote  the  reaction
beeaaae  they  form  local  galranic  currenUi.

Aooording  to  the  observationi  of  Cailletet,  if,  at  the  (irdtDary  preuure,  sulphuric  acid
with  line  liberate*  100  |iarta  of  hydrogen,  then  with  a  prexsure  of  (HI  atuiovpliere-
47  parts  will  be  liberatail  and  1  part  at  a  preaxurs  of  tau  atmosiihereti.  With  a  reduced
prtaaure  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pomp  lUa  {nita  ore  liberated.  Helmholtz  showi^
that  a  reduced  pressure  also  exerciset^  itn  inflaence  on  galviuiic  elements.

Drtmy,  Liiwel,  and  others  ehowed  tliut  :iuu  liberates  hydrogen  and  forms  basic  saltn
trnimnn  onilawitheolatioaaot  many  aoltu^for  ioAtanoe,  HCl..  alnminium  sulphate,  and

Hndium  aad  patah

I-  they  fon

46  PKINCIPLE8  OF  CHEMISTRY

salts,  interferes  with  its  application  in  many  cases,  particularly  for  the
preservation  of  liquids  either  containing  or  capable  of  developing
acid.  For  this  reason  zinc  vessels  ought  not  to  be  used  for  the  prepa-
ration or  preservation  of  food,  as  this  often  contains  acids  which  form

The  salts  of  ammonia  act  more  strongly  than  the  salts  of  potassium  and  sodium  ;  the
zinc  remains  bright.  It  is  evident  that  this  action  is  founded  on  the  formation  of
double  salts  and  basic  salts.

The  variation  with  concentration  in  the  rate  of  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on  zinc
(containing  impurities)  under  otherwise  uniform  conditions  is  in  evident  connection  with
the  electrical  conductivity  of  the  solution  and  its  viscosity,  although,  when  largely
diluted,  the  action  is  almost  proportional  to  the  amount  of  acid  in  a  known  volume  of
the  solution.  Forging,  casting  the  molten  metal,  and  similar  mechanical  influences
change  the  density  and  hardness  of  zinc,  and  also  strongly  influence  its  power  of  liberating
hydrogen  from  acids.  Kayander  showed  (1881)  that  when*  magnesium  is  submitted  to
the  action  of  acids :  (a)  the  action  depends,  not  on  the  nature  of  the  acid,  but  on  its
basicity ;  {h}  the  increase  of  the  action  is  more  rapid  than  the  growth  of  the  concentration ;
and  (c)  there  is  a  decrease  of  action  with  the  increase  of  the  coefficient  of  internal
friction  and electrical  conductivity.

Spring  and  Aubel  (1887)  measured  the  volume  of  hydrogen  disengaged  by  an  alloy
of  zinc  and  a  small  quantity  of  lead  (0*0  p.c),  because  the  action  of  tvcids  is  then  uni-
form. In  order  to  deal  with  a  known  surface,  spheres  were  taken  (9'5  millimetres
diameter)  and  cylinders  (17  mm.  dia.),  the  sides  of  wliich  were  covered  with  wax  in  order
to  limit  the  action  to  the  end  surfaces.  During  the  commencement  of  the  action  of  a
definite  quantity  of  acid  the  rapidity  increases,  attains  a  maximum,  and  then  declines  as
the  acid  becomes  exhausted.  The  results  for  5,  10,  and  15  per  cent,  of  hydrochloric  acid
are  given  below.  H  denotes  the  number  of  cubic  centimetres  of  hydrogen,  D  the  time
in  seconds  elapsing  after  the  zinc  splieres  have  been  plunged  into  the  acid.  At  15°  were
obtained :

H=  50

100

200

400

600

800

1000

5  p.c.  D  =  714

11.52

1755

2731

:50O8

6284

15462

10  p.c.  D  =-  301

455

r.49

095

1573

2746

6748

15  p.c.  I)  --  10(5

151

233

440

H2()

1604

4289

At  35- :

5  p.c.  D  -  HVl

705

1058

1700

2525

4132

8499

10  p.c.  D  =  9«

148

230

460

835

1594

3785

15  p.c.  D  -  44

('>4

112

256

505

1011

2457

At  55° :

5  p.c.  D  -  178

27  G

40«

609

1164

2105

5093

10  p.c.  D  -  34

60

113

258

45)1

970

2457

15  p.c.  D  =  24

35

5H

136

230

610

1593

In  consequence  of  the  complex  character  of  the  phenomenon,  the  authors  themselves
dt)  not  consider  their  determinatirnis  as  being  conclusive,  and  only  give  them  a  relative
significance  ;  and  in  this  connection  it  is  remarkable  that  hydrobromic  acid  under  similar
conditions  (with  an  equivalent  strength)  gives  a  greater  (from  2  to  5  times)  rapidity  of
action  than  hydrochloric  acid,  but  sidphuric  acid  a  far  smaller  velocity  (nearly  25  times
smaller).  It  is  also  remarkable  that  during  the  reaction  the  metal  becomes  much  more
heated  than  the  acid.

It  may  be  mentioned  that  zinc  dust  and  zinc  itself,  when  heated  with  hydrated  lime
and  similar  hydrates,  disengages  hydrogen  :  tliis  method  lias  even  been  proposed  for
obtaming  hydrogen  for  filling  war  balloons.

7JH0,  CAOMITM.  AND  MERCtlBY  .47

poisonuus  salts  with  the  zinc.  Even  ordinary  wat«r,  containing  car-
)ionio  acid,  slowly  attacks  zinc.

FineJy  dirided  zinc,  or  ziiir  dvM,  obtained  in  the  diatillation  of
the  metal  when  the  receiver  is  not  heaterl  u]>  to  the  melting  point,  on
account  of  its  presenting  a  large  surface  of  contact  and  containing
foreign  matter  (particularly  zinc  oxide),  has  in  the  highest  degree  the
property  of  decompoBing  acids,  and  even  water,  which  it  easily  de-
composes, particularly  if  slightly  heated.  On  this  account  zinc  dust  is
oftan  used  in  laboratories  and  factories  as  a  reducing  agent.  A  similar
influence  of  the  finely  divided  state  is  also  noticed  in  other  metals —
for  instjvnce,  copper  and  silver ^which  again  shows  the  close  con-
nection between  chemical  and  pliysico- mechanical  phenomena.  We
must  first  of  all  turn  tn  this  close  connection  for  an  explanation
of  tlie  widely  spread  application  of  zinc  in  galvanic  batteries,  where
the  chemical  (latent,  potential)  energy  of  the  acting  substances  is  trana-
fonned  into  (evident,  kinetic)  galvanic  energy,  and  through  this  latter
into  heat,  light,  or  mechanical  work.

Hermann  ond  Stromeyer,  in  1S19,  showed  that  etcimmm  is  almost
always  found  with  zinc,  and  in  many  respects  resembles  it.  \N'hen
distilled  the  cadmium  volatilises  sooner,  because  it  has  a  lower  boiling
point.  Homctimes  the  zitic  dust  obtained  by  the  first  distillation  of
zinc  contains  as  much  as  -'>  per  cent,  of  cadmium.  When  zinc  blende,
containing  cadmium,  is  roasted,  the  zinc  passen  into  the  state  of
oxide,  and  the  cadmium  .-sulphide  in  the  ore  oxidises  into  ciuJmium
sulfate,  Cd80„  which  resists  tolerably  well  the  action  of  heat ;  there-
fore if  roasted  zinc  blen<le  be  washed  with  water,  a  solution  of
cadmium  sulphate  will  be  obtained,  from  which  it  is  very  easy  to
prepare  metallic  cadmium.  Hydrog«a  sulphide  may  be  used  for
{separating  cadmium  from  its  solutions;  it  gives  a  yellow  jirecijiitale
of  emlmiiim  unilphidf,  CdS  (acconling  to  the  ei|aa,tion  CdS04  +  H.^S
=^H^0,H-Cd8),"  which,  on  account  of  its  characteristic  colour,  is
used  SB  a  pigment."  ^''  Cadmium  sulphide,  when  strongly  heated  in
Air,  leaves  cadmium  oxide,  from  which  the  metal  may  lie  obtained  in
precisely  the  same  way  as  in  the  case  of  zinc.

'I  Itmajbeheieremnrked  UiKt  gnlr>1litt«o((il
acids)  doei  not  (^ve  ■  prei-ipitate  o(  .^alfiliide  ol  e:
tiilplnaetted  hydrogen.

■<  Ma  Sulphide  of  cadmium  appeuH  in  Iwo  vitric^tiEii  n!  ■  •imiliLr  fkemiml  but  diflrreat
phT««I  cbuKcter:  one  i>  of  a  lemuii  r>i>luar,  lUid  the  other  bright  r«d.  KlobaakoS
r  ISSO)  vtodinl  the  pbjHical  propt^rtien  ol  these  vkiietiea  more  doselj.  The  up.  gr.  of  Uie
fanner  »  U-»DC.  and  of  the  JatteT  4'Gia,  They  belong  to  diAeient  ciyBtdlogTaphia
sjtiiBio*.  Tlie  ilrnl  TOriety  may  be  converted  into  the  second  by  friction  or  pressDrc,  bat
i  cannot  be  converted  into  ihe  8rrt  Tarioly  by  thew  meuiB.

48 .  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Cadmium  is  a  white  metal,  and  when  freshly  cut  is  almost  as  white
and  lustrous  as  tin.  It  is  so  soft  that  it  may  be  easily  cut  with  a  knife,
and  so  malleable  that  it  can  be  easily  drawn  into  wire,  rolled  into
sheets,  <fec.  Its  specific  gravity  is  8-67,  melting  point  320®,  boiling
point  770°  ;  its  vapours  bum,  forming  a  brown  powder  of  the  oxide  J'
Next  to  mercury  it  is  the  most  volatile  metal  ;  hence  Deville  deter-
mined the  density  of  its  vapours  compared  with  hydrogen,  and  found
it  to  be  equal  to  ^U'\  ;  therefore  the  molecule  contains  one  cUom  whose
weight  ^112.  V.  Meyer  found  the  like  for  zinc ;  the  molecule  of
mercury  also  contains  one  atom.

Mercury  resembles  zinc  and  cadmium  in  many  respects,  but  presents
that  distinction  from  them  which  is  always  noticed  in  all  the  heaviest
metals  (with  regard  to  atomic  weight  and  density)  compared  with  the
lighter  ones — namely,  that  it  oxidises  with  more  difficulty,  and  its
compounds  are  more  easily  decomposed.**  ***" Besides  compounds  of  the

1-  Aiii()ng!>t  the  compounds  of  cadmium  very  closely  allied  to  the  compounds  of  ziuc,
we  must  mention  cadmium  iodide,  Cdl-^,  which  is  used  in  medicine  and  photography.
This  salt  crvKtallises  very  well :  it  is  prepared  by  the  direct  action  of  iodine,  mixed  with
water,  on  metallic  cadmium.  One  part  of  cadmium  iodide  at  20°  requires  for  its  solation
I'OH  part  of  water.  It  may  be  remarked  that  cadmium  chloride  at  the  same  tempemtare
requires  0*71  part  of  water  to  dissolve  it,  so  that  the  iodine  compound  of  this  metal  is
less  soluble  than  the  chloride,  whilst  the  reverse  relation  holds  in  the  case  of  the  oonre-
sponding  compounds  of  the  alkali  or  alkaline  earthy  metals.  Cadmium  sulphate  crystal-
lises well,  and  has  the  composition  3CdS04,HH20,  thus  dififering  from  zinc  sulphate.

Cadmium  oxide  is  soluble,  although  sparingly,  in  alkalis,  but  in  the  presence  of
tartaric  and  cettain  other  acids  the  alkaline  solution  of  cadmium  oxide  does  not  change
when  boile<l,  whilst  a  diluted  solution  in  that  case  deposits  cadmium  oxide  :  this  may
also  serve  for  separating  zinc  c<Mnpounds  from  those  of  cadmium.  Cadmium  is  precipi-
tated from  its  salts  by  zinc,  which  fact  may  also  be  taken  advantage  of  for  separating
cadmium :  for  this  reason,  in  an  alloy  of  zinc  and  cadmium,  acids  first  of  all  extract  the
zinc.  Cadmium  {»  in  all  respects  less  energetic  than  zinc.  Thus,  for  instance,  it  decom-
l)oses  water  with  difficulty,  and  this  only  when  strongly  heated.  It  even  acts  but  slowly
on  acids,  but  then  displaces  hydrogen  from  them.  It  is  necessary  here  to  call  attention
to  the  fact  that  for  alkali  and  alkaline  earthy  metals  (of  the  even  series)  the  highest
atomic  weight  determines  the  greatest  energy  ;  but  cadmium  (of  the  uneven  series),
whilst  havijig  a  larger  atomic  weight  than  zinc,  is  less  energetic.  The  salts  of  cadmium
are  colourless,  like  those  of  zinc.  De  Schulten  obtained  a  crystalline  oxychloride,
Cd(OH)CI  by  heating  marble  with  a  solution  of  cadmium  chloride  in  a  sealed  tube
at  200^

li  bi^  Accnidiujj  to  its  atomic  weight,  mercurj' follows  gold  in  the  periodic  system,
just  as  ciulniiunt  follows  silver  and  zinc  follows  copper: —

Ni= 59  Cu- (58  Zn=  65

Pd  =  106  Ag-108  Cd  =  112

Pt=196  Au  =  198  Hg  =  200

Eventually  we  shall  see  the  near  relation  of  platinum,  palladium,  and  nickel,  and  also  of
gold,  silver,  an<l  copi>er,  but  we  will  now  point  out  the  parallelism  between  these  three
groups.  The  relation  l>etween  the  physical  and  also  chemical  properties  is  here  strikingly
similar.  Nickel,  imlladium, and  platinum  are  very  difficult  to  fuse  (far  more  so  than  iron,
ruthenium,  and  osmium,  which  stand  before  them). Copper,  silver,  and  gold  melt  far  more

ZISC,  CADSODM.  ASD  MEECUBY  49

usual  type  RX,,  it  also  gives  those  of  the  lower  type,  RX,  wliich  ;ire
unknown  for  zinc  and  cadmiurn.'*  Mercury  therefore  gives  salts  of
the  composition  HgX  (mei'cQrooB  salts)  and  HgX^  (mercuric  salts),  the
oxides  having  the  formulw  HgjO  and  HgO  respectively,

Mercury  is  found  in  ua/urr  almost  exclusivply  in  combination  with
sulphur  (like  jniic  and  cadmium,  but  ie  still  rarer  than  them)  in  the
lorm  known  as  cinnabar,  HgS  (Chapter  XX.,  Note  29).  It  is  far  more
tsrelf  met  with  in  the  native  or  metallic  condition,  and  this  in  all
probability  has  been  derived  from  cinnabar.  Mertury  ore  is  found  only
in  a  few  places— namely,  in  Spain  (in  Almaden),  in  Tdria,  Japan,  Peru,
and  California.  About  the  year  1880  Minenkoff  diacovereil  a  rich  bed
of  cinnabar  in  the  Bahmout  district  (near  the  station  of  Nikitovka),
in  the  Government  of  Ekaterinoslav,  so  that  now  Russia  even  ex-
ports mercury  to  other  countries.  Cinnabar  is  now  being  worked
in  Daghestan  in  the  Caucasus.  Mercury  ores  are  easily  reduced  to
metallic  mprcury,  becnuse  the  combination  between  the  metal  and  the
sulphur  is  one  of  but  little  stability.  Oxygen,  iron,  liuie,  and  many
other  Bubatances,  when  heated,  easily  destroy  tlie  combination.  If  iron
is  heated  with  cinnabar,  iron  sulphide  is  formed  ;  if  cinnabar  is  heated
with  lime,  mercury  and  calcium  sulphide  and  sulphate  are  formed,
*HgS  +  4CaO=4Hg+3CaS  +  CaSO*.  On  being  heated  in  the  air,  or
roasted,  the  sulphur  burns,  oxidises,  forndng  sulphurous  anhydride,
and  vapours  of  metallic  mercury  are  formed.  Mercury  is  more  easily
distilled  than  all  other  metals,  its  boiling  point  being  about  351°,  (ind
therefore  its  separation  from  natural  admixtures,  deiTOmposed  by  one  of
the  above -ni en tionwl  methods,  is  efiected  at  the  expense  of  a  coai-
psnitively  small  amount  of  heat.  The  mixture  of  mercury  vapour,
air,  and  products  of  combustion  obtained  is  cooled  in  tubes  (by  water
or  nir),  and  the  mercury  condenses  as  liquid  metal."

saail;  in  t,  atrntiK  lienl  Hi
nwli  «UU  more  eaaily.
eopiMT,  (ilrer,  uii)  gold  ■
Ihe  motX  rnUtilo  mettli
«  dincoltf,  uid

II  tlie  lUtea  preceding  riitUIh,  iuiU  line,  c«diiiiaro,«iid  nmrcury
■  ickel,  pulUdium,  and  plutinntn  we  rerf  nlightlj'  valiitile :
e  more  volatile  |  nnd  sine,  oodmium,  uid  meroni?  ue  lunong
Ziuc  oiidiiies  more  eBMly  thou  copper,  and  !■  lednced  vrith
lerenry  as  compared  with  gold.

p«rtt«  tor  oadmiam  and  oilvi-r  are  iub-rmediate  in  the  reopcvtive  groapa, BeUtions  of
thii  kind  olearljr  nhow  the  nature  ut  the  periodic  law,

»  Thna  Ihalliom,  lewl.  and  biematli,  foUowLng  uiercury  according  tn  tlieit  atomic
w«iglita,  form,  beaide*  compouiidit  <>(  tlie  bJgheHt  types,  TLX;.  PbX,.  and  BiXj,  alw  the
kMm  one*  TIX.  PbX^  and  BiX.v

f  DiinDg  the  oondenaatic

J  iqplit  Dp  into  the  liiieBl

metMUic]
■distillatioT

khake  up  raeronry  w

60  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Mercury,  as  everybody  knows,  is  a  liquid  metal  at  the  ordinary
temperature.  In  its  lustre  and  whiteness  it  resembles  silverJ^  At
—  39°  mercury  is  transformed  into  a  malleable  crystalline  metal ;  at  0®
its  specific  gravity  is  13*596,  and  in  the  solid  state  at  —40^  it  is
14*39.*^  Mercury  does  not  change  in  the  air — that  is  to  say,  it  does
not  oxidise  at  the  ordinary  temperature — but  at  a  temperature
approaching  the  boiling-point,  as  was  stated  in  the  Introduction,  it
oxidises,  forming  mercuric  oxide.  Both  metallic  mercury  and  its
compounds  in  general  produce  salivation,  trembling  of  the  hands,
and  other  unhealthy  symptoms  which  are  found  in  the  workmen
exposed  to  the  influence  of  mercurial  vapours  or  the  dust  of  its  com-
pounds.

As  many  of  the  compounds  of  mercury  decompose  on  being  heated
— for  instance,  the  oxide  or  carbonate  ^^ — and  as  zinc,  cadmium,  copper,
iron,  and  other  metals  separate  mercury  from  its  salts,  ^^  it  is  evident

produce  bucIi  a  mercury  powder.  The  mercury  Heparated  (for  instance,  reduced  by  vah^
BtonceH  like  sulphurous  anhydride)  from  solutions,  forms  such  a  powder.  According  to
the  experiments  of  Nenist,  this  disintegrated  mercury  when  entering  into  reactions
develops  more  heat  than  the  dense  liquid  metal — that  is  to  say,  the  work  of  disintegra-
tion reappears  i  i  the  form  of  heat.  This  example  is  instructive  in  considering  thernio-
chemical  deductions.

'^  Mercury  may  sometimes  be  obtained  in  a  perfectly  pure  state  from  works  (in  iron
bottles  holding  about  85  kilos),  but  after  being  used  in  laboratories  (for  baths,  calibmtimi,
&c.)  it  contains  impurities.  It  may  be  purified  mechanically  in  the  following  way :  a
paper  filter  with  a  fine  hole  (pricked  with  a  needle)  is  placed  in  a  glass  funnel  and  mer-
cury is  ix)ured  into  it,  which  slowly  trickles  through  the  hole,  leaving  the  imparities  upon
the  filter.  Sometimes  it  is  squeezed  through  chamois  leather  or  through  a  block  of  wood
(as  in  the  well-known  experiment  with  tlie  air-pump).  It  may  be  purified  from  many
metals  by  contact  with  dilute  nitric  acid,  if  small  drops  of  mercury  are  allowed  to  pass
through  a  long  column  of  it  (from  the  fine  end  of  a  funnel) ;  or  by  shaking  it  np  with
sulphuric  acid  in  air.  Mercury  may  be  purified  by  the  action  of  an  electric  current,  if  it
be  covered  with  a  solution  of  HgNOj.  But  the  complete  purification  of  mercury  for
barometers  and  thermometers  can  only  be  attained  by  distillation,  best  in  a  vacnum
(the  vapour- tension  of  mercury  is  given  in  Chapter  II.,  Note  27).  For  this  purpose
Weinhold's  apparatus  is  most  often  used.  The  principle  of  this  apparatus  is  very
ingenious,  the  distillation  being  efifected  in  a  Torricellian  vacuum  continuously  supplied'
with  fresh  mercury,  whilst  the  condensed  mercury  is  continuously  removed.  This
process  of  distillation  requires  very  little  attention,  and  gives  about  one  kilo  of  pure
mercury  per  hour.

^^  If  the  volume  of  liquid  mercury  at  0°  be  taken  as  1000000,  then,  according  to  the
determinations  of  Regnault  (re-calculated  by  me  in  1875),  at  /  it  will  be  1000000 +  180*1<

*7  All  salts  of  mercury,  when  mixed  with  sodium  carbonate  and  heated,  give  mercurous
or  mercuric  carbonates ;  tliese  decompose  on  being  heated,  forming  carbonic  anhydride,
oxygen,  and  vapours  of  mercury.

^*  Spring  (1888)  showed  that  solid  dry  HgCl  is  gradually  decomposed  in  oontact  with
metallic  copper.  According  to  the  determinations  of  Thomsen,  the  formation  of  a  gram
of  mercurial  compounds  from  their  elements  develops  the  following  amounts  of  heat  (in
thouMuais  of  units):  Hg^fO,  42;  Hg-i-0,  81;  Hg  +  S,  17;  Hg  +  Cl,  41;  Hg  +  Br,  84;
Hg+I,  24;  HgfCl.^  68;  Hg  +  Br.^  51; HgH^l4,84; Hg  +  C^N.^,  19. These  numbers

•  •

•

•  • • • .

•  •  •  • *•  •

• •••••  •»

"  •  •  • •  •  •

ZISC. CADMIUM, AND MERCCRT  51

that  mercury  lias  less  chemical  energy  tban  the  meta,ls  nlready
described,  even  than  zinc  and  cadmium.  Nitric  acid,  when  acting  on
an  exetu  of  mercury  at  the  ordinary  tempeniturP,  gives  mercurous
nitr&te,  HgNOj.'"  The  aame  acid,  under  the  influence  of  heat  and
wheu  in  excess  (nitric  oxide  being  libenited),  forms  mercuric
nitrate,  Hg(N03)j,  This,'"  both  in  its  composition  am)  properties,
resembles  the  salts  of  zinc  and  cadmium.  Dilute  eulphuric  acid
does  not  act  on  mercury,  but  strong  sulphuric  acid  dissolves  it,  with
evolution  of  liulphuro'ig  aiihydrulf  (not  hydrogen ),  and  on  being  slightly
heated  with  au  excess  of  mercury  it  forma  the  sparingly  soluble  mer-
carous  sulphate,  Hg^SO,  ;  but  if  mercury  Vie  strongly  heated  with  an
excess  of  the  acid,  the  mercuric  salt,  HgSO,,^'  is  formed.  Allcaiis  do
not  acton  mercury,  but  the  non-metals  chlorine,  bromine,  sulphur,  and
phosphorus  easily  combine  with  it.  They  form,  like  the  acids,  two  series
of  compounds,  HgX  andHgX,.  The  oxygen  compound  of  the  lirst  series
is  the  suboxide  of  mercury,  or  mercurous  oxide,  Hg^O,  and  of  the
second  order  the  oxide  UgO,  mercuric  oxide.  The  chlorine  compound
corresponding  with  the  suboxide  is  HgCl  (calomel),  and  with  the  oxide
UgC),  (corrosive  sublimiite  or  mercuric  chloride),  tn  the  compounds
HgX,  mercury  resembles  the  metals  of  the  firat  group,  and  more
especially  silver. In  the mercuric compounds  there is an  evident

krc  IcuK  than  the  cocreBpoiiding  one«  fur  i>itA4Nliim.  'wdiuin.  cHlciuni.  boriuni.  and  fur
tiBe  toA  cadmiiini— for  iniUnoe,  Zn  <  O.  nn  i  Zii  t  Clj,  1)7 ;  Zn  •  Br..„  TU ;  Zii  •-  Ij.  4U ;
Cd-CI.^B8;  Cdt-Br^73;  Cd  +  Ij.lU.

■'  This  Hit  uoily  tomu  th«  cTfitallo-hydrate  HgNO-.HiO.correHpoiidiiigutith  ortlio.
nitne  acid,  H^O,  (the  tenni  ortho-,  pyro-,  lUid  oietK-ticidB  lU^  eiploined  in  tlie  chnpler
on  PbonpfaorDii),  wiUi  the  Rabatilntiiin  of  Hg  fur  H.  In  an  uqneoas  solation  this  salt  aui
oolj  be  pmerred  in  the  prenence  of  free  mercar;.  otherwiiie  it  fcirmii  bwiu  saltij,  vrliii^li
will  bemeBtioned  hereafter  ^Chapter  'H.,  Note  S»l

"  Hermric  nitrate,  Hb|N0]),,8H^,  crystalliseii  trtnn  a  concentrated  wlatian  of  mer-
enl7  in  an  exmsiof  bailing  nitria  acid.  Water  decomposeii  this  Hit;  at  the  onliniiry
tempenlDn  rrjalalB  of  a  haaio  ealt  of  the  conipUNition  Hg(NO;).,.HgO,3H.,0  are  formed,
uid  wHli  all  e>ce«B  of  water  the  inwilable  yellow  bnxi..-  mlt  HglNO^I^HiC'^HgO.  Thtue
three  aalta  correspond  with  tlie  type  of  ortho-nUriL'  acid,  |H]NO,).><  in  which  mercury  in
.nbaliluted  for  I.  3  anil  »  timen  H.j.  Ah  all  thew  wit-  still  contain  water,  it  is  posHible
that  tbey  Eorreapnnd  with  the  tBtr«hydr»to^NjOj  +  iH-.0  =  N.,0(OH)s  if  ortho-nitric
acid-N:^i*8HiO  =  aNO(OH|i.

'I  To  obtain  Uie  inercuric  salt  a  large  eifenc  ol  strong  Bulphurio  acid  must  be  taken
and  atnmglj  heated.  Wirb  a  amall  .|UaiilitT  of  water  colonrlcu  uryatalB  of  HgSO,.H/)
inaj  be  (riiUined,  An  eiceaa  of  water,  especially  when  heated,  fomm  the  ba«io  salt  (aa
m  Sota  Wl,  UgSO„aHgO,  whiah  correaponds  with  tribydrated  salphuric  acid,  SOj  +  8H.jO
-  8(0B|*.  witli  Ibe  snbalilntiou  of  H,  by  MHg,  which  in  mercnrio  aalts  in  equivalent  to
II4.  Le  Cbat«li«ir  I ISWI  gires  the  following  ratio  between  the  amount*  of  equivalents
I«r  litre  :

Hg80,  . . . 0.818  oHoo  ]H(i  aoa

SOs - . . 0^63  142  21(1  9'«1

—that  is.  the  relatite  anjtmnt  ot  free  acid  decreaae*  aa  tlie  strength u(  the  wilotion

52  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

resemblance  to  those  of  magnesium,  cadmium,  &c.  Here  the  atom
of  mercury  is  bivalent,  as  in  the  type  RXg.**  Every  soluble  mer-
curous  compound  (corresponding  with  the  type  of  the  suboxide  of
mercury),  HgX,  forms  a  white  precipitate  of  calomel,  HgCl,  with
hydrochloric  acid  or  a  metallic  chloride,  because  HgCi  is  very  slightly
soluble  in  water,  HgX  +  MCI  =  HgCl  +  MX.  In  soluble  mercuric
compounds,  HgX  2,  hydrochloric  acid  and  metallic  chlorides  do  not
form  a  precipitate,  because  corrosive  sublimate,  HgCl2}  ^^  soluble  in
water.  Alkali  hydroxides  precipitate  the  yellow  mercuric  oxide  from
a  solutipn  of  HgX 2,  and  the  black  mercurous  oxide  from  HgX.
Potassium  iodide  forms  a  dirty  greenish  precipitate,  Hgl,  with
mercurous  salts,  HgX,  and  a  red  precipitate,  Hglj,  with  the  mer-
curic salts,  HgX2.  These  reactions  distinguish  the  mercuric
from  the  mercurous  salts,  which  latter  represent  the  transition  from

^  The  question  of  the  molecular  weight  of  calomel — that  is,  whether  the  mercury  in
the  BaltH  of  the  suboxide  is  monatomic  or  diatomic — long  occupied  the  minds  of  chemists,
although  it  is  not  of  very  great  importance. It  is  only  recently  (1894)  that  this  quesiioii
can  be  considered  as  answered,  thanks  to  the  researches  of  V.  Meyer  and  Harris,  in
favour  of  diatomicity — that  is,  that  calomel  is  analogous  to  peroxide  of  hydrogen  and
contains  Hg.^Cl'j  (like  O^H*^) in its  molecule  if  corrosive sublimate contains  HgCL|
(like  water  OH.^). As  a  matter  of  fact,  direct  experiment  gives  the  vapour  density  of
calomel  as  about  118 — that  is,  indicates  that  its  molecule  contains  HgCl,  whilst  ihe
molecule  of  the  sublimate,  judging  also  by  the  vapour  density  (nearly  186),  ooukuns
HgCl.j ;  it  might  therefore  be  concluded  that  the  mercury  in  the  suboxide  is  nol  only
monovalent  (corresponding  to  H)  but  also  monatomic,  whilst  in  the  oxide  it  is  divalent
and  diatomic. Instances  of  a  variable  atomicity,  as  shown  by-  the  vapour  density,  are
known  in  N.^O,  NO,  and  NH5,  CO  and  CO.2,  PCI5  and  PCla,  and  it  might  therefore  be
supposed  that  the  present  was  a  similar  instance. But  there  are  also  instances  of  a
variable  equivalency  which  do  not  correspond  to  a  variation  of  atomicity — for  example,
OH.^ (water) and OH (peroxide  of hydrogen), CH4 (methane), CH5 (ethyl),  and
CH.^  (ethylene),  &c. Here,  according  to  the  law  of  substitution,  the  residues  of  OH^  and
CH4  combhie  together  and  give  molecules;  OHOH  =  O3H2  (peroxide  of  hydrogen)  and
CH5CH.-,  =  C.^He  (ethane),  &c. The  same  may  be  assumed  also  to  be  the  relation  of
calomel to sublimate;  the residue HgCl,  which  is  combined  with CI in  sublimate,
corresponds to HgClj,  and in calomel  it  may  be  supposed  that  this  residue  is  com-
bined with  itself,  forming  the  molecule  HgQCl^. On  this  view  of  the  composition  of  the
molecule  of  calomel  it  would  follow  that  in  the  state  of  vapour  it  breaks  up  into  two
molecules,  HgCI.^  and  Hg,  when  the  vapour  density  would  be  about  118  (because  that  of
sublimate  is  about  ISO  and  that  of  mercury  about  100),  and  that  in  cooling  this  mixture
(like  a  mixture  of  HCl  and  NHi()  again  gives  Hg3Cl2. It  was  therefore  necessary  to
prove  that  calomel  is  decomposed  in  the  state  of  vapour. This  was  not  effected  for  a
long time, although Odling, as  far back as  the  thirties,  showed  that  gold  becomes
amalgamated  {i.e.  absorbs  metallic  mercury)  in  the  vapour  of  calomel,  but  not  in  the
vaf)our  of  sublimate. Recently,  however,  V.  Meyer  and  Harris  (1894)  have  shown  that
a  greater  amount of  the  vapour  of  mercury  than  of calomel  passes  (at  about  466°)
through  a  i)orous  clay  cell,  containing  calomel. This  proves  that  the  vapour  of  calomel
contains  a  mixture  of  the  vapours  of  Hg  and  HgCl.^,  as  would  follow  from  the  second
hyx>othesis. Moreover, on introducing a heated  piece of KHO into  the  vapour  of
calomel,  Meyer  observed  the  formation,  not  of  suboxide  (black),  but  of  oxide  of  mercury
(vellow). Tlugrefore the  molecular  fonnula  of  calomel  must  be  taken  as  Hg^Clj  (and  not
HgC^l).

ZINC.  CADMIUM.  AKB  MKBCUET  53

the  mercuric  salts  to  mercury  itself,  2HgX  =  Hg  +  HgXj.  The
saiU,  HgX,  as  well  aa  HgX„  are  reduced  by  naaoent  hydrngen  (e.g.
from  2n  +  H,S()j),  by  such  -  metals  as  zinc  and  copper,  and  also
by  many  reducing  agents — for  exaiuple,  hypophosphorous  acid,  the
lowest  grade  of  oxidatioa  of  pboephoruB,  by  sulphurous  anhydride,
stannous  chloride,  Ac.  Under  the  action  of  these  reagents  the
mercuric  salts  are  tirst  Iransformeil  into  the  mercurous  salts,  and
the  latter  are  then  reduced  to  metallic  mercury.  Thiy  reaction  is  so
delicate  that  it  serves  to  detect  the  smallest  quantity  of  mercury  ;
for  inst&nce,  in  cases  of  poisoning,  fche  mercury  is  detected  by  im-
mersing a  copper  plate  in  the  solution  to  be  tested,  the  mercury
being  then  deposited  upon  it  (more  readily  on  passing  a  gal-
vanic current).  The  copper  plate,  on  being  rubbed,  shows  a  sUvery
white  colour  ;  on  being  heated,  it  yields  vapours  of  mercury,  and
then  agaiu  assumes  its  original  red  colour  (if  it  doen  not  oxidise).
The  mercurous  compounds,  HgX,  under  the  action  of  oxidising
agents,  even  air.  pass  int«  mercuric  compounds,  especially  in  the
presence  of  acids  (otherwise  a  Iwisic  salt  is  produced),  2HgX -(-:JHX-f-0
=2HgX^-J-H,0  ;  but  the  mercuric  compounds,  when  in  contact  with
mercury,  cliange  more  or  less  readily,  and  turn  into  mercurous  com-
pounds, HgXj-fHgss^HgX.  For  this  reason,  in  ordpr  to  preserve
solutions  of  mercurous  salts,  a  little  mercury  is  generally  added  to
them.

The  lowest  oxygen  compound  of  mercuiy— that  is,  iHcivoroiis  arid"-,
HgjO— does  not  seem  to  exist,  for  the  substance  precipitated  in  the
form  of  a  l.lnck  mass  by  the  action  of  alkalis  on  a  solution  of  mer-
curous salts  gradually  separates  on  keeping  into  the  yellow  mercuric
oxide  and  metallic  mercury,  as  does  also  a  simple  mechanical  mix-
ture of  oxide,  HgO,  with  mercury  (OuiUiurt,  Barfoed).  The  other
compound  of  mercury  with  oxygen  is  already  known  to  us  as  memiric
ffjrid^,  HgO,  obtained  in  the  form  of  a  red  crystalline  substance  by  the
oxidation  of  mercury  in  the  air,  and  precipitated  as  a  yellow  powder
by  the  action  of  sodium  hydroxide  on  solutinns  of  salts  of  the  type
HgX,.  In  thif^  case  it  is  amorphous  and  more  amenable  to  the
action  of  various  reagents  (Chap.  XI.,  Note  32)  than  when  it  is  in  the
crystalline  state.  Indeed,  on  trituration,  the  red  oxide  is  changed  into
a  powder  of  a  yellow  colour.  It  is  very  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  and
forms  an  alkaline  solution  which  precipitates  magnesia  from  the  solii'
tion  of  ita  salt^

Mercury  combines  directly  with  chlorine,  and  the  tirst  pi-oduct  of
combination  ia ealomf!  or  mervuri/im  chUiridf,  HgjCl.j.  This  is  obtained,
I  above  stated,  in  the  form  of  a  white  precipitat«  by  mixing  solu-

54  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

tions  of  mercurous  salts  with  hydrochloric  acid  or  with  metallic
chlorides.  A  precipitate  of  calomel  is  also  obtained  by  reducing  a
boiling  aqueous  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate,  HgCl^i  with  sulphur-
ous anhydride.  It  is  likewise  produced  by  heating  corrosive  subli-
mate with  mercury.*^****"  Calomel  may  be  distilled  (although  in  so  doing
it  decomposes  and  recombines  on  cooling  from  a  state  of  vapour) ;  its
vapour  density  equals  118  compared  with  hydrogen  (=1)  (see  Note  23).
In  the  solid  state  its  specific  gravity  is  7'0 ;  it  crystallises  in  rhombic
prisms,  is  colourless,  but  has  a  yellowish  tint,  turns  brown  from  the
action  of  light,  and  when  boiled  with  hydrochloric  acid  decomposes  into
mercury  and  corrosive  sublimate.  It  is  used  as  a  strong  purgative.
Corrosive  subliinate  &r  mercuric  chloride,  HgClj,  can  be  obtained  from
or  converted  into  calomel  by  many  methods. ^^  An  excess  of  chlorine
(for  instance,  aqua  regia)  converts  calomel  and  also  mercury  into  corro-
sive sublimate.  It  owes  its  name  corrosive  sublimate  to  its  vola-
tility, and,  in  medicine  up  to  the  present  day,  it  is  termed  Mercuriv^
siihlimaius  sen  corrosiinis.  The  vapour  density,  compared  with  hy-
drogen (  =  1)  is  135  ;  therefore  its  molecule  contains  HgClj.  It  forms
colourless  prismatic  crystals  of  the  rhombic  system,  boils  at  307°,
and  is  soluble  in  alcohol.  It  is  usually  prepared  by  subliming  a
mixture  of  mercuric  sulphate  with  common  salt,  HgSO^  +  2NaCl
=Na2S04-f  HgClj.  Corrosive  sublimate  combines  with  mercuric
oxide,  forming  an  oxychloride or  basic  salt,^^*>^ of  the  composition

"  ^^  Calomel  (in  Japanese  '  Keyfun ')  has  been  prepared  in  Japan  (and  China)  for
many  centuries,  by  heating  mercury  in  clay  crucibles  with  sea  salt,  which  oontains
MgClj  and  gives  HCl.  The  vapour  of  the  mercury  reacts  with  this  HCl  and  the  oxygen
of  the  air  and  forms  calomel :  2Hg  -f  2HC1  +  O  =  Hg^Cl^  +  H^G.  The  calomel  collects
on  the  lid  of  the  crucible  in  the  form  of  a  sublimate  (Divers,  1894).

^  HgClq  is  partially  converted  into  calomel  even  in  the  act  of  dissolving  in  ordixLarj
water,  especially  under  the  action  of  light.

^  ^^  As  feebly  energetic  bases  (for  instance,  the  oxides  MgO,  ZnO,  PbO,  CuO,  ALtOs,
Bi^Os,  (fcc),  mercuric  oxide  {see  Notes  20,  21)  and  mercurous  oxide  easily  give  basic  salts,
which  are  usually  directly  formed  by  the  action  of  water  on  the  normal  salt,  according
to  the  general  equation  (for  mercuric  compounds,  RX^) :

nRXo  +  wH^O  =  2w»HX  +  {n-m)BX^m'RO
neutml  .^hU water  acid  basic  salt

or  else  are  produced  directly  from  the  normal  salt  and  the  oxide  or  its  hydroxide.  Thus
mercurous  nitrate,  when  treated  with  water,  forms  basic  salts  of  the  composition
6(HgNOs),Hg.^O,H20,  2(HgN05),Hg<,0,H50,  and  8(HgN05),HgaO,H20,  the  first  two  of
which  crystallise  well.  Naturally  it  is  possible  either  to  refer  similar  salts  to  the
type  of  hydrates — for  instance,  the  second  salt  to  the  hydrate  N205,4HjO — or  to  view
it  as  a  compound,  HgNOs,HgHO,  but  our  present  knowledge  of  basic  salts  is  not
sufficiently  complete  to  admit  of  generalisations.  However,  it  is  already  possible  to
view  the  subject  in  the  following  aspects :  (1)  basic  salts  are  principally  formed  trom.
feeble  bases :  (2)  certain  metals  (mentioned  above)  form  them  with  particular  ease,  so  thai
one  of  the  causes  of  tlie  formation  of  many  basic  salts  must  depend  on  the  property  of  the
inetal  itself ;  (8)  those  bases  which  readily  form  basic  salts  as  a  rule  also  readily  form

Zmc,  CADMIUM.  AND  MERCURY  55

HgCl„2HgO  (magnesium  and  zinc  foim  similar  conipounds).  This
oompound  is  obtained  by  mixing  a  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate
with  mercurit  oxide  or  with  a  solution  of  sodiuoi  bicarbonate.  In
general,  wiili  botb  mercurous  and  n)«rciiric  salts,  there  is  a  marked
tendency  to  form  basic  salta."'

Mercury  h»s  a  remarkable  power  of  forming  very  unstable  com-
pounds  with  ammonia,  in  which  the  mercury  replaces  the  hydrogen,
an<l,  if  a  mercuric  compound  be  taken,  its  atom  occupies  the  place  of
two  atoms  of  the  hydrogen  in  the  ammonia.  Thus  Plan tamour  and
Hirtzel  showed  that  precipitated  mercuric  oxide  dried  at  a  gentle
heat,  when continuously  heated  (up to  lOO^-lSO")  in a stream of

double  taiu ;  (()  in  t)w  lontuition  of  bB«[c  hIIb,  u  also  everywUere  iu  clxemistij,  whers
■ofllcieiii  fiictii  hATe  aecruniilftLed,  we  de^rlj  aoe  the  coJictitiotiB  of  oquolly  bu-Uuctd
h«terugeiieon>  ayntcDw,  inch  u  we  uw,  for  iimUnco,  in  tbe  (urmatiuii  of  douiilo  salu,
crjuUJlo-bf dfktes,  d:c.

Tbe  mercuric  uKsofleD  form  doable  wlta  (conSiming  the  Uiird  (heHiBl.uirJ  mcrruric
chloride  eMily  eonilMnes  with  s.mn«>niB,  tonning  Hg(rJH,)aCI,.orin  Beueril  HgCIjnMCI.
It  ■  miitnie  of  menarona  and  potiuaiDin  BDlphatCH  be  dissolved  in  dilate  Bnlplinrie  acid,
ttiE  unlntJon  eaailj  jteldn  Isnie  colonrlem  erysUJB  of  ■  double  salt  of  the  ODinpnntian
K^O,.SHgBO,.3R,0.  Bofltlay  obtained  cryatalline  comiionDdB  of  mercnric  chloride  with
hydrocUoric  acid,  and  mercaria  iodide  with  bjdriodic  aoid ;  uid  Thomsen  describeit  the
compound  HeBrhHBr.lH,0  as  a.  well-uryaUllieed  wit,  melting  at  13°,  and  having,  in
a  molten  state,  a  gpeciflo  gravity  SIT  and  a  high  index  of  refraction.  Moreover,  tbu
capacity  of  salt*  for  forming  basic  oomponnds  hsa  been  conniderably  cleared  up  since  the
inrestigatiim  (by  Wllrli,  Loreni.  and  others)  of  glycol,  C,H,(OU).i  land  of  polyutoniic
aJcohola  resembling  it),  hecauae  the  ethers  C^H^X.,,  corresponding  with  it,  ore  capable  d[
lormiDg  com  pounds  containing  CiH^XjnC.jHjO,

Oil  the  other  hand,  there  is  reoaoa  to  think  tliat  thepniperty  of  forming  baHic  salts  is
cooQected  with  the  polymerisation  of  bases,  especially  colloidal  onus  laee  the  chapter
ou  tjiliut,  Ixind  Salts,  oiid  TnniiHtic  Acid).

"  Hercnric  iodide,  Hgl..,  is  obtained  first  as'a  yellow,  and  then  as  a  red,  preciptate  on
railing  aolDtiona  of  mercuric  salts  and  potsssituEi  iodide,  and  ih  soluble  in  an  excess  of  tUe
Isller  tin  consequence  o(  the  formation  of  the  double  salt,  HgKIt) ;  o[  ammonium  chloride
(for  a  similar  reason),  Ac.  It  crystallises  at  the  ordinary  teraperature  in  square  prisms
of  •  ted  Goloar.  On  being  heattid,  them  change  into  yellow  rhombic  cryBlals,  isouiorphous
with  mercuric  chloride.  TbiB  yellow  form  of  mercnric  iodide  is  very  unstable,  and  when
cooled  and  triturated  easily  agajti  afisumee  tbo  more  stable  rud  form.  When  fuaed,  a
yellow  liquid  ia  obtained.  Mercuric  cyanide,  Hg1CN).j,  Innus  one  of  the  most  stable
metallic  cyanides.  It  is  oHttuned  by  dissolring  mercnric  niide  in  pmssic  acid,  and  by
boiling  Prussian  blue  with  water  and  mercuric  oxide,  ferric  oxide  being  then  obtained  in
the  precipitate.  Mercnric  cyanide  is  a  colonileas  crystalline  subatanoe,  soluble  in  water,
and  distmgnisbed  by  its  great  stability:  sulphuric  acid  does  not  liberate  prussic  acid
from  it,  and  even  caustic  potash  does  Dot  remove  t)ie  cyanogen  (a  oomplei  salt  is
probably  produced),  but  the  halogen  acids  disengage  HCN.  Like  the  chloride,  it  com-
bines with  mercuric  oxide,  forming  the  oxycyanide,  Hg,0(CN)2,  and  it  shows  a  very  marked
tendency  to  form  double  compoundit— for  example,  K,Hg(CN)i.  The  alkali  chlorides  and
iodides  form  similar  compounds— for  instance,  the  soltHgKl(CN)j  crystallises  very  well,
and  is  prodaied  by  directly  mixing  solutions  of  potassium  iodide  and  mercuric  cyanide.

Wells  (1880)  and  Tare  obtained  and  inrestiga-ted  many  such  double  salts,  and  showed
tbe  powdbility  of  the  formation,  not  only  of  HgCI,MCI  and  HgCL,aHCI  where  H  is  a
metal  id  the  alkslie— tor  etomple,  Cs-but  alao  of  HgCl.jaUCl,B(HgCl,)MCl,  and  in
)I  nHgXiniHX,  where  X  sUnds  for  rarious  haloids.

56  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

dry  ammonia,  leaves  a  brown  powder  of  mercuric  nitride,  NjHgs,
according  to  the  equation  3HgO  +  2NH3=N2Hg8  +  3H20."»»»-  This
substance,  which  is  attacked  by  water,  acids,  and  alkalis  (giving  a
white  powder),  is  very  explosive  when  struck  or  rubbed,  evolving
nitrogen,  proving  that  the  bond  between  the  mercury  and  the  nitrogen
is  very  feeble.^'^ By  the  action  of  liquefied  ammonia  on  yellow  mercuric

2  J  bu  See  Chapter  XIX.,  Note  6  bis :  HgjP.j. In  studying  the  metallic  nitrides  it  is
necessary  to  keep  the  corresponding  phosphides  in  mind.

^*  HgsNi  is  similar  in  composition  to  MgsNj,  «tc.  (Chapter  XIV.)  The  readiness  with
which  mercuric  nitride  explodes  shows  that  the  connection  between  the  nitrogen
and  the  mercury  is  very  unstable,  and  explains  the  circumstance  that  the  so-called
mercury  fulminate^  or  fulminating  mercury^  is  an  exceedingly  explosive  substance.
This  substance  is  prepared  in  large  quantities  for  explosive  mixtures ;  it  enters  into  the
composition  of  [)ercus8ion  caps,  which  explode  when  struck,  and  ignite  gunpowder.
Mercury  fulminate  was  discovered  by  Howard,  and  from  that  time  has  been  prepared  in
the  following  way  :  one  part  of  mercury  is  dissolved  in  twelve  parts  of  nitric  acid,  of
sp.  gr.  1*80,  and  when  the  whole  of  the  mercury  is  dissolved,  5*5  parts  of  90  p.c.  alcohol
are  added,  and  the  mass  is  shaken.  A  reaction  then  commences,  accompanied  by  a  rise  in
temperature  due  to  the  oxidation  of  the  alcohol.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  many  oxidation
products  are  produced  during  the  action  of  Uie  nitric  acid  on  the  alcohol  (glycoUic  acid,
ethers,  &c.)  When  the  reaction  becomes  tolerably  vigorous,  the  same  quantity  of  alcohol
is  adde<l  as  at  the  commencement,  when- a  grey  precipitate  of  the  fulminate  separates.
This  salt  has  the  composition  C..>Hg(NO.j)N.  It  explodes  when  struck  or  heated.  The
mercury  in  it  may  be  replaced  by  other  metals — for  instance,  copper  or  zinc,  and  also
silver.  The  silver  salt,  C.jAg.j(N0.2)N,  is  obtained  in  a  precisely  analogous  manner,  and  is
even  more  explosive.  Under  the  action  of  alkali  chlorides,  only  half  the  silver  is  replaced
by  the  alkali  metal,  but  if  the  whole  of  the  silver  be  replaced  by  an  alkali  metal,  then
the  salt  decomix)ses.  This  is  evidently  because  combinations  of  this  kind  proceed  in  virtue
of  the  formation  of  substances  in  which  mercury,  and  metals  akin  to  it,  are  connected
in  an  unstable  way  with  nitrogen.  Potassium  and  other  light  metals  are  incapable  of
entering  into  such  connection  and  therefore,  the  substitution  of  potassium  for  mercury
entails  the  splitting-up  of  the  combination.  Investigations  of  the  fulminates  were
carried  on  by  Gay-Lussac  and  Liebig,  but  only  the  investigations  of  L.  N.  Shishkoff
fully  cleared  up  the  composition  and  relation  of  tliese  substances  to  the  other  carbon
compounds.  Shishkoff  showed  that  fulminates  correspond  with  the  nitro-acid,
C...H2(N0.^)N.  The  explosiveness  of  the  group  depends  partly  on  its  containing  at  the  same
time  NO-2  and  carbon;  we  already  know  that  all  such  nitrogen  compounds  are  explosive.
If  we  imagine  that  the  NO.j  is  replaced  by  hydrogen,  we  shall  have  a  substance  of  the
composition  C,{H5N.  This  is  acetonitrile— that  is,  acetic  acid  -f  NHj-  'iH^O,  or  ethenyl
nitrile,  as  shown  in  Chapter  VI.  The  formntion  of  an  acetic  compound  by  the  action  of
nitric  acid  on  alcohol  is  easily  understood,  because  acetic  acid  is  produced  by  the  oxida-
tion of  alcohol,  and  the  prmluction  of  the  element h  of  ammonia,  indispensable  for  the
formation  of  a  nitrile,  is  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  nitric  acid  under  the  action  of
reducing  substancen  in  many  cases  forms  ammonia.  Moreover  a  certain  analogy  has
b<'en  found  between  fulminating  acid  and  hydroxylamine,  but  details  upon  this  sub-
ject must  be  looked  for  in  works  on  organic  chemistry.  Tlie  explosiveness  of  fulminating
niercurj',  the  rapidity  of  its  decomposition  (gunpowder,  and  even  guncotton,  bum  more
slowly  and  explode  less  violently),  and  the  force  of  its  explosion,  are  such  that  a  small
quantity  ( loosely  covered)  will  shatter  massive  objects.

The  investigations  of  Abel  on  the  communication  of  explosion  from  one  substance  to
another  are  remarkable.  If  guncotton  be  ignited  in  an  open  space,  it  bums  quietly;  but
if  fulminating  mercurj-  be  exploded  by  the  side  of  it,  the  decomposition  of  the  guncotton
is  effected  instantaneously,  and  it  then  shatters  the  obje<'ts  upon  which  it  lies,  so  rapid  is

Zmo, CADMniM, AND  MEKCURY  57

oxiJt!  Weit);  also  uttained  an  explosive  compound,  dinifi'Cummmoiiiuni
hydroxide,  N,Hg|0,  which  corresponds  with  an  amuioiiiuDi  oxide,
(NH,)jO,  iu  which  the  whole  of  the  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  mercury.
A  Bolution  of  uiumonin  reacts  with  niorcuric  oxide,  forming  the
hydroxide,  NHg^'OH,  to  which  a  whote  series  of  salts,  NHg.^X,  corre-
spond ;  these  are  genendly  insoluble  ici  water  and  ('a{iable  of  decom-
posing with  an  expiosi'in.  But  sails  of  the  same  type,  but  with  one  atom
of  mercury,  XHjHgX,  are  more  frequently  and  more  easily  formed  ;
they  were  principally  studied  by  Kane,  altliough  known  mui-h  earlier.
Thus,  if  ammonia  be  added  to  a  solution  of  corrosive  Eublimat«
(or,  still  better,  in  reverse  order},  a  precipitate  is  obtained  known  as
white  precipitate  {^ereiiritu  prifcipitalUH  affiiiii)  o
fA/ori'le,  NHjUgCl.  which  may  also  be  regarded  not  only  an  sal -a:
with  the  substitution  of  H.,  by  mercury,  but  also  as  HgXj,  whei-e
one  X  represents  CI  and  the  other  X  represents  the  ammonia  radicle,
HgC'lj  +-2NH,  =  NHj-HgCl  +  NH,C!.  When  heated,  mercur-
ammonium  chloride  decomposes,  yielding  mei-curous  chloride  ;  when
heated  with  dry  hydrochloric  acid  it  forms  ammonium  chloride  and
mercuric  chloride.  Other  simple  and  double  salts  of  mercurammonium,
NHjHgX,  are  also  known.  Pici  ( 11*90)  showed  that  all  the  compounds
HgHjNX  may  be  regarded  as  compounds  of  the  above-named  Hg^NX
with  NH(X  because  their  sum  equals  ^HgH^X.""''

""PPW""!

tlic  ilMnuipwition. Abel  eiplaii

tull  briuga  Ule  molecules  of  inmciitlan  into  A  unifnnn  (>r  u  iC  were  liumoniaUB  state  ol
Tibrfttiott,  which  c&DtwH  Lh»  npifl  dp(*ooipoBttiou  nf  tho  whulu  oiuaH.  TLib  rapid  dHcuni-
puBlioB  ol  exploHve  huImUjiccu  lUfinLii  lUe  distincliua  between  eiploKian  uid  toiu-
biutioD.  BeiidiH  thin,  Berthulol  showed  tint  Imni  tbkt  [ijnn  iil  [lowerfnl  miileculiir
conciUNuu  which  UkeH  place  during  the  nplaaian  of  fnlminitting  ineruurf.  tlie  stnte
at  tlrtuo  und  atahilit;  of  equilibrioin  ol  aubttuiccs  which  ore  endotlienual,  or  capuLilp
•it  ilecompoBing  with  the  digcDeogeiiiuituf  heitt — foriiutonoa,  cjajiogen.iiitroconipounda.
iiilnmii  mide.  Ac— ia  jrenorally  dentrojsd,  Thorpf  showed  that  cutboti  bisuJpliide,  CS,,
■laa  M)  endotheimil  Bahatance,  dwomiiOBeH  into  aolphnr  uid  chorcunl,  wbcti  fultniiintiiig
UMKUty  i*  exploded  in  ountHct  with  it

"  "•  The  cspneilj  tor  replacing  hydrogeu  in  cUloririe  oi  niutnonium  by  int^tiil»  also
belong!  ts  Zo  and  Cd.  Kvasnik  (1SS3),  by  the  nclinii  ot  unmaniiL  upon  alduholic  aola.
ticn*  ol  CdCl,  and  ZnCl,,  obtained  >ub»taiioea  ut  the  (tenenl  roriDDla  M(NH]CI).u  toimed
•m  it  ware  fnim  two  moleculeii  uf  ukl-BUUnmiiaf  bj  tlie  anbiititution  ot  two  atoiDB  ril
hydrogen  by  a  diiLtomiu  uielal.  These  subttancet  appeal  m  white,  finely  cryiiliUliue
powder*.  Under  the  action  ol  beat  hulf  tlie  anirounia  psKsea  off,  aiid  a  eouipound  ut  the
eom position  UCIXH3CI  ia  formed.  Tbei^omporuidBorctuJimuniiuid^inc;  are  rliRtiuguiahecl
f rum  aach  other  bj  tiie  (ontier  being  more  volatile  tlion  IJie  latter.

Wh  may  further  remark  that  in  the  Hriea  Mg.  Zn,  Cd,  and  Hg  tlie  capacity  io  form
doable  hJIh  of  rlirerse  compiwitioD  iDcreawa  witki  the  atomic  weight.  Thus,  according  to
VTrlU  and  Walden'a  obMrtation*  llSUil),  the  latio  h  :  m  lor  the  type  HMnmBC'l,
-M-K.  Li.  >a.  ,  .  E=Mg.  Zn  .  .  .  )  ii  tor  Mg  1 ;  I,  tor  Zn  B :  1.  S:  1,  and  1 :  1;  for
Cd,  baudea  thiis  uilta  ue  knovra  with  theratio  4;  1,  wid  fur  HgS:  I,  a:  1, 1;  1.3:11,1:

58  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

Mercury  as  a  liquid  metal  is  capable  of  dissolving  other  metals  and
forming  metallic  solutions.  These  are  generally  called  '  amalgams.'  The
formation  of  these  solutions  is  often  accompanied  by  the  development
of  a  large  amount  of  heat — for  instance,  when  potassium  and  sodium
are  dissolved  (Chapter  XII.,  Note  39) ;  but  sometimes  heat  is  absorbed,
as,  for  instance,  when  lead  is  dissolved. It  is  evident  that  phenomena
of  this  kind  are  exceedingly  similar  to  the  phenomena  accompanying
the  dissolution  of  salts  and  other  substances  in  water,  but  here  it  is
easy  to  demonstrate  that  which  is  far  more  difficult  to  observe  in  the
case  of  salts  :  the  solution  of  metals  in  mercury  is  accompanied  by  the
formation  of  definite  chemical  compounds  of the  mercury  with  the
metals  dissolved. This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  when  pressed  (best
of  all in  chamois leather)  such solutions  leave  solid,  definite  com-
pounds of  mercury  with  metals. It  is,  however,  very  difficult  to  obtain
them  in  a  pure  state,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  separating  the  last
traces  of  mercury, which  is mechanically  distributed between the
crystals  of  the  compounds. Nevertheless,  in  many  cases  such  com-
pounds have undoubtedly been obtained, and their existence Ib
clearly  shown  by  the  evident  crystalline  structure  and  characteristic
appearance  of  many  amalgams Thus,  for  instance,  if  about  2^  p.c.  of
sodium  be  dissolved  in  mercury,  a  hard,  crystalline  amalgam  is  obtained,
very  friable  and  little  changeable  in  air. It  contains  the  compound
NaHg5  (Chapter  XII.,  Note  39). Water  decomposes  it,  with  the  evolu-
tion of  hydrogen,  but  more  slowly  than  other  sodium  amalgams,  and
this  action  of  water  only  shows  that  the  bond  between  the  sodium
and  the  mercury  is  weak,  just  like  the  connection  between  mercury
and  many  other  elements — for  instance,  nitrogen. Mercury  directly
and  easily  dissolves  potassium,  sodium,  zinc,  cadmium,  tin,  gold,  bis-
muth, lead,  <S;c.,  and  from  such  solutions  or  alloys  it  is  in  most  cases
easy  to  extract  definite  compounds—  thus,  for  instance,  the  compounds
of  mercury  and  silver  have the  compositions HgAg and AgjHgj.
Objects  made  of  copper  when  rubbed  with  mercury  become  covered
with  a  white  coating  of  that  metal,  which  slowly  forms  an  amalgam  ;
silver  acts  in  the  same  way,  but  more  slowly,  and  platinum  combines
with mercury with  still  greater  difficulty. This  metal  only  readily
forms  an  amalgam  when  in  the  form  of  a  fine  powder. If  salts  of
platinum  in solution  are  poured  on  to an  amalgam  of  sodium,  the
latter  element  reduces  the  platinum,  and  the platinum separated  is
dissolved  by  the  mercury. Almost  all  metals  readily  form  amalgams
if  their  solutions  are  decomposed  by  a  galvanic  current,  where  mer-
cury forms  the  negative  pole. In  this  way  an  amalgam  may  even
be made  with  iron,  although iron in  a  mass  does not dissolve in

ZWC.  r.ADMIUM,  ASD  MERCflEY

59

mercury.  Some  amalgams  are  found  in  nature-for  instanie,  silver
amalganiB.  Amalgams  are  used  in  coiiBiderable  qufintitiea  in  the  art^.
Thus  the  Grilubility  of  silver  in  merrury  is  taken  advantage  of  for
extracting  that  metal  from  the  ore  by  means  of  amalgamation,  and
for  silvering  by  fire.  The  aaitie  is  the  case  with  gold.  Tin  amal-
gam, which  is  incapable  of  crystalliaing  and  is  obtained  by  dissolv-
ing  tin  in  mercury,  composes  the  brilliant  coating  of  oi-dinary  look-
'Dg'gl^^sMi  which  is  mode  to  adhere  to  the  surface  of  the  polished
glass  by  simply  pressing  by  mechanitnl  means  sheets  of  tin  foil  bathed
in  mercury  on  to  the  cleansed  surface  of  the  glass.'''  {6W  'The
Nature  of  Amalgams,'  by  W.  L.  Dudley  ;  Toronto,  l««it.}

. Cl^l >

.t  (rk,>.

entirely

wn  cadnuDm  uid  mercury  ia  the  ptfriodic  djAtem  fChnpter  SV.)
4fB  there  rmtot  ft  Hingle  known  olement,  it  ni&y  be  that  bhiB  seriea  in
[nenta  inopalile  ol  exiatiug  under  iireKent  uou^tiana.  Uuwevet,  nji tu  thia
way  or  Miotlier,  it  m»j  ba  concluded  that  the  proiwrtien  of  etjivudniium
will  be  betwMD  those  of  cndminin  luiil  merrory.  1 1  ought  to  hsTe  mi  atomie  weight  of  nbont
1R5,  to  fonn  ui  ntide  EcO.  a  slightly  atable  oiid«  Er.jO.  Bath  ought  to  b«  feeble  buey,
auiljr  (ormiog  doable  and  baaic  aalta.  The  rahiRie  of  tlie  oiide  will  be  nearly  IT'G,  because
the  volume  of  cadmiam  oxide  ia  about  16,  and  llut  of  meronric  oiide  IS.  Therefore  the
d«iiiity  of  the  oiide  wiU  approach  171 -^  17  8  =  9-7.  The  metal  onght  to  be  eaaily  fnaihle,
oxidiMng  when  heated,  of  a  grey  colour,  with  a  Eppcitli:  Tolnme,  about  H  (cadmioui^lH,
mercury  ^15),  and,  theiefore,  its  upecific  gravity  (ISG-^ltl  will  nearly^  11.  Uuchametalta
unkuown.  But  in  1879  Dahl,  in  Norway,  diafovered  in  the  island  of  Oterij,  uot  far  from
Kragero,  in  a  fein  of  Iceland  apar  in  a  nickel  mine,  traces  of  a  new  metal  which  he  ooUmI
nonegiiua.  and  which  preaealed  a  certain  reaembknoe  to  ekacadminm.  Perfect  purity
of  tlie  metal  Kaa  not  attained,  and  therefore  the  properties  ascribed  to  iiorwegioni  miut
be  refanJed  as  approdmata,  and  likely  to  undergo  considerable  alMralion  on  further
(tody.  A  Bolation  of  the  roaated  mineral  in  aciil  was  twice  precipitated  by  sulphuretted
hydnigen.  and  again  ignited  ;  the  oxide  obtained  was  easily  reduced.  When  ths  mehtl
<ru  dissolved  in  hydtochloric  acid  largely  diluted  with  water,  and  the  Mdntion  boiled,  the
b»ic  salt  was  pKCipitated.  and  thna  freed  from  the  copper  which  remained  in  the  solu-
tion. The  redOced  metal  had  a  density  ifii,  and  easily  oxidised.  If  the  compositioa  NgO
be  asMgned  to  the  oiide,  then  Ng-  H6'9.  It  fnsed  at  aB4° ;  the  liydroiide  wae  holuble
in  alkalis  and  potassium  carbonate.  In  any  case-,  if  nornegium  in  not  a  mixture  of  otface
metals,  it  belongs  to  the  uneven  aerien,  because  the  heavy  metals  of  the  even  eerieu  are
not  easily  reducible.  Bniuner  thinkx  thai  norweginm  oxtde  is  NgiOj,  the  atom  Ng  ■  aiU,
and  i>lacea  it  in  Group  VI.,  series  11,  but  tlieii  tlie  feebly  acid  higher  oxide,  NgOj.  ought
to  be  formed.

Amongst  the  metals  accompanying  liiic  which  have  Iwen  numed.  but  not  authenti-
cally sepanted,  must  be  included  the  aeUnium  of  Phipson  |18H1).  He  remarked
that  certain  sorts  of  ainc  give  a  wliite  precipitiite  of  linc  sulphide  which  blackeuh  on
expMare  to  light  and  then  becomeH  white  in  the  dark  again.  Itti  oxide,  elosely  re-
■eraliling  in  many  ways  cadminm  oiide,  is  insuluble  in  alkslis,  and  it  forms  a  white
metallic  snlphide.  blackening  on  exposure  to  li^ht.  As  no  (nitber  mention  has  been
made  ot  it  nnce  1B8S.  its  existence  mUHt  be  regarded  ns  doubtful.

60  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

CHAPTER  XVII

HORON, ALUMINIUM, AND THE ANALOGOUS METALS OF THE THIRD

GROUP

If  the  elements  of  small  atomic  weight  which  we  have  hitherto
discussed  be  placed  in  order,  it  will  be  clearly  seen  that,  judging
by  the  formula}  of  their  higher  compounds,  one  element  is  wanting
l)etw<'on  beryllium  and  carbon.  For  lithium  gives  LiX,  beryllium
forms  B0X2,  and  then  comes  carbon  giving  CX^.  Evidently  to
complete  the  series  we  must  look  for  an  element  forming  RX3,  and
having  an  atomic  weight  greater  than  9  and  less  than  12.  And  boron
is  such  a  one  ;  its  atomic  weight  is  II,  and  its  compounds  are  expressed
by  BX3.  Lithium  and  beryllium  are  metals ;  carbon  has  no  metallic
properties ;  lK)ron  appears  in  a  free  state  in  several  forms  which  are
intermediate  between  the  metals  and  non-metals.  Lithium  gives  an
energetic  caustic  oxide,  beryllium  forms  a  very  feeble  base  ;  hence  one
would  expect  to  find  that  the  oxide  of  boron,  B.2O3,  has  still  more
f('(;ble  basic  i)roperti('s  and  some  acid  properties,  all  the  more  as  CO^
and  N.^O.,,  which  follow  after  B2O3  in  their  composition  and  in  the
periodic  system,  are  acid  oxides.  And,  indeed,  the  only  known  oxide  of
boron  exhibits  a  feeble  basic  character,  together  with  the  properties  of
a  feeble  acid  oxide.  This  is  even  seen  from  the  fact  that  a  solution  of
boron  oxide  reddens  blue  litmus  and  Jicts  on  turmeric  paper  as  an
alkali,  and  these  reactions  may  be  used  for  determining  the  presence  of
BjO.,  in  solutions.  By  themselves  the  alkali  borates  have  an  alkaline
reaction,  which  clearly  indicates  the  feeble  acid  character  of  boric  acid.
If  they  are  mixed  in  s<»lution  with  hydrochloric  acid,  boric  acid  is
liberated,  and  if  a  piece  of  turmeric  paper  be  immei*sed  in  this  solution
and  then  dried,  the  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid  volatilises,  while  the
boric  acid  remains  on  the  paper  and  communicates  a  broxcn  coloration  to
it,  just  like  alkalis.

Boron  trioxide  or  boric  anhydride  enters  into  the  composition  of
many  minerals,  in  the  majority  of  cases  in  small  quantities  as  an
isomorphous  admixture,  not  replacing  acids  but  bases,  and  most  fre-

BOBON,  ALVmtflim.  ASD  THE  ANAtOGOirS  METAI.B

61

quently  alnmiitft  (Al,Og),  for  as  a  rule  tlie  aniouttt  of  alumina  de-
oreases  as  that  of  the  boric  anhydride  increases  in  them.  This  sub-
stitution ie  explained  by  the  similarity  between  the  atomic  composition
of  the  oxides  of  aluminium  (alumina)  and  boron.  Tlie  suhdiviaioii  of
oxides  into  basic  and  acid  c-an  in  no  way  be  sharply  defined,  and  here
we  meet  with  the  moat  conelosive  proof  of  the  faot,  for  the  oxides  of
boron  and  aluminium  belong  to  the  number  of  intermediate  oxides,
closely  approaching  the  limit  separating  the  basic  from  the  actd  o:tidea.
Their  type  (Chapter  XV.)  R,jU,  is  intermediate  between  those  of  the
biisic  oxides  R^O  and  RO  and  those  of  the  iiuid  oxides  R^O^  and  RO;,.
If  we  turn  our  attention  to  the  chlorides,  we  remark  that  lithium
chloride  is  soluble  in  watt^r,  i.s  not  volatile,  and  is  not  decomposed  by
water  ;  the  chinrides  of  lieryllium  and  magnesium  are  more  volatile,
and  although  not  entirely,  still  are  decomposed  by  water  ;  whilst  the
chlorides  of  boron  and  aluminium  are  still  more  volatile  and  are  decom-
poeed  by  water.  Thus  the  position  of  boron  and  aluminium  in  the  seriea
of  the  otiier  elements  is  clearly  defined  by  their  atomic  weights,  and
show.i  us  that  we  must  not  expect  any  new  and  distinct  functions  in
these  elements.

Boron  was  originally  known  in  the  form  of  sodium  borate,
Ka,B^O;,I0H,O,  or  borax,  or  littcal,  which  was  expoi-ted  from  Asia,
where  it  is  met  with  in  solution  in  certain  lakes  of  Thibet  ;  it  has  also
been  discovered  in  California  and  Nevada,  U.S.A.'  Boric  acid  was
afterwards  found  in  sea-water  and  in  certain  mineral  springs.* Its

'  Bonn  Id  either  directly  ubtnined  from  lake'  (Uit
•mil  Uie  lakem  o(  Thibet  nboal  1,000  (dub  per  aimutii  ),<H
Nulv  3)  vilh  tioiliuiD  orbonate  <ikboii[  1,000  tona  |wr
loiwl  fnWQ  the  Toecan  imiiure  borio  >cid  and  aodii
eTolTsd).  Bom  p\B»  superBHtiinted  »olution«  «i
.t  eTyntaUiseB,

.linsrifBii  lakes  Kii  e  «biiiU  3,000  toiw
bylieatingnutivecalL-iuuiboriilefii'e
uiiiuui).  or  itUubtaiuedlap  to  3.0U0
un  cirboiiBte  (eBrbonie  anhydride  ia
Ih  tompjirative  eaae  (Gernei),  from
ler  temperatureH.  in  octahcdra,  eon.

Uining  N*.,B407JiU,0.  Its  hji.  gi.  in  I'SI.  But  if  the  crystal  1i»atioD  proceeds  in  open
tbwelB,  then  nt  lempentnmii  beloir  GS°,  the  wdiDsry  pruunatic  crjriitallo-hjdrBte
B,Ns^T>  10H,0  in  obtained.  Its  8p.  gr.  is  1-71,  it  effloreiwes  in  dij  air  at  tlie  ordinary
temperallire,  and  at  U°  100  pnett  o(  water  dinwlve  aboDl  A  parts  of  this  crystal]  o-hydrate.
at  S0°  ST  parts,  and  at  100°  301  partfi.  Borax  fuses  when  heated,  Icnes  its  water  and
givH  an  anhTdroas  salt  wliich  at  a  r«d  hnat  tases  into  u  niobi1«  liquid  and  solidifies  into
a  transparent  amorphoUH  glaat  l«p,  gi.  9*87),  which  before  hardening  acquires  the  pasty
(yHHlition  peenliiLr  to  conunon  molten  }(luds.  Molten  borax  dissolves  toany  oKides  and  nn
wUdif^g  scquiras  characteristic  tints  with  Ok  dJRerent  oxides :  thus  oxide  of  cobalt  gives
a  dark  bine  glass,  nickel  a  yellow,  ohroniiuro  a  green,  tnanganese  an  amBthyst.  nra-
ntom  a  bright  yello*,  *c.  Owing  to  its  fusibility  and  property  of  dissolving  oxides,
bnrai  ia  employed  in  soldering  and  brazing  metids.  Borax  treqnently  enters  into  the
if  "trass  and  fnsible  ghisses.
Wp  may  niention the  following  among tlie  miuprals  which  iiiotaiii boron:  cal-

,  borate,  |CaO)j(B.pjHH,0),,  (nnnd  and exlraoled in Asia  Minor,  near BruH ;

rift'  (stasiJartite).  |MKO)ilB,Os)9,HgCI.„ ^t SUsslnrt, in tlie regular Bysli<m.

- crystals and iimiin'hr.»UH nissse!. (opefiHc: gravity  S'ltB), used in the arts ;

62  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

presence  may  be  discovered  by  means  of  the  green  coloration  which  it
communicates  to  the  flame  of  alcohol,  which  is  capable  of  dissolving  free
boric  acid.'"^  Many  of  the  boron  compounds  employed  in  the  arts  are
obtained  from  the  impure  boric  acid  which  is  extracted  in  Tuscany  from
the  so-called  auffioni.  In  these  localities,  which  present  the  remains
of  volcanic  action,  steam  mixed  with  nitrogen,  hydrogen  sulphide,  small
(|uantities  of  boric  acid,  ammonia,  and  other  substances,  issue  from  the
earth.  ^^^*  The  boric  acid  partially  volatilises  with  the  steam,  for  if  a
solution  of  boric  acid  be  boiled,  the  distillate  will  always  contain  a  cer-
tain amount  of  this  substance.^

erem^effite  (Damour),  AIBO5  or  ALO5B2O5,  found  in  the  Adalchalonsk  moimiain«  in
coIourleBS,  transparent  priHniH  (fipeciiic  gra\'ity  8*28)  re»embling  apatite;  daiholitr,
(CaO)2(Si02)iB.^03,H-jO ;  and  ulksite,  or  the  boron-sodium  carbonate  trom  which  a
large  quantity  of  borax  w  now  extracted  in  America  (Note  1).  As  much  as  10  px.  of
lM)ric  anhydride  sonietinieH  enterH  into  the  composition  of  tourmaline  and  axinite.

3  This  green  coloration  is  best  seen  by  taking  an  alcoholic  solation  of  volatile  ethrl
borate,  which  is  easily  obtained  by  the  action  of  boron  chloride  on  alcohol.

5biii  p,  C'higefTrtky  showed  in  lHrt4  (at  Geneva)  tliat  in  the  evaporation  of  saline
solutions  many  salts  are  carried  off  by  the  vapour— for  instance,  if  a  solutimi  of  potanh
containing  about  17-2()  grams  of  KjCO-^  per  litre  be  boiled,  about  5  milligrams  of  salt  ai«
carried  of!  for  every  litre  of  water  eva]>onited.  Witli  Li.^COj  the  amount  of  salt  carried
over  is  infinitesimal,  and  with  Na^COj  it  is  half  tliat  given  by  KjCOj.  The  ▼olatilisation
of  B3O;;  under  these  circumstances  is  incomparably  greater — for  instance,  when  a
solution  containing  14  grams  of  B.^Oj  per  litre  is  boiled,  every  litre  of  water  e\-aporated
carries  over  about  35()  milligrams  of  BjO^.  When  Chigeffsky  passed  steam  through  a
tube  containing  B-^O^  at  4(K)  ,  it  carried  over  so  much  of  this  substance  that  the  £une
of  a  Bunsen's  burner  into  wliicli  the  steam  was  led  gave  a  distinct  green  coloration;  but
when,  instead  of  steam,  air  was  passed  through  the  tul)e  there  was  no  coloration  what-
ever. By  pla<*ing  u  tube  with  a  cold  surface  in  steam  containing  B^Oj,  Chigeffsky
obuined  a  cr>'stalline  dfiH)sit  of  the  hydrate  B(OH)5  on  the  surface  of  the  tulie.
Besides  this,  he  found  that  the  amount  of  B^Oj  carrie<l  over  by  steam  increases  with  the
temperature,  and  that  crystals  of  BiOH)-  placed  in  an  atmosphere  of  steam  (although
l)erfectly  still)  volatilise,  which  shows  that  this  is  not  a  matter  of  mechanical  transfer.
but  is  based  on  tlie  capacity  of  B.^O-,  and  B(OHi-  to  pass  into  a  state  of  vapour  in  an
atmosphere  of  steam.

'  How  it  is  that  these  vaiH>urs  containing  l)oric  acid  are  formed  in  the  interior  of  tlie
eartli  is  at  presc>nt  unknown.  Dumas  supposes  that  it  de|)ends  on  the  presence  of  boron
sulphide^  B^S-  (others  think  l)oron  nitride),  at  a  certain  depth  in  the  earth.  This  sub-
stance may  be  artificially  pre[mred  by  heating  a  mixture  of  boric  acid  Mid  charcoal  in  a
stream  of  carbon  bisulphide  vapour,  and  by  the  direct  combination  of  boron  and  the
vapour  of  sulphur  at  a  white  heat.  The  almost  non-cr>'stalline  componnd  B-jSt,  sp.  gr.
1'55,  thus  obtained  is  somewhat  volatile,  has  an  unpleasant  smell,  and  is  very  easily  de-
composed by  water,  forming  boric  jicid  and  hydrogen  sulphide,  B^Sj  +  8H3O  ■  B2O3  +  8H.»H.
It  is  supposed  that  a  ImmI  of  l>on)n  sulphide  lying  at  a  certain  depth  below  the  sorface'of
the  earth  comes  into  contact  with  sea  water  which  has  percolated  through  the  uraier
strata,  becomes  ver>'  hot,  and  gives  steam,  hydrogen  sulphide,  and  boric  acid.  This  also
explains  the  presence  of  ammonia  in  the  vapours,  because  the  sea  water  certainly  passes
through  crevices  containing  a  certain  amount  of  animal  matter,  which  is  decomiKMed
by  the  action  of  heat  and  evolves  ammonia.  Tliere  are  several  other  hypotheses  for  ex-
plaining the  preseni-e  of  the  vapours  of  Iwric  acid,  but  owing  to  the  want  of  other  known
localities  the  comparison  of  these  In-pothoses  is  at  present  liardly  possible.  The
amount  of  boric  anhydride  in  the  vapours  which  escape  from  the  Tuscan  fmneroUes  and

BORon, ALUMINIUM, AND  TBB  ANALOGOUS  METALS

6ft

■  boric  acid  be  introduced  into  an  excess  of  a  strong  hot  solution
Klium  hydroxide,  tben,  on  slowly  cooling,  the  salt  NaB0^4H]0
crystallisea  out.  Tliia  salt  contaiusan  equivalent  of  Na^O  to  one  equi-
valent BjOj.  It  might  be  terme<t  a  neutral  salt  did  it  not  possess
strongly  Alkaline  reactions  and  easily  split  upinUi  the  albali  end  the
more  stable  lx>rax  or  biborate  of  sodium  nientiuned  above,  whicli  con-
tains 2BiOj  to  NajU." This  salt  is  prepared  by  the  action  of  borie

■olfioni  is  i-rr;  Incoiimdenblp,  less  than  one-tenth  per  mit^  aud  therefore  the  direct  ei-
tnction  of  ihe  acid  would  be  ver;  dneconomiisl,  hence  tfae  heat  contained  in  the  diiclurgeil
vkponn  14  made  a»  at  for  evaporating  the  water.  This  ie  done  in  the  following  manner,
HeaflTToirB  are  coiiBtraclfld  otpt  Oiv  crevices  evolving  Uio  vairanra,  and  the  water  o[
ume  neigfitioaring  ipring  in  puued  into  them.  The  vaponra  ure  cansed  to  pass  thronith
Iheaa  resenroini,  and  iu  bo  doing  the]'  give  Dp  all  their  boric  acid  lo  the  water  nud  henl
It.  au  Uwt  after  about  toeutj-fuiu  luinrs  it  even  boils ;  atili  thin  water  only  forma  u  vvi)'
■rnah  mlntioii  of  boric  itsii.  This  aolation  is  then  pnxtml  into  InwFr  bacinH  nnrl  npijn
Htnraled  \iy  the  »i»DrH  diiudutrged  Irom  the  surth.  )iv  wliii'h  iii<-im!i  n  ri-rljini  ninoiittt

1  CieBb  quantity  ol  boric  acid  nbsorbed  ;  the  u

[.  and  BO  on  until  the  water  has  collected  a  somewhat
lid. The  Rolntion  ie  drawn  from  the  laat  reservoir  a  intu

Dude  of  lead,  the  Bolntion  ib  also  evaporated  l>y  the  vapoari  escaping  from  the  enrth,

andattMiiiadeniutyof  10°  to  11°  Bt,amf.  It  is  allowed  to  fettle  in  the  vessel  c.  in  which
ileoDlB  and  ciyBtaJlises,  yielding  (not  qail«  pure)  cryilalline  boric  acid.  At  bempenturpB
abete  lUO*,  for  instance,  with  superheated  aleujn.  boric  iicid  vulstiliBes  with  Htontn  very

F»lt>  of  llie type  o

ai,  MBOj  or MHjBOj-

64  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

acid  on  a  solution  of  sodium  carbonate.  Borax  may  be  perfectly  purified
by  crystallisation.  If  a  saturated  and  hot  solution  of  borax  be  mixed
with  strong  hydrochloric  acid,  common  salt  and  a  normal  crystalline
hydrate  of  boric  acid  are  formed.  The  composition  of  this  hydrate
is  B(H0)3,  according  to  the  form  BX3 — that  is,  of  the  composition
B.203,3H20.  This  is  the  easiest  method  of  obtaining  pure  boric  acid.
The  water  is  easily  expelled  from  this  hydrate  ;  it  loses  half  at  100°  and
the  remainder  on  further  heating,  and  the  remaining  B^Oj  or  boric
anhydride  fuses  at  oSO**  (according  to  Camelley),  forming  at  first  a
ductile  (easily  drawn  out  into  threads),  tenacious  mass  and  then  a
colourless  liquid  solidifying  to  a  transparent  glass,  which  absorbs
moisture  from  the  atmosphere  and  then  becomes  cloudy.^ Only  the

liberation  of  ammonia  (BoUey),  abBorbs  carbonic  anhydride  like  an  alkali,  dissolres
iodine  like  an  alkali  (Georgiewics),  and  seems  to  be  decomposed  by  water.  Thus  Rose
showed  that  strong  sohitions  of  borax  give  a  precipitate  of  silver  borate  with  silver
nitrate,  whilst  dilute  solutions  precipitate  silver  oxide,  like  an  alkali.  Georgiewics
even  supposes  (1888)  boric  anhydride  to  be  entirely  void  of  acid  properties ;  for  all  acids,
on  acting  on  a  mixture  of  solutions  of  potassium  iodide  and  iodate,  evolve  iodine,  but
boric  acid  does  not  do  this.  With  dilute  solutions  of  sodium  hydroxide  Berthelot  ob-
tained a  development  of  heat  equal  to  11^  thousand  calories  per  equivalent  of  aUnli  (40
grams  sodium  hydroxide)  when  the  ratio  Na^jO  :  2B2O3  (as  in  borax)  was  takoi,  and  only
4  thousand  calories  when  the  ratio  was  Na^O  :  B2O3,  whence  he  concludes  that  water
powerfully  decomposes  those  sodium  borates  in  which  there  is  more  alkali  than  in  borax.
Laurent  (1849)  obtained  a  sodium  compound,  Na^O,  4B3O5,10H2O,  containing  twice  as
much  boric  anhydride  as  borax,  by  boiling  a  mixture  of  borax  with  an  equivalent
quantity  of  sal-ammoniac  until  the  evolution  of  ammonia  entirely  ceased.

Hence  it  is  evident  that  feeble  acids  are  as  prone  to,  and  as  easily,  form  acid  salts
(that  is,  salts  containing  much  acid  oxide)  as  feeble  bases  are  to  give  basic  salts.  These
relations  become  still  clearer  on  an  acquaintance  with  such  feeble  acids  as  silicic,
molybdic,  (kc.  This  variety  of  the  proportions  in  which  bases  are  able  to  form  salts  recalls
exactly  the  variety  of  the  proportions  in  which  water  combines  with  crystallo-hydrates.
But  the  want  of  sufficient  data  in  the  study  of  these  relations  does  not  yet  permit  of
their  being  generalised  under  any  common  laws.

With  respect  to  the  feeble  acid  energy  of  boric  anhydride  I  think  it  asefol  to  add  the
following  remarks.  Carl>onic  anhydride  is  absorbed  by  a  solution  of  borax,  and  dis-
places boric  anhydride ;  but  it  is  also  displaced  by  it,  not  only  on  fnsion,  bat  also  on
solution,  as  the  preparation  of  Ymt&x  itself  shows.  Sulphuric  anhydride  is  absorbed  by
boric  acid,  forming  a  compound  B(HS04)5,  where  HSO4  is  the  radicle  of  solphurio  acid
(D'Ally).  With  phosphoric  acid,  boric  acid  forms  a  stable  compound,  BPO4,  or
B.jOjP.^Os,  undecomposable  by  water,  as  Gustavson  and  others  have  shown.  With
reKi>ect  to  tartaric  acid,  boric  anhydride  is  able  to  play  the  same  part  as  antimcmioas
oxide.  Mannitol,  glycerol,  and  similar  polyhydric  alcohols  also  seem  able  to  form  parti-
oularly  characteristic  compounds  with  boric  anhydride.  All  these  aspects  of  the  subject
require  still  further  explanation  by  a  metho:!  of  fresh  and  detailed  resetirch.

*'  Ditte  determined  thf*  sp.  gr. : —

0°  1-2  80°

BaO-  VSim  l-847(i  1-6988

B(OH). ir>4r>a  1-5172  i-a838

Solubility l-9r>  292  1082

The  last  line  gives  the  HolubiUty,  in  grams,  of  boric  acid,  B(OH).-„  per  100  c.c.  of  water,
also  according  to  the  determinations  of  Ditte.

alkaliue  twits  of  boric  acid  are  8olab1«  in  w&ter,  but  all  borat<»  are
solublt^  ill  acids,  owing  to  their  easy  decompose bility  and  the  solubility
of  boric  acid  itself.  Although  borii:  anhydride,  B^O-,,  absorbs  SH.^O
from  damp  air,  atill  in  the  presence  of  water  it  always  '  LOinbinea  with
ft  lea«  quantity  of  buses  (borax  only  contains  ^).  However,  fused  boric
Anhydride  forms  a  crystalline  compound  with  magnesium  of  the  same
type  as  the  hydrate  (MgO);,B,03  (Ehelmann),  and  even  with  sodium  it
forms  (NajOjaBiOj  or  Na;,BO.T  {Benedict).  Aa  a  rule,  the  salts  of
boric  acid  contain  less  base,  although  they  are  all  able  U)  form  saline
compuunds  with  Ijases  when  fueed.  Uenemlly,  vitreous  fluxes  are
formed  by  this  means,**  which  when  fused  recall  ordinary  aqueous  aoiu-
tion»  in  many  respects,  ^ome  of  them  crystallisf!  on  solidifying,  and
then  they  have,  like  salts,  a  dofluite  composition.  The  property  of
boric  anhydride  of  forming  higher  grades  of  combination  with  basic
oxides  when  fused  explains  the  power  of  fused  borax  to  dissolve  metaUic
oxides,  and  the  experiments  of  Ebelniann  on  the  preparation  of  artificial
crystals  of  the  precious  stones  by  means  of  boric  anhydride.  Boric
anhydride  is,  although  with  difficulty,  volatile  at  a  high  temperature,
and  therefore  if  it  dissolves  an  oxide,  it  may  be  partially  driven  off  from
SDch  a  solution  by  prolonged  and  powerful  ignition  ;  in  which  case
the  oxides  previously  in  solution  separate  out  in  a  crystalline  form,
and  frequently  in  the  same  forms  as  those  in,  which  they  occur  in
nature  — for  example,  crystals  of  alumina,  which  by  itself  fuses  with
difficulty,  liave  been  obtained  in  tbis  innuner.  It  dissolves  in
molten  boric  anhydride,  and  separates  out  in  natural  rhomlrohedric
crystals. In this way  Ebelmann also obtained npiitel — that is,  a

'  It  it  ovidsDt  tbat,  ID  (be  iireoeDcg  of  buic  oIiIle^  walrr  Himpvtce  witli  Uieni,  vtliial]
Imct  in  all  prolMibility  detenniiieii  both  the  unoant  of  water  in  Ihc  sulls  of  borio  uiil  a*
<rell  w  liieit  decompoution  by  tui  excesi  of  wkter.  Id  coafirnuitiou  of  tbu  abi>v«-
meDlioned  competing  action  between  wiktcr  uid  hues,  I  think  it  aeeful  to  paint  nut
UmM  the  crystAUo-hydnM  of  boriu  containLDg  SH^O  ioa,y  be  rei<reeeiited  iw  B(HO)£,  ur
iMber  ae  Bi,(OH)t,  with  the  substitation  of  one  atom  of  hydrogen  by  sodium,  biuli:
N«iB,O,,3Il,0  =  aBilOII)t(ONa|.  The  componitioii  of  the  acid  borio  snlta  is  very  VBridl,
■•  i«  uen  from  the  [act  that  ReychJer  (189S)  obtained  (Ca,0)SB20],  (Rb,0]E&,0.-.
IcaoreavondinK  to  boroi)  and  (Li,0)B]0],  and  that  Le  Chalelier  and  Ditto  obtained,  for
CO,  MgO,  Ac,  (HO)B.Oj,  (RO^iSBjOj,  (RO)aB,Oj,  (BOI^BjOj,  and  even  lRO)jB,Oj.

*  A  gbuM  can  only  be  formed  by  those  slightly  lolattle  oiideB  which  correipoud  with
TeaUc  auda,  like  Bilim,  phosphoric  and  boric  anhydrideii,  Ac,  which  themselves  give
glimij  mavWB,  like  quartz,  glacial  phasphoric  acid,  and  boric  anhydride.  They  lue  able.
tike  aqoeoiDB  Bolntiona  and  like  metallic  alloys,  to  solidity  either  in  an  amorphona  toiiti
nr  to  yield  (or  even  be  wholly  converted  into)  definite  cryiColline  compoondi.  This  view
illiutratea  the  position  at  solations  amongst  the  other  cliemical  compoonde,  and  allow*
all  alloys  to  be  regarded  Irom  the  aspect  ol  the  uommoii  law«  at  cheiDical  reactions.  1
have  thmsfore  freqnently  recurred  to  it  in  this  work,  and  have  aJDCc  the  foar  ISGU
intruduoed  it  into  varioos  provinces  of  ehemistry.

rOL.  II.  F

66  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

compound of magnesium  and aluminium oxides  which occurs  in
nature.^

Free  boron  was  obtained  (1809)  by  Davy,  Gay-Lussac,  and  Th^nard
when  they  obtained  the  metals  of  the  alkalis,  for  boric  anhydride
when  fused  with  sodium  gives  up  its  oxygen  to  the  sodium,  and  free
boron  is  liberated  as  an  amorphous  powder  like  charcoal.  ^^  It  is  of  a
brown  colour,  specific  gravity  2'45  (Moissan),  and  when  dry  does  not
alter  in  the  air  at  the  ordinary  temperature  ;  but  it  bums  when  ignited
to  700°,  and  in  so  doing  combines  not  only  with  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  but
also  with  the  nitrogen.  However,  the  combustion  is  never  complete,
because  the  boric  anhydride  formed  on  the  surface  covers  the  remain-
ing mass  of  the  boron,  and  so  preserves  it  from  the  action  of  the
oxygen.  Acids,  even  sulphuric  (forming  SO^)  and  phosphoric  (form-
ing  phosphorus), easily oxidise amorphous boron, especially when

*  If  boric  acid  in  its  aqueouH  solntions  proves  to  be  exceedingly  feeble,  unenergetic,
and  easily  displaced  from  its  salts  by  other  acids,  yet  in  an  anhydrous  state,  as  anhydride,
it  exhibits  the  properties  of  an  energetic  acid  oxide,  and  it  displaces  the  anhydrides  of
other  acids.  TliiH  of  course  does  not  mean  that  the  acid  then  acquires  new  chemical
properties,  but  only  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  anhydrides  of  the  majority  of  acids  are
much  more  volatile  than  boric  anliydride,  and  therefore  the  salts  of  many  acids — even  of
sulphuric  acid — are  decomposed  when  fused  with  boric  anhydride.

By  itself  boric  acid  is  used  in  the  arts  in  small  quantity,  chiefly  for  the  preservation
of  meat  and  fish  (which  must  be  afterwards  well  washed  in  water)  and  of  milk,  and  for
soaking  the  wicks  of  stearin  candles ;  the  latter  application  is  based  on  the  fact  that
the  wicks,  which  are  made  of  cotton  twist,  contain  an  ash  which  is  infusible  by  itself  but
which  fuses  when  mixed  with  boric  acid.

*<*  Amorphous  boron  is  prepared  by  mixing  100  parts  of  powdered  boric  anhydride
with  50  parts  of  sodium  in  small  lumps ;  this  mixture  is  tlirown  into  a  powerfully  heated
cast-iron  crucible,  covered  with  a  layer  of  ignited  salt,  and  the  crucible  covered.
Reaction  proceeds  rapidly ;  the  mass  is  stirred  with  an  iron  rod,  and  poured  directly  into
water  containing  hydrochloric  acid.  The  action  is  naturally  accompanied  by  the  forma-
tion of  sodium  borate,  which  is  dissolved,  together  with  the  salt,  by  the  water,  whilst  the
boron  settles  at  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  as  an  insoluble  powder.  It  is  washed  in  water,
and  dried  at  the  onlinary  temperature.  Magnesium,  and  even  charcoal  and  phosphorus,
are  also  able  to  reduce  boron  from  its  oxide.  Boron,  in  the  form  of  an  amorphous  powder,
very  easily  passes  through  filter- paper,  remains  suspended  in  water,  and  colours  it  brown,
so  that  it  appears  to  be  soluble  in  water.  Sulphur  precipitated  from  solutions  shows  the
same  (colloidal)  proi)erty.  When  borax  is  fused  with  magnesium  powder,  it  gives  a  brown
powder  of  a  compound  of  boron  and  magnesium,  Mg.^B  (Winkler,  1890),  but  when  a
mixture  of  1  part  of  mugnesium  and  3  parts  of  B.>0-,  is  heated  to  redness  (Moissan,  1892),
it  forms  amorphous  boron  in  the  fonn  of  a  chestnut- coloured  powder,  which,  after  being
washed  with  water,  hydrochloric  and  hydrofluoric  acids,  is  fused  again  with  B.JO3  in  an
atmosphere  of  hydrogen  in  order  to  prevent  the  access  of  the  nitrogen  of  the  air,  which
is  easily  absorbcjd  by  incandescent  amorphous  boron.

Sabatier  (1H91)  considers  that  a  certain  amount  of  gaseous  hydride  of  boron  is  evolved
in  the  action  of  hydro<:hloric  acid  ui)on  the  alloys  of  magnesium  and  boron,  becaude  tlie
^as  disengaged  hums  with  a  green  flame.  Still,  the  existence  of  hydride  of  boron  cannot
be  regarded  as  <'ertain.

Under  tho  action  of  the  heat  of  the  electric  furnace  boron  forms  with  carbon  a
carbide,  BC,  as  Mithlhiiuser  and  Moissan  showed  in  1893.

BORON,  ALT7MINIUM.  AND  THE  ANALOOOU9  MRT*tf<

67

heated,  converting  it  into  boric  acid.  Alkalis  liave  the  suime  action
oil  it,  onlj  in  this  case  hydrogen  is  evolved.  Boron  decomposes
steam  at  a  red  Ileal,  alsij  with  evolution  of  hydrogen.

Amorphous  boron,  like  charcoal,  dissolves  in  certain  molten  metala.
The  property  of  fused  ahi  minium  u/iiiaaolving  boron  in  poitsiderable
quantity  is  very  striking  ;  on  cooling  sach  a  solution,  the  boron  par-
tinJly  combined  with  the  aluminium  separates  out  in  a  crystalline
form,  and  its  properties  are  then  exceedingly  remarkable.  The
crystalline  boron  may  be  obtained  by  heating  (to  1 ,300°)  the  pulverulent
boron  with  aluminium  in  a  well-closed  crucible,  the  access  of  air
being  prevented  as  far  as  possible.  After  cooling,  crystals  are  observed
on  the  surface  of  the  aluminium,  and  may  easily  be  separated  by  dissolving
the  latter  in  hydrochloric  acid,  which  does  not  act  on  the  crystals.  The
specitic  gravity  of  the  crystals  is  2'6H  ;  they  are  partially  transparent,
but  are  for  the  most  part  coloured  dark  brown  ]  they  contain  about
4  p.c.  of  carbon  and  up  to  7  p.c.  of  aluminium,  so  that  they  cannot
bo  considered  as  pure  boron.  Nevertheless,  the  properties  of  this
erynlaUine  substance,  which  was  obtained  by  Wiihler  and  Deville,
are  very  remarkable.  It  most  closely  resembles  the.  diamond  in  its
jtroperties — in  fact,  these  crystals  have  the  lustre  and  high  refracting
power  proper  to  the  diamond  only,  whilst  their  hardness  competes  with
that  of  the  diamond.  Their  powder  polishes  even  the  diamond,  and  like
the  diamond  scratches  the  .=apphii-e  and  corundum.  Crystalline  boron  is
much  more  stable  with  respect  to  chemical  reagents  than  the  amorphous
variety,  and  as  it  resembles  the  diamond,  so  amorphous  boron,  on  the
other  hand,  distinctly  recalls  certain  of  thi  properties  of  charcoal  ;  thus
a  certain  resemblance  exists  between  Iwron  and  carbon  in  a  free  state,
which  is  further  justified  by  the  proximity  of  their  positions  in  the
periodic  system.

Among  the  other  compounds  of  boron,  those  with  nitrogen  and
the  halogens  are  the  most  remarkable.  As  already  mentioned  above,
amorphous  boron  combines  directly  with  nilroff^n  at  a  red  heat.  If
it  be  heated  in  a  glass  tul>e  in  a  stream  of  nitric  oxide,  per-
lact  combustion  takes  place,  .')l!  +  3NO=Bs03+.'iBN.  If  the  residue
be  treated  with  nitric  acid,  the  boric  anhydride  dissolves,  whilst  the
b<rron  nitride  remains"  as  an  extremely  light  white powder,  which

"  At  ftrat  boron  nitride  mii  obtained  bf  heating  boric  uid  with  potasHium  ojuiide
or  other  iTyiiniigen  compoaDds.  It  may  be  mors  simplf  prepuvd  by  heating  ftiihydraus
tioTU  with  potiufiiam  tertncjanide,  or  by  beating  barsx  witli  ■lumamruti  chloride.  For
thin  purpnw  una  purl  ot  bnrm  is  iiitimatelj'  miied  with  two  purts  of  dry  Bninioniura
cblundfi,  HDd  the  miilur«  hntedin  o.  pUtinmn  craoible.  A  parous  masa  iafanoed,  which
alter  cnuhingand  treating  with  water  and  hydrochlorio  acid,  leaves  bornn  nitride.  Birrnn
"  iwn,  eonotponding  to  BN;  thia  body  was  oblainefi  hy  BesBou  anil

f  •*

\.

,  . .•- -  -

•  • ■

\

•*

• . < I % .••4  ".1-  I'.- ' . it- »»•  "~

• -. \ in*!  •*:  ■♦^» "*"- - - -
-...  ; -.  .^.  \\v  T ■ r:»- .. ••

. ■ . ;•• ^ :l 11!  IV" •'- *"

.-.• .• .i*l.<. ■*■•'--*.'"-  ~ '

% , »  ,»'.";;T.''*- ■'■-■**■•

- ■ • ::.!•• • T.-.'t-  " ■*  ■-■

■  ■  •• •

■  ;; «  it:. "*  v"-  '

j  .  ■  ~ . .  ~  -

\  .•.■.;:'.M  > •■•  - -  •-

,  • ,  • ''\ivT  .«:••  '*''-"- ■■*  ■ ■  • "

X  -\  n'.mv; it  A''.^ -S* ~- ■  -

■
\ ••■Mr. '» -r*  .. .  -••

s X. ,V  ;>  ili-Tii..*:  7  '■■','■  -  "

w  .. . '..»>!:.!»'  is  i:-  Z^"^'^'  '■ "

: .;;>ti:li:ii:  ••■='-' ^ :

. »  . ■ I  •  • .  ~

_  » ; \ %» ...  .  »•  * •  •  •  • "

• "(•  ■:  . .-. .  ■-■  -
".!..!• -~  ■■•  -  ■  —  :*

•1«

••441  •« ••■■

li»^

•  «t«

(It !*«•••  •■' •

■II  fl'

"ltt«1

iHv I'-
ll 111!.- ■

!  .I'.tv:  w.:..  • •

. u.  •.-.  r ;•.  li.-..-

.  ..  ■  -M  '  '
•.■  •:  :■..;■.■..  v^"»."?
■  ■  ...  r.-.roi  in  '»^'''

.  . .. .-. '.t-^-iud  lU

' ^. ■  V- v  I/.'i "•*;'»

-..:.■ n^F

BOUnN-, AI.l'MINH'M, AND TilK ASAI.OdnrS METAl.P

Ithe  liqoid  1-77).  lias  a  composition  BPa.'JHjO  (or  B,On,H,0.6HF).
Il  It  has  also  its  correspouding  salte.''  Ht  is  a  caustic  liquid,  having  the
II  properties  of  a  powerful  ai:id  ;  but  it  does  not  act  on  glaES,  which  shuwH
I  that  there  is  no  free  hydrofluoric  acid  present.  Under  the  action  of
wat«r  this  system  changes,  with  the  formation  of  boric  acid  and
hydro-borofluoric  acid  (HBF,)  acconling  to  the  equation  4BF,HjO,
=  3HBF,  +  BH303  +  r)H,0.'^  This  hydroborofluoric  acid  has  its
oOTTesponding  salts — for  instance,  KBP,.  On  evapontting  theaqueoua
aolutioii  this  free  acid  decomposes,  with  the  evolution  of  hydro-
llaoric  acid,  and  a  stable  system  is  ngain  obtained  :  ^H-BFj  +  ^HjO
—  B,FftHi„Oj4-:^HF.  Theresultant  solution  (containing  2BF.|,6HjO,
1^.  gr.  1'58),  which  is  identical  with  that  formed  by  the  evaporation  of
A  solution  of  boric  acid  with  hydrotluoric  acid,  again  only  contains
a  Minipound  of  boron  fluoride  with  water.  Probably  there  are
various  other  possible  and  more  or  less  stable  states  of  eijuiUbrium
aiid definite compounds of boron fluoride, hydrotluoric acid, and

Nothing  of  this  kind  occurs  with  boron  chloride,  because  hydro-
chloric acid  dues  not  act  on  boric  acid.  However,  amorphous  boron
at  400=  bums  in  chlorine,  and  at  410=  forras  boron  chloride,  BCl.,
The  boron  bums  in  the  chlorine,  forming  a  gas  which,  in  a  freezing
mixture,  condenses  into  a  liquid  boiling  at  17°,  and  gives  up  its  excess
of  chlorine,  if  there  be  any,  to  mercury.  The  specific  gravity  of  this
liquid  is  l'i'2  at  6°,  Boron  ohlorid<>  may  also  be  directly  obtjiined
from  boric  anhydride  by  the  simultaneous  action  of  charcoal  and
chlorine  at  a  high  temperature  :  B/Jj  +  aC  +  SCl,  =  2BCI3  +  3CO.  It
is  also  obtained  by  the  action  of  phosphoric  chloride  on  boric  an-
hydride in  a  closed  lube  at  200°,  Tt  is  completely  decomposed  by
water,  like  the  chloranhydride  of  an  acid,  boric  acid  being  formed  ;
bence  it  fumes  in  the  air  :  3BCl3  +  6HjO  =  aBHaOj+fiHCl. Boron

mmiilvi  bul  ilirei-l  eliomitiil  ItmiBforDuilions,  wid  I  tl
thv  judttiesh  "(  lliiWH  oljwrvatMitiB  opon  the  atttoo

''  Thry  trn  called  fluubomtes.  Tliey  may  bs  prepared  directly  tmni  flnurides  utid
bniMei.  Sach  pompouiiiU  i>l  htJotfeHH  with  oiygen  i«lls  are  known  in  nutnre  (tor
initancf,  npntite  and  boracile).  and  may  be  artificially  prepared.  The  compoBitioa  of
tha  Hooboralei — tar  example,  K4BF1O,— may  be  eipreaaed  aa  that  of  a  donbU  wit,
BOlOK).8KF.  I(  an  cKtvia  of  water  decompotes  them  (BazaroS),  tliik  does  nol  pnne
UiaL  they  dn  out  eiEiat  ax  such,  (or  many  double  aalts  are  demmpoBed  by  wsMr.

'*  Flnobiiitic  acid  conlain*  borou  fluoride  and  water,  hydrofluoboric  aoid,  boron  fluo>
ride,  and  hydroflDonc  acid.  It  is  evident  that  on  the  one  aide  the  mnipetiCioo  betwaea
w>tec  and  hydmSuoriD  acid,  and,  on  tlio  other  hand,  their  power  to  combine,  are  among
th«  toMoi  which  act  hen.  From  the  fact  that  bydroborofiuoiic  acid,  HBPi,  can  only
dial  ID  an  aiiaeouB  eolation,  it  mnst  be  HBBUine^  tliat  it  tonne  u  oimenlmt  »,tulj]e  system
only  in  the  pnaenre  of  llH.,0.

')■ I

70  PRINCU^LES  OF  ClIEMISTKY

forms  with  bromine  a  similar  compound,  BBrg,  specific  gravity  at
6° =2*64,  boiling  at  90°.  The  vapour  densities  of  the  fluoride,  chloride,
and  bromide  of  boron  show  that  they  contain  three  atoms  of  the
halogen  in  the  molecule — that  is,  that  boron  is  a  trivalent  element
forming  BX3J6  w.

As  in  the  first  group  lithium  is  followed  by  sodium,  giving  a  more
basic  oxide,  so  in  the  second  group  beryllium  is  followed  by  magnesium,
and  so  also  in  the  third  group  there  is,  besides  the  lightest  element,
boron,  whose  basic  character  is  scarcely  defined,  aluminium,  Al  =  27,
whose  oxide,  alumina,  has  somewhat  distinct  basic  properties,  which,
although  not  so  powerful  as  in  magnesium  oxide,  are  more  distinct
than  in  boric  anhydride.  Among  the  elements  of  the  third  group,
aluminium  is  the  most  widely  distributed  in  nature  ;  it  will  be  sufiicient
to  mention  that  it  enters  into  the  composition  of  clay  to  demonstrate
the  universal  distribution  of  aluminium  in  the  earth's  crust.

Alumina  is  so  named  from  its  being  the  metal  of  alums  (alumen),
Claj/y  which  is  so  widely  distributed  and  familiar  to  everybody,  is
the  insoluble  residue  obtained  after  the  action  of  water  containing
carbonic  acid  on  many  rocks,  and  especially  on  the  felspars  contained
in  some  of  them.  Felspar  is  a  compound  containing  potash  or  soda,
alumina,  and  silica.  The  primary  rocks,  like  granite,  contain  many
similar  compounds  (ttee  Chapter  XV III.  :  Felspars).  Felspar  is  acted
on  by  water  containing  carbonic  acid,  all  the  alkalis  (potash  and
soda),  and  a  portion  of  the  silica  passing  into  the  water  as  substances
which  are  soluble  and  carried  away  by  it,  whilst  the  alumina  and
silica  left  from  the  felspar  remain  on  the  spot  where  the  solution
has  taken  place.  This  is  the  original  method  of  the  formation  of
clay  in  its  primary  deposits  among  rocks  along  whose  crevices  the
atmospheric  water  has  permeated.  Such  primary  deposits  often  contain
a  white  pure  clay,  termed  kaolin  or  porcelain  clay.  But  such  clay  is  a
rarity,  because  the  conditions  for  its  formation  are  rarely  met  with.
The  water,  whilst  acting  chemically  on  rocks,  at  the  same  time  destroys
them  mpchanically,  and  carries  off  the  finely  divided  residues  of  dis-
integration with  it.  Clay  is  most  easily  subjected  to  this  mechanical
action  of  water,  because  it  is  composed  of  grains  of  exceedingly  small
size  and  void  of  any visible crystalline structure,  which  easily  re-

HiiiiK  icnlide  of  boron,  BI3,  wiw*  obtained  by  Moinwin  (1H91),  by  heating  a  mixture  of
the  vtti>ourK  of  HI  and  BCI3  in  a  tube,  or  by  the  action  of  iodine  vapour  (at  760°)  or  HI
upon  ainorp})oiiH  boron.  BI3  in  a  Hohd  Kubntance  whicli  diHSolves  in  benzol  and  CS>i,  reacts
with  water,  niellH  at  4;J'^\  boilH  at  'ilO"^,  haH  a  dennity  8'8  at  50°,  and  partially  decomposefi
in  the  light.  Beswrn  (iKUl)  obtained  BIBr^  (boiling  at  1*26°).  and  BI.^Br  (boiling  at  180°)
by  heating  (8(HV-4l)0^)  a  mixture  of  the  vapours  of  HI  and  BBr^,  and  fthowed  that  NH5
conibineK  with  BBr^  and  BI3  in  variouH  proportionn.

BOfiOtr,  AUTMINIUM.  AND  THE  ANAI-OGOUS  METALS 71

main  suspended  in  water.  Tlie  cloudy  water  of  i-unning  mountain
nreanis  generally  cuntains  particlee  of  clay  in  suspension,  owing  lo  the
above- described  chemical  and  niectiaaical  action  of  the  water  on  tlie
minerals  contained  in  the  mountain  rocks.  Together  with  these
minute  particles  of  clay  the  water  carries  away  the  coarser  components
on  which  it  is  not  able  to  act — for  example,  splinters  of  rock,
grains  of  mica,  quarti^  ic.  They  were  originally  held  together  by
those  minerals  which  form  clay.  When  the  water  itcts  on  these
binding  minerals,  a  sandy  mass  is  formed  which  water  bears  away.
The  cloudy  water  in  which  the  particles  of  clay  and  sand  are  held
in  suspension  carries  them  to,  and  deposits  thejn  at,  the  estuaries  of
rivers,  lakes,  seas,  and  oceans.  The  coarser  particles  are  first  di- posited
and  form  sand  and  similar  disintegrated  rocky  matter,  whilst  the
clay,  owing  tii  its  finely  divided  state,  is  carried  on  further,  and  is
only  deposited  in  the  stUl  partis  of  the  rivers,  lakes,  &c.  Such  dis-
integrations of  rocks  and  separations  of  clay  from  sand  have  been
gradually  going  on  during  the  millions  of  years  of  the  earth's  existence,
and  are  now  proceeding,  und  have  been  the  cause  of  the  formation  of
the  immense  deposits  of  sandstone  and  clay  now  forming  a  pfirt  of  the
earth's  strata.  Such  beds  of  clay  may  have  been  transferred  by  cur-
rents and  streams  from  one  locality  to  another,  so  that  we  must  dis-
tinguish between  primary  and  secondary  deposits  of  ctuy.  In  places
these  beds  of  clay  have,  owing  to  long  exposure  under  water,  and
perhaps  partially  owing  to  the  action  of  heat,  undergone  compression,
and  have  formed  the  rocky  masses  known  as  clay  slates  and  schists,
which  sometimes  form  entire  monntaitn;,  Roo ting  slates  belong  to  this
class  of  rocks.

From  what  has  been  said  above  it  will  be  evident  that  these
deposits  can  never  consist  of  a  chemically  pure  and  hfimogeueous  sub-
stance, but  will  contain  all  kinds  of  extraneous  insoluble  tinely  divided
matter,  and  especially  sand— that  is,  fragments  of  rock,  chieQy  quartz
(SiO,).  It  is,  however,  possible  t<i  considerably  puri^  clay  from
these  impu  rities,  owing  to  the  fac  t  that  they  are  the  resul  t  of
mecliaiiical  disintegration,  whilst  the  clay  has  been  formed  as  a  residue
of  the  chemical  alteration  of  roc'ky  matter,  and  theiefore  its  particle-s
are  incomparably  more  minute  than  the  particles  of  sand  and  other
rock  fragments  mixed  with  it.  This  difference  in  the  sine  of  tlie  grains
causes  the  clay  to  remain  longer  in  suspension  when  shaken  up  in  water
than  the  coarser  grains  of  sand.  If  clay  be  shaken  up  in  water,  and
especially  if  it  be  previously  boiled  in  it,  and  if  after  the  hrst  portion
has  settled  the  cloudy  watfr  be  decanted,  it  will  give  a  deposit  of  a

f  Diuuh  purer  clay  than  the  original. This  method  is  employed  for

72  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

purifying  kaolin  designed '  for  the  manufacture  of  the  best  kinds  of
china,  earthenware,  J^c.  A  similar  method  is  also  employed  in  the  in-
vestigation of  earths  for  determining  the  composition  of  soils  chiefly
composed  of  a  mixture  of  sand,  clay,  limestone,  and  mould.  The
limestone  is  soluble  in  dilute  acids,  but  neither  the  clay  nor  sand  passes
into  solution  by  this  means,  and  therefore  the  limestone  is  easily
separated  in  the  investigation  of  soils.  The  clay  is  separated  from  the
sand  by  a  mechanical  method  similar  to  that  described  above,  and
termed  levujation,^'^

'^  The  proceBS  of  levigation  is  based  on  the  difference  in  the  diameters  of  the  particles
of  clay  and  sand. In  density  these  partiples  differ  but  little  from  «>ach  other,  and  there-
fore a  stream  of  water  of  a  certain  velocity  can  only  carry  away  the  particles  of  a  certain
diameter,  whilst  the  imrticles  of  a  larger  diameter  cannot  be  borne  away  by  it. This  is
due  to  the  resistance  to  falling  offered  by  the  water. Tliis  resistance  to  substances
moving  in  it  increases  with  the  velocity,  and  therefore  a  substance  falUng  into  water  will
only  move  with  an  increasing  velocity  until  its  weight  equals  the  resistance  offered  by
the  water,  and  then  the  velocity  will  be  uniform. And  as  the  weight  of  the  minute
particles  of  clay  is  small,  the  maximum  velocity  attained  by  them  in  falling  is  also  small.
A  detailed  account  of  the  theor}-  of  falling  bodies  in  liquid,  and  of  the  experiments  bear-
ing on  this  subject,  may  be  found  in  my  work,  Concerning  the  Resistance  of  Liquids  and
Aeronautics^  1B80. The  minute  particles  of  cluy  remain  suspended  longer  in  water,  and
take  longer  to  fall  to  the  bottom. Heavy  particles,  although  of  small  dimensions,  fall  more
quickly,  and  are  borne  away  by  water  with  greater  difficulty  than  the  lighter. In  this  way
gold  and  other  hea\'y  ores  arc  washed  free  from  sand  and  clay,  and  the  coarser  portions  and
heavier  particles  are  left  behind. A  current  of  water  of  a  certain  velocity  cannot  carry
away  with  it  particles  of  more  than  u  definite  diameter  and  density,  but  by  increasing  the
velocity  of  the  current  a  point  may  be  anaved  at  when  it  will  bear  away  larger  particles.
A  description  of  apparatus  for  the  observation  of  phenomena  of  this  kind  is  given  by
Schbne  in  his  memoir  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Moscow  Society  of  Natural  Sciences  for
lb<)7. In  order  to  be  able  accurately  to  vary  the  velocity  of  the  current  of  water,  a
cylinder  is  employed  in  which  the  earth  to  be  exi)erimented  on  is  placed,  and  water  is  in-
troduced through  the  conical  bottom  of  the  cylinder. The  rate  at  which  tlie  water  rises
in  the  cylinder  will  vary  according  to  the  quantity  of  water  flowing  per  unit  of  time  into
the  vessel,  and  consequently  particles  of  various  sizes  will  be  carried  away  by  the  water
flowing  over  the  upi>er  edges  of  the  vessel. Schiine  sliowed  by  direct  experiment  that  a
current  of  water  having  a  velocity  of  O'l  mm.  per  second  will  carry  away  particles  ha\nng
a  diameter  of  not  more  than  00075  mm.,  that  is,  only  the  most  minute;  with  a  velocity
i'--0'2  mm.  i)er  second,  particles  having  a  diameter  r/  — 0*011  mm.  are  carried  away;
with  v^Oa  mm.,  d  -  0014G  mm.; with  t'  =  0-4  mm.,  d^OOll  nmi. ;  with  v  =  0-5  mm.,
(J'=zOO'l  mm.;  with v^l mm., r/-  008 mm.; with v  =  A  mm.,  d-0'07  mm.; with
r 10  mm.,  r/^  0187  mm. ; -x^ith  r  -12  mm.,  <i^0'l5  mm.;  and  therefore  if  the  ciurrent
does  not  exceed  one  of  these  velocities,  it  will  only  carry  away  or  wash  away  particles
having  a  diameter  less  than  that  indicated. The  sand  and  other  particles  mixed  with
the  clay  will  then  remain  in  the  vessel. The  very  minute  [>articles  obtained  after  levi-
gation are  all  considered  as  clay,  although  not  only  clay  but  other  rock  residae  may  also
exist  in  it  as  very  fine  particles. However,  this  is  very  seldom  tlie  case,  and  the  fine
nmd  separated  from  all  clays  has  pnictically  the  same  conqHJsition  as  the  purest  kinds
of  kaolin.

The  relation  between  the  amounts  of  clay  and  sand  in  soils  used  for  the  cultivation  of
plants  is  very  imi)ortant,  because  a  soil  rich  in  clay  is  denser,  heavier,  slirinks  up  under
the  action  of  heat,  and  does  not  readily  yield  to  the  plough  in  dn,-  or  wet  weather,  whilst
a  soil  rich  in  y^and  is  friable,  crumbling,  easily  parts  with  its  moisture  and  dries  rapidly,

BORON, ALUMINIUM, AND  THE ANALOGOUS  METALS  78

By  treating  claj  with  strong  sulphuric  acid,  which  dissolves  the
alumina  in  it,  and  then  (by  means  of  an  alkaline  carbonate)  dissolving  the
silica  which  was  combined  with  the  alumina  in  the  clay  (but  not  that

but  is  comparatively  easily  worked.  Neither  crumbling  Baud  nor  pure  clay  can  be  re-
garded as  a  good  cultivating  soil.  The  diiference  in  the  amounts  of  clay  and  sand  in  a
M>il  has  also  a  purely  chemical  signification.  Sand  is  easily  permeated  by  the  air,  because
its  particles  are  not  closely  picked  together.  Hence  the  chemical  change  of  manures
proceeds  very  easily  in  sandy  soils.  But  on  the  other  hand  such  soils  do  not  retain  the
nutritious  principles  contained  in  the  manure,  nor  the  water  necessary  for  the  nourish-
ment of  plants  by  means  of  their  roots.  Solutions  of  nutritious  substances,  containing
salts  of  potassium,  phosphoric  acid.  Sec,  when  passed  through  sand  only  leave  a  portion
moistening  tlie  surface  of  its  particles.  The  sand  has  only  to  be  washed  with  pure  water
and  all  the  adhering  films  of  solution  are  washed  away.  It  is  not  so  with  clay.  If  the
above  solutions  be  passed  through  a  layer  of  clay  the  retention  of  the  nutritive  substances
of  these  solutions  will  be  very  marked ;  this  is  partly  because  of  the  very  large  surface
which  the  minute  particles  of  clay  expose.  The  nutritive  elements  dissolved  in  water  are
retained  by  the  particles  of  clay  in  a  peculiar  manner — that  is,  the  absorptive  power  of
clay  is  very  great  compared  to  that  of  sand — and  this  has  a  great  significance  in  the
economy  of  nature  (Chapter  XIII.,  p.  547).  It  is  evident  that  for  cultivation  the  most
convenient  soils  in  every  respect  will  be  those  containing  a  definite  mixture  of  clay  and
sand,  and  indeed  the  most  fertile  soils  have  this  composition.  The  study  of  fertile  soils,
which  is  so  important  for  a  knowledge  of  the  natural  conditions  for  the  application  of
fertilisers,  belongs,  strictly  speaking,  to  the  province  of  agriculture.  In  Bussia  the  first
foundation  of  a  scientific  fertilisation  has  been  laid  by  Dokuchaeff.  As  an  example  only,
we  will  give  the  composition  of  four  soils  ;  (1)  The  black  earth  of  the  Simbirsk  Govern-
ment ;  (2)  a  clay  soil  from  the  Smolensk  Government ;  (3)  a  more  sandy  soil  from  the
Moscow  Government ;  and  (4)  a  peaty  soil  from  near  St.  Petersburg.  These  analyses  were
made  in  the  laboratory  of  the  St.  Petersburg  University  about  1860,  in  connection  with
experiments  on  fertilisation  (conducted  by  me)  by  the  Imperial  Free  Economical  Society.
10,000  grams  of  air-dried  soil  contain  the  following  quantities  (in  grams)  of  substances
capable  of  dissolving  in  acids,  and  of  ser\<ing  for  the  nourishment  of  plants.

(1)  (-2)  («)  (4)

NajO 11  5  4  4

K2O . .  58  10  7  5

MgO 92  83  19  7

CaO 134  17  14  11

PoOs 7  1  7  3

N 44  11  13  16

S 13  7  7  6

Fe^Os 341  155  111  46

By  chemical  and  mechanical  analysis,  the  chief  component  parts  per  100  parts  of  air-
dried  soil  are

Clay 46  29  12  10

Sand 40  67  86  84

Organic  matter ...  37  1'7  06  41

Hygroscopic  water  63  13  08  19

Weight  of  a  litre  in  grams  .  1150  1270  1350  060

The  black  earth  excels  the  other  soils  in  many  respects,  but  naturally  it>*  ntores  are  also
exhausted  by  cultivation  if  nothing  be  returned  to  it  in  the  form  of  fertilisers  ;  and  the
improvement  of  a  soil  (for  instance,  by  the  addition  of  marl  or  peat,  and  by  drainage  and
watering),  and  its  fertilisation,  if  carried  on  in  cpnformity  with  its  comi)osition  and  with
the  properties  of  the  plants  to  be  cultivated,  are  capable  of  rendering  not  only  every

74  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

occarring  in  the  form  of  sand,  Jcc.,  which  is  hardly  dissolved  by  car-
bonate of  soda  solution  at  all  even  on  boiling),  we  may  form  an  idea  of
the  proportion  between  the  component  parts  of  a  clay  ;  and  by  igniting
it  at  a  high  temperature  we  may  determine  the  amount  of  water  held
in  it.  In  the  purer  sorts  of  clay  dried  at  100^  (sp.  gr.  of  pure  kaolin  is
about  2' 5)  this  proportion  is  about  2Si02  :  2H2O  :  AI2O3.  In  this  case
the  conversion  of  felspar  into  kaolin  is  expressed  by  the  equation  : —

K,0,Al.,03,6Si02  =  Al203,2Si02  +  K,0,4Si02 ;

Felspar  Kaolin

the  •compound  K.20,4Si02  passes  into  solution.

But  as  a  rule  clays  contain  from  45  to  60  p.c.  of  silica,  from  20  to
30  p.c.  of  alumina,  and  about  1 2  p.c.  of  water  ;  and  it  cannot  be
supposed  that  clays  are  always  homogeneous,  because  they  are
an  aggregation  of  residues  (of  silico-aluminous  compounds)  which
are  unacted  on  by  water.  Nevertheless,  clays  always  contain  a
hydrous  compound  of  alumina  and  silica,  which  is  able  to  give  up  the
alumina  contained  by  it  as  a  base  to  strong  sulphuric  acid,  forming
aluminiuui  sulphate,  which  is  soluble  in  water.  After  this  treatment
the  silica  remains,  and  is  soluble  in  a  solution  of  an  alkaline  car-
bonate.**

Hoil  fit  for  cultivHtion,  but  also  of  improving  its  value,  so  that  in  the  coarse  of  time  whole
coontrteH  (like  Holland)  may  clearly  improve  their  agricultural  position,  whilst  under
the  ordinary  regime  of  continued  exhaustion  of  the  soil,  entire  regions  (as,  for  instance,
many  parts  of  Central  Asiaj  may  be  rendered  unfit  for  any  agriculture.

'•*  Everyone  knows  that  a  mixture  of  clay  and  water  is  endowed  with  the  property  of

taking  a  given  form  when  subjected  to  a  moderate  pressure. This  plasticity  of  clay

n-nders  it  an  invaluable  material  for  practical  puri>oses. From  clay  are  moulded  and

nninufa<;tured  a  variety  of  objects,  beginning  with  the  common  brick  and  ending  with  the

nu»Ht  deli<!ate  <ijina  works  of  art. This  plasticity  of  clay  increases  with  its  purity.

Wlien  artiirles  matle  of  clay  are  dried,  the  well-known  hard  mass  is  obtained ;  but  water

washes  it  away,  and  furthermore,  the  cohesion  of  its  i)article8  is  not  sufficiently  great  for

it  to  resist  Die  impression  of  blows,  shocks,  ike. If  such  an  turticle  be  subjected  to  the

lution  of  heat,  its  volume  first  decreast^s,  then  it  begins  to  lose  water,  and  it  shrinks  still

furtlier  (in  tin*  cast'  of  a  compact  mass  approximately  by  \-  of  its  linear  measurement).

On  the  other  hand,  a  great  coherence  of  particles  is  obtained,  and  thus  burnt  clay  has  the

liardness  of  stone. Pure  clay,  however,  shrinks  so  considerably  when  burnt  that  the  form

giv«'n  to  it  is  <IiHtroy«'d  and  cracks  easily  form ;  such  vessels  are  also  porous,  so  that

tlu'y  will  not  lu)ld  water. The  addition  of  sand — that  is,  silica  in  fine  particles — or  of

chtimottr that  is,  already  burnt  and  crushed  clay-  renders  the  mass  much  more  dense

and  incapablif  of cracking  in  the  furnace. Nevertheless, such  clay  articles (bricks,

eartlirnware  vesM-ls,  »Vc.)  are  still  i)orous  to  liquids  after  being  burnt,  because  the  clay

in  the  fnrniue  is  only  baked  and  does  not  fuse. In  order  to  obtain  articles  impervious

to  water  the  chiy  must  either  be  mixed  with  substances  which  form  a  glassy  mass  in  the

fnrniue,  |M*rnieating  the  clay  and  filling  up  its  ^wres,  or  else  only  the  surface  of  Uie

article  is  covered  with  such  a  glassy  fusible  substance. In  the  first  case  the  purest  kinds

of  clay  giv«'  what  is  known  as  china,  in  the  second  case  i)orcelain  or  *  faience.' So,  for

instance,  by  covi-ring  the  surface  of  clay  articles  with  a  layer  of  the  oxides  of  lead  and

Clay  is  the  source  from  which  aluminH,  AljO;,,  and  the  majority  of
the  (.'Dtupouiids  of  aluminium  are  prepared.  Among  these  compounds
the  most  important  are  the  alums — that  is,  tlie  double  sulphates  of
potassium(andftlliedmetal3)aiifla]uminium,  AlK(SO,|)j,12HjO,  When
clay  is  treated  with  sulphuric  acid  diluted  with  a  certain  amount  nf
water,  aluminium  sulphate,  Al^t.SOf)^,  is  foimed  ;  and  if  potassium
carbonate  or  sulphaM  l>e  added  to  this  solution,  a  double  siilt  or
alum  is  obtained  in  solution.  The  alums  crystallise  easily,  and  are
prepai'ed  on  a  very  large  manufac^turing  scale  owing  to  their  being
employed  in  the  process  of  dyeing.  Alums  are  soluble  in  water,  and,
on  the  addition  of  ammonia  to  their  solutions,  they  give  hydroii*
alumina,  or  aliiiuiniitm  hydroxide,  us  a  white  gelatinous  precipitate,
which  is  insoluble  in  water  but  easily  soluble  in  acids,  even  when  dilute,
and  in  aqueous  soda  or  potash.  The  solubility  of  alumina  in  acids
indicates  the  basic  character  of  the  oxide,  and  its  solubility  in  alkalis
and  its  power  of  formiug  compounds  with  them  shows  the  wenkneSiS
of  this  basic  charact«i-.  However,  the  feeblest  acids,  even  carbonic
acid,  take  ap  the  alkali  from  such  a.  solution,  and  the  alumina  then
separates  out  in  a  precipitate  as  the  hydroxide.  It  must  also  be  re-
nieoibered  as  characteristic  of  the  salt-fonning  propeities  of  alumina
tliat  it  does  not  combine  with  such  feeble  acids  as  carbonic,  sulphurous,
or  hypoclilorous,  iia. — that  is,  its  compounds  with  these  aeids  are
decomposed  by  water,  tt  is  also  important  to  observe  that  the
hydroxide  is  not  soluble  in  atjueous  ammonia.

Aliiiiiina,  Al^O^ — that  is,  the  anhydrous  aluminium  oxide— is
met  with  in  nature,  sometimes  in  a  somewhat  pure  state,  having
crystallised  in  transparent  crystals,  which  are  often  coloured  by  im-
purities  (chromic,  cobaltio,  and  ferric  compounds).  Huch  are  the  ruby
ajid  sapphire,  the  former  red  and  the  latter  blue.  They  have  a  specific
gravity  4-0,  are  distinguished  by  their  very  great  hardness,  which  is
second  only  to  that  of  the  diamond,  and  they  represent  the  purest
form  of  alumina.  They  are  found  in  (Jeylon  and  other  islands  of  the
Indian  Archipelago,  embedded  in  a  rock  matrix."""" Ctiriindum  is  the

while  gliHW  vhen  tatwd  witli  ailicH  And  da;,  lu  tliu  prepurHlion  uf  ihina,  flnnr  HpHJ-  aad
tknuXj  pauni  niliui  in  miiuil  up  into  the  clay ;  £hese  in)[ceilivn(B  give  b  diimh  nhich  in
intnnlile  tint  HiftenB  in  thu  funuu.'e,  «>  tbiit  sll  thv  puriii^lBii  ol  Ihu  oUf  uohtre  iii  lliix
■iifliCDed  nuio,  which  hunlenii  on  cooling.  A  gliLZe  eoiuixiud  u(  gloiwy  HuhntunceH,  vhieh
naif  fnae  ikl  ■  high  teni|x?rsturu.  in  iUao  applied  lo  the  surfuie  at  iiluiui  urtiulee.

nvt  'fftproy  I1S90)  obtained  ttuisparent  rubies,  which  drystiillided  iu  rbombohedrn,
Mid  tfweiuhlfd  natUTkl  mbiea  in  thair  hardosKB,  colour,  siie,  and  otlier  propertivn.  He
heatod togelber  ■ mixture ol  ainhydmas  alumiua WDtniuiiig  more or le>M raustio

I  with bikrinni fluoride  and biL-hrDm«to ol poUsaiom. The liiller is added
ibe  Ribj  Ah  colour,  und  in  taken  in  sinnll  ijannlity  (not  mom  thin  i  pnrtn  by

76  PRINC^IPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

same  crystallised  anhydrous  alumina  coloured  brown  by  a  trace  of
oxide  of  iron. A  very  much  larger  portion  of  this  impurity  occurs  in
efnery,  which  is  found  in  crystalline  masses  in  Asia  Minor  and  in
Massachusetts,  and  owing  to  its  extreme  hardness  is  employed for
polishing  stones  and  metals. In  this  anhydrous  and  crystalline  state
the  aluminium  oxide  is  a  substance  which  very  powerfully  resists  the
action  of  reagents,  and  is  insoluble  both  in  solutions  of  the  alkalis
and  in  strong  acids. It  is  only  capable  of  passing  into  solution  after
being  fused  with  alkalis.*^ Alumina  may  be  obtained  in  this  form  by
artificial  means  if  the  hydroxide  be  ignited  and  then  fused  in  the  oxy-
hydrogen  flame. *^ Alumina  also  occurs  in  nature  in  combination  with
water — as,  for instance,  in the rather rare minerals  hydrargUHte
(sp. gr. 2-3), Al203,3H20  =  2A1(H0)3, and diaspare, A\^0^,Kfi
=  2A10(H0)  (sp.  gr.  3*4). A  less  pure  hydrate,  mixed  with  ferric
oxide,  sometimes  occurs  in  masses  (at  Baux  in  the  south  of  France)  and
is  tenned  bauxite ;  it  contains  Al203,2H20  =  Al20(HO)4  (sp.  gr.  2'6).
When  bauxite  is  ignited  with  sodium  carbonate,  carl)onic  anhydride
is  liberated  and  the  alumina  then  combines  with  the  sodium  oxide,
foiming  a  saline  alurainate  of  the  oxides  of  aluminium  and  sodium.
This  is  taken  advantage  of in  practice  for  the  preparation  of  pure
alumina  compounds on  a  large  scale,  for bauxite  is  found  in  large
masses  (in  the  South  of  France,  in  Austria,  and  in  Carolina  in  South
America), and the resultant compound of alumina and sodium
is  soluble  in  water  iind  does  not  contain  ferric  oxide. This  solution
when  subjected  to  the  action  of  carbonic  anhydride  gives  a  precipi-
tfite  of aluminium hydroxide,*^' which  with  acids  forms  aluminium

weight  to  100  parts  of  alumina).  Tlie  mixture  in  put  into  a  clay  crucible,  and  heated
(for  from  100  hours  to  8  days)  in  a  reverberatory  furnace  at  a  temperature  approaching
1,500°.  At  the  end  of  the  experiment  the  crucible  was  found  to  contain  a  crystal-
line maHH,  and  the  walls  were  covered  with  crystals  of  the  ruby  of  a  beautiful  rose  colonr.
It  was  found  that  the  acceHs  of  moist  air  was  indispensable  for  the  reaction.  According
to  Fr<>my,  the  fonnation  of  the  ruby  may  be  here  explained  by  the  formation  of  fluoride
of  aluminium  which  under  the  action  of  the  moist  air  at  the  high  temperature  of  the
furnace  gives  the  ruby  and  hydrofluoric  acid  gas.

1^  The  effects  of  purely  mechanical  subdivision  on  the  solubility  of  alumina  are  evident
from  the  fact  that  native  anhydrous  alumina,  when  converted  into  an  exceedingly  fine
powder  by  means  of  levigation,  dissolves  in  a  mixture  of  strong  sulphuric  acid  and  a  small
quantity  of  water,  especially  when  heated  in  a  closed  tube  at  200^,  or  when  fused  with
a<'id  sulphate  of  potassium  (ser  Chapter  XIII.,  Note  i)).

^  The  preparation  of  crystallised  alumina  is  given  on  p.  05,  and  in  Note  18  bis.  When
alumina,  moistened  with  a  solution  of  cobalt  salt,  is  ignited,  it  forms  a  blue  mass  called
Tlumard's  salt.  This  coloration  is  taken  advantage  of  not  only  in  the  arts,  but  also  for
distinguishing  alumina  from  other  earthy  substances  resembling  it.

-^  The  treatment  of  bauxite  is  carried  on  on  a  large  scale,  chiefly  in  order  to  obtain
alumina  from  alkaline  solutions,  free  from  ferric  oxide,  because  in  dyeing  it  is  necessary
to  have  salts  of  aluminium  which  do  not  contain  iron.  But  this  end,  it  would  seem,  may
also  be  obtained  by  igniting  alumina  containing  ferric  oxide  in  a  stream  of  chlorine  mixed

BOSON.  ALUMINIUM.  ASD  THE  ANALOGOUS  METAIS

77

saltfi.  If  ttqneouR  ammonia  be  added  to  a  solution  of  aluminium
sulphate  n  gelatioous  precipitate  is  formed,  'which  at  first  remaina
saspended  in  the  liquid  iLnd  then  on  aettling  fomiB  a  gelatinous  mass,
which  itaelf  indicates  the  colloiiial  prnjmrty  of  uhiviinium  kydroxide.
The  following  points  are  cliaracteriBtic  of  this  M)lloidid  state  :  (1)  in  an
anhydrous  state  such  a  colloidal  subatnncc  is  insoluble  in  water,  as
alumina  la  -.  (2)  in  the  hydriited  stiite,  it  is  gelatimius  and  insoluble  in
water ;  and  (3)  it  is  iilso  cnpable  nf  existing  in  siilutions,  from  wliich
it  separates  out  in  a  no n -crystal line  Btat«,  forming  a  substance  re-
semblinj;  glue.  These  different  stiites  of  colloids  were  distinguished  by
Gfaham,  who  gave  them  the  following  ^ery  oharooteristic  names.  He
called  the  gelatinous  form  of  the  hydiiite  hyilroriel,  t.r.  a  gelatinous
hydrBt«,  and  the  soluble  form  of  the  aqueous  compound,  hijdrosol,
from  the  I^tin  for  a  soluble  hydrate.  Alumina  readily  and  frequently
a.ssume3  these  states.  The  gelatinous  hydnite  rjf  alumina  is  its
hydrogel.  It  is,  as  has  lieen  already  mentioned,  insoluble  in  water,
and,  like  all  similar  hydrogels,  shows  not  the  faintest  sign  uf  crystid-
lisation  ;  it  is  apt  to  vary  in  many  of  its  properties  with  the  amount  of
wat4'r  it  c<mtain8,  iind  loses  its  water  on  ignition,  leaving  a  white
powder  of  the  anhydrous  oxide.  The  hydrogel  of  alumina  is  soluble
both  in  acids  and  alkalis.  It  may  also  be  obtained  by  the  evaporation
of  its  solutions  in  such  feebly  energetic  acids  as  volatile  acetic  acid.
These  properties  ore  very  frequently  made  use  of  in  the  arts,  and
especially  in  the  proerMi''!  of  dy.ing,  because  the  hydrogel  of  alumina
in  precipitating  attrat-ts  a  number  of  colouring  miittei-s  from  their
solutions,  the  precipitate  being  thus  colourefl  by  the  dyes  attracted."

irith  hydtntnu'lKiu  vapoQiA,  aa  ferric  chloHdu  LJien  vululiliBHti.  K.  b&y«r  i>baerved  Uutt  in
ibis  Imttment  ol  linnxilc  with  sodn,  abaat  1  molecales  of  Hodinn)  lij-ilroiide  pauB  luto
anlation  Ui  I  niolvculc  at  lUumina,  nnd  that  on  agitating  this  aolnlioii  (eapecially  in  the
pnaenoe  at  aaavi  olieiuly  piHJpitated  aJiuniniuai  hydroiide),  aliout  two-thirds  ol  the
ftJnmiitit  i(  prefipiMt«l,  to  that  only  1  molecule  of  alnnuDa  to  lU  moleuuleti  of  sodium
bjdimide  reroitina  in  imlntiou.  Thin  nolution  is  evaparet«d  directly,  Juid  used  Bgnia.
H*  tberelore  treuta  baaxile  diiwtly  with  a.  Bolotion  o[  NoHO  ut  170°  in  a,  cloaed
bailor,  and  on  unling  addii  hydnited  aluminntn  thu  rEHDltnnt  wilutlim.  The  greater  poll
at  the  diBHilved  nJnniina  then  precipitate!  on  thi«  hydntted  iilaniino.  nud  the  solution  ia
owd  orer  a|{aJn,  The  hydroiide  which  HepanleH  from  the  alkaliuH  solation  contiiinE
AltOB)^  -UI  these  properties  lieaf  a  greHt  cesainblnnDe  to  thnae  uF  bono  acid.  It  may
be  taken  (or  granted  that  the  relation  between  sodium  hyJruiide  ami  olumma  in  solution

II  lime  be  added  to  a  solntion  ol  alnmina  in  alkah  (sodium  aluminate)  caluiom
•huninAtei*  precipitated,  from  whioh  acids  first  citnct  the  lime,  learing  aluminium
bjrdnnidc,  which  is  easily  solnble  in  acids  (Loewig).  When  sodium  alominate  is  miied
with  a  solntion  ol  sodium  bicarbonate,  a  double  carbonate  of  the  alkali  and  aluminium
ia  precipitftled,  whicli  is  easily  soluble  in  acids.

"  Tbcae  colomed  precipitates  of  olomiua  are  termed  laket,  and  ore  employed  in  dye-
' »  pasttlB,  oil  colours,  *c.

TS  rSrX.nprjvi  ,-vg- .-ffT-WT-gntv

The  p«pinn,*  .rf  ax-,1  .fT«  ^  di*  «i,4ovin«,t  of  aluminoas
eomp.>and>  .imjctiaiite.  ta  -h^  kw««s  <tf  <H«Br  aw  founded  on  this
fMC^  When  pr^ctpcaoid  tojo  tfc*  fibrcs  of  tisiMs  (csUcoes,  linens,
ie-i  th^  alximiniani  hjdr.vsafc  waiew  them  impenne«Ue  to  water;

ID

fify

8'

Thas.  J  .:rr»=:':  ^u.-ar-Otf  ai*=«^  ^h  ,.*  '^:«:r^.noi  a^ii^r.  Jrc^  w  .adcd  to  m  aolatioD
of  Aay  4:am-:iai  s*JL  *ad  lA-a  in  uxw,  ,s  jiiis,L  «>  ib*5  »i3m:jHim*T  be  precipiUtod.
di*=e  pcm.:i:<  w-cti  «  hj  --i^mi«:-ne»  ^.:^i.  -^  ,^3^^  ^j^  ^.^^^  ^J^  ^^  ^  p^

cipitAV-  rzu*  sc  ^  ia*5  i.-cn_=ii  _s  Mie  V  r. mtcx*  v-oh  th*  c«>k«ring  matter,  and  that
thi*  cocp. rri:>i  i^  =.:«  ifo  nrrv^wwe  "?▼  w-Afcr.  Tlx*  rrie^  ijbw  becvoe  insclnble  in  water  If
»  dve  be  miiPd  »:-Ji  «»r:tt  paste  aa.i  al^Eafniaax  «e€ate,  and  then,  by  means  of
eii;Z»T^  bl^x-ks  jav.tzi  A  ie«a-  :i  wl>.£.  i«  a»as&r  liiia  miitoie  to  a  fabric  which  i«
then  belted,  -Jw  4:Tr::iin::r=.  J^'«<^>^  'rH  >»Te  u»  hrdzrvel  U  alumina  which  binds  the
col.>arinsr  matter,  and  w^ier  w-_  =0  .i3c:£^  be  ^bCe  t.>  ^ash  the  |)cjpnent  from  the  material
—that  is.  a  ^^-aU^  *  £i*d"  dy*  Ls  c<>5a:3**L  Li  the  ease  of  drein^  a  fabric  a  uniform
tint.  :t  i*  irst  soakie^i  in  a  "iot^iii.a  c£  aluminiosi  aieetase  and  then  dried,  bv  which
laeaiL*  the  acetic  acid  is  dr.vvs  off.  wiLle  she  hjdropel  <rf  alnmina  adheres  to  the  fibrwof
the  matenal.  If  the  l*;u^^  Kr  thei>.  pas^sed  thr>.^«t^  a  solntion  of  a  dye  in  water,  the
former  will  he  a:trurte»i  zo  the  |^x?:oc5  coT%^r«d  wixh  aloznina.  and  closely  adhere  to  them.
If  certain  j»an^  of  tht?  material  be  provctied  by  the  application  ol  an  acid,  snch  as  tartaric,
C^HiO*.  '"*^"lic,  citric,  Jtc.  the<e  acid-i  beitu:  T>xr-ToJatile  ,  the  alumina  will  be  disaolved
1  thcne  part*,  and  she  p:^:mec:  will  not  adhere.  <o  that  after  washing,  a  white  design
ill  be  obtaine«l  on  those  part*  which  have  been  -so  protected.

In  dye-works  thr  alaminiom  acetate  is  generally  v->btained  in  solution  by  taking  a
.>Iution  of  alom.  and  mi\in^  :l  with  a  solatioo  d  lead  acetate.  In  this  case  lead
sulphate  i*  precipitated  and  alumininm  acetate  remains  in  solution,  together  with  either
acetate  or  <alphate  of  potaiv>:anu  according  to  the  amount  ol  acetate  of  lead  first  taken,
The  complete  decomposition  will  be  as  follows:  KAlSO4i,-iPbiC.,H5O.,U=KC^50^
-  AUC-zHjOi'-  -  2PbSOi,  or  the  less  c*^mplete  decomposition,  iK All SO4U -:-  SPbfC^HjOj^i
-^\l(C,H302'3-K.iS04-^8PbSO,.  If  the  resultant  solution  of  aluminium  acetate  be
evaporated  or  further  boiletl.  tlie  acetic  acid  passes  off  and  the  hydrogel  of  alumina

remains.

As  the  salt  of  i>otassium  obtained  in  the  solution  passes  away  with  the  water  used
for  wafihinp,  and  the  salt  of  lead  precipitated  has  no  practical  use,  this  method  for  the
preparation  of  aluminium  acetate  cannot  be  considered  economical;  it  is  retained  in  the
process  of  dyeing  mainly  because  both  the  salts  employed,  alum  and  sugar  of  lead,  easily
iryHtallise,  and  it  is  easy  to  judge  of  their  degree  of  purity  in  this  form.  Indeed,  it  is
very  imiwrtant  to  employ  pure  reagents  in  dyeing,  because  if  impurity  is  present — such
as  a  small  quantity  of  an  iron  compound— the  tint  of  the  dye  changes ;  thus  madders  give
a  re<l  colour  with  alumina,  but  if  oxide  of  iron  be  present  the  red  changes  into  a  violet
tint.  The  aluminium  hydroxide  in  soluble  in  alkalis,  whilst  ferric  oxide  is  not.  There-
fr>rft  Hodium  aluminate— that  is,  the  dissolved  compound  of  alumina  and  caustic  soda —
obtained,  as  already  described,  from  bauxite,  is  Hometimes  employed  in  dyeing.  Every
aluminium  salt  pives  a  solution  containing  sodium  aluminate  free  from  iron,  when  it  is
mixed  with  excess  of  cauKtic  soda.  This  solution,  when  mixed  with  a  solution  of
ammonium  chloride,  gives  a  precipitate  of  the  hydrogel  of  alumina  :  AJ(OH)5  +  SNaHO
\  JJNII|('1  AKOH):,  +  3NaCl  +  3NH40H.  There  was  originally  free  soda,  and  on  the
additifui  of  Hiiliimnioniac  there  is  free  ammonia,  and  this  does  not  dissolve  alumina,
llii-nftin-  thi^  hydrogel  of  the  latter  is  precipitated.

»^  A  iiotlu-r  direct  metho<l  for  the  preparation  of  pure  aluminium  compounds  consists  in

tlif  triMiinwni  of  rrifnUir  containing  aluminium  fluoride  together  with  sodium  fluoride,

AINii-Kfl '•'''**  niiiH-nil  in  exi>orted  from  Greenland,  and  is  also  found  in  the  Urals. It

h  rrH»«hiMl  .iiid  lu'iiti'cl  ill reverlM-ratory  furnaces  with  lime,  and  the  resultant  mass  is

'%Uh\  >%ith  wilt  IT ;  Hoditnii  aluminate  is  then  obtained  in  solution,  and  calcium  fluoride

he  pn-cipitaU'  AlNiisl^'fl  «  3CaO JU'aFj-H  AlNft.-.O...

BOBON.  ALCHmiUU,  Aim  THE  ANALOGOUS  UETAI^
this may be  taken ndvanta^  of  for  the  preparation  of  waterproof

77i/-  hydrosiJ  of  alumina — i.e.  the  f^olulde  alumiriuiu  hydroxide — is
niorp  difficult  tti  obtain.'"  In  order  to  obtain  this  soluble  variety  of
alumina,  Graham  took  a  solution  of  its  hydrogel  in  hydrochloric  acid-  -
that  is,  a  solution  of  aluminium  chloride,  which  is  able  to  dissolve  a
stJU  further  quantity  of  the  hydrogel  of  alumina,  forming  a  basic  salt
having  probably  one  fif  the  compositions  Al(HO)Cla  or  AI(H0),^C1.
'When  such  a  solution,  considerably  diluted  with  water,  is  subjected  to
dialysis  -  that  is,  to  diffusion  through  a  membrane  *'*— the  hydrochloric
acid  diffuses  through  the  membrani'  and  leaves  the  alumina  in  the
form  of  hydroaol.  The  resultant  solution,  e\'eii  when  only  ciintoining
two  or  three  per  cent,  of  alumina,  jmsses  into  the  hydrogel  state  with
such  facility  that  it  is  sufficient  to  transfer  it  from  one  vessel  to
another  which  has  not  been  previously  washed  with  water,  for  the
entire  mass  to  solidify  into  a  jelly.  But  a  solution  containing  not
more  than  one-half  per  cent,  of  alumina  may  eien  be  boiled  without
coagulating  ;  however,  after  the  lapse  of  several  days  this  solution  will
of  its  own  accord  yield  the  hydrogel  of  alumina.'''  '■''

lewitlluHHiuU  ospoRBibleaiiUiullil;
n  iuu«t  be  dilute — that  is,  not  cootaiii  moie  tlutn  one  put  of
anA  if  this  wlution  be  hmted  in  t,  closed  vessel  (m  thut  the
iftpornte)  to  the  boiling  point  ol  water,  for  oue  and  nhiilf  totnodnys.
lliea  the  Bolation,  which  appareiDtly  renuiiiiB  miallervd,  loiwB  itn  oHgiDHl  aHtrini;eat  taste,
pn^t  Id  ulntioDa  of  all  tht^  lulte  of  alnmiDa.  &ntl  lias  instead  the  purely  acid  laato  of
tinegai.  The  ■oluUoti  then  no  longer  contains  the  ult,  but  acetic  scid  and  the  hydrnsol
nf  Klmnina  in  an  ancombincd  state ;  thej  tBB.y  be  isolated  from  each  other  by  evaporat-
ing the  aoetic  acid  in  shallow  veaseU  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  with  a  thin  layer
of  liijiud  the  alumina  dovs  not  separate  xa  a  preci[Htate.  When  (he  acid  vapours  eease  to
ooma  off  theiv  remains  a  solation  at  the  hydrosol  of  alumina,  which  is  tasteless  and  Iiua
no  action  ou  litmoa  paper.  When  concentrated,  this  solution  acqairei  a  more  and  more
ictoey  eonaistency,  and  when  completely  evaparsted  over  a  water-bath  it  leaves  a  non-
cTTalaUina  gine-1  ike  hydrate,  whose  composition  is  Al^fH^Of  =  Al,Os,aH,jO.  The  smallest
qnantitj  of  alkalis,  and  of  many  acids  aud  salts,  will  convert  the  hydrosol  into  the
li|rdrcigel  ol  alumina — that  is.  convert  the  aluminium  hydroxide  from  a  soluble  into  au
inaolnble  form,  or,  as  it  is  said,  cause  the  hfdrat«  to  voagulsCe  or  gelatinise,  Ihesmallest
anioonl  of  sulphuric  acid  and  its  salts  wilt  cntiiie  the  alumina  to  gelatin ise_tbat  is,
(KUH  the  hydrogel  to  separate. Many  such  coUoidal  solutions  are  known  (Vol.  T.  p,  m.

n  In  a  diaJyuer,  Vol.  I.  p,  03,  \ote  IH.

u  i~  The  different  states  in  which  the  bydmtea  ol  aim

r  varieties  of  the  hydrates  of  the  oxides  ol  ii

ida,  as  well  aa  of  phoephorio  and  silicic  auii

We  sliall  therelore  liav«  nwasfon  to  recu

of  this  work.

I  most  remarkable  pecaliarity  ol  Graham's  solution
and  leaves  a  bine  ring  on  it,  which  s'

ition. If  in  the  dialfsii

ina  occur  and  are  prepared
in  and  uhrominm.nl  moljrUlic
s,  ol  many  sulphides,  proteid

s  tlial  it  aolidifien  on  1
basic  hydrochloric  aci<

80  PHINCIPLKS  OF  CHEMISTRY

With  respect  to  alumina  as  a  base,  it  is  very  important  to  observe
that  it  is  not  only  capable  of  combining  with  other  bases  '®  but  that
it  does  not  give  salts  with  feeble  volatile  acids  (like  carbonic  and
hypochlorous)  ;  it  forms  salts  which  are  easily  decomposed  by  water,
especially  when  heated,^^  as  well  as  double  and  basic  salts,'^  so  thai  U
forms  a  char  example  of  a  feebfe  baseJ^  To  these  characteristics  of
alumina  we  must  add  that  it  not  only  gives  compounds  of  the  type
AIX3,  but  also  the  polymeric  type  Al^Xg,  even  when.X  is  a  simple
univalent  haloid  like  chlorine.  Deville  and  Troost  showed  (1857)
that  the  vapour  density  of  aluminium  chloride  (at  about  400°)  is  9*37
with  respect  to  air  -that  is,  nearly  135  with  respect  to  hydrogen,  and
therefore  the  formula  of  its  molecule  is  expressed  by  AljGli;,  and
not  AlCls,^^  although  in  the  ease  of  boron,  arsenic,  and antimony,

be  replaced  by  a  Himilar  acetic  acid  salt,  a  hydrosol  of  alumina  is  obtained  which  does
not  act  npon  litmus.

"'  Com|K>unds  of  alumina  with  bases  (aluminates,  see  Note  21)  are  sometimes  met
with  in  nature.  Such  are  spinel  (sec  p.  05),  MgO,Al.,05  =  MgAl<{04,  chryaoberyl,
BeAl.204,  and  others.  Magnetic  oxide  of  iron,  FeO,Fe.205=Fe504,  and  compoonds  like
it,  belong  to  the  stune  clans.  Here  we  evidently  have  a  case  of  combination  *  by  analogy,'
as  in  solutions  and  alloys,  acconipanie<l  by  the  formation  of  strictly  definite  saline  oom-
])omids,  and  such  instances  form  a  clear  transition  from  so-called  solutions  and  certain
mixtures  to  the  tyx>e  of  true  salts.

^  Not  only  aluminium  acetate  (Note  24),  but  also  every  other  alominiom  salt  with  a
volatile  acid,  parts  with  its  acid  on  heating  an  aqueous  solution — that  is,  is  decomposed
by  water,  and  forms  either  basic  salts  or  a  hydrate  of  alumina.  By  dissolTing
aluminium  hydroxide  in  nitric  acid  we  may  easily  obtain  a  well-crystallising  alufninium
nitrate,  AlfNO.',).-„9H.,(),  which  fuses  at  73°  without  decomposing  (Ordway),  gives  a
basic  salt,  *2A1..0.v^HNO-„  at  100",  and  at  1-10  leaves  the  aluminium  hydroxide  perfectly
free  from  the  elements  of  nitric  acid.  But  the  solutions  of  this  salt,  like  those  of  the
a4^«tate,  are  idso  able  to  yield  aluminium  hydroxide.  From  all  this  it  is  evident  that
we  must  supitosc  that  the  solutions  of  this  and  similar  salts  contain  an  equilibrated
dissociated  system,  containing  the  salt,  the  acid,  and  the  base,  and  their  compoands  with
water,  as  well  as  partly  the  molecules  of  water  itself.  Such  examples  much  more
clearly  confirm  those  conceptions  of  solutions  which  are  given  in  the  first  chapter  than  a
general  preliminary  acquaintance  with  the  subject  can  do.

^  As  an  example  of  native  basic  salts  we  may  cite  a/MniVf,  or  alum-stone  (sp.  gr  S*6),
which  sometimes  occurs  in  crystals,  but  more  frequently  in  fibrous  masses.  It  has  been
found  in  masses  in  the  Caucasus  (at  Zaglik,  forty  versts  distance  from  Elizabetpol),  and
at  Tolfa,  near  Rome.  Its  composition  is  K.>0,8Al.,0-,4SO-,6H20  (alonite  contains  9HjO).
It  is  soluble  in  water  but  not  decomiKh>ed  by  it,  but  after  being  slightly  ignited  it  gives
up  alum  to  it.  It  may  be  artificially  prei^ared  by  heating  a  mixture  of  alum  with  almni-
niuni  sulphate  in  a  closed  tube  at  '2SiO~.

^  As  the  colloidal  proix>rties  arc  i^articularly  sharply  developed  in  thoee  oxides
<A1.>0-,  SiO^,  MoO:;,  SnO.s  Sic.)  which  show  ^likc  water  also  I  the  properties  of  feeble  bases
and  feeble  acidis  there  is  probably  some  causal  reason  for  this  coincidence,  all  the  mote
so  since  among  organic  substances— gelatins,  albumins,  iVc. — the  representatires  of  the
coUoids  also  have  the  property  of  feebly  combining  with  bases  and  acids.

^  Since  Deville's  exi)erimeuts  the  question  of  the  density  of  aluminium  chloride  has
)>een  frequently  re-investigatetl.  The  subject  has  more  especially  occupied  the  attentioo
of  Nilson,  Petten.s«tii.  Fnedel  and  Crafts  and  V.  Meyer  and  his  collaborators.  In  general,
it  has  been  found  tliat  at  low  temi^eratnres  (up  to  4I0-)  the  density  is  constant,  and

which give  oxides R>,Oj of the same coinpositiun as Al^tl,-,, the
chlorine compounds form noti- polymeric molecules, BCI^, AsC'l,,

iiulkatH  •  luoleDale  AI,C1,;  wbi'Ul  depoljuoeriHatioii  prabubly  l^tboagL  it  is  not  jrot
eemua)  lakeH  plkue  at  liigher  tumpisriitareB,  itnd  tlw  nioleonlu  AlClj  is  obluiDeil.  AloDg
with  Uiia  there  hiu  bMii,  uid  atill  la,  n  dillBrence  <iF  opinion  an  U>  the  rnpouF  density  of
■iDtniiiimii  ellijl  and  inelUrl— wliPllieT  for  insUnce,  AItCH-)i  or  ALjfCU,!,  expresaeR  die
mulecule  nt  Ibe  lutlHr.  The  iiitxrest  of  these  remBruheu  in  intinutely  vonnntled  with  the
qiie«lii>ii  o{  llie  vsliiney  of  •lumiuinmi  il  we  hold  to  tlie  opiiiiou  liui  cIcmsntB  in  their
vuioas  compunnilH  hers  K  coDiitiuie  and  Htriirtljr  deGnito  vuJencf.  In  thin  cau  the
(ormnla  AlCI,  ur  A1(CH.^]  wnulr]  iliaw  thai  Al  JH  IrJvidpnt,  uid  that  cODneqnently  tlie
ooinptnuidy  ot  tdamiiiium  •»  AltOHli.  A10.i|&1,  and,  in  general,  AJXj.  But  if  the  mole-
eole  be  Al^lj,  it  i«— lot  the  foUiiwen  of  lliE  doctriiia  ot  the  invariable  valency  of  the
elemenlH— iui'ouipatible  tnlh  tht<  iilea  of  the  Irivuieucy  of  Kianiinioiu.  luid  tliey  H»sume
it  to  br  quadriralml  like  nirboii.  likening  Al.jC1«  to  ethnns  C^Hg^CH.^CH,,  although
UuB  dne>  not  ripbiii  why  Al  does  not  form  Al-CI^,  or,  ia  general,  AIX,.  In  this  work
another  eappoailiun  is  introdaied ;  acootding  to  this,  altlioagh  alaminiam,  as  an  element
of  groop  HL,  gice*  compoiuidB  ot  tJio  type  AOi^,  thin  daa«  not  eiclude  the  pOBBibilJty  of
tbeiie  molecolea  oomlnning  with  othen,  and  conseqaently  with  eacli  other — that  ia,
forming  AlxXg;  jnat  u  the  inolecnlea  of  nnivolent  elamentB  exist  either  an  Hj,  Cl^  Ac>,
or  aa  Na,  and  the  nioleciile«  of  biraleiit  elementa  either  a*.  Zo,  or  aa  S»  or  even  »^  lu
the  Snt  place  it  most  be  recognined  that  tlie  limi  ting  form  does  not  eilianiit  all  power  of
combinolioD.  it  only  exhauats  the  CB|Hicity  ot  the  element  for  combining  with  X'«,  but
the  satoraled  lubstance  nuiy  afterwardii  tombine  with  whole  motfrulm,  which  fact  is
best  proved  by  the  capaeity  of  siihatttucea  to  fumi  cryalalline  Gomjionnds  with  water,
aminoma,  Al:  Bat  in  aoiiie  eoliiktanues  thia  faculty  tor  fortlier  eoinhinationB  is  lesa
developed  ifor  iiiHlance.  in  carbon  tetrachloride,  CCI4I.  whilst  in  others  it  ia  more  ao.
AlXj  combines  with  many  other  niulecnles.  Now  it  a  limitiiig  torni,  wliiuh  does  not
combine  with  new  X's.  nevertheless  combineit  with  iitlier  whole  moieunlua,  il  will
natorally  in  lome  inatoncea  combine  with  itHelf,  will  pnlyuieriiie.  In  tins  maimer  the
mind  clearly  grasps  the  ides  that  Ibe  same  torcen  wIlicK  ('HUM  S]  to  unite  itself  to  Cl^,
tic  CjU4loCI«.&e, also  unite  moleonles  of  a  similar  kind  toother  1  tiinn  polsmrriiuitian
neaaea  to  be  an  isolated  fragmentary  phenomenon,  and  chsmieaJ  combinalionii  '  by
sDaki0r'  auquire  a  particular  and  important  interest.  In  eonfomiity  with  these  views
the  Inlawing  propoaition  may  be  mmlp  ooneerninj?  the  compounds  of  aluminium.  They
an:  of  the  tn>e  AIXj  in  the  limit,  like  BXj,  bat  those  limiting  forms  are  still  able  to
oonibiDe  to  form  AlXj.HZ.  and  the  aluminium  chloride  is  a  comiwund  of  this  kind— i.f.
|.UXi)r  I"  lionni,  lor  example,  in  BCI3,  this  tendency  to  form  farther  comiioands  it
leas  developed.  Hence  boron  chkiridi-  appesra  as  BClj,  and  not  (BCI])].  Polymenaa-
liuo  i*  not  only  possible  when  a  aiibsl&nce  haa  not  attained  the  limit  (althongh  it  ismore
probkblu  then),  bat  also  when  tlie  limiting  Iprm  haa  been  reached,  it  only  the  latter  haa
the  (acuity 'of  combining  with  other  wivile  moleeolea.  We  may  therefore  conclude  that
•lamiDiDin.  like  boron,  is  trivalent  in  the  aam«  sense  that  lithium  and  sodinm  are
onindeat,  tnagnedom  bivalent,  and  carbon  letravalent.  In  n  word,  there  is  no  reawin
Id  coiiaider  that  alaniiniuni  ia  capable  of  tanning  compounds  AIX),  and  in  that  way  lu
riplain  the  eiiatence  of  llie  molecule  AlsCl«.  Furthermore,  there  are  many  reasoua  tor
thinking  that  AlFg,  Al^Os,  and  other  empirical  formoln  do  not  etprese  the  molecular
oaightt  ot  theae  compounds,  but  thai  they  are  much  higher:  A1.F„,  AVOj..  In
tecanl  years  convincing  proofs  of  the  troth  of  the  above  statements  have  been  (dilained,
•ud  o(  the  imlepBiidenl  nsistenoe  of  AlXa  in  a  state  of  vapour ;  for  Comb  luw  deter-
mined the  vaponr  density  of  the  volatile  aoetjl  of  aluminium  acetole  Al(CgH702).i
iwhich  melts  at  1W>.  boils  at  S1B=,  and  distils  without  i  Imcc  ot  det
li.aud  that  it  exactly  correspondii  to  the  above  molecular  ciuuiiosition.  On  the  other  ha
Ijouise  and  Roux  (18801  by  employing  llie  method  of  '  treeiing  point  depression' 1
•oIutioDs  (C1ui|>ter  I.,  Note  4fl|  found  tliat  the  ruoleenlea  A1,(C,Hi)b  and  ii^<^~
A<-,,  comspnnd  to  the  type  Al^Xi-  Tlius  it  may  now  Uc  itocepled  that
fnmiKHiliuK  nt  the  compounds  ot  nliiininiiini  in  their  sinipleM  fi.rin  is
limy  may  polyiuerite  and  give  A1...X6  ot,  in  genernl,  AljXj,,.
VOL.  11.

82  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

SbCl3.^^  This  duplication  (polymerisation)  of  the  form  AIX3  is  con-
nected with  the  facility  with  which  the  salts  of  aluminium  combine
with  other  salts  to  form  double  salts  and  with  aluminium  hydroxide
itself  to  form  basic  salts.

Aluminium  s^ilpIuUey  Al2(S04)3,  which  is  obtained  by  treating  clay
or  the  hydrates  of  alumina  with  sulphuric  acid,  crystallises  in  the  cold
with  27H.;0,  or  at  the  ordinary  temperature  in  pearly  crystals,  which
arc  greasy  to  the  touch  and  contain  IGHjO.^^ Its  solutions  act  like  sul-
phuric acid — for  instance,  they  evolve hydrogen  with  adnc,  forming
basic salts, which are sometimes  met with in  nature (o/umtnt^
Al203,S03,9H20,  alumiane,  Al203,2S03,  and  others),  and  may  be  ob-
tained by  the  decomposition  of  normal  salts  and  by  the  direct  solution  of
the  hydroxide  in  normal  salts  :  these  exhibit  a  varying  composition,
(Al203)„(S03)^(H20),,  where  ?u/  n  is  less  than  3. Aluminium  sulphate
is  now  prepared  (from  the  pure  hydrate  obtained  from  bauxite.  Note
21)  in  large  quantities  for  dyeing  purposes  (instead  of  alums)  as  a
mordant. With  solutions  of  the  alkali  sulphates  (potassium,  sodium,
ammonium,  rubidium,  and  csesium  sulphates),  the  normal  salt  easily
forms  double  salts,  termed  alums — for  example,  the  ordinary  crystalline
alum  contains  KA1(S04)2,12H20,  or  K2S04,Al2(S04)8,24H20. In  the
ammonium  alums (which  leave  a  residue  of  alumina  when  ignited)
the  potassium is  replaced by  ammonium (NH4). Alums  are  used
in  large  quantities,  because  there is  scarcely  any  other  salt  which
crystallises  so  easily. In  this  respect  the  alums  formed  by  potassium
and  ammonium  are  equally  convenient  to  purify,  because  they  pre-
sent  a considerable difference in  their solubility at the ordinary
and  higher  temperatures. If  the  crystallisation  be  conducted  rapidly,
the  salt  separates  in  minute  crystals,  but  if  it  be  slowly  deposited,
especially  in  large  masses,  as  in  factories,  then  crystals  several  centimetres
long  are  sometimes  obtained. At  a  higher  temperature  alums  are  very
much  more  soluble,  and  crystallise  with  greater  diflSculty,  and  are  there-
fore less  easily  freed  from  impurities  ;  at  0°  100  parts  of  water  dissolve
3  parts,  at  30°  22  parts,  at  70° 90  parts,  and  at  100**  357  parts  of
potassium  alum.^^ The  solubility  of  ammonium  alum  is  slightly  less.

■^^  lu  the  cuse  of  ^ulliiim,  as  a  cl()s<>  analogue  of  aluniiniiim,  Lecoq  de  Boisbaadnui
(1880)  Hhowed  tliat  probably  the  molecule  galliam  chloride  contains  GasCl^  at  low  tern-
peratureH  and  high  presHureH,  and  that  it  dinsociateH  into  GaCI^  at  high  temperatures  and
low  presHurcH.  The  molecule  of  indium  chloride  seeniHto  exist  only  in  the  simplest  lorm,
InCl-.

'^  The  pure  salt  (KiH^O)  is  not  hygroscopic.  In  the  presence  of  impurities  the
amount  of  water  increases  to  lHlf.^0,  and  the  salt  becomes  hygroscopic.

•**  The  common  form  of  crystals  of  alums  is  octahedral,  but  if  this  solution  contains  a
certain  small  excess  of  alumina  al)ove  the  ratio  *2A1(0H-)  to  K.^SOj,  and  not  more  sulphnric

BORON, ALUSrnmjM, .VND  THE  ANAX'OGOtfS WETALS

The  specific  gravity  of  pottLssium  alum  is  1-74,  of  atumoniuin  alum
1  '63,  and  of  sodium  alum  I  '60.  Alums  easily  part  witb  their  water  of
crystallisatiou  ;  thus  potash  alum  partially  effloresces  when  exposed  to
the  air,  and  loses  9  mol.  H^O  under  tlie  rei;eiver  of  an  air-pump.  At
100°,  dry  air  passed  over  alums  takes  up  iieuriy  all  their  water.  As
we  have  already  mentioned  (Chapter  XV.),  the  law  of  isomorphous  sub-
Etitutions  eshibtt«  itaelf  more  clearly  in  the  alums  than  in  any  other
salts,  and  all  alums  not  only  eoutaui  the  same  amount  of  water  of
crystallisation,  MR{SO,),I-2H,0  (where  M  =  K,  NH„  Na  ;  R  =  Al,
Fe,  Cr),  und  appear  in  crystals  whose  plauea  are  inclined  at  equal
angles,  but  they  also  give  every  possible  kind  of  isojnoj'phous  mixture.
Hie  ahimiaium  in  them  is  easily  replaced  liy  iron,  ohromiuin,  indium
and  sometimes  by  other  metals,  whilst  the  potassium  may  be  sub-
stituted by  sodium,  rubidium,  ammonium,  and  thallium,  and  the
sulphuric  acid  may  be  replaced  by  selenic  and  chromic  acids.

Aluminium  chlori'ln,  Al,fil^,  is  obtained,  like  other  similar  chlorides,
(forinstanceMgCl,)eitherdirectlyfront  chlorine  and  the  metal,  or  by  heat-
ing to  redness  an  intimate  mixture  of  tlieamorphous  anhydrous  oxide  and
charcoal  in  a  stream  of  dry  chlorine.'^  ''*■'  The  resultant  sublimate  is  very
»-olatile,"  and  forms  a  crystalline,  easily  fusible  mass,  which  deliquesces
in  the  air  and  easily  dissolves  in  water,  with  the  evolution  of  a  large

Kid  tluui  SHjSO,  u>  3AII0U},,  then  it  eiw

Unlrou.  uii]  tbew  bIddis  are  culled  'cubic'

the;  ciui  cuntuin  no  iron  iii  nulation,  tur  o:

if  Iha  Iklbtr  be  in  enWH  tlusre  »n  be  no  aicide  at  ic

r^iMtiid  rrum  Itslj,  wbere  this;  wens  prepwed  fram  &luaite  (Xote  'J8|.

"  k'-  II  is  also  tfirmed  b;  the  action  of  hydrochloric  aoid  opon  metallio  BlamiDinm
(Nitnun  uid  Pattenaou).  bf  lieating  idtuiiiDa  in  a  luixtiue  o[  the  vapoan  of  UB.phlhslinB
ud  HCl  IFmire,  1880),  uid  by  the  action  al  dry  HCl  npoii  Hn  alloy  ut  U  p.v.,  ur  more
ot  At  aod  cupper  (Uobet;).

^  A]iunininni  chloride  toges  ftt  17B°,  boila  at  1H3°  (preNnare  7SH  iiim..  at  lAH"  under  a.
pnsBBn  ol  !t&0  mm.,  mhI  at  318°  undui  S.STS  pun.),  accarding  to  Friedel  and  CraflH,  ho
Ibal  il  boila  ijomediatelj  attor  faiion.  According  to  Seabert  und  ?a1Urd  (1S93),  Al.Clg
hUH  at  1M°.  Aluminium  bromide  Idwh  at  abont  Qlj",  and  the  iodide  at  18Ii°  iLCMinliug  to
Weber,  at  1^'^  according  to  Deville  and  Troost.

All  then  halogen  compoaoda  ot  alnminium  are  aolable  in  water.  Aluminium
fitLoride,  AlF]  (AUPyi).  JH  inwilable  in  water.  It  ia  obtained  by  diBBolving  alnniEna  in
liydroflooric  acid  ;  «  tolation  is  then  lormed,  bat  it  containg  an  eiceaa  ol  hydrofiuoric
add.  Wben  this  ulu lion  is  evitporated.aryBtalB  containing  Al,F,,HF,QiO  oreobtained,
Tbey  arc  also  inwiluble  in  water.  By  natncating  the  above  eolutioaKith  a  large  qoMititj
lA  alnuiua.  and  thuo  eiapurating,  we  obtain  oryHtalB  having  the  compoutioc  Al,Fg,TH]0.
All  theH  coinpuandB,  when  ignited,  leave  innolnble  uihydioai  aluminium  fluoiide.  U
lonna  eoloucleu  rhomlx^edn,  which  are  non-YoUtile.  of  ap.  gr.  B-I,  and  are  decomposed
by  Btsam  into  alomina  and  hydrofluoric  tw;i<I.  The  acid  mluliou  uppiirently  contaioh  n
eampDond  which  has  its  CDrreBtwadiag  wiJtK ;  by  the  luldiliou  of  u  Aulalioii  of  polaiuiiiiii
Boonile,  a  gelatinous  preoipitale  of  AlKjFj  is  obtained.  A  Blmilar  compound  occiirx  m
jiiely,  AlNajFh  ^i  er^olilt,  up.  gr.  S-O.

n  couiUinutioiiN  of  the  cube  and  oct

They  jire  valued  by  the  dyer  becau

ie  precipitated  belore  alumina,  ai

present. These  ulutns  were  loi

1

84  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

amount  of  heat.^  *»**  On  evaporating  this  solution,  hydrochloric  acid
and  aluminium  hydroxide  are  liberated.  But  if  the  solution  be
heated  in  a  closed  tube,  with  an  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid,  then,  on
cooling,  crystals  of  AlCl3,6H20  are  obtained — that  is,  aluminium
chloride  both  combines  with  water  and  is  decomposed  by  it.  And  the
faculty  of  the  type  AIX3  for  combining  with  other  molecules  is  seen  in
the  compounds  of  AICI3  with  many  other  chlorine  compounds.  Thus,
for  example,  a  mixture  of  aluminium  chloride  with  sulphur  tetrachloride
gives  Al2Cl6,SCl4,  under  the  action  of  chlorine,  whilst  with  phosphorus
pentachloride  it  forms  AlCl3,PCl5  ;  it  also  combines  with  NOCl.  Thus,
the  compounds  AlCl3,N0Cl,  Aici3,POCl3,  AlCl8,3NH3,  A1C13,KC1,
AlCl3,NaCl  are  known. ^*^  The  compound  of  aluminium  and  sodium
chlorides,  AlNaCl4,  is  very  fusible  and  much  more  stable  in  the  air
than  aluminium  chloride  itself.  It  seems  to  be  of  the  same  type  as
the  alums.  This  compound,  AlNaCl4,  is  employed  in  the  extraction
of metallic  aluminium,  as we shall presently proceed to describe.

5«  bw  1,1  tiiirt  respect  ulurainioin  chloride  resembles  the  chlor-aiihydridea  of  the  acids,
aiid  probably  in  the  tiqaeouK  Kolation  the  elements  of  the  hydrochloric  acid  are  already
separated,  at  least  partially,  from  the  aluminium  hydroxide.  The  fwlution  may  also  be
obtained  by  the  action  of  aluminium  hydroxide  on  hydrochloric  acid.

^^  Here  we  see  an  instance  in  confirmation  of  what  has  been  said  in  Note  80 — i^,  the
action  of  the  molecule  A1C1-.  We  will  cite  still  another  instance  confirming  the  power
of  alumina  to  enter  into  complex  combinations.  Alumina,  moistened  with  a  solation  of
calcium  chloride,  gives,  when  ignited,  an  anhydrous  crystalline  substance  (tetrahedral),
which  is  soluble  in  acids,  and  contains  (Al.jO-)e(CaO),yCaCl.2.  Even  clay  forms  a  similar
stony  substance,  whi<'h  might  be  of  practical  use.

Among  the  nu)st  comjilex compounds  of  aluminium,  ultramarine^  or  lapis  lazuliy
must  be  mentioned. It  occurs  in  nature  near  Lake  Baikal,  in  crystals,  some  colonrleM
and  others  of  various  tints— green,  blue,  and  violet. ^Vhen  heate^il  it  becomes  dull  and
acquires  a  very  brilliant  bine  colour. In  this  form  it  is  used  for  ornaments  (like  mala-
chite), and  as  a  brilliant  blue  pigment. At  the  present  time  ultramarine  is  prepared
artificially  in  large  quantities,  and  this  process  is  one  of  the  most  important  conquests
of  science; for the blue  tint  of ultramarine  has  been  the  object  of many  scientific
researches,  which  have  culminated  in  the  manufacture  of  this  native  substance. The
most  characteristic  property  of ultramarine  is  that  when  placed  in  salphnric  acid  it
evolves  hydrogen  sulphide  and  becomes  colourless. This  shows  that  the  blue  coloar  of
ultramarine  is  due  to  the  presence  of  sulphides. If  clay  be  heated  in  a  furnace  with
sodium  sulphate  and  charcoal  (fonuing  sodium  sulphide)  without  access  of  air,  a  white
mass  is  obtained,  which  becomes  green  when  heated  in  the  air,  and  when  treated  with
water  leaves  a  colourless  substance  known  as  *  white  ultramarine.' When  ignited  in  the
air it  absorbs  oxygen and turns  blue. The  coloration  is  ascribed  to  the  presence  of
metallic  sulphides  or  iK»ly>ulphides,  but  it  is  most  probable  that  silicon  solphide,  or  its
oxysulphide,  SiOS,  in  present. At  all  events  the  sulphides  j)lay  an  important  part,  bnt
the  problem  is  not  yet  quite  settled. The  formula  NagAleSi^Oa^S  is  ascribed  to  white
ultramarine. The  green  probably  contains  more sulphur,  and  the  blue  a  still  larger
quantity. The last is supposed  to contain NaaAlgSi^Oi^Sj. It is moi«  probable
(according to (hickelberger, 1882)  that  the composition of the blue  varies  between
Si,gAl,HNa-..„Se07, and Sii8Ali..,Na2oSo06p. The latter may be expressed as
(Al.»05)o(Si0.j),H(N»V30),oSa()5, which would indicate the presence of insafliciently-
oxidised  suli>hur  in  ultramarine.

BOROS,  ALrjflNIirM.  AND  TKE  ANALOBOITS  METALS 86

Alaminium  bifituide,  whiih  is  obtained  by  the  direct  combination  of
metallic  aluminiuro  with  bromine,  closely  reseinbies  the  chloride  ;  it
melts  at  90°,  volfitilises  at  270",  and  its  vapour  density  indicates  the
formula  AljBr,..  Aluminium  iodide  is  obtained  by  heating  iodine  with
finely  dinded  aluminium  in  a  closed  tube  ;  it  is  go  easily  decomposed
by  oxygen  that  its  viifwur  even  explodes  when  mixetl  with  it.^"

MriitUii-  Aluminium  was  first  pcepared  by  Wohler  in  IS2]1  as
a  grey  powder  by  the  action  of  piitassium  on  aluminium  chloride.
He  afterwaniit  (in  184o)  obtained  it  as  a  white  compact  metal,
unoxidisable  in  the  air,  and  only  slowly  attacked  by  acids.  Owing
to  thf  vast  and  wide  occurrence  of  clay,  many  efforts  have  been  made
in  investigating  in  detail  the  methwls  for  the  extraction  of  this  metal.
These  efforts  wei-e  brought  to  a  successful  issue  (1854)  by  Hainte-Claire
Deville,  who  is  also  renowned  tor  his  doctrine  of  dissociation.  Experi-
ments on  a  large  scale  have  proved  that  metallic  aluminium,  altliough
possessed  of  great  lightness,  strength,  and  durability,  is  not  so  generally
suitable  fur  technical  purposes  as  was  at  lirst  thought.  Nitric  and  many
other  acids,  indeed,  do  not  act  on  it,  but  the  alkalis,  alkaline  substances,
and  even  saits^for  instance,  moist  table  salt — humidity,  Ac., ^' ''''  tarnish
it,  and  hence  object:^  made  of  aluminium  suffer  at  the  surfaces,  alter,
and  cannot,  as  was  hoped,  replace  the  precious  metals,  from  which  it
differs  in  its  extreme  lightness.  But  the  alloys  made  with  aluminium
(especially  with  copper,  for  example  aluminium  bronze)  are  very
valuable  in  their  properties  and  applications.

The  Deville  method  for  the  preparation  of  metallic  aluminium  is

^-  At  din  nrdindfy  t«DipvrBtiu»  nJaiuiniiun  does  not  ilHcnnipoHe  water,  bub  il  a  aiiuill
qiuntit;  of  iodine,  or  of  liydriodic  Mid  »aA  iodiiie,  or  of  Klutuitiium  iodide  mid  iodine,  in
Addvd  (o  thfi  water,  Iheu  hjdFogou  is  abuiidtmtly  erolvud.  It  is  urident  that  here  tixe
Teaation  pmceeds  at  the  eipenBe  of  the  {onnation  nf  A1,I(,  und  that  tbiH  Habatunce,  with
WBter.  given  tluminiam  hydroxide  and  hjdriodic  acid,  whiuh,  with  lUiuniDiuiii,  emlveft
h)-drogiui.  AlaminiDni  |iTobah]]r  belongii  to  tlicne  metalij  having  a  greater  BfliDity  tor
nijrgeo  than  for  the  haJiigenii  (Note  SA  tri).

almnidinai  and  eqieciAlly  if  it  be  rubbed  upon  t3ie  Hurface  of  alnoiiniunj  moiHtened  with

■  dilute  add,  the  Al  beeomeB  ra|)id1y  o:

•cmmpanied  by  a  very  cnrious  uppeBnuiDe,

of  oiiile  of  altunininm  growing  upon  the  r

lern.  and  lubKqnently  by  A.  Sokoleff  in IBM. Tliia  iDtereBtiug  and  enriouR  phei

mcnoD  has  not  to  my  knowledge  been  Further  ibudied,

I  think  it  neCBHarr,  however,  to  add  that  ocoordiuj;  to  Lubberi  and  Baacher's
r«warcli«a  IIBSI),  wine,  aitlee,  milk,  oil,  urinn,  earth,  &c.,  hare  no  more  artioti  upon  aJu-
miniaiD  resseli  than  apon  copper,  tin,  and  other  Bimilar  articlea.  In  the  eonrse  of  four
Oionllii  ordinary  rinegar  dignolved  (I'RG  gem.  of  Al  per  »].  ven(im«tre.  whilst  a  G  per  cent,
wlDtion  o[  wmiDon  lalt  diswilvcd  almut  O'OS  grm.  of  alaniininm.  Ditte  (1890)
sliowedthit  Al  is  acted  upon  by  nitric  and  aalphnrii:iu:ids,  although  only  Hlowly  (oKing  to
Uw  tormatioD  of  a  layer  of  ga»,  •«  in  Chat>ter  XVL,  Note  10)  and  that  the  reiution  pni^
obhU  miieh  more  mpidly  in  raoDO  or  in  tbc  preyence  ot  oxidising  ngentx.  Al  ifl  ereitf
i>»idi»ml  by  nater  on  thr i.urla<*,  but  Ihr  tliin  .on Ling  of  uluniinn  iornied prevents

idiwd  (A1.P3  being  (onned).  The  oxidation  in
[or  for)  formed  by  threads
It  pointed  out  by  Cans  in

letol. ThiB

86  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

based  on  the  decomposition  of  the  above-mentioned  compound  of
sodium  and  aluminium  chlorides  by  metallic  sodiam.  The  oompoand
is  obtained  by  passing  the  vapour  of  aluminium  chloride  (evolved  from
a  mixture  of  alumina,  extracted  from  bauxite  or  cryolite,  with
charcoal  ignited  in  a  stream  of  chlorine)  over  red-hot  salt,  when  the
compound  AINaCl4  is  itself  volatilised,  and  may  in  this  manner  be
obtained  pure.  A  mixture  of  this  compound  with  salt  and  fluor  spar,
or  with  cryolite,  is  heated  with  a  certain  excess  of  sodium,  cut  into
small  lumps.  C)n  a  large  scale  this  operation  is  carried  on  in  special
furnaces  with  a  small  access  of  air  and  at  a  high  temperature*  The  de-
composition takes  place  chiefly  according  to  the  equation  Na AICI4  +  3Na
=  4NaCl  +  Al.  Neither  charcoal  nor  zinc  will  reduce  the  oxygen
compounds  of  aluminium  ;  even  sodium  and  potassium  do  not  act  on
alumina.  Moreover,  metallic  aluminium,  like  magnesium,  is  able  to
reduce  even  the  metals  of  the  alkalis  from  their  oxygen  compounds.
This  is  connected  with  the  fact  that  the  atom  of  oxygen  evolves
more  heat  in  combining  with  Al  (and  Mg)  than  it  does  in  combining  with
other  metals  :  whilst  on  the  other  hand,  chlorine  (and  the  other  halo-
gens) evolve  more  heat  in  combining  with  the  metals  of  the  alkalis.**^
Since  the  close  of  the  eighties  the  metallurgy  of  aluminium  has
taken  a  new  direction,  based  upon  the  action  of  an  electric  current
upon  cryolite  at  a  high  temperature,''^  and  the  solution  of  oxide  of
aluminium  (obtained  from  bauxite  or  in  the  form  of  corundum)  in
it ;  under  these  conditions  metallic  aluminium  is  reduced  at  the
negative  pole  (cathode)  in  a  sufficiently  pure  state,  and  if  the  cathode
be  copper,  forms  alloys  with  it.  Such  are  Hall's  and  Cowle's  (both  in
the  United  States)  and  the  Neuhausen  process  (where  the  current  is
obtained  from  a  dynamo  worked  by  the  Falls  of  the  Rhine  at  Schafif-

f urther  action.  In  ike  eourMe  of  twelve  liourK  nitric  ticid  sp.  ^.  1*383  dissolved  at  17^
aliout  20  grniH.  of  aluniiniiim  (containing  only  a  Hmall  amonnt  of  Si,  l  —  J  p.c.)  from  a  sq.
metre  of  fturfa<.'e  {Jm  Rouart,  1891).

•'»'' »''  In  ad<iition  to  the  data  piven  in  Chapters  XI.,  XIll.,  and  in  Chapter  XV.,  Note  19,
the  following  are  the  aniountn  of  heat  in  thouHandH  of  unitn,  evolved  in  the  formation  of
the  oxides  and  chloridcK  from  the  metalH  taken  in  gram-atomic  quantities :

Na-^O  100 ;  MgO  140*  ;  ^  Al.,,05  120*  ;  ^  FeoO.-,  «»* ;
Na.,Clo  19.5  ;  MgCL  151 ;  \  Al^jClo  107;  \  Fe^cie  64.

Tlie  asteriskft  following  the  oxidew  of  Mg,  Al  and  Fe  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
<>xi8ting  data  refer  to  the  formation  of  the  hydrates  of  these  metals,  from  which  the  heat
of  formation  of  the  anhydrous  oxides  may  easily  be  assumed,  because  the  heat  of
hydration  (for  example,  MgO-f  H.^O)  has  not  yet  l)een  determined.

^'  Cryolite?  under  the  action  of  the  current  at  about  1,000°  gives  off  the  vapour  of  Na
which  reduces  the  Al,  but  it  recombines  with  the  liberated  fluorine  and  again  passes  into
the  fuse<l  mass.  It  is  important  to  obtain  aluminium  at  as  Iowa  temperature  as  posaible,
but  the  action  proceeds  far  more  easily  with  the  solution  (alloy)  of  oxide  of  aluminium  in
cryolite.

hansen).  Aa  an  example,  we  will  deacrilw  (in  the  words  of  Prof.  D.  P.
KoDOvnlluflj  who  becAme  ncquaintcd  witL  this  jiroceas  at  the  Chicago
Exhibition),  Hall's  process  as  applied  near  Fittsbarg,  n/bere  it  gives
ftbout  ]/iW)  kilos  of  Al  a  daj.  An  iron  Imx  (about  1  metre  long  and
4  metre  wide),  provideirl  with  a  well  rammed  down  charcoal  lining,  ia
charged  with  a  mixture  of  cryolite  and  AI^Oj  (from  bauxite),  over
which  salt  is  strewn,  and  a  current  of  -"i.OOO  amperes  at  20  volts  is
passed  through  the  mixture.  The  anftle  h  composed  of  a  carbon  cylinder
(about  9  em.  in  dimnetei),  while  the  charcoal  lining  forms  the  cathode.
When  the  temperature  inside  the  box  ia  raised  to  a  red  heat  by  the
current,  the  mixture  fuses  and  the  Ai.jO^  begins  to  decompose.  The
Al  liberateil  collects  at  the  bottom  of  the  box,  whilst  the  oxygen
fvolved  bums  the  charcoal  anode.  When  the  decomposition  is  at
an  end,  and  the  resistance  of  the  mass  increases,  a  fresh  quantity  of
Al,Os  ia  added,  and  this  is  ci:mtinned  until  the  amount  of  impurities
accnmalated  in  the  fumiw:e  and  passing  into  the  metal  becomes  too
great."  •■'■

jVlnminium  has  a  white  cnlour  resembling  that  of  tin — that  is,  it  is
greyer  than  silver  and  has  the  feebly  dull  lustre  of  tin,  but  compared  to
tin  and  pore  silver,  alaminium  is  very  hard.  Its  density  is  267 — that
is,  it  is  nearly  four  times  lighter  than  silver  and  three  times  lighter  i

than  copper.  It  melts  at  an  incipient  red  heat  (fiOO"),  and  in  so  doing
is  but  slightly  oxidised .  At  the  ordinary  t«mpei'ature  it  does  not  alter
in  the  air,  and  in  a  compact  mass  it bams  with  great  difficulty  at  a  |

white  heat,  but  in  thin  sheets,  inti^i  which  it  may  be  rolled,  or  asa  very  '

fine  wire,  it  bums  with  a  brilliant  white  light,  since  it  forms  an  in-
fusible and  non-volatile  oxide.  Aluminium  itself  is  non-volatile  at  a
furnace  heat.  These  properties  render  Al  a  very  good  reducing  agent,
«nd  N.  N.  Beketotf  showed  that  it  reduces  the  oxides  of  the  alkali  !

metals  (Chapter  XTII.,  Not*  ''*'''').  Dilute  sulphuric  acid  has  scarcely
any  action  on  it,  but  the  strong  acid  dissolves  it,  espeeially  with  the  aid
of  heaL  Nitric  acid,  dilute  or  sti'Ong,  has  no  action  whatever  ou  it.  On
the  other  hand,  bydrochioric  acid  dissolves  aluminium  with  great  ease,

''  <'>•  Tfar  ciwt  of  working  this  proceut  cui  be  brought  ns  Inw  lu.  lIO  centa  per  lb.  or
■honl  ii  fL'L  \mr  kilo.  Id  England,  Cutner,  prioi  to  the  intTndutlion  of  the  electric
uiMhod,  obUimtd  Al  b;  loliiDK  a  mintDre  nl  1,-iOO  piuM  of  the  donUe  salt  NiiAlCI,,  000
put*  ot  cryolite,  and  850  parts  of  Nu.  and  obtained  about  130  partE  of  Al.  »o  that  the  cohI
ot  thia  ptocgaa  LH  aboat  1^  time  that  of  the  elec^c  meUiod.

Bncluier  fooDd  that  milphide  of  alnnuninin,  AI^Sj,  is  more  auitahle  lor  the  prepmbinn
of  Al  bf  the  electrolytic  method  than  A1]0],  but  aince  the  formation  of  Al.Sj  by  heating  '

a  mixtare  of  A^O;  and  oliarcool  in  nulphuc  vapour  pTooenlK  sith  diffloolty.  Gray  (1894)
proposed  to  prepare  Alj^j  by  heating  a  miitoiv  ot  charcoal,  (ulpbate  ot  alDminiuin,  and
u^OiD  dnoride. The  remltant  molten  miitaie  ot  NoF  and  ALjSj  giieti  alDmiaiiim
^Jjiaetlj  DDdsr  the  action  of  an  electric  current.  .

88  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

as  do  also  solutions  of  caustic  soda  and  potash. In  the  latter  cases
hydrogen  is  e  vol  veil.'®

Aluminium  forms  alloys  with  different  metals  with  great  ease.
Among  them  the  copper  alloy  is  of  practical  use.  It  is  called
aht minium  hron::e.  This  alloy  is  prepared  by  dissolving  11  p.c.
by  weight  of  metallic  aluminium  in  molten  copper  at  a  white
heat.  The  formation  of  the  alloy  is  accompanied  by  the  development
of  a  considerable  (quantity  of  heat,  so  that  it  glows  to  a  bright  white
hoat.  This  aUoy,  which  corresponds  with  the  formula  AICU3,  presents
an  exceedingly  homogeneous  mass,  especially  if  perfectly  pure
copper  be  taken.  It  is  distinguished  for  its  capacity  to  fill  up  the
most  minute  impressions  of  the  mould  into  which  it  may  be  cast,
and  by  its  oxtniordinary  elasticity  and  toughness,  so  that  objects  caft
from  it  may  be  hammered,  drawn,  (S:c.,  and  at  the  same  time  it  is  fine-
grainoil  and  exceedingly  hai*d,  takes  an  excellent  polish,  and,  what  is
ntost  important,  its  surface  then  remains  almost  unchangeable  in  the
air,  and  has  a  colour  and  lustre  which  may  be  compared  to  that  of  gold
alloys,  llenoe  aluminium  bronze  is  much  used  in  the  arts  for  making
sptjons,  watches,  vessels,  forks,  knives,  and  for  ornaments,  <fec.  No
less  import-iuit  is  the  fact  that  the  admixture  of  one-thousandth  part
of  aluminium  with  steel  renders  its  castings  homogeneous  (free  from
cavities)  to  an  extent  that  could  not  be  arrived  at  by  other  means,  nor
does  the  (juality  of  the  steel  in  any  respect  deteriorate  by  this  admix-
ture*, but  rather  is  it  improved.  In  a  pure  state,  aluminium  is  only
enipl<»y(Hl  for  sueh  objects  as  require  the  haftiness  of  metals  with
eoniparative  lightness,  such  as  telescopes  and  various  physical  appa-
ratus and  small  articles.

Aciu)rding  to  tlie  periodic  system  of  the  elements,  the  analogues  of
niagnesiunr  are  zinc,  cadmium,  and  mercury  in  the  second  group.  So
also  in  the  third  group,  to  which  aluminium  belongs,  we  find  its  corre-
sponding analogues  (jaUitihi,  indlnm,  and  thaUium, They  are  all  three

'•*  AluiniuiUiu,  wIrmi  lu-ated  to  the  high  t<'mpt*ratnre  of  the  electric  furnace,  dinsolvett
t'urhon  and  forms  an  alloy  which,  according  to  Moissau,  when  rapidly  treated  with  cold
hydrochloric  acid  leaven  a  coniix)und  CsAlj  in  the  form  of  a  yellow  cryHtalline  trans-
panMit  iH>wder,  sp.  gr.  '28G  [nee  Chapter  VIII.  Note  12  bis).  This  carbide  of  aluminium
C-,.V1|  corresiwndH  to  methane  CHi,  for  Al  replaces  H-  and  carbon  O2  or  H4,  that  is,  it  is
e(iual  to  three  molecules  of  CHi  with  the  substitution  of  twelve  atoms  of  H  in
it  by  four  of  Al,  or,  what  is  the  sauie  thing,  it  is  the  duplicated  molecule  of  ALO5  with
the  substitution  of  O^  by  C5.  And  indeed  C3AI4  under  the  action  of  water  forms  marsh
gas  and  hydrate  of  alumina:  C5AI4+ 12HoO-3CH4  +  4Al(OH)5.  This  decomposition
gives  a  new  aspect  of  the  synthesis  of  hydro-carbons,  and  quite  agrees  with  what  should
follow  from  the  action  of  water  ujKjn  the  metallic  carbides  as  applied  by  me  for  explaining
the  origin  of  naphtha  (Chapter  VIII.,  Notes  57,  58,  and  6U).  Frank  (1894)  by  heating  Al
with  carlxin  obtained  a  similar  although  not  c|uite  pure  compound,  which  (like  CaC2)
evolves  acetylene  with  hydrochloric  acid i.e.  probably  has  the  composition  AIC5.

ROHON.  ALtTHSIDM,  AND  THE  ASALOOOXTH  METAI.s

BO  rarely  and  sparingly  met  with  in  nature  that  they  eould  only  lie
discovered  by  means  of  the  spectroscope.  This  fact  shows  that  they
ai-e  partially  volatile,  as  sliould  be  the  case  according  to  the  property
of  their  nearest  neighbours,  the  very  volatile  zinc,  cadtnium  and  nier-
cary.  As  with  them,  in  gallium,  indium,  and  thallium  the  density  of
the  metal,  decomiiosnbility  of  compounds,  Ac,  rises  with  the  atomii;
weight.  But  here  we  find  ii  peculiarity  which  does  not  exist  in  the
second  group.  In  the  latter,  the  fusibility  increases  with  the  atomic
weight  of  magnesium,  i'.inc,  ciLdniiuni,  and  niercory  :  indeed,  the
heaviest  metal — mercury — is  a,  liquid.  In  the  third  group  it  is  not  so.
In  iirder  U)  understand  this  it  is  sufficient  to  turn  our  attention  to
the  elements  of  the  tui-ther  groups  of  the  uneven  aeries — for  inatance,
Ui  group  v.,  containing  phosphorus,  arsenic,  and  antimony,  or  to
group  VI.,  with  sulphur,  selenium,  and  tellurium,  and  also  to
group  V^II.,  where  chlorine,  bromine  and  iodine  are  situated.  In
alt  these  instances  the  fusibility  decreases  with  a  rise  of  atomic
weight ;  the  meraljers  of  the  higher  eeriec,  the  elements  of  a  high
atomic  weight,  fuse  with  greater  difficulty  than  the  lighter  elements.
The  representatives  of  the  uneven  series  of  group  III.,  aluminium,
gallium,  indium,  thallium,  forming,  as  they  do,  a  transition,  all  show
an  intermediate  behaviour.  Here  the  most  fusible  of  all  ia  the  medium
meuil  gallium,'*''',  ^hich  fuses  at  the  heat  of  the  hand  ;  whilst  indium,
thallium,  and  aluminium  fuse  at  much  higher  temperatures.

Zinc  (group  II.),  which  has  an  atomic  weight  65,  should  be  followed
in  group  III.  by  an  element  with  an  atomic  weight  of  about  (59.  It
will  be  in  the  same  group  as  Al  and  should  consequently  give  RjO,,.
BCI;t,  K,(SO,)2,  alums  and  similar  compounds  analogous  to  those  of
aluminium.  Its  oxide  shouKl  be  more  easily  reducible  to  metal  than
alumina,  just  as  zinc  oxide  is  more  easily  reduced  than  magnesia.  The
oxide  RjO,  should,  like  alumina,  have  feeble  but  clearly  expressed
basic  properties.  The  metal  reduced  from  its  compounds  should  have  a
greater  atomic  volume  than  zinc,  because  in  the  fifth  series,  proceeding
from  zinc  to  bromine,  the  volume  increases.  And  as  the  volume  of
zino  =  9*2,  and  of  arsenic  =  18,  that  of  our  metal  should  be
near  to  12.  Tliis  is  also  evident  from  the  fact  that  the  volume  of
aluminium  =:  11,  and  of  indium  =  14,  and  our  m^tal  is  situated  in
group  III.,  between aluminium and indium. If  its  volume  =  ll-6

fallible. That  the Iflmporatarp  of  raitoii rUw  on  both aideti  of  tiu  (silicon  in  Ten;

■nftuibl?:  evniuuiiatii.  900";  tiu,  S»U°:  lead,  SaB°|:  ui  it  sIki  doeB  in  group  III.,  *Urtiii|c
I  tan  gnUioni.  (or  indium  fuwn  Kt  1TU°.  leKB  OMuiy  tbim  gnUioia  bat  more  eiuiljr  than
^^||ttBBi  1904'  I. Aluminium  nlwi  (uh^»  u-il1>  gi-pnter  difficulty  tlisn  KMixnn.

90  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

and  its  atomic  weight  be  about  69,  then  its  density  will  be  nearly  6-9.
The  fact  that  zinc  is  more  volatile  than  magnesium  gives  reason  for
thinking  that  the  metal  in  question  will  be  more  volatile  than
aluminium,  and  therefore  for  expecting  its  discovery  ])y  the  aid  of
the  spectroscope,  <fec.

These properties  were  indicated  by  me  for  the  analogue  of  alu-
minium in  1871,  and  I  named  it  (see  Chapter  XV.)  eka-aluminium.
In  1875,  Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran,  who  had  done  much  work  in  spectrum
analysis,  discovered  a  new  metal  in  a  zinc  blende  from  the  Pyrenees
(Pierrefitte). He recognised its individuality and  difference  from
zinc,  cadmium,  indium,  and  the  other  companions  of  zinc  by  means  of
the  spectroscope  ;  but  he  only  obtained  some  fractions  of  a  centigram
of  it  in  a  free  state. Consequently  only  a  few  of  its  reactions  were
determined,  as,  for  instance,  that  barium  carbonate  precipitates  the  new
oxide  from  its  salts  (alumina,  as  is  known,  is  also  precipitated). Lecoq
de  Boisbaudran  named  the  newly  discovered  metal  (/allium. As  one
would  expect  the  same  properties  for  eka-aluminium  as  were  observed
in  gallium,  I  pointed  out  this  fact  at  the  time  in  the  Memoirs  of  the
Paris  Academy  of  Sciences. All  the  subsequent  observations  of  Lecoq
de  Boisl)audran  confirmed  the  identity  between  the  properties  of  gallium
and  those  indicated  for  eka-aluminium. Immediately  after  this  the
ammonium  alum  of  gallium  was  obtained,  but  the  most  convincing  proof
of all  was  found  in  the  fact that the density  of  gallium  although
first  apparently  different  (4*7)  from  that  indicated  above,  afterwards,
when  the  metal  was  carefully  purified  from  sodium  (which  was  first
used  as  a  reducing  agent),  proved  to  be  just  that  (5*9)  which  would
have l)een looked for in the analogue of aluminium  ; and,  what
was  very  important,  the  equivalent  (23*3)  and  atomic  weight  (69*8)
determined by the specific  heat  (008) were shown  by  experiment
to l)e such as would be expected. These facts confirmed the
universality  and  applicability  of  the  periodic  system  of  the  elements.
It  must  be  remarked  that  previous  to  it  there  was  no  means  of  either
foretelling the properties or even the existence of undiscovered
elements.  ^^

Much  more  light  has  been  thrown  on  that  element  of  the  aluminium

'•■^  Tlie  Kpectruiu  of  gallium  in  eharacteriHed  by  a  brilliant  violet  line  of  wave-length
-  117  uiilliontliH  of  a  millimetre.  The  metal  can  be  separated  from  the  solution,  con-
taining a  mixture  of  the  many  metals  occurring  in  the  zinc  blende,  by  making  use  of  the
following  reactions  :  it  is  prt>cipitated  by  sodium  carbonate  in  the  first  portions;  it  give«
a  sulphate  which,  on  lx)iling,  easily  decomi>o8es  into  a  basic  stvlt,  very  slightly  soluble
in  water ;  and  it  is  deposited  in  a  metallic  state  from  its  solutions  by  the  action  of  a
galvanic  current.  It  fuses  at  +  30 ',  and,  when  once  fused,  remains  liquid  for  some
time.  It  oxidises  with  difficulty,  evolves  hydrogen  from  hydroc-hloric  acid  and  from
potassimn  hydroxide,  and,  like  all  feeble  bases  (for  instance,  alumina  and  indium  oxide),

group  which  follows  after  cadininin  (its  position  in  the  periodic  afitem
it)  Iir.,  7,  that  IB,  it  is  in  group  11 1,  ia  the  7th  series).  This  is
iruiiuiii,  In,  which  also  occurs  in  smfttl  quantities  in  certain  zinc  orea.
It  WM  discovered  (1863)  by  Reich  ami  Richter  (and  more  fully  investi-
gated by  Winkler)  in  the  Freilierg  zinc  ores,  and  was  named  indinm
from  the  fact  that  it  gives  to  the  flame  of  a  gas-burner  a,  blue  colora-
tion, owing  to  the  indigo  blue  spet-tral  lines  proper  to  it.  The  equi-
valent (nrf  Chapter  XV.,  Note  I-5|,  specific  heat,  and  other  properties
of  the  metal  criiiHrin  Ihe  atomic  weight  lu  =  113.*"

Inasmuch  as  we  found  among  the  analogues  of  maj,'neaium  in
group  II.  a  metal,  mercury,  heavier  and  more  easily  reduced  than
the  rMt,  and  giving  two  grades  of  oxidation,  sii  we  sjiould  expect  to
find  a  metal  amon^  the  analogues  of  aluminium  in  gi'oup  III.  which
wonld  be  heavy,  easily  reduced,  and  give  two  grades  of  oxidation,  and
would  have  an  atomic  weight  greater  than  '200.  8uch  is  /halHiim.
It  forms  compounds  of  a  lower  type,  TIX,  besides  the  higher  unstable
type  TIX,,  just  as  mercury  gives  HgX,  and  HgX.  In  the  form  of
the  thallii!  oxide,  T!jO^,  the  base  is  but  feebly  energetic,  aa  would  be
expected  by  analogy  with  the  oxides  AljO^,  Ga.^Oj,  and  In^Oj,  whilst
in  tballons  oxide,  TL^O,  the  basic  properties  are  shaqily  defined,
H»  uiight  be  expected  according  to  tlie  properties  of  the  typo  RjO
(Chapter  XV.).  Thnllium  was  diacovered  in  1861  by  Crookes  and  l.y
I^uny  in  certain  pyrites.  When  pyrites  are  employed  in  the  manu-
facture of  sulphuric  acid,  they  are  burned,  and  give  besides  sulj>hurous
Kubydride  the  vapours  of  various  substances  which  accimpiiny  the
sulphur,  and  are  volatile.  Among  these  substances  arsenic  and
selenium  are  found,  and  together  with  them,  thallium.  These  sub-
stances accumulate  in  a  more  or less considerable  quantity in the

il  FuElj  fonn»  bn»iL-  h-UIx. Tlii'  Ujaruiidu  \f.  wtabte  :
■odslightljm  in  citustii:  uiuiitonia.
Pellenuion  I.

«*  The  vMK"ir  denait;  of  indiaiD  chloride.  InClj  (Note  SI),  deteniiin«l  by  Nilson  and
PrtlerBHD,  conflrma  tbia  nUimic  Height.  Indium  is  lu-paiBted  from  lino  uid  codmiam,
vitb  whirh  it  QCL-nni,  bj  Uking  advanUge  □{  the  [act  that  its  lifdrmide  ia  insoluble  in
amiDiiDM,  tUt  the  Botutiuna  o(  ita  salts  give  indinm  when  treated  with  linc  (hence  indium
is  diaanlTed  after  :'4ie  by  acids)  and  that  thejr  give  s  precipitate  iiith  hydrogen  sulphide
•veu  in  acid  aolationa.  Metallic  indium  ia  grey,  lias  a  xp,  gi.  of  Ti%  fusea  at  176°,  and
doe*  not  niidiie  in  the  air ;  when  ignited,  it  Brnt  gives  a  block  suboxide,  In^Oj,  then
ToUtilises  and  givea  a  brown  oiide,  IiijO;^  whose  aalta,  InX,,  are  also  farmed  bj  the
diKMt  action  of  aoids  on  the  metal,  hydrogen  being  erolTed.  Canntic  alkalis  do  not  act
on  indiDTD,  from  irhtch  it  is  evident  that  it  ia  leiiB  capable  of  forming  alkaline  cumpoonda
than  aluminium  la:  however,  with  potaasinman'daadiainlijdroiides.  aolutiona  of  indium
BAlta  give  a  ooloorlefiH  precipitate  of  the  hydroxide,  which  ifi  soluble  in  an  eXL-eits  of  the
alkali,  like  the  hydroxides  of  aluminium  and  line.  lU  nalU  do  not  crriiUJIise.  Nilaon
•lul  Pettoraaon  I168U).  by  the  action  of  HCl  upon  In.  obtained  volatile  ciyBtaUine,
InCl,,  and  by  tr<»ling  thia  compound  with  I

92  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

tubes  through  which  the  vapours  formed  in  the  combustion  of  the
pyrites  have  to  pass.  When  the  methods  of  spectrum  analysis  were
discovered  (1860),  a  great  number  of  substances  were  subjected  to
spectroscopic  research,  and  it  was  observed  that  those  sublimations
which  are  obtained  in  the  combustion  of  certain  pyrites  contained  an
element  having  a  very  sharply-defined  and  characteristic  spectrum —
namely,  in  the  green  portion  of  the  spectra  it  gave  a  well-defined  band
(wave-length  535  millionth  millimetres)  which  did  not  correspond  with
any  then  known  element.'*^

Under  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current  solutions  of  thallium  salts
deposit  the  metal  in  the  form  of  a  heavy  powder.  It  is  of  a  grey  colour
like  tin,  is  soft  like  sodium,  and  has  a  metallic  lustre.  Its  specific
gravity  is  11  8,  it  melts  at  290°,  and  volatilises  at  a  high  temperature.
When  heated  slightly  above  its  melting  point  it  forms  an  insoluble
(in  water)  higher  oxide,  TljOg,  as  a  dark-coloured  powder,  generally
however  accompanied  by  the  lower  oxide  TI2O,  which  is  also  black
but  soluble  in  water  and  alcohol.  This  solution  has  a  distinctly
alkaline  reaction.  This  thallmis  oxide  melts  at  300°,  and  is  easily
obtained  from  the  hydroxide  TIHO  by  igniting  it  without  access  of
air  (in  the  presence  of  air  the  incandescent  thallous  oxide  partly  passes
into  thallie  oxide).  Thallous  hydroxide,  TIOH,  crystallises  with  one
molecule  H.;0  in  yellow  prisms  which  are  very  easily  soluble  in  water.
Metallic  thallium  may  be  used  for  its  preparation,  as  the  metal  in  the
presence  of  water  attracts  oxygen  from  the  air  and  forms  the  hydroxide.
But  metallic  thallium  does  not  decompose  water,  although  it  gives
a  hydroxide  whicli  is  soluble  in  water.^^  ^''* All  the  other  data  for  the

•^  ThuUiuiii  was  aft«*rwttrdHfouiul  in  certain  micas  and  in  the  rare  mineral  crookesite,
crontaininj,'  lead,  silver,  thallium,  and  selenium.  Its  isolation  depends  ou  tlie  fact  that  in
tlic  presence  of  acids  thallium  forms  thallous  compounds,  TIX.  Among  these  eompouuds
the  chloride  and  sulphate  are  only  slightly  soluble,  and  give  with  hydrogen  sulphide  a
black  preci[»itate  of  the  sulphide  T1..,S,  which  is  soluble  in  an  excess  of  acid,  but  insoluble
in  annnonium  sulphide.

11  lib  The  best  method  of  prepairing  thallous  hydroxide,  TIOH,  is  by  the  decomposition
of  the  recpiisite  (juantityof  baryta  by  thallous  sulphate,  which  is  slightly  soluble  in  water;
barium  sulphate  is  then  obtained  in  the  precipitate  and  tluillous  hydroxide  in  solution.
This  solubility  of  the  hydroxide  is  exceedingly  characteristic,  and  forms  one  of  the  most
important  properties  of  thallium.  These  lower  (thallous)  comi)ounds  are  of  tlie  ijye
TIX,  and  recall  the  salts  of  the  alkalis.  The  salts  TIX  are  colourless,  do  not  give  a  pre-
cipitate with  the  alkalis  or  ammonia,  but  are  precipitated  by  ammonium  carbonate,
because  thallous  carbonate,  TI..CO3,  is  sparingly  soluble  in  water.  Platinic  chloride  gives
the  same  kind  of  precipitate  as  it  does  with  the  salts  of  potassium — that  is,  thallous
l)latinochloride,  PtTl.,(:i«.  All  these  facts,  together  with  the  isomon>hism  of  the  salts
TIX  with  those  of  potassium,  again  point  out  what  an  imi)ortant  significance  the  types
of  comiK)Unds  have  in  the  determination  of  the  character  of  a  given  series  of  substances.
Although  thallium  has  a  greater  atomic  weight  auid  greater  density  than  potassium,  and
although  it  ha?*  a  less  atomic  volume,  nevertheless  thallous  oxide  is  analogous  to
jiotassium  oxide  in  many  respects,  for  they  both  give  compounds  of  the  same  tji*,

BORON. ALLiMINIUM, .ASD THE ANALOGOUS METALS

chemical  and  physical  properties  of  thn-llium,  of  its  two  grades  of  oxida-
tion antl  of  their  corresponding  salts,  are  expressed  hy  the  position
occupied  by  this  metal  in  virtue  of  its  atomic  weight  Tl  =  204,  between
mercury  Hg  =  200.  and  lead  Pb  =  206.

Gallium,  indium,  and  thallium  belong  to  the  uneven  series,  and  tliei-e
should  be  elements  of  the  even  seri«s  in  group  III.  corresponding
with  ciilcium,  strontium,  and  barium  in  group  11.  These  ele-
ments should  ill  their  oxides  H.jOj  present  basic  characters  of  a  more
energetic  kind  than  those  shown  by  aluminiL,  just  as  calcium,
strontium,  and  barium  give  more  energetic  bases  thun  magnesium,  zinc,
and  cadmium.  Such  are  j/ttnuiii  and  ytterbium,  which  occur  in  a
rare  Swedish  mineral  failed  gadoVinite,  and  are  thei-efore  termed
the  gadoHiiite  metals.  To  these  belong  also  the  metal  linthanttin,
which  accompanies  the  two  other  metala  eerium  and  didi/mium  in
the  mineral  i^erU^,  and  it  therefore  belongs  In  the  cerite  metals.  All
tbeae  metals  and  certain  others  accompanying  them,  give  basic  oxides
RjOj.  At  first  their  formula  was  supposed  to  be  RO,  but  the
npptication  of  the  periodic  system  required  their  being  counted  as
elements  of  groups  III.  and  IV.,  which  was  also  confirmed  by
the  c]et«nDination  of  the  specific  heats  of  these  metals,'^  and  better

RX.  We  nu;  farUier  remiuk  that  UikUoati  fluoride,  TIF,  in  easily  solublE  in  wml«r  e,a
well  BH  UMHuns  eilicnflnoritl'-,  SiTI,Fg.  but  Uut  llmlloaB  cyanide,  TICN,  in  aparinglf
•ololiltf  in  wnter.  ThiB,  togethprwjth  Uie  sliglit  -olubilily  of  thallons  chloride,  TICl,  uid
solphala,  Tl.,SO,.  mdicatea  ui  luujuxy  between  TIX  lUid  tile  ults  of  silver,  AgX.

At  ngiuilK  ihe  higberuiide  or  the  ihatltc  onide,  TI^O,,  the  thulliDm  i>  trivilenl  in  it—
llut  ia,  it  fann<  componndH  at  cIih  type  TlXj.  The  hydroiide,  T10<OIl),  U  formed  by  ihe
•etion  of  hydrogen  peroiido  ou  Ihnllona  oiide,  or  by  the  MHioa  of  ikmrnoniit  on  n  bdId-
tion  of  tluJUo  chloride.  TICl-..  ]t  is  obtained  ui  n  broiru  iirvcipitute.  insoluble  in  wKter
bat  owily  aolnble  in  ■cid^  with  whicli  it  giTes  IhAlliu  mltg,  TlXj,  ThJlii^  ehl.iride,  which
it  obtained  by  raintioasly  betting  the  nietaJ  in  ».  atrsam  of  rlilorine,  torms  an  easily
fniibls  wbil«  nutm.  which  is  mlable  ui  water  and  able  to  port  with  two-tliirda  of  its
chlorine  when  heated.  An  oqueoui  solution  oF  this  aalt  yields  colourless  tryataJs  con-
Uioing  one  eqaivklent  of  water,  tt  is  evident  from  the  above  Ihnt  all  the  Ihallia  *alts
OOB  eonily  be  reduced  lo  thiUloUH  •ntlla  by  reducing  agents  sach  M  snlphnronn  anhy-
dride, Bine,  tie.  Beiides  these  mltx.  thallic  sulphate,  Tl.^BO^I^i.THjO.  Uixllic  nitrate,
TlfNO^l,*H,0.  «c..  are  known.  These  adW  ore  docomiwsed  hy  water,  like  the  ulto  of
many  fc«hle  haaic  metals — lor  example,  aluminium.

"  The  apocific  boat  of  cerium  dBlerminod  (IWO)  hy  me,  and  afterwards  I'oniirmed  by
HiDebrand,  corresponds  with  that  atomic  weighk  of  eerinm  according  tn  which  the  vnm-
poaition  of  two  oxidea  ahonld  be  Ce^O;  and  CeO,.  Hillebnuid  also  obtained  metallio
lonthoniun  and  didyminm  by  decompaaing  their  salts  by  a  galvanic  current,  and  lie
loaad  their  iipecific  beatii  to  be  near  that  of  cerinm  and  about  001,  and  it  is  therefore
justifiable  to  gii'e  them  an  atomic  weight  near  that  of  oeritun,  as  was  done  on  the  Uiaix
of  tlie  periodic  law.  Op  to  187D  yttrinm  oiida  was  also  giTen  the  fonnnla  RO.  Hai-ing
m-deterrnined  Uie  eqairnlent  of  yttrinm  oiide  (with  respect  to  water),  luid  foand  it  to  be
TI'G,  I  considered  it  necessary  to  oIm  ascribe  to  it  the  composition  VgOj,  becanae  then
it  talla  into  it«  proper  place  in  the  periodic  lystem.  If  the  equivalent  n!  the  oxide  to
■nttf  be  Tlil,  it  contain*  580  of  metal  per  Ifl  of  oxygen,  and  conseqaently  one  port  by
A  of  hydrogen  replace!  39'3  ol  yttrinm,  and  if  it  be  regarded  oa  bivalent  (oxide,

94  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMisrrRr

still  by  the  fact  that  Nilson  and  Cleve,  in  th&r  researches  on  tlie
gadolinite  metals  (1879),  discovered  that  they  contain  a  peculiar  and
very  rare  element,  scafuiiunh,  which  by  the  magnitude  of  its  atomic
weight,  Sc  ^  44,  and  in  all  its  properties,  exactly  corre^>onds  with  the
metal  (prexionsly  foretold  on  the  basis  of  the  periodic  ^stem)  ekabaron,
whose  properties  were  determined  by  taking  the  cerite  and  gadolinite
metals  as  forming  oxides  R^O,.^'

ROs  it  woold  not,  by  its  Atomic  weight  58*<V,  find  *  pUoe  in  the  second  group.  Bni
if  it  be  tAken  as  trirmlent — that  i&.  if  the  fonnnU  of  its  oxide  be  R^O^  and  salts  RXj —
then  Y  =  88,  and  a  portion  is  open  for  it  in  the  third  group  in  the  sixth  series  after  mbi-
diom  and  strontiam.  These  alterations  in  the  atomic  weights  of  the  cerite  and  gmdolin-
ite  metalH  were  afterwards  accepted  bv  Cleye  and  other  investigatcMrs,  who  now  ascribe
a  formula  R^O^  to  all  the  newly  discovered  oxides  of  these  metals.  But  still  the  poaitaon
in  the  periodic  system  of  certain  elements — for  example  of  holminm,  thulium,  samarium,
and  others— has  not  yet  been  determined  for  want  of  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  their  pro-
perties in  a  state  of  purity.

^  So,  for  example,  in  1A71.  in  the  Journal  of  tkr  Bussian  Phytioo-Chemical  Soeiriy
(p.  45)  and  in  Liebig's  Anttahn^  Supt.  Band  riii.  198,  I  deduced,  on  the  basis  of  the
periodic  law,  an  atomic  weight  44  forekaboron,and  Nil8<Hiin  1888 found  that  of  scandium,
which  is  ekaboron,  to  be  Sc  =  44*03.  The  periodic  law  showed  that  the  specific  grayity  of
the  ekaboron  oxide  would  be  about  8*5,  that  it  would  have  decided  but  feeble  basic  pro-
perties and  that  it  would  give  colourless  salts.  And  this  proved  to  be  the  case  with
scandium  oxide.  In  describing  scandium,  Cleve  and  Nilson  acknowledge  that  the  par-
ticular interest  attached  to  this  element  is  due  to  its  complete  identity  with  the  expected
element  ekaboron.  And  this  accurate  foretelling  of  properties  could  only  be  arrived  at  by
admitting  that  alteration  of  the  atomic  weights  of  the  cerite  and  gadolinite  metals  which
was  one  of  the  first  results  of  the  application  of  the  periodic  system  of  the  elements  to
the  interpretation  of  chemical  facts.  In  my  first  memoirs,  namely,  in  the  BnUetin  of
the  St.  Petersburg  Acadfiny  of  Sciences,  vol.  viii.  (1870),  and  in  Liebig's  Annalen  (/.  c.
p.  168)  and  others,  I  particularly  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  altering  the  then  accepted
atomic  weights  of  cerium,  lanthanum,  and  didymium.  Cleve,  Hoglnnd,  Hillebrand  and
Norton,  and  more  especially  Brauner,  and  others  accepted  the  proposed  alteration,  and
gave  fresh  proofs  in  favour  of  the  proposed  alterations  of  these  atomic  weights.  The  study
of  the  fluorides  was  particularly  important.  Placing  cerium  in  the  fourth  group,  the
composition  of  its  highest  oxide  would  then  be  CeO-j,  and  its  compounds  CeX4,  and  the
lower  oxide,  Ce^Os  or  CeX-.  Brauner  obtaine<l  the  fluoride  CeF4,H20  corresponding
with  the  first,  and  a  double  crystalline  salt,  8KF,'2CeF4,2H20,  without  any  admixture  of
compound  of  the  lower  grade  CeX-„  which  generally  occur  together  with  the  majority  of
salts  corresponding  with  CeX4.  It  will  be  seen  from'  these  formulae  and  from  the  tables  of
the  elements,  tliat  cerium  and  didymium  do  not  belong  to  the  third  group,  which  is  now
being  described,  but  we  mention  them  here  for  convenience,  as  all  the  cerite  and
ga<lolinite  metals  have  much  in  common.  These  metals,  which  are  rare  in  nature,
resemble  each  other  in  many  respects,  always  aceom[>any  each  other,  are  with  difficulty
isolated  from  each  other,  and  stand  together  in  the  periodic  system  of  the  elements;
they  have  acquired  a  peculiar  interest  owing  to  their  having  been  in  1870  the  objects  of
the  study  of  Mariguac,  Delafontaine,  Soret,  Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran,  Brauner,  Cl^ve,
Nilson,  the  professors  of  Upsala,  and  others.

The  cerite  and  gadolinite  metals  occur  in  rare  siliceous  minerals  from  Sweden,
America,  the  Urals,  and  Baikal,  such  as  cerite  (in  Sweden),  gadolinite,  and  orthite;  and
in  still  rarer  minerals  formed  by  titanic,  niobic,  and  tantalic  acids,  such  as  euxenite  in
Norway  and  America,  and  samarskite  in  Norway,  the  Urals  and  America,  and  in  a  few
rar«>  fluorides  and  phosphates.  Among  the  latter,  monazite  is  found  in  somewhat
considerable  quantities  in  Brazil  and  North  Carolina;  this  contains  the  i^sphate  of

The  brevity  of  tliis  work  aud  tLe  great  rarity  of  the  above-mentioned
elements  will  give  me  the  right  to  exclude  their  description,  all  the

C(!nai]i.CtfPO,(-Cej03P.iOn).higetliFr  with  <lid]'niiuiii,tli(iriutn  Mid  liuitl>aiiutu(u»<irdiii>!
Ut  W,  EiliMii  imd  Slwpleigti'B  uulysei),  and  is  Daw  used  lor  prepnring  that  miitiUK  of
Ihe  oiidn  of  tlic  rare  mtUit  (etpecially  ThO„C(^0,.Lii.p.'i,  ice),  which  is  emiJojed  for
ineandeimiit  burimrn  lAuer  Ton  WoUbnchl,  Ha  it  baa  bcma  found  bj  eiperiui^nt  that
Uu?H}  midc}]  wbcD  mispd  to  innuideimence  in  a  non-Jliiniaoa»  g&«  fljune^  gite  ti  far
more  brillinDt  flame  witb  a  smaller  consDDiption  of  ga«,  beeidea  being  anitalitp  for  anch
uon-lnminouB  gase*.  an  water  gas.  The  innDlBcienc;  of  material  to  work  upon,  and
tlw  ditGcnItjr  of  Mparating  the  oxideB  from  each  other,  are  the  chief  reiuDtia  why
tbe  oompoftitiou  of  tbu  oompauuda  of  tlieae  rai«  metals  iti  ao  ijn[>erfbctly  kuowii.
C«ite  ia  the  moat  aeceaaihie  of  theae  mineiwia.  Beaidea  ailioa  it  containa  muro
thui  SO  p.  c.  ul  the  uxideH  of  ceriniu,  lantbannni  (from  1  p.  c.l.  and  didfiiuDni.  The
demnpoetticm  of  iCa  powder  bj  aalphunc  acid  ^ri^ea  anlphatea,  all  of  which  are  anbibJc  iii
walM.  The  otber  luinerals  mentioned  above  are  aleo  deuomposwl  in  the  same  manner.
Ill*  aolution  of  unlpliatet  ia  precipitated  wiUi  frpo  oxalic  ■uid.  which  forma  saltainioluble
in  water  aud  diltite  ncida  with  all  tbe  write  and  'i^lnlJDit^^  uiidef.  The  otid«e  them-
■elvea  are  obtiuDed  by  igniting  the  onLlAtea.  Whim  ienitad  iu  the  air  the  oerinm
paaaea  troiu  It*  ordinary  oxide  C^jOj  intu  tlie  Lif{her  uiide  CbOj,  which  it  eo  feeble  a
baae  that  its  aaltt  are  decomposed  by  water,  aJid  it  ia  inaiiluhln  in  dilute  nitric  acid.
Theratore  it  is  alwayt  po««ib1e  to  remove  nil  tlie  cerium  aiide  by  repeated  ignitions  and
wlotionB  in  anlphnrie  acid.  The  fortbec  separation  nt  the  metnta  is  mainly  baaed  on
foar  method  a  employed  by  many  inveatigators.

(a)  A  Aoiation  of  the  mixed  aalta  ifiLrcated  with  an  excehriof  itnlidpotasainmBnIpliate.
Dooble  xallH,  anch  u  CenlSO,)s,3K..SOi,  are  tliua  formed.  The  gadolinite  melAla.
naiDBly  yttrium,  ytterbium,  and  erbinra,  then  remain  in  solution — that  ia,  their  doable
■alia  are  aoluble  in  a  aolntion  of  pataaainm  sulphate.  wliiEst  the  cerite  metali — namely,
eelimn,  lanthannm,  and  didyminm — are  precipitated,  that  ia,  their  donble  salts  are
ioBolDble  in  ■  uturatad  eolation  of  pota»duin  snlphate.  Thin  ordinary  mutliod  •>(
■eptrationH  however.  ap|i«ara  from  the  reaearchea  of  Harignac  to  be  ao  untmstworthy
that  a  cnnaidenibte  auioant  of  didymiam  and  (he  other  metala  remain  in  the  solnblH  pnr-
tion,  owing  to  tha  but  that,  although  indiTiduAUy  inaoluble.  they  are  diRiwlve'd  when
mixed  together,  TUuh  erbium  and  terbinm  orvur  bath  in  the  solution  and  precipitate.
NeverthelBiu,  lierylliuui.  yttrium,  erbium,  and  ytterbium  belong  to  the  aoluble,  and  acan-
dimti.  oeriiun.laRtbaiium.didynuum.and  thorium  to  the  inaolnble  portion.  The  insoluble
salt  of  muidiam.  for  example  li.e.  inaolnble  in  u  solution  of  potaasium  Bulphslel,  haa  a
composition  Sc,()JO,|j,aK,SO,.

(b)  The  oiidea  obtained  by  the  ignitinnof  the  oxaiateaare  diswilved  in  nitric  acid  (tlie
nitntes  of  the  cerite  nustala  easily  fonn  double  salts  with  thoae  of  the  alkali  met&ls,  and
aa  some — foreiaiuple.Uie  anunonio- lanthanum  salt — CTyatalliw  very  well,  they  ahuuldbe
■tndied  and  applied  to  the  analytical  separation  of  tliew  raetalaj,  tile  aolntion  ia  (bet)
ey^Kiraled  to  JrylieaH,  and  tlte  reaidue  fused.  All  nitrates  are  deatmyed  by  heat ;  tbone
nf  aloiniuinai  and  iron.  d:e..  rery  easily,  tlioae  of  the  cerite  and  gadolinite  metala  also
•wsilj'  (althoogb  not  to  euily  as  the  above)  but  iu  different  degrees  and  aequuiice;  sotliat
by  oarryinj;  on  the  decomposition  carefully  troia  the  bogiuuing  it  is  poaaible  to  destroy
the  uitnUe  nf  only  one  metal  wiUiont  touching  the  others,  or  leaving  them  as  inaolnble
baaic  aalta  This  method,  like  the  preceding  and  the  two  following,  mnst  be  repeated
mn  many  ae  wveoty  timea  to  attain  u  really  conatant  product  of  fixed  properties,  that
is,  one  in  which  the  decomposed  and  midecumpoMid  portiona  cunlain  one  and  the  same
aside. This  melbod,  dup  La  Berlin  ami  worked  out  by  Buuaen. baa  given  in  the  bauds  ol

1  and  Nilson  the  best  renultii,  enpecially  fur  tlie  iseparatiun  of  the gadotiuitt

I**— -*o  and  Nil
,  ytterbium
Aaolutioni
with  a  stni
ly  of  the  b

ly  of  the  bases  (fnotional  pi

ipitation)- Thus,  the  didyminm  hydniiide  is  Snt

J

96  PRINCIPLES  OF  -CHEMISTRY

more  as  the  principles  of  the  periodic  system  eiiable  manj  of  their
properties  to  be  foreseen,  and  as  their  practical  uses  (cerium  oxalate  is

precipitated  from  a  mixtare  of  the  salts  of  (lid3rmiam  aiid  lanthanum.  A  partial  sepa-
ration may  be  effected  h^^  repeating  the  solution  of  the  precipitate  and  fractional
precipitation,  but  a  perfectly  pure  product  is  scarcely  attainable.

{d)  The  formates  having  different  degrees  of  solubility  (lanthanum  formate  420  parts
of  water  per  one  of  salt,  didymium  formate  221,  cerium  formate  360,  yttrium  and  erbium
formates  easily  soluble)  give  a  possible  means  of  separating  certain  of  the  godolinite
metals  from  each  other  by  a  method  of  fractional  solution  and  precipitation,  as  Bunsen,
Bahr,  Cleve,  and  others  have  pointed  out.

(e)  Crookes  (1893)  took  advantage  of  the  fractional  precipitation  of  alcoholic  solutions
•of  the  chlorides  by  amylene,  and  by  this  means  separated,  for  example,  erbium,  terbium,
and  others.

(/)  Lastly,  oxide  of  thorium  ThOo  (Chapter  VIII.,  Note  59)  is  separated  by  means  of
its  solubility  in  a  solution  of  sodium  carbonate.

A  good  method  of  separating  these  metals  is  not  known,  for  they  are  so  like  each
other.  There  are  also  only  a  few  methods  of  distinguishing  them  from  each  other,  and
we  can  only  add  the  following  four  to  the  above.

•  The  faculty  of  oxidising  into  a  higher  oxide.  This  is  very  characteristic  for  cerium,
which  gives  the  oxides  Ce^Oj  and  CeO.»  or  Ce204.  Didymium  also  gives  one  colourless
oxide,  DigOj,  which  is  capable  of  forming  salts  (of  a  lilac  colour),  and  another,  according
to  Brauner,  Di.205  which  is  dark  brown  and  does  not  form  salts,  so  far  as  is  known,
and  (like  eerie  oxide)  acts  as  an  oxidising  agent,  like  the  higher  oxides  of  tellurium,
manganese,  lead,  and  others.  Lanthanum,  yttrium,  and  many  others  are  not  capable
of  such  oxidation.  The  presence  of  the  higher  oxides  may  be  recc^nised  by  ignition  in
a  stream  of  hydrogen,  by  which  means  the  higher  oxides  are  reduced  to  the  lower,  which
then  remain  unaltered.

**  The  majority  of  the  salts  of  the  gadolinite  and  eerite  metals  are  colourless,  but
those  of  didymium  and  erbium  are  rose-coloured,  the  salts  of  the  higher  oxide  of  cerium,
CeX4,  yellow,  of  the  higher  oxide  of  terbium,  yellow,  &c.  Thus,  the  first  metals  ob-
tained from  gadolinite  were  yttrium,  giving  colourless,  and  erbium,  giving  rose-coloured,
salts.  Afterwards  it  was  found  that  the  salts  of  erbium  of  former  investigators  contained
numerous  colourless  salts  of  scandium,  ytterbium,  itc,  so  that  a  coloration  sometimes
indicates  the  presence  of  a  small  impurity,  as  was  long  known  to  be  the  case  in
minerals,  and  therefore  this  point  of  distinction  cannot  be  considered  trustworthy.

•^  In  a  solid  state  and  in  solutions,  the  salts  of  didymium,  samarium,  holmium,  d'c,
give  characteristic  absorption  spectra,  as  we  i)ointed  out  in  Chapter  XIII.,  and  this
naturally  is  connected  with  the  colour  of  these  salts.  The  most  important  point  is,  that
those  metala  which  do  not  give  an  absorption  spectrum — for  example,  lanthanum,
yttrium,  scandium,  and  ytterbium — may  be  obtained  free  from  didymium,  samarium,
and  the  other  metals  giving  absorption  spectra,  because  the  presence  of  the  latter  may
be  easily  recognised  by  means  of  the  spectroscope,  whilst  the  presence  of  the  former  in
the  latter  cannot  be  <listinguished,  and  therefore  the  purification  of  the  former  can  be
-carried  further  than  that  of  the  latter.  We  may  further  remark  that  the  sensitiveness
of  the  si>ectrum  reaction  for  diilymiuni  is  my  great  that  it  is  possible  with  a  layer  of
solution  half  a  metre  thick  to  recognise  the  i>resence  of  1  part  of  did]rmium  oxide  (as
salt)  in  40,000  parts  of  water.  Cossa  determined  the  presence  of  didymium  (together
with  cerium  and  lanthanum)  in  apatites,  limestones,  lx)nes,  and  the  ashes  of  plants  by
this  nn^thotl.  The  main  group  of  dark  lines  of  didymium  correspond  with  wave-lengths
of  from  580  to  570  millionths  mm. ;  and  the  secondary  to  about  520,  780,  480,  &c.  The
chief  absorption  bands  of  samarium  are  472-480,  417,  500,  and  559.  Besides  which,
Crookes  applied  the  investigation  of  the  spectra  of  the  phosphorescent  light  which  is
emitted  by  certain  earths  in  an  almost  perfect  vacuum,  when  an  electric  discharge  isjpassed
through  it,  to  the  discovery  and  characterisation  of  these  rare  metals.  But  it  would  seem
that  the  smallest  admixture  of  other  oxides  (for  example,  bismuth  uranium)  00  powerfully

Uinragli  iwlntiona  or  pawden  nf  the  si
tixv  eleuiEnW,  bat  M  apectm  vary  witli
thiA  tnethod  ouinut  be  ooni^ideted  ah  trc
'  The  moat  importajit  point  of  iIibI
the  direct  ilelmniHation  of  Ihm  equin
of  tbe  oxide  by  weight  which  combineit  I
■ohTdrule,  80^,  tor  (he  lonnaticm  of  a  □
Aod  JiBM>lved  in  nitric  acid,  Bnlphnric  m
drTUeu  o«er  ■  water-bath  and  then  he
drice  off  the  eiceu  of  salpharic  acid,  bot
in  that  rue  not  be  perfectly  Boloble  in
and  of  theanhyilronBndphate^wecaD  G'
iiu  moat  tm*lworthy  figoros  in  this  ccn
<addt  TS'T  (Cftve;  according  to  my  dett

used  in  medicine^  and  didymiiim  oxide  in  the  manufacture  of  glass,  a.
Tiiixture  of  the  oxides  of  lanthanum  and  similar  metals  is  employed  for

luanenvCB  tlu-'ue  spectra  Liuit  thv  tanthunental  dirtinctiona  of  tb-i  oiidea  canuot  he  del«r-
mitied  hy  tllift  uicthod, B^HldrrH  which,  the  apectra  obtained  l>y  the  pasgngu  of  sparks
Its  are  determined  and  applied  to  dJutiiLguiMhing
the  temperature  and  elaaticity  (conceD (ration)
itworbhy.

□ctiou  of  individual  metallia  oiides  is  given  bj
Jcnl  ipilJi  reapect  to  waler — that  ia,  the  amount
!ike  water)  with  80  parts  by  weight  of  aulphurid
irmal  salt-  For  thia  purpose  the  DTi'de  it  weighed
id  is  then  abided,  and  the  whole  is  evaporated  to
ited  over  a  naked  Same  snffiaiently  strongly  to
loasuot  to  decompose  the  salt  (the  product  would
water);  then,  knowing  the  weight  of  the  oxide
dtheeqnivalentnftheoxide.  The  foUowingare
neotion :  scandium  oxide  IS'BS  (Nilson),  yttriam
-mination,  IBTl— Tl'e),  oeroaa  oiide— that  is,  the
ding  to  rarioQB  ioveatigators  (Bnnsen,  Brauner,
■nd  otbent)  from  lOS  to  111,  the  higher  oiide  of  cerium  from  85  to  87,  lanthanoin  oxide,
•cowding  to  Branner.  lOS,  didymium  oxide  (in  salta  of  the  ordinary  loner  form  of
(HddatioTi)  about  119  (Marignac,  Brauner,  dive),  samarium  oxide  about  llfl  (Cli^Te),
jtlerfiiBin  Diiile  ISl'H  (Nilun).  It  may  not  be  saperfluona  here  to  draw  attention  to  the
lad  that  the  eqnivolent  of  the  oxides  of  all  tlie  gadolinite  and  cerite  metals  for  water
disbribate  tliewaeliea  into  four  groups  with  a  nomewliat  constant  diftereoee  of  nearly  itD.
In  the  Srst  group  is  loaDdinm  oxide  with  equivalent  IS,  in  the  second,  yttrinm  oxide  7S,
in  the  tliird.  Luithanum,  uerium,  didyiuinm,  and  iiamaiium  oxides  with  tiqaivalent  aboot
im,  and,  in  tlie  fourth,  erbium,  ytterbiuni,  and  thoriam  oxides  with  equivalent  about  IHl.
o(  period  ia  nearly  JS.  And  if  we  ascribe  the  type  R^Oj  to  all
oxidea — that  is,  it  we  tnple  the  weight  of  the  equivalent  of  the  oiide — we  shall
difierence  ol  the  groups  nearly  eqaal  to  DO,  which,  for  too  atoms  of  the  metal.
le  ordinary  periodic  difference  of  4G.  If  one  and  the  same  type  of  oxide  KjOj  be
to  all  these  elements  (as  now  generally  a^^oepted,  in  many  cases  there  being
itly  Irostworthy  data),  then  the  atomic  weights  should  be  Sc  ^  41,  Y  i  86,
laS.  Ce  =  140,  Di  =  141,(Qsodymium  110.  praseodymium  111),  Sm  —  IBO,  ¥b  b  170,
also  terbium  117,  holmium  183,  nlphayttrium  1B7,  erbium  166,  thulium  170,  deoipiam  171.
It  ahoold  be  observed  that  there  may  be  instancea  of  basic  salts.  If,  lor  example,  an
element  with  an  atomic  weight  90  gave  an  oxide  RO^  but  salta  ROX],  then  by  tvunting
iti  oxide  as  Kfii  its  atomic  weight  wotdd  be  159.

JUI  the  point*  distinguishing  many  gadolinito  and  cerite  elements  havv  not  been
■nffifiently  well  eabbbli^ed  in  certain  cases  (for  example,  vith  decipium,tliu1iun],  hoi-
miom.  and  others).  At  present  the  most  certain  are  yttrium,  scandium,  cerium,  and
Untliannm,  In  the  case  ol  didyrniom,  lor  example,  there  is  still  much  that  is  doubtful.
Didymium,  diBcnvered  in  ISJfl  by  Hononder  after  lanthanum,  diflera  from  the  latter  in
ita  absorption  qwctrom  and  tbe  lilac-rose  «>loor  of  its  salta  Delafontiuno  {1878)  sepa-
rated aainariam  from  it.  Welsbach  showed  the,t  it  contains  two  particular  ciements,
neodyminm  (soiLa  blniah-red)  and  praseodyniiiun  (salts  apple-green),  and  Beoqaerel
(1887)  by  invBBligatiog  the  apeotra  of  cryHlala,  recognised  the  presence  of  eix  iiidi-
vidoal  elements.  Probably,  theretoru,  many  nf  the  now  recognised  elemeuta  contain  a
niixttu«  of  rarioQB  others,  and  as  yet  there  ia  not  enongh  cnnlirmalion  of  their  indiridn-
alily.  As  regards  yttrium,  scondiuui.  ceriam,  and  lanthanum,  which  have  been
eslablifhod  without  doubt,  I  Ihiok  that,  owing  to  their  great  rarity  iu  nature  and
chemiul  art.  it  would  be  nuperfluoua  to  describe  tliem  further  in  so  elementary
work  as  the  present.  Wa  may  add  tliat  Winkler  (1891)  obtained  a  hydrogen  compound
nf  lanthanum,  whow  mrnpoBitiau  (according  to  Branner)  is  I^Hj,  as  would  be  expected
VOL.  II.

u

1)8  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

giving  a  bright  light,  as  this  mixture  emits  a  brilliant  whit«  light
when  bronght  to  incandescence)  are  very  limited,  bj  reason  of  their
great  raritj  in  nature,  and  the  difficulty  of  separating  them  from  one
another.

from  the  composition  of  Na^H,  Mg^H.^.  Ac.  C.  Winkler  (1891),  on  redacing  CeO-^  witli
magnesiam,  also  remarked  a  rapid  absorption  of  hydrogen,  and  showed  that  a  hydride  of
cerium  J  CeH.2,  corresponding  to  CaH«  and  the  other  similar  hydrides  of  metals  of  the
alkaline  earths,  is  formed  (Chapter  XIV.,  Note'»>3).

BIUCON .

CHAPTER XVIII

OTHER KLEMEST3 OF THE FOURTH (iROUP

Cabbok,  which  (ifives  the  compounds  CH^  and  C<Jj,  belongs  to  the
fourth  group  of  elements.  The  nearest  element  to  carbon  is  silicon,
which  forms  tbe  compounds  SiH4  and  5iO,,  ;  its  relntioii  to  carbon  is
like  that  of  aluminium  to  boron  or  phosphorus  to  nitrogen.  As  carbon
composes  the  principal  and  most  essential  part  of  animitl  and  vegetable
substances,  so  is  silicon  alniist  an  invariable  component  part  of  the
rocky  furmationB  of  the  earth's  crust.  Silicon  hydride,  SiH„  like  CHj,
has  no  acid  properties,  but  silica,  SiOj,  shows  feeble  acid  properties
like  carbonic  anhydride.  In  u  free  state  silicon  is  also  a  non-volatile,
slightly  energetic  non-metal,  like  carbon.  Therefore  the  form  and
nature  of  the  compounds  of  carbon  and  silicon  are  'very  similar.  In
addition  to  this  resemblance,  silicon  presents  one  exceedingly  important
distinction  from  carbon  :  namely,  the  nature  of  the  higher  degree  of
oxidation.  Tiiat  is,  silica,  silicon  diox.ide,  or  silicic  anhydride,  SiOj  is
a  solid,  non-volatile,  and  exceedingly  infusible  substance,  very  unlike
carbonic  anhydride,  00.^,  which  is  a  gns.  This  expresses  the  essential
peculiarity  of  silicon.  The  cause  o£  this  distinction  may  he  most
probably  sought  for  in  the  polymeric  composition  of  silica  compared
with  carbonic  anhydride.  The  molecule  of  carljonic  anhydride  con
tains  COj,  as  seen  by  the  density  of  this  gas.  The  molecular  weight
and  vapour  density  of  silica,  were  it  volatile,  would  probably  correspond
with  the  formula  SiO,,  but  it  might  be  imagined  that  it  would  corre-
spond to  a  far  higher  atomic  weight  of  Si.Oj,,  principally  from  the
fact  that  SiH,  is  a.  gas  like  CH„  and  SiCl^  is  a  hquid  and  volatile,
boiling  at  fi?" — that  is,  even  lower  th&n  CCI^,  which  boils  at  76°.  In
general,  analogous  compounds  of  silicon  and  carbon  have  nearly  the
same  boiling  points  if  they  are  liqaid  and  volatile. ' From  this  it  might

'  Chlorotxnu,  CHCI3,  boils  at  60°,  ikiid  silicon  ailoiofonn,  SiHClj,  at  R4'';  xiJicnn
«thjl.  8i(C,HiJ,,  boilB  ul  about  IBO",  and  its  correspoiiding  carbon  oowpound,  CfCjH^l,,
at  aboDt  140°  ;  etbjl  oithosjjicste,  SilOCiHs)^,  "boils  at  100°,  and  i!tk;l  orthiKtutboDste.
C(OCA)«,  at  1M°.  Tlie  specific  volmncs  in  a  liquid  state— that  is,  those  of  Uie  mlinon
BBenlly  are  Hligbllf  gmtor  Uiaii  tliote  ol  the  carbon  conipannda;  lor

100  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMIiiTRY

he  f:xj>icted  that  silicic  anhyJride,  SiOj,  woald  be  a  gas  like  carbonic
anhydride,  whilst  in  reality  silica  is  a  hard  non- volatile  sabstauce,^^
and  therefore  it  mav  with  great  certainty  be  considered  that  in  this
condition  it  i.s  polymeric  with  SiO^,  as  on  polymerisation — for  instance,
when  cyanogen  passes  into  paracyanogen,  or  hydrocyanic  acid  into
cyanuric  acid  (Chapter  IX.)— very  frequently  gaseous  or  volatile
ftuliStances  change  into  solid,  non- volatile,  and  physically  denser  and
more  o^mplex  substances.^  We  will  tirst  make  acquaintance  with  free
silicon  and  its  volatile  compounds,  as  substances  in  which  the  analogy
of  silicon  with  carVion  is  shown,  not  only  in  a  chemical  bat  also  in  a
physical  sense. ^

«»rriple.  the  volumert  of  CCl4  =  94,  SiCli-Ui  CHCI5-8I,  SiHCl5=8a,  of  ClOCHa)^
]H0,  und  SirOC.'.,,H5.i4  =  201. The  corresponding  salts  hare  also  nearly  equal  specifie
vohimfri;  for  example,  C.'aCO^^  87,  CaSiO.-,  =  41. It  is  impossible  to  compare  SiO^  and
CO^,  U-CHU-^/i  their  jiliyhieal  states  are  so  widely  different.

'  I'*'  iJut  -liliea  fn:^.-**  aii(J  volatilises  -Moissani  iu  the  heat  of  the  electric  furnace,  aboot
iVtfH) ',  SiO^  in  al-^i  fNirtially  volatile  at  the  temperature  attained  in  the  flame  of  detonat-
ing ifH«i  ''Cmiier,  lhy*2j.

^  A  iirr*|)«;rly  of  interoombination  is  ob^^ervable  in  the  atoms  of  carbon,  and  a  facoltv
for  jiit«'n-oniljiiiution,  or  [)olyineri.-iation.  is  also  seen  in  the  nnnatorated  hydrocarbons
and  rnrlntu  coiufKiundiH  in  ;;t'neral.  In  silicon  a  proi>erty  of  the  same  nature  is  found  to
\>fi  partiruJarly  develop«:d  in  silica,  SiOj,  which  is  not  the  case  with  carbonic  anhydride.
Tlie  fiU-uJty  of  the  molecules  of  silica  for  combining  both  with  other  molecnles  and
amon)^  tti*riijs4*lves  is  exhibite<l  in  the  formation  of  most  varied  compounds  with  bases,
in  the  fr>rniation  of  hydrates  with  a  gradually  decreasing  proportion  of  water  down  to
anhydrouH  silica,  in  the  colloid  nature  of  the  hydrate  (the  molecules  of  colloids  are  always
conipU'x;,  in  the  formation  of  i)olynieric  ethereal  suits,  and  in  many  other  properties
whifli  will  }»•  considered  in  the  s<'quel.  Having  come  to  this  conclusion  as  to  the  poly-
niiTi«-  ntiit<-  of  KiWca  since  the  years  lft5()-186(),  I  have  found  it  to  be  confirmed  bv  aH
Hul'M-ijuent  re»earcheH  on  the  com]V)undK  of  silica,  and,  if  I  mistake  not,  this  view  b*-**
now  lM!i'n  v«'ry  generally  iu"<'epted.

'  It  was  ()nly  after  (Jirhardt,  and  in  general  subsequently  to  the  establislmient  of
the  true  atomic  w«?ights  of  the  elements  (Chapter  VII.),  tliat  a  true  idea  of  the  atomic
weight  of  silicon  and  of  the  com]V)sition  of  silica  was  arrived  at  from  the  fact  that  the
niolcciilfH  of  Si("l4,  SiF|,  Si(0('oH5)|,  &c.,  never  contain  less  than  28  parts  of  silicon.

The  (|uesiir)n  of  the  row  posit  ion  of  silica  was  long  the  subject  of  the  most  contta-

dicUtry  Htai^'ments  in  the  history  of  science. In  the  last  century  Pott,  Bergmanu,  and

Hcheele  distinguished  silica  from  alumina  and  lime. In  the  beginning  of  the  present

C4!ntury  Hmithson  tor  thf>  first  time  expressed  the  opinion  that  silica  was  an  acid,  and

the  minerals  of  nK'ks  salts  of  this  acid. Berzelius  determined  the  presence  of  oxygen  in

Hilicsa— namely,  that  8  j>arts  of  oxygen  wore  united  with  7  of  silicon. The  composition  of

lilica  was  first  expresscKl  as  SiO  (and  for  the  stike  of  shortness  S  only  was  sometimes

Tittim  insU'iMl). An  investigation  in  the  amount  of  silica  present  in  crystalline  minerals

lowed  Uiat  the  amount  of  oxygen  in  the  bases  bears  a  very  varied  proportion  to  the

Bonnt  of  oxygon  in  th<^  silica,  and  that  this  ratio  varies  from  2:1  to  1:8. The

lAio  1 :  1  is  also  met  with,  but  tin*  majority  of  these  minerals  are  rare. Other  more

OHunon  minerals  contain  a  larger  pro[K)rtion  of  silica,  the  ratio  between  the  oxygen  of

^*  bMM  and  the  oxygen  of  the  silica  IxMug  equal  to  1  :  2,  or  thcreabonta ;  such  are  the

aa^  Ufarad<HnteH,  oligoclasc,  talc,  <l'c. Tlic  higher  ratio  1  :  8  is  known  for  a  widely

L  Mries  of  natural  silicates — for  example,  the  fels[)ars. Those  silicates  in  which

if  oxygen  in  tlie  bases  is  e<iual  to  that  in  the  silica  are  termed  mononiicates  ;

RIUCON  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OP  THE  FOTTHTH  GHODP 101

Free  silicon  can  be  obtained  in  an  amorplious  or  crystalline  st&te.
Amorplious  silicon  is  produced,  like  aliuuiniuni,  by  decomposing  the
double  duoride  of  sodium  and  silicon  (sodium  ailicoBuoride)  by  means
ofsodium;  Nft.,SiFs  +  4Na  =  GNaF  +  Si.  By  treating  the  maHs  thus
obtained  trith  water  the  sodium  Uuoride  tuay  be  extracted  and  the
residue  will  consist  of  brown,  powdery  silicon.  In  oider  to  free  it  from
any  silica  which  might  be  formed,  it  is  treated  with  liydi-oHuoric  acid.
This  silicon  powder  is  not  lustrous  ;  wlien  heated  it  easily  ignites,  but
does  not  completely  burn. It  fuses  when  very  strongly  heated,  and

Ihvit  guu'iul  Limiulu  will  be  (RO).jSiOa  or  (B50s)j(Si0a)5.  Tbow  in  nliioh  the  ratio  ot
Ibe  oiygED  i«  eqnkl  to  1  ;  3  uro  termed  bitiliealei,  uid  their  geiiend  formolii  will  be
BOSiO,  ot  EiOs  (SiOj),.  Those  in  which  tho  rm  tin  is  1 :  8  will  be  tritiKcaia,  niiA  their
genenl  fOnonlA  (BO),(8iO,)3  or  (I^O,)^8iO,),.

In  tbeu  rannnlB  the  now  establiihed  compoHition  ot  SiOg— that  is,  that  in  which  the
itAomot  Si  =  38 — iflemployed.  Bereeliim,  who  mode  an  occoraLe  anAljeie  of  tbecompoEution
ol  telipu,  uid  recognised  il  m  a  IriiiilicBte  formed  bf  thp  unioo  ot  potiuBlDin  oxide  uid
■Inminii  with  silica,  in  just  the  aune  msnoer  as  Uie  aluma  ue  formed  b;  sDlphuriu  aaid,
gave  nlin  the  eome  fDnnnla  aa  solpharic  nnhydride— that  in,  SiOj.  lo  thin  cume  the
tonnal*  □!  felspu  nonld  be  exactly  aimilar  to  that  of  the  alums— tlint  is.  EAl(Si04).j,
UksUu-'slnua,  EAl(SO,|,.  II  the  composition  of  dtica  be  repreBenl(>d  ■»  SiOj,  the  Btom
of  nilicini  must  be  recognised  a»  eqiul  to  M  (if  O  =  18;  or  it  0  =  8,  ug  it  wna  before  tiUien
lobe,Si  =  31|.

Tba  [ormer  formnlB  ol  ailica,  SiO(Si^ll,)  uid  BiOi[Si  =  4a),  were  first  cbaneed  into
Ob  present  one,  SiO^Si  =  ae),  an  the  buiia  ot  tile  following  orgnmenlB :— An  eicoaa  of
■ili«  DuL-urs  in  nalnre,  itnd  in  ailieeoiu  rocliH  free  silica  ia  general] j  found  side  by  aide  with
the  (ilicates,  uid  one  ia  therefore  led  to  the  concluiion  that  it  haa  formed  acid  suite.
It  wonld  therefore  be  incorrect  to  coDaider  the  tri8iliciit«s  aa  noimal  aalle  of  silica,  (or
thej  contain  the  largeat  proportion  of  silica;  it  ia  much  better  to  admit  another  formula
with  a  smaller  proportion  ot  oxygen  for  silica,  and  it  then  appears  that  the  majority  of
minerals  are  normal  or  alightly  basic  aalta,  whiliit  eonie  of  the  minerals  predominating
in  nature  contain  an  excess  ot  silica — that  is,  belling  to  the  order  of  acid  Holla.

At  the  present  time,  when  thne  is  a  general  method  (Chapter  YII.)  lor  the  determina-
tion of  atomic  weights,  the  volumes  of  the  volatile  oompouiiiU  of  silica  show  that  its  atomic
weiglit  Si  —  38,  and  therefore  wlicA  is  BiO^,  Ttius,  for  example,  the  vaponr  density  of
bUcod  chloride  with  respect  to  air  is,  as  Diuuaa  showed  |1BS3),6'91,  and  hence  with  respect
lo  hydrogen  it  is  SS'G,  and  consequently  its  molecular  weight  will  be  ITl  (instead  of  ITO
aa  indicated  by  theory).  This  weight  contains  SB  psxts  ot  silicon  and  113  parts  of
chlnrinu.  and  as  an  atom  of  the  latter  is  equal  to  SB'S,  the  molecole  of  silicon  chloride  oou-
laina  EiCl^,  Aa  two  atoms  of  chlorine  are  eqnivalent  to  one  of  oxygen,  the  composition
of  dica  will  be  SiOi-that  iii,  the  same  as  stannic  oxide,  finO,,  or  titanic  oxide,  TiO„  and
the  like,  and  also  as  carbonic  and  Hulphurona  anbydridea,  COg  and  SOj.  But  ailica  bears
bat  little  physical  resemblance  to  the  latter  compounds,  wbilat  stannic  and  titannic
ozidei  resemble  ulica  both  physically  and  chemically.  They  ate  non-volatile,  crystalline,
■nsolnble,  are  colloids,  also  lonn  feeble  acida  liVe  silica,  /ie„  and  they  might  therefore  be
•ipeetod  to  form  analogous  compotmds,  and  be  iaomorphons  with  silica,  aa  Harignao
(1SS9J  found  aetnally  to  be  the  case.  He  obtained  stannoflaorides,  for  example  an  easily
■olnble  stroDtiara  salt,  HrSnFf,  SB/),  correaponcling  with  the  already  long  known  nilico-
Hoorides.  such  as  SrSiF,,  SH^O,  These  two  s»ltd  are  almost  identical  in  crystalline
form  (monOElinic  ;  angle  ol  the  prism,  83°  for  the  former  and  B<°  (or  the  latter;  inclina-
tion ol  the  aies,  10S°  46'  (or  the  hitter  and  lOS"  SO'  for  the  former),  that  is,  Ibey  an
isouorphons,  Wv  may  here  odd  that  the  spedflo  volume  of  silica  in  a  solid  form  is  SS^,
uid  of  staimlc  oxide  !1*6.

102  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

has  then  the  appearance  of  carbon/  Crystalline  silicon  is  obtained  in
a  similar  way,  but  by  substituting  an  excess  of  aluminium  for  the
sodium:  SNaaSiF^-f 4A1  =  6NaF  +  4AlF3  +  3SL  The  part  of  the
aluminium  remaining  in  the  metallic  state  dissolves  the  silicon,  and
the  latter  separates  from  the  solution  on  cooling  in  a  crystalline  form.
The  excess  of  aluminium  after  the  fusion  is  removed  by  means  of  hydro-
chloric and  hydrofluoric  acid.  The  best  silicon  crystals  are  obtained
from  molten  zinc  ;  15  parts  of  sodium  silicofluoride  are  mixed  with
20  parts  of  zinc  and  4  parts  of  sodium,  and  the  mixture  is  thrown
into  a  strongly  heated  crucible,  a  layer  of  common  salt  being  used  to
cover  it ;  when  the  mass  fuses  it  is  stirred,  cooled,  treated  with
hydrochloric  acid,  and  then  washed  with  nitric  acid.  Silicon,  especially
when  crystalline,  like  graphite  and  charcoal,  does  not  in  any  way  act
on  the  above-mentioned  acids.  It  forms  black,  very  brilliant,  r^;iilar
octahodra  having  a  specific  gravity  of  2*49  ;  it  is  a  bad  conductor  of
(»lectricity,  and  does  not  burn  even  in  pure  oxygen  (but  it  bums  in
gaseous  fluorine).  The  (mly  acid  which  acts  on  it  is  a  mixture  of  hydro-
fluoric and  nitric  acids  ;  but  caustic  alkalis  dissolve  in  it  like  aluminium,
with  evolution  of  hydrogen,  thus  showing  its  acid  character.  In
general  silicon  strongly  resists  the  action  of  reagents,  as  do  also  boron
and  carbon.  Crystalline  silicon  was  obtained  in  1855  by  Deville,  and
amorphous  silicon  in  1826  by  Berzelius.^  *»**

Silicon  hydnde,  SiH4,  analogous  to  marsh  gas,  was  obtained  first
of  all  in  an  impure  state,  mixed  with  hydrogen,  by  two  methods  :  by
the  action  of  an  alloy  of  silicon  and  magnesium  on  hydrochloric  acid,*
and  by  the  action  of  the  galvanic  current  on  dilute  sulphuric  acid,
using electrodes of aluminium, containing silicon. In these  cases

*  A  Hiiniliir  fi)rin  of  silicon  in  obtained  by  fusing  Si02  with  magnesiain,  when  slo.  alloy
of  Ki  and  Mg  in  alno  formed  (Gatti>nnann).  Warren  (1868)  by  heating  magnesimn  in  a
KtHMini  of  SiFt  obtained  Kilicon  and  itH  alloy  with  magneBiom.  Winkler  (1890)  found
that  MgaHi'  and  Mg.^Si  are  formed  when  SiO-j  and  Mg  are  heated  together  at  lower  tern-
jM^raturcH,  whilHt  at  a  high  t4>mi)eratare  Si  only  is  formed.

''I''*  It  iH  very  remarkable  that  Hilicon  decompoueH  carbonic  anhydride  at  a  white  heat,
fonnin^  a  wbite  maHH  which,  after  being  treated  with  {)otasHiam  hydroxide  and  hydrofluoric
acid,  l(Mi>  es  a  very  Htable  yellow  HubKtance  of  the  fonnula  SiCO,  wliich  is  formed  according
to  the  equation,  HSi  +  'iCO.j  —  SiO^  +  2SiC0.  It  in  also  slowly  formed  when  silicon  is  heated
with  carl>oni(;  oxide.  It  is  not  oxidised  when  heated  in  oxygen.  A  mixture  of  silicon  and
carbon  when  heated  in  nitrogen  gives  the  c(mipound  Si.^C.jN,  which  is  also  very  stable.
On  this  basis  Schiitzenberger  recognises  a  group,  C.^Si.^,  as  eai)able  of  combining  with  O9
and  N,  like  C.

Wt*  may  add  that  Troost  and  Hautefeuille,  by  heating  amorphous  silicon  in  the
vapour  of  SiCl4,  obtained  crystalline  silicon,  and  probably  at  the  same  time  lower  com-
])ound8  of  Ki  and  CI  were  temporarily  formed.  In  tlie  vai)our  of  TiCl4  under  the  same
conditions  crystalline  titanium  is  formed  (Le\'y,  1892).

^  This  alloy,  as  Beketoff  and  ChcrikofT  showed,  is  easily  obtained  by  directly  heating
finely  divideil  silica  (the  experiment  may  be  conducted  in  a  test  tube)  with  magnesiam

SILICON  ASD  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOt'BTH  OROltP lOS

olicon  hydride  is  set  free,  together  with  hydrogen,  and  the  presence
of  the  hydride  is  shuwn  by  the  fact  that  the  hydrogen  Bepftrated
igDites  gpontaneously  on  coming  into  contact  with  the  air,  forming
water  and  silica.  The  formation  of  silicon  hydride  by  the  actioTi
of  hydrochloric  acid  on  magnesium  silicitte  is  perfectly  akin  to  the
formation  of  phnsphuretted  hydn'geti  by  the  action  of  hydrochloric
acid  on  calcium  phosphide,  to  the  formation  ni  hydrogen  sulphi<le  by
the  action  of  acids  on  many  metallic  sulphides,  and  to  the  formation
of  hydrocarbons  by  the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  on  white  cast
iron.  On  heating  silicon  hydride — that  is,  on  [nasing  it  through  an
inctindescent  tube,  it  is  decomposed  into  silicon  and  bydi-ogen.  Just  like
the  hydrocarbons,  but  the  caustic  slkalis,  althougii  without  action
on  the  latter,  react  with  silicon  hydride  according  to  the  equation  :
SiH,  +  2KHO+H,0=SiKsO,  +  4Hj.

,Siii«ni  cA/finVf,  SiClj,  is  obtained  from  amurphou.s  anhydrous  silica
(made  by  igniting  the  hydrate)  mixed  with  charcoal,''  heated  to  a  white

powder  {Giapter  XIV.,  Note*  IT.  IMI.  The  anljeliuice  formed,  when  thniwa  into  ■  aolo-
tioD  o(  hrdrochlonc  k id,  bfoIvi-b  iipi>iiUn«>ualy  influomable  and  impme  BilicoD  hjiilridp,
■o  tbst  the  fleli-  inflnmnnibiiity  of  the  gm  is  euril;  demomtratt'd  by  thin  meuia.

In  18£O-60  Wuhlet  and  Buff  obtained  an  alloy  ol  ailicnn  aiid  magneHiutn  by  the
action  of  Midiiim  on  a  molten  mixture  of  magneHium  elilnride.  Hodium  iiili«>fluoriile.
and sodinm chloride. The Hodinm then iiimu1t«nHiia«ly reduces the Biti<»n and

Friedel  and  Ladenbarg  BDbsequently  prepared  eiliiMm  hfdride  in  a.  pure  ytate,  and
itbflrwed  that  it  ia  not  Bpontaneoaaty  inflammable  in  air,  at  tlie  ordinary  preaanre,  but  that,
like  PUj.  and  like  the  miitnre  prepared  by  the  above  methiida,  it  eauily  taken  tire  in
air  ander  a  lower  prenBure  or  when  mixed  wilh  hydrogen.  They  prepared  the  pare
ivmpoand  in  the  following  manner:  Wijhler  ahowed  tlial  when  dry  hydrochloric  acid
tpu  a  paaaed  through  a  nligbtly  heated  tnbe  containing  ailicou  it  forma  ■  very  volatile
coloiuleH  lirjaid,  which  fumes  atrongly  in  air;  this  ia  u  mixtnre  of  Bilieon  chloride,  SiCI,,
and  iHiam  chiorofuna,  KiHClj,  which  correapondB  with  ordinary  chlorofonn,  CHCI3.
Thii  miitore  ia  easily  separated  by  distillation,  becanae  silicon  chloride  lioiU  at  S7^,  and
ailican  efaloroliifm  at  S6".  Tlie  formation  of  the  hitter  wUl  be  understood  from  the
eqnalion  Si  +  SHCUH,  +  SiHCIj.  It  ia  an  aohydroua  inflammable  liquid  of  ^xriHo
grafity  I'd.  It  forms  ■  transition  product  between  SiHj  and  HiClt^nd  may  be  obtained
ttoia  silicDn  hydride  by  the  action  of  chlorine  and  SbClt,  and  ia  tlnelf  also  tninnfonned
into  silicon  chloride  by  the  action  of  chlorine,  Gattenuann  obtained  SiHCl;  by  heatiuj(
thp  maas  obtuued  after  the  action  (Note  41  ol  Mr  upon  ^\0„  in  a  atnwm  of  cMorine
(witli  HCl}  at  about  170^.  Friedel  and  Ladenbnrg,  by  acting  on  auhydroDs  alcohol  with
■iUcon  chloroform,  oljtsined  an  ethereal  compound  having  the  compoallion  SiHfOCHg),,.
This  ether  bails  at  ISS",  and  when  acted  on  by  sodium  diaongages  ailicou  hydride,  and
is  cMiVfMvd  into  ethyl  ortho«ilical«,  Si(OC,Hs)„  according  to  the  equation  4SiH<OC,Hj):i
•  HiH,  +  Ht)i(OCI.jHt|i  (the  sodium  aepina  to  be  uncluuiged),  which  ia  exactly  similar
to  the  decompoaitiou  of  the  lower  oiidea  of  phoMphoFoa,  with  the  evolution  of  phoa-
I^iiuetted  hydrogen.  If  we  designato  the  group  CgU],  contained  in  the  silicon  ethers  by
Kt.  the  parallel  ia  found  to  be  exact :

*I*eO(OH|j  =  PHj+  3PO(OU)s ;  t9iH(0Et)s  -  8iHi  +  8Bi(0EtJ..

'  The  amarphoQB  silica  is  mixed  witli  Ktarch,  dried,  and  then  charred  by  hcatjue  the
a  ft  elosed  crucible. A  rery  intimate  mJiturp  of  ailica  and  charcoal  la  llius

104  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

heat  in  a  stream  of  dry  chlorine — that  is,  by  that  general  method  by  which
many  other  chloranhydrides  having  acid  properties  are  obtained.  Silicon
chloride  is  puritied  from  free  chlorine  by  distillation  over  metallic  mercury.
Free  silicon  forms  the  same  substance  when  treated  with  dry  chlorine.
It  is  a  volatile  colourless  liquid,  which  boils  at  59°  and  has  a  specific
gravity  of  1*52.  It  fumes  strongly  in  air,  has  a  pungent  smell,  and  in
general  has  the  characteristic  properties  of  the  acid  chloranhydrides.
It  is  completely  decomposed  by  water,  forming  hydrochloric  acid  and
silicic  acid,  according  to  the  equation  :  SiCl4  +  4H20=Si(OH)4  -f  4HC1.'

formed.  In  Chapter  XI.,  Note  18,  we  saw  that  elemente  like  silicon  disen^^age  more
heat  with  oxygen  tlian  with  chlorine,  and  therefore  their  oxygen  compounds  cannot  be
directly  deconipoHed  by  chlorine,  bat  that  this  can  be  effected  when  the  affinity  of  carbon
for  oxygen  ih  utilined  to  aid  the  action.  When  the  mass  obtained  by  the  action  of  Mg
upon  SiO.j  it)  heated  to  800°  in  a  current  of  chlorine,  it  easily  forms  SiCli  (Gattermann) :
besides  which  two  other  compounds,  corresponding  to  SiCli,  are  formed,  namely:
Bi.jCle,  which  boils  at  145<'  and  solidifies  at  -1°,  and  SijClg,  which  boUs  at  about  218°.
These  HubKtances,  which  answer  to  corresponding  carbon  compounds  (C^H^  and  C^Hg),
act  upon  water  and  form  corresponding  oxygen  compounds;  for  instance,  SisCl«+4HsO
-  (HiOjHj.^  +  UHCl  gives  the  analogue  of  oxalic  acid  (C0.2H)2.  This  substance  is  insoluble
in  water,  decomposes  under  the  action  of  friction  and  heat  with  an  explosion,  and  should
be  called  ailiro-oxalic  acidj  Si.2H204  {see  later.  Note  11  *>'•).

7  Silicon  chloride  shows  a  similar  behaviour  with  alcohol. This  is  accompanied  by  a
very  characteristic  phenomenon;  on  pouring  silicon  chloride  into  anhydrous  alcohol  a
momentary  evolution  of  heat  is  observed,  owing  to  a  reaction  of  double  decomposition,
but  this  is  immediately  followed  by  a  powerful  cooling  effect,  due  to  the  disengagement
of  a  large  amount  of  hydrocliloric  acid — that  is,  there  is  an  absorption  of  heat  from  the
formation  of  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid. This  is  a  very  instructive  example  in  this
respect ;  here  two processes  occurring  simultaneously — one chemical  and  the  o^et
phyHical — are  divided  from  each  other  by  time,  the  latter  process  showing  itself  by  a
distinct  fall  in  temperature. In  the  majority  of  cases  the  two  processes  proceed  simulta-
neously, and  we  only  observe  the  difference  between  the  heat  developed  and  absorbed. In
acting  on  alcohol,  silicon  chloride  forms  ethyl  orthosilicate,  SiCl4  +  4fiOC2HA=4HCl
-^  Bi(OC2H5)4.  This  substance  boils  at  160°,  and  has  a  specific  gravity  0*94. Another  salt,
ethyl  metasilicate,  SiO(OC2H5)<2,  is  also  formed  by  the  auction  of  silicon  chloride  on  anhy-
drous alcohol;  it  volatilises  above  800°,  having  a  sp.  gr.  1*08. It  is  exceedingly  interest-
ing that  these  two  ethereal  salts  are  both  volatile,  and  both  correspond  with  silica,
SiOj :  the  first  ether  corresponds  to  the  hydrate Si(0H)4,  orthosilic  acid,  and  the
second  to  the  hydrate  SiO(OH)2,  metasilicic  acid. As  the  nature  of  hydrates  may
be  judged  from  the  composition  of  salts,  so  also,  with  equal  right,  can  ethereal  salts
serve  the  same  purpose. The  composition  of  an  ethereal  salt  corresponds  with  that
of  an  acid  in  which  the  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  a  hydrocarbon  radicle — ^for  instance,  by
C-^H}. And,  therefore,  it  may  be  truly  said  that  there  exist  at  least  the  two  silicic  acids
above  mentioned. We  shall  afterwards  see  that  there  are  really  several  such  hydrates;
that  these  ethereal  salts  actually  correspond  with  hydrates  of  silica  is  clearly  shown
from  the  fact  that  they  are  decomposed  by  water,  and  that  in  moist  sir  they  give
klcohol  and  the  corresponding  hydrate,  although  the  hydrate  which  is  obtained  in  the
residue  always  corresponds  with  the  second  ethereal  salt  only — that  is,  it  has  the
oompoaition  SiO(OH)<2 ;  this  form  corresponds  also  to  carbonic  acid  in  its  ordinary  salts.
This  hydrate  is  formed  as  a  vitreous  mass  when  the  ethyl  silicates  are  exposed  to  air,
owing  to  the  action  of  the  atmospheric  moisture  on  them. Its  specific  gravity  is  1*77.
9il4con  bromide^  SiBr4,  as  well  as  sUicon  bromoform,  SiHfirs,  are  substances  closely
g  the  chlorine  compounds  in  their  reactions,  and  they  are  obtained  in  the  same

SILICON  AND  THE  OTHKR  ELKMESTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  OHOUP 105

The  must  remarkable  of  the  haloid  compounds  of  silicuti  ia  sUvion
^tioridc,  Sip,.  It  is  a  gaseoua  substiiucc  only  liquefied  by  inteiiEe  cold,
— 100°,  and  is  obtained  (Chapter  X[.)  directly  by  the  action  of  hydro-
fluoric acid  on  silica  and  its  compounds  (SiO,  +  4HF=2H/J  4  SiFj),  and
also  by  heating  fluorspar  with  silica  (2CaF,,  +  3SiO;=l>CaSi03  +  SiF.i).''
Td  ordc^i'  to  prepare  silicon  fluoride,  sand  or  broken  glass  is  mixed  with
an  equal  quantity  by  weight  of  flu<jr8par  and  G  parts  by  weight  of
strong  sulphuric  acid,  and  the  mixture  is  gently  heated.  It  fumes
strongly  in  air,  reacting  with  the  aqueous  vapours,  although  it  is  pro-
duced frorc  silica  and  hydrofluoric  acid  with  the  separation  of  water.
It  is  evident  that  a  reverse  reaction  occurs  here;  that  is  to  say,
the  water  reacts  with  the  silicon  fluoride,  but  the  reaction  is
not  complete.  This  phenoinenoii  is  similar  to  that  which  occurs
when  water  decomposes  aluminium  chloride,  but  at  the  same  time
hydrochloric  acid  dissolves  aluminium  hydroxide  and  forms  the  same
aluminium  chloride.  The  relative  amount  of  water  present  (together
with  the  temperature)  determines  the  limit  and  direction  of  the
reaction.  The  faculty  *hiih  silicun  fluoride  has  of  reacting  with
water  is  so  great  that  it  takca  up  the  elements  of  water  from  many
substances — for  instance,  like  sulphuric  acid,  it  chars  paper.  Water
dissolves  ahout  300  volumes  of  this  gas,  but  in  this  cose  it  is  not  a
common  dissolution  which  takes  place,  but  a  reaction.  During  the  flrat
absorption  of  silicon  fluoride  by  water,  silicic  acid  is  separated  in  the
form  of  a  jelly,  but  a  certain  quantity  of  the  silicon  fluoride  also
remains  in  the  liquid,  becau.se  the  hydrofluoric  acid  formed  dissolves
the  other  part  of  the  silica "  and  forms  the  so-called  hydrnjluoBilicic

I  iodoform,  SiUIj,  boils  at  wiioat  )iW,  li&s  a.  specific:  gnritj  at  S'l,
t  muiner  a»  ailicou  diloTotonn,  ucid  it  funned,  to)^t)ier  wiib  siltcon  iodide,
D  of  a  mixture  i>f  hjdrogfiii  and  b^driodic:  acid  oa  beated  ailjcon.  Silieoii
.t  tbe  ordinary  Wmperatute,  f nainfj  DiC  abont  130° ;  it  may  bs  dUtilled  lu
DDic  luibjctride,  but  euily  tukea  fiie  iii  air,  and  behaTes  wilh  water  and
oUmt  Rsgenta  just  tike  (ilicun  chloride.  It  ma;  ho  obtained  by  the  direct  action  of  the
vainnu'cd  iodine  on  heated  silicon.  Beason  (lStll|  alw  obtained  aiCljt  (boils  at  1111°),
SiClA  (173^1,  and  SiClIs  (330°),  uut  the  colreaponding  bromine  compoandB.  All  the
halogen  componnda  of  Si  are  capable  of  abaorbiog  SNHj  and  more.  Besides  whicli
BeMoa  obtained  BiSCl,  by  heating  Si  in  the  vapour  of  chloride  of  ealphur;  Uiis
(ompcaod  melt«  at  74°,  boil*  at  185°,  and  gires  with  water  the  hydrate  of  SiO^,  HCl,
■DdH,S.

*  Tbii  property  of  calcium  fluoride  of  conTertlng  ulica  into  a  gas  and  a  vitieomi  fusible
•lag  of  caleinm  silicate  ia  freqaently  taken  odvan-tage  of  in  the  laboratory  and  in  practioe
ID  Older  to  remoTe  ailica.  The  aarae  reaction  is  employed  for  preparing  silicon  fluoride
oa  a  large  scale  in  the  manufacture  uf  hydro  Buosilicic  acid  (tile  sequel),

*  Tlie  amount  of  heat  developed  by  the  solntiaa  of  silicic  adi,  SiOjitH-,0.  in  lUjuooaB
hydrofluoric  acid,  aHFnH,0,  increases  with  the  mugnitude  of  2  lUid  nonnolty  equals
f  E,AOO  heat  miits.  where  z  varies  between  1  aud  «.  However,  when  z  =  10  the  n
amonnt  of  heal  is  develc^ed  (^«)l,fiOO  units),  and  beyond  that  the  am.
(Thomseo).

106  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

acid  :  H2SiF6=SiF4  +  2HF=SiH203  +  6HF— SH^O.  That  is  to  say,
a  metasilicic  acid,  SiHjOa,  in  which  O3  is  replaced  by  F,j.  Thi*
view  of  the  composition  of  hydrofluosilicic  acid  may  be  admitted,
because  it  forms  a  whole  series  of  crystallisable  and  well  defined
salts.  In  general,  the  whole  reaction  of  water  on  silicon  fluoride  may
be  expressed  by  the  equation  :  3SiF4  ^  3H20=SiO(OH)2  +  2SiHjF€.
Hydrofluosilicic  acid  and  silicic  acid  resemble  each  other  as  much,  and
difler  as  much,  in  their  chemical  character  as  water  and  hydrofluoric
acid.  For  this  reason  silicic  aci<l  is  a  feebler  acid  than  hydrofluosilicic
acid,  and  in  addition  to  this  the  former  is  insoluble,  and  the  latter
soluble,  in  water,*®  Hydrofluosilicic  acid  is  also  formed  if  silicic  acid
be  dissolved  in  a  solution  of  hydrofluoric  acid.  It  is  incapable  of
volatilising  without  decomposition,  and  on  heating  the  concentrated
acid  silicon  fluoride  is  evolved,  leaving  an  aqueous  solution  of  hydro-
fluoric acid.  This  is  the  reason  why  solutions  of  hydrofluosilicic  acid
corrode  glass.  This  decomposition  may  be  further  accelerated  by  the
additi(m  of  sulphuric  acid,  or  even  of  other  acids.  Hydrofluosilicic  acid,
when  acting  on  potassium  and  barium  salts,  gives  precipitates,  because
the  salts  of  these  metals  are  but  sparingly  soluble  in  water :  thus
2KX  +  H2SiF(,=2HX-hK2SiFG. The  potassium  salt  is  obtained  in

"*  III  reality,  however,  it  would  seem  that  the  reaction  is  still  more  complex,  becanse
the  aqueous  solution  of  silicon  fluoride  does  not  yield  a  hydrate  of  silica,  but  a  fluo*
hydrate  (SchifF),  Si.205(OH)F,  corresponding  to  the  (pyro)  hydrate  81203(011)2,  equ&l  to
SiO(OH).2Si02,  so  that  the  reaction  of  silicon  fluoride  on  water  is  expressed  by  the  equa-
tion :  5SiF4  +  4H.2O  -  aSiH.^Fe  4-  Si...O.->(OH)F  +  HF.  However,  Berzelius  states  that  the
hydrate,  when  well  washed  with  water,  contains  no  fluorine,  which  is  probably  due  to  the
fact  that  an  excess  of  water  decomposes  Sio05(OH)F,  forming  hydrofluoric  acid  and  the
conii>ound  Si.,0-(0H).2.  Water  saturated  with  silicon  fluoride  disengages  silicon  fluoride
and  hydrofluoric  acid  when  treated  with  hydrochloric  acid,  the  gelatinous  precipitate  being
simultaneously  dissolved.  It  may  be  further  remarked  that  hydrofluosOicic  acid  has  been
frequently  regarded  as  SiO.,.,GHF,  because  it  is  formed  by  the  solution  of  silica  in  hydro-
fluoric acid,  but  only  two  of  these  six  hydrogens  are  replaced  by  metals.  On  concentra-
tion, solutions  of  the  acid  begin  to  decompose  when  they  reach  a  strength  of  6H3O
per  HjSiFfl,  and  therefore  the  acid  may  be  regarded  as  Si(OH)4,2H<|0,6HF,  bat  the  cor-
responding salts  contain  less  water,  and  there  are  even  anhydrous  salts,  R<|SiFg,  so  that
the  acid  itself  is  most  simply  represented  as  H.^SiF^.

If  gaseous  silicon  fluoride  be  passed  directly  into  water,  the  gas-conducting  tal>e  be-
comes clogged  wntli  the  precipitated  silicic  acid.  This  is  best  prevented  by  immersing  the
end  of  the  tube  under  mercury,  and  then  pouring  water  over  the  mercury;  the  silicon
fluoride  then  passes  through  the  mercury,  and  only  comes  into  contact  with  the  wat^r  at
its  surface,  and  consequently  the  gas-conducting  tube  remains  unobstructed.  The  silicic
ticid  thus  obtained  soon  settles,  and  a  colourless  solution  with  a  pleasant  but  distinctly
acid  taste  is  procured.

Mackintosh,  by  taking  9  p.c.  of  hydrofluoric  acid,  observed  that  in  the  course  of  an

hour  its  action  on  opal  attained  77  p.c.  of  the  possible,  and  did  not  exceed  1^  p.c.  of  its

possible  action  on  (quartz  during  the  same  time. This  shows  the  difference  of  the

^structure  of  these  two  modifications  of  silica,  which  will  be  more  fully  described  in  the

sequel.

SILICON  AND  TUE  nTOER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOPHTH  r.nOUP 107

the  form  of  very  fine  oi^tahedra,  but  the  precipitate  does  not  form
quickly,  and  at  first  appeurs  as  a  jelly.  Nevertheless,  tlie  decomposi-
tioQ  is  complete,  and  it  is  taken  advantage  of  for  obtaining  their  corre-
sponding acids  from  salts  of  potassium.'"  **''

Silicon,  having  so  much  in  common  with  carbon,  ia  also  able  to
combine  with  it  in  the  proportion  given  by  the  law  uf  substitution,
that  is,  it  forms  a  carbide  of  silicon  CSi,  called  cnrbfirundiini  and
obtained  by  Miihlhiiuser  and  AcJieaon  in  the  United  States,  and  by
Mnissan  in  Pntuce(189l),  and  others,  by  reducing  silica  with  carbon  in
the  electrical  furnace  at  a  temperature  of  about  2500°  ",  I.e.  by  the
action  of  an  electrical  current  upon  a.  mixture  of  carbon  and  SiO^
with  NaCl.  After  treating  the  resultant  mass  with  acids  and  washing
with  water,  carborundum  is  obtained  in  transparent,  lustrous  gmins
of  B  greenish  color,  possessing  great  hardness  (greater  than  corundum)
and  therefore  used  for  polishing  the  hardest  kinds  of  steel  and  stones.
The  specific  gravity  is  alwut  3'1.  Carborundum  does  not  alter  at  a
red  heat,  does  not  burn,  and  apparently  approaches  the  diamond  in
its  properties.  (Moissan  obtained,  1894,  a  similar  very  hard  com-
pound for  boron,  BjC,  ap.  gr.  2'5.)

According  to  the  principle  of  substitution,  if  silicon  forms  SiH,,
a  series  of  hydrates,  or  hydroxy  I  derivatives,  ought  to  exist
corresponding  to  it.  The  first  hydrate  of  an  alcoholic  character
ought  to  have  the  composition  SiHg(OH)  ;  the  second  hydrate
SiHj(OH)j ;  the  third,  SiH<OH)j ;  "  i-''  and  the  last,  8i(OH),. The

labh  The  Dodiiuo  »»lt  in  tui  mciri-  soluble  iii  wster,  aui]  cryBtiilliBeB  tu  tlitt  heni^Diil
Bjnrtem.  The  numueHioni  aaJt,  UjjSiPq,  and  i.itlciuin  ault  lire  solnljlB  iii  watar.  Tlie
will  oF  bydniSDoiulicic  acid  mny  be  Dblained  nut  odI;  by  tbe  iwtion  ol  the  acid  on  baeoB
or  by  doable  deeuuipoutionfl,  bnt  also  by  the  ibction  of  hydroHnoric  mad  on  metollio
inl]Cftt««,  Solpbutic  aeid  decompouB  them,  with  evolution  of  bydroflaoric  moid  and
■ilioon  fluoride,  (wd  Uie  e&lts  when  beaied  btoWb  silicon  Hnoride,  luaviagiii  reaidae  of
melsUic  fluoride,  R,F,.

■■  See  Note  t  fain.  Probably  ScbiltieDberger  had  already  obtained  CSi  in  bis
reaeJU^heB  togetlmr  witb  other  ailicon  coni])ouiidH.  An  unOTphonH,  [em  hard  compoiuid
ul  the  BUD«  lUloy  ia  also  obtained  together  iFitb  tite  bard  tryHtaUine  CSi.

II  kb  Xhe  fnlloiring  con  si  deration  ia  very  important  in  explaining  the  natDTHot  the  lower
hydrato  wlliiJi  an  known  (or  silicon.  It  we  8nii[KMe  watet  bl  be  takeu  np  from  tbe  Grit
liydratea  {jost  as  lonniu  acid  ia  CH(OH|],  minut  water),  we  aball  obluin  (be  Yarions
lower  bydntns  correHponding  witb  xilicoD  hydride.  When  ignited  lliey  abonld,  like
lriio*{JinronB  and  bypopfaaspharouB  avida,  diiungage  silieon  bydride.  and  lenve  a  residiie
of  eilJM  behind —I.e.  of  the  oxide  cnireeponding  ta  the  higheat  hydrate — iaitl  as  organic
hydnten  ((or  eiample,  (orroic  acid  with  an  slkatil  form  carbonic  anhydride  a«  the  hlgheat
oxygen  compound.  Buch  imperfect  hydratei  of  wlieou,  or,  mote  correctly  speaking,  of
Hlicou  hydride,  were  flrit  obtained  by  Wolilet  (18  SB)  and  etudied  by  Geuther  (ISOG),  and
«(Te  named  after  their  characteristic  colouiB. (Sw  Note  0),

Leaeonr  is  a  white  hydrate  of  the  compontion  3iH(OH)i.  It  is  obtained  by  alowly
puaiug  the  Tapoor  of  ailicon  chloroform  into  cold  water:  BiHClx  +  SHjO<'SiH(OH),-fSHCl.
But  thi«  hydrate,  like  tlie  corresponding  hydrate  of  phaaphriroit  or  carbon,  does  not

- 1.

■:. :e.-Lc?-e  h  is  fijaal  toSiO^  +  ^H^O;  and  it
•:::." : >: \^-.'.T^r "ii  silicon  chloride,  when  all  four
.>  ■■.;..*:•.  :  v  lonr  hvdmxyl  groups. It  does  not,
.. -:  .f  -"!}.:-.  \'--  easilr  looses  i^urt  of  its  water.

>  ■  •-  :.:  ;  V..-.I  j: . i.::.  :a  the  fnf»e  >tateaiid  in  coinbinatinn

■> :  : ■  •>  ::.:. Trie  .omposition  of  most  of  the  i\K-ky

: : :.: ' > .  r..>: Thest-  silicious  cumponnds  are  sub-

.^  s. .....:.  :J:t.T  ;'TN»i«erties.  crystalline  forms,  and  rela-

::  .:■.: ::■:; i*re  ccMuprised  in  a  special  branch  of

X-  .  J.: -.  :■: .-iir:*.!!.  cc^nipounds i,  and  are  treated  of  in

^ >.  :r..\:.  ::.  lU'^ling  wiih  them  further,  we  shall

^  -■  >.  *  I'T •:.  .•:  :h«e  various  compounds. It  is  first

--  ::::.:  .^••s^^rij-rion  of  silica  itself,  espeoiidly  as

:  : :  «  .:h  :r.  :*ATure  in  a  separate  state,  and  often

>  xs.:> ■: -I.  kv  ::.rT.LATioriSw  calletl 'quartz." In  an  anhy-
-  .  .  >..■.-..  .'v.trs  ::.  irst  ^reaTest  variety  of  natural  forms  —

^  -  ■.,■.:•:'.  .:^>'^^\ss  LexaiTonal  prisms,  terminated  by

,\  ,  > "::.■.  ,rv>:Als  are  ivJc^urle^  and transparent,

ri  :<  i^  :  he  purest  form  of  silica. Pris-
.  ,  . — >  .  : \'  s  .  - .  s:-:".  >  :v.tTi:ne«  at  lain  considerable  size,  and

N .:.:::.:::  ;::A-h.i:.i^\'iliility.  great  hardne.ss,  and

v .; -. : .:  .:. :.-y ,-irt ust\i for  ornaments,  for  seals,

V ^ .,N ., v  .. ,  :'....  k  .r\S':.i*  ooloureni  with  organic  ma  rter  in

.  .  : ^:  -  ..  :».  rr.  ■:  v-f  :i>  wau-r. Tli**  ciitIk^ii  hydnite  of

■.:.::>  :  7:;:ii .i»  iii.  fHOOHi:  but  tlie  tiilii-oii

:  ^»A:^:.  I'SiH  OH  -,  pArtin^'  with  8H..0.  and

.  *• .  -  "...  ~:.i-..-i  ::.;i>:  N  an  anhydriile  :  all  the  liytinifrt*ii

V- .."•.•:■: ■:  !-i  :-.i:.'i *:«■.!.  i»o  nMiidiiiinp  liydrogi'Ui  lK*iiig

^ ■.  -  .:.:.*..".>.  u].::i.  nnii  hAs  the  coxnposi'tiim  Sj.ILO

.."-..■ ...■ i ».':..:,.  hviiriio  -SiO.. A  rollow  livdrute,
' "■ -  N .  .-..:..«■.:  \  :",  .ic::.mi  •■•f  hvtlnx^hhmV  arid  on  .111  allov

■  •  w

. "* ■  ■- ' .  : >  : -  .il"  u: s;,.H40-.. Most pn»liahly.  however.

""'  •■-..'. ; :^• ■■■•'.■>:■..*..  .i:.^i  >:.\iiil'»  in  :lif  same  relation  to  the  hy»lnit<*

^. •  ^  » .-...■.,.:.,  ^;  ..  : :!.,";  \.;:-.i:r  S.H  OH  -..  Uvau«*  tliis  very  simiily  expreesos

^'■' '■  " •; :■ '..•."■. 1.  ;;.;^'.3:>i -.i:!.. t]u- H«>.H.]ui with the loss of water.

*  '  ■ • ^^.^^ ^:H  OH  ■.. W}:,  1:  ilu-f  lowtT  hydrates  are  ij;mte<l  without

mV.'  ^!^  '1  '  " "' ^  "''-' ''"■'■■■'l^'"'  •'  ■■■*•'  liy-irou'ru.  silioon.  and  silica— that  is,  it  niay  be
MUjI^.p-,!  ;h.,, !l,.  y  :,.n:.  >.:.,..:,  hy.irio.- wlnVh  dtvomiH-.s«-s  into  silicon  and  hydnveui

iVmM!in,",'  ,V""i'  ;'"•  ''''"-l'^'"'"'*' 'ii'^i  hyi^.i-ho-pliorou.  atids  pve  phosphoric  icid  and
L,...  o 1  ''>"--^'-"  . Wli..n ij:nH..d  i„  air,  they  bum,  fonning  Mlioa. Thev  art'

k'iv,.  sili...r 7 '"'  *  ■"  '"■'■'"  ''"*  ''''*"  ^^*"''^*''^  «'*•'  alkalis  they  evolve  hvdroKvA  and

u..:u;::!:;:i\::;:::^^  ^^"o.  2SiK,03+H,o^-ou,.  They

from  earoZ-rT.v 'lb'-'*  "'i7-'^  *"''• '*"^  """^^  ^"^^■"- '^^"•>'  """'*  ''*'^'  ^"«^>-  diHtin-uisht^il
*o  tho  right  and  tl.,.  oir  '"'♦?"  V'  1*'*^"^''***'^  ^'«*'^'  '^"^^  '■'>f^»t«'«  "»!•  plane  of  polarisati
ttw  other  th..v  «n.  b.f/ I"i  '^'~'"  **"'  ""*'  "'*'  •"'"lihednil  faces  are  right  and

■•nictionofp;.h,rise^ 'u^r^Xn'T^^^^  ''  ^'^''•'" '^vantage  of  in  the  con-

trs. u„t,  „,th  this phynical  difference^ which  ie  naturally  dependent

ion
in

SILICON  AND  THE  OTHEE  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  GROUP J  09

contact  with  which  it  has  been  produced  has  a  brown  or  giej'ish  colour,
and  then  bearii  the  name  of  cairru/orin  or  miioki/  (/uarfz.  In  this  foi-m  it
ban  the  same  usee  eis  ro'^k  crystal,  especially  na  It  is  often  found  in  large
inassps.  The  same  minei'al,  frequently  occurs,  coloured  red  or  pink  hy
manganese  or  iron  oxides,  especially  in  aqueous  formations,  and  is
then  known  as  amethyiil.  When  finely  coloured  the  amethyst  is  used
as  n  precious  stone,  but  amethysts  most  frequently  occur  as  small
crystals  in  the  cavities  formed  in  other  rocky  formations,  ttnd  espe-
cially in  those  formed  in  silica  itself.  A  similar  anhydrous  silica
is  often  found  in  transparent  non-crystalline  mnsses,  having  the
same  specific  gravity  as  rock  crystal  itself  (2't>l>).  In  this  case  it
is  called  quartz.  Sometimes  it  forma  complete  rocky  formations,  but
more  often  penetrates  or  is  interspersed  through  other  rocky  forma-
tions, together  with  other  siliceous  ■compounds.  Thus,  in  granite,
ignartz  Ls  mixed  with  felspar  and  similar  substances.  .Sometimes  the
colouring  of  quartz  is  80  considerable  that  it  is  hardly  transparent  in
thin  sheets,  but  it  is  often  found  in  transparent  masses  slightly  coloured
with  various  tints.  The  existence  in  nature  of  enormous  masses  of  quartz-
proves  that  it  resists  the  action  of  wat«r.  When  water  destroys  rocky
formations,  the  siliceous  minerals  which  they  contain  are  partly  dis-
solved and  partly  transformed  into  clay,  ic.  But  the  quartz  remains
nntouchrd,  in  the  form  of  grains  in  which  it  existed  in  the  rocky
formation  ;  sometimes,  when  crushed,  it  is  carried  away  by  the  water
and  deposited.  This  is  the  nature  of  »o7ul.  Naturally,  sometimes
other  rocky  substances  which  are  not  changed  by  water,  or  only
slightly  acted  on  hy  it,  are  found  in  sand  ;  but  as  these  latter  are  more
or  less  changed  by  the  continuous  action  of  water,  it  is  not  unusual  to
find  sand  which  consists  almost  entirely  of  pure  quartz.  Common  sand
is  generally  coloured  yellow  or  reddish-brown  by  foreign  mineral  matter,
consisting  principally  of  ferruginous  minerals  and  clays.  The  purest
or  so-called  quartz  sand  is,  however,  rarely  found,  and  is  recognised  by
tlie  absence  of  colour,  and  also  by  the  test  that  when  sliaken  in  water
it  does  not  form  any  turbidity  :  this  shows  the  absence  of  clay  ;  when
fused  with  bases  it  forms  a  colourless  glass,  and  on  this  account  is  a
valuable  material  for  the  manufacture  of  glass.  Sands  were  formed  at
all  periods  of  the  earth's  existence;  the  ancient  ones,  compressed  by
strata  of  more  recent  formation  and  permeated  with  various  substances
(deposited  from  the  infiltrating  water),  are  sometimes  solidified  into

ou  k  oertiiii  diff»TBiii:i;

1  the  diHlribntioiiof  tb

e  molecules— IhsTO  18  not  onlj  no  obnecv.

khlr  diflerenue  ia  the  cb

ot  even  in  Iho  deuiitj  of  the  maas. Per-

tectljr  para  rock  nrjriai

aioel  invariabU  wiUi  respect  to  itn  »peuiflo

and  ucfQrate  (iBtciniii

•ktiona  made  by  SH-iiiheil  ou  tLe  specifle

gravity  nf  rnclt  iryttiiJ

show  tluit  lif  tlir  .:ry,l

1 be  free  from  Aukb)  it  la  very  eonslwit

an<l  i»'...i«J  U.  a-lW.

110  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

rock,  called  saiidstone,  composing,  in  some  places,  whole  mountain
chains,  and  serviceable  as  a  most  excellent  building  material,  on  account
of  the  slight  change  it  undergoes  under  the  influence  of  atmospheric
agencies,  and  on  account  of  the  facility  with  which  it  may  be  wrought
from  rocky  formations  into  immense  regularly-shaped  flags — the  latter
property  is  due  to  the  primary  laminar  structure  of  the  sand  formations
deposited,  as  above-mentioned,  by  water.  Many  grindstones  and  whet-
stones are  made  from  such  rocks.

Perfectly  pure  anhydrous  silica  is  not  only  known  in  the  con*
<lition  of  rock  crystal  and  quartz  having  a  specific  gravity  of  2*6,  but
also  in  another  special  form,  having  other  chemical  and  physical  pro-
perties. This  variety  of  silica  has  a  specific  gravity  of  2*2,  and  is
formed  by  fusing  rock  crystal  or  heating  silicic  acid.^'*»*«  Silicic  acid,
when  heated  to  a  dull  red  heat,  parts  entirely  with  the  water  it
<:on tains,  and  leaves  an  exceedingly  fine  amorphous  mass  of  silica  (easily
levigated,  but  difficult  to  moisten) ;  it  is  chamcterised  by  such  excessive
friability  that,  when  lightly  blown  on,  a  large  mass  of  it  rises  into  the
air  like  a  cloud  of  dust.  A  mass  of  anhydrous  silica  may  be  poured  in
this  way  from  one  vessel  to  another  like  a  liquid,  and  like  the  latter  it
takes  a  horizontal  position  in  the  vessel  containing  it.^^  Anhydrous
silica,  like  quartz,  does  not  fuse  in  the  heat  of  a  furnace,  but  it  fuses  in
the  oxy hydrogen  flame  to  a  colourless  glassy  mass  exactly  similar  to  that
formed  in  the  same  way  from  rock  crystal.  In  this  condition  silica  has
a  specific  gravity  of  2*2.*^  *>** Both  forms  of  silica  are  insoluble  in

i»  bii  Several  other  modifications  are  known  as  minute  crystals.  For  example,  there
is  a  particular  mineral  first  found  in  Styria  and  known  as  tridymite.  Its  specific  gravity
2'8  and  form  of  crystals  clearly  distinguish  it  from  rock  crystal ;  its  hardness  is  tlie  same
as  that  of  quartz — that  is,  slightly  below  that  of  the  ruby  and  diamond.

^^  There  is  a  distinct  rise  of  temperature  (about  4")  when  amorphous  silica  is
moistened  with  water.  Benzene  and  amyl  alcohol  also  give  an  observable  rise  of
temperature. Charcoal  and  sand  give  the  same  result,  although  to  aiess  extent.

*'  *•'•  Silica  also  occurs  in  nature  in  two  modifications.  The  opal  and  tripoli
(infusorial  earth)  have  a  specific  gravity  of  about  2*2,  and  are  comparatively  easily
soluble  in  alkalis  and  hydrofluoric  acid.  Chalcedony  and  flint  (tinted  quartzoae
concretions  of  aqueous  origin),  agate  and  similar  forms  of  silica  of  undoubted  aqueous
origin,  although  still  containing  a  certain  amount  of  water,  have  a  specific  gravity  of  2'6,
and  correspond  with  quartz  in  the  difficulty  with  which  they  dissolve.  This  form  of
silica  sometimes  permeates  the  cellulose  of  wood,  forming  one  of  the  ordinary  kinds  of
petrified  wood.  The  silica  may  be  extracted  from  it  by  the  action  of  hydrofluoric  acid,
and  the  cellulose  remains  behind,  which  clearly  shows  that  silica  in  a  soluble  form  (see
sequel)  has  permeated  into  the  cells,  where  it  has  deposited  the  hydrate,  which  has  lost
water,  and  given  a  silica  of  sp.  gr.  2*0.  The  quartzose  stalactites  found  in  certain  caves
are  also  evidently  of  a  similar  aqueous  origin;  their  sp.  gr.  is  also  2*6.  As  crystals
of  amethyst  are  frequently  found  among  chalcedonies,  and  as  Friedau  and  Sarrau  (1879)
obtained  crj'stals  of  rock  crystal  by  heating  soluble  glass  with  an  excess  of  hydrate  of
silica  in  a  closed  vessel,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  rock  crystal  itself  is  formed  in  the
wet  way  from  the  gelatinous  hydrate. Chroustchoflf  obtained  it  directly  from  soluble

SILICON  AND  TirE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  QEOnP 111

ordinary  acids,  and  even  when  they  are  in  the  state  of  powder,
alkalis  in  solution  Bi:t  very  slowly  and  feebly  on  them  ;  rock  crystul
offers  much  greater  resistanc'e  to  the  action  of  alkalis  thuji  the
powder  obtained  by  heating  the  hydrate.  The  latter  is  quite  solulile,
althouifh  but  tilowly,  iu  hot  alkaline  solutions.  This  last  property
appertains  in  a  greater  degi'ee  to  anhydrous  silica  having  a  specific
gravity  of  2'2  than  to  that  which  has  a  specific  gravity  of  '2-G.  Hydro-
fluoric acid  more  easily  transforms  the  former  into  silicon  fluoride  than
it  does  the  latter.  Both  varieties  of  silica,  when  taken  in  the  form  of
powder,  easily  combine  with  bases,  forming,  on  being  fused  with
an  alkali,  a  vitreous  slag,  which  is  a  salt  corresponding  with  silica.
Glass  is  such  a  salt,  formed  of  alkalis  and  alkaline  earthy  bases  ;  if
the  glass  does  not  contain  any  of  the  latter — that  is,  if  only  alkaline
glaKS  be  taken— a  mass  soluble  in  water  is  obtained.  In  order  to  obtain
fiuch  toluble  gla»s,  potassium  or  sodium  carbonates,  or  better  a  mixture
of  the  two  (fusion  mixture),  is  fused  with  tine  sand.  A  still  better
and  further  saturation  of  the  alkali.s  with  silica  is  effected  by  the  action
of  alkaline  solutions  on  the  silicon  hydrate  met  with  in  nature;  for
instance,  an  alkaline  solution  is  often  made  use  of  to  act  on  the  so-
called  (W;i<iifi,  or  collection  of  siliceous  skeletons  of  the  lowest  micro-
scopical infusoria,  which  is  sometimes  found  in  considerable  layers  in
the  form  of  a  sandy  mass.  Tripoli  is  used  for  polishing,  not  only  on
account  of  the  considerable  liardness  of  the  silica,  but  also  because
the  microscopic  bodies  of  the  infusoria  have  a  pointed  shape,  which,
however,  is  not  angular,  so  that  they  do  not  scratch  metals  like
sand.'*  The  alkaline  solutions  of  silic&  obtained  by  boiling  tripoli  with
caustic  soda  under  pressure  contain  various  proportions  of  silica
and  alkali.'"^' In  order  that  it  may  contain  the  greatest  amount  of

Mlka.  Thus  Uiia  hydruUi  is  nble  tc>  fiimi  in>t  oiily  the  vnriutj'  having  llie  specific  gravity
S'3  bul  ■]■<)  the  nlore  atable  vaiHrty  at  ip.  gr.  Sfl ;  nud  both  tx'ieX,  nilh  u  bdihII  pm-
portiao  of  nlsr  and  in  a  pvrfectly  lUihydRinii  gtate  in  au  ninorphoaii  and  crystalline
(ono.  All  UiHe  facts  are  cipreesed  by  reeogniging  uilica  aii  ilimorplioUB,  aiid  their
ckoH  roust  be  liMked  for  in  a  diflereuce  iu  Ibu  degree  of  imlynwris&tion.

I'  Deposits  of  perfectly  white  tripoli  have  been  disuoTered  iie«r  Batooin,  and  might
fKDTe  of  wme  conunenial  imporbuic-e.

"  '•*•  Alkkliue  Bolutioua.  saturated  with  hIIIud  lUid  Imonn  as  solahlr  glau,  nre  pre.
pared  aa  a  large  scale  for  technical  purpuM's  by  the  action  of  potaSBiuin  (or  nodium)
hjdtiixide  in  a  steam  boiler  on  tripoli  nr  iufniiorUl  earth,  which  contains  a  laigu  propor-
lidU  ut  amorpbous  silica.  All  soluti«»ii  of  the  alksliDe  Biliuites  have  an  alkaline  reaction,
aud  are  eren  decomposed  by  carbonic  iLciil.  Tbuy  are  chleHy  nsed  by  the  dyer,  for  the
name  purposes  aa  sodium  aluininate,  and  also  tor  giving  a,  luudcess  and  polish  to  stncco
and  otlwr  omncntB,  and  in  general  tu  HubstiuK.'Es  which  cuntain  lime.  A  lump  of  cludh
whrn  iuunersed  in  soluble  ghuM,  or  better  still  wbeu  moUtened  irith  a  Bolution  and
afterwards  Hashed  in  water  (or  betl^^r  in  hydrofluosilicic  acid,  in  order  to  bind  together
Uut  Ine  alkali  and  make  it  insoluble),  becomes  eiceedingly  hard,  lows  its  friability,
1  cohesive,  and cannot bo leiigatod in water. This tnuiefonnation  is

112  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

silica,  silicic  acid  should  be  added  to  the  heated  solution.  Silicic
acid  is  formed  by  taking  any  solotion  containing  silica  and  alkali,
and  adding  to  it,  by  degrees,  some  acid — for  instance,  sulphuric
or  hydrochloric  :  if  the  experiment  be  carried  on  carefully  and
the  solution  be  concentrated,  the  whole  mass  thickens  to  a  jelly,
due  to  the  gelatinous  form  of  the  silicic  acid  separated  from  the
salt  by  the  action  of  the  acid. The  decomposition  may  be  expressed

by  the  following  equation:  Si(ONa)4  +  4HCl  =  4NaCl  +  Si(OH)4.
The  hydrate  separated,  Si(OH).,  easily  loses  part  of  the  water  and
forms  a  jelly,  the  whole  mass  gelatinising  if  the  solution  be  strong
enough.*"'

Neither  of  the  two  varieties  of  anhydrous  silica,  nor  the  various
natural  gelatinous  hydrates,  are  directly  soluble  in  water.  There  is,
however, a condition of  silica known which is soluble in water,

due  to  the  faot  that  the  hydrate  of  silica  present  in  the  eolation  acts  upon  the  lime,
forming  a  stony  mass  of  calcium  silicate,  whilst  the  carbonic  acid  previously  in  com-
bination with  the  lime  enters  into  combination  with  the  alkali  and  is  washed  away  by
the  water.

^^  The  equation  given  above  does  not  express  the  actual  reaction,  for  in  the  first
place  silica  has  the  faculty  of  forming  compounds  with  bases,  and  therefore  the  for-
mula SiNa404  is  not  rightly  deduced,  if  one  may  so  express  oneself.  And,  in  the  second
place,  silica  gives  several  hydrates.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  hydrate  precipitated
does  not  actually  contain  so  high  a  proportion  of  water  as  Si(0H)4,  but  always  less.
The  insoluble  gelatinous  hydrate  which  separates  out  is  able  (before,  but  not  after,
having  been  dried)  to  dissolve  in  a  solution  of  sodium  carbonate.  When  dried  in  air  its
composition  corresjxjnds  with  the  ordinarj-  salts  of  carbonic  acid — that  is,  SiH^Oj,  or
SiO(OH)2.  If  gradually  heatod  it  loses  water  by  degrees,  and,  in  so  doing,  gives  various
degrees  of  combination  with  it.  The  existence  of  these  degrees  of  hydration,  having  the
composition  SiHaOs/iSiO.,.,  or,  in  general,  wSiO.jwH^O,  where  nKn^  must  be  recognised,
because  most  varied  degrees  of  combination  of  silica  with  bases  are  known.  The
hydrate  of  Hilica,  when  not  dried  above  30°,  has  a  composition  of  nearly  H^SijOg
=  (H.>SiO.',)2Si0..i,  but  at  60°  contains  a  greater  proportion  of  silica — that  is,  it  loses  still
more  water ;  and  at  100°  a  hydrate  of  the  composition  SiH.^OsSSiO^,  and  at  250°  a
hydrate  having  approximately  a  composition  SiH2037Si02  is  obtained.

These  data  show  the  complexity  of  the  molecules  of  anhydrous  silica.  The  hydrates
of  silica  easily  lose  water  and  give  the  hydrates  (Si0.2)n(H.20)m,  where  m  becomes
smaller  and  smaller  than  ?i.  In  the  natural  hydrates,  this  decrement  of  water  proceeds
quite  consecutively,  and,  so  to  say,  imperceptibly,  until  n  becomes  incomparably  greater
than  in,  and  when  the  ratio  becomes  very  large,  anhydrous  silica  of  the  two  modifications
26  and  2*2  is  obtained.  The  composition  {Si02)uhH20  still  corresponds  with  2*9  p.c.  of
water,  and  natural  hydrates  often  contain  still  less  water  than  this.  Thus  some  opals
are  known  which  contain  only  1  p.c.  of  water,  whilst  others  contain  7  and  even  10  p.c
As  the  artificially  prepared  gelatinous  hydrate  of  silica  when  dried  has  many  of  the
proi)erties  of  native  opals,  and  as  tliis  hydrate  always  loses  water  easily  and  con-
tinually, there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  transition  of  (Si02)n(H20iii)  into  anhydrous
silica,  l)oth  amorphous  and  crystalline  (in  nature,  chalcedony),  is  accomplished  gradually.
Thin  can  only  be  the  case  if  the  magnitude  of  n  be  considerable,  and  therefore  the
molecule  of  silica  in  the  hydrate  is  undoubtt»dly  complex,  and  hence  the  anhydrous
silica  of  sp.  gr.  2*2  and  2'C  does  not  contain  Si02,  but  a  complex  molecule,  Sii«02N — that
is,  the  structure  of  silica  is  polymeric  and  complex,  and  not  simple  as  represented  above
by  the  formula  SiO.j.

lOLICOS  AND  THB  OTHER  ELEMEHT8  OF  THE  FOUBTH  GBOUI' 118

«vli4hh  giliea;  and  silicu  is  found  in  this  state  in  nature.  8ma1]
■jaaotities  of  soluble  giliau  are  met  with  in  all  waters.  Certain  mineral
springs,  and  especially  hot  springs —of  which  the  best  known  are  the
Geysers  of  Iceland  and  thosie  in  the  North  American  NutionHl  Park
(Yellowstone  Valley)— contain  a  considerable  amount  of  silica  in  solu-
tiou.  Such  water,  permeating  the  objects  it  meets  with  —for  iostance,
wood— penetrates  into  tbein  and  deposits  silica  inside  them,  that  is,
transforms  them  into  a  petrified  condition.  Siliceous  staliLctiles,
and  also  many  (if  not  all)  forms  of  silica  are  furoiL-d  by  such  water.
The  absorption  of  silica  by  plants  by  means  of  their  roots,  and
alao  by  the  lower  oi-ganisms  having  siliceous  bodies,  is  due  also  to
their  nourishing  themselves  with  tbe  solutions  containing  silicH
continually  formed  in  nature.  Thus,  in  plants,  in  the  straws  of
the  grasses,  in  hard  shave-grass,  and  especially  in  the  knots  of
bn.inl>oo  and  other  straw-like  plants,  a  considerable  quantity  of
silicu  is  deposited,  which  must  previously  have  been  absorbed  by  the
plants.

Silicic  acid  it;  a  colloid.  The  gelatinous  silicon  hydrate  is  its
hydrogeL,  the  soluble  hydrate  is  tlie  hydrosol  (Chapter  XII,)  Both
varieties  may  be  easily  obtained  from  the  alkaline  silicates  and  from
water-glass.  The  very  same  substances— that  is,  aqueous  solutions  of
soluble  glass  and  acid— taken  in  the  same  proportion,  may  produce
either  the  gelatinous  or  the  soluble  silica,  according  to  the  way  these
solutions  are  mixed  together.  If  the  acid  be  added  little  by  little  to  the
nlkaiine  nlicnfe,  with  continuous  stirring,  a  moment  arrives  when  the
whole  mass  thickens  to  a  jelly,  hydrogel  ;  in  this  c«se  the  silicic  acid  is
fonued  in  the  midst  of  the  olkaline  solution  and  becomes  insoluble.
But  if  the  mixing  be  done  iji  the  reverse  order — that  is,  if  the  soluble
glass  be  added  to  the  a«id,  or  if  a  quantity  of  acid  be  rapidly  poured  into
the  solution  of  the  salt— then  the  separation  of  the  silica  takes  place
in  the  midst  of  the  acid  liquid,  and  it  is  obtained  in  the  foi-ra  of  the
soluble  hydrate,  the  hydrosol.'^

■"  The  {iresenw  of  ui  eieena  of  acid  nidi  the  reteatioa  ot  thu  Bilicn  iii  tlis  solotioD,
bHsano  the  EeUtinouB  silica  obUined  in  the  above  nuniier,  bal  not  liputed  to  00° —
Ihiit  is  coutuniDg  more  water  thui  the  b^drdte  KuSiOj — iimcpre  MilaWeiownterwrntain-
ing  aciil  than  in  pniE  water.  Thi«  would  seem  to  indicate  a  feeble  teiidonFy  of  utica  to
f^onlune  with  amda,  and  it  might  even  have  been  imagined  that  in  pncb  a  Aolutioii  the
lijdntte  ol  silica  ia  held  in  combination  b;  an  esDeas  ol  acid,  liad  Grahun  not  oblcuned
•olnbla  silica  pertoctlj  tree  from  acid,  and  if  them  were  not  Bolutionii  of  eilica  free  from
■nj  acid  in  nktare.  At  all  eventa  a  tolerably  strong  lolation  of  free  HihcK  or  lilicie
acid  ma;  be  obtained  hvm  tolable  glass  diluted  with  water.  TIw  Bolutinn,  lievides  silica,
will  conlitin  wdiam  diloride  and  aiieioessol  the  acid  taken.  If  thin  aolnlion  rmtuiins  for
soma  time  eiposod  U>  the  air,  or  in  a  closed  vessel,  and  under  rarious  other  conditions,
it  istoand  that,  after  a  time,  insoluble  gelaiinous  silica  aepnrfttea  out — tluitis,  the  soluble
form  of  silica  is  onalable,  like  the  aolnbla  form  of  alamiiiR.  Tba  analogous  forms  ot
VOL.  II.

114  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  hydrosol  of  silica  prepared  by  mixing  an  excess  of  hydrochloric
acid  with  a  solution  of  sodium  silicate,  may  be  freed  from  the  admix-
tures both  of  hydrochloric  acid  and  salt,  sodium  chloride,  by  ineans  of
dialysiSf^'^  as  Graham  showed  (in  1861)  in  enquiring  into  the  nature  of
colloids  (Chapter  I.),  and  making  many  other  important  chemical  in-
vestigations. The  solution,  containing  the  acid,  salt,  and  silica,  all
dissolved  in  water,  is  poured  into  a  dialyser — that  is,  a  vessel  with  a
porous  diaphragm  surrounded  by  water.  Certain  substances  pass  more
easily  through  the  diaphragm  than  others.  This  may  be  represented
thus  :  the  passage  through  the  diaphragm  proceeds  in  both  directions,
and  if  the  solutions  on  each  side  of  the  diaphragm  be  equally  strong,
there  will  be  equal  numbers  of  molecules  of  the  soluble  substance
pjissing  into  either  side  in  a  given  time,  some  passing  quickly  and
others  slowly.  The  metallic  chlorides  and  hydrochloric  acid  belong  to
the  series  of  crystalloids  which  easily  pass  through  a  diaphragm,  and
therefore  the  hydrochloric  acid  and  sodium  chloride  contained  in  the
above-mentioned  dialyser  pass  from  the  solution  through  the  diaphragm
into  the  water  of  the  external  vessel  with  considerable  rapidity.  The
a(jueous  solution  of  colloidal  silica  also  penetrates  through  the  diaphragm,
but  very  much  more  slowly.  But  if  the  amount  of  the  substance
dissolved  is  not  equal  on  either  side  of  the  diaphragm,  the  whole
system  strives  to  atUiin  a  state  of  equilibrium  ;  that  is,  the  given
substance  penetrates  through  the  diaphragm  from  the  side  where  it
is  in  excess  to  the  part  where  there  is  a  smaller  quantity  of  it.  All  sub-
stiinces  which  are  soluble  in  water  have  the  faculty  of  penetrating
through  a  membrane  swollen  in  water,  but  the  velocity  of  penetration
is  not  equal,  and  in  this  respect  the  dialyser  separates  substance  like
a  sieve.  The  silica  pjisses  less  rapidly  through  the  diaphragm  than  the
sorlium  chloride  and  hydrochloric  acid,  so  that  by  repeatedly  changing
the  external  water  it  is  easy  to  effect  the  extraction  of  the  chlorine
compounds  from  the  dialyser,  which  will  finally  only  contain  a  solution
of  silica.  This  extraction  (of  HCl  and  NaCl)  may  be  so  complete  that
the  liquid  taken  from  the  dialyser  will  not  give  any  precipitate  with  a
solution  of  silver  nitrate.  Graham  obtained  in  this  way  soluble  silica
having  a  distinctly  acid  reaction,  which,  however,  disappeared  on  the
addition  of  a  very  minute  quantity  of  alkali  ;  for  ten  parts  of  silica  in
the  solution  it  was  sufficient  to  take  one  part  of  alkali  in  order  to  give  the

molybdic  or  tunjjstic  tuiidH  may  be  heated,  evai>orated,  and  kept  for  a  long  period  of  time
witliout  the  soluble  form  being  converted  into  the  insoluble.

''  Srf  Chapter  I.,  Note  18.  A  solution  of  water-glass  mixed  with  an  excess  of  hydro-
chloric acid  is  jx^ured  into  the  dialyser,  and  the  outer  vessel  is  filled  with  water,  which  is
continually  renewed.  The  water  carries  off  the  sodium  chloride  and  hydrochloric  acid,
and  the  hydrosol  remains  in  the  dialyser.

SILICON  AND  THE  OTHER  Et.EMENTS  (IF  Tire  FOtTITH  GROUP 115

liquid  an  alkaline  reaction,  so  slightly  energetic  are  the  acid  properties
of  eilicic  ucid.  The  solution  of  silica  ohtaineit  hy  this  method  becomes
gelfttiooua  on  standing,  on  being  heated,  or  on  evaporution  under  the
receiver  of  an  air-pump,  &c.  The  hydrosol  ia  triinsformed  into  the
bydrogel,  the  soluble  hydrate  into  the  gelatinous.

Thus  in  addition  to  the  gelatinous  form  of  the  silicic  acid,  there

exists  iilao  a  variety  of  this  substance,  Bolub

with  alumina. Such  variation  lu  properti

tions  with  regard  to  watei-  characterise

sabstonces  having  a  great  significance  in  nature.

sabstancBB is  eaiiecially  great among organic

ticulorly  in  those  classes  of  them  which  compose  the  principal  material

of  the  bodies  of  animals  anrl  plants. It  is  sufficient  to  mention,  for

water,  ax  ia  the  case

exactly  the  same  rela-

of other

The  nUBiber  of  such

ipounds,  and  por-

&  familiar  to  all  t
and  jelly. The  s

arpenter's  and  other
me  substance  is  also

ibjectA  together. In  a
mposition  of  hides  and

i  the

B ioBtance,  the  gelatin  which  L

katlli^  and  in  the  form  of  s

^BB^^D  '°  ^^^  solution  which  is  used  to  j

■  fWbiiliar  insoluble  condition  it  enters  into  the  cc
bones.  These  various  forms  of  gelatin  difier  i
different  varieties  of  silica.  The  property  of  forming  a  jelly  is  exactly
the  same  as  in  silica,  and  the  adhesiveness  of  the  solutions  of  both  sub-
btunces  is  identical ;  soluble  silica  adheres  like  a  solution  of  gelatin.
The  same  properties  are  again  shown  by  starcji,  rosin,  and  albumin,
and  by  a  series  of  similar  sub^jtauces.  The  diaphragms  used  in  dia-
lysis are  also  insoluble,  gelatinous,  forms  of  colloids.  The  Itodles  of
animals  and  plaots  consist  largely  of  similar  matter,  insoluble  in  water,
corresponding  with  the  gelatinous  or  insoluble  silicon  hydrate,  or  with
glae.  The  albumin  which  coagulates  when  eggs  are  boiled  is  a  typical
form  of  the  gelatinous  condition  of  such  substances  in  the  body.
These  slight  indications  are  suthcient  in  order  to  show  how  great  ia
the  signi^cance  of  those  ti'ansfor  ma  tions  which  are  so  well  marked
ia  silica,  The  facta  discovered  by  Graham  in  18G1-18G4  comprise  the
most  essential  acquisitions  in  the  general  association  of  these  pheno
mena  of  nature  in  the  history  of  organic  forms.  The  facility  of  transit
frum  hydrogel  to  hydrosol  is  the  tirst  condition  of  the  possibility  of
the  development  of  organisms.  The  blood  contains  hydrosols,  and  the
hydrugels  of  the  same  substances  are  contidned  in  the  muscles  and  tis-
sues, and  especiitlly  on  the  surface,  of  the  body.  All  tissues  are  formed
from  the  blood,  and  in  that  case  the  hydrosola  are  converted  into  hydro-
gels.'*  The  absence  of  crystallisation,  the  property,  apparently  under
the  influence  of  feeble  agencies,  of  passing  from  the  soluble  condition  to

Hill  It

>c  UiWKiytv

tJF  biillii.,

J

116  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRr

the  insoluble,  to  the  gelatinous  condition  of  the  hydrogel,  constitute
the  fundamental  properties  of  all  colloids.*^

Silica,  as  regards  its  salt  forming  properties^  stands  in  the  series
of  oxides  on  the  boundary  line  on  the  side  of  the  acids  in  just  such  a
place  as  alumina  occupies  on  the  side  of  the  bases — that  is,  aluminium
hydroxide  is  the  representative  of  the  feeblest  bases  and  silicic  acid
is  the  least  energetic  of  acids  (at  least  in  the  presence  of  water— that
is,  in  aqueous  solutions)  ;  in  alumina,  howeveft,  the  basic  properties
are  distinctly  expressed,  while  in  silica  the  acid  properties  preponderate.
Like  all  feeble  acid  oxides  it  is  capable  of  forming,  with  other  acids,
saline  compounds  which  are  but  slightly  stable  and  are  very  easily
decomposed  in  the  presence  of  water.  The  chief  peculiarity  of  the  silicates
consists  in  the  number  of  their  types.  The  salts  formed  with  nitric  or
sulphuric  acid  exist  in  one,  two,  and  three  tolerably  stable  forms,  but
for  acids  like  silicic  acid  the  number  of  forms  is  very  great,  almost
unlimited.  The  natural  silicates  in  particular  furnish  proof  of  this
fact ;  they  contain  various  bases  in  combination  with  silica,  and  for
one  and  the  same  base  there  often  exist  various  degrees  of  combination.
As  feeble  bases  are  capable  of  forming  basic  salts  in  addition  to  normal
salts — that  is,  a  compound  of  a  normal  salt  with  a  feeble  base  (either
the  hydroxide  or  the  oxide) — so  the  feeble  acid  oxides  (although
not  all)  form,  in  addition  to  normal  salts,  highly  acid  salts — that  is,
normal  salts  plus  acid  (hydrate  or  anhydride).  Such  acids  are  boric,
phosphoric,  molybdic,  chromic,  and  especially  silicic,  acid.

In  order  to  explain  these  relations  it  is  necessary  first  to  recollect
the  existence  of  the  various  hydrates  of  silica,  or  silicic  acids, ^  and  then

tlie  solutions  from  the  leaves  and  stems  penetrate  into  the  roots  and  other  parts  in  the
form  of  hydroBolH,  where  they  are  converted  into  hydrogels — that  is,  into  an  iusolable  form,
which  is  acted  on  with  difficulty  and  is  easily  kept  unaltered  until  thfe  period  of  growth
— for  example,  until  the  following  spring — when  they  are  re-converted  into  hydrosols,  and
the  insoluble  substance  re-enters  into  the  sap,  and  8er\-e8  as  a  source  of  the  hydrogels  in
the  leaves  and  other  portions  of  plauts-

*®  As  regards  their  chemical  composition  the  colloids  are  very  complex — that  is,  they
have  a  high  molecular  weight  and  a  large  molecular  volume—  in  consequence  of  which  they
do  not  penetrate  through  membranes,  and  are  easily  subject  to  variation  in  their  physical
and  chemical  pro})erties  (owing  to  their  complex  structure  and  polymerism  ?)  They  have
but  little  chemical  energy,  and  are  generally  feeble  acids,  if  belonging  to  the  order  of
oxides  or  hydrates,  such  as  the  hydrates  of  molybdic  and  tungstic  acids  (Chapter  XXI.).
But  now  the  number  of  substances  capable,  like  colloids,  of  passing  into  aqueous  solutions
and  of  easily  separating  out  from  them,  as  well  as  of  appearing  in  an  insolnble  form,  mnst
be  supplemented  by  various  other  substances,  among  wliich  soluble  gold  and  mlvet
(Chapter  XXIV.)  are  of  particular  interest.  Sotliatnow  it  maybe  said  that  the  capacity
of  forming  colloid  solutions  is  not  limited  to  a  definite  class  of  compounds,  but  is,  if  not
a  general,  at  all  events,  an  exceedingly  widely  distributed  phenomenon.

■^  Tliis  is  in  accordance  with  the  generally-accepted  representation  of  the  relations
between  salts  and  the  hydrates  of  acids,  but  it  is  of  little  help  in  the  study  of  siliceous

SnJCOS  AKD  TBE  OTHEB  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  POURTH  HBOXJP 117

to  turn  our  attention  to  the  similatity  between  silioon  oompoundB  and
metallic  alloye.  Silica  in  an  oxide  having  the  appearance  of,  tuid  ia
man;  respects  the  same  properties  as,  those  oxides  which  carabine  with
it,  and  if  two  metals  are  capable  of  forming  homogeneous  alloys  in
which  there  exist  definite  or  iudetinite  compounds,  it  is  permissible  to
ytHunie  a  similar  power  of  forming  alloys  in  the  case  of  itimlogous  oxides.
Such  alloys  nre  found  in  indefinite,  amorphous  masses  in  the  form  of
glass,  lava,  slags,  and  a  number  of  similar  siliceous  compounds  which
do  not  contain  any  deSnite  types  of  combination,  but  nevertheless  are
homogeneous  throughout  their  mass.  By  slow  cooling,  or  under  other
circumstances,  de&nite  crystalline  compounds  may — and  sometimes  do
— separate  from  this  homogeneous  mass,  as  also  sometimes  definite
crystalline  alloys  separate  from  metallic  alloys.

The  formation  of  crystalline  rocks  in  nature  is  partly  of  such  a
nature.  By  aqueous  or  igneous  agency,  but  in  any  case  iti  a  liquid
cooditiou,  those  oxides  which  form  the  earth's  crust  and  her  crystiLlline
minerals  came  into  mutual  contact.  First  of  all  tbey  formed  a  shape-
less mass,  of  which  lava,  glass,  slags  and  solutions  are  examples,  but
little  by  little,  or  else  suddenly,  some  definite  compounds  of  certain
onides  existiti];  in  this  alloy  or  in  the  shapeless  muss  were  formed. This

oompminda.  GeDenllj  upoakiiig,  it  beeoines  noreisarj  tn  eipUJn  the  proparty  ol
(SiCy.  to  eonibJDe  with  (RO)'..,  vhere  n  may  be  jtreatur  ihna  in,  uad  wliera  R  may  be
H^C*,  Jic.  Bute  we  are  lided  bj  Ihoee  (acts  irhirh  luvp  heva  nttainril  b;  the  iiivestiga-
tian  of  cArbon  compoands*  enpeciaJly  vrithreBpeot  U>  glycol.  Glycol  ie  acompoand  harinif
the  coropo«ition  CjHoOi,  only  diflerinK  from  alcohol,  C.,HnO.  by  ui  Mtra  iilom  u(  oxygBii.
Tlii«  hydmte  containB  two  hydroiyi  groopg,  which  nuiy  be  sut-cMaively  replaced  by
dilathie.  &c.  Hence  the  compoaition  of  glycol  iihniild  be  repreaenled  ae  C]H,(OU|,.
It  biu  been  found  that  glycol  fomiB  BO-eslled  pnlyglycoU.  Their  origin  will  be  nnder-
ttood  from  the  faft  that  glycol  aa  A  hydrate  hai  a  correapuiidiug  anhydride  of  the
annpoulion  C,R,0,  known  as  ethylene  oiide.  Tliia  mbatance  in  ethane,  CaHg,  in  wbioh
two  hydrogens  aw  replaced  by  one  atom  of  orygen.  Ethylene  oxide  ia  not  the  only
anhydride  of  glycol,  allbougli  it  ia  the  simplest  one,  because  C.jHjO  =  C,H,{OH),  -  B,0.
Varioos  other  anhydndcn  of  gljool  are  possible,  nad  have  aclually  been  obtained,  of  the
oampowtioD  nCjHitOH),  ~  (n  ~  l)HiO  =  (C^Ht).0.  _  i(OH)r  TheM  imperfect  anhy-
dridea  at  glycol,  or  polyglycoli,  still  contain  hydioiyla  lilie  glycol  itself,  and  therefore
■R  of  an  aloobolic  chancter  in  the  same  sense  bb  glycol  itself.  They  are  obtained  bj
Tuiooi  methods,  and,  amongst  othora,  by  the  direct  combination  of  ethylene  oxide  with
glycol,  beainse  C,H,(OH).,  +  (n  -  l)CjH^O  =  (CgH.l.O, -iWH),.  The  most  important
eucnmatauoe,  from  a  thaorelical  point  o(  view,  is  that  these  polyglyools  may  be  distilled
withont  Dndergning  decomposition,  and  that  the  genenl  tormnU  given  above  expresses
their  actual  mdecaUi  cumposilion.  Hence  ne  have  bore  a  direct  couibination  of  the  anhy-
dride with  tlie  hydrate,  and.  ninreovor,  a  repeated  one.  The  formuhi  A.H^Omajbe  used
to  Biprein  tlie  ciimpositiou  of  glycol  and  polyglycols  witli  respect  to  ethylene  oxide  in  the
nuHt  aiiuple  maaner,  if  A  atnnd  for  ethylene  oxide.  When  n  =  1  we  have  glycol,  when
n  >•  gnater  than  1  a  polyglycol.  Suub  also  is  Uia  relalionihip  of  the  ults  of  hydrate  of
•ilk*,  if  A  stand  for  silica,  and  if  we  imagine  that  H,0  may  also  be  taken
Such  a  tepreeenlation  of  Uur  poli/tilieic  aeidi  corrmponds  with  llie  reprencntali
pdlymerism  of  silica.  Lmrent  supposed  the  exislence  of  several  polymeric  form*,  StgO),
SisOe,  &c,  hrtiin  silica.  SiO,.

S  I

d

118  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

is  entirely  similar  to  two  metals  forming  a  homogeneous  alloy,'^  and
under  known  circumstances  (for  instance,  on  cooling  the  alloy,  or  in
the  case  of  aqueous  solution  when  the  two  metals  are  simultaneously
liberated  from  the  solution),  definite  crystalline  compounds  are
separated.  In  any  case  there  is  no  doubt  that  there  is  less  distinc-
tion between  silica  and  bases,  than  between  bases  and  such  anhydrides,
as,  for  instance,  sulphuric  or  nitric,  or  even  carbonic,  as  is  seen  ou
comparing  the  physical  and  chemical  properties  of  silica  and  various
kinds of  oxides. Alumina,  especially,  is  exceedingly  near akin to

'1  For  us  the  Utter  have  not  a  saline  character,  only  because  they  are  not  regarded
from  tliis  point  of  view,  bat  an  alloy  of  sodium  and  zinc  is,  in  a  broad  sense,  a  salt  in  many
of  its  reactions,  for  it  is  subject  to  the  same  double  decompcmitions  as  sodium  phosphide
or  sulphide,  which  clearly  have  saline  properties.  The  latter  (sodium  phosphide),  when
heated  with  ethyl  iodide,  forms  ethyl  phosphide,  and  the  former — i.e.  the  alloy  of  zinc
and  sodium — gives  ^inc  ethyl ;  that  is,  the  element  (P,  S,  Zn)  which  was  united  with  the
sodium  passes  into  combination  with  the  ethyl :  RNa  +  EtI  =  REt  +  Xal.  By  com-
bining sodium  successively  with  chlorine,  sulphur,  phosphorus,  arsenic,  antimony,  tin,
and  zinc,  we  obtain  >^(ibstances  having  less  and  less  the  ordinary  appearance  of  salts,  but
if  the  alloy  of  sodium  and  zinc  cannot  be  termed  a  salt,  then  perhaps  this  name  cannot  be
given  to  so<linin  sulphide,  and  the  compounds  of  sodium  with  phosphorus.  The  following
circumstance  may  alsti  be  observed :  with  chlorine,  sodium  gives  only  one  compound  (with
oxygen,  at  the  most  three),  with  sulphur  five,  with  phosphorus  probably  still  more,  with
antimony  naturally  ritill  more,  and  the  more  anal(^ous  an  element  is  to  sodium,  the  more
varied  are  the  proportions  in  which  it  is  able  to  combine  with  it,  the  less  are  the  altera-
tions in  the  properties  which  take  place  by  this  combination,  and  the  nearer  does  the
com}X)and  funned  approach  to  the  class  of  compounds  known  as  indefinite  chemical
compounds.  In  this  sense  a  siliceous  alloy,  containing  silica  and  other  acids,  is  a
salt.  The  oxide  to  a  certain  extent  plays  the  same  part  as  the  sodium,  whUst  the  silica
pliiys  the  part  of  the  acid  element  which  was  taken  up  successively  by  zinc,  phosphorus,
sulphur,  S:c.,  in  the  above  examples.  Such  a  comparison  of  the  silica  compounds  with
alloys  presents  the  great  advantage  of  including  under  one  category  the  definite  and
indefinite  silica  compounds  which  are  so  analogous  in  composition — that  is,  brings
under  one  heoA  such  crystalline  substances  as  certain  minerals,  and  such  amorphous
substances  us  are  frt>quently  met  with  in  nature,  and  are  artificially  prepared,  as  glass,
slags,  enamels,  itc.

If  the  compounds  of  silica  are  substances  like  the  metallic  alloys,  then  (1)  the  chemical
union  between  the  oxides  of  which  they  are  composed  must  be  a  feeble  one,  as  it  is  in  all
compounds  formed  between  analogous  substances.  In  reality  such  feeble  agencies  as
water  and  carbonic  acid  are  able,  although  slowly,  to  act  on  and  destroy  the  majority
of  the  complex  silica  compounds  in  rocks,  as  we  saw  in  the  preceding  chapter;  (2)
their  formation,  like  that  of  alloys,  should  not  be  accompanied  by  a  considerable
alteration  of  volume  ;  and  this  is  actually  the  case.  For  example,  felspar  has  a  specific
gravity  of  about  2'C,  and  therefore,  taking  its  composition  to  be  KaO,AL|05,6Si0.2,  we  find
its  volume,  corresponding  with  this  formula,  to  be  556*8  2*6  =  214,  the  volume  of  K.^O  — 35,
of  Al^Oj  =  26,  and  of  SiOo  =  22*6.  Hence  the  sum  of  the  volumes  of  the  component
oxides,  85  +  26  +  6  x  22*6  -  196,  which  is  verj'  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  felspcur ;  that  is,
its  formation  is  attended  by  a  slight  expansion,  and  not  by  contraction,  as  is  the  case  in
the  majority  of  other  cases  when  combinations  determined  by  strong  affinities  are
(vccomplished.  In  the  case  in  question  the  same  phenomenon  is  observed  as  in  solutions
and  alloys — that  is,  as  in  cases  of  feeble  affinities.  So  also  the  specific  gravity  of  glass
is  directly  dei>end<»nt  on  the  amount  of  those  oxides  which  enter  into  its  composition.  If
in  the  prec(>(liiig  example  we  take  the  sp.  gr.  of  silica  to  be,  not  2*65,  but  2*2,  its  volume
"■27*8,  and  the  sum  of  the  volumes  will  be  ^=224 — that  is,  greater  than  that  of  orthoclase.

SIUCOV  ASD  THE  OTHEH  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  (IBOUP 119

silica ;  not  only  in  the  hydrated  state,  hut  eiIgo  in  the  anbydrouH
condition,  there  exist!>  a  certain  siinilurity  between  the  crystalline  forms
of  alumina  and  silica,  in  the  uiicombined  state.  Buth  aro  veiy  hard,
transfurent,  inactive,  non- volatile,  itifusible,  and  cryati»llise  in  the
hexa^iial  iiysleni' — in  a  word,  they  are  remarkably  similar,  aud  for  this
rvasuu  they  are  capable,  like  two  kindred  metals,  of  eiiteiing  into  many
different  degrees  of  comhiuatinii,  laoiuorphous  mixtures^that  in,  liifler-
iug  by  the  substitution  of  oxides  akin  both  in  theii'  physical  and  chemical
chHract«r3 — are  very  freijuently  met  with  aniong  iiiineruls,  and  the
study  of  the  latter  gave  the  principal  impetus  to  the  study  of  iso-
morphism. Thus,  in  a  whole  aeries  of  minerals,  lime  and  magnesia  are
found  in  variable  and  interchangeable  proportions.  Exactly  the  same
may  be  said  of  potasBium  and  sodium,  of  alumina  and  ferric  oxide,
nt  DiangiinouB,  ferrous,  magnesium  oxides,  ibc.  Such  isomorphism
does  not,  however,  extend  without  change  of  form  anil  pro[>ertie3
beyond  certain  rather  narrow  limits.^' What  I  mean  by  this  is  that

"  II  is,  however,  easy  lo  imi«ine,  will  eifiHrience  iwDBnnii  the  iilll>|>ottitiaii,  ttmb  In  a
Doiaiilei  HliueousrompnnndcDnlaining  tor  iiiqUnce  fiodiain  mid  caldupi.the  whole  of  tile
■odiniD  nuf  he  replnctd  bji  poUsainiii.  nnit  n(  l/if  mme  time  the  whnlc  ol  Uie  cnlciom
bf  magneHDin.  becniwe  then  blia  «ubatitution  of  {iDMiuiinm  for  ttie  ftndiam  will  prodace  a.
otuuige  in  the  nntare  of  the  sahBtance  cantnir7  to  Ihiit  whirh  will  occar  froni  the  ualDiom
bdin^  reptatect  hy  nu^neiuDiii.  That  mcreitBe  in  wei|^ht.  decreaBfi  in  duimity,  incriHwe  of
ehemiiwl  ouergj,  which  aqcompouiM  Ihe  eielmiiija  of  Bodinm  tor  potaiwiiini  will,  go  to
■iwak,  bB  competiBiled  hy  the  oichioige  of  ealciain  tat  mimoeBiiini,  beonoBe  hotli  in
■e^ht  uid  in  propertieB  the  ■nm  □(  N&  +  Cil  in  veiy  neur  to  the  mxa  o(  R  +  Hg.
Pgnni^itf  or  augite  aui  be  tiikon  aa  itn  enunple ;  ila  onmpoaition  iiiay  be  Biiirenaed  hy
the  tonnnlii  CaHgSiiOg ;  that  is.  it  oorreatMiids  with  the  acid  HgSiOj ;  it  i«  a  biHiliute.
In  muijr  reiipeet*  it  closely  resemblM  nnutber  minenU  called  '»podamfnt'  (they  txe
both  motioclinic).  Thia  Intter  h&H  the  compnniljou  IdgAltSi  uOis-  Ou  reduoiug  both
lonanlK  to  nn  egiiiU  coiitpiitH  of  itilica  tile  Inllnwui);  diatiuclioa  will  be  obaertH  between
them:  ({ndaniene  (Li.jO)F,i  Al,0]l„»aSiO] ;  nugite  (CaO)i:(U|^|„RUSiO^  Thut  ia,  the
diflareuce  between  them  cmi«ist«  in  Ihe  sum  of  the  nttgneaia  uiid  lime  IM|tOI,s-t^(CiiO)„
replacinR  the  nuni  of  the  lithium  oiide  and  altimina  (Li,0)i  +  (At,0:it(;  and  in  the
chesnial  relation  thene  itnmi  are  near  to  one  snother,  becauHc  nu^eBium  and  calcitiia,
both  in  fonna  of  oxidation  and  in  energy  {as  baHw).  iu  all  reopecta  occupy  a  poaition
iuUxmediale  between  Uthiam  and  aluminium,  and  therefore  the  sum  of  the  flnit  may  be
repUced  by  the  aom  of  the  aecond.

If  we  take  the  compoaition  of  apodumene,  at  it  is  often  represented  U>  be.
Li]0,ALAn.«»iO^  t£e  coireaponding  formola  of  angite  will  be  (CaO);,|UKO)i,lSiO„
Mid  sIsD  the  unonnl  of  oiyeen  in  the  sum  of  Li,OAI,0,  will  be  the  same  a>  in  (CaO^MgO),.
1  nuiy  ninurii,  tnr  the  sake  of  cieanieag.  that  lithinmbelongatotheOrtit,  aluminiuintothc
third  if'iDp.  and  calcium  and  magneaium  to  the  intermediate  second  group  1  lithium,  like
■skium.  belong  to  the  even  iteriea.  and  magnesiuui  and  alamiaiam  to  the  uneven.

Tbo  rcpreaentation  of  the  anbatitutions  ol  nn^ngoni  compouuds  here  introduced  waa
lirat  deducfd  by  me  in  ISSS.  It  Hnda  mndi  confirmalian  in  facta  which  have  Uvn  sub-
aequenlly  diacnvered— tor  example,  with  respeot  to  Lonrmalin.  Wlllfing  (ISSS),  on  the
batia  of  a  nomber  ot  analyWH  (eapecinlly  of  those  by  Riigga),  atatea  that  all  varlelies  con-
U-in  an  isomorphous  mixture  of  alktdi  and  magneaia  (ourmalin ;  inUt  the  compoai-
tioii of  the  formei  Ihtre ent«rH iaai0^8B,Oa,8AI,Oi,;lNa^.^,0,  anil  of  the  latter  ■

iOibSBiO],SAl,Os,lilMKO,IIHiO. Hence  it  is  seen  Ihat  the  former  ooDtain*  iu  addition

120  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

lime  is  not  always  replaced  totally,  but  often  only  in  small  quantities,
by  magnesia,  or  by  the  manganoas  and  ferrous  oxides,  without  changing
the  crystalline  form.  The  same  may  be  observed  with  regard  to  potassium
and  lithium,  which  may  be  in  part,  but  not  completely,  replaced  by
sodium. On  the total  substitution  of  one  metal  for  another,  often
(although  not  invariably)  the  entire  nature  of  the  substance  is  changed  ;
for  instance,  Piistatite  (or  bronzite)  is  a  magnesium  bisilicate  with  a
small  isomorphous  substitution  of calcium for  magnesium  ;  its  com-
position is  expressed  by  the  formula  MgSiOs,  it  belongs  to  the  rhombic
system. On  the  entire  substitution  of  calcium,  wollastonile,  CaSiO^,
of  the  monoclinic  system,  is  obtained  ;  when  manganese  is  substituted,
rhodonite^  of  the  triclinic  system,  is  produced  ;  but  in  all  of  them  the
angles  of  the  prism  are  86°  to  88°.^'

the  Ham  of  8A1.205,2Na20,H20,  whilst  in  the  latter  this  sum  of  oxides  is  replaced  by
12MgO,  in  which  there  is  as  much  oxygen  as  in  the  sum  of  the  more  clearly-defined  base
2Na.jO  and  less  basic  3AI.3O5H2O — that  is,  the  relation  is  just  the  same  here  as  between
augite  and  si)odumcne.

^  With  respect  to  the  silica  compounds  of  the  various  oxides,  it  must  be  obserred
that  only  tlie  alkali  salts  are  known  in  a  soluble  form ;  all  the  others  only  exist  in  an
insoluble  form,  so  that  a  solution  of  the  alkali  compounds  of  silica,  or  soluble  glass,  gives
a  precipitate  with  a  solution  of  the  salts  of  the  majority  of  other  metals,  and  this  pre-
cipitate will  contain  the  silica  compounds  of  the  other  bases.  The  maximum  amount  of
the  gelatinous  hydrate  of  silica,  which  dissolves  in  caustic  potash,  corresponds  with  the
formation  of  a  compound,  2K.20,9Si02.  But  this  compound  is  partially  decomposed,  with
the  precipitation  of  hydrate  of  silica,  on  cooling  the  solution.  Solutions  containing  a
smaller  amount  of  silica  may  be  kept  for  an  indefinite  time  without  decomposing,  and
silica  does  not  separate  out  from  the  solution ;  but  such  compounds  crystallise  from  the
solutions  witli  difficulty.  However,  a  crystalline  bisilicate  (with  water)  has  been  obtained
for  sodium  having  the  comjwsition  Na^O.SiO^ — i.e.  corresponding  to  sodium  carbonate.
The  whole  of  the  carbonic  acid  is  evolved,  and  a  similar  soluble  sodium  metasilicate  is
obtained  on  fusing  3'5  parts  of  sodium  carbonate  with  2  parts  of  silica.  If  less  silica  be
taken  a  portion  of  the  sodium  carbonate  remains  undecomposed ;  however,  a  substance
may  then  be  obtained  of  the  composition  Si(0Na)4,  corresponding  with  orthosilicic  acid.
It  contains  the  maximum  amount  of  sodium  oxide  capable  of  combining  with  silica  under
fusion. It  is  a  sodium  orthosilicate,  (Na20)2,SiOo.

Calcium  carbonate,  and  the  carbonates  of  the  alkaline  earths  in  general,  also  evolve
all  their  carbonic  acid  when  heated  with  silica,  and  in  some  instances  even  form  somewhat
fusible  compounds.  Lime  forms  a  fusible  slag  of  calcium  silicate^  of  the  composition
CaO,Si02  and  2CaO,HSi02.  With  a  larger  proportion  of  sihca  the  slags  are  infusible  in  a
furnace.  Tlie  magnesium  slags  are  less  fusible  than  those  with  lime,  and  are  often
formed  in  smelting  metals.  Many  compounds  of  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  with
silica  are  also  met  with  in  nature.  For  instance,  among  the  magnesium  compounds  there
is  olivine,  {MirOy^^HiOij  sp.  gr.  3-4,  which  occurs  in  meteorites,  and  sometimes  forms  a
precious  stone  (peridote),  and  occurs  in  slags  and  basalts.  It  is  decomposed  by  acids,  is
infusible  before  the  blow-pipe,  and  crystallises  in  the  rhombic  system.  Serpentine  has
the  composition  8MgO,2Si02,2H20 ;  it  sometimes  forms  whole  mountains,  and  is  dis-
tinguished  for  its  great  cohesiveness,  and  is  therefore  used  in  the  arts.  It  is  generally
tinted  green ;  its  specific  gravity  is  2'5 ;  it  is  exceedingly  infusible,  even  before  the  blow-
pipe. It  is  acted  on  by  acids.  Among  the  magnesium  compounds  of  silica,  talc  is  verv
widely  used.  It  is  frequently  met  with  in  rocks  which  are  widely  distributed  in  nature,
and  sometimes  in  compact  masses ;  it  can  be  used  for  writing  like  a  slate  pencil  or  chalk

SiriCON  AHD  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  GROUP

The  most  reninrkiible  coniplBx  siliceous  conipoamla  are  the  folnparf,
which  enter  into  neurty  nit  the  primurj  roi^ks  like  porphjry,  grniiite,
gneiss,  ibc.  These  felspnra  nlwitys  contain,  ia  addition  to  silicii  anii
nluminn,  oxides  presenting  more  marked  bnsic  properties,  such  as  potaeh,
soda,  and  lime.  Thus  the  ortluiclni^  (^udularia),  or  ordinary  felspiir
(moiioclinic)  of  the  granites,  contains  K,U,AI]0,,GS!>iOj  ;  alhiM  contains
tlie  same  substances,  only  with  NujO  instead  of  KjO  (it  already  npper-
buiiB  to  the  triclinic  system)  ;  aiiortliite.  contains  lime,  and  its  conip)Bi
tion  is  CiiOiAljOiillSiOj.  (>n  expreseing  the  two  last  as  contaijiing
equal  quantities  of  oxygen,  we  have  : —

Albite  Na,  AIj  Sir,  Oi,^
Anorthite  Ca^  AI4  Si,  0,^
It  is  then  evident  that  on  the  conversion  of  albite  into  anorthite,  Na^Si.j
ia  rephkced  byCajAlj,  and  this  sum,  both  in  chemical  energy  and  in  the
form  of  oxide,  may  be  considered  as  corresponding  with  the  tirst,  because
sodium  and  silicon  are  extreme  elements  in  chemical  character  (from
gruujis  I.  and  IV,),  and  calcium  and  aluminium  are  means  between
them  (from  groups  II.  and  III.},  and  actually  both  these  felspar  mine-
mis  are  not  only  of  one  (triclinic)  system,  but  foiTO  (Tchermak,
8chust«r)  all  possible  kinds  of  deiinite  compounds  (isomorphiiuu
mixtures)  betwceji  themselves,  as  indii^ted  by  their  composition  and
all  their  properties.  Tims  oligoclase,  andesine,  labnidorite,  i-c.  (plagio-
closes),  are  nothing  more  than  mutual  combinations  of  albite  and
anorthite.  Labmdorite  consists  of  idbite,  in  combination  with  1  to  2  mole-
cules of  anorthite.  The  class  of  zrolilen  corresponds  to  the  felspars  ;  they
are  bydrated  compounds  of  a  similar  composition  to  the  felspars.  Thus
tuiiroliU  contains  Na^OjAljO,,  3810^,211,0,  and  analcime  presents  the
same  composition,  but  contains  4SiO,  instead  of  3SiOj. In  general,

■md  being  grciie;  to  tlw  tottch,  i*  alsn  known  ui  tIentUe.  It  oryHtallineii  in  the  rhombic
■falnn,  mnd  rcsambleii  mica  in  m>n<r  resprcts  1  like  it,  it  ii  divisible  into  UmiiUB,  greoaj
to  the  touch,  and  hftfing  &  ap.  gr.  ST.  Theiio  luninn  >re  rer3'  wift,  lustrouB,  and
tmuparent,  aiul  u*  intniuble  n\i  iniolnble  in  acids,  Tiie  compiwitioD  of  Ula  approachps
nnrlT  to  flHKO^S>Oj,aH^,

AmuDg  Uie  crjiUlline  mlieatM  the  following  minerals  are  known :— H'oWnifonifr
(liilnihu--Rp«i),  cryttAlliuB  in  the  mooocliuic  ayatem  ;  Bp.gr.3*S;  it  ia  aemi-trauKparent.
diDlcullt;  fntible,  decompoaed  by  acids,  and  biw  the  composition  of  a,  metasilicate,
CkOHiOi.  But  UKmiDTphonii  miitnrea  of  caJaimn  and  magneaium  ailicatei  occor  with
particular  Iretiaency  in  natare.  The  aiigilet  (ap.  gr,  S'3),  diallagea.  hyperttheneH,  horn-
blmdea  lap.  gr.  S'l|.  ampbibolea,  oommon  aabestoa,  and  many  aimilar  mineralg.  Home-
llraea  turwing  tlw  (maentiftl  parts  of  entire  rock  lormationa,  contain  Tariona  relative
pmpnTtinna  oS  the  bieilicates  of  ealcinm  and  m»gne»iam  partiidly  miieil  with  other
■neUUie  iilieatea,  and  genetallj  anhydronn,  or  only  contuininK  a  anmll  amount  of  water.
In  the  pymienea,  a«  a  mie.  lime  prodnminaUrs,  and  in  the  amphiboleH  (alao  o(  Ihe
«  predominates. Details  npon  thia  subject  must  be  looked

IfcWairfca  upon  m

the  felspars  and  zeolites  contain  RO,AI,0,,jiSiO.„  wliere  ii  varies  con-
siderably."

Such  complex  silicates  are  generally  iusoluble  in  water,^'  and if

'*  The  TDBJarity  u(  tlio  siliceous  minerala  huTe  uow  been  obtained  nrtiBciillj  aader
niioai  ruoditinna.  Tlina  N.  N.  Sokololl  ohowed  Uiab  alagn  reiy  freqaentlj  unnUin
peridote.  HauLefenille.  CliroDatchnlT,  Friedel.  aad  Sum«n  obUined  Iclapar  identical  in
an  reapects  <*itll  the  luitam]  minenla.  The  details  of  tbe  mothods  liere  employed  miul
be  looked  (or  iu  speciil  wuiks  on  nilnemlogy  :  bnt,  as  an  example,  we  will  describe  the
method  of  tha  ptvpaiation  (it  felspar  employed  b;  Friedel  and  Saruin  (1881).  Pmm
the  fiu^t  that  ftfiiipiif  j^Tea  ap  potaflaimn  sibcate  to  vater  even  at  the  ordinary  tetti-
perature  {Debniy'B  ciptrimBntal,  thejr  cwndoded  that  the  felapai  in  gnuiites  tuid  an
aqueoUH  origin  (iLud  thia  may  be  supposed  to  be  Ihe  case  from  geolof^'cal  da(*t;  then^  in
tbe  fimt  place,  its  Farinatinu  could  uot  he  accumpliahed  onleaH  in  the  preaouoe  oF  m
exoesH  of  a  solution  ot  potaaaiuDi  ailicBle.  In  order  to  render  thia  argument  clear  I
vaf  mention,  ae  an  eismple,  that  carnaUitf  ia  decomposed  by  water  into  eauly  solnble
nugnesium  ohloride  and  |iolausinm  Ghli>ride,  and  therefore  if  it  ia  of  aqneons  origin  it
Mold  not  be  formed  otherKiJW  than  from  a  solution  containing  on  eiceaa  of  niognesinm
chloride^  and,  in  the  second  place,  from  a  strou^ly-bmted  solntiou :  again,  felspar  itself
and  its  fellow-oomponenta  in  graoitea  are  aiihirdrouH.  Ou  thuae  factH  wtre  haaed
eiperimcnta  of  heating  hydrates  of  lulica  with  iilmntna  and  a  solution  of  pDlASMtun
silicate  in  a  dosed  vessel.  The  mixture  was  placed  in  a  seiLled  platinam  tube,  vhioh
was  encloued  in  a  steel  tube  and  heal«d  In  dull  redness.  When  the  mixture  con-
tained on  excess  of  silitm  the  rcsidae  contained  many  crygtiUs  of  rock  orysUJ  and
tridymile,  together  with  ■  powder  of  felspar,  wliidi  formed  th^  main  product  of  the
reaction  when  the  proportion  of  hydrate  of  ulica  was  decreased,  and  a  mixture  of  a
■ointion  of  patiwsinm  Bilioat«  with  alumina  3U«cipitat«d  tf^ether  with  Uie  silica  by  mixing
■olohle  glaBs  with  aluminium  chloride  wbs  employed.  The  composition,  properties,  and
forms  of  the  resultant  felsp«r  proved  it  to  be  identical  witb  (hat  fouud  in  nature.  The
experiments  approach  very  nearly  to  the  natural  couditioos,  all  the  more  as  felspar  and
qaartt  are  obtained  together  in  one  mixture,  as  they  so  often  occur  in  natore.

"  The  applioatiou  of  eementt  ig  bailed  on  lliis  prindple ;  tliey  are  those  sorts  of
*  liydraolic '  lime  which  generally  form  a  stony  moss,  wlkich  hardens  evsn  under  water,
when  mixed  with  sand  and  water.

Tlie  bydraolic  properties  of  cements  lure  due  to  their  containing  calcareous  and  ailiao-
aluminons  compound  which  are  able  to  oombine  with  water  and  tonn  hydrates,  which
are  then  umuted  on  by  water.  This  is  beat  proved,  iu  the  first  place,  by  the  fact  thai
certain  slogs  containing  lime  and  ailica,  and  obtained  by  fusion  (for  example,  in  blaat-
lurmicos),  solidify  like  eementi  when  finely  groond  and  mixed  with  water;  and,  in  tbe
■econd  place,  by  the  method  now  employed  for  the  inanntaotnre  of  artificial  cementa
(formerly  only  peculiar  and  comparatively  rare  natural  prodncta  were  used).  For  tbi*
purpose  a  mixttiro  of  lime  and  clay  is  token,  containing  about  3G  p^'.  of  the  latter ;  thia
mixture  is  then  boated,  not  to  fusion,  bnt  until  both  the  carbonic  anhydride  and  water
contained  in  the  clay  are  expelled.  This  mane  when  finely  groDud  forme  Portland  oemont,
wlkich  hardens  under  water.  The  process  of  hardening  is  based  on  the  formation  of
chemical  compounds  between  tbe  lime,  silica,  alnmina,  and  water.  These  substances  are
also  found  combined  together  iu  various  natural  minerals — for  example,  in  the  xeoUteo,
01  we  saw  above.  In  all  oases  cement  nhich  has  set  oontaina  a  considerable  amotmt  ol
water,  and  ita  hardening  Is  naturally  due  to  hydration — that  is,  to  the  formation  ol
compounds  with  water.  Well,  prepared  and  very  linely-gronud  cement  '■f^Urt
comparatively  qnickly  (in  several  days,  especially  after  being  rammed  down),  with  B  pait*
(and  even  more)  of  coarse  sand  and  with  water,  into  a  atony  moss  which  ia  as  hard  and
durable  as  many  atones,  and  more  so  ttisn  bricks  and  limestone.  Hence  not  Only  aQ
utaritime  constructions  (docks,  ports,  bridges,  tic),  bnt  also  ordinary  bnildings,  are  made
of  Portland  cement,  and  ore  distinguished  for  their  great  dorobibty.  A  comlnnotinn  of
troiiwork  (ties,  girders)  and  cement  is  particularly  auitable  for  the  wnstraction  of  wjoe-

SILICON  AND  THE  OTHEB  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  GROUP 128

they  undergo  change  in  it,  it  is  but  very  slow,  and  more  often  only  in
the  presence  of  carbonic  acid.  Some  of  the  silicutea  which  are  insoluble
ill  water  are  easily  and  directly  decompiiBert  by  iicids  ;  for  instance,  the
£eolit«s  and  those  fused  silicates  wliii-h  contain  a  lat'ge  quantity  of
energetic  bases^ — eueh  as  lime. Many  of  the  silicates,  like  glass,'''  are

ilncln,  urclieR,  resprvuirH,  Ale.  Ari'biOi  nnd  waJls  niiiile  nt  audi  utnoentit  miiT  be  much
leiK  tliiok  than  lJio»e  boilt  up  of  cinlmnry  Btont.  UeuL-e  tlie  prodneliaii  ui<i  qsh  of
cemirnt  mpidlj  iiifreawB  from  year  in  year.  The  orijsin  of  uetiiratti  d&U  rtMimcting
crmentt  is  chiefty  duB  lo  Vinit.  In  Riituiia  Profensnr  SchnliiwhetJu  hns  grnatly  aided
th«  eiteHBian  of  nccimte  duta  «inoeniiiig  Portland  remeot.  MoDy  works  for  tliu  inuiiu-
(■otnre  of  (winent  bave  iklreody  bean  oHtabliuhed  in  vxrioiiH  [HirtB  of  RmwiH,  nni)  Uiit
iiidDitry  promiees  ■  great  future  in  the  arts  of  uODStmctioD.

"  OUiM  prenenU  s  aimitur  pomplMi  ctuninnsitiiiu,  lilte  that  o(  miuiy  miuenJ*.  Tlie
nrdinory  (orta  of  white  glow  pontaio  about  TG  pji,  of  Hilica,  ID  gu-.  of  Bckdjuui  uiide,  auil
IS  px  of  lime;  bat  tbe  inferior  eoitii  of  gUiii  aomelimeK  iioDt«iu  up  to  lUjij^  of  iUuiDiD&,
The  inixtuiOB  which  are  uwmI  for  the  manufaolnris  of  gUait  are  also  luoat  varied.  For
example,  about  SDO  parts  of  pure  NUid,  about  tOO  parts  of  wHliDiu  carbonate,  and  GO  of
limeatone  ore  taken,  and  aometimes  doable  the  proportinu  of  Uie  latter.  Ordinary  loifo-
glau  contains  wdiDm  oiide,  time,  and  silica  as  the  chief  vomponenl  parts.  It  is  gener-
ally prepared  bam  sodium  sulphate  mixed  vitli  cliarcual.  silica,  uul  lime  (Chapter  XII.),
in  which  ease  the  following  reaction  takes  place  «t  a  high  temperature:  ^JagSO,  +  C -f  BiO...
^  Na^SiOi  i- SOj  +  CO.  SomeUoiei  potOBBium  mrlHUUite  is  taken  for  the  preparation  of
tbe  better  qualities  of  glass.  In  this  case  a  glasn.  potuih-i/liui,  ia  obtained  cuutaining
polaaaiam  oxide  instead  of  sodium  oiide.  The  best-known  of  these  glamieB  ia  the  so-
called  Bohemian  glass  or  crystal,  which  is  prepared  by  tbe  tusioiiof  GO  parts  of  potausium
tarbonate,  IE  paita  of  lime,  audi  UO  i»rt«  ol  quiirtx.  Thepreceding  kinds  of  gliue  contain
lime,  whilitt  crystal  glass  contains  lead  olidu  inatead,  Flint  glass — that  is,  the  lead  glass
Dsed  for  optioal  inatrnmentii—  ia  prepared  in  this  manner,  naturally  from  the  purest
possible  malfHals.  Crytlal-glaa—i.e.  glass  containing  lead  oiide — is  softer  than
ordinary  glaaa,  more  foaible  and  has  a  higher  index  of  refraction.  However,  altliough
the  materials  for  the  preparation  of  glass  be  most  carefully  sorted,  a  certain  amount
of  iron  oriden  falls  into  the  glaaa  and  rendera  it  greenith,  Tliis  coloration  may
be  deatmyed  by  adding  a  number  of  subatances  to  the  vitreouB  mnsa,  which  are  able
to  Donvert  the  lerroas  oxide  into  feiria  oxide ;  for  example,  manganese  peroxide
(becauae  tbe  peroxide  is  deoxidised  lo  manganous  oiide,  which  only  gives  a  pale  violet
tint  to  the  glass)  and  areenioaa  anhydride,  which  ia  deoxidised  to  arsenic,  and  this  is
volatilised.  The  mannfaclnre  of  glaaa  is  carried  on  in  [nraaces  giving  a  very  high  tem-
perature (ofteu  in  regenerative  liimacea.  Chapter  IX,|  Large  clay  crucibles  are  placed
in  these  tamacea,  and  the  mixtare  destined  For  the  preparation  ol  the  glaaa,  having  been
Brat  muted,  ia  chiu'ged  into  theemciUea.  The  l«ni|ieratnre  of  the  Fomaueia  then  gradu-
ally raised.  The  proceaa  lakea  place  in  three  avparate  atagea.  At  Srat  the  miiB<>  inter-
mixes and  bt^ma  to  react ;  then  it  [osea,  evolves  carbonic  acid  gaa.  and  forms  a  molten
maaa;  and,  lastly,  at  the  highest  temperature,  it  becomea  homogeneous  and  qni1«  hijuid,
which  IB  neceaaary  for  tbe  ultimate  elimination  of  the  carbonic  anhydride  and  aotid  im-
purities, which  latter  collect  at  the  bottom  of  tlie  crucible.  Tlie  temperature  is  then  some-
wbat  lowered,  and  the  glaaa  is  taken  out  on  tubes  and  blown  into  objects  of  various  shapes.
tn  the  manofactoro  of  wiodow-glasa  it  is  blown  into  large  cylinders,  which  are  then  cut  at
the  ends  and  across,  and  afterwards  bent  back  iji  a  turuace  into  the  ordinary  sheets.  After
being  worked  np,  all  glass  objects  liave  lo  be  siibjeclwl  to  a  slow  cooling  {annniling)  in
special  fomacea.  otherwise  they  are  very  brittle,  as  ia  aeen  in  the  ao-callod  '  Hujierl's
drops,'  formed  by  dropping  molten  glaaa  into  wiiler :  although  theae  drops  preserve  tlieir
(oTBi,  they  are  aa  brittle  that  they  break  up  into  a  line  powder  if  a  small  piece  be  knocked
oS  thmn. Glass  objecta  have  (requently  lo  >>e  poIlshe<l  and  chased. In the nianu-

124  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

hardly  changed  by  acids,  particularly  if  they  contain  much  silica,
whilst  fusion  with  alkalis  leads  to  the  formation  of  compounds  rich  in
biises,  after  which  acids  decompose  the  alloys  formed. ^^

According  to  the  periodic  law,  the  nearest  analogues  of  silicon  ought
to  be  elements  of  the  uneven  series,  because  silicon,  like  sodium,  mag-
nesium, and  aluminium,  belongs  to  the  uneven  series.^®  Immediately
after  silicon  follows  ekasilicon  or  germanium^  Ge  =  72,  whose  properties
were  predicted  (1871)  before  Winkler  (1886)  in  Freiberg,  Saxony
(Chapter  XV.  §  5),  discovered  this  element  in  a  peculiar  silver  ore  called
argyrodite,  AggGeS.ij.^^ Easily  reduced  from  the  oxide  by  heating  with

[X)li8hed.  Coloured  glasses  are  either  made  by  directly  introducing  into  the  glass  itself
various  oxides,  which  give  their  characteristic  tints,  or  else  a  thin  layer  of  a  coloured
glass  is  laid  on  the  surface  of  ordinary  glass.  Green  glasses  are  formed  by  the  oxides
of  chromium  and  copper,  blue  by  cobalt  oxide,  violet  by  manganese  oxide,  and  red  glass
by  cuprous  oxide  and  by  the  so-called  purple  of  Cassias — i.e.  a  compound  of  gold  and
tin — which  will  be  described  later.  A  yellow  coloration  is  obtained  by  means  of  the
oxides  of  iron,  silver,  or  antimony,  and  also  by  means  of  carbon,  especially  for  the  brown
tints  for  certain  kinds  of  bottle-glass.

From  what  has  been  said  about  glass  it  will  be  understood  that  it  is  impossible  to
give  a  definite  formula  for  it,  because  it  is  a  non-crystalline  or  amorphous  alloy  of
silicates  ;  but  such  an  alloy  can  only  be  formed  within  certain  limits  in  the  proportions
between  the  comi)oueiit  oxides.  With  a  large  proportion  of  silica  the  glass  very  easily
bjconies  clouded  when  heated ;  with  a  considerable  proportion  of  alkalis  it  is  easily
a'vted  on  by  moisture,  and  becomes  cloudy  in  time  on  exposure  to  the  air ;  with  a  large
proi)ortion  of  lime  it  becomes  infusible  and  opaque,  owing  to  the  formation  of  crystalline
compounds  in  it ;  in  a  word,  a  certain  proportion  is  practically  attained  among  the  com-
jx)nent  oxides  in  order  that  the  glass  formed  may  have  suitable  properties.  Nevertheless,
it  may  be  well  to  remark  that  the  composition  of  common  glass  approaches  to  the
fornmla  Na.20,CaO,4Si0.2.

The  coefficient  of  cubical  expansion  of  glass  is  nearly  equal  to  that  of  platinum  and
iron,  being  approximately  ()'0O0027.  The  specific  heot  of  glass  is  nearly  0'18,  and  the
specific  gravity  of  common  soda  glass  is  nearly  2*5,  of  Bohemian  glass  2*4,  and  of  bottle
glass  2*7.  Flint  glass  is  much  heavier  than  common  glass,  because  it  contains  the
heavier  oxide  of  lead,  its  specific  gravity  being  2'9  to  8'2.

^  It  must  be  recollected  that  although  acids  seem  to  act  only  feebly  on  the  majority
of  silicates,  nevertheless  a  finely-levigated  powder  of  siliceous  compounds  is  acted  on  by
strong  acids,  especially  with  the  aid  of  heat,  the  basic  oxides  being  taken  up  and  gela-
tinous silica  left  behind.  In  this  respect  sulphuric  acid  heated  to  200°  with  finely-divided
siliceous  comi)ounds  in  a  closed  tube  acts  very  energetically.

**  Such  elements  as  silicon,  tin,  and  lead  were  only  brought  together  under  one
common  group  by  means  of  the  periodic  law,  although  the  quadrivalency  of  tin  and  lead
was  known  much  earlier.  Generally  silicon  was  placed  among  the  non-metals,  and  tin
and  lead  among  the  metals.

'^^  At  first  (Febmarj'  1886)  the  want  of  material  to  work  on,  the  absence  of  a
spectrum  in  the  Bunsen's  flame,  and  the  solubility  of  many  of  the  compounds  of
germanium,  presented  difficulties  in  the  researches  of  Professor  Winkler,  who,  on
analysing  arg}'rodite  by  the  usual  method,  obtained  a  constant  loss  of  7  p.  c,  and  was
thus  led  to  search  for  a  new  element.  The  presence  of  arsenic  and  antimony  in  the
ivccompanying  minerals  also  impeded  the  separation  of  the  new  metal.  After  fusion  with
sulphur  and  sodium  carbonate,  argyrodite  gives  a  solution  of  a  sulphide  which  is  pre-
cipitated by  an  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid ;  germanium  sulphide  is  soluble  in  ammonia
and  then  precipitated  by  hydrochloric  acid,  as  a  white  precipitate,  which  is  dissolved

SILICON  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  GROUP 125

hydrogen  and  charcoal,  and  separated  from  its  solutions  by  zinc,
metallic  germanium  proved  to  be  greyish  white,  easily  crystallisable  (in
octehedra),  brittle,  fusible  (under  a  coating  of  fused  borax)  at  alx)ut
900°,  and  easily  oxidisable  ;  the  specific  gravity  =  5*469,  the  atomic
weight  =  72*3,  and  the  specific  heat  =  0*076,^°  as  might  be  expected
for  this  element  according  to  the  periodic  law.  The  corresponding
germaniuvi  dioxide,  Ge02,  is  a  white  powder  having  a  specific  gravity
of  4*703  ;  water,  especially  when  boiling,  dissolves  this  dioxide  (I  part
of  GeOj  requires  for  solution  247  parts  of  water  at  20°,  95  parts  at
100°).  It  forms  soluble  salts  with  alkalis  and  is  but  sparingly  soluble
in  acids.^*  In  a  stream  of  chlorine  the  metal  forms  germanium
chloride,  GeCl4,  which  boils  at  86°,  and  has  a  specific  gravity  of
1*887  at  18°  ;  water  decomposes  it,  forming  the  oxide.  All  these  pro-
perties ^^  of  germanium,  showing  its  analogy  to  silicon  and  tin,  form  a
most  beautiful  demonstration  of  the  truth  of  the  periodic  law.^^

The  increase  of  atomic  weight  from  silicon  2b  to  germanium  72
is  44 — that  is,  about  the  same  difference  as  there  is  in  the  atomic
weights  of  chlorine  and  bromine  ;  between  germanium  and  its  next
analogue,  (in  (Sn  =  118),  the  difference  is  46 — that  is,  almost  as  much
as  the  amount  by  which  the  atomic  weight  of  iodine  exceeds  that  of
bromine.

Metallic  tin  is  rarely  met  with  in  nature  ;  it  occurs  in  the  veins  of
ancient  formations,  almost  exclusively  in  the  form  of  oxide,  8n02)  called

(or  decompofted)  by  water.  After  being  oxidised  by  nitric  acid,  dried  and  ignited
gemuuiiam  sulphide  leaves  the  oxide  GeO.^,  which  is  reduced  to  the  metal  when  ignited
in  a  stream  of  hydrogen.

^  G.  Kobb  determined  the  spectmm  of  germanium,  when  the  metal  was  taken  as  one
of  the  electrodes  of  a  powerful  RahmkorflTs  coil.  The  wave-lengths  of  the  most  distinct
lines  are  602,  W^,  518,  513,  481,  474,  millionths  of  a  millimetre.

^•If  germaniom  or  germaniom  sulphide  be  heated  in  a  stream  of  hydrochloric  acid,
it  forms  a  volatile  Uquid.  boiling  at  72°,  which  Winkler  regarded  as  germanium  chlr/rirl«,
GeC'lj,  or  germanium  chloroform,  GeHCl.v  It  is  decomposed  by  water,  forming  a  white
sabstanee.  which  may  perhaps  be  the  hydrate  of  germanious  oxide,  GeO,  and  acts  as  a
powerfully  reducing  agent  in  a  hydrochloric  acid  solution.

^  Under  certain  circumstances  germanium  gives  a  blue  coloration  like  that  of  ultra-
marine, as  Winkler  showed,  which  might  have  been  expected  from  the  analogy  of  ger-
manium with  silicon.

55  Wiiikkr  expressed  this  in  the  following  words  iJour.  f.  praci.  Chtmie^  1886  fS],
M«  Vf^\^\'.  *.  .  .  .  es  kann  keinem  Zweifel  mehr  unterUegen,  dasa  das  Dene  Elemail
nicht»  AndereK  als  da4»  v<n-  f  unfzehn  Jahren  von  MendeUrff  prognoHticirte  EluuUiemtr
ist.'

*  Detw  ein«rD  «ehlagenderen  Beweis  f  Or  die  Richtigkeit  der  Lelir«  ran  der  Periodir
der Elements,  als den.  welchen  die Verkorperung  des  bisher  hjpothetiadiMi  '*J
siBcrazn  **  is  web  Mrhlie«i«t,  kann  es  kaum  geben,  nnd  er  bfldet  in  Waluiidit  md
di«  \Aome  Be-stitigrmg  einer  kuhn  aofgesidlten  Theorie,  er  hfAvwit/^  maB  m
Erwestervng  de«  chemischen  Genchtfeldes,  einen  miehtigai  SdinU  i^s

126  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

tin-stone.  The  best  known  tin  deposits  are  in  Cornwall  and  in  Malacca.
In  Russia,  tin  ores  have  been  found  in  small  quantities  on  the  shores  of
Lake  Ladoga,  in  Pitkarand.  The  crushed  ore  may  easily  be  separated
from  the  earthy  matter  accompanying  it  by  washing  on  inclined  tables,
as  the  tin-stone  has  a  specific  gravity  of  6*9,  whilst  the  impurities  are
much  lighter.  Tin  oxide  is  very  easily  reduced  to  metallic  tin  by  heating
with  charcoal.  For  this  reason  tin  was  known  in  ancient  times,  and  the
Phoenicians  brought  it  from  England.  Metallic  tin  is  cast  into  ingots  of
considerable  weight  or  into  thin  sticks  or  rods.  Tin  has  a  white  colour,
rather  duller  than  that  of  silver.  It  fuses  easily  at  232°,  and  crystallises
on  cooling.  Its  specific  gravity  is  7-29.  The  crystalline  structure  of
ordinary  tin  is  noticed  in  bending  tin  rods,  when  a  peculiar  sound  is
heard,  produced  by  the  fracture  of  the  particles  of  tin  along  the  sur-
faces of  crystalline  structure.

When  pure  tin  is  cooled  to  a  low  temperature  it  splits  up  into
^separate  crystals,  the  bond  between  the  particles  is  lost,  the  tin  assumes
a  grey  colour,  iDccomes  less  brilliant — in  a  word,  its  properties  become
changed,  as  Fritzsche  showed.  This  depends  on  the  peculiar  structure
which  the  tin  then  acquires,  and  is  particularly  remarkable  because
it  is  effected  by  cold  in  a  solid.^^  ^**  If  such  tin  be  fused,  or  even
simply  heated,  it  becomes  like  ordinary  tin,  but  is  again  changed  when
cooled.  When  in  this  condition  tin  has  a  specific  gravity  of  7*19.
Similarly,  tin  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  the  galvanic  current  on
a  solution  of  tin  chloride  ;  it  then  appears  in  crystals  of  the  cubic
system,  and  has  a  specific  gravity  of  7*18 — that  is,  the  same  as  when
cooled.  ^^

Tin  is  softer  than  silver  and  gold,  and  is  only  surpassed  by  lead  in
this  respect.  In  addition  to  this  it  is  very  ductile,  but  its  tenacity  is
very  slight,  so  that  wire  made  from  it  will  bear  but  little  strain.  In
consequence  of  its  ductility  it  is  easily  worked,  by  forging  and  rolling
into  very  thin  sheets  (tin  foil),  which  are  used  for  wrapping  many
articles  to  preserve  them  from  moisture,  tkc.  In  this  case,  however,
and  in  many  others,  lead  is  mixed  with  the  tin,  which,  within  certain
limits,  does  not  alter  the  ductility.  Whilst  so  soft  at  the  ordinary
temperatures  tin  becomes  brittle  at  200°,  before  fusing.  Tin  powder
may  be  easily  obtained  if  the  metal  be  fused  and  then  stirred  whilst
cooling.  At  a  white  heat  tin  may  be  distilled,  but  with  more  diflBculty
than  zinc. If  molten  tin  comes  into  contact  with  oxygen,  it  oxidises,

^  ''»^  Emilianoflf  (1«90)  states  that  in  the  cold  of  the  Russian  winter  80  out  of  200
tin  moulds  for  candles  were  spoilt  through  becoming  quite  brittle.

^'  The  tin  deiM)sited  by  an  electric  current  from  a  neutral  solution  of  SnCl^  easily
oxidises  and  becomes  coated  with  SuO  (Vignon,  1889).

SluroS  AKD  THE  OTHEB  ELKMENTS  OF  THE  FOFRIH  OHOUP 127

forming  Btannic  oxide,  SnO„  find  its  vapour  burng  witli  a  white  Samit.
At  ordinary  tumperaluri^ti  tin  does  not  oxidine,  and  thia  very  important
property  of  tin  allows  it  to  be  applied  in  many  oas&s  tor  coTeriiig  other
metals  to  prevent  their  oxidising.  Thifi  ia  termed  tinning.  Iron  and
eoppor  are  frequently  tinned.  Iron  and  steel  sheets,  coated  with  tin,
hear  the  nume  of  tin  plate  (for  the  most  part  made  in  England),  and  are
used  for  numerous  purposes.  Tin  plate  is  prepared  by  immersing  iron
sheets,  previously  thoroughly  cleansed  by  acid  and  mechanical  means,
intf>  molten  tin."  ■'''

Tin  with  copper  forms  bronze,  an  alloy  which  ia  most  extensively
used  in  the  arts.  Bronze  has  various  colours  and  a.  variety  of  phy-
sical properties,  according  to  the  relative  amount  of  copper  and  tin
which  it  contains.  With  an  excess  of  copper  the  alloy  hiia  a  yellow
colour  ;  the  admixtura  of  tin  imparts  considerable  hardness  and
elasticity  to  the  copper.  An  alloy  containing  78  parts  of  copper  and
al>out  22  per  cent,  of  tin  is  sa  elastic  that  it  is  used  for  casting  bells,
which  naturally  require  a  very  elastic  and  hard  alloy.'" For  casting

51  01.  It  ilier  this  the  roatiiig  of  tin  be  r»pidlj  cooled — tor  inHlance,  by  dulling
witlet  over  it — Jl  cirBtalliwa  into  divtrw  Btnr-shaped  agnma,  wliicli  bHronip  vieible
wliBn  Uie  sheetH  are  first  ioimerKd  in  dilute aqua  legia  and  then  in n  Hilulioii ot

Tim  costing  of  iron  b;  tin,  guards  it  igaiast  the  direot  Hoceaa  of  air,  bat  il  ouly  iire-
cerves  the  iron  from  oiidatitin  so  long  as  it  toaas  n.  perfedtl;  coiitinaone  cuatlng.  II
the  iron  U  left  bare  in  cerlun  places,  it  trill  be  ponerfolly  oiJdiaed  at  IheHe  spots,
because  the  tin  is  eleetro-Qegative  with  respect  to  the  iron,  and  thus  the  oiidation
ik  eotifined  entirely  to  the  iron  in.  Uu-  pmscui^e  ol  tin.  Hence  n  r-oatiuK  of  tin  orer
iron  object*  only  partially  preaerres  them  [ram  ranting.  In  this  retpect  a  C'Oiitiiig  nf
line  in  more  eSecloal.  However,  a  dense  nnd  invariable  alloy  ih  formed  over  tin?
RUrfaca  of  contact  of  the  iron  ajid  tin,  which  binds  the  coating  of  tiD  to  the  remaining
mass  of  tlie  iron.  Tin  may  be  fused  with  cast  iron,  and  gives  a,  greyish-white  alloy,
which  is  very  easily  coat,  and  ii  Died  for  coating  many  objects  for  which  iron  by  itself
would  be  onsnitable  owing  to  its  ready  ondisability  and  porosity.  The  coaling  of  copper
objeott  bf  tin  is  generally  done  to  ]>reiien-e  the  copper  from  the  action  of  acid  liqnidsi
which  would  attack  the  eoppor  in  the  presence  of  air  and  convert  it  into  soluble  salts.
Tin  is  not  acted  on  io  thia  manner,  and  therefore  copper  veasoti  for  the  preparation  of
food  should  be  tinned.

"  The  ancient  Chineae  alloys,  containing  about  SO  p.c.  of  tin  (apeciSc  gravity  of
alliiys  abont  SD),  which  have  been  rapidly  cooled,  are  distinguished  for  tlieir  resonance
oud  elastii-ity.  These  alloys  were  ronnerly  manofoDtiired  in  large  quantities  in  China  (or
the  inuncid  inatnunents  known  w  loia-tomB.  Owing  lo  their  hardness,  alloys  of  this
nOitare  ore  also  employed  tor  casting  guns,  bearings,  £c.,  and  on  alloy  containing  about
11  p,c.  at  Uii  (vorrespondJDg  with  the  ratio  CuuSn)  is  known  as  gun-melol.  Tlie  addition
ot  a  onall  qnuitily  of  phoaphorui,  up  to  9  p.  c,  renders  bronze  still  harder  and  more
elastic,  and  the  alloy  so  fonued  is  now  tued  under  the  name  of  phospbor-broDze.

The  alloy  SnCoj  is  brittle,  of  a  blniah  colour,  and  baa  nothing  in  oommaD  with  either
coppoc  or  tin  in  its  appearance  or  properties.  II  remains  perfectly  homogeneaus  on  dooI.
ing.  and  ncqnii'ea  a  crystalline  stmcture  (RicheJ.  All  these  signs  cloarly  indicate  that
the  alloy  SaCoj  is  a  prudnct  of  chemical  comliination,  which  ia  also  seen  to  lie  the  caw
'ensity.S-ei.  Hod  there  been  no  contraction,  the  density  of  the  alloy  would  be
I  tlie  heaineat  of  nil  the  alloys  of  tin  and  copper,  hecanso  the  density  of  tin  is

128  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

statues  and  various  large  or  small  ornamental  articles  alloys  containing
2  to  5  p.  c.  of  tin,  10  to  30  p.  c.  of  zinc,  and  65  to  85  p.  c.  of  copper  are
used.^**  Tin  is  also  often  used  alloyed  with  lead,  for  making  various
objects — for  instance,  drinking  vessels.

Tin  decomposes  the  vapour  of  water  when  heated  with  it,  liberating
the  hydrogen  and  forming  stannic  oxide.  Sulphuric  acid,  diluted  with  a
considerable  quantity  of  water,  does  not  act,  or  at  all  events  acts  very
slightly,  on  tin,  but  tin  reduces  hot  strong  sulphuric  acid,  when  not
only  sulphurous  anhydride  but  also  sulphuretted  hydrogen  is  evolved.
Hydrochloric  acid  acts  very  easily  on  tin,  with  evolution  of  hydrogen
and  formation  of  stannous  chloride,  SnCl^,  in  solution,  which,  with  an
excess  of  hydrochloric  acid  and  access  of  air,  is  converted  into  stannic
chloride  :  SnCl,  +  2HC1  -f  O  =  SnCl4  -f  HgC^e  bi»  Nitric  acid  dUuted
with  a  considerable  quantity  of  water  dissolves  tin  at  the  ordinary  tem-
perature, whilst  the  nitric  acid  itself  is  reduced,  forming,  amongst  other
products,  ammonia  and  hydroxylamine.  Here  the  tin  passes  into  solu-
tion in  the  form  of  stannous  nitrate.  Stronger  nitric  acid  (also  more
dilute,  when  heated)  transforms  the  tin  into  its  highest  grade  of  oxida-
tion, Sn02,  but  the  latter  then  appears  as  the  so-called  metastannic

729  and  of  copper  8*8.  The  alloy  SnCu4,  specific  gravity  877,  has  similar  properties.
All  the  alloys  except  SnCaj  and  SnCu4  split  up  on  cooling;  a  x)ortion  richer  in  copper
solidifies  first  (this  phenomenon  is  termed  the  liquation  of  an  alloy),  but  the  above  two
alloys  do  not  split  up  on  cooling.  In  these  and  many  similar  facts  we  can  clearly  dis-
tinguish a  chemical  union  between  the  metals  forming  an  alloy.  The  alloys  of  tin  and
copper  were  known  in  verj'  remote  ages,  before  iron  was  used.  The  alloys  of  zinc  and
tin  are  less  used,  but  alloys  composed  of  zinc,  tin,  and  copx>er  frequently  replace  the  more
costly  bronze. Concerning  the  alloys  of  lead  see  Note  46.

^  An  excellent  proof  of  the  fact  that  alloys  and  solutions  are  subject  to  law  is  given,
amongst  others,  by  the  application  of  Raoult's  method  (Chapter  I.,  Note  49)  to  solutions
of  different  metals  in  tin.  Thus  Heycock  and  Neville  (1889)  showed  that  the  temperature
of  solidification  of  molten  tin  (226'^"4)  is  lowered  by  the  presence  of  a  small  quantity  of  other
metals  in  proportion  to  the  concentration  of  the  solution.  The  following  were  the  reduc-
tions of  the  temperatiu-e  of  solidification  of  tin  obtained  by  dissolving  in  it  atomic  propor-
tions of  different  metals  (for  example,  65  parts  of  zinc  in  11,800  parts  of  tin) ;  Zn  2°*58,
Cu  2°-47,  Ag  2°C7,  Cd  2°16,  Pb  2^22,  Hg  2^8,  Sb  2°  [rise],  Al  l°-84.  As  Raoult's  method
(Chapter  VII.)  enables  the  molecular  weight  to  be  determined,  the  almost  perfect  identity
of  the  resultant  figures  (except  for  aluminium)  shows  that  the  molecules  of  copper,  silver,
lead,  and  antimony  contain  one  atom  in  the  molecule^  like  zinc,  mercury,  and  cadmium.
They  obtained  the  same  result  (1890)  for  Mg,  Na,  Ni,  Au,  Pd,  Bi  and  In.  It  should  here
be  mentioned  that  Ramsay  (1889)  for  the  same  puriwse  (the  determination  of  the  mole-
cular weight  of  metals  on  the  basis  of  their  mutual  solution)  took  advantage  of  the
variation  of  the  vapour  tension  of  mercury  {see  Vol.  I.,  p.  134),  containing  various  metals
in  solution,  and  he  also  found  that  the  above-mentioned  metals  contain  but  one  atom  in
tlie  molecule.

3ti  bit  xhe  action  of  a  mixture  of  hydrochloric  acid  and  tin  forms  an  excellent  means
of  reducing,  wherein  both  the  hydrogen  liberated  by  the  mixture  (at  the  moment  of
sepivration)  and  the  stannous  chloride  act  as  i)owerful  reducing  and  deoxidising  agents.
Thus,  for  instance,  by  this  mixture  nitro-compounds  are  transformed  into  amido-com-
|)Ounds — that  is,  the  elements  of  the  group  NOj  are  reduced  to  NHj.

9IUC0N  AND  THE  OTBEK  ELEMESTS  OF  THE  PODBTII  OHOUP 129

uuid,  whicb  does  not  dissolve  in  nitric  acid,  and  therefore  the  tin  does
not  pass  into  solution.  Feeble  acids — for  instance,  carbonic  and  organic
acids^do  not  act  on  tin  even  in  the  presence  of  oxy^n,  because  tin  does
not  form  any  powerful  bases.

It  is  important  tii  remark  as  a  clia.racteristia  of  tic  that  it  is  re-
duced from  itH  solutions  by  many  metals  which  aremore  easily  oxidised,
as,  for  instance,  by  zinc.

In  coiitbiiuUivn,  tin  appears  in  the  two  types,  8nX,  and  SuX^,"
compounds  of  the  inter.meiliate  type,  Sn^X,-,,  being  also  known,  but  these
Utter  pass  with  remarkable  facility  iii  most  cases  into  compounds  of
the  higher  and  lower  types,  and  therefore  the  form  SrXj  cannot  be
considered  as  independent.

Stannous  tuade,  SnO,  Jn  an  anhy«lrous  condition  is  obtained  by
boiling  solutions  of  stannons  salts  with  alkalis,  the  first  action  of
the  alkali  being  to  prenipitate  a  white  hydrate  nf  stannous  oxide,
Sn(OH)jSnO.  The  latter  when  heated  parts  with  water  as  easily  aa  the
hydrate  of  copper  oxide.  In  this  form  stannous  oxide  is  a  black  crystal-
line powder  (specilic  gravity  6-7)  capable  of  further  oxidation  when
heated.  The  hydrate  is  freely  solable  in  acids,  and  also  in  potassium
and  iiodiuii)  hydroxides,  but  not  in  aqueous  ammonia.^'*  This  property
indicates  the  feeble  basic  properties  of  this  lower  oxide,  which  acts  in
many  casesasare<:lucing  agent. ^^ Among  the  compounds  corresponding

^  Mun}-  inUtilc  unnpoundi  ot  tin  ue  knonn,  nhowi  mnlpuulurvfei^litH  c&n  tbereldfe
be  euUbliBbci]  from  tbvit  VKpnar  dsnBitien.  Amnni;  tb«ta  tBBj  be  mentianed  tUnnic
chloride,  SuCI,,  uid  Bbumii:  ethide.  Sii(C)Bs)4  (the  Inltitr  boilH  st  about  \W).  But
V.  UcTer  foarKl  the  vopniir  denait;  of  Htiuinonit  cldoride.  SnCI^  to  be  vottuble  between  its
boiling  point  (HOA")  uid  1100",  ulriDg,  it  woold  seaoi,  to  the  fact  thul  the  molecule  then
ruin*  hvni  Sn.,Cl,  to  SnClj.bot  tbeTttpODT  den nity  proved  to  be  less  than  tliat  indicated
by  the  Sntt  uid  greater  tluui  that  «howu  by  the  second  lominia,  nlthnngh  it  appimcliea
to  the  latter  au  tlie  teinperatnre  riaea — that  is,  it  preiieiite  a  Bimilar  plieiiomenon  lo  that
olmerved  in  tile  p«awji-  of  N.,04  into  NO,.

"  When  rapidlj  boiled,  an  alltaline  solution  of  Btanuonii  oiida  deposits  tin  and  tomiB
Alaonic  oiiOe,  ISnO^Sn  +SdO,,  which  remuub  in  the  alkaline  solution.

=<•  Weber  (IStta)  by  precipitating  a  solution  of  stauuoas  chloride  with  sodiom  sulphite
(this  salt  as  «  redaciog  agent  prevents  tlie  oxidation  ot  the  stnuDoua  compound)  and  dis-
•olving  the  muhed  p>«cipitate  in  nitric  acid,  obtained  crjvtala  of  ilannout  nilrate,
Sa(NOj)i,90H30,  tm  refrigerating  the  solution.  Tbis^crjstallo-hydrate  eaail;  melts,  and
is  deliqoescenL  Btwidea  this,  a  more  sUble  anhydrons  basic  salt,  SniNO,)j,8DO,  it.
eauly  lonned.  In  general,  staniLons  oxide  an  4  feeble  base  easily  fcmifl  basic  salts.  Just
as  cnpric  and  lead  oxides  do.  For  the  same  reBBon  SnXj  easily  forms  double  salts.
Thus  apotassium  salt.  &nK^l„H,0,  and  eepeciaUy  an  ammonium  salt,  »q(NH,),CIi,HiO.
called  pinA  toll,  art  known.  Some  of  these  uUls  are  used  in  the  arte,  owiug  U>  their
bdog  more  stable  than  tin  salts  alone.  Stannous  bromide  and  iodide,  SuBr^  and  Sulj.
tesKOibla  the  eblotide  in  many  respects.

Aniuug  other  stannous  salts  a  sulphate,  BuBO,,  is  known.  It  is  formed  as  a  crystal-
tine  iniwder  wbeu  a  solatian  of  stannous  oxide  in  sulpbaiic  acid  is  evaporated  under  the
nearer  u(  aa  ur-pump. The  feeble  basic  character  of  the  stannous  oxide  is  clear);^

It  dec.

extreme  facility,  when  heated,  is

130  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

with  stannous  oxide  the  most  remarkable  and  the  one  most  frequently
used  is  stannous  chloride  or  cMoride  of  tin,  SnClj,  also  called  proto-
chloride  of  tin  (because  it  is  the  lowest  chloride,  containing  half  as
much  Gl  as  SnCl4).  It  is  a  transparent,  colourless,  crystalline  sub-
stance, melting  at  250°  and  boiling  at  606**.  Water  dissolves  it,  without
visible  change  (in  reality  partial  decomposition  occurs,  as  we  shall  see
presently).  It  is  also  soluble  in  alcohol.  It  is  obtained  by  heating  tin
in  dry  hydrochloric  acid  gas,  the  hydrogen  being  then  libei*ated,  or
by  dissolving  metallic  tin  in  hot  strong  hydrochloric  acid  and  then
evaporating  quickly.  On  cooling,  crystals  of  the  monoclinic  system  are
obtained  having  the  composition  SnCl2,2H20.  An  aqueous  solution  of
this  substance  absorbs  oxygen  from  the  atmosphere,  and  gives  a  precipi-
tate containing  stannic  oxide.  From  this  it  follows  that  a  solution  of
stannous  chloride  will  act  as  a  reducing  agent,  a  fact  frequently  made
use  of  in  chemical  investigations — for  example,  for  reducing  metals
from  their  solutions — since  even  mercury  may  be  reduced  to  a  metallic
state  from  its  salts  by  means  of  stannous  chloride.  This  reducing
property  is  also  employed  in  the  arts,  especially  in  the  dyeing  industry,
where  this  substance  in  the  form  of  a  crystalline  salt  finds  an  extensive
application,  and  is  known  as  tin  salt  or  tin  crystals.

Stannic  oxid^,  SnOg,  occurring  in  nature  as  tinstone,  or  c<i8siferite,  is
formed  during  the  oxidation  or  combustion  of  heated  tin  in  air  as  a
white  or  yellowish  powder  which  fuses  with  difl&cultjr.  It  is  prepared
in  large  quantities,  being  used  as  a  white  vitreous  mixture  for  coat-
ing ordinary  tiles  and  similar  earthenware  objects  with  a  layer  of
easily  fusible  glass  or  enamel.  Acid  solutions  of  stannic  oxide  treated
with  alkalis,  and  alkaline  solutions  treated  with  acids,  give  a  pre-
cipitate of  stannic  hydroxide,  Sn(0H)4,  also  known  as  stannic  acid,
which,  when  heated,  gives  up  water  and  leaves  the  anhydride,  SnO,,
which  is  insoluble  in  acids,  clearly  showing  the  feebleness  of  its  basic
character.  When  fused  with  alkali  hydroxides  (not  with  their  carbo-
nates or  acid  sulphates),  an  alkaline  compound  is  obtained  which  is
soluble  in  water.  Stannic  hydroxide,  like  the  hydrates  of  silica,  is  a
colloidal  substance,  and  presents  several  different  modifications,  de-
pending on  the  method  of  preparation,  but  having  an  identical  compo-
sition ;  the  various  hydroxides  have  also  a  different  appearance,  and
act  differently  with  reagents.  For  instance,  a  distinction  is  made
between  ordinary  stannic  acid  and  metastannic  acid. Stannic  acid  is

and  Bulphurous  anhydride,  but  it  easily  forms  doable  salts  with  the  salts  of  the  alkali
metals.

In  gaseoas  hydrochloric  acid,  stannous  chloride,  SnCl2,2H<}0,  forms  a  liquid  ha>nn^
the  composition  SnCl3,HCI,SH.jO  (sp  gr.  2*2,  freezes  at  —27°),  and  a  solid  salt,  SnCl:{,H.>0
(Engel).

SILICON  ASD  THE  OTHER  ELEMEST3  OF  THE  FOURTH  GROUP 181

produced  by  precipitation  hy  soda  or  ommontu  from  a  fresh ly- prepared
solution  of  stannic  chloride,  SnCl,,  in  water  ;  on  drying  the  precipitate
thuB  obtained,  a  n  on- crystal  line  mass  is  formed,  which  is  freely  soluble
Id  strong  hydrochloric  or  nitric  acids,  and  also  in  potassium  and  sodiuni
bydroxidea.  This  ordinary  stannic  acid  may  be  still  better  obtained
from  sodium  stannat*  by  the  action  of  acids.  MetasCannii-  iteid  is
insoluble  in  sulphuric  and  nitric  acids.  It  is  obtained  in  the  fonii  of
a  heavy  white  powder  by  treating  tin  with  nitric  acid  ;  hydrochloric
acid  do<^s  not  dit^olve  it  immediately,  but  changes  it  to  such  an  extent
that,  after  pouring  off  the  acid,  water  extracts  the  stannic  chloride,
•SnCI|,  already  formed.  Dilute  alkiilis  not  only  dissolve  nietiLsbinnic
acid,  but  also  transform  it  into  salts,  whicb,  slowly,  yet  completely,
dissolve  in  jntri-  iPiUnr,  but  are  insoluble  even  in  dilute  alkali
hydroxides.  Dilut*  hydi-ocliloric  acid,  especially  when  boiling,  changes
the  ordinary  hydrate  into  metastatinic  acid.  On  this  depends,  by
the  way,  the  formation  uf  a  white  precipitate,  stannic  hydroxide,  from
solutions  ni  stannous  and  ebmnic  chlorides  diluted  with  water.  The
stannic  oxide  first  dissolved  changes  under  the  influence  of  hydro-
chloric acid  into  metastannic  itcid,  which  is  insoluble  in  water  in  the
presence  of  hydrochloric  acid.  Soltitiona  of  metastannic  acid  differ
from  solutions  of  ordinary  stannic  Hcid,  and  in  the  presence  of  alkali
they  change  into  solutions  of  ordinary  acid,  so  that  metastannic  acid
corresponds  princijHilly  with  the  auid  compounds  of  i^tanuic  oxide,
and  ordinary  stannic  iLcid  with  the  alkaline  compounds.'"  Grahnm
obtained  a  soluble  colloidal  hydroxide  ;  it  is  subject  to  the  same  trans-
formations that  are  in  general  peculiar  tu  colloids.

Stannic  oxide  shows  the  properties  of  a  slightly  enei^tic  and  inter-
mediate oxide  (like  water,  silica,  Ac.) ;  that  is  to  say,  it  forms  saline
compounds  both  with  bases  and  with  acids,  but  both  are  easily  de-
composed, and  are  but  slightly  stable.  But  still  the  acid  character  is
more  clearly  developed than  the  liasic,  as  in  silica,  germanio  oxide,

*°  Fr^mj  HilppiHien  tlie  CBuae  nf  Cbe  diSerencu  to  roiisiet  in  a  difference  ot  iwl;-
meriutiOQ,  uid  coniiiderB  thkt  tlie  ordiiuij  scid  cmTeBiionds  witli  the  oxide  SnO»  and
Ibe  meU-acid  with  the  oii<1e  BnjOjg,  bat  it  is  mare  probable  tlmt  both  nra  iKiijmeric
bat  in  ft  diSenmt  degrue.  Stuiait'  acid  with  sodiam  c«-bonit(«  Kirei  H  siUt  ot  the  com-
poeition  Nit,8nOj.  The  aiuiie  salt  is  alw>  obtained  bj  tailing  metutiuinic  acid  with
■odinm  hydrolide,  whilst  metaBUnnic  add  giTet  a  uJt,  Nu,SnOj,4SnOg  |Frilui;),  when
treated  with  a  dilute  HxlBtiun  of  nlkoli;  moreover,  Btannic  ac^id  is  aleo  Bolnblein  the  nrdj-
iiaij  stuumte,  Nik,SnOs  (WeWr),  «  that  both  HUoiiic  acidndilie  Inth  tonua  of  silica)  ore
capable  of  polymeriaatiun,  and  probablj  onlj  differ  in  \i*  degree.  In  general,  there  ia
here  a  great  reaembliuice  to  ailica,  and  Grohaiu  obtaiued  a  Holntionot  atonnioacid  bjthe
direct  dialjuB  uf  it*  (Ukaliae  soluliou.  Tbe  nioin  ilifleronw  between  these  ocidi  is  bhnl
the  metd^add  i>  solnble  in  hydrochloric  acid,  slid  gives  a  preeipitHte  with  HUlphuric  acid
■od  stonnouii  dJotide,  which  do  not  prepipitale  tha  ordinary  acid.  Viguon  (IS**)
id  that  niare  heat  U  evolved  in  dJBBolving  >tanRiG  acid  in  KHO  l^on  mi^taataniuo.

132  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

and  lead  dioxide.  This  determines  the  character  of  the  compounds
SnX4,  corresponding  to  stannic  chloride,  SnCl4  (also  called  tetrachloride
of  tin).  It  is  obtained  in  an  anhydrous  condition  by  the  direct  action
of  chlorine  on  tin,  and  is  then  easily  purified,  because  it  is  a  liquid
boiling  at  1 1 4°,  and  therefore  can  be  easily  distilled.  Its  specific
gravity  is  2*28  (at  0°),  and  it  fumes  in  the  open  air  (spiritus  fumans
libavii),  reacting  on  the  moisture  of  the  air,  thus  showing  the
properties  of  a  chloranhydride.  Water  however  does  not  at  first
decompose  it,  but  dissolves  it,  and  on  evaporation  gives  the  crystallo-
hydrate  SnCl4,5H20.  If  but  little  water  be  taken,  crystals  containing
SnCl4,3H20  are  formed,  which  part  with  one-third  of  the  water  when
placed  under  the  receiver  of  the  air-pump.  A  large  quantity  of  water
however,  especially  on  heating,  causes  a  precipitate  of  metastannic
acid  ^*  and  formation  of  HCl.

"  The  fomiatioii  of  the  compound  SnCl4,3H.20  is  accompanied  by  so  great  a  contrac
tiou  that  theHe  crystals,  although  they  contain  water,  are  heavier  than  the  anhydrous
chloride  SnCl.j.  The  pentft-hydrated  crystallo-hydrate  absorbs  dry  hydrochloric  acid,  and
gives  a  liquid  of  specific  gravity  1"971,  which  at  0°  yields  crystals  of  the  compound
SnCl4,2HCl,6H.>0  (it  corresponds  with  the  similar  platinum  compound),  which  melt  at  20^
into  a  liquid  of  siwoific  gravity  1"925  (Engel).

Stannic  chloride  combines  with  ammonia  (SnCl|,4NH5),  hydrocyanic  acid,  phospho^
retted  hydrogen,  phosphorus  pentachloride  (SnCl4,PCl5),  nitrous  anhydride  and  its
chloranhydride  (SnCl4,N.705  and  SnCl4,2NOCl),  and  with  metallic  chlorides  (for  example,
K28nClg,(NH4).2SnClg,  &c.)  In  general,  a  highly-developed  faculty  for  combination  is
observed  in  it.

Tin  does  not  combine  directly  with  iodine,  but  if  its  filings  be  heated  in  a  closed  tube
with  a  solution  of  icxline  in  carbon  bisulphide,  it  forms  staimic  iodide,  Snl^,  in  the  form
of  red  rx-tahedra  which  fuse  at  142*^  and  volatilise  at  295°. The  fluorine  compotmda  of
tin  have  a  special  interest  in  the  history  of  chemistry,  because  they  give  a  series  of
double  salts  which  are  isomorphous  with  the  salts  of  hydrofiuosilicic  acid,  SiRsF,^,  and
this  fact  ser\-ed  to  confirm  the  formula  SiOQ  for  silica,  as  the  formula  SnOj  was  indubi-
table. Although stannic  fluoride^  SnF4,  is  almost  unknown in  the free state,  its
corresponding  double  salts  are  very  easily  formed  by  the  action  of  hydrofluoric  acid  on
alkaline  solutions  of  stannic  oxide ;  thus,  for  example,  a  crystalline  salt  of  the  oomposi^
tion  SnK.2F(},H>0  is  obtained  by  dissolving  stannic  oxide  in  potassium  hydroxide  and
then adding hydrofluoric acid to  the  solution. Tlie  banum salt,  SnBftF^iSH^sO,  is
sparingly  soluble  like  its  corresponding  silicofluoride. Tlie  more  soluble  salt  of  sirontiam,
SnSrFfi/iHjO,  crjstallises  very  well,  and  is  therefore  more  important  for  the  purposes  of
research ;  it  is  iHomoq)hous  witli  the  corresponding  salt  of  silicon  (and  titanium) ;  the
magnesium  salt  contains  (JH-^O.

Stannic  sulphide,  81182,  is  formed,  as  a  yellow  precipitate,  by  the  action  of  sul-
phuretted hydrogen  on  acid  solutions  of  stannic  salts ;  it  is  easily  soluble  in  ammonium
and  potassium  sulphides,  because  it  has  an  acid  character,  and  then  forms  thiostannat^s
(see  Chapt«rr  XX. j  In  an  anhydrous  state  it  has  the  form  of  brilliant  golden  yellow
plates,  which  may  be  obtained  by  heating  a  mixture  of  finely-divided  tin,  sulphur,  and
sal-ammoniac  for  a  considerable  time.  It  is  sometimes  used  in  this  form  under  the
name  of  mosaic  gold,  as  a  cheap  substitute  for  gold-leaf  in  gilding  wood  articles.  On
ignition  it  parts  with  a  |K)rtion  of  its  sulphur,  and  is  converted  into  stannous  sulphide
SnS.  It  is  soluble  in  caustic  alkalis.  Uydrocliloric  acid  does  not  dissolve  the  anhydrous
crystalline  conii>ound,  but  the  j)recipitated  j>owdery  sulphide  is  soluble  in  boiling  strong
hydrochloric  acid,  with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen  sulphide.

tCON  AND  THB  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  GROUI' 133

The  alkali  compoitndg  oj'  glannie  oj^trfe— tliut  is,  tlie  compounds  in
irbich  it  pl»ys  the  pirt  of  an  acid,  corresponding  in  this  respect  to  the
Oipounds  of  silira  iind  other  Eiuhydrides  of  the  coni|ioBition  ROj— iiie
r  easily  formed  und  are  used  in  the  art«.  Ttieir  composition  in
L'moat  cases  corresponds  with  the  foi-mula  SnM,0,— thnt  is,  SnO(MO)j,
similttr  to  CX")(M;0)„  where  M=K,  :Sa.  Acida,  even  feeble  acids  like
carbonic,  decam|)Ose  the  salts,  like  the  corresponding  compounds  of  alu-
mina or  silica.  In  or<ler  to  obtain /'ofnusijun  utannat'',  which  crystallises
in  rhoral)ohedra,  and  has  the  conipoaition  HnKjOs^SHjO,  potaBsium
hydroxide  (C'  parts)  is  fused,  and  metostannic  acid  (3  parts)  griidually
added.  Sodium  glaniia/e  is  prepared  in  practice  in  large  t|UantitieE  by
healing  a  solution  of  caustic  soda  with  lead  oxide  .and  metallic  tin.
In  thLs  last  case  an  .ilkaline  solution  ot  lead  oxide  is  formed,  and  the  tin
acl«  OD  the  solution  in  such  a  way  as  to  reduce  the  lead  to  the  metallic
state,  and  itself  passes  into  solution.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  lejid
displaces  tiji  when  in  combination  with  acids,  whilst  tin,  on  the  con-
trary, displaces  lead  from  its  alkali  compounds.  By  dissolving  the
mass  obtainotl  in  water,  and  adding  alcohol,  sodium  stannnte  is  pre-
cipitated, which  may  then  be  dissolved  in  water  and  purified  by
re -crystallisation.  In  this  case  it  has  the  composition  SnNa.jOjiSHjO
if  separated  fnim  strong  solutions,  and  SnNa^Oj.lOH.^U  when  cryatal-
lisrHi  at  a  low  temperature  from  dilute  solutions.  In  the  arts  this
salt  is  used  as  a  mordant  in  dyeing  operations.  With  a  cold  solution
of  sodium  hydroxide  meta.atannic  acid  forms  a  salt  of  the  compositicn
(NaHO)„5SnO„3H,0,  from  which  Fr^my  drew  his  conclusions  con-
cerning the  polymerism  of  metastannic  acid.  Tin,  like  other  metals
and  many  metalloids,  gives  a  peroxide  form  of  combination  or  per-
irlannic  oxidi.  This  substance  was  obtained  by  Spring  (1889)  in  the
form  of  a  hydrate,  H.^Sn,0,=2(Sn03)HjO,  by  mixing  a  solution  of
8nCl„  containing  an  excess  of  HCI,  with  freshly  prepared  peroxide
of  barium.  A  cloudy  liquid  is  then  obtiuned,  and  this  after  being
subjected  to  dialysis  leaves  a  gelatinous  mass  which  on  drying  is
found  to  have  the  composition  .Sn.iHjOf.  Above  100°  this  substance
pves  off  oxygen  and  leaves  Sndlj.  It  is  evident  that  SnOj  iie&n
the  same  relation  to  SnO,  aa  H»0,^  to  HjO  or  ZnO,  to  ZnO,  &c.

Tin  occupies  the  same  position  amongst  the  analogues  of  silicon  as
cadmium  and  indium  amongst  the  analogues  of  magnesium  and
aluminium  respectively,  and  as  in  each  <)f  these  cases  the  heavier
analogues  with  a  high  atomic  weight  and  a  special  combination  of
jiroperties — namely,  mercury  and  thallium— are  known,  so  also  for
silicon  we  have  lead  as  the  heaviest  anali^ue  (Ph^206),  with  a  series
ed  and  special  properties. The  higher  type,  PbX,^for

1S4  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMSTRY

instance,  PbO^ — is  in  a  chemical  sense  fmr  less  stable  tJian  the  lower
type,  PbX.  The  ocdinarr  compounds  oi  lead  correspond  with  the
latter,  and  in  addition  to  this,  PbO,  although  not  particularly  ener-
getic, is  still  a  decided  base  easily  forming  basic  salts,  PbX^  (PbO),.
Although  the  compounds  PbX|  are  onstable  they  offer  many  points  of
analogy  with  the  corresponding  ccMnpoonds  of  tin  SnO^  ;  this  is  seen,
for  instance,  in  the  fact  that  PbO^  is  a  feeble  acid,  giving  the  salt
PbK}^^},  that  PbCli  is  a  liquid  like  SnCl4  which  is  not  affected  by
sulphuric  acid,  and  that  PbF|  gives  double  salts,  like  SnF4  or  SiF^
(Brauner  1894.  See  Chapter  IL,  Note  49  bis);  Pb(CjH5)4  also
resembles  Sn(C2H^)4  ic.  All  this  shows  that  lead  is  a  true  analogue
of  tin,  as  Hg  is  of  cadmium.^'  ^^

Lecui  is  found  in  nature  in  considerable  masses,  in  the  form  of
galena,  Uad  ^uiphidej  PbS.**  The  specific  gravity  of  galena  is  7*58,
colour  grey  ;  it  crystallises  in  the  r^ular  system,  and  has  a  fine
metallic  lustre.  Both  the  native  and  artificial  sulphides  are  insoluble
in  acids  (hydrogen  sulphide  gives  a  black  precipitate  with  the  salts
PbX  2).^^  **^  When  heated,  lead  melts,  and  in  the  open  air  is  either  totally
or  partially  transformed  into  white  lead  sulphate,  PbSO^,  as  it  also  is
by  many  oxidising  agents  (hydrogen  peroxide,  potassium  nitrate).
Lead  sulphate  is  also  insoluble  in  water/'  and  lead  is  but  rarely  met
with  in  this  form  in  nature.  The  chromates,  vanadates,  phosphates,  and
similar  salts  of  lead  are  also  somewhat  rare.  The  carbonate,  PbCOs,  is
sometimes  found  in  large  masses,  especially  in  the  Altai  region.  Lead
sulphide  is  often  worked  for  extracting  the  silver  which  it  contains  ;
and  as  the  lead  itself  also  finds  manifold  industrial  applications,  this
work  is  carried  out  on  jin  exceedingly  large  scale.  Many  methods  are
employed.  Sometimes  the  lead  sulphide  is  decomposed  by  heating  it
with  cast  iron. The  iron  takes  up  the  sulphur  from  the  lead  and  forms

41  bu  Although  this  has  long  been  generally  recognised  from  the  resemblance  between
the  two  metals,  still  from  a  chemical  point  of  view  it  has  only  been  demonstnted  by
means  of  the  periodic  law.

*^  Mixed  ores  of  copper  compoands  together  with  PbS  luid  ZnS  lure  frequently
found  in  the  most  ancient  primary  rocks.  As  the  separation  of  the  metals  themselves
is  difficult,  the  ores  are  separated  by  a  method  of  selection  or  mechanical  sorting.  Such
mixed  ores  occur  in  Russia,  in  many  parts  of  the  Caucasus,  and  in  the  Donetz  district
(at  Xagolchik).

**  *»'*  Lead  sulphide  in  the  presence  of  zinc  and  hydrochloric  acid  is  completely
reduced  to  metallic  lead,  all  the  sulphur  being  given  off  as  hydrogen  sulphide.

^  Lea<l  sulphate*,  PbS04,  occurs  in  nature  {angh'sitc)  in  transparent  brilliant  crystals
which  are  inomorphous  with  barium  sulphate,  luid  have  a  specific  gravity  of  6'8.  The
game  salt  is  forme<l  on  mixing  sulphuric  acid  or  its  soluble  salts  with  solutions  of  lead
Milts,  as  a  lieavy  white  precipitate,  which  is  insoluble  in  water  and  acids,  but  dissolves
in  a  solution  of  ammonium  tartrate  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  ammonia.  This,
lest  servos  to  distinguish  this  salt  from  the  similar  salts  of  strontium  and  barium.

8IUC0N  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  POUBTH  OEOUP 185

easily-faaibleiron  sulphide,  which  does  not  mix  with  the  heavii^r reduced
lead.  But  another  procesB  is  more  fr«quently  used  :  the  lead  ore  (it  must
be  clean  ;  that  is,  free  from  ejirthy  matter,  which  may  be  easily  removed
by  washing)  is  heated  in  a  reverberatory  furnace  to  a  moderate  tempera-
ture with  II  free  access  of  air.  During  this  operation  part  of  the  lead
sulphide  oxidises  and  forms  lead  sulphate,  FbSO,,  and  lead  oxide.
When  the  oxidation  of  part  of  the  lead  has  been  attained,  it  ia  neces-
sary to  shut  off  the  air  supply  and  increase  the  temperature,  then  the
oxidised  compounds  of  the  lead  enter  into  reaction  with  the  remaining
lead  sulphide,  with  formation  of  sulphurous  anhydride  and  metallic  lead.
At  fim  from  PbH  +  O^,,  fbO  +  SO,  are  formed,  and  alsofroni  PbS  +  O,
lead  sulphate  PbSO.,  and  then  FbO  and  PbSO,  react  with  the  remain
ing  PltS,  according  f«  the  e<|uationa  iPbO  -f  PbS  =  3Pb  +  SO,  and
alsoPbSU,  +PbS  =  2Pb  +  tiSOj."

The  appearance  of  lead  is  well  known  ;  its  Bpeciiic  gravity  is  ITS  ;
the  bluish  colour  and  well-marked  metjUhc  lustre  of  freshly-uut  lead
quickly  disappear  when  exposed  to  the  air,  because  it  becomes  coated
with  a  layer—  although  a  very  thin  layer — of  oxide  and  salts  formed
by  the  moisture  aud  itcids  in  the  atmosphere.  It  melts  at  3*20°,  and
crystallises  in  octahedra  on  cooling.  Its  softness  is  apparent  from
the  flexibility  of  lead  pipes  and  sheeta,  and  also  from  the  fact  that  it
may  be  cut  with  a  knife,  and  also  that  it  leaves  a  grey  streak  when
rubbed  on  paper.  On  account  of  its  being  so  soft,  lead  naturally
cannot  Ije  applied  in  many  ca.ses  where  most  metals  may  be  used  ;  but
on  the  other  baud  it  is  a  metal  which  is  not  ea.sily  changed  by
chemical  reagents,  and  as  it  is  capable  of  being  soldered  and  drawn
into  sheets,  &c.,  lead  is  most  valuable  for  many  t«chnical  uses.  Lead
pipes  are used  for  conveying  water  ''  and  many  other  Itijuids,  and

"  An-ordiiiB  to  J.  B,  Hunntij-  (WOll  till'  Innt  nuniBii  dMompoailioii  (Pb9  +  PbSO,
^  iPb-i-9SU,)  ix  retdl;  mncii  more  coiaplictiled,  and  in  fact  a  portiuti  of  Ihe  Flitl  is
ttiMolvcd  ill  Ihe  Pb,  lonuiii);  ■  tXng  GOntaiuinK  PbO.  PI)H  ui<1  PbSO,,  wlulst  a  portioD
ol  the  iMd  i^latilisex  irith  the  HO,  in  the  (41m  ol  w  compoDiul  PhSjOt,  which  in  tXao
formed  in  uther  I'tweB,  but  hsa  not  jut  been  tLnraut^hly  Htudied.

BmideH  the»e  melhcidB  for  extncting  luod  from  Pba  in  ito  oroa,  roasting  (the  removal
of  the  a  ill  the  form  of  SO,)  and  iimelling  with  charcoal  with  a  blast  in  the  wuiie
manner  an  in  the  mauufacLare  at  {ii(I  iron  (Cliapter  SJJl.)  are  also  emploved.

We  maif  xdd  that  PbS  in  uanttict  wtlL  Za  and  hydrochloric  acid  (which  has  no  action
apoiiPbKalanejentirelyditcampoHg,  running  UjBaod  uetallii:  lend  ;  PbS  +  Zn -;- 9H<.-J
=  Pb-fZnCI,-f-H,8.

Aalead  is  eaailyredaced  from  iU  riniB,  and  the  ore  ItHeK  has  a  inelillie  appeoiwiee,  it
Har^iriaing  that  it  was  known  to  the  ancients,  and  that  ita  prupertiei  were  famili

lo  Ibe  aluh

Hence

ic  lead,  reduced  fi

I  itut

living  Lt

-II*"

B  oF  LTystalti,  ih  called  *s

■  Fmhljr  tul  new  bwd  pip«x  <

oF  oxy^n,  carbonic  acid,  Ac,  i

136  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

sheet  lead  is  used  for  lining  all  kinds  of  vessels  containing  liquids —
(acids,  for  instance)  which  act  on  other  metals.  This  particularly  refers
to  sulphuric  and  hydrochloric  acids,  because  at  a  low  temperature  they
do  not  act  on  lead,  and  if  they  form  lead  sulphate,  PbS04,  and  chloride,
PbCl2,  these  salts  being  insoluble  in  water  and  in  acids,  cover  the
lead  and  protect  it  from  further  corrosion.*^  All  soluble  preparations
of  lead  are  poisonous.  At  a  white  heat  lead  may  be  partially  distilled  ;
the  vapours  oxidise  and  burn.  Lead  may  also  be  easily  oxidised  at
low  temperatures.  Lead  only  decomposes  water  at  a  white  heat,
and  does  not  liberate  hydrogen  from  acids,  with  the  exception  only
of  very  strong  hydrochloric  acid  and  then  only  when  boiling.
Sulphuric  acid  diluted  with  water  does  not  act  on  it,  or  only  acts
very  feebly  at  the  surface  ;  but  strong  sulphuric  acid,  when  heated,
is  decomposed  by  it,  with  the  evolution  of  sulphurous  anhydride.  The
best  solvent  for  lead  is  nitric  acid,  which  transforms  it  into  a  soluble
salt,  Pb(N03)2.

Although  acids  thus  have  directly  but  little  effect  on  lead,  and
this  is  one  of  its  most  important  practical  properties,  yet  when  air
has  free  nccess,  lead  (like  copper)  very  easify  reacts  tvith  many  acids,  even
with  those  which  are  comparatively  feeble.  The  action  of  acetic  acid
on  lead  is  particularly  striking  and  often  applied  in  practice.  If  lead
l>e  plunged  into  acetic  acid  it  does  not  change  at  all  and  does  not  pass
into  solution,  but  if  part  of  the  lead  be  immersed  in  the  acid,  and
the  other  part  remain  in  contact  with  the  air,  or  if  lead  be  merely
covered  with  a  thin  layer  of  acetic  acid  in  such  ^  way  that  the  air
is  practically  in  contact  with  the  metal,  then  it  unites  with  the  oxygen
of  the  air  to  form  oxide,  which  combines  with  the  acetic  acid  and
forms  lead  acetate,  soluble  in  water.  The  formation  of  lead  oxide  is
especially  marked  from  the  fiict  that  with  a  sufficient  quantity  of  air

lead  pipes  under  the  action  of  running  water  soon  become  coated  with  a  film  of  salts —
lead  sulphate,  carbonate,  chloride,  &c. — which  are  insoluble  in  water,  and  the  water  pipes
then  become  harmless.

**'*  Lead  is  used  in  the  arts,  and  owing  to  its  considerable  density,  it  is  cast,  mixed
with  small  quantities  of  other  metals,  into  shot.  A  considerable  amount  is  employed
(together  with  mercury)  in  extracting  gold  and  silver  from  poor  ores,  and  in  the  manu-
facture of  chemical  reagents,  and  especially  of  lead  cliromate.  Lead  chromate^  PbCrO^,
is  distinguished  for  its  brilliant  yellow  colour,  owing  to  which  it  is  employed  in  consider-
able quantities  as  a  dye,  mainly  for  dyeing  cotton  tissues  yellow.  It  is  formed  on  the  tissue
itself,  by  causing  a  soluble  salt  of  lead  to  react  on  potassium  chromate.  Lead  chromate
is  met  with  in  nature  as  '  red  lead  ore.'  It  is  insoluble  in  water  and  acetic  acid^  but
.it  dissolves  in  aqueous  potash.  The  so-called  pewter  vessels  often  consist  of  an  alloy  of
5  parts  of  tin  and  1  part  of  lead,  and  solder  is  composed  of  1  to  2  parts  of  tin  with  \  part
of  lead.  Amongst  the  alloys  of  lead  and  tin,  Rudberg  states  that  the  alloy  PbSn^  standi
out  from  the  rest,  since,  according  to  his  observations,  the  temperature  of  solidification
of  the  alloy  is  187  \

SUJCOS  iSa  THE  OTHBE  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  POUETH  GROUP

not only is the normal lead ticetAtfi formed  but nlsu the basic

When  oxidising  in  the  presence  of  air,**  when  heated  or  in  the
presence  of  an  ftcid  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  leiid  forms  compounds
of  the  type  PhXj.  Letul  oxide,  Pl»0,  known  in  industry  as  Hlhargr,
BilberglAtte(this  name  is  due  to  the  fnct  that  silver  is  extmcted  from  the
lead  ores  of  this  kind)  und  m:issicot.  If  the  lead  is  oxidised  in  air  at  ii
high  temperature,  the  oxide  which  is  formed  fusee,  and  on  cooling  is
easily  ohtnined  in  fused  masses  which  split  up  intn  scales  of  a  yellowish
colour,  having  a  specilie  gravity  of  9-3  ;  in  this  form  it  bears  the  name
of  litharge.  Litharge  is  principally  used  for  making  lead  salts,  for
the  extraction  of  raetallif  lead,  and  also  for  the  preparation  i>f
drying  oils— for  instance, from  linseed  oil.'" When oxidised care-

''  TUe  uorm»l  IbihI  nwtale,  knomi  iu  Irode  uh  lugar  of  Ira/l,  owing  to  il«  Imiing  a
nnetiili  UMe.  IiM  the  loraiuU  Fb[C,HsO-,)-j,SH.p.  This  siiJt  only  crystiLlliBes  from  acid
wlationa.  Iti»  capable  of  diBHoMng  nlurllierqmuilityaf  leiidoiudeor  o(  metallic  lead  in
the  ptttauM  o(  ur.  A  Iwsic  ull  at  the  o'liipoKiliaii  Pb<C,H.^O,)j,l:■hHjaJ  is  then  lormei
which  in  Bolnlile  in  wuter  and  hJuoIiuI.  At  in  lliinnilt  thu  ntunlierofahnnEiBeTeiiiuidUiH
Mune  u  in  the  hydnto  of  teetie  Mid,  (;,H,Oa,HjO  =  C,H3|OH)„  ilmnyba  rspreBented  >u>
Out  hydnle  in  wbJcb  two  or  bydroeeu  ant  rttplaced  hyleiul—tlwt  i»,uiC2H:<0H)(0,Pb).
This  baflic  tall  i&  Oft^  in  me<)idiie  us  b  remedy  for  inflammation,  for  bandogiTig  wounds,
tce^  and  also  in  the  DDuiafiiclure  if  while  lead.  Giber  basic:  atetatea  of  lead,
Eontaiiiing  a  still  greater  anioant  ol  lead  niide.  lue  known.  According  lo  the  above
npressotatiou  nf  the  camponitiuu  of  tlie  ]>rai.-«ding  lend  Bcetale,  a  basic  salt  of  Ihe  oom-
positioD  (C.jHs),|0^b|s  ytonld  b^alsu  possible,  bnl  wbsl  appear  to  be  ntill  more  haae
■aJte  are  known.  As  Uie  cliamctcT  of  a  sidt  also  deiieuda  on  Uio  property  of  the  haee
fnou  which  it  is  fortned.  it  would  seetn  that  lead  forma  a  hydroxide  of  the  composition
HOPbOH,  eoDtoining  two  water  residDee.  one  or  bath  of  which  may  be  replac^  by  the
acid  raaidnes.  If  both  water  residues  are  replaced,  a  normal  nalt.  XPbX,  is  obluued,
wbilet  if  only  one  ii  replaced  a  basic  oalt,  XFbOU,  ii^  formed.  Bat  lead  does  not  only
^n  this  normal  hydroxide,  bnt  also  polyhydrcnidee.  Pb(OH),»PbO,  and  if  we  may  imagine
Hut  in  theiHe  polyhydroiides  there  is  a  sobstitnlion  of  both  the  water  residaea-  by  ncUl
reaiilaes,  then  the  power  nl  lend  for  lomiiug  baiiic  sallH  is  eiplained  by  tlie  prupertien  of
tlie  bane  which  enters  into  their  coiupositioii.

*•  Pew  compoondB  ore  Itnowu  ol  the  lower  type  PhX,  and  Htill  fewer  of  the  inter.
mediate  type  PbX,,  To  the  Sn>t  type  belongs  tlie  ao-called  lead  snbonde,  Pb,G,  ob-
lAJned  hy  the  ignition  of  lead  oxalate.  C,PbO,.  wilboat  access  of  air.  It  ih  h  black  powder,
which  easily  breaks  up  nader  the  action  of  acido,  and  even  by  the  simple  action  ot  heat,
into  metallic  lead  and  le«d  oxide.  This  is  the  character  of  all  suboxides.  They  euinot
be  regarded  aa  [ndependenl  mlt-fonning  oxides,  neither  con  those  forms  of  oxidation  of
lead  which  conlAin  more  oxygen  than  the  oxide  of  lead,  PbO,  and  le«R  tliao  the  dioxide,
PbO,.  As  we  shall  see,  at  least  two  BDch  componnda  are  formed.  Tims,  for  example,
an  oxide  having  the  composition  Plt^O^  is  known,  but  it  is  decompoaed  by  the  action  of
arrida  into  lead  oxide,  which  paases  into  flolutlon,  and  lead  dioxide,  which  remaine  behind.
Such  is  red  lead. (See  further  on.)

■>  In  the  boiling  of  drying  oiln.  the  lead  oxide  partially  pasies  into  H>lution,  forming
■  HponiScd  compound  capable  n(  attracting  oxygen  and  solidifying  into  a  tor-like  mints,
which  forms  the  oil  paint. Perhops,  however,  glycerine  partially  acts  in  the  process.

Otsotettky  by  saturating  drying  oil  wilFi  the  Halts  of  certain  metals  olitained  oil
eolour*  of  great  durability.

e  of  very  flnely-diiided  litharge  with  glycerine  (50  ports  of  litharge  to  S  cc.

138  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

fully  and  slightly  heated,  lead  forms  a  powdery  (not  fused)  oxide
known  under  the  name  of  massicot.  It  is  best  prepared  in  the
laboratory  by  iieating  lead  nitrate,  or  lead  hydroxide.  It  has  a
yellow  colour,  and  differs  from  litharge  in  the  greater  difficulty  with
which  it  forms  lead  salts  with  acids.  Thus,  for  instance,  when
massicot  is  moistened  with  water  it  does  not  attract  the  carbonic  acid
of  the  air  so  easily  as  litharge  does.  It  may,  however,  be  imagined
that  the  cause  of  the  difference  depends  only  on  the  formation  of
dioxide  on  the  surface  of  the  lead  oxide,  on  which  the  acids  do  not
act  In  any  case  lead  oxide  is  comparatively  easily  soluble  in  nitric
and  acetic  acids.  It  is  but  slightly  soluble  in  water,  but  com-
municates an  alkaline  reaction  to  it,  since  it  forms  the  hydroxide.
This  hydroxide  is  obtained  in  the  shape  of  a  white  precipitate  by  the
action  of  a  small  quantity  of  an  alkali  hydroxide  on  a  solution  of  a
lead  salt.  An  excess  of  alkali  dissolves  the  hydroxide  separated,  which
fact  demonstrates  the  comparatively  indistinct  basic  properties  of  lead
oxide.  The  normal  lead  hydroxide,  which  should  have  the  composition
Pb(0H).2,  is  unknown  in  a  separate  state,  but  it  is  known  in  combina-
tion with  lead  oxide  as  Pb(OH).2,2PbO  or  Pb302(OH)2.  The  latter
is  obtained  in  the  form  of  brilliant,  white,  octahedral  crystals  when
basic  lead  acetate  is  mixed  with  ammonia  and  gently  heated.  The
basic  qualities  of  this  hydroxide  are  shown  distinctly  by  its  absorbing
the  carbonic  anhydride  of  the  air.  When'  an  alkaline  solution  of  the
hydroxide  is  boiled,  it  deposits  lead  oxide  in  the  form  of  a  crystalline
powder.

Lead  oxide  forms  but  few  soluble  salts — for  instance,  the  nitrate
and  the  acetate.  The  majority  of  its  salts  (sulphate,  PbS04  ;  carbonate,
PbCOg  ;  iodide,  Pbl.^,  <fec.)  are  insoluble  in  water.  These  salts  are
colourless  or  light  yellow  if  the  acid  be  colourless.  In  lead  oxide  Hie
faculty  of  forming  basic  saJts,  PbXgnPbO  or  PbX2riPbH202,  is  strongly
developed.  A  similar  property  was  observed  in  magnesium  and  also
in  the  salts  of  mercury,  but  lead  oxide  forms  basic  salts  with  still
greater  facility,  although  double  salts  are  in  this  case  more  rarely
formed."^"

of  anhydrous  gly(;erine)  forms  a  very  quick  (two  miuutes)  setting  cement,  which  is  insoluble
in  water  and  oils,  and  is  very  useful  in  setting  up  chemical  apparatus.  The  hardening  is
base<l  on  the  reaction  of  the  lead  oxide  with  glycerine  (Moraffsky).

^  It  is  very  instructive  to  observe  that  lead  not  only  easily  forms  basic  salts,  but  also
salts  containing  several  acid  groups.  Thus,  for  example,  lead  carbonate  occurs  in  nature
and  forms  comiwunds  with  lead  chloride  and  sulphate.  The  first  compound,  known  as
corneous  U'ad,2>ho8geniteA\»,H  the  comjiosition  PbCOj.PbCL ;  it  occurs  in  nature  in  bright
cubical  crystals,  and  is  prepared  artificially  by  simply  boiling  lead  chloride  with  lead
carbonate.  A  similar  compound  of  normal  salts,  PbS04,PbC05,  occurs  in  nature  as
ianarkitc  in  montHjlinic  crystals. LeadhiUite  contains  PbS04,3PbC05,  and  also  occurs

UCOy  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OK  TIIB  FOURTH  OROUf 189

Amongst  the  soluble  lend  salts,  that  best  known  and  most  often
applied  In  practJL-al  chemistry  is  lead  nitrate,  nhtiuned  directly  by
dissolving  lead  or  its  oxide  in  nitric  acid.  The  normal  salt,  Pb(N03)],
crystallises  in  octahedm,  dissiilveB  in  water,  and  has  a  specific  gravity
of  4 '5.  When  a  solution  of  this  salt  acts  <m  white  lead  or  is  boiled
with  litharge,  the  basic  suit,  haviag  a  com|Haiti-m  Pb(0H)(N03),  is
formed  in  CTystalliiie  needles,  sparingly  soluble  in  cold  water  but  ensily
dissolved  in  hot  water,  and  therefore  in  many  respects  resembling  lead
chl'iride.  When  the  nitrate  is  heated,  either  lead  oxide  is  obtained  or
else  the  oxi'le  in  combination  with  pei'oxlile.

Lead  ch/iiriii'-,  PbClj,  la  precipitated  from  the  soluble  salts  of  load
when  a  stn>Dg  solution  is  treate<l  with  hydrochloric  acid  or  a  metallic
chloride.  It  is  »iluble  in  considerable  quantities  in  hot  water,  and
therefore  if  the  solutions  be  dilute;  or  hot,  the  precipitation  uf  lead
chloride  does  not  occur,  and  if  a  hot  solution  lie  cooied,  tlie  salt
separates  in  brilliant  prismatic  crystals.  It  fuses  when  heated  (like
silver  chloride),  but  is  insoluble  in  ammonia. This  salt  is  sometimes

wiah,  monocliniv.  tiil»il>ir  i^rj  i-Li^U.  Wi^  will  tuni  imr  uLU^ntinii  tu  these  sulta  uf
1,  becaaae  it  in  ver;  i>nibublc  tliul  tlii-ir  (uniuitiou  is  uilied  ti>  the  formutian  ol  tlie
hMie  uJta,  lUid  the  tullowing  iiniHidenilion  h  tun;  leiui  lo  the  explanatioii  of  the  eiist-
eivM  of  both.  In  describing  lUiva  we  mrefiiUy  develuped  tlie  conception  of  potymeriH.
iiod.  which  it  is  itlto  indi^eiitable  to  rteopiite  ih  the  eampoiition  of  many  other
oxidrt.  Thus  it  ma;  be  trappoeed  that  FbO]  i>  $.  Bimiliu'  pulfmerined  ivmponud  to
SiOf— t.c  that  the  coDipositiun  of  lead  pttmxide  will  be  PbnO.,.,  becaoae  lend  methyl.
PbMe«,  uid  l«d  ethyl.  FbEt^,  ore  volatile  coiDpoanib,  wbil*t  FbOg  >a  nnn-yolatile,  and  i'h
i«7  iUie  ailica  in  this  renpect,  and  nut  in  the  leaet  like  oubouic  auhydride.  Still  mere
■bould  a  polyiDeiio  stmctiue,  Fb.On,  be  aticribed  tu  lead  oxidis  since  it  dilfem  as  littln
from  lead  diuxide  in  its  phyaical  proparLies  as  carbonic  oxide  does  from  carbonic
anhydride,  and  being  an  nnsatnrated  eomponnd  is  more  likely  to  be  capablu  of  inter-
combination  (polynierisation)  than  lead  dioxide.  TIhshi  considerations  reapeetio);  the
complexity  ot  lead  imide  conid  liuve  no  real  -signiflcance,  and  Linild  not  be  accepted,  nere
it  not  tortheexieteuceof  the  above-mentioned  baaicandmiiedHaltB.  The  oxide  apparently
corresponds  with  the  wmpoiiLon  FbaX].,  and  since,  ucuording  tuihisEepreHentation,  the
nomber  of  X's  iu  the  salts  of  lead  is  considarable,  it  in  obvions  that  they  may  be  diierse.
Wlien  a  part  of  UwHe  X's  is  replaced  by  the  water  re>Hdue(OU)or  by  oxygen,  Xj^O,  and
a  fLiia  ty  an  acid  rrtidue,  X,  then  basic  salts  are  obtuined,  but  if  ■  part  of  (lie
is  replaced  by  acid  residnes  ot  one  kind,  uid  the  other  part  by  auid  residues  ii{  another
le  mixed  salts  abool  which  wv  axe  now  apeakiug  are  formed.  Thntt,  tor
anple,  we  may  suppose,  (or  a  comporison  of  the  coDiponitiou  of  the  uia]ority  of  the

Hives  in  tli»  following  Form :— Ix-iul  'Mid.j,  Fli,.0,],  its  crystalline  hydrate.  Pbi,Og| OH),.
leadcliloride,PhnCl5„Ii»uiosydilond,..pl.,,Cl,.,OB,tbeothetoiyphloride,Pb,^OH)»C'l,0„
inendipite  tffe  Noti-  61),  PI.|iCi,0„,  i.nnijsi  lead  carbonate.  Pb,^COi),„  cry«talline  basic
-It,  Pb,,(OHWCOj)fc  white  lead.  Pb,.jlCOj),iHO)„  corneous  lead,  Pb,jCI,JCOs),.
laaarkitf ,  Pb,^C0s}j(80.)„  leadhillite,  PbiilCOjWSOJi,  «c.  The  number  12  !■  only
taken  to  avoid  fractional  quantities,  Poni^ly  the  polymeriialion  is  much  higher  than
thi«,  The  theory  ol  the  polyraeiisatioii  of  oxides  introduced  by  lue  in  UiB  flnt  edition  ot
I)  ii  now  beginning  to  be  generaUy  aoMpted.

140  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

met  with  in  nature,  and  when  heated  in  air  is  capable  of  exchanging
half  its  chlorine  for  oxygen,  forming  the  basic  salt  or  lead  oxjchloride,
PbCljPbO,  which  may  also  be  obtained  by  f  asing  PbCl^  andPbO  together.
The  reaction  of  lead  chloride  with  water  vapoar  leads  to  the  same
conclusion,  showing  the  feeble  Ijasic  character  of  lead  2PbCl2  +  H^O
=PbCl2,PbO  +  2HC1.  When  ammonia  is  added  to  an  aqueous  solution
of  lead  chloride  a  white  precipitate  isform<Kl,  which  parts  .with  water
on  l>eing  heated,  and  has  the  composition  Pb(OH)Cl,PbO.  This  com-
pound is  also  formed  by  the  action  of  metallic  chlorides  on  other  soluble
basic  salts  of  lead.'''*

Lead  carbonate,  or  white  fead,  is  the  most  extensively  used  basic
lead  salt.  It  has  the  valuable  property  of  *  covering,'  which  only  to  a
certain  extent  appertains  to  lead  sulphate  and  other  white  powdery
substances  used  as  pigments.  This  faculty  of  '  covering '  consists  in
the  fact  that  a  small  quantity  of  white  lead  mixed  with  oil  spreads
uniformly,  and  if  such  a  mixture  be  spread  over  a  surface  (for  instance^
of  wood  or  metal)  the  surface  is  quickly  covered— that  is,  light  does  not
penetrate  through  even  a  very  thin  layer  of  superposed  white  lead  ;  thus,
for  example,  the  grain  of  the  wood  remains  invisible.**  White  lead,
or  basic  lead  carbonate^  after  l)eing  dried  at  120°,  has  a  compositaon
Pb(OH)2,2PbC03.''^ It  may  be  obtained  by  adding  a  solution  of  sodium

^>  A  Kimilar  basic  salt  having  a  wliite  colour,  and  therefore  uued  as  a  substitute  for
wliite  lead,  iH  alno  obtained  by  mixing  a  sohition  of  basic  lead  acetate  with  a  solution  of
lead  chloride.  Its  formation  is  expressed  by  the  equation:  2PbX(OH),Pl>0  +  PbCl3
=  2Pb(On)Cl,PbO-fPbX._,.  Similar  basic  compounds  of  lead  are  met  with  in  nature
— for  instance,  mendipitr,  PbCl,*2PbO,  which  appears  in  brilliant  yellowish-white
manses.  The  ignititm  of  red  lead  with  sal-ammoniac  results  in  similar  polybaaic
compounds  of  lea<l  chloride,  forming  the  CasstTs,  or  mineral  yellow  of  the  composition
PbC1.2«PbO.  Lead  iodide^  Pbl.^,  is  still  less  soluble  than  the  cliloride,  and  is  therefore
obtained  by  mixing  potassium  i<Klide  with  »  solution  of  a  lead  salt.  It  separates  as  a
yellow  powder,  which  may  be  dissolved  in  boiling  water,  and  on  cooling  separates  in  very
brilliant  crystalline  scales  of  a  golden  yellow  colour.  Tlie  salts  PbBrj,  PbP^,  Pb(CN)2,
Pb.2Fe(CN)rt  are  also  insoluble  in  water,  and  form  white  pre<ripitates.

^^  It  is  remarkable  that  a  peculiar  kind  of  attraction  exists  between  boiled  linseed
oil  and  white  lejvd,  as  is  seen  from  the  following  experiments.  White  lead  is  triturated
in  water.  Although  it  is  heavier  than  water,  it  remains  in  suspension  in  it  for  some  time
and  is  thoroughly  moistened  by  it,  so  that  the  trituration  may  be  made  perfect ;  boiled
linsee<l  oil  is  then  added,  and  shaken  up  with  it.  A  mixture  of  the  oil  and  white  lead  is
then  found  to  settle  at  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  Although  the  oil  is  much  lighter  than
the  water  it  does  not  float  on  the  top,  but  is  retainefl  by  the  white  lead  and  sinks  under
the  water  together  yni\\  it.  Tliere  is  not,  lM)wever,  any  more  x)erfect  combination  nor
even  any  solution.  If  the  resultant  mass  be  then  treated  with  ether  or  any  otiier  liquid
<apab1e  of  dissf)1ving  the  oil,  the  latter  passes  into  solution  and  leaves  the  white  lead
unalt4>re<l.

•"^  It  may  l>e  regarde<l  as  a  salt  corresponding  with  the  normal  hydrate  of  carbonic
acid,  C(()H)4,  in  which  three-quarters  of  the  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  lead.  A  salt  is  also
known  in  which  till  the  hydrogen  of  this  hydrate  of  carbonic  acid  is  replaced  by  lead —
namely,  the  salt  c<mtaining  C04Pb.2. Tliis  salt  is  obtained  as  a  white  crystalline  sub>

8ILIC0N  ASD  THE  OTHER  EI,EMENTS  OF  THE  FWBTH  aHOtTP 141 V

(.tirbonate  to  a  solution  of  one  of  the  basic  salta  of  ioad — for  inatance, 1
the  basic  aeetate— and  likewise  bv  treating  this  latter  with  carlwnic I
acid. For  this  purpose  the  Boliition  of  basic  acetate  ia  poured  into  the 1
veaael/;  it  is  prepared  in  thn  vat  A,  containing  litharge,  into  which 1
the  pump  P  df  iivere  the  solution  of  the  acetate,  which  i^mainB  after
the  action  of  carbonic  anhydride  on  the  basic  salt. In  A  a  basic  salt  is
formed  having  a  composition  appronching  toPb,(<JH)^(C,H/».j)a  ;  car-
bonic anhydride,  2Cl'>.i,  is  passed  ihrough  this  solution  and  precipitates ■

■^

ff» — ^

d^j

\ '1

iiciiffi  ■III  Hill  HUB

'i-—  - 1

I-I^l

Ek'^I  W

mUi;!" ...;)'

■-'"'"■

«.:.  ■■■-..,...  r

■  '■ — ' — ' ~- — ' :

white  lead,  Pba{OH),(CO,)„  and  normal  lead  acetate,  P^C^HjO,)^  re-
mains in  the  solution,  and  is  pumped  back  into  the  vat  A  containing
lead  oxide,  where  the  normal  salt  is  again  (on  being  agitated)  converted
into  the  basic  salt. This  is  run  into  the  vessel  E,  and  thence  intu  /.
Into  the  lalt«r  carbonic  anhydride  is  delivered  from the  generator  D,
and  forms  a  precipitate  of  white  lead."'^ ''''

In  order  to  mark  the  transition  from  lead  oxide,  FbC),  Into  lead
dioxide PbO^ (plumbic anhydride),  it is  necessary to direct our

rtuc«  by  Ihe  »(ioii  of  walw  «id  carbonic  acid  w.  loud. The  normal  sail,  PbCOj,  ociuii
in  Ulan  under  Iha  nmne  of  white  luad  ore  (sp.  rt.  B*17).  in  crj«tnlit,  isomocphoiui  with
antgmite.  and  ib  lonned  by  Vht  douWa  deconipMilioo  of  laid  nilrata  with  Bodimn  aa-
bon»te.a>  ahniry  while  precipil.t*. Thui,  bolh  thme  wdla  rewmblt.  white  lead,  but

floe  slate  of  dirisiori.

»""■  One  o(  the  many  luetliudB  by  irhieh  ii-liite  laad  la  prepared  conaista  in  miiijiB

mawioot  with  aoeljc  acid  nr  ougar  ol  luad,  and  leaving  the  mixtoru  eipoied  Lo  air  |aad

re-miiing  tnnn  time  to  time).  contuniDK  Mrbouic  acid,  which  ia  abaoibed  from  tbo

KoHaee  by  the  buic  salt  (onued. After  repeated  railing)  (»ilh  Uie  addition  of  water),

^ItojuUre  ota«  ia  eanverted  into  wluto  lead,  which  ia  thua  obtained  very  finely  divided.

142  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

attention  to  the  intermediate  oxide,  or  red  lead,  Pb304.'**  In  the  arts
it  is  used  in  considerable  quantities,  because  it  forms  a  very  durable
yellowish-red  paint  used  for  colouring  the  resins  (shellac,  colophony,
&c,)  composing  sealing  wax.  It  also  forms  a  very  good  cheap  oil
paint,  used  especially  for  painting  metals,  more  particularly  because
drying  oils — for  instance,  hemp  seed,  linseed  oils — very  quickly  dry
with  red  lead  and  with  lead  salts.  Red  lead  is  prepared  by  slightly
heating  massicot,  for  which  purpose  two-storied  stoves  are  used.  In
the  lower  story  the  lead  is  turned  into  massicot,  and  in  the  higher
one,  having  the  lower  temperature  (about  300°),  the  massicot  is  trans-
formed into  red  lead.  Fr^my  and  others  showed  the  instability  of  red
lead  prepared  by  various  methods,  and  its  decomposition  by  acids,  with
formation  of  lead  dioxide,  which  is  insoluble  in  acids,  and  a  solution
of  the  salts  of  lead  oxide.  The  artificial  production  (synthesis)  of  red
lead  by  double  decomposition  was  most  important.  For  this  purpose
Fr^my  mixed  an  alkaline  solution  of  potassium  plumbate,  KjPbOs  (pre-
pared by  dissolving  the  dioxide  in  fused  potash),*^  ****  with  an  alkaline
solution  of  lead  oxide.  In  this  way  a  yellow  precipitate  of  minium
hydrate  is  formed,  which,  when  slightly  heated,  loses  water  and  turns
into  bright  red  anhydrous  minium  Pb304.

Minium  is  the  first  and  most  ordinary  means  of  producing  lead
dioxide, or plumbic  anhydride, PbOg,"^*^  because when red le^id is

^  If  lead  hydroxide  be  dissolved  in  potash  and  sodium  hypoclilorite  be  added  to
the  solution,  the  oxygen  of  the  latter  acts  on  the  dissolved  lead  oxide,  and  partially
converts  it  into  dioxide,  so  that  the  so-called  lead  sesquioxide  is  obtained  ;  its  empirical
formula  is  Pb-^Os-  Probably  it  is  nothing  but  a  lead  salt — i.e.  is  referable  to  the  type  of
dioxide  of  lead,  or  its  hydroxide,  PbO(OH)2,  in  which  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  are  replace<l

by  lead,  PbOlO.^Pb). The  brown  compound  precipitated  by  the  action  of  dilute  acids

for  example,  nitric — splits  up,  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  into  insoluble  lea<l
dioxide  and  a  solution  of  a  lead  salt.  This  compound  evolves  oxygen  when  it  is  heated.
It  dissolves  in  hydrochloric  acid,  forming  a  yellow  liquid,  which  probably  contains  com-
pounds  of  the  compt>sition  PbCl.^  and  PbCl4,  but  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature  the
latter  soon  loses  the  excess  of  chlorine,  and  then  only  lead  chloride,  PbCl^,  remains.  In
order  to  see  the  relation  between  red  lead  and  lead  sesquioxide,  it  must  be  obser\'ed  that
they  only  differ  by  an  extra  quantity  of  lead  oxide — that  is,  red  lead  is  a  basic  salt  of  the
preceding  compound,  and  if  the  compound  Pb^Os  may  be  regarded  as  PbOjPb,  then  red
lead  should  be  looked  on  as  Pb03Pb,PbO — that  is,  as  basic  lead  plumbate.

ftibu  Fremy  obtained  potassium  plumbate  in  the  following  manner.  Pure  lead  dioxide
is  placed  in  a  silver  crucible,  and  a  strong  solution  of  pure  caustic  potash  is  poured  over
it.  The  mixture  is  heated  and  small  quantities  are  removed  from  time  to  time  for  testing,
which  consists  in  dissolving  in  a  small  quantity  of  water  and  decomposing  the  resultant
solution  with  nitric  acid.  There  is  a  certain  moment  during  the  heating  when  aconKJder-
able  amount  of  insoluble  lead  dioxide  is  precipitated  on  the  addition  of  the  nitric  acid  ;
the  solution  then  contains  the  salt  in  question,  and  the  heating  must  be  8toppe<l,  and  a
small  amount  of  water  added  to  dissolve  the  potassium  plumbate  formed.  On  cooling
the  salt  separates  in  somewhat  large  crystals,  which  have  the  same  composition  as  the
stannate— that  is,  PbO(KO).^,8H.^O.

**  Lead  dioxide  is  often  called  lead  peroxide,  but  this  name  leads  to  error,  because

■hUCOK  AXD  THE  OTBER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  GROUP 143

Htrented  with  dilute  nitric  acid  it  gives  up  lead  oxide,  and  PbO,  remains,
■  on  which  dilute  nitric  ncid  does  not  act.  The  coniposition  of  luiniuni
I  ii  Fh^O,,  and  therefore  the  action  of  nitric  acid  on  it  is  expressed  by
I  the  equation  :  Pb,0.  +  4UN0,  =  PbO,  +  2Pb(NO,),  +  :iH,0.  The
Ldioxide  may  also  he  obtained  l>y  treating  lead  hydroxide  suspended  in
HMiter  with  n  stream  of  rhlorine.  X^nder  these  conditions  the  chlorine
^pkkes  up  the  hydrogen  from  the  wat«r,  and  the  oicygeu  passes  over  to  the
BSead  oxide. '^  When  a  strong  solution  of  lead  nitntte  is  decomposed  by
Fifae  electric  current,  the  appearance  of  crystalline  lead  dioxide  is  also
■■obeerved  upon  the  positive  pole  ;  it  is  also  found  in  imture  in  the  form
ft^rfa  black  crystalline  substance  having  a  specific  gravity  of  94.  When
ftartificially  produced  it  is  a  fine  dark  powder,  resisting  the  action  of
Bitoids,  but  nevertheless  when  treated  with  strong  sulphuric  acid  it
ftftrolves  oxygen  and  forms  lead  liulpbate,  and  with  hydrochloric  acid  it
B%m>lves  chlorine.  The  oxidising  property  of  lead  dioxide  depends
Bot  course  on  the  facility  of  iU  transition  into  the  more  stable  lend
■vzide,  which  in  easily  understood  from  the  whole  history  of  lead  com-
|||Kmnds.  In  the  presence  of  alkati»  it  transforms  chromium  oxide  into
■'^romic  acid,  whilst  lead  chromate,  FbCrO,,  is  formed,  remaining,  how-
■:9Ter,  in  solution,  on  account  of  its  being  soluble  in  caustic  alkalis.  The
^oxidising  action  of  lead  dioxide  on  sulphurous  anhydride  is  most  strik-
I  tng,  as  it  immediately  absorbs  it,  with  formation  of  lend  sulphate.

PbOj  docs  DOt  Hhow  Uie  prapc
hnt  is  endaired  with  aoid  pro]
which  in  iiotthectLse  withtTDC
pDDTid  nf  lead,  MBi]0,  ii  for  bi

rties  of  true  peroxiJe«,  lik?  hydmgen  or  barinm  peruxideti,
leTtieH — UiM  lu,  it  in  Me  U>  (onn  Uue  ults  with  biuea,
peroiidsH.  liud  dioxide  it  ■  normal  snlt-roimiiiit  niui-
iUi,C*0,rorteriniu,«iidTeOjtorteUoriuni,*f.TUer»ll

evolve  chlarine  when  treated  wilh  hjdnwhloric  wid,  whiUt  trae  puroiidEB  fonn  hirdnigen
poraude.  The  tme  lead  peroxide,  if  it  were  obtwued,  would  probably  have  the  oompoii-
tion  Pb^t,  or,  in  oouibiiiation  with  peroxide  ol  hydrogen,  H]Pb,0,  ^  HgO, -)■  PbiOj.
jnd^ng  (lomtb*  peroxides  correHpoiiding  with  anlpbaric,  chromic,  aiid  other  acids,  which
we  ■hall  aHenrarda  connider.

Ah  a  proof  of  the  tact,  that  the  form  FbOi,  or  PbX„  is  the  highext  nonDal  form  ol  lUty
fombiDaUon  of  lead,  it  in  moat  importaot  to  remark  that  it  might  be  eipeuted  Ibat  tile
action  of  lead  chloride,  PbCl^  on  linc-etbyl,  ZnEbj,  would  reealt  in  the  formation  ol
BBC  chloride,  ZnCl^,  and  ]ead-«th;l.  FbBtj,  but  that  in  reality  the  reaction  proeeeda  olher-
wiie.  Half  of  the  lead  in  oet  treo,  and  lead  tetretbyl,  Pb£t„  is  formed  an  a  colaurleEs
liijnid.  bailing  at  aboat  aoO"  (BntleroS,  Fraaklatid.  Buckton,  Cahoiirs  and  othen).  The
type  PbX,  is  nob  only  cxpreiwed  in  PbEtj  and  PbO^,  hut  also  in  PhF„  obtaineil  by
Branner.

"  According  to  Camelley  and  Walker,  the  hydrate  (PbOi)„HaO  ii.  then  formed ;  it
loaeii  water  at  £30°.  Tlie  ouhydroua  dioxide  remaina  unchanged  np  to  380°,  and  it  then
cnnvfrt!<l  inln  lbs  sesquioiide,  PbgO,,  which  again  loaea  oxygen  at  about  (00°,  and  forms
red  lead,  PbjO,,  Red  lead  also  Iowa  oxygen  at  aboat  SSO",  forming  lead  oxide,  PbO.
whii-h  fnw*  without  change  at  about  000°,  a.nd  remains  conntant  aa  far  aa  the  limit  t>f
the  obeert-ationa  made  (about  BOD°).

The  beat  method  for  preparing  pure  lead  dioxide  coumkIh  in  mixing  a  hot  wtDtiun  of
d  cUoride  with  a  aoiution  of  bleaching  powder  <  Fehrmau].

144  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

This  is  accompanied  by  a  change  of  colour  and  development  of  heat,
PbOj  •\-  SOo  =  PbS04.  When  triturated  with  sulphur  the  mbcture
explodes,  the  sulphur  burning  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  of  the  lead
dioxide.  Tetrachloride  of  lead,  PbCl4,  belongs  to  the  same  class  of
lead  compounds  as  PbOa-  ThLs  chloride  is  formed  by  the  action  of
strong  hydrochloric  acid  upon  PbOj,  or,  in  the  cold,  by  passing  a  stream
of  chlorine  through  water  containing  PbClg  in  suspension.  The  resul-
tant yellow  solution  gives  off  chlorine  when  heated.  With  a  solution
of  sal  ammoniac  (Nicolukin,  1885)  it  gives  a  precipitate  of  a  double
salt,  (NH4).2PbCl6  (very  slightly  soluble  in  a  solution  of  sal  ammoniac),
which  when  treated  with  strong  sulphuric  acid  (Fried rich,  1890)  gives
PbCl4  as  a  yellow  liquid  sp.  gr.  3*18,  which  solidifies  at  —  18°,  and  when
heated  gives  PbClg  +  Clg.  It  is  not  acted  upon  by  H2SO4  like  SnCl,.
Tetrafluoride  of  lead  (Brauner)  belongs  to  the  same  class  of  compounds,
it  easily  forms  double  salts  and  decomposes  with  the  evolution  of
fluorine  (Chapter  II.,  Note  49  bis).  ^^  ws

Amongst  the  elements  of  the  second  and  third  groups  it  was
observed  that  the  elements  were  more  basic  in  the  even  than  in  the
aneven  series.  It  is  sufficient  to  remember  calcium,  strontium,  and
barium  in  the  even,  and  magnesium,  zinc,  and  cadmium  in  the  uneven
•  series.  In  addition  to  this,  in  the  even  series,  as  the  atomic  weight
increases,  in  the  same  type  of  oxidation  the  basic  properties  increase
(the  acid  properties  decrease) ;  for  example,  in  the  second  group,  calcium,
strontium,  barium.  The  same  also  appears  in  the  fourth  and  all  the
following  groups.  In  the  even  series  of  the  fourth  group  titanium,
zirconium^  cerium,  and  thorium  are  found.  All  their  highest  oxides,
RO.2,  even  the  lightest,  titanic  oxide,  TiOj,  have  more  highly  developed
basic  properties  than  silica,  Si02,  and  in  addition  to  this  the  basic
properties  are  more  distinctly  seen  in  zirconium  dioxide,  ZKJ.^j  ^'han
in  titanic  oxide,  TiOj,  although  the  acid  property  of  combining  with
bases  still  remains.  In  the  heaviest  oxides,  cerium  dioxide,  CeO.^,  and
thorium  dioxide,  Th02,  no  acid  properties  are  observed,  these  being
both  purely  basic  oxides.  In  Chapter  XVII.  (Note  43)  we  already
pointed  out  this  higher  oxide  of  cerium.  As  the  above-mentioned
elements  are  rather  rare  in  nature,  have  but  little  practical  applica-
tion, and  do  not  present  any  new  forms  of  combination,  it  is  un-
advisable  to  dwell  on  them  in  this  treatise.

Titanium  is  found  in  nature  in  the  form  of  its  anhydride  or  oxide,
TiO.2,  mixed  with  silicon  in  many  minerals,  but  the  oxide  is  also  found

5»;  bii  The  pluiiibatett  of  Ca  aiid  other  similar  metalH,  mentioned  in  Chapter  111.,  Note  7 ,
also  belong  to  the  form  PbX|.

SILICON  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  GROUP 145

separately  in  the  form  of  senii-metalHc  rutiJe  (sp.  p;r.  4*2).  Another
titanic  mineral  is  found  as  a  mixture  in  other  ores,  known  as  titanic
iron  are  (in  the  Thuensky  mountains  of  the  southern  Ural  ;  it  is  known
as  thnenite\  FeTiO;,.  This  is  a  salt  of  ferrous  oxide  and  titanic  anhy-
dride. It  crystallises  in  the  rhombohedric  system,  has  a  metallic
lustre,  grey  colour,  sp.  gr.  4*5.  The  third  mineral  in  which  titanium  is
found  in  considerable  quantities  in  nature  is  sphene  or  titan  ite,  CaTiSiO.-,
=  CaOjSiOgjTiOg,  sp.  gr.  3-5,  colour  yellow,  green,  or  the  like,  crystal-
lises in  tablets.  The  fourth,  but  rare,  titanic  mineral  is  peroffskite^
calcium  titanate,  CaTiOg  ;  it  forms  blackiih-grey  or  brown  cubic
crystals,  sp.  gr.  4*02,  and  occurs  in  the  Ural  and  other  localities.  It
may  be  prepared  artificially  by  fusing  sphene  in  an  atmosphere  of  water
vapour  and  carlx)nic  anhydride.  At  the  end  of  the  last  century  Klap-
roth  showed  the  distinction  between  titanic  compounds  and  all  others
then  known. '^

*^  The  conipouiidH  of  titanium  are  generally  obtained  from  rutile  ;  the  finely-ground
ore  is  fused  with  a  considerable  amount  of  acid  potassium  sulphate,  until  the  titanic
anhydride,  as  a  feeble  base,  passes  into  solution.  After  coolinj?,  the  resultant  mass  is
{(ground  up,  dissolved  in  cold  water,  and  treated  with  ammonium  hydrosulphide ;  a  black
precipitate  then  sei)arates  out  from  the  solution.  This  precipitate  contains  TiOj  (as
hydrate)  and  various  mettillic  sulphides — for  example,  iron  sulphide.  It  is  first  washed
with  water  and  then  with  a  solution  of  sulphurous  anhydride  until  it  becomes  colourless.
This  is  due  to  the  iron  sulphide  contained  in  the  precipitate,  and  rendering  it  l)lack,  being
converted  into  dithionate  by  the  action  of  the  sul]>hurous  acid.  The  titanic  acid  left  behind
is  nearly  pure.  The  considerable  volatility  of  titanium  chloride  may  also  be  taken  advan-
tage of  in  preparing  the  com]Miunds  of  titanium  from  rutile.  It  is  formed  by  heating  a
mixture  of  rutile  and  charcoal  in  dry  chlorine  ;  the  distillate  then  contains  titanium  chlo-
ride^ TiCl4.  It  may  be  easily  purified,  owing  to  its  having  a  constant  boiling  point  of  130°.
Its  specific  gravity  is  1*7() ;  it  is  a  colourless  liquid,  which  fumes  in  the  air,  and  is  perfectly
soluble  in  water  if  it  be  not  heated.  When  hot  water  acts  on  titanic  chloride,  a  large
proportion  of  titam'c  acid  separates  out  from  the  solution  and  passes  into  metatitanic  acid.
A  similar  decomi)Osition  of  acid  solutions  of  titanic  acid  is  accomplished  whenever  they
jvre  heated,  and  es]>ecially  in  the  jiresence  of  sulphuric  acid,  just  as  with  metastannic
ivcid,  which  titanic  acid  resembles  in  many  respects.  On  igniting  the  titanic  acid  a
colourless  |)owder  of  the  anhydride,  TiOj,  is  obtained.  In  this  form  it  is  no  longer  soluble
in  acids  or  alkalis,  and  only  fuses  in  the  oxy-hydrogen  flame  ;  but,  like  silica,  it  dissolves
when  fused  with  alkalis  and  their  carbonates ;  as  already  mentioned,  it  dissolves  when
fused  with  a  considerable  excess  of  acid  potassium  sulphate — that  is.  it  then  reacts  as  a
feeble  base.  This  shows  the  basic  character  of  titanic  anhydride;  it  hasatonce,  although
feebly  develoi>«^d,  both  basic  and  aci<l  properties.  The  fused  mass,  obtained  from  titanic
anhydride  and  alkali  when  treated  with  water,  parts  with  its  alkali,  and  a  residue  is  obtained
of  a  sparingly -soluble  poly-titanate.  K.,Ti05wTi02.  The  hydrate,  which  is  precipitated  by
anunonia  from  the  solutions  obtained  by  the  fusion  of  TiO,.  with  a<'id  jwtassiura  sulphate,
wlien  dried  fonns  an  amorphous  mass  of  the  composition  Ti(OH)4,  But  it  loses  water  over
sulphuric  acid,  gradually  passing  into  a  hydrate  of  the  composition  TiO(OH).j,  and  wlien
heated  it  parts  with  a  still  larger  proportion  of  water;  at  100=  the  hydrate  Ti,0-(OH).^  is
obtained,  and  at  JJOO  the  anhydride  itself.  The  higher  hydrate,  TilOH)^,  is  soluble  in
dilute  a<id,  and  the  solution  may  be  diluted  with  water ;  but  on  boiling  the  sulphuric  acid
solution  (though  not  the  solution  in  hydrochloric  acid),  all  the  titanic  acid  separates  in
a  niochfied  form,  which  is,  however,  not  only  insoluble  in  dilute  acids,  but  even  in  strong

VOL.  II.  .  L

14fj  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

The  comparatively  rare  element  ziramiuin,  Zr  =  90,  is  very  similar
to  titanium,  but  has  a  more  basic  character.  It  is  rarer  in  nature
than  tiUinium,  and  is  found  principally  in  a  mineral  called  zircon^
ZrSiC)^  =  Zr(>2,Si0.2,  crystallising  in  square  prisms,  sp.  gr.  4o.  It  has
considerable  hardness  and  a  characteristic  brownish-yellow  colour,  and

sulphuric  acid.  This  hydrate  liaH  the  comiwsition  Ti^O-fOHlo,  hut  sliows  different  i>ro-
l»i'rtieK  froui  those  of  the  hydrate  of  the  Kame  composition  descrihed  above,  and  therefore
this  modified  hydrate  is  called  metaiitanic  acid.  It  is  most  imiM^rtant  to  note  the
property  of  the  ordinary  gelatinous  hydrate  (that  precipitated  from  acid  s<ilutions  hy
ninmonia)  of  dissolving  in  acids,  the  more  so  since  silica  does  not  show  this  property.
In  this  projwrty  a  transition  apparently  appears  between  the  cases  of  connnon  solution
(based  on  a  capacity  for  unstable  combination)  and  the  case  of  the  fonnation  of  :i
hydrosol  (the  solubility  of  gemianiuni  oxide,  GeO.^,,  i^erhaps  presents  another  such
instance).  If  titanium  cliloride  be  added  drop  by  drop  to  a  dilute  solution  of  alcohol
and  liydrogen  |>eroxide,  and  then  ammonia  be  added  to  the  resultant  solution,  a  yellow
precipitate  of  titanium  trioxide^  TiOsH^O,  separates  out,  as  Piccini,  Weller,  and  Classen
showed. This  substance  apparently  belongs  to  the  category  of  true  peroxides.

Titanium  chloride  absorbs  ammonia  and  forms  a  comi>ound,  TiCl4,4NH,-,  as  a  red-
brown  po^'der  which  attracts  moisture  from  the  air  and  when  ignited  fonns  titaiiinm
nitride,  Ti-.N^. Phosphuretted  hydrogen, hydrocyanic  »uid, and  many  similar  <omi>onnds
are  also  absorbed  by  titanium  cliloride,  with  the  evolution  of  a  considerable  amount  of
heat. Tlius,  for  example,  a  yellow  crystalline  jw^der  of  the  Vomiwsitioii  TiCl|,iiHCN
is obtained by passing dry hydrocyanic acid vajwur into cold titanium chloride.
Titanium  chloride  combines  in  a  similar  manner  with  cyanogen  chloride,  phosphorus
pentocliloride,  and  phosphorus  oxychloride,  forming  molecular  comjiounds,  for  examjtle
TiCl4,P0Cl-. This  faculty  for  further  combination  probably  stands  in  connection,  on
the  one  hand,  with  the  capacity  of  titanium  oxide  to  give  polytitanates,  TiO(MO).,.,«TiO.; ;
on  the  other  hand,  it  corresponds  with  the  kindred  faculty  of  stannic  chlori<le  for  the
formation  of  i)oly-comi)ounds  (Note  41),  and  lastly  it  is  probably  relate<l  to  the  remark-
able behaviour  of  titanium  towards  nitrogen. Metallic titanium, 'obtained as  a  grey
jwwder  by  reducing  i>otassium  titanofluoride,  K.^.TiF^,  (sp.  gr.  iVo't  K.  Hofman  18J».S),  with
iron  in  a  charcoal  crucible,  combines  directly  with  nitrogen  at  a  red  heat. If  titanic
anhydride  be  ignited  in  a  stream  of  ammonia,  all  the  oxygen  of  the  titanic  oxide is
<lisengage<l,  and  the  comjwund  TiN.^  is  formed  as  a  dark  violet  substance  having  a  copi>er-
red  lustre. A  compound  TijN^  it*  also  known  ;  it  is  obtained  by  igniting  the  comi)ound
Ti7,N4  in  a  stream  of  hydrogen,  and  is  of  a  golden-yellow  colour  with  a  metallic  lustre.
To  this  order  of  compounds  also  belongs the  well-known and  chemically historical
ctmipound  known  as  titanium  nitrocyanide  ;  its  comiX)sition  is  Ti^CNi. This  substance
appears  as  infusible,  sometimes  well-formed,  cubical  crystals  of  sp.  gr.  4*8,  and  having  a
red  copi^er  colour  and  metallic  lustre;  it  is  found  in  blast  furnace  slag. It  is  insoluble
in  acids  but  is  acte<l  on  by  chlorine  at  a  red  heat,  forming  titanium  chloride. It  was  at
first  regarded  as  metallic  titanium ;  it  is  formed  in  the  blast  furnace  at  the  ex|>ense  of
those  cyanogen  com|K)unds  (potassium  cyanide  and  others)  which  are  always  present,
and at the expense of  the  titanium  comjiounds  which accompany  the  ores  of  iron.
Wiihler,  who  investigated  this  compound,  obtained  it  artificially  by  heating  a  mixture  of
titanic oxide with a small quantity  of  charcoal,  in a  stream  of nitrogen,  and  thus
proved  the  direct  jwwer  for  combination  between  nitrogen  and  titanium. Wlien  fuse<l
with  caustic  ]>otasli,  all  the  nitrogen  compounds  of  titanium  evolve  ammonia  and  form
I)otassium  titanate. Like  metals  they  are  able  to reduce  many  oxides- -for  exam])le,
oxides  of  copjier — at  a  red  heat. Among  the  alloys  of  titanium,  the  cnstalline  compound
Al4Ti  is  remarkable. It  is  obtained  by  directly  dissolving  titanium  in  funed  aluminium  :
its  sjMJcific  gravity  is  311. The  cr>stals  are  ver>'  sUible,  and  are  only  soluble  in  aqua
regia  and  alkalis.

SILICON  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  FOIRTH  GROUP 147

is  occasionaHy  found  in  tlie  form  of  transp{ii*ent  crystals,  as  a  precious
stone  caHed  hyacinth."'"*  MetalHc  zirconium  was  obtained,  by  Berzelius
and  Troost,  by  the  action  of  aluminium  on  potassium  zirconofluoride  in
the  same  way  that  silicon  is  prepared  :  it  ft)rms  a  crystalline  powder,
similar  in  appearance  to  graphite  and  antimony,  but  having  a  very  con-
siderable hardness,  not  much  lustre,  sp.  gr.  -I*  15.  In  many  respects  it
resembles  silicon  ;  it  does  not  fuse  when  heated,  and  even  oxidises  with
difficulty,  but  liberates  hydrogen  when  fused  with  potash.  When  fused
with  silica  it  liberates  silicon.  With  carbon  in  the  electrical  furnace  it
forms  ZrCa,  with  hydrogen  it  gives  ZrH,  (like  CaHj,  Winkler,  Vol.  I.,
p.  621)  ;  hydrochloric  and  nitric  acids  act  feebly  on  it,  but  aqua  regia

*  The  formula  ZrO  was  first  given  to  the  oxide  of  zircouium  as  a  base,  in  this  case
Zr  =  45  whilnt  the  present  atomic  weight  is  Zr  =  90 — that  is,  tlie  fonnuhi  of  the  oxide  is
now  reco]^ised  as  being  ZrOo.  The  reasons  for  ascribing  tliis  formula  to  the  comix>uud8
of  zirconium  are  as  follows.  In  the  first  place,  the  investigtition  of  tlie  crystalline  forms
of  the  zirconofluorides — for  example,  K..ZrFc,  MgZrFc,5HoO — which  proved  to  l)e
analogous  in  composition  and  crystalline  form  with  the  corresponding  compounds  of
titanium,  tin,  and  silicon.  In  the  second  place,  the  si>ecific  heat  of  Zr  is  0*067,  which
corres|x)nds  with  the  combining  weight  90.  Tlie  third  and  most  important  reason  for
doubling  the  combining  weight  of  zirconium  was  given  by  Deville's  determination  of  the
vapour  density  of  zirconium  chloride^  ZrCl^.  This  substance  is  obtained  by  igniting
zirconium  oxide  mixed  with  charcoal  in  a  stream  of  dry  chlorine,  and  is  a  colourless,
saline  substance  which  is  easily  volatile  at  440°.  Its  density  referred  to  air  was  found  to
be  8*15,  that  is  117  in  relation  to  hydrogen,  as  it  should  be  according  to  the  molecular
formula  of  this  substance  above-cited.  It  exhibits,  however,  in  many  respects,  a  saline
character  and  that  of  an  acid  chloranhydride,  for  zirconium  oxide  itself  presents  very
feebly  developed  acid  properties  bnt  clearly  marked  basic  properties.  Thus  zirconium
chloride  dissolves  in  water,  and  on  evaporation  the  solution  only  partially  disengages
hydrochloric  acid — resembling  magnesium  chloride,  for  example.  Zirconium  was  dis-
covered and  cliaracterised  as  an  individual  element  by  Klaproth.

Pure  compounds  of  zirconium  are  generally  prepared  from  zircon,  which  is  -finely
ground,  but  as  it  is  very  hard  it  is  first  heated  and  thrown  into  cold  water,  by  which
means  it  is  disintegrated.  Zircon  is  deconijiosed  or  dissolved  when  fused  with  acid
potassium  sulphate,  or  still  more  easily  when  fused  with  acid  potassium  fluoride
(a  double  soluble  salt,  K.^.ZrF^j,  is  then  formed);  however,  zirconium  compounds  are
generally  prepared  from  jx)wdered  zircon  by  fusing  it  with  sodium  carbonate
and  then  boiling  in  water.  An  insoluble  white  residue  is  obtained  consisting  of  a
compound  of  the  oxides  of  sodium  and  zirconium,  which  is  then  treated  with  hydro-
chloric acid  and  the  solution  evaporated  to  dryness.  The  silica  is  thus  converted
into  an  insoluble  fonn,  and  zirconium  chloride  obtained  in  solution.  Ammonia  pre-
cipitates zirconium  hydroxide  from  this  solution,  as  a  white  gelatinous  precipitate,
ZrO(OH).,.  Wlien  ignited  this  hydroxide  loses  water  and  in  so  doing  undergoes  a  spon-
taneous recalescence  and  leaves  a  white  infusible  and  exceedingly  hard  mass  of  zirconium
oxide,  ZrO.^,  having  a  specific  gravity  of  54  (in  the  electrical  furnace  ZrOj  fuses  and
volatilises  like  SiO.,>,  Moissa.n).  Owing  to  its  infusibility,  zirconium  oxide  is  used  as  a
substitute  for  lime  and  magnesia  in  the  Drummond  light.  This  oxide,  in  contradistinc-
tion to  titanium  oxide,  is  soluble,  even  after  prohmged  ignition,  in  hot  strong  sulphuric
acid.  The  hydroxide  is  easily  soluble  in  acids.  The  comjwsition  of  the  salts  is  ZrX^,  or
ZrOX.j,  or  ZrOX2,Zr0.j,  just  as  with  those  of  its  analogues.  But  although  zirconium
oxide  forms  salts  in  the  same  way  with  acids,  it  also  gives  salts  with  bases.  Thus  it
liberates  carbonic  anhydride  when  fused  with  so<lium  ctirrbonate,  forming  the  salts
Zr(NaO)4,  ZrO(XaO).2,  &c. Water,  however,  destroys  these  salts  and  extracts  the  soda.

l2

148  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

easily  dissolves  it.  It  is  distinguished  from  silicon  by  the  fact  that
hydrofluoric  acid  acts  on  it  with  great  facility,  even  in  the  cold  and
when  diluted,  whilst  this  acid  does  not  act  on  silicon  at  all.

The  very  similar  element  thorium  (Th  =  232)  was  distinguished  by
Berzelius  from  zirconium.  It  is  very  rarely  met  with,  in  thorite  and
orangeitey  ThSi04,2H20. The  latter  is  isomorphous  with  zircon  (sp.  gr.

*^  Thorium  has  also  been  found  in  the  form  of  oxide  in  certain  pyrochlore?*,  euxinites,
monaziteH,  and  other  rare  minerals  containing  waits  of  niobium  and  phofii>lirttcs.  The
compounds  of  thorimn  are  prepared  by  decomposing  thorite  or  orangeite  with  strong
sulphuric  acid  at  its  boiling  point ;  this  renders  the  silica  insoluble,  and  the  thorium
oxide  passes  into  solution  when  the  residue  is  treated  with  cold  water,  after  having  been
previously  boiled  with  water  (boiling  water  does  not  dissolve  the  oxide  of  thorium).
Lead  and  other  impurities  are  separated  by  passing  sulphuretted  hydrogen  through  the
.solution,  and  the  thorium  hydroxide  is  then  precipitati'd  by  ammonia.  If  this  hydroxide
be  dissolved  in  the  smallest  possible  amount  of  hydrochloric  acid,  and  oxalic  acid  be  then
added,  thorium  oxalate  is  obtained  as  a  white  precipitate,  which  is  insoluble  in  ivn  excess
of  oxalic  acid ;  this  reaction  is  taken  advantage  of  for  separating  this  metal  from  many
others.  It,  however,  resembles  the  cerite  metals  (Chapter  XVII,,  Note  43)  in  this  and
many  other  respects.  Tlie  thorium  hydroxide  is  gelatinous;  on  ignition  it  leaves  an
infusible  oxide,  ThO.^,  which,  when  fuse<l  with  borax,  gives  crystals  of  the  same  fonn  as
stannic  oxide  or  titanic  anhydride ;  sp.  gr.  9'80.  But  the  basic  properties  are  much  more
developed  in  thorium  oxide  than  in  the  preceding  oxides,  and  it  does  not  even  disengage
carbonic  acid  when  fused  with  sodium  carbonate — that  is,  it  is  a  much  more  energetic
base  than  zirconium  oxide.  The  hydrate,  ThO.>,  however,  is  soluble  in  a  solution  of
Na^COj  (Chapter  XVII.,  Note  43).  Thoriiun  chloride,  ThCl,,  is  obtained  as  a  distinctly
crystalline  sublimate  when  thorium  oxide,  mixed  with  charcoal,  is  ignited  in  a  stream  of
dry  chlorine.  When  heated  with  potassium,  thorium  chloride  gives  a  metallic  powder  of
thorium  having  a  sp.  gr,  ll'l.  It  burns  in  air,  and  is  but  slightly  soluble  in  dilute  acids.
The  atomic  weight  of  thorium  was  established  by  Chydenius  and  Delafontaine  on  the
basis  of  the  ismorphisni  of  the  double  fluorides.

149

CHAPTER XIX

PHOSPHORUS AND THE OTHER ELEMENTS OF THE Fimi GROUP

NiTROdEX  is  the  lightest  and  most  widely  distributed  representative  of
the  elements  of  the  fifth  group,  which  form  a  higher  saline  oxide  of  the
form  R^O;,,  and  a  hydrogen  compound  of  the  form  RH3.  Phosphorus,
arsenic,  bismuth,  and  antimony  belong  to  the  uneven  series  of  this
group.  Phosphorus  is  the  most  widely  distributed  of  these  elements.
There  is  hardly  any  mineral  substance  composing  the  mass  of  the
earth's  crust  which  does  not  contain  some — it  may  be  a  small — amount
of  phosphorus  compounds  in  the  form  of  the  salts  of  phosphoric  acid.
The  soil  and  earthy  substances  in  general  usually  contain  from  one  to
ten  parts  of  phosphoric  acid  in  10,000  parts.  This  amount,  which
appears  so  small,  has,  however,  a  very  important  significance  in  nature.
No  plant  can  attain  its  natural  growth  if  it  be  planted  in  an  artificial
soil  completely  free  from  phosphoric  acid.  Plants  equally  require  the
presence  of  potash,  magnesia,  lime,  and  ferric  oxide,  among  basic,  and
of  carbonic,  sulphuric,  nitric,  and  phosphoric  anhydrides,  among  acid
oxides.  In  order  to  increase  the  fertility  of  a  more  or  less  poor  soil,
the  above-named  nutritive  elements  are  introduced  into  it  by  means  of
fertilisers.  Direct  experiment  has  proved  that  these  substances  are
undoubtedly  necessary  to  plants,  but  that  they  must  be  all  present
simultaneously  and  in  small  quantities,  and  that  an  excess,  like  an
insufficiency,  of  one  of  these  elements  is  necessarily  followed  by  a  bad
harvest,  or  an  imperfect  growth,  even  if  all  the  other  conditions  (light,
heat,  water,  air)  are  normal.  The  phosphoric  compounds  of  the  soil
accumulated  by  plants  pass  into  the  organism  of  animals,  in  which
these  substances  are  assimilated  in  many  instances  in  large  quantities.
Thus  the  chief  component  part  of  bones  is  calcium  phosphate,  Ca3P20j„
and  it  is  on  this  that  their  hardness  depends.  *

I  Dry  boiieH  cvnitain  about  one-third  of  gelatinous  matter  and  about  two-thirds  of
a»li,  eliietly  cakiuiu  phoHphate.  The  saltH  of  phosplioric  acid  are  also  found  in  the  mass
of  the  earth  as  separate  niineralH;  for  example,  the  apatites  contain  this  salt  in  a
cr>'HtaUiiie  form,  combined  with  calcium  chloride  or  fluoride,  CaRgjSCasCPO^)),  where

150  PKINCIPLE.S OF CHEMISTRY

Phosphorus  was  first  extracted  by  Brand  in  1669,  by  the  ignition
of  evaporated  urine.  After  the  lapse  of  a  century  Scheele,  who  knew
of  the  existence  of  a  more  abundant  source  of  phosphorus  in  bones^
pointed  out  the  method  which  is  now  employed  for  the  extraction  of
this  element.  Calcium  phosphate  in  hones  permeates  a  nitrogenous
organic  substance,  which  is  called  ossein,  and  forms  a  gelatin.
When  bones  are  treated  exclusively  for  the  extraction  of  phosphorus,
neglecting  the  gelatin,  they  are  burnt,  in  which  case  all  the  ossein  is
burnt  away.  When,  however,  it  is  desired  to  preserve  the  gelatin,  the
bones  are  immersed  in  cold  dilute  hydrochloric  acid,  which  dissolves
the  calcium  phosphate  and  leaves  the  gelatin  untouched  ;  calcium
chloride  and  acid  calcium  phosphate,  CaH4(P04)2,  are  then  obtained  in
the  solution.  When  the  bones  are  directly  burnt  in  an  open  fire  their
mineral  components  only  are  left  as  an  ash,  containing  about  90  per
cent,  of  calcium  phosphate,  Ca3(P04)2,  mixed  with  a  small  amount  of
calcium  carbonate  and  other  salts.  This  mass  is  treated  with  sulphuric
acid,  and  then  the  same  substance  is  obtained  in  the  solution  as  was
obtained  from  the  unburnt  bones  immersed  in  hydrochloric  acid — i,e,  the
acid  calcium  phosphate  soluble  in  water,  in  which  reaction  naturally
the  chief  part  of  the  sulphuric  acid  is  converted  into  calcium  sulphate :

Ca3(P04)2  +  2H2SO4  =  2CaS04  +  C&U.iTO,).^.
Ca3(P04)2  4-  4HC1 =  2CaCl2  -I  CaH4(P04)2.

On  evaporating  the  solution,  erystallisable  acid  calcium  phosphate
is  obtained.  The  extraction  of  the  phosphorus  from  this  salt  con-
sists in  lieating  it  with  charcoal  to  a  tvhite  heat.  When  heated,  the
acid  phosphate,  CaH4(P04)2,  first  parts  with  water,  and  forms  the
metaphosphate,  Ca(P03)2,  which  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  may  be
regarded,  like  the  acid  salt,  as  composed  of  pyrophosphate  and  phos-
phoric anhydride,  2Ca(P03)2  =  Ca2P207  +  P2O5.  The  latter,  with
charcoal,  gives  phosphorus  and  carbonic  oxide,  P2O5  +  5C  =  P2  +  5Gr).

R  =  F  or  CI,  sometimes  in  a  state  of  isomoi-phous  mixture.  This  mineral  often  crj-stallines
in  fine  hexagonal  prisms ;  sp.  gr.  3' 17  to  3*22.  Vi%-ianite  is  a  hydrated  ferrous  phosphutis
Fe5(P04).,,8H20.  Phosphates  of  copiier  are  frequently  found  in  copper  mines ;  for  example,
iagilite,  Cu5(P04)2,Cu(OH).^,2H20.  Lead  and  aluminium  form  similar  salts.  They  are
nearly  all  insoluble  in  water.  The  tuiijuoise,  for  instance,  is  hydrated  phosphate  of  aluminti^
(AljO-,).2,P2055H20,  coloured  with  a  salt  of  cop|>er.  Sea  and  other  waters  always  contain
a  small  amount  of  phosphates.  Tlie  ash  of  sea-plants,  as  well  as  of  land-plants,  always
contains  phosphates.  Deposits  of  calcium  phosphate  are  often  met  with  ;  they  are  termed
jihosphorites  and  osteolites,  and  are  composed  of  the  fossil  remains  of  the  bones  of  animals ;
they  are  used  for  manure.  Of  the  same  nature  are  the  so-called  guano  dejwsits  from
Baker's  Island,  and  entire  strata  in  Sjmiii,  France,  and  in  the  Governments  of  Orloff
and  Kursk  in  Russia.  It  is  evident  that  if  a  soil  destined  for  cultivation  contain  very
little  phosphoric  acid,  the  fertilisation  by  means  of  these  minerals  will  be  l>enefieial,
but,  naturally,  only  if  the  other  elements  necessar>'  to  plants  W  present  in  the  soil.

I solui

^BOaPHOKUS  AND  THK  OTiiER  ELEMENTS  OF  GKUUP  V. 151

e  tliat  in  reality  a  aouiewliat  complicated  process  takes  place  liore,
aiding  ultimately  products  Recording  to  the  following  equation  :
2CftH ,(P<  I, ),  4  .iC  =  4 H.p  +  Ch,P/I;  f  P,  +  ,100.

iter  the  steam  iias  come  over,  ]jhosphoru3  anil  carboniu  fixide  distil

from  the  retort  and  (.'alcium  pyrophosphate  remains  behind.'  ''*"

As  phosphorus  melts  at  aliout  40',  it  conden.seij  at  the  bottom  of

receiver  in  a  molten  liquid mass,  which  is  cast  under  water  in

ibes.  and  is  sold  in  the  form  of  sticks. Thin  is  comnion  or  '/eHov

It  is  a  transparent,  yellowish,  waxy  substance,  which  is

tlot  brittle,  almost  in.'inluble  in  water,  and  easily  undergoes  change  in

its  external  appeai-ance  and  properties  uti'ler  the  action  of  light.,  bent,

and  of  various  substances. It  crystallises  (by  sublimation  or  from  its

solution  in  carbon  bisulphide)  in  the  regular  system,  aud^  (in  contra-

listiiiction  to  the  other  vurieties)  is  easily  soluble  in  I'Jirbon  bisulphide,

also  partially  in  other  oily  liquids. In  this  it  recalls  common

111  lA  nnl]ihiiTiL^  dr  bydrovlilurii:  u
tl  (uUt  Frum  the  reudue,  aud  in  t
1  to  take  burnt  baau,  bat  mine
L<  Iw  emploj-ed  tn,  niBterinlii  For  t\u,

BftiHK  tliB  iiyn>[)li<is|iiuite_i

]  obtain  h  FrrHli  qoMiitity
muiner  to  extnutt  itU  llw  pluwiiWrtis,
pluwpliDriteH,  DHteolitiii,  and  npi^titcB  nnj  hIsk
tnctiiu  uf {iIuhiiIhicuk. Its PXtriKtion lor tlie
■uauufactRni  n( nuili'heii  is  ever;rw1irre  rxleiiiliiig.
■nd  in  Kuwun,  in  tlw  Unkli,  in  tlw  Gorerumout  lA
Perm,  it  hu  Kltiiued  such  praportionit  thnt  the
dislrict  in  «ble  to  iiapply  otlier  cnantries  with  p1u>N-
ptionu. A  eroA  dimij-  methodH  havs  be«n  pm|Kweil
for  iMilitikliiig  tlie  citnuiion  of  phoaphonis  but
uoue  of  them  differ  eiwentiall)'  frotu  the  usual  one,
beottlBe  the  proltleni  in  dependent  on  the  liberation
of  pbOBphoric  acid  by  the  ution  of  aoids,  uid  on  itii
ultimate  redaction  bj  charcoal. Thos  the  calcium
plumphate  niaf  be  mixed  directly  with  charcoal  iiliil
■and,  and  photpborus  nil!  be  liberated  on  heuliii);
the  mixttuc,  Iwcause  the  nlica  di»|ihK.'eB  the  phm- ,
phuric  anhydride,  irhich  given  catbduic  oiid?  and
idHMpborox  with tlie  cbaioul. II  luw  alKo  Iwen
(tmpnstiil  to  panH  hydrochloric  acid  over  an  incaii-
■leaiiut  uiitnre  oF  calcium  pbospbate  and  charcoal ;
the  acid  then  aatH  just  oa  tbe  tiilica  does,  libentiuK
phosphoric anhydride,  which is reduced by  thi:
cluiicoal. Il  is  ne«Mi«ry  to  pieTent  tbe  accwis  ol
o(  pliD*pboraii,  becanne  they  tAke  Are  very  eoisily ;
by  causing  the  gm*ou«  prodncts  to  pass  lhrou((h  «
tbe  eondenaer  hIidwii  in  Be.  Hit  is  uHoally  employed.

'  Vernou  IIHDI)  nljaervud  that  ordinary  (yelloirl  pbos|il]orus  in  dimorphoas.  II  it  lit-
melted  and  by  careful  cooling  be  brought  in  a  liqaid  torm  to  ae  low  e,  temperature  us
{■Mnble,  it  ^les  ■  lariety  which  mella  at  4S°'8  |thv  ordinary  variety  fuses  at  tl'-i).
■p.  gr.  1837  (that  of  the  ordinary  variety  is  I'SIS)  at  IS'.  cry«lalliws  in  rhombic  prinno
linattiBd  of  in  forms  belonging  to  tile  mbioMl  system). Thin  is  similar  to  the  retatii>u

Iral  and  prismatic  snlplinr  (Chapter  X

wklHlUt  CQCDln^

n  tbe  condensation  of  the  vapours
•e  they  are  CDndensed  under  water
el  full  oF  wilier. For  this  piirposr

152  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

sulphur.  Its  specific  gravity  is  1  '84.  It  fuses  at  44°,  and  passes  into
vapour  at  290°  ;  it  is  easily  inflammable,  and  must  therefore  be
handled  with  great  caution  ;  careless  rubbing  is  enough  to  cause  phos-
phorus to  ignite.  Its  application  in  the  manufacture  of  matches  is
based  on  this.'^**"  It  emits  light  in  the  air  owing  to  its  slow  ^  oxida-
tion, and  is  therefore  kept  under  water  (such  water  is  phosphorescent
in  the  dark,  like  phosphorus  itself).  It  is  also  very  easily  oxidised  by
various  oxidising  agents  and  takes  up  the  oxygen  from  many  sub-
stances.^ *»**  Phosphorus  enters  into  direct  combination  with  many
metals  and  with  sulphur,  chlorine,  &c.,  with  development  of  a  con-
siderable amount  of  heat.  It  is  very  poisonous  although  not  soluble  in
water.

Besides  this,  there  is  a  red  variety  of  phosphorus,  which  diflers  con-
siderably from  the  above.  Bed  phosphorus  (sometimes  wrongly  called
amorphous  p}U)sp1wrus)  is  partially  formed  when  ordinary  phosphorus

?bu  According  to  Herr  Iriiiyi  (an  Hungarian  student),  tlie  firnt  pliosphoniH  niatclies
were  made  in  Austria  at  Roemer'8  works  in  1885.

5  The  abHori>tion  of  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere  at  a  constaint  ordinary  temperature
by  a  large  surface  of  pliosphorus  proceeds  so  uniformly,  regularly,  and  rapidly,  that  it
may  serve,  as  Ikeda  (Tokio,  1898)  has  shown,  for  demonstrating  the  law  of  the  velocity
(rate)  of  reaction,  wliich  is  considered  in  theoretical  chemistry,  and  shows  that  the  rate
of  reaction  is  proportional  to  the  active  mass  of  a  substance — i.e.  ilx  (l(=^k{A-~x)  where
t  is  the  time,  A  the  initial  mass  of  the  reacting  substance — in  tluK  case  oxygen — x
the  amount  of  it  which  has  entered  into  reaction,  and  k  the  coefficient  of  proi>ortionality.
Ikeda  took  a  test-tube  (diameter  about  10  mm.),  and  covered  its  outer  surface  with  a
coating  of  phosphorus  (by  melting  it  in  a  test-tube  of  large  diameter,  inserting  the
smaller  test-tube,  and,  w^hen  the  pliosphorus  had  solidified,  breaking  away  the  outer  test-
tube),  and  intnxluced  it  into  a  definite  volume  of  air,  contained  in  a  Woulfe's  bottle
(immersed  in  a  water  bath  to  maintain  a  constant  tenii>erature),  one  of  whose  orifices
was  connected  with  a  mercury  manometer  showing  the  fall  of  j>ressure,  x.  Knowin«;
that  the  initial  pressure  of  the  oxygen  (in  air  nearly  750  x  "OaO^)  was  about  l.');-)  nnn.  A,
the  coefficient  of  the  rate  of  reaction  k  is  given,  by  the  law  of  the  variation  of  the  rate  of

reaction  with  the  mass  of  the  reacting  substance,  by  the  equation  :  A*  = log ' ,  wlicn-

f A  —  X

t  is  the  time,  counting  from  the  commencement,  of  the  exjieriment  in  minutes. Wlien

the  surface  of  the  phos]3horus  was  about  11  sq.  cm.,  the  following  results  were  actually

obtained  .

<  =  10  20  80  40  50  CO  minutes

x  =  10-5  21-5  811  40*7  491  57-8  mm

10,000  A- =  82  82  82  88  88  83

The  constancy  of  A'  is  well  shown  in  this  case.  The  determination  takes  a  comparatively
short  time,  so  that  it  may  serve  as  a  lecture  experiment,  and  demonstrates  (me  of  the
most  ini]M>rtant  laws  of  chemical  mechanics.

**•'*  Not  (mly  do  oxidising  agents  like  nitric,  chromic,  and  similar  acids  act  uihui
j>liosphorus,  but  even  the  alkalis  are  attacked — that  is,  phosphorus  acts  as  a  reducing;
agent.  In  fact  it  reduces  many  substances,  for  instance,  copper  from  its  salts.
When  phosphorus  is  heated  with  sodium  carbonate,  the  latter  is  partially  reduced  to
carbon.  If  phosphorus  be  placed  under  wat«r  slightly  warmed,  and  a  stn-ani  of  oxygen
be  passed  over  it,  it  will  bum  under  the  water.

|:?HOaPHOHUS  AND  THE  OTUEE  ELEMENTS  OF  OBOUP  V. 153

s  exposed  to  the  b

1  of  light  for  a  long  time. It  is  also

;  for  0

luple,

when  onlin

(ihosplior

combines  witli  chlorine,  bromine,  iodine,  or  oxygen,  u  portion  of  it  is
converted  into  red  phosphorus,  ychrotter,  in  Vienna,  inveatignted  this
variety  of  phosphorus,  and  pointed  out  by  what  methods  it  may  be
produced  in  corisideiulile  ([uaiitities.  Red  pbosphoriia  is  a  jwwdery  red-
brown  opaque  substance  of  specific  gravity  2*14.  It  does  not  combine
so  energetically  with  oxygen  and  othei-  substances  as  yellow  phosphorus,
and  evolves  less  heat  in  combining  with  theiu,'  Common  phosphorus
easily  oxidises  in  the  air  ;  red  phosphorus  does  not  oxidise  at  nil  at  the
ordinary  temperature  ;  hence  it  doe*  not  phosphoresce  in  tlie  air,  and
kybe  very  conveniently  kept  in  the  form  of  powder.  It  does  not,  like
phospborUH,  fuse  at  44°. After  being  converted  into  vapour  at

tbunnot^liemicii]  (ItiltiruiuiiLtioim  Tor  pliuHphctnia  and  itii  citiii]H>iiiiilM  iLitu  froui
the  lAAt  Dfiiitary,  wljf^  Lavaiaier  Hud  LftplAi'd  baral  jihoRpliunib  iii  iixygi^ii  in  im  it^
i-ulurimeter.  AiidniirH,  DeKjiretz,  FsTre,  luid  olherH  huTV  Btudiud  tbe  muii>  Bnl>ilict.  The
inost  uuunte  nod  t:im)[ilHte  datu  aic  doe  hi  TLoniBeD.  To  detenuinit  tliB  heat  of
(ooibtuUnn  of  yoUnw  pliosphonm,  TLomai-ii  oiidised  it  in  u  ciloriniBlBr  with  iodic  acid  lu
the  presence  nl  water,  and  a  nuittmr  ot  phoaphoroati  and  phovphoric  kdd*  ma  thu«
lonutd  Iwtw  not  an;  hypophoaphtinc  acid  [ornwd  ? — SaJaer),  and  the  iodic  acid  converted
into  hjdriodii  acid.  It  was  fimt  nBtesaary  bo  introduce  two  coirecliong  into  the  calori-
luetrie  reantt  obtained,  one  for  the  oudatioii  of  tlw  phoiphorous  into  plioiphoHc  lUrid,
fcUDwing  tlieir  relative  aiuounta  by  analywe.  and  the  other  for  the  deoiida^on  at  tins
iodic  acid.  The  reanlt  then  obtained  exprewiea  tbe  conventioD  iif  phosphoroiu  into
liydialed  phoBphorio  acid.  Tliia  maat  be  coneoted  tor  the  heat  of  solulion  ot  the  hydrate
in  water,  and  for  the  heat  of  combination  of  the  iitihydnde  with  water,  before  we  can
ubuin  the  beat  evolved  in  the  reaction  of  Pj  with  Og  in  the  proportion  for  the  lormatiim
of  P^O^.  It  ia  natural  that  with  ao  complex  a  method  there  ie  a  poaaibility  of  many
aniall  Hrron,  and  the  resultant  figures  will  only  jiresent  a  certain  degree  ol  accunu-y
■il«r  repeated  oorrectionB  t>y  various  methods.  Of  suoh  a  kind  are  the  following  flgnnn
determined  by  Tliom»en,  which  we  express  in  IhouBands  of  calorieBi — Pj  +  Oj^OTU;
Ps  +  0i  +  aa,0=4«);  P-,  +  Oi  +  anmsanrw«ter=*OS,  Hence  we  aee  that  P,Oi  *  SHjO
'3a:aPH]0,+  an  excCHS  of  water  =5.  Experiment  further  ahuwed  that  trrnUllised
PHgO,,  in  disKOlving  in  wal«r,  evolven  ^'T  tliouaand  calories,  and  that  fnaed  (HS^j  PBjOi
evalvei<5*9t]iaUBand  calories,  wheuce  the  hea.t  ol  Ineion  of  HiFOi-a'E  thousand  calorien.
Fur  phoBpliorous  acid,  HjPOj,  Thomseu  obt^ned  Pj  t  O,  -t  SHfi-iiO.  and  the  solution  of
cryrtiatlinBd  HiPOj  in  water  =  -U18,and  of  fused  HjPOj=  -i- a-«.  Porb)'pnpho»plM>couB
M-id,  BjPOg,  (he  lientH  ot  so] otion  are  nearly  the  same  <  -  0' 17  and  -i-9-l|.  and  the  heat
of  fonnation  P.i-t-O  4  SH.,O^TS;  hence  its  convenion  into  SRjPO,  evolves  ITA  thooBaiid
valuricB,  and  the  conversion  ot  aHjFOx  into  SHjPO^^^ ISO  thousand  calories.  For  tlie
sake  of  comparison  we  will  take  the  comhinatioli  ot  dJorine  with  phoapbuma,  also
accnrding  toTlioms«n,peraatomsDtphoBplioms,P,-»-SCl,  =  lIil.P,-l-IiC1,-31(ltluniHaud

!IPCIj=  IHO,  iJPCls  ^  347,  and  SPOClj  ^  148  tl  lousand  calories.

tusion  lor  P  tlhat  is,  for  SI  parto  ol  phimplioms  by  weight)  -  OIB  tlmusand  calmiei  ;  the
convendon  ol  yellow  into  reil  phiisphorns  fnr  P,  tram  -t  lu  to  +37  llioossnd  calorieK;
P-.Hi-*M,HI  +  PH;  =  a4,PH,i^HBr  =  !B  thousand  calorie..

At  tile  nrdiuary  teiuperatare  {-Ml'-  C.)  phosphorus  is  not  oxidised  by  pure  oxygen :
oxidation  only  takes  place  with  a  fJight  rise  of  teinperatnre,  or  the  dilution  of  the  oxygen
*ilt  other  gaaes  (especially  nitrogen  or  hydrogen),  or  a  decrease  of  pi

154  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

290°  or  300^,  it  again  passes  into  the  ordinary  variety  when  slowly
cooled.  Red  phosphorus  is  not  soluble  in  carbon  bisulphide  and  other
oily  liquids,  which  permits  of  its  being  freed  from  any  admixture  of  the
ordinary  phosphorus.  It  is  not  poisonous,  and  is  used  in  many  cases  for
which  the  ordinary  phosphorus  is  unsuitable  or  dangerous  ;  for  example,
in  the  manufacture  of  matches,  which  are  then  not  poisonous  or  in-
flammable by  accidental  friction,  and  therefore  the  red  variety  has  now
replaced  the  ordinary  phosphorus.**  b"

The  heads  of  the  *  safety  '  matches  do  not  contain  any  phosphorus,
but  only  substances  capable  of  burning  and  of  supporting  combus-
tion. Red  phosphorus  is  spread  over  a  surface  on  the  box,  and  it
is  the  friction  against  this  phosphorus  which  ignites  the  matches.
There  is  no  danger  of  the  matches  taking  fire  accidentally,  nor  are
they  poisonous.'  This  red  phosphorus  is  prepared  by  heating  the
oi-dinary  phosphorus  at  230°  to  270°  ;  it  is  evident  that  this  must
be  done  in  an  atmosphere  incapable  of  supporting  combustion—
for example, in nitrogen, carbonic anhydride,  steam, etc. On a

1  bu  Ordinan*  pliospliorus  takeH  fire  at  a  temperature  ((K)'^)  at  whicli  no  other  knowqi
HubHtance  will  burn.  ItH  application  to  the  manufacture  of  matches  is  based  on  this
property.  In  order  to  illustrate  the  easy  inflammability  of  common  (yellow)  phosphorus,
its  solution  in  carVx^n  bisulphide  may  be  poured  over  paper;  this  solvent  quickly
evaporates,  and  the  free  phosphorus  spread  over  a  large  surface  takes  fire  spontaneously,
notwithstanding  the  cooling  effect  produced  by  the  evaporation  of  the  bisulphide.  The
majority  of  phosphorus  matches  are  composed  of  common  phosphorus  mixed  with  some
oxidising  substance  which  easily  gives  up  oxygen,  such  as  lead  dioxide,  |)otassiuni
chlorate,  nitre,  iVc.  For  this  purpose  common  phosphorus  is  carefully  triturated  under
wann  water  containing  a  little  gum  ;  lead  di(»xide  and  potassium  nitrate  are  then  added
to  the  resultant  emulsion,  and  the  match  ends,  previously  coated  with  sulphur  or  paraffin,
are  dipi)ed  into  this  preparation.  After  this  the  matches  are  dii)ped  '\\\U)  a  solution
of  gum  and  shellac,  in  order  to  preserve  the  phosphorus  from  the  action  of  the  air.
When  such  a  match  containing  particles  of  yellow  phosphorus  is  rubbed  over  a  rough
surface,  it  becomes  (especially  at  the  iK)int  of  rupture  of  the  brittle  gummy  coating)
slightly  heated,  and  this  is  sufficient  to  cause  the  phosphorus  to  take  fire  and  bum  at
the  expense  of  the  oxygen  of  the  other  ingredients.

*  In  the  so-called  '  stifety  '  or  Swedish  matches  (which  are  not  poisonous,  and  do  not
take  fire  from  accidental  friction)  a  mixture  of  red  phosphorus  and  glass  forms  the
surface  on  which  the  matches  are  struck,  and  the  matches  themselves  do  not  contain  any
phosphorus  at  all,  but  a  mixture  of  antimonious  sulphide,  Sb.^S-,  (or  similar  com-
bustible substances)  and  potassium  chlorate  (or  other  oxidising  agents).  The  com-
bustion, when  once  started  by  contact  with  the  re<l  phosphorus,  proceeds  by  itself
at  the  expense  of  the  inflammatory  and  combustible  elements  contained  in  the  tip  of  the
match.  The  mixture  applied  on  the  match  itself  must  not  l>e  liable  to  take  fire  from  a  blow
or  friction.  The  mixture  forming  the  heads  of  the  'safety  '  matches  has  the  following
approximat«»  composition  :  55-60  parts  of  chlorate  of  potassium,  5-10  parts  of  peroxide  of
manganese  (or  of  K-.Cr.O;),  about  1  part  of  sulphur  or  charcoal,  about  1  part  of  penta-
sulphide  of  antimony,  Sb,S5,  and  80-40  parts  of  rouge  and  powdered  glass.  This  mixture
is  stirred  uj)  in  gum  or  glue,  and  the  matches  are  dipped  into  it.  The  paper  on  which
the  matches  are  struck  is  coated  with  a  mixture  of  red  phosphorus  and  trisulphide  of
antimony,  SboS-,  stirred  up  in  dextrine.

PH08PH0Rl>i ANI> THE OTHEK ELEMENTS 01- GROVP Y. 155

large  scale,  ordinarj*  phosphorus  is  placed  in  closed  iron  vessels,'^  ^*  and
immersed  in  a  bath  of  difierent  proportions  of  tin  and  lead,  bv  which
means  the  temperature  of  250°  necessary  for  the  conversion  is  easily
attained.  It  is  kept  at  this  temperature  for  some  time.  The  tempera-
ture is  at  first  cautiously  raised,  and  the  air  is  thus  partially  expelled
by  the  heat,  and  also  by  the  evolution  of  steam  (the  phosphorus  is
damp  when  put  in),  whilst  the  remaining  oxygen  is  also  partially
absorbed  by  the  phosphorus,  so  that  an  atmosphere  of  nitrogen  is
produced  in  the  iron  vessel.  Red  phosphorus  enters  into  all  the
reactions  proper  to  yellow  phosphorus,  only  with  greater  difficulty
and  more  slowly  ;  *"  and,  as  its  vapour  tension  (volatility)  is  less  than

*  bu  Phosphorus  only  acts  on  iron  at  a  red  heat.  Tlie  boiler  in  provide<l  with  a  safety
valve  and  gas-condactiiij;  tulje,  which  is  immerse<l  in  mercurj-  or  other  liquid  to  prevent
the  admission  of  air  into  the  lioiler.

^  The  specific  heat  of  the  yellow  variety  is  0*1HV»— that  is,  greater  than  that  of  the  red
variety,  which  is  0*170.  The  sp.  gr.  of  the  yellow  is  1-84,  and  of  the  red  prepared  at  2ti0°
2*15,  and  of  that  prepared  at  5H0-  and  above  {i.e.  'metallic'  phosphorus,  ser  below)
=  2*34.  At  230'^  the  pressure  of  the  vapour  of  ordinary  phosphorus  -  514  millimetres
r>f  mercury,  and  of  the  red  0 — that  is  to  say,  the  red  phosphorus  does  not  form
any  vapour  at  this  temi>erature ;  at  447^  the  vapour  tension  of  ordinary  phosphorus  is  at
first  =  5500  mm.,  but  it  gradually  diminishes,  whilst  that  of  red  phosphorus  is  equal  to
1636  mm.

Hittorf,  by  heating  the  lower  portion  of  a  closed  tube  containing  red  phosphorus  to
530*^  and  the  upper  portion  to  447",  obtained  crystals  of  the  so-called  *  metallic  *  phosphorus
at  the  upper  extremity.  As  the  vapour  tensions  (according  to  Hittorf,  at  530°  tlie  vapour
tension  of  yellow  phosphorus  =  8040  mm.,  of  red  =  G139mm.,  and  of  metallic  =  4130mm.)
and  reactions  are  different,  metallic  phosphorus  may  be  regarded  as  a  distinct  variety.
It  is  still  less  energetic  in  its  chemical  reaction  than  red  phosphorus,  and  it  is  denser
than  the  two  preceding  varieties :  sp.  gr.  =  2*34.  It  docs  not  oxidise  in  the  air ;  is
crystalline,  and  has  a  metallic  lustre.  It  is  obtained  when  ordinary  phosphorus  is  heated
with  lead  for  several  hours  at  400-  in  a  closed  vessel,  from  which  the  air  has  been  exhausted.
The  resultant  mass  is  then  treated  with  dilute  nitric  acid,  which  first  dissolves  the  lead
(phosphorus  is  electro-negative  to  lead,  and  does  not,  therefore,  act  on  the  nitric  acid  at
first)  and  leaves  brilliant  rhonibohedral  crystals  of  phosphorus  of  a  dark  violet  colour
with  a  slight  metallic  lustre,  which  conduct  an  electric  current  incomparably  better
thaii  the  yellow  variety ;  this  also  is  characteristic  of  the  metallic  state  of  phos-
phorus.

The  researches  of  Lemoine  partially  explain  the  passage  of  yellow  (ordinary)  phos-
phorus into  its  other  varieties.  He  heated  a  closed  glass  globe  containing  either  ordinary  or
red  phosphorus,  in  the  vapour  of  sulphur  (440^),  and  then  determined  the  amount  of  the
red  and  yellow  varieties  after  various  periods  of  time,  by  treating  the  mixture  with  carbon
bisulphide.  It  appeared  that  after  the  lapse  of  a  certain  time  a  mixture  of  definite  and
equal  composition  is  obtained  from  both — that  is,  between  tlie  red  and  yellow  varieties  a
state  of  equilibrium  sets  in  like  that  of  dissociation,  or  that  observed  in  double  decom-
positions. But  at  the  same  time,  the  progress  of  the  transformation  appeared-to  be
dependent  on  the  relative  quantity  of  phosphorus  taken  per  volume  of  tlie  globe
{i.e.  upon  the  pressure).  Neglecting  the  latter,  we  will  cite  as  an  example  the  amounts
of  the  red  phosphorus  transformed  into  the  ordinary,  and  of  the  ordinary  not  con-
verted into  red,  per  30  grams  of  red  or  yellow  taken  per  litre  capacity  of  the  globe,
heated  to  440"".  When  red  phosphorus  was  taken,  4*75  grams  of  yellow  phosphorus  were
formed  after  two  hours,  four  grams  after  eight  hours,  three  grams  after  twenty-four  hours,

156  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTKY

that  of  the  yellow  variety,  it  may  be  supposed  that  a  polymerisation
takes  place  in  the  passage  of  the  yellow  into  the  red  modification,  just  as
in  the  passage  of  cyanogen  into  paracyanogen,  or  of  cyanic  acid  into
cyanuric  acid  (Chapter  IX.  Notes  39  bis  and  -48).

The  vapour  of  phosphorus  is  colourless  ;  its  density  remains  constant
between  300°  and  1000°  (Dumas,  1833;  Mitscherlich,  Deville,  and
Troost,  1859,  and  others).  The  density  with  respect  to  air  has  been
determined  as  from  4*3  to  4*5.  Hence,  referred  to  hydrogen,  it  is
4*4  X  14*4  =  63,  corresponding  with  a  molecular  weight  124,  i.e,  the
molecule  of  phosphorus  in  a  state  of  vapour  contains  P4.  The  reader
will  remember  that  the  molecule  of  nitrogen  contains  N.2,  of  sulphur  S,,
or  S2,  and  of  oxygen  O2  or  O3.

The  chemical  energy  of  phosphoinis  in  a  free  state  more  nearly
approaches  that  of  sulphur  than  nitrogen.  Phosphorus  is  combustible  and
inflames  at  60°  ;  but  having  in  the  act  of  combination  parted  with  a  por-
tion of  its  energy  in  the  form  of  heat  it  becomes  analogous  to  nitrogen,
so  long  as  there  is  no  question  of  its  reduction  back  again  into  phos-
phorus. Nitrig  acid  is  easily  reduced  to  nitrogen,  whilst  phosphoric
acid  is  reduced  with  very  much  greater  difficulty.  All  the  compounds  of
phosphorus  are  less  volatile  than  those  of  nitrogen.  Nitric  acid ,  HNO3,
is  easily  distilled  ;  metaphosphonc  acid,  HPO3,  is  generally  said  to  be

and  the  last  limit  remained  constant  on  further  heating.  When  thirty  grams  of  yellow
phosphorus  were  taken,  five  grams  remained  unaltered  after  two  hours,  four  grams
after  eight  hours,  and  after  twenty-four  hours  and  more  three  grams  as  before.
Troost  and  Hautefeuille  showed  that  liquid  phosphorus  in  general  changes  more  easily
into  tlie  red  than  does  phosphorus  vapour,  which,  liowever,  is  able,  although  slowly,  to
deposit  red  phospliorus.

The  question  presents  itself  as  to  whether  phosphorus  in  a  state  of  vai>our  is  the
ordinary  or  some  otlier  variety  ?  Hittorf  (1865)  collected  many  data  for  the  solution  of
this  problem,  which  leave  no  doubt  that  (as  experimental  figures  show)  the  density
of  the  vapour  of  phosphorus  is  always  the  same,  although  the  vai>our  tension  of  the
different  varieties  and  their  mixtures  is  very  variable.  Tins  shows  that  the  different
varieties  of  phosphorus  only  occur  in  a  liquid  and  solid  state,  as  indeed  is  implied
in  the  idea  of  polymerisation.  Strictly  speaking,  the  vapour  of  phosphorus  is  a
particular  state  of  this  substance,  and  the  molecular  formula  P4  refers  only  to  it,  and  not
to  any  other  definite  state  of  phosphorus.  But  Raoult's  solution  method  showed  that
in  a  benzene  solution  the  fall  of  the  freezing  point  indicates  for  ordinary  phosphorus  a
molecule  P4,  judging  by  the  determinations  of  Paterno  and  Nasini  (1888),  Hirtz  (inyO),
and  Beckmaim  (1891),  who  obtained  for  sulphur  by  the  same  method  a  molecular  weiglit
--  Sg,  in  conformity  with  the  vapour  density.  Further  research  in  this  direction  will
l>erhaps  show  the  |x>ssibility  of  finding  the  molecular  weight  of  red  phosphorus,  if  a
means  be  discovered  for  dissolving  it  without  converting  it  into  the  yellow  variety.

1  think  it  will  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  the  fact  that
red  phosphorus,  which  we  must  recognise  as  polymeric  with  the  yellow,  stands  nearer  to
nitrogen,  whose  molecule  is  Nj,  in  its  small  inclination  towards  chemical  reactions^
although  judging  by  its  small  vapour  tension  it  must  be  more  complex  than  ordinary
(yellow  and  white)  phosphorus.

■PH03PH0HUS  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OP  OHOI'P  V, 157

■volatile  ;  tripthyl limine,  N(C,Hs)3,  boils  at  90°,  and  trietlijl-
pbosphine,  P(C,H.,)„  at  127°.

Pliospliorus  not  only  combines  easily  and  directly  with  oxygen,  but
also  with  chlorine,  bromine,  iodine,  sulphur,  and  with  certain  metals,
and  red  phosphorus  whenbeati^H  comiiines  with  hydrogen  also.*'"'  So,  for
instance,  when  fused  witli  sodium  under  niiphthii,  phosphorus  gives  the
compound  NajPj.  Zinc,  absorbing  the  vapour  of  phosphorus,  gives  the
phosphide  Zn^P,  (up.  gr.  4-7G) ;  tin,  HnP  ;  copper,  CujP  ;  even  platinum
combines  with  phosphorus  (PtPj,  sp.  gr.  6'77).'' '''  Iron,  when  combinect
even  with  a  suiall  quantity  of  phosphorus,  becomes  brittle.'  Some  of
these  compounds  of  phosphorus  lire  obtitined  by  the  action  of  phos-
phorus on  the  solutions  of  metallic  salts,  and  by  the  ignition  of  metallic
oxides  in  tlie  vapour  of  phosphorus,  or  by  heating  mixtures  of  phos-
jihates  with  charcoal  and  metals.  Phosphides  do  not  exhibit  the
external  properties  of  salts,  which  are  so  clearly  seen  in  the  chlorides
and  Btill  distinctly  observable  in  the  sulphides.  The pluwpkidea  of  the
jnelnla  of  the  alkalis  and  of  the  alkaline  eartlis  are  even  immediately
and  very  easily  decomposed  by  wat«r,  whereas  this  is  found  to  be  the
case  with  only  a  very  few  sulphides,  and  still  more  rarely  and  indistinctly
with  tho  chlorides. We  may  take  calcium  phosphide  as  an  example.' ''''

^^^  with  tho  ch

^^^Hbw  Dombineii
I  with  nitiojieii :

{net  luTther  •m)  xlinwril  Iliis  m  IHIil,  and  obiarTed  Uiat  As  when  licated
ith  hyilmtieu.
.jwcilyof  niprcury(Clmi<tfrXVl.,  Kote  25  l.ia)  to  (jive  lumUble  tonipomidi*
■ogea  given  rise  to  tho  sniiiKMitiiiii  llwt  similureumponiidii  exist  with  plioBphcii'aB
aIbo.  i^ni^  ft  compound  wim  obUiuvd  by  Gmngcc  11893)  by  heating  mercuty  with  ioiKdc
of  pho»pharns  in  a  dosed  tube  ut  UT5"-9<KI^.  After  reinoving  the  iodide  of  mercncj
fanned,  there  remain  flue  rhombic  crystnlH  liiiving  a  mel&llia  tantre,  and  eampiHitJon
Ugjpg.  TliiB  cooipaund  in  stable,  doeti  not  alter  at  the  ordinary  teaipetntnie  and  only
decoiDposeH  at  a  red  hent ;  when  healed  in  ail  it  burai  with  a  Baiae,  Nitric  and  hydio-
chlorio  Bcldii  Ao  nut  act  npnn  it,  but  it  in  eftsUy  demmpoHd  by  aiian  tegiii.  A  plioK|ihidF
o(  copper.  CugP.j,  was  obhuned  by  (inui^cer  (IWIS)  by  heating  a  miiture  of  water,
finely  divided  copper  and  red  phoHplinrus  in  a  sealed  tube  to  IBO'.  Tlie  exoege  of
copper  WKH  alterwardii  vanhed  gtvayby  a  solution  of  NHj  in  the  presence  otajr.

The  metallic  couiponndB  of  pboiiphanui  ponaess  t,  great  cbemical  interest,  bei«n«e
(hey  (how  a  transition  from  metallic  alloyiiffor  initance,  at  Sb,A»)  to  the  nnlpbideo,  halo-
gen Uklte,  and  oxides,  and  on  tlie  oilier  baud  to  Ibe  nitrides.  Although  there  am  already
many  fragmcotary  data  on  the  subjoct.  Ib«  interesting  provimv  ot  the  metallic  plmii-
phides  cannot  yet  be  legiirded  as  in  any  way  generalised.  The  varied  apphontiona  (phos-
phot'iron,  phaapbor-bmnie,  £v.).  which  the  phonphideB  have  recently  acquired  shonltl
give  a  stFong  incentive  to  lliu  complete  knd  detailed  study  ot  this  anbject,  wliicli
would,  in  my  opiujcm,  help  to  the  eiplanulioo  of  chemlEal  relntionii  beginning  with  ailo3-s
(■olutions)  and  ending  with  suits  ond  the  compounds  of  hydrogen  |bydrideHl,IiecBUB«  the
phosphor- metals,  as  in  proved  by  direct  eipvriment,  stood  in  the  some  relntion  to  phos-
*  hydrogen  as  the  snlphiden  do  timurdu  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  or  as  the  metallic
to  hydniRbloric  acid.
Many  otbet  compounds  o(  phovpburiii'  ore  also  capable  ol  forming  pboephnretled
I.  Thus  BP  also  gives  PB,-,  (iicf  Clmpler  XVIL,  JJoleli).  According  to  Lllpke
i|  phosphnretted  hydrogen  is  foruied  by  |ihaaphide  ol  tin. The  ktler  i»  prepared  liy

158  PKINCIPLKS OF CHEMISTRY

Phosphi)rus  is  laid  in  a  deep  crucible,  and  covered  with  a  clay  plug,
over  which  lime  is  strewn.  At  a  red  heat  the  vapours  of  phosphorus
combine  with  the  oxygen  of  the  lime  arid  form  phosphoric  anhydride,
which  forms  a  salt  with  another  portion  of  the  lime,  whilst  the
liberated  calcium  combines  with  the  phosphorus  and  forms  calcium
phosphide.  Its  composition  is  not  quite  certain  ;  it  may  be  CaP
{corresponding  with  liquid  phosphuretted  hydrogen).  This  substance
is  remarkable  for  the  following  reaction  :  if  we  take  water — or,  better
still,  a  dilute  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid — and  throw  calcium  phos-
phide into  it,  bubbles  of  gas  are  evolved,  which  take  fire  spon-
taneously in  the  air  and  form  white  rings.  This  is  owing  to  the  fact
that  the  liquid  hydrogen  phosphide,  PH^,  is  first  formed,  thus,
CaP  -f  2HC1  =  CaCla  4-  PH^,  which,  owing  to  its  instability,  very
easily  splits  up  into  the  solid  phosphide,  P2H,  and  gaseous  phosphide,
PH3  ;  5PH2  —  P.jH  4-  3PH3  ;  the  latter  corresponds  with  ammonia.
The  mixture  of  the  gaseous  and  liquid  phosphides  takes  fire  spon-
taneously in  the  air,  forming  phosphoric  acid.  The  same  hydrogen
phosphides  are  formed  when  water  acts  on  sodium  phosphide  (P2Na3).
A  similar  mixture  of  gaseous  liquid  and  solid  phosphuretted  hydrogen
{Retgers  1894)  is  formed  by  heating  (in  a  glass  tube)  red  phosphorus
in  a  stream  of  dry  hydrogen.  Hence  we  see  that  there  are  three  com-
pounds of  phosphorus  with  hydt'ogen  :  (1)  The  first  or  solid  yellow
phosphide,  P2H  (more  probably  P4H2),  is  obtained  by  the  action  of
strong  hydrochloric  acid  on  sodium  phosphide  ;  it  takes  fire  when
struck  or  at  175°.  (2)  The  liquid,  PHj,  or  more  correctly  expressed  as
the  molecule,  P2H.„is  a  colourless  liquid  which  takes  fire  spontaneously
in  the  air,  boils  at  30°,  is  very  unstable,  and  is  easily  decomposed  (by
light  or  hydrochloric  acid)  into  the  two  other  phosphides  of  hydrogen.
It  is  prepared  by  passing  the  gjises  evolved  by  the  action  of  water
on  calcium  phosphide  through  a  freezing  mixture.^  And,  lastly,  (3),
gaseous  hydrogen  phosphide,  phosphiue^  PH3,  which  is  distinguished  as
being  the  most  stable.  It  is  a  colourless  gas,  which  does  not  take  fire
in  the  air. It  has  an  odour  of  garlic,  and is  very  poisonous. It

treating  molten  tin  covered  with  a  layer  of  carbonate  of  unimouiiini,  with  red  phoHphorus  ;
200-HOO  c.c.  of  water  are  then  poured  into  a  fllask,  :5-r>  grams  of  this  phosphide  of  tin
dropi>ed  in,  and  after  driving  out  the  air  by  a  stream  of  carbonic  acid,  hydrochloric  acid
(sp.  gr.  1104)  is  poured  in.  Tlie  diHengagement  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen  takes  place  on
lieating  the  flask  in  a  water  bath.  The  following  is  another  easy  method  for  preparing
PH-,.  A  mixture  of  1  part  of  zinc  dust  (fume)  and  2  parts  of  red  phosphorus  are  heated
in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen  (the  mixture  bums  in  air).  Combination  takes  place
accompanied  by  a  flash,  and  a  grey  mass  of  Zn3P2  is  formed  which  gives  PH5  when  treated
with  dilute  H.^SO^.

*  Tlie  siK)ntaneou8  inflammability  of  the  hydride  PH.j  in  air  is  very  remarkable,  and
it  is  particularly  interesting  that  its  analogues  in  composition,  PiC^Hiv).^  (the  formula  must
be  doubled)  and  7jn{Q<{i\iJiy  also  take  fire  H{x>ntaneoosly  in  air.

PHOSPHORUS  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  (Hiori*  V. 159

resembles  aramonia  in  many  of  its  properties.®^*''  It  is  easily  decom-
posed by  heat,  like  ammonia,  forming  phosphorus  and  hydrogen  ;  but
it  is  very  slightly  soluble  in  water,  and  does  not  saturate  acids,
although  it  forms  compounds  with  some  of  them  which  resemble
ammonium  salts  in  their  form  and  properties.  Among  them  the  com-
pound with  hydriodic  acid,  PH4I,  analogous  to  ammonium  iodide,  is
remarkable.  This  compound  crystallises  on  sublimation  in  well-formed
cubes,  like  sal-anmioniac,  which  it  resembles  in  many  respects.  How-
ever, this  compound  does  not  enter  into  those  reactions  of  double
decomposition  which  are  proper  to  sal-ammoniac,  because  its  saline
properties  are  very  feebly  developed.  Phosphuretted  hydrogen  also
combines,  like  ammonia,  with  certain  chloran hydrides  ;  but  they  are
decomposed  by  water,  with  the  evolution  of  phosphine.  Ogier  (1880)
showed  that  hydrochloric  acid  also  combines  with  phosphine  under  a
pressure  of  20  atmospheres  at  -f  18°,  and  under  the  ordinary  pressure
at  —35°,  forming  the  crystalline  phosphonium  chloride  PH4CI,  corre-
sponding to  sal-ammoniac.  Hydrobromic  acid  does  the  same  with  greater
ease,  and  hydriodic  acid  with  still  greater  facility,  forming  phosphonium
iodide,  PH4I.9

8bK  The  aiiiilogy  between  PH3  and  NH-  is  particularly  clear  in  the  hydrocarbon
derivatives.  Just  as  NH.^.R,  NHRj,  and  NR-,  where  R  is  CHj,  and  other  hydrocarbon
radicles,  corre8i>ond  to  NH-,  so  there  are  actually  similar  compounds  corresponding  to  PH,.
Tliese  compounds  form  a  branch  of  organic  chemistry.

^  The  periodic  law  and  direct  experiment  (the  molecular  weight)  show  that  PH5  is  the
normal  comjwund  of  P  and  H  and  that  it  is  more  simple  than  PH.>  or  P.JH4,  just  as
methane,  CH4,  is  more  simple  than  etliane,  C.^Hg,  whose  empirical  composition  is  CH3.
The  formation  of  liquid  phosphuretted  hydrogen  may  be  understood  from  the  law  of
substitution.  The  univalent  radicle  of  PH-  is  PH.2,  and  if  it  is  combined  with  H  in  PH-
it  replaces  H  in  liquid  phosphuretted  hydrogen,  which  thus  gives  P..H4.  This  substance
correBponds  with  free  amidogen  (hydrazine),  N^Hi  (Chapter  VI.)  Probably  PoHj  is  able
to  combine  with  HI,  and  i>erhaps  also  with  2HI,  or  other  molecules — that  is,  to  give  a
substance  corresponding  to  pliosphoniun  iodide.

Phoaphonium  iodide,  PH4I,  may  be  prepared,  according  to  Baeyer,  in  large  quanti-
ties in  the  following  manner: — 100  parts  of  phosphorus  are  dissolved  in  dry  carbon
bisulphide  in  a  tubulated  retort  :  when  the  mixture  has  coole<l,  175  parts  of  iodide
are  added  little  by  little,  and  the  carbon  bisulphide  is  then  distilled  off,  this  being  done
towards  the  end  of  the  oi>eration  in  a  current  of  dry  carbonic  anhydride  at  a  moderate
temperature.  The  neck  of  the  retort  is  then  connected  with  a  wide  glass  tube,  and  the
tubulure  with  a  funnel  furnishe<l  with  a  stopcock,  and  containing  50  parts  of  water.
This  water  is  added  drop  by  drop  to  the  phosphorous  iodide,  and  a  violent  reaction  takes
place,  with  the  evolution  of  hydriodic  acid  and  phosphonium  iodide.  The  latter  collects
as  crystals  in  the  glass  tube  and  the  retort  itself.  It  is  purified  by  further  distilla-
tions ;  more  than  KM)  parts  may  be  obtained.  Baeyer  expresses  the  reaction  by  tlie
equation  PJ  +  2H.,0  =-  PH4l  +  PO.^ ;  and  the  comix>und  PO.^  may  be  represented  as
phosphorous  ])hosphoric  anhydride:  P.^Oj  +  PjO.-;'— 4P0.2.  Asa  better  proportion  we
may  take  400  grams  of  phosphorus,  (WO  grams  of  iodine,  and  240  grams  of  water,  and
express  the  fonnation  thus  :  13P  +  91  +  aiH^O  =  3H4P2O7  +  7PH4I  +  2HI  (Chapter  XI..
Note  77).

PhoKphonium  io<lide and  even  phosphine  act  as  redncing  agents  in solutions  of

160  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

Phosjjhureited  hydrogen,  or phosphinej  PH,,  is  generally  prepared  by
the  action  of  caustic  pot^ish  on  phosphorus.*®  Small  pieces  of  phos-
phorus are  dropped  into  a  flask  containing  a  strong  solution  of  caustic
potash  and  heated.  Potassium  hypophosphite,  HjKPOo,  is  then  ob-
tained in  solution  ;  gaseous  phosphuretted  hydrogen  is  evolved  :

P^-f  3KH0-f  3H20=  3(KH2PO.,)  +  PH3.

Liquid  phosphuretted  hydrogen  (and  free  hydrogen)  is  also  formed,
together  with  the  phospbine,  so  that  the  gaseous  product,  on  escaping
from  the  water  into  the  air,  takes  fire  spontaneously,  forming  beautiful
white  rings  of  phosphoric  acid.  In  this  experiment,  as  in  that  with
calcium  phosphide,  it  is  the  liquid,  P2H4,  that  takes  fire  ;  but  the
phosphine  set  light  to  by  it  also  burns,  PH3  +  04=  PH3O4.  The  same
phosphuretted  hydrogen,  PHg,  may  be  obtained  pure,  and  not  spon-
taneously combustible,  by  igniting  the  hydrates  of  phosphorous  acid
(4PH303  =  PH3  +  3PH304)  and  hypophosphorous  acid  (2PH3O.,
=  PH34-PH3O4)  ;  or,  more  simply,  by  the  decomposition  of  calcium
phosphide  by  hydrochloric  acid,  because  then  all  the  liquid  phosphide,
P2H4,  is  decomposed  into  non-volatile  P2H  and  gaseous  PH3.  Pure
phosphine  liquefies  when  cooled  to  —90°,  boils  at  —  85°,  and  solidities
at  —  1 35°  (Olszewski).  When  phosphorus  burns  in  an  excess*®  ^'''  of  dri/

many  metallic  salts. Cavazzi  showed  that  with  a  solution  of  sulphurous  anhydride  phos-
phine gives  sulphur  and  phosphoric  acid.

'0  The  air  must  first  be  expelled  from  the  flask  by  hydrogen,  or  some  other  gas  which
will  not  supiwrt  combustion,  as  otherwise  an  explosion  might  take  place  owing  to  the
spontaneous  inflammability  of  the  phosphuretted  hydrogen.

The  combustion  of  phosphuretted  hydrogen  in  oxygen  also  takes  place  under  water
when  the  liubbles  of both  gases  meet,  and  it  is very  brilliant. The phosphuretted
liydrogen  obtained  by  tlie  action  of  x^bosphorus  on  caustic  ix)tash  always  contains  free
•  hydrogen,  and  often  even  the  greater  part  of  the  gas  evolved  consists  of  hydrogen.

Furr  phoHphnretted  hydrogen  (not  containing  hydrogen  or  liquid  or  solid  phos-
phides) is  obtained  by  the  action  of  a  solution  of  jKitash  on  phosphonium  iodide :
PH|l  +  KHO  =  PH5  +  KI  +  H2O  (in  just  the  same  way  as  ammonia  is  liberate<l  from
ammonium  chloride).  The  reaction  proceeds  easily,  and  the  purity  of  the  gas  is  seen
from  the  fact  that  it  is  entirely  absorbed  by  bleaching  powder  and  is  not  spontaneously
inflanmuible.  Its  mixture  with  oxygen  explodes  when  the  pressure  is  diminished
(Chapter  XVIII.,  Note  8).  The  vapours  of  bromine,  nitric  acid,  itc,  cause  it  to  again
accjuire  the  property  of  inflaming  in  the  air;  that  is,  they  partially  decompose  it,
forming  the  liiiuid  hydride,  l\>Hi.  Oppenheim  showed  that  when  red  phosphorus  is
heatc'<l  at  '200  with  hydrochloric  acid  in  a  closed  tube  it  forms  the  compound
I'C'l-lM-.rO-),  together  with  phospliine.

""'''  If  there  be  a  deficiency  of  oxygen,  phosphorous  anhydride  V  X)-  is  formed.  It
WHS  ol)tiiined  by  Thorpe  and  Tutton  (1890)  and  is  easily  volatilised,  melts  at  22  "5,  boils
without  change  (in  an  atmosphere  of  N.j  or  CO.,,)  at  17H°,  and  is  therefore  easily  separated
from  PjO-,  whicii  volatilises  with  difficulty.  The  va|X)ur  density  shows  that  the  mole-
cular weight  is  double,  i.e.  V \0^^  (like  .\s.jO.-).  Although  colourless,  phosphorous  anhydride
(its  density  in  a  state  of  fusion at  24^  =l'y3t>)  turns  yellow  and  reddens  in  sun-light

r:rH08PH0BU8  and  the  other  elemebts  of  oboup  v. Iftl

cygen,  then  only  jihmphvrl'^  rni/ii/drkl';  PjOj,  is  forDi«<l.  It  is
*  prepared  by  dropping  pieces  of  phosphorus  Ihrough  a  wide  tulje,  fixed
into  llie  upjier  neck  of  a  large  gliisa  globe,  on  to  a  cup  suspended  in  the
centre  of  the  globe.  These  lumps  are  set  alight  by  touching  them  with
A  hot  wire,  and  the  phusplioruH  burns  into  PjO^.  Tlie  dry  air  necessary
for  its  combustion  is  forced  into  the  globe  through  a  lateral  neck,  and
the  white  flakes  of  phosphoric  anhydride  formed  are  carried  by  the
current  of  air  through  a  second  tatera.1  neck  into  a  series  nf  Woulfe's
bottles,  where  they  settle  as  friable  white  flukes,  Phosphoric  nnhydride
may  also  be  formed  by  passing  dry  air  through  a  solution  of  phosphorus
in  carbon  biaulphide.  All  the  materials  for  the  preparation  of  thiasub-
stance  must  be  carefully  dried,  because  it  c"»iii)i««  with  great  eagerness
icilfi  wiiter,  at  the  same  time  developing  a  large  amount  of  heat  and
forming  nietaphosphoric  acid,  HPOj,  from  which  the  wiit«r  cannot
be  separated  by  heat,  Phosphoric  anhydride  is  a  colourless  snow-like
substance,  which  attracts  moisture  from  the  air  with  the  utmost  avidity.
It  fuses  at  a  red  heat,  and  then  vohJlVinM.  Its  ufhnity  for  water  is  so
great  that  it  takes  it  up  from  many  Bultstances.  Thus  it  converts  sul-
phuric ucid  into  sulphuric  anhydrid*?,  and  carbohydrates  (wooil,  paper)
are  carlM>ni8ed,  and  give  up  the  elements  of  water  when  brought  into
contact  with  it.

Wben  moist  filiosphorus  slowly  oxidises  in  the  air,  it  not  only
forms  phosphorous  and  phosphoric  acids,  but  also  hypophosphoric  ncid,
HjP^'l^j,  which  when  in  a  dry  state  easily  splits  up  at  60°  into  phos-
phorous and  metaphoaphoric  acids  (H,P,0,.  =  HjPOj  +  HPOj),  but
differs  fiom  a  mixture  of  these  ai-ids  in  that  it  fornis  well-chai'acterised
salts,  of  which  the  sodium  salt,  H,Na,,P,Og,  is  but  slightly  soluble  in
wat«r  (the  sodium  salts  of  phosphoric  and  phosphorous  acids  are  easily
soluble),  and  that  it  ilocs  not  act  as  a  reducing  agent,  like  mixtures
containing  phospborous  acid,"

(poHHihIy  n-d  phosphirug  xvparktfx  nnl  7),  uid  decnmpoMS  nt  100'  lonuliig  hjpophos-
phomUH  nuhydride  PiO,  (Nnte  11)  i-oA  (ilioKphuruii.  It  piuses  into  P^Oj  in  ur  uid
(iiyKen,  vid  whiai  nlightly  healed  in  oxygen  beooiiieii  Ituninooa,  uid  n]linia.te1]f  ttih»
ire.  Cold  w»ter  slowljr  transfonns  P.,0.,  rato  phoiphoric  »cid,  but  liol  wnter  givm  un
vxplcHian  and  leldii  to  the  formation  ol  PHj,  IPjOb  +  BUjO  =  PHj  +  MPHjO,).  AUullH
•ct  io  Uie  tame  manner.  It  takes  Are  in  tUoiinc  nnd  foims  POCIj  and  PO-.C\,  ittkd
«orabine>  vitli  fnilphnr  at  160°,  forming  P.j8,0,,  |the  moleculu'  formula  i>  doable  tbi>)  «
■Dbatance  which  vnlatiliAeii  inTucDo  and  in  decompoied  by  water  into  H.,Sknd  phoBpboric
■cid,  i^.  it  mny  be  regarded  as  P^Oj.  in  which  Oj  has  been  rtsplacwl  by  two  atoms  at
■nlphnr.  Jndgiog  from  the  above,  the  mixbnre  of  P^Oj  and  P^Oj  fonued  in  the  combaa-
Una  al  (ihoaphoraB  in  air  in  Iranalonned  into  PjOj  in  an  eieeu  ol  aiygan,

■I  Suiter  iiruveil  the  eiiateace  ol  hypuphosphoric  avid  (it  in  also  called  «nbiihoiipboric

acid),  in  which  many  chemista  did  not  believe. Drawe  (1H8I4)  and  Hammeloberg  (ISM)  ia-

VMtigated  itH  aalta. It  oiay  be  obtained  in  a  (rr>e  state  by  the  followini;  metliod. The

Intion  of  acid  produced  by  the  alow  oxidAtiou  of  mnist  phosphomH  is  mixed  with  a

VOL.  II.  K

^^^—aolni

162  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Judging  by  the  general  law  of  the  formation  of  acids  (Chapter  XV. )^
the  series  of  phosphorus  compounds  should  include  the  following  ortho-
adds  and  their  corresponding  anhydrides,  answering  to  phosphuretted
hydrogen,  HgP  ; —

H3PO4,  phosphoric  acid,  and  Pa^5>  anhydride,

H3PO3,  phosphorous  acid,  and  ^2^31  anhydride,

H3PO2,  hypophosphorous  acid,  and  P2O,  anhydride.**

The  last  of  these  (the  analogue  of  N2O)  is  almost  unknown.  Phos-
phoric anhydride  (P2O5)  with  a  small  quantity  of  water  does  not  at  first
give  orthophosphoric  acid,  PH3O4,  but  a  compound  P20ft,H20,  or
PHO3,  whose  composition  corresponds  with  that  of  nitric  acid  ;  this  is
metaphosphoric  acid.  Even  with  an  excess  of  water,  combining  with
phosphoric  anhydride,  this  metaphosphoric  acid,  and  not  the  ortho-^
passes  at  first  into  solution.  Metaphosphoric  acid  in  solution  only
passes  into  orthophosphoric  acid  when  the  solution  is  heated  or  after
a  lapse  of  time.

Orthophosphoric  acid  *^  is  obtained  by  oxidising  phosphorus  with
nitric  acid  until  the  phosphorus  entirely  passes  into  solution  and  the

solution  (26  p.c.)  of  sodium  acetate.  A  salt,  Na<}H2P20e,6H20,  crystallises  out  on  cool-
ing ;  it  is  soluble  in  45  parts  of  water,  and  gives  a  precipitate  of  Pb2P20e  with  lead  salts
(Ag4P20o  with  salts  of  silver).  The  lead  salt  is  decomposed  by  a  current  of  hydrogen
sulphide,  when  lead  sulphide  is  precipitated,  while  the  solution,  evaporated  under  tho
receiver  of  an  air-pump,  gives  crystals  of  H4P206,2H20,  which  easily  lose  water  and
give  H4P2O6.  Tlie  salts  in  which  the  H4  is  replaced  by  Ni2,  or  NiNa2,  or  CdNa2,  &c.,.
are  insoluble  in  water.

In  order  to  see  the  relation  between  phosphoric  acid  and  hypophosphoric  acid  which
does  not  contain  the  elements  of  phosphorous  acid  (because  it  does  not  reduce  either
gold  or  mercury  from  their  solutions),  but  which  nevertheless  is  capable  of  being  oxidised
(for  example,  by  potassium  permanganate)  into  phosphoric  acid,  it  is  simplest  to  apply
the  law  of  substitution.  This  clearly  indicates  the  relation  between  oxalic  acid,  (COOH)2,
and  carbonic  acid,  OH(COOH).  Tlie  relation  between  the  above  acids  is  exactly  the
same  if  we  express  phosphoric  acid  as  OH(P002H2),  because  in  this  case  P2H4O6,  or
(P002H2)5,  will  correspond  with  it  just  as  oxalic  does  with  carbonic  acid.  A  similar
relationship  exists  between  hyposulphuric  or  dithionic  acid,  (S020H)2,  and  sulphuric
acid,  0H(S020H),  as  we  shall  find  in  the  following  chapter.  Dithionic  acid  corresponds
with  the  anhydride  SoOj,  intermediate  between  SO2  and  SO5 ;  oxalic  acid  with  C2O3,
intermediate  between  CO  and  CO2 ;  hypophosphoric  ivcid  corresponds  with  the  anhy-
dride P2O4,  intermediate  between  P.^Os  and  P2O5,  and  the  analogue  of  N2O4.

**  Besides  the  hydrates  enumerated,  a  compound,  PH3O,  should  correspond  with  PH3.
Tliis  hydrate,  wliicli  is  analogous  to  hydroxylamine,  is  not  known  in  a  free  state,  but  it  is
known  as  triethylphosphine  oxide,  P(C2H5)30,  which  is  obtained  by  the  oxidation  of
triethylphosphine,  P(C.jH5)j.  It  must  be  observed  that  there  may  also  be  lower  oxides  of
phosphorus  correxiwnding  with  PH3,  like  N2O  and  NO,  and  there  are  even  indications
of  the  fonnation  of  such  compounds,  but  the  data  concerning  them  cannot  be  considered
as  finnly  established.

*^  Phosphoric  acid,  being  a  soluble  and  ahnost  non-volatile  substance,  cannot  be  pre-
pared like  hydrochloric  and  nitric  acids  by  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on  the  alkali  phos-
phates, although  it  is  partially  liberated  in  the  process. For  this  puri>ose  the  salts  of

PHOSPHORUS  AND  THE OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  GROUP V. 168

lower  oxides  of  nitrogen  cease  to  be  evolved.  The  reAotion  takes  place
best  with  dilute  nitric  acid,  and  when  aided  by  heat.  The  resultant
solution  is  evaporated  to  a  syrup.  If  r  weighed  quantity  of  phosphorus
(dried  in  a  current  of  dry  carbonic  anhydride)  be  taken,  a  crystalline
mass  of  the  acid  can  be  obtained  by  evaporating  the  solution  until  it  con-
sista  only  of  tho  quantity  '*  of  phosphoric  acid  corresponding  with  the
amount  of  phosphorus  taken  (from  31  pai-ts  of  P,  98  parts  of  soiution).
The  acid  fuses  at  +39"  ;  specific  gravity  of  the  liquid  ]'88.  Phosphorus
pentachloride,  PCI,.,,  find  OKychloride,  PfXIlj  (see  further  on),  give
orlhophosphoric  acid  and  hydrochloric  acid  with  water.  The  two  other
varieties  of  phosphoric  acid,  with  which  we  ahal!  presently  become
acquainted,  give  the  same  ortho-acid  when  under  the  influence  of  acids,
with  particular  ease  when  boiled  an  J  more  slowly  in  the  cold.  By
itself  orthophoephoric  acid  (either  in  solution  or  when  dry)  does  not
pass  into  the  other  varieties  ;  it  does  not  oxidise,  and  therefore  presents
the  limiting  and  stable  form.  Wlien  heated  to  300°,  it  loses  waterand
passes  into  pyrophosphoric  acid,  SHaPO,  =  HjO  +  H,P,0„ whilst  ata
red  heat  it  loae.s  twii/e  as  much  wat«r  and  is  converted  into  metaphos-
phoric  a^^id,  H^Pd,  =  H/l +  HPO,,.  In  aqueous  solution  orthophoa-
phoric  acid  differs  clearly  from  pyro-  or  m eta-phosphoric  acids,  because
the  solutions  of  these  latter  acids  give  different  reactions  :  thus  ortho-
phosphoric  iicid  does  not  precipitate  albumin,  does  not  give  a  precipitate
with  liftrium  chloride,  and  forms  a  yellow  precipitate  of  silver  ortho-
phosphate,  AggPO,,  with  silver  nitrate  (in  the  presence  of  alkalis,  but
not  otherwise) ;  whilst  a  solution  of  pyrophosphoric  acid,  H^P^O;,
although  it  does  not  precipitate  albumin  or  barium  chloride,  gives
a  white  precipitate  of  silver  pyrophosphate,  Ag,P,0;,  with  silvei'
nitrate  ;  and  a  solution  of  metaphoaphoric  acid,  HPOj,  precipitAtes
both  albumin  and  barium  chloride,  and  gives  a  white  precipitate  of
silver  metuphosphate,  AgPO.,,  with  silver  nitrate.  These  points  of
distinction  were  studied  by  Giuham,  and  are  exceedingly  instructive.
They  show  that  the  solution  of  a  substance  does  not  determine
the  maximum  of  chemical  combination  mth  water,  that  solutions  may
coTitain  various  degrees  of  combination  with  water,  and  that  there  is
tt  clear  difference  between  the  water  serving  for  solution  and  that
entering  into  chemical  combination.  Graham's  experiments  also
showed  that  the  water  whose  removal  or  combination  determines  the

Kuinm  or  lend  m«y  be  Ukeii,  becanee  tbej  give  iiinolnhle  BalU,lhngBftjlPO,>,+3H,aO,
=  SBa80,-)aHxP0,;  Bone  uh  conUina,  besid««  calcium  phmipliate,  BOclium  and  ni«g-
iKwnm  phoHpfaaton,  uid  fldnrides  und  other  anlU,  w  Ihitt  it  nuinol  ^ve  dtrectl;  a  pure
plioapboric  acid.

■'  It  thin  iB  not  doDe  the  orthophoBphoric  acid,  PHjO,,  loses  a  portioD  of  ttg  vrat«r,
la  with  Ni  elooBB  o[  wuter,  it  doen  not  ctf«(aUim,

164  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

conversion  of  ortho-  into  meta-  and  pyrophosphoric  acids  differs  dis-
tinctly from  water  of  crystallisation,  for  he  obtained  the  salts  of  ortho-,
meta-,  and  pyrophosphoric  acids  with  water  of  crystallisation,  and  they
differed  in  their  reactions,  like  the  acids  themselves.  This  water  of
crystallisation  was  expelled  with  greater  ease  than  the  water  of  constitu-
tion of  the  hydrates  in  question.  ^^*>*«

Orthophosphoric  acid  has  a  pleasant  acid  taste  and  a  distinctly  acid
reaction  ;  it  is  used  as  a  medicine,  and  is  not  poisonous  (phosphorous
acid  is  poisonous).  Alkalis,  like  sodium,  potassium,  and  ammonium
hydroxides,  saturate  the  acid  properties  of  phosphoric  acid  when  taken
in  the  ratio  2NaH0  :  H3PO4 — that  is,  when  salts  of  the  composition
HNa.2P04  are  formed.  When  taken  in  the  ratio  NaHO  :  H3PO4,  a
solution  having  an  acid  reaction  is  obtained,  and  when  3NaH0  :  H3PO4
— that  is,  when  the  salt  Na3P04  is  formed — an  alkaline  reaction  is
obtained.  Hence  many  chemists  (Berzelius)  even  regarded  the  salts
of  composition  R2HPO4  as  normal,  and  considered  phosphoric  acid
to  be  bibasic.  But  the  salt  Na3HP04  also  shows  a  feeble  alkaline
reaction,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  judge  the  characteristic  peculiarities
of  acids  by  the  reactions  on  litmus  paper,  as  we  already  know  from
many  examples.  Orthophosphoric  acid  is  tribasic,  because  it  contains
three  equivalents  of  hydrogen  replaceable  by  metals,  forming  salts,
such  as  NaH2P04,  Na2HP04,  and  NajPO,.  It  is  also  tribasic,  because
with  silver  nitrate  its  soluble  salts  always  give  Ag3P04,**  a  salt  with
three  equivalents  of  silver,  and  because  by  double  decomposition  with

14  bli  Xhe  difference  between  the  reactions  of  ortUo-,  meta-  and  pyrophoephoric  acidK,
efitablished  by  Graham  {see  p.  168),  is  of  such  importance  for  the  tlieory  of  hydrates  and
for  explaining  the  nature  of  solutions,  that  in  my  opinion  its  influence  upon  chemical
thought  has  been  far  from  exhausted.  At  the  present  time  many  such  instances  are
knovm  both  in  organic  (for  instance,  the  difference  between  the  reactions  of  the  solutions
of  certain  anhydrides  and  hydrates  of  acids),  and  inorganic  chemistry  (for  example,  the
difference  between  the  rose  and  purple  cobalt  comi)ounds,  Chapter  XX IT,  Scb.)  They
essentially  recall  the  long  known  and  generalised  difference  between  C.2H4  (ethylene)
C^H^O  (ethyl  alcohol  =  ethylene  +  water),  and  C4H,oO  (ethyl  ether  =  2  ethylene  +  water
=  2  alcohol  —  water) ;  but  to  the  present  day  the  numerous  analogous  phenomena  exist-
ing among  inorganic  substances  are  only  considered  as  a  simple  difference  in  degrees  of
affinity,  distinguishing  the  water  of  constitution  (hydration),  crystallisation,  and  solution
without  penetrating  into  the  difference  of  the  structure  or  distribution  of  the  elements,
which  exists  here  and  gives  rise  to  a  distinct  isomerism  of  solutions.  In  my  opinion  the
progress  of  chemistry,  especially  with  regard  to  solutions,  should  make  rapid  strides  when
the  cause  of  the  isomerism  of  solutions,  for  instance,  of  ortho-  and  pyrophosphoric  acids,
has  become  as  clear  to  us  as  the  cause  of  many  well-studied  instances  of  the  isomerism
polymerism,  and  metamerism  of  organic  compounds.  Here  it  forms  one  of  tliose  many
important  problems  which  remain  for  the  chemistry  of  the  future  in  a  state  of  only
indistinct  presentiments  and  in  the  form  of  facts  empirically  known  but  insufficiently
comprehended.

»*  Silver  orthophosphate,  Ag3P04,  is  yellow,  sp.  gr.  7'8*i,  and  insoluble  in  water.
When  heated  it  fuses  like  silver  chloride,  and  if  kept  fused  for  some  length  of  time

PHOSPHonVB  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  GROUP  V. 165

terium  chloride  it  forms  a  salt  oi  the  composition  B»a(PO()j,  and
silver  and  barium  hardly  ever  give  basic  salts.  With  the  metals
of  the  alkalis,  phosphoric  acid  forms  soluble  salts,  but  the  iiomial
suits  of  the  luetiils  of  the  alkaline  earths,  RjtPOJ^  and  even
R^Hj(Pl_>,),  lire  insoluble  in  wnter,  but  dissolve  in  feeble  acids,  such
as  phosphoric  ."Lnd  iicetic,  because  they  then  form  soluble  acid  salts,
eapeciiiUy  RH,(PO,)^.'*

it  iii\es  a  wbitu  {iyn>|iba>ilihiite  (the  deoompouticm  whicli  can»»  thin  is  not  kiu>nu|.
It  is  soIdIiIh  in  uineana  nolutioiu  of  phiwplloric,  nitric,  and  eren  acetic  uids,  dI
uumoiiia,  luiil  uiKii;r  of  ilH  iwlls.  U  gilvuT  nitnto  act*  on  a  dimetaUic  arthophiM-
phate— fur  toaUiico,  Na^PO, — it  still  gieeo  AgiFOj,  nitric  acid  being  disengaged:
NasHPO^  +  aAgNOj-AgjPOj  +  SKuNOj  +  HNOj.  Wlieli  nloohol  i»  lidded  to  silver
□rtha[>boaphHl«.  AgjPO(,  dinnlved  in  syrup;  phospboric  acid,  it  preciiutates  ii
white  «1t  {tlie  uluobol  takes  up  the  tree  phosphoric  acid)  baring  the  nompositioD
AgiHPOf.wliii'h  in  immediately  dennnposed  by  water  into  the  normal  salt  and  phoa-
pboric  acid.

■■  The  reseiircllPs  of  Thomseo  showed  that  in  very  dilate  aqaeoDs  solutions  the
majority  o(  inoDubasic  acids— nitric,  acetic,  hydrochloric,  &c.  (bat  hydroflaoric  acid  more
and  hjdrocysnio  1es«)— HX  evolve  the  following  amoonts  dI  heatfin  thousaudsol  calories)
with  caustic  soda:  NaHO  +  SHX^U;  NaaO  +  HS:  =  lJ;  9NaH0 -f  HX  ^  14 ;  that  is,  it
n  be  Kwliole  number  >iNaHO'!-HX  =  14  and  NsHO  +  nBX^U.  Hence  reaction  here  only
takes  place  betweeD  one  molesale  o[  NaHO  and  one  maleoole  of  acid,  and  tlis  mmiunJiig
quantity  of  acid  or  alkali  doei  not  enter  into  the  reaction.  In  the  case  ol  bibaaic  acids,
tt,B"  (sulphuric,  dithiooic,  oialic,  sqlphnrettwl  hydrogen.  Ac),  NaH0  +  aH,R"^14  i
NaHO-vH,B"  =  I4;  SNaHO -i- H^R"  =  2H ;  uNaBO-f  HiB"^a8  ;  that  is,  with  an  excess  of
acid  (NaHO  +  SH'^")  14  thousand  units  of  heat  are  developed,  and  with  an  excess  of  alkali
fl8.  When  phosphoric  acid  is  taken  (but  not  all  tribasic  acids— tor  instance,  not  citricflhe
general  cliaracter  ol  the  phenomenon  is  aimilai  to  the  preceding,  namely.  NaUO  +  SHjFOt
-  li-1;  NaHO  +  HsPOj  =14-M;  INaHO  ■*  HjPO,  =  371;  SNaHO+HjP04=  84-0;
ANaHO'-H^Oi  '  S5'3;  or,  in  general  tennu, NoHO  +  nHiPO^  ^  14(approiimalelylaDd
uKaHO-t-HjPO,  ^  Sfi  and  not  43,  nhirh  shawB  a  pecoliarity  of  phosphoric  acid.  In  the
ciwe  of  energetic  acids,  when  one  equivalent  (3H  grams)  of  aodiiuu  (in  the  form  of
hydroxidu)  replaces  one  equivalent  (1  gram)  of  hydrogen  (with  the  formation  of  water
and  in  dilute  solutions},  14,Ut)0  heat  unite  are  evolved ;  and  Uiis  is  true  for  phoaphoric
wid  when  in  HjPO,.  Xa  or  Na,  replaces  H  or  H^,  bat  when  Na^  replaces  H,  less  heat  is
devebped.  This  will  be  seen  from  the  following  scheme  baaed  on  the  preceding
llgnres:  BjPOi  +  NaHO  =  148;  NaHiPC-tNaHO  -  19-8 ;  NajHPO.  +  NaHO  =  611;
with  NajPO,  -t-  NaHO,  a  very  small  amount  of  heat  is  evolved,  as  may  be  jadKt^d  fn>m
Ihefactthnt  Na^O,.)  BNaHO  ^  I'S,  bat  still  heat  is  evolved.  It  must  be  supposed
that  in  acting  ou  phosphoric  acid  in  the  preaenco  of  ■  large  quantity  of  water,  a  certain
portion  ol  the  todium  hydroxide  remains  as  slkali  unoomhined  with  the  acid.  Thus,  on
inareaeing  tlie  tuaas  of  the  alkali,  heat  is  still  evolved,  and  a  fresh  interchange  between
Na  and  H  take4  place.  Hence  water  shows  a  decomposing  action  on  the  alkali  phoaphates.
The  same  d«™npo«ing  action  of  water  ia  aeem,  but  to  a  less  extent,  with  Na3HP04,  as
may  be  judged  both  Irotn  the  reactions  ol  this  salt  and  from  the  amount  of  beat
developed  by  NoH-iPO^  with  NaHO.  9ooh  on  explanation  is  in  accordance  with  many
facts  concemiug  the  decompositiou  of  ealts  by  water  already  known  to  us,  Booent
reaearches  made  by  Berthelot  and  Louguinine  hove  confirmed  the  above  deduotiona  made
by  me  lu  llie  Hrst  edition  (IBTIJ  of  this  work.  At  the  present  time  views  ol  this  nalore ara
•omewbat  generally  accepted,  although  Ibey  are  not  snfBcienllj  strictly  applied  in  other
eases.  As  regards  I'U-O,  it  may  be  .said  thai :  on  the  subetitntion  of  the  firat  hydrogen
this  acid  acta  as  a  powerful  acid  (like  HCl,  ENOj,  H,80,);  ou  the  subalitution  of  the
^^^^Mond  bydrugeii  ao  a  weaker  acid  (like  an  organic  acid);  and  on  the  anbstitntian  of  ^M

^^^^Hm  third.  BH  an  iiIccjIiuI.  for  instance  phcuol,  having  the  properties  of  u  feeble  acid.  ^M

166  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Phosphoric  anhydride,  or  any  of  its  hydrates,  when  ignited  with  an
excess  of  sodium  hydroxide,  carbonate,  <fec.,  forms  normal  or  trisodiurn
orthophosphcUe,  Na3F04,  but  when  a  solution  of  sodium  carbonate  is
decomposed  by  orthophosphoric  acid,  only  the  salt  >Na2HP04  is
formed ;  and  when  an  excess  of  sodium  chloride  is  ignited  with
orthophosphoric  acid,  hydrochloric  acid  is  evolved,  and  the  acid  salt
H2NaP04  alone  is  formed.  These  facts  clearly  indicate  the  small
energy  of  phosphoric  acid  with  respect  to  the  formation  of  the  tri-
metaliic  salt,  which  is  seen  further  from  the  fact  that  the  salt  'N&^'PO^
has  an  alkaline  reaction,  decomposes  in  the  presence  of  water  and  car-
bonic acid,  forming  Na2HP04,  corrodes  glass  vessels  in  which  it  is
boiled  or  evaporated,  just  like  solutions  of  the  alkalis,  disengages,  like
them,  ammonia  from  ammonium  chloride,  and  crystallises  from  solu-
tions, as  Na3P04,12H20,  only  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  alkali.
At  15°  the  crystals  of  this  salt  require  five  parts  of  water  for  solution  ;
they  fuse  at  77°.

Disodium  orthop}io»phatey  or  common  sodium  phosphate,  Na2HP04,
is  more  stable  both  in  solution  and  in  the  solid  state.  As  it  is  used  in
medicine  and  in  dyeing,  it  is  prepared  in  considerable  quantities,  most
frequently  from  the  impure  phosphoric  acid  obtained  by  the  action  of
sulphuric  acid  on  bone  ash.  The  solution  thus  formed — which  contains,
besides  phosphoric  and  sulphuric  acids,  salts  of  sodium,  calcium,  and
magnesium — is  heated,  and  sodium  carbonate  added  so  long  as  car-
bonic anhydride  is  disengaged.  A  precipitate  is  formed  containing  the
insoluble  salts  of  magnesium  and  calcium,  whilst  the  solution  contains
sodium  phosphate,  Na2HP04,  with  a  small  quantity  of  other  salts,  from
which  it  may  be  eiisily  purified  by  crystallisation.  At  the  ordinary
temperature  its  solutions,  especially  in  the  presence  of  a  small  amount
of  sodium  carbonate,  give  finely-formed  inclined  prismatic  crystals,
Na2HP04,12H20  ;  when  the  crystallisation  takes  place  above  30°
they  only  contain  7H2O.  The  former  crystals  even  lose  a  portion  of
their  water  of  crystallisation  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (the  salt
eflfloresces),  and  form  the  second  salt  with  7H2O  ;  whilst  under  the
receiver  of  an  air-pump  and  over  sulphuric  acid  they  also  part  with
this  water.  *^  When  ignited  they  lose  the  last  molecule  of  water  of
constitution,  and  give  sodium  pyrophosphate,  Na4P207.

»7  Na2Hl'04,12H.20  has  a  sp.  gr.  1-58.  Poggiale  detennined  the  solubihty  in  100
parts  of  water  (1)  of  the  anhydrous  ortho-salt  Na2HP04,  and  (2)  of  the  corresponding
pyro-solt  Na4p207  : —

0^  20°  40°  80°  100°

I.  1-6  111  80-9  81  108

II.  8*2  6*2  18*5  80  40

At  temperatures  of  20°  to  100°  the  ortho-salt  is  bo  very  much  less  soluble  that  this

^>H08PH0RU8  AND  THE  OTHER  ELKMENTS  OF  GROUP  V, 167

^*  Mfmogoditim  orthopltosjAatf,  KftH^POj,  crystftllisen  with  one
eqniTalent  of  water  ;  its  solution  has  an  acid  reaction.  At  100°  the
salt  only  loses  this  water  of  crystallisation,  and  at  al)out  200^  it  parts
with  all  its  wat«r,  forming  the  metnphosphate  NaPO,,,  Tt  is  pre-
pared from  ordinary  Borfium  phosphate  hy  adding  phosphoric  atid
until  the  solution  does  not  give  a  precipitate  with  l)ariuiii  chloride,  and
then  evaporating  and  crystallising  the  solution.  The  solution  of  this
salt  does  not  absorb  carbonic  anhydride,  and  does  not  give  a  precipitate
with  salts  of  calcium,  barium,  Jic.'"

•liflereDm  alone  ulrvody  indicates  the  deepi; -eented  Altenitioa  in  coiiBtilntion  ulncli  Uked
place  in  the  poBiiHge  from  the  ortho-  to  the  pyro-«BltB,

>'  Tbe  ammonium  orlhophmphatei  reecmblo  the  aodiam  salts  in  nuuiy  renpectii,  bnt
the  fneUhility  of  the  di-  and  Iri-metallio  salte  i»  Beoti  id  theui  Btill  more  vleorly  tliui  in
tbe  Bodium  Baits;  thui  tNH,)sF04,  Mid  eveii  (NRil^HPO^,  lose  amtnnnia  in  the  ur
(especially  nhen  heated,  even  in  BoIatiDas);  KH,H]PO,  alcmedoeBiiotdiiwnei^iunniDnia
and  haa  an  aoid  reaction.  The  orjutals  of  the  flrst  fwlt  contain  SHjO,  und  axe  only
lormed  in  the  preuence  ol  an  evceBs  of  ammonia ;  both  the  othen  are  anliydmuB,  and
may  be  obtnined  like  the  eodioni  saltn.  WJien  ignited  these  salts  leave  raetaphnsphorio
auid  behinil ;  tor  eiamiile,  INS^j.jHPO,  =  SNH,  =  H^  +  HPO,.  AminoQia  ftlao  entera
into  the  composition  of  many  double  phosphatsB.  Ammoniuin  BOdiom  orthophoflfibate,
or  aiiuply  phosphate,  NHjN«HP04,4H,0,  crystsJlises  in  large  traBBjiarent  crynlals  (nun
a  miitnre  □!  the  solutions  of  diiiodium  phosphate  and  ammoainin  chloride  (in  whioh
CBii»  sodium  chloride  is  obtained  in  the  mother  li<ioid),  or,  better  Btill,  bom  a  solution  ol
mDnoBodium  pbusphate  saturated  with  ammonia.  It  is  also  formed  from  the  phosphatea
in  arine  when  it  fenueuta.  Thia  ^alL  ia  frequently  naed  in  testing  metallic  compounds
by  the  blow-pipe,  becanse  when  ignited  it  leaves  a  vitreoaB  metaphoEpbate,  NaPOs,
which,  like  borai,  diHsotvea  metallic  oiidea,  fanning  characteristic  tinted  gUesee.

When  a  solution  of  triaodiom  phoBphal«  in  added  to  a  solution  of  a  magnesJDDi  Halt  it
giveB  a  white  precipitate  of  the  normal  orthopliosphate  Hg,(FO,)„TH.jO.  If  the  tri-
sodium  sail  be  replaced  by  tbe  ordinary  salt,  N*]HPO(,  a  precipitate  is  also  toraied,  and
MgIlPO„7U^O  is  obtained.  It  might  be  thought  that  the  normal  salt  HgifPO,),  would
be  precipil&ted  ifdisodinm  phosphate  was  added  to  aoUDonia  and  a  salt  of  magnesium,  but
in  reality  nntinoniuiii  magneiium  orlhijphoi^tHtle,  HgNIl(POt.SH]0,  is  precipitated  aa
a  crystalline  powder,  whicdi  loses  smitMiuia  and  water  when  ignil«d,  and  gives  a  pyro-
phospbsle,  Mg^,07.  This  salt  occnrs  in  nature  as  tbe  minera]  stnivite,  and  in  variooa
prodoctB  of  the  chaogee  of  animal  matter.  If  we  consider  that  the  above  salt  parts  with
anunonia  with  difficulty,  and  that  the  corresponding  salt  ol  sodinm  is  not  formed  nnder
the  same  conditions  (HgNaP04,9UgO  is  obtsiued  by  the  action  ul  magnesia  on  disodium
phnpliate).  if  we  turn  our  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  salts  of  calcinm  and  barium  do
not  form  double  salts  as  easily  u  mneneainm,  and  remember  that  the  shUh  oF  nsg-
neaiiun  in  general  easily  form  double  ammoninm  salts,  we  ore  led  Ut  think  that  this
salt  IB  not  really  a  normal,  but  an  acid  salt,  corresponding  with  Ns^HPO,,  in  which  Noj
is  replaced  by  tbe  equivalent  group  NHjHg.

The  coninuin  normal  ealcium  plioiphnle,  CogrPO^)],  occurs  in  minerals,  in  nnrmala,
especially  in  bones,  and  also  probably  in  plants,  altliough  the  anh  of  many  portions  ol
plants,  oaa  rule,  contains  less  lime  than  the  formation  of  the  normal  salt  requires.  Thus
100  ports  of  the  ash  (from  S,000  partB  of  grain)  of  rye  groin  contain  47'K  of  phosphoric
anhydride  and  only  3'7  of  lime,  and  even  the  ssh  of  the  whole  of  the  rye  [including  the
atlaw)  contains  twice  as  tanch  phosphoric  aohydride  as  lime,  and  the  normal  salt  contains
■Imost  equal  weights  ol  these  sabstances.  Only  the  ash  of  grosses,  and  especially  of
clover,  and  of  trees,  contains  in  the  majority  of  coaea  more  lime  than  is  required  for  the
}f  CssPgOg. This  salt,  which  is  insolable  in  water,  dissolves  even  in  auoh

168  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

As  a  hydrate,  orthophosphoric  acid  should  be  expressed,  after  the
fashion  of  other  hydrates,  as  containing  three  water  residues  (hydroxyl
groups),  I'.c.  as  P0(0H)3.  This  method  of  expression  indicates  that
the  type  PX5,  seen  in  PH4I,  is  here  preserved,  with  the  substitu-
tion of  X2  by  oxygen  and  X3  by  three  hydroxyl  groups.  The  same
type  appears  in  POCI3,  PCI3,  PF5,  &c.  And  if  we  recognise  phos-
phoric acid  as  P0(0H)3,  we  should  expect  to  find  three  anhydridea
corresponding  with  it  :  (1)  [PO(OH)2]20,  in  which  two  of  the  three
hydroxyls  are  preserved  ;  this  is  pyrophosphoric  acid,  H4P2O7.  (2)
PO(OH)0,  where  only  one  hydroxyl  is  preserved.  This  is  metaphos-
phoric  acid.  (3)  (PO)203  or  PjO^,  that  is,  perfect  phosphoric  anhydride^
Therefore,  pyro-  and  nieta-phosphoric  acids  are  imperfect  anhydrides  (or
anhydro-acids)  of  orthophosphoric  a^cid.^^

feeble  acids  as  ticetic  and  sulphurous,  and  even  in  water  containing  carbonic  acid.  Th»
latter  fact  is  of  immense  importance  in  nature,  since  by  reason  of  it  rain  water  is  able  to
transfer  the  calcium  phosphates  in  the  soil  into  solutions  which  are  absorbed  by  plants..
The  solubility  of  the  normal  salt  in  acids  takes  place  by  virtue  of  the  formation  of  an
acid  salt,  which  is  evident  from  the  quantity  of  acid  required  for  its  solution,  and  more
especially  from  the  fact  that  the  acid  solutions  when  evaporated  give  crystalline  scalea
of  the  acid  calcium  phosphate,  CaH4(P04)2,  soluble  in  water.  This  solubility  of  the  acid
salt  fonns  the  basis  of  the  treatment  by  acids  of  bones,  phosphorites,  guano,  and  other
natural  products  containing  the  normal  salt  and  employed  for  fertilising  the  soil.  The
perfect  decomposition  requires  at  least  2H2SO4  to  Ca3(P04)<2,  but  in  reality  less  is  taken^
BO  that  only  a  portion  of  the  normal  salt  is  converted  into  the  acid  salt.  Hydrochloric
acid  is  sometimes  used.  (In  practice  such  mixtures  are  known  as  superphosphates)^
Certain  experiments,  however,  show  that  a  thorough  grinding,  the  presence  of  organic,  and
especially  of  nitrogenous,  substances,  and  the  porous  structure  of  some  calcium  phosphates
(for  example,  in  burnt  bones),  render  the  treatment  of  phosphoric  manures  by  acids  super-
fluous— that  is,  the  crop  is  not  improved  by  it.

"  In  this  sense  the  ortho-acid  itself  might  be  regarded  as  an  anhydro-acid,  counting
P(H0)5  aK  the  perfect  hydrate,  if  PH5  existed ;  but  as  in  general  the  normal  hydrates
correspond  with  the  existing  hydrogen  compounds  with  the  tiddition  of  up  to  4  atoms  of
oxygen,  therefore  PH5O4  is  the  normal  acid,  just  as  SH2O4  and  C]H04;.while  NHOj^
CH2O-,  are  meta-acids,  or  higher  normal  acids  (NH5O4  and  CH4O4)  with  the  loss  of  a
molecule  of  water.

In  order  to  see  the  relation  between  the  ortho-,  pyro-,  and  meta-phosphoric  acids,  the
first  thing  to  remark  in  them  is  that  the  anhydride  P..O5  is  combined  with  8,  2,  and  1
molecules  of  water.  In  the  absence  of  data  for  the  molecular  weight  of  ortho-  and  pyro-
phosphoric acids  it  is  necessary  to  mention  that  all  existing  data  for  meta-phosphoric  acid
indicate  (Note  21)  that  its  molecule  is  much  more  complex  and  contains  at  least H-P5O9,
or  Il4}P(;Oi5.  The  explanation  of  the  problems  which  here  present  themselves  can,  it  seems
to  me,  be  only  looked  for  after  a  detailed  study  of  the  phenomena  of  the  polymerisations
of  mineral  substances,  and  of  those  complex  acids,  such  as  phosphomolybdic,  which  we
shall  hereafter  describe  (Chapter  XXI.)  A  similar  instance  is  exhibited  in  the  solubility
of  hydrate  of  silica  (produced  by  the  action  of  silicon  fluoride  on  water)  in  fused  nieta-
l>hosphoric  acid,  with  the  formation,  on  cooling,  of  an  octahedral  conijiound  (sp.  gr.,  8'1)
containing  SiO,},P205.  A  certain  indication  (but  no  proof)  that  ordinary  orthophos-
phoric acid  is  polymerised  is  given  by  Staudenmaier  (1893),  who  obtained  a  salt,
K5H4P5O12,  by  the  action  of  a  solution  of  KH2PO4  uponK2C05;  and  a  comix>und,
KH5P2O8,  corresponding  to  the  doubled  molecule  of  H-PO4,  by  the  action  of  KH2PO|
upon  H3PO4  itself.

^^—S"

w

PHOSPHORUS  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  GROUP  V. 169

Pyrophoiphtn-ic  aeid,  H^FgO^,  is  formed  by  heating  ortkophos-
phoric  acid  to  250°  when  it  loses  water."  ^'*  Its  normal  salta  are
formed  l)y  igniting  the  dimetflllic  salts  of  itrthophtisphoric  acid  of
the  types  HM.^PO,.  Thus  from  the  disodium  salt  we  obtain  sodium
pyrophosphaU-,  Na|PjO,  (it  crystaHiaes  from  water  with  lOHjO,  is
■y  stable,  fuses^wlien  heated,  has  an  alkaline  re-action,  and  does  not
ortho-BaltK  whpu  its  solution  is  boiled);  and  from  the  mono-
n  salt  NaHjP(t,  the  acid  salt  Na,H,PjOj  (easily  soluble  in
Vater)  is  formed  ;  this  has  an  acid  reaction,  and  when  ignited  further
'J^vea  the  meta-halt.^"

Mrtnjikii&phoric  aeid,  UPOj  (the  analogue  of  nitric  acid),  is  formed
the  ignition  of  the  pyro-  and  ortho-acids  (or,  bett«r,  of  their
imonium  salts),  as  a  vitreous,  hyj^roKcopic,  fused  mass  (glacial  phoa-
phoric  acid,  acidum  pkonphoricvm  glaeia/e),  soluble  in  water  and
volatilising  without  decompositinn.  It  is  also  formed  in  the  first
slow  action  of  cold  water  on  the  anhydride,  but  metaphosphoric  acid
gradually  changes  int«  the  ortho-acid  when  its  solution  is  boiled,  or
,wlieQ  it  is  kept  for  any  length  of  lime,  especially  in  the  presence  uf

PJTOp

tiltad

llWHaj  tlic  ortlio-iu'iil  ia  pMtially  tnuislomiiMl  into  tlm
pjro-Kid  M  330'-,  whil»t  at  aei)°  Hie  IbIUt  b^in»  to  i  olfttiliae.  At  800=  the  niets-acid
only  is  fm-med.

V  The  luetluid  iif  preporatiou  of  the  oi'iil  ituelf  codtiiitte  iu  convertjiif^  the  mxtitim  lult,
Kt^PgOi,  by  doable  deenmpoaitiiai  with  water  uid  a.  Bait  of  lead,  into  iusolnble  leiid
pjTopboipbcte,  PbjP.jO?,  whith  is  then  autqwnded  in  water  and  ducouiposed  by  sulphiir-
tiltod  hydiDgeii ;  lead  Hnlpbide  in  tbtis  precipitated,  lUid  pyropboephoric  add  letnuUH  in
•olalion. Thin  eolntinn  ciuiuot  be  heated,  or  the  pyro-acid  will  paiw  into  the  orthih,  bnl
aporaled  nuder  the  receiver  o(  tui  airpamp. It  coneentralei  to  a  Hjmp  and
^l^yBlalli<ee,  and  when  ignited  in  thia  b>mi  loaea  water,  and  forma  metHphoaphoric  acid.
'  mumbleg  ortliaphoRphi>ric  acid  in  miiny  ceapectit ;  itti  aalta  with  tbe  alkaUa  are  alu
'  ibis,  and  the  olbere  iiiwiluble  in  water  but  soluble  in  acidn. When  beated  in  twlutiou
orthophOHphnric  acid,  aa  well  aa  when  (used  witb  an  exeeaH  of  alkali.
Witt  heated  aininonioni  cbloride  with  plioapbaric  aeid  (hydrochloric  ncid  was  erolred),
ited  the  reaidue to  drive  oft  ammonta,  and  obtained  pyrophoephoric  acid  in  the

ma  indicator  in  neutraliiiog  by  au  aUali  nieta-
|dio^borie  acid  is  mouabasiu,  and  orthophcnphoric  acid  in  bibaHc,  it  is  poaaible  by  meana
at  this  difference  to  follow  tbe  tranaition  of  mela-  into  ortho-phoephorir  acid.  Sabatier
(1888)  carried  on  an  inveatiKation  of  tliia  nature,  and  fonnd  that  the  rate  of  tranaforma-
tiOD  ia  dependent  nn  the  tempetnlure.  and  ia  fiobject  Ui  the  ^teneral  laws  of  Ibe  rate  at
cbonieal  tnuiafonuationii  which  belonga  to  pbyaical  cliemiatry.

HetaphiHphoric  iwid  haa  a  particolar  interaat  in  respect  to  the  TarialJona  to  which
it*  Milla  are  aobject.  The  metaphoiipbateH  are  formitd  by  thu  ignition  of  the  acid  ortho-
pbo^batea,  MHaPO,,  or  MNH.HPOj,  or  of  Ibe  acid  pyropbofipbates,  MjHtPaO,,  or
II)i(NH,)tPiOi,  water  and  ammonia  being  ifiven  ofi  in  the  pnceaa.  Tbe  properties  ol  tbe
metai^m^ihatea,  wbich  hare  a  aimibir  coEnpoaition  to  nitratea — for  iDEttance,  NaPO^,  or
BB(POa)fi^ — vary  according  to  tbe  duration  of  the  ignition  lo  which  tbo  ortUo-,  or  pyro-
cli  they  are  pregiored  have  been  sabjected. When  the  aalta  NaHjPOi

NHiNaHPO,  are  atrongly  ignited,  a  «Ut  KaPO:,  is  tomied.  which  deliqueMva  In  the

170  PRDkCIPLES  OF  CHEia>TRY

In  order  to  see  the  rriatioii  between  phosphorie  acid  and  the  lower
ackk  of  pho^>bonis, it is  simfJest  to  imagine  the  sabstitntion  of

axr,  «nl  |pT««  •  gelatinotw  pr«dpitete  with  saiu  of  the  alValme  eArth&.  Bot.  m»  Grmham
(in  UMIMO;,  «al  mmnj  oChen,  especiaDj  FleitiiiAon  And  Hetmebei]^  lin  1^40-50^  and
Taimiwn  ^id  the  nineCiesi,  obacrred,  imder  other  coDd2Kk«&  the  fialts  of  the  same  oom-
pontkm  scqnire  oUur  properties.  The  above  chemists  recogniae  five  polrmeric  fcwms  of
meimfhompbmlem^  (HPO^^,  We  vill  foUov  the  namenrlmtnn  and  rewrehesof  Fledt-
numn,

McmametapluMphofie  acid.  The  aalt«  are  distinguished  for  their  in^nbtlitT  in
water ;  eren  the  aalU  XaPO>  KPO^  are  instJnUe.  Ther  are  obtained  bv  igniting  the
mooometallic  orthophoaphaies — for  exain{^  RH^PO^i — op  to  the  tesnperatnre  al  which
all  water  is  eT<dred  (SKT^),  bat  noi  to  fnaioii. No  doaUe  salts  are  known.

Dimei4ipho9phcric  acid,  on  the  oontrmrj,  easily  forms  doable  salts — for  example,
KNaPjO^  and  also  the  copper  potassiam  salt,  SlC.  The  copper  salt  is  obtained  by  evapo-
rating a  aolation  of  copper  oxide  in  orthofrfiosphonc  acid.  A  bloe  ortho-salt,  CoRHO^,
first  leparates  from  the  aolation,  then  a  li^t-bloe  pyro-salt,  Co^P^O; ;  and  above  S50-,
when  metaphoi^horic  acid  itself  begins  to  volatilise,  the  dimetJ4>ho^>hate,  CoPjO^,  is
formed.  The  residue  is  washed  with  water,  and  decomposed  with  a  hot  solution  of  sodium
sulphide,  when  the  sodium  salt,  Na^PsO*,  is  obtained  in  solution.  This  salt,  when  evapo-
rated with  alcohol,  gives  crystals  containing  2  mol.  IL^O,  which,  however,  retain  their
solubility  (in  7  parts  of  water)  after  the  water  is  driven  off  at  100^.  When  fused,  these
crystals  give  a  deliquescent  salt  (hexa-metaphosphate).  The  solution  of  the  salt  has  a
neutral  reaction,  which  only  after  prolonged  boiling  becomes  acid,  owing  to  the  forma-
tion of  orthophosphate,  NaH<{P04.  The  soluble  salts  of  dimetaphosphoric  acid  give  the
insoluble  silver  salt,  Ag^^^^^  with  silver  nitrate,  and  a  precipitate  of  BaP^OeSH^O
with  barium  chloride.

Trimetaphotphoric  ticid  is  obtained  as  the  sodium  salt  NajPsO^  when  any  other
metaphoffphate  of  sodium  is  fused  and  slowly  cooled,  then  dissolved  in  a  slight  excei^s
of  warm  water,  and  the  resultant  solution  evaporated.  The  crystals  contain  6  mol.  H2O,
and  dissolve  in  four  parts  of  water.  An  acid  reaction  is  only  obtained,  as  with  the  pre-
ceding salt,  after  prolonged  boiling  with  water.  The  acid  is  a  true  analc^ue  of  nitric
acid,  becauHe  all  its  metallic  salts  are  soluble.

Hexametaphosphoric  acid.  Fleitmann  so  named  the  ordinary  metaphosphoric  acid
(glacial)  wliich  attracts  moisture.  The  deliquescent  sodium  salt  is  obtained,  like  the  tri-
mctaphoHphate,  only  by  rapid  cooling.  It  is  also  formed  by  fusing  stiver  oxide  with
an  exceHH  of  phosphoric  acid.  The  sodium  salt  is  soluble  in  water,  and  gives  viscous,
elastic  precipitates  with  salts  of  Ba,  Ca,  and  Mg.  Lubert  (1898)  obtained  salts  of  Ag,
Pb,  &c.

Jawein  and  Thillot  (1889),  who  investigated  the  sodium  salts  of  metaphosphoric  acid
by  Raoult's  method,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  salts  of  di-  and  tri-metaphosphoric
acid  behave  in  such  a  manner  that  their  molecule  must  be  represented  as  non-polymerised
NaPOs,  whilst  those  of  hexametaphosphoric  acid  behave  as  (NaPOs)^.  At  all  events,
the  series  of  salts  which  Fleitmann  and  Henneberg  regard  as  monometaphosphates — i.e.
as  non-iK)lymerised — are  most  probably  the  most  polymerised,  because  they  are  in-
soluble.

According  to  Tumman's  researches,  vitreous  metaphosphoric  acid  contains  a  mixture
consisting  chiefly  of  two  varieties,  differing  in  the  solubility  and  degree  of  stability  of
their  Halts.  The  least  stable  corresponds  to  Flcitmann's  hexa-acid,  and  gives  three
iscmicric  salts.  Tamnian  came  to  the  conclusion  that  there  exist  fKjlymers  also  in  the
fonn  (»f  p4>nta-,  ortho-,  and  deca-metaphosphoric  acids.  Without  going  into  details  upon
this  Htihjcit,  1  do  not  think  it  superfluous  to  point  out  that  the  undoubted  capability  of
m<*taphoHph(»ri<*  acid  to  polymerise  should  be  connected  with  its  faculty  of  combining
with  waU'r,  whilst  the  degree  of  {>olymerisation  and  the  number  of  polymeric  forms
cannot  yet  be  considered  as  sufficiently  explained.

^■PHOBPHOBUS  -AND  THS!  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  GROUP  V. 317

^droxyl  in  H,P(>,  or  PO(OH),  by  hyd.-ngen.  Then  from  ortho-
■  phoaphoricacid,PO{OH)j,weHha]!  obtain  phosph..rouRaoid,POH(OH)„
and  hj-p)phosphoroiis  acid,  PUH(OH)  ;  and,  furthermore,  phosphorous
acid  Hhould  be  bibasic  if  orthophasphoric  nuid  was  tribasic,  and
hypophoBplioroua  acid  should  \m:  uimiobasic.  This  conclusion  *' ''''  is,
in  fact,  true,  and  hence  all  the  acids  of  phosphorus  may  be  referred
to  one  common  type,  PX,,  whose  representatives  are  PH,I  and
PCI,„POC!„PCl^F3,  &c.

I'/ioiij/lioroiiii  acid,  PHjOj,  is  generally  obtained  from  phoKphoniB
trichloride.  PCI,,  by  the  a<;lion  of  water  ;  PCI.,  +  3H.fi  =  SHt'l
+  PH3O,,  Both  iicidB  formed  are  soluble  in  water,  but  are  easily
separated,  because  hydrochloric  acid  is  volatile  whilst  phosphorous
acid  volatilises  with  difficulty,  and  if  a  small  amount  of  water  be
originally  taken  the  hydrochloric  acid  nearly  bII  passes  off  directly.
Concentrated  solutions  of  phosphoi-ous  acid  give  crystals  of  HjPO.-,,
which  fuse  at  '0°,  attract  moisture  from  the  air,  and  deliquesce  when
ignited,  giving  phosphine  and  phosphoric  acid,*^  and  are  oxidised  into

""•  The  bibiUBly  of  HjPOj.  BBUbUnbed  by  WiirW,  hAH  buen  proved  liy  many  direct
imentn  (see,  lor  iuHtuice,  Nol«  93),  luiicnig  whidi  we  uiuy  mention  (h»l  Aiuat  {1S93}
o[  the  iu)n«ou<i  solationn  of  NmBPO;  xud  MaHO  •uid  added  absolute
aleoliol  to  it.  Too  InjerH  were  tonned;  the  Dpiwt.  alwholic.  enntained  all  the  eioesB
DtN&HO,wliilBt  the  lower  only  eontuni'd  the  ult  Xib^HFOj,  which  wnHtheretoreanmfale
lorBmctwiUi  the  eiceiiH  ul  NoHO.  Aiunl  iJw  obtuined  NitHjPOs  by  wttDmling  HgPOs
with  sodjfc  Dutil  he  obtuiued  &  neatriLl  reactiou  with  Diethyl^omnge.  The  reptitceiiient
of  one  alom  of  U  by  eodinm  here,  as  in  phosphoric  sl-id  (Nate  Ifl),  ipTeB  more  heat  tlian
Ui«  replaoement  of  the  tecimd  alom.  For  tlut  tiiinl  atom  there  is  no  foriDalion  of  a  oall,
and  Uierefore  no  eTolation  of  heat.  The  monometallic  Baits— for  example,  MaHiPOi— or
the  unmonia  salts,  wlien  heated  to  iaO°,  gHve,  as  Amat  had  preriiinsly  ehuwn,  a  eatl
of  hibuic  pyrophoephorous  arid,  NugH^PiOj.

"  PhoiphoroQs  acid,  when  subjef  ted  to  tLe  attioii  of  naHceot  bydrogeu  (line  and  sul-
phuric acid),  evolves  pliospUine,  and  when  boiled  with  ao  eieeaa  of  idkuli  il  evolveB
hydrogen  (PIlsOs  +  BKHO  =  PKjO(  +  aHjO+  H.^)l  owing  to  ite  liability  to  oxidation,  it  >e

cipJlateH  iihei  from  the  nitrate  and  merirary  from  its  salts.

These  reactions  are  perhaps  connected  with  the  fact  that  in  tins  acid  nue  atom  of
hydrogen  alionld  bo  considered  an  in  the  Haine  condition  as  in  phoBt>buretted  hydrogen,
which  is  eipremed  by  the  formula  PRO(OH)-,,  if  we  represent  it  as  PH,X,  with  the  snb-
atitation  of  two  of  tlie  hydiogcn  atoms  by  oxygen  and  of  HX  by  two  of  hydrojtyl.  The
direct  pasaa^  of  phosphorous  chloride  into  phosphoroDs  acid  would,  however,  indic^ite
that  all  tlie  three  atoms  of  hydrogen  in  it  occnr  in  the  form  of  hydroxyl,  becaUHe  no
difrereuce  is  Imown  Iwtween  the  three  atoms  of  chlorina  in  PClj— they  all  react  alike,  as
■  mle.  However,  Menschntkio,  by  acting  on  alcohol,  t^jOH,  with  phoaphorous  chloride,
obtained  hydrochloric  acid  and  a.  substance  P(C.,HiO)CLh  and  from  it  by  the  action  of
bromine  he  obtained  ethyl  bromide,  C.jH^r,  and  a  compoand  PBrOCly,  which  proves,
to  a  certain  extent,  the  existence  of  a  diRerenee  between  the  three  atoms  of  chloriue  in
phosphorous  chloride.  If  we  lum  our  attei-ilioD  to  the  formation  of  pliosphine  by  Uie
ignition  of  phospfaonm*  acid,  we  see  that  tPHjO,  only  evolve  8H  in  the  form  of  PU;,
and  therefore  the  residue — that  is,  SPUjO^— will  ulill  contain  one  hydrogen  of  the
n  pliosphine,  because  in  IFBjO^  we  should  recognise  four  snch  hydro-

172  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

orthophosphoric  acid  by  many  oxidising  agents.  In  its  salts  only  two
hydrogen  atoms  are  replaced  by  metals  (Wiirtz) ;  the  salts  of  the
alkaline  metals  are  soluble,  and  give  precipitates  with  salts  of  the
majority  of  other  metals.

The  monobasic  hypoplioBphorous  acid,  PH3O.2,  gives  salts  PH202Na,
(PH202)2Ba,  &c.  ;  the  two  remaining  atoms  of  hydrogen  (which
exist  in  the  same  form  as  in  phosphine,  PH3)  are  not  replaceable  by
metals,  and  this  determines  the  property  of  these  salts  of  evolving
phosphuretted  hydrogen  when  heated  (especially  with  alkalis).  In
acting  on  substances  liable  to  reduction  it  is  this  hydrogen  which  acts,
and,  for  example,  rediices  gold  and  mercury  from  the  solutions  of
their  salts,  or  converts  cupric  into  cuprous  salts.  In  all  these  instances
the  hypophosphorous  acid  is  converted  into  phosphoric  acid.  Under
the  action  of  zinc  and  sulphuric  acid  it  gives  phosphine,  PH3.  Never-
theless, neither  hypoposphorous  acid  nor  its  dry  salts  absorb  oxygen
from  the  air.  The  salts  of  hypophosphorous  acid  are  more  soluble
than  those  of  the  preceding  acids  of  phosphorus.  Thus  the  sodium
salt  PNaH202  does  not  give  a  precipitate  with  barium  chloride,  and
the  salts  of  calcium,  barium,  and  many  other  metals  are  soluble. '^^
The  hypophosphites  are  prepared  by  boiling  an  alkali  with  phosphorus
so  long  as  phosphuretted  hydrogen  is  evolved.  The  acid  itself  is
obtained  from  bariimi  hypophosphite  (prepared  in  the  same  manner  by
boiling  phosphorus  in  baryta  water),  by  decomposing  its  solution  with
sulphuric  acid.  By  concentration  of  the  solution  of  hypophosphorous
acid  (it  must  not  be  heated  above  120°,  at  which  temperature  it
decomposes)  a  syrup  is  formed  which  is  able  to  crystallise.  In  the
solid  state  hypophosphorous  acid  fuses  at  +  17°,  and  has  the  properties
of  a  clearly  defined  acid.

The  types  PX3  and  PX.-„  which  are  evident  for  the  hydrogen  and
oxygen  compounds  of  phosphorus,  are  most  clearly  seen  in  its  halogen
compounds,^^  to  the  consideration  of  which  we  will  proceed,  fixing

gens  aK  in  phoHphine.  We  arrive  at  the  Hame  conclusion  by  examining  the  decomposition
»f  hypophosphorouH  acid,  2PH50.2  =  PH5-f  PH5O4.  In  the  two  molecules  of  the  mono-
basic hypophoH[)horoU8  acid  taken,  there  are  only  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  replaceable  by
metals,  whilst  in  the  molecule  of  the  resultant  phosphoric  acid  there  are  three.  Perhaps
relations  of  this  nature  determine  the  relative  stability  of  the  di-metallic  salts  of  ortho-
phosphoric  acid.

**  Calcium  hyjwphosphite  is  used  in  medicine.  According  to  Cavazzi,  a  mixture  of
sodium  hypophosphite,  NaH.^PO-j,  and  sodium  nitrate  explodes  violently.

'^  Fluorine  and  bromine  give  PX-  and  PX5,  like  chlorine.  With  respect  to  iodiiio
PI5  is,  in  n  chemical  sense,  a  very  unstable  substance,  and  y^eneraWy  phosphorus  ti^i-
iodide  only  is  formed  (from  yellow  or  red  phosphorus  and  iodine  in  the  requisite  proix)r-
tions).  It  is  a  red  crystalline  substance,  fuses  at  55°,  is  ea.sily  decom|>osed  by  water,
forming  phosphorous  and  hydriodic  acids,  and  when  heated  it  evolves  iodine  vapours
and  forms  phosphorus  di-iodide,  PI... This  substance  may  be  obtained  in  the  same

t

P PHOSPHORUS  AND  THE OTHRR ELBMEHTS  OF  GKOlTp  V. 173

l-cmr  attention  more  especially  on  the  chlorine  compMunds,  &s  being
■■the  moat  important  from  the  historical,  theoretical,  and  prncticni  point
I  of  view.

I Phosphorus  huvns  in  chlorine,  forming  phosphorous  chloride,  PCI;,,

I  and with an excess of chlorine, phosphoric chloride, PCI3. The

I  oxychloride,  POCl;,,  as  the  Bimplest  chloran hydride  iiccording  to  the

I  type  PXi,  and  also  phnsphoric  clilori'le,  correspond  with  orlhophos-

phoric  acid,  PO(OH),,,  while  phospliorous  chloride,  PC'lj,  coiTcsponda

with phosphorous acid  and  the  type  FX^. Phosphoric  oxychloride,

POCl;,,  is  a  colourless  liquid,  boiling  at  110°. Phosphorus  trichloride

is  also  a  colourless  liquid,  boiling  at  IG",''''  whilst  phosphoric  chloride

V  BUiiuier  an  the  jireueding  by  Inking  ■  smiiUvr  |>rn)urtinn  of  iodine  (S  parts  of  iodine  In
I  Iput  of  phoBphuraii,whiUt  the  tri-iodid>?  rviiaires  12-3);  it  aJm  romia  red  crystak.,  which
B  melt  at  110".  When  decampOHed  by  water  it  nat  onlj  given  phoaphoroaa  and  hfdriodic
■  VcidB,  but  bJHO  pboHphine  and  a  yellow  >fDb«t<inpe  fib  lover  oxide  of  pfaospbenm).  In  it4
frflompovtion  di-iodide  of  phoaphonit<  corrvfliHinds  with  liquid  phospbnretted  hjdrogeu,
B,PHj,  uidpiobabljr its  molecnlar weight  ia  mni-h  higher:  P^It  or  PiLh  Ao.  Ah  the  iodine
^  fompounds  of  phosphonui  giie  hydrioilir  ajid  i>]ioKphur»uB  nf ids  with  water,  and  as  both
theK  iitlb«tiuicei>  &re  rsducing  ^ents  in  the  preeetic^e  of  water  (and  hydrate*),  iodide  ol
phOBpboms  aim  auts  n»  a  redaving  agent.

•»  111  ■  liquid  state  the  denaily  of  phiwphoniDB  ehloride  at  10°  =  I'fiUT,  aud  therefore
its  molecular  volaiue  ^137'S'l'GDT  =  Ni>-D,  iind  that  of  idioaphonm  oijchluride  is  equal  In
Isa'Gl-aBS^BO'T:  hence  the  addition  of  oiygen  hae  iimduceil  iwnsidentble  incrvaw  in
volume,  jnal  as  in  the  conyersiun  iif  kitl|]hur  dichleride,  SCI],  into  Hulpbaryl  clilorid,^
SOCl],  the  lolnme  changes  Iroui  M  to  71.  Il  i>  tbe  eama  with  the  boiling.painls :  phoa-
phoruE  trichloride  boils  at  70°,  the  oiji'hloridc  at  100°,  sulphur  dichloride  at  64°,  and
■nlphnryl  chloride  at  7S° — that  is,  the  ndditinn  of  oxygen  Tuiefs  the  bmliug  points.

The  BOjiOBr  deTttity  of  phoiiphorus  triehloridc  and  oiychloride  eorreaponds  with  their
larmaln  (Cabonn,  WUrti) — namely,  is  eiual  to  half  the  molecular  weight  referred  to
hydrogen.  Bat  it  is  not  to  with  phosplioras  ppntacbloride.  Cahours  «howl^d  Uiat  the
Vapoor  density  of  phosphoms  pentochloride  referred  to  air  =  S'ltS,  to  hydrogen  =  G3-n,
whilst  according  to  tbe  formnla  PClj  it  nboulil  be  ^  lOliJ.  Hence  this  formula  corre-
qunds  with  four,  and  not  with  two,  molecules.  This  shows  tliat  the  raponr  of  phospboric
diloride  contains  two  and  not  one  U]ole(.-nle,  that  in  a  state  nt  vapour  it  splits  up,  like
■al^ammoniac,  solpburic  acid,  lie.  The  prodnuts  of  diaruption  must  here  be  phosi^ron*
eUoride,  PCIj,  and  chlorine,  Cl^  bodies  which  eawly  reform  pbnspboric  chloride.  PCI),
•t  a  lower  temiierature.  This  decompoeitiua  ol  phosphoric  chloride  in  ita  conversion
Into  vapour  is  confirmed  by  Ihe  tact  thai  the  vapour  of  this  almost  colourless  subelanoa
•hows  the  green  ish- yellow  colour  proper  to  chlorine.  This  disaodation  ol  phosphoric
chloride  haa  been  considered  by  some  chemists  aa  a  sign  that  phosf^oros,  like  nitrogen,
doe*  not  give  volatile  compoimda  of  the  type  PXs,  and  that  such  substance  are  only
obUtined  as  unstable  molecolar  compunnds  which  break  up  when  distilled  ;  for  example.
PE,.HI.  PCls,CI,.  NHs,HCl,  Ac.  To  pro>-e  that  tbe  molecule  PCU  actually  eiistn,
WUrti  in  IHTO  observed  that  when  mixed  with  the  vapour  of  phosphoroni  chloride  the
vapoui  of  phosphoric  chloride  distils  ovi-r  ifrinn  IVU'  tc  IIW^)  perfectly  colourless,  and
ha*  a  density  which  is  really  near  to  the  formula— namely,  to  lUl — and  the  same  density
determined  lor  the  pentachloride  in  an  atniosphere  of  chlnriue.  Hence  at  low
temperatures  and  in  admixture  with  one  of  the  {iroducts  of  dissociation,  there  is  n
hnger  that  decomposition  which  occurs  at  higher  temperatures — tliat  is,  we  hai-e  here
of  dissociation  proceeding  at  moderate  temperature*.

jt  important  proof  in  favoUI  of  the  type  PXg  is  eihibiled  by  phospbunis  penU-
fluoride  I'Fj,  obtained  by  Thorpe  aa  a  mlourless  gas  which  nnly  eorrodes  glasa  attW

174  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

is  a  solid  yellowish  substance,  which  volatilises  without  melting  at
about  168°.  They  are  all  heavier  than  water,  and  form  types  of
the  chloranhydrides  or  chlorine  compounds  of  the  non-metallic  elements
whose  hydrates  are  acids,  just  as  NaCl  or  BaCls  are  types  of  halogen
metallic  salts.

If  a  piece  of  phosphorus  be  dropped  into  a  flask  containing  chlorine,
it  burns  when  touched  with  a  red-hot  wire,  and  combines  with  the
chlorine.  If  the  phosphorus  be  in  excess,  liquid  pliosphorus  tri-
chloride, PCI3,  is  always  formed,  but  if  the  chlorine  be  in  excess  the
solid  pentachloride  is  obtained.  The  trichloride  is  generally  pre-
pared in  the  following  manner.  Dry  chlorine  (passed  through  a  series
of  Woulfe's  bottles  containing  sulphuric  acid)  is  led  into  a  retort  con-
taining sand  and  phosphorus.  The  retort  is  heated,  the  phosphorus
melts,  spreads  through  the  sand,  and  gradually  forms  the  tri-
chloride, which  distils  over  into  a  receiver,  where  it  condenses.
Plioaphoric  chloride  or  pJioapfiorus  pentachloride,  PCl.i^,  is  prepared  by
passing  dry  chlorine  into  a  vessel  containing  phosphorus  trichloride
(purified  by  distillation).  Phosphorous  chloride  combines  directly  with
oxygen,  but  more  rapidly  with  ozone  or  with  the  oxygen  of  potassium
chlorate  (SPClg  +  KCIO3  =  3POCI3  -f  KCl),  forming  pliosphorus  oxy-
cldoridcj  POCI3  (Brodie).  This  compound  is  also  formed  by  the  first
action  of  water  on  phosphoric  chloride  ;  for  example,  if  two  vessels,
one  containing  phosphoric  chloride  and  the  other  water,  are  placed
under  a  bell  jar,  after  a  certain  time  the  crystals  of  the  chloride
disappear  and  hydrochloric  acid  passes  into  the  water.  The  aqueous
vapour  acts  on  the  pentachloride,  and  the  following  reaction  occurs  :
PCI5  -f  H2O  =  POCI3  -H  2HC1,  the  result  being  that  liquid  phosphorus

the  lapee  of  time ;  it  may  be  kept  over  mercury,  and  has  a  normal  density.  It  is  formed
when  hquid  arsenic  trifluoride,  AsF^,  is  added  to  phosphoric  chloride  sorroanded  by  a
freezing  mixture  :  3PCI5  +  5 AsFj  =  8PF5  +  GAsClj.

In  general,  fluorine  and  phosphorus  give  stable  compounds :  PF3,  POF3,  and  PFj^
as  would  be  expected  from  the  fact  that  in  passing  from  CI  to  I  (i.e.  as  the  atomic
weight  of  the  halogen  increases)  the  stability  of  the  com|K)unds  with  P  and  the  tendency
to  giTe  PX5  (Note  24)  decreases.  Phosphorus  t  ri-Jiuoride  is  obtained  by  heating  a  mixture
of  ZnF.^  and  PBrj,  by  the  action  of  AsFj  upon  PCI5,  by  heating  phosphide  of  copper
with  PbF-j,  &c.  It  is  a  strong-smelling  gas,  which  liquefies  at  — 10°  under  a  pressure
of  40  atmospheres,  giving  a  colourless  liquid.  It  dissolves  easily  in  (is  absorbed  by,
reacts  with)  water,  and  acts  upon  glass;  when  mixed  with  Cl-j  it  combines  with  it
(Poulenc,  1891),  forming  PCI2F5,  a  colourless  gas  of  normal  density,  which  is  trans-
formed into  a  liquid  at  8^,  decomposes  into  PF-, +  CI2  at  250°,  and,  with  a  small  amount
of  water,  gives  oxy-fluoride  of  phosphorus,  POF-  (with  a  large  amount  of  water  it  gives
PH5O1),  which  Moissan  (1891)  obtained  by  the  action  of  dry  HF  upon  P-^Oj,  and  Thorpe
and  Tuttou  (1890)  by  heating  a  mixture  of  cryolite  and  P-^Os.  It  is  a  gas  of  normal
density,  like  PF5,  and  was  obtained  by  Moissan  by  the  action  of  fluorine  upon  PF5
(PSF5,  sec  Cliapter  XX.,  Note  20).  Thus  the  forms  PXj  and  PX5  not  only  exist  in  many
solid  and  non- volatile  substances,  but  also  as  vapours.

PH0SPH0BD8  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OP  GHOUP  V. 175

oxychloride  U  found  in  one  vessel,  and  &  solatioa  of  hydruchloric  ain<{  in
the  other.  However,  im  excess  of  water  directly  transforms  phosphoric
chloride  into  orthophosphoric  acid,  PCI.,  +  4H;0  =  PH;,0,  +  5Ha,"^
since  POCl,  reacts  with  water  CiH^O),  fonniug  3HCI  and  phosphoric
rtcid  P0{0H)3.

The  above  chlorine  compounds  serve  not  only  as  a  type  of  tlie-
chloranhydridea,  but  also  iis  n  means  fur  the  preparation  of  other
acid  chloranhydridfs.  Thus  the  conversion  of  acids  XHO  into  chlor-
anbydrideH,  XCl,  ta  generally  accomplished  l»y  means  of  pboephorus
jxmtachJoride.  This  fact  was  discovered  by  Chancel,  and  adopted  by
Gerhardt  as  an  important  method  for  studying  organic  acids.  By  this
means  oi^anic  acids,  containing,  as  we  know,  RCOOH  (where  R  is  n
hydrocarbon  group,  and  where  carboxjl  may  repeat  itself  several  times
hy  replacing  the  hydrogen  of  hydrocfti'bon  compounds),  are  converted
into  their  chloranhydrides,  RCOCI.  "With  water  they  again  form  the
acid,  and  resemble  the  chloranhydrides  of  mineral  acids  in  their
general  properties.

Since  carbonic  acid,  CO(OH)j,  contains  two  hydroxy!  groups,  its
perfect  chloranbydride,  COCIj,  carbonic  ofryehloride,  carbon;/)  cMorvh
or  phoHijene  gat,  contains  two  atoms  of  chlorine,  and  differs  frem
the  chloranhydrides  of  organic  ttddn  in  that  In  them  one  atom  of
chlorine  ia  replace*!  by  the  hydroca.rbon  radicle  RCOCl,  if  R  be  a
monatomic  radicle  giving  a  hydrocarbon  RH.  It  is  t;vident,  on  the
one  hand,  that  in  RCOCI  the  hydrogen  is  replaced  by  the  radicle
COCI,  which  is  also  able  to  replace  several  atoms  of  hydrogen  (for
example,  CjM,(COCI)j  corresponds  with  the  bibasic  succinic  acid)  ;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  reactions  of  the  chloranhydrides  of

■"  Fliua]>hciriis  ixycbloride  in  obUined  by  the  u;tiDD  of  pbosphorie  cliloride  on
hfdntf-H  lit  ncidn  (bECnaee  ulkalis  dHompooa  pboaphorue  oxychloride  I,  occordiug  to  llie
«Hi»tion  PCli  1-  HHO  =  POCl,  +  RCl  +  HCl,  whore  EHO  is  oa  acid.  The  reutiou  only
proceeds  ncoordiiig  to  this  eqantion  with  monobasia  acida,  but  tbeu  RCl  is  valoitile,  uid
therefore  ■  niiitnre  li  obtained  of  two  vohiCile  nDbatancaa,  the  acid  chloride  and  phua-
phoma  oiychloride,  which  are  MimeCimeB  difHoult  to  aeparate ;  whilst  if  tile  hydrate
be  polibaaic  the  reaction  Ireqaently  proceeds  eo  that  an  anhydride  is  (onned :
3lHs0.j  +  PCli  =  BO  +  POClj+2HCl.  If  the  unliydrido  be  non-volatile  (like  boric),  or
eaeil;  decomposed  llikc  utaliD),  it  ia  easy  Ui  obtain  pore  oiychloride.  Thus  phoa-
phania  oiycliluridu  is  often  prepared  by  acting  on  boric  or  oiolioacid  with  phosphorio
chloride.  It  is  idwi  formed  when  the  vapour  of  phoEphoric  chloride  is  passed  over
phoephoric  anhydride,  PiO^  +  SPCl,  =  SPOCIj.  This  forms  an  excellent  example  iu  proof
al  the  fact  tliat  the  lormation  of  one  subBtaDos  from  two  does  not  necessarily  show  that
the  leroltant  compoaiid  contains  the  moleeoles  of  these  eobstancea  in  its  moleuola.  But
oitlier  oxycliltirides  of  pboiphatus  are  alio  formed  by  the  interaction  of  plioepboric  anhy-
dride and  chloride :  tlina  at  20U"  the  oblor&nbydrlde,  POiCl,  or  chlorauhydride  of  meta-
phosphoric  acid,  la  funned  (Oastavson).  The  cliloisnhydride  of  pyrophoaphorie  acid,
p,QsCI,,  was  ohtMned  (Hayter  and  Micbaelis),  together  with  NOCl,  ttc^  hy  the  Ktion.
of  NO  upon  cold  PClj,  aa  a  fuming  liquid  boUing  at  910°,

176  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

organic  acids  will  answer  to  the  reactions  of  carbonyl  chloride,  as  the  re-
actions of  the  acids  themselves  answer  to  those  of  carbonic  acid .  Carbonyl
chloride  is  obtained  directly  from  dry  carbon  monoxide  and  chlorine  '^
exposed  to  the  action  of  light,  and  forms  a  colourless  gas,  which  easily
condenses  into  a  liquid,  boiling  at  +8°,  specific  gravity  1*43,  and  having
the  suffocating  odoor  belonging  to  all  chloranhyd rides.  Like  all  chlor-
anhydrides,  it  is  immediately  decomposed  by  water,  forming  carbonic
anhydride,  according  to  the  equation  COClj  +  HjO  =  COj  +  2HC1,
and  thus  expresses  the  type  proper  to  all  chloranhydrides  of  both
mineral  and  organic  acids.^^

In  order  to  show  the  general  method  for  the  preparation  of  acid
chloranhydrides,  we  will  take  that  of  acetic  acid,  CHj'COOH,  as  an  ex-
ample. Phosphorus  pentachloride  is  placed  in  a  glass  retort^  and  acetic
acid  poured  over  it ;  hydrochloric  acid  is  then  evolved,  and  the  sub-
stance distilling  over  directly  after  is  a  veiy  volatile  liquid,  boiling  at  50**,
and  having  all  the  properties  of  the  chloranhydrides. With  water  it

^  The  direct  action  of  the  san's  raya,  or  of  magnesium  light,  is  necessary  to  start  the
reaction  betweten  carbonic  oxide  and  chlorine,  but  when  once  started  it  will  proceed
rapidly  in  diffused  light.  An  excess  of  chlorine  (which  gives  its  coloration  to  the
colourless  phosgene)  aids  the  completion  of  the  reaction,  and  may  afterwards  be  removed
by  metallic  antimony.  Porous  substances,  like  charcoal,  aid  the  reaction.  Phosgene
may  be  prepared  by  passing  a  mixture  of  carbonic  anhydride  and  chlorine  over  incan-
descent charcoal.  Lead  or  silver  chloride,  when  heated  in  a  current  of  carbonic  oxide,
also  partially  form  phosgene  gas.  Carbon  tetrachloride,  CCI4,  also  forms  it  when  heated
with  carbonic  anhydride  (at  400*^),  with  phosphoric  anhydride  (StK)*^),  and  most  easily  of  all
with  sulphuric  anhydride  (2S0.^  +  CCI4  =  C0Cl2  +  S.PjCl,,  this  is  pyrosulphuryl  chloride).
Chloroform,  CHCl.-;,  is  converted  into  carbonyl  chloride  when  heated  with  S02(0H)C1
(the  first  chloranhydride  of  sulphuric  acid);  CHCI5+ SO5HCI-COCI.2  + S0.2  +  2HC1
^Dewar),  and  when  oxidised  by  cliromic  acid.

Among  the  reactions  of  phosgene  we  may  mention  the  formation  of  urea  with
ammonia,  and  of  carbonic  oxide  when  heated  with  metals.

^  We  are  already  acquainted  with  some  of  the  chloranhydrides  of  the  inorganic
.i^i^g — for  instance,  BCI3,  and  SiCl4 — and  here  we  shall  describe  those  which  correspond
with  sulphuric  acid  in  the  following  chapter.  It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  when  hydro-
chloric  acts  on  nitric  acid  (aqua  regia.  Vol.  I.  p.  467)  there  is  formed,  besides  chlorine,
the  oxychlorides  NOCl  and  NO.^Gl,  which  may  be  regarded  as  chloranhydrides  of  nitric
and  nitrous  acids  (nitrogen  chloride.  Vol.  I.  p.  476).  The  former  boils  at  -  6°,  the  latter
«t  +5°,  the  specific  gravity  of  the  first  at  -12°  =  1*416,  and  at  -18°  =  1'438  (Geuther),
and  of  the  second  « 1*3 ;  the  first  is  obtained  from  nitric  oxide  and  chlorine,  the  second
from  nitric  peroxide  and  chlorine,  and  also  by  the  action  of  phosphoric  chloride  on  nitrio
acid.  If  the  gases  evolved  by  aqua  regia  be  passed  into  cold  and  strong  sulphuric  acid,
they  form  crystals  of  the  composition  NHSO5  (like  chamber  crystals),  which  melt  at  86°,
and  with  sodium  chloride  form  acid  sodium  sulphate  and  the  oxychloride  NOCl.  This
•chloranhydride  of  nitric  acid  is  termed  nitrotyl  chloride.

Cyanogen  ehloritJr^  CNCl,  is  the  gaseous  chloranhydride  of  cyanic  acid;  it  is  formed
by  the  action  of  chlorine  on  aqueous  mercury  cyanide,  Hg(CN)2  +  2Cl2  =  HgClj  +  2CNCl.
When  chlorine  acts  on  cyanic  acid,  it  forms  not  only  this  cyanogen  chloride,  but  also  poly-
merides  of  it — a  liquid,  boiling  at  18^,  and  a  solid,  boiling  at  190°.  The  latter  corre-
sponds with  cyanuric  acid,  and  consequently  contains  C3N3CI5.  Details  concerning  these
substances  must  be  looked  for  in  works  on  organic  chemistry.

PHOSPHORira  AND  THR OTHKH  ELSMKNTB  OF  eBOUP  T. 177

forms  hydrochloric  and  (wetic  acids.  The  reaction  hero  taking  plu^e
may  be  explained  thus  :  the  substitution  of  the  oxygen  taken  frora  llie
acetic  acid  {from  its  fai'bo'ty!)  by  two  atoms  of  chlorine  from  the
PCI.,  should  be  lis  follows  ;  CHsCOOH  +  PCU=CH;,COHCIj  +  POOl3.
But  the  comjHJund  CH;,  COHCl^  does  not  exist  in  a.  free  state  (because
it  would  indieJite  the  possibility  ot  the  formation  of  comjKJUoda  of
the  type  CXs,  and  carbon  only  gives  those  of  the  type  OX,)  ;  it
therefore  spliU  up  into  HCl  and  the  chloranhydride  CHiCl  )C1.  The
general  scheme  for  the  re-nction  of  phosphorus  pentAuhloride  witli
hydrates  ROH  is  exactly  the  same  as  with  water  ;  namely,  ROH  with
PCI..,  gives  POCI.,  +  HCl  +  RCl  -that  is  a  chloranhydride.""  ^''

Containing,  as  they  do,  chlorine,  which  easily  reacts  with  hydrogen,
phosphorus  pentoehloride,  trichloride,  and  oxychloride  enter  into
reaction  with  ammonia,  and  give  a  sei-ies  of  amide  and  nitrite  com*

a  bi.  TiiiB  nmction  inileiid  ]irnc»Hi»  very  oftsily  uid  compltttel)'  wilL  a.  iiiiaiber  i>(
hydrnxidfls.  if  tliey  di»  nnt  rvafl  tm  liyilroL'bloric  acid  Aud  phospbontB  nijchLundti,  vluoli
is  Uie  <:iuB  vheii  thef  have  slkuliue  pr(i[H!iiiei>.  When  Ibe  hjdrondit  is  bibitqio  and
IK  preaent  in  tiLVBti,  it  unt  nnlmtiieiitl]'  happenB  Hint  the  eltsniEnCa  al  witlet  ata  lakaa
up:  B(0H;,  +  PL\  ^  HQ  •  SHCI  >-  POCIx.  The  ufaydnde  RO  may  then  be  eon-
verted  iiitu  chUmihydride,  HO  +  PCI^ --=  RCL;  +  POClj— tb>(  ix,  phnsphnra*  penta-
chloride  brin^  aboiil  tho  subxtitatmu  of  O  by  CI,.  Tboa  oaibonyl  tUeride,  COCL^  boioii
chloride,  aBCtz),  and  suucinin  ctUoricle,  C.|H,0,Ct„  At.,  are  rvipetlirely  nbtainetl  by  the
airtion  i>t  plioiipb'iric  cliloride  nn  catlnuie,  buric.  and  iincjinia  anhydrides.  PhosphDran
■■entaHduride  rencte  in  a  similar  manner  oti  the  aldehydes,  RCHO.  forming  R(JHCL„
aad  on  the  chliiriuihjrdridM  Ihemnelves— fw  ejample,  with  aoetic  ebloHde,  CH.,-COf.'l
(when  heated  in  a  ulimed  tabe),  it  forma  a  sabBtanoe  haiing  the  cumiKisilion  CHjCCI].

Ph<H>|ihnnistrii<hlondeando>ychloride  act  In  a  aimilar  moDner  to  phnapburiu  i^hloride.
When  phoHphnnjH  trichloride  urtx  on  an  acid.  SRHO  +  PCt.i^HRCUPIHOli.  It  a  salt
it  taken,  then  by  tlie  iKtinii  of  iiho«|ihoni>  airchloride  ■  ocrrpspcniding  chloranhydride
sad  sail  of  orthojihoaiihoric  acid  are  easily  formed:  8R(K01  +  POCIj=3HCl  +  PO(KOl3.
The  cbloiuihydride  ItCI  is  always  more  tolalile  than  its  corregpandinj;  acid,  and  divlilii
OTOT  before  the  hydrate  RUO.  Thus  acetii?  arid  boils  at  111°.  and  its  chlorajihydride
at  E0°.  Phospborie  and  phospliorons  acids  are  very  aliRhUy  volatile,  whilst  their
chloranbydrides  are  coinparatively  easily  conierted  into  vaponi.  The  facility  of  (he
uldoranhydrides  tu  react  At  tlie  expense  of  their  own  chlorine  detennines  their  if^at
importance  lu  ehemistry.  For  instance,  aappose  we  reqnire  to  know  the  molecular
lonnala  nf  some  hydrate  which  does  not  paiui  into  a  4tiile  of  vaponr  uid  does  not  give  a
chlonuibydnde  with  hydrochloric  acid— that  it,  which  has  nut  any  basic  oi  alkaline
properties:  we  mnat  then  endeaTonr  to  obtain  this  chloranhydride  by  means  ol
pboapboric  chloride,  and  it  frequently  happens  that  the  i-DcTeiipondinK  chloranhydride  is
Tolfttila.  The  resultant  chloranhydride  is  then  converted  into  vapour,  and  its  compoaitioii
is  deteioiined ;  and  if  we  know  its  composition  we  are  uble  to  decide  that  of  its
corresponding  hydrate.  Thns.  for  example,  fmm  the  formala  of  ailicou  chloride,  9i01,.  of
of  boron  chloride,  BCIj,  we  can  judfte  the  cnmpnaitinn  of  their  corresponding  hydrates,
Si(tlO),.  BIHO)].  Baring  obtained  the  chlnranhydriile  RCl  or  BCl.,  it  ia  possible  by  iU
meant  to  ulitaiu  many  other  compounds  ot  the  same  radicle  R  according  to  the  equation
MX^RCUMfl  +  RX.  M  may  be  ^  H,  K,  Ag,  or  other  metal.  The  reaction  pnxieeds
thtu  if  M  turms  a  stable  ramjiound  with  cliloriiie— for  eiample.  silver  chloride,  hydro-
chloric acid,  and  R,  an  unsUble  substance.  Hence,  K  cbloruihydride  is  frequently
employed  for  the  formation  of  other  compounds  nf  a  given  radicle  :  for  instance,  with
tbay  tumi  amides  RXH,,  and  with  suKs  HOK,  with  sohydrides  K^,  £c.

TOL.  n.  s

^^^^miwnii

178  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

pounds  of  phosphorus.  Thus,  for  example,  when  ammonia  acts  on  the
oxychloride  we  obtain  sal-ammoniac  (which  is  afterwards  removed  hy
wat^r)  and  an  orthophosphoric  triamide,  PO(NH2)3,  as  a  white  in-
soluble powder  on  which  dilute  acids  and  alkalis  do  not  act,  but  which,
when  fused  with  potassium  hydroxide,  gives  potassium  phosphate  and
ammonia  like  other  amides.  When  ignited,  the  triamide  liberates
ammonia  and  forms  the  nitrile  PON,  just  as  urea,  C0(NH2)„
gives  off  ammonia  and  forms  the  nitrile  CONH.  This  nitrile,  called
moputphosf^fiatnide,  PON,  naturally  corresponds  with  metaphosphoric
jvoid,  namely,  with  its  ammonium  salt.  NH4PO3  — H20=P02*NH2,
an  as  yet  unknown  amide,  and  POj'NHj  — HjO  gives  the  nitrile  PON.
This  relation  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  PON,  moistened  with  water,
gives  metaphosphoric  acid  when  ignited.  It  is  the  analogue  of  nitrous
oxide,  NON.  It  is  a  very  stable  compound,  more  so  than  the  pre-
ceding.-^^

*®  Tlie  reaction  of  ammonia  on  phosphorus  pentoclilorido  is  nion*  complex  than  the
preceding.  This  is  readily  understood :  to  the  oxychloride,  POCls,  there  corresponds  a
hydrate  PO(OH)5,  and  a  salt  PO(NH40)5,  and  consequently  also  an  amide  PO(NH2)5,
whilst  the  penttvchloride,  PCI5,  has  no  corresponding  hydrate  PlOH)^,  and  therefore  there
is  no  amide  P(NH2)5.  The  reaction  with  ammonia  will  be  of  two  kinds  :  either  instead  of
5  mol.  NHs,  only  3  mol.  NHj  or  still  less  will  act;  ♦.«.  PCyNH.i).,,  PC1.-(NH .).,  cVrc.  are
formed;  or  else  the  pentacliloride  will  act  like  a  mixture  of  chlorine  with  the  trichloride,
and  then  as  the  result  there  will  be  obtained  thej>roduct8  of  the  action  of  chlorine  o)i  those
amides  wliich  are  formed  from  phosphorus  trichloride  and  ammonia.  It  would  api>ear
that  both  kinds  of  reaction  proceed  simultaneously,  but  both  kinds  of  products  are  un-
stable, at  all  events  complex,  and  in  the  result  there  is  obtained  a  mixture  containing
sal-ammoniac,  d'c.  The  products  of  the  first  kind  should  react  with  water,  and  we  should
obtain,  for  example,  PCl5(NH,)o-f2H.20-8HCl  and  P0(H0)(NH2)j.  This  substance  has
not  actually  been  obtained,  but  the  compound  PONU(NH2)derived  from  it  by  elimination
of  the  elements  of  water  is  known,  and  is  termed  diphosphamide  \  it  is,  however,  more
probable  that  it  is  a  nitrile  than  an  amide,  because  only  amides  contain  the  group  NH^.
It  is  a  colourless,  stable,  insoluble  jwwder,  which  possibly  corresponds  with  pyrophos-
phoric  acid,  more  especially  since  when  heated  it  evolves  ammonia  and  gives  and  leaves
phosphoryl  nitride,  PON — that  is,  the  nitrile  of  metaphosphoric  acid.  The  amide  corre-
sponding with  the  pyrophosphate  P.203(NH40)4  should  be  P205(NH.2)4,  and  the  nitriles
corresponding  to  tlie  latter  would  be  P..,02N(NH2)5,  P20N2(NH2)2,  and  p2N5(NH2).  The
composition  of  the  first  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  above  diphosphamide.  The  third
pyrophosphoric  nitrile  has  a  formula  P.^X^Hi,  and  this  is  the  com}K>sitiou  of  tlie  body
known  ah  phospharn^  PHX2  ("*  **  certain  sense  this  is  the  analogue  of  N5H  jwlymerised,
Chapter  VI.)  Indeed,  phospham  has  been  obtained  by  heating  the  products  of  the  action
of  ammonia  on  phosphoric  chloride,  as  an  insoluble  and  alkaline  powder,  which  gives
ammonia  and  phosphoric  acid  when  subjected  to  the  action  of  water.  The  same  sub-
stance  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  ammonium  chloride  on  phosphoric  chloride  (PNC1.>  is
first  formed,  and  reacts  further  with  ammonia,  forming  phospham),  and  by  igniting  the
mass  which  is  fonned  by  the  action  of  ammonia  on  phosphorus  trichloride.  Formerly  the
composition  of  phospham  was  supposed  to  be  PHN2,  now  there  is  reason  to  think  that  its
molecular  weight  is  PjHjNe.

The  above  compounds  correspond  with  normal  salts,  but  nitriles  and  amides  eorre-
sponding  to  acid  salts  are  also  possible,  and  they  will  be  acids.  For  example,  the  amide
PO(HO)2(NH2),  and  its  nitrile,  will  be  either  PN(HO),  or  PO(HO){NH),  but  at  all

^rHOSPHOBUS  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OF  OBODP  V.  17)

The  most  important  analogue  of  phosphorus  is  ar*enie,  the  metallic
Ikspect  of  which  and  the  general  character  of  its  compounds  of  the  types
fVsXj  iind  AsX.^  at  once  recall  the  inetals.  The  hydrate  of  its  highest
oxide,  arsenic  acid  {ortho -arsenic  )iL-id),  H^iAsO^,  is  an  oxidising  agent,
and  gives  up  a  portion  of  itci  oxygen  to  many  other  substances  ;  but,
nevertheless,  it  is  very  like  phosphoric  acid.  Mitscherlich  estnblished
the  conception  of  isomorphism  by  comparing  the  salts  of  these  acids, ^^

events  of  the  compoBitimi  PNHiO,.  aad  having  acid  prti|>ertieB.  Tbe  iiaiiiioiiiuin  sail  of
IbiiphoiphonitritirariiKil  i>  odled  phosphuniG  ncii]},  PNH(NH,)Oi,  is  obtained  bj
Uiew^nn  of  uamoniii  on  phosphoric  uihydride,  PgOj  +  INHj  ^  H,0  i-3PNH|NH,|0t.
A  DOD-crystKUiiie  soluble  miLw  is  thus  fotmed,  which  is  diisolyed  in  >  dilute  Bolntioii  of
unmonia  and  prtKipitated  ttith  btu-ium  chloride,  and  Che  resultsnl  bariam  aolt  is  than
decompoiwd  with  vnlpburic  arid,  lUid  thaa  a  aolntion  of  the  acid  of  the  above  oompositioa
in  obtained.

It  in  etident  Imiu  the  theory  of  the  (onuntJoD  of  amidei  aud  nllnlea  (Chapter  IX.)
that  very  many  t^ompoanfld  uF  this  kind  i;an  correspond  with  the  acids  of  |ihoflpharus ;
bul  aa  yet  only  a  lew  are  known.  The  easy  tnuisitions  of  the  ortho-,  meta-,  and  pjro-
pbosphoric  acids,  by  meane  of  tX\e  hjdroj^en  of  ammonia,  into  the  lower  acida,  and  mn-
verael  J,  tend  to  complicate  the  stodylof  this  very  large  claHa  of  eotnpoundH,  and  it  is  rarely
that  the  uatore  of  a  iirodaet  tlinn  ohtuined  can  be  juilged  troin  iU  compoaition  ;  and  this
all  lie  more  that  InHtaDces  of  isomensm  and  polyuieriam,  of  miiture  between  water  of
crystallisation  and  of  conititntioTi,  ike.,  are  here  possible.  Many  data  are  yet  needed
to  enable  on  to  form  a  true  judgment  as  to  llie  composition  and  atrootnre  of  nuoh
uompoundH.  As  the  beat  proof  of  this  we  will  describe  the  very  iuteresbiog  and  most
folly  inVBHti^ted  compound  of  thin  class,  PKCI.j,  called  cklnropliatphamiile,  or  nitrogen
chlarophanpliorite.  It  is  formed  in  small  quantities  wlien  the  vapour  of  pbosiihoria
chloride  is  passed  over  ignited  ul-ammoniHC.  Besson  il8»l)  heated  the  oomponud
PClt^NHs  (which  is  easily  and  directly  loruieid  from  PClj  and  NHj)  under  a  pressure  of
about  GO  mm.  (oF  mercury)  to  300°,  and  obtaiDetl  brilliant  crystals  dF  PNC1.„  which  melted
at  106°  (in  the  [vsidne  after  the  distillation  of  sal-ammoniacal  pbospham).  The  chlorine
ia  it  iu  very  etable — quite  different  from  that  in  phoHphoric  chloride.  Indeed,  the  re-
sultant sobstance  ■>  not  only  insoloble  in  water  (though  soluble  in  alcohol  and  ether),  but
It  is  not  even  moistened  by  it.  and  distils  over,  together  witJi  steam,  without  being  decom-
insed.  In  a  free  state  it  easily  crystallises  in  colonTlesB  prisma,  fuses  at  111°.  boils  at  360'
(Gladstone.  Wichellmus),  and  when  fused  with  potash  gives  potasainni  tMoride  and  the
amidonitrile  of  idioBphoric  acid.  Judging  from  ite  lumiula  and  Uie  siiuplicity  of  its  iwm-
pnsition  and  reactiiina.  it  might  be  thought  tliHl  tile  mulecalar  weight  of  this  substance
would  be  eipressed  by  the  formula  FC1,N,  that  it  correspoi^da  with  PON  and  with  PCI,
ilike  POClj),  wilti  the  TObstilution  of  CI,  by  N.  joiit  aa  in  POCI]  two  atoms  of  chlorine
are  replaoed  by  oxygen ;  but  all  these  sarmiii«s  are  iQcunevt,  because  its  vapour  density
|relem<l  to  hyilrugeu—Oladslone,  Wichelluiusl  -1H3— that  is,  the  molecular  form ota
must  be  three  timua  greater,  PjNjClg.  The  polTmeriaaliun  Itripling)  is  here  of  eiactly
the  same  kind  an  «ilb  the  uitriles.

"  It  is  necesury  to  renutrk  that,  although  arsenic  ia  so  cloaely  analogoua  to  t^os-
phoruB  (especially  in  the  higher  forms  of  camlinatiun,  RXj  and  HXj),  al  the  same  time
it  eihihita  a  certain  resemblance  and  even  iaau]or|ilnsm  with  the  oorreaponding  eoin-
pounds  of  sulpliur  (especi^y  the  metallic  compounds  of  tlie  type  MA  a,  corresponding
with  MS).  Tbu4  compounds  containing  metals,  arsenic,  and  sulphur  are  very  frefjuently
met  with  in  nature. Sometime*  the  relativa  umoimts  of  arsenic  and  snlphur  vary,  so  ,

that  an  iaomorphooa  aubstitntion  between  th«  arsenides  and  sulphides  must  be  reoog-  ^

niaed. Besides  FeS^  (ordinary  pyrites),  and  FeAs^,  iron  forms  an  arsenical  pyrilea  con-  ^H

taiuing  both  sulphur  and  arsenic,  which  From  its  comiwsitiou,  FeAs8 or  FcS.jFeAs),  ^H

180  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

Arsenic  occurs  in  nature,  not  only  combined  with  metals,  but  also,
although  rarely,  native  and  also  in  combination  with  sulphur  in  two
minerals — one  red,  realgar^  AS2S2,  and  the  other  yellow,  orpiment,
AS2S3  (Chapter  XX.,  Note  29).  Arsenic  occurs,  but  more  rarely,  in
the  form  of  salts  of  arsenic  acid — for  instance,  the  so-called  cobalt  and
nickel  blooms,  two  minerals  which  are  found  accompanying  other  cobalt
ores,  are  the  arsenates  of  these  metals.  Arsenic  is  also  found  in  cer-
tain clays  (ochres)  and  has  been  discovered  in  small  quantities  in  some
mineral  springs,  but  it  is  in  general  of  rarer  occurrence  in  nature  than
phosphorus.  Arsenic  is  most  frequently  extracted  from  arsenical
pyrites,  FeSAs,  which,  when  roasted  without  access  of  air,  evolves  the
vapour  of  arsenic,  ferrous  sulphide  being  left  behind.  It  is  also  obtained
by  heating  arsenious  anhydride  with  charcoal,  in  which  case  carbonic
oxide  is  evolved.  In  general,  the  oxides  and  other  compounds  are  very
easily  reduced.  Solid  arsenic  is  a  steel-grey  brittle  7netal,  having  a
bright  lustre  and  scaly  structure.  Its  specific  gravity  is  5*7.  It  is
opaque  and  infusible,  but  volatilises  as  a  yellow  vapour  which  on  cooling
deposits  rhombohedral  crystals.^®  *>*"  The  vapour  density  of  arsenic  is
150  times  greater  than  that  of  hydrogen — that  is,  its  molecule,  like  that
of  phosphorus,  contains  4  atoms,  AS4.  When  heated  in  the  air,  arsenic
easily  oxidises  into  white  arsenious  anhydride,  AS2O3,  but  even  at  the
ordinary  temperature  it  loses  its  lustre  (becomes  dull),  owing  to  the
formation  of  a  coating  of  a  lower  oxide.  The  latter  appears  to  be  as
volatile  as  arsenious  anhydride,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  is  owing  to
the  presence  of  this  compound  that  the  vapours  of  arsenious  compounds,
when  heated  with  charcoal  (for  example,  in  the  reducing  flame  of  a  blow-
pipe), have  the  characteristic  smell  of  garlic,  because  the  vapour  of
arsenic  itself  has  not  this  odour.

Arsenic  easily  combines  with  bromine  and  chlorine ;  ^*  nitric  acid

50  bb  According  to  Retgers  (1898)  tlie  arsenic  mirror  (see  farther  on)  is  an  unstable
variety  of  metallic  arsenic,  whilst  the  brown  product  which  is  formed  together  with  it  in
Marsh's  apparatus  is  a  lower  hydride  AsH.  Schuller  and  McLeod  (1894),  however,  recog-
nise a  i>eculiar  yellow  variety  of  arsenic.

'•  Hydrochloric  acid  dissolves  arsenious  anhydride  in  considerable  quantities,  and
this  is  probably  owing  to  the  formation  of  unstable  compounds  in  which  the  arsenious
anhydride  plays  the  part  of  a  base.  A  comiwund  called  arsenious  oxychloride,  having
the  coniix)sition  AsOCl,  is  even  known.  It  is  formed  when  arsenious  anhydride  is  adde<l
little  by  little  to  boiling  arsenic  trichloride,  As..,05  + AsCls-SAsOCl.  It  is  a  transparent
substance,  which  fumes  in  air,  and  combines  with  water  to  form  a  crystalline  mass  having
the  coniiK)sition  As.,(OH)4C1.2.  When  heated  it  decomposes  into  arsenious  chloride  and
a  fresh  oxychloride  of  a  more  complex  composition,  As„0^Cl2.  Araenic  trichloride,  wlien
treated  with  a  small  quantity  of  water,  forms  the  crystalline  compound,  As..,(HO)|('l.^>,
mentioned  above.  Tliest^  compounds  resemble  the  basic  salts  of  bismuth  and  alu-
miniuni.  The  existence  of  these  compounds  shows  that  arsenic  is  of  a  more  metallic
or  basic  characti-r  than  [>hosphoru8. Nevertheless  arsniie  trichloride^  AsClj,  resembles

PHOSPHOBl'S  AND  THE  OTHER  BLEMENTS  OP  OROUP  V. 181

and  aqua  regia  also  oxidise  it  into  the  higher  oxide,  or  rather  its  hjdrate,
nrsenic  scid.*^ As  for  as  is  known,  it  does  not  decompose  steara,  and

jili(M|ibnru»  iritliluridE:  in  luuiy  rrspecl«.  Il  tn.  abuiued  Ijy  tlie  iiir-xi  iu-(ioii  i)t  uliluriue
nu  luwaif.  <ir  by  dialiUiii);  a  niiilnrc  o!  coiamon  lult,  snlplmric  hoU,  unl  UMi
■Iride.  The  UWer  lunle  of  [irBpnnilion  already  indiealei!  the  htnic  pfoperlim'
Araenioua  cblorido  inn  coIodtIeiib  oily  liqpid,  boiling  at  ISO°,  sad  liBvin);  k  ap.  gr.  lit  9*91).  t(
luuw»  In  nir  like  other  clilorujLhydTidvH,  bat  it  ia  mutli  more  slowly  And  impuHvotly  deuom-
poaed  by  iriiter  tliui  phuiphorUH  trichloride.  A  cotiudenble  quantity  ot  water  iq  retjuirvd
(or  its  complete  decomposition  into  hydrochlorir  acid  and  araenionB  juihydride.  It  fonua
an  exeeilaut  oiaiupleof  tbe  tranutiou  from  true  metallic  chiorideii  to  tnie  chJotiuiliydridn
ol  tho  acids.  II  bardly  combines  icitli  chlorine,  ix.  if  AiClj  is  formed  il  IB  very  unstuble.
Anenie  Iribniiiiidc,  AiBrj,  is  formed  u  ■  cryitalline  lubstancv,  fasiug  at  'JU°  uid  boil-
ing at  390°,  by  the  direct  action  of  metallic  arnenic  on  a  F^lution  of  bromine  in  iivban
Inmlphide,  the  Utler  being  then  eraporated.  The  specific  gravity  ot  armnia  tribiomide
in  BSD.  Ccytttollinu  arsenic  tri-iodide,  Anlj,  havii^  a  ap.  gi.  4'IU),  may  be  obtained  in  a
like  nunuer :  it  may  be  diaaolvod  in  water,  and  on  evapomtiou  »epanit«ii  unt  from  the
salntion  in  no  anbydniiiB  state — that  is.  it  in  nat  decoinpcned — anrt  cauH«<]Dentlj  beliavea
hint  metallic  salta.  Aneuie  trifiuorirU,  AvFs,  ia  obtuned  by  healing  flnor  iipar  and
anwDioiu  anhydride  with  sulphuric  acid.  It  ia  a  fuming,  colourlenii,  and  very  paisonoDH
liquid,  which  boils  at  A8°  and  ba«  a  up.  gr.  of  S'TS.  It  is  decomposed  by  water,  It  ia  very
remarkable  that  Hnorine  torniH  a  penlatlaoride  of  araenic  also,  nlthoagh  Ihia  componnd
has  not  yet  hwfn  obtained  in  a  sepantte  atate,  bnt  only  in  combination  with  jiotasaiiun
Rnoride,  Thi»  conipiiand,  K]A«F»,  is  formed  aa  prismatic  crjatalH  when  potaaiiam
amenale,  SjAaO,.  ia  disaoWed  in  hydroflnoric  acid.

^  ArtBiiif  aciil^  H^aO^,  oomaponding  vitb  orthaphosphoriu  acid,  i*  Formed  by
Olidiaing  araenions  anhydride  with  nitric  acid,  and  evaporating  tlie  resultant  eolutioo
until  it  attains  a  ap.  gr.  of  3*3;  on  cooling  it  separates  in  cryatola  having  the  above
ciKr^K>4ilion.  Tliia  hydrate  Dorreapondfl  with  bLe  normal  aalU  of  araenic  iicid;  bat  on
itisaolving  in  water  (without  heatingi,  and  on  cooling  a  strong  aolution.ctyslala  containing
a  graaler  amount  ol  water,  namely,  (AhHsO^JbH^O,  aeporate.  This  water,  like  water  it
CTyBtalliaation,  ia  very  easily  eipelled  at  100".  At  120'  cryatols  having  a  conipiailion
identical  *ilh  Ihiit  of  pyrophoapboric  acid,  AajH^O;,  separate,  but  water,  ou  diaeolving
this  hydrate  with  the  development  at  heat,  (orms  a  solution  in  no  way  diSering  horn  a
tdlabion  of  ordinary  araenia  aoid,  so  thai  it  is  uot  an  independent  pyroanenic  acid  that
i<  formed.  Neither  ia  there  any  true  ajialogne  of  metapliospliuric  add,  although  the
Mimpoond  AsHOj  ia  formed  at  300°,  and  on  solidifying  formi.  n  mass  having  a  pearly
lustre  and  sparingly  Botuble  in  cold  water  :  hut  on  coming  into  contact  with  worm  water
it  beeoineN  very  hot,  and  gives  ordinary  orthoaraenic  acid  in  solution.  Arstmie  acid
(arms  tliree  leriea  of  saltn,  which  are  perfectly  oualogona  to  the  three  aeriea  of  ortho-
phoaphatea.  Thua  the  noniud  udt,  KjAsO,.  is  formed  by  fusing  the  other  potaesitim
aroenates  with  potassium  carbonate ;  it  is  soluble  in  water  and  crystallises  in  needles
which  do  uot  contain  water.  Di-potoseiuiii  lurHetiate,  KiHAnOt,  is  formed  in  solution
by  niinng  iwtsjwinm  carbonate  and  ataenic  acid  until  carbonic  anhydride  lAeHsea  to  b«
erolTiid;  it  does  not  crystallise,  and  boa  ■□  allialine  reaction;  hence  it  corresponds
jNirtectly  with  tlie  sodium  phosphate.  As  was  mentioned  ilMTe,  anenie  acid  itself
aula  as  an  Qiidiidng  agent;  for  eiunple^  il  is  used  in  the  mannfacture  of  aniline  dyes
for  oiidiaing  the  aniline,  and  it  is  preparwl  in  large  quantities  tor  this  purpoae.
When  sniphurettad  hydrogen  is  passed  through  its  solution,  snlphnric  acid  and
aneniona  anhydride  ore  obtained  in  solution.  Arsenic  aoid  is  very  easily  sotnble  in
water,  and  its  solution  Iws  on  exceedingly  oi^id  reaction,  and  when  boiled  vitli  liydn--
chloric  acid  evolvea  I'hloriue,  like  eeletiic,  chromic,  manganic,  and  cerl«in  ulher  highir
mBtotUc  aciils.

Jnnnir  iiiiAKdnJf,  AsgOg,  is  produced  when  araenic  acid  is  heated  to  redness. It
iretully  boiled,  aa  at  a  bright  red  bast  it  decompouea  into  oxygen  andarMnionq

182  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTKY

it  acts  exceedingly  slowly  on  those  acids,  like  hydrochloric,  which  are
not  capable  of  oxidising.

Arseniuretted  hydrogen^ arsine, ASH3, resembles phosphuretted
hydrogen  in  many  respects. This  colourless  gas,  which  liquefies  into  a
mobile  liquid at  —40°,  has  a  disagreeable  garlic-like  odour,  is  only
slightly  soluble  in  water,  and is exceedingly  poisonous. Even  in  a
small  quantity  it  causes  great  suffering,  and  if  present  to  any  consider-
able amount  in  air  it  even  causes  death. The  other  compounds  of  arsenic
are  also  poisonous,  with  the  exception  of  the  insoluble  sulphur  compound
and  some  compounds  of  arsenic  acid. Arseniuretted  hydrogen,  AsH^,
is  obtained  by  the  action  of  water  on  the  alloy  of  arsenic  and  sodium,
sodium  hydroxide  and arseniuretted hydrogen  being  formed. It  is
also  formed  by  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on  the  alloy  of  arsenic  and
zinc  :  ZngAsj  +  3H2S04=2AsH3-|-3ZnS04.^^ The  oxygen  compounds
of  arsenic  are  very  easily  reduced  by  the  action  of  hydrogen  at  the
moment  of its evolution  from  acids,  and the  reduced arsenic then
combines  with  the  hydrogen  ;  hence,  if  a  certain  amount  of  an  oxygen
compound  of arsenic  be  put  into  an  apparatus containing zinc  and
sulphuric  acid  (and  thus  serving  for  the  evolution  of  hydrogen),  the
hydrogen  evolved  will  contain  arseniuretted  hydrogen. In  this  case  it
is  diluted  with  a  considerable  amount  of  hydrogen. But  its  presence
in  the  most  minute  quantities  may  be  easily  recognised  from  the  fact
that  it  is  easily  decomipoaed  by  heat  (200°  according  to  Brunn)  into
metallic  arsenic  and  hydrogen,  and  therefore  if  such  impure  hydrogen
be  passed  through  a  moderately- heated  tube  metallic  arsenic  will  be
deposited  as  a  bright  layer  on  the  part  of  the  tube  which  was  heated
{see  Note  30  bis). This  reaction is  so sensitive  that  it  enables  the
most  minute  traces  of  arsenic  to  be  discovered  ;  hence  it  is  employed
in  medical  jurisprudence,  as  a  test  in  poisoning  cases. It  is  easy  to
discover  the  presence  of  arsenic  in  common  zinc,  copper,  sulphuric  and
hydrochloric  acids,  <kc.  by  this  method. It  is  obvious  that  in  testing
for  poison  by  Marsh's  apparatus  it  is  necessary  to  take  zinc  and  sul-
phuric acid  quite  free  from  arsenic. The  arsenic  deposited  in  the  tube
may  be  driven  as  a  volatile  metal  from  one  place  to  another  in  the
current  of hydrogen  evolved,  owing  to  its  volatility. This  foniis  a
distinction  between  arseniuretted  and  an timoniu retted  hydrogen,  which

anhydride,  ArKenic  anhydride  is  an  amorphous  substance  almost  entirely  insoluble  in
water,  but  it  attracts  moisture  from  tlie  air,  deliquesces,  and  passes  into  the  acid.  Hot
water  produces  this  transformation  with  great  ease.

^  The  formation  of  arseniuretted  hydrogen  is  accompanied  by  the  absorption  of  37,000
heat  units,  while  phosphine  evolves  18,000  (Ogier),  and  ammonia  27,000.  Sodium  (O'G  p.c.)
amalgam,  with  a  strong  solution  of  As.jO.-^,  gives  a  gas  containing  86  vols,  of  arsenic  and
14  vols,  of  hydrogen  (Cavazzij,

PHOSPHORira  AND  THE  OTHER  ELES1ENT8  OF  OROIT  V. 188

Eis  decomposed  by  heat  in  just  the  same  wny  na  arseniuretted  hydrogen,
I  but  the  mirror  given  by  Sb  is  not  so  volatile  as  that  formed  by  Aa.

If  Iiydrogeii  coutnina  araeniu retted  hydrogen,  it  also  gives  metjillic
■  Arsenic  when  it  burns,  because  in  the  reducing  flume  of  hydrogen  the

urienic  U  liepotittd  m

UtntnK  Bl'anLLD  it  poural  tbroi
ttlun  o( »  mlTTur  uf  sneniri  ■mi
t  lifhlsd,  Kiul  >  popceliiiii  ill»h
ii  ilriBl  by  pnulng  thrniifih  tl

OJ^gen  attracted  combines  entirely  with  the  hydrogen  and  not  with
tite  arsenic,  so  that  if  a  cold  object,  auch  as  a  piece  of  china,  be  held  in
tthe  hydrt^en  dame  the  arsenic  wiil  be  deposited  upon  it  as  a  metallic

The  most  common  compound  of  t

i  the  .'wlid  and  volatile

Thin  spot,  ur  the  metallic  rin
'iHted  u  to  whether  it  in  really  d
rtdDMd  in  the  hydrogen  Same — (o

from  the  [iw
and  antimony  behaTes  i

I  IMUUel

lich  ia  d«)iONiCed  OD  tlie  heated  tube,  mayeaiuly  hu
o  srwnie  or  iiroceedx  from  w>me  other  tiabatoiiF«
itaiie«,  carbon  or  ontimoiij.  The  aecesaity  for  din-
iy  i»  all  the  moFe  frequently  enooonlered  in  luodiuil
preparations  of  antimony  ore  very  frequently  u«sd  an
hjdiDgen  npparatua  juitt  like  aTHenie,  and  tbece-
re  in  making  an  inTestigiition  loi  poiBoniiig  by  antenia  it  is  easy  to  mistake  it  for
itimcmy.  The  best  method  to  diatingnish  between  the  metallic  upota  of  anemc  and
antimony  ie  U>  teat  tbem  with  a  aolution  of  lodiimi  hypochlorite,  free  from  chlorine,  be-
thiii  will  dinsolvs  anenic  and  not  antimony.  Such  a  solution  u  eoiUy  obtained  by
tt«  doable  decomposition  of  salations  of  Midium  carbonate  and  bleoobing  powder.  A
1  of  potoKKium  chlorate  acts  in  tha  Bamn  manner,  only  more  slowly.  Further
lars  must  be  looked  for  in  auolytioal  works.

minretted  hydrogen,  hke  phospburetled  hydrogen,  is  only  ulightly  soluble  in  water.
•llcaliae  properties — that  is,  it  dooi  not  combine  with  acids — and  acta  aa  a
g  agent.  Wlien  passed  into  a  solution  of  silver  nitrate  it  giveii  a  blackish  brown
«te  of  metallic  silver,  the  arsenic  being  oxidised.  If  acting  on  copper  solpbata
liior  natts,  arseaioretted  hydrogen  sometiuiee  forma  arsenides — i.e.  it  rednces  the
niMitllic  salt  with  its  liydrugen,  and  it  itAcU  redocvd  to  aisenia.  Bulpbnric,  and  even
hydrochloric,  acid  redncea  arseuiuretted  hydrogen  to  arsaniE,  and  it  is  still  more  easily
deoompoaed  by  arseiiious  chloride,  and  with  pbospboroos  chloride  it  givea  the  compound
PAs.  Ananinretted  bydrogeu  gives  metallic  arsenic  with  an  acid  solution  of  Hrseniuus
uliydride  (Tivoli).

i

184  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

arseniotts  anhydride,  AsjOg,  which  corresponds  with  phosphorous  and
nitrous  anhydrides.  This  very  poisonous,  colourless,  and  sweet-tasting
substance  is  generally  known  under  the  name  of  arsenic,  or  whiU
arsenic.  The  corresponding  hydrate  is  as  yet  unknown  ;  its  solutions,
when  evaporated,  yield  crystals  of  arsenious  anhydride.  It  is  chiefly
prepared  for  the  dyer,  and  is  also  used  as  a  vermin  killer,  and  sometimes
in  medicine  ;  it  is  a  product  from  which  all  other  compounds  of  arsenic
can  be  prepared.  It  is  obtained  as  a  by-product  in  roasting  cobalt
and  other  ores  containing  arsenic.  Arsenical  pyrites  are  sometimes
purposely  roasted  for  the  extraction  of  arsenious  anhydride.  When
arsenical  ores  are  burnt  in  the  air,  the  sulphur  and  arsenic  are  converted
into  the  oxides  AsjOg  and  SO2.  The  former  is  a  solid  at  the  ordinary
temperature,  and  thQ  latter  gaseous,  and  therefore  the  arsenious  anhy-
dride is  deposited  as  a  sublimate  in  the  cooler  portion  of  the  flues
through  which  the  vapours  escape  from  the  furnace.  It  collects  in
condensing  chambers  especially  constructed  in  the  flues.  The  deposit
is  collected,  and  after  being  distilled  gives  arsenious  anhydride  in  the
form  of  a  vitreous  non- crystalline  mass.  This  is  one  of  the  varieties  of
arsenious  anhydride,  which  is  also  known  in  two  crystalline  forms.
When  sublimed — i.e.  when  it  rapidly  passes  from  the  state  of  vapour
to  the  solid  state — it  appears  in  the  regular  system  in  the  form  of  octa-
hedra.^^  It  is  obtained  in  the  same  form  when  it  is  crystallised  from
acid  solutions.  The  specific  gravity  of  the  crystals  is  3-7.  The  other
crystalline  form  (in  prisms)  belongs  to  the  rhombohedral  system,  and  is
also  formed  by  sublimation  when  the  crystals  are  deposited  on  a  heated
surface,  or  when  it  is  crystallised  from  alkaline  solutions.^^

5*  According  to  MitBcherlich'Bdetennination,  the  vapour  density  of  arKenious  anhydride
is  199  (H^  1) — that  is,  it  answerH  to  the  molecuhir  formuhi  AsjO^.  Probably  this  is  con-
nected with  the  fact  that  the  molecule  of  free  arsenic  contains  Ah|.  V.  Meyer  and  Billz,
however,  showed  (1889)  that  at  a  temperature  of  about  1,700'^  the  vapour  density  of  arsenic
corresponds  with  the  molecule  As^,  and  not  A84,  as  at  lower  temperatures.

5«  Arsenioup  anhydride  is  obtained  in  an  amorphous  form  after  prolonged  heating  at
a  temperature  near  to  that  at  which  it  volatilises,  or,  better  still,  by  heating  it  in  a  closed
vessel.  It  then  fuses  to  a  colourless  liquid,  which  on  cooling  forms  a  transparent  ritreous
mass,  whose  specific  gravity  is  only  slightly  less  than  that  of  the  crystalline  anhydride.
On  cooling,  this  vitreous  mass  undergoes  an  internal  change,  in  which  it  crystallises
and  becomes  opaque,  and  acquires  the  appearance  of  porcelain.  The  following  difference
between  the  vitreous  and  opaque  varieties  is  very  remarkable :  when  the  vitreous  variety
is  dissolved  in  strong  and  hot  hydrochloric  acid  it  gives  crystals  of  the  anhydride  on
cooling,  and  this  crystallisation  is  accompanied  by  the  einissiou  of  light  (which  is  visible
in  the  dark),  and  the  entire  liquid  glows  as  the  crystals  begin  to  separate.  The  opaque
variety  does  not  emit  light  when  the  crystals  separate  from  its  hydrochloric  acid  solution.
It  is  also  remarkable  that  the  vitreous  variety  passes  into  the  opaque  form  when  it  is
pounded — that  is^  under  the  action  of  a  series  of  blows.  Tlius,  several  varieties  of
arsenious  anhydride  are  known,  but  as  yet  they  are  not  characterised  by  any  special
chemical  distinctions,  and  even  differ  but  little  in  their  specific  gravities,  so  that  it  cannot
be  said  that  the  above  differences  are  due  to  any  isomeric  transformation — that  is,  to  an

■  PHOSPHORUS  AND  ISE  OTHER  ELBHBNTS  OF  QBOUF  V. 185

B  SolutioDB  of  arflpnioua  nnhjdride  have  a  sweet  metallic  taste,  and
■give  aftirbte  acid  reaction.  Its  solubititj'  increases  with  the  iidmiicture
B  of  acids  and  alkalis.  This  shows  the  property  of  arseoious  anhydride
I  of  forming  salts  with  acids  ami  alkalis.  And  in  fact  compounds  of  it
K  with  hydrochlonc  acid  (Nute  31),  Eulphuric  anhydride  (wf  further  on),
li.Bnd  with  thp  alkali  oxidee  are  known. ^'  If  silver  nitrate  be  added  to
la  solution  of  arsenious  anhydride,  it  does  not  give  any  precipitate  unless
m.%  certain  amount  of  the  arsenious  anhydride  is  saturated  with  an  alkali

■  • — for  instance,  ammonia.  It  then  gives  a  precipitate  of  silver  nrsenite,
ft.AgsAsO).  This  is  yellow,  soluble  in  an  excess  of  ammonia,  and  aiihy-
V^rous ;  it  distinctly  shows  that  arsenious  acid  is  tribasic,  and  that  it
Vdiffers  in  this  respect  from  phosphorous  acid,  in  whicb  only  two  atoms  of
Wkydrogen  can  be  replaced  by  metals.^" The  feeble  acid  character  of

•rrangeDHjnt  of  thu  atonw  in  the  molecule^but  jirobablj  unly  depend  on  a,  diBerenoe  in
Ihe  tliBtribotiuu  o(  the  molecnleB,  ur,  id  other  termH,  ar?  iihyaical  and  not  clieimcal
vtrUitioiia.  One  pkrt  of  the  ritHou«  unbydride  reqnirw  twelve  purts  nf  boiliug  wftter
tar  ilH  nolDtioD,  or  twenty-five  partB  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  The  opaqae  rariety  is
Imh  soluble,  und  ut  the  ordinary  temperatore  reqnires  about  aeveuty  parte  of  water  for
iIb  aolation.

"  AmeniaUB  anhydride  does  n6t  oxidise  in  air.  either  in  a  dry  alale  or  in  aulutian,
but  in  Ihe  preaenc«  of  alfcalis  it  abBorba  oxygen  from  the  air.  and  acta  bb  an  excellent
redndng  agenl.  Thin  probably  'a  connected  with  the  fact  that  VBenic  acid  ia  much
more  energetic  tlian  arseniau*  acid,  and  that  it  is  arsenic  acid  which  it  lornied  by  the
oxidation  of  the  latter  in  the  pteaeDce  of  aJkaliB.  Aineoiaaa  anhydride  is  eaHily  redooej
to  artenic  by  nuiny  melala,  eren  1>;  copper-

"  ThefeebleueKaof  the  acid  properlie»of  arneiuouB  anhydride  iBseen  in  thetact that  if
it  be  dimotied  in  ammmiik  water,  and  then  a  still  Btronger  Bolutinn  of  ammonia  be  added,
prinnaticeryBtalit  nepanite  having  the  poroposition  of  ammoninm  metarBenite.  NIL^sOj.
'  monium  aalt  deliqaeitueH  in  air,  and  Insea  all  ita  ammonia.  The  niBgDCBinm  salt
itallic.  Mgj(AaOs|„ ;  it  is  iniiolDble  in  water,  and  is  formed  by  mixing  an  ammo-
ilDtion  □!  arBsninDB  anhydride  with  an  anuooniacal  solution  of  a  magnesinin  salt.
olnble  even  in  iinunonia,  altboogh  it  disBolve*  in  an  eicese  of  acids.  Hagneuoni
le  gives  the  same  salt  with  araenionB  Bolatiima,  and  lience  magnesia  is  one  of
t  antidotes  For  arwenic  pniaoniug.  Tlit;  ttrnntUemif  rujijKr  tse  moch  (wed  IQ
infactnrc  of  colonn,  mure  eapecially  of  pigmvnta.  They  are  diBtingniBhed  by
insolnbility  in  water  and  by  their  remarkably  virid  green  colour,  but  at  tlie  Bume
hj  their  poisonoUB  character.  Not  only  do  sach  pigiDentH  applied  to  wall  i»pers  or
oUm  materialB  easily  doat  oft  from  them,  but  tliey  give  exhalatioDB  containing  AaHj.  The
CuXj,  when  mixed  with  an  allcnlioe  solnUon  of  arBenioas  acid,  give  a  jfreen
ofacoppeTBaltcalledScAwIe'a  fTfrn.  Its  umpoHtion  is  probably  CoBAaOj.
liBBolven  it,  and  gives  a  colourleas  Bolnlion,  eontaining  cnprou*  atienaW — lliat
npound  IB  rednced  and  the  arsenic  anhjected  to  a  further  oxidation.
■o«^led  Sehtomn/url  green  was  still  nuire  uted.  especially  in  ronner  times;  it  ib
>n  cupric  aalt,  which  reaenibles  the  preoeiliug  in  many  respects,  hot
diffsrent  tint.  It  is  prepared  by  mixing  boiling  snlatioBB  of  arxenioua  acid  and
acetate.  Arsenious  acid  forms  an  insolnble  componnd  with  ferric  hydroxide,  re.
phosphate :  aud  this  is  the  rvasou  why  freshly  precipitated  oxide  of  iron  is
emt^ed  an  an  aiiliJalrfor  anenie.  The  freshly  precipitated  oxide  of  iron,  taken  im-
mediately alter  poisomiig  by  arsenic,  convetis  the  anenious  acid  into  an  insoluble  stale,
by  lonaing  a  compound  uu  which  the  acida  of  the  stomech  have  no  action,  so  that  the
poisoning  cwinnt  pnwi-ed. It  Is remorkiiliic thiit  the inhnhitiints  of  cirtsin mr

186  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

arsenious  anhydride  is  confirmed  by  the  formation  of  saline  compounds
with  acids.  In  this  respect  the  most  remarkable  example  is  the
anhydrous  compound  with  sulphuric  acid,  having  the  composition
As^OsjSOa.  It  is  formed  in  the  roasting  of  arsenical  pyrites  in  those
spaces  where  the  arsenious  anhydride  condenses,  a  portion  of  the
sulphurous  anhydride  being  converted  into  sulphuric  anhydride,  SOj,
at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  of  the  air.  The  compound  in  question
forms  colourless  tabular  crystals,  which  are  decomposed  by  water  with
formation  of  sulphuric  acid  and  arsenious  anhydride.^^

Antimany  (stibium),  Sb^l20,  is  another  analogue  of  phosphorus.
In  its  external  appearance  and  the  properties  of  its  compounds  it  re-
sembles the  metals  still  more  closely  than  arsenic.  In  fact,  antimony
has  the  appearance,  lustre,  and  many  of  the  characteristic  properties  of
the  metals.  Its  oxide,  SbjOs,  exhibits  the  earthy  appearance  of  rust
or  of  lime,  and  has  distinctly  basic  properties,  although  it  corresponds
with  nitrous  and  phosphorous  anhydride,  and  is  able,  like  them,  to  give
saline  compounds  with  bases.  At  the  same  time  antimony  presents,  in
the  majority  of  its  compounds,  an  entire  analogy  with  phosphorus  and
arsenic.  Its  compounds  belong  to  the  type  SbXj  and  SbXg.  It  is
found  in  nature  chiefly  in  the  form  of  sulphide,  SbaSg.  This  substance
sometimes  occurs  in  large  masses  in  mineral  veins  and  is  known  in
mineralogy  under  the  name  of  antimony  glance  or  atihnitey  and  com-
mercially as  antimony  (Chapter  XX.,  Note  29).  The  most  abundant
deposits  of  antimony  ore  occur  in  Portugal  (near  Oporto  on  the  Douro).
Besides  which  antimony  partially  or  totally  replaces  arsenic  in  some
minerals  ;  thus,  for  example,  a  compound  of  antimony  sulphide  and
arsenic  sulphide  with  silver  sulphide  is  found  in  red  silver  ore.  But  in
every  case  antimony  is  a  rather  rare  metal  found  in  few  localities.  In
Russia  it  is  known  to  occur  in  Daghestan  in  the  Caucasus.  It  is
extracted  chiefly  for  the  preparation  of  alloys  with  lead  and  tin,
which  are  used  for  casting  printing  type.^" Some  of  its  compounds  are

tainoUH  countrieH  accuHtom  themselveH  to  taking  arsenic,  as  a  means  which,  according  to
their  experience,  helps  to  overcome  the  fatigue  of  mountain  ascents.  Arsenious  anliydride
and  certain  of  its  salts  are  also  used  in  medicine,  naturally  only  in  small  quantities.
When  taken  internally  arsenic  passes  into  the  blood,  and  is  mainly  excreted  by  the
urine.

"'•*  Adie  (1H85IJ  obtained  compounds  of  AsoOj  with  1,  2,  4,  and  8  SO3  by  the  direct
action  of  ordinary  and  Nordhausen  sulphuric  acid  upon  As-^O-.  Weber  had  previously
obtained  Ah.>0;jS03  (which  disengages  SO5  at  225*^),  and  also  other  As-^O^/zSOj  (where
n  -3,  (>.  aiidH),  by  the  acti<m  of  the  vapours  of  SO-  upon  As-^.O^ata  definite  temperature.
The  com[M)und  As-^O-.HSOs  loses  SO3  at  100^.  Oxide  of  antimony,  Sb-^O^,  gives  similar
comiK)unds.  Adie  (1891)  also  obtained  (by  the  action  of  SO-  upon  H3PO4)  a  compound
H3PO43SO-,  in  the  fonn  of  a  viscous  liquid  decomposed  by  water.

*^*  Printers'  tyjie  consists  of  an  alloy  known  as  '  type-metal,'  containing  usually
about  15  parts  of  antimony  to  85  parts  of  lead  ;  sometimes  (for  example,  for  stereotypes)

'  PHOSPHORl'S  AND  TTIE  OTHBE  KLBMENTS  OP  GHOIIP  V. 187

IvW  used  in  medicine,  the  most  important  in  this  respect  being  antimony
pentasulphide,  Sb,8j  (m/fiir  aitrntinn  aiilimonii),  and  tartar  emetic,
which  is  a  double  salt  derived  from  tartaric  acid  and  has  thR  composi-
tion C,H,K(SbO)Og.  Even  the  native  antimony  sulpiiide  is  used  in
large  quantities  aa  a  purgative  for  horses  and  dogs.  Metallic  antiniony
is  extracted  from  the  glance,  ShjS.;,  by  roasting,  when  the  sulphur
burns  away  and  the  antimony  oxidises,  forming  the  oxide  SbjOj,  which
is  then  heated  with  charcoal,  and  thus  reduced  to  a  melallic  gtate.  The
■'eduction  may  be  carrietl  on  in  the  laboratory  on  a  small  scale  by
fusing  the  sulphide  with  iron  which  takes  up  the  sulphur, '"•>'•

Metallic  antimony  hiis  a  white  colour  and  a  brilliant  lustre  ;  it
remains  untarnished  in  the  air,  for  the  metal  does  not  oxidise  at  the
ordinary  temperature.  It  crystallises  in  rhomlwhedra,  and  always
shows  a  distinctly  crystalline  structure  which  gives  it  iiuite  a  different
aspect  from  the  majority  of  the  metals  yet  known.  It  is  most  like
tellurium  in  this  respect.  Antimony  is  brittle,  so  that  it  is  very  easily
powdered  ;  its  sijecific  gravity  is  (i'7,  it  melts  at  about  433%  but  only
volatilises  at  a  bright  red  heat.  When  heated  in  the  air — fi>r  instance,
before  the  blow-pipe--it  bums  and  gives  white  otlouvlese  fumea,  c<m-
siating  of  the  oxide.  This  oxide  is  termed  antimonious  oxide,  although
it  might  as  well  be  termed  antimonious  anhydride.  It  is  given  the
first  name  because  in  the  majority  of  cases  its  compounds  with  acids
are  used,  but  it  forms  compounds  with  the  alkalis  just  as  easily.

Antimonious  oxide,  like  arseniaus  anhydride,  crystallises  either  in
regular  octahedra  or  in  rhombic  prisins  ;  itsapecitic  gravity  is  5-56  ;  when
heated  it  becomes  yellow  and  then  fuses,  and  when  further  heated  in  air
it  oxidises,  forming  an  oxide  of  th«  composition  Sb^Oi.  Antimonious
oxide  is  insoluble  in  water  and  in  nitric  acid,  but  it  easily  dissolves  in
strong  hydrochloric  acid  and  in  aUtalia,  as  well  as  in  tartaric  acid  or
solutions  of  its  acid  salts.  When  d  issolved  in  the  latter  it  forms  tai  tar
emetic. It  is  precipitated  from  its  solutions  in  alkalis  and  acids  (by

from  111  tn  IJ  iK'r  F^iit.  Bi  or  n  ]vr  leiit.  Sn  bii<I  even  Ca  in  Aiitlnit.  Tb«  hardDesH  of  tlie
1  is  HSHiitial  [nr  tirinting,  eirideotly  dependii  upon  the  preneiieo  of  Bntinioijy,
>u  inniit  bo  nvoiiJoil,  mni*  tliis  rendiirB  the  »11oy  brittle,  md  the  ty|>e  »fl»T  a

itimnn;  a  iirepued  in  a  state  of  gieater  parity  by  heatini;  with  clurooal  ths
obtkioed  by  thu  action  of  nitric  will  on  tlie  impare  commerulkl  metijljo  wiliniony,
bued  on  the  buit  tWt  by  Ui»  ai'tion  of  the  acid,  antiinouy  lorme  the  oxide  SbjOj,
L*  but  slightly  Holable  in  wBtor.  Tlie  ttrHSnic,  which  n  nearly  always  present,  (orma
r  ateemoas  uid  arsenic  acids,  and  remains  in  aolntion.  The  purest  autinumy  is
ea«ily  obtained  From  tartar  emetic,  by  heating  it  with  a  small  quantity  of  uitnr.  Metidl'o
antimony  also  occurs,  although  ruely,  native  ;  and  as  it  is  Tery  easily  obtiuned,  it  was
known  to  the  aloheniiiita  of  tbe  fifteenth  century.  Very  pure  metallic  antimony  mny  lie
dapositt^  by  the  electric  current  from  a  mUition  ol  sntimonious  sulphide  in  sodioDi
~  '  " ,fter  tht  addition  ol  audiiiiii  t-liloritlv  U.  <he  s^huion.

i

190  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Bi=208.  Here,  as  in  the  other  groups,  the  basic,  metallic,  proper-
ties increase  with  the  atomic  weight.  Bismuth  does  not  give  any
hydrogen  compound  and  the  highest  oxide,  BiaO.,,  is  a  very  feeble
acid  oxide.  Bismuthous  oxide,  BijOs,  is  a  base,  and  bismuth  itself
a  perfect  metal.  To  explain  the  other  properties  of  bismuth  it  must
further  be  remarked  that  in  the  eleventh  series  it  follows  mercury,
thallium  and  lead,  whose  atomic  weights  are  near  to  that  of  bismuth,
and  that  therefore  it  resembles  them  and  more  especially  its  nearest
neighbour,  lead.  Although  PbO  and  PbOj  represent  types  different
from  BijOa  and  BijO^,  they  resemble  them  in  many  respects,  even  in
their  external  appearance,  moreover  the  lower  oxides  both  of  Pb  and  Bi
are  basic  and  the  higher  acid,  which  easily  evolve  oxygen.  But  judging
by  the  formula,  Blfis  is  a  more  feeble  base  than  PbO.  They  botii  easily
give  basic  salts.

Bismuth  forms  compounds  of  two  types,  BiXg  and  BiX.^,*^  which
entirely  recall  the  two  types  we  have  already  established  for  the
compounds  of  lead.  Just  us  in  the  case  of  lead,  the  type  PbXj  is
basic,  stable,  easily  formed,  and  passes  with  difficulty  into  the  higher
and  lower  types,  which  are  unstable,  so  also  in  the  case  of  bismuth  the
type  of  combination  BiXg  is  the  usual  basic  form.  The  higher  type  of
•combination,  BiXg,^^  in  fact  behaves  toward  this  stable  type,  BiXg,  in
exactly  the  same  manner  as  lead  dioxide  does  to  the  monoxide  ;  and
bismuthic  acid  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  chlorine  on  bismuth  oxide
suspended  in  water,  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  lead  dioxide  is  obtained

*^  Metallic  bismuth  is  very  easily  obtained  when  the  conipoundH  of  the  oxide  are
reduced  by  i>owerful  reducing  a^^ents,  but  when  lens  powerful  reducing  agents  — for
example,  stannous  oxide-  are  taken,  bismuth  suboxide  is  formed  as  a  black  cr^'stalline
powder.  It  is  a  compound  of  the  tyiHs  BiX.2,  its  composition  being  BiO ;  it  is  decomposed
by  acids  into  the  metal  and  oxide,  which  passes  into  solution.

*•  The  type  BiXj  is  represented  by  the  i>entoxide,  Bi-^O^,  its  metahydrate,  Bi.jOj.H.^O,
•or  BiHOs,  known  as  bismuthic  luid,  and  the  pyrohydrate,  Bi.H^Oy.  BUmuth pentoxitlc
is  obtained  by  the  prolonged  passage  of  chlorine  tlirough  a  boiling  solution  of  potassium
hydroxide  (sp.  gr.  1*38),  containing  bismuth  oxide  in  susi>ension ;  the  precipitate  is
washed  with  water,  with  l)oiling  nitric  acid  (but  not  for  long,  as  otherwise  the  bismuthic
acid  is  decomposed),  then  again  with  water,  and  finally  the  resultant  bright  red  powder  of
the  hydrate  BiHOj  is  dried  at  125°.  The  prolonged  action  of  nitric  acid  on  bismuthic
anliydride,  BijOs,  results  in  the  fonnation  of  the  comiwund  Bi.204,H.20,  which  decomposes
in  moist  air,  forming  Bi..>0.-;.  The  density  of  bismuthic  anhydride  is  5*  10,  of  the  tetroxide,
Bi.204,  500,  and  of  bismuthic  acid,  BiHO-„  5*75.  Pyrohisniuthic  acid,  Bi.2H407,  forms
a  brown  powder,  which  loses  a  [Kirtion  of  its  water  at  150",  and  decomposes  on  furtlier
heating,  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen  and  water.  It  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  (wtas-
sium  cyanide  on  a  solution  of  bismuth  nitrate.  The  meta-salts  of  bismuthic  acid  are
known,  for  example  KBiO-.  They  generally  occur,  however,  in  combinations  with  nieta-
bismuthic  acid  itself.  Thus  Andre  (1891)  took  a  solution  of  the  double  salt  of  BiBr^  and
KBr,  treated  it  with  bromine  after  adding  ammonia,  and  obtained  a  red-brown  precipi-
tate, which  after  being  washed  (for  several  weeks)  had  the  composition  KBiO-,  HBiO^
When  washed  with  diluU>  nitric  acid  this  salt  gave  bismuthic  acid.

PHOSPHORUS  AHD  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  OP  GROUP  V. 191

1  lead  oxide.  It  is  an  oxidising  agent  like  lead  dioxide,  and  even
the  acid  character  in  bismuthic  acid  is  only  slightly  more  developed
than  in  leaxl  dioxide.  Here,  as  in  the  case  of  lend  (minium),  inter-
mediate compounds  are  easily  formed  in  whiuh  the  bismuth  of  the
lower  oxide  plays  the  part  of  a  bn»e  combined  with  the  ncid  which  is
formed  by  the  higher  forDi  of  the  osLidation  of  biBiuuth.

In  niiture,  bismuth  occurs  in  only  a  few  localities  anil  iu  small
(juantitieR,  most  frequently  in  a  native  state,  and  more  rarely  as  oxide
and  as  a  compound  of  bismuth  sulphide  with  the  sulphides  of  other
nictala,  and  aometimea  in  gold  ores.  It  is  estracted  from  its  native  ores
by  simple  fusion  in  the  furnace  shown  in  fig.  85.  This  furnace  contains
an  inclined  iron  retort,  into
the  upper  extremity  ™of
which  the  ore  is  charged,
and  the  molten  melal  Hows
from  the  lower  extremity.
It  is  relined  by  re-melting,
and  the  pure  metal  may  be
obtained  by  dissolving  in
nitric  acid,  decomposing  the
iultant  salt  with water,

reducing  the  precipitate
he&ting  it  with  charcoal.
Bismuth  is  a  metal  which

crystallises  very  well  from  a  molten  state.  Its  specific  gravity  is  9'8  ;
it  melts  at  269°,  and  if  it  be  melted  in  a.  crucible,  allowed  to  cool  slowly,
and  the  crust  broken  and  the  remaining  molten  liquid  poured  out,  perfect
rhombohedral  crystals  of  bismuth  are  obtained  on  the  sides  of  the
crucible.*'""  It  is  brittle,  has  a  grey-coloured  fracture  with  a  reddish
not  hard,  and  ia  but  very  slightly  ductile  and  malleable ;  it

itilises  at  a  white  heat  and  easily  oxidises. It  recalls  antimony  and

many  of  its  properties. When  oxidised  in  air,  or  when  the

te  is  ignited,  biamuth  forms  the  lande,  BijOj,  as  a  white  powder

'bich  fuses  when  heated  and  resembles  massicot. The  addition  of  an

[cess  of  caustic  potash  to  a  solution  of  a  bismuthous  salt  gives  a  white

lipitatc  of  the  hydroxide,  BiO(OH),  which  loses  its  water  and  gives

H^rnril  ilmsa)  nbtuined  ■>  |wcDliiif  vuivty  nl  biumntli  by  huLini!  pure  rrjiitaUiiie

U>  A  briglib  red  lieitl  in  K  atr«iun  oF  iiitnigen. A  rtwiiisIi  vapour  wiw  disposiUid

.inna  ot  tliv  uppantna  in  the  farm  of  •  KTey  powder,  wbifh  under  the

the  iL|ipcBr>n«  of  mionte  Klobolen. An atmosphere

t(>i  IhiK  inuifuTDialion,  other  guea  meh  u  hydrogen  and  muboi

milioii. The  reioltant  amorphoim  bi«muth  tuaCH  M  ilW  (the  cryitiijtine
'),  1.1.,  gr,  H-WS. (Does  it

192  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

the  anhydrous  oxide  when  boiled  with  a  solution  of  caustic  potash
Both  the  hydroxide  and  oxide  easily  dissolve  in  acids  and  form  bis
muthous  salts.

Bisinuthous  oxide,  Bi2^3»  is  *  feeble  and  unenergetic  base.  The
normal  hydroxide  of  the  oxide  BijOa  is  Bi(0H)3 ;  it  parts  with  water
and  forms  a  metahydroxide  (bismuthyl  hydroxide),  BiO(OH).  Both  of
these  hydroxides  have  their  corresponding  saline  compounds  of  the
composition  BiXj  and  BiOX.  And  the  form  BiOX  is  nothing  else  but
the  type  of  the  basic  salt,  because  3ROX  =  RX-|-R203.  It  is  evident
that  in  the  type  BiXg  the  bismuth  replaces  three  atoms  of  hydrogen.
And  indeed  with  phosphoric  acid  solutions  of  the  bismuthous  salts
give  a  precipitate  of  the  composition  BiP04.  On  the  other  hand,  in
the  form  of  compounds  BiOX  or  Bi(0H)2X,  the  univalent  group  (BiO)
or  (BiH202)  is  combined  with  X.  Many  bismuth  salts  are  formed
according  to  the  type  BiOX.  For  instance  the  carbonate,  (BiO)2C03j
which  corresponds  with  the  other  carbonates  M2CO3.  It  is  obtained
as  a  white  precipitate  when  a  solution  of  sodium  carbonate  is  added  to
a  solution  of  a  bismuth  salt.^^  The  compound  radicle  BiO  is  not  a
special  natural  grouping,  as  it  was  formerly  represented  to  be  ;  it  is
simply  a  mode  of  expression  for  showing  the  relation  between  the  com-
pound in  question  and  the  compounds  of  other  oxides.

Three  salts  of  miric  acid  are  known  containing  bismuthous
oxide.  If  metallic  bismuth  or  its  oxide  be  dissolved  in  nitric  acid,  it
forms  a  colourless  transparent  solution  containing  a  salt  which  sepa-
rates in  large  transparent  crystals  containing  Bi(N03)3,5H20.  When
heated  at  80°  these  crystals  melt  in  their  water  of  crystallisation,  and
in  so  doing  lose  a  portion  of  their  nitric  acid  together  with  water,
forming  a  salt  whose  empirical  formula  is  Bi2N2H209.  If  the  preceding
salt  belongs  to  the  type  BiX3,  this  one  should  belong  to  the  form
BiOX,  because  it=BiO(N03)  +  Bi(H202)(N03).  This  salt  may  be
heated  to  150°  without  change.  When  the  first  colourless  crystalline
salt  dissolves  in  water  it  is  decomposed.  There  is  no  decomposition  if
an  excess  of  acid  be  added  to  the  water  —that  is  to  say,  the  salt  is  able
to  exist  in  an  acid  solution  without  decomposing,  without  separation  of
the  so-called  basic  salt — but  by  itself  it  cannot  be  kept  in  solution  ;  water
decomposes  this  salt,  acting  on  it  like  an  alkali.  In  other  words  the
basic  properties  of  bismuthic  oxide  are  so  feeble  that  even  water  acts  by
taking  up  a  portion  of  the  acid  from  it.  Here  we  see  one  of  the  most
striking  facts,  long  since  observed,  confirming  that  action  of  water  on
salts  about  which  we  have  spoken  in  Chapter  X.  and  elsewhere. This

■**  Bftsic-  bismuth  carboimte  is  employed  for  whitening  the  skm  (veloutine,  li'c.)

rPHOSPHORUS  AND  THE  OTHER  ELEJIENT3  OF  OROUP  V. 193

I  water  mny  lie  expressed  thus  :— BiXH  +  2HvO=Bi(OH).iX
A  salt  of  the  type  Bi(OH)jX  is  obtained  in  the  procipitat*.
Vtut  if  the  ijuatitity  of  acid,  HX,  be  increased,  the  salt  BiX,  is
again  formed  and  passes  into  solution.  The  quantity  of  the  salt  BiOX
whicli  passes  into  solution  on  the  aJdition  of  a  given  quantity  of  acid
depends  inilisputflibly  on  the  amount  (inaas)  of  water  (Muir),  The
solution,  which  is  perfectly  transparent  with  a  small  amount  of  water,
becomes  cloudy  and  deposits  the  salt  of  the  type  Bit)X,  when
diluted.  The  white  flaky  precipitate  of  Bi(0H>2NU,  formed  from  the
normal  salt  Bi(N0j)3  by  mixing  it  with  Bve  parts  of  water,  and  in
^'eneral  with  a  smalt  amount  of  water,  is  used  in  me<lirine  under  the
name  of  mjigistery  of  bismuth.'^

Metallic  bismuth  is  used  in  the  preparation  of  fusible  alloys.  The
addition  of  bismuth  to  many  metals  renders  them  very  hard,  and  at  the
same  time  generally  lowers  their  melting  point  to  a  considerable  extent.
Thus  Wood's  metal,  which  contains  one  part  of  cadmium,  one  part  of
tin,  two  parts  of  lead,  rind  four  parts  of  bismuth,  fuses  at  about  60°,  and
in  general  many  alloys  composed  of  bismuth,  tin,  lead,  and  antimony
melt  below  or  about  the  boiling  point  of  water."

rated  and  a  BtiU  more  bnoic
«a,ter  has  iip|)itrently  no
iO(NOi).BiO(OHl.  In  th«
It  to  show  that  the  tjpe
m  BiiXf,'  lUid  not  BiXj  ;

*'  With  nn  eicesB  ot  wster  n  rnrther  quuiti  ty  ol  acid  it  4
■alt  funued.  The  ultinmte  product,  on  which  lUi  eT»»
lu^tioD  whutever,  is  a.  mbnUncv  hitFiiig  the  MrmpoBitioi
latter  gall  we  see  the  limit  of  iJinnge,  itnd  this  limit  a]
of  the  saline  nuBpaniidg  ot  Mionnthic  oxide  ia  ot  the
lull  it  is  very  probable,  on  the  htnH  of  llie  example*  whi(
lead,  that  this  ty|ie  ahoold  be  still  fDitber  polymeriBed  in  order  togiveacoirectideaof  the
type  of  the  hiunnthuas  compoDnde.  I(  we  refer  all  the  biBmntfaous  compoanda  to  this
type,  Bi'jXg,  we  shall  obtain  the  toUowinx  eipreiivioD  for  the  composition  ot  the  nitntea  :
namul  wit.  BtilNO,),,  Gr>t  basic  salt.  B)iO(OH|.,INOj)],  mo^'atery  of  biamnth,
BI^0H),|N0,1^  and  the  liinitinj;  form  Bi.jO,(OH)<NOj).

The  general  character  of  bismathooa  oiide  in  it»  coniponnde  is  well  exemplified
in  the  Ditntlri  biemutbuua  chloride,  BiCl^,  which  ih  obbuned  by  Iiealing  biamutb
in  chlorine,  or  by  diwolvinif  it  iu  aqna  re^a,  and  then  dinlilling  withont  ocutKe  of
air,  IB  alio  decomposed  hy  *»U>i  in  exactly  the  same  maimer,  and  forma  basic
Mits— for  instance,  first.  BiOCl,  like  the  above  salt  of  nitric  acid.  Bionoth
cblorido  boils  at  447°  and  probably  its  formula  Ik  BiClj.  Polymerisation  loay  take
|>U«  in  aome  compounda  and  not  in  others.  A  I'ulolile  componnd  of  the  compoaition
Bi(C]Hj),:  is  also  known  aa  a  liqaid  which  in  insoluhle  in  water  and  deannpoaes  with
eiploaioii  when  heated  at  130°.  Double  salts  conbuning  chloride  of  bismuth  are :
9(KCI)ffiCl]3H.,0  (from  a  Rolation  ol  BijO-,  and  KCl  in  hydnwhlonc  acid)  and
EClBiCtjsH,0.  BiKham  llSSa)  also  obtained  EBr|SO,},ia  UhuUr  cryalola  by  treating
the  above-Domed  donhle  nalt  with  strong  snlphnric  acid. The  compoeitioti  ol  this  salt

"  Ah  the  meUls  toiitaiued  i
diSlenltly  volatile  and  their  olio
oury  in  many  phjnijoal  cKperimen
that  they  du  not  give  any  vaponi
Bisointh  expands  in  pAosing  int
LVOL.  II.

alloyH  like  the  above  Ibismsth,  lead,  tin.  cadmium)  ore
a  are  fnaible,  tbey  may  lie  employed  in  the  pUceiil  mer-
t  conducted  at  o^al>ore70^a^d  they  oOer  theadvanto^i
laving  an  apprreciable  tension  (meicury  at  lOn'.OToinm.)

194  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

Just  as  in  group  II.,  side  by  side  wilh  the  elements  zinc,  cadmium,
and  mercury  in  the  uneven  series,  we  found  calcium,  strontium,  and
barium  in  the  even  series  ;  and  as  in  group  IV.,  parallel  to  silicon,  ger-
manium,  tin,  and  lead,  we noticed  thallium,  zirconium,  cerium,  and
thorium  ;  so  also  in  group  V.  we  find,  beside  those  elements  of  the  un-
even series  just  considered  by  us,  a  series  of  analogues  in  the  even  series,
which,  with  a  certain  degree  of  similarity  (mainly  quantitative,  or  relative
to  the  atomic  weights),  also  present  a  series  of  particular  (qualitative)
independent  points  of  distinction. In  the  even  series  are  known  vana-
diujn,  which  stands  between  titanium  and  chromium,  niuhinmy  between
zirconium  and  molybdenum,  and  tantalum^  situated  near  tungsten  (an
element  of  group  VI.  like  chromium  and  molybdenum ). Just  as  bismuth
is  similar  in  many  respects  to  its  neighbour  lead,  so  .also  do  these  neigh-
bouring elements  resemble  each  other,  even  in  their  external  appearance,
not  to  mention  the  quality  of  their  compounds,  naturally  taking  into
account  the  differences  of  type  corresponding  with  the  different  groups.
The  occurrence  in  group  V.  determines  the  type  of  the  oxides,  R.^O.,
and  R2O5,  and  the  development  of an  acid  character  in  the higher
oxides. The  occurrence  in  the  even  series  determines  the  absence  of
volatile  compounds,  RH3,  for  these  metals,  and  a  more  basic  character
of  the  oxides  of  a  given  composition  than  in  the  uneven  series,  ttc."*^
Vanadium,  niobium,  and  tantalum  belong  to  the  category  of  rare  metals,
and  are  exceedingly  difficult  to  obtain  pure,  more  especially  owing  to
their  similarity  to,  and  occurrence  with,  chromium,  tungsten  and  other
metals,  and also  in  combination among themselves  ; therefore  it  is
natural  that  they  have  been  far  from  completely  studied,  although  since
1860  chemists  have  devoted not  a  little  time  to  their  investigation.
The researches carried out  by Marignac, at (ieneva, on niobium,
and by Sir Henry Roscoe,  at Manchester, on vanadium deserve
special  attention. The  undoubted  external  resemblance  of  the  com-
pounds  of chromium  and  vanadium,  as well  as the want of com-
pleteness in  the  knowledge  of  the  compounds  of  vanadium,  long  caused
its  oxides  to  l>e  considei'ed  analogous  in  atomic  composition  to  those
formed  by  chromium. The  higher  oxide  of  vanadium  was  therefore
supposed  to  have  the  formula  VO3. But  the  fact  of  the  matter  is,
that the chemical analogy of the elements does not hold  in one
direction  only  ;  vanadium  is  at  one  and  the  same  time  the  analogue  of

deiinity. Accortling  to  Liiedeking  the  mcMin  <'oefticicut  of  expansit>n  of  liquid  biKinuth  is
0(MMM)44U  (between  270"  and  :J03^),  and  of  solid  bisimitli  00000  111.

•"*  Although,  guided  by  Brauner,  wlio  nhowed  that  didyniium  gives  a  higher  oxide.
Di.jO^,  I  place  this  eleMient  in  the  fifth  group,  still  I  am  not  certain  as  to  its  position,
becauBe  I  consider  that  the  questions  relating  to  this  metal  are  still  fiir  from  being  defi-
nitely answerel.

PHOSPnORUS  AND  TRK  OTHKH  RLEMEKT8  OF  OROm"  V, 196

II,  and  consequently  of  the  elements  like  sulphur  of  group  VI,

md  also  the  analcgae  of  phosphorus,  arsenic,  and  antimony  ;  just  as

iiuth  stands  in  respect  to  lead  aud  antimony. Investigation  has

wii  thikt  the  compounds  rif  vanadinm  nre  alwnys  a^^companjed  by  those

(  phosphorus  as  well  as  of  iron,  and  that  it  is  even  more  difficult  to

■eparate  it  from  the  compounds  of  phosphorus  than  from  those  of  iron

tnd  tungsten. We  should  Unve  to  extend  our  description  considerably

B  wished  to  give  the  complete  history,  even  of  vanadium  alone,  not

D  mention  niobium  and  tantalum,  all  the  more  as  questions  would  not

mfreijuently  arise  concerning  the  compounds  of  these  elements  which

e  not  yet  been  fully  elucidated. We  sliall  therefore  limit  ourselves

)  pointing  out  the  most  important  features  in  the  history  of  these

Henients,  the  more  so  since  the  minerals  themselves  in  whicti  they  occur

e  exceedingly  rare  and  only  accessible  to  a  few  invc«tigatoi-s.

An  important  point  in  the  history  "i  the  memliers  of  this  group

1  the  circumstance  that  they  form  volatile  compounds  with  chlorine,

milar  to  the  cimpounds  of  the  elements  of  the  phosphorus  group,

Jiiely,  of  the  type  RXg. The  Tiip<)ur  densities  of  the  compounds

this kind  were determined,  and served as the most important

s  for  the  explanation  of  the  atomic  composition  of  these  molecules.

1  this  we  see  the  power  of  general  and  fundamentiil  laws,  like  the

few  of  Avogodro-Gerhardt. An oxychloride,  VOCl^,, is  known  for

idium,  which  is  the  perfect  analogue  of  phosphorus  oJtychloride,

■t  was  formerly  considered  to  he  vanadium  chloride,  foi-  Just  as  in

of  uranium  (Chapter XXI.),  its  lower  oxide,  V(),  was  con-

Edered  to  be  the  metal,  because  it  la  exceedingly  difficultly  reduced —

■en  potassium  does  not  remove  all  the  oxygen,  beside.s  which  it  haa

metallic  appearance,  and  decomposes  acids  like  a  metal  ;  in  a  word,  it

l^i^mulates  a  metal  in  every  respect. I'uiiailiiiiii  <i.t-yc!ilor!ile  is  obtained

J  heating  the  trioxide,  V.jO;,,  mined  with  charcoal,  in  a  current  of  hy-

;  the  lower  oxide  of  vanadium  is  then  formed,  and  this,  when

in  a  current  of  dry  chlorine,  gives  the  o.xyohloride  VtXJli.as  a

widish  liquid  which  does  not  act  on  sodium  and  may  be  purified  by

S»tillatiiin  over  this  metal. It  fumes  in  the  air,  giving  reddish  vapours  ;

i  reacts  on  water,  forming  hydrochloric  and vanadic  acids ; hence,

1  the  one  hand  it  is  very  similar  to  phosphorus  osychloride,  and  on

i  other  hand to chromium  osychloride,  CHXjClj  (Cliapter XXI.)

Bt  is  of  a  yellow  colour,  its  specific  gravity  is  I'-'^S,  it  boils  at  130°,  and

a  T&pour  ilensity  is  86  with  respect  to  hydrogen  ;  therefore  the  above

mula  expresses  its  molecular  weight.''-*

»  WllBI

,1  400',  tlicj

»r.  ot I

oi  J  chloride  ni'o  lienled  with  i

tnllm.

196  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

Vanadic  anhf/dride,  VgO^,  is  obtained  either  in  small  quantities
from  certain  clays  where  it  accompanies  the  oxides  of  iron  (hence  some
sorts  of  iron  contain  vanadium)  and  phosphoric  acid,  or  from  the  rare
minerals  :  volborthite^  CUHVO4,  or  basic  vanadate  of  copper  ;  vana-
dinite,  PbC1.^3Pb3(V04)2  ;  lead  vanadate,  Pb3(V04)2,  etc.  The  latter
salts  are  carefully  ignited  for  some  time  with  one-third  of  their  weight  of
nitre  ;  the  fused  mass  thus  formed  is  powdered  and  boiled  in  water  :  the
yellow  solution  obtained  contains  potassium  vanadate.  The  solution
is  neutralised  with  acid,  and  barium  chloride  added  ;  a  meta-salt,
Ba(V03)2,  is  then  precipitated  as  an  almost  insoluble  white  powder,
which  gives  a  solution  of  vanadic  acid  when  boiled  with  sulphuric
acid.  (The  precipitate  is  at  first  yellow,  as  long  as  it  remains  amor-
phous, but  it  afterwards  becomes  crystalline  and  white.)  The  solution
thus  obtained  is  neutralised  with  ammonia,  which  thus  forms  ammo-
nium (meta)  vanadate,  NH4VO3,  which,  when  evaporated,  gives  colour-
less crystals,  insoluble  in  water,  containing  sal-ammoniac  ;  hence  this
salt  is  precipitated  by  adding  solid  sal-ammoniac  to  the  solution.
Ammonium  vanadate,  when  ignited,  leaves  vanadic  acid  behind.  In
this  it  differs  from  the  corresponding  chromium  salt,  which  is  de-
oxidised into  chromium  oxide  when  ignited.  In  general,  vanadic  acid
has  but  a  small  oxidising  action.  It  is  reduced  with  difficulty,  like
phosphoric  or  sulphuric  acid,  and  in  this  differs  from  arsenic  and
chromic  acids.  Vanadic  acid,  like  chromic  acid,  separates  from  its  solu-
tion as  the  anhydride  Y2^r»»  ^^^  ^^^  ^^  ^  hydrous  state.  Vanadic
anhydride,  V.2O5,  forms  a  reddish-brown  mass,  which  easily  fuses  and  re-
solidifies into  transparent  crystals  having  a  violet  lustre  (another  point
of  resemblance  to  chromic  acid)  ;  it  dissolves  in  water,  forming  a  yellow
solution  with  a  slightly  acid  reaction. '^*^

of  Bp.  gr.  ii*H8,  which  is  deliqueecent  in  air  and  has  tho  composition  VOClo.  Only
its  vapour  density  is  unknown,  and  it  would  be  extremely  important  U>  determine
whether  its  molecular  composition  is  that  given  above,  or  whether  it  corresponds  with
the  fornmla  V.20.;Cl4.  Another  less  volatile  oxychloride,  VOC'l,  is  formed  with  it  as
a  brown  insoluble  substance,  which  is,  liowever,  soluble  in  nitric  acid  like  the  preceding.
Koscoe  obtained  a  still  less  chlorinated  substance,  namely,  (VO)Xl ;  but  it  may  only
consist  of  a  mixture  of  VO  and  VOCl.  At  all  events,  we  here  find  a  graduated  series  such
as  is  met  with  in  the  compounds  of  very  few  other  elements.

^  Strong  acids  and  alkalis  dissolve  vanadic  anhydride  in  considerable  quantities,
forming  yellow  solutions.  When  it  is  ignited,  especially  in  a  current  of  hydrogen,  it
evolves  oxygen  and  forms  the  lower  oxides ;  \^tO.^  (acid  solutions  of  a  green  colour,  like
the  salts  of  chromic  oxide),  V.^Oj,  and  the  lowest  oxide,  VO.  The  latt<."r  is  the  metallic
powder  which  is  obtained  when  the  vanadium  oxychloride  is  heated  in  an  excess  of
hydrogen,  and  was  formerly  mistaken  for  metallic  vanadium.  When  a  solution  of
vanadic  acid  is  treated  with  metallic  zinc  it  forms  a  blue  solution,  which  seems  to  contain
this  oxide.  It  acts  as  a  reducing  agent  (and  forms  a  close  analogue  to  chromous  oxide,
CrO).  Metallic  vnuddiuin  can  only  be  obt«iined  from  vanadium  chloride  which  is  quite
free  from  oxygen. Moissan  (1898)  obtained  it  by  reducing  the  oxide  with  carbon  in  the

PlPHOSPHOItUS  AKD  THE  OTUBR  ELEMEHTS  OF  OBOOP  Y. 197

Niobiiuii  and  (anto/ww'"  occur  as  acids  m  rare  minerals,  and  are
inftinly  extracted  from  tnntnlite  and  tobi iiiblti',  which  are  found  in
Bavai'in,  Finland,  North  America,  and  in  the  UniU.  These  minerals
are  composed  of  the  fei'rous  Baits  of  niobii*  and  tftntalic  nciUs ;  thity

BJEctric  (omHce,  uid  caDaidered  It  to  b«  tatml  intosible  ot  tlie  metiils  iii  Uio  MirieB  PI.
Ct.  Mil,  VS.  W.  and  V  (liu  aIho  ubUtiiiad  a  <xnn|uand  oJ  vnimdinni  mid  ciirbonl.  The
>p«.'illv  ){raiitj  ol  this  meUI  ib  G'5.  It  ik  ot  a  )^}<  white  uoluar,  ia  nut  dvi-nmiiuiied  bj
utkUir,  mid  i*  not  oiidiied  in  nir,  but  bDnis  Hb«n  Btningl;  lltwted.  Bnil  cui  bu  fnaed  in  k
current  of  faydrogflo  (fornting  perliaifs  n  coiii]HiiiDd  vith  li^droj^eul.  It  ib  iDBulable  iii
hydrocbloriu  acid,  but  lusily  diEBulvflB  iu  nitTtu  iic:id.  and  when  fosed  with  i^AUBtic;  aodii  it
fomiB  Hodimn  v&n&dihte.

Ah  Tpgikrdfl  tlie  ^ta  of  Tumdii;  luiid,  ^tbrve  difttirent  cbLhBv«  uti-  knon-ii ;  the  first
KOrroBpund  with  Dietuvui&dic  Hdid,  VMO3  =  MjOV./Jj,  the  aetond  mureaiiond  with  the
dicbninmlei— tlut  is,  have  the  compoHitioii  V,H.jO„,  wbieh  is  eqnal  to  M,,0  +  9V,0,
—and  the  Ibicd  cinTB"pond  with  iirlhovaiutdit  acid,  VMjO,  or  aM,0  +  V,Oj.  The  latter
lire  foramd  when  vauadic  aiihjdrida  ia  liuMid  with  an  eieeHs  of  au  alkaliue  earbonale.

Vanulic  aoid  );irea  the  Bo-calleil  -  com|ilex  '  aeida  (which  are  conaidered  more  fnU;  iu
Cha|>ter  XXI.  in  opealciDg  ot  Uo  and  W|— j.«.  ucida  lonned  of  two  ucida  asaiioilaled  into
one.  TbDB  Friedheim  (lHm)|  obliuued  phosphor- ranadic  acid,  and  Situniti-DtunoDt
I1S90)  a  niuilar  arsenivraimdia  add.  The  (ormer  is  obtained  hj  heatiiiK  V,Oi  with
■irap;  phoBphoric  acid.  The  reaaltant  gulden-jeDow  tabular  crjatuls  bare  the
eompoution  H.jOVjOiPgOiBU..O,  iind  tliere  are  comaponding  Hklta  —  for  eiampli-,
(JJHJiVaOjP.jOj  with  S  and  tH.O.  *c.  TUbbb  ualu  caunot  be  separated  bj  crratallina-
lion.  M  that  tbere  are  '  eotapleiSH '  uf  these  acidB  in  a  whole  aeriea  of  wlti  (nod  alao  in
nature).  It  maj'  be  lupponeil  tFrieiUieini)  tluit  V^Oj  here.  s«  it  were,  playa  the  part  ol  a
bale,  ot  that  thoee  acidn  may  he  looked  upon  aa  double  Balta.  Among  the  tme  doable
ulta  of  vanadiani  (Nb  and  Ta|  very  imny  aru  known  aDionB  the  l^Doridea,  ench  %»
VPjaNH^F,  VOF,aNH,F.  VO.jP,aNH,F,  Ao.  (PeMernBon,  Piaani,  and  Oeorgi,  ISflO-oai.

Vanadium  waa  diacoiered  at  the  beipimine  of  tbiB  centut^by  Del.Rio.and  afterwardH
iDTealigated  by  Sefalrinn,  hat  it  «u  only  in  1808  tbiil  RoKCoe  eaUhlislied  tile  nboYe
lormnliie  ol  the  Tauadic  coinponuds.

*'  The  rKnearchee  made  hy  Rom'oe  were  preceded  by  thoae  of  MarigiuH!  in  ISflB,  on
the  cuni^uiti/t  uf  tiiubiHiii  uid  tunlutiim.  to  which  were  also  ascribed  diflurent  fonnnhe
from  thiitw  now  CBcugniwd.  Tantulum  Wiis  discorered  siijinltiuieaaBly  with  Taoadiiun
by  Hatchi4t  and  Ekeberg,  and  waa  afleiwar-ds  studied  by  Boae,  who  iu  XtU  diacotered
niobinm  in  it.  Xolwithsliuiditig  the  nomtrroutt  reaearchea  of  Hermann  lir.  Uoacuw],
Kcbell.  Hme,  and  Uarignac.  atitl  there  ia  not  yet  any  certainty  an  to  the  parity  of,  and
the  pnipertieB  aHaibed  to,  the  compuundn.  of  theae  elements.  They  are  difficult  to
Kcpikratc  from  each  other,  and  eapeoially  from  the  cerite  metals  and  titaniom,  &c.,  which
ncoonipniiy  them.  Before  the  inveatigationa  of  Roae  the  higheHt  oiide  of  (ankdum  irta
auppoaeil  to  belong  tu  the  type  TaXg— that  is.  it>t  compoaition  waa  taken  aa  TaOj,  and  to
the  tower  oiide  wa*  aai'ribed  a  formtda  TaO,.  Roae  gate  the  formula  TaO,  to  the
higher  oiide,  and  discoTered  a  naw  element  called  niobinm  in  the  anbBtance  preriously
anppoaed  to  be  the  lower  oxide.  Ha  even  admitted  the  exiatente  of  a  third  element  occur-
ring together  with  tantalum  and  niobium,  wliich  he  named  pelopium,  bat  he  afterwards
found  that  pelc^ic  acid  waa  only  another  oxide  uf  niobium,  and  he  conaidered  it  probable
that  the  higher  oiide  of  thia  element  iaNhO..,  ojid  the  lower  NKOj.  Hermann  found  that
niobic  acid  which  waa  convidered  pure  contained  a  considerable  i|uantity  of  tontalic  acid,
and  beaiiteii  thia  lie  admitted  the  existence  of  another  q>ecia]  metallic  acid,  which  he  called
itmenic  arid,  after  the  locality  Ithe  Ilmen  inuuntaina  of  the  Utalal  of  the  mineral  bom
which  lie  obtained  it.  V.  Kobell  recognised  stilt  another  acid,  which  be  called  dianicadd,
and  (he>«  diverse  itatemunta  were  only  brouifht  into  agroemant  in  tlie  sixties  hy  Marigiuw,
He  first  of  all  indicated  an  ai-eumle  method  lor  the  separalion  of  tanlalic  and  niobic
I,  whiuh  are  alwav*  nhtiLined  iu  twliuiiture.

^^^^^apmpoai

J

198  PKINCIPLES OF CHEMISTEV

contain  about  15  per  cent,  of  ferrous  oxide  in  isomorphous  mixture
with  manganous  oxide,  in  combination  with  various  proportions  of
tantalic  and  niobic  anhydrides.  These  mineials  are  first  fused  with
a  considerable  amount  of  potassium  bisulphate,  and  the  fused  mass
is  boiled  in  water,  which  dissolves  the  ferrous  and  potassium  salts  and
leaves  an  insoluble  residue  of  impure  niobic  and  tantalic  acids.  This
raw  product  is  then  treated  with  ammonium  sulphide,  in  order  to
extract  the  tin  and  tungsten,  which  pass  into  solution.  The  residue
containing  the  acids  (acct>rding  to  Marignac)  is  then  treiited  with  hydro-
fluoric acid,  in  which  it  entirely  dissolves,  and  potassium  fluoride  is
added  to  the  resultant  hot  solution  ;  on  cooling,  a  sparingly  soluble
double  fluoride  of  potassium  and  tantalum  separates  out  in  fine  crystals,
while  the  much  more  soluble  niobium  salt  remains  in  solution.  The
difference  in  the  solubility  of  these  double  salts  in  water  acidified  with
hydrofluoric  acid  (in  pure  water  the  solution  becomes  cloudy  after  a
certain  time)  is  so  great  that  the  tantalum  compound  requires  150  parts
of  water  for  its  solution,  and  the  niobium  compound  only  13  parts.
The  Greenland  columbite  (specific  gravity  5*36)  only  contains  niobic
acid,  and  that  from  Bodenmais,  Bavaria  (specific  gravity  6*06)  almost
equal  quantities  of  tantalic  and  niobic  acids.  Having  isolated  tantalic
and  niobic  salts,  Marignac  found  that  the  relation  between  the  potas-
sium and  fluorine  in  them  is  very  variable — that  is,  that  there  exist
various  double  salts  of  fluoride  of  potassium,  and  of  the  fluorides  of
the  metals  of  this  group,  but  that  with  an  excess  of  hydrofluoric  acid
both  the  tantalum  and  niobium  compounds  contain  seven  atoms  of
fluorine  to  two  of  potassium,  whence  it  must  be  concluded  that  the
simplest  formula  for  these  double  salts  will  be  K2RF7  =  RF5,2KF  ;
that  is,  that  the  type  of  the  higher  compounds  of  niobium  and  tantalum
is  RX;„  and  hence  is  similar  to  phosphoric  acid.  A  chlonde,  TaCls,
may  be  obtained  from  pure  tantalic  acid  by  heating  it  with  charcoal
in  a  current  of  chlorine.  This  is  a  yellow  crystalline  substance,  which
melts  at  211°,  and  boils  at  241°  ;  its  vapour  density  with  respect  to
hydrogen  is  180,  as  would  follow  from  the  formula  TaCl^.  It  is  com-
plet/cly  decomposed  by  water  into  tantalic  and  hydrochloric  acids.
Niobium  pentachloride  may  be  prepared  in  the  same  manner  ;  it  fuses
at  194°,  and  boils  at  240°.  When  treated  with  water  this  substance
gives  a  solution  containing  niobic  acid,  which  only  separates  out  on
boiling  the  solution.  Delafontaine  and  Deville  found  its  vapour
density  to  be  9*3  (air  =1),  jjis  is  shown  by  its  formula  NbCl;,."'*^

**  If  niobic  aci<l  be  mixed  with  a  small  (lUAiiiity  of  cluireoal  and  ijjTiited  in  a  stream
of  clilorine,  a  difficultly-fusible  and  difficultly-volatile  oxycliloride,  NbOCI.-,  separates.
The  vapour  density  of  this  compound  with  respect  to  air  is  7'r),  and  this  va|H)ur  density

PlIOSPHOKUS AM) THE OTHEH ELEMENTS OF (JKOIP V. 199

perfectly  eoiifirnis  the  accunvcy  of  the  fonnulee  given  by  Marigiiac,  and  indicates  tl;e
({uantitative  analogy  between  the  compounds  of  niobium  and  tantalum,  and  tlioHe  of
phosphorus  and  arsenic,  and  consequently  also  of  vanadium.  In  their  qualitative  rehi-
tioiis  (as  is  evident  also  from  the  corres|K>ndence  of  the  atomic  weights),  the  compounds
of  tantalum  and  niobium  exhibit  a  great  aiuilogy  with  the  com|)ound8  of  molybdenum  and
tungsten.  Thus  zinc,  when  acting  on  acid  solutions  of  tantalic  and  niobic  compounds,
given  a  blue  coloration,  exactly  as  it  does  with  those  of  tungsten  and  molybdenum  (also
titanium).  These  ac*ids  form  the  same  large  number  of  salts  as  those  of  tungsten  and
in<ilybdenum.  The  anhydrides  of  the  acids  are  also  insoluble  in  water,  but  as  colloids  are
sometimes  held  in  solution,  just  like  those  of  titanic  and  molybdic  acids.  Furthermore,
niobium  is  in  every  res|)ect  the  nearest  analogue  of  molybdenum,  and  tantalum  of  tung*
sten.  Xiobiutn  is  obtained  by  reducing  the  double  fluoride  of  niobium  and  sodium,  with
sodium.  It  is  difficult  to  obtain  in  a  pure  state.  It  is  a  metal  on  which  hydrochloric
lU'id  act's  with  some  energy,  as  also  does  hydrofluoric  acid  mixed  with  nitric  acid,  and  also
a  boiling  solution  of  caustic  potash.  Tantalum,  which  is  obtained  in  exactly  the  same
way,  is  a  much  heavier  metal.  It  is  infusible,  and  is  only  acted  on  by  a  mixture  of
hydrofluoric  and  nitric  acids.  Rose  in  18(M  showed  that  in  the  reduction  of  the  double
fluoride,  NbF.^,2KF,  by  sodium,  a  greyish  powder  is  obtained  after  treating  with  water.
The  specific  gravity  of  this  powder  is  6*H,  and  he  considers  it  to  be  niobium  hydride,
XbH.  Neither  did  he  obtain  metallic  niobium  when  he  reduced  with  magnesium  and
aluminium,  but  an  alloy,  Al-Nb,  having  a  sp.  gr.  of  4*5.

Niobium,  so  far  as  is  known,  unites  in  three  proportions  with  oxygen.  NbO,  which  ib
formed  when  NbOF-,,2KF  is  reduced  by  sodium  ;  NbO.^,  which  is  formed  by  igniting
uiobic  acid  in  a  stream  of  hydrogen,  and  niobic  anhydride,  NhjOj,  a  white  infusible
substance,  which  is  insoluble  in  acids,  and  has  a  specific  gravity  of  4*5.  Tantalic  anhy-
dride closely  resembles  niobic  anhydride,  and  has  a  specific  gravity  of  7'2.  The  tantalates
and  niohatv9  present  the  tyx)e  of  ortho-salts — for  example,  NajHNb04,6HoO,  and  also  of
[»yi*o-salts,  such  as  K5HNb.^07,BH.,0,  and  of  meta-snlts — for  example,  KNb05,2H.20.
And,  besides  these,  they  give  salts  of  a  more  complex  type,  containing  a  larger  amount
of  the  elements  of  the  anhydride ;  thus,  for  instance,  when  niobic  anhydride  is  fused
with  caustic  potash  it  forms  a  salt  which  is  soluble  in  water,  and  crystallises  in  mono-
clinic  prisms,  having  the  composition  KgNb(}Oio,16H.^O.  There  is  a  perfectly  similar
isoniorphous  salt  of  tantalic  acid.  Tantalite  is  a  salt  of  the  type  of  metatantalic  acid,
Fe(TaO.-).j.  The  composition  of  Yttrotantalite  appears  to  correspond  with  orthotantalic
iiciil.

200  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

CHAPTER  XX

SULPHUR, SELENIUM, AND TELLURIUM

The  acid  character  of  the  higher  oxides  RO3  of  the  elements  of
group  VI.  is  still  more  clearly  defined  than  that  of  the  higher  oxides  of
the  preceding  groups,  whilst  feeble  basic  properties  only  appear  in
the  oxides  RO3  of  the  elements  of  the  even  series,  and  then  only  for
those  elements  having  a  high  atomic  weight — that  is,  under  those  two
conditions  in  which,  as  a  rule,  the  basic  characters  increase.  Even  the
lower  types  RO2  and  ^2^31  ^^-9  formed  by  the  elements  of  group  VI.,
are  acid  anhydrides  in  the  uneven  series,  and  only  those  of  the  elements
of  the  even  series  have  the  properties  of  peroxides  or  even  of  bases.

Sulphur  ia  the  typical  representative  of  group  VI.,  both  on  account  of
the  fact  that  the  acid  properties  of  the  group  are  clearly  defined  in  it,  and
also  because  it  is  more  widely  distributed  in  nature  than  any  of  the  other
elements  belonging  to  this  group.  As  an  element  of  the  uneven  series
of  group  VI.,  sulphur  gives  HgS,  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  SO3,  sulphuric
anhydride,  and  SO2,  sulphurous  anhydride.  And  in  all  of  them  we  find
acid  properties — SO;,  and  SOj  are  anhydrides  of  acids,  and  HjS  is  an
acid,  although  a  feeble  one.  As  an  element  sulphur  has  all  the  pro-
perties of  a  true  non-metal  ;  it  has  not  a  metallic  lustre,  does  not
conduct  electricity,  is  a  bad  conductor  of  heat,  is  transparent,  and
combines  directly  with  metals — in  short  it  has  all  the  properties  of  the
non-metals,  like  oxygen  and  chlorine.  Furthermore,  sulphur  exhibits
a  great  qualitative  and  quantitative  resemblance  to  oxygen,  especially
n  the  fact  that,  like  oxygen,  it  combines  with  two  atoms  of  hydrogen,
and  forms  compounds  resembling  oxides  with  metals  and  non-metals.
From  this  point  of  view  sulphur  is  bivalent,  if  the  halogens  are  univa-
lent.' The  chemical character  of sulphur  is  expressed by  the fact

•  Tlie  cliaracter  of  sulphur  is  very  clearly  defined  in  the  organo-metallic  com-
]x>und8.  Not  to  dwell  on  this  vast  subject,  which  belongs  to  the  province  of  organic
chemistry,  I  think  it  will  be  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  compare  the  physical  properties
of  the  ethyl  compounds  of  mercury,  zinc,  sulphur  and  oxygen.  The  composition  of  all  of
them  is  expressed  by  the  general  formula  (C.^H5).jR,  where  R  —  Kg,  Zn,  S,  or  O.  They
are  all  volatile  :  mercury  ethyl,  Hg(C.^H5).2,  boils  at  159^,  its  sp.  gr.  is  2-144,  molecular

SULPHUR. SELBNITW, AND  TKLLURIUM  201

Mt  it  forma  a  very  aliglitly  stable  and  feebly  energetic:  ncid  wiili
Tiydrogen.  The  aalts  correspoadiiig  with  lliis  acid  are  the  sulphides,
just  as  tiie  DsideH  oon'tapond  to  water  an<l  the  L'hioridefi  to  hydroi-hlorio
ftcid.  However,  its  we  shall  ufierwards  see  more  fully,  the  sulphides
ure  more  iiiiulogiius  to  the  former  than  to  the  latter.  But  although
comliining  with  metals,  Hki^  oxygen,  sulphur  also  forms  chemically
stable  compounds  with  oxygen,  and  this  fact  impresses  a  peculiiir
character  on  all  the  relntiotia  of  this  element.^

Sulphur  belongs  to  the  number  of  those  oleinenta  which  are  very
widfJy  distributed  in  nahire,  and  occurs  both  free  and  combined  in
various  forms.  The  atmosphere,  however,  is  almost  entirely  free  fn>lii
I'ompoundH  of  sulphur,  although  a  cei-taiii  amount  of  ttiem  should  be
present,  if  only  from  the  fact  that  sulphurous  anhydiide  is  emitted
from  the  earth  in  volcanic  eruptiojis,  and  in  the  air  of  cities,  where
much  coal  is  burnt,  since  this  always  CM^ntiiins  FeS^.  Sea  and  river
water  generally  eontnin  more  or  less  sulphur  in  the  form  of  sul-
phates. The  beds  of  gypsum,  soiHum  sulphate,  mjignesium  Bulphnle_
and  the  like  are  fonnations  of  undoubtedly  aqueous  origin.  The  sul-
phates contained  in  the  soil  are  the  source  of  the  sulphur  found  in
plants,  and  are  inilis|iensable  to  their  growth.  Among  vegetable
substances,  the  proteids  always  contain  from  one  to  two  per  cent,  of
sulphur.  From  plants  the  albuminous  substances,  together  with  their
sulphur,  pass  into  the  animal  organism,  and  therefore  the  decomposition
of  animal  matter  is  accompanied  by  the  odour  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen,
as  the  product  into  which  the  sulphur  pas.'^s  in  the  decomposition  of
the  albuminous  substances.  Thus  a  rotten  egg  emits  sulphuretted  hy-
drogen. Sulphur  occurs  largely  in  iiature,  as  the  various  insoluble  sul-
phides of  the  nietale.  Iron,  copper,  idnc,  lead,  antimony,  arsenic,  J:c..
occur  in  nature  combined  with  sulphur.  These  giil/Jii'/vs  frequently
have  a  metallic  lustre,  and  iu  the  majority  of  ca.*(es  occur  crystallised,

TolimiH  =  im:  line  eUiyl  ImilH  M  UB",  .p.  i^t.  I'twg!,  vi>lunie  101:  etli^t  gnJiihi'k-.
SIC^jlj,  hoiU  at  00-,  "p.  gt.  O'Has,  volume  1(17 ;  L^omnion  eUmr,  methyl  uiide.  0(C,Hi)„
bniliBlss",  ap.gT.  ffTsa,  volume  101,  m  ftdililianUiw]i;<.'UdiethyUtaelr,IC',H..,l,  ^  C^Hi.n
iKiiU  thoal  0°,  *p.  gr.  bIiouC  U'H3,  volume  about  114.  TIiur  tlie  BUlmtitulioD  nf  Hg,  S,  mil
O  Bdu-celi  cliuiges  Uie  vuluioe,  niitwithataDding  Lhe  diSurenuv  ol  Uis  weighlai  tliF
pbjaicjil  infliumve.  i(  one  inay  ao  eiprees  onmelf,  o(  Iheue  ElemeulB,  tthivh  iu¥  en  reiy
diflerent  in  llieir  alomk-  weiglilH,  is  klmnat  aJike.

'  Thenslore  iu  fanner  times  «alpliur  wat>  hnawn  aa  an  luuphid  «lenieiil,  Altliongli  llie
analogy  betwden  Ule  uumpnnnda  oF  anlpliur  And  oxygen  haa  lieen  recDgnivbd  from  tht-
very  birtb  cf  niodern  clitgoiiitry  loiriug.  amoogHt  otlacr  thiuga.  to  tlie  (wH  tlial  tile  (ti.idpi>^
and  aalphidea  an  tbe  looit  widely  tpread  iiieballic  urea  iu  iiHtunt),  atill  It  has  only  boni
i^leatly  etprevaed  by  the  periodic  system,  wliJch  placeH  both  thene  elementii  in  gronp  VI.
Here,  moreoier.  etftude  out  that  pariUlelisni  wliich  eiists  between  SO,  and  otone  VOy,
botveeu  KgftUx  and  peruiide  of  piilaniaiD  K20,(Volkovitch  in  INUSsgiiin  drew  attentinii
H  Ibia  pualleliMU).

i

202  prin'ciplp:8  of  chemistkv

and  also  very  often  several  sulphides  occur  combined  or  mixed
together  in  these  crystalline  compounds.  If  they  are  yellow  and  have
a  metallic  lustre  they  are  called  pyrites.  Such  are,  for  example,
copper  pyrites,  CuFeS.^,  and  iron  pyrites,  FeS.^,  which  is  the  commonest
of  all.  They  are  all  also  known  as  glances  or  blendes  if  they  are
greyish  and  have  a  metallic  lustre — for  example,  zinc  blende,  lead
glance,  PbS,  antimony  glance,  Sb2S3,  ike.  And,  lastly,  sulphur  occurs
native.  It  occurs  in  this  form  in  the  most  recent  geological  formations
in  admixture  with  limestone  and  gypsum,  and  most  frequently  in  the
A'icinity  of  active  or  extinct  volcanoes.  As  the  gases  of  volcanoes  con-
tfHn  sulphur  compounds— namely,  sulphuretted  hydrogen  and  sulphurous
anhydride,  which  by  reacting  on  one  another  may  produce  sulphur,  which
also  frequently  appears  in  the  craters  of  volcanoes  as  a  sublimate — it
might  be  imagined  that  the  sulphur  was  of  volcanic  origin.  But  on  a
nearer  aquaintance  with  its  mode  of  occurrence,  and  more  especially
considering  its  relation  to  gypsum,  CaS()|,  and  limestone,  the  present
general  opinion  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  'native' sulphur  has
been  formed  by  the  reduction  of  the  gypsum  by  organic  matter  and
that  its  occurrence  is  only  indirectly  connected  with  volcanic  agencies.
Near  Tetush,  on  the  Volga,  there  are  beds  containing  gypsum,  sulphur,
and  asphalt  (mineral  tar).  In  Europe  the  most  important  deposits  of
sulphur  are  in  the  south  of  Sicily  from  Catania  to  Girgenti.'*  There
are  very  rich  deposits  of  sulphur  in  Daghestan  near  Cherkai  and
Cherkat  in  Khyut,  near  Mount  Kanabour-bam,  near  Petrovsk,  and
in  the  Kira  Koumski  steppes  in  the  Trans- Caspian  provinces,  which
are  able  to  supply  the  whole  of  Kussia  with  this  mineral.  Abundant
deposits  of  sulphur  have  also  been  found  in  Kamtchatka  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  volcanoes.  The  method  of  separation  of  the  sulphur
from  its  earthy  impurities  is  Vjjvsed  on  the  fact  that  sulphur  melts  when
it  is  heated.  The  fusion  is  carried  on  at  the  expense  of  a  portion  of
the  sulphur,  which  is  burnt,  so  that  the  remainder  may  melt  and  run
from  the  mass  of  the  earth.  This  is  carried  on  in  special  furnaces
called  calcaroni,  built  up  of  unhewn  stone  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
mines.^

^  Wlien  in  Sicily,  I  found,  near  CaltaniBetta,  a  specimen  of  sulphur  with  mineral  tar.
In  the  same  neighbourhood  there  are  naphtlm  springs  and  mud  volcanoes.  It  may  l>e
that  these  substances  have  reduced  the  sulphur  from  gypsum.

The  cliief  proof  in  favour  of  the  origin  of  sulphur  froni  gypsum  is  tliat  in  treating  the
deposits  for  the  extraction  of  the  sulpliur  it  is  found  that  the  proportion  of  sulphur
to  calcium  carbonate  never  exceeds  that  which  it  would  he  had  they  both  been  derive<l
frolh  calcium  salphate.

•  Naturally  only  those  ores  of  sulphur  which  contain  a  considerable  amount  of  sulphur
can  be  treated  by  this  method. With  poor  ores  it  is  necesnary  to  have  recourse  to  dis-

known

...  __  .1  fioirert  nf  giilpkiirJ'  But  when  the  temperature  of  the
rtveiver  attains  the  melting  ]K>int  of  sulphur,  it  passes  into  a  liquid

lilUtioii  or  meclinnii-nl  Ireattupnt  in  orilFr  In  nrinmte  tlip  Bnlt>1mr.  but  iCn  prEce  is  eolow
llwl  tbia  metlidd  in  ninsl  vobm  i>i  nnt  jinilltnbli-.

Thv  imlphaT  obtuneil  b<r  tbe  Bbove-deHcribed  uietliod  still  wntsinH  Houie  impnritieii,
bot  it  ta  fminently  iiihcIh  nse  of  in  this  form  liir  manj'  imrpoiVH.  uid  eapwiklly  in  mn-
ildanble  c|DantitteB  for  the  inutufBctuie  (it  anlpliDric  acid,  anij  tor  alrewilig  otur  gntpes.
For  other  pnrpiweii.  anil  eapeciaJIj  in  the  prepimtiiin  at  gunpowder,  ft  purer  sulphur  in
r«inired.  Kolphnr  niny  be  purified  b;  diHtillntinn.  The  urnde  Bulpbor  ii  o&lled  rough,
■nd  Iho  dietillod  aulplmr  rrjinrif.  Thp  iim,ngen]ent  given  in  fi|;.  HA  is  cmpln^ed  tor
re&ninjc  «atpbDr.  Tlie  mugli  milpliui  Ih  melted  in  the  boiler'/,  (nd  h  iL  tnelts  it  in  run
throng  the  tube  F  inUi  ui  iron  retort  B  hented  by  the  uiked  fluae  ol  the  tumaoe.
Here  Uie  Hulphur  i*  eon  verted  into  vapour,  wliicb  piuaeR  titmugb  n  wide  tube  into  tho
ubambvr  O.  mirroiiiided  by  ntune  walls  snd  fumi«btd  with  a  wfetj-vtlve  S.

204  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMLSTKY  .

state  and  is  cast  into  moulds  (like  sealing  wax),  and is  then  known
under  the  name  of  roU  sulphur.^

In  an  uncombined  state  sulphur  exists  in  several  inodijicationsy  and
forms  a  good  example  of  the  facility  with  which  an  alteraticm  of  proper-
ties can  take  place  without  a  change  of  composition — that  is,  as  regards
the  material  of  a  substance.  Common  sulphur  has  the  well-known
yellow  colour.  This  colour  fades  as  the  temperature  falls,  and  at  — 50°
sulphur  is  almost  colourless.  It  is  very  brittle,  so  that  it  may  be  easily
converted  into  a  powder,  and  it  presents  a  crystalline  structure,  which,
by  the  way,  shows  itself  in  the  unequal  expansion  of  lumps  of  sulphur
by  heat.  Hence  when  a  piece  of  sulphur  is  heated  by  the  warmth  of
the  hand,  it  emits  sounds  and  sometimes  cracks,  which  probably  also
depends  on  the  bad  heat-conducting  power  of  this  substance.  It  is  easily
obtained  in  a  crystalline  form  by  artificial  means,  because  although
insoluble  in  water  it  dissolves  in  carbon  bisulphide,  and  in  certain  oils.'
Solutions  of  sulphur  in  carbon  bisulphide  when  evaporated  at  the
ordinary  temperature  yield  well-formed  transparent  crystals  of  sulphur
in  the  form  of  rhombic  octahedra,  in  which  form  it  occurs  native.  The
specific  gravity  of  these  crystals  is  2  045.  Fused  sulphur,  cast  into
moulds  and  cooled,  has,  after  being  kept  a  long  time,  a  specific  gravity
2*066  ;  almost  the  same  as  that  of  the  crystalline  sulphur  of  the  above
form,  which  shows  that  common sulphur  is  the  same  as  that  which

^  Sulphur  ifiay  be  extracted  by  various  other  means.  It  may  be  extriicted  from  iron
pyrites,  FeS.^,  which  is  very  widely  distributed  in  nature.  From  100  parts  of  iron  pyrites
about  half  the  sulphur  contained,  namely,  about  25  parts,  may  be  extracted  by  heating
without  the  iiccess  of  air,  a  lower  sulphide  of  iron,  which  is  more  stable  under  the  action
of  heat,  being  left  behind.  Alkali  waste  (Chapter  XII.),  containing  calcium  sulphide  an<1
gypsum,  CaSO(,  may  be  used  for  the  same  purpose,  but  native  sulphur  is  so  cheap  that
recourse  can  only  be  had  to  these  sources  when  the  calcium  sulphide  appears  as  a  worth-
less bye-product.  The  most  simple  process  for  the  extraction  of  sulphur  from  alkali
waste,  in  a  chemical  sense,  consists  in  evolving  sulphuretted  hydrogen  from  the  calcium
sulphide  by  the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid.  The  sul])hurett«d  hydrogen  when  burnt
gives  water  and  sulphurous  anhydride,  which  reacts  on  fresh  sulphuretted  hydrogen
with  the  separation  of  sulphur.  The  combustion  of  the  sulphuretted  hydrogen  may  be
so  conducted  that  a  mixture  of  2H.2S  and  SO.j  is  straightway  formed,  and  this  mixture
will  deposit  sulphur  (Chapter  XII.,  Note  14).  (irossage  and  Chance  treat  alkali  waste
with  carbonic  anhydride,  and  subject  the  sulphuretted  hydrogen  evolved  to  incomplete
combustion  (this  is  best  done  by  passing  a  mixture  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  and  air,
taken  in  the  requisite  proportions,  over  red-hot  ferric  oxide),  by  which  means  water  an<l
the  vapour  of  suliihur  are  formed  :  H.,>S  +  O  «  H.^0  +  S.

^  One  hundred  parts  of  liquid  carbon  bisulphide,  CS.2,  dissolve  lO'o  parts  of  sulphur
at  -11°,  24  parts  at  0°,  37  parts  at  15°,  4«  parts  at  22-,  and  isi  parts  at  55' .  The
stvturated  solution  boils  at  55°,  whilst  pure  carbon  bisulphide  boils  at  17^.  The  solution
of  sulphur  in  carbon  bisulphide  reduces  the  tem(>erature,  just  as  in  the  solution  of  salts
in  water.  Thus  the  solution  of  20  parts  of  sulphur  in  50  parts  of  carbon  bisulphide  at
22*^  lowers  the  temperature  by  5°  ;  100  imrts  of  benzene,  CjjHg,  dissolves  00G5  part  of
sulphur  at  20",  and  4*877  parts  at  71  ;  chloroform,  CHCl-,  dissolves  1"2  part  of  sulphur
at  22',  and  10  H5  parts  at  174  .

SULPHUR, SELENIUM, AND TEIJATRIUM  205

crystallises  in  octahedra.  The  specific  lieat  of  octahedral  sulphur  is
0*17  ;  it  melts  at  114°,  and  forms  a  bi-ight  yellow  mobile  liquid.  On
further  heating,  the  fused  sulphur  undergoes  an  alteration,  which  we
shall  presently  describe,  first  observing  that  the  above  octahedral  state
of  sulphur  is  its  most  stable  form.  Sulphur  may  be  kept  at  the  ordi-
nary temperature  in  this  form  for  an  indefinite  length  of  time,  and
many  other  modifications  of  sulphur  pass  into  this  form  after  being  left
for  a  certain  time  at  ordinary  temperature.

If  sulphur  be  melted  and  then  slightly  cooled,  so  that  it  forms  a
crust  on  the  surface  and  over  the  sides  of  the  crucible,  while  the
internal  mass  remains  liquid,  then  the  sulphur  takes  another  crystal-
line form  as  it  solidifies.  This  may  be  seen  by  breaking  the  crust,  and
pouring  out  the  remaining  molten  sulphur.®  It  is  then  found  that  the
sides  of  the  crucible  are  covered  with  jrrismatic  crystals  of  the  mono-
clinic  system  ;  they  have  a  totally  diflferent  appearance  from  the  above-
described  crystals  of  rhombic  sulphur.  The  prismatic  crystals  are
brown,  transparent,  and  less  dense  than  the  crystals  of  rhombic
sulphur,  their  specific  gravity  being  only  1*93,  and  their  melting  point
higher — about  120°.  These  crystals  of  sulphur  cannot  be  kept  at
the  ordinary  temperature,  which  is  indeed  evident  from  the  fact  that
in  time  they  turn  yellow  ;  the  specific  gravity  also  changes,  and  they
pass  completely  into  the  ordinary  modification.  This  is  accompanied
by  a  considerable  development  of  heat,  so  that  the  temperature  of  the
mass  may  rise  12°.  Thus  sulphur  is  dimorphous  -tYmt  is,  it  exists  in
two  crystalline  forms,  and  in  both  forms  it  has  independent  physical
properties.  However,  no  chemical  reactions  are  known  which  distin-
guish the  two  modifications  of  sulphur,  just  as  there  are  none  dis-
tinguishing aragonite  from  calcspar.^

If  molten  sulphur  be  heated  to  158°  it  loses  its  mobility  and
l>ecomes  thick  and  very  dark-coloured,  so  that  the  crucible  in  which  it

®  If  the  experiment  ]>e  made  in  a  vesHel  with  a  narrow  capillary  tube,  the  Hulphar
fuses  at  a  lower  temperature  (occurs,  as  it  wero,  in  a  BU{)ersaturated  state),  and  solidifying
at  90°,  appears  in  a  rhombic  form  (Schiitzenberger).

^  If  sulphur  be  cautiously  melted  in  a  U  tube  immersed  in  a  salt  bath,  and  then
gradually  cooled,  it  is  possible  for  all  the  sulphur  to  remain  liquid  at  100"^.  It  will  now
be  in  a  state  of  superfusion ;  thus  also  by  careful  refrigeration  water  may  be  obtained  in
a  liquid  state  at  — 10*^,  and  a  lump  of  ice  then  causes  such  water  to  form  ice,  and
the  temperature  rises  to  0^.  If  a  prismatic  crystal  of  sulphur  be  thrown  into  one  branch
of  the  U  tube  containing  the  liquid  sulphur  at  100^,  and  an  octahedral  crystal  be  thrown
into  the  other  branch,  then,  as  Gemez  showed,  the  sulphur  in  each  branch  wUl  crystal-
lise in  the  corresponding  form,  and  both  forms  are  obtained  at  the  same  temperature ;
therefore  it  is  not  the  uifluence  of  temi>erature  only  which  causes  the  molecules  of
sulphur  to  distribute  themselres  in  one  or  another  form,  but  also  the  influence  of  the
crystalline  parts  already  formed.  This  phenomenon  is  essentially  analogous  to  the
phenomena  of  supersaturated  s :>lutions.

206  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

is  heated  may  be  inverted  without  the  sulphur  running  out.  When
hecated  above  this  temperature  the  sulphur  again  becomes  liquid,  and
at  250°  it  is  very  mobile,  although  it  does  not  acquire  its  original
colour,  and  at  440°  it  boils.  These  modifications  in  the  properties  of
sulphur  depend  not  only  on  the  variations  of  temperature,  but  also  on
a  change  of  structure.  If  sulphur,  heated  to  about  350°,  be  poured  in
a  thin  stream  into  cold  water,  it  does  not  solidify  into  a  solid  mass,  but
retains  its  brown  colour  and  remains  soft,  may  l>e  stretched  out  into
threads,  and  is  elastic,  like  guttapercha.  But  in  this  soft  and  ductile
state,  also,  it  does  not  remain  for  a  long  time.  After  the  lapse  of  a
certain  period  this  soft  ti'ansparent  sulphur  hardens,  becomes  opaque,
passes  into  the  ordinary  yellow  modification  of  sulphur,  and  in  so  doing
develops  heat,  just  as  in  the  conversion  of  the  prismatic  into  the  octa-
hedral variety.  The  soft  sulphur  is  characterised  by  the  fact  that  a
certain  portion  of  it  is  insoluble  in  carbon  bisulphide.  When  soft  sul-
phur is  immersed  in  this  liquid,  only  a  portion  of  common  sulphur
pass&s  into  solution,  whilst  a  certain  portion  is  quite  insoluble  and
remains  so  for  a  long  time.  The  maximum  proportion  of  insoluble
sulphur  is  obtained  by  heating  slightly  above  170°.  It  melts  at  114°.
An  exactly  similar  insoluble  amorphouH  aulphnr  is  obtained  in  certain
reactions  in  the  wet  way,  when  sulphur  separates  out  from  solutions.
Thus  sodium  thiosulphate,  NagSjOa,  when  treated  with  acids,  gives  a
precipitate  of  sulphur,  which  is  insoluble  in  carbon  bisulphide.  The
action  of  water  on  sulphur  chloride  also  gives  a  similar  modification  of
sulphur.  Certain  sulphides,  when  treated  with  nitric  acid,  also  yield
sulphur  in  this  fonn.'"

^^  A  certain  amount  of  inKoluble  Kulpliur  remains  for  a  long  time  in  the  mass  of  soft
sulphur,  (rluin^ng  into  the  ordinary  variety.  Freshly-cooled  soft  sulphur  contains  about
one-third  of  insoluble  sulphur,  and  after  the  lapse  of  two  veai-s  it  still  contains  about
15  p.c.  Flowers  of  sulphur,  obtained  by  the  rapid  condensation  of  sulphur  from  a  state
of  vapour,  also  contains  a  certain  amount  of  insoluble  suli)hnr.  linpidUj  distilled  and
condensed  sulphur  ixXso  contains  some  insoluble  snli)hur.  H*.*nce  a  certain  amount  of
insoluble  sul])hur  is  frequently  found  in  roll  sulphur.  The  action  of  light  on  a  solution
of  sulphur  converts  a  certain  portion  into  the  insoluble  modification.  Insoluble  sulphur
is  of  a  lighter  colour  than  the  ordinary  variety.  It  isl>est  ])repared  by  vaporising  sulphur
in  a  stream  of  carbonic  anhydride,  hydrochloric  acid,  S:v.,  aiul  collecting  the  va^wur  in
cold  water.  When  condensed  in  this  maimer  it  is  nearly  all  insoluble  in  carbon  bisul-
phide. It  then  has  the  form  of  hollow  spheroids,  and  is  therefore  lighter  than  the
common  variety :  sp.  gr.  1'8'2.  An  idea  of  the  modifications  talking  place  in  sulphur
between  110  and  '2'A)-'  may  be  formed  from  the  fact  tliut  at  1."<V  li<jiiid  sulphur  has  a
coefficient  of  expansion  of  about  O'OOO,'),  whilst  betw»'cn  l.'ilT  and  'I'^i^^  it  is  less  than
000():J.

Engel  (iM'.n),  by  decom()08ing  a  saturated  solution  of  liyi>o'^ul|)lnle(»f  sodium  (Note  4ti)
with  HCl  in  the  cold  (the  sulphur  is  not  precipitated  directly  in  this  case),  obtained,  after
shaking  up  with  chlorofonn  and  eva|X)ration,  crystals  of  -^ulphur  (sp.  gr.  2*1H.'»),  which,  after
several  hours,  jmssed  into  the  insoluble  (in  CS.,)  state,  and  in  so  doing  became  opaque,
and  increased  in  volume. But  if  a  mixture  of  solution  of  Xa.S  ,0-  and  HCl  be  allowed  to

BULTHUB.  SELKNIUM.  AKI)  I-ELLUBIUM  207

mperatured  of  440°  to  700°  tlie  vapour  density  of  sulphur  is
J  referred  to  air — i.e.  about  9S  referred  to  hydmgRn.  Hence,  at
these  temperatures  llm  mrJfC'tln  of  miiplnir  coiititiwi  air  iiloiiin ;  it  has
the  compiKiitioii  8„,  The  ngreement  lietweeu  the  observations  of  Duirias,
Mitecherlich,  Bineau,  and  Deville  ernifirms  the  aucuiiicy  of  this  result.
But  in  this  respect  tlie  pro])erties  of  sulphur  wen?  found  to  lie  variable.
Wlien  lieated  to  liigher  turiiperaturea,  that  is  to  say,  iibovf  800°,  the
t'apuur  density  of  sulphur  is  ftiund  bi  Ije  one-third  of  this  quantity,  i.e.
about  32  referred  to  hydrogen.  At  thl-i  temperature  the  moU.eule  of'
ifafphir,  like  that  of  hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  and  chlorine,  euiUainii
I.Kn>  ahmin  ;  hence  tlie  molecular  formula  is  then  S^.  This  variHlion  in
the  vapour  density  of  sulphur  evidently  corresponds  with  a  polymeric
niodilicutiun,  and  may  be  likened  to  the  tiunsforroation  of  nEone,  0„
into  oxygen,  O,,  oi- belter  still,  of l^nKoue,  CsH,;,  into  ficetylene,

«£)»  tlw  cull<iia  vnrii-ti»4  uf  Ihe  uicUUiu  Holphide.,  Hlumiiiu.  buiou.  «.ui  silver),  but  llu«
collf^d  tutirtion  vf  titlphitr  Mwn  depiwitfl  lulphur  inaolable  in  CS...

Wbeu  ■  wlutinii  <if  ^iilpLuretted  liyclmgen  id  wKler  ia  decum|KM«d  by  nii  dactriu
cnneiit  thi:'  Hulphnr  in  ilvposilcd  on  the  poaitiiv  pole,  luid  hoc  IhereFare  wi  dectrck
negative  eliaructer,  and  tliia  fiiilpliiir  is  solnble  in  cArboii  biuJphide.  When  n  Bolnlion
of  anlphtironft  tfi\A  ia  det'ompuiwd  in  tbo  Bame  ULruuier,  Uie  sulphur  \t  depuait^d  on  tlie
iiegative  pnli^i  «ud  W  tliervforo  eleotro-poutiTe,  and  t]i«  Hulphur  «o  deposited  ib  iaaoluble
in  ctrbon  binulphidc.  The  sulphur  vhich  i«  combined  with  metals  uiUHt  havu  the  pm-
p«rtiw  ol  the  sulphur  cont^nvd  in  iiulphnrettoil  hydrogen,  wliiUt  tbe  sulphur  combined
witli  chlorine  it,  like  that  vhich  ia  combinnd  with  oxygen  in  aoli'huroai.  anhydride.
HeoM  BcTtlidlot  rHoognisea  the  preaence  of  aolnble  xnlphtu  iu  uiaUilic  >nl|iliideB,  und  ol
th«  inaoluble  modiHcutiim  of  aniorjihonti  ■ii]i>har  in  sulphur  chluride.  Oloei  ahowed  tlwl
the  «al|i>inr  preci]MCal«d  from  Hilutioni  ia  either  soluble  or  inanlublo.  aocDrdin|i  la
whetlier  it  aepualea  tmm  an  alkaline  or  acid  aolation.  If  aulphnr  b«  mdbad  vitli
a  lonatl  qnantity  of  iuline  l^^  bminiue.  then  oti  pourinH  out  tlie  molten  roawi  it  lotnta
amiirpbnUH  mlphnr.  which  keep"  ao  (or  a  terj  long  lime,  and  ia  inanlublo.  or  iieacl)-  ao,  in
ntcbcin  hiiulphide.  Thi«  ia  taken  advantage  «f  in  caatiiiK  rartaiii  articlua  in  HUlpiiur,
which  by  thia  meanB  retain  their  tenacity  for  a  long  time;  for  example,  the  diaca  of

"  Hen,  however,  it  i>i  very  important  to  remark  that  both  heuiene  and  awtylene
can  eiiat  at  the  onlioary  tempeniture.  whilat  tlw  lulpbar  molecule  S,  only  exiBle  at  liigh
(i!Ui{>entlurHS ;  and  il  tliia  anJpUur  be  allowed  tr>  ciwl.  it  paSHea  flrat  into  S,  and  then  into
a  iii|uid  tlate.  Were  it  iwasible  to  have  Hul|diur  at  U>e  ordinary  temperature  in  both  tin?
above  iniijilieationa,  then  in  all  probuhility  the  sulgJiiir  in  the  atnle  &,  woiiM  preaeol
tnlallj  different  ptoperliea  from  those  which  it  bas  in  the  (oroi  S,,  JuaL  aa  the  |TO|>erlies
of  gaaeoaa  acetylene  are  tar  from  being  aimilor  to  Ihoue  of  liquid  bencene.  Italphur,  in
tlu  form  r>(  H,,  ia  probably  a  anbaUnce  which  boil«  «t  a  much  lower  temperature  tlian
tlie  variety  with  which  we  are  now  dealing.  Patemo  nnd  Naaini  ll>«M|,  following  the
nMbod  of  itepnaaion  or  fall  o(  tlie  treeung-point  in  a  beniene  aolnlion,  lonnd  that  the
in»l*eiilH  of  aulphur  in  aolntion  containa  S|.

One  inuKt  here  call  attention  to  the  turt  lliat  EOlphur,  witli  all  ita  analogy  (a
o>fg«n  (which  also  ahowa  itself  in  its  faculty  to  eite  Ihe  mndiBcation  8,},  ia  also  able
In  givB  a  amim  of  campounda  coiilaining  more  alonii  >it  aulphur  lliau  the  aUHlogoiisoiy-
LpoaDdG  do  of  OTjg<?n. Thna,  for  inataikce.  c<iiu|KiUndH  uf  5  iitoma  of  nnlphur  with

208  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

In  its  faculty  for  comhhiation,  sulphur  most  closely  resembles  oxygen
and  chlorine ;  like  them,  it  combines  with  nearly  all  elements,  with
the  development  of  heat  and  light,  forming  sulphur  compounds,  but
as  a  rule  this  only  takes  place  at  a  high  temperature.  At  the  ordinary
temperature  it  does  not  enter  into  reactions,  owing,  amongst  other
things,  to  the  fact  that  it  is  a  solid.  In  a  molten  state  it  acts  on  most
metals  and  on  the  halogens.  It  burns  in  air  at  about  300°,  and  with
carbon  at  a  red  heat,  but  it  does  not  combine  with  nitrogen.

Fine  wires,  or  the  powders  of  the  greater  number  of  metals,  burn  in
the  vapour  of  sulphur.  The  direct  combination  of  hydrogen  with  sul-
phur is  restricted  by  a  limit — that  is,  at  a  given  temperature  and  under
other  given  conditions  it  does  not  proceed  unrestrictedly  ;  there  is  no
explosion  or  recalescence.  Sulphuretted  hydrogen,  HjS,  decomposes  at
its  temperature  of  combination— that  is,  it  is  easily  dissociated.  ^^  The
same  phenomenon  is  repeated  here  as  with  water,  except  that  the  tem-
peratures at  which  the  attraction  of  hydrogen  for  sulphur  begins  and
ceases  are  much  lower  than  in  the  case  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  The
tempemture  at  which  combination  takes  place  is  here,  as  in  many  other
instances,  nearly  the  same  as  that  at  which  dissociation  begins.  Hence
sulphuretted  hydrogen  is  formed  in  a  small  quantity  by  the  direct
ignition  of  a  mixture  of  the  vapour  of  sulphur  and  hydrogen.  How-
ever, the  temperature  must  not  be  high,  because  otherwise  the  whole
of  the  sulphuretted  hydrogen  is  decomposed  ;  but  at  lower  temperatures
a  small  amount  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  is  formed  by  direct  combina-
tion.'^ Sulphuretted  hydrogen  however,  like  all  other  hydrogen  com-

1  atom  of  barium,  BaS^,  are  known,  whereas  with  oxygen  onh'  BaOo  ih  known.  On  every
side  one  cannot  but  see  in  sulphur  a  faculty  for  the  union  of  a  greater  number  of  atoms
than  with  oxygen.  With  oxygen  the  form  of  ozone,  O5,  is  very  unstable,  the  stable  form
is  O2  ;  whilst  with  sulphur  S^  is  the  stable  form,  and  S.j  is  exceedingly  unstable.  Further-
more, it  is  remarkable  that  sulphur  gives  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation,  H.^S04,  correspond-
ing, as  it  were,  with  its  complex  composition,  if  we  sui)i)ose  that  in  Sg  four  atoms  of  sulphur
are  replaced  by  oxygen  and  one  by  two  atoms  of  hydrogen.  The  fornuiljv  of  its  compounds,
K2SO4,  K2S2O5,  K.^Ss,  BaSs,  and  many  others,  have  no  analogues  among  the  compounds
of  oxygen.  They  all  correspond  with  the  fonn  Sg  (one  portion  of  the  sulphur  beinf^
replaced  by  oxygen  and  another  by  metals),  which  is  not  attained  by  oxygen.  In  this
faculty  of  sulphur  to  hold  many  atoms  of  other  substances  the  same  forces  appear  which
cause  many  atoms  of  sulphur  to  form  one  complex  molecule.

**  In  the  formation  of  potassium  sulphide,  K.,S  (that  is,  in  the  combination  of  3*2
parts  of  sulphur  with  78  parts  of  potassium),  aljout  100  thousand  heat  units  are  deve-
loped. Nearly  as  much  heat  is  developed  in  the  combination  of  an  equivalent  quantity
of  sodium  ;  about  00  thousand  heat  units  in  the  formation  of  calcium  or  strontium  sul-
phide ;  about  40  thousand  for  zinc  or  cadmium  sulphide,  and  about  20  thousand  for  iron,
cobalt,  or  nickel  sulphide.  Less  heat  is  evolved  iu  the  combination  of  sulphur  with
copi)er,  lead,  and  silver.  According  to  Thomsen,  sulphur  develops  heat  with  hydrogen
in  solutions.  The  reaction  Io,Aq,H..,S  =  21,830  calories.  But,  as  the  reaction  I.,  ^H2  + Aq
develops  26,84*2  calories,  it  follows  tliat  the  reaction  Hj-f-S  develops  4,r)12  calories.

•'»  If snl[>liiir l)e melted in a  flask and'  heated nearly  to its boiling point, as

Sl'LPHUR.  SELENIUM.  AND  TELLURIl^  209

pounds,  may  be  easily  oblflined  by  the  double  decomposition  of  its  con*-
spun<liiig  metallic  compounds,  the  replncement  of  the  metal  by  hydrogen
beiny  effected  by  the  action  of  acids  on  the  sulphideK.  Thi-  metallic  sub
phides  are,  as  n  rule,  easily  fonned.  A  salphide,  when  mixed  with  a  non'
viilntile  acid,  may  give,  by  double  decomfwAition,  a  salt  of  the  acid  taken
and  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  M^S  +  H .JSO^  =HjS  +  M^SO,.  However,  if
is  notftll  sulphides  norsolutiiins  of  all  aciils  that  will  evolve  sulphuretted
hydrogen,  which  fact  is  exceedingly  characteristic,  because,  for  example,
all  carbonates  evolve  carbonic  anhydride  when  treated  with  any  acid.
Hulphuric  acid  will  only  evolve  sulphuretted  hydrogen  from  those  sul-
phides which  contain  a  metal  capable  of  decomposing  the  acid  with  the
evolution  of  hydrogen.  Thus  zinc,  iron ,  calcium,  niagnesium,  manganese,
potassium,  sodium,  A'c,  form  sulphides  which  evolve  sulphurett-ed
hydrogen  when  treated  with  sulphuric  acid,  and  the  metalH  themselves
evolve  hydrogen  with  acids.'*  The  sulphides  of  those  metals  which  do
not  lilterate  hydrogen  from  acids  do  not  generally  act  on  acids — that  is,

Lidoff  slioneil,  tlip  miililioii,  drup  by  drop  (from  a  funnel  with  a  ttopcoclt)  of  lienvj  (ICU)
naphtlu  oil  tnt  laliripnting  oleonaplitha),  Ac,  ie  followed  by  a  reguliu-  FTolation  of  onl-
tihuretled  hrdnignx.  Thin  ih  utBlogDOB  lo  the  action  ol  broiniiH!  of  iodine  on  panlSn
nnd  other  oils,  lutiune  hjdrobroniic  or  hydriodio  afid  ia  then  Inrmed  (Chapter  XI.)
A  certain  nmoan I  □!  hydrogen  anlphide  is  even  formed  when  Bulphor  is  boiled  with  water.

"  However,  the  iiiaLter  is  really  much  more  coropliMted.  ThuaiinD  Bulphide  pyolye*
snlphnretted  hydroKen  with  tulpbaric  ot  hydrocbloiio  acids,  but  does  not  react  with
■cetic  add  tuid  iBcntdiwd  by  nitricacid.  Ferrous  sulphide  evolres  sulphureltud  hjitro-
gHuvitlisvidx.  whilst  the  biitulpliide,FeSi.dae)i  not  react  with  adds  of  ordinary  Htrength.
Tliis  ■bseiu.-e  nl  nation  depeudi,  among  other  things,  on  the  form  in  which  the  natiYe
inin  pyritwa  oix'urs ;  it  is  a  crystalline,  oompaot,  and  very  dense  ■ubslajice ;  tad  acids  in
genenl  reset  vith  gruHl  difficulty  on  such  mctaJlic  sulphides.  This  is  seen  very  clearly
in  the  eiue  of  line  sulphide;  it  this  substanc*  is  ubtaiued  by  doable  decompaaition,  it
seiMUUtos  as  a  white  preciintate,  which  evolves  sulphuretted  hydrogen  with  grrnt  ease
when  treated  with  acids.  Zinc  sal|Aide  is  obt&Lued  in  tlie  suns  form  when  linc  is  timed
with  snlphur,  but  native  line  salphide — which  owiits  in  compact  masses  of  zinc  blende,
and  has  a  metallic  luatre — is  sot  decomposed  or  scarcely  decomposed  by  snlphuric  acid.

Another  source  ot  complication  in  the  behnviour  of  the  metallic  sulpliides  towards
acids  depends  on  the  action  of  water,  and  is  «hown  in  the  tact  that  the  action  varies
with  diflerent  degrees  of  dilution  or  proportion  ot  water  present.  The  best  known
example  ot  this  is  antimonions  sulphide,  Sb^Sj,  for  strong  hydrochloric  acid,  contain.
tag  not  more  water  tfian  corresponds  with  HCI,6HjO,  eren  deeamposed  native  anti-
mony glance,  witli  evolution  ot  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  whilst  dilnle  avid  has  no  action,
and  in  the  presence  ol  an  excess  of  water  the  reaction  3SbCI--t'SH,S  =  8b.^,  +  IIHCI
ocmis,  whilst  in  the  presence  of  a  emidl  aiaonat  ol  »nt«r  the  reaction  ptocetHts  in
exactly  the  opposite  diieotiou.  Here  the  participation  ot  water  in  the  reuctioii  uiid  its
affinity  are  evident.

The  facts  that  tend  nulphide  is  ineolublo  in  acids,  tliat  linc  sulphide  ia  aolnble  in
liydrochloris  acid  bat  insoluble  in  acetic  acid,  that  caldum  sulphide  is  ei'en  devamposed
by  CArbonic  acid,  S!c — all  these  peculiarities  ol  the  sulphides  are  in  correlation  with  the
■looant  ot  heat  evolved  in  the  reaction  ol  the  oxides  with  hydrogen  salphide  and  with
acids,  an  ik  seen  from  the  obsemtioas  of  Favie  mid  Silberman,  and  from  tlie  coroparisono
made  by  Btrthelot  in  the  Proceedings  ol  the  Paris  Academy  ol  Sciences.  1X71),  to  which
ir  the  reader  lor  lacther  details.
.  II.  !•

210  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

do  not  form  sulphuretted  hydrogen  with  them  ;  such  are,  for  example,
the  sulphides  of  lead,  silver,  copper,  mercury,  tin,  ttc.  Therefore,  the
modus  oj)era7idi  of  the  formation  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  by  the  action
of  acids  on  metallic  sulphides  may  be  looked  on  as  a  phenomenon  of  the
combination  of  hydrogen,  at  the  moment  of  its  evolution,  with  the  sul-
phur, which  is  combined  with  the  metal.  Such  a  representation  is  all
the  more  simple  as  all  the  circumstances  under  which  sulphuretted
hydrogen  is  formed  are  exactly  similar  to  the  conditions  of  the  forma-
tion of  hydrogen  itself.  Thus  the  usual  mode  of  preparing  sulphurette<i
hydrogen  is  by  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on  ferrous  sulphide,  in
which  the  same  apparatus  and  method  are  employed  as  in  the  prepara-
tion of  hydrogen,  only  replacing  the  metallic  iron  or  zinc  by  ferrous
sulphide  or  zinc  sulphide.  The  reaction  between  sulphide  of  iron  and
sulphuric  acid  takes  place  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  is  accom-
panied by  just  as  small  a  development  of  heat  as  in  the  liberation  of
hydrogen  itself,  FeS-hH2S04=FeS04-+-H2S.''^

Ill  nature  sulphuretted  hydrogen  is  formed  in  many  waya  The
most  usual  mode  of  its  formation  is  by  the  decomposition  of  albu-
minous substances  containing  sulphur,  as  mentioned  above.  Another
method  is  by  the  reducing  action  of  orgaiiic  matter  on  sulphates,
and  by  the  action  of  water  and  carbonic  acid  on  the  sulphides  formed
by  this  reduction.  Volcanic  eruptions  are  a  third  source  of  sulphuretted
hydrogen  in  nature.  Although  sulphuretted  hydrogen  is  formed  in
small  quantities  everywhere,  it  nevertheless  soon  disappears  from  the
atmosphere,  owing  to  its  being  easily  decomposed  by  oxidising  agencies.
Many  mineral  waters  contain  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  and  smell  of  it ;
they  are  called  *  sulphur  waters.'

Sulphuretted  hydrogen,  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  is  a  colourless
gas,  having  a  a  very  unpleasant  odour.  It  has,  iis  its  composition  HjS
shows,  a  specific  gravity  seventeen  times  greater  than  hydrogen,  and

'*  Ferrous  sulphide  is  formed  by  heating  a  piece  of  iron  to  an  incipient  white  heat,
and  then  removing  it  from  the  furnace  and  bringing  it  into  contact  with  a  piece  of
Kulphar.  Combination  then  proceedB,  accompanied  by  the  development  of  heat,  and  the
ferrous  sulphide  formed  fuses.  The  sulphide  of  iron  thus  formed  is  a  black,  easily-
fusible  substance,  insoluble  in  water.  When  damp  it  attracts  oxygen  from  the  air,  and
is  converted  into  green  vitriol,  FeS04.  If  all  the  iron  docs  not  combine  with  the  sulphur
in  the  method  described  above,  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  will  evolve  hydrogen  as  well
as  hydrogen  sulphide.

We  will  not  describe  the  details  of  the  preparation  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen
employed  as  a  reagent  in  the  laboratory,  because,  in  the  first  ])lace,  the  methods  are
essentially  the  same  as  in  the  preparation  of  hytlrogen,  and,  in  the  second  ])lace,  because
t\w  apparatus  and  methods  employed  are  always  described  in  text-books  of  analytical
chemistry.  Ferrous  sulphide  may  be  advantageously  replaced  by  calcium  sulphide  or  a
mixture  of  calcium  and  magnesium  sulphides.  A  solution  of  magnesium  hydrosulphide,
MgSjHQS,  is  ver}-  convenient,  as  at  60°  itVvolves  a  stream  of  pure  hydrogen  sulphide.  A
paste,  consisting  of  CuS  with  crystals  of  MgCl^  and  water,  may  also  be  employed,  since
it  only  evolves  HjS  when  heated  (Habermann).

SULPRUS,  SELENIUH, AND  TBLI.UIUUU

therefiire  it  13  s"niewhat  heavier  than  uir.  Sulphuretted  hydrogen  li^ue-
_/(>»  at  alxiut  —74°,  aad  at  the  oidinary  temperature  wben  Bubjected  ton
pressure  of  10  to  IS  atmosphetes  ;  at  -H5°  it  is  ronverted  itito  a  solid
crystalline  mass.'^"'  Tlie  easy  liijuefaction  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen
is  evidently  allied  to  its  soluljitity.  One  volume  of  water  at  0"  dis-
solves 4-37  volumes  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  at  10°  Srn^  volumes,
und  at  20''  2'SI  volom&s,"'  The  ailutiona  iiupart  a  very  feeble  red
(.■oloration  ta  litmus  paper.  This  gas  is  poisonous.  One  part  in  fifteen
hundred  parts  of  air  will  kill  birds.  Mammalia  die  in  an  atmosphere
containing  jj^n  °^  ^^^  S^^'

I5ulphurett«d  hydrogen  i»  very  easily  dei-omputu:'!  into  its  component
parts  by  the  action  of  heat  nr  a  series  of  electric  sparks.  Mejice  it  is
not  surprising  that  sulphuretted  hydi-ogen  undergoes  change  under  thi?
notion  of  many  sulistances  having  ,1  considerable  affinity  for  hydrogen
and  ijxygen.  Very  many  metals'^  evolve  hydrogen  with  sulphuretted
hydrogen,  s<)  that  in  this  respect  it  presents  the  property  of  an  iicid ;  for
instance,  2H,S  +  Sn=2H^  +  Sn.Sa.  This  may  I*  uken  advantage  of  for
det«rmining  the  coniposition  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  because  a  given
volume  then  leaves  the  same  volume  of  hydrogen.  On  the  other  hand,
oxygen,'*  chlorine,'^  and  even  iodine  decompose  sulphurett«d  hydrogen,

■^  ^^  Liqnid  iulphuretleil  hjdrogvii  is  mosL  enAily  obtained  by  Clw  decomptBitlcm  af
llfdnigeii  poljaalphide,  vhich  we  ihall  preseutiy  deacrib?,  by  tile  ution  o[  heat,  and  in
(be  proAeui^e  ot  a  nnall  lunaant  oF  nter.  If  poured  into  a  bent  tabe,  like  tbat  dcBcribed
for  tint  liqaefaction  of  ammonia  (Cli&pter  VI.I,  Lha  hydrogen  polysnlphidc  is  decomposed
by  beat,  iu  the  presence  of  water,  into  sulphur  and  «DlpbareCted  hydrogen,  which  con-
densM  in  the  cold  end  of  the  tube  into  a  colourlea*  liquid.

"  Solpbutettdd  bydrogen  is  itill  more  ooloble  in  alcohol  than  in  water ;  one  rolnuie
al  the  ordinary  temperalare  dieaolfoa  ai  niach  as  eight  volumee  of  the  gaa.  The  eoln-
lione  in  water  and  alcohol  undergo  change,  especially  in  open  veuele,  owing  to  tbe  fact
Ibat  the  wal«t  uul  alooiiol  disaolve  oxygen  froni  tbe  atmosphere,  whicb,  acting  on  the
tnlpfaaietted  hydrogen,  forms  water  and  anlphur.  The  aolution  may  be  so  altered  in
Ihia  mwiner  that  every  trace  uf  solphnretted  hydrogen  disappears.  Bolutions  of  anl-
phoretted  hydrogen  in  glycerine  change  much  more  slowly,  and  may  therefore  be  kept  for
»  long  linui  aa  reogentit.  De  Forcrond  obtained  a  bydral«,  H.,S,ieH.jO,  resembling  Uie
hydrates  given  by  many  gases.

"  Some  metale  evolve  hyrlrogen  from  sulpliuretted  hyilroj^en  at  the  onliniuy  tem-
porMure.  For  example,  the  light  metals,  anil  copiier  and  eilvec  (eHpnioUy  with  thii
ocoHH  ot  air?)  unong  the  heavy  metals.  Henee  articlea  made  of  silver  turn  black  in  tliu
preivnoe  ol  vapours  containing  sulphoretled  hydrogen,  becanoe  silver  suliJiide  is  block.
Zinc  uul  codniium  act  at  a  red  beat,  but  not  coiapletely.

"  If  eulphtiretted  hydrogen  escapes  from  a  fine  orifice  into  the  air.  it  will  burn  when
ligbtedt  aad  be  trooaformed  into  snlphuroua  anbydride  and  waler.  But  if  it  buma  in  a
limited  supply  of  air — for  instance,  when  a  cylinder  is  filled  witb  it  and  lighted— then  only
the  hydrogen  burnt,  which  hoa,  jndging  from  tlie  amoant  of  heat  devebiped  in  it«  com-
biKition  and  from  all  ile  properties,  a  greater  affinity  for  oxygen  than  sulphur.  In  thiH
respect  the  combustion  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  resembles  that  of  hydrocarbons.

'"  Hence  bloaohiug  powder  and  cliloHne  dentroy  the  disagreeable  smell  of  sdI-
pbtiretled  hydrogen. (For  the  reaction  of  hvilrogen  lolphide  and  iodine,  lee  Chapter

212  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

removing  the  hydrogen  from  it  and  leaving  free  sulphur,  so  that  in
this  reaction  the  sulphur  is  replaced  by  the  above-named  elements  ;  for
example,  H2S  +  Br2=2HBr-|-S. In  no  other  hydrogen  compound  is
it  so  easy  to  show  the  substitKfion,  both  of  hydrogen  and  of  the  ele-
ment combined  with  it,  as  in  hydrogen  sulphide. This  clearly  proves
the  feeble  union  between  the  elements  forming  this  gas. Compounds
containing  a  considerable  amount  of  oxygen,  with  which  they  easily
part,  can  accomplish  the  separation  of  the  sulphur  very  easily. Such
are,  for  instance,  nitrous  acid,  chromic  acid,  and  even  ferric  oxide  and
the  higher  oxides  like  it. Thus,  if  sulphuretted  hydrogen  be  passed
into  a  solution  of  chromic  acid  or  an  acid  solution  of  ferric  oxide,
water  is  formed,  and  the  stilphnr  is  sejxirated  in  a  free  state. Thus,
sulphuretted  hydrogen  acts  as  a  reducing  agent,  in  virtue  of  the  hydro-
gen it  contains. Salts  of  iodic,  chlorous,  chloric,  and  other  acids  aire
reduced  by  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  their  oxygen  acting  mainly  on  its
hydrogen  ; but  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  a  powerful  oxidising
agent  a  portion  of  the  sulphur  may  also  be  oxidised  to  sulphurous
anhydride. The  reducing  action  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  is  frequently
applied  in  chemical  manipulations  for  the  preparation  of  lower  oxides,
and  for  the  conversion  of certain  oxygen  compounds  into  hydrogen
compounds  ; thus,  the  higher  oxides  of  nitrogen  are  converted  into
ammonia  by  it,  and  in  the  presence  of  alkalis  the  nit ro-com pounds  are
converted  into  ammonia  derivatives. The  reaction  of  sulphuretted
hydrogen on sulphurous  anhydride  belongs to  this class of  pheno-
mena, the  chief  products  of  which  are  sulphur  and  water,  2H.2S-f-S02
=2H20-|-S3.

The  acid  character  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  is  clearly  seen  in  its
action  on  alkalis  and  salts. *^  ****  Thus  lead  oxide  and  its  salts  in
the  presence  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  form  water  or  an  acid,  and  sul-
phide of  lead:  PbX2  +  H2S=PbS  +  2HX.  This  reaction  takes  place
even  in  the  presence  of  powerful  acids,  because  lead  sulphide  is  one  of
those  sulphides  which  are  unacted  on  by  acids,  and  in  solutions  the
reaction  is  a  complete  one.  This  reaction  is  taken  advantage  of  for
the  preparation  of  many  acids,  by  first  converting  into  a  lead  salt,  and
then  submitting  this  salt  to  the  action  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  For
example,  lead  formate  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen  gives  formic  acid.
Sulphuretted  hydrogen  in  acting  on  a  number  of  metallic  acid  substances
in  solution  or  in  an  anhydrous  state  also  forms  corresponding  sulphates  :
(1)  if  it  does  not  reduce  the  acid  ;  (2)  if  the  sulphur  compound  corre-
sponding with  the  anhydride  of  the acid  be  insoluble  in  water,  the

lUbi*  Perfectly  dry  H..>S  (Hughea  1«1)*2)  Ims  no  action  upon  iMTfertly  dry  salts,  just  as
dry  HCI  does  not  react  with  drj'  XH-  or  metals  (Chapter  IX.,  Note  21>i.

SITLPHPK.  SELEMItJM,  AND  TEIJ.l'BirM

i-eactioii  prucecdB  in  sulutiona  ;  (3)  if  the  sulphuretted  hydri.igeji  und  tlie
ucid  taken  do  not  come  in  uontact  with  an  »lkali,  on  which  they  would
\m  able  to  act  Srat ;  and{-l)if  the  sulphur  compound  lie  nut  decomposed
by  water.  Thus  B"lutiona  of  ar-seninus  acid  give  a  pretipitale  of
arsenious  sulphide,  AsjSj,  with  aulphui-etted  hydrogen. 1  This  reaction
proceeds  not  only  in  the  presence  of  wiit«r,  but  also  of  acids,  because
the  latter  do  nut  decompose  the  resultant  sulphui-  compounds.  The
type  of  tlie  deconi position  is  the  same  as  with  \ias(^ — that  is,  the
sulphur  anJ  oxygen  change  places  :  E(l„  + iiHjSsItS.p+nH/J.  Some
sulphides  corresponding  with  acid  aiiliydrides  are  decomposed  by
water,  and  therefore  are  not  fumied  in  the  presence  of  water.  Such,
for  example,  are  the  sulphides  of  phospburuB.'"

The  metallic  sulphides  correspundiiig  with  the  metallic  1  oxides
have  either  a  feeble  alkaline  or  a  feeble  acid  character,  according  to
the  character  of  the  corresponding  oxide,  and  therefore  by  combining

»  Tlw  unlpliide  P,S  is  obtuintil  by  t«uliiou»lj-  tuning  lUo  reqoiailB  Jiroportions  of
I'liminou  pluMiilioruii  and  milpliur  uiiiler  vuUn;  it  ia  •.  liquid  whicb  «olidiflnB  at  0",  lui'l
iiiiylie  ilintOIed  without  undergtring  rliinigB,l>iit  iC  himsB  iu  air  and  easily  lakea  fira.  The
hi|[bef  adlphide,  P^S.  has  aimiUr  pruperties.  Bat  little  hMt  ia  evolved  in  the  lornution
of  these  coiupnunilx,  and  it  mity  b*  imppoiied  tLut  thej  no  Inniieil  hj  the  direct  conjnno-
tion  of  whole  molecules  of  phiwpborUB  luid  miliihur;  but  if  the  proportion  of  snlphar  be
increaeed,  the  reaction  ii  accompwiied  by  so  conniderable  a  ri»e  of  temperatncelthat  an
FEIilosioti  takes  place,  and  for  the  iwke  at  sufely  red  phosphoras  must  be  uwid,  mixed
ni>  intjniatcl;  as  passible  with  powdered  -luliihnr  and  heated  in  an  atmosphere  of  carbonic
lUiliydride.  The  higher  compnuudH  ore  decnnitiosed  by  water.  By  iucreSHuig'tho  pro-
portion of  aulpbnr,  the  fi.llowinK  ciiroiwnnds  linve  lieen  obtained ;  PjSs  as  iirismB^t fuses
ftt  lCE°,Rebs),solable  in  curbon  bisulphide,  and  nnattsred  by  air  and  waUr ;  phoiphoma
iritvlphiite,  P,Sj,  is  the  analogue  of  P,0, ;  it  is  b  light  yellow  i^slalline  componnd
only  slightly  soluble  ia  carbon  bisalphide.  fnKible  and  volatile,  dewmposed  into  bydro-
geu  sulphide  and  phmphorcms  acid  by  wuter,  und,  like  the  liifibest  compound  of
•olphnr  and  pliospliurqs.  P.j»„  it  forms' thio-Nilts  with  poUssium  sulpliide,  Ao.  This
phatpliunu peiilaiulphiilt  a,ntispoad»  with  phosiihoric  anbydride ;  hhe  the  trisulpbide  it
Kiv»  hydrogen  snlphidfl  and  pho«iilioric  acid  wtilh  an  eioem  of  water.  It  reacts  in  majiy
ropect*  like  pliosidioriB  chloride.  The  snlphide  Pift.j  is  also  known  :  th«  vnpour  density
o{  this  compound  teems  to  indicate  ■  molecule  PjBg.

PkoiphoTua  lulphoehloridii,  P8CI],  corres-ponda  villi  pboBphoms  oxytliloride.  It  is
a  oolonrless,  pleasant-nmelliag  liquid,  boiling  at  191°,  and  of  sp.  gr.  IGH ;  it  fumes  in  nir
and  is  deconipoaed  hy  water:  PSClj  +  *H,0  =  PHjO,  f  11,9  +  SHa.  It  ia  ohtaineil
when  phoaphoric  chloride  is  treated  with  hydnogen  snlphide,  hydrochloric  acid  being  oleu
formed;  it  is  also  produced  by  the  action  of  phosphoric  chloride  on  certiun  sulphides — fur
example,  on  autimonioDs  aulphide,  also  hy  the  (cantious)  action  of  phosphoms  on  sulphur
chloride :  9P  +  a^^Cl,  ^  SPSCl^  -i  43.  l^  the  action  of  PCIi  upon  certain  sulphides,  tor
siample,  Sl»,83,hy  the  reaction  ;  BMCl  +  PjSi  =  PSCI3  +  MjPBj  (Glatxel,  lt)9B),ftnd  in  the
reaction  BPCIj  +  SCXU,  =  PClj  +  POCl,  +  PBClj,  showing  Uie  rednoing  action  of  phos-
phorus trichloride,  whioh  a  especially  clear  in  the  reaction  80^  +  PClj  ^  SO3  +  POClj.
Thorpe  and  Ilodger  |1B89),  hy  heating  SPbR,  or  BiF^  with  liluMphoma  pentasolphidc.
land  also  by  heating.  AsFj  and  P8Clj  to  lo«=),  obtained  thiophoephory!  flnoride  aa  a
culoorlesti,  spontaneonslj  mflunmable  gas  (arc  further  on.  Note  Tl  bis,  and  Chspt«r  XIX..
NoU  afi).  The  action  of  PSCIj  upon  XaHO  gives  a  salt  of  monotbiophosphoric  acid
■ KahierwJiky).  HjPSOj,  which  gives  soluble  salts  of  tin  alkalis.

^^^Urt«,

214  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

together  they  are  able  to  form  saline  substances — that  is,  salts  in
which  the  oxygen  is  replaced  by  sulphur.  Thus  sulphuretted  hydrogen
having  the  properties  of  a  feeble  acid  ^^  has,  at  the  same  time,  the
properties  of  water,  and  forms  the  type  of  the  sulphur  derivatives,
which  may  also  be  formed  by  means  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  just  as
the  oxides  may  be  formed  by  the  aid  of  water.  But  as  sulphuretted
hydrogen  has  acid  properties,  it  combines  more  easily  with  the  basic
metallic  sulphides.  Hence,  for  instance,  there  exists  a  compound
of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  with  potassium  sulphide,  potassium  hydro-
sulphide,  2KHS=K2S  +  H2S,  just  as  there  are  potassium  hydroxides  ;
but  there  are  scarcely  any  compounds  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  with
the  sulphides  corresponding  with  acids.  Thus  the  sulphides  of  the
metals  may  be  regarded  either  as  salts  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  or  as
oxides  of  the  metals  in  which  the  oxygen  is  replaced  by  sulphur.  In
general  terms  the  sulphides  exhibit  the  same  degrees  of  difference  with
respect  to  their  solubility  in  water  as  do  the  oxides.  Thus  the  oxides  of
the  alkali  metals,  and  of  some  of  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths,  are
soluble  in  water,  whilst  those  of  nearly  all  the  other  metals  are  insoluble.
The  same  may  be  said  as  to  the  sulphides  ;  the  sulphides  of  the  metals
of  the  alkalis  and  certain  of  the  alkaline  earths  are  soluble  in  water,
whilst  those  of  the  other  metals  are  insoluble.  Those  metals,  like  alu-
minium, whose  oxides — for  example,  AI2O3 — have  intermediate  pro-
perties and  do  not  form  compounds  with  feeble  acids,  at  least  in  a
wet  way,  also  do  not  form  sulphides  by  this  method,  although  these
may  be  obtained  indirectly.  And  in  general  the  sulphides  of  the  metals
are  easily  formed  in  a  wet  way,  and  with  particular  ease  if  they  are

'I  Sulphuretted  hydrogen  does  not  saturate  the  alkahne  properties  of  alkali
hydroxides,  so  that  a  solution  of  potassium  hydroxide  will  not  under  any  circumstances,
give  a  neutral  liquid  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  In  this  case  tlie  sulphurettt^
hydrogen forms  in solution only  an acid salt with the potassium : KHO  +  IL.S

—  KHS  +  H.2O. It  must  be  supposed  that  the  normal  salt  is  not  formed  in  the  solution

—  that  is,  that  the  reaction  2KH0  +  H.2S  =  K^S  +  QH^O  does  not  take  place.  This  is
seen  from  the  fact  that  a  development  of  heat,  depending  on  the  formation  of  potassium
hydrosulphide,  KHS,  is  remarked  when  as  much  hydrogen  sulphide  is  imssed  into  a
solution  of  potassium  hydroxide  as  it  will  absorb.  But  if  a  further  quantity  of  potassium
hydroxide  be  added  to  the  resultant  solution,  heat  is  not  developed,  whilst  if  alkali  be
added  to  potassium  acid  sulphate  or  sodium  acid  carbonate,  heat  is  developed.  It  must
not  be  concluded  from  this  that  H3S  is  a  monobasic  acid,  for  here  there  is  a  question  of  the
decomposing  action  of  water  upon  K^S  ;  KoS  and  H^^O  in  reacting  on  each  other  should
absorb  heat  if  the  reaction  of  KHS  upon  KHO  evolves  heat.  Furthermore,  it  must  be
taken  into  account  that  potassium  oxide,  K.,>0,  and  the  anhydrous  oxides  like  it,  also  do
not  exist  in  solutions,  for  whenever  they  are  formed  they  immediately  react  with  the
water,  forming  caustic  potash,  KHO,  &c.  In  the  same  way,  directly  i)ota8sium  sulphide^
K^S,  is  formed  in  water  it  is  decomposeil  into  potassium  hydroxide  and  hydrosulphide :
K.jS  +  HjO  =  KHO  +  KHS.  Potassium  sulphide,  K.,.S,  in  a  solid  state  corresponds  wth
K3O,  although  neither  can  exist  in  solution.

SITLPHUR,  SELENIUM,  AND  TELLUEIUM  215

wluble  in  water.  In  this  cosb  their  salts  eater  into  doul>le  decoin-
)sition  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  or  with  soluble  sulphides,  and
give  an  iiienluble  suljihide — for  instance,  a  salt  of  lead  gives  lead
sulphide  with  sulphuretted  liyHrogen.  By  the  action  of  sulphuretled
hydrogen  on  a  sail  <ii  a  metal,  n  free  acid  must  Ito  formed  Iwsides  the
metallic  sulphide.  Thus  if  a  metal  M  be  in  a  state  of  combination
MXj,  then  by  the  aotiim  nf  sulphuretted  hydrogen  there  will  be  formed,
besides  MS,"  an  acid  3HX,  It  is  eiviilent  that  sulphuretted  hydrogen
will  not  precipitate  an  insoluble  sulphide  from  the  salts  of  those  nietils
whose  sulphides  react  with  free  acid,  such  as  /inc,  iron,  manganese,  A-i'.
The  reaction  FeCU+  H.jS=FeS  +  2HCI,and  the  like,  do  not  take  place
because  the  acid  acta  on  the  ferrous  sulphide.  Autimonious  sulphidt
is  not  acte<:l  on  by  dilute  hydrochloric  acid,  but  it  is  decomposed  by
strong  acid,  and  therefore  in  presence  of  an  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid
antimonious  chloride  doe.s  not  entirely  react  with  hydrogen  sulphide,
whilst  the  reaction  2SbC%  +  SH.jS^SbgS^  +  6Ha  is  a  complete  one
in  a  dilute  solution  and  with  n  small  ([Uatitity  of  acid.  Those  metallic
sulphides  which  are  decoiuposed  l>y  acids  may  be  obtained  in  a  wet  way
by  the  double  decomposition  of  the  salts  of  the  metals,  not  with  hydro-
gen Kulphide,  but  with  solubh'  metallic  sulpbide.s,  such  as  sulphide  of
ammonium  or  of  {M)ta«sium,  because  then  no  free  acid  is  formed,  but  a
>;alt  of  ihe  metal  (potassium  or  ammonium)  which  was  taken  as  a
soluble  sulphide. So,  for  example,  FeCI,-l-K.S=FeS+2KUl.'»

"  Duriiit;  repeut  yeuru  (bcvinaixK  wiUi  EicUiilze.  1)4H:!|  it  lum  hetm  fniiiiit  thnt  luuiy
DirtikUic  KQlpliidoB  whicli  were  nniHidereH  totollT  idsuIuIiIb  du,  undet  certain  circum-
sUiivei,  lotm  rety  imxtiilile  wlationH  in  water,  u  slresdr  uitnttnned  in  Cluiptcr  I.,
Note  GT,  ArwDie  snlpliiito  in  very  luuiily  olitained  iu  tlie  lomi  at  B  Bolotion  (hydrMcl).
Bolations  of  rojipor  mkI  cndiuiuiti  iiulphidei  uuijr  bIho  \>b  easily  ubbiiuiil  hv  precipitatinK
(heir  ulte  CuX.,.  or  CilX.,  witli  auiuioniiuti  solphide,  sud  wuhiuj;  tlie  precipitate;  but
tliay  tut  re-prHipitKt«il  liy  th«  tdditiiiii  of  Foreifin  saltu.

"  In  reality  tlie  preueding  reuction  iihoold  be  eipreioed  thae :  FeCL,  +  "KHS
-  Fe8  -  aKC!  +  ItjH  (Nnte  31).  be«D»e  in  the  preaeace  of  water  not  KjS  bat  KHS
rencilK.  But  an  the  antplmretliNl  hydrogen  tAken  no  part  id  the  reaction,  it  i«  usual  to
eK|ireaH  the  formatSDn  of  mch  tntlphidea  without  taking  the  hydrogen  anlphide  proceeding
from  the  potasaiam  or  animmiiain  hydrDBOlpbidea  into  acoount. It  is  not  dhdbI  to  employ

liydrosalpbide— in  order  lOBToid  tlie  (onnationofa  non- volatile  salt  of  potaaiinni  and  to
liace,  togetlier  with  the  formation  of  the  sul{rfiide,  u  salt  of  ammnniiim  which  can  always
le  drfreo  off  by  ovaimratinK  the  aolntioa  and  igniting  the  reaidnp— for  inntanee:
Feci,  ^  (NH,I,K  =  FeH  '  3NH,CI.  Tbas  the  metallic  snlphides  may  be  divided  iuto
three  chief  L'huHiH :  (II  lliime  mlulite  in  lealer,  (1)  thnir  ititoluble  in  water  but  rraeiing
tnVfc  aeids,  and  f»l  llmu-  inm'labtr  b-il'i  lu  -aalrr  and  acid:  The  tliird  class  may  be
euUy  enbdivided  into  two  groups ;  to  the  first  grunp  belong  tliooe  snlphides  wliich
correapond  with  bases  or  basic  oxides,  and  are  therefore  nnable  to  play  the  part  of  an
acid  with  the  *nlphide>  of  the  alkalis,  sjid  are  insoluble  in  NS,US,  whilst  the  solphideb
of  the  second  Kinn|i  an.-  of  an  ai^id  chanuter.  and  give  soluble  thio-Halt«  with  the
itphides  td  Uie  alkaUnu  rneUla.  in  which  they  play  the  part  of  an  acid. To  this  gmnp

J

216  PRINCIPLES OF CUEMISTKV

Metallic  sulphides  may  be  obtained  by  many  other  means  besides
the  action  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  on  salts  and  oxides,  or  by  the
simple  combination  of  metals  with  sulphur  when  heated  or  fused.  Thus
they  may  also  be  formed  by  the  reduction  of  sulphates  by  heating  them
with  charcoal  or  other  means.  Charcoal  t^ikes  up  the  oxygen  from
many  sulphates,  lea>'ing  corresponding  sulphides.  Thus  sodium  sul-
phate, Na2S04,  when heated  with  charcoal,  forms  sodium  sulphide,

belong  those  metalH  whose  correHponding  oxides  have  acid  properties.  It  must  be
observed,  however,  that  not  all  metallic  acids  have  corresponding  sulphides,  partly
owing  to  the  fact  that  certain  acids  are  reducible  by  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  especially
when  their  lower  degrees  of  oxidation  are  of  a  basic  character.  Such  are,  for  instance,
the  acids  of  chromium,  manganese,  &c.  Sulphuretted  hydrogen  converts  them  into
lower  oxides,  having  the  properties  of  bases.  Those  bases  which  do  not  combine  with
feeble  acids,  such  as  carbonic  acid  and  hydrc^en  sulphide,  give  a  precipitate  of  hydroxide
with  ammonium  sulphide^for  example,  aluminium  salts  react  in  this  manner.  This
di£ference  of  the  metals  in  their  behaviour  towards  sulphuretted  hydrogen  gives  a  very
valuable  means  of  separating  them  from  each  other,  and  /«  taken  advantage  of  in
analytical  chemistry.  If,  for  instance,  the  metals  of  the  first  and  third  groups  occur
together,  it  is  only  necessary  to  convert  them  into  soluble  salts,  and  to  act  on  the
solution  of  the  salts  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen ;  this  will  precipitate  the  metals  of  the
third  group  in  tlie  form  of  sulphides,  whilst  the  metals  of  the  first  group  will  not  be  in
the  least  acted  on.  Such  a  method  of  separating  the  metals  is  considered  more  fully  in
analytical  chemistry,  and  we  will  therefore  limit  ourselves  here  to  pointing  out  to  whicli
groups  the  most  common  metals  belong,  and  the  colour  which  is  proper  to  the  sulphide
precipitated.

Metals  which  are  precipitated  by  stdphuretted  hydrogen^  as  sulphides  from  a  solu-
tion of  their  salts,  even  in  the  presence  of  free  acid  :

The  precipitate  is  soluble  in  ammonium  sulphide  :

Platinum  (dark  brown)  i  Antiinoity  (oninge)

Gold  (dark  brown)  I  Arsenic  (yellow)

Tin  (yellow  and  brown)

The  precipitate  is  insoluble  in  ammonium  sulphide  :

Copper  (black)  '  Mercury  (black)

Silver  (black)
Cadmium  (yellow)

Lead  (black)

Metals  which  are  precipitated  by  ammonium  sulphide  from  neutural  solutions,  but
not  precipitated  from  acid  solutions  by  sulphuretted  hydrogen  :
The  sulphide  precipitated  is  soluble  in  hydrochloric  acid  :

Zinc  (white)  I  Manganese  (rose  colour)  Iron  (black)

The  sulphide  precipitated  is  not  soluble  in  dilute  hydrochloric  acid  :

yiclicl  (black)  Cohalt  (black)

A  hydroxide,  and  not  a  sulphide,  is  precipitated :

Chromium  (green)  '  Aluminium  (white)

The  nietalH  of  the  alkalis  and  of  the  alkaline  earths  are  not  precipitated  either  by
sulphuretted  hydrogen  or  ammonium  sulphide.  The  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  when
in  acid  solutions  in  the  form  of  phosphates  and  many  other  salts  are  precipitated  by
ammonium  sulphide,  because  the  latter  neutralises  the  free  acid,  with  formation  of  an
ammonium  salt  of  the  acid  and  evolution  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen.

SULPHUR,  SELENIUM,  AND  TELLUEIUH 217

Naj.S.  Besides  which  metallic  sulphides  are  alao  obtained  by  heating
metulfi  or  their  oxides  in  tlie  vapours  of  many  suljihui'  coiiipoumlH  -  for
example,  in  the  vapour  of  carbon  bisulphide,  C'Sj,  when  the  carbon  takes
up  the  oxygen  and  the  sulphur  conibiiiea  with  the  metal.  T)ie  sulphidee
formed  in  this  manner  are  often  crystalline,  itnd  often  appear  with
those  properties  and  in  that  crystalline  form  in  which  they  occur  in
nature.  13 esides  which  we  must  mention  that  many  i if  the  sulphides
of  the  metals  are  oxidised  In  air  at  the  ordinary,  and  espcciHlly  at  a
higher,  tempeniture,  forming  either  SO,  and  the  oxide  of  the  metal  or
sulphates.  This  oxidation  proceeds  with  particular  ease,  even  at  the
oi-dinary  temperature,  when  a  metallic  sulphide  is  precipitated  from
its  solutions,  aG  a  fine  powder  containing  water.  The  sulphides  of  iron
and  manganese,  &^^.,  are  very  easily  oxidised  in  this  manner.  But  if
these  hydrates  be  ignited,  they  lose  their  water  (the  ignition  must  be
carried  on  in  a  eti'eam  of  hydrogen  to  prevent  their  oxidation  during
the  process),  become  denser,  and  are  no  longer  oxidised  at  the  ordinary
t«mperatiire.  Those  sulphides  whose  corresponding  sulphates  are  de-
t.'omposed  by  heat  part  with  their  suljihur  in  the  form  of  sulphurous
anhydride  when  they  are  ignited  in  air,  and  the  metal,  as  a  rule,
remains  behind  as  oxide.  This  is  taken  advantage  of  iu  the  treatment
of  sulphurous  ores. The  prot;ess  is  called  nuisling.

Hydrogen  not  only  form's  sulphuretted  hydrogen  with  sulphur,  but
it  also  combines  with  it  in  several  othei'  proportions,  just  as  it  combines
with  oxygen,  fonuing  not  only  water  but  iilso  hydrogen  peroxide.
Moreover  these  iiolysnljihi'ltK  of  hydrogen  are  also  unstable,  like
hydrogen  peroxide,  omA  are  also  obtained  from  the  correspionding
polyaulphideti  of  the  meUils  of  the  alkaline  earths,  just  as  hydrogen
peroxide  is  obtained  from  barium  peroxide.  Thus  calcium  forms  not
only  calcium  sulphide,  CaS,  but  also  as  lii-,  tri-,  and  penta -sulphide,
CaS,^,  and  all  these  compounds  are  soluble  in  water.  Solium  also  com-
bines with  sulphur  in  the  same  proportions,  forming  sulphides  from
NajS  to  NajSi-  If  an  acid  be  added  to  a  solution  of  a  polysulplude,
it  gives  sulphur,  sulphuretted  hydr^igen,  and  a  suit  of  the  metal.  For
instance,  MS,  -f  2HC]  =  MCt  j  +  HjS  +  4S.  If  we  reverse  the  opera-
tion, and  pour  a  solution  of  a  polysulphide  into  an  acid,  sulphur  is
not  precipitated,  but  an  oily  liquid  is  formed  which  is  heavier  than
water  and  insoluble  in  it.  This  is  the  polysulphide  of  hydrt^en  :
MS,  +  2HC1  =  MCij  +  H-,S,v  As  Rebs  showed  (188^!).  whatever
polysulphide  be  taken — of  sodium,  for  instance-  -it  always  gives  one
and  the  same /i^rfrojen /)en(a«((/pAi(/c,"  of  specific  gravity  1-71  (15°).

J

218  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

It  can  only  }je  preserved  in  the  alwence  of  water  and  at  low  tempera-
tures, and  then  not  for  long  :  for,  especially  in  the  presence  of  alkalis
and  when  slightly  warmed,  it  splits  up  very  easily  into  sulphuretted
hydrogen  and  sulphur.*'*

The soluble sulphides and polysulphides  of the metals of  the
alkalis and alkaline earths — for example, of ammonium,*^ potas-

hydrochloric  acid  he  always  obtained  hydrogen  pentasulphide,  whence  it  is  evident  thai
4IL|Sm  =  (n  — 1)11.285  -f  (5  —  w)H.2S.  For  example,  if  H.^S^  were  fonned,  it  would  decompose
according  to  the  equation  4H,>S.j  -  H0S5  -^  3H,,S.  The  hydrogen  pentasulphide  formed
breaks  up  into  hydrogen  sulphide  and  sulphur  when  brought  into  contact  with  water.
Previous  to  Rebs'  researches  many  chemists  stated  tiiat  all  polysulphides  gave  the
bi-sulphide  HsS.*,  and  Hofmann  recognised  only  hydrogen  tri-sulphide,  H^Sj.

**  The  formation  of  the  polysulphides  of  hydrogen,  H.,>S«,  is  easily  understood  from  .
the  law  of  substitution,  like  that  of  the  saturated  hydrocarbons,  Ci,H.,>h-^.>,  knowing  that
sulphur  gives  H.^S,  because  the  molecule  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  may  be  divided  into  H
and  HS.  This  radicle,  US,  is  equivalent  to  H.  liy  substituting  this  radicle  for  hydrogen
in  H^S  we  obtain  (HS)H8-HoS.j,  (HS)'HS)S-H.S.;,  ilc,  in  general  H...8,,.  Thehomo-
logues  of  CH4,  CwH^N  +  s  are  formed  in  this  manner  from  CH|,  and  consequently  the  ix>ly-
Mulphides  H^Sn  are  the  homologues  of  U.^8.  The  question  arises  why  in  H.jSn  tlie  apparent
limit  of  n  is  5 — that  is,  why  does  the  substitution  end  with  the  formation  of  H-tS^  ?  The
answer  appears  to  me  to  be  clearly  because  in  the  molecule  of  sulphur,  Sg,  there  are  six
atoms  of  sulphur  (Note  11).  The  forces  in  one  and  the  other  case  arc  the  same.  In  the
one  case  they  hold  S^  together,  in  the  other  85  and  H.> ;  and,  judging  from  H^S,  the  two
atoms  of  hydrogen  are  equal  in  power  and  significance  to  the  atom  of  sulphur.  Just  as
hydrogen  peroxide,  H.^.O.^,  expresses  the  composition  of  ozone,  O3,  in  which  O  is  replaced
by  H2,  so  also  H.2S5  corresponds  with  Se-

*•  Ammonium  sulphide^  (NH4).28,  may  be  prepared  by  passing  sulphuretted  hydrogen
into  a  vessel  full  of  dry  ammonia,  or  by  passing  both  dry  gases  together  into  a  very  cold
receiver.  In  the  latter  case  it  is  necessary  to  prevent  the  access  of  air,  and  to  have  an
excess  of  ammonia.  Under  these  circumsttmces,  two  volumes  of  ammonia  combine  with
one  volume  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  and  form  a  colourless,  very  volatile,  crystalline
substance,  having  a  very  unpleasant  odour,  which  is  very  poisonous  and  exceedingly
unstable.  When  exposed  to  the  air  it  absorbs  oxygen  and  acquires  a  yellow  colour,  and
then  contains  oxygen  and  polysulphide  compounds  (because  a  portion  of  the  hydrogen
sulphide  gives  water  and  sulphur).  It  is  soluble  in  water  and  forms  a  colourless  solution,
which,  however,  in  all  probability  contains  free  ammonia  and  the  acid  salt — tliat  is,
ammonium  hydrosulphide,  NH4HS,  or  (NH|).2S,H.,8.  This  salt  is  formed  when  dry
ammonia  is  mixed  with  an  excess  of  dry  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  The  compound  con-
tains equal  volumes  of  the  components  NH-,  +  H.,.S  =  (NH4)HS.  It  crystallises  in  an
anhydrous  state  in  colourless  plates,  and  may  be  easily  volatilised  (dissociating  like
ammonium  chloride),  even  at  the  ordinary  temperature  ;  it  has  an  alkaline  r^M^tion,
absorbs  oxygen  from  the  air,  is  soluble  in  water,  and  its  solution  is  usually  prepared  by
saturating  an  aqueous  solution  of  ammonia  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  According  to
the  ordinary  rule,  these  salts,  like  other  ammonium  salts,  split  up  into  ammonia  and
sulphuretted  hydrogen  when  they  are  distilled.

A  solution  of  ammonium  sulphide  is  able  to  dissolve  Buli)hur,  and  it  then  contains
compounds  of  hydrogen  ix)lysulphido  and  ammonia.  Some  of  these  compounds  may  be
obtained  in  a  crystalline  form.  Thus  Fritzsche  obtained  a  compoimd  of  ammonia  with
hydrogen  pentasulphide,  or  anmionium  pentasulphide,  (NHi).^85,  in  the  following  manner :
He  saturated  an  aqueous  solution  of  ammonia  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  added
l>owdered  sulphur  to  it,  and  passed  ammonia  gas  into  the  solution,  which  then
absorbed  a  fresh  amount.  After  this  he  again  passed  sulphuretted  hydrogen  into  tlie
Holntion,  and  then  added  sulphur,  and  then  again  ammonia. After  repeating  this  seventl

sn.pirrK,  selenhtm.  and  teixuhium  2i&

"  mid  calfiuiii,^"— have  tlie  appearance  and  properties  of  salts,
*  just  as  the  hydratetl  oxides  have,  whilst  the  sulphides  of  the  metals  of  the

imes.  omnge-jellow  crystals  nf  (SH,),Ri  BBpurttted  out  from  the  Ikjuiil. Tiipsc  ctjutnl-
TiFlted  at  10"  to  GO",  mid  were  rcry  onBtnliU'.

Wlien  It  oolutioD  of  nnimonium  hjdrosolphide,  prupsred  by  esturntiDg  a  solution  ol
inunonia  with  sulphnretldd  liydro)ten,  u  eipoMid  to  the  Kir,  iC  lon\a  yellDw,  ovrin);  to  the
iraeoee  of  on  ammoiiium  imlyiitilphidf',  whose  tormiLtian  in  dne  to  the  sulphiuetled
Ljrdrogen  beitig  oiidisod  by  the  tie  uid  couverted  into  wAter  nnd  tiulphur,  whioh  in  itic-
solved  by  tlie  lumuoninin  sulphide.  In  certain  uiiUyticiil  reaptiODH  it  it  nsnul  to  employ
■olnliim  of  iknimoiiiuin  »utphiile  which  Iibb  be«n  kept  for  Boms  time  and  ncijaited  »
This  yellov  Hiilpbide  of  ammoDiiun  depOHitn  nolphar  when  nstarated  with
whilst  •  frculily-prepBrvd  nolnlioo  only  BroltesHulphurelted  bj'drogen.  The  yellow
ID  furthermore  coiit&inK  unmonium  thioaulphate,  which  in  derived  iiot  ouly  from
idmtion  of  the  ammmiitimsnlphidB,bnt  aliia  from  tlia  iwtion  of  the  liberated  snlphur
□n  the  unmotiiH,  just  an  nn  ulkaline  «iil(  of  thioiialphiiric  MiA  and  s  salphide  an^  formed
l>y  the  action  of  mlpbor  on  n  mlution  of  a  caQHtii;  alkali.

"  Puttutivni  nilpliiilr.  K]S,  in  obtained  by  besting  a  mixture  of  potsBeiam  sulphate
aoil  chantOkl  to  a  bri(;ht-red  heat.  It  may  be  prepared  in  lolution  by  taking  a  solution
of  potajunuui  hydroxide,  dividing  it  into  two  equal  parts,  and  unturatiiig  one  portion  with
HUlphnretted  hydrogen  so  hing  am  it  in  abnorbed.  Thin  portion  will  then  oontain  the  acid
fait  KHB  (Note  ai|.  The  two  portionii  are  then  mined  together,  and  potaaainm  HnlphJde
will  then  be  obtained  in  the  itolntion.  This  solution  baa  a.  strongly  alkaline  reaction,  and
i«  colourleHB  when  fre'hly  prepared,  but  it  very  eauily  undergoea  change  when  exposed  to
the  air.  Forming  potaa^inm  thiot^ulphate  and  polysulpbides.  When  the  solntion  in  evapo-
ralod  at  low  lemperntnre-  nncler  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,  it  yieldii  crystals  containing
K,,3,BH,0  (heated  at  If-li' .  they  port  with  H  mol.  H^O,  and  at  higher  temperatnre>
tliey  lose  nearly  all  their  water  without  evolving  sulphuretted  hydrogen).  When
Lhey  are  ignited  in  glass  ve"»el"  Ihey  eorrode  the  glaia.  When  a  solution  ol  eaustio
liotaah,  completely  saturated  with  snlpbarHttud  hydrogen,  is  evaporated  under  the
receiver  of  an  air-pump  it  forms  ndnnrless  rhomlmlmdra  of  pulniniHm  hi/ilmiulplii(h,
d(KUS),HjO,KiS,H,,S,H./>,  The»e  eryatala  are  deli'insacent  in  the  air,  but  do  not
cliaoge  in  a  vacuum  when  beuteil  up  to  170°,  and  at  higher  temperatures  they  \i>ne
water  but  do  not  eroivi'  salphnrettvd  hydrogen.  The  anhydrous  compound,  KH^,
fniies  at  a  dark-reil  bent  into  a  very  mobile  yellow  liquid,  which  gradnally  becomes
lUrker  in  colour  and  M>lidtHe»  tii  a  red  masa.  It  is  remarkable  that  when  a  solution  of
the  compound  KSR  '•*  boiled  it  wmewhat  eaHily  evoliet  half  its  sulphuretted  hydrogen,
leaving  potassinm  sulphide,  K..K,  in  solation :  and  a  nolntion  of  the  lattor  in  water  is
also  able  to  evolve  sniplinrettud  hydrogen  on  pmlnngeil  boiling,  but  the  evnlution
cannol  be  rendered  complete,  and,  therefore,  at  a  certain  temperature,  a  solution  of
tiotaasium  sulphide  will  not  he  capable  of  absorbing  anlphnrelted  hydrogen  at  all.  From
this  we  must  conclude  that  potaasinm  hydroxide,  water,  and  anlphuretted  hydrogen
foroi  a  system  whose  nnoplei  equilibrium  is  subject  to  the  laws  of  dissoeiation,  depends
■itathe  lelatire  mass  of  each  robstanee.  on  the  temperature,  and  the  dissociation  preseure
Potaiwinm  sulphide  is  not  only  soloblo  in  water,  but  also  in

^^^^■|^  the  lelatire  m
^^^^■HHm  compoiient

^^^^^n BtneUns  shu'
^^^^^  t.:-,>i-.i.:j* it  a

BtneUns  shuned  Ibal  in  addition  to  potoisinm  i
Tiiaulpliide.  K.>Rj ;  Irisnlphide,  K^S;. ;  tetnwulphidi
.Kccordlng  to  the  r«»earehe«  ol  Sehiine,  the  last  t
diderent  cominunds  of  lutSHnium  and  sulphi
hydtoiide  or  carbonate  with  an  excess  of  sulphi

uibydride.  At  about  SOC
sulphur  coiiipiinnil  of  potasi
and  given  tbi-  tetnuulpliide

potaasinm  pcntasniphide  i
nm.  When  healed  to  800°  i
which  at  this  temperature  is

ide  (here  also  exist  potaasinm
fit;  and  pentasulpliide,  K,S,,,
are  the  moat  stable,  nieae
prepared  by  fusing  polaminm
porcelain  crndble

formed; this

the

220  PRI>X'IPLES OF CHEMl.sTIlV

higher  groups  resemble  their  oxides  and  have  not  at  all  the  appearance

heat — namely,  at  about  900- — tlie  trisulphide  is  fornieil.  Thi;?;  compound  may  be  also
formed  by  igniting  potassium  carbonate  in  a  stream  of  carbon  bisulphide,  in  which  case
a  compound,  K.;CS-,  is  first  formed  corresiwnding  to  potassium  carbonate,  and  carbonic
anhydride  is  evolved.  On  further  ignition  this  compound  splits  up  into  carbon  and
potassium  trisulphide,  K0S3.  The  tetrasulphide  may  also  be  obtained  in  solution  if  a
solution  of  potassium  sulphide  be  boiled  with  the  requisite  amount  of  sulphur  without
access  of  air.  Tliis  solution  yields  red  crystals  of  the  composition  K.2S4,2H20  when
it  is  evaporated  in  a  vacuum.  These  crystals  are  very  hygroscopic,  easily  soluble  in
water,  but  very  sparingly  in  alcohol ;  when  ignited  they  give  off  water,  sulphuretted
hydrogen,  and  sulphur.  If  a  solution  of  potassium  sulphide  be  boiled  with  an  excess  of
sulphur  it  forms  the  pentasulpliide,  which,  however,  is  decomposed  on  prolonged  boiling
into  sulphuretted  hydrogen  and  potassium  tbiosulphate  :  K.2S5  +  3H.20  =  K.2S.205+8H.2S.
A  substance  called  liver  of  sulphur  was  formerly  frequently  used  in  chemistry  and
medicine.  Under  this  name  is  known  the  substance  which  is  formed  by  boiling  a
solution  of  caustic  potash  with  an  excess  of  flowers  of  sulphur.  Tliis  solution  contains  a
mixture  of  i)otassium  pentasulphide  and  thiosulphate,  HKHO  +  12S  -  2K2S5  +  K2S2O5
+  8H3O.  The  substance  obtained  by  fusing  xx)tassium  carbonate  with  an  excess  of
sulphur  was  also  known  as  liver  of  sulphur.  If  this  mixture  be  heated  to  an  incipient
dark-red  heat  it  will  contain  potassium  thiosulphate,  but  at  higher  temperatures  potas-
sium sulphate  is  formed.  In  either  case  a  polysulphide  of  i)otassium  is  also  present.
The  sulphides  of  sodium,  for  example  Na-^S,  NaHS,  Arc,  in  many  respects  closely  resemble
the  corresponding  potassium  compounds.

^  The  metalK  of  the  alkaline  earths,  like  those  of  the  alkalis,  form  several  compounds
with  sulphur ;  thus  calcium  forms  compounds  with  one  and  with  five  atoms  of  sulphur.
There  are  doubtless  also  intermediate  sulphides.  If  sulphuretted  hydrogen  be  passed
over  ignited  lime  it  forms  water  and  calcium  sulphide^  which  may  also  be  formed  by
heating  calcium  sulphate  with  charcoal,  wliilst  if  sulphur  be  heated  with  lime  or  with
calcium  carbonate,  then  naturally  oxygen  compounds  (calcium  thiosulphate  and  sulphate)
are  formed  at  the  same  time  as  calcium  sulphide.  The  prolonged  action  of  the  vapour
of  carbon  bisulphide,  especially  when  mixed  with  carbonic  anhydride,  on  strongly  ignited
calcium  carbonate  entirely  converts  it  into  sulphide.  Calcium  sulphide  is  generally
obtained  as  an  almost  colourless,  opaque,  brittle  mass,  which  is  infusible  at  a  white  heat,
and  is  soluble  in  water.  The  act  of  solution  (as  with  K.^S,  Note  21)  is  partly  accompanied
by  a  double  decomponition  with  the  water.  When  heated,  dry  calcium  sulphide  does  not
absorb  oxygen  from  the  air.  An  excess  of  water  decomposes  it,  like  many  other  metallic
sulphides,  precipitating  lime  (as  a  product  of  the  decomposition  the  lime  hinders  the
action  of  the  water  ujMm  the  CaS  ;  ace  soda  refuse,  Chapter  XII.,  Note  12),  and  forming
a  hydrosulphide,  CaH.^S...,  in  solution.  This  comi>ound  is  also  formed  by  passing  sul-
phuretted hydrogen  through  an  aqueous  solution  of  calciuhi  sulphide  or  lime.  Its  solution,
like  that  of  calcium  sulphide,  has  an  alkaline  reaction.  It  decomposes  when  evaporated,
and  ab«orbs  oxgen  from  the  air.  Calcium  pentasulphide,  CaSs,  is  not  known  in  a  pure
state,  but  may  be  obtained  in  admixture  with  calcium  thiosulphate  by  boiling  a  solution
of  hme  or  ctdcium  sulphide  with  sulphur:  8CaH.,02  + 12S:=2CaS5  +  CaS.205-i-3H20.  A
similar  com^iound  in  an  impure  fonu  is  fonned  by  the  action  of  air  on  alkali  waste,  and  in
used  for  the  preparation  of  thiosulphates.

Many  of  the  sulphides  of  the  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths  are  i)hosphorescent —
that  is,  they  have  the  faculty  of  emitting  light,  after  having  been  subjected  to  the
action  of  sunlight,  or  of  any  bright  source  of  light  (Canton  phosphorus,  <tc.)  The
luminosity  lasts  some  time,  but  it  is  not  pennanent,  and  gradually  disappears.  ThiK
phosphorescent  proi)erty  is  inherent,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  to  nearly  all  substanceK
(Becquerel),  but  for  a  very  short  time,  whilst  with  calcium  sulphide  it  is  comimratively
durable,  lasting  for  seveml  hours,  and  Dewar  (1894)  showed  that  it  is  far  more  intense  at
very  low  temi>eratnres  (for  instance,  in  Ixxlies  cooled  in  liquid  oxygen  to  —182°).  It  iH
due  to  the  excitation  of  the  surfaces  of  substances  by  the  action  of  light,  and  is  deter-

SFLPnirB.  SELBNIXTM.  AND  TKLLUfilUM  S21

it  salts,  and  this  is  more  especially  the  case  with  regard  to  the  cryatnl-
e  forma  in  which  they  frequently  occur  in  nature.'^

mined  by  those  raj-»  wliich  eiliibil  a  chemicul  action.  Hence  dnylight  or  llie  light  nt
hurnitig  magnesiani,  Ac,  actfl  more  powerfn.ll)-  thun  Ihe  light  of  »  lamp,  &P.  Wamerlm
hoa  siiown  tliat  %  KiniUI  ijanntitf  ot  mi^neHiuin  lighted  near  thr  finiface  of  a  phoH-
pbonwveot  sabHMncc  npidly  eicitex  the  grcntcut  poBsiblu  intennity  of  laounomty  :  this
enabled  him  to  (caod  a,  method  ol  measiuing  the  intennitj'  of  light — u.  to  obtun  •
constiuit  unit  of  light — and  to  apply  it  to  photogmphy.  TIib  nature  of  the  L-liange  which
IV  accompiiflhed  on  the  »arliwe  of  the  lamincnia  aubHtiLnce  ia  at  present  unknown,  bnt  in
«iy  OiwD  it  ia  a  reoewable  one,  becauwi  the  onieriment  n»y  be  repealed  /or  an  infinite
iinmber  of  time*  and  takea  plaue  in  a  -vacnum.  The  intensity  and  tint  at  the  light
eniittud  depend  on  the  method  of  jirepmation  of  the  cftloium  sulphide,  and  on  the
decree  iif  ignition  and  purity  of  the  colciam  carbonate  taken.  According  Co  the  obMrTft>
tiouB  of  Beequerel,  the  pr»iance  of  compounds  of  manginese,  bismuth.  &c.,  sodium
snlphide  (but  not  potaasiam  nulfdiidel,  &e^  although  in  minute  tmr.'os,  ii  perfectly
indiapenaable,  Thi>  gives  reaton  for  thinkintr  that  the  formation  (in  the  dark|  and
decomposition  (in  light)  of  double  wits  like  UnS.NiLjS  perhaps  form  tlie  chemical  cause
of  the  phenomena.  Compounds  of  etrontium  and  barium  have  this  property  to  even  ■
gtealer  eitent  than  calcium  Hoipliide.  The.Be  compounds  may  be  prepared  as  in  the
following  eiwaple:  A  miitnre  of  sodium  Ihionnlphate  and  strontium  chloride  is  prepared ;
A  doable  decomposition  tnJces  pinn  between  the  salts,  and,  on  the  addition  of  alcohol,
etrontinin  thioanlphale,  SrS^O-,  is  preoipitBtod,  which,  when  ignited,  learea  strontium
sulphide  behind.  The  strontium  sulphide  thus  prepared  emits  (when  dry)  a  greenisli
yellow  light.  It  contains  •  certain  amount  of  eulphur,  sodium  sulphide,  and  strontium
imlpliale.  By  ignition  at  various  temperatureB.  and  by  different  methods  of  preparation,
it  is  possible  to  obtain  mixtures  which  emit  diOerent  coloured  lights.

"  Aa  examples,  we  will  describe  the  suJphides  of  anenic,  sntimony,  and  mercury.
Arsenic  [rianlphide,  or  orpinurnt,  AajSj,  occurs  native,  and  is  obtained  pure  when  a
eolution  of  arsenious  anhydride  in  the  prenenoe  of  hydroohloric  acid  comes  into  contact
with  snlphnretled  hydrogen  (tlicre  is  no  iireoipitale  in  the  absence  of  free  acid).  A
beautiful  yellow  predpiUte  is  then  obtained:  As^j-t-HHiH^^SH^O-fAaiS, ;  it  hues
when  heated,  and  valatilises  withoDt  divnmposition.  As^a,  Is  easily  obtained  in  a
colloid  form  (Chapter  I.,  Note  r>7).  Wlien  fuwd  it  forms  a  semi- transparent,  yellow
miSH,  and  it  is  ibas  that  it  enters  the  market.  Tlie  specific  gravity  of  native  orpiment
is  V*.  and  that  ol  the  artificially- fused  roaas  is  S'T.  It  is  used  as  a  yellow  pigment,  and
owing  to  its  insolnbility  in  walwr  and  acids  it  is  lees  injurions  than  the  other  compounds
correnponding  to  arsenions  acid.  According  to  the  type  AsX„  realgar,  Ab8,  is  knovm,
bnt  it  is  probable  that  tlie  true  oimpositiou  of  this  comiionnd  is  As,S,— that  is,  it
presents  the  same  relation  to  orpiment  ns  liqaid  plinsphuretted  hydrogen  does  to
gaseous.  Rifolgar  ISandamra)  occurs  native  as  brilliant  red  crystals  of  specific  gravity
S'I>9,  and  may  be  prepared  artificially  by  fusing  arsenic  and  snlphar  in  the  proportions
indicated  by  its  formulie.  It  is  prepared  in  large  quantities  by  distilling  a  mixture  n(
snlphnr  and  usenical  pyrile*.  Like  orpiment  il  dissolves  in  calcium  snlphide,  and  even
in  oanntic  potoali.  It  is  used  for  signal  lights  and  fireworks,  because  it  deflagrates  and
gives  a  large  and  very  brilliant  white  flame  with  nitre.

Witli  antimony,  snlphur  gives  a  tri-  and  d  penU.enlpliide.  The  farmer,  9b,j8j,  which
correspmids  with  antimonions  oxide,  oecum  native  (Chapter  XIX.)  in  a  cryHtallioe  form  i
its  sp.  gr,  is  then  4-U,  and  it  presents  brilliant  rhombic  crystals  of  a  grey  colour,  which
fuse  when  h4>BtHl.  A  substance  of  the  same  composition  is  obtained  as  an  nmorplious
orange  powder  by  passing  sulphuretted  hydrogen  into  an  acid  solution  of  antimonioos
otide.  In  Uiis  respect  autimoniou)  oxide  again  reacte  hke  anenioua  acid,  and  the  sul-
phides ol  biith  are  soluble  in  ammonium  and  potassium  sulphides,  and,  especially  in
the  case  of  iriKiiious  sulphide,  are  easily  obtained  in  colloidal  solutions.  By  prolonged
boiling  with  water,  antimonious  sulphide  may  be  entirely  converted  into  the  oxide,
sulphide  being  crolved  (Elbers). Native  antimony  sulphide,  or  the  otuige

222  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMJSTRY

As  the  acids  derived  from chlorine,  phosphorus,  and  carbon  are
the  oxidised  hydrogen  compounds  of  these  elements,  so  also  we  can

precipitated  trisulpliide  when  fused  with  dry,  or  boiled  with  disHolved,  alkalis,  forma  a
dark-coloured  mass  (Kermes  mineral)  formerly  much  used  in  medicine,  which  contains
a  mixture  of  antimonious  sulphide  and  oxide.  There  are  also  compounds  of  these  sab-
stances.  A  so-called  antimony  vermilion  is  much  used  as  a  dye;  it  is  prepared  by
boiling  sodium  thiosulphate  (six  parts)  with  antimony  trichloride  (five  parts)  and  water
(fifty  parts).  This  substance  probably  contains  an  oxysulphide  of  antimony — that  is,  a
portion  of  the  oxygen  in  the  oxide  of  antimony  in  it  is  replaced  by  sulphur.  Red  anti-
mony ore,  and  antimony  glass,  which  is  obtained  by  fusing  the  trisulphide  with
antimonious  oxide,  have  a  similar  composition,  SboOS*.  In  the  arts,  the  antimony  penta-
8ulphid€y  SbQSs,  is  the  most  frequently  used  of  the  sulphur  comix>unds  of  antimony.  It
is  formed  by  the  action  of  acids  on  the  so-called  Schlippe's  salt,  which  is  a  sodium
fAtoW/m;?^twona/r,SbS(NaS)5,  corresponding  with  (Chapter  XIX.,  Note  41  bis)  orthanti-
monic  acid,  SbO(OH)3,  with  the  replacement  of  oxygen  by  sulphur.  It  is  obtained  by
boiling  finely-powdered  native  antimony  trisulphide  with  twice  its  weight  of  Bodiom
carbonate,  and  half  its  weight  of  sulphur  and  lime,  in  the  presence  of  a  considerable
quantity  of  water.  The  processes  taking  place  are  as  follows : — The  sodium  carbonate  is
converted  into  hydroxide  by  the  lime,  and  then  forms  sodium  sulphide  with  the  sulphur ;
the  sodium  sulphide  then  dissolves  the  antimony  sulphide,  which  in  this  form  already
combines  with  the  greatest  amount  of  sulphur,  so  that  a  compound  is  formed  corre-
sponding with  antimony  penttisulphide  dissolved  in  sodium  sulphide.  The  solution  is
filtered  and  crystallised,  care  being  taken  to  prevent  access  of  air,  which  oxidises  the
sodium  sulphide.  This  salt  crystallises  in  large,  yellowish  crystals,  which  are  easily
soluble  in  water  and  have  the  composition  Na3SbS4,*JHoO.  When  heated  they  lose  their
water  of  crystallisation  and  then  fuse  without  alteration ;  but  when  in  solution,  and  even
in  crystalline  form,  this  salt  turns  brown  in  air,  owing  to  the  oxidation  of  the  sulphur
and  the  breaking  up  of  the  com{)ound.  As  it  is  used  in  medicine,  esjiecially  in  the  pre-
paration of  antimony  pentasulphide,  it  is  kept  under  a  layer  of  alcohol,  in  which  it  is
insoluble.  Acids  precipitate  antimony  pentasulphide  from  a  solution  of  this  salt,  as  an
orange  powder,  insoluble  in  acids  and  very  frequently  used  in  medicine  {siiJfur  auratum
antimonii).  This  substance  when  heated  evolves  vapours  of  sulphur,  and  leaves  antimony
trisulphide  behind.

Mercury  forms  compounds  with  sulphur  of  the  same  types  as  it  does  with  oxygen.
Mercurous  sulphide,  Hg..,S,  easily  splits  up  into  mercury  and  mercuric  sulphide.  It  is
obtained  by  the  action  of  potassium  sulphide  on  mercurous  chloride,  and  also  by  the
action  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  on  solutions  of  salts  of  the  type  HgX.  "  Mercuric  sul-
pliide,  HgS,  corresponding  with  the  oxide,  is  cinnabar;  it  is  obtained  as  a  black  precipi-
tate by  the  action  of  an  excess  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  on  solutions  of  mercuric  salts.
It  is  insoluble  in  acids,  and  is  therefore  precipitated  in  their  jnesence.  If  a  certain
amount  of  water  containing  sulphuretted  hydrogen  be  added  to  a  solution  of  mercuric
chloride,  it  first  gives  a  white  precipitate  of  the  comjwsition  Hg-SgClj — that  is,  a  com-
pound HgCl,2HgS,  a  sulphochloride  of  mercury  like  the  oxychloride.  But  in  the  pre-
sence of  an  excess  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  the  black  precipitate  of  mercuric  sulphide
is  formed.  In  this  state  it  is  not  crystalline  (the  red  variety  is  fonned  by  the  prolonged
action  of  polysulphides  of  ammonium  upon  the  black  HgS ),  but  if  it  be  heated  to  its
temperature  of  volatilisation  it  forms  a  red  crystalline  sublimate  which  is  identical  with
native  cinnabar.  In  this  form  its  specific  gravity  is  8'0,  and  it  forms  a  red  jwwder,  owing
to  which  it  is  used  as  a  red  pigment  (vermilion)  in  oil,  pastel,  and  other  paints.  It  is  so
little  attacked  by  reagents  that  even  nitric  acid  has  no  action  on  it,  and  the  gastric
juices  do  not  dissolve  it,  so  that  it  is  not  poisonous.  When  heated  in  air,  the  sulphur
bums  away  and  leaves  metallic  mercury.  On  a  large  scale  cimiahar  is  usually  prepared
in  the  following  manner:  300  parts  of  mercurj*  and  115  i)arts  of  sulphur  Are  mixed
together  as  intimately  as  possible  and  poured  into  a  solution  of  75  parts  of  caustic  potash
in  425  i>arts  of  water,  and  the  mixture  is  heated  at  50-  for  several  hours. Red  mercury

SULPHUR, SELENIUM, AND TELLUKIUM  223

form  an  idea  of  the  acid  hydrates  of  sulphur,  or  of  the  nm-mal  acids
of  sulphur^  by  representing  them  as  the  oxidised  products  of  sulphur-
etted hydrogen —

HCl

HjS

H3P

H4C

HCIO

H.,SO(?)

H3P0(?)

H4CO

HCIO2

H2S0.^(?)

H3PO2

H4CO2

HCIO3

H,S03

H3PO3

H4CO3

HCIO4

H2SO4

H3PO,

H4CO,  30

In  the  case  of  chlorine,  if  not  all  the  hydrates,  at  all  events  salts  of
all  the  normal  hydrates  are  known,  whilst  in  the  case  of  sulphur  only
the«acids  H2S,  H^SOg  and  H.2SO4  are  known.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
the  latter  are  obtained  not  only  as  hydrates  but  also  as  stable  anhy-
drides, SO2  and  8^)3,  which  are  formed with  the  evolution  of  heat

hulpliide  18  tliUK  formed,  and  septu'ates  out  from  tlie  solution.  The  reaction  which  takes
])lace  is  as  follows :  A  soluble  coini)ound,  KoHgS.^,  is  first  formed ;  this  compound  is  able
to  seiMirate  in  colourless  silky  needles,  which  are  soluble  jn  the  caustic  potash,  but  are
decorajx)sed  by  water,  and  at  50"^ ;  this  solution  (perhai)s  by  attracting  oxygen  from  the
air)  slowly  deposits  HgS  in  a  crystalline  form.

Spring  conducted  an  interesting  research  (at  Lioge,  1H94)  upon  the  conversion  of  the
black  amoii)hou8  sulphide  of  mercury,  HgS,  into  red  crystalline  cinnabar.  This  research
formed  a  sequel  to  Spring's  classical  researches  on  the  influence  of  high  pressures  upon
the  properties  of  solids  and  their  capacity  for  mutual  combination.  He  showed,  among
other  things,  that  ordinary  solids  and  even  metals  (for  instance,  Pb),  after  being  con-
siderably compressed  under  a  pressure  of  20,000  atmospheres,  return  on  removal  of  the
pressure  to  their  original  density  like  gases.  But  this  is  only  true  when  the  compressed
solid  is  not  liable  to  an  alIotroi)ic  variation,  and  does  not  give  a  denser  variety.  Thus
prismatic  sulphur  (sp.  gr.  19)  passes  under  pressure  into  the  octahedral  (sp.  gr.  2*05)
variety.  Black  HgS  (precipitated  from  solution)  has  a  sp.  gr.  7*0,  while  that  of  the  red
variety  is  82,  and  therefore  it  might  be  exjHJcted  that  the  former  would  pass  into  the  latter
under  pressure,  but  experiments  both  at  the  ordinarj-  and  a  higher  temperature  did  not
give  the  looked-for  result,  because  even  at  a  pressure  of  20,000  atmospheres  the  black
sulphide  was  not  compressed  to  the  density  of  cinnabar  (a  pressure  of  as  much  as
:J5,000  atmospheres  was  necessary,  which  could  not  be  attained  in  the  experiment).  But
Spring  prepared  a  black  HgS,  which  had  a  sp.  gr.  of  80,  and  this,  under  a  pressure  of
2,500  atmospheres,  passed  into  cuinabar.  He  obtained  this  peculiar  black  variety  of
HgS  (sp.  gr.  8-0)  by  distilling  cinnabar  in  an  atmosphere  of  CO.>,  when  the  greater
portion  of  the  HgS  is  redeposited  in  the  form  of  cinnabar.  Under  the  action  of  a  solu-
tion of  polysulphide  of  ammonium,  this  variety  of  HgS  passes  more  slowly  into  the  red
variety  than  the  precipitated  variety  does,  while  under  pressure  the  conversion  is  com-
paratively easy.

It  IS  worthy  of  remark,  that  Linder  and  Picton  obtained  complex  compounds  of
many  of  the  sulphides  of  the  heavy  metals  (Ca,  Hg,  Sb,  Zn,  Cd,  Ag,  Au)  with  H^S,  for
example  H2S,7CuS  (by  the  action  of  H.^S  upon  the  hydrate  of  oxide  of  copper),
H.2S,9CuS  (in  the  presence  of  acetic  acid  and  with  an  excess  of  H.^S),  &c.  Probably  we
have  here  a  sort  of  *  solid '  solution  of  H^S  in  the  metallic  sulphides.

"»  CH4  gives  CH4O  or  CH3(0H),  woo<l  spirit;  CHjO-^  or  CH2(0H).,,,  which  decom-

poses  into  water and CHjO— that is, methylene oxide or formaldehyde; CH4O3

-  CH(0H).--H.20  +  CH0(0Hj, or formic acid; and CHt04  =  C(OH)4-2H20+C04.

There  are  four  tj-pical  hydrogen  comi)Ounds,  RH,  RH.,,,  RH-,  and  RH4,  and  each  of  them

has  tis  tjrjncal  oxide. Beyond  H4  and  O4  combination  does  not  proceed.

224  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTKY

from  sulphur  and  oxygen  ;  32  parts  of  sulphur  in  combining  with
32  parts  of  oxygen — that  is,  in  forming  SO2 — evolve  71,000  heat
units,^^  and  if  the  oxidation  proceeds  to  the  formation  of  SO3,  103,000
heat  units  are  evolved.  These  figures  may  be  compared  with  those
which  correspond  with  the  passage  of  carbon  into  CO  and  CO^,  when
29,000  and  97,000  units  of  heat  are  evolved.  This  determines  the
stability  of  the  higher  oxides  of  sulphur,  and  also  expresses  the  pecu-
liarity of  sulphur  as  an  element  which,  although  an  analogue  of  oxygen,
forms  stable  compounds  with  it,  and  thus  fundamentally  diflfers  from
chlorine.  The  higher  and  lower  oxides  of  chlorine  are  powerful  oxi-
dising agents,  whilst  the  higher  oxide  of  sulphur,  SO3,  has  but  feeble
oxidising  powers,  and  the  lower  oxide,  SOj,  frequently  acts  as  a  re-
ducing agent,  and  is  formed  by  the  direct  combustion  of  sulphur,  just
as  carbonic  anhydride,  CO^,  proceeds  from  the  combustion  of  carbon.
In  the  combustion  of  sulphur,  and  also  in  the  oxidation  (roasting)  of  the
sulphides  and  poly  sulphides  by  their  ignition  in  air,  sulphurous  oxide,
or  sulphurous  anhydride,  or  sulphur  dioxide,  80.2,^*  ****  is  exclusively
formed.  It  is  prepared  on  a  large  scale  by  burning  sulphur  or  roasting
iron  pyrites  or  other  sulphides  ^^  for  the  manufacture  of  sulphuric
acid  (Chapter  VI.),  and  for  direct  application  in  the  manufacture  of
wine  or  for  bleaching  tissues  and  other  purposes.  In  the  latter  in-
stances its  application  is  based  on  the  fact  that  sulphurous  anhydride
acts  on  certain  vegetable  matters,  and  has  the  property  of  a  reducing
and  feeble  acid.^"^  ^^*

5'  Rhombic  sulplmr,  71,0H0  heat  units;  monocHiiic  sulphur,  71,720  units,  according
to  Thomseii.

31  hi*  However,  when  sulphur  or  metallic  sulphides  bum  in  an  excess  of  air,  there  is
always  formed  a  certain,  although  small,  amount  of  SO5,  which  gives  sulphuric  acid  with
the  moisture  of  the  air.

^'"^  The  enormous  amount  of  sulphuric  acid  now  manufactured  is  chieflj'  prepared  by
roasting  native  pyrites,  but  a  considerable  amount  of  the  SO.^  for  this  purpose  is
obtained  by  roasting  zinc  blende  (ZnS)  and  copper  and  lead  suli)hides.  A  certain  aiuount
is  also  procured  from  soda  refuse  (Note  0)  and  the  residues  obtained  from  the  purification
of  coal  gas.

Mbin  Sulphurous  anhyth-ide  is  also  obtained  by  the  decomposition  of  many  sulphates,
especially  of  the  heavy  metals,  by  the  action  of  heat ;  but  this  requires  a  very  powerful
heat.  This  formation  of  sulphurous  anhydride  from  sulphates  is  based  on  the  decom*
position  proper  to  suii)hnric  acid  itself.  When  sulphuric  acid  is  strongly  heated  (for
instance,  by  dropping  it  ujwn  an  incandescent  surface)  it  is  decomj>osed  into  water,
oxygen,  and  sulphurous  anhydride — that  is,  into  those  compounds  from  which  it  is
formed,  A  similar  decom}x»sition  i>roceeds  during  the  ignition  of  many  sulphates.  Even
so  stable  a  sulx>hate  as  gy|>Hum  does  not  resist  the  action  of  very  high  tem()eratures,  but
is  decomix)sed  in  the  same  manner,  lime  being  left  behind.  The  decom^wsition  of  sul-
l>hates  by  heat  is  accomplished  with  still  greater  facility  in  the  presence  of  sulphur,
because  in  this  case  the  liberated  oxygen  combines  with  the  sulphur  and  the  metal  is
able  to  form  a  sulphide.  Thus  when  ferrous  sulphate  (green  vitriol)  is  ignited  with  sul-
phur, it  gives  ferrous  sulphide  and  sulphurous  anhydride  :  FeSOj  -  2S  —  FeS  4- 280^,  and

aULPHITR,  SELENIUM.  AITD  TEXLXmiCH

225

In  the  laboratory— that  is,  on  a  smnll  scale  -sulphtirouB  aniij-dride
best  preptired  by  deoxidising  sulphuric  acid  by  boating  it  with
charcoal,  nr  copper,  sulphur,  mercury,  ic.  Charcoul  produces  this
decomposition  of  sulphuric  acid  at  but  moderately  high  temperatures  ;
it  is  itself  converted  into  carbonic  anhydride,"'  "^  and  therefore  when
sulphuric  acid  is  heated  with  charcoal  it  evolves  a  mixture  of  sulphurous
and  carbonic  anhydrides  :  C  +  2HjSfl,  =  COj  +  2SO,  +  2Hj<>.  The
metals  which  are  unable  to  decompose  water,  and  which  do  not,  there-
fore, expel  hydi-iigen  from  sulphuric  acid,  are  frequently  capable  of
di'compoaing  sulphuric  acid,  with  the  evolution  of  sulphurous  anhydride,
just  as  they  decompose  nitric  acid,  forming  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen.
These  metals  are  silver,  mercury,  copper,  lead,  and  others.  Thus,  for
example,  the  action  oE  copper  on  sulphuric  acid  maybe  expressed  by
the  following  equation  :  Cu  +■  2HjSf),  =  CuSO,  +  H(%  +  SH.^O.  In
the  laboratory  this  reaction  is  carried  un  iu  a  flask  with  a  gasconduet-
ing  tube,  and  does  not  take  place  unless  aided  by  heat.^*

In  its  physical  and  chemical  pivperties  sulphurous  anhydride
|>resents  a  great  renemhhtnce  to  carbonii:  aniij/drirle.  It  is  a  heavy  gas,
somewhat  considerably  soluble  in  water,  very  easily  condensed  into  a
liquid  ;  it  forms  normal  and  acid  salts,  does  not  evolve  oxygen  under
the  direct  action  of  heat,"  although  such  metals  as  sodium  and  magne-
sium bum  in  it,  just  as  in  carbonic  anhydride.  It  has  a  surtbcatirig
odour,  which  is  well  known  owing  to  its  being  evolved  when  sulphur
or  sulphur  matches  are  burnt  In  characterising  the  properties  of
sulphurous  anhydride,  it  is  very  important  to  remember  (Chapter  II.)
also  that  it  is  more  easily  liquefied  lat —10°,  or at 0° under  two

tliia  reaction  amy  eien  be  used  (or  thn  prepnnilion  of  tliis  gnu.  At  iwy  BOlphuric  ujd
lUid  Mulpbur  give  ui  eiCremel;  uniform  itreuii  of  pure  HUlpliaroan  unhydride,  su  tlinl  it
it  betit  prepiuetl  on  a  lutuinlauturiDg  Huule  by  tUiH  luethud.  Iron  pyrites,  Fe&i,  when
lieuMd  la  ISO°  with  sulphnric  uid  (ip,  gr.  I'TSJ  in  cut-iron  veeHeU  alio  givea  au  abnn-
iLuil  uid  nnitonD  eupply  of  >ulphDnnis  uibfilnde.

"■"  Mellitic  uid  is  lormed  >t  tUe  nune  tLme  (VemeuiUe).

"  The  thennochemiul  detit  oonuectcd  with  this  reution  are  an  roUawi:  A
miilecule  of  hydrogen  H;„  in  conibining  with  oxygen  (0  =  10)  develope  about  SS,<MO  heat
nuitil.  whilst  (be  nxilecule  of  SO]  in  nnabiniiig  witb  oiygen  only  derelopa  about  S3,000
lieKt  unite — that  is,  aboDt  half  as  moch — and  Uierelore  thoae  metaJs  which  cannot  decom-
|>n«e  water  may  still  be  able  lo  deoxidise  anlphuric  into  sulpbUTODs  acid.  Those  met«U
wliivh  decompojtfl  water  and  ^ulj^nric  aoid  with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen,  erolre
in  combining  with  siiteen  pArtn  by  weight  ol  oiygen  more  heat  than  hydrogen  d
rot  eiample,  K,,Na,j.Ca  develoii  nhanit  or  more  than  100,000  heat  onita ;  Fe,  Zn,  Hn  about
7IIJM0  to  M.OOO  beat  nnits;  whilst  those  metals  which  neither  decompiwewaternorevol>B
liydrogen  from  aulpharic  ai^id.  bnl  are  utill  capable  ol  eroliing  salphiiroas  anliydride  from
it.  develop  less  heatHilh  uxygvii  thati  hydrogen,  but  nearly  the  «iunesjnunnt.if  nut  more
than,  aolphnroUH  anhydride  di-ielflpii — for  exani|i1e,  Co  and  Hg  develop  abimt  (0,1)00  and
I'b  about  £0.000  heat  unitK.

M  That  iH,  it  only  dixwcintes  and  re-fomiB  thf  original  product  nn  cooling.

VOL.  II.  q

226  PKINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

atmospheres  pressure)  than  carbonic  anhydride  (thirty-six  atmospheres
at  0°),^'*  that  it  is  more  soluble  than  carbonic  anhydride  (Vol.  T.
p.  79)  ;  at  0°,  100  vols,  of  water  dissolve  180  vols,  of  carbonic
anhydride  and  688  vols,  of  sulphuric  anhydride),  that  the  molecular
weight  of  80.2=64  and  of  002=44,  and  that  the  density  of  liquid  sul-
phurous anhydride  at  0°:=1*43  (molecular  volume=45)and  of  carbonic
anhydride =0*95  (molecular  volume  =  49).  Although  sulphur  dioxide
is  the  anhydride  of  an  acid,  nevertheless,  like  carbonic  anhydride,  it  does
not  form  any  stable  compounds  with  water,  but  gives  a  solution  from
which  it  may  be  entirely  expelled  by  the  action  of  heat.^®  The  acid
character  of  sulphurous  anhydride  is  clearly  expressed  by  the  fact  that
it  is  entirely  absorbed  by  alkalis,  with  which  it  forms  acid  and  normal
salts  easily  soluble  in  water.  With  salts  of  barium,  calcium,  and  the
heavy  metals,  the  normal  salts  of  the  alkalis,  M2SO3,  give  precipitates
exactly  like  those  formed  by  the  carbonates.  In  general,  the  salts  of
sulphurous  acid  are  closely  analogous  to  the  corresponding  carbonates.
Acid  sodium  sulphite^  NaHSOs,  may  be  obtained  by  passing  sul-
phurous anhydride  into  a  solution  of  sodium  hydroxide.  It  is  also
formed  by  saturating  a  solution  of  sodium  carbonate  with  the  gas
(carbonic  anhydride  is  then  given  oflf),  and  as  the  solubility  of  the  acid
sulphite  is  much  greater  than  that  of  the  carbonate,  a  further  quantity
of  the  latter  may  be  dissolved  after  the  passage  of  the  sulphurous
anhydride,  so  that  ultimately  a  very  strong  solution  of  the  sulphite
may  be  formed  in  this  manner,  from  which  it  may  be  obtained  in  a
crystalline  form,  either  by  cooling  and  evaporating  (without  heating,
for  then  the  salt  would  give  off  sulphurous  anhydride)  or  by  adding
alcohol  to  the  solution.  When  exposed  to  the  air  this  salt  loses
sulphurous  anhydride  and  attracts  oxygen,  which  converts  it  into
sodium  sulphate.  The  acid  sulphit<es  of  the  alkali  metals  are  able  to
combine  not  only  with  oxygen,  but  also  with  many  other  substances —
for  example,  a  solution  of  the  sodium  salt  dissolves  sulphur,  forming
sodium  thiosulphate,  gives  crystalline  compounds  with  the  aldehydes
and  ketones,  and  dissolves  many  bases,  converting  them  into  double

•»*  At  a  given  temperature  the  pressure  of  this  gas  evolved  from  any  salt  will  be
less  than  that  of  carbonic  anhydride,  if  we  compare  the  separation  of  a  gas  from  its  salts
with  the  phenomenon  of  evaporation,  tvs  was  done  in  discussing  tlie  decomposition  of
calcium  carbonate.

Liquid  sulphurous  anhydride  is  used  on  a  large  scale  (Pictet)  for  the  production  of
cold.

5''  De  la  Rive,  Pierre,  and  more  especially  Roozebooni,  have  investigated  the
crystallo-hydrate  which  is  formed  by  sulphurous  anhydri<le  and  water  at  temperatures
below  7°  under  the  ordinary  pressure,  and  in  closed  vessels  (at  tenijieratures  below  12°  L
Its  composition  is  S0.2,7H.20,  and  density  1'2.  This  hydrate  correKix)nd8  with  the  similar
hydrate  CO...,8H-20  obtained  by  Wroblewsky.

SULPHUR.  SKLENJUM,  AND  TELLLRIUM  227

Upbites.  Having  the  faculty  of  attracting  or  absi^rliiug  oxygen,  acid
sodium  sulphite  w  also  able  to  alisorli  chloriue,  and  is  tlierefoi'o
employed,  like  sodium  thiosulpliate,  for  tlie  removal  of  chloride  (as  an
antichlor),  especially  in  the  blenching  '>f  fabrics,  when  it  is  necessary
tu  remove  tlie  last  trnces  of  the  chlorine  held  in  the  tissues,  which
might  otherwise  have  an  injurious  effect  on  them.  If  a  solution  of  an
iilkali  hydroxide  be  divided  into  two  parts,  and  one  half  is  saturated
with  sulphurous  anhydride,  and  then  the  other  half  added  to  it,  a
normal  salt  will  be  obtained  in  the  solution,  having  an  alkaline  reaction,
like  a  solution  of  sodium  ciLrbouHte.  The  acid  salt  has  a  neutral
reaction.**'^'  Like  sodium  carbonatti,  lu/riiKif  nodhi/n  milji/iiie  has  the
composition  NajSOjilOHjO,  and  its  mnximum  solubility  is  at  -JS" — in
a  wonl,  it  very  closely  resembles  siidiiiiu  carbonate.  Although  this
salt  does  not  give  off  sulphurous  anhydride  from  its  solution,  it  is  abte,
like  the  acid  salt,  to  absorb  oxygen  from  the  air,  and  is  then  converted
into  sodium  sulphate. '^

Besides  the  acid  character  we  must  also  point  out  the  reducing
character  of  sulphurous  anhydride.  The  reducing  action  of  sutpliurous
acid,  its  anhydride  and  salts,  is  due  to  their  faculty  of  passing  into
sulphuric  acid  and  sulphates.  The  reducing  action  of  the  sulphites
is  particularly  energetic,  so  that  they  even  convert  nitric  o.vide  into
nitrous  oxide  :  K.jSOj  +  2N(J=K  ^.SO,  +  N.;0.  The  salts  of  many  of  the
higher  oxides  are  converted  into  those  of  the  lower — for  example,  FeX,
into  FeX„  CuX,  into  CuX,  HgXj  into  HgX  ;  thus  2FeXj  +  SO, 4  2H ^O
=2FeXj  +  HjKr»,  +2HX,  In  the  presence  of  water,  sulphurous
anhydride  is  oxidised  by  chlorine  (SO.^  *  2H,0  +  Cl,=HjKO,  +  2HCl),
iodine,  niti-ous  acid,  hydrogen  peroxide,  hypochlorous  acid,  cidoric  acid,
and  other  oxygen  compounds  of  the  halogens,  chromic,  manganic,  and
many  other  metallic  acids  and  higher  oxides,  as  well  as  all  peroxides.
Free  oxygen  in  the  presence  of  spongy  platinum  is  able  to  oxidise
sulphurous  anhydride  even  in  the  absence  of  water,  in  which  cose
sulphuric  anhydride  SO^  is  forme<l,  so  that  the  latter  may  be  prepared
by  passing  a  inixtui-e  of  sulphurous  auliydride  and  oxygen  over
incandescent  spongy  platinum,  or,  as  it  is  now  prepared  on  a  large  scale
in  chemical  works,  by  jMissing  this  niixtui-e  over  asbestos  or  pumioe

»""•  ScliviiJier  |18H9)  l.j  satnrating  NuUSO-  with  poUali.  ar  KHSO:,  with  BOda,
nbUined  NaKSOj,  in  tlie  first  inatiuic^e  with  H,0,  uid  in  (he  eecoDil  instuice  with  iH/),
lirolmbly  owinjf  to  the  diflleri-ut  media  iu  which  the  cryBtala  ub  tormeil.  In  RenemI  idI-
phnrona  acid  easily  fonoH  double  salts.

"'  The  normal  talta  of  calcium  and  miLgneijintn  ore  Blitjhtl]',  uul  the  acid  salts  eaul;,
Hilnble  in  water.  Tlieae  ueid  solphiCes  uv  tuoch  dkbiI  in  practice;  thus  calcium  liisul-
phile  i«  employed  in  tha  manufsctnre  a!  ceUntose  (nun  wwdasl,  for  miiing  with  fibrous
—-swttcr  in  the  mannfiLcture  uf  pajier.

228  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

stone  moistened  with  a  solution  of  platinum  salt  and  ignited.  Sul-
phurous anhydride  is  completely  absorbed  by  certain  higher  oxides — for
instance,  by  barium  peroxide  and  lead  dioxide  (PbO^-f  S02=PbS04).3**

There  are,  however,  cases  where  sulphurous  anhydride  acts  as  an
oxidising  agent  — that  is,  it  is  deoxidised  in  the  presence  of  substances
which  are  capable  of  absorbing  oxygen  with  still  greater  energy  than
the  sulphurous  anhydride  itself.  This  oxidising  action  proceeds  with
the  formation  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  or  of  sulphides,  while  the
reducing  agent  is  oxidised  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  of  the  sul-
phurous anhydride.  .  In  this  respect,  the  action  of  stannous  salts  is
particularly  remarkable.  Stannous  chloride,  SnCl2,  in  an  aqueous
solution  gives  a  precipitate  of  stannic  sulphide,  SnSg,  with  sulphurous
anhydride — that  is,  the  latter  is  deoxidised  to  sulphuretted  hydrogen,
wliile  SnXj  is  oxidised  into  SnX4.  A  solution  of  sulphurous  anhydride
has  also  an  oxidising  action  on  zinc.  The  zinc  passes  into  solution,  but  no
hydrogen  is  evolved,^^  because  a  salt  of  hydrosidphtirous  acid,  ZnS2G4,
is  formed. The  free  acid  is  still  less  stable  than  the  salt.

The  faculty  of  sulphurous  anhydride  of  combining  with  various
substances  is  evident  from  the  above-cited  reactions,  where  it  combines
with  hydrogen  and  with  oxygen,  and  this  faculty  also  appears  in  the

**  This  reaction  is  taken  advantage  of  in  removing  sulphurous  anhydride  from  a  mix-
ture of  gases.  Lead  dioxide,  PbO<},  is  brown,  and  when  combined  with  sulpliurous  anhy-
dride it  forms  lead  sulphate,  PbS04,  whicli  is  white,  so  that  the  reaction  is  evident  both
from  the  change  in  colour  and  development  of  heat.  Sulphurous  anhydride  is  slowly
decomposed  by  the  action  of  light,  with  the  separation  of  sulphur  and  formation  of  sul-
phuric anhydride.  Tliis  explains  the  fact  that  sulphurous  anhydride  prepared  in  the
dark  gives  a  white  precipitate  of  silver  sulphite,  Ag.jSO-,,  with  silver  chlorate,  AgC104,
but  when  prepared  in  the  light,  even  in  diflfubed  light,  it  gives  a  dark  precipitate.  This
naturally  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  sulphur  liberated  then  forms  silver  sulphide,
which  is  black.

'*  Schonebein  observed  that  the  liquid  turns  yellow,  and  acquires  the  faculty  of
decolorising  litmus  and  indigo.  Schiitzenberger  showed  that  this  depends  on  the  foima-
tion  of  a  zinc  salt  of  a  peculiar  and  very  powerfully-reducing  acid,  for  with  cupric  salts
the  yellow  solution  gives  a  red  precipitate  of  cuprous  hydrate  or  metallic  copper,  and  it
reduces  salts  of  silver  and  mercury  entirely.  An  exactly  similar  solution  is  obtained  by
the  action  of  zinc  on  sodium  bisulphite  without  access  of  air  and  in  the  cold.  The
yellow  liquid  absorbs  oxygen  from  the  air  with  great  avidity,  and  forms  a  sulphate.  If
the  solution  be  mixed  with  alcohol,  it  deposits  a  double  sulphite  of  zinc  and  sodium,
ZnNaQ(S05)2,  which  does  not  decolorise  litmus  or  indigo.  The  remaining  alcoholic  solu-
tion deposits  colourless  crystals  in  the  cold,  which  absorb  oxygen  with  great  energy  in
the  presence  of  water,  but  are  tolerably  stable  when  dried  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-
pump.  The  solution  of  these  crystals  has  the  above-mentioned  decolorising  and  reducing
properties.  These  crystals  contain  a  sodium  salt  of  a  lower  acid  ;  their  composition  was
at  first  supposed  to  be  HNaSO.>,  but  it  was  afterwards  proved  that  they  do  not  contain
hydrogen,  and  present  the  composition  NaoS.204  (Bernthseu).  The  same  salt  is  formed
by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current  on  a  solution  of  sodium  bisulphite,  owing  to  the
action  of  the  hydrogen  at  the  moment  of  its  liberation.  If  SO ,  resembles  COj  in  its
comixisition,  then  hyposulphurous  acid  H2S2O4  resembles  oxalic  acid  H..C.JO4.  Perhaps
ail  analogue  of  foniiic  acid  SH.jO..  will  be  discovered.

sULPIim.  SELESH'M,  MiV  TELLUBIITT  929

fiict  tlmt,  like  carbonic  oxide,  it  coutbin<^s  with  cliloriue,  forming  a,
cbloran hydride  of  sulpliuric;  acid,  .SOjClj,  to  whicli  we  sball  iifterwards
r«turn.  Tlie  same  fiiculty  for  comljiiiatiuti  also  appears  in  the  salts  of
suljihuroua  iLcid,  in  their  liitbility  Ui  oxi<liLtion  and  in  the  exceedingly
chill ■acMristic  formatipn  of  a  peculiar  serips  of  salts  iibtained  l>y  Pelouze
and  Frt'Uiy.  At  a  temperature  of  —  1  U°  oi-  Ijelow,  nitric  oxide  NO  is
iibsorbed  by  olkaiiun  solutions  of  the  alkali  sulphites,  forming  a  peculiar
series  uf  nitroaulphtleii.  At  a  higher  temperature  these  salts  are  not
formed  but  the  nitric  oxide  is  reduced  to  nitrous  oxide.  But  in  the
cold  the  liquid  saturated  with  nitric  oxide  after  ii  certiiin  time  gives
prisraatta  crystals  resembling  those  of  nitre.  The  composition  of  the
potassium  salt  is  K,SNjO,,-  -thut  is,  the  salt  contains  the  demerits  of
pittassiuni  sulphite  and  iif  nitric  oxide.'"

There  are  also  several  other  substances,  formed  by  the  oxides  of
)gen  and  sulphur,  which  belong  to  this  class  of  complex  and,  under

lit]!  uf  thiH  -lilt  is  vury  y;riMl,  »nd  mn;  be  vuiainred  to  Umt  nt  the  com.
poBud  nf  torruUK  italpbate  with  iiitriv  niide,  for  nheii  lieiLt«d  undrr  the  tunlsct
influencft  of  i*|>o)igy  plKtinnin,  uhucoitJ,  Aru-.,  it  flpLJt«  np  into  pDliu»inui  unlphftta  uid
nitiuDu  oxide.  At  lflO°  the  dry  tiaJI  gi«ea  off  oilriu  uxidu,  und  rH-turniH  {ntiuBiiun  snl-
phite.  Tbo  Ine  acid  luu  not  yet  bmu  obtained.  Tlieiw  utlte  rewaible  the  etaiet  o\
tHifilioiiilritn  diicovered  hy  Fr^y  in  184S,  They  «re  ohl*itied  by  piHuing  iialpbutons
uibydride  through  *  Htacantrateil  nud  itranKly  alluliDe  oqueoiu  Hdiitiun  of  patiusiaui
nitrilt!.  The;  Mte  taluble  in  witter,  but  ure  precipitated  by  wii  excena  of  ulluli.  The  Hnt
pnidnct  of  Ibe  action  Imi^  the  maipnsitiun  K^^IS^On.  It  is  then  converted  by  the
Farther  action  of  Bnliiliurous  anhyddde,  aJd  water,  and  other  reaeents  iiilo  n  aeiies  of
similat  complex  sails,  uuiny  of  wbieh  give  well.fonned  cryntalii.  One  ninat  suppose  that
the  chief  I'liiiw  of  the  tommtion  of  the«e  leiy  uoniplei  ooinpoDnds  is,  that  tliey  contain
anuturate'l  voiupounda.  HO,  KMO<j,  and  KUHOj,  all  of  which  are  HnbJMl  to  oxidation
and  farther  eoiubinaliini,  and  tberefure  taRily  cainbine  among  each  other.  Tlte  devom-
poaition  of  theae  vouiponude,  with  tlit  evolution  of  ammonia,  when  their  snlntioDs  are
healed  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  niolecale  ctiiitaiiia  the  deuxidiutC,  aolphornua  anhydride,
whidi  tedacep  the  nitrons  acid,  NO(OHr,  to  nuunionia.  In  my  opinion  Ibe  coaiposition
nf  Uie  iialphonitrites  may  be  very  Biinply  referred  to  the  eumpositiuii  ul  miimfmlai  iu
which  the  hydrogen  in  partly  replaced  by  tlie  radicle  of  the  itnLpbatee.  IF  we  repreeent
the  CfdDpotfitioa  oF  potasainm  Hulphate  aa  "EO'Kl^lO^i  the  groap  KSOj  will  be  eqaiva-
lent  (aci'oiding  to  the  law  uf  «nbeliIntion)  t<>  HO  aud  ti>  liydrngtui.  It  viimliines  witll
hydrogen.  Forming  Llie  putajtiiinm  aoid  fiulphite,  KH8O3.  Hem*  the  group  KSOj  niay
also  reiilacu  tlie  hydrugeit  in  aouuoiuM-  Judging  by  my  analyux  (1h70|  the  extreme
limit  of  thia  aubntitution.  ^(USOsij,  agrevs  with  that  of  the  aulphonitrite,  which  is
eaailj  formed,  aimultaneoniily  with  alkali,  by  the  action  oF  poUkiiium  sulphite  on  potas-
Htniu  nitrite,  aomrdiiig  to  the  equaUon  BK(KS0,)  +  KNOj  +  aH^  =  N|K905),+  4HK0.
The  resmrcbee  uf  Berglund,  and  esifeciaUy  of  BaM:hig  llaS7|,  fully  verified  my  concla-
Hioua,  and  ahowid  that  we  must  diatiugnish  the  following  type*  of  Halts,  corresponding
with  ammonia,  where  X  atanda  For  the  lulphonic  group,  HSOj,  in  which  the  hydrogen  i«
replaced  by  potiuBium  1  lienee  X  =  KSO; :  (L|  NH^X,  IU)  NHX„  (»)  NH,.  |1)  N(OH)XH,
IS)  X|UU).\.^  (H)  N|OH|^,  jnat  ae  NRilOH  i  is.  l>ydioxylamine.  NHIOH).,,  ii  the  hydrate
of  nitruu*  oxide,  and  N(OH|j  is  ortbonitroo^  acid,  as  tolhiws  from  the  law  nf  ■nbali-
tutioii.  TlUK  chuui  of  componnds  is  in  inont  intimate  relation  Willi  tlie  aeriea  of  ml-
phoiiilniDa  conipoiiud*.  uorteaponding  with  '  clianiber  uryatuls'  and  tlwir  acids,  which  we

230  PRI^X'IPLES OF CHEMISTRY

some  circumstances,  unstable  compounds.  In  the  manufacture  of
sulphuric  acid,  both  these  classes  of  oxides  come  into  contact  with  each
other  in  the  lead  chambers,  and  if  there  be  insufficient  water  for  the
formation  of  sulphuric  acid  they  give  crystalline  compounds,  termed
cJiamber  crystals.  As  a  rule,  the  composition  of  the  crystals  is  ex-
pressed by  the  formula  NHSO5.  This  is  a  compound  of  the  radicles
NO2  of  nitric  acid,  and  HSO3  of  sulphuric  acid,  or  nitrosulphuric
acid,  NOa'SHOj,  if  sulphuric  acid  be  expressed  as  OH'SHOs  and  nitric
by  NOjOH.  The  tabular  crystals  of  this  substance  fuse  at  about  70°,
are  formed  both  by  the  direct  action  of  nitrous  anhydride  or  nitric
peroxide  (but  not  NO,  which  is  not  absorbed  by  sulphuric  *  acid)  on
sulphuric  acid  (Weltzien  and  others),  and  especially  on  sulphuric  acid
containing  an  anhydride  and  the  lower  oxides  of  sulphur  and  nitric  acid.**
Thiosulphuric  acidj  H2S2O3 — that  is,  a  compound  of  sulphurous  acid
and  sulphur — also  belongs  to  the  products  of  combination  of  sulphurous
acid.  In  the  same  way  that  sulphurous  acid,  H2SO3,  gives  H2SO4  with
oxygen,  so  it  gives  H2S2O3  with  sulphur.  In  a  free  state  it  is  very  un-
stable, and  it  is  only  known  in  the  form  of  its  salts  proceeding  from  the
direct  action  of  sulphur  on  the  normal  sulphites  ;  if  endeavours  be
made  to  separate  it  in  a  free  state,  it  immediately  splits  up  into  those
elements  from  which  it  might  be  formed — that  is,  into  sulphur  and
sulphurous  acid.  The  most  important  of  its  salts  is  the  sodium
thioaulpJuUe  (known  as  hyposulphite),  NaaSjOajSHjO,  which  occurs  in
colourless  crystals,  and  is  unacted  on  by  atmospheric  oxygen  either
when  in  a  dry  state  or  in  solution.  Many  other  salts  of  this  acid  are
easily  formed  by  means  of  this  salt,^'  *»^*  although  this  cannot  be  done

"  In  the  Hulphuric  acid  chambers  the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen  and  Kulpliur  take  part
in  the  reaction.  They  are  oxidised  by  tlie  oxygen  of  the  air,  and  fonn  nitro-salphuric
acid — for  example,  'iSO.*  +  N^Oj  +  O.^  +  H._,0  =  2NHSO5.  This  eomiwund  dissolves  in  strong
sulpharic  acid  without  changing,  and  when  this  solution  is  diluted  (when  the  sp.  gr.  falls
to  1*5),  it  splits  up  into  sulphuric  acid  and  nitrous  anhydride,  and  by  the  action  of  sul-
phurous anhydride  is  converted  into  nitric  oxide,  which  by  itself  (in  the  absence  of  nitric
acid  or  oxygen)  is  insoluble  in  sulphuric  acid.  These  reactions  are  taken  advantage  of
in  retaining  the  oxides  of  nitrogen  in  the  Gay-Lussac  coke-towers,  and  for  extracting  the
absorbed  oxides  of  nitrogen  from  the  resultant  solution  in  the  Glover  tower.  Although
nitric  oxide  is  not  absorbed  by  sulphuric  acid,  it  reacts  (Rose,  Briining)  on  its  anhydride,
and  forms  sulphurous  anhydride  and  a  crystalline  substance,  N.2S.,09=  2N0  +  8SO5  —  SOj
~  N2O52SO-.  This  may  be  regarded  as  the  anhydride  of  nitro-sul[»huric  acid,  because
N.^S.^Oq  =  2NHSO5  — H.^0;  like  nitro-sulphuric  acid,  it  is  decomposed  by  water  into
nitro-sulpliuric  acid  and  nitrous  anhydride.  Since  boric  and  arsenious  anhydrides,
alumina  and  other  oxides  of  the  fonn  R.^Oj  are  able  to  combine  with  sulphuric  anhydride
to  form  similar  compounds  decomposable  by  water,  the  above  compound  does  not  present
any  exceptional  phenomenon.  The  substance  N0C1S0-,  obtained  by  Weber  by  the
action  of  nitrosyl  chloride  upon  sulphuric  anhydride  belongs  to  this  class  of  compounds.

■*'  *>'*  Many  double  salts  of  thiosulphuric  acid  are  known,  for  instance,  PbS^O^.SNaMSjOs,
I'JHaO;  CaSaO.-„3K.>S.j05,5H.20,  tic.  (Fortman,  Schwicker,  Fock,  and  others).

SULPHUR.  BELENHTM,  ASP  TKTXl'RIliM

281

salph
^^^^  when

ith  all  bisps,  fur  such  iHisea  ns  alumina,  ferric  oxiile,  clirotuiuuL  oxide,

ltd  others  do  not  give  compounds  with  thiosulphuric  acid,  juat  as  they

not  form  stabli*  compounds  with  carbonic  acid. Whenever  these

Its  might  be  formed,  they  (like  the  acid)  split  up  into  sulphurous  acid

ilpbur,  and  furthermore  th«  elements  of  thiosulphuric  add  in

?ttseB iwt  in  a  reducing manner, forming sulphuric  acid and

;ing  up  the  oxygen  from  reducible  oxides. Tlius  when  treated  with

thiosulphate  the  soluble  ferric  salts  give  a  precipitate  of  sulphur  and

ferrous  salts. The  thiosulphates  of  the  metals  of  the  alkalis  are

^obtained  directly  by  boiling  a  solution  of  their  sulphites  with  sulphur  :

NftjSOj  +  S  =  Na.jSjfJj. The  same  salts  are  formed  by  tlie  action  of

sulphurous  anhydride  on solutions  of the sulphides  : tlius sodium

iulphide dissolved in water  gives sulphur  and  sodium  thiosulphate

when  a  stream  of  sulphurous  anhydride  is  passed  through  it  :  :2Na.jS

<>f  3SO,  =  ^Na^S/tj  -I-  S. The polysulphides of the  alkali metals

'hen left expoae<l to the  air  attract  oxygen and  also  form  tliio-

ilphates.*'

Thus  when  nlkili  wshIp,  wliich  uoiitaing  culcinm  Bulpbidti,  uudetgoea  nxidution  in
culcium  ifllfHUlphfde.  and  Ui«n  ealcioia  tbiosnlphnte,  CitS,0;t.
in  t,  KolDtion  of  snliBharou*  moid,  btnides  the  hypoauliiliurous  Kid
of  solphiw  Slid  thioaulpfaate  is  obtained  (Note  SU),  SSO^-t-Zn,
^  ZnBOi-fZnSiO^.  In  tliis  cn«e,  u  in  the  tormntion  of  brpOBiili>bnrouii  uiil,  there  is
no  hydRigeD  libcnted.  One  of  the  niobt  common  methodH  for  preparing  thiosalpbKt«B
(.■ODBiBti  in  the  arlioii  of  talphvr  on  the  alJcaiii.  The  reaction  ih  acvompliahed  hj  the
loTnuttiOD  of  sulphideH  and  tbioiiUl|>hatei,  juiil  oa  the  reu'tion  of  chlorine  on  olkDiliii  is
■ecampuiied  b;  Uie  fonnntion  of  hyxnchlorites  and  cliloriden ;  hence  in  this  respect  the
tbinmtphatea  hold  the  (ame  position  in  the  order  of  the  compoands  of  anlphnr  as  the
bypochtoiiteB  do  among  tbc  chlorine  componndH.  The  leaction  ol  caotttic  aoda  on
Ml  eiGCH  of  sulpliut  mttir  be  etpriHiHid  thOB :  eNaH0  +  19«  ^  SNa^j  +  NHgatOs-f-HH^.
IThu*  snlphiiT  is  Htlabte  in  alkalia.  On  a  large  Kale  Kidinm  thioaolphale.  Na,S,Oj,  ie
by  first  heating  sodium  salplukto  with  chareaal,  to  formBOdiDm  eulphide.  which
(ben  disaoWed  in  water  and  treated  with  nulpharoiui  anhydride.  The  reaction  ia  oom-
vben  the  solution  hae  become  slightly  acid.  A  eertain  amount  of  caustic  alkali  ia
the  slightly  acid  Koiation;  a  portion  of  the  snlpliur  is  thua  precipitated,  and  the
ia  then  bailed  and  erapunted  when  the  ult  ciynlAlliwa  out.  The  talnration
(be  nlDtlon  of  aodium  aalphide  by  anlphurons  anhydride  ia  carried  on  in  different
■for  example,  by  meann  of  coke-tower»,  by  cauBing  the  nolntion  of  sulphide  to
over  tbe  coke,  and  the  aalphnroua  anhydride,  obtuned  by  burning  sulphur,  to
up  the  Boke-tnwHr  from  below.  A.n  eiuenii  of  sulphumua  unhydride  luaHt  b«
kI,  as  otherwise  iiodinm  trithionate  ia  formed,  Sodium  thio[iliuHphate  is  alio  pre.
by  the  dunhle  decomposition  ol  the  uoluhle  calcinm  thioHUlplial«  with  sodiimi  sal.
or  carbonate,  in  whiah  case  cakium  sulphate  or  carbonate  iH  precipitated.  The
ukloiiuD  tJiioaalphate  is  prepared  by  the  action  of  anlphurouB  anhydride  on  either  colciain
Holphide  or  klbsli  waiite.  A  dilote  solution  ol  calcium  thioautphate  may  be  obtained  by
iHwting  alkali  waste  whicli  has  been  exposed  to  the  action  of  air  with  water.  On  eva-
poration, this  Kotutiou  ipveH  orystals  of  the  salt  containing  Ca8,0i,BH.,0.  A  HOtntion  d(
tnJauin  thioeulpluLte  muat  bu  evapomted  with  great  care,  because  olherwiE^?  the  Halt
break*  Dp  into  sulphur  and  enlciuiii eulpliide. Eren  the  crystallised  salt  Hnnwtiiueo

tf  »tablH,  do  not  eWorwicd  and  at  0^  d'lwnhe  in

232  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTKY

Althougli  sulphur,  oxidising  at  a  high  temperature,  only  forms  a
small  quantity  of  sulphuric  anhydride,  SO3,  and  nearly  all  passes  into
sulphurous  anhydride,  still  the  latter  may  be  converted  into  the  higher
oxide,  or  sulphuric  anhydride^  SO3,  by  many  methods.  Sulphuric
anhydride  is  a  solid  crystalline  substance  at  the  ordinary  temperature  ;
it  is  easily  fusible*(15°),  and  volatile  (46°),  and  rapidly  attracts  moisture.
Although  it  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  sulphurous  anhydride
with  oxygen,  it  is  capable  of  further  combination.  Thus  it  combines
with water, hydrochloric acid,  ammonia, with  many  hydrocarbons,

one  part  of  water,  and  at  20°  in  0*6  part.  The  solution  of  this  salt  does  not  undergo
any  change  when  boiled  for  a  short  time,  but  after  prolonged  boiling  it  deposits  sulphur.
Tlie  crystals  fuse  at  56°,  and  lose  all  their  water  at  100°.  When  the  dry  salt  is  ignited
it  gives  sodium  sulphide  and  sulphate.  With  acids,  a  solution  of  the  thiosulphate  soon
becomes  cloudy  and  deposits  an  exceedingly  fine  powder  of  sulphur  (Note  10).  If  tlie
amount  of  acid  added  be  considerable,  it  also  evolves  sulphurous  anhydride :  H2S.2O3
—  H.jO  +  S  +  SOj.  Sodium  thiosulphate  has  many  practical  uses  ;  it  is  used  in  photo-
graphy for  dissolving  silver  chloride  and  bromide.  Its  solvent  action  on  silver  chloride
may  be  taken  advantage  of  in  extracting  this  metal  as  chloride  from  its  ores.  In
dissolving,  it  forms  a  double  salt  of  silver  and  sodium:  AgCl  +  Na<{8203  =  NaCl
+  AgNaS.203.  Sodium  thiosulphate  is  an  anfichlor—ihsiX  is,  a  substance  which  hinders
the  destructive  action  of  free  chlorine  owing  to  its  being  very  easily  oxidised  by  chlorine
into  sulphuric  acid  and  sodium  chloride.  The  reaction  with  iodine  is  different,  and  is
remarkable  for  the  accuracy  with  which  it  i)roceed8.  The  iodine  takes  up  half  the
sodium  from  the  salt  and  converts  it  into  a  tetnvthionate  ;  2NaoS205  + 1^  =  2NaI  +  Na3S40^
and  hence  this  reaction  is  employed  for  the  determination  of  free  iodine.  As  iodine  is
expelled  from  potassium  iodide  by  chlorine,  it  is  possible  also  to  determine  the  amount
of  chlorine  by  this  method  if  ]>otassium  iodide  be  added  to  a  solution  containing  chlorine.
And  as  many  of  the  higher  oxides  are  able  to  evolve  iodine  from  potassium  iodide,  or
chlorine  from  hydrochloric  acid  (for  example,  the  higher  oxides  of  manganese,  chromium,
X'c),  it  is  also  i)osKible  to  determine  the  amounts  of  these  higher  oxides  by  means  of
sodium  thiosulphate  and  liberated  iodine.  This  forms  the  basis  of  the  iodometric  method
of  volumetric  analysis.  The  dettiils  of  these  methods  will  be  found  in  works  on  analytical
chemistrj'.

On  adding  a  solution  of  a  lead  salt  gradually  to  a  solution  of  sodium  thiosulphate  a
white  precii)itate  of  lea<l  thiosulphate,  PbSaOs,  is  formed  (a  soluble  double  salt  is  first
formed,  and  if  the  action  be  rapid,  lead  sulphide).  When  this  substance  is  heated  at
200^,  it  undergoes  a  change  and  takes  fire.  Sodium  thiosulphat'e  in  solution  rapidly
reduces  cupric  salts  to  cuprous  salts  by  means  of  the  sul])liurous  acid  contained  in  the
thiosulphate,  but  the  resultant  cuprous  oxide  is  not  ])recipitated,  because  it  passes  into
the  state  of  a  thiosulphate  and  forms  a  double  salt.  These  double  cuprous  salts  are
excellent  reducing  agents.  The  solution  when  heated  gives  a  black  precipitate  of  copper
sulphide.

The  following  formula?  sufficiently  explain  the  ix)sition  held  by  thiosulphuric  acid
among  the  other  acids  of  sulphur  :

Sulphurous  acid  SO.^HlOH)

Sulphuric  acid  SO.^OHfOH)

Thiosulphuric  acid  S02SH(OH

Hyposulphurous  acid  SO...H{S02H)

Dithionic  acid  SO.]oH(  SO.^OH )

At  one  time  it  was  thought  that  all  the  salts  of  thiosulphuric  acid  only  existed  in
combination  with  water,  and  it  was  then  supi>osed  that  their  conii>ositioii  was  H|S204,  or
H.jSOq,  but  Popp  obtained  the  anhydrous  salts.

SULPHUB.  8ELENIUH.  AKS  TELLOEIUH  288

and  even  witli  sulpliuric  acid,  lioric  and  nitrous  anhydrides,  ic,  and
also  with  bftsfia  which  bum  directly  in  its  vapour,  forming  sulphates  in
the  presenc-e  of  traces  "£  moisture  (frf  Chapter  IX.,  Note  29).  The
oxidation  of  sulpliuraus  unliydride,  SO,,  into  sulphuric  anhydiicle,  SO,,
is  effected  by  poking  a  mixture  of  the  fortuer  and  dry  oxygen  or
air  over  incandescent  spongy  .platinum.  An  inoreiifie  of  pressure
accelerates  the  reaction  (Hauiscii).  If  the  product  be  passed  into  a
cold  vessel,  crystalline  sulphuric  anhydride  is  deposited  upon  the  sides  of
the  vessel,  but  as  it  is  diAicult  Ui  avoid  all  traces  of  moisture  it  always
contains  compounds  of  its  hydrates:  HjS,Oj  and  H,.S,0|,,  whose
presence  so  modifies  tlie  propertiefi  of  the  anhydridi-  (Weber)  that
formerly  two  modifications  of  the  anhydride  were  recognised.  The
same  sulphuric  anhydride  niay  Ih>  obtained  from  certain  anhydrous
sulphates,  or  those  which  are  almost  so,  which  are  decomposed  by  heat,
whilst  an  impure  but  perfectly  anhydrous  anhydride  is  formed  by
distillation  over  [ihosphoric  anhydride.  For  instance,  acid  sodium
sulphate,  NaHSO,,  and  the  pyro-  or  di-sulphatc.  Na,Sj(>,  (Chapter
XII.)  formed  from  it,  when  ignited  evolve  sulphuric  anhydride.  Green
vitrioi-that  is,  ferrous  sulphate,  FeSU^— belongs  to  the  number  of
those  sulphates  which  easily  give  off  sulphuric  aniiydride  under  the
action  of  heat.  It  contains  water  of  crystallisation  and  |>arts  with  it
when  it  is  heated,  but  the  last  etjuivalent  of  water  is  driven  off  with
difficulty,  just  as  is  the  case  with  magnesium  sulphate,  MgSO,7HjO  ;
however,  when  thoroughly  heated,  this  evolution  of  sulphuric  anhydride
lioes  take  place,  although  not  completely,  liecause  at  a  high  temperature  a
portion  of  it  is  decomposed  by  the  ferrous  oxide  (SO3  +  2FeO),  which
is  converted  into  ferric  oxide,  Fe^O,,,  and  in  consequence  part  of  the
sulphuric  anhydride  is  converted  into  8ulphun.>uE  anhydride.  Thus  the
products  of  the  decomposition  of  ferrous  .sulphate  will  be  :  ferric  oxide,
Fe(0,,  sulphurous  anhydride,  SUj,  and  sulphuric  .-inhydride,  SO^,
aecordingto  the  equation  :  2FeS0,  =  Fe,0,  +  SO,  +  SO3.  Afl  water
still  remains  with  the  ferrous  sulphate  when  it  is  heated,  the  result  will
partially  consist  of  the  hydrate  H,Mt),,  with  anhydride,  SO^,  dissolved
in  it.  Sulphuric  acid  was  for  a  long  time  prepared  in  tliis  manner  ;
the  process  was  formerly  carried  on  on  a  large  scale  in  the  neighbour^
hood  of  Nordhausen,  and  hence  the  sulphuric  acid  prepared  front
ferrous  ijulphate  is  caWeii.  j'liiiihig  yordhaiaeii  acid.  At  the  present
time  the  fuming  acid  is  prepare<l  by  passing  the  volatile  products  of  the
ilecompoaition  of  ferrous  sulphate  through  strong  sulphuric  acid  pre-
pared by- the  ordinary  method.  The  sulphurous  anhy<lride  is  insoluble
in  it,  but  it  absorbs  the  sulphuric  anhydride.  Sulphuric  anhydride
jji,y  be  prepared  ntit  only  by  igniting  FeSO^  or  sodium  pyrosulphate,

■ide  J

234  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

NagSgOy  (the  decomposition  proceeds  at  600°),  but  also  by  heating
a  mixture  of  the  latter  and  MgS04  (Walters) ;  in  the  former  case  a
stable  double  salt  MgNa2(S04)2  finally  remains.  It  is  also  obtained
by  the  direct  combination  of  SO2  and  O  under  the  action  of  spongy
platinum  or  asbestos  coated  with  platinum  black  (C.  Winkler's  pro-
cess). Nordhausen  sulphuric  acid  fumes  in  air,  owing  to  its  containinjg
and  easily  giving  off  sulphuric  anhydride,  and  it  is  therefore  also  called
fuming  sulphuric  acid]  these  fumes  are  nothing  but  the  vapour  of
sulphuric  anhydride  combining  with  the  moisture  in  the  air  and  forming
non-volatile  sulphuric  acid  (hydrate).^'

Nordhausen  sulphuric  acid  contains  a  peculiar  compound  of  8O3
and  H2SO4,  or  pyrosulphuric  acid  ;  an  imperfect  anhydride  of  sulphuric
acid,  H2S2O7,  analogous  in  composition  with  the  salts  Na2S207,
K2Cr207,  and  bearing  the  same  relation  to  H2SO4  that  pyrophosphoric
acid  does  to  H3PO4.  The  bond  holding  the  sulphuric  acid  and
anhydride  together  is  unstable.  This  is  obvious  from  the  fact  that  the
anhydride  may  easily  be  separated  from  this  compound,  by  the  action  of
heat.  In  order  to  obtain  the  definite  compound,  the  Nordhausen  acid
is  cooled  to  5*^,  or,  better  still,  a  portion  of  it  is  distilled  until  all  the
anhydride  and  a  certain  amount  of  sulphuric  acid  have  passed  over  into
the  distillate,  which  will  then  solidify  at  the  ordinary  temperature,
because  the  compound  H2SO^,S03  fusas  at  35°.  Although  this  sub-
stance reacts  on  water,  bases,  «fec.,  like  a  mixture  of  SO3  +  H2SO4,  still

^  Nordhausen  Hulphuric  acid  may  serve  as  a  very  simple  means  for  the  preparation
of  sulphuric  anhydride.  For  this  purpose  the  Nordhausen  acid  is  heated  in  a  glass
retort,  whose  neck  is  firmly  fixed  in  the  mouth  of  a  well-cooled  flask.  The  access  of
moisture  is  prevented  by  connecting  the  receiver  with  a  drying-tube.  On  heating  the
retort  the  vapours  of  sulphuric  anhydride  will  pass  over  into  the  receiver,  where  they
condense ;  the  crystals  of  anhydride  thus  prepared  will,  however,  contain  traces  of
sulphuric  acid — that  is,  of  the  hydrate.  By  repeatedly  distilling  over  phosphoric
anhydride,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  the  pure  anhydride,  SO5,  especially  if  the  process  be
carried  on  without  access  of  air  in  a  closed  vessel.

The  ordinary  sulphuric  anhydride,  which  is  imperfectly  freed  from  the  hydrate,  is  a
snow-white,  exceedingly  volatile  substance,  which  crj'stallises  (generally  by  sublimation)
in  long  silky  prisms,  and  only  gives  the  pure  anhydride  when  carefully  distilled  over
P.,05.  Freshly  prepared  crystals  of  almost  pure  anhydride  fuse  at  16°  into  a  colourless
liquid  having  a  specific  gravity  at  26°  =  1*91,  and  at  il^  =  I'Hl ;  it  volatilises  at  46°.  After
being  kept  for  some  time  the  anhydride,  even  containing  only  small  traces  of  water,
undergoes  a  change  of  the  following  nature :  A  small  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid  com-
bines by  degrees  with  a  large  proportion  of  the  anhydride,  forming  polysulphuric  acids,
H..>S04,«SO-„  which  fuse  with  difficulty  (even  at  100  ,  Marignac),  but  decompose  when
heated.  In  the  entire  absence  of  water  this  rise  in  the  fusing  ix)int  does  not  occur
(Wel>er),  and  then  the  anhydride  long  remains  liquid,  and  solidifies  at  about  -f-15°,  vola-
tilises at  40^,  and  has  a  si>ecific  gravity  1'94  at  16^.  We  may  add  that  Weber  (1881),  by
treating  sulphuric  anhydride  with  sulphur,  obtained  a  blue  lower  oxide  of  sulphur,  S-^.Os.
Selenium  and  tellurium  also  give  similar  products  with  S(|-,  SeSO^,,  and  TeSO^.  Water
does  not  act  uixm  them.

SUIJWVB, SELKMl'M. AND  TELLURIITM

235

since  a  definite  ciimpriuiul,  HaS.jl*;,  exists  in  a  free  state  and  gives  sails
.iiid  a  chloran hydride,  SjO,,Cl...i"  we  must  admit  the  existence  of  a
definite  pyi-osulphuric  acid,  like  pyropliosphoric  acid,  only  that  the
latter  has  a  fiirgreatersfabilityand  is  not  even  converted  into  a  perfect
hydrate  by  water.  Further,  the  salts  M^^O;  dissolved  in  water  react
in  the  same  manner  as  the  acid  salts  MHS(.tg,  whilst  the  imperfect
liydrat«s  i>f  phusphoric  acid  (fur  example,  PHO,,  H,PjO,)  have  in-
dependent reactions  even  in  an  aqueous  solution  which  distinguish  them
and  their  salts  fii>m  the  perfect  hydi-ates.

Snijj/itirie  aeiil.  H.,S()„  is  foi-med  b_v  the  combination  of  its  anhy-
dride, SO^,  and  waT^i-,  with  the  evolution  of  a  large  amount  of  heat  ;
the  reaction  So, -|-H^t»  develops  21,:)00  heat  units.  The  method  of  its
preparation  on  a  large  scale,  and  most  of  the  methods  employed
for  it'i  formation,  are  de[ienrli'nt  tin  the  oxidation  of  .sulphurous
anhydride,  and  the  formation  of  su5phuric  anhydride,  which  forms
sulphuric  acid  under  the  action  of  water.  The  technical  method  of  its
manufacture  has  been  deacril^ed  in  Chapter  VI.  The  acid  obtained
from  tite  /vf/  e/iainlirrr  contains  a  cimsiderable  amount  of  water,  and
is  also  impure  owing  to  the  pi-esence  of  oxides  of  nitrogen,  lead  com-
pounds, and  certain  impurities  fmra  the  burnt  sulphur  which  have
come  over  in  a  gaaeons  and  vaporous  state  (for  example,  arsenic  com-
pounds). For  practical  purpuses,  hardly  any  notice  Ls  taken  of  the
majority  of  these  impurities,  because  lh*y  do  not  interfere  with  its  general
([ualities.  Most  frei|uently  endeavours  are  only  made  to  ^enl"^■e,  as  far
iis  possible,  all  the  water  which  can  be  expelled.'"' That  is,  the  object

"  PjrDhuJiihuric  cliloran hydride,  or  purotvtphiiTiil  Mori-lr,  SjOjClj.  correspond'
to  pjiroadlphurio  acid,  in  the  ume  way  tluit  sulphnrjl  chloride,  SO^L^  nomspoadi
to  BQlphoric  Hid.  Tiw  camixwitioD  H/>^Cli=^8a,CI]  +  SC,.  It  is  obUined  by  the
■ctioD  of  the  Tapour  of  salpharic  anhvdride  ou  iDlpbiit  chloride:  3.;CL,  +  SHOs ^ GSO..
+  3^^CLj.  It»&lwlornied(aiiduat>ulphur]'l  chloride,  BO.jCI,.  Hichaelia)  by  the  notioD
of  pbuplionu  pentacblorido  in  eioeii«  on  HUlpburic  uid  lor  ita  first  cbloninhfdride,
ilHOjCl).  It  iti  an  oily  liquid,  boiling  at  about  1B0°,  a,nd  of  sp.  gr.  IB.  According  to
KonoTaloff  (Chapter  VII.|.  ite  Tapour  dcnaity  ii  normal.  It  ahonld  be  noliced  thilt  the
ume  mbatuica  ib  oblaiucd  bj  the  action  of  tolphnric  anhydride  on  lulphor  tetmehloHdii,
and  also  on  carbon  tctncliloride,  and  this  substmnce  n  the  last  product  ol  the  metAlepHiB
ot  CH,.  and  therefore  the  compariaon  of  SCI.,  and  t1,CI,  with  products  of  meUlepais  (tee
latar)  kino  tinda  confirmntiou  in  particular  roactiong.  Bose,  who  obtained  pyrouulphuryl
chloride,  S.,OiClj,  regarded  it  m  iK\„,&AO:„  for  at  that  time  an  endeavour  miH  always
made  to  Bnd  two  component  parts  of  opponite  polarity,  and  this  subntance  wan  cited  ae  a
pIDot  of  the  eiiatonee  of  a,  heiiohluride,  SCt^  PjrosulpliDryl  chloride  is  decomposed  bj
cold  water,  but  more  slowly  than  chlorosulpburic  acid  and  the  other  chlonuihydrids".

The  relation  between  pyrosulphuric  acid  and  the  normal  acid  will  be  obvious  if  we
cKptesH  the  latter  by  the  formula  OH<SOr,H),  because  the  »nlphoiuc  group  (HOsH)  i>
then  eridently  eiguiTaJeiit  Ui  OH.  and  cODHeqaeutly  to  R.  aiid  if  we  replaiw  bntli  the
hydtogens  iu  water  by  tliiH  radicle  we  shall  nbUiii  ISO^HIgO— that  is,  pyrotmliilinric  Hcid.

•9  The  remoTol  of  the  water,  or  coiintntTHt  inn  to  almost  the  real  acid.  HjHO,,  is
n  tim  firnt  lAiwv  In  Kroid  the  expense  of  tninsit  (it  in  cheH|ier

136  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHESnsTRY

j  tij  obcaiu  the  lij'drat«,  H.jSO,,  from  tlie  dilute  acid  (60  per  cent.),
and  this  is  effected  by  evaporat-ioo  by  means  of  heat. Every  given
mixture  of  wuter  and  sulphuric  auid  begins  to  part  with  a  c^rta
amount  of  aqueous  vapour  when  heated  tu  a  certain  definite  temperatui
At  a  low  temperature  either  there  ia  no  oiap'ratiun  of  water,  or  there
can  even  be  an  absorption  of  moisture  from  the  air. As  the  removal
ot  the  water  proceeds,  the  vapour  tension  of  the  residue  deoreaaea  for
the  aaine  temperature,  and  therefore  the  moi-e  dilute  the  acid  the  lower
the  temperature  at  wbicli  it  gives  up  u  portion  of  its  water. In  co
sequence  of  this,  the  removal  of  water  from  dilute  eolutious  of  sulphui
iwid  may  be  easily  carried  on  (up  U\  I"*  p.c.  HjSO^)  in  leail  vesse

because  at  low  tcmperati:
But  as  the  acid  becomes
the  water  couies  over  bi

3  dilute  sulphuric  acid  does  nnt  attack  lead.
ore  coDceatrated  the  temperature  at  whic]i
imea  higher  HTid  higher,  and  then  the  a.cit\

lo  reiume  the  VBteF  LliHn  to  pay  for  its  tnuiMtj,  And  in  the  Hwuud  place  beciinM>  nuMJ I
l>race»»« — lor  inBlnDi*.  tlie  refining  ot  |ieCr<iUutn — require  n  istrong  aciil  free  li
aXMsa  lit  Vktir,  the  weak  lurid  bitving  no  iwtiiiii. Wben  in  the  mauoftU'tars  of  d
lidA,  both  the  Gay-Lniwu  tower  (cold,  uitiutnl  ut  tlie  end  nf  llie  chamben)  taA  Uw j
Glover  tower  (hot.  situated  at  the  begiiuiing  of  the  jiluit,  between  the  chki
ovena  tor  the  pmdoation  of  tlO,)  ue  employed,  a.  mixture  of  nitrou  <i.r.  (he  |
the  Oity-Lua«4c  tower)  uid  chambrr  ucii)  ronUiniiig  about  IW  p.o.  H,&0,  ii  poilMd'l
into  tbe  Glnver  tower,  wliare  nnder  the  lU'tiou  ot  the  hut  Inrn&ce  gnesii  contuidnf  80«  |
und  tlie  witter  held  in  the  ohunber  acid  <1)  N^Ai  le  evolv»]  from  the  nitro«:  (S)  Watct-
ia  expelled  from  tlie  chAmber  und: |9|  «  portion  ot  the  SO,  U  converted  into  H(SO,;
and  Ml  the  tamaoe  gaxea  are  uuled. Thos.  amongst  other  thing*,  the  Qlover  towcc
faciliUtea  the  coneeutratinn  of  the  chamber  acid  (removal ot  U-jO),  but  Uw  pwdatt
fenerallj  i-oniaiii!  niriny  impnritien.

SULPffUB,  SEI-ESirM, A^fD  TEIXrHIllff

287

Vrt^ns  to  act  on  lend  (with  the  evolution  of  aulphurettwl  hydrogen  nod
converstun  of  the  lead  into  sulphate),  »ncl  therefore  lead  vessels  cannot
l>e  employed  for  the  complete  reuioi"al  of  the  water.  For  this  purpose
the  evaporation  ia  generally  carried  on  in  glass  or  platinum  retorts,  like
those  depicted  in  ngs.  87  and  ISy.

The  cffiiontralion  •>/  nuf/Jnirir  aeiii  io  glass  retorts  is  not  a  con-
tinuous process,  and  consists  of  heating  the  dilute  TS  per  cent,  acid
until  it  censes  to  give  ofT  aqueous  vapour,  and  until  acid  containing
93-98  per  cent.  HiS04  (06'  Banme)  is  nl)tained— and  ihis  takes  place
when  the  temperature  reaches  320"  iind  the  density  of  the  residue
reaches  1-847  (66°  Baunii^).*''' The  pliitiniim  vessels  designed  for  the

continuous  concentration  of  sulphuric  ELcid  ooosist  of  a  still  b,  furnished
with  a  still  head  k,  a  connecting  pipe  e  F,  and  a  syphon  tube  i!  r,
which  draws  off  the  sulphuric  acid  conc«ntratedin  the  lioiler.  A  stream
of  sulphuric  acid  previously  con^^entraU,■^^  in  lenfl  retorts  U^  u  density  of
about  60°  Baume^i.*.  to  75  per  oent.  or  u  sp.  gr.  of  1  7 — runs  con-
tinuously into  the  retort  through  a  tiyphiin  funnel  a.  Theappamtuaisfed
from  above,  because  the  at^id  freithly  supplied  is  lighter  than  that  which
lias  already  lost  water,  and  nlwi  iN-cnuse  the  water  is  more  nuily
evaporated  from  the  freely  supplied  /wid  at  the  surface. Thi^  platinum

'"  The  diffiL-nllir  with  •hirh  llu>  lul  |»nl.Hi>  iit  ostfii  sr*  ranovtd  U  trm  Inm  tba
(„l  that  the  bnilinit  bvccmw  mj  ImKulM.  lAUll)'  MulnK  •!  onm  nHnntnt.  Ilwn  (utdnilr
ntortinit  ifKin,  witli  Uiv  npiil  Ifimuiton  nf  ■  nmaliLinihla  uriMiil  nf  (bam.  itiul  ftt  Uia
«unetiiiicl>ttmping«odc*rnoT*rli»nlr>Kllw>>wlin  ulivh  It  i>  h>M.  Kimm  II  ii  Dot
tor  tiM  Kla-  tm.rU  U.  It.»l.  <luriii|r  Uw  dl.tmali.Hi  ;  D.i.  p.iim.
be  IwvlrrrrA,  u  llw  l>iilii,j(  ttivri  proi!**)*  qDU>  — " — -nlj .

▲

238  PRINXIPLES  OF  C'UEMISTKY

retort  is  heated,  and  the  steam  coming  off  ^'  is  condensed  in  a  worm
F  G,  whilst  {IS  fresh  dilute  acid  is  supplied  to  the  boiler  the  acid  already
concentrated  is  drawn  off  through  the  syphon  tube  H  b,  which  is
furnished  with  a  regulating  cock  by  means  of  which  the  outflow  of  the
concentrated  acid  from  the  bottom  of  the  retort  can  be  so  regulated
that  it  will  always  present  one  and  the  same  specific  gravity,  corre-
sponding with  the  strength  required.  For  this  purpose  the  acid  flowing
from  the  syphon  is  collected  in  a  receiver  ii,  in  which  a  hydrometer,
indicating  its  density,  floats ;  if  its  density  be  less  than  66*^  Baume,
the  regulating  cock  is  closed  sufiiciently  to  retaid  the  outflow  of  sul-
phuric acid,  so  as  to  lengthen  the  time  of  its  evaporation  in  the  retort/*

*^  According  to  Rog^aalt,  the  vapour  tensions  (in  millimetres  of  mercury)  of  the
water  given  off  by  the  hydrates  of  sulpharic  acid,  H^SOijUHjO,  are —

t  =5°

15^

30°

n  =  l

01

01

0-2

2

0-4

0-7

1-5

3

0-9

10

41

4

1-3

2-8

70

5

21

4-2

10-7

7

8-2

6-2

150

9

41

80

190

11

4-4

00

22-2

17

5-0

10-6

201

According  to  Lange,the  vapour  tension  of  the  aqueous  vajtour  given  off  from  solations
of  sulphuric  acid  containing  p  x>er  cent.  H.,.SOi,  '^^  '°>  CQuals  the  barometric  pressDre
720  to  780  mm.

p  =  10 20 30 40 50 GO 70 HO 85 90 95

t=  102° 105° 108° 114° 124° 141° 170^ 207° 233° 262° 295°

The  latter  figures  give  the  temperature  at  which  water  is  easily  exj^elled  from  solu-
tions of  sulphuric  acid  of  different  strengths.  But  the  evai)oration  begins  sooner,  and
concentration  may  be  carried  on  at  lower  temperatures  if  a  stream  of  air  be  passed
through  the  acid. Kessler's  process  is  based  ujwn  this  (Note  48).

'^  Tlie  greatest  part  of  the  sulphuric  acid  is  used  in  the  soda  manufacture,  in  the
conversion  of  the  common  salt  into  sulphate.  For  this  j^ui-pose  an  acid  having  a
density  of  60°  Baume  is  amply  sufficient.  Chamber  acid  has  a  density  up  to  1'57  =  50°  to
51°  Baum^;  it  contains  about  35  per  cent,  of  water.  About  15  per  cent,  of  this  water  can
be  removed  in  leaden  stills,  and  nearly  all  the  remainder  imiy  be  expelled  in  glass  or
platinum  vessels.  Acid  of  66°  Baum^,  =1*847,  contains  about  OCiwr  cent,  of  the  hydrate
HqS04.  The  density  falls  with  a  greater  or  less  proiK)rtion  of  water,  the  maximum
density  corresponding  with  97^  per  cent,  of  the  hydrate  HoSOj.  The  concentration  of
H.,,S04  in  platinum  retorts  has  the  disadvantage  that  sulphuric  acid,  upwards  of  90
I)er  cent,  in  strength,  does  corrode  platinum,  although  but  slightly  (a  few  grams  per  tens
of  tons  of  acid).  The  retorts  therefore  recjuire  rei)tiirin«,',  and  the  cost  of  the  platinum
exceeds  the  price  obtained  for  concentrating  the  acid  from  90  per  cent,  to  98  per  cent,  (in
factories  the  acid  is  not  concentrated  beyond  this  by  evaporation  in  the  air).  This  incon-
venience has  lately  (1891,  by  Mathey)  been  eliminated  by  coating  the  inside  of  the  plati-
num retorts  with  a  thin  (01  to  002  mm.)  layer  of  gold  which  is  40  times  less  corroded  by
sulphuric  acid  than  platinum.  Negrier  (1890)  carries  on  the  distillation  in  porcelain
dishes.  Blond  by  heating  a  thin  platinum  wire  immersed  in  the  acid  by  means  of  an
4jlectric  current,  but  the  most  promising  method  is  that  of  Kessler  (1891),  which  consists

SULPHUR.  SELEKIUM,  AVD  TBLLURIDM  389

Strictly  speaking,  sulphuric  acid  in  not  rolntile,  and  at  its  Bo-called
boiling-poiiit  '*  it  reallj  decomposes  into  its  anhydriile  and  water  ;  its
boiling-point  (338°)  being  nothing  eke  but  its  temperature  of  decom-
position. The  products  of  tills  decomposition  are  Rubstances  boiling
touch  Itelow  the  temperature  of  the  decomposition  of  sulphuric  acid.
This  conclusion  with  regard  to  the  process  of  the  distdlation  of  sul-
phuric acid  may  be  deduced  from  Bineau's  observations  on  the  lapour-
ileusity  of  sulphuric  acid.  This  density  referred  to  hydrogen  proved
to  be  half  that  which  sulphuric  acid  should  have  according  to  its
molecular  weight,  HjSO^,  in  which  ease  it  should  he  i'J,  whilst  the
observed  density  was  equal  to  24'5.  Besides  which,  Marigoac  showed
that  the  first  portions  of  the  sulphuric  acid  distilling  over  contain  less
of  the  elements  of  water  than  the  portion  which  reujains  liefaind,  or
which  distils  over  towards  the  end.  This  is  explained  by  the  fact  that
on  distillation  the  sulphuric  acid  is  decomposed,  but  a  portion  of  the
water  proceeding  from  its  decomposition  is  retained  by  the  remaining
mass  of  sulphuric  acid,  and' therefore  at  Hrst  a  mixture  of  Bulphuri<^
iicid  and  sulphuric  anhydride — i.e.  fuminj;  sulphuric  acid — is  obtaine<l
in  the  di.stiilate.  It  is  possible  by  repeating  the  distillation  several  times
and  only  collecting  the  first  portions  of  tlie  distillate,  to  obtain  a
dbtinctly  fuming  acid.  To  obtain  the  definite  hydrate  H.^SO^  it  is
necessary  to  refrigerate  a  highly  concentrated  acid,  of  as  great  a  purity
as  possible,  to  which  a  small  quantity  of  sulphuric  anhydride  has  been
previously  added.  Sulphuric  acid  containing  a  small  quantity  (a  fraction
of  ft  per  cent,  by  weight)  of  water  only  freezes  at  a  very  low  temperature,
while  the  pure  normal  acid,  H^SO,,  solidifies  ufaen  it  is  cooled  below  0°,

in  pasHDg  hot  Hir  nret  HolpUurit  nviil  Hnwini;  in  a.  Lbin  Btreum  in  Btone  vubbdIe,  ho  tluit
Uiere  is  Do  boiliog  but  onl;  evHimmtioii  at  iDoderato  temperutareH : Hie  tnuiHlerencc  nf

■ud  prvveutH  the  dtHtilliag  veaHt^U  being  A^m^tml.

When,  by  evupnnition  o(  tile  wftter,  milplioric  acid  stUias  a  denBitj-  of  Wfl°  Baumr
(qi.  gr.  I'BJ),  it  in  itapmbiUe  lo  oanceotrate  iL  further,  becanae  it  then  diatilB  <iTer
■uichatiged.  Thr  dinlUtalion  of  aHlphuric  acid  in  not  K<^ueiaU;  t'&rried  nn  on  a  l>n;t<
«al«,  but  foruiH  a  Uborntor;  procSBB,  euiilajed  nbeu  ikuticnLuly  pure  aeid  in  requireil.
The  diatUlation  is  cBeoted  either  in  platiouui  retortii  (uruiBlivd  witli  correipanding  eoD-
denaen  and  receivers,  or  in  glaae  retorts.  lu  the  latter  cane,  great  caution  is  necetiMry,
becauK  tbe  boiling  ui  Hulphuric  ecid  ilnelf  is  ucoinpanied  by  etitl  more  violent  jerks  and
greater  irrvguUrity  than  even  the  fvaporstiou  of  tbe  laat  inrtiono  nf  water  contained  in
the  acid.  II  the  glaee  retort  wliich  holds  (he  strong  nulphurie  acid  to  be  distilled  be
lieated  directly  from  below,  it  frequently  jurkn  and  breaks.  For  greater  aalcly  the
heating  ia  not  clteet«d  trom  below,  bnt  at  the  sideH  of  the  retort.  The  eTaporution  then
does  not  pro<:eed  in  the  wliole  masR,  but  only  Irani  the  upper  portions  of  the  liquid,  and
thenfoR  goee  on  much  more  quietly.  The  licit)  may  be  m>de  to  boil  qnietly  also  by
iitrroiioding  the  retort  with  good  cHtndnctDM-  oi  heal — for  eiample.  iron  filings,  or  by
iiuiueriiing  a  bunch  of  plalinnm  irinrs  in  theiicid.  a»  tbe  bubbles  of  solphuric  add  vapour

240  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

and  therefore  the  normal  acid  tirst  crystallises  out  from  the  concen-
trated sulphuric  acid.  By  repeating  the  refrigeration  several  times,
and  pouring  off  the  unsolidified  portion,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  a  pure
normal  hydrate,  H2SO4,  which  melts  at  10°'4.  Even  at  40°  it  gives  off
distinct  fumes — that  is,  it  begins  to  evolve  sulphuric  anhydride,  which
volatilises,  and  therefore  even  in  a  dry  atmosphere  the  hydrate  H2SO4
becomes  weaker,  until  it  contains  \\  p.c.  of  water.^^

In  a  concentrated  form  sulphuric  acid  is  commercially  known  as  oil
of  vitriol  J  because  for  a  long  time  it  was  obtained  from  green  vitriol  and
because  it  has  an  oily  appearance  and  flows  from  one  vessel  into  another
in  a  thick  and  somewhat  sluggish  stream,  like  the  majority  of  oily
substances,  and  in  this  clearly  differs  from  such  liquids  as  water,  spirit,
ether,  and  the  like,  which  exhibit  a  far  greater  mobility.  Among  its
reactions  the  first  to  be  remarked  is  its  faculty  for  the  formation  of
many  compounds.  We  already  know  that  it  combines  with  its  anhy-
dride, and  with  the  sulphates  of  the  alkali  metals  ;  that  it  is  soluble  in
water,  with  which  it  forms  more  or  less  stable  compounds.  Sulphuric
acid,  when  mixed  with  water,  develops  a  very  considerable  amount  of
heat.'*^

Besides the normal hydrate H2SO4, another definite hydrcUe^

'**  Thus  it  appears  that  so  common,  and  apparently  so  stable,  a  compound  as  sul-
phuric acid  decomposes  even  at  a  low  temperature  with  separation  of  the  anhydride,  but
this  decomposition  is  restricted  by  a  limit,  corresponding  to  the  presence  of  about  \\  p.c.
of  water,  or  to  a  composition  of  nearly  H.,0,12H.2SO,.

Now  there  is  no  reason  for  thinking  that  this  substance  is  a  definite  compound;
it  is  an  equilibrated  system  which  does  not  decompose  under  ordinary  circumstances
below  338°.  Dittmar  carried  on  the  distillation  under  pressures  varying  between  80  and
2,140  millimetres  (of  mercury),  and  he  found  that  the  composition  of  the  residue  hardly
varies,  and  contains  from  99*2  to  98-2  per  cent,  of  the  normal  hydrate,  although  at  80  mm.
the  temperature  of  distillation  is  about  210°  and  at  2,140  mm.  it  is  882°.  Furthermore,
it  is  a  fact  of  practical  importance  that  under  a  j^ressure  of  two  atmospheres  the  dis-
tillation of  sulphuric  acid  proceeds  very  quietly.

Sulphuric  acid  may  be  purified  from  the  majority  of  its  impurities  by  distillation,  if
the  first  and  last  portions  of  the  distillate  be  rejected.  The  first  portions  will  contain
the  oxides  of  nitrogen,  hydrochloric  acid,  itc,  and  the  last  portions  the  less  volatile
impurities.  The  oxides  of  nitrogen  may  be  removed  by  heating  the  acid  with  charcoal,
which  converts  them  into  volatile  gases.  Sulphuric  acid  may  be  freed  from  arsenic  by
heating  it  with  manganese  dioxide  and  then  distilling.  This  oxidises  all  the  arsenic  into
non-volatile  arsenic  acid.  Without  a  preliminary  oxidation  it  would  partially  remain  as
volatile  arsenious  acid,  and  might  pass  over  into  the  distillate.  The  arsenic  may  also
be  driven  off  by  first  reducing  it  tt)  arsenious  acid,  and  then  passing  hydrochloric  acid
gas  through  the  heated  acid.  It  is  then  converted  into  arsenious  chloride,  which
volatilises.

^  The  amount  of  heat  developed  by  the  mixture  of  sulphuric  acid  with  water  is
expressed  in  the  diagram  on  p.  77,  Volume  I.,  by  the  middle  curve,  whose  abscissas  are
the  percentage  amounts  of  acid  (H.^SOj)  in  the  resultant  solution,  and  ordiuatesthe  num-
ber of  units  of  heat  corresponding  with  the  formation  of  100  cubic  centimetres  of  the  solu-
tion (at  18°). The  calculations  on  which  the  cun'e  is  designed  are  based  on  Thomsen's

H,SOj,HjO  (84-48  per  i;e]it.  o£  the  iionnti.1  hydrate,  and  l.i-5-'  per  oent.
<if  water)  is  known;  it  cry etallisee '"'*''■  extremely  easily  in  lurge  six-

«,  which  thow  lliftt  OK  gr
liUDibiniiitf  Willi  m  iiiolwules  of  *ftter  |
liilloHiiig  iiambci  of  units  of  heat,  R,-

. 137=

1411^

iW

191-

in

•-  stnnas  for  Uie  specific  heat  or  H,SOjiirH.jO  [ucoiding  Lo  Uuigmif  and  PfanDdlar),
■ud  T  tor  the  ri»  in  tampenlare  which  pi'ocerdqfiomtheiaiitnreol  H^SO,  withN»IL,0.
The  dli4[ciuii  shows  that  coatTHtion  luicl  rise  of  temperuture  proceed  nhnant  parallel
with  each  other.

so  u.  pjclcBnng  (Ig!HJ|  showed  (a)  that  dilute  solutioiia  of  sulphuric  a>:ict  containing
up  lo  H,SO|  +  lOHjO  deposit  ioe  (nt  -  0°-12  when  there  is  2,000  HjO  per  HjSOu  at  -  0°-aa
when  there  i.  I,000H,O.  at  -1°-M  when  there  is  aOUHgO,  at  -a-^'ia  when  there  is
lOeH/),  at  -  i'S  when  there  is  aOB.iO,  at  - 16"-7  when  there  is  B0H,O,  and  at  -  Bl"  when
the  cumposilian  o[  the  solutiou  is  HySOi  +  lOS.p) ;  (b)  that  far  higher  coiicentrationa
eiyslaili  wpantte  out  at  a  considerable  degree  of  cold,  having  the  composition
H,80,4Hp.  which  lueit  at  -!U°-E,  and  if  eillie^  water  or  H.iSO,  be  added  to  this  com-
[unnd  the  lempemture  of  utTsUlliaation  lalla,  so  that  u  wlutinn  of  the  cflmpoaition
iaU,8O4*100H,O  KivBB  crrvtals  nf  tlie  aborr  hfdrute  At  -TO'-'.  IGH.iBOi-f  lOOH^
at  -4T°,  ltaUjBO,410<IHMOat  ~3a<',10H..SO,- 100H,O  at -5^°  ;  (<!  tliat  iT  (heamoant
III  H,80,  be  >^till  greater,  then  u  hydratu  H]SO,H,0  separates  out  aud  melts  at  +a<^E,
while  the  oddiUon  ol  water  or  sulphoric  acid  to  it  lowers  the  temperature  at  crystallisa-
tion Ml  tlint  Ilia  cij^talliMitian  of  H-^SOiHaO  from  a  solution  of  the  L-onipoutioD
H,804+ TTilBjO  UkeH  place  al  -aS",  H.,SO, -M'SH,0  al  -O^S,  HaSOj+lSHjO  at
-i-B°7.  HiSO.i-0-75H,0  at  +a"'8,  ttjHO.  +  O-jHjO  at  -10°  ;  Ull  that  when  there  n
le«s  Uion  (OIIX)  per  lOuH.jSO,,  Tefrigention  separates  out  the  normal  hydnle  H,,SO,,
which  melts  at  *  1U"*S£,  and  that  a  solution  ol  ttie  oomposition  H.j8(J,  -  O-SAHiO  deposits
Ctyslals  of  this  hydrate  at  -Si",  H.jSO,  +  0']oa,0  at  -4  -],  HgSO^+U'OGHjO  at
+  i'-V.  while  tuminit  acid  ol  the  coiuposition  H:,iJO,-r0'0BSO3  deposits  Ur,SO,  at  about
^T°.  Thus  the  temperatitre  of  the  separation  ot  cr;Btals  clearly  distinguishes  the
above  lour  rcgioinii  of  solutions,  and  in  the  siHce  between  H..SO,-vH„0  and  -faSHjO
u  particohir  hydrate  HiSO,4H..O  separal**  out,  discovered  by  Pickering,  tile  isulalion
lit  whicli  deserves  toll  attention  and  further  reMenrvh.  I  may  add  here  that  the  existence
uf  a  hydrate  HjS0,4II]0  wob  pointed  nut  in  m;  work,  Tlit  Iimetiigatioii  nf  Agaeoua
SolutioHi,  p.  lao  (1887).  upon  the  batis  that  it  him  at  all  temperatures  a  smaller  value
for  111*  coelBdenI  of  expansion  k  in  the  tominla  8i  ~  t!^  |1  — ^'1  than  tlie  ndjacent
Itu  composition)  snlationa  of  sulphm^c  acid.  And  tor  solotiuus  ttpproxi mating  to
R,»0,iaH/)  in  their  cnni|K}»itiuii.  k  is  coustont  at  all  teuiperatiire.  (for  more  dilute
solutions  the  value  of  k  increases  with  I  and  lor  more  concentrated  solutions  it  decreases).
This  solulimi  (with  lUll.,0)  forms  the  point  oE  transition  between  more  dilute  solutions
which  deponil  ice  (water}  when  refrigerated  and  those  which  give  crystalsot  H.jSO,lII,0.
According  lu  B.  Picket  {IHDl)  tlie  solution  E^SO,  IOH.,0  tl«eies  at  -88'  (but  uo
reference  is  made  as  lo  what  separates  ont),  i.e.  at  a  lower  temperature  tlian  all  the
other  soluliaoH  of  nnlphuric  acid.  However,  in  respect  lo  these  lost  researcheH  of
R.  Pictet  |fDr8H*8H  pjs.  H.,SO,  -BS-.  tor  HjSOjHjO  ,3-5°,  (or  H.jSO,aU,0  -70°,  for
H,SO,4HjO  -  10",  .tB.J  it  Hhoold  1«  remarked  that  tliey  oRer  some  rioite  improbable
data;  (or  example,  livH~S0,7aIl,0  they  give  the  freezing  point  as  0'',  (or  HgSOjBODHiO
-!- 1'"6,  and  even  for  H,s6,lUU0H.,b-rll°-S,iUtliongh  it  is  well  known  that  a  small  amount
rA  sniphuric  acid  lowers  the  temperature  of  the  formation  ol  ice.  I  have  found  b;  direct
' It  that  a  froien  solidified  solution  of  HjSO , -i- SODHjO  melted  ounplelcly  at

J

242  PRINCIPI^S  OF  CHEMISTRY

sided  prisnu,  which  form  above  0°-  aamely,  at  about  +8''-5  ;  when
heated  to  210=  it  loset,  water.^' If  the  hydrates  H,SO,  and  Hj80<,H,0
exist  at  low  temperatures  as  definite  crystalline  compounds,  and  if
pyrosulphnric  acid,  HgSO^MO,,  has  the  same  property,  and  if  they  all
decompose  with  more  or  leas  ease  on  a  rise  of  temperature,  wiih  the
disengagement  of  either SO,  or H.jO,  and in  their  ordinary  form
present  all  the  properties  of  simple  solutions,  it  foHiuvs  tlmt  betweeu
sulphuric anhydride, SOj, and water, HjO, thfio p\ists a cowM
secutire  series  of  homogeneous  liquids  or  solutiouii,  among  which  1
must  distinguish  dffiniU  compounds,  and  therefore  it  is  i|uiti'  JQst'iflab)
to  look  for  other  definite  compounds  between  SO3  and  H/\  beyond  t
conditions  for  a  change  of  state. In  this  respect  we  mny  be  guidad  Ig
the  variation  of  properties  of  any  kind,  proceeding  I'on currently  witl|a
variation  in  the  composition  of  a  solution.

But  only  a  few  properties  have  been determiutil  with 1
accuracy. In  those  properties  which  have  been  d<.'t«ri<)iiip(l  for  n
solutions  of  sulphuric  acid,  it  is  actually  seen  that  thp  above- mentio
definite  compounds  are  distinguished  by  distinctive  umrks  of  c
As  an  example  we  may  cite  the  variation  of  the  spei'ilic  gravity  witit  1
variation  of  temperature  (namely  Kssiln/dl,  if  h  be  ihe  sp.  gi-.  and  I  li
temperature). For  the  normal  hydrate,  H,SO„  this  fiictor  is
determined  from  the  fact  that-

«=  18528— 1 0-65(  +  0-01 3l',

where  *  is  the  specific  gravity  ;it  I  (degrees  Celsius)  if  the  sp.  ;
water  at  4°=10,000.  Therefore  K=10-65— 0  026/.  This  means  I
at  0°  the  sp.  gr.  of  the  acid  H^SO,  decreases  by  10(i-">  fur  every  rise  o
a  degree  of  temperature,  at  10"  by  10'39,  at  20°  by  10-13,  at  30"  by  '
9'8T.^'  And  for  solutions  cuntaioing  slightly  more  anhydride  tban
the  acid  H.^SO^  (1.'?.  for  fuming  sulphuric  acid),  as  well  as  for  solutions
containing  more  water,  K  is  greater  than  for  the  acid  HjSOi-  Thus  for
the  solution  S03,2HjSO„  at  10°  K  =  1 1  0. On  diluting  the  acid  HjSO,

"  With  an  excess  ot  -now,  the  liydrHtp  HaSOi.H.O,  like  lUe  normal  liydrate,  gives  4
freezing  mixture,  owing  to  Ihe  nbitorptiuii  nf  a  large  nmonnt  of  heat  (the  Intent  heat
of  fusion).  In  melting,  tlie  molecule  H.,SO,  alinorba  litiO  bent  unitH,  ami  the  molecule
H.jSOiH.tO  3,660  hsat  anits.  If  therefon-  we  mix  one  Kt>Li"  >i>oIeeale  of  this  hjrdnle
with  neTenteen  ^''uu  moIeculeB  of  snow,  tliero  in  nu  iibsorption  of  IS.OSO  lienl  ntiitB,
liecauw  ITH^O  ahsoFha  IT  X  1,430  heat  units,  anil  the  combination  of  the  monolij^dnte
with  wntcr  oTolveH  9,800  heat  Unit".  Ab  the  specific  hent  of  the  re»iiltant  compoDnd
H,80„IhH^  =  O'SIS,  the  fall  of  temperature  will  be  -  BS"*!.  Anfl,  in  fact,  b  very
low  tempenilare  ni«i|  be  obtained  by  nienuH  of  Huliilinric  arid.

"  For  exan>i>1e,  if  it  lie  tnhen  that  at  10"  the  rp.  hi.  nf  pure  Rnlphiiric  acid  is  1-8830,
then  At  211'  it  is  |-HSiH)  -  (SO IIHIOIH |xi<9i.

SULPHUR.  SBLENIUM,  AND  TELLURIUM

243

K  »gain  increases  until  the  foriuiition  of  the  solution  H,jSO,,H,0
(K=11'I  at  10"),  and  then,  on  further  dilution  with  water,  it  again
decreases.  Consequently  Iwth  hydrates  HjHU,  and  H.jSC.),,!!,^  are
here  expressed  by  an  alteration  of  the  nmgnitude  o(  K.

This  shows  that in )i.iuid sotnHons  i( If;  p.*ssibl.- l.y  stii.lviii!;  ihp

IliiHlEBs^EH

•? 1 "-i'V

-4= s — m «  ^ft

:£.xi:^iaaH  w  -am

!£'»■■■■■  ^[-  w  _

IVI

variation  of  their  properties  (without  a  change  of  physical  state)  to
recognise  the  presence  or  formation  of  detiuite  hydrate  compounds,
and  therefore  an  exact  investigation  of  the  properties  of  solutions,  of
their  specific  gravity  for  instance,  should  give  direct  indications  of  auch
compounds." The  mean  I'esult  of  the  most  trustworthy  determinations

^  CntortUDAtel;,  notwithnluiding  Ibe  gteiit  number  of  {rikgnieiitary  and  HyiileiiuLlic
miGUfheK  which  h»ye  been  luiide  (by  Parts,  Ure,  Biiiun,  Kalbe,  Lunge,  MMrignae,
Kn-maM.  ThomMn,  Periiin,  and  others)  for  datsnmning  the  relation  between  the  ap.  gr.
ruid  vompnitiou  of  solatioas  of  dalphuric  bcid,  they  cxmlnin  diiCTeiMiticies  which  lunoiuiC
to.  nod  even  iiicceed,  0-OOa  in  tlie  up.  gr.  For  iiwlance.  at  lB'-4  the  solotioD  of  composi-
Uoi> n,SO,»H)0  biu  »  ip.  ^r.  I'rj4gs  acuirdiiig  to  PeiUn  (1S80),  I'SSOl according  bo

244  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

of  this  nature  is  given  in  the  following  tables.  The  first  of  these  tables
gives  the  specific  gravities  (in  vacuo,  taking  the  sp.  gr.  of  water  at
4°=1),  at  0°  (column  3),  15°  (column  4),  and  30°  (column  5),'*3m,  f^^^
solutions  having  the  composition  HgHOj-fuHgO  (the  value  of  n  is
given  in  the  first  column),  and  containing  }»  (column  2)  per  cent,  (by
weight  in  vacuo)  of  H2SO4.''"'''*

10374

1-0717

M337

1-2040

1-2758

1-3223

1-3865

1-4301

1-4881

1-5635

1-6648

1-7940

1-8445

1-8529

Pickering  (1890),  and  1*5525  according  to  Lnnge  (1H90).  Tlie  cause  of  these  dis-
crepancies must  be  looked  for  in  the  methods  employed  for  determining  the  composition
of  the  Koluiions — i.e.  in  the  inaccuracy  with  which  the  percentage  amount  of  H.2SO4  is
determined,  for  a  difference  of  1  p.c.  corresponds  to  a  difference  of  from  0*(K)70  (for  very
weak  solutions)  to  0"0118  (for  a  solution  containing  about  73  p.c.)  in  the  specific  gravity  (that
is  the  factor  ds'dp)  at  15^.  As  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  sj>ecific  gravity  with  an
accuracy  even  exceeding  0"0002,  the  s^KJcific  gravities  given  in  the  adjoining  tables  are
only  averages  and  most  probable  data  in  which  the  error,  esi>eoially  for  the  30 — 80  p.c,
solutions  cannot  be  less  than  O'OOIO  (taking  water  at  4^  as  1).

i5  bu  Judging  from  the  best  existing  detenninations  (of  Marignac,  Kreniers,  and
Pickering)  for  solutions  of  sulphuric  acid  (especially  those  containing  more  than  5  p.c.
H.2SO4)  within  the  limits  of  0°  and  SO'^  (and  even  to  40-),  the  variation  of  the  sj).  gr.  witli
the  tenii>eratuve  /  may  (within  the  accuracy  of  the  existing  determinations)  Xhh  perfectly
expressed  by  the  equation  Sf=  80  + A/  f  B/-.  It  must  be  added  that  (1)  three  specific
gravities  fully  det<*nnine  the  variation  of  the  density  with  t ;  (2)  <Ih  tit  —  A.  r2B^ — i.e.  the
factor  of  the  temperature  is  expressed  by  a  straight  line;  V.\)  the  value  of  A  (if  />  be
greater  than  .">  i>.c.)  is  negative,  and  numerically  much  greater  than  B ;  (4)  the  value  of
B  for  dihite  solutions  containing  less  than  25  p.c.  is  negative;  for  s<^>lutionsapproxiniatinjj
to  H  .SO,3H  .0  in  their  comi>osition  it  is  equal  to  0,  and  for  solutions  of  greater  con-
centration B  is  }M)sitive ;  (5)  the  factor  (Js'iJp  for  all  tenq^eratures  attains  a  maximum
value  al>out  H_,S(),HoO;  (0)  on  dividing  ds'tlt  by  S,,,  and  so  olitaining  the  coefficient  of
expansion  h  isrr  Note  53j,  a  minimimi  is  obtained  near  H.SOi  and  H2SO,4H._.0,  and  a
maximum  ut  HjSOjHoO  for  all  temi^ratures.

.'k- tn  Tliesc  data  (as  well  as  those  in  tlie  following  table)  ha\  e  been  recalculated  by
me  chiefly  uixjn  the  basis  of  Kremer's,  Pickenng's,  Perkin's,  and  my  own  determinations;
all  the  reipiisite  corrections  have  been  introduced,  and  I  have  reason  for  thinking  thnt
in  each  of  them  the  i>robable  error  (or  difference  from  the  true  figures,  now  unknown)  of

a

100

p
516

50

9-82

25

17-88

15

26-63

10

35-25

8

40-50

6

47-57

5

52-13

4

57-65

3

64-47

2

73-13

1

84-48

0-5

91-59

H.,S04

100

15°

30°

1-0341

1-0292

1-0666

1  -0603

M257

1-1173

1-1939

1-1837

1-2649

1-2540

1-3110

1-2998

1-3748

1-3622

1-4180

1-4062

1-4755

1-4631

1-5501

1-5370

1-6500

1-6359

1-7772

1-7608

1-8284

1-8128

1-8372

1-8221

StrLPHUR, SELENIUM, AND  TELLURII^M  '246

In  the  second  table  the  fii*st  column  gives  the  percentage  amount  ]>
(by  weight)  of  H.28O4,  the  second  column  the  weight  in  grams  (Sj^)
of  a  litre  of  the  solution  at  15°  (at  4°  the  weight  of  a  litre  of  water
=  1,000  grams),  the  third  column,  the  variation  (dS/dt)  of  this  weight  for
a  rise  of  1°,  the  fourth  column,  the  variation  dS/dp  of  this  weight  (at
15°)  for  a  rise  of  1  per  cent,  of  H2»S04,  the  fifth  column,  the  difference
between  the  weight  of  a  litre  at  0°  and  15°  (So  —  Sjg),  and  the  sixth
column,  the  difference  between  the  weight  of  a  litre  at  15°  and  30°

(^15  — ^30)-

P

^15

(ISr,  lit

dS^^dp

^0  —  ^^15

s,,  -  IS

0

999-15

0148

7-0

0-7

3-4

5

10330

0-27

6-8

3-1

50

10

1067-7

0-38

7-1

5-2

6-4

20

1141-9

0-58

7-7

8-6

8-9

30

1221-3

0-69

8-2

10-4

10-4

40

1306-6

0-75

8-8

11-3

11-2

50

1397-9

0-79

9-9

11-9

11-8

60

1501-2

0-86

10-8

130

12-7

70

16131

0-93

11-6

141

13-8

80

1731-4

1-04

11-0

15-8

15-4

90

1819-9

1-08

5-4

16-4

160

95

1837-6

1-03

+  1-7

15-8

15-1

100

1837-2

103

- 1  -9^

15-7

151

50

The  figures  in  these  tables  give  the  means  of  finding  the  amount
of  H2SO4  contained  in  a  solution  from  its  specific  gravity, '^"^  and  also
show  that  '  special  points '  in  the  lines  of  variation  of  the  specific  gravity
with  the  temperature  and  percentage  composition  correspond  to  certain
definite  compounds  of  H2SO4  with  C)H2.  This  is  best  seen  in  the
variation  of  the  factors  {dS^dt  and  c^jdp)  with  the  temperature  and

the  Hpecific  gravity  does  not  exceed  ±0'(HJ()7  (if  water  at  4°  =  1)  for  the  25—80  p.c.  solu-
tiouM,  and  ±0*0002  for  the  more  dilute  or  concentrated  solutions.

-  •  The  factor  dSdp  passes  through  0,  that  is,  the  specific  gravity  attaiub  a  maximum
value  at  about  98  p.c.  This  was  discovered  by  Kohlrausch,  and  confirmed  by  Chertel
Pickering,  and  others.

^  Naturally  under  the  condition  that  there  is  no  other  ingredient  besides  water,
which  is  sufficiently  true.  For  commercial  acid,  whose  specific  gravity  is  usually  expressed
in  degrees  of  Baume's  hydrometer,  we  may  add  that  at  15°

Specific  gravity 1 11 12 IS 14 15 IC 17 18
Degree  Baumd 0 13 24 SSS 412 481 -541 595 (U-2

i'S Baumd  (the  strongest  commercial  acid  or  oil  of  vitriol)  corresponds  to  a  sp.  gr.  1*84.

By  employing  the  second  table  (by  the  method  of  interpolation)  the  specific  gravity,
at  a  given  temperature  (from  0°  to  80°)  can  be  found  for  any  percentage  amount  of
HjSO  ,  and  therefore  conversely  the  i)ercentage  of  HjSOi  can  be  found  from  the  specific
gravity.

246  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

composition  (columns  3,  4,  second  table).  We  have  already  mentioned
how  the  factor  of  temperature  points  to  the  existence  of  hydrates,
H2SO4  and  H2SO4H2O.  As  regards  the  factor  f/S  dp  (giving  the
increase  of  sp.  gr.  with  an  increase  of  1  per  cent.  H2  ^^\)  the  following
are  the  three  most  salient  points  :  (I)  In  passing  from  98  per  cent,  to
100  per  cent,  the  factor  is  negative,  and  at  100  per  cent,  about  —  0*0019
{i.e.  at  99  per  cent,  the  sp.  gr.  is  about  1*8391,  and  at  100  per  cent,
about  1*8372,  at  15°,  the  amount  of  HjSO^  has  increased  whilst  the
sp.  gr.  has  decreased),  but  as  soon  as  a  certain  amount  of  SO-,  is
added  to  the  definite  compound  H2SO4  (and  *  fuming'  acid  formed)
the  specific  gravity  rises  (for  example,  for  H2SO4  0'136  SO3  the  sp.  gr.
at  15°= 1*866),  that  is  the  factor  becomes  positive  (and,  in  fact,  greater
by  -I- 0*01),  so  that  the  formation  of  the  definite  hydrate  H2SO4  is
accompanied  by  a  distinct  and  considerable  break  in  the  continuity
of  the  factor  •''•'***** ;  (2)  The  factor  (dS/dp)  in  increasing  in  its  passage
from  dilute  to  concentrated  solutions,  attains  a  maximum  value  (at  15°
about  0*012)  about  H2SO42H2O,  ie.  at  about  the  hydrate  corresponding
to  the  form  SXg  proper  to  the  compounds  of  sulphur,  for  S(OH),,
=  H2S042H20  ;  the  same  hydrate  corresponds  to  the  composition  of
gypsum  CaS042H20,  and  to  it  also  corresponds  the  greatest  contraction
and  rise  of  temperature  in  mixing  H28O4  with  HjO  (see  Chapter  I.,
Note  28) ;  (3)  The  variation  of  the  factor  (dH/dp)  under  certain  varia-
tions in  the  composition  proceeds  so  uniformly  and  regularly,  and  is  so
different  from  the  variation  given  under  other  proportions  of  H2HO4  and
H2O,  that  the  sum  of  the  variations  of  di^/dj)  is  expressed  by  a  series
of  straight  lines,  if  the  values  of  p  be  laid  along  the  axis  of  Jilxscissa*
and  those  of  d^/dp  along  the  ordinates."''' Thus,  for  instiince,  for  15^,  at

55  bin  Whetlier  Himilar  (even  small)  breaks  in  the  continuitj'  of  the  factor  r/.V  djt
exist  or  not,  for  otlier  hydrates  (for  instance,  for  H,.S04H.20  and  H.,>S044H.^O)  cannot  as
yet  be  aflSmied  owing  to  the  want  of  accurate  data  (Note  53).  In  my  investigation  of
this  subject  (1H87)  I  admit  their  possibility,  but  only  conditionally;  and  now,  w^ithout
insisting  u]H>n  a  similar  opinion,  I  only  hold  to  the  existence  of  a  distinct  break  in  thr
factor  at  H2SO4,  being  guided  by  C.  Winkler's  observations  on  the  sjiecific  gravities  of
fuming  sulphuric  acid.

^'*  In  1887,  on  considering  all  the  existent  observations  for  a  temperature  0^,  I  gave
the  accompanying  scheme  (p.  248)  of  the  variation  of  the  factor  ih  dp  at  0°.

I  did  not  then  (1887)  give  this  scheme  an  absolute  value,  and  now  after  the  appearanct*
of  two  series  of  new  determinations  (Lunge  and  Pickering  in  181HM,  which  disagree  in
many  jKjints,  1  think  it  well  to  state  quite  clearly:  (1)  that  Lunge's  and  Pickering's  new
determinations  have  not  added  to  the  ivccuracy  of  our  data  respecting  the  variation  of
the  specific  gravity  of  solutions  of  sulphuric  jicid  ;  (2)  that  the  sum  total  of  existing  data
does  not  negative  (within  the  limit  of  experimental  accuracy)  the  jxissibility  of  a  rectilinear
and  broken  form  for  the  factors  (hdjt;  (3)  that  the  supposition  of  'special  points'  in
fis'dp,  indicating  definite  hydrates,  finds  confirmation  in  all  tlie  latest  determinations:
(4)  that  the  supposition  respecting  the  existence  of  hydrates  determining  a  break  of
the  factor  th'dp  is  in  no  way  altered  if,  instead  of  a  series  of  broken  straight  lines,  there

SIT-PHTTB,  SELENIUM. AND  TELLl'BTl'M

247

10  per  cent.  ilti/dp=0-Q07\,  at  20  per  cent.  =0-0077,  at  .TO  per  cent.
=  0-00f<2,  at  +0  per  cent.  =0-0088,  that  ia,  for  each  10  per  cent,  the
factor  increases  by  aliout  O-OWG  for  tlie  whole  of  the  above  range,  but
beyond  this  it  becomes  larger,  and  then,  after  parsing  HjHOjSH.jO,
it  begin-s  t*>  fall  i-apidly.  Such  changfts  in  the  variation  of  the  factor
take  place  apparently  about  definite  hydrate.s, '*'■''  and  especially
about  H^S0,4H.A  HjS0,2H,O  and  H,j.SO,H,0.  All  this  indiL-ating
as  it  does  the  special  chemical  affinity  ui  sulphuriu  acid  fur  water,
although  of  no  small  signilicance  for  comprehending  the  natui-e  of  solu
tions  (sTf  Chapter  I.  and  Chapter  VII,),  cfrntains  many  special  points
which  require  detailed  investigation,  the  chief  dithculty  being  that  it
re<|uire.s  great  accuracy  in  a  large  number  of  experimental  data.

The  great  affinity  of sulphucic  aeid  for  water  is  also  seen from

t>E  A  tontiunoas  Berien  of  tuireB,  nearly  ftpproncliiiif!  slrniKht  Hues;  njiil  (5)  tlukt  Uiw
null ject  deserveg  (u  I  raeutioned  in  1887)  uew  wi'l  canrfuj  elabomtiou,  b««iuiie  it  cancerm
Uinl  foremoot  problgm  in  (lui  acimiue — cnlutionit— lUiil  mtrodiuws  it  -ipvciftl  nietlwd  into  it
— Umt  ia,  tbi!  iitndy  uf  differeiiUnJ  vnriatiouB  In  a.  pnjporty  wliieb  in  no  e»!iily  observed
4«  Utn  Hpecjfici  gravity  of  a  liquid.

>»"i-  TbeBe  hydrates ate:  (a)  HjSOi-SOjH./)  Imelts  at  +10''-JK {b)  HjSO.ajO

-SOs9H,0  Icrystallo-hydnkto,  melU  at  -f8°-£):  |c|  lL,80,aHjO  lis  itppureiJtly  nut
cryatalliaablel ;  ('')  one  of  tlie  bydntes  betweeu  HySO,eH.,0  luid  H.,S043H,0,  most
imtMbly  O^jlHiO^SOjEH^O,  ror  it  erysUHiKB  at  -a4°'S[Note  SO  biaj;  and  (r)  n
certain  hjtdtmte  >rith  a  Uige  pcopDition  of  water,  about  H.,et0,I5DH.,O.  The  eiintenee
of  the  Uiit  IB  inferred  from  tbc  Fact  that  thefacloT(J<,'i2^finttallii.tit»rtiiigfniiu  H'al«r,  and
tiien  riaea,  aud  this  change  tAksB  place  wlicnpiB  lean  than  B  p.c.  Certninly  a  rhniisein  the
variation  of  ilt'ilp  or  if(,'i/f  doea  tikho  place  in  the  iieighhnurli'H'd  of  these  B\-u  hyilrateo
(Pickering.  IWOi  recognised  ■  Ux  greater  nuuihor  of  hydrntCHi.  I  think  it  well  to  add
tluit  if  tb>t  rumpoaitinn  uF  the  snlutions  lie  (-ipre»>iMl  hv  the  iiereeiitage  ainonnt  of
molocoleB— r,SOs-(100-r,(ajO  we  fiuil that tor H.,Sn„  T,-r.l),  For  H,SO,3tt/>  r,

=  aB-B0,a,fQrH.jHO,H,O,  J-,  =  38-338- SUJI,  while  for  H.SO.lH.Afi-lO'lM^WJ—t.e.
that  the  chief  hyitratea  are  distributed  lyniDU'tri  caUy  betveen  H.,0  and  H^SO,.  Bnides
wbicli  I  may  mention  that  my  reiearchei  llBtSTI  apun  the  abrupt  ehaiiges  in  [lie  factor
for  •olDtiona  of  lalpfaQric  acid,  and  upon  the  correxpondence  nl  the  breaks  of  iU:dp  -with
definite  hydratee,  revived  eu  indirect  conflrmatiun  not  only  in  the  solutions  of  HNOj,
HCl.  CyH.pO,  CsH,0,  ibc,  which  I  investigated  |in  my  work  cited  in  Chapter  L,  Note  19),
but  alw  in  the  careful  observations  made  by  Frofesmr  CheltioH  on  the  wlDtionn  of  FeCls
uud  ZnC'l,  IChapter  XVI.,  Note  II  which  showed  the  eii*tence  in  these  solutions  of
aa  Almost  tinular  change  in  dtidp  as  is  foand  in  solpburie  ncid.  Tlie  detailed  renearoheo
(1HS81  m«de  by  Tourbaba  on  the  solutions  of  uuuiy  organic  substances  are  of  a  nimilar
nslnre.  Beudee  which,  H.  Civmpton  I1S88I.  in  ht«  researches  on  the  electrical  con-
dnutivitj  of  aolationi  of  sulphuric  acid,  wid  Tammiuin,  in  his  observations  on  their
vikponc  kmiiion,  found  a  canelntiou  with  the  liydratxs  indicated  as  above  by  the  in-
vrstigalioD  of  their  specific  gntvitiM.  The  iuDuence  of  mixtures  of  a  definite  Domposition
apon  tlie  cbemieal  relations  of  so]ations  is  even  «ihibited  in  such  a  complei  process  as
cloctcolyaii.  V.  Koarilud  (ISBIl  showed  that  luiitureH  coutuniug  about  3  p.e.,  IT  p.c.
ktid  TS  p-e.  ol  snlphutic  acid — i^.  whune  vomposition  approachen  tlust  of  the  hjdrateH
H^OtIS0H,O,  H.,SO,IIH,0  and  H,HO,UU,0~eKhibit  certain  pet-aliarities  in  respect  U>
the  araoant  of  pvruiide  of  hydrogen  formed  during  electrolysis.  Thus  a  S  p.c.  wlutioii
give*  a  maximnm  amount  of  peroxide  »l  hydrogen  at  the  negative  |iale,  as  compared  with
tJul  given  by  other  iteighbonring  I'oneenlrations. Starting  from  3  p.i'..  the  formation  of

ptroiide  of  liydropen  •

II  C.I  a:

248  PRINCIPLES OF CUEMLSTRY

the  fact  that  when  the  strong  acid  acts  on  the  majority  of  organic
substances  containing  hydrogen  and  oxygen  (especially  on  heating)  it
very  frequently  takes  nj)  these  elempnts  in  the  form  of  water.  Thus
strong  sulphuric  acid  acting  on  alcohol,  CgHijO,  removes  the  elements
of  water  from  it,  and  converts  it  into  olefiant  gas,  C2H4.  It  acts  in  a
similar  manner  on  wood  and  other  vegetable  tissues,  which  it  chars.
If  a  piece  of  wood  be  immersed  in  strong  sulphuric  acid  it  turns  black.
This  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  wood  contains  carbohydrates  which
give  up  hydrogen  and  oxygen  as  water  to  the  sulphuric  acid,  leaving
charcoal,  or  a  black  mass  veiy  rich  in  it.  For  example,  cellulose,
CgHioOft,  acts  in  this  manner.'"

We  have  already  had  frecjuent  occasion  to  notice  the  very
energetic  acid  j^roperties  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  therefore  we  will  now
only  consider  a  few  of  their  aspects.  First  of  all  we  must  remember
that,  with  calcium,  strontium,  and  especially  with  barium  and  lead,
sulphuric  acid  forms  very  slightly  soluble  salts,  whilst  with  the
majority  of  other  metals  it  gives  more  easily  soluble  salts,  which  in  the
majority  of  cases  are  able,  like  sulphuric  acid  itself,  to  combine  with
water  to  form  crystallo-hydrates.  Normal  sulphuric  acid,  containing
two  atoms  of  hydrogen  in  its  molecule,  is  able  for  this  reason  alone
to  form  two  classes  of  salts,  normal  and  arcid,  which  it  does  with  great
facility  tvith  the  alkali  metals.  The  metals  of  the  alkaline  earths
and  the  majority  of  other  metals,  if  they  do  form  acid  sulphates,  do  so
under  exceptional  conditions  (with  an  excess  of  strong  sulphuric  acid),
and  these  salts  when  formed  are  decomposable  by  water — that  is,
although  having  a  certain  degree  of  physical  stability  they  have  no
chemical  stability.  Besides  the  acid  salts  RHSO4,  sulphuric  acid  also
gives  other  forms  of  acid  salts.  An  entire  series  of  salts  having  the
composition  RHS04,H2S04,  or  for  bivalent  metals  RS04,3H2S04,'^
has  been  prepared.  Such  salts  have  been  obtained  for  potassium,
sodium,  nickel,  calcium,  silver,  magnesium,  manganese. They  are  pre-

*^  Cellulofte,  for  iiiBiance  unsized  i)ai>er  or  calico,  ih  dissolved  by  strong  Bulphuric
acid.  Acid  diluted  with  about  half  its  volume  of  water  converts  it  (if  the  action  be  of
short  duration)  into  vegetable  parchment  (Chapter  I.,  Note  IH).  The  action  of  dilute
solutions  of  ftulphuric  acid  converts  it  into  hydro-cellulose,  and  the  fibre  loses  its  coherent
quality  and  becomes  brittle.  The  prolonged  action  of  strong  sulphuric  acid  chars  the
cellulose  while  dilute  acid  converts  it  into  glucose.  If  sulphuric  acid  be  kept  in  an  open
vessel,  the  organic  matter  of  the  dust  held  in  the  atmospliere  falls  into  it  and  blackens  the
acid.  Tlie  same  thing  happens  if  sulphuric  acid  \>e  kept  in  a  bottle  closed  by  a  cork ;  the
cork  becomes  charred,  and  the  acid  turns  black.  However,  the  chemical  proi>erties  of
the  acid  undergo  only  a  very  slight  change  when  it  turns  black.  Sulphuric  acid  which  is
considerably  diluted  with  water  does  not  produce  the  above  effects,  which  clearly  shows
their  dependence  on  the  affinity  of  the  sulphuric  acid  for  water.  It  is  evident  from  the
preceding  tliat  strong  sulphuric  acid  will  act  as  a  powerful  ^xjison  ;  whilst,  on  the  other
hand,  when  very  dilute  it  is  employed  in  certain  medicines  and  as  a  fertiliser  for  plitiits.

SLT-PHTB,  SKLRSIOM. AND  TELHTBIITI  "240

pared  1>y  dissolving  the  sulphates  in  an  excess  uf  sulphurio  .irid  anil
heating  the  solutiun  until  the  excess  nf  sulphuric  Hoid  is  driven  ofT;
on  cooling,  the  mass  solidifips  to  a  crystalline  salt.  Heside.s  which,
Ritie  obtained  a  salt  having  the  conipiisition  NujStf^jNaHSOj,  aud  if
HNaSO,  be  heated  it  easily  tonus  a  salt  Na,,SjOj  =  Na,jSO,.SO.,  :
hence  it  is  clear  that  sulphuric  anhydride  combines  with  various  pro
portions  of  bases,  just  as  it  combines  with  various  pi'uportions  uf
water.

We  have  already  learned  that  sulphuric  acid  displaces  the  acid  from
the  ftalts  of  niti-ic,  carbonic,  and  many  other  volatile  acids.  Berthollet's
laws  (Chapter  X.J  explain  this  by  the  sntall  Vdlittility  of  sulphuric
acid  ;  and,  indeed,  in  an  iiquenus  solution  sulphuric  acid  displncen  the
much  less  soluble  l>oric  acid  from  it.'i  compounds — for  instance,  from
borax,  and  it  al*i  displaces  sQiia  from  its  compounds  with  bases  ;  but
both  boric  anhydride  and  silica,  whenfusetl  with  sulphates,  decompose
them,  displacing  sulphuric  anhydride.  HO^,  because  they  are  less
volatile  than  sulphuiic  anhydride.  It  is  also  well  known  that  with
metals,  sulphuric  acid  forms  salts  giving  ofT  hydrogen  (Fe,  Zn,  &c.),  or
sulphur  dioxide  (Cu,Hg,  Jtc.).^*  "'

The  reiiclionN  of  sulphuric  acid  irll/i  re»/iect  to  orgiiiiu-  sulmtatKys
lire  generally  determined  by  its  acid  character,  when  the  direct  ex-
traction of  water,  or  oxidation  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  of  the
sulphuric  acid,'^-'  or  disintegration  does  not  take  place.  Tbns  the
majority  of  the  saturated  hydrocarbons,  U.H,,.,  form  with  sulphuric
acid a  special  class  of  mi/,.l„mic  acirfs,  C„H,._|{HSO,)  ;  for  example,

>*  Webrr  (1881)  uhUiiiikl  >  iM-riru  «(  ults  R-fifiHOr.  "R^O  For  K,  Rt,  (.'■,  mid  Tt.

» •>>•  DilU  (ISfiO)  dividHH  nil  the  iu»taU  iTitu  twi>  KTaups  with  reHpect  Co  HUlphunu
ndd  ;  the  first  groop  includBii  niiTer,  iiiercnrj,  copiier,  leul,  tad  biimoth,  which  are  ouly
Actflil  npan  by  hot  (xincentnlnd  icid.  In  this  ciiite  anlpburDaa  anhydride  in  evolveil
KitbuDt  uiy  bje-reactionB.  Tlio  Becond  gToap  amlamt  luuigwieBa,  nickel,  cobalt,  iron,
one.  cadmium,  alnminium,  tin,  thalUani,  and  thp  alkali  metals.  They  reaot  with  sul-
pbnric  nciJ  o(  uif  cancuntration  nt  any  temperatore.  At  a  low  temperature  hydmjten  la
dineugsged,  and  at  higher  tempenklareii  (and  with  Tery  Mmceotralsd  acidj  hydrngeii  hiu)
unlphuroax  anhydride  are  HimiiltaiieDaHly  evoHed.

"  For  eiample,  the  aeUoii  of  hot  nalphnric  U'iil  on  nitrogenous  tompoundu,  an
applied  in  Kjeldahl'e  method  tor  tlie  eatimatian  of  nilrogeu  {Volume  I.  p.  24flJ,  It  is
oliviona  thai  when  anlphurie  arid  act*  M  an  oiidiuiig  agiint  it  tormii  aolphuroun  anhydride,

Tha  action  ol  snlpharic  ncid  oii  the  alvoholn  j>  exactly  aimilar  to  itB  avtioii  on
iitkalii,  bucauae  the  alcoliola,  like  alkidiii,  resist  on  acidic :  a  molecule  of  akohnl  with  u
molecule  uf  anlphurie  acid  aeparulvs  water  aJid  (onuH  lUi  aeid  ethnreal  salt — tlut  i^
there  i«  produced  an  ethereal  coinpnand  correatHiudiug  with  add  taltn.  Thoa,  Fut
eUDiple.  the  action  ot  >ulpharii-  acid,  U,80„  on  ordinary  alcohol,  C^^OH,  giTei  water
luid  lUlphovinic  acid,  CaHjHSO,— tliat  ia,  sulphuric  acid  in  which  one  atom  of  hydni|{eii
i>  repUc«d  by  the  radiele  C^j  o(  ethyl  akohol,  SO,(OU)[OCgH,),  or,  wh»t  ia  Uie  saniti
{,  the  hydrogen  in  ■leohol  ia  replacwd  b]r  blie  radicle  (snlphcayl)  ol  nilphnrio  aciil,
0-BO,lOH).

250  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

benzene,  C^H^,  forms  benzeuesulphonic  acid,  C^jH./SOgH,  water  being
separated,  for  the  formation  of  which  oxygen  is  taken  up  from  the
sulphuric  acid,  for  the  product  contains  less  oxygen  than  the  sulphuric
acid.  It  is  evident  from  the  existence  of  these  acids  that  the  hydrogen  in
organic  compounds  is  replaceable  by  the  group  SO3H,  just  as  it  may  be
replaced  by  the  radicles  CI,  NO2,  COgH  and  others.  As  the  radicle
of  sulphuric  acid  or  sulphoxyl^  SOgOH  or  SHO3,  contains,  like  carboxyl
(Vol.  I.,  p.  395),  one  hydrogen  (hydroxyl)  of  sulphuric  acid,  the
resultant  sul)stances  are  acids  whose  basicity  is  equal  to  the  numl)er
of  hydrogens  replaced  by  sulphoxyl.  Since  also  sulphoxyl  tsJces  the
place  of  hydrogen,  and  itself  contains  hydrogen,  the  sulpho-acids  are
equal  to  a  hydrocarbon  +  SO3,  just  as  every  organic  (carboxylic)  acid
is  equal  to  a  hydrocarbon  H-  CO.j.  Moreover,  here  this  relation  corre-
sponds with  actual  fact^  because  many  sul phonic  acids  are  obtained
by  the  direct  combination  of  sulphuric  anhydride :  C,jH5(S03H)
=  CgHg  +  SO3.  The  sulphonic  acids  give  soluble  barium  salts,  and
are  therefore  easily  distinguished  from  sulphuric  acid.  They  are
soluble  in  water,  are  not  volatile,  and  when  distilled  give  sulphurous
anhydride  (whilst  the  hydroxyl  previously  in  comVnnation  with  the
sulphurous  anhydride  remains  in  the  hydrocarl)on  group  ;  thus  phenol,
C^jHj'OH,  is  obtained  from  benzeuesulphonic  acid),  and  they  are  very
energetic,  because  the  hydrogen  acting  in  them  is  of  the  same  nature  as
in  sulphuric  acid  itself.^"

Sulphuric  acid,  as  containing  a  large  proportion  of oxygen,  is  a

'"'  We  will  mention  the  following  difference  between  the  snlphonic  acids  and  the
ethereal  acid  Hulphates  (Note  59)  :  the  former  re-fonn  sulphuric  acid  with  difficulty  and
the  latter  easily.  Thus  sulphovinic  acid  when  heated  with  an  excess  of  water  is  recon-
verted into  alcohol  and  sulphuric  acid.  This  i8explaine<l  in  the  following  manner.  Both
these  classes  of  acids  are  produced  by  the  substitution  of  hydrogen  by  SO.^H,  or  the
univalent  radicle  of  sulphuric  a<.'id,  but  in  the  formation  of  ethereal  acid  sulphates  the
SO5H  replaces  the  hydrogen  of  the  hydroxyl  in  the  alcohol,  whilst  in  the  formation  of
the  sulphonic  acids  the  SO3H  replaces  the  hydrogen  of  a  hydrocarbon.  This  difference
is  clearly  evidenced  in  the  existence  of  two  acids  of  the  composition  S04C.»Hg.  The  one,
mentioned  above,  is  sulphovinic  acid  or  alcohol,  C.2H..,'OH,  in  which  the  hydrogen  of  the
hydroxyl  is  replaced  by  sulphoxyl  -^  C.jH5*OS05H,  whilst  the  other  is  alcohol,  in  which
one  atom  of  the  hydrogen  in  ethyl,  C.^H^,  is  replaced  by  the  sulphonic  group — that  is
=  (C2H4)S05H"OH.  The  latter  is  called  isethionic  acid.  It  is  more  stable  than  sulpho-
vinic acid.  The  details  as  to  these  interesting  comiK>nnds  must  be  looked  for  in  workn  on
organic  chemistry,  but  I  think  it  necessary  to  note  one  of  the  general  methods  of  formation
of  these  acids.  The  sulphites  of  the  alkalis — for  example,  K.,SO:i — when  heated  with  the
halogen  products  of  metalepsis,  give  a  halogen  salt  and  a  salt  of  a  sulphonic  acid.  Thus
methyl  iodide,  CH,-,I,  derived  from  mivrsh  gas,  CHi,  when  heated  to  100'^  with  a  solution
of  potassium  sulphite,  K.^SO.-^,  gives  |)otassium  iodide,  KI,  and  potassium  methylsul-
phonate,  CH5SO3K — tliat  is  a  salt  of  the  sulphonic  acid.  This  shows  that  the  sulphonic
acid  may  be  referred  to  sulphurous  acid,  and  that  there  is  a  resemblance  between  sul-
phuric and  Hulphnrous  acid,  which  clearly  reveals  itself  here  in  the  formation  of  one
product  from  them  Ixith.

c-  rELLujL:vx  i^l

it  is  deooMUm.  jiWarnhf  fm 9^*4.^**44  -wjtAy^r^it  MSui  v:&9«fr  .or  tr^vtrK
mlthoagk  bqvc  laicfr.  mS^sa^sr,^  avtir.tS's.  azfri  s:iqnlii£r-K  S^tf^i^^tV
acid  acts  in  tkis  maamet  *xl  <&£fcr^«L  ei'fcwr.  MMv«ry«  $ji^\te<r^  ^ir>cticjtv
and  other  siutaaMft.  waadk  ^e^  iz=^t>ttf-  >•  evoiv^  Kwirv^^iKt  tV**!  x)
direcdr,  as  we  saw  eb  deKnirjcix  ^{iitxrK'tts  azthpln«ie.

Althncgh  tk-  hixliaie  «€  a  Li^tber  st^spt  form  odt  v>xkiaiio«)  yOKAi'lirr
XV.  |y  solpliant  a&fajdjnik-  b  «^Ar4e-  'A  fardier  «xufciati^yv  a»\i  ^vrm$  A
kind  of  penjxide.  j««t  as  ShTdrceec  sires  hvdn^o  p^f\>\kk>  in  ;iuKiiiik^;
to  water,  ^ir  as  aodiaak  acd  p^assiim.  >«sad«s  th^  oxki^'ts  N;ft^l^  ;jii>^)
K^O,  ^ve  tlieir  |ien>xidca.  ojc&pjviids  which  ad^  in  .^  v^iuiv'tii  ;^^vw'
imstaUe,  powerfblhr  oxidiBD^  and  w<  diii^ily  sible  to  enl^Mr  iuu^  mUih>
combiiiatirjDi^  If  the  •^xidefr  of  pi>tadsiam,  liariunu  «.Vv\«  Iv  %»m(VArtsi
to  water,  then  their  per&xides  most  in  like  manner  corr^(>^MHi  U^
hydrogen  pcnjxide,^^  not  •>n]j  lecaose  the  oxygen  cont^uue^i  iu  thiMM
is  very  molHle  and  easilv  litjersted.  and  l^eo^ose  their  i>'aoIum)«  ^i^^
simibLT,  hot  also  becaose  ther  can  ije  matoallv  tmn^^rtned  int%^  t^^^^
Other,  and  are  able  tu  fi^rm  compounds  with  eAoh  other«  >*rith  tvftsK^vik
and  with  water,  and  indeed  form  a  kind  of  pen^xido  sjih«.*^^  Tl^ii)^
is  also  the  diaracter  of  y<r*»#//i/iwri>  <iW'/,  disco venni  in  ISTS  Uy
Berthelot,  and  its  oorrespi^ding  anhydride  or  peroxide  of  sulphurS^O.
It  is  formed  from  2SOj  -h  <>  with  the  absi>q>tiou  of  ht\it  ^  -*  ^*^
thousand  heat  units),  like  ozone  from  ^^^  +  O  (  —  29  thou$tiud  uui(«  of
heat),  or  hydrogen  peroxide  from  H^O  4-  O  (  -  21  thousand  lu^rtt  unit*^

Peroxide  of  sulphur  is  produced  by  the  action  of  a  silent  di«*^h«irp»
upon  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and  sulphurous  anhydride.***'* With  w^ter

*•*  The  reaction  BaO-O  develops  lilKM*  hoat  unitK,  whilst iho  nmotiou  W^K"^  ■■  \>
ftbHorbs  21,000  heat  units.

^*  Schune  obtained  a  compoand  of  pen>xide  of  lianuiu  with  |H*rtAidt*  of  hvdi-^Ht^Mt  It
barium  peroxide  be  di»8olve<1  in  hydnx^hlorir  (or  tUH^tivi  aoid,  or  if  n  •*<%hitiou  t>f
hy<b'ogen  peroxide  be  diluted  with  a  s«)lution  of  Imriuni  hydntxido,  a  |uuv  h>di^lt>i<«  i^rt'
cipitated  having  the  compoHition  BaO.^^BH.^.O  ^st>nit'tini(*H  th«>  i^>iu)MtHition  i*<  tukmi  ah
BaOjfCH.^O).  This  fact  wan  already  known  toTlu'nrtrtl.  Sohon«»  showiHl  thnt  if  hydi'^t^im
peroxide  be  in  excess,  a  crystalline  compound  of  the  two  jH»n>xid»«M,  IUit).^ll.ji>j,  ii*  pivoipi
tated.  Sehone  also  obtained  small  well-fonned  or>-Ktals  of  th<*  hmuk*  oom)HMition  b\
adding  a  solution  of  ammonia  to  an  acid  solution  of  barium  iH*roxidiM<^^utainni)iM  Imiiutti
salt  and  hydrogen  peroxide  or  a  c<mi{K)und  of  BaO-.i  with  the  ac*id).  Thun  iHintiin
peroxide  combines  with  l>oth  water  and  hydrogen  {)en>xide.  This  is  a  very  iu«)Hirtaiit  fArl
for  the  comprehension  of  the  comiwsition  of  other  iH»n)xides.  MonMiver,  if  tho  jH»r«»\id«»«i
are  able  to  give  hydrates  they  can  also  form  i>orres)Kmding  salts,  i.e.  they  ran  (Himhnto
with  bases  and  acids,  as  was  afterwards  found  to  be  the  casc>on  further  n^iH^an'h  into  ihix
subject.

•^  Anhydrous  sulphuric  pevtxide,  S.2O7,  is  obtained  by  the  prolonginl  (H  to  lt»  Iiouvh)
action  of  a  silent  discharge  of  considerable  intensity  on  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and  wul
phurouH  anhydride ;  the  vapour  of  sulphuric  peroxide,  S-^O;,  condensoH  as  liquid  dro|M,
or  after  being  cooled  to  0-'  in  the  form  of  Iqng  prismatic  cryttalt,  renmnbling  thoMi  of

252  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

S2O7  gives  persulphuric  acid,  H-^SgOy.  The  latter  is  obtained
more  simply  l)y  mixing  strong  sulphuric  acid  (not  weaker  than
H2S04,2H.20)  directly  with  hydrogen  peroxide,  or  by  the  action  of  a
galvanic  current  on  sulphuric  acid  mixed  with  a  certain  amount  of  water,
and  cooled,  the  electrodes  being  platinum  wires,  when  persulphuric  acid
naturally  appears  at  the  positive  pole.^^  When  an  acid  of  the  strength
HjS04,6H.jO  is  taken,  at  first  the  hydrate  of  the  sulphuric  per-
oxide, SjO-jHaO,  only  is  formed  ;  but  when  tiie  concentration  about
the  positive  pole  reaches  H2S04,3H20,  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  peroxide
and  the  hydrate  of  sulphuric  peroxide  begins  to  be  formed.  Dilute
solutions  of  sulphuric  peroxide  can  be  kept  better  than  more  con-
centrated solutions,  but  the  latter  may  be  obtained  containing  as
much  as  123  grams  of  the  peroxide  to  a  litre.  It  is  a  very  instructive
fact  that  hydrogen  peroxide  is  always  formed  when  strong  solutions  of
persulphuric  acid  break  up  on  keeping.  So  that  the  bond  between  the
two  peroxides  is  established  both  by  analysis  and  synthesis  :  hydrogen
peroxide  is  able  to  produce  S2H2OJ,,  and  the  latter  to  produce  hydrogen
peroxide.  A  mixture  of  sulphuric  peroxide  with  sulphuric  acid  or
water  is  immediately  decomposed,  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen,  either
when  heated  or  under  the  action  of  spongy  platinum. The  same  thing

Hulphuric  anhydride.  The  anhydix)UH  coniix)und  S2O7  (and  also  the  hydrate<l  compound)
cannot  be  prenerved  long,  as  it  HplitH  up  into  oxygen  and  nulphuric  anhydride.  Direct
experiment  shows  that  a  mixture  of  equal  volumes  of  sulphurous  anhydride  and  oxygen
leaves  a  residue  of  a  quarter  of  the  oxygen  taken,  or  half  of  the  whole  volume,  which
indicates  the  formula  S._,07.  This  substance  is  soluble  in  water,  and  it  then  given  a
hydrate,  probably  having  the  comiK)sition  S207,H20  ^iJSHO,.  This  solution  oxidises
the  salts  SnX.^,,  potassium  iodide,  and  others,  which  renders  it  iMJssible  to  prove  that  tlie
solution  actually  contains  one  atom  of  oxygen  capable  of  effecting  oxidation  to  two  mole-
cules of  sulphuric  anhydride.

In  order  to  fully  demonstrate  the  reality  of  a  i)eroxide  form  for  acids,  it  should
be  mentioned  that  some  years  ago  Bnxlie  obtained  the  so-called  acetic  peroxide,
(CjHoO).202,  by  the  action  of  barium  jieroxide  on  acetic  anhydride,  (C.)H30)oO.  Its
corresponding  hydrate  is  also  known.  This  shows  that  true  i>eroxide8  and  their
hydrates,  with  reactions  similar  to  those  of  hydrogen  i>eroxide,  are  possible  for  acids.
A  similar  higher  oxide  has  long  been  known  for  chromium,  and  Berthelot  obtained  a
like  compound  for  nitric  acid  (Chapter  VI.,  Note  20).

'"  When  an  acid  of  the  strength  H^SOittH.^.O  is  taken,  at  first  only  the  hydrate  of
the  sulphuric  i^eroxide,  S2O7H2O,  is  formed,  but  when  the  concentration  at  the  positive
pole  reaches  H2SO18H2O,  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  i>eroxide  and  the  hydrate  of  sulphuric
peroxide  begins  to  be  formed.  A  state  of  equilibrium  is  ultimately  arrived  at  when
the  amounts  of  these  substances  correspond  to  the  proiK)rtion  S._,07  :  2H2O3,  which,
as  it  were,  answers  to  a  new  hydrate,  S2^9''^H.2(>.  But  its  existence  cannot  be  admitted
because  the  sulphuric  jwroxide  can  be  easily  distinguished  from  the  hydrogen  peroxide
in  the  solution  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  former  does  not  act  on  an  acid  solution  of
potassium  {)ermanganate,  whilst  the  hydrogen  peroxide  disengages  both  its  own  oxygen
and  that  of  the  permanganic  acid,  converting  it  into  manganous  oxide.  Their  common
property  of  liberating  it^ine  from  an  acid  solution  of  the  potassium  iodide  enables  the
sum  of  the  active  oxygen  in  them  both  to  be  determined.

SULPIIUB,  SELEsruM,  AND  TELLUHTOK  358

takes  pl-Ai-e  with  a  solution  oC  linrytn,  altliougih  at  tirst  no  pi'ecipitiite  in
fornied  >ind  the  deconi position  of  the  Imriumaalt,  BaS^Oa,  with  the  for-
mation of  BaiiO,,  only  proce*Ja  slowly,  so  that  the  solution  may  be
filt«re<l  (the  barium  salt  of  persnlplmric  acid  is  soluble  in  water).  Mer-
cury, ferrous  oxide,  aurl  the  stannous  salts,  (ire  oxidised  by  S^H^Oj,.
These  are  all  diatinct  signs  of  true  peroxides.  The  same  i-ominon  pro-
perties (capacity  for  oxidising,  property  of  forming  peroside  of  hydi-ogen,
ii!c.)  are  possessed  by  the  alkali  salts  of  persulphuric  acid,  which  are
nl)taiiied  by  the  action  of  an  electric  cuiTent  u]>on  certain  sulphates,
for  instance  ammonium  or  potassium  sulphate.  The  ammonium  nilt
of  [lersulpLuric  acid,  (SH,),jSi()„  is  eB|>ecially  gasily  formed  by  this
means,  and  is  now  prepared  on  a  Urge  scale  and  used  (like  Nb.jO^  and
HjO,)  for  bleaching  tissues  and  filires''"',

■«  If  a  Holiition  o(  aultiliiiric  wk\  wliitli  Lhh  Itfuu  fiiKt  biilijwlwl  In  elecbrolyiiii!  be
iitolnliaed  with  poUiih  la  barjrlii,  the  uU  whicli  ia  foniieil  begins  lo  i1(voiiipa»
rapidly  with  the  evolution  M  oiygBn  iBertlielot.  1»»0).  On  KulorBtioK  with  viuuitic
Iwinlji.  II,-.-  -..luliiiii  lit  llie  salt  formed  may  1*  aejinrntod  from  tlie  Hulphale  of  bBrilull,

ami  tliiii  1* |.-i!ii.;r  <if  the  roBulUiit  iMimiJoiiiid,  BKK,,Og,  majr  be  dslenniued  (rom

ll . I'-'^iim^l. Msnilmll  limil  »tui1iei]  the  fonDBtioii  of  thi>  duH

<<l I  '  .  U  .  Ill' sDbjected  u  ■nturo.te'l  wilnlinu  nf  bianlphate  of  potanalitm

liiil.- iir. -:-  .>  iii  iiLi.'iil  of  S-BJ  amplTea  ;  before  electnilytUH  dilute  nalphuric  uia
in  lulildi  i<>  nil'  iiipiiil  Mirriiuiiditi^  Ibe  n^ative  pole,  and  ilariuj;  elrctrolirsiii  tlie  solution
at  the  wiihIb  is  vuoled.  Tlie  electTDljsis  is  enntinaed  without  inteiroption  for  two  days.
and  a  white  crystalline  deposit  nepiumtes  at  the  anof'te.  To  avuid  decomposition,  tlie
latter  in  not  filtered  thron)(h  pai>er.  but  through  a  perfnniled  platinum  ]>liil«,  and  diied
on  n  porous  lile.  The  mother  liquiir,  with  tile  addition  of  a  freah  »i>luIioii  of  bisnlphatH
of  potassium,  is  again  subjected  to  elettnilyHi  s  and  the  crystaU  formed  Kt  tlit^  aiiudi!  are
aj^ain  oollect«d,  &c-  The  salt  so  obtained  may  be  recrystalliHed  l>j  diMSolviii);  it  in  hot
water  and  mpidly  onoling  the  Holution  after  filtration  ;  a  small  pru[)<irtion  of  the  sitlt  is
decomposed  by  this  treatment.  Hapid  cooling  is  fallowed  by  the  d^miatiun  of  small
coliuaiinr  crystals ;  slow  cooling  gives  larite  prismatic  cryrtalB.  The  coinponitjon  of  the
salt  ia  delermiDed  eithet  by  iiinitiiig'  it,  when  it  forms  snlfdiate  <>t  jaitiUMiiiu,  iir  else  by
titmtiug  the  activ?  onygen  with  permanganate  :  its  composition  watt  found  to  L-Drrerqwnd
to  tbe  wit  of  peraulphurie  acid,  KiELtO).  The  solntiou  o(  tlw  wit  has  a  neutral  reaction,
and  ilosii  not  give  a  iirecipitate  with  salts  of  other  metals.  K.^^^Os  in  the  most  iuHoluble
of  the  suits  (f  persolphoric  acid.  With  nitrate  of  ailvHr  il  forms  itersulpbnte  of
iiittBr,  which  ff,vea  peroxide  of  silver  under  tlie  action  at  water  acoarding  to  the  equation
JigiHiOi,  *  IIR.O  =  ig-fl.,  -f  aH.jtiO,.  With  eu  alkaline  solution  of  ti  cupriv  salt  (Fehhug's
Holutiou  I  il  fonuK  a  red  precipitate  of  peroxide  of  copper.  UanganeBS  »nd  cobiit  salts
give  pi¥ci]>itiite«  of  MnO}  and  Co,Oj.  Ferrous  salts  al«  rapidly  oxidised,  potassium
iodide  slowly  disengages  iodine  at  the  ordinary  Mmperalure.  All  these  reactions  indioite
tile  powerful  oxidising  projierties  of  K^B,0,.  In  oxidising  in  the  presence  of  water  it  Riven
a  residue  of  KH^O,.  The  dei'oropoBition  of  the  dij  salt  begins  at  10U=  but  is  not  com-
plete even  at  SSO",  The  freshly  prepared  saJt  is  inodorous,  but  after  being  kept  in  a
cloned  Teawl  it  evolves  a  pecnlior  smell  different  from  that  of  o«one.  The  amnionium
■alt  of  persulphuric  acid,  lNH,)iS,0(,  is  obtained  in  n  similar  manner.  It  is  soluble  to
the  exleut  of  M  part.i  per  100  ports  by  weight  ol  water.  The  decomposition  of  the
onunoniiuu  salt  by  the  hydrated  oiide  of  b&rium  Rives  the  bonum  salt,  BaU.P(iIl|0,
which  is  soluble  to  the  extent  of  fi;f '3  ports  in  100  |mrV«  ol  water  BlU-.  The  ciy«t»l»  do  not
ilelinauce  in  tlie  nir  and  decompose  in  the  course  of  Heverol  days;  they  decompose  most
n  perfectly  dry  air. .Solotiiins  of  the  pure  >ialt  decompoi™  slowly  at  the  ottlinarj

254  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

In  order  to  understand  the  relation  of  sulphuric  peroxide  to  sulphuric
acid  we  must  first  remark  that  hydrogen  peroxide  is  to  be  considered,
in  accordance  with  the  law  of  substitution,  as  water,  H(OH),  in  which
H  is  replaced  by  (OH).  Now  the  relation  of  HjSaOy  to  H2SO4  is
exactly  similar.  The  radicle  of  sulphuric  acid,  equivalent  to  hydrogen,
is  HSO4  ;  6*  *»*«  it  corresponds  with  the  (OH)  of  water,  and  therefore
sulphuric  acid,  H(SH04),  gives  (SH04)2or  S^HjOg,  in  exactly  the  same
manner  as  water  gives  (H0)2 — Le.  HgOg.®^

The  largest  part  of  the  stdphuric  acid  made  is  used  for  reacting^
on  sodium  chloride  in  the  manufacture  of  sodium  carbonate  ;  for  the
manufacture  of  the  volatile  acids,  like  nitric,  hydrochloric,  <fec.,  from
their  corresponding  salts  ;  for  the  preparation  of  ammonium  sulphate,
alums,  vitriols  (copper  and  iron),  artificial  manures,  superphosphate
(Chapter  XIX.,  Note  18)  and  other  salts  of  sulphuric  acid  ;  in  the  treat-
ment of  bone  ash  for  the  preparation  of  phosphorus,  and  for  the  solu-
tion of  metals— for  example,  of  silver  in  its  separation  from  gold — for

temperatare ;  on  boiling  bariam  sulphate  is  gradually  precipitated,  oxygen  being  liberated
simoltaneoasly.  To  completely  decompose  this  salt  it  is  necessary  to  boil  its  solution  for  a
long  time.  Alcohol  dissolves  the  solid  salt ;  the  anhydrous  salt  does  not  separate  from,
the  alcoholic  solution,  but  a  hydrate  containing  one  molecule  of  water,  6aS.20gH2O,
which  is  soluble  in  water  but  insoluble  in  absolute  alcohol.  Solid  barium  persulphate
decomposes  even  when  slightly  heated.  The  free  acid,  which  may  serve  for  the  prepara-
tion of  other  salts,  is  obtained  by  treating  the  barium  salt  with  sulphuric  acid.  The
lead  salt,  PbS.^Og,  has  been  obtained  from  the  free  acid  ;  it  crystallises  with  two  or  three
molecules  of  water.  It  is  soluble  in  water,  deliquesces  in  the  air,  and  with  alkalis  gives
a  precipitate  of  the  hydrated  oxide  which  rapidly  oxidises  into  the  binoxide.

Traube,  before  ManJiall's  researches,  thought  that  the  electrolysis  of  solutions  of
sulphuric  acid  did  not  give  persulphuric  acid  but  a  persulphuric  oxide  having  the  com-
l30sition  SOj.  On  repeating  his  former  researches  (1892)  Traube  obtained  a  persulphuric
oxide  by  the  electrolysis  of  a  70  per  cent,  solution  of  sulphuric  acid,  and  he  separated  it
from  the  solution  by  means  of  barium  phosphate.  Analysis  showed  that  this  substance
corresponded  to  the  above  composition  SO,,  and  therefore  Traube  considers  it  very
likely  that  the  salts  obtained  by  Marshall  corresponded  to  an  acid  H^SO ,  +  SO4,  i.e.  that
the  indifferent  oxide,  S0|,  can  combine  with  sulphuric  acid  and  form  peculiar  saline
compounds.

tij  bu  Or  one  of  those  supposed  ions  which  api)ear  at  the  positive  pole  in  the  decompo-
sition of  sulphuric  acid  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current.

"•^  If  this  be  true  one  would  expect  the  following  i>eroxide  hydrates :  for  phosphoric
acid,  (H...P0,).2 -- HjPA  =  2H.^0  +  2PO5;  for  carbonic  acid,  (HCOj^  =  H^CjOo  «
H.2O  +  C.^O-, ;  and  for  lead  the  true  i^eroxide  will  be  also  Pb  .O^,  &c.  Judging  from  the
example  of  barium  peroxide  (Note  62),  these  peroxide  forms  will  probably  combine
together.  It  seems  to  me  tliat  the  compounds  obtained  by  Fairley  for  uranium  are  very
instructive  as  elucidating  the  ^^eroxides.  In  the  action  of  hydrogen  peroxide  in  an  acid
solution  on  uranium  oxide,  U0-„  there  is  formed  a  uraniimi  i>eroxide,  UO,,4H2O(U  =  240),
but  hydrogen  peroxide  Jicts  on  nranium  oxide  in  the  presence  of  caustic  soda ;  on  the
addition  of  alcohol  a  crystalline  compound  containing  Na,UOg,4H.^.O  is  precipitated,
which  is  doubtless  a  compound  of  the  peroxides  of  sodium,  Na^OQ,  and  uranium,  UO,.
It  is  ver}-  iK>ssible  that  the  first  |)eroxide,  UO,,4H.20,  contains  the  elements  of  hydrogen
peroxide  and  nranium  peroxide,  U.2O7,  or  even  UiOHjojHjOj,  just  as  the  i)eroxide  form
lately  discovered  by  Spring  for  tin  perhaps  contains  Sn.>0:„H.70j.

SULPHtTt.  SELEXItT*. AND  TELLURIUM  255

cleaning  metals  from  mst,  ix.  A  h^rge  amount  of  oil  of  vitriol  is  also
used  in  treatment  of  organic  sabetances  ;  it  b  used  fo;  the  extraction
of  stearin,  or  stearic  acid,  from  tallow,  for  refining  petroleum  and
various  v^ietable  oils,  in  the  preparation  of  nit ro-gljcerine  (Chapter  VI.,
Notes  37  and  37  bis),  for  dissolving  indigo  and  other  colouring  matters,
for  the  conversion  of  paper  into  v^etable  parchment,  for  the  prepara-
tion of  ether  from  alcohol,  for  the  preparation  of  various  artificial  scents
from  fusel  oil,  for  the  preparation  of  v^etable  acids,  such  as  oxalic,
tartaric,  citric,  for  the  conversion  of  non-fermentable  starchy  substances
into  fermentable  glucose,  and  in  a  number  of  other  processes.  It
would  be  difficult  to  find  another  artificially-prepared  substance
which  is  so  frequently  applied  in  the  arts  as  sulphuric  acid.  Where
there  are  not  works  for  its  manufacture,  the  economical  production  of
many  other  substances  of  great  technical  importance  is  impossible.
In  those  localities  which  have  arrived  at  a  high  technical  activity
the  amount  of  sulphuric  acid  consumed  is  proportionally  large  ;
sulphuric  acid,  sodium  carbonate,  and  lime  are  the  most  important  of
the  artificially-prepared  agents  employed  in  factories.

Besides  the  normal  acids  of  sulphur,  HgSOg,  H^SOgS,  and  H.2SO4,
corresponding  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  H.^S,  in  the  same  way
that  the  oxy-acids  of  chlorine  correspond  with  hydrochloric  acid,  HCl,
there  exists  a  peculiar  series  of  acids  which  are  termed  thionic  acids.
Their  general  composition  is  S^HaOo,  where  n  varies  from  2  to  5.  If
n  =  2,  the  acid  is  called  dithionic  acid.  The  others  are  distinguished
as  trithionic,  tetrathionic,  and  pentathionic  acids.  Their  composition,
existence,  and  reactions  are  very  easily  understood  if  they  be  referred
to  the  class  of  the  sulphonic  acids- that  is,  if  their  relation  to
sulphuric  acid  be  expressed  in  just  the  same  manner  as  the  relation  of
the  organic  acids  to  carbonic  acid.  The  organic  acids,  as  we  saw
(Chapter  IX.),  proceetl  from  the  hydrocarbons  by  the  substitution  of
their  hydrogen  by  carboxyl— that  is,  by  the  radicle  of  carbonic  acid,
CH2O3  —  HO  =  CHO2.  The  formation  of  the  acids  of  sulphur  by
means  of  sulphoxyl  may  be  represented  in  the  same  manner,  IIHf),
=Hj804-HO.  Therefore  to  hydrogen  Tl,  there  should  correHp^nd  \)xl
acids  H-SHO,,  sulphurous,  and  SHO^SHO,  =  8,11,/),,  or  diihi/,r,i/,  ;
to  SHj  there  should  correspond  the  adds  H\\(H\\(}^)  =  \\J^,i}  Ohio
sulphuric),  and  8(8H03),  =  H,S/>,  ^trithioni/:;  ;  fy,  H,U,'i)l^  n^hU
S,H(8H03)  =  H^,0,  (unknown),  and  -VKM<i,;,  =.  M^/;^  /M.,«
thionic);  to  83H,  the  acids  H^ff/HlfO,;  ;and  H,/KM<;,;,  ^M^  O
(pentathionic).  We  know  that  iodine  r^:^^  ,hr^,t\y  ^j^,,  ,,^,^  hydr/ri^/.r,
of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  and  coml^in^.  with  it,  «nd  if  MM..:„|.hr,fi..
acid  contain,  the  radicle  of  «uIphurHee.J  hydr.^^.  (en  hrh^^M,  r,r,*f^/|

256  PRINCIPLES OF CUEM18TRY

with  sulphur)  of  the  same  nature  as  in  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  it  is  not
surprising  that  iodine  reacts  with  sodium  thiosulphate  and  forms  sodium
tetrathionate.  Thus,  thiosulphuric  acid,  HS(SH03),  when  deprived
of  H,  gives  a  radicle  which  immediately  combines  with  another  similar
radicle,  forming  the  tetrathionate  S2(S02HO)2.  On  this  view  ^"^  of
the  structure  of  the  thionic  acids  and  salts,  it  is  also  clear  how  all  the
thionic  acids,  like  thiosulphuric  acid,  easily  give  sulphur  and  sulphides,
with  the  exception  only  of  dithionic  acid,  HjSaOc,  which,  judging
from  the  above,  stands  apart  from  the  series  of  the  other  thionic
acids.  Dithionic  acid  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  sulphuric  acid  as
oxalic  acid  does  to  carbonic  acid.  Oxalic  acid  is  dicarboxyl,  (CH02)2
=  C2H2O4,  and  so  also  dithionic  acid  is  disulphoxyl,  (81103)2  =  S2H2O6.
Oxalic  acid  when  ignited  decomposes  into  carbonic  anhydride  and
carbonic  oxide,  CO,  and  dithionic  acid  when  heated  decomposes  into
sulphuric  anhydride  and  sulphurous  anhydride,  SO2,  and  SO2  stands
in  the  same  relation  to  SO3  as  CO  to  CO 3.  This  also  explains  the
peculiarity  of  the  calcium,  barium,  and  lead,  &<:.  salts  of  the  thionic  acids
Ijeing  easily  soluble  (although  the  corresponding  salts  of  H2S03,H2SO4,
and  H.^S  dissolve  with  difficulty),  because  the  former  are  similar  to
the  salts  of  the  sulphonic  acids,  which  are  also  soluble  in  water.
Thus  the  thionic  acids  are  disulphonic  acids,  just  as  many  dicarboxylic
acids  are  known — for  example,  CH2(C02H)2,  C^H4(C02H)2.^'*

'•"  This  view  was  communicated  by  me  in  1870  to  the  Russian  Chemical  Society.

•*  Dithionic  acid^  H..S.,)0,i,  is  distinguished  among  the  thionic  acids  as  containing
the  least  proportion  of  sulphur.  It  is  also  called  hyposulphuric  acid,  because  its  8ap|K>sed
anhydride,  S.^,0;„  contains  more  O  than  sulphurous  oxide,  SOo  or  S.^O,,  and  less  than
sulphuric  anhydride,  SO3  or  S.jO.j.  Dithionic  acid,  discovered  by  Gay-Lussac  and
"Welter,  is  known  as  a  hytjrate  and  as  salts,  but  not  as  anhydride.  The  method  for  pre-
paring dithionic  acid  usually  enii)loyed  is  by  the  action  of  finely-powdered  manganese
dioxide  on  a  solution  of  sulphurous  anhydride.  On  shaking,  the  smell  of  the  latter
disappears,  and  the  manganese  salt  of  the  acid  in  (piestion  passt^s  into  solution;
MnOj  f  2SO.j  =  MnSo06.  If  the  temi>erature  be  raised,  the  dithionate  splits  up  iuUi
sulphurous  anhydride  and  manganese  sulphate,  MnSOj.  (lenerally  owing  to  this  a
mixture  of  manganese  sulphate  and  dithionate  is  obtained  in  the  solution.  They  may
be  separated  by  mixing  the  solution  of  the  manganese  salts  with  a  solution  of  barium
hydroxide,  when  a  precipitate  of  manganese  hydroxide  and  barium  sulphate  is  obtained.
In  this  manner  barium  dithionate  only  is  obtained  in  solution.  It  is  purified  by
ci-ystallisation,  and  sei)arates  as  BaS.jOfl,2H.jO ;  this  is  then  dissolved  in  water,  and
decomiKised  with  the  requisite  amount  of  sulphuric  acid.  Dithionic  acid,  H-^S.^Og,  then
renmins  in  solution.  By  concentrating  the  resultant  solution  under  the  receiver  of  an
air-punii)  it  is  possible  to  obtain  a  liquid  of  sp.  gr.  r847,  but  it  still  contains  water,  and
on  further  evai>oration  the  acid  decomjwses  into  sulphuric  acid  and  sulphurous  anhy-
dride:  H.,,S.^,0,;  =  H.JSO4  +  SO.j.  The  same  decom|>osition  takes  i)lace  if  the  solution  be
slightly  heated.  Like  all  the  thionic  acids,  dithionic  acid  is  readily  attacked  by  oxidising
agents,  and  pa>iHes  into  sulphurous  acid.  No  dithionate  is  able  to  withstand  the  action
of  heat,  even  when  ver>'  slight,  without  giving  off  sulphurous  anhydride :  KoS.jOg
—  K.SO.i  +  SO .. The  alkali  dithionates  have  a neutral reaction  (which  indicates  tlie

£NIUM, AND  TELLUEiUM

Sulphur  exbibita  an  acid  character,  not  only  in  its  compounds  witli
hydrogen  and  osygen,  but  also  in  those  with  other  elements. The

enertretic  Dttlarc  of  the  ncid)  ore  salnble  in  water,  uid  in  U
resemblnneB  to  the  wUb  of  nJLrio  acid  (Uieir  nnhydridoH  iL
( 188S)  desrrilied  nunjr  of  Oio  aailM  of  ditliionic  acid,

LwiKtois,  aboul,  IMO,  obUined  ti  pei^uliar  tliionie  acid  by  heating  a  utmng  Eolation
ut  acid  potuBsiam  HnlpliiU)  vHb  Sowem  of  Bulphor  to  about  UO",  until  the  diHBpppsiance
ot  the  yetlow  colur&tion  ftnt  produced  by  (he  solution  of  the  sulphur.  On  cooling,  a
jiortioii  of  the  golplinr  was  preuipiCated,  >uid  cryatals  of  a  nalt  of  Mlhianii!  acid,
KgSjO,  (partly  mixed  witli  potMBium  BuJpbate),  iiepBnited  out,  Plesay  aflerwarda
ahowed  tlut  the  action  of  BolphniouB  aciit  on  a,  thioBulpbato  also  give*  salphnr  and
tiithioniL-  atiid:  aKj9,0j  +  SSO,^aK]S]0«  +  S.  A  miitnre  of  potBwium  acid  satphite
and  tbiosnlphate  also  gives  a  trithionate.  It  JB  viiry  posBiblo  that  a  reaction  of  the
aune  kind  occnra  in  the  formation  of  trithioiuc  acid  by  Lunglold'a  method,  because
potUHinm  sulphite  and  sulphur  yield  potuaiam  thioaulphate.  The  potassium  thioaul-
pfaate  may  alw  be  replaced  by  pataBsium  anlphidH,  and  on  passing  aniphorous  anhydride
thtDDRh  the  solution  thiosali^te  is  fliBt  foitned  and  then  trithiounla;  4KHSOs-l-K,S
i-lS0,^3K,SsO,,|-aH]0.  The  wjdium  salt  isnot  Eormed  uuiieclheBune  circumstiuiGis
M  the  cntTesponding  potosainm  salt.  The  sodiom  salt  does  not  crystalline  tuid  is  rery
UDRtable:  the  barinm  wit  is,  however,  more  Btdble.  Tlie  barinni  snd  potaasimn  ulta
Are  ftnhydruuB,  they  give  neotrnl  aolutiouK  aind  decompose  wlieu  ignited,  with  the
eVoIatioD  ot  sulphnt  and  sulphurous  unhyitridu,  a  flutpliate  being  left  behind,  EgSgO«
-K(S0i  +  80,  +  S.  It  a,  solution  ot  the  potaasiam  salt  be  deoimpused  by  meuiH  of
hydniRaosilisic  ot  chloric  acid,  the  insoluble  aalta  ol  these  aaids  are  precipitated  and
trithionic  acid  is  obtained  in  wlution,  which  however  very  easily  breuka  up  an  oonoen-
trfttion.  The  addition  of  salts  of  copper,  meraur;.  silver,  tEc,  to  a  solution  of  a  trithiounte
in  followed,  either  immediately  or  after  a  cerlaJn  time,  by  the  formation  of  a  black  pre-
riptbite  of  the  sulphides  whose  formation  is  dne  to  the  decomposition  of  the  trithionic
aeid  with  the  transfereuce  of  its  sulphur  to  the  metal.

Tftralhi*mir  add,  HiS^Og,  iu  contradiatirtetioo  to  the  preceding  acids,  is  much
lUorQ  stable  id  the  free  state  than  in  the  form  of  salts.  In  the  latter  form  it  is  easily
oourerted  iiatA  trithionate,  with  liberation  of  sulphur,  i^odium  tetrathianate  was
obtained  by  Pordos  and  GiHis,  by  the  action  of  iodine  on  a  solution  of  sodium  thiosnl-
phate.  The  reaction  essentially  cansists  in  the  iodine  taking  up  half  the  Bodiujn  ot  the
iMoBulphate,  iiuumnch  as  the  latter  contains  Mb,S,0],  whilst  the  tetrathionate  containB
KaaA  or  Na,3,0.,  so  that  the  reaction  is  as  follows:  aNa,a,Oi-l-I,^aNal4-Na,S,0(.
It  ia  evident  that  telrathionic  acid  staDds  to  thiosulphoric  acid  iu  exactly  tlie  same
raUtioo  as  dJUiionic  acid  does  to  sulphurous  a^id ;  for  the  uuae  amount  of  the  other
elemente  in  dithionate,  KSOj,  and  tetrathiooate,  KSgO,,,  there  ia  half  as  much  metal  as
in  aolphito,  K^BO^,  and  thiosulphate,  K^S^O^.  If  in  the  above  reaction  the  sodium
Ihioaolphate  he  replaced  by  the  lead  salt  PbS,0],  the  sparingly-solnble  lead  iodide  Phi]
and  the  soluble  salt  FbS^O,  are  obtained.  Moreover  the  lead  salt  eaaily  gives  tetra-
thiouic  acid  itoelf  IPbSO,  is  precipitated).  The  flolntion  ot  tetnthionic  acid  may  be
evaporated  over  a  water-bath,  and  atlerwurilH  in  a  rwutini,  when  it  gives  a  colourless
liquid,  which  has  no  smell  and  a  very  acid  reai^tion.  When  dilute  it  may  be  heated  to
its  bfriliug- point,  but  in  a  concentrated  form  it  decomposes  into  sulphuric  acid,  Bul-
phOTDOB  anhydride,  and  anlphur :  U,B,0,^  HiSO,  +  SO,  +  8,.

Fmtathiimie  and,  HiS^Og,  also  belongs  to  this  seriea  ot  acids.  But  little  is  known
sODCeniing  it,  either  *e  hydrate  or  in  salts.  It  is  formed,  together  willi  tetnilhionic
Boid,  bytlie  direct  action  ol  Bulphurous  acid  on  sulphuretted  hydrogen  in  an  aqueous
solution ;  a  large  proportion  ot  sulphur  being  precipitated  at  the  same  time :  BSOg
+  BH,8  =  H,SbO,  +  iSS  +  4HiO.

It,  aa  was  ahown  above,  the  lliinnic  acida  are  disulphonic  acids,  they  may  be  ob-
,  like  other  Bulphonio  acids,  by  means  ol  potassiom  sulphite  and  sulphur  chloride.
'OL.  II.  B

258  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY .

compound  of  sulphur  and  carbon  has  been  particularly  well  investigated.
It  presents  a  great  analogy  to  carbonic  anhydride,  both  in  its  elementary
composition  and  chemical  character.  This  substance  is  the  so-called
carbon  bisulphide,  CSg,  and  corresponds  with  COg.

Thus  Spring  demonstrated  the  formation  of  potassium  trithionate  by  the  action  of  sul-
phur dichloride  on  a  strong  solution  of  potassium  sulphite :  2KSO3K  +  SClj  =  S(S05K).2
+  2KC1.  If  sulphur  chloride  be  taken,  sulphur  also  is  precipitated.  The  same
trithionate  is  formed  by  heating  a  solution  of  double  thiosulphates ;  for  example,  of
AgES203.  Two  molecules  of  the  salts  then  form  Hilver  sulphide  and  potassium
trithionate.  If  the  thiosulphate  be  the  potassium  silver  salt  S05K(AgS),  then  the
structure  of  the  trithionate  must  necessarily  be  (S03K).2S.  Previous  to  Spring's
researches,  the  action  of  iodine  on  sodium  thiosulphate  was  an  isolated  accidentally
discovered  reaction ;  he,  however,  showed  its  general  significance  by  testing  the  action  of
iodine  on  mixtures  of  different  sulphur  compounds.  Thus  with  iodine,  I.2,  the  mixture
Na^S  +  NaQSOs  forms  2NaI  +  Na2S305,  whilst  the  mixture  Na^S^Oj  +  NajSOj  + 1^  gives
2NaI  +  Na^^SsOg — that  is,  trithionic  acid  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  thiosulphuric  acid
as  the  latter  does  to  sulphuretted  hydrogen.  We  adopt  the  same  mode  of  represen-
tation :  by  replacing  one  hydrogen  in  H^S  by  sulphuryl  we  obtain  thiosulphuric  acid,
HSOj'HS,  and  by  replacing  a  second  hydrogen  in  the  latter  again  by  sulphuryl  we  obtain
trithionic  acid,  (HS05)2S.  Furthermore,  Spring  showed  that  the  action  of  sodium
amalgam  on  the  thionic  acids  causes  reverse  reactions  to  those  above  indicated  for
iodine.  Thus  sodium  thiosulphate  with  Na.^  gives  Na^S  +  Na-jSOs,  and  Spring  showed
that  the  sodium  here  is  not  a  simple  element  taking  up  sulphur,  but  itself  enters  into
double  decomposition,  replacing  sulphur  ;  for  on  taking  a  potassium  salt  and  acting  on
it  with  sodium,  ES03(SK)  +  NaNa  =  KS03Na  +  (SK)Na.  In  a  similar  way  sodium
dithionate  with  sodium  gives  sodium  sulphite:  (NaS03)2  +  Na.2  =  2NaS03Na ;  sodium
trithionate  forms  NaSOsNa  and  NaSOsSNa,  and  tetrathionate  forms  sodium  thiosul-
phate, (NaS03)S-2(NaS03)  +  Na,  =  2(NaS03)(NaS).

In  all  the  oxidised  compounds  of  sulphur  we  may  note  the  presence  of  the  elements
of  sulphurous  anhydride,  SO2,  the  only  product  of  the  combustion  of  sulphur,  and  in  this
sense  the  compounds  of  sulphur  containing  one  S0.>  arc^

^%0  '^"•^HO  ^°'H0  ^ -HO

Sulpliurous  Sulphuric  Benzene  sulphonic Thiosulphuric

acid  acid  acid  acid

while,  according  to  this  mode  of  representation,  the  thionic  acids  are —

HO  HO  HO  HO

SO2  SO.2  SO.,  SOo

SO2  SO., ^  SO., •'  SO.] ••

HO  HO  HO  HO

Dithionic  Trithionic  Tetratliionic  Pentathionic

Hence  it  is  evident  that  SO.^  has  (wliilst  C0.,>  has  not)  the  faculty  for  combination,
and  aims  at  forming  SOoX.^.  These  X.j  can  =  0,  and  the  question  naturally  suggests
itself  as  to  whether  the  O.,  which  occurs  in  SO.,  is  not  of  the  same  nature  as  this  oxygen
which  adds  itself  to  SO.i — that  is,  whether  SO.^  does  not  correspond  with  the  more
general  type  ftX„  and  its  comjwunds  with  the  type  SX.-,  ?  To  this  we  may  answer  *  Yes
and  '  No ' — '  Yes '  in  the  general  sense  which  proceeds  from  the  investigation  of  the
majority  of  compounds,  especially  metals,  where  RO  corresponds  with  RCI2,  RX^ ;  *  No '
in  the  sense  that  sulphur  does  not  give  either  SHj,  SH^,  or  SCl^,,  and  therefore  the
stages  SX,  and  SXg  are  only  observable  in  oxygen  compounds.  With  reference  to  the
type  SXg  a  hydrate, S(HO)^,  might  be  expected,  if  not SCI,,. And  we  must  recog-

SULPHCR, SELENIUM, AND  TELLDRIDM  iiS9

6  first  endeavours  to  obtain  a  compouutl  of  sulphur  with  CAfbun
i  unsuccessful,  for  although  sulphur  does  combine  dir«!tlj  with
carbon,  jet  the  formation  of  this  compound  requires  distinctly
detinit«  uunditions.  If  sulphur  be  miKed  with  charcoal  and  heated,  it
is  simply  driven  off  fn>ni  the  latter,  and  not  the  smaHest  trace  of
carbon  bisulphide  is  obtained.  The  formation  of  this  compound
requires  that  the  charcoal  should  be  Krst  heated  to  a  red  heat,  hut  not
above,  and  then  either  the  vapour  of  s.ulphur  pas.sed  over  it  or  lumps
of  sulphur  thrown  on  to  the  I'ed-hut  charcoal,  but  in  small  quantities,
so  as  not  to  lower  the  tempeiature  of  the  latter.  If  the  charcoal  be
heated  to  a  white  heat,  the  amount  of  carbon  bisulphide  formed  is  less,
This  depends,  in  the  first  place,  on  the  carbon  bisulphide  dissociating
at  a  high  temperature.''''  In  the  second  place,  Favre  and  Siiberman
showed  that  in  the  combustion  of  one  gram  of  carbon  bisulphide  (the
products  will  be  CO,  +  '280,,)  3,400  heat  units  are  evolved — that  is,
the  combustion  of  a  molecular  quantity  of  carbon  bisulphide  evolves
258,400  heat  units  (according  to  Berthelot,  246,000).  From  a  molecule
of  carbon  bisulphide  in  grams  we  may  olitain  12  grams  of  carbon,
whose  combustion  evolves  96,000  heat  units,  and  04  grams  of  sulphur,
evolving  by  combustion  (into  SO.j)  140,800  heat  units.  Hence  we  see
that  the  component  elements  Bcparately  evolve  less  heat  by  their  com-
bustion  (237,000 heat  units)  than  carbon bisulphide  itself  -that is,

ujiie  tluH  lijilrate  from  a  stadj  of  the  i»iiipouiiilH  o{  HUljihariu  uuid  wiLh  water,  tn
addition  to  what  hiu  been  ulreBd;  said  regpecting  the  cDinplex  widf  [armed  bj  aalphiu,
1  tliink  ii  wall  to  mention  that,  au:ording  to  the  abore  view,  iiti]]  more  complex  o^gen
acid*  and  wit*  of  snlphor  may  be  looked  for.  For  inetanue,  the  unit  Na,8iOg  obtained
hy  Villien  (1888]  in  of  this  kind.  It  in  formed  l<:K«U»!r  with  eoainm  trilhionate  and
■nlpliDT,  irbuu  SO,  i«  piu»ed  through  a  cold  HOlation  of  Ni^jSjOj,  (rhidi  is  then  allowed
to  Etand  (or  sereral  days  ai  the  ordinar;  (smperalore :  3Naj8,Oj  +  lBO,^NH^,Ot
^-NajB^ii+S,  It  nuiy  be  wmauied  here,  as  in  the  thionic  ncids,  that  there  ore  two
onlphoxyls,  boand  together  not  onlj  bjr  H,  bnt  aln  bj  SO;,  or  wliot  is  almost  the
BAiue  thing,  that  thesnlphoiyl  is  combined  with  Ibe  residaeot  trithionic  lund,  ij>.  replaces
one  4LqQeonH  residne  in  trithionic  acid.

^  Bran  light  decomposes  carbon  bisDlphidu,  bat  not  to  tbe  extent  of  separating
cejhon  1  nndpr  the  atljon  of  the  snn's  rays  it  is  decomposed  into  snlphor  jind  ik  solid
nobftlance  which  is  conuidered  to  be  carbon  monoanlpbide ;  it  is  of  a  red  imlour,  and  its
■p.  gr.  is  r60,  (The  formatioo  of  a  red  liquid  compODnd  CjS:  has  also  been  remarked.)
Thorpe  (1889)  ohtierved  a  eomplel*^  decompoaitioD  of  oarbon  bimlphide  ond^r  the  action
of  a  liqnid  alloy  of  potansinm  and  sodium  ;  it  is  accompanied  by  an  explosion  lutd  the
deposition  of  csrbon  and  sulphur.  A  similar  complete  decompoHilion  of  ciLrbon  binul-
phide  is  also  accomplished  by  tbe  action  of  mercury  fuhniiiste  (Chapter  XVI.,  Niitc  30),
and  is  dne  to  the  fact  that  at  the  ordiriari/  Irmperalur''  (at  which  carbinj  bisulphide  in
not  prodnoeil/  the  decampatition  of  carbon  hixnlphide  takes  place  with  the  df^velopmi-nt
ol  heat— tlist  i*,  it  presents  an  exothermal  reaction,  like  the  decomposition  ol  all
explasiFHiL  It  in  very  posi^ible  tliat  at  a  higher  temperatnrc,  wheu  cofbon  bisulphide  is
formed,  the  rombitialian  of  carbim  with  lulpliur  is  also  nji  eiathemul  readloa — that  ie,
bcAl  i*  developed.  If  thie  ohould  be  the  ease,  curbon  bisulphide  would  preiaut  a  mo*t
'  re  example  in  thermoahemiitry.

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHKMI8TBY

that  heat  should  be  evolved  (at  the  ordinary  temperature)  and  not
absorbed  in  its  decomposition,  and  therefore  that  the  formation  of  car-
bon bisulphide  from  charcoal  and  sulphur  is  in  all  probability  accom-
pnnied  by  ftn  absorption  of  lieat.'"  It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that,
like  other  cmupouuds  produced  with  iin  al>aorption  of  heat  (ozone,
nitrous  oxide,  hydrogen  peroxide,  tkc),  carbon  bisulphide  is  unstable
and  easily  converted  into  the  original  substances  from  which  it  is
obtained.  And  indeed  if  the  vapour  of  carbon  bisulphide  be  passed
through  a  red-hot  tube,  it  is  decomposed  that  is,  it  dissociates^ — into
sulphur  and  carbon.  And  this  tnlces  place  at  the  temperature  at  which
this  substance  is  formed.  Just  as  water  deccimposes  into  hydrogen  and
oxygen  at  the  temperature  of  its  formation. In  this  absorption  of  heat

>

in  the  formation  of  carbon  bisulphide  is  explained  the  facility  with  which j
it  Buffers  reactions  of  decomposition,  which  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel,
and  its  main  difference  from  the  closely  analogous  carbonic  anhydride.

''>  The  facl  should  not  b«  lost  sight  ol  thai  salphar  and  rhurL-tuiJ  nre  wllda  at  the
tirdiuaTyt«nipemturp.whil>ttcaTboubiinilpbicJei8aTt>r;vo1iLti]e1iqaid,Hiid(VD«eqaentljr,iB
the  act  of  combination,  referred  lo  the  ordinary  teuipvmture  |Nole  69),  there  it,  ni  it  were,  ft
paSMge  into  a  liquid  state,  and  this  reqaires  the  absorption  ol  heat. And  farthemon^
the  molecule  of  sulphur  containa  at  least  nil  alnmit,  nad  the  molecnle  of  carboa  in  a][ I
probability  (Chapter  VIII.)  a,  rerj  consideroble  number  of  aloma  ;  tlms  the  reMUon  ot  I
(Olphur  on  charcoal  ma;  be  expressed  in  the  following  manner:  3C„ 4- nS|— SaOSj —
that  is,  from  n  +  D  molecules  there  proceed  Un  molecules,  and  as  ii  must  be  vaij  enmr  I
sidcrable,  Sii  must he  ([reater  than 8  +ti, which indicates  a  decomposition  in  Ite  I
formation  of  lATbon  hiaulplxido,  althongh  the  reaction  at  first  Kight  appears  ■•  ooe  ol  f
oombination. This  decoinpo'^ition  is  seen  ulso  from  the  Tolami!«  in  the  aalid  tad  Ij
states. Carbon  bisalphide  luu  a  sp.  gr.  □(  1*39 ;  hence  itk  molecular  vuluiue  is  59.
the  rolanie  ot  oaibon,  even  in  the  form  of  charcoal,  is  not  more  than  6.  and  the  rolmM  I
of  B,  iH  ao  i  hence  U  votuinsK  after  combination  give  69  rolnmes— an  expauiwon  ti
plu'e,  as  in  decompoaitions.

BUI.PHITB,  SELESIUM.  AND  TELLURIUM

261

"In  the  labornlory  carbon  b&ulphide  is  prepared  as  follows :  A
^porcelain  tube  is  luted  into  a  furnace  in  an  inclined  position,  the  upper
extremity  of  the  tuhe  l)eiug  clused  l>y  a  cork,  and  the  lower  end
connected  with  a  condenser.  The  tube  contains  chai'coa!,  which  is
niised  to  a  red  heat,  aud  then  pieces  of  sulphur  are  placed  in  the  upper
end.  The  sulphur  melts,  and  its  vapour  comes  into  contact  with  the
re<!-hot  charcoiil,  when  combination  takes  place  ;  the  vapoura  con-
dense in  the  condenser,  carlxiu  bi^uiphide  being  a  liquid  boiling  at
48°.  On  a  large  scale  the  apparatus  depicted  in  tig.  90  is  employed.
A  cast-iron  cylinder  rests  on  a  stanJ  in  a  furnace.  Wood  char'coal  is
charjjed  into  the  cylinder  through  the  upper  tube  closed  by  a  clay
stopper,  whilst  the  sulphur  is  introduced  through  a  tube  reaching  to

thrown  into  this  tube
converted  into  vapour,

il  in  the  cylinder.  The
through  the  esit  tube

■  which  has  not  entered

the  bottom  of  the  cylinder.  Pieces  of  sulphu
fall  on  to  the  l>ottoffl  of  the  cyliuder,  and  ait
which  passes  through  the  entire  layer  of  charco
vapour  of  carbon  bisulphide  thus  formed  ]>asae;
first  into  a  Woulfe's  bottle  (where  the  sulphu
into  the  reaction  is  condensed),  and  then  into  a  fitrongly-cooled  con-
denser or  worm.''

Pure  carbon  bisulphide  is  a  colourless  liquid,  which  refracts  light
strongly,  and  has  a  pure  ethereal  smell  ;  at  0°  its  specific  gravity  is  1  -293,
and  at  15°  r271.  If  kept  foralongtirae  it  seems  to  undergo  a  change,
especially  when  it  is  kept  under  water,  in  which  it  is  insoluble.  It
boils  at  48°,  and  the  tension  of  its  vapour  is  so  great  that  it  evaporates
very  easily,  producing  cold,'"  and  tlierefore  it  has  to  be  kept  in  well-
stoppered  vessels  ;  it  is  generally  kept  under  a  layer  of  water,  which
hinders  its  evaporation  and  does  not  dissolve  it.'^

'I  Cftibou  IriBolphidB,  as  pre|iiired  od  h  luige  HCHie,  U  gpueritUj  verj  impure,  and
oonUinii  not  noly  solphnr,  bat,  more  eapeckJly,  other  iinimritiBS  whieli  pive  it  a,  verj
iIiAagrMiible  oiloiii.  The  best  laetliod  of  pmifftjig  this  nuIodoniuB  CArbou  bisotpliide  Ja
to  ahiJni  it  up  with  &  uertain  ajQoant  ol  merculic  cJlloriile,  or  aveu  simply  with  matourj,
imtil  the  aurfiwe  nf  the  mel&l  ciwseB  to  turn  bUuk.  Alter  this  the  oHiTboD  bistdpbide
jntut  be  poured  off  mid  diiitlUed  oTbr  a  vater-bath,  after  uunJDjf  with  aome  oil  to  rutAUi
the  itnpQTitieB.

"  II  mrbcm  biHOlpbide  be  evaporated  under  the  reeeiv«T  ol  Hn  ur-pump,  or  b;  meuiH
of  ■  carreut  ol  sir,  it  in  poauble  to  obtain  a  temperature  us  low  as  —60°,  lUid  the  carbon
bisnlphidi?  doet  not  solidify  it  this  temperaturv.  However,  if  a  series  ol  air-bubbleB  be
pMied  thmagh  it  b;  meann  ol  bellows,  a  (.ry stall  ine  white  subst&ncv  remains  which
volatilises  belnw  0^:  this  a  hydrate,  H^,9C8| ;  it  ewtily  decomposes  into  water  and
oarboii  bisulphide.  It  it  formed  in  the  above  experiment  b;  the  moisture  held  in  tlie
sir  pasMd  through  tlie  carbon  bisnlphide.  aud  the  lall  of  tempenlnre.

™  Struug  alifflhol  is  miscible  in  oil  proportions  with  carbon  bisulphide,  but  dilute
alcohol  only  in  a  definite  aniouut,  owing  to  its  diminished  aolubility  troui  the  preeeuoe  ol
the  mler  in  it.  Etbol,  hydmcorbonB,  fatty  oils,  aud  nuiny  other  organic  substiuiov*  arc
I  eaw  in  eubon  lusulphide. This  is  t«ken  iulvs.ntsge  ol  in

262  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

Carbon  bisulphide  enters  into  nAny  combinations,  which  are  fre-
quently closely  analogous  to  the  compounds  of  carbonic  anhydride.  In
this  respect  it  is  a  thio-anhydride — i.e,  it  has  the  character  of  the  acid
anhydrides,^'  ****  like  carbonic  anhydride,  with  the  difference  that  the
oxygen  of  the  latter  is  i^placed  by  sulphur.  By  thio-compounds  in
general  are  understood  those  compounds  of  sulphur  which  differ  from
the  compounds  of  oxygen  as  carbon  bisulphide  does  from  carbonic
anhydride — that  is,  which  correspond  with  the  oxygen  compounds,  but
with  substitution  of  sulphur  for  oxygen.  Thus  thiosulphuric  acid  is
mono-thiosulphuric  acid — that  is,  sulphuric  acid  in  which  one  atom
of  sulphur  replaces  one  atom  of  oxygen.  With  the  sulphides  of  the
alkalis  and  alkaline  earths,  it  forms  saline  substances  corresponding
with  the  carbonates,  and  these  compounds  may  be  termed  thio-car-
bonates.  For  example,  the  composition  of  the  sodium  salt  Na^CSs  is
exactly  like  that  of  sodium  carbonate.  They  are  formed  by  the  direct
solution  of  carbon  bisulphide  in  aqueous  solutions  of  the  sulphides  ;  but
they  are  difficult  to  obtain  in  a  crystalline  form,  because  they  are  easily
decomposable.  When  the  solutions  of  these  salts  are  highly  concen-
trated they  begin  to  decompose,  with  the  evolution  of  sulphuretted
hydrogen  and  the  formation  of  a  carbonate,  water  taking  part  in  the
reaction— for  example,  K2CS3  -f  SHaO  =  K2CO3  -f  SHgS.^*

extracting  the  fatty  oils  from  vegetable  »eeds,  hucIi  as  linseed,  palni-uutH,  or  from  bones,  &c.
The  preparation  of  vegetable  oils  is  usually  done  by  pressing  the  seeds  under  a  press,
but  the  residue  always  contains  a  certain  amount  of  oil.  These  traces  of  oil  can,
however,  be  removed  by  treatment  with  carbon  bisulphide.  In  this  manner  a  solution
is  obtained  which  when  heated  easily  parts  with  all  the  carbon  bisulphide,  leaving  the
non-volatile  fatty  oil  behind,  so  that  the  same  carbon  bisulphide  may  be  condensed  and
used  over  again  for  the  same  purpose.  It  also  dissolves  iodine,  bromine,  indiarubber,
sulphur,  and  tars.

Carbon  bisulphide,  especially  at  high  temperatures,  very  often  acts  by  its  elements
in  a  manner  in  which  carbon  and  sulphur  alone  are  not  able  to  react,  which  will  be
understood  from  what  has  been  said  above  resjwcting  its  endothermal  origin.  If  it  be
passed  over  red-hot  metals — even  over  copi)er,  for  instance,  not  to  mention  sodium,  &c. —
it  forms  a  sulphide  of  the  metal  and  deposits  charcoal,  and  if  the  vapour  be  passed  over
incandescent  metallic  oxides  it  forms  metallic  sulphides  and  carbonic  anhydride  (and
sometimes  a  certain  amount  of  sulphurous  anhydride).  Lime  and  similar  oxides  give
under  these  circumstances  a  carbonate  and  a  sulphide — for  example,  CS.i  +  3CaO  =  2CaS
-I-  CaCOj.  The  sulphides  obtained  by  this  means  are  often  well  crystallised,  like  those
found  in  nature — for  example,  lead  and  antimony  sulphides.

75  bu  And  just  as  COCl,  corresponds  to  COj,  so  also  the  chloran hydride,  CSCl^  or
thlophosgencj  corresponds  to  CS^.

'*  If  instead  of  a  sulphide  we  take  an  alkali  hydroxide,  a  thiocarbonate  is  also
formed,  together  with  a  carbonate— thus,  8BaH..,0.,>  + J5CS^-2BaCS,-  +  BaC03  +  8H20.
From  the  instability  of  the  thiocarbonates  of  the  alkaline  metals  we  can  clearly
see  the  reason  of  the  difficulty  with  which  the  salts  of  tlie  heavier  metals  are  formed,
whose  basic  i>roperties  are  incomparably  weaker  than  those  of  the  alkali  metals.  How-
ever, these  salts  may  be  obtained  by^double  decomposition.  Ammonia  in  reacting  on
carbon  bisulphide  gives,  besides  products  like  those  fonned  by  other  alkalis,  a  whole

SULPHUB.  BELENIVM",  AND  TBLLURIliM  268

I  A  remarkuble  example  "  *'»  of  the  thio- coin pou ads  is  found  in  th  lo-
e.  cyanic  acid  in  which  the  oxygen  is  replaced  by
sulphur,  HCNS.  We  know  (Chapter  IX.)  that  with  oxygen  the
cyaiiidea  of  the  tilkaline  metals  RCN  give  cyanates  RCNO  ;  but  they

eerie«  of  protliuU  o[  h«  aomiiloiL  t.  structnre  as  those  si
Ihe  HctiOD  of  carbonic  uihyilride  on  uninuniik  lu  tLi
loraiation  o\  tUe  aDuDoaiiim  carbaiuLtoH,  tmd  s&w  tl
oj&nideii.  It  in  not  snrpruing  after  tluB  that  Ihu  action  of  carbou  bisulphide  □□
ammoiiia  uot  only  produces  the  above-menlioned  wltB,  liut  also  amidic  oompoundH
corretponding  with  them,  in  whicli  the  oiygen  is  whollj  or  partiaUy  replooed  by  Bulpliur.
Thn*  amuumiuiD  dilUiocarbsnmte  in  very  easily  obtaioed  il  cii.rbonblKii]i>Lidebeadded  ti>
Ml  «]eoliolia  Kilutiou  ol  ammotiia,  and  the  miiitnre  cooled  in  n  closed  vhabvI.  The  soil
then  separates  out  iu  minate  yellow  crystals,  C^gHeSj.

Carbon  bisiilpfaide  not  only  (onnB  oompoiuids  irith  the  metfdlic  lulphidea,  but  also
with  Hulphnrettod  hydrogan— that  is,  it  fonns  Ihhcarbonh  ai-iJ,  HjCS,.  Thin  in
obtaiineil  by  carcfoUif  mixing  solotions  of  thiocarboiiotos  with  dilute  hjdroohiorio  sold,
It  then  iie]nmtes  in  an  oily  layer,  which  easily  deoumpOHes  in  the  presence  of  water  into
■alpburetled  hydrogen  and  carbon  biHulphide,  just  h  Clie  eorreiiponding  carbomc  uid
(hydrate)  decomposes  into  water  uid  oarbonio  anhydride.  Carbon  bisulphide  combines
not  only  with  sodium  sniphide,  but  also  with  the  bisulphide.  NOgS],  not,  bowever,  with
the  trisiilphide,  Ni-jS,.

The  relation  of  carbon  bisulphide  to  the  otl;er  ciu-bon  compounds  preseats  nuny
most  interesting  features  which  are  i«nsidered  in  organic  cliemiatry.  We  will  here
only  turn  oar  attention  to  one  of  the  compounds  ol  thiHClasB,  EthylguIphide,(C,I{i)!tS,
combines  with  ethyl  iodide,  C,H^,  forming  it  nvw  molecule,  StC,U,)3:.  It  we  desig-
nate the  hydrocarbon  groap,  fur  instance  ebhyl,  C,H,,  by  Et,  the  reaction  would  be
eiprossed  hy  the  following  equation  :  Eb,8-l-BtI  =  SE[3l.  This  oomponud  is  uf  a  saline
cliaracter,  corresponds  with  salts  ol  (he  alkalis,  and  is  closely  aiialogoun  to  ammonium
chloride-  II  is  solable  iu  water;  when  heat^  it  again  splits  up  into  its  componeutF
EtI  and  Et]S.  and  with  silver  hydroxide  gives  a  hydioiide,  EtjS'OH,  baring  the
property  of  a  distinct  and  energetic  alkali,  resembling  caostic  ammonia.  Thus  the
compound  group  SEtj  combines,  like  potassium  or  ammoninui,  with  iodise,  hydroxy),
chlorine,  Ac.  The  hydroxide  SEtj'OH  is  soluble  in  water,  precipitates  metallic  salts,
salurates  acids,  &b.  Hence  sulphur  here  enters  into  a  relation  towards  other  elementit
(inulai  to  that  of  nitrogen  in  ammonia  and  ammonium  salts,  with  only  this  difference.
that  nitrogen  retains,  besides  iodine,  hydrozyl,  and  other  groups,  also  Hj  or  Et,  (for
example,  XH,CI,  NEtiRI,  NEt,I),  whilst  sulphur  only  retains  Ktj.  Compounds  of  the
formula  SHjX  ore  however  unknown,  only  llie  prodoets  of  snbititntion  SEtjX,  itc.  are
known.  The  distinctly  alkaline  properties  ol  the  hydroxide,  triethylsulphiiie  hydroxide,
SEtgOH,  and  also  the  sharply-defined  prnperties  of  the  corresponding  hydroxide,
tetraethylamniomnni  hydroxide,  NEt^OH.  depend  naturally  not  only  on  the  properties
ol  the  nitrogen  and  sntpbnr  entering  Into  their  composition,  but  also  on  the  laige  pro.
portion  of  hydrocarbon  gronpa  tliey  contain.  Judging  from  the  existence  of  the  ethyl-
ralphine  componnds,  it  might  be  inngined  that  sulphur  forms  a  compoand,  SH^  with
hydrogen  ;  bat  no  snch  compound  is  known,  jnst  as  XH^  is  unknown,  althougli  NH,C1

">>'■  Thorpe  and  Bodifer  (ISBU).  by  heatioK  amixtuie  o(  lead  HuoHde  and  phosphorua
pentasalphide  to  3^°  in  an  atmoriphere  of  dry  nitrogen,  obtained  gaseous  phoaphorux
fiuoKUphiilr,  or  Ihiophorphoryl  ftHoridr.  PSFs,  corresponding  with  FOCI].  Thih
eolourlete  gaa  is  converted  into  a  colDurless  liquid  by  a  pressure  of  eleven  atmospheres ;
it  does  not  arl.  on  dry  mercury,  and  likes  fire  spontaneously  in  air  or  oxygen,  forming
plios|ihoras  jiuntalluoride,  phospUoric  anhydride,  and  sulphorons  anhydride.  It  is
wlnble  in  ether,  but is  decomposed  by  water; PSFj-l-4H^^H,S-t-HxPO,  +  alIF

^^«1

264  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

also  combine  with  sulphur,  and  therefore  if  yellow  prussiate  of  potash
be  treated  as  in  the  preparation  of  potassium  cyanide,  and  sulphur  be
added  to  the  mass,  potassium  thiocyanate,  KNCS,  is  obtained  in
solution.  This  salt  is  much  more  stable  than  potassium  cyanate  ;  it
dissolves  without  change  in  water  and  alcohol,  forming  colourless
solutions  from  whi6h  it  easily  crystallises  on  evaporation.  It  may  be
kept  exposed  to  air  even  when  in  solution  ;  in  dissolving  in  water  it
absorbs  a  considerable  amount  of  heat,  and  forms  a  starting-point  for
the  preparation  of  all  the  thiocyanates,  RONS,  and  organic  compounds
in  which  the  metals  are  replaced  by  hydrocarbon  groups.  Such,  for
example,  is  volatile  mustard  oil,  C3H5CSN  (allyl  thiocyanate),^"*  which
gives  to  mustard  its  caustic  properties.  With  ferric  salts  the  thiocyanates
give  an  exceedingly  brilliant  red  coloration,  which  serves  for  detecting
the  smallest  traces  of  ferric  salts  in  solution.  Thiocyanic  acid,  HCNS,
may  be  obtained  by  a  method  of  double  decomposition,  by  distilling
potassium  thiocyanate  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid.  It  is  a  volatile
colourless  liquid,  having  a  smell  recalling  that  of  vinegar,  is  soluble  in
water,  and  may  be  kept  in  solution  without  change.^"*  ****

The  sulphur  compounds  of  chlorine  CI2  S  and  CI2S2  may  be  regarded
on  the  one  hand  as  products  of  the  metalepsis  of  the  sulphides  of
hydrogen,  H2S  and  H2S2 ;  and  on  the  other  hand  of  the  oxygen  com-
pounds of  chlorine,  because  chloride  of  sulphur,  CI2S,  resembles  chlorine
oxide,  CI2O,  whilst  CI2S2  corresponds  with  the  higher  oxide  of  chlorine  ;
or  thirdly,  we  may  see  in  these  compounds  the  type  of  the  acid  chloran-
hydrides,  because  they  are  all  decomposed  by  water,  forming  hydrochloric

'*  Although  mustard  oil  may  be  obtained  from  the  thiocyanates,  it  is  only  an  isomer
of  allyl  thiocyanate  proper,  as  is  explained  in  Organic  Cheniietry.

75 bu  Sulphur  can  only  replace  half  the  oxygen  in  COo,  as  is  seen  in  carbon  oxysttlphide,
or  monothiocarbonic  anhydride  COS.  This  substance  was  obtained  by  Than,  and  is
formed  in  many  reactions.  A  certain  amount  is  obtained  if  a  mixture  of  carbonic  oxide
and  the  vapour  of  sulphur  be  passed  through  a  red-hot  tube.  When  carbon  tetrachloride
is  heated  with  sulphurous  anhydride,  this  substance  is  also  fonned  ;  but  it  is  best  obtained
in  a  pure  form  by  decomposing  potassium  thiocyanate  with  a  mixture  of  equal  volumes
of  water  and  sulphuric  acid.  A  gas  is  then  evolved  containing  u  certain  amount  of
hydrocyanic  acid,  from  which  it  may  be  freed  by  passing  it  over  wool  containing
moistened  mercuric  oxide,  which  retains  the  hydrocyanic  acid.  The  reaction  is  expressed
by  the  equation:  2KCNS  +  2H2S04  +  2H..,0  =  K.S04+ (NH,).jS04-f 2COS.  It  is  also
formed  by  passing  the  vapour  of  carbon  bisuli)hide  over  alumina  or  clay  heated  to
redness  (Gautier;  silicon  sulphide  is  then  formed).  COS  is  also  formed  by  passing
phosgene  over  a  long  layer  of  asbestos  mixed  with  sodium  sulphide  at  270^  ;  CdS  +  COClj
=  CdCl,  +  COS  (NuricsiCn,  1892).  The  pure  gas  has  an  aromatic  odour,  is  soluble  in  an
equal  voliune  of  water,  which,  however,  acts  on  it,  so  that  it  must  be  collected  over
mercury.  When  slightly  heated,  carbon  oxysulphide  decomposes  into  sulphur  and
carbonic  oxide.  It  bums  in  air  with  a  pale  blue  flame,  explodes  with  oxygen,  and  yields
potassium  sulphide  and  carbonate  with  i>otassiuni  hydroxide:  COS  + 4KHO  =  K2C05
+  K^S  +  2H.2O.

8PLPHTTR, selenium:, AND  TELLUHTOH  266

acid,  and  sulphur  tetrachloride,  SGl^,  is  decomposed  with  the  formation
of  sulphurous  auhydride.^^

The  compounds  of  sulphur  with  chlorine  are  prepared  in  the
apparatus  depicted  in  tig.  'Jl.  As  sulphur  chloride  ia  decomposed  by
water,  the  chlorine  evolved  in  the  dask  C  must  be  dried  before  coming
into  contact  with  the  sulphur.  It  is  therefore  first  passed  thi-ough  a
Woulfe'a  bottle,  B,  containing  sulphuric  acid,  and  then  through  the
cylinder  D  containing  pumice  st^ine  moistened  with  sulphuric  acid,  and
then  led  into  the  retort  E,  in  which  the  sulphur  is  heated.  The  com-
pound which  is  formed  distils  over  into  the  receiver  R.  A  certain
amount  of  sulphur  passes  over  witli  the  sulphur  chloride,  but  it'  the
resultant  distillate  be  re-.satunite<I  with  chlurine  nnd  distilled  no  free

p|»tlJc  iKimpoiuiile

sulphur  remains,  the  boiling-point  riBes  to  144°,  and  pure  sulphur
chloride,  S^C!^  is  obtained.  It  has  this  formula  because  if«  vapour
density  referred  to  hydrogen  is  68.  It  ia  also  obtained  by  heating
certain  metallic  chlorides  (stannous,  tuercuric)  with  sulphur  ;  both  the

'"  There  is  no  reawii  for  seeing  nny  eontf ndictioii  or  mutual  iticoiDpatibility  in  Iheie
three  view,  becaaw  eiery  atmlogy  is  more  or  Ua»  mollified  by  a  ciinnge  of  elementB.
Thnii.  tor  instance,  it  cnunot  bo  expected  that  Ihe  product  of  the  niet«lepfli»  of  bjdrogen
Bolphide  KotUd  resemble  the  corrmponding  prodncta  of  water  in  nil  resjiecta,  beoBnae
watdT  h^B  not  the  Mid  proportiea  of  hydrogen  sulphide.  In  the  days  of  dualism  and
elBrtrroal  polarity  it  was  sopposod  that  Ihe  iinlphiir  varied  in  it«  nature:  in  hydragBn
BUlphide  or  potanaiom  anlphi'ie  il  was  eonaidered  to  be  negatJTe,  and  in  anlpliorona
anhydride  or  aulphnr  dieliloride  poBilire.  It  then  appeared  evident  that  eulphur
diohlorirle  would  have  no  point  Df  analogy  vith  polaadnm  SDlpbide.  Bat  nielalopaiB,  or
its  expression  in  the  law  of  substitution,  neceiutatea  sncli  0[HnionB  being  laid  aside.  II
we  ou  compare  CO.j,  CH„  CO,,  CHCI3,  CHj(OH|  with  each  other,  we  cannot  recognliw
any  difference  in  the  sulpUur  in  KH^,  SCLj,  SK^,  or  in  geneml  BX„  tor  ollierwiae  we

266  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

metal  and  chlorine  then  combine  with  the  sulphur.  Sulphur  chloride
is  a  yellowish- brown  liquid,  which  boils  at  144°,  and  has  a  speciGc  gra-
vity of  1  '70  at  0°.  It  fumes  strongly  in  the  air,  reacting  on  the  moisture
contained  therein,  and  has  a  heavy  chloranhydrous  odour.  It  dissolves
sulphur,  is  miscible  with  carbon  bisulphide,  and  falls  to  the  bottom  of  a
vessel  containing  water,  by  which  it  is  decomposed,  forming  sulphurous
anhydride  and  hydrochloric  acid  ;  but  it  6rst  forms  various  lower
stages  of  oxidation  of  sulphur,  because  the  addition  of  silver  nitrate  to
the  solution  gives  a  black  precipitate.  With  hydrogen  sulphide  it  gives
sulphur  and  hydrochloric  acid,  and  it  reacts  directly  with  metals —
especially  arsenic,  antimony,  and  tin — forming  sulphides  and  chlorides.
In  the  cold,  it  absorbs  chlorine  and  gives  sulphur  dichloridey  SCla-  The
entire  conversion  into  this  substance  requires  the  prolonged  passage  of
dry  chlorine  through  sulphur  chloride  surrounded  by  a  freezing  mixture.
The  distillation  of  the  dichloride  must  be  conducted  in  a  stream  of
chlorine,  as  otherwise  it  partially  decomposes  into  sulphur  chloride  and

should  have  to  acknowledge  as  many  different  states  of  sulphur,  carbon,  or  hydrogen
there  are  compounds  of  sulphur,  carbon,  or  hydrogen.  The  essential  truth  of  the  matter
is  that  all  the  elements  in  a  molecule  play  their  part  in  the  reactions  into  which  it  enters.
Often  this  appears  to  be  contradicted  in  the  result — for  example,  hydrogen  alone  may
be  replaced ;  but  it  is  not  this  hydrogen  alone  that  has  determined  the  reaction ;  all
the  elements  present  have  participated  in  it.  This  may  be  made  clearer  by  the
following  rough  illustration.  Supposing  two  regiments  of  soldiers  were  fighting  against
each  other,  and  that  several  men  were  lost  by  one  of  the  regiments  ;  no  one  could  say  that
it  was  only  these  men  who  took  part  in  the  engagement.  The  other  men  fired  and  the
bullets  flew  over  the  heads  of  their  opponents.  It  was  not  only  those  who  fell  who
fought,  although  they  only  were  removed  from  the  field  of  battle  ;  the  fighting  proceeded
among  the  masses,  but  only  those  few  were  disabled  who  went  forward  and  were  more
conspicuous  &c. ;  not  that  the  remainder  did  not  take  part  in  the  action ;  they  also
fought  and  were  an  object  of  attack,  only  they  remained  sound  and  unhurt.  Hydrc^en
is  lighter  than  other  elements  and  its  atoms  more  mobile ;  it  subjects  itself  more  frequently
and  easily  to  reactions  ;  but  it  is  not  it  alone  which  reacts,  it  is  even  less  liable  to  attack
than  other  elements.  It  participates  in  exceedingly  diverse  reactions,  not  indeed  because
the  hydrogen  itself  varies,  but  because  one  atom  of  it  puts  itself  forward,  another  is
hidden,  one  is  united  with  carbon,  another  feebly  held  by  sulphur,  one  stands  or  moves
in  the  neighbourhood  of  oxygen,  another  is  joined  to  a  hydrocarbon.  All  hydrogen  atoms
are  equal,  and  equally  serve  as  an  object  of  attack  for  the  atoms  of  molecules  encountering
them,  but  those  only  are  removed  from  the  sphere  of  jvction  which  are  nearer  the  surface  of
a  molecule,  which  are  more  mobile,  or  held  by  a  less  sum  of  forces.  So  also  sulphur  is
one  and  the  same  in  sulphur  dichloride,  in  sulphurous  or  sulphuric  anhydride,  in
hydrogen  sulphide,  in  potassium  sulphide,  but  it  reacts  differently,  and  those  elements
which  are  with  it  also  vary  in  their  reactions  because  they  are  with  it,  and  it  varies  its
reactions  because  it  is  with  them.  It  is  possible  to  seize  on  a  character  common  to
substances  quantitatively  and  qualitatively  analogous  to  each  other.  It  may  be  admitted
that  an  element  in  certain  forms  is  not  able  to  enter  into  reactions  into  which  in  other
forms  it  enters  willingly,  if  only  the  requisite  conditions  are  encountered ;  but  it  must
not  therefore  be  concluded  that  an  element  changes  its  essential  quality  in  these
different  cases.  The  preceding  remarks  touch  on  questions  which  are  subject  to  much
argument  among  chemists,  and  I  mention  them  here  in  order  to  show  the  treatment  of
those  most  imin)rtiint  problems  of  chemistry  which  lie  at  the  basis  of  this  treatise.

8ULPHUB,  SELENIUM, AMD  TlLLtTRIUM  267

hlorine.  Pure  sulphur  dichloride  is  a.  reddish -brown  liquid,  wliich
lembles  the  lower  chloride  in  many  respects  ;  its  specific  gravity  is
2  ;  its  odour  is  more  suffocating  than  that  of  sulphur  chloride  ;  it
elatilises  at  64°."

Thioni/I  chloride,  SOCIj,  may  be  regarded  as  oxidised  sulphur
ihloride  ;  it  corresponds  with  sulphur  chloride,  SjCl^,  in  which  one
a  of  sulphur  is  replaced  by  oxygen.  At  the  same  time  it  is  chlorine
s  (hypochlorouB  anliydride,  CljO)  combined  with  sulphur,  and  also
e  chloranhydride  of  sulphurous  a.cid— that  is,  SO(HO)j,  in  which  the
a  hydroxy!  groups  are  replaced  by  two  atoms  of  chloune,  or  Mulphu*
IS  anhydride,  80^,  in  which  one  atoni  of  oxygen  is  replaced  by  two
atoms  of  chlorine.  All  these  representations  are  confirmed  by  reactions
of  formation,  or  decompo.oition8  ;  they  all  agree  with  our  notions  of  the
other  compounds  of  sulphur,  oxygen,  and  chlorine  ;  hence  these  defini-
tions are  not  contradictory  to  each  other.  Thus,  for  instance,  thionyl
chloride  was  first  obtained  by  Schiff,  by  the  action  of  dry  sulphurous
anhydride  on  phosphorus  pentachlonde.  On  distilling  the  resultant
liquid,  thionyl  chloride  comes  over  first  at  80°,  and  on  continuing
the  distillation  phosphorus  oxychloride  distils  over  at  above  1 00°,
PCl.:i-i-S0,=Pl)Cl3-l-SI»Cl.i.  This  mode  of  preparation  is  direct  evi-
dence of  the  oxychloride  character  of  SOClj.  Wiirtz  obtained  the  same
substance  by  passing  a  stream  of  chlorine  oxide  through  a  cold  solution
of  sulphur  in  sulphur  chloride  ;  the  chlorine  oxide  then  combined  directly
with  the  sulphur,  S  i-  CljO=SOCla,  whilst  the  sulphur  chloride  remained
unchanged  (sulphur  cannot  be  combined  directly  with  chlorine  oxide,  as
an  explosion  takes  place).  Thionyl  chloride  is  a  colourless  liquid,  with
asufibcating  acrid  smell ;  it  has  a  specific  gravity  atO°of  1*675,  and  boils

"  The  Dbaerv^  v
and  Umt  giveu  by  tlie
point  being  lower  th*

luubity  of  suljjhar  dirliloride  teleired  to  hifdrogen  ia  GS'S,
t  is  GIB.  The  smaller  molecuUr  neight  eiplaiiis  iU  boiling
□f  aulphiu  clilorlde,  S/;ij.  The  reBctions  of  both  these
.  dolphuT  converts  the  dichloride,  8C1»  into  the  mano-
eliloride,  S^Ctj.  In  one  point  the  diohloride  diffen  distlDCtlj'  tram  the  monochloride —
that  is,  in  it«  cspiujity  for  essil)'  giving  up  chlorine  and  decomposing.  Even  light  de^
composes  it  into  chlorine  and  the  monochloride.  Hence  it  ttcls  on  many  sabstancm  in
the  uuue  manner  m  chlorine,  or  sahstancei  which  easily  part  with  the  liilt^r,  sDch  as
phosphoric  or  antimonio  ahloride.  In  distincliun  to  thew,  however,  sulphnr  dichloride
•muld  appenr  lo  distil  without  any  considerable  decomposition,  judging  by  the  vapour
deiiaity.  But  thin  is  not  a  vklid  conclneioii,  tor  if  there  be  a  decompoBitioo,  then
1SCL,^S^1,-I-CL!:  now  the  density  of  salphDr  chloride^ OTG,  and  of  chlorine -SSG,
and  consequently  a  mixture  of  equal  volumes  of  the  two  =  fil'6,  just  the  same  as  an
equal  volume  of  sulphur  dichloride.  Thfre/ore  the  liinlillalion  of  tulpkur  diehlaride
it  prohably  nolhing  but  its  drrompotifion.  Hence  the  compound  SClj,  which  is  stable
at  the  ordinary  temperature,  decumposps  at  61".  lu  the  cold  it  absorbs  a  further  amouut
of  chlorine,  corresponding  to  f^Cl,,  bat  even  at  -  10°  a  portion  of  the  absorbed  chlorine
is  given  o9— thai  is,  disitociation  takes  placs.  Thai  the  tetrachloride  is  even  less  sUbte
tluiu  Uie  dichloride.

268  PEI>XIPLE.S  OF  CHE3tlSTBr

at  7H'\  It  sinks  in  vater,  by  vhich  it  is  immedijitely  decomposed,  like
all  crhlccanhvdiidies — for  example,  like  carbon jl  chknide,  which  corre-
Kpondh  with  it  :  ??OClj  +  H/J=.SO,+2HCL~«^

Normal  trulphurur  wcid  has  two  c€frrt*jMimd\ng  Morank}fdride»  ;  the
finst,  HO^OH/Jl,  Ls  sulphuric  acid,  SCy  HO),,  in  which  one  equivalent
of  Wy  U  replaced  by  chlorine  ;  the  second  has  the  compoaiticm  SO^d^ —
that  is,  two  HO  groups  are  substituted  by  two  of  <^ilorine.  The  second
chloran hydride,  or  the  compound  SO^Cl^  is  called  sulphury!  chloride,
and  the  firut  chloranhydride,  SO^HOCl,  may  be  called  chloroeolphonic
acid,  l>ecaui^  it  is  really  an  acid ;  it  stUl  retains  one  hydroxyl  of  sul-
phuric acid,  and  its  corresponding  salts  are  known.  Thus,  potassium
chloride  absorbs  the  vapour  of  sulphuric  anhydride,  f<»ining  a  salt,
H(^>;jKCl,  cr^rresponding  with  8O3HCI  as  acid.  In  acting  on  sodium
r'hloride  it  forms  hydrochloric  acid  and  the  salt  NaSOjCL  This  first
chloranhydride  of  sulphuric  acid,  SOjHOCl,  discovered  by  Williamson,
is  obtained  either  by  the  action  of  phosphorus  pentachloride  on  sulphuric
tuM  (PCl.,-fH.,S04=P<X:Jl3-f  HCl  +  H»S03Cl),or  directly  by  the  action
of  dry  hydrochloric  acid  on  sulphuric  anhydride,  S03  +  HC1=HS03C1.
Tlie  uiOHt  easy  and  rapid  method  of  its  formation  is  by  direct  saturation
of  cjold  Nordhauwen  acid  with  dry  hydrochloric  acid  ga8(S03+HCl
sifHO^CI),  and  distillation  of  the  resultant  solution;  the  distillate
thon  (jonUiins  HS0;,C1.  It  is  a  colourless  fuming  liquid,  having  an  acrid
odour  ;  it  boils  at  153°  (according  to  my  determination,  confirmed  by
Konoviiloff),  and  its  specific  gravity  at  19°  is  1-776.  It  is  immediately
<l<H'Oin|)OHO(l  by  water,  forming  hydrochloric  and  sulphuric  acids,  as
Mhouid  \)r  l]u*  caso  with  a  true  chloranhydride.  In  the  reactions  of
lliJH  cliloninliyilride  wo  find  the  easiest  means  of  introducing  the
Mul|>lioni(f{i()Uj)  HSOy  into  other  compounds,  because  it  is  here  combined
with  chinrino.  The  second  chloranhydride  of  sulphuric  acid,  or  »ulphuryl
f*hlori(h\  SO.^CI.^,  was  obtained  by  Regnault  by  the  direct  action  of  the
sun's  ray  on  a  mixture  of  equal  volumes  of  chlorine  and  sulphurous
oxiil(».  Tht»  ^as(»s  j^nvilually  condense  into  a  liquid,  combining  together
as  carbonic  oxide  tloes  with  chlorine.  It  is  also  obtained  when  a  mix-
tun»  i)f  the  two  ^a8t»s  in  acetic  acid  is  allowed  to  stand  for  some  time.
The  lirst  chloranhydride,  S().,H(^1,  decomposes  when  heated  at  200°  in
a  clos(»d  tube  into  sulphuric  acid  and  sulphuryl  chloride.  It  boils  at
70  ,  its  spccitic  ^'nivity  is  1*7,  it  j»ives  hydrochloric  and  sulphuric  acids
with  water,  fumes  in  tlie  air,  and,  judging  by  its  vapour  density,  does
not  decompiKso  when  ilistilled."'*

■■ '*'  llail.»j«  \\\u\  Sims  ilSlKU  ohtrtimul  thionyl  l»roniule.  SOBr^  by  treating  SOClj
\\\\\\  mhIuuh  luouMilo  ; it  i**  tt  hmI  li*iui»l,  sp.  jir.  'JtVi.  aiul  tioooniiH»«ie>i  at  150\

=  "  P\»osuli»lun>i  ihloriilo,  S.^VI...  S»v  Noto  44.  ThoqH'  ami  Kirman,  by  tr««tiiig
S\V,  ^^><1»  in\obt;uniHl  SO;vOH»l'\  rt«  rt  liquiil  K»iling  at  ltU5  ,biit  which  dtH.*oinpo8ed  with
litvuti'*  <a»Ml>l>  ami  th«'»  >:rtVo  SlV^.K,.

SULPHUR, SELBNUriK, AND  TELLURIUM  269

^  In  the  group  of  tlie  halogens  we  saw  four  closely  analogous  elenR'nts
*  "fluorine,  chlorine,  hromiiie,  i»ud  iodine- — and  we  meet  with  the  same
numl^er  of  closely  allied  analogues  in  the  oxygen  group  ;  for  Iiesides

The  acids  ot  Hulpbor  iiHturolly  hnve  their  ■.-nrre-.ponilmK  ntntnoniuiu  aniu,  und  the
Utter  their  unideo  and  nitriles.  It  will  be  reiidiij  aniterHtDod  how  vaHt  a  field  far
reeearcb  ta  presented  by  the  Heriefi  ot  caiiip<iund»  ot  sulphar  uai  nitrogen,  if  we  onlj'  re
memliar  tliat  In  cuboaiv  &nd  romtic  itctdii  there  correiipoiidx,  as  we  uw  jChapter  IX.),  a

Uiure  correspond  two  amiDoniDm  Baits,  SagtHOIINH^O)  and  80](NH,0)3;  tlinw
smides:  the  acid  iiniidii  SO,(HO)(NH.j),  or  fmlphouuD  luid,  the  uonn&]  saliue  compouud
8OriNH,0)(N(l,),  or  Bminoniniu  wilphwniite,  BJid  Ihe  norrod  amide  SO^NH.j),,  or  Hul-
phunide  (the  annlogae  of  ure«;;  then  the  itcid  nitrile,  80N(H0),  uid  two  neutral
nilriles.  SON[NHj)  uid  8N5.  Tbero  MB  similar  componnda  corronponding  witli  sul-
phnroas  iteid,  and  therefore  its  nitrileii  will  be,  lUi  sciil.  iiN<BO),  its  natt,  and  the  normal
oompound,  SN(NH.,).  Ditbiouip  and  the  other  acids  oFuulphar  should  bJho  have  their
Eorresponding  unidea  and  Ditrilss.  On3y  a  few  eiamplea  are  known,  which  ne  will
briefly  deucribe.  Sulphuric  acid  forms  sslta  of  I'ery  great  alability  with  ammoaia,  and
ammonium  Hutptist«  is  one  ot  the  eommnneat  anunoniacal  aompounda.  It  is  obtnined
by  the  direct  action  ot  nmmonia  on  snlphoric:  acid,  or  by  the  action  ot  the  latter  on
ammonium  eorboiuite ;  it  aeporatea  tram  its  aotutiona  in  an  anbydrons  state,  like
polaSHUm  sulphate,  with  which  it  ja  iaomarphous.  Hence,  the  composition  at  crjstaU
otammoninm  snlpfaate  in  (FIB,).,aO,.  This  salt  fuses  at  140°,  and  does  not  undergo
any  change  when  heated  up  to  IBO",  At  higher  temperatures  it  does  not  lose  water,  bat
parts  with  hall  its  ammonia,  and  ia  converted  into  the  acid  salt,  HNU,SO, ;  and  this
acid  salt,  on  further  heating,  nadergoea  a  Further  decomposition,  and  splits  up  into
nitrogen,  water,  and  acid  ammouinm  sulphite,  HNHgSO].  At  the  ordinary  temperature
Lbe  normal  salt  ia  aolnble  intwii.'e  its  weight  of  water  and  at  the  boiling-point  of  water  in
an  equal  weight.  In  its  faculty  tor  combinations  this  salt  exhibits  a  great  reeemblance
In  potassiimi  solphate,  and,  like  it,  easily  forms  a  number  of  double  salta;  the  most
remarkable  nf  whieh  are  the  ammoiua  alums,  NH,AIB,0„]aH,0,  and  the  double  salts
formed  by  the  metals  of  the  maguesinm  gronp,  having,  for  example,  the  oompooitian
(NH,),Mga,Og,eH,0.  Anunoninm  sulphate  does  not  give  an  amide  when  heated,
perhaps  owing  to  the  facalty  ot  lolphnric  anhydride  to  retain  the  water  combined  with
it  with  great  force,  Bnt  the  lunides  of  snlphoric  acid  may  be  yeiyconveniently  prepared
from  snlphnric  anhydride.  Their  formation  by  Ibis  method  is  rery  easily  nudersiood
because  an  unide  is  equal  to  an  ammonium  salt  less  water,  and  it  the  anhydride  be
taken  it  will  give  an  amide  directly  with  ammonia.  Thna,  if  dry  ammonia  be  paaaed  into
a  Teasel  sorrounded  by  a  freezing  miiture  and  nontaiuing  snlpburio  anhydride,  it  forms
a  white  powdery  mass  called  aulphatamuion.hav  log  the  oompoeition  80s,9H3N,  and  resem-
bling the  limilir  compound  ol  carbonic  aoid,  CO~,;aNHE.  This  substance  ia  naturally  lbe
anunoninm  salt  ot  sulpliamio  acid,  SO~(NH,0|MUt.  It  is  slowly  acted  on  by  water,  and
may  therefore  be  obtained  in  solution,  in  which  it  slowly  reacts  with  barium  chloride,
irbich  proves  that  with  water  it  still  forms  ammonium  sulphate.  If  thie  nuhetance  be
carefully  dissolved  in  water  and  evaporated,  it  yielda  well-formed  crystals,  whose  solutiou
no  longer  gives  a  precipitate  with  barium  chloride.  This  is  not  due  to  the  preaence
ot  imporilies,  bat  to  a  change  in  the  nature  0 1  the  substanoe,  and  therefore  Rose  calls
the  crystalline  modidcation  paniiulpltalairinwn.  Platinum  chloride  only  precipitates
half  the  nitrogen  an  platinochloride  from  eolutinna  of  sulphat-  and  parasnlphatammon,
which  shows  that  they  are  ammonium  salts,  SO,(NH,0)(NHil.  It  may  be  that  the
reaeon  ot  the  difference  in  the  two  modifications  ia  connected  with  the  tact  that  two
dilterent  aubalauces  of  the  composition  !},H|SOi  are  possible:  one  is  the  amide
SO^MU.j)^  corresponding  with  the  normal  aalt,  and  the  other  is  the  aalt  of  the  uitrile
acid  corresponding  with  aoid  anunoninm  snlphate—that  is,  SONfONH,)  corresponde
b  (be  acid  aON(OH)^SO~(NH,0)OH-aEjO. Hence  there  may  here  b«  a  dUterence

270  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

sulphur  this  group  also  includes  selenium  and  tellurium  :  O,  S,  Se,  Te.
These  two  groups  are  very  closely  allied,  both  in  respect  to  the  mag-

of  the  same  nature  as  between  urea  and  ammonium  cyanate.  Up  to  the  present,  the
isomerism  indicated  above  has  been  but  little  investigated,  and  might  be  the  subject  of
interesting  researches.

If  in  the  preceding  experiment  the  anmionia,  and  not  the  sulphuric  anhydride,  be
taken  in  excess,  a  soluble  substance  of  the  composition  SSO^jSNHj  is  formed.  This
compound,  obtained  by  Jacqueline  and  investigated  by  Voronin,  doubtless  also  contains
a  salt  of  sulphamic  acid — that  is,  of  the  amide  corresponding  with  tho  acid  ammonium
sulphate  =  HNH4S04-H20  =  (NH.i)S02(OH).  Probably  it  is  a  compound  of  sulphatam-
mon  with  sulphamic  acid.  Thus  it  has  an  acid  reaction,  and  does  not  give  a  precipitate
with  barium  chloride.

With  normal  sulphate  of  ammonium,  an  amide  of  the  composition  N2H4SO2  should
correspond,  which  should  bear  the  same  relation  to  sulphuric  acid  as  urea  bears  to  car-
bonic acid.  This  amide,  known  as  sulphamide,  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  dry  ammonia
on  the  sulphuryl  chloride,  SO^Cl^,  just  as  urea  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  ammonia  on
carbonyl  chloride,  S02Cl^  +  4NH5  =  N.2H4S02-f2NH4Cl.  The  ammonium  chloride  is
separated  from  the  resultant  sulphamide  with  great  difficulty.  Cold  water,  acting  on  the
mixture,  dissolves  them  both ;  the  cold  solution  does  not  give  a  precipitate  with  barium
chloride.  Alkalis  act  on  it  slowly,  as  they  do  on  urea ;  but  on  boiling,  especially  in  the
presence  of  alkalis  or  acids,  it  easily  re-combines  with  water,  and  gives  an  anmioninm
salt.  V.  Traube  (1892)  obtained  sulphamide  by  the  reaction  of  sulphuryl,  dissolved  in
cliloroform,  upon  ammonia.  The  resultant  precipitate  dissolves  when  shaken  up  with
water,  and  the  solution  (after  boiling  with  the  oxides  of  lead  or  silver)  is  evaporated,
when  a  syrupy  liquid  remains.  With  nitrate  of  silver  the  latter  gives  a  solid  compound,
which,  when  decomposed  by  hydrochloric  acid,  gives  free  sulphamide  in  large  coloorleee
crystals,  having  the  composition  S02(NH2)2-  This  substance  fuses  at  81°,  begins  to
decompose  below  100°,  and  is  entirely  decomposed  above  250° ;  it  is  soluble  in  water,
and  the  solution  has  a  neutral  reaction  and  bitter  taste.  When  heated  with  acids,
sulphamide  gradually  decomposes,  forming  sulphuric  acid  and  ammonia.  If  the  silver
compound  obtained  by  the  action  of  sulphamide  on  nitrate  of  silver  be  heated  at  170°-180°
until  ammonia  is  no  longer  evolved,  and  the  residue  be  extracted  with  water  acidulated
with  nitric  acid,  a  salt  separates  out  from  the  solution,  answering  in  its  composition  to
sulphamide,  SOaNAg,  which  =  the  amide  -NH-- S02N2H4-NH3=S02NH.  The  action
of  sulphuryl  chloride  (and  of  the  other  chloranhydrides  of  sulphur)  on  ammonium  car-
bonate always,  as  Mente  showed  (1888),  results  in  the  formation  of  the  salt  NH(S05NH4)2.

The  nitriles  corresponding  with  sulphuric  acid  are  not  as  yet  known  with  any  cer-
tainty. The  most  simple  nitrile  corresponding  with  sulphuric  acid  should  have  the
composition  NoHgSOi  4H2O  -  N.^S.  This  would  be  a  kind  of  cyanogen  corresponding
with  sulphnric  acid.  On  comparing  sulphurous  acid  with  carbonic  tvcid,  w^e  saw  that
they  present  a  great  iinalogy  in  many  respects,  and  therefore  it  might  be  expected  that
nitrile  compounds  having  the  coniiwsition  NHS  and  N.^.S^  would  be  found.  The
latter  of  these  compounds  is  well  known,  and  was  obtained  by  Soubeiron,  by  the  action
<»f  dry  ammonia  on  sulphur  chloride.  Tliis  substance  corresponds  with  cyanogen
(paracyanogen),  and  is  known  as  nitrogen  sulphide,  N.^S.,,.  It  is  formed  according  to
the  equation  3SCI2  *  HNH.-  N..,S,+ S^  6NH,C1.  The  free  sulphur  and  nitrogen  sul-
phide are  dissolved  by  acting  on  the  product  with  carbon  bisulphide,  the  nitrogen
sulphide  beinj;  much  less  soluble  than  the  sulphur.  It  is  a  yellow  substance,  which  is
excessively  irritating  to  the  eyes  and  nostrils.  It  explodes  when  rubbed  with  a  hard
substance,  being  naturally  decomposed  with  the  evolution  of  nitrogen  ;  but  when  heated
it  fuses  without  decomposing,  and  only  decomposes  with  explosion  at  157°.  It  is
insolul>le  in  water,  and  only  slightly  so  in  alcohol,  ether,  and  carbon  bisulphide  ;  100  parts
of  the  latter  dissolve  15  part  of  nitrogen  sulphide  at  the  boiling  i)oint.  Tliis  solution
on  cooling  deposits  it  in  minute  transparent  prisms  of  a  golden  yellow  colour.

SULPHUR.  SBLESIUM. AND  TBLLURIUM  271

uitudea  of  their  atomic  weighta  and  aUo  iii  the  faculty  of  the  elt^menta
of  Iwth  groups  for  combining  with  metals.  The  distinct  analojiy  aud
detinite  degree  of.  variance  known  to  ua  for  the  halogens,  also  repeat
th«mselve8  in  the  same  degree  for  the  elemeota  of  the  oxygen  group.
Amongst  the  halogens  fluorine  has  many  peculiarities  compared  to
CI,  Br  and  I  which  are  more  closely  analogous,  whilst  oxygen  differs  in
many  respecta  from  S,  Se,  Te,  which  possess  greater  similarities.  The
analogy  in  a  quantitative  respect  is  perfect  in  both  cases.  Thus  the
halogens  combine  with  H,  and  the  elements  of  the  oxygen  group  with
H,,  forming  HjO,  H^S,  H^Se,  HjTe,  The  hydrogen  compounds  of
selenium  and  tellurium  are  acids  like  hydrogen  sulphide.  Selenium,
1<y  simple  heating  in  a  sti-eam  of  hydrogen,  partially  combines  with  it
directly,  hut  seleniuretted  hydrogen  is  more  readily  decomposable  by
heat  than  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  and  this  property  is  still  more
developed  in  tellurett«d  hydrogen.  Hydrogen  seleuide  and  telluride
are  gases  like  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  and,  like  it,  are  soluble  in  water,
form  saline  compounds  with  alkalis,  precipitate  metallic  salts,  are
obtained  by  the  action  of  acids  im  their  compounds  with  metals,  &c.
Selenium  and  tellurium,  like  sulphur,  give  two  noi-mal  grades  of  com-
bination with  oxygen,  both  of  an  acid  character,  of  which  only  the
forms  corresponding  to  sulphurous  anhydride  ^namely,  selenious  an-
hydride, SeO„  and  tellurous  anhydride,  TeO^''' — are  formed  directly,

"  ffelonwui  anhi/driiU,  SeOj,  in  a  volalDe  aoliil,  wliicli  nrj-BtsllineB  in  prienw  Bolnble
in  Wkter.  It  is  bout  pnicure^  by  tbu  iwtinD  of  nitric  uid  on  Belrniam.  The  well-known
rewaiDhes  o(  Nileon  (187*)  ahnweil  that  the  uUta  ol  Bulcnious  iwid  ouilj  form  acid  wlti,
uid  UTS  90  ubBiartBri«tic  ill  uuiny  reiipectB  Ihsl  tbcy  may  pvpn  len-e  tor  judging  the
aniloKy  of  typN  of  otides.  Thns  the  oxidrs  of  the  compOBition  RO  give  nonnal  salts
of(he«imp(witionRSe03,SH,0,whereR^  Mn,  Co,  Ni,  Cu,  Zn.  TluiultiialinaEneBiain,
buinu.  and  culfinm  contaiD  a  different  quantity  ol  miter,  as  do  kIso  the  nails  ot  the
oiidea  RjO,.  We  here  tam  attention  to  the  inct  Ihat  beryllium  gives  a  normal  Mlt,
Be3e0^aH30,and  natasaltanalogonstothoH!  of  alnmininm.  ACi>udmni.9e,(Se03),,H,0,
yttriom,  Y^fSeOjIi.lSHjO,  and  other  oxides  of  tbe  form  JLjO,,  which  speaks  in  fnronr  ol
the  foimnla  B«0,

TeHarioua  aniit/dride  is  also  a  colourless  solid,  which  crystallises  in  octahedra;  it  also,
when  heal«d,  first  fnaes  uid  then  volalilisea.  It  is  inso1abli>  in  nnlt-r,  and  the  ilecompo-
aition  of  itE  salts  gives  a  hydrate,  HjTeOj,  which  is  inaolulile.

It  is  a  very  characteriatia  circumstance  that  selenions  and  lellurona  anhydrides
are  rary  easily  reducrd  to  aeloninm  and  Iclliiriani.  This  IB  not  only  effected  by  melaln
like  HOC,  or  by  snlphnretted  hydrogen,  which  are  powerful  deojiJiBers,  but  rven  by  aul-
phaKrOs  anhydride,  which  is  able  to  precipitate  selenium  and  tellarium  from  solutionK
uTtbo  solenites  and  teltnritea,  and  even  of  the  ncids  themselTes,  which  is  tskeu  advantage
of  in  obtaining  these  elements  and  separating  them  (mm  sulphur,

Solphunc  acid.  SB  we  know,  rarely  acts  as  an  oiidi«ng  agent.  It  is  otherwise  with
■elenic  and  tellnric  acids,  H^SeO^  and  S^TeOt,.  which  are  powerful  oiidising  agents— thai
is,  ore  easily  reduced  in  many  cirDumilance*  either  into  the  lower  oiide  or  ev«n  to  selenium
lUiil  telliiTium. A  powerfal  oxidising  agent  is  required  in  order  to  oonverl  selenioas  and

272  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

These  are  both  solids,  obtained  by  the  combustion  of  the  elements
themselves  and  by  the  action  of  oxidising  agents  on  them.  They  form
feebly  energetic  acids,  having  distinct  bibasic  properties  ;  however,  a
characteristic  diflference  from  SO.j  is  observable  both  in  the  physical
properties  of  these  compounds  and  in  their  stability  and  capacity  for
further  oxidation,  just  as  in  the  series  of  the  halogens  already  known  to
us,  only  in  an  inverse  order  ;  in  the  latter  we  saw  that  iodine  combines
more  easily  than  bromine  or  chlorine  with  oxygen,  forming  more  stable
oxygen  compounds,  whereas  here,  on  the  contrary,  sulphurous  anhydride,

tellorous  anhydrides  into  selenic  and  telluric  anhydrides,  and,  moreover,  it  must  be  em-
ployed in  excess.  If  chlorine  be  passed  through  a  solution  of  potassium  selenide,  E^Se,  tel-
luride,  K2Te,  selenite,  K^SeOj,  or  tellurite,  K<2Te03,  it  acts  as  an  oxidiser  in  the  presence  of
the  water,  forming  potassium  selenate,  K2Se04,  or  tellurate,  K  2X004. The  same  salts  are
formed  by  fusing  the  lower  oxides  with  nitre. These  salts  are  isomorphons  with  the
corresponding  sulphates,  and  cannot  therefore  be  separated  from  them  by  crystallisation.
The  salts  of  potassium,  sodium,  magnesium,  copper,  cadmium,  <S:c.  are  soluble  like  the
sulphates,  but  those  of  barium  and  calcium  are  insoluble,  in  perfect  analogy  with  the  sul-
phates. When  copper  selenate,  CuSe04,  is  treated  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen  (CaS
is  precipitated),  selenic  acid  remains  in  solution. On  evaporation  and  drying  in  vacuo
at  180°  it  gives  a  syrupy  liquid,  which  may  be  concentrated  to  almost  the  pure  acid,
H2Se04,  having  a  specific  gravity  of  2*6. Cameron  and  Macallan  (1891)  showed  that  pore
H2Se04  only  remains  liquid  in  a  state  of  superfusion  whilst  the  solidified  acid  melte  at
+  58°,  the  solid  acid  crystallises  well,  its  sp.  gr.  is  then  295. The  hydrate  H2Se04,H90
melts  at  +  25°. The  acid  in  a  superf used  state  has  a  sp.  gr.  2*86  and  the  solid  2*68.
Like  sulphuric  acid  strong  selenic  acid  attracts  moisture  from  the  atmosphere ;  it  is  not
decomposed by  sulphurous acid,  but  oxidises  hydrochloric  acid  (like  nitric,  chronuc,
and  manganic  acids),  evolving  chlorine and forming selenious acid, H2Se04  +  2HCl
=  H^SeOj  +  H2O  +  CI2. Telluric  acid,  H.,Te04,  is  obtained  by  fusing  tellurous  anhydride
with  potassium  hydroxide  and  chlorate ;  the  solution,  containing  potassium  tellurate,
is  then  precipitated  with  barium  chloride,  and  the  barium  tellurate,  BaTe04  obtained
in  the  precipitate is decomposed by sulphuric acid. A  solution of telluric  acid
is  thus  obtained,  which  on  evaporation  yields  colourless  prisms,  soluble  in  water,  and
containing  TeH204,2H20. Two  equivalents  of  water  are  driven  off  at  160° ;  on  further
heating the last equivalent  of  water  is  expelled,  and  then  oxygen  is  given off. It
also  gives  chlorine  with  hydrochloric  acid,  like  selenic  acid. Its  salts  also  correspond
with  those  of  sulphuric  acid. It  must,  however,  be  remarked  that  telluric  and  selenic
acids  are  able  to  give  jwly-acid  salts  with  much  greater  ease  than  sulphuric  acid. Thus,
for  example,  there  are  known  for  telluric  acid  not  only  K2TeO|,5H20  and  KHTe04,3H20,
but  also  KHTe04,H2Te04,H20  =  K2TeO„8H.,TeO„2H20. This  salt  is  easily  obtained
from  acid  solutions  of  tlie  preceding  salts  and  is  less  soluble  in  water. As  selenioua  anhy-
dride is  volatile  and  gives  similar  poly-salts,  it  may  be  surmised  that  selenious,  tellorous,
selenic,  and  telluric  anhydrides  are  polymeric  as  compared  with  sulphurous  andsolphoric
anhydrides,  for  which  reason  it  would  be  desirable  to  determine  the  vapour  density  of
selenious  anhydride. It  would  probably  correspond  with  Se^O,  or  Se.-^Og.

In  order  to  show  the  very  close  analogy  of  selenium  to  sulphur,  I  will  quote  two
examples.  Potassium  cyanide  dissolves  selenium,  as  it  does  sulphur,  forming  potassium
selenocyanate,  KCNSe,  corresponding  with  potassium  thiocyanate.  Acids  precipitate
selenium  from  this  solution,  because  selenocyanic  aoid,  HjCNSe,  when  in  a  free  state  is
immediately  decomposed.  A  boiling  solution  of  sodium  suljihite  dissolves  selenium,
just  as  it  would  sulphur,  forming  a  salt  analogous  to  thiosulphate  of  sodium,  namely,
sodium  selenosulphate,  Na^SSeO^.  Selenium  is  separated  from  a  solution  of  this  salt  by
the  action  of  acid.

SULPHUR.  SELENIUM.  AND  TELLOBIUM

as  we  know,  is  Jiffioultly  decomposed,  parts  with  its  sulphur  witli
diliii-ulty,  and  is  easily  oxidianl  and  especially  in  its  salts,  wliiie
selenious  and  tellurous  iiiihydrides  are  oxidised  with  difficulty  and
easily  reducpd,  even  by  means  of  sulph-untus  acid.

Selenium  was  otitained  in  1S17  bj  Beraelius  from  the  sublimate
which  collects  in  the  first  chamber  in  the  preparatioti  of  sulphuric
acid  from  Fahlun  pyrites.  Certain  other  pyrites  also  contain  small
quantities  of  selenium.  Some  native  selenldes,  especially  those  of  lead,
mercuiy,  and  copper,  have  been  found  in  ibe  Hartz  Mountains,  but
only  in  small  quantities.  Fyritos  and  blendes,  in  which  the  sulphur
is  partially  replaced  by  selenium,  still  remain  the  chief  source  for  ita
extraction.  When  these  pyrites  are  roasted  they  evolve  aeleuious
anhydride,  which  condenses  in  the  cooler  portions  of  the  apparatus  in
which  the  pyrites  ai'e  roasted,  and  is  partially  i>r  wholly  reduced  by
the  sulphurous  anhydride  simultaneously  formed.  The  presence  of
selenium  in  ores  and  sublimates  is  most  simply  tested  by  heating  them
before  the  blowpipe,  when  they  evolve  the  characteristic  odour  of  garlic.
Selenium  exhibits  two  nioiliticationa,  like  sulphur  :  one  amorphous
and  insoluble  in  carbon  bisulphide,  the  other  crystalline  and  slightly
soluble  in  carbon  bisulphide  (in  1 ,000  parts  at  18°  and  6,000  at  0°),  and
separating  from  its  solutions  in  mnnoclinic  prisms.  If  tiie  red  preci-
pitate obtained  by  the  action  of  sulphurous  anhydride  on  selenious
anhydride  bo  dried,  it  gives  a  brown  ptiwder,  having  a  specific  gravity
of  4'ii6,  which  when  heated  changes  colour  and  fuses  to  a  metallic
mass,  which  gains  lustre  as  it  cools.  The  selenium  acquires  different
properties  according  to  the  rate  at  which  it  is  cooled  from  a  fused
state  :  if  rapidly  cooled,  it  remains  amorphous  and  has  the  same  specific
gravity  (4'28)  as  the  powder,  but  if  slowly  cooled  it  becomes  cryatnl-
line  and  opaque,  soluble  iu  carbon  bisulphide,  and  has  a  specific  gravity
of  4'BO.  In  this  form  it  fuses  at  214°  and  remains  unchanged,  whilst
the  amoi-phous  form,  especially  above  t'O",  gradually  passes  into  the
crystalline  variety.  The  transition  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution
of  heat,  as  iu  the  case  of  sulphur  :  thus  the  iinalogy  between  sulphur
and  selenium  is  clearly  shown  here.  In  the  fused  amorphous  form
selenium  presents  a  brown  mass,  slightly  translueent,  with  a  vitreous
fracture,  whilst  in  the  crystalline  form  it  has  the  apjjearance  of  a  grey
metal,  with  a  feeble  lustre  and  a  crystalline  fiTicture."  *'' tSelenium

^t-iM  Mathmfln.  in  hii  roseal
|lsaD)  I.  ptcullu  inodifioaliou
vryBtalliiiH  and  iimotphoon  hIbi
by  BloHly  evapontint;  it  solutioi
the  urifBtallinB  Turie  ' '

leB  upon  tlie  allotropic  (onus  of  seleniam,  poiabed  oi
which  Kppcuv,  ou  it  were,  u  ■  UiAsition  betwn
im.  II  IB  obtEuned  togethrr  witbth«  oririttllino  vuHel
il  Beleninm  ia  biBolptudti  ol  cuImu,  and  diSen  fro:
ia  cryBUls;  it  pUBes  into  the  Uller  inuiIiGoal:

whwa  heated. Sohulti  tSaa  nbtaJned  selenium  (like  Ag.  ted  Chapter  XXIT.)  it]

274  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

boils  at  700°,  forming  a  vapour  whose  density  is  only  constant  at  a  tem-
perature of  about  1,400°,  when  it  is  equal  to  79*4  (referred  to  hydrogen)
— that  is,  the  molecular  formula  is  then  Se^,  like  sulphur  at  an  equally
high  temperature.

Tellurium  is  met  with  still  more  rarely  than  selenium  (it  is  known
in  Saxony)  in  combination  with  gold,  silver,  lead,  and  antimony  in
the  so-called  foliated  tellurium  ore.  Bismuth  telluride  and  sUver
telluride  have  been  found  in  Hungary  and  in  the  Altai.  Tellarium  is
extracted  from  bismuth  telluride  by  mixing  the  finely-powdered  ore
with  potassium  and  charcoal  in  as  intimate  a  mixture  as  possible,
and  then  heating  in  a  covered  crucible.  Potassium  telluride,  KjTe,
is  then  formed,  because  the  charcoal  reduces  potassium  tellurite.
As  potassium  telluride  is  soluble  in  water,  forming  a  red-brown
solution  which  is  decomposed  by  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere
(K2Te4  0  +  H20=2KH04-Te),  the  mass  formed  in  the  crucible  is
treated  with  boiling  water  and  filtered  as  rapidly  «ts  possible,  and  the
resultant  solution  exposed  to  the  air,  by  which  means  the  tellurium
is  precipitated.®^  In  a  free  state  tellurium  has  a  perfectly  meUxlUc
appearance  ;  it  is  of  a  silver- white  colour,  crystallises  very  easily  in
long  brilliant  needles  ;  is  very  brittle,  so  that  it  can  be  easily  reduced
to  powder  ;  but  it  is  a  bad  conductor  of  heat  and  electricity,  and
in  this  respect,  as  in  many  others,  it  forms  a  transition  from  the  metals
to  the  non-metals.  Its  specific  gravity  is  6*18,  it  melts  at  an  incipient
red  heat,  and  takes  fire  when  heated  in  air,  like  selenium  and  sulphur,
burning  with  a  blue  flame,  evolving  white  fumes  of  tellurous  anhy-
dride, TeOg,  and  emitting  an  acrid  smell  if  no  selenium  be  present  ;
but  if  it  be,  the  odour  of  the  latter  preponderates.  Alkalis  dissolve
tellurium  when  boiled  with  it,  potassium  telluride,  K^Te,  and  potassium
tellurite,  KjTeOg,  being  formed. The  solution  is  of  a  red  colour,  owing

fonn,  but  these  researches  are  not  so  conclusive  as  those  upon  soluble  silver,  and  we
shall  therefore  not  consider  them  more  fully.

80  The  tellurium  thus  prepared  is  impure,  and  contains  a  large  amount  of  seleniiun.
The  latter  may  be  removed  by  converting  the  mixture  into  the  salts  of  potassium,  and
treating  this  with  nitric  acid  and  barium  nitrate,  when  barium  selenate  only  is  precipitated,
whilst  the  barium  tellurate  remains  in  solution.  This  method  does  not,  however,  give  a
pure  product,  and  it  appears  to  be  best  to  separate  the  selenium  from  the  telluriam  in  a
metallic  form ;  this  is  done  by  boiling  the  impure  potassium  tellurate  with  hydrochloric
acid,  which  converts  it  into  potassium  tellurite,  from  whieli  the  tellurium  is  reduced  by
sulphurous  anhydride.  Tlie  metal  thus  obtained  is  then  fused  and  distilled  in  a  streaiu
of  hydrogen ;  the  selenium  volatilises  first,  and  then  the  tellurium,  owing  to  its  being
much  less  volatile  than  the  former.  Nevertheless,  tellurium  is  also  volatile,  and  may  be
separated  in  this  manner  from  less  volatile  metals,  such  as  antimony.  Brauner  deter-
mined the  atomic  weight  of  pure  tellurium,  and  found  it  to  be  125,  but  showed  (1889)
that  tellurium  purified  by  the  usual  method,  even  after  distillation,  contains  a  large
amount  of  impurities.

SULPHUR, SELENIUM, AND  TELLURIUM  276

to  the  presence  of  the  telluride,  KgTe  ;  but  the  colour  disappears  when
the  solution  is  cooled  or  diluted,  the  tellurium  being  all  precipitated  :
2K2Te  +  KaTeOg  +  3H20=6KHO  +  3Te.8>

^*  The  decomposition  proceeds  in  the  above  order  in  the  cold,  but  in  a  hot  solution
with  an  excess  of  potassium  hydroxide  it  proceeds  inversely.  A  similar  phenomenon
takes  place  when  tellurium  is  fused  with  alkalis,  and  it  is  therefore  necessary  in  order  to
obtain  potassium  telluride  to  add  charcoal.

Selenium  and  tellurium  form  higher  compounds  with  chlorine  with  comparative
ease.  For  selenium,  SeCl^  and  SeCl|  are  known,  and  for  tellurium  TeCl.^  and  TeCl^.
The  tetrachlorides  of  selenium  and  tellurium  are  formed  by  passing  chlorine  over  these
elements.  Selenium  tetrachloride,  SeCl^,  is  a  crystalline,  volatile  mass  which  gives
selenious  anhydride  and  hydrochloric  acid  with  water.  Tellurium  tetrachloride  is  much
less  volatile,  fuses  easily,  and  is  also  decomposed  by  water.  Both  elements  form  similar
compounds  with  bromine.  Tellurium  tetrabromide  is  red,  fuses  to  a  brown  liquid,
volatilises,  and  gives  a  crystalline  salt,  E^TeBrg,  SHoO,  with  an  aqueous  solution  of
potassium  bromide.

T  2

276  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

CHAPTER XXI

CHROMIUM, MOLYBDENUM, TUNGSTEN, URANIUM, AND MANGANESE

Sulphur,  selenium,  and  tellurium  belong  to  the  uneven  series  of  the
sixth  group.  In  the  even  series  of  this  group  there  are  known  chro-
miuniy  molyhdenuiriy  tungsten^  and  uranium  ;  these  give  acid  oxides
of  the  type  RO3,  like  SO3.  Their  acid  properties  are  less  sharply
defined  than  those  of  sulphur,  selenium,  and  tellurium,  as  is  the  case
with  all  elements  of  the  even  series  as  compared  with  those  of  the
uneven  series  in  the  same  group.  But  still  the  oxides  CrOs,  M0O3,
W0„,  and  even  UO3,  have  clearly  defined  acid  properties,  and  form
salts  of  the  composition  M0,nR03  with  bases  MO.  In  the  case  of  the
heavy  elements,  and  especially  of  uranium,  the  type  of  oxide,  UO3,
is  less  acid  and  more  basic,  because  in  the  even  series  of  oxides  the
element  with  the  highest  atomic  weight  always  acquires  a  more  and
more  pronounced  basic  character.  Hence  UO3  shows  the  properties  of
a  base,  and  gives  salts  UO.2X.2.  The  basic  properties  of  chromium,
molybdenum,  tungsten,  and  uranium  are  most  clearly  expressed  in  the
lower  oxides,  which  they  all  form.  Thus  chromic  oxide,  CraOg,  is  as
distinct  a  base  as  alumina,  AI2O3.

Of  all  these  elements  chrominin  is  the  most  widely  distributed
and  the  most  frequently  used.  It  gives  chromic  anhydride,  Cr03,  and
chromic  oxide,  Cr.^Oa — two  compounds  whose  relative  amounts  of
oxygen  stand  in  the  ratio  2:1.  Chromium  is,  althoiigh  somewhat
rarely,  met  with  in  nature  as  a  compound  of  one  or  the  other  type.
The  red  chromium  ore  of  the  Urals,  lead  chromate  or  crocoisite
PbCr04,  was  the  source  in  which  chromium  was  discovered  by
Vauquelin,  who  gave  it  this  name  (from  the  Greek  word  signifying
colour)  owing  to  the  brilliant  colours  of  its  compounds  ;  the  chromates
(salts  of  chromic  anhydride)  are  red  and  yellow,  and  the  chromic  salts
(from  Cr,03)  green  and  violet.  The  !od  lead  chromate  is,  however,  a
rare  chromium  ore  found  only  in  the  Urals  and  in  a  few  other  localities.
Chromic  oxide,  Cr.,03,  is  more  frequently  met  with.  In  small  quantities
it  forms  the  colouring  matter  of  many  minerals  and  rocks — for  example^

CHROMIUM.  MOLYBDENUM.  TIIN68TEN.  URANll'M,  ETC. 377

of  some  serpentines.  The  comiuoiieat  ore,  and  the  cliief  aouroe  of  the
ehromiuni  compounds,  ia  the  chrome  iroji  ore  or  chnimite,  which  occurs
in  the  Urals'  and  Asia  Minor,  CtLlifornio,  Australia,  aad  other
localitiea.  This  ia  magnetic  iron  ore,  FeOiFe.^Oj,  in  which  the  ferric
oxide  is  replaced  by  chromic  oxide,  its  compoeitioa  lieing  FeO.CfjOj.
Chrome  iron  ore  crystallises  in  octahedra  of  sp.  gr.  1'4  ;  it  hns  a  feeble
metallic  lastre,  is  nf  a  ^eyish-black  colour,  and  gives  a  lirown  powder.
It  ia  very  feebly  acted  on  by  acids,  but  when  fused  with  potassium
acid  sulphate  it  gives  a  soluble  moss,  which  contains  a  chromic  salt,
besides  potassium  sulphate  and  ferrous  sulphate.  In  practice  the
treatment  of  chrome  iron  ore  is  mainly  carried  on  for  the  pi-eparatioii
of  chromates,  and  not  of  chromic  salts,  and  therefore  we  will  trace  the
history  of  the  element  by  beginning  with  chromic  at^id,  and  especiaUy
with  the  working  up  of  the  chrome  iron  ore  into  j/olag»iiim  dichronuUe,
KjCr^O;,  as  the  most  common  salt  of  this  acid.  It  must  lie  remarked
that  chi-omic  anhydride,  CrO^,  is  ouly  obtained  in  an  anhydrous  state,
and  is  distinguished  for  its  capacity  for  easily  giving  anhydro-salta
with  the  alkalis,  containing  one,  two,  and  even  three  equivalents  of  the
anhydride  to  one  equivalent  of  base.  Thus  among  the  potassium  salts
there  is  known  the  normal  or  yellow  chromate,  K.jC'rClj,  which  corre-
sponds to,  and  is  perfectly  isomorphouii  with,  potastsium  sulphate,  easily
forms  isomorphims  mixtures  with  it,  and  is  not  therefore  suitable  for  a
process  in  which  it  is  necessary  to  separate  the  salt  from  a  mixture
conlaining  sulphates.  As  in  the  presence  of  a  certain  excess  of  acid,
thedichnimate,  KjCr.p?  =  1K^CtO^  -!-  L'HX  —  2KX  —  H^O.ia  easily
formed  from  K^jCrO,,  the  object  of  the  manufacturer  is  to  produce
such  a  dichromate,  the  more  so  as  it  contains  a  larger  proportion  of  the
elements  of  chromic  acid  than  tbe  normal  salt.  Finely-ground  chrome
iron  ore,  when  heated  with  an  alkali,  absorbs  oxygen  almost  as  easily
(Chapter  III,,  Note  7}  as  a  mixture  of  the  oxides  of  manganese  with
an  alkali.  This  alsorption  is  due  to  the  presence  of  chromic  oxide,
which  is  oxidised  into  the  anhydride,  and  then  conihines  with  the
alkali  CrjO,  -t-  O3  =  iCrO,.  As  the  oxidation  and  forTuation  of  the
chromate  proceeds,  the  mass  turns  yellow.  The  ir<m  is  also  oxidised,
hut  does  not  give  ferricaeid,  because  the  capacity  of  the  chromium  for
oxidation  is  incomparably  greater  than  that  of  the  ir'>n.

A  mixture  of  lime  (sometimes  with  potash)  and  chrome  iron  ore
is  heated  in  a  reverlwratory  furnace,  with  free  access  of  air  and  at  a

'  Tho  working  of  the  L'ral  chrome  iron  ore  into  chromiuDi  compounds  has  been
annl;  eaUblialied  in  Ruaxin,  tlunkB  to  Ibe  endeavoan  of  F.  K.  Uahnkofl,  who  con-
■kmcted  luge  varhii  lot  this  pnrpoBe  on  the  river  Kuua,  near  EMiougi,  where  u  moch
•a  11,000  tons  of  ore  me  treated  ycnrtj,  owing  to  which  the  importation  o(  ehromiuin  pre-

Sa  into  KoBHiti  has  ceuted.  ■
d

278  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

red  heat  for  several  hours,  until  the  mass  becomes  yellow  ;  it  then
contains  normal  calcium  chromate,  CaCr04,  which  is  insoluble  in
water  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  lime.^  ^^^  The  resultant  mass  is
ground  up,  and  treated  with  water  and  sulphuric  acid.  The  excess  of
lime  forms  gypsum,  and  the  soluble  calcium  dichromate,  CaCr^O-,
together  with  a  certain  amount  of  iron,  pass  into  solution.  The
solution  is  poured  off,  and  chalk  added  to  it ;  this  precipitates  the
ferric  oxide  (the  ferrous  oxide  is  converted  into  ferric  oxide  in  the
furnace)  and  forms  a  fresh  quantity  of  gypsum,  while  the  chromic  acid
remains  in  solution — that  is,  it  does  not  form  the  sparingly-soluble
normal  salt  (1  part  soluble  in  240  parts  of  water).  The  solution  then
contains  a  fairly  pure  calcium  dichromate,  which  by  double  decom-
position gives  other  chromates  ;  for  example,  with  a  solution  of  potassium
sulphate  it  gives  a  precipitate  of  calcium  sulphate  and  a  solution  of
potassium  dichromate,  which  crystallises  when  evaporated.^

Potdssium  dichromate^  KgCrgOy,  easily  crystallises  from  acid  solu-
tions in  red,  well  formed  prismatic  crystals,  which  fuse  at  a  red  heat
and  evolve  oxygen  at  a  very  high  temperature,  leaving  chromic  oxide
and  the  normal  salt,  which  undergoes  no  further  change  :  2K2Gr207
==  2K2Cr04  +  CrjOg  +  O3.  At  the  ordinary  temperature  100  parts
of  water  dissolve  10  parts  of  this  salt,  and  the  solubility  increases  as
the  temperature  rises.  It  is  most  important  to  note  that  the
dichromate  does  not  contain  water,  it  is  K2Cr04  +  Cr03  ;  the  acid
salt  corresponding  to  potassium  acid  sulphate,  KHSO4,  does  not  exist.
It  does  not  even  evolve  heat  when  dissolving  in  water,  but  on  the  con-
trary produces  cold,  i.e.  it  does  not  form  a  very  stable  compound  with
water.  The  solution  and  the  salt  itself  are  poisonous,  and  act  as
powerful  oxidising  agents,  which  is  the  character  of  chromic  acid  in
general.  When  heated  with  sulphur  or  organic  substances,  with
sulphurous  anhydride,  hydrogen  sulphide,  tfec,  this  salt  is  deoxidised,
yielding  chromic  compounds.^  *>^*  Potassium  dichromate  ^  is  used  in  the
arts and  in  chemistry  as  a  source  for  the preparation of  all other

1  bis  But  (,i|(j  calcium  chroraate  is  soluble  in  water  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of
chromic  acid,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  a  solution  of  chromic  acid  dissolves
lime.

^  There  are  many  variations  in  the  details  of  the  manufacturing  processes,  and  these
must  be  looked  for  in  works  on  technical  chemistry.  But  we  may  add  that  the  chromate
may  also  be  obtained  by  slightly  roasting  briquettes  of  a  mixture  of  chrome  iron  and
lime,  and  then  leaving  the  resultant  mass  to  the  action  of  moist  air  (oxygen  is  absorbed,
and  the  mass  turns  yellow).

-  i>i*  xhe  oxidising  action  of  potassium  dichromate  on  oi*ganic  substances  at  the
ordinary  temperature  is  e8i)ecially  marked  under  the  action  of  light.  Thus  it  acts  on
gelatin,  as  Poutven  discovered  ;  this  is  applied  to  photograi>hy  in  the  processes  of  photo-

For  Note  3  see  p.  279.

CBEOMrUM,  MOLYBDENUM,  TUTSOSTEN.  DKANIUJT,  BTC. 279

chromium  vompounds.  It  is  converted  into  yellow  pigmentG  by  means
of  doulile  decomposition  with  salts  of  lead,  barium,  and  zinc.  When
solutions  of  the  salts  of  these  metals  are  mixed  witb  potassium
dicliromate  (iji  dyeing  generally  mixed  with  soda,  in  order  to  obtain
normal  salts),  tjiey  are  precipitated  as  insoluble  normal  salts  ;  for
example,  2BaClj  +  K,Cr^O,  +  H,0  =  L>BaCrO,  +  2KC1  +  2HC1.  It
follows  from  this  that  these  salts  are  insoluble  in  dilute  acids,  but
the  precipitation  in  not  complete  (as  it  would  be  with  the  normal  salt).
The  barium  and  xiric  salts  are  of  a  U'cuon  yellow  colour  ;  the  lead  salt
has  a  still  more  intense  colour  pasiiing  into  orange.  Yellow  cotton
prints  are  dyed  with  this  pigment.  The  silver  salt,  Ag^Cr!.!,,  ia  of  a
bright  red  colour.

When  potassium  diohronute  ia  mixed  with potassium hydroxide

ipruTtu'e,  pliolo-lilbiigrtiiiihf ,  pigment  printing,  ,V(i.  Undw  the  actiim  of  light  thia  goUtin
IB  oiidiwiil,  luiil  Lbe  diroiiiia  anhydride  ileoiidiwd  into  chromio  oxide,  which  oniles  nith
Ibe  gelntin  siid  [nrms  a  canipuand  iasoluble  in  huiu  wsttir,  whilst  where  IheUghthu  not
iu:ted,  tlie  gvlatin  reiowDH  iwlnble,  its  properties  being  unSiSeclBd  hj  the  presence  of
chromic  acid  or  i>oliu>«utu  dichromate.

'  Animoniuni  uid  sodiom  dichiomates  ue  now  also  prepared  on  b  large  Hmla.  The
BOdiam  salts  nm;  be  prepared  in  eiacUy  the  laano  maunei  at  those  o[  potoasium.  The
uonnal  salt  oonibinet  with  ten  eqaivalents  of  nater,  like  Glauber's  salt,  irith  which  it  is
isonuirphoug.  lis  Mjlntioa  above  SO"  deposite  the  nubydrous  salt.  Sodium  dichromate
oiystal-i  cvntain  N^jCr,07,3U]0.  The  ammoiviuw  salt)  o/ rArvmic  oct'ii  are  obtained
b;  satnraUng  the  tuiliydride  itseK  with  mniiioain.  The  diclinimale  is  obtained  by
salnntting  one  part  of  the  anhydride  with  ainmonia,  and  then  iwdding  a  second  part  ol
anbfdride  and  eTaparsUog  under  the  receiver  of  an  ur-pump.  On  ignition,  the  nonoal
and  acid  salts  leave  chromic  oxide.  PotiusiDUi  uuiudiunm  chroinate,  NU.KCiO,,  ia
obtained  in  yellow  needles  from  a  solution  of  potasatnm  dichmmatc  in  aqneons  ammoais ;
it  not  only  Iowsh  uiunonia  and  becomes  converted  into  potsesinm  dialironiate  when
ignited,  bat  also  by  degrees  at  the  ordinary  temperature.  This  shows  the  feeble  ener^
of  obromic  acid,  and  its  tendency  to  form  stable  dichiomates.  Magneaium  chromate  is
eotnble  in  water,  ba  abo  ia  the  Atrontium  iialt.  The  calcium  salt  is  alim  somewhat  Bolnble,
bub  the  barium  talt  in  almiwl  insoluble.  The  isomorphism  with  sulphuric  acid  is  shown
in  U»  chronuite«  by  the  fact  that  the  magnei>iiun  and  ammoniam  salts  form  double  salts
oonbining  six  equivalents  of  water,  which  are  perfectly  isomorphous  with  the  corre-
ponding  Bulphalet.  The  magaetiuui  salt  cryalaUisea  iu  large  crystals  uontaining  seven
equndenta  of  water.  The  beryllium,  cerium,  and  cobalt  salts  are  iuaolnble  in  water.
Chromic  acid  dineolves  manganous  carbonate,  but  on  evaporation  the  solotiou  depositn
lOMigiaunBe  dioxide,  formed  at  the  expense  of  Lhe  oiygen  of  the  chromic  acid.  Chromic
add  also  oiidiset  ferrous  oxide,  and  ferric  oxide  is  Bolubte  in  ohromia  acid.

One  of  tlie  cliramales  moat  nsed  by  the  dyer  is  tbe  insoluble  yellow  lead  chromate,
PhCK).  (Chapter  XVIII„  Note  48),  which  ia  precipitated  on  mixing  solutions  of
PhX,  witli  soluhle  chromates.  It  easily  forms  a  basic  salt,  hafiog  the  composition
PbOJTiCrO,,  an  a  oryslftlline  powder,  obtained  by  fusing  the  normal  salt  with  nitre  and
then  rapidly  washing  iu  water.  The  same  snbstanve  is  obtained,  although  impure  and
in  small  loantity,  by  treating  lead  chromate  with  neutral  potasaiutn  ohrumate,  especially
uu  boiling  the  iniitore ;  and  thi*  gives  the  possihility  of  attaining,  by  means  of  these
materials,  various  lints  of  lead  chromiite,  from  yellow  lo  red,  psssmg  through  diSerent
mange  shades.  Die  ilecompoailion  which  laJres  place  (incompletely!  in  this  case  i>
■■  loUowa:  ap1.CrO,*K,CrO,-PbCrOj,PbO+K,Cr,0,— that  is,  potassium  dichromate
U  fonDed  in  aolntion.

280  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

or  carbonate  (carbonic  anhydride  being  disengaged  in  the  latter  case)  it
forms  the  normal  salt,  K2Cr04,  known  as  yellow  chronuite  of  potassium.
Its  specific  gravity  is  2*7,  being  almost  the  same  as  that  of  the  dichro-
mate.  It  absorbs  heat  in  dissolving  *  one  part  of  the  salt  dissolves  in
1*75  part  of  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  forming  a  yellow
solution.  When  mixed  even  with  such  feeble  acids  as  acetic,  and  more
especially  with  the  ordinary  acids,  it  gives  the  dichromate,  and  Graham
obtained  a  trichromate,  KaCrjOio  =  K2Cr04,2Cr03,  by  mixing  a
solution  of  the  latter  salt  with  an  excess  of  nitric  acid.

Chromic  anhydride  is  obtained  by  preparing  a  saturated  solution  of
potassium  dichromate  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  and  pouring  it  in  a
thin  stream  into  an  equal  volume  of  pure  sulphuric  acid.^  On  mixing,
the  temperature  naturally  rises ;  when  slowly  cooled,  the  solution
deposits  chromic  anhydride  in  needle-shaped  crystals  of  a  red  colour
sometimes  several  centimetres  long.  The  crystals  are  freed  from  the
mother  liquor  by  placing  them  on  a  porous  tile.^  *'*■  It  is  very  important
at  this  point  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  hydrate  of  chromic
anhydride  is  never  obtained  in  the  decomposition  of  chromic  compounds,

^  The  sulphuric  acid  should  not  contain  any  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen,  becaase  they
reduce  chromic  anhydride  into  chromic  oxide.  If  a  solution  of  a  chroniate  be  heated
with  an  excess  of  acid — for  instance,  sulphuric  or  hydrochloric  acid — oxygen  or  chlorine
is  evolved,  and  a  solution  of  a  chromic  salt  is  formed.  Hence,  under  these  circum-
stances, chromic  acid  cannot  be  obtained  from  its  salts.  One  of  the  first  methods
employed  consisted  in  converting  its  salts  into  volatile  chro?nium  hexafluoruU^  CrF^.
This  compound,  obtained  by  Unverdorben,  may  be  prepared  by  mixing  lead  chromaie
with  fluor  spar  in  a  dry  state,  and  treating  the  mixture  with  fuming  sulphuric  acid  in  a
platinum  vessel :  PbCrO ,  +  .SCaF.j  4  4H...SO ,  -  PbSO ,  +  8CaS04  -f  4H...O  +  CrF,3.  Fuming
sulphuric  acid  is  taken,  and  in  considerable  excess,  because  the  chromium  fluoride  which
is  formed  is  very  easily  decomix)sed  by  water.  It  is  volatile,  and  forms  a  very  caustic,
poisonous  vapour,  which  condenses  when  cooled  in  a  drj'  platinum  vessel  into  a  red,
exceedingly  volatile  liquid,  which  fumes  iK^werfully  in  air.  The  vapours  of  this
substance  when  introduced  into  water  are  decomposed  into  liydrofluoric  acid  and
chromic  anhydride  :  CrF„  +  3H.,,0  =  Cr03  f  6HF.  If  very-  little  water  be  taken  the  hydro-
fluoric acid  volatilises,  and  chromic  anhydride  separates  directly  in  crystals.  The
chloranhydride  of  chromic  acid,  CrO.^Cl.^  (Note  5),  is  also  decomposed  in  the  same
manner.  A  solution  of  chromic  acid  and  a  precipitate  of  barium  j^ulphate  are  fonnetl  by
treating  the  insoluble  barium  chroniate  with  an  equivalent  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid.
If  carefully  evajwrated,  the  solution  yields  crj-stals  of  chromic  anhydride.  Fritzsche
ga\e  a  very  convenient  method  of  preparing  chromic  anhydride,  based  on  the  relation
of  chromic  to  sulphuric  acid.  At  the  ordinary  tenqn'rature  tlie  strong  acid  dissolves
biith  chromic  anhydride  and  {wtassium  chroniate,  but  if  a  (rertain  amount  of  water  is
added  to  the  solution  the  chromic  anhydride  separates,  and  if  the  amount  of  water  be
increased  the  precipitated  chromic  anhydride  is  again  dissolved.  The  chromic  anhy-
dride i^  ahnost  all  separated  from  the  solution  when  it  contain*^  two  equivalents  of
water  to  one  etjuivalent  of  sulphuric  acid.  Many  metlio<ls  for  tlie  pn'paration  of  chromic
anhydride  are  ba«^ed  on  this  fact.

'*''"'  They  cannot  be  filtered  through  pai>er  or  washed,  because  the  chromic
anhydride is reduced by the filter-pai>er, and is dissolved <luring the process of

^ing.

OHBOMirM,  MOLTBDENl'M.  TCTNGSTES.  URANIUM.  ETC. 281

but  always  the  nnJtytlridt,  CrOj,  The  corresponding  hydrate,  C'rO,Hi,
or  any  other  hydrate,  is  not  even  known.  Nevertheless,  it  inust  be
adniitterl  that  chromic  acid  is  bibasic,  liecause  it  forms  salts  isomorphous
or  perfectly  analogous  with  the  salts  formed  by  sulphuric  acid,  which  is
the  best  example  of  a  bibasic  acid.  A  clear  proof  of  the  biba-sicity  of
CrOj  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  nnhydride  and  salts  give  (when  heated
with  sodium  chloride  and  sulphuric  acid)  a,  volatile  chloranhjdride,
CrO^Cl,,  containing  two  atoms  of  chlorine  as  a  bibasic  acid  should.^

*  B«iaoliuB  observed,  and  Rose  cftrefullr  mveBtig»ted,  this  remarkablo  ra»qtion,
whioh  occurs  between  thnimio  Mid  Bad  midiara  chloride  in  the  prenenca  of  anlphnric
Kid.  II 10  piu-ts  of  coDunoD  salt  bt-  miied  witli  12  [iiuts  o[  ]iotuBiuiii  dichromnte,  fused,
cooled,  uid  brokou  op  into  larnpa,  lUid  placed  in  a  retort  witli  SO  puts  ol  tiuiuDg  >al-
phuric  uid,  it  girm  ri«e  to  &  riolunt  reaction,  accompanied  by  the  farmattoii  ol  brown
(oniea  of  ehTomic  ehlorankydridf,  or  ehmtayl  chloride,  CtOgCl^,  according  to  the  re-
action: CrOs-taNaCl  +  H,SO,-Na,804  +  H,0  +  CrOjCl,,  The  addition  of  on  excess  of
anlpkurio  acid  ia  neceisarj  in  order  to  retain  tlie  wa(«r.  The  same  Bubstance  ia  alwayn
formed  vben  a  metallic  cliloride  is  heated  with  oliromic  acid,  or  au;  ol  its  «Jt8,  in  the
presence  of  gqlphuHo  acid.  The  formation  of  thia  volatile  snbeliuice  is  easily  observed
from  the  btown  ookinr  which  is  proper  to  iM  vapour.  On  condensing  tbe  vaponr  in  a
dry  receiver  a  liquid  is  obtsined  having  a  »p.  gr.  of  1'9,  boiling  at  118°,  and  giving  a
vapour  whose  denaitj,  compared  with  hydrugen,  is  7B,  which  corresponds  with  the  above
fonnnlo.  Chnunyl  chloride  is  decomposed  by  heal  into  chromic  oiide,  oxygen,  and
cliloHne:  aCr<\CLj«CrjOi4aCI,  +  0;  so  that  it  is  able  to  act  simulUueouHly  as  a
pawerfnJ  Diidisiiig  and  cbloriualing  agent,  wliivh  is  token  advantage  ol  in  llie  investiga-
tion of  many,  and  espiwially  of  organic,  subBtoriees.  When  reuted  nith  water,  thi^
aubstauce  first  falls  to  the  bottom,  nud  is  then  decomposed  into  hydrochloric  and  chromio
acids,  like  all  chloronhydrtdes:  CrO,CL,-i-H.,0  =  CrOs-i-aHCl.  When  brought  into  con-
tact with  infjommable  substonceii  it  Aets  Are  luthem;  it  acts  thus,  lor  instance,  on
pliosphoms,  sulphur,  oil  of  tnrponline,  anunoiiio,  hydrogen,  and  other  HUbetancea.  It
attracts  moistnre  from  the  atmoE|ihore  with  great  energy,  and  mnst  therefore  be  kept  in
cloaed  vessels.  It  dissolves  iodine  and  rhlnrinv,  and  even  timns  a  solid  L-ompound  with
the  latter,  which  depends  upon  the  faculty  of  chromium  la  form  its  higher  oiide,
CrgO,.  Tlie  close  analogy  in  the  physital  properties  of  the  chloronhydrides.  CrO,CljUld
SOiCI],  is  very  remarkable,  althoogb  BDlphnroDn  anhydride  ia  a  gas,  and  the  correoponding
cxide,  CrCXh  is  a  non-volatile  solid.  It  may  be  imagined,  therefore,  that  chrciminm  di-
oxide (which  will  be  mentioned  in  the  following  note)  presents  a  polymerised  modification
of  the  substance  having  the  composition  CtO, ;  in  fact,  this  i»  obvioua  Irom  the  method
of  itB  formation.

II  three  iiarts  of  potasaiiim  dichromate  be  mixed  with  lutir  parts  of  strong  hydrochloric
acid  and  a  amall  qnontity  of  water,  and  gently  warmed,  it  all  passe*  into  aolation,
and  no  chlorine  is  evolved ;  on  cooling,  the  liquid  defiuiits  red  prismatic  cryalAle,  known
as  Pttigoli  inff,  very  stable  in  air.  Tliie  has  the  comtnsition  KCI,CrOs,  and  is  Infmed
according  to  the  equation  K,Cr.)0,-f  SIlCI»3KCI,CiOji^H/).  It  is  evident  that  thia
ia  ^  first  i-lilDnuiliydride  of  chromic  odd,  HCrOjCI,  in  which  the  liydrogeu  is  re-
placed by  potassium.  It  is  decomposed  by  water,  and  on  evaporation  the  solalion  yielda
potMsinm  dichroniate  and  hydrochloric  acid.  This  is  a  Iivsh  inslaiicu  uf  the  reversible
reaelioUB  so  fieqaentiy  enconntered.  With  sulphnric  acid  Pelignt's  salt  lorma  chnnnyl
chloride.  The  latter  circumslance,  and  the  fact  tlial  Gouther  prodticed  Peligot'a  salt
from  potossinni  chromate  and  chromyl  cidoride,  give  reason  for  thinking  that  it  is  a
eomponndof  thew  twoaubslaoces:  aKCl,Cr03  =  K,CrO,  +  CrO.;Cl5.  Itisalsosometimes
regarded  ax  patuBsinm  dichromate  in  which  one  atom  of  oxygen  is  replaced  by  chlorine —
espondiug  with  KgCr,0,. When  heated  it  parts  with  all  its

(nrtber  hei

282  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Chromic  anhydride  is  a  red  crystalline  substance,  which  is  converted
intx)  a  black  mass  by  heat ;  it  fuses  at  190°,  and  disenga,ges  oxygen
above  250°,  leaving  a  residue  of  chromium  dioxide,  CrOj,^  and,  on  still
further  heating,  chromic  oxide,  CrjOg.  Chromic  anhydride  is  exceed-
ingly soluble  in  water,  and  even  attracts  moisture  from  the  air,  but,  as
was  mentioned  above,  it  does  not  fo)*m  any  definite  compound  with
water.  The  specific  gravity  of  its  crystals  is  2*7,  and  when  fused  it  has
a  specific  gravity  2*6.  The  solution  presents  perfectly  defined  acid
properties.  It  liberates  carbonic  anhydride  from  carbonates ;  gives
insoluble  precipitates  of  the  chromates  with  salts  of  barium,  lead,  silver,
and  mercury.

The  action  of  hydrogen  peroxide  on  a  solution  of  chromic  acid  or  of
potassium  dichromate  gives  a  blue  solution,  which  very  quickly  becomes
colourless  with  the  disengagement  of  oxygen.  Barreswill  showed  that
this  is  due  to  the  formation  of  a  perchromic  anhydride^  Cr^Oy,  corre-
sponding with  sulphur  peroxide.  This  peroxide  \&  remarkable  from  the
fact  that  it  very  easily  dissolves  in  ether  and  is  much  more  stable  in
this  solution,  so  that,  by  shaking  up  hydrogen  peroxide  mixed  with  a
small  quantity  of  chromic  acid,  with  ether,  it  is  possible  to  transfer  all
the  blue  substance  formed  to  the  ether.^  ***■

With  oxygen  acids,  chromic  acid  evolves  oxygen  ;  for  example,  with

^  This  intermediate  degree  of  oxidation,  CrOo,  may  also  be  obtained  by  mixing  solu-
tions of  chromic  salts  with  solutions  of  chromates.  Tlie  brown  precipitate  formed
contains  a  coniiK)und,  Cr,>0-,,Cr03,  consisting  of  equivalent  amounts  of  chromic  oxide
and  anhydride.  The  brown  precipitate  of  chromium  dioxide  contains  water.  The  same
substance  is  formed  by  the  imperfect  deoxidation  of  cliromic  anhydride  by  various  redu-
cing agents.  Cliromic  oxide,  when  heated,  absorbs  oxygen,  and  appears  to  give  the  same
substanc*'.  (^hromic  nitrate,  when  ignited,  also  gives  this  substance.  Wlien  this  sub-
stance is  heated  it  first  disengages  water  and  then  oxygen,  chromic  oxide  being  left.  It
corre8i)ondH  with  manganese  dioxide,  Cr^O.^CrO^  —  .SCrO.2.  Kriiger  treated  chromium
dioxide  with  a  mixture  of  sodium  chloride  and  sulphuric  acid,  and  found  tliat  chlorine
gas  was  evolved,  but  that  chromyl  chloride  was  not  formed.  Under  the  action  of  light,
a  solution  of  chromic  acid  also  deposits  the  brown  dioxide.  At  the  ordinary  temperature
chromic  anhydride  leaves  a  brown  stain  \x\Hn\  the  skin  and  tissues,  which  probably  pro-
(Mieds  from  a  decomposition  of  the  same  kind.  Chromic  anhydride  is  soluble  in  alcohol
containing  water,  and  this  solution  is  decomi>osed  in  a  similar  manner  by  light
Chromium  dioxide  fonns  K^CrOj  when  treated  with  H.j0.j  in  the  presence  of  KHO.

<J  *•'-  Now  that  persulphuric  acid  H.^S.-Oj}  is  well  known  it  might  be  supposed  that
perchromic  anhydride,  Cr.jO;,  would  correspond  to  i^erchromic  acid,  HjCr.^Og,  but  as  yet
it  is  not  certain  wh<'ther  corresixinding  salts  are  formed.  Pcchard  (1891)  on  adding  an
excess  of  H.,.()_,  and  baryta  water  to  a  dilute  solution  of  CrO-^  (H  grm.  per  litre),  observed
the  f<irmation  of  a  yellow  precipitate,  but  oxygen  was  disengaged  at  the  same  time  and
the  ))recii)itate  (which  easily  exjiloded  when  dried)  was  found  to  contain,  besides  an
admixtur«»  of  BaO..,  a  comixmnd  BaCrOj;,  and  this  =  HaOj  +  CrO-,  and  does  not  correspond
to  p«'rchromic  acid.  The  fact  of  its  decomposing  with  an  explosion,  and  the  mode  of  its
preparation,  proves,  however,  that  this  is  a  similar  derivative  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen  to
persulphuric  acid  (Chapter  XX.)

CHROMIUM.  MOLYBDENUM.  TUNGSTEN,  UBAHITIM,  ETC. 28S

Bolphuric  ueid  the  following  reaction  takes  plwe  :  2Cr05  +  3Hj804
=Cr,(S0,),  +  0;,H-3H,0.  It  will  be  readily  underatood  from  this  that
a  mixlurn  of  chromic  acid  or  ofila  tails  icith  mlphitric.  acid  forms  an
excellent  oxidintTig  ag^'nt,  which  is  (requ«intly  employed  in  cheroical
laborattirieB  and  even  for  technical  purposes  as  a  means  of  oxidation.
Thus  hydmgen  sulphide  and  sutphurrius  anhydride  are  coQverted  into
sulphuric  acid  by  this  means.  Chrttiuic  acid  is  able  to  act  as  a  powerful
oxidising  agent  Ijecause  it  passes  iato  chromic  oxide,  and  in  so  doing
disengages  half  of  the  oxygen  contained  in  it;  2Cr<Jj=CraO,,  +  tla.
Thus  chromic  anhydride  itself  is  a.  powerful  oxidising  agent,  and  is
theref'ire  employed  instead  of  nitric  acid  in  galvanic  bjitteries  {as  a
depolariser),  the  hydrogen  evolved  at  the  carlxin  being  then  oxidised,
and  the  chromic  acid  converted  into  a  non-volatile  product  of  deoxida-
tii'n,  instead  of  yielding,  as  nitric  acid  does,  volatile  lower  oxides  of
offensive  odour.  Organic  substances  are  more  or  less  perfectly  oxidised
by  means  of  chromic  anhydride,  although  this  generally  requires  the  aid
of  heat,  and  does  not  proceed  in  the  presence  of  alkalis,  but  generally
in  the  pretence  of  acidu.  In  acting  on  a  solution  of  potassium  iodide,
chromic  acid,  like  many  oxidising  agents,  lil)ei*ates  iodine  ;  the  reaction
proceeds  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  CrOj  present,  and  may  serve
for  determining  the  amount  of  CrOg,  since  the  amount  of  iodine  lilierated
can  be  accurately  determined  by  the  iodometric  method  (Chapter  XX.,
Not*  42).  If  chromic  anhydride  be  ignited  in  a  stream  of  ammonia,  it
gives  chromic  oxide,  water,  and  nitrogen.  In  all  cases  when  chromic
acid  acts  as  an  oxidising  agent  in  the  presence  of  acids  and  under  the
action  of  heat,  the  pro<luct  of  its  deoxidation  is  a  chromic  s»lt,  CrX^;,
which  is  characterised  by  the  green  colour  of  its  solution,  so  that  the
red  or  yellow  mluium  of  a  salt  of  chromic  acid  is  then  transformed  into
a  yreen  nohition  of  a  chromic  salt,  derived  from  chromic  oxide,  Cr^O,,
which  is  closely  analogous  t^i  Al^llj,  Fe^O^i,  and  other  bases  of  the  com-
poBition  11,03.  '^'>'B  anak^y  ia  seen  in  the  insolubility  of  the  anhydrous
oxide,  in  the  gelatinous  form  of  the  colloidal  hydrate,  in  the  formation
of  niuma,'  of  a  volatile  chloride  of  chromium,  dec' '''

'  Ah  ft  mixture  ol  jwIusiuDi  dichinmate  and  snlpharic  iwid  in  UHnuUy  em|ili)y«l
lor  oxidation,  the  rHsaltant  nolnlion  guDeiBlly  coutainn  a  double  Bul|ihiil«  of  podu-
■iau  uid  chronuain — tlul  ia,  rArorna  alum,  iuniotphoot  ititli  urdiiiary  oluoi —
K5CrjO;t4H.iaO,  +  aOH]0=  0j+KjCri(aO,|„!MH20ora(KCr(86,J»lBH,O|.  Itispre-
p«red  b;  diiibolTiDg  potaiiaium  dichromkta  in  dilute  salphuric  mcid ;  alcobol  in  theu  luliled
■Dd  Ibe  Boiution  ilitEhtl;  heated,  or  anlpliurous  anhydride  it  paawd  throagh  it.  On  Urn
addition  ol  ili^ohol  to  a  cold  miitore  0!  patauiam  dioluoniate  and  solpkuric  ai-id,  Ibe
gradoal  dineugagemeut  of  iileBunl-Bmelling  volatile  prodnct*  ol  the  oxidation  ol  alcobol,
and  Hspiicially  of  aldeliydu.  C.H^O,  ih  remarked. If  the  Ceoipentiue  u(  d«cumpoiition

284  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTEY

Chromic  oxide,  CrjOg,  rarely  found,  and  in  small  quantities,  in  chrome
ochre,  is  formed  by  the  oxidation  of  chromium  and  its  lower  oxides,  by

does  not  exceed  35'^,  a  violet  solution  of  chrome  alum  is  oj3tained,  but  if  the  tempera-
ture be  higher,  a  solution  of  the  same  alum  is  obtained  of  a  green  colour.  As  chrome
alum  requires  for  solution  7  parts  of  water  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  it  follows  that  if
a  somewhat  strong  solution  of  potassium  dichromate  be  taken  (4  parts  of  water  and  \^
of  sulphuric  acid  to  1  part  of  dichromate),  it  will  give  so  concentrated  a  solution
of  chrome  alum  that  on  cooling,  the  salt  will  separate  without  further  evaporation.  If
the  liquid^  prepared  as  above  or  in  any  instance  of  the  deoxidation  of  chromic  acid,
he  heated  (the  oxidation  naturally  proceeds  more  rapidly)  somewhat  strongly,  for  in-
stance, to  the  boiling-point  of  water,  or  if  the  violet  solution  already  formed  be  raised  to
the  same  temperature,  it  acquires  a  bright  green  colour,  and  on  evaporation  the
same  mixture,  which  at  lower  temperatures  so  easily  gives  cubical  crystals  of  chrome
alum,  does  not  give  any  crystals  whatever.  If  the  green  solution  he  kept,  however, /or
several  weeks  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  it  deposits  violet  crystals  of  chrome  alum.
The  green  solution,  when  evaporated,  gives  a  non-crystalline  mass,  and  the  violet
crystals  lose  water  at  100°  and  turn  green.  It  must  be  remarked  that  the  transition  of
the  green  modification  into  the  violet  is  accompanied  by  a  decrease  in  volume  (Lecoq  de
Boisbaudran,  Favre).  If  the  green  mass  formed  at  the  higher  temperature  be  evaporated
to  dryness  and  heated  at  80°  in  a  current  of  air,  it  does  not  retain  more  then  6  equi-
valents of  water.  Hence  Lowel,  and  also  Schrotter,  concluded  that  the  green  and  violet
modifications  of  the  alum  depend  on  different  degrees  of  combination  with  water,  which
may  be  likened  to  the  different  compounds  of  sodium  sulphate  with  water  and  to  the
different  hydrates  of  ferric  oxide.

However,  the  question  in  this  case  is  not  so  simple,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see.
Not  chrome  alum  alone,  but  all  the  chromic  salts,  give  two,  if  not  three,  varieties.  At
least,  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  existence  of  two — a  green  and  a  violet  modifcation.
The  green  chromic  salts  are  obtained  by  heating  solutions  of  the  violet  salts,  the  violet
solutions  are  produced  on  keeping  solutions  of  the  green  salts  for  a  long  time.  The  con-
version of  the  violet  salts  into  green  by  the  action  of  heat  is  itself  an  indication  of  the
possibility  of  explaining  the  different  modifications  by  their  containing  different  propor-
tions (or  states)  of  water,  and,  moreover,  by  the  green  salts  having  a  less  amount  of
water  than  the  violet.  However,  there  are  other  explanations.  Chromic  oxide  is  a  base
like  alumina,  and  is  therefore  able  to  give  both  acid  and  basic  salts.  It  is  supposed  that
the  difference  between  the  green  and  violet  salts  is  due  to  this  fact.  This  opinion  of
Kriiger  is  based  on  the  faet  that  alcohol  separates  out  a  salt  from  the  green  solution
which  contains  less  sulphuric  acid  than  the  normal  violet  salt.  On  the  other  hand,
Liiwel  showed  that  all  the  acid  cannot  be  separated  from  the  green  chromic  salts  by
suitable  reagents,  as  easily  as  it  can  be  from  the  same  solution  of  the  violet  salts ;  thus
barium  salts  do  not  precipitate  all  the  sulphuric  acid  from  solutions  of  the  green  salts.
According  to  other  researches  the  cause  of  the  varieties  of  the  chromic  salts  lies  in  a
difference  in  the  bases  they  contain — that  is,  it  is  connected  with  a  modification  of  the
properties  of  the  oxide  of  chromium  itself.  This  only  refers  to  the  hydroxides,  but  as
hydroxides  themselves  are  only  special  forms  of  salts,  the  differences  observed  as  yet
in  this  direction  between  the  hydroxides  only  confirm  the  generality  of  the  difference
observed  in  the  chromic  comjiounds  {see  Note  7  bis).

The  salts  of  chromic  oxide,  like  those  of  alumina,  are  easily  decomposed,  give  basic
and  double  salts,  and  have  an  acid  reaction,  as  chromic  oxide  is  a  feeble  base.  Potas-
sium and  sodium  hydroxides  give  a  precipitate  of  the  liydroxide  with  chromic  salts,
CrXj.  The  violet  and  green  salts  give  a  hydroxide  soluble  in  an  excess  of  the
reagent  ;  but  the  liydroxide  is  held  in  solution  by  very  feeble  affinities,  so  that  it  is
partially  separated  by  heat  and  dilution  with  water,  and  completely  so  on  boiling.
In  an  alkaline  solution,  chromic  hydroxide  is  easily  converted  into  chromic  acid
by  the  action  of  lead  dioxide,  chlorine,  and  other  oxidising  agents.  If  the  chromic
oxide  occurs  together  with  such  oxides  as  magnesia,  or  zinc  oxide,  then  on  precipitation

CHROMIUM.  MOLYBDENUM.  TITSflSTEN,  TIHAWIITM, ETC. 986

I  roductioD  of  chFOn)at«B  {for  example,  of  ammoniunj  or  mercuric
oliromate)  and  by  the  decomposition  (splitting  up)  of  the  saline  corn-
It  sepualvB  uDl  from  iu  solution  in  eombiiidtioa  with  these  oxiden,  fomiiuK,  lor  ej[iLnip1<<,
ZuO.Cr.jOj.  Viarf  obtained  i»mponnil»  of  Cr,0.,  with  Ihe  oiidaa  at  Mg,  Zu,  Cd.  ftc.)
On  preoipitating  the  violet  solution  of  chroiD«  &lum  with  umaoutn.  a  precipitate  contain-
ing Cr,Os,OH,0  is  obtained,  whiUt  the  precipitate  from  the  boiling  solution  with  caustic
potiub  wnfi  a  hydrate  containing  lour  equivalents  of  water.  When  fueed  with  borax  ahromio
siJtB  gire  a  grwn  glaiB.  The  same  coloration  is  eomniniiioated  to  ordinal;  glisi  b;  the
limenee  of  traces  of  chromic  oxide.  &.  chrome  glass  containing  a  large  omoant  of
chroitue  oiide  may  be  ground  up  and  used  as  a  green  pigment.  Among  the  hydrates
of  oxide  of  chromium  OuigHrl'i  green  forms  one  of  the  widelj-used  green  pigments  which
have  been  substituted  for  the  poisonous  aneniul  copper  pigments,  such  as  Schweinturt
green,  which  formerlj  wan  much  need.  Qnignet'n  green  has  an  extremely  bright  green
colour,  und  is  diitinguished  for  its  great  stability,  not  only  tinder  the  action  of  light  bat
oIki  towiuds  TMgeut)! ;  thus  It  is  not  altered  by  alkaline  •oluttons,  and  even  nitric  acid
does  not  act  on  it.  This  pigmeoi  remains  unchanged  up  to  a  temperature  of  asO°  ;  it
oouMins  Cr.j03,9HO.„  and  genemJly  a  small  isniannt  of  alkali.  It  is  prepared  by  Fusing  H
parts  of  boric  acid  trilh  1  part  nl  potasBiani  dichromate :  oxygen  is  disengaged,  and  a
green  glass,  containing  a  mixture  of  the  borates  of  chromium  and  potassium,  is  obtained.
When  cijul  this  glass  ia  ground  up  and  treated  with  water,  which  extrac'^  the  bono

'  acid  and  alkali  and  leaves  the  aboTe.named  chromic  hydroxide  behind. This  hydroxide
only  portn  with  its  water  si  a  red  heat,  leaving  the  anhydrous  oxide.

The  chromic  hydroxides  lose  their  water  by  ignition,  and  in  so  doing  become  spon-
taneously incandescent,  like  the  ordinary  ferric  hydroxide  (ChB]>ter  XXII.i,  It  Is  Dot
known,  however,  whether  all  the  modiflcatious  of  chromic  oxide  show  this  phonomenon.
The  anliydrons  ehroinie  oxide,  CcjO.v  is  exceedingly  difBcnltly  soluble  in  acids,  if  it
baa  pvuivd  through  the  above  recalejcencc.  But  if  it  has  parted  with  its  water,  or  (he
greater  part  of  it,  and  not  yet  undergone  this  self-induced  incandescence  (has  not  lost  a
portion  nl  its  energy),  then  it  is  soluble  in  w^ida.  It  is  not  reduced  by  hydrogen.  It  ia
easily  obtained  in  varioas  cryetalline  forme  by  many  methods.  The  chromatvs  of  mer-
coiy  and  ammonium  give  a  VBt7  convenient  method  for  its  preparation,  lieeaase  when
ignited  they  leave  chromic  oxide  behind.  In  the  Hrtit  inslsjioe  oxygen  and  mercury  are
disengaged,  and  in  the  secmid  case  nitrogen  and  water:  aHgiCiO^  ^  Cr.jOj -i- O^  +  4Bg  or
(NH.),Cr^,  =  Cr.j03-HH,0  +  N,.  The  second  reaction  is  very  energetic,  and  the  mass
of  salt  buniB  tpontanenualy  if  the  temperatoie  be  sntBciently  high.  A  miibnm  of  potv^
uum  sulphate  and  chromic  oxide  is  formed  by  healing  potassinm  dichromate  with  an
equal  weight  of  solphnr :  KjCr.iO,  +  B  =  KsSO,  +  Cr.,0,.  The  sulphate  is  easily  extnwled
by  water,  and  there  remains  a  bright  green  reaidne  of  the  oxide,  whose  colour  is  more
brilliant  the  lower  the  temperatnre  of  the  docomposition,  The  oxide  thus  obtained  ia
used  as  a  green  pigment  for  ohinu  and  enamel.  The  anhydrouH  chromic  oxide  obtained
from  chromyl  chloride.  CrO,CL,,  has  a  specific  gravity  of  K-31,  and  forms  almost  black
crystals,  which  give  a  green  powder.  They  »re  bard  enough  to  scratch  glass,  and  have  a
metallic  lustre.  The  erystalline  form  of  chromic  oxide  is  identical  with  thatnf  the  oxide
of  iron  and  alumina,  with  which  it  is  isomorphons.

'  "•  Tlia  most  important  ot  the  compounds  correspondiug  with  chromic  oxide  is  chrvmie
chloride.  Cr,Cla,  which  is  known  in  an  anhydrous  and  iu  a  hydrated  form.  It  resembles
rertio  and  aluminie  chlorides  in  many  respeots.  There  in  a  great  difference  between
the  anhydrouH  and  the  hydrated  cMoridee  ;  the  former  ia  insolable  in  water,  the  latter
easily  dissolves,  and  on  evaporation  its  solnlion  lorms  a  hygroscopic  masa  which  is  very
unalalilii  and  easily  evolves  hydrochloric  acid  when  heated  with  water.  The  anhydrona
Ibnn  isof  a  violet  colonr.  and  Wlihler  gives  the  following  method  for  its  preparation  ;  an
intimate  mixture  is  prepared  of  the  anbydroue  chromic  oxide  with  carbon  and  orgauic
maUer,  and  charged  into  a  wide  Infusible  glass  or  porcelain  tube  which  is  heated  in  a
conbustiimfuniucc;  one  eitnimil;  of  the  tnliecommunicatei  wilh  an  apparatus  geuemt-

K  in(  chlorine  which  \i  paK.>>ed  through  several  bottles  containing  sulphuric  acid  in  order

286  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

poundH  of  the  oxide  itself,  CrXj  or  Cr^Xu,  like  alumina,  which  it
resembles  in  forming  a  feeble  l>ase  easily  giving  double  and  basic  salts,
which  are  either  green  or  violet.

to  dry  it  perfooily  In^fort)  it  r«nu*)ieii  the  tube.  On  heating  the  x>ortion  of  the  tube  in
which  the  mixtiin*  is  placinl  and  passing  chlorine  throagh.  a  slightly  volatile  sublimate  of
ohromir  chloride,  OCI3  or  Cr.^.Cl^,  is  formed.  This  substance  forms  violet  tabular
ery»taU^  which  may  be  distilled  in  dry  chlorine  without  change,  but  which,  however,  re-
quire a  red  heat  for  their  volatilisation.  These  crystals  are  greasy  to  the  touch  and  in-
Moluble  in  water,  hut  if  they  be  ix>wdered  and  boiled  in  water  for  a  long  time  they  pa^
into  ri  grr«n  aolution.  Strong  sulphuric  acid  does  not  act  on  the  anhydrous  salt,  or
only  aots  with  exotHnling  slowness,  like  water.  Even  aqua  regia  and  other  acids  do  not
act  on  the  crystals,  and  alkalis  only  show  a  very  feeble  action.  The  specific  gravity  of
Uie  crystals  is  3*99.  When  fused  with  sodium  carbonate  and  nitre  they  give  sodium
chloride  and  iMitassium  ohromate,  and  when  ignited  in  air  they  form  green  chromic  oxide
and  evolve  chlorine.  On  ignition  in  a  stream  of  ammonia,  chromic  chloride  forms
sal-anunoniao  and  chromium  nitride,  CrN  (analogous  to  the  nitrides BN,A1N).  Mosberg  and
Peligot  Hhowe<l  that  when  chromic  chloride  is  ignited  in  hydrogen,  it  parts  with  one>third
of  its  chlorine,  forming  chromous  chloride,  Crd.,> — that  is,  there  is  formed  from  a  com-
]K>und  corrt»s))onding  with  chromic  oxide,  Cr-^O^,  a  compound  answering  to  the  suboxide,
chromous  oxide,  CrO — just  as  hydrogen  converts  ferric  chloride  into  ferrous  chloride  with
the  aid  of  heat.  Chrotnoua  chloride^  CrCl.;^  forms  colouriess  crystals  easily  soluble  in
water,  which  in  dissolving  evolve  a  considerable  amount  of  heat,  and  form  a  blue  liquid,
ca{Nible  of  absorbing  oxygen  from  the  air  with  great  facility,  being  converted  thereby
into  a  chromic  compound.

The  blue  solution  of  chromous  chloride  may  also  be  obtained  by  the  action  of  metallic
sine  on  the  green  solution  of  the  hydrated  chromic  chloride  ;  the  zinc  in  this  case  takes
up  chlorine  just  as  the  hydrc^n  did.  It  must  be  employed  in  a  large  excess.  Chromic
oxide  is  also  formed  in  the  action  of  zinc  on  chromic  chloride,  and  if  the  solution  remain
for  a  long  time  in  contact  with  the  zinc  the  whole  of  the  chromium  is  converted  into
chromic  oxychloride.  Other  chromic  salts  are  also  re<luced  by  zinc  into  chromous  salts,
CrX^,  just  us  the  ferric  salts  FeXj  are  converteil  into  ferrt^us  salts  FeX.^  by  it.  The
chromous  salts  are  excee<lingly  unstable  and  easily  oxidise  and  pass  into  chromic  salts ;
hence  the  re<luciiig  jwwer  of  these  salts  is  verj-  great.  From  cu|>ric  salts  they  separate
cuprous  salts,  frt^m  stannous  salts  they  precipitate  metallic  tin,  they  reduce  mercuric
salts  into  niercun>us  and  ferric  into  fem^us  salts.  Moreover,  they  absorb  oxygen  from
the  air  direi-tly.  With  ix)ta8sium  chromate  they  give  a  brown  precipitate  of  chromium
dioxide  or  of  chromic  oxide,  according  to  the  relative  amounts  of  the  substances  taken  :
CrOs  +  CrO  =  aCrO^  or  CrOj -f  3CrO  =  2Cr,,0T.  Aqueous  ammonia  gives  a  blue  precipi-
tate, and  in  the  presence  of  ammoniacal  salts  a  blue  liquid  is  obtained  which  turns  red
in  the  air  from  oxidation.  Tliis  is  acconiimnietl  by  the  fonnation  of  compounds  analo-
gous to  those  given  by  cobalt  (Chapter  XXII.)  A  t=olution  of  chromous  chloride  with  a
hot  saturated  solution  of  sodium  acetate.  C..H-,NaO..,  gives,  on  cooling,  transparent  red
crystals  of  chromous  acetate,  C|H,;Cr04,H>0.  This  salt  is  also  a  iK>werful  reducing
agent,  but  may  l>e  kept  for  a  long  time  in  a  vessel  full  of  carl)ouic  anhydride.

The  insoluble  anhydrous  r/iro/wic  c/i/orj</f  CrCl- verj- easily  ^xiwra  into  solution  in
the  presence  of  a  trace  (0"(H>4)  of  chromous  chloride  CrCl.,.  Thi>  remarkable  phe-
nomenon was  observed  by  Peligot  and  explained  by  Lowel  in  the  f»>llowing  manner:
chromous  cliloride,  as  a  lower  stage  of  oxidation,  is  capable  t)f  abs<^rbiiig  Ix^th  oxygen
and  chlorine,  combining  with  various  substances.  It  is  able  to  decompose  many
chloride^  by  taking  up  chlorine  from  them ;  thus  it  precipitates  mercurous  chloride  from
a  >4>lution  of  mercuric  chloride,  and  in  so  doing  passes  into  chromic  chloride:  4CrCl._»
-•2Ht'Cl2  =  C'rjCl,;-r*iHgCl.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  same  phenomemm  takes  place
when  the  anhydrous  chromic  chloride  ih  mixed  with  a  solution  of  chromous  chloride.
The  latter  will  then  take  up  a  portion  of  the  chlorine  of  the  former,  and  puss  into  a

OHROHIUH, MOLYBDENUI^  TCNOSTEN.  URANIDH, ETC. BB7

The  reduction  of  chromic  oxide — for  instance,  in  a  sulutinii  by  unc
^nd  Bulphuric  acid— leads  to  the  fonoation  of  cbromous  oxide,  CrO,  and

Boliible  hydrate  iif  duomic  chloride  (hidrnchloriiJe  nl  riiido  ot  dliromiDm).  imd  Ihe
originRl  »iiliydroafi  cUroinio  thloride  will  juvtt  iuto  iJiromoux  ohlciride.  The  pliromons
Dhloride  Ri-foimed  in  lliis  manner  will  then  act  »a  it  tresli  qauiLity  vl  the  ohntmie
chloride,  and  in  thia  miuiner  tnuiafer  it  entirely  into  salulioo  hb  hydrnto.  Thie  lie*  is
Canfirmed  b;  the  (set  that  other  dilorides,  CHpnble  oF  nbsofbing  chlorine  like  chiomone
chloride,  niso  induce  the  oolntion  oF  the  insolable  chromic  chloride — For  example,  ferrons
chloride.  FeClj,  and  foprODK  chloride.  The  preience  of  Kinc  also  aida  the  ulution  ol
ohroniic  oliloride,  owing  to  its  conTerting  a  portinn  oF  it  into  GbromoaB  chloride.  The
solution  of  chromic  cidoride  in  water  obtaincid  by  Iheu  niethodit  ia  perFectlj  identical
with  that  which  ie  lormed  by  dissolving  chromic  hydroiide  in  hydrochloric  acid.  On
eTaporating  the  green  tolulion  obtained  in  thin  manner,  it  given  a  green  maaa,  con-
tninlng  water.  On  Further  heating  it  leaven  a  solnble  chromic  uiycliloride,  and  when
ignited  it  Rial  tonnt  an  insoluble  oiychloride  and  then  chromic  oiide;  but  no  anby-
drona  chromic  cMoride,  Cr,Clr.,  is  farmed  hf  heating  the  aqneouB  solation  oF  chromic
chloHde,  which  forma  an  important  fact  in  sap]>ort  ot  the  view  that  the  green  tolu-
lion oF  chromic  chloride  is  nothing  else  but  bydrochloride  oF  oxide  oF  chromium.  At
100°  the  composition  oF  the  green  hydmte  a  Cr,C1^9H.jO.  and  on  evaporation  at  the
ordinary  tcmperatnre  over  H3SO,  crystals  ar«  obtained  with  19  equivalents  oF  water ;
the  red  inwu  obUined  at  130°  oontaina  Cr,O„4Cr]Cl„.:j4Hi0.  Tlie  greater  {lortiDB  iif
it  is  soluble  in  water,  like  the  mass  which  is  formed  at  1B0°.  Tlie  latter  contains
Cr^],9Cr]Cl,„nB.jO^H(Cr,OCl„»H.iO|— that  in,  it  preseDts  the  same  composition  as
chromic  chloride  in  wliich  one  atom  oF  oxygen  replaces  two  oF  chlorine.  And  if  the
hydrate  oF  uliromlc  chloride  be  regarded  u  Cr.jOj.eQCt,  the  aubstaitce  winch  in  ob-
tained shnold  be  regarded  as  Crt05,4HCl  combined  with  water,  H,0.  The  addition
of  alkalis— For  example,  baryta — to  a  sotutlon  of  chromic  chloride  immediately  produces
a  precipitate,  which,  however,  re-disBolves  on  shaking,  owing  to  the  [ormatiun  of  one  ot
the  oiychlorides  just  mentioned,  which  may  be  regarded  on  batir-  lall*.  Thus  we  may
reprnBeut  the  prodact  oF  the  change  produced  on  chromic  chloride  nnder  the  iiiflaence
of  water  and  heat  b;  the  following  Formalee  :  Stat  Cr,0^ilHCl  or  Cr}Clg,BH.O  is  Formed,
then  CriOj,4HCl,H»0  or  (.■r,0Cl,.3Hi^,  and  laotly  Cr]OibeHCi,BH,0  or  CrjO,Cla,8H^.
In  all  three  cases  there  are  S  equivalents  oF  chromium  to  at  least  3  eqnivaleuts  of
water.  These  compounds  may  be  r^orded  as  being  intermediate  between  chromic
hydroxide  and  chloride;  chromic  chloride  Is  Cr,Cl,i,  the  Sr«l  oxychloride  Cr,|OHI,Cl„
the  second  Cr]tOH),a„  and  the  hydrate  Cr.,(OHI,^tbal  is,  the  chlorine  is  replaced  by
hydroxyL

H  is  very  important  to  remark  two  cironmslantes  ill  respect  to  this;  {II  That  the
whole  of  the  chlorine  in  the  above  compoandi  is  not  prBcipilated  From  their  solutions
by  silver  nitrate ;  thus  the  normal  salt  of  the  cuntpuaition  Cr;Cl,»<)U,0  only  gives  up
two-lhird«  of  its  chlorine ;  therefore  Peligot  snpposaa  that  the  normal  salt  coiitains  the
oxychloride  combined  with  hydrochloric  acid:  Cr.jClg  +  9H,O^Cr,0,Cl„4HCl,  and  thai
the  chlorine  held  as  hydrochloric  acid  reacts  HiUi  the  silrer,  whilst  that  hi>ld  in  the
oxychloride  does  not  enter  into  reaction,  JQSt  an  we  observe  a  very  Feebly-developed
lacnlty  for  reaction  in  the  anhydrous  chromic  chloride;  and  (S)  iF  the  grevii  aqneans
solution  oF  CrClj  he  leFt  to  stand  For  some  linae,  it  ultimately  turns  violet :  in  this  form
the  whole  ot  the  cblorioD  is  ptedpitated  by  AgNO.^,  whilst  bailing  re-converts  it  into  the
rariety.  Liiwel  obtained  the  violet  solution  ot  hydrochloride  of  chromic  oxide  by
jKising  the  violet  chronuc  sulphate  with  barinm  chloride.  Silver  nitrate  pracipi-
all  the  chlorine  from  this  violet  modiScalion :  but  it  the  violet  solution  be  boiled
■od  so  converted  into  the  green  modification,  silver  nitrala  then  only  preci]>ititlr-i  a  portion
ot  the  chlorino.

Beconn  (18ao-189S|  obuined  a  cryslAllohydrsle  of  violet  I'hmmiuui  sulphate,
Crs(30tl],  with IS  or  15  U^O By boilinE a  aolutton of this  crystalloliydrate,  he

288  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

its  salts,  CrX.2j  of  a  blue  colour  (see  Notes  7  and  7  *>^»). The  further

converted  it  into  the  green  salt,  which,  when  treated  with  alkah's,  gave  a  precipitate
of  Cr^O-.tSH^O,  Holuble  in  2H.2SO1  (and  not  3),  and  only  forming  the  basic  salt,
Cr'^(OH).2(304)3.  He  therefore  concludeB  that  the  green  saltH  are  basic  salts.  The
cryoHcopic  detenninations  made  by  A.  Speransky  (1892)  and  Marchetti  (1892)  give  a
greater  '  dcprcHHion '  for  the  violet  than  the  green  salts,  that  is,  indicate  a  greater
molecular  weight  for  the  green  salts.  But  as  Etard,  by  lieating  the  violet  sulphate  to
100'^,  converted  it  into  a  green  salt  of  the  same  composition,  but  with  a  smaller  amount
of  H.^0,  it  follows  that  the  formation  of  a  basic  salt  alone  is  insufficient  to  explain  the
difference  between  the  green  and  violet  varieties,  and  this  is  also  shown  by  the  fact  that
BaCl^  precipitates  the  whole  of  the  sulphuric  acid  of  the  violet  salt,  and  only  a  portion
of  that  of  the  green  salt.  A.  Speransky  also  showed  that  the  molecular  electro-
conductivity  of  the  green  solutions  is  less  than  that  of  the  violet.  It  is  also  known  that
the  passtige  of  the  former  into  the  latter  is  accompanied  by  an  increase  of  volume,  and,
according  to  Recoura,  by  an  evolution  of  heat  also.

Piccini's  researclies  (1894)  throw  an  important  light  upon  the  peculiarities  of  the
green  chromium  trichloride  (or  chromic  chloride) ;  he  showed  (1)  that  AgF  (in  contra-
distinction to  the  other  salts  of  silver)  precipitates  all  the  chlorine  from  an  aqoeous
solution  of  the  green  variety ;  (2)  that  solutions  of  green  CrCls.CHijO  in  ethyl  alcohol
and  acetone  precipitate  all  their  chlorine  when  mixed  with  a  similar  solution  of  AgNO.^ ;
(8)  that  the  rise  of  the  boiling-point  of  the  ethyl  alcohol  and  acetone  green  solutions  of
CrCl.-„fiH..C)  (Chapter  VII.,  Note  27  bis)  shows  that  i  in  this  case  (as  in  the  aqueous  solu-
tions of  MgSO^  and  HgCl.j)  is  nearly  equal  to  1,  that  is,  that  they  are  like  solutions  of
non-condnctors ;  (4)  that  a  solution  of  green  CrClj  in  methyl  alcohol  at  first  precipitates
about  S  of  its  chlorine  (an  aqueous  solution  about  §)  when  treated  with  AgNOs,  l>ot
after  a  time  the  whole  of  the  clilorine  is  precipitated  ;  and  (5)  that  an  aqueous  eolation
of  the  green  variety  gradually  passes  into  the  violet,  while  a  methyl  alcoholic  solaUon
preserves  its  green  colour,  both  of  itself  and  also  after  the  whole  of  the  chlorine  has
been  precipitated  by  AgNO-.  If,  however,  in  an  aqueous  or  methyl  alcholic  solntion
only  a  i)ortion  of  the  chlorine  be  precipitated,  the  solution  gradually  turns  violet.
In  mv  oi)iiiion  tho  general  meaning  of  all  these  observations  requires  further  elucidation
and  explanation,  which  should  be  in  hannony  with  the  theor>'  of  solutions.  Recoura,
moreov«»r,  obtaini'd  compounds  of  the  green  salt,  Cro(SO|)-,  witli  1,  2,  and  3  molecules  of
H.,S()|,  K.,SO„  and  even  a  compound  Cr.j(S0,).-,HX'r04.  By  neutralising  the  sulphuric
jvcid  of  the  comiMiundrt  of  Cri(SO,)-  and  H.,,SO|  with  caustic  8oda>  Recoura  obtained  an
evolution  of  38  thousand  calories  i)er  each  2NttH0,  while  free  H-jSOj  only  gives  SO'S
thousand  calories.  Recoura  is  of  opinion  that  special  chromo  sulphuric  acids,  for
instance  (CrSO,)H..SO,-- iCr.j(SO|).-,H,;SO,,  are  formed.  With  a  still  larger  excess  of
sulphuric  acid,  Recoura  obtained  salts  containing  a  still  greater  number  of  sulphuric
acid  riwlicles,  but  even  this  method  does  not  explain  the  difference  between  the  green  and

violet  salts.

These  facts  nuist  naturally  be  taken  into  consideratitm  in  order  to  arrive  at
any  complete  decision  as  to  the  cause  of  the  different  modifications  of  the  chromic  salts.
We  muv  ob«erv«'  that  the  green  modification  of  chromic  chloride  does  not  give  double
salts  with  the  metallic  chlorides,  whiUt  the  violet  variety  forms  comi>ounds  C^2C1^J,2RC1
(where  R-an  alkali  metal),  which  are  obtained  by  heating  the  chromates  with  an  excess
of  hvdrochloric  acid  and  evaporating  tlu*  solution  until  it  actjuires  a  violet  colour.  As
the  result  of  all  the  existing  researches  on  the  green  and  violet  chronuc  salts,  it  appears
to  me  most  probable  that  their  difference  is  deterinined  by  the  feeble  basic  character  of
rhroniic  oxide,  by  its  faculty  of  givin«,'  basic  salts,  and  by  the  colloidal  properties  of  its
hvdroxide  (those  three  proi>ertieH  are  mutually  connected),  and  moreover,  it  seems  to  me
that  th»'  r«*lati(m  between  the  green  and  violet  salts  of  chromic  oxide  best  answers  to  the
relation  of  the  purpureo  to  the  luteo  cobaltic  salts  (C'lmpter  XXII.,  Xote  35).  This
subject  cannot  y«'t  be  considered  as  exhausted  (srr  Note  7V

We  mav  here  observe  that  with  tin  the  chromic  salts,  CrX-,  give  at  low  temperatures

CIIFiOMIUM, MOLYBDENUM, TUNGSTEN. UKANIUM, ETC. 289

reduction  ^  of  oxide  of  chromium  and  its  corresponding  compounds
gives  DiftalUc  chroinium.  Deville  obtained  it  (probably  containing
carbon)  l)v  reducing  chromic  oxide  with  carbon,  at  a  temperature  near
the  melting  point  of  platinum,  about  1750^,  but  the  metal  itself  does
not  fuse  at  this  temperature.  Chromium  has  a  steel-grey  colour  and  is
very  hard  (sp.  gr.  5*9),  takes  a  good  polish,  and  dissolves  in  hydro-
chloric acid,  but  cold  dilute  sulphuric  and  nitric  acids  have  no  action
upon  it.  Bunsen  obtained  metallic  chromium  by  decomposing  a  solution
of  chromic  chloride,  Cr^Clg,  by  a  galvanic  current,  as  scales  of  a  grey
colour  (sp.  gr.  7*3).  Wohler  obtained  crystalline  chromium  by  igniting
a  mixture  of  the  anhydrous  chromic  chloride  CrjCl,;  {see  Note  7  bis)
with  finely-divided  zinc,  and  sodium  and  potassium  chlorides,  at  the
lK)iling-point  of  zinc. When  the  resultant  mass  has  cooled  the  zinc  may

CrX.2  and  SnXv;,  whilst  at  high  temperatures,  on  the  contrary,  CrX<2  reduces  the  metal
from  its  Halts  SnXj.  The  reaction,  therefore,  belongs  to  the  class  of  reversible  reac-
tions (Beketoff).

Poulene  obtained  anhydrous  CrFs  (sp.  gr.  3*78)  and  CrF.^  (sp.  gr.  4'11)  by  the
action  of  gaseous  HF  upon  CrCLj.  A  solution  of  fluoride  of  chromium  is  employed  as  a
mordant  in  dyeing.  Recoura  (181)0)  obtained  green  and  violet  varieties  of  Cr^BrejCHaO.
The  green  variety  can  only  be  kept  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  HBr  in  the  solution  ;
if  alone  its  solution  easily  passes  into  the  violet  variety  with  evolution  of  heat.

^  The  reduction  of  metallic  chromium  proceeds  with  comparative  ease  in  aqueous
solutions.  Thus  the  action  of  sodium  amalgams  upon  a  strong  solution  of  Cr^Cl^}  gives
(first  CrCl.^)  an  amalgam  of  chromium  from  which  the  mercury  may  be  easily  driven  off
by  heating  (in  hydrogen  to  avoid  oxidation),  and  there  remains  a  spongy  mass  of  easily
oxidizable  chromium.  Plaset  (1891),  by  passing  an  electric  current  through  a  solution  of
chrome  alum  mixed  with  a  small  amount  of  H2SO4  and.  K^jSO^,  obtained  hard  scales  of
chromium  of  a  bluish-white  colour  possessing  great  hardness  and  stability  (under  the
action  of  water,  air,  and  acids).  Glatzel  (1890)  reduced  a  mixture  of  2KC1  +  Cr.^Clrt  by
heating  it  to  redness  with  shavings  of  magnesium.  The  metallic  chromium  thus
obtained  has  the  ap^iearance  of  a  fine  light-grey  p)owder  which  is  seen  to  be  crystalline
under  the  niicro8coi>e  ;  its  sp.  gr.  at  16'  is  6*7284.  It  fuses  (with  anhydrous  borax)  only  at
the  highest  temperatures,  and  after  fusion  presents  a  silver- white  fracture.  The  strongest
magnet  has  no  action  upon  it.

Moissan  (1898)  obtained  chromium  by  reducing  the  oxide  Cr.^Oj  with  carbon  in  the
i^lectrical  furnace  (Chapter  VIII.,  Note  17)  in  9-10  minutes  with  a  current  of  850  amperes  and
no  volts.  The  mixture  of  oxide  and  carbon  gives  a  bright  ingot  weighing  100-110  grams.
A  current  of  100  ampiTes  and  50  volts  completes  the  experiment  upon  a  smaller  quantity
of  material  in  15  minutes ;  a  current  of  SOampI'res  and  50  volts  gave  an  ingot  of  10  grams
in  30-40  minutes.  The  resultant  carbon  alloy  is  more  or  less  rich  in  chromium
(from  H7;J7-9r7  p.c).  To  obtain  the  metal  free  from  carbon,  the  alloy  is  broken  into
large  lumps,  mixed  with  oxide  of  chromium,  put  into  a  crucible  and  covered  with  &
layer  of  oxide.  This  mixture  is  then  heated  in  tl»e  electric  furnace  and  the  pure  metal
is  obtained.  This  reduction  can  also  be  carried  on  with  chrome  iron  ore  FeOCr^Oj
w^hich  occurs  in  nature.  In  this  case  a  homogeneous  alloy  of  iron  and  chromium
is  obtained.  If  tliis  alloy  be  thrown  in  lumps  into  molten  nitre,  it  forms  insoluble
sesquioxide  of  iron  and  a  soluble  alkaline  chromatc.  This  alloy  of  iron  and
chromium  dissolved  in  molten  steel  (chrome  steel)  renders  it  hard  and  tough,  so  that
sucIj  strol  has  many  valuable  ai)plication8.  The  alloy,  containing  about  3  p.c.  Cr  and
about  i:}  |).c.  carbon,  is  even  harder  than  the  ordinary  kinds  of  temi)ered  steel  and  has  a
fine  granul.ir  fracture.  The  usual  mode  of  preparing  the  ferrochromes  for  adding  io
steel  is  by  fusing  powdered  chrome  iron  ore  under  fluxes  in  a  graphite  crucible.

VOL. II.  U

290

I'KIXCIPLES OF  CHKMISTRY

be  dissolved  in  dilute  nitric  ncid,  nnd  grey  crystalline  chromium  (sp.  gr.
6'81)  is  left  l)eliind.  Frt?iiiy  also  prepared  crystalline  cbromiuia  by  the
action  of  the  vapour  of  sodium  on  anhydrous  chromic  chloride  in  a
stream  of  liydrogen,  using  the  apparatus  shown  in  the  accompanying
drawing,  and  placing  the  sodium  and  the  chromic  chloride  in  separata
porcelain  boats.  The  tube  cimtaining  these  boats  is  only  heated  when
it  is  quite  full  of  dry  hydrogen.  The  crystals  of  metallic  chromium
obtained  in  the  tut)e  are  grey  cubes  having  n  considerable  hardness  and
withstanding  the  action  of  powerful  acids,  and  even  of  aqua  regia.
The  chromium  obtained  by  Wohler  by  the  action  of  a  galvanic  current
is,  on  the  contrary,  acted  on  under  these  conditions.  The  reason  of
this  difference  must  be  looked  for  in  the  presence  of  imparities,  and  in
the  crystalline  structure. But  in  any  case,  among  the  properties  of

metallic  chroiuiutii,  the  following  may  lie  considered  established  :  it  is
white  in  cdliiur,  with  a.  specific  gravity  of  about  6'7,  is  extremely  hard
in  a  crystalline  fnrm,  is  not  oxidised  by  ;iir  at  the  ordinary  temperature,
and  with  carbon  it  forms  alloys  like  cast  iron  and  Steel.

The  two  analogues  of  chromium,  m-fffl.d'-nin,.  and  tungiU-n  (or  wol-
fram), arc  oE  still  rarer  occurroiiee  in  natuiv,  and  form  acid  oxides,  ROj,
which  arc  still  les.s  energetic  than  CrO:,.  Tungsten  occurs  in  the  some-
what rare  miiiends.xcA'Wi/'',  CaWft,,  and  irolfrom  ;  the  latter  being  an
isomorphous  mixture  of  the  nurttial  tungstntes  of  iron  and  inangnnese,
(MnFejWO,.  Mulybdonuin  is  nicist  frei]uctitly  met  withas  mol^bU'-nUe,
MoS;,,  which  presents  a  certain  resemblance  to  graphite  in  its  physical
prcijiertii's  and  softness.  It  also  occurs,  but  much  more  rarely,  as  a
yellow  lead  ore,  PblloO,.  In  both  these  forms  molybdenum  occurs  in
the  primary  nwks,  in  gi-anites,  gneiss,  .tc,  and  in  iron  and  copper  ores

CHROMIUM, MOLYBDENUM, TUNGSTEN, URANIU3I, ETC. 291

in  Saxony,  Sweden,  and  Finland.  Tungsten  ores  are  sometimes  met
with  in  considerable  masses  in  the  primary  rocks  of  Bohemia  and
Saxony,  and  also  in  England,  America,  and  the  Urals.  The  pre-
liminary treatment  of  the  ore  is  very  simple  ;  for  example,  the  sulphide,
M0S2,  is  roasted,  and  thus  converted  into  sulphurous  anhydride  and
molybdic  anhydride,  MoOj,  which  is  then  dissolved  in  alkalis,  generally
in  ammonia.  The  ammonium  molybdate  is  then  treated  with  acids,
when  the  sparingly  soluble  molybdic  acid  is  precipitated.  Wolfram  is
treated  in  a  different  manner.  Most  frequently  the  finely-ground  ore  is
repeatedly  boiled  with  hydrochloric  and  nitric  acids,  and  the  resultant
S(^>lutions  (of  salts  of  manganese  and  iron)  poured  off,  until  the  dark
br.jwn  mass  of  ore  disappears,  whilst  the  tungstic  acid  remains,  mixed
with  silica,  as  an  insoluble  residue  ;  it  is  treated  also  with  ammonia,
and  is  thus  converted  into  soluble  ammonium  tungstate,  which  passes
into  solution  and  yields  tungstic  acid  when  treated  with  acids.  This
hydrate  is  then  ignited,  and  leaves  tungstic  anhydride.  The  general
character  of  molylniic  and  tungstic  anhydrides  is  analogous  to  that  of
chromic  anhydride ;  they  are  anhydrides  of  a  feebly  acid  character,
which  easily  give  polyacid  salts  and  colloid  solutions.^  ^^*

^  '»"  The  atomic  comixjsition  of  the  tungsten  and  molybdenum  conipoundw  is  taken  as
being  identical  with  that  of  the  compounds  of  sulphur  and  chromium,  because  (1)  both
these  metals  give  two  oxides  in  which  the  amounts  of  oxygen  per  given  amount  of  metal
stand  in  the  ratio  2:3;  (2)  the  higher  oxide  is  of  the  latter  kind,  and,  like  chromio
and  sulphuric  anhydrides,  it  has  an  acid  character ;  (S)  certain  of  the  molybdates  are  iso-
morphous  with  the  sulphates ;  (4)  the  specific  heat  of  tungsten  is  0*0334,  consequently
the  product  of  the  atomic  weight  and  si)ecific  heat  is  G'15,  like  that  of  the  other  elements
—  it  is  the  same  with  molybdenum,  96*0  x  00722  ~  6-9  ;  (5)  tungsten  forms  with  chlorine
not  only  comi)ound8  WCl*},  WCI5,  and  WOCI4,  but  also  WO-iCl^,  a  volatile  substtuice  the
analogue  of  chromyl  chloride,  CrO.^Cl.^,  and  sulphuryl  chloride,  SO-^Cl.^.  Molybdenum
gives  the  chlorine  compounds,  MoCl^,  MoCl-,(?),  M0CI4  (fuses  at  194°,  boils  at  268°;
according  to  Debray  it  contains  MoCl.O,  MoOClj,  MoOjCL,  and  MoO..,(OH)Cl.  The
existence  of  tungsten  hexachloride,  WCl,,,  is  an  excellent  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  type
SX,,  ai)pears  in  the  analogues  of  sulphur  as  in  SO- ;  (6)  the  vai)our  density  accurately
dct«'nuined  for  the  chlorine  compounds  MoClj,  WCl,;,  WCI5,  WOCl|  (Roseoe)  leaves  no
doubt  as  to  the  molecular  composition  of  the  compounds  of  tungsten  and  molybdenum,
for  tlu'  observed  and  calculated  results  entirely  agree.

Tun^'steii  is  sometimes  called  scheele  in  honour  of  Scheele,  who  discovered  it  in  1781
and  riiolyVxlenum  in  1778.  Tungsten  is  also  known  as  wolfram  ;  t)ie  former  name  was  the
name  given  to  it  by  Scheele,  because  he  extracted  it  from  the  mineral  then  known  as
tungsten  and  now  called  scheelite,  CaWO^.  The  researches  of  Ros<;oe,  Blomstrand  and
others  have  subsequently  thrown  considerable  light  on  the  whole  history  of  the  conn)ounds
of  molybdenum  and  tungsten,

Tlu'  aiinnonium  salts  of  tungsten  and  molybdic  acids  when  ignited  leave  the  anhy-
drides which  nsemble  each  other  in  many  resjKH-ts.  Tungntcn  anhydride^  ^O-^  is  a
yellowi^li  substance,  which  only  fuses  at  a  strong  heat,  and  has  a  sp.  gr.  of  6*8.  It  ie
iu^olublf  both  in  water  and  acid,  but  solutions  of  the  alkalis,  and  even  of  the  alkali  car-
boiiiit«--.<lissolve  it,  esi)ecially  when  heated,  forming  alkaline  salts.  Mohjhdic  anhiidridey
MoO-,  i>  obtiiiiied  by  igniting  the  acid  (hydrate)  or  the  ammonium  sadt,  and  forms  a
white  mass  which  fuses  at  a  red  heat,  and  solidifies  to  a  yellow  crystalline  nniss  of  sp.  gr.

u  2

292  rRlNClPLE> OF CHE>U>TKV

Hydrogen  (which  does  not  directly  form  componnds  with  Cr,  Mo,

4'4:  whilst  OQ  farther  beting  in  open  vessels  or  in  a  stream  of  air  thi»  anhrdride
$ublimr*  in  pe^irly  scales — this  enables  it  to  be  4^»btAine<i  in  a  tolerablv  pore  state.  Water
di*ir*1re»  it  in  snudl  qoantities — namely.  1  f«art  rvqaire>  6V»*  parts  of  vater  for  its  solaiioo.
The  hTdrate*  of  m>lvbd:c  anhydride  are  soluble  <if*o  in  acidt  «a  hydrate,  HJIoOi.  is
obtained  from  the  nitric  acid  solaticm  of  the  ammoniom  salt  s  vhich  forms  one  of  their
distinctions  from  the  tongr^tic  acids.  Bat  after  ignitiop  molybdic  anhydride  is  insoluble
in  acidSf  like  tongue  anhydride ;  alkalis  dissolve  this  anhydride,  easily  forming  molybdatea.
Pota.'vaam  bitartrate  dissolves  the  anhydride  vith  the  aid  of  heat.  None  of  the  acida
yet  considered  by  ns  form  so  many  different  salts  with  one  and  the  ftame  base  (alkali)  as
molybdic  and  tongstic  acids.  The  compo^iticm  of  the$e  salt»,  and  their  properties  alsoi,
Tary  considerably.  The  most  important  discovery  in  this  respect  was  made  by  Margne-
rite  and  Laorent,  who  showed  that  the  salt^  which  contain  a  large  proportion  of  tnngstie
acid  are  easily  sol  able  in  water,  and  ascribed  this  property  to  the  fact  that  tangsiic  acid
may  be  obtained  in  trreral  staiet.  The  common  tongstates,  obtained  with  an  excess  of
alkali,  have  an  alkaline  reaction,  and  on  the  addition  of  snlphoric  or  hydrochUxric  acid
first  deposit  an  acid  salt  and  then  a  hydrate  of  tangstic  acid,  which  is  insoluble  both  in
water  and  acids ;  bat  if  instead  of  salpharic  or  hydrochloric  acids,  we  add  acetic  or  phos-
phoric acid,  or  if  the  tongstate  be  saturated  with  a  fresh  qnsntity  of  tongstic  acid,  which
may  be  done  by  boiling  the  solution  of  the  alkali  salt  with  the  precipitated  tungstic  scid^
a  solution  i*>  obtained  which,  on  the  addition  of  sulphuric  or  a  similar  acid,  does  not
give  a  precipitate  of  tungstic  acid  at  the  ordinary  or  at  higher  temperatures.  The  solution
then  contains  peculiar  salts  of  tungstic  acid,  and  if  there  be  an  excess  of  acid  it  also
contains  tungstic  acid  itself;  Laurent,  Riche.  and  others  called  it  metaiung^ic  aeidy  and
it  is  am  known  by  this  name.  Those  salts  which  with  acids  immediately  give  the  in-
soluble tungstic  acid  have  the  composition  R.WO*,  RHWO4,  whilst  those  which  give
the  soluble  metatangittic  acid  contain  a  far  greater  pro]iortion  of  the  acid  elements.
Scheibler  obtaineil  the  (soluble*  metatang->tic  acid  itself  by  treating  the  soluble  barium
(meta)  tetratangstAte,  BaO,4  WO-,  with  vnlphnric  acid.  SQbse<}aent  research  showed  the
existence  of  a  similar  phenomenon  for  molybdic  acid.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  is  a
case  of  colloidal  modifications.

Many  chemists  have  worked  on  the  various  salts  formtnl  by  molybdic  and  tun<^stic
acids.  The  tungstates  have  be<»n  inve«tijratf»d  by  Marguerite,  Laurent,  Marignac^
itiche,  Scheibler.  Anthon,  and  others.  The  molyUlates  were  partially  studied  bv  "the
same  chemists,  but  chiefly  by  Struve  and  Svanl>erg,  Dtlafontaine.  and  others.  It  apptars
that  for  a  given  amount  of  base  the  salts  contain  one  to  eijrht  equivalents  of  molybdic  or
tangxtic  anhydride  ;  i>.  if  the  base  have  the  comix)sitior»  RO.  then  the  highest  proportion
of  base  will  be  contained  by  the  salts  of  the  comjwsition  ROWOj  or  ROM0O5 — that  is,  by
thr>se  salts  which  corres[)ond  with  the  normal  acids  HjWO^  and  H  .MoO^,  of  the  same  nature
as  salphuric  acid  ;  but  there  also  exist  salts  of  the  composition  RO/2WO3,  HOjSWO^
ROjHWOj.  The  water  contained  in  the  composition  of  many  of  the  acid  salts  is  oft*  n
not  taken  into  a<c<»unt  in  the  above.  Tl:e  properties  of  the  siilts  holding  different  pro-
I>ortionH  of  acid-  vary  considerably,  but  one  salt  may  U'  converted  into  another  by  the
addition  of  acid  or  ba>e  with  great  facility,  and  the  greater  the  i'ro|K)rtionof  the  elements
of  the  acid  in  a  salt,  the  more  stable,  within  a  certain  limit,  is  its  solution  and  the  salt
itself.

The  mont  common  ammonium  molylxlate  has  the  comix'»sition  (NH4HO)^,H.,0,7MoOi
(or,  Hccordinji  to  Mari}^iac  and  others,  XH4HM0O4),  ami  is  prej^red  by  evaporating  sji
ammoniacal  sr>lulion  of  molybdic  acid.  It  is  used  in  the  laboratory  for  precipitating
plioK[»hnric  acid,  and  i-^  purified  for  tliis  purj>ose  by  mixin};  its  solution  with  a  small
quantity  of  niapiesiiim  nitrate,  in  order  to  precipitate  any  phosphoric  acid  present,  filter-
ing, and  tiien  addiiig  nitric  acid  and  evaporatirg  to  Trym  s«i.  A  pure  ammonium  molvb-
daU*  free  from  [»liosi»horic  acid  may  tl.en  In?  extracted  from  the  residue.

Pho«iphoric  aci  1  fi>nns  in-oluhle  comp.  unds  with  the  oxides  of  uranium  and  iron
tin,  bismuth,  tVc.  having  fecM.*  basic  and  even  acid  iroi>ertits. This  perhaps  depends

CflROMTlTM.  MOLYBDESUW.  TUNGSTEN,  rRAHnW,  ETC. 293
*»nd  W)  reduces  moljbdio  and  tungstie  unhydride  nt  a  red  heat ;  aiid

on  the  tact  that  Lhe  Btomi  i  f  Ixydtogva  in  pIuMiilinric  acid  ani  of  u  vciy  dillertnt
obBTOcter,  lu  He  anv  aboro.  Tluwe  atoaip  al  liyilrogsd  whidi  are  ra|ilitci>d  nitli  dilUcDlty
by  wnmoniom,  lodiani,  .tc,  mre  prububiy  eiurilj  mpUced  by  tifebly  energelie  uid
gn>a[>«— tliat  is,  the  (ormatiou  ol  particular  complel  »llHiliuii«a  niay  bo  fipeotod  to
take  iln'X  at  lhe  eipeDH  ol  Ihne  >Uim«  of  tba  hydrogen  o[  pbo»|i|]aric  itcid  uid  ur
oertHm  feebis  metnllio  ueidi;  and  llieae  ■ubiUocfls  Will  titill  lie  scids,  becniuo  the
bydnigDn  of  lhe  t>l""plioric  noida  and  metoillic  wids,  which  ii  easily  repUced  by  metala,
ia  not  removed  by  Ihoit  mataal  combination,  hat  remuini  in  tha  reaultiint  compound.
Soch  ■ccmclunon  is  TerilieS  in  the  ;)i^(^Ao»M][^[Jic  onili  obtaintid  UObUI  by  Oebny.
II  a.  gobitioB  of  ftmmoniam  niolybdole  bo  acidified,  uid  a,  small  amonnt  of  a  oolutian  lit
may  bn  Acid)  contiining  orthriphoiiphoric  acid  or  its  salts  bo  added  to  it  (su  that  there  ■»
al  leant  10  purls  ol  molybdii'  acid  present  to  I  part  of  phosphoric  aoidl,theu  after  a  period
ity-tuuT  houTb  the  whole  ol  the  phosphoricucid  is  separated  oflnycllinr  precipitate,
itoioing,  however,  not  more  than  B  to  1  p.c.  of  phorphorio  auhydrid«,  about  9  p.D.  of
monia,  about  HI  ]).c.  of  molybdic  aiihydiidr,  and  aboal  1  p.c.  oF  water.  The  (ormolioii
a  this  preci]Htate  is  so  distinct  lUid  so  caoipletc  that  this  method  is  employed  for  the  di*-
enrery  and  sepuation  nl  the  snisllettqiuintilieH  of  phosphoric  acid.  Phusphoric  acid  wae
(□and  to  bv  present  in  the  mmjurity  ol  rotika  by  this  means.  The  precipitate  is  soluble
in  ainmouia  and  ita  ealts,  in  albolLH  and  phaapbateSr  but  is  perfectly  insolnble  in  nitric,
fmlphuric,  and  ijydroclitoric  acids  in  the  presence  ol  ammonium  molybdate.  Tbeaom|>ii-
sitian  of  the  precipitate  appears  tta  vary  nniler  the  conditions  of  ita  precipitation,  bat  its
nature  became  cIbbt  when  the  aoid  corresponding  with  it  was  obtained.  If  the  above-
described  yellow  precipitate  bo  boiled  in  aigna  regia,  the  ammonia  ia  destroyed,  and
an  ao id  ifi  obtained  in  solution,  which,  when  evaporated  in  theair,cryatallibesout  inyuUuw
oblique  prisms  ol  approximately  Uiecoin|>Dsitiiin  FjOj,20Hi>O],SBH,O.  Such  an  unnsoal
proportion  ol  component  porta  is  explained  by  the  nbnie-menUonod  considerations.  We
«aw  above  that  molybdic  acid  easily  give*  solta  R,OnMaOjntII.jO,  which  we  may  imagine
to  eorreopond  to  n  hydratv  XoOiiHOy^nUaO^iitB^O.  And  suppose  that  aucb  a  hydrate
reocta  on  ortUophoaphoric  acid,  [arming  water  and  compouuda  ol  the  composition
MoO,,(HP04(nMo03(HH.jO  or  MoO;(H.jPO,>jhMoO!iIhH.,0  ;  Ihii.  is  octnally  the  comiwi-
tiou  of  phosphomolybdic  acid.  Probably  it  contains  a  portion  ol  the  hydroKeu  replaceable
by  metals  of  both  the  acids  H^PO,  and  ol  H.jHoO,.  Tlie  cryatullino  acid  abore  is
probably  H.-,MoPO„eUoO;„laH,a,  This  acid  n  really  tribosic.  because  its  aqaeons
solution  precipitates  salta  of  potossiuDi,  smmouiam,  rubidium  (but  not  litbiam  and
sodium)  from  aciil  lolution;  and  gives  f  i/elloti/  preoifutate  ol  the  composiUon
B,HoPO,:9MoO,,SIL,0.  where  R  ^  NH,.  Sesides  these,  salts  of  another  componlioa
may  be  obtained,  as  woald  be  expected  from  the  preceding.  These  salts  are  only  stable
in  acid  wintions  (which  is  naturally  dne  to  their  containing  an  excess  of  asid  oxides),
whiUt  under  the  action  ol  alkalis  they  give  colourleH  phosphomolybdatae  of  the  compo-
sition R,MoP0.'bMoO.i,SU,0.  The  correspondiDg  salts  of  potassium,  silver,  ammonium,
an  eanily  wlubte  in  watar  and  orystallino.

Phosphomolybdic  acid  is  on  euunple  oF  the  eompUx  inorganie  aeiiU  flrst  obtained
by  Morignoc  and  afterwards  generalised  and  studied  in  detail  by  Gibbs.  We  shall
afterwards  meet  with  several  eiam|t1es  of  such  acids,  and  we  will  now  turn  attention  to
ibe  fact  that  thoy  are  usually  formed  by  weak  polybasic  acids  (boric,  sihcic,  molybdic,
^c),  and  in  certain  respecta  resemble  the  cobaltic  and  anch  simitar  complex  compounds,
with  which  we  shall  become  acquainted  in  the  following  chapter. Au  on  example  we  will

will  iUuatrata  the  possibility  of  a  considerable  complexity  in  the  comjioHLtion  of  solta
The  action  of  ammomnm  niolybdate  n|ion  a  dilate  solution  oF  purpureo- cobaltic  salts  {tea
Chapter  XSII.)  ocidolated  with  acetic  acid  gives  a  salt  which  after  drying  at  100°  has  t^e
compoBitinoCo,0;10NH;7HoOj3R,0.  Afteiignition thissaltleaveaaresidoi  '
composition  SCoOTHoOi.  An  analogous  compound  is  alsoobtoined  For  tongatic

ion  Co,OjluNUslDWO:,a!L,0.  In  this  case  attar  ignition  there  remains  a  sali

294  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

this  forms  the  means  of  obtaining  metallic  molybdenum  and  tungsten,

of  Uie  cimiixvsitiou  CoOo  WO3  ( Carnot,  1889).  Professor  Koamakoff,  by  treating  a  solotion  of
|)otas8iuni  aiid  sodium  molybdates,  containing  a  certain  amount  of  suboxide  of  cobalt,  with
bn>miiie  obtaineil  siUts  having  the  composition :  SK^OCo^OslSMoO^SOH^O  (light  green)
andaK.pCo..Or40Mtv40H.O  idark  green).  Pechard(  1893)  obtained  salts  of  the  four  complex
phosphotungstic  acidii  by  evafH^rating  equivalent  mixtoresof  solutions  of  phosphoric  acid
and  niottitun^tic  acid  {$ef  farther  cm:  phosphotrimetatongstic  acid  'P^0^12WO:i4SlL/yf
phosphototnimetatuugstic  acid  P^0^16W0569H.>0,  phosphopentametatnngiitio  acid
P.»05*il>W0-,H./>,  and  phosphohexametatungstic  acid  Pj0524WO.-,59HaO.  Kehimaim
and  Frankt'l  desorilW  still  more  complex  salts,  such  as :  SAg-jOiBaOPsO^aSWO^H^O,
6BaO-iK...OP.p.v2'iWO-»4?<Ii.O.  Analogous  double  salts  with  22WO5  were  also  obtained
vrith  KSr,  KHg,  BaHe.  and  XH^Pb.  Kehrmann  (189d)  considers  the  possibility  of
obtaining  an  unlimited  number  of  such  salts  to  be  a  general  characteristic  of  such  00m-
{xmnds.  Mahom  and  Friedheim  (189'J)  obtained  compounds  of  similar  complexity  for
molybtlic  and  arsenic  acids.

For  tunpstic  acid  there  are  known :  \l^  Normal  salts — for  example,  KjW04  I  (SI)  the
so-calltHl  acid  salts  ha\  e  a  comiwsition  like  3K..O,^WO.-„6H^O  or  K«H8(W04)7,aH.p ;  (S>
the  tritungstates  like  Na.-.0,8WO..^aH^M3  =  Na^H,(W04V«H.>0.  All  these  three  classes  of
salts  ar^'  soluble  in  water,  but  are  precipitated  by  barium  chloride, and  with  acids  insola-
tion give  an  ius^^luble  hydnite  of  tungstic  acid ;  whilst  those  salts  which  are  enumerated
below  do  not  give  a  precipitate  either  with  acids  or  with  the  salts  of  the  heavy  metals,  be-
cause* thfv  fonu  s^-^hiblo  stilts  even  with  barium  and  lead.  They  are  generally  called  meta-
tun^'statt's.  They  all  iH^>ntain  water  and  a  larger  proportion  of  acid  elements  than  the
precetliuj:  «»ahs  ;  ^4  the  tetnitungstales,  like  Xa  O,4WO>10H^O  and  BaO,-4W05,9H30  for
example  ;  {'>*  the  tvtaiungstates — for  example.  X;40.^<WO>44H50.  Since  the  metatong-
t>tates  lose  x^  much  water  at  UH>'  that  they  leave  salts  whose  composition  corresponda
with  ail  acid,  :>H^.0.4W0-— that  is,  H.W^Ou — whilst  in  the  meta  salts  only  9  hydrogens
arv  replaiHHl  by  metals,  it  i<  a'^sumevl.  nlthough  without  much  ground,  that  these  salts
contain  a  jwrticular  s*>lublo  n\ctatunj;>;;o  acid  of  the  i.'\nnix>sition  HkWiOij.

As  an  example  wo  will  give  a  sV.ort  deM?ript:on  of  the  sodium  salts.  The  normal
N;i,lt,  Na  AV04,is  t»l»:aiiusl  byhoatiuj:  a  stn^ng  s.»luiii>n  of  "^xiium  carbonate  with  tongstic
acid  to  a  toiniV(T.\tU!\^  ot  >0  ;  if  thr  solution  K-  liht-red  hot,  it  crystallises  in  rhombic
tabular  ory-iaK,  b.aviui;  tho  ^s^niis^'^irion  XajWc\.'JHjO.  which  remain  unchanged  in  the
air  anil  an-  laN-.ly  soluMc  \n  water.  Wlu-n  lh:>  >iih  is  fus***!  with  a  fresh  quantity  of
tur.iTstiv-  at-.»l.  it  c".vo>  a  iiiluiig-talc.  which  i<  sohiblf  in  water  and  separates  from  ita
;>olutU>n  in  ii\s;aU  containing:  water.  Tho  sanio  sal:  i^  obtained  by  carefully  adding
hydn^  iil'iic  u  ivl  tt»  tlio  «»^^lutlon  of  tl:o  r.orn:aI  s.\l:  s<^  \<n^^  as  a  precipitate  does  not
apiH-ar.  M\d  iho  li.iu;«i  •^till  ha<  an  aika'.iiio  n  action.  Thi>  salt  was  first  supposed  to
luivo  tho  voni|H»>;t:on  Na  AV  >0:.lH..O,  lut  it  has  «.:!;oo  l»oen  found  to  contain  ^at  100")
X.H,  W-«,\,.lt'»U/^ that  i<..  It  » .^rros|vj:»i>  with  ll:o  similar  siilt  of  molybdic  acid.

(If  ihi-  •^iil  K^  hoattnl  to  a  n-vi  hoat  in  a  stream  of  hydn'^on,  it  loses  a  portion  of  its
cxygi-n.  ac^iuirt' s  a  metallic  lu<tro.  ur.vl  turn-i  ji  ^j.^Uh-n  yellow  c\»lour.  and,  after  lieing
treated  with  water.  aik;ili.  and  acid,  leavo>  ^r.-ldcn  yelLnv  leariet>  and  cubes  which  are
v»ry  like  j;oiil.  Tiii-i  \oi>  remarkable  sub>»t.*nv'o.  d-^'»n«r^sl  by  WJIhler.  luus  according
to  Mahiiznti-  analy--i<.  the  ov^m|>«^sition  X;t^.W.i.>  ;  tliat  i-^.  it.  as  it  were,  contains  a
t'ouMf  tur.jT^tate  of  lupgstvn  oxide.  WO  .  and  «'f  <^vi:um.  Xa^W04.W0oW0.->.  The
diHV>mp^-»".f..'n  «f  the  fu<*Hl  s*Hlium  v^ilt  is  Ivst  t  rToott-xi  t  y  t:ne;y-divided  tin.  Tliis  sul>-
>:anof  lia-  a  ••p.  gr.  t»  i» ;  it  conduct ««  electricity  like  v.'.«>:a!s.  and  like  them  has  a  metallic
l::^tre.  Winn  bnMijzht  into  contact  with  .*inc  an.;  si'.lpluiric  acid  :t  di-^en^rages  hydrogen,
and  it  Incomes  cvnen^l  w.ih  a  i^vitinj;  of  c^^p^vr  ;:;  a  s.«lut:«»n  of  copj^r  sulphate  in  the
pres«:Kce  of  /inc— that  i««,  notwith>ta«dinj:  its  i^uv.pltx  co:n|\»sit:on  it  presents  to  a
irrtair.  txtent  the  apivarar.ce  and  rt^actiiui'.  of  tlif  metals  It  is  not  acletl  on  by  aqua
Tt-^'.A  '-r  alkaline  M.MUtions,  but  it  is  oxidistsl  \vhei\  i,cnit«\l  in  air.

Tl:e  «i.tunj:<tate  mentione»l  aK^ve.  d»'pri\e*l  of  water  ha\ini:  undergone  a  modifica-
tion >  milar  to  that  of  metapho<phoric  acid  .  after  Iviuj:  trt^ated  with  water,  leaves  an

CHROMIITM, MOLYBDEITTTM.  TDHOaTEN, URANIUM. ETC. 295
Both  mf.lnh  nre infasiblt!,  and  both  under  ihe  action  of  heiiL form

uihyilroUB,  ■purioglj  soluble  tetratangetnte,  Nii,W0„3W0„  which,  wben  heatad  at  130"
iu  ■  clowil  tobs  vriih  wnter.  pasus  into  ui  ssaily  lolublo  metatungiitate.  It  may  there-
ton  bu  luitl  that  Ihe  metabimgiit>t«s  are  hydrated  compounds.  On  bailing  a  nolution  of
tlie  itlKiiB-iaentiiiiied  *alt>i  ol  Hodiam  with  the  yellow  hydrate  of  tungBtii:  acid  tliey  give
a  Milati'in  oC  inetatnngHlate,  which  is  the  hydrated  tetntun|jBLate.  Its  crygtnla  uontain
Ka;WfO,j,10H,0.  After  the  hydrate  of  tnngHtic  ucid  (ubtaincd  from  the  ordinary  tang*
sltktoH  by  precipitation  witli  an  acid)  lias  stood  a  Xaaf  time  in  eontact  with  a  solution  (hot
or  Dotd)  of  loditun  tunijatate,  it  gives  a  solution  which  ta  not  pre<:ipitii,ted  by  hydroohl<tri«
acid  1  this  miut  be  filtered  and  evaporated  o^ei  ■nlphuric  acid  in  a  desiccator  {it  in  do-
compoied  by  boiling).  It  first  forma  a  tbij  dooM  solotion  lalmninioui  floats  in  it)  of
sp.  gr.  H-U,  and  oi.-tahadral  orystala  of  todium  mctatuiigatale,  Na..,W40,^aH^0,  ap.  gr.
Am,  then  separate.  It  elflDreBcea  and  loses  water,  and  at  lOO"  only  two  ont  ol  llie
ten  equivalents  of  water  remain,  but  the  properties  of  the  salt  remain  unaltered.  If  the
salt  be  deprived  ot  water  by  farther  heating,  it  beoomee  insoluble.  At  the  ordinary
temperature  one  part  ul  water  diHKilveB  ten  parts  ol  the  metatUDgatate.  The  other
metatunn^tstes  are  easily  oltlainod  from  thi«  salt.  Thus  a  stroDg  and  hot  Aolntion,
mixed  with  a  like  solution  ot  bariom  ciiloride.  givea  on  cooling  crystals  of  barium  meto-
tnngsUlq,  BaW,0,],DH.]0.  These  crystals  are  diswilvcd  without  diange  in  water  nm-
tnining  bjdrovhloric  acid,  and  also  in  hot  water,  but  they  arc  poitiolly  decomposed  by
cald  water,  with  the  formation  ul  a  solutiun  of  melatungalic  acid  and  of  the  normal
barium  uU  BaWU^.

In  onltT  to  e«plain  the  difference  in  the  properties  of  the  salts  ot  tnogslic  add,  we
nuy  odd  that  n  mixture  of  a  solution  ol  tongstic  acid  wiUi  a  solution  of  silicic  acid  does
not  co«e<ilatc  when  heated,  althongh  the  silicic  acid  alone  would  do  so ;  this  is  due  Co
the  formation  of  a  silicotungstic  acid,  discovered  by  Marignau,  which  presents  a  fresh
enunple  of  a  com[ilei  acid.  A  solution  ot  a  tangstale  dissolves  gelatinous  silica,  just  as
it  does  gelatinous  tnngatic  acid,  and  when  evaporated  deposits  a  crystalline  salt  of
sOicotnugotic  acid.  Tliis  solution  is  not  precipitated  either  by  acids  (a  clear  analogy  to
the  metatangslaUn)  or  by  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  and  corresponds  with  a  series  ot  sails.
These  sitlls  contain  one  etinivaleiit  of  silica  and  8  equivalents  of  hydrogen  or  metals,  in
the  same  form  as  in  salts,  to  12  or  10  eiiuivalenW  of  tuni;stic  anhydride  ;  for  ciample.
the  crystalline  potassium  salt  has  the  compositjon  KgW,igiO,^llUiO^4Kj0,19W0s,
SiO„llH,0.  Acid  salU  ore  oito  known  in  which  halt  at  the  metal  is  replaced  by
hydrogen.  The  complexity  ot  the  conipositiou  ot  snch  complex  acids  (tor  eiample,  of
the  pluwphomolybdic  acid)  involuntarily  leada  to  the  idea  at  polymerisation,  which  we
were  obligvd  to  recognise  tor  silica,  lead  oiide,  and  other  compounds.  This  po!ymeri«a-
(ion.  it  seems  to  me^  may  bo  understood  thus  :  ■  hydrate  A  (for  example,  tungstic  acidt
is  capable  of  combining  with  a  hydrate  B  (fur  example,  silica  or  phosphoric  acid,  with
or  without  the  disonglgnuont  of  water),  and  by  reaeon  of  tliis  faculty  it  is  capable  ol
polymerisation — that  is,  A  combines  with  A — combines  with  itself — just  as  aldehyde,
CiHtO,  or  the  cyanogen  oomponnds  are  able  to  combine  with  hydrogen,  oxygen,  *c.,
and  are  liable  to  polymerisation.  On  this  view  the  molecule  of  tungstic  af id  is  prubably
much  more  complex  than  ve  represent  it ;  this  agrees  with  the  easy  Tohilility  ot  sneh
compouTids  OS  the  chlonnliydtides,  CiO^Cl^  MoO^CI],  the  amiloEaes  of  the  volatile
sull^arj'l  vhlcride,  SO^CLj,  and  with  the  non-volatility,  or  difficult  volatiUty,  ot  chromic
and  molybdio  anhydrides,  the  analogues  ot  tbe  volatile  snlplinric  anhydride.  Such  a
view  also  Bnda  a  certain  confirmaliou  in  the  Teeeorcbes  mode  by  Graham  on  the  i:olUii4al
sluts  i>(  tongstic  acid,  because  colloidal  properties  only  apjiertain  lo  compounds  ot  a  very
eomplr^  composition.  The  observntions  made  by  Grohsm  on  the  colloidal  state  of
tungstio  and  molybdic  acids  introduced  much  new  matter  into  the  history  ot  these  sub-
staOcoB.  When  sodium  tnngtUte,  mixed  iu  a  dilute  solution  «-ith  an  equivalent  qnautiCj
of  dilute  hydrochloric  acid,  is  placed  in  a  dialyner,  hydrochloric  add  and  sodium  chloride
pas*  Ihruugh  tlie  membrane,  and  a  solution  of  toiigslic  acid  renuUnii  in  tlie  dialyser.
Out  of  100  parts  of  tungstic  acid  about  80  parts  reniain  m  the  dialyser. The  solution

J

296  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

compounds  with  carbon  and  iron  (the  addition  of  tungsten  to  steel
renders  the  latter  ductile  and  hard).^  Molybdenum  forms  a  grey  powder,
which  scarcely  aggregates  under  a  most  powerful  heat,  and  has  a  specific
gravity  of  8*5.  It  is  not  acted  on  by  the  air  at  the  ordinary  tempera-
ture, but  when  ignited  it  is  first  converted  into  a  brown,  and  then  into  a
blue  oxide,  and  lastly  into  molybdic  anhydride.  Acids  do  not  act  on  it
— that  is,  it  does  not  liberate  hydrogen  from  them,  not  even  from
hydrochloric  acid— but  strong  sulphuric  acid  disengages  sulphuroos
anhydride,  forming  a  brown  mass,  containing  a  lower  oxide  of  molyb-
denum. Alkalis  in  solution  do  not  act  on  molybdenum,  but  when  fused

has  a  bitter,  aBtringent  taste,  and  does  not  yield  gelatinous  tungstic  acid  (hydrogel)
either  when  heated  or  on  the  addition  of  acids  or  salts. It  may  also  be  evaporated  to
dryness;  it  then  forms  a  vitreous  mass  of  the  hydrosol  of  tungstic  acid^  which  adheres
strongly  to  the  walls  of  the  vessel  in  which  it  has  been  evaporated,  and  is  perfectly
soluble  in  water. It  does  not  even  lose  its  solubility  after  having  been  heated  to  200°,
and  only  becomes  insoluble  when  heated  to  a  red  heat,  when  it  loses  about  2j^  p.c.  of
water. The  dry  acid,  dissolved  in  a  small  quantity  of  water,  forms  a  gluey  mass,  jnst
like  gum arabic, which is  one of  the  representatives  of the  hydrosols  of  colloidal
substances. Tlie  solution,  containing  5  p.c  of  the  anhydride,  has  a  sp.  gr.  of  1*047  ;  with
20  p.c,  of  1*217; with  50  p.c,  of  180;  and  with  80  p.c,  of  8"24. The  presence  of  a
polymerised  trioxide  in  the  form  of  hydrate,  H2OW5O0  or  H.2O4WO3,  must  then  be
recognised  in  the  solution :  this  is  confirmed  by  Sabaneeflf's  cryoscopic  determinations
(1889). A  similar  stable  solution  of  molybdic acid  is  obtained  by  the  dialysis  of  a
mixture  of  a  strong  solution  of  sodium  molybdate  with  hydrochloric  acid  (the  precipitate
which  is  formed  is  re-dissolved). If  M0CI4  be  precipitated  by  ammonia  and  washed  with
water,  a  point  is  reached  at  which  perfect  solution  takes  place,  and  thq  molybdic  acid
forms  a  colloid  solution  which  is  precipitated  by  the  addition  of  ammonia  (Mutlimann).
The  addition  of  alkali  to  the  solutions  of  the  hydrosols  of  tungstic  and  molybdic  acids
immediately  results  in  tlie  re-formation  of the ordinary  tungstates  and  molybdatcs.
Tliere  appears  to  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  same  transformation  is  accomplished  in  the
passage  of  the  ordinary  tungstates  into  the  nietatungstates  as  takes  place  in  the  passage
of  tungstic  acid  itself  from  an  insoluble  into  a  sohible  state ; but  this  may  be  even
actually  proved  to  be  the  case,  because  Scheibler  obtained  a  solution  of  tungstic  acid,
before  Graham,  by  decomposing  barium  metatungstate  (Ba04W03,9H.^O)  with  sulphnnc
ivcid. By  treating  this  salt  with  sulphuric  acid  in  the  amount  required  for  the  precipi-
tation of  the  baryta,  Scheibler  obtained  a  solution  of  metatungstic  acid  which,  when
containing  43'7.'5  p.c.  of  acid,  had  a  sp.  gr.  of  1*034,  and  with  27'61  p.c.  a  sp.  gr.  of  1*827 —
that  is,  specific  gravities  corresponding  witli  those  found  by  Graham.

Pechard  found  that  as  much  heat  is  evolved  by  neutralising  metatungstic  acid  as  with
sulphuric  acid.

Questions  connected  with  the  metamorphoses  or  modifications  of  tungstic  and
molybdic  acids,  and  the  polymerisation  and  colloidal  state  of  substances,  as  well  as  the
formation  of  complex  acids,  belong  to  that  class  of  problems  the  solution  of  which
will  do  much  towanls  attaining  a  true  comprehension  of  the  mechanism  of  a  number  of
chemical  reactions.  I  think,  moreover,  that  questions  of  this  kind  stand  in  intimate  con-
nection with  the  theory  of  the  formation  of  solutions  and  alloys  and  other  so-called  inde>
finite  conii)Ound8.

"  Moissan  (IbUa)  studied  the  compounds  of  Mo  and  W  formed  with  carbon  in  the
electrical  furnace  (they  are  extremely  hard)  from  a  mixture  of  the  anhydrides  and  carbon.
Poleck  and  Griitzuer  obtained  definite  comjwjunds  FeW^  and  FeW^Cj  for  tungsten.
Metallic  W  and  Mo  displace  Ag  from  its  solutions  but  not  Pb.  There  is  reason  for  believing
that  the  sp.  gr.  of  pure  molybdenum  is  higher  than  that  (85)  generally  ascribed  to  it.

CHROMRTM. HOLYBDESCM. TITNOSTES.  LmASTtTM. ETC, 297

■with  it  hydrogen  is  given  off,  which  shovri;,  as  does  iU  wliole  character,
the  acid  projierties  of  the  met^l.  The  properties  of  tungsten  are  almost
identical ;  it  is  infusible,  has  nn  iron-grey  colour,  is  exceedingly  hard,  so
that  it  even  scratches  glass.  Its  Epecilic  gravity  is  19'I  (according  to
Rosuoe),  so  that,  like  uranium,  platinum,  Ac,  it  ia  one  of  the  heaviest
metals."''''  Just  as  sulphur  and  chromium  hivve  their  corresponding
persulphuric  and  perchromic  acids,  HjH/^m  "iid  H^Ci-O,,  having  the
properties  of  peroxides,  and  corresponding  to  peroxide  of  hydrogen,  so
also  molybdenum  and  tungsten  are  known  to  give  /lermoli/lxlii'  and  jier-
Uinf/stic  acids,  H^Mo^O,  and  H,W/J„  which  have  the  properties  of  true
pero^iides,  i-f.  easily  disengage  iodine  from  KI  and  chlorine  from  HCl,
easily  part  with  their  oxygen,  and  are  formed  by  the  action  of  peroside
of  hydrogen,  into  which  they  are  readily  reconverted  (hence  they  may
be  regarded  as  compounds  of  HjO,  with  SMoOa  and  2WO3),  ic.  Their
formation  (fioerwald  lt<84,  Kemmerer  18SI)  is  at  once  seen  in  the
coloration  (not  destroyed  by  lioiling),  which  is  obtained  on  mixing  a
solution  of  the  salts  with  peroxide  of  hydrogen,  and  on  treJtting,  fur  in-
stance, molybdic  acid  with  a  solution  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen  (Pechard
1892).  The  acid  then  forms  an  orange -colon  red  solution,  which  after
evaporation  in  vacuo  leaves  MojHj0^4H,0  as  a  crystalline  jiowder,
and  loses  4H5O  at  100",  beyond  which  it  decomposes  with  the  evolu-
tion of  oxygen.^"'

Urniiiam,  0=240,  has  the  highest  atomic  weight  of  all  the
aualo-jues  of  chromium,  and  indeed  of  all  the  elements  yet  known. Its

*  >>i'  Wc  may  conctade  our  deicription  of  tdngiten  mid  molybdmiutn  1>;r  ststiog  Uut
thair  sulphur  HnDpoands  have  <ui  ncid  L'huuctcr,  like  carbaa  binilpllide  or  stiuinia  bqI-
phida.  U  su1t>bu rotted  hydrogen  be  pnsaed  through  ■  solotion  of  a  iDolybdnte  it  dues
not  give  ■  precipiUto  unlBBB  Bnlpharic  acid  t>e  preaeat,  when  a  d«k  hnjwn  pracipitnte  of
mobjhdei>am  Irittilphiiln,  HaS,,  U  Innneil.  When  tilia  salpbide  is  ignited  withont  aacvia
of  airitgiieHthehiBnlphideMoa,;  Ihelultoris  notable  lo  ootnbine  with  potisnium  snlphida
like  the  tiiialiriiide  HoSj,  which  farme  n  nail,  K,MoS,,  eorces|iOBding  with  K^UoOj.
This  is  salable  in  wnter,  and  lejnnleB  out  from  its  lolution  in  red  cryBtali,  vbith  have  k
nietnllic  lastre  and  reflect  a  green  light.  It  is  easily  ohtiined  by  hectiog  the  native
bisulphide,  MoS^,  with  potash,  sulphur,  und  a.  small  amoont  of  charcoal,  vrliich  serves  for
deoxidising  the  oxygen  mmpoundK,  Tangsten  gives  similar  compoands.  RjWS,,  where
K  =  KHi,  K,  Nit.  They  Ms  deHJniposed  by  mcids,with  the  separation  ol  tungsten  trisul-
phido,  WS„  and  molybdennni  IrisDlpliide,  Ho^j.  Bideul  (iei»)  obtained  W..Njby  beating
WOi  in  NHj. This  compoand  exhibited  the  general  properties  of  metallic  nitrides.

"'"  When  peroxide  cf  hydn^n  arte  upon  a  solution  ol  potasuiun  moljbdate  well-
tormed  yellow  crystals  belonging  to  the  triclinic  system  segwrate  oat  in  the  cold.  When
these  i^ryotiUs  lU-e  heuted  in  tiuno  tliey  flret  lose  water  and  then  decompose,  leaving  a
residue  L-«mposed  ul  the  salt  originally  taken.  They  are  soluble  in  water  but  insolnble
in  aluubol.  Their  compusiliDn  ia  represented  by  the  formnla  K.Mii^,3H,0.  An  am-
monianisall  is  obtained  by  evaporating  peniside  uf  hydnitieu  with  amuioiiinni  molybdate.
Tlielollowing  salt*  havealso  been  obtained  by  (lie  action  ol  peroxide  ol  hyilmgennpon  the
oorresponding  molybdates:  Na,MO]OAflH,0— in  yellow  prismatic  crystals;  UgMo,O,10U,O
-—stcUiir  ueedlns ;  BaMa,0,3H]a — in  laicruBCapic  yellow  octaliedra.  A  roircEponding
sodium  petlniigsliiip  hu  been  obtiiined  by  Pi.ymtd  by  Uiiliiie  "Odiiini  lungKlnle  with  a

298  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

highest  salt-forming  oxide,  UO3,  shows  very  feeble  acid  properties.
Although  it  gives  sparingly-soluble  yellow  compounds  with  alkalis,
which  fully  correspond  with  the  dichromates — for  example,  Na^UjO-
=Nii.^O,2U03,*^ — yet  it  more  frequently  and  easily  reacts  with  acids,  HX,

Holubioii  of  iHjroxide  of  liydroj^en  for  several  minutes.  The  solution  rapidly  turnB  yellow,
and  no  lonj{<?r  gives  a  precipitate  of  tungstic  anhydride  when  treated  with  nitric  acid.
When  evaporated  in  vacuo  the  solution  leaves  a  thick  syrupy  liquid  from  which  ray-like
crystalH  H<?parate  out ;  these  crystals  are  more  soluble  in  water  than  the  salt  originally
taken.  Wlien  heated  they  also  lose  water  and  oxygen.  Their  composition  answers  to
tluj  formula  M,{W.^0«2H^0,  where  M  =  Na,  NH4,  &c.  The  permolybdates  and  per-
tungstates  have  similar  properties.  When  treated  with  oxygen  acids  they  give  peroxide
of  hydrogen,  and  disengtige  chlorine  and  iodine  from  hydrochloric  acid  and  potassium
iodide.

Piccini  (181)1)  showed  that  peroxide  of  hydrogeu  not  only  combines  with  the  oxygen
compounds  of  Mo  and  W,  but  also  with  their  fluo-compounds,  among  which  anunoniom
fluo-molybdateMoO.^F.^  'iNH^  and  others  have  long  been  known.  (A  few  new  salts  of
similar  composition  have  been  obtained  by  F.  Moureu  in  1893.)  The  action  of  pefoxide
of  hydrogen  upon  these  compounds  gives  salts  containing  a  larger  amount  of  oxygen  ;  for
instance,  a  solution  of  MoO.^F.^*iKFH.^O  with  i)eroxide  of  hydrogen  gives  a  yellow  solu-
tion which  after  cooling  separates  out  yellow  crj'stalline  flakes  of  M0O3F512KFH2O,  resem-
bling the  salt  originally  taken  in  their  external  ttpi)earanco.  By  employing  a  similar  method
IMccini  also  obtained  :  Mo03F.,,2RbFH,iO — yellow  monoclinic  crystals;  Mo05F<2C8FH.^O,
— yellow  flakes,  and  the  corresponding  tungstic  compounds.  All  these  salts  re-act  like
peroxide  of  hydrogen.

In  speaking  of  these  comi>ounds  I  for  my  part  think  it  may  be  well  to  call  attention
to  the  fact  that,  in  the  first  place,  the  composition  of  Piccini's  oxy-fluo  compounds  does
not  coiTespond  to  that  of  perniolybdic  and  pertungstic  acid.  If  the  latter  be  expres»ed
by  fornmlte  with  one  eipiivulent  of  an  element,  they  will  be  HM0O4  and  HWO4,  and  the
oxy-fluo  form  corresiMinding  to  them  should  have  the  composition  M0O5F  and  WO3F
while  it  contains  JMO-F.^  and  WO-F-,  i.r.  answers  as  it  were  to  a  higher  degree  of  oxida-
tion, M(»II.,05  and  W^IIO;,.  But  if  perniolybdic  atid  be  regarded  as  2M0O3  +  H2  O.^^i.e.
as  containing  the  elements  of  i>eroxi(le  of  hydn»gen,  then  Piccini's  compound  will  also  be
found  to  contain  the  original  salts +  I1.^0  ;  for  example,  from  MoO;iF./lKFH.jO  there  is
obtaiined  a  compound  M<»O^F.j2KFlI/)._j,  i.e.  instead  of  H.^O  they  contain  H.^O.^.  In  the
second  place  the  capacity  of  the  salts  of  molybdenum  and  tungsten  to  retain  a  further
amount  of  oxygen  or  H«(^..  i)robably  bears  some  relation  to  their  property  of  giving  com-
plex acids  and  (»f  iM)lynierising  which  has  been  considered  in  Note  8  bis.  There  is,
however,  a  great  chemical  interest  in  the  accunmlation  of  data  resjwcting  these  high
peroxide  con)i)oun(ls  corresponding  to  molvbdic  and  tungstic  acids.  With  regard  to  the
peroxide  form  of  uranium,  an'  Cliai»ter  XX.,  Note  (50,

'"  Uranium  tri(»xide,  or  uranic  oxide,  sliows  its  feeble  basic  and  acid  properties  in  a
great  number  of  its  reactions.  (1)  Solutions  of  uranic  salts  give  yellow  precipitates  with
alkalis,  but  these  precipitates  do  not  contain  the  hydrate  of  the  oxide,  but  compounds  of
it  with  bases  ;  for  exami)le,  2U0.J  NO- ),,  +  GKIIO  -  4KNO-  -h  JJII.^O  +  K.^U.j07.  There  are
other  urufto-tilkali  coiiqnmnds  of  the  same  constitution  ;  for  example,  (NH|).^U.^07
(known  connnercially  as  uranic  oxide),  MgU.^O;,  BaU.^O;.  They  are  the  analogues  of  the
di(  hromates.  Sodium  uranate  is  the  most  generally  used  under  the  name  of  uranium
yellow,  Na^U.jO;.  It  is  used  for  imparting  the  characteristic  yellow-green  tint  to  glass
and  ]>orcelain.  Neither  heat  nor  water  nor  acids  are  able  to  extract  the  alkali  from
s()(iiuni  unuiatr,  Na.U.O;,  and  therefore  it  is  a  true  insoluble  salt,  of  a  yellow  colour,  and
clearly  indicates  the  acid  character  (although  feeble)  of  uranic  oxide.  (*2)  The  carbonates
of  the  alkaline  earths  (for  instance,  barium  carbonate)  precipitate  uranic  oxide  from  its
salts,  as  they  do  all  the  sailts  of  feeble  bases;  for  exanji)le,  ll^O-.  (3)  The  alkaline  car-
honatts,  when  added  to  solutions  of  uranic  salts,  give  w.  i>rccipitat(\  which  is  soluble  in

CHROMIUM,  MOL^'BDENl'M,  TUNGSTEN.  TTtANIl'M,  ETC. 299

forming  fluorescent  yellowish -green  salts  of  the  composition  UOjX,,
and  in  this  respect  uranic  trioxide,  VO^,  difleia  from  chromic  anhydride,
Crf  "j,  although  the  latter  Li  able  to  give  the  oxyeliloride,  CrO,CI,.  In
inolylxlenum  and  tungsten,  however,  we  see  a  clear  transition  from
chromium  to  uranium.  Tims,  for  eitample,  chromyl  chloride,  CrO,Cla,
b  a  brown  liquid  which  volatilises  without  change,  and  is  completely
decomposed  by  water ;  molybdenum  oxychloride,  MoOjCl,,  is  a  crya-
tftllioe  substance  of  a  yellow  colour,  which  is  volatile  and  suluble  in
water  ( Blomstrund),  like  many  salts.  Tungsten  oxychloride,  WOjClj,
stands  still  nearer  to  uranyl  chloride  in  its  properties  ;  it  forms  yellovv
scales  on  which  wat«r  and  alkalis  act,  as  they  do  on  many  salts  {zinc
chloride,  ferric  chloride,  aluminium  chloride,  stannic  chloride,  •ti'.),  and
perfectly  corresponds  with  the  difficultly -vol  utile  salt,  UO.jCI,  (obtained
by  Peligot  by  the  action  of  chlorine  on  ignited  uranium  dioxide,  T.'0,),
which  is  also  yellow  and  gives  a  yellow  solution  with  water,  like  all  the

an  fxiTit  fflhi  rraiiriit,  anil  iwrticoliirly  au  if  the  arid  em\K>nittva  he  taken.  Thin  is
due  to  tlie  fHCt  (lint  (4)  tlie  anuiyl  atilM  ea*ily  forai  double  tattt  with  the  salts  ol  tbe
■Ikiiji  metAls,  iurrlpding  the  atitmol  unliuliiiiun.  Uraninm,  in  the  fann  ol  theae  double
Baits,  often  gives  ults  of  wdl-deSned  Drystidlia*  form,  althongh  the  aimple  aolttue  little
pmne  to  •ppeftr  in  crystds.  Sovh,  [or  eKMnple,  are  tlie  salts  obtained  bydiaitolTing  pot**-
■lum  uranatii,  KjUjO-,  in  acids,  with  the  addition  ol  potassiuni  salts  of  the  sajne  acids.
Thuo,  with  hydrocliloiic  acid  and  potouinni  chloride  a  irell-lomied  oiystalline  snlt,
BgfCO-iJCl^.aHjO.  belonging  lo  the  moDOulioio  (yitem,  is  produced.  This  salt  decom-
piMeg  iu  disBolriiig  iu  pore  water.  Among  these  double  aaltfi  we  may  montiou  the
dooble  carbonate  with  the  olkahm  B,|UO,|(COn),  (equal  to  BB,CO, -t  UOjCO,! ;  the
acetates,  R|UO,|(C,HjO,|^r-lor  instanee,  the  sodium  aatt,  Na(D0,)(C,e,iO,),v  and  the
polasBium  sail,  K(UO.,ilCiHrf),)„H,Oi  the  anlphalas,  B,(C0,)|80j)i,aHi0,  Ac.  In  the
preceding  formula  B  —  K,  Na,  NH„  or  Rt  "  ^'lii  Ba,  &e.  Thit  proprriy  of  giving
eatHpnralivtlg  liable  doublrialU  iHdUatet  fffbly  dttielopad  balie  propertiet,  bwaaso
double  uitH  ore  mainly  fonned  by  salte  of  ^■tincll]'  basic  nielAls  lUuise  lonn,  as  it  were,
the  bHsie  elemnnt  of  ■  double  imltl  nnd  salts  ol  leebly  enerEetio  bases  (theae  (onn  the  acid
elemimt  of  a  double  salt),  JDst  as  tile  former  also  give  acid  aolts ;  the  acid  of  the  acid
■alts  is  niiloced  in  the  dnable  mIIk  by  the  iwll  of  the  feebly  energetic  base,  which,  like
water,  belongs  tu  llie  cloBs  of  iDtermediato  bstss.  For  thia  reason  bariom  doot  not
give  dAuble  salts  with  atkolui  as  magnesiutD  doeA,  and  tliis  ie  why  double  hsIIs  are
DinrH  eosily  lunned  by  iiolosBiam  thou  by  lithium  in  the  series  ol  the  alkali  metals.
[hi  The  moat  reuutrkable  property,  proving  the  feeble  enei^y  of  nmoic  oxide  as  a  base,  is
seen  in  Oits  foet  (hat  when  theii  composition  lb  compared  with  Uiat  of  other  Mlts  those  of
Dranic  oxide  aliciiyt  ajipear  m  bii4ie  lalti.  It  is  well  kntrwn  that  a  normal  salt.  B..^g,
cnrreBpondBwilh  the  oxide  tt^.^whereX^  CI,  NO.^.  Ac, or  Xj  <^  SOt.COji^i:.:  hot  there
also  exist  bnaio  solU  al  the  same  type  where  X  ^  HO  or  JEi  =  O.  We  saw  salta  of  aU
kindB  oniniig  the  solla  of  alominiam,  chromiuni,  and  olhen.  With  uranic  uiide  no  aalla
are  kniiwD  of  the  types  UXn  (UCl^,  U(SOi)i,  olumo,  Ac,  are  not  known),  nor  eren  sails,
n(HO|^  or  UOX„  bnl  it  always  tonnn  ealli  of  Ihe  type  UlHOj^X,  or  DO.jX,.
Jndgiii);  trum  (he  loci  that  nearly  all  the  eolla  of  iusqIc  oxide  reUin  wnler  in  orynUlising
tmm  llioir  dolationo,  and  that  tliis  water  is  dilBcalt  to  separate  troro  them,  it  may  be
thoDght  Id  be  water  of  hydration.  This  is  seen  in  pari  from  Ihe  foci  that  the  eomposiliou
nf  many  of  the  saltaof  nrauia  oxide  may  tiiea.  beeipreneed  without  Ihe  pretence  uf  water
of  crystallisntion ;  for  iuslADce.  tVHOuK^CI,  (and  the  salt  ol  NH^,  U|HO|,K,(SO,). ,
C|E0)t(t'3H,0^a. Sodiam  Dronyl  acetate  however  does  not  cootaiu  water.

302  PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

metallic  uranium  as  a  grey  metal,  having  a  specific  gravity  of  18*7,  and
liberating  hydrogen  from  acids,  with  the  formation  of  green  uranous
salts,  UX4,  which  act  as  powerful  reducing  agents.**

rated.  The  solution  of  uranous  chloride  in  water  is  green.  It  is  also  formed  by  the
action  of  zinc  and  copper  (forming  cuprous  chloride)  on  a  solution  of  uranyl  cliloride,
UO.^Cli,  especially  in  the  presence  of  hydrochloric  acid  and  stvl-ammouiac.  Solutions  of
uranyl  salts  are  converted  into  uranous  salts  by  the  action  of  various  reducing  Agents,
ttud  among  others  by  organic  substances  or  by  the  action  of  light,  whilst  the  salts  UX4
are  converted  into  uranyl  salts,  UO.jX;^,  by  exposure  to  air  or  by  oxidising  agents.  Solu-
tions of  the  green  uranyl  salts  act  as  powerful  reducing  agents,  and  give  a  browii  preci-
pitate of  the  uranous  hydroxide,  UH4O4,  with  potash  and  other  alkalis.  This  hydroxide
is  easily  soluble  in  acids  but  not  in  alkalis  On  ignition  it  does  not  form  the  oxide  UO^,
because  it  decomposes  water,  but  when  the  higher  oxides  of  uranium  are  ignited  in  a
stream  of  hydrogen  or  with  charcoal  they  yield  uranous  oxide.  Both  it  and  the  chloride
UCI4  dissolve  in  strong  sulphuric  acid,  forming  a  green  salt,  U(SO|),;,2H.20.  The  same
^alt,  together  with  uranyl  sulphate,  UO.^(SO|),  is  formed  when  the  green  oxide,  UsO^,  is
dissolved  in  hot  sulphuric  acid.  The  salts  obtained  in  the  latter  instance  m.ay  be
separated  by  adding  alcohol  to  the  solution,  which  is  left  exposed  to  the  light;  the  alcohol
reduces  the  uranyl  salt  to  uranous  salt,  an  excess  of  acid  being  required.  An  excess  of
water  decomposes  this  salt,  forming  a  basic  salt,  which  is  also  easily  ])roduced  under
other  circumstances,  and  contains  UO(S04),2H.20  (which  corresponds  to  the  uranic  salt).

1  *  The  atomic  weight  of  uranium  was  formerly  taken  as  half  the  present  one,  U  =  120,
And  the  oxides  U.2O5,  suboxide  UO,  and  green  oxide  U.-,04,  were  of  the  same  types  as  the
oxides  of  iron.  With  a  certain  resemblance  to  the  elements  of  the  iron  group,  uranium
presents  many  points  of  distinction  which  do  not  i)erniit  its  being  grouped  witli  them.
Thus  uranium  forms  a  very  stable  oxide,  U.^O-(U  =  120),  but  does  not  give  the  corre-
si>onding  chloride  U._^Cl,j  (Roscoe,  however,  in  1874  obtained  UC1;„  like  M0CI5  and  WCI5),
and  under  those  circumstances  (the  ignition  of  oxide  of  uranium  mixed  with  charcoal,  in
a  stream  of  chlorine),  when  the  formation  of  this  compound  might  be  expected,  it  gives
(U  — 120)  the  chloride  UCI2,  which  is  characterised  by  its  volatility  ;  tiiis  is  not  a  pro-
perty, to  such  an  extent,  of  any  of  the  bichlorides,  RCl.^,  of  the  iron  group.

The  alteration  or  doubling  of  the  atomic  weight  of  uninium — i.r.  the  recognition  of
U=240 — was  made  for  the  first  time  in  the  first  (Russian)  edition  of  this  work  (1871  J,  and
in  my  memoir  of  the  same  year  in  Liebig's  Aunalen,  on  the  ground  that  with  an  atomic
weight  120,  uranium  could  not  be  placed  in  the  perio<lic  system.  I  think  it  will  not  be  BU]^)er-
fluous  to  add  the  following  remarks  on  this  subject :  (1)  In  the  other  groups  (K — Rb — Cs,
Ca — Sr — Ba,  CI— Br — 1)  the  acid  character  of  the  oxides  decreases  and  tiieir  basic  charac-
ter increases  with  the  rise  of  atomic  weight,  and  therefore  we  should  expect  to  find  the
same  in  the  group  Cr— Mo — W — U,  and  if  CrO-„  M0O-.  WO-  be  the  anhydrides  of  acids
then  we  indeed  find  a  decrease  in  their  acid  character,  and  therefore  uranium  trioxide,
UO.-„  should  be  a  very  feeble  anhydride,  but  its  basic  projK'rties  should  also  be  very
feeble.  Uranic  oxide  does  indeed  show  these  proixrties,  as  was  pointed  out  above  (Note
10).  (2)  Chromium  and  its  analogues,  besides  the  oxides  KO.-,  also  fonn  lower  grades  of
oxidation  HO.^,,  H..O-„  and  the  same  is  seen  in  nraninni  ;  it  forms  UO-,  UOo,  U._^0-  and
their  conipt)unds.  V^)  Mc»lybdenuni  and  tungsten,  in  being  reduced  from  R0-,  easily  and
frequently  gi\t' an  intermediate  oxide  of  a  blue  colour,  and  uranium  show.s  the  same
property  ;  giving  the  so-called  green  oxide  which,  aceonling  to  pr<">ent  views,  must
be  regarded  as  I'-O^  U(X.2U05,  analogous  to  Mo-O,.  ill  The  higher  chlorides,  RCl^,
possible  for  the  elements  of  this  group,  are  either  unstable  (WC'l.i  or  do  not  exit^t  at  all
(C'r);  but  there  is  one  single  lower  volatile  conipoun*!.  which  is  decomposed  by  water,
and  liable  to  further  reduction  into  a  non-volatile  chloriiie  pnulnct  and  the  metal.  The
sani!.'  is  observed  in  uranium,  which  forms  an  easily  volatih*  chloride,  I'Cl,,  decomposed
by  water,  to)  The  high  sp.  gr.  of  uranium  (isr.i  is  exjtl  lijiel  by  its  analogy  to  tungsten
.(sp. gr, rJlj. (Oi For  uranium,  as for chromium and  tungste'.i. \ellow tints pre-

C'HUOMirM, MOLYBDENTM, TrXGSTEN, TRANIl'M, ETC. 303

As  the  salts  of  uranic  oxide  are  reduced  in  the  absence  of  organic
matter  by  the  action  of  light,  and  as  they  impart  a  chai-acteristic
coloration  to  glass,  ^"^  they  find  a  certain  application  in  photography  and
glass  work.

If  we  compare  together  the  highly  acid  elements,  sulphur,  selenium,
and  tellurium,  of 'the  uneven  series,  with  chromium,  molybdenum,
tungsten,  and  uranium  of  the  even  series,  we  find  that  the  resemblance
of  the  properties  of  the  higher  fonn  RO3  does  not  extend  to  the  lower
forms,  and  even  entirely  disappears  in  the  elements,  for  there  is
not  the  smallest  resemblance  between  sulphur  and  chromium  and  their
analogues  in  a  free  state.  In  other  words,  this  means  that  the  small
periods,  like  Na,  Mg,  Al,  Si,  P,  S,  CI,  containing  seven  elements,  do
not  contain  any  near  analogues  of  chromium,  molybdenum,  etc.,  and
therefore  their  true  position  among  the  other  elements  must  be  looked
for  only  in  those  large  periods  which  contain  two  small  periods,  and
whose  type  is  seen  in  the  period  containing  :  K,  Ca,  Sc,  Ti,  V,  Cr,  Mn,
Fe,  Co,  Ni,  Cu,  Zn,  Ga,  Ge,  As,  Se,  Br.  These  large  periods  contain
Ca  and  Zn,  giving  RO,  Sc,  and  Ga  of  the  third  group,  Ti  and  Ge
giving  RO.^,  V  and  As  forming  R.^Os,  Cr  and  Se  of  the  sixth  group,
Mn  and  Br  of  the  seventh  group,  and  the  remaining  elements,  Fe,
Co,  Ni,  form  connective  members  of  the  intermediate  eighth  group,  to
the  description  of  the  representatives  of  which  we  shall  turn  in  the
following  chapters.  We  will  now  proceed  to  describe  manganese^
Mn  =  T).!,  as  an  element  of  the  seventh  group  of  the  even  series,  directly
followini^  after  Cr— 52,  which  corresponds  with  Br=80  to  the  same
(legiee  that  Cr  does  with  Se=79.  For  chromium,  selenium,  and
bromine  very  close  analogues  are  known,  but  for  manganese  as  yet
none  have  been  obtained  -that  is,  it  is  the  only  representative  of  the
even  series in  the  seventh  group. In  placing manganese  with  the

(loniiiiate  in  the  form  RO-.  whilst  the  lower  forms  are  green  and  blue.  (7)  Ziramermann
1 1 NMl»  determined  the  vrti)our  densities  of  uranous  bromide,  UBr„  and  cliloride,  UCI4
1 1'.»- 1  and  l.'j'i),  and  they  were  found  to  correspond  to  the  formula*  given  above — that  is,
they  confirmed  the  higher  atomic  weight  U--240.  Roacoe,  a  great  authority  on  the
in»tiils  of  this  group,  was  the  first  to  accept  the  proposed  atomic  weight  of  uranium,
r "J  10.  which  since  Zimmernumn's  work  has  be«m  generally  recognised.

'-•  Uranium  glass,  obtained  by  the  addition  of  the  yellow  salt  K2U.2O7  to  glass,  has  a
u'nen  yellow  fluorescence,  and  is  sometimes  employed  for  ornaments;  it  absorbs  the
\  i«jlet  rays,  like  the  other  salts  of  uranic  oxide — that  is,  it  possesses  an  absorption  spec-
trum in  which  the  violet  rays  are  absent.  The  index  of  refraction  of  the  absorbed  rays
is  altered,  and  they  are  given  out  again  as  greenish-yellow  rays;  hence,  comjK)und8  of
inanie  acid,  when  placed  in  the  violet  portion  of  the  spectrum,  emit  a  green ish-yellow
lij^'ht.  and  this  forms  one  of  the  best  examples  (another  is  found  in  a  solution  of  quinine
-.ulpliate)  of  the  phenomenon  of  fluorescence.  The  rays  of  light  which  pass  through
uranic  comi>ounds  do  not  contain  the  rays  which  excite  the  phenomena  of  ftuoresceucQ
and  of  cheinical  transformation,  as  the  researches  of  Stokes  prove.

804  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

halogens  in  one  group,  the  periodic  system  of  the  elements  only  requires
that  it  should  bear  an  analogy  to  the  halogens  in  the  higher  type  of
oxidation — i.e.  in  the  salts  and  acids — whilst  it  requires  that  as  great
a  difference  should  be  expected  in  the  lower  types  and  elements  as  there
exists  between  chromium  or  molybdenum  and  sulphur  or  selenium.
And  this  is  actually  the  case.  The  elements  of  the  seventh  group  fonu
a  higher  salt- forming  oxide,  R-i^?*  ^^^  i^s  corresponding  hydrate,
HRO4,  and  salts— for  e*^ample,  KCIO4.  Manganese  in  the  form  of
potassium  permanganate,  KMn04,  actually  presents  a  great  analogy  in
many  respects  to  potassium  perchlorate,  KCIO4.  The  analogy  of  the
crystalline  form  of  both  salts  was  shown  by  Mitscherlich.  The  salts  of
permanganic  acid  are  also  nearly  all  soluble  in  water,  like  those  of
perchloric  acid,  and  if  the  silver  salt  of  the  latter,  AgClO^,  be  sparingly
soluble  in  water,  so  also  is  silver  permanganate,  AgMn04.  The  specific
volume  of  potassium  perchlorate  is  equal  to  55,  because  its  specific
gravity=2-54  ;  the  specific  volume  of  potassium  permanganate  is  equal
to  58,  because  its  specific  gravity =2-71.  So  that  the  volumes  of
equivalent  quantities  are  in  this  instance  approximately  the  same
whilst  the  atomic  volumes  of  chlorine  (35-5/1  3=27)  and  manganese
(55/7*5)  are  in  the  ratio  4:1.  In  a  free  state  the  higher  acids  HCIO4
and  HMn04  are  both  soluble  in  water  and  volatile,  both  are  powerful
oxidisers — in  a  word,  their  analogy  is  still  closer  than  that  of  chromic
and  sulphuric  acids,  and  those  points  of  distinction  which  they  present
also  appear  among  the  nearest  analogues — for  example,  in  sulphuric  and
telluric  acids,  in  hydrochloric  and  hydriodic  acids,  etc.  Besides  MnjOy
manganese  gives  a  lower  grade  of  oxidation,  MnOa,  analogous  to
sulphuric  and  chromic  trioxides,  and  with  it  corresponds  potassium
manganate,  K^MnO,,  isomorphous  with  potassium  sulphate.*^  In  the
still  lower  grades  of  oxidation,  Mn.^Oy  and  MnO,  there  is  hardly  any
similarity  to  chlorine,  whilst  every  point  of  resemblance  disappears
when  we  come  to  the  elements  themselves — i.e.  to  manganese  and
chlorine — for  manganese  is  a  metal,  like  iron,  which  combines  directly
with  chlorine  to  form  a  saline  compound,  MnCl^,  analogous  to  magne-
sium chloride.'^

Manganese  l)elongs  to  the  number  of  metals  widely  distributed  in

*®  Tlie  coinpiirison  of  potassium  pennangaiiatc  with  potassium  perchlorate,  or  of
potassium  manganato  witli  potassium  sulphate,  shows  directly  that  many  of  the  physical
and  chemical  propertie:'  of  suhstunces  do  not  dei">end  on  the  nature  of  the  elements,
but  on  the  atonuc  types  in  which  they  appear,  on  the  kind  of  movements,  or  on  the  posi-
tions in  which  the  atoms  forming  the  molecule  occur.

1'  If,  however,  wt;  compare  the  spectra  (Vol.  I.  p.  505)  of  chlorine,  bromine,  and
iodine  with  that  of  nuuiRanese,  a  certain  resemblance  or  amilo^y  is  to  be  found  connect-
ing manganese  both  to  iron  and  to  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine.

CHROMU'M. MOLYBDENUM, TUNGSTEN, URANIUM, ETC. 305

nature,  especially  in those  localities where  iron occurs,  whose  ores
frequently  contain  compounds  of  manganous  oxide,  MnO,  which  presents
a  resemblance  to  ferrous  oxide,  FeO,  and  to  magnesia. In  many  minerals
magnesia  and  the  oxides  allied  to  it  are  replaced  by  manganous  oxide ;
calcspars  and  magnesites — i,e,  R'^COg  in  general — are  frequently  met
with  containing  manganous  carbonate,  which  also  occurs  in  a  separate
state,  although  but  rarely. The  soil  also  and  the  ash  of  plants  generally
contain  a  small  quantity  of  manganese. In  the  analysis  of  minerals
it  is  generally  found  that  manganese  occurs  together  with  magnesia,
because,  like  it,  manganous  oxide  remains  in  solution  in  the  presence  of
amnioniacal  salts,  not  being  precipitated  by  reagents. The  property  of
this  manganous  oxide,  MnO,  of  passing  into  the  higher  grades  of  oxida-
tion under  the  influence  of  heat,  alkalis,  and  air,  gives  an  easy  means
not  only  of  discovering  the  presence  of  manganese  in  admixture  with
magnesia,  but  also  of  separating  these  two  analogous  bases. Magnesia  is
not  able  to  give  higher  grades  of  oxidation,  whilst  manganese  gives  them
with  great  facility. Thus,  for  instance,  an  alkaline  solution  of  sodium
hypochlorite  produces  a  precipitate  of  manganese  dioxide  in  a  solution  of
a  manganous  salt  :  MnCl2  +  NaClO-h2NaHO=Mn02-hH20-f3NaCl  ;
whilst  magnesia  is  not  changed  under  these  circumstances,  and  remains
in  the  form  of  MgCl^. If  the  magnesia  be  precipitated  owing  to  the
presence  of  alkali,  it  may  lie  dissolved  in  acetic  acid,  in  which  manganese
dioxide  is  insoluble. The  presence  of  small  quantities  of  manganese
may  also  be  recognised  by  the  green  coloration  which  alkalis  acquire
when  heated  with  manganese  compounds  in  the  air. This  green  colora-
tion depends  on  the  property  of  manganese  of  giving  a  green  alkaline
manganate  : MnCl2  +  4KHO  +  02=k2Mn04  4-2KC1  ■h2H20. Thus
f/te  /fifufft/  of  oxidising/  in  the presence  of  alkalis  forms  an  essential
character  of  manganese. The  higher  grades  of  oxidation  containing
Mn.^Oj  and  MnO.,  are  quite  unknown  in  nature,  and  even  MnOg  is  not
so  widely  spread  in  nature  as  the  ores  composed  of  manganous  com-
pounds which  are  met  with  nearly  everywhere. The  most  important
ore  of  manganese  is  its  dioxide,  or  so  called  jyeroxide^  MnO.„  which  is
known  in  mineralogy  as pyrolnsite. Manganese  also occurs as an
oxide corresponding with  magnetic  iron ore, MnO,Mn203=Mn304,
forming  the  mineral  known  as  hausmannile. The  oxide  Mn203  also
occurs  in  nature  as  the  anhydrous  mineral  braunite,  and  in  a  hydrated
form,  Mn/JjjH.jO,  called  manganite. Both  of  these  often  occur  as  an
admixture in  pyrolusite. Besides  which,  manganese  is  met  with  in
nature  as  a  rose-coloured  mineral,  rhodonite,  or  silicate,  MnSiOg. Very
fine  and  rich deposits  of manganese ores have been  found in the
Caucasus,  the  Urals,  and  along  the  Dnieper. Those  at  the  Sharapansky

VOL.  II.  X

306  rRIN'CIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

district  of  the  Government  of  Kutais  and  at  Nicopol  on  the  Dnieper
are  particularly  rich.  A  large  quantity  of  the  ore  (as  much  as  100,000
tons  yearly)  is  exported  from  these  localities.

Thus  manganese  gives  oxides  of  the  following  forms :  MnO,
mans^anous  oxide,  and  manganous  salts,  MnXj,  corresponding  with  the
base,  which  resembles  magnesia  and  ferrous  oxide  in  many  respects  ;
MnjOj,  a  very  feeble  base,  giving  salts,  MnXj,  analogous  to  the
aluminium  and  ferric  salts,  easily  reduced  to  MnXj  ;  MnO^,  dioxide,
generally  called  peroxide,  an  almost  indifferent  oxide,  or  feebly  acid  ;**
MnOs,  manganic  anhydride,  which  forms  salts  resembling  potassium
sulphate  ;^*^*'  MnaOy,  permanganic  anhydride,  giving  salts  analogous
to  the  perchlorates.

All  tJie  oxides  of  manganese  when  h*:attd  with  acids  give  salts,  MnX^,
corresponding  with  the  lower  grade  of  oxidation,  inanganous  oxide,
MnO.  Manganic  oxide,  Mn^Og,  is  a  feebly  energetic  base ;  it  is  true
that  it  dissolves  in  hydrochloric  acid  and  gives  a  dark  solution  con-
taining the  salt  MnClj,  but  the  latter  when  heated  evolves  chlorine
and  gives  a  salt  corresponding  with  manganous  oxide  MnCl2 — i.e.  at
fii-st  :  Mn.P3-|-6HCl=3H20-fMn2Cl6,  and  then  the  MnaClg  decom-
poses into  2 IVInClj -h  Clj.  None  of  the  remaining  higher  grades  of
oxidation  have  a  basic  character,  but  act  as  oxidising  agents  in  the
presence  of  a:ids,  disengaging  oxygen  and  passing  into  salts  of  the  lower
grade  of  oxidation  of  manganese,  MnO.  Owing  io  this  circumstance,
the  manganous  salts  are  often  obtained  ;  they  are,  for  instance,  left  in
the  residue  when  the  dioxide  is  used  for  the  preparation  of  oxygen  and
chlorine.  ^^

^8  The  name  'peroxide'  should  only  be  retained  for  those  highest  oxides  (and  MnOj
stands  between  MnO  and  MnOs)  which  either  by  a  direct  method  bf  double  decomposition
are  able  to  j;ive  hydrogen  peroxide  or  contain  a  larger  proportion  of  oxygen  than  the
base  07  tlie  acid,  junt  as  hydroj^en  peroxide  contains  more  oxygen  than  water.  Their
type  will  be  H.jO.j,  and  they  are  exemplified  by  barium  peroxide,  BaO.^,  and  sulphur
peroxide,  S.^O;,  &c.  Such  a  dioxide  as  MnO,i  is,  in  all  probability,  a  salt — that  is,  a
manganous  manganato,  MnO^MnO,  and  also,  as  a  basic  salt  of  a  feeble  base,  capable  of
combining  with  alkalin  and  ncidt<.  Hence  the  name  of  manganese  peroxide  should
be  abandoned,  and  replaced  by  manganese  dioxide.  PbC^  is  better  termed  lead  dioxide
than  peroxide.  Bisulphide  of  manganese,  MnS.^,  corresponding  to  iron  pyrites,  FeSo,
sometimes  occurs  in  nature  in  fine  octahedra  (and  cube  combinations),  for  inst.mce,  in
Sicily  ;  it  is  called  Hauerite.

18  bN  On  comparing  the  manganatcs  with  the  permanganates— for  example,  KjMnO,
with  KMuO,  -we  find  that  they  differ  in  composition  by  the  abstraction  of  ou«3  equivalent
of  the  metal.  Such  a  relation  in  composition  produced  l>y  oxidation  is  of  frequent
occurrence- -for  instance,  K,Fe(CN),,  in  oxidising  gives  KsFefCN)^  ;  H2SO,  in  oxidising
gives  per-^nlphuric  acid,  HSO,,  or  H.^S70h  ;  H^O  forms  HO  or  H^O.^,  &c.

'••  In  tlu»  preparation  of  oxygen  from  the  dioxide  by  means  of  HjSOi,  MnS04  is
formed ;  in  the  preparation  of  chlorine  from  HCl  and  MnO^,  MnCl^  is  obtained.  TheBC
two  manganons  salts  may  be  taken  as  examples  of  compounds  MnX.^.  Manganous
sulphate  generally  contains  various  impurities,  and  also  a  large  amount  of  iron  salt

CHROMIITM.  MOLYBDEN0M.  TrNOSTEN,  I'BAmTTM.  ETC. 807

'  As  thd  salts  of  mauganous  oxida  MnX,  close);  resemble  (and  arn
iRomorpbous  with)  the  salts  of  magnesia  UgXg  in  many  respects  (with

ffrom  the  nutrve  UnO^),  from  Khkh  it  »nnal  be  Freed  by  rrysUlliuttoii.  Ihvit
retno\-al  nmy,  however,  be  sfTBrtod  bj  miiiiiK  a  porliou  of  the  liqoid  with  a  tolutlon  of
Bortium  corbonato ;  n  preoipilnts  of  inangiknoni  cnrbonate  is  then  formed.  This  pro-
cliiitale  ia  eaUecl«d  And  wiwihed,  nnd  then  added  to  the  remuning  maaa  of  tlie  impDre
volntiuti  of  maijgajioafi  Aulphate;  on  heating  ttie  aotutjon  with  thia  precipitatfli  the
whole  of  the  inm  in  pT»»pitatHl  ai  oxide.  Tfaii  is  due  to  the  tact  that  in  the  solation  of
thd  muiganefle  dioxide  in  Aolphurio  aeid  the  whole  of  the  Iron  in  converted  into  the
ferric  iitat«  (becaase  the  dioxide  acts  as  an  oiiiliiiing  agent),  which,  ait  an  eiceedinglj
fcoble  biLiie  precipitated  b;  cali-iani  carbonate  and  other  kindred  salts,  in  also  precipitated
b;  manganoni  cubonate.  After  being  treated  in  this  manner,  the  wilution  of  manganoui
sulpbate  ia  further  poriSed  h;  crjBtiUli»tiun.  If  it  be  a  bright  red  colonr.  it  is  due  t«
the  presenoe  of  higher  gradox  of  oxidation  of  manganese;  the;  mn;  be  destroTed  by
boiling  the  MluUnn,  when  tlie  nt^gen  from  tfac  oiides  of  manganese  ia  evolved  and  a
verjr  faintly  colonred  solution  of  inanganonBHalpbateia  obtained.  This  salt  is  remarkable
tor  the  taaility  witli  which  it  gives  varinna  combinntions  with  water.  By  erapontting
the  almost  colonrlViiK  sulutjon  of  manganoat  aulphati  al  very  low  lemperaturen.  and  b;
cooling  the  saturated  aolntion  at  abont  0°,  crystals  are  obtained  containing  T  atoms  of
water  of  crystallisalion.  MnSO,,TIliO,  which  are  isomorpboiis  with  cobaltoaa  end  tenons
sulphates.  These  crystals,  even  at  10°,  lose  S  p.o.  of  water,  and  completely  pfflarcace  at
IE  ',  losing  about  30  p.o.  of  witter.  By  eraporoiting  a  solution  of  the  ul(  at  the  ordinary
Leintieratare,  bat  not  above  11U°,  crystals  are  obtained  containiDg  B  mol.  HjO,  which
are  isoinurphoDs  with  copper  Kulphate;  whilst  if  the  crysttilli  nation  be  carried  on  between
3fl'  and  30°,  large  Inmspareut  prismatic  crystals  are  formed  oontaioing  4  mot.  H.,0  {tea
Nickel).  A  boiling  solution  abto  deposits  these  cryatuls  together  witli  crystuls  contiuning
3  mol.  H,0,  whilst  Uie  first  sojt,  when  fused  and  boUud  with  alcohol,  givtH  crystals
ooutaiuing  3  mol.  HjO.  Grnliam  obtained  a  monuhydmlnl  sstt  by  drying  the  salt  at
about  300 '.  The  last  atom  of  watet  IB  elimiu>led  wxth  dillicolty,  as  is  the  case  with  all
salts  like  MgSO,nH.jO.  The  crysUls  ooutaining  a  umsidemble  amount  of  water  are
rose-Doloured,  and  the  anliydrou*  crystals  are  colonrlees.  The  solobility  of  MuttO^lH^O
(Chapter  I.,  Note  2i)  per  100  parts  of  water  is :  at  lu',  137  parts ;  at  a7°'B,  Its  parts ;  at
7B'.  KG  parts ;  ind  at  101°,  93  pactH.  Whence  it  is  neen  that  at  the  boiling-point  this  salt
is  less  Boliible  than  at  lower  lempenitares,  Mid  therefore  a  solution  satnrslvd  at  the
ordinary  temperature  becomes  tarbid  when  boileil.  HangHiionsHnlphata,hHinganHlogonB
to  msgnBsium  salpliste.  ia  dcoamposed,  like  the  latter,  wlien  ignitrd,  but  it  does  not  then
leave  DiangauDDs  oxide,  but  the  interuiediiile  oxide,  HiijO,.  It  gives  double  salts  with
tbe  alkali  sulphates.  With  aluminium  sulphate  it  tomia  fine  radiated  crystals,  whose
eompLMitiou  resembles  that  of  the  alnma— namely.  MnAI^|SO,|„  34U,0.  This  salt  is
enaily  soluble  in  water,  and  occurs  in  nature.

Uanganont  chloride,  HClj,  cryatalliaes  with  4  mol.  H,0,  like  the  ferrous  salt,  and
iiDt  with  0  mol.  H,0  like  many  kindred  salts — for  example,  those  of  cobalt,  catcinm.  and
maguesium;  tOO  parts  of  water  dissolve  W  parts  of  the  anbydrons  salt  nt  10'  aud  SS
piuto  at  03°.  Alcohol  also  dissolves  msnganous  chloride,  and  tbe  alcoholic  solution
bums  with  a  red  Name.  Thi<>  salt,  like  magnesium  ahloride,  readily  forms  donble  salts.
A  Hilntion  of  borax  gives  a  dirty  rase-colonred  precipitate  baring  tbe  comginsitioa
Hiili|<BO.,|jH.O.  which  is  used  as  a  ilrior  in  paint-making,  PotassiDiu  cyanide  pro-
duces a  yellowish-gnry  precipitate.  HaC,N.j,wilbnianganoua  salts,  soluble  in  an  excess  of
tlie  reagent,  a  double  salt,  KiMnCif,.  coirospondiug  with  potoHiiam  femcyanide,
iHiing  formed.  On  evaporation  of  this  BClnlLan,  a  i>artian  of  the  manganese  is  oxidiled
and  predpitBted,  whilst  a  salt  u>rms|innding  to  Gmelin's  red  salt.  KiMnCgNg  (u«
Chapter  XXII.).  remains  in  solution.  Sulphuretted  hjrdiogen  does  not  prvcipitiiie
salts  of  mangiuiese,  not  even  Uie  acetate,  bnt  ammonium  sulphide  gives  a  flnh>cnl(Hiie<l
precipitate,  Miif! ;  at  SSO'this  sulphide  of  mauganeie  passes  into  a  green  variety  (Anlany).
Oxalic  acid in  strong  solations  uf inaii|{aiu>as  salts  gives  a  irhjl«  jirHipilate  of  tha

808  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

the  exception  of  the  fact  that  MnXj  are  rose  coloured  and  are  easily
oxidised  in  the  presence  of  alkalis),  we  will  not  dwell  upon  them,  but

oxaliite,  MnCjO^.  This  precipitate  is  insoluble  in  water,  and  is  used  for  the  preparation
of  nianganous  oxide  itself  because  it  decomposes  like  oxalic  acid  when  ignited  (in  a  tube
without  access  of  air),  with  the  formation  of  carbonic  anhydride^  carbonic  oxide,  and
inanganous  oxide.  Manganoua  oxide  thus  obtained  is  a  green  powder,  which  however
oxidises  with  such  facility  that  it  bums  in  air  when  brought  into  contact  with  an
incandescent  substance,  and  passes  into  the  red  intermediate  oxide  Mns04.  In  solutions
of  manganous  salts,  alkalis  produce  a  precipitate  of  the  hydroxide  MnEL{02T  which
rapidly  absorbs  oxygen  in  the  presence  of  air  and  gives  the  brown  intermediate  oxide,
or,  more  correctly  speaking,  its  hydrate.

Manganous  oxide,  besides  being  obtained  by  the  above-described  method  from  man-
ganous oxalate,  may  also  be  obtained  by  igniting  the  higher  oxides  in  a  stream  of
hydrogen,  and  also  from  manganese  carbonate.  The  manganons  oxide  ignited  in  the
presence  of  hydrogen  acquires  a  great  density,  and  is  no  longer  so  easily  oxidised.  It
may  also  be  obtained  in  a  crystalline  form,  if  during  tlie  ignition  of  the  carbonate  or
higher  oxide  a  trace  of  dry  hydrochloric  acid  gas  be  passed  into  the  current  of  hydrogen.
It  is  thus  obtained  in  the  form  of  transparent  emerald  green  crystals  of  the  regular
system,  and  in  this  state  is  easily  soluble  in  acids.

Manganous  oxide  in  oxidising  gives  the  red  oxide  of  wanganesr^yLn^O^.  This  is  the
moHt  stable  of  all  the  oxides  of  manganese  ;  it  is  not  only  stable  at  the  ordinary  bat  also
at  a  high  temi>erature — that  is,  it  does  not  absorb  or  disengage  oxygen  spontaneously.
When  ignited,  all  the  higher  oxides  of  manganese  pass  into  it  by  losing  oxygen,  and
manganous  oxide  by  absorbing  oxygen.  This  oxide  does  not  give  any  distinct  salts,
but  it  dissolves  in  sulphuric  acid,  forming  a  dark  red  solution,  which  contains  both
manganous  and  manganic  (of  the  oxide,  Mn.^O^)  sulphates.  The  latter  with  potassium
sulphate  gives  a  manganese  alum,  in  which  the  alumina  is  replaced  by  its  isoroorphous
oxide  of  manganese.  But  this  alum,  like  the  solution  of  the  intermediate  oxide  in  sul-
phuric acid,  evolves  oxygen  and  leaves  a  manganous  salt  when  slightly  heated.

Mauganese  dioxide  is  still  less  basic  than  the  oxide,  and  disengages  oxygen  or  a
halogen  in  tlie  presence  of  lurids,  forming  manganous  salts,  like  the  oxide.  However,  if  it
l»o  KUKp«Mi(le<l  in  etln-r,  and  hydrochloric  acid  gas  passed  into  the  mixture,  which  is  kept
cool,  th«'  ether  actjuires  a  green  colour,  owing  to  the  formation  of  tetra-chloride  of
manganese,  MnCl,,  corresponding  with  tin*  dioxide  which  passes  into  solution.  It  i*
however  very  unstable,  beijig  exceedingly  easily  decomposed  with  the  evolution  of
chlorine.  The  corresponding  fluoride,  MnF,,  obtained  by  Nickles  is  much  more  stable.
At  all  events,  manganesi;  dioxide  does  not  exliibit  any  well-defined  basic  chamcter,  but
has  rutlier  an  acid  character,  which  is  particularly  siiown  in  the  compounds  MnF|  and
MnCi,  just  mentioned,  and  in  the  property  of  manganese  dioxide  of  combining  with
iilkalis.  If  tile  higher  grades  <tf  oxidation  of  manganese  he  deoxidised  in  the  presence  of
alkalis,  they  frei^uently  give  the  dioxide  combined  with  tlie  alkali — for  example,  in  the
presence  of  potash  a  compound  is  formed  which  contains  K.O.oMnOo,  which  shows  the
weak  acid  character  of  this  oxide.  When  ignited  in  the  presence  of  sodium  comjwunds
manganese  dioxide  freijuently  forms  Na.O.MMnO^  and  Na  .0,l'2MnO.,,  and  lime  when
heated  witli  MnO.^  gives  from  CaO.lJMnOj  to  (Ca()i,.,Mn()..  (R<msseau)  according  to  the
t«Mnperatnre.  Besides  which,  perhaps,  MnO,  is  a  sahne  compound,  containing
MnOMnOj  or  (MnOi-Mn.^.O;,  and  there  are  reactions  which  sui)port  such  a  view  < Spring,
Ricliards,  Tranbe,  and  others) ;  for  instance  it  is  known  that  manganous  chloride  and
potassium  permanganate  give  the  dioxide  in  the  presence  of  alkalis.

Mani^'anese  dioxide  nniy  be  obtained  from  manganous  salts  by  the  action  of  oxidis-
ing agents.  If  manganous  hy<lroxide  or  carbonate  be  shaken  up  in  water  through
which  chlorine  is  passed,  the  hypochlorite  of  tlu?  nn'tal  is  not  formed,  as  is  the  case
with  certain  other  oxides,  but  manganese  dioxide  is  pn'cipitated :  2Mn02H.j  +  Cl.^
^  MnClo  •  Mn(\„HjO  +  up.  Owing  to  this  fact,  hyiKK-lilorites  in  the  presence  of  alkalis
and  lU'etic  acid  when  added  to  a  solution  of  manganous  salts  give  hydrated  manganese

CnBOMIfM.  MOLYBDENUM,  TUNOSTEK.  ITBANIUM.  ETC. 809

limit  ourselves  to  illustrating  the  chemJcnl  chnrftcter  of  manganese  by
describing  the  metal  and  ila  corresponding  acids.  The  fact  alone  thut
Ihe  oxides  of  manganese  are  not  reduced  to  the  metal  when  ignited  iti
hydrogen  (whilst  the  oxides  of  iron  give  metallic  iron  under  these
circumstances},  but  only  to  mangiinous  oxide,  MnO,  shows  thut
manganese  liiis  a  considerable  aflinity  for  oxygen— that  is,  it  is  difficult
to  reiiuce.  This  may  be  effected,  however,  by  means  of  cluircoal  or
sodium  at  s  very  high  temperature.  A  mixture  of  one  of  the  oxides  of
ninngnnt'se  with  charcoal  or  organic  matter  givos  fused  inrlalHc  man-
gniiese  under  the  powerful  heat  developed  by  coke  with  an  artiliciiil
draught.  The  metal  was  obtained  for  the  tirat  time  in  this  manner  by
Galin,  after  Pott,  and  more  especially  Hcheele,  had  in  the  last  century
shown  the  difference  between  the  compounds  of  iron  and  manganese
(they  were  previously  regarded  as  being  the  same).  Manganese  is  pre-
pared by  mixing  one  of  its  oxides  in  a  finely-divided  state  with  oil  and
.■soot ;  the  resultant  mass  is  then  first  ignited  in  order  to  decompose
the  organic  matter,  and  af  h-rwunls  fltrougly  heated  in  a  charcoal  crucible.
The  manganese  thus  obtain&l,  however,  contains,  as  a  rule,  a  consider-
able amount  of  silicon  and  other  impurities.  Its  specific  gravity  varies
between  7'2  and  8'0.  It  baa  a  ligbt  grey  colour,  a  foebly  metallic
lustre,  and  although  it  is  very  bard  it  can  be  scratched  by  a  file.  It
rapidly  oxidises  in  air,  being  converted  into  a  black  oxide  ;  water  acts
on  it  with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen — this  decomposition  proceeds  very
rapidly  with  boiling  water,  and  if  tlie  metal  contain  carbon.'"

ilioiiile,  118  nun  meiilioned  above.  HungauoiiB  nitrate  altm  leave*  inmiguieBe  iliuiide
whi^n  liHuted  t<>  300°.  It  i»  aldo  obtaiaed  from  nuuiganoui  and  mati^uiic  udts  or  the
kllialis,  wben  they  uru  deunnposed  in  Ihe  presence  ol  a  small  umimiit  ■>[  odd  ;  the  prac-
tical method  ot  converting  the  wJt«  MnX.,  into  the  liigbec  grades  of  oiidation  i>  f;iveu  io
Cliaiiter  H.,  Note  «.

*•  Other  chemittA  h*re  obtained  man)[anese  by  different  methodd,  and  attribnted
diScrent  properties  to  it.  This  difference  prubably  depands  on  the  presence  ol  eirbou
in  different  proportions.  Deville  oblniued  nwogiUHJW  b;  anhjeetiug  the  pure  dioiids,
mixed  with  pure  oharvool  (from  bnnit  saKar).toii  strong  henl  in  ■  lime  cnidble  until  the
reaultoot  metsl  (used.  The  metal  obtained  lud  a  rose  tint,  like  hismnth,  und  lihe  it
won  very  brittle,  although  eiceediiigly  hard.  It  deoomposeil  water  at  tlie  ordiniiry
IflDiiieratnre.  B runner  obtained  manganese  having  a  specific  gravity  ol  nbont  7-1.  which
decumpo»d  water  very  teehly  at  the  ordinary  temperatnre,  did  not  oiidisB  in  sir,  and
was  capable  ol  taking  a  liright  polish,  like  steel;  it  had  the  grey  colour  of  isssl  iron,  woa
very  brittle,  and  hard  enough  to  scratch  steel  and  g[as«,  like  a  diamoml.  Brunner'a
muthud  WSE  oa  toUows:  He  decomposed  the  manganese  fl  no  ride  (obtahied  sa  •  soluble
uompuuud  by  the  action  o(  hydrofluoric  acid  on  mougsnese  carbonate)  with  uodinm,  by
miiinn  Ihate  •nhstanocs  together  in  ■  crucihla  and  covering  the  mitlure  with  ■  Uyer  of
■alt  Olid  Huur  apar;  otter  which  the  cmcible  was  first  grsdnolly  bested  nnlil  the  reaction
b^an,  and  then  strongly  healed  in  order  to  lone  the  tnelal  separated.  Glatiel  (1880)
ohuined  i&  gmis.  ol  manganese,  haTing  a  grey  colour  and  sp.  gr,  7*Mrt,  by  licotiug  ■
miEtars  of  100  grais.  of  HnCtj  with  aOO  grms.  KCl  and  IS  grms.  Mg  to  a  bngbt  wUtfl
hvitt- Hoisaiui  and  others,  by  heating  the  oiides  ol  manganese  witli  turban  in  the  electria

810  PRINCIPLES  OF  ClIEMISTKY

It  has  been  shown  above  that  if  manganese  dioxide,  or  any
lower  oxide  of  manganese,  be  heated  with  an  alkali  in  the  presence  of
air,  the  mixture  absorbs  oxygen,^^  and  forms  an  alkaline  mauganate  of  a
green  colour:  2KHO  +  Mn02 4-0=K2Mn04  4-H20.  Steam  is  disen-
gaged during  the  ignition  of  the  mixture,  and  if  this  does  not  take
place  there  is  no  absorption  of  oxygen.  The  oxidation  proceeds  much
more  rapidly  if,  before  igniting  in  air,  potassium  chlorate  or  nitre  be
added  to  the  mixture,  and  this  is  the  method  of  preparing  potassium
luuriganatey  K^MnO^.  The  resultant  mass  dissolved  in  a  small  quantity
of  water  gives  a  dark  green  solution,  which,  when  evaporated  under  the
receiver  of  an  air  pump  over  sulphuric  acid,  deposits  green  crystals  of
exactly  the  same  form  as  potassium  sulphate  —namely,  six-sided  prisms
and  pyramids.  The  composition  of  the  product  is  not  changed  by  being
redissolved,  if  perfectly  pure  water  free  from  air  and  carbonic  acid  be
taken.  But  in  the  presence  of  even  very  feeble  acids  the  solution  of
this  salt  changes  its  colour  and  becomes  red,  and  deposits  manganese
dioxide.  The  same  decomposition  takes  place  when  the  salt  is  heated
with  water,  but  when  diluted  with  a  large  quantity  of  unboiled  water
manganese  dioxide  does  not  separate,  although  the  solution  turns  recL
This  change  of  colour  depends  on  the  fact  that  potassium  manganate,
K2Mn04,  whose  solution  is  green,  is  transformed  into  potassium  per-
manganate, KMn04,  whose  solution  is  of  a  red  colour.  The  reaction
proceeding  under  the  influence  of  acids  and  a  large  quantity  of  water

famiice,  obtained  carbides  of  raanganese — for  example,  Mn,-^C — and  remarked  that  the  roetal
volatilised  in  the  heat  of  the  voltaic  arc.  Metallic  manj^anese  is,  however,  not  prepared  on
a  large  scale,  but  only  its  alloys  with  carbon  (they  rea<lily  and  rapidly  oxidi»e)  and  /prro-
manyajuat'  or  a  coarsely  crystalline  alloy  of  iron,  manganese  and  carbon,  which  is
smelted  in  bbist-fumaces  like  pig-iron  (sec  Chapter  XXII.)  This  ferro-manganese  ia
employed  in  the  manufacture  of  steel  by  Bessenier's  and  other  processes  {see  Chapter
XXII.)  and  for  the  manufacture  of  manganese  bronze.  However,  in  America,  Green  and
Wahl  (IHI).'))  obtained  almost  pure  metallic  manganese  on  a  large  scale.  They  first  treat
the  ore  of  MnO.>  with  JM)  p.c.  sulphuric  acid  (which  extracts  all  the  oxides  of  iron
present  in  the  ore),  and  then  heat  it  in  a  reducing  flame  to  convert  it  into  MnO,  which
they  mix  with  a  i>owder  of  Al,  lime  and  CaF.>  (as  a  flux),  and  heat  the  mixture  in  a
crucible  lined  with  magnesia  ;  a  reaction  inmiediately  ttikes  place  at  a  certain  temperature,
and  a  metal  of  specific  gravity  7"3  is  obtained,  which  only  contains  a  smell  trace  of  iron.

Manganese  gives  two  compounds  with  7utrogrHy  MnjN^  and  Mn^N.^.  They  were
obtained  by  Prelinger  (1H94)  from  the  amalgam  of  manganese  Mn7Hg5  (obtained  on  a
mercury  anode  by  the  action  of  an  electric  current  u^K^n  a  solution  of  MnCl^) ;  the
mercury  nniy  be  removed  from  this  amalgam  by  heating  it  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen,
and  then  metallic  manganese  is  obtained  as  a  grey  porous  mass  of  specific  gravity  7'42.
If  this  anuilgam  be  heated  in  dry  nitrogen  it  gives  Mn;,N.,  (grey  jx)wder,  sp.  gr.  0'58),  but
if  heated  in  an  atmosphere  of  NHj  it  gives  (as  also  does  Mn5N.2)  Mn5N2,  (a  dark  mass
with  a  metallic  lustre,  sp.  gr.  C"'21),  which,  when  heated  in  nitrogen  is  converted  into
Mn-.N.j,  and  if  heated  in  hydrogen  evolves  NH3  and  disengages  hydrogen  from  a  solution
of  NH,C1.  At  all  events,  manganese  is  a  metal  which  decomposes  water  more  easily
than  iron,  nickel,  and  cobalt.

*'  Volume  I.  p.  157,  Note  7.

canoMirM.  molybdenum,  tckostes,  usakicm,  etc, 811

is  expressed  in  the  fnllowing  manner:  3KjMnOi4  2H,0=2KMn04
+  MnOj  +  4KH0.  IE  there  is  ft  Urge  proportion  of  acid  and  the  de-
fcraipiisition  is  iiided  by  heat,  the  nmnganese  dioxide  and  potassium
penuangaDftte  are  also  decomposed,  with  formation  of  tnangaiious  salt.
Exactly  tlie  same  deoom position  as  Cakes  place  under  the  action  of  acids
is  also  aL'i'ompUshed  by  niagnesiuDi  sulphikte,  which  raacLs  in  many  uases
like  an  acid.  When  water  holding  atniospbei-ic  oxygen  in  solution  acts
on  a  solution  of  potassium  mauganate,  the  oxygen  combiner  directly
with  the  nianganate  and  forms  pota.^ium  permanganate,  without
precipitating  manganese  dioxide,  2KjMnO,  +  0  +  HjO  ^  SKMnO^
H-2KH0.  Thus  a  sijlution  oE  potassium  nianganate  undergoes  a  very
characteristic  change  in  colour  and  passes  from  green  to  red  ;  hence  tltis
salt  received  the  name  of  chameleon  mineral.'^

Pofamium  permanganate,  KMnO,,  crystallises  in  well-formed,  long
red  prisms  with  a  bright  green  metallic  lustre.  In  the  arts  the  potash
is  frequently  replaced  by  soda,  and  by  other  alkaline  bases,  but  no  salt
of  permanganic  acid  crystallisps  so  well  as  the  potassium  salt,  and
therefore  this  salt  is  exclusively  used  in  chemical  laboratories.  One
part  of  the  crystalline  salt  dissolves  in  15  parts  of  water  at  the  ordinary
temperature.  Tlie  solution  is  of  a  very  deep  red  colour,  which  is  so
intense  that  it  is  still  clearly  observable  after  being  highly  diluted  with
water. In  a  solid  state  it  is  decomposed  by  heat,  with  evolution  of

"  II  w»»  kuown  to  Ihe  kichemiits  by  this  nwrne,  hot  the  true  eiplonatioD  of  the
ohuige  in  colour  is  dua  to  Ihe  re«e«jeheB  ot  Clieyillol,  Edwards,  Mitscherlich,  and
Forchhaiunier.  The  thnnge  in  colour  ut  potiuiaiiini  maDgiiiinle  in  due  to  it*  iaala-
tnlil;  and  to  iti>  Hplittinjt  np  into  two  other  iniuigiuieiie  componnilii,  s.  higher  and  a
lover :  UMiiO.^^  Mn  O7  ^MiiO...  Muiganew  trioiide  in  really  decomposed  in  tbia manner
by  the  iwlion  of  wiler  i«e  later):  3MuOj  +  HjO  =  SHnHO.TMnO.,  (Franke,  Thorpe,
and  Humbly).  Tlie  instability  ol  the  sail  is  proved  by  the  fact  of  its  being  dcoiidised  by
organic  matter,  with  the  formation  of  munganeHe  diuiide  and  alluli,  so  that,  for  hislance,
a  solution  of  this  salt  cannot  bv  filtered  thivngb  puper.  The  presence  nt  on  eiceen  o(
alkali  increases  Ihe  stability  ol  the  salt  l  when  heated  it  breaks  np  in  tlie  presence  ol
water,  with  the  evolnlioo  of  oxygen.

The  method  of  preparingjio(oni«tHpm«OHffonn<i'»illbennder*toodfrom  the  above.
There  are  many  recipeo  for  preparing  thin  Kabstiincr,  us  it  is  now  used  in  conniderable
quoalities  both  tor  technical  and  laboratory  purposes.  Bnt  in  all  caaes  the  euenou  of
the  methods  is  one  and  the  sanie:  a  miitare  of  alkali  with  any  oxide  of  monganeee
(even  nuuigaitoDa  liydnixide,  which  may  be  obtained  from  manganons  chloride)  is  Hr«t
heated  in  the  presence  of  airnr  of  an  oxidising  mbatance  (for  the  sake  of  raiudity.witli
potoasium  chlomtel :  the  resultant  mass  is  then  treated  with  water  and  bested,  when
maugaiieee  dioxide  in  precipitated  and  potMssinm  permanguiate  remains  in  solntion.
This  solutinii  may  be  boiled,  oa  the  liquid  will  contain  tree  alkali;  but  the  so'Btion
cannot  be  eiaimrated  to  dryaeiie,  becauoe  a  Btrcnj  solution,  an  well  oa  the  solid  tolt,  ia
deoompoaed  by  heat.

By  adding  a  dilute  eolntion  of  mauganDDB  Halpl
diaiide  uid  dilute  nitric  acid,  the  whole  of  the  miuig
nic  acid  (Crniii).

312  PRINCIPLES  OF CHEMISTRY

oxygen,  a  residue  consisting  of  the  lower  oxides  of  manganese  and
potassium  oxide  being  left.*^*'*  ^^^  A  mixture  of  permanganate  of  potas-
sium, phosphorous  and  sulphur  takes  fire  when  struck  or  rubbed,  a
mixture  of  the  permanganate  with  carbon  only  takes  fire  when  licatod,
not  when  struck.  The  instability  of  the  salt  is  also  seen  in  the  fact
that  its  solution  is  decomposed  by  peroxide  of  hydrogen,  which  at  the
same  time  it  decomposes.  A  number  of  substances  reduce  potassium
permanganate  to  manganese  dioxide  (in  which  case  the  red  solution
becomes  colourless).'*^  Many  organic  substances  (although  far  from
all,  even  when  boiled  in  a  solution  of  permanganate)  act  in  this  manner,
being  oxidised  at  the  expense  of  a  portion  of  its  oxygen.  Thus,  a
solution  of  sugar  decomposes  a  cold  solution  of  potassium  permanganate.
In  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  alkali,  with  a  small  quantity  of  sugar,
the  reduction  leads  to  the  formation  of  potassium  manganate,  because
2KMn04  +  2KH0=0  +  2K2Mn04  +  H2O.  With  a  considerable  amount
of  sugar  and  a  more  prolonged  action,  the  solution  turns  brown  and
precipitates  manganese  dioxide  or  even  oxide.  In  the  oxidation  of
many  organic  bodies  by  an  alkaline  solution  of  KMn04  generally  three-
eighths  of  the  oxygen  in  the  salt  are  utilised  for  oxidation  :  2KMn04
=K20  4-2Mn02  +  03.  A  portion  of  the  alkali  liberated  is  retained  by
the  manganese  dioxide,  and  the  other  portion  generally  combines  with
the  substance  oxidised,  because,  the  latter  most  frequently  gives  an  acid
with  an  excess  of  alkali.  A  solution  of  potassium  iodide  acts  in  a
similar  manner,  being  converted  into  potassium  iodate  at  the  expense  of
the  three  atoms  of  oxygen  disengaged  by  two  molecules  of  potassium
permanganate.

In  the  presence  o/aciclsy potasaium perjnanf/anaie  acts  as  an  oxidising
agent  with  still  greater  energy  than  in  the  presence  of  alkalis.  At  any
rate,  a  greater  proportion  of  oxygen  is  then  available  for  oxidation,
namely,  not  g,  as  in  the  presence  of  alkalis,  but  J,  because  in  the  first
instance  manganese  dioxide  is  formed,  and  in  the  second  case  mangan-
ous  oxide,  or  rather  the  salt,  MnX2,  corresponding  with  it. Thus,  for

^  *»'*  The  solution  of  this  salt  with  on  excess  of  impure  coiniiKTcitil  alkali  generally
acquires  a  jjreen  tint.

'^^  A  solution  of  potassium  permanganate  gives  a  beautiful  absorption  spectrum
(Chapter  XIII.)  If  the  light  in  passing  through  this  solution  loses  a  [><)rtion  of  its  rays
in  it  (if  one  may  so  account  for  it),  this  is  partially  explained  by  the  increased  oxidising
power  whicli  the  solution  then  acquires.  We  may  here  also  remark  that  a  dilute  solution
of  permanganate  of  inttassium  forms  a  colourless  solution  with  nickel  salts,  because
the^green  colour  of  the  solution  of  nickel  salts  is  complementary  to  the  red.  Such  a
decolorised  solution,  containing  a  large  proportion  of  nickel  and  a  small  proportion  of
manganese,  decom{>oses  after  a  time,  throws  down  a  precipitate,  and  re-acquires  the
green  colour  proi>er  to  the  nickel  salts.  The  addition  of  a  solution  of  a  cobalt  Sivlt  (rose-
red)  to  the  nickel  salt  also  destroys  the  colour  of  both  salts.

CHBOSniTM.  MOLYBDENUM,  TrNGSTEK.  LTUNH.TM.  ETC. 818

tance,  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  sulphuiic  acid,  the  deconi-
position  is  acconiijlJGheci  in  the  following  inaiiiier  :  "JKMii04  4-3Hi80^

=  KaSO,  +  2Mn8U,  +  3H/)  +  50.  Tliii  decomposition,  however,  does
not  proceed  directly  on  inixiug  a  solution  of  the  stilt  with  sulphuric
acid,  and  vrystAls  of  the  salt  even  dissolve  in  oil  of  vitriol  without  the
evolution  of  oxygen,  and  this  soluticn  only  decoinposea  hy  degrees  after
iL  certain  time.  This  is  due  to  th«  fact  that  sulphuric  acid  lil>erates
_ free  [jernianganic  acid  from  the  peroianganate,*'  uhich  acid  is  stable
B  solution. But  if,  in  the  presence  of  acid.'i  and  a  permanganate,  there

"  U«i

wir]  is  eilowed  tt

act  on  potiLBaiain  pemuingaiiatc  without  any  ^peciitl
oai,  a  Urge  ammiiit  of  oifgeii  i*  evolved  (it  ma;  even  eitdode  nnd  inSuneJ.  awl
m  Tiolut  >pnf  of  Uit  ilecampoaing  perauuigiuiie  add  is  giv«u  oK.  Bui  if  the  pure  salt
li.e.  free  from  i^Unrine)  be  disBoIved  in  pore  well-cuoleJ  Buljjhuric  acid,  withdtlt
uny  riiie  in  lamperslanj,  a.  green -coloured  liquid  SBttles  »t  tlie  boltiiui  of  tlie  ve»iiol.
Thjl  liqaid  dnen  not  conlaui  uij-  lulplinric  ajiid,  BJid  oiusiBts  of  peimuigiuuc  inliirdride,
Hu.jO,  (Aschoft,  Terieill-  It  is  ini|>OH«iblB  to  prepare  anj  Bousidemble  (jnaHtity  of  the
anhjdridu  by  thia  method,  an  it  decompoBea  with  »u  BiploHion  u  it  colleela,  evolving
olfKuii  and  leiiTtng  rod  oiide  of  mBU|;iuiege.  Femiaiiganit  anhi/drUIr,  Wnfl,,  in
dJBaolviiig  in  anlphariiiLcid,  giveaa  green  eal  ntion,  whii-li  iHccording  to  Fnuike,  18ST|eini-
Uinii  a  UMuiiUDDd  JUu,SO,„  =  (MnU.-J.SOi — that  ia,  snlpliariv  acid  iu  which  buth  hjdrg-
gen>  are  replaced  by  the  grunp  MnOj,  which  ia  combined  with  OK  in  penuHUgnnate  of
pobusiom.  Thin  iniitare  witli  a  sniall  qnantity  of  HiiUsrgiveH  Mn.j07.  aocnrdiiig  to  the
equation:  (HnO]),SO,+H,0  -  R,B04  +  Mil,0,,  and  when  beated  to  HU"  it  gives  man-
gantMlrioxide,  (UtiO]|vBO,>IL,0  o  aHnO^ ^f^ H,BO,  •  U.  Pure  manganeie  trioxido  ia
obtained  it  tlie  solnlion  of  |  HiiO:);,SO,  be  poured  indnipson  to  widi urn  carbonate.  Then,
logetlier  wilb  carbunio  anhydride,  a  apray  of  mangnnew  trioiide  piuaea  over,  which
may  be  collected  in  a  well-cmled  reoeivei,  and  this  >howB  that  the  reaetioD  prneeeda
acoording  tothesqaation:  |Hi>0.i)jSO,  i  N*.,COj '^  Na,SO,-.  UMtiOj-t  COg-t-UiTliarpe}.
The  ttioxide  is  decrompnaed  by  water,  furming  nuuiganeae  ilioiide  and  a  aolution  ol
permaHgaiac  add-.  SMnOj  +  H.O  ^  MnO,-t-9UMuO,.  The  suiie  W'id  ia  obtained  by
dinsolying  permangauiu  anhydride  in  water.

Barium  penuiuigaunUi  when  tirated  wjtli  aulpbnric  acid  givea  tlie  same  anid.  Thia
barium  salt  may  lie  prepared  by  the  action  of  Imiiam  chloride  un  the  diSlcultty  aoluhle
HJlver  permangiuiBte,  AgHuO,,  which  ia  precipitated  nn  mixing  a  atrong  aolntion  of  the
potaHBiDni  salt  witli  silver  nitrate.  The  solatloQ  of  permanganic  aoid  forms  a  bright  red
liquid  which  reQects  a  dork  violet  tint.  A  dilute  solution  1>as  exactly  the  same  colour
oa  that  of  the  potassium  salt.  It  deposita  manganeee  dioxide  when  exposed  to  the  action
of  light,  and  also  when  heated  nliovc  80°,  and  Uits  proueeds  the  more  rapidly  the  more
dilute  the  solutiou.  It  shows  its  oiidiaing  properties  in  many  cases,  as  alrMkdy
mentioned.  Even  hydrogen  gas  is  ahwirbed  by  a  solution  of  permanganic  acid;  and
charcoal  and  sulphur  ore  alto  oiidiMid  by  it,  aa  they  are  by  potaHsiutu  permanganate.
This  nuiy  be  token  advantage  uC  in  analysing  gunpowder,  because  when  it  is  treated
with  a  solution  of  potnasiuni  penuauganale,  all  lite  sulphur  is  convetted  mto  sulphuric
acid  and  aJI  tlie  cbomid  into  carbonic  onhyilride.  Finely-divided  platiniun  immediately
decomposea  permanganic  acid.  With  potoasiuni  iodide  it  liberates  iodine  (which  may
afterword*  be  oxidised  into  iodic  ucid)  (Hitsclierlich,  Fromhen,  AschofT,  and  othors).
Ammonia  does  not  lotin  a  correnponding  sail  with  free  permanganic  acid,  because  it  is
oxidised  with  evolatioii  of  nitrogen.  The  oxidiaing  action  of  permanganic  acid  iu  a
■troug  sulutton  may  be  accompanied  by  finniu  ond  llie  formation  of  violet  fumes  nf
permanganic  acid  ;  than  a  strong  solution  of  it  liikes  Are  when  brought  into  contact  witli
poper,  alcohol,  alkaline  aalphides,  fats,  &e.

odd  that,  according  bi  FraidiB,  1  part  of  potaasiuni  permanganate  with  13

814  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

is  a  substance  capable  of  absorbing  oxygen — for  instance,  capable  of
passing  into  a  higher  grade  of  oxidation  —  then  the  reduction  of  the
permanganic  acid  into  manganous  oxides  sometimes  proceeds  directly
at  the  ordinary  temperature.  This  reduction  is  very  clearly  seen,
because  the  solutions  of  potassium  permanganate  are  red  whilst  the
manganous  salts  are  almost  colourless.  Thus,  for  instance,  nitrous  acid
and  its  salts  are  converted  into  nitric  acid  and  decolorise  the  acid  solution
of  the  permanganate.  Sulphurous  anhydride  and  its  salts  immediately
decolorise  potassium  permanganate,  forming  sulphuric  acid.  Ferrous
salts,  and  in  general  salts  of  lower  grades  of  oxidation  capable  of  being
oxidised  in  solution,  act  in  exactly  the  same  manner.  Sulphuretted
hydrogen  is  also  oxidised  to  sulphuric  acid  ;  even  mercury  is  oxidised
at  the  expense  of  permanganic  acid,  and  decolorises  its  solution,  being
converted  into  mercuric  oxide.  Moreover,  the  end  point  of  these  reactions
may  easily  be  seen,  and  therefore,  having  first  determined  the  amount
of  active  oxygen  in  one  volume  of  a  solution  of  potassium  permanganate,
and  knowing  how  many  volumes  are  required  to  effect  a  given  oxidation,
it  is  easy  to  determine  the  amount  of  an  oxidisable  substance  in  a
solution  from  the  amount  of  permanganate  expended  (Marguerite's
method).

The  oxidising  action  of  KMn04,  like  all  other  chemical  reactions,
is  not  accomplished  instantaneously,  but  only  gradually.  And,  as  the
course  of  the  reaction  is  here  easily  followed  by  determining  the  amount
of  salt  unchanged  in  a  sample  taken  at  a  given  moment,^'*  the  oxidising
reaction  of  potassium  permanganate,  in  an  acid  liquid,  was  employed  by
Harcourt  and  Esson  (1865)  as  one  of  the  first  cases  for  the  investigation
of  the  laws  of  the  rate  of  chemical  chaiige'^^  as  a  subject  of  great  import-
ance in  chemical  mechanics. In  their  experiments  they  took  oxalic  acid,

parts  of  sulphuric  twid  at  100"  gives  brown  crj'stals  of  the  Rait  Mn.2(S04)3,EL|S04,4H.,0,
which  gives  a  precipitate  of  hydratetl  manganese  dioxide,  H.^MuO-  =  MnC^H.^O,  when
treated  with  water.

Spring,  by  precipitating  potassium  pennanganate  witli  sodium  sulphite  and  washing
the  precipitate  by  decantation,  obtained  a  soluble  colloidal  manganese  oxide,  whose
composition  was  the  mean  between  Mn^O^  and  MnO,. — namely,  Mn.^O.-;,4(Mn0.2H.^O).

^*  For  rapid  and  accurate  determinations  of  this  kind,  advantage  is  taken  of  those
methods  of  chemical  Analysis  which  are  known  as  '  titrations '(volumetric  analysis),  and
consist  in  measuring  the  volume  of  st^lntions  of  known  strength  required  for  the  comi)lete
conversion  of  a  given  substance.  Details  respecting  the  theory  and  practice  of  titration,
in  wliich  potassium  permanganate  is  very  frequently  employed,  must  be  looked  for  in
works  on  analytical  chemistry.

-''  The  measurements  of  velocity  and  acceleration  serve  for  determining  the  measure
of  forces  in  mechanics,  but  in  that  case  the  velocities  arc  magnitudes  of  length  or  paths
passed  over  in  a  unit  of  time.  The  velocity  of  chemical  change  embodies  a  conception  of
quite  anrtther  kind.  In  the  first  place,  the  velocities  of  reactions  are  magnitudes  of  the
masses  which  have  entered  into  chemical  transformations  ;  in  the  second  place,  these
velocities  can  only  be  relative  quantities. Hence  the  conception  of '  velocity  '  has  quite  a

CHROMIUM. MOLYBDENUM, TUNGSTEN, UKANIUM, ETC. 315

C2H2O4,  which  in  oxidising  gives  carbonic  anhydride,  whilst,  with
an  excess  of  sulphuric  acid,  the  potassium  permanganate  is  converted
into  manganous  sulphate,  MnSO^,  so  that  the  ultimate  oxidation
will  be  expressed  by  the  equation:  5C2H204  4-2MnK04  +  3H2S04
=  10CO2  +  K2SO4  +  2MnSO4  +  8H2O.  The  influence  of  the  relative
amount  of  sulphuric  acid  is  seen  from  the  annexed  table,  which  gives
the  measure  of  reaction  p  per  100  parts  of  potassium  permanganate,
taken  four  minutes  after  mixing,  using  n  molecules  of  sulphuric  acid,
H2SO4,  per  2KMn04  +  5C2H204  :

n=  2  4  6  8 12 16 22

p  =22  36 51 63 77 86 92

showing  that  in  a  given  time  (4  minutes)  the  oxidation  is  the  more
perfect  the  greater  the  amount  of  sulphuric  acid  taken  for  given  amounts
of  KMn04  and  C2H2O4.  It  is  obvious  also  that  the  temperature  and
relative  amount  of  every  one  of  the  acting  and  resulting  substances
should  show  its  influence  on  the  relative  velocity  of  reaction  ;  thus,  for
instance,  direct  experiment  showed  the  influence  of  the  admixture
of  manganous  sulphate.  When  a  large  proportion  of  oxalic  acid  (108
molecules)  was  taken  to  a  large  mass  of  water  and  to  2  molecules  of
permanganate  14  molecules  of  manganous  sulphate  were  added,  the
quantity  x  of  the  potassium  permanganate  acted  on  (in  percentages
of  the  potassium  permanganate  taken)  in  t  minutes  (at  16^)  was  as
follows  :

<=2 5 8 11 14 44 47 53 61 68
x=  5-2 12-1 18-7 251 31-3 684 7U7 758 798 830

These  figures  show  that  the  rate  of  reaction — that  is,  the  quantity  of
permanganate  changed  in  one  minute — decrejvses  proportionally  to  the
decrease  in  the  amount  of  unchanged  potassium  permanganate. At  the

different  meaning  in  chemiHtry  from  what  it  has  in  mechanicH.  Their  only  common  factor
is  time.  11  dthe  the  increment  of  time  and  dx  the  quantity  of  a  Hubstunce  changed  in
this  space  of  time,  then  the  fraction  (or  quotient)  dx  dt  will  express  the  rate  of  the
reaction.  The  natural  conclusion,  come  to  both  by  Uarcourt  and  Ekhou,  and  previously  to
them  (1850)  by  Wilhelmj  (who  investigated  the  rate  of  conversion,  or  inversion,  of  sugar
in  its  passage  into  glucose),  consists  in  establishing  that  this  velocity  is  pro|x>rtional  to
the  quantity  of  substances  still  unchanged — i.€.  that  dx  dt  =  C{X-x),  where  C  is  a
constant  coefficient  of  proportion<ility,  and  where  A  is  the  quantity  of  a  substance  taken
for  reaction  at  the  moment  when  ^  =  0  and  j'  =  0— that  is,  at  the  beginning  of  the
experiment,  from  which  the  time  t  and  quantity  x  of  substance  changed  is  counted.
On  integrating  the  preceding  equation  we  obtain  log(A  A  — j*)- A7,  where  A:  is  a  new
constant,  if  we  take  ordinary  (and  not  natural)  logarithms.  Hence,  knowing  A,  x,  and  /,
for  each  reaction,  we  find  k^  and  it  proves  to  be  a  constant  quantity.  Thus  from  the
figures  cited  in  the  text  for  the  reaction  2KMnO4  +  108C2H.jOt  +  14MnSO],  it  may  be
calculated  that  Ar  =  00114;  for  example,  t  =  U,  7  =  68*4  (A  =  100),  whence  it/ ^0*5004  and
ib»  0-0114,  {8M  aUo  Chapter  XIY.,  Note  8,  and  Chapter  XXVII.,  Note  25  bis).

316  PKINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

commencement,  about  2  6  per  cent,  of  the  salt  taken  was  decomposed  in
the  course  of  one  minute,  whilst  after  an  hour  the  rate  was  about
0*5  per  cent.  The  same  phenomena  are  observed  in  every  case  which
has  been  investigated,  and  this  branch  of  theoretical  or  physical
chemistry,  now  studied  by  many,^^  promises  to  explain  the  course  of
chemical  transformations  from  a  fresh  point  of  view,  which  is  closely
allied  to  the  doctrine  of  affinity,  because  the  rate  of  reaction,  without
doubt,  is  connected  with  the  magnitude  of  the  affinities  acting  between
the  reacting  substances.

*'  The  researches  made  by  Hood,  Van't  HoflE,  Ostwald,  Warder,  Menschutkin,  Kono«
valoflT,  and  others  have  a  particular  significance  in  this  direction.  Owing  to  the  com-
parative novelty  of  this  subject,  and  the  absence  of  applicable  as  well  as  indubitable
deductions,  I  consider  it  impossible  to  enter  into  this  province  of  theoretical  chemistry,
altliough  I  am  quite  confident  that  its  development  should  lead  to  very  important  results,
especially  in  respect  to  chemical  equilibria,  for  Van't  Hoff  has  already  shown  that
the  limit  of  reaction  in  reversible  reactions  is  determined  by  the  attainment  of  eqoal
velocities  for  the  opposite  reactions.

317

CHAPTER  XXTT

IRON, COBALT, AND NICKEL

JuDciiNG  from  the  atomic  weights,  and  the  forms  of  the  higher  oxides
of  the  elements  ah-eady  considered,  it  is  easy  to  form  an  idea  of
the  seven  groups  of  the  periodic  system.  Such  are,  for  instance,  j;he
typical  series  Li,  Be,  B,  C,  N,  O,  F,  or  the  third  series,  Na,  Mg,  Al,  Si,
P,  S,  CI.  The  seven  usual  types  of  oxides  from  R^O  to  R2O7  correspond
with  them  (Chapter  XV.)  The  position  of  the  eighth  group  is  quite
separate,  and  is  determined  by  the  fact  that,  as  we  have  already  seen,
in  each  group  of  metals  having  a  greater  atomic  weight  than  potassium
a  distinction  ought  to  be  made  between  the  elements  of  the  even  and
uneven  series.  The  series  of  even  elements,  commencing  with  a
strikingly  alkaline  element  (potassium,  rubidium,  caesium),  together  with
the  uneven  series  following  it,  and  concluding  with  a  haloid  (chlorine,
bromine,  iodine),  forms  a  large  period,  the  properties  of  whose  members
repeat  themselves  in  other  similar  periods.  The  elements  of  the  eighth
group  are  situated  between  the  elements  of  the  even  series  and  the  ele-
ments of  the  uneven  series  following  them.  And  for  this  reason  elements
of  the  eighth  group  are  found  in  the  middle  of  each  large  period.  The
properties  of  the  elements  belonging  to  it,  in  many  respects  independent
and  striking,  are  shown  with  typical  clearness  in  the  case  of  iron,  the
well-known  represent.'itive  of  this  group.

Iron  is  one  of  those  elements  which  are  not  only  widely  diffused  in
the  crust  of  the  earth,  but  also  throughout  the  entire  universe.  Its
oxides  and  their  various  compounds  are  found  in  the  most  diverse
portions  of  the  earth's  crust ;  but  here  iron  is  always  found  combined
with  some  other  element.  Iron  is  not  found  on  the  earth's  surface  in
a  free  state,  because  it  easily  oxidises  under  the  action  of  air.  It  is
occasionally  found  in  the  native  state  in  meteorites,  or  aerolites,  which
fall  upon  the  earth.

Meteoric  iron  is  formed  outside  the  earth.*  Meteorites ai-e  fragments
which  are  carried  round  the  sun  in  orbits,  and  fall upon  the earth

•  The  compoHition  of  meteoric  iron  is  variable. It  generally  contains  nickel,  phoH-
phorus,  carbon,  «tc. The  schreiluTijite  of  meteoric  stoncB  contains  Fe|Ni.^P.

318  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

when  coming  into  proximity  with  it  during  their  motion  in  space.  The
meteoric  dust,  on  passing  through  the  upper  parts  of  the  atmosphere,
and  becoming  incandescent  from  friction  with  the  gases,  produces  that
phenomenon  which  is  familiar  under  the  name  of  falling  stars.^ Such  is

'  Comets  and  the  rings  of  Saturn  ought  now  to  be  considered  as  consisting  of  an
accnmalation  of  such  meteoric  cosmic  particles.  Perhaps  the  part  played  by  these
minute  bodies  scattered  throughout  space  is  much  more  important  in  the  formation
of  the  largest  celestial  bodies  than  has  hitherto  bean  imagined.  The  investigation  of
this  branch  of  astronomy,  due  to  Schiaporelli,  has  a  bearing  on  the  whole  of  natural
science.

The  question  arises  as  to  why  the  iron  in  meteorites  is  in  a  free  state,  whilst  on  earth
it  is  in  a  state  of  combination. Does  not  this  tend  to  show  that  the  condition  of  our
globe  is  very  different  from  that  of  the  rest  ? My  answer  to  this  question  has  been
already  given  in  Volume  I.  p.  377|  Note  57. It  is  my  opinion  that  inside  the  earth  there
is  a  mass  similar  in  composition  to  meteorites — that  is,  contaming  rocky  matter  and
metallic  iron,  partly  ciurburetted. In  conclusion,  I  consider  it  will  not  be  out  of  place
to  odd  the  following  explanations. According  to  the  theory  of  the  distribution  of  pres-
sures (sae  my  treatise,  On  Barometrical  Levelling^  1876,  pages  48  et  aeq.)  in  an  atmo>
sphere  of  mixed  gases,  it  follows  that  two  gases,  whose  densities  are  d  and  rf  i,  and  whose
relative  quantities  or  partial  pressures  at  a  certain  distance  from  the  centre  of  gravity
orp  h  and  /ti,  will,  when  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  centre  of  attraction,  present  a
different  nvtio  of  their  mosses  x  :  x^ — that  is,  of  their  partial  pressures— which  may  be
found  by  the  equation  rZi(log  /i  — log  ap)  =  rf(log  A^  — log  jti). If,  for  instance,  d  :  ^1  =  2: 1,
and  h  =  hi  (that  is  to  say,  the  masses  ore  equal  at  the  lower  height)  =  1000,  then  when
x  =  10  the  magnitude  of  x^  will  not  be  10  {i.e.  the  mass  of  a  gas  at  a  higher  level  whose
density  —1  will  not  be  equal  to  the  mass  of  a  gas  whose  density  =2,  as  was  the  cose  at
a. lower  level),  but  much  greater — namely,  a:|  =  100 — that  is,  the  lighter  gas  will pre-
dominate over  a  heavier  one  at  a  higher  level. Therefore,  when  the  whole  mass  of  the
earth  was  in  a  state  of  vapour,  the  substances  having  a  greater  vapour  density  accumu-
lated about  the  centre  and  those  with  a  lesser  vapour  density  at  the  surface. And  as
the  vapour  densities  depend  on  the  atomic  and  molecular  weights,  those  substances  which
have  small  atomic  and  molecular  weights  ought  to  have  accumulated  at  the  surface,  and
those  with  high  atomic  and  molecular  weights,  which  are  the  least  volatile  and  tlie  easiest
to  condense,  at  the  centre. Thus  it becomes  apparent  why  such light  elements  as
hydrogen,  carbon,  nitrogen,  oxygen,  sodium,  magnesium,  aluminium,  silicon,  phosphorus,
sulphur,  chlorine,  potassium,  calcium,  and  their  comi)ounds  predominate  at  the  surface
and  largely  form  the  earth's  crust. There  is  also  now  much  iron  in  the  sun,  as  spectrum
analysis  shows,  and  therefore  it  must  have  entered  into  the  composition  of  the  earth
and  other  planets,  but  would  have  accumulated  at  the  centre,  because  the  density  of
its  vapour  is  certainly  large  and  it  easily  condenses. There  was  also  oxygen  near  the
centre  of  the  earth,  but  not  sufficient  to  combine  with  the  iron. The  former,  as  a  much
lighter  element,  princii>ally  accumulated  at  the  surface,  where  we  at  the  present  time
find all oxidised compounds and even a riMunaut of free  oxygen. This  gives  the
possibility not only  of  explaining in accordance  with cosmogonic  theories tl.e pre-
dominance of  oxygen  compounds  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  with  the  occurrence  of
unoxidiH<Ml  iron  in  the  interior  of  the  earth  and  in  meteorites,  but  also  of  understanding
why  the  density  of  the  wliole  earth  (over  5j  is  far  greater  than  that  of  the  rocks  (1  to  8)
composing  its  crust. And  if  all  the  preceding argunwiits and  theories  (for  instance
tlie  Kupi>osition  that  the  sun,  earth,  and  all  the  phmets  were  formed  of  an  elementary
homogeneous  mass,  formerly  composed  of  vapours  and  gases)  be  true,  it must  l)e  ad-
mitted that  the  interior  of  the  earth  and  other  planets  contains  metallic  (unoxidised)  iron,
which,  however, is  only  found  on  the  surface  as  aerohtes. And  then  assuming  that
aerolites are  the fragments of planets which have crumbled to pieces so to say
.during  cooling  (this  has  been  held  to  be  the  case  by  astronomers,  judging  from  the  paths

then
Uie  I

P  IRON,  COBALT.  AND  KICKEL  819

Wie  doctrine  concerning  meteorites,  and  therefore  the  fact  of  their
containing  rocky  (siliceous)  matter  and  nietnUio  iron  sliowa  that  outside
ahe  earth  the  elements  and  their  aggregation  are  in  some  degree  the
nauie  as  upon  the  eai^h  itself.

I  The  most  widely  ditrusnil  terreBtrial  compound  of  iron  is  iron
reiBulphide,  FeS„  or  iV^ji  pi/riteM.  It  occurs  in  fonaations  of  both
[Aqueous  nnd  igneous  origin,  and  sometimes  in  enonnuus  masses.  It  is
n  Bubstance  having  a  greyish-yellow  colour,  with  a  metallic  lustre,  and  a
mecifie  gravity  of  O'O  ;  it  crystalliBes in  the  regular  system. '*''
[  The  oxides  are  the  prineipul  ores  used  for  producing  metallic  iron.
sShe  majority  of  the  oreii  contjiin  ferrio  oxide,  Fe^Oj,  either  in  a
LBree  state  or  coniliined  with  water,  or  else  in  combination  with  ferrous
hzide,  FeO.  The  species  and  varieties  of  iron  ores  are  numerous  and
niverse.  Ferric  oxide  in  a  separate  form  appears  sometimes  as  crystals
Ebf  the  rhombohedric  system,  having  a  metallic  lustre  and  greyish  steel
fOolour  ;  they  are  brittle,  and  form  a  red  powder,  specific  gravity  about
pt'S-^.  Ferric  oxide  in  type  of  oxidation  nnd  properties  resembles
niumina  ;  it  is,  however,  although  with  difficulty,  soluble  in  acids  even
itvhen  anhydrous.  The  crystalline  oxide  bears  the  name  of  gpemdar
iiron  ore,  but  ferric  oxide  mi>st  often  occurs  in  a  non -crystalline  form,
^n  masses  ha\'ing  a  red  fracture,  and  is  then  known  as  ivil  hirmatite.
^Id  this  form,  however,  it  is  rather  a  rare  ore,  and  is  principally  found
Mn  veins. The  hydrates  of  ferric oxide,  ferric  hydroxides,*  are  most

|fd  keroliteii),  it  is  rpodily  nndprttood  why  Ihey  uhauld  \ie  composeil  of  nietallic
Hnd,  iu»)  this  woald  ciplain  its  iwiuironce  iii  Lhe  deiiUm  uf  the  earth,  which  we
lAUomed  aa  Ibo  t«iUB  ol  onr  tlwoTy  ol  the  fornintion  of  naphtha  (Chapler  VIII.,  RuIub
67-«01.

1 6i>  Immenw  dpposilB  n[  imn  pyrites  are  kuown  in  variona  partH  o(  Bawia.  On  the
river  Uxta,  ncoj  Bnrovitai,  llionsanila  ol  tona  are  yearly  collectad  trom  the  detriloa  of
the  neighbauriog  roeks.  In  IheOovtrumentsof  Toula,  Riaun,  uidiu  the  Donets  <1iatiict
ihb  layers  of  pyriles  occur  nmong  the  coal  warn*.  Vary  lliick  beda  of  pyritea
kDD*n  id  many  parti  of  the  Caucasas.  But  the  deposits  of  the  UraJa  arc  par-
larly  raat,  and  have  been  worked  for  a  long  time.  AmoiigKt  these  I  wijl  only  iDdicate
"ihe  depo«t«  on  the  Soymennky  entiite  near  tlie  KJiihleimsky  works;  the  Kaletiuiiky
its  near  the  Virhny-Isetsky  works  (doutaining  1-a  p.a.  Cu) ;  Dn  the  banks  of  tlie
river  Koashaivi  near  KoDshvi  (3-G  pj:.  Cu),  and  the  deposits  near  the  Bogodmsby
works  (S-S  p-c.  Cn).  Iron  pyrites  (especially  that  containing  copper  which  is  entmctud
after  roosting]  is  now  chiefly  employed  lor  roasting,  aa  a  soaroe  of  SO,  for  the  manubu-
tare  of  chamber  nnlj^nric  acid  (VoLI.  p.  391),  bat  the  remaioiDg  oiido  of  Iron  is  per-
teetly  luiuble  tor  smelting  into  pig  iron,  althoagh  it  giTes  a  snlphnroDa  pig  iron  (the
salphar  may  be  easily  removed  hy  subsequent  treatment,  especially  with  the  aid  of
ferro-nuuiganose  in  Bensomer's  prooem).  The  great  technical  importance  of  iron  pyrites
JMds  to  its  sometimes  being  imported  fiom  great  distances;  loF  instance,  into  Enitlaud
from  Spain.  Besides  whiclk,  when  heated  in  closed  retorts  FeS^  gives  sulphur,  and  it
allowed  to  aiidine  in  damp  ur.  green  litriol.  FeSO,.

'  The  hydrated  ferric  oiide  is  fnand  in  nature  in  a  dnal  form. It  is  somewhat  wely
mot  with  in  the  form  of  a  cryalailiiii

320  PKINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTKY

often  found in aqueous or  stratiOed  formations,  and  are  known  as
brown  hannatitea  \  they  generally  have  a  brown  colour,  form  a  yellowish-
brown  powder,  and  have  no  metallic  lustre  but  an  earthy  appearance.
They  easily  dissolve  in  acids  and  diffuse  through  other  formations,  espe-
cially clays  (for  instance,  ochre)  ;  they  sometimes  occur  in  reniform  and
similar  masses,  evidently  of  aqueous  origin. Such  are,  for  instance,
the  so-called  bog  or  lake  and  peat  ores  found  at  the  bottom  of  marshes
and  lakes,  and  also  under  and  in  peat  beds. This  ore  is  formed  from
water  containing  ferrous  carbonate  in  solution,  which,  after  absorbing
oxygen,  deposits  ferric  hydroxide. In  rivers  and  springs,  iron  is  found
in solution as ferrous carbonate through the agency of carbonic
acid  : hence the existence  of  chalybeate  springs  containing  FeCO^.
This  ferrous  carbonate,  or  sid^.rite,  is  either  found  as  a  non -crystalline
product of  evidently  aqueous  origin,  or  as  a  crysbdline spar called
spathic  iron  ore. The  reniform  deposits  of  the  former  are  most  re-
markable ;  they  are  called  spherosiderites,  and  sometimes  form  whole
strata in the Jurassic and carboniferous formations. Afagnetic
iron  ore,  Tefi^  =  FeO,Fe203,  in  virtue  of its purity and  practical
uses,  is  a  very  important  ore  ;  it  is  a  compound  of  the  ferrous  and
ferric oxides, is naturally magnetic, has a specific gravity  of  5*1,
crystallises  in  well-formed  crystals  of  the  regular  system,  is  with  diflS-
culty  soluble  in  acids,  and  sometimes  forms  enormous  masses,  as,  for
instance,  Mount  Blagodat  in  the  Ural. However,  in  most  cases — for
instance,  at  Koi-sak-Mogila  (to  the  north  of  Berdiansk  and  Nogaiska,
near  the  8ea  of  Azov),  or  at  Krivoi  Rog  (to  the  west  of  Ekaterinoslav) —
the  magnetic  iron  ore  is  mixed  with  other  iron  ores. In  the  Urals,  the
Caucasus  (without  mentioning  Siberia),  and  in  the  districts  adjoining  the
basin  of  the  Don,  Russia  possesses  the  richest  iron  ores  in  the  world.
To  the  south  of  Moscow,  in the  Governments of  Toula and Nijni-
novgorod,  in  the  Olonetz  district,  and  in  the  Government  of  Orloffsky
(near  Zinovieff  in  the  district  of  Kromsky),  and  in  many  other  places,
there  are  likewise  abundant  supplies  of  iron  ores  amongst  the  deposited
aqueous  formations  ; the  siderite  of  Orloffsky, for instance, is dis-
tinguished by  its  great  purity.'

an<l  com  position  Fe  H^O|.  or  Ft'HO, — that  is,  nue  of  oxide  of  iron  to  one  of  water
Fe_jO.-^.ILO ;  frequently  found  us  brown  ironHt«)ne,  fonninj^  a  dense  mass  of  fibrous,
reniform  deposits  containin;^  'iFe^O-.-iH^O — that  is,  liaving  a  composition  FeiH.jO^.  In
bo^ij  ore  ami  other  nimihir  ores  we  most  often  find  a  mixture  of  tliis  hydrated  ferric  oxide
with  chiy  and  other  impurities.  The  specific  gravity  of  such  formations  is  rarely  as  hitj^h
as  10.

•  The  ores  of  iron,  similarly  to  all  substances  extracted  from  veins  and  deposits,  are
worked  according'  to  mininj^  practice  by  means  of  vertical,  horizontal,  or  inclined
Rhafts  which  reach  and  penetrate  the  veins  and  strata  containin*;  the  ore  dejwsits.
The  mass  of  ore  excavated  is  raised  to  the  surface,  then  sorted  either  by  hand  or  else  m

IRON, COBALT. AND  NIOKEL

3  other

s  also  found  in  the  form  of  t

>,  and  also  ii

ni  pounds — for

me  phosphates  ;
pure  state,  and  have  not
.1  compounds  of  iron  pre-
1  enters  into  the  composi-

ice,  in  certain  silicates,  a
forms  are  cumpara lively  rare  in  nature  in
the industiial importauce of those nati
viously  mentioned. In  small  quantities  i

tion  of  every  kind  of  xnil  and  all  rocky  formations,  Aa  ferrous  oxide,
FeO,  is  isomorphous  with  magnesia,  and  ferrie  oxide,  Fe^Oj,  with
alumina,  isomorphous  suhstitution  is  possible  here,  and  hence  minerals
are  not  unfrequently  found  in  which  the  quantity  of  iron  varies  con-
siderahly  ;  such,  for  instance,  are  pyroxene,  amphibole,  certain  vsrieties
of  niica,  ttc.  Although  much  irrm  oxide  is  deleterious  to  the  growth  of
vegetation,  still  plants  do  not  fluurish  without  iron  ;  it  enters  as  an
indispensitble  component  inti>  the  composition  of  all  higher  otyanimnt ;
in  the  ash  of  plants  we  always  find  more  or  less  of  its  compounds.  It
also  o<%urs  in  blood,  and  forms  one  of  the  colouring  matters  in  it  ;
100  parts  of  the  blood  of  the  highest  organisms  contain  aliout  0-05  of  iron.
The  rfriuciimt  of  the  ores  of  iron  into  metallic  inm  is  in  prin-
ciple veiy  simple,  because  when  the  oxides  of  inm  are  strongly  heated
with  charcoal,  hydrogen,  carlxmic  oxide,  and  other  reducing  agents,'^
they easily  give metallic iron. But  the matter is i-endered  more

■pecml  KirLin)!  uppiuatDa  ||;eDeT»]ty  acting  uitb  water  to  wkhIi  llie  ore),  mid  is  subjected

uiproGtable,  i

Inc
!  □(  the  chei

nel&U,

edresai

iwlj,  IhoH)  I
en  profitable  to  tnuiaporL  very  rich  uid  pure  orei  {wit
70  p.c.  of  inm)  from  loog  distanciu.  Tlie  detftilii  eonoeniing  tlic  working  u
of  metnU  wO]  be  found  in  special  treatiseij  on  metntliiigj'  ftud  niining.

'  Th«  redaction  of  iron  OKides  by  hydrogen  twloagB  to  the  order  of  reveruble  re-
■ctiona  |C)u)pl«r  □.),  and  ia  Iherclore  delenuined  by  n  limit  which  ia  here  eiprefsed
by  Ihts  atuinnicnt  of  the  uune  preiHiire  M  in  thi-  vam  where  hydrogen  BctB  oo  irou
oiidw,  and  iw  in  the  c*sc  where  (at  Ibe  ume  teiupentore)  witler  is  decomposed  by
Dwttllic  iron.  Tlw  calvnlittiDnB  reEemng  Iti  tbja  nutter  were  nude  by  Henri  Sainte-CIiure
Doville  tlB1*>)'  S|>oneT  "ou  was  pluceil  in  it  tnbe  having  a  temperature  t.  one  end  of
which  was  connected  wiUi  a  ibbs«1  conUining  water  at  0=  Ivapour  tension  -  iS  mm.)
aad  tbe  other  end  with  a  mercury  pomp  and  pressure  gsnge  which  determined  the
limiting  tension  attained  by  tlie  dry  hydrogen  p  (subtracting  the  tension  of  the  water
n^iour  from  tlie  tension  observed!.  A  tnlw  was  then  taken  containing  an  excess  of  iron
tnidc.  It  K&i  filled  witb  hydrogen,  sjid  tlie  tension  ji,  observed  ut  the  residual  hydrogen
whoD  the  water  wax  condensed  nt  0*^.

860=

j,,= -

The  equality  of  the  preaanre  ItenwiMi)  of  the  hydrogen  in  the  ts
hydrotfen  here  Iwhaves  like  the  vapour  of  iron  or  of  its  otide.

By  taking ferrie  oxide,  FeiOj, Moissoti observed  thai ■

magnetic  mide»  Fe^tO),  at  nOO^  into  ferrousoxide,  FeO,  and  at

Wright  and  Lull  (IS7S),  whilst  investigating  tbe  reduction  of  oi

tcmperalnre  of  reaction  depends  on  the  coadilion  of  the  oi:

VOL.  tl.

found  that  (a)  the

322  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

difficult  by  the  fact  that  the  iron  does  not  melt  at  the  heat  developed
by  the  combustion  of  the  charcoal,  and  therefore  it  does  not  separate
from  those  mechanically  mixed  impurities  which  are  found  in  the  iron
ore.  This  is  obviated  by  the  following  very  remarkable  property  of
iron  :  at  a  high  temperature  it  is  capable  of  combining  with  a  small
quantity  (from  2  to  5  p.c  )  of  carbon,  and  then  forms  cast  iron,  which
easily  melts  in  the  heat  developed  by  the  combustion  of  charcoal  in  air.
For  this  reason  metallic  iron  is  not  obtained  directly  from  the  ore,  but
is  only  formed  after  the  further  treatment  of  the  cast  iron  ;  the  first
product  extracted  from  the  ore  being  cast  iron.  The  fused  mass  dis-
poses itself  in  the  furnace  below  the  slag — that  is,  the  impurities  of  the
ore  fused  by  the  heat  of  the  furnace.  If  these  impurities  did  not  fuse
they  would  block  up  the  furnace  in  which  the  ore  was  being  smelted,
and  the  continuous  smelting  of  the  cast  iron  would  not  be  possible  ;  ^
it  would  be  necessary  periodically  to  cool  the  furnace  and  heat  it  up
again,  which  means  a  wasteful  expenditure  of  fuel,  and  hence  in  the
production  of  cast  iron,  the  object  in  view  is  to  obtain  all  the  earthy
impurities  of  the  ore  in  the  shape  of  a  fused  mass  or  slag.  Only
in  rare  ca^es  does  the  ore  itself  form  a  mass  which  fuses  at  the
temperature  employed,  and  these  cases  are  objectionable  if  much  iron
oxide  is  carried  away  in  the  slag.  The  impurities  of  the  ores  most
often  consist  of  certain  mixtures — for  instance,  a  mixture  of  clay  and
sand, or  a mixture of limestone  and clay,  or  quartz, &c. These

precipitated  ferric  oxide  is  reduced  by  hydrogen  at  85°,  that  obtained  by  oxidising  the
metal  or  from  its  nitrate  at  175° ;  (b)  when  other  conditions  are  the  Raxne,  the  redaction
by  carbonic  oxide  commences  earlier  than  that  by  hydrogen,  and  the  reduction  by
hydrogen  still  earlier  than  that  by  charcoal ;  (c)  the  reduction  is  effected  with  greater
facility  when  a  greater  quantity  of  heat  is  evolved  during  the  reaction.  Ferric  oxide
obtained  by  heating  ferrous  sulphate  to  a  red  heat  begins  to  be  reduced  by  carbonic
oxide  at  202°,  by  hydrogen  at  260°,  by  charcoal  at  480°,  whilst  for  magnetic  oxide,  FcjO^,
the  temperatures  are  200°,  290°,  and  450°  respectively.

^  The  primitive  methods  of  iron  manufacture  were  conducted  by  intermittent  pro-
cesses in  hearths  resembling  smiths'  fires.  As  evidenced  by  the  uninterrupted  action
of  the  steam  boiler,  or  the  process  of  lime  burning,  and  the  continuous  preparation  and
condensation  of  sulphuric  acid  or  the  uninterrupted  smelting  of  iron,  every  industrial
process  becomes  increasingly  profitable  and  complete  under  the  condition  of  the  con-
tinuous action,  as  far  as  possible,  of  all  agencies  concerned  in  the  production.  This
continuous  method  of  production  is  the  first  condition  for  the  profitable  production
on  the  large  scale  of  nearly  all  industrial  products.  This  method  lessens  the  cost  of
labour,  simplifies  the  supervision  of  the  work,  renders  the  product  uniform,  and  fre-
quently introduces  a  very  great  economy  in  the  expenditure  of  fuel  and  at  the  same  time
presents  the  simplicity  and  perfection  of  an  equilibrated  system.  Hence  every  manu-
facturing operation  should  be  a  continuous  one,  and  the  manufacture  of  pig  iron  and
sulphuric  acid,  which  have  long  since  become  so,  may  be  taken  as  exami^les  in  many
respects.  A  study  of  these  two  manufactures  should  form  the  commencement  of  an
acquaintance  with  all  the  contemporary  methods  of  manufacturing  both  from  a  tech-
nical and  economical  point  of  view.

IRON,  COBALT. AND  NICKEL  SiH

impurities  do  not  sepanite  of  themselves,  or  do  not  fuse.  The  difficulty
of  the  industry  lies  iu  forming  an  easily -fusible  slog,  iaU>  which  the
whole  of  the  foreign  matter  of  the  ore  would  pass  and  flow  down  to  the
Viottom  f'f  the  furnace  above  the  heavier  cast  iron.  Thia  ia  etieeted  by
mixing  certain  _/(iij¥j*  with  the  ore  and  charcoal.  A  flux  is  a  substance
which,  wheti  mixed  with  the  foreign  matter  of  the  ore,  forius  a  fusible
vitreous  mass  or  slag.  The  flux  used  for  silica  is  limestone  with  clay  ;
for  limestone  a  definite  quantity  of  silica  is  used,  the  best  procedure
having  been  arrived  at  by  experiment  and  by  long  practice  in  iron
smelting  and  Other  metal lurf^ical  processes.'^

Thus  the  following  materials  have  to  be  iutroduved  into  the  furnace
where  the  smelting  of  the  iron  ore  is  carried  iin  ;  (1)  the  iron  ore,
composed  of  oxide  of  iron  and  foreign  matter  ;  (~2)  the  flux  required  t«
form  a  fusible  skg  with  the  foreign  matter  ;  (3)  the  carbon  which  is
necessary  (<i)  for  reducing,  (l>)  for  combining  with  the  reduced  iron
to  form  cast  iron,  (c)  principally  for  the  purpose  uf  combustion  and
thf  heat  generated  thereby,  necessary  not  only  for  reducing  the  iron
and  transforming  it  into  cast  iron,  but  also  for  melting  the  slag,  as  well
as  the  cast  iron — and  {4)  the  air  necessary  for  the  combustion  of  the
charcoal.  The  air  is  introduced  after  a  preparatory  heating  in  order  to
economise  fuel  and  to  obtain  the  highest  temperature.  The  air  is
forced  in  uniler  pressure  by  means  ■>£  a  special  blast  arrangement.
This  permits  of  an  exact  regulation  of  the  heat  and  rate  of  smelting.
All  these  component  parts  necessary  for  the  smelting  of  iron  must  be
contained  in  a  vertical,  that  is,  tthaft/nrnacf,  which  at  the  base  must
have  a  receptacle  for  the  accumulation  of  the  slag  and  cast  iron  formed,
in  order  that  the  operation  Tan.j  proceed  without  interruption.  The
walls  of  such  a  furnace  ought  to  be  built  of  flreproof  mat«rials  if  it  be

'  Tbe  compoiition  ot  *lai;  Biutatile  far  itou  smelting  duibL  often  uppraMibea  tb«
lolbiwing :  GO  to  60  pj:.  SiO.„  S  lo  30  Al,Oj,  the  reit  of  the  mAw  couHiBtiDK  of  MgO,
CoO,  MnO,  FeO.  Thas  Die  moit  tasiMe  sJmj  (acoordiuK  bo  the  obsenatiouH  at
Bodeiniui)  cuatuos  tiu>  ulloj  ALjOj.lCsOJSi  O,.  On  altering  the  qDnntity  of  nuigneuK
•mA  lime.  Hnd  Mtncintlir  ul  Uu-  Alknlis  (whiali  incniMes  the  laiihililyl  and  oft  silioi
(whiri  dwruiBeii  ill,  the  temperftture of  f o«on  changeawith  the  relation  lietween  the  total
qiuuititf  of  oiygeu  uid  that  iu  the  ailica.  Sluga  of  Uie  EompoiiitioDl  RO.SiO,  an)  eaulj
(uinhle.  have  a  vitreoufl  appearance,  and  are  very  commen.  Banc  tJaffH  apprDa<'-h  the
•xnnpoBilion  3BO,SiO,.  Hence,  knowing  the  composition  and  qiuuiCity  of  Hie  foreign
matter  in  tbe  on,  it  ia  at  auce  easy  to  find  the  quantity  and  quality  nl  tbH  Hui  viiich
muat  bv  Midcd  to  form  a  euitablo  *Ug.  The  Bntelting  of  iron  ia  rendered  more  oimpleK
by  th«  fact  that  the  silica,  8iO„  which  enters  into  the  Blag  and  flaxea  ia  capable  of  form-
ing a  alig  with  the  iron  oiides.  In  order  that  the  leant  quantity  of  iron  may  pant  into
(be  alog,  it  is  neuessaiy  for  it  to  be  rednced  before  the  temperature  Ih  attained  at  which
tbe  tim*  are  formed  (about  1000°),  whiuh  in  effected  hy  reducing  the  iron,  not  with  duir-
ooa]  itself,  hut  with  carbonic  oxide.  From  this  it  will  be  undemtood  how  the  progress  of
the  whole  Ireatmtmt  may  hr  judged  hy  titu  propt^iea  of  the  alu^s.  Details  of  Ihia
oonipticiited  and  well-ntudird  subject  will  be  found  in  works  on  metallurgy.

324  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

designed  to  serve  for  the  continuous  production  of  cast  iron  by  charging
the  ore,  fuel,  and  flux  into  the  mouth  of  the  furnace,  forcing  a  blast  of
air  into  the  lower  part,  and  running  out  the  molten  iron  and  slag  from
below.  The  whole  operation  is  conducted  in  furnaces  known  as  blcutt
fumo/ces.  The  annexed  illustration,  fig.  93  (which  is  taken  by  kind
permission  from  Thorpe's  Dictionary  of  Applied  Chemistry),  represents
the  vertical  section  of  such  a  furnace.  These  furnaces  are  generally
of  large  dimensions — varying  from  50  to  90  feet  in  height.  They  are
sometimes  built  against  rising  ground  in  order  to  afford  easy  access  to
the  top  where  the  ore,  flux,  and  charcoal  or  coke  are  charged.^

^  The  section  of  a  blast  furnace  is  represented  by  two  truncated  cones  joined  at  their
bases,  the  upper  cone  being  longer  than  the  lower  one  ;  the  lower  cone  is  terminated  by
the  hearth,  or  almost  cylindrical  cavity  in  which  the  cast  iron  and  slag  collect,  one
side  being  provided  with  apertures  for  drawing  off  the  iron  and  slag.  The  air  is  blown
into  the  blast  furnace  through  special  pipes,  situated  over  the  hearth,  as  shown  in  the
section.  The  air  previously  passes  through  a  series  of  cast-iron  pipes,  heated  by  the
combustion  of  the  carbonic  oxide  obtained  from  the  upper  parts  of  the  furnace,  where
it  is  formed  as  in  a  '  gas-producer.'  The  blast  furnace  acts  continuously  until  it  is  worn
out ;  the  iron  is  tapped  off  twice  a  day,  and  the  furnace  is  allowed  to  cool  a  little  from
time  to  time  so  as  not  to  be  spoilt  by  the  increasing  heat,  and  to  enable  it  to  withstand
long  usage.

Blast  furnaces  worked  with  charcoal  fuel  are  not  so  high,  and  in  general  give  a
smaller  yield  than  those  using  coke,  because  the  latter  are  worked  with  heavier  charges
than  those  in  which  charcoal  is  employed.  Coke  furnaces  yield  20,000  tons  and  over  of  pig
iron  a  year.  In  the  United  States  there  are  blast  furnaces  80  metres  high,  and  upwards
of  600  cubic  metres  capacity,  yielding  as  much  as  180,000  tons  of  pig  iron,  requiring  a  blast
of  about  750  cubic  metres  of  air  per  minute,  heated  to  600°,  and  consuming  about  0'85
part  of  coke  per  1  i>art  of  i>ig  iron  produced.  At  the  present  time  the  world  produces  as
much  as  30  million  tons  of  pig  iron  a  year,  alwut  ^^  of  wliich  is  converted  into  wrought
iron  and  steel.  The  chief  i)roducors  are  the  United  States  (about  10  million  tons  a  year)
and  England  (about  9  million  tons  a  year) ;  Russia  yields  about  1^  million  tons  a  year.
The  world's  production  bus  doubled  during  the  last  20  years,  and  in  this  respect  the
United  States  have  outrun  all  other  countries.  The  reason  of  this  increase  of  production
must  be  looked  for  in  the  increased  demand  for  iron  and  steel  for  railway  purposes,  for
structures  (esi)ecially  ship-building),  and  in  the  fact  that :  (a)  the  cost  of  pig  iron  has
fallen,  thanks  to  the  erection  of  hirjjo  furnaces  and  a  fuller  study  of  the  processes  taking
pla<*e  in  them,  and  {h)  that  everj'  kind  of  iron  ore  (even  sulphurous  and  phosphoritic)  can
now  be  converted  into  a  homogeneous  steel.

In  order  to  more  thoroughly  grasp  the  chemical  process  which  takes  place  in  blast
furnaces,  it  is  necessary  to  follow  the  course  of  the  material  charged  in  at  the  top  and  of
the  iiir  passing  through  the  furnace.  From  50  to  200  parts  of  carbon  are  expended  on  100
parts  of  iron.  The  ore,  flux,  and  coke  are  charged  into  the  top  of  the  furnace,  in
layers,  as  the  cast  iron  is  formed  in  the  lower  parts  and  flowing  down  to  the  bottom
causes  the  whole  contents  of  the  furnace  to  subside,  thus  forming  an  empty  space  at
the  top,  which  is  again  filled  up  with  the  afore- mentioned  mixture.  During  its  down-
ward course  this  mixture  is  subjected  to  increasing  heat.  This  rise  of  temperature
first  drives  off  the  moisture  of  the  ore  mixture,  and  then  leads  to  the  formation  of
the  products  of  the  dry  distillution  of  coal  or  charcoal.  Little  by  little  the  subsiding
mass  attains  a  temj^rature  at  which  the  heated  carbon  reacts  with  the  carbonic  anhydride
passing  upwards  through  the  furnace  aJid  transforms  it  into  carbonic  oxide.  This  is
the  reason  why  carbonic  anhydride  is  not  evolved  from  the  furnace,  but  only  carbonic
oxide.  As  regards  the  ore  itself,  on  bj?ing  heated  to  about  (»00°  to  800°  it  is  reduced  at
the  exiKjnse  of  the  carbonic  oxide  ascending  the  furnace,  and  formed  by  the  contact  of

niOS.  COBALT,  AND  KICKEL

The  €<!»/  iron  t'oniied  in  blast  furnaces  is  not  always  of  tlie  simie
quality. When  slowly  cuoled  it  is  soft,  has  a  grey  colour,  and  is  not

IheearboniOiinliydridairilhtlicinciuideiecntrliir  out  no  that  I!  o  teaact'on  'n  the  blut
luntKce  IB  without  doubt  brought  Aiboat  b/f  tlit  format  on  nnd  decomp  mt  d  of  carttonie
oxide  itoS  not  bj  «irbon  ilselJ— IhuB,  FcjOa-f  8C0  =  Fei  SCO  The  rednoed  iron,  on
further  Bubsidencv  nnd  contict  ttith  carbon,  tonon  uut  ron  w1  ch  flows  to  the  bottom
of  the  furnace. In  tbene  loner  Uj-ers,  where  the  lemEeralnre h  I  gheat  (ttboot  1,800°),

I

I

fiasurj  nn-liTlciL

the  foniign  matter  of  Urn  ore  finatlir  forms  lUg,  wliich  hIbo  in  Fnsibte,  with  the  aid  <
Buea.  The  Hr  blown  iu  from  below,  through  the  Mvcalled  Imsiwri,  enmnDt«TBcarbo
in  the  lower  laj-ern  of  the  fnmace,  and  bumn  it,  mnierting  it  into  ou-bonio  uibjdiidi
It  is  evident  that  this  develops  the  highest  toinpemtare  in  these  lower  layers  of
fumaoe,  becaaie  here  tlie  combnfltion  of  the  carbon  in  eRected  b;  heated  and  compreawd
air.  This  ia  Tsr;  enenlial,  tor  it  ia  by  virtue  of  thiq  high  Icmpei
proOMt  of  forming  the  ilag  and  of  fonning  and  tnaing  the  cait  in

Lit the  J

i

826  PRINCIPLflS  OF  CHEMISTRY

completely  soluble  in  acids.  When  treated  with  acids  a  residue  of
graphite  remains  ;  it  is  known  as  grey  or  soft  cast  iron.  This  is  the
general  form  of  the  ordinary  cast  iron  used  for  casting  various  objects,
because  in  this  state  it  is  not  so  brittle  as  in  the  shape  of  white  cast
irouy  which  does  not  leave  particles  of  graphite  when  dissolved,  but
yields  its  carbon  in  the  form  of  hydrocarbons.  This  white  cast  iron
is  characterised  by  its  whitish-grey  colour,  dull  lustre,  the  crystalline
structure  of  its  fracture  (more  homogeneous  than  that  of  grey  iron),  and
such  hardness  that  a  file  will  hardly  cut  it.  When  white  cast  iron  is
produced  (from  manganese  ore)  at  high  temperatures  (and  with  an  ex-
cess of  lime),  and  containing  little  sulphur  and  silica  but  a  considerable
amount  of  carbon  (as  much  as  5  p.c),  it  acquires  a  coarse  crystalline
structure  which  increases  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  manganese,
and  it  is  then  known  under  the  name  of  '  spiegeleisen '  (and  'ferro-
manganese  ').^

simultaneously  in  these  lower  portions  of  the  furnace.  The  carbonic  acid  formed  in
these  parts  rises  higher,  encounters  incandescent  carbon,  and  forms  with  it  carbonic
oxide.  This  heated  carbonic  oxide  acts  as  a  reducing  agent  on  the  iron  ore,  and  is  re-
converted by  it  into  carbonic  anhydride ;  this  gas  meets  with  more  carbon,  and  again
forms  carbonic  oxide,  which  again  acts  as  a  reducing  agent.  The  final  transformation
of  the  carbonic  anhydride  into  carbonic  oxide  is  effected  in  those  parts  of  the  famaoe
where  the  reduction  of  the  oxides  of  iron  does  not  take  place,  but  where  the  temperature
is  still  high  enough  to  reduce  the  carbonic  anhydride.  The  ascending  mixtare  of
carbonic  oxide  and  nitrogen,  CO^,  &c.,  is  then  withdrawn  through  special  lateral
apertures  formed  in  the  upper  cold  parts  of  the  furnace  walls,  and  is  conducted  through
pipes  to  those  stoves  which  are  used  for  heating  the  air,  and  also  sometimes  into  other
furnaces  used  for  the  further  processes  of  iron  manufiicture.  The  fuel  of  blast  fumaoes
consists  of  wood  charcoal  (this  is  the  most  expensive  material,  but  the  pig  iron  pro-
duced  is  the  purest,  because  charcoal  does  not  contain  any  sulphur,  while  coke  does),
anthracite  (for  instance,  in  Pennsylvania,  and  in  Russia  at  Pastouhoff's  works  in  the
Don  district),  coke,  coal,  and  even  wood  and  peat.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
utilisation  of  naphtha  and  naphtha  refuse  would  probably  give  very  profitable  results
in  metallurgical  processes.

The  process  just  described  is  accompanied  by  a  series  of  other  processes.  Thus,  for
instance,  in  the  blast  furnace  a  considerable  quantity  of  cyanogen  compounds  are  formed.
This  takes  place  because  the  nitrogen  of  the  air  blast  comes  into  contact  with  incan-
descent carbon  and  various  alkaline  matters  contained  in  the  foreign  matter  of  the  ores.
A  considerable  quantity  of  potassium  cyanide  is  formed  when  wood  charcoal  is  employed
for  iron  smelting,  as  its  ash  is  rich  in  potash.

®  The  specific  gravity  of  white  cast  iron  is  about  7"5.  Grey  cast  iron  luts  a  much  lower
specific  gravity,  namely,  7'0.  Grey  cast  iron  generally  contains  less  manganese  and
more  silica  than  white;  but  both  contain  from  2  to  8  p.c.  of  carbon.  The  difference
between  the  varieties  of  cast  iron  depends  on  the  condition  of  the  carbon  which
enters  into  the  composition  of  the  iron.  In  white  cast  iron  the  carbon  is  in  combination
with  the  iron — in  all  probability,  as  the  comjwund  CFe4  (Abel  and  Osmond  and  others
extracted  this  compound,  which  is  sometimes  called  '  carbide,'  from  tempered  steel,
which  stands  to  unannealed  steel  as  white  cast  iron  does  to  grey),  but  perhaps  in  the  state
of  an  indefinite  chemical  compound  resembling  a  solution.  In  any  case  the  compound  of
the  iron  and  carbon  in  white  cast  iron  is  chemically  very  unstable,  because  when  slowly
cooled  it  decomposes,  with  separation  of  graphite,  just  as  a  solution  when  slowly  cooled

IRON, COBALT. AND NICKEL  827

Cast  iron  ia  ii  raatprial  which  is  either  soitable  for  direct  application
'  for  casting  in  moulds  or  else  for  working  up  into  wroMght  iron  and
nUel.  The  latter  principally  differ  from  cast  iron  in  their  containing
less  carbon— thus,  ateel  contains  from  1  p.c.  to  0'5  p.c.  of  carbon  and
far  less  silicon  and  manganese  than  cast  iron  ;  wrought  iron  does
not  generally  contain  more  than  025  p.c.  of  carlxjn  and  not  more  than
0'25  p.c.  of  the  other  impurities.  Thus  the  essence  of  the  working  up
of  cast  iron  int<i  ateel  and  wrought  iron  consists  in  the  renioval  of  the
greater  part  of  the  cartxin  and  other  elements,  S,  P,  Mn,  Si,  ic.  This
is  effected  by  means  of  oxidation,  because  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere,
oxidising  the  iron  at  a  high  temperature,  ftirms  solid  oxides  with  it  ;
and  the  latter,  coming  intu  contact  with  the  carljon  contained  in  the
cast  iron,  are  deoxidispti,  forming  wrought  iron  and  carlionic  oxide,
which  is  evolved  from  the  mass  in  a  gaseous  form.  It  is  evident  that
the  oxidation  must  1>e  carried  on  with  a  molt«n  mass  in  a  state  of
agitation,  so  that  the  oxygen  of  the  air  may  lie  lirought  into  contact
with  the  whole  mass  of  (.'arlton  contained  in  the  cast  iron,  or  else  the
operation  is  effected  by  means  of  the  addition  of  oxygen  compounds
of  iron  (oxides,  ores,  as  in  Martin's  process).  Cast  iron  melts  much
more  easily  than  wrought  iron  and  steel,  and,  therefore,  as  the  carbon
separates,  the  mass  in  the  furnace  (in  puddling)  or  hearth  (in  the
bloomery  process)  liecomesniore  and  more  solid  ;  moreover  the  degree  of
hardness  fonns,  Xo  a  certain  extent,  a  measure  of  the  amount  of  carbon
separated,  and  the  operation  may  terminate  either  in  the  formation  of
steel  or  wrought  iron. '" In  any  case,  the  iron  used  for  industrial  pur-

jieldit  D  portion  of  the  subs  tan  ce  diHBolred.  The  aepumtion  of  ciLrlion  in  the  forniof
j^vphitv  on  the  canvetnion  ol  white  cast  iron  into  grey  is  neroi:  complete,  bowecer  elowly
Ihfl  wparatiou  be  csnied  on;  pait  oC  thecvbon  remaina  in  combinfttion  with  the
iron  in  the  wme  atkte  in  which  it  niaU  in  white  cut  iron.  Hence  when  gref  cant  iron  ■>
(retted  with  acids,  the  wbole  of  thecuboD  doen  not  remun  in  the  farm  of  gniihite.  hnta
put  of  it  iB  Bcpajnted  u  hydrocarbona,  which  proves  the  eiiBtenceotchetnioally-combined
carbon  in  grey  caat  iron.  It  ie  anWcientto  re-melt  grey  cast  iron  and  to  cool  itqnichly  to
tnuiafonn  it  into  white  caat  iron.  It  ii  not  carbon  (Jone  that  infloences  the  propertiBi  o(
out  iron ;  when  it  cont&inH  »  considerable  amount  of  snlphnr,  cast  iron  remaina  white
eveil  otter  haiing  been  slowly  cooled.  The  same  is  obaened  in  cast  iron  very  rich  in
miuiguiese  (B  to  7  p.c),  and  in  this  latter  case  the  froctnre  ia  very  distinctly  cryatalline
and  brilliant. When  ca«t  iron  contains  a  large  amonnt  of  ouuigMieiie,  tbe  qoantity  of

practice  i^nllod  lerro-manganeae  (p.  BIO),  nod  are  prepared  for  the  Beaaomor  proooaa.
Rrey  coat  iron  not  having  an  nniform  fitnielnre  ia  much  more  liable  to  Taiiona  ohangea
than  (lenae  and  tlioroughly  nniforcn  white  oust  iron,  and  the  latter  oiudiaea  moch  mora
Blowly  iu  air  than  the  former.  While  cast  iron  ia  oot  only  naed  for  conversion  into  wrouglit
iron  and  steel,  bat  also  in  those  cases  wbere  great  liardneaa  iareqaired,  sltbongh  it  be  ac-
companied by  a  certain  brittleiieas ;  for  inalan™,  (or  making  rollers,  plongh-ahares,  *o.

'<*  Thia  direct  pincetis  of  separating  the  cjarbon  from  cast  iron  is  termed  pu^/iu^.  II
is  conducted  in  rererberatory  hrniaoes.  The  cast  iron  is  placed  on  the  bed  of  tbe
[amace  and  melted  ;  through  a  special  apertnre.  the  pnddler  stira  npthe  oiidiaing  niasft

828  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

poses  contains  impurities.  Chemically  pure  iron  may  be  obtained  by
precipitating  iron  from  a  solution  (a  mixture  of  ferrous  sulphate  with

of  cast  iron,  pressiDg  the  oxides  into  the  molten  iron.  This  reaemblea  kneading  dough,
and  the  process  introduced  in  England  became  known  as  paddling.  It  is  evident  that
the  puddled  mass,  or  bloom,  is  a  heterogeneous  sabstance  obtained  by  mixing,  and
hence  one  part  of  the  mass  will  still  be  rich  in  carbon,  another  will  be  poor,  some  parts
will  contain  oxide  not  reduced,  &c.  The  further  treatment  of  the  puddled  mass  oonaists
in  hammering  and  drawing  it  out  into  flat  pieces,  which  on  being  hammered  become
more  homogeneous,  and  when  several  pieces  are  welded  together  and  again  hammered
out  a  still  more  homogeneous  mass  is  obtained.  The  quality  of  the  steel  and  iron  thus
formed  dex)end8  principally  on  their  uniformity.  The  want  of  uniformity  depends  on
the  oxides  remaining  inside  the  mass,  and  on  the  variable  distribution  of  the  carbon
throughout  the  mass.  In  order  to  obtain  a  more  homogeneous  metal  for  manufac-
turing articles  out  of  steel,  it  is  drawn  into  thin  rods,  which  are  tied  together  in
bundles  and  tlien  again  hammered  out.  As  an  example  of  what  may  be  attained  in  this
direction,  imitation  Damascus  steel  may  be  cited ;  it  consists  of  twisted  and  plaited
wire,  which  ih  then  hammered  into  a  dense  mass.  (Real  damascened  wootz  steel
may  be  made  by  melting  a  mixture  of  the  best  iron  with  graphite  (^)  and  iron  rust;
the  article  is  then  corroded  with  acid,  and  the  carbon  remains  in  the  form  of  a  pattern.)

Steel  and  wrought  iron  are  manufactured  from  cast  iron  by  puddling. They  are,  how-
ever, obtained  not  only  by  this  method  but  also  by  the  bloomery  j^roceaa,  which  is  carried
out  in  a  fire  similar  to  a  bhicksmith's  forge,  fed  with  charcoal  and  provided  with  a  blast ;
a  pig  of  cast  iron  is  gradually  pushed  into  the  fire,  and  portions  of  it  melt  and  fall  to  the
bottom  of  the  hearth,  coming  into  contact  with  an  air  blast,  and  are  thus  oxidised. The
bloom  thus  formed  is  then  squeezed  and  hammered. It  is  evident  that  this  process  is
only  available  when  the  charcoal  used  in  the  fire  does not  contain  any  foreign  matter
which  might  injure  the  (juality  of  the  iron  or  steel — for  instance,  sulphur  or  phosphonu
— and  therefore  only  wood  charcoal  may  be  used  with  impunity,  from  which  it  follows
that  this  process  can  only  be  carried  on  where  the  manufacture  of  iron  can  be  conducted
with  this  fuel. Coal and  coke  contain the  above-mentioned  impurities, and would
therefore produce iron  of a  brittle  nature,  and thus it  would be  necessary  to  have
recourse  to  puddlin*,',  where  the fuel  is  burnt  on  a  special  hearth,  separate  from  the
cast  iron,  whereby  the  impurities  of  the  fuel do  not  come into  contact  with  it. The
manufacture  of  steel  from  cast  iron  may  also  be  conducted  in  fires ;  but,  in  addition  to
this,  it  is  also  now  prepared  by  many  other  methods. One  of  the  long-known  processes
is  called  cementation^  by  which  steel  is  prepared  from  wrought  iron  but  not  from  cast
iron. For  this  process  strips of  iron  are  heated  red-hot  for  a  considerable  time  whilst
immersed  in  powdered  charcoal ;  during  this  operation  the  iron  at  the  surface  combines
with the  charcoal,  which  however  does  not  penetrate  ;  aft^»r this  the  iron  strips  are
*e-forged,  drawn  out  again,  and  cemented  anew,  relocating  this  process  until  a  steel  of  the
desired  quality  is  formed — that  is,  containing  the  requisite  i^roportion  of  carbon. The
Bessemer  process  occupies  the  front  rank  among  the  newer  methods  (since  1856) ;  it
is  so  called  from  the  name  of  its  inventor. This process  consists in  running  melted
cast iron into converters  (holding about  6 tons  of cast iron) — that is, egg-shaped
receivers, fig. 94, capable of revolving on trunnions (in order to charge in the
cast  iron  and  discharge  the  steel), and  forcing  a  stream  of  air  through  small  apertures
at  a  considerable  pressure. Combustion  of  the  iron  and  carbon  at  an  elevated  tempera-
ture then  takes  j)lace,  resulting  from  the  bubbles  of  oxygen  thus  penetrating  the  mass
of  the  cast  iron. The  carbon,  however,  burns  to  a  greater  extent  than the  iron,  and
therefore  a  mass  is  obtained  which  is  much  poorer  in  carbon  than  cast  iron. As  the
combustion  proceeds  very  rapidly  in  the  mass  of  metal,  the  temperature  rises  to  such  an
extent  that  even  the  wrought  iron  which  may  be  formed  remains  in  a  molten  condition,
whilst  the  steel,  being  more  fusible  than  the  wrought  iron,  remains  very  liquid. In
half  an  hour  the  mass  is  ready. The  purest  possible  cast  iron  is  used  in  the  Bessemer

IRON, COBAIT, AND  NICKEL

UkgneBiuni  sulp)iAt«  or  ammoDiuni  chloride)  bj  tbe  pi'oIoDged  actiuii  of
a  feeble  gnlviinic  current  ;  the  iron  may  be  then  obtained  as  a  dense

wKJng

1

(aciUtaleH  the  remOTiil  of  the  pbospliociiH.  This  htMK  Bessemer  proceaa,  or  Tluimai
OitrhrUt  procen,  inlnidaced  aboat  ISM),  enublea  ores  cnilaiiiing  ■  canudenble  amuanl
at  pboep1iDni«,  Khich  had  hitherto  onl;  Uien  u»d  for  cut  iron,  to  be  used  tor  mUring
ircangbl  iron  and  steel.  NataralljtliegtvulcitimifoiTTiitjwillbe  obtcined  b;  re-melUng
tbe  melol.  Steel  i>  re-melted  in  un*l]  wiuil  fnnucea.  in  muKs  not  eiceeding  SO  liiloi ;
a  liqnid  metiil  la  lormed,  which  ma;  be  csHt  in  monlda,  A  miitore  ol  wmoght  and  cast
iron  is  uFten  Used  tor  making  coat  st^el  (thi>  adJition  of  a  Kmall  amoont  of  metallic  Al
imprnten  the  hoUK'getieit]'  of  tbe  castings,  bf  racilitaling  the  piUHBge  of  the  impuritiei
into  ^lagl.  Lu'ge  ate^i  ca&tinga  aje  made  by  Himaltaiteoai  fusion  in  «et?ia]  farnacei  and
crucibleii  in  lliis  waj,  eaetinga  up  to  80  tons  or  more,  ench  aa  lanie  ordnance,  may  be
made.  This  walten,  and  therefore  homogenMne,  ateel  in  called  east  tfeet.  Of  lale  fean
the  Martin'i  proertt  for  the  mantiFactare  uf  Bteel  hu  rome  largely  into  nu ;  it  waa
inreuted  in  Francs  aboat  IWW,  and  with  the  nse  of  regenerative  Famsnait  enableelai^
quantitiea  oF  ca«t  steel  to  be  made  at  a  time.  It  is  based  on  the  meltinR  of  caat  iron  with
iron  oxiden  and  iron  itaelf — for  inatance,  pnre  ore*,  scrap,  *c.  There  the  carbon  of  the
cast  iron  and  the  oxygen  of  the  oxide  form  carbonic  oiide,  and  the  carbon  tbereFoni
bams  ont,  and  thna  cast  steel  is  obtained  Fmm  i^st  iron,  jiravidln)i,  natnrally,  that  there
t,  reqoiaite  propnrtinri  and rorreBponding  degree  of  heat. The  advantage  of  Ihfa

PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

This  method,  proposed  by  Bottcher  and  applied  Ijy  Klein,  gives,
3  B,.  Lenz  showed,  iron  coutaioing  occluded  hydrogen,  which  is  dis-

iiu  is  Lhnt  Dot  only  do  the  curboi
I Ibe  flnlphur  nnd  phosptiorab  oF  the  ca
oiidei. Daring  the  lost  decadi
,  armoar  plate,  goiu,  boileni.  ice.

e  or  Bl

•pplicai

n  for

i

developed  to  an  enormons  eitent,  thanki
Ihe  inTention  of  cheap  prooesiea  for  the  moiiufactare  ol  large  moBBen  nt  homogeneoiis
out  st«el.  WronKht  iron  may  also  be  melted,  but  the  beat  ol  b  biut  faroace  it>  inscilBciiinl
foe  this.  It  easU;  melte  in  the  oiybydrDgeu  flame.  II  tnuf  be  obtained  ill  *  mpllen
■late  directly  from  cant  iron,  if  the  latter  be  nielted  nith  nitre  and  sofficientiy  etirrvd  np.
CongidttrablB  oxidatioQ  then  token  plofe  inside  tlie  saiuta  of  cut  iron,  and  the  temperatant
does  to  BDch  an  extent  that  the  wrooght  iron  fanned  renwintt  liqaid.  A  method  is  alMi
known  tor  obtaining  wrought  iron  directly  tram  ritli  iron  ores  by  the  action  otrArbooic
oxide :  the  nroaght  iron  ie  then  formed  an  >  epongy  mass  (which  forms  an  excellent
filter  for  pnrifying  water),  and  may  be  worked  up  into  wrought  iron  or  steel  either  by
lorging  or  by  disBolving  in  molten  cast  iron.

EverybcHty  is  more  or  less  familiar  witb  the  differcnt^f  in  thf  properties  of  alfrel  and
wvught  irun.  Iron  is  remarkable  for  its  softuesH,  pliability,  and  sidbII  elasticity,  whilnl
■teel  may  be  characterised  by  its  capability  of  attainiug  elasticity  and  hardness  if  it  be
cooled  suddenly  after  having  been  heated  to  a  defiuite  tomperature,  or,  as  it  is  termed,
lempeieii,  Bnt  if  tempered  steel  be  re-heat«d  aud  slowly  uooled,  it  heciimes  as  aufl  as
wrought  iron,  and  can  tbeu  be  cnt  with  tlia  file  and  forged,  aud  in  general  can  be  made
to  aasame  any  shape,  tike  wrought  iron.  lu  tliis  soft  condition  it  is  (Ailed  anneaini  uteeL
The  transition  from  tempered  to  ouueoled.  steel  tbtm  takes  place  in  n  similar  way  to  the
transition  from  white  to  grey  cast  iron.  Steel,  when  homogoneoas,  has  cousiderabU
InitrB,  and  such  a  fine  granular  stmctore  that  it  takes  a  very  high  polish.  It«  trmoture
clearly  ehows  the  granular  nature  of  ite  atmclure.  The  possibility  of  tempering  atoel
enable*  it  tn  be  nsed  for  making  aU  kinds  of  cutting  instmmeiitH,  because  annealed  steal
nan  be  forged,  turned,  dnwn  (under  rollent,  for  instance,  for  making  rails,  bars.  &o.),  Sled,
fto..  and  it  may  then  be  tempered,  ground  and  polished.  Tlin  method  and  tempAatnra
ol  tampering  and  annealing  steel  determine  its  hardness  and  other  quablies.  Steal  ia
generally  tempered  to  the  required  degree  of  hardness  in  the  following  manner:  It  la.
first  itrongly  boated  (lor  instance,  ap  to  BW^),  and  then  plunged  into  wntei^-tluil  ia.
hardened  by  rapid  cooling  (it  then  becomes  as  brittle  aa  glass).  It  is  then  heated  until
the  surface  o^umes  a  definite  colour,  and  finally  cooled  either  quickly  or  slowly.
When  steel  is  heated  up  to  330',  its  surface  acquires  a  yellow  colonr  (sorginl  inMm-
ments) ;  it  first  of  all  becomes  itraw-coloared  (raEorsi&c),  and  then  gold-coloored;  then
at  a  temperatare  o(  iW  it  becomoe  brown  (ncissoni),  then  red,  then  light  blue  at  38S°
(iprings),  then  indigo  nt  300°  (files),  and  finally  sea-green  at  about  Sia°.  These  eolotua
He  only  the  tints  of  thin  films,  like  the  hues  of  sosp  bubbles,  and  appear  on  the  Ktad
becauee  a  thin  layer  of  oxides  is  formed  over  its  surface.  Steel  rusts  more  slowly  thMi
WTDUgbt  iron,  aud  in  more  soluble  in  acids  tbaji  cast  iron,  but  leas  no  than  wToaght  iron.
Its  specific  gntvity  in  abont  T6  to  T'S,

As  reganls  the  formation  of  sleel.  it  was  a  long  time  before  the  processor  cemeDl«lion
was  thoroughly  understood,  because  in  this  case  infusible  ohorooal  permeates  <mftli«d
wrought  iron.  Caron  showed  that  lllis  permeation  depends  on  the  fact  that  theehalUMl
need  in  the  process  contains  alkalis,  which,  in  the  presence  of  the  uitr(^D  Of  Iba
air,  form  met^lic  cyanides ;  Chene  being  volatile  and  tnaible,  permeate  the  inm,  and,
giving  np  their  carbon  to  it,  serve  ai  the  material  for  the  formation  of  Bleel.  Tfaia
etpleiution  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  charcoal  without  alkalis  or  without  nitragm
will  not  cement  iron.  The  cliorcoal  unad  (or  cementation  acta  badly  when  oaed  over
again,  as  it  ban  loit  alkali.  Tlie  very  robttile  ammonium  cyanide  easily  conduoei  to  tfaa
(ormntion  of  Hieel.  Althotigh  steel  is  ■Isa  formed  by  the  action  of  cyanogen  compoiuida,
nevortbeless  it  doee  not  contain  more  nitrogen  than  cast  or  wrought  iron  (0-01  p.cj,  uid.

IRON. COBALT. AND NICKEL

I  tnga^ed  on heating. This  galvanic
■;Biaking  gnlvanopliistic  clich^t,  which  .

deposition  of  iron is used for
.re  distinguished  for  their  great

.Wtrogeu.  Hf^nce  the  piLrt  plik^ed  by  nitrogen  m  atetit  In  bnt  &n  Lnrtigritficant  one.  It
be  uatffnl  here  to  add  eorue  infonDatioii  bahen  from  Coxon'e  treatievi  canceming  the
euca  of  Foreign  nutter  on  the  qnality  of  steeL  The  principal  properliea  of  iibeel  are
emperiug  and  aimeaJing.  The  cocnpounda  of  iron  with  ailicon  and  bmoa  have
not  th^ue  propertieii.  They  are  more  stable  than  the  c&rbon  conipoDnd.  and  thiq  latter
ta  cnpiible  of  changing  itt:  properties ;  because  Uie  carbon  in  it  either  enters  into
combitiiitiou  or  eLsei>i  disengaged,  which  datennineH  the  condition  of  bardnesa  or  eoftnees
of  Htsel,  aa  in  white  and  grey  cast  iron.  When  nlowly  cooled,  ateel  aphta  ngi  into  a
mixture  of  soft  and  carbnretted  iron  :  hnt^  neverthelese,  the  carbon  does  not  aepante
from  tho  iron.  If  snch  steel  be  ag&iti  heated,  it  fomiB  a  nniform  compound,  and  hardeua
when  rapidly  cooled.  If  the  wme  ateni  as  before  be  taken  and  heated  a  long  time,  tlien,
after  beiuK  Hlowly  cooled,  it  1»«>ui«h  much  mors  BolnWe  in  acid,  and  leuves  a  reaidne  of
pnrp  carbon.  This  ahown  that  the  combination  between  the  carbon  and  iron  in  steel
becomes  destroyed  when  subjected  to  best,  and  the  iteel  becomes  iron  mixed  with
cuboo.  Snoh  burnt  steel  cannot  be  temper^,  bat  nuy  be  oorrecUd  by  continued
forging  in  n  heated  oondition,  which  has  the  eSect  of  rediBtributiug  the  carbon  equally
thmughoDt  the  w^ioie  mass.  After  the  forgiog,  if  the  iron  is  poru  and  the  carbon  has
not  been  burnt  out,  steel  is  again  formed,  which  may  be  tempered.  If  nteel  be  re-
peatedly or  strongly  heated,  it  becomes  bnmt  throngb  and  cannot  be  tempered  or
annealed ;  the  carbon  separatee  from  the  iron,  and  thie  is  effected  more  easily  if  the
eteel  contains  oilier  impurities  which  are  capable  of  lorming  stable  combinatiouF  with
iron,  such  as  Bili«>n,  sulphur,  or  phosphoraa.  If  there  be  much  silicon,  it  occnpiee  the
place  of  the  carbon,  and  then  continued  forging  will  iiot  iodooa  the  carbon  once
Bepvuated  to  re-enter  into  combination.  Such  steel  is  easily  burnt  through  and  cannot
be  corrected;  when  burnt  through,  it  is  Hard  aad  cannot  be  annealed — this  iv  lough
■tflel,  an  inferior  kind.  Iron  which  cocttuns  sulphur  and  phosphorus  cements  badly,
combinea  but  little  witli  carbon,  and  steel  of  Ibis  kind  is  brittle,  both  hut  and  cold.
Iron  in  oombinaliou  with  the  above-mentioned  sabstancos  cannot  be  annealed  by  slow
oooling,  showing  that  these  compounds  are  more  stiUile  than  thos«  of  carbon  and  iron,
and  Iheretore  (hey  prevent  the  formation  ol  the  latter.  Snoh  metals  as  tin  and  limi
combine  with  iron,  hat  not  with  carbon,  and  form  a  brittle  mass  whiob  cannot  he
annealed  and  is  deleterious  to  steel.  MuiganeBo  and  tangiteo,  on  the  contrary,  am
o^iahle  of  combining  with  charcoal ;  they  do  not  hinder  the  formation  of  steel,  but  eren
ramore  the  injurious  effects  of  other  aduiiitnren  (by  transforming  these  admixed  sub-
'  compoiuids  and  slags),  and  are  therefore  ranked  with  the  anbstaacsea
rliicli  aot  heue&cially  on  steel  \  but,  nevurtbelcss,  the  beat  steel,  which  is  capable  of
iwing  most  olteu  ite  primitive  qualities  after  burning  or  hot  forging,  is  the  pnrest.
~  lition  of  Ni,  Cr,  W,  and  certain  other  metals  to  steel  renders  it  very  sniteble  for
special  purposes,  and  is  therefore  freqnently  made  use  of.  '

It  is  worthy  of  attention  that  steel,  besides  temper,  possesses  many  variable
riew  of  which  may  be  made  in  the  classification  of  the  lor'i  of  ttcel
iBTS,  Cockerell).  (1)  Very  mild  steel  contains  from  O'OS  to  O-SO  p.c.  ol  carbon,  breaks
ight  of  10  to  SO  kilos  per  square  millimetre,  and  has  an  extension  of  30  to
Ml  fx.  1  it  may  be  welded,  like  wroaght  iron,  but  cannot  ba  tempered ;  is  used  in  shMSts
tor  boilers,  armour  plate  and  bridges,  nails,  rivets.  Ac.  as  a  substitnte  tor  wrought  iron  ;
(a)  mils  tteel,  from  0*S()  to  0'3$  p.c.  of  carbon,  lesistanoe  to  tension  EU  to  BO  hiloa,
extension  IS  to  30  p.c.  not  easily  welded,  and  tempers  badly,  used  for  axlea.  rails,  and
railiray  tyrea,  for  connonH  and  gans,  and  fur  parts  of  machines  destined  to  resist  bending
;  <8  luini  alecl.  carbon  D'SC  to  O'SO  p.c,  breaking  weigtit  00  to  70  kilos  per
imelre,  extension  10  to  15  p.c,  cannot  bs  welded,  takes  a  tempers  nsed  for
lids  of  springs,  swords,  part*  nt  machinery  in  motion  subjeelsd  to  friction,

832  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

hardness.  Electro- deposited  iron  is  brittle,  but  if  heated  (after  the
separation  of  the  hydregen)  it  l)ecomes  soft.  If  pure  ferric  hydroxide,
which  is  easily  prepared  by  the  precipitation  of  solutions  of  ferric
salts  by  means  of  ammonia,  be  heated  in  a  stream  of  hydrogen,  it
forms,  first  of  all,  a  dull  black  powder  which  ignites  spontaneously  in
air  (pyrophoric  iron),  and  then  a  grey  powder  of  pure  iron.  The
powdery  substance  first  obtained  is  an  iron  suboxide ;  when  thrown
into  the  air  it  ignites,  forming  the  oxide  ¥efi^.  If  the  heating  in
hydrogen  be  continued,  more  water  and  pure  iron,  which  does  not
ignite  spontaneously,  will  be  obtained.  If  a  small  quantity  of  iron  be
fused  in  the  oxyhydrogen  flame  (with  an  excess  of  oxygen)  in  a  piece
of  lime  and  mixed  with  powdered  glass,  pure  molten  iron  will  be
formed,  because  in  the  oxyhydrogen  flame  iron  melts  and  bums,  but
the  substances  mixed  with  the  iron  oxidise  first.  The  oxidised  im-
purities here  either  disappear  (carbonic  anhydride)  in  a  gaseous  form,
or  turn  into  slag  (silica,  manganese,  oxide,  and  others) — that  is,  fuse
with  the  glass.  Pure  iron  has  a  silvery  white  colour  and  a  specific
gravity  of  7*84  ;  it  melts  at  a  temperature  higher  than  the  melting-
points of silver,  gold, nickel,  and  steel,  i.e.  about  1400*^-1500**  and

spindles  of  looms,  hammerH,  spades,  lioos,  &c. ;  (4)  vert/  hard  steely  carbon  0*6  to  0*65
p.c,  tensile  breaking  weight  70  to  80  kilos,  extension  5  to  10  p.c,  does  not  weld,  bat
tempers  easily ;  used  for  small  springs,  saws,  files,  knives  and  similar  instramenta.

The  proiwrties  of  ordinary  wrought  iron  are  well  known.  The  beet  iron  is  the  mofit
tenacious — that  is  to  say,  that  which  does  not  break  up  when  struck  with  the  hammer
or  bent,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  is  sufficiently  hard.  There  is,  however,  a  distinction
between  hard  and  soft  iron.  Generally  the  softest  iron  is  the  most  tenacious,  and  can
best  be  welded,  drawn  into  wire,  sheets,  &c.  Hard,  esi)ecially  tough,  iron  is  often
characterised  by  its  breaking  when  bent,  and  is  therefore  very  difficult  to  work,  and
objects  made  from  it  are  less  serviceable  in  many  respects.  Soft  iron  is  most  adapted
for  making  wire  and  sheet  iron  and  such  small  objects  as  nails.  Soft  iron  is  characterised
by  its  attaining  a  fibrous  fracture  after  forging,  whilst  tough  iron  preserves  its  granular
structure  after  this  operation.  Certain  sorts  of  iron,  although  fairly  soft  at  the  ordinary
temj)erature,  become  brittle  when  heated  and  are  difficult  to  weld.  These  sorts  are
less  suitable  for  being  worked  up  into  small  objects.  The  variety  of  the  properties  of
iron  depends  on  the  impurities  which  it  contains.  In  general,  the  iron  used  in  the  arts
still  contains  carbon  and  always  a  certain  quantity  of  silicon,  manganese,  sulphur,
phosphorus,  &c.  A  variety  in  the  proportion  of  these  component  parts  changes  the
quality  of  the  iron.  In  luldition  to  this  the  change  which  soft  wrought  iron,  having  a
fibrous  structure,  undergoes  when  subjected  to  repeated  blows  and  vibrations  is  con-
siderable; it  then  becomes  granular  and  brittle.  This  to  a  certain  degree  explains  the
want  of  stability  of  some  iron  objects — such  as  truck  axles,  which  must  be  renewed  after
a  certain  term  of  service,  otherwise  they  become  brittle.  It  is  evident  that  there  are
innumerable  intermediate  transitions  from  wrought  iron  to  steel  and  cast  iron.

At  the  present  day  the  greater  part  of  the  cast  iron  manufactured  is  converted  into
steel,  generally  cast  steel  (Bessemer's  and  Martin's).  I  may  add  the  Urals,  Donetz
district,  and  other  parts  of  Russia  offer  the  greatest  advantages  for  the  development  of
an  iron  industry,  because  these  localities  not  only  contain  vast  supplies  of  excellent  iron
ore,  but  also  coal,  which  is  necessary  for  smelting  it.

K

IRON, COBALT, AND  NICKEL

lie'ow  the  melting  point  of  platinum  (1750°)."  But  pure  iron  liecoiues
s'>ft  At  a  temperature  cuusiderahly  Iwlow  that  at  which  it  melts,  and
may  then  Ik.'  eusily  forged,  welded,  and  rolled  or  drawn  into  shei^ts  and
wirfi.'"*'"  Pure  imn  may  lie  rolled  into  an  excewiingly  thin  aheot,
wi>ighing  less  than  a  uheet  of  ordinary  paper  of  the  same  size.  This
ductility  is  the  most  importajit  property  of  iron  in  all  its  fomiB,  and  is
moat  marked  with  sheet  iron,  nnd  k'ast  £o  with  coat  iron,  wIioer
ductility,  compared  with  wrought  iron,  is  small,  hut  it  IB  still  very
con  hide  rahle  when  compared  with  other  suhstances— such,  for  instance,

T/i(  chrfmieal  projmrtien  of  irori  have  been  already  repeatedly
mentioned  in  preceding  chapters.  Iron  riisf*  in  air  at  the  ordinary
temperature — that  is  to  say,  it  becomes  covered  with  a  layer  of  iron
oxides.  Here,  without  doubt,  the  moisture  of  the  air  plays  a  part,
because  in  dry  air  iron  does  not  oxidise  at  all,  and  also  because,  more

■'  According  to  iatonnittiim  eapplied  b;  A,  T.  blunder's  experirnHnta  at  the  ObuDkoS
Steel  Wotkt,  140  Tolnmes  ol  liquid  molleu  steel  give  ItM  volames  of  wilid  nicUL  By
meuiH  ol  A  gfdnuic  current  ot  great  iotenaitj  nad  dense  chnrcosl  >s  otie  eleatmde.  and
iron  ma  the  other,  Bemodosii  welded  iron  and  fuied  holes  through  sheet  iioji.  Soft
•ranaght  iron,  like  steel  and  soft  malleable  caet  iron,  may  be  melted  in  Siemens'
T^eneratiTe  fomaoes,  and  in  fumaeeH  heated  with  naphtha,

II  bu  Qcre  (leeai,  tait,  Barret,  Tchemoff.  Ownond,  and  otlieru  observed  that  at  s
tempsmtnre  approaching  000'^— that  is,  between  dark  and  bright  rod  heat— all  kinds  o(
wrooghl  iron  andergn  a.  peculiar  change  called  rrcaleicnicf,  i.e.  »  eponlaneaus  rise  of
temperature.  I(  iron  be  coniiderablf  heated  and  allowed  to  enol.  it  maj  be  observed
that  at  this  teiii])«ratare  the  cooling  stops — that  is,  httent  heat  is  disengaged,  oorre-
Bponding  with  a  change  in  condition.  The  speoiflc  heat,  electrical  conductivity,  msgnetio,
and  other  properties  then  also  change.  In  tempering,  tlie  teniperatnie  ol  recalescenee
must  not  be  readied,  will  BO  also  in  annealing.  Ac,  It  ia  evident  that  a  change  ot  the
internal  condition  in  here  encountered,  eiac tl;  similar  to  the  tnuiHition  from  a  solid  to  ■
lii|uJd,  although  there  it  no  evident  phj^icaj  cbaugR,  It  is  probable  that  attentive  study
ironld  lead  to  the  discover;  o(  a  aimilai  clian^e  ill  other  subitanCHs,

I*  The  partdclee  fl(  steel  are  linked  logeCher  or  connected  luore  closely  than  those  of
the  other  inelals ;  this  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  it  only  breaks  with  a  tensile  atnu'n  ot
eo-eo  kilos  per  sq.  mm.,  whilst  wrought  iron  only  withstands  abonl  SO  kilos,  cast  iron
Ii).  cop|>er  SS,  silver  33,  platinnm  BO,  wood  S.  The  elasticity  uf  iron,  steel,  and  niher
metals  is  expressed  by  the  so-called  coefirteni  ofrlaiticily.  Lei  a  rod  be  taken  whnae
length  is  L;  if  a  weight,  P.  be  hung  from  the  eitiemity  of  it.  it  will  lengthen  to  I,
The  leas  it  lengthens  Dnder  other  eqnat  conditions,  the  more  elastic  the  material,  if  ii
resamei  its  original  length  when  the  weight  is  removed.  It  has  been  shown  by  eiperiment
that  the  increase  in  length  (,  due  Ui  elasticity,  is  dirocUy  proportional  to  Ibc  length  L
and  the  weight  P,  und  inversely  proporticinal  to  the  section,  but  changra  with  the
materiaL  The  coef&^eot  of  elaaticity  eipressea  that  weight  (in  kilos  per  sq.  mm.)
under  which  a  rod  baring  a  sqaare  sactioa  taken  as  I  (we  take  I  sq.  mm.)  acquires
donble  the  length  by  tension.  Kalurolly  in  practice  material*  do  not  withstand  such  a
lengthening,  under  a  certain  weight  they  attain  •  limit  ot  elasticity,  ■'.>.  they  stretch
permanently  (ondergo  defonnationi,  Kegleirling  tractions  las  the  elastieity  of  metala
Yoriw  not  oidy  with  the  temperature,  bnt  oImi  with  forging,  purity,  ftc),  the  coediciaat
ot  elasticity  of  steel  and  iron  is  30,000,  copper  and  brasi  lO.OOU,  silver  T.DOU,  glass  fl,000,
■ ■  d»Ji>dl.aon.

834  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

particularly,  ammonia  is  always  found  in  iron  rust ;  the  ammonia  must
arise  from  the  action  of  the  hydrogen  of  the  water,  at  the  moment  of  its
separation,  on  the  nitrogen  of  the  air.  Highly-polished  steel  does  not
rust  nearly  so  readily,  but  if  moistened  with  water,  it  easily  becomes
coated  with  rust.  As  rust  depends  on  the  access  of  moisture,  iron  may
be  preserved  from  rust  by  coating  it  with  substances  which  prevent
the  moisture  having  access  to  it.  Thus  arises  the  practice  of  covering
iron  objects  with  paraffin,*^  varnish,  oil,  paints,  or  enamelling  it
with  a  glassy-looking  flux  possessing  the  same  coefficient  of  expansion  as
iron,  or  with  a  dense  scoria  (formed  by  the  heat  of  superheated  steam ),
or  with  a  compact  coating  of  various  metals.  Wrought  iron  (both  as
sheet  iron  and  in  other  forms),  cast  iron,  and  steel  are  often  coated  with
tin,  copper,  lead,  nickel,  and  similar  metals,  which  prevent  contact  with
the  air.  These  metals  preserve  iron  very  effectually  from  rust  if  they
form  a  completely  compact  surface,  but  in  those  places  where  the  iron
becomes  exposed,  either  accidentally  or  from  wear,  rust  appears  much
more  quickly  than  on  a  unifonn  iron  surface,  because,  towards  these
metals  (and  also  towards  the  rust),  the  iron  will  then  behave  as  an
electro- positive  pole  in  a  galvanic  couple,  and  hence  will  attract
oxygen.  A  coating  of  zinc  does  not  produce  this  inconvenience,  because
iron  is  electro-negative  with  reference  to  zinc,  in  consequence  of  which
galvanised  iron  does  not  easily  rust,  and  even  an  iron  boiler  containing
some  lumps  of  zinc  rusts  less  than  one  without  zinc.^^  Iron  oxidises
at  a  high  temperature,  forming  iron  scale,  Fe304,  composed  of  ferrous
and  ferric  oxides,  and,  as  has  been  seen,  decomposes  water  and  acids
with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen.  It  is  also  capable  of  decomposing
salts  and  oxides  of  other  metals,  which  property  is  applied  in  the  arts
for  the  extraction  of  copper,  silver,  lead,  tin,  ttc.  For  this  reason
iron  is  soluble  in  the  solutions  of  many  salts — for  instance,  in  cupric
sulphate,  with  precipitation  of  copper  and  formation  of  ferrous  sul-
phate.''' When  iron  acts  on  acids  it  sAwAys/ornu  compounds  FeX.^ —

"  Paraffin  is  one  of  the  best  i^reaervatives  for  iron  against  oxidation  in  the  air.  I
found  this  by  experiments  about  18C0,  and  immediately  i)ublished  the  fact.  This  method
is  now  very  generally  applied.

1*  See  Chapter  XVIII.,  Note  34  bis.  Based  on  the  rapid  oxidation  of  iron  and  its
increase  in  volume  in  the  presence  of  water  and  salts  of  ammonium,  a  packing  is  used
for  water  mains  luid  steam  pipes  which  is  tightly  hanmiered  into  the  socket  joints.
This  packing  consists  of  a  mixture  of  iron  filings  and  a  small  quantity  of  sal-aounoniac
(and  sulphur)  moistened  with  water ;  after  a  certain  lapse  of  time,  esi)ecially  after  the
pipes  have  been  used,  this  mass  swells  to  such  an  extent  that  it  hermetically  seals  tlie
joints  of  the  pipes.

1^  Here,  however,  a  ferric  salt  may  also  be  formed  (when  all  the  iron  has  dissolved
and  the  cupric  salt  is  still  in  excess),  because  the  cupric  salts  are  reduced  by  ferrous
gaits. Cast  iron  is  also  dissolved.

IRON.  COBALT,  AND  NICKEL  836

I  &B,t  is,  corre.spondin^'  to  the  suboxide  FeC>  --  and  anhwering  to  iiiaguc»ium
I'  oompounds — and  hence  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  are  replaced  by  one
['.Ktom  of  iron,  Strongly  oxidising  acids  like  nitric  acid  may  transform
■*  the  ferrous  salt  which  is  forming  into  the  higher  degree  of  oxidation  or
ferric  salt  (corresp.jnding  with  the  sesquioxide,  Fe^O,),  but  this  is  a
secondary  reaction.  Iron,  although  easily  soluble  in  dilute  nitric  acid,
loses  this  property  when  plunged  into  strong  fuming  nitric  acid  ;  after
this  operation  it  even  loses  the  property  of  solubility  in  other  acids
until  the  external  coating  formed  by  the  action  of  the  stroiig  nitric
acid  is  mechanically  removed.  Tliis  condition  of  iran  is  termed  the
passive  state.  The  pumiiiv  cnntlttl'm  of  iron  depends  on  the  formation,
on  itfl  surface,  of  a  coaling  of  oxid«  due  to  the  iron  being  acted  on  by
the  lower  oxides  of  nitrogen  contained  in  the  fuming  nitric  acid.'^
Strong  nitric  acid  which  does  not  eonlain  these  lower  oxides,  does  not
Pender  iron  passive,  but  it  is  only  necessary  to  add  some  alcohol  or
other  reducing  agent  which  forms  these  lower  oxidett  in  the  nitric  acid,
and  the  iron  will  assume  the  passive  state.

Iron  readily  combiues  with  non-metals — for  instance,  with  chlorine,
iodine,  bromine,  sulphur,  and  even  with  phosphorus  and  carbon  ;  but
on  the  other  hand  the  property  of  combining  with  metals  is  but  little
developed  in  it — that  is  to  say,  it  does  not  easily  form  alloys.  Mercury,
which  acts  on  most  metals,  does  not  act  directly  on  iron,  and  the  I'run
apia!gani,  or  solution  of  iron  in  mercury,  which  is  used  for  electrical
machines,  is  only  obtained  in  a  particular  way — namely,  with  the
co-operation  uf  a  sodium  amalgam,  in  whicli  the  iron  dissolves  and  by
means  of  which  it  is  reduced  from  solutions  of  its  salts.

When  iron  acts  on  acids  it  forms  ferrous  salts  of  the  type  FcXj,
.  and  in  the  presence  of  air  and  oxidising  agents  they  change  by  degrees
into  ferric  salts  of  the  type  Fi-Xj.  This  faculty  of  passing  from  the
ferrous  to  the  ferric  state  is  still  furtherdeveloped  in  ferrous  hydroiide.
If  sodium  hydroxide  be  added  to  a  solution  of  ferrous  sulphate  or
green  vitriol,  FeSO^.'^a  white  precipitate  of  ferrous  hydroxide,  FeHjO.^,

I'  Powdery  reduced  iroo  iit  lasaite  with  rogurf  to  nitric  »«id  o(  a  hpei-ifie  gruvity  of
I'ST,  but  when  heated  the  acid  acts  on  it.  Thin  puwiveDeae  disappeura  in  thit  ma^etio
field.  Soint-Edme  attiibntes  tbe  paumvitneaa  ul  iton  liuid  nickel)  lo  Ihu  Fomubion  of
nitride  of  iion  an  [he  inifaca  ot  the  mets.1.  becauae  he  observed  tlmt  when  lieabed  in  dij

Reiuncn  obwrved  that  it  ■  strip  of  iron  be  imDierBed  in  acid  and  placed  in  the  mag-
netio  Belli,  it  is  prineipall;  iliHaolTed  at  its  middle  pari— tiint  la,  tile  acid  acta  more  teeblj
■I  the  polflit.  Aecotding  to  Etard  |1S91)  ttiong  nitcio  acid  dJHiioIves  iron  in  makio^  it
pawive,  although  tbe  action  it  a  rery  alow  one.

"  Jnwi  vilriol  or  green  vitriol,  Bulphate  ol  iron  or  ferroDB  salphate,  Kcnerally  oya-
UUiuK  from  eolntiom,  like  mB^e«um  anlphate,  with  Hevcu  molecnlea  of  wat«r,
FeBOuTHgO. Thin  nail  ia  not  ooly  lonoed  by  the  action  ol  iruii  on  sulphuric  ucid,  but

336  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

is  obtained  ;  but  on  exposure  to  the  air,  even  under  water,  it  turns
green,  becomes  grey,  and  finally  turns  brown,  which  is  due  to  the
oxidation  that  it  undergoes.  Ferrous  hydroxide  is  very  sparingly
soluble  in  water  ;  the  solution  has,  however,  a  distinct  alkaline  reaction,
which  is  due  to  its  being  a  fairly  energetic  basic  oxide.  In  any  case,
ferrous  oxide  is  far  more  energetic  than  ferric  oxide,  so  that  if  ammonia
be  added  to  a  solution  containing  a  mixture  of  a  ferrous  and  ferric
salt,  at  first  ferric  hydroxide  only  will  be  precipitated.  If  barium
carbonate,  BaCOg,  be  shaken  up  in  the  cold  with  ferrous  salts,  it
does  not  pi*ecipitate  them — that  is,  does  not  change  them  into  ferrous
carbonate  ;  but  it  completely  separates  all  the  iron  from  the  ferric
salts  in  the  cold,  according  to  the  equation  FejClg  +  SBaCOj  +  SH^O
=  FeaOajSHaO  +  SBaCla  +  SCOa-  I^  ferrous  hydroxide  be  boiled  with
a  solution  of  potash,  the  water  is  decomposed,  hydrogen  is  evolved,  and
the  ferrous  hydroxide  is  oxidised.  The  ferrous  salts  are  in  all  respects
similar  to  the  salts  of  magnesium  and  zinc  ;  they  are  isomorphous
with  them,  but  differ  from  them  in  that  the  ferrous  hydroxide  is  not
soluble  either  in  aqueous  potash  or  ammonia.  In  the  presence  of  an
excess  of  ammonium  salts,  however,  a  certain  proportion  of  the  iron

also  by  the  action  of  moisture  and  air  on  iron  i>yrite8,  especially  when  previoualy  roasted
(FeS.2  +  02  =  FeS  +  S02),  and  in  this  condition  it  easily  absorbs  the  oxygen  of  damp  air
(FeS  +  04  =  FeS0,).  Green  vitriol  is  obtained  in  many  processes  as  a  bye-product.
Ferrous  sulphate,  like  all  the  ferrous  salts,  ban  a  pale  greenish  colour  hardly  perceptible
in  solution.  If  it  be  desired  to  preserve  it  without  change — that  is,  so  as  not  to  contain
ferric  comi)ounds — it  is  necessar>'  to  keep  it  liermetically  setUed.  This  is  best  done  by
expelling  the  air  by  means  of  sulphurous  anhydride  or  ether ;  sulphurous  anhydride,
SO.^,  removes  oxygen  from  ferric  compounds,  which  might  be  formed,  and  is  itaelf
changed  into  sulphuric  acid,  and  hence  the  oxidation  of  the  ferrous  compound  does  not
take  place  in  its  presence.  Unless  these  precautions  are  taken,  green  vitriol  tams
brown,  partly  changing  into  the  ferric  salt.  When  turned  brown,  it  is  not  completely
soluble  in  water,  because  during  its  oxidation  a  certain  amount  of  free  insoluble  ferric
oxide  is  formed:  CFeSOj  +  03  =  2Fe-j{S04)-,  + Fe.,.0-.  In  order  to  cleanse  such  mixed
green  vitriol  from  tlie  oxide,  it  is  necessary  to  add  some  sulphuric  acid  and  iron  and  boil
the  mixture;  the  ferric  salt  is  then  transformed  into  the  ferrous  state :  Fej(S04)5  +  Fe
-SFeSOi.

Green  vitriol  is  used  for  the  manufacture  of  Nordhausen  sulphuric  acid  (Chapter
XX.),  for  preparing  ferric  oxide,  in  many  dye  works  (for  preparing  the  indigo  vata  and
reducing  blue  indigo  to  white),  and  in  many  otlier  processes;  it  is  also  a  very  good
disinfectant,  and  is  the  cheapest  salt  from  which  other  compounds  of  iron  may  be
obtained.

The  otlier  ferrous  salts  (excei)ting  tht  yellow  prussiate,  which  will  l>e mentioned  later
are  but  little  used,  and  it  is  therefore  unnecesHarj-  to  dwell  uiwn  them.  We  will  only
mention  ferrous  chloride,  which,  in  the  crystalline  state,  has  the  com]X>sitiou
FeGl.^,4H.^,0.  It  is  easily  prepared ;  for  instance,  by  the  action  of  hydrochloric  acid  on
iron,  and  in  the  anhydrous  state  by  the  action  of  hydrodiloric  acid  gas  on  metallic  iron
at  a  red  heat.  The  anhydrous  ferrous  chloride  then  volatilises  in  the  form  of  colourless
cubic  crystals.  Ferrous  oxalate  <or  the  double  potassium  salt)  acts  as  a  powerful
reducing  agent,  ami  is  fretiuently  enipl(»yed  in  i)hotography  (as  a  developer).

is  not  precipitated  by  alkalis  and  alliali  carbonates,  whicli  fact  points
to  the  formation  of  doable  animoniuui  salts. '"  The  ferrous  salts  have
a  dull  grtfitixh  colour,  and  form  solutionii  also  of  a  pale  green  colour,
whilst  the  ferric  salts  have  a  brou-Ji  or  raddish- brown  I'olour.  Tin'
ferrous  salt«,  i>eing  capable  of  oxi'lation,  fonn  very  acti^'e  reducing
agents — for  instance,  under  their  action  gold  chloride,  AuCl,,,  deposits
metallic  gold,  nitric  acid  is  transformed  into  lower  oxidea,  and  th(i
nighest  oxides  of  manganese  ako  pass  into  the  lower  forms  of  oxidation.
All  these  reactions  take  place  with  especial  ease  in  the  pi-esenie  of  an
exce&s  of  acid.  This  depends  on  the  fact  that  the  ferrous  <ixide,  FeO
(or  salt),  acting  as  a  reducing  agent,  turns  into  ferric  oxide,  Fe^d,  (or
salt),  and  in  the  ferric  state  it  requires  more  acid  for  the  formation
of  a  normal  salt  than  in  the  ferrous  condition.  Tiius  in  the  normal
ferrous  sulphate,  F^O,,  there  is  nne  equivalent  of  inm  to  one
<M^uivalent  of  sulphur  (in  the  sulphuric  radicle),  but  in  the  neutral
ferric  salt,  Fe5(yO,)„  there  is  one  equivalent  of  iron  to  one  and  a
half  of  sulphur  in  the  form  of  the  elements  of  sulphuric  acid.  '^

The  most  simple  oiiidising  agent  for  transforming  fernms  into  ferric
salts  is  chlorine  in  the  presence  of  water— for  instance,  liFeCl^  +  Clj

I'  FemjUH  6ii1|)liiitB,  likt  magiieKinm  nuliiliitlF,  •
|NH,}j80„Fe90„eH.,0.  Thi«  salt  doea  notoiidin
iH  IherefoR  n»d  for  itiuidardiHinK  SMxO,

'"  The  InnsfomiBtuni  ol  ferrous  oxide  iulu  lemc  oiide  is  nol  oomiilebelir  alTeoted  in
air,  «  then  only  *  part  al  the  snboiide  is  ccmverted  into  terrii:  oxide.  Under  tbsae
circuuistuioes  the  sn-uUed  uiBt(netic  oxide  »l  inm  is  generallj  pmdnmd,  which  coDtains
ototnic  qnuttitiea  of  the  luboiide  uid  oxide —niunel;,  FeO,Fe,0- ^  Fv^^O,.  This  snb-
Htance,  us  idresdy  mentioned,  is  [onnd  in  Dstiiie  snd  in  iron  bixIh.  It  in  alto  formed
when  nioHt  ferrous  ukI  (erria  «alts  uie  heated  in  nir  \  thou,  for  iartaiice,  whea  ferToai
carbuualo,  PeCOj  (nutive  or  the  pmoipitate  niven  by  soda  in  a  wilntiou  of  FX,),  i>
bested  it  loses  the  elemeots  of  carfaonio  aohjilride,  and  magnetic  oxide  n-iiuiue.  This
oxide  of  iron  is  attracted  by  the  magnet,  and  iv  on  tfUH  account  ualled  magnetic  oxide.
altlioDKh  it  does  not  always  show  niagnetic  proiierties.  It  magnetic  oxide  lie  disHilTediu
any  acid— For  instance,  hydrochloric — -whioli  dikes  uoC  aet  aa  an  oxidixing  sgeut.  a  ferroas
wtft  is  first  formed  and  ferric  oxide  remaiDK,  which  is  also  ciLiaibte  of  iwsxinj  into
sulation.  The  beet  way  of  preparing  the  hydrate  ol  the  magnetic  oxide  in  by  decuiupo«ing
a  niiiture  ol  ferrous  and  ferric  wltH  with  unmania ;  it  i^  however,  indispenMibta  to  poor
thiij  mixture  into  the  ammonia,  and  not  vice  etrtii.ii*  in  that  case  the  ferrous  niide  would
atfir-it  be  precipitated  alone,  and  then  the  ferric^  oxide.  Tliu  conijiound  than  formed  haaa
bright  gmu  colour,  and  when  dried  forms  »  hlocli  powder.  Other  conihinutionii  ol
ferroUK  with  len-ic  oxide  are  known,  an  are  also  compounds  ot  ferric  oxide  with  oth«r
IwwH.  Thus,  For  inBtanee,compnaDdB  ore  hnowu  eootaining  i  moleenletof  ferroD*  oxide
In  I  of  ferric  oxide,  and  also  0  ol  ferrous  lo  1  of  ferric  oxide.  Thew  are  also  magnetic,
■Jid  ars  Formed  by  heating  iron  in  air.  The  inagneuam  compound  M)(0,Fe,Oj  is
](rTjiu«fl  by  psHsing  gaseous  hydroclilorie  acid  over  a  heated  mixture  of  mMnieaia  and
Ferric  oxide.  Crystalline  magnesium  oxide  is  then  formed,  and  lilruk.  shiuy,  oclaliedral
cryataJs  ol  the  above-mentioned  composition.  This  compouiid  i*  aiuUngoa*  to  the
.dominate*— for  instance,  lu  spinel.  Bemheim  {IHHH)  and  Rous^^an  (IHUlf  obbuned
many  similar  colnpoDnda  ol  feiTtc  oxide.  Mid  LUeir  oom|HiHit>o»  iigipnifnlly  correspoiidii

388  PKINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

=  FeaClg,  or,  generally  speaking,  2FeO  +  Cl.^  +  H2O  =  Fe^03  +  2HC1,
When  such  a  transformation  is  required  it  is  best  to  add  potassium
chlorate  and  hydrochloric  acid  to  the  ferrous  solution  ;  chlorine  is
formed  by  their  mutual  reaction  and  acts  as  an  oxidising  agent.
Nitric  acid  produces  a  similar  effect,  although  more  slowly.  Ferrous
salts  may  be  completely  and  rapidly  oxidised  into  ferric  salts  by  means
of  chromic  acid  or  permanganic  acid,  HMn04,  in  the  presence  of  acids —
for  example,  lOFeSO,  +  2KMn04  +  8H2SO4  =  5Fe2(S04)3  +  2MnS04
+  K.2SO4  +  8H2O.  This  reaction  is  easily  observed  by  the  change  of
colour,  and  its  termination  is  easily  seen,  because  potassium  perman-
ganate forms  solutions  of  a  bright  red  colour,  and  when  added  to  a
solution  of  a  ferrous  salt  the  above  reaction  immediately  takes  place  in
(he  presence  of  acid,  and  the  solution  then  becomes  colourless,  because  all
the  substances  formed  are  only  faintly  coloured  in  solution.  Directly  all
the  ferrous  compound  lias  passed  into  the  ferric  state,  any  excess  of
permanganate  which  is  added  communicates  a  red  colour  to  the  liquid
(see  Chapter  XXI.)

Thus  when  ferrous  salts  are  acted  on  by  oxidising  agents,  they  pass
into  the  ferric  form,  and  under  the  action  of  reducing  agents  the
reverse  reaction  occurs.  Sulphuretted  hydrogen  may,  for  instance,  be
used  for  this  complete  transformation,  for  under  its  influence  ferric  salts
are  reduced  with  separation  of  sulphur — for  example,  FejClg  +  H^S
=  2FeCl2  +  2HC1  +  8.  Sodium  thio.iulphate  acts  in  a  similar  way  :
Fe^CU  +  Na^S^Os  +  H.p  =  2FeCl2  -f  ^&.,H0,  +  2HC1  +  S.  Me-
tallic iron  or  zinc,^"  in  the  presence  of  acids,  or  sodium  amalgam,  <tc.,
acts  like  hydrogen,  and  has  also  a  similar  reducing  action,  and  this
furnishes  the  best  method  for  reducing  ferric  salts  to  ferrous  salts  —
for  instance,  Fe^Clg  +  Zn  =  2FeCl2  I-  ZnCl^.  Thus  the  transition fnn a
ferrous  naJti^  to  ferric  salts  and  vice  versa  Is  always  possible.^^

-^  CopjX'r  and  cuprous  salts  also  reduce  ferric  oxide  to  ferrous  oxide,  and  are  them-
selves turned  into  cupric  salts.  The  essence  of  the  reactions  is  ex])re8sed  by  the  following
equations :  FeoO-,  +  Cu.O - 2FeO  +  2CuO  ;  Fe.^0.-  +  Cu  =  2FeO  +  CuO.  This  fact  is  made
use  of  in  analysing  copjier  compounds,  the  quantity  of  copi»er  being  ascertained  by  the
amount  of  ferrous  salt  o})tained.  An  excess  of  feiTic  salt  is  required  to  complete  the
reaction.  Here  we  have  an  example  of  reverse  reaction  ;  the  ferrous  oxide  or  its  salt  in
the  presence  of  alkali  transforms  the  cu])ric  oxide  into  cui>rous  oxide  and  metallic  copper,
as  observed  by  Lovel,  Knopp,  and  others.

-'  We  will  here  mention  the  reactions  by  means  of  which  it  may  be  ascertained
whether  the  ferr<»us  comi>ound  has  been  entirely  converted  into  a  ferric  compound  or
vicr  rrrsr/.  There  are  two  substances  which  are  best  employed  for  this  pur|x>se :
|M)tassium  ferri(  yanide,  FeK.-(-,iN,.,  and  ]>otassium  thiocyamite,  KCNS.  The  first  salt
gives  with  fermns  salts  a  blue  precipitate  of  an  insoluble  salt,  having  a  composition
Fe.CioNi.,;  but  with  ferric  salts  it  does  not  form  any  precipitate,  and  only  gives  a  brown
colour,  and  therefore  when  transforming  a  ferrous  m,li  into  a  ferric  salt,  the  completion
of  the  transformation  nniy  l>e  detected  by  taking  a  drop  of  the  liquid  on  pai)er  or  on  a
I>orcelain  plate  and  addintr  n  drop  of  the  ferricyanide  solution. If  a  blue  precipitate  be

Ferric  oj^iH',  or  s^jiquiuxida  "/  iron,  Fe,l>j,  i.s  fnutiJ  iu  niiture,
ami  is  ai'tiScially  prepared  in  the  form  of  a  red  powder  Ijy  many
methods.  Thus  after  healing  green  vitriol  a  red  oxide  of  iron  remains,
called  uoU'utiiar,  which  is  ust^d  lu  an  oil  painty  pi'iiicipally  for  painting
"■o<)d.  The  same  substatice  iu  the  form  of  a  very  fine  powder  (I'ouge)
ii  used  for  polishing  glass,  st«el,  and  other  objects.  If  a  mixture  of
ferrous  sulphate  with  ai:  excess  of  common  salt  Ije  strongly  heat«d,
crystalline  ferric  oxide  will  l<e  formed,  having  %  dark  violet  colour,  and
resembling  some  natural  varieties  of  thii<  substance.  When  ii'on  pyrites
is  lieated  for  preparing  sulphurous  anhydride,  ferric  oxide  also  remains
behind  ;  it  ia  used  as  a  pigment.  On  the  addition  of  alkalis  to  a
solution  of  ferric  salts,  a  brown  precipitate  of  ferric  hydroxide  is  formed,
which  when  heated  (even  when  Iwiled  in  water,  that  is,  at  alwut  100°,
according  to  Toniassi)  easily  parts  with  the  water,  and  leaves  red
anhydrous  ferric  oxide.  Pure  ferric  oxide  does  not  show  any  mag'
netic  properties,  but  when  heated  tin  a  whit«  heat  it  loses  oxygen  and  is
converted  into  the  magnetic  oxide.  Anhydrous  ferric  oxide  whicti  lia-i
lieen  heateil  to  a  high  t«mperature  is  with  difGculty  soluble  in  acids
(Ijut  it  is  soluble  when  heated  in  strong  acids,  and  also  when  fused  with
potassium  hydrogen  sulphate),  whilst  ferric  hydn>xide,  at  all  events
that  which  is  precipitated  from  salts  by  means  of  alkalis,  is  very  readily
sfjiubte  in  acids.  The  precipitated /err icr  lii/droxidK  has  the  coiupositioii
2Fe30,3H.iO,  or  Fc^HfiOj.  If  this  ordinary  hydroxide  be  rendere.1
anhydrous  (at  100°),  at  a  certain  moment  it  Iteccmes  incandescent
—that  is,  loses  a  certain  quantity  of  heat.  This  self-incandescence
depends  on  internal  displacement  pro<luced  by  the  transition  of  the
easily -soluble  (in  acids)  variety  into  the  difficultly -soluble  variety,
and  does  not  depend  im  the  losn  of  water,  since  (.lie  anhydrous  oxide
undergoes  the  same  change.  In  addition  to  this  there  exists  a  ferric
hydroxide,  or  hydrated  oxide  of  iron,  which,  like  the  strongly -heated
anhydrous  iron  oxide,  is  difficultly  soluble  in  acids.  This  hydroxide  on
I'ising  water,  or  after  the  loss  of  'WAt«r,  does  not  undergo  such  self-
incandescence,  because  no  such  state  of  internal  displacement  occurs
( loss  of  energy  or  heat)  with  it  as  that  which  is  peculiar  to  the  ordinary
oxide  of  iron.  The  ferric  hydroxide  which  is  difficultly  soluble  in  acids
has  the  composition  Fe^Oj.HjO. This  hydroxide  is  obtained  by  a  pro-

(rinnfii,  Ih^ii  purt  o(  llie  ffiroUB  suit  *tUl  cematn* ;  if  there  i»  none,  the  tran«tonniition  is
iHimpIelB.  Tlic  Ihiosyuuiite  doea  not  give  ■n;  muHrad  coloralion  with  leminH  sulta ;  hot
with  Iprric  nJlt  in  the  niiMt  diluted  state  Jl  romw  n  briiflil  rvd  voluble  voui|H>Dud,  and
tlierHlore  ohen  tnnifonning  ■  lerrio  b«II  inki  it  (errons  tnll  we  niont  proceiHl  *»  before.
leninR  a  drop  of  the  •olation  with  thiocrniinitr,  whrii  the  •I'leiiro  of  n  red  colour  will
proTe  tiie  tobil  tnuiBromiatiou  of  the  ferric  uilt  into  the  feTToaa  utate,  uid  it  ■  red  colniir
it  uppHrent^it  <ihown  thst  the  Inuuiturmitiou  i»  not  yet  oompletH.

340  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

longed  ebullition  of  water  in  which  ferric  hydroxide  prepared  by  the
oxidation  of  ferrous  oxide  is  suspended,  and  also  sometimes  by  similar
treatment  of  the  ordinary  hydroxide  after  it  has  been  for  a  long  time
in  contact  with  water.  The  transition  of  one  hydroxide  to  another  is
apparent  by  a  change  of  colour  ;  the  easily -soluble  hydroxide  is  redder,
and  the  sparingly-soluble  hydroxide  more  yellow  in  colour.**

The  normal  salts  of  the  composition  Fe2X5  or  FeX,  correspond
with  ferric  oxide — for  example,  the  exceedingly  volatile ^^jrric  cJUaridey
Fe2Cl6,  which  is  easily  prepared  in  the  anhydrous  state  by  the  action
of  chlorine  on  heated  iron.*^ Such  also  is  the  normal  ferric  nitrate,

^  The  two  ferric  hydroxides  are  not  only  characterised  by  the  above-mentioned
properties,  bat  also  by  the  fact  that  the  first  hydroxide  forms  immediately  with  potaasinm
ferrocyanide,  K4FeCoN(},  a  bine  colour  depending  on  the  formation  of  Prussian  bine,
whilst  the  second  hydroxide  does  not  give  any  reaction  whatever  with  this  salt.  The
first  hydroxide  is  entirely  solable  in  nitric,  hydrochloric,  and  all  other  acids;  whilst  the
second  sometimes  (not  always)  forms  a  brick-coloared  liquid,  which  appears  turbid
and  does  not  give  the  reactions  peculiar  to  the  ferric  salts  (P^an  de  Saint-Gilles,
Scheurer-Kestner).  In  addition  to  this,  when  the  smallest  quantity  of  an  alkaline  salt
is  added  to  this  liquid,  ferric  oxide  is  precipitated.  Thus  a  colloidal  solution  is  formed
(hydrosol),  which  is  exactly  similar  to  silica  hydrosol  (Chapter  XYII.),  according  to
which  example  the  hydrosol  of  ferric  oxide  may  be  obtained.

If  ordinary  ferric  hydroxide  be  dissolved  in  acetic  acid,  a  solution  of  the  colour  of  red
wine  is  obtained,  which  has  all  the  reactions  characteristic  of  ferric  salts.  But  if  this
solution  (formed  in  the  cold)  be  heated  to  the  boiling-point,  its  colour  is  very  rapidly
intensified,  a  smell  of  acetic  acid  becomes  apparent,  and  the  solution  then  contains  a
new  variety  of  ferric  oxide.  If  the  boiling  of  the  solution  be  continued,  acetic  acid  is
evolved,  and  the  modified  ferric  oxide  is  precipitated.  If  the  evaporation  of  the  acetic
iieid  be  prevented  (in  a  closed  or  sealed  vessel),  and  the  liquid  be  heated  for  some  time,
the  whole  of  the  ferric  liydroxide  then  passes  into  the  insoluble  form,  and  if  some  alkaline
salt  be  added  (to  the  hydrosol  formed),  the  whole  of  the  ferric  oxide  is  then  precipitated
in  its  insoluble  fonn.  Tliis  method  may  be  applied  for  separating  ferric  oxide  from
solutions  of  its  salts.

All  phenomena  observed  respecting  ferric  oxide  (colloidal  properties,  various  forms,
formation  of  double  basic  salts)  demonstrate  that  this  substance,  like  silica,  alumina,
lead  hydroxide,  tfec,  is  polymerised,  that  the  composition  is  represented  by  (Fe^O^)!*.

**  Tlie  ferric  compound  which  is  most  used  in  practice  (for  insttince,  in  medicine,  for
cauterising,  stopping  bleeding,  <fec. — Oleum  Martis)  is  ferric  chloride^  Fe^Cl^i,  easily
obtained  by  dissolving  the  ordinary  hydrated  oxide  of  iron  in  hydrochloric  acid.  It  is
obtained  in  the  anhydrous  state  by  the  action  of  chlorine  on  heated  iron.  The  experi-
ment is  carried  on  in  a  porcelain  tube,  and  a  solid  volatile  substance  is  then  formed  in
the  shape  of  brilliant  vIoIpI  scales  which  very  readily  absorb  moisture  from  the  air,  and
when  heated  witli  water  <lt>ooinpose  into  crystalline  ferric  oxide  and  hydrochloric  acid  :
Fe.iCl6  +  3HoO  =  r)HCN  Fe/)-.  Vvn'w  chloride  is  so  volatile  that  the  density  of  its
vapour  may  be  determined.  At  140''  it  is  equal  to  164'0  referred  to  hydrogen  ;  the
formula  FeoCln  corresponds  with  a  density  of  1C2'5.  An  aqueous  solution  of  this  shU
has  a  brown  colour.  On  evaporating  and  cooling  this  solution,  crystals  separate  con-
taining 6  or  1*2  molecules  of  H.>0.  Ferric  chloride  is  not  only  soluble  in  water,  but  also
in  alcohol  (similarly  to  magnesium  chloride,  &c.)  and  in  ether.  If  the  latter  solutions
are  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  sun  they  become  colourless,  and  deposit  ferrous  chloride,
FeClj,  clilorine  l>eing  disengaged.  After  a  certain  lapse  of  time,  the  aqueous  solutions
of  ferric  cliloride  decompose  with  precipitation  of  a  basic  salt,  thus  demonstrating  the
instability  of  ferric  chloride,  like  the  other  salts  of  ferric  oxide  (Note  22). This  salt  is

IRON. COBALT, AND NICKEL
Fe5(N0,),| ;  it  ia  obtainetl  by  dissolving  iron  in  an  ex

841
a  of  nitric  aeidi

luucli  aiore  stable  in  the  romi  of  double  ulla,  Uke  dl  t>io  lorric  auU>  uid  dao  tlie
8&lta  of  manj  other  tvMe  baran.  FotasBiaui  or  uiuooiiiaiB  oblotide  formii  with  it  var;
beaatitol  red  urjataln  ol  a  double  ult,  having  the  oumpoiiitlon  Fc,Cln,4KCI,aH^
Wbdii  a  HolDlimi  of  this  Ball  in  eiaporutad  it  deuompoBen.  with  wporatiou  of  pdlaBsiuiii
chloHde.

B.  Roowboflm  (Itimj  vtudied  in  deUil  <ilb  for  CnCl^  Chapter  XIV.,  ^~ote  50)  the
oepiuktioD  of  diflereul  hjdialeH  from  Balnniited  sulutioiu  at  Fe^CL.  M  TiuiaUH  c«ii>wu-
ttntioiia  uid  lemperatnreg ;  lie  found  that  there  are  1  ciyBtalluhydriLlec  mith  13.  7.  E,  uid
1  mcleculeB  of  water.  Aii  orauga  yellow  only  ulightly  h jgroBOOpio  hjdr»tB.FejClo,ialliO,
i>  ini»te»H]y  uid  uBDally  obtained,  which  melUnt  37°;  ita  aol ability  nt different  tempem-
tureit  ig  repre»>ut«d  by  th»  curve  BCD  in  the  accumpanying  flKuri!,  where  the  point  B

"\

Ft.

;J

)

'■tt:_o

u*

•'r^

°>

^^xT

^^,

Hfi

^0 -^

A

1

ilublUty  o(  ¥t.V\,

ling  aboDt  Fe.,Cl^  -t-8SU.,0,
lydnte  FajCl„,i:iH.jO,  u>d
-atnie  at  i^ryslaUisatiun  with  ui  inureue  in  tbe
nt  oF  water  [m  tbe  figure  the  tempeTBturefl  are
B  amount  of  r  ju  the  fonnula  iiFB,Clg+  lOOH.O
klong  the  ajda  of  oldinateB).  When  anhydronB  F(L,C1n  \*  added  to  Che  aboie  bydrntv
(laHjO),  or  some  of  (he  water  in  evaporitad  fmm  the  Iftlter,  very  hygroscopic
cr^iftld  of  FbjCI,.EH,0  (Friterhe)  are  formed ;  they  melt  at  5U",  tbeir  solubility  is
eiptessed  by  tbe  curve  HJ,  which  alw  pres«ntH  a  uDali  branch  at  the  end  J.  Thin
■gain  gives  the  fall  iu  the  teiuiiersture  of  ciyBtaJliimtiaii  with  an  lucreue  in  tbe  auuiunt
of  FejClfl.  BendeB  theas  Eurves  and  the  iwlnbility  of  the  anhydrout.  salt  expreaaed  by
the  line  KL  (ap  to  100°.  beyond  which  cliloriue  is  libemled).  Booieboou  alsu  gives  the
two  curves,  EFO  and  JK,  corresponding  to  the  crystallahydntt^x,  Fe,Clg,THiOimeltaat
*-t*'-5.  that  ia  lower  than  any  of  the  others.)  and  FejCl^.tU-^O  (melts  at  l&'-a),  which
he  discovered  by  a  systematic  research  on  tbe  Bolationi  of  ferric  chloride.  The  curve
AB  repreaents  the  aeparation  of  ice  from  dilate  solutions  of  the  salt.

The  researches  of  the  same  Dutch  eheniiat  upon  the  conditions  of  the  formation  of
crystal!  from  tlie  double  salt  |NH,Cll,FejCU2]i,0  are  even  more  perfect.  This  salt
wsB  obtnined  in  18SB  by  Fritsche.  and  is  easily  formed  From  a  atiDng  solution  ol  Fe^CI,,
by  adding  sal-ammoninc,  when  it  sepsrateii  In  crimson  rbonibic  orysteLi,  which,  after
disMilving  in  water,  only  deposit  again  on  vvapoiation,  together  witli  the  sal-amnuiniac,
(It»a)  found  tluit  wlien  tliu  wilution  coulainR  b  molecuUs  of  Fe,,Cls,  and

^^^_ BnoEcboom

342

PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

taking  care  as  far  as  possible  to  prevent  any  rise  of  temperature.^^ The
normal  salt  separates  from  the  brown  solution  when  it  is  concentrated

a  molecules  of  NH4CI,  per  100  molecules  HjO,  then  at  15°  one  of  the  following  separa-
tions takes  place :  (1)  crystals,  Fe.^Cl,.„12H.20,  when  a  varies  between  0  and  11,  and  b
between  4*65  and  4*8,  or  (2)  a  mixture  of  these  crystals  and  the  double  salt,  when  a
-1-86,  and  6  =  4-47,  or  (3)  the  double  salt,  Fe,^Cl«,4NH4Cl,2HaO,  when  a  varies
between  2  and  ll'S,  and  b  between  8*1  and  4*56,  or  (4)  a  mixture  of  sal-ammoniac  with
the  iron  salt  (it  crystallises  in  separate  cubes,  Retgers,  Lehmann),  when  a  varies
between  7'7  and  10*9,  and  b  is  less  than  8*88,  or  (5)  sal-ammoniac,  when  a  =  ll'88.  And
as  in  the  double  salt,  a'-b'-'iil  it  is  evident  that  the  double  salt  only  separates  oat
when  the  ratio  o  :  6  is  less  than  4  :  1  (i.e.  when  Fe^Clc  predominates). The  above  is

seen  more  clearly  in  the  accom-
^  panying  figure,  where  a,  or  the

number  of  molecules of  NH4CI
per  100H.jO,  is  taken  along the
axis  of  abscissfB,  and b,  or  the
number  of  molecules  of  Fe.2Cl,},
along  the  ordinates. The  corves
ABCD  correspond  to  saturation
and  present  an  iso-therm  of  15^.
The portion  AB  corresponds  to
the  separation  of  chloride  of  iron
(the ascending nature of this
curve  shows  that  the  solubility  of
Fe.^Cle  is  increased  by  the  pre-
sence of NH4CI,  while  that of
NH4CI  decreases  in  the  presence
of  Fe,^Cle),  tho  portion  BC  to  the
double  salt,  and  the  portion  CD
to  a  mixture  of  sal-ammoniac  and
ferric  cliloride,  while  the  straight
line  OF  correKponds  to  the  ratio  Fe^Cl,i,4NHjCl,  or  a  '-  h'-'i  '  I. The  portion  CE  shows
that  more  double  salt  niay  be  introduced  into  the  solution  without  decomposition,  but
then tlie  Holutif)n  depoHits  a  mixture  of  sal-ammoniac  and  ferric  cliloride  {are  Chapter
XXIV.  Note  d^'^^}. If  there  were  more  such  well-investigated  cases  of  solutions,  onr
knowledge  of  double salts,  solutions,  the  influence of water,  equilibria,  isoraorphous
mixtures,  and  such-like  provinces  of  chemical  relations  might  be  considerably  advanced.
'^*  Tlie  normal  ferric  salts  are  decomposed  by  heat  and  even  by  water,  forming  basic
salts,  which  may  be  prepared  in  various  ways. Generally  ferric  hydroxide  is  dissolved
in  solutions  of  ferric  nitrate  ;  if  it  contains  a  double  quantity  of  iron  the  basic  salt  is
formed  which  contains  Fe.Ps  (in  the  form  of  hydroxide)  +2Feo(N03),3=^8Fe.^O(NO.i)4,
a  salt  of  the  tyi>e  Fe.^OX,. Probably  water  enters  into  its composition. With  con-
siderable quantities  of  ferric  oxide,  insoluble  basic  salts  are  obtained  containing  various
amounts  of  ferric  hydroxide. Thus  when  a  solution  of  the  above-mentioned  basic  acid
is  boiled,  a  precipitate  is formed  containing 4(Fe.j05)^,'2(N..>Oi),3H..O,  which  probably
contains 2Fe.,.0.^(NO-).2  +  2Fe^O-„8H.20. If  a  solution  of  basic  nitrate  be  sealed  in  a
tube  nnd  then  immersed  in  boiling  water,  the  colour  of  the  solution  changes  just  in
the  same  way  as  if  a solution  of ferric  acetate  had  been  emi)loyed  (Note  22). The
solution  ol)tained  smells  strongly  of  nitric  acid,  and  on  adding  a  drop  of  sulphuric  or
Aydrochlr)ric  acid  tlie  insoluble  variety  of  hydrated  ferric  oxide  is  precipitated.

Normal  ferric  orfhophosphaf  is  soluble  in  suli)huric,  hydrochloric,  and  nitric  acids,
but  insolul)le  in  others,  such  ns,  for  instance,  acetic  acid.  The  composition  of  this  fuvlt
in  the  anhydrous  state  is  FeP04,  because  in  orthophosjihoric  acid  there  are  three  atoms
of  hydrrgen,  and  iron,  in  the  ferric  state,  replaces  the  three  atoms  of  hydrogen.  This
salt  is  obtaine*!  from  ferric  acetate,  which,  with  disodiuni  phosphate,  forms  a  white  pre-

FHi.  96.— Diagnini  of  tlie  formation,  at  15°,  of  the  double
svlt  Fe,('l„4NH/M2H30  or  Fe(NHj^n,H,0.  (After
Roozebotun.)

IRON, COBALT, ASD  NIC-KKL  943

tinder  a,  Itel!  jar  over  sulphurie  acid.  This  shIi,  Fe^(N03).„9HjO,  then
crystallises  in  well-formed  and  perfectly  colourless  crystals,^''  which
ileli<^uesce  in  air,  melt  nt  'iH",  and  nre  soluble  in  and  decomposed  by
water.  The  decompftsition  may  be  i<een  from  the  fact  that  the  eolution
ia  browu  and  does  not  yield  the  whole  of  the  salt  again,  but  gives
partly  basic  salt  The  normal  salt  {only  stable  in  the  presence  of  an
excess  of  HNOj)  is  completely  decomposed  with  great  facility  by  heal-
ing with  water,  even  at  130',  and  tliis  is  made  use  of  for  removing  iron
(and  also  certain  other  oxides  of  the  form  RjO.,)  from  many  other
biises  (of  the  fonii  RU)  whose  nitrates  are  far  more  stable.  The  ferric
salts,  feX„  ui  passing  into  ferrous!  salts,  act  us  oxidising  ageiit";,  as  is
lieen  from  the  fact  that  they  not  only  lilxM-ate  S  from  SHj,  but  also
iodine  from  KI  like  many  oxidising  agents. '■'  '■'■

eipilntc  of  FeP04,  contaimni;  water.  If  a  mlulioii  uf  ferno  I'Moriilx  lyetlowish-nid
coluar)  be  mixed  vith  a  solation  of  eodium  Hetale  in  eiceni,  the  liquid  ounmH  Ml
inteniw  brown  colour  which  demonstrate*  tlip  fonontion  of  a  mrtun  quantity  of  fertic
itceUte;  then  the  diwidiani  phoaphate  diretlly  forms  n  whitB  guUUQOOs  prectpitnle  of  ferric
phosphate.  B  J  this  nieanB  the  whole  ot  the  iron  may  be  pro«ipil»ted,  and  the  liquid  which
wiu  brown  then  becomes  uolnurlesg.  If  tliis  normaJ  nidt  be  diiwolrtid  in  orthophuBpboric
wid,  Die  crjBtJiUine  Hcid  sdt  FeHjiPOtI,  Ik  Inrmed.  It  there  buan  excessof  ferric  oxide
in  thH  Hnlntiiiu,  the  precifHtHte  will  conitist  of  the  basic  «all.  If  ferric  phosphate  lie
diwrnlred  in  hydrucUnrie  acid,  ami  ainmoniK  be  added,  a  salt  is  precipitated  on  beatinji
wiiich,  after  oontinoed  waHliiny  ill  water  uh)  heating  Ito  remoTe  the  water),  haa  (be
eompoBitioQ  Fe^PgO,!— tlial  ia,  UFejOjJ>,0».  In  >ui  agacous  oundiUon  lliis  salt  may  be
oonuderod  u  ferrie  hydrtnidct  Pe^fOUl^^  in  which  fOH)^  i*  replaced  by  the  e<]iiiTaIeut
tfTonp  PO,.  Wbeuever  ammonia  ia  added  to  a  nolution  containing  an  eicesH  of  ferric
halt  aud  a  certain  amount  of  phonphuric  iLcid,  a  |)recipilate  ia  (omied  eontiiiiiinn  llie
whole  of  the  phosphoric  acid  in  the  uia«i)  ol  the  ferric  oxide.

Ferric  Diide  ia  characteriaed  ae  a  feeble  bote,  and  also  by  Che  fact  of  its  fonning  double
ulU— for  instance,  patatainin  iron  alum,  which  baa  a  composition  Fai(tj04lj,K,S0,.
^iH^O  or  FeK|30,)^ialLjO.  It  is  nblained  in  the  form  of  almost  uuhmrleix  or  light
roiie-ivloiireil  lan^e  iictahedra  ii(  Ibe  reiniliu  Bystem  by  aimply  mixing  xolotiona  of
potaHium  gulphate  and  the  leiric  kulphale  obtained  by  diewlving  ferric  oxide  in  aiil.
pharic  acid.

"•  It  would  aeem  (hat  all  noriiiol  ferric  nJta  are  cotoarleas,  and  that  the  brown  colour
which  i«  pepuliar  to  the  solutiong  ia  real);  due  to  liasic  ferric  Rail*.  A  ruiuarkable
example  ol  the  apparent  change  of  colour  of  -aalta  in  repreaented  by  the  lermua  and  ferric
oialatei.  The  tolmei  in  a  dry  atale  baa  a  yellow  colour,  although  se  a  rule  the  ferroui
sails  are  green,  and  the  tatter  ia  colniirleaa  or  pale  green.  VHien  the  norma]  ferric  salt  is
dinxolved  in  water  it  is,  lilie  many  ultc,  probably  decomposed  by  tlie  wat^r  into  acid
uid  basic  (alts,  and  the  latter  caumonicatcH  a  brown  colour  to  the  (olution.  Iron  alum
ia  almost  colourleas,  in  easily  dKOiii|>nNeil  bjr  water,  and  ia  the  beat  pruof  of  our  asaer.
lion.  The  stody  of  the  phenomeoa  pvouiiar  to  ferric  nitrate  might,  in  tny  opinion,  gire
a  very  aseful  addi^on  to  onr  knoKledgc  ol  tlie  aquooni  solotiona  of  talta  in  general,

»<>>•  ThereacUonFe^Ci+KI^FeX-i-i-KX^-I  proceeds  wmparatively  slowly  in  nolu-
tioua,  is  not  complote  (depends  upiiu  the  masal,  and  is  reversible.  In  this  connection  »■
may  cite  the  lollowiog  data  Imtu  Scubert  anil  Rohrer'a  (ISOl)  compreheaiiive  researched.
The  invesligations  were  oonduclvd  with  Holutions  containing  ^  gnun — eqniialent
weights  of  Fe.j(SO()i  {i-t:  eootaiiiiiig  S(1  gruna  ol  uUt  per  litre),  and  a  correapondiug
solution  n(  KI ;  Ilie  amount  of  iodine  liberated  Iwing  deleruiineil  (after  the  adilition  ol
starch)  by  a  solation  (also  ^,  noni.nl)  of  SttjSPj  {fe  Chupler  XX.,  NoU'  I9|. The  pro-

344  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Iron  forms  one  other  oxide  besides  the  ferric  and  ferrous  oxides  ;
this  contains  twice  as  moch  oxjg&i  as  the  former,  hot  is  so  very
unstable  that  it  can  neith«-  be  obtained  in  the  free  state  nor  as  a
hydrate.  Whenever  soch  conditions  of  doaUe  decomposition  oocor  as
shoold  allow  of  its  separation  in  the  free  state,  it  deocHnposes  into
oxygen  and  ferric  oxide.  It  is  known  in  the  state  of  salts,  and  is  only
stable  in  the  presence  of  alkalis,  and  forms  salts  with  them  whidi  have
a  decidedly  alkaline  reaction  ;  it  is  therefore  a  feebly  acid  oxide.  Thos
when  small  pieces  of  iron  are  heated  with  nitre  or  potaasiiun  dilorate
a  potassiam  salt  of  the  composition  K^FeO^  is  fOTmed,  and  therefore
the  hydrate  corresponding  with  this  salt  should  have  the  oompositiOQ
jHjFeOi.  It  is  called  ferric  acid.  Its  anhydride  ought  to  contain
FeOj  or  Fe20r, — twice  as  much  oxygen  as  ferric  oxide.  If  a  solutioQ
of  potassium  ferrate  be  mixed  with  acid,  the  free  hydrate  ought
to  be  formed,  but  it  immediately  decomposes  (2E2Fe04  +  5H^04
=r  2KjS04  +  Fea(804)3  +  5HjO  +  O3),  oxygen  being  evolved.  If  a
small  quantity  of  acid  be  taken,  or  if  a  solution  of  potassium  ferrate
be  heated  with  solutions  of  other  metallic  salts,  ferric  oxide  is  sepa-
rated— for  instance  :

2ChiS04  +  2KaFe04  =  2K^04  +  O3  +  FejO,  +  2CuO.

Both  these  oxides  are  of  course  deposited  in  the  form  of  hydrates.
This  shows  that  not  only  the  hydrate  HjFeOi,  but  also  the  salts  of  the
heavy  metals  corresponding  with  this  higher  oxide  of  iron,  are  not
formed  by  reactions  of  double  decomposition.  The  solution  of  potas-
sium ferrate  naturally  acts  as  a  powerful  oxidising  agent ;  for  instance,
it  transforms  manganous  oxide  into  the  dioxide,  sulphurous  into
sulphuric  acid,  oxalic  acid  into  carbonic  anhydride  and  water,  &c.^
Iron  thus  combines  with  oxygen  in  three  proportions  :  RO,  R^O^,

greBS  of  the  reuctioii  was  expressed  by  the  amount  of  hberated  iodine  in  peroentai^es
of  the  theoretical  amount.  For  instance,  the  following  amount  of  iodide  of  potassioni
was  decomposed  when  Fe<{(S04)7.  +  2nKI  was  taken  :

7t*=  1 2  8 6 10  20

After  15'  11-4  26'8  406  73  5  916  96-0

„ 80'  140  85-8  47H  78-5  94*8  97*4

1  hour  190  42*7  660  840  957  976

„ 10 „  82-6  660  75-7  93  2  96-5  976

„ 48 „  89-4  67-7  82-6  934  966  97-«

Similar  rcHultH  were  obtained  for  FeCl-„  but  then  the  amount  of  iodine  liberated  was
Komowhat  greater.  Similar  results  were  also  ol)tained  by  increasing  the  mass  of  FeX^
per  KI,  and  by  replacing  it  by  HI  {see  Chapter  XXI.,  Note  26).

^  If  chlorine  be  passed  through  a  strong  solution  of  {>ota8Mium  hydroxide  in  which
hydrated  ferric  oxide  is  suspended,  the  turbid  liquid  acquires  a  dark  pomegran&ie-red
colour  and  contains  i)otassium  ferrate :  lOKHO  +  Fc^Oj  +  SCL^  -=  2K^Fe04  +  6KC1  +  SH^O.
The  chlorine  must  not  be  in  excess,  otherwise  the  salt  is  again  deconii)osed,  although  the
mode  of  decomi)osition  is  unknown ;  however,  ferric  chloride  and  potassium  chlorate
are  probably  formed. Another  way  in  which  the  above- described  salt  is  formed  is  also

IRON.  COBALT. ASD  NICKEL  345

add  ROj.  It  miglit  have  been  expected  that  there  would  !«  inler-
uiediate  stages  ROj  (correaponding  to  pyrites  FeS,)  ^d  Rjtl,,  but  for
irun  these  are  unknown.'*''''  The  lower  oxide  has  n.  distinctly  Iwaie
character,  the  higher  is  feebly  acid.  The  only  one  which  is  Btalile  iu
the  free  state  is  ferric  oxide,  Fe^ttj  ;  the  euboxide,  FeO,  ahsorl*
oxygen,  and  ferric  anhydride,  Fe(J. ,  evolves  it.  It  is  also  the  same
for  other  elements  ;  the  character  of  each  is  determined  by  the  relative
degree  of  stability  of  the  known  osidea.  The  salts  FeXj  correspond
with  the  auboxJde,  the  salts  FeX,  or  Fe^X,-  with  the  senquioxide,  and
FeX|.  represents  those  of  ferric  acid,  as  its  potassium  salt  is  FeOj(OK).j,
corresponding  with  K.jSt),,  K,MnO,,  K-^CrOj,  Ac.  Iron  therefore
forms  compounds  of  the  types  FeXj,  FeX.,,  and  FeX,),  but  this  latter,
like  the  type  NX;,,  does  not  appear  separately,  but  only  when  X  re-
presents betert^eneous  elements  or  groups  ;  for  instance,  for  nitrogen
in  the  form  of  NO,(0H),  NH.Cl,  Ac,  for  iron  in  the  form  of
Fe0.j(OK)i.  But  still  the  type  FeX^  exists,  and  therefore  FeX,  and
FeX.i  are  compmnds  which,  like  amiuonia,  NH;:,  ure  capable  of  further
combinations  up  to  FeX,^ ;  this  is  also  seen  in  the  property  of
fernms  and  ferric  salts  of  forming  compounds  with  water  of  crystallisa-
tion, besides  double  and  basic  salts,  whose  stability  is  detennioed  by
the  quality  of  the  elements  include*!  in  the  types  FeX.j  and  FeX^.'*  "^
It  is  therefore  to  be  expected  that  there  should  be  complex  compounds

nfiUAftcHtile  ;  A  ({Alvanjc  cmrfint  (from  6  Grovti  elemenU)  ia  piuuufd  Lhninfph  canb-iroit
and  pUliDoni  electrodes  into  a  strong  sulntion  of  potmaium  hydroiide.  Thr  cast
irnii  electrode  is  oounetted  witli  tlie  iKnalins  po'B.  "id  tbo  platinum  electrode  i»  iinr
rnunded  bjr  a  poronB  earthenware  Cflinder-  Oiy)(eii  wouM  be  evoWed  at  the  caat-
iruu  flectrode,  but  it  is  onud  up  in  niidation,  and  a  duk  eolulion  of  potasaiiuii  ferrate  ii-
thi^refoTe  formed  about  it. It  is  reitiuluble  that  tile  cast  iron  canDot  be  replaced  by

"  ''<•  When  Maud  and  his  asiiiiitanti)  obtained  the  remarkable  volatile  compound
Xi|CO),  Ideacribed  later,  Clupter  XXU.),  it  was  shown  iDbuqaentlT  by  Mond  wid
Quincke  (lB91},>ad  lUso  bj  Barlhelot,  that  iron,  under  oertain  oonditions,  iu  &  iitream  of
cHrbouic  Diide.  alrw  volatiliaes  and  forms  a  compoand  like  that  given  by  nickel.  Rokw
iind  Suuddar  then  showed  that  when  viter  guM  i«  pauted  through  and  kept  under
pressure  (S  atmo*|Jieria)  in  iron  vessels  a  portion  of  the  iron  volntiliaes  from  tlie
sides  of  the  vessel,  and  that  when  the  gA&  is  burnt  it  deposits  a  certain  amount  of  oiddes
of  iron  (the  same  resalt  is  obtained  with  ordinary  roal  gas  which  contains  a  small  suiuuul
ol  CO).  To  obtain  the  volatile  cmnpound  ofiroH  vrith  rarbonfr  oxide.  Blond  prepared
a  flnel;  dirided  iron  by  heating  the  oialate  in  ■  gtiewu  of  hydrogen,  and  after  cooling  it
to  B0°— 15' he  passed  CO  over  the  powder.  The  iron  then  formed  (although  veryelowly)
a  volatile  componnd  contoinii^  Fe(CO)ii  <as  though  it  answered  to  a  very  high  type.
FeX,o),  which  when  cooled  condenses  into  ft  Liquid  (slightly  o^oared,  probably  owing  to
incipient  decomposition),  up.  gr.  1*47,  which  uilidiHus  at  —31°,  boilti  «t  about  108°.  and
lias  a  vapour  density  (abont  fl'S  with  reHpect  to  air)  con-Mpondiug  to  the  sboie  funuuln :
it  decomposes  at  180°.  Water  and  dilute  acids  do  not  iwt  upon  it,  but  it  deconiposea
under  the  action  of  light  and  forms  a  hard,  nun-volatile  crystalline  yellow  componod
Fb,(CO),  which  decomposes  al  SO"  and  again  fcirms  Fe(CO)).

"=  "•  When  the  molecular  Fe,Cl,  ie  produced  instead  o(  FeClj  this  comi>lit»Li<«v  ot.
the  type  also  occurs.

346  PiilXCIPLES OF CHEMl.STJiV

derived  from  ferrous  and  ferric  oxides.  Amongst  these  the  series
of  cyanogen  compounds  is  particularly  interesting  ;  their  formation
and  character  is  not  only  determined  by  the  property  which  iron
possesses  of  forming  complex  types,  but  also  by  the  similar  faculty  of
the  cyanogen  compounds,  which,  like  nitriles  (Chapter  IX.),  have
clearly  developed  properties  of  polymerisation  and  in  general  of  forming
complex  compounds.  ^^

In  the  cyanogen  compounds  of  iron^  two  degrees  might  be  expected  :
Fe(CN).2,  corresponding  with  ferrous  oxide,  and  Te(CN>3,  correspond-
ing with  ferric  oxide.  There  are  actually,  however,  many  other  known
compounds,  intermediate  and  far  more  complex.  They  correspond
with  the  double  salts  so  easily  formed  by  metallic  cyanides.  The  two
following  double  salts  are  particularly  well  known,  very  stable,  often
used,  and  easily  prepared.  Potassium /errocyanide  or  yellow  prussiate
o/])ot€Lsh,  a  double  salt  of  cyanide  of  potassium  and  ferrous  cyanide,
has  the  composition  FeC2N2,4KCN ;  its  crystals  contain  3  mol.  of  water  :
K4FeC6Ng,3H.20.  The  other  is  potassium  ferricyanide  or  red  prussiate
of  potash.  It  is  also  known  as  Gmelin^s  scUt,  and  contains  cyanide  of
potassium  with  ferric  cyanide  ;  its  composition  is  Fe(CN)3,3KCN  or
KaFeCgNg.  Its  crystals  do  not  contain  water.  It  is  obtained  from
the  first  by  the  action  of  chlorine,  which  removes  one  atom  of  the
potassium.  .  A  whole  series  of  other  ferrocyanic  compounds  correspond
with  these  ordinary  salts.

Before  treating  of  the  preparation  and  properties  of  these  two
remarkable  and  very  stable  salts,  it  must  be  observed  that  with  ordi-
nary reagents  neither  of  them  gives  the  same  dou])le  decompositions
as  the  other  ferrous  and  ferric  salts,  and  they  both  present  a  series  of
remarkable  properties.  Thus  these  salts  have  a  neutral  reaction,  are
unchangeil  by  air,  dilute  acids,  or  water,  unlike  potassium  cyanide  and
even  some  of  its  double  salts.  When  solutions  of  these  salts  are  treated
with  caustic  alkalis,  they  do  not  give  a  precipitate  of  ferrous  or  ferric
hydroxides,  neither  are  they  precipitated  by  sodium  carbonat.e.  This
led  the  earlier  investigators  to  recognise  special  independent  groupings
in  them.  The  yellow  prussiate  was  considered  to  contain  the  complex
radicle  FeC,,N^,  combined  with  potassium,  namely  with  K^,  and  K,
was  attributed  to  the  red  prussiate.  This  was  confirmed  by  the  fact
that  whilst  in  both  salts  any  other  metal,  even  hydrogen,  might  be
substituted  for  potassium,  the  iron  remained  unchangeable,  just  as
nitrogen in cyanogen,  ammonium,  and nitrates  does  not  enter  into

■^  Some  light  may  be  thrown  upon  the  faculty  of  Fe  of  forming  various  compounds  with
CN,  by  the  fact  that  Fe  not  only  combines  with  carbon  but  also  with  nitrogen.  Nitride
of  iron  Fe.^N  was  o})tainecl  by  Fowler  by  heating  finely  powdered  iron  in  a  Ktreaiii  of
NH-  at  the  temperature  of  melting  lead.

P  IfiOH,  COBALT,  AKD  NICKEL  347

KdouMe  deconijiDsitioii,  being  in  tbe  stAte  of  the  couijileK  radicles  UN,
kITHj,  NOj. Such  a  representation  is,  however,  completely  superfluous
Vior  the  explaoation  of  the  peculiarities  in  the  reactions  of  such  com-
M  fOMtide  as  double  Halts. If  a  magDesium  salt  which  can  be  precipitated
miiy  potassium  hydroxide  does  not  form  a  precipitnte  in  the  presence  of
luuitiDaiuni  chloride,  it  is  very  clear  that  it  is  nwiiig  to  the  formation
m«t  a soluble  duubli?  salt  which  is  not  dei-omposed  by  alkalis, And
■  tliere  is  no  necessity  to  aci;ount  for  the  peculiarity  of reaction  of  a
B  double  salt  by  the  formation  of  a new  complex  riidicle. In  the  same
I  way  also,  in  the  presence  of  an excess  of  tartaric  acid,  cupric  salts  do
I  not  form  a  precipitate  with  potassium  hydroxide,  l>ecause  a  double  salt
Informed. These  peculiarities  are  more  easily  understood  in  the  case
t'Ot  cyanogen  compounds  than  in  all  otiiers,  because  all  cyanogen  com-
pounds,  as unsaturated compounds, show a marked tendency to
complexity. This  tendency  is  satisfied  in  double  salts. The  .-ippear-
ance  of  a  peculiar  character  in  double cyanides  is  the more easily
understood  since  in  the  case  of  potassium  cyanide  itself,  and  also  in
hydrocyanic acid, a great many  peculiarities  have been observed
which are not  encountered in those haloid compounds, pota.saium
chloride  and  hydrochloric  acid,  with  which  it  was  usual  to  compare
cyanogen  compounds. These  peculiarities  liecome  more  comprehensible
on  comparing  cyanogen  compounds  with  amuionium  compounds. Thus
in  the  pi'esence  of  ammonia  the  reactions  of  many  compounds  change
considerably. If in addition to this it is remembei-ed that the
presence  of  many  carbon  (organic)  compounds  freijuently  complet<?ly
disturbs  the  reaction  of  salts,  the  peculiarities  of  certain  double  cyanide.**
will  appear  still  less  strange,  because  they  contain  carbon. The  fact
that  the  presence  of  cai'bon  or  another  element  in  the  compound  pro-
duces a  change  in  the  reactions,  Tuay  be compared  to  the  action  of
oxygen,  which,  when  entering  into  a  combination,  also  very  materially
changes  the  nature  of  reactions. Chlorine  is  not  detected  by  silv.;r
nitrate  when  it  is  in  the  form  of  potassium  chlorate,  KCIO^,  as  it  is
detected  in  potassium  chloride,  KOI. The  iron  in  ferrous  and  ferric
compounds  varies  in  its  reactions. In  addition  to  the  above-mentioned
facts,  consideration ought  to  be  given  to  the  circumstance  that  the
easy  mutability  of  nitric acid uudergoes  modification in its alkali
salts,  and  in  general  the  properties  of  a  salt  often  differ  much  from
those  of  the  acid. Every  double  salt  ought  to  iie  regarded  as  a  pecu-
liar kind  of  saline  compound  :  potassium  cyanide  is,  as  it  were,  a  basic,
and  ferrous  cyanide  iin  acid,  element. They  may  be  unstable  in  the
separate  state,  hut  form  a  stable  double  compound when  combined
t«.igcther  ;  the  act  of  combination  d  isengagcs  the  energy  of  the  elements.

348  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

and  they,  so  to  speak,  saturate  each  other.  Of  course,  all  this  is  not  a
definite  explanation,  but  then  the  supposition  of  a  special  complex  radicle
can  even  less  be  regarded  as  such.

Potassium  ferrocyanide,  K4FeC6N5,  is  very  easily  formed  bj  mixing
solutions  of  ferrous  sulphate  and  potassium  cyanide.  First,  a  white
precipitate  of  ferrous  cyanide,  FeCsNj,  is  formed,  which  becomes  blue
on  exposure  to  air,  but  is  soluble  in  an  excess  of  potassium  cyanide^
forming  the  ferrocyanide.  The  same  yellow  prussiate  is  obtained  on
heating  animal  nitrogenous  charcoal  or  animal  matters— such  as
horn,  leather  cuttings,  <S:c. — with  potassium  carbonate  in  iron
vessels,'^  ^^  the  mass  formed  being  afterwards  boiled  with  water  with
exposure  to  air,  potassium  cyanide  first  appearing,  which  gives  yellow
prussiate.  The  animal  charcoal  may  be  exchanged  for  wood  charcoal,
permeated  with  potassium  carbonate  and  heated  in  nitrogen  or
ammonia  ;  the  mass  thus  produced  is  then  boiled  in  water  with  ferric
oxide. ^®  In  this  manner  it  is  manufactured  on  the  large  scale,  and  is
called  *  yellow  prussiate '  ('  prussiate  de  potasse,'  Blutlaugensalz).

It  is  easy  to  substitute  other  metals  for  the  potassium  in  the  yellow
prussiate.  The  hydrogen  salt  or  hydroferrocyanic  acid,  H4FeCeNe»  is
obtained  by  mixing  strong  solutions  of  yellow  prussiate  and  hydro-
chloric acid.  If  ether  be  added  and  the  air  excluded,  the  acid  is
obtained  directly  in  the  form  of  a  white  scarcely  crystalline  precipitate
which  becomes  blue  on  exposure  to  air  (as  ferrous  cyanide  does  from  the
formation  of  blue  compounds  of  ferrous  and  ferric  cyanides,  and  it  is
on  this  account  used  in  cotton  printing).  It  is  soluble  in  water  and
alcohol,  but  not  in  ether,  has  marked  acid  properties,  and  decomposes
carbonates,  whicli  renders  it  easily  possible  to  prepare  ferrocyanides  of

^  ^'»  The  Bulphur  of  the  animal  refuse  here  forms  the  compound  FeKSg,  which
by  the  action  of  potassium  cyanide  yields  potassium  sulphide,  thiocyanate,  and  ferro-
cyanide.

*  Potassium  ferrocyanide  may  also  be  obtained  from  Prussian  blue  by  boiling  with  a
solution  of  potassium  hydroxide,  and  from  the  ferricyanide  by  the  action  of  alloJis  and
reducing  substances  (because  the  red  prussiate  is  a  product  of  oxidation  produced  by
the  action  of  chlorine :  a  ferric  salt  is  reduced  to  a  ferrous  salt),  <tc.  In  many  works
(especially  in  Gennany  and  France)  yellow  prussiate  is  prepared  from  the  mass,  con-
taining oxide  of  iron,  and  employed  for  purifying  coal  gas  (Vol.  I.,  p.  861),  which
generally  contains  cyanogen  compounds.  About  2  p.c.  of  tlie  nitrogen  contained  in  coal  is
converted  into  cyanoj^en,  which  forms  Prussian  blue  and  thiocyanates  in  the  mass  used
for  purifying  the  gas.  On  evaporation  the  solution  yields  large  yellow  crystals  containing
8  molecules  of  water,  which  is  easily  expelled  by  heating  above  100'^.  100  parts  of  water
at  the  ordinary  temperature  are  capable  of  dissolving  25  parts  of  this  salt ;  its  sp.  gr.  is
r88.  When  ignited  it  forms  potassium  cyanide  and  iron  carbide,  FeC^  (Chapter  XIII.,
Note  12).  Oxidising  sul>stances  change  it  into  potassium  ferricyanide.  With  strong
sulphuric  acid  it  gives  carbonic  oxide,  and  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  when  heated,
prussic  acid  is  evolved  according  to  the  equation:  2K4FeC6N6+ 3H.,,S04  =  K.^FejCeN^
+  8K^SO|  +  6HCN  ;  hence  in  the  yellow  prussiate  K^  replaces  Fe.

IRON.  COB.M.T. AND  HICKET.  849

the  inetAis  of  the  alkalis  and  allc&lme  earths  ;  ihesp  ure  readily  soluble.
hrtve  a  neutral  reaction,  and  resemble  the  yellow  prussiate.  Solutions
of  these  salts  form  precipitnlas  with  the  salts  of  other  metala,  because  the
ferrocyanides  of  the  heavy  luetalB  are  insoluble.  Here  either  the  whole
of  the  putassiuiu  of  the  yellow  prussiate,  or  only  a.  ■pan  of  it,  is  exchanged
for  an  equivalent  quantity  of  the  heavy  metal.  Thus,  when  a  cupric
suit  is  added  ton  solution  of  yelIowprussiat«,  a  red  precipitate  isobtaine^d
which  still  contains  half  the  potassium  of  the  yellow  prussiate  :

K,Fe06Ns+CuS04  =  KjCaFeCsNs  +  K,8O,.

But  if  the  process  be  reversed  (the  salt  of  opper  l)eing  then  in  excess)
the  whole  of  the  potassium  will  be  exchanged  for  i;<ipper,  forming  a
reddish- brown  precipitate,  Cu.jFeOfiN(;,9HaO.  This  reaction  and
those  similar  to  it  are  very  sensitive  and  may  be  used  for  detecting
metals  in  solution,  more  especially  as  the  ci>!our  of  the  precipitate
very  often  shows  a  marked  difference  when  one  metal  is  exchanged
for  another  Zinc,  cadniium,  lead,  antimony,  tin,  silver,  cuprous  and
aurou's  salts  form  w/ttf-f  precipitates ;  cupric,  uramuni,  titanium
and  molybdenum  salts  reddish-hroivn ;  those  of  nickel,  coltalt,
and  chromium,  green  precipitates  ;  with  ferrous  galtt,  ferrocyanidp
forms,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  a  xnhite  precipitate— namelv,
FejFeCaN^,  or  FeCjN,— which  tunia  blue  on  exposure  to  air,  and
with  ferric  salts  a  bhte  prfeiintnte  called  PruMiitn  blue.  Here  the
potassium  is  replaced  by  iron,  the  reaction  being  expressed  thus  r
■JFejCln  +  .'iK,FeCr.N6=  12KC!  +  F«.Fe,C|,N,g,  the  latter  formula
expressing  the  composition  of  Prussian  blue.  It  is  therefore  the
compound  4Fe(CN)a+3Fe(CN),.  The  yellow  prussiate  is  prepared  in
chemical  works  on  a  large  scale  especially  for  the  m^inufacture  of  this
blue  pigment,  which  is  us«d  for  dyeing  cloth  and  other  fabrics  anil
also  as  one  of  the  ordinary  blue  paints.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  nnd
the  stuffs  are  therefore  dyed  by  first  soaking  them  in  a  solution  of  a
terrii'  salt  and  then  in  a  solution  of  yellow  prussiate.  If  however
jin  excess  of  yellow  prussiat«  l>e  present  complete  substitution  between
potassium  and  iron  does  not  occur,  and  niJitble  Pnumian  /ilrie  is
formed;  KFe,(CN),,=  KC'N,Fe(CN};,Fe(CN),,.  This  blue  salt  is
colloidal,  is  soluble  in  pure  water,  but  insoluble  and  precipitateil
when  other  salts— for  instance,  potassium  or  sodium  cliloride  — are
present  eyen  in  small  quantities,  and  is  thnrefore  first  obtained  as  a
precipitate."

n>  Sknap  <>litaiiH<d  Uiix  •dl both  Irnm  putii4>ium  rerrocyanide  wiUi  ferric  clilorliiu

350  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Potassium  ferricyanide.  or  red  prusHiaU  of  potash,  KgFeCgN^;,  is
called  *Gmelin*s  salt,'  because  this  savant  obtained  it  by  the  action
of  chlorine  on  a  solution  of  the  yellow  prussiate  :  K4FeC6Ng  +  Cl
=  KgFeCfjNjj -f  KCl.  The  reaction  is  due  to  the  ferrous  salt  being
changed  by  the  action  of  the  chlorine  into  a  ferric  salt.  It  separates
from  solutions  in  anhydrous,  well-formed  prisms  of  a  red  colour,  but
the  solution  has  an  olive  colour  ;  100  parts  of  water,  at  10**,  dis-
solve 37  parts  of  the  salt,  and  at  100°,  78  parts.'^  The  red  prus-
siate gives  a  blue  precipitate  with  ferrous  salts,  called  TumhulVs  blue^
very  much  like  Prussian  blue  (and  the  soluble  variety),  because  it  also
contains  ferrous  cyanide  and  ferric  cyanide,  although  in  another  propor-

in  both  the  ferric  and  ferrous  HtateH. With  ferrous  chloride  it  forms  Prussian  blue,  and
with  ferric  chloride  Turnbull's  blue.

Prussian  blue  was  discovered  in  the  beginning  of  the  last  century  by  a  Berlin
manufacturer,  Diesbach.  It  was  then  prepared,  as  it  sometimes  is  also  at  pi^seni,
directly  from  potassium  cyanide  obtained  by  heating  animal  charcoal  with  potai^ftiiiiii
carbonate.  The  mauH  thuB  obtained  is  dissolved  in  water,  alum  is  added  to  the
solution  in  order  to  saturate  the  free  alkali,  and  then  a  solution  of  green  vitriol  is  added
which  has  previously  been  sufficiently  exposed  to  the  air  to  contain  both  fenic  and
ferrous  salts.  If  the  solution  of  potassium  cyanide  be  mixed  with  a  solution  containing
both  salts,  Prussian  blue  will  be  formed,  because  it  is  a  compound  of  ferroos  cyanide,
FeC.jN.2,  and  ferric  cyanide,  Fe.jC,;N,}.  A  ferric  salt  with  potassium  ferrocyanide  forma
a  blue  colour,  because  ferrous  cyanide  is  obtained  from  the  first  salt  and  ferric  cyanide
from  the  second.  During  the  preparation  of  this  compound  alkali  must  be  avoided,  aa
otherwise  the  precipitate  would  contain  oxides  of  iron.  Prussian  blue  has  not  a  crystal-
line structure  ;  it  forms  a  blue  mass  with  a  copper-red  metallic  lustre.  Both  acids  and
alkalis  act  on  it.  The  action  is  at  first  confined  to  the  ferric  salt  it  contains.  Thus
alkalis  form  ferric  oxide  and  ferrocyanide  in  solution:  '2Fe.2C,iN^,8FeC2N.2+12KHO
=  2(Fe<20-,3H...O)  +  }iK,FeC,;N,;  Various  ferrocyanides  may  thus  be  prepared.  Prussian
blue  is  s(»luble  in  an  acjueous  solution  of  oxalic  acid,  forming  blue  ink.  In  air,  when
exposed  to  >  the  action  of  light,  it  fades ;  but  in  the  dark  again  absorbs  oxygen  and
becomes  bhie,  which  fact  is  also  sometimes  noticed  in  blue  cloth.  An  excess  of  potassinm
ferrocyanide  renders  Prussian  blue  soluble  in  water,  although  insoluble  in  various  saline
solutions — that  is,  it  converts  it  into  the  soluble  variety.  Strong  hydrochloric  acid  also
dissolves  Prussian  blue.

''^^  An  excess  of  chlorine  must  not  be  employed  in  pivj)aring  this  comiwund,  otherwise
the  reaction  goes  further.  It  is  easy  to  find  out  when  the  action  of  the  chlorine  on  potassium
ferrocyanide  must  cease  ;  it  is  only  necessary  to  take  a  sample  of  the  liquid  and  add  a
solution  of  11  ferric  salt  to  it.  If  a  prpcipitate  of  Prussian  blue  is  formed,  more  chlorine
must  l>e  added,  as  there  is  still  some  undecom])OHed  ferrocyanide,  for  the  ferricyanide
dr>e8  not  give  a  i)recipitate  with  ferric  salts.  Potassinni  ferricyanide,  like  the  ferro-
cyanide, easily  exchanges  its  potassium  for  hydrogen  and  various  metals  by  double
decomposition.  With  the  salts  of  tin,  silver,  and  mercury  it  forms  yellow  precipitates,
and  with  those  of  uranium,  nickel,  cobalt,  copper,  and  bismuth  brown  precipitates.  The
lead  salt  under  the  action  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  forms  lead  sulphide  and  a  hydrogen
salt  or  acid,  H.-FeC„N,;,  corresponding  with  iH)tassium  ferricyanide,  which  is  soluble,
crystallises  in  red  needles,  and  resembles  hydroferrocyanic  acid,  II,FeC,}N,3.  Under  the
action  of  reducing  agents — for  instance,  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  coi)per — potassium  ferri-
cyanide is  changed  into  ferrocyanide,  esjjccially  in  the  presence  of  alkalis,  and  thus  fomiK
a  rathtr  energetic  oxidisimj  agent — capable, for  instance,  of  changing  manganous  oxide
into  dioxide,  bleaching  tissues,  Arc.

IRON.  COBALT.  AND  NICKEL  851

I,  l)«ting  formed  According  to  the  equ.itiou  :  3FeCi.,  +  2K3FeC,,N,,
=6KCt  +  Fe,,FL.,C,aN,j,  or  Sl'eCjN^.FeaCBNB  ;  in  Prussian  l.lue  we
have  FejCy,,,,  and  here  FesCy^^.  A  ferric  salt  ought  to  fonn  ferrio
cyanide  FejC,;N,,,  with  red  prussiate,  but  ferric  cyanide  is  isoluble,
and  therefore  no  precipitate  ib  obtained,  and  the  liquid  only  becomes

If  chlorine  aiid  sudiuui  are  representatives  of  independent  groups
of  elements,  the  same  may  also  be  said  of  iron.  Its  nearest  ana-
logues show,  besides  a  similni'ity  in  character,  a.  likeness  as  regards
physical  properties  and  a  proximity  in  at«niio  weight.  Iron  occupies  a
medium  position  amongst  its  nearest  analogues,  both  with  respect  to
properties  und  faculty  of  forming  saline  oxides,  and  also  as  regaids
utomiu  weight. On  tlie  one  hand,  cobalt,  58,  and  nickel,  69,  approocli

I'  II  [■  importAiit  to  menlion  a  wrieH  a(  revlily  nrystBlliHiiible  nnita  formed  by  the
Bttion  ol  nitric  uid  on  potaflaiiun  and  otlier  ferrocynuiiles  and  ferricyftiiidei.  Theae
ult  contuD  the  elements  ol  nitric  otide,  and  are  therefore  called  ni(ro-(nifrofiil
frrriegattidei  {nilropruiiideii.  Generally  a  crystalline  aodiiini  salt  ii  obtaiixed.
NitjFeC,NaO,SH,0.  In  iti  composition  tbiB  wit  differs  frotn  the  red  sodium  salt,
NajFeCJtg,  by  the  (act  that  in  it  oDe  molecule  o(  aodiuin  cyanide.  NaCN,  i«  replaced  by
nitric  oiide.  KO,  In  order  to  prepare  it.  potaasium  forrocyanide  in  powder  in  mixed
with  five-eeventhh  o(  its  weight  of  nitric  (toid  diluted  with  an  equal  volnnie  ol  wat«r.
The  mixtore  is  at  firnt  left  at  t<ie  ordinary  temperature,  and  then  heated  on  a
water-bath.  Here  ferricyanide  in  first  of  all  formed  (as  ahownbythe  liquid  (pving  A
prwipilalewith  terrouH  chloride^  wUiuh  ttien  dieapiwaro  lua  jirecipitalc  with  ferroua
rbliiride).  and  formn  a  grfen  precipituile.  Tliv  liquid,  wben  cooled,  depoiita  cryHUl*
of  nitre.  The  lic|nid  is  then  straineil  oO  nnd  miied  with  iwdiani  carbonale,  boiled,
filtered,  and  evaporated ;  tmdium  nitrate  and  the  salt  described  are  depoailed  in  crfstala.
It  aeparates  in  priamB  of  a  red  colour.  Alkalis  and  salts  of  the  alkaline  catlhn  do  not
niTe  preoipitales :  they  are  Boluble,  but  the  sails  of  iron,  line,  copper,  and  silwr  form
prei^pitalea  where  aodinm  ie  ex(hani;ed  with  these  metala.  It  ia  remarkable  thai  the
■ulphidea  of  the  alkali  tuelalH  give  with  this  salt  an  intense  bright  purple  coloration.
Thia  aeriea  of  compauudit  wax  diacovtred  hj  Gtnflin  and  studied  by  Playfair  and  otliers
(IHia).

This  Mriea  to  a  certain  eilent  KHembles  the  uitro-sulphide  series  descrilied  by
Rousain.  Here  tlie  primary  compound  ivnaists  of  black  orj'Blals,  which  are  obtAined  a«
follows: — Solutions  of  ]>otaasiuni  hydrotinlphide  and  nitrate  are  mined,  and  the  miiturt^
is  agitated  whilst  ferriir  chloride  is  added,  then  Imiled  and  fllt«red ;  on  cooling.  blaA-
rnjilalt  am  deposited.  haTing  the  composition  Fb„8i  (NO)u„H.jO  (Bqaeuberg).  or,  accord-
ing to  Darnel,  FeNO„NH,S.  They  have  a  slightly  metallic  Insbre.  and  are  soluble  in
water,  alcohol,  and  ethfr.  Thej  abwrh  the-  latter  as  easily  as  calcium  chloride  abaorbs
water.  In  the  pretenc*  of  alkalis  Uiese  ciyalals  remain  nnchanged,  but  with  acids  tliey
evolre  nilrio  oiides.  There  ore  eereral  compounds  which  are  capable  of  interchanging,.
and  correspond  with  Rouasin's  salt.  Here  we  enter  into  tbv  series  of  the  nitrouen
componnda  whieli  have  been  a«  yet  but  little  investigated,  and  will  most  probably  in
time  form  moat  iuatiDCtive  material  for  tbndying  the  naturu  of  that  element.  These
series  ol  compounds  are  a*  unlike  the  usual  saline  compounds  ol  inorganic  chemiktry  im
are  organic  hydnicarhoni.  There  is  noneceiMity  to  describe  tliese  series  in  detail,  because
their  couneetiou  with  othei  compounds  ia  mit  yet  clear,  and they  hare  not  yet  any

852  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

iron,  56  ;  they  are  metals  of  a  more  basic  character,  they  do  uot  form
stable  acids  or  higher  degrees  of  oxidation,  and  are  a  transition  to
copper,  63,  and  zinc,  65.  On  the  other  hand,  manganese,  55,  an«l
chromium,  52,  are  the  nearest  to  iron  ;  they  form  both  basic  and  acid
oxides,  and  are  a  transition  to  the  metals  possessing  acid  properties.
In  addition  to  having  atomic  weights  approximately  alike,  chromiani,
manganese,  iron,  cobalt,  nickel,  and  copper  have  also  nearly  the  same
specific  gravity,  so  that  the  atomic  volumes  and  the  molecules  of  their
analogous  compounds  are  also  near  to  one  another  (see  table  at  the
beginning  of  this  volume).  Besides  this,  the  likeness  between  the
above-mentioned  elements  is  also  seen  from  the  following  :

They  form  suboxides,  RO,  fairly  energetic  bases,  isomorphoos  with
magnesia— for  instance,  the  salt  RS04,7H20,  akin  to  MgSO^^THjO,
and  FeS04,7H.20,  or  to  sulphates  containing  less  water;  with  alkali
sulphates  all  form  double  salts  crystallising  with  6H2O  ;  all  are  capable
of  forming  ammonium  salts,  &c. The  lower  oxides, in  the  cases  of
nickel  and  cobalt,  are  tolerably  stable,  are  not  easily  oxidised  (the
nickel compound with more  difficulty  than cobalt,  a  transition to
copper)  ; with manganese,  and especially  with  chromium,  they  ar«
more easily oxidised than  with iron and pass into  higher  oxides.
They also  form  oxides of  the  form  R2O3,  and  with  nickel,  cobalt,
and  manganese  this  oxide  is  very  unstable,  and  is  more  easily  reduced
than  ferric  oxide  ;  but,  in  the  case  of  chromium,  it  is  very  stable,  and
forms  the  ordinary  kind  of  salts. It  is  isomorphous  with  ferric  oxide,
forms  alums,  is  a  feeble  base,  &c. Chromium,  manganese,  andiron  are
oxidised  by  alkali  and  oxidising  agents,  forming  salts  like  NagSO^  ;
but  cobalt  and  nickel  are  difficult  to  oxidise  ;  their  acids  are  not  known
with  any  certainty,  and  are,  in  all  probability,  still  less  stable  than  the
ferrates. Cr,Mn  and  Fe  form  compounds  R^Cl,;  which  are  like  Fe^Clj
in  many  respects ;  in  Co  this  faculty  is  weaker  and  in  Ni  it  has  almost
disappeared. The  cyanogen  compounds,  especially  of  manganese  and
cobalt,  are  very  near  akin  to  the  corresponding  ferrocyanides. The
oxides  of  nickel  and  cobalt  are  more  easily  reduced  to  metal  than  those
of  iron,  but  those  of manganese  and  chromium are  not  reduced so
easily  as  iron,  and  the  metals  themselves  are  not  easily  obtained  in  a
pure  state  ;  they  are  capable  of  forming  varieties  resembling  cast  iron.
The  metals  Cr,Mn,Fft,Co,  and  Ni  have  a  grey  iron  colour  and  are  very
difficult  to  melt,  but  nickel  and  cobalt  can  be  melted  in  the  reverbera-
tory  furnace  and are  nsoie  fusible  than  iron,  whilst chromium  is  more
ditficult  to melt  than platinum  (Deville). These  metals decompose
wiiter,  but  with  greater  difficulty  as  the  atomic  weight  rises,  forming  a
transition  to  copper,  which  does  not  decompose  water. All the  com-

IRON.  COBALT, AND  NICKEL

pouuda  of  tlie&e  metals  have  various  colours,  which  are  soiuetiniea  very
bright,  especially  in  the  higher  stages  of  oxidation.

These  metala  of  the  iron  group  are  often  met  with  together  in
nature.  Mangaaese  nearly  everywhere  accompanies  iruD,  and  iron  is
always  an  ijigredient  in  the  ores  of  manganeae.  Chroroinin  is  found
principally  as  chrome  ironstone — that  is,  a  peculiar  kind  of  magnetic
oxide  in  which  FcjOj  is  replaced  by  Cr^Oj,

Nickel  and  cobalt  are  as  inseparable  companions  as  iron  and
manga tiese.  The  similarity  between  tliem  even  extends  to  such
remote  projierties  as  inaguetic  qualities.  In  this  series  of  luetals  we
tind  those  which  are  the  most  magnetic  :  iron,  coiialt,  and  nickel.
There  is  even  a  magnetic  oxide  among  the  chromium  compounds,  such
being  unknown  in  the  other  series.  Nickel  easily  liecomes  passive  in
strong  nitric  acid.  It  absorbs  hydrogen  in  just  the  same  way  as  iron.
Tu  short,  in  the  series  Cr,  Mn,  Fe,  Co,  and  Ni,  tliere  are  many  points
in  common  although  there  are  many  differences,  as  will  be  seen  still
more  clearly  on  becoming  acquainted  with  cobalt  and  nickel.

In  nature  eohall  is  principally  found  in  combiuatiou  with  arsenic
and  sulphur.  Cobalt  arsenide,  or  viAalt  ejieiw,  CoAs,,  is  found  in
brilliant  crystals  of  the  regular  system,  principally  in  Saxony.  Cxhalt
glance,  CoAb,CoS„  I'esembles  it  very  much,  and  also  belongs  to  the
regular  system  ;  it  is  found  in  SwtHlen,  Norway,  and  the  Caucasus.
Kupfemiekel  is  a  nickel  ore  in  combination  with  arsenic,  but  of  a
different  composition  from  cobalt  arsenide,  having  the  formula  NiAs  ;
it  is  found  in  Bohemia  and  Saxony.  It  has  a  copper-red  colour  and  is
rarely  crystalline;  it  is  so  called  because  the  miners  of  Saxony  first
mistook  it  for  an  ore  of  copper  (Kup/er),  but  were  unaltle  to  extract
cupper  from  it.  iVicfc?  glance,  NiS^,NiAsj,  corresponding  with  cobalt
glance,  is  also  known.  Nickel  accompanies  the  ores  of  cobalt  and
cobalt  those  of  nickel,  so  that  both  metals  are  found  together.  The
ores  of  cobalt  are  worked  in  the  Caucasus  in  the  Government  of
Elizavetopulslt.  Nickel  ores  containing  aqueous  bydratecl  nickel  silicate
are  found  in  the  Ural  (Revdausk).  Large  quantities  of  a  similar  ore
are  exported  into  Europe  from  New  Caledonia.  Both  ores  contain
about  12  per  cent.  Ni.  aarnierUe,  <RO)5(SiO^)4UHjO,  where  R=Ni
and  Mg,  predominates  in  the  New  Caledonian  ore.  Large  deposits  of
nickel  have  been  discovered  in  Canada,  where  the  ore  (as  nickelous
pyrites)  is  free  from  arsenic.  Cobalt  is  principally  worked  up  into
cobalt  compounds,  hut  nickel  is  generally  reduced  to  the  metallic  state,  in
which  it  is  now  oft«n  used  for  alloys  -for  instance,  for  coinage  in  many
European  States,  and  for  plating  other  metals,  because  it  does  not
oxidise. Cobalt  arsenide  and  cobalt  glance  are  principally  used  for  the

854  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

preparation  of  c()])alt  compounds  ;  they  are  first  sorted  by  discarding
the  rocky  matter,  and  then  roasted.  During  this  process  most  of  the
sulphur  and  arsenic  disappears  ;  the  arsenious  anhydride  volatilises
with  the  sulphurous  anhydride  and  the  metal  also  oxidises.'*  It  is  a
simple  matter  to  obtain  nickel  and  cobalt  from  their  oxides.  In  order
to  obtain  the  latter,  solutions  of  their  salts  are  treated  with  sodium

^  The  residue  from  the  roasting  of  cobalt  ores  is  called  zafflor^  and  is  often  met  with
in  commerce.  From  this  the  purer  compounds  of  cobalt  may  be  prepared.  The  ores  of
nickel  are  also  first  roasted,  and  the  oxides  dissolved  in  acid,  nickelous  salts  being  then
obtained.

The  further  treatment  of  cobalt  and  nickel  ores  is  facilitated  if  the  arsenic  can  be
almost  entirely  removed,  which  may  be  effected  by  roasting  the  ore  a  second  time  vriUia
small  addition  of  nitre  and  sodium  carbonate  ;  the  nitre  combines  with  the  arsenic,
forming  an  arsenious  salt,  which  may  be  extracted  with  water.  The  remaining  mass  is
dissolved  in  hydrochloric  acid,  mixed  with  a  small  quantity  of  nitric  acid.  Copper,  iron,
manganese,  nickel,  cobalt,  t&c,  pass  into  solution.  By  passing  hydrogen  sulphide
through  the  solution,  copper,  bismuth,  lead,  and  arsenic  are  deposited  as  metallic  sul-
phides ;  but  iron,  cobalt,  nickel,  and  manganese  remain  in  solution.  If  an  alkaline  eola-
tion of  bleaching  powder  be  then  added  to  the  remaining  solution,  the  whole  of  the
manganese  will  first  be  deposited  in  the  form  of  dioxide,  then  the  cobalt  as  hydrated
cobaltic  oxide,  and  finally  the  nickel  also.  It  is,  however,  impossible  to  rely  on  this
method  for  effecting  a  complete  separation,  the  more  so  since  the  higher  oxides  of  the
three  above-mentioned  metals  have  all  a  black  colour ;  but,  after  a  few  trials,  it  will  be
easy  to  find  how  much  bleaching  powder  is  required  to  precipitate  the  manganese,  and
the  amotmt  which  will  precipitate  all  the  cobalt.  The  manganese  may  also  be  separated
from  cobalt  by  precipitation  from  a  mixture  of  the  solutions  of  both  metals  (in  the  form  of
the  '  ous '  salts)  with  ammonium  sulphide,  and  then  treating  the  precipitate  with  acetic
acid  or  dilute  hydrochloric  acid,  in  which  manganese  sulphide  is  easily  soluble  and  cobalt
sulphide  almost  insoluble.  Further  particulars  relating  to  the  separation  of  cobalt  from
nickel  may  be  found  in  treatises  on  analytical  chemistry.  In  practice  it  is  usual  to  rely  on
the  rough  method  of  Hex)aration  founded  on  the  fact  that  nickel  is  more  easily  reduced  and
more  difficult  to  oxidise  than  cobalt.  The  New  Caledonian  ore  is  smelted  with  CaSO^
and  CaCOj  on  coke,  and  a  metallic  regulus  is  obtained  containing  all  the  Ni,  Fe,  and  S.
This  is  roasted  with  SiO.^,  which  converts  all  the  iron  into  slag,  whilst  the  Ni  remains
combined  with  the  S  ;  this  residue  on  further  roasting  gives  NiO,  which  is  reduced  by  the
carbon  to  metallic  Ni.  Tlie  Canadian  ore  (a  pjTites  containing  11  p.  c.  Ni)  is  frequently
treated  in  America  (after  a  preliminary  dressing)  by  smelting  it  with  Na<iS04  and
charcoal ;  the  resultant  fusible  Na.,,S  then  dissolves  the  CuS  and  FeS.j,  while  the  NiS  i»
obtained  in  a  bottom  layer  (Bartlott  and  Thomson's  process)  from  wliich  Ni  is  obtained
in  the  manner  described  above.

For  manufacturing  puri)oses  somewhat  impure  cobalt  compounds  are  frequently  used,
which  are  converted  into  smalt.  This  is  glass  containing  a  certain  amount  of  cobalt
oxide  ;  the  glass  acquires  a  bright  blue  colour  from  this  addition,  so  that  when  powdered
it  may  be  used  as  a  blue  pigment;  it  is  also  unaltered  at  high  temperatures,  so
that  it  used  to  take  the  place  now  occupied  by  Prussian  blue,  ultramarine,  &c.  At
present  smalt  is  almost  exclusively  used  for  colouring  glass  and  china.  To  prepare
smalt,  ordinary  impure  cobalt  ore  (zaffre)  is  fused  in  a  crucible  with  quartz  and  potassium
carbonate.  A  fused  mass  of  cobalt  glass  is  thus  formed,  containing  silica,  cobalt  oxide,
and  i)otassium  oxide,  and  a  metallic  mass  remains  at  the  l>ottom  of  the  crucible,  con-
taining almost  all  the  other  metals,  arsenic,  nickel,  copper,  silver,  «S:c.  This  metallic
mass  is  called  aprisn,  and  is  used  as  nickel  ore  for  the  extraction  of  nickel.  Smalt  usually
contains  70  p.c  of  silica,  '20  p.c.  of  potash  and  soda,  and  about  5  to  6  p.c.  of  cobaltous
oxide ;  the  remainder  consisting  of  other  metallic  oxides.

1H05.  COBALT, AND  NICKEL  355

carbitnate  and  tlie  precipitated  carbonates  are  heat«d  ;  the  aulioxidea
are  thuii  obtained,  and  these  latter  nre  reduced  in  a.  streuui  of
liydrogen,  or  even  by  heating  with  ammoniuDi  chloride.  They  easily
oxidise  when  in  the  state  of  powder.  When  the  chlorides  of  nickel
and  cobalt  are  heated  iu  a  stream  of  hydrogen,  the  nietal  is  deposited
in  brilliant  scales.  JVickel  i»  alwayii  mwJi  itwre  emtiSy  ami  i/niciJif
redoced  than  rohnlt.  Nickel  melts  more  easily  than  cobalt,  and  this
even  furnishes  a  means  ui  testing  the  heating  powers  of  a  reverberatoiy
fuinace.  Cobalt  fuses  at  a  temperature  only  a  little  lower  than  that
at  which  iron  dees.  In  gener.il,  colialt  is  nearer  to  iron  than  nickel,
nickel  being  nearer  to  cnpper.^^^''  Both  nickel  and  colwlt  have  mag-
netic properties  like  iron,  but  Co  is  less  magnetic  than  Fe,  and  Ni  still
less  so.  The  specific  gravity  of  nickel  reduced  by  Lydrogeu  ii  d'l  and
that  of  cobalt  !?'9.  Fused  cobalt  has  a  specific  gravity  of  8-5,  the
density  of  ordinary  nickel  being  aluii  ist  the  same.  Nickel  has  a  greyish
silvery-white  colour  ;  it  is  brilliant  and  very  ductile,  so  that  the  finest
wire  may  be  easily  drawn  from  it.  This  wire  has  a  resistance  to
tension  equal  to  iron  wire.  The  Iteautiful  colour  of  nickel,  and  the
high  polish  which  it  is  capable  of  receiving  and  retaining,  aa  it  does
not  oxidise,  render  it  a  useful  metal  for  ranny  purposes,  and  in
many  ways  it  resembles  silver.'^  "^ It  is  now  very  common  to  cover

"''<•  All  we  know  renpecling  the  ralationa  at  Co  aad  Ni  to  Fi-  and  Cn  canlirm^  the
fACl  tlwl  Co  u  more  cbaclr  related  to  Fe  and  Ni  lo  Cu  ;  uid  u  the  utomic  weight  i>l
Fe  —  SO  lUid  of  Co  -  63,  then  KCordiDg  Co  the  principles  ol  the  periodic  ajstem  it  woahl
be  expected  Chat  the  utoiiiie  weight  of  Co  would  be  aboat  GD^eO,  whiUt  Ihut  ol  Ki  Bhoald
be  grenter  than  that  oF  Co  bat  leas  tliao  that  of  Co,  i.'.  about  eU-S-HOG,  Bowerer,  an
yet  the  utajority  ol  the  determiiutionB  of  the  atomic  weighU  of  Co  uid  Ni  give  a
different  remilt  anil  show  that  a  lower  atomic  weight  is  obtained  for  Ni  than  lor  Cii.
Thaa  K.  Winkler  1 18M)  obtained  (employing  metals  deposited  electrolytically  and  deter-
mining the  uaiiDUt  of  iodine  which  combined  with  t^em)  Ni  ^  SS'TU  and  Co  ^  5U'3T  (if
H  -  1  and  t  =  laS'M).  In  inj  opinion  thia  ehonld  not  be  regarded  as  proving  that  the
prineiples  ol  the  periodic  ayatem  cannot  be  applied  in  this  instance,  cor  aa  a  raaeoD  lor
allering  the  position  ol  these  elements  in  tbc  system  (i,r^.  by  placing  Ki  alter  Fe.and  Co
ncil  to  Co),  be>:aiiM  in  the  lint  plaoe  the  Rftores  given  by  dtAerentdiemiEts  (for  iaHtance,
Zimmernuiin.  KfUbb,  and  others)  on  somewhat  divergent,  and  in  the  second  plaon  the
majority  of  the  latest  modes  ol  determining  the  atemic  weightu  of  Co  mid  Ni  aim  kt
finding  wliat  weights  nl  these  metals  react  with  known  weights  ol  other  elements  without
tiLking  into  aoconot  the  lacnlty  they  liave  ol  absorbing  hydrogen  ;  *inoe  this  faculty  is
mot*  developed  in  Ni  than  in  Co  the  iiydrogen  loculnded  in  Nil  should  lower  the  atomic
weight  of  Ni  more  than  that  of  Co.  On  the  whole,  tlie  [|ueBticm  of  the  ahimic
weights  of  Co  and  Ni  cannot  yet  be  considered  as  decided,  notwithstanding  the
nniaeroasrewarohetwhich  hare  been  mode:  still  there  can  be  uo  donbt  that  the  alomic
weights  of  tbeae  two  metals  are  VB17  Dearly  equal,  and  greater  Uuui  tliat  of  Fe.  but  lena
thou  that  of  Cn.  This  question  is  of  great  interest,  not  only  tor  completinij  iiUr  know-
ledge of  these  metals,  but  also  for  perfecting  our  knowledge  of  tl^e  periodic  system  of  the

"*"  For  instance,  the  alkalis  may  be  fused  iu  nickel  vessels  ss  well  as  in  lilrer,
because  they  hare  no  action  nponeithur  metal. Nickel,  like  silver,  it  not  nc'ed  npan  by

356  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

other  metals  with  a  layer  of  nickel  (nickel  plating).  This  is  done  by  a
process  of  electro -plating,  using  a  solution  of  a  nickel  salt.  The
colour  of  cobalt  is  dark  and  redder  ;  it  is  also  ductile,  and  has  a
greater  tensile  resistance  than  iron.  Dilute  acids  act  very  slowly  on
nickel  and  cobalt  ;  nitric  acid  may  be  considered  as  the  best  solvent
for  them.  The  solutions  in  every  case  contain  salts  corresponding  with
the  ferrous  salts — that  is,  the  salts  CoXj,  NiXj,  correspond  with  the
suboxides  of  these  metals.  These  salts  in  their  types  are  similar  to  the
magnesium  salts.  The  salts  of  nickel  when  crystallising  with  water
have  a  green  colour,  and  form  bright  green  solutions,  but  in  the  anhy-
drous state  they  most  frequently  have  a  yellow  colour.  The  salts  of
cobalt  are  generally  rose-coloured,  and  generally  blue  when  in  the
anhydrous  state.  Their  aqueous  solutions  are  rose-coloured.  Cobaltous
chloride  is  easily  soluble  in  alcohol,  and  forms  a  solution  of  an  intense
blue  colour.^^

dilute  acids.  Only  nitric  acid  dissolves  both  metals  well.  Nickel  is  harder,  Bnd  fuses  at
a  higher  temperature  than  silver.  For  castings,  a  small  quantity  of  magnesiam  (0*001
part  by  weight)  is  added  to  nickel  to  render  it  more  homogeneous  (just  as  almniniiun  is
added  to  steel).  Nickel  forms  many  valuable  alloys.  Steel  containing  8  p.c.  Ni  is  par-
ticularly valuable,  its  limit  of  elasticity  is  higher  and  its  hardness  is  greater ;  it  is  used
for  armour  plate  and  other  large  pieces.  The  alloys  of  nickel,  especially  with  copper  and
zinc  (melchior,  see  later),  aluminium  and  silver,  although  used  in  certain  cases,  are  now
replaced  by  nickel-plated  or  nickel-deposited  goods  (deposited  by  electricity  from  a
solution  of  the  ammonium  salts).

•^•^  Tlie  change  of  colour  is  dei)endeut  in  all  probability  on  the  combination  with
water,  or  according  to  others  ou  polymeric  transformation.  It  enables  a  solution  of
cobalt  chloride  to  be  used  as  sympathetic  ink.  If  something  be  written  with  cobalt
chloride  on  white  paper,  it  will  be  invisible  on  aocountof  the  feeble  colour  of  the  solution,
and  when  drj'  nothing  can  be  distinguished.  If,  however,  the  paper  be  heated  before  the
fire,  the  rose-coloured  salt  will  be  changed  into  a  less  hydrous  blue  salt,  and  the  writing
will  become  quite  visible,  but  fade  away  when  cool.

The  cliange  of  colour  which  takes  place  in  solutions  of  CoCl.^  under  the  influence  not
only  of  solution  in  water  or  alcohol,  but  also  of  a  change  of  temperature,  is  a  character-
istic of  all  the  halogen  salts  of  cobalt.  Crystalline  iodide  of  cobalt,  C0I26H2O,  gives  a
dark  red  solution  between  —  22'  'and  -f  20^  ;  above  -I-  20'^  the  solution  turns  brown  and
passes  from  olive  to  green,  from  -  35^  to  H20^  the  solution  remains  green.  According  to
Etard  the  change  of  colour  is  due  to  the  fact  that  at  first  the  solution  contains  the
hydrate  CoI.^HoO,  and  that  above  85^  it  contains  CoIoiHoO.  These  hydrates  can  be
crystallised  from  the  solutions;  the  fonner  at  (.rdinary  temperature  and  the  latter  ou
heating  the  solution.  The  intermediate  olive  colour  of  the  solutions  corresponds  to  the
incipient  decomimsition  of  the  hexahydrated  salt  and  its  passage  into  C0I24H2O.  A
solution  of  the  hexahydrated  chloride  of  cobalt,  C'oCl,.(iH.jO,  is  rose-coloured  between
-  22-  and  -  2r>^  ;  but  the  colour  changes  starting  fiom  -^25",  and  passes  through  all
the  tint>  bttween  red  and  blue  right  up  to  50  ;  a  true  blue  solution  is  only  obtained
;it  55  and  remains  u[>  to  800^.  This  true  blue  solution  contains  another  hydrate,
CoCl.2H,>().

The  dependence  between  the  solubility  of  the  iodide  and  chloride  of  cobalt  and
the  tenii  erature  is  expressed  by  two  almost  straight  lines  corresj  onding  to  the  hexa-
and  di-hydrat!'s ;  the  passage  of  the  one  into  the  other  hydrate  being  expressed  by  a
cur\'e. The  same  character  of iihenomena  is  seen  also  in  the  variation  of  the  vuponr

IRON. COBALT, AND  NICKEL  i357

If  a  solutioji  uf  potussiuiu  hydroxide  l)e  added  to  a  solution  of  a
cobalt  salt,  a  hluu  precipitate  of  the  bafiic  sHlt  will  be  formed. If  a

lenaiou  ol  Bolutions  o(  chloriila  ot  colislt  with  llic  l«ui[iariitnre.  We  linva  rejiaalsdlj
Hen  Ihnt  wiQeauB  wlutiouB  (tor  iustmice,  Cluiiter  XXII.,  Nute  1&  lor  FajCI,)  dopoait
diflereDl  FrysMlla-hjdnibeB  kb  diffenint  temiumtnms  Mid  tlinl  Uie  undaal  <>t  mMa
in  tlie  hyilntf  dearuuea  u  tlw  temjioiuture  f  Hmh,  ho  tbtl  it  ■«  not  ■arii'i^t!  tl>*t
CoCl,lHgO  |ar  acuording  tci  PotilitEin  CoCI.,H,OI  nbonlil  Wfnrnle  nuL  hIwiij  Si'  and
CoCliBHiO  At  95^  uid  beloT.  Nor  i»  it  t-tiwptiunitl  tluti  tlie  i^lmir  oF  «  Halt  vuiea
■ccording  ms  it  cootiiiiis  diflerent  uaounts  of  B^O.  Bn(  in  Uiis  inBUuoe  il  U  cluraoler-
ialic  tiiBit  the  chuiKe  ol  eolonr  takes  ]i]iua  iu  sotilliiiu  in  tbe  presence  of  ui  exc«H  of
water.  This  apparentlj  ahoWB  that  the  actual  solution  ma;  contain  either  CoCI^SHjO  or
CoCljaH„0.  And  oa  we  know  tliat  a  »tntion  maj  Doatuin  both  meMphoiiphuriu  PHOi
and  orthophoaphurio  acid  H]PO,  ^  HPOj+HgO,  aa  well  aa  certain  uUier  aab;dride«,
the  qneatioQ  of  the  stale  ot  aabntanCHa  in  ouIutionnbecomeB  still  mure  coraplicnled.

Nickel  HUlphate  cryiilaltliit^  Irom  nential  aolatiooa  at  a  leDipeiatara  of  from  IS"  XoUP
in  rhombie  ciyBtalH  containing  7H]0.  Ita  form  appiCMwhea  verr  closely  to  that  of  the
■alts  ot  tine  and  mseneBinm.  The  planes  ol  u  vertical  prism  lor  msfpiesiam  aaltx  ate
incliucd  at  an  angle  of  90°  30'.  for  zinc  «alts  at  an  angle  of  Dl^  T',  and  lor  nickel  salts  at
au  an);le  ot  01°  10'.  Such  is  also  the  form  of  the  zinc  and  magncBiatn  selenalen  and
chroinntea.  Cobalt  solpbate  containing  T  molecules  of  water  iit  doposited  in  crjitals
of  the  numoclinu^  vjstem.  like  the  corresponding  salts  ol  iron  nuil  manganese.  The  angle
of  a  vertical  prism  tor  the  iron  salt  =  89°  M',  for  cobalt  ^  SS'  29'.  and  the  inclinatioD  of
the  horizontal  pinacoid  to  the  vertical  prigm  tor  the  iron  aalt  ^  9B>  9',  and  tor  the  cobalt
■oJt  1M>^  36'.  All  the  isomorpboos  miitnrea  of  the  salts  ot  magnesium,  iron,  cobalt,
nii'kfl  and  manganese  have  the  same  form  if  they  contain  T  mol.  H,0  and  iron  or  cobalt
prrrloniinate,  whilst  if  there  is  a  prepondeiauoe  of  nwgneaium.  sine,  or  nitkel,  the
crjBtsls  have  a  rhombic  form  like  magiiesiiim  sulphate.  Hence  thes«  Bulphates  are
ihiiorphoiit,  bnt  tor  some  the  one  form  is  more  Hlableand  torolharstlie  other.  Brooke,
Uoss,  Miticherlich,  Bammeiaberg.  and  UarigU'u:  lisveeiplaiDfjilIhew  relations.  Brooke
and  Hitscherlich  also  supposed  that  NiSO^.TH^O  is  not  onlif  caputile  of  assuming  these
tomu,  but  also  that  ot  the  tetragonai  sjratem,  besause  it  in  deposited  in  this  form  from
acid,  iLDd  especially  from  sligbtly-beated  solutions  '30°  to  -tO'^l,  Bnt  Harignao  demon-
Btraled  that  the  tetragonal  crystals  do  not  conta  in  7,  bat  S.  molecules  ot  water.  NiSOi.flH,0.
He  also  observed  that  a  solution  evaporated  at  90°  to  T0°  deposits  monoclinic  crystals,
bnt  nl  a  dilfeieiit  foim  from  ferrous  sulphate,  FeBO^.THgO — namely,  the  angle  of  the
prism  is  71°  GS',  that  of  the  pinacoid  9E°  0'.  This  salt  appears  to  be  the  same  wich  0
molecnlas  of  water  as  the  tetragonal.  Marigoae  also  obtUQed  magueeiuni  and  zinc
•alts  with  B  molecnlea  ot  water  by  evaporating  their  soUilions  at  a  higher  tem-
perature, and  these  sails  were  found  to  be  isoinorphoas  with  the  monoolinio  nickel  salt.
In  additinn  to  this  it  mnxt  ba  observed  that  the  rhombic  ci;iitslBot  nickel  intphate  with
TH^O  become  tnrbid  under  the  inflnence  ol  beat  and  light,  loce  water,  and  change  into
the  tetragonal  salt.  The  monoolinic  orystals  in  time  also  become  tnrbid,  and  change
their  stmctare.  so  that  tlie  tetragonal  form  oF  this  salt  is  Uie  most  stable.  Let  u*  also
add  that  nickel  soltihate  in  all  its  shapeH  toms  very  beantihil  emerald  green  crystals,
which,  when  heated  to  380°,  assome  a  dirty  greenish-yellow  hoe  and  then  cuulaia  one
molecule  ol  water.

Klobb  USUI)  and  Lsnglot  and  Lenoir  olitained  aobydroas  CoHO,  and  NiSO,  by
igniting  the  hydrated  salt  with  (NH4)^S0,  notil  the  ammonium  «all  had  completely
volatilised  and  decomposed.

We  msy  add  that  when  eqainOent  aijueoas  tolntions  of  NiXj  (green)  and  CoXg  (red)
are  mixed  together  they  give  an  almost  colonrlesa  (grey)  solution,  in  whioh  the  green  and
red  sdIodt  of  the  component  parts  disappears  owing  to  the  combination  ol  the  comple-
mentary colours.  ^

KTible ;

358  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

solution  of  a  cobalt  salt  be  heated  almost  to  the  boiling-point,  and  the
solution  be  then  mixed  with  a  boiling  solution  of  an  alkali  hydroxide,
a  pink  precipitate  of  cobaltous  hydroxide^  C0H2O2,  will  be  formed.  K
air  be  not  completely  excluded  during  the  precipitation  by  boiling,  the
precipitate  will  also  contain  brown  cobaltic  hydroxide  formed  by  the
further  oxidation  of  the  cobaltous  oxide.^**  Under  similar  circumstanceB
nickel  salts  form  a  green  precipitate  of  nickelous  hydroxide^  tho  forma-
tion of  which  is  not  hindered  by  the  presence  of  ammonium  salts,  bat
in  that  case  only  requires  more  alkali  to  completely  separate  the
nickel.  The  nickelous  oxide  obtained  by  heating  the  hydroxide,  or
from  the  carbonate  or  nitrate,  is  a  grey  powder,  easily  soluble  in  acids
and  easily  reduced,  but  the  same  substance  may  be  obtained  in  the
crystalline  form  as  an  ordinary  product  from  the  ores  ;  it  crystallises
in  regular  octahedra,  with  a  metallic  lustre,  and  is  of  a  grey  colour.
In  this  state  the  nickelous  oxide  almost  resists  the  action  of  acids.*^  ****.

soluble  in  water  but  scarcely  soluble  in  ethyl  and  methyl  alcohol. They  decompose  into
green  oxide  of  nickel  and  potassium  fluoride  when  heated  in  a  current  of  air. The

analogous  salt  of  cobalt  crystallises  in  crimson  flakes.

If  instead  of  potassium  fluoride,  CoCl^  or  NiCl^  be  fused  with  ammoniom  fluoride,
they  also  form  double  salts  with  the  latter.  This  gives  the  possibility  of  obtaining
anhydrous  fluorides  NiF.^  and  CoF.^.  Crystalline  fluoride  of  nickel,  obtained  by
heating  the  amoqihous  powder  formed  by  decomposing  the  double  ammonium  salt  in
a  stream  of  hydrofluoric  acid,  occurs  in  beautiful  green  prisms,  sp.  gr.  4*68,  which  are
insoluble  in  water,  alcohol,  and  ether ;  sulphuric,  hydrochloric,  and  nitric  acids  also  hare
no  action  upon  them,  even  when  heated;  NiF.^,  is  decomposed  by  steam,  with  the  forma-
tion of  black  oxide,  which  retains  the  crystalline  structure  of  the  salt.  Fluoride  of
cobalt,  obtained  as  a  rose-coloured  powder  by  decomposing  the  double  ammonium  salt
with  the  aid  of  heat  in  a  stream  of  hydrofluoric  acid,  fuses  into  a  ruby-coloured  mass
which  hoars  distinct  signs  of  a  crystalline  structure ;  sp.  gr.  4"48.  The  molten  salt
only  voltitilises  at  about  1400',  which  forms  a  clear  distinction  between  C0F2  and  the
volatile  NiFj.  Hydrochloric,  sulphuric,  and  nitric  acids  act  upon  CoF^  even  in  the  cold,
althoiif^h  slowly,  while  when  lieated  the  reacti(jn  proceeds  rapidlj-  (Poulenc,  1892).

•'^'  Hydrated  suboxide  of  cobalt  (de  Scliulten,  18H9)  is  obtained  in  the  following
manner.  A  solution  of  10  grams  of  CoCl.^OH.^.O  in  00  c.c.  of  water  is  heated  in  a  flask
with  250  grams  of  caustic  potash  and  a  stream  of  coal  gas  is  passed  through  the  solution.
When  heated  the  hydrate  of  the  suboxide  of  cobalt  which  separates  out,  dissolves  in  the
caustic  potash  and  forms  a  dark  blue  solution.  This  solution  is  allowed  to  stand  for  24
hours  in  an  atmosphere  of  coal  gas  (in  order  to  prevent  oxidation).  The  crystalline  masi%
which  separates  out  has  a  comx>oBition  Co(OH),,  and  to  the  naked  eye  appears  as  a  violet
powder,  wliich  is  seen  to  be  crystalline  under  the  niicroscoi>e.  The  specific  gravity  of
this  hydrate  is  S'Hi)?  at  15°.  It  does  not  undergo  change  in  the  air;  warm  acetic  acid
dissolves  it,  but  it  is  insoluble  in  wann  and  cold  solutions  of  ammonia  and  sal-
ammoniair.

r.i  »)i-  The  following  reaction  may  be  added  to  those  of  the  cobaltous  and  nickelous
salts*,  potassium  cyanide  forms  a  precipitate  with  cobalt  salts  which  is  soluble  in  an
excess  of  th<?  reagent  and  forms  a  green  solution.  On  heating  this  and  adding  a  certain
quantity  of  acid,  a  double  cobalt  cyanide,  is  fornie<l  which  'corresjwnds  with  potassium
ferricyivnide.  Its  formation  is  accompanied  with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen,  and  is
f»nmded  \\\>o\\  the  property  which  cobalt  has  of  oxidising  in  an  alkaline  solution,  the  de-
velopment of  whi<'h  has  been  observed  in  sucli  a  considerable  measure  in  the  cobaltamine
salts. Tlie  process  wliich  goes  on  In^re  may  be  expressed  by  the  following  equation  ;

IHON, COBALT, AMD HICKEL  369

It  is  interesting  to  note  the  rflatutn  of  the  fobaltous  and  iiitkelous
liydroKiileu  to  nmminiia  ;  itqueous  nmmonia  dissolves  the  precipitate  of
cobaltous  and  nickelous  hydroxide.  Tlie  biue  aumionincal  solutiun  of
nickel  resembles  the  same  solution  of  cupric  oxide,  but  Ima  a  somewhat
reddish  tint.  It  is  characterised  by  the  fact  that  it  dissolves  silV  in
the  same  way  aa  the  ammoniacal  cupric  oxide  diasolves  eelluloBe.  Ain-
Dionia  likewise  dissolves  the  precipitate  of  cobaltous  hydroxide,  forming
a  brownish  liquid,  which  lieconies  darker  in  air  and  finally  assumes  a
bright  red  hue,  absorbing  oxygen. Theadmixtare  of  ammonium  chloride  '

prevents  thn  precipilatjon  of  cobalt  salts  by  ammonia  ;  when  the  am-
monia is  added,  ii  brown  solutiim  is  obtained  frum  whicli,  as  in  the
ca.se  of  the  preceding  solution,  potaesium  hydroxide  does  not  separate
the  cobaltous  oxide.  Peculiar  compounds  are  produi;ed  in  this  solution  ;
they  are  comparatively  stable,  containing  ammonia  and  an  excess  of
oxygen  ;  they  bear  the  name  cobaltoamine  and  coboltianiine  salts.  They
hiive  been  principally  investigated  l>y  Oenth,  Fremy,  Jorgeuson  and
others.  Geiith  fuund  that  when  a  cobalt  salt,  mixed  with  an  axcesa  of
ammonium  chloride,  is  treated  with  ammonia  and  exposed  to  the  air,
after  a  certain  lapse  of  time,  on  adding  hydrochloric  acid  and  boiling,
a  red  powder  is  precipitated  and  the  reroainirig  solution  contains  an
orange  salt.  The  study  of  the^ie  compounds  led  to  the  discovery  of  a
whule  series  of  similar  salts,  some  of  which  correspond  with  particular
higher  degrees of  oxidation  of  cobalt,  which  are  described lat«r.'^

CoC^,+  *KCN  first  torms  CoK,C,N„,  which  i«Jt  with  water,  Ofi,  torniii  poluHiiun
hfdroiide,  KHO,  hydrogen,  H,  itnd  tbi:'  Wt,  KgCoCsNu-  Here  Diiturally  the  iireseuce  ol
Ibe  lu-id  is  iodiiqieiiulde  ia  couuqaauce  of  ila  being  required  to  ooiuliiiic  with  the  klkali.
Fmin  iii|ueoDi  noIutiouB  thin  atli  cryBtitlliiiesio  tnOBpareot,  heia^nalprinniol  njelloF
<'«loiir,  Bnaily  aolnbla  in  witUir,  The  reftcCious  ol  doable  decompinilirin,  and  even  the
lonnalinn  dI  the  correBpondiog  nuid,  ure  here  complete!;  the  same  ■■  in  the  cmie  et  Ibfi
terricjnuiide.  It  a  Dickeloiu  wit  be  treated  in  preciaely  Ibe  Bsme  niuuner  m  that  jiut
deacribed  tor  a  aalt  ol  cobalt,  decompoaition  will  occur.

^  The  cobalt  lalU  ma;  be  dindad  into  at  least  the  rcilluviiiK  claaae*,  which  repeat
themwilvea  tor  Cr,  Ir,  Rh  (we  shall  not  stop  to  consider  the  Utter,  partieolarly  aa  (he;
closely  reaemble  the  cobalt  aalta)  :  —

(n|  ^MiHcmtiiiR  eoboli  lalU,  which  are  simply  direct  cniapounds  of  the  cobaltoUn
•alts  CoX,  with  umnooii,  aimiUr  to  vui»a«  other  conipoonds  of  tiie  lalt*  ol  ailTar,
copper,  and  even  oalciom  and  magnesium,  with  ammonia.  Thej  are  euity  crystalUied
trotn  ui  wnmoniaca]  solution,  and  have  u  piuk  colour.  Tliua.  tor  inalance.  whao
cobaltoUD  clJoride  in  solntion  is  miied  uritb  sufficient  ammonia  to  redissolve  (Ue
precipitate  flnt  formed,  octahedral  crystals  ace  depoailsd  which  liave  a  compaiUon
CaCl«JI']0,ONB^  TlieM  «alta  are  nothing  else  hut  oonihinatiotia  witli  ammonia  ol
cryitatliBation— it  it  may  be  so  termed — Ifkeiiing  them  in  tliia  way  to  coinbtualion*  with
water  ol  crjHtaliiMlion.  Thi«  limilarity  it  evident  both  from  their  oompomlion  aud  troni
their  capability  ot  giving  oB  ammonia  at  various  lemperatures.  Tlie  oiont  import*ot
point  to  obaerre  ia  that  all  these  aalls  contain  (I  moleouls*  of  ammonia  to  latum  ot  cobalt,
andthiBammoniaialieldiDfairlyslablecanneetioM.  Water decnmpose- these saltfc  INiekel
behaves  similarly  without  lorming  other  compaunds  oorrcsiionding  to  the  true  cobaltic,)

ib)  The  •olationa  ol  the  obova-roeotioDed  salu  are  reodered  turbid  by  tha  action  ol

860  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHE3iISTRY

Nickel  does  not  possess  this  property  of  abaorbiog  the  oxygen  of  the  air
when  in  an  aramoniacal  solution. In  order  to  understand  this  distinc-

the  air ;  they  absorb  oxygen  and  become  covered  with  a  cmst  of  oxycobaHamine  Milit.
The  latter  are  gparingly  soluble  in  aqneoas  ammonia,  have  a  brown  ooloar,  and  are
charactehBed  by  the  fact  that  with  warm  water  they  evolve  oxygen,  forming  aalta  of  the
following  category :  The  nitrate  may  be  taken  as  an  example  of  this  kind  of  salt ;  its
composition  in  CoN207,5NH5,H20.  It  differs  from  oobaltons  nitrate,  Co(N05)2t  in  con-
taining an  extra  atom  of  oxygen — that  is,  it  corresponds  with  cobalt  dioxide,  CoO^  in
the  same  way  that  the  first  salts  correspond  with  cobaltous  oxide ;  they  contain  5,  and
not  6,  moleculcH  of  ammonia,  as  if  NH3  had  been  replaced  by  0,bnt  we  shall  aft^rwaids
meet  compounds  containing  either  5NH3  or  6NH3  to  each  atom  of  cobalt.

(c)  The  luteocobaltic  salts  are  thus  called  because  they  have  a  yellow  (loieiia)
colour.  They  are  obtained  from  the  salts  of  the  first  kind  by  submitting  them  in  dilate
solution  to  the  action  of  the  air  ;  in  this  ease  salts  of  the  second  kind  are  not  formed,
because  they  are  decomposed  by  an  excess  of  water,  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen  and
the  formation  of  luteocobaltic  salts.  By  the  action  of  ammonia  the  salts  of  the  fifth
kind  (roseocobaltic)  are  also  converted  into  luteocobaltic  salts.  These  last-named  salts
generally  cryntallii^  readily,  and  have  a  yellow  colour ;  they  are  comparatively  mudi
more  stable  than  the  preceding  ones,  and  even  for  a  certain  time  resist  the  action  of
boiling  water.  Boiling  aqueous  potash  liberates  ammonia  and  precipitates  hjrdrated
cobaltic  oxide,  Co-205,8H.,>0,  from  them.  This  shows  that  the  luteocobaltic  salts  corre-
spond with  cobaltic  oxide,  Co.^O.^,  and  those  of  the  second  kind  with  the  dioxide.
When  a  Holution  of  luteocobaltic  sulphate,  €0.2(804)3,1 2NH-5,4H4jO,  is  treated  with
baryta,  barium  sulpliate  is  precipitated,  and  the  solution  contains  Inteocobaliie
hydroxidts  Co(OH)-„6NH5,  which  is  soluble  in  water,  is  powerfully  alkaline,  absorbs
the  oxygen  of  the  uir,  and  when  heated  is  decomposed  with  the  evolution  of  am-
monia. This  compound  therefore  corresponds  to  a  solution  of  cobaltic  hydroxide  in
ammonia.  Tlie  luteocobaltic  salts  contain  2  atoms  of  cobalt  and  12  molecnles  of
ammonia — that  in,  6NH3  to  each  atom  of  cobalt,  like  the  salts  of  the  first  kind.  The
€oX.2  HiiltH  htivc*  a  metallic  taste,  whilst  those  of  lateocobalt  and  others  have  a  purely
saline  taste,  like  the  salts  of  the  alkali  metals.  In  the  luteo-salts  all  the  X's  react  (are
ionised,  as  some  chemists  say)  as  in  ordinary  salts — for  instance,  all  the  CI.2  is  pre-
cipitated by  a  solution  of  AgNO-, ;  all  the  (SO4).-  gives  a  precipitate  with  BaX.^,  &c.
Tlie  double  salt  formed  with  PtCl,  is  composed  in  the  same  manner  as  the  potassium
salt,  K.PtCl,  2K(1  -PtCl,,  that  is,  contains  (CoCl3,0NH3V..,8PtCl4,  or  the  amount  of
chlorine  in  tlu»  PtCl,  is  double  that  in  the  alkaline  salt.  In  the  rosepentamine  (^),  and
rose tet ram in<'  if),  salts,  also  all  the  X's  react  or  are  ionised,  but  in  the  (g)  and  {h)  salts
only  a  portion  of  the  X's  react,  and  they  are  equal  to  the  {e)  and  (/)  salts  minus  water;
this  means  that  although  the  water  dissolves  them  it  is  not  combined  with  them,  as
PHO3  differs  from  PH3O3 ;  phenomena  of  this  class  correspond  exactly  to  what  has
been  already  (Chapter  XXL,  Note  7)  mentioned  respecting  the  green  and  violet  salts  of
oxide  of  chromium.

{(J)  The  fuHcocohultic  salts.  An  ammoniacal  solution  of  cobalt  salts  acquires  a  brown
colou  in  the  air,  due  to  the  formation  of  these  salts.  They  are  also  produced  by  the
decomposition  of  salts  of  the  second  kind  ;  they  crystallise  badly,  and  are  separated  from
their  solutions  by  addition  of  alcohol  or  an  excess  of  ammonia.  ^Vhen  boiled  they  give
up  the  ammonia  and  cobaltic  oxide  which  they  contain.  Hydrochloric  and  nitric  acids
give  a  yellow  precipitate  with  these  salts,  which  turns  red  when  boiled,  forming  salts  of
the  next  category.  The  fj)llowing  is  an  example  of  the  composition  of  two  of  the  fusco-
cobaltic  salts,  Co,,0(S04).,hNH3,4H.20  and  Co.^Clj.HNH^.SH.O.  It  is  evident  that  the
fuscocobaitic  salts  an-  ammoniacal  compounds  of  basic  cobaltic  salts.  The  normal  co-
baltic sulphate  (Uiglit  to  have  the  comi>o8ition  Co^lSOjl-.^Co^O.-^SSO^;  the  simplest
basic  salts  will  be  Co.2U(SO,).2-Co.,.03,2S03,  and  Coo0.2(SO,)  =  Co.20.vSb3.  The  fusco-
cobaitic salts  (•orresiH)nd  with  the  first  type  of  basic  salts.  They  are  changed  (in  con-
centrated solutions)  into  oxycobaltamine  salts  by  al)sor|)tion  of  one  atom  of  oxygen,

raOS,  COBALT. ABD  mCKEL  861

tioii,  and  in  general  the  relation  of  nickel,  it  is  important  to  observe
that  cobalt  more  easily  forms  a  higher  degree  of  oxidation — namely,

Co,0,{SO,),.  TIk  whole  proccBS  o(  tnldation  will  be  as  lollow.;  first  ot  ull  Co,X,.  i>
whaJtoiu  wit,  ia  in  the  solution  (X  u  univalent  buloid.  a  molecnleii  of  the  aolt  being
tikoDl,  then  CojOXi.  the  bukic  cobultic  Bait  ((th  aenea),  Iheu  Cn,0,X„  the  Halt  of  thu
difxide  (Sad  wriflil.  The  series  of  buic  mJIb  with  Hn  ncid.  9HX,  tonas  wat^'i'  and  a
Dornul  Hit,  C(t,X,  (in  B.  5,  S  series).  These  wiUs  are  combined  with  T«riooii  smomita  of
■rater  imd  ammonia.  UndeF  manj  conditions  the  salts  o(  fuscocobalt  are  naaily  tcunn
Inrmed  into  salts  of  the  next  series.  The  salts  of  the  series  that  has  jost  h«en  describeil
contain  1  molecnles  of  ammonia  to  1  atom  ut  cobalt.

(f)  The  roarorobaitie  lor  rosepentamine),  CoX,HgO,GNHt.  lulls,  like  the  lDt«o-
oobaltio.  coiTespond  with  the  normal  cobaltic  salts,  bnL  contain  less  ammonia,  and  nn
extra  molecnle  of  vater.  Thns  the  stdpliote  is  obtained  from  cobaltoas  sulphate
dissolved  in  ammonia  and  left  expoHed  to  the  air  nntil  transformed  into  a  hroiin  solution
of  the  fnscoDobaltic  salt ;  when  this  is  treated  with  snliihnric  acid  *  crjrstalline  powder
of  tlie  roseocobaltio  salt,  Co,|SO,):„lUNHi.sHgO,  separates.  The  formation  of  this  salt
iaeuiit;  anderstond:  cobaltons  sulphate  in  the  presence  of  immonia  absorbeox^gen.and
(lie  Bolntion  ot  the  tnscocobftltie  salt  will  therefore  contain,  like  cobaltous  snlphate.  ona
part  ot  enlphnric  acid  to  every  part  of  cobalt,  so  that  the  whole  prooeie  of  fonnation  may
beeipreaseil  by  the  eqaation:  10NHi  +  aCoSO«+ HjS0,  +  4a,0-F0-Co,(SO.),.„10NHi,
BBrjO.  This  salt  torms  tetragODal  crystals  oF  a  red  colour,  slightly  soluble  in  cold,  bat
readily  soluble  in  wann  water.  When  the  snlphate  is  treated  with  baryta,  roseocobaltio
hydroxide  is  formed  in  the  eolotioD,  which  absorbs  the  carbonic  anhydride  of  the  air.
It  ia  obtained  trom  the  next  series  by  the  action  of  alkalis.

(/)  Tbu  nmrlrtramint  fobaltic  Kilti  Coa„.iH^A}iSs  were  obtained  by  Jorgenson.
and  belling  to  Uie  type  ot  the  lateo-salts,  only  with  the  substitution  of  WB,  tor  H,0.
Like  Iha  Inleo-  and  roseo-salCs  they  give  double  salts  with  PtCI^  similar  to  the  alkaline
double  soils,  for  instuice  (CoaHj0.4Ne,)a(SO,ljCl.jPtCl,.  They  am  darker  in  colour
than  the  preceding,  but  also  crystallise  well.  They  are  formed  by  dissolring  CoCO,  in
Hnlplmric  acid  (ot  a  giien  BtrengthI,  and  after  NH;  and  carbonate  df  nintnoninm  have
been  added,  air  is  passed  throngh  the  solution  IFor  oxidation)  until  thu  lutter  tams  rt^.
II  is  then  evaporated  with  lumps  ot  cHrbonate  ot  ammonium,  filtered  Ircm  the  prw-ipi'
late  4tnd  crystallised.  A  salt  of  the  oompoxition  Co,|COi),lSO,),  |aH,0,INHil,  ii  thus
olitstned.  Irom  which  the  other  salts  ma;  be  easily  prepared.

Ig)  The  puTjiaTeoeoballic  tallt,  CoXs,fiNH],  are  also  prodncta  ot  the  direct  oxidation
al  ammoniacal  solutioDB  ot  cobalt  salts.  The;  ore  easily  obtained  b;  besting  tbe  ti>seo-
coballic  and  luteo-salts  with  strong  acids.  The;  are  to  all  eflects  the  same  as  the
Coaeocobaltic  salts,  only  anhydrons.  Thus,  tor  instance,  the  purpuroocobaltic  chloride,
Co,a„10NH„  or  CoC1,,SNH„  is  obtained  li;  boiling  the  oiycoballamine  salts  with
aninuini*.  Them  is  the  same  distinction  between  these  salts  and  the  preceding  ones  as
bntareen  the  various  onrnpnands  of  cobaltons  chloride  with  water.  In  the  purpuieo-
cDbaltic  only  X,  ont  of  the  X,,  react  'am  ionised).  To  the  rosetetramine  salts  I/)  there
correnpoud  the  purpureottlramint  salts,  CoX^O.tNH,.  The  eoirespouding  chromium
pnrpDreopenlamine  salt,  CrClj.fiNH,  is  obtained  with  particular  ease  I  Christen  sen,  18UB).
Dry  anhydrous  chromium  chloride  is  treat«l  with  anhydrous  liquid  amnmnia  in  a
frecxing  mixture  composed  of  liquid  CO^  and  chlorine,  and  after  some  time  (be  mixture
ia  token  ont  of  the  freering  mixture,  so  that  the  excess  of  NH^j  boile  away;  the  violet
crystals  then  immediately  acquire  the  red  colour  of  the  salt.  CrClj.GNH.t,  which  is  fi<rmsd.
Theprodnct  is  washed  with  water  (to  extract  Uie  Inteo-solt.  CrCI,.flNH,).  which  does  not
dissolve  the  salt,  and  it  is  then  rerrystallised  trom  ■  hot  solution  ot  hydrocliloric  acid.

IA)  The  pmfocobaliir  mIU,  CoX.^lNH.-.,  are  green,  and  form,  with  respect  to  the
rosetetramine  salts  |/),  the  {iroducts  of  aJtinate  dehydration  |lor  example,  like  meta-
phosphoric  acid  with  respect  to  orthophosphoric  acid,  but  in  dissolving  in  water  they  give
neither  rosetetramine  nor  tetramlne  salt*.  |Tn  my  opinion  one  shonld  expect  salts  with
a  still  smaller  omrinnt  of  SH,,  of  the  blue  collar  proper  to  tbe  low  hydra  ted  componnris

362  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

iteaquioxide  of  cobalt,  cobaltic  oxide,  CojOj — than  nickel,  especially  in
the  presence  of  hypuchlorous  acid. If  a  solution  of  a  cobalt  salt  be

of  cobalt ;  the  green  colour  of  the  prazeo-salts  already  forms  a  step  towards  the  blue.)
JiirgenHon  obtained  salts  for  ethylene-diamine,  N-jHtC-^Hi  which  replaces  2NH5.  After
being  kept  a  long  time  in  aqneoas  solution  they  give  rosetetramine  salts,  just  as  meta-
phosphorie  acid  gives  orthophosphoric  acid,  while  the  rosetetramine  salts  are  coorerted
into  prazeo*8alts  by  Ag^O  and  NaUO.  Here  only  one  X  is  ionised  out  of  the  X^.  There
are  also  basic  salts  of  the  same  type ;  bat  the  best  known  is  the  chromiam  salt  caOed  the
rhodozochromic  salt,  Cr./OH).-,Cl5,6NH5,2H<20,  which  is  formed  by  the  prolonged  action
of  water  upon  the  corresponding  roseo-salt.

The  cobaltamine  compounds  differ  essentially  but  little  from  the  ammoniaeal  ccnn-
pounds  of  other  metals.  The  only  difference  is  that  here  the  cobaltic  oxide  is  obtained
from  the  cobaltous  oxide  in  the  presence  of  ammonia.  In  any  case  it  is  a  simpler  question
than  that  of  the  double  cyanides.  Those  forces  in  \'irtue  of  which  sach  a  considerabk
number  of  ammonia  molecules  are  united  with  a  molecule  of  a  cobalt  compound,  apper-
tain naturally  to  the  series  of  those  slightly  investigated  forces  which  exist  even  in  the
highest  degrees  of  combination  of  the  majority  of  elements.  They  are  the  same  focoet
which  lead  to  the  formation  of  compounds  containing  water  of  crystallisation,  double
salts,  isomorphouH  mixtures  and  complex  acids  (Chapter  XXL,  Note  8  bis).  The
simpleHt  concei)tioii,  according  to  my  opinion,  of  cobalt  compounds  (much  more  so  than
by  aHKuming  special  complex  radicles,  with  Schiif,  Weltzien,  Claus,  and  others),  may  be
formed  by  comi)aring  them  with  other  ammoniacal  products.  Anmionia,  like  water,  com-
bines in  various  proportions  with  a  multitude  of  molecules.  Silver  chloride  and  ealcinm
chloride,  just  like  cobalt  cliloride,  absorb  ammonia,  forming  compounds  which  are
times  slightly  stable,  and  easily  dissociated,  sometimes  more  stable,  in  exactly  the
way  as  water  combines  with  certain  substances,  forming  fairly  stable  compounds  called
hydroxides  or  hydrates,  or  less  stable  compounds  which  are  called  compounds  with  water
of  crystallisation.  Naturally  the  difference  in  the  properties  in  both  cases  depends  on
the  properties  of  those  elements  which  enter  into  the  coni]>osition  of  the  given  substance,
and  on  those  kinds  of  affinity  towards  which  chemists  have  not  as  yet  turned  their
attention.  If  boron  fluoride,  silicon  fluoride,  <l'c.,  combine  with  hydrofluoric  acid,  if
plutinic  chloride,  and  even  cadmium  chloride,  combine  with  hydrochloric  acid,  these
coni|>oun(ls  may  be  rej^arded  as  double  salts,  because  acids  are  salts  of  hydrogen.  But
evidently  water  and  ammonia  have  the  same  saline  faculty,  more  especially  as  they,  like
haloid  acids,  contain  hydrogen,  and  are  both  ca^mble  of  further  combination — for  instance,
ammonia  with  hydrochloric  acid.  Hence  it  is  simpler  to  compare  complex  ammoniacal
with  double  salts,  hydrates,  and  similar  comjwunds,  but  the  ainmoiiio-metaUic  »alts
present  a  most  complete  (jualitative  and  quantitative  resemblance  to  the  hydrattd  talis
0/  ffirtalff.  The  com|X)sition  of  the  latter  is  MX„/;jU.^O,  where  M  =  metal,  X  —  the
haloid,  simplo  or  complex,  and  n  and  in  the  quantities  of  the  haloid  and  so-called  water
of  cr>'stallisation  respectively.  The  composition  of  tiie  ammoniacal  salts  of  metals  is
MXh/z/NHj.  The  water  of  crystallisation  is  held  by  the  salt  with  more  or  less  stability,  and
some  salts  even  do  not  retain  it  at  all ;  some  part  with  water  easily  when  exposed  to  the  air,
others  wiien  heated,  and  then  with  difficulty.  In  the  cas<»  of  some  metals  all  the  salts  com-
bine with  wat<T,  whilst  with  others  only  a  few,  and  the  water  so  combined  may  then  be
easily  disengaged.  All  this  applies  equally  well  to  the  ammoniacal  salts,  and  therefore  the
combination  of  annnonia  nuiy  be  tenned  the  ammonia  of  cri/staUisatioji.  Just  as  the
water  which  is  combined  with  a  salt  is  held  by  it  with  different  degrees  of  force,  so  it  is  with
ammonia.  In  combining  with  '2NH-,  PtCl^  evolves  31,000  cals. ;  while  CaCl^  only  evolves
14,000  <als. ;  and  the  former  comiwund  parts  with  its  NH-  (to}j:ether  with  HCl  in  this
ease)  with  more  difficulty,  only  above  200\  while  the  latter  disengages  ammonia  at  180'^.
/nC'l../2NH5  in  forming  ZnCL,  4NH3  evolves  only  11,000  cals.,  and  splits  up  again  into
its  components  at  HO  '.  The  amount  of  combined  ammonia  is  as  variable  as  the  amount
of  water  of  crystallisation— for  instance,  SnI,8NH5,CrCl...8NH-.CrClj6NH,,CrCl55NH5,
IMCl^.lNH-,,  tl'e.  are  known. Very  often  NH3  is  replaceable  by  OH.^  and  conversely. A

IRON, COBALT, AKD  KICKEL  868

luixed  witli  iMriuiii  carbonate  and  An  excess  of  liypoi^hlurous  acid  be
added, or  chlorine  gas  be  passed through  it, then  at  the ordinary

cnlonrleiu,  iLuliyctronu  uupric  salt — for  inaCnnce,  cnpric  Hi]]p1iate — when  LombinMl  vilh
wslFi  fomis  blue  snd  green  sallB.Bnd  violet  nrhuu  ooiubiued  witb  unmuniii,  irnteitnibe
pnawd  thmogh  aohydniuB  cu|]i>erBulp1uiteUu)  unit  absorbs  water  luii)  butumps  biuled  ;  il
Buituaiuit  be  nilntituled  Inr  Uic  water  the  hMting  beuomeii  much  mors  intense,  und  the
Hit  breakit  up  into  b  fine  violet  powder.  With  wMec  Ca30„6U,O  is  (bmied,  ud  with
■iiinionia  CnSOtiBNHj,  tlie  nomber  of  wMer  uid  unmouu  moleculeg  rBtuiied  by  the
»ll  bein);  tbe  uune  iu  each  OHe,  oud  ju  k  [irooF  oF  thin,  and  that  it  is  iiul  an  iaoUted
coint'ideiific,  the  rfooarlcable  fiLct  must  be  Home  in  mind  that  water  and  amiiioaia  con-
Be<.'uLive3v.  molecule  for  molpcule,  are  isapable  t>t  bupptantiug  eauh  other,  and  farming  the
ciniKmiidH  CuSO,,eH.jO,  CuS0,.4H,0,NHs;  Cu8O,.SH,0,9NH3  ;  CnSO^.lH.jO.SNH, ;
CuSOj,HjO,4NHs,  and  CuSO^SNHj.  The  last  of  these  compooudH  was  obtained  by
Heiir;-  Boss,  and  luy  exprrimente  have  Hhawn  that  more  utunonia  tlian  this  ciumot  be
retaineil.  Bjr  adding  to  a  strong  wlution  of  cupric  sulphate  sufficient  ammonia  to
dissolve  the  whole  ol  the  oxide  precipitated,  and  tlien  adding  sloahul,  Berzeliait  obtained
the  compoond  CaSO,.H^,<NHn,  &c.  The  law  of  euliBtitatioii  also  asaists  in  renderini;
these  phenomena  clearer,  because  a  enoipamii]  of  auimoiiia  with  water  forma  ammoniom
hydroniile,  NH,HO,  aud  tbe^refore  these  molecules  combining  with  onu  anotlier  may  also
interchange,  u  being  nl  equal  value. Iu  general,  those  salts  form  stable  amiDoniacol

and  as  anunonia  is  oapable  of  combining  with  acids,  and  as  some  of  the  sails  formed  b/
slightly  energetic  bases  in  their  properties  niore  elosely  resemble  acids  (that  is,  salts  of
hyitriigen)  thiui  thoae  salts  coutaining  more  energetic  bases,  we  might  expect  to  find
uiire  stable  and  more  easily- foimed  ammoniu- metallic  salts  mith  metals  and  their
oxides  having  weaker  basic  properties  Ihoa  vritit  those  which  form  energetic  bosetk  This
explains  why  the  salts  of  potassiiun.  barium,  Ac,  do  not  form  anunomo.meta])ic  salto,
whilst  the  salts  of  silver,  copper,  sine,  Arc.  eaoil;  form  them,  and  the  salts  BX^  still
more  easily  and  with  greater  stability,  lliis  consideration  also  acoouuts  tor  the  great
stability  of  the  ammooiacal  componads  of  cnpiic  otide  compared  with  those  of  silver
oxide,  since  the  former  is  displaced  by  the  latter.  It  also  enables  ns  to  see  clearly  the
distinction  which  exists  in  the  stability  ol  the  cobaltamine  salts  containing  salts  uorre-
poiidiug  with  cohaltous  oxide,  and  those  corresponding  with  higher  oxides  of  cobalt,
Icff  tbe  latter  ore  weaker  bases  than  cobaltons  oxides.  The  nature  of  ths  /oreei
HHil  quality  oj  the  phenoinena  occurring  during  the  formatioH  iifth*  mott  ttablemb-
ilancn,  and  of  lack  cmtymiiiidi  as  cryitaliitabUi  eompoitndf,  art  one  and  Iketame,
although  perhapi  exhibited  in  a  differiml  degree.  This,  in  my  opinion,  may  be  best
oonfirmed  by  examining  tbe  coinpaunds  of  carboD.  because  lor  this  element  the  nature
of  the  forces  acting  during  tl\tf  formation  of  its  compounds  is  well  known.  Let  us  take
as  an  example  two  nnslable  compounds  ol  carbon.  J^oetic  acid,  CjUjO]  (specific  gravity
1'0«|,  with  water  forms  tbe  hydrate,  C.jHiOy,U.jO,  dcuser  iVOll  than  eitlier  of  the  com-
pouents.  but  unstable  and  easily  decomposed,  generally  simply  referred  to  aa  a
solution.  Bneb  also  is  the  crystalliue  compound  ol  oxalic  acid,  C,S,0(,  with  water,
CjHjO„aH^.  Tlieir  formation  might  be  predicted  as  starting  from  the  hydrocarbun
C,H^  ill  which,  as  iu  any  other,  the  byilrogen  may  be  exchanged  lor  chlorine,  Uia
water  residue  (hydroxylf,  itrc.  The  first  substitution  product  with  hydroxyl,  CiHttHO),
is  stable ;  it  can  be  distilled  without  alteration,  resists  a  temperature  higher  than  1110°,
and  theu  does  not  give  ofl  water.  This  is  ordinary  alcohol.  The  second,  C,H4(HO>t,
can  also  be  distilled  without  change,  but  can  be  decomposed  into  water  and  CgH^O
(elhylens  oxide  or  aldehyde):  it  boils  at  abont  197°,  whilst  the  first  hydrate  boils  at  Ta°,
a  diflerenee  ol  about  100^'.  The  c3otnpouiid  C]H](HO)^  will  be  the  third  product  ol  such
nitntitution  ;  it  ought  to  boil  at  about  N00°,  but  does  not  resist  thin  temperature— it  de-
oonipoees  into  HiO  and  CjILiO,,.  where  only  one  hydroxyl  group  remains,  and  the  otb^r
atom  ol  oxygen  is  left  in  the  same  condition  as  in  ethylene  oxide.  C,H,0.  Tliore  is  a  prool
Glycol,  C,H,iHOf„  iHiiU  iit  lUT^.  luut  fcmin  water  and  ethylene  oiide.  which

S64  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

temperature  on  shaking,  the  whole  of  the  cobalt  will  be  separated
in the  form of black  cobaltic oxide  : 2C0SO4  +  CIHO  +  2BaC03

boils  at  18°  (aldehyde^  its  isomeride,  boils  at  21°) ;  therefore  the  product  disengaged  by
the  splitting  up  of  the  hydrate  boils  at  184°  lower  than  the  hydrate  C3H4(HO)9.  Thas
the  hydrate  C2H3(HO)3,  which  ought  to  boil  at  about  800°,  splits  up  in  exactly  the  same
way  into  water  and  the  product  C2H4O2,  which  boils  at  117° — that  is,  nearly  188°  lower
than  the  hydrate,  C2H3(HO)3.  But  this  hydrate  splits  up  before  distillation.  The
above-mentioned  hydrate  of  acetic  acid  is  such  a  decomposable  hydrate — that  is  to
say,  what  is  called  a  solution.  Still  less  stability  may  be  expected  from,  the  following
hydrates.  C.2H2(HO)4  also  splits  up  into  water  and  a  hydrate  (it  contains  two  hydroxyl
groups)  called  glycollic  acid,  C2H20(HO).^  =  C2H405.  The  next  product  of  substitution
will  be  C2H(HO)5 ;  it  splits  up  into  water,  HoO,  and  glyoxylic  acid,  C2H4O4  (three
hydroxyl  groups).  The  last  hydrate  which  ought  to  be  obtained  from  CfH^,  and  ought
to  contain  C^CHO)^,  is  the  crystalline  compound  of  oxalic  acid,  C2H2O4  (two  hydroxyl
groups),  and  water,  2H2O,  which  has  been  already  mentioned.  The  hydrate  C2(HO)«
=  C,.H204,2H.20,  ought,  according  to  the  foregoing  reasoning,  to  boil  at  about  600°
(because  the  hydrate,  C2H4(HO)2,  boils  at  about  200°,  and  the  substitution  of  4  hydroxy]
groups  for  4  atoms  of  hydrogen  will  raise  the  boiling-point  400°).  It  does  not  resist  this
temperature,  but  at  a  much  lower  point  splits  up  into  water,  2H2O,  acnd  the  hydrate
C20.>(HO)2,  which  is  also  capable  of  yielding  water.  Without  going  into  further  dis-
cussion of  this  subject,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  formation  of  the  hydrates,  or  com-
pounds with  water  of  crystallisation,  of  acetic  and  oxalic  acids  has  thus  received  an
accurate  explanation,  illustrating  the  point  we  desired  to  prove  in  affirming  that  com-
pounds with  water  of  crystallisation  are  held  together  by  the  same  forces  as  those  which
act  in  the  formation  of  other  complex  substances,  and  that  the  easy  displaceability
of  the  water  of  crystallisation  is  only  a  peculiarity  of  a  local  character,  and  not
a  radical  point  of  distinction.  All  the  above-mentioned  hydrates,  C^X^y  or  » pro-
ducts of  their  destruction,  are  actually  obtained  by  the  oxidation  of  the  first  hydrate,
C.2H5(HO),  or  common  alcohol,  by  nitric  acid  (Sokoloff  and  others).  Hence  the  forces
which  induce  salts  to  combine  with  nHiO  or  with  NH-  are  undoubtedly  of  the  same
order  as  the  forces  which  govern  the  formation  of  ordinary  *  atomic  *  and  saline  com-
pounds. (A  great  impediment  in  the  study  of  the  former  was  caused  by  the  conviction
which  reigned  in  the  sixties  and  seventies,  that  '  atomic '  were  essentially  different
from  '  molecular '  compounds  like  crystallohydrates,  in  which  it  was  assumed  that
there  was  a  combination  of  entire  molecules,  as  though  without  the  participation  of  the
atomic  forcep,)  If  the  bond  between  chlorine  and  different  metals  is  not  equally  strong,
so  also  the  bond  uniting  wH.jO  and  «NH- is  exceeding  variable ;  there  is  nothing  very
surprising  in  this.  And  in  the  fact  that  the  combination  of  different  amounts  of  NH-,
and  HoO  alters  the  capacity  of  the  haloids  X  of  the  salts  RX.,  for  reaction  (for  instance,
in  the  luteo-salts  all  the  X-^,,  while  in  the  purpureo,  only  2  out  of  the  8,  and  in  the  prazeo-
salts  only  1  of  the  H  X's  reacts),  we  should  see  in  the  first  place  a  phenomenon  similar
to  what  we  met  with  in  Cr._,Cle,  (Chapter  XXI.,  Note  7  bis),  for  in  both  instances  the  essence
of  the  difference  lies  in  the  removal  of  water;  a  molecule  RC1'„6H20  or  RC1-„6NH.-
contains  the  halogen  in  a  perfectly  mobile  (ionised)  state,  while  in  the  molecule
RCl.-,5HoO  or  RCl:;,5NH->  a  portion  of  the  halogen  has  almost  lost  its  faculty  for  reacting
with  AgNO-,,  just  as  metalepsicul  chlorine  has  lost  this  faculty  which  is  fully  developed  in
the  chloranhydride.  Until  the  reason  of  this  difference  be  clear,  we  cannot  expect  that
ordinary  points  of  view  and  generalisation  can  give  a  clear  answer.  However,  we  may
assume  that  here  the  explanation  lies  in  the  nature  and  kind  of  motion  of  thcatoms  in  the
molecules,  although  as  yet  it  is  not  clear  how.  Nevertheless,  I  think  it  well  to  call
attention  again  (Chapter  I.)  to  the  fact  that  the  combination  of  water,  and  hence,  also,
of  any  other  element,  leads  to  most  diverse  consequences ;  the  water  in  the  gelatinous
hydrate  of  alumina  or  in  the  decahydrated  Glauber  salt  is  ver>'  mobile,  and  easily  reacts
like  water  in  a  free  state  ;  but  the  same  water  combined  with  oxide  of  calcium,  or  C2H4
<for  instance,  in  C.,H»;0  and  in  C4H,oO),or  with  P.jO^,  has  become  quite  different,  and  no

mas,  OOBALT, AND  HIOKEL  865

ftCo^O,  +  2BftS0,  +  HCl  +  2C0,.  Undor  theae ciremustftiit-eH  uIcWpIohs
oxide  does  not  immediately  form  lilack  aesquioxide,  liut  after  a  consider-
able Bpaee  ot  time  it  also  separates  in  the  form  of  sesijuioxide,  NijO;,
but  always  later  than  cobalt.  Tliis  is  due  to  the  relative  diliiculty  of
further  osidation  of  the  nickelous  oxide.  It  is,  however,  possible  to
oxidise  it ;  if,  for  instance,  the  hydroxide  NiHjOj  be  shaken  in  water
and  chioi-iiie  gas  lie  passed  thi-ouali  it,  then  nickel  chloride  will  be
forined,  which  is  soluble  in  wat«r,  and  inspluble  nickelic  oxide  in  the
form  of  a  black  precipitate:  3N"iHiOj  +  CljsNiCI, -t-NijO„3HjO.
Nickelic  oxide  may  also  lie  obtained  by  adding  sodium  hypochlorite
mixed  with  alkali  to  a  solution  of  n.  nickel  salt.  Nickelic  and  cobaltio
hydrates  are  black.  Nickelic  oside  evolves  oxygen  with  all  acids,  and
in  cooBequence  of  this  it  is  not  separated  asa  precipitate  in  the  presence
of  acids  ;  thus  it  evolves  chlorine  with  hydrochloric  acid,  exactly  like
manganese  dioxide.  When  nickelic  oxide  ia  dissolved  in  aqueous
ammonia  it  liberates  nitrogen,  and  an  ammoniacal  solution  of  nickelous
oxide  is  foi-med. When  heated,  nickelic  oxide  loses  oxygen,  forming

linger  kcts  like  wktei'  in  >  free  HUte.  We  we  the  aame  pheiunneaon  in  niftn;  other
«»e»— lor  aiftinpte,  the  chloriae  in  chloralcB  tin  longrr  giTBi  a  precipiUte  n(  chloride  ot
nilver  with  AgNO,.  Than,  oltbougli  the  itiHtuice  which  is  louad  in  the  difforenoe
between  the  toseo-  nnd  purpDreo-B*lta  ileiiervet  to  1m  fully  studied  on  itctKiuut  of  itc  liro-
plieitjr,  Btill  it  ia  1»i  from  beiot;  eieeptioaal,  uid  we  ciuiuot  expect  it  to  be  tboronghly
eiplaiuMi  oaleM  u  moas  ot  similu  inHtftiiceii.  nbidi  ftre  exceeding;!;  umunou  unong
chemieal  cunipoauda,  Ih)  coajointl;  explained.  (Among  the  rewimhe*  which  add  to
oar  knowledge  reBp«cling  the  compln  uiunoniiuiit]  compouiidi,  1  tliink  it  iudiaiienuble
to  fhII  the  reuler's  atteutinn  to  Prof.  KaumakofTe  dissertntioa  '  On  unnplex  metallic
bnsee,'  1H9H.I

Koamakoff  (ISfll)  showed  that  the  Bo1nl>ilit;  o(  the  luteo-soll,  CoClj.6NHv  »l  l)°
^4'30(pBr  lOOotWHler).  nt  Sn°^T'T,  that  in  puaning  lnt«  the  n>wo-Mlt,CoCl.tH,bsNHj,
the  Bolabililj'  rises  coDsidersblf.  und  at  0°  =  1U'4.  and  at  30^=:ftbiiat  ST,  whilst  iJie
pkBsage  into  the  parpuruo-salt,  CoClj.SXH^.  !»  ucomponied  b;  B  great  full  in  the
Bolnbility,  muDelf ,  at  O^^OSB,  wid  at  IW^ubout  O'S.  And  as  u7Btalloh;drataB  with  ■
smaUer  amount  of  watur  are  osually  mors  solnble  than  the  higher  crjstailoLjdratea  (tie
(Ihalflier),  whilst  here  we  Snd  that  the  solobilitj  falls  {in  the  purpnreo-aiiltl  with  a  Iom
ot  water,  that  water  which  is  contuned  in  the  roseu-sall  cannot  be  compared  with  the
water  of  c[7Btallisatiiin.  Konmakolt,  therefore,  connects  the  fall  in  solubility  (in  the
paAMfie  ol  the  roseo-  into  the  parpureo-saltt)  with  tlie  acconipsnying  Iobg  in  the  reactiie
ca|iacity  of  the  chlorine.

In  couclnsion,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  eleniBnts  of  the  eighth  group — that  is,  the
analccuas  ot  iron  and  platinum— suHirding  In  my  opiDian.will  yield  moat  Iruiltul  reanlta
when  studied  as  to  combination"  with  whole  inoUenles,  as  already  shown  by  the  examples
ol  complex  ammoniacal,  cyanogen,  nitro-,  and  other  compuunda.  which  are  easily  formed
in  this  eighth  group,  and  are  remarkable  (or  their  stabihty.  This  faculty  ol  the  etemeuts
of  the  eighth  group  tor  forming  the  complei  cumpaunds  olladed  to,  i«  in  all  probabihly
connected  with  the  position  which  the  eighth  group  occupies  with  regard  to  the  others.
Following  the  wveath,  which  forms  the  type  KX;.  it  might  be  expected  to  conlaiti  the
most  complex  type.  BXg.  Tliis  in  met  with  in  OaO,.  The  other  elements  of  the  aighth
group,  however,  only  form  the  lower  types  RX^,  RXj.  RX^  ....  and  thcM*  cccordiR^
i^'jould  lie  expected  to  eggrej^te  themselves  rnlo  the  higher  typeb,  whiah  is  aecom-
i^ahed  ill  the  forniatioii  ol  the  Hbore-meutio.iiBj  complei  cuiiipoHiidii.

866  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

nickelous  oxide.  Cobaltic  oxide,  C02O3,  exhibits  more  stability  than
nickelic  oxide,  and  shows  feeble  basic  properties  ;  thus  it  is  dissolved
in  acetic  acid  without  the  evolution  of  oxygen.^"*  ^*'  But  ordinary  acids,
especially  on  heating,  evolve  oxygen,  forming  a  solution  of  a  cobaltous
salt.  The  presence  of  a  cobaltic  salt  in  a  solution  of  a  cobaltous  salt
may  be  detected  by  the  brown  colour  of  the  solution  and  the  black
precipitate  formed  by  the  addition  of  alkali,  and  also  from  the  fact  that
such  solutions  evolve  chlorine  when  heated  with  hydrochloric  acid.
Cobaltic  oxide  may  not  only  be  prepared  by  the  above-mentioned
methods,  but  also  by  heating  cobalt  nitrate,  after  which  a  steel-coloured
mass  remains  which  retains  traces  of  nitric  acid,  bat  when  heated
further  to  incandescence  evolves  oxygen,  leaving  a  compound  of
cobaltic  and  cobaltous  oxides,  similar  to  magnetic  ironstone.  Cobalt
(but  not  nickel)  undoubtedly  forms  besides  C02O3  a  dioxide  C0O2.
"This  is  obtained  ^  when  the  cobaltous  oxide  is  oxidised  by  iodine  or
peroxide  of  barium. ^^

5*  »»»•  Marshall  (1891)  obtaioed  cobaltic  sulphate,  Ca,(SO|)5,18H20,  by  the  action  of  an
electric  current  upon  a  strong  solution  of  C0SO4.

5*^  The  action  of  an  alkaline  hypochlorite  or  hypobromite  upon  a  boiling  solution  of
cobaltous  salts,  according  to  Schroederer  (1889),  produces  oxides,  whose  composition
varies  between  C05O5  (Rose's  compound)  and  Ca^Oj,  and  also  between  C05O9  and
Coi-20|9.  If  caustic  potash  and  then  bromine  be  added  to  the  liquid,  only  C02O3  is
formed.  The  action  of  alkaline  hypochlorites  or  hypo-bromites,  or  of  iodine,  npon
cobaltic  salts,  gives  a  highly-coloured  precipitate  which  has  a  different  colour  to  the
hydrate  of  the  oxide  Co...(0H),5.  According  to  Carnot  the  precipitate  produced  by  the
hypochlorites  has  a  composition  CoioOi,„  whilst  that  given  by  iodine  in  the  presence  of
an  alkali  contains  a  larger  amount  of  oxygen.  Fortmann  (1891)  reinvestigated  the
composition  of  the  higher  oxygen  oxide  obtained  by  iodine  in  the  presence  of  alkali,  and
found  that  the  greenish  precipitate  (v.hich  disengages  oxygen  when  heated  to  100°)
corresponds  to  the  formula  CoO.,.  The  reaction  must  be  expressed  by  the  equation:
CoX.  + 1 .  +  4KHO  =  CoO.,  +  2KX  +  2KI  +  2H  .0.

^7  Prior  to  Fortmann,  Rousseau  (1h89)  endeavoured  to  solve  fhe  question  as  to
whether  CoO,.  was  able  to  combine  with  bases.  He  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  barium
compound  corresponding  to  this  oxide.  Fifteen  grams  of  BaCl.j  or  BaBr^  are  triturated
with  5-<)  grams  of  oxide  of  barium,  and  the  mixture  heated  to  redness  in  a  closed
platinum  crucible ;  I  gram  of  oxide  of  cobalt  is  then  gradually  atlded  to  the  fused  mass.
Each  addition  of  oxide  is  accompanied  by  a  violent  disengagement  of  oxygen.  After  a
short  time,  however,  the  mass  fuses  quietly,  and  a  salt  settles  at  the  bottom  of  the
crucible,  which,  when  freed  from  the  residue,  appears  as  black  hexagonal,  very  brilliant
crystals.  In  dissolving  in  water  this  substance  evolves  chlorine  ;  its  composition  corre-
sponds to  the  formula  2(CoO...)B^C.  If  the  original  mass  be  heated  for  a  long  time
(40  hours),  the  amount  of  dioxide  in  the  resultant  mass  decreases.  The  author  ob-
tained a  neutral  salt  having  the  composition  CoO.BaO  (this  compound  -BaO.,.CoO)
by  breaking  up  the  mass  as  it  agglomerates  together,  and  bringing  the  pieces  into
contact  witli  the  more  heated  surface  of  the  crucible.  This  salt  is  formed  between  the
somewhat  narrow  limits  of  temj)erature  1,000^-1,100'^ ;  above  and  below  these  limits
compounds  richer  or  poorer  in  CoO,,  are  formed.  The  fonnation  of  CoO_,  by  the  action
of  BaO..,  and  the  easy  decomposition  of  CoOo  with  the  evolution  of  oxygen,  give  reason
for  thinking  that  it  belongs  to  the  class  of  peroxides  (like  Cr  .O7,  CaO„  tVc.) ;  it  is  not  vet
known  whether  they  give  jieroxide  of  hydrogen  like  the  true  iK'roxides. The  fact  that

IROS. COBALT. AND NICKEL  8fi7

Nickel  alloys  piisseaa  qunlitiea  which  render  them  valu.'iljie  for
technical  purposes,  the  alloy  of  nickel  with  iron  being  particularly
remarkable.  This  alloy  is  met  witli  in  nature  as  tnvleoric  iron.  The
Pallasoffsky  mass  of  meteoric  iron,  preserved  in  the  St.  Peteraburg
Ai'iidemy,  fell  in  Siberia  in  the  last  century  ;  it  weigliR  about  15  cwt.
and  cimtains  88  p.c.  of  iron  and  about  10  p.c.  of  nickel,  with  e.
small  admixture  of  other  metals.  In  the  arts  (leriiuin  silver  is  m<«t
extensively  used  ;  it  is  an  alloy  containing  nickel,  copper,  and  zinc  in
various  proportions.  It  generally  con.sists  of  about  50  parts  of  copper,
25  parts  of  zinc,  and  2-'>  parts  of  nickel.  This  alloy  is  characterised  by
its  white  colour  resembling  that  of  silver,  and,  like  this  latter  metal,  it
does  not  rust,  and  therefore  furnishes  an  excellent  substitute  for  silver
in  the  majority  of  cases  where  it  is  used.  Alloys  which  contain  silver
in  addition  to  nickel  show  the  properties  of  stiver  to  a  .still  greater
extent.  Alloys  of  nickel  are  used  for  currenpy,  and  if  rich  deposits  *if
nickel  are  iliacovered  a  wide  tield  of  application  lies  before  it,  not  only
in  a  pure  state  (because  it  is  a  beautiful  metal  and  does  not  rust}'but>
also  for  use  in  alloys.  Steei  vessels  (pressed  or  forged  out  of  sheet
steel)  covered  with  nickel  have  such  practical  merits  that  their  mana-
facture,  which  has  not  long  commenced,  will  must  prolably  be  rapidly
developed,  whilst  nickel  steel,  wliich  exceeds  ordinary  steel  in  its
tenacity,  has  already  proved  its  ex.cellent  ({Ualities  for  many  pnrposeB
(for  instance,  for  armour  plate).

Until  1890  no  compound  of  cobalt  or  nickel  was  known  of  sullicient
volatility  to  determine  the  molecular  weights  of  the  compounds  '>t  these
metals  ;  hut  in  1890  Mr.  L.  Moiid,  in  conducting  (together  with  Langer
and  Quincke)  bis  researches  on  the  action  of  nickel  upon  carbonic  oxide
(Chapter  IX.,  Note  24  bis),  observed  that  nickel  gnwiuolly  volatilises  in
a  stream  of  carbonic  oxide  ;  this  only  takes  place  at  low  temperatures,
and  is  seen  by  the  coloration  of  the  flame  of  the  carbonic  oxide.  This
observation  led  to  the  discovery  of  a  remarkable  volatile  coiii/j(»ind  of
niekel  and  carbnnic  itxide,  having  as  molecular  composition  Ni(C0)4,^"

]( ift  obtiuned  by  meuts  of  iodme  fprobabl  j  ILroiif^h  HIO),  jldJ  its  great  reaemblLiivti
to  HnO.,.  leiLdB  rather  to  the  sniipoaitioii  that  CoO,  >a  a  very  feeble  Boliou  oiide.  The
form  CoO.,  ie  repeated  in  tiie  cobaltic  compoonils  (Note  S5j,  atid  liu-  r^niatence  of  CaO.j
ahonld  hare  long  ago  been  recognised  upon  thia  baaia.

>"  Thin  componnd  ia  hnoim  an  nickel  letra-cnrb>nij1.  It  appears  to  me  yet  premnlure
to  JQd|;e  of  tim  stracture  of  sDch  an  eitraordiniirj  coupmuid  aa  MilCO),.  It  hu  lon^
Invn  IninwD  that  potaHntam  i-umbinet  with  CO  Forming  K.|CO).  (Chapter  IX..  Note  31),
but  thia  gabalanco  ia  apparuntlf  xatioe  an-d  noii-Tolatile,  and  has  aa  little  in  comuion
with  Ni(CO),  a»  Na,H  has  with  SbH,.  However.  Berthelot  obserred  that  when  NiC,Ot
ia  kept  in  ait,  it  oxidiaea  and  give«  a  colourlesa  tniDponnd,  NijC^Oi.lOlIiO,  hairing
apparently  laline  propertiea.  We  muy  add  that  Sthatienber^r,  on  reducing  NiCL,  1^
heating  it  in  a  current  o(  hydrogen,  obatttsd  that  an-ckel  compound  partially  ToUtfliaea
with  the  HCl  and  gTTee  melallii^  nickrl  wlifH  healeil  ogaio. Tlie  platinnui  compound,

868  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

as  determined  by  the  vapour  density  and  depression  of  the  freezing
point.  Cobalt  and  many  other  metals  do  not  form  volatile  compounds
under  these  conditions,  but  iron  gives  a  similar  product  (Note  26  bis).
Ni(C0)4  is  prepared  by  taking  finely  divided  Ni  (obtained  by  reducing
NiO  by  heating  it  in  a  stream  of  hydrogen,  or  by  igniting  the  oxalate
NiC204)^^  and  passing  (at  a  temperature  below  50°,  for  even  at  60°
decomposition  may  take  place  and  an  explosion)  a  stream  of  CO  over
it ;  the  latter  carries  over  the  vapour  of  the  compound,  which  condenses
(in  a  well-cooled  receiver)  into  a  perfectly  colourless  extremely  mobile
liquid,  boiling  without  decomposition  at  43°,  and  crystallising  in  needles
at  —25°  (Mond  and  Nasini,  1891).  Liquid  Ni(C0)4  has  a  sp.  gr.  1-356
at  0°,  is  insoluble  in  water,  dissolves  in  alcohol  and  benzene,  and  burns
with  a  very  smoky  fiame  due  to  the  liberation  of  Ni.  The  vapour  when
passed  through  a  tube  heated  to  180°  and  above  deposits  a  brilliant
coating  of  metal,  and  disengages  CO.  If  the  tube  be  strongly  heated
the  decomposition  is  accompanied  by  an  explosion.  If  Ni(CO)4  *^
vapour  be  passed  through  a  solution  of  CuClj,  it  reduces  the  latter  to
metal ;  it  has  the  same  action  upon  anammoniacal  solution  of  AgCl,  strong
nitric  acid  oxidises  Ni(C0)4,  dilute  solutions  of  acids  have  no  action  ;
if  the  vapour  be  passed  through  strong  sulphuric  acid,  CO  is  liberated,
chlorine  gives  NiCl  and  COClj  ;  no  simple  reactions  of  double  decom-
position are  yet  known  for  Ni(C0)4,  however,  so  that  its  connection
with  other  carbon  compounds  is  not  clear.  Probably  the  formation  of
this  compound  could  be  applied  for  extracting  nickej  from  it  ores.^®

PtCl,,(CO).->  (Chapter  XXIII.,  Note  11),  offerH  the  greatest  analogy  to  Ni(C0)4.  This
compound  was  obtained  as  a  vohxtile  substance  by  Schutzenberger  by  moderatpely
heating  (to  235*^)  metallic  platinum  in  a  mixture  of  chlorine  and  carbonic  oxide.  If  we
desipiate  CO  by  Y,  and  an  atom  of  chlorine  by  X,  then  taking  into  account  that,
according  to  the  periodic  system,  Ni  is  an  analogue  of  Pt,  a  certain  degree  of  corre-
spondence  is  seen  in  the  composition  NiY4  and  PtX-^Y.^,,  It  would  be  interesting  to
compare  the  reactions  of  the  two  com[)ounds.

•'^  According  to  its  empirical  formula  oxalate  of  nickel  also  contains  nickel  and
carbonic  oxide.

■*o  Tlie  following  are  the  thermo-chemical  datii  (according  to  Thomsen,  and  referred
to  gram  weights  expressed  by  tlie  formula,  in  large  calories  or  thousand  units  of  heat)
for  the  fonnation  of  corresponding  compounds  of  Mn,  Fe,  Co,  Ni,  and  Cu  (  +  Aq  signifies
that  the  reaction  proceeds  in  an  excess  of  water) :

R  =  Mn

Fe

Co

Ni

Cu

R  +  CL-i  Aq

1'2H

100

95

94

63

R  +  Br.2  +  Aq

10(5

78

73

72

41

R  +  I .  +  Aq

7»;

48

43

41

82

R  +  d-l  H^O

Dr.

(W

63

61

88

R  +  0.,  +  SO^

f  ;<H..,0

198

ir.9

1C.3

163

130

RCl.  +  Aq

+  1G

18

18

19

11

Tliese  examples  show  that  for  analogous  reactions  the  amount  of  heat  evolved  in
passing  from  Mn  to  Fe,  Co,  Ni,  and  Cu  varies  in  reguhir  sequences  as  the  atomic  weight
increases,  A  similar  difference  is  to  be  found  in  other  groups  and  series,  and  proves
that  thermo-chemical  phenomena  are  subject  to  the  periodic  law.

CHAPTER XXIII

TQB PLATtKUM METALS

Tub  six  metals  :  rutheniiuD,  Ru,  rhodium,  Rh,  palladium,
On,  iridium,  Ir,  and  platinum,  Pt,  are  met  witti  associated  together  io
nature.  Platinum  always  predominates  over  the  others,  and  hence
they  are  known  oa  the  platinum  vtelale.  By  their  chemical  cliaracter
their  position  in  the  periodic  system  b  in  the  eighth  group,  correspond-
ing with  iron,  cobalt,  and  nickel.

The  natural  transition  from  titanium  and  vanadium  to  copper  and
zinc  by  means  of  the  elements  of  the  iron  group  is  demonstrated  by  all
the  properties  of  these  elements,  aud  in  exactly  the  same  manner  a
transition  from  zirconium,  niobium,  and  molybdenum  to  silver,  cadmium,
and  indium,  through  ruthenium,  rhodium,  and  palladium,  is  in  perfect
accordance  with  fact  and  with  the  magnitude  of  the  atomic  weights,  as
also  is  the  position  of  osmium,  iridium,  and  platinum  between  tantalum
and  tungsten  on  the  one  side,  and  gold  and  mercury  on  the  other.  In
all  these  three  eases  the  elements  of  smaller  atomic  weight  (chromium,
molybdenum,  and  tungsten)  ai'e  able,  in  their  higher  grades  of
oxidation,  to  give  acid  oxides  having  the  properties  of  distinct  but
feehly  energetic  acids  (in  the  lower  oxides  they  give  bases),  whilst  the
elementa  of  greater  atomic  weight  (line,  cadmium,  mercury),  even  in
their  higher  grades  of  oxidation,  only  give  bases,  although  with  feebly
developed  Iwisic  properties.  The  platinum  metals  present  the  same
intermediate  properties  such  as  we  have  already  seen  in  iron  aud  the
elements  of  the  eighth  group,

In  the  platinum  metals  the  intermediate  properties  of  feebfy  acid
and  f'xbly  ba»ic  metals  are  developed  with  great  clearness,  so  that
there  is  not  one  sharply -defined  acid  anhydride  .among  their  oxides,
although  there  is  a  great  diversity  in  the  gi'ades  of  oxidation  from  the
type  RO,  Ifl  RjO.  The  feelileuess  '.'f  the  chemical  forces  observed  in
the  platinum  metals  is  connected  with  the  ready  decomposability  of
their  compounds,  with  the  small  atomic  volume  of  the  metals  thetn-

VOL,  II.  B  B

i

870  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

selves,  and  with  their  large  atomic  weight.  The  oxides  of  platinum,
iridium,  and  osmium  can  scarcely  be  termed  either  basic  or  acid  ;  thej
are  capable  of  combinations  of  both  kinds,  each  of  which  is  feeble.
They  are  all  intermediate  oxides.

The  atomic  weights  of  platinum,  iridium,  and  osmium  are  nearlj
191  to  196,  and  of  palladium,  rhodium,  and  ruthenium,  104  to  106.
Thus,  strictly  speaking,  we  have  here  two  series  of  metals,  which
are,  moreover,  perfectly  parallel  to  each  other  ;  three  members  in
the  first  series,  and  three  members  in  the  second — namely,  platinum
presents  an  analogy  to  palladium,  iridium  to  rhodium,  and  osmium
to  ruthenium.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  the  whole  group  of  the
platinum  metals  is  characterised  by  a  number  of  common  properties,
both  physical  and  chemical,  and,  moreover,  there  are  several  points  of
resemblance  between  the  members  of  this  group  and  those  of  the  iron
group  (Chapter  XXII.)  The  atomic  volumes  (Table  III.,  column  18)
of  the  elements  of  this  group  are  nearly  equal  and  very  small.  The  iron
metals  have  atomic  volumes  of  nearly  7,  whilst  that  of  the  metals  allied
to  palladium  is  nearly  9,  and  of  those  adjacent  to  platinum  (Pt,  Ir,  Os,)
nearly  9*4.  This  comparatively  small  atomic  volume  corresponds  wiUi
the  great  infusibility  and  tenacity  proper  to  all  the  iron  and  platinum
metals,  and  to  their  small  chemical  energy,  which  stands  out  very
clearly  in  the  heavy  platinum  metals.  All  the  platinum  metals  are
very  easily  reduced  by  ignition  and  by  the  action  of  various  reducing
agents,  in  which  process  oxygen,  or  a  haloid  group,  is  disengaged  from
their  compounds  and  the  metal  left  behind.  This  is  a  property  of  the
platinum  metals  which  determines  many  of  their  reactions,  and  the
circumstance  of  their  always  being  found  in  nature  in  a  native  state.
In  Russia  in  the  Urals  (discovered  in  1819)  and  in  Brazil  (1735)
platinum  is  obtained  from  alluvial  deposits,  but  in  1892  Professor
Inostrantseff  discovered  a  vein  deposit  of  platinum  in  serpentine  near
Tagil  in  the  Urals.*  The  facility  with  which  they  are  reduced  is  so
great  that  their  chlorides  are  even  decomposed  by  gaseous  hydrogen,
especially  when  shaken  up  and  heated  under  a  certain  pressure.  Hence
it  will  be  readily  understood  that  such  metals  as  zinc,  iron,  «fec.,  separate
them  from  solutions  with  great  ease,  which  fact  is  taken  advantage  of
in  practice  and  in  the  chemical  treatment  of  the  platinum  metals.^  ***•

1  Wells  and  Penfield  (1888)  have  described  a  mineral  8perr}'llite  found  in  the  Canadian
gold-bearing  quartz  and  consisting  of  platinum  diarsfnide,  PtAs...  It  is  a  noticeable  fact
that  this  mineral  clearly  confirms  the  position  of  platinum  in  the  same  groap  as  iron,
because  it  corresi^nds  in  crystalline  fonn  (regular  octahedron)  and  chemical  composition
with  iron  pyrites,  FeSo.

•  b>*  Some  light  is  thrown  upon  the  facility  with  which  the  platinum  compoonda
decompose  by  Thomson's  data,  showing  that  in  an  excess  of  water  (  + Aq)  the  formation

THE  PLATmUM  METALB  371

All  tlie  platinum  metula,  like  those  of  the  iron  group,  uregrey,  with
n  comparatively  feeble  metallic  lustre,  and  are  very  infusiMe.  In  this
respect  they  stand  in  the  same  order  as  the  metals  of  the  iron  series  ;
tiiekpl  is  more  fusil  ile  and  whiter  than  cobalt  and  iron,  so  also  palla-
dium is  whiter  and  more  fusihle  thtui  rhodiun\  and  rutheninm,  and
pUtinum  is  comparatively  more  fusible  and  whiter  than  iridium  or
osmium.  The  saline  compounds  of  these  metals  are  red  or  yellow,  like
those  of  thu  majority  of  the  metals  of  the  iron  series,  and  like  the
latter,  the  different  forms  of  oxidation  present  different  colours.  More-
over, certain  complex  compounds  nf  the  platinum  metals,  like  certain
complex  compounds  of  the  iron  series,  either  have  particular  character-
istic tints  or  else  are  colourless.

The  platinum  metals  are  found  m  nahire  iMsocin(i;d  tix/etker  in
aJiuvia!  di-jiimiis  in  a  few  localities,  from  which  they  are  washed,
owing  to  their  I'ery  considerable  density,  which  eiuiblea  a  stream  of
water  to  wash  away  the  sand  and  clay  with  which  they  are  mixed.
Platinum  deposits  are  chiefly  known  in  the  Umls,  and  also  in  Braxil
and  a  few  other  localities.  The  platinum  ore  washed  from  these
alluvial  deposits  presents  the  appearance  of  more  or  less  coarse  grains,
and  sometimes,  as  it  were,  of  serai-fused  nuggets.*'

All  the  platinum  metals  give  ci>mpound3  with  the  halogens,  and  the
highest  haloid  type  of  combination  for  all  is  RX,.  For  the  majority
of  the  platinum  metals  this  type  is  exceedingly  unstable  ;  the  lower
compounds  corresponding  to  the  type  RX„  which  are  formed  by  the
spparation  of  X„  are  more  stable.  In  the  type  RX^  the  platinum
metais  form  more  stable  salts,  which  offer  no  little  resemblance  to

from  plfttJDuiu.  of  anch  a  double  wit  (w  PtCl^SKa,  is  a

sniiil]  evolatJon  of  heal  (>m  Chapter  XXI.,  Kote  40|,  I,

only  BVolveB  about  aS.UOO  Mlorie* (henm  the  reaction, I't-tCl,j  +  4ii, will  eYidently

di  sen  gage  still  leaa,  becaoM  PtCl,  +  aKCl  eraWea  a  certain  amount  al  heat),  whilst  on

the  other  band,  Fei-Clj-t-Aq  gives  100,000  caloriea,  and  even  the  reaction  with  copper

(for  the  tonnatioo  ol  the  double  salt)  evotvex  93,000  valoriea.

'  The  largeat  amount  of  platinum  is  extracted  in  the  Urals,  about  five  tons  anauaUy,
A  certain  nnioDDl  ol  gold  i>  eitracted  from  the  waaliod  platinum  by  meana  of  mercnrj'.
which  does  not  diHaolie  the  platinum  metals  but  diiBolTea  the  gold  accompanying  the
platinnm  in  its  orea.  Moreover,  the  orea  of  platinum  alwaya  contain  nietala  of  the  iron
iieriea  asaocialed  with  them.  The  washed  and  mechaBieally  sorted  ore  in  the  mujorit;
of  csHeB  conlaine  uboot  TO  to  SO  p.c.  of  platinuDi,  about  [>  to  B  p.c,  of  iridium,  and  a  khdo-
what  eiDaHcr  quantjt;  of  onniani.  The  other  platioom  melala — palladium,  Thodiom,  add
ruthonium — occur  in  smaller  proportions  than  the  three  above  named.  SoioeUmes  graiiu
of  almost  pore  osmium- iridium,  containing  oalj  a  sma]]  quantitr  nf  other  metala,  ore
found  iu  platinum  oree.  Thin  oimiiim-iridiufn  may  be  eamly  separated  from  the  othsr
platinum  metals,  owing  to  its  being  nearly  iicsoloble  in  aqua  refria,  by  which  the  latter
are  eaiily  dissolved.  There  am  graiDv  of  platinum  which  are  magnetic.  The  grains  of
osmi am- indium  are  very  hard  and  malleable,  and  are  therefore  used  for  certain  pai.
poeei.  lor  inslAnce,  for  the  tips  of  gold  pens.

372  PRI>X1PLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

the  kindred  compouBds  of  the  iron  series — ^for  example,  to  nickeloiis
chloride,  NiCl,,  cobaltoas  chloride,  CoCl^,  &c.  This  even,  expresses
it-self  in  a  similarity  of  volume  (platinotis  chloride,  PtCl^,  Tolume,  46  ;
nickelowi  chloride,  NiClj  =  50),  although  in  the  type  RX^  the  tme  iron
metals  give  very  stable  compounds,  whilst  the  platinom  metals  fre-
quently react  after  the  manner  of  suboxides,  decomposing  into  the
metal  and  higher  types,  2RX2  =  R  +  RX4.  This  probably  depends  on
the  facility  with  which  RX2  decomposes  into  R  and  X^  when  X^
combines  with  the  remaining  portion  of  RX,.

As  in  the  series  iron,  cobalt,  nickel,  nickel  gives  NiO  and  Ni^Oj,
whilst  cobalt  and  iron  give  higher  and  varied  forms  of  oxidation,  so
also  among  the  platinum  metals,  platinum  and  palladium  only  give  the
forms  RX2  and  RX4,  whilst  rhodium  and  iridium  form  another  and
intermediate  type,  RX3,  also  met  with  in  cobalt,  corresponding  with
the  oxide,  having  the  composition  R2O3,  besides  which  they  form
an  acid  oxide,  like  ferric  acid,  which  is  also  known  in  the  form  of
salts,  but  is  in  every  respect  unstable.  Osmium  and  ruthenium^  like
manganese,  form  still  higher  oxides,  and  in  this  respect  exhibit  the
greatest  diversity.  They  not  only  give  RXj,  RX3,  RX4,  and  RX^,
but  also  a  still  higher  form  of  oxidation,  RO4,  which  is  not  met  with  in
any  other  series.  This  form  is  exceedingly  characteristic,  owing  to  the
fact  that  the  oxidas,  OSO4  and  RUO4,  are  volatile  and  have  feebly  acid
properties.  In  this  respect  they  most  resemble  permanganic  anhydride,
which  is  also  somewhat  volatile.^

When  dissolved  in  aqua  regia  (PtCl,  is  formed)  and  liberated  from
the  solution  by  sal-ammoniac  ( (NH4)2  PtClf,  is  formed)  and  reduced  by
ignition  (which  may  be  done  by  Zn  and  other  reducing  agents,  direct
from  a  solution  of  PtClj)  platinum  ^  ***"*  forms  a  powdery  mass,  known

•^  In  charocteriHing  the  platinum  metals  according  to  their  relation  to  the  iron  metalti,
it  iw  very  imix)rtant  to  add  two  more  very  remarkable  points.  The  platinum  metals  are
ca])able  of  forming  a  sort  of  unstable  compound  with  hydrogen  ;  they  absorb  it  and  only-
part  with  it  when  somewhat  strongly  heated.  This  faculty  is  especially  developed  in
platinum  and  palladium,  and  it  is  xery  characteristic  that  nickel,  which  exactly  corresponds
with  platinum  and  palladium  in  the  periodic  system,  should  exhibit  the  same  faculty  for
retaining  a  considerable  (quantity  of  liydrogen  (Graham's  and  Raoalt's  experiments).
Another  characteristic  proj^rty  of  the  platinum  metals  consists  in  their  easily  giving
(like  cobalt  which  forms  the  cobaltic  salts)  stable  and  characteristic  saline  compounds
with  ammonia,  and  like  Fe  and  Co,  double  salts  with  the  cyanides  of  the  alkali  metals,
«s\>(»cially  in  their  lower  forms  of  combination.  All  the  above  so  clearly  brings  the
elements  of  the  iron  series  in  close  relation  to  the  platinum  metals,  that  the  eighth  group
accpiires  as  natural  a  character  as  can  be  required,  with  a  certain  originality  or  indivi-
duality for  each  element.

.1  bin  platinuni  was  first  obtained  in  the  last  century  from  Brazil,  where  it  was  called
silver  (platinus).  Watson  in  1750  characterised  platinum  as  a  separate  independent
metal. In  1H08  Wollaston  discovered alladium  and  rhodium  in  crude  platinum,  and  at

THE  PLATnmi  METAL9  378

as  spongy  platinum  or  platlQUm  black.  If  this  powder  of  phitinum  lie
heat«d  and  pressed,  or  hammered  in  a  cylinder,  the  gmiiia  agj^regate  or
forge  together,  and  form  a  cootinuoua,  though  of  courfie  not  entirely
homogeneous,  mass.  Flatinuui  was  formerly,  and  is  even  now,  worked
up  in  this  manner.  The  platinum  money  formerly  used  in  Russia  waa
made  in  this  way.  Sainte-Ciaire  I'evilie,  in  the  fifties,  for  the  first
time  melted  platinum  in  considerable  quantities  by  employing  a  special
furnace  made  in  the  form  of  a  small  reverberatory  furnace,  and  com-
poiM^d  of  two  pieces  of  lime,  on  whicb  the  Lent  of  the  oxyhydrogen  flame
has  no  action.  Into  this  furnaee  (shiown  in  tig.^4,  Vol.  I.  p.  lT5)-~i>r,
mure  strictly  speaking,  into  the  cavity  made  in  the  pieces  of  lime — the
platinum  is  introduced,  and  two  orifices  are  made  in  the  lime  ;  through
one,  the  upper,  or  side  orifice,  is  introduced  an  oxyhydrogen  gas  burner,
in  which  either  detonating  gas  or  a  mixture  of  oxygen  and  coal-ga.s  is
burnt,  whilst  the  other  orifice  serves  for  the  escape  of  the  products  of
combuHtion  and  certain  impurities  which  are  more  volatile  than  the
platinum,  and  especially  the  oxidised  compounds  of  osmium,  ruthenium,
and  palladium,  which  are  comparatively  easily  volatilised  by  heat  In
this  manner  the  platinum  is  converted  into  a  continuous  metallic  form
by  means  of  fusion,  and  this  method  is  now  used  for  njelting  consider-
able masses  of  platinum*  and  its  alloys  with  iridium,
nbout  tJie  same  time  Teimunl  diBiing^uiRheil  iridium  and  osmium  iu  il,  Proleaaor  CUdh,
of  Euan,  in  bin  rasearclieB  od  the  ptotinaui  meta.la  iklwat  1S4U)  discoiOTed  ratbenlDin
in  them,  uid  to  him  are  due  nika;  importiuit  diWMiyoriea  witli  rogud  to  Uighc  eleraeiitB,
incli  M  the  indiCHtiDn  □!  the  remarkable  aiialoiiiy  between  the  iieries  Pd— Rh— Ku  wid
Pt— II-- Oa.

Tilt  trmlmonl  <•;  platiiiKmorf  it cbieSyntTried  on  for Cbo  extmction  of  theplaliauin
itielf  uid  iu  Moys  witb  iridiam,  beoiuie  these  mtilols  offer  «  greater  reHiitance  to  the
action  of  chemical  reagent*  and  high  temperatures  Ih&n  an;  ol  the  othei  undlenblc  and
dn*  tile  metaU,  and  therafon  the  viie  so  oftan  need  in  the  laboratory  aud  for  technical
[Hupoaeii  JH  made  from  ttum,  ai  also  are  Torioiu  lecsels  aaed  for  ijieniical  purposes  in
the  Uliorator;  and  in  works.  Thai  snlphuric  acid  is  distilled  in  platinum  retun>.  and
many  substances  are  fnaed,  i^ited,  and  e>faporated  in  the  laboratory  in  platinom
cnieibles  and  on  platinma  fcrit.  Gold  snd  many  other  substances  are  dissolved  in  dishes
made  ol  iridium-plstiuum,  because  the  aUoys  of  platinum  and  iridium  ore  hut  liiglilly
attarkcd  when  subjected  to  the  action  nl  aqua  regia.

The  oompaiativety  high  density  (about  3 1*5|,  hudnesv,  ductility,  and  infusibility  i  it
docs  not  melt  at  a  fonmce  heat,  but  only  in  the  oiyhydrogen  tiome  or  olectriu  lumace),
as  well  as  the  tact  of  it*  resiiiliiig  the  action  of  water,  air,  and  othxr  reageuts.  rduders  ui
alloy  of  90  parts  o(  pUtinuro  and  10  pacta  of  iridium  (Deville's  phitinnm- iridium  alloyi  ■
most  valuable  material  for  muking  standard  weights  oud  meaimres,  such  a*  the  metm,
kilnjiTam,  and  pound,  and  therefore  all  lUe  newest  standunU  of  moal  connlries  are  tuaile
of  this  slloy.

■  This  proces*  haa  altered  the  technical  treatment  of  platinum  Id  a  considerable
eitent.  It  ha*  in  particular  facilitated  th«  mouufaclure  of  alloys  of  platinum  with
iridium  and  rhodium  from  the  pure  platijium  ores,  since  it  is  sufficient  to  fuse  the
ore  in  onler  for  the  greater  amonnt  ol  the  oBmium  to  bum  off,  and  for  the  moos  to  fuse
into  ■  homogeneous,  malleable  aUoy,  which  con  be  directly  made  ua«  of.  There  i^  very
tittle  rutbenium  in  the  ores  of  platinum. If  during  fusio;]  lead  be  ndded.  i[  diutolies

874  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

To  obtain  pure  platinum,  the  ore  is  treated  with  aqua  regia  in  which
only  the  osmium  and  iridium  are  insoluble. The  solution  contains  the
platinum  metals  in  the  form  RCI4,  and  in  the  lower  forms  of  chlorina-
tion, RCI3  and RCI2,  because some  of  these metals — for  instance,
palladium  and  rhodium — form  such  unstable  chlorides  of  the  type  RX4
that  they  partially  decompose  even  when  diluted  with  water,  and  pass
into  the  stable  lower  type  of  combination  ;  in  addition  to  which  the
chlorine  is  very  easily  disengaged  if  it  comes  in  contact  with  substances
on  which  it  can  act. In  this  respect  platinum  resists  the  action  of
heat  and  reducing  agei^ts  better  than  any  of  its  companions — that  is,
it  passes  with  greater  difficulty  from  PtCl4  to  the  lower  compound
PtClj. On  this  is  based  the  method  of  preparation  of  more  or  less
pure  platinum. Lime  or  sodium  hydroxide  is  added  to  the  solution  in
aqua  regia  until  neutralised,  or  only  containing  a  very  slight  excess  of
alkali. It  is  best  to  first  evaporate  and  slightly  ignite  the  solution,  in
oi*der  to  remove  the  excess  of  acid,  and  by  heating  it  to  partially  con-
vert the  higher  chlorides  of  the  palladium,  &c.,  into  the  lower. The
addition  of  alkalis  completes  the  reduction,  because  the  chlorine  held
in  the  compounds  RX^  acts  on  the  alkali  like  free  chlorine,  converting
it  into  a  hypochlorite. Thus  palladium  chloride,  PdCl4,  for  example,
is  converted  into  palladious  chloride,  PdClg,  by  this  means,  according
to  the  equation  PdCl4  +  2NaHO=PdCl2  +  NaCl-f  NaClO  +  HaO. In
a  similar  manner  iridic  chloride,  IrCl4,  is  converted  into  the  trichloride,
IrClg,  by  this  method. When  this  conversion  takes  place  the  platinum
still  remains  in  the  form  of  platinic  chloride,  PtCl4. It  is  then  possible
to  take  advantage  of  a  certain  difference  in  the  properties  of  the  higher
and  lower  chlorides  of  the  platinum  metals. Thus  lime  precipitates  the
lower  chlorides  of  the  members  of  the  platinum  metals  occurring  in
solution  without  acting  on  the  platinic  chloride,  PtCl4,  and  hence  the
addition  of  a  large  proportion  of  lime  immediately  precipitates the
associated  metals,  leaving  the  platinum  itself  in  solution  in  the  form
of  a  soluble  double  salt,  PtCl4,CaC1.2. A  far  better  and  more  perfect

the  platinum  (and  other  platinum  metals)  owing  to  its  being  able  to  form  a  very  charac-
teristic alloy  containing  PtPb.  If  an  alloy  of  the  two  metals  be  left  exposed  to  moist
air,  the  excess  of  lead  is  converted  into  carbonate  (white  lead)  in  the  presence  of  Uie
water  and  carbonic  atrid  of  the  air,  whilst  the  above  platinum  alloy  remains  unchanged.
The  white  lead  may  be  extracted  by  dilute  acid,  and  the  alloy  PtPb  remains  unaltered.
The  other  platinum  metals  also  give  similar  alloys  with  lead.  The  fusibility  of  these
alloys  enables  the  platinum  metals  to  be  separated  from  the  gangue  of  the  ore,  and  they
may  afterwards  be  separated  from  the  lead  by  subjecting  the  alloy  to  oxidation  in
furnaces  furnished  with  a  \yone  ash  bed,  because  the  lead  is  then  oxidised  and  absorbed
by  the  bone  ash,  leaving  the  platinum  metals  untouched.  This  method  of  treatment
was  proposed  by  H.  Sainte-Claire  Deville  in  the  sixties,  and  is  also  used  in  the  analysis  of
these  metals  {srf  further  on).

THE  PLATINUH  HETALS  SIS

reparation  is  effected  by  mean«  of  nmmtniitiin  chloride,  which  givea,  with
platinic  chloride,  an  insoluble  yellow  precipitate,  PtCl„2NH,CI,  whilst
it  forms  soluble  double  salts  with  the  lower  chlorides  RClj  and  RClj,
so  that  aniQionium  chloride  precipitates  the  platinum  ouly  from  the
solution  obtained  by  the  preceding  method.  These  methods  are
employed  for  prepariog  the  platinum  which  is  used  for  the  manufacture
of  platinum  articleti,  because,  having  platinum  in  eolution  as  calcium
platinochloride,  PtCaClg,  or  as  the  insoluble  ammoniuni  plaCinochloride,
Pt(NH,)jCig,  the  platinum  compound  in  every  case,  after  dcying  or
ignition,  loses  all  the  chlorine  from  the  platinic  chloride  and  leaves  finely-
divided  metallic  platinum,  which  may  be  converted  into  homogeneous
metal  by  compression  and  forging,  or  by  fusion.'

^  For  the  ulbimnte  puriGcatioD  of  plntiiiiuu  from  iiallndliuu  And  iridium  the  metftU
muut  be  re-diuolved  in  aqua  Kgiii,  anJ  tlie  wlutioD  evaporated  until  the  Tssidue  begins
to  evolre  chlorine.  The  TcHidne  is  than  rG^predpitaled  irith  ommoniam  or  potaiBium
chlotide.  The  precipitate  may  still  contain  a  certain  omonut  of  iridium,  irhich  paAoea
with  greater  dilGcaltjr  from  the  tetrachloride,  IrCI^  into  the  trichloride,  IrClj.  but  it  will
be  quite  free  from  pallodiom,  because  the  latter  easily  loses  its  chlorine  and  pauses  into
palladioas  chloride,  PdClg,  which  gives  an  emily-Boluble  salt  with  potasaiam  chloride.
The  precipitate,  containing  a  small  quontitj'  of  iridiom,  ia  then  heated  with  sodium
carbonate  in  a  crocible,  when  the  ma»  decomposes,  giving  metallic  platinum  and
iridiciRi  oxide.  If  potaHsium  chloride  has  been  employed,  the  residue  after  ignition  is
washed  with  water  and  treated  with  aqua  r^ia.  The  iridium  oxide  remainfi  Dudissolved,
aiid  the  platinum  eswiy  passes  into  solution.  Only  cold  and  dilute  aqua  regia  most  be
used.  The  solution  will  then  contain  pure  platinic  chloride,  which  Forms  the  starting-
point  [or  the  preparation  ot  all  platiuuiu  oompounda.  Pare  platiuani  for  accurate
resBorctuw  (for  iuatonce,  for  the  unit  of  light,  according  to  Violle'a  method)  may  be
obtained  (Uylins  and  Foerstet,  IsaS)  by  Finfcener'a  method,  by  disBolring  the  impiue
metal  in  aqoa  regia  (it  should  be  eraporated  to  drive  oil  the  nitrogen  compoondsj,  and
addiug  KaCI  so  as  to  form  a  double  sodinm  aalt,  which  ia  purified  by  crystallising  with  a
small  amount  of  caustic  soda,  washing  the  crystals  with  a  strong  solution  of  NaCI,  and
then  diasolving  them  in  a  hot  1  p.c.  solution  of  soda,  repeating  the  above  and  ultimately
Igniting  tlie  doable  salt,  previoosly  dried  at  1M°,  in  a  stream  of  hydrogen ;  platinom
black  and  NaCl  are  then  foimed.  The  three  following  are  very  sensitive  teats  (to
thousandths  o(  a  pet  cent.)  lor  the  prewnce  ul  Ir,  Ra,  Hh,  Fd  (osmium  is  not  usually
preeent  in  platinum  which  has  once  been  purifled,  since  it  easily  volatilisen  with  Clj
and  CO],  and  in  the  first  treatment  of  the  cmdo  platinum  either  passea  off  as  OsO,
or  remains  undissolved).  Fe,  Cu,  Ag,  and  Fh:  <1)  the  assay  is  alloyed  with  10  porta  of
pare  lend,  the  alloy  treated  with  dilute  nitric  acid  |lo  remove  the  greater  part  of  the
Fill,  and  diaaolved  in  aqua  regia;  the  reaidae  will  consist  ot  Ir  and  Ru;  the  Fb  is
precipitated  from  the  nitric  acid  sidntioa  by  sulphuric  aoid,  whihtt  the  remaining
platinum  metola  are  redaccd  Irom  the  evaporated  aolution  by  tormie  acid,  and  the
resultant  precipitate  luaed  with  KHSO, ;  the  Pd  and  Rh  are  thus  converted  into  soluble
salts,  and  the  farmer  is  then  pcei^ipitated  by  HgC^Nj.  (3)  Iron  may  be  detected  by  tbo
usual  reagents,  if  the  erode  platinum  be  dissolved  in  aqua  regis,  and  the  platinum
metals  precipitated  From  the  solution  by  lormic  acid.  (8)  It  crude  platinum  (as  foil  or
sponge)  be  heated  in  a  mixture  ot  clJoiine  arid  carbonic  oxide  it  volatilises  twith  a
certain  amount  of  Ir,  Fd,  Fe,  lie.)  as  PtCi„SCO  (Note  U),  whilst  the  whole  of  the  Bh,
Ag,  and  Cu  it  may  contain  remiuna  behind.  Among  otiier  characteristic  reactions  tol
the  platinum  metals,  we  may  laeution:  (1)  lliat  ihodimn  is  precipitated  from  tliesolatian
obtained  atter  fusion  with  iCHSO^  [>n  wliich  Ft  dues  not  dissolve)  by  NHj,  acetic  and
tannic  acids;  (S)  that  dilute  aqua  regia  diHwlves  prccipiUted  Ft.  but  not  Rb  ;  13)  that

876  PHINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Metallic  platinum  in  a  fused  state  has  a  specific  gravity  of  2 1  ;  it
is  grey,  softer  than  iron  but  harder  than  copper,  exceedingly  dnctiley
and  therefore  easily  drawn  into  wire  and  rolled  into  thin  sheets,  and
may  be  hammered  into  crucibles  and  drawn  into  thin  tubes,  dec.  In
the  state  in  which  it  is  obtained  by  the  ignition  of  its  compounds,
it  forms  a  spongy  mass,  known  as  spongy  platinum,  or  else  as  powder
(platinum  black).^  In  either  case  it  is  dull  grey,  and  is  characterised,
as  we  already  know,  by  the  faculty  of  absorbing  hydrogen  and  other
gases.  Platinum  is  not  acted  on  by  hydrochloric,  hydriodic,  nitric,  and
sulphuric  acids,  or  a  mixture  of  hydrofluoric  and  nitric  acids.  Aqua
regia,  and  any  liquid  containing  chlorine  or  able  to  evolve  chlorine  or
bromine,  dissolves  platinum.  Alkalis  are  decomposed  by  platinum  at
a  red  heat,  owing  to  the  faculty  of  the  platinum  oxide,  PtO^,  formed  to
combine  with  alkaline  bases,  inasmuch  as  it  has  a  feebly-developed  acid
character  {see  Note 8). Sulphur,  phosphorus  (the  phosphide,  PtPj,

if  the  insolable  residue  of  the  platinum  metals  (Ir,  Ra,  Os)  obtained,  after  treating  with
aqna  regia,  be  fused  with  a  mixture  of  1  part  of  KNO5  and  8  parts  of  K9CO3  (in  a  gold
crucible),  and  then  treated  with  water,  it  gives  a  solution  containing  the  Ru  (and  a
portion  of  the  Ir),  but  which  throws  it  all  down  when  saturated  with  chlorine  and
boiled ;  (4)  that  if  iridium  be  fused  with  a  mixture  of  KHO  and  KNO5,  it  gives  a  soluble
potassium  salt,  IrK204  (the  solution  is  blue),  which,  when  saturated  with  chlorine,  giree
IrCl^,  which  is  precipitated  by  NH4CI  (the  precipitate  is  black),  forming  a  doable  salt,
leaving  metallic  Ir  after  ignition ;  (5)  that  rhodium  mixed  with  NaCl  and  ignited  in  a
current  of  chlorine  gives  a  soluble  double  salt  (from  which  sal-ammoniac  separates  Pt
and  Ir),  which  gives  (according  to  Jorgensen)  a  difficultly  soluble  purpureo-salt  (Chapter
XXII.,  Note  85),  Rh2Cl3,5NH3,  when  treated  with  NH3;  in  this  form  the  Rh  may  be
easily  purified  and  obtained  in  a  metallic  form  by  igniting  in  hydrogen ;  and  (6)  th*t
palladium,  dissolved  in  aqua  regia  and  dried  (NH4CI  throws  down  anyPt),  gives  soluble
PdClo,  which  forms  an  easily  crystallisable  yellow  salt,  PdCl.^NHs,  with  ammonia  ;  this
salt  (Wilm)  may  be  easily  purified  by  crystallisation,  and  gives  metallic  Pd  when
ignited.  These  reaclions  illustrate  the  method  of  separating  the  platinum  metals  from
each  other.

^  We  have  already  become  acquainted  with  the  effect  of  finely-divided  platinum  on
many  gaseous  substances.  It  is  best  seen  in  the  so-called  j)latinum  blackj  which  is  a
coal-black  powder  left  by  the  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on  the  alloy  of  zinc  and  platinum
or  which  is  precipitated  by  metallic  zinc  from  a  dilute  solution  of  platinum.  In  any
case,  finely-divided  platinum  absorbs  gases  more  powerfully  and  rapidly  the  more
finely  divided  and  porous  it  is.  Sulphurous  anhydride,  hydrogen,  alcohol,  and  many
organic  substances  in  the  presence  of  such  platinum  are  easily  oxidised  by  the  oxygen  of
the  air,  although  they  do  not  combine  with  it  directly.  7'he  absorption  of  oxygen  is  as
much  as  several  hundred  volumes  per  one  volume  of  platinum,  acd  the  oxidising  power
of  such  absorbed  oxygen  is  taken  advantage  of  not  only  in  the  laboratory  but  even  in
manufacturing  processes.  Asbestos  or  charcoal,  soaked  in  a  solution  of  platinic  chloride
and  ignited,  is  very  useful  for  this  purpose,  because  by  this  means  it  becomes  coated  with
platinum  black.  If  50  grams  of  PtClj  be  dissolved  in  60  c.c.  of  water,  and  70  c.c.  of  a
strong  (40  p.c.)  solution  of  formic  aldehyde  added,  the  mixture  cooled,  and  then  a
solution  of  50  grams  of  NaHO  in  50  grams  of  water  added,  the  platinum  is  pre-
cipitated. After  washing  with  water  the  precipitate  passes  into  solution  and  forms  a
black  liquid  containing  soluble  colloidal  platinum  (Loew,  1890).  If  the  precipitated
platinum  be  allowed  to  absorb  oxygen  on  the  filter,  the  temperature  rises  40°,  and  a
very  porous  jp7a^j« Mm  black  is  obtained  which  vigorously  facilitates  oxidation.

THE  FLATTin'M  MBTALS  S77

is  formed),  arsenic  and  silicon  all  act  more  or  less  rapidly  on  plaLinuni,
under  the  iiiQuence  of  heat.  Many  of  the  metals  form  alloys  with  it.
Even  charcoal  combines  with  platinum  when  it  is  ignited  with  it,  and
therefore  carbonaceous  matter  cannot  be  Bubjected  to  pnilongcd  and
powerful  ignitionin  platinum  vessels.  Hence  a  platinum  crucible  soon
becomes  dull  on  the  surface  in  a  smoky  Hame.  Platinum  also  forms
alloys  with  zinc,  Jeiid,  tin,  copper,  gold,  and  silver.'  Although  mercury
does  not  directly  dissolve  platinum,  still  it  forms  a  solution  or  amtilgam
with  spongy  platinum  in  the  presence  of  sodiui-i  amalgam  ;  a  similar
amalgam  is  also  formed  by  the  action  of  sodium  amalgam  on  a  solution
of  platinum  chloride,  and  is  used  for  physical  experiments.

There  are  Ivw  Undx  of  pintinuvi  eompminiU,  PtX,  and  PtXj.
The  former  are  produced  by  an  excess  of  halogen  in  the  cold,  and  the
latter  by  the  aid  of  heat  or  by  the  splitting  up  of  the  former.  The
starting-point  for  the  platinum  compounds  is  platiimm  teCmcliloride,
jilatinic  thloridf,  PtCl,,  obtained  by  dissolving  platinum  in  aqua
regia.'  ■■'"  The  solution  crystallises  in  the  cold,  in  a  desiccator,  in  the
form  of  reddish-brown  deliquescent  crystals  which  crmtain  hydrochloric
acid,  PtClj,2HCl,fiH,0,  and  behave  like  a  true  acid  whose  salts  cor-
resixind  to  the  formula  R^PtCI,;— aminoniuni  platinochloride,  for
example.' '"  The  hydrochloric  acid  is  UberfttiHl  from  these  crystals  by
gently  heating  or  evaporating  the  solution  to  dryness  ;  or,  better  still,
after  treatment  with  silver  nitrate  a  reddish -brown  mass  remains
behind,  which  dissolves  in  water,  and  foiTus  a  yellowish-red  solution
which  on  cooling  deposits  crystals  of  the  compusition  PtCT„8H,(J,
The  tendrney  of  PtClj  /«  combine  with  hydrochlmic  acid  and  water —
that  is,  to  form  higher  rryntalliw^  eomj>oiind»—is  evident  in  the
platinum  compounds,  and  must  Ite  taken  into  account  in  explaioing
the  properties  of  platinum  and  the  forniatiiin  of  many  other  of  its
complex  compounds.  Dilute  solutions  of  platinic  chloride  aie  yellow,
and  are  completely  reduced  by  hydrogen,  sulphurous  anhydride,  and
many  reducing  agents,  which  first  convert  the  platinic  chloride  into

'  It  ia  neofsakry  (o  [mmrk  that  pluiunni  irlwn  alloyed  with  *iltrr,  or  ss  udiiIkiuii,
w  aolable  in  nitrio  uid,  unit  in  tliia  reapect  il  diflerm  fiom  gold,  M  ttul  it  in  poaHibl«,
by  allojing  gold  with  lilter,  olid  nctinjc  on  the  ulloy  witli  nitrio  ncid,  to  rpcognisa
the  pmeDce  of  platinum  in  the  gold,  becaaM  nitric  acid  doe*  not  net  on  Kold  ftllnynd
with  silver.

'!>■>  Pta,u>Blso  lonned  by  the  Hf  tion  ril  h  miitnie  nt  HCI  vapour  and  air,  uid  by

'■"  Pifceon  1 1891 1  obtained  fine  yellow  cryvtal*  of  PtHiClg.tHjO  by  addingilnmg  huI-
phorio  acid  to  a  slrong  solntioo  of  PlHsCl^BHjO.  If  cryitaU  i>f  HaPlCUBHjO  ha
melted  in  vaono  (00^  in  the  prexEnee  ol  anbydrotm  poUah,  ■  red-brown  solid  hydrat*  ia
obtained  containing  Icsa  Halet  ntuf  QCl.  which  parts  with  the  reiiiaindei  at  900°,  leaving
anhydnine  FtCI,.  The  latter  doea  not  diaengage  chlorine  before  390'.  and  ia  pofeollj
soluble  in  water.

878  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

the  lower  compotind  platinous  chloride,  PtCl2.  That  faculty  which
reveals  itself  in  platinum  tetrachloride  of  combining  with  water  of
crystallisation  and  hydrochloric  acid  is  distinctly  marked  in  its  pro-
perty, with  which  we  are  already  acquainted,  of  giving  precipitates
with  the  salts  of  potassium,  ammonium,  rubidiam,  &c.  In  general  it
readUy  forms  double  aalta^  R2PtCl6=PtCl4-h2RCl,  where  R  is  a
univalent  metal  such  as  potassium  or  NH4.  Hence  the  addition  of  a
solution  of  potassium  or  ammonium  chloride  to  a  solution  of  platinic
chloride  is  followed  by  the  formation  of  a  yellow  precipitate,  which  is
sparingly  soluble  in  water  and  almost  entirely  insoluble  in  alcohol  and
ether  (platinic  chloride  is  soluble  in  alcohol,  potassium  iridiochloridey
IrKsClg,  i.e.  a  compound  of  IrCls,  is  soluble  in  water  but  not  in  aloohol).
It  is  especially  remarkable  in  this  case,  that  the  potassium  oompoands
here,  as  in  a  number  of  other  instances,  separate  in  an  anhydrous  form,
whilst  the  sodium  compounds,  which  are  soluble  in  water  and  alcohol,
form  red  crystals  containing  water.  The  composition  Na2PtCl5,6H20
exactly  corresponds  with  the  above-mentioned  hydrochloric  compound.
The  compounds  with  barium,  BaPtClg,4H20,  strontiam,  SrPtCl6,8H20,
calcium,  magnesium,  iron,  manganese,  and  many  other  metals  are  all
soluble  in  water.**

^  Nilson  (1877),  who  investigated  the  platinochlorides  of  various  metals  subsdqnently
to  BonsdorfF,  Topsoe,  Cleve,  Marignac,  and  others,  foand  that  anivalent  and  bivalent
metals — such  as  hydrogen,  potassium,  ammonium  .  .  .  beryllium,  calcium,  bariom —
give  compounds  of  such  a  composition  that  there  is  always  twice  as  much  chlorine  in
the  platinic  chloride  as  in  the  combined  metallic  chloride ;  for  example,  K^Cl^^PtClf ;
BeC1.2,PtCl4,8H.20,  &c.  Such  trivalent  metals  as  aluminium,  iron  (ferric),  chromium,  di-
dymium,  cerium  (cerous)  form  coniix)unds  of  the  type  RCljPtC^,  in  which  the  amounts  of
chlorine  are  in  the  ratio  3  :  4.  Only  indium  and  yttrium  give  salts  of  a  different  compoei-
tion— namely,  2lnCl5,r)PtCl4,3CH.20  and  4YCl5,5PtCl4,5lH.^O.  Such  quadrivalent  metals
as  thorium,  tin,  zirconium  give  compounds  of  the  type  RClijPtCl^,  in  which  the  ratio  of
the  chlorine  is  1  :  1.  In  this  manner  the  valency  of  a  metal  may,  to  a  certain  extent,  be
judged  from  the  composition  of  the  double  salts  formed  with  platinic  chloride.

Platinic  bromide,  PtBr^,  and  iodide,  Ptlj,  are  analogous  to  the  tetrachloride,  bat  the
iodide  is  decomposed  slill  more  easily  than  the  chloride.  If  sulphuric  acid  be  added  to
platinic  chloride,  and  the  solution  evaporated,  it  forms  a  black  porous  mass  like  char-
coal, which  deliquesces  in  the  air,  and  has  the  composition  Pt(S04).2.  But  this,  the
oidy  oxygen  salt  of  the  type  PtX4,  is  exceedingly  unstable.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that
platinum  oxiiU,  the  oxide  of  the  type  PtO.2,  has  a  feeble  acid  character.  This  is  showii
in  a  number  of  instances.  Thus  if  a  strong  solution  of  platinic  chloride  treated  with
sodium  carbonate  be  ex))osed  to  the  action  of  light  or  evaporated  to  dryness  and  then
washed  with  water,  a  sodium  platinate,  Pt-,Niu07,(>H,jO,  remains.  The  composition  of
this  salt,  if  we  regard  it  in  the  same  sense  as  we  did  the  salts  of  silicic,  titanic,  molybdic
and  other  acids,  will  be  PtO(ONa).2,'2PtO.2,0H>O — that  is,  the  same  type  is  repeated  as
we  saw  in  the  crystalline  compounds  of  platinum  tetrachloride  with  sodium  chloride,  or
with  hydrochloric  acid — namely,  the  tj^^e  PtX48Y,  where  Y  is  the  molecule  H.jOjHCl,  drc.
Similar  comiK>unds  are  also  obtained  with  other  alkalis.  They  will  be  platinates  of  the
alkalis  in  which  the  platinic  oxide,  PtO.2,  plays  the  part  of  an  acid  oxide.  Rousseau
(lH^<t))  obtained  different  grades  of  combination  BaOPt02,  3(BaO)2Pt0.2,  li'c,  by  igniting
a  mixture  of  PtC^  and  caustic  barj'ta. If  such  an  alkaline  compound  of  platinum  be

THE  PLATINITM  METALS  S79

ylatiiuiua  chloride,  PtClj,  is  formed  when  Iiydrogei]  platiimoliliiriile,
PtH.jClg,  la  ignib^  at  300°,  or  when  potassium  ia  lieated  at  230°  in  a
streuQi  of  chlorine.  The  uiidecom posed  tetrachloride  is  extracted  from
the  residue  by  washing  it  with  water,  and  a  greeniah-grey  or  brown
insoluble  mass  of  the  dic-hloride  (sp.  gr.  5-9)  ia  then  obtained.  It  is
soluble  in  liydrochloric  acid,  giving  an  acid  solution  of  the  composition
PtClj.SHCI,  corresponding  with  the  type  of  double  salU  PtRjCl,.
Although  platinoua  chloride  decomposes  lielow  500'',  still  it  is  formed  to
a  small  extent  at  higher  temperatures.  Troost  and  Hautefeuille,  and
Seelheim  observed  that  when  platinum  waastrongly  ignited  in  a  stream  of
chlorine,  the  metal,  as  it  were,  slowly  volatilised  and  was  deposited  in
crystals  ;  a  volatile  chloride,  probably  platiuous  chloride,  was  evidently
formed  in  this  case,  and  deoompoaed  subsequently  to  its  formation,
depositing  crystals  of  platinum.

The  properties  of  platinum  alH>ve-de8cril>edare  re|>eated  more  or  less
distinctly,  or  aometimea  with  certain  modifications,  in  the  above-men-
tioned associates  and  analogues  of  this  metal.  Thus  although  palladium
forms  FdCl,,  this  form  passes  into  PdCIj  with  extreme  ease.^ Whilst

ticated  wilb  acetic  acid,  the  olkitli  coinbiuea  with  tbe  latter,  (tod  a  plaihiic  hydroxiitt,
PtlOH)4,  remainB  u  a.  biowu  nukas,  which  losoa  water  and  oiyB*"  when  ipnited,  and  iu
un  doliig  deCDtapooea  with  a  alight  axpLoaion.  When  alightly  ignited  this  }ijdroxide  first
loaei  water  and  gives  the  very  nuaUbla  oiide  PIO,.  PUtinic  sulphide,  PtM,,  belongs  lo
tbe  aiuiie  type ;  it  ia  precipitated  by  tbe  action  of  anlphnretted  liydrogen  on  a  Boljltioa
of  platinum  tetrachloride.  The  moiat  precipitate  ia  capable  of  attracting  oiygun,  and  ia
then  converted  into  tlie  salphate  ahure  tnentioued,  whk-li  ii  aotable  in  water.  Tbia
abnorption  of  oiygen  and  couversioa  into  sulphate  is  another  mualratiou  nf  the  baaio
natnre  of  PtOi,  to  that  it  clearly  eihibits  both  liaaic  auil  auiil  propertira.  The  latter
appisr,  for  instance,  in  the  tact  that  platinic  anlphide,  PtSg,  g>*ea  i^ryatalline  oompunnda
with  the  alkali  eulphidea.

■  In  oomtiaring  the  charaoterisUca  of  iha  pUtinutn  metals,  it  toast  be  nbaecved  that
palladium  in  its  form  of  cotnbination  PdXj  gives  saUixo  rHinipounda  of  coaHiderabte
stability.  Ajnongit  them  pallaJoiu  chluridr'  is  fonned  by  the  direct  action  of  i^lilorine
or  aqna  regia  (uot  in  exconB  or  iu  dilute  soluti'iaa)  on  pailadium.  It  forma  a  brown
■olutioD,  which  girea  a  black  itmolnble  pretipitate  of  pallailuHt  iuiliiU.  PALj,  with
sotntioua  of  iodides  (in  Uija  respect,  aa  io  many  others,  palladium  resemblea  mercury  In
the  mercuric  eoiDponnda  HgXj).  With  a  solution  of  mercuric  cyanide  it  given  a  yellnwiah
white  precipitate,  palladous  cyauide,  PdCjt^i,  which  is  soluble  ia  potassium  cyanide,  and
gives  other  double  salts,  H^PdCtN,.

That  portion  of  the  platinum  ore  which  diasolves  in  aqua  regia  and  is  precipitated
by  ammonium  or  potassium  chloride  does  not  contain  palladinm.  It  remains  in  aolU'
tion,  liecanse  the  palladic  clitoride,  PdCI,,  ia  decomposed  and  tbe  palbuUius  chloride
formed  in  not  precipitated  by  ammaninm  chloride ;  the  same  bolda  good  for  all  the  other
lower  chlorides  of  the  platintun  metals.  Zinc  (and  iron)  separates  out  all  tbe  nnprecipi-
tated  pUlinam  metait  land  also  copper,  lie)  ftom  the  aolulion.  The  palladium  in  found
in  these  platinum  residues  precipitated  by  unc.  U  thia  miitnre  of  metals  Iw  treat«d
with  aqua  regia,  all  the  palladium  will  iiaaa  into  solatinn  as  palladous  chloride  with
some  platinic  chloride.  By  tliis  treatment  tl'u  main  portion  of  the  iridinm,  rhodium.  A-c.
remains  almost  undissoWerl,  the  platinum  ia  nepaiated  from  the  miitore  of  palladoni
and  plaliiiic  cliloridea  by  u.  aolution  of  ammoiiium  cliloridc,  ai-il  the  eolation  of  palladium

880  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

rhodium  and  iridium  in  dissolving  in  aqua  regia  also  form  RhCl4  and

is  precipitated  by  potaBsium  iodide  or  mercuric  cyanide.  Wilm  (1881)  showed  th*t
palladium  may  be  separated  from  an  impure  solution  by  saturating  it  with  ammonia;  all
the  iron  present  is  thus  precipitated,  and,  after  filtering,  the  addition  of  hydrochloric
acid  to  the  filtrate  gives  a  yellow  precipitate  of  an  ammonio-palladium  compound,
PdCl2,2NH3,  whilst  nearly  all  the  other  metals  remain  in  solution.  Metallic palladiufn
is  obtained  by  igniting  the  am monio- compound  or  the  cyanide,  PdC^N^.  It  occutb
native,  although  rarely,  and  is  a  metal  of  a  whiter  colour  than  platinum,  sp.  gr.  11*4,
melts  at  about  1,500°  ;  it  is  much  more  volatile  than  platinum,  partially  oxidises  on  the
surface  when  heated  (Wilm  obtained  spongy  palladium  by  igniting  PdCl^^SNHj,  and
observed  that  it  gives  PdO  when  ignited  in  oxygen,  and  that  on  further  ignition  this
oxide  forms  a  mixture  of  Pd20  and  Pd),  and  loses  its  absorbed  oxygen  on  a  further  rise
of  temperature.  It  does  not  blacken  or  tarnish  (does  not  absorb  sulphur)  in  the  air  ai
the  ordinary  temperature,  and  is  therefore  better  suited  than  silver  for  astronomical  and
other  instruments  in  which  fine  divisions  have  to  be  engraved  on  a  white  metal,  in  order
that  the  fine  lines  should  be  clearly  visible.  The  most  remarkable  property  of  palladium,
discovered  by  Graham,  consists  in  its  capacity  for  absorbing  a  large  amount  of  hydrogen.
Ignited  palladium  absorbs  as  much  as  940  volumes  of  hydrogen,  or  about  0*7  p.c.  of  its
own  weight,  which  closely  approaches  to  the  formation  of  the  compound  PdsHj,  and
probably  indicates  the  formation  of  palladium  hydridey  PdjH.  This  absorption
also  takes  place  at  the  ordinary  temperature — for  example,  when  palladium  serves  as
an  electrode  at  which  hydrogen  is  evolved.  In  absorbing  the  hydrogen,  the  palladiom
does  not  change  in  appearance,  and  retains  all  its  metallic  properties,  only  its  volume
increases  by  about  10  p.c. — that  is,  the  hydrogen  pushes  out  and  separates  the  atoms  of
the  palladium  from  each  other,  and  is  itself  compressed  to  ^^^i  ^^  i^^  volume.  This  com-
pression indicates  a  great  force  of  chemical  attraction,  and  is  accompanied  by  the  evola-
tion  of  heat  (Chapter  11.,  Note  38).  The  absorption  of  1  grm.  of  hydrogen  by  metallic
palladium  (Favre)  is  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of  i'2  thousand  calories  (for  Pt  90,
for  Na  13,  for  K  10  thousand  units  of  heat).  Troost  showed  that  the  dissociation
pressure  of  palladium  hydride  is  inconsiderable  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  but  reaches
the  atmospheric  pressure  at  about  140°.  This  subject  was  subsequently  investigated  by
A.  A.  Cracow  of  St.  Petersburg  (1H94),  who  showed  that  at  first  the  absorption  <rf
hydrogen  by  the  palladium  proceeds  like  solution,  according  to  the  law  of  Dalton  and
Henry,  but  that  towards  tlie  end  it  proceeds  like  a  dissociation  phenomenon  in  definite
compounds;  this  forms  another  link  between  the  phenomenon  of  solution  and  of  the
formation  of  definite  atomic  compounds.  Cracow's  obsen-ations  for  a  temperature  18°,
showed  that  the  electro-conductivity  and  tension  vary  until  a  compound  Pd.^H  is  reached,
and  namely,  that  the  tension  p  rises  with  the  volume  v  of  hydrogen  absorbed,  according
to  the  law  of  Dalton  and  Henry — for  instance,  for

p  =  1l  3-2  5  5  7-7  mm.

i;=14  20  34  47

The  maximum  tension  at  18°  is  9  mm.  At  a  temperature  of  about  140°  (in  the  yai>onr  of
xylene)  the  maximum  tension  is  about  760  mm.,  and  when  r  =  10  — 50  vols,  the  tension
(according  to  Cracow's  experiments)  stands  at  90  — 450  mm. — that  is,  increases  in  pro-
portion to  the  volume  of  hydrogen  absorbed.  But  from  the  point  of  view  of  chemical
mechanics  it  is  especially  important  to  remark  thiit  Moutier  clearly  showed,  through
palladium  hydride,  the  similarity  of  the  phenomena  which  proceed  in  evaporation  and
dissociation,  which  fact  Henri  Sainte-Claire  Deville  placed  as  a  fundamental  proposition
in  the  theory  of  dissociation.  It  is  possible  upon  the  basis  of  the  second  law  of  the
theory  of  heat,  according  to  the  law  of  the  variation  of  tlie  tension  p  of  evaporation  with
the  temperature  T  (counted  from  —273°),  to  calculate  the  latent  heat  of  evi^wration
Ij  {see  works  on  physics)  because  424  L  =  T  (IVZ— 1  D)  dpdt,  where  <2  and  D  are  the
weights  of  cubic  measures  of  the  gas  (vapour)  and  liquid.  (Thus,  for  instance,  for
water,  when  f  =  100°,  T=373,  fZ  =  0605,  D  =  960,  d>/V/f  =  0027  m.,  18,596  =  367, L-536,

THE  PLATINUM  METALS  3fll

Ii-CI,,  but  tliey  paas  into  RhCl^  and  IrClj  *■'  '■'•.very  easilj  when  heated

whenco  434  L^32T,Se4,  uid  (he  aecnnd  iwrtion  ol  the  eqnatioD  92(1,114,  which  U
gaffioieoUj  ueai,  within  the  Umita  of  eiperiiiientKl  error,  lee  Chapter  L,  Note  11.)
The  umg  eqoatioD  is  applicable  to  Ibe  diiuoi^iatinn  of  Na,H  and  K,H— {Chapter  XIL,
Note  49) — but  it  has  onlj  been  Terilied  in  thin  respect  tor  PdgH,  bidoij  Montier,  by
CBlcolating  the  uuonnt  oE  boat  L  eTolvsd,  lor  f  ^  30,  acranding  to  the  variation  ot
tlie  tension  (ifpldf)  oblainod  11  tbonsand  calorits,  which  in  veiy  near  the  Agate
obtuned  eiperioieii tally  b;  Favre  lire  Chapter  XII.,  Note  44).  The  absorbed  hTdrogen
ia  eauily  diaenf-aged  by  ignition  or  ducreii.aed  pressure.  The  njaultsnt  Fomponnil
doe»  not  decompose  at  the  ordiuarj  tamperaitare,  hnt  when  exposed  to  air  the  meto!
Hometimea  glows  spontaneonaly,  owin);  to  Uie  bydrogan  baming  at  the  expense  of
the  atmospheric  oxygen.  The  hydrogen  absorbed  by  paliadiuui  acta  towards  majiy
Kolutiona  oc  a  reducing  agent ;  in  a  word,  everything  here  points  to  the  formation  of  a
definite  oompooiid  and  at  the  game  time  of  a  physically-iompreBsed  gas,  and  forma  ods
of  tlie  beat  examples  of  the  bond  existing  between  chemical  and  physieal  processes,  to
which  we  have  many  times  drawn  attention.  It  muBt  be  again  remembered  tbat  the
other  roctala  of  the  eighth  groap.  even  copper,  are,  like  palladltiai  and  platinnm,  able  to
combine  with  hydrogen.  The  permeability  of  iron  and  platinum  tubes  to  hydrogen  is
naturally  doe  to  the  formation  ol  similar  compounds,  but  palladium  is  the  most
permeaMe.

*  <■■■  Bhodium  is  generally  separated,  together  with  iridiiuo,  trom  the  reaiduea  left
alter  the  treatiaent  ot  native  plaUciun,  because  the  palladium  is  entirely  separated  fnini
tlxem,  and  Uie  rutbeaiam  is  present  in  them  is  very  small  traces,  whilst  the  osmium  at
any  rate  is  easily  aepurated,  aa  we  shall  soon  see.  The  mixtare  ol  rhodiam  and  iridium
which  is  left  iindissnlved  iu  dilnte  aqua  regis  is  dissolved  in  chlorine  water,  or  by  tbe^
action  of  chloriue  on  a  miiture  of  the  metals  with  sodiani  chloride.  In  either  case  both
tnatala  pass  into  solution.  They  may  be  separated  by  many  methods.  In  either  casc'
(if  the  action  be  aided  by  heat)  the  rhodium  is  obtained  in  the  form  ol  the  chloride
BhCl.ih  and  the  iridium  as  iridions  chloride,  IrCtj.  They  both  torm  double  salts  with
sodium  chloride  which  are  solnble  in  water,  but  the  iridium  Bait  is  also  partially  soluble
iu  alcohol,  whilst  the  rhodium  salt  is  not.  A  mixtare  ot  the  chloridee,  when  treated  with
dilute  aqua  regia.  gives  iridic  chloride,  IrCI«,  whilst  the  rhodium  ohloride,  BhClj,  re-
roaina  nnallered '.  ammonium  chloride  then  preuipilates  the  iridinm  ae  ammonium  iridio-
chloride.  Ir(NH,l,Cl,„  and  on  evaporating  the  roae-eoloured  filtrate  the  rhodium  gives
a  cryBtnlline  salt,  Rh(NH,);Cld.  Rhodium  mod  its  varioDs  oiidea  are  dissolved  ivben
fused  with  poCasainm  hydrDgnn  aulphale,  ajid  give  a  solnble  double  sulphate  (whilst
iridium  remains  unacted  ouj ;  tliia  fact  ia  very  characteristic  tor  this  metal,  which  offers
in  its  properties  many  points  of  t^semblance  with  the  iron  metals.  When  fosed  with
polasaium  hydroxide  and  chlorate  it  is  oxidised  like  iridium,  but  it  ia  not  aftermtds
solnble  in  water,  In  which  respect  it  diSera  Iroin  ruthenium.  Tbisistaken  advantage  ot  tor
separating  rhodium,  ruthenium,  and  iridium.  In  any  oase,  rhodium  under  ordinary
conditions  alwaya  gives  salts  of  the  type  BX;,  and  not  of  any  other  type ;  and  not  only
halogen  salts,  but  alao  oxygen  salts,  are  known  in  this  type,  which  is  rare  among
the  platinum  metals.  Rhodium  chloride,  RhCli,  ia  known  in  an  insoluble  anhydrous
and  also  in  a  aolnble  lonn  (like  CrX]  or  salts  of  cliromic  oiidea),  in  which  it  easily  give*
double  salts,  compounds  with  water  of  cryatalliaation,  and  forms  roee-colaurod  solutious.
Iu  this  Inrm  rhwlium  easily  gives  doable  salts  of  the  two  types  RhMsCI^and  RhMjCl,—
for  example,  KjRhCl«,SH,0  sod  K,BbCli,II,0.  Solntions  of  the  salts  (at  least,  the
ammaniotn  salt)  ot  the  Brat  kind  give  salts  of  the  second  kind  wlien  they  are  btnled.  If
a  strong  solntion  of  potash  be  added  to  a  red  solution  ot  rhodium  cldoride  and  boiled,  a
black  precipiUte  of  the  hydroxide  Rh(OHI:  is  formed ;  but  il  the  solution  ot  |>oUsli  is
added  little  by  little,  it  given  a  yellow  precipitate  containing  more  water.  This  yellow
hydrate  ol  rhodium  oiide  gives  a  yellow  solution  when  it  is  dissolved  in  acids,  which
only  becomes  rou-colourad  alter  being  bailed.  It  is  obvious  a  change  here  takes  fdaee.
' IB  of  the  salts  ol  ctuoiUM  oxide. II  ia  alao  a  remarkable  fact  (hat

882  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY'

or  when  acted  upon  by  substances  capable  of  taking  up  chlorine  (even
alkalis,  which  foroi  bleaching  salts).  Among  the  platinum  metals,
ruthenium  and  osmium  have  the  most  acid  character,  and  although  they
give  RUCI4  and  OSCI4  they  are  easily  oxidised  to  RUO4  and  OSO4  ^7
the  action  of  chlorine  in  the  presence  of  water  ;  the  latter  are  volatile
and  may  be  distilled  with  the  water  and  hydrochloric  acid,  from  a
solution  containing  other  platinum  metals.^  ^'* Thus  with  respect  to

the  black  hydroxide,  like  many  other  oxidised  compounds  of  the  platinoid  metals,  does
not  disBolye  in  the  ordinary  oxygen  acids,  whilst  the  yellow  hydroxide  is  ^isily  soluble
and  gives  yellow  solutions,  which  deposit  imperfectly  crystallised  salts.  Metallic
rhodium  is  easily  obtained  by  igniting  its  oxygen  and  other  compounds  in  hydrogen,  or
by  precipitation  with  zinc.  It  resembles  platinum,  and  has  a  sp.  gr.  of  IS'l.  At  the
ordinary  temperature  it  decomposes  formic  acid  into  hydrogen  and  carbonic  anhydride,
with  development  of  heat  (Deville).  With  the  alkali  sulphites,  the  salts  of  rhodium  and
iridium  of  the  t>'pe  RX.^  give  sparingly-soluble  precipitates  of  double  sulphites  of  the
composition  R(SO,^Na)5,H20,  by  means  of  which  these  metals  may  be  separated  fiom
solution,  and  also  may  be  separated  from  each  other,  for  a  mixture  of  these  salts  when
treated  with  strong  sulphuric  acid  gives  a  soluble  iridium  sulphate  and  leaves  a  red  in-
soluble double  salt  of  rhodium  and  sodium.  It  may  be  remarked  that  the  oxides  Ir<|03  '^'^
Rh.20.-  are  comparatively  stable  and  are  easily  formed,  and  that  they  also  form  different
double  salts  (for  instance,  IrCl5,8KCl3H.,0,  RhCl5,2NH4Cl4H.p,  RhCl3,8NHiC114HaO)
and  compomids  like  the  cobaltia  compounds  (for  instance,  luteo-salts  RhX5,6NH3,  roseo-
salts,  RhX-HjOSNH-;,  and  purpureo-salts  IrXs.SNHj,  &c.)  Iridious  oxide,  Jx^O^  is
obtained  by  fusing  iridious  chloride  and  its  compounds  with  sodium  carbonate,  and
treating  the  mass  with  water.  The  oxide  is  then  left  as  a  black  powder,  which,  when
strongly  heated,  is  decomposed  into  iridium  and  oxygen;  it  is  easily  reduced,  and  is
insoluble  in  acids,  which  indicates  the  feeble  basic  character  of  this  oxide,  in  many
respects  resembling  such  oxides  as  cobaltic  oxide,  eerie  or  lead  dioxide,  &c.  It  does  not
dissolve  when  fused  with  potassium  hydrogen  sulphate.  Rhodium  oxide,  RIL1O5,  is  a
far  more  energetic  base. It  dissolves  when  fused  with  potassium  hydrogen  sulphate.

From  what  liiis  been  said  respecting  the  separation  of  platinum  and  rhodium  it  will
be  understood  how  the  compounds  of  iridium^  which  is  the  main  associate  of  platinum,
are  obtained.  In  describing  the  treatment  of  osmiridium  we  shall  again  have  an
opportunity  of  learning  the  metliod  of  extraction  of  the  compounds  of  this  metal,  which
has  in  recent  times  found  a  technical  application  in  the  form  of  its  oxide,  Ir203;
this  is  obtained  from  many  of  the  compounds  of  iridium  by  ignition  with  water,  is
easily  reduced  by  hydrogen,  and  is  insoluble  in  acids.  It  is  used  in  painting  on  china,
for  giving  a  blivck  colour.  Iridium  itself  is  more  difficultly  fusible  than  platinum,  and
when  fused  it  does  not  decompose  acids  or  even  aqua  regia ;  it  is  extremely  hard,  and  is
not  malleable  ;  its  sp.  gr.  is  22*4.  In  the  form  of  powder  it  dissolves  in  aqua  regia,  imd
is  even  partially  oxidised  when  heated  in  air,  sets  fire  to  hydrogen,  and,  in  a  word,  closely
resembles  platinum.  Heated  in  an  excess  of  chlorine  it  gives  iridic  chloride,  IrCH^,  but
this  loses  chlorine  at  50°  ;  it  is,  however,  more  stable  in  the  form  of  double  salts,  which
have  a  characteristic  hlack  colour—for  instance,  Ir(NH4).,Cl,i — but  they  give  iridious
chloride,  IrClj,  when  treated  with  sulphuric  acid.

9  t"^*  We  have  yet  to  become  acquainted  with  the  two  remaining  associates  of  platinum
— ruthenium  and  osmium — whose  most  important  property  is  that  they  are  oxidised
even  when  heated  in  air,  and  that  they  are  able  to  give  volatile  oxides  of  the  form  RUO4
and  OSO4  ;  these  have  a  jwwerful  odour  (like  iodine  and  nitrous  anhydride).  Both  these
higher  oxides  are  solids ;  they  volatilise  with  great  ease  at  100°  ;  the  former  is  yellow
and  the  latter  white.  They  are  known  as  ruthrnic  and  osjnic  anJnjdridrs,  although  their
aqueous  solutions  (they  both  slowly  dissolve  in  water)  do  not  show  an  acid  reaction,  and
although  they  do  not  even  exipel  carbonic  anhydride  from  potassium  carbonate,  do  not

THE  PLATINUH  UETALS  88S

tlie  typfs  of  cuiubuiation,  all  the  platinum  metals,  under  certain  circuui-
stancea,  give  compounds  of  the  type  IIX4 — for  iostance,  BO,,  RCl,,  ikc.

give  L'ryHUJJme  uitLii  vith  baseH,  and  tiieir  nllnliae  HoluLioiiH  parttally  deposit  th«n
■l^uii  when  boiled  (in  eiooas  ol  vratar  deeompones  the  salU).  The  fonauliB  OsO,  und
RqO^  ooiTMpond  with  the  vapoor  density  of  theue  oiiiles.  Thus  DevUlo  found  the
TUpoiii  density  of  oBtnic  anhydride  to  be  138  (by  the  formnla  1375)  refetied  to  hydrogen.
Tcnimat  and  Vsoquetin  diecoTered  this  uompound,  uid  Berxcliua,  WUhler,  Fiitzocbe,
Stniv^,  Deville,  CUua,  July,  nnd  other*  helped  in  its  inveBligatioD ;  nevertlieletiB  there
are  xtill  raiLDy  questions  concerning  it  trhich  icmnin  unnolvod.  It  shntiM  be  obHired
tliat  BOf  IB  the  highest  knoim  farm  tor  an  oaygen  componud.  and  RH^  is  the  highest
knovn  foTin  (or  a  i:Qiii]>ound  of  hydrugen ;  whilst  the  hsgheHt  (Drma  of  acid  hydrates
couurn  3iH,0„  PHjO..  8H.0„  ClHOj— all  with  four  atoms  of  oiygeo,  and  therefore  in
this  nnmbcr  there  i*  apparently  the  limit  for  the  simple  forms  of  combinatian  of  hydrogen
and  Mygen.  In  combioation  with  trcvrtU  atoma  0!  an  element,  or  sorerat  eleroents,
there  may  he  more  than  O^  or  H,,  bat  a  molecnie  never  contains  more  than  fonr  atoms
of  either  O  or  H  to  one  atom  of  another  element.  That  the  simplest  forms  of  conibina-
tiou  ol  hydrogen  and  oxygen  are  exiiaustrd  by  the  list  RH,.  RHj,  RH,,  RH,  RO,  R0„
BOs,  RO,.  The  extreme  members  are  RU,  nni]  ROj,  and  are  only  met  with  for  snoh
elements  as  carbon,  silicon,  osminm,  mtheuium,  which  also  give  RCl,  with  cliliirine.
In  these  extreme  forma,  RS(  and  RO,,  the  componnds  are  the  least  stable  (com-
pare SiH.,  FRj.  9H,h  CIH.  or  RuO„  MoOj,  ZrOj,  SrO|,  and  easily  give  np  part,  or  even
all,  their  oxygen  or  hydrogen.

The  primary  wares  from  which  the  compounds  of  mlheninm  and  osminni  are
obtained  is  either  otmiridimn  (the  oamiam  predominates,  from  IrOs  to  ItOhi,  sp.  gr.
from  Id  to  all,  which  ooonrs  in  platinum  ores  (it  is  distinguished  from  the  grains  of
platinum  by  its  crystalline  stmctore,  baidnees.  and  insolubility  in  aqna  regis),  or  else
those  insoluble  i^sidses  which  are  obtained,  as  wo  saw  above,  after  treating  platinum
with  ai]na  tegia.  Osmium  predominates  in  these  materials,  which  sometimes  contain
from  SO  p.c.  la  40  p.c.  of  it,  and  rarely  more  than  t  p.o,  to  5  p.c.  of  rdthenium,  Tha
process  tor  their  treatment  is  as  follows:  they  are  first  fused  with  S  parts  ol  zinc,  and
the  zinc  is  then  extracted  with  dilute  hydrochloric  acid.  The  oemiridium  thna  treated
is,  according  to  Fritzsche  and  StmTi<'s  method,  then  added  to  a  fused  miitore  of
polasunm  hydroxide  and  chlorate  in  an  iron  crucible ;  the  mass  as  it  begins  to  evolve
oxygen  acts  on  the  metal,  and  the  reaction  afterwards  proceeds  spontaneously.  The
dark  prodnct  ia  treated  with  water,  and  gives  a  solution  of  osmium  and  mthenium  in
the  form  of  solnble  salts,  R^OsO,  and  R^uO,,  whilst  the  insoluble  reeidne  contains  a
mixture  of  oxides  of  iiidinm  {and  some  osmium,  rhodium,  and  ruthenium),  and  grains
of  mebsliic  iridium  still  unacted  on.  According  to  Fnhny's  method  the  lumps  ol
ouniridinm  are  straightway  heated  to  whiteness  in  a  porcelain  tube  in  a  stream  of  sir  or
oxygen,  when  the  very  volatile  osmic  anhydride  is  obtained  directly,  and  is  collects  in
a  well-cooled  receiver,  whilst  tha  ruthenium  gives  a  crystalline  soblimate  of  the  dinxido,
RnOj,  which  is,  however,  very  difficultly  volatile  (it  volatilises  together  with  osmic
anhydride),  and  therefore  remains  in  the  cooler  portions  of  Uie  tabs  1  this  method  does
not  give  volatile  ratbenic  anhydride,  and  the  iridium  and  other  metaJs  are  not  oxidised
or  give  nun- volatile  products.  This  method  is  simple,  and  at  once  gives  dry,  pure  osmic
anhydride  in  the  reoeiver,  and  rathenium  dioxide  in  the  subUioale.  The  air  which
passes  Ihroogh  the  tube  should  he  previously  passed  through  sulphuric  acid,  not  only  in
order  to  dry  it.  but  also  to  remove  the  organic  and  redueing  dust  The  vapour  of  osmic
anhydride  must  be  powerfully  cooled,  and  altunately  passed  over  caustic  potash..  A
third  mode  ol  treatmejit.  which  is  most  Frequently  employed,  was  proposed  by  Wghler,
and  consists  in  ali)fhtly  heating  (in  order  that  the  sodinm  chloride  shonld  not  melt)  an

metals  then  form  compounds  wiUi  chlorine  and  sodium  chloride,  whilst  the  osmium
forms  the  chloride,  OsClu  which  reacts  with  the  moisture,  and  gives  oBimo  anhydride,
whieh  ia  condensed. The  mthenium  in  tliis.  as  in  the  other  processes,  does  not  directly

384  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

But  this  is  the  highest  form  for  only  platinum  and  palladiun
The  remaining  platinum  metals  further,  like  iroTif  give  (teida  of  the  typ

give  ruthenic  anhydride,  but  is  always  extracted  as  the  soluble  miheniam  salt,  K^aO
obtained  by  fusion  with  potassium  hydroxide  and  chlorate  or  nitrate.  When  the  orang*
coloured  ruthenate,  K^RuO^,  is  mixed  with  acids,  the  liberated  ruthenic  acid  immediate]
decomposes  into  the  volatile  ruthenic  anhydride  and  the  insoluble  mthenio  oxide
2K.,Ru04  +  4HN05=Ru04  +  Ru02,2lL20  +  4KN05.  When  onoe  one  of  the  abore  oon
pounds  of  ruthenium  or  osmium  is  procured  it  is  easy  to  obtain  all  the  remainix
compounds,  and  by  reduction  (by  metals,  hydrogen,  formic  acid,  drc.)  the  meta]
themselves.

Osmic  anhydride,  OSO4,  is  very  easily  deoxidised  by  many  methods.  It  blackei
organic  substances,  owing  to  reduction,  and  is  therefore  used  in  investigatiiig  Tegetab]
and  animal,  and  especially  nerve,  preparations  under  the  microscope.  Although  oamj
anhydride  may  be  distilled  in  hydrogen,  still  complete  reduction  is  accomplished  when
mixture  of  hydrogen  and  osmic  anhydride  is  slightly  ignited  (just  before  it  inflames).  ]
osmium  be  placed  in  the  flame  it  is  oxidised,  and  gives  vapours  of  osmic  anhydride,  whic!
become  reduced,  and  the  flame  gives  a  brilliant  light.  Osmic  anhydride  deflagrate
like  nitre  on  red-hot  charcoal ;  zinc,  and  even  mercury  and  silver,  reduce  osmic  anhjdrid
from  its  aqueous  solutions  into  the  lower  oxides  or  metal;  such  reducing  agents  a
hydrogen  sulphide,  ferrous  sulphate,  or  sulphurous  anhydride,  alcohol,  Ac,  act  in  tfa
same  manner  with  great  ease.

The  lower  oxides  of  osmium,  ruthenium,  and  of  the  other  elements  of  the  platinui
series  are  not  volatile,  and  it  is  noteworthv  that  the  other  elements  behave  differentia
On  comparing  SO.^,  SO^;  As^Os,  As-Pj;  PjOj,  P.^Os;  CO,  COj,  Ac,  we  observe
converse  phenomenon  ;  the  higher  oxides  are  less  volatile  than  the  lower.  In  the  cai
of  osmium  all  the  oxides,  with  the  exception  of  the  highest,  axe  non-volatile,  and  it  ma
therefore  be  thought  that  this  higher  form  is  more  simply  constituted  than  the  lowe:
It  is  possible  that  osmic  oxide,  OSO2,  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  the  anhydride  a
C2H4  to  CH4 — i.e.  the  lower  oxide  is  perhaps  0r.,.0,,  or  is  still  more  polymerised,  whie
would  explain  why  the  lower  oxides,  having  a  greater  molecular  weight,  are  less  volatil
than  the  higlier  oxides,  just  as  we  saw  in  the  case  of  the  nitrogen  oxides,  NjO  and  NO.

Buthrnium  and  osmium,  oht^'med  by  the  ijfintion  or  reduction  of  their  compound
in  the  form  of  powder,  have  a  density  considerably  less  than  in  the  fused  form,  and  diffe
in  this  condition  in  their  capacity  for  reaction  ;  they  are  much  more  difficultly  fused  thai
platinum  and  iridium,  altliough  ruthenium  is  more  fusible  than  osmium.  RutheniuB
in  jKjwder  has  a  specific  gravity  of  H'5,  the  fused  metal  of  12'2  ;  osmium  in  powder  has  ;
specific  gravity  of  200,  and  when  semi-fused— or,  more  strictly  speaking,  agglomerated—
in  the  oxy-hydrogen  flame,  of  21*4,  and  fused  225.  The  powder  of  slightly-heated  osmiun
oxidises  very  easily  in  the  air,  and  when  ignited  bums  like  tinder,  directly  forming  th«
odoriferous  osmic  anhydride  (hence  its  name,  from  the  Greek  word  signifying  odour)
ruthenium  also  oxidises  when  heated  in  air,  but  with  more  difficulty,  forming  the  oxidi
RuOj.  The  oxides  of  the  types  RO,  R,.0-„  and  RO.,  (and  their  hydrates)  obtained  b;
reduction  from  the  higher  oxides,  and  also  from  the  chlorides,  are  analogous  to  tho«
given  by  the  other  platinum  metals,  in  which  respect  osmium  and  ruthenium  closeh
resemble  them.  We  may  also  remark  that  ruthenium  has  been  found  in  the  platinun
deposits  of  Borneo  in  the  fonn  of  laurite,  Ru.S-.  in  grey  octahedra  of  sp.  gr.  7*0.

For  osmium,  Moraht  and  Wischin  (18i):Jl  obtained  free  osmic  acid,  H.2OSO4,  bi
decomposing  K2OSO1  with  water,  and  precipitating  witji  alcoliol  in  a  current  of  hydrogex
(because  in  air  volatile  OSO4  is  formed) ;  with  1I...S,  osmic  acid  gives  0803(HS)a  at  th<
ordinary  temperature.

Debray  and  Joly  showed  that  ruthenic  anliydride,  RuO^,  fuses  at  25°,  boils  at  100-,
and  evolves  oxygen  when  dissolved  in  potasli,  forming  the  salt  KRUO4  (not  isomorphouf
with  iwtassium  permanganate).

Joly  (18'.)1),  who  studied  the  ruthenium  compounds  in  greater  detail,  showed  that  the
easily-fonned  KRUO4  gives  RUKO4RUO.-,  when  ignited,  but  it  resembles  KMn04  in  manj

THE  PLATINUM  JKETALS  885

EO3  01-  hydmtea,  UiRO,=ROj(HO>j  (the  type  of  sulphuric  acid) ;  but
tliey,  like  ferric  tiiiil  maugaiiic  acids,  are  chiefly  known  in  the  form  of
sftlts  fit  the  composition  K^RIJ^  or  K,Il.^O;  (like  the  dichromate).  These
salts  are  (ibtnlued,  like  the  manganatea  and  ferrutea,  \>j  fusing  the  oxides,
or  even  the  metnls  themselves,  with  nitric,  or,  betl«r  still,  with  poljisaium
peroxide.  They  are  soluble  in  water,  are  easily  deoxidised  and  do  not
yield  the  acid  anhydrides  under  the  action  of  acids,  but  break  up,  either
(like  the  ferrate)  farming  uxygen  and  a  basic  oxide  (iridium  and  rhodium
react  in  this  manner,  as  tliey  do  not  give  liigher  foruis  of  oxidation),  or
passing  into  a  Irjwer  and  higher  form  of  oxidation — that  is,  reacting
like  a  manganate  (or  partly  like  nirrite  or  phosphite).  Osmium  and
ruthenium  react  according  to  the  latter  form,  as  they  are  capable  of
giving  hiff/ier  forma  o/ oxidation,  OsO,  and  RuO^,  and  therefore  their
reactions  of  decomposition  may  be  essentially  represented  by  the  equa-
tion :  aosOjsOsOj+OsO,.'"

icspcctH.  In  eeaeril.  Rn  has  mucL  in  common  with  Md.  JdIj'  |lKmi|  nlw,  showed  thst
it  KXO]  be  added  to  a  eotution  of  SnCI,  cuuUinitig  HC'I,  the  wlnCioa  beuomuH  liot,  itml
a  udt,  BuCliNOiKCI,  is  formed,  whicli  euten  into  double  dei^ompoaition  and  is  very
stable,  Horeover,  if  RdCIi  be  treated  with  an  eieeas  ul  nitrio  avid,  it  tormii  a  eall,
BuCljNOHjO,  After  being  beated  ito  bailing)  and  Lhe  addition  of  UCl.  The  vapuur
denmty  of  BdO|,  detennined  by  Debray  and  Jolj,  ceireHponda  to  tbat  foruola-

"  Altbongli  palladiam  givas  the  same  types  ot  oombination  [with  chlorinel  as
lilatiaam,  its  teductioa  la  HXj  is  inCDmparablj  easier  than  that  of  platinic  ohloride.  and
iii  the  ciue  of  iridiam  it  is  alsa  very  easy.  Iridic  chloride,  IrCLi.  acts  as  an  oiididnK
agent,  readily  parts  with  a.  fourth  d(  its  chlorine  to  a  number  of  substances,  leadil)'
BYolvea  ohloriue  when  heated,  and  it  is  only  at  low  tamperatores  that  chlorine  and  luiua
it^ia  oonvert  iridiom  into  iiidiu  chloride.  In  disengsfjing  chlorine  iridinm  mare  often
and  easily  girta  the  very  stable  iridious  chloride,  IrClj  (pnrbapa  this  sabstance  is
Ir,CU  =  IrClj4rCl,,  ioiwluble  in  water,  but  aoloble  in  potaHiinin  chloride,  because  it
fumis  the  double  salt  KglrClol,  than  Ihe  dichloride,  IrClg.  This  compoand,  corresponding
to  IrXf,  is  very  stable,  and  corresponds  with  the  banic  axidp,  Ir^Oj,  resembling  Ibe
oiides  Fb,Os,  CojOj.  To  this  form  (here  correspond  animoniacal  componuds  aimilar  to
those  HicBD  by  cnbaltic  oiide.  Altbongh  iridium  also  giies  an  atnd  in  the  form  of  the
salt  Kgll.fO,,  it  does  not,  like  iron  (and  duominm),  form  the  corresponding  chloride,
IrClg.  in  general,  in  this  as  in  the  other  eleni  ents,  it  is  impossible  to  predict  the  chlorine
conipoundA  from  those  of  oiygen.  Jnst  as  there  is  no  chloride  SCl^  bnt  only  SCI^,  ho
Hleo,  altlioniih  IrOj  exists,  IrClg  is  wanting,  the  only  chloride  being  IrCI,.  and  this
ia  unstable,  like  SCI^  and  easily  parts  witli  its  chlorine.  In  this  respect  rliodiom  is
lery  nmcb  like  iridium  (ss  plaliniun  ia  like  palladiom).  For  RhCl^  decompiiws  witli
extreme  ease,  whilst  rhodium  chloride,  RhCl;,  is  very  stable,  like  many  of  the  salts  of
the  type  BhXj,  although  like  the  platinum  elements  these  aalts  are  easily  reduced  lo
mi-tal  by  the  action  of  heat  and  powerful  reagents.  There  is  as  close  a  resemblance
between  wmimn  and  rutheniuiu.  Oamium  w  hen  aubmitted  to  the  action  of  dry  chlorine
gives  oamic  chloride,  OaClu  bat  the  latter  is  converted  by  water  (as  is  osmium  by  moist
chlorinej  into  osmic  anhydride,  altliougU  the  greater  portion  is  then  decomposed  into
Os(HO)t  and  iHCl,  Uke  a  chloranhydride  of  an  acid.  In  general  this  acid  character  Is
more  developed  in  osmiom  than  in  platiaam  stud  iridium.  Having  parted  witli  chlorine,
osmic  chloride.  OsCI,.  K>ves  the  onsUble  trichloride,  OsCli,  and  the  stable  soluble
dichloride,  OsCU.  wliicb  correspondi  with  platinous  chloride  in  its  properties  and
reactions. The  reUtiun  of  rutheninm  to  the  halogen*  is  of  the  aune  natote.

VOL.  II.  <it

886  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Platinum  and  its  analogues,  like  iron  and  its  analogues,  n,re  able  \
form  complex  and  comparatively  stable  cyanogen  and  ammonia  coi
pounds,  corresponding  with  the  ferrocyanides  and  the  ammoniacal  con
pounds  of  cobalt,  which  we  have  already  considered  in  the  precedii
chapter.

If  platinous  chloride,  PtCl2  (insoluble  in  water),  be  added  by  degree
to  a  solution  of  potassium  cyanide,  it  is  completely  dissolved  (lil
silver  chloride),  and  on  evaporating  the  solution  deposits  rhombi
prisms  of  j^^f^^^'^''^^  pfatinocyanide,  PtK2(CN)4,3H20.  This  salt,  lil
all  those  corresponding  with  it,  has  a  remarkable  play  of  colours,  doe  i
the  phenomena  of  dichromism,  and  even  polychromism,  natural  to  a
the  platinocyanides.  Thus  it  is  yellow  and  reflects  a  bright  bk
light.  It  is  easily  soluble  in  water,  effloresces  in  air,  then  turns  ret
and  at  100°  orange,  when  it  loses  all  its  water.  The  loss  of  wat<
does  not  destroy  its  stability — that  is,  it  still  remains  unchanged,  an
its  stability  is  further  shown  by  the  fact  that  it  is  formed  whe
potassium  ferrocyanide,  K4Fe(CN)g,  is  heated  with  platinum  blacl
This  salt,  first  obtained  by  Gmelin,  shows  a  neutral  reaction  wit
litmus  ;  it  is  exceedingly  stable  under  the  action  of  air,  like  potassiui
ferrocyanide,  which  it  resembles  in  many  respects.  Thus  the  platinui
in  it  cannot  be  detected  by  reagents  such  as  sulphuretted  hydrogen
the  potassium  may  be  replaced  by  other  metals  by  the  action  of  the:
salts,  so  that  it  corresponds  with  a  whole  series  of  compounds,  R2Pt(CN)
and  it  is  stable,  although  the  potassium  cyanide  and  platinous  salts,  c
which  it  is  composed,  individually  easily  undergo  change.  Whe
treated  with  oxidising  agents  it  passes,  like  the  ferrocyanide,  into
higher  form  of  combination  of  platinum.  If  salts  of  silver  be  adde
to  its  solution,  it  gives  a  heavy  white  precipitate  of  silver  platinc
cyanide,  PtAg2(CN)4,  which  when  suspended  in  water  and  treated
with  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  enters  into  double  decomposition  with  th
latter  and  forms  insoluble  silver  sulphide,  AgoS,  and  soluble  hydrc
platitionjanic  acid,  H._>Pt(CN)4.  If  potassium  platinocyanide  be  mixe
with  an  equivalent  quantity  of  sulphuric  acid,  the  hydroplatinc
cyanic  acid  liberated  may  be  extracted  by  a  mixture  of  alcohol  an<
ether.  The  ethereal  solution,  when  evaporated  in  a  desiccator,  deposit
bright  red  crystals  of  the  composition  PtH2(CN)4,r)H20.  This  aci<
colours  litmus  paper,  liberates  carbonic  anhydride  from  sodium  car
bonate,  and  saturates  alkalis,  so  that  it  presents  an  analogy  to  hydro
ferrocvanic  acid.''

11  This  ju-id  character  is  explained  by  tlie  influence  of  the  platinum  on  the  hydrogei
and  by  the  attachment  of  the  cyanogen  groups.  Thus  cyanuric  acid,  H3(CN)30v  is  ai
energetic  acid  comi)ared  with  cyanic  acid,  HCNO. And  tlie  formation  of  a  comix>ttn<

TITE PLATINITM  METALS  887

AmmoDia,  like  potassium  cyanide,  has  tlie  faculty  of  easily  reacting
with  platiaum  dichloride,  forming  compounds  eimilar  to  the  platino-

with  five  nioleoQlet  ol  wnter  of  eryBtaillHation,  (PtH,|CNl„ce50t,  eonfimiB  the  opinion
that  pUtinum  is  able  to  [onii  wmpoanda  of  atill  higher  lypvB  tliun  Ihnl  oiprpsiied
iu  its  Boline  compounda,  lind.  moreorer,  the  L'OiRbiDntion  □(  lij'dropliLtinacyaniG  ftdd
with  water  doCH  not  tcMh  tho  limit  ot  the  couiponndB  n-hich  ■ppt-u'e  in  PtCluSHCI,
OIljO.

A  whole  •eriea  of  p!aliniir^aniilei  ot  the  comman  type  PtB,ICN),irRjO  is  obtained
by  ineana  of  double  decoiniKiiiition  nilh  the  poluwiain  or  hydrogen  or  Mvat  salts.  For
eumple,  tlie  Kklts  ol  Bodinm  and  lilhiom  con  tain,  like  tbe  politBBiain  salt,  three  tnolecDles
of  water.  The  nodiuiu  ult  ia  Milnble  iu  water  and  olcohot.  The  ammoninin  aolt  liui  thv
coinpoititioii  Pt[MHi|,|C'N),.!m.jO(nd  gives  crjotaUwhipb  raflect  blue  and  roKe-wlourcd
light.  Thit  onunomUiD  sail  deoompoaea  at  SO0°,  with  erolotioii  nf  water  and  ominoniiua
cyanide,  lekTing  t,  greeniah  plaiinurn  difyanide,  Pt{CN),,  which  ia  inaoluble  in  water
■ad  acid  but  diaaolvea  in  potaauiom  cyanide,  hydrocjaDJc  acid,  and  other  cyonidea.  The
same  plalinaoa  eyuu'de  b  obCoiiied  by  the  ikcUoD  nt  enlpharic  aaid  on  the  potassium
Bolts  In  thelonnof  areddisb-browuiuuoriihanapn'dpitatti.  The  moat  cburocteriKtic  of  the
ptalmocyanides  ore  tho«e  ol  tbe  ulknline  VHrtliB.  Tbi^  magneBinm  anit  PtH^Crtl,,TH]0
CTyntnllisea  in  regular  pnanm,  whnae  aide  FoceB  ore  of  a  metallie  green  colour  abd  terminal
planes  dark  blue.  It  shows  a  cormine'rvd  colour  along  tli«  main  aiia,  and  dork  ted
along  the  lateral  *xfs ;  it  eoajly  loses  netcr,  (SH.jO),  at  40°,  and  then  tama  bloe  lit  thea
routpaina  GHmO,  whieb  is  Frequently  tbe  case  with  the  plattnocyanidea].  Ita  oqueons
Holation  ia  colourless,  and  an  olcohoHc  aolation  deposits  yellow  erystala.  The  temoinder
of  the  water  ia  given  off  at  380°,  It  is  obtaiued  by  aataruting  platinocyanic  acid  with
ma^enia,  or  else  by  doable  dernmpoaition  bebween  tbe  barium  salt  and  ma^CBiam  snl-
phiite.  The  strontium  aalt.  StPtlCN|„tE,0  ctystalliseH  in  milk-white  plates  liaving
a  violet  and  green  iridescence.  When  it  eflloreeces  in  a  desicaator,  its  snrface*  bare
a  violet  and  metallic  green  iridescence,  i.  colourless  solntioD  □!  tbe  barium  salt
PIBa(CX{„4H30  ia  obtained  by  satmating  a  aolatjou  ot  hydroplatiiiocjauiG  odd  with
baryta,  or  bj  boiling  the  insoluble  copper  platinocyanide  in  baryta  water.  It  erystolliMts
in  monoclinic  prianuof  a  yellow  colour,  with  blue  and  green  iridescence;  it  loses  half  ita
water  at  100",  and  the  wbole  at  IH)'.  Tbe  ethyl  salt,  Pt(t',Hs)](CK),.9ll,0,  i.  also
very  characteristic  ;  ita  crystals  ace  isamorpboiu  with  those  of  the  potasaiura  salt,  oud
are  obtained  by  passing  liydmcbloric  acid  into  an  akobotia  aolation  of  hydroplatino-
cyanie  acid.  The  facility  with  which  they  cryttalliae,  the  regularity  <■!  their  forma,
and  their  csmarkable  play  of  eoloura,  renders  the  preparation  of  the  platinocyanides  one

By  tlie  actirm  of  chlorine  or  dilute  nitric  acid,  the  platinocyanides  are  converted  into
suits  of  the  eompoution  PtMglCN)^,  which  corresponds  with  Pt(CNj],3KCN— that  is.
lliey  expresa  the  type  of  a  non-eiiatent  form  of  oiidation  of  platinum,  PtXj  H^  oiido
Pl^OsJ,  just  at  potassium  forrieyanide  (FeCy3,SKCy)  corrcaponda  with  ferric  oiide,  and
the  ferrocyanide  corresponds  with  the  fcrroua  oiide.  The  potassium  salt  of  this  aeries
contains  PUta(CN|i,3aiO,  and  forras  brown  r&gular  priams  with  9  metallic  lustre,  and  ia
soluble  in  water  bat  insoluble  in  alcohol.  Alkalis  re-convert  tliis  compound  into  the
ordinary  pUtinooyanide  K.jPtlCNj,,  taking  up  the  eicess  of  cyanogen.  It  is  remarkable
tbnl  tbe  gaits  of  the  type  PiMiCy,  contain  the  same  amouut  of  water  of  crystalliaation
HI  thow  dF  the  type  PtM.jCy,.  Thus  the  aalta  of  potassium  aud  lithium  coutoia  throe,
and  the  salt  of  magnesium  seven,  molecalei.  of  water,  like  the  correspandiiig  salta  ot  the
type  ot  platinoua  oiide.  Moreover,  neither  platinum  nor  any  of  its  aaaooiales  gives  any
cyanogen  componnd  oorreaponding  with  tbe  oxide,  i.e.  having  the  oompooilioa  PtK,Cyn.
just  oa  thera  are  no  compound*  higher  than  thoae  which  correspond  to  BCyjiiMCy  tor
i^obalt  or  iron.  This  would  appear  to  indicate  the  absence  of  any  aneh  oyomdes,  and
iadeadiloT  no  element  are  there  yet  known  any  poly-cyouides  eontainiog  more  than  Ihr««
eiioiialenls  of  cyanogen  for  one  equivnlsnt  ot  the  element. The  phenomenon  is  perhaps

388  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

cyanide  and  cobaltia  compounds,  which  are  comparatively  stable. £
as ammonia  does  not  contain  any  hydrogen  easily  replaceable

connected  with  tlie  faculty  of  cyanogen  of  giving  tricyanogen  polymerides,  sach  an  cyani
acid,  solid  cyanogen  chloride,  &c.  Under  the  action  of  an  excess  of  chlorine,  a  solnt
of  PtK.2(CN)t  gives  (besides  PtK^Cys)  a  product  PtK2Cy4Cl9,  which  evidently  oonta
the  fonn  PtX^,  but  at  first  the  action  of  the  chlorine  (or  the  electrolysis  of,  or  addit
of  dilute  peroxide  of  hydrogen  to,  a  solption  of  PtK2Cy4,  acidulated  with  hydrochl<
acid)  produces  an  easily  soluble  intermediate  salt  which  crystallises  in  thin  copper-
needles  (Wilm,  Hadow,  1889).  It  only  contains  a  small  amount  of  chlorine,  i
apparently  corresponds  to  a  compound  5PtK.iCy4  +  PtK2Cy4Cl5  +  SiH^O.  Under
action  of  an  excess  of  ammonia  both  these  chlorine  products  are  conyerted  either  cc
pletely  or  in  part  (according  to  Wilm  ammonia  does  not  act  upon  VtK^Cjg^  u
PtCy.j,2NH5,  i.e.  a  platino-ammonia  compound  {see  further  on).  It  is  also  necesaai^
pay  attention  to  the  fact  that  ruthenium  and  osmium — which,  as  we  know,  give  big]
fonns  of  oxidation  than  platinimi — are  also  able  to  combine  with  a  larger  proportion
potassium  cyanide  (but  not  of  cyanogen)  than  platinum.  Thus  rutheniom  formi
crystalline  hydroruthenocyanic  acid,  RuH4(CN)6,  which  is  soluble  in  water  and  alod
and  corresponds  with  the  salts  M4Ru(CN)0.  There  are  exactly  similar  oamic  cc
pounds — for  example,  K408(CN)ti,3H-^0.  The  latter  is  obtained  in  the  form  of  coloorU
sparingly-soluble  regular  tablets  on  evaporating  the  solution  obtained  from  a  fni
mixture  of  potassium  osmiochloride,  K.^OsCl^,  and  potassium  cyanide.  These  oamic  i
ruthenic  compounds  fully  correspond  with  potassium  ferrocyanide,  K4Fe(CN),},8H20,  i
only  in  their  composition  but  also  in  their  crystalline  form  and  reactions,  which  ag:
demonstrates  the  close  analogy  between  iron,  ruthenium,  and  osmium,  which  we  hi
shown  by  giving  these  tliree  elements  a  similar  position  (in  the  eightli  group)  in  i
periodic  system.  For  rhodium  and  iridium  only  salts  of  the  same  type  as  the  ferricyani^
M-^RCy,;,  are  known,  and  for  palladium  only  of  the  type  M2PdCy4,  which  are  analogs
to  the  i)Iatinum  salts.  In  all  these  examples  a  constancy  of  th^  types  of  the  don
cyanides  is  apparent.  In  the  eighth  group  we  have  iron,  cobalt,  nickel,  copper,  and  tli
analogues  ruthenium,  rhodium,  palladium,  silver,  and  also  osmium,  iridium,  platini
gold.  The  double  cyanides  of  iron,  ruthenium,  osmium  have  the  type  K4R(CN)^;
cobalt,  rhodium,  iridium,  the  type  K.-,R(t-'N)6 ;  of  nickel,  palladium,  platinum  the  t]
K.2K1CN),  and  K.^K(C'N)5;  and  for  copjwr,  silver,  gold  there  are  known  KR(CN)2,
that  the  i)resence  of  4,  3,  2,  and  1  atoms  of  i>otassium  corresponds  with  t
order  of  the  elements  in  the  periodic  system.  Those  types  which  we  have  m
in  the  ferroeyanides  and  ferricyanides  of  iron  repeat  themselves  in  all  the  platim
metals,  and  this  naturally  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  formation  of  simi
so-called  double  salts  is  of  exactly  the  same  nature  as  that  of  the  ordinary  salts.  If,
exjjressing  the  union  of  the  elements  in  the  oxygen  salts,  the  existence  of
aqunms  residue  (hydroxyl  group)  be  adnutted,  in  which  the  hydrogen  is  replaced  b;
metal,  we  have  then  only  to  apply  this  mode  of  expressitm  to  the  double  salts  and  \
anftl(»gy  will  be  obvious,  if  only  we  remember  that  CI.,.,  (CN).,,,  SO4,  &c.,  are  equivalent
O,  as  we  see  in  RO,  RCI.2,  RSO4,  &c.  They  all  -  X,,  and,  therefore,  in  point  of  h
wherever  X  (  Cl  or  OH,  Arc.)  can  be  placed,  there  (C1,.H),  (SO4H),  &c.,  can  also  stai
And  as  ClJI  C'l  i  HCl  and  SO,H  =  OH  -  SO5,  Ac,  it  follows  tlnit  molecules  HCl  or  S(
or,  in  general,  whole  molecules — for  instance,  NII3,  H,.0,  salts,  &c.,  can  annex  themsel^
tna  conJiK^und  containing  X.  (This  is  an  indirect  consequence  of  the  law  of  substitnti
which  explains  the  origin  of  double  salts,  ammonia  coni}X)und8,  com]X)und8  with  wa
of  crvhtallisation,  iVrc,  by  one  general  method.)  Thuh  the  d(mble  salt  MgS04,K..»S<
according  to  this  reasoning,  may  hr  considered  as  av  substance  of  the  same  type
M^Cl...,  namely,  as  -Mg(S04K)o,  and  the  alums  as  derived  from  A1(0H)(S04),  namely,
A1(S0,KmS0|).  Without  stopping  to  pursue  this  digression  further,  we  will  ap|
these  considerations  to  the  type  of  the  ferroeyanides  and  ferricyanides  and  th
l)]atinum  analogues. Such  a  salt  as  KoPtCyj  may  accordingly  be  regarded  as  P^CyjK

THE  PLATISi™:  METALS  389

metnls,  and  as  naimoni&  itfielE  is  able  to  combine  witli  acids,  the
PtX,  plays,  as  it  were,  the  part  of  an  acid with reference to the

like  PtlOHl: ;  und  sach  a  salt  ag  PtK^yj  u  PtCy(Cy,E]j,  tlie  analogue  ol  PtXIOH),,
or  AlX(OH)-j,  and  other  compounds  of  the  type  RSa-  PotuBium  femcyuiide  uid  th*
ifcnftlogotii  Gompounda  of  cobAlt,  iridiuui,  uid  fhodium.  belong  to  t1i«  wae  type,  with  the
same  diaenuce  M  there  is  between  BSIOH)2  and  RIOU)j,  ainoe  FeKjCy,^Fe<CyoK)].
Limiting  mysell  to  these  GoUBideritians.  which  may  puti&Ily  elucidate  th«  nature
of  double  ultB,  I  will  DOW  [abb  again  to  the  qoiupli-i  Wkliue  compuutids  knoim  for
platinum.

(A.)  Oil  mixing  a  wlutjon  of  potoeBiota  thiocyuisle  with  a,  sulatiou  ol  potaisinm
platinoaochloride,  K,FtCl„  tbey  form  it  double  thiocyuiale,  PtKr,ICNS)„  which  is  easily
HOluble  in  water  and  alcohol,  d^atallises  in  red  prisius,  and  givtm  ui  onuige- coloured
solution,  which  precipitutoB  uilCii  of  the  heaty  metahi.  The  ikclion  of  flulpfauiic  acid
on  the  lena  salt  of  the  came  type  giceH  the  auid  itself,  PtH.,(BCN|4,  which  corre-
Bponds  with  these  salts. The  type  of  Ihexe  camponnda  h  evideutly  the  same  as  that  of

(B)  PlalinouB  chloride,  PtCLj,  which  is  insutuhte  iii  water,  fonuH  double  >alta  with
llif  intliillii;  chloridet.  These  double  chloridBS  are  mlubla  id  water,  and  capable  of
cryBtallisiii][.  Hence  when  a  hydmchloric  acid  solution  of  pUtinous  chloride  is  miied
with  BOlntkiiw  Of  malallic  salts  and  evaporated  it  forms  orystatlitie  salts  of  a  red  or
yellow  colour.  Thus,  for  example,  the  poUasium  Halt,  PtK^Clt,  is  red,  and  easily
Holuhle  ID  water;  the  sodium  salt  is  ahw  soluble  in  alcohol;  the  barium  salt,
PtBaCl|,SQ.,0.  ia  soluble  in  water,  but  the  silver  lalC,  PtAgjCl,,  ii  insoluble  in  water,
and  may  be  osed  tor  obtaining  the  remaining  salts  by  means  of  double  decomposition
with  (heir  chloridet.

|C|  A  remarkable  example  at  the  complei  componnds  of  platinmn  was  observed  by
Schiitienborger  (1888).  He  showed  tliat  fttielydivided  platinum  in  the  presence  ol
chlorine  and  carbonic  oxide  at  aSO^-SOO"  gives  phosgene  and  a  volatile  compound  con-
taining platinum-  The  same  substance  is  formed  by  the  action  of  carbonic  okide  on
platinoUB  cbloride.  It  decomposes  with  an  explosion  in  contact  with  water.  Carbon
tetrachloride  dissolves  a  portion  of  this  subslance,  and  on  evaporation  giree  (.Tystals  of
aPtCLuSCO,  whilst  the  uomponnd  PtCl„9CO  remains  nndiasolved.  When  (used  and
sublimed  it  gives  yelluw  needles  of  PtCLi,CO,  and  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  ol
carbonic  oxide  PtCIj,'2C0  is  lormed.  These  compounds  are  fasible  (tJie  first  at  950°,the
second  at  1411°,  and  the  third  at  195°).  In  this  case  (as  in  Uie  double  cyanides)  com-
bination takes  place^  becaase  both  carbonic  oside  and  platinona  chloride  are  unsaturated
compounds  capable  ol  further  combination.  The  carbon  tetrachloride  solution  absorbs
NHj  and  gives  PtCl^CO.SNH,,  and  PtCL„3CO,aNH!^,  and  these  subaUucee  are  aualo.
gous  (Foerster,  Zeisel,  Jiirgeusen)  to  similar  componnds  containing  complex  amines  (lor
instance,  pyridine,  C^^),  instead  of  NHj,  and  ethylene,  Ac,  instead  of  CO,  no  that  here
we  have  a  whole  series  ol  complex  platioo-componnds.  The  compound  PlCl,CO
diosoh-oH  in  hydrochloric  acid  without  change,  and  the  solution  disengages  all  the
cartwuic  ojcide  wheu  KCN  is  added  to  it,  which  shows  that  those  forces  which  bind
3  molecules  of  KCN  to  PtCI,  can  also  binil  the  molecale  CO,  or  1  molecules  of  CO.
When  the  hydrochloric  acid  solation  of  PtCI,CO  ia  mixed  with  a  solution  of  sodium
acetate  or  acetic  acid,  it  gives  a  precipitate  of  PtOCO,  i.e.  the  Clj  is  replaced  by  oxygen
[probably  becaase  the  acetate  is  decomposed  by  water).  Tliis  oiide,  PtOCO,  splits  op
into  Pt  -^  COj  at  8G0°.  PtSCO  is  obtained  by  the  action  ol  sulphuretted  bydrogea  upon
PtCljCO,  Ail  this  loads  to  the  condnsioD  that  the  group  PtCO  U  able  to  ossimikte
X,  =  CV..,  S,  O,  &c.  IMylius,  Foerstor,  1891).  Pnllinger  (1891),  by  igniting  spongy
platinoro  at  960°,  Beat  in  a  stream  o!  chlorine,  and  thou  in  a  stream  of  carbonic  oxide,
obtained  (besides  volatile  products)  a  non-volatile  yellow  substance  which  remained
onolianged  in  air  and  disengaged  chlorine  and  phosgeoe  gas  when  ignited;  its  compo-
ailion  WBS  PlCls(CO)j,  which  apparently  proves  it  to  be  a  compound  of  PtCI,  and

890  rKiN'cipjjss  OF  chemistry

ammonia. Owing  to  the influence of the  ammonia,  the X^  in  th
resultant  compound will  represent  the  same  character as  it  has  i

2COCl,>,  iiH  IHC.'l...  iH  able  to  combine  witli  oxychlorideB,  aiid  forms  oomewhat  t»tub'
compounds.

(D)  The  fiiculty  of  platinous  chloride  for  forming  stable  compoundH  with  divers  sul
Btancert  hIiowh  itself  in  the  formation  of  the  comiX)und  1HC1..>,PC13  by  the  action  of  pho
phorus  iK'ntacliluride  at  250^  on  platinum  ix>wder  (IM  reacts  in  a  Himilar  nionue
according  to  Fink,  18))*i).  The  jtroduct  contain^  1)oth  jthoflphoms  (wntochloride  an
platinum,  whilHt  the  jtreHence  of  PtCU  in  fdiown  in  the  fact  that  the  action  of  waU
produceH  chlorplat i no-phoaphorous  aciil^  PtCLP(OH)-.

{E)  After  the  cyanides,  the  double  Halttt  of  platinum /ormnZ  by  sulphurous  acid  ai
moHt  distingniHhed  for  their  Htability  and  characterirttic  properties.  Thin  is  all  the  moi
inHtnictive,  an  sulphurous  acid  is  only  feebly  energetic,  and,  moreover,  in  theHc,  aH  in  a
itH  com})0undH,  it  exhibitH  a  dual  reaction.  The  saltn  of  sulphurous  acid,  RiSO.>  eith*
react  as  salts  of  a  feeble  bibasic  acid,  where  the  group  SO^  presents  itself  as  bivalen
and  consequently  equal  to  X.,»,  or  else  they  react  after  the  manner  of  salts  of  a  monoban
acid  containing  the  Kinnt*  residue,  RSO-,  as  occurs  in  the  salts  of  sulphuric  acid.  lu  su
phurouB  acid  this  residue  is  combined  with  hydrogen.  H1SO3H),  whilst  in  Hulphuric  ac
it  is  unit<*d  with  the  atjueous  residue  (hydroxyl.l,  OH/SOsHi.  These  two  forms  of  actic
of  thr'  sulpliites  ap]H*:ir  in  their  reiu'tioiis  with  the  platinum  salts — that  is  to  say,  salts
both  kinds  are  formed,  and  they  both  correspond  with  the  tv[)e  PtH.^Xi.  Tlie  01
series  of  salts  contain  PtH.j(S03)..„  and  their  reactions  are  due  to  the  bivalent  renidi
of  sulphurous  arid,  which  replaces  X>.  The  others,  which  have  the  coin|iositi<
PtR.(SO-H 1 1,  contain  sulphoxyl.  The  latter  salts  will  evidently  react  like  acids ;  tlu
are  formed  simultaneously  with  the  salts  of  the  first  kind,  and  pass  into  them.  Thei
salts  are  obtained  cither  by  directly  dissolving  i>latinous  oxide  in  water  containing  su
I>hurouM  acid,  or  by  passing  sulphurous  anhydride  into  a  solution  of  platinons  chloric
in  hydrwhloric  acid.  If  a  solution  i.»f  platinons  chl«)rid«»  or  platinons  oxide  in  sulphuroi
acid  be  saturutetl  with  sodium  carbonate,  it  forms  a  white,  sparingly  soluble  prccipita
containiu;^  l*tNa.fS(.)-Na),.7lI..O.  If  this  pr»»cipitat«'  l>e  dissolved  in  a  small  quantity!
liy<lro<'Iil<>ric  acid  and  Icfl  to  cvaiMtrate  at  th**  onlinary  tenip'rature,  it  deposits  u  t^uli  <
the  othrr  ty]>»»,  IMNa  ,iSO-',.,lI/^.  i"  tin-  form  of  a  y»'Ilow  inrnder,  which  is  R|»arin^
finlublr  in  watvr.  Tin-  jJotas^Muni  salt  analt)«;i»U'>  to  tlu'  tirst  salt,  PtK.2(S03K)i/JH.jO,
prfcipitutt'cl  liy  p:is-in^'  siilplnirous  anhydride  into  a  sohition  of  potassium  sulphite  i
which  platini>u>«  oxido  is  su^iHMidcd.  A  similar  salt  is  known  for  ammonium,  and  wil
livdnK-hlorii-  ai-id  it  ;.mv«'s  a  salt  of  the  second  kind,  Pti  XH|l,.lSO-?..,HoO.  If  aniinoiii<
chloride  of  platinnni  be  added  to  an  atpicous  M>lution  of  sulphurous  anhydride,  it  is  tir
deoxidised,  and  chlorii»e  is  evolved,  ft)rminj(  a  salt  of  tlie  tyi>e  PtX^  ;  a  double  decomp
hition  then  take-i  place  with  the  ammonium  sulphit<',  and  a  siUt  of  the  conipo»iti«:
Pt(XH|).C'l.-iS()-H)  is  fc»nned  lin  a  desiccator).  Tin-  aciil  character  of  this  subattince
explained  by  the  fact  that  it  contains  the  elements  SO-H  — sulphoxyl,  with  the  hydroiff
nut  yet  displacecl  by  a  metal.  On  saturatin;^  a  solution  of  this  acid  witli  |K>tassitij
carbonat*'  it  iriv».'s  oranj,'e-col<inred  crystals  of  a  ]M»tassiuni  salt  of  the  coni|K)sitic:
I'tiN'H,i;('l.-'S<)-Ki.  Hen-  it  is  evident  that  an  eqnivaleiit  «if  chlorine  in  Pt(NH4l._.C'l4
replaee«l  by  the  univalent  residue  of  snlphurons  ai:i<l.  Among  these  salts,  that  of  tli
coniiM-isition  l*t-NIl|i,.C'l_,iSO-Hij,IIjO  is  very  readily  formed,  and  crystallises  in  wel
formed  colourless  crystals;  it  i>^  obtained  by  dis>olvin;;  ammtmium  platiuosocliloridi
Pt.NH,'J'l„  in  an  ajpieous  solution  of  sulphnnms  acid.  The  difliculty  with  which  su
plinrons  anliy<lrid<'  and  platinum  are  se]iarated  from  these  salts  indicat<>s  the  same  bawi
chanuter  in  these  coni{Miunds  as  is  seen  in  the  double  cyanides  of  platinum.  In  the:
passa;^e  into  a  com])lux  salt,  the  metal  i»latinum  and  the  gnmp  SO.^  niodify  thei
relati»»ns  (compared  with  those  of  PtXj  or  SO..X.,l,  just  as  the  chlorine  in  the  saltH  KC'IC
K("l(.)-.  an<l  K('l()|  is  moilitied  in  its  relations  as  compared  with  hydrochloric  acid  n
jiotassium  chloride.

THE PLATINUM  METALS

391

iacal  salts  ;  consoquently,  the  aramoniacal  cmnpomidB  produceil
fruiu  PtXj  will  b6  salts  in  which  X  will  be  replacealile  by  rarioua
other  haloids,  just  as  the  metal  is  replaced  in  the  cyanogen  salts  ;  such
ia  the  nature  of  the  jitalino-ainm&nium  eompomuin.  PtX,,  finiaa  com-
pouiidsj  with  2NH3  and  with  INHj,  and  b<)  also  PtX,  gives  (not
dire(;tly  from  PtXj  and  ammonia,  but  from  the  compfiunds  of  PtX.^  by
the  action  of  chlorine,  Ac.)  similar  compounds  with  'JNH^  and  with

{F)  No  leu  uhuHuteriatiu  »re  iiu!  plaltnanitritet  formed  by  plutinonB  oxide.  The;
correH|ioncl  wilh  nilrouB  uiid,  wboM  salts,  BNOj,  coiitaia  the  nnivdent  iodide,  NOj,
nliicb  IB  capable  oF  replneing  chlorine,  uid  theretoro  the  salts  of  this  kind  should  torn  a
commoti  type  PtRj(NOil„  and  such  it  salt  oE  potasBinm  hu  actoally  been  obtained  hj
mixing  a  solution  of  potOAaima  platinosochloride  with  a  feolntioD  of  potuaimn  nitntfi,
when  the  hqaid  becomes  colourless,  especially  if  it  be  heated,  which  indicates  the  change
ill  Ihe  chemical  distribution  of  the  clemonts.  As  the  liquid  deootorisea  it  gradnallj
deposits  sparinglj  soluble,  colonrless  prisma  of  the  potasAiam  salt  K.^PtfKO^^^,  wbieh
does  not  contain  an;  water.  With  silver  nitmte  a  solotion  ot  this  salt  gives  a  precipitate
of  silver  platinonitrile,PtAga(NOal|,  The  ailrer  of  this  salt  maj  be  replaced  by  other
metals  by  means  of  double  decompositiou  with  metallic  chlorides^  The  spajinglj  solnble
bntiam  salt,  irben  treated  with  an  equivalent  quantity  of  lulphutic  aeid,  giTes  b  soluble
twirl,  which  separates,  under  the  receiTer  of  ad  air-pump,  in  red  crystals ;  this  acid  has
the  composition  PtH^NOi),.  To  the  potaBsium  salt,  K.jPt(NOi)„  there  correspond
(Vi-ies,  IBIM)  KjPt(NOi),Bri  and  K,Pt(NOj),Cl,  and  other  compounds  ot  the  ume  type
K,^tX„,  whore  X  is  partly  replaced  by  CI  or  Br  and  partly  by  (NO,),  showing  a
traniution  towards  the  type  of  the  double  salts  like  the  platino-amnumiacal  salts.  (The
corresponding  double  sodimn  nitrite  salt  of  cobalt  ia  aolnble  in  water,  while  be  K,MH,
and  many  other  salts  are  insoluble  in  water,  as  I  was  informed  by  Prof.  K.  WinUer
in  1894).

Id  all  the  preceding  complex  compounds  of  Pt  ne  see  a  comnuin  type  PtXt,flMX
(I.e.  of  double  salts  corresponding  to  PlO)  or  PtMaX,  =  Pt(MX,)„  corresponding  to
Pt<HO)i  with  the  replacement  of  O  by  its  equivalent  Xg.  Too  other  facta  moat  also  be
noted.  In  the  first  place  these  X's  generally  correspond  [a  elements  (like  chlorine)  ot
croups  (like  CN,  NOj,  SOj,  kc),  which  are  capable  of  larther  Dombinabion.  In  the
■ecund  place  all  the  compounds  ol  the  type  PtH.jXj  are  capable  of  combining  with
chlorine  ur  similar  elements,  and  Cli  as  passing  into  com  pound  a  of  the  types  PtXj  or  PtX4.

"  The  platinum  salt  and  ammonia,  when  once  combined  together,  are  no  longer
subject  to  their  ordinary  reactions  but  form  compounds  which  are  comparatively  very
stable.  The  question  at  once  snggesta  itself  to  all  who  are  acquainted  with  tbew  plieno-
meua.  as  to  what  is  the  relation  of  the  elemeotn  contained  in  these  compoonds.  The  flrat
explanation  ia  that  these  compounds  are  salts  of  ammonium  in  which  the  hydrogen  is
partially  replaced  by  platinum.  This  is  the  view,  with  certain  sliodus  of  difference,  held
by  many  respectiug  the  platino-ammoniom  uompoonds.  They  were  regarded  in  this
light  by  Gerfaardt,  ticliifl,  Kotbe,  Weltzien,  and  many  others. If  we  snppoae  the  bydro-

■  in  2NII,X  to  be  replacwl  by  bivalent  pUlinnm  (as  in  the  salts  PtX,),  we  dull
impound  PtS.j.aNHi.  The  L-ompouiid  with  4NH,  will
e  represented  by  a  lurther  snbatitDtion  n!  the  hydrogen  in  ammonia  by  ammo-
niom  itself— i.c.  as  NII,(NH,X),Pt  at  PtX^.^NHi-  A  niodifiution  ot  this  view  is  found
in  that  representation  of  compounds  of  this  kind  which  is  based  on  atomicity.  As
platinom  in  PtX,  is  bivalent,  has  two  sffinities,  and  ammonia,  NUi,  is  also  bivalent,
becAUse  nitrogen  is  quinquivalent  and  is  bere  only  combined  with  H^,  it  is  evident  what
bends  sbouUbeiepresentedrnPtXa^NHjaniinPtXibiNH,.  InthBformor,Pt(NH,Cl)„
the  nitrogen  of  each  atom  of  ammonia  ia  united  by  three  affiuitiei  with  Bj,  by  one  with

[>P^— that  ii

PRINCIPLES  OF  0HEKJ8TBT

lia  acta on  b.  boiling  Bolation  of  plaUnous  chloride in
ikydi'ochlorii; ttcid, it produces the green aalt  of  Magnus (1829),

sta,  and  by  tbe  fittb  with  clilonDe.  The  otber  comiionnd  ia  PtlKHs-NH^Cl).,— Uut
N  is  Dnibed  l>y  one  sfEnity  nith  the  other  N,  wbiUt  the  renwiniDg  bonds  are  tbo
>a  in  the  first  Mlt.  It  is  evident  tlikt  this  uniou  or  ahain  of  nmmonJiLB  Iub  no
K  limit,  and  the  roaitt  ennenlial  fualt  oi  snth  a  mule  of  repreeentilion  i>  th&l  it  dox
licate  ut  all  what  niunbei  o(  aromoniits  are  capable  oF  being  rctaiiied  b;  pl&tinDm.
rer,  it  is  hudly  poSBible  to  admit  the  bond  between  nitrogen  and  pl&tinuin  in  such
ilile  compoonde,  (or  these  kinda  of  aBtnitieii  are,  at  alt  eventa.  feeble,  and  cannot  lead
to  atabititj,  bat  would  rather  iadi«l«  eiploaiTe  und  eaailj-ileooinposed  «iiD pounds,
MoreoTer,  it  ia  nob  clear  why  this  platinDm.  which  is  eapableof  giving  PtX„  does  not  act
with  its  remaining  affinities  when  the  addition  at  ammonia  to  PlX,  takce  place.  Tlue,
and  eertain  other  consideiatioDs  which  indicate  the  imperfection  of  tbla  represent«lioa  o(
the  atmctnre  of  the  platino-ammonium  aalba,  canae  many  ohemiats  to  iticline  more  to  the
representations  of  Ber»liua,  Claua,  Gibba,  and  nbhera,  who  aappoae  that  NHj  ia  able  to
combine  with  aabataDCea,  to  ad  join  itself  or  pair  itself  with  them(tbiakindof  combiuatioli
ia  called  'Faanmg')  without  altering  the  fundamental  capacity  ot  a  substance  lor  furtlier
couibiuationa.  Tbns,  in  PtX„9NH„  the  ammonia  ia  tbe  aaaociate  of  PtX^  u  1*
eipreaaed  by  tbe  tormala  N.jHgPtX^  WitliODt  enlarging  on  the  expoaition  of  the  detaQfl
of  thia  dnctriue,  we  will  only  mention  thai  it,  like  the  Brat,  ilnea  not  render  it  poanble  to
toreaee  a  limit  lo  the  compoonda  with  ammonia;  it  iaolates  componnda  of  Lhia  kind
into  a  apecial  and  artificial  class;  does  not  ahow  the  connection  between  compoBIlda  of
thia  and  of  otber  kinds,  and  therefore  it  eaaentially  only  expresses  the  fact  of  the  aetsa-

reasoiis  we  ia  not  hold  bo  either  ot  these  proposod  repreaetitatiooa  of  the  Aminomo-
platinnia  componnda,  bat  regard  them  from  the  point  of  view  cited  above  with  relemna
to  double  aalta  and  water  of  crystallisation — that  is,  we  embrace  all  these  compomidB
under  tlie  repreaentation  of  compounds  of  oomplei  typea.  Tlie  type  of  the  oomponsd
PtX„aXH,  ia  far  more  probably  the  same  ia«  that  of  PtX^bSZ— i,p.  as  PtX^.  or,  stiU  mota
accoiately  and  truly,  it  ia  a  compound  of  tlie  same  type  aa  PtXi,3KX  or  PtXg.SH^,  A«-
Although  the  platinnm  first  entered  into  PtE,X,  as  tbe  type  PbXg.  yet  its  chancier  ha*

pound  SO,(OH|,isabtained,oTwhenKC10„tbebiglii>rIiiRu,iBoLtained  from  KCL  For  na
aa  yet  there  ia  no  qDestiou  as  tawhat  aSinitiea  hold  X,  and  what  hold  SfiHt.  becans«  th»

atoms,  whiuli  there  ia  no  reason  (or  taking  aa  a  common  phenomenon.  It  seems  to  me
that  it  ia  moat  important  oao  commencument  to  render  dear  the  analogy  in  tbe  (ounatioa
oE  varioae  complex  compounds,  and  it  ia  this  analogy  of  the  ammouia  rompooiKla  witli
those  ot  water  ot  crystallisation  and  double  asJts  tliat  forma  the  main  object  ot  the
primary  generalisation.  We  recognise  in  platinum,  nt  all  events,  not  only  tbe  fbor
affinitiea  expressed  in  the  compound  PtCI  ^,  bub  a  much  larger  number  of  tbem,  if  only
the  afimnialtoii  of  affnitiet  ia  actnally  [>oaaible.  Thua,  in  aulpUnr  we  recognise  not  two
bat  a  niach  greater  nnmber  of  eMnitiea;  it  ia  clear  that  at  lout  aii  affiulties  ca,ii  lut.
So  alao  among  the  analogneaof  platinum:  oBmioau]iydrido,OsOH,Ni(COI„  PtHjCl,^  *«.
Indicate  the  existence  of  at  least  eight  affinitiea;  whilst,  in  ohloriDe,  judging  trom  tlM
oompDund  KCIO4  -  CIOs(OK)  =  CIX7.  we  muat  recognise  at  least  aeven  alBiiiliea,
instead  of  the  one  which  ia  accepted,  Tbe  latter  mode  of  calculaUng  affinities  ia  s  triboto
to  tbat  period  of  the  development  of  acieuoe  when  only  the  aimplest  hydrogen  cotnpotuda
were  considered,  and  when  all  complex  coiupoDuda  were  entirely  neglected  (th*^  wto*
placed  under  the  claaa  ot  molecular  componnds).  This  ia  inauffiaient  for  tb«  [ii  iimiiiI
if  knowledge.becaQsewefindthat,  in  complex  compounds  sa  in  the  most  lumpla,  tiM
conabant  typea  or  modes  ot  equilibrium  are  repeated,  and  the  character  oi  j— rtnin
a  greatly  modified  in  the  passage  from  the  most  simple  into  very  ajaqfia

THE  VLATTSVX  METALS

FtCl,,2NHj,,  insoluble  in  water  aad  hydroclilorie  acid.  But,  judging
liy  its  Inactions,  this  salt  has  twice  this  formula.  Thus,  Gros  (1837),
oil  lioiling  Magnus's  salt  with  nitric  acid,  observed  tbat  half  the  chloi-ine
was  replaced  bj'  the  residue  of  nitric  acid  and  half  the  platinum  was
disengaged  :  2PtCl,(NH,)a  +  2HNO3  =  PtCI,(N03MNH,},  +  2PtCl,.
The Gros'a  salt  thuB  obtained,  PtClj(N03)s4NH, (if Magnus's  salt

Juagiof  (mill  the  moat  i-omplei  plolino-ammoniom  oompouuds  PIC1,.1NH;,  ws
«lionld  tAnui  the  poBsibility  of  the  torniiitiOD  of  componndB  ot  the  tjpe  PtX,Y,,  where
Y,  =  iX,  •=  4NHj,  wid  this  shows  that  iboae  forces  which  form  auch  a  ehimeleristio
•erieH  of  doable  pUtinocjriiaideB  PtKi(CN)„llH^,^Tobabl7  also  dstenniiie  the  [DrmiilioD
of  the  higher  Ammonia  deriTativett,  aa  ia  veea  on  comparing —

PtClj NHj CI, 8NHj

Pt(CN),  KCN KCN BHjO,

Mi>r«oTeT,  it  ia  obnoiuljr  mach  more  nataral  U)  sKribe  the  fseulty  for  cambiniitiati
with  nY  to  the  whole  ot  the  kcting  elemeuts— thiit  ia,  to  PtX,  or  PtX„  and  iiol  to
plitiDiim  lUone.  NataiiUI;  such  componnda  ure  not  prodoced  with  bd;  Y,  With
certain  X'a  there  oiUy  combine  certiun  Y'a.  The  best  known  and  moat  frequentlj-
lormed  ™mpnnnijii  ot  thiB  kiod  are  Ihoae  with  water — that  is,  eompounda  witli  water  of
crjatallieatioD.  Compooada  with  hlILs  arft  double  aalta;  also  we  know  that  aimilar
componada  are  alao  freqiieatlj  formed  bj  means  of  amiDonia.  Balta  ot  line,  ZnX^,
copper,  CqX],  ailTor,  AgX,  and  many  others  ^re  Himilarcomponnda,  bnb  these  and  many
other  ammoaio-nirtalUc  saline  compounds  are  anatable,  and  rea^ilj  part  with  their
combined  ammonia,  and  it  ia  only  in  the  elements  of  the  platinum  group  and  in  tlie
group  ol  the  analuiraeii  of  iron,  that  we  obeetTe  the  faculty  to  form  sl^le  ammonto-
nietallic  eompounda.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  metals  of  the  platinum  and  iron
groups  are  able  to  form  seTeral  high  grades  of  oxidation  which  have  an  acid  character,
and  consequently  in  the  lower  degrees  of  combination  there  yet  remain  affinities  capable
of  retaining  other  elements,  and  tbey  probably  retain  ammonia,  and  hold  it  the  more
stably,  becauxe  all  the  properties  of  the  platinum  eompounda  are  rather  acid  than  haaic
-that  is,  PtX,.  recalls  ratbei  HX  or  SnX.  or  CX.  than  EX,  CaXj,  BaX,,  &c„  and
ammi>nia  natorally  will  ratlier  combine  with  an  acid  than  with  a  basic  snbatanoe.
Fartlier,  a  dependence,  or  certain  connection  ot  the  forms  of  oxidation  with  the  ammonia
compoands,  is  seen  on  comparing  the  following  compotmda:

PdCl„3NHj,tt,0  PdClj,lNH3,H,,0

PtCI.„aNH3  PtCl„lNH-

RhCljpBNHj  RuCl-biNHspSajO

IrCl3,£NHj  09Clj,iNHj,aH,0

We  know  that  platinum  and  palladium  give  compounds  of  lower  types  than  iridium
and  rhodium,  whilst  tutheniiun  and  oamiuni  give  the  highest  forms  of  oxidation ;  thia
nhowH  itself  in  this  case  also.  Ve  have  pnrfWHely  cited  the  same  compounds  with  INHj
(or  osminm  and  ruthenium  as  we  have  for  plulinnm  and  palladium,  and  it  is  then  seen
that  Ru  and  Oa  are  capable  of  retaining  OiLfl  and  SH.jO,  besides  CL,  and  N'H,,  which
the  compoands  at  platinum  and  palladium  are  noable  to  do.  The  same  ideas
wluch  were  developi^  in  Note  SE,  Chapter  XXn.  respecting  the  cohallia  componnda  ue
IHirfecIiy  applicable  to  the  present  case,  i,ir,  to  the  plalinia  compounds  or  ammonia
compoondu  of  the  platinum  metala,  among  which  Rh  and  Ir  give  compounds  which  are
perfectly  analogous  In  tlie  cobaltia  compounds.

Iridiom  and  rhodium,  which  easily  give  eompounda  of  Che  type  EXj,  give  eompounda
(CUua)  of  the  type  IrXi.BNHs,  of  a  rose  colour,  and  RhXifiNH,,  of  a  yellow  colour.
Jorgensen,  in  his  reseacohes  on  these  oomponndii.  showed  their  entire  analogy  with  the
cobalt  oompoends,  as  was  to  be  eipected  from  the  periodic  system.

394  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

belongs  to  the  type  PtXg,  then  Gros*s  salt  belongs  to  the  type  PtX4),  la

soluble  in  water,  and  the  elements  of  nitric  acid,  but  not  the  chlorine,

contained  in  it  are  capable  of  easily  submitting  themselves  to  double

saline  decomposition. Thus  silver  nitrate  does  not  enter  into  double

decomposition  with  the  chlorine  of  Gros's  salt. Most  instructive  was

the  circumstance  that  Gros,  by  acting  on  his  salt  with  hydrochloric

acid, succeeded  in substituting  the  residue  of  nitric  acid in it  by

chlorine,  and  the  chlorine  thus  introduced,  easily  reacted  with silver

nitrate. Thus  it  appeared  that  Gros's  salt  contained  two  varieties  of

chlorine — one  which  reacts  readily,  and  the  other  which  reacts  with

difficulty. The  composition  of  Groses  first  salt  is  PtCl2(NH3)4(N03),  ;

it  may l)e converted into PtCl2(N  113)4(804), and in  general into
PtCl,(NH3)4X2.»3

The  salt  of  Magnus  when  boiled  with  a  solution  of  ammonia  gives
the  salt  (of  Keiset's  first  base)  PtCl2(NH3)4,  and  this,  when  treated
with  bromine,  forms  the  salt  PtCl2Br2(NH3)4,  which  has  the  same
composition  and  reactions  as  Gros's  salt.  To  Keiset's  salts  there
corresponds  a  soluble,  colourless,  crystalline  hydroxide^  Pt(OH)2(NH3)4,
having  the  properties  of  a  powerful  and  very  energetic  alkcUi ;  it
attracts  carbonic  anhydride  from  the  atmosphere,  precipitates  metallic
salts  like  potash,  saturates  active  acids,  even  sulphuric,  forming
colourless  (with  nitric,  carbonic,  and  hydrochloric  acids),  or  yellow
(with sulphuric  acid), salts  of  the  type  PtX2(NH3)4.^* The com-

*"  Subsequently,  a  whole  series  of  such  compounds  was  obtained  with  various
elements  in  the  place  of  the  (non- reacting)  elilorine,  and  nevertheless  they,  like  the
chlorine,  reacted  with  diflBculty,  whilst  the  second  portion  of  the  X's  introduced  into
such  salts  easily  underwent  reaction.  This  formed  the  most  important  reason  for  the
interest  which  the  study  of  the  composition  and  structure  of  the  platino-ammonimn
salts  subsequently  presented  to  many  chemists,  such  as  Reiset,  Blomstrand,  Peyrone,
RtieflFski,  Gerhardt,  Buckton,  Clbve,  Thomsen,  Jorgensen,  Koomakoff,  Vemer,  and
others.  The  salts  PtX^j'iNH-,,  discovered  by  Gerhardt,  also  exhibited  seyeral  difiFerent
properties  in  the  two  pairs  of  X's.  In  the  remaining  platiuo-ammoniom  salts  all  the
X's  appear  to  react  alike.

The  (juality  of  the  X's,  retainable  in  the  platmo-ammoninm  salts,  may  be  considerably
modified,  and  they  may  frequently  be  wholly  or  partially  replaced  by  hydroxyl.  For
example,  the  action  of  ammonia  on  the  nitrate  of  Gerhardt's  base,  Pt(NO.^)4,2NH3,  in  a
boiling  solution,  gradually  produces  a  yellow  crystalline  precipitate  which  is  nothing
else  than  a  basic  hijdrate  or  alkali,  Pt{OH)4,2XH3.  It  is  sparingly  soluble  in  water,  but
gives  directly  soluble  salts  PtX4,2NH5  with  acids.  The  stability  of  this  hydroxide  is
sucli  that  potash  does  not  expel  ammonia  from  it,  even  on  boiling,  and  it  does  not  change
below  130  .  Similar  properties  are  shown  by  the  hydroxide  Pt(OH)2,2NH3  and  the
oxide  PtO/iNH;,  of  Reiset's  second  base.  But  the  hydroxides  of  the  compounds  con-
taining 4NH5  are  particularly  remarkable.  The  presence  of  ammonia  renders  them
soluble  and  energetic.  The  brevity  of  this  work  does  not  permit  us,  however,  to
mention  many  interesting  particulars  in  connection  with  this  subject.

•*  Hydroxides  are  known  corresponding  with  Gros's  salts,  which  contain  one  hydroxyl
group  in  the  place  of  that  chlorine  or  haloid  which  in  Gros's  salts  reacts  with  difficulty,

THE  PLATISTM  METAI.S  S9S

parative  stability  (for  instance,  as  compared  with  Aj^Cl  and  NH,)  of
aach  compounds,  and  the  existence  of  many  other  compounds  analogous

nod  these  hfdraiideB  do  nut  at  once  show  the  piopertiee  of  lUWis,  juvt  us  ihc  vliloiiiiv
which  standi  in  the  wme  place  does  nut  react  distjnctlj' ;  but  ■till,  after  tbc  pTolouged
MtioD  ol  acids,  thiBhjdnnyl  groap  is  also  leplaiwd  b;  acidx.  Thos,  for  example,  the  action
Of  nitric  acid  on  PKKO,,),Cl„lNH3  causes  the  non-active  chlorine  to  te>i«t,  bnt  in  the
product  all  Cbe  chlorine  is  not  replaced  by  NO,,  but  only  halt,aud  (he  otlier  half  id  replaced
bjlbebjdcoiylgionp:  Pt{N03l^ls,*NH5  +  HN03  +  a,0  =  Pt(NO;)rfOH|,lNHs  +  aHCl;
and  this  is  particolarly  characterislic,  becanae  brae  the  hydroiyl  group  bas  not  reacted
with  the  acid — an  evident  ligu  of  the  uon-olkikliue  character  ol  this  rexidae.  I  think  il
may  be  well  to  coll  attention  to  (he  fact  that  (he  compoaition  of  tlie  ammouio-metalla-
HiltB  very  nlteli  exhibits  a  eorreapondeace  IwtwMD  the  unonnt  of  X'a  and  the  amoout
of  NH,,  of  such  a  nature  that  we  find  they  contain  eitbei  XNHj  or  the  grouping
XSNH,:  tor  example,  Pt(XNH,|,  and  Pt(XaNHj|.i,  Cii(XaNHi)j,  PtlXMH,),,  Sc.
Judging  tnun  this,  Che  view  of  the  crmstitu^on  at  the  double  cyanides  of  platinum
giren  in  Note  11  finds  some  conflnnation  here,  but,  in  my  opinion,  all  questions
rmpecting  the  componition  |aad  ttructorej  of  tlie  ammoniactl,  double,  eompiei,  and
cryHtolliution  componnds  etond  connected  with  the  uilntion  of  qaeetioas  reitpecling  the
formation  of  compounds  of  varions  degrees  of  stability,  among  which  a  theory  of
■alutiuns  mast  be  ioclnded,  and  therefore  1  think  tiiat  the  time  has  not  yet  come  for  a
complete  generalisation  of  the  data  which  exJst  for  these  compounds ;  and  here  1  again
refer  the  reader  to  Prof.  Koumakolf' s  work  cited  in  Chapter  XXn.,  Note  SS.  However,
we  may  add  a  few  individual  remarks  conceruing  the  platim'a  compounds.

To  the  common  properties  ol  the  pUtino-unnionlnm  salts,  we  must  add  not  only  their
ilahUity  (feeble  ocida  and  alkalis  do  not  dewmpoHO  Uiem.  the  ammonia  is  not  CTolved
by  hentiug.  &u.),  bnt  also  the  fact  that  tlie  ordinary  reactions  of  platinum  an  concealed
in  them  to  as  great  an  extent  ai  those  ol  iron  a  (be  ferricyauides.  Thus  neither  alkalis
nor  hydrogen  nnlphide  will  iio[ianaa  the  platinum  from  them.  For  example,  sulphoretted
hydnigen  in  acting  on  Oros's  selts  gives  snlphnr,  remores  half  the  chlorine  by  means  nf
its  hydrogen,  and  fomiB  salts  ol  Reiset's  first  base.  This  may  be  ondenftood  or  explained
by  eoDnidering  the  pUtinom  in  the  molecole  as  covered,  nailed  np  by  the  ammonia,  or
•litOHted  in  the  centre  of  the  luolecnle,  and  therefore  tnacceasible  to  reagents.  On  this
UMtumptiim,  however,  we  should  expect  to  find  clearly -expressed  ammoniacal  properties,
and  this  is  not  the  case.  Thus  ammonia  ie  euily  decomposed  by  chlorine,  whilst  in
acting  ou  the  plfttino-ammomam  salts  containing  PtX.,  end  SNEj  or  4NHj,  chlorine
combines  and  does  not  destroy  the  ammonia;  it  converts  Reiset's  salts  into  those  of
Uros  and  Gerhsrdt.  Thus  from  PtX.j,aNU3  there  is  formed  PtXiCl^aNHs.  and  from
PtXj,4NHi  the  salt  of  Gios's  base  PlXjCl^lNHs.  This  shows  tliat  the  amount  of
chlorine  which  combines  is  not  dependent  on  the  amount  of  ammonia  present,  but  is  due
to  the  basic  properties  ol  platinum.  Owing  to  (his  some  chemists  suppose  the  ammonia
to  be  inactive  en  passive  in  oertoin  compounds.  It  appears  to  me  that  these  relotions,
Ibiite  miidifioalions,  in  the  usual  properties  of  ammonia  and  platinum  are  eiphuned
diiecUy  by  their  mutual  combination.  Sulphur,  in  sulphurous  anhydride,  SOg,  and
liydrogen  sulfide,  SH],  is  naturally  one  and  the  same,  bnt  il  we  only  knew  of  it  in  the
form  u(  hydrogen  sulphide,  then,  luiving  obtained  it  in  the  form  of  sulphurous  anhydride,
we  sliould  consider  its  properties  as  hidden.  The  oxygen  in  magnetia,  MgO,  and  in
nitric  peroxide,  NO],  is  so  different  that  there  is  no  resemblance.  Arsenic  no  longer
reacts  in  its  compounds  with  hydrogen  as  it  reacts  in  its  compounds  with  chlorine,  and
in  their  compounds  with  nitrogen  all  metals  modify  both  their  reactions  and  their  physical
properties.  We  are  aocuslomed  to  judge  the  metals  by  their  saline  compounds  with
halwd  groups,  and  nmmoniii  by  its  compounds  witb  acid  substances,  and  here,  in  the
phitinn-oompounda,  If  we  assniue  the  platintun  (o  be  bound  to  tlie  entire

396  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

to  them,  endows them  with a particular  chemical interest. Thus
Kournakoff  (1889)  obtained  a  series  of  corresponding  compounds  contain-

tion  of  tlie  chlorine  (and  other  haloid  simple  and  complex  groups)  in  Gros's  salts  acts  in
a  different  manner  from  the  other  portion,  and  why  only  half  of  it  acts  in  the  usual  way.
But  this  also  is  not  an  exclusive  case.  The  chlorine  in  potassium  chlorate  or  in  cafbon
tetrachloride  does  not  react  with  the  same  ease  with  metals  as  the  chlorine  in  the  salts
corresponding  with  hydrochloric  acid.  In  this  case  it  is  united  to  oxygen  and  carbon,
whilst  in  the  platino-anmionium  compounds  it  is  united  partly  to  platinum  and  partly  to
the  platino-ammonium  group.  Many  chemists,  moreover,  suppose  that  a  part  of  the
chlorine  is  united  directly  to  the  platinum  and  the  other  part  to  the  nitrogen  of  the
ammonia,  and  thus  explain  the  difference  of  the  reactions ;  but  chlorine  united  to
platinum  reacts  as  well  with  a  silver  salt  as  the  chlorine  of  ammonium  chloride,  NH4CI,
or  nitrosyl  chloride,  NOCl,  although  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  this  case  there  is  a
union  between  the  chlorine  and  nitrogen.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  explain  the  absence
of  a  facile  reactive  capacity  in  a  portion  of  the  chlorine  by  the  conjoint  influence
of  the  platinum  and  ammonia  on  it,  whilst  the  other  portion  may  be  admitted  as
being  under  the  influence  of  the  platinum  only,  and  therefore  as  reacting  as  in  other
salts.  By  admitting  a  certain  kind  of  stable  union  in  the  platino-ammonium  grouping,
it  is  possible  to  imagine  that  the  chlorine  does  not  react  with  its  customary  facility,
because  access  to  a  portion  of  the  atoms  of  chlorine  in  this  complex  grouping  is  difficult,
and  the  chlorine  union  is  not  the  same  as  we  usually  meet  in  the  saline  compounds  of
chlorine.  These  are  the  grounds  on  which  we,  in  refuting  the  now  accepted  explanations
of  the  reactions  and  formation  of  the  platino- compounds,  pronounce  the  following  opinion
as  to  their  structure.

In  characterising  the  platino-ammonium  compounds,  it  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind
that  compounds  which  already  contain  PtX4  do  not  combine  directly  with  NH3,  and  that
such  compounds  as  PtX4,4NH3  only  proceed  from  PtX.^,  and  therefore  it  is  natural  to
conclude  that  those  affinities  and  forces  which  cause  PtX2  to  combine  with  Xj  also  cause
it  to  combine  with  2NH3.  And  having  the  compound  PtX.^,2NH3,  and  supposing  that  in
subsequently  combining  with  Cl^  it  reacts  with  those  affinities  which  produce  the  com-
pounds of  platiuic  chloride,  PtCl,,  with  water,  iwtassium  chloride,  potassium  cyanide,
hydrochloric  acid,  and  the  like,  wc  explain  not  only  the  fact  of  combination,  but  also
many  of  the  reactions  occurring  in  the  transition  of  one  kind  of  platino-ammonium  salts
into  another.  Thus  by  this  means  we  explain  the  fact  that  (1)  PtX2,2NH5  combines
with  2NH5,  formintif  salts  of  Reiset's  first  base  ;  (2)  and  the  fact  that  this  compound
(represented  as  follows  for  distinctness),  PtX..,2NH5,2NH5,  when  heated,  or  even  when
boiled  ill  solution,  again  passes  into  PtX2,2NH3  (which  resembles  the  easy  disengage-
ment of  water  of  crystallisation,  ti'c.) ;  (3)  the  fact  that  PtXo,2NH3i8  capable  of  absorbing,
under  the  action  of  the  same  forces,  a  molecule  of  chlorine,  PtX.2,2NH5,Cl2T  which  it
then  retains  with  energy,  because  it  is  attracted,  not  only  by  the  platinum,  but  also  by  the
hydrogen  of  the  ammonia;  (4)  the  fact  that  this  chlorine  held  in  this  compound  (of
Gerliardt)  will  have  a  position  unusual  in  salts,  which  will  explain  a  certain  (although
very  feebly-marked)  difficulty  of  reaction;  (5)  the  fact  that  this  does  not  exhaust  the
faculty  of  platinum  for  further  combination  (we  need  only  recall  the  compound
PtCl4,2HCl,lCH..O),and  that  therefore  both  PtX  .,2NH3,Cl,  and  PtX.2,2NHs,2NH3  are  still
capable  of  combination,  whence  the  latter,  with  chlorine,  gives  PtX.2,2NH3,2NH5,Cl2,
after  the  tyi>e  of  PtX.|Y.|  (and  perhaps  higher) ;  ((5)  the  fact  that  Gros's  compounds
thus  formed  are  readily  re-converted  into  the  salts  of  Reiset's  first  base  when  acted  on
by  reducing  aj^ents ;  (7)  the  foot  that  in  Gros's  salts,  PtX,,,2NH5(NH5X).2,  the  newly-
attached  chlorine  or  haloid  will  reaet  with  difficulty  with  salts  of  silver,  i'c,  because  it  is
attached  both  to  the  platinum  and  to  the  ammonia,  for  both  of  which  it  has  an  attraction ;
(8)  the  fact  that  the  faculty  for  further  combination  is  not  even  yet  exhausted  in  the
type  of  Gros's  salts,  and  that  we  actually  have  a  compound  of  Gros's  chlorine  salt  with
pltttinous  chloride  and  with  platinic  chloride;  the  salt  PtSO |,2NH3,2NH3,S04  com-
bines further  also  with  H2O  ;  (9)  the  fact  that  such  a  faculty  of  combination  with  new

THE  PLATINUM  METALS  397

iiig  lliiocarbamide,  CSN^H,,  in  th<-  place  of  ammojiia,  PtCl„-lCSNjH  „
and  others  oorresponding  with  Reieet'e  salts.  Hydroxy! amine,  and
other  substances  corresponding  with  ammonia,  alBO  give  siniilar  com-
pounds. The  common  properties  and  compos: tioti  uf  such  compounds
show  their  entire  analogy  t<i  the  cohaltia  compounds  (especially  for
I'Utheiiinni  and  iridium)  and  correspond  to  the  fact  thnt  l>oth  the
platinum  metals  and  cobalt  occur  in  the  same,  eighth,  group.

iui>]<'<.-uleu  ie  iiatar&lly  mors  developed  in  the  lower  forms  of  combination  tliui  in  (he
lii^-bpr.  Bciice  tlie  miU  ol  BHiaet's  first  biue— tor  exunple,  Pta.„3NH,,!tNUj— both
L'oiiibine  witli  water  wid  give  ptecipit«l«B  [eolnhle  in  wntcr  but  not  in  hydnvhlorii:  ncidj
lit  doulile  suits  with  maay  eslts  of  the  beufy  metals — for  example,  nith  le»d  chloride,
(ru|iric  diloride,  uid  slso  with  plntinio  lUid  pUtLnous  chloridet  (Buoktoii'ii  Bolts).  Th«
Ultei  wmponads  will  have  the  oouipositiou  PtCLj,9NBi,3MIj,PtCt,— tlmt  is,  Ibe  sune
voinpositioa  u  the  salts  of  Reisct't  secouil  base,  bat  it  caouot  be  irlenticul  with  it.
Such  an  inlere-ting  case  does  actually  exist.  The  first  sail,  PtCl2,*fJH,.PlCl..,  is  green,
insoluble  in  water  and  in  hydrochlorio  aoid,  and  is  known  HS  llajfnui't  talt,  and  the
iieu]u<),  PlCLi,aNH],  is  Beiset's  fellow,  spariDgl;  soluble  (in  water).  They  are  polymeric,
namely,  the  first  contains  twice  the  number  af  elements  held  iu  the  serond,  and  at  the
same  time  they  easily  i>ai»  into  each  other.  If  ninmonla  be  added  to  a  hot  bydrouhloria
acid  wlntion  of  [lUtiDOoa  chloride,  it  forms  Ilie  sail  PtC]^iJiH^  but  in  the  imwnoe  of
an  excess  of  platinoue  chloride  it  giiea  Magnos's  salt.  On  boiling  the  latter  in  unmonia  it
giveaacotoiuUBBsotnbU  salt  of  Keiset's  first  base,  PtCli,tNH„and  if  this  be  boiled  nitb
water,  ammonia  is  disengaged,  and  a  salt  of  Reiset'e  second  base.  PtCL),2NH},  Is  obtained.
A  class  of  pUtino-ammoninm  isomerides  (obtained  by  Uillon.and  Tliomsen)  are  also
known.  Bucklon'a  salts— lor  example,  the  copper  salt— were  obtained  by  them  from  the
salts  of  Reiset'i  first  base,  PtCli,lXHj,  by  treatment  with  a  sotntion  of  cnpric  chloride,
iCc,  and  therefore,  according  to  our  method  of  eipreasion.  Buckton's  copper  salt  will  be
PtCt„JNH:„CaCt,.  This  salt  i>  saloble  In  water,  but  not  in  hydrochloriu  acid.  In  it
the  ammonia  mntit  be  oonmdered  a*  anited  to  the  platiDDm.  But  if  cnpric  chloride  be
itisBolved  in  ammonia,  and  a  ulution  of  platinous  chloride  in  ammonium  chloride  is
■dded  to  tl,  a  riolet  precipitate  is  obbuued  of  the  name  oomposicion  ■•  Bnoktoirn
salt,  which,  however,  is  iusolable  in  water,  but  suloble  in  bydrtwiiloric  acid.  In  thisa
liurtion,  if  not  all,  of  the  ammunia  muHt  be  re.garded  as  united  to  the  eopper,and  it  must
Lberefure  be  represented  a«  (^uCLutNHjJ'tC'lj.  This  form  is  identical  in  composition
but  diflerent  in  properties  (is  isomeric)  with  the  preceding  salt  IBuckton'a).  The  salt  of
Maguus  is  intermediate  between  them,  PtCL^.lNHjjna., ;  it  is  insolnble  in  water  oud
bydrochloric  acid.  These  and  seitain  other  instances  of  isomeric  compounds  in  the
series  of  the  plalino-ammciniam  salts  throw  a  light  on  the  nalare  of  the  oomponnds  in
•[ucstion,  JQBt  as  the  study  o(  the  isomeridea  of  the  carbon  compounds  hss  sened  and
still  serves  as  the  chief  cause  of  the  npid  pm^cresa  of  organic  chemistry.  In  conclusion,
we  may  add  that  (according  to  the  law  of  snbnlitution)  wo  mast  neeessarily  expect  all
hind^  of  intermediate  compounds  between  the  platino  and  aualogous  ammonia  deriTa-
tives  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  complex  compounds  of  nitrous  acid  on  the  other.
Perhaps  the  iustanoe  of  the  reaction  of  ammonia  upon  osmic  anhydride,  OaO,.  observed
by  Fritsche,  Fr^my,  and  others,  and  more  full;  stndied  by  Joly  (181)1),  belongs  to  this
class.  The  latter  ifaowed  that  when  ammonia  acts  upon  an  alkaline  solution  of  OsOi
the  reaction  proceeds  according  to  the  equation:  QaO,-f  KHO  +  NH]^OsNKO]i-lBgO.
It  might  be  imagined  that  in  this  case  the  kunmonia  is  axidised,  pcobably  forming  the
residue  of  nitroas  acid  (NO),  while  the  type  OsO,  is  deoxidised  into  OsO^,  and  a  salt,
OoOlNOHEO),  of  the  type  OsX^  is  formed.  This  salt  crystallises  well  in  light  yellow
uclahedra.  It  corresponds  to  oimiamic  acid,  ObU(ON)(HOj,  wbow  anhydriile,
[OsO(NO|^,  hss  the  composition  Os,NiO„  wfaich  equals  aOs^  NgO^,  to  the  same  extent
as  the  ■bOTt-mentioned  compound  PtCO,  equals  Pt-f  CO,  (tee  Note  11).

898  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

CHAPTER  XXIV

COPPER, SILVER, AND GOLD

That  degree  of  analogy  and  difference  which  exists  between  iron,
cobalt,  and  nickel  repeats  itself  in  the  corresponding  triad  ruthenium,
rhodium,  and  palladium,  and  also  in  the  heavy  platinum  metals,
osmium,  iridium,  and  platinum.  These  nine  metals  form  Group  VIII.
of  the  elements  in  the  periodic  system,  being  the  intermediate  group
between  the  even  elements  of  the  large  periods  and  the  uneven,  among
which  we  know  zinc,  cadmium,  and  mercury  in  Group  II.  Copper,
silver,  and  gold  complete  ^  this  transition,  because  their  properties
place  them  in  proximity  to  nickel,  palladium,  and  platinum  on  the  one
hand,  and  to  zinc,  cadmium,  and  mercury  on  the  other.  Just  as  Zn,
Cd,  and  Hg  ;  Fe,  Ru,  and  Os  ;  Co,  Rh,  and  Ir  ;  Ni,  Pd,  and  Pt,
resemble  each  other  in  many  respects,  so  also  do  Cu,  Ag,  and  Au.
Thus,  for  example,  the  atomic  weight  of  copper  Cu  =  63,  and  in  all  its
properties  it  stands  between  Ni  =  59  and  Zn  =  65.  But  as  the  tran-
sition from  Group  VIII.  to  Group  II.,  where  zinc  is  situated,  cannot  }ye
otherwise  than  through  Group  I.,  so  in  copper  there  are  certain  pro-
perties of  the  elements  of  Group  I.  Thus  it  gives  a  suboxide,  CujO,
and  salts,  CuX,  like  the  elements  of  Group  I.,  although  at  the  same
time  it  forms  an  oxide,  CuO,  and  salts  CuX.^,  like  nickel  and  zinc.  In
the  state  of  the  oxide,  CuO,  and  the  salts,  CuXa,  copper  is  analogous  to
zinc,  judging  from  the  insolubility  of  the  carbonates,  phosphates,  and
similar  salts,  and  by  the  isomorphism,  and  other  characters.*  In  the
cuprous  salts'  there  is  undoubtedly  a  great  resemblance  to  the  silver

1  The  perfectly  unique  j^sition  held  by  copper,  silver,  and  gold  in  the  periodic  system
of  the  elements,  and  the  degree  of  affinity  which  is  found  between  them,  is  all  the  more
remarkable,  as  nature  and  practice  have  long  isolated  these  metals  from  all  others  bv
having  employed  them — for  example,  for  coinage — and  determined  their  relative
iuii>ortance  and  value  in  conformity  with  the  order  (silver  between  copper  and  gold)  of
their  atomic  weights,  itc.

-  Cupric  sulphate  contains  5  molecules  of  water,  CuSOjjoHoO,  and  the  isomorphoas
mixtures  with  ZnS04,7HoO  contain  either  5  or  7  equivalents,  according  to  whether  copper
or  zinc  predominates  (Vol.  II.  p.  0).  If  there  be  a  large  proportion  of  copper,  and  if  the
mixture  contain  r>II.,.0,  the  form  of  the  isomorphous  mixture  (triclinic)  willbe  isomorphous
with  cupric  sulphate,  CuSOj.SHaO,  but  if  a  large  amount  of  zinc  (or  magnesitun,  iron,
nickel,  or  cobalt i  be  present  the  form  (rhombic  or  monoclinic)  will  be  nearly  the  same

COPPBB,  SILVEK,  AND  QOLD  399

salts— thus,  for  example,  silver  chloride,  AgCl,  is  characterised  hy  its
insolubility  and  capacity  of  combining  with  ammonia,  and  in  tfaiB  respect
cupnms  chloride  closely  reserables  it,  for  it  is  also  insoluble  in  water,
and  combines  with  ammonia  and  diesolves  in  it,  &c.  Its  composition  is
also  RCl,  the  same  aa  AgCl,  NaCI,  KCI,  Ac,  and  silver  in  many  com-
pounds resembles,  and  is  even  isoniorphoua  with,  sodium,  so  that  this
again  justifies  their  being  brought  together.  Silver  chloride,  cuprous
chloride,  and  sodium  chloride  crystallise  in  the  regular  system.
Besides  which,  the  specific  heats  of  copper  and  silver  require  that  they
should  have  the  atomic  weights  ascribed  lo  them.  To  the  oxides  CujO
and  Ag^O  there  are  corresponding  sulphides  Ag^M  and  Cu,S.  They
both  occur  in  nature  in  crystals  of  the  rhombic  ayatem,  and,  what  ia
most  important,  copper  glance  contains  an  isomorphous  mixture  of
them  both,  and  retains  the  form  of  copper  glance  with  various  pro-
portions of  copper  and  silver,  and  therefore  has  the  composition  RjS
where  R  ^  Cu,  Ag.

Notwithstanding  the  resemblance  in  the  atomic  composition  of  the
cupriius  compounds,  CuX,  and  silver  compounds,  AgX,  with  the  com-
poantls  uf  the  alkali  metals  KX,  N'aX,  there  is  a  considerable  degree
of  difference  between  these  two  series  of  elements.  This  difference  is
clearly  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  alkali  metals  belong  to  those  elements
which  ciimhine  with  extreme  facility  with  oxygen,  decompose  water,
and  form  the  most  alkaline  liases ;  whilst  silver  and  copper  are
oxidised  with  difficulty,  form  less  energetic  oxides,  and  do  not  decom-
pose water,  even  at  a  rather  high  temperatui-e.  Moreover,  they  only
displace  hydrogen  from  very  few  acids.  The  difference  between  them
is  also  seen  in  the  dissimilarity  of  the  properties  of  many  of  the
coiresponding  compounds.  Thus  cuprous  oxide,  CujO,  and  silver  oxide,
AgjO,  are  insoluble  in  water;  the  cuprous  and  silver  carlionates,
chlorides,  and  sulphates  are  also  sparingly  soluble  in  water.  The
oxides  of  silver  and  copper  are  also  easily  reduced  to  metal.  This
difference  in  properties  is  in  intimate  relation  with  that  diffei'ence  in
the  density  of  the  metals  which  exists  in  this  case.  The  alkali  metals
belong  wi  the  lightest,  and  copper  aad  silver  to  the  heaviest,  and  there-
fore the  distance  between  the  molecules  in  these  metals  is  very  dis-
bimilar — it  is  greater  for  the  former  than  the  latter  (tables  in  Chapter
XA'.).  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  pnriodic  law,  tins  difference
between  copper  and  silver  and  such  elements  of  Group  I.  as  potassium
and rubidium,  is  clearly  seen  from  the  fact  that  copper  and silver

rated  Bolutions  of  ouh  o(  them  lulU

inter  which  is  contaiaed  in  n  crystal

itiEt  vith  Um  HolutEon  (Clupter  XJV.,  Note  37).

of  line  mlpbftte,  ZaiiO„7HJi.  Supctf
isc  in  llut  form  uitl  with  Ibst  unoont  <
n  olhec  ut  the  tM»  bioaght  in

400  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

stand  in  the  middle  of  those  large  periods  (for  example,  K,  Ca,  Sc,  Ti,
V,  Cr,  Mn,  Fe,  Co,  Ni,  Cu,  Zn,  Ga,  Ge,  As,  Se,  Br)  which  start  with
the  true  metals  of  the  alkalis — that  is  to  say,  the  analogy  and  difierence
between  potassium  and  copper  are  of  the  same  nature  as  that  between
chromium  and  selenium,  or  vanadium  and  arsenic.

Copper  is  one  of  the  few  metals  which  have  long  been  known  in  a
metallic  form. The  Greeks  and  Romans  imported  copper  chiefly  from
the  island  of  Cyprus — whence  its  Latin  name,  cuprum. It  was  known
to  the  ancients  before  iron,  and  was  used,  especially  when  alloyed  with
other  metals,  for  arms  and  domestic  utensils. That  copper  was  known
to  the  ancients  will  be  understood  from  the  fact  that  it  occurs,  although
rarely,  in  a  native  statCj  and  is  easily  extracted  from  its  other  natural
compounds. Among  the  latter  are  the  oxygen  compounds  of  copper.
When ignited with  charcoal,  they  easily  give up  theii  oxygen to
it, and yield  metallic  copper  ; hydrogen  also  easily  takes up the
oxygen  from  copper  oxide  when  heated. Copper  occurs  in  a  native
state,  sometimes  in  association  with  other  ores,  in  many  parts  of  the
Urals  and  in  Sweden,  and  in  considerable  masses  in  America,  espe-
cially in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  great  American  lakes  ;  and  also  in
Chili,  Japan,  and  China. The  oxygen  compounds  of  copper  are  also  of
somewhat  common  occurrence  in  certain localities ;  in this  respect
certain deposits  of  the  Urals  are  especially  famous. The  geological
period  of  the  Urals  (Permian)  is  characterised  by  a  considerable  dis-
tribution of  copper  ores. Copper  is  met  with  in  the  form  of  cuprous
oxide,  or  suboxide  of  copper,  Cu.^O,  and  is  then  known  as  red  copper
ore,  because  it  forms  red  masses  which  not  unf requently  are  crystallised
in  the  regular  system. It  is  found  much  more  rarely  in  the  state  of
cupric  oxide,  CuO,  and  is  then  called black  copper  ore. The most
common  of  the  oxygenised  compounds  of  copper  are  the  basic  carbonate
corresponding  with  the  oxides. That  these  compounds  are  undoubtedly
of  aqueous  origin  is  apparent,  not  only  from  the  fact  that  specimens
are  frequently  found  of  a  gradual  transition  from  the metallic,  sul-
phuretted, and  oxidised  copper  into  its  various  carbonates,  but  also  from
the  presence of  water in  their  composition,  and from  the  laminar,
reniform  structure  which  many  of  them  present. In  this  respect  nxal4i^
chite  is  particularly  well  known  ;  it  is  used  as  a  green  paint  and  also
for  ornaments,  owing  to  the  diversity  of  the  shades  of  colour  presented
by the different  layers  of  deposited  malachite. The  composition  of
malachite  corresponds  with  the  basic  carbonate  containing  one  molecule
of  cupric carbonate  to one  of  hydroxide  :  CuCCKjCuHaOg. In  this
form  the  copper frequently  occurs  in admixture  with  various sedi-
mentary rocks,  forming  large  strata,  which  confirms  the  aqueous  origin

COPPER, SILVER. AND OOLD  401

of  these  t-ompounds.  There  are  nmny  such  localities  in  the  Perm  and
other  Governments  bounding  the  Urals.  Blue  carbunalf  of  ci-piv.r,  or
ttxiirilK.  is  also  often  met  with  in  the  same  localities  ;  it  contains  the
same  ingri'dients  as  malacliite,  but  in  a  different  proportion,  ils  com-
position l>eing  CuHjOj.SCuCOj.  Both  these  suhfitances  may  l>e  ob*
tnined  artificially  by  the  action  of  the  alkali  carlxinates  on  solutions
of  cupric  salts  at  various  temperatures.  These  native  carbonates  are
often  used  for  the  extraction  of  copper,  all  the  more  as  tJiey  very
readily  give  metallic  copper,  evohing  water  and  carbonic  anhydride
when  ignited,  and  leaving  the  easily -reducible  cupric  oxide.  Copper
is,  however,  still  more  Dft^en  met  with  in  the  form  of  the  sulphides.
The  sulphides  of  copper  generally  occur  in  chemiciil  cumbination
with  the  sulphides  of  iron,"  These  copper-sulphur  compounds  (topper
pyrites  CuFeMj,  variegated  copper  ore  CujFeSj,  .tc)  generally  occur  in
veins  in  a  rock  gangue.

Thr  exlmr-tion  of  co j>i-er  from  it»  oxui^  ores  does  not  present  any
difficulty,  because  the  copper,  when  ignited  with  charcoal  and  melted,
is  reduced  from  the  impurities  which  accompany  it.  This  mode  of
smelting  copper  ores  is  carried  on  in  cupola  or  cylindrical  furnaces,
fluxes  forming  a  slag  being  added  tu  the  mixture  of  ore  and  charcoal.

^  Irou  pyrites,  FeS-j,  vepj-  ott^n  CdUbuti  a  fiiDCLll  qu&iilii^  of  copper  Hulphide  {see
Chuplfir  XXII.,  Nole  a  bii),  uid  oil  buniuigthe  iron  pyrites  for  anlpharons  anhydride  tbe
coppf  r  oi;ide  remuua  m  tlui  residue,  from  wbivb  Uuj  ix»pper  ia  often  extracted  with  profit.
For  this  porpoBe  the  whole  ot  the  solplint  is  not  Ijuml  uD  from  the  iron  pyrites,  bat  m.
portion  is  left  behind  io  the  ore,  which  in  then  slowly  ignited  (roaiited)  withacceaa  of  air.
Cajiric  BulphMe  is  then  tormed,  uid  is  extracted  by  water ;  or  what  ia  better  and  more
frequently  done,  (he  reaidoe  from  the  roasting  of  tbe  pyrites  ia  roasted  with  common
Halt,  and  the  hoIuEiod  of  eaprio  ebloride  obtained  by  lixiviating  ia  precipitated  with  iron.
A  lur  greater  amonut  of  copper  ia  obtained  from  other  aulphnretted  ores.  Among  these
eop]irr  glance,  Ca^S,  ia  more  rarely  met  with.  It  has  a  metallie  Inatre,  is  grey,  geaerslly
crystalline,  and  is  obtained  in  admiiture  with  organic  matter  :  eo  that  then  is  no  doubt
that  ita  origin  la  due  to  the  redoeini;  action  of  the  latter  on  solutionn  ol  cupric  anlphato.
rariegiUrd  rapper  ore,  which  cryBtalliBea  in  octahedra,  not  infreqoently  fonus  an
admitture  in  copper  glance;  it  han  a  metallic  lastre,  and  is  rMldiali-brown :  it  has  a
BUperSciuI  play  ol  colonra,  due  to  oxidation  praceeding  on  its  turlace.  Its  coiuivaitian  is
CujFeBj.  Bat  the  most  commoD  and  widely-diatributed  copper  ore  ia  copprr pyritet,
which  crjstaltiaes  ia  regnlar  octabedra ;  it  bas  a  metallic  lantre,  a  up.  gr.  of  40,  and
yellow  colour.  Its  composition  is  CoFeS,,  It  mu&t  be  remarked  tliat  tbe  Balpburons
oreH  ol  copper  are  oxidioed  in  the  presence  of  water  containing  oxj^ren  in  solation,
aud  form  cnpric  salpbate,  bine  vitriol,  which  ia  easily  aolable  in  water.  If  this  water
contains  calcinm  carbonate,  gypsum  and  cuprin  carbonate  am  formed  by  doable
di^composition:  CnaO.-l-CaCOj  -  CnCO.i  +  CaSO,.  Hence  copper  aalphide  in  the  form
of  different  ores  mast  be  Donsidered  as  the  prioiary  pn>dnct,  and  the  many  other  copper
ores  as  secondnry  prodncts,  formed  by  water.  This  is  coiiSrmed  by  tlie  fact  that  at  the
present  time  the  water  extracted  from  many  copper  niinea  contains  cupric  anlphate  in
solntioD.  From  this  liquid  it  is  easy  to  extract  cnpric  oiide  bj'  the  action  ot  organic
matter  and  Tarioos  impuiitiei  of  water.  Hence  metallic  copper  is  sometimes  found  iu
natural  prodncts  of  tbe  modification  of  copper  sulphide  and  is  probably  deponited  by
the  action  of  organic  matter  present  in  tbe  w^ter.

VOL.  II.  D  P^

402  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  smelted  copper  still  contains  sulphur,  iron,  and  other  metallic
impurities,  from  which  it  is  freed  by  fusion  in  reverberatory  furnaces,
with  access  of  air  to  the  surface  of  the  molten  metal,  as  the  iron  and
sulphur  are  more  easily  oxidised  than  the  copper.  The  iron  then
separates  as  oxides,  which  collect  in  the  slag.*

*  Copper  ores  rich  in  oxygen  are  very  rare  ;  the  sulphur  ores  are  of  more  commcm
occurrence,  but  the  extraction  of  tho  copper  from  them  is  much  more  difficult.  The
problem  liere  not  only  conBiHts  in  the  removal  of  the  sulphur,  but  also  in  the  remoTal  of
the  iron  combined  with  the  sulphur  and  copper.  This  is  attained  by  a  whole  aeries  of
operations,  after  whicK  there  still  sometimes  remains  the  extraction  of  the  metallic  silver
which  generally  accompanies  the  copper,  although  in  but  small  quantity.  These
processes  commence  with  the  roasting — i.e.  calcination — of  the  ore  with  aooesa  of  air,  by
which  means  the  sulphur  is  converted  into  sulphurous  anhydride.  It  should  here  be
remarked  that  iron  sulphide  is  more  easily  oxidised  than  copper  sulphide,  and  therefore
the  greater  part  of  the  iron  in  the  residue  from  roasting  is  no  longer  in  the  form  of
sulphide  but  of  oxide  of  iron.  The  roasted  ore  is  mixed  with  charcoal,  and  siliceous  fluxes,
and  smelted  in  a  cupola  furnace.  The  iron  then  passes  into  the  slag,  because  its  oxide
gives  an  easily-fusible  mass  with  the  silica,  whilst  the  copper,  in  the  form  of  sulphide,
fuses  and  collects  under  the  slag.  The  greater  part  of  the  iron  is  removed  from  the
mass  by  this  smelting.  The  resultant  coarse  tnetal  is  again  roasted  in  order  to
remove  the  greater  part  of  the  sulphur  from  the  copper  sulphide,  and  to  convert  the
metal  into  oxide,  after  whicli  the  mass  is  again  smelted.  These  process^  are  repeated
several  times,  according  to  the  richness  of  the  ore.  During  these  smeltings  a  portion  of
the  copper  is  already  obtained  in  a  metallic  form,  because  copper  sulphide  gives
metcdlic  copper  with  the  oxide  (CuS  +  2CuO  =  SCu+SO.J.  We  will  not  here  describe
the  furnaces  used  or  the  details  of  this  process,  but  the  above  remarks  include  the  ex-
planation of  those  chemical  processes  which  are  accomplished  in  the  various  tech-
nical operations  whicli  are  made  use  of  in  the  process  (for  details  see  works  on
metallurgy).

Besides  the  smelting  of  copi>er  there  also  exist  methods  for  its  extraction  from
solutions  in  the  wet  way,  as  it  is  called.  Recourse  is  generally  had  to  these  methods  for
poor  copper  ores.  The  copper  is  brought  into  solution,  from  which  it  is  separated  by
means  of  metallic  iron  or  by  other  methods  (by  the  action  of  an  electric  current).  The
sulphides  arc  roasted  in  such  a  manner  that  the  greater  part  of  the  copper  is  oxidised
into  cupric  sul])hate,  whilst  at  the  same  time  the  corresponding  iron  salts  are  as  far  as
possible  decomposed.  This  process  is  based  on  the  fact  that  the  copper  sulphides  absorb
oxygen  when  they  are  calcined  in  the  i)re8ence  of  air,  forming  cupric  sulphate.  The
roasted  ore  is  treated  with  water,  to  which  acid  is  sometimes  added,  and  after  lixivia-
tion  the  resultant  solution  containing  copper  is  treated  either  with  metallic  iron  or  with
milk  of  lime,  which  precipitates  cupric  hydroxide  from  the  solution.  Copper  oxide
ores  poor  in  metal  may  be  treated  with  dilute  acids  in  order  to  obtain  the  copper
oxides  in  solution,  from  which  the  copper  is  then  easily  precipitated  either  by  iron  or
as  hydroxide  by  lime.  According  to  Hunt  and  Dou^'las's  method,  the  copper  in  the  ore
is  converted  by  calcination  into  the  cupric  oxide,  which  is  brought  into  solution  by
the  action  of  a  mixture  of  solutions  of  ferrous  sul])hat«  and  sodium  chloride ;
the  oxide  converts  the  ferrous  chloride  into  ferric  oxide,  forming  copper  chlorides,
according  to  the  equation  8CuO  ♦  2FeCl.,,  CuCl^  +  iiCuCl  -^  Fe^Os.  The  cupric  chloride
is  »iolul)le  in  water,  wliilst  the  cuprous  cliloride  is  dissolved  in  the  solution  of  sodium
chloride,  luid  therefore  all  the  copper  passes  into  solution,  from  which  it  is  precipitated
by  iron.

The  same  American  metallurgists  give  tho  following  wet  method  for  extracting  the
Ag  and  An  occurring  in  many  copper  ores,  especially  in  sulphurous  ores :  (1)  The  Cu.>S  is
first  converted  into  oxide  by  roasting  in  a  calciner ;  (2)  the  CuO  is  extracted  by  the
dilute*  suli)huric  u^rid  obtained in  the  fourth  process,  the  Cu  then  passes  into  solution.

Copper  is  chftMcterised  by  its  r«l  colour,  which  distinguishes  il
from  all  nther  metals.  Pure  copper  is  soft,  ami  may  be  beaten  out  by
a  bammer  at  the  onJinary  temperature,  and  when  hot  may  be  rolled
into  very  tliin  sheets.  Extremely  thin  leaves  of  eopper  transmit  a
green  light.  The  tenacity  of  copper  is  also  considerable,  and  next  to
iron  it  is  one  uf  the  must  durable  metals  in  this  respect.  Copper  wire
of  1  sq.  millimetre  in  sectiononlybreaksundera  weight  of  45  kilograms.
The  apecibc  gravity  of  copper  is  8-S,  unless  it  contains  cavities  due  to  the
fact  that  molten  copper  absorbs  oxygen  from  the  air,  which  is  disen-
gaged on  cooling,  anil  therefore  gives  a  porous  mass  wboae  density  is
much  teiia.  Rolled  copper,  and  alsiithat  which  is  deposited  by  the  electric
current,  has  a  comparatively  high  ilensity.  Copper  melts  at  a  bright
red  heat,  about  1050°,  although  belnw  the  temperature  at  which  many
kinds  of  cast  iron  melt.  At  a  high  temperature  it  is  converted  into
vapour,  which  communicates  a  green  colour  to  the  Hame.  Both  native
copper  and  that  cooled  from  a  molten  state  crystallise  in  regular
octahedra.  Copper  is  not  oxidised  in  dry  nir  at  the  oi-dinary  tempera-
ture, but  when  cabined  it  becomes  coated  with  a  layer  of  oxide,  and  it
di>es  not  burn  even  at  the  highest  temperature.  Copper,  when  calcined
ill  nir,  forma  either  the  red  cuprous  oxide  or  the  black  cupric  oxide,

winle  tli«  Ag,  An  uid  oxiiea  o[  irtm  rrnuilii  WIuuil  in  tbu  ceaidllB  (rrniii  wliicli  the  noblH
uit-Ulh  uni)-  be  Bilrmcted) ;  (3)  «  portion  of  tliB  uopper  in  iolntion  is  converteJ  iuU.  CnCI,
(uitl  CutiO,  precipiUled)  b;  mesiu  of  llie  CuCI^  obUineil  in  tbe  lltth  proceaa  ;  (4)  the
mixlurcolsolotioiuof  CuSO,uidCaCt,i*conTert«I  into  tbe insolnble  CnCI (ult  ol  the
Bobniills)  bj  (he  Ktioa  of  the  SOj  ubUineil  bj  routing  the  ore  (in  the  linit  Dperatioo),
■ulphtiric  acid  is  then  formed  in  the  eolntion,  wtcarding  to  thv  eqnktion:  CnSO,  +  CuCl,
4Sa,-faUjO  ^aHaSOf-t-aCnCIl  (B)  the  precipitated  CuCl  ia  treated  with  ilme  and
waler,  nod  gives  CaCl,  in  aolntioo  vid  CuO  in  the  reudae ;  and  larti;  (S)  the  CojO  i>
reduced  to  metallic  Cn  by  oarboD  in  a  (Dmaoe.  According  to  Crooke'e  method  the  impure
oopiiar  tegnlna  obtained  by  routing  and  unelting  the  ore  is  broken  up  and  inuneried
repeatedly  in  molten  lead,  whieh  eitraota  the  Ag  and  Au  accnrriag  in  the  regulun.  The
retina  ia  then  heatetl  in  a  rererbemtory  fumaoe  Ui  run  oH  the  lead,  and  ii  then  amelted
(or  Cn.

Hiiall  (juantitiei  of  oiidea  nf  oopper.  Aa  copper,  when  miied  witb  u  amiUI  aoinaot  of
loTviini  tubstiuioes.  loaet  its  Imacity  to  a  certain  derive,  the  uauufaoture  of  very  thin
flhevt  copper  reqnim  the  use  nl  Chili  copper,  which  itdiiitiugnuhed  for ita  great  aoftDOU.
and  tliereture  when  it  ia  deaired  to  have  pure  copper,  il  in  b«sl  lo  t«ke  thin  aheet  copper,
like  tlial  wbieh  ia  aaed  in  the  uanotaclare  of  cartridges.  Bnl  the  purest  copper  ia  dsctru-
lytic  copper — thai  is,  thai  which  ia  depoailei]  from  a  oolnlion  by  the  action  ot  an
electric  corrent.

II  tbe  copper  ooutiunii  silver,  u  is  often  (he  caae,  it  is  navd  in  gold  refiueriea  lor  the
precipitation  of  ailTer  From  iu  aolntioba  in  aolphnric  acid.  Iron  and  zinc  ndace  copper
aalta.  bnl  copper  redacea  mercury  and  silver  ulta.  The  precipitate  containa  not  only  the
silver  which  waa  previonaly  in  aulntion,  bnl  also  iill  that  which  was  ill  the  copper.  The
tilver  Bolntiona  iu  mlphuiic  acid  are  obtained  in  thp  neparation  ot  silver  From  gold  by
tieating  their  alloys  with  salphuriB  acid,  which  only  diMolToe  tbe  tilver.

404  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

according  to  the  temperature  and  quantity  of  air  supplied.  In  air
at  the  ordinary  temperature,  copper — as  everyone  knows — becomes
coated  with  a  brown  layer  of  oxides  or  a  green  coating  of  basic  salts,
due  to  the  action  of  the  damp  air  containing  carbonic  acid.  If  this
action  continue  for  a  prolonged  time,  the  copper  is  covered  with  a  thick
coating  of  basic  carbonate,  or  the  so-called  verdigris  (the  ctrugo  nolnlis
of  ancient  statues).  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  copper,  althon^
scarcely  capable  of  oxidising  by  itself,  "^  in  tJie  presence  of  tvtiter  and
acids — even  very  feeble  acids,  like  carbonic  acid — absorbs  oxygen  from
the  air  and  forms  salts,  which  is  a  very  characteristic  property  of  it  (and
of  lead).^  Copper  does  twt  decompose  water,  and  therefore  does  not  diaen-

^  Schiitzeiiberger  showed  that  when  the  basic  carbonate  of  copper  is  deoompoeed  bj
an  electric  current  it  gives,  besides  the  ordinary  copper,  an  allotropic  form  which  giow«
on  the  negative  platinum  electrode,  if  its  surface  be  smaller  than  that  of  the  positive
copper  electrode,  in  the  form  of  brittle  crystalline  growths  of  sp.  gr.  8*1.  It  differs  from
ordinary  copper  by  giving  not  nitric  oxide  but  nitrous  oxide  when  treated  with  nitric
acid,  and  in  being  very  easily  oxidised  in  air,  and  coated  with  red  shades  of  colour.  It
is  possible  that  this  is  copper  hydride,  or  copper  which  has  occluded  hydrogen.  Sprii^
(1H92)  observed  that  copper  reduced  from  the  oxide  by  hydrogen  at  the  lowest  possible
temperature  was  pulverulent,  while  that  reduced  from  CuCl^  at  a  somewhat  high  tem-
perature appeared  in  bright  crystals.  The  same  difference  oocnrs  with  many  other
metals,  and  is  probably  partly  due  to  the  volatility  of  the  metallic  chlorides.

*^  This  is  taken  advantage  of  in  practice  ;  for  instance,  by  pouring  dilute  acids  orer
copper  turnings  on  revolving  tables  in  the  preparation  of  copper  salts,  such  as  verdigris,
or  the  basic  acetate  2C|H,jCu04,CuH20o,5H.^O,  which  is  so  much  used  as  an  oil  paint  {i^.
with  boiled  oil).  The  capacity  of  copper  for  absorbing  oxygen  in  the  presence  of  acids
is  so  great  that  it  in  i>o88ible  by  this  means  (by  taking,  for  example,  thin  copper  shapings
moistened  with  Hulphuric  acid)  to  take  up  all  the  oxygen  from  a  given  volume  of  air,  and
this  is  even  employed  for  the  analysis  of  air.

Tlie  combination  of  cr)ppt'r  with  oxygen  is  not  only  aided  by  acids  but  also  by  alkalis,
although  cupric  oxide  does  not  api)ear  to  have  an  acid  character.  Alkalis  do  not  act  on
copper  except  in  the  presence  of  air,  when  they  produce  cupric  oxide,  which  does  not
appear  to  combine  with  such  alkalis  as  caustic  potash  or  soda.  But  the  action  of
anunoiiia  is  particularly  distinct  (Chapter  V.,  Note  *2).  In  the  action  of  a  solution  of
ammonia  not  only  is  oxygen  absorbed  by  the  copper,  but  it  also  acts  on  the  ammonia.
and  a  definite  quantity  of  ammonia  is  always  acted  on  simultaneously  with  the  passage
of  the  copper  into  solution.  The  ammonia  is  then  converted  into  nitrons  acid,  according
to  the  reaction  :  NH-  +  O-,  —  NHO,.  -^  H./).  and  the  nitrous  acid  thus  formed  passes  into  the
state  of  ammonium  nitrite,  NH4N0.,..  In  this  manner  three  equivalents  of  oxygen  are
expended  on  the  oxidation  of  the  ammtmia,  and  six  equivalents  of  oxygen  pass  over  to
the  copper,  forming  six  atoms  of  cupric  oxide.  Tlie  latter  does  not  remain  in  the  state
of  oxide,  but  combines  with  the  ammonia.

A  strong  solution  of  common  salt  does  not  act  on  copj)er,  but  a  dilute  solution  of  the
salt  commies  copper,  converting  it  into  oxychloride — that  is,  in  the  presence  of  air.
This  action  of  salt  water  is  evident  i)i  those  cases  when;  the  bottoms  of  ships  are  coated
with  sheet  copper.  From  what  has  been  said  above  it  will  be  evident  that  copper  vessels
should  not  be  employed  in  the  preparation  of  food,  because  this  contains  salts  and  acid^
which  act  on  copper  in  the  presence  of  air,  and  give  copper  salts,  which  are  poisonoor.
and  therefore  the  food  prepjired  in  untinned  copi>er  vess*»l8  may  be  poisonous.  Henoe
tinned  vessels  are  employed  for  this  purpose — that  is,  copi)er  vessels  coated  with  a  tKm
layer  of  tin,  on  which  acid  and  saline  solutions  do  not  act.

COPPER.  SILVER.  AND  GOLD  406

gago  hj'tlriigeu  fruun  it  either  at  the  ordinary  or  at  liigii  tempe  nit  urea.
Nor  does  copper  liberate  hydrogen  from  the  oxygen  aeida  ;  these  net  on
it  in  two  ways  ;  they  either  give  up  u  portion  of  their  oxygeu,  form-
iug  lower  grades  <ii  oxidation,  nr  else  only  react  in  the  presence  of
air.  Thus,  when  nitric  acid  nets  on  copper  it  evolves  nitric  oxide,  the
cupper  being  oxidised  at  the  expense  of  the  nitric  acid.  In  tlie  same
way  copper  converts  sulphuric  acid  into  the  lower  grade  of  oxidatiim —
into  sulphurous  anhydride,  SO,.  In  these  case.-i  the  copper  is  uxidised
t<i  copper  oxide,  which  combines  with  the  excess  of  acid  taken,  and
tlierefore  forms  a  cuprie  salt,  CuX^.  Dilute  nitric  acid  does  not  act
on  copper  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  but  wlien  heat«d  it  reacts
with  great  ease ;  dilute  sulphuric  &cid  does  not  act  on  copper  except
in  presence  of  air.

Both  the  oxides  of  copper,  Cu^O  and  CuO,  are  unactetl  on  by
air,  and,  rta  already  mentioned,  they  Ijiith  occur  in  nature.^'"''  How-
ever, in  the  majority  of  cases  copper  is  obtained  in  the  form  oi'
cupric  oxide  and  its  salts— and  the  copper  compimnds  usnl  indus-
trially generally  belong  to  this  type.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the
nijiroua  amij^mniU  absorb  nxygeii,  fnim  the  air  and  pass  into  cupric
compounds.  The  cupric  compounds  may  serve  as  the  source  for  the
preparation  of  cuprous  oxide,  because  many  reducing  agents  are
capable  "i  deoxidising  the  oxide  into  the  suboxide.  Organic  sub-
stances are  most  generally  employed  for  this  purpose,  and  especially
saccharine  substances,  which  are  able,  in  the  presence  of  alkalis,  tu
undergo  oxidation  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  of  the  cupric  oxide,
and  Ui  give  acids  which  combine  with  the  alkali ;  2CuO  —  O  :=  CujO.
In  this  case  the  deuxidation  of  the  ctipper  may  be  carried  further  and
metallic  copper  obtauied,  if  only  the  reaction  be  aided  by  heat  Thus,
for  example,  a  tine  powder  of  metallic  copper  may  be  obtained  by  heat-
ing an  amnioniacal  solution  of  cupric  oxide  with  caustic  potash
and  K"^!*  sugar.  But  if  the  retlucing  action  of  the  saccharine
sub-stance  proceed  in  the  presence  of  a  sutticient  quantity  of  alkali  in

"  ''<■  Copper.  bi>aide>i  tbe  onprons  oiide,  Cd.j  O,  uid  cupric  oxide,  CaO,  gi  res  two  knOTn
higher  fomiB  of  oxidftdon,  but  they  liAVfl  ucATcetj  been  inTeBUgmted,  uid  evtin  tlieir
MHiipoaition  IB  not  well  known.  Copprt-  ilioxi-l*  |CnO„  or  CqOj,H,0.  perhaps  CnOH.,Oi)
in  oblAined  hy  the  Htion  of  lijrdrogea  peroiiile  on  capric  hydroxide,  vhen  the  grean
colour  ol  the  liUtar  i>  clnuiged  to  yellow.  It  in  very  ungtitble,  oud  ia  decompouHl  even
by  boiling  wntvr,  with  the  evolution  nl  oiy^n.  whilat  tbe  action  of  acids  given  i.-aprio
ultA.  oxygen  being  hUo  diseng>f;ed.  A  still  hi)^hcr  copprr  peraruir  is  formed  by  heating
a  mixture  ol  uaatic  potaih,  nitre,  nnd  metallir  oiipper  to  a  red  heat,  and  by  dinsolving
cupric  hydroxide  in  nolation*  of  the  hyp<K:hlori  tea  of  the  alkali  metala.  A  slight  limting
of  the  wlable  salt  fonned  ia  enough  tor  it  to  lie  decDn]|>owd  into  oxygen  anil  cogiper
dioxide,  which  ia  piecipilaled.  Judging  froni  Prt'iny'e  researches,  the  compMitiou  of  tbe
copper-potnaiic  compound  alioald  be  K^ul.l,.  Perhnpa  this  la  B  compound  of  tbe
prroxidea  of  pota«ium.  K.,0.,.  luid  of  d-piXT,  CuOj.

J

406  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

solution,  and  at  not  Um)  high  a  t^nipei-ature,  cuprous  oxide  is
tained.  To  see  this  reaction  clearly,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  tiike  i
cupric  salt,  because  the  alkali  necessary  for  the  reaction  might  [
cipitiite  cupric  oxide — it  is  necessary  to  add  previously  some  substa
which  will  prevent  this  precipitation.  Among  such  substan^
tartaric  acid,  C4H(j06,  is  one  of  the  best.  In  the  presence  of  a  su
cient  quantity  of  tartaric  acid,  any  amount  of  alkali  may  be  added  t
solution  of  cupric  salt  without  producing  a  precipitate,  because  a  solu
double  salt  of  cupric  oxide  and  alkali  is  then  formed.  If  glucose  (
instance,  honey  or  molasses)  be  adde<l  to  such  an  alkaline  tarts
solution,  and  the  temperature  be  slightly  raised,  it  first  gives  a  yell
pi-ecipitate  (this  is  cuprous  hydroxide,  OuHO),  and  then,  on  boili
a  red  precipitate  of  (anhydrous)  cuprous  oxide.  If  such  a  niixti
be  left  for  a  long  time  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  it  deposits  w<
formed  crystals  of  anhydrous  cuprous  oxide  belonging  to  the  regu
system.^

'  (-olourleHH  sdlutiona  of  cuproiiH  BaltA  may  aluo  be  obtaiued  by  the  action  of
phuruuH  or  phoRpliorouB  acid  andHimilar  lower  grades  of  oxidation  on  the  blae  solution
the  cupric  Halts.  This  in  very  clearly  and  easily  effected  by  means  of  aodimn  ti
sulphate,  Na^H.^O-,  which  is  oxidised  in  the  process.  Cuprous  oxide  can  not  only
obtained  by  the  deoxidation  of  cupric  oxide,  but  also  directly  from  metallic  copper  it{
because  the  latter,  in  oxidising  at  a  red  heat  in  air,  first  gives  cuprous  oxide.  It  is  ]
pared  in  tluH  manner  on  a  large  scale  by  heating  sheet  copper  rolled  into  Bpirali
reverberatory  furnaces.  Care  must  be  ttiken  tliat  the  air  is  not  in  great  excess,  and  t
the  coating  of  red  cuprous  oxide  formed  does  not  begin  to  pass  into  tlie  black  cupric  ox:
If  the  oxidised  spiral  sheet  is  then  unbent,  the  brittle  cuprous  oxide  fallH  away  fx
the  soft  metal.  The  suboxide  obtained  in  this  manner  fuses  with  ease.  It  i»  necesa
U)  pn^vent  tlie  access  of  air  during  the  fusion,  and  if  the  mass  contains  cupric  oxidi
must  be  mixed  with  charcoal,  which  reduces  the  latter.  Cuprous  chloride,  CuCl,  coi
Kponding  with  cuprous  oxide  (as  sodium  (rhloride  corres^Mmds  with  sodiiun  oxide),  wl
calcined  with  sodium  carbonate,  gives  sodium  chloride  and  cuprous  oxide,  carbo
anliydride  being  evolved,  because  it  does  not  ctmibine  with  the  cuprous  oxide  under  th
c(mditions.  The  reat:tion  can  bt^  cxpressiMl  by  the  following  equation :  2C^uCl  +  Na2C
■"Cu.,.<)-  'iN'iCl-f  CC\..  Tht^  cupric  f)xide  itself,  when  calcined  with  finely-divided  i\>p\
this  copiMT  powder  may  be  obtained  by  many  methods — for  instance,  by  immersing  z
in  a  solution  of  a  copper  salt,  or  by  igniting  cupric  oxide  in  hydrogen),  gives  the  fusil
cujirous  oxide:  ('u  f  CuO -Cu.^O.  Both  the  native  and  artificial  cuprous  oxide  Imv
sp.  gr.  of  5*(5.  It  is  insoluble  in  water,  and  is  not  acted  on  by  <dry)  air.  When  heal
with  aci<lsth«*  suboxiile  forms  a  solution  of  a  cupric  salt  and  metallic  copper — for  exam]:
C.'u .()  ♦  H  ,,S( ) ,  -  Cu  +  CuSO^  4  II ,().  H<  )wever,  strong  hydnK!hloric  acid  does  not  sepan
metalli<'  copper  on  dissolving  cuprous  oxide,  which  i^,  duo  to  the  fact  that  the  ouprt
chloridi'  formed  is  soluble  in  stroiig  hydrochloric  acid.  Cuprous  oxide  also  dissolves
a  solution  <if  ammonia,  and  in  the  abs«'nce  of  air  gives  a  colourless  soluti<m,  which  tui
blue  in  tlie  air,  absorbing  oxygon,  owing  to  the  conversion  of  the  cuprous  oxide  ti
ciij»ri<'  oxide.  The  bln<;  siilution  thus  formed  may  1h*  again  reconverted  into  a  cidourh
cuprous  sr)lution  by  immersing  a  c(»pper  strij)  in  it,  be<-uuse  the  metallic  copjier  th
deoxidiM's  the  cupric  oxid<»  in  the  solution  into  «-uprous  oxide.  Cupntus  oxide  is  chan
teri^'d  by  the  fact  that  it  gives  red  glasses  when  fuse«l  with  glass  or  with  salts  formi
vitr«'ous  alloys.  Cilass  tinted  with  cuprous  oxi<le  is  used  for  ornaments.  The  Access
air  must  be  avoided  during  its  pre[>arat ion,  because  the  colour  then  becomes  green,  owi:

CnpPEH.  Sn-VEB. ASD OOLU  407

Cuprie  I'liloride,  (.'uOl.j,  when  ignited,  givea  cii/iroiu  chJuridg,  Cii(.'l
— %.«.  the  salt  i-orrespoudinj^  witli  suboxide  of  copper — and  therefore
uuproUB  chloride  is  always  formed  when  copper  enters  into  renction
with  chlorine  at  a  high  teuii>erature.  Thus,  for  example,  when  copper
is  calcined  with  mercuric  chloride,  it  forms  cupi-iius  chloride  niid  I'apnurs
of  ineroury.  The  same  substance  is  obtained  on  beating  metallic
copper  in  hydrochloric  acid,  hydrogen  being  disengaged  ;  but  thia  reac
tion  Kuly  proceeds  with  finely-divid«d  copper,  as  hydrochloric  acid  acts
very  feebly  oa  compact  massea  of  copper,  and,  in  the  presence  of  air,
gives  cuprie  chloride.  The  green  solution  of  cuprie  chloride  is  decolo-
rised by  luetallic  copper,  cuprous  chloride  being  fr>rmed  ;  but  this
reaction  is  only  accomplished  with  ease  when  the  solution  is  very  con-
centrated and  in  the  presence  of  an  excess  of  hydnwhloric  acid  t'l
dissolve  the  cuprous  chloride.  The  aildition  uf  water  to  the  solu-
tion precipitates  the  cuprous  chloride,  because  it  is  less  soluble  in
dilute  than  in  strong  hydrochloric  acid.  Many  reducing  agents  which
are  able  to  take  up  half  the  oxygen  from  euprif  oxide  are  able,  in  the
presence  of  hydixtchloric  acid,  to  form  cuprous  chloride.  Stannous
silts,  sulphurous  anhydride,  alkali,  sulphites,  phosphorous  and  hypo-
phosphorous  acids,  and  many  similar  reducing  agents,  act  in  this
manner.  The  usual  method  of  preparing  cuprous  chloride  consists  in
passing  sulphurous  anliydride  into  a  very  strong  solution  of  cuprie
chloride  ;  aCuCl,  +  .SOj  -(-  2H,0  =  2CuCl  +  2HC1  +  H,SO«.  Cuprous
cliloride  forms  colourless  cubic  crystals  which  are  insoluble  in  watei-,
It  is  easily  fusible,  and  even  volatile.  Under  the  action  of  oxidising
agents,  it  passes  into  the  cuprie  salt,  and  it  absorbs  oxygen  from  moist
air,  forming  cuprie  oxychloride,  Cu,Cl,0.  ij./iwoitg  ammonia  easily
rli*»ole«s  cuprous  chloride  as  well  as  cuprous  oxide  ;  the  solution  al^i
turns  blue  on  exposure  to  the  air.  Thus  an  ammoniacal  solution  of
cuprous  chloride  serves  as  an  excellent  absorbent  for  oxygen  ;  but  this
solution  absorlis  not  only  oxygen,  but  also  certain  other  gases — for
example,  carbonic  oxide  and  acetylene.'

li>  tlu'  tKniuCion  ol  oupric  oiide,  whU'b  ailcion  glus  bine.  ThiB  ma;  enn  be  Uken
wlvuitage  ol  in  t«lini;  tor  capper  ander  the  blow-pipe  by  beating  the  copper  oompouiid
Hitli  linru  in  the  flAme  ol  ■  bluw-pipe ;  a  red  gUu  is  oblained  in  tlie  reducing  flame,
ruid  ■  bloeglauin  the  oiidi*iii|{  AaiBe.  cjvring  fc<lhe  conreriion  of  the  cupioiuintocaprio
■Hide.

Etard  (1SS3),  b]r  pawing  iDlpiiarouB  luihjrdcide  into  a  eolatioD  ol  cuprie  acBUt«,  ol>-
tained  ■  white  precipitate  ol  caprom  ■uJpbite.  (.'d,SO,  JljO.  whilst  he  obtained  the  wma
ult.  ol  a  red  colour,  from  tlie  duoble  salt  uf  udium  and  copper;  but  Ibere  arc  not  anj
conTiocing  praofi  ol  iHomeriam  in  tbia  cau,

*  The  lolubibt  J  of  cnprous  ohlmida  in  anunaniiL  is  due  lo  the  lormaUon  of  oomponndi
between  the  ammonia  and  Iba  chloride.  Id  a  vann  solution  the  compound  NUs,"CdC1
iK  farmed,  and  at  t|fe  ordinury  tatapamlore  CuCI.NHv  Tliia  mXt  it  lolQble  b  Uydnj-
chloric  acid,  and  then  forma  a  correiipondiiig  double  laJl  of  cuprouH  chloride  and  uniiio-

1

408  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

When  copper  is  oxidised  with  a  considerable  quantity  of  oxygen  at
a  high  temperature,  or  at  the  ordinary  temperature  in  the  presence  of
acids,  and  also  when  it  decomposes  acids,  converting  them  into  lower
grades  of  oxidation  (for  example,  when  submitted  to  the  action  of
nitric  and  sulphuric  acids),  it  forms  cnpric  oxide,  CuO,  or,  in  the
presence  of  acids,  cupric  salts.  Copper  rust,  or  that  black  mass  which
forms  on  the  surface  of  copper  when  it  is  calcined,  consists  of  cupric
oxide.  The  coating  of  the  oxidised  copper  is  very  easily  separated
from  the  metallic  copper,  because  it  is  brittle  and  very  easily  peels  off,
when  it  is  struck  or immersed in water. Many  copper salts  (for

nium  cliloride.  By  the  actiou  of  a  certain  excess  of  ammonia  on  a  hyditHshloric  acid
solution  of  cuprous  chloride,  very  well  formed  crystals,  having  the  eompositicm
CnCl,NH3,H20,  are  obtained.  Cuprous  chloride  is  not  only  soluble  in  ammonia  and
hydrochloric  acid,  but  it  also  dissolves  in  solutions  of  certain  other  salts — ^for  example,
in  sodium  cliloride,  potassium  chloride,  sodium  thiosulphaie,  and  certain, others.  All
the  solutions  of  cuprous  chloride  act  in  many  cases  as  very  powerful  deoxidising
substances;  for  example,  it  is  easy,  by  means  of  these  solutions,  to  precipitate
gold  from  its  solutions  in  a  metallic  form,  according  to  the  equation  AuCls  +  SCnCl
=  Au-f  8CuC1.2.

Among  the  other  compounds  corresponding  with  cuprous  oxide,  cuprous  iodide,  Cnl,
is  worthy  of  remark.  It  is  a  colourless  substance  which  is  insoluble  in  water  and
sparingly  soluble  in  ammonia  (like  silver  iodide),  but  capable  of  absorbing  it,  and  in  this
respect  it  resembles  cuprous  chloride.  It  is  remarkable  from  the  fact  that  it  is  exceed-
ingly easily  formed  from  the  corresponding  cupric  compound  Cul<}.  A  solution  of  cupric
iodide  easily  decomposes  into  iodine  and  cuprous  iodide,  even  at  the  ordinary  tempera-
ture, whilst  cupric  chloride  only  suffers  a  similar  change  on  ignition.  If  a  solution  of  a
cupric  suit  be  mixed  with  a  solution  of  potassium  iodide  the  cupric  iodide  formed  imme-
diately deeonipoHeH  into  free  iodine  and  cuprous  iodide,  which  separates  out  as  a  precipi-
tate. In  tliis  case  the  cupric  salt  acts  in  an  oxidising  manner,  like,  for  example,  nitrous
acid,  ozcme,  and  other  Hubstances  which  liberate  iodine  from  iodides,  but  with  this  differ-
ence, that  it  only  liberates  lialf,  whilst  they  set  free  the  whole  of  the  iodine  from  potas-
sium iodide  :  2K I  -^  CuCl...  -  2KC1  +  Cul  -+  I.

It  must  alno  be  remarked  that  cuprous  oxide,  when  treated  with  hydrofluoric  acid,
given  an  insoluble  cui)rous  Huoride,  CuF.  Cu{)rou8  cyanide  is  also  insoluble  in  water,
and  in  obtained  by  the  addition  of  hydrocyanic  acid  to  a  solution  of  cupric  chloride
saturated  with  sulphurous  anhydride.  This  cuprous  cyanide,  like  silver  cyanide,  g^ves
a  double  soluble  salt  witli  potassium  cyanide.  The  double  cyanide  of  copper  and
potassium  is  tolerably  stable  in  the  air,  and  enters  into  double  decompositions  with
various  other  salts,  like  those  double  cyanides  of  iron  with  whicl\  we  are  already
acquainted.

Copper  hydride,  CuH,  also  belongs  to  the  number  of  the  cuprous  compounds.  It
was  obtained  by  Wiirtz  by  mixing  a  hot  (70*^)  solution  of  cupric  sulphate  with  a  solution
of  liyi)ophosphorous  acid,  H-POo.  Tlie  addition  of  the  reducing  hypophosphorous  acid
must  be  stopped  when  a  brown  precipitate  makes  its  appearance,  and  when  gas  begins
to  be  evr)lved.  The  brown  precipitate  is  the  hydrated  cuprous  hydride.  When  gently
heated  it  disengages  hydrogen  ;  it  gives  cui>rous  oxide  when  exposed  to  the  air,  bums
in  a  stream  of  chlorine,  and  liberates  hydrogen  with  hydrochloric  acid:  CuH  +  HCl
=  -CuCl-l  Hj.  Zinc,  silver,  mercury,  lead,  and  many  other  heavy  metals  do  not  form
such  a  compound  with  hydrogen,  neither  under  these  circumstances  nor  under  the  action
of  hydrogen  at  the  moment  of  the  decomposition  of  salts  by  a  galvanic  current.  The
greatest  resembance  is  seen  between  cuprous  hydride  and  the  hydrogen  compounds  of
potassium,  stxlium,  Pd,  Ca,  and  Ba.

COPPER.  sriVER,  AND  OnLt»  409

instAuce,  the  aitrit«  nnd  carbonate)  leave  oxide  of  copper"""  in  ilie
form  of  friaMe  black  powder,  after  being  ignited.  If  the  ignition  be
f»rried  further.  CUjO  may  be  formed  from  the  CuO.*"  AnhydrouB
cupric  oxide  is  very  enoily  dissolved  in  Kcids;  forming  cuprie  salts,  CuX^.
They  are  analogous  to  the  salts  MgX,,  ZnX,,  NiX^,  FeXj,  in  many
respects.  On  adding  potassium  or  ammonium  hydroxide  to  a  solution
of  a  cupric  salt,  it  forms  a  gelatinous  blue  precipitate  of  the  liydrated
oxide  of  copper,  CuH^Oj,  insoluble  in  wBt«r.  The  resultant  precipitate
i>  redUn'Jixd  bif  an  excefS  of  ammonia,  and  gives  a.  very  beautiful
azure  blue  solution,  of  so  intense  a  colour  that  the  presence  uf  small
traces  of  cupric  saltis  may  be  discovareit  by  this  means.^ An  excess  of

■  '■•  The  oiiile  of  topper  obtniurf  by  ignilJng  the  nilntp  i«  frequently  umJ  (ur
organii;  luuiljteii.  It  U  b ;;!'»>«'<'[''•'  *J"1  n^taint  nitrogen  (I'E  c.c  per  gnin)  when  the
tittnte  in  faeateil  in  •acao  (Ricbkrd*  ud  Rogers.  lHgS|.

*  •''  Oiiile  ol  copper  i*  iilio  («pable  of  ditnociitling  when  heiitcd.  Debny  and
JiHHinii  diown]  tint  it  then  diKngages  oxygen.  tIioh  muimom  tetiHon  it  conitiuit
Inr  ft  given  tempentnr«,  providing  tlut  faaioo  doe*  not  tain  pUoe  (the  CaO  then
diiulres  in  the  molten  CiijO);  Ihkt  this  lews  of  oiiigpn  it  followed  bji  the  forniktian  ol
suboiido,  and  Uut  on  DOoling,  tlui  oiygen  is  mgaia  abwrbed,  loniung  CuO.

>  Capric  oxide  and  miuij  of  its  salts  are  able  to  gire  definite,  ulUiDngli  nnstabla,
fompvHUiU  mlh  ammonia,  Thia  fiwultji  alreadf  shavi  ilttelf  in  the  fuft  tlint  cupric
oijde.  ttn  well  ■■  tba  aalts  of  oippet,  diasolven  in  aqneoiu  ammonia,  Bjid  also  in  the  fact
that  sultii  ot  copper  absorb  ammiiniit  gas.  II  unnioma  lie  added  to  a,  bolntiou  ul  Any
cupric  ult.  it  first  lorms  ■  previpitate  of  cDpric  hfdroiide,  which  then  diiwultea  in  on
eice>«i  of  ammonia.  The  solution  thus  formed,  when  evapuntcd  ur  un  the  addition  of
Klcuhol.  frequently  depoaiti  crrstals  of  salts  containing  both  the  elemeotH  of  the  salt  of
ropper  taken  and  of  ammonia.  Seveisl  such  compounds  are  genentlty  formed.  Thos
cnpric  chloride,  CuCl^  according  to  Deherun,  forma  four  oonipouuda  with  ammonia^
namely,  with  one,  two,  (our,  and  eii  molecolcs  of  ammooio.  Thus,  for  etample,
if  auimonia  gu  be  pawed  into  a  boiling  »aturuted  lolotion  of  cupric  chloride,  on
cooling.  HmaJI  octaliednil  crjitala  of  a  blue  colour  separate  out.  containing
CuCl2.UNH,.II.,0.  Al  1S0°  Ibis  subaUnce  loves  half  the  ammonia  and  all  the  water
contained  in  it,  leaving  tile  cDmponud  CnCl^NHj.  Nitrat*  of  copper  forms  the  com-
pound Cn|NO]).^aMII,.  This  compound  remains  Dnchanged  on  evaporation.  Dry
capric  sulphate  alisoibs  ammonia  gas,  and  gives  a  compound  containing  UtC  molecules  of
ammonia  to  one  of  sitlpliale  (Vol.  I.,  p.  aST,  and  Chapter  XXil.,  Note  M).  If  this  com-
pound is  disaotved  in  oqueoii*  ammonia,  on  evsporation  it  deposits  a  crystalline  aubstance
conUiniDg  Cll80i,lNHj,H«0.  At  ISO"  this  substauoe  loeeH  tbe  molecule  of  water  and
onB-fnorth  of  its  ammonia.  On  ^ition  all  these  compounds  part  with  the  remaining
uiuiionia  in  the  form  of  an  ammoniacal  salt,  ho  that  the  residue  consists  of  onpric  oiido.
Biilli  the  hydnl«d  and  aabydnios  cupric  oiid«  ore  soluble  in  aqueous  ammanio.

Tbe  solution  obtained  hy  the  action  of  oijueoug  aiuoionia  and  air  on  copper  tuniingi
I  Note  SI  is  remarkable  fur  its  faculty  of  iliuotaing  ctltalo§e,  which  tt>  insoluble  in  water,
dilnle  acids,  and  alkalis.  Paper  soaked  in  such  a  oolution  acquires  the  property  of  not
rotting,  of  bemg  difficultly  iwmbnstible,  and  waterproof,  ice.  It  has  therefore  been
applied,  especially  in  England,  to  many  prsj^ticaJ  purpose^^for  example,  to  the  coo-
•ImcLion  of  temporary  buitdings,  for  covering  Tootn,  Ac.  The  compasitioo  of  tlie
snlMl«ui«  held  in  solotion  is  CnlHOi„«NH^

If  dry  ammonia  gsa  be  pluMed  over  cupric  ntide  heated  (o  'jeG°,  a  portion  uf  tbe  oiid;
of  cu|i|iDT  remains  unaltered,  whilst  the  other  portion  gives  nipper  nr'riifr.  the  oxygen  nf
tbe  copper  oiido  combining  with  the  hydrogen  and  tormiug  water.  The  oxide  ol  coppsr
which  lemaiui  unchanged  ia  easily  remored by  washing  Ilie  nwultant product  with

410  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

potassium  or  sodium  hydroxide  does  not  dissolve  cupric  hydroxide.
A  hot  solution  gives  a  black  precipitate  of  the  anhydrous  oxide
instead  of  the  blue  precipitate,  and  the  precipitate  of  the  hydroxide
of  copper  becomes  granular,  and  turns  black  when  the  solation
is  heated.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  blue  hydroxide  is
exceedingly  unstable,  and  when  slightly  heated  it  loses  the  elements
of  water  and  gives  the  black  anhydrous  cupric  oxide  :  CuH^O)
=  CuO  +  HjO.

Cupric  oxide  fuses  at  a  strong  heat,  and  on  cooling  forms  a  heavy
crystalline  mass,  which  is  black,  opaque,  and  somewhat  tenacious.  It
is  a  feebly  energetic  base,  so  that  not  only  do  the  oxides  of  the  metab
of  the  alkalis  and  alkaline  earths  displace  it  from  its  compounds,  but
even  such  oxides  as  those  of  lead  and  silver  precipitate  it  from  Bolutions,
which  is  partially  due  to  these  oxides  beingsoluble,  although  but  slightly
so,  in  water.  However,  cupric  oxide,  and  especially  the  hydroxide,
easily  combines  with  even  the  least  energetic  acids,  and  does  not  give
any  compounds  with  bases  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  easily  Jarms
basic  salts,  ^  ^^*  and  in  this  respect  outstrips  magnesium  and  recalls  the

aqueouH  ammonia.  Copper  nitride  is  very  stable,  and  is  insolable ;  it  has  the  oompoai-
tion  Cu-,N  {i.e.  the  copper  is  monatomic  here  as  in  Cil^O),  and  is  an  amorplioaB  gi«en
powder,  which  is  decomposed  when  strongly  ignited,  and  gives  citproiia  chloride  and
ammonium  cliloride  when  treated  witli  hydrochloric  acid.  Like  the  other  nitridea,  copper
nitride,  Cu.-.N,  has  Hcarcely  been  investigated.  Granger  (1892),  by  heating  copper  in  the
vapour  of  phospIioruB,  obtained  hexagonal  prisms  of  Cu;^P,  which  passed  into  Cn«P
(previouHly  obtained  by  Abel)  when  heated  in  nitrogen.  Arsenic  is  easily  abaorbed  by
copper,  and  its  pre»eiice  (like  P),  even  in  small  quantities,  has  a  great  influence  upon
the  properties  of  copper — for  instance,  pure  copper  wire  1  sq.  mm.  in  section  breaks
under  a  load  of  ^^i  kilos,  wliile  tlie  presence  of  0'22  p.c.  of  arsenic  raises  the  breaking
load  to  4*2  kilos.

y  Ms  ^\y  j^  comparatively  feeble  base,  oxide  of  copper  easily  forms  both  basic  and
double  salts.  As  an  instance  we  may  mention  the  double  salts  composed  of  the
dichloride  CuClo,2HoO  and  i)otas8ium  chloride.  Tlie  double  salt  CuK2Cl4,aHjO
cr^'stallises  from  solutions  in  blue  plates,  but  when  heated  alone  or  with  substances
taking  up  water  easily  gives  hroivn  needles  CuKClj  and  at  the  same  time  KCl,  and  this
reaction  is  reversible  at  92 '  as  Meyerhoffer  (18«9)  showed  {i.e.  above  92°  the  simpler
double  salt  is  formed  and  below  U2  the  more  complex  salt).  With  an  excess  of  the
copper  salt,  KCl  gives  another  double  salt,  Cu.2KCl5,4H.20,  the  transition  temperature  of
which  is  SS'-^.  The  instances  of  equilibria  which  are  encountered  in  such  complex
relations  {see  Chapter  XIV.,  Note  25,  astrakhanite,  and  Chapter  XXEC.,  Note  SES)  are
embrac<;d  by  the  law  of  phases  given  by  Gibbs  (Transactions  of  the  Connecticat
Aca<leniy  of  Sciences,  1875-1H7H,  in  »I.  Willard  Gibbs'  memoir  'On  the  equiUbrium  of
hetero<ujeneous  substances : '  and  in  a  clearer  and  more  accessible  form  in  H.  W.
Bakhuis  Uoozeboom's  pai>er8,  Rec.  trav.  cliim.,  Vol.  VI.,  and  in  W.  Meyerho£fer*8  memoir
Die  Phascurvijel  and  Hire  Amvendunr/en,  1898,  to  which  sources  we  refer  those  desiring
fuller  information  respecting  this  lawj.  Gibbs  calls  '  bodies  '  substances  (simple  or  com-
l)oun(l)  capable  of  formuig  homogeneous  complexes  (for  instancei  solutions  or  inter-
combinations)  of  a  varied  composition ;  9. phase — a  mechanically  separable  portion  of  such
1>odies  or  of  their  homogeneous  complexes  (for  instance,  a  vapour,  liquid  or  precipitated
solid),  perfeet  equilibrium — suuh a  state of bodies  and  of their  complexes as is

oxides  of  lead  or  iiieroury.  Hence  the  hydroxide  of  lopper  Oisaolvts  ia
w.lutioas  of  neutral  cupric  salts.  Tbe  cuprii;  saltsare  generuliy  blue  or
gi-een,  because  cupric  hydroxide  itself  is  coloured.  But  some  of  the
snltB  in  the  anhydrous  state  are  colourlets.'"

tlio  unoant  of  one  d(  the  cuin[<oiieul  jmrtf  (fur  iiiBUiuw,  of  it  sitit  ia  a  wturaWd  ■olulion),
wliile  kn  imper/nel  fguilihrium  it  bucIi  a  one  for  wliiuh  sxieh  a  cliunpi  coneBpondi  with
■  change  ol  prsBinre  ((or  uuUni.'e,  ui  onuturateil  wilntiuu).  Th«  law  of  pbaMH  «mnst<
in  the  fact  that :  n  lioiliei  unli/  giee  a  per/rcl  equilibriuni  when  n  +  I  phata  pariiciiiai*
In  tlial  fquitibriHm-~tor  eiainple,  in  the  e()DilibnDai  of  a  salt  in  IIh  wtuntud  sulution
in  Tatef  there  Ke  two  boiliea  (the  salt  and  waterj  and  lliree  pliaseH,  nuiivlj,  tlie  salt,
aolutioQ,  and  rapoar,  which  cmi  he  mechaiu<:aUy  sepaTatoiI  fnua  each  othei',  and  to  this
eqnilibrimn  there  corresponds  a  definite  tension.  At  the  same  time,  n  badiei  maj/
ocrariH  n*iphatn,  but  only  al  onedrfinite  trmperature  an4i one prrtiure ;  a  chan|[e
et  one  of  these  may  bring  nbuut  aoothri  statu  Iperfeot  or  not-.«qniIibriimi  atahle  or
Dnstahle).  Tbns  voter  «heu  liquid  at  th«  ordinal;  tempemtnre  oIlBra  Ino  phases
(liqoid  and  rapoarl  and  is  in  perfect  equihlirinm  In  hIbo  is  ice  bBlow  0"),  but  water,  ice,
and  Tapani  (thtee  phaxes  and  only  one  body}  can  only  be  in  eqnilibriam  at  0",  and  at  the
ordiasr;  preBsnre;  with  a  change  of  '  there  will  nmiun  either  only  ice  and  Ta,p[iur  or
only  liqnid  water  and  Tapour:  whilst  with  ■  rise  of  prendre  not  only  will  the  rapour
pasH  into  the  liquid  (there  again  only  remain  two  pltaHs)  bat  also  tbe  temperature  of
lliu  foitoalion  of  ice  will  tall  (by  aboat  7''  per  1000  atmoapherei).  The  same  laws  ol
phii,iies  are  applicable  to  tbe  «iusidention  of  the  formation  of  umple  or  donble  salts,
IruiQ  wttarated  lulaliims  and  U>  a  number  of  other  purely  chemical  relationH,  Thus,  for
(^irimple,  in  the  uUme-meattoned  inilanee,  when  the  bodiei  are  KCI,  CaCl^  and  H,0,
perfevt  Hqnilibrinm  (which  here  liaa  referentre  to  the  solubility)  consisting  of  four  phases,
correspond*  to  the  (allowing  scTon  oaaee,  considering  only  tbe  phases  (above  D°)
A  ^  CoCl»lKCI,9K,0 ;  B  »  CaCl^CI;  C  ^  CuCl^aH,0,KCl,  solntion  and  Tspour:
(1)  A  +  B  +  solntion<vapnur;  (8)  A  +  C  +  eolntion  +  vapour ;  |81  At  KCI  nolntion
4- vapour;  (4|  A  +  B  +  C 4  vapour  (it  loUows  that  B  +  KCI  +  solution  gives  A);  |fi)
A  tC  +  KCU vapour;  (0)  B  +  C»  solutiont -vapoar;  and  (7)  B-i-KCl  +  solution  +  vapour.
Thus  above  91°  A  gives  B  -^  KCI.  The  law  ol  pluses  by  bringing  complei  iiislances  of
cbeniical  rsactiou  under  simple  physical  schemes,  facilitates  their  study  in  detail  and
gives  the  means  of  seeking  the  simpleit  chemical  relations  dealing  with  solntiuns,  dis-
saciatiun.  doable  decompositions  and  siniilac  cases,  and  therefore  deserves  consideration,
but  a  detailed  eipoaitiou  of  this  subject  must  be  looked  for  in  works  on  physiual
chemistry.

'"  The  xmrtoti] euprie iiitrale,CaK.,Ot,SH,fl,  iaobtainedasadeliquesoeRlsaUof  ablne
uiluar  I  soluble  in  water  and  in  ulcohol)  by  diasolving  oo|)per  or  cnpric  oxide  in  nitiio  scid.
It  in  »<•  easily  decomposed  by  tlie  action  uf  heat  that  i[iaiaipa«sible  to  drive  oil  tbe  water
ofcrystallisaitnn  from  it  belnre  it  begins  lodecompow.  During  the  ignition  of  the  normal
salt  the  cupric  oiids  formed  enters  into  oom^ination  with  tbe  remaining  uodecumiKwed
norma]  salt,  and  gives  a  btuic  salt,  CaN,Oo,9CuH,0.,.  The  same  basic  salt  ia  obtained
if  a  oertsin  quantity  of  alkali  or  cupric  hydmiide  or  carbonate  be  added  to  the  solution
of  tlie  normal  salt,  which  is  even  decomposed  when  boiled  witli  metallic  copper,  and  forms
the  basic  salt  aa  a  green  powdor.  which  easily  decomposes  under  the  sction  al  heat  and
leaves  a  residoe  of  cnpric  oiide.  The  basic  salt,  having  the  comfiositioii  CuN.jO,,aCaH,Og,
it  nearly  insoluble  in  water.

Tlie  Burmal  earbonate  c/nifTWr.  CuCOj.  occurs  in  natnre.althangheitremely  rarely.
If  solutions  ot  CDptic  salts  be  uiiied  with  solutions  of  alkali  carbonates,  then,  ai  in  the
case  of  mtgaesinm,  carbonic  anhydride  ia  evolved  and  bsaic  salts  are  formed,  which  vary
in  voiiiposition  acourding  tu  tlio  temperatore  and  conditions  of  the  reaction.  By  mixing
cold  solatiouH,  a  voluminous  Idue  precipitate  in  formed,  containing  an  equivalent  pro-
porlioti  ot  cupric  liydmitid,,  mid  carlHxiaLe (after  itaiiding  or  hcitiiig,  ita  composition

412  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  commonest  normal  salt  is  blue  vitriol  ~i,e,  the  normal  capri
sulphate.  It  generally  contains  five  molecules  of  water  of  crystal] i»
tion,  CuS04,5Il20.  It  forms  the  product  of  the  action  of  stron;;  su
phuric  acid  on  copper,  sulphurous  anhydride  being  evolved.  The  san
salt  is  obtained  in  practice  by  carefully  roasting  sulphuretted  ores  <
copper,  and  also  by  the  action  of  water  holding  oxygen  in  solution  o
them  :  CuS  4.04=  CUSO4.  This  salt  forms  a  by-product,  obtained  i
gold  refineries,  when  the  silver  is  precipitated  from  the  sulphuric  aci
solution  by  means  of  copper.  It  is  also  obtained  by  pouring  dilui
sulphuric  acid  over  sheet  copper  in  the  presence  of  air,  or  by  heatic
cupric  oxide  or  carbonate  in  sulphuric  acid.  The  crystals  of  this  sa
belong  to  the  triclinic  system,  have  a  specific  gravity  of  2*19,  are  of
beautiful  blue  colour,  and  give  a  solution  of  the  same  colour.  I(
parts  of  water  at  0°  dissolve  15,  at  25°  23,  and  at  100**  about  45  par
of  cupric  sulphate,  CuS04.*^^^ At  100°  this  salt  loses  a  portion  of  i

18  tlje  Kftme  an  malachite,  Kp.  j^.  3-5):  2CuS0,->  2Na2C0.,  +  H.jO  =  CuCO5,CDH^
+  2Na.^S0|  +  CO....  If  the  resultant  blue  precipitate  be  heated  in  the  liqaid,  it  loses  wal
and  is  transformed  into  a  granular  green  mass  of  the  composition  CiLiGO| — i.e.  int<
.  comitound  of  the  normal  salt  with  anhydrous  cupric  oxide.  This  Halt  of  the  oxide  cor
sponds  with  orthooarbonic  acid,  C{OH),  — CH40j,  where  4H  is  replaced  by  2Ca.  i
further  boiling  this  salt  loses  a  portion  of  the  carbonic  acid,  forming  black  cupric  oxi<
BO  unstable  is  the  componnd  of  copper  with  carl>onic  anhydride.  Another  basic  Halt  whi
occurs  in  nature,  2C'uCO-,CuH,,0.j,  is  known  as  azurite,  or  blue  carbonate  of  copper  ;
also  loses  carbonic  acid  when  boiled  witli  water.  On  mixing  a  solution  of  cupric  sulpiu
with  sodium  sesquicarbonate  no  precipitate  is  at  first  obtained,  but  after  boiling  a  p
cipitate  is  formed  having  the  composition  of  malachite.  Debray  obtained  artific
azurite  by  heating  cupric  nitrate  with  chalk.

10  hi*  Although  sulphati'  of  copi)er  usually  crystallises  with  5H.jO,  that  is,  difT(>rfni
to  the  sulphates  of  Mg,  Fe,  and  Mu,  it  is  nevertheless  perfectly  isomorphouii  with  the
as  is  seen  not  <mly  in  the  fact  that  it  gives  isom<^rphous  mixtures  with  them,  contiiini
a  similar  amount  of  water  of  crystallisation,  but  also  in  the  ease  with  which  it  forn
like  all  biises  analog«>us  to  MgO,  double  salts,  R,Cu(SO,\.,(»H.,0,  where  R=K,  Rb,  C
of  the  iMonocliiiic  system.

Salts  of  tliis  kind,  like  CuCl  .,'2KCl,-2H..O,rtKXy,,  t^rc,  present  a  composite
C'liXo  if  the  representation  of  double  suits  given  in  Chapter  XXTII.,  Note  11,
iwlmitti'd,  beciiustj  they,  like  C-u(HO),,  eojitain  (^u(X..K),.,  where  X.j  =  SO|,  i.r.  i
n'sidue  of  sulphuric  acid,  which  combines  with  H .,  and  is  therefore  able  to  repla
the  }{.,  by  X,.  or  O.  A  detailed  study  of  the  crystallint*  forms  of  these  saltH.  made  ■
Tutton  (189a)  isrr  Chapter  XIII.,  Note  li,  showed  :  (1)  that  '2'1  investigated  salts  of  tl
com]«osition  R.M(SO,).fiH..O,  where  R--K.  Rb.  Cs,  and  M  Mg,  Zn,  C(l,  Mn,  Pe,  Co,  ^
Cu,  i)res<'nt  a  <'omplete  crystallographic  resemblance;  (2(  that  in  all  respects  tlit*  I
salts  j>resent  a  transition  between  the  K  and  Cs  salts;  (3)  that  the  Cs  salts  for
en.stals  most  easily,  and  the  K  salts  the  most  diflficultly,  and  that  for  the  K  salts  of  (
and  Mn  it  was  <'ven  im|Missible  t<^  obtain  well-formed  erystals;  (4)  that  notwithstHudii
the  eloNt  nesK  of  their  angles,  tlie  general  a]>|H»arance  (liabiti  of  the  {Mttassium  com])oni
differs  very  clearly  from  the  Cs  salts,  while  the  Rb  salts  pres<.Mit  a  distmct  transition
tliis  respect ;  (.5)  that  the  angle  of  the  inclination  <»f  one  of  the  axes  to  the  plane  of  the  t^
other  aixes  showed  that  in  the  K  salts  (angle  from  75"  to  7r>'  'dH')  the  inclination  is  lt»Hi
in  tin*  Cs  salts  (from  72"  52'  to  73°  50')  greatest,  and  in  the  Rb  salts  (from  78-  .'i?'
71"  42')  intermediate  between  the  two;  the  rei)lacement  of  Mg.  .  .  .  Cu  protluces  but

rOPPBB.  Sn.VER.  AND  OOl.D  -113

water  of  crystallisation,  which  it  only  parts  with  entirely  nt  a  high
temperature  (220°)  and  then  gives  a  white  powder  of  the  aiihydn>«3
Bu1phut«  ;  and  the  latter,  on  further  cnleinatiou,  loses  the  elements  of
Bulphuric  anhydride,  leaving  cupric oxide,  like  all  the  cupric  wilts.  The
aniiydruus  (cdlourloss)  cupHc  sulphate  is  sometimes  used  for  altsorbing
wtiter  ;  it  turns  blue  in  the  process.  It  ofiers  the  advantage  that  it
retains  both  hydrcK:hloric  acid  and  water,  hut  not  carbonic  anhydride."
r'upric  sulphate  is  used  for  steeping  seed  com  ;  this  is  said  to  prevent
the  growth  of  certain  parasites  on  the  plants.  In  the  ai-ts  a  oonsidi-'r-
able  quantity  of  cupric  sulphate  is  also  used  in  the  pi-eparation  of  other
copper  salts — tor  instance,  of  certain  pigments  "  ''''^and  a  particulai'ly

vFTf «ii»11 chuige in tbis  uigle; (fl) that  the other uiglm  and the ntio  ai  the
■  xeH  ol  the  crytt^a  exhibit  ■  Himilu' variation ;  and  (T)  tlwt  thu*  the  viuintioo  i>(  the
I'lrm  >«  cbicrfly  detemuneid  by  tb«  atomie  weight  ol  thr  alkaline  metal. Ao  ui  example
<vc  cite  the  magnitade  of  tbe  indiDBtinii  of  Ibe  lUea  of  R,M(SO4)n(IH,0,
R^  K  Rh  C«

M  =  Mg  Tfi^  la'  7*°  I'  TS"  W

Id  78=  W  74°  7'  73^  S3'

Cd  ~  74»  7'  7a"  M'

Mn  —  78°  8'  73^  Kl'

Fe  70°  ae'  71°  IB'  78^  H'

Co  76°  B'  78°  BB'  73°  62'

Ni  78°  0'  78°  67'  71!°  S8'

Cu  76°  Sa"  74"  la"  78°  60"

Tfai*  Bhewi  clearly  (within  the  llmita  ol  posubte  turor,  whieh  miiy  Iw  m  mai'h  aa
UlO  tlie  sliDOat  peclect  identity  of  the  iudeiKiulvut  crystalline  (onnB  mitwitliatandiiig  Ibe
difemiii-'e  ol  the  atomic  veiehl*  of  the  diatomic  elementH,  M  =  Mg  .  ,  .  Cu.

"  In  addition  to  what  has  been  uid  (Chapter  1.,  Note  es,  and  Chap(«r  XXII..
Note  M)  reapecliiig  the  combinatioD  0(  Cu80|  witl\  water  and  aumuinin,  we  inay  add
Ibal  LachinoR  (IHBSI  abowed  that  CuSOj.SH^  loses  HUfi  at  180°,  thai  CuSO,,GN'H>
alK>  biMD  4iNB:  ■!  890".  and  that  only  IHjO  uid  iiiUi  remain  in  eombinatiini  with
the  CaSO,.  The  laxt  {11,0  eaii  only  be  driven  off  by  heating  to  SOty,  and  the  laat
INHj  by  heating  to  800°.  Ammonia  diapUcea  nntet  Irom  Ca80„EH,0,  but  water
coDuiit  di({dace  the  ammonia  from  Cat<0,.6NUs.  II  bydiurhluric  acid  gai  be  paued
over  CuSO„5aiO  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  it  flr»l  Umm  CnSOj,BH,0.3HCI,  and
then  CaS04,aH,0,SHCl.  When  air  ia  pasted  over  Il;e  Utter  compound  it  pasMs  into
CoSOjH^O  with  a  amall  arooODt  ol  HCl  laboot  jjHW).  At  100°  Co80„5U^O  in  a
stream  o)  hydrochloric  add  gas  give«  Ca80„tH.j0.aH(;l,  and  then  Cn80„lH.,0HCl,
whilst  alter  pnJongad  boating  CaSOj  remains,  which  rapidly  pasiea  into  CnS0u6IL,0
when  placed  onder  a  bell  jar  over  water.  Over  Bolpborii:  acid,  however.  CnBO,,6UjO
only  parte  with  8H^,  and  if  CuSO,,aU,..0  be  placed  over  water  it  again  (arms
Cu804,EH,0,  and  ao  on.

■I  !'■•  Commercial  blue lilriol  geuerallycontwusterroosBulpbiite.  Die  aalt  is  purified
by  converting  the  terrtma  talt  into  a  lerric  sUt  by  heating  the  solotion  with  chlorine  or
nitric  acid.  The  solatiou  u  Uiau  evaporated  to  diTnesa,  and  (he  DOchaaged  cupric  sul-
phate eitracted  Irom  the  residoe,  which  will  contain  tha  larger  portion  ol  the  ferric
nxide,  The  remainder  will  be  nepaialcd  if  cupric  hydroxide  ia  added  to  the  solution  and
boiled;  the  coprip  otide,  CnO,  then  precipitalee  the  lerric  oxide,  FajOg,  jntt  as  it  is  itself
precipitated  by  «il*er  oxide.  But  the  solatiou  will  contain  a  amall  proportiou  of  a  basic
■alt  ol  copper,  and  therefnni  Hulphnric  acid  must  be  added  to  tlui  filtered  solution,  and  the
■alt  allowed  to  crytlalliae,  Aciit  salts  are  not  lormed,  and  cupric  BOlphale  itself  ha*  an
acid  rsactjon  on  litmai  papor.

414  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMI5TRY

large  quantity  is  used  in  the  ^'canopiasiic  pntc^^  which  consists  in
the  deposition  of  copper  from  a  solution  of  cupric  solphate  hj  the
action  of  a  galvanic  current,  when  the  metallic  copper  is  deposited
on  the  negative  pole  and  takes  the  shape  of  the  latter.  The  de-
scription of  the  pnxTesses  of  galvanoplastic  art  introduced  bj  Jacohi
in  St.  Petersburg  forms  a  part  of  applied  physics,  and  will  not  be
touched  on  here,  and  we  will  only  mention  that,  although  first  intro-
duced for  small  articles,  it  is  now  used  for  such  articles  as  type  moulds
(cliches),  for  maps,  prints,  <^c.,  and  also  for  large  statues,  and  for  the
deposition  of  iron,  zinc,  nickel,  gold,  silver,  &c,  on  other  metals  and
materials.  The  beginning  of  the  application  of  the  galvanic  current  to
the  practical  extraction  of  metals  from  solutions  has  also  been  estab-
lished, especially  since  the  dynamo- electric  machines  of  Gramme,
Siemens,  and  others  have  rendered  it  possible  to  cheaply  conrert  the
mechanical  motion  of  the  steam  engine  into  an  electric  current.  It  is
to  be  expected  that  the  application  of  the  electric  current,  which  has
long  since  given  such  important  results  in  chemistry,  will,  in  the  near
future,  play  an  important  part  in  technical  processes,  the  example  being
shown  by  electric  lighting.

The  alloys  of  cojyper  with  certain  metals,  and  especially  with  zinc
and  tin,  are  easily  formed  by  directly  melting  the  metals  together.
They  are  easily  cast  into  moulds,  forged,  and  worked  like  copper,
whilst  they  are  much  more  durable  in  the  air,  and  are  therefore  fre-
queutly  used  in  the  arts.  Even  the  ancients  used  exclusively  alloys
of  copper,  and  not  pure  copper,  but  its  alloys  with  tin  or  different
kinds  of  bronze  (Chapter  XVIII.,  Note  35).  The  alloys  of  copper  with
zinc  an;  called  brass  or  *  yellow  metal.*  Brass  contains  about  32  p.c.  of
zinc  ;  generally,  however,  it  does  not  contain  more  than  65  p.c.  of
copper.  The  remainder  is  composed  of  lead  and  tin,  which  usually
occur,  although  in  small  quantities,  in  brass.  Yellow  metal  contains
about  40  p.c.  of  zinc.'"^ The  addition  of  zinc  to  copper  changes  the

•-  Amonj^  i\\v  alloys  <»f  copptjr  rest»iii})liiig  brass,  <irlfa  furfal,  invented  by  A.  Dick
(Loiuloii)  is  larjj<*ly  iiHeul  (since  1883).  It  contains  55  p.c.  Cu,  and  41  p.c.  Zjfi,  the
remaining;  4  [).c.  boinj;  composed  of  iron  (as  much  as  Sh  p.c,  which  is  first  alloyed  with
ziiK'),  or  of  i'ohalt,  and  manj^anosc,  and  certain  other  metals.  The  sp.  gr.  of  delta  metal
is  8-4.  It  melts  at  i»50^,  and  then  becomes  so  fluid  that  it  fills  up  all  the  CAvitie^  in  a
mould  and  forms  excellent  castings.  It  has  a  t*»nsile  strength  of  70  kilos  per  aq.  mm.
(^\m  nu'tal  about  '20,  ])hosphor  bronze  al>out  80).  It  is  very  soft,  especially  when  heated
to  000'  ,  but  after  forjjing  and  rolling  it  becomes  very  hard;  it  is  more  difficultly  acted
u[>ou  by  air  and  water  than  other  kinds  of  brass,  and  preserves  its  golden  yellow  coloar
for  any  length  of  time,  esj)ecially  if  well  jwlished.  It  is  used  for  making  bearinga,  scrvw
IirojM'lh'rs,  valves,  and  numy  other  articles.  In  general  the  alloys  of  Cu  and  Zn  con-
taining about  ^  ]).c.  by  weight  of  cop|>er  were  for  a  long  time  almost  exclusiveK-  made  in
Sweden  and  Kngland  (Bristol,  Birmingham).  These  alloys  for  the  most  port  are  cheaper,
hardrr,  an<l  more  fusible  than  copjH'r  alone,  and  form  good  castings. The  alloys  con-

OnpPBB. SILVER, AND OOLD  416

colour  of  the  latter  to  a  considerable  degree  ;  witli  a  certain  aninunt  of
Mtic  the  colour  of  the  copper  Iwcomes  yellow,  and  with  a  still  larger
proportion  of  zinc  an  alloy  is  fonned  which  has  a  greenish  tint.  In  those
alloys  of  zinc  and  copper  which  contain  a  Ini^er  amount  of  zinc  than
of  copper,  the  yellow  colour  disappears  and  is  replaceil  by  a  greyish
colour.  But  when  the  amount  of  zint-  is  diminished  tJi  about  20  p.c,
(he  alloy  is  red  and  bard,  and  is  calletl  'tfinihac,'  A  contraction  tahen
plat-e  in  alloying  copper  with  ?inc,  so  that  the  volume  of  the  alloy  is
less  than  that  of  either  metal  individually.  The  zinc  volatilises  on
prolonged  heatini^  at  a  high  temperature  and  the  excess  of  metallic
copper  remains  behind.  When  heated  in  the  air,  the  ^inc  oxidises
before  the  copper,  so  that  all  the  zinc  alloyed  with  copper  may  be
removed  from  the  copper  by  this  nie&ns.  An  important  propei-ty  cif
brass  oontaining  about  'iO  p.c.  of  7.inc  is  that  it  is  soft  and  malleable  in
the  cold,  but  becomes  somewhat  brittle  when  heated.  We  may  also
mention  that  ordinary  copper  coins  contain,  in  order  to  render  them
hard,  tin,  zinc,  and  iron  (Cu  ^  95  p.c.)  ;  that  it  is  now  customary  to  add
a  small  amount  of  phosphorus  to  copper  and  bronze,  for  the  same  pur-
pose ;  and  also  that  cupper  is  added  to  silver  and  gold  in  coining,  itc.
to  render  it  hard  ;  moreover,  in  Germany,  Switzerland,  anil  Belgium,
and  other  countries,  a  silver-white  alloy  (melchior,  German  silver,  it.),
for  base  coinage  and  other  purposes,  is  prepared  from  bra^  and  nickel
(from  10  to  20  p.c.  of  nickel  ;  20  to  50  p.c.  zinc  :  50  to  70  p.c.  copper),
or  directly  from  copper  and  nickel,  or,  more  rarely,  from  an  alloy  con-
taining silver,  nickel,  and  copper."  *■''

Copper,  in  its  cuprous  compounds,  is  so  analogous  to  eilv':r,  that

liunin^  in-txi  p.c.  Cn  cryatiUlife  in  cahea  it  bIowIj  cooled  IBi  alio  giret  iri^KMii).  By
wuihinK  the  mrfue  ol  hnwa  with  dilute  Kolphiiric  ftciil,  Kn  ib  rrmoted  uid  thu  article
■cquim  the  eolonr  of  copper.  The  Maya  »pprniu>binK  Zn.L'aj  ia  their  oompoHitinn
cihibil  tbe  gmMrat  nmijttaiuia  (luder  other  eijUKl  tondttiona ;  of  puritjr,  (otginft,  rolling,
&&)  The  additioB  of  8  p.c.  Al,  or  B  p.c  Rn,  {mproret  the  ijiulitjr  of  hraiu.  Beapevting
slaminiDm  bmnw  lee  Chajiter  XTII.  p.  B8.

"<"•  BiJl  (alu  Kunenah]'),  leas,  by  inTtntieitling  the  (ftectriuil  condnctmly  of  the
idloys  of  anUmony  uid  copper  <rilh  lead,  caine  In  thu  t'onrloeion  thnt  only  two  definite
componiidB  of  ulttiitoBy  and  copper  f  tint,  whiUl  lh«  olheritlloya  ura  either  liloye  of  these
tfto  together  or  with  anlimoiiy  or  «itb  copper.  Tbeae  coinpouiida  iire  CUjSb  uid
Ca,8b — one  mireapondB  with  the  nuiiiDuni,  und  the  other  with  the  luininiiuii,  eluctrical
fsiiatuiee.  In  geDenl,  the  reaiatimce  oftered  to  ui  electrical  cnrrenl  fonnt  one  of  the
■nethoda  by  which  the  compoajlion  of  defiaito  ulloya  (lot  exiuniile,  Pb^Zn))  ia  often
ealabliiihad,  whilst  the  eleetromotive  force  of  ntloya  aSorda  (Laurie,  18S8)  •  Btilt  mora
•ccnrate  method — tor  inaUnce,  aerenO  deGnile  compounds  were  diacorecsd  by  this
method  unong  the  alloyo  of  copper  with  lino  uid  tin ;  but  we  will  not  eater  into  any
detuU  of  Ihia  subjeot,  becaaae  we  sToid  all  rHfereneca  to  olectricity,  ulthon^  the  reader  '
i<i  recommended  to  make  himsell  acqnainted  wilh  (his  branch  of  acieuce,  which  has  many
points  in  common  with  ehemiatrj.  The  itody  of  alloya  regarded  an  solid  solutions  ihould,
in  my  opinion,  throw  much  light  upon  the  qaestioii  of  lolutiona,  which  ia  atill  obacuia
in  man;  aipecla  and  in  raany  branches  of  chemiatry.

J

He

PH1NCIPLE8  OP  CHBMISTBy

were  there  no  cu]>ric  compounds,  or  if  silver  guve  stable  trompouDds'
of  the  higher  oxide,  AgU,  tlie  resemblauce  would  be  as  close  as
between  chlorine  am!  bromine  or  dnc  and  cadmium  ;  but  silver
compounds  corresponding  to  AgO  are  quite  uiiknowTi.  Although
silver  peroxide — whicli  was  regai'ded  as  AgO,  but  which  BertJinlot
(1880)  recognised  as  the  seequioxide  Ag^Oj — ia  known,  still  it  doe*
not  form  any  true  salts,  and  consequently  cannot  be  placed  alone
witlk  cupric  oxide.  In  distinction  to  copper,  silver  as  a  mntal  do«t
not  oxidise  under  the  influence  of  heat  ;  and  its  oxides,  Ag^O  and
Agattj,  enaily  lose  oxygen  (see  N'ote  8  tri).  Silver  does  twt  oxiiiiM  in
air  at  the  ordinary  pressure,  and  is  therefore  classed  among  the
i  a  white  colour,  which  is  much  pgreri
metal,  especially  when  the  metal  is  chenii-
-  is  always  used  alloyed,  because  chemt-
r  is  so  soft  that  it  wears  exceedingly  easily,  whilst  wlien
t  of  copper,  it  becomes  very  hard,  without

so-called  noble  inela/s. It ha
than  that  of  any  other  known
cally  pure. In  the  arts  silvt
cully -pure  silvt
fused  with  a  s
losing  its  colour.

'^  There  are  uot  muij  solt  metoU ;  le:
vliat  4ofC,  and  potasAmni  mid  Bodium  v
are  unnoronB  &iid  hiud,  iLud  niAuy  aChc^i

copper
t. Tbe

BtalB  I

Bnt t

lie very

blighl s>^tG<:

un™  i.r

he  priu:

fill  apphcition

which  i

hanl  a

the  ordinary

•tMUO".

Ah  the  value  ol  Hilver

lifjwuds  exelusively  on

of  teUiog  tbe

imiiuri

0.^  idlayed  wi

ca.loimiry  in  m

ost  orout

lenWm

rkwiartideir

if  the  alkkline  e
is  are  even  brittle,  eapecuCj bionuth
ince  which  them propcKies faare
BB  of  snbBtances  (ailhoogh,  hovera.  i(
IB  of  metaltl  Ib  seen  from  the  eumjd*
tempemlore,  soft  nt  100',  oaA brittle

itn  purity,  uid  a.*  thetv  ia  uo  po««biltl*
Ji  it  from  itB  Hit«nial  uppeukuiw,  it  »

IE  nnihy  of  tlie  silrar. In  Ftmk*  iIib

Maay  of  niWer  •howu  the  amount  of  pure  silver  in  l.CMO  pacts  by  wBi){ht ;  ui  Busaia  ths
unauDt  of  pnre  ailver  in  SS  parts-lhat  is,  the  aasay  Khows  the  nninbsr  ol  ■olotoifa
(i'as  gr«m»)  of  pore  ailver  in  one  pound  (110  gnuna)  of  alloyed  silver. Rnuiiui  ■th'cc  u
gouerally  a*  hhshj— that  U,  contains  81 parts  by  weight  of  pnro  Bilver  sad  la  ptufo  el j
copper  and  other  metjda. French  money  oontAina  90  ji-u.  (in  the  Rawtiui  aystMn  ttiii
will  bo  8a(  asuy)  by  weight  of  silver  [Eughsb  uDin>  and  jewolleiy  conUiu  ua-S  p*. <d j
aUvetj  ;  the  KUver  ronblr  is  of  BBi  asBsy— that  in,  it  conloina  SS'8  p.c.  of  6ilTer~»nd  tb J
gmaUer  RuHaiao  ailver  coinage  is  of  IS  Msivy,  and  therefore  contains  60  p.c.  of  ailwB.  I
Bilrer  ornameiits  imd  articles  are  usually  made  in Busaia  of  t»  aiid  Tfl  ■««» As  J
the  alloys  of  ailver  and  cupper,  e-pecially  after  being  hulijeoted  to  the  aclii.o  o(  ^-bi.  an  I
not  Mt  white  as  pure  sUvpt,  they  EeneraUj  undergo  a  proocM  known  as  '  bUtKOung  ■  |«  I

COPPEB, SILVER. AND  GOtD

a  native  state  and  in  certain  com-
!  o£  rather  rare  occurrence. A  far

Silver  occurs  in  imlui-e,  both  i:
pouiuU. Native  silver,  however,  :

'  pickling 'I  kfter  being  varked  up.  This  conBiiita  in  remavinK  tbe  copper  bom  tlieaarfaci'
o[  the  lUticle  by  sabjecting  it  to  >  d&rlc-red  he^I  and  then  Immening  it  in  dilute  acid.
During  llie  ciil«D&tioii  the  copper  on  the  nurface  in  oiidiied,  vhilut  the  Kilter  remains
nnchiuiged ;  the  dilute  lUiid  then  dinMilres  tivr  cnpper  oiidea  formed,  luid  pure  tilvei  is
tell  on  the  suifaoe.  The  •nrfaca  ia  dull  aiter  thit  treAtmenl,  owiDg  to  the  removal  of  *
portion  ot  the  metal  by  the  acid.  Atter  being  palinheii  the  article  acquires  the  desired
luatro  unit  colour,  so  ai  to  be  IndiBtinguiulisble  from  a  pure  silver  object.  In  order  to
tSHt  a  Hilver  article,  a  portiou  of  its  maro  mnst  be  taken,  not  from  the  surface,  but  to  a
certain  depth.  The  methoda  of  Moa;  used  in  pr»cUi»  are  very  varied.  The  commoneiil
uid  moat  often  uaed  In  that  known  aa  captlintion.  It  it  baaed  on  the  diSerence  in  the
oiidiaabilit;  ot  copper,  lead,  and  silver. The  cupel  ia  a  poroas  cup  with  thick  aide*,

miule  bf  compreiwiiig  bone  axh.  The  porono  miua  <it  bone  uh  abaorbs  the  luaed  oxides,
eBpecially  the  lead  oxide,  which  ia  eaiiily  fnaible,  but  it  does  not  absorb  the  unoiidised
metal.  The  latter  collects  into  a  globule  under  the  action  of  a  strong  heat  in  the  cupel,
and  on  cooling  solidifies  into  a  butt«n.  which  may  then  be  weighed.  Several  cupels  are
placed  in  a  laoffle.  A  muffle  ia  a  Mmi-Of lindrical  elajr  veesel.  ahowu  in  the  aceompatiTing
drawing.  The  sides  o(  the  muffle  are  pierced  with  several  oriBces,  which  allow  the  aeceis
of  air  into  it.  The  mnffle  is  placed  in  a  fnniace,  irhere  it  is  strongly  healed.  Under  the
action  of  the  air  entering  the  mnffle  the  copper  ot  the  silver  alloy  ia  oxidised,  but  as  the
oiide  ol  copper  is  intaaihla,  or.  more  itrictly  speakiog,  dilAcoltly  funble,  a  certain  qiiui-
Uty  ol  lead  ia  added  to  the  alloy ;  the  lead  is  also  oxidised  by  the  air  at  the  high  tem-
perature of  the  muffle,  and  given  the  very  fUfiUe  lead  oxide.  The  copper  oxide  then
fu»f.  with  the  leoil  oxide,  and  ia  absorbed  by  the  enpel,  whilst  the  silver  remains  at  a
VOL,  II.  "  tl.

418  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

greater  quantity  of  silver  occurs  in  combination  with  sulphur,  t
especially  in  the  form  of  sifver  sulphide,  Ag^S,  with  lead  sulpL
or  copper  sulphide,  or  the  ores  of  various  other  metals.  The  lar^
amount  of  silver  is  extracted  from  the  lead  in  which  it  occurs.  If  1
lead  be  calcined  in  the  presence  of  air,  it  oxidises,  and  the  result
lead  oxide,  PbO  (*  litharge'  or  *  silbergliitte,'  as  it  is  called),  melts  i;
a  mobile  licjuid,  which  is  easily  removed.  The  silver  remains  in
unoxidised  metallic  state.  ^^ This  process  is  called  cupefkuion,

l>ri^']it  wliit<»  globule.  If  the  weiglit  of  the  alloy  ttiken  and  of  the  silver  left  on  the  ci
hv  detcnniiitid,  it  is  possible  to  CAlculate  the  composition  of  the  alloy.  Thustlie  entat
of  eupellation  consists  in  the  separation  of  the  oxidisable  metals  from  Hilver,  wliich  c
not  oxidise  under  the  action  of  heat.  A  more  accurate  method,  based  on  the  precipita
of  silver  from  its  solutions  in  the  form  of  silver  chloride,  is  described  in  detail  in  -wc
on  analvtical  chemistry.

"  In  America,  whence  the  largest  amount  of  silver  is  now  obtained,  ore«  are  wor
containing  not  more  than  ^  p.c.  of  silver,  whilst  at  i  p.c.  its  extraction  is  very  profita
Moreover,  the  extraction  of  silver  from  ores  containing  not  more  than  O'Ol  p.c.  i)f
metal  is  sometimes  profitable.  The  majority  of  the  lead  smelted  from  galena  conti
silver,  which  is  extracted  from  it.  Thus  near  Arras,  in  France,  an  ore  {a  wot
which  contains  about  05  parts  of  lead  and  0'08H  part  of  silver  in  100  partt»  of  ore,  w)
corresponds  with  130  parts  of  silver  in  100,000  parts  of  lead.  At  Freiberg,  in  Saxony,
ore  used  (enriched  by  meclianical  dressing)  containB  al>out  0*9  of  silver,  100  of  lead,
2  of  copper  in  10,000  parts.  In  every  case  the  lead  is  first  extracted  in  the  man
descril>ed  in  Chapter  XVIII.,  and  this  lead  will  contain  all  the  silver.  Not  nufrequei
other  ores  of  silvt^r  are  mixed  with  lead  ores,  in  order  to  obtain  an  argentiferouA  leai
the  product.  The  extraction  of  small  qutmtities  of  silver  from  lead  is  facilitated  by
fact  (Pattinson's  process)  that  molten  airgentiferous  leatl  in  cooling  first  depo
crystals  of  pure  lead,  which  fall  to  the  iMjttom  of  the  cooling  vessel,  whilst  the  pro]
ilou  of  silviT  in  the  unsoliditied  mass  increases  owing  to  the  removal  of  the  crys
of  lead.  The  lead  ih  enriched  in  thi^  manner  until  it  contains  ^,\-,  part  of  silver.  ;
is  tluMi  subjected  to  cuptdltition  on  a  larger  scale.  According  to  Park's  process,  ziin
added  to  the  molten  argenlifrrous  lead,  ami  the  alloy  of  l*b  and  Zn,  which  first  rte]>ir<
out  on  ciKiling.  is  collected.  This  alloy  is  found  to  contain  all  the  silver  previoii.-ly  c
tained  in  the  lead.  The  addition  of  0'5  p.c.  of  aluminium  to  the  zinc  (R«>8sler  and  Edelni
facilitates  the  extraction  of  the  Ag  from  the  resultant  alloy  besides  preventing  oxi
lion;  for,  after  re-melting,  nearly  all  the  lead  easily  runs  off  (remains  fluid  I,  i
l«'aves  an  alloy  eontaining  about  JJO  p.c.  Ag  an<l  alxuit  70  p.c.  Zn.  This  alloy  may  l>e  n
a>>  an  anode  in  a  solution  of  ZnC'l^,  when  the  Zn  is  deiM.>sited  on  the  cathode,  leaving
silver  with  a  small  amount  of  I'b,  iVrc.  behind.  Tin?  silver  can  be  easily  obtained  pure
treating  it  with  dihite  acids  and  tuiwiling.

The  ores  of  r^ilver  which  contain  a  larger  aniount  of  it  are:  silver  glance,  A jj.^S  t
gr.  7'.i)  ;  argentiferous-coi»per  glance,  CuAgS  ;  horn  siher  or  chloride  of  silver,  Ag<
argentiferous  grey  copper  ore',  polybasite,  M.KS..  (where  M  Ag,  Cu,  and  R-Sb,  J
aind  arga'utiferous  g<ild.  'I'he  latter  i>  the  u>ual  form  in  which  gold  is  found  in  allu^
<Ie[)Osits  and  iu'es.  The  crystals  of  gold  from  the  l>erez<ilTsky  mines  in  the  Urals  eoiit
IM)  to  U5  of  gold  and  T)  to  l»  i»f  siher,  and  the  Altai  g«>l<l  <-ontains  r»U  to  i\o  of  gtd«i  and  iU]
:{'H  of  silver.  The  projM.ati*)!!  (»f  silver  in  native  gt)ld  varies  between  these  limits  in  otl
Inealities.  Silver  ores,  which  generally  occur  in  veins,  usii.iliy  contain  native  siher  a
\ariou-.  sulphur  comiMmnds.  The  most  famous  mines  in  Ku rope  are  in  Saxony  iKr
InTgi,  which  has  a  yearly  outi)Ut  of  ais  nmch  as  'J(»  tons  oi  silver,  Hungary,  and  Bolien
(41  tons).  In  Ihissia.  silver  is  extracted  in  tin;  Altai  and  at  Nerchinsk  (17  tons).  T
richest  hiivir  mines  known  are  in  America.  esiM-ciaily  in  Clidi  (as  nmch  aH  70  t<n\
Mexico  (200  ton-*),  and  more  jjailicularly  in  the  Western  States  of  North  America. T

rOPPEH, SILVEB, ASD  GOIJ)  419

Coinmercial  silver  generally  contains  copper,  and,  more  mrely,  other
tnetallic  impuritiea  also.  Cheaiically  piitv  tilver  is  obtained  either  by
cnpelUtion  of  by  subjecting  ordinary  silver  to  the  following  irentnient.
The  silver  in  first  dissolved  in  nitric  acid,  which  converts  it  and  the
copper  into  nitrates,  Cu(N'03)2  and  AgNO;,  ;  hydrochloric  acid  is  then
added  to  the  resultiLDt  solution  (green,  owing  to  the  presence  of  the
cupriu  suit),  which  is  considerably  dituteii  with  water  in  order  to  retaiii
the  leail  chloride  in  solution  if  the  silver  contained  lead.  The  copper
and  many  other  metals  remain  in  solution,  whilst  the  silver  is  prei'ipi-
tiited  as  silver  chloride.  The  precipitate  is  allowed  to  settle,  and  the
liijuid  is  decanted  off;  the  precipitate  is  then  wBahed  and  fused  with
sodium  carlionute.  A  double  decomposition  then  tnkes  place,  sodium
chloride  and  silver  carbiinAt«  l^eing  formed  ;  but  the  latter  decomposes
into  metallic  silier,  because  the  silver  oxide  is  decomposed  by  heat  :
AgjCOj  =s  Agj  +  O  +  COj.  The  silver  chloride  may  also  be  mixed
with  metallic  zinc,  sulphuric  acid,  and  water,  and  left  for  some  time,
when  the  zinc  removes  the  chlorine  frtim  the  silver  chloride  and  pre-
cipitates the  silver  as  a  powder.  This  finely-divided  silver  is  called
'  molecular  silver.' '™

cithiiBBB  of  tliew  miiiaR  niity  be  iodgwl  (ram  IhH  tnrt  Ihiit  one  mine  in  the  Stale  tit
Nevadu  ICamitlouk,  near  Wuhoe  nod  the  uities  ol  QulJ  Uill  ud  Virginlu),  which  w*h  Ah-
coiured  in  ISaB,  gkfe  its  ontpnl  of  100  Iodb  in  laW.  In  pliuw  of  oupetlation,  chlori-
itaCioD  m«]'  idait  be  employed  (or  extncting  Bilver  tnim  its  ores.  The  method  of
ohlorinktion  coDsiBls  in  converting  Uie  niter  in  an  ore  into  silver  chloride.  This  ii
either  done  bf  »  wet  or  b;  a  Atj  method,  toiutitif[  tlw  ore  wilb  NuCl.  When  the  Bilvet
chloride  is  formed,  the  eitckctioo  ol  the  luetnl  is  aisu  done  bj  two  melhoda.  The  first
coniuata  in  the  oilver  chloride  being  reduvud  Co  metiJ  bjr  mewiB  nf  iron  in  rotating
barrela,  with  the  unbiiequent  addition  ol  nifrcury  nliieh  diHaolves  the  silver,  bat
does  not  act  on  the  other  metals.  The  inetonry  holding  Ibe  aiiver  iu  aoldlion  iadiiitiUed,
when  the  silver  remaina  behind.  This  luelliad  is  citlled  ariialgamatian.  The  other
method  is  lesa  frequently  aned,  and  amsifllH  in  diasnlving  the  silver  chloride  in  lodiuni
chloride  or  in  Bodiiun  thiosnlphuCe.  Mid  Uieu  itPGcifiitating  the  silver  fnim  the  aolntion.
The  umalerunation  in  tbeti  carried  on  in  rotating  liarreia  containing  the  roaat«d  ore  miied
ivith  water,  inin,  and  mercniy.  The  iron  redoLtiB  the  silver  chloride  by  taking  up  the
chlorine  [rom  it.  The  techniunl  deUiU  of  tbeae  processes  are  described  in  works  on
metallorgy.  The  eitraction  of  AgCl  by  the  wet  method  is  carried  on  (Patera's  prouessl
by  means  of  a  solalion  ol  hyporalphite  ol  sodium  which  diisolves  AgCl  Itre  Note  38),  or
by  lixiviating  with  a  3  p.c  nolutioo  of  a  double  hyposulphite  of  Na  and  Cn  (obtained  by
adding  CuSO,  Ia  Xa,S^,).  The  reanltsnt  tolntion  of  AgCl  is  first  treated  with  soda
to  precipiUte  PbCOj,  and  then  with  No^S,  which  pr»'ipitates  the  Ag  and  An.  The
process  nhould  be  carried  on  rapidly  to  prevent  the  prtcipi latino  of  Cu.,S  from  the  solu-
tion of  CuSO,  and  Na,S,0^

"  There  is  another  practical  method  which  ia  alio  sniUtble  fur  separating  the  Kllver
from  the  solntions  obtained  in  photograpby,  and  conaiats  in  precipitating  the  silvnr  by
oialio  add.  In  this  case  the  amoont  of  aiiver  in  the  solution  mnet  be  known,  and  lU
groniB  of  oxalic  acid  dissolved  in  400  grams  of  w^ter  must  be  added  fur  every  fiO  grains
of  silver  in  aolntion  in  a  litre  of  water.  A  precipitate  ol  silver  oiolate,  Ag,C,0,,  is  then
obtained,  which  ia  insolnble  in  water  bnt  soluble  in  acids.  Hence,  if  the  ll[|uid  contain
any  free  acid  it  must  be  previously  freed  from  It  by  the  addition  of  Aodinm  carbonate.

420  rRlXCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Chemically-pure  silver  has  an  exceeding  pure  ivhite  colour,
specitic  gravity  of  lO'O.  Solid  silver  is  lighter  than  the  molten  :
and  therefore  a  piece  of  silver  floats  on  the  latter:  The  f
point  of  silver  is  al)out  950''  C,  and  at  the  high  tem]>erature  ati
by  the  combustion  of  detonating  gas  it  volatilises.***  By  emp
silver  reduced  from  silvtT  chloride  by  milk  sugar  and  caustic  p
and  distilling  it,  Stas  obtained  silver  purer  than  that  obtained  I
other  means  ;  in  fact,  this  w«is  perfectly  pure  silver.  The  vap
silver  has  ii  very  l>eautifu]  green  colour,  which  is  seen  when  a
wire  is  i)laced  in  an  oxyhydrogen  flame. ^^

It  has  long  ])een  known  (Wohler)  that  when  nitrate  of
AgN<  )3,  reacts  as  an  oxidising  agent  upon  citrates  and  tartrates
able  und<»r  certain  conditions  to  give  either  a  salt  of  suboxide  of
(see  Note  19)  or  a  red  soluticm,  or  to  give  a  precipitate  of  m
silver  reduce<l  at  the  expense  of  the  organic  substances.  In  1889
Lea,  in  his  researclies  on  tins  class  of  reactions,  showed  that  j

Tho  r»*suUiint  prt'i-ipitato  rif  silvor  oxtiluto  is  driod,  mixed  with  an  equal  weif^hl
HiNlitiMi  riirlionatt',  and  tlirown  into  u  ^rently-heuted  cmcible.  The  »(fparatior
Kil\i.-r tlwn lu-ocerdh  witlioiit  an  explosion,  whilst  the  silver  oxalate if lieate

dcc'oni[i«)srs  with  «'X]»losioii.

Ac( Didiiij;  to  StaH,  the  ht'st  method  for  ol>taiuing  nilver  from  its  BolatioiiH  i»
n'diK'tion  <>f  Kihi>r  chloridi'  dissolved  in  annnouiti  hymeuuH  of  an animoniaciil  koI
cuproiw  tliio^iilpliatr  ;  tlir  silver  i-*  then  precipitated  in  a  crystalline  form.  A  soi
annuouiuni  ^n][>1iit«;  may  hr  used  in><tead  of  the  cujirouH  Rait.

'' Silver  is  \fi  y  malh-ahit*  and  dnctile;  it  may  he  ben  ton  into  leaves  0-«)0*2
thi  •kiM'^-'. SiJM'r  win*  may  h«»  madi*  so  fine  that  I  ^ram  is  drawn  into  u  wire
nutr-'- I'-ii^r. In  tlii->  ri-jM-et >ilvrr  i^ -econd  only  to  j,'old. A  wire  of  *2  mm.  il
hr«'ii]v-  ur.di-r  ;i  -tr.iin  of  'JO  kilMirram-.

1*  li:  nitltiii;,'.  -ilM-r  uh-orh^  a  <iin-^iderahl»' anumnt  of  oxyjjen,  whieli  is  iliHtMi);
siili.lit\  i!:l'.  Oih-  \i«lnini'  nf  m«ilti'n  silver  ali»«<>rhs  as  nuieh  as  22  vohmii's  of  ttxv"
-till. l!t\  .iiL,  flu  'ih'-r  form- ravitii'>'  liki*  tin*  rraters  of  a  vidcano,  and  throw>«  of
o>viii'_'  t«'  tin-  ♦•M'lutiM'i  iif  till'  >ra^ ;  nil  tln'-i'  ]ilii>nomi>na  r«*eall  a  videano  on  a  rn
s<mI»  il>umn->i.  SihiT  uhirh  cnntains  a  small  cpiantity  of  copi»er  •»r  gold,  iVr.  d
sli'iw  tlii^"  [irojMTty  of  di-^-nl\  jn^  oxy^ni.

rill-  .ilisoiplJD'i  (if  <ixy/<Mi  hy  uiidtrn  sihrr  !«»,  however,  an  oxidation,  Imt  it  i
saiiif  tinii'  a  pln'iiomcnon  «if  -olntion.  Om*  inhir  eentiraetre  of  mrdtr'n  si]
di--i'l\i'  twf'iity  t\\i»  cnhir  i<ntim«'tr«'s  <if  oxyj^en.  which,  even  at  0-,  onlj-  wvW
;:i;iiii.  wliiUt  1  I  iihii-  (M-ntinu-tri"  ol  silver  weij^h>  at  h-ast  lU  ^^rams,  anil  ihoref*
impi>--ilil<'  t«>  •'Up|M»«M'  tli;it  the  ali^nrption  of  tin*  oxy;ren  is  attended  by  t]u»  fr>rm
an\  oitiniti-  i-DiiiiuMnid  irirli  in  i>xy«;eij»  of  sIImm'  and  oxy«;en  (alM»ut  45  atoms  of  '
1  Ml  ii\\;/in)  in  any  otlirr  hnl  a  di-.«<«Miat«'(l  fi)rm,  an<l  thi*.  is  the  stato  in  whi
»-taiMi-  in  -nliition  nni-t  !•«■  >«';;.«rd«d  i('hapt«>r  I.)

1.1 <  li:it«lii'r  -lu<Wfd thai  jit  ^J'H) and !."»  atmnsphen-s  pri*s8nr»«  silviT ub;
mm  11 ■<x\;jfn that it niny In- n';;;irdi'd  a>. ha\  iii;: f«>rm«-d the  eonip«>nii(l Ai;
mixtiiM-  «•!"  A;.'.^  anil  A'_';<>. M(»i«M»v<r,  ^ihi-r  oxid**,  A«;^0,  only  deconij>ns»»s  ut  :MHi
l.<\v  I'll -iin-,  \\hiUt  at jiri-^^^uri-  al»o\e  iO  atnio^plnTrs  there  is  uo  <l<*comiK>!<
;;o(i liut  only  nt KM)-'.

Si. I-  -houjMJ  thnt  ♦>ilver  is  oxidisrtl  hy  jtir  in  the  presence  of  acids.  V.  d.  I
( iitii.i  im-'l  till-,  nnd  ■-howfd  that  an  acidified  solntion  of  potassium  IH'nnanf^annte
ili-.~oiVi"-  sil\i*r  in  the  presence  of  air.

COPPER.  SILVER, AND  GOLD

gilvr  is  here  furtoetJ,  whioU  he  called  aJiotropic  silver.  It  may  be
obtained  by  uking  200  c.c.  of  a  10  per  cent,  solntion  of  AgNOj  and
quickly  adding  a  mlstare  (neutralised  with  NaHO)  of  200  c.a.  of  a
80  per  cent,  solution  of  FeS(J,  and  200  c.c.  of  »  40  por  cent,  solution
of  Bodium  citrate.  A  lilac  precipitate  is  obtained,  which  is  collected
on  a  filter  (the  precipitate  becomes  blue)  and  washed  with  a.  solution  itf
NH  iNOj.  It  then  becomes  soluble  in  pure  water,  forming  a  red
perfectly  transparent  solution  from  which  the  diEsotved  silver  is  preci-
pitated ou  the  addition  of  many  soluble  foreign  boilies.  Some  of  the
latter — for  instance,  NH^NOj,  alkaline;  sulphates,  nitrates,  and  citrates
—give  a  precipitate  which  i-edissolves  in  pure  wnter,  whilst  others — for
instance,  MgSO,,  FeSO,,  KjCr,Oj,  AgNOj,Ba(NOa).jand  many  others-
convert  the  precipitated  silver  into  a  new  variety,  which,  although  no
longer  soluble  in  water,  regains  its  solubility  in  a  solotion  of  borax
and  is  soluble  in  ammonia.  Both  the  soluble  and  insoluble  silver  are
rapidly  converted  into  the  ordinary  grey -metallic  variety  by  sulphuric
acid,  although  nothing  is  given  off  in  the  i-eactioa ;  the  same  change
takes  place  on  ignition,  but  in  this  case  CO,  is  disengaged  ;  the  latter
is  formed  from  the  organic  sabstances  which  remain  (to  the  amount  of
.1  per  cent.)  in  the  modified  silver  (they  are  not  removed  by  soaking  in
alcohol  or  water).  If  the  precipitated  silver  be  slightly  washed  and
laid  in  a  smooth  thiu  layer  on  paper  or  glass,  it  is  seen  that  the  suluble
variety  is  red  when  moist  and  a  fine  blue  colour  when  dry,  whilst  the  in-
soluble variety  has  a  blue  rcQex.  Besides  these,  under  special  conditions '"

19  When  aolotuiiiB  ot  AgNOj,  FeBO,.  sHiliou.  liWftte,  *nd  NaUO  tie  mued  together
ill  Uie  nuiuiEr  described  ■buve,  they  llicow  dovni  a.  preiupilnW  ot  n  bemitifnl  lilac
colour;  when  tnuiaferred  to  ■  filter  |»per  the  [ipicipitate  soud  cliiui);ee  colour,  unil
bvcuines  ditrk  blue.  To  obtua  the  HabBtauoe  as  pure  an  ponKible  it  >»  wubed  with  a
G-IU  f.c.  BolnliuD  of  unnumiuin  aitnbe;  Che  liajnid  in  deuuitei],  and  ISU  c.c.  of  vater
pauTDil  over  the  iiiecipitate.  It  then  disKilve*  entirely  in  the  water.  A  amoJl  quaiitity  of
»  uturBtal  KolntiaD  o(  unmoninm  nitnte  ii  wtded  to  the  aolution,  nod  the  ailver
ID  Kilatioo  asain  sepuates  out  lu  n  pneipitate.  These  alteriute  snlationi  and
precJpitaliou«  are  rejieated  wven  or  eight  timeii,  after  which  the  precifutatc  in  trana-
(erred  to  a  filter  and  washed  with  tS  p.c.  oloohal  until  tlie  filtrate  KiveH  no  reaidae  on
evaporation.  An  analysia  of  tim  Kubatancu  bo  obtained  tihow«d  that  it  oontauied  from
OTla  p.0.  to  UT'Sl  IM!.  uf  luntallie  Bilver.  It  remnined  to  dlscorei  what  the  reiaaiaing
■J-3  p-e.  were  oompoHHl  ot.  Ajm  thoy  merely  impurities,  or  is  the  sabatance  tome  com-
poond  nl  lilveir  witb  oxygen  or  hydrogen,  or  doe*  it  contain  citric  acid  in  combination
whicli  might  Mraiuit  for  its  aolubility  7  The  Grst  soppooitiun  is  Ht  aaide  by  the  (act
that  nn  puea  are  diaengoged  by  the  precipitate  of  lilveiieilheT  Under  the  action  of  gaaea
or  when  Iieated.  The  tacoud  aappoeitiou  in  rIidwd  to  he  impoaaible  by  the  tact  that
there  ia  no  deOnile  relation  between  the  >ilvei  laud  citric  acid.  A  delcrminalion  of  (he
■unDOut  of  silver  in  lolntion  abowcd  that  tile  amoutil  u(  dlric  acid  varivH  greatly  for  one
and  the  aauus  amount  ot  ailver.  and  there  ia  im  oimpte  niia  between  Lhem.  Among
other  method*  ol  prapaiing  uiluble  ailiet  giTen  hy  Carey  Lea,  »e  niuy  mention  the
method  publiBbed  by  him  in  18B1.  AkNO.-,  ia  added  to  a  Milution  of  deitrine  in  caUMic
Hoda  or  potush ;  at  firit  a  preci[ntate  of  brown  oiide  iit  Mtlver  ii  tbrawn  dawn,  bat  llie

422  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTBY

a  golden  yellow  variety  maybe  obtained,  which  gives  a  brilliant  j
yellow  coating  on  glass  ;  but  it  is  easily  converted  into  the  ore
grey- metallic  state  by  friction  or  trituration.  There  is  no  doub
that  there  is  the  same  relation  between  ordinary  silver  which  ii
fectly  insoluble  in  water  and  the  varieties  of  silver  obtained  by  '
I,ea  ^^  ^^^  as  there  is  between  quartz  and  solnble  ailica  or  be

brown  colour  then  changes  into  a  leddiah  choooUte,  owing  to  the  redoctioii  of  tb
by  the  dextrine,  and  the  solution  tarns  a  deep  red.  A  lew  dvtqps  of  thia  aolntk
water  bright  red,  and  give  a  perfectly  transparent  liquid.  The  deztrina  eolntioa
pared  by  distiolving  40  grams  of  caustic  soda  and  the  same  amoiuit  ol  ocdinai^
dextrine  in  two  litres  of  water.  To  tliis  solution  is  gradually  added  28  gtmrnm  of  .
dissolved  in  a  small  quantity  of  water.

The  insoluble  allotropio  silver  is  obtained,  as  was  mentioned  above,  fkom  a  ■
of  silver  prepared  in  the  manner  described,  by  the  addition  of  anlphaie  of  <
iron,  barium,  magnesium,  &o.  In  one  experiment  Lea  suooeeded  in  obteini
insoluble  allotropic  Ag  in  a  crystalline  form.  The  red  solution,  dleecribed  abcm
standing  several  weeks,  deposits  crystals  spontaneously  in  the  fonn  of  ahori
needles  and  thin  prisms,  the  liquid  becoming  colourless.  This  inaolable  Tariet]
rubbed  upon  i>aper,  has  the  apjiearance  of  bright  shining  green  flakea,  which  i
light.

The  gold  variety  is  obtained  in  a  different  manner  to  the  two  other  Tanel
Kulutiun  is  prepared  containing  200  c.c.  of  a  10  p.o.  solution  of  nitrate  of  silrer, !
of  a  20  p.c.  solution  of  Rochelle  salt,  and  800  c.c.  of  water.  Just  as  in  the  pterioi
the  reaction  consisted  in  the  reduction  of  the  citrate  of  silver,  so  in  this  case  it  c
in  the  reduction  of  the  tartrate,  which  here  first  forms  a  red,  and  then  a  bladkpiei
of  allotropic  Ag,  whicli,  when  transferred  to  the  filter,  appears  of  a  beantifol
colour.  After  washing  and  drying,  this  precipitate  acquires  the  liuii«  and
l)eculiAr  tr>  polished  gold,  and  this  is  especially  remarked  where  the  precipitate
into  roil  tact  witli  glass  or  china.  An  analysis  of  the  golden  variety  gave  a  pen
composition  of  1)H'750  to  Oh-749  Ag.  Both  the  insoluble  varieties  (the  blue  an
have  a  difTfreiit  s]>ccific  ^'ravity  from  onlinar>' silver.  Whilst  that  of  faaed  silver  i
an<1  of  fniely-dividcd  silver  10'()*2.  the  specific  gravity  of  the  blue  insolnble  varietv
an<1  of  the  ^ol<l  variety  H'51.  The  gold  variety  passes  into  ordinary  Ag  with
Thi-^  transition  may  even  be  remarkvd  on  the  filter  in  those  places  which  have
tally  not  Itccu  moistened  with  water.  A  simple  shook,  and  therefore  friction
particle  uiN>n  another,  is  enough  to  convert  the  gold  variety  into  normal  whiti
Carey  Tahi  sent  s4imi)leH  of  the  gold  variety  for  a  long  distance  by  rail  packed  i
tubes,  in  v\'hi<-)i  tlte  silver  occupied  al>out  the  quarter  of  their  volume ;  in  one  tn'
he  filled  up  tln\  space  with  cotton-wool.  It  was  afterwards  found  that  the  aha
the  particles  of  Aj;  ha<l  completely  converted  it  into  onlinary  white  silver,  and  th
the  tube  containing  the  cotton-wool  had  preserved  the  golden  variety  intact.

The  soluble  variety  of  Ag  also  passes  into  the  ordinary  state  with  great  ei
heat  of  conversion  l>ein);,  as  Praiige  showe<l  in  iHiH),  about  +00  calories.

IS  Ml  The  opinion  of  the  nature  of  soluble  silver  given  below  was  first  enunci
tlu*  Journal  of  the  liuHsian  Chemical  Socittif,  Februar>"  1,  1890,  Vol.  XXH.  J<
This  view  is,  at  the  present  time,  generally  accepted,  and  this  silver  is  frequently
a»*  the  'colloid'  variety.  I  may  add  that  Carey  lica  tihserved  the  solution. of  oi
mole<-ular  siher  in  ammonia  without  the  access  of  air.

I"*  "^  It  is,  however,  noteworthy  that  ordinary*  metallic  lead  has  long  been  com
nrtluble  in  water,  that  lx)n)n  has  been  rei)eatedly  ohtaintKl  in  a  brown  solution  an
observations  upon  the  development  of  certain  bacteria  have  shown  that  the  latter
water  which  has  In^en  for  some  time  in  contact  with  metals.  This  seems  to  indio
passage  of  small  quantities  of  metals  into  water  (however,  the  formation  of  pero
hydrogen  may  be  supposed  to  have  some  influence  in  these  cases).

COPPKK,  fllLVEB.  A!n>  OOI.D  428

CuS  and  Aa,Sj  in  tlieir  ordinary  insoluble  fonns  and  in  thp  state  of
the  ciilloid  Bolution  of  their  liydroBols  (nf^/:  Chapter  I.,  Note  57,  and
Chapter  XVII.,  Note  2a  bia).  Here,  however,  an  important  step  in
iwlviinc«  has  heen  made  in  this  respect,  that  we  are  dealing  with  the
solution  of  a  simple  body,  and  moreover  of  a  metal — i.e.  of  a  particu-
larly characteristic  state  of  matter.  And  as  boron,  gold,  and  certain
other  simple  bodies  have  already  been  obtained  in  a  soluble  (collmd)
form,  and  as  nuitjemus  organic  compounds  (albuminous  substances,
gum,  cellulose,  starch,  &c.)  and  inorganic  substances  are  also  known  in
this  fiirro,  it  might  be  said  that  the  colloid  state  (of  hydrogels  and  hydro-
sols)  can  be  acquired,  if  not  by  every  substance,  at  all  events  by  sub-
stances of  most  varied  chemical  character  under  particular  conditions
of  foroiation  from  solutions.  And  this  being  the  case,  we  may  hope
that  a  further  study  of  soluble  colluid  compounds,  which  apparently
present  various  transitions  towards  emulsions,  may  throw  a  new  light
upcm  the  complex  question  of  solutions,  which  forms  one  of  the  problems
■  of  the  present  epoch  of  chemical  science.  Moreover,  we  may  remark  that
Spring  (1890)  clearly  proved  the  colloid  state  of  soluble  silver  by  means
of  dialysis  as  it  did  not  pas.s  through  the  membrane.

As  regards  the  capacity  of  silver  for  chemical  reactions,  it  is
remarkable  for  its  small  capacity  for  cumbinabion  with  oxygen  and  for
its  considerable  energy  of  combination  with  sulphur,  iodine,  and  cer-
tain kindred  non-metals.  Sih-er  dote  not  oxidiee  at  any  temperature,
and  its  oxide,  AgoO,  is  decomposed  by  heat.  It  is  also  a  very  impor-
tant fact  that  silver  is  not  oxidised  by  oxygen  cither  in  the  presence  of
alkalis,  even  at  exceedingly  high  teuperatures,  or  in  the  presence  of
acids — at  least,  of  dilute  acids — which  properties  render  it  a  very
important  metal  in  chemical  industry  for  the  fusion  of  alkalis,  aud  also
for  many  purpnses  in  everyday  life  ;  for  instance,  for  making  spoons,
salt-cellars,  Ac.  Ozone,  however,  oxidises  it.  Of  all  acids  nitric  acid
has  the  greatest  action  on  silver.  The  reaction  is  accompanied  by  the
formation  of  oxides  of  nitrogen  and  silver  nitrate,  AgNOj,  which
dissolves  in  water  and  does  not,  therefore,  hinder  the  further  action  of
the  acid  on  the  metal.  The  halngen  acids,  especially  hydriodic  acid,
act  on  silver,  hydrogen  being  evolved  ;  but  this  action  soon  stops,
owing  to  the  halogen  compounds  of  silver  being  insoluble  in  water  and
only  very  slightly  soluble  in  acids ;  they  therefore  preserve  the  remaining
mass  of  metal  from  the  further  action  of  the  acid  ;  in  consequence  of
this  the  action  of  the  halogen  acids  isi  only  distinctly  seen  with  finely-
divided  silver.  Sulphuric  acid  acts  on  silver  in  the  same  manner  that
it  does  on  copper,  only  it  must  be  concentrated  and  at  ■  '""her
temperature. Sulphurous  anhydride.and  not  hydrogen

i

424  TRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

but  there  is  no  action  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  even  in  the  prese]
of  air.  Among  the  various  salts,  sodium  chloride  (in  the  presence
moisture,  air,  and  carb(jnic  acid)  and  potassium  cyanide  (in  the  presei
of  air)  act  on  silver  more  decidedly  than  any  others,  converting  it  resp
tively  int<j  silver  chloride  and  a  double  cyanide.

Although  silver  does  not  (directly  combine  with  oxygen,  still  th
diffei'ent  grades  of  combination  with  oxygen  may  be  obtained  ii
rectly  from  the  salts  of  silver.  They  are  all,  however,  unstable,  i
decompose  into  oxygen  and  metallic  silver  when  ignited.  These  th
oxides  of  silver  have  the  following  composition  :  silver  suboxi
Ag,0,'-*  corresponding  with  the  (little  investigated)  suboxides  of
alkali  metals  ;  sUver  oxide,  Ag^O,  corresponding  with  the  oxides  of
alkali  metals  and  the  ordinary  wilts  of  silver,  AgX  ;  and  silver  peroxi
AgO,'^  *****  <^>**»  judging  from  Bert  helot's  researches,  AgjOj.  Silver  t*x
is  obtained  as  a  bn»wn  precipitiite  (which  when  dried  does  not  cont
water)  by  adding  potassium  hydroxide  to  a  solution  of  a  silver  sal
for  example,  of  silver  nitrate. The  precipitate  formed  seems,  howei

CMiivi'i't it into  mi arj^t'iitic -.all j«inl  iiH-tallio  «»ilvi'r. In  thi^  res|>ect  cuprouK  o:
prixi-nt-  a  rrrtaiii  n'-rmlihiucf  t<i tli«'>c  siiliiixi«l«'«s. Hut c<)|»i>«.*r  foniis  u  Kuln-kxid
till- <niMH()viiti<ni ('m,("), wliich  i^ iil»tain»Ml by  tli*- art  ion nf  an alkaline soliitio:
stanjuMis  <)xi(l«'  on  cuihmc  hy<lnixi«lr.  and  is  (l»'c<)jn|>M>-«Ml  by  a«-ids  into  cuprio salts
nictallir  rojuxT, Tin-  ]tn»blfnj<  iilT«i('«l  by  the  «»nbn\i«lrs,  a^^  woU  a-«  by  the |K'roxi

<viiiiiiit  1ti>  fiitiv.wli'ri'fl ii>.  fiillv  >.ii1\'<m1.

<-:inni)t  bi'  run^^idrriMl  a*,  fully  -.olv'-d

<-:inni)i  in'  fnu^'KuTiMi  a*.  luny  -.(iiv<'«i.

"• '"'^  Silnr  fx  m.iiiir.  \-^0  or  A^'/V.- "i^  (ibtain<d  by  tli*-  dro*  miH>>ition  of  u  ilj
(10  l^r.i  miliitinn  of  sihrr  nitratf  l)y  tin- artion  of  a  i^'ahauii.'  current  (Ritt4»r).  On
jHi^iri\i-  jMib'.  wlii'ii-  oxyL:<'U  i-  u«»ually  ••\olvi'd  in  tlir  ibconii)o-.iti<)n  of  salts,  lirittle  j
nt-i'dli-^  with  a  nn-tallir  lu>.tri',  whi-h  o.-ia-i«inally  att.iin  a  Hituifwliat  cnn  side  ruble

■  ■!•.• f1w.li f..fiiiiwl IMiiii- .ii>ji iii^f tliiltio III \i-!ttiii< iitii] iii>r>f ii'iiiM')«.i> witll flic* o^*<t1»«I^.

COPPER.  Sn,\'ER.  ASD  GOLD  42!)

to  bo  an  hydroxide,  AgHU,  i.e.  AgHOj  +  KHO  =  KNO,  >  AgH< »,
mid  the  furmatioii  of  the  anhydrous  oxide,  2AgH0  =  Ag,U  +  Hjf),
may  be  cumpared  with  the  formation  of  t)ie  unhydruuH  cupric  osjde  by
the  actiou  of  potassium  hydroxide  on  hot  cuprii-  solutions.  Silver
hydroxide  deconipoees  into  water  and  silver  oside,  even  at  low
temperatures  ;  nt  least-,  the  hydroxide  no  longer  exists  at  60^,  bub
forma  the  anhydrous  oxide,  Agjt>."*  *"  Silver  oxide  is  almost
insoluble  in  water ;  but,  nevertheless,  it  is  undoubtevlly  a  rather
powerful  basic  oxide,  because  it  displaces  the  oxides  of  many  metals
from  their  soluble  salts,  ttnd  saturates  such  acids  as  nitric  acid,
forming  with  them  neutral  salts,  which  do  not  act  on  litmus  jtaper.'"
DndiJubtedly  water  dissolves  a  small  ([uaatity  of  silver  oxide,
whieli  explains  the  possibility  of  its  action  on  solutions  of  salts — for
example,  on  solutions  of  cupric  salts.  Water  in  which  silver  oxide
is  shrtken  up  lias  a  distinctly  alkaline  reuction.  The  oxide  is  dis-
tinguished by  its  great  instability  when  heated,  so  that  it  loses  all  its
oxygen  when  slightly  heated.  Hydrogen  reduces  it  at  about  «0^'" '''*
Tiie  feebleness  of  the  affinity  of  silver  for  oxygen  is  shown  by  the  fact
that  silver  oxide  decomposes  under  the  action  of  light,  so  that  it  must  be
kept  in  opaque  vessels.  The  silver  galls  are  colourle.ss  and  decompose
when  heated,  leaving  metallic  silver  if  the  elements  of  the  acid  are
vriiatile.™"'  They  have  a  peculiar  metallic  taste,  and  are  exceedingly
fioisonous  ;  the  majority  of  them  are  acted  on  by  light,  especially  in
the  presence  of  organic  substances,  which  are  then  oxidised.  The
alkaline  cnrbonates  give  a  white  precipitate  of  silver  carbonate-,
Ag.^OOj,  which  is  insoluble  in  water,  but  soluble  in  ammonia  and
ammonium  carbonate.  Aqueous  ammonia,  added  to  a  solution  of  a
normal  silver  salt,  first  acts  like  potassium  hydroxide,  but  the  precipitate
dissolves  in an  excess  of  the  reageot,  like  the  precipitate  of  cupric

"""  Acmnliiig  to  Carey  Lea,  howeiar,  oiid*  o!  silver  atill  ret»iiiB  walitt  even  nt  100'',
uid  oil];  puts  with  it  Ingvtber  «ith  the  otygen.  Oiidu  of  silver  in  used  tor  tolunriDg
glu.  yellow.

"  Tlie  reaction  ol  FMOHJ2  apon  AgHO  in  Uie  piewnee  ot  NaUO  letuls  to  tbe
(oniulion  at  a  compound  ol  both  oxides,  PbOnAgaO,  ficiui  wliii'li  the  laidt-  of  IrmS
dotiiiot  Iw  removed  bj-  alkaliei  (Wohler,  Letou).  Wiihler.  WeliOi,  and  other-  oblauied
erynlalliue  doable  aoJtg,  B^gSj,  bj  tbe  action  ot  strong  Milutiiins  iif  RX  •>!  the  baliiKeD
mHb  ol  ttie  Blkaline  metala  npoD  AgX,  where  R^  Cs,  Kb,  K.

**''*  Aomrding  to  Hiiller,  lerric  oxide  is  rednced  by  hydroKim  (m  Cliafiter  XXIt.,
Mote  G)  at  SPS"  (into  wbat  fi.  copric  oxide  at  140°,  Slfli  at  lUy  ;  nickelioi*  uxide,  NiO,
is  redured  to  the  tioboiide,  Ni,0,  at  IBS*,  and  to  niokel  at  970';  aac  oiiite  requinw  w
liigh  a  temjieratare  for  it«  redai-tion  that  the  glius  tabe  10  vhich  Mitllcr  conducted  the
Bi|Kviinenb  did  not  ntwid  the  beat ;  antimonj  oiide  reqairee  a  teiuperattire  ol  316-  lor
it*  rediurlion ;  jretlow  mercuric  oxide  in  rednced  at  ISU^  and  the  rod  oxide  at  330°  ;  ailvec
oiide  al  8G°,  aiid  platinmn  oxide  eren  at  the  ordinal;  teuperature.

"■"A  ailica  compmuid,  Ag^OSiOg  i«  obtained  by  fueinf;  A^NOj  nith  lilica;  Ihi*  aatt
is  able  lu  di-ivoipoBC  with  the  evolution  ul  olj-geii,  leavinfi  Ag  f  SiO,.

J

426  ruixciPLES  of  chemistry

hydroxide.*'  Silver  oxalate  and  the  halogen  compounds  of  silver
insoluble  in  water ;  hydrochloric  acid  and  soluble  chlorides  ^
as  already  repeatedly  observetl,  a  white  precipitate  of  silver  chlo
in  sf^lutions  of  silver  salts.  Pot'issium  iodide  gives  a  yellow
precipitate  of  silver  ifxlide.  Zinc  separates  all  the  silver  in  a  met
forui  from  solutions  of  silver  salts.  Many  other  metals  and  reclu<
agents  —for  example,  organic  substances — also  reduce  silver  from
solutions  of  its  salts.

Sifver  nitrate^  AgNOj,  is  known by  the  name of lunar cau
(or hipis  inft'mafis) ; it is obtained  by dissolving metallic si
in  nitric  acid. Tf  the  silver  be  impure,  the  resultant  solntion
contain  a  mixture  of  the  nitrates  of  copper  and  silver. If  this  mixl
be evaporated to dryness and the residue carefully fuseil at
incipient  red  heat,  all the cu})ric  nitrate  is  decomposed,  ^'hilst
greater  part  of  the  silver  nitrate  remains unchanged. On treai
the  fused  mass  with  water  the  latter  is  dissolved,  whilst  the  cu
oxide  remains  insoluble. If  a  certain  amount  of  silver  oxide  be  ad
to  tlie  solution  containing  the  nitrates  of  silver  and  copper,  it  dispL
all  th<^  cupric  oxide. In  this  case  it  is  of  course  not  necessary  to  t
pure  silver  oxide,  but  only  to  pour  off  some  of  the  solution  and  to
I)otassiuni  hydroxide  to  one  portion,  and to  mix  the  resultant
cipitato  of  the  hydroxid«»s,  Cu(0H)2  and  AgOH,  with  the  remaii
portion.'-"- I>y  these  methods  all  the  copper  can  be  easily  removed

-'  If  u  snlutidii  of  II  silver  salt  !)<•  pn-cipitiited  by  siiclium  liy<lroxifle,  and  aqi:
anuiioniii  i-  u«Mi'«l  (lr(i[>  l»y  clrop  until  tlu*  prfclpitiito  is  completely  (liKS4)lvi>4l.
liquid  wli«-n  f\  j»i>nrat«'(l  «li'pM«.it«'  a  vinh-t  nias>  «)f  l•^y>^talliln*  silver  oxido.  If  moist  ^
«»\i<li!  br  lift  in  u  stron;^'  holution  of  annmuiii  it  <,'ives  a  Ithu'k  muss,  which  easily  do
j)i)«i»'s  with  .1  li>u«l  <'XplMsi(»n.  fspfcially  wIhmj  strufk.  This  hltick  8u))staiic>o  is  c
fulminating:  -ihcr.  rr«»l)al»ly  this  i•^  a  cMmpouml  likt'  tlu'  other  comiH)uiuls  of  n
with  annni>nia.  an<l  in  <'X[>l«Klin^  tln'  i)\y«:<'n  of  tin'  silver  oxide  fonns  water  witl
hy(lro.:j«-n  of  tli«'  annin)niji,  whi<'h  i**  naturally  atTonij»anie<l  by  the  evolutirm  of  heat
formation  of  ■_'a-,.nU'^  nitrop-n,  or.  a^^  Hasthi;^'  states,  fulminatinj^  silver  eoiituiiis  NA
oiu'  of  tin-  aujid*'--  ifor  iiwtaurr.  NIIA;: .  NH-  :  A;; .(>  — H^.Ol.  Fulminating  silver  is
forjut'd  when  pota-^siuni  hydroxide  i>-  addi'd  to  a  solution  of  silver  nitratt*  in  aniiii
Thi-  <lan;:rroU'^  «'\plo>,ion^  whirh  an*  [)rodut<'d  by  this  couii>ouud  render  it  needful
^'n-at  ran-  In-  taki'U  wluMi  --alts  df  silvi-r  <'o)ue  into  contael  with  ammonia  and  al
is.r  Chapt.-r  XVI..  Note'jr.i.

--'  So  that  N\«'  \\vYc  encounter  the  following;  [)hi>n«^nn'na  :  eopi>er  disphiees  silver
till-  solution--  of  its  salt-..  au<l  sihiT  oxi«b'  displarcx  copper  oxide  from  cupric  <
(luidi'd  liy  ♦h»' coMccption'' i'nun<"iat<'il  in  ('ha[)trr  XV..  we  can  ace<mnt  for  this  ii
followin-j  inanni-r:  Tin'  atoiui<-  volume  of  ^ihrr  1(»:>,  aind  of  copper -- 7* :>,  <>f  <
o\id«'  :{'J,  and  of  <'oppt'r  oxide  V.\.  A  j;n'at<'r  contract i(»n  lui>^  tnken  phice  in  tlie
inatioii  of  cuprii'  oxide.  CuO.  than  in  the  fornnitiou  of  silver  oxide,  Ajr,.0,  since  ir
former  I  l:J -7  To  the  volume  after  combination  with  the  o\y«;en  has  increased  hv
little,  whilst  the  \«)lumi'  of  silver  oxi»h»  is  considerably  greater  than  that  of  the  niot
t-ontaijis  Wl  i-Jv  U>U)  ITT.  Hence  silver  oxide  is  h-ss  compact  than  cupric  o:
and  is  therefore  less  stable  ;  but,  on  the  other  haml,  there  an;  greater  iiitei
between  the  atoms  in  silver  oxide  tluui  in  cupric  oxide,  an<l  therefore  silver  oxide  ib  ab

COPPEE,  SILVER.  AND  GOLD  ■  427

pure  silver  nitrate  obtained  (its  solution  is  colourless,  while  the  preaence
of  Cu  renders  it  blue),  which  may  be  ultimately  purified  by  crystnllisa-
tion.  It  cryatalliaes  in  colourieaa  ti-anaparent  priamntic  plates,  which
ure  not  acterl  on  by  air.  They  are  aniiydrous.  Ita  ap.  gr.  is  4-34  ;  it
dissolves  in  half  ita  weight  of  water  at  the  ordinary  t-emperature.-"''*
The  pure  iialt  is  not  acted  on  by  light,  but  it  easily  acts  in  an  oxidising
niaunei-  on  the  majority  of  organic  substances,  which  it  generally
blackens.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  organic  substance  is  oxidised
by  the  silver  nitrat«,  which  is  reduced  to  metallic  silver  ;  the  latter  is
tlius  obtained  in  a  finely-divided  state,  which  causes  the  black  stain.
This  peculiarity  is  taken  advantage  o£  for  marking  lintfn.  Silver  nitrate
is  for  the  same  reason  used  for  cntUrisini;  vxiiituh  and  various  gniwths
on  tlic  body.  Here  again  it  acta  by  virtue  of  its  nxidising  capacity  in
destroying  the  oi^anic  matter,  whicli  it  oxidises,  as  is  seen  from  the
separation  of  a  coating  of  black  metallic  powdery  silver  from  the  part
cauterised.^'  ""'  From  the  description  of  the  preparation  of  silver  nitrate
it  will  have  been  seen  that  this  salt,  which  fuses  at  31S°,  does  not

^iv't  more  stablt!  c^omponnda  th&n  those  of  ccpper  nkidi^.  Tliifi  iR  rerified  by  the  tiifurea
ouci  daU  lit  tlieii  reaotioiu.  It  is  impoiisible  to  «>]oulftl«  (or  unpric  tulnto,  bH(«aM  thii
taii  has  not  yet  bean  abtaunoil  in  an  lUihyilToaii  Mtnto;  but  the  HulpbuLps  of  both  oxides
are  knovni.  Tbe  iijieciflc  gruTity  ol  copper  anlphulo  in  «i  untiyilronii  stale  ia  8-B8,  and  of
Hilver  anlphnte  S'Sfl;  the  molecolu  rolnme  oI  UiH  InnuBi  i>  45,  sod  »(  the  laiter  6H.
TbeKraup  t)0,  in  the  cupper  occnpieii,  us  it  wsre,  a  vulonie  tfi-lS^Sa,  end  ui  the  eilrer
Halt  A  TolaiDU  Sa-HS'^ae ;  heiice  «  uuiLller  coubnctiou  has  taken  place  in  the  farmatiun
o(  the  onppet  «alt  tnim  the  mide  than  iu  the  lormatiou  ol  tbe  silver  salt,  and  cunae-
qurntlf  the  lattf-r  shotdd  be  more  alable  thiui  Uie  lornier.  Hence  silier  oxide  is
able  to  decompose  tile  salt  of  copper  onidp,  vrhihit  with  renpect  to  the  metals  both  salts
liBve  been  foniii^  with  an  almost  ideutieal  caiitnu.-tian,  oinoe  58  volnmen  of  the  silver
■alt  oontain  31  volumes  ol  metat  Idiffereuco  -  ST),  uid  45  volnmes  of  the  copper  salt
cuutain  7  volnmes  ol  copper  (differenoe  =  Sa).  Besides  which,  it  mnst  be  observed  that
copper  oxide  displaces  irou  oxide,  joat  as  silver  oxide  diaplaces  copper  oxide.  Silver,
co|iper,  Bud  iron,  in  the  form  o(  oxideu.  diBplnce  each  other  in  the  above  order,  but  in  the
form  of  metals  in  s  reverse  order  (iron,  copper,  ailver).  The  cause  of  this  order  of  the
displacement  of  the  oxides  lies,  amougat  olbirr  thinga,  in  their  oompoBitioii.  Tbejr  have
(he  cimpoaitioii  AggO,  CqjOj.  FojO;!  the  oxide  containing  a  leax  proportion  of  otfgeu
itiaplacuB  tbal  G<mtaining  a  larger  pro[KiTtioii.  because  the  baaic  cbamcter  diminiabea
vtilh  tlu>  increase  of  contaJDed  oxygen.

Copper  also  displooes  mercury  (rum  its  ulta.  It  may  betv  be  reoutrked  that  Spring
(IfSa).  on  leaving  a  mixture  of  dry  merenroiiB  chloride  and  co|iper  for  two  hours,
observed  a  diatinct  rodoction.  wliich  belongs  to  the  category  of  those  phenomeoa  which
demoDsInte  the  eiislence  of  a  mobility  of  pnrts  [i.e.  atoms  and  molecDlesI  iu  solid  sab.

"  "•  The  reaelion  o(  1  pari  by  weight  ol  AgNO;  reqnirea  (according  to  Kremers)  the
following  amounlK  of  water;  at  0°,  O'BS  part,  al  ir'S,  0'41  part,  at  5«°,  O-SO  part,
lit  tlO^.  0-og  part,  and,  lecORliag  to  Tildes,  at  13B°.  O-MIT  part,  and  at  188°,  0-OSI6
imrt.

""I  It  may  be  remarked  that  the  blaek  stain  piudnctd  by  the  reduction  <il  metallic
•ilver  diaappeara  under  tile  action  of  a  sulatiun  ot  morcoric  efalahdii  or  ><(  poUssium
cyanide,  bceuuiu:  Ihew  aaUn  ui-t  on  HnelyHltt-idei!  silver.

428  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

decompose  at  an  incipient  red  heat  ;  when  cast  into  sticks  it  is  usual
employed  for  cauterising.  On  further  heating,  the  fused  salt  undergcj
decomposition,  first  forming  silver  nitrite  and  then  metallic  silv<
With  ammonia,  silver  nitrate  forms,  on  evaporation  of  the  solutic
colourless  crystals  containing  AgN03,2HN3  (Marignac).  In  genei
the  salts  of  silver,  like  cuprous,  cupric,  zinc,  &c.  salts,  are  able  to  gi
several  compounds  with  ammonia  ;  for  example,  silver  nitrate  in  a  d
state  absorbs  three  molecules  (Rose).  The  ammonia  is  generally  easi
expelled  from  these  compounds  by  the  action  of  heat.

Nitrate  of  silver  easily  forms  double  salts  like  AgN032NaNO3  ai
AgXOaKNOa.  Silver  nitrate  under  the  action  of  water  and  a  halog
gives  nitric  acid  {see  Vol.  I.  p.  280,  formation  of  N2O5),  a  halogen  salt
silver,  and  a  silver  salt  of  an  oxygen  acid  of  the  halogen.  Thus,  i
example,  a  solution  of  chlorine  in  water,  when  mixed  with  a  solution
silver  nitrate,  gives  silver  chloride  and  chlorate.  It  is  here  evident  tl:
the  reaction  of  the  silver  nitrate  is  identical  with  the  reaction  of  t
caustic  alkalis,  as  the  nitric  acid  is  all  set  free  and  the  silver  oxide  01
reacts  in  exactly  the  same  way  in  which  aqueous  pota^  acts  on  fi
chlorine.  Hence  the  reaction  may  be  expressed  in  the  followi
manner  :  GAgNOg  4-  3C1,  +  3H.,0  =  ^AgCl  +  AgClOa  +  6NHO3.

Silver  nitrate,  like  the  nitrates  of  the  alkalis,  does  not  contain  a
water  of  crystallisation.  Moreover  the  other  salts  of  silver  alm<
always  separate  out  without  any  water  of  crystallisation.  The  sib
salts  are  further  characterised  by  the  fact  that  they  </ire  n*nO
basir  nor  acid  snlts,  owing  to  which  the  formation  of  silver  sa
generally  forms  the  means  of  det(irmining  the  true  composition
acids  thus,  to  any  acid  H„X  there  corresponds  a  salt  Ag„X--:
instance,  AggPO^  (Chapter  XIX.,  Note  15).

Si/i'f  r  gives  insoluble  and  exceedingly  stable  amipouncls  xcith
halof/riis.  They  are  obtained  V)y  double  decomposition  with  gri
facility  whenever  a  silver  salt  comes  in  contact  with  halogen  saJ
Solutions  of  nitrate,  sulphate,  and  all  other  kindred  salts  of  silver  gi
li  precipitate  of  silver  chloride  or  iodide  in  solutions  of  chlorides  a
iodides  and  of  the  halogen  acids,  because  the  halogen  salts  of  silver  1
insoluble  both  in  water  -'*  and  in  other  acids. Siher  chloride,  AgCl,

-'  SilviT  «hl(>riil«'  is  ulinost  iM'rfoctly  iiisolubl*'  in  Wiit«T.  but  is  soinowhut  soluble
\\iitr<'r  <"<>iitaiuiu^;  sodium  ililoriib'  or  liydnu-lilorif  acid,  or  otlier  chloride^i,  uiid  many  8a
ill  solution.  Thus  at  llM)"",  100  partH  of  wiiter  siitunit^'d  with  wwliuni  chloride  disso
01  part,  of  silvt-r  (■hl«>rid*'.  Bromide  and  iodide  of  silver  urn  less  wiluble  in  this  rvs^^
a>.  also  in  regard  to  «»ther  solv«Mit8.  It  rthould  be  remarked  that  silver  chloride  dissol
in  .f(thiii<>ns  of  (itnnionia,  pofoasium  njaniih',  (ind  of  stjdiiDn  tliinsnlyhatv^  Na-.S^
Silver  broniidf  i-.  almost  perfectly  anulojrous  to  the  chloride,  but  silver  iodide  ih  nen
insoluble  in  a  •^olution  of  ainnumia. Silver  chloride  even  absorbs  dry  ammonia  %

COPPER.  SILVER,  AND  GOLD

439

then  obtained  iis  a  white  (locculent  precipitate,  silver  bromide  forma  a
yellowisli  precipitate,  and  silver  iodide  has  e.  very  distinct  jellow
colour.  These  linlogen  i-oiiipounda  sumetimes  ai'dir  in  nature;  they
are  formed  by  a  dry  raethod — by  the  action  of  halogen  compounds  on
silver  conipoimds,  especially  under  the  influence  of  heat.  SUver  chlo-
ride euilj  fuae.t  at  i^l"  on  cooling  from  a  molten  Btat«  ;  it  forms
a  somewhat  soft  horn-like  mass  which  can  be  cut  with  a  knife
and  is  known  as  kin-n  silver.  It  volatilises  at  a  higher  tempera-
ture. Ita  ammoaiacal  solution,  on  the  evaporation  of  the  ammonia,
deposits  crystalline  chloride  of  silver,  in  octahedra.  Bromide  and
i'ldide  of  silver  also  appear  in  forms  of  the  regular  system,  so  that  in
thi.s  respect  the  halogen  salts  of  silver  resemble  the  halogen  salts  of  the
alkali  metals."

lorming  very  anaUbte  amnnniiwad  compoDndH.  Wheii  honted,  these  eoBiponinJii  (Vol.  I.
[k  2S0,  Note  8}  evolve  the  amniiHiu,  u  thef  aJso  do  uoder  the  octiou  of  oil  Kfida.  Silver
ohlonde  enlen  into  donblo  decompotiitioii  wtth  potawiiuiii  cyinide,  (iinaing  a  solnhle
dnabic  cyuiide.  which  ve  AtU  piesentl;  dewribe ;  it  oIho  tanns  n  lolable  doable  alt,
NaAgSgO],  Willi  Hodintu  thiosnliJimte.

8i]rer  chloride  otter*  different  mudiSntious  in  the  tLtrnctnre  ol  it*  molecale,  H  it  Been
in  the  vtfiatJDiui  in  the  conBJ«lencf  of  the  precipit&te,  and  in  the  differenoes  in  theftction
ol  light  •rhioh  partially  decomposeaAgCI  (see  Note  9S).  Stasaad  Carey  Lea  mveatigated
this  subject,  which  has  a  particnlu  importance  in  photograptaj-,  becailHe  ailrer  brnmide
alM)  f;\\f»  phalo-iaiti.  There  is  BtiU  mnch  to  be  discoverijd  iu  this  respect,  since  Abnej
sliOKttd  that  perfactlj'  diy  AgCI  pUued  in  a,  racnum  in  the  dark  is  not  in  the  Uaat  acted
upon  when  sqbBer|iunt]j  eiposed  to  light,

"  Silt'tr  bromidt  and  iodide  (whicb  oecur  ns  the  minenls  bromite  and  iodite)
resemble  tlie  chloride  in  avatj  respwln,  bnt  the  degree  o(  affinity  of  ailver  for  iodine  is
greater  than  that  tor  chlorine  and  bnunihe,  albhoogh  less  heat  is  evolved  [ler  Note  38  his).
Deville  dedneed  lhi«  fact  from  a  nnmber  of  experiments.  Thns  silver  chloride,  whan
treat«d  with  hjdriodic  oeid,  evolves  hydrochloric  acid,  and  forms  silver  iodide.  Finely-
divided  silver  easily  UberM«s  faydrogen  when  treated  with  bydriodio  acid ;  it  produces
the  same  de«oiDpasiti<m  with  hydrochloric  acid,  bnt  in  a  coasidentbly  leas  degrne  and
only  on  the  nirtaoe.  The  diSerence  between  silver  chloride  und  iodide  is  especially
ruinarkable,  sinco  the  formation  of  the  former  is  attended  with  a  greater  contraction
thiui  that  of  the  latter,  The  volame  of  AgCl^SO;  of  chlorine  ST,  of  silver  10,  the  sam
-87.  bence  a  contractioa  hiueDSoed;  and  in  the  formation  of  silver  ii>dide  an  etpaniion
takes  i^ace,  for  the  volame  of  Ag  ii  10,  of  I  30.  and  nf  A|;I  SO  instead  of  86  (deiiBLty,
AgCI,  G'SS ;  Agl,  S-ST).  The  atom*  of  chlorine  have  united  with  the  atoms  of  silver
witliont  nulling  asunder,  whilst  the  atoms  of  iodine  must  have  mined  apart  in
(.-ombining  with  the  silver.  It  is  otherwise  with  respect  to  the  metal;  the  distauM
between  its  atoms  in  the  metal-S'S,  in  silver  chloride  =  3*0,  and  in  silver  iodide
=  a*G;  hence  it*  atoms  have  moved  asunder  considerably  in  both  Bases.  It  is  also  very
rtoiarkftble,  as  PLeeau  observed,  that  tlie  denisity  of  silver  iKdido  increases  with  a  rise  of
leiiipernture— that  it.  a  contraction  takes  place  when  it  is  hewled  and  an  ex]iatisiou  when
i  t  is  eooled.

In  urder  to  eiplain  the  (act  that  in  silver  compounds  the  iodidu  is  more  stable  than
the  chliiride  and  oiide.  Professor  N.  N.  BeketoS,  in  hit. '  Hesearcbes  on  the  Phenomena
of  flabslitutions '  (KharkoS.  ISflB),  propoxeii  the  following  original  hypothesiB.  which  we
will  give  in  almost  the  ncirds  of  tbe  author: — In  the  case  of  alnmininm,  the  oude,  AljO^
is  more  stable  than  the  chloride.  AlgCI^,  and  the  iodide,  AI,Ig,  In  the  •ocids  the  omoant
of  the  metal  it  to  the  omoant  o(  the  element  oombined  with  it  ax  r.«'S  (Al  ^  9T'8Us  to  18,

430  PJUNCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Silver  chloride  may  1^  decomposed,  with  the  separation  of  sil
oxide, by  heating  it  with  a  solution  of  an  alkali,  and if  an  oi^

or  in  the  ratio  11'2  :  loO  ;  for  the  clilori<le  tli**  ratio  i«--  25  :  100 ;  for  the  uxlide  it  -  7  :
In  tln'  rjisf  of  silvtT  tlit^  oxide  (ratio  V.\'A) :  100)  is  Icsk  Ktahle  than  the  chIori<1e  <i
--:J01  :  1(H»),  and  the  iodido  ^ratio  of  tho  weij^ht  of  metal  to  the  weipht  nf  the  1ial<
—  Ho  :  100)  is  thi*  nio.>tt  stablt*.  From  these  and  simihu*  examples  it  fnllowA  thiit  th<*  i
ptalde  I'linipciunds  an*  thoNU  in  whicli  the  wtij^lit-.  of  the  c*ombined  Huhstaiices  arv  e<j
Tliis  nniY  hi>  jiartlv  exphiiiied  by  tlie  attnu'tion  of  siiiiihir  molecules  even  aft*?r  t
liavin;;  })a*«s(>d  into  (.lunbination  with  others.  This  attniction  id  proiMtrtional  to
product  of  the  aetinj;  nuisM-s.  In  silver  oxide  the  attraction  of  Ag.,»  for  Ajf.j --■  210  i<
-l»;,()r.(i,  and  llie  attraction  of  A«;...  for  O-210  x  l(i  -8,450.  The  attraction  of  like  u:
culert  thus  c<»unteractH  the  attraction  of  the  unlike  moleculeft.  Tlie  fonner  natui
d<K's  not  oven-ome  the  latter,  otherwise  there  would  l)e  a  diHniption,  hut  it  novertht
diminishes  the  stability.  In  the  case  of  an  e(|uality  or  proximity  of  the  niufniitud
the  combining'  masses,  the  attraction  of  the  like  ]>artH  will  counteract  the  Btability  of
comi>ound  to  thelea^«t  extent — in  other  words,  with  an  inequality  of  the  conihiniMl  nia<
the  molecules  have  an  inclination  to  return  to  an  elementary  Htate,  to  clecon)[io«.e.  w]
does  not  exist  to  such  an  extent  where  the  combinetl  masses  are  equal.  Ther«.*  in,  ih
fore,  a  tendency  for  lar^^e  mas.-.es  to  combine  with  large,  and  for  amall  masses  to  c<>m
with  snnill.  Hence  A «:._.(.)■  2K I  jrives  K._.()-f  2AjjI.  The  influence  of  an  e<]UAht
nnis.-es  on  the  stability  is  seen  particularly  clearly  in  the  effect  of  a  rise  of  tein|H*nif
Argentic,  mercuric,  auric  and  (»ther  oxides  cr>m]M)Hed  of  une<jiial  masHOKf  arc*  soniev
readily  d«'composed  by  heat,  whilst  the  <»xide-*  of  the  lighter  metals  (like  water  j  are  n«
easily  dccoiniMised  by  hi»at.  Silver  chloride  and  iodide  approach  the  cnnditioi
eipiality,  and  are  n<»t  decomiH>s<>d  by  hent.  The  mf>st  stable  oxides  under  the  uetioi
heat  are  those  of  nuigneMium,  calcium,  silicon,  and  aluminium,  aince  they  also  a]>|>n
the  condition  of  e(iuality.  F\>r  the  same  reason  hydricMlic  acid  decomiH>seH  with  >rre
facility  than  hydmchloric  aci<l.  Chlorin**  iloe^  nt»t  ju't  on  magnesia  or  aliiniina.  bi
acts  (Ml  lime  and  silver  oxi<le,  i^'c.  Thi.-^  is  jiartially  explained  by  the  fact  that  hy  i
siderin^'  lieat  as  a  mo<le  of  motion,  and  knowing  that  the  atomic  heats  of  the  fr**e  elfur
aree<iu;il,  it  must  be  r^uj>]»:)-.e<l  that  the  amount  of  the  motion  of  atoms  (their  r/»  dr
eiiual,and  iis  it  i-  ccpial  to  the  i»rodni  t  of  the  mass  (atomic  weight)  into  the  j^iiiurf  «>f
velocity,  it  follows  thai  the  ;:ivater  the  combining  weight  the  smaller  will  be  the  s<ii
«•!  the  velocity.  Hud  if  th«'  «•. .nibiniu'^  wi-iu'lils  be  nearly  ec|ual.  then  the  vehK-iti«-.  also
In-  nearly  eciu.il.  Ib-ine  thi-  gn-ati-r  iIh-  ditTerenc  e  bf'tween  the  weights  of  tlu-  eonibi
atoms  thr  gii  .it<  T  will  be  thi"  ditTi-n-iice  between  tlieir  velocities.  The  diflfereiUM*  betv
tin-  veloritie-  will  incieasr  with  the  temperature,  and  theref<»re  the  teniiH>ratnr<>  of
<-om])o-itiiiii  will  !>•'  the  -.oont-r  attained  the  greater  be  the  original  diflfereiK-e  -tha
the  greater  the  dilTen-nce  of  th».'  w«'iglits  nf  tlie  cond)ined  substances.  The  nearer  tl
weights  are  io  ea<-h  otln-r,  tlie  more  analogou**  the  mf)tion  of  the  unlike  atoniv.  ^nd  '
seipiently,  the  more  stable  the  rexnltanl  componn<l.

Tlie  instability  of  enpric  chl(»ride  and  nitric- oxide,  the  absence  of  comixiunds  of  Huo
with  oxygen,  whilst  tlu-re  are  com])oun<U  of  oxygen  with  chlorine, the  great«*r  ^t.-ibilit
the  oxvgen  rompi>unds  of  i<Kline  than  tho>»e  of  chlorine,  the  stability  of  lM>ron  nitride.
tliein-t.ibilitv  "tf  l•yan^>g«■n.anflallnml•e^of«.imi]arinstan^e•^.  where,  judging  from  thfal
argument,  one  woulil  i-xpf.tt  'owing  Ut  tiie  clo-fncs-.  <if  the  atomic  weights)  u  stabi
•.how  that  iJikrtMtT'x  ;(ililiti<>]i  to  ilie  niiM-haniral  ilK-«My  of  diemical  phenomena  is
lar  from  "Uttirii  iit  f<»r  explaining  the  true  nlalicMis  of  afUnities.  Nevertheh»ss.  in
mode  of  lAiil.nnih;:  tin-  nlatiM-  •.tnbilitii-.  of  cuniponnd-^.  welind  an  exce«'dinglv  int  -i
iuiT  tn-alment  of  (|ni>^iions  of  ].rimary  import.mce.  Withont  ^nch  efforts  it  wouN
ini|»o--ibli'  to  grneralisr  thi*  i-omplex  dnta  of  experiini-ntal  knowledge.

I'hinriifr  I'/  \ilrt  f\  .VgK,  is  obtained  by  di.ssnl\ing  Ag.O  or  .\g. CO-  in  hydrofluoric,  j,
It  »litT«r.s  from  the  other  halogen  salts  of  -.iKer  in  bi-ing  solnbh*  in  water  (1  ]>art  nf  j^al
O'.'i.'jof  waleri.  It  crystallises  from  its  solnt  ion  in  prism.-.  AgFli  _,(>  i  Marigna<i.  or  Aj;K:>]
irfiiundh'ri,  whicli  lo^'  their  water  in  vacuo, (ilintz  (Isjili,  hy  electr»»lising  u  satun

corrgR.  sn-VKR.  ahd  gold  481

uubsUitice  be  added  to  the  ntkuli  the  •jhloride  cnn  easily  be  reduced  to
metallic  silver,  the  silver  oxide  beiii;^  reduced  in  the  oxidation  of  the
organic  substance.  Iron,  zinc,  and  many  other  nietala  reduce  silver
chloride  in  the  presence  of  water.  Cuprous  and  uiercurous  chlorides
and  many  organii^  substances  are  also  able  to  reduce  the  silver  from
chloride  of  ailver.  This  shows  the  rather  easy  decomposahility  of  the
halogen  compounds  of  silver.  Silver  iodide  is  mufh  more  stable  in  this
respect  thun  the  chloride.  The  same  is  also  observwl  with  respect  to
the  action  of  light  upon  moist  AgCl.  White  ail  ver  chloride  soon  acquires
a  violet  colour  when  exposed  to  the  action  of  light,  and  especially
under  the  direct  action  of  the  sun's  rays.  After  being  acted  upon
by  light  it  is  no  longer  entirely  soluble  in  ammonia,  but  leaves
metallic  silver  undissolved,  from  which  it  might  be  assumed  that  the
action  of  light  consist«d  in  the  decomposition  of  the  silver  chloride
into  chlorine  and  metallic  silver  and  in  fact  the  silver  chloride  be-
conies  in  lime  darker  and  darker.  Silver  bromide  and  iodide  are  much
more  slowly  acted  on  by  light,  and,  according  to  certain  observations,
when  pure  they  are  even  quite  unacted  on  ;  at  least  they  do  not  change
in  weight,^'  '■''  so  that  if  they  are  act«d  on  by  light,  the  change  they
undergo  must  be  one  of  a  change  in  the  structure  of  their  parts  and  not
of  decomposition,  as  it  is  in  stiver  chloride.  The  silver  chloride  under
the  action  of  light  changes  in  weight,  which  indicates  the  formation  of
a  volatile  product,  and  the  deposition  of  metallic  silver  on  dissolving
in  ammonia  shows  tho  loss  of  chlorine.  The  change  does  actually
occur  under  the  action  of  light,  but  the  decomposition  does  not  go
as  far  as  into  chlorine  and  silver,  but  only  to  the  formation  of  a  sub-
chloride  of  silver,  Ag^Ol,  which  is  of  ck  brown  colour  and  is  easily  de-
composed into  metallic  silver  and  silver  chloride,  Ag^Cl  =  AgCI  +  Ag.
This  change  uf  the  chemical  composilion  and  structure  of  the  halogen
salts  of  silver  under  the  action  of  light  forms  tlie  basis  of  j>ho(orp-apky,
iMicause  the  halogen  compounds  of  silver,  after  having  been  exposed  to
lifj'ht,  give  a  precipitate  of  finely -divided  silver,  of  a  black  colour,
when  treated  with  reducing  agents.*''

Aolnticin  of  Ag;F.  ciIiUuihI  pnlyjiutfride  nf  tUvrt,  AgjP,  which  i«  3e«impo»»d  by  WBtot
iiitii  AgF  -f  Ag-  II  is  >1mi  lonued  1>y  thp  actian  n\  s  atroag  aolntiou  of  AgF  upon  Anelj.
(livMed  (preci[>itat<>d|  silvet.

"  '''■  The  duuigiw  bioatjht  uboat  hy  tho  nFtiiii  ol  light  ne<.-e<«ititte  diKliDguiiihin^  the
photo- B&lts  of  siWer,

'^  In  photogrnphy  thew-  ure  chIIm)  '  ilevelaixrv'  The  moet  ooxaiaaa  developera  lire :
Miintioni  of  feiruuB  aulphute,  pyrognllDl,  Iprrona  oulntCi  bydroiylMnine,  patuHinin  lul-
pbite,  hjdnMininone  (Ibu  last  uts  pajticruliuly  well  uid  i*  very  ooovenient  to  DSe),  &d.  The
chemical  pruceftBca  of  phottigrapby  ore  ol  great  practiiwl  uid  llieoretical  intereit ;  but  it
woiilil  be  impoBBiblein  thii  Hork  to  enter  inlu  IhU  Bi>eciBl  branch  ol  cbcmiitrj,  which  haa  ■■
jrelbeenTorylittlevatkedoDtbnina  theoretical  paint  uf  view,  Nerertheleu,  we  wilt  psnse

432  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  insolubility  of  the  halogon  compounds  of  silver  forms
basis  of  many  methods  used  in  practical  chemistry.  Thus  by  meai
this  reaction  it  is  possible  to  (»btain  salts  of  other  acids  from  a  hal
salt  of  a  givon  metal,  for  instance,  RCl^  +  2AgN03=R(NO,)^4-'2Ji
Tlie  formation  of  the  halogen  comix)unds  of  silver  is  very  frequc
used  in  the  invrstigati(»n  of  organic  substances  ;  for  example,  if
pnKluct  of  metalepsis  c«mtaining  iodine  or  chlorine  he  heateil  wi
silver  siilt  or  silver  oxide,  the  silver  combines  with  the  halogen
gives  a  halogen  salt,  whilst  the  elements  previously  combined  with
silver  rei»lace  the  halogen.  For  instance,  ethylene  dibromide,  CjH,
is transformed into ethylene  diacetate,  C.2H4(CaH30.^)2,  and  8

to  considtM'  corlaiu  aH{H.>cts  of  tliiH  Bubject  which  are  of  a  purely  chemical  iiiteres
eK|K?iiiilly  th«'  fiuts  coiuerning  subchloritlr  of  silvvrj  Ag.jCl  {nee  Note  19),  aud  the  ]
salt^^  I  N<)t(*  2:)  I.  Tlioro  is  no  doubt  tliat  under  tho  action  of  light,  AgCl  becumeK  <
in  colour,  d(M-rca>u.>s  in  weight,  and  probably  forniH  a  mixture  of  AgCI,  Af^.^Cl,  an
But  the  iHoIatioii  of  the  Kubohloride  haH  only  l>een  recently  accomplished  by  GCii
means  of  the  A^'^F.  discovered  by  him  ysee  Note  t24).  Many  chemintB  (and  among
p{(KlgkinM>ni  as»unted  that  an  oxychloride  of  silver  was  formed  by  the  docomponit
A^(  '1  und«*r  the  action  of  light.  Carey  Lea's  ( 1M81H  and  A.  KichardRou's  (1H91)  expi*ri
show«'d  that  the  product  forniecl  does  not,  however,  contain  any  oxygen  at  all,  ai
chan>zi'  in  colour  iir<Mluce<l  by  the  action  of  light  u|Min  AgCl  is  most  probably  due  t
formation  of  Ag^C'l.  This  substance  was  isolated  by  (riintz  (iHfll)  by  passing  HC
crystals  of  A^^.K.  He  also  obtained  Ag.jl  in  a  similar  manner  by  passing-  HI,  and
by  passing  II.,,S  over  Ag.,F.  A^jC.'l  is  best  pre]»ared  by. the  action  of  phoapUon
chloride  uiN)n  A;^>F.  At  the  temperature  of  its  formation  AgXl  has  an  easily  chan|
tint,  with  shiuh.-s  of  violet  red  to  violet  black.  Under  the  action  of  light  a  s
nKonn-ric)  sub-'tance  is  obtained,  which  sjilitr*  up  into  AgCl-!  Ag  when  heated.
|M>ia'^^ium  cvMiiidc  A;;. CI  ;,nves  Aj;  +  A;rCN  •  KCl,  whence  it  is  {Ktssihle  to  onloulu
li»-at  of  fitrnintiniiof  A^r,.Cl  :  it-'2'.)-7,  whiUt  the  heat  of  formation  of  AgCl  -:  i>lJ-2 — /
reaction  *iA>,'('l  Aj.Cl  :  CI  corre«.iM»ud**  to  an  ab-iorption  of  *i8'7  major  calories.
admit  tin*  fonii.it  ion  of  -.luli  acompoimd  by  thcin'tion  of  li«;ht.it  is  evident  that  tho  v
ot  till- li;,'lit  i"«  II  •ii-uiMiil  in  the  above  reaction,  (.'an-y  Lea  ilNi»*J)  subjected  AgCl.  AgH
A;;!  to  a  pn--m''  i»f  conr^'  in  thf  ilark)  of  II.ihm)  atmospheres,  and  to  trituration
wat»'r  in  a  nioit.ir.  and  ob>-frv«'d  a  cliiui;;e  of  cnlnnr  indicating  incipient  tlfOoniiHi
wliirh  i•^  farilita!<'«l  nn(b-r  tli<*  action  «)f  li«:ht  by  tli«' molecular  currents  set  up(r^*mn
Kj^'iiiiiITi.  The  clian;,'e  of  <'ol<»ur  of  the  halo;;en  salts  of  silver  under  the  action  of
and  th<'ir  farnll>  of  >iil»s«M|ni'ntly  j^ivinj;  a  visible  [ihotographic  imago  under  the  act
'  dt.'Vt'lopiTs,'  luu-'t  n<»w  In*  n-irardetl  a-,  coiinecti><l  with  the  dec<>miK»sition  of  AgX,  It
to  tin-  formation  i»f  A^'.X.  and  tin*  flilTi'ient  tinted  photo-salts  must  In.*  eouMide:
>h\ -itiin^  citntainiii^'suih  A;:._.X's.  Cai^'V  Lea  obtaini'd  photo-Milts  of  this  kind  not  u:
tin;  a<tii»n  of  lijht  but  aKo  in  many  (Uher  way-,  which  we  will  enumerate  to  prov«
tli«-v  mntain  tlie  products  of  an  incompletf  i-ombination  of  Ag  with  the  halo)(ens,  (f
salt-  \>:..X  mn-t  Im- n'j,'ar<led  as  snch'.  Tin"  photo-alts  have  been  obtained  ill  1
imp<rf«Mi  <hloriii.ition  <if  silver  ;  '2i  by  tin-  imomph-te  decomposition  of  AgjO  or  Ai
by  ali«rnat»'l\  liratin>^  and  tnatin;^'  with  a  hali»;,'<'n  aiid  ;  i;li  by  the  action  of  nitri
or  NajS  .()-  upcii  \>:;<'l;  ili  by  mixing:  a  .-olut ion  of  Aj,'N().- with  the  hydrates  ot
Mn<>  anil  <'rl>.  and  pri'cipitatinj;  by  HCl ;  (.'h  by  the  action  of  HCl  upon  the  pr
oblaijHil  by  the  n-dnction  of  i-itrat^.-  of  silver  in  liydro;^en  i  Note  lOi,  and  (t»)  by  tho  j
iif  milk  snu'ai-  upon  A;.,'N(K,  t<»gether  with  soda  and  aft«'rwar»ls  acidulating  with  HC
thi-e  reaction-  -honld  lca«l  to  the  formation  of  ]>roducts  f>f  ini]"»«'rfect  conibiiiatioi
tli«-  lialo^ren-  ami  }:i\e  phot«)-salts  of  a  >inn'lar  diversity  of  colour  to  thoise  prt>
by  the  action  oi  developers  njHni  the  hal(»gen  salt^^  of  silver  after  exposure  to  liulit.

COPPEB.  SILVER.  AMD  OOLD  48S

broruitle  by  }ieattng  it  with  silver  acetate,  2CjHjOj  Ag.  The  insoIuMlity
of  l.lie  halogen  compounds  of  silver  ia  still  more  frequently  taken  ad-
vimtage  of  in  determiniiig  the  amount  of  silver  and  halogen  in  a  given
solution.  If  it  is  retjuired,  for  instance,  to  determine  the  quantity  of
chlorine  pi'esent  in  the  form  of  a  metallic  chloride  in  a  given  solution,
a  solution  of  silver  nitrate  ia  added  to  it  so  long  as  it  gives  a  pre-
cipitate. On  iiliakitiff  or  stirritig  the  liquid,  the  silver  chloride  easily
settles  in  the  form  of  heavy  tlakes.  It  is  possible  in  this  way  to
precipitate  the  whole  of  the  chlorine  from  a  solution,  without  adding
an  Qxcesa  of  silver  niti'ate,  since  it  can  be  easily  seen  whether  the
addition  of  a  fresli  quantity  of  silver  nitrate  produces  a.  precipitate  in
the  clear  liquid.  In  this  manner  it  is  possible  to  add  to  a.  solution
containing  chlorine,  as  much  silver  as  is  required  for  its  entire  precipi-
tation, and  to  calculate  the  amount  of  chlorine  previously  in  solution
from  the  amount  of  the  s<)lution  of  silver  nitrate  consumed,  if  the
quantity  of  silver  nitrate  in  this  solution  has  been  previously  deter-
mined.*' '■''  The  atomic  proportions  and  preliminary  experiments  with
a  pore  salt^or  example,  with  sodium  chloride — will  give  the  amount
of  chlorine  from  the  quantity  of  silver  nitrate.  Details  of  these
methods  will  be  found  in  works  on  analytical  chemistry."  "'

»  \\t  i„  order  to  determine  when  tha  reaction  ia  at  an  end,  a  few  drops  of  a  aolutiou
t>r  K,CrO,iire  added  to  tb«  solation  of  the  chloride.  Before  all  the  ehloriue  ia  precipiUHtd
asA^I.  tlie  precipitate  (alter  ahakiiiK)  is  whito  (giun)  AgiCtO,  with  SRC)  givea  3AgCl) ;
boL  when  all  the  chtoriae  in  tliroiim  down  AgjCrO,  iH  lurmed,  whiuh  i^oloars  the  preeipi-
tatfl  njddiili-brown. Id  order  lo  obtain  acciuate  results  the  liqaid  should  be  nuntral

""■  Sileer  ryantdf.  AgCN,  ia  clowly  Mmlogoos  to  the  haloid  salts  of  silver.  It  it
ohliLined,  io  simiUi'  mauner  to  silver  chloHdo,  b)'  the  adilitiou  of  putsssiniu  cyanide  to
silier  nitrate.  A  while  pivctpitale  is  then  fomud,  which  is  nlmost  insoluble  in  boiling
water.  It  is  aLu,  like  silver  chloride,  iosotuUe  in  itilnto  acids,  Howeier,  il  is  distolred
when  heatvd  with  nitric  acid,  and  both  hydriodJc  aud  hyilrochlaric  acids  act  on  it,  con-
verting it  inUi  aiUor  chloride  and  iodide.  AUoJjb,  however,  do  not  act  on  silver  cyanide,
althuogh  they  act  on  the  other  haloid  salts  of  silver.  Ainmouin  luid  solutions  of  the
eyamdea  o(  tlw  alkali  metals  diasolve  silver  cyanide,  as  they  do  the  chloride.  In  the
latter  cs*e  double  cyanides  us  formed— tor  example,  KAgC^N,.  This  salt  is  obtained  in
a  crystalline  state  on  evaporating  a  solntion  of  silver  cyanide  in  potassimn  cyanide.  It
is  mncli  more  stable  than  silver  cyanide  itwif.  It  has  a  neutral  reaction,  does  not
clmn);e  in  the  til,  uid  does  not  smell  of  hydrocyanic  acid.  Many  acids,  in  acting  on  a
Bolnllon  of  this  double  salt,  precipitate  the  insoluble  silver  cyanide.  Metallic  silver  dis-
solves in  a  Bolntion  ol  potaasinm  cyanide  in  the  presence  of  air,  with  larmstion  of
the  same  double  lult  end  potassium  hydroxide,  und  when  ulver  chloride  dissolves  in
potassium  cyanide  it  forms  potasainta  chloride,  besides  the  salt  KAgCiN,.  This  doable
salt  of  silver  is  used  in  silver  plating.  For  this  purpo^  potassium  cyanide  is  added  to
its  solntion,  as  otherwise  silver  cyanide,  und  uot  metallic  silver,  is  deposited  by  the
electric  current.  Utwo  electrodes— one  positive  (silvetl  aud  the  otlier  negative  |copper) —
be  intmerted  in  such  ■  solntion,  silver  will  Ue  deposited  spon  the  Utter,  aud  the
silver  of  the  poutive  electrode  will  be  dissolved  by  the  liiguid,  which  will  thus  preserve
the  same  amooDt  of  metal  in  tolotian  as  it  ariginally  contained.  If  instead  at  tlw
negative  electrode  ft  copper  object  be  taken,  well  cleaned  (rom  >U  dirt,  the  silver
VOL.  II.  Tl  ■!

484  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Accarate  experiments,  and  more  espeoiallj  the  reBeardkeM  of
Sum  at  Brussels,  show  the  proportion  in  which  silver  reacte  whli
metallic  chlorides.  These  researches  have  led  to  the  determina-
tion of  the  combining  weights  of  silver,  sodium,  potaanamt  chlorine^
bromine,  iodine,  and  other  elements,  and  are  distingaiahed  for  thor
model  exactitude,  and  we  will  therefore  descfribe  them  in  flome  deUiL
As  sodium  chloride  is  the  chloride  most  generally  Qaed  for  the  pre-
cipitation of  silver,  since  it  can  most  easily  be  obtained  in  a  pure  italQ^
we  will  here  cite  the  quantitative  observations  made  by  Staa  for  show*
ing  the  co-relation  between  the  quantities  of  chloride  of  aodiiun  and
silver  which  react  together. In  order  to  obtain  perfectly  pore  sodiOB

will  be  deposited  in  an  even  coatii^ ;  this,  indeed,  tcfttOB  tbe  mode  of  wUver  pUUim§  k§
the  wet  method^  whicb  is  most  often  osed  in  practice.  A  aolntioii  of  otne  part  of  alnr
nitrate  in  80  to  50  parts  of  water,  ahd  mixed  with  a  soiBoiflDt  quantity  of  a  aolntko  d
potassium  cyanide  to  redissolve  the  precipitate  of  silTer  esraaide  fonmed,  givM  a  Ml
coating  of  silver,  but  if  twice  an  much  water  be  used  the  mudm  miztun  givva  a  W|^
coating.

Silver  plating  in  the  wet  way  has  now  replaced  to  a  oonndetable  extent  the  di
process  of  dry  silveringj  because  this  process,  which  consiste  in  dieeolTii^  eilTar  is
mercury  and  applying  the  amalgam  to  the  surface  of  the  objects,  and  then  ymponu^
the  mercury,  offers  the  great  disadvantage  of  the  poisonous  meicurj  fumes.  fTrsMw
these,  there  is  another  method  of  silver  plating,  based  on  the  direct  displeoemoil  d
silver  from  its  salts  by  other  metals — for  example,  by  copper.  The  roiycii  xednees  thi
silver  from  its  compounds,  and  the  silver  separated  is  deposited  upon  the  copper.  Ikn
a  Bolutiou  of  silver  chloride  in  sodium  thiosulphate  deposits  a  coating  of  silTer  upas  t
strip  of  copper  immerned  in  it.  It  is  best  for  this  purpose  to  take  pore  9ilver  tufyhiir
This  is  prepared  by  mixing  a  solution  of  silver  nitrate  with  an  excess  of  smnuMiia,  tad
adding  a  saturated  solution  of  sodium  sulphite  and  then  alcohol,  which  precipitatM
Hilver  Hulphite  from  the  solation.  The  latter  and  its  solutions  are  very  easily  deoompoted
by  copper.  Metallic  iron  proiluces  the  same  decomposition,  and  iron  and  steel  articlei
may  be  very  readily  silver-plated  by  means  of  the  tliiosulphate  solution  of  silTer  cfakvMk
Indeed,  copi)er  and  similar  metals  may  even  be  silver-plated  by  means  of  silver  cdilande;
if  the  diloride  of  silver,  with  a  small  amount  of  acid,  be  rubbed  upon  the  snriauee  of  Ihi
c()pi>er,  the  latter  becomes  covered  with  a  coating  of  sUver,  which  it  has  rednoed.

Silver  plating  is  not  only  applicable  to  metallic  objects,  but  also  to  glass,  chins,  Ac
Glass  is  silvered  for  various  purposes — for  example,  glass  globes  silvered  internally  an
UHed  for  ornamentation,  and  have  a  mirrored  surface.  Common  looking-glass  silveisd
upon  one  side  forms  a  mirror  which  is  better  than  the  ordinary  mercury  nunors,  owinf
to  the  truer  colours  of  the  image  dac  to  the  whiteness  of  the  silver.  For  opUcsl  is-
Ktruments — for  example,  telescopes — concave  mirrors  are  now  made  of  silvered  glMi,
which  has  first  been  ground  and  i>olished  into  the  required  form.  The  wilvering  of  gUua
is  based  on  the  fact  that  silver  which  is  reduced  from  certain  solutions  deposits  itself  usi-
fornily  in  a  perfectly  homogeneous  and  continuous  but  very  thin  layer,  forming  a  biiglit
reflecting  surface.  Certain  organic  substances  have  the  property  of  reducing  Kilver  in  thi*
form.  The  best  known  among  these  are  certain  aldehydes — for  instance,  ardinszy
acetaldchyde,  C.jH|0,  which  easily  oxidises  in  the  air  and  forms  acetic  acij,  CoHtOJ.
This  oxidation  also  easily  takes  place  at  the  expi>nse  of  silver  oxide,  when  a  certain  amoonl
oi  ammonia  is  added  to  the  mixture.  The  oxide  of  silver  gives  up  its  oxygen  to  the
aldehyde,  and  the  silver  reduced  from  it  is  deposited  in  a  metallic  state  in  a  nniform
bright  coating.  The  same  action  is  produced  by  certain  saccharine  substanoes  and
certain  organic  acids,  such  as  tartaric  acid,  &c.

COPPER,  SILVER.  AND  QOLD  4S6

chloride,  he  took  pure  rock  salt,  containing  only  a  small  ijuantily  ol
rnagneHJuii  and  calcium  cumpounds  and  a  sma^l  amount  of  potassium
salts.  Tliis  salt  was  disaolved  in  water,  and  the  saturated  solution
evaporated  by  boiling.  The  sodium  chloride  separated  out  during  the
boiling,  and  the  mother  liquor  containing  the  impurities  was  poured
off.  Alcohol  of  65  p,c.  strength  and  platinic  chloride  were  added
to  the  reaultent  salt,  in  order  to  precipitate  all  the  potassium  and
a  certain  part  of  the  sodium  salts.  The  resultant  alcoholic  solution,
containing  the  sodium  and  platinum  chlorides,  was  then  mixed  with  a
solution  of  pure  ammonium  chloride  in.  cirder  to  remove  the  platinic
chloride.  After  this  precipitation,  the  Rolution  was  evaporated  in  a
platinum  retort,  and  then  separate  portions  of  this  puritied  sodium
chloride  were  collected  as  they  crystallised.  The  same  salt  was  pre-
pared from  sodium  sulphate,  tartrate,  nitrate,  and  from  the  platino-
chloride,  in  order  to  have  sudiiim  chluride  prepared  by  different  methods
and  from  different  sources,  and  in  this  manner  ten  samples  of  sodium
chloride  thus  prepared  were  purified  and  investigated  in  their  relation
to  silver.  After  being  dried,  weighed  quantities  of  all  ten  samples
ijf  sodium  chloride  were  dissolved  in  water  and  mixed  with  a  solution
in  nitric  aeid  of  a  weighed  quantity  of  perfectly  pure  silver.  A
slightly  greater  quantity  of  silver  was  taken  than  would  be  required
for  the  decomposition  of  the  sodium  chloride,  and  when,  after  pour
lag  in  all  the  silver  solution,  the  silver  chloride  hiul  settled,  the
amount  of  silver  remaining  in  excess  was  determined  by  means  of  a
solution  of  sodium  cldoride  of  known  strength.  This  solution  of
sodium  chloride  was  added  so  long  as  it  formed  a  precipitate.  In  this
manner  Stas  determined  how  many  pJtrU  of  sodium  chloride  curre-
spoad  to  100  parts  by  weight  of  silver.  The  result  of  ten  determina-
tions-was that  for  the  entire  precipitation  of  100  parts  of  silver,
from  54'2060  to  542093  parts  of  sodium  chloride  were  required.  The
difference  is  so  inconsiderable  that  it  has  no  perceptible  influence
on  the  subsequent  calculations.  The  mean  of  ten  experiments  was
that  100  parts  of  silver  reaut  with  54-20"t<  parts  of  sodium  chloride.
Xn  order  to  learn  from  this  the  relation  between  the  chlorine  and
silver,  it  was  necessary  to  determine  the  quantity  of  chlorine  contained  in
S4-2078  parts  of  sodium  chloride,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  quantity
of  chlorine  which  combines  with  100  parts  of  silver.  For  this  purpose
8taa  made  a  series  of  observations  on  the  quantity  of  silver  chloride
obtained  from  100  parts  of  silver.  Four  syntheses  were  made  by  him
for  this  purpose.  Tiie  first  synthesis  consisted  in  the  formation  of
silver  chloride  by  the  action  of  chlorine  on  silver  at  a  red  heat.  This
experiment  showed  that  100  parts  of  silver  give  132'!K41,  132*843  and

I

.  I

486  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

132*843  of  silver  chloride.  The  second  method  oonsiBted  in  diBa
a  given  quantity  of  silyer  in  nitric  acid  and  precipitating  it  by  i
of  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid  passed  over  the  surface  of  the  liquid
resultant  mass  was  evaporated  in  the  dark  to  drive  off  the  nitrii
and  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid,  and  the  remaining  silver  chlorid
fused  first  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrochloric  acid  gas  and  then  i
In  this  process  the  silver  cliloride  was  not  washed,  and  therefore
could  be  no  loss  from  solution.  Two  experiments  made  b;
method  showed  that  100  parts  of  silver  give  132*849  and  11
parts  of  silver  chloride.  A  third  series  of  determinationa  wa
made  by  precipitating  a  solution  of  silver  nitrate  "with  a  c
excess  of  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid.  The  amount  of  silver  el:
obtained  was  altogether  132*848.  Lastly,  a  fourth  determinatic
made  by  precipitating  dissolved  silver  with  a  solution  of  amm^
chloride,  when  it  was  found  that  a  considerable  amonnt  of
(0*3175)  had  passed  into  solution  in  the  washing;  for  100
of  silver  there  was  obtained  altogether  132*8417  of  silver  ch
Thus  from  the  mean  of  seven  determinations  it  appears  the
parts  of  silver  give  132-8445  parts  of  silver  chloride — that  ii
32*8445  parts  of  chlorine  are  able  to  combine  with  100  pa
silver  and  with  that  quantity  of  sodium  which  is  csontain
54*2078  parts  of  sodium  chloride.  These  observations  shovi
32*8445  parts  of  chlorine  combine  with  100  parts  of  silve
with  21*3633  parts  of  sodium.  From  these  figures  expressin
relation  between  the  combining  weights  of  chlorine,  silver,  and  8<
it  would  be  possible  to  determine  their  atomic  weights — that  i
coinbiuing  quantity  of  these  elements  with  respect  to  one  pi
weight  of  hydrogen  or  16  parts  of  oxygen,  if  there  existed  a  sei
similarly  accurate  determinations  for  the  reactions  between  hyc
or  oxygen  and  one  of  these  elements — chlorine,  sodium,  or  silvc
we  determine  the  quantity  of  silver  chloride  which  is  obtained
silver  chlorate,  AgClOg,  w^e  shall  know  the  relation  betwee
combining  weights  of  silver  chloride  and  oxygen,  so  that,  takii
quantity  of  oxygen  as  a  constant  magnitude,  we  can  learn  froi
I'eaction  the  combining  weight  of  silver  chloride,  and  from  the  p
ing  numbers  the  combining  weights  of  chlorine  and  silver.  Fc
j)urpose  it  was  first  necessary  to  obtain  pure  silver  chlorate.
8tas  (lid  by  acting  on  silver  oxide  or  carbonate,  suspended!  in
with  gaseous  chlorine. '^^

-•■  The  plienomeiion  whi<rh  then  takes  place  is  rlest-rilwd  by  Staa  as  follown,  in  a
whicli  is  ]H»rfoot  in  itH  cleanioBH  and  accuracy :  if  fiilver  oxide  or  carbonate  be  ah!
in water,  and an excesH  of  water  nattirated  witli  clilorine  be  added, all th<

COPPER.  SILVER. AND  GOLD  487

The  decomposition  of  the  silver  chlorate  thus  obtained  was  awoin-
))lished  by  the  action  of  a  solution  of  sulpliurous  Einhydride  on
it.  The  salt  was  lirst  fused  by  carefully  heating  it  at  '2iS^.  The  solution
of  sulphurous  anhydride  used  waa  one  saturated  at  0°.  Sulphui-ous
anhydride  in  dilute  solutions  is  oxidised  at  the  expense  of  silver
clklor&te,  even  at  low  temperatures,  with  great  ease  if  the  liquid  be
continually  sliaken,  sulphuric  acid  and  silver  chloride  heing  formed  :
AgC10,i  +  3SO.j  +  .1H.;0=AgCl  +  3H5SO,.  After  decomposition,  the
resullfLnt  liquid  waa  evaporated,  and  the  residue  of  silver  chloride
weighed.  Thus  the  process  cimsisted  in  taking  a  known  weight  of
silver  chlorate,  converting  it  into  silver  chloride,  and  determining
the  weight  of  the  latter.  The  analysis  conducted  in  this  manner  gave
the  following  results,  which,  like  the  preceding,  designate  tlie  weight
in  A  vacuum  calculated  from  the  weights  obtained  in  air  :  In  the
first  experiment  it  appeared  that  138 '7890  grams  of  silver  chlorate
gave 103-9795  parts  of  silver  chloride,  and  in  the  second  experiment

anil  tliu  water  thea  cantuna,  bemdea  the  excess  ii(  clilonnii,  only  pure  hTpochlornus
■cid  withoaC  the  ^B^0  tmce  ol  chloric  or  chloroiu  nciS.  It  b  utreiin  of  chlorine  be
passed  into  wntar  contuniDg  an  exceti  of  tilrsr  oxtdf  or  siWoT  cubonata  while  the
liriaii]  is  continually  iftitated,  the  reaction  in  the  smne  an  the  preceding;  silver
chloride  aud  hypochloroa«  acid  are  fanned.  BntthiB  acid  does  not  long  remain  in  a  Free
state:  it  gradnally  acts  on  the  ailver  oiide  and  girua  silver  hypochlorite,  i.e.  AgClO.
If,  after  some  time,  the  current  of  chlorine  be  slopped  but  the  shaking  continued,
the  liquid  los«s  its  ohsracterlatic  odoar  of  hj^wchlorout  acid,  nhile  prestrTiag  ita
energetic  decolourising  property,  hecanse  the  xiWer  bypochlorit&*bich  is  formed  in  «Heily
soluble  in  water.  In  the  pretence  of  ui  excess  of  silver  oiide  tliiii  salt  can  be  kept  In
sevrral  days  without  de«im position,  but  it  '•*  exceedingly  unstable  when  no  eicesa  o(
silirr  oxide  or  carbonate  is  prenent.  So  long  a.b  the  solution  of  silver  hypochlorite  ia
shaken  up  with  the  wlver  oxide,  it  preserves  its  trnnspsjency  and  bleaching  property,
bol  directly  It  is  allowed  to  stand,  and  the  silver  oxide  settles,  it  become*  rapidly  cloudy
and  deposits  large  flakes  of  aQver  chloride,  so  that  the  lilniJc  trilver  oxide  which  had
settled  becomes  covered  with  the  wliite  precipitaU.  The  liituid  then  loseti  its  bleaching
properties  and  conlun*  silver  chlorate,  i,r.  AgCIOj,  in  eolnlion,  which  has  a  siigbtly
alkaline  re«c(ion,  owing  to  the  preseoce  ol  a  small  ainonnt  of  dissotred  oxide.  In  this
manner  the  reaction*  which  ate  consecntiioly  Biccnuiplished  may  be  expressed  by  the
e^nsliims  -.
nHj  +  3A^,0  *  BH^O  -  nJigCl  ■+  8HCIO  ;

SAgCIO  ^  4AgCI  +

Hence,  Staa  gives  the  following  method  for  th  i^  preparation  ol  silver  chlorsto  :  A  slow
current  ol  chlorine  is  earned  ia  act  on  oxide  oF  silver,  suKpended  in  water  which  ia  kepi
in  a  state  of  continual  ai^tation.  The  shaking  in  continned  aftor  the  supply  of  chlorine
has  been  stopped,  in  nrdi-r  th4t  the  free  hypochlorous  acid  should  puss  into  silver
hypoddorite,  wid  the  reaultuil  MilatioD  of  the  hypochlorite  ia  drawn  ofl  from  the
eediioent  of  the  eice»s  ol  silver  o«ide.  This  solution  decomposes  sponUneonslj  into
silver  chloride  and  clilutale.  The  pure  silver  chlorate,  AgClOg,  does  not  change  under
the  action  ol  light.  The  salt  ia  prepared  lor  furllier  nse  by  drying  it  in  dry  air  at  irSD".
It  ia  necessary  during  drying  to  prevent  the  iccesi  of  any  orguiic  matter ;  this  is  done  by
filtering  the  air  through  cotton  wool,  and  passing  it  over  s  layer  o(  red-hot  tuipper  oxide.

J

I  1  !

I

I

I  .1

' 1 '

488  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

that  259-5287  grams  of  chlorate  gave  194-44515  gr»ms  t
chloride,  and  after  fusion  194*4435  grama.  The  mean  reault
ex]>eriment8,  converted  into  percentages,  shows  that  100  parts
chlorate  contain  74*9205  of  silver  chl<Nride  and  25-0795  parts  ol
From  this  it  is  possible  to  calculate  the  comlnning  weight
chloride,  because  in  the  decomposition  of  silver  chlorate  i
obtained  three  atoms  of  oxygen  and  one  moleoale  c
chloride:  AgClO,  =  AgCl  +  30.  Taking  the  weight  of
of  oxygen  to  be  16,  we  find  from  the  mean  resalt  that  \
valent  weight  of  silver  chloride  is  equal  to  143*395.  Thus  i
AgCl= 143*395,  and  as  the  preceding  experiments  show  tb
chloride  contains  32*8445  parts  of  chlorine  per  100  parts  i
the  weight  of  tiie  atom  of  silver**^**  most  he  107*94  i
of  chlorine  35*45.  The  weight  of  the  atom  of  sodiam  is  de
from  the  fact  that  21*3633  parts  of  sodium  chloride  oomb
32 '8445  parts  of  chlorine  ;  consequently  Nar=  23*05.  This  oe
arrived  at  by  the  analysis  of  silver  chlorate^  was  verified  1
of  the  analysis  of  potassium  chlorate  by  deoompoeing  it
and  determining  the  weight  of  the  potassium  chloridti!  formed,
by  effecting  the  same  decomposition  by  igniting  the  ohlor
stream  of  hydrochloric  acid.  The  combining  weight  of  f
chloride  was  thus  determined,  and  another  series  of  deten
cc»nfimied  the  relation  between  chlorine,  potassium,  and  silve
sanio  manner  as  the  relation  between  sodium,  chlorine,  and  si
determined  above.  Consequently,  the  combining  weights  of
chlorine,  and  potassium  could  be  deduced  by  combining  these  d
the  analysis  of  silver  chlorate  and  the  synthesis  of  silver  chlori
agreement  V>etween  the  results  showed  that  the  determinatic
by  the  last  method  were  perfectly  correct,  and  did  not  depeni
considerable  degree  on  the  methods  which  were  employed  in
ce<ling  determinations,  as  the  combining  weights  of  chlorine  a
obtained  were  the  same  as  before.  There  was  naturally  a  d
but  so  small  a  one  that  it  undoubtedly  depended  on  the  errors
tal  to  every  process  of  weighing  and  experiment.  The  atomi
of  silver  was  also  determined  by  Stas  by  means  of  the  syn
silver  sulphide  and  the  analysis  of  silver  sulphate.  The  <x
weight  obtained  by  this  method  was  107*920.  The  synthesis
iodide  and  the  analysis  of  silver  iodate  gave  the  figure  107*91

31.  bu  xiie  reHultR  given  by  SUh'  determiiiationH  have  recently  been  reoalci
certain  correctiong  have  been  introdaced.  We  give  in  tlie  context  the  avom^
van  der  Plaat's  and  Thoraaen's  calcnlationa,  aH  well  oh  in  Table  III.  neg\
doubtful  thouaandths.

COPPER, SILVER. AND SOLD

syiitliesis  of  silver  bromide  with  the  analjuis  of  silver  bi-oiiiatc  gave  the
figure  107'92l.  The  synthesis  of  silver  chloride  and  the  analysis  of
silver  chlorate  gave  a  mean  result  of  I07't)37.  Hence  there  is  na
doubt  that  the  combining  weight  of  silver  is  at  least  as  much  as  107'9
—greater  than  107-90  and  less  than  107'95,  and  probably  equal  to  the
meaii:sl07-92.  St&s  determined  the  combining  weights  of  many  other  j.
elements  in  this  manner,  such  as  lithium,  potassium,  sodium,  bromine,
chlorine,  iodine,  and  also  nitrogen,  for  the  determination  of  the
anjount  of  silver  nitrate  obtained  from  a  given  amount  of  silver
gives  directly  the  combining  weight  of  nitrogen.  Taking  that
of  oxygen  as  1 6,  he  obtained  the  following  combining  weights
for  these  elements  :  nitrogen  14-04,  silver  107''J3,  chlorine  35-46,
bromine  79''J5,  iodine  126'85,  lithium  7*02,  sodium  23-04,  potassium
3915.  These  figures  differ  slightly  from  those  which  are  usually
employed  in  chemical  investigations.  They  must  be  regarded  as  the
result  of  the  best  observations,  whilst  the  figures  usually  used  in
practical  chemi.stry  are  only  approximate — are,  no  to  speak,  round
numbers  for  the  atomic  weights  wliich  diH'er  so  little  from  the  exact
figures  (for  instance,  for  Ag  108  Instead  of  107'92,  for  Na  23  instead
of  23-04}  that  in  ordinary  determinations  and  calculations  the
difference  falls  within  the  limits  of  experimental  error  inseparable  from
such  determinations.

The  exhaustive  investigations  conducted  by  Stas  on  the  atomic
weights  of  the  above-named  elements  have  great  significance  in
the  solution  of  the  problem  as  to  whether  the  atomic  weights  of  the
elements  can  be  expressed  in  whole  numbers  if  the  unit  taken  be  the
atomic  weight  of  hydrogen.  Prout,  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,
stated  that  this  was  the  case,  and  held  that  the  atomic  weights  of  the
elements  are  multiples  of  the  atomic  weight  of  hyilrogen.  The  subse-
quent determinations  of  Berzelius,  Penny,  Marchand,  Marignac,  Dumas,
and  more  especially  of  8tas,  proved  this  conclusion  to  be  untenable ;
since  a  whole  series  of  elements  proved  to  hare  fractional  atomic
weights— for  oxnraple,  chlorine,  about  3.^-5.  On  account  of  this,
Marignac  and  Dumas  stated  that  the  atomic  weights  of  the  elements
are  expressed  in  relation  to  hydrogen,  either  by  whole  numbers
or  by  numbers  with  simple  fractions  of  the  magnitudes  ^  and  |.  But
Stas's  researches  refute  this  supposition  also.  Even  between  the  com-
bining weight  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  there  is  not,  so  far  as  is  yet
known,  that  simple  relation  which  is  required  by  Prout'g  hypot/iegU,''^

"  This  lirpotbesiH,  lor  the  eiUliliiilimFnt  or  rctutAtion  ol  irliipli  to  muiy  reB(«rohes
hAve  been  ouide,  in  ciceedingl;  imponant,  and  tally  dcBerret  Ihe  atteation  wliioh  has
btfen  givtiD  to  it. Indeed,  J  it  appeared  thut  the  atomic  wcightaof  all  the  element!  could

440  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

i.e.y  taking  0=16)  the  atomic  weight  of  hydrogen  is  equal  not  to  1  but
to  a  greater  number  somewhere  between  1*002  and  1-008  or  mean

be  expreRsed  in  whole  numbers  with  reference  to  hydrogen,  or  if  they  at  least  proTed  to
be  commensurable  with  one  another,  then  it  could  be  affirmed  with  confidence  that  the
elements,  with  all  their  diversity,  were  formed  of  one  material  condensed  or  grooped  in
various  manners  into  the  stable,  and,  under  known  conditions,  andecomposable  gronps
which  we  call  the  atoms  of  the  elements.  At  first  it  was  supposed  that  all  the  elements
were  nothing  else  but  condensed  hydrogen,  but  when  it  appeared  that  the  atomic  wei^tn
of  the  elements  could  not  be  expressed  in  whole  numbers  in  relation  to  hydiY)geii,
it  was  still  possible  to  imagine  the  existence  of  a  certain  material  from  which  hoth  hydro-
gen and  all  the  other  elements  were  formed.  If  it  should  transpire  that  four  atoms  of  thia
material  form  an  atom  of  hydrogen,  then  the  atom  of  chlorine  would  present  itself  ss
consisting  of  142  atoms  of  this  substance,  the  weight  of  whose  atom  would  be  equal  to
0'25.  But  in  this  case  the  atoms  of  all  the  elements  should  be  expressed  in  wb(4e
numbers  with  respect  to  the  weight  of  the  atom  of  this  original  material.  Let  us  8ap>
pose  that  the  atomic  weight  of  this  material  is  equal  to  unity,  then  all  the  atomic  weights
should  be  expressible  in  whole  numbers  relatively  to  this  unit.  Thus  the  atom  of  one  ele-
ment, let  us  suppose,  would  weigh  ?n,  and  of  another  77,  but,  as  both  m  and  n  must  be
whole  numbers,  it  follows  that  the  atomic  weights  of  all  the  elements  would  be  commen-
surable. But  it  is  sufficient  to  glance  over  the  results  obtained  by  Stas,  and  to  be
assured  of  their  accuracy,  especially  for  silver,  in  order  to  entirely  destroy,  or  at  least
strongly  undermine,  this  attractive  hypothesis.  We  must  therefore  refuse  our  assent  to  tiie
doctrine  of  the  building  up  from  a  single  substance  of  the  elements  known  to  us.  This
hyxK>thesis  is  not  supported  either  by  any  known  transformation  (for  one  element  haw  nerei
been  converted  into  another  element),  or  by  the  commensurability  of  the  atomic  weights
of  the  elements.  Although  the  hypothesis  of  the  formation  of  all  the  elements  firam  s
single  substance  (for  which  Crookes  has  suggested  the  name  protyle)  is  most  attractive
in  its  comprehensiveness,  it  can  neither  be  denied  nor  accepted  for  want  of  sulBoient  data
Marignac  t-ndeavoured,  however,  to  overcome  Stas's  conclusions  as  to  the  incommenso-
rability  of  the  atomic  weights  by  supposing  that  in  his,  as  in  the  determinations  of  all
other  observers,  there  were  unperceived  errors  which  were  quite  independent  of  the  mode
of  observation — for  example,  silver  nitrate  might  be  supposed  to  be  an  unstable  substance
which  (^hiiii'Tes,  under  the  heatings,  evaporations,  and  other  processes  to  which  it  is  sub-
j«^cted  in  the  reactions  for  the  determination  of  the  combining  weight  of  silver.  It  might
1)0  supposed,  for  instance,  that  silver  nitrate  contains  some  impurity  which  cannot  be
removed  by  any  means  ;  it  might  also  be  supposed  that  a  portion  of  the  elements  of  the
nitric  acid  arc  disen^agcul  in  the  evaporation  of  the  solution  of  silver  nitrate  (owing  to  the
decomposing  action  of  water),  and  in  its  fusion,  and  that  we  have  not  to  deal  with  nomud
silver  nitrate,  but  witli  a  slightly  basic  salt,  or  perhaps  an  excess  of  nitric  acid  which
cannot  be  removed  from  the  salt.  In  this  case  the  observed  combining  weight  will  not
refer  to  an  actually  definite  chemical  compound,  but  to  some  mixture  for  which  thei«
does  not  exist  any  perfectly  exact  combining  relations.  Marignac  upholds  this  proiK>sition
by  the  fact  that  the  conclusions  of  Stas  and  other  observers  res]>ecting  the  combinins
weights  determined  with  the  greatest  exaetitu<le  very  nearly  a^ee  witli  the  proposition
of  tile  connnensurability  of  the  atomic  weights— for  example,  the  combining  weight  <rf
silver  was  shown  to  be  equal  to  10708,  so  that  it  only  differs  by  0"08  from  the  whole
number  108,  which  is  generally  accepted  for  silver.  The  combining  weight  of  iodine
proved  to  be  equal  to  12(VH5 — that  is,  it  differs  from  127  by  0*15.  The  eonibining  weirfits
c»f  sodium,  nitrogen,  bromine,  chlorine,  and  lithium  are  still  nearer  to  the  whole  or  round
numbers  which  are  generally  accept<'d.  But  Marignac's  proposition  will  hardly  bear
criticism.  Indeed  if  we  express  the  combining  weights  of  the  elements  determined  bv
Stas  in  relation  to  hydrogen,  the  approximation  of  these  weights  to  whole  number*
disapivears,  be<'ause  one  part  of  hydrogen  in  reality  does  not  combine  with  16  parts  of
oxygen,  but  with  15*02  parts,  and  therefore  we  shall  obtain,  taking  H=  1,  not  the  above-
cited  figures,  but  for  silver  10738,  for  bromine  7055,  magnitudes  which  are  still  further

COPPEH.  SILVER. AND  OOLD

I  OOri.  Such  a  conclusion  arrived  «t  by  direct  experiiuent  caunot  but
be  regarded  as  having  greater  weight  than  Prout's  supposition
(hjpotheaiB)  that  the  atomic  Aveights  of  the  elements  are  in  multiple
proportion  to  each  other,  which  would  gi\e  reason  for  surmising  (but  nOt
aEserting)  a  complexity  of  nature  in  the  elements,  and  their  com-
mon origin  from  a  single  primary  material,  and  for  expecting  their
mutual  conversion  into  each  other. All  such  ideas  and  hopes  must

rmnovud  from  whole  nnmberik  Betides  wli'ch,  if  MiuiK>'^'*  propoaUion  were  (rue  the
fambining  wni^l  o!  iiilvet  determmed  by  one  method — e.g.  hj  Lhe  onijyius  ot  diver
tlilorate  coinbinBd  with  the  Bynthews  ol  silver  uhloride— wonld  not  agree  well  wilh  the
tombiniog  weight  determined  by  another  method — e.g.  hy  meanii  of  the  uialyeisut  kilver
iodnte  iind  the  BjntheiUB  at  silveT  iodide.  If  in  one  ciue  a,  h»nc  wtt  conld  be  obtained,
in  tbe  other  ciwe  ui  acid  salt  might  be  obtained.  Tlieu  the  analyHiH  of  the  uid  aalt
would  give  diSerent  reKnltii  (rtun  thut  of  the  basic  siUt.  Tfana  Harignac's  acKumenta
eaniiot  serve  •«  a  (apport  (or  the  viiidivaliuii  ot  Prout'B  LypotheBis,

III  (TDDclnaion,  I  thiiik  it  will  not  be  out  ot  place  to  cite  the  following  paseage  from  a
pap<*r  I  read  before  the  Chemieal  Soeietir  of  London  in  1669  (Appandix  II.),  referring  to
tbe  bypathesis  of  the  complexity  of  the  elemenliHrecogiuHed  in  chemiatry.  owing  to  the
Wt  that  many  have  eDdoavotired  to  apply  the  periodic  law  to  the  justitieatton  of  Uiifl

of  many  gods  bnt  only  one  matter.'

'  When  we  try  to  explain  the  origin  of  the  idiea  of  a  uniqne  primary  matter,  ve  easily
tmcii  that,  in  the  absence  of  dednctions  from  experiment,  it  derives  its  origin  from  the
scientifically  philosophical  attempt  at  discovering  some  kind  of  unity  in  the  immense
diversity  iti  indiriilualitiea  which  we  see  aroimd.  In  clsHsical  times  snch  a  tendency
could  only  be  satisfied  by  oonueptions  abont  the  immaterial  world-  As  to  the  material
world,  our  auDestors  were  compelled  to  reai»rt  U>  some  hypothesis,  and  they  adopted  tbe
idoa  of  niiity  in  tbe  formative  material,  becanse  they  were  not  able  to  evolve  the  concep-
tion of  any  other  poHsible  unity  iu  order  ^l  conmect  tbe  wultitarioua  reletions  of  matter.
Responding  to  tbe  same  legitimate  scientific  tendency,  natural  science  haa  diaciivered
throughoDt  tbe  univene  a  unity  of  pUn,  a  nuity  of  forces,  and  a.  unity  ot  matter  ;  and
the  coDVinciDg  EonclUBioDs  of  modem  Bcisnce  cutnpel  every  one  tu  admit  these  kinds  ot
unity.  But  while  we  admit  unity  in  many  things,  we  none  the  less  most  also  explain
the  individuality  and  the  apparent  diversity  (vliich  we  cannot  fail  to  trace  everywhere.
It  Has  said  of  old  "  Give  nt  n  tnlcmm  and  it  nill  become  eaay  to  displace  the  earth."
So  also  we  must  say,  "Give  us  something  that  ia  individnaUsed,  and  the  apparent
diversity  will  be  easily  understood." Otherwise,  hon  could  unity  reeult  in  a  mnltitods

'  After  a  long  and  painstaking  research,  natdral  science  lias  discovered  the  inditidu-
olities  of  the  ohemical  elements,  and  therefore  it  is  now  capable,  not  only  of  anolyaing,
bnt  also  of  •ynthesising ;  it  can  nnderstand  and  grasp  generality  and  unity,  as  well  aa
the  individualised  and  multifarions.  The  general  and  aniversaJ,  like  time  uud  apace,  like
force  and  motion,  vary  uniformly.  The  nniform  admit  ol  interpolations,  reTcaling  every
intermediate  phase ;  but  the  multitndinuua,  the  individualiBed^BUch  hf  outselvea,  or  the
chemical  elements,  or  the  members  of  a  peculiar  puriudic  fimctiait,i>{  the  elements,  or
Daltou's  multiple  proportions— is  cbaracteiised  iu  another  way.  We  see  iu  it — side  by
side  wilh  a  general  connecting  principle — leaps,  brewJis  of  caiitinl]ity,pDinlBiFluch  escape
from  the  analyaia  of  the  infinitely  small— an  absence  o[  complete  inl«raiediale  links.
Cbemistiy  baa  found  an  annwer  to  the  question  us  to  the  CAUsea  ol  multitudes,  and  while
retaining  the  conception  ot  many  elements,  all  snbniitted  to  the  discipline  of  a  general
law,  it  oilers  an  escape  from  the  Indian  Nirvana — tbu  absorptiou  in  tbe  onivenal— re-
placing it  by  the  individualised.  However,  the  pJace  lor  iiidividoolity  is  so  limited  by
tbe  all-grasping,  all-powerful  nniversal,  that  it  is  merely  a  point  ol  aupport  (oi  lhe  nndat-
ntanding  of  maltitudc  in  unity,"

442  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

now,  thanks  more  especially  to  Stas,  be  placed  in  a  region  void  of  any
experimental  support  whatever,  and  therefore  not  subject  to  the  dis-
cipline of  the  positive  data  of  science.

Among  the  platinum  metals  ruthenium,  rhodium,  and  palladium,
by  their  atomic  weights  and  properties,  approach  silver,  just  as  iron
and  its  analogues  (cobalt  and  nickel)  approach  copper  in  all  respects.
Gold  stands  in  exactly  the  same  position  in  relation  to  the  heavy
platinum  metals,  osmium,  iridium,  and  platinum,  as  copper  and
silver  do  to  the  two  preceding  series.  The  atomic  weight  of  gold  is
nearly  equal  to  their  atomic  weights  ;  ^^  it  is  dense  like  these  metals.
It  also  gives  various  grades  of  oxidation,  which  are  feeble,  both  in
a  basic  and  an  acid  sense.  Whilst  near  to  osmium,  iridium,  and  pla-
tinum, gold  at  the  same  time  is  able,  like  copper  and  silver,  to  form
compounds  which  answer  to  the  type  KX — that  is,  oxides  of  the  compo-
sition RjO.  Cuprous  chloride,  CuCl,  silver  chloride,  AgCl,  and  aurous
chloride,  AuCl,  are  substances  which  are  very  much  alike  in  their
physical  and  chemical  properties.^®***"*  They  are  insoluble  in  water,
but  dissolve  in  hydrochloric  acid  and  ammonia,  in  potassium cyanide,

^  It  miglit  bo  expected  from  the  periodic  law  and  analogies  with  the  aerieci  iion,  cobalt,
nickel,  copper,  zinc,  that  the  atomic  weights  of  the  elements  of  the  series  oemiam,
iridium,  pUitinuni,  gold,  mercury,  would  rise  in  this  order,  and  at  the  time  of  the  esta-
blishment of  the  periodic  law  (1869),  the  detenninations  of  Berzelius,  Rose,  and  others
gave  tlie  following  values  for  the  atomic  weights :  08  =  200,  Ir  =  197,  Pt  =  198,  An  — 196,
Hg  -200.  Tlie  fulfilment  of  the  expectations  of  the  periodic  law  was  given  in  the  first
phioe  by  th«/  fre^h  determinations  (Seubert,  Dittmar,  and  Arthur)  of  the  atomic  weight  of
pljitinum,  which  proved  to  be  nearly  19(>,  if  0  =  16  (as  Marignac,  Bruuner,  and  others
proj)0!>e)  ;  in  the  second  phice,  by  the  fact  that  Seubert  proved  that  the  atomic  weight  of
osmium  is  ivully  less  than  that  of  i)latinum,  and  approximately  08  =  191 ;  and,  in  tlie
thinl  place,  by  the  fact  that  after  the  researches  of  Kriiss,  Thorpe,  and  Laurie  there  was
no  doul»t  that  the  atomic  weight  of  gold  is  greater  than  that  of  platinum — namelx,
nearly  1U7.  •

^  '••*  In  Chapter  XXIL,  Note  40,  we  gave  the  thermal  data  for  certain  of  the  com-
pounds of  copper  of  the  tyiH)  CuX.^ ;  we  will  now  cite  certain  data  for  the  cnproub
compounds  of  the  type  CuX,  which  present  an  analogy  to  the  corresponding  compound^
AgX  and  AuX,  some  of  which  were  investigated  by  Thomseu  in  his  classical  work,
'  Thermochemi'>(he  Untt^rsuchungen  '  (Vol.  iii.,  1mh3).  The  data  are  given  in  the  same
manner  a^  in  the  above-mentioned  note:

R

Cu

Ag

An

R  •  CI

+  33

4  21)

+  «

R Br *

+  25

-r23

0

R  -  I

^16

+  14

-6

R-  0

+  41

+ 6

-?

ThuH  w<'  sfe  in  the  first  place  that  gold,  which  possesses  a  nmch  smaller  affinity  than  Ag,
evolves  farlesH  heat  than  an  etjuivalent  amount  of  copper,  giving  the  same  compound,  and
in  the  second  place  that  the  combination  of  copper  with  one  atom  of  oxygen  disengaim
more  heat  than  its  combination  with  one  atom  of  a  halogen,  whilst  with  silver  the  rererse
is  the  ease.  This  is  connected  with  the  fact  that  CU2O  is  more  stable  tinder  the  acti<ni
of  heat  than  Ag.^O.

COPPER, SILVER, AND SOLD

eodiuiii  thiosulphate.  iic.  Just  as  copper  forms  a.  link  )>etweon  the  iron
mi'tnla  ami  zinc,  and  as  silver  unites  the  light  platinum  metals  with
cudmiuni,  so  iilso  gold  presents  a  transition  from  the  heavy  platinum
metals  to  mercury.  Copper  gives  saline  compounds  of  the  types  CuX
nnd  CuX),  silver  of  the  type  AgX,  whilst  gold,  besides  compounds  of
the  type  AuX,  very  easily  and  most  fretjuently  forms  those  of  the  type
AuClj.  The  compounds  of  this  type  freijuently  pass  into  th(«e  of  the
lower  type,  just  as  PtX,  passes  into  PtX,,  and  the  same  is  observable
in  the  eJemeiits  which,  in  their  atouiit  weights,  foUow  gold.  Mercury
gives  HgX^  and  HgX.  thallium  gives  TlX,i  and  TiX,  lead  gives
PbX,  and  PbXj.  On  the  other  hand,  gold  in  a  qualitative  respect
differs  from  silver  and  copper  in  the  erfr-tjif  ea«e  with  which  all  its  com-
pounds are  rednfed  to  inetai  by  many  means.  This  is  not  only  accom-
plished by  many  reducing  agents,  but  also  by  the  action  of  heat.  Thus
its  chlorides  and  oxides  lose  their  chlorine  and  oxygen  when  heated,
and,  if  the  temperature  be  sufficiently  high,  these  elements  are  entirely
expelled  and  metallic  gold  alone  remains.  Its  compounds,  therefore,
not  as  oxidising  agents.*^

Ill  natur-^  gold  occurs  in  the  primary  and  chiefly  in  quartKose  rocks,
and  especially  in  quartz  veins,  as  in  the  Urals  {at  BerezofFak),  in
Australia,  and  in  California.  The  native  gold  is  exti'acted  from  these
rocks  by  subjecting  them  to  a  mechanical  treatment  consisting  of
crushing  and  washing.''^  ^* Nature  has  already  accomplished  a  similar

"  HcHTy  Atpoma  vid  moloculeft,  althongh  tli«y  may  pre^enl  nukay  |ioLatB  of  Aaiklogj,  ftre
more  ea.ail;  i»UW ;  than  C„H^  itlthougb,  like  C^O,,  it  wmbines  with  Br^,  uid  hu  »
Kiinil&rcoinpo«itlriD,  jet  reacts  wiUi  much  greater  dilBtulIylhaJi  C.jHt.  uid  in  this  it  reaem-
MeB  gold  ;  Ibe  heavy  atom*  and  molecnlon  are,  bo  to  eay,  inert,  and  alro*dj  Mtnnitod  by
themnelTes.  Gold  in  ita  higher  grade  of  oxidation,  An^Os,  preaeiita  feeble  baujc  pro-
I>crtie»  and  weakly-deyeloped  acid  propertiei,  so  ttaat  thi«  oiide  o(  gold.  Au.^j,  may  be
referred  to  the  pUh  oC  feeble  acid  oiidei,  like  platinic  oiide.  This  in  not  the  uew  in  the
highed  known  oiide»  of  copper  and  silver.  Bnt  in  the  lower  grade  ol  oxidation,  aorDiu
oxide,  An.jO,  gold,  like  ellvei  and  i-opiier,  preeents  Iweic  properties,  although  they  are
not  vary  pronounced.  In  tliia  respect  it  standi,  lery  close  iii  its  iiroperties,  although
not  in  iti  (ypet  of  combination  (AdX  and  AnXj),  to  plalinnui  (Ft^^  and  PtX,)  and  its
analognes.

As  yet  tlie  general  chemical  characteristicB  of  gold  aud  its  compoandfl  have  not  been
liilly  iuTestigated.  This  in  partly  dae  to  the  fact  that  very  few  researches  hB^-e  been
undertaken  on  the  compoandn  of  this  metal,  owing  to  its  in*cveB«biUly  tor  working
Tu  large  quantities.  A>  the  atomic  weight  o!  gold  is  high  (Au  =  IllT|,  the  preparation  of
its  compoundii  requires  that  it  should  lie  taken  in  largo  qnantilies,  which  forma  an
obstacle  to  ill  being  [ally  itudivd.  Hence  the  facts  eonceming  the  bifitory  of  this  metal
lire  rarely  dlltingaished  by  that  eiaclitade  wiCli  which  many  tacts  have  been  esUblished
i^ncoruing  other  elements  mure  aocestible,  and  long  known  in  use.

"*''  lionstadt  (1ST3|  ibowed  that  sea  wialer,  besides  silver,  always  coutnina  gold.
Hunsler  (1SB3|  showed  that  the  water  of  the  Norwegian  fiords  umUina  aboat  E  milli-
gnuns  of  gold  per  too  (or  t>  milliardths) — t.e  a  qiuuility  dewrving  practical  attention,  and
I  think  it  may  be  already  said  that,  considering  the  immeasurable  amoanl  of  sea  water,

444  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

disintegration  of  the  hard  rocky  matter  containing  gold.*®  These  dis-
integrated rocks,  washed  by  rain  and  other  water,  have  formed  gold-
bearing  deposits,  which  are  known  as  alluvial  gold  deposits.  Gold-
bearing  soil  is  sometimes  met  with  on  the  surface  and  sometimes  under

bringing  it  into  contact  with  RubHtancea  capable  of  dcpogiting  gold  apon  their  siirface.
The  first  efforts  might  be  made  upon  the  extraction  of  salt  from  sea  water,  and  a«  the
total  amount  of  sea  water  may  be  taken  as  about  2,000,000,000,000,000,000  tona,  it  follows
that  it  contains  about  10,000  million  tons  of  gold.  The  yearly  production  of  gold  is  about
200  tons  for  the  whole  world,  of  which  about  one  quarter  is  extracted  in  Rasaia.  It  is
supposed  that  gold  is  dissolved  in  sea  water  owing  to  the  presence  of  iodidea,  which,  under
the  action  of  animal  organisms,  yield  free  iodine.  It  is  thought  (as  Profeasor  Konova-
loff  mentions  in  his  work  upon  *Tlie  Industries  of  the  United  States,*  1894)  thai
iodine  facilitates  the  solution  of  the  gold,  and  the  organic  matter  its  precipitation.
These  facts  and  considerations  to  a  certain  extent  explain  the  distribution  of  gold  in
veins  or  rock  fissures,  chiefly  filled  with  quartz,  because  there  is  sufficient  reason  for
BupiK)Bing  that  these  rocks  once  formed  the  ocean  bottom.  R.  Dentrie,  and  sabse-
quently  Wilkinson,  showed  that  organic  matter — for  instance,  cork — and  pyrites  are  able
to  precipitate  gold  from  its  solutions  in  that  metallic  form  and  state  in  which  it  occurs
in  quartz  veins,  where  (especially  in  the  deeper  parts  of  vein  deposits)  gold  is  frequently
found  on  the  surface  of  pyrites,  chiefly  arsenical  pyrites.  Kazantseff  (in  Ekaterinburg,
1891)  even  supposes,  from  the  distribution  of  the  gold  in  these  p3rrites,  that  it  occurred
in  solution  as  a  compound  of  sulphide  of  gold  and  sulphide  of  arsenic  when  it  penetrated
into  the  veins.  It  is  from  such  considerations  that  the  origin  of  vein  and  pyritic  gold
is,  at  the  present  time,  attributed  to  the  reaction  of  solutions  of  this  metal,  the  remains
of  which  are  seen  in  the  gold  still  present  in  sea  water.

^  However,  in  recent  times,  especially  since  about  1870,  when  chlorine  (either  as  a
solution  of  the  gas  or  as  bleaching  powder)  and  bromine  began  to  be  applied  to  the  extrac-
tion of  finely-divided  gold  from  \x)OX  ores  (previously  roasted  in  order  to  drive  off  amenic
and  sulphur,  and  oxidise  the iron),  the  extraction of  gold  from  quartz  and  pyrites,
by  the  wet  method,  increases from  year to  year, and begins to  equal the amount
extracted  from  alluvial deiwsits. Since the nineties the cyanide  process  (Chapter
XIII., Note 13 bis) has taken an important phvce among the wet methods for
extracting  gold  from  its  ores.  It  consists  in  pouring  a  dilute  solution  of  cyanide  of  potas-
biuni  (about  500  parts  of  water  and  1  to  4  parts  of  cyanide  of  potassium  per  1,000  parts
of  ore,  tlu-  amount  of  cyanide  dei>endiiig  \i\)oi\  the  richness  of  the  ore)  and  a  mixture
of  it  with  NaCN,  [src  Chapter  XIII.,  Note  VI)  over  the  crushed  ore  (which  need  not  be
roasted,  whilst  roasting  is  indiBjwnsable  in  the  clilorination  process,  as  otherwise  the
chlorine is used up in oxidising the sulphur, arsenic, itc.) The  gold is disHolved
very rapidly even from pyrites, where it generally occurs on tlie surface in  such
fine  and adhtTrnt particles that  it  either  cannot  be  mechanically  washed awav or
more  fn-ciuently  is  carried  away by  the stream of  water,  and  cannot be caught by
mechanical means or by the mercury used for catching the gold in the sluices.
Clilorination  had  already  given  the  iM)ssibility  of  extracting  the  finest  particleH  of  gold;
but  the  cyanide  process  enables  such  pyrites  to  be  treated  as  could  be  scarcely  worked
by  other  means. The  treatment  of  the  crushed  ore  by  the  KCN  is  carrietl  on  in  simple
wooden  vats  (coated  with  paraffin  or  tan  with  the  greatest  i>ossible rapidity  (in  order  that
the  KCN  solution  should  not  have  time  to  change)  by  a  method  of  systematic  lixiviation,
and  is  completed  in  10  to  12  hours. The  resultant  solution  of  gold,  containing  AuK(CN).
is  deconii)oscd  citluT  with  freshly-made  zinc  filings  (but  when  the  gold  settles  on  the
Zn,  the  cyanide  solution  reiicts  ui>on  the  Zn  with  the  evolution  of  H.^  and  formation  of
ZnH  ,0./)  or  by  sodium  amalgam  prepared  at  the  moment  of  reaction  by  the  action  of  an
electric  current  upon  a  solution  of  NaHO  jHJured  into  a  vessel  partially  immersed  in
mercury  (the  NaCN  is  renewed  continually  by  this  means). The  silver  in  the  ore  paases
into  solution,  together  with  the  gold,  as  in  amalgamation.

COPPER.  Sn.A'ER.  AND  OOLD  445

the  upper  soil,  but  more  fi-eqitently  along  the  banks  of  dried-up  wiiter-
cnurses  and  riiDniug  streaiuB.  The  snnd  of  many  riverK  contains,
liowevcr,  II  very  small  amount  of  gold,  which  it  is  not  profitAble  to
work  ;  for  exaoiple,  tbat  of  the  Alpine  rivera  contains  &  parte  of  gold
in  10.000,000  parts  of  sand.  The  richest  gold  deposits  are  those  of
Siberia,  Rspeeially  in  the  southrni  parts  of  the  Government  of  Ypiiiseisk,
the  South  Urals,  Mexico,  Califoniia,  South  Africa,  and  Ausl.niUa,
and  then  the  comparatively  poorer  alluvial  deposits  of  many  countries
(Hungary,  the  Alps,  and  Spain  in  Europe).  The  extraction  of  the
gold  from  alluvial  deposits  is  based  on  the  principle  of  levigatioQ  ;  the
earth  is  washed,  while  constantly  agitated,  by  a  str«ini  of  water,
which  carries  away  the  lighter  portion  of  the  earth,  and  leaves  the
cotti-scr  particles  of  the  rock  and  heavier  particles  of  the  gold,  together
with  certain  substances  which  accompany  it,  in  the  washing  apparatus.
The  extraction  of  this  va/lied  gold  only  necessitates  meelmnical  ap-
pliances," and  it  is  not  therefore  surprising  that  gold  was  known  to
savages  and  in  the  most  remote  period  of  history.  It  aouietimes  occurs
in  crystals  belonging  to  the  regular  system,  but  in  the  majority  of  cases

''  But  tlie  pnrticln  of  gold  are  lOtaetimOB  i

tlie  wsthiiig. It  U  Uieu  proStaUe  k
KfX  (Nute  aoj.

Til tipealdnij  of  the  exbiutinn  of  gold  the  fnUowmg  reiTinrka  mAj  not  be  out  of

In  Calitornu  advuitage  is  taken  of  water  snppliud  train  bi([h  altitudes  in  order  to
have  u  powerful  bead  ul  wiiter,  with  wliich  tlie  ruuki  are  direct!;  waHbnd  ■■■}-,  tbus
avaiiling  the  greater  paitian  of  the  moqluuiiual  lahaur  r»c|ainid  tar  the  eiploitation  of

The  hut  reaiduea  of  gold  are  Miiiiulinieii  exlntcted  from  wnd  by  waiihing  them  with
iuercurj,  whlc^h  diiwilie*  the  gold.  The  nuid  mixed  with  vater  U  cftiueil  to  uimv  into
contact  with  merciiT;  during  tbe  wBHbing. The  mercury  ia  then  diatUled.

Han;  aolphurona  ores,  even  pjriteii.  cnntaici  a  small  amount  of  gold,  Coiuponiids  of
gcild  with  hhanoth,  BiAug,  telluriaiu,  AnTe^  ^calrerite).  &c.,  bave  been  foauil^  although

Among  the  minerals  which  accompna;  gold,  and  from  which  tlie  prexeucei^l  gold  may
he  MjKacted,  we  may  mention  white  ijnarti,  titauif  and  magnetic  iron  ores,  and  also  the
fallowing,  which  are  of  rarer  oconmuioe  :  lirciiti.  lopM,  garnet,  and  »ncb  like.  Tbe  con-
H'Httated  gold  waahingn  fint  undergo  a  meelmnical  IrsalmenC,  itnd  the  impure  gold
ohtained  ih  treated  tor  pure  gohl  hy  larioDs  m^thodi.  It  the  gold  contain  a  cnniiderable
nmount  of  foreign  nielals,  etpeti ally  lead  and  copper,  il  la  aometimen  cupelled,  like  lilver,
no  that  the  oiidlBable  metals  may  be  abBDrhed  by  Uie  Dopel  in  the  fiirm  of  oiidee,  but  in
every  caw  the  gold  ia  obtained  together  witb  siltw,  becanite  Uie  latter  metal  aln  is  not
otidised.  Sometime*  the  gold  is  extracted  by  means  of  Dienioiy,  tliat  ia,  by  ■malgama.
tion  (and  tiis  mercnry  sDhsequently  drivuD  off  by  djatillfttian),  or  by  smelting  it  witb
lead  (which  is  afterwards  removed  hy  niidatian)  and  proceMCB  like  those  employed  fot
tlie  eitntctiou  of  silver,  because  gold,  like  ^ilTsr.  doen  not  oxidise,  is  dinsolveJ  by  lead
and  mercury,  and  is  non-rolatite.  II  copper  or  any  other  metal  ooDtain  giild  and  it  bo
euiployed  as  an  anode,  pure  copjier  will  be  depoaiud  Dpon  llie  cathode,  while  all  the
gold  will  remnin  at  the  snodo  »t  a  •lime.  This  method  often  amply  repays  the  whola
cost  of  the  proMTiK,  since  it  gives,  besides  the  gold,  n  par*  frl«elrolytic  copper.

446  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

in  nuggets  or  grains  of  greater  or  less  magnitude.  It  always  contains
silver  (from  very  small  quantities  up  to  30  p.c,  when  it  is  called
*  electrum  ')  and  certain  other  metals,  among  which  lead  and  rhodium
are  sometimes  found.

Ttie  separation  of  Uie  silver  from  gold  is  generally  carried  on  with
great  precision,  as  the  presence  of  the  silver  in  the  gold  does  not
increase  its  value  for  exchange,  and  it  can  be  substituted  by  other
less  valuable  metals,  so  that  the  extraction  of  the  silver,  as  a  precioos
metal,  from  its  alloy  with  gold,  is  a  profitable  operation.  This
separation  is  conducted  by  different  methods.  Sometimes  the  argenti-
ferous gold  is  melted  in  crucibles,  together  with  a  mixture  of  common
salt  and  powdered  bricks.  The  greater  portion  of  the  silver  is  thus
converted  into  the  chloride,  which  fuses  and  is  absorbed  by  the  slags,
from  which  it  may  be  extracted  by  the  usual  methods.  The  silver  is
also  extracted  from  gold  by  treating  it  with  boiling  sulphuric  acid,
which  does  not  act  on  the  gold  but  dissolves  the  silver.  But  if  the
alloy  does  not  contain  a  large  proportion  of  silver  it  cannot  be  extracted
by  this  method  or  at  all  events  the  separation  will  be  imperfect^  and
therefore  a  fresh  amount  of  silver  is  added  (by  fusion)  to  the  gold,  in
such  quantity  that  the  alloy  contains  twice  as  much  silvpf  as  gold.
The  silver  which  is  added  is  preferably  such  as  contains  gold,  which  is
very  frequently  the  case.  The  alloy  thus  formed  is  poured  in  a  thin
stream  into  water,  by  which  means  it  is  obtained  in  a  granulated
form  ;  it  is  then  boiled  with  strong  sulphuric,  acid,  three  parts  of
acid  being  used  to  one  part  of  alloy.  The  sulphuric  acid  extracts
all  the  silver  without  acting  on  the  gold.  It  is  best,  however,  to
pour  off  the  first  portion  of  the  acid,  which  has  dissolved  the  silver,
and  then  treat  the  residue  of  still  imperfectly  pure  gold  with  a  fresh
quantity  of  sulphuric  acid.  The  gold  is  thus  obtained  in  the  form
of  powder,  which  is  washed  with  water  until  it  is  quite  free  from
silver.  The  silver  is  precipitated  from  the  solution  by  means  of
copper,  so  that  cupric  sulphate  and  metiillic  silver  are  obtained.  This
process  is  carried  out  in  many  countries,  as  in  Russia,  at  the  Govern-
ment mints.

CJold  is  generally  used  alloyed  with  copper  ;  since  pure  gold,
like  pure  silver,  is  very  soft,  and  therefore  soon  worn  away.  In
assaying  or  deterinining  the  amount  of  pure  gold  in  such  an  alloy
it  is  usual  to  add  silver  to  the  gold  in  order  to  make  up  an  alloy
containing  three  parts  of  silver  to  one  of  gold  (this  is  known  iis
(juartatiun  b(»cause  the  alloy  contains  ^  of  gold),  and  the  resultant
alloy  is  treated  with  nitric  acid.  If  the  silver  be  not  in  excess  over
the  gold,  it  is  not  all  dissolved  by  the  nitric  acid,  and  this  is  the  reason

COPPER.  SILTEJt.  AND  GOLD

for  the  quttrtatiou.  The  ainnunt  of  pure  gold  (assay)  is  determined  by
\\'t'ighiDf{  the  gold  which  remains  nfter  thLi  treatment.  English  gold
(^  '22  L'arats)  coinage  is  composed  of  an  alloy  containing  D1-G6  p.c.  of
gold,  bot  for  many  articles  gold  ia  frequently  used  contiiiiiing  a  larger
iiiUiouiit  of  foreign  metaU.

/"lire  ffitld  may  be  obtained  fi'imi  gold  alloys  by  dissolving  iu  aijua
regia,  and  then  adding  ferrous  sulphate  to  the  solution  or  heating  it
with  a  solution  of  oxalic  acid.  These  deoxidising  agents  reduce  the
gokl,  but  not  the  other  metals.  The  chlorine  conihined  with  the  gold
then  acts  like  free  chlorine.  The  gold,  thus  reduced,  is  precipitated  as
an  exceedingly  fine  brown  powder.''"  •'■'  It  is  then  washed  with  water,
and  fused  with  nitre  or  borax.  Pure  gold  redecta  a  yeUow  light,  anil
in  the  form  of  very  thin  sheets  (gold  leaf),  into  which  it  can  be
hammered  and  rolled,"  '■■'  it  transmits  a  bluish-green  light.  The
spei^ific  gravity  of  gold  is  about  IS'.^,  the  sp.  gr.  of  gold  coin  is  about
17-1.  It  fuses  at  1000° — ^at  a  higher  temperature  than  silver — and  can
be  drawn  into  exceedingly  fine  wires  or  hammered  into  thin  sheets.
With  its  softness  and  ductility,  gold  is  distinguished  for  its  tenacity,
and  a  gold  wire  two  nnllimetres  thick  breaks  only  under  a  load  of  68
kilograms.  Gold  vaporises  even  at  a.  furnace  heat,  and  imparts  a
greenish  colour  to  a  flame  passing  over  it  in  a  furnace.  Gold  alloys
with  copper  almost  without  changing  its  volume.^^ In  its  chemical

^<  '••'  Svbntlllinder  (1BV3)  obtained  gold  in  a  solnblv  colloid  form  ((lie  aaliitim.  it  i-iolct)
bjr  tlie  action  of  b  miitnra  of  wdnliuns  ot  uarinm  acetate  and  NaHO  apoti  a  solution  ol
AiiClj.  TUa  gold  aeparatea  oQt  {rom  nu^h  a  BOlDtion  in  eiocU;  the  name  ttmoner  as  Ag
does  from  the  aolntion  ot  colloid  silver  oieDtioned  aboie.  There  alwiiyv  remain*  n
oertain  umonnt  of  a  higher  niide  ot  ceriam,  C<-Oj,  id  the  solution — i.e.  the  gold  ia
mducBd  bj  canrerting  the  ■.■erinm  into  a  bigber  grade  of  ondution.  BcsidHS  which
Erlian  aiid  Uof  manu  sliowed  that  sulpbiile  uf  gold  preeiiiitated  b;  tlie  action  of  B  ,H  upon
a  oolation  of  AaKCjg  miied  tiiih  UCl  etiilj  pawies  into  A  colloid  ■ololiua  altr.t  being
properi;  vaiihed  (like  Aft,8s,  CnS,  Set..  Chapter  1..  Note  GT).

"  "'  Gold-leaf  ii  naed  for  gilding  wood  (leather,  cArdboaid,  and  «nchlikp,  apon  which
it  ia  glned  by  means  of  lamish,  JliP.),  and  ia  ubaol  0*003  millimetre  thick.  It  is  obtkiiied
from  thin  sheets  {weigbiug  at  first  aboDl  (  grm,  to  a  sqnue  indi),  rolled  l<etween  gold
roUen,  by  gradual!;  hammenng  them  <in  ptu'kels  uf  n  number  at  oiioe)  between  iibHta
ol  inoiiit  {bnt  not  wet)  parchment,  and  tbeji.  after  i^utling  llieni  into  toor  pieces,  belweea
a  specially  prepared  membrane,  vhii^h,  when  at  tha  right  degiev  of  muistare,  does  not
tear  ur  (tick  together  under  the  blows  of  the  huumer.

"  The  lonnaliini  of  the  alloja  Cu+ Zn.  Ca +  8n.  Cn  +  Bi,  Cu  +  8b,  Pb  -  Sb.  Agi^  l*b.
AgiSii,  Ad  4  Zo,  Aa  +  iin,  l!c.,  i»  accompanied  by  a  contraction  land  evulntioii  of  heat).
The  (ornmtion  ot  l!m  alloys  Fe  +  Hb,  Fe+PK  Cm-Pb,  Pb  +  Sn.  Pb  +  Sn,  Pb-^^b,
Zn-tSb,  Ag  +  Cn,  Au  +  Cb,  An  +  Pb,  takes  place  with  •  oerUin  iiioreasa  in  volume.
With  regard  lo  the  alloys  ot  gold,  it  may  be  mantioaed  tliat  gold  is  only  elighlly
dissolved  by  raeronry  (about  IKMl  p-e.,  Dudley,  1(W0) :  the  remaining  portion  Ioiiub  ■
graoalar  alloy,  whose  oompositiou  has  not  been  deBnitely  determined.  Aluuimiam  (and
silicon)  »l»o  hove  the  capsfity  of  (onning  alloys  with  gold.  The  prenencv  of  a  ninall
ataonnt  of  alumininm  lowers  the  melting  poiul  of  gold  coiisidenibly  ( Roberts- .\uDlen,
1«M) ;  thai  the  addition  of  1  p.c.  oi  alumininm  lowers  it  bj  W-2H,  the  addition  nl  10  pjj.

448  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

aspect,  gold  presents,  as  is  already  seen  from  its  general  characteristics
given  above,  an  example  of  the  so-called  noble  metals — i.e,  it  is
incapable  of  being  oxidised  at  any  temperature,  and  its  oxide  is
decomposed  when  calcined.  Only  chlorine  and  bromine  combine
directly  with  it  at  the  ordinary  temperature,  but  many  other  metals
and  non-metals  combine  with  it  at  a  red  heat — for  example,  sulphur,
phosphorus,  and  arsenic.  Mercury  dissolves  it  with  great  ease.  It
dissolves  in  potassium  cyanide  in  the  presence  of  air;  a  mixtare  of
sulphuric  acid  with  nitric  acid  dissolves  it  with  the  aid  of  heat,
although  in  small  quantity.  It  is  also  soluble  in  aqua  r^^a  and  in
selenic  acid.  Sulphuric,  hydrochloric,  nitric,  and  hydrofluoric  acids
and  the  caustic  alkalis  do  not  act  on  gold,  but  a  mixture  of  hydro-
chloric acid  with  such  oxidising  agents  as  evolve  chlorine  naturally
dissolves  it  like  aqua  regia.^'  ***".

As  regards  the  compounds  of  gold,  they  belong,  as  was  said
alK)ve,  to  the  types  AuXg  and  AuX.  Auric  chloride  or  gold  (ri-
chloride,  AuCl^,  which  is  formed  when  gold  is  dissolved  in  aqua  regis,
belongs  to  the  former  and  higher  of  these  types.  The  solution  of  thii
substance  in  water  iias  a  yellow  colour,  and  it  may  be  obtained  pure  by
evaporating  the  solution  in  aqua  regia  to  dryness,  but  not  to  the  point
of  decomposition.  Tf  the  evaporation  proceed  to  the  point  of  crystal-
lisation, a  compound  of  gold  chloride  and  hydrochloric  acid,  AuHCl^,  is
obtained,  like  the  allied  compounds  of  platinum  ;  but  it  easily  parts
with  the  acid  and  leaves  auric  chloride,  which  fuses  into  a  red-brown
liquid,  and  then  solidifies  to  a  crystalline  mass.  If  dry  chlorine  be
passed  over  gold  in  powder  it  forms  a  mixture  of  aurous  and  auric
chlorides,  but  the  aurous  chloride  is  also  decomposed  by  water  into
gold  and  auric  chloride.  Auric  chloride  crystallises  from  its  solutions
as  AuCl3,2H  ,0,  which  easily  loses  water,  and  the  dry  chloride  loses
two-thirds of its chlorine  at  185°,  forming aurous  chloride, whilst

Al  by  41  '1.  Tlu.'  luttiT  alloy  is  white.  The  alloy  AuAl^  has  a  cliaracieristic  purple
f(»l«'iir,  and  it>i  ineltiu},'  point  is  :>'2  •.")  above  that  of  j^'old,  which  shows  it  to  be  a  definite
compound  of  the  two  niotiils.  The  meltinjj  iK)ints  of  alloys  richer  in  Al  gradually  fall
to  (>('»(>  — that  i^..  below  that  of  aluniinium  (G(>5' ).

Heycock  and  X««ville  (IHlVi),  in  stadyinfjf  the  fViplo  alloys  of  Au,  Cd,  and  Sn,  observed
a  tendency  in  the  gold  to  jjive  comi>ounds  with  Cd,  and  by  sealing  a  mixtare  of  Au  and  Cd
in  ft  tube,  from  which  the  air  had  been  exhausted,  and  heating  it,  they  obtained  a  ervT
crystalline  brittle  definite  alloy  AuCd.

.-.M.h  Calderon  ilH'j'Ji,  at  the  re<iuost  of  some  jewellers,  investigated  the  cause  of  a
peculiar  alteration  sometimes  found  on  the  surface  of  dead-<;old  articles,  there  appearing
brownish  and  blackish  spots,  which  widen  and  alter  their  fonn  in  course  of  time.  He
came  to  the  conclusion  tliat  thost?  spots  are  due  to  th<>  appearance  and  development  of
peruliar  micro-organisms  (Aspergillus  niger  and  Micrococcus  cimbareus)  on  the  t'old,
spores  of  which  were  found  in  abundance  on  the  cotton-wool  in  which  the  gold  article*

had  bee!i  kept.

COPPER. SILVER, AND GOLD  4-J9

above  300^  the  latter  chloride  also  loses  its  chlorine  and  leaves
metallic  gold.  Auric  chloride  is  the  usual  form  in  which  gold  occurs  in
solutions,  and  in  which  its  salts  are  used  in  the  arts  and  for  chemical
l»urposes.  It  is  soluble  in  water,  alcohol,  and  ether.  Light  has  a  reduc-
ing action  on  these  solutions,  and  after  a  time  metallic  gold  is  deposited
upon  the  sides  of  vessels  containing  the  solution.  Hydrogen  when
nascent,  and  even  in  a  gaseous  form,  reduces  gold  from  this  solution
to  a  metallic  state.  The  reduction  is  more  conveniently  and  usually
effected  by  ferrous  sulphate,  and  in  general  by  the  action  of  ferrous
salts.'^

If  a  solution  of  potassium  hydroxide  be  added  to  a  solution  of  auric
chloride,  a  precipitate  is  first  formed,  which  re-dissolves  in  an  excess  of
the  alkali.  On  being  evaporated  under  the  receiver  of  an  air-pump,
this  solution  yields  yellow  crystals,  which  present  the  same  composition
as  the  double  salts  AUMCI4,  with  the  substitution  of  the  chlorine  by
oxygen — that  is  to  say,  potassium  aurate,  AuKOj,  is  formed  in  crystals
containing  SHjO.  The  solution  ha.s  a  distinctly  alkaline  reaction.
Auric  oxidey  AujOj,  separates  when  this  alkaline  solution  is  boiled  with
an  excess  of  sulphuric  acid.  But  it  then  still  retains  some  alkali ;  how-
ever, it  may  be  obtained  in  a  pure  state  as  a  brown  powder  by
dissolving  in  nitric  acid  and  diluting  with  water.  The  brown  powder
decomposes  below  250°  into  gold  and  oxygen.  It  is  insoluble  in  water
and  in  many  acids,  but  it  dissolves  in  alkalis,  which  shows  the  acid
character  of  this  oxide.  An  hydroxide,  Au(OH)  ,  may  be  obtained  as  a
brown  powder  by  adding  magnesium  oxide  to  a  solution  of  auric  chlo-
ride and  treating  the  resultant  precipitate  of  magnesium  aurate  with
nitric  acid. This  hydroxide  loses  water  at  100°,  and  gives  auric  oxide.'*

^^  Stannous  chloride  as  a  reducing  agent  also  acts  on  auric  chloride,  and  gives  a  red
precipitate  known  as  puTj)le  of  Cassius.  This  substance,  which  probably  contains  a
mixture  or  compound  of  aurous  oxide  and  tin  oxide,  is  used  as  a  red  pigment  for  china
aid  glass.  Osalic  acid,  on  heating,  reduces  metallic  gold  from  its  salts,  and  this  property
may  be  tiiken  advantage  of  for  sepvrating  it  from  its  solutions.  The  oxidation  which
then  takes  place  in  the  presence  of  water  may  be  expressed  by  the  following  equation  :
2AuClt;-»-3C,H..04^2Au-f  CHCl  "^  6CO.,.  Nearly  all  organic  substances  have  a  reducing
action  on  gold,  and  solutions  of  gold  leave  a  violet  stain  on  the  skin.

Auric  chloride,  like  platinic  chloride,  is  distinguished  for  its  clearly-developed
property  of  forming  double  salts.  These  double  salts,  as  a  rule,  belong  to  the  type
AuMCl|.  The  compound  of  auric  chloride  with  hydrochloric  acid  mentioned  above
evidently  belongs  to  the  same  type.  The  compounds  2KAuCl4,5H-jO,  NaAuCl4,2H20,
AuNH4Cl4,H>0,  Mg'AuCl4)..,2H.>0.  and  the  like  are  easily  crj'stallised  in  well-formed
crj'stiils.  Wells,  Wheeler,  and  Pfitfield  (181)2)  obtained  RbAuCl4  (reddish  yellow)  and
CsAuCl,  (golden  yellow),  and  corresponding  bromides  (dark  coloured).  AuBri(  is  ex-
tremely like  the  chloride.  Auric  cyanide  is  obtained  easily  in  the  form  of  a  double  salt
of  |)otassium,  KAu(CN)|,  by  mixing  saturated  and  hot  solutions  of  potassium  cyanide
with  auric  chloride  and  then  cooling.

^^  If  ammonia  be  add(*d  to  a  solution  of  auric  chloride,  it  forms  a  yellow  precipitate^

VOL.  II.  O  G

450  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTBY

The  starting-point  of  the  compounds  of  the  type  AuX  ^*  is  geld
inonochloride  or  aurous  chloride^  AuCl,  which  is  formed,  as  mentioned
above,  by  heating  auric  chloride  at  185°.  Aurous  chloride  forms  a
yellowish -white  powder  ;  this,  when  heated  with  water,  is  decomposed
into  metallic  gold  and  auric  chloride,  which  passes  into  solution :
3 AuCl  =  AuClg  +  2  Au.  This  decomposition  is  accelerated  by  the  action
of  light.  Hence  it  is  obvious  that  the  compounds  corresponding  with
aurous  oxide  are  comparatively  unstable.  But  this  only  refers  to  the
simple  compounds  AuX  ;  some  of  the  complex  compounds,  on  the
contrary,  form  the  most  stable  compounds  of  gold.  Such,  for  ex-
ample, is  the  cyanide  of  gold  and  potassium,  AuK(CN)2.  It  is  formed,
for  instance,  when  finely-divided  gold  dissolves  in  the  presence  of
air  in  a  solution  of  potassium  cyanide:  4KCN-f 2Au-|-HjO  +  0
=  2KAu(CN).2  +  2K HO  (this  reaction  also  proceeds  with  solid  pieces
of  gold,  although  very  slowly).  The  same  compound  is  formed  in
solution  when  many  compounds  of  gold  are  mixed  with  potassium
cyanide,  because  if  a  higher  compound  of  gold  be  taken,  it  is  reduced

of  the  so-called  fulminating  gold,  which  contains  gold,  chlorine,  hydrogen,  nitrogen.
and  oxygen,  but  its  formula  is  not  known  with  certainty.  It  is  probably  a  sort  of  md-
monio-metallic  compound,  AUiO^jiNH-,,  or  amide  (like  the  mercury  compound).  Thii
precipitate  explodes  at  140^,  but  when  left  in  the  presence  of  solutions  containing  am-
monia it  loses  all  its  chlorine  and  becomes  non-explosive.  In  this  form  the  compoaitioo
Au...05,2NH-.,H20  is  ascribed  to  it,  but  this  is  uncertain.  Auric  sulphide,  Au.,S-  i>
obtained  by  the  action  of  hydrogen  sulphide  on  a  solution  of  auric  chloride,  and  also
directly  by  fusing  sulphur  with  gold.  It  has  an  acid  character,  and  therefore  dissolre^
in  sodium  and  ammonium  sulphides.

•^*  Many  double  salts  of  suboxide  of  gold  belong  to  the  type  AuX — for  instance,  tht-
cyanide  corresponding  to  the  type  AuKX.>,  like  PtKoX,,  with  which  we  became  acquainted
in  the  last  chft])ter.  We  will  enumerate  several  of  the  representativea  of  this  class  ci
compounds.  If  auric  chloride,  AuCl-„  l>e  mixed  with  a  solution  of  so<lium  thiosulphatt?.
the  gold  passes  into  a  colourless  solution,  which  deposits  colourless  crvstals,  con-
taining a  donblo  thiosulphate  of  gold  and  sodium,  which  are  easily  soluble  in  wat*^
but  are  precipitated  by  alcohol.  The  composition  of  this  salt  is  Na5An(S.,0";).»,2HAT
If  the  sodium  thiosulphate  be  represented  as  NaS.jOjNa,  the  double  salt  in  qaestioo
will  be  AuXa(S,0";Na)^,2H.,,0,  according  to  the  type  AuNaXo.  Tlie  solution  of  U»i>
colourless  and  easily  crystallisable  salt  has  a  sweet  taste,  and  the  gold  is  not  t>eparat«d
from  it  either  by  forrous  sulphate  or  oxalic  acid.  This  salt,  which  is  known  as  Fordm
and  Grlin'ff  .salt,  is  used  in  medicine  and  photography.  In  general,  aurous  oxid*
exhibits  a  distinct  inclination  to  the  formation  of  similar  double  salta,  as  we  saw  alr*^
with  PtX.j — for  example,  it  forms  similar  salts  with  sulphurous  acid.  Tims  if  a  solntiiin
of  sodium  sulphite  be  gradually  added  to  a  solution  of  oxide  of  gold  in  sodiom
hydroxide,  the  ]>recii»itate  at  first  formed  re-dissolves  to  a  colourless  solution,  which
contains  the  double  salt  Na3Au(SO-).j  =  AuNa(S05Na).2.  The  solution  of  this  salt
when  mixed  with  barium  chloride,  first  forms  a  precipitate  of  barinin  sulpliite  and
then  a  red  barium  double  salt  which  corresponds  with  the  above  sodium  salt.

The  oxygen  comi)ound  of  the  type  AuX,  aurous  oxide,  AuoO,  is  obtained  an  a  gxeeni^^
violet  powder  on  mixing  aurous  chloride  with  i)otassium  chloride  in  the  cold.  Witi
hydrochloric  acid  this  oxide  gives  gold  and  auric  chloride,  and  when  heated  it  easilT
splits  up  into  oxygen  and  metallic  gold.

COPPER, SILVER, AND GOLD  451

by  the  potassium  cyanide  into  aurous  oxide,  which  dissolves  in  potas-
sium cyanide  and  forms  KAu(CN)2.  This  substance  is  soluble  in
water,  and  gives  a  colourless  solution,  which  can  be  kept  for  a  long
time,  and  is  employed  in  electro-gilding — that  is,  for  coating  other
metallic  objects  with  a  layer  of  gold,  which  is  deposited  if  the  object
be  connected  with  the  negative  pole  of  a  battery  and  the  positive  pole
<;onsist  of  a  gold  plate.  When  an  electric  current  is  passed  between
them,  the  gold  from  the  latter  will  dissolve,  whilst  a  coating  of  gold
from  the  solution  will  be  deposited  on  the  object.

«i^*^

:| .;  ■■

.  •  I

APPENDIX  I

AN ATTEMPT TO  APPLY  TO CHEMISTRY ONE OF THE
PRINCIPLES  OF  NEWTON'S  NATURAL  PHILOSOPHY

By  professor  MENDELEEFF

A LECTURE DELIVERED AT THE ROYAL INSTITUTION OF ORE  AT BRITAIN

ON  FRIDAY, MAY 31,  1889

Nature,  inert  to  the  eyes  of  the  ancients,  has  been  revealed  to  us  as  full  of
life  and  activity.  The  conviction  that  motion  pervaded  all  things,  which  was
first  realised  with  respect  to  the  stellar  universe,  has  now  extended  to  the
unseen  world  of  atoms.  No  sooner  had  the  human  understanding  denied  to
the  earth  a  fixed  position  and  launched  it  along  its  path  in  space,  than  it  was
sought  to  fix  immovably  the  sun  and  the  stars.  But  astronomy  has  demon-
strated that  the  sun  moves  with  unswerving  regularity  through  the  star-set
imiverse  at  the  rate  of  about  50  kilometres  per  second.  Among  the  so-called
fixed  stars  are  now  discerned  manifold  changes  and  various  orders  of  move-
ment. Light,  heat,  electricity— like  sound — have  been  proved  to  be  modes
of  motion ;  to  the  realisation  of  this  fact  modem  science  is  indebted  for
powers  which  have  been  used  with  such  brilliant  success,  and  which  have  been
expoimded  so  clearly  at  this  lecture  table  by  Faraday  and  by  his  successors.
As,  in  the  imagination  of  Dante,  the  invisible  air  became  peopled  with  spiritual
beings,  so  before  the  eyes  of  earnest  investigators,  and  especially  before  thoee
of  Clerk  Maxwell,  the  invisible  mass  of  gases  became  peopled  with  particles :
their  rapid  movements,  their  collisions,  and  impacts  became  so  manifest  that
it  seemed  almost  possible  to  count  the  impacts  and  determine  many  of
the  peculiarities  or  laws  of  their  collisions.  The  fact  of  the  existence  of
these  invisible  motions  may  at  once  be  made  apparent  by  demonstrating  the
difference  in  the  rate  of  dififusion  through  porous  bodies  of  the  light  and
rapidly  moving  atoms  of  hydrogen  and  the  heavier  and  more  sluggish  par-
ticles of  air.  Within  the  masses  of  liquid  and  of  solid  bodies  we  have  been
forced  to  acknowledge  the  existence  of  persistent  though  limited  motion  of
their  ultimate  particles,  for  otherwise  it  would  be  impossible  to  explain,  for
example,  the  celebrated  experiments  of  Graliam  on  diffusion  through  lirjuid
and  colloidal  substances. If  there  were, in  our  times,  no  belief  in  the

454  PKINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

molecular  motion  in  solid  bodies,  could  the  famous  Spring  have  hoped  to
attain  any  result  by  mixing  carefully-dried  powders  of  potash,  saltpetre  and
sodium  acetate,  in  order  to  produce,  by  pressure,  a  chemical  reaction  between
these  substances  through  the  interchange  of  their  metals,  and  have  derived,
for  the  conviction  of  the  incredulous,  a  mixture  of  two  hygroscopic  thongfa
solid  salts — sodium  nitrate  and  potassium  acetate  ?

In  these  invisible  and  apparently  chaotic  movements,  reaching  firom  the
stars  to  the  minutest  atoms,  there  reigns,  however,  a  harmonious  order  which
is  commouly  mistaken  for  complete  rest,  but  which  is  really  a  consequoiee
of  the  conservation  of  that  dynamic  equilibrium  which  was  first  discerned
by  the  genius  of  Newton,  and  which  has  been  traced  by  his  snceessors  ia  the
detailed  analysis  of  the  particular  consequences  of  the  great  generalisslioii,
namely,  relative  immovability  in  the  midst  of  imiversal  and  actlTe  moTemeot
But  the  unseen  world  of  chemical  changes  is  closely  analogous  to  tbt
visible  world  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  since  our  atoms  form  distinct  portioo»
of  an  invisible  world,  as  planets,  satellites,  and  comets  form  distinct  portions
of  the  astronomer's  universe ;  our  atoms  may  therefore  be  compared  to  the
solar  systems,  or  to  the  systems  of  double  or  of  idngle  stflLrs :  for  exan^fe,
ammonia  (NH^)  may  be  represented  in  the  simplest  manner  by  supponif
the  sun,  nitrogen,  surrounded  by  its  planets  of  hydrogen ;  and  common  iib
(NaCl)  may  be  looked  on  as  a  double  star  formed  of  sodium  and  chlorinb
Besides,  now  that  the  indestructibility  of  the  elements  has  been  acknow-
ledged, chemical  changes  cannot  otherwise  be  explained  than  as  efaanges  of
motion,  and  the  production  by  chemical  reactions  of  galTanio  eurrenti,  of
light,  of  heat,  of  pressure,  or  of  steam  power,  demonstrates  visibly  that  the
processes  of  chemical  reaction  are  inevitably  connected  with  enormous  though
unseen  displacements,  originating  in  the  movements  of  atoms  in  moleeulei.
Astronomers  and  natural  philosophers,  in  studying  the  visible  motions  of  the
heavenly  bodies  and  of  matter  on  the  earth,  have  understood  and  have  eeti-
mated  the  value  of  this  store  of  energy. But  the  chemist  has  had  to  pnnoe
a  contrary  course. Observing  in  the  physical  and  mechanical  phenome»
which  accompany  chemical  reactions  the  quantity  of  energy  manifested  by
the  atoms  and  molecules,  he  is  constrained  to  acknowledge  that  viithin  the
molecules  there  exist  atoms  in  motion,  endowed  with  an  energy  which  like
matter  itself,  is  neither  being  created  nor  capable  of  being  destroyed. That'
fore,  in  chemistry,  we  must  seek  dynamic  equiUbrium  not  only  between  the
molecules,  but  also  in  their  midst  among  their  component  atoms. Manj
conditions  of  such  equilibrium  have  been  determined,  but  much  remains  to  be
done,  and  it  is  not  uncommon,  even  in  these  days,  to  find  that  some  chemists
forget  that  there  is  the  possibility  of  motion  in  the  interior  of  molecules,  sd^
therefore  represent  them  as  being  in  a  condition  of  death-hke  inactivity.

Chemical  combinations  take  place  with  so  much  ease  and  rapidit};
possess  so  many  special  characteristics,  and  are  so  numerous,  that  their  nn*
plicity  and  order  were  for  a  long  time  hidden  from  investigators.  8ympithj
relationship,  all  the  caprices  or  all  the  fancifulness  of  human  intercoozie.
seemed  to  have  found  complete  analogies  in  chemical  combinations,  but  wilk

this  difference,  that  the  characteristics  of  tlie  material  substances such  tf

sih  cr,  for  example,  or  of  any  other  body— remain  unchanged  in  every  ii^

API'ENDIX 1,  465

iliviRion  froiu  ihu  lurgcsl  niassfs  lo  tbe  suiDlleat  iinrticlc*'.  mid  coneequoittly
tbese  choreic teristifs  uiusi  be  properties  of  the  particlefl.  Hut  the  world  of
heavenly  himinarips  appeared  eijitally  foticifu!  at  man's  first  acquaintance
with'  it,  so  marh  eo,  that  the  astruloKers  iiimgined  a  connection  between  the
individualities  of  tnen  knit  the  i-nnjunctiunBof  ^ilivnetB.  Thanks  to  the  genius
of  Lavoisier  and  of  Dalton,  man  has  been  iible,  in  the  nnseen  world  of  che-
mical combinationa,  to  recognise  laws  of  the  same  simple  oriler  as  those
which  CopemicuH  and  Kepler  proved  to  exist  in  the  planetary  universe-  Man
discovered,  and  continue!  every  hour  to  iliscover,  whal  remains  unchajiged
in  chemical  evolution,  and  how  changes  lake  place  in  combinations  of  tbe
unchangeable.  He  has  learned  to  predict,  not  only  what  poiwible  cainbiua-
tions  may  take  place,  but  alao  the  very  ei:ietence  o(  atoms  of  unknown  elemen-
tary substances,  and  ban  besiden  succeeded  in  making  innumemble  practical
applications  of  his  knowledge  to  the  great  advantage  of  Lie  race,  and  has
accomplished  this  notwithstanding  that  notions  of  sympathy  and  alHnily
still  preserve  a  strong  vitality  iu  science.  At  present  we  cannot  apply
Newton's  principles  to  chemislry,  because  the  soil  is  only  being  now  prepared.
The  invisible  world  of  chemical  atoms  is  still  waiting  for  ibe  creator  of  che-
mical mechanics.  For  him  our  age  is  collecting  a  mass  of  materials,  the
inductions  of  well-digeeted  facts,  and  many-sided  inferences  simiiai'  to  those
which  existed  for  Astronomy  and  Mechanics  in  the  days  of  Newton.  It  is
well  also  to  remember  that  Newton  devoted  much  time  to  clietnical  experi-
ments, and  while  considering  questionB  of  celestial  mechanics,  persistently
kept  in  view  the  mutual-  action  of  those  infinitely  small  worlds  which  are
concerned  in  chemical  evolutions.  For  this  reason,  and  also  to  maintain  the
unity  of  laws,  it  seems  to  me  that  we  must,  in  tbe  first  instance,  seek  to
harmonise  tbe  various  phases  of  contenjporai'y  chemical  theories  with  tbe
iinmortnJ  principles  of  the  Newtonian  natural  philosophy,  and  so  hasten  the
advent  of  true  chemical  meehaiiico.  Let  the  above  considerations  serve  as
my  justification  for  the  attempt  which  I  propose  to  make  to  act  as  a  champion
of  tbe  universality  of  tbe  Newtonian  principles,  which  I  believe  are  com-
petent to  embrace  every  phenomenon  in  tbe  universe,  firom  tbe  rotation  of
the  fixed  stars  to  the  interchanges  of  chetnical  atoma.

In  the  first  place  I  consider  it  indispensable  to  bear  in  mind  tliat,  up  to
quite  recent  times,  only  a  one-sided  affinity  has  been  recognised  in  chemical
reactions.  Thus,  for  example,  from  the  circomstance  that  red-hot  iron  de-
composes water  with  the  evolution  of  hydrogen,  it  was  concluded  that  oxygen
had  a  greater  athnity  for  iron  than  for  hydrogen.  Uui  hydrogen:  in  presence
of  red-hot  iron  scale,  appropriates  its  oxygen  and  forms  water,  wlience  an
exactly  opposit*  conelnsion  may  be  formed.

I>urin};  the  last  ten  years  a  gradual,  scarcely  perceptible,  but  most
important  change  has  taken  place  in  the  views,  and  consequently  in  the
tesearclies,  of  chemists.  They  have  sought  everywhere,  and  have  always
found,  systems  of  conservation  or  dynamic  equilibrium  eubslanlially  similar
to  those  which  natural  philoBojihers  have  long  since  discovered  in  the  visible
world,  and  in  virtue  of  which  the  position  of  tbe  heavenly  bodies  in  the
nniverse  is  determined.  There  where  one-sided  affinities  only  were  at  first
detected,  not  only  secondary  or  lateral  ones  have  been  found,  but  even  those

456  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

which  are  diametrically  opposite ;  yet  among  these,  dynamical  equilibrimn
establishes  itself  not  by  excluding  one  or  other  of  the  forces,  but  regulatiog
them  all.  80  the  chemist  finds  in  the  fiame  of  the  blast  furnace,  in  the
formation  of  every  salt,  and,  with  especial  clearness,  in  double  salts  an^  iji
the  crystallisation  of  solutions,  not  a  fight  ending  in  the  victory  of  one  side,
as  used  to  be  supposed,  but  the  conjunction  of  forces ;  the  peace  of  dynamic
equilibrium  resulting  from  the  action  of  many  forces  and  affinities.  Car-
bonaceous matters,  for  example,  bnm  at  the  expense  of  the  oxygen  of  the
air,  yielding  a  quantity  of  heat,  and  forming  products  of  combustion,  in
which  it  was  thought  that  the  afiinities  of  the  oxygen  with  the  combustible
elements  were  satisfied.  But  it  appeared  that  the  heat  of  combustion  was
competent  to  decompose  these  products,  to  dissociate  the  oxygen  from  the
combustible  elements,  and  therefore  to  explain  combustion  fully  it  is  neces-
sary to  take  into  account  the  equilibrium  between  opposite  reactions,  between
those  wliich  evolve  and  those  which  absorb  heat.

In  the  same  way,  in  the  case  of  the  solution  of  common  salt  in  water,  it
is  necessary  to  take  into  account,  on  the  one  hand,  the  formation  of  couiponnd
particles  generated  by  the  combination  of  salt  with  water,  and,  on  the  other,
the  disintegration  or  scattering  of  the  new  particles  formed,  as  weU  as  of
these  originally  contained. At  present  we  find  two  currents  of  thought,
apparently  antagonistic  to  each  other,  dominating  the  study  of  solutions :
according  to  the  one,  solution  seems  a  mere  act  of  building  up  or  association ;
according  to  the  other,  it  is  only  dissociation  or  disintegration. The  truth
lies,  evidently,  between  these  views ;  it  lies,  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  prove
by  my  investigations  into  aqueous  solutions,  in  the  dynamic  equilibrium  of
particles  tending  to  combine  and  also  to  fall  asunder. The  large  majority  of
chemical  reactions  which  appeared  to  act  victoriously  along  one  line  have
been  proved  capable  of  acting  as  victoriously  even  along  an  exactly  opposite
line, Klcnients  wliich  utterly  decline to combine  directly  may  often  be
formed  into  comparatively  stable  compounds  by  indirect  means,  as,  for  ex-
ample, in  the  case  of  chlorine  and  carbon  ;  and  consequently  the  sympathies
and  antipathies  which  it  was  thought  to  transfer  from  human  relations  to
those  of  atoms  should  be  laid  aside  until  the  mechanism  of  cheiiiical  rela-
tions is  explained. Let  us  remember,  however,  tliat  chlorine,  which  does  not
form  witli  carbon  the  chloride  of  carbon,  is  strongly  absorbed,  or,  as  it  were,
dissolved,  by  carbon,  which  leads  us  to  suspect  incipient  chemical  action  even
in  an  external  and  purely  surface  contact,  and  involuntarily  gives  rise  to
conceptions  of  that  unity  of  the  forces  of  nature  which  has  been  so  ener-
<;etically  insisted  on  by  Sir  AViiliam  Grove  and  formulated  in  his  famous
pjiradox. Grove noticed  that platinum, when fused  in  the  oxyhydrogen
fiame,  during  which  operation  water  is  formed,  when  allowed  to  drop  into
water  decomposes  the  latter  and  produces  the  explosive  oxyhydrogen  mixture.
The  explanation  of  this  paradox,  as  of  many  c»thers  which  arose  during  the
period  of  chemical  renaissance,  has  led,  in  our  time,  to  the  promulgation  by
Henri  Sainte-Claire  Deville  of  the  conception  of  dissociation  and  of  equili-
brium, and  has  recalled  the  teaching  of  Berthollet,  which,  notwithstantliug  its
Srilliant  confirmation  by  Heinrich  liose  and  L)r.  Gladstone,  had  not,  up  to
at  period,  been  included  in  received  chemical  views.

APPESDrx  I.  457

Oiemical  equilibrium  in  gpiitral.  and  (liasociiUiott  in  particular,  arv  now
hein^  ao  Tull)  worked  out  in  ilptail.  ainl  «u|iplied  in  such  various  wa^'»i.  tbnt  I
ilo  not  Allude  to  tbeni  to  develop,  but  only  rise  them  ns  ei&iiiples  b,v  which
tn  indicnte  the  correctness  of  a  leudency  to  regard  chemiciil  couibi nations
from  points  of  view  dilTering  torn  tboee  expressed  by  tile  term  litlherto  ap-
propriated to  define  cbeinicnl  forces,  nnniely, '  affinity.'  Oientical  equiJibrik,
disEociatioB.  the  speed  of  chemjonl  reactions,  thennocbemiatry.  epectroecopy,
and,  more  than  all,  the  determination  of  the  intiuence  of  masBea  and  the
search  for  a  connection  between  the  properties  and  weights  of  atoms  and
molecules— in  one  word,  the  vsst  mass  of  the  moBt  important  cliemical  re-
searches of  ths  present  day-  -clearly  indicate  the  near  apprnacli  nf  ifie  time
when  chemical  doctrines  will  Kubniit  fully  and  completely  to  llie  doctrine
which  was  first  announced  in  the  Frvncipiit  of  Newton.

Tn  order  tliut  the  application  of  thes«  principles  uiny  bear  fruit  it  is  evi-
dently insufficient  to  assume  that  etaticKl  eijuUibrium  reigus  alone  in  chemical
s]  stetiia  or  chemical  raolecaleti ;  it  i.i  necessary  to  t;ras]i  the  conditions  of
jio«sible  states  of  dynamical  eijuilibria,  and  to  apply  to  them  kinetic  prin-
ciples. Nunieroiia  considerations  compel  ub  to  renounce  the  idea  of  statical
eijuilibrinm  in  molecnles,  and  the  recent  yet.  strongly- supported  appeals  to
dyniuiiic  principlcB  cunslitute,  in  my  opinion,  the  foundation  of  the  modem
teaching  relating  to  atomicity,  or  the  valency  of  the  elements,  which  usually
forms  tlie  basis  of  investigations  into  orgnnic  or  carbon  compounda.

This  teaching  has  led  to  brilliant  explanations  of  very  many  chemical
relations  and  to  cases  of  isonieripm.  or  the  difference  in  the  properties  of
substances  having  the  snme  composition.  It  haa  been  ao  fruitful  in  its  many
applications  and  in  the  foreshadowing  of  remote  conseiiuencen.  especially
renpecting  carbon  compounds,  that  it  is  impoaHiiile  to  deny  its  claims  to  be
ranked  as  a  great  achievement  of  chemical  science.  Us  practical  application
to  the  synthesis  of  many  substances  of  the  most  compUcated  tomposition
entering  into  the  j-trncturo  of  organised  bodies,  and  to  the  creation  of  an  un-
limited number  of  carbon  coiupuiinds,  amongwbich  the  colours  derived  from
coal  tar  stand  prominently  forward,  surpass  the  synthetical  powers  of  Nature
itself.  Vet  this  teaching,  a,8  applied  to  the  stiuctiint  of  carbon  compoiiuds,
is  not  on  the  face  of  it  directly  applicable  to  the  in^'eHtigaIlott  of  other  ele-
uentB,  because  in  examirdng  the  first  it  is  possible  to  asHutue  that  the  atoms
of  carbon  have  always  a  definite  and  equal  number  of  affinities,  whilst  in  the
combinations  of  other  elements  this  is  evidently  inadmissible.  Thus,  For
example,  an  atom  of  carbon  yields  only  one  compound  with  four  atoms  o(
hydrogen  and  one  with  four  atoms  of  chlorine  iu  the  molecule,  whilst  the
atoms  of  chlorine  and  hydrogen  unite  only  in  llie  proportions  of  one  to  one.
Simplicity  is  here  eiident.  and  forma  a  {wint  of  departure  from  which  it  is
easy  to  move  forward  with  firm  and  secure  treail.  dther  elements  are  of  a
different  nature.  Phosphonis  imitea  with  three  and  with  live  atoms  of
chlorine,  and  consequently  the  simplicity  and  sharpness  of  the  application  of
atmctural  conceptions  are  lost.  Sulphur  unites  only  with  two  atoms  of
hydrogen,  but  with  oiygen  it  enters  into  hightr  orders  of  combination.  The
periodic  relationship  which  exists  among  alt  the  pmptrties  of  the  elenients—
such,  for  example,  aa  Iheb  ability  to  enter  into  various  combinatiooa— and

458  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

their  atomic  weights,  indicate  that  this  variation  in  atomicity  is  subject  to
one  perfectly  exact  and  general  law,  and  it  is  only  carbon  and  its  near
analogues  which  constitute  cases  of  permanently  preserved  atooiicity.  It  is
impossible  to  recognise  as  constant  and  fundamental  properties  of  atoms,
powers  which,  in  substance,  have  proved  to  be  variable.  Bnt  by  abandonini^
the  idea  of  permanence,  and  of  the  constant  saturation  of  affinities — that  is
to  say,  by  acknowledging  the  possibility  of  free  affinities— many  retain  a
comprehension  of  the  atomicity  of  the  elements  '  under  given  conditions ;  *
and  on  this  frail  foundation  they  build  up  structures  composed  of  chemical
molecules,  evidently  only  because  the  conception  of  manifold  affinities  gives,
at  once,  a  simple  statical  method  of  estimating  the  composition  of  the  most
complicated  molecules.

I  shall  enter  neither  into  details,  nor  into  the  various  consequences  follow-
ing from  these  views,  nor  into  the  disputes  which  have  sprung  up  respecting
them  (and  relating  especially  to  the  number  of  isomerides  possible  on  the
assumption  of  free  affinities),  because  the  foundation  or  origin  of  theories  of
this  nature  suffers  from  the  radical  defect  of  being  in  opposition  to  dynamies.
The  molecule,  as  even  Laurent  expressed  himself,  is  represented  as  an  archi-
tectural structm-e,  the  style  of  which  is  determined  by  the  fundamental
arrangement  of  a  few  atoms,  whilst  the  decorative  details,  which  are  doable
of  being  varied  by  the  same  forces,  are  formed  by  the  elements  entering  into
the  combination.  It  is  on  this  account  that  the  term  *  structural '  is  so  appro-
priate to  the  contemporary  views  of  the  above  order,  and  that  the  *  struc-
tmralists '  seek  to  justify  the  tetrahedric,  plane,  or  prismatic  disposition  of
the  atoms  of  carbon  in  benzene.  It  is  evident  that  the  consideration  relates
to  the  statical  position  of  atoms  and  molecules  and  not  to  their  kinetic  rela-
tions. The  atoms  of  the  structural  type  are  like  the  lifeless  pieces  on  a  chess
board :  they  are  endowed  bnt  with  the  voices  of  living  beings,  and  are  not
those  living  beinpfs  themselves  ;  acting,  indeed,  according  to  laws,  yet  each
possessed  of  a  store  of  energy  which,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,
must  be  taken  into  account.

In  the  days  of  Haiiy,  crystals  were  considered  in  the  same  statical  and
structural  li^'ht,  but  modern  crystallographers,  having  become  more  tho-
roughly accjuainted  with  their  physical  properties  and  their  actual  formation,
have  abandoned  the  earlier  views,  and  have  made  their  doctrines  de|>endent
on  dvnamics.

The  immediate  object  of  this  lecture  is  to  show  that,  starting  with
Newton's  third  law  of  motion,  it  is  possible  to  preserte  to  chemistry  all  the
advant8«(es  arising  from  structm"al  teaching,  without  being  obliged  to  build
up  molecules  in  solid  and  motionless  figures,  or  to  ascribe  to  atoms  definite
limited  valencies,  directions  of  cohesion,  or  affinities.  The  wide  extent  of
the  subject  obliges  me  to  treat  only  a  small  portion  of  it,  namely  of  suhstitu-
tion^y  without  specially  considering  combinations  and  decompositions,  and
even  then  limiting  myself  to  the  simplest  examples,  which,  however,  will
throw  open  prospects  embracing  all  the  natural  complexity  of  chemical  rela-
tions. For  tliis  reason,  if  it  should  prove  possible  to  form  groups  similar,  for
example,  to  H ,  or  CH,.  as  the  remnants  of  molecules  CH,  or  C.^H-  we  shaU
not  pause  to  consider  them,  because,  as  far  as  we  know,  they  fall  asunder  into

APPEja>L\  I.  459

tvrn  pfirts,  U,  4  H.,  or  ClI,  +  H,,  aa  soon  as  iliev  are  even  temporftrUy  formed,
and  are  incapable  of  separate  existenee,  and  therefore  can  lake  no  part  in
the  elementary  aet  of  substitution.  ^Vitb  respect  to  tbe  aiiuplcst  moleeules
which  we  Ehall  aelect— that  is  to  say,  tEioHe  of  which  the  parts  have  no  sepa-
rate existence,  and  therefore  cannot  appear  in  anbstitutionB — -we  ahnll  con-
aider  them  ciccordinft  to  the  periodic  law,  arranging  them  in  direct  dependence
on  the  atomic  weight  of  the  elemcnta.

Thus,  for  example,  the  molecules  of  ihe  simplest  hydrogen  compoimde—

HF  H.0  H,N  JI,C

hydrofluoric  acid  water  »mnioniu.  metb«iiB

correspond  with  elements  the  atomic  weigbts  of  which  decrease  consecutively
F  =  19,  0  =  le,  N  =  14,  C  =  12.

Neither  the  arithmetical  order  (1,  'i,  3,  4  atoms  of  hydrogen)  nor  tito  total
information  we  possess  res[>ecting  the  elements  will  permit  ns  to  interpolate
into  this  typical  aeries  one  more  additional  element ;  and  therefore  we  have
here,  for  hydrogen  compounds,  a  natural  base  on  which  are  built  up  those
simple  chemical  combinations  which  we  take  as  typical,  Bol  even  they  are
competent  to  unite  with  each  other,  as  we  see,  for  instance,  in  tbe  property
which  hydroHuoric  acid  has  of  forming  a  hydrate— that  is,  of  oombiiiing  with
water ;  and  a  ainiilar  attribute  of  amatonia,  resulting  in  the  formation  of  a
caustic  alkali,  KH^.R^O,  or  NH,OH.

Having  made  these  indispensable  jireliminary  observalious,  I  may  now
attack  tbe  problem  itself  and  attempt  to  explain  the  so-called  strocture  or
rather  construction,  of  molecules—  [hat  is  to  say,  their  constitution  and  IranS'
formations — without  bavingrecourse  to  the  teaching  of' etructuraliats,' but  on
Newton's  dynamical  principles.

Of  Newton's  three  laws  of  motion,  only  the  third  can  be  applied  directly
to  chemical  molecules  when  regarded  as  systems  of  atoms  among  which  it
must  be  supposed  that  there  exist  connuon  influences  or  forces,  and  resulting
compounded  relative  motions.  Chemical  reactions  of  every  kind  are  un-
doubtedly accomplished  by  changes  in  these  internal  movements,  respecting
the  nature  of  which  nothing  is  known  at  present,  but  the  existence  of  which
the  mass  of  evidence  collected  in  modem  times  forces  us  to  acknowledge  as
foriiimg  part  of  the  common  motion  of  the  universe,  and  as  a  fact  farther
established  by  the  circumstance  that  chemical  reactions  are  always  charac-
terised by  changes  of  volume  or  the  relations  between  the  atoms  or  the
molecules.  Newton's  third  law,  which  is  applicable  to  every  system,  declares
that,  'action  is  also  associated  with  reaction,  and  is  eijual  to  il.'  Tbe
brevity  of  conciseness  of  this  axiom  was,  however,  qualilied  by  Newton  in
a  more  expanded  statement,  'the  action  of  bodies  one  npon  another  are
always  equal,  and  in  opposite  directions.'  This  simple  fact  constitutes  tbe
point  of  departure  fur  explaining  dynamic  equilibrium — that  is  to  say,  systems
of  conseri'ancy.  It  is  capable  of  satisfying  even  the  dualists,  and  of  explain.
ittg,  without  additional  assimiptions,  the  preservation  of  those  chemical  types
which  Dumas,  Laurent,  and  Gerhardt  created  unit  t^vpes,  and  those  views  of
atomic  combinations  which  the  structurolikts  express  by  atomicity  or  tbe  .

•160  PRINOIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

valency  of  the  elements,  and,  in  connection  with  them,  the  varioas  numbers
of  atlinities.  In  reality,  if  a  system  of  atoms  or  a  molecule  be  given,  then  in
it,  according  to  the  third  law  of  Newton,  each  portion  of  atoms  acts  on  the
remaining  portion  in  the  same  manner,  and  with  the  same  force  as  the
second  set  of  atoms  acts  on  the  first.  We  infer  directly  from  this  considera-
tion that  both  sets  of  atoms,  forming  a  molecule,  are  not  only  equivalent  with
regard  to  themselves,  as  they  must  be  according  to  Daltou's  law,  but  also  that
they  may,  if  united,  replace  each  other.  Let  there  be  a  molecule  containing
atoms  A  B  C,  it  is  clear  that,  according  to  Newton's  law,  the  action  of  A  on
B  C  must  be  equal  to  the  action  of  B  C  on  A,  and  if  the  first  action  is  directed
on  B  C,  then  the  second  must  be  directed  on  A,  and  consequently  then,  w^here
A  can  exist  io  dynamic  equilibrium,  B  C  may  take  its  place  and  act  in  a  like
manner.  In  the  same  way  the  action  of  C  is  equal  to  the  action  of  A  B.  In
one  word  every  two  sets  of  atoms  forming  a  molecule  are  equivalent  to  each
other,  and  may  take  each  other's  place  in  other  molecules,  or,  having  tlie
power  of  balancing  each  other,  the  atoms  or  their  complements  are  endowed
with  the  power  of  replacing  each  other.  Let  us  call  this  consequence  of  an
evident  axiom  *  the  principle  of  substitution,*  and  let  us  apply  it  to  those
typical  forms  of  hydrogen  compounds  which  we  have  already  discofised,  and
which,  on  account  of  their  simplicity  and  regularity,  have  served  as  startmg-
points  of  chemical  argument  long  before  the  appearance  of  the  doctrine  of
structure.

In  the  type  of  hydrofluoric  acid,  HF,  or  in  systems  of  double  stars,  are
included  a  multitude  of  the  simplest  molecules.  It  will  be  sufficient  for  our
purpose  to  recall  a  few :  for  example,  the  molecules  of  chlorine,  CI,,  and  of
hydrogen,  H.^,  and  hydrochloric  acid,  HCl,  which  is  famiUar  to  all  in  aqueous
solution  as  spirits  of  salt,  and  which  has  many  points  of  resemblance  with
HF,  HBr,  HI.  In  these  cases  division  into  two  i)arts  can  only  be  made  in
one  way,  and  therefore  tlie  principle  of  substitution  renders  it  probable  that
exchanges  between  the  chlorine  and  the  hydrogen  can  take  place,  if  they  are
competent  to  unite  with  each  other.  There  was  a  time  when  no  chemist
would  even  admit  the  idea  of  any  such  action  ;  it  was  then  thought  that  the
power  of  combination  indicated  a  polar  difference  of  the  molecules  in  com-
bination, and  this  thought  set  aside  all  idea  of  the  substitution  of  one  com-
ponent element  by  another.

Thanks  to  the  observations  and  experiments  of  Dumas  and  Laurent  fifty
years  ago,  such  fallacies  were  dispelled,  and  in  this  manner  the  principle
of  substitution  was  exhibited.  Chlorine  and  bromine  acting  on  many
hydrogen  compounds,  occupy  iunnediately  the  place  of  their  hydrogen,  and
the  displaced  hydrogen,  with  another  atom  of  chlorine  or  bromine,  form:}
hydrochloric  acid  or  bromide  of  hydrogen.  This  takes  place  in  all  t\T)ical
hydrogen  compounds.  Thus  chlorine  acts  on  this  principle  on  gaseous
hydrogen — reaction,  under  the  influence  of  hgiit,  resultmg  in  the  formation
of  hydrochloric  acid.  Chlorine  acting  on  the  alkalis,  constituted  similarly  to
water,  and  even  on  water  itself — only,  however,  under  the  influence  of  light
and  only  partially  because  of  the  instability  of  HCIO — forms  by  this  principle
bleachirg  salts,  which  are  the  same  as  the  alkalis,  but  with  their  hydrogen
replaced  by  chlorine. In  ammonia  and  in  methane,  chlorine  can  also  replace

APPESWX  I.

I  rormed  in  lliis  Tiinituer  the  Ho-cnll«J
riiloriile  of  nitrogen.  NC'l ,.  which  decomposes  very  readily  with  violent  explo-
Hi:>ii  nil  account  nf  th^  evolved  gasea,  nnd  fatla  asnnder  ns  chlorine  and
II  troi'cii.  Oiit  at  marsh  gas,  or  methane.  CH,,  nin.v  be  obtained  consecti-
tively,  liy  this  metljod.  c\ery  possible  aiihstitntiou,  of  which  chloroform,
CHCl.  is  the  best  known,  nnil  oarbon  tetrachloride.  CCl,,  the  most  instriic-
Ii\'e.  But  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  cliloriDe  and  bromine  act,  in  the  manner
Hhjwn,  on  the  siiuplest  typical  hydrog-en  coniponnds,  their  action  on  the
more  complicated  onos  mny  be  assumed  to  be  the  same.  This  caa  be  easily
ileuionstraled.  The  hydrogen  of  benzeni,  C,H„,  reacts  feebly  nnder  the  inflii-
etice  of  light  on  liquid  bromine,  but  Giiatavaon  has  shown  that  the  addition
of  the  Bnialleet  quantity  of  metallic  aluniiniuiD  caitsea  energetic  action  and
llie  e\'olntion  of  larjje  volumes  of  hydrogen  bromide.

If  we  pa'^B  on  to  the  second  typical  faydrogen  compound— that  is  to  say,
water— its  molecule,  HOH,  may  be  split  up  in  two  ways :  either  into  an  atom
of  hydrogen  and  a  semi-molecule  of  hydrojjen  peroiide,  HO,  or  into  oxygen,
O.  and  two  atoms  of  hydros^n.  H  ;  and  therefore,  according  to  the  principle
of  substitution,  it  is  endeiit  thai  one  atom  of  hydi-ogen  can  exchange
with  hydrogen  oxide,  HO,  and  two  atonis  of  hydrogen,  H,  with  one  atom  of
oxygen,  0.

Both  these  forms  of  sniistitiition  will  constitute  methods  of  oxidation —
that  is  to  say,  of  the  entrance  of  oxygpii  into  the  compound  -  a  reaction
whidi  is  so  common  in  nature  as  well  as  in  the  arts,  taking  place  at  the
expense  of  the  oxygen  of  the  air  or  by  the  aid  of  various  osidising  sub-
ulancea  or  bodies  which  part  easily  with  their  osygen.  There  is  no  occasion
to  reckon  up  the  unlimited  niiniber  of  ea.see  of  sticli  oxidisini;  rcMtions.  It
b  eiitticient  to  state  that  in  the  first  of  these  oxyuen  is  directly  transferred,
and  the  position,  the  clieinieal  function,  which  hydrogen  origina'ly  ocupied,
is,  after  the  substitution,  occupied  by  the  hydroxy!.  Thus  ammonia,  NH,,
yields  hydroiylamine,  NH^(On),  a  mbstance  which  retains  many  of  tlie
properties  of  ammonia.

Blelhane  and  a  number  of  other  hvdrociirbons  yield,  by  substitntion  of
the  hydrogen  by  itBO\ide,  methyl  alcohol,  CH,(Oiri,  and  other  alcohols.  The
Biibstitutiou  of  one  atom  of  oxygen  for  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  is  equally
romnion  with  hydro};en  compounds.  By  this  means  alcohoUc  liquids  con-
taining ethyl  alcohol,  or  spirits  of  win*,  C  H,(OH),  are  oxidised  until  they
become  vinegar,  or  acetic  acid,  C  H.OiOH).  In  the  same  way  caustic
ammonia,  or  the  combination  of  ammonia  with  water,  NlIj,H,0,  or  NH,(OH),
which  contains  a  great  deal  of  hydrogen,  by  oxidation  o/ichanges  four  atoms
of  hydrogen  for  two  atoms  of  ojtygen,  and  becomes  converted  into  nitric  acid,
NO,(OHl.  This  process  of  conversion  of  ammonium  salts  into  saltpetre  goes
on  in  the  lields  every  summer,  and  with  e^'pecial  rapidity  in  tropical  countries.
The  noeihod  by  which  this  is  aituomplished,  though  complex,  though  Involving
the  a,gency  of  all -perm  eating  micro-organisms,  is,  in  substance,  the  same  as
that  by  which  alcohol  is  converted  into  acetic  acid,  or  ■,'lycol,  C,H,{OH),,  into
oxalic  ac>d,  if  we  view  the  process  of  oxidation  iu  the  light  of  the  Newtonian
principles.

But  whil«  speaking  of  the  application  of  the  principle  of  snbstitntion  to

462  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

water,  we  need  not  multiply  instances,  but  must  turn  our  attention  to  two
special  circumstances  which  are  closely  connected  with  the  very  mechanism
of  substitutions.

In  the  first  place,  the  replacement  of  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  by  one  atom
of  oxygen  may  take  place  in  two  ways,  because  the  hydrogen  molecule  is
composed  of  two  atoms,  and  therefore,  imder  the  influence  of  oxygen,  the
molecule  forming  water  may  separate  before  the  oxygen  has  time  to  take  its
place.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  find,  during  the  conversion  of  alcohol
into  acetic  acid,  that  there  is  an  interval  during  which  is  formed  aldehydcf
C.^H^O,  which,  as  its  very  name  implies,  is  *  alcohol  dehydrogenatnm,*  or
alcohol  deprived  of  hydrogen.  Hence  aldehyde  combined  with  hydrogen
yields  alcohol ;  and  united  to  oxygen,  acetic  acid.

For  the  same  reason  there  should  be,  and  there  actually  are,  intermediate
products  between  ammonia  and  nitric  acid,  NO.^CHO),  containing  either,  less
hydrogen  than  ammonia,  less  oxygen  than  nitric  acid,  or  less  water  than
caustic  ammonia.  Accordingly  we  find,  among  the  products  of  the  deoxida-
tion  of  nitric  acid  and  the  oxidation  of  ammonia,  not  only  hydroxylamine,
but  also  nitrous  oxide,  nitrous  and  nitric  anhydrides.  Thus,  the  prodaction
of  nitrous  acid  results  from  the  removal  of  two  atoms  of  hydrogen  from
caustic  ammonia  and  the  substitution  of  the  oxygen  for  the  hydrogen,
NO  (OH) ;  or  by  the  substitution,  in  ammonia,  of  three  atoms  of  hydrogen  by
hydroxyl,  N(0H)3,  and  by  the  removal  of  water:  N(0H)s-H.p  =  NO(OH).
The  peculiarities  and  properties  of  nitrous  acid — as,  for  instance,  its  action  on
ammonia  and  its  conversion,  by  oxidation,  into  nitric  acid — are  thus  clearly
revealed.

On  the  other  hand,  in  speaking  of  the  principle  of  substitution  as  applied
to  water,  it  is  necessary  to  observe  that  hydrogen  and  hydroxyl,  H  and  OH,
are  not  only  competent  to  unite,  but  also  to  form  combinations  with  them-
selves, and  thus  become  H.^  and  H..0., ;  and  such  are  hydrogen  and  the
peroxide  thereof.  In  general,  if  a  molecule  A  B  exists,  then  molecules  A  A
and  15  B  can  exist  also.  A  direct  reaction  of  this  kind  does  not,  however,
take  place  in  water,  therefore  undoubtedly,  at  the  moment  of  formation,
hydrogen  reacts  on  hydrogen  peroxide,  as  we  can  show  at  once  by
experiment ;  and  further  because  hydrogen  peroxide,  H.,0.„  exhibits  a
structure  containing,'  a  molecule  of  hydrogen,  H„  and  one  of  oxygen,  O
either  of  which  is  capable  of  separate  existence.  The  fact,  however,  may
now  be  taken  as  thoroughly  established,  that,  at  the  moment  of  combustion
of  liydrogen  or  of  the  hydrogen  compounds,  hydrogen  peroxide  is  alwavs
formed,  and  not  only  so,  but  in  all  probability  its  formation  invariably  pre-
cedes the  formation  of  water.  This  was  to  be  expected  as  a  consequence  of
the  law  of  Avoj^adro  and  Gerhardt,  which  leads  us  to  expect  this  sequence
in  the  case  of  equal  interactions  of  volumes  of  vapours  and  gases ;  and  in
hydrogen  peroxide  we  actuaU}'  have  such  equal  volumes  of  the  elementary
gases.

The  instability  of  hydrogen  peroxide  that  is  to  say,  the  ease  with
which  it  decomposes  into  water  and  oxygen,  even  at  the  mere  contact  of
porous  substances — accounts  for  the  circumstance  that  it  does  not  form  a  per-
manent product  of  combustion,  and  is  not  produced  during  the  decomposition

of  water.  I  taay  mention  this  additional  comtideration  that,  with  respect
to  hydrogen  peroxide,  we  may  look  for  its  effecting  Btill  tiirCher  Hubstitu-
lions  of  hydrogen  by  means  of  which  we  may  expect  to  obtain  still  more
highly  oxidised  water  couipouuds,  such  as  ItjOj  and  H^O,.  These  Sohiiobein
and  Itunacn  have  lung  been  seeking,  and  Berthelot  is  investigating  them
al  present,  ll  is  probable,  however,  tbat  the  reaction  will  stop  at  the
last  ciiiiipoiuid.  becsnae  we  lind  that,  in  a  number  of  cases,  the  udditiun  of
fonr  aiome  of  oxygen  seems  to  form  a.  limit.  Tbus,  OsU,,  KCIO,,  KMnO,,
KjSO,,  Na^ru,,  and  such  like,  represent  the  highest  fp-odes  of  oxidation.'

Ah  fur  the  last  forty  yeorH,  from  the  times  of  lier/elinti,  Dumas,  Liebi;^,
Gerhardt,  Williamson,  Frankland,  Kolbe,  Kekiilf,  and  Bntlerotf,  most  theo-
retical generalisations  havi>  centred  round  organic  or  carbon  compounds,
we  will,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  leave  out  the  discussion  of  Finmionia  deriva-
tives, notwithstanding  their  aimplicity  with  respect  to  Uie  doctrine  of  substi-
tutions ;  we  will  dwell  more  especially  on  its  application  to  carbon  compounds,
starling  &om  methane,  CJi,,  as  the  simplest  of  the  hydrocarbons,  containing
in  its  molecule  one  atom  of  carbon.  According  to  the  principles  enumerated
■we  may  derive  from  CH,  every  combination  of  tho  form  CH,,X,  CH^Xj,
CHX„and  CX,.  in  which  X  is  on  element,  or  radicle,  eiiuivalent  to  hydrogen —
that  is  to  sav,  competent  to  lake  its  place  or  to  combine  with  it.  Sncli  are
the  chlorine  snbatitntes  already  mentioned,  such  is  wood-spirit,  CH,(1JH|,  in
which  X  is  represented  by  the  residue  of  water,  and  such  are  numerous  other
carbon  derivatives.  If  we  continue,  with  the  aid  of  hydroxy],  further  substi-
tutions of  the  hydrogen  of  uietbane  we  shall  obtain  successively  C'H.,iOH).j,
CH|OH)„  and  C(OH),.  But  if.  in  proceeding  thus,  we  bear  in  mind  that
CH^(OH).j  contains  two  hydroxyls  in  the  same  form  as  hydrogen  peroxide,
HjO.j  or  [0H)„,  contains  them — and  moreover  not  only  in  one  molecule,  but
tof^ther,  attached  to  one  and  the  same  atom  of  carbon— so  here  we  must
look  for  the  same  decomposition  as  that  which  we  tind  in  hydrogen  peroxide,
and  accompanied  also  by  the  formation  of  water  as  an  independently
existing  molecule  ;  therefore  CR;(Oi]),  should  yield,  as  it  actually  does,  im-
mediately water  and  the  oxide  of  methylene,  CH.,0,  which  is  methane  with

niFDtl,  Slid  bpcsDHi  thu  lijilmKvii  uimpouQdu  If^.  HC1,  H^S,  HjP,  EI,Si)  always  lonn
their  higliest  uiidee  with  four  KtouiH  ol  oij'geu.  imd  lU)  tbe  lif|{hesl  forms  of  oxides  (OoO,,
BnOa)  sfso  DDutoiu  four  of  oiygeii,  and  eiphtgrnnp*  of  the  periodic  ajistem.rorrespondiug
to  the  liighest  bnaie  oxides  R.O,  RO,  R,0],  RO.;,  &,0„,  BUj^,  &,0„  and  RO4,  imply  tlis
■bo*e  relation  ship,  and  becaune  nl  the  nenrest  unali^^eti  sinang  tlii-  eleiDcuti— such  u
Hg,  Zn,  Cd,  nndHg;  <>i  Cr.  Ho,  W,  uid  Ui  or  Bi,  De,  Sn.uidPt;  or  F,  CI,  Br,  and  I,
and  no  lorth— not  more  thftn  four  are  known,  it  ueras  to  me  th^t  iu  Cheue  relationship*
there  lies  a  deep  iutenuit  and  mMnin);  with  regard  l»  chemical  mechanicii. But  because,

celeatia]  i>yBt«nis  01  amnn((  cheoiical  molernlev,  in  very  uttractirti,  eapetially  betaOBe  the
atomk  tvacbing  at  once  acijaiiea  it*  tmu  meaning,  I  will  reuUI  the  loUowing  factii  rv-
tatinn  to  the  solar  >]Fst<ln.  There  are  eight  inajoi  plai  ets,  of  which  the  four  inner  one*
are  not  only  leparated  from  the  four  outer  by  MleToiita,  bnt  diRer  from  them  in  many
lespecta,  au,  for  example,  in  the  imallneu  of  their  diameters  and  their  greater  density.
Satom  with  his  ring  has  eight  satellites.  Jupiter  and  Uruiua  have  ciach  four.  It  is  evi-
dent that  in  the  solar  ayslem*  also  we  meet  with  these  hiKher  number*  tour  anil  eight
which  ai^>ear  in  the  oombination  of  chemical  raoledules.

464  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

oxygen  substituted  for  two  atoms  of  hydrogen.  Exactly  in  the  same  manner
out  of  CH(0H)3  are  formed  wat«r  and  formic  acid,  CHO(OH)y  and  oat  of
C(0H)4  is  produced  water  and  carbonic  acid,  or  directly  carbonic  anhydride,
CO..,  which  will  therefore  be  nothing  else  than  methane  with  the  doable  re-
placement of  pairs  of  hydrogen  by  oxygen.  As  nothing  leads  to  the  snppoii-
tion  that  the  four  atoms  of  hydrogen  in  methane  differ  one  from  the  other.
so  it  does  not  matter  by  what  means  we  obtain  any  one  of  the  eombinations
indicated — they  will  be  identical ;  that  is  to  say,  there  will  be  no  case  of
actual  isomerism,  although  there  may  easily  be  such  cases  of  isomerism  at
have  been  distinguished  by  the  term  metamerism.

Fonnic  acid,  for  example,  has  two  atoms  of  hydrogen,  one  attached  to  tbe
carbon  left  from  the  methane,  and  the  other  attached  to  the  oxygen  whieli
has  entered  in  the  form  of  hydroxy!,  and  if  one  of  them  be  replaced  by  some
substance  X  it  is  evident  that  we  shall  obtain  substances  of  the  same  composi-
tion, but  of  different  construction,  or  of  different  orders  of  movemiuit  among
the  moleculefi,  and  therefore  endowed  with  other  properties  and  reactions.  If
X  be  methyl,  OH,— that  is  to  say,  a  group  capable  of  replacini^  hydrogen
because  it  is  actually  contained  with  iiydrogen  in  methane  itself — then  by
substituting  this  group  for  the  original  hydrogen  we  obtain  acetic  acid,
CCH^O(OH),  out  of  formic,  and  by  substitution  of  the  hydrogen  in  its  oxide  or
hydroxyl  we  obtain  methyl  formate,  CHO(OCH,).  These  Bubstances  differ  00
much  from  each  other  physically  and  chemically  that  at  first  sight  it  if  hardly
possible  to  admit  that  they  contain  the  same  atoms  in  identically  the  same
proportions.  Acetic  acid,  for  example,  boils  at  a  higher  temperatnre  than
water,  and  has  a  higher  spcciiic  gravity  than  it,  whilst  its  metameridt,
methyl  formate,  is  lighter  than  water,  and  boils  at  80° — that  is  to  8ay>it
eva))onite8  very  easily.

Let  us  now  turn  to  carbon  compounds  containing  two  atoms  of  carbon  to
the  molecule,  as  in  acetic  acid,  and  proceed  to  evolve  them  from  methane  bv
the  principle  of  substitution.  This  principle  declares  at  once  that  methane
can  only  be  split  up  in  the  four  following  ways: —

1.  Into  a  group  CH.j  equivalent  with  H.  Let  us  call  changes  of  thii
natiure  methylation.

2.  Into  a  group  CH.,  and  H.^.  We  will  call  this  order  of  snbstitutions
uiothylenation.

8.  Into  CII  and  H.,,  which  connnutations  we  will  call  acetylenation.

4.  Into  C  and  H,,  which  may  be  called  carbonation.

It  is  evident  that  hydrocarbon  comimnnds  containing  two  atoms  of  carbon
can  only  )>roceed  from  methane,  CH,,  which  contains  four  atoms  of  hydrogen
bv  the  first  three  methods  of  substitution  ;  carbonation  would  yield  free  carbon
if  it  could  take  place  directly,  and  if  ihe  molecule  of  free  carbon — which  is  in
reality  very  complex,  that  is  to  say  strongly  polyatomic,  as  I  have  long  since
been  i)roving  by  various  means — could  contain  only  C.^  like  the  molecules
().,  H.,  N .,  and  so  on.

By  meth\lation  we  should  evidently  obtain  from marsh  gas,  etliane

('.H,CH,-C!lI,-

liy  niethylenation— that  is,  by  substituting  group  CH.^  for  II, — 'methaDe
forms  ethylene,  CH.CH,  -  C.^H,.

I

APPEITDIX  I.  465

!)>■  ftcatylenalion— thai  is.  bj  subatitiitiug  three atomsofhydrogeu,  Hj,  in
iiiethsne— by  tlie  remnant  CH,  we  gut  ttcetylene.  CHCH-C,H,.

If  we  liave  applied  the  principles  of  Newton  correctly,  thers  should  not  be
niiy  other  hydroc&rboQB  containin);  two  atoms  of  carbon  in  the  molecule.
All  these  potiibinations  have  long  been  known,  anil  in  each  of  thi^ui  we  can
not  only  produce  those  substilutioiis  of  which  an  example  has  been  given  in
the  case  of  methane,  bnt  also  all  the  phases  of  other  substitutions,  as  we  shali
find  from  a  few  more  instances,  by  the  aid  of  which  I  trust  that  I  shall  be
able  to  ahow  the  great  complesity  ot  thos*  derivatives  which,  on  the  principle
of  substitution,  can  be  obtained  from  each  hydrocarbon.  Let  ua  content  our-
selves with  the  case  of  ethane,  CH^CFL,,  m\A  the  substitution  of  the  hydrogen
by  hydroxyl. The  following  are  the  possible  changes :  —

1.  CH,CH.,(OH):  this  is  nothing  more  than  spirit  of  wine,  or  ethvl
alcohol,  C.HjlOH)  or  C,,H„U.

2.  CH.,(0H:)CH,,(()H)  :  this  is  the  glycol  of  Wiirt/.  which  has  shed  so
much  hght  on  the  history  ot  alcohol.  Its  isomeride  may  be  t'HjCH|OH)„
but  as  we  have  seen  in  the  case  of  CH(OH).,,  it  decomposes,  giving  off  water,
and  forming  aldehyde,  CH,fHO,  a  substance  capable  of  yielding  alcohol  bj
uniting  with  hydrogen,  and  of  yielding  acetic  acid  by  uniting  with  oxygen.

If  glycol,  CH.,(()H)Ctt,((.)H),  loses  its  water,  it  may  be  seen  at  once  that
it  will  not  now  yield  aldehyde,  CH,CHO,  but  its  isomeride,  CH^Rj,  ^^^^
oxide  of  ethylene.  I  have  here  indicated  in  a  special  manner  the  oiygen
which  has  taken  the  place  of  two  atotna  of  the  hydrogen  of  ethane  taken
from  different  atoms  of  the  carbon.

3.  CH,C(0H:(|  decomposed  as  CH(OH)„  formint;  water  and  acetic  acid.
CH,CO|nU).  It  ia  evident  that  this  acid  is  nothing  else  than  formic  acid.
CHtllOH),  with  its  hydrogen  replaced  by  methyl.  Without  examining
fiirlher  the  vast  number  of  possible  derivatives.  I  will  direct  your  attention
t»  the  circumstance  that  in  dissolving  acetic  acid  in  watiT  we  obtain  llie
maximtmi  contraction  and  the  griiatesC  viscosity  when  to  the  molecule
CH|('0|nH)  is  added  a  muleculo  of  water,  which  is  the  proportion  which
would  fonn  the  hydrate  CH,,C(OH).,.  It  is  probable  that  the  doubling  of
the  molecule  of  acetic  acid  at  temperatures  approaching  its  boiling-point
has some connection  with this  power of  uniting  with one molecule of

4.  CHjOH)C(OH).,  is  evidently  an  alcoholic  acid,  and  indeed  this  com-
pound, after  losing  water,  answers  to  glycolic  acid.  CH..,(UH)(.'(.)(OH|.
Without  investigating  all  the  possible  isuinerides.  we  uilt  note  only  that  the
hydiMe  CH(OH),,CHiClH),  has  the  same  composition  as  Cn.,(OH)t'|OH)„
and  although  corroxponding  to  glycol,  and  being  a  symmetrical  substance,  it
becomes,  on  parting  with  its  water,  the  aldehyde  of  oxalic  acid,  or  the  gl  joxal
of  Debus,  CUOCHO.

5.  CH(OHj„C(UH  ,1,  from  Uie  tendency  of  oil  the  preceding,  corresponds
with  glyoxylic  acid,  an  aldehyde  acid,  rHOC^riCOII),  because  the  group
rO(()H),  or  corboxyl,  enters  into  the  compositions  of  organic  acids,  and  the
group  CHO  deHues  the  aldehyde  function.

6.  C(OH)^C(OII),,  through  the  loss  of  2H,0  yields  tUe  bibasie  omUo  acid

i

4G6  PRIN'CIPLES OF CHEMISTRY

C()(OH)CO(OH),  which  generally  crystallises  with  2H.,0,  following  thus  the
normal  type  of  hydration  characteristic  of  ethane.^

Thus,  by  applying  the  principle  of  substitution,  we  can,  in  the  simplest
manner,  derive  not  only  every  kind  of  hydrocarbon  compound,  such  as  the
alcohols,  the  aldehyde-alcohols,  aldehydes,  alcohol-acids,  and  the  acids,  hot
also  combinations  analogous  to  hydrated  crystals  which  usually  are  dis-
regarded.

But  even  those  unsaturated  substances,  of  which  ethylene,  CH.^CH„  and
acetylene,  CHCH,  are  types,  may  be  evolved  with  equal  siniplicitj.  With
respect  to  the  phenomena  of  isomerism,  there  are  many  possibilities  among
the  hydrocarbon  compounds  conta'ning  two  atoms  of  carbon,  and  without
going  into  details  it  will  be  sufficient  to  indicate  that  the  following  fomiuls.
though  not  identical,  will  be  isomeric  substantially  among  themselves:—
CH.CHX,  and  CH^XCH.X,  although  both  contain  C,H^X,,;  or  CBLCX.,  and
(^HXCHX,  although  both  contain  C.  H.>X.,  if  by  X  we  indicate  chlorine  or
generally  an  element  capable  of  replacing  one  atom  of  hydrogen,  or  capable
of  uniting  with  it.  To  isomerism  of  this  kind  belongs  the  case  of  aldehyde
and  the  oxide  of  ethylene,  to  which  we  have  already  referred,  because  both
have  the  composition  C.,H,0.

What  I  have  said  appears  to  me  sufficient  to  show  that  the  principle  of
substitution  adequately  explains  the  composition,  the  isomerism,  and  all  the
diversity  of  combination  of  the  hydrocarbons,  and  I  shall  limit  the  further
development  of  these  views  to  preparing  a  complete  list  of  every  possible
hydrocarbon  compound  containing  three  atoms  of  carbon  in  the  molecule.
There  are  eight  in  all,  of  which  only  five  are  known  at  present.^

Among  those  possible  for  C.,H,;  there  should  be  two  isomerides,  propylene
and  trimethylene,  and  they  are  both  already  known.  For  C.,H,  there  should
l»e  three  isoniorides :  allylene  and  allene  are  known,  but  the  third  has  not
yet  been  discovered ;  and  for  C.jH..  there  should  be  two  isomerides,  though
neither  of  them  is  known  as  yet. Their  composition  and  structure  are  easilv

-  One  moro  ifionioride,  CH.,CH(OH),  is  ])ossil)le—  tliat  is,  secondary  vinyl  alcohol
^vllic'll  is  roliitt'd  to  ethylene,  CH.,,CH.j,  V)ut  derived  liy  the  principle  of  Kiibstitution  from
CH,.  Other  isomerides,  of  the  composition  CoHiG,  such,  for  example,  as  CCH-iOBH,
are  iiiipossihle.  htM;ause  it  would  correspond  with  the  hydrocarlx)n  CHCH5=C..H4,  which
is  isomeric  witli  ethylene,  and  it  cannot  be  derived  from  methane.  If  such  an  iKonieride
exi'»ted  it  wonld  he  derived  from  CH.,,  but  such  ]»roduct8  are,  up  to  the  present,  unknown.
In  siuh  cases  the  insufficiency  of  the  jioints  of  departure  of  tlie  statical  Htructural  t<Mu:h-
in}^  is  sliown.  It  first  admits  constant  atomicity  and  then  rejects  it,  the  facts  ser\'inif  to
efitabh^h  eitlier  one  or  the  other  view;  and  therefore  it  seems  to  me  that  we  muBt  c(»n<*
to  the  conclusion  that  the  structural  method  of  reasoning,  having  done  a  service  to
science,  has  outlived  the  age,  and  must  be  regenerated,  jis  in  their  time  was  the  teachiiu;
of  tlie  electro-chemists,  the  radicalists,  and  the  adherents  of  the  doctrine  of  tvpen.  A*
wo  caniu)t  now  lean  on  the  views  above  stated,  it  is  time  to  abandon  the  titru<'tiiral
tlieory  They  will  all  be  united  in  chemical  mechanics,  and  the  principle  of  subHtitatioo
must  be  looked  on  only  as  a  preparation  for  the  coming  eiioch  in  chemistrv,  when^
sucli  cases  as  the  isomerism  of  fumaric  and  maleic  acids,  when  explained  dynamically  **
proposed  by  I^e  Bel  and  Van't  Hoff,  nniy  yield  i>oints  of  departure.

•'»  Conceding  variable  atomicity,  the  structuralists  must  exi>ect  an  incomparably  lan^r
number  (»f  isomerides,  aJid  they  cannot  now  decline  to  acknowledge  the  chani^  i4
atomicity,  were  it  only  for  the  examples  HgCl  and  HgCl.^,  CO  and  CO.,,  PCI5  and  PCI-.

APPENDIX I.  467

(letliiced  from  ethane,  ethylene,  and  acetylene,  by  inethylation,  by  methylena-
tion,  by  acetylenation  and  by  carbonation.

1.  C.H,  =  CH,CH.CH,  out  of  CH,CH, by methylation. This hydro-
carbon is  named  propane.

2.  C,H,.  =  CH.CHCK,  out of  CR.CH, by methylenation. This sub-
stance is  propylene.

8.  i\,K,,  =  CH,CH,CII., out of  CH,CH, by  methylenation. This  sub-
stance is  trimethylene.

4.  C,H,  -  CII,GCH  out  of  CH^CH^  by  acetylenation  or  from  CHCH  by
inethylation. This  hydrocarbon  is  named  allylene.

5.  C,H, =- r^Jr outof  CHjC  H.J  by  acetylenation,  or  from  CH.CH.  by

/"'XT  ptT r^TTr^fT

methylenation,  because pW = fH ' This  body  is  as  yet  miknown.

6.  C,H,  =  CH,CCH,  out  of  CH,Cn,  by  methylenation.  This  hydro-
carbon is  named  allene,  or  iso-allylene.

CHCH

7.  C.,H^ = p out  of  CHyCH.,  by  symmetrical  carbonation,  or  oi:t

of  CHXH,  by  acetylenation. This  compound  is  unknown.

8.  C,R, = ^J^ out  of  CH3CH, by  carbonation,  or  out  of  CHCH  by

methylenation. This  compound  is  unknown.

If  we  bear  in  mind  that  for  each  hydrocarbon  serving  as  a  type  in  the
above  tables  there  are  a  number  of  corresponding  derivatives,  and  that  every
compound  obtained  may,  by  further  methylation,  methylenation,  acetylena-
tion, and  carbonation,  produce  new  hydrocarbons,  and  these  may  be  followed
by  a  numeious  suite  of  derivatives  and  an  immense  nimiber  of  isomeric
substances,  it  is  possible  to  understand  the  limitless  number  of  caibon  com-
pounds, although  they  all  have  the  one  substance,  methane,  for  their  origin.
Tlie  number  of  substances  is  so  enormous  that  it  is  no  longer  a  question  of
enlarging  the  possibilities  of  discovery,  but  rather  of  finding  some  means  of
testing  them  analogous  to  the  well-known  two  which  for  a  long  time  have
served  as  gauges  for  all  carbon  compounds.

I  refer  to  the  law  of  even  numbers  and  to  that  of  limits,  the  first  enunciated
by  Gerhardt  Bome  forty  years  ago,  with  respect  to  hydrocarbons,  namely,
that  their  molecules  always  contain  an  even  number  of  atoms  of  hydrogen.
But  by  the  method  which  I  have  used  of  deriving  all  the  hydrocarbons  from
methane,  CH„  this  law  may  be  deduced  as  a  direct  consequence  of  the
•principle  of  substitutions.  Accordingly,  in  methylation,  CH.,  takes  the  place
of  H,  and  therefore  CH,  is  added.  In  methylenation  the  number  of  atoms  of
hydrogen  remains  unchanged,  and  at  each  acetylenation  it  is  reduced  by  two,
and  in  carbonation  by  four,  atoms — that  is  to  say,  an  even  number  of  atoms
of  hydrogen  is  always  added  or  removed.  And  because  the  fundamental
hydrocarbon,  methane,  CH^,  contains  an  even  number  of  atoms  of  hydrogen,
all  its  derivative  hydrocarbons  will  also  contain  even  numbers  of  hydrogen,
find  this  constitutes  the  law  of  even  numbers.

The  principle  of  substitutions  explains  with  equal  simplicity  the  conception
•of  the  limiting  compositions  of  hydrocarbons  C«H.jm+.^,  which  I  derived,  ia

468  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

1861/  in  an  empirical  manner  from  accumulated  materials  available  at  thtt
time,  and  on  the  basis  of  the  limits  to  combinations  worked  oat  by  Dr.  Frank-
land  for  other  elements.

Of  all  the  various  substitutions  the  highest  proportion  of  hydrogen  is
yielded  by  methylation,  because  in  that  operation  alone  does  the  quantity  of
hydrogen  increase ;  hence,  taking  methane  as  a  point  of  deiMLitare,  if  we
imagine  methylation  effected  (n  -  1)  times  we  obtain  hydrocarbon  eompounds
containing  the  highest  quantities  of  hydrogen.  It  is  oyident  that  they  will
contain  CH^  +  (n  -  1)CU.^,  or  CnH^i*  +  .^,  because  methylation  leads  to  the  addi-
tion of  CH.j  to  the  compound.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  by  the  principle  of  substitution — that  is  to  sayt
by  the  third  law  of  Newton— we  are  able  to  deduce,  in  the  simplest  manner,
not  only  the  individual  composition,  the  isomerism,  and  relations  of  sab-
stances,  but  also  the  general  laws  which  govern  their  most  complex  combina-
tions without  having  recourse  either  to  statical  constructions,  to  the  deftnxtion
of  atomicities,  to  the  exclusion  of  free  affinities,  or  to  the  recognition  of  those
single,  double  or  treble  bonds  which  are  so  indispensable  to  stmctoralists  in  the
explanation  of  the  composition  and  construction  of  hydrocarbon  oompoonds.
And  yet,  by  the  application  of  the  dynamical  principles  of  Newton,  we  can
attain  to  that  chief  and  fundamental  object,  the  comprehension  of  isomerism
in  hydrocarbon  compounds,  and  the  forecasting  of  the  existence  of  combina-
tions as  yet  unknown,  by  which  the  edifice  raised  by  structural  teaching  if
strengthened  and  supported.  Besides— and  I  count  this  for  a  circumstance
of  Bpecial  importance— the  process  which  I  advocate  will  make  no  diflerenee
in  those  special  cases  which  have  been  already  so  well  worked  out,  such  as,
for  example,  the  isomerism  of  tlie  hydrocarbons  and  alcohols,  even  to  the
extent  of  not  interfering  with  the  nomenclature  which  has  been  adopted,  and
the  structural  system  will  retain  all  the  glory  of  having  worked  up,  in  a
thoroughly  scientific  maimer,  the  store  of  information  which  Gerhardt  had
uecuuiulated  about  the  middle  of  the  fifties,  and  the  still  higher  glor>-  of
establishing  the  rational  synthesis  of  organic  substances.  Nothing  will  be
lost  to  the  structural  doctrine  except  its  statical  origin ;  and  as  soon  as  i(
will  embrace  the  dynamic  principles  of  Kewton,  and  suffer  itself  to  be  fnuded
by  them,  I  believe  that  we  shall  attain  for  chemistry  that  unity  of  principle
which  is  now  wanting.  Many  an  adept  will  be  attracted  to  that  brilliant  aud
fascinating  enterprise,  the  penetration  into  the  unseen  world  of  the  kinetir
relations  of  atoms,  to  the  study  of  which  the  last  twentj'-five  years  have  con-
tributed so  much  labour  and  such  high  inventive  faculties.

l)*Alembert  found  in  mechanics  that  if  inertia  be  taken  to  represent  force.
dynamic  etjuations  may  be  applied  to  statical  (lucstions,  which  are  thereby
rendered  more  simple  and  more  easily  understood.

The  structural  doctrine  in  chemistry  has  imconsciously  followed  the  same
course,  and  therefore  its  terms  are  easily  adopted ;  the}*  may  retain  their
present  forms  provided  that  a  truly  dynamical— that  is  to  say,  Newtonian-
meaning  be  ascribed  to  them.

Before  linishing  my  task  and  demonstrating  the  possibility  of  adapting

*  '  E-^Kiii  (I'uno  tlirorie  8ur  leH  liniites  dcH  conibiimiKoim  organiques,*  (lar  D.  Mpnd«*lre^.
ail  uout  iJStil,  Jiulitiin  de  VAcadimie  i.  d.  Sc.  dc  St.  Ptterabourg,  t.  v

APPESDIX  I.  469

stnietural  iloctriiies  to  the  dynamics  of  "N'awtod.  I  consuler  it  iiidiBpensablo
to  toucii  OD  oue  ijueation  wliich  iintnraJI;  ariees,  and  wliich  I  liave  beard
ilisruesed  more  tlinn  ont^e.  H  bromine,  the  atom  tif  which  is  eighty  times
hell^'ie^  tha.Q  thnt  of  hydrogen,  takes  the  place  of  hydrogen,  it  would  eeem
that  the  whole  ajatem  of  dynainic  equililirioiii  must  be  destroyed.

\Yitliotit  entering  into  tlie  minute  analysis  of  this  (jueBtion,  I  think  it
will  be  sufficient  to  examine  it  by  the  light  of  two  weil-known  phenomena,
one  ot  which  n'ill  be  found  in  the  department  sF  chemistry  and  the  other  in
thnt  of  celestial  mechanics,  and  both  will  serve  to  deuionatrate  tlie  eitisience
of  that  unity  in  the  plan  of  creation -which  is  a  consequence  of  the  Newtoninn
doctrines.  Eiportments  demonstrate  that  when  a  heavy  element  is  substi-
tuted for  a  light  one  in  a  chemical  compound^fur  example,  for  maipiesiiini,
in  the  oxide  of  that  metal,  an  atom  of  laercury,  wliich  is  Hj  times  heavier —
the  chief  chemical  characIeristicB  or  propertici  are  generally,  though  not
always,  preserved.

The  snbstitntion  of  silver  for  hydroijen,  than  which  it  is  103  times  heavier,
does  not  affect  all  the  properties  of  tlie  substance,  thongh  it  does  some.
Therefore  chemical  substitutions  of  this  kind—  the  substitution  of  hght  far
heavy  atoinE— need  not  necessarily  entail  changes  in  the  original  eijuiltbrinm  ;
and  this  point  is  still  further  ehicidated  by  the  cansideration  that  the  periodic
law  indicates  the  decree  of  influence  of  nn  increment  of  weight  in  the  atom
as  alTecting  the  possible  equilibria,  and  also  what  degree  of  increase  in  the
weight  of  lie  atoms  reproduces  some,  thongh  not  all,  of  the  properties  of  iho
substance.

This  tendency  to  repetition — these  periods— may  be  likened  to  those
annual  or  diurnal  perioils  iiith  which  we  are  so  familiar  on  l!ie  earth.  Days
and  years  follow  each  other,  but,  as  they  do  so,  many  things  change  ;  and  in
like  manner  chemical  evolutions,  changes  in  the  masses  of  the  elements,
permit  of  much  remaining  undisturbed,  thongh  many  properties  underci}
alteration.  The  system  is  maintained  according  to  the  laws  of  eonsertation
in  nature,  but  the  motions  are  altered  in  consequence  of  the  change  of  parts.

Next,  let  UB  take  an  astronomical  case — such,  for  example,  as  the  earth  and
the  uioon— and  let  us  imagine  that  the  mass  of  the  latter  is  constantly
increasing.  The  question  is,  what  will  then  occur?  The  path  of  the  moon
in  space  is  a  wave-line  simibr  lo  that  which  geometriciBns  have  iiaiueil  epi-
cycloidal,  or  the  locus  of  a  point  in  a  circle  rolling  round  another  circle,  Unt
ill  consei^uence  of  the  inHuence  of  the  moon  it  is  evident  that  the  path  of  the
earth  itself  cannot  be  a  geometric  ellipse,  even  supposing  the  sun  lo  be  im-
movably ti\ed ;  it  must  be  an  epicycloidal  curve,  though  not  very  far  removed
from  the  true  ellipse — that  is  to  say,  it  will  be  impressed  with  but  faint  un-
dulations. It  is  only  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  earth  and  the
moon  which  describes  a  true  ellipse  round  the  sun.  If  the  moon  were  to
increase,  the  relative  undulations  of  the  earth's  path  would  increase  in  nmpli-
tude,  those  of  the  moon  would  also  change,  and  when  the  mass  of  the  moon
had  increased  to  an  equiJity  with  that  of  the  earth,  the  path  would  consisl  of
epicycloidal  canes  crossing  each  other,  iind  having  opposite  pliaBCS.  But  a
aiaiilar  relation  exists  between  the  sun  iind  the  earth,  because  the  former  is
olao  moving  in  space. We  way  apply  these  views  to  the  world  of  atoms,  and

J

470  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEIVUSTRY

suppose  that  in  their  movements,  when  heavy  ones  take  the  place  of  those
that  are  U<;hter,  similar  changes  take  place,  provided  that  the  system  or  the
molecule  is  preserved  throughout  the  change.

It  seems  probable  that  in  the  heavenly  systems,  during  incalculable
astronomical  periods,  changes  have  taken  place  and  are  still  going  on  similar
to  those  which  pass  rapidly  before  our  eyes  during  the  chemical  reaction  of
molecules,  and  the  progress  of  molecular  mechanics  may — we  hope  will— in
course  of  time  permit  us  to  explain  those  changes  in  the  stellar  world  which
have  more  than  once  been  noticed  by  astronomers,  and  which  are  now  so
carefully  studied.  A  coming  Newton  will  discover  the  laws  of  these  changes.
Those  laws,  when  applied  to  chemistf^,  may  exhibit  pecoliarities,  but  these
will  certainly  be  mere  vatiations  on  the  grand  harmonious  theme  which
reigns  in  nature.  The  discovery  of  the  laws  which  produce  this  harmony  in
chemical  evolution  will  only  be  possible,  it  seems  to  me,  under  the  banner
of  Newtonian  dynamics,  which  has  so  long  waved  over  the  domains  of
mechanics,  astronomy,  and  physics.  In  calling  chemists  to  take  their  stand
imder  its  peaceful  and  catholic  shadow  I  imagine  that  I  am  aiding  in  estab-
lishing that  scientific  union  which  the  managers  of  the  Royal  Institution
wish  to  effect,  who  have  shown  their  desire  to  do  so  by  the  flattering  invita-
tion which  has  given  me— a  Rirssian — the  opportunity  of  laying  before  the
countrymen  of  Newton  an  attempt  to  apply  to  chemistry  one  of  his  immortal
principles.

APPENDIX II

THE PERIODIC LAW OF THE CHEMICAL ELEMENTS

By professor MENDELEEFF

faraday  lectube  delivebed  before  the  fellows  of
the  chemical  society  in  the  theatre  of  the  royal  institution,

on  tuesday,  june  4,  1889

The  hiffh  honour  bestowed  by  the  Chemical  Society  in  inviting  me  to  pay  a
tribute  to  the  world-famed  name  of  Faraday  by  deUvering  this  lecture  has
induced  me  to  take  for  its  subject  the  Periodic  Law  of  the  Elements — this
being  a  generalisation  in  chemistry  which  has  of  late  attracted  much
attention.

While  science  is  pursuing  a  steady  onward  movement,  it  is  convenient
from  time  to  time  to  cast  a  glance  back  on  the  route  already  traversed,  and
especially  to  consider  the  new  conceptions  which  aim  at  discovering  the
general  meaning  of  the  stock  of  facts  accumulated  from  day  to  day  in  our
laboratories.  Owing  to  the  possession  of  laboratories,  modern  science  now
bears  a  new  character,  quite  unknown,  not  only  to  antiquity,  but  even  to  the
preceding  century.  Bacon's  and  Descartes'  idea  of  submitting  the  mechanism
of  science  simultaneously  to  experiment  and  reasoning  has  been  fully  realised
in  the  case  of  chemistry,  it  having  become  not  only  possible  but  always
customary  to  experiment.  Under  the  all-penetrating  control  of  experiment,
a  new  theory,  even  if  crude,  is  quickly  strengthened,  provided  it  be  founded
on  a  suHicient  basis ;  the  asperities  are  removed,  it  is  amended  by  degrees,
and  soon  loses  the  phantom  light  of  a  shadowy  form  or  of  one  founded  on
mere  prejudice ;  it  is  able  to  lead  to  logical  conclusions,  and  to  submit  to  ex-
perimental proof.  Willingly  or  not,  in  science  we  all  must  submit  not  to  what
seems  to  us  attractive  from  one  point  of  view  or  from  another,  but  to  what
represents  an  agreement  between  theory  and  experiment ;  in  other  words,  to
demonstrated  generalisation  and  to  the  approved  experiment.  Is  it  long
since  many  refused  to  accept  the  generalisations  involved  in  the  law  of  Avo-
gadro  and  Ampere,  so  widely  extended  by  Gerhardt  ?  We  still  may  hear  the
voices  of  its  opponents ;  they  enjoy  perfect  freedom,  but  vainly  will  their
voices  rise  so  long  as  they  do  not  use  the  language  of  demonstrated  facts

472  PKINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

The  striking  observations  with  the  spectroscope  which  have  permitted  tib  to
analyse  the  chemical  constitution  of  distant  worlds,  seemed,  at  first,  appli-
cable to  the  task  of  determining  the  nature  of  the  atoms  themselves ;  but  the
working  out  of  the  idea  in  the  laborator}'  soon  demonstrated  that  the  charac-
ters of  spectra  are  determined,  not  directly  by  the  atoms,  but  by  the  mole-
cules into  which  the  atoms  are  packed ;  and  so  it  became  evident  that  more
verified  facts  must  be  collected  before  it  will  be  possible  to  formulate  new
generalisations  capable  of  taking  their  place  beside  those  ordinary  ones  based
upon  the  conception  of  simple  substances  and  atoms.  But  as  the  shade  of  the
leaves  and  roots  of  living  plants,  together  with  the  relics  of  a  decayed  vege>
tation,  favour  the  growth  of  the  seedling  and  serve  to  promote  its  luxurious
development,  in  like  manner  sound  generalisations — together  with  the  rehcs
of  those  which  have  proved  to  be  untenable — promote  scientific  productivity,
and  ensure  the  luxurious  growth  of  science  under  the  influence  of  rays  ema-
nating from  the  centres  of  scientific  energy.  Such  centres  are  scientific
associations  and  societies.  Before  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  powerful  of
these  I  am  about  to  take  the  liberty  of  passing  in  review  the  twenty  years'  hfe
of  a  generalisation  which  is  known  under  the  name  of  the  Periodic  Law.  It
was  in  March  1869  that  I  ventured  to  lay  before  the  then  youthful  Russian
Chemical  Society  the  ideas  upon  the  same  subject  which  I  had  expressed  in
my  just  written  *  Principles  of  Chemistry.'

Without  entering  into  details,  I  will  give  the  conclusions  I  then  arrived
at  in  the  very  words  I  used : —

'  1.  The  elements,  if  arranged  according  to  their  atomic  weights,  exhibit
an  evident  j)criodicity  of  properties.

*  2.  Elements  which  are  similar  as  regards  their  chemical  properties  have
atomic  weights  which  are  either  of  nearly  the  same  value  (e.g.  platinum,
iridium,  osuiiuni)  or  which  increase  regularly  [e.g.  potassium,  rubidiiuii,
ca?sium).

*  3.  The  arrangement  of  the  elements,  or  of  groups  of  elements,  in  the
order  of  their  atomic  weights,  corresponds  to  their  so-called  valencies  as  well
us,  to  some  extent,  to  their  distinctive  chemical  properties— as  is  apparent,
among  otlier  series,  in  that  of  lithium,  beryllium,  barium,  carbon,  nitrogen,
oxygen,  and  iron.

*  4.  The  elements  which  are  the  most  widely  diffused  have  am  all  atomic
weights.

'  5.  The  magnitude  of  the  atomic  weight  determines  the  character  of  the
element,  just  as  the  magnitude  of  the  molecule  determines  the  character  of
a  compound.

'6.  \\q  must  expect  the  discovery  of  many  yet  u7ik%onm  elements — for
example,  elements  analogous  to  aluminium  and  silicon,  whose  atomic  weight
would  be  between  65  and  75.

'  7.  The  atomic  weight  of  an  element  may  sometimes  be  amended  by  a
knowledge  of  those  of  the  contiguous  elements.  Thus,  the  atomic  weight  of
tellurium  must  lie  between  123  and  126,  and  cannot  be  128.

*  8.  Certain  characteristic  properties  of  the  elements  can  be  foretold  from
their  atomic  weights.

APPENDIX II.  473

*  The  aim  of  this  communication  will  be  fully  attained  if  1  succeed  in
drawing  the  attention  of  investigators  to  those  relations  which  exist  between
the  atomic  weights  of  dissimilar  elements,  which,  so  far  as  1  know,  have
hitherto  been  almost  completely  neglected.  I  believe  that  the  solution  of
some  of  the  most  important  problems  of  our  science  lies  in  researches  of  this
kind.'

To-day,  twenty  years  after  the  above  conclusions  were  formulated,  they
may  still  be  considered  as  expressing  the  essence  of  the  now  well-known
periodic  law.

Reverting  to  the  epoch  terminating  with  the  sixties,  it  is  proper  to  indi-
cate three  series  of  data  without  the  knowledge  of  wliich  the  periodic  law
could  not  have  been  discovered,  and  which  rendered  its  appearance  natural
and  intelligible.

In  the  first  place,  it  was  at  that  time  that  the  numerical  value  of  atomic
weights  became  definitely  known.  Ten  years  earlier  such  knowledge  did  not
exist,  as  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  that  in  1860  chemists  from  all  parts
of  the  world  met  at  Karlsruhe  in  order  to  come  to  some  agreement,  if  not
with  respect  to  views  relating  to  atoms,  at  any  rate  as  regards  their  definite
representation.  Many  of  those  present  probably  remember  how  vain  were
the  hopes  of  coming  to  an  understanding,  and  how  much  ground  was  gained
at  that  Congress  by  the  followers  of  the  miitary  theory  so  brilliantly  repre-
sented by  Cannizzaro.  I  vividly  remember  the  impression  produced  by  his
speeches,  which  admitted  of  no  compromise,  and  seemed  to  advocate  truth
itself,  based  on  the  conceptions  of  Avogadro,  Qerhardt,  and  Begnault,  wliich
at  that  time  were  far  from  being  generally  recognised.  And  though  no
understanding  could  be  arrived  at,  yet  the  objects  of  the  meeting  were  attained,
for  the  ideas  of  Cannizzaro  proved,  after  a  few  years,  to  be  the  only  ones
which  could  stand  criticism,  and  which  represented  an  atom  as— *  the
smallest  portion  of  an  element  which  enters  into  a  molecule  of  its  compound.'
Only  such  real  atomic  weights — not  conventional  ones— could  atford  a  basis
for  generalisation.  It  is  sufficient,  by  way  of  example,  to  indicate  the
following  cases  in  which  the  relation  is  seen  at  once  and  is  perfectly  clear : —

K  =39  Kb  =  85  Cs  =133

Ca  *  40  Sr  =  87  Ba  =  137

whereas  with  the  equivalents  then  in  use —

K  =39  Rb  =  85  Cs  =133

Ca  =  20  Sr  =  435  Ba  =  085

the  consecutiveness  of  change  in  atomic  weight,  wliich  with  the  true  values
is  60  evident,  completely  disappears.

Secondly,  it  had  become  evident  during  the  period  1860-70,  and  even
during  the  preceding  decade,  that  the  relations  between  the  atomic  weights
of  analogous  elements  were  governed  by  some  general  and  shnple  laws.
Cooke,  Cremers,  Gladstone,  Gmelin,  Lenssen,  Pettenkofer,  and  especially
Dumas,  had  already  established  many  facts  bearing  on  that  view.  Thus
Dumas  compared  the  following  groups  of  analogous  elements  with  organic
radicles : —

474

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

Diff.

Diff.

Diff.
P  = 31)

Li  - 7
Na  =  23

K =39

16

16

Ca  -20
Sr =44

3x8

13x8

A8= 75
Sb  =  119

44

44

O  » 8»

I

DiF,
8

Ba  -68

Bi  --=  207

S  =16
Se«40

8x8

2x44

Ux8

Te  =  64)

and  pointed  out  some  really  striking  relationships,  such  as  the  following : —

F =19.

CI  =  35-5  =  19  +  10-5

Br-80 =19  +  2x16-5  +  28.

I =127=2x19  +  2x16-5  +  2x28.

A.  Sirecker,  in  his  work  *  Theorien  und  Experimente  zur  BestiuimuDg
der  Atom^ewichte  der  Elemente '  (Braunschweig,  1859),  after  summarising
the  data  relating  to  the  subject,  and  pointing  out  the  remarkable  series  of
equivalents  —

Cr  -  26-2 Mn  =  276

Fe  =  28 Ni  =  29
Zn  =  32-5

Co  =  30 Cu  =  81-7

remarks  that :  It  is  hardly  probable  that  all  the  above-mentioned  relatioDs
between  the  atomic  weights  (or  equivalents)  of  chemically  analogous  elements
are  merely  accidental.  We  must,  however,  leave  to  the  future  the  discovery
of  the  law  of  the  relations  which  appears  in  these  figures.*  ^

In  such  attempts  at  arrangement  and  in  such  views  are  to  be  recognised
the  real  forerunners  of  the  periodic  law ;  the  ground  was  prepared  for  it
between  1860  and  1870,  and  that  it  was  not  expressed  in  a  determinate  form
before  the  end  of  the  decade  may,  I  suppose,  be  ascribed  to  the  fact  that  only
analogous  elements  had  been  compared.  The  idea  of  seeking  for  a  relation
between  the  atomic  weif»lits  of  all  the  elements  was  foreign  to  the  ideas  then
current,  so  that  neither  the  via  telliirique  of  De  Chancourtois,  nor  the  law  of
octarrs  of  Xewlands,  could  secure  anybody's  attention.  And  yet  both  De
Chancourtois  and  Newlands  like  Dumas  and  Strecker,  more  than  Lenssen
and  Pettenkofer,  had  made  an  approach  to  the  periodic  law  and  had  dis-
covered its  m'erms.  The  solution  of  the  problem  advanced  but  slowly,  because
the  facts,  but  not  the  law,  stood  foremost  in  all  attempts ;  and  the  law  could
not  awaken  a  general  interest  so  long  as  elements,  having  no  apparent  con-
nection with  each  other,  were  included  in  the  same  octave,  as  for  example :  -

1st octave of

!

1

Newlands  .  .

H

F

CI

Co  i!t  Ni

Br

Pd

I

Pt  .t  Ir

7th  Ditto  ....

0

S

Fe

Se

Kh  &  Ihi

Te

Au

OsorTh

Analogies  of  tlie  above  order  seemed  quite  accidental,  and  the  more  so  a*
the  octave  contained  occasionally  ten  elements  instead  of  eight,  and  when  two

•  '  Es  ist  wohl  kauni  anzunehmen,  duss  alle  ini  Vorhergehenden  herv'orgeh<»l»enfn
Bczif'hungfu  zwischen  den  Atoiiigewichten  (odcr  Aeqiiivalenten)  in  chcmisc'hen  Verluli-
nissen  eiiiaiuler  iihnlichu  Elemente  bloss  zufallig  sind.  Die  Auffindang  der  in  dieset
Zalilen  ffrsrt::lirhrn  Beziehuugen  miissen  wir  jedoeh  der  Zukanft  uberlassen.'

APPENDIX II.  475

such  elements  as  I3a  and  V,  Co  and  Ni,  or  Rh  and  Ru,  occupied  one  place  in
the  octave.'  Nevertheless,  the  fruit  was  ripening,  and  I  now  see  clearly  that
Strccker,  De  Chancourtois,  and  Newlands  stood  foremost  in  the  way  towards
the  discovery  of  the  periodic  law,  and  that  they  merely  wanted  the  boldness
necessary  to  place  the  whole  question  at  such  a  height  that  its  reflection  on
the  facts  could  be  clearly  seen.

A  third  circumstance  which  revealed  the  periodicity  of  chemical  elements
was  the  accumulation,  by  the  end  of  the  sixties,  of  new  information  respecting
the  rare  elements,  disclosing  their  many-sided  relations  to  the  other  elements
and  to  each  other.  The  researches  of  Marignac  en  niobium,  and  those  of
Roscoe  on  vanadium,  were  of  special  moment.  The  striking  analogies  between
vanadium  and  phosphorus  on  the  one  hand,  and  between  vanadium  and
chromimn  on  the  other,  which  became  so  apparent  in  the  in^'estigation8  con-
nected with  that  element,  naturally  induced  the  comparison  of  V  =  51  with
Cr  =  52,  Kb  =  94  with  Mo  =  96,  and  Ta=192  with  W  =  194;  while,  on  the
other  hand,  P  =  31  could  be  compared  with  S  =  3*2,  As  =  75  with  Se  =  79,  and
Sb  »  120  with  Te  »  125.  From  such  approximations  there  remained  but  one
step  to  the  discovery  of  the  law  of  periodicity.

The  law  of  periodicity  was  thus  a  direct  outcome  of  the  stock  of  generali-
sations and  established  facts  which  had  accumulated  by  the  end  of  the  decade
18G0-1870  :  it  is  an  embodiment  of  those  data  in  a  more  or  less  systematic
expression.  W  here,  then,  lies  the  secret  of  the  special  importance  which  has
since  been  attached  to  the  periodic  law,  and  has  raised  it  to  the  position  of  a
generalisation  which  has  already  given  to  chemistry  unexpected  aid,  and
which  promises  to  be  far  more  fruitful  in  the  future  and  to  impress  upon
several  branches  of  chemical  research  a  peculiar  and  original  stamp?  The
remaining  part  of  my  communication  will  be  an  attempt  to  answer  this
question.

In  the  fitst  place  we  have  the  circumstance  that,  as  soon  as  the  law  made
its  appearance,  it  demanded  a  revision  of  many  facts  which  were  considered
by  chemists  as  fully  established  by  existing  experience.  I  shall  return,  later
on,  briefly  to  this  subject,  but  I  wish  now  to  rtmind  you  that  the  periodic
law,  by  icsisting  on  the  necessity  for  a  revision  of  supposed  facts,  exposed
itself  at  once  to  destruction  in  its  very  origin.  Its  first  requirements,  how-
ever; have  been  almost  entirely  satisfied  during  the  last  20  years;  the  sap-
posed  facts  have  yielded  to  the  law,  thus  proving  that  the  law  itself  was  »
legitimate  induction  from  the  verified  facts.  But  our  inductions  from  data
have  often  to  do  with  such  details  of  a  science  so  rich  in  facts,  that  only
generalisations  which  cover  a  wide  range  of  important  })henomena  can  attract
general  attention.  What  were  the  regions  touched  on  by  the  periodic  law  ?
This  is  what  we  shall  now  consider.

The  most  important  point  to  notice  is,  that  periodic  functions,  used  for
the  purpose  of  expressing  changes  which  are  dependent  on  variaiions  of  time
and  space,  have  been  long  known.  They  are  familiar  to  the  mind  when  we
have  to  deal  with  motion  in  closed  cycles,  or  with  any  kind  of  deviation  from

'  To  jadge  from  J.  A.  R.  Newlands's  work,  On  the  l>iscovery  of  the  Periodic  LatL\
London,  3884,  p.  149;  ' Ou  the  Law  of  Octaves'  (from  the  Chemical  Ncus,  12,  83,
Aagust  18,  18C5).

476  PKINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

a  stable  position,  such  as  occurs  in  pendulum-oscillations.  A  like  periodic
function  became  evident  in  the  case  of  the  elements,  depending  on  the  mass
of  the  atom.  The  primary  conception  of  the  masses  of  bodies,  or  of  the  masses
of  atoms,  belongs  to  a  category  which  the  present  state  of  science  forbids  us
to  discuss,  because  as  yet  we  have  no  means  of  dissecting  or  analysing  the
conception.  All  that  was  known  of  functions  dependent  on  masses  derived
its  origin  from  Galileo  and  Newton,  and  indicated  that  sach  functions
either  decrease  or  increase  with  the  increase  of  mass,  like  the  attraction  of
celestial  bodies.  The  numerical  expression  of  the  phenomena  was  always
found  to  be  proportional  to  the  mass,  and  in  no  case  was  an  increase  of  mass
followed  by  a  recurrcDce  of  properties  such  as  is  disclosed  by  the  periodic  law
of  the  elements.  This  constituted  such  a  novelty  in  the  study  of  the  phenomena
of  nature  that,  although  it  did  not  lift  the  veil  which  conceab  the  tme  concep-
tion of  mass,  it  nevertheless  indicated  that  the  explanation  of  that  conception
must  be  searched  for  in  the  masses  of  the  atoms ;  the  more  so,  as  all  masses
are  nothing  but  aggregations,  or  additions,  of  chemical  atoms  which  would  be
best  described  as  chemical  individuals.  Let  me  remark,  by  the  way«  that
though  the  Latin  word  *  individual  *  is  merely  a  translation  of  the  Greek  word
*  atom,'  nevertheless  history  and  custom  have  drawn  a  sharp  distinction
between  the  two  words,  and  the  present  chemical  conception  of  atoms  is
nearer  to  that  defined  by  the  Latin  word  than  by  the  Greek,  although  this
latter  also  has  acquired  a  special  meaning  which  was  unknown  to  the  classics.
The  periodic  law  has  shown  that  our  chemical  individuals  display  a  harmcmie
periodicity  of  properties  dependent  on  their  masses.  Now  natural  science
has  long  been  accustomed  to  deal  with  periodicities  observed  in  nature,  to
seize  them  with  the  vice  of  mathematical  analysis,  to  submit  them  to  the
rasp  of  experiment.  And  these  instruments  of  scientific  thought  would
surely,  long  since,  have  mastered  the  problem  connected  with  the  chemical
elements,  were  it  not  for  a  new  feature  which  was  brought  to  light  by  tlie
periodic  law,  and  which  gave  a  peculiar  and  original  character  to  the  periodic
function.

If  we  mark  on  an  axis  of  abscissae  a  series  of  lengths  proportional  to
angles,  and  trace  ordinates  which  are  proportional  to  sines  or  other  trigone*
metrical  functions,  we  get  periodic  curves  of  a  harmonic  character.  So  it
nii<:^ht  seem,  at  first  sight,  that  with  the  increase  of  atomic  weights  the  func-
tion of  the  properties  of  the  elements  should  also  vary  in  the  same  harmonious
way.  But  in  this  case  there  is  no  such  continuous  change  as  in  the  curves
just  referred  to,  because  the  periods  do  not  contain  the  infinite  number  of
points  constituting  a  curve,  but  a  fin  if e  number  only  of  such  points.  An
example  will  better  illustrate  this  view. The  atomic  weights —

Ag-108 Cd  =  112 In  =  113 Sn  =  118 Sb==120

Te  =  125 I  =  127

steadily  increase,  and  their  increase  is  accompanied  by  a  modification  of
many  properties  which  constitutes  the  essence  of  the  periodic  law^.  Thus,
for  example,  the  densities  of  the  above  elements  decrease  steadily,  being
respectively —

10-5  8-6  7-4  7-2  67  6-4  4-9

APPENDIX  II.  477

while  their  oxides  contain  an  increasing  quantity  of  oxygen —

Agp Cd,0, ln,0,  Sn,0,  Sb,0,  Te.O, 1,0,

But  to  connect  by  a  curve  the  summits  of  the  ordinates  expressing  any
of  these  properties  would  involve  the  rejection  of  Dalton's  law  of  multiple
proportions.  Not  only  are  there  no  intermediate  elements  between  silver,
which  gives  AgCl,  and  cadmium,  which  gives  CdCl,,  but,  according  to  the
very  essence  of  the  periodic  law,  there  can  be  none  ;  in  fact  a  uniform  curve
would  be  inapplicable  in  such  a  case,  as  it  would  lead  us  to  expect  elements
possessed  of  special  properties  at  any  point  of  the  curve.  The  periods  of  the
elements  have  thus  a  character  very  different  from  those  which  are  so  simply
represented  by  geometers.  They  correspond  to  points,  to  numbers,  to  sudden
changes  of  the  masses,  and  not  to  a  continuous  evolution.  In  these  sudden
changes  destitute  of  intermediate  steps  or  positions,  in  the  absence  of
elements  intermediate  between,  say,  silver  and  cadmium,  or  aluminium
and  silicon,  we  must  recognise  a  problem  to  which  no  direct  application
of  the  analysis  of  the  infinitely  small  can  be  made.  Therefore,  neither  the
trigonometrical  functions  proposed  by  Ridberg  and  Flavitzky,  nor  the  pen-
dulum-oscillations suggested  by  Crookes,  nor  the  cubical  curves  of  the  Kev.
Mr.  Haughton,  which  have  been  proposed  for  expressing  the  periodic  law,
from  the  nature  of  the  case,  can  represent  the  periods  of  the  chemical
elements.  If  geometrical  analysis  is  to  be  applied  to  this  subject,  it  will  re-
quire to  be  modified  in  a  special  manner.  It  must  find  the  means  of  repre-
senting in  a  special  way,  not  only  such  long  periods  as  that  comprising

K Ca Sc Ti V Cr Mn Fe Co Ni Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br,

but  short  periods  like  the  following  : —

Na Mg Al Si P S CI.

In  the  theory  of  numbers  only  do  we  find  problems  analogous  to  ours,
and  two  attempts  at  expressing  the  atomic  weights  of  the  elements  by  alge-
braic formula;  seem  to  be  deserving  of  attention,  although  neither  of  them
can  be  considered  as  a  complete  theory,  nor  as  promising  finally  to  solve  the
problem  of  the  periodic  law.  The  attempt  of  E.  J.  Mills  (1886)  does  not
even  aspire  to  attain  this  end.  He  considers  that  all  atomic  weights  can  be
expressed  by  a  logarithmic  function,

lo(« -0-9375'),

in  which  the  variables  n  and  f  are  whole  numbers.  Thus,  for  oxygen,  n  =  2,
and  <  =  1,  whence  its  atomic  weight  is  =  15*94 ;  in  the  case  of  chlorine,
bromine,  and  iodine,  n  has  respective  values  of  3,  6,  and  9,  whilst  ^  =  7,  G,
and  9  ;  in  the  case  of  potassium,  rubidium,  and  cesium,  n  -  4,  6,  and  9,  and
/  -  14,  18,  and  20.

Another  attempt  was  made  in  1888  by  B.  N.  Tchitch^rin.  Its  author
places  the  problem  of  the  periodic  law  in  the  first  rank,  but  as  yet  he  has
investigated  the  alkali  metals  only Tchitcherin  first noticed the  simple

478  PKINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

relations  existing  between  the  atomic  volumes  of  all  alkali metals; they
can  be  expressed,  acjording  to  his  views,  by  the  formula

A(2- 0-00535  An),

where  A  is  the  atomic  weight,  and  7?  is  equal  to  8  for  litliium  and  sodium,  to
4  for  potassium,  to  3  for  rubidium,  and  to  2  for  ciesium. If  n  remained  equal
to  8  during  the  increase  of  A,  the  volume  would  become  zero  at  A  =  46|,
and  it  would  reach  its  maximum  at  A  ^  23J. The  close  approximation  of
the  number  46§  to  the  diflferences  between  the  atomic  weights  of  analogous
elements  (such  as  Cs  —  Kb,  I  —  Br,  and  so  on) ;  the  close  correspondence  of
the  number  23^  to  the  atomic  weight  of  sodium ;  the  fact  of  n  being  neces-
sarily a  whole  number,  and  several  other aspects  of  the  question,  induce
Tchitcherin  to  believe  that  they  afford  a  clue  to  the  understanding  of  the
nature  cf  the  elements  ;  we  must,  however,  await  the  full  development  of
his  theory  before  pronouncing  judgment  on  it. What  we  can  at  present  only
be  certain  of  is  this :  that  attempts  like  the  two  above  named  must  be  re-
peated and  multiplied,  because  the  periodic  law  has  clearly  shoi^ii  that  the
masses  of  the  atoms  increase  abruptly,  by  steps,  which  are  clearly  connected
in  some  way  with  Dalton's  law  of  multiple  proportions ;  and  because  the
periodicity  of  the  elements  finds  expression  in  the  transition  from  RX  to
liX.^,  RX3,  RX,,  and  so  on  till  RX„  at  which  point,  the  energy  of  the  com-
bining forces  being  exhausted,  the  series  begins  anew  from  RX  to  RX.,,  and
so  on.

While  connecting  by  new  bonds  the  theory  of  the  chemical  elements  with
Dalton's  theory  of  multiple  proportions,  or  atomic  structure  of  bodies,  the
periodic  law  opened  for  natural  philosophy  a  new  and  wide  field  for  specula-
tion. Kant  said  that  there  are  in  the  world  '  two  things  which  never  cease
to  call  for  the  admiration  and  reverence  of  man :  the  moral  law  witliin
ourselves,  and  the  stellar  sky  above  us.'  But  when  we  turn  (hu-  thoughts
towards  the  nature  of  the  elements  and  the  periodic  law,  we  must  add  a  third
subject,  namely, '  the  nature  of  the  elementary  individuals  which  we  discover
everywhere  around  us.'  Without  them  the  stellar  sky  itself  is  inconceiv-
able ;  and  in  thu  atoms  we  see  at  once  their  peculiar  individualities,  the  in-
finite nniltiplieity  of  the  individuals,  and  the  submission  of  their  seeming
freedom  to  the  general  harmcmy  of  Nature.

Having  thus  indicated  a  new  mystery  of  Nature,  which  does  not  yet  yield
to  rational  conception,  the  periodic  law.  together  with  the  revelations  of
spectrum  analysis,  have  contributed  to  again  revive  an  old  but  remarkably
long-lived  hope  — that  of  discovering,  if  not  by  experiment,  at  least  by  a
mental  effort,  the  primary  matter— whk-h  had  its  genesis  in  the  minds  of
the  Grecian  philosophers,  and  has  been  transmitted,  together  with  many
other  ideas  of  the  classic  period,  to  the  lieirs  of  their  civilisation.  Having
grown,  during  the  times  of  the  alchemists  up  to  the  j)eriod  when  experimental
proof  was  requiied,  the  idea  has  rendered  good  service;  it  induced  those
.careful  observations  and  experiments  which  later  on  called  into  being  the
works  of  Scheele,  Lavoisier,  Prieetley,  and  Cavendish.  It  then  slumbered
awhile,  but  was  soon  awakened  by  the  attempts  either  to  confirm  or  to  refute
.the  ideas  of  Prout  as  to  the  multiple  proportion  relationship  of  the  atomic

APPENDIX II.  479

weiji^hts  of  all  the  elements.  And  once  again  the  inductive  or  experimental
method  of  studying  Nature  gained  a  direct  advantage  from  the  old  Pytha-
gorean idea  :  because  atomic  weights  were  determined  with  an  accuracy
formerly  unknown.  But  again  the  idea  could  not  stand  the  ordeal  of  experi-
mental test,  yet  the  prejudice  remains  and  has  not  been  uprooted,  even  by
Stas  ;  nay,  it  has  gained  a  new  vigour,  for  we  see  that  all  which  is  imperfectly
worked  out,  new  and  unexplained,  from  the  still  scarcely  studied  rare  metals
to  the  hardly  perceptible  nebulae,  have  been  used  to  justify  it.  As  soon  as
spectnun  analysis  appears  as  a  new  and  powerful  weapon  of  chemistry,  the
idea  of  a  primary  matter  is  immediately  attached  to  it.  From  all  sides  we
see  attempts  to  constitute  the  imaginary  substance  helium^  the  so  much
longed  for  primary  matter.  No  attention  is  paid  to  the  circumstance  that
the  helium  line  is  only  seen  in  the  spectrum  of  the  solar  i)rotuberances,  so
that  its  universality  in  Nature  Remains  as  problematic  as  the  primary  matter
itself;  nor  to  the  fact  that  the  helium  line  is  wanting  amongst  the  Fraun-
hofer  lines  of  the  solar  spectrum,  and  thus  does  not  answer  to  the  brilliant
fundamental  conception  which  gives  its  real  force  to  spectrum  analysis.

And  finally,  no  notice  is  even  taken  of  the  indubitable  fact  that  the  bril-
liancies of  the  spectral  lines  of  the  simple  substances  vary  under  different  tem-
peratures and  pressures  ;  so  that  all  probabilities  are  in  favour  of  the  helium
line  simply  belonging  to  some  long  since  known  element  placed  under  such
conditions  of  temperature,  pressure,  and  gravity  as  have  not  3*et  been  realised
in  our  experiments.  Again,  the  idea  that  the  excellent  investigations  of
Lockyer  of  the  spectrum  of  iron  can  be  interpreted  in  favour  of  the  compound
nature  of  that  element,  evidently  must  have  arisen  from  some  misunder-
standing.  The  spectrum  of  a  compound  certainly  does  not  appear  as  a
sum  of  the  spectra  of  its  components;  and  therefore  the  observations  of
Lockyer  can  be  considered  precisely  as  a  proof  that  iron  imdergoes  no  other
changes  at  the  temperature  of  the  sun  than  those  which  it  experiences  in  the
voltaic  arc  —provided  the  spectrum  of  iron  is  preserved.  As  to  the  shifting
of  some  of  the  lines  of  the  spectrum  of  iron  while  the  other  lines  maintain
their  positions,  it  can  be  explained,  as  shown  by  M.  Kleiber  ('  Journal  of  the
Russian  Chemical  and  Physical  Society,'  1885,  147),  by  the  relative  motion
of  the  various  strata  of  the  sun's  atmosphere,  and  by  Zollner's  laws  of  the
relative  brilliancies  of  different  lines  of  the  spectrum.  Moreover,  it  ought
not  to  be  forgotten  that  if  iron  were  really  proved  to  consist  of  two  or  more
imknown  elements,  we  should  simply  have  an  increase  in  the  nmuber  of  our
elements— not  a  reduction,  and  stiU  less  a  reduction  of  all  of  them  to  one
single  primary  matter.

Feeling  that  spectrum  analysis  will  not  yield  a  support  to  the  Pythagorean
conception,  its  modem  promoters  are  so  bent  upon  its  being  confirmed  by
the  periodic  law,  that  the  illustrious  Berthelot,  in  his  work  *  Les  origines  de
PAlchimie,'  1885,  313,  has  simply  mixed  up  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  law
of  periodicity  with  the  ideas  of  Prout,  the  alchemists,  and  Democritus  about
primary  matter.* But  the  periodic  law,  based  as  it  is  on  the  solid  and  whole-

^  That  is,  a  gabstance  having  a  wave-length  equal  to  00005875  millimetre.
*  He maintains  (on  p.  809) that the  periodic law reqaires two  new  analogous
elements,  having  atomic  weights  of  48  and (V4,  occupying  positions  between sulphur

480  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

some  ground  of  experituental  research,  has  been  evolved  independentlv  of
any  conception  as  to  the  nature  of  the  elements ;  it  does  not  in  the  least
originate  in  the  idea  of  a  miiqne  matter ;  and  it  has  no  historical  connec-
tion with  that  relic  of  the  torments  of  classical  thought,  and  therefore  it
affords  no  more  indication  of  the  unity  of  matter  or  of  the  compound  character
of  our  elements,  than  the  law  of  Avogadro,  or  the  law  of  specific  heats,  or
even  the  conclusions  of  spectrum  analysis.  None  of  the  advocates  of  i
uni(xue  matter  have  ever  tried  to  explain  the  law  from  the  standpoint  of  idea»
taken  from  a  remote  antiquity  when  it  was  found  convenient  to  admit  the
existence  of  man^  gods—and  of  a  unique  matter.

When  wo  try  to  explain  the  origin  of  the  idea  of  a  imique  primary
matter,  we  easily  trace  that  in  the  absence  of  inductions  firom  experiment  it
derives  its  origin  from  the  scientifically  philosophical  attempt  at  discovering
some  kind  of  unity  in  the  immense  diversity  of  individualities  which  we  see
around.  In  classical  times  such  a  tendency  could  only  be  satisfied  by  con-
ceptions about  the  immaterial  world.  As  to  the  material  world,  our  ancestors
were  couipclled  to  resort  to  some  hypothesis,  and  they  adopted  the  idea  of
unity  in  the  formative  material,  because  they  were  not  able  to  evolve  the
conception  of  any  other  poRsible  unity  in  order  to  connect  the  multifuioct
relations  of  matter.  Responding  to  the  same  legitimate  scientific  tendency,
natural  science  has  discovered  throughout  the  universe  a  unity  of  plan,  a
unity  of  forces,  and  a  unity  of  matter,  and  the  convincing  conclosions  of
modern  science  compel  every  one  to  admit  these  kinds  of  unity.  Bot  while
we  admit  unity  in  many  things,  we  none  the  less  must  also  explain  the
individuality  and  the  apparent  diversity  which  we  cannot  fail  to  trace  ever}*-
where.  It  has  been  said  of  old,  *  Give  us  a  fiilcrum,  and  it  wiU  become  easy  to
displace  the  earth.*  So  also  we  must  say,  *  Give  us  something  that  is  individu-
alised, and  the  apparent  diversity  will  be  easily  xmderstood.*  Otheniise,  how
could  unity  result  in  a  multitude  ?

After  a  long  and  painstaking  research,  n^atural  science  has  discovered  the
individualities  of  the  chemical  elements,  and  therefore  it  is  now  capable  not
only  of  analysing,  but  also  of  synthesising ;  it  can  understand  and  gra^p
generality  and  unity,  as  well  as  the  individualised  and  the  multifarioos.
The  general  and  universal,  like  time  and  sjiace,  like  force  and  motion,  vary  uni-
formly ;  the  uniform  admit  of  interpolations,  revealing  every  intermediate
phase.  But  the  nuiltitudinous,  the  individualised — such  as  ourselves,  or  the
chemical  elements,  or  the  members  of  a  peculiar  periodic  function  of  the
elements,  or  Haltou's  multiple  proportions— is  characterised  in  another
way;  we  see  in  it,  side  by  side  with  a  connecting  general  principle,  leap's
breaks  of  contiiniity,  points  which  escape  from  the  analysis  of  the  infinitelj
small — an  absence  of  complete  intermediate  links.  Chemistry  has  found  an
answer  to  the  question  as  to  the  causes  of  multitudes;  and  while  retaining
the  conception  of  many  elements,  all  submitted  to  the  discipline  of  a  general
law.  it  offers  an  escape  from  the  Indian  Nirvana—  the  absorption  in  the
universal,  replacing  it  by  the  individualised. However,  the  place  for  indi-

luul  st'h'uimii.  althonjrh  notliint;  of  the  kind  resalts  from  any  of  the  different  re«dinp>  i-?

tlu'  liiw.

APPENDIX n.

481

viduality  ia  bo  limited  by  the  oU-grftspiug,  all-powerfttl  universal,  that  it  is
merely  a  point  of  support  for  the  nnderBtanding  of  multitude  in  unity.

Having  touched  upon  the  metaphysical  bases  of  the  conception  of  a
unique  matter  which  is  supposed  to  enter  into  the  composition  of  all  bodies
I  think  it  necessary  to  dwell  u]K>n  another  theory,  akin  to  the  above  concep-
tion— the  theory  of  the  compound  character  of  the  elements  now  admitted  by
some — nnd  eipecinlly  npon  one  particular  circumstance  which,  bein^  related
to  the  periodic  law,  is  considered  to  be  an  argument  in  favour  of  that  hypo-
thesiB.

Dr.  Pelopidas,  in  1983,  made  a  conmiunicalion  to  the  Russian  Chemical
and  Physical  Society  on  the  periodicity  of  the  hydrocarbon  radicles,  pointing
out  the  remarkable  parallelism  which  ws.e  to  be  noticed  in  the  change  of
propertied  of  hydrocarbon  radicles  and  elements  when  classed  in  groups.
Professor  Camelley,  in  1886,  developed  a  similar  paraUehsni.  The  idea  of
M.  Pelopidaa  will  be  easily  understood  if  we  coiisider  the  series  of  hydro-
carbon radicles  which  contain,  say,  6  atoms  of  carbon  : —

VI. VII. vm.

I.  II.  III.  IV.

C„H,, QH,, C„H,, C,H,„

C,H, C„H,

C.H,

The  first  of  these  radicles,  like  the  elemeots  of  the  1st  gronp,  combines  with
CI,  OH,  and  bo  on,  and  gives  the  derivatives  of  heiyl  alcohol,  C,jH,3(0H)  ;
bot,  in  proportion  as  the  number  of  hydrogen  atoms  decreases,  the  capacity
of  the  radicles  of  combining  with,  say,  the  halogcDs  increases.  C,.H,;  already
combines  with  2  atoms  of  chlorine;  C.,H,,  with  8  atoms,  and  so  on.  The
lost  members  of  the  series  comprise  Che  radicles  of  acids  :  thus  C„Hi,  which
belongs  to  the  6th  group,  gives,  like  sulphur,  a  bibasic  acid,  C,,H,0.,(OH)..,
which  is  homologous  with  oxalic  acid.  The  parallelism  can  be  traced  still
farther,  because  C^H^  appears  as  a  monovalent  radicle  of  benzene,  and  with
it  begins  a  new  series  of  aromatic  derivatives,  so  analogous  to  the  derivatives  of
(he  aliphatic  series.  Let  me  also  mention  another  example  from  among  those
which  have  been  given  by  M.  Pelopidas.  Starting  from  the  alkaline  radicle
of  monomethylararaoniimi,  N(CHj)H„  or  NCH,„  which  presents  many
analogies  with  the  alkaline  metals  of  the  1st  group,  he  arrives,  by  successively
diminishing  the  number  of  the  atoms  of  hydrogen,  at  a  7tli  group  which
contains  cyanogen,  CN,  which  has  long  since  been  compared  to  the  halogens
of  the  7th  group.

The  most  im]iortant  consequence  which,  in  my  opinion,  con  be  drawn
from  the  above  comparison  is  that  the  periodic  law,  so  apparent  in  the
elements,  has  a  wider  appUcation  than  might,  appear  at  first  eight;  it  opens
np  a  new  vista  of  chemical  evolutions.  But,  while  admitting  the  fullest
parallelism  between  the  periodicity  of  the  eleinents  and  that  of  the  compound
radicles,  we  must  not  forget  that  in  tlie  periods  of  the  hydrocarbon  radicles
we  have  a  Increase  of  mass  as  we  pass  from  the  representatives  of  the  first
group  to  the  next,  while  in  the  periods  of  the  elements  the  mass  inereate»
during  the  progression.  It  thus  becomes  evident  that  we  cannot  speak  of  an
identity  of  periodicity  in  both  cases,  unless  we  put  aside  the  ideasof  mass
and  attraction,  which  are  the  real  corner-stones  of  the  whole  of  natural
science,  and  even  enter  into  those  very  conceptions  of  simple  substauces  which

VOL.  II.  \.  \

482  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

came  to  light  a  full  hundred  yean  later  than  the  immortal  piinei^es  of
Newton.*

From  the  foregoing,  as  well  as  from  the  iailuree  of  so  many  attempts  at
finding  in  experiment  and  speculation  a  proof  of  the  oompouid  oliaraeter  of
the  elements  and  of  the  existence  of  primordial  matter,  it  is  eyident,  in  my
opinion,  that  this  theory  must  be  classed  among  mere  Utopias.  But  ntopias
can  only  be  combated  by  freedom  of  opinion,  by  experiment,  and  by  new
Utopias.  In  the  republic  of  scientific  theories  freedom  of  opinions  is  gaanaa-
teed.  It  is  precisely  that  fireedom  which  permits  me  to  eritioifle  openly  the
widely-difEused  idea  as  to  the  unity  of  matter  in  the  elements.  Ezpeorimflnts
and  attempts  at  confirming  that  idea  haye  been  so  numearouB  that  it  reaDy
would  be  instructive  to  have  them  all  collected  together,  if  only  to  semre  as  a
warning  against  the  repetition  of  old  fiulures.  And  now  as  to  new  ntopias
which  may  be  helpful  in  the  struggle  against  the  old  ones,  I  do  not  think  it
quite  useless  to  mention  a  pha/ntaty  of  one  of  my  students  who  ima^iined  that
the  weight  of  bodies  does  not  depend  upon  their  mass,  but  upon  the  charaeter
of  the  motion  of  their  atoms.  The  atoms,  aocording  to  this  new  ntopian,  may
all  be  homogeneous  or  heterogeneous,  we  know  not  which;  we  know  them
in  motion  only,  and  that  motion  they  maintain  with  the  same  penistenoe  as
the  stellar  bodies  maintain  theirs.  The  weights  of  atoms  difEaor  only  in  ooo-
sequence  of  their  various  modes  and  quantity  of  motion ;  the  heaviest  atoms
may  be  much  simpler  than  the  lifter  ones :  thus  an  atom  of  mercury  may
be  simpler  than  an  atom  of  hydrogen— the  manner  in  which  it  moyes  oftusos
it  to  be  heavier.  My  interlocutor  even  suggested  that  the  view  which
attributes  the  greater  complexity  to  the  lighter  elements  finds  oonfirmatiQii
in  the  fact  that  the  hydrocarbon  radicles  mentioned  by  Pelopidas,  while
becoming  lighter  as  they  lose  hydrogen,  change  their  properties  periodically
in  the  same  manner  as  the  elements  change  theirs,  according  as  the  atoms
grow  heavier.

The  French  proverb,  La  critique  eat  facile,  moM  Vart  eat  difficile,  how-
ever, may  well  be  reversed  in  the  case  of  all  such  ideal  views,  as  it  is  much
easier  to  formulate  than  to  criticise  them.  Arising  firom  the  virgin  soQ  of
newly-established  facts,  the  knowledge  relating  to  the  elements,  to  their
masses,  and  to  the  periodic  changes  of  their  properties  has  given  a  motive
for  the  formation  of  Utopian  hypotheses,  probably  because  they  could  not  be
foreseen  by  the  aid  of  any  of  the  various  metaphysical  systems,  and  exist,
like  the  idea  of  gravitation,  as  an  independent  outcome  of  natural  science,
requiring  the  acknowledgment  of  general  laws,  ^nrhen  these  have  been  estab-
lished with  the  same  degree  of  persistency  as  is  indispensable  for  the  aocep^
ance  of  a  thoroughly  established  fieust.  Two  centuries  have  elapsed  since  ihe
theory  of  gravitation  was  enunciated,  and  although  we  do  not  understand  its
cause,  we  still  must  regard  gravitation  as  a  fundamental  conception  of  natural
philosophy,  a  conception  which  has  enabled  us  to  perceive  much  more  t^»"
the  metaphysicians  did  or  could  with  their  seeming  onmiscienoe.  A  hundred

*  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  year  in  which  Lavoisier  was  bom  (1748)— the  aatbor  of
the  idea  of  elements  and  of  the  indestractibility  of  matter — is  later  by  exactly  one
century  than  the  year  in  which  the  author  of  the  theory  of  gravitation  and  mass  was  bom
a648  N.S.). The  affiliation  of  the  ideas  of  Lavoisier  and  those  of  Newton  is  beyond  doubt

APPENDIX n.  483

yeaj9  later  the  conceptioii  of  the  elemenlB  arone ;  it  made  choiuistry  wbtit  it
now  is ;  and  yet  we  have  ndvanced  as  little  in  our  comprehenaion  of  simple
Biibstances  einoe  the  times  of  Lavoisier  and  DalUin  as  we  have  in  our  iindtr-
standing  of  gravitation.  The  periodic  law  of  the  elements  is  only  twenty
years  old;  it  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that,  knowing  nothing  abniit  the
oauses  of  gra%itation  and  mass,  or  about  the  nature  of  the  elementa,  we  do
not  comprehend  the  rationale  of  the  periodic  law.  It  ia  only  b.v  collecting
established  laws— that  is.  hj*  working  at  the  acquirement  of  truth— that  we
can  hope  gradually  to  liil  the  veil  which  conceals  from  us  the  causes  of  the
mysteries  of  Nature  and  to  (liacover  their  mutual  dependency.  Like  the
telescope  and  the  microscope,  laws  founded  on  the  basis  of  experiment  are
the  instruments  and  means  of  enlarging  our  mental  horizon.

In  the  remaining  part  of  my  communication  I  shall  endeavour  to  show,
and  as  briefly  as  possible,  in  how  far  the  periodic  law  contributes  to  enlarge
OUT  range  of  vision.  Before  the  promulgation  of  this  law  the  chemioal
elements  were  mere  tragmentary,  incidental  facts  in  Nature ;  there  was  no
special  reason  to  expect  the  discovery  of  new  elemenlu.  and  the  new  ones
which  were  discovered  from  time  to  lime  appeared  to  be  posseeaed  of  c^uitu
novel  properties.  The  law  of  periodicity  first  enabled  ua  to  perceive  undiE-
covsred  elements  at  a  distance  which  forcuerly  was  inaccessible  to  chemicul
vision;  and  long  ere  they  were  discovered  new  elements  appeared  before  our
eyes  possessed  of  a  number  of  well'Jefined  properties.  We  now  know  three
cases  of  elementfl  whose  eviaience  aiid  properties  were  foreseen  by  the  instru-
mentality of  the  periodic  law.  I  need  but  mention  the  brilliant  discovery  of
galHum,  which  proved  to  correspond  to  eka-alumintum  of  the  periodic  law,  by
Lecoq  de  Boisbandran ;  of  icandiuin,  corresponding  to  elcaboron,  by  Nilson  ;
and  of  fjermani urn,  which  proved  to  correspond  in  all  respects  to  ekosilieor,
by  Winkler.  When,  in  ISTl,  I  described  to  the  Buasian  Chemical  Society
the  properties,  clearly  defined  by  the  periodic  law,  which  such  elements
ought  to  poBsesB,  I  never  hoped  that  I  should  live  to  mention  their  discovery
to  the  Chemical  Society  of  Great  Britain  as  a  confirmation  of  the  exactitude
and  the  (generality  of  the  periodic  law.  Now  that  I  have  had  the  happiness
of  doing  so,  I  nnhesitatingly  say  that,  although  greatly  enlarging  our  vision,
even  now  the  periodic  law  needs  further  improvements  in  order  tiiat  it  may
become  a  trustworthy  instnunent  in  further  diaeoveriea,"

I  will  venture  to  allude  to  some  other  matters  which  chemistry  has  dis-
cerned by  means  of  its  new  instrument,  and  which  it  could  not  have  made

'  I  foreaeo  some  more  new  eleuiento,  hat,  uol  with  the  same  dertiluilo  oa  Iwfoie.  1
■h&ll  tcive  one  example,  wid  jet  I  do  not  see  it  qnite  distinutlr.  In  the  Kries  which  con-
Uins  Rg=Wt,  Pb^aoe,  and  Bi  ^  ^08,  we  con  immgine  tlm  eiigtence  M  the  pluce  VI— 11)
o[  %a  eUmeot  anoJagona  to  telladiun,  which  ne  can  describe  ■■  dTi-tellurium,  Dt,  hBring
ui  Klomic  weight  of  313,  uid  the  property  of  fDiniing  the  oxide  DtO^.  If  this  element
n$Mj  eiists,  it  ought  in  the  free  state  to  be  ui  ettailj  fusible,  orysl»lline,  aun-volfttili
metal  of  a  grey  oolonr.  having  a  density  of  nhout  (TS,  ctt[iu,b1e  of  giriag  s  dioiide,  DtO,,
Hqn^f  endowed  with  feeble  acid  luid  basic  properties.  Thig  dioiide  mast  give  on  aclite
■nidation  an  nnatabte  higher  oxide,  l>tO<i,  which  should  resemble  in  its  prop,?itiea  PliO,
and  Bi,Oj.  Dri-tclloriam  hydride,  if  it  bo  found  to  exist,  wiU  bo  a  less  stable  cnmpoDnd
thjsneven  H,Ta.  The  compounds  of  dri-telluriam  will  be  easily  lednwd,  and  it  wiU  form
chantcteristic  definite  nUoya  with  other  metnls.

F484

PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

I

oat  without  a,  knowledge  of  the  law  of  periodicity,  aud  I  will  coofiae  iiiy<«]f
to  simple  eubstanoea  and  to  oxides.

Before  the  periodic  law  was  formulated  the  atomic  weij^htsof  the  elements
Were  purely  empirical  numbers,  so  that  the  magnitude  of  the  eqnivaleat.  and
the  atomicity,  or  the  value  in  subatitution  possesaed  by  an  atom,  could  only
be  tested  by  critically  examining  the  methods  of  detenoination,  but  nerer
directly  by  considering  the  numerical  values  themselves ;  in  short,  we  were
oompeUedto  move  in  the  durk.  to  aiibmit  to  the  facts,  instead  of  being  masters
of  them.  I  need  not  recount  the  methods  which  permitted  the  pvriodio  law
at  last  to  master  the  facts  relatini^  to  atomic  weights,  and  I  would  merdy
enll  to  mind  that  it  compelled  us  to  modify  the  valencies  of  indium  »ai
oerium,  and  to  assign  to  their  compoiinda  a  different  molecular  composition.
Detenninatioos  of  the  specific  heats  of  these  two  metaU  fully  confirmed  the
change.  The  trivalency  of  yllrmm,  which  makes  us  now  repreaenl  its  oiide
as  Y5O.,  instead  of  as  YO,  was  also  foreseen  (in  ISTOi  by  the  periodic  law,  and
it  has  now  become  so  probable  that  Clfive,  and  all  other  subseijnent  invftsti.
gators  of  the  rare  metaJs,  have  not  only  adopted  it,  but  have  also  applied  it
without  any  new  demonstration  to  subatances  so  imjierfectly  known  as  those
of  the  cerite  and  gadolittite  group,  especially  since  Hillebrond  detenuined  the
specific  heats  of  lanthanum  and  didyraium  and  confirmed  the  expectations
suggested  by  the  periodic  law.  But  here,  especially  in  the  case  oi  didynunm,
we  meet  with  a  series  of  difficulties  long  since  foreseen  through  the  periodic
law,  but  only  now  becoming  evident,  and  chiefly  arising  &oiu  the  relative
ranty  and  insufficient  knowledge  of  the  elements  which  usnolly  accompany
didymium.

Fasaing  to  the  reaults  obtained  in  the  case  of  the  rare  elements  hfryUium,
teandiutn,  and  thorium,  it  is  found  that  these  have  many  points  of  contact
with  the  periodic  law.  Although  Avd^eff  long  since  proposed  the  magnesn
formula  to  represent  beryllium  oxide,  yet  there  was  so  much  to  be  Mid  in
favoiu"  of  the  alumina  formula,  on  account  of  the  specific  heat  ol  the  melali
and  the  isomorphism  of  the  two  oxides,  that  it  became  generally  adopted
and  seemed  to  be  well  established.  The  periodic  law,  however,  as  Braaa»r
repeatedly  insisted  (■  Berichte,'  1878,872;  1881,  63],  was  agiunstthe  formolt
Be,0;, ;  it  recpiired  the  magnesia  formula  BeO — that  is,  an  atomic  wcoglil
of  0- -because  there  was  no  place  in  the  system  for  an  element  like  berylUmi
having  an  atomic  weight  of  13-5.  This  divergence  of  opinion  lasted  for
years,  and  I  often  heard  that  the  question  as  to  the  atomic  weight  of  berrlliimi
tlireatened  to  disturb  the  generality  of  the  periodic  law,  or,  at  anv  rale,  to
require  some  important  modlficatioas  of  it.  Many  forces  were  operating  in
the  controversy  regarding  beryllium,  evidently  because  a  much  more  im-
portant question  was  at  issue  than  merely  that  involved  in  the  discusdon  of
theatomio  weight  of  a  relatively  rare  element:  and  during  the  controversy
the  periodic  law  became  better  imderstood,  and  the  mutual  relations  of  the
elements  became  more  apparent  than  ever  before.  It  is  most  remarkable  tint
of  the  periodic  law  was  won  by  the  researches  of  tlie  verj-  obserren
who  previously  had  discovered  a  number  of  facta  in  auppori  of  the  tri-
valency of  beryllium.  Applying  the  higher  law  of  Avogadro,  N'ilaon  and
Petteison  have  finally  shown  that  the  density  of  the  vapour  of  the  hvegV

^  who  prev

H^ valency  c
^^^ Petteison

APPENDIX U.

4B5

regard  berj' Ilium  us  bivnlect  iti
I  conBider  the  confirmation  of  AvdeelTs
1  the  historj  of  the  periodic  law  ob  the
:bod''s  hands,  confirmed the  existence  of

linm chloride, BeCl;, obli^ea
conformity  with  the  periodio  law,'
and  Bmuuer's  view  as  important  i:
discovery  of  scandium,  which,  in  Ni
ekaboron.

The  circumstance  that  thorimn  proved  to  he  quadrivalent,  and  Tb  -  232.
in  accordance  with  the  views  of  Chydenius  and  the  requirements  of  the
periodic  law,  passed  almost  unnoticed,  and  was  accepted  without  opposition,
and  yet  both  thorium  and  uranium  are  of  great  importance  in  the  periodic
system,  as  they  are  its  last  members,  and  have  the  highest  atomic  weights  of
all  the  elements.

The  alteration  of  the  atomic  weight  of  urnnjHm  from  U -120  into  U  =  240
attracted  more  attention,  the  change  having  been  made  on  account  of  the
periodic  law,  and  for  no  other  reason.  Now  that  Roecoe,  Bammelsberg,
Zinunermann,  and  several  others  have  admitted  the  various  claims  of  the
periodic  law  in  the  case  of  uranium,  its  high  atomic  weight  is  received  with-
out objection,  and  it  endows  that  element  with  a  special  interest.

%Vhile  thus  demonstrating  the  necees-ity  for  modifying  tlie  atomic  weights
of  several  insufficiently  known  elements,  the  periodic  law  enabled  us  also  to
delect  errors  in  tlie  determination  of  the  atomic  weights  of  several  elements
whose  valencies  and  true  position  among  other  elements  were  already  well
known.  Three  such  eases  ore  especially  noteworthy :  those  of  tellurium,
titaniimi  and  platinum.  Berzelius  had  determined  the  atomic  weight  of
lelluriiim  to  be  128,  while  the  periodic  law  claimed  for  it  an  atomic  weight
below  that  of  iodine,  which  had  been  fixed  by  Stas  at  126'5,  and  which  was
certainly  not  higher  than  127.  Brauue'r  then  undertook  the  investigation,
and  he  has  shown  that  the  true  atomic  weight  of  tellurium  is  lower  than  that
of  iodine,  being  near  to  125.  For  titanium  the  extensive  researches  of
Thorpe  have  confirmed  the  atomic  weight  of  Ti  -  48,  indicated  by  the  law,
and  already  foreseen  by  Rose,  but  contradicted  by  the  analyses  of  Pierre  and
several  other  chemists.  An  equally  brilliant  confirmation  of  tlie  expectations
based  on  the  periodic  law  has  been  given  in  the  case  of  the  series  osmium,
iridium,  platinum,  and  gold.  At  the  time  of  the  promulgation  of  the  periodic
law,  the  determinations  of  Berzelius,  Hose,  and  many  others  gave  the  follow-
ing figures  :—

Ob  =  200;  Ir  =  197;  Pt  =  198;  Au  =  196.

'  Let  me  mention  another  proof  of  the  bivnlenc;  ot  berylliaui  wliiah  may  liavc  passed
>  it  wu  onlypabliBliodiuthe  Russian  chemical  litoratnie.  Having  remuked
It  the  deneiC;  of  such  solutions  of  chlorides  of  metals,  MCI.,  as  contain  300
mols.  o[  irater  (of  a  lalge  anil  constant  amounb  of  water)  regnlarl;  increuws  aa  Itie  mole-
Cdlai  weight  ol  Ibe  dissolved  sail  increases,  I  proposed  to  one  of  our  yonng  chemists,
U.  Bncilukofl,  that  b«  sboutd  investigate  berylUoD)  chloride.  If  itB  molecule  be  BeClj
ihi  weight  mutl  be  -SO;  and  in  such  a  case  it  must  be  heavier  than  the  molecule  o(
KC1  =  74'E,  and  lighter  tlian  that  ot  HgClj=93.  On  the  coDtrary,  it  berylliom  chloride  ia
a  trichloride,  BeClj^lai),  its  molecule  must  be  heavier  than  that  of  CaCl,-lIl.  and
ligblet  than  thubol  Mria^^iatt.  Experiment  has  shown  the  coneotaeas  ot  the  former
lorniohi,  the  solution  BeCl^-i- 3000,0  having  (at  IB"/*")  a  density  of  10138,  this  being  a
higher  den>ity  than  tbalot  the  solution  KC1  + 2000,0  (=^1-0121),  sjid  lower  than  that  ot
HgCls  +  200U]O(  =  l-020S|.  The  biialent-y  ot  beryllium  was  thns  uanfirmed  in  the  cose
both  ot  the  diseolved  and  the  vaiiorised  chloride.

Q  1881)  tl

486  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

The  expectations  of  the  periodic  law  ^  have  been  confirmed*  first,  by  new
determinations  of  the  atomic  weight  of  platinum  (by  Senbert,  Dittmar,  and
M* Arthur,  which  proved  to  be  near  to  196  (taking  O » 16,  as  proposed  by
Marignac,  Branner,  and  others) ;  secondly,  by  Senbert  having  proved  that
the  atomic  weight  of  o$miu/in  is  really  lower  than  that  of  platinnm,  being
near  to  191;  and  thirdly,  by  the  investigations  of  Eriiss,  Thorpe  and
Lanrie,  proving  that  the  atomic  weight  of  gold  exceeds  that  of  platinnm,
and  approximates  to  197.  The  atomic  weights  which  were  thus  fonnd  to
require  correction  were  precisely  those  which  the  periodic  law  had  indicated
as  affected  with  errors ;  and  it  has  been  proved,  therefore,  that  the  periodic
law  affords  a  means  of  testing  experimental  results.  If  we  suooeed  in  dis>
eovering  the  exact  character  of  the  periodic  relationships  between  the
increments  in  atomic  weights  of  allied  elements  discussed  by  Bidbezg  in
1685,  and  again  by  Bazaroff  in  1887,  we  may  expect  that  our  instrument
will  give  us  the  means  of  still  more  closely  controlling  the  experimental  data
relating  to  atomic  weights.

Let  me  next  call  to  mind  that,  while  disclosing  the  variation  of  chemical
properties,*  the  periodic  law  has  also  enabled  us  to  systematically  discuss
many  of  the  physical  properties  of  elementary  bodies,  and  to  show  that  these
properties  are  also  subject  to  the  law  of  periodioity.  At  the  Moscow  Congress
of  Russian  Naturalists  in  August,  1869,  I  dwelt  upon  the  relations  which
existed  between  density  and  the  atomic  weight  of  the  elements.  The  follow-
ing year  Professor  Lothar  Meyer,  in  his  well-known  piqper,*^  studied  the
same  subject  in  more  detail,  and  thus  contributed  to  spread  information
about  the  periodic  law.  Later  on,  CameUey,  Laurie,  L.  Meyer,  Roberts-
Austen,  and  several  others  applied  the  periodic  system  to  represent  the  order
in  the  changes  of  the  magnetic  properties  of  the  elements,  their  melting
points,  the  heats  of  formation  of  their  haloid  compounds,  and  even  of  such
mechanical  properties  as  the  co-efficient  of  elasticity,  the  breaking  stress,  &c.,
Ac.  These  deductions,  which  have  received  further  support  in  the  discovery
of  new  elements  endowed  not  only  with  chemical  but  even  with  physical
properties,  which  were  foreseen  by  the  law  of  periodicity,  are  well  known ;
so  I  need  not  dwell  upon  the  subject,  and  may  pass  to  the  consideration  of
oxides.'*

^  I  pointed  them  oat  in  the  Liebig'a  Annaletif  Supplement  Band^  viii.  1871,  p.  Sll.
^  Thus,  in  the  typical  small  period  of

Li,  Be,  B,  C,  N,  O,  F,

we  see  at  once  the  progression  from  the  alkali  metals  to  the  acid  non-metals,  snch  as
are  the  halogens.

*<*  Liebig'a  Annalen^  Supplement  Band.,  vii.  1870.

**  A  distinct  periodicity  can  also  be  discovered  in  the  spectra  of  the  elements.  Thus
the  researches  of  Hartley,  Ciamician,  and  others  have  disclosed,  first,  the  homology
of  the  spectra  of  analogous  elements:  secondly,  that  the  alkali  metals  have  simpler
spectra  than  the  metals  of  the  following  groups ;  and  thirdly,  that  there  is  a  certain  like-
ness between  the  complicated  spectra  of  manganese  and  iron  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
no  less  complicated  spectra  of  chlorine  and  bromine  on  the  other  hand,  and  their  likeness
corresponds  to  the  degree  of  analogy  between  those  elements  which  is  indicated  by  the
periodic  law.

APPENDIX  n.

487

In  indicating  tbu  llie  giadtial  increase  oF  the  power  of  elements  of  eom-
bining  with  oirgen  is  Boconipanied  by  a  corresponding  deoreaae  in  their
power  of  combining  with  hydrogen,  the  periodic  law  ha^  shown  thnt  there  is
a  limit  of  oxidation,  jast  as  there  is  &  well-known  Hmtt  to  the  capacity  of
etementB  for  eoinbinitig  with  hvdrogen.  A  single  ntoin  of  an  element  com-
biaeB  with  at  most  four  atoms  of  either  hydrogen  or  oxygen  ;  and  while  CH,
and  SiHj  repre»ent  the  highest  hydrides,  so  BuO,  and  OsOi  ar«  the  highest
oxides.  We  are  thus  led  to  recognise  types  of  oxides,  jast  as  we  have  had  to
recognise  types  of  hydrides.''

The  periodic  law  has  demonstrated  that  the  maximntu  extent  to  which
different  non-wetals  enter  into  combination  with  oxygen  is  determined  by  the
extent  to  which  they  combine  with  hydrogen,  and  that  the  sum  of  the  number
of  equivalents  of  both  must  be  eqnal  to  H.  Thus  oldorine,  which  combines
with  1  atom  or  1  equivalent  of  hydrogen,  cannot  fix  more  than  7  equivalents
of  oxygen,  giving  C1,0; ;  while  sulphur,  which  fixes  2  ec|uivalont9  of  hydrogen,
cannot  combine  with  more  than  6  equivaJents  or  U  atoms  of  oxygen.  It  thus
becomes  evident  that  we  cannot  recognise  as  a  fundamental  property  of  the
elements  the  atomic  valencies  deduced  from  their  hydrides  ;  and  that  we
must  modify,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  theory  of  atomicity  if  we  desire  to  raise
it  to  the  di^ty  of  a  general  principle  capable  of  uffording  an  insight  into  the
constitution  of  all  compound  moleculca.  In  other  words,  it  ie  only  to  carbon.
which  is  quadrivalent  with  regard  both  to  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  that  we  con
apply  the  theory  of  constant  valency  and  of  bond,  by  means  of  which  so  many
■till  endeavour  to  explain  the  structure  of  compound  molecules.  But  1  should
go  too  far  if  I  ventured  to  explain  in  detail  the  conclusions  which  can  be
drawn  from  the  above  considerations.  Still,  I  think  it  necessary  to  dwell
upon  one  particular  fact  which  must  be  explained  from  the  point  of  view  of
the  periodic  law  in  order  to  clear  the  way  to  its  eitendon  in  that  particular
direction.

The  higher  oxides  yielding  salts  the  formation  of  which  was  foreseen  by
the  periodic  system — for  instance,  in  the  short  series  begioning  with  sodium —
Na,0,  MgO,  Alp,,  SiO„  P,0,.  SO,,  CLO;,

must  be  clearly  distinguished  from  the  higher  degrees  of  oxidation  which  cor-
respond  to  hydrogen  peroxide  and  bear  the  true  character  of  peroxides.  Per-
oxides such  as  Nap  J,  BaO,,  and  the  like  liave  long  been  known. Similar

"  Formerly  it  wna  unpposed  tlial,  Iwing  t.  bi  vuloiit  olBment,  oajgnu  can  enter  intonny
grouping  of  Uie  ■toms,  and  there  was  no  limit  fonjBeen  as  to  tlis  «it«[il  to  whicb  it  could
(orther  entfr  into  combination. Wu  could  not  explain  why  bivulentBolphnr.  which  lamas

kS>"'"<S>°'

kSJ>  "  <-:S>''-

tlempnts,  an,  (or  initaiuie,  olilariDe,  form  cORipoanda  Bnch  as —

<:i_0— o— O— 0-K

488  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

peroxides  have  also  recently  become  known  in  the  case  of  chromium,  snlphtir,
titeuiinm,  and  many  other  elements,  and  I  have  sometimes  heard  it  said  that
discoveries  of  this  kind  weaken  the  conolosions  of  the  periodic  law  in  so  fiir
as  it  concerns  the  oxides.  I  do  not  think  so  in  the  least,  and  I  may  remark,
in  the  first  place,  that  all  these  peroxides  are  endowed  with  certain  properties
obviously  common  to  all  of  them,  which  distinguish  them  from  the  actual,
higher,  salt-forming  oxides,  especially  their  easy  decomposition  by  means  of
simple  contact  agencies ;  their  incapability  of  forming  salts  of  the  common
type ;  and  their  capability  of  combining  with  other  peroxides  (like  the  fiBtculty
which  hydrogen  peroxide  possesses  of  combining  with  barium  peroxide,  dis-
covered by  Schoene).  Again,  we  remark  that  some  groups  are  especially
characterised  by  their  capacity  of  generating  peroxides.  Such  is,  for  instance,
the  case  in  the  sixth  group,  where  we  find  the  well-known  peroxides  of
sulphur,  chromium,  and  uranium ;  so  that  further  investigation  of  peroxides
will  probably  establish  a  new  periodic  function,  foreshadowing  that  molyb-
denum and  tungsten  will  assume  peroxide  forms  with  comparative  readiness.
To  appreciate  the  constitution  of  such  peroxides,  it  is  enough  to  notice  that
the  peroxide  form  of  sulphur  (so-called  persulphuric  acid)  stands  in  the  same
relation  to  sulphuric  acid  as  hydrogen  peroxide  stands  to  water : —

H(OH),  or  H3O,  responds  to  (OH)(OH),  or  H^O^,
and  so  also —

H(HSOJ,  or  ELjSO^,  responds  to  (HSOJ(HSOJ,  or  HjSjOg.

Similar  relations  are  seen  everywhere,  and  they  correspond  to  the  principle

of  substitutions  which  I  long  since  endeavoured  to  represent  as  one  of  the

chemical  generalisations  called into  life  by  the  periodic  law. So also

sulphuric  acid,  if  considered  with  reference  to  hydrox}'!,  and  represented  as

follows —

HO(SO.,OH),

has  its  corresponding  compound  in  dithionic  acid —

(SO,OH)(SO,OH),  or  H.,S,0,.

Therefore,  also,  phosphoric  acid,  H0(P0Ho02),  has,  in  the  same  sense,  its
corresponding  compound  in  the  subphosphoric  acid  of  Saltzer : —

(POH,0,)(POa,0,),  or  H,P,0, ;

and  we  must  suppose  that  the  peroxide  compoimd  corresponding  to  phosphoric
acid,  if  it  be  discovered,  will  have  the  following  structure : —

(H,P0,)2  or  H,P,0,  =  2H.,0  +  2P03.»^

So  far  as  is  known  at  present,  the  highest  form  of  peroxides  is  met  with  in

'3  In  this  sense,  oxalic  acid,  (COOH)2,  also  corresponds  to  carbonic  acid,  OH(COOH),
in  the  same  wa}'  that  dithionic  iccid  corresponds  to  sulphuric  acid,  and  subphosphoric
acid  to  phosphoric;  hence,  if  a  peroxide  corresponding  to  carbonic  acid  be  obtained,
it  will  have  the  structure  of  (HC05)2,  or  HjjCQOg  =  H3O  +  C2O5.  So  also  lead  must  have
a  real  peroxide,  Pb^Os.

the  peroxide  of  nronium,  UO,,  prepared  by  Fairley ;  '*  while  ObO,  is  the
highest  oxide  giving  salts.  The  line  of  argument  which  is  inspired  bj  the
periodic  Iftw,  so  far  from  being  weakened  by  the  discovery  of  peroxideB,  is
thus  actnally  strengthened,  and  we  must  hope  that  a  farther  exploration  of
the  region  under  consideration  will  confirm  the  applicability  to  cliemistry
generally  of  the  principles  deduced  &od>  the  periodic  law.

Permit  me  now  to  conclude  my  rapid  sketch  of  the  oxygen  compoimds  by
the  observation  that  the  periodic  law  ia  especially  brought  into  evidence  in
the  case  of  the  oxides  which  cooatitnte  the  immense  majority  of  bodies  at  our
disposal  oa  the  surface  of  the  earth.

The  oxides  are  evidently  subject  to  tLe  law,  both  as  regards  their  chemical
and  their  physical  properties,  especially  if  we  take  into  account  the  cases  of
polymerism  which  arc  so  obvious  when  comparing  CO.^  with  Si„0.,,.  In  order
to  prove  this  I  give  the  densities  <  and  the  specific  volumes  v  of  the  higher
oxides  of  two  short  periods.  To  render  comparison  easier,  the  oxides  are  all
represented  as  of  the  form  B.,0..  In  the  column  headed  A  the  diUerences
are  given  between  the  volume  of  the  oxjgen  compound  and  that  of  the  parent
element,  divided  by  n — that  is,  by  the  number  of  atoms  of  oxygen  in  the
compound ;—  '''

Na,0  ..
MftO...
A1,0,..
Si,0,  ..
PA  ■■
S.O. ..

.  2-6 24

-22

€a,0 .

ScjO, .

2-7

SJi

SIS

36

3-06

3.^>

4-2

38

li-49

.12

2-74

73

-65

I  have  nothing  to  add  to  tliese  figures,  except  that  like  relations  appear  in
other  periods  as  well.  The  above  relations  were  precisely  those  which  made
it  possible  for  me  to  be  certain  that  the  relative  density  of  ekasilicoii  oxide
would  be  aboQt  4'7  ;  germanium  oxide,  actually  obtained  by  Winkler,  proved,
in  fact,  to  have  the  relative  density  4-703.

Tlie  foregoing  account  is  far  from  being  an  exhaustive  one  of  all  that  lias
ateady  been  discovered  by  means  of  the  periodic  law  telescope  in  the  boimd.
less  realms  of  chemical  evolution.  Still  less  is  it  an  exhaustive  accoimt  of  all
that  may  yet  be  seen,  but  I  trust  that  the  httJe  which  I  have  said  wiU  account

"  The  cotnpoimiln  of  oraninni  prepiired  by  Fairley  seem  to  nin  mm^i  n •  ^'

in  nnde.t«,di„g  th«  pe,o,id™. By  ZLlL  ol  h/d^„  ^"^7^11'  '"  7

UO„  .  pe^ide  of  erbium,  UO„iH,0,  i.  obUl^  So)  ^^^  Jl^l^fTlf '^
-I  hrdrogeu  p.r»ide  «t  en  «r«,iem  <»iJ«  in  the  p„^™  of  lu^^^.  "  \,^"*
depoait  it  obtained  vhicb  hu  the  composilion  Na^VO.  IH  n  .,.,1  j  r'  "  "J"**!"""
iioa  of  »diun,  peroxide,  N^O,  mitZ^^^t^^^'vo  HT"'''  V  '^°'"'''^
f™«  p.r««id«,  UO,.H,0,™nt^^th«  elen,e.U  of  hyd^n  1^.^"^  """'  '^^
petmude,  D,Oj,  or  even  U(OH)*a,0^  like  the  peroid  T^  fwuide  uid  unuiiiini
Spring,  which  h».  the  ronrtitolioaSn.jOj,H,0,  '  ™ 's™""?  diecorered  by

"  A  thus  rvpreBButa  the  iverage  increase  nf  .nin, >
t*u.6d  in  the  higber  .alt-forming  oxide. The  .J„^  *^  "<™  "f  t«Jg«n  ■»».

olA.whiIeinU»«_„f...„..__,_ .. ..  '"''*' P™- "' n<!e. a  higher tUbb

«  ^<^J  negati,e.

_ ...  „=  ,^uBr  HH-ioniuiig  oxide. The  ,cid  «.i,l

ol  A.  whde  m  the  ««  of  the  .trong],  Jt.,^,  ^j^"*

APPENDIX  III

ARGON,  A  NEW  CONSTITUENT OF  THE  ATMOSPHERE
Written  bt  PBOFESSOB  MENDELEEFF  IN  FEBBDARY  1895

The  remarks  made  in  Chapter  V.,  Note  16bLs  respecting  the  iiewly  liiacovered
conatitnent  of  the  atmosphere  are  here  supplemented  by  data  (taken  from
the  publications  of  the  Boyal  Society  of  London)  given  bj  the  diacoverera
Lord  Bajleigh  and  Professor  Itameay  in  Jannary  IBOS,  together  with  obser-
vations mode  by  Crookes  and  Olazewsky  upon  the  same  subject.

Tliis  gaa,  which  was  discovered  hy  Bayleigh  and  Ramsay  in  atmo-
spheric nitrogen,  was  named  argon  '  by  them,  and  upon  the  Bupposition  of
it«  being  an  element,  thej  gave  it  the  symbol  A.  But  its  true  chemical
nature  is  not  yet  fully  known,  for  not  only  has  no  compound  of  it  been  yet
obtained,  but  it  has  not  even  been  brougrbt  into  any  reaction.  From  all  that
is  knonn  about  it  at  the  present  time,  we  may  conclude  with  the  discovecerB
that  argon  belongs  to  those  gases  which  are  permanent  constituents  of  the
atmosphere,  and  that  it  is  ii  new  element.  The  latter  statement,  however,
requires  confirmation.  We  shall  presently  see,  however,  that  the  negative
chemical  character  of  argon  (its  incapacity  to  react  with  any  substance),  and
the  small  amount  of  it  present  in  the  atmosphere  (about  1^  per  cent,  by
volume  in  the  nitrogen  of  air,  and  consequently  about  1  per  cent,  by  volume
in  air),  as  well  as  the  recent  date  of  its  discovery  (1894)  and  the  difficulty
of  its  preparation,  are  ijuite  sufficient  reasons  for  the  incompleteness  of  the
existing  knowledge  respecting  this  element,  itut  since,  so  for  as  is  yet  known,
we are dealing with a normal constituent of  the atmosphere '  "*, the

'  Prom  Ihc  Gnwk  A(>7i»— itmrt.

'  *!•  In  Sote  18  bin,  Chapter  V.,  I  raenliooed  that,  jndgitig  from  the  gpadfio  gravity
ot  argon,  it  might  posubly  be  polymorised  nitrugsn,  Nj,  bearing  the  name  relMionahip  to
nitroijeD,  N,,  that  ozone,  0-„  bears  to  ordinary  oiygen.  If  this  idea  were  confinaed.  BtQI
one  would  Dot  imagine  that  argon  was  formed  from  tlie  atmoepheri
reactions  bj  which  it  woa  obtained  by  Rayleigh  and  Bamuy,  bat  rather  that  it  uisss
from  the  nitrogen  of  the  atmosphere  onder  natural  conditions.  Afthoogh  this  propaution
ia  not  qoite  destroyed  by  the  more  recent  reanlts.  still  it  is  aontradicted  by  the  fact  that
the  ratio  of  the  specific  heats  of  argon  was  found  to  bo  I'M.  which,  as

Coold  not  be  the  ease  for  a  gaft  containing  S  atoms  in  ite  molectile,  siooe  aueh  gasea  (tee
Chapter  XIV.,  Note  T)  give  the  ratio  approiinately  1-3  (for  eiample,  CO.j). In  abstain-
ing (rom  farther  conela«iona,  for  they  mnst  inevitably  be  pnrely  conjectnral,  I  a
it  adviiable  to  suggest  that  in  condocting  farther  researches  npon  aigon  il  might  be  w

492  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

existing  data,  notwithstanding  their  insufficiently  definite  nature,  should
find  a  place  even  in  snch  an  elementary  work  as  the  present,  all  the  more  as
the  names  of  Bayleigh,  Bamsay,  Crookes  and  Olszewsky,  who  have  worked
upon  argon,  are  among  the  highest  in  our  science,  and  their  researches  among
the  most  difficult.^  These  researches,  moreover,  were  directed  straight  to
the  goal,  which  was  only  partly  reached  owing  to  the  unusual  properties  of
argon  itseH

When  it  became  known  (Chapter  Y.,  Note  4  bis)  that  the  nitrogen  obtained
firom  air  (by  removing  the  oxygen,  moisture  and  CO,  by  various  reagents)
has  a  greater  density  than  that  obtained  firom  the  various  (oxygen,  hydrogen
and  metallic)  compounds  of  nitrogen,  it  was  a  plausible  explanation  that  the
latter  contained  an  admixture  of  hydrogen,  or  of  some  other  light  gas  lower-
ing the  density  of  the  mixture.  But  such  an  assumption  is  refiited  not  only
by  the  fact  that  the  nitrogen  obtained  firom  its  various  compounds  (after
purification)  has  always  the  same  density  (although  the  supposed  impurides
mixed  with  it  should  vary),  but  also  by  Bayleigh  and  Bamsay *s  experiment
of  artificially  adding  hydrogen  to  nitrogen,  and  then  passing  the  mixture  over
red-hot  oxide  of  copper,  when  it  was  found  that  the  nitrogen  r^ained  its
original  density,  i.e,  that  the  whole  of  the  hydrogen  was  removed  by  this
treatment.  Therefore  the  difference  in  the  density  of  the  two  varieties  of
nitrogen  had  to  be  explained  by  the  presence  of  a  heavier  gas  in  admixture
with  the  nitrogen  obtained  fix)m  the  atmosphere.  This  hypothesis  was  con-
firmed by  the  fact  that  Bayleigh  and  Bamsay  having  obtained  purified  nitrogen
(by  removing  the  0.^,  CO,  and  H,0),  both  firom  ordinary  air  and  fixun  air
which  had  been  previously  subjected  to  atmolysis,  that  is  which  had  been
passed  through  porous  tubes  (of  burnt  clay,  e,g,  pipe-stem),  surroilnded  by  a
rarefied  space,  and  so  deprived  of  its  lighter  constituents  (chiefly  nitrogen),
found  that  the  nitrogen  firom  the  air  which  had  been  subjected  to  atmolysiB
was  heavier  than  that  obtained  fi*om  air  which  had  not  been  so  treated.  This
experiment  showed  that  the  nitrogen  of  air  contains  an  admixture  of  a  gas
which,  being  heavier  than  nitrogen  itself,'*  diffuses  more  slowly  than  nitrogen

to  Bubject  it  to  as  high  a  temperature  as  possible.  And  the  possibility  of  nitrogen
polymerising  is  all  the  more  admissible  from  the  fact  that  the  a^^egation  of  its  atoms
in  the  molecule  is  not  at  all  unlikely,  and  that  polymerised  nitrogen,  judging  from  many
examples,  might  be  inert  if  the  polymerisation  were  accompanied  by  the  evolution  of
heat.  In  the  following  footnotes  I  frequently  return  to  this  hypothesis,  not  only  because
I  have  not  yet  met  any  facts  definitely  contradictory  to  it,  but  also  because  the  chief
prox>ertics  of  argon  agree  with  it  to  a  certain  extent. -

^  The  chief  difficulty  in  investigating  argon  lies  in  the  fact  that  its  preparation  requires
the  eniploj'ment  of  a  large  quantity  of  air,  which  has  to  be  treated  with  a  number  of
different  reagents,  whose  perfect  purity  (especially  that  of  magnesium)  will  always  be
doubtful,  and  argon  haslnot  yet  been  transferred  to  a  substance  in  which  it  could  be  easily
purified.  Perhaps  the  considerable  solubility  of  argon  in  water  (or  in  other  suitable
liquids,  wliich  have  not  apparently  yet  been  tried)  may  give  the  means  of  doing  ho,  and  it
may  be  possible,  by  collecting  the  air  expelled  from  boiling  water,  to  obtain  a  richer  source
of  argon  than  ordinary  air.

'  It  might  also  be  supposed  that  this  heavy  gas  is  separated  by  the  copper  when  the
latter  absorbs  the  oxygen  of  the  air ;  but  such  a  supposition  is  not  only  improbable  in
itself,  but  does  not  agree  with  the  fact  that  nitrogen  may  be  obtained  from  air  by  absorb-
ing the  oxygen  by  various  other  substances  in  solution  (for  instance,  by  the  lower  oxides

APPENDIX  in.  493

through  the  porous  material.  It  remained,  therefore,  to  separate  this  iiu-
purity  &om  the  Ditrogen.  To  do  this  Bayleigh  and  Hamsay  adopted  two
methodB,  couvertiag  tl|p  nitcogBD  into  solid  and  liquid  aubBtances,  either
by  absorbing  the  aitrogen  by  heated  ma;;nesinm  (Chapter  V.,  Note  6,  and
Chapter  XIV.,  Note  14),  with  the  formation  of  nitride  of  magnesinm,  or  else
hy  converting  It  into  nitria  acid  by  the  aoCion  of  electric  sparks  or  the  presence
of  an  exceftg  of  air  and  alkali,  as  in  Cavendish's  method.'"*  Iq  both  cases
the  nitrogen  entered  into  reaction,  while  the  heavier  gaa  miied  with  it
remained  inert,  and  was  thus  able  to  be  isolated.  That  is,  the  argon  conld  bo
separated  by  these  means  from  the  excess  of  atmospheric  nitrogen  accom-
panying it.'  As  an  illustrition  we  will  describe  how  argon  was  obtained
from  the  atmospheric  nitrogen  by  means  of  magnesium.'  To  begin  with,
it  was  discovered  that  when  atmospheric  nitrogen  was  passed  through  a  tube
containing  metallic  magnesium  healed  to  redness,  its  specific  gravity  rose  to
14'B8.  As  this  showed  that  part  of  the  gas  was  absorbed  by  the  magnesium,
a  mercury  gasometer  filled  with  atmospheric  nitrogen  was  .taken,  and  the
gas  drawn  over  soda-lime.  PmO-,  heated  magnesium "  and  then  through
tubes  containing  red-hot  copper  oxide,  soda-lime  and  phosphoric  anhydride
to  a  second  mercury  gasometer.  Every  time  the  gas  was  repassed  through
the  tubes,  it  decreased  in  volume  and  increased  in  density. After  repeating

□I  the  metals,  tike  FeO)  besides  red-bot  caliper,  and  tlmt  tbe  nitingm  obtuned  is  ulwaTH
jaat  u  beavf.  BesidoB  which,  nitrogen  is  also  set  free  from  its  oiides^by  copper,  undthe
nitrogen  thus  obtuned  is  lighter.  Therefore  it  is  not  the  topper  which  produces  tbu
heavj  gas — i.e.  argon.

>  ^^  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  Cavendiah  obtained  a  sui  "
verting  nitrogen  into  nitric  s£id; but  he  pnid  no  attention  t^
had  in  hia  htLnds  the  very  argoo  recently  diecovered.

'  When  in  thenc  eipetimoata,  instead  of  atmospherio  nitrogen  the  gas  obtained  from
its  compound  waa  taken,  an  inert  residue  of  a  heavy  gns,  having  the  propertiea  ot  orgon,
was  also  remarked,  but  its  amoont  was  very  small.  Rayleigh  and  Ramsay  ascribe  the
formation  of  this  residuF  to  the  fact  that  the  goB  in  these  etperimoDts  was  collected  over
water,  and  a  portion  of  the  dissolved  argon  in  it  might  have  passed  into  the  nitrogen.  As
the  aothon  of  tliis  supposition  did  not  prove  it  by  any  special  experiments,  it  forms  a
weak  point  in  tbeir  clasaical  research.  U  it  be  admitted  that  argon  is  Nj,  the  foot  oF  ita
being  obtained  from  the  nitrogen  ofcompoDnds  might  be  explaiaedby  the  polymerisatinn
ot  a  portion  of  the  nitrogen  in  the  act  of  reaction,  althougli  it  is  impossible  to  refute
Bayleigh  and  Ramsay's  hypothesis  of  its  being  evolved  from  the  water  employed  in  the
manipulation  ot  the  gases.  Three  thousand  volumes  of  nitrogea  extracted  from  ita
componnda  gave  about  tlu'ee  volumes  of  argon,  while  thirty  volumes  were  yielded  by  the

»  The  preparation  of  argon  by  the  conversion  of  nitrogen  into  ixitrio  acid  is  complicated
by  tbe  necessity  of  adding  a  hirge  proportion  of  oxygen  and  alkali,  of  passing  an  electric
discharge  throngh  the  miitnre  for  a  long  period,  and  then  removing  the  nimaining
oxygen.  Alt  this  was  repeatedly  done  by  tha  authora,  but  this  method  ia  far  more
complex,  both  in  practice  and  theory,  than  the  preparation  of  argon  by  means  ot
mipMsium.  From  IDD  volumes  of  air  subjected  to  conversion  iato  HN'O^,  070  volume
ot  argon  were  obtained  after  absorbing  the  excess  of  oxygen.

*  In  these  and  the  following  experiments  tbe  magnesium  waa  placed  in  an  ordinary
hard  glass  tube,  and  heated  in  a  gas  foruace  to  a  temperature ~  ~  '

the  glass,  The  current  of  gaa  moat  be  very  slaw  [a  tube  containing  a  small  quantity  ot
sulphuric  acid  served  as  a  meter),  as  otherwise  the  heat  evolved  in  the  foimation  ol  the
MgjNj  (Chapter  XIV.,  Note  H)  will  melt  the  tube.

494  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

this  for  ten  days  1,500  c.c.  of  gas  were  reduced  to  200  cc.,  and  the  density
increased  to  16'1  (if  that  of  £1, » 1  and  N^  - 14).  Further  treatment  of  the
remainder  brought  the  density  up  to  19*09.  After  adding  a  small  quantity
of  oxygen  and  repassing  the  gas  through  the  apparatus,  the  density  rose  to
20*0.  To  obtain  argon  by  this  process  Bamsay  and  Bayleigh  (employing  a
mercury  air  pump  and  mercury  gasometers)  once  treated  about  150  litres  of
atmospheric  nitrogen.  On  another  occasion  they  treated  7,925  cc.  of  air  by
the  oxidation  method  and  obtained  65  c.o.  of  argon,  which  corresponds  to
0*82  per  cent.  The  density  of  the  argon  obtained  by  this  means  was  nearly
19*7,  while  that  obtained  by  the  magnesium  method  varied  between  19*09
and  20-88.

Thus  the  first  positive  and  very  important  &ct  respecting  argon  is  that
its  specific  gravity  is  nearly  20 — ^that  is,  that  it  is  20  times  heavier  than
hydrogen,  while  nitrogen  is  only  14  times  and  oxygen  16  times  heavier  than
hydrogen.  This  explains  the  difference  observed  by  Bayleigh  between  the
densities  of  nitrogen  obtained  from  its  compounds  and  from  tise  atmosphere
(Chapter  V.,  Note  4  bis).  At  0^  and  760  nmi.  a  litre  of  the  former  gas  weigjis
1*2505  grm.,  while  a  litre  of  the  latter  weighs  1*2572,  or  taking  H  ■■  1,  the
density  of  the  first  »  18*916,  and  of  the  latter  -« 18*991.  If  the  density  of
argon  be  taken  as  20,  it  is  contained  in  atmospheric  nitrogen  to  the  extent  of
about  1*28  per  cent,  by  volume,  whilst  air  contains  about  0*97  per  cent,  by
volume.

When  argon  had  been  isolated  the  question  naturally  arose,  was  it  a  new
homogeneous  substance  having  definite  properties  or  was  it  a  mixture  of
gases  ? The  former  may  now  be  positively  asserted,  namely,  that  argon  is  a
peculiar  gas  previously  unknown  to  chemistry. Such  a  conviction  is  in  the
first  place  established  by  the  fact  that  argon  has  a  greater  number  of  nega-
tive properties,  a  smaller  capacity  for  reaction,  than  any  other  simple  or
compound  body  known. The  most  inert  gas  known  is  nitrogen,  but  argon
far  exceeds  it  in  this  respect. Thus  nitrogen  is  absorbed  at  a  red  heat  by  many
metals,  with  the  formation  of  nitrides,  while  argon,  as  is  seen  in  the  mode
of  its  preparation  and  by  direct  experiment,  does  not  possess  this  property.
Nitrogen,  under  the  action  of  electric  sparks,  combines  with  hydrogen  in  the
presence  of  acids  and  with  oxygen  in  the  presence  of  alkalis,  while  argon  is
unable  to  do  so,  as  is  seen  from  the  method  of  separation  from  nitrogen.
Rayleigh  and  Rauisay  also  proved  that  argon  is  unable  to  react  with  chlorine
(dry  or  moist)  either  directly  or  under  the  action  of  an  electric  discharge,  or
with  phosphorus  or  sulphiu*,  at  a  red  heat. Sodium,  potassium,  and  tellurium
may  be  distilled  in  an  atmosphere  of  argon  without  change. Fused  caustic
soda,  incandescent  soda-lime,  molten  nitre,  red-hot peroxide  of  sodium,
and  the  polysulphides  of  calcium  and  sodium  also  do  not  react  with  argon.
riatinimi  black  does  not  absorb  it,  and  spongy  platinum  is  unable  to  excite  its
reaction  with  oxygen  or  chlorine. Aqua  regia,  bromine  water,  and  a  mixture
of  hydrochloric  acid  and  KMnO^  were  also  without  action  upon  argon. Besides
which  it  is  evident  from  the  method  of  its  preparation  that  it  is  not  acted  upon
by  red-liot  oxide  of  copper.  All  these  facts  exclude  any  possibility  of  argon  con-
taininf]f  any  already  known  body,  and  prove  it  to  be  the  most  inert  of  all  the
gases  known. But  besides  these  negative  points,  the  independency  of  argon  is

APPENDIX  m.  495

conliiiiied by four obBerved positive pfoperties possessed by it, whicli

1.  The  speetrom  of  orfron  observed  by  Crookea  under  a  low  pressure  (iu
Qeissler-FlUcker  tubes)  distinguisheB  it  from  other  gases.'  It  wns  proved
by  this  inetuis  thai  the  argon  obtained  by  Hieans  of  magnesium  is  identical
witli  that  which  remains  after  the  conversion  of  the  atmospheric  nitrogen
into  nitric  acid.  Like  nitrogen,  argon  presents  two  spectra  produced  at
different  potentials  of  the  induced  current,  one  being  orange-red,  the  other
steel'blue  ;  the  latter  is  obtained  under  a  higher  degree  of  mrefaction  and
with  a  battery  of  Leyden  jara.  Both  the  spectra  of  argon  (in  contradistinction
to  those  of  nitrogen)  are  distinguished  by  clearly  defined  lines.'  The  red
(ordinary)  spectrum  of  argou  has  two  particularly  brilliant  and  charocteristic
red  line*  {not  lor  &om  the  bright  red  line  of  lithium,  on  the  opposite  side  to
the  orange  band)  having  wave-lengthe  705-64  and  696-56  {nee  Vol,  I.,
p.  S6S).  Between  these  bright  lines  there  are  in  addition  lines  wit)i  wave  -
lengthH  608-8,  565-1,  5610,  3557,  518-58,  516-5,  450-95,  420-10,  415-95  and
S94-65.  Altogether  80  lines  have  been  obeened  in  this  spectrum  and  119  in
the  blue  spectrum,  of  which  26  are  common  to  both  spectra.'

2.  According  to  Eayleigh  and  Ramsay  the  solubility  of  argon  in  water
ia  approximately  4  volumes  in  100  vohtmes  of  water  at  13°.  Tims  argon
is  nearly  2^  limes  more  soluble  than  nitrogen,  emd  its  solubility  ap-
proaches that  of  oxygen.  Direct  experiment  proves  that  nitrogen  obtained
from  air  &om  boiled  water  is  heavier  than  that  obtained  straight  from  the
atmosphere. This  again  is  an  indirect  proof  of  the  presence  of  argon  in

3.  The  ratio  k  of  the  two  specific  heats  (at  a  constant  presmire  and  at

'  The  greateat  brilliuiC5t  of  the  Bpectnun  ol  Krgoti  is  obtained  at  »  tenHion  of  S  mm.,
while  for  nitrogen  it  i«  about  7B  mm.  (Crooke8>.  lii  Chapter  V.,  Note  16  bi».  it  is  uij
that  tbti  ume  blue  line  obHerved  io  t)ie  iiiectrom  of  lUgon  U  oliia  obseiTed  in  the  ■pBclrum
ol  nitiO(;«n.  Ibis  in  a  miatike,  since  thfj-e  ie  no  coinoideuoe  between  the  lilae  lines  ol
the  ugon  and  Ditiogen  ipeotra.  Howerer,  we  nuj  add  that  for  nitrogvn  the  toliawing
Diodenitely  bright  lines  are  Imovn  of  wave-lengtbs  SSG,  GT4,  S44,  GIB,  117,  Ui,  43«,  and
*3n,  which  are  repM.ted  in  the  spcdra  (red  and  blue)  of  argon,  jadging  by  Crookea'
researches  (IRBG);  bat  it  is  naturally  impOBsibW  to  assert  that  there  is  pertei^t  identity
until  some  speciid  comparative  work  luw  been  done  in  this  sobject,  which  is  very  desirable,
and  more  especially  tar  the  blnisb-violet  portion  ol  the  npectmm,  more  particularly
between  the  lines  119-136,  as  these  hues  are  distingnished  by  their  brillinncy  in  both  the
argon  and  nitrogen  spectra.  The  aboie- mentioned  euppoiition  of  argon  being  polymerised
nitrogen  (tf^).  formed  from  nitrogen  IN,),  with  the  ecolation  ol  heat,  might  find  some
support  shoold  it  be  found  alter  careful  compariaon  that  even  a  limited  number  ol
spectral  lines  Goincided.

*  At  Srsl  the  spectnim  of  argon  eihibits  the  nitrogan  linos,  but  aiter  a  cerbiin  time
these  lines  disappear  (ander  the  influence  of  the  plabiqnm,  and  also  of  Al  and  Mg,  but
irilli  the  tatter  the  epecttum  of  hydrogen  appears)  and  leave  a  pure  argon  spectrum.  II
does  not  appear  cloar  to  me  whether  a  polymerisation  here  lakes  place  or  a  simple
absorption.  Perhaps  the  etiioidatioa  ol  tliis  qaestion  would  prove  important  in  the
history  of  argon.  It  would  Iw  desiiable  to  know,  for  instiuice,  whether  the  volume  of
argon  changes  when  it  is  fint  xuhjected  to  the  action  of  the  electric  discbargi

*  Crookes  suppoees  that  argnii  contains  a  mixture  of  two  ifaaes.  bat  as
r  this,  beyond  certain  peculiarities  of  a  epectroncopic  character,

n  this  hypolheaii  forlber.

J

PRINCIPLES  OF  OHBWIBTBY

]

'496

B.  constant  volume)  oi  argon  was  de-termintd  by  Rayleigh  and  Bamaay  b,v  the
method  of  the  velocity  of  sound  (ac*  Chapter  XIV.,  Note  7  and  Chapter  Vn,
Note  26)  and  was  found  to  be  nearly  1*66,  that  is  greater  thao  for  those  gases
whose  molecules  contain  two  atoina  (for  inHtonce,  CO.Hj.N,,  air,  Ac.,  for
which  k  is  nearly  1-4)  or  those  whose  molecules  contain  three  a
instanee,  CO.j,NjO,  Jtc.,  for  which  k  is  nboat  1-3),  but  closely  approiimata
to  the  ratio  of  the  specific  heats  of  mercury  vapour  (Kundt  and  Warbarg,
ft  =  1'6T).  And  as  the  niolecnle  of  mercury  vapour  contEuns  oi
may  be  said  that  argon  is  a  simplG  gaseoua  body  whose  molecule  contains
one  atom.'"  A  compound  body  should  give  a  smaller  ratio.  The  experi-
ments npoQtheliquefactiouofargou,  which  we  shall  presently  describe,  speak
against  the  supposition  that  argon  is  a  mixture  of  two  Koses,  The  Impon-
ance  of  the  results  in  question  makes  one  wish  that  the  determinations  of  the
ratio  of  the  specific  beats  (and  other  physical  properties)  might  be  confinaed
with  aU  possible  acctiracy."  If  we  admit,  as  we  are  obliged  to  do  for  the
present,  that  argon  is  a  new  element,  its  density  ehows  that  its  atomic  weight
must  be  nearly  40,  that  is,  near  to  that  of  E  -  39  and  Ca  -  40,  which,  dots
not  correspond  to  the  existing  data  respecting  the  periodicity  of  the-propeities

1°  This  portion  o(  HajlBigh  and  Hojosay's  roBearchaa  deaervea  putimlar  mtlratjon  a^
BO  Inr,  no  gB.BGou8  BnbstancE  is  known  whose  molacnle  oontains  bnt  one  Htom.  Were  it
nol  for  tbe  above  detflrminationa,  it  mig'ht  be  thought  th&t  argon,  hftving  k  density  9U^
has  a,  complex  molecule,  ivnd  mn;  be  a  compound  or  polfmoriaed  body,  fc  ~
or  N^F.,  oringenenilXn;  bat  aa  the  matter  etanda,  it  can  onl;  be  said  that  either  (I)
ugan  is  a  new,  peculiar,  and  ijnite  □nnsDal  elementary  sabstance,  sinoe  there  is  no
reaaon  tor  nasuming  it  to  contain  two  simple  goecB,  or  (S)  the  miiguitnde,  k  (the  ral
the  tipecifio  heats)  does  not  only  depeiLd  apon  the  □amber  of  atoms  ooutaiDed  u
molecules,  bat  alao  upon  tbe  store  d[  internal  energy  (internal  motion  of  the  aloi
the  molecnle).  Should  the  latter  be  admitted,  it  would  follow  that  the  molemlei  ot  lety
active  gaseons  elements  would  correspond  to  a  smaUer  ):  than  those  o[  other  giucial
an  equal  number  of  atoms  in  their  moleonle.  Snoh  u  gas  is  chlorine,  for  which  Jt^l'St
(Chapter  XIV.,  Note  7).  For  gases  baring  a  small  obemieal  energy,  on  the  contimiy,  a
larger  maguitnde  would  be  expected  for  k.  I  think  these  qneetions  might  be  partial^
settled  by  determining  ft  for  omne  (Oj)  and  sulphur  (Sg)  (at  shout  600°).  In  other  woMt,
I  would  suggest,  though  only  provisianally,  that  the  msgDitode,  it^l'fl,  obtained  lor
argon  might  prove  to  agree  with  the  hypothesis  that  argon  is  Nj,  Formed  from  K)  with
the  erolution  ot  heat  or  loss  ot  energy.  Here  nrgoQ  gives  rise  to  questions  r>~
importance,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  thsl  fu  rtber  research  will  throw  some  light  ai^
In  making  these  romarhs,  I  only  wish  to  clear  the  road  tor  tnitber  progress  in  the  utody
ot  argon,  and  of  the  qaestions  depending-  on  it. I  may  aim)  lamork  that  it  oi^n  U  X,

formed  with  the  erolution  of  heat,  its  i

compounds  (tor  instance,  boron  nitride  ot
very  high  temperature,

"  Without  bating  the  slightest  reason  for  doubting  the  accuracy  of  Rayleigh  an!
Bomaays  determinations,  I  think  it  necessary  to  say  that  as  yet  (Pebmory  leS5)  1  a
only  acquainted  with  the  short  memoir  •>!  the  above  ohemlsls  iu  the  '  Procendings  ul  Iba
Royal  Society,'  which  does  not  give  any  description  of  tbe  methods  employed  and  n
>bt(uned,  while  at  the  end  (in  the  general  conalnsions)  the  authors  themselns  ex
lome  doubt  as  to  tbe  simple  nature  ot  aiEon.  Moreover,  it  seems  to  me  that  (Sate  ID)
,here  must  lie  a  dependence  at  k  npon  the  chemical  energy.  Besides  which,  it  m  net
>lear  what  density  o(  the  gas  Kayiaigh  and  Rsraaay  took  in  determining  *.  {Ir  argon  ^
S's,  its  density  would  be  near  to  21. |  Hejiee  I  permit  myself  1«  eipteiw  same  doobt  aa^
whotber  tbe  moleooje  ot  argon  vi ' '

nitrogen,  N,,
■f  titanium)  might  only  take  ploa

APPENDIX UI.

497

of  the  elements  in  dependence  upon  their  utomic  weights,  for  there  is  no
reason  on  the  basis  of  existiuR  data  for  admitting  Einy  intorraodiftte  elements
betwoen  CI  -  Ho'H  and  K  -  39,  and  all  the  positions  above  potassium  iu  the
periodic  system  ure  occupied.  This  renders  it  very  desirable  that  the  velocity
of  Bomid  in  arRon  shouJd  be  re- determined.'^

4.  Argi>n  was  hqueticd  by  Professor  Olszewsky,  who  is  well  known  for  his
classical  researches  upon  liquefied  Rases.  Tltese  reseiurches  have  an  especial
interest since they  show  that  argon  exhibits a perfect constaney in its

"  If  it  sliauld  be  found  that  k  tor  argon  is  Ush  than  It,  or  that  k  is  depeodtint  apon
the  chemiciJ  energy,  it  would  be  posuble  to  admit  tlut  the  molecule  of  argon  contains
not  one,  bnt  several  atoms— for  instance,  either  Nj  (then  the  density  wonid  be  31,  which
IB  neu  to  the  observed  density}  or  X,h  il  S  st&nd  lax  on  element  with  an  atomic  weight
near  to  fl'7.  No  okments  are  known  between  H=:l  and  Iii— T,  bnt  perhaps  they  may
•lin,  The  hypothesis  A^40  does  not  admit  aigoa  into  the  periodic  system.  It  the
moleonle  of  atgon  be  taken  as  k., — i.«.  the  alomia  weight  an  k—30 — argon  apparently
finds  a  place  in  OronpVin.,  between  F^  10  •n.dKft'-aS;  bat  such  a  position  ottld  only
be  joBtifled  by  the  consideration  that  elements  ol  small  atomic  weight  belong  to  the
cat^ory  of  typical  elements  which  offer  many  pecnliaritiea  in  their  properties,  aa  is
seen  on  comparing  N  with  the  other  elements  of  Gronp  V.,  or  O  with  those  of  Group  VI .
Apart  from  this  there  appears  to  me  to  be  littla  probability,  in  tlie  light  of  the  periodic
law,  in  the  position  of  an  inert  snbataDce  like  argon  in  Gronp  V  ILI.,  Itetween  sach  active
elements  as  Quorine  and  sodinm,  as  the  representatives  of  Ihia  gronp  by  their  atomic
weights  and  also  by  their  properties  show  distinct  transitions  from  the  elements  ol  the
last  groapsof  the  nneven  itecies  to  the  etementa  of  the  first  groups  of  the  even  aeries— Fur

Vd.

vm.

n.

0-llJ

F  =  19

Mg  =  iM

although  [mm  a  aamerical  point  of  view  there  is  a  similar  sequence  to  the  above,  stilt
from  a  chemical  and  physical  point  of  view  the  resalt  is  quite  diflerenl,  as  there  is  no
such  reserablanoe  between  the  properties  of  O,  F  and  Na,  Mg,  as  between  Cr,  Mn,  and
Co.  Zn.  I  repeat  that  only  the  typioal  character  ot  the  elements  with  small  atomic
weights  can  justify  the  atomic  weight  A  =  30.  and  the  placing  of  argon  in  Group  VUT.
amongst  the  typical  elements;  then  N.  O,  F,  A  are  a  series  of  gasca

It  appears  to  me  simpler  to  assume  that  argon  contains  Nj,  especially  us  argon  is
present  in  nitrogen  and  accompanies  it,  and,  as  a  matter  ot  lact,  none  ol  the  ohuerved
imperties  of  argon  are  contradictory  to  this  hypothesis.

These  observations  were  written  by  me  in  the  beginning  of  February  18BS,  and  on
the  Wtb  of  that  month  I  received  a  letter,  dated  February  BE,  from  Protetisar  Ramsay
inlonning  me  that  ■  the  periodic  classification  entirely  corresponds  to  its  (argon's!  atomic
weight,  and  that  it  even  gives  a  fresli  prool  of  the  periodic  law,"  judging  from  the
researches  of  my  English  friends.  Bat  in  what  these  researches  consisted,  and  how  the
above  agreement  between  tlie  atomic  aeightof  argon  and  the  periodic  system  was  arrived
at,  is  not  referred  to  in  the  letter,  and  we  remun  in  expectation  of  a  first  pohlication  ol
the  work  ol  Lord  Rayleigb  and  Professor  Ramaey.  [For  more  complete  information  see
papers  read  before  the  Royal  Society,  January  81,  180B,  February  13,  March  10,  and
May  ai,  ISOfl,  and  a  paper  poblished  in  the  Chemical  Society'i  Transactions,  IHOB,
p.  684. For  abstracts  of  these  and  other  papers  on  argon  and  heliom,  and  correipon-

ft,  aee  -Natare,'  ISSE  and  lH9fi.J

E  E

498  PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

properties  in  the  liquid  and  critical  states,  which  almost  *^  disposes  of  the  sup-
position that  it  contains  a  mixture  of  two  or  more  unknown  gases.  As  the
first  experiments  showed,  argon  remains  a  gas  under  a  pressure  of  100
atmospheres  and  at  a  temperature  of  -  90^ ;  this  indicated  that  its  critical
temperature  was  prohably  below  this  temperature,  as  was  indeed  found  to
be  the  case  when  the  temperature  was  lowered  to  — 128^*6  '^  by  means  of
liquid  ethylene.  At  this  temperature  argon  easily  liquefies  to  a  colourlese
liquid  under  88  atmospheres. The  meniBCUS  begins  to  disappear  at  between

13  There  only  remains  the  very  remote  possibility  that  argon  consists  of  a  mizture  of
two  gases  having  very  nearly  the  same  properties.

1^  The  following  data,  given  by  Olszewsky,  supplement  the  data  given  in  Chapter  XL,
Note  29,  upon  liquefied  gases.

(tc)  (pe)  i  U  •

Na  -146°  85  -194°-4  -814°  O-eSS

CO  -1890-6  86-6  -190°  -807  ?

A  -12P  60*6  -187**  -189°-6  1*5

0-2  -118°*8  60-8  -1820-7  ?  l-ia4

NO  -  98°-6  718  -1680-6  -167®  ?

CH4  -  81°-8  64-9  -164®  -168o-8  0416

where  tc  is  the  absolute  (critical)  boiling  point,  pc  the  pressure  (critical)  in  atmospheres
corresponding  to  it,  t  the  boiling  point  (ander  a  pressure  of  760  mm.),  ti  the  malting  point,
and  a  the  specific  gravity  in  a  liquid  state  at  t.

The  above  shows  that  argon  in  its  properties  in  a  liquid  state  stands  near  to  oxygen
(as  it  also  does  in  its  solubility),  but  that  all  the  temperatures  relating  to  it  (fe,  ^,  and  ^1)
are  higher  than  for  nitrogen.  This  fully  answers,  not  only  to  the  higher  density  of  argon,
but  also  to  the  hypothesis  that  it  contains  Ns.  And  as  the  boiling  point  of  argon  differs
from  that  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen  by  less  than  10^,  and  its  amount  is  small,  it  is  easy  to
understand  how  Dewar  (1894),  who  tried  to  separate  it  from  liquid  air  and  nitrc^n  by
fractional  distillation,  was  unable  to  do  so.  The  first  and  last  portions  were  identical,
and  nitrogen  from  air  showed  no  difference  in  its  liquefaction  from  that  obtained  from
its  compoundH,  or  from  that  which  had  been  passed  through  a  tube  containing  incandescent
magnesium.  Still,  it  is  not  quite  clear  why  both  kinds  of  nitrogen,  after  being  passed
over  the  magnesium  in  Dewar's  experiments,  exhibited  an  almost  similar  alteration  in
their  properties,  independent  of  the  appearance  of  a  small  quantity  of  hydrogen  in  them.

Concluding  Betnarks  (March  81,  1895).— The  'Comptes  rendus'  of  the  Paris
Academy  of  Sciences  of  March  18, 1895,  contcuns  a  memoir  by  Berthelot  upon  the  reaction
of  argon  with  the  vapour  of  benzene  under  the  action  of  a  silent  discharge.  In  his  ex-
periments, Berthelot  succeeded  in  treating  88  per  cent,  of  the  argon  taken  for  the
purjwse,  and  supplied  to  him  by  Ramsay  (37  c.c.  iji  all).  The  composition  of  the  product
could  not  be  determined  owing  to  the  small  amount  obtained,  but  in  its  outward
api>earance  it  quite  resembled  the  product  formed  under  similar  conditions  by  nitn^en.
This  observation  of  the  famous  French  chemist  to  some  extent  supports  the  supposition
tliat  argon  is  a  polymerised  variety  of  nitrogen  whose  molecule  contains  N5,  while  ordinary
nitrogen  contains  N.2.  Should  this  supposition  be  eventuaUy  verified,  the  interest  in
argon  will  not  only  not  lessen,  but  become  greater.  For  this,  however,  we  must  wait  for
further  observations  and  detailed  experimental  data  from  Rayleigh  and  Ramsay.

The  lati>8t  information  obtained  by  me  from  London  is  that  Professor  Ramsay,  by
treating  cleveite  (containing  PbO,  UO5,  YjOj,  <fcc.)  with  sulphuric  acid,  obtained  argon,
and,  judging  by  the  spectrum,  helium  also.  The  accumulation  of  similar  data  may,  after
detailed  and  diversified  research,  considerably  increase  the  stock  of  chemical  knowledge
which,  constantly  widening,  cannot  be  exhaustively  treated  in  these  '  Princi|)les  of
Chemistry,'  although  very  probably  furnishing  fresh  proof  of  the  *  periodicity  of  the
eloments.'

APPENDIX  III.  499

-  119°-8  and  -  121°-6,  mean  -  121°  at  a  pressure  of  50-6  atmospheres.  The
vapour  tension  of  liquid  argon  at  —  128°'6,  is  38*0  atmospheres,  at  — 187**
it  is  one  atmosphere,  and  at  —  189°*6  it  solidifies  to  a  colourless  substance
like  ice.  The  specific  gravity  of  liquid  argon  at  about  -  187°  is  nearly  1*5,
which  is  fea  above  that  of  other  liquefied  gases  of  very  low  absolute  boiling
point.

The  discovery  of  argon  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  chemical  acquisi-
tions of  recent  times,  and  we  trust  that  Lord  Bayleigh  and  Professor  Bamsay,
who  made  this  wonderful  discovery,  will  further  elucidate  the  true  nature  of
argon,  as  this  should  widen  the  fundamental  principles  of  chemistry,  to  which
the  chemists  of  Great  Britain  have  from  early  times  made  such  valuable
contributions.  It  would  be  premature  now  to  give  any  definite  opinions
upon  so  new  a  subject.  Only  one  thing  can  be  said ;  argon  is  so  inert  that
its  rdle  in  nature  cannot  be  considerable,  notwithstanding  its  presence  in  tlie
atmosphere.  But  as  the  atmosphere  itself  plays  such  a  vast  part  in  the
life  of  the  surface  of  the  earth,  every  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  its  compo-
sition must  directly  or  indirectly  react  upon  the  simi  total  of  our  knowledge
of  nature.

KK  a

,f!

If.  !

M

u

I

INDEX OF AUTHOBITIES

Abashbff,  i.  75
Abel,  h.  56,  326,  410
Acheson,  ii.  107
Adie,  ii.  186
Alex^eff,  i.  75,  94
Allaard,  i.  458
Amagat,  i.  132, 135,  140
Amat,  ii.  171
Ammermiiller,  i.  504
Ampere,  i.  309
Andr^eff,  i.  251
Andrews,  i.  136,  203
Angeli,  i.  266
Ansdeli,  i.  451
Arfvedson,  i.  575
Arrhenias,  i.  89,  92,  389
Aschoff,  ii.  313
Askenasy,  i.  508
Aubel,  ii.  45
Aubin,  i.  238
ATdteff,  i.  618 ;  ii.  484
ATOgadro,  i.  309

Babo,  ▼.,  i.  93,  200,  203

Bach,  i.  394

Baohmetieff,  ii.  31

Baeyer,  ▼.,  i.  507

Bagouski,  i.  384

BaUey,  i.  449 ;  ii.  29,  538

Baker,  i.  318,  403

Balard,  i.  480,  494,  495,  505

BaU,  u.  414

Bannoff,  i.  506

Barfoed,  ii.  53

Baroni,  i.  331

Barreswill,  iL  282

Baadrimont,  ii.  35

Baom^,  i.  193

Bamngauer,  ii.  20

Baamhauer,  i,  495

Bayer,  u.  76, 159

Bazaroff,  L  409 ;  ii.  24,  68,  486

BOX

Becher,  i.  17

Becker,  i.  16

Beckmann,  i.  91,  4%  ;  ii.  156

Becquerel,  i.  228 ;  ii.  97,  220

Beilby,  i.  71

Beilstein,  i.  373  ;  ii.  188

Beketoflf,  i.  120,  122,  124,  146,  403,  459,

466,  534,  541,  674,  577 ;  ii.  87,  102,

289,  429
Bender,  i.  476
Benedict,  ii.  65
Berglnnd,  ii.  229
Bergman,  i.  27,  435 ;  ii.  100
Berlin,  i.  95
Bernouilli,  i.  81
Bemthsen,  ii.  228
Bert,  i.  86, 153
Bertheim,  ii.  337
Berthelot,  i.  171,  173,189,199,229,230,

258,  264,  266,  267,  272, 283,  289,  351,

372,  393,  394,  405,  415, 424,  438,  457,

463,  502,  506,  607,  518,  529,  637, 582 ;

ii.  23,  67,  207,  209,  251,  253,  259, 345,

367
Berthier,  ii.  8
BerthoUet,  i.  27,  31, 106,  433,  434,  459.

470,  602,  609
Berzelius.  i.  131,  148,  194,  256,  379;  ii.

8, 100, 102, 147, 148, 219, 281, 300, 48£
Besson,  i.  288 ;  ii.  67,  70,  106, 179
Beudant,  ii.  7,  8

Bineau,  i.  100,  271,  452,  504 ;  ii.  239
Binget,  i.  75
Blaese,  u.  188
Blagden,  i.  91,  428
Blake,  ii.  30
BUtz,  u.  184
Blomstrand,  ii.  299
Boerwald,  ii.  279
Bottger,  ii.  695
Bogorodsky,  i.
Boilleau,  i.  416
Boisbaudran,  L.  de,  i.  97, 102,  572,  600 ;

ii.  6,  26,  90,  82,  284,  483

502

PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

BOB

Bornemann,  i.  509

Botkin,  ii.  30

Bouchardat,  ii.  45

Boullay,  ii.  55

Bourdiakofif,  i.  584,  617

Boussingault,  i.  131,  157,  233,  235,  525,

615
Boyle,  i.  124
Brand,  ii.  150
Brandau,  i.  481
Brandes,  i.  72
Bravais,  i.  233
Brauner,  i.  490,  491 ;  ii.  26,  59,  94,  96,

97,  134,  144, 194,  271, 488
Brewster,  i.  569
Brigham,  ii.  193
Brodie,  i.  212,  351,  405  ;  ii.  252
Brooke,  ii.  357
Brown,  i.  81,  88
Brugelimann,  i.  616
Bmnn,  ii.  182,  189
Bruyn,  i.  262
Briihl,  i.  263,  337

Bmnner,  i.  124, 146, 263 ;  ii.  230, 809, 584
Bachner,  i.  615
Bnckton,  ii.  143
Buflf,  ii.  103
Bunge,  i.  288
Bunsen,  i.  43,  69,  78,  117, 180, 465, 668.

575,  576,  577  ;  ii.  27,  289
Bussy,  i.  75,  594,  619
Butlerofif,  i.  143
Bystrom,  i.  585

Cagniard  de  Latour,  i.  135,  345

Cahours,  ii.  143,  173

Cailletet,  i.  132,  138  ;  ii.  45

Callender,  i.  134

Calvert,  i.  484  ;  ii.  45

Cannizzaro,  i.  584,  587

Carey-Lea,  ii.  420,  424,  425,  432

Carius,  i.  69,  481

Carnelley,  i.  483,  515,  555  ;  ii.  22, 29, 30,

31,  04,  143,  486
Carnot,  ii.  2<)4,  361
Caron,  i.  595,  604,  610  ;  ii.  336
Carrara,  i.  213
Cass,  ii.  85

Castner,  i.  431,  535,  541
Cavazzi,  ii.  160,  172,  182
Cavendish,  i.  113,  125,  228 ;  ii.  493
Chabri{^  i.  229

Chappuis,  i.  50,  199,  205,  264
Chapuv,  i.  59

Cheltzoff,  i.  393,  457  ;  ii.  41,  247,  582
Cherikoff.  ii.  102
Chertel,  ii.  245
^hevillot,  ii.  311

DEV

Chevreol,  i.  530

Chigoffsky,  ii.  62

ChristomanoB,  i.  511

Chroustchoff,  i.  853,  444 ;  ii.  122

Chydenins,  ii.  148,  485

Ciamician,  i.  565,  573 ;  ii.  486

Clark,  i.  26

Classen,  ii.  146

ClausiuB,  i.  81,  98,  140,  142,  212,  309,

491
Clement,  i.  494
Cldve,  u.  26.  94,  97,  484
Cloez,  i.  207,  246,  377
Clowes,  i.  242
CiJderon,  i.  596
CoUendar,  i.  184
Comaille,  i.  596
Comb,  ii.  81
Connell,  i.  508
Coppet,  i.  91,  428,  601
Corenwinder,  i.  501
Coma,  i.  565
Conrtois,  i.  494
Cracow,  ii.  380
Crafts,  i.  880 ;  ii.  80,  88
Cremers,  ii.  100
Croissier,  i.  251
Crompton,  i.  247
Crookes,  i.  229,  617; u.  20,  91,  96.

440.  491
Orum,  ii.  79,  311
Condall.  i.  611
Curtius,  i.  258,  265

Dahl,  ii.  59

Dalton,  i.  29,  78,  81,  109.  206,  271,  822

Dana,  ii.  8

Davies i  484

Davy,  i.  37,  114, 195,  255,  364.460,463,
484,  489,  494,  533,  541,  594,  604,  617

Deacon,  i.  599

Debray,  i.  609 ;  ii.  45. 122.  291, 293,
384,  385

De  Chancoortois,  ii.  20,  26

De  Forcrand,  ii.  106,  211

De  Haen,  ii.  189

De  Heen,  i.  140

Delafontaine,  ii.  97,  148.  198

De  la  Rive,  i.  198 ;  ii.  226

Del-Rio,  ii.  197

De  Saussore.  i.  235,  240

De  Schulten,  ii.  48

Deville,  St.-Claire,  i.  4, 86, 118. 143. 179,
180,  227,  239,  280,  281,  801.  320, 892,
393,  399,  459,  467,  476.  477,  500. 534,
595,  608,  609 ;  ii.  48,  80,  83,  85.  102,
147,  156,  198,  289.  309.  821,  852. 873
374,  429

INDEX OF  AUTHORITIES

6oa

DE VBI

De  Vries,  i.  62,  64,  429

Dewar,  i.  3,  5,  135,  139,  163,  297,  563,

565,  569,  585 ;  ii.  176,  220
Dick,  ii.  414
Dingwall,  i.  486
Ditte,  i.  72,  403,  430, 457, 509, 539, 618  ;

ii.  64,  65,  85,  189,  249
DiUmar,  i.  100,  452  ;  ii.  240
Divers,  I  274.  294  ;  ii.  54
Dixon,  i.  171
Ddbereiner,  i.  145
Dokoachaefif,  i.  344
Donny,  i.  534
Dossios,  i.  502
Draper,  i.  465
Drawe,  ii.  161
Drebbel,  i.  294
Dulong,  i.  131,  148,  437
Dumas,  i.  28,  131,  148,  150,  233,  302,

320,  379,  471,  476,  584,  586,  604 ;  u.

22,  37,  62,  101,  156,  420
Dumont,  ii.  197

Ebelmann,  ii.  65

Eder,  i.  566

Edron,  ii.  95

Edwards,  ii.  311

Egoreff,  i.  569

Eissler,  i.  553

Elbers,  u.  221

fhnich,  i.  286,  287

Emilianoff,  ii.  126

Engel,  i.  457  ;  ii.  130,  132,  189,  206

Engelbardt,  i.  530

Edtvds,  i.  333

Erdmann,  i.  150

Ernst,  i.  399

Erof^efif,  i.  352

Esson,  ii.  314

tard,  i.  72,  516,  615  ;  u.  288,  335,  356
Ettinger,  i.  53,  312

Famintzin,  i.  611

Faraday,  i.  134,  177,  296,  385,  463,  464

Favorsky  i.  373

Favre,  i.  120, 172,  267  ;  ii.  83,  259, 284,

380,  582
Fick,  i.  62
Fisher,  ii.  424
Fizeau,  ii.  31,  429
Flavitzky,  i.  21
Fleitmann,  ii.  170
Foerster,  ii.  375,  389
Forchhammer,  ii.  311
Fordos,  ii.  257
Fortmann,  ii.  230,  366
Fourcroy,  i.  114

GBO

Fowler,  i.  449

Frank,  ii.  88

Franke,  ii.  311, 313

Frankel,  u.  294

Frankenheim,  ii.  7

Frankland,  i.  178,  357,  486 ;  ii.  16,  143

Fraunhofer,  i.  563

Fr6my,  i.  228, 489,  492;  ii.  74,  131,  133,

142,  229,  290,  359
Freyer,  i.  171,  488
Friedheim,  ii.  197,  294
Friedel,  i.  353,  472 ; ii.  80,  83, 103,

122
Friedrich,  i.  49 ;  ii.  144
Fritzsche,  i.  94,  285,  600,  612  ;  ii.  125,

218,  280,  341
Fromherz,  ii.  313
Fiirst,  i.  484

Galileo,  i.  7

Garni,  i.  582

Garzarolli-Thumlackh,  i.  481

Gattermann,  i.  596 ;  ii.  102,  104

Gautier,  i.  585

Gavaloffsky,  i.  160

Gay-Lussac,  i.  40,  61,  71,  93,  170,  302.

307,  406,  412,  460,  463,  464,  467, 600,

506,  508,  511,  515,  534,  539 ;  ii.  8,  5(3,

256
Geber,  i.  17
G61is,  ii.  257
Genth,  ii.  359
Georgi,  ii.  197
Georgiewics,  ii.  64
Gerberts,  i.  628
Gerhardt,  i.  196,  309,  357,  388
Gerlach,  i.  525
Gemez,  i.  97  ;  ii.  205
Geuther,  i.  281,  283,  285  ;  ii.  176
Gibbs,  i.  140,  464 ;  ii.  293,  410
Girault,  i.  498

Gladstone,  i.  337,  438,  573 ;  ii.  213
Glatzel,  ii.  213,  289,  309
Glauber,  i.  17,  26,  193,  432
Glinka,  i.  607
Goldberg,  i.  93
Gooch,  i.  484
Gore,  i.  489,  492,  493
Graham, i. 62,  63,  98,  143,  155,  388,

429,  518,  601 ;  ii.  77,  114,  131,  163,

170,  296,  307
Granger,  ii.  157,  410
Grassi,  i.  88
Green,  ii.  310
Greshoff,  i.  403
Griffiths,  i.  135
Grimaldi,  i.  537
Groth,  u.  10

604

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

OBO

Grouven,  i.  615

Grove,  i.  118,  liy

Griinwald,  i.  673

Grutzner,  ii.  296

Guckelberger,  ii.  84

Guibourt,  ii.  53

Guldberg,  i.  439,  464

Giintz,  i.  575  ;  ii.  430

Gustavson,  i.  443,  444,  472,  505,  547 ;

ii.  29,  175
Guthrie,  i.  99,  428,  601
Guy,  1.  136

Habebmann,  ii.  210

Hagebach,  i.  573

Hagen,  i.  337

Haitinger,  i.  593

Hammerl,  i.  613

Hanisch,  ii.  233

Hannay,  i.  352  ;  ii.  135

Harcourt,  ii.  314

Hargreaves,  i.  515

Hams,  ii.  52

Hartley,  i.  573  ;  ii.  486

Hartog,  ii.  268

Hasselberg,  i.  566

Haiiy,  ii.  7

Haughton,  ii.  20

Haussermann,  i.  483

Hautefeuille,  i.  199,  205,  264,  409,  414,

476,  477,  501,  538  ;  ii.  102,  122,  379
Hayter,  ii.  175
Hemilian,  i.  132
Henipel,  i.  59,  524
HenkolT,  i.  530
Henneborg,  ii.  170
Hcnning,  ii.  3
Henry,  i.  78,  81
Hcrard,  ii.  191
Hermann,  ii.  8,  47,  197
Hermes,  i.  529
Hertz,  ii.  156
Hess,  i.  178,  588
Heycock,  i.  537  ;  ii.  128,  448
Hillebrand,  ii.  26,  93,  94,  484
Hintze,  ii.  10
Hirtzel,  ii.  55
Hittorf,  ii.  155
Hodgkinson,  ii.  482
Hoglund,  li.  94

Hofmann,  i.  302  ;  ii.  146,  218,  447
Holtzmann,  i.  505
Hopp6-Seyler,  i.  611
Horstmann,  i.  408
Houzeau,  i.  202
Hughes,  ii.  212
Hugo,  ii.  21
Humboldt,  i.  170

KOU

Humbly,  i.  493 ;  ii.  311
Hutchinson,  i.  491
Huth,  u.  20
Hoyghens,  i.  569

Ikeda,  ii.  152
Uosva,  i.  202

Inostrantzeff,  i.  345  ;  ii.  4
Isambert,  i.  250,  257,  408 ;  ii.  41
Ittner,  i.  412

Janbsen,  i.  569

Jawein,  ii.  170

Jay,  i.  258

Jeannel,  i.  104

Joannis,  i.  251,  255,  405,  537,  559

Jdrgensen,  i.  498 ;  u.  359,  361,  376

Johnson,  ii.  45

JoUy,  i.  233

Joly^  ii.  384,  385

Kamenbkt,  ii.  414

Hammerer,  i.  286,  462,  509 ;  ii  297

Kane,  ii.  57

Kapoustin,  i.  403

Karsten,  i.  427,  428,  541,  599

Eassner,  i.  158

Kayander,  i.  133,  384;  ii.  46

Keiser,  i.  150

Kekul^,  i.  358,  369,  507  ;  ii.  294

Keyser,  ii.  33

Ehichinsky,  i.  440

Kimmins,  i.  510

KirchhofI,  i.  567

Kirmann,  ii.  268

Kirpicheflf,  i.  132

Kjeldahl,  i.  249 ;  ii.  249

Klaproth,  ii.  7,  145,  147,  301

Kleiber,  i.  570

Klimenko,  i.  465

Klobb,  ii.  357

Klodt,  i.  426

Knopp,  ii.  338

Knox,  i.  489

Kobb,  ii.  125

Kobell,  ii.  197

Koch,  i.  44

Kohlrausch,  i.  245,  525

Kolbe,  i.  506

Konovaloflf,  i.  39,  65,  90,  93,  100,  140,

142,  172,  322 ;  ii.  235,  268
Kopp,  i.  586,  587,  612  ;  ii.  3, 37
Koucheroff,  i.  373
Kolotoff,  i.  2()3

Koumakoff,  i.  393  ;  ii.  294,  365,  396
Kouriloflf,  i.  209,  247,  274  ;  ii.  41

INDEX OF AUTHOEITIES

506

KRA

Kraevitch,  i.  133,  134

Kraft,  i.  65,  88,  537

Krafts,  i.  393

Kreisler,  i.  233

Kremers,  i.  87,  443  ;  ii.  244,  427

Kreider,  i.  484

Eronig,  i.  81

Kruger,  ii.  282,  284

Eriiss,  ii.  355,  442,  447,  486

Eabierschky,  ii.  213

Kiihlmann,  i.  608

Kuhnheim,  i.  612

Kandt,  i.  328,  589 ;  ii.  496

Evasnik,  ii.  57

Kynaston,  i.  522

Lachinoff,  i.  116,  457  ;  ii.  410

Ladenburg,  ii,  103

Lamy,  ii.  91

Landolt,  i.  7,  337

Lang,  i.  399

Langer,  i.  226,  459,  462

Langlois,  i.  570 ;  u.  257

Latcbinofif  (see  Lacbinofif),  i.  103,  352

Laurent,  i.  28,  196,  388,  471,  526 ;  ii.  7,

9,  10,  117,  292
Laurie,  i.  106 ;  u.  32,  442, 486
Lavenig,  i.  140
Lavoisier,  i.  7,  29,  49,  114, 131, 155,

379,  459
Leblanc,  ii.  8
Le  Cbatelier,  i.  158,  172,  350,  393,  399,

585,  588,  611 ;  ii.  51,  65,  420
Le  Due,  i.  131, 170
L^mery,  i.  125
Lemoine,  i.  501 ;  ii.  155
Lercb,  i.  405
Leroy,  i.  285
Lesooeur,  i.  103
Leton,  ii.  425
Levy,  ii.  102
Lewes,  i.  371
Lewy,  i.  232
Lidoff,  ii.  209

Liebig,  i.  195,  388,  495,  527 ;  ii.  56
Linder,  ii.  223
Li^-Bodart,  i.  604,  612
Lisenko,  i.  373
Liveing,  i.  563,  569
Lockyer,  i.  565,  569
Ix)ew  ii  376

Lowei,  i!  525,  600 ;  U.  45,  284,  286
Loewig,  i.  528 ;  ii.  77
Loewitz,  i.  96
Lossen,  i.  262
Louget,  i.  489
Louginine,  i.  360
Louise,  ii.  81

MIL

Lovel,  i.  515  ;  ii.  338
Lubavin,  i.  593
Lubbert,  ii.  85,  170
Ludwig,  i.  463
Luedeking,  ii.  194
Luflf,  ii.  321
Lunge,  ii.  244,  246
Liipke,  ii.  157
Lvofif,  i.  358

Maack,  i.  596

Mac  Cobb,  i.  612

Mac  Laurin,  i.  553

McLeod,  ii.  180

Magnus,  i.  93,  510

Mailfert,  i.  199

Malaguti,  i.  437, ;  ii.  300

MaUard,  i.  172,  393,  588  ;  ii.  4

MaUet,  i.  493

Maquenne,  i.  349,  620,  621

Marchand,  i.  150

Marchetti,  ii.  288

Maresca,  i.  534

Marguerite,  ii.  292

Marignac,  i.  198,  233,  428,  430, 453,  454,

518,  525,  600,  601 ;  u.  6,  9,  95,  101,

194,  197,  198,  199,  234,  239,  241,  244,

292,  293,  295,  357,  440,  486
Markleffsky,  i.  273
MarkovnikofI,  i.  373
Maroffsky,  ii.  138
Marshall,  ii.  253,  365
Matigon,  i.  258,  266
Maumen^,  i.  258
Maxwell,  i.  81
Mayow,  i.  17
Mendel6eff,i.  99, 132, 133, 136, 141,275,

321,  357,  373,  377,  406,  426,  427, 428,

506,  587,  596  ;  ii.  27,  33,  93,  94
Menschutkin,  i.  171
Mente,  ii.  270
Merm^,  i.  462
Merz,  i.  505
Meselan,  i.  463
Metzner,  ii.  189
Metchikofif,  i.  44
Meusnier,  i.  114
Meyer  (Lotbar),  i.  226,  321,  403;  ii.  21,

24,  26,  29,  33,  486
Meyer  (Victor),  i.  135, 171, 294, 303,  320,

427,  459,  462,  467,  488,  506,  508, 558 ;

ii.  43,  48,  52,  80,  129,  184
Meyerhoflfer,  ii.  410
Miasnikofif,  i.  372
Michaelis,  ii.  175
Michel,  i.  65,  88
Millon,  i.  481,  484,  508
Mills,  ii.  20

506

PKrSCIPLE3  OF  CHEMISTRY

Mitchell,  L  lo«

MitscherUch,  i.  428,  527 ;  ii.  1, 5, 8, 156,

184,  311,  313
Moissao,  L  202,  ai9,  353,  490,  5^,  585,

621 ;  iL  66,  67,  70,  88.  100,  107.  147.

174,  196,  289,  295,  309,  311,  313.  321
Mond,  L  1*29,  400,  405 ;  u.  345,  367
Monge,  i.  114
Monnier,  i.  611
MontemaitiDi,  L  279
Moraht,  ii.  384
Moreaa,  ii.  298
Morel,  i.  549
Mosander,  iL  97
Mnhlhaaser,  u.  66,  107
Mair,  ii.  193
Malder,  i.  515
Miiller-Erzbach,  i.  103
MaUer,  i.  427  ;  u.  425
Manster,  ii.  443
Miiniz,  i.  238,  241,  420,  553
Mathmann,  ii.  273
Mylius,  ii.  375,  389

Na8CH0li>,  i.  483

Nasini,  i.  496 ;  ii.  156

Natanson,  i.  282,  409

Natterer,  i.  132, 135,  141,  385

Naumann,  i.  399,  408

Nernst,  i.  62,  148 ;  U.  3,  50

Nensky,  i.  245

Neville,  i.  537 ;  ii.  128,  448

Newlands,  ii.  21,  26

Newth,  i.  505

Newton,  i.  7,  29

Nickles.  ii.  10

Nikolukin,  i.  491 ;  ii.  144

Nilson,  i.  VAH  ;  ii.  20,  37,  80,  83,  91,  94,

\ir>,  271,  37H,  4HH
Nonlenskiold,  i.  241
Norton,  i.  76  ;  ii.  94
Nuricsan,  ii.  2r>4

Odmno,  ii.  .52

OfTf  r,  i.  99

Ogier,  i.  321,  509  ;  ii.  159,  182

Olszewski,  i.  139,  509 ;  ii.  491,  497

Oppenheini,  i.  500

Old  way,  ii.  80

Osmond,  ii.  320

Ossovetsky,  ii.  137

Ostwald.  i.  H9,  92,  389,  441,  443

OuniolY,  i.  02

Pallahij,  i.  491  ;  ii.  83

PanfelotT,  i.  003

I'urac.lsiiH,  i.  17,  125,  129,  379

qo

Parkiiifloii,  L  596,

Pashkoffskj.  L  595

Pasteur,  L  44,  241,  242

Paterao,  i.  496 ;  iL  156

Pattison  Moir,  L  436

Pebai,  L  315.  484

Ptehard,  ii.  282,  294,  296,  297

PekatoroB,  L  465

Peligot,  iL  299,  301

Pelopidas,  iL  22,  481

Pelonze,  L  463,  464,  480,  610;  iL  229

Penfield,  L  545 ;  iL  370

Perkin,L558;  iL  244

Perman,  i.  537

Personne,  i.  75,  506,  537

Petit,  L  584,  586

Petrieff,  L  440

Pettenkofer,  iL  82

Pettersscm,  L  618,  619 ;  iL  37, 80.  83, 91,

197,484
Pfaondler,  L  445 ;  iL  241,  430
Ffeiffer,  i.  64
Pfordten,  Y.  der,  iL  420
Phipson,  i.  596 ;  ii.  59
Picdni,  iL  23, 146, 197,  288,  298
Pici,  ii.  57
Pickering,  i.  88,  91,  99,  104,  106.  272,

333,  452.  517,  525,  529,  613  :  iL  241,

245  246  247
Pictet*,  L  8J,  129, 137  ;  u.  31,  241
Picton,  ii.  223

Pierre,  i.  452,  495  ;  ii.  226.  485
Pierson,  i.  93
Pigeon,  iL  377
Pionchon,  i.  585
Pistor,  i.  399
Plantamour,  ii.  5
Plaset,  ii.  289
Plessy,  ii.  257
Pliicker.  i.  572
Poggiale,  i.  427
Poiseuille,  i.  355
Poleck,  u.  296
Poluta,  ii.  30
Popp,  ii.  232
Potilitzin,  i.  96,  97,  98,  445.  486,  499,

502.  509,  612  ;  ii.  29.  357
Pott,  ii.  100
Poulenc,  ii.  174,  289
Prange,  ii.  422
Prelinger,  ii.  310

Priestley,  i.  17,  154.  159,  297.  379.  402
Pringsheim,  i.  465
Prost,  i.  98,  486
Prout,  i.  31 ;  ii.  439
Puchot,  i.  452
PuUinger,  ii.  389

Quincke,  i.  427,  495

INDEX  OF  AUTHORITIES

507

RAM

Raxmelsbebo,  i.  430,  510,  525 ;  ii.  26,

161,485
Bamsay,  i.  133,  140,  141,  232,  247,  333,

495,  496,  581 ;  ii.  128,  491
Bantsheff,  ii.  20

Raoalt,  L  91,  274,  330,  331,  332,  429
Basoher,  ii.  85
Basohig,  i.  263 ;  ii.  229
Baihke,  i.  399
Bay,  i.  17

Bayieigh,  i.  226,  232,  491
Bebs,  u.  213,  217
Beoonra,  i.  332 ;  ii.  289
Begnaalt,  i.  40,  53,  54,  90,  93,  131, 133,

297,  443,  495,  584,  587,  588 ;  ii.  50,

208,238
Beioh,  ii.  91
Beiset,  i.  238
Bemsen,  ii.  335
Betgers,  ii.  157, 158, 180
Beyohler,  ii.  65
Beynolds,  i.  581

BichardB,  i.  526,  585  ;  ii.  32,  432
Biohe,  i.  509  ;  ii.  127,  292
Bichter,  i.  193,  194  ;  ii.  91
Bidberg,  ii.  21,  24,  486
Biddle,  i.  135
Bideal,  ii.  297
Boberts-Aasten,  ii.  486
Bobinson,  i.  515
Bodger,  ii.  213,  263
BodweU,  i.  17
Boebaok,  i.  294
Bdggs,  u.  119
Bohrer,  ii.  343
Boozeboom,  i.  106,  452,  453,  464,  496,

506,  511,  599,  613 ; ii.  3,  226,  341,

410
Boscoe,  i.  80,  100,  101,  379,  452,  463,

485,  486,  568,  572 ;  ii.  26,  194,  196,

197,  297,  303,  485
Bose,  i.  436,  437,  518,  525,  608,  612  ;

ii.  8,  230,  235,  248,  281,  363,  428,  485
Bosenberg,  ii.  351
Bossetti,  i.  428
Boaart,  Le,  ii.  86

BooBseau,  i.  354  ;  ii.  337,  366,  378
Boax,  ii.  81
Badberg,  ii.  136
Btlcker,  i.  142
Badorff,  i.  91, 428,  598,  601
BybaUdn,  i.  455

Babaneeff,  i.  371
Sabatier,  i.  284 ;  ii.  66
Saint  Edm^,  ii.  335
Saint  GiUes,  i.  431
Sakorai,  i.  331

SOR

Salzer,  ii.  161

Sarasin,  ii.  122

Sarrau,  i.  140,  142

Saunders,  ii.  189

Scharples,  i.  576

Scheele,  i.  155,  161,  412,  459,  462,  608  ;

ii.  100, 150,  291
Soheffer,  i.  453
Scheibler,  ii.  292,  296
Scherer,  ii.  8
Schiaparelli,  ii.  318
Schidloffsky,  i.  238
Schiloflf,  i.  212
Schlamp,  i.  332
Schiff,  i.  430,  588  ;  ii.  106,  267
Scl;loesiDg,  i.  238,  239,  240,  553,  610
Schmidt,  i.  539
Schneider,  i.  89
Schone,  i.  208, 200,  211, 394, 617 ;  ii.  15,

72  219  251  488
Schonebein,  i.'l98,  202,  208,  212,  509  ;

ii.  228,  463
Schottlander,  ii.  447
Schroder,  i.  75
Schroederer,  ii.  366
Schrotter,  ii.  153,  284
Schiitzenberger,  i.  511,  579 ;  ii.  102, 107,

228,  367,  389
Schuliachenko,  i.  608
Schuller,  ii.  180
Schultz,  i.  518 ;  ii.  273
Schulze,  i.  98 ;  ii.  215
Schuster,  i.  572
Schwicker,  ii.  227,  230
Scott,  i.  405,  537,  558
Sechenoff,  i.  80,  86
Seelheim,  ii.  379
Sefstrom,  ii.  197
Selivanofif,  i.  476,  507,  508
Senderens,  i.  284
Serullas,  i.  485
Setterberg,  i.  576
Seubert,  ii.  27,  83,  343,  442
Sewitsch,  i.  372
ShafTgotsch,  i.  555
Shapleigh,  ii.  95
Shenstone,  i.  611
Shields,  i.  333
Shishkoff,  i.  276 ;  ii.  56
Silbermann,  i.  120, 172  ;  ii.  259
Sims,  ii.  268
Skraap,  ii.  346
Smith,  i.  271
Smithson,  ii.  100
Snyders,  ii.  100
Sokoloff,  ii.  85,  122
Solet,  i.  509
Sonstadt,  ii.  443
Sorby,  i.  88

508

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

SOB

Soret,  i.  66,  202,  203,  427

Spring,  i.  38,  98,  434,  486;  ii.  45,  50,

133,  223,  258,  288,  314,  423,  427
Stadion,  i.  485
Stahl,  i.  16
Bias,  i.  7,  233,  379,  428,  498,  581 ;  u.

420,  434,  485
Staudenmaier,  ii.  168
Stcherbakoff,  i.  97,  428,  458,  601
Stohmann,  i.  359,  360,  396
Stokes,  i.  355
Stortenbeker,  i.  511
Stromeyer,  ii.  47
Struv6,  i.  208,  612

Tait,  i.  203

Tammann,  i.  91,  148;  ii.  170,  247

Tanatar,  i.  511

Tchitch^rin,  U.  21

Terreil,  ii.  313

Than,  i.  317

Th^nard,  i.  207,  229, 460, 464,  534, 539  ;

ii.  251
Thillot,  ii.  170
Thilorier,  i.  385
Thomsen,  i.  Ill,  120,  124,131,173,189,

267,  359,  389,  396,  441,  453,  466,  472.

494,  502,  515,  529,  555,  582 ;  ii.  9, 32,

50,  55,  105,  165,  208,  224,  264,  368,

370,  438,  442
Thorpe,  i.  142,  285,  445, 493 ;  ii.  27, 160,

173,  213,  259,  263,  268,  301,  313,  442,

486
Thoune,  i.  294,  295
Tiemman,  i.  213
Tilden,  i.  516
Timeras^eff,  i.  170
Timof6eff,  i.  78
Tessi(j  du  Motay,  i.  158
Tissandier,  i.  78
Titherley,  i.  539
Tivoli,  ii.  183
Tomassi,  ii.  339
Topsoe,  i.  506
Tourbaba,  i.  88  ;  ii.  247
Trapp,  i.  511

Traube,  i.  312,  611 ;  ii.  270
Troost,  i.  64,  274,  281,  320,  409,  414,

500,  538 ; ii.  80,  83,  102,  147,  156,

254,  379
Tscherbacheff,  i.  577
Tutton,  i.  543  ;  ii.  160,  174,  412

Umoff,  i.  429
Unverdorben,  ii.  280
Urlaub,  ii.  301

Valentine,  i.  17
Van  der  Heyd,  i.  599

will

Van  der  Plaats,  L  496 ;  ii.  438

Van  der  Waals,  L  82, 140

Van  Deventer,  i.  599

Van  Helmont,  i.  379

Van  Mamm,  i.  198

Van  't  Hoff,  L  64,  65,  331,  599 ;  ii*  3

Vare,  ii.  55

Vauquelin,  L  114,  619 ;  u.  7

Veeren,  i.  612  ;  ii.  45

Veley,  i.  279

Vemeuille,  ii.  225

Vernon,  ii.  151

V^zes,  ii.  391

Viard,  ii.  285

Vignon,  u.  126. 131

ViUard,  i.  106,  296,  297

VilUers,  ii.  259

Violette,  i.  342,  345

VioUe,  i.  301

Vogt,  i.  611

Volkovitch,  ii.  201

Voskresensky,  i.  345

Waaoe,  i.  439

Waobter,  i.  508

Wagner,  i.  357

Wahl,  ii.  310

Walden,  ii.  67

Walker,  ii.  143

Walmer,  i.  573

Walter,  ii.  256

Walters,  ii.  234

Wanklyn,  i.  100,  539

Warburg,  i.  589  ;  ii.  496

Warder,  i.  450

Warren,  ii.  102

Watson,  i.  527  ;  u.  169

Watts,  i.  526

Weber,  i.  280,  583  ;  ii.  83, 129, 131,  186,

230,  233,  234,  249
Weith,  i.  502
Weitz,  ii.  57
Welch,  ii.  425
Weller,  ii.  140

Wells,  i.  477,  545  ;  ii.  57,  370
Welsbach,  u.  96,  97
Weltzien,  i.  204,  595
Wenzel,  i.  193

Weruboff  (see  Wyruboflf),  ii.  4
Weselski,  i.  507
Weyl,  i.  255
Wheeler,  i.  545
Wichelhaus,  ii.  179
Wiedemann,  i.  439,  588
Wilhehnj,  ii.  315
Willgerodt,  i.  508 ;  ii.  29
Williamson,  ii.  268
Wilm,  ii.  376,  388

INDEX  OF  AUTHORITIES

509

WIN

ZOR

Winkler,  i.  78,  79,  577,  594, 621 ;  ii.  25, Wiirtz,  i.  301,  476  ; ii.  171,  173,  213,

30,  66,  97,  102,  124,  125,  147,  234,  267

246.  365,  483  Wyruboff,  ii.  4,  9

Wischin,  ii.  384
WiBlicenus,  i.  267,  294
Witt,  ii.  3
WShler,  i.  410,  619; ii.  85,  103,  107,

146,  285.  289,  420,  425
WoUaston,  i.  8
Wreden,  i.  607
Wright,  ii.  321
Wroblewski,  i.  79,  80,  106,  139, 387  ;

11.226
Wulfing,  ii.  119
Wullner,  i.  91,  672

Young,  i.  134,  136,  140,  141,  247,  495,
496

Zaboudskt,  i.  354
Zaencheffsky,  i.  140
Zimmennann,  ii.  26.  303,  355,  485
Zinin,  i.  276
Zdrensen.  i.  284
Zorn,  i.  296

SUBJECT INDEX

ACI

Acid,  acetic  sp.  gr.  of  solutions  of,  i.  69

—  arsenic,  ii.  181

—  bismuthic,  ii.  190

—  boric,  ii.  64

—  carbamic,  i.  408

—  chamber,  i.  294

—  chloric,  i.  482

—  chloro-platino-phosphorous,  ii.  890

—  chlorosulphonic,  ii.  268

—  chlorous,  i.  481

—  chromic,  i.  208 ;  ii.  282

—  chromo-solphurio,  ii.  288

—  cyanic,  i.  409

—  cyanoric,  i.  409

—  dithionic,  ii.  256

—  ferric,  ii.  344

—  fluoboric,  ii.  69

—  graphitic,  i.  351

—  hydriodic,  i.  601,  603,  505,  506

—  hydro-boro-fluoric,  ii.  69

—  hydrobromic,  i.  80,  503,  505,  506

—  hydrochloric,  i.  448,  451,  453

—  hydrocyanic,  i.  406,  411

—  hydro-ferro-cyanic,  ii.  348

—  hydrofluoric,  i.  49

—  hydrofluosilic,  ii.  106

—  hydro-platino-cyanic,  ii.  386

—  hydrosulphurous,  ii.  228

—  hydro-rutheno-cyanic,  ii.  388

—  hypochlorous,  i.  479,  481

—  hyponitrous,  i.  265,  294

—  hypophosphoric,  ii.  161

—  hypophosphorous,  ii.  172

—  iodic,  i.  100,  508

—  isethionic,  ii.  250

—  nietantimonic,  ii.  188

—  metaphosphoric,  ii.  162,  169

—  metastannic,  ii.  131

—  molybdic,  ii.  292

—  nitric,  i.  208,  272
Nordhausen,  ii.  233

—  orthophosphoric,  ii.  162

—  osmic,  ii.  384

—  pentathionic,  ii.  257

ALK

Acid,  percarbonic,  L  394

—  perchloric,  i.  484

—  periodic,  i.  610

—  permanganic,  ii.  318

—  permolybdic,  ii.  297

—  pemitrio,  i.  264

—  persolphnrio,  iL  251

—  pertongstic,  ii,  397

—  phosphamio,  ii.  179

—  phosphamolybdio,  ii.  293

—  phosphorous,  ii.  171

—  polysilicic,  ii.  117

—  pyrophosphoric,  ii.  169

—  pyrosulphuric,  ii.  284

—  sUenio,  ii.  272

•—  silico-tungstic,  ii.  295

—  stannic,  ii.  130

—  sulphonic,  ii.  249

—  sulphuric,  i.  76,  77, 89,  111,  290,  294 ;

ii.  235,  238,  241

—  telluric,  ii.  272

—  tetrathionic,  ii.  257

—  thiocarbonic,  ii.  263

—  thiocyanic,  ii.  263

—  thionio,  ii.  255

—  thiosulphuric,  ii.  230

—  trithionic,  ii.  257

—  tungstic,  ii.  292,  294

—  vanadic,  ii.  196
Acids,,  i.  185

—  avidity  of,  i.  389.  442

—  basicity  of,  i.  387

—  complex,  i.  197 ;  ii.  293

—  fuming,  i.  102

—  organic,  i.  394,  396,  405
Acetylene,  i.  372
Actinium,  ii.  59

Affinity,  chemical,  i.  26,  389
Air,  i.  131,  231,  233
Alchemy,  i.  14
Alcohol,  i.  53,  88
Alkali,  metals,  i.  558,  577

—  waste,  ii.  204
Alkalis,  i.  186

SUBJECT  INDEX

511

ALL

Allotropism,  i.  207
Alloys,  ii.  128,  537
Alumina,  ii.  75
Aluminium,  ii.  70,  85

—  bromide,  ii.  84

—  bronze,  ii.  88

—  carbide,  ii.  88

—  chloride,  ii.  80,  83

—  double  chlorides,  ii.  84

—  fluoride,  ii.  83

—  hydroxide,  ii.  75

—  iodide,  ii.  85

—  nitrate,  ii.  80

—  sulphate,  ii.  82
Alums,  ii.  5,  82,  343
Alunite,  ii.  80
Amalgams,  ii.  58
Amides,  i.  258,  406
Amidogen,  i.  258

—  hydrate,  i.  258
Amines,  i.  416
Ammonia,  i.  229,  246

—  of  crystallisation,  i.  257

—  heat  of  solution  of,  i.  74

—  in  air,  i.  240

—  liquefaction  of,  i.  250

—  saits,  i.  254

—  soda  process,  i.  524

—  solutions  of,  i.  80,  252
Ammonium,  i.  254

—  amalgam,  i.  255

—  bicarbonate,  i.  527

—  carbamate,  i.  407,  408

—  carbonate,  i.  407

—  cobalt  salts,  ii.  359

—  dichromate,  ii.  279

—  molybdate,  ii.  292

—  nitrate,  i.  273,  274

—  nitrite,  i.  284

—  phosphates,  ii.  167

—  sulphate,  ii.  269

—  sulphide,  ii.  218

Analogy  of  elements,  i.  573,  578
Anthracite,  i.  345
Antimoniuretted  hydrogen,  ii.  189
Antimony,  ii.  186

—  chlorides,  ii.  189

—  oxides,  ii.  187,  188

—  sulphides,  ii.  221
Aqua  Begia,  i.  467
Aqueous  radicle,  i.  213
Argon,  i.  226,  232 ;  App.  III.
Arsenic,  ii.  179

—  anhydride,  ii.  181

—  sulphides,  ii.  221

—  tribromide,  ii.  181

—  trichloride,  ii.  180

—  trifluoride,  ii.  181
Arsenious  anhydride,  ii.  184

CAL

Arsenious  oxychloride,  ii.  180
Arsenites,  ii.  185
Arseniuretted  hydrogen,  ii.  182
Astrakhanite,  i.  59
Atmolysis,  i.  156
Atomic  theory,  i.  216

—  volumes,  ii.  33

—  weights,  i.  21

Atoms  and  molecules,  i.  322

Babium,  i.  614,  617

—  chlorate,  i.  483

—  chloride,  i.  615

—  hydroxide,  i.  616

—  metatungstate,  ii.  295

—  nitrate,  i.  615

—  oxide,  i.  616

—  peroxide,  i.  157, 160,  209,  617

—  sulphate,  i.  614,  615
Bauxite,  ii.  76
Benzalazine,  i.  258
Berthollet's  doctrine,  i.  433
Beryllium,  i.  618

—  atomic  weight  of,  i.  325,  618

—  chloride,  i.  584

—  oxide,  i.  619
Binary  theory,  i.  195
Bismuth,  ii.  189

—  nitrates,  ii.  192

—  oxides,  ii.  190, 191
Blast  furnace,  ii.  324
Bleaching,  i.  469

—  powder,  i.  162,  477
Boiling  point,  absolute,  i.  130
Borates,  ii.  63

Borax,  ii.  61

Boric  anhydride,  ii.  64

Boron,  ii.  60.  66

—  chloride,  ii.  69

—  fluoride,  ii.  67,  68

—  iodide,  ii.  70

—  nitride,  i.  227  ;  u.  67

—  oxide,  ii.  60

—  specific  heat  of,  i.  585

—  sulphide,  ii.  62
Bromides,  ii.  32
Bromine,  i.  494
Bronze,  ii.  127

Butyl  alcohol,  solubility  of,  i.  75

Cadmium,  ii.  47

—  iodide,  ii.  48

—  oxide,  ii.  48

—  sulphide,  ii.  47
Caesium,  i.  576
Calcium,  i.  590,  604

—  carbonate,  i.  592,  608,  609,  610

512

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

CAL

Calcium  chloride,  i.  237,  612
crystallohydrates  of,  i.  613

—  fluoride,  i.  491

—  hypochlorite,  i.  162

—  iodide,  i.  604

—  peroxide,  i.  607

—  phosphate,  ii.  167

—  sulphate,  i.  611

—  sulphide,  ii.  220
Calomel,  ii.  54
Carbamide,  1.  409
Carbides,  1.  349,  353
Carbon,  i.  338

—  bisulphide,  ii.  258

—  molecule  of,  i.  354

—  oxysulphide,  ii.  264

—  tetrachloride,  i.  473
Carbonic  anhydride,  i.  379

assimilation  of  by  plants,  i.  393

dissociation  of,  i.  392,  393,  899

in  air,  i.  238,  242

liquid,  i.  385

solutions  of,  i.  80,  86

specific  heat  of,  i.  393

Carbonic  oxide,  i.  396

and  nickel,  i.  405

Carborundum,  ii.  107
Carboxyl,  i.  395
Camallite,  i.  421,  544,  560
Catalytic  phenomena,  i.  211
Caustic  potash,  i.  550

—  soda,  i.  529
Cements,  ii.  122
Cerite  metals,  ii.  93
Cerium,  ii.  93

Chamber  crystals,  i.  290 ;  ii.  230

Charcoal,  i.  343

Chemical  change,  rate  of,  ii.  314

—  transformations,  i.  3
Chloranhydrides, i. 468 ;  ii. 174,  176,

177
Chlorates,  i.  482
Chlorides,  i.  455,  466  ;  ii.  31
Chlorine,  i.  463

—  compounds,  heat  of  formation  of,  i.  44

—  crystallohydrates  of,  i.  464

—  oxides,  i.  479

—  preparation  of,  i.  460

—  solubility  of,  i.  463
Chloroform,  i.  473
Chlorophosphamide,  ii.  179
Chloryl  compounds,  i.  476
Chrome  alum,  ii.  283
Chromic  acid,  i.  208

—  anhydride,  ii.  280

—  oxide,  ii.  284,  285
Chromium,  ii.  276,  289

—  chlorides,  ii.  285

—  fluorides,  ii.  280,  289

DIS

Chromyl  chloride,  ii.  281
Chryseone,  ii.  108
Clay,  u.  70
Coal,  i.  345
Cobalt,  ii.  353

—  dioxide,  ii.  366

—  fluoride,  ii.  358
Cobaltamine  salts,  ii.  359
Cobaltic  oxide,  ii.  362
Cobalto-amine,  ii.  359
CobaJtoas  hydroxide,  ii.  358
Cohesion  of  liquids,  i.  52
Coke,  i.  345

Collodion  cotton,  i.  275
Colloids,  i.  63  ;  ii.  77,  423
Combination,  chemical,  i.  3
Combining  weights,  i.  21 ;  ii.  439
Combustion,  imperfect,  i.  341

—  heat  of,  i.  172, 176,  399,  400
Compounds,  definite  and  indefinite,  i.  31

—  types  of,  ii.  10
Compressibility  of  solutions,  i.  88
Conductivity,  electro-molecular,  i.  389
Contact  reactions,  i.  163,  290
Copper,  ii.  400

—  carbonate,  ii.  411

—  complex  salts  of,  ii.  412

—  nitrate,  ii.  411

—  nitride,  ii.  409

—  sulphate,  ii.  413
Corundum,  ii.  75
Critical  points,  i.  141
Cryohydrates,  i.  99

Cryoscopic  investigations  of  solutions

i.  90,  332
Crystals,  i.  51
Crystalline  form,  ii.  7
Crystallo-hydrates,  i.  102
Crystalloids,  i.  63
Cupellation,  ii.  417
Cyanides,  i.  406
Cyanogen,  i.  406,  414

—  chloride,  ii.  176

DEcoMPOsmoN,  chemical,  i.  4
Deliquescence,  i.  104
Delta  metal,  ii.  414
Desiccator,  i.  58
Detonating  gas,  i.  115, 170, 173
Depression  of  freezing  point  of  solu-
tions, i.  90,  92,  330
Dialysis,  i.  63  ;  ii.  114
Diamond,  i.  350,  353
Didymium,  ii.  93
Diffusion,  rate  of,  i.  63
Dimorphism,  i.  610,  ii.  178
Disinfectants,  i.  245
Disodium  orthophosphate,  ii.  166

SUBJECT  INDEX

518

DIS

Dissociation,  i.  36,  282, 608
DistilUtion,  dry,  i.  4,  247,  342
Dast,  atmospheric,  i.  241

Efflorescence,  i.  103
Ekaoadmiam,  ii.  59
Ekasilicon,  ii.  25
Electro-chemical  theory,  i.  195
Electric  energy  and  thermal  units,  i.

582
Electrolysis,  i.  116
Elements,  i.  20

—  grouping  of,  ii.  1

—  typical,  ii.  19
Emulsions,  i.  98
Energy,  chemical,  i.  29
Equations,  chemical,  i.  278
Equivalents,  law  of,  i.  194
Equivalent  weights,  i.  581
Ethane,  i.  366

Ether,  critical  points  of,  i.  141

Ethylene,  i.  370

Ethyl  silicates,  i.  104

Euchlorine,  i.  484

Eudiometer,  i.  169

Expansion,  linear,  of  elements,  ii.  31

Explosion,  rate  of  transmission  of,  i.

171
Explosives,  i.  275,  276

Felspar,  ii.  122

Fermentation,  i.  242

Ferric  chloride,  i.  558  ;  ii.  340

—  hydrates,  ii.  339

—  nitrate,  ii.  340

—  orthQphosphate,  ii.  342

—  oxide,  ii.  339
Ferrous  chloride,  ii.  335

—  sulphate,  ii.  335
solubility  of,  i.  72

—  sulphide,  ii.  210
Flame,  i.  177,  179
Fluoborates,  ii.  69
Fluorides,  i.  491,  493
Fluorine,  i.  203,  489
Fluorspar,  i.  491

Formula,  chemical,  i.  151,  326
Freezing  mixtures,  i.  76
Fuel,  calorific  capacity  of,  i.  360
Furnace,  electrical,  i.  352
Fusco-cobaltic  salts,  ii.  360

Gadolinite  metals,  ii.  93
Gallium,  ii.  88,  90
Gas,  illuminating,  i.  361
—  producers,  i.  397

lOD

Gases,  absorption  of,  i.  348

—  diffusion  of,  i.  83

—  expansion  of,  i.  133

—  liquefaction  of,  i.  134,  135,  137

—  measurement  of,  i.  78,  300

—  solution  of,  i.  68,  78,  86

—  theory  of,  i.  81,  83,  140
Germanium,  ii.  26, 124

—  chloride,  ii.  125

—  oxide,  ii.  125
Glass,  i.  123

—  soluble,  ii.  110
Glauber's  salt,  i.  517
Glycols,  ii.  117
Gold,  ii.  442

—  alloys,  i.  446,  447

—  chlorides,  ii.  448,  450

—  colloid,  ii.  447

—  cyanide,  ii.  450

—  extraction  of,  ii.  444,  445

—  fulminating,  ii.  450

—  oxides,  ii;  448

—  refining,  ii.  446
Graduators,  i.  424
Graphite,  i.  350,  351
Gros'  salt,  ii.  393
Guignet's  green,  ii.  285
Gunpowder,  i.  557
Gypsum,  i.  593,  611

Halogens,  i.  445,  487,  499
Halogen  compounds,  heat  of  formation
of,  i.  494,  502 ;  ii.  32

boiling-points  of,  i.  502

Hausmannite,  ii.  10

Helium,  i.  570  ;  ii.  498

Hemimorphism,  ii.  9

Homeomorphism,  ii.  8

Homologous  compounds,  i.  358

Humus,  i.  344

Hydrates,  i.  109,  185

Hydrazine,  i.  258

Hydrides,  i.  621 ;  ii.  23

Hydrocarbons,  i.  355,  359

Hydrogen,  i.  123, 129, 130, 142, 143, 146

—  pentasulphide,  ii.  217

—  peroxide,  i.  207,  312
Hydrosols,  i.  98
Hydroxyl,  i.  192,  213
Hydroxy lamine,  i.  262
Hypochlorites,  i.  481
Hyponitrites,  i.  294

Imides,  i.  258
Indium,  ii.  27,  37,  88,  97
lodates,  i.  509
Iodides,  ii.  32

—  of  nitrogen,  i.  607

VOL.  H.

L  L

514

PRINCIPLES OF  CHEMISTRY

lOD

Iodine,  i.  320,  321.  496,  497,  498

—  chlorides  of,  i.  611
lodosobenzol,  i.  508
Iridious  oxide,  ii.  382
Iridiam,  ii.  382
Iron,  ii.  317,  322,  585

—  and  carbonic  oxide,  ii.  345

—  -  cast,  ii.  325

—  nitride,  ii.  346

—  ores,  319

—  sulphate,  ii.  335
Isethionic  acid,  ii.  250
Isomorphism,  i.  203,  368  ;  ii.  1,  4,  8

Kaolin,  ii.  70

Lakes,  ii.  77

Lanthanum,  ii.  93

Laughing  gas,  ii.  297

Law  of  Avogadro-Oerhardt,  i.  309

BerthoUet,  i.  445

Boyle  and  Mariotte,  i.  132

combining  weights,  i.  221

• Dulong  and  Petit,  i.  584

equivalents,  L  1 94

even  numbers,  i.  357

Gay  Lussac,  i.  133,  304,  307

Guldberg  and  Waage,  i.  441

Henry  and  Dalton,  i.  78

—  - indestructibility  of  matter,  i.  6
Kirchofif,  i.  568

limits,  i.  357

maximum  work,  i.  120

multiple  proportions,  i.  109,  214

partial  pressures,  i.  82

periodic,  ii.  17

phases,  ii.  410

reversed  spectra,  i.  568

specific  heats,  i.  584

substitution,  i.  2G0,  305

volumes,  i.  304

Lead,  ii.  134

—  acetate,  ii.  137

—  carbonate,  ii.  140
■ —  chloride,  ii.  139

—  ehromate,  ii.  136,  279

—  dioxide,  ii.  142

—  nitrate,  ii.  139

—  oxide,  ii.  137

—  red,  ii.  142

—  salts  of,  i.  491

—  tetrachloride,  ii.  144

—  tetrafluoride,  ii.  144

—  white,  ii.  140
lieucone,  ii.  107
Levigation,  ii.  72

Light,  chemical  action  of,  i.  465

MOL

Lime,  i.  605

Liquids,  boiling  points  of,  i.  135

Lithium,  i.  574

—  carbonate,  i.  575

Litharge,  ii.  137

Litmus,  i.  185

Lixiviation,  methodical,  i.  521

Luteo-cobaltio  ^alts,  ii.  S59

Magkxjs'  salt,  ii.  392
Magnesia,  i.  597
Magnesium,  i.  590,  594  .

—  carbonate,  i.  592,  602

—  chloride,  i.  602

—  crystallohydrates  of,  i.  601

—  double  salts  of,  i.  597

—  nitride,  i.  595

—  silicide,  iL  102

—  sulphate,  i.  600
Manganese,  ii.  303

—  nitrides,  ii.  310

—  oxides,  ii.  306,  307,  308,  313

—  peroxide,  i.  159  ;  ii.  305

—  sulphate,  ii.  307

Mass,  influence  of,  i.  32,  436
Matches,  ii.  154
Matter,  primary,  ii.  440

—  transmutability  of,  L  14
Mercury,  ii.  48

—  ammonia  compounds,  ii.  57

—  basic  salts  of,  ii.  54

—  chlorides,  ii.  52,  53,  54

—  compounds,  heat  of  formation,  ii.  50

—  cyanide,  ii.  55

—  fulminating,  ii.  56

—  iodide,  ii.  55

—  nitrates,  ii.  51

—  nitrides,  ii.  56

—  oxides,  ii.  53

—  sulphate,  ii.  57

—  sulphides,  ii.  221
Metalepsis,  i.  28,  471
Metalloids,  i.  23
Metals,  i.  23

of  alkaline  earths,  i.  64,  590,  591

of  alkalis,  i.  543

displacement  of,  ii.  427
Methane,  i.  360

Moisture,  determinat^ttn  of,  in  gases,  L
40

influence  upon  reaction,  i.  403
Molecular  volumes,  ii.  37

—  weight  and  boiling  point,  i.  331

coefficient  of  refraction,  i.  336

latent  heat,  i.  329

—  specific  gravity  of  solutions,  L

335
surface  tension,  i.  334

SUBJECT  INDEX

515

MOL

Molecules,  i.  319,  322
Molybdates,  ii.  292
Molybdenam,  ii.  290

—  anhydride,  ii.  291

—  fluo-compounds,  ii.  298

—  sulphides,  ii.  297
Monophosphamide,  ii.  17H
Monosodium  orthophosphate,  ii.  167
Morphotropy,  ii.  10

Naphtha,  i.  373,  377
Nascent  state,  i.  33,  145,  146
Neodymium,  ii.  97
Nickel,  ii.  353

—  alloys,  ii.  367

—  and  carbonic  oxide,  ii.  367

—  fluoride,  ii.  358

—  hydroxide,  ii.  358

—  oxide,  ii.  365

—  sulphate,  i.  97  ;  ii.  359

—  tetra-carboxyl,  ii.  367
Niobium,  ii.  194,  198,  199
Nitrates,  i.  273

Nitres,  i.  268,  555
Nitric  anhydride,  i.  280

—  oxide,  i.  286
Nitrides,  i.  227,  258,  620
Nitriles,  i.  406
Nitrites,  i.  284
Nitro-cellulose,  i.  275
Nitro-compounds,  i.  274
Nitrogen,  i.  223,  225,  475

—  chloride,  i.  476

—  iodide,  i.  507

—  oxides  of,  i.  267.  280,  284,  294,  295

—  sulphide,  ii.  270
Nitro-prussides,  ii.  351
Nitroso-compoands,  i.  288
Nitrosulphates,  ii.  229
Nitrosyl  chloride,  ii.  176
Norwegium,  ii.  59

Occlusion,  i.  143
Olefiant  gas,  i.  370
Organo-metallic  compounds,  i.  356
Osmium,  ii.  372,  382,  384
Osmotic  pressure,  i.  64
Osmuridlum,  ii.  383
Oxamide,  i.  406
Oxidation,  i.  16
Oxides,  i.  183  ;  ii.  36
Oxycobaltamine  salts,  ii.  359
Oxygen,  i.  152,  157,  158,  163

—  compounds,  heat  of  formation  of,  i.

120,  466
Ozone,  i.  198,  229

P.uxADroM,  ii.  369

—  hydride,  i.  143  ;  ii.  380

POT

Palladous  chloride,  ii.  379

—  iodide,  ii.  379
Paracyanogen,  i.  414
Paramorphism,  ii.  9
Parasulphatammon,  ii.  269
Peat,  i.  344

PeUgot's  salt,  ii.  281
Percentage  composition,  i.  326
Perchloric  anhydride,  ii.  282
Periodates,  i.  510
Permanganic  anhydride,  ii.  313
Permolybdates,  ii.  297
Peroxide,  chloric,  i.  484
Peroxides,  i.  159  ;  ii.  15,  23
Perstannic  oxide,  ii.  133
Persulphates,  ii.  253
Petroleum,  i.  373
Phenol,  solubility  of,  i.  75
Phlogiston,  i.  17
Phosgene  gas,  ii.  175
Phospham,  ii.  178
Phosphides,  ii.  157
Phosphine,  ii.  158,  160
Phosphonium  iodide,  ii.  159
Phosphoric  anhydride,  ii.  161
Phosphorous  anhydride,  ii.  160
Phosphorus,  ii.  149

—  ammonium  compounds,  ii.  178

—  chlorides,  ii.  174

—  fluorides,  ii.  173

—  iodides,  i.  505.  506  ;  ii.  172

—  oxy chlorides,  ii.  175

—  sulphides,  ii.  213

—  sulpho-chloride,  ii.  213

—  thermo-chemical  data  for,  ii.  153
Phosphuretted  hydrogen,  ii.  158,  160
Photography,  ii.  431
Photo-salts,  ii.  432

Plants,  chemical  reactions  in,  i.  547

—  and  nitrogen,  i.  230
Platinic  chloride,  ii.  377

—  hydroxide,  ii.  379
Platino-ammonium  compounds,  ii.  391

—  chlorides,  i.  467 ;  ii.  378

—  cyanides,  ii.  386

—  nitrites,  ii.  390

—  sulphites,  ii.  390
Platinous  chloride,  ii.  379
Platinum,  ii.  376

—  alloys,  ii.  373

—  black,  ii.  376

—  metals,  ii.  369,  375

—  oxide,  ii.  378
Poly-haloid  salts,  i.  545
Polymerism,  i.  207,  367
Polysulphides,  ii.  217
Potassium,  i.  544,  558

—  aurate,  ii.  449

—  bromide,  i.  550

616

PRINCIPLES  OF  CHEMISTRY

POT

Potassium  carbonate,  i.  549

—  chlorate,  i.  161,  482

—  chloride,  i.  72,  543

—  chromate,  ii.  280

—  cyanide,  i.  412,  551

—  dichromate,  ii.  278

—  ferricyanide,  ii.  346

" —  ferrocyanide,  i.  346,  412

—  hydrosulphide,  ii.  219

—  hydroxide,  i.  548

—  iodide,  i.  550

—  manganate,  ii.  310

—  nitrate,  i.  553

—  oxides,  i.  559

—  permanganate,  ii.  311

—  stannate,  ii.  133

—  sulphate,  i.  72,  549

—  sulphide,  ii.  219

—  telluride,  ii.  274
Praseocobaltic  salts,  ii.  361
Praseodidymium,  ii.  97
Proteid  substances,  i.  224
Prout's  hypothesis,  ii.  439
Prussian  blue,  i.  419  :  ii.  349
Purpureo-cobaltic  salts,  ii.  361
Purpureo-tetramine  salts,  ii.  361
PyrocoUodion,  i.  275
Pyronaphtha,  i.  375
Pyrosulphuryl  chloride,  L  321 ;  ii.  236

Reactions,  chemical,  i.  3

conditions  for,  i.  34

contact,  i.  39

cndothermal,  i.  30

exothermal,  i.  30

limit  of,  i.  437

rate  of,  ii.  152

Hecalescence,  ii.  333
Reduction,  i.  l(j
Refraction  equivalent,  i.  336
Regenerative  furnaces,  i.  398
Reiset's  salts,  ii.  394
Respiration,  i.  152,  154,  387
Rhodium,  ii.  381
Rock  salt,  i.  421
Roseocobaltic  salts,  ii.  360
Rosetetramine  salts,  ii.  361
Rubidium,  i.  570
Ruthenium,  ii.  372,  382,  384

Salammoniac,  i.  248,  318,  457

—  solubility  of,  i.  458

—  vapour  density  of,  i.  317
Salts,  i.  187,  419

—  acid,  i.  193,  533

—  basic,  i.  193,  533  ;  ii.  54

—  double,  i.  598

' BOD

Salts,  electrolysis  of,  i.  191

—  heat  of  formation,  i.  189

—  melting  points  of,  i.  135

—  pyro,  i.  193

—  theory  of,  i.  193
Saponification,  i.  530
Scandium,  ii.  94
Selenium,  ii.  273

—  chlorides,  ii.  276
Selenioas  anhydride,  ii.  271
Silica,  ii.  100  ;  ii.  108

—  soluble,  ii.  113
Silicates,  i.  544  ;  ii.  116
Silicon,  iL  99

—  chloride,  ii.  103,  104

—  chloroform,  ii.  103

—  bromide,  ii.  104

—  fluoride,  ii.  105

—  hydride,  ii.  102,  103

—  iodide,  ii.  105

—  iodoform,  ii.  105
Silver,  ii.  418

—  allotropic  varieties  of,  ii.  421

—  bromide,  ii.  429

—  chlorate,  ii.  437

—  chloride,  ii.  429

—  cyanide,  ii.  433

—  fluoride,  ii.  430

—  fulminating,  ii.  426

—  hyponitrite,  i.  294

—  iodide,  ii.  429

—  nitrate,  ii.  426

—  nitrite,  i.  284

—  orthophosphate,  ii.  164

—  oxides,  ii.  424

—  peroxide,  ii.  422

—  plating,  ii.  434

—  soluble,  ii.  420

—  subchloride,  ii.  432
Slags,  ii.  323
Smalt,  ii.  354
Soaps,  i.  531

Soda  ash,  i.  519

—  caustic,  i.  527

—  manufacture  of,  i.  459

—  waste,  i.  522
Sodamide,  i.  539
Soda  lime,  i.  237
Sodium,  i.  513,  533

—  alloys,  i.  559

—  amalgams,  i.  537

—  bicarbonate,  i.  526

—  carbonate,  i.  519,  525

crystallohydrates  of,  i.  108

—  —  manufacture  of,  i.  523
solutions  of,  i.  525

—  chloride,  i.  419

double  salts  of,  i.  430

solutions  of,  i.  88,  99,  429

SUBJECT  INDEX

517

SOD

ScNiium  hydride,  i.  537

—  hydroxide,  i.  528,  529
solutions  of,  i.  529

—  nitrate,  i.  269
solutions  of,  i.  72

—  organo  compounds  of,  i.  540

—  oxides,  i.  540,  541

—  phosphates,  ii.  166

—  platinate,  ii.  378

—  pyrosulphate,  i.  518

—  sesquicarbonate,  i.  526

—  stannate,  ii.  133

—  subchloride,  i.  540

—  sulphate,  i.  513
acid  salt,  i.  518

crystallohydrates  of,  i.  516

solutions  of,  i.  73,  515,  516

—  -  sulphite,  ii.  226

—  thiosulphate,  ii.  230
solutions  of,  i.  74

—  tungstate,  ii.  294
Soils,  i.  344  ;  ii.  73
Solubility  coefficient  of,  i.  67,  71
Solutions,  i.  330

—  aqueous,  i.  59

—  boiling  points  of,  i.  94,  100

—  crystallisation  of,  i.  427

—  colour  of,  i.  95

—  diffusion  of,  i.  61,  429

—  of  double  salts,  i.  599

—  formation  of  ice  from,  i.  91,  428

—  heat  of  formation  of,  i.  74,  75,  76

—  of  gases,  i.  68

—  isotonic,  i.  64

—  saturated,  i.  65

• —  specific  gravity  of,  i.  429,  584

—  supersaturated,  i.  96

—  theory  of,  i.  64,  89,  92,  97,106,  215,
323,  608  ;  ii.  3,  164

—  vapour  tension  of,  i.  90,  92

—  volumes  of,  i.  87

—  Specific  heat,  i.  585,  586,  588
Spectra  absorption,  i.  566
Spectrum  analysis,  i.  560,  561
Stannic  chloride,  ii.  132

—  fluoride,  ii.  132

—  oxide,  ii.  130

—  sulphide,  ii.  1.32
Stannous  chloride,  ii.  130

—  oxide,  ii.  129

—  salts,  ii.  129

Steam,  vapour  tension  of,  i.  54
Steel,  ii.  327,  328,  330
Strontium,  i.  615

—  chloride,  i.  615

—  hydroxide,  i.  615

—  nitrate,  i.  615

—  oxide,  i.  617
Substitution  chemical,  i.  5

URA

Sulphamide,  ii.  270
Sulphatammon,  ii.  269
Sulphates,  ii.  248
Sulphides,  i.  98 ;  ii.  213
Sulphonitrites,  ii.  229
Sulphoxyl,  ii.  250
Sulphur,  ii.  200

—  chlorides  of,  ii.  264
Sulphuretted  hydrogen,  ii.  208
Sulphuric  anhydride,  ii.  232

—  peroxide,  ii.  251
Sulphurous  anhydride,  ii.  224
Sulphuryl  chloride,  ii.  268
Superphosphates,  ii.  168

Tantalum,  ii.  194, 198
Tellurium,  ii.  2^4

—  bromide,  ii.  275

—  chlorides,  ii.  275
Tellurious  anhydride,  ii.  271
Temperature,  critical,  i.  131
Test  papers,  i.  185
ThalUum,  ii.  88,  91
Thallic  oxide,  ii.  93
Thallous  hydroxide,  ii.  92

—  oxide,  ii.  92
Thiocarbonates,  ii.  262
Thionyl  chloride,  ii.  267
Thiophosgene,  ii.  262
Thiophosphoryl  fluoride,  ii.  263
Theory,  atomic,  i.  216

—  unitary,  i.  195

—  vortex,  i.  217
Thermochemistry,  i.  173
Thorium,  ii.  148

Tin,  ii.  125

—  alloys,  ii.  127
Titanium,  ii.  144

—  chloride,  ii.  145

—  nitride,  ii.  146

—  nitrocyanide,  ii.  146

—  oxides,  ii.  145
Tripoli,  ii.  110

Trisodium  orthophosphate,  ii.  166
Tun^states,  ii.  292
Tungsten,  ii.  290

—  anhydride,  ii.  291

—  nitride,  ii.  297

—  sulphide,  ii.  297
Tumbull's  blue,  ii.  350
Types  of  combination,  ii.  10

ULTItAMABINE,  ii.  84

Uranium,  ii.  30,  297

—  atomic  weight  of,  ii.  26

—  dioxide,  ii.  301

—  oxides,  ii.  298

?!L3i:i?!liS-  -:€

TsBunnL  -sssaamoKzim,  i.  JRL

L  1:91.400.401

—  MMimrmnm

—  JlgTliBff. i.  JIM

—  gmosaiiace.  i.  JM

T<aEiIfl&mx.  L:£4i

Tiitiiaiei.

WAXn.L4i»

—  camfcmSsatL  gL  L  114.  U^  14!Sl  10L

erf  eofi^dtistkia.  L  109

erf  crrsiaPf^tinn.  L  S^  9IO

on  of.  L  11^
ol  L  ^

XitnEK.iL  93

n-  39

—  nDBona-ciiiorides,  iL  41

—  cUori^  iL  40,  41

—  coa^ovnds.  heal  of  formation  of,  ii.
SI

—  anim,  iL  39,  40

—  salphatf.  iL  39
Zireoniom,  iL  146

—  dtlocide,  iL  147

—  hjdioxide,  iL  147

—  oxide,  iL  147
