Colomba and Carmen (Prosper Mérimée, 1901)
==========================================================
Carmen is the archetypal femme-fatale novella and the source of one of opera's greatest hits. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (colombacarmentra00mruoft).

t rO)

p ,^

\r>- ;



CO

IVIicrosoft  Corporation


SEEM  BY


The
French  Classical  Romances

Complete  in  Twenty  Crown  Octavo  Volumes
Editor-in-Chief

EDMUND    GOSSE,    LL.D.

With  Critical  Introductions  and  Interpretative  Essays  by

HENRY    JAMES  PROF.    RICHARD    BURTON  HENRY    HARLAND

ANDREW    LANG  PROF.    F.    C.    DE     SUMICHRAST

THE    EARL    OF    CREWE  HIS    EXCELLENCY    M.    CAMBON

PROF.    WM.    P.    TRENT  ARTHUR    SYMONS  MAURICE     HEWLETT

DR.    JAMES     FITZMAUR;CE-KELLY  RICHARD     MANSFIELD

BOOTH     TARKINGTON  DR.    RICHARD     GARNETT

PROF.    WILLIAM    M.    SLOANE  JOHN    OLIVER     HOBBES


./c^*^--^'


PROSPER    M^RIMISE


COLOMBA

AND

CARMEN


TRANSLATED    FROM    THE    FRENCH
BY    THE    LADY    MARY    LOYD


WITH    A    CRITICAL    INTRODUCTION
BY    ARTHUR    SYMONS

A     FRONTISPIECE      AND     NUMEROUS

OTHER        PORTRAITS        WITH

DESCRIPTIVE   NOTES  BY

OCTAVE     UZANNE


P.  F.  COLLIER    c-    SON
NEW    YORK


?Q


JB52288

Z6.   Z^  S7


PROSPER   MERIMEE


Stendhal  has  left  us  a  picture  of  ]\Ierimee  as  "  a
young  man  in  a  gray  frock-coat,  very  ugly,  and  with  a
turned-up  nose.  .  .  .  This  young  man  had  something
insolent  and  extremely  unpleasant  about  him.  His
eyes,  small  and  without  expression,  had  always  the  same
look,  and  this  look  was  ill-natured.  .  .  .  Such  was  my
first  impression  of  the  best  of  my  present  friends.  I
am  not  too  sure  of  his  heart,  but  I  am  sure  of  his  tal-
ents. It  is  M.  le  Comte  Gazul.  now  so  well  known,  and
a  letter  from  whom,  which  came  to  me  last  week,  made
me  happy  for  two  days.  His  mother  has  a  good  deal  of
French  wit  and  a  superior  intelligence.  Like  her  son,
it  seems  to  me  that  she  might  give  way  to  emotion  once
a  year."  There,  painted  by  a  clear-sighted  and  disinter-
ested friend,  is  a  picture  of  Merimee  almost  from  his
own  point  of  view,  or  at  least  as  he  would  himself  have
painted  the  picture.  How  far  is  it,  in  its  insistence  on
the  attcndvisscmcnt  unc  fois  par  an,  on  the  subordination
of  natural  feeling  to  a  somewhat  disdainful  aloofness,
the  real  Merimee?
Vol.  6  V  A


Prosper   Merimee


Early  in  life,  Merimee  adopted  his  theory,  fixed  his
attitude,  and  to  the  end  of  his  hfe  he  seemed,  to  those
about  him,  to  have  walked  along  the  path  he  had
chosen,  almost  without  a  deviation.  He  went  to  Eng-
land at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  to  Spain  four  years
later,  and  might  seem  to  have  been  drawn  naturally  to
those  two  countries,  to  which  he  was  to  return  so  often,
by  natural  afifinities  of  temper  and  manner.  It  was  the
English  manner  that  he  liked,  that  came  naturally  to
him;  the  correct,  unmoved  exterior,  which  is  a  kind  of
positive  strength,  not  to  be  broken  by  any  onslaught
of  events  or  emotions;  and  in  Spain  he  found  an  equally
positive  animal  acceptance  of  things  as  they  are,  which
satisfied  his  profound,  restrained,  really  Pagan  sensu-
ality. Pagan  in  the  hard,  eighteenth-century  sense.
From  the  beginning  he  was  a  student,  of  art,  of  his-
tory, of  human  nature,  and  we  find  him  enjoying,  in
his  deliberate,  keen  way,  the  studied  diversions  of  the
student;  body  and  soul  each  kept  exactly  in  its  place,
each  provided  for  without  partiality.  He  entered  upon
literature  by  a  mystification,  Le  Theatre  de  Clara
Ga;xul,  a  book  of  plays  supposed  to  be  translated  from
a  living  Spanish  dramatist;  and  he  followed  it  by  La
Gitda,  another  mystification,  a  book  of  prose  ballads
supposed  to  be  translated  from  the  Illyrian.  And  these
mystifications,  like  the  forgeries  of  Chatterton,  contain
perhaps  the  most  sincere,  the  most  undisguised  emo-
tion which  he  ever  permitted  himself  to  express;  so  se-

vi


Prosper   Merimee


cure  did  he  feel  of  the  heart  behind  the  pearl  necklace  of
the  dccoUctcc  Spanish  actress,  who  travesties  his  own
face  in  the  frontispiece  to  the  one.  and  so  remote  from
himself  did  he  feel  the  bearded  gentleman  to  be,  who
sits  cross-legged  on  the  ground,  holding  his  lyre  or
guzla,  in  the  frontispiece  to  the  other.  Then  came  a
historical  novel,  the  Chronique  dii  Rcgnc  dc  Cliarlcs
IX,  before  he  discovered,  as  if  by  accident,  precisely
what  it  was  he  was  meant  to  do:  the  short  story.  Then
he  drifted  into  history,  became  Inspector  of  Ancient
Monuments,  and  helped  to  save  Vezelay,  among  other
good  deeds  toward  art,  done  in  his  cold,  systematic,
after  all  satisfactory  manner.  He  travelled  at  almost
regular  intervals,  not  only  in  Spain  and  England,  but
in  Corsica,  in  Greece  and  Asia  ]\Iinor,  in  Italy,  in  Hun-
gary, in  Bohemia,  usually  with  a  definite,  scholarly  ob-
ject, and  always  with  an  alert  attention  to  everything
that  came  in  his  way,  to  the  manners  of  people,  their
national  characters,  their  differences  from  one  another.
An  Ultimate  friend  of  the  Countess  de  Montijo,  the
mother  of  the  Empress  Eugenie,  he  was  a  friend,  not  a
courtier,  at  the  court  of  the  Third  Empire.  He  was
elected  to  the  Academy,  mainly  for  his  Etudes  sur
VHistoirc  Romaine,  a  piece  of  dry  history,  and  imme-
diately scandalized  his  supporters  by  publishing  a
story,  Arscnc  Guillof,  which  was  taken  for  a  veiled  at-
tack on  religion  and  on  morals.  Soon  after,  his  imagi-
nation seemed  to  flag;  he  abandoned  himself,  perhaps

vii


Prosper  Merimee


a  little  wearily,  more  and  more  to  facts,  to  the  facts  of
history  and  learning;  learned  Russian,  and  translated
Poushkin  and  Tourguenieff;  and  died  in  1870,  at
Cannes,  perhaps  less  satisfied  with  himself  than  most
men  who  have  done,  in  their  lives,  far  less  exactly
what  they  have  intended  to  do.

"  I  have  theories  ahoiit  the  very  smallest  things —
gloves,  boots,  and  the  like,"  says  Merimee  in  one  of  his
letters;  des  idccs  trcs-arretecs,  as  he  adds  with  emphasis
in  another.  Precise  opinions  lead  easily  to  prejudices,
and  Merimee,  who  prided  himself  on  the  really  very
logical  quality  of  his  mind,  put  himself  somewhat  de-
liberately into  the  hands  of  his  prejudices.  Thus  he
hated  religion,  distrusted  priests,  would  not  let  himself
be  carried  away  by  any  instinct  of  admiration,  would
not  let  himself  do  the  things  which  he  had  the  power
to  do,  because  his  other,  critical  self  came  mockingly
behind  him,  suggesting  that  very  few  things  were  alto-
gether worth  doing.  "  There  is  nothing  that  I  despise
and  even  detest  so  much  as  humanity  in  general,"  he
confesses  in  a  letter;  and  it  is  with  a  certain  self-com-
placency that  he  defines  the  only  kind  of  society  in
which  he  found  himself  at  home:  "(i)  With  unpreten-
tious people  whom  I  have  known  a  long  time;  (2)  in  a
Spanish  venta,  with  muleteers  and  peasant  women  of
Andalusia."  One  day,  as  he  finds  himself  in  a  pensive
mood,  dreaming  of  a  woman,  he  translates  for  her  some

lines  of  Sophocles,  into  verse,  "  English  verse,  you  un-

viii


Prosper  Merimee


derstand,  for  I  abhor  French  verse."  The  carefulness
with  which  he  avoids  received  opinions  shows  a  certain
consciousness  of  those  opinions,  which  in  a  more  imagi-
natively independent  mind  would  scarcely  have  found
a  place.  It  is  not  only  for  an  effect,  but  more  and
more  genuinely,  that  he  sets  his  acquirements  as  a
scholar  above  his  accomplishments  as  an  artist.  Clear-
ing away,  as  it  seemed  to  him,  every  illusion  from  be-
fore his  eyes,  he  forgot  the  last  illusion  of  positive
people:  the  possibility  that  one's  eyes  may  be  short-
sighted.

Merimee  realizes  a  type  which  we  are  accustomed
to  associate  almost  exclusively  with  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, but  of  which  our  own  time  can  offer  us  many  ob-
scure examples.  It  is  the  type  of  the  esprit  fort:  the
learned  man,  the  choice,  narrow  artist,  who  is  at  the
same  time  the  cultivated  sensualist.  To  such  a  man  the
pursuit  of  women  is  part  of  his  constant  pursuit  of
human  experience,  and  of  the  document,  which  is  the
summing  up  of  human  experience.  To  Merimee  his-
tory itself  was  a  matter  of  detail.  "  In  history  I  care
only  for  anecdotes,"  he  says  in  the  preface  to  the
CJironiqitc  dii  Rcgnc  dc  Charles  IX.  And  he  adds:  "  It
is  not  a  very  noble  taste;  but,  I  confess  to  my  shame,  I
would  willingly  give  Thucydldes  for  the  authentic
memoirs  of  Aspasia  or  of  a  slave  of  Pericles;  for  only
memoirs,  which  are  the  familiar  talk  of  an  author  with

his  reader,  afiford  those  portraits  of  man  which  amuse

ix


Prosper  Merimee


and  interest  me."  This  curiosity  of  mankind  above  all
things,  and  of  mankind  at  home,  or  in  private  actions,
not  necessarily  of  any  import  to  the  general  course  of
the  world,  leads  the  curious  searcher  naturally  to  the
more  privately  interesting  and  the  less  publicly  impor-
tant half  of  mankind.  Not  scrupulous  in  arriving  at  any
end  by  the  most  adaptable  means,  not  disturbed  by  any
illusions  as  to  the  physical  facts  of  the  universe,  a  sin-
cere and  grateful  lover  of  variety,  doubtless  an  amusing
companion  with  these  who  amused  him,  Merimee
found  much  of  his  entertainment  and  instruction,  at  all
events  in  his  younger  years,  in  that  "  half  world  '"  which
he  tells  us  he  frequented  "  very  much  out  of  curiosity,
living  in  it  always  as  in  a  foreign  country."  Here,  as
elsewhere,  Merimee  played  the  part  of  the  amateur.
He  liked  anecdotes,  not  great  events,  in  his  history;
and  he  was  careful  to  avoid  any  too  serious  passions  in
his  search  for  sensations.  There,  no  doulit,  for  the  sen-
sualist, is  happiness,  if  he  can  resign  himself  to  it.  It  is
only  serious  passions  which  make  anybody  unhappy;
and  Merimee  was  carefully  on  the  lookout  against  a
possible  unhappiness.  I  can  imagine  him  ending  every
day  with  satisfaction,  and  beginning  every  fresh  day
with  just  enough  expectancy  to  be  agreeable,  at  that
period  of  his  life  when  he  was  writing  the  finest  of  his
stories,  and  dividing  the  rest  of  his  leisure  between  the
drawing-rooms  and  the  pursuit  of  uneventful  adven-
tures.

X


Prosper  Merimee


Only,  though  we  are  automates  aiitant  qu  esprit,  as
Pascal  tells  us,  it  is  useless  to  expect  that  what  is  auto-
matic in  us  should  remain  invariable  and  unconditioned.
If  life  could  be  lived  on  a  plan,  and  for  such  men  on
such  a  plan,  if  first  impulses  and  profound  passions
could  be  kept  entirely  out  of  one's  own  experience,  and
studied  only  at  a  safe  distance,  then,  no  doubt,  one
could  go  on  being  happy,  in  a  not  too  heroic  way.  But,
with  Merimee  as  with  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  the
scheme  breaks  down  one  day,  just  when  a  reasonable
solution  to  things  seems  to  have  been  arrived  at.  Meri-
mee had  already  entered  on  a  peaceable  enough  liaison
when  the  first  letter  came  to  him  from  the  Inconnue
to  whom  he  was  to  write  so  many  letters,  for  nine  years
without  seeing  her,  and  then  for  thirty  years  more  after
he  had  met  her,  the  last  letter  being  written  but  two
hours  before  his  death.  These  letters,  which  we  can
now  read  in  two  volumes,  have  a  delicately  insincere
sincerity  which  makes  every  letter  a  work  of  art,  not
because  he  tried  to  make  it  so,  but  because  he  could
not  help  seeing  the  form  simultaneously  with  the  feel-
ing, and  writing  genuine  love-letters  with  an  excellence
alrnost  as  impersonal  as  that  of  his  stories.  He  begins
with  curiosity,  which  passes  with  singular  rapidity  into
a  kind  of  self-willed  passion;  already  in  the  eighth  let-
ter, long  before  he  has  seen  her,  he  is  speculating  which
of  the  two  will  know  best  how  to  torture  the  other:
that  is,  as  he  views  it,  love  best.    "  We  shall  never  love

xi


Prosper  Merimee


one  another  really,"  he  tells  her,  as  he  begins  to  hope
for  the  contrary.  Then  he  discovers,  for  the  first  time,
and  without  practical  result,  "  that  it  is  better  to  have
illusions  than  to  have  none  at  all."  He  confesses  him-
self to  her,  sometimes  reminding  her:  "  You  will  never
know  either  all  the  good  or  all  the  evil  that  I  have  in
me.  I  have  spent  my  life  in  being  praised  for  qualities
which  I  do  not  possess,  and  calumniated  for  defects
which  are  not  mine."  And,  with  a  strange,  weary  hu-
mility, which  is  the  other  side  of  his  contempt  for  most
things  and  people,  he  admits:  "  To  you  I  am  like  an
old  opera,  which  you  are  obliged  to  forget,  in  order  to
see  it  again  with  any  pleasure."  He,  who  has  always
distrusted  first  impulses,  finds  himself  telling  her  (was
she  really  so  like  him,  or  was  he  argidng  with  himself?):
"  You  always  fear  first  i-mpulses;  do  you  not  see
that  they  are  the  only  ones  which  are  worth  anything
and  which  always  succeed?  "  Does  he  realize,  un-
able to  change  the  temperament  which  he  has  partly
made  for  himself,  that  just  there  has  been  his  own
failure?

Perhaps  of  all  love-letters,  these  of  INIerimee  show
us  love  triumphing  over  the  most  carefully  guarded
personality.  Here  the  obstacle  is  not  duty,  nor  circum-
stance, nor  a  rival ;  but  (on  her  side  as  on  his,  it  would
seem)  a  carefully  trained  natural  coldness,  in  which
action,  and  even  for  the  most  part  feeling,  are  relin-
quished to  the  control  of  second  thoughts.    A  habit  of

xii


Prosper   Merimee


repressive  irony  goes  deep:  Merimee  might  well  have
thought  himself  secure  against  the  outbreak  of  an  un-
conditional passion.  Yet  here  we  find  passion  betray-
ing itself,  often  only  by  bitterness,  together  with  a  shy,
surprising  tenderness,  in  this  curious  lovers'  itinerary,
marked  out  with  all  the  customary  sign-posts,  and  lead-
ing, for  all  its  wilful  deviations,  along  the  inevitable
road.

It  is  commonly  supposed  that  the  artist,  by  the
habit  of  his  profession,  has  made  for  himself  a  sort  of
cuirass  of  phrases  against  the  direct  attack  of  emotion,
and  so  will  suffer  less  than  most  people  if  he  should  fall
into  love,  and  things  should  not  go  altogether  well  with
him.  Rather,  he  is  the  more  laid  open  to  attack,  the
more  helplessly  entangled  when  once  the  net  has  been
cast  over  him.  He  lives  through  every  passionate
trouble,  not  merely  with  the  daily  emotions  of  the
crowd,  but  with  the  whole  of  his  imagination.  Pain  is
multiplied  to  him  by  the  force  of  that  faculty  by  which
he  conceives  delight.  What  is  most  torturing  in  every
not  quite  fortunate  love  is  memory,  and  the  artist  be-
comes an  artist  by  his  intensification  of  memory.  Meri-
mee has  himself  defined  art  as  exaggeration  a  propos.
Well,  to  the  artist  his  own  life  is  an  exaggeration  not
a  propos,  and  every  hour  dramatizes  for  him  its  own  pain
and  pleasure,  in  a  tragic  comedy  of  which  he  is  the
author  and  actor  and  spectator.     The  ]M-actice  of  art

is   a   sharpening   of   the   sensations,    and,    the    knife

xiii


Prosper  Merimee


once  sharpened,  does  it  cut  into  one's  hand  less
deeply  because  one  is  in  the  act  of  using  it  to  carve
wood  ?

And  so  we  find  Merimee,  the  most  impersonal  of
artists,  and  one  of  those  most  critical  over  the  caprices
and  violences  of  fate,  giving  in  to  an  almost  obvious
temptation,  an  anonymous  correspondence,  a  mysteri-
ous unknown  woman,  and  passing  from  stage  to  stage
of  a  finally  very  genuine  love-affair,  which  kept  him
in  a  fluttering  agitation  for  more  than  thirty  years.  It
is  curious  to  note  that  the  little  which  we  know  of  this
hicpunuc  seems  to  mark  her  out  as  the  realization  of
a  type  which  had  always  been  Merimee's  type  of
woman.  She  has  the  "  wicked  eyes  "  of  all  his  heroines,
from  the  Mariquita  of  his  first  attempt  in  literature,
who  haunts  the  Inquisitor  with  "  her  great  black  eyes,
like  the  eyes  of  a  young  cat,  soft  and  wicked  at  once."
He  finds  her  at  the  end  of  his  life,  in  a  novel  of  Tour-
guenieff,  "  one  of  those  diabolical  creatures  whose
coquetry  is  the  more  dangerous  because  it  is  capable
of  passion."  Like  so  many  artists,  he  has  "invented  his
ideal  before  he  meets  it,  and  must  have  seemed  almost
to  have  fallen  in  love  with  his  own  creation.  It  is  one
of  the  privileges  of  art  to  create  nature,  as,  according  to
a  certain  mystical  doctrine,  you  can  actualize,  by  sheer
fixity  of  contemplation,  your  mental  image  of  a  thing
into  the  thing  itself.  The  Inconnuc  was  one  of  a  series,
the  rest  imaginary;  and  her  power  over  Merimee,  we

xiv


Prosper  Merimee


can  hardly  doubt,  came  not  only  from  her  queer  like-
ness of  temperament  to  his,  but  from  the  singular,  flat-
tering pleasure  which  it  must  have  given  him  to  find
that  he  had  invented  with  so  much  truth  to  nature.


II

Merimee  as  a  writer  belongs  to  the  race  of  Laclos
and  of  Stendhal,  a  race  essentially  French;  and  we  find
him  representing,  a  little  coldly,  as  it  seemed,  the  claims
of  mere  unimpassioned  intellect,  at  work  on  passionate
problems,  among  those  people  of  the  Romantic  period
to  whom  emotion,  evident  emotion,  was  everything.
In  his  subjects  he  is  as  "  Romantic  "  as  Victor  Hugo  or
Gautier;  he  adds,  even,  a  peculiar  flavour  of  cruelty  to
the  Romantic  ingredients.  But  he  distinguishes  sharp-
ly, as  French  writers  before  him  had  so  well  known  how
to  do,  between  the  passion  one  is  recounting  and  the
moved  or  unmoved  way  in  which  one  chooses  to  tell
it.  To  Merimee  art  was  a  very  formal  thing,  almost  a
part  of  learning;  it  was  a  thing  to  be  done  with  a  clear
head,  reflectively,  with  a  calm  mastery  of  even  the  most
vivid  material.  While  others,  at  that  time,  were  in-
toxicating themselves  with  strange  sensations,  hoping
that  "  nature  w-ould  take  the  pen  out  of  their  hands  and
write,"  just  at  the  moment  when  their  own  thoughts
became  least  coherent,  Merimee  went  quietly  to  work
over  something  a  little  abnormal  which  he  had  found  in

XV


Prosper  Merimee

nature,  with  as  disinterested,  as  scholarly,  as  mentally
reserved  an  interest  as  if  it  were  one  of  those  Gothic
monuments  which  he  inspected  to  such  good  purpose,
and,  as  it  has  seemed  to  his  biographer,  with  so  little
sympathy.  His  own  emotion,  so  far  as  it  is  roused,
seems  to  him  an  extraneous  thing,  a  thing  to  be  con-
cealed, if  not  a  little  ashamed  of.  It  is  the  thing  itself
he  wishes  to  give  you,  not  his  feelings  about  it;  and  his
theory  is  that  if  the  thing  itself  can  only  be  made  to
stand  and  speak  before  the  reader,  the  reader  will  sup-
ply for  himself  all  the  feeling  that  is  needed,  all  the  feel-
ing that  would  be  called  out  in  nature  by  a  perfectly
clear  sight  of  just  such  passions  in  action.  It  seems  to
him  bad  art  to  paint  the  picture,  and  to  write  a  descd
tion  of  the  picture  as  well.

And  his  method  serves  him  wonderfully  up  to  a
certain  point,  and  then  leaves  him,  without  his  being
well  aware  of  it,  at  the  moment  even  when  he  has  con-
vinced himself  that  he  has  realized  the  utmost  of  his
aim.  At  a  time  when  he  had  come  to  consider  scholarly
dexterity  as  the  most  important  part  of  art,  Merimee
tells  us  that  La  Venus  cflllc  seemed  to  him  the  best
story  he  had  ever  written.  He  has  often  been  taken
at  his  word,  but  to  take  him  at  his  word  is  to  do  him
an  injustice.  La  Venus  d'lUe  is  a  modern  setting  of  the
old  story  of  the  Ring  given  to  Venus,  and  Merimee  has
been  praised  for  the  ingenuity  with  which  he  has  ob-
tained an  effect  of  supernatural  terror,  while  leaving  the

xvi


Prosper  Merimee


way  open  for  a  material  explanation  of  the  supernatural.
What  he  has  really  done  is  to  materialize  a  myth,  by  ac-
cepting in  it  precisely  what  might  be  a  mere  supersti-
tion, the  form  of  the  thing,  and  leaving  out  the  spiritual
meaning  of  which  that  form  was  no  more  than  a  tem-
porary expression.  The  ring  which  the  bridegroom
sets  on  the  finger  of  Venus,  and  which  the  statue's  fin-
ger closes  upon,  accepting  it.  symbolizes  the  pact  be-
tween love  and  sensuality,  the  lover's  abdication  of  all
but  the  physical  part  of  love;  and  the  statue  taking  its
place  between  husband  and  wife  on  the  marriage-night,
and  crushing  life  out  of  him  in  an  inexorable  embrace,
symbolizes  the  merely  natural  destruction  which  that
granted  prayer  brings  with  it,  as  a  merely  human  Mes-
salina  takes  her  lover  on  his  own  terms,  in  his  abandon-
ment of  all  to  Venus.  Merimee  sees  a  cruel  and  fan-
tastic superstition,  which  he  is  afraid  of  seeming  to  take
too  seriously,  which  he  prefers  to  leave  as  a  story  of
ghosts  or  bogies,  a  thing  at  which  we  are  to  shiver  as
at  a  mere  twitch  on  the  nerves,  while  our  mental  con-
fidence in  the  impossibility  of  what  we  can  not  explain
is  preserved  for  us  by  a  hint  at  a  muleteer's  vengeance.
"  Have  I  frightened  you?  '"  says  the  man  of  the  world,
with  a  reassuring  smile.  "Think  about  it  no  more;  I
really  meant  nothing."

And  yet,  does  he  after  all  mean  nothing?    The  devil,
the  old  Pagan  gods,  the  spirits  of  evil  incarnated  under

every  form,  fascinated  him:  it  gave  him  a  malign  pleas-

xvii


Prosper  Merim^e


lire  to  set  them  at  their  evil  work  among  men,  while,
all  the  time,  he  mocks  them  and  the  men  who  believed
in  them.  He  is  a  materialist,  and  yet  he  believes  in  at
least  a  something  evil,  outside  the  world,  or  in  the
heart  of  it,  which  sets  humanity  at  its  strange  games,
relentlessly.  Even  then  he  will  not  surrender  his
doubts,  his  ironies,  his  negations.  Is  he,  perhaps,  at
times,  the  atheist  who  fears  that,  after  all,  God  may
exist,  or  at  least  who  realizes  how  much  he  would  fear
him  if  he  did  exist?

Merimee  had  always  delighted  in  mystifications;  he
was  always  on  his  guard  against  being  mystified  him-
self, either  by  nature  or  by  his  fellow-creatures.  In  the
early  "  Romantic  "  days  he  had  had  a  genuine  passion
for  various  things:  "local  colour,"  for  instance.  But
even  then  he  had  invented  it  by  a  kind  of  trick,  and,
later  on,  he  explains  what  a  poor  thing  "  local  colour  "
is,  since  it  can  so  easily  be  invented  without  leaving
one's  study.  He  is  full  of  curiosity,  and  will  go  far  to
satisfy  it,  regretting  "  the  decadence,"  in  our  times,
"  of  energetic  passions,  in  favour  of  tranquillity  and
perhaps  of  happiness."  These  energetic  passions  he
will  find,  indeed,  in  our  own  times,  in  Corsica,  in  Spain,
in  Lithuania,  really  in  the  midst  of  a  very  genuine  and
profoundedly  studied  ''  local  colour,"  and  also,  under
many  disguises,  in  Parisian  drawing-rooms.  Merimee
prized  happiness,  material  comfort,  the  satisfaction  of
one's  immediate  desires,  very  highly,  and  it  was  his

xviii


Prosper  Merimee


keen  sense  of  life,  of  the  pleasures  of  living,  that  gave
him  some  of  his  keenness  in  the  realization  of  violent
death,  physical  pain,  whatever  disturbs  the  equilibrium
of  things  with  unusual  emphasis.  Himself  really  self-
ish, he  can  distinguish  the  unhappiness  of  others  with
a  kind  of  intuition  w^hich  is  not  sympathy,  but  which
selfish  people  often  have:  a  dramatic  consciousness  of
how  painful  pain  must  be.  whoever  feels  it.  It  is  not
pity,  though  it  communicates  itself  to  us,  often  enough,
as  pity.  It  is  the  clear-sighted  sensitiveness  of  a  man
who  watches  human  things  closely,  bringing  them
home  to  himself  with  the  deliberate,  essaying  art  of  an
actor  who  has  to  represent  a  particular  passion  in  move-
ment.

And  always  in  Merimee  there  is  this  union  of  curi-
osity with  indifference:  the  curiosity  of  the  student,  the
indifference  of  the  man  of  the  world.  Indifference,  in
him,  as  in  the  man  of  the  world,  is  partly  an  attitude,
adopted  for  its  form,  and  influencing  the  temperament
just  so  much  as  gesture  always  influences  emotion.
The  man  who  forces  himself  to  appear  calm  under  ex-
citement teaches  his  nerves  to  follow  instinctively  the
way  he  has  shown  them.  In  time  he  will  not  merely
seem  calm  but  will  be  calm,  at  the  moment  when  he
learns  that  a  great  disaster  has  befallen  him.  But,  in
Merimee,  was  the  indifference  even  as  external  as  it
must  always  be  when  there  is  restraint,  when,  therefore,
there  is  something  to  restrain?  \\^as  there  not  in  him
B  xix


Prosper  Merimee


a  certain  drying  up  of  the  sources  of  emotion,  as  the
man  of  the  world  came  to  accept  ahnost  the  point  of
view  of  society,  reading  his  stories  to  a  Uttle  circle  of
court  ladies,  when,  once  in  a  while,  he  permitted  himself
to  write  a  story?  And  was  not  this  increase  of  well-
bred  indifference,  now  more  than  ever  characteristic,
almost  the  man  himself,  the  chief  reason  why  he  aban-
doned art  so  early,  writing  only  two  or  three  short
stories  during  the  last  twenty-five  years  of  his  life,  and
WTiting  these  with  a  labour  which  by  no  means  conceals
itself?

Merimee  had  an  abstract  interest  in,  almost  an  en-
thusiasm for,  facts;  facts  for  their  meaning,  the  light
they  throw  on  psychology.  He  declines  to  consider
psychology  except  through  its  expression  in  facts,  with
an  impersonality  far  more  real  than  that  of  Flaubert.
The  document,  historical  or  social,  must  translate  itself
into  sharp  action  before  he  can  use  it ;  not  that  he  does
not  see.  and  appreciate  better  than  most  others,  all
there  is  of  significance  in  the  document  itself;  but  his
theory  of  art  is  inexorable.  He  never  allowed  himself
to  write  as  he  pleased,  but  he  wrote  always  as  he  con-
sidered the  artist  should  write.  Thus  he  made  for  him-
self a  kind  of  formula,  confining  himself,  as  some
thought,  within  too  narrow  limits,  but,  to  himself,  do-
ing exactly  w'hat  he  set  himself  to  do.  with  all  the  sat-
isfaction of  one  who  is  convinced  of  the  justice  of  his
aim  and  confident  of  his  power  to  attain  it.

XX


Prosper  Merimee

Look,  for  instance,  at  his  longest,  far  from  his  best
work,  La  Chvoniqiic  du  Regno  de  Charles  IX.      Like
so  much  of  his  work,  it  has  something  of  the  air  of  a
tour  dc  force,  not  taken  up  entirely  for  its  own  sake.
Merimee  drops  into  a  fashion,  half  deprecatingly,  as  if
he  sees  through  it,  and  yet,  as  with  merely  mundane
elegance,  with  a  resolve  to  be  more  scrupulously  exact
than  its  devotees.     "  Belief,"   says  some  one  in  this
book,  as  if  speaking  for  Merimee,  "  is  a  precious  gift
which  has  been  denied  me."     Well,  he  will  do  better,
without  belief,  than  those  who  believe.    Written  under
a  title  which  suggests  a  work  of  actual  history,  it  is
more  than  possible  that  the  first  suggestion  of  this
book  really  came,  as  he  tells  us  in  the  preface,  from  the
reading  of  "  a  large  number  of  memoirs  and  pamphlets
relating   to  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century."     "  I
wished  to  make  an  epitome  of  my  reading."  he  tells  us,
"  and  here  is  the  epitome."    The  historical  problem  at-
tracted him;  that  never  quite  explicable  Massacre  of
St.  Bartholomew,  in  which  there  was  precisely  the  vio-
lence of  action  and  uncertainty  of  motive  which  he
liked  to  set  before  him  at  the  beginning  of  a  task  in
Hterature.      Probable,    clearly   defined   people,    in   the
dress  of  the  period,  grew  up  naturally  about  this  central
motive;  humour  and  irony  have  their  part;  there  are
adventures,  told  with  a  sword's  point  of  sharpness,  and
in  the  fewest  possible  words;  there  is  one  of  his  cruel
and  loving  women,  in  whom  every  sentiment  becomes

xxi  2

Vol.  6  ^


Prosper  Merimee


action,  by  some  twisted  feminine  logic  of  their  own.
It  is  the  most  artistic,  the  most  clean-cut,  of  historical
novels;  and  yet  this  perfect  neatness  of  method  sug-
gests a  certain  indifference  on  the  part  of  the  W'riter,
as  if  he  were  more  interested  in  doing  the  thing  well
than  in  doing  it.

And  that,  in  all  l)ut  the  very  best  of  his  stories
(even,  perhaps,  in  Arsciic  Gtiillot,  only  not  in  such  per-
fect things  as  Carmen,  as  Mateo  Faleoiie)  is  what
Merimee  just  lets  us  see,  underneath  an  almost  faultless
skill  of  narrative.  An  incident  told  by  Merimee  at  his
best  gathers  about  it  something  of  the  gravity  of  his-
tory; the  composed  way  in  which  it  is  told  helping  to
give  it  the  equivalent  of  remoteness,  allowing  it  not
merely  to  be,  but,  what  is  more  difficult,  to  seem,  classic
in  its  owii  time.  "  Magnificent  things,  things  after  my
own  heart — that  is  to  say,  Greek  in  their  truth  and
simplicity,"  he  writes  in  a  letter,  referring  to  the  tales
of  Poushkin.  The  phrase  is  scarcely  too  strong  to
apply  to  what  is  best  in  his  own  work.  Made  out  of  ele-
mental passions,  hard,  cruel,  detached  as  it  w-ere  from
their  own  sentiments,  the  stories  that  he  tells  might
in  other  hands  become  melodramas;  Carmen,  taken
thoughtlessly  out  of  his  hands,  has  supplied  the  libretto
to  the  most  popular  of  modern  light  operas.  And  yet,
in  his  severe  method  of  telling,  mere  outlines,  it  seems,
told  with  an  even  stricter  watch  over  what  is  signifi-
cantly left  out  than  over  what  is  briefly  allowed  to  be


xxn


Prosper  Merimee


said  in  words,  these  stories  sum  up  little  separate  pieces
of  the  world,  each  a  little  world  in  itself.  And  each  is
a  little  world  which  he  has  made  his  own,  with  a  labour
at  last  its  own  reward,  and  taking  life  partly  because
he  has  put  into  it  more  of  himself  than  the  mere  inten-
tion of  doing  it  well.  Merimee  loved  Spain,  and  Car-
mciu  which  by  some  caprice  of  popularity  is  the  symbol
of  Spain  to  people  in  general,  is  really,  to  those  who
know  Spain  well,  the  most  Spanish  thing  that  has  been
written  since  Gil  Bias.  All  the  little  parade  of  local
colour  and  philology,  the  appendix  on  the  Calo  of  the
gipsies,  done  to  heighten  the  illusion,  has  more  sig-
nificance than  people  sometimes  think.  In  this  story
all  the  qualities  of  Merimee  come  into  agreement;  the
student  of  human  passions,  the  traveller,  the  observer,
the  learned  man,  meet  in  harmony;  and,  in  addition,
there  is  the  aficionado,  the  true  amateur,  in  love  with
Spain  and  the  Spaniards.

It  is  significant  that  in  the  reception  of  ]\Ierimee  at
the  Academic  Francaise  in  1845,  ^I-  Etienne  thought
it  already  needful  to  say:  "  Do  not  pause  in  the  midst
of  your  career;  rest  is  not  permitted  to  your  talent."
Already  Merimee  was  giving  way  to  facts,  to  facts  in
themselves,  as  they  come  into  history,  into  records  of
scholarship.  We  find  him  writing,  a  little  dryly,  on
Catiline,  on  Caesar,  on  Don  Pedro  the  Cruel,  learning
Russian,  and  translating  from  it  (yet,  while  studying

the  Russians  before  all  the  world,  never  discovering  the

xxiii


Prosper  Merimee

mystical  Russian  soul),  writing  learned  articles,  writ-
ing reports.  He  looked  around  on  contemporary  lit-
erature, and  found  nothing  that  he  could  care  for.
Stendhal  was  gone,  and  who  else  was  there  to  admire?
Flaubert,  it  seemed  to  him,  was  "  wasting  his  talent
under  the  pretence  of  realism."  Victor  Hugo  was  "  a
fellow  with  the  most  beautiful  figures  of  speech  at  his
disposal,"  who  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  think,  but  in-
toxicated himself  with  his  own  words.  Baudelaire
made  him  furious.  Renan  filled  him  with  pitying  scorn.
In  the  midst  of  his  contempt,  he  may  perhaps  have
imagined  that  he  was  being  left  behind.  For  whatever
reason,  weakness  or  strength,  he  could  not  persuade
himself  that  it  was  worth  while  to  strive  for  anything
any  more.  He  died  probably  at  the  moment  when  he
was  no  longer  a  fashion,  and  had  not  yet  become  a

classic.

Arthur  Symons.


XXIV


LIFE   OF   MERIMEE


Prosper  Merimee  was  the  son  of  Jean  Francois  Lconor
Merimee,  a  painter  and  historian  of  art,  and  Anna  Moreau,
his  zi'ife,  zcho  also  zvas  a  painter;  he  zi'as  born  on  the  28th
of  September,  i8os,  in  Paris.  He  zi'as  brought  up  a  dandy
and  an  Anglomaniac ;  Haditt  zcas  the  intimate  friend  of
his  parents.  At  college  Merimee  zvas  not  brilliant  as  a
scholar,  and  it  zvas  not  until  he  reached  his  tzventy-second
year  that  he  began  to  turn  to  intellectual  pursuits.  A  few
months  later  he  took  his  place  in  the  innermost  circle  of  lit-
erary life  in  Paris.  About  182^  he  became  the  friend  of
Stendhal,  zvhose  genius  and  temperament  exercised  a
strong  influence  upon  Merimee.  The  latter  zvas  nozv  writing
the  series  of  Hve  romantic  plays,  zvhich  he  presently  pub-
lished together,  pretending  that  they  zvere  translated  from
an  imaginary  Spanish  dramatist,  Clara  Gazul;  of  these,  one,
"  The  Spaniards  in  Denmark,"  possesses  real  merit;  the
others  are  of  a  juvenile  extravagance.  Merimee' s  second
work,  the  "  Guzla  "  of  182"/,  zvas  also  a  mystification,  for  this
pretended  to  be  a  collection  of  Illyrian  folk-songs.  In  1828
he  published  a  sort  of  chronicle-play,  the  "Jacquerie,"  and
in  182P  his  earliest  novel,  the  "  Chronique  du  temps  de
Charles  IX,"  zvith  zvhich  latter,  for  the  first  time,  Merimee
enjoyed  a  considerable  success.    In  "  Charles  IX"  he  imi-

XXV


Life  of  Merimee

tatcd,  until  closer  success  than  any  other  French  romancer
has  done,  the  historical  manner  of  Sir  IValter  Scott.     In
1829  he  composed  three  of  the  most  interesting  of  his  early
short  stories — "  Lc  Vase  Atnisque,"  "  L' Enlevement  de  la
Redoiite,"  and  "  Mateo  Falcone."    In  1830  he  travelled  in
Spain,  and,  on  his  return  to  Paris,  entered  the  Civil  Service;
he  zvas  moved  from  department  to  department  until  at  length
he  found  the  place  zvhich  exactly  suited  him  in  the  Fine
Arts  Section  of  the  Home  Office.    His  life  for  the  few  next
years  was  dissipated  and  cynical;  he  ivrote  little,  and  that  lit-
tle not  his  best.   "  La  Double  Mcprise,"  not  a  very  character-
istic story,  is  almost  the  only  literary  product  of  this  period.
But  in  i8s5  Merimee  was  appointed  Inspector  General  of
Historic  Monuments  in  France,  and  in  the  course  of  the
next  year  he  formed  his  life-long  friendship  with  the  Coun-
tess of  Monti  JO ;  these  tzvo  events  greatly  added  to  the  seri-
ous interests  of  his  life.    In  1836  he  began  that  mysterious
correspondence  zuith  the  "  Unknozvn,"  zvhich  has,  since  his
death,  been  read  zn'ith  so  acute  an  interest.    Four  of  Meri-
mee's  most  celebrated  zvorks  belong  to  the  years  immediately
subsequent — "  Venus  d'llle"  to  1837,  "  Colombo"  to  1840,
" Arsene  Guillot"  to  1844,  and  "Carmen"  to  1843.     Of
these,  "  Colomba  "  zvas  zvritten  during  a  journey  Merimee
undertook  in  Corsica.    His  fame  was  now  ivide,  but  not  uni-
versal, he  had  many  enemies;  in  1844  he  zvas  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  French  Academy  after  stormy  scenes  and  by  a
narrozv  majority.     As  Inspector  of  Monuments,  Merimee
travelled  for  years  through   the   length   and   breadth   of
France,  ami  his  services  to  art  and  archccology  zvere  invalu-
able.    He  published  long  and  laborious  historical  zvorks,

xxvi


Life  of  Merimee

zvhich  arc  no  longer  zvidely  remembered.  In  i8^j  the  Em-
peror Napoleon  III  married  Eugenie,  the  daughter  of  Mcri-
nice's  intimate  and  old  friend,  Madame  de  Montijo,  and  the
novelist  became  closely  attached  to  the  court  of  the  Tuile-
ries;  he  zvas  even  employed  on  diplomatic  work  of  a  particu-
larly delicate  kind.  He  zvrote  little  of  an  imaginatiz'c  nature
during  the  last  years  of  his  life,  the  short  story  called  "  Lo-
kis  "  (i86p)  being  the  principal  exception.  Merimee  settled
at  Cannes,  zvhere  he  died  on  the  ijth  of  September,  18/0.
To  the  great  surprise  of  his  friends,  it  zvas  found  that  he
had  become  a  Protestant  in  his  last  brief  illness.  The  post-
humous publication  of  his  extremely  beautiful  and  origi-
nal letters  to  tzn'o  "  unknozvn  "  ladies  and  to  Panizzi  did
much  to  keep  alive  and  to  refresh  the  memory  of  Prosper
Merimee.

E.  G.


xxvu


CONTENTS

PAGES

Prosper  Merimee v-xxiv

Arthur  Symons

LifeofM6rim6e xxv-xxvii

Edmund  Gosse

Colomba 1--^^

Carmen ,     .     .     .     .  1-89

The  Portraits  of  Merimee 9^-99

Octave  Uzanne


XXIX


C  O  L  O  M  B  A


CHAPTER    I

"  Pe  far  la  to  vendetta,
Sta  sigur',  vasta  anche  ella."

■ —  Voccro  du  Niolo.

Early  in  the  month  of  October,  181-,  Colonel  Sir
Thomas  Nevil,  a  distinguished  Irish  officer  of  the  Eng-
lish army,  alighted  with  his  daughter  at  the  Hotel
Beauveau,  ]\Iarseilles,  on  their  return  from  a  tour  in
Italy.  The  perpetual  and  universal  admiration  of  enthu-
siastic travellers  has  produced  a  sort  of  reaction,  and
many  tourists,  in  their  desire  to  appear  singular,  now
take  the  nil  aduiirari  of  Horace  for  their  motto.  To  this
dissatisfied  class  the  colonel's  only  daughter,  Lliss
Lydia,  belonged.  ''  The  Transfiguration  "  had  seemed
to  her  mediocre,  and  Vesuvius  in  eruption  an  efifect  not
greatly  superior  to  that  produced  by  the  Birmingham
factory  chimneys.  Her  great  objection  to  Italy,  on  the
whole,  was  its  lack  of  local  colour  and  character.  J\Iy
readers  must  discover  the  sense  of  these  expressions  as
best  they  may.  A  few  years  ago  I  understood  them
very  well  myself,  but  at  the  present  time  I  can  make
nothing  of  them.  At  first,  ]\Iiss  Lydia  had  flattered  her-
self she  had  found  things  on  the  other  side  of  the  Alps


Colomba

which  nobody  had  ever  before  seen,  about  which  she
could  converse  az'cc  Ics  hoiuiclcs  gciis,  as  M.  Jourdain
calls  them.  But  soon,  anticipated  in  every  direction  by
her  countrymen,  she  despaired  of  making  any  fresh  dis-
coveries, and  went  over  to  the  party  of  the  opposition.
It  is  really  very  tiresome  not  to  be  able  to  talk  about
the  wonders  of   Italy  without  hearing  somebody  say

"  Of  course  you  know  the  Raphael  in  the  Palazzo

at ?     It  is  the  finest  thing  in  Italy!  "  and  just  the

thing  yon  happen  to  have  overlooked!  As  it  would
take  too  long  to  see  everything,  the  simplest  course  is
to  resort  to  deliberate  and  universal  censure.

At  the  Hotel  Beauveau  ]\Iiss  Lydia  met  with  a  bit-
ter disappointment.  She  had  brought  back  a  pretty
sketch  of  the  Pelasgic  or  Cyclopean  Gate  at  Segni,
which,  as  she  believed,  all  other  artists  had  completely
overlooked.  Now,  at  Marseilles,  she  met  Lady  Fran-
ces Fenwick,  who  showed  her  her  album,  in  which  ap-
peared, between  a  sonnet  and  a  dried  flower,  the  very
gate  in  cpiestion,  brilliantly  touched  in  with  sienna.
Miss  Lydia  gave  her  drawing  to  her  maid — and  lost  all
admiration  for  Pelasgic  structures.

This  unhappy  frame  of  mind  was  shared  by  Colo-
nel Nevil,  who,  since  the  death  of  his  wife,  looked  at
everything  through  his  daughter's  eyes.  In  his  estima-
tion, Italy  had  committed  the  unpardonable  sin  of  bor-
ing his  child,  and  was,  in  consequence,  the  most  weari-
some country  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Fie  had  no  fault
to  find,  indeed,  with  the  pictures  and  statues,  but  he
was  in  a  position  to  assert  that  Italian  sport  was  ut-

2


Colomba

terly  wretched,  and  that  he  had  been  obHged  to  tramp
ten  leagues  over  the  Roman  Campagna,  under  a
burning  sun,  to  kill  a  few  worthless  red-legged  par-
tridges.

The  morning  after  his  arrival  at  Tvlarseilles  he  in-
vited Captain  Ellis — his  former  adjutant,  who  had  just
been  spending  six  weeks  in  Corsica — to  dine  with  him.
The  captain  told  Miss  Lydia  a  story  about  bandits,
which  had  the  advantage  of  bearing  no  resemblance  to
the  robber  tales  with  which  she  had  been  so  frequently
regaled,  on  the  road  between  Naples  and  Rome,  and
he  told  it  well.  At  dessert,  the  two  men,  left  alone  over
their  claret,  talked  of  hunting — and  the  colonel  learned
that  nowhere  is  there  more  excellent  sport,  or  game
more  varied  and  abundant,  than  in  Corsica.  "  There
are  plenty  of  wild  boars,"  said  Captain  Ellis.  "  And
you  have  to  learn  to  distinguish  them  from  the
domestic  pigs,  which  are  astonishingly  like  them.  For
if  you  kill  a  pig,  you  find  yourself  in  difficulties  with  the
swine-herds.  They  rush  out  of  the  thickets  (which  they
call  maqiiis)  armed  to  the  teeth,  make  you  pay  for  their
beasts,  and  laugh  at  you  besides.  Then  there  is  the
moufion,  a  strange  animal,  which  you  will  not  find  any-
where else — splendid  game,  l)ut  hard  to  get — and  stags,
deer,  pheasants,  and  partridges — it  would  be  impossible
to  enumerate  all  the  kinds  with  which  Corsica  swarms.
If  you  want  shooting,  colonel,  go  to  Corsica!  There,
as  one  of  my  entertainers  said  to  me,  you  can  get  a  shot
at  every  imaginable  kind  of  game,  from  a  thrush  to  a
man!"

3


Colomba

At  tea,  the  captain  once  more  delighted  Lydia  with
the  tale  of  a  vciidcUa  Iraiiszrrsalc,'^  even  more  strange
than  his  first  stor)-,  and  he  thoroughly  stirred  her  enthu-
siasm by  his  descriptions  of  the  strange  wild  beauty  of
the  country,  the  peculiarities  of  its  inhabitants,  and  their
primitive  hospitality  and  customs.  Finally,  he  offered
her  a  pretty  little  stiletto,  less  remarkable  for  its  shape
and  copper  mounting  than  for  its  origin.  A  famous
bandit  had  given  it  to  Captain  Ellis,  and  had  assured
him  it  had  been  buried  in  four  human  bodies.  Wiss
Lydia  thrust  it  through  her  girdle,  laid  it  on  the  table
beside  her  bed,  and  unsheathed  it  twice  over  before  she
fell  asleep.  Her  father  meanwhile  was  dreaming  he  had
slain  a  mouflon,  and  that  its  owner  insisted  on  his  pay-
ing for  it,  a  demand  to  which  he  gladly  acceded,  seeing
it  was  a  most  curious  creature,  like  a  boar,  with  stag's
horns  and  a  pheasant's  tail.

"  Ellis  tells  me  there's  splendid  shooting  in  Cor-
sica," said  the  colonel,  as  he  sat  at  breakfast,  alone
with  his  daughter.  "  If  it  hadn't  been  for  the  dis-
tance, I  should  like  to  spend  a  fortnight  there."

"  Well,"  replied  Miss  Lydia,  "  why  shouldn't  we  go
to  Corsica?  While  you  are  hunting  I  can  sketch — I
should  love  to  have  that  grotto  Captain  Ellis  talked
about,  where  Napoleon  used  to  go  and  study  when  he
was  a  child,  in  my  album."

It  was  the  first  time,  probably,  that  any  wish  ex-
pressed by  the  colonel  had  won  his  daughter's  api)roba-

*  A  vendetta  in  which  vengeance  falls  on  a  more  or  less  distant
relation  of  the  author  of  the  original  offence.


Colomba

tion.  Delighted  as  he  was  by  this  unexpected  harmony
on  their  opinions,  he  was  nevertheless  wise  enough  to
put  forward  various  objections,  calculated  to  sharpen
Miss  Lydia's  welcome  whim.  In  vain  did  he  dwell  on
the  wildness  of  the  counrty,  and  the  difficulties  of  travel
there  for  a  lady.  Nothing  frightened  her;  she  liked
travelling  on  horseback  of  all  things;  she  delighted  in
the  idea  of  bivoucking  in  the  open;  she  even  threatened
to  go  as  far  as  Asia  Minor — in  short,  she  found  an  an-
swer to  everything.  No  Englishwoman  had  ever  been
to  Corsica;  therefore  she  must  go.  What  a  pleasure  it
would  be,  when  she  got  back  to  St.  James's  Place,  to
exhibit  her  album!  "  But,  my  dear  creature,  why  do
you  pass  over  that  delightful  drawing?  "  "  That's  only
a  trifie — just  a  sketch  I  made  of  a  famous  Corsican
bandit  who  was  our  guide."  "What!  you  don't  mean
to  say  you  have  been  to  Corsica?  "

As  there  were  no  steamboats  between  France  and
Corsica,  in  those  days,  inquiries  w'ere  made  for  some
ship  about  to  sail  for  the  island  Miss  Lydia  proposed  to
discover.  That  very  day  the  colonel  wrote  to  Paris,  to
countermand  his  order  for  the  suite  of  apartments  in
which  he  was  to  have  made  some  stay,  and  bargained
with  the  skipper  of  a  Corsican  schooner,  just  about  to  set
sail  for  Ajaccio,  for  two  poor  cabins,  but  the  best  that
could  be  had.  Provisions  were  sent  on  board,  the  skip-
per swore  that  one  of  his  sailors  was  an  excellent  cook,
and  had  not  his  equal  for  boitiUcabaisse  ;  he  promised
mademoiselle  should  be  comfortable,  and  have  a  fair
wind  and  a  calm  sea.

5


Colomba


The  colonel  further  stipulated,  in  obedience  to  his
daughter's  wishes,  that  no  other  passenger  should  be
taken  on  board,  and  that  the  captain  should  skirt  the
coast  of  the  island,  so  that  Miss  Lydia  might  enjoy  the
view  of  the  mountains.


CHAPTER    II

On  the  day  of  their  departure  everything  was
packed  and  sent  on  board  early  in  the  morning.  The
schooner  was  to  sail  with  the  evening  breeze.  Mean-
while, as  the  colonel  and  his  daughter  were  walking
on  the  Canebiere,  the  skipper  addressed  them,  and
craved  permission  to  take  on  board  one  of  his  relations,
his  eldest  son's  godfather's  second  cousin,  who  was
going  back  to  Corsica,  his  native  country,  on  important
business,  and  could  not  find  any  ship  to  take  him  over.

"  He's  a  charming  fellow,"  added  Captain  Mattel,
"  a  soldier,  an  officer  in  the  Infantry  of  the  Guard,  and
would  have  been  a  colonel  already  if  the  other  [mean-
ing Napoleon]   had  still  been  emperor!  "

"  As  he  is  a  soldier,"  began  the  colonel — he  w^as
about  to  add,  "  I  shall  be  very  glad  he  should  come  with
us,"  when  Miss  Lydia  exclaimed  in  English:

"  An  infantry  officer!  "  (Her  father  had  been  in  the
cavalry,  and  she  consequently  looked  down  on  every
other  branch  of  the  service.)  "  An  uneducated  man,
very  likely,  who  would  be  sea-sick,  and  spoil  all  the
pleasure  of  our  trip!  "

The  captain  did  not  understand  a  word  of  English,
but  he  seemed  to  catch  what  Miss  Lydia  was  saying
Vol.  6  7  C


Colomba

by  the  pursing  up  of  her  pretty  mouth,  and  immediately
entered  upon  an  elaborate  panegyric  of  his  relative,
which  he  wound  up  by  declaring  him  to  be  a  gentle-
man, belonging  to  a  family  of  corporals,  and  that  he
would  not  be  in  the  very  least  in  the  colonel's  way,  for
that  he,  the  skipper,  would  undertake  to  stow  him  in
some  corner,  where  they  should  not  be  aware  of  his
presence.

The  colonel  and  Miss  Nevil  thought  it  peculiar  that
there  should  be  Corsican  families  in  which  the  dignity
of  corporal  was  handed  down  from  father  to  son.  But,
as  they  really  believed  the  individual  in  question  to  be
some  infantry  corporal,  they  concluded  he  was  some
poor  devil  whom  the  skipper  desired  to  take  out  of  pure
charity.  If  he  had  been  an  officer,  they  would  have
been  obliged  to  speak  to  him  and  live  with  him;  but
there  was  no  reason  why  they  should  put  themselves
out  for  a  corporal — who  is  a  person  of  no  consequence
unless  his  detachment  is  also  at  hand,  with  bayonets
fixed,  ready  to  convey  a  person  to  a  place  to  which  he
would  rather  not  be  taken.

"  Is  your  kinsman  ever  sea-sick?  "  aemanded  IMiss
Nevil  sharply.

"  Never,  mademoiselle,  he  is  as  steady  as  a  rock,
either  on  sea  or  land!  "

"  Very  good  then,  you  can  take  him,"  said  she.

"  You  can  take  him!  "  echoed  the  colonel,  and  they
passed  on  their  way.

Toward  five  o'clock  in  the  evening  Captain  IMattei
came  to  escort  them  on  board  the  schooner.     On  the

8


Colomba

jetty,  near  the  captain's  gig,  they  met  a  tall  young  man
wearing  a  blue  h-ock-coat,  buttoned  up  to  his  chin;  his
face  was  tanned,  his  eyes  were  black,  brilliant,  wide
open,  his  whole  appearance  intelligent  and  frank.  His
shoulders,  well  thrown  back,  and  his  little  twisted  mus-
tache clearly  revealed  the  soldier — for  at  that  period
mustaches  were  by  no  means  common,  and  the  National
Guard  had  not  carried  the  habits  and  appearance  of  the
guard-room  into  the  bosom  of  every  family.

When  the  young  man  saw  the  colonel  he  doffed  his
cap,  and  thanked  him  in  excellent  language,  and  with-
out the  slightest  shyness,  for  the  service  he  w^as  render-
ing him.

"  Delighted  to  be  of  use  to  you,  my  good  fellow!  "
said  the  colonel,  with  a  friendly  nod,  and  he  stepped  into
the  gig.

"  He's  not  very  ceremonious,  this  Englishman  of
yours,"  said  the  young  man  in  Italian,  and  in  an  under-
tone, to  the  captain.

The  skipper  laid  his  forefinger  under  his  left  eye,
and  pulled  down  the  corners  of  his  mouth.  To  a  man  ac-
cjuainted  with  me  language  of  signs,  this  meant  that  the
Englishman  understood  Italian,  and  was  an  oddity  into
the  bargain.  The  young  man  smiled  slightly  and
touched  his  forehead,  in  answer  to  Mattel's  sign,  as
though  to  indicate  that  every  Englishman  had  a  bee  in
his  bonnet.  Then  he  sat  down  beside  them,  and  began
to  look  very  attentively,  though  not  impertinently,  at
his  pretty  fellow-traveller.

"  These  French  soldiers  all  have  a  good  appear-

9


Colomba

ance,"  remarked  the  colonel  in  English  to  his  daughter,
"  and  so  it  is  easy  to  turn  them  into  officers."  Then
addressing  the  young  man  in  French,  he  said,  "  Tell  me,
my  good  man,  what  regiment  have  you  served  in?  "
The  young  man  nudged  his  second  cousin's  godson's
father  gently  with  his  elbow,  and  suppressing  an  ironic
smile,  replied  that  he  had  served  in  the  Infantry  of  the
Guard,  and  that  he  had  just  quitted  the  Seventh  Regi-
ment of  Light  Infantry.

"  Were  you  at  Waterloo?     You  are  very  young!  "

"  I  beg  your  pardon,  colonel,  that  was  my  only  cam-
paign."

"  It  comits  as  two,"  said  the  colonel.

The  young  Corsican  bit  his  lips.

"  Papa,"  said  Miss  Lydia  in  English,  "  do  ask  him
if  the  Corsicans  are  very  fond  of  their  Buonaparte."

Before  the  colonel  could  translate  her  question  into
French,  the  young  man  answered  in  fairly  good  Eng-
lish, though  with  a  marked  accent:

"  You  know,  mademoiselle,  that  no  man  is  ever  a
prophet  in  his  own  country.  We,  who  are  Napoleon's
fellow-countrymen,  are  perhaps  less  attached  to  him
than  the  French.  As  for  myself,  though  my  family  was
formerly  at  enmity  with  his,  I  both  love  and  admire
him."

"You  speak  English!"  exclaimed  the  colonel.

"  Very  ill,  as  you  may  perceive!  "

Miss  Lydia,  though  somewhat  shocked  by  the
young  man's  easy  tone,  could  not  help  laughing  at  the
idea  of  a  personal  enmity  between  a  corporal  and  an  em-

10


Colomba

peror.  She  took  this  as  a  foretaste  of  Corsican  pecul-
iarities, and  made  up  her  mind  to  note  it  down  in  her
journal.

''  Perhaps  you  were  a  prisoner  in  England?  "  asked

the  colonel.

"  No,  colonel,  I  learned  English  in  France,  when  I
was  very  young,  from  a  prisoner  of  your  nation."

Then,  addressing  Miss  Nevil:

"  Mattel  tells  me  you  have  just  come  back  from
Italy.  No  doubt,  mademoiselle,  you  speak  the  purest
Tuscan — I  fear  you'll  find  it  somewhat  difficult  to  un-
derstand our  dialect."

"  My  daughter  understands  every  Italian  dialect,"
said  the  colonel.  "  She  has  the  gift  of  languages.  She
doesn't  get  it  from  me."

"  Would  mademoiselle  understand,  for  instance,
these  lines  from  one  of  our  Corsican  songs  in  which  a
shepherd  says  to  his  shepherdess:

"  S'entrassi  'ndru  paradisu  santu,  santu,
E  nun  truvassi  a  tia,  mi  n'esciria."  *

Miss  Lydia  did  understand.  She  thought  the  quo-
tation bold,  and  the  look  which  accompanied  it  still
bolder,  and  replied,  with  a  blush,  "  Capisco."

"  And  are  you  going  back  to  your  own  country  on
furlough?  "  inquired  the  colonel.

"  No,  colonel,  they  have  put  me  on  half  pay.  be-
cause I  was  at  Waterloo,  probably,  and  because  I  am

*  "  If  I  entered  the  holy  land  of  paradise  and  found  thee  not,  I
would  depart  !  " — Serenata  di  Zicavo.

II


Colomba

Napoleon's  fcllo\v-countr3-man.  I  am  going  home,  as
the  song  says,  low  in  hope  and  low  in  purse,"  and  he
looked  up  to  the  sky  and  sighed.

The  colonel  slipped  his  hand  into  his  pocket,  and
tried  to  think  of  some  civil  phrase  with  which  he  might
slip  the  gold  coin  he  was  fingering  into  the  palm  of  his
unfortunate  enemy.

"  And  I  too/'  he  said  good-humouredly,  "  have  been
put  on  half  pay,  but  your  half  pay  can  hardly  give  you
enough  to  buy  tobacco!  Here,  corporal!  "  and  he  tried
to  force  the  gold  coin  into  the  young  man's  closed  hand,
which  rested  on  the  gunwale  of  the  gig.

The  young  Corsican  reddened,  drew-  himself  up,  bit
his  lips,  and  seemed,  for  a  moment,  on  the  brink  of
some  angry  reply.  Then  suddenly  his  expression
changed  and  he  burst  out  laughing.  The  colonel,
grasping  his  gold  piece  still  in  his  hand,  sat  staring  at
him.

'*  Colonel,"  said  the  young  man,  when  he  had  recov-
ered his  gravity,  "  allow  me  to  ofTer  you  two  pieces  of
advice — the  first  is  never  to  offer  money  to  a  Corsican,
for  some  of  my  fellow-countrymen  would  be  rude
enough  to  throw  it  back  in  your  face;  the  second  is  not
to  give  people  titles  they  do  not  claim.  You  call  me
*  corporal,'  and  I  am  a  lieutenant — the  difference  is  not
very  great,  no  doubt,  still "

"  Lieutenant!  lieutenant!  "  exclaimed  Sir  Thomas.
"  But  the  skipper  told  me  you  were  a  corporal,  and  that
your  father  and  all  your  family  had  been  corporals  be-
fore you!  "

12


Colomba

At  these  words  the  young  man  threw  himself  back
and  laughed  louder  than  ever,  so  merrily  that  the  skip-
per and  his  two  sailors  joined  the  chorus.

"Forgive  me,  colonel!"  he  cried  at  last.  "The
mistake  is  so  comical,  and  I  have  only  just  realized  it.
It  is  quite  true  that  my  family  glories  in  the  fact  that  it
can  reckon  many  corporals  among  its  ancestors — but
our  Corsican  corporals  never  wore  stripes  upon  their
sleeves!  Toward  the  year  of  grace  i  lOO  certain  villages
revolted  against  the  tyranny  of  the  great  mountain
nobles,  and  chose  leaders  of  their  own,  whom  they  called
corporals.  In  our  island  we  think  a  great  deal  of  being
descended  from  these  tribunes."

"  I  beg  your  pardon,  sir,"  exclaimed  the  colonel,  "  I
beg  your  pardon  a  thousand  times!  As  you  under-
stand the  cause  of  my  mistake,  I  hope  you  will  do  me
the  kindness  of  forgiving  it!  "  and  he  held  out  his  hand.

"  It  is  the  just  punishment  of  my  petty  pride,"  said
the  young  man,  still  laughing,  and  cordially  shaking
the  Englishman's  hand.  "  I  am  not  at  all  ofifended.
As  my  friend  Mattel  has  introduced  me  so  unsuccess-
fully, allow  me  to  introduce  myself.  My  name  is  Orso
della  Rebbia;  I  am  a  lieutenant  on  half  pay;  and  if,  as
the  sight  of  those  two  fine  dogs  of  yours  leads  me  to
believe,  you  are  coming  to  Corsica  to  hunt,  I  shall  be
very  proud  to  do  you  the  honours  of  our  mountains  and
our  maquis — if,  indeed,  I  have  not  forgotten  them  alto-
gether! "  he  added,  with  a  sigh.

At  this  moment  the  gig  came  alongside  the
schooner,  the  lieutenant  offered  his  hand  to  Miss  Lydia,

13


Colomba

and  then  helped  the  colonel  to  swing  himself  up  on
deck.  Once  there,  Sir  Thomas,  who  was  still  very
much  ashamed  of  his  blunder,  and  at  a  loss  to  know
what  he  had  better  do  to  make  a  man  whose  ancestry-
dated  from  the  year  iioo  forget  it,  invited  him  to  sup-
per, without  waiting  for  his  daughter's  consent,  and  with
many  fresh  apologies  and  handshakes.  ]\Iiss  Lydia
frowned  a  little,  but,  after  all,  she  was  not  sorry  to  know
what  a  corporal  really  was.  She  rather  liked  her  guest,
and  was  even  beginning  to  fancy  there  was  something
aristocratic  about  him — only  she  thought  him  too  frank
and  merry  for  a  hero  of  romance.

'■  Lieutenant  della  Rebbia,"  said  the  colonel,  bowing
to  him,  English  fashion,  over  a  glass  of  Madeira,  "  I
met  a  great  many  of  your  countrymen  in  Spain — they
were  splendid  sharp-shooters."

"  Yes,  and  a  great  many  of  them  have  stayed  in
Spain,"  replied  the  young  lieutenant  gravely.

"  I  shall  never  forget  the  behaviour  of  a  Corsican
battalion  at  the  Battle  of  Vittoria,"  said  the  colonel;  "  I
have  good  reason  to  remember  it,  indeed,"  he  added,
rubbing  his  chest.  "  All  day  long  they  had  been  skir-
mishing in  the  gardens,  behind  the  hedges,  and  had  killed
I  don't  know  how  many  of  our  horses  and  men.  When
the  retreat  was  sounded,  they  rallied  and  made  ofT  at  a
great  pace.  We  had  hoped  to  take  our  revenge  on
them  in  the  open  plain,  but  the  scoundrels — I  beg  your
pardon,  lieutenant;  the  brave  fellows,  I  should  have
said — had  formed  a  square,  and  there  was  no  breaking  it.
In  the  middle  of  the  square — I  fancy  I  can  see  him  still

14


Colomba

— rode  an  officer  on  a  little  black  horse.  He  kept  close
beside  the  standard,  smoking  his  cigar  as  coolly  as  if
he  had  been  in  a  cafe.  Every  now  and  then  their  bugles
played  a  flourish,  as  if  to  defy  us.  I  sent  my  two  leading
squadrons  at  them.  Whew!  instead  of  breaking  the
front  of  the  square,  my  dragoons  passed  along  the  sides,
wheeled,  and  came  back  in  great  disorder,  and  with  sev-
eral riderless  horses — and  all  the  time  those  cursed
bugles  went  on  playing.  When  the  smoke  which  had
hung  over  the  battalion  cleared  away,  I  saw  the  officer
still  puffing  at  his  cigar  beside  his  eagle.  I  was  furious,
and  led  a  final  charge  myself.  Their  muskets,  foul  with
continual  firing,  would  not  go  off,  but  the  men  had
drawn  up,  six  deep,  with  their  bayonets  pointed  at  the
noses  of  our  horses;  you  might  have  taken  them  for  a
wall.  I  was  shouting,  urging  on  my  dragoons,  and  spur-
ring my  horse  forward,  when  the  officer  I  have  men-
tioned, at  length  throwing  away  his  cigar,  pointed  me
out  to  one  of  his  men,  and  I  heard  him  say  something
like  "y4/  capcllo  bianco!  " — I  wore  a  white  plume.  Then
I  did  not  hear  any  more,  for  a  bullet  passed  through  my
chest.  That  was  a  splendid  battalion,  M.  della  Rebbia,
that  first  battalion  of  the  Eighteenth — all  of  them  Corsi-
cans,  as  I  was  afterward  told!  "

"  Yes,"  said  Orso,  whose  eyes  had  shone  as  he  lis-
tened to  the  story.  "  They  covered  the  retreat,  and
brought  back  their  eagle.  Two  thirds  of  those  brave
fellows  are  sleeping  now  on  the  plains  of  Vittoria!  "

"  And,  perhaps,  you  can  tell  me  the  name  of  the
officer  in  command?  "

15


Colomba

"  It  was  my  father — he  was  then  a  major  in  the
Eighteenth,  and  was  promoted  colonel  for  his  conduct
on  that  terrible  day."

"  Your  father!  Upon  my  word,  he  was  a  brave
man!  I  should  be  glad  to  see  him  again,  and  I  am  cer-
tain I  should  recognise  him.     Is  he  still  ahve?  "

"  No,  colonel,"  said  the  young  man,  turning  slightly
pale.

"  Was  he  at  Waterloo?  "

"Yes,  colonel;  but  he  had  not  the  happiness  of
dying  on  the  field  of  battle.  He  died  in  Corsica  two
years  ago.  How  beautiful  the  sea  is!  It  is  ten  years
since  I  have  seen  the  Mediterranean!  Don't  you  think
the  Mediterranean  much  more  beautiful  than  the  ocean,
mademoiselle?  "

"  I  think  it  too  blue,  and  its  waves  lack  grandeur."

"  You  like  wild  beauty  then,  mademoiselle!  In  that
case,  I  am  sure  you  will  be  delighted  with  Corsica."

"  My  daughter,"  said  the  colonel,  "  delights  in
everything  that  is  out  of  the  common,  and  for  that  rea-
son she  did  not  care  much  for  Italy."

"  The  only  place  in  Italy  that  I  know,"  said  Orso,
"  is  Pisa,  where  I  was  at  school  for  some  time.  But  I
can  not  think,  without  admiration,  of  the  Campo-Santo,
the  Duomo,  and  the  Leaning  Tower — especially  of
the  Campo-Santo.  Do  you  remember  Orcagna's
*  Death  '?  I  think  I  could  draw  every  line  of  it — it  is
so  graven  on  my  memory."

Miss  Lydia  was  afraid  the  lieutenant  was  going  to
deliver  an  enthusiastic  tirade.

i6


Colomba

"  It  is  very  pretty/'  she  said,  with  a  yawn.  ''  Ex-
cuse me,  papa,  my  head  aches  a  Httle;  I  am  going-
down  to  my  cabin."

She  kissed  her  father  on  the  forehead,  inchned  her
head  majestically  to  Orso,  and  disappeared.  Then  the
two  men  talked  about  hunting  and  war.  They  discov-
ered that  at  Waterloo  they  had  been  posted  opposite
each  other,  and  had  no  doubt  exchanged  many  a  bullet.
This  knowledge  strengthened  their  good  tmderstanding.
Turn  about,  they  criticised  Napoleon,  Wellington,  and
Bliicher,  and  then  they  hunted  buck,  boar,  and  moun-
tain sheep  in  company.  At  last,  when  night  was  far
advanced,  and  the  last  bottle  of  claret  had  been  emp-
tied, the  colonel  wrung  the  lieutenant's  hand  once  more
and  wished  him  good-night,  expressing  his  hope  that
an  acquaintance,  which  had  begun  in  such  ridiculous
fashion,  might  be  continued.  They  parted,  and  each
went  to  bed.


17


CHAPTER    III

It  was  a  lovely  night.  The  moonlight  was  dancing
on  the  waves,  the  ship  glided  smoothly  on  before  a  gen-
tle breeze.  Miss  Lydia  was  not  sleepy,  and  nothing  but
the  presence  of  an  unpoetical  person  had  prevented  her
from  enjoying  those  emotions  which  every  human  be-
ing possessing  a  touch  of  poetry  must  experience  at  sea
by  moonlight,  ^^^^en  she  felt  sure  the  young  lieutenant
must  be  sound  asleep,  like  the  prosaic  creature  he  was,
she  got  up.  took  her  cloak,  woke  her  maid,  and  went
on  deck.  Nobody  was  to  be  seen  except  the  sailor  at
the  helm,  who  was  singing  a  sort  of  dirge  in  the  Corsi-
can  dialect,  to  some  wild  and  monotonous  tune.  In  the
silence  of  the  night  this  strange  music  had  its  charm.
Unluckily  ]\Iiss  Lydia  did  not  understand  perfectly  what
the  sailor  was  singing.  Amid  a  good  deal  that  was  com-
monplace, a  passionate  line  would  occasionally  excite
her  liveliest  curiosity.  But  just  at  the  most  important
moment  some  words  of  patois  would  occur,  the  sense
of  which  utterly  escaped  her.  Yet  she  did  make  out
that  the  subject  was  connected  with  a  murder.  Curses
against  the  assassin,  threats  of  vengeance,  praise  of  the
dead  were  all  mingled  confusedly.  She  remembered
some  of  the  lines.  I  will  endeavour  to  translate  them
here.

i8


Colomba

..."  Neither  cannon  nor  bayonets  .  .  .

Brought  pallor  to  his  brow.  .  .  .

As  serene  on  the  battlefield  ...  as  a  summer  sky.

He  was  the  falcon — the  eagle's  friend  .  .  .

Honey  of  the  sand  to  his  friends  .  .  .

To  his  enemies,  a  tempestuous  sea.  .  .   .

.  .  .  Prouder  than  the  sun  .  .  .  gentler  than  the  moon

.  .  .  He  for  whom  the  enemies  of  France  .  .  .

never  waited  .  .  .  Murderers  in  his  own  land

.  .  .  struck  him  from  behind  .  .  .

As  Vittolo  slew  San)piero  Corso  .  .  .*

Never  would  they  have  dared  to  look  him  in

the  face  .  .  .  Set  up  on  the  wall

before  my  bed  .  .  .  my  well-earned  cross  of  honour

.  .  .  red  is  its  ribbon  .  .  .  redder  is  my

shirt  !  .  .  .  For  my  son,  my  son  in  a  far  country

.   .  .  keep  my  cross  and  my  blood-stained  shirt  !  .  .  .

.  .  .  He  will  see  two  holes  in  it  .  .  .  For  each

hole,  a  hole  in  another  shirt  !  .  .  .  But  will  that  accomplish

the  vengeance  ?  .  .  .  I  must  have  the  hand

that  fired,  the  eye  that  aimed  .   .  .  the  heart

that  planned  !  "  .  .  .

Suddenly  the  sailor  stopped  short.

"  Why  don't  you  go  on,  my  good  man?  "  inquired
Miss  Nevil.

The  sailor,  with  a  jerk  of  his  head,  pointed  to  a  figure
appearing  through  the  main  hatch v.-ay  of  the  schooner:
it  was  Orso,  coming  up  to  enjoy  the  moonlight.  "  Pray
finish  your  song,"  said  Miss  Lydia.  "  It  interests  me
greatly!  "

The  sailor  leaned  toward  her,  and  said,  in  a  very
low  tone,  "  I  don't  give  the  rimhccco  to  anybody!  "

*  See  Filippini,  Book  XI.  The  name  of  Vittolo  is  still  execrated
in  Corsica.  At  the  present  day  it  is  synonymous  with  the  word
"  traitor,"

19


Colomba

"The  what?"

The  sailor,  without  replying,  began  to  whistle.

"  I  have  caught  you  admiring  our  Mediterranean,
Miss  Nevil,"  said  Orso,  coming  toward  her.  "  You
must  allow  you  never  see  a  moon  like  this  anywhere
else!"

"  I  was  not  looking  at  it,  I  was  altogether  occu-
pied in  studying  Corsican.  That  sailor,  who  has  been
singing  a  most  tragic  dirge,  stopped  short  at  the  most
interesting  point."

The  sailor  bent  down,  as  if  to  see  the  compass  more
clearly,  and  tugged  sharply  at  Miss  Nevil's  fur  cloak.
It  was  quite  evident  his  lament  could  not  be  sung  before
Lieutenant  Orso.

"What  were  you  singing,  Paolo  France?"  said
Orso.  "  Was  it  a  ballata  or  a  voccro?  *  Mademoiselle
understands  you,  and  would  like  to  hear  the  end."

"  I  have  forgotten  it,  Ors'  Anton',"  said  the  sailor.

And  instantly  he  began  a  hymn  to  the  Virgin,  at  the
top  of  his  voice.

Miss  Lydia  listened  absent-mindedly  to  the  hymn,

*  When  a  man  is  dead,  and  more  particularly  when  he  has  been
murdered,  his  body  is  laid  out  upon  a  table,  and  the  women  of  his
family,  or,  failing  them,  of  his  friends'  families,  or  even  strangers,
known  for  their  poetic  talent,  improvise  laments  in  verse,  in  the  dia-
lect of  the  country,  before  a  numerous  audience.  These  women  are
called  voceratrici  or,  according  to  the  Corsican  pronunciation,  bticera-
trici,  and  the  dirge  is  called  vocero,  buceru,  or  buceratu,  on  the  eastern
coast,  and  ballata  on  the  western.  The  word  vocero,  together  with  its
derivatives  vocerar  and  voceratrice,  comes  from  the  Latin  word  vocife-
rare.  Occasionally  several  women  take  turns  at  improvising,  and
often  the  wife  or  daughter  of  the  dead  man  sings  the  funeral  lament
herself.

20


Colomba

and  did  not  press  tlie  singer  any  further — though  she
was  quite  resoh^ed,  in  her  own  mind,  to  find  out  the
meaning  of  the  riddle  later.  But  her  maid,  who,  being
a  Florentine,  could  not  understand  the  Corsican  dialect
any  better  than  her  mistress,  was  as  eager  as  Miss  Lydia
for  information,  and,  turning  to  Orso,  before  the  Eng-
lish lady  could  warn  her  by  a  nudge,  she  said:  "  Captain,
what  does  gkniig  the  riinbccco  mean?  "  *

"  The  rimbecco!  "  said  Orso.  "  Why,  it's  the  most
deadly  insult  that  can  be  offered  to  a  Corsican.  It
means  reproaching  him  with  not  having  avenged  his
wrong.    Who  mentioned  the  rimbecco  to  you?  "

"  Yesterday,  at  Marseilles,"  replied  Miss  Lydia  hur-
riedly, "  the  captain  of  the  schooner  used  the  word."

"And  whom  was  he  talking  about?"  inquired
Orso  eagerly.

"  Oh,  he  was  telling  us  some  old  story  about  the
time — yes,  I  think  it  was  about  Vannina  d'Ornano."

"  I  suppose,  mademoiselle,  that  Vannina's  death  has
not  inspired  you  with  any  great  love  for  our  national
hero,  the  brave  Sampiero?  "

"  But  do  you  think  his  conduct  was  so  very  he-
roic? "

"  The  excuse  for  his  crime  lies  in  the  savage  cus-


*  The  Italian  word  7-imbt'ccare  signifies  "to  send  back,"  "to  re-
join," "  to  throw  baclc."  In  the  Corsican  dialect  it  means  to  address
to  any  one  a  public  and  insulting  reproach — a  man  gives  the  rimbecco
to  the  son  of  a  murdered  person  if  he  tells  him  his  father  has  not
been  avenged.  The  rimbecco  is  a  sort  of  summons  to  the  man  who
has  not  yet  wiped  out  the  insult  in  blood.  By  the  Genoese  law  the
author  of  a  rimbecco  was  very  severely  punished.

21


Colomba

loms  of  the  period.  And  tlien  Sampiero  was  waging
deadly  war  against  the  Genoese.  What  confidence
could  his  fellow-countrymen  have  felt  in  him  if  he
had  not  punished  his  wife,  who  tried  to  treat  with
Genoa?  "

"  Vannina,"  said  the  sailor,  "  had  started  of¥  without
her  husband's  leave.  Sampiero  did  quite  right  to
wring  her  neck!  "

"  But,"  said  Miss  Lydia,  "  it  was  to  save  her  hus-
band, it  was  out  of  love  for  him,  that  she  was  going  to
ask  his  pardon  from  the  Genoese."

"To  ask  his  pardon  was  to  degrade  him!"  ex-
claimed Orso.

"  And  then  to  kill  her  himself!  "  said  ]\Iiss  Lydia.
"  What  a  monster  he  must  have  been!  "

"  You  know  she  begged  as  a  favour  that  she  might
die  by  his  hand.  What  about  Othello,  mademoiselle,
do  you  look  on  him,  too,  as  a  monster?  "

"There  is  a  difference;  he  was  jealous.  Sampiero
was  only  vain!  "

"  And  after  all  is  not  jealousy  a  kind  of  vanity?  It
is  the  vanity  of  love;  will  you  not  excuse  it  on  account
of  its  motive?  "

Miss  Lydia  looked  at  him  with  an  air  of  great  dig-
nity, and,  turning  to  the  sailor,  inquired  when  the
schooner  would  reach  port.

"  The  day  after  to-morrow,"  said  he,  "  if  the  wind
holds."

"  I  wish  Ajaccio  were  in  sight  already,  for  I  am  sick
of  this   ship."     She   rose,   took  her  maid's  arm,   and

22


J


Colomba

walked  a  few  paces  on  the  deck.  Orso  stood  motionless
beside  the  helm,  not  knowing  whether  he  had  better
walk  beside  her,  or  end  a  conversation  which  seemed
displeasing  to  her.

"  Blood  of  the  Madonna,  what  a  handsome  girl!  "
said  the  sailor.  "If  every  flea  in  my  bed  were  like  her,  I
shouldn't  complain  of  their  biting  me!  "

Miss  Lydia  may  possibly  have  overheard  this  artless
praise  of  her  beauty  and  been  startled  by  it;  for  she
went  below  almost  immediately.  Shortly  after  Orso
also  retired.  As  soon  as  he  had  left  the  deck  the  maid
reappeared,  and,  having  cross-questioned  the  sailor,  car-
ried back  the  following  informatioin  to  her  mistress.
The  ballata  which  had  been  broken  off  on  Orso's  ap-
pearance had  been  composed  on  the  occasion  of  the
death  of  his  father.  Colonel  della  Rebbia,  who  had  been
murdered  two  years  previously.  The  sailor  had  no
doubt  at  all  that  Orso  was  coming  back  to  Corsica
per  fare  la  vendetta,  such  was  his  expression,  and  he
affirmed  that  before  long  there  would  be  fresh  meat  to
be  seen  in  the  village  of  Pietranera.  This  national  ex-
pression, being  interpreted,  meant  that  Signor  Orso  pro-
posed to  murder  two  or  three  individuals  suspected  of
having  assassinated  his  father — individuals  who  had,  in-
deed, been  prosecuted  on  that  account,  but  had  come
out  of  the  trial  as  white  as  snow,  for  they  were  hand
and  glove  with  the  judges,  lawyers,  prefect,  and  gen-
darmes.

"  There  is  no  justice  in  Corsica,"  added  the  sailor,
"  and  I  put  much  more  faith  in  a  good  gun  than  in  a
Vol.  6  23  ^


Colomba

judge  of  the  Royal  Court.  If  a  man  has  an  enemy  he
must  choose  one  of  the  three  S's."  *

These  interesting  pieces  of  information  wrought  a
notable  change  in  Miss  Lydia's  manner  and  feeling  with
regard  to  Lieutenant  della  Rebbia,  From  that  moment
he  became  a  person  of  importance  in  the  romantic  Eng-
lishwoman's eyes.

His  careless  air,  his  frank  and  good  humour,  which
had  at  first  impressed  her  so  unfavourably,  now  seemed
to  her  an  additional  merit,  as  being  proofs  of  the  deep
dissimulation  of  a  strong  nature,  which  will  not
allow  any  inner  feeling  to  appear  upon  the  surface.
Orso  seemed  to  her  a  sort  of  Fieschi,  who  hid  mighty
designs  under  an  appearance  of  frivolity,  and,  though  it
is  less  noble  to  kill  a  few  rascals  than  to  free  one's  coun-
try, still  a  fine  deed  of  vengeance  is  a  fine  thing,  and
besides,  women  are  rather  glad  to  find  their  hero  is
not  a  politician.  Then  Miss  Nevil  remarked  for  the
first  time  that  the  young  lieutenant  had  large  eyes,
white  teeth,  an  elegant  figure,  that  he  was  well  edu-
cated, and  possessed  the  habits  of  good  society.  Dur-
ing the  following  day  she  talked  to  him  frequently,  and
found  his  conversation  interesting.  Fie  was  asked  many
questions  about  his  own  country,  and  described  it  well.
Corsica,  which  he  had  left  when  young,  to  go  first  to
college,  and  then  to  the  Ecole  militaire,  had  remained
in  his  imagination  surrounded  with  poetic  associations.
When  he  talked  of  its  mountains,  its  forests,  and  the

*  A  national  expression  meaning  schioppetto,  stiletto,  strada — that
is,  gun,  dagger,  or  yfig/it,

24


Col


omba


quaint  customs  of  its  inhabitants  he  grew  eager  and
animated.  As  may  be  imagined,  the  word  vengeance
occurred  more  than  once  in  the  stories  he  told — for  it
is  impossible  to  speak  of  the  Corsicans  without  either
attacking  or  justifying  their  proverbial  passion.  Orso
somewhat  surprised  Miss  Nevil  by  his  general  condem-
nation of  the  undying  hatreds  nursed  by  his  fellow-
countrymen.  As  regarded  the  peasants,  however,  he
endeavoured  to  excuse  them,  and  claimed  that  the  ven-
detta is  the  poor  man's  duel.  "  So  true  is  this,"  he  said,
"  that  no  assassination  takes  place  till  a  formal  challenge
has  been  delivered.  '  Be  on  your  guard  yourself,  I  am
on  mine!  '  are  the  sacramental  words  exchanged,  from
time  immemorial,  between  two  enemies,  before  they
begin  to  lie  in  wait  for  each  other.  There  are  more
assassinations  among  us,"  he  added,  "  than  anywhere
else.  But  you  will  never  discover  an  ignoble  cause  for
any  of  these  crimes.  We  have  many  murderers,  it  is
true,  but  not  a  single  thief."

When  he  spoke  about  vengeance  and  murder  Miss
Lydia  looked  at  him  closely,  but  she  could  not  detect
the  slightest  trace  of  emotion  on  his  features.  As  she
had  made  up  her  mind,  however,  that  he  possessed  suffi-
cient strength  of  mind  to  be  able  to  hide  his  thoughts
from  every  eye  (her  own,  of  course,  excepted),  she  con-
tinued in  her  firm  belief  that  Colonel  della  Rebbia's
shade  would  not  have  to  wait  long  for  the  atonement  it
claimed.

The  schooner  was  already  within  sight  of  Corsica.
The  captain  pointed  out  the  principal  features  of  the

25


Colomba

coast,  and,  though  all  of  these  were  absolutely  unknown
to  Miss  Lydia,  she  found  a  certain  pleasure  in  hearing
their  names;  nothing  is  more  tiresome  than  an  anony-
mous landscape.  From  time  to  time  the  colonel's  tele-
scope revealed  to  her  the  form  of  some  islander  clad
in  brown  cloth,  armed  with  a  long  gun,  bestriding  a
small  horse,  and  galloping  down  steep  slopes.  In  each
of  these  Miss  Lydia  believed  she  beheld  either  a  brigand
or  a  son  going  forth  to  avenge  his  father's  death.  But
Orso  always  declared  it  was  some  peaceful  denizen  of  a
neighbouring  village  travelling  on  business,  and  that
he  carried  a  gun  less  from  necessity  than  because  it  was
the  fashion,  just  as  no  dandy  ever  takes  a  walk  without
an  elegant  cane.  Though  a  gun  is  a  less  noble  and
poetic  weapon  than  a  stiletto,  Miss  Lydia  thought  it
much  more  stylish  for  a  man  than  any  cane,  and  she
remembered  that  all  Lord  Byron's  heroes  died  by  a  bul-
let, and  not  by  the  classic  poniard.

After  three  days'  sailing,  the  ship  reached  Les  San-
guinaires  (The  Bloody  Islands),  and  the  magnificent
panorama  of  the  Gulf  of  Ajaccio  was  unrolled  before
our  travellers'  eyes.  It  is  compared,  with  justice,  to
the  Bay  of  Naples,  and  just  as  the  schooner  was  enter-
ing the  harbour  a  burning  niaqitis,  which  covered  the
Punta  di  Girato,  brought  back  memories  of  Vesuvius
and  heightened  the  resemblance.  To  make  it  quite
complete,  Naples  should  be  seen  after  one  of  Attila's
armies  had  devastated  its  suburbs — for  round  Ajaccio
everything  looks  dead  and  deserted.  Instead  of  the
handsome  buildings  observable  on  every  side  from  Cas-

26


Colomba

tellamare  to  Cape  Misena,  nothing  is  to  be  seen  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  Gulf  of  Ajaccio  but  gloomy
maquis  with  bare  mountains  rising  behind  them.  Not
a  villa,  not  a  dwelling  of  any  kind — only  here  and  there,
on  the  heights  about  the  town,  a  few  isolated  white
structures  stand  out  against  a  background  of  green.
These  are  mortuary  chapels  or  family  tombs.  Every-
thing in  this  landscape  is  gravely  and  sadly  beautiful.

The  appearance  of  the  town,  at  that  period  espe-
cially, deepened  the  impression  caused  by  the  loneliness
of  its  surroundings.  There  was  no  stir  in  the  streets,
where  only  a  few  listless  idlers — always  the  same — were
to  be  seen;  no  women  at  all,  except  an  odd  peasant
come  in  to  sell  her  produce;  no  loud  talk,  laughter,  and
singing,  as  in  the  Italian  towns.  Sometimes,  under  the
shade  of  a  tree  on  the  public  promenade,  a  dozen  armed
peasants  will  play  at  cards  or  watch  each  other  play;
they  never  shout  or  wrangle;  if  they  get  hot  over  the
game,  pistol  shots  ring  out,  and  this  always  before  the
utterance  of  any  threat.  The  Corsican  is  grave  and
silent  by  nature.  In  the  evening,  a  few  persons  come
out  to  enjoy  the  cool  air,  but  the  promenaders  on  the
Corso  are  nearly  all  of  them  foreigners;  the  islanders
stay  in  front  of  their  own  doors ;  each  one  seems  on  the
watch,  like  a  falcon  over  its  nest.


27


CHAPTER    IV

When  Miss  Lydia  had  visited  the  house  in  which
Napoleon  was  born,  and  had  procured,  by  means  more
or  less  moral,  a  fragment  of  the  wall-paper  belonging  to
it,  she,  within  two  days  of  her  landing  in  Corsica,  began
to  feel  that  profound  melancholy  which  must  overcome
every  foreigner  in  a  country  whose  unsociable  in-
habitants appear  to  condemn  him  or  her  to  a  condition
of  utter  isolation.  She  was  already  regretting  her
headstrong  caprice;  but  to  go  back  at  once  would  have
1}een  to  risk  her  reputation  as  an  intrepid  traveller,  so
she  made  up  her  mind  to  be  patient,  and  kill  time  as
best  she  could.  With  this  noble  resolution,  she  brought
out  her  crayons  and  colours,  sketched  views  of  the  gulf,
and  did  the  portrait  of  a  sunburnt  peasant,  who  sold
melons,  like  any  market-gardener  on  the  Continent,
but  who  wore  a  long  white  beard,  and  looked  the
fiercest  rascal  that  had  ever  been  seen.  As  all  that  was
not  enough  to  amuse  her,  she  determined  to  turn  the
head  of  the  descendant  of  the  corporals,  and  this  was
no  difficult  matter,  since,  far  from  being  in  a  hurry  to
get  back  to  his  village,  Orso  seemed  very  happy  at  Ajac-
cio,  although  he  knew  nobody  there.  Furthermore,
Miss  Lydia  had  a  lofty  purpose  in  her  mind;  it  was

28


Colomba

nothing  less  than  to  civihze  this  mountain  bear,  and
induce  him  to  rehnquish  the  sinister  design  which
liad  recahed  him  to  his  island.  Since  she  had  taken
the  trouble  to  study  the  young  man,  she  had  told  her-
self it  would  be  a  pity  to  let  him  rush  upon  his  ruin,
and  that  it  would  be  a  glorious  thing  to  convert  a
Corsican.

Our  travellers  spent  the  day  in  the  following  man-
ner: Every  morning  the  colonel  and  Orso  w^ent  out
shooting.  IMiss  Lydia  sketched  or  wrote  letters  to  her
friends,  chiefly  for  the  sake  of  dating  them  from  Ajaccio.
Toward  six  o'clock  the  gentlemen  came  in,  laden  with
game.  Then  followed  dinner.  Miss  Lydia  sang,  the
colonel  went  to  sleep,  and  the  young  people  sat  talking
till  very  late.

Some  formality  or  other,  connected  with  his  pass-
ports, had  made  it  necessary  for  Colonel  Nevil  to  call
on  the  prefect.  This  gentleman,  who,  like  most  of  his
colleagues,  found  his  life  very  dull,  had  been  delighted
to  hear  of  the  arrival  of  an  Englishman  who  was  rich,
a  man  of  the  world,  and  the  father  of  a  pretty  daughter.
He  had,  therefore,  given  him  the  most  friendly  recep-
tion, and  overwhelmed  him  with  offers  of  service;  fur-
ther, within  a  very  few  days,  he  came  to  return  his  visit.
The  colonel,  who  had  just  dined,  was  comfortably
stretched  out  upon  his  sofa,  and  very  nearly  asleep.
His  daughter  was  singing  at  a  broken-down  piano;
Orso  was  turning  over  the  leaves  of  her  music,  and  gaz-
ing at  the  fair  singer's  shoulders  and  golden  hair.  The
prefect  was  announced,  the  piano  stopped,  the  colonel

29


Colomba

got  up,  nibljed  his  eyes,  and  introduced  the  prefect  to
his  daughter.

"  I  do  not  introduce  M.  della  Rebbia  to  you,"  said
he,  "  for  no  doubt  you  know  him  already."

"  Is  this  gentleman  Colonel  della  Rebbia's  son?  "
said  the  prefect,  looking  a  trifle  embarrassed.

"  Yes,  monsieur,"  replied  Orso.

"  I  had  the  honour  of  knowing  your  father."

The  ordinary  commonplaces  of  conversation  were
soon  exhausted.  The  colonel,  in  spite  of  himself,
yawned  pretty  frequently.  Orso,  as  a  liberal,  did  not
care  to  converse  with  a  satellite  of  the  Government.
The  burden  of  the  conversation  fell  on  j\Iiss  Lydia.
The  prefect,  on  his  side,  did  not  let  it  drop,  and  it  was
clear  that  he  found  the  greatest  pleasure  in  talking  of
Paris,  and  of  the  great  world,  to  a  woman  who  was  ac-
quainted with  all  the  foremost  people  in  European  so-
ciety. As  he  talked,  he  now  and  then  glanced  at  Orso,
with  an  expression  of  singular  curiosity.

"  Was  it  on  the  Continent  that  you  made  M.  della
Rebbia's  acquaintance?  "  he  inquired.

Somewhat  embarrassed.  Miss  Lydia  replied  that  she
had  made  his  acquaintance  on  the  ship  which  had  car-
ried them  to  Corsica.

"  He  is  a  very  gentlemanly  young  fellow,"  said  the
prefect,  in  an  undertone;  "and  has  he  told  you,"  he
added,  dropping  his  voice  still  lower,  "  why  he  has
returned  to  Corsica?  "

Miss  Lydia  put  on  her  most  majestic  air  and  an-
swered :

30


Colomba

"  I  have  not  asked  him,"  she  said.  "  You  may
do  so."

The  prefect  kept  silence,  but,  an  instant  later,  hear-
ing Orso  speak  a  few  words  of  English  to  the  colonel,
he  said :

"  You  seem  to  have  travelled  a  great  deal,  monsieur.
You  must  have  forgotten  Corsica  and  Corsican  habits."

"  It  is  quite  true  that  I  was  very  young  when  I  went
away."

"  You  still  belong  to  the  army?  "•

"  I  am  on  half  pay,  monsieur."

"  You  have  been  too  long  in  the  French  army  not
to  have  become  a  thorough  Frenchman,  I  have  no
doubt?"

The  last  words  of  the  sentence  were  spoken  with
marked  emphasis.

The  Corsicans  are  not  particularly  flattered  at  being
reminded  that  they  belong  to  the  "  Great  Nation."
They  claim  to  be  a  people  apart,  and  so  well  do  they
justify  their  claim  that  it  may  very  well  be  granted
them.

Somewhat  nettled,  Orso  replied:  "Do  you  think,
M.  le  Prefet,  that  a  Corsican  must  necessarily  serve
in  the  French  army  to  become  an  honourable  man?  "

"  No,  indeed,"  said  the  prefect,  "  that  is  not  my
idea  at  all;  I  am  only  speaking  of  certain  customs  be-
longing to  this  country,  some  of  which  are  not  such  as
a  Government  official  would  like  to  see."

He  emphasized  the  word  ciisfonis,  and  put  on  as
grave  an  expression  as  his  features  could  assume.    Soon


Colomba

after  he  got  up  and  took  his  leave,  bearing  witli  him
Miss  Lydia's  promise  that  she  would  go  and  call  on  his
wife  at  the  prefecture.

When  he  had  departed:  "  I  had  to  come  to  Cor-
sica," said  ]\Iiss  Lydia,  "  to  fmd  out  what  a  prefect  is
like.     This  one  strikes  me  as  rather  amiable."

"  For  my  part,"  said  Orso,  "  I  can't  say  as  much.
He  strikes  me  as  a  very  queer  individual,  with  his  airs
of  emphasis  and  mystery."

The  colonel  was  extremely  drowsy.  ]\Iiss  Lydia
cast  a  glance  in  his  direction,  and,  lowering  his  voice:

"  And  I,"  she  said,  "  do  not  think  him  so  mysterious
as  you  pretend;  for  I  believe  I  understood  him!  "

"  Then  you  are  clear-sighted  indeed.  Miss  Nevil.
If  you  have  seen  any  wit  in  what  he  has  just  said  you
must  certainly  have  put  it  there  yourself."

"  It  is  the  Marquis  de  Mascarille,  I  think,  who  says
that,  M.  della  Rebbia.  But  would  you  like  me  to  give
you  a  proof  of  my  clear-sightedness?  I  am  something
of  a  witch,  and  I  can  read  the  thoughts  of  people  I  have
seen  only  twice."

"  Good  heaA'ens!  you  alarm  me.  If  you  really  can
read  my  thoughts  I  don't  know  whether  I  should  be
glad  or  sorry."

"  M.  della  Rebbia,"  went  on  ]\Iiss  Lydia,  with  a
blush,  "  we  have  only  known  each  other  for  a  few  days.
But  at  sea,  and  in  savage  countries  (you  will  excuse  me,
I  hope) — in  savage  countries  friendships  grow  more
quickly  than  they  do  in  society  ...  so  you  must
not  be  astonished  if  I  speak  to  you,  as  a  friend,  upon

32


Colomba

private  matters,  with  which,  perhaps,  a  stranger  ought
not  to  interfere."

"  Ah!  do  not  say  that  word,  ]\Iiss  Nevil.  I  hke  the
other  far  better."

"  Well,  then,  monsieur,  I  must  tell  3-ou  that  without
having  tried  to  find  out  your  secrets,  I  have  learned
some  of  them,  and  they  grieve  me.  I  have  heard,  mon-
sieur, of  the  misfortune  which  has  overtaken  your  fam-
ily. A  great  deal  has  been  said  to  me  about  the  vin-
dictive nature  of  your  fellow-countrymen,  and  the  fash-
ion in  which  they  take  their  vengeance.  Was  it  not  to
that  the  prefect  was  alluding?  "

"Miss  Lydia!  Can  you  believe  it!"  and  Orso
turned  deadly  pale.

"  No,  M.  della  Rebbia,"  she  said,  interrupting  him,
"  I  know  you  to  be  a  most  honourable  gentleman.  You
have  told  me  yourself  that  it  was  only  the  common  peo-
ple in  your  countr_v  who  still  practised  the  vendetta —
which  you  are  pleased  to  describe  as  a  kind  of  duel."

"  Do  you,  then,  believe  me  capable  of  ever  becom-
ing a  murderer?  "

"  Since  I  have  mentioned  the  subject  at  all,  Mon-
sieur Orso,  you  must  clearly  see  that  I  do  not  suspect
you,  and  if  I  have  spoken  to  you  at  all,"  she  added,
dropping  her  eyes,  "  it  is  because  I  have  realized  that
surrounded,  it  may  be,  by  barbarous  prejudices  on  your
return  home,  you  will  be  glad  to  know  that  there  is
somebody  who  esteems  you  for  having  the  courage  to
resist  them.  Come!  "  said  she,  rising  to  her  feet,
"  don't  let  us  talk  again  of  such  horrid  things,  they  make
^  33


Colomba

my  head  ache,  and  besides  it's  very  late.  You  are  not
angry  with  me,  are  you?  Let  us  say  good-night  in  the
English  fashion,"  and  she  held  out  her  hand.

Orso  pressed  it,  looking  grave  and  deeply  moved.

"  Mademoiselle,"  he  said,  "  do  you  know  that  there
are  moments  when  the  instincts  of  my  country  wake
up  within  me.  Sometimes,  when  I  think  of  my  poor
father,  horrible  thoughts  assail  me.  Thanks  to  you,  I
am  rid  of  them  forever.    Thank  you!  thank  you!  "

He  would  have  continued,  but  Miss  Lydia  dropped
a  teaspoon,  and  the  noise  woke  up  the  colonel.

"  Delia  Rebbia,  we'll  start  at  five  o'clock  to-morrow
morning.     Be  punctual!  "

"  Yes,  colonel."


34


CHAPTER    V

The  next  day,  a  short  time  before  the  sportsmen
came  back,  Miss  Nevil,  returning  with  her  maid  from  a
walk  along  the  seashore,  was  just  about  to  enter  the
inn,  when  she  noticed  a  young  woman,  dressed  in  black,
riding  into  the  town  on  a  small  but  strong  horse.  She
was  followed  by  a  sort  of  peasant,  also  on  horseback,
who  wore  a  brown  cloth  jacket  out  at  the  elbows.  A
gourd  was  slung  over  his  shoulder  and  a  pistol  was
hanging  at  his  belt,  his  hand  grasped  a  gun,  the  butt  of
which  rested  in  a  leathern  pocket  fastened  to  his  saddle-
bow— in  short,  he  wore  the  complete  costume  of  a  brig-
and in  a  melodrama,  or  of  the  middle-class  Corsican
on  his  travels.  Miss  Nevil's  attention  was  first  attracted
by  the  woman's  remarkable  beauty.  She  seemed  about
twenty  years  of  age;  she  was  tall  and  pale,  with  dark
blue  eyes,  red  lips,  and  teeth  like  enamel.  In  her  ex-
pression pride,  anxiety,  and  sadness  were  all  legible.
On  her  head  she  wore  a  black  silk  veil  called  a  mczzaro,
which  the  Genoese  introduced  into  Corsica,  and  vv'hich
is  so  becoming  to  women.  Long  braids  of  chestnut
hair  formed  a  sort  of  turban  round  her  head.  Her  dress
was  neat,  but  simple  in  the  extreme.

Miss  Nevil  had  plenty  of  time  to  observe  her,  for
35


Colomba

the  lady  in  the  niczzaro  had  haUcd  in  the  street,  and  was
questioning  somebody  on  a  subject  which,  to  judge
from  the  expression  of  her  eyes,  must  have  interested
her  exceedingly.  Then,  as  soon  as  she  received  an  an-
swer, she  touched  her  mount  with  her  riding-switch,
and,  breaking  into  a  quick  trot,  never  halted  till  she
reached  the  door  of  the  hotel  in  which  Sir  Thomas  Nevil
and  Orso  were  staying.  There,  after  exchanging  a  few
words  with  the  host,  the  girl  sprang  nimbly  from  her
saddle  and  seated  herself  on  a  stone  bench  beside  the
entrance  door,  while  her  groom  led  the  horses  away  to
the  stable.  Miss  Lydia,  in  her  Paris  gown,  passed  close
beside  the  stranger,  who  did  not  raise  her  eyes.  A  quar-
ter of  an  hour  later  she  opened  her  window,  and  savv
the  lady  in  the  mczzaro  still  sitting  in  the  same  place
and  in  the  same  attitude.  Not  long  afterward  the  colo-
nel and  Orso  returned  from  hunting.  Then  the  land-
lord said  a  few  words  to  the  young  lady  in  mourning,
and  pointed  to  della  Rebbia  with  his  finger.  She  col-
oured deeply,  rose  eagerly,  went  a  few  paces  forward,
and  then  stopped  short,  apparently  much  confused.
Orso  w^as  quite  close  to  her,  and  was  looking  at  her
curiously.

"  Are  you  Orso  Antonio  della  Rebbia?  "  said  she
in  a  tremulous  voice.     "  I  am  Colomlja."

"  Colomba!  "  cried  Orso.

And  taking  her  in  his  arms  he  kissed  her  tenderly,
somewhat  to  the  surprise  of  the  colonel  and  his  daugh-
ter— for  in  England  people  do  not  kiss  each  other  in  the
street.

36


Colomba

"  Brother,"  said  Colomba,  "  you  must  forgive  me
for  having  come  v\'ithout  your  permission.  But  I  heard
from  our  friends  that  you  had  arrived,  and  it  is  such  a
great  consolation  to  me  to  see  you."

Again  Orso  kissed  her.  Then,  turning  to  the  colo-
nel:

"  This  is  my  sister,"  said  he,  "  whom  I  never  should
have  recognised  if  she  had  not  told  me  her  name — Co-
lomba— Colonel  Sir  Thomas  Nevil — colonel,  you  will
kindly  excuse  me,  but  I  can  not  have  the  hanour  of
dining  with  you  to-day.    ]\Iy  sister "

''  But,  my  dear  fellow,  wliere  the  devil  do  you  expect
to  dine?  You  know  very  well  there  is  only  one  dinner
in  this  infernal  tavern,  and  we  have  bespoken  it.  It  will
afford  my  daughter  great  pleasure  if  this  young  lady
will  join  us."

Colomba  looked  at  her  brother,  who  did  not  need
m.uch  pressing,  and  they  all  passed  together  into  the
largest  room  in  the  inn,  which  the  colonel  used  as  his
sitting  and  dining  room.  Mademoiselle  della  Rebbia,
on  being  introduced  to  Miss  Nevil,  made  her  a  deep
courtesy,  but  she  did  not  utter  a  single  word.  It
was  easy  to  see  that  she  was  very  much  frightened  at
finding  herself,  perhaps  for  the  first  time  in  her  life,  in
the  company  of  strangers  belonging  to  the  great  world.
Yet  there  was  nothing  provincial  in  her  manners.  The
novelty  of  her  position  excused  her  awkwardness.  Miss
Nevil  took  a  liking  to  her  at  once,  and,  as  there  was  no
room  disengaged  in  the  hotel,  the  whole  of  which  was
occupied  by  the  colonel  and  his  attendants,  she  offered,

37


Colomba

either  out  of  condescension  or  curiosity,  to  have  a  bed
prepared  in  her  own  room  for  ^Mademoiselle  dclla
Rebbia.

Colomba  stammered  a  few  words  of  thanks,  and
hastened  after  Miss  Nevil's  maid,  to  make  such  changes
in  her  toilet  as  were  rendered  necessary  by  a  journey  on
horseback  in  the  dust  and  heat.

When  she  re-entered  the  sitting-room,  she  paused
in  front  of  the  colonel's  guns,  which  the  hunters  had
left  in  a  corner.

"  What  tine  weapons,"  said  she.  "  Are  they  yours,
brother?  "

"  No,  they  are  the  colonel's  English  guns — and  they
are  as  good  as  they  are  handsome."

"  How  much  I  wish  you  had  one  like  them!  "  said
Colomba.

"  One  of  those  three  certainly  does  belong  to  della
Rebbia,"  exclaimed  the  colonel.  "  He  really  shoots
almost  too  well!  To-day  he  fired  fourteen  shots,  and
brought  down  fourteen  head  of  game."

A  friendly  dispute  at  once  ensued,  in  which  Orso
was  vanquished,  to  his  sister's  great  satisfaction,  as  it
was  easy  to  perceive  from  the  childish  expression  of  de-
light which  illumined  her  face,  so  serious  a  moment
before.

"Choose,  my  dear  fellow,"  said  the  colonel;  but
Orso  refused.

"  Very  well,  then.  Your  sister  shall  choose  for
you."

Colomba  did  not  wait  for  a  second  invitation.  She
38


Colomba

took  up  the  plainest  of  the  guns,  but  it  was  a  first-rate
Manton  of  large  calibre.

"  This  one,"  she  said,  "  must  carry  a  ball  a  long  dis-
tance."

Her  brother  was  growing  quite  confused  in  his  ex-
pressions of  gratitude,  when  dinner  appeared,  very  op-
portunely, to  help  him  out  of  his  embarrassment.

]\Iiss  Lydia  was  delighted  to  notice  that  Colomba,
who  had  shown  considerable  reluctance  to  sit  down  with
them,  and  had  yielded  only  at  a  glance  from  her  brother,
crossed  herself,  like  a  good  Catholic,  before  she  began
to  eat.

"  Good!  "  said  she  to  herself,  "  that  is  primitive!  "
and  she  anticipated  acquiring  many  interesting  facts  by
observing  this  youthful  representative  of  ancient  Cor-
sican  manners.  As  for  Orso,  he  was  evidently  a  trifle
uneasy,  fearing,  doubtless,  that  his  sister  might  say  or  do
something  which  savoured  too  much  of  her  native  vil-
lage. But  Colomba  watched  him  constantly,  and  regu-
lated all  her  own  movements  by  his.  Sometimes  she
looked  at  him  fixedly,  with  a  strange  expression  of
sadness,  and  then,  if  Orso's  eyes  met  hers,  he  was  the
first  to  turn  them  away,  as  though  he  would  evade  some
question  which  his  sister  was  mentally  addressing  to
him,  the  sense  of  which  he  understood  only  too  well.
Everybody  talked  French,  for  the  colonel  could  only
express  himself  very  badly  in  Italian.  Colomba  under-
stood French,  and  even  pronounced  the  few  words  she
was  obliged  to  exchange  with  her  entertainers  toler-
ably well.
Vol.  6  39  E


Colomba

After  dinner,  the  colonel,  who  had  noticed  the  sort
of  constraint  which  existed  between  the  brother  and
sister,  inquired  of  Orso,  with  his  customary  frankness,
whether  he  did  not  wish  to  be  alone  with  jMademoiselle
Colomba,  offering,  in  that  case,  to  go  into  the  next
room  with  his  daughter.  But  Orso  hastened  to  thank
him,  and  to  assure  him  they  would  have  plenty  of  time
to  talk  at  Pietranera — this  was  the  name  of  the  village
Avhere  he  was  to  take  up  his  abode.

The  colonel  then  resumed  his  customary  position
on  the  sofa,  and  Miss  Nevil,  after  attempting  several
subjects  of  conversation,  gave  up  all  hope  of  inducing
the  fair  Colomba  to  talk,  and  begged  Orso  to  read  her
a  canto  out  of  Dante,  her  favourite  poet.  Orso  chose
the  canto  of  the  Inferno,  containing  the  episode  of
Francesca  da  Rimini,  and  began  to  read,  as  impressively
as  he  was  able,  the  glorious  tiercets  which  so  admi-
rably express  the  risk  run  by  two  young  persons  who
venture  to  read  a  love-story  together.  As  he  read  on
Colomba  drew  nearer  to  the  table,  and  raised  her  head,
which  she  had  kept  lowered.  Her  wide-open  eyes
shone  with  extraordinary  fire,  she  grew  red  and  pale
by  turns,  and  stirred  convulsively  in  her  chair.  How^
admirable  is  the  Italian  organization,  which  can  under-
stand poetry  without  needing  a  pedant  to  explain  its
beauties!

When  the  canto  was  finished:

"How  beautiful  that  is!"  she  exclaimed.  "Who
wrote  it,  brother?  "

Orso  was  a  little  disconcerted,  and  Miss  Lydia  an-
40


Colomba

swered  with  a  smile  that  it  was  written  by  a  Florentine
poet,  who  had  been  dead  for  centuries.

"  You  shall  read  Dante,"  said  Orso,  "  when  we  are
at  Pietranera."

"  Good  heavens,  how  beautiful  it  is!  "  said  Colomba
again,  and  she  repeated  three  or  four  tiercets  which  she
had  remembered,  speaking  at  first  in  an  undertone;
then,  growing  excited,  she  declaimed  them  aloud,  with
far  more  expression  than  her  brother  had  put  into  his
reading.

Miss  Lydia  was  very  much  astonished.

"  You  seem  very  fond  of  poetry,"  she  said.  "  How
I  envy  you  the  delight  you  will  find  in  reading  Dante
for  the  first  time!  "

"  You  see,  Miss  Nevil,"  said  Orso,  "  what  a  power
Dante's  lines  must  have,  when  they  so  move  a  wild
young  savage  who  knows  nothing  but  her  Pater.  But
I  am  mistaken!  I  recollect  now  that  Colomba  be-
longs to  the  guild.  Even  when  she  was  quite  a  little
child  she  used  to  try  her  hand  at  verse-making,  and  my
father  used  to  write  me  word  that  she  was  the  best
vocerafrice  in  Pietranera,  and  for  two  leagues  round
about."

Colomba  cast  an  imploring  glance  at  her  brother.
Miss  Nevil  had  heard  of  the  Corsican  unprovisatvici,  and
was  dying  to  hear  one.  She  begged  Colomba,  then,
to  give  her  a  specimen  of  her  powers.  Very  much
vexed  now  at  having  made  any  mention  of  his  sister's
poetic  gifts,  Orso  interposed.  In  vain  did  he  protest
that  nothing  was  so  insipid  as  a  Corsican  halluta,  and

41


Colomba

that  to  recite  Corsican  verses  after  those  of  Dante  was
hke  betraying-  his  country.  All  he  did  was  to  stimulate
;Miss  Nevil's  curiosity,  and  at  last  he  was  obliged  to  say
to  his  sister:

"Well!  well!  improvise  something — but  let  it  be
short!  "

Colomba  heaved  a  sigh,  looked  fixedly  for  a  mo-
ment, first  at  the  table-cloth,  and  then  at  the  rafters  of
the  ceiling;  at  last,  covering  her  eyes  with  her  hand
like  those  birds  that  gather  courage,  and  fancy  they  are
not  seen  when  they  no  longer  see  themselves,  she  sang,
or  rather  declaimed,  in  an  unsteady  voice,  the  following
scroiata:

"  THE    MAIDEN    AND    THE    TURTLE-DOVE

"  In  the  valley,  far  away  among  the  mountains,  the
sun  only  shines  for  an  hour  every  day.  In  the  valley
there  stands  a  gloomy  house,  and  grass  grows  on  its
threshold.  Doors  and  windows  are  always  shut.  No
smoke  rises  from  the  roof.  But  at  noon,  when  the  sun-
shine falls,  a  window  opens,  and  the  orphan  girl  sits
spinning  at  her  wdieel.  She  spins,  and  as  she  works,
she  sings — a  song  of  sadness.  But  no  other  song  comes
to  answer  hers!  One  day — a  day  in  spring-time — a  tur-
tle-dove settled  on  a  tree  hard  by,  and  heard  the  maid-
en's song.  '  Maiden.'  it  said,  '  thou  art  not  the  only
mourner!  A  cruel  hawk  has  snatched  my  mate  from
me! '  '  Turtle-dove,  show  me  that  cruel  hawk;  were  it
to  soar  higher  than  the  clouds  I  would  soon  luring  it
down  to  earth!     But  who  will  restore  to  me,  unhappy

42


A


Colomba

that  I  am,  my  brother,  now  in  a  far  country?  '  '  Maid-
en, tell  me,  where  thy  brother  is,  and  my  wings  shall
bear  me  to  him.'  "

"  A  well-bred  turtle-dove,  indeed!  "  exclaimed  Orso,
and  the  emotion  with  which  he  kissed  his  sister  con-
trasted strongly  with  the  jesting  tone  in  which  he
spoke.

"  Your  song  is  delightful,"  said  Miss  Lydia.  ''  You
must  write  it  in  my  album;  I'll  translate  it  into  Eng-
lish, and  have  it  set  to  music."

The  worthy  colonel,  who  had  not  understood  a  sin-
gle word,  added  his  compliments  to  his  daughter's  and
added:  "  Is  this  dove  you  speak  of  the  bird  we  eat
broiled  at  dinner  to-day?  "

Miss  Nevil  fetched  her  album,  and  was  not  a  little
surprised  to  see  the  iinprovvisatricc  write  down  her
song,  with  so  much  care  in  the  matter  of  economizing
space.

The  lines,  instead  of  being  separate,  were  all  run
together,  as  far  as  the  breadth  of  the  paper  would  per-
mit, so  that  they  did  not  agree  with  the  accepted  defini-
tion of  poetic  composition — "short  lines  of  unequal
length,  with  a  margin  on  each  side  of  them."  Made-
moiselle Colomba's  somewhat  fanciful  spelling  might
also  have  excited  comment.  More  than  once  Miss
Nevil  was  seen  to  smile,  and  Orso's  fraternal  vanity  suf-
fered tortures.

Bedtime  came,  and  the  two  young  girls  retired  to
their  room.     There,  while  ]\Iiss  Lydia  unclasped  her

43


Colomba

necklace,  ear-rings,  and  bracelets,  she  watched  her  com-
panion draw  something  out  of  her  gown — something  as
long  as  a  stay-busk,  but  very  different  in  shape.  Care-
fully, almost  stealthily,  Colomba  slipped  this  object
under  her  ?;?^j^aro,  which  she  had  laid  on  the  table.
Then  she  knelt  down,  and  said  her  prayers  devoutly.
Two  minutes  afterward  she  was  in  her  bed.  Miss  Lydia,
naturally  very  inquisitive,  and  as  slow  as  every  English-
woman is  about  undressing  herself,  moved  over  to  the
table,  pretended  she  was  looking  for  a  pin,  lifted  up  the
mezzaro,  and  saw  a  long  stiletto — curiously  mounted
in  silver  and  mother-of-pearl.  The  workmanship  was
remarkably  fine.  It  was  an  ancient  weapon,  and  just
the  sort  of  one  an  amateur  w^ould  have  prized  very
highly.

"  Is  it  the  custom  here,"  inquired  Miss  Nevil,  with
a  smile,  "  for  young  ladies  to  wear  such  little  instru-
ments as  these  in  their  bodices?  "

"  It  is,"  answered  Colomba,  with  a  sigh.  "  There
are  so  many  wicked  people  about!  "

''  And  would  you  really  have  the  courage  to  strike
with  it,  like  this?  "  And  Miss  Nevil,  dagger  in  hand,
made  a  gesture  of  stabbing  from  above,  as  actors  do  on
the  stage.

"  Yes,"  said  Colomba,  in  her  soft,  musical  voice,  "  if
I  had  to  do  it  to  protect  myself  or  my  friends.  But  you
must  not  hold  it  like  that,  you  might  wound  yourself
if  the  person  you  were  going  to  stab  were  to  draw
back."  Then,  sitting  up  in  bed,  "  See,"  she  added,
"  you  must  strike  like  this — upward!    If  you  do  so,  the

44


Colomba

thrust  is  sure  to  kill,  they  say.     Happy  are  they  who
never  need  such  weapons."

She  sighed,  dropped  her  head  back  on  the  pillow,
and  closed  her  eyes.  A  more  noble,  beautiful,  vir-
ginal head  it  would  be  impossible  to  imagine.  Phidias
would  have  asked  no  other  model  for  Minerva.


45


CHAPTER    VI

It  is  in  obedience  to  the  precept  of  Horace  that  I
have  begun  by  plunging  in  media  res.  Now  that  every
one  is  alseep — the  beautiful  Colomba,  the  colonel,  and
his  daughter — I  will  seize  the  opportunity  to  acquaint
my  reader  with  certain  details  of  which  he  must  not  be
ignorant,  if  he  desires  to  follow  the  further  course  of  this
veracious  history.  He  is  already  aware  that  Colonel
della  Rebbia,  Orso's  father,  had  been  assassinated.
Now,  in  Corsica,  people  are  not  murdered,  as  they  are
in  France,  by  the  first  escaped  convict  who  can  devise
no  better  means  of  relieving  a  man  of  his  silver-plate.
In  Corsica  a  man  is  murdered  by  his  enemies — but  the
reason  he  has  enemies  is  often  very  dif^cult  to  discover.
Many  families  hate  each  other  because  it  has  been  an
old-standing  habit  of  theirs  to  hate  each  other;  but  the
tradition  of  the  original  cause  of  their  hatred  may  have
completely  disappeared.

The  family  to  which  Colonel  della  Rebbia  belonged
hated  several  other  families,  but  that  of  the  Barricini
particularly.  Some  people  asserted  that  in  the  six-
teenth century  a  della  Rebbia  had  seduced  a  lady  of  the
Barricini  family,  and  had  afterward  been  poniarded  by
a  relative  of  the  outraged  damsel.    Others,  indeed,  told

46


Colomba

the  story  in  a  different  fashion,  declaring  that  it  was  a
della  Rebbia  who  had  been  seduced,  and  a  Barricini  who
had  been  poniarded.  However  that  may  be,  there  was,
to  use  the  time-honoured  expression,  "  blood  between
the  two  houses."  Nevertheless,  and  contrary  to  cus-
tom, this  murder  had  not  resulted  in  others;  for  the
della  Rebbia  and  the  Barricini  had  both  been  equally
persecuted  by  the  Genoese  Government,  and  as  the
young  men  had  all  left  the  country,  the  two  families
were  deprived,  during  several  generations,  of  their
more  energetic  representatives.  At  the  close  of  the
last  century,  one  of  the  della  Rebbias,  an  officer  in  the
Neapolitan  service,  quarrelled,  in  a  gambling  hell,  with
some  soldiers,  who  called  him  a  Corsican  goatherd,
and  other  insulting  names.  He  drew  his  sword,  but
being  only  one  against  three,  he  would  have  fared  very
ill  if  a  stranger,  who  was  playing  in  the  same  room,  had
not  exclaimed,  "  I,  too,  am  a  Corsican,"  and  come  to  his
rescue.  This  stranger  was  one  of  the  Barricini,  who,
for  that  matter,  was  not  acquainted  with  his  country-
man. After  mutual  explanations,  they  interchanged
courtesies  and  vowed  eternal  friendship.  For  on  the
Continent,  quite  contrary  to  their  practice  in  their  own
island,  Corsicans  quickly  become  friends.  This  fact
was  clearly  exemplified  on  the  present  occasion.
As  long  as  della  Rebbia  and  Barricini  remained  in  Italy
they  were  close  friends.  Once  they  were  back  in  Cor-
sica, they  saw  each  other  but  very  seldom,  although
they  both  lived  in  the  same  village;  and  when  they
died,  it  was  reported  that  they  had  not  spoken  to  each

47


Colomba

other  for  five  or  six  years.  Their  sons  hved  in  the  same
fashion — "on  ceremony,"  as  they  say  in  the  island;  one
of  them,  Ghilfuccio,  Orso's  father,  was  a  soldier;  the
other,  Giudice  Barricini,  was  a  lawyer.  Having  both
become  heads  of  families,  and  being  separated  by  their
professions,  they  scarcely  ever  had  an  opportunity  of
seeing  or  hearing  of  each  other.

One  day,  however,  about  the  year  1809,  Giudice
read  in  a  newspaper  at  Bastia  that  Captain  Ghilfuccio
had  just  been  decorated,  and  remarked,  before  wit-
nesses, that  he  was  not  at  all  surprised,  considering  that

the  family   enjoyed   the   protection   of   General   .

This  remark  was  reported  at  Vienna  to  Ghilfuccio,
who  told  one  of  his  countrymen  that,  when  he  got
back  to  Corsica,  he  would  find  Giudice  a  very  rich  man,
because  he  made  more  money  out  of  the  suits  he  lost
than  out  of  those  he  won.  It  was  never  known  whether
he  meant  this  as  an  insinuation  that  the  lawyer  cheated
his  clients,  or  as  a  mere  allusion  to  the  commonplace
truth  that  a  bad  cause  often  brings  a  lawyer  more  profit
than  a  good  one.  However  that  may  have  been,  the
lawyer  Barricini  heard  of  the  epigram,  and  never  forgot
it.  In  1 812  he  applied  for  the  post  of  mayor  of  his
commune,   and   had  every   hope   of  being  appointed,

when  General wrote  to  the  prefect,  to  recommend

one  of  Ghilfuccio's  w^ife's  relations.  The  prefect  lost
no  time  in  carrying  out  the  general's  wish,  and  Barri-
cini felt  no  doubt  that  he  owed  his  failure  to  the  in-
trigues of  Ghilfuccio.  In  18 14,  after  the  emperor's  fall,
the  general's  protege  was  denounced  as  a  Bonapartist,

48


Colomba

and  his  place  was  taken  by  Barricini.  He,  in  his  turn,
was  dismissed  during  the  Hundred  Days,  but  when  the
storm  had  blown  over,  he  again  took  possession,  with
great  pomp,  df  the  mayoral  seal  and  the  municipal  reg-
isters.

From  this  moment  his  star  shone  brighter  than
ever.  Colonel  della  Rebbia,  now  living  on  half-pay  at
Pietranera,  had  to  defend  himself  against  covert  and
repeated  attacks  due  to  the  pettifogging  malignity  of
his  enemy.  At  one  time  he  was  summoned  to  pay  for
the  damage  his  horse  had  done  to  the  mayor's  fences;
at  another,  the  latter,  under  pretence  of  repairing  the
floor  of  the  church,  ordered  the  removal  of  a  broken
flagstone  bearing  the  della  Rebbia  arms,  which  covered
the  grave  of  some  member  of  the  family.  If  the  village
goats  ate  the  colonel's  young  plants,  the  mayor  always
protected  their  owners.  The  grocer  who  kept  the  post-
office  at  Pietranera,  and  the  old  maimed  soldier  who
had  been  the  village  policeman — both  of  them  attached
to  the  della  Rebbia  family — were  turned  adrift,  and
their  places  filled  by  Barricini's  creatures.

The  colonel's  wife  died,  and  her  last  wish  was  that
she  might  be  buried  in  the  middle  of  the  little  wood  in
which  she  had  been  fond  of  walking.  Forthwith  the
mayor  declared  she  should  be  buried  in  the  village
cemetery,  because  he  had  no  authority  to  permit  burial
in  any  other  spot.  The  colonel,  in  a  fury,  declared  that
until  the  permit  came,  his  wife  would  be  interred  in
the  spot  she  had  chosen.  He  had  her  grave  dug  there.
The  mayor,  on  his  side,  had  another  grave  dug  in  the
4  49


Colomba

cemetery,  and  sent  for  the  police,  that  the  law,  so  he
declared,  might  be  duly  enforced.  On  the  day  of  the
funeral,  the  two  parties  came  face  to  face,  and,  for  a
moment,  there  was  reason  to  fear  a  struggle  might
ensue  for  the  possession  of  Signora  della  Rebbia's
corpse.  Some  forty  well-armed  peasants,  mustered  by
the  dead  woman's  relatives,  forced  the  priest,  when  he
issued  from  the  church,  to  take  the  road  to  the  wood.
On  the  other  hand,  the  mayor,  at  the  head  of  his  two
sons,  his  dependents,  and  the  gendarmes,  advanced  to
oppose  their  march.  When  he  appeared,  and  called  on
the  procession  to  turn  back,  he  was  greeted  with  howls
and  threats.  The  advantage  of  numbers  was  with  his
opponents,  and  they  seemed  thoroughly  determined.
At  sight  of  him  several  guns  were  loaded,  and  one  shep-
herd is  even  said  to  have  levelled  his  musket  at  him,
but  the  colonel  knocked  up  the  barrel,  and  said,  "  Let
no  man  fire  without  my  orders!  "  The  mayor,  who,
like  Panurge,  had  "  a  natural  fear  of  blows,"  refused  to
give  battle,  and  retired,  with  his  escort.  Then  the
funeral  procession  started,  carefully  choosing  the  long-
est way,  so  as  to  pass  in  front  of  the  mayor's  house.  As
it  was  filing  by,  an  idiot,  who  had  joined  its  ranks,  took
it  into  his  head  to  shout,  "  Vive  I'Empereur!  "  Two  or
three  voices  answered  him,  and  the  Rebbianites,  grow-
ing hotter,  proposed  killing  one  of  the  mayor's  oxen,
which  chanced  to  bar  their  w^ay.  Fortunately  the  colo-
nel stopped  this  act  of  violence.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  mention  that  an  official
statement  was  at  once  drawn  up,  or  that  the  mayor  sent

50


Colomba

the  prefect  a  report,  in  his  subHmest  style,  descrbing  the
manner  in  which  all  laws,  human  and  divine,  had  been
trodden  under  foot — how  the  majesty  of  himself,  the
mayor,  and  of  the  priest  had  been  flouted  and  insulted,
and  how  Colonel  della  Rebbia  had  put  himself  at  the
head  of  a  Bonapartist  plot,  to  change  the  order  of  suc-
cession to  the  throne,  and  to  excite  peaceful  citizens
to  take  arms  against  one  another — crimes  provided
against  by  Articles  86  and  91  of  the  Penal  Code.

The  exaggerated  tone  of  this  complaint  diminished
its  effect.  The  colonel  wrote  to  the  prefect  and  to  the
public  prosecutor.  One  of  his  wife's  kinsmen  was
related  to  one  of  the  deputies  of  the  island,  another
was  cousin  to  the  president  of  the  Royal  Court.
Thanks  to  this  interest,  the  plot  faded  out  of  sight,
Signora  della  Rebbia  was  left  quiet  in  the  wood,  and
the  idiot  alone  was  sentenced  tq  a  fornight's  impris-
onment.

Lawyer  Barricini,  dissatisfied  with  the  result  of  this
affair,  turned  his  batteries  in  a  different  direction.  He
dug  out  some  old  claim,  whereby  he  undertook  to  con-
test the  colonel's  ownership  of  a  certain  water-course
which  turned  a  mill-wheel.  A  lawsuit  began  and
dragged  slowly  along.  At  the  end  of  twelve  months,
the  court  was  about  to  give  its  decision,  and  according
to  all  appearances  in  favour  of  the  colonel,  when  Barri-
cini placed  in  the  hands  of  the  public  prosecutor  a  let-
ter, signed  by  a  certain  Agostini,  a  well-known  bandit,
threatening  him,  the  mayor,  with  fire  and  sword  if  he
did  not  relinquish  his  pretensions.     It  is  well  known

51


Colomba

that  in  Corsica  the  protection  of  these  brigands  is
much  sought  after,  and  that,  to  obhge  their  friends,
they  frequently  intervene  in  private  quarrels.  The
mayor  was  deriving  considerable  advantage  from  this
letter,  when  the  business  was  further  complicated  by  a
fresh  incident.  Agostini,  the  bandit,  wrote  to  the  pub-
lic prosecutor,  to  complain  that  his  handwriting  had
been  counterfeited,  and  his  character  aspersed,  by  some
one  who  desired  to  represent  him  as  a  man  who  made
a  traffic  of  his  influence.  "  If  I  can  discover  the
forger,"  he  said  at  the  end  of  his  letter,  "  I  will  make
a  striking  example  of  him."

It  was  quite  clear  that  Agostini  did  not  write  the
threatening  letter  to  the  mayor.  The  della  Rebbia  ac-
cused the  Barricini  of  it  and  vice  versa.  Both  parties
broke  into  open  threats,  and  the  authorities  did  not
know  where  to  find  the  culprit.

In  the  midst  of  all  this  Colonel  Ghilfuccio  was  mur-
dered. Here  are  the  facts,  as  they  were  elicited  at  the
official  injuiry.  On  the  2d  of  August,  18 — ,  toward
nightfall,  a  woman  named  Maddalena  Pietri,  who  was
carrying  corn  to  Pietranera,  heard  two  shots  fired,
very  close  together,  the  reports,  as  it  seemed  to  her,
coming  from  the  deep  lane  leading  to  the  village,  about
a  hundred  and  fifty  paces  from  the  spot  on  which  she
stood.  Almost  immediately  afterward  she  saw  a  man
running,  crouching  along  a  footpath  among  the  vines,
and  making  for  the  village.  The  man  stopped  for  a
minute,  and  turned  round,  but  the  distance  prevented
the  woman  Pietri  from  seeing  his  features,  and  besides,

52


I


Colomba

he  had  a  vine-leaf  in  his  mouth,  which  hid  ahnost  the
whole  of  his  face.  He  made  a  signal  with  his  head  to
some  comrade,  whom  the  witness  could  not  see,  and
then  disappeared  among  the  vines.

The  woman  Pietri  dropped  her  burden,  ran  up  the
path,  and  found  Colonel  della  Rebbia,  bathed  in  his
own  blood  from  two  bullet  wounds,  but  still  breathing.
Close  beside  him  lay  his  gun,  loaded  and  cocked,  as  if
he  had  been  defending  himself  against  a  person  who
had  attacked  him  in  front,  just  when  another  had  struck
him  from  behind.  Although  the  rattle  was  in  his
throat,  he  struggled  against  the  grip  of  death,  but  he
could  not  utter  a  word — this  the  doctors  explained  by
the  nature  of  the  wounds,  which  had  cut  through  his
lungs:  the  blood  was  choking  him,  it  flowed  slowly,
like  red  froth.  In  vain  did  the  woman  lift  him  up,  and
ask  him  several  questions.  She  saw  plainly  enough
that  he  desired  to  speak,  but  he  could  not  make  himself
understood.  Noticing  that  he  was  trying  to  get  his
hand  to  his  pocket,  she  quickly  drew  out  of  it  a  little
note-book,  which  she  opened  and  gave  to  him.

The  wounded  man  took  the  pencil  out  of  the  note-
book and  tried  to  write.  In  fact,  the  witness  saw  him
form  several  letters,  but  with  great  difBculty.  As  she
could  not  read,  however,  she  was  unable  to  understand
their  meaning.  Exhausted  by  the  effort,  the  colonel  left
the  note  bo'~>k  in  the  woman's  hand,  which  he  squeezed
tightly,  looking  at  her  strangely,  as  if  he  wanted  to  say
(these  are  the  witness's  own  words):  "  It  is  important
— it  is  my  murderer's  name!  "

53


Colomba

Macldalcna  Pictri  was  going  up  to  the  village,  when
she  met  Barricini,  the  mayor,  with  his  son  \'incentello.
It  was  then  almost  dark.  She  told  them  what  she  had
seen.  The  mayor  took  the  note-book,  hurried  up  to
his  house,  put  on  his  sash,  and  fetched  his  secretary
and  the  gendarmes.  Left  alone  with  young  Vincen-
tello,  ]\Iaddalena  Pietri  suggested  that  he  should  go
to  the  colonel's  assistance,  in  case  he  was  still  alive,  but
Vincentello  replied  that  if  he  were  to  go  near  a  man
w'ho  had  been  the  bitter  enemy  of  his  family,  he  would
certainly  be  accused  of  having  killed  him.  A  very
short  time  afterward  the  mayor  arrived,  found  the  colo-
nel dead,  had  the  corpse  carried  away,  and  drew  up
his  report.

In  spite  of  the  agitation  so  natural  on  such  an  occa-
sion. Monsieur  Barricini  had  hastened  to  place  the  colo-
nel's note-book  under  seal,  and  to  make  all  the  inquiries
in  his  power,  but  none  of  them  resulted  in  any  discov-
ery of  importance.

When  the  examining  magistrate  arrived  the  note-
book was  opened,  and  on  a  blood-stained  page  were
seen  letters  written  in  a  trembling  hand,  but  still  quite
legible  ;  the  sheet  bore  the  word  Agosti — and  the
judge  did  not  doubt  that  the  colonel  had  intended  to
point  out  Agostini  as  his  murderer.  Nevertheless,  Co-
lomba della  Rebbia,  who  had  been  summoned  by  the
magistrate,  asked  leave  to  examine  the  no<"e  book.  Af-
ter turning  over  the  leaves  for  a  few  moments,  she
stretched  out  her  hand  toward  the  mayor  and  cried,
"  There  stands  the  murderer!  "     Then  with  a  precision

54


\


Colomba

and  a  clearness  which  were  astonishing,  considering  the
passion  of  sorrow  that  shook  her,  she  related  that,  a  few
days  previously,  her  father  had  received  a  letter  from
his  son,  which  he  had  burned,  but  that  before  doing
so  he  had  written  Orso's  address  (he  had  just  changed
his  garrison)  in  the  note-book  with  his  pencil.  Now,
his  address  was  no  longer  in  the  note-book,  and  Co-
lomba concluded  that  the  mayor  had  torn  out  the  leaf
on  which  it  was  written,  which  probably  was  that  on
which  her  father  had  traced  the  murderer's  name,  and
for  that  name  the  mayor,  according  to  Colomba,  had
substituted  Agostini's.  The  magistrate,  in  fact,  noticed
that  one  sheet  was  missing  from  the  quire  on  which
the  name  was  written,  but  he  remarked  also  that  leaves
were  likewise  missing  from  other  quires  in  the  same
note-book,  and  certain  witnesses  testified  that  the  colo-
nel had  a  habit  of  tearing  out  pages  when  he  wanted  to
light  a  cigar — therefore  nothing  was  more  probable
than  that,  by  an  oversight,  he  had  burned  the  address
he  had  copied.  Further,  it  was  shown  that  the  mayor
could  not  have  read  the  note-book  on  receiving  it  from
Maddalena  Pietri,  on  account  of  the  darkness,  and  it  was
proved  that  he  had  not  stopped  an  instant  before  he
went  into  his  house,  that  the  sergeant  of  the  gendarmes
had  gone  there  with  him,  and  had  seen  him  light  a  lamp
and  put  the  note-book  into  an  envelope  which  he  had
sealed  before  his  eyes.

When  this  of^cer  had  concluded  his  deposition,  Co-
lomba, half-distracted,  cast  herself  at  his  feet,  and  be-
sought him,  by  all  he  held  most  sacred,  to  say  whether
Vol.  6  55  F


Colomba

he  had  not  left  the  mayor  alone  for  a  single  moment.
After  a  certain  amount  of  hesitation,  the  man,  who  was
evidently  affected  by  the  young  girl's  excitement,  ad-
mitted that  he  had  gone  into  the  next  room  to  fetch
a  sheet  of  foolscap,  but  that  he  had  not  been  away  a
minute,  and  that  the  mayor  had  talked  to  him  all  the
time  he  was  groping  for  the  paper  in  a  drawer.  More-
over, he  deposed  that  when  he  came  back  the  blood-
stained note-book  was  still  on  the  table,  in  the  very
place  where  the  mayor  had  thrown  it  when  he  first
came  in.

Monsieur  Barricini  gave  his  evidence  with  the
utmost  coolness.  He  made  allowances,  he  said,  for
Mademoiselle  della  Rebbia's  excitement,  and  was  ready
to  condescend  to  justify  himself.  He  proved  that  he
had  spent  his  whole  evening  in  the  village,  that  his  son
Vincentello  had  been  with  him  in  front  of  the  house
at  the  moment  when  the  crime  was  committed,  and
that  his  son  Orlanduccio,  who  had  had  an  attack  of
fever  that  very  day,  had  never  left  his  bed.  He  pro-
duced every  gun  in  his  house,  and  not  one  of  them  had
been  recently  discharged.  He  added,  that,  as  regarded
the  note-book,  he  had  at  once  realized  its  importance;
that  he  had  sealed  it  up,  and  placed  it  in  the  hands  of
his  deputy,  foreseeing  that  he  himself  might  be  sus-
pected, on  account  of  his  quarrel  with  the  colonel.  Fi-
nally, he  reminded  the  court  that  Agostini  had  threat-
ened to  kill  the  man  who  had  written  a  letter  in  his
name,  and  he  insinuated  that  this  ruffian  had  probably
suspected  the   colonel,   and   murdered   him.     Such   a

56


Colomba

vengeance,  for  a  similar  reason,  is  by  no  means  unprece-
dented in  the  history  of  brigandage.

Five  days  after  Colonel  della  Rebbia's  death,  Agos-
tini  was  surprised  by  a  detachment  of  riflemen,  and
killed,  fighting  desperately  to  the  last.  On  his  person
was  found  a  letter  from  Colomba,  beseeching  him  to
declare  whether  he  was  guilty  of  the  murder  imputed
to  him,  or  not.  As  the  bandit  had  sent  no  answer,  it
was  pretty  generally  concluded  that  he  had  not  the
courage  to  tell  a  daughter  he  had  murdered  her  father.
Yet  those  who  claimed  to  know  Agostini's  nature  thor-
oughly, whispered  that  if  he  had  killed  the  colonel,
he  would  have  boasted  of  the  deed.  Another  bandit,
known  by  the  name  of  Brandolaccio,  sent  Colomba  a
declaration  in  which  he  bore  witness  "  on  his  honour  "
to  his  comrade's  innocence — but  the  only  proof  he  put
forward  was  that  Agostini  had  never  told  him  that  he
suspected  the  colonel.

The  upshot  was  that  the  Barricini  suffered  no  incon-
venience, the  examining  magistrate  was  loud  in  his
praise  of  the  mayor,  and  the  mayor,  on  his  side,
crowned  his  handsome  behaviour  by  relinquishing  all
his  claims  over  the  stream,  concerning  which  he  had
brought  the  lawsuit  against  Colonel  della  Rebbia.

According  to  the  custom  of  her  country,  Colomba
improvised  a  ballafa  in  presence  of  her  father's  corpse,
and  before  his  assembled  friends.  In  it  she  poured  out
all  her  hatred  against  the  Barricini,  formally  charged
them  with  the  murder,  and  threatened  them  with  her
brother's  vengeance.     It  was  this  same  hallata,  which

57


Col


omba


had  grown  very  popular,  that  the  sailor  had  sung  before
Miss  Lydia.  When  Orso,  who  was  in  the  north  of
France,  heard  of  his  father's  death,  he  applied  for  leave,
but  failed  to  obtain  it.  A  letter  from  his  sister  led  him
to  believe  at  first  in  the  guilt  of  the  Barricini,  but  he
soon  received  copies  of  all  the  documents  connected
with  the  inquiry  and  a  private  letter  from  the  judge,
which  almost  convinced  him  that  the  bandit  Agostini
was  the  only  culprit.  Every  three  months  Colomba
had  written  to  him,  reiterating  her  suspicions,  which
she  called  her  "  proofs."  In  spite  of  himself,  these  ac-
cusations made  his  Corsican  blood  boil,  and  sometimes
he  was  very  near  sharing  his  sister's  prejudices.  Nev-
ertheless, every  time  he  wrote  to  her  he  repeated  his
conviction  that  her  allegations  possessed  no  solid  foun-
dation, and  were  quite  unworthy  of  belief.  He  even
forbade  her,  but  always  vainly,  to  mention  them  to  him
again.

Thus  two  years  went  by.  At  the  end  of  that  time
Orso  was  placed  on  half-pay.  and  then  it  occurred  to
him  to  go  ])ack  to  his  own  country — not  at  all  for  the
purpose  of  taking  vengeance  on  people  whom  he  be-
lieved innocent,  but  to  arrange  a  marriage  for  his  sister,
and  the  sale  of  his  own  small  property — if  its  value
should  prove  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  live  on  the
Continent.


58


1

^'^'


VF


CHAPTER    VII

Whether  it  was  that  the  arrival  of  his  sister  had
reminded  Orso  forcibly  of  his  paternal  home,  or  that
Colomba's  unconventional  dress  and  manners  made
him  feel  shy  before  his  civilized  friends,  he  announced,
the  very  next  day,  his  determination  to  leave  Ajaccio,
and  to  return  to  Pietranera.  But  he  made  the  colonel
promise  that  when  he  went  to  Bastia  he  would  come  and
stay  in  his  modest  manor-house,  and  undertook,  in  re-
turn, to  provide  him  with  plenty  of  buck,  pheasant,
boar,  and  other  game.

On  the  day  before  that  of  his  departure  Orso  pro-
posed that,  instead  of  going  out  shooting,  they  should
all  take  a  walk  along  the  shores  of  the  gulf.  With
Miss  Lydia  on  his  arm  he  was  able  to  talk  in  perfect
freedom — for  Colomba  had  stayed  in  the  town  to  do
her  shopping,  and  the  colonel  was  perpetually  leaving
the  young  people  to  fire  shots  at  sea-gulls  and  gannets,
greatly  to  the  astonishment  of  the  passers-by,  who  could
not  conceive  why  any  man  should  waste  his  powder  on
such  paltry  game.

They  were  walking  along  the  path  leading  to  the
Greek  Chapel,  which  commands  the  finest  view  to  be
had  of  the  bay,  but  they  paid  no  attention  to  it.

59


Colomba

"  Miss  Lydia,"  said  Orso,  after  a  silence  which  Had
lasted  long  enough  to  become  embarrassing,  "  teJ  me
frankly,  v/hat  do  you  think  of  my  sister?  "

"  I  like  her  very  much,"  answered  ]\Iiss  Nevil.
"  Better  than  you,"  she  added,  with  a  smile;  *'  for  she
is  a  true  Corsican,  and  you  are  rather  too  civilized  a
savage!  "

"Too  civilized!  Well,  in  spite  of  myself,  I  feel
that  I  am  growing  a  savage  again,  since  I  have  set  my
foot  on  the  island!  A  thousand  horrid  thoughts  dis-
turb and  torment  me,  and  I  wanted  to  talk  with  you  a
little  before  I  plunge  into  my  desert!  "

"  You  must  be  brave,  monsieur!  Look  at  your
sister's  resignation;  she  sets  you  an  example!  "

"Ah!  do  not  be  deceived!  Do  not  believe  in  her
resignation.  She  has  not  said  a  word  to  me  as  yet,  but
every  look  of  hers  tells  me  what  she  expects  of  me."

"  What  does  she  expect  of  you,  then?  "

"  Oh,  nothing!  Except  that  I  should  try  whether
your  father's  gun  will  kill  a  man  as  surely  as  it  kills  a
partridge."

"What  an  idea!  You  can  actually  believe  that,
when  you  have  just  acknowledged  that  she  has  said
nothing  to  you  yet?     It  really  is  too  dreadful  of  you!  "

"  If  her  thoughts  were  not  fixed  on  vengeance,  she
would  have  spoken  to  me  at  once  about  our  father;
she  has  never  done  it.  She  would  have  mentioned  the
names  of  those  she  considers — wrongly,  I  know — to
be  his  murderers.  But  no;  not  a  word!  That  is  be-
cause we  Corsicans,  you  see,  are  a  cimning  race.     My

60


J


Colomba

sister  realizes  that  she  does  not  hold  me  completely  in
her  power,  and  she  does  not  choose  to  startle  me  while
I  may  still  escape  her.  Once  she  has  led  me  to  the  edge
of  the  precipice,  and  once  I  turn  giddy  there,  she  will
thrust  me  into  the  abyss."

Then  Orso  gave  Miss  Nevil  some  details  of  his  fa-
ther's death,  and  recounted  the  principal  proofs  which
had  culminated  in  his  belief  that  Agostini  was  the
assassin.

*'  Nothing,"  he  added,  "  has  been  able  to  convince
Colomba.  I  saw  that  by  her  last  letter.  She  has  sworn
the  Barricini  shall  die,  and — you  see,  Miss  Nevil,  what
confidence  I  have  in  you! — they  would  not  be  alive
now%  perhaps,  if  one  of  the  prejudices  for  which  her
uncivilized  education  must  be  the  excuse  had  not  con-
vinced her  that  the  execution  of  this  vengeance  belongs
to  me,  as  head  of  her  family,  and  that  my  honour  de-
pends upon  it!  "

"Really  and  truly.  Monsieur  della  Rebbia!"  said
Miss  Nevil,  "  you  slander  your  sister!  "

"  No.  As  you  have  said  it  yourself,  she  is  a  Corsican;
she  thinks  as  they  all  think.  Do  you  know  why  I  was  so
sad  yesterday?  "

"  No.  But  for  some  time  past  you  have  been  sub-
ject to  these  fits  of  sadness.  You  were  much  pleasanter
in  the  earlier  days  of  our  acquaintance."

"  Yesterday,  on  the  contrary,  I  was  more  cheery
and  happy  than  I  generally  am.  I  had  seen  how  kind,
how  indulgent,  you  were  to  my  sister.  The  colonel
and  I  were  coming  home  in  a  boat.     Do  you  know

6i


Colomba

what  one  of  the  boatmen  said  to  me  in  his  infernal
patois?  '  You've  killed  a  deal  of  game,  Ors'  Anton',
but  you'll  find  Orlanduccio  Barricini  a  better  shot  than
you!'"

"  Well,  what  was  there  so  very  dreadful  in  that  re-
mark? Are  you  so  very  much  set  upon  being  consid-
ered a  skilful  sportsman?  "

"  But  don't  you  see  the  rufTfian  was  telling  me  I
shouldn't  have  courage  to  kill  Orlanduccio!  "

"  Do  you  know,  M.  della  Rebbia,  you  frighten  me!
The  air  of  this  island  of  yours  seems  not  only  to  give
people  fevers,  but  to  drive  them  mad.  Luckily  we  shall
be  leaving  it  soon!  "

"  Not  without  coming  to  Pietranera — you  have
promised  my  sister  that."

"  And  if  we  were  to  fail  in  that  promise,  we  should
bring  down  some  terrible  vengeance  on  our  heads,  no
doubt!"

"  Do  you  remember  that  story  your  father  was  tell-
ing us,  the  other  day,  about  the  Indians  who  threatened
the  company's  agents  that,  if  they  would  not  grant
their  prayer,  they  Avould  starve  themselves  to  death?  "

"  That  means  that  you  would  starve  yourself  to
death!  I  doubt  it  very  much!  You  would  go  hungry
for  one  day,  and  then  Mademoiselle  Colomba  would
bring  you  such  a  tempting  bniccio  *  that  you  would
quite  relinquish  your  plan."

"  Your  jests  are   cruel.   Miss   Nevil.     You   might

*  A  sort  of  baked  cream  cheese,  a  national  dish  in  Corsica.
62


Colomba

spare  me.  Listen,  I  am  alone  here;  I  have  no  one  but
you  to  prevent  me  from  going  mad,  as  you  call  it.
You  have  been  my  guardian  angel,  and  now !  "

"  Now,"  said  ]\Iiss  Lydia  gravely,  "  to  steady  this
reason  of  yours,  which  is  so  easily  shaken,  you  have
the  honour  of  a  soldier  and  a  man,  and,"  she  added,
turning  away  to  pluck  a  tlower,  "  if  that  will  be  any
help  to  you,  you  have  the  memory  of  your  guardian
angel,  too!  "

"  Ah,  Miss  Nevil,  if  I  could  only  think  you  really
take  some  interest!  "

"  Listen,  i\L  della  Rebbia,"  said  Miss  Nevil,  with
some  emotion.  "  As  you  are  a  child,  I  will  treat  you
as  I  would  treat  a  child.  \Mien  I  was  a  little  girl  my
mother  gave  me  a  beautiful  necklace,  which  I  had
longed  for  greatly;  but  she  said  to  me,  '  Every  time
you  put  on  this  necklace,  remember  you  do  not  know
French  yet.'  The  necklace  lost  some  of  its  value  in
my  eyes,  it  was  a  source  of  constant  self-reproach.  But
I  wore  it,  and  in  the  end  I  knew  French.  Do  you  see
this  ring?  It  is  an  Egyptian  scarab^eus,  found,  if  you
please,  in  a  pyramid.  That  strange  figure,  which  you
may  perhaps  take  for  a  bottle,  stands  for  '  human  life.'
There  are  certain  people  in  my  country  to  whom  this
hieroglyphic  should  appear  exceedingly  appropriate.
This,  which  comes  after  it,  is  a  shield  upon  an  arm,
holding  a  lance:  that  means  struggle,  battle.  Thus  the
two  characters,  together,  form  this  motto,  which
strikes  me  as  a  fine  one,  '  Life  is  a  battle.'  Pray  do  not
fancy  I  can  translate  hieroglyphics  at  sight!  it  was  a

63


Colomba

man  learned  in  such  matters  who  explained  these  to  me.
Here,  I  will  give  you  my  scarabaeus.  Whenever  you  feel
some  wicked  Corsican  thought  stir  in  you,  look  at  my
talisman,  and  tell  yourself  you  must  win  the  battle  our
evil  passions  wage  against  us.  Why,  really,  I  don't
preach  at  all  badly!  "

"  I  shall  think  of  you,  Miss  Nevil,  and  I  shall  say
to  myself "

"  Say  to  yourself  you  have  a  friend  who  would  be
in  despair  at  the  idea  of  your  being  hanged — and  be-
sides it  would  be  too  distressing  for  your  ancestors  the
corporals!  "

With  these  words  she  dropped  Orso's  arm,  laugh-
ing and  running  to  her  father.

"  Papa,"  she  said,  "  do  leave  those  poor  birds  alone,
and  come  and  make  up  poetry  with  us,  in  Napoleon's
grotto!"


64


CHAPTER    VIII

There  is  always  a  certain  solemnity  about  a  de-
parture, even  when  the  separation  is  only  to  be  a  short
one.  Orso  and  his  sister  were  to  start  very  early  in  the
morning,  and  he  had  taken  his  leave  of  Miss  Lydia  the
night  before — for  he  had  no  hope  that  she  would  dis-
turb her  indolent  habits  on  his  account.  Their  fare-
wells had  been  cold  and  grave.  Since  that  conversation
on  the  sea-shore.  Miss  Lydia  had  been  afraid  she  had
perhaps  shown  too  strong  an  interest  in  Orso,  and  on
the  other  hand,  her  jests,  and  more  especially  her  care-
less tone,  lay  heavy  on  Orso's  heart.  At  one  moment
he  had  thought  the  young  Englishwoman's  manner  be-
trayed a  budding  feeling  of  afifection,  but  now,  put  out
of  countenance  by  her  jests,  he  told  himself  she  only
looked  on  him  as  a  mere  acquaintance,  who  would  be
soon  forgotten.  Great,  therefore,  was  his  surprise,  next
morning,  when,  as  he  sat  at  coffee  with  the  colonel,  he
saw  Miss  Lydia  come  into  the  room,  followed  by  his
sister.  She  had  risen  at  five  o'clock,  and  for  an  Eng-
lishwoman, and  especially  for  Miss  Nevil,  the  efifort  was
so  great  that  it  could  not  but  give  him  some  cause  for
vanity.

"  I  am  so  sorry  you  should  have  disturbed  yourself

5  65


Colomba

so  early,"  said  Orso.  "  No  doubt  my  sister  woke  you
up  in  spite  of  all  my  injunctions,  and  you  must  hate
us  heartily!     Perhaps  you  wish  I  was  hanged  already!  "

"  No,"  said  Miss  Lydia,  very  low  and  in  Italian,
evidently  so  that  her  father  might  not  hear  her,  "  but
you  were  somewhat  sulky  with  me  yesterday,  because
of  my  innocent  jokes,  and  I  would  not  have  you  carry
away  an  unpleasant  recollection  of  your  humble  serv-
ant. \\^hat  terrible  people  you  are,  you  Corsicans!
Well,  good-bye!     We  shall  meet  soon,  I  hope."

And  she  held  out  her  hand.

A  sigh  was  the  only  answer  Orso  could  find.  Co-
lomba came  to  his  side,  led  him  into  a  window,  and
spoke  to  him  for  a  moment  in  an  undertone,  showing
him  something  she  held  under  her  mczzaro.

"  Mademoiselle,"  said  Orso  to  Miss  Nevil,  "  my
sister  is  anxious  to  give  you  a  very  odd  present,  but
we  Corsicans  have  not  much  to  offer — except  our  affec-
tion— which  time  never  wipes  out.  My  sister  tells  me
you  have  looked  with  some  curiosity  at  this  dagger.  It
is  an  ancient  possession  in  our  family.  It  probably
hung,  once  upon  a  time,  at  the  belt  of  one  of  those
corporals,  to  whom  I  owe  the  honour  of  your  acquaint-
ance. Colomba  thinks  it  so  precious  that  she  has  asked
my  leave  to  give  it  to  you,  and  I  hardly  know^  if  I
ought  to  grant  it,  for  I  am  afraid  you'll  laugh  at  us!  "

"  The  dagger  is  beautiful."  said  Miss  Lydia.  "  But
it  is  a  family  weapon,  I  can  not  accept  it!  "

"  It's  not  my  father's  dagger,"  exclaimed  Colomba
eagerly;  "  it  was  given  to  one  of  mother's  ancestors  by

66


I


Colomba

King  Theodore.    If  the  signorina  will  accept  it,  she  will
give  us  great  pleasure."

"  Come,  ]\liss  Lydia,"  said  Orso,  "  don't  scorn
a  king's  dagger!  "

To  a  collector,  relics  of  King  Theodore  are  infinite-
ly more  precious  than  those  of  the  most  powerful  of
monarchs.  The  temptation  was  a  strong  one,  and  al-
ready Miss  Lydia  could  see  the  effect  the  weapon
would  produce  laid  out  on  a  lacquered  table  in  her
room  at  St.  James's  Place.

"  But,"  said  she.  taking  the  dagger  with  the  hesi-
tating air  of  one  who  longs  to  accept,  and  casting  one
of  her  most  delightful  smiles  on  Colomba.  "'  dear
Signorina  Colomba  ...  I  can  not  ...  I  should  not
dare  to  let  you  depart  thus,  unarmed."

"  My  brother  is  with  me,"  said  Colomba  proudly,
"  and  we  have  the  good  gun  your  father  has  given  us.
Orso,  have  you  put  a  bullet  in  it?  "

Miss  Nevil  kept  the  dagger,  and  to  avert  the  dan-
ger consequent  on  giz'iug  instruments  that  cut  or  pierce
to  a  friend,  Colomba  insisted  on  receiving  a  soldo  in
payment.

A  start  had  to  be  made  at  last.  Yet  once  again
Orso  pressed  Miss  Nevil's  hand,  Colomba  kissed  her,
and  then  held  up  her  rosy  lips  to  the  colonel,  who  was
enchanted  with  this  Corsican  politeness.  From  the  win-
dow of  the  drawing-room  !Miss  Lydia  watched  the
brother  and  sister  mount  their  horses.  Colomba's  eyes
shone  with  a  malignant  joy  which  she  had  never  re-
marked in  them  before.     The  sight  of  this  tall  strong

67


Colomba

creature,  with  her  fanatical  ideas  of  savage  honour,
pride  written  on  her  forehead,  and  curled  in  a  sardonic
smile  upon  her  lips,  carrying  off  the  young  man  with
his  weapons,  as  though  on  some  death-dealing  errand,
recalled  Orso's  fears  to  her,  and  she  fancied  she  beheld
his  evil  genius  dragging  him  to  his  ruin.  Orso,  who
was  already  in  the  saddle,  raised  his  head  and  caught
sight  of  her.  Either  because  he  had  guessed  her
thought,  or  desired  to  send  her  a  last  farewell,  he  took
the  Egyptian  ring,  which  he  had  hung  upon  a  ribbon,
and  carried  it  to  his  lips.  Blushing,  Miss  Lydia
stepped  back  from  the  window,  then  returning  to  it  al-
most at  once,  she  saw  the  two  Corsicans  cantering  their
little  ponies  rapidly  toward  the  mountains.  Half  an
hour  later  the  colonel  showed  them  to  her,  through  his
glasses,  riding  along  the  end  of  the  bay,  and  she  no-
ticed that  Orso  constantly  turned  his  head  toward  the
town.  At  last  he  disappeared  behind  the  marshes,  the
site  of  which  is  now  filled  by  a  flourishing  nursery
garden.

Miss  Lydia  glanced  at  herself  in  the  glass,  and
thought  she  looked  pale.

"  What  must  that  young  man  think  of  me,"  said
she,  "and  what  did  I  think  of  him?  And  why  did  I
think  about  him?  ...  A  travelling  acquaintance!
.  .  .  What  have  I  come  to  Corsica  for?  ...  Oh!  I
don't  care  for  him!  ...  No!  no!  and  besides  the
thing  is  impossible  .  .  .  And  Colomba  .  .  .  Fancy
me  sister-in-law  to  a  voceratrice,  who  wears  a  big
dagger!  "


Colomba

And  she  noticed  she  was  still  holding  King  Theo-
dore's dagger  in  her  hand.  She  tossed  it  on  to  her
toilette  table.  "  Colomba,  in  London,  dancing  at  Al-
macks !  .  .  .  Good  heavens !  what  a  lion  *  that  would
be,  to  show  off!  .  .  .  Perhaps  she'd  make  a  great  sen-
sation! .  .  .  He  loves  me,  I'm  certain  of  it!  He  is  the
hero  of  a  novel,  and  I  have  interrupted  his  adventurous
career.  .  .  .  But  did  he  really  long  to  avenge  his  father
in  true  Corsican  fashion?  .  .  .  He  was  something  be-
tween a  Conrad  and  a  dandy  .  .  .  I've  turned  him  into
nothing  but  a  dandy!  .  .  .  And  a  dandy  with  a  Corsi-
can tailor!  .  .  ."

She  threw  herself  on  her  bed,  and  tried  to  sleep —
but  that  proved  an  impossibility,  and  I  will  not  under-
take to  continue  her  soliloquy,  during  which  she  de-
clared, more  than  a  hundred  times  over,  that  Signor
della  Rebbia  had  not  been,  was  not,  and  never  should
be,  anything  to  her.

*  At  this  period  this  name  was  used  in  England  for  people  who
were  the  fashion  because  they  had  something  extraordinary  about
them.


69


CHAPTER    IX

Meanwhile  Orso  was  riding  along  beside  his  sis-
ter. At  first  the  speed  at  which  their  horses  moved
prevented  all  conversation,  but  when  the  hills  grew  so
steep  that  they  were  obliged  to  go  at  a  foot's  pace,
they  began  to  exchange  a  few  words  about  the  friends
from  whom  they  had  just  parted.  Colomba  spoke  with
admiration  of  Miss  Nevil's  beauty,  of  her  golden  hair,
and  charming  ways.  Then  she  asked  whether  the  colo-
nel was  really  as  rich  as  he  appeared,  and  whether  Miss
Lydia  was  his  only  child.

"  She  would  be  a  good  match,"  said  she.  "  Her
father  seems  to  have  a  great  liking  for  you "

And  as  Orso  made  no  response,  she  added:  ''Our
family  was  rich,  in  days  gone  b}^  It  is  still  one  of  the
most  respected  in  the  island.  All  these  siguori  about
us  are  bastards.*  The  only  noble  blood  left  is  in  the
families  of  the  corporals,  and  as  you  know,  Orso,  your
ancestors  were  the  chief  corporals  in  the  island.  You
know  our  family  came  from  beyond  the  hills, f  and  it

*  The  descendants  of  the  feudal  lords  in  Corsica  are  known  as
siguori.  There  is  a  rivalry  as  regards  birth  between  the  siguori  and
the  caporali.

\  Otherwise  "from  the  eastern  coast."  The  meaning  of  the  ex-
pression "</i  la  dei  monti"  which  is  in  constant  use,  alters  according

70


I


I


Colomba

was  the  civil  wars  that  forced  tis  over  to  this  side.  If
I  were  you,  Orso,  I  shouldn't  hesitate — I  should  ask
Colonel  Nevil  for  his  daughter's  hand."  Orso  shrugged
his  shoulders.  "  With  her  fortune,  you  might  buy  the
Falsetta  woods,  and  the  vineyards  below  ours.  I  would
build  a  fine  stone  house,  and  add  a  story  to  the  old
tower  in  which  Sambucuccio  killed  so  many  Moors  in
the  days  of  Count  Henry,  //  bcl  Misscre.''  *

"  Colomba,  you're  talking  nonsense,"  said  Orso,
cantering  forward.

"  You  are  a  man,  Ors'  Anton',  and  of  course  you
know  what  you  ought  to  do  better  than  any  woman.
But  I  should  very  much  like  to  know  what  objection
that  Englishman  could  have  to  the  marriage.  Are
there  any  corporals  in  England?  "

After  a  somewhat  lengthy  ride,  spent  in  talking  in
this  fashion,  the  brother  and  sister  reached  a  little  vil-
lage, not  far  from  Bocognano,  where  they  halted  to
dine  and  sleep  at  a  friend's  house.  They  w^ere  wel-
comed with  a  hospitality  which  must  be  experienced
before  it  can  be  appreciated.  The  next  morning,  their
host,  who  had  stood  godfather  to  a  child  to  whom  Ma-
dame della  Rebbia  had  been  godmother,  accompanied
them  a  league  beyond  his  house.

to  the  geographical  position  of  the  person  who  emploji^s  it.  A  chain
of  mountains  runs  right  through  Corsica  from  north  to  south.

*  See  Filippini,  Book  II.  Count  Arrigo  bel  Missere  died  toward
the  year  looo.  The  story  goes  that  at  his  death  a  voice  was  heard
in  the  air  singing  these  prophetic  words  :

"  E  morto  il  Conte  Arrigo  bel  Missere
E  Corsica  sara  di  male  in  peggio  ! "

Vol.  6  7^  a


Colomba

"  Do  you  see  those  woods  and  thickets?  "  said  he  to
Orso,  just  as  they  were  parting.  "  A  man  who  had
met  with  a  misfortune  might  hve  there  peacefully  for
ten  years,  and  no  gendarme  or  soldier  would  ever  come
to  look  for  him.  The  woods  run  into  the  Vizzavona
forest,  and  anybody  who  has  friends  at  Bocognano  or
in  the  neighbourhood  would  want  for  nothing.  That's
a  good  gun  you  have  there.  It  must  carry  a  long  way.
Blood  of  the  Madonna!  What  calibre!  You  might  kill
better  game  than  boars  with  it!  "

Orso  answered,  coldly,  that  his  gun  was  of  English
make,  and  carried  "  the  lead  "  a  long  distance.  The
friends  embraced,  and  took  their  different  ways.

Our  travellers  w^ere  drawing  quite  close  to  Pietra-
nera,  when,  at  the  entrance  of  a  little  gorge,  through
which  they  had  to  pass,  they  beheld  seven  or  eight
men,  armed  with  guns,  some  sitting  on  stones,  others
lying  on  the  grass,  others  standing  up,  and  seeming-
ly on  the  lookout.  Their  horses  were  grazing  a
little  way  off.  Colomba  looked  at  them  for  a  moment,
through  a  spy-glass  which  she  took  out  of  one  of  the
large  leathern  pockets  all  Corsicans  wear  when  on  a
journey.

"Those  are  our  men!"  she  cried,  with  a  well-
pleased  air.     "  Pieruccio  has  done  his  errand  well!  "

"What  men?"  inquired  Orso.

"  Our  herdsmen,"  she  replied.  "  I  sent  Pieruccio
off  yesterday  evening  to  call  the  good  fellows  together,
so  that  they  may  attend  you  home.  It  would  not  do
for  you  to  enter  Pietranera  without  an  escort,  and  be-

72


Colomba

sides,  you  must  know  the  Barricini  are  capable  of  any-
thing! "

"  Colomba,"  said  Orso,  and  his  tone  was  severe,
"  I  have  asked  you,  over  and  over  again,  not  to  men-
tion the  Barricini  and  your  groundless  suspicions  to
me.  I  shall  certainly  not  make  myself  ridiculous  by
riding  home  with  all  these  loafers  behind  me,  and  I
am  very  angry  with  you  for  having  sent  for  them  with-
out telhng  me."

"  Brother,  you  have  forgotten  the  ways  of  your
own  country.  It  is  my  business  to  protect  you,  when
your  own  imprudence  exposes  you  to  danger.  It  was
my  duty  to  do  what  I  have  done."

Just  at  this  moment  the  herdsmen,  who  had  caught
sight  of  them,  hastened  to  their  horses,  and  galloped
down  the  hill  to  meet  them.

"  Evviva  Ors'  Anton'!"  shouted  a  brawny,  white-
bearded  old  fellow,  wrapped,  despite  the  heat,  in  a
hooded  cloak  of  Corsican  cloth,  thicker  than  the  skins
of  his  own  goats.  "  The  image  of  his  father,  only
taller  and  stronger!  What  a  splendid  gun!  There'll
be  talk  about  that  gun,  Ors'  Anton' !  "

"  Evvviva  Ors'  Anton'!"  chorused  the  herdsmen.
"We  were  sure  you'd  come  back,  at  last!  "

"Ah!  Ors'  Anton'!"  cried  a  tall  fellow,  with  a
skin  tanned  brick  red.  "  How  happy  your  father
would  be.  if  he  were  here  to  welcome  you!  The  dear,
good  man!  You  would  have  seen  him  now,  if  he
would  have  listened  to  me — if  he  would  have  let
me   settle   Guidice's   business!  .  .  .  But   he   wouldn't

73


Colomba

listen  to  me,  poor  fellow!  He  knows  I  was  right,
now!  "

"Well,  well!"  said  the  old  man.  "  Guidice  will
lose  nothing  by  waiting."

"  Evvviva  Ors'  Anton'!"  And  the  reports  of  a
dozen  guns  capped  the  plaudit.

Very  much  put  out,  Orso  sat  in  the  midst  of  the
group  of  mounted  men,  all  talking  at  once,  and  crowd-
ing round  to  shake  hands  with  him.  For  some  time  he
could  not  make  himself  heard.  At  last,  with  the  air
he  put  on  when  he  used  to  reprimand  the  men  of  his
company,  or  send  one  of  them  to  the  guard-room,  he
said:

"  I  thank  you,  friends,  for  the  affection  you  show
for  me,  and  for  that  which  you  felt  for  my  father!  But
I  do  not  want  advice  from  any  of  you,  and  you  must
not  offer  it.       I  know  my  own  duty."

"He's  right!  he's  right!"  cried  the  herdsmen.
"  You  know  you  may  reckon  on  us!  "

"  Yes,  I  do  reckon  on  you.  But  at  this  moment
I  need  no  help,  and  no  personal  danger  threatens  mc.
Now  face  round  at  once,  and  be  ofT  with  you  to  your
goats.  I  know  my  way  to  Pietranera,  and  I  want  no
guides."

"  Fear  nothing,  Ors'  Anton',"  said  the  old  man.
"  They  would  never  dare  to  show  their  noses  to-day.
The  mouse  runs  back  to  its  hole  when  the  tom-cat
comes  out!  "

"Tom-cat  yourself,  old  gray-beard!"  said  Orso.
"  What's  your  name?  "

74


Colomba

"What!  don't  you  remember  me,  Ors'  Anton'?  I
Avho  have  so  often  taken  you  up  behind  me  on  that
biting  mule  of  mine!  You  don't  remember  Polo
Griffo?  I'm  an  honest  fellow,  though,  and  with  the
della  Rebbia,  body  and  soul.  Say  but  the  word,  and
when  that  big  gun  of  yours  speaks,  this  old  musket  of
mine,  as  old  as  its  master,  shall  not  be  dumb.  Be  sure
of  that,  Ors'  Anton'!  "

"Well,  well!  But  be  of¥  with  you  now,  in  the
devil's  name,  and  let  us  go  on  our  way!  "

At  last  the  herdsmen  departed,  trotting  rapidly  oil
toward  the  village,  but  they  stopped  every  here  and
there,  at  all  the  highest  spots  on  the  road,  as  though
they  were  looking  out  for  some  hidden  ambuscade,
always  keeping  near  enough  to  Orso  and  his  sister  to
be  able  to  come  to  their  assistance  if  necessary.  And
old  Polo  Griffo  said  to  his  comrades:

"I  understand  him!  I  understand  him!  He'll  not
say  what  he  means  to  do,  but  he'll  do  it!  He's  the
born  image  of  his  father.  Ah!  you  may  say  you  have
no  spite  against  any  one,  my  boy!  But  you've  made
your  vow  to  Saint  Nega.*  Bravo!  I  wouldn't  give  a
fig  for  the  mayor's  hide — there  won't  be  the  makings  of
a  wineskin  in  it  before  the  month  is  out!  "

Preceded  by  this  troop  of  skirmishers,  the  last  de-
scendant of  the  della  Rebbia  entered  the  village,  and
proceeded  to  the  old  mansion  of  his  forefathers,  the  cor-
porals.    The  Rebbianites,  who  had  long  been  leader-

*  This  saint  is  not  mentioned  in  the  calendar.     To  make  a  vow  to
Saint  Nega  means  to  deny  everything  deliberately.

75


Colomba

less,  had  gathered  to  welcome  him,  and  those  dwellers
in  the  village  who  observed  a  nentral  line  of  conduct  all
came  to  their  doorsteps  to  see  him  pass  by.  The  adher-
ents of  the  Barricini  remained  inside  their  houses,  and
peeped  out  of  the  slits  in  their  shutters.

The  village  of  Pietranera  is  very  irregularly  built,
like  most  Corsican  villages — for  indeed,  to  see  a  street,
the  traveller  must  betake  himself  to  Cargese,  which
was  built  by  Monsieur  de  Marboeuf.  The  houses,
scattered  irregularly  about,  without  the  least  attempt
at  orderly  arrangement,  cover  the  top  of  a  small  pla-
teau, or  rather  of  a  ridge  of  the  mountain.  Toward  the
centre  of  the  village  stands  a  great  evergreen  oak,
and  close  beside  it  may  be  seen  a  granite  trough,  into
which  the  water  of  a  neighbouring  spring  is  conveyed
by  a  wooden  pipe.  This  monument  of  public  utility
was  constructed  at  the  common  expense  of  the  della
Rebbia  and  Barricini  families.  But  the  man  who
imagined  this  to  be  a  sign  of  former  friendship  between
the  two  families  would  be  sorely  mistaken.  On  the
contrary,  it  is  the  outcome  of  their  mutual  jealousy.
Once  upon  a  time.  Colonel  della  Rebbia  sent  a  small
sum  of  money  to  the  Alunicipal  Council  of  his  com-
mune to  help  to  provide  a  fountain.  The  lawyer
Barricini  hastened  to  forward  a  similar  gift,  and  to
this  generous  strife  Pietranera  owes  its  w'ater  supply.
Round  about  the  evergreen  oak  and  the  fountain  there
is  a  clear  space,  known  as  "  the  Square,"  on  which  the
local  idlers  gather  ever}-  night.  Sometimes  they  play  at
cards,  and  once  a  year,  in  Carnival-time,  they  dance.

7^


J


Colomba

At  the  two  ends  of  the  square  stand  two  edifices,  of
greater  height  than  breadth,  built  of  a  mixture  of  gran-
ite and  schist.  These  are  the  Tozuers  of  the  two  oppos-
ing famihes,  the  Barricini  and  the  della  Rebbia.  Their
architecture  is  exactly  alike,  their  height  is  similar,  and
it  is  quite  evident  that  the  rivalry  of  the  two  families
has  never  been  absolutely  decided  by  any  stroke  of
fortune  in  favor  of  either.

It  may  perhaps  be  well  to  explain  what  should  be
understood  by  this  word,  "Tower."  It  is  a  square
building,  some  forty  feet  in  height,  which  in  any  other
country  would  be  simply  described  as  a  pigeon-house.
A  narrow  entrance-door,  eight  feet  above  the  level  of
the  ground,  is  reached  by  a  very  steep  flight  of  steps.
Above  the  door  is  a  window,  in  front  of  which  runs  a
sort  of  balcony,  the  floor  of  which  is  pierced  wdtli  open-
ings, like  a  machicolation,  through  which  the  inhab-
itants may  destroy  an  unwelcome  visitor  without  any
danger  to  themselves.  Between  the  window  and  the
door  are  two  escutcheons,  roughly  carved.  One  of
these  bears  what  was  originally  a  Genoese  cross,  now
so  battered  that  nobody  but  an  antiquary  could  recog-
nise it.  On  the  other  are  chiselled  the  arms  of  the
family  to  whom  the  Tower  belongs.  If  the  reader  will
complete  this  scheme  of  decoration  by  imagining  sev-
eral bullet  marks  on  the  escutcheons  and  on  the  window
frames,  he  will  have  a  fair  idea  of  a  Corsican  mansion,
dating  from  the  middle  ages.  I  had  forgotten  to  add
that  the  dwelling-house  adjoins  the  tower,  and  is  fre-
quently connected  with  it  by  some  interior  passage.

77


Colomba

The  della  Rebbia  house  and  tower  stand  on  the
northern  side  of  the  square  at  Pietranera.  The  Barri-
cini  house  and  tower  are  on  the  southern  side.  Since
the  colonel's  wife  had  been  buried,  no  member  of  either
family  had  ever  been  seen  on  any  side  of  the  square,
save  that  assigned  by  tacit  agreement  to  its  own  party.
Orso  was  about  to  ride  past  the  mayor's  house  when  his
sister  checked  him,  and  suggested  his  turning  dow^n
a  lane  that  would  take  them  to  their  own  dwelling
without  crossing  the  square  at  all.

"  \Miy  should  we  go  out  of  our  way?  "  said  Orso.
"  Doesn't  the  square  belong  to  everybody?  "  and  he
rode  on.

"Brave  heart!"  murmured  Colomba.  "...  My
father!  you  will  be  avenged!  "

When  they  reached  the  square,  Colomba  put  her-
self between  her  brother  and  the  Barricini  mansion,  and
her  eyes  never  left  her  enemy's  windows.  She  noticed
that  they  had  been  lately  barricaded  and  provided  with
arcJicre.  Archcrc  is  the  name  given  to  narrow^  open-
ings like  loopholes,  made  between  the  big  logs  of  wood
used  to  close  up  the  lower  parts  of  the  windows.  When
an  onslaught  is  expected,  this  sort  of  barricade  is  used,
and  from  behind  the  logs  the  attacked  party  can  fire  at
its  assailants  with  ease  and  safety.

"The  cowards!"  said  Colomba.  "Look,  brother,
they  have  begun  to  protect  themselves!  They  have
put  up  barricades!  But  some  day  or  other  they'll  have
to  come  out."

Orso's  presence  on  the  southern  side  of  the  square
78


Colomba

made  a  great  sensation  at  Pietranera,  and  was  taken  to
be  a  proof  of  boldness  savouring  of  temerit)-.  It  was
subject  of  endless  comment  on  the  part  of  the  neutrals,
when  they  gathered  around  the  evergreen  oak,  that
night.

"  It  is  a  good  thing."  they  said,  "  that  Barricini's
sons  are  not  back  yet,  for  they  are  not  so  patient  as  the
lawyer,  and  very  likely  they  would  not  have  let  their
enemy  set  his  foot  on  their  ground  without  making
him  pay  for  his  bravado."

"  Remember  what  I  am  telling  you,  neighbour,"
said  an  old  man,  the  village  oracle.  "  I  watched  Co-
lomba's  face  to-day.  She  had  some  idea  in  her  head.
I  smell  powder  in  the  air.  Before  long,  butcher's  meat
will  be  cheap  in  Pietranera!  "


79


CHAPTER    X

Orso  had  been  parted  from  his  father  at  so  early  an
age  that  he  had  scarcely  had  time  to  know  him.  He
had  left  Pietranera  to  pursue  his  studies  at  Pisa  when
he  was  only  fifteen.  Thence  he  had  passed  into  the
military  school,  and  Ghilfuccio,  meanwhile,  was  bear-
ing the  Imperial  Eagles  all  over  Europe.  On  the  main-
land, Orso  only  saw  his  father  at  rare  intervals,  and  it
was  not  until  1815  that  he  found  himself  in  the  regi-
ment he  commanded.  But  the  colonel,  who  was  an  in-
flexible disciplinarian,  treated  his  son  just  like  any  other
sub-lieutenant — in  other  words,  with  great  severity.
Orso's  memories  of  him  were  of  two  kinds:  He  recol-
lected him,  at  Pietranera,  as  the  father  who  would  trust
him  with  his  sword,  and  would  let  him  fire  off  his  gun
when  he  came  in  from  a  shooting  expedition,  or  who
made  him  sit  down,  for  the  first  time,  tiny  urchin  as
he  was,  at  the  family  dinner-table.  Then  he  remem-
bered the  Colonel  della  Rebbia  who  would  put  him
under  arrest  for  some  blunder,  and  who  never  called
him  anything  but  Lieutenant  della  Rebbia.

"  Lieutenant  della  Rebbia,  you  are  not  in  your  right
place  on  parade.  You  will  be  confined  to  barracks  three
days."

80


.  Colomba

"  Your  skirmishers  are  five  yards  too  far  from  your
main  body — five  days  in  barracks."

"  It  is  five  minutes  past  noon,  and  you  are  still  in
your  forage-cap — a  week  in  barracks."

Only  once,  at  Quatre-Bras,  he  had  said  to  him,
"  Well  done,  Orso!     But  be  cautious!  "

But,  after  all,  these  later  memories  were  not  con-
nected in  his  mind  with  Pietranera.  The  sight  of  the
places  so  familiar  to  him  in  his  childish  days,  of  the  fur-
niture he  had  seen  used  by  his  mother,  to  whom  he  had
been  fondly  attached,  filled  his  soul  with  a  host  of  ten-
der and  painful  emotions.  Then  the  gloomy  future
that  lay  before  him,  the  vague  anxiety  he  felt  about
his  sister,  and,  above  all  other  things,  the  thought  that
Miss  Nevil  was  coming  to  his  house,  which  now  struck
him  as  being  so  small,  so  poor,  so  unsuited  to  a  person
accustomed  to  luxury — the  idea  that  she  might  pos-
sibly despise  it — all  these  feelings  made  his  brain  a
chaos,  and  filled  him  with  a  sense  of  deep  discourage-
ment.

At  supper  he  sat  in  the  great  oaken  chair,  blackened
with  age,  in  which  his  father  had  always  presided  at
the  head  of  the  family  table,  and  he  smiled  when  he
saw  that  Colomba  hesitated  to  sit  down  with  him.  But
he  was  grateful  to  her  for  her  silence  during  the  meal,
and  for  her  speedy  retirement  afterward.  For  he  felt
he  was  too  deeply  moved  to  be  able  to  resist  the  attack
she  was  no  doubt  preparing  to  make  upon  him.  Co-
lomba, however,  was  dealing  warily  with  him,  and
meant  to  give  him  time  to  collect  himself.  He  sat  for
6  8i


Colomba

a  long  lime  motionless,  with  his  head  on  his  hand,
thinking  over  the  scenes  of  the  last  fortnight  of  his  life.
He  saw,  with  alarm,  how  every  one  seemed  to  be  watch-
ing what  wonld  be  his  behaviour  to  the  Barricini.  Al-
ready he  began  to  perceive  that  the  opinion  of  Pietra-
nera  was  beginning  to  be  the  opinion  of  all  the  world  to
him.  He  would  have  to  avenge  himself,  or  be  taken
for  a  coward!  But  on  whom  was  he  to  take  vengeance?
He  could  not  believe  the  Barricini  to  be  guilty  of  mur-
der. They  were  his  family  enemies,  certainly,  but  only
the  vulgar  prejudice  of  his  fellow-countrymen  could
accuse  them  of  being  murderers.  Sometimes  he  would
look  at  Miss  Nevil's  talisman,  and  whisper  the  motto
"  Life  is  a  battle!  "  over  to  himself.  At  last,  in  a  reso-
lute voice,  he  said,  "I  will  win  it!"  Strong  in  that
thought,  he  rose  to  his  feet,  took  up  the  lamp,  and  was
just  going  up  to  his  room,  when  he  heard  a  knock  at  the
door  of  the  house.  It  was  a  very  unusual  hour  for  any
visitor  to  appear.  Colomba  instantly  made  her  appear-
ance, followed  by  the  woman  who  acted  as  their  servant.
■    "  It's  nothing!  "  she  said,  hurrying  to  the  door.

Yet  before  she  opened  it  she  inquired  who  knocked.
A  gentle  voice  answered,  "  It  is  I."

Instantly  the  wooden  bar  across  the  door  was  with-
drawn, and  Colomba  reappeared  in  the  dining-room,
followed  by  a  little  ragged,  bare-footed  girl  of  about
ten  years  old,  her  head  bound  with  a  shabby  kerchief,
from  which  escaped  long  locks  of  hair,  as  black  as  the
raven's  wing.  The  child  was  thin  and  pale,  her  skin
was  sunburnt,   but   her  eyes   shone  with   intelligence.

82


Colomba

When  she  saw  Orso  she  stopped  shyly,  and  courtesied
to  him,  peasant  fashion — then  she  said  something  in  an
undertone  to  Colomba,  and  gave  her  a  freshly  killed
pheasant.

"  Thanks,  Chili,"  said  Colomba.  "  Thank  your
uncle  for  me.     Is  he  well?  "

"  Very  well,  signorina,  at  your  service.  I  couldn't
come  sooner  because  he  was  late.  I  waited  for  him  in
the  moqiiis  for  three  hours."

"  And  you've  had  no  supper?  "

"Why  no,  signorina!     I've  not  had  time."

"  You  shall  have  some  supper  here.  Has  your
uncle  any  bread  left?  "

"  Very  little,  signorina.  But  what  he  is  most  short
of  is  powder.  Now  the  chestnuts  are  in,  the  only  other
thing  he  wants  is  powder."

"  I  will  give  you  a  loaf  for  him,  and  some  pow-
der, too.  Tell  him  to  use  it  sparingly — it  is  very
dear."

"  Colomba,"  said  Orso  in  French,  "  on  whom  are
you  bestowing  your  charity?  "

"  On  a  poor  bandit  belonging  to  this  village,"  re-
plied Colomba  in  the  same  language.  "  This  little  girl
is  his  niece."

"  It  strikes  me  you  might  place  your  gifts  better.
Why  should  you  send  powder  to  a  ruffian  who  will  use
it  to  commit  crimes?  But  for  the  deplorable  weak-
ness every  one  here  seems  to  have  for  the  bandits,
they  would  have  disappeared  out  of  Corsica  long
ago."

83


Colomba

"  The  worst  men  in  our  country  are  not  those  who
are  '  in  the  country.'  "  *

*'  Give  them  bread,  if  it  so  please  you.  But  I  will
not  have  you  supply  them  with  ammunition."

"  Brother,"  said  Colomba,  in  a  serious  voice,  "  you
are  master  here,  and  everything  in  this  house  belongs  to
you.  But  I  warn  you  that  I  will  give  this  little  girl  my
mczzaro,  so  that  she  may  sell  it,  rather  than  refuse  pow-
der to  a  bandit.  Refuse  to  give  him  powder!  I  might
just  as  well  make  him  over  to  the  gendarmes!  What  has
he  to  protect  him  against  them,  except  his  cartridges?  "

All  this  while  the  little  girl  was  ra\'enously  devour-
ing a  bit  of  bread,  and  carefully  watching  Colomba  and
her  brother,  turn  about,  trying  to  read  the  meaning  of
what  they  were  saying  in  their  eyes.

"And  what  has  this  bandit  of  yours  done?  What
crime  has  driven  him  into  the  maqiiis?  "

"  Brandolaccio  has  not  committed  any  crime,"  ex-
claimed Colomba.  "  He  killed  Giovan'  Oppizo,  who
murdered  his  father  while  he  was  away  serving  in  the
army  I "

Orso  turned  away  his  head,  took  up  the  lamp,  and,
without  a  word,  departed  to  his  bedroom.  Then  Co-
lomba gave  the  child  food  and  gunpowder,  and  went
with  her  as  far  as  the  house-door,  saying  over  and  over
again :

"  Mind  your  uncle  takes  good  care  of  Orso!  "

*  To  be  a//a  campagna.,  otherwise  to  be  a  bandit.  The  word  bandit
is  not  a  term  of  opprobrium  ;  it  is  taken  in  the  sense  of  banished,  the
outlaw  of  the  old  English  ballads.

84


CHAPTER    XI

It  was  long  before  Orso  fell  asleep,  and  as  a  con-
sequence he  woke  late — late  for  a  Corsican,  at  all
events.  When  he  left  his  bed,  the  first  object  that
struck  his  gaze  was  the  house  of  his  enemies,  and  the
archcre  with  which  they  had  furnished  it.  He  went
downstairs  and  asked  for  his  sister.

'*  She  is  in  the  kitchen,  melting  bullets,"  answered
Saveria,  the  woman-servant.

So  he  could  not  take  a  step  without  being  pursued
by  the  image  of  war.

He  found  Colomba  sitting  on  a  stool,  surrounded
by  freshly  cast  bullets,  and  cutting  up  strips  of  lead.

"What  the  devil  are  you  doing?"  inquired  her
brother,

"  You  had  no  bullets  for  the  colonel's  gun,"  she  an-
swered, in  her  soft  voice.  "  I  found  I  had  a  mould  for
that  calibre,  and  you  shall  have  four-and-twenty  car-
tridges to-day,  brother."

"  I  don't  need  them,  thank  God!  "

"  You  mustn't  be  taken  at  a  disadvantage,  Ors'  An-
ton'. You  have  forgotten  your  country,  and  the  peo-
ple who  are  about  you."

"  If  I  had  forgotten,  you  would  soon  have  reminded
85


Colomba

me.     Tell  me,  did  not  a  big  trunk  arrive  here  some
days  ago?  "

"  Yes,  brother.     Shall  I  take  it  up  to  your  room?  "

"You  take  it  up!  \\'hy,  you'd  never  be  strong
enough  even  to  lift  it!  ...  Is  there  no  man  about  who
can  do  it?  "

"  I'm  not  so  weak  as  you  think!  "  said  Colomba,
turning  up  her  sleeves,  and  displaying  a  pair  of  round
white  arms,  perfect  in  shape,  but  looking  more  than
ordinarily  strong.  "  Here,  Saveria,"  said  she  to  the
servant;  "  come  and  help  me!  "

She  was  already  lifting  the  trunk  alone,  when  Orso
came  hastily  to  her  assistance.

"  There  is  something  for  you  in  this  trunk,  my  dear
Colomba,"  said  he.  "  You  must  excuse  the  modesty
of  my  gifts.  A  lieutenant  on  half-pay  hasn't  a  very
well-lined  purse!  "

As  he  spoke,  he  opened  the  trunk,  and  took  out  of
it  a  few  gowns,  a  shawl,  and  some  other  things  likely
to  be  useful  to  a  young  girl.

"What  beautiful  things!"  cried  Colomba.  "I'll
put  them  away  at  once,  for  fear  they  should  be  spoiled.
I'll  keep  them  for  my  wedding,"  she  added,  with  a  sad
smile,  "  for  I  am  in  mourning  now!  "

And  she  kissed  her  brother's  hand.

"  It  looks  affected,  my  dear  sister,  to  wear  your
mourning  for  so  long."

"  I  have  sworn  an  oath,"  said  Colomlxa  rcsolutelv,
"  I'll  not  take  ofT  my  mourning.  .  .  ."  And  her  eyes
were  riveted  on  the  Barricini  mansion.

86


Colomba

"Until  your  wedding  day?"  said  Orso,  trying  to
avoid  the  end  of  her  sentence.

"  I  shall  never  marry  any  man,"  said  Colomba,  "  un-
less he  has  done  three  things  .  .  ."  And  her  eyes  still
rested  gloomily  on  the  house  of  the  enemy.

"  You  are  so  pretty,  Colomba,  that  I  wonder  you
are  not  married  already!  Come,  you  must  tell  me
about  your  suitors.  And  besides,  I'm  sure  to  hear
their  serenades.  They  must  be  good  ones  to  please  a
great  voceratrice  like  you."

"  Who  would  seek  the  hand  of  a  poor  orphan  girl?
.  .  .  And  then,  the  man  for  whom  I  would  change  my
mourning-dress  will  have  to  make  the  women  over
there  put  on  mourning!  "

"  This  is  becoming  a  perfect  mania,"  said  Orso
to  himself.  But  to  avoid  discussion  he  said  nothing
at  all.

"  Brother,"  said  Colomba  caressingly,  ''  I  have
something  to  give  you,  too.  The  clothes  you  are  wear-
ing are  much  too  grand  for  this  country.  Your  fine
cloth  frock-coat  would  be  in  tatters  in  two  days,  if  you
wore  it  in  the  viaquis.  You  must  keep  it  for  the  time
when  Miss  Nevil  comes."

Then,  opening  a  cupboard,  she  took  out  a  complete
hunting  dress.

''  I've  made  you  a  velvet  jacket,  and  here's  a  cap,
such  as  our  smart  young  men  wear.  I  embroidered  it
for  you.  ever  so  long  ago.  Will  you  try  them  on?  "
And  she  made  him  put  on  a  loose  greisn  velvet  jacket,
with  a  huge  pocket  at  the  back.  On  his  head  she  set  a
Vol.  6  ^7  H


Colomba

pointed  black  velvet  cap,  embroidered  with  jet  and  silk
of  the  same  colour,  and  finished  with  a  sort  of  tassel.

"  Here  is  our  father's  carcJwra,"  *  she  said.  "  His
stiletto  is  in  the  pocket  of  the  jacket.  I'll  fetch  you  his
pistol."

"  I  look  like  a  brigand  at  the  Ambigu-Comique,"
said  Orso,  as  he  looked  at  himself  in  the  little  glass
Saveria  was  holding  up  for  him.

"  Indeed  you  look  first-rate,  dressed  like  that,  Ors'
Anton',"  said  the  old  servant,  "  and  the  smartest  pin-
sitfo  f  in  Bocognano  or  Bastelica  is  not  braver."

Orso  wore  his  new  clothes  at  breakfast,  and  during
that  meal  he  told  his  sister  that  his  trunk  contained  a
certain  number  of  books,  that  he  was  going  to  send  to
France  and  Italy  for  others,  and  intended  she  should
study  a  great  deal.

"  For  it  really  is  disgraceful,  Colomba,"  he  added,
"  that  a  grown-up  girl  like  you  should  still  be  igno-
rant of  things  that  children  on  the  mainland  know  as
soon  as  they  are  weaned."

"  You  are  quite  right,  brother,"  said  Colomba.  "  I
know  my  own  shortcomings  quite  well,  and  I  shall  be
too  glad  to  learn — especially  if  you  are  kind  enough  to
teach  me."

Some  days  went  by,  and  Colomba  never  mentioned
the  name  of  Barricini.     She  lavished  care  and  attention


*  Carchera,   a  belt   for  cartridges.     A  pistol   is  worn  fastened  to
the  left  side  of  it.

f  Pinsuto,  the  name  given  to  men  who  wear  the  pointed  cap,  bar-

reta  pinsuta.

88


Colomba

oil  her  brother,  and  often  talked  to  him  about  Miss
Nevil.  Orso  made  her  read  French  and  ItaHan  books,
and  was  constantly  being  surprised  either  by  the  cor-
rectness and  good  sense  of  her  comments,  or  by  her
utter  ignorance  on  the  most  ordinary  subjects.

One  morning,  after  breakfast,  Colomba  left  the
room  for  a  moment,  and  instead  of  returning  as  usual,
with  a  book  and  some  sheets  of  paper,  reappeared  with
her  me^izaro  on  her  head.  The  expression  of  her  coun-
tenance was  even  more  serious  than  it  generally  was.

'*  Brother,"  she  said,  "  I  want  you  to  come  out  with
me."

"  Where  do  you  want  me  to  go  with  you?  "  said
Orso,  holding  out  his  arm.

"  I  don't  want  your  arm,  brother,  but  take  your
gun  and  your  cartridge-pouch.  A  man  should  never
go  abroad  without  his  arms."

"  So  be  it.  I  must  follow  the  fashion.  Where
are  we  going  to?  "

Colomba,  without  answering,  drew  her  ine^::aro
closer  about  her  head,  called  the  watch-dog,  and  went
out  followed  by  her  brother.  Striding  swiftly  out  of
the  village,  she  turned  into  a  sunken  road  that  w^ound
among  the  vineyards,  sending  on  the  dog,  to  whom  she
made  some  gesture,  which  he  seemed  to  understand,
in  front  of  her.  He  instantly  began  to  run  zigzag  fash-
ion, through  the  vines,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  the
other,  always  keeping  within  about  fifty  paces  of  his
mistress,  and  occasionally  stopping  in  the  middle  of
the  road  and  wagging  his  tail.    He  seemed  to  perform

89


Colomba

his  duties  as  a  scout  in  the  most  perfect  fashion  im-
aginable.

"  If  Muschetto  begins  to  bark,  brother,"  said  Co-
lomba, "  cock  your  gun,  and  stand  still."

Half  a  mile  beyond  the  village,  after  making  many
detours,  Colomba  stopped  short,  just  where  there  was  a
bend  in  the  road.  On  that  spot  there  rose  a  little
pyramid  of  branches,  some  of  them  green,  some  with-
ered, heaped  about  three  feet  high.  Above  them  rose
the  top  of  a  wooden  cross,  painted  black.  In  several  of
the  Corsican  cantons,  especially  those  among  the
mountains,  a  very  ancient  custom,  connected,  it  may
be  with  some  pagan  superstition,  constrains  every
passer-by  to  cast  either  a  stone  or  a  branch  on  the  spot
whereon  a  man  has  died  a  violent  death.  For  years  and
years — as  long  as  the  memory  of  his  tragic  fate  endures
— this  strange  offering  goes  on  accumulating  from  day
to  day.

This  is  called  the  dead  man's  pile — his  "  inucchio."

Colomba  stopped  before  the  heap  of  foliage,  broke
off  an  arbutus  branch,  and  cast  it  on  the  pile.

"  Orso,"  she  said,  "  this  is  where  your  father  died.
Let  us  pray  for  his  soul!  "

And  she  knelt  down.  Orso  instantly  followed  her
example.  At  that  moment  the  village  church-bell
tolled  slowly  for  a  man  who  had  died  during  the  preced-
ing night.     Orso  burst  into  tears.

After  a  few  minutes  Colomba  rose.  Her  eyes  were
dry,  but  her  face  was  eager.  She  hastily  crossed  her-
self with  her  thumb,  after  the  fashion  generally  adopted

90


Colomba

by  her  compatriots,  to  seal  any  solemn  oath,  then,  hur-
rying her  brother  with  her,  she  took  her  way  back  to
the  village.  They  re-entered  their  house  in  silence.
Orso  went  up  to  his  room.  A  moment  afterward  Co-
lomba followed  him,  carrying  a  small  casket  which  she
set  upon  the  table.  Opening  it,  she  drew  out  a  shirt,
covered  with  great  stains  of  blood.

"  Here  is  your  father's  shirt,  Orso!  "

And  she  threw  it  across  his  knees.  "  Here  is  the
lead  that  killed  him!  "  And  she  laid  two  blackened
bullets  on  the  shirt.

"  Orso!  Brother!  "'  she  cried,  throwing  herself
into  his  arms  and  clasping  him  desperately  to  her.
"  Orso,  you  will  avenge  him!  "

In  a  sort  of  frenzy  she  kissed  him,  then  kissed  the
shirt  and  the  bullets,  and  went  out  of  the  room,  leaving
her  brother  sitting  on  his  chair,  as  if  he  had  been
turned  to  stone.  For  some  time  Orso  sat  motionless,
not  daring  to  put  the  terrible  relics  away.  At  last,  with
an  effort,  he  laid  them  back  in  their  box,  rushed  to  the
opposite  end  of  his  room,  and  threw  himself  on  his  bed,
with  his  face  turned  to  the  wall,  and  his  head  buried  in
his  pillow,  as  though  he  were  trying  to  shut  out  the
sight  of  some  ghost.  His  sister's  last  words  rang  un-
ceasingly in  his  ears,  like  the  words  of  an  oracle,  fatal,
inevitable,  calling  out  to  him  for  blood,  and  for  inno-
cent blood!  I  shall  not  attempt  to  depict  the  unhappy
young  man's  sensations,  which  were  as  confused  as
those  that  overwhelm  a  madman's  brain.  For  a  long
time  he  lay  in  the  same  position,  without  daring  to  turn

91


Colomba

his  head.  At  last  he  got  up,  closed  the  lid  of  the  casket,
and  rushed  headlong  out  of  the  house,  into  the  open
country,  moving  aimlessly  forward,  whither  he  knew
not.

By  degrees,  the  fresh  air  did  him  good.  He  grew
calmer,  and  began  to  consider  his  position,  and  his
means  of  escape  from  it,  with  some  composure.  He
did  not,  as  my  readers  already  know,  suspect  the  Barri-
cini  of  the  murder,  but  he  did  accuse  them  of  having
forged  Agostini's  letter,  and  this  letter,  he  believed,  at
any  rate,  had  brought  about  his  father's  death.  He  felt
it  was  impossible  to  prosecute  them  for  the  forgery.
Now  and  then,  when  the  prejudices  or  the  instincts  of
his  race  assailed  him,  and  suggested  an  easy  vengeance
— a  shot  fired  at  the  corner  of  some  path — the  thought
of  his  brother-officers,  of  Parisian  drawing-rooms,  and
above  all,  of  Miss  Nevil,  made  him  shrink  from  them
in  horror.  Then  his  mind  dwelt  on  his  sister's  re-
proaches, and  all  the  Corsican  within  him  justified  her
appeal,  and  even  intensified  its  bitterness.  One  hope
alone  remained  to  him,  in  this  battle  between  his  con-
science and  his  prejudices — the  hope  that,  on  some  pre-
text or  other,  he  might  pick  a  quarrel  with  one  of  the
lawyer's  sons,  and  fight  a  duel  with  him.  The  idea  of
killing  the  young  man,  either  by  a  bullet  or  a  sword-
thrust  reconciled  his  French  and  Corsican  ideas.  This
expedient  adopted,  he  began  to  meditate  means  for  its
execution,  and  was  feeling  relieved  already  of  a  heavy
burden,  when  other  and  gentler  thoughts  contributed
still  further  to  calm  his  feverish  agitation.     Cicero,  in

92


Colomba

his  despair  at  the  death  of  his  daughter  TulHa,  forgot
his  sorrow  when  he  mused  over  all  the  tine  things  he
might  say  about  it,  Mr.  Shandy  consoled  himself  by
discourses  of  the  same  nature  for  the  loss  of  his  son.
Orso  cooled  his  blood  by  thinking  that  he  would  depict
his  state  of  mind  to  Miss  Nevil,  and  that  such  a  picture
could  not  fail  to  interest  that  fair  lady  deeply.

He  was  drawing  near  the  village,  from  which  he
had  unconsciously  travelled  a  considerable  distance,
when  he  heard  the  voice  of  a  little  girl,  who  probably
believed  herself  to  be  quite  alone,  singing  in  a  path  that
ran  along  the  edge  of  the  mdqiiis.  It  was  one  of  those
slow,  monotonous  airs  consecrated  to  funeral  dirges,
and  the  child  was  singing  the  words:

"  And  when  my  son  shall  see  again  the  dwelling  of  his  father,
Give  him  that  murdered  father's  cross ;   show  him  my  shirt  blood-
spattered."

"  What's  that  you're  singing,  child?  "  said  Orso,  in
an  angry  voice,  as  he  suddenly  appeared  before  her.

"Is  that  you,  Ors'  Anton'?"  exclaimed  the  child,
rather  startled.     "  It  is  Signorina  Colomba's  song."

"  I  forbid  you  to  sing  it!  "  said  Orso,  in  a  threaten-
ing voice.

The  child  kept  turning  her  head  this  way  and  that,
as  though  looking  about  for  a  way  of  escape,  and  she
would  certainly  have  run  off  had  she  not  been  held
back  by  the  necessity  of  taking  care  of  a  large  bundle
which  lay  on  the  grass,  at  her  feet.

Orso  felt  ashamed  of  his  own  vehemence.  "  What
91


Colomba

are  you  carrying  there,  little  one?  "  said  he,  with  all
the  gentleness  he  could  muster.  And  as  Chilina  hesi-
tated, he  lifted  up  the  linen  that  was  wrapped  round  the
bundle,  and  saw  it  contained  a  loaf  of  bread  and  other
food.

"  To  whom  are  you  bringing  the  loaf,  my  dear?  "
he  asked  again.

"  You  know  quite  well,  Ors'  Anton'  :  to  my
uncle."

"  And  isn't  your  uncle  a  bandit?  "

"  At  your  service,  Ors'  Anton'."

'*  If  you  met  the  gendarmes,  they  would  ask  you
where  you  w^ere  going  ..."

"  I  should  tell  them,"  the  child  replied,  at  once,
"  that  I  was  taking  food  to  the  men  from  Lucca  who
were  cutting  down  the  mdqitis."

"  And  if  you  came  across  some  hungry  hunter  who
insisted  on  dining  at  your  expense,  and  took  your  pro-
visions away  from  you?  "

"  Nobody  would  dare!  I  would  say  they  are  for
my  uncle!  "

"Well!  he's  not  the  sort  of  man  to  let  himself  be
cheated  of  his  dinner!  ...  Is  your  uncle  very  fond  of
you?"

"  Oh,  yes,  Ors'  Anton'.  Ever  since  my  father  died,
he  has  taken  care  of  my  whole  family — my  mother
and  my  little  sister,  and  me.  Before  mother  was  ill,
he  used  to  recommend  her  to  rich  people,  who  gave
her  employment.  The  mayor  gives  me  a  frock  every
year,  and  the  priest  has  taught  me  my  catechism,  and

94


Colomba

how  to  read,  ever  since  my  uncle  spoke  to  them  about
us.     But  your  sister  is  kindest  of  all  to  us!  "

Just  at  this  moment  a  dog  ran  out  on  the  pathway.
The  little  girl  put  two  of  her  fingers  into  her  mouth
and  gave  a  shrill  whistle,  the  dog  came  to  her  at  once,
fawned  upon  her,  and  then  plunged  swiftly  into  the
thicket.  Soon  two  men,  ill-dressed,  but  very  well
armed,  rose  up  out  of  a  clump  of  young  wood  a  few
paces  from  where  Orso  stood.  It  was  as  though  they
had  crawled  up  like  snakes  through  the  tangle  of  cytisus
and  myrtle  that  covered  the  ground.

"  Oh,  Ors'  Anton',  you're  welcome!  "  said  the  elder
of  the  two  men.    "  Why,  don't  you  remember  me?  "

"No!"  said  Orso,  looking  hard  at  him.

"  Queer  how  a  beard  and  a  peaked  cap  alter  a  man!
Come,  monsieur,  look  at  me  well!  Have  you  forgotten
your  old  Waterloo  men?  Don't  you  remember  Brando
Savelli,  who  bit  open  more  than  one  cartridge  alongside
of  you  on  that  unlucky  day?  "

''What!  Is  it  you?"  said  Orso.  "And  you  de-
serted in  1816! "

'*  Even  so,  sir.  Faith!  soldiering  grows  tiresome,
and  besides,  I  had  a  job  to  settle  over  in  this  countr\'.
Aha,  Chili!  you're  a  good  girl!  Give  us  our  dinner  at
once,  we're  hungry.  You've  no  notion  what  an  appe-
tite one  gets  in  the  maqiiis.  Who  sent  us  this — was  it
Signorina  Colomba  or  the  mayor?  "

"  No,  uncle,  it  was  the  miller's  wife.  She  gave  me
this  for  you,  and  a  blanket  for  my  mother."

"  What  does  she  want  of  me?  "
95


Colomba

"  She  says  the  Lucchesi  she  hired  to  clear  the  nid-
qitis  are  asking  her  five-and-thirty  sous,  and  chestnuts
as  well — because  of  the  fever  in  the  lower  parts  of  Pie-
tranera."

"The  lazy  scamps!  .  ,  .  I'll  see  to  them!  ,  .  .
Will  you  share  our  dinner,  monsieur,  without  any  cere-
mony? We've  eaten  worse  meals  together,  in  the  days
of  that  poor  compatriot  of  ours,  whom  they  have  dis-
charged from  the  army."

''  No,  I  thank  you  heartily.  They  have  discharged
me,  too!  "

"  Yes,  so  I  heard.  But  I'll  wager  you  weren't  sorry
for  it.  You  have  your  own  account  to  settle  too.  .  .  .
Come  along,  cure,"  said  the  bandit  to  his  comrade.
"  Let's  dine!  Signor  Orso,  let  me  introduce  the  cure.
I'm  not  quite  sure  he  is  a  cure.  But  he  knows  as  much
as  any  priest,  at  all  events!  "

"  A  poor  student  of  theology,  monsieur,"  quoth  the
second  bandit,  "  who  has  been  prevented  from  follow-
ing his  vocation.  Who  knows,  Brandolaccio,  I  might
have  been  Pope!  "

"  What  was  it  that  deprived  the  Church  of  your
learning?  "  inquired  Orso.

"  A  mere  nothing — a  bill  that  had  to  be  settled,  as
my  friend  Brandolaccio  puts  it.  One  of  my  sisters  had
been  making  a  fool  of  herself,  while  I  was  devouring
book-lore  at  Pisa  University.  I  had  to  come  home,  to
get  her  married.  But  her  future  husband  was  in  too
great  a  hurry;  he  died  of  fever  three  days  before  I  ar-
rived.    Then  I  called,  as  you  would  have  done  in  my

96


Colomba

place,  on  the  dead  man's  brother.  I  was  told  he  was
married.    What  was  I  to  do?  "

"  It  really  was  puzzling!     \Miat  did  you  do?  "

''  It  was  one  of  those  cases  in  which  one  has  to  re-
sort to  the  gunflint."'  *

"  In  other  words?  "

''  I  put  a  bullet  in  his  head,"  said  the  bandit  coolly.

Orso  made  a  horrified  gesture.  Nevertheless,  curi-
osity, and,  it  may  be,  his  desire  to  put  off  the  moment
when  he  must  return  home,  induced  him  to  remain
where  he  was,  and  continue  his  conversation  with  the
two  men,  each  of  whom  had  at  least  one  murder  on  his
conscience.

\Miile  his  comrade  was  talking.  Brandolaccio  was
laying  bread  and  meat  in  front  of  him.  He  helped  him-
self— then  he  gave  some  food  to  his  dog,  whom  he  in-
troduced to  Orso  under  the  name  of  Brusco,  as  an  ani-
mal possessing  a  wonderful  instinct  for  recognising  a
soldier,  whatever  might  be  the  disguise  he  had  as-
sumed. Lastly,  he  cut  ott  a  hunch  of  bread  and  a  slice
of  raw  ham,  and  gave  them  to  his  niece.  "  Oh,  the
merry  life  a  bandit  lives!  "  cried  the  student  of  theol-
ogy,  after  he  had  swallowed  a  few  mouthfuls.  '"  You'll
try  it  some  day,  perhaps,  Signor  della  Rebbia,  and
you'll  find  out  how  delightful  it  is  to  acknowledge  no
master  save  one's  own  fancy!  "

Hitherto  the  bandit  had  talked  Italian.  He  now
proceeded  in  French.

"  Corsica  is  not  a  very  amusing  country  for  a  young

*  La  scaglia,  a  very  common  expression.

7  97


Colomba

man  to  live  in — but  for  a  bandit,  there's  the  difference!
The  women  are  all  wild  about  us.  1,  as  you  see  me
now,  have  three  mistresses  in  three  different  villages.
I  am  at  home  in  every  one  of  them,  and  one  of  the
ladies  is  married  to  a  gendarme!  "

'*  You  know  many  languages,  monsieur!  "  said
Orso  gravely.

"  If  I  talk  French,  'tis  because,  look  you,  maxima
dcbctiir  pucris  reverential  We  have  made  up  our  minds,
Brandolaccio  and  I,  that  the  little  girl  shall  turn  out
well,  and  go  straight,"

'*  When  she  is  turned  fifteen,"  remarked  Chilina's
uncle,  "  I'll  find  a  good  husband  for  her.  I  have  one  in
my  eye  already."

"  Shall  you  make  the  proposal  yourself? "  said
Orso.

"  Of  course!  Do  you  suppose  that  any  well-to-do
man  in  this  neighbourhood,  to  whom  I  said,  '  I
should  be  glad  to  see  a  marriage  between  your  son  and
Michilina  Savelli,'  w'ould  require  any  pressing?  "

"  I  wouldn't  advise  him  to!  "  quoth  the  other
bandit.  "  Friend  Brandolaccio  has  rather  a  heavy
hand!"

"  If  I  were  a  rogue,"  continued  Brandolaccio,  "  a
blackguard,  a  forger,  I  should  only  have  to  hold  my
wallet  open,  and  the  five-franc  pieces  would  rain
into  it."

"  Then  is  there  something  inside  your  wallet  that
attracts  them?  "  said  Orso.

*'  Nothing.  But  if  I  were  to  write  to  a  rich  man,
98


Colomba

as  some  people  have  written,  '  I  want  a  hundred  francs,'
he  would  lose  no  time  about  sending  them  to  me.  But
I'm  a  man  of  honour,  monsieur."

"  Do  you  know,  Signor  della  Rebbia,"  said  the
bandit  whom  his  comrade  called  the  cure,  "  do  you
know  that  in  this  country,  with  all  its  simple  habits,
there  are  some  wretches  who  make  use  of  the  esteem
our  passports  "  (and  he  touched  his  gun)  "  insure  us,
to  draw  forged  bills  in  our  handwriting?  "

"  I  know  it,"  said  Orso,  in  a  gruff  tone;  "  but  what
bills?  "

"  Six  months  ago,"  said  the  bandit,  "  I  was  taking
my  walks  abroad  near  Orezza,  when  a  sort  of  lunatic
came  up  to  me,  pulling  off  his  cap  to  me  even  in  the
distance,  and  said:  '  Oh,  M.  le  Cure  '  (they  always  call
me  that),  '  please  excuse  me — give  me  time.  I  have
only  been  able  to  get  fifty-five  francs  together!  Hon-
our bright,  that's  all  I've  l^een  able  to  scrape  up.'  I,
in  my  astonishment,  said,  '  Fifty-five  francs!  What  do
you  mean,  you  rascal?  '  '  I  mean  sixty-five,'  he  re-
plied; '  but  as  for  the  hundred  francs  you  asked  me  to
give  you,  it's  not  possible.'  'What!  you  villain!  I
ask  you  for  a  hundred  francs?  I  don't  know  who  you
are.'  Then  he  showed  me  a  letter,  or  rather  a  dirty
rag  of  paper,  whereby  he  was  summoned  to  deposit  a
hundred  francs  on  a  certain  spot,  on  pain  of  having  his
house  burned  and  his  cows  killed  by  Giocanto  Castri-
coni — that's  my  name.  And  they  had  been  vile
enough  to  forge  my  signature!  What  annoyed  me
most  was  that  the  letter  was  written  in  patois,  and  was

99


Colomba

full  of  mistakes  in  spelling — I  who  won  every  prize  at
the  university!  I  began  by  giving  my  rascal  a  cuff  that
made  him  twist  round  and  round.  '  Aha!  you  take  me
for  a  thief,  blackguard  that  you  are!'  I  said,  and  1
gave  him  a  hearty  kick,  you  know  where.  Then  feel-
ing rather  better,  I  went  on,  '  When  are  you  to  take
the  money  to  the  spot  mentioned  in  the  letter?  '  '  This
very  day.'  'Very  good,  then  take  it  there!'  It  was
at  the  foot  of  a  pine-tree,  and  the  place  had  been  exactly
described.  He  brought  the  money,  buried  it  at  the
foot  of  the  tree,  and  came  and  joined  me.  I  had  hidden
myself  close  by.  There  I  staid,  with  my  man,  for  six
mortal  hours,  M.  della  Rebbia.  I'd  have  staid  three
days,  if  it  had  been  necessary.  At  the  end  of  six  hours
a  Bastiaccio,  a  vile  money-lender,  made  his  appearance.*
As  he  bent  down  to  take  up  the  money,  I  fired,  and  I
had  aimed  so  well  that,  as  he  fell,  his  head  dropped
upon  the  coins  he  was  unearthing.  '  Now,  rascal,'  said
I  to  the  peasant,  '  take  your  money,  and  never  dare  to
suspect  Giocanto  Castriconi  of  a  mean  trick  again!  '

"  The  poor  devil,  all  of  a  tremble,  picked  up  his  six-
ty-five francs  without  taking  the  trouble  to  wipe  them.
He  thanked  me,  I  gave  him  a  good  parting  kick,  and
he  may  be  running  away  still,  for  all  I  know."

"  Ah,  cure!  "  said  Brandolaccio,  "  I  envy  you  that
shot!     How  you  must  have  laughed!"

*  The  Corsican  mountaineers  loathe  the  inhabitants  of  Bastia,
whom  they  do  not  consider  their  fellow-countrymen  at  all.  They
never  say  Bastiese.  They  always  say  Bastiaccio.  It  is  well  known
that  the  termination  accio  generally  indicates  contempt.

100


Colomba

"  I  had  hit  the  money-lender  in  the  temple,"  the

bandit  went  on,   "  and  that  reminded  me  of  Virgd's

lines :

.  .  .  "  '  Liquefacto  tempora  plumbo
Diffidit,  ac  multa  porrectum  extendit  arena.'

Liquefacto!  Do  you  think,  Signor  Orso,  that  the
rapidity  with  wdiich  a  bullet  flies  through  the  air  will
melt  it?  You  wdio  have  studied  projectiles,  tell  me
whether  you  think  that  idea  is  truth  or  fiction?  "

Orso  infinitely  preferred  discussing  this  question  of
physics  to  arguing  with  the  licentiate  as  to  the  morality
of  his  action.  Brandolaccio,  who  did  not  find  their  sci-
entific disquisition  entertaining,  interrupted  it  with  the
remark  that  the  sun  was  just  going  to  set.

"  As  you  w^ould  not  dine  with  us,  Ors'  Anton',"  he
said,  "  I  advise  you  not  to  keep  Mademoiselle  Colomba
waiting  any  longer.  And  then  it  is  not  always  wise  to
be  out  on  the  roads  after  sunset.  Why  do  you  come
out  without  a  gun?  There  are  bad  folk  about  here —
beware  of  them!  You  have  nothing  to  fear  to-day.
The  Barricini  are  bringing  the  prefect  home  with  them.
They  have  gone  to  meet  him  on  the  road,  and  he  is  to
stop  a  day  at  Pietranera,  before  he  goes  on  to  Corte,  to
lay  what  they  call  a  corner-stone — such  stupid  nonsense!
He  will  sleep  to-night  with  the  Barricini;  but  to-mor-
row they'll  be  disengaged.  There  is  Vincentello,  who
is  a  good-for-nothing  fellow,  and  Orlanduccio,  who  is
not  much  better.  .  .  .  Try  to  come  on  them  separate-
ly, one  to-day,  the  other  to-morrow.  .  .  .  But  be  on
the  lookout,  that's  all  I  have  to  say  to  you!  "

lOI


Colomba

"  Thanks  for  the  warning,"  said  Orso.  "  But  there
is  no  quarrel  between  us.  Until  they  come  to  look  for
me,  I  shall  have  nothing  to  say  to  them."

The  bandit  stuck  his  tongue  in  his  cheek,  and
smacked  it  ironically,  but  he  made  no  reply.  Orso  got
up  to  go  away.

"  By  the  way,"  said  Brandolaccio,  "  I  haven't
thanked  you  for  your  powder.  It  came  just  when  I
needed  it.  Now  I  have  everything  I  want  ...  at  least
I  do  still  want  shoes  .  .  .  but  I'll  make  myself  a  pair
out  of  the  skin  of  a  moufflon  one  of  these  days."

Orso  slipped  two  five-franc  pieces  into  the  bandit's
hand.

''  It  was  Colomba  who  sent  you  the  powder.  This
is  to  buy  the  shoes."

''  Nonsense,  lieutenant!  "  cried  Brandolaccio,  hand-
ing him  back  the  two  coins.  "  D'ye  take  me  for  a
beggar?  I  accept  bread  and  powder,  but  I  won't  have
anything  else!  "

"  We  are  both  old  soldiers,  so  I  thought  we  might
have  given  each  other  a  lift.    Well,  good-bye  to  you!  "

But  before  he  moved  away  he  had  slipped  the
money  into  the  bandit's  wallet,  unperceived  by  him.

"  Good-bye,  Ors'  Anton',"  quoth  the  theologian.
"  We  shall  meet  again  in  the  inaquis,  some  day.  perhaps,
and  then  we'll  continue  our  study  of  Virgil."

Quite  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  Orso  had  parted
company  with  these  worthies,  he  heard  a  man  running
after  him,  as  fast  as  he  could  go.     It  was  Brandolaccio.

"This  is  too  bad,  lieutenant!"  he  shouted  breath-

102


Colomba

lessly,  "really  it  is  too  bad!  I  wouldn't  overlook  the
trick,  if  any  other  man  had  played  it  on  me.  Here  are
your  ten  francs.  All  my  respects  to  jMademoiselle
Colomba.  You  have  made  me  run  myself  quite  out  of
breath.     Good-night! "


Vol.  6  103


CHAPTER    XII

Orso  found  Colomba  in  a  state  of  considerable
anxiety  because  of  his  prolonged  absence.  But  as  soon
as  she  saw  him  she  recovered  her  usual  serene,  though
sad,  expression.  During  the  evening  meal  the  conver-
sation turned  on  trivial  subjects,  and  Orso,  emboldened
by  his  sister's  apparent  calm,  related  his  encounter  with
the  bandits,  and  even  ventured  on  a  joke  or  two  con-
cerning the  moral  and  religious  education  that  was
being  imparted  to  little  Chilina,  thanks  to  the  care  of
her  uncle  and  of  his  worthy  colleague  Signer  Cas-
triconi.

"  Brandolaccio  is  an  upright  man."  said  Colomba;
"  but  as  to  Castriconi,  I  have  heard  he  is  quite  unprin-
cipled."

"  I  think,"  said  Orso,  "  that  he  is  as  good  as  Bran-
dolaccio, and  Brandolaccio  is  as  good  as  he.  Both  of
them  are  at  open  war  with  society.  Their  first  crime
leads  them  on  to  fresh  ones,  every  day,  and  yet  they  are
very  likely  not  half  so  guilty  as  many  people  who  don't
live  in  the  maquis.'"

A  flash  of  joy  shone  in  his  sister's  eyes.  "  Yes,"
he  continued,  "  these  wretches  have  a  code  of  honour
of  their  own.     It  is  a  cruel  prejudice,  not  a  mean  in-

104


Colomba

slinct  of  greed,  that  has  forced  them  into  the  hfe  they
are  leading."

There  was  a  silence.

"  Brother,"  said  Colomba,  as  she  poured  out  his
coffee,  "  perhaps  you  have  heard  that  Carlo-Battista
Pietri  died  last  night.  Yes,  he  died  of  the  marsh-
fever."

"Who  is  Pietri?"

"  A  man  belonging  to  this  village,  the  husband  of
Maddalena,  who  took  the  pocket-book  out  of  our  fa-
ther's hand  as  he  was  dying.  His  widow  has  been  here
to  ask  me  to  join  the  watchers,  and  sing  something.
You  ought  to  come,  too.  They  are  our  neighbours,
and  in  a  small  place  like  this  we  can  not  do  otherwise
than  pay  them  this  civility."

"Confound  these  wakes,  Colomba!  I  don't  at  all
like  my  sister  to  perform  in  public  in  this  way."

"  Orso,"  replied  Colomba,  "  every  country  pays
honour  to  its  dead  after  its  own  fashion.  The  ballafa
has  come  down  to  us  from  our  forefathers,  and  we  must
respect  it  as  an  ancient  custom.  Maddalena  does  not
possess  the  '  gift,'  and  old  Fiordispina,  the  best  vocera-
trice  in  the  country,  is  ill.  They  must  have  somebody
for  the  ballata."

"  Do  you  believe  Carlo-Battista  won't  find  his  way
safely  into  the  next  world  unless  somebody  sings  bad
poetry  over  his  bier?  Go  if  you  choose,  Colomba — I'll
go  with  you,  if  you  think  I  ought.  But  don't  impro-
vise! It  really  is  not  fitting  at  your  age,  and — sister,
I  beg  you  not  to  do  it!  "

105


Colomba

*'  Brother,  I  have  promised.  It  is  the  custom  here,
as  }oii  know,  and,  I  tell  you  again,  there  is  nobody  but
me  to  improvise."

"  An  idiotic  custom  it  is!  "

"  It  costs  me  a  great  deal  to  sing  in  this  way.  It
brings  back  all  our  own  sorrows  to  me.  I  shall  be  ill
after  it,  to-morrow.  But  I  must  do  it.  Give  me  leave
to  do  it.  Brother,  remember  that  when  we  were  at
Ajaccio,  you  told  me  to  improvise  to  amuse  that  young
English  lady  who  makes  a  mock  of  our  old  customs.
So  why  should  I  not  do  it  to-day  for  these  poor  people,
who  will  be  grateful  to  me,  and  whom  it  will  help  to
bear  their  grief?  "

"  Well,  well,  as  you  will.  I'll  go  bail  you've  com-
posed your  ballata  already,  and  don't  want  to  waste  it."'

"  No,  brother,  I  couldn't  compose  it  beforehand.  I
stand  before  the  dead  person,  and  I  think  about  those
he  has  left  behind  him.  The  tears  spring  into  my  eyes,
and  then  I  sing  whatever  comes  into  my  head."

All  this  was  said  so  simply  that  it  was  quite  impos-
sible to  suspect  Signorina  Colomba  of  the  smallest
poetic  vanity.  Orso  let  himself  be  persuaded,  and  went
with  his  sister  to  Pietri's  house.  The  dead  man  lay  on
a  table  in  the  largest  room,  with  his  face  uncovered.
All  the  doors  and  window^s  stood  open,  and  several
tapers  were  burning  round  the  table.  At  the  head
stood  the  widow,  and  behind  her  a  great  many  women,
who  filled  all  one  side  of  the  room.  On  the  other  side
were  the  men,  in  rows,  bareheaded,  with  their  eyes  fixed
on  the  corpse,  all  in  the  deepest  silence.     Each  new

1 06


Colomba

arrival  went  up  to  the  table,  kissed  the  dead  face,*
bowed  his  or  her  head  to  the  widow  and  her  son.  and
joined  the  circle,  without  uttering  a  word.  Neverthe-
less, from  time  to  time  one  of  the  persons  present
would  break  the  solemn  silence  with  a  few  words,  ad-
dressed to  the  dead  man.

"Why  has  thou  left  thy  good  wife?  "'  said  one  old
crone.  "  Did  she  not  take  good  care  of  thee?  What
didst  thou  lack?  Why  not  have  waited  another  month?
Thy  daughter-in-law  would  have  borne  thee  a  grand-
son!" A  tall  young  fellow,  Pietri's  son,  pressed  his
father's  cold  hand  and  cried:  "  Oh!  why  hast  thou
not  died  of  the  viola  iiiortc?  f  Then  we  could  have
avenged  thee!  "

These  were  the  first  words  to  fall  on  Orso's  ear  as
he  entered  the  room.  At  the  sight  of  him  the  circle
parted,  and  a  low  murmur  of  curiosity  betrayed  the
expectation  roused  in  the  gathering  by  the  z'oceratrice's
presence.  Colomba  embraced  the  widow,  took  one  of
her  hands,  and  stood  for  some  moments  wrapped  in
meditation,  with  her  eyelids  dropped.  Then  she  threw
back  her  me::;cayo,  gazed  fixedly  at  the  corpse,  and  bend-
ing over  it,  her  face  almost  as  waxen  as  that  of  the  dead
man,  she  began  thus:

"  Carlo-Battista!  May  Christ  receive  thy  soul!  .  .  .
To  live  is  to  sufifer!  Thou  goest  to  a  place  .  .  .  where
there  is  neither  sun  nor  cold.  .  .  .  No  longer  dost  thou
need  thy  pruning-hook  .  .  .  nor  thy  heavy  pick.  .  .  .

*  This  custom  still  exists  at  Bocognano  (1840).
f  La  mala  morte,  a  violent  death.
107


Colomba

There  is  no  more  work  for  thee!  .  .  .  Henceforward
all  thy  days  are  Sundays!  .  .  .  Carlo-Battista!  May
Christ  receive  thy  soul!  .  .  .  Thy  son  rules  in  thy
house.  ...  I  have  seen  the  oak  fall,  .  .  .  dried  up  by
the  libcccio.  ...  I  thought  it  was  dead  indeed,  .  .  ,
but  when  I  passed  it  again,  its  root  .  .  .  had  thrown  up
a  sapling.  .  .  .  The  sapling  grew  into  an  oak  ...  of
mighty  shade.  .  .  .  Under  its  great  branches,  Mad-
dele,  rest  thee  well!  .  .  .  And  think  of  the  oak  that
is  no  more!  "

Here  Maddalena  began  to  sob  aloud,  and  two  or
three  men  who,  on  occasion,  would  have  shot  at  a
Christian  as  coolly  as  at  a  partridge,  brushed  big  tears
off  their  sunburnt  faces.

For  some  minutes  Colomba  continued  in  this  strain,
addressing  herself  sometimes  to  the  corpse,  sometimes
to  the  family,  and  sometimes,  by  a  personification  fre-
quently employed  in  the  ballata,  making  the  dead  man
himself  speak  words  of  consolation  or  counsel  to  his
kinsfolk.  As  she  proceeded,  her  face  assumed  a  sub-
lime expression,  a  delicate  pink  tinge  crept  over  her
features,  heightening  the  brilliancy  of  her  white  teeth
and  the  lustre  of  her  flashing  eyes.  She  was  like  a
Pythoness  on  her  tripod.  Save  for  a  sigh  here  and
there,  or  a  strangled  sob,  not  the  slightest  noise  rose
from  the  assembly  that  crowded  about  her.  Orso,
though  less  easily  affected  than  most  people  by  this
wild  kind  of  poetry,  was  soon  overcome  by  the  general
emotion.  Hidden  in  a  dark  corner  of  the  room,  he
wept  as  heartily  as  Pietri's  own  son.

108


Colomba

Suddenly  a  slight  stir  was  perceptible  among  the
audience.  The  circle  opened,  and  several  strangers  en-
tered. The  respect  shown  them,  and  the  eagerness
with  which  room  was  made  for  them,  proved  them  to
be  people  of  importance,  whose  advent  was  a  great
honour  to  the  household.  Nevertheless,  out  of  respect
for  the  ballata,  nobody  said  a  word  to  them.  The  man
who  had  entered  first  seemed  about  forty  years  of  age.
From  his  black  coat,  his  red  rosette,  his  confident  air,
and  look  of  authority,  he  was  at  once  guessed  to  be  the
prefect.  Behind  him  came  a  bent  old  man  with  a  bil-
ious-looking complexion,  whose  furtive  and  anxious
glance  w'as  only  partially  concealed  by  his  green  spec-
tacles. He  wore  a  black  coat,  too  large  for  him,  and
which,  though  still  quite  new,  had  evidently  been  made
several  years  previously.  He  always  kept  close  beside
the  prefect  and  looked  as  though  he  would  fain  hide
himself  under  his  shadow.  Last  of  all,  behind  him,
came  two  tall  young  men,  w-ith  sunburnt  faces,  their
cheeks  hidden  by  heavy  whiskers,  proud  and  arrogant-
looking,  and  showing  symptoms  of  an  impertinent  curi-
osity. Orso  had  had  time  to  forget  the  faces  of  his
village  neighbours;  but  the  sight  of  the  old  man  in
green  spectacles  instantly  called  up  old  memories  in
his  mind.  His  presence  in  attendance  on  the  prefect
sufficed  to  insure  his  recognition.  This  was  Barricini,
the  lawyer,  mayor  of  Pietranera,  who  had  come,  with
his  two  sons,  to  show  the  prefect  what  a  ballata  was.
It  would  be  difficult  exactly  to  describe  w4iat  happened
within  Orso's  soul  at  that  moment,  but  the  presence  of

109


Colomba

his  father's  foe  filled  him  with  a  sort  of  horror,  and
more  than  ever  he  felt  inclined  to  yield  to  the  suspi-
cions with  which  he  had  been  battling  for  so  long.

As  to  Colomba,  when  she  saw  the  man  against
whom  she  had  sworn  a  deadly  hatred,  her  mobile  coun-
tenance assumed  a  most  threatening  aspect.  She
turned  pale,  her  voice  grew  huarse,  the  line  she  had
begun  to  declaim  died  on  her  lips.  But  soon,  tak-
ing up  her  ballata  afresh,  she  proceeded  with  still
greater  vehemence.

"  When  the  hawk  bemoans  himself  .  .  .  beside  his
harried  nest,  .  .  .  the  starlings  flutter  round  him  .  .  .
insulting  his  distress."

A  smothered  laugh  was  heard.  The  two  young
men  who  had  just  come  in  doubtless  considered  the
metaphor  too  bold.

"  The  falcon  will  rouse  himself.  .  .  .  He  will  spread
his  wings.  .  .  .  He  will  wash  his  beak  in  blood!  .  .  .
Now',  to  thee,  Carlo-Battista,  let  thy  friends  .  .  .  bid
an  eternal  farewell!  .  .  .  Long  enough  have  their  tears
flowed!  .  .  .  Only  the  poor  orphan  girl  will  not  weep
for  thee!  .  .  .  Wherefore  should  she  moan?  .  .  .  Thou
hast  fallen  asleep,  full  of  years,  ...  in  the  midst  of
thine  own  kin,  .  .  .  ready  to  appear  ...  in  the  pres-
ence of  the  Almighty.  .  .  .  The  orphan  weeps  for  her
father  .  .  .  overtaken  by  vile  murderers,  .  .  .  struck
from  behind.  .  .  .  For  her  father,  whose  blood  lies  red
.  .  .  beneath  the  heaped-up  green  leaves.  .  .  .  But
she  has  gathered  up  this  blood,  .  .  .  this  innocent  and
noble  blood!  ,  .  .  She  has  poured  it  out  over  Pietra-

IIO


^


Colomba

nera  .  .  .  that  it  may  become  a  deadly  poison.  .  .  .
And  the  mark  shall  be  on  Pietranera  .  .  .  until  the
blood  of  the  guilty  .  .  .  shall  have  wiped  out  the  blood
of  the  innocent  man!  "

As  Colomba  pronounced  the  last  words,  she
dropped  into  a  chair,  drew  her  mczzaro  over  her  face,
and  was  heard  sobbing  beneath  it.  The  weeping
women  crowded  round  the  i)uproz'isafricc;  several  of  the
men  were  casting  savage  glances  at  the  mayor  and  his
sons;  some  of  the  elders  began  to  protest  against  the
scandal  to  which  their  presence  had  given  rise.  The
dead  man's  son  pushed  his  way  through  the  throng,
and  was  about  to  beg  the  mayor  to  clear  out  with  all
possible  speed.  But  this  functionary  had  not  waited
for  the  suggestion.  He  was  on  his  way  to  the  door,
and  his  two  sons  wTre  already  in  the  street.  The  pre-
fect said  a  few  words  of  condolence  to  young  Pietri,
and  followed  them  out,  almost  immediately.  Orso
went  to  his  sister's  side,  took  her  arm,  and  drew  her
out  of  the  room.

"  Go  with  them,"  said  young  Pietri  to  some  of  his
friends,     ''  Take  care  no  harm  comes  to  them!  "

Hastily  two  or  three  young  men  slipped  their  sti-
lettos up  the  left  sleeves  of  their  jackets  and  escorted
Orso  and  his  sister  to  their  own  door.


Ill


CHAPTER    XIII

Panting,  exhausted,  Colomba  was  utterly  incapa-
ble of  uttering  a  single  word.  Her  head  rested  on  her
brother's  shoulder,  and  she  clasped  one  of  his  hands
tightly  between  her  own.  Orso,  though  secretly  some-
what annoyed  by  her  peroration,  was  too  much  alarmed
to  reprove  her,  even  in  the  mildest  fashion.  He  was
silently  waiting  till  the  nervous  attack  from  which  she
seemed  to  be  sufifering  should  have  passed,  when  there
was  a  knock  at  the  door,  and  Saveria,  very  much  flus-
tered, announced  the  prefect.  At  the  words,  Colomba
rose,  as  though  ashamed  of  her  weakness,  and  stood
leaning  on  a  chair,  which  shook  visibly  beneath  her
hand.

The  prefect  began  with  some  commonplace  apol-
ogy for  the  unseasonable  hour  of  his  visit,  condoled
with  Mademoiselle  Colomba,  touched  on  the  danger
connected  with  strong  emotions,  blamed  the  custom  of
composing  funeral  dirges,  which  the  very  talent  of  the
voceratricc  rendered  the  more  harrowing  to  her  auditors,
skilfully  slipped  in  a  mild  reproof  concerning  the  tend-
ency of  the  improvisation  just  concluded,  and  then,
changing  his  tone —

"  M.  della  Rebbia,"  he  said.  '•'  I  have  many  mes-

112


Colomba

sages  for  yon  from  your  English  friends.  Miss  Nevil
sends  her  affectionate  regards  to  your  sister.  I  have  a
letter  for  you  from  her."

"  A  letter  from  Miss  Nevil!  "  cried  Orso.

"  Unluckily  I  have  not  got  it  with  me.  But  you
shall  have  it  within  five  minutes.  Her  father  has  not
been  well.  For  a  little  while  we  were  afraid  he  had
caught  one  of  our  terrible  fevers.  Luckily  he  is  all
right  again,  as  you  will  observe  for  yourself,  for  I  fancy
you  will  see  him  very  soon."

*'  Miss  Nevil  must  have  been  very  much  alarmed!  "

"  Fortunately  she  did  not  become  aware  of  the  dan-
ger till  it  was  quite  gone  by.  M.  della  Rebbia,  Miss
Nevil  has  talked  to  me  a  great  deal  about  you  and
about  your  sister."

Orso  bowed.

"  She  has  a  great  affection  for  you  both.  Under
her  charming  appearance,  and  her  apparent  frivolity,  a
fund  of  good  sense  lies  hidden."

"  She  is  a  very  fascinating  person,"  said  Orso.

"  I  have  come  here,  monsieur,  almost  at  her  prayer.
Nobody  is  better  acquainted  than  I  with  a  fatal  story
which  I  would  fain  not  have  to  recall  to  you.  As  M.
Barricini  is  still  the  mayor  of  Pietranera,  and  as  I  am
prefect  of  the  department,  I  need  hardly  tell  you  what
weight  I  attach  to  certain  suspicions  which,  if  I  am
rightly  informed,  some  incautious  individuals  have
communicated  to  you,  and  which  you,  I  know,  have
spurned  with  the  indignation  your  position  and  your
character  would  have  led  me  to  expect."

8  113


Colomba

"  Colomba,"  said  Orso,  moving  uneasily  on  his
chair.  "  You  are  very  tired.  You  had  better  go  to
bed."

Colomba  shook  her  head.  She  had  recovered  all
her  usual  composure,  and  her  burning  eyes  were  fixed
on  the  prefect.

"  M.  Barricini,"  the  prefect  continued,  "  is  exceed-
ingly anxious  to  put  an  end  to  the  sort  of  enmity  .  .  .
or  rather,  the  condition  of  uncertainty,  existing  be-
tween yourself  and  him.  .  .  .  On  my  part,  I  should  be
delighted  to  see  you  both  in  those  relations  of  friendly
intercourse  appropriate  to  people  who  certainly  ought
to  esteem  each  other."

"  Monsieur,"  replied  Orso  in  a  shaking  voice,  "  I
have  never  charged  Barricini  with  my  father's  mur-
der. But  he  committed  an  act  which  must  always  pre-
vent me  from  having  anything  to  do  with  him.  He
forged  a  threatening  letter,  in  the  name  of  a  certain
bandit,  or  at  least  he  hinted  in  an  underhand  sort  of
way  that  it  was  forged  by  my  father.  That  letter,  mon-
sieur, was  probably  the  indirect  cause  of  my  father's
death."

The  prefect  sat  thinking  for  a  moment.

"  That  your  father  should  have  believed  that,  when
his  own  hasty  nature  led  him  into  a  lawsuit  with  Signor
Barricini,  is  excusable.  But  such  blindness  on  your
part  really  can  not  be  admitted.  Pray  consider  that
Barricini  could  have  served  no  interest  of  his  own  by
forging  the  letter.  I  will  not  talk  to  you  about  his
character,  for  you  are  not  acquainted  with  it,  and  are

114


Colomba

prejudiced  against  it;  but  you  can  not  suppose  that  a
man  conversant  with  the  law "

"  But,  monsieur,"  said  Orso,  rising  to  his  feet,  "  be
good  enough  to  recollect  that  when  you  tell  me  the
letter  was  not  Barricini's  work,  you  ascribe  it  to  my
father.     And  my  fathers  honour,  monsieur,  is  mine!"

*'  No  man  on  earth,  sir,  is  more  convinced  of  Colo-
nel della  Rebbia's  honour  than  myself!  But  the  writer
of  the  letter  is  now  known."

"  Who  wrote  it?  "  exclaimed  Colomba,  making  a
step  toward  the  prefect.

"  A  villain,  guilty  of  several  crimes — such  crimes  as
you  Corsicans  never  pardon — a  thief,  one  Tomaso  Bian-
chi,  at  present  confined  in  the  prison  at  Bastia,  has  ac-
knowledged that  he  wrote  the  fatal  letter."

"  I  know  nothing  of  the  man,"  said  Orso.  "  What
can  have  been  his  object?  "

"  He  belongs  to  this  neighbourhood,"  said  Co-
lomba. "  He  is  brother  to  a  man  who  was  our  miller
— a  scamp  and  a  liar,  unworthy  of  belief."

"  You  will  soon  see  what  his  interest  in  the  matter
was,"  continued  the  prefect.  "  The  miller  of  whom
your  sister  speaks — I  think  his  name  was  Teodoro —
was  the  tenant  of  a  mill  belonging  to  the  colonel,
standing  on  the  very  stream  the  ownership  of  which
M.  Barricini  was  disputing  with  your  father.  The  colo-
nel, always  a  generous  man,  made  very  little  profit  out
of  the  mill.  Now  Tomaso  thought  that  if  Barricini  got
possession  of  the  stream  there  would  be  a  heavy  rent
to  pay,  for  it  is  well  known  that  Barricini  is  rather  fond

115


Colomba

of  money.  In  short,  to  oblige  his  brother,  Tomaso
forged  the  letter  from  the  bandit — and  there's  the  whole
story.  You  know  that  in  Corsica  the  strength  of  the
family  tie  is  so  great  that  it  does  sometimes  lead  to
crime.  Please  read  over  this  letter  to  me  from  the
attorney-general.  It  confirms  what  1  have  just  told
you."

Orso  looked  through  the  letter,  which  gave  a  de-
tailed relation  of  Tomaso's  confession,  and  Colomba
read  it  over  his  shoulder.

When  she  had  come  to  the  end  of  it  she  exclaimed:

"  Orlanduccio  Barricini  went  down  to  Bastia  a
month  ago,  when  it  became  known  that  my  brother
was  coming  home.  He  must  have  seen  Tomaso,  and
bought  this  lie  of  him!  "

"  Signorina,"  said  the  prefect,  out  of  patience,
"you  explain  everything  by  odious  imputations!  Is
that  the  way  to  find  out  the  truth?  You,  sir,  can  judge
more  coolly.  Tell  me  what  you  think  of  the  business
now?  Do  you  believe,  like  this  young  lady,  that  a
man  who  has  only  a  slight  sentence  to  fear  would  de-
liberately charge  himself  with  forgery,  just  to  oblige
a  person  he  doesn't  know?  "

Orso  read  the  attorney-general's  letter  again,  weigh-
ing every  word  with  the  greatest  care — for  now  that
he  had  seen  the  old  lawyer,  he  felt  it  more  difficult  to
convince  himself  than  it  would  have  been  a  few  days
previously.  At  last  he  found  himself  obliged  to  admit
that  the  explanation  seemed  to  him  to  be  satisfactory.
But  Colomba  cried  out  vehemently:

ii6


Colomba

"  Tomaso  Bianchi  is  a  knave!  He'll  not  be  con-
victed, or  he'll  escape  from  prison!  I  am  certain  of
it!"

The  prefect  shrugged  his  shoulders.

''  I  have  laid  the  information  I  have  received  before
you,  monsieur.  I  will  now  depart,  and  leave  you  to
your  own  reflections.  I  shall  wait  till  your  own  reason
has  enlightened  you,  and  I  trust  it  may  prove  stronger
than  your  sisters  suppositions."

Orso,  after  saying  a  few  words  of  excuse  for  Co-
lomba, repeated  that  he  now  believed  Tomaso  to  be
the  sole  culprit.

The  prefect  had  risen  to  take  his  leave.

"  If  it  were  not  so  late,"  said  he,  "  I  would  suggest
your  coming  over  with  me  to  fetch  Miss  Nevil's  letter.
At  the  same  time  you  might  repeat  to  M.  Barricini
what  you  have  just  said  to  me,  and  the  whole  thing
would  be  settled."

"  Orso  della  Rebbia  will  never  set  his  foot  inside
the  house  of  a  Barricini!  "  exclaimed  Colomba  impetu-
ously.

"  This  young  lady  appears  to  be  the  tintinajo  *  of
the  family!  "  remarked  the  prefect,  with  a  touch  of
irony.

"  Monsieur,"  replied  Colomba  resolutely,  "  you
are  deceived.  You  do  not  know  the  lawyer.  He  is  the
most  cunning  and  knavish  of  men.     I  beseech  you  not

*  This  is  the  name  given  to  the  ram  or  he-goat  which  wears  a
bell  and  leads  the  flock,  and  it  is  applied,  metaphorically,  to  any
member  of  a  family  who  guides  it  in  all  important  matters.

117


Colomba

to  make  Orso  do  a  thing  that  would  overwhehii  him
with  dishonour!  "

''Colomba!"  exclaimed  Orso,  "your  passion  has
driven  you  out  of  your  senses!  "

"Orso!  Orso!  By  the  casket  I  gave  you,  I  be-
seech you  to  listen  to  me!  There  is  blood  between
you  and  the  Barricini.  You  shall  not  go  into  their
house!  "

"Sister!"

"  No,  brother,  you  shall  not  go!  Or  I  will  leave
this  house,  and  you  will  never  see  me  again!  Have
pity  on  me,  Orso!  "  and  she  fell  on  her  knees.

**  I  am  grieved,"  said  the  prefect,  "  to  find  Mad-
emoiselle Colomba  so  unreasonable.  You  will  con-
vince her,  I  am  sure."

He  opened  the  door  and  paused,  seeming  to  expect
Orso  to  follow  him.

"  I  can  not  leave  her  now,"  said  Orso.  "  To-mor-
row, if "

"  I  shall  be  starting  very  early,"  said  the  prefect.

"  Brother,"  cried  Colomba,  clasping  her  hands,
"  wait  till  to-morrow  morning,  in  any  case.  Let  me
look  over  my  father's  papers.  You  can  not  refuse  me
that!"

"  Well,  you  shall  look  them  over  to-night.  But  at
all  eyents  you  shall  not  torment  me  afterward  with
your  violent  hatreds.  A  thousand  pardons,  monsieur!
I  am  so  upset  myself  to-night — it  had  better  be  to-
morrow."

"  The  night  brings  counsel,"  said  the  prefect,  as
ii8


Colomba

he  went  out.  "  I  hope  all  your  uncertainty  will  have
disappeared  by  to-morrow."

"  Saveria,"  Colomba  called,  "  take  the  lantern  and
attend  the  Signor  Prefetto.  He  will  give  you  a  letter
to  bring  back  to  my  brother."

She  added  a  few  words  which  reached  Saveria's
ear  alone.

"  Colomba,"  said  Orso,  when  the  prefect  was  gone,
"  you  have  distressed  me  very  much.  Will  no  evi-
dence convince  you?  "

"  You  have  given  me  till  to-morrow,"  she  replied,
"  I  have  very  little  time;  but  I  still  have  some  hope."

Then  she  took  a  bunch  of  keys  and  ran  up  to  a
room  on  the  upper  story.  There  he  could  hear  her
pulling  open  drawers,  and  rummaging  in  the  writing-
desk  in  which  Colonel  della  Rebbia  had  kept  his  busi-
ness papers.


Vol.  6  1 19


CHAPTER    XIV

Saveria  was  a  long  time  away,  and  when  she  at  last
reappeared,  carrying  a  letter,  and  followed  by  little  Chi-
lina,  rubbing  her  eyes,  and  evidently  just  waked  out
of  her  beauty  sleep,  Orso  was  wound  up  to  the  highest
possible  pitch  of  impatience.

"  Child,"  said  Orso,  "  what  are  you  doing  here  at
this  hour?  "

"  The  signorina  sent  for  me,"  replied  Chilina.

"  What  the  devil  does  she  want  with  her?  "  thought
Orso  to  himself.  But  he  was  in  a  hurry  to  open  Miss
Lydia's  letter,  and  while  he  was  reading  it  Chilina  went
upstairs  to  his  sister's  room.

"  My  father,  dear  sir,  has  not  been  well,"  Miss  Nevil
wrote,  "  and  he  is  so  indolent,  besides,  that  I  am
obliged  to  act  as  his  secretary.  You  remember  that,
instead  of  admiring  the  landscape  with  you  and  me  the
other  day,  he  got  his  feet  wet  on  the  sea-shore — and  in
your  delightful  island,  that  is  quite  enough  to  give  one
a  fever!  I  can  see  the  face  you  are  making!  No  doubt
you  are  feeling  for  your  dagger.  But  I  will  hope  you
have  none  now.  Well,  my  father  had  a  little  fever,  and
I  had  a  great  fright.     The  prefect,  whom  I  still  persist

I20


Colomba

in  thinking  very  pleasant,  sent  us  a  doctor,  also  a  very
pleasant  man,  who  got  us  over  our  trouble  in  two  days.
There  has  been  no  return  of  the  attack,  and  my  father
would  like  to  begin  to  shoot  again.  But  I  have  for-
bidden that.  How  did  you  find  matters  in  your  moun-
tain home?  Is  your  North  Tower  still  in  its  old  place?
Are  there  any  ghosts  about  it?  I  ask  all  these  questions
because  my  father  remembers  you  have  promised  him
buck  and  boar  and  moufflon — is  that  the  right  name
for  those  strange  creatures?  We  intend  to  crave  your
hospitality  on  our  way  to  Bastia,  where  we  are  to  em-
bark, and  I  trust  the  della  Rebbia  Castle,  which  you
declare  is  so  old  and  tumble-down,  will  not  fall  in  upon
our  heads!  Though  the  prefect  is  so  pleasant  that
subjects  of  conversation  are  never  lacking  to  us —
I  flatter  myself,  by  the  way,  that  I  have  turned  his
head — we  have  been  talking  about  your  worshipful
self.  The  legal  people  at  Bastia  have  sent  him  certain
confessions,  made  by  a  rascal  they  have  under  lock  and
key,  which  are  calculated  to  destroy  your  last  remain-
ing suspicions.  The  enmity  which  sometimes  alarmed
me  for  you  must  therefore  end  at  once.  You  have  no
idea  what  a  pleasure  this  has  been  to  me!  When  you
started  hence  with  the  fair  z'occratricc,  with  your  gun  in
hand,  and  your  brow  lowering,  you  struck  me  as  being
more  Corsican  than  ever  —  too  Corsican  indeed  !
Basta!  I  write  you  this  long  letter  because  I  am  dull.
The  prefect,  alas!  is  going  away.  We  will  send  you  a
message  when  we  start  for  your  mountains,  and  I  shall
take  the  liberty  of  writing  to  Signorina  Colomba  to

121


Colomba

ask  her  to  give  me  a  bniccio,  ma  solenncl  Meanwhile,
give  her  my  love.  I  use  her  dagger  a  great  deal  to  cut
the  leaves  of  a  novel  I  brought  with  me.  But  the
doughty  steel  revolts  against  such  usage,  and  tears  my
book  for  me,  after  a  most  pitiful  fashion.  Farewell,  sir!
My  father  sends  you  '  his  best  love.'  Listen  to  what
the  prefect  says.  He  is  a  sensible  man,  and  is  turning
out  of  his  way,  I  believe,  on  your  account.  He  is  going
to  lay  a  foundation-stone  at  Corte.  I  should  fancy  the
ceremony  will  be  very  imposing,  and  I  am  very  sorry
not  to  see  it.  A  gentleman  in  an  embroidered  coat  and
silk  stockings  and  a  white  scarf,  wielding  a  trowel — and
a  speech!  And  at  the  end  of  the  performance  manifold
and  reiterated  shouts  of  '  God  save  the  King.'  I  say
again,  sir,  it  will  make  you  very  vain  to  think  I  have
written  you  four  whole  pages,  and  on  that  account  I
give  you  leave  to  write  me  a  very  long  letter.  By  the
way,  I  think  it  very  odd  of  you  not  to  have  let  me
hear  of  your  safe  arrival  at  the  Castle  of  Pietranera!

"  Lydia.

"  P.  S. — I  beg  you  will  listen  to  the  prefect,  and  do
as  he  bids  you.  We  have  agreed  that  this  is  the  course
you  should  pursue,  and  I  shall  be  very  glad  if  you  do  it."

Orso  read  the  letter  three  or  four  times  over,  mak-
ing endless  mental  comments  each  time  as  he  read.
Then  he  wrote  a  long  answer,  which  he  sent  by  Sa-
veria's  hand  to  a  man  in  the  village,  who  was  to  go
down  to  Ajaccio  the  very  next  day.  Already  he  had
almost  dismissed  the  idea  of  discussing  his  grievance,

122


Colomba

true  or  false,  against  the  Barricini,  with  his  sister.
Miss  Lydia's  letter  had  cast  a  rose-coloured  tint  over
everything  about  him.  He  felt  neither  hatred  nor  sus-
picion now.  He  waited  some  time  for  his  sister  to  come
down,  and  finding  she  did  not  reappear,  he  went  to  bed,
with  a  lighter  heart  than  he  had  carried  for  many  a  day.
Colomba,  having  dismissed  Chilina  with  some  secret
instructions,  spent  the  greater  part  of  the  night  in  read-
ing old  papers.  A  little  before  daybreak  a  few  tiny
pebbles  rattled  against  the  window-pane.  At  the  sig-
nal, she  went  down  to  the  garden,  opened  a  back  door,
and  conducted  two  very  rough  men  into  her  house.
Her  first  care  was  to  bring  them  into  the  kitchen  and
give  them  food.  My  readers  will  shortly  learn  who
these  men  were.


123


CHAPTER    XV

Toward  six  o'clock  next  morning  one  of  the  pre-
fect's servants  came  and  knocked  at  the  door  of  Orso's
house.  He  was  received  by  Colomba,  and  informed
her  the  prefect  was  about  to  start,  and  was  expecting
her  brother.  Without  a  moment's  hesitation  Colomba
replied  that  her  brother  had  just  had  a  fall  on  the  stairs,
and  sprained  his  foot;  that  he  was  unable  to  walk  a
single  step,  that  he  begged  the  prefect  to  excuse  him,
and  would  be  very  grateful  if  he  would  condescend  to
take  the  trouble  of  coming  over  to  him.  A  few  minutes
after  this  message  had  been  despatched,  Orso  came
downstairs,  and  asked  his  sister  whether  the  prefect  had
not  sent  for  him.

With  the  most  perfect  assurance  she  rejoined:

"  He  begs  you'll  wait  for  him  here."

Half  an  hour  went  by  without  the  slightest  percep-
tible stir  in  the  Barricini  dwelling.  Meanwhile  Orso
asked  Colomba  whether  she  had  discovered  anything.
She  replied  that  she  proposed  to  make  her  statement
when  the  prefect  came.  She  affected  an  extreme  com-
posure. But  her  colour  and  her  eyes  betrayed  her  state
of  feverish  excitement.

At  last  the  door  of  the  Barricini  mansion  was  seen
124


Colomba

to  open.  The  prefect  came  out  first,  in  travelling  garb;
he  was  followed  by  the  mayor  and  his  two  sons.  What
was  the  stupefaction  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  village
of  Pietranera,  who  had  been  on  the  watch  since
sunrise  for  the  departure  of  the  chief  magistrate  of
their  department,  when  they  saw  him  go  straight
across  the  square  and  enter  the  della  Rebbia  dwell-
ing, accompanied  by  the  three  Barricini.  "  They
are  going  to  make  peace!  "  exclaimed  the  village  poli-
ticians.

"  Just  as  I  told  you,"  one  old  man  went  on.  "  Ors'
Anton'  has  lived  too  much  on  the  mainland  to  carry
things  through  like  a  man  of  mettle."

"  Yet,"  responded  a  Rebbianite,  "  you  may  notice
it  is  the  Barricini  who  have  gone  across  to  him.  They
are  suing  for  mercy."

'*  It's  the  prefect  who  has  wheedled  them  all
round,"  answered  the  old  fellow.  "  There  is  no  such
thing  as  courage  nowadays,  and  the  young  chaps  make
no  more  fuss  about  their  father's  blood  than  if  they
were  all  bastards."

The  prefect  was  not  a  little  astounded  to  find  Orso
up  and  walking  about  with  perfect  ease.  In  the  brief-
est fashion  Colomba  avowed  her  own  lie,  and  begged
him  to  forgive  it.

"  If  you  had  been  staying  anywhere  else,  monsieur,
my  brother  would  have  gone  to  pay  his  respects  to  you
yesterday."

Orso  made  endless  apologies,  vowing  he  had  noth-
ing to  do  with  his  sister's  absurd  stratagem,  by  which

125


Colomba

lie  appeared  deeply  mortified.  The  prefect  and  the
elder  Barricini  appeared  to  believe  in  the  sincerity  of
his  regret,  and  indeed  this  belief  was  justified  by  his
evident  confusion  and  the  reproaches  he  addressed  to
his  sister.  But  the  mayor's  two  sons  did  not  seem  sat-
isfied.

"  We  are  being  made  to  look  like  fools,"  said  Or-
landuccio  audibly.

"  If  my  sister  were  to  play  me  such  tricks,"  said
Vincentello,  "  I'd  soon  cure  her  fancy  for  beginning
them  again."

The  words,  and  the  tone  in  which  they  were  ut-
tered, offended  Orso,  and  diminished  his  good-will.
Glances  that  were  anything  but  friendly  were  exchanged
between  him  and  the  two  young  men.

Meanwhile,  everybody  being  seated  save  Colomba,
who  remained  standing  close  to  the  kitchen  door,  the
prefect  took  up  his  parable,  and  after  a  few  common-
places as  to  local  prejudices,  he  recalled  the  fact  that
the  most  inveterate  enmities  generally  have  their
root  in  some  mere  misunderstanding.  Next,  turning
to  the  mayor,  he  told  him  that  Signor  della  Rebbia
had  never  believed  the  Barricini  family  had  played  any
part,  direct  or  indirect,  in  the  deplorable  event  which
had  bereft  him  of  his  father;  that  he  had,  indeed,
nursed  some  doubts  as  to  one  detail  in  the  lawsuit  be-
tween the  two  families;  that  Signor  Orso's  long  ab-
sence, and  the  nature  of  the  information  sent  him,  ex-
cused the  doubt  in  question;  that  in  the  light  of  recent
revelations  he  felt  completely  satisfied,  and  desired  to

126


Colomba


re-open  friendly  antl  neighbourly  relations  with  Signor
Barricini  and  his  sons.

Orso  bowed  stiffly.  Signor  Barricini  stammered  a
few  words  that  nobody  could  hear,  and  his  sons  stared
steadily  at  the  ceiling  rafters.  The  prefect  was  about
to  continue  his  speech,  and  address  the  counterpart  of
the  remarks  he  had  made  to  Signor  Barricini,  to  Orso,
when  Colomba  stepped  gravely  forward  between  the
contracting  parties,  at  the  same  time  drawing  some
papers  from  beneath  her  neckerchief.

''  I  should  be  happy  indeed,"  she  said,  "  to  see  the
quarrel  between  our  two  families  brought  to  an  end.
But  if  the  reconciliation  is  to  be  sincere,  there  must
be  a  full  explanation,  and  nothing  must  be  left  in  doubt.
Signor  Prefetto,  Tomaso  Bianchi's  declaration,  com-
ing from  a  man  of  such  vile  report,  seemed  to  me  justly
open  to  doubt.  I  said  your  sons  had  possibly  seen  this
man  in  the  prison  at  Bastia."

"It's  false!"  interrupted  Orlanduccio;  "I  didn't
see  him!  "

Colomba  cast  a  scornful  glance  at  him,  and  pro-
ceeded w^ith  great  apparent  composure.

"  You  explained  Tomaso's  probable  interest  in
threatening  Signor  Barricini,  in  the  name  of  a  dreaded
bandit,  by  his  desire  to  keep  his  brother  Teodoro  in
possession  of  the  mill  which  my  father  allowed  him  to
hire  at  a  very  low  rent."

"  That's  quite  clear,"  assented  the  prefect.

■'Where  was  Tomaso  Bianchi's  interest?"  ex-
claimed Colomba  triumphantly.     "  His  brother's  lease

127


Colomba

had  run  out.  My  father  had  given  him  notice  on  the
1st  of  July.  Here  is  my  father's  account-book;  here
is  his  note  of  the  warning  given  to  Teodoro,  and  the
letter  from  a  business  man  at  Ajaccio  suggesting  a  new
tenant."

As  she  spoke  she  gave  the  prefect  the  papers  she
had  been  holding  in  her  hand.

There  was  an  astonished  pause.  The  mayor  turned
visibly  pale.  Orso,  knitting  his  brows,  leaned  for^vard
to  look  at  the  papers,  which  the  prefect  was  perusing
most  attentively.

"We  are  being  made  to  look  like  fools!"  cried
Orlaiiduccio  again,  springing  angrily  to  his  feet.  "  Let
us  be  off,  father!  We  ought  never  to  have  come
here!"

One  instant's  delay  gave  Signer  Barricini  time  to
recover  his  composure.  He  asked  leave  to  see  the  pa-
l')ers.  Without  a  word  the  prefect  handed  them  over  to
him.  Pushing  his  green  spectacles  up  to  his  forehead,
looked  through  them  with  a  somewhat  indifferent  air,
while  Colomba  watched  him  with  the  eyes  of  a  tigress
W'ho  sees  a  buck  drawing  near  to  the  lair  where  she  has
hidden  her  cu1)S.

"  Well,"  said  Signor  Barricini,  as  he  pulled  down
his  spectacles  and  returned  the  documents,  '*  knowing
the  late  colonel's  kind  heart,  Tomaso  thought — most
likely  he  thought — that  the  colonel  would  change  his
mind  al)out  the  notice.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Bianchi  is
still  at  the  mill,  so "

"  It  was  I,"  said  Colomba,  and  there  was  scorn  in

128


Colomba

her  voice,  "  who  left  him  there.  My  father  was  dead,
and  situated  as  I  was,  I  was  obHged  to  treat  my  broth-
er's dependents  with  consideration."

"  Yet,"  quoth  the  prefect,  "  this  man  Tomaso  ac-
knowledges that  he  wrote  the  letter.  That  much  is
clear."

"  The  thing  that  is  clear  to  me,"  broke  in  Orso,  "  is
that  there  is  some  vile  infamy  underneath  this  whole
business."

*'  I  have  to  contradict  another  assertion  made  by
these  gentlemen,"  said  Colomba.

She  threw  open  the  door  into  the  kitchen  and  in-
stantly Brandolaccio,  the  licentiate  in  theology,  and
Brusco,  the  dog,  marched  into  the  room.  The  two
bandits  were  unarmed — apparently,  at  all  events;  they
wore  their  cartridge  belts,  but  the  pistols,  which  are
their  necessary  complement,  were  absent.  As  they  en-
tered the  room  they  doffed  their  caps  respectfully.

The  effect  produced  by  their  sudden  appearance
may  be  conceived.  The  mayor  almost  fell  backward.
His  sons  threw  themselves  boldly  in  front  of  him,  each
one  feeling  for  his  dagger  in  his  coat  pocket.  The
prefect  made  a  step  toward  the  door,  and  Orso,  seizing
Brandolaccio  by  the  collar,  shouted:

"  What  have  you  come  here  for,  you  villain?  "

"This  is  a  trap!"  cried  the  mayor,  trying  to  get
the  door  open.  But,  by  the  bandits'  orders,  as  was
afterward  discovered,  Saveria  had  locked  it  on  the  out-
side.

"  Good  people,"  said  Brandolaccio,  "  don't  be
9  129


Colomba

afraid  of  me.  I'm  not  such  a  devil  as  I  look.  We  mean
no  harm  at  all.  Signor  Prefetto,  I'm  your  very  humble
servant.  Gently,  lieutenant!  you're  strangling  me!
We're  here  as  witnesses!  Now  then,  Padre,  speak
up!     Your  tongue's  glib  enough!  "

"  Signor  Prefetto,"  quoth  the  licentiate,  "  I  have
not  the  honour  of  being  known  to  you.  My  name  is
Giocanto  Castriconi,  better  known  as  the  Padre.  Aha,
it's  coming  back  to  you!  The  signorina  here,  whom  I
have  not  the  pleasure  of  knowing  either,  has  sent  to
ask  me  to  supply  some  information  about  a  fellow  of
the  name  of  Tomaso  Bianchi,  with  whom  I  chanced
to  be  shut  up,  about  three  weeks  ago,  in  the  prison  at
Bastia.    This  is  what  I  have  to  tell  you."

"  Spare  yourself  the  trouble,"  said  the  prefect.  "  I
can  not  listen  to  anything  from  such  a  man  as  you.
Signor  della  Rebbia,  I  am  willing  to  believe  you  have
had  nothing  to  do  with  this  detestable  plot.  But
are  you  master  in  your  own  house?  Will  you  have
that  door  opened?  Your  sister  may  have  to  give  an
account  of  the  strange  relations  in  which  she  lives  with
a  set  of  bandits."

"Signor  Prefetto!"  cried  Colomba,  "I  beseech
you  to  listen  to  what  this  man  has  to  say!  You  are
here  to  do  justice  to  everybody,  and  it  is  your  duty  to
search  out  the  truth.     Speak.  Giocanto  Castriconi!"

"  Don't  listen  to  him,"  chorused  the  three  Barri-
cini.

"  If  everybody  talks  at  once,"  remarked  the  bandit,
with    a   smile,    "  nobody    can    contrive    to    hear   what

130


Colomba

anybody  says.  Well,  in  the  prison  at  Bastia  I  had  as
my  companion — not  as  my  friend — this  very  man,
Tomaso.  He  received  frequent  visits  from  Signor
Orlanduccio."

"  You  lie!  "  shouted  the  two  brothers  together.

"  Two  negatives  make  an  affirmative, "  pursued
Castriconi  coolly.  "  Tomaso  had  money,  he  ate  and
drank  of  the  best.  I  have  always  been  fond  of  good
cheer  (that's  the  least  of  my  failings),  and  in  spite  of
my  repugnance  to  rubbing  shoulders  with  such  a
wretch,  I  let  myself  be  tempted,  several  times  over,  in-
to dining  with  him.  Out  of  gratitude,  I  proposed  he
should  escape  with  me.  A  young  person — to  whom  I
had  shown  some  kindness — had  provided  me  with  the
necessary  means.  I  don't  intend  to  compromise  any-
body. Tomaso  refused  my  offer,  telling  me  he  was
certain  to  be  all  right,  as  lawyer  Barricini  had  spoken
to  all  the  judges  for  him,  and  he  was  sure  to  get  out
of  prison  with  a  character  as  white  as  snow,  and  with
money  in  his  pocket,  too.  As  for  me,  I  thought  it
better  to  get  into  the  fresh  air.    Dixi.''

"  Everything  that  fellow  has  said  is  a  heap  of  lies."
reiterated  Orlanduccio  stoutly.  "  If  we  were  in  the
open  country,  and  each  of  us  had  his  gun,  he  wouldn't
talk  in  that  way."

"  Here's  a  pretty  folly!  "  cried  Brandolaccio.
"  Don't  you  quarrel  with  the  Padre,  Orlanduccio!  "

"  Will  you  be  good  enough  to  allow  me  to  leave
this  room,  Signor  della  Rebbia,"  said  the  prefect,  and
he  stamped  his  foot  in  his  impatience.

131


Colomba

"  Saveria!  Saveria!  "  shouted  Orso,  "open  the
door,  in  the  devil's  name!"

"  One  moment,"  said  Brandolaccio.  "  We  have  to
shp  away  first,  on  our  side.  Signor  Prefetto,  the  cus-
tom, when  people  meet  in  the  house  of  a  mutual  friend,
is  to  allow  each  other  half  an  hour's  law,  after  depart-
ure."

The  prefect  cast  a  scornful  glance  at  him.

"  Your  servant,  signorina,  and  gentlemen  all!  "  said
Brandolaccio.  Then  stretching  out  his  arm,  "  Hi,
Brusco,"  he  cried  to  his  dog,  "  jump  for  the  Signor
Prefetto!"

The  dog  jumped;  the  bandits  swiftly  snatched  up
their  arms  in  the  kitchen,  fled  across  the  garden,  and
at  a  shrill  whistle  the  door  of  the  room  flew  open  as
though  by  magic.

"  Signor  Barricini,"  said  Orso,  and  suppressed  fury
vibrated  in  his  voice,  "  I  hold  you  to  be  a  forger!
This  very  day  I  shall  charge  you  before  the  public
prosecutor  with  forgery  and  complicity  with  Bianchi.
I  may  perhaps  have  a  still  more  terrible  accusation  to
bring  against  you!  "

"  And  I,  Signor  della  Rebbia,"  replied  the  mayor,
"  shall  lay  my  charge  against  you  for  conspiracy  and
complicity  with  bandits.  Meanwhile  the  prefect  will
desire  the  gendarmes  to  keep  an  eye  upon  you."

"  The  prefect  will  do  his  duty,"  said  that  gentleman
sternly.  "  He  will  see  the  public  order  is  not  disturbed
at  Pietranera;  he  will  take  care  justice  is  done.  I  say
this  to  you  all,  gentlemen!  "

132


Colomba

The  mayor  and  Vincentello  were  outside  the  room
already,  and  Orlanduccio  was  following  them,  stepping
backward,  when  Orso  said  to  him  in  an  undertone:

"  Your  father  is  an  old  man.  One  cufif  from  me
would  kill  him.  It  is  with  you  and  with  your  brother
that  I  intend  to  deal."

Orlanduccio's  only  response  was  to  draw  his  dagger
and  fly  like  a  madman  at  Orso.  But  before  he  could
use  his  weapon  Colomba  caught  hold  of  his  arm  and
twisted  it  violently,  while  Orso  gave  him  a  blow  in  the
face  with  his  fist,  which  made  him  stagger  several  paces
back,  and  come  into  violent  collision  with  the  door
frame.  Orlanduccio's  dagger  dropped  from  his  hand.
But  Vincentello  had  his  ready,  and  was  rushing  back
into  the  room,  when  Colomba,  snatching  up  a  gun,
convinced  him  that  the  struggle  must  be  unequal.  At
the  same  moment  the  prefect  threw  himself  between
the  combatants.

"  We  shall  soon  meet,  Ors'  Anton'!  "  shouted  Or-
landuccio, and  slamming  the  door  of  the  room  vio-
lently, he  turned  the  key  in  the  lock,  so  as  to  insure
himself  time  to  retreat.

For  a  full  quarter  of  an  hour  Orso  and  the  prefect
kept  their  places  in  dead  silence,  at  opposite  ends  of  the
room.  Colomba,  the  pride  of  triumph  shining  on  her
brow,  gazed  first  at  one  and  then  at  the  other,  as  she
leaned  on  the  gun  that  had  turned  the  scale  of  victory.

"  What  a  country!  Oh,  w4iat  a  country!  "  cried  the
prefect  at  last,  rising  hastily  from  his  chair.  "  Signor
della  Rebbia,  you  did  wrong!    You  must  give  me  your

133


Colomba

word  of  honour  to  abstain  from  all  violence,  and  to
wait  till  the  law  settles  this  cursed  business."

"  Yes,  Signor  Prefetto,  I  was  wrong  to  strike  that
^■illain.  But  I  did  strike  him,  after  all,  and  I  can't  re-
fuse him  the  satisfaction  he  has  demanded  of  me."

"Pooh!  no!  He  doesn't  want  to  fight  you!  But
supposing  he  murders  you?  You've  done  everything
you  could  to  insure  it."

"  We'll  protect  ourselves,"  said  Colomba.

"  Orlanduccio,"  said  Orso,  "  strikes  me  as  being  a
plucky  fellow,  and  I  think  better  of  him  than  that,  mon-
sieur. He  was  very  quick  about  drawing  his  dagger.
But  perhaps  I  should  have  done  the  same  thing  in  his
place,  and  I'm  glad  my  sister  has  not  an  ordinary  fine
lady's  wrist."

"  You  are  not  to  fight,"  exclaimed  the  prefect.  "  I
forbid  it!"

"  Allow  me  to  say,  monsieur,  that  in  matters  that
afTect  my  honour  the  only  authority  I  acknowledge  is
that  of  my  own  conscience."

"  You  sha'n't  fight,  I  tell  you!  "

"  You  can  put  me  under  arrest,  monsieur — that  is,
if  I  let  you  catch  me.  But  if  you  were  to  do  that,  you
would  only  delay  a  thing  that  has  now  become  inevita-
ble. You  are  a  man  of  honour  yourself,  monsieur;  you
know  there  can  be  no  other  course."

"  If  you  were  to  have  my  brother  arrested,"  added
Colomba,  "  half  the  village  would  take  his  part,  and
we  should  have  a  fine  fusillade."

"  I  give  you  fair  notice,  monsieur,  and  I  entreat
134


Colomba

you  not  to  think  I  am  talking  mere  bravado.  I  warn
you  that  if  Signer  Barricini  abuses  his  authority  as
mayor,  to  have  me  arrested,  I  shall  defend  myself."

"  From  this  very  day,"  said  the  prefect,  "  Signer
Barricini  is  suspended.  I  trust  he  will  exculpate  him-
self. Listen  to  me,  my  young  gentleman,  I  have  a  liking
for  you.  What  I  ask  of  you  is  nothing  to  speak  of.
Just  to  stay  quietly  at  home  till  I  get  back  from  Corte.
I  shall  only  be  three  days  away.  I'll  bring  back  the
public  prosecutor  with  me,  and  then  we'll  sift  this
wretched  business  to  the  bottom.  Will  you  promise
me  you  will  abstain  from  all  hostilities  till  then?  "

"  I  can  not  promise  that,  monsieur,  if,  as  I  expect,
Orlanduccio  asks  me  to  meet  him."

"  What,  Signor  della  Rebbia !  would  you — a  French
officer — think  of  going  out  with  a  man  you  suspect  of
being  a  forger?  "

"  I  struck  him,  monsieur!  "

"  But  supposing  you  struck  a  convict,  and  he  de-
manded satisfaction  of  you,  would  you  fight  him?
Come,  come,  Signor  Orso!  But  Fll  ask  you  to  do  even
less,  do  nothing  to  seek  out  Orlanduccio.  Fll  consent
to  your  fighting  him  if  he  asks  you  for  a  meeting."

"  He  will  ask  for  it,  I  haven't  a  doubt  of  that.  But
Fll  promise  I  won't  give  him  fresh  cufTs  to  induce  him
to  do  it."

"  What  a  country!  "  cried  the  prefect  once  more,  as
he  strode  to  and  fro.  "  Shall  I  never  get  back  to
France?  "

"  Signor  Prefetto,"  said  Colomba  in  her  most  dulcet
Vol.  6  135  K


Colomba

tones,  "  it  is  growing  very  late.  Would  you  do  us
the  honour  of  breakfasting  here?  "

The  prefect  could  not  help  laughing.

"  I've  been  here  too  long  already — it  may  look  like
partiality.  And  there  is  that  cursed  foundation-stone.
I  must  be  ofT.  Signorina  della  Rebbia!  what  calami-
ties you  may  have  prepared  this  day!  "

"  At  all  events,  Signor  Prefetto,  you  will  do  my
sister  the  justice  of  believing  her  convictions  are  deeply
rooted — and  I  am  sure,  now,  that  you  yourself  believe
them  to  be  well-founded."

"  Farewell,  sir!  "  said  the  prefect,  waving  his  hand.
"  I  warn  you  that  the  sergeant  of  gendarmes  will  have
orders  to  watch  everything  you  do."

When  the  prefect  had  departed —

"  Orso,"  said  Colomba,  "  this  isn't  the  Continent.
Orlanduccio  knows  nothing  about  your  duels,  and  be-
sides, that  wretch  must  not  die  the  death  of  a  brave
man."

"  Colomba,  my  dear,  you  are  a  clever  woman.  I
owe  you  a  great  deal  from  having  saved  me  from  a
hearty  knife-thrust.  Give  me  your  little  hand  to
kiss!  But,  hark  ye,  let  me  have  my  way.  There  are
certain  matters  that  you  don't  understand.  Give
me  my  breakfast.  And  as  soon  as  the  prefect  has
started  off  send  for  little  Chilina,  who  seems  to  per-
form all  the  commissions  she  is  given  in  the  most
wonderful  fashion.  I  shall  want  her  to  take  a  letter
for  me."

While  Colomba  was  superintending  the  preparation
136


Colomba

of  his  breakfast,  Orso  went  up  to  his  own  room  and
wrote  the  following  note:

"  You  must  be  in  a  hurry  to  meet  me,  and  I  am  no
less  eager.  We  can  meet  at  six  o'clock  to-morrow
morning  in  the  valley  of  Acquaviva.  I  am  a  skilful
pistol-shot,  so  I  do  not  suggest  that  weapon  to  you.
I  hear  you  are  a  good  shot  with  a  gun.  Let  us  each
take  a  double-barrelled  gun.  I  shall  be  accompanied
by  a  man  from  this  village.  If  your  brother  wishes  to
go  with  you,  take  a  second  witness,  and  let  me  know.
In  that  case  only  I  should  bring  two  with  me.

"  Orso  Antonio  della  Rebbia."

After  spending  an  hour  with  the  deputy-mayor,  and
going  into  the  Barricini  house  for  a  few  minutes,  the
prefect,  attended  by  a  single  gendarme,  started  for
Corte.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  later,  Chilina  carried  over
the  letter  my  readers  have  just  perused,  and  delivered  it
into  Orlanduccio's  own  hands.

The  answer  was  not  prompt,  and  did  not  arrive  till
evening.  It  bore  the  signature  of  the  elder  Barricini,
and  informed  Orso  that  he  was  laying  the  threatening
letter  sent  to  his  son  before  the  public  prosecutor.  His
missive  concluded  thus:  "  Strong  in  the  sense  of  a
clear  conscience,  I  patiently  wait  till  the  law  has  pro-
nounced on  your  calumnies."

Meanwhile  five  or  six  herdsmen,  summoned  by  Co^
lomba,  arrived  to  garrison  the  della  Rebbia  Tower.  In
spite  of  Orso's  protests,  archcre  were  arranged  in  the

137


Colomba

windows  looking  onto  the  square,  and  all  through  the
evening  offers  of  service  kept  coming  in  from  various
persons  belonging  to  the  village.  There  was  even  a
letter  from  the  bandit-theologian,  undertaking,  for  him-
self and  Brandolaccio,  that  in  the  event  of  the  mayor's
calling  on  the  gendarmes,  they  themselves  would
straightwa}'  intervene.  The  following  postscript  closed
the  letter:

"  Dare  I  ask  you  what  the  Signor  Prefetto  thinks  of
the  excellent  education  bestowed  by  my  friend  on  Brus-
co,  the  dog?  Next  to  Chilina,  he  is  the  most  docile  and
promising  pupil  I  have  ever  come  across."


138


CHAPTER    XVI

The  following  day  went  by  without  any  hostile
demonstration.  Both  sides  kept  on  the  defensive.
Orso  did  not  leave  his  house,  and  the  door  of  the  Barri-
cini  dwelling  remained  closely  shut.  The  five  gen-
darmes who  had  been  left  to  garrison  Pietranera  were
to  be  seen  walking  about  the  square  and  the  outskirts
of  the  village,  in  company  with  the  village  constable,
the  sole  representative  of  the  urban  police  force.  The
deputy-mayor  never  put  off  his  sash.  But  there  was  no
actual  symptom  of  war,  except  the  loopholes  in  the
two  opponents'  houses.  Nobody  but  a  Corsican  would
have  noticed  that  the  group  round  the  evergreen  oak
in  the  middle  of  the  square  consisted  solely  of  women.

At  supper-time  Colomba  gleefully  showed  her
brother  a  letter  she  had  just  received  from  Miss  Nevil.

"  My  dear  Signorina  Colomba,"  it  ran,  "  I  learn
with  great  pleasure,  through  a  letter  from  your  brother,
that  your  enmities  are  all  at  an  end.  I  congratulate  you
heartily.  J\ly  father  can  not  endure  Ajaccio  now  your
brother  is  not  there  to  talk  about  war  and  go  out  shoot-
ing with  him.  We  are  starting  to-day,  and  shall  sleep
at  the  house  of  your  kinswoman,  to  whom  we  have  a

139


Colomba

letter.      The   day   after   to-morrow,   somewhere   about
eleven  o'clock,  I  shall  come  and  ask  you  to  let  me
taste  that  mountain  bniccio  of  yours,  which  you  say  is
so  vastly  superior  to  what  we  get  in  the  town.
"  Farewell,  dear  Signorina  Colomba.

"  Your  affectionate

"  LvDiA  Nevil."

"  Then  she  hasn't  received  my  second  letter!  "  ex-
claimed Orso,

"  You  see  by  the  date  of  this  one  that  Miss  Lydia
must  have  already  started  when  your  letter  reached
Ajaccio.     But  did  you  tell  her  not  to  come?  "

''  I  told  her  we  were  in  a  state  of  siege.  That  does
not  seem  to  me  a  condition  that  permits  of  our  receiv-
ing company."

"  Bah!  These  English  people  are  so  odd.  The
very  last  night  I  slept  in  her  room  she  told  me  she
would  be  sorry  to  leave  Corsica  without  ha^'ing  seen  a
good  vendetta.  If  you  choose,  Orso,  you  might  let
her  see  an  assault  on  our  enemies'  house."

"  Do  you  know,  Colomba,"  said  Orso,  "  Nature
blundered  when  she  made  you  a  woman.  You'd  have
made  a  first-rate  soldier."

"  Maybe.  Anyhow,  I'm  going  to  make  my  bntc-
cio"

"  Don't  waste  your  time.  We  must  send  some-
body down  to  warn  them  and  stop  them  before  they
start."

"  Do  you  mean  to  say  you  would  send  a  messenger
140


Colomba

out  in  such  weather,  to  have  him  and  your  letter  both
swept  away  by  a  torrent?  How  I  pity  those  poor  ban-
dits in  this  storm!  Luckily  they  have  good /?//ouL*  Do
you  know  what  you  ought  to  do,  Orso?  If  the  storm
clears  you  should  start  off  very  early  to-morrow  morn-
ing, and  get  to  our  kinswoman's  house  before  they
leave  it.  That  will  be  easy  enough,  for  Miss  Lydia
always  gets  up  so  late.  You  can  tell  them  everything
that  has  happened  here,  and  if  they  still  persist  in  com-
ing, why!  we  shall  be  very  glad  to  welcome  them."

Orso  lost  no  time  in  assenting  to  this  plan,  and
after  a  few  moments'  silence,  Colomba  continued:

"  Perhaps,  Orso,  you  think  I  was  joking  when  I
talked  of  an  assault  on  the  Barricini's  house.  Do  you
know  we  are  in  force — two  to  one  at  the  very  least?
Now  that  the  prefect  has  suspended  the  mayor,  every
man  in  the  place  is  on  our  side.  We  might  cut  them
to  pieces.  It  would  be  quite  easy  to  bring  it  about.  If
you  liked,  I  could  go  over  to  the  fountain  and  begin
to  jeer  at  their  women  folk.  They  would  come  out.
Perhaps — they  are  such  cowards! — they  would  fire  at
me  through  their  loopholes.  They  wouldn't  hit  me.
Then  the  thing  would  be  done.  They  would  have
begun  the  attack,  and  the  beaten  party  must  take  its
chance.  How  is  anybody  to  know  which  person's  aim
has  been  true,  in  a  scuffle?  Listen  to  your  own  sister,
Orso!  These  lawyers  who  are  coming  will  blacken
lots  of  paper,  and  talk  a  great  deal  of  useless  stuff.
Nothing  will  come  of  it  all.    That  old  fox  will  contrive

*  Thick  cloth  cloaks  with  hoods.
141


Colomba

to  make  them  think  they  see  stars  in  broad  midday.
Ah!  if  the  prefect  hadn't  thrown  himself  in  front  of
Vincentello,  we  should  have  had  one  less  to  deal  with."

All  this  was  said  with  the  same  calm  air  as  that
with  which  she  had  spoken,  an  instant  previously,  of  her
preparations  for  making  the  bniccio.

Orso,  quite  dumfounded,  gazed  at  his  sister  with
an  admiration  not  unmixed  with  alarm.

"  My  sweet  Colomba,"  he  said,  as  he  rose  from  the
table,  "  I  really  am  afraid  you  are  the  very  devil.  But
make  your  mind  easy.  If  I  don't  succeed  in  getting
the  Barricini  hanged,  I'll  contrive  to  get  the  better  of
them  in  some  other  fashion.  '  Hot  bullet  or  cold
steel '  * — you  see  I  haven't  forgotten  my  Corsican."

"  The  sooner  the  better,"  said  Colomba,  with  a
sigh.  "  What  horse  will  you  ride  to-morrow,  Ors'
Anton'?  "

"The  black.     Why  do  you  ask?"

"  So  as  to  make  sure  he  has  some  barley."

When  Orso  went  up  to  his  room,  Colomba  sent
Saveria  and  the  herdsmen  to  their  beds,  and  sat  on
alone  in  the  kitchen,  w^here  the  bniccio  was  simmering.
Now  and  then  she  seemed  to  listen,  and  was  apparently
waiting  very  anxiously  for  her  brother  to  go  to  bed.
At  last,  when  she  thought  he  was  asleep,  she  took  a
knife,  made  sure  it  was  sharp,  slipped  her  little  feet  into
thick  shoes,  and  passed  noiselessly  out  into  the  garden.

This  garden,  which  was  inclosed  by  walls,  lay  next
to  a  good-sized  piece  of  hedged  ground,  into  which  the

*  Palla  calda  ti  farru  frcddii,  a  very  common  saying.
142


I


Colomba

horses  were  turned — for  Corsican  horses  do  not  know
what  a  stable  means.  They  are  generaUy  turned  loose
into  a  field,  and  left  to  themselves,  to  find  pasture  and
shelter  from  cold  winds,  as  best  they  may.

Colomba  opened  the  garden  gate  with  the  same
precaution,  entered  the  inclosure,  and  whistling  gently,
soon  attracted  the  horses,  to  whom  she  had  often
brought  bread  and  salt.  As  soon  as  the  black  horse
came  within  reach,  she  caught  him  firmly  by  the  mane,
and  split  his  ear  open  with  her  knife.  The  horse  gave
a  violent  leap,  and  tore  off  with  that  shrill  cry  which
sharp  pain  occasionally  extorts  from  his  kind.  Quite
satisfied,  Colomba  was  making  her  way  back  into  the
garden,  when  Orso  threw  open  his  window  and
shouted,  "  Who  goes  there?  "  x\t  the  same  time  she
heard  him  cock  his  gun.  Luckily  for  her  the  garden-
door  lay  in  the  blackest  shadow,  and  was  partly
screened  by  a  large  fig-tree.  She  very  soon  gathered,
from  the  light  she  saw  glancing  up  and  down  in  her
brother's  room,  that  he  was  trying  to  light  his  lamp.
She  lost  no  time  about  closing  the  garden-door,  and
sHpping  along  the  wall,  so  that  the  outline  of  her  black
garments  was  lost  against  the  dark  foliage  of  the  fruit-
trees,  and  succeeded  in  getting  back  into  the  kitchen  a
few  moments  before  Orso  entered  it.

"  What's  the  matter?  "  she  inquired.

"  I  fancied  I  heard  somebody  opening  the  garden-
door,"  said  Orso.

"Impossible!  The  dog  would  have  barked.  But
let  us  go  and  see!  "

143


Colomba

Orso  went  round  the  garden,  and  having  made  sure
that  the  outer  door  was  safely  secured,  he  was  going
back  to  his  room,  rather  ashamed  of  his  false  alarm.

"  I  am  glad,  brother,"  remarked  Colomba,  "  that
you  are  learning  to  be  prudent,  as  a  man  in  your  posi-
tion ought  to  be."

"  You  are  training  me  well,"  said  Orso.  "  Good-
night! "

By  dawn  the  next  morning  Orso  was  up  and  ready
to  start.  His  style  of  dress  betrayed  the  desire  for
smartness  felt  by  every  man  bound  for  the  presence  of
the  lady  he  would  fain  please,  combined  vv'ith  the  cau-
tion of  a  Corsican  in  vendetta.  Over  a  blue  coat,  that
sat  closely  to  his  figure,  he  wore  a  small  tin  case  full  of
cartridges,  slung  across  his  shoulder  by  a  green  silk
cord.  His  dagger  lay  in  his  side  pocket,  and  in  his
hand  he  carried  his  handsome  Manton,  ready  loaded.
While  he  was  hastily  swallowing  the  cup  of  cofTee  Co-
lomba had  poured  out  for  him,  one  of  the  herdsmen
went  out  to  put  the  bridle  and  saddle  on  the  black
horse.  Orso  and  his  sister  followed  close  on  his  heels
and  entered  the  field.  The  man  had  caught  the  horse,
but  he  had  dropped  both  saddle  and  bridle,  and  seemed
quite  paralyzed  with  horror,  while  the  horse,  remem-
bering the  wound  it  had  received  during  the  night,  and
trembling  for  its  other  ear,  w-as  rearing,  kicking,  and
neighing  like  twenty  fiends.

"Now  then!  make  haste!"  shouted  Orso.

"  Ho,  Ors'  Anton'!  Ho,  Ors'  Anton'!  "  yelled  the
herdsman.     "  Holy  Madonna!  "  and  he  poured  out  a

144


Colomba

string  of  imprecations,  numberless,  endless,  and  most
of  them  quite  untranslatable.

"  What  can  be  the  matter? "  inquired  Colomba.
They  all  drew  near  to  the  horse,  and  at  the  sight  of  the
creature's  bleeding  head  and  split  ear  there  was  a  general
outcry  of  surprise  and  indignation.  My  readers  must
know  that  among  the  Corsicans  to  mutilate  an  enemy's
horse  is  at  once  a  vengeance,  a  challenge,  and  a  mortal
threat.  "  Nothing  but  a  bullet-wound  can  expiate  such
a  crime."

Though  Orso,  having  lived  so  long  on  the  main-
land, was  not  so  sensitive  as  other  Corsicans  to  the
enormity  of  the  insult,  still,  if  any  supporter  of  the
Barricini  had  appeared  in  his  sight  at  that  moment,  he
would  probably  have  taken  instant  vengeance  on  him
for  the  outrage  he  ascribed  to  his  enemies.

"  The  cowardly  wretches!  "  he  cried.  "  To  avenge
themselves  on  a  poor  brute,  when  they  dare  not  meet
me  face  to  face!  "

"  What  are  we  waiting  for?  "  exclaimed  Colomba
vehemently.  "They  come  here  and  brave  us!  they
mutilate  our  horses!  and  we  are  not  to  make  any  re-
sponse?    Are  you  men?  "

"Vengeance!"  shouted  the  herdsmen.  "Let  us
lead  the  horse  through  the  village,  and  attack  their
house!  "

"  There's  a  thatched  barn  that  touches  their
Tower,"  said  old  Polo  Griff o;  "  I'd  set  fire  to  it  in  a
trice."

Another  man  wanted  to  fetch  the  ladders  out  of  the
145


Colomba

church  steeple.  A  third  proposed  they  should  break  in
the  doors  of  the  house  with  a  heavy  beam  intended  for
some  house  in  course  of  building,  which  had  been  left
lying  in  the  square.  Amid  all  the  angry  voices  Co-
lomba was  heard  telling  her  satellites  that  before  they
went  to  work  she  would  give  each  man  of  them  a  large
glass  of  anisette.

Unluckily,  or  rather  luckily,  the  impression  she  had
expected  to  produce  by  her  own  cruel  treatment  of  the
poor  horse  was  largely  lost  on  Orso.  He  felt  no  doubt
that  the  savage  mutilation  was  due  to  one  of  his  foes,
and  he  specially  suspected  Orlanduccio;  but  he  did  not
believe  that  the  young  man,  whom  he  himself  had  pro-
voked and  struck,  had  wiped  out  his  shame  by  slitting
a  horse's  ear.  On  the  contrary,  this  mean  and  ridicu-
lous piece  of  vengeance  had  increased  Orso's  scorn  for
his  opponents,  and  he  now  felt,  with  the  prefect,  that
such  people  were  not  worthy  to  try  conclusions  with
himself.  As  soon  as  he  was  able  to  make  himself  heard,
he  informed  his  astonished  partisans  that  they  would
have  to  relinquish  all  their  bellicose  intentions,  and  that
the  power  of  the  law.  which  would  shortly  be  on  the
spot,  would  amply  suffice  to  avenge  the  hurt  done  to  a
horse's  ear.

"I'm  master  here!"  he  added  sternly;  "and  I  in-
sist on  being  obeyed.  The  first  man  who  dares  to  say
anything  more  about  killing  or  burning,  will  quite  pos-
sibly get  a  scorching  at  my  hands!  Be  off!  Saddle
me  the  gray  horse!  "

"  What's  this,  Orso?  "  said  Colomba,  drawing  him
146


Colomba

apart.  "  You  allow  these  people  to  insult  us?  No
Barricini  would  have  dared  to  mutilate  any  beast  of
ours  in  my  father's  time."

"  I  promise  you  they  shall  have  reason  to  repent  it.
But  it  is  gendarme's  and  jailer's  work  to  punish
wretches  who  only  venture  to  raise  their  hands  against
brute  beasts.  I've  told  you  already,  the  law  will  punish
them;  and  if  not,  you  will  not  need  to  remind  me  whose
son  I  am."

"  Patience!  "  answered  Colomba,  with  a  sigh.

"  Remember  this,  sister,"  continued  Orso;  "  if  I
find,  when  I  come  back,  that  any  demonstration  what-
ever has  been  made  against  the  Barricini  I  shall  never
forgive  you."  Then,  in  a  gentler  tone,  he  added,
"  Very  possibly — very  probably — I  shall  bring  the
colonel  and  his  daughter  back  with  me.  See  that  their
rooms  are  well  prepared,  and  that  the  breakfast  is  good.
In  fact,  let  us  make  our  guests  as  comfortable  as  we
can.  It's  a  very  good  thing  to  be  brave,  Colomba,  but
a  woman  must  know  how  to  manage  her  household,
as  well.  Come,  kiss  me,  and, be  good!  Here's  the
gray,  ready  saddled."

"  Orso,"  said  Colomba,  "  you  mustn't  go  alone."

"  I  don't  need  anybody,"  replied  Orso;  "  and  I'll
promise  you  nobody  shall  slit  my  ear."

"  Oh,  I'll  never  consent  to  your  going  alone,  while
there  is  a  feud.  Here!  Polo  GrifTo!  Gian'  Franco!
Memmo!  take  your  guns;  you  must  go  with  my
brother."

After  a  somewhat  lively  argument,  Orso  had  to
147


Colomba

give  in,  and  accept  an  escort.  From  the  most  excited
of  the  herdsmen  he  chose  out  those  who  had  been  loud-
est in  their  desire  to  commence  hostihties;  then,  after
laying  fresh  injunctions  on  his  sister  and  the  men  he
was  leaving  behind,  he  started,  making  a  detour,  this
time,  so  as  to  avoid  the  Barricinis'  dwelling.

They  were  a  long  w'ay  from  Pietranera,  and  were
travelling  along  at  a  great  pace,  when,  as  they  crossed
a  streamlet  that  ran  into  a  marsh,  Polo  Griffo  noticed
several  porkers  wallowing  comfortably  in  the  mud,  in
full  enjoyment  at  once  of  the  warmth  of  the  sun  and
the  coolness  of  the  water.  Instantly  he  took  aim  at
the  biggest,  fired  at  its  head,  and  shot  it  dead.  The
dead  creature's  comrades  rose  and  fled  with  astonish-
ing swiftness,  and  though  another  herdsman  fired  at
them,  they  reached  a  thicket  and  disappeared  into  it,
safe  and  sound.

"  Idiots!  "  cried  Orso.  "  You've  been  taking  pigs
for  wild  boars!  "

''  Not  a  bit,  Ors'  Anton',"  replied  Polo  Griffo.
"  But  that  herd  belongs  to  the  lawyer,  and  I've  taught
him,  now,  to  mutilate  our  horses."

"What!  you  rascal!"  shouted  Orso,  in  a  perfect
fury.  "You  ape  the  vile  behaviour  of  our  enemies!
Be  off,  villains!  I  don't  want  you!  You're  only  fit  to
fight  with  pigs.  I  swear  to  God  that  if  you  dare  follow
me  I'll  blow  your  brains  out!  "

The  herdsmen  stared  at  each  other,  struck  quite
dumb.  Orso  spurred  his  horse,  galloped  ofif,  and  was
soon  out  of  sight.

148


Colomba

"Well,  well!  "  said  Polo  Griffo.  "  Here's  a  pretty
thing.  You  devote  yourself  to  people,  and  then  this  is
how  they  treat  you.  His  father,  the  colonel,  was  angry
with  you  long  ago,  because  you  levelled  your  gun  at  the
lawyer.  Great  idiot  you  were,  not  to  shoot.  And  now
here  is  his  son.  You  saw  what  I  did  for  him.  And  he
talks  about  cracking  my  skull,  just  as  he  would  crack
a  gourd  that  lets  the  wine  leak  out.  That's  what  people
learn  on  the  mainland,  Memmo!  "

"  Yes,  and  if  any  one  finds  out  it  was  you  who
killed  that  pig  there'll  be  a  suit  against  you,  and  Ors'
Anton'  won't  speak  to  the  judges,  nor  buy  off  the  law-
yer for  you.  Luckily  nobody  saw,  and  you  have  Saint
Nega  to  help  you  out."

After  a  hasty  conclave,  the  two  herdsmen  concluded
their  wisest  plan  was  to  throw  the  dead  pig  into  a  bog,
and  this  project  they  carefully  executed,  after  each  had
duly  carved  himself  several  slices  out  of  the  body  of  this
innocent  victim  of  the  feud  between  the  Barricini  and
the  dells  Rebbia.


149


CHAPTER    XVII

Once  rid  of  his  unruly  escort,  Orso  proceeded
calmly  on  his  way,  far  more  absorbed  by  the  prospec-
tive pleasure  of  seeing  Miss  Nevil  than  stirred  by  any
fear  of  coming  across  his  enemies.

''  The  lawsuit  I  must  bring  against  these  Barricini
villains,"  he  mused,  "  will  necessitate  my  going  down  to
Bastia.  Why  should  I  not  go  there  with  Miss  Nevil?
And  once  at  Bastia,  why  shouldn't  we  all  go  together  to
the  springs  of  Orezza?  "

Suddenly  his  childish  recollections  of  that  pic-
turesque spot  rose  up  before  him.  He  fancied  himself
on  the  verdant  lawn  that  spreads  beneath  the  ancient
chestnut-trees.  On  the  lustrous  green  sward,  studded
with  blue  flowers  like  eyes  that  smiled  upon  him,  he
saw  Miss  Lydia  seated  at  his  side.  She  had  taken  off
her  hat,  and  her  fair  hair,  softer  and  finer  than  any  silk,
shone  like  gold  in  the  sunlight  that  glinted  through
the  foliage.  Her  clear  blue  eyes  looked  to  him  bluer
than  the  sky  itself.  With  her  cheek  resting  on  one
hand,  she  was  listening  thoughtfully  to  the  words  of
love  he  poured  tremblingly  into  her  ear.  She  wore  the
muslin  gown  in  which  she  had  been  dressed  that  last
day  at  Ajaccio.     From  beneath  its  folds  peeped  out  a

150


Colomba

tiny  foot,  shod  with  black  satin.  Orso  told  himself  that
he  would  be  happy  indeed  if  he  might  dare  to  kiss  that
little  foot — but  one  of  ]\Iiss  Lydia's  hands  was  bare  and
held  a  daisy.  He  took  the  daisy  from  her,  and  Lydia's
hand  pressed  his,  and  then  he  kissed  the  daisy,  and  then
he  kissed  her  hand,  and  yet  she  did  not  chide  him.  .  .  .
and  all  these  thoughts  prevented  him  from  paying  any
attention  to  the  road  he  was  travelling,  and  meanwhile
he  trotted  steadily  onward.  For  the  second  time,  in
his  fancy,  he  was  about  to  kiss  ]\Iiss  Nevil's  snow-white
hand,  when,  as  his  horse  stopped  short,  he  very  nearly
kissed  its  head,  in  stern  reality.  Little  Chilina  had
barred  his  way,  and  seized  his  bridle.

'*  Where  are  you  going  to,  Ors'  Anton'?  "  she  said.
"  Don't  you  know  your  enemy  is  close  by?  "

"  i\Iy  enemy!  "  cried  Orso,  furious  at  bemg  in-
terrupted at  such  a  delightful  moment.  "  \Miere  is
he?"

"  Orlanduccio  is  close  by,  he's  waiting  for  you!
Go  back,  go  back!  "

"Ho!  ho!  So  he's  waiting  for  me!  Did  you  see
him?"

"Yes,  Ors'  Anton'!  I  was  lying  down  in  the
heather  when  he  passed  by.  He  was  looking  round
everywhere  through  his  glass."

"  And  which  way  did  he  go?  "

"  He  went  down  there.  Just  where  you  were
going!"

"Thank  you!"

"  Ors'  Anton',  hadn't  you  better  wait  for  my  uncle?
Vol.  6  ^5^  T


Colomba

He  must  be  here  soon — and  with  him  you  would  be
safe."

"  Don't  be  frightened,  Chih.  I  don't  need  your
uncle."

"  If  you  would  let  me,  I  would  go  in  front  of  you."

"  No,  thanks!    no,  thanks!  "

And  Orso,  spurring  his  horse,  rode  rapidly  in  the
direction  to  which  the  little  girl  had  pointed.

His  first  impulse  had  been  one  of  blind  fury,  and  he
had  told  himself  that  fortune  was  offering  him  an  ex-
cellent opportunity  of  punishing  the  coward  who  had
avenged  the  blow  he  had  received  by  mutilating  a
horse.  But  as  he  moved  onward  the  thought  of  his
promise  to  the  prefect,  and,  above  all,  his  fear  of  miss-
ing ]\Iiss  Nevil's  visit,  altered  his  feelings,  and  made
him  almost  wish  he  might  not  come  upon  Orlanduccio.
Soon,  however,  the  memory  of  his  father,  the  indignity
offered  to  his  own  horse,  and  the  threats  of  the  Barri-
cini,  stirred  his  rage  afresh,  and  incited  him  to  seek
his  foe,  and  to  provoke  and  force  him  to  a  fight.  Thus
tossed  by  conflicting  feelings,  he  continued  his  prog-
ress, though  now  he  carefully  scrutinized  every  thicket
and  hedge,  and  sometimes  even  pulled  up  his  horse
to  listen  to  the  vague  sounds  to  be  heard  in  any  open
country.  Ten  minutes  after  he  had  left  little  Chilina
(it  was  then  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning)  he
found  himself  on  the  edge  of  an  exceedingly  steep  de-
clivity. The  road,  or  rather  the  very  slight  path,  which
he  was  following,  ran  through  a  inaquis  that  had  been
lately  burned.     The  ground  was  covered  with  whitish

152


Colomba

ashes,  and  here  and  there  some  shrubs,  and  a  few  big
trees,  blackened  by  the  flames,  and  entirely  stripped  of
their  leaves,  still  stood  erect — though  life  had  long
since  departed  out  of  them.  The  sight  of  a  burned
rnaquis  is  enough  to  make  a  man  fancy  he  has  been
transported  into  midwinter  in  some  northern  clime,
and  the  contrast  between  the  barrenness  of  the  ground
over  which  the  flames  have  passed,  with  the  luxuriant
vegetation  round  about  it,  heightens  this  appearance
of  sadness  and  desolation.  But  at  that  moment  the
only  thing  that  struck  Orso  in  this  particular  landscape
was  one  point — an  important  one,  it  is  true,  in  his  pres-
ent circumstances.  The  bareness  of  the  ground  ren-
dered any  kind  of  ambush  impossible,  and  the  man
who  has  reason  to  fear  that  at  any  moment  he  may  see
a  gun-barrel  thrust  out  of  a  thicket  straight  at  his  own
chest,  looks  on  a  stretch  of  smooth  ground,  with  noth-
ing on  it  to  intercept  his  view,  as  a  kind  of  oasis.  After
this  burned  rnaquis  came  a  number  of  cultivated  fields,
inclosed,  according  to  the  fashion  of  that  country,  with
breast-high  walls,  built  of  dry  stones.  The  path  ran
between  these  fields,  wdiich  were  irregularly  dotted  with
huge  chestnut-trees,  producing,  from  a  distance,  the
efifect  of  a  thick  wood.

The  steepness  of  the  declivity  made  it  necessary  for
Orso  to  dismount.  He  was  walking  quickly  down  the
hill,  which  was  slippery  with  ashes  (he  had  thrown  the
bridle  on  his  horse's  neck),  and  was  hardly  five-and-
twenty  paces  from  one  of  these  stone  fences,  when,  just
in  front  of  him,  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  road,  he

153


Colomba

perceived  first  of  all  the  barrel  of  a  gun,  and  then  a
head,  rising  over  the  top  of  the  wall.  The  gun  was
levelled,  and  he  recognised  Orlanduccio,  just  ready  to
fire.  Orso  swiftly  prepared  for  self-defence,  and  the
two  men,  taking  deliberate  aim,  stared  at  each  other
for  several  seconds,  with  that  thrill  of  emotion  which
the  bravest  must  feel  w^hen  he  knows  he  must  either
deal  death  or  endure  it.

"Vile  coward!"  shouted  Orso.

The  words  were  hardly  out  of  his  mouth  when  he
saw  the  flash  of  Orlanduccio's  gun,  and  almost  at  the
same  instant  a  second  shot  rang  out  on  his  left  from
the  other  side  of  the  path,  fired  by  a  man  whom  he  had
not  noticed,  and  who  was  aiming  at  him  from  behind  an-
other wall.  Both  bullets  struck  him.  The  first,  Or-
landuccio's, passed  through  his  left  arm,  which  Orso
had  turned  toward  him  as  he  aimed.  The  second  shot
struck  him  in  the  chest,  and  tore  his  coat,  but  coming  in
contact  with  the  blade  of  his  dagger,  it  luckily  flattened
against  it,  and  only  inflicted  a  trifling  bruise.  Orso's
left  arm  fell  helpless  at  his  side,  and  the  barrel  of  his
gun  dropped  for  a  moment,  but  he  raised  it  at  once,  and
aiming  his  weapon  with  his  right  hand  only,  he  fired
at  Orlanduccio.  His  enemy's  head,  which  was  only
exposed  to  the  level  of  the  eyes,  disappeared  behind
the  wall.  Then  Orso,  swinging  round  to  the  left,  fired
the  second  barrel  at  a  man  in  a  cloud  of  smoke  whom
he  could  hardly  see.  This  face  likewise  disappeared.
The  four  shots  had  followed  each  other  with  incredible
swiftness;  no  trained  soldiers  ever  fired  their  volleys  in

154  •


Colomba

quicker  succession.  After  Orso's  last  shot  a  great
silence  fell.  The  smoke  from  his  weapon  rose  slowly
up  into  the  sky.  There  was  not  a  movement,  not  the
slightest  sound  from  behind  the  wall.  But  for  the  pain
in  his  arm,  he  could  have  fancied  the  men  on  whom  he
had  just  fired  had  been  phantoms  of  his  own  imagina-
tion.

Fully  expecting  a  second  volley,  Orso  moved  a  few
steps,  to  place  himself  behind  one  of  the  burned  trees
that  still  stood  upright  in  the  maquis.  Thus  sheltered,
he  put  his  gun  between  his  knees,  and  hurriedly  re-
loaded it.  Meanwhile  his  left  arm  began  to  hurt  him
horribly,  and  felt  as  if  it  were  being  dragged  down  by  a
huge  weight.

What  had  become  of  his  adversaries?  He  could
not  understand.  If  they  had  taken  to  flight,  if  they
had  been  wounded,  he  would  certainly  have  heard  some
noise,  some  stir  among  the  leaves.  Were  they  dead,
then?  Or,  what  was  far  more  likely,  were  they  not  wait-
ing behind  their  wall  for  a  chance  of  shooting  at  him
again?  In  his  uncertainty,  and  feeling  his  strength
fast  failing  him,  he  knelt  down  on  his  right  knee,  rested
his  wounded  arm  upon  the  other,  and  took  advantage
of  a  branch  that  protruded  from  the  trunk  of  the  burned
tree  to  support  his  gun.  With  his  finger  on  the  trig-
ger, his  eye  fixed  on  the  wall,  and  his  ear  strained  to
catch  the  slightest  sound,  he  knelt  there,  motionless,
for  several  minutes,  which  seemed  to  him  a  century.
At  last,  behind  him,  in  the  far  distance,  he  heard  a  faint
shout,  and  very  soon  a  dog  flew  like  an  arrow  down  the

155


Colomba

slope,  and  stopped  short,  close  to  him,  wagging  its  tail.
It  was  Brusco,  the  comrade  and  follower  of  the  bandits
— the  herald,  doubtless,  of  his  master's  approach.
Never  was  any  honest  man  more  impatiently  awaited.
With  his  muzzle  in  the  air,  and  turned  toward  the  near-
est fence,  the  dog  snififed  anxiously.  Suddenly  he  gave
vent  to  a  low  growl,  sprang  at  a  bound  over  the  wall,  and
almost  instantly  reappeared  upon  its  crest,  whence  he
gazed  steadily  at  Orso  with  eyes  that  spoke  surprise  as
clearly  as  a  dog's  may  do  it.  Then  he  sniffed  again,  this
time  toward  the  other  inclosure,  the  wall  of  which  he
also  crossed.  Within  a  second  he  was  back  on  the  top  of
that,  with  the  same  air  of  astonishment  and  alarm,  and
straightway  he  bounded  into  the  thicket  with  his  tail
between  his  legs,  still  gazing  at  Orso,  and  retiring
from  him  slowly,  and  sideways,  until  he  had  put  some
distance  between  them.  Then  ofT  he  started  again,
tearing  up  the  slope  almost  as  fast  as  he  had  come
down  it,  to  meet  a  man,  who,  in  spite  of  its  steepness,
was  rapidly  descending.

"  Help,  Brando!  "  shouted  Orso,  as  soon  as  he
thought  he  was  within  hearing.

"Hallo!  Ors' Anton'!  are  you  wounded?  "  inquired
Brandolaccio,  as  he  ran  up  panting.  "  Is  it  in  your
body  or  your  limbs?  "

"  In  the  arm."

"  The  arm — oh,  that's  nothing!  And  the  other  fel-
low? "

"  I  think  I  hit  him."

Brandolaccio  ran  after  his  dog  to  the  nearest  field
156


Colomba

and  leaned  over  to  look  at  the  other  side  of  the  wall,
then  pulling  off  his  cap —

"  Signor  Orlanduccio,  I  salute  you!  "  said  he,
then  turning  toward  Orso,  he  bowed  to  him,  also,
gravely.

"  That,"  he  remarked,  "  is  what  I  call  a  man  who
has  been  properly  done  for."

"  Is  he  still  alive?  "  asked  Orsd,  who  could  hardly
breathe.

"  Oh!  he  wouldn't  wish  it!  he'd  be  too  much  vexed
about  the  bullet  you  put  into  his  eye!  Holy  Madonna!
What  a  hole!  That's  a  good  gun,  upon  my  soul!  what
a  weight!  That  spatters  a  man's  brains  for  you!
Hark  ye,  Ors'  Anton'!  when  I  heard  the  first  piif,  piff,
says  I  to  myself:  '  Dash  it,  they're  murdering  my  lieu-
tenant! '  Then  I  heard  bourn,  bourn.  'Ha,  ha!'  says
I,  '  that's  the  English  gun  beginning  to  talk — he's  fir-
ing back.'  But  what  on  earth  do  you  want  with  me,
Brusco?  "

The  dog  guided  him  to  the  other  field.

"  Upon  my  word,"  cried  Brandolaccio,  utterly  as-
tonished, ''a  right  and  left,  that's  what  it  is!  Deuce
take  it!  Clear  enough,  powder  must  be  dear,  for  you
don't  waste  it!  "

"  What  do  you  mean,  for  God's  sake? "  asked
Orso.

"  Come,  sir,  don't  try  to  humbug  me;  you  bring
down  the  game,  and  then  you  want  somebody  to  pick
it  up  for  you.  Well!  there's  one  man  who'll  have
a  queer  dessert  to-day,  and  that's  Lawyer  Barricini! —

157


Colomba

yon  want  butcher's  meat,  do  you?  WeW,  here  you  have
it.    Now,  who  the  devil  will  be  the  heir?  "

"  What!  is  Vincentello  dead  too?  "

"  Dead  as  mutton.  Salute  a  noil  *  The  good  point
about  you  is  that  you  don't  let  them  suffer.  Just  come
over  and  look  at  Vincentello;  he's  kneeling  here  with
his  head  against  the  wall,  as  if  he  were  asleep.  You
may  say  he  sleeps  like  lead,  this  time,  poor  devil."

Orso  turned  away  his  head  in  horror.

"  Are  you  certain  lie's  dead?  "

"  You're  like  Sampiero  Corso,  who  never  had  to
fire  more  than  once.  Look  at  it  there,  in  his  chest,  on
the  left — just  where  Vincileone  was  hit  at  Waterloo.
I'll  wager  that  bullet  isn't  far  from  his  heart — a  right
and  left!  Ah!  I'll  never  talk  about  shooting  again.  Two
with  two  shots,  and  bullets  at  that!  The  two  brothers!
If  he'd  had  a  third  shot  he'd  have  killed  their  papa.
Better  luck  next  time.  What  a  shot!  Ors'  Anton'!
And  to  think  that  an  honest  poor  chap  like  me  will
never  get  the  chance  of  a  right  and  left  at  two  gen-
darmes! "

As  he  talked  the  bandit  was  scanning  Orso's  arm,
and  splitting  up  his  sleeve  with  his  dagger,

*'  This  is  nothing,"  said  he.  "  But  this  coat  of
yours  will  give  Signorina  Colomba  work  to  do.  Ha!
what's  this  I  see?  this  gash  upon  your  chest?  Nothing
went  in  there,  surely?  No!  you  wouldn't  be  so  brisk
as  you  are!     Come,  try  to  move  your  finger.     Do  you

*  An  exclamation  generally  used  after  the  word  "death"  and  which
is  supposed  to  serve  as  its  corrective.

158


Colomba

feel  my  teeth  when  I  bite  your  Httle  finger?  Not  very
well?  Never  mind!  it  won't  be  much.  Let  me  take
your  handkerchief  and  your  neckcloth.  Well,  your
coat's  spoilt,  anyhow!  What  the  devil  did  you  make
yourself  so  smart  for?  Were  you  going  to  a  wedding?
There !  drink  a  drop  of  wine.  \Miy  on  earth  don't  you
carry  a  flask?  Does  any  Corsican  ever  go  out  without
a  flask?  "

Then  again  he  broke  off  the  dressing  of  the  wound
to  exclaim:

"A  right  and  left!  Both  of  them  stone  dead!
How  the  Padre  will  laugh!  A  right  and  left!  Oh,  here's
that  little  dawdle  Chilina  at  last!  "

Orso  made  no  reply — he  was  as  pale  as  death  and
shaking  in  every  limb.

"Chili!"  shouted  Brandolaccio,  "go  and  look  be-
hind that  wall!  "

The  child,  using  both  hands  and  feet,  scrambled
onto  the  wall,  and  the  moment  she  caught  sight  of  Or-
landuccio's  corpse  she  crossed  herself.

"  That's  nothing,"  proceeded  the  bandit;  "  go  and
look  farther  on,  over  there!  "

The  child  crossed  herself  again,

"Was  it  you,  uncle?"  she  asked  timidly.

"  Me!  Don't  you  know  I've  turned  into  a  useless
old  fellow!  This.  Chili,  is  the  signor's  work;  offer  him
your  compliments."

"  The  signora  will  be  greatly  rejoiced."  said  Chi-
lina. "  and  she  will  be  very  much  grieved  to  know  you
are  wounded,  Ors'  Anton'."

»59


Colomba

"  Now  then,  Ors'  Anton'/'  said  the  bandit,  when  he
had  finished  binding  up  the  wound.  "  Chihna,  here,
has  caught  your  horse.  You  must  get  on  his  back,  and
come  with  me  to  the  Stazzona  maqiiis.  It  would  be  a
sly  fellow  who'd  lay  his  hand  on  you  there.  When
we  get  to  the  Cross  of  Santa  Christina,  you'll  have  to
dismount.  You'll  give  over  your  horse  to  Chilina,
who'll  go  off  and  warn  the  signorina.  You  can  give
her  your  messages  now,  as  you  ride  along.  You  can
say  anything  to  the  child,  Ors'  Anton'.  She  would  let
herself  be  cut  in  pieces  rather  than  betray  her  friends,"
and  then,  fondly,  he  turned  to  the  little  girl,  "  That's
it,  you  little  hussy;  a  ban  on  you,  a  curse  on  you — you
jade!"  For  Brandolaccio,  who  was  superstitious,  like
most  bandits,  feared  he  might  cast  a  spell  on  a  child  if
he  blessed  it  or  praised  it,  seeing  it  is  a  well-known  fact
that  the  mysterious  powers  that  rule  the  A)nwccliia-
tiira  *  have  a  vile  habit  of  fulfilling  our  wishes  in  the
very  opposite  sense  to  that  we  give  them.

"  Where  am  I  to  go,  Brando?  "  queried  Orso  in  a
faint  voice.

"  Faith!  you  must  choose;  either  to  jail  or  to  the
uiaqitis.  But  no  della  Rebbia  knows  the  path  that  leads
him  to  the  jail.    To  the  maquis,  Ors'  Anton'."

"Farewell,  then,  to  all  my  hopes!"  exclaimed  the
wounded  man,  sadly.

"Your  hopes?  Deuce  take  it!  Did  you  hope  to
do  any  better  with  a  double-barrelled  gun?     How  on

*  Annocchiatitra,  an   involuntary  spell   cast  either  by  the  eye  or
by  spoken  words.

1 60


Colomba

earth  did  the  fellows  contrive  to  hit  you?  The  rascals
must  have  been  as  hard  to  kill  as  cats."

"  They  fired  first,"  said  Orso.

"True,  true;  I'd  forgotten  that! — piff,  piff — bouni,
bouml  A  right  and  left,  and  only  one  hand!  *  If  any
man  can  do  better,  I'll  go  hang  myself.  Come!  now
you're  safely  mounted!  Before  we  start,  just  give  a
glance  at  your  work.  It  isn't  civil  to  leave  one's  com-
pany without  saying  good-bye."

Orso  spurred  his  horse.  He  would  not  have  looked
at  the  tw^o  poor  wretches  he  had  just  destroyed,  for  any-
thing on  earth.

"  Hark  ye,  Ors'  Anton',"  quoth  the  bandit,  as  he
caught  hold  of  the  horse's  bridle,  "  shall  I  tell  you  the
truth?  Well,  no  ofifence  to  you!  I'm  sorry  for  those
poor  young  fellows!  You'll  pardon  me,  I  hope;  so
good-looking,  so  strong,  so  young.  Orlanduccio,  I've
shot  with  him  so  often!  Only  four  days  ago  he  gave  me
a  bundle  of  cigars,  and  Vincentello — he  was  always  so
cheery.  Of  course  you've  only  done  what  you  had  to
do,  and  indeed  the  shot  was  such  a  splendid  one,  no-
body could  regret  it.  But  I,  you  see,  had  nothing  to  do
with  your  vengeance.  I  know  you're  perfectly  in  the
right.  When  one  has  an  enemy  one  must  get  rid  of
him.     But  the  Barricini  were  an  old  familv.     Here's


*  If  any  unbelieving  sportsman  is  inclined  to  doubt  the  possibil-
ity of  Signer  della  Rebbia's  right  and  left  shot,  I  would  suggest  his
betaking  himself  to  Sartena,  and  there  hearing  how  one  of  the  foremost
and  most  agreeable  residents  in  that  town  saved  himself  unaided
and  with  one  arm  broken,  in  at  least  equally  dangerous  circumstances.

"  i6i


Colomba

another  of  tiiem  wiped  out,  and  by  a  right  and  left  too!
It's  striking."

As  he  thus  spoke  his  funeral  oration  over  the  Bar-
ricini,  Brandolaccio  hastily  guided  Orso,  Chilina,  and
Brusco,  the  dog,  toward  the  Stazzona  maqiiis.


162


CHAPTER    XVIII

Meanwhile,  very  shortly  after  Orso's  departure,
Colomba's  spies  had  warned  her  that  the  Barricini  were
out  on  the  warpath,  and  from  that  moment  she  was
racked  by  the  most  intense  anxiety.  She  was  to  be
seen  moving  hither  and  thither  all  over  the  house,  be-
tween the  kitchen  and  the  rooms  that  were  being  made
ready  for  her  guests,  doing  nothing,  yet  always  busy,
and  constantly  stopping  to  look  out  of  a  window  for
any  unusual  stir  in  the  village.  Toward  eleven  o'clock,
a  somewhat  numerous  cavalcade  rode  into  Pietranera.
This  was  the  colonel,  with  his  daughter,  their  servants,
and  their  guide.  Colomba's  first  word,  as  she  wel-
comed them,  was  "  Have  you  seen  my  brother? "
Then  she  questioned  the  guide  as  to  the  road  they  had
taken,  and  the  hour  of  their  departure,  and  having
heard  his  answers,  she  could  not  understand  why  they
had  not  met  him.

"  Perhaps,"  said  the  guide,  "  your  brother  took  the
higher  path;  we  came  by  the  lower  one."

But  Colomba  only  shook  her  head  and  asked  more
questions.  In  spite  of  her  natural  firmness  of  character,
increased  as  it  was  by  her  proud  desire  to  conceal  any

163


Colomba

sign  of  weakness  before  strangers,  she  could  not  hide
her  anxiety,  and  as  soon  as  she  had  informed  them  of
the  attempted  reconciHation,  and  of  its  unfortunate
issue,  this  was  shared  by  the  colonel  and  Miss  Lydia.
Miss  Nevil  became  very  uneasy,  and  wanted  to  have
messengers  sent  off  in  every  direction,  and  her  father
offered  to  remount  at  once  and  set  out  with  the
guide  in  search  of  Orso.  Her  guests'  alarm  recalled
Colomba  to  a  sense  of  her  duties  as  a  hostess.  She
strove  to  force  a  smile  as  she  pressed  the  colonel  to
come  to  table,  and  suggested  twenty  plausible  reasons,
which  she  herself  demolished  within  an  instant,  to  ac-
count for  her  brother's  delay.  The  colonel,  feeling  it
to  be  his  duty,  as  a  man,  to  reassure  the  ladies,  put
forward  his  own  explanation.

"  I'll  wager,"  he  said,  "  that  della  Rebbia  has  come
across  some  game  or  other.  He  has  not  been  able  to
stand  out  against  that  temptation,  and  we  shall  soon
see  him  come  in  with  a  heavy  bag.  'Pon  my  soul,"  he
went  on,  "  we  did  hear  four  shots  fired  on  the  road.
Two  of  them  were  louder  than  the  others,  and  I  said
to  my  girl,  '  I'll  bet  anything  that's  della  Rebbia  out
shooting!  My  gun  is  the  only  one  that  would  make
that  noise.'  "

Colomba  turned  pale,  and  Lydia,  who  was  watching
her  closely,  had  no  difficulty  in  guessing  the  suspicions
with  which  the  colonel's  conjecture  had  inspired  her.
After  a  few  minutes'  silence,  Colomba  eagerly  inquired
whether  the  two  louder  reports  had  been  heard  before
or  after  the  others.    But  neither  the  colonel,  his  daugh-

164


Colomba

ter,  nor  the  guide  had  paid  much  attention  to  this  all-
important  detail.

Toward  one  o'clock,  as  none  of  Colomba's  messen-
gers had  yet  returned,  she  gathered  all  her  courage,
and  insisted  that  her  guests  should  sit  down  to  table
with  her.  But,  except  the  colonel,  none  of  them  could
eat.  At  the  slightest  sound  in  the  square,  Colomba
ran  to  the  window\  Then  drearily  she  returned  to
her  place,  and  struggled  yet  more  drearily  to  carry
on  a  trivial  conversation,  to  which  nobody  paid  the
slightest  attention,  and  which  was  broken  by  long  in-
tervals of  silence.  All  at  once  they  heard  a  horse's
gallop.

"Ah!  That  must  be  my  brother  at  last!"  said
Colomba,  rising  from  her  chair.  But  when  she  saw
Chilina  astride  on  Orso's  horse — "  My  brother  is  dead!  "
she  cried,  in  a  heart-rending  voice.

The  colonel  dropped  his  glass.  Miss  Lydia
screamed.  They  all  rushed  to  the  door  of  the  house.
Before  Chilina  could  jump  off  her  steed,  she  w^as
snatched  up  like  a  feather  by  Colomba,  who  held  her
so  tight  that  she  almost  choked  her.  The  child  un-
derstood her  agonized  look,  and  her  first  words  were
those  of  the  chorus  in  Othello:  "  He  lives!  "  Colom-
ba's grasp  relaxed,  and  nimbly  as  a  kitten  Chilina
dropped  upon  the  ground.

"  The  others?  "  queried  Colomba  hoarsely.  Chi-
lina crossed  herself  with  her  first  and  middle  finger.  A
deep  flush  instantly  replaced  the  deadly  pallor  of  Co-
lomba's face.     She  cast  one  fierce  look  at  the  Barricini

165


Colomba

dwelling,  and  then,  with  a  smile,  she  turned  to  her
guests.

"  Let  us  go  in  and  drink  our  coffee,"  she  said.

The  story  the  bandit's  Iris  had  to  tell  was  a  long
one.  Her  narrative,  translated  literally  into  Italian  by
Colomba,  and  then  into  English  by  Miss  Nevil,  wrung
more  than  one  oath  from  the  colonel,  more  than  one
sigh  from  the  fair  Lydia.  But  Colomba  heard  it  all
unmoved.  Only  she  twisted  her  damask  napkin  till  it
seemed  as  if  she  must  tear  it  in  pieces.  She  inter-
rupted the  child,  five  or  six  times  over,  to  make  her
repeat  again  that  Brandolaccio  had  said  the  wound  was
not  dangerous,  and  that  he  had  seen  many  worse.
When  she  had  finished  her  tale,  Chilina  announced
that  Orso  earnestly  begged  he  might  be  sent  writing
materials,  and  that  he  desired  his  sister  would  beseech
a  lady  who  might  be  staying  in  his  house  not  to  depart
from  it,  until  she  had  received  a  letter  from  him.

"  That  is  what  was  worrying  him  most,"  the  child
added;  "  and  even  after  I  had  started  he  called  me  back,
to  bid  me  not  forget  the  message.  It  was  the  third
time  he  had  given  it  to  me."  When  Colomba  heard
of  her  brother's  injunction  she  smiled  faintly,  and
squeezed  the  fair  Englishwoman's  hand.  That  young
lady  burst  into  tears,  and  did  not  seem  to  think  it  ad-
visable to  translate  that  particular  part  of  the  story  to
her  father.

"  Yes,  my  dear,"  cried  Colomba,  kissing  Miss
Nevil.  "  You  shall  stay  with  me,  and  you  shall  help  us."

Then,  taking  a  pile  of  old  linen  out  of  a  cupboard,
1 66


Colomba

she  began  to  cut  it  up,  to  make  lint  and  bandages.
Any  one  who  saw  her  flashing  eyes,  her  heightened
colour,  her  alternate  fits  of  anxiety  and  composure,
would  have  found  it  hard  to  say  whether  distress  at  her
brother's  wound,  or  delight  at  the  extinction  of  her
foes,  were  most  afifecting  her.  One  moment  she  was
pouring  out  the  colonel's  coffee,  and  telling  him  how
well  she  made  it,  the  next  she  was  setting  Miss  Lydia
and  Chilina  to  work,  exhorting  them  to  sew  bandages,
and  roll  them  up.  Then,  for  the  twentieth  time,  she
would  ask  whether  Orso's  wound  was  very  painful.  She
constantly  broke  ofif  her  own  work  to  exclaim  to  the
colonel :

"  Tw^o  such  cunning  men,  such  dangerous  fellows!
and  he  alone,  wounded,  with  only  one  arm!  He  killed
the  two  of  them!  What  courage,  colonel!  Isn't  he  a
hero?  Ah,  Miss  Nevil!  how  good  it  must  be  to  live  in
a  peaceful  country  like  yours!  I'm  sure  you  did  not
really  know  my  brother  till  now!  I  said  it — '  The  falcon
will  spread  his  wings!  '  You  were  deceived  by  his  gen-
tle look!    That's  because  with  you,  Miss  Nevil Ah!

if  he  could  see  you  working  for  him  now!  My  poor
Orso!"

Miss  Lydia  was  doing  hardly  any  work,  and  could
not  find  a  single  word  to  say.  Her  father  kept  asking
why  nobody  went  to  lay  a  complaint  before  a  magis-
trate. He  talked  about  a  coroner's  inquest,  and  all  sorts
of  other  proceedings  quite  unknown  to  Corsican  econ-
omy. And  then  he  begged  to  be  told  whether  the
country  house  owned  by  that  worthy  Signer  Brando-

Vol.  6  ^  M


Colomba

laccio,  who  had  brought  succour  to  the  wounded  man,
was  very  far  away  from  Pietrancra,  and  whether  he
could  not  go  there  himself,  to  see  his  friend.

And  Colomba  replied,  with  her  usual  composure,
that  Orso  was  in  the  nidqiiis;  that  he  was  being  taken
care  of  by  a  bandit;  that  it  would  be  a  great  risk  for
Iiim  to  show  himself  until  he  was  sure  of  the  line  the
prefect  and  the  judges  were  likely  to  take;  and,  finally,
that  she  would  manage  to  have  him  secretly  attended
by  a  skilful  surgeon.

"  Above  all  things,  colonel,"  she  added,  "  remember
that  you  heard  the  four  shots,  and  that  you  told  me
Orso  fired  last."

The  colonel  could  make  neither  head  nor  tail  of  the
business,  and  his  daughter  did  nothing  but  heave  sighs
and  dry  her  eyes.

The  day  was  far  advanced,  when  a  gloomy  proces-
sion wended  its  way  into  the  village.  The  bodies  of
his  two  sons  were  brought  home  to  Lawyer  Barricini,
each  corpse  thrown  across  a  mule,  which  was  led  by  a
peasant.  A  crowd  of  dependents  and  idlers  followed
the  dreary  cortege.  With  it  appeared  the  gendarmes,
who  always  came  in  too  late,  and  the  deputy-mayor,
throwing  up  his  hands,  and  incessantly  repeating,
"What  will  the  Signor  Prefetto  say!"  Some  of  the
women,  among  them  Orlanduccio's  foster-mother,
were  tearing  their  hair  and  shrieking  wildly.  But  their
clamorous  grief  was  less  impressive  than  the  dumb  de-
spair of  one  man,  on  whom  all  eyes  were  fixed.  This
was  the  wretched  father,  who  passed  from  one  corpse

i68


Colomba

to  the  other,  hfting  up  the  earth-soiled  heads,  kissing
tlie  blackened  lips,  supporting  the  limbs  that  were  stitl
already,  as  if  he  would  save  them  from  the  jolting  of  the
road.  Now  and  then  he  opened  his  mouth  as  though
about  to  speak,  but  not  a  cry  came,  not  a  word.  His
eyes  never  left  the  dead  bodies,  and  as  he  walked,  he
knocked  himself  against  the  stones,  against  the  trees,
against  every  obstacle  that  chanced  to  lie  in  his  path.

The  women's  lamentations  grew  louder,  and  the
men's  curses  deeper,  when  Orso's  house  appeared  in
sight.  When  some  shepherds  of  the  della  Rebbia
party  ventured  on  a  triumphant  shout,  their  enemy's
indignation  became  ungovernable.  "  Vengeance!
Vengeance!  "  exclaimed  several  voices.  Stones  were
thrown,  and  two  shots,  fired  at  the  windows  of  the
room  in  which  Colomba  and  her  guests  were  sitting,
pierced  the  outside  shutters,  and  carried  splinters  of
wood  on  to  the  table  at  which  the  two  ladies  were  work-
ing. Miss  Lydia  screamed  violently,  the  colonel
snatched  up  a  gun,  and  Colomba,  before  he  could
stop  her,  rushed  to  the  door  of  the  house  and  threw
it  violently  open.  There,  standing  high  on  the
threshold,  with  her  two  hands  outstretched  to  curse
her  enemies:

"  Cowards!  "  she  cried.  "  You  fire  on  women  and
on  foreigners!  Are  you  Corsicans?  Are  you  men?
W'retches,  who  can  only  murder  a  man  from  behind.
Come  on!  I  defy  you!  I  am  alone!  My  brother  is
faraway!  Come!  kill  me,  kill  my  guests!  It  would  be
worthy  of  you!  .  .  .  But  you  dare  not,  cowards  that

169


Colomba

you  are!  You  know  we  avenge  our  wrongs!  Away
with  you!  Go,  weep  like  women,  and  be  thankful  we
do  not  ask  you  for  more  blood!  "

There  was  something  terrible  and  imposing  in  Co-
lomba's  voice  and  mien.  At  the  sight  of  her  the  crowd
recoiled  as  though  it  beheld  one  of  those  evil  fairies
of  which  so  many  tales  are  told  on  long  winter  evenings,
in  Corsica.  The  deputy-mayor,  the  gendarmes,  and  a
few  women  seized  the  opportunity,  and  threw  them-
selves between  the  two  factions;  for  the  della  Rebbia
herdsmen  were  already  loading  their  guns,  and  for  a
moment  a  general  fight  in  the  middle  of  the  square
had  appeared  imminent.  But  the  two  parties  were  both
leaderless,  and  Corsicans,  whose  rage  is  always  subject
to  discipline,  seldom  come  to  blows  unless  the  chief
authors  of  their  internecine  cjuarrels  are  present.  Be-
sides, Colomba,  who  had  learned  prudence  from  vic-
tory, restrained  her  little  garrison.

"  Let  the  poor  folks  weep  in  peace."  she  said.
"  Let  the  old  man  carry  his  own  flesh  home.  What
is  the  good  of  killing  an  old  fox  who  has  no  teeth  left
to  bite  with,  .  .  .  Giudice  Barricini!  Remember  the
2d  of  August!  Remember  the  blood-stained  pocket-
book  in  which  you  wrote  with  your  forger's  hand!  My
father  had  written  down  your  debt!  Your  sons  have
paid  it.    You  may  go  free,  old  Barricini!  "

^^"ith  folded  arms  and  a  scornful  smile  upon  her
lips,  Colomba  watched  the  bearers  carry  the  corpses
of  her  enemies  into  their  home,  and  the  crowd  with-
out it  melt  gradually  away.     Then  she  closed  her  own

170


1


Colomba

door,  and,  going  back  into  the  dining-room,  she  said
to  the  colonel:

"  I  beg,  sir,  you  will  forgive  my  fellow-countrymen!
I  never  could  have  believed  that  any  Corsican  would
have  fired  on  a  house  that  sheltered  strangers,  and  I  am
ashamed  of  my  country."

That  night,  when  j\Iiss  Lydia  had  gone  up  to
her  room,  the  colonel  followed  her,  and  inquired
whether  they  had  not  better  get  out  of  a  village  where
they  ran  incessant  risk  of  having  a  bullet  through
their  heads,  the  very  next  morning,  and  leave  this  coun-
try, seething  with  treachery  and  murder,  as  soon  as
possible.

Miss  Nevil  did  not  answer  for  some  time,  and  her
father's  suggestion  evidently  caused  her  considerable
perplexity.     At  last  she  said:

"  How  can  we  leave  this  poor  young  creature,  just
when  she  is  so  much  in  need  of  consolation?  Don't
you  think  that  would  be  cruel,  father?  "

"  I  only  spoke  on  your  account,  child,"  said  the
colonel.  "  And  I  assure  you  that  if  I  once  felt  you
were  safe  in  the  hotel  at  Ajaccio,  I  should  be  very  sorry
to  leave  this  cursed  island  myself,  without  shaking  that
plucky  fellow  della  Rebbia's  hand  again."

"  Well  then,  father,  let  us  wait  a  while,  and  before
we  start  let  us  make  quite  sure  we  can  not  be  of  any  use
to  them."

"  Kind  soul!  "  said  the  colonel,  as  he  kissed  his
daughter's  forehead.  "  It  is  a  pleasure  to  see  you  sacri-
fice yourself  for  the  sake  of  softening  other  people's

171


Colomba

suffering.  Let  us  stay  on.  We  shall  never  have  to
repent  having  done  right."

Miss  Lydia  tossed  sleeplessly  to  and  fro  in  her  bed.
Sometimes  she  took  the  vague  night  sounds  for  prepa-
rations for  an  attack  on  the  house.  Sometimes,  less
alarmed  on  her  own  account,  she  thought  of  poor,
wounded  Orso,  who  was  probably  lying  on  the  cold
earth,  with  no  help  beyond  what  he  might  expect  from
a  bandit's  charity.  She  fancied  him  covered  with
blood,  and  writhing  in  hideous  suffering;  and  the  ex-
traordinary thing  was  that  whenever  Orso's  image  rose
up  before  her  mind's  eye,  she  always  beheld  him  as  she
had  seen  him  when  he  rode  away,  pressing  the  talis-
man she  had  bestowed  upon  him  to  his  lips.  Then  she
mused  over  his  courage.  She  told  herself  he  had  ex-
posed himself  to  the  frightful  danger  he  had  just  es-
caped on  her  account,  just  for  the  sake  of  seeing  her
a  little  sooner.  A  very  little  more,  and  she  would  have
persuaded  herself  that  Orso  had  earned  his  broken  arm
in  her  defence!  She  reproached  herself  with  being  the
cause  of  his  wound.  But  she  admired  him  for  it  all
the  more,  and  if  that  celebrated  right  and  left  was  not
so  splendid  a  feat  in  her  sight  as  in  Brandolaccio's  or
Colomba's,  still  she  was  convinced  few  lieroes  of  ro-
mance could  ever  have  behaved  with  such  intrepidity
and  coolness,  in  so  dangerous  a  pinch.

Her  room  was  that  usually  occui)ied  by  Colomba.
Above  a  kind  of  oaken  pric-dieu,  and  beside  a  sprig  of
blessed  palm,  a  little  miniature  of  Orso,  in  his  sub-lieu-
tenant's uniform,  hung  on  the  wall.     Miss  Nevil  took

172


Colomba

the  portrait  down,  looked  at  it  for  a  long  time,  and
laid  it  at  last  on  the  table  by  her  bed,  instead  of  hang-
ing it  up  again  in  its  place.  She  did  not  fall  asleep  till
daybreak,  and  when  she  woke  the  sun  had  travelled
high  above  the  horizon.  In  front  of  her  bed  she  be-
held Colomba,  waiting,  motionless,  till  she  should  open
her  eyes.

"  Well,  dear  lady,  are  you  not  very  uncomfortable
in  this  poor  house  of  ours?  "  said  Colomba  to  her.  "  I
fear  you  have  hardly  slept  at  all."

"  Have  you  any  news,  dear  friend?  "  cried  ]\Iiss
Nevil,  sitting  up  in  bed.

Her  eye  fell  on  Orso's  picture,  and  she  hastily
tossed  her  handkerchief  upon  it.

"  Yes,  I  have  news,"  said  Colomba,  with  a  smile.

Then  she  took  up  the  picture.

"  Do  you  think  it  like  him?  He  is  better  looking
than  that!  "

"  Really,"  stammered  Miss  Nevil,  quite  confused,
"  I  took  down  that  picture  in  a  fit  of  absence!  I  have
a  horrid  habit  of  touching  everything  and  never  put-
ting anything  back!    How  is  your  brother?  "

"  Fairly  well.  Giocanto  came  here  before  four
o'clock  this  morning.  He  brought  me  a  letter  for  you,
Miss  Lydia.  Orso  hasn't  written  anything  to  me!  It
is  addressed  to  Colomba,  indeed,  but  underneath  that
he  has  written  '  For  Miss  N.'  But  sisters  are  never
jealous!  Giocanto  says  it  hurt  him  dreadfully  to  write.
Giocanto,  who  writes  a  splendid  hand,  ofifered  to  do  it
at  his  dictation.     But  he  would  not  let  him.     He  wrote

173


Colomba

it  with  a  pencil,  lying  on  his  back.  Brandolaccio  held
the  paper  for  him.  My  brother  kept  trying  to  raise
himself,  and  then  the  very  slightest  movement  gave  him
the  most  dreadful  agony  in  his  arm.  Giocanto  says  it
was  pitiful.     Here  is  his  letter."

Miss  Nevil  read  the  letter,  which,  as  an  extra  pre-
caution, no  doubt,  was  written  in  English.  Its  con-
tents were  as  follows:

"  Mademoiselle:  An  unhappy  fate  has  driven  me
on.  I  know  not  wdiat  my  enemies  will  say,  what  slan-
ders they  will  invent.  I  care  little,  so  long  as  you,
mademoiselle,  give  them  no  credence!  Ever  since  I
first  saw  you  I  have  been  nursing  wild  dreams.  I
needed  this  catastrophe  to  show  me  my  own  folly.

"  I  have  come  back  to  my  senses  now.  I  know
the  future  that  lies  before  me,  and  I  shall  face  it  with
resignation.  I  dare  not  keep  this  ring  you  gave  me,
and  which  I  believed  to  be  a  lucky  talisman.  I  fear,
Miss  Nevil,  you  may  regret  your  gift  has  been  so  ill-
bestowed.  Or  rather,  I  fear  it  may  remind  me  of  the
days  of  my  own  madness.  Colomba  will  give  it  to  you.
Farew^ell,  mademoiselle!  You  are  about  to  leave  Cor-
sica, and  I  shall  never  see  you  again.  But  tell  my  sis-
ter, at  least,  that  I  still  possess  your  esteem — and  I  tell
you,  confidently,  that  I  am  still  worthy  of  it.

"  O.  D.  R."

Miss  Lydia  had  turned  away  while  she  read  the  let-
ter, and  Colomba,  who  was  w-atching  her  closely,  gave

174


Colomba

her  tlie  Egyptian  ring,  with  an  inquiring  glance  as  to
what  it  all  meant.  But  Miss  Lydia  dared  not  raise  her
head,  and  looked  dejectedly  at  the  ring,  alternately  put-
ting it  on  her  finger  and  pulling  it  off  again.

"  Dear  Miss  Nevil,"  said  Colomba,  "  may  I  not
know  what  my  brother  says  to  you?  Does  he  say  any-
thing about  his  health?  "

"  Indeed,"  said  Miss  Lydia,  colouring,  "  he  doesn't
mention  it.  His  letter  is  in  English.  He  desires  me  to
tell  my  father —  He  hopes  the  prefect  will  be  able  to
arrange "

W^ith  a  mischievous  smile,  Colomba  sat  down  on
the  bed,  took  hold  of  both  Miss  Nevil's  hands,  and,
looking  at  her  with  her  piercing  eyes —

''  Will  you  be  kind?  "  she  said.  "  Won't  you  an-
swer my  brother's  letter?  You  would  do  him  so  much
good!  For  a  moment  I  thought  of  waking  you  when
his  letter  come,  and  then  I  didn't  dare!  "

''  You  did  very  wrong,"  replied  Miss  Nevil.  "  If
a  word  from  me  could "

"  I  can't  send  him  any  letter  now.  The  prefect  has
arrived,  and  Pietranera  is  full  of  his  policemen.  Later
on,  we'll  see  what  we  can  do.  Oh,  ]\Iiss  Nevil,  if  you
only  knew  my  brother,  you  would  love  him  as  dearly
as  I  do.  He's  so  good!  He's  so  brave!  Just  think
of  what  he  has  done!  One  man  against  two,  and
wounded  as  well!  "

The  prefect  had  returned.  W^arned  by  an  express
messenger  sent  by  the  deputy-mayor,  he  had  brought
over  the  public  prosecutor,  the  registrar,  and  all  their

175


Colomba

myrmidons,  to  investigate  the  fresh  and  terrible  catas-
trophe which  had  just  compHcated,  or  it  may  be  ended,
the  warfare  between  the  chief  famihes  of  Pietrancra.
Shortly  after  his  arrival,  he  saw  the  colonel  and  his
daughter,  and  did  not  conceal  his  fear  that  the  business
might  take  on  an  ugly  aspect.

"  You  know,"  he  said,  "  that  the  fight  took  place
without  witnesses,  and  the  reputation  of  these  two  un-
happy young  men  stood  so  high,  both  for  bravery  and
cunning,  that  nobody  will  believe  Signor  della  Rebbia
can  have  killed  them  without  the  help  of  the  bandits
with  whom  he  is  now  supposed  to  have  taken  refuge."

"  It's  not  possible,"  said  the  colonel.  "  Orso  della
Rebbia  is  a  most  honourable  fellow.  I'll  stake  my  life
on  that."

"  I  believe  you,"  said  the  prefect.  "  But  the  public
prosecutor  (those  gentry  always  are  suspicious)  does
not  strike  me  as  being  particularly  well  disposed  toward
him.  He  holds  one  bit  of  evidence  which  goes  rather
against  our  friend — a  threatening  letter  to  Orlanduccio,
in  which  he  suggests  a  meeting,  and  is  inclined  to  think
that  meeting  was  a  trap."

"  That  fellow  Orlanduccio  refused  to  fight  it  out
like  a  gentleman."

"  That  is  not  the  custom  here.  In  tliis  country,
people  lie  in  ambush,  and  kill  each  other  from  behind.
There  is  one  deposition  in  his  favour — that  of  a  child,
who  declares  she  heard  four  reports,  two  of  which  were
louder  than  the  others,  and  produced  by  a  heavy  weap-
on, such  as  Signor  della  Rebbia's  gun.     Unluckily,  the

176


Colomba

child  is  the  niece  of  one  of  the  bandits  suspected  of
being  his  accomphces,  and  has  probably  been  taught
her  lesson."

"  Sir,"  broke  in  Miss  Lydia,  reddening  to  the  roots
of  her  hair,  "  we  were  on  the  road  when  those  shots
were  fired,  and  we  heard  the  same  thing."

"Really?  That's  most  important!  And  yon,  colo-
nel, no  doubt  you  remarked  the  very  same  thing?  "

"  Yes,"  responded  Miss  Lydia  quickly.  "  It  was
my  father,  who  is  so  accustomed  to  firearms,  who  said
to  me,  '  There's  Signor  della  Rebbia  shooting  with  my
gun!'"

"  x\nd  you  are  sure  those  shots  you  recognised  were
the  last?"

"  The  two  last,  weren't  they,  papa?  "

Memory  was  not  the  colonel's  strong  point,  but  as
a  standing  rule,  he  knew  better  than  to  contradict  his
daughter.

"  I  must  mention  this  to  the  public  prosecutor  at
once,  colonel.  .\nd  besides,  we  expect  a  surgeon  this
evening,  who  will  make  an  examination  of  the  two
bodies,  and  find  out  whether  the  wounds  were  caused
by  that  particular  weapon."

"  I  gave  it  to  Orso,"  said  the  colonel,  "  and  I  wish

I  knew  it  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea.     At  least

Plucky  boy!  I'm  heartily  glad  he  had  it  with  him,  for
I  don't  quite  know  how  he  would  have  got  off  if  it  hadn't
been  for  mv  Manton."


177


CHAPTER    XIX

It  was  rather  late  when  the  surgeon  put  in  an  ap-
pearance. On  his  road  up  he  had  met  with  an  adven-
ture of  his  own.  He  had  been  stopped  by  Giocanto
Castriconi.  who,  with  the  most  scrupulous  politeness,
called  on  him  to  come  and  attend  a  wounded  man.
He  had  been  conducted  to  Orso's  retreat,  and  had
applied  the  first  dressings  to  his  wound.  The  bandit
had  then  accompanied  the  doctor  some  distance  on  his
vray,  and  had  greatly  edified  him  by  his  talk  concerning
the  most  celebrated  professors  at  Pisa,  whom  he  de-
scribed as  his  intimate  friends.

"  Doctor,"  said  the  theologian,  as  they  parted,
"  you  have  inspired  me  with  such  a  feeling  of  respect
that  I  think  it  hardly  necessary  to  remind  you  that  a
physician  should  be  as  discreet  as  a  confessor."  And
as  he  said  the  words  he  clicked  the  trigger  of  his  gun.
"  You  have  cpiite  forgotten  the  spot  at  which  we  have
had  the  honour  of  meeting.  Fare  you  well!  I'm  de-
lighted to  have  made  your  acquaintance."

Colomba  besought  the  colonel  to  be  present  at  the
post-mortem  examination.

"  You  know  my  brother's  gun  better  than  any-
body," she  said,  "  and  your  presence  will  be  most  valu-

178


Colomba

able.  Besides,  there  are  so  many  wicked  people  here
that  we  should  run  a  great  risk  if  there  were  nobody
present  to  protect  our  interests."

When  she  was  left  alone  with  Miss  Lydia,  she  com-
plained that  her  head  ached  terribly,  and  proposed  that
they  should  take  a  walk  just  outside  the  village.

''  The  fresh  air  will  do  me  good,"  she  said.  "  It  is
so  long  since  I've  been  out  of  doors."

As  they  walked  along  she  talked  about  her  brother,
and  Miss  Lydia,  who  found  the  subject  tolerably  inter-
esting, did  not  notice  that  they  had  travelled  a  long
way  from  Pietranera.  The  sun  was  setting  wdien  she
became  aware  of  this  fact,  and  she  begged  Colomba  to
return.  Colomba  said  she  knew  a  cross-cut  which
would  greatly  shorten  the  walk  back,  and  turning  out
of  the  path,  she  took  another,  which  seemed  much  less
frequented.  Soon  she  began  to  climb  a  hill,  so  steep
that  to  keep  her  balance  she  was  continually  obliged  to
catch  hold  of  branches  w'ith  one  hand,  while  she  pulled
her  companion  up  after  her  with  the  other.  After  about
twenty  minutes  of  this  trying  ascent,  they  found  them-
selves on  a  small  plateau,  clothed  with  arbutus  and
myrtle,  growing  round  great  granite  boulders  that
jutted  above  the  soil  in  every  direction.  Miss  Lydia
was  very  tired,  there  was  no  sign  of  the  village,  and
it  was  almost  quite  dark.

"  Do  you  know,  Colomba,  my  dear,"  she  said,  '''  I'm
afraid  we've  lost  our  way!  "

"  No  fear!  "  answered  Colomba.  "  Let  us  get  on.
You  follow  me."

179


Colomba

"  But  I  assure  you  we're  going  wrong.  The  village
can't  be  over  there.  I'm  certain  we're  turning  our
backs  on  it.  \Vhy,  look  at  those  lights,  far  away.
Pietranera  must  be  in  that  direction."

"  My  dear  soul,"  said  Colomba,  and  she  looked  very
much  agitated,  "  you're  perfectly  right.  But  in  the
maqiiis — less  than  a  hundred  yards  from  here—"

"Well?"

"  My  brother  is  lying.  If  you  choose,  I  might  see
him,  and  give  him  one  kiss."

Miss  Nevil  made  a  gesture  of  astonishment.

"  I  got  out  of  Pietranera  without  being  noticed,"
continued  Colomba,  "  because  I  was  with  you,  other-
wise I  should  have  been  followed.  To  be  so  close  to
him,  and  not  to  see  him!  Why  shouldn't  you  come
with  me  to  see  my  poor  brother?  You  would  make
him  so  happy!  "

''  But,  Colomba —  That  wouldn't  be  at  all  proper
on  my  part "

"  I  see.  With  you  women  who  live  in  towns,  your
great  anxiety  is  to  be  proper.  We  village  women  only
think  of  what  is  kind."

"  But  it's  so  late!  And  then  what  will  your  brother
think  of  me?  "

"  He'll  think  his  friends  have  not  forsaken  him,  and
that  will  give  him  courage  to  bear  his  sufferings."

"  And  my  father?    He'll  be  so  anxious!  "

"He  knows  you  are  with  me.  Come!  Make  up
your  mind.  You  were  looking  at  his  picture  this  morn-
ing," she  added,  with  a  sly  smile.

1 80


Colomba

''No!  Really  and  truly,  I  don't  dare,  Colomba!
Think  of  the  bandits  who  are  there."

*'  Well,  what  matter?  The  bandits  don't  know
you.    And  you  were  longing  to  see  some."

"  Oh,  dear!  "

"  Come,  signorina,  settle  something.  I  can't  leave
you  alone  here.  I  don't  know  what  might  happen  to
you.  Let  us  go  on  to  see  Orso,  or  else  let  us  go  back
to  the  village  together.  I  shall  see  my  brother  again.
God  knows  when — never,  perhaps!  "

"  What's  that  you  are  saying,  Colomba?  Well,  well,
let  us  go!  But  only  for  a  minute,  and  then  we'll  get
home  at  once."

Colomba  scjueezed  her  hand,  and  without  making
any  reply  walked  on  so  cjuickly  that  ]\Iiss  Lydia  could
hardly  keep  up  with  her.  She  soon  halted,  luckily,  and
said  to  her  companion:

"  We  won't  go  any  farther  without  warning  them.
We  might  have  a  bullet  flying  at  our  heads."

She  began  to  whistle  through  her  fingers.  Soon
they  heard  a  dog  bark,  and  the  bandits'  advanced  sen-
try shortly  came  in  sight.  This  was  our  old  acquaint-
ance Brusco,  who  recognised  Colomba  at  once  and  un-
dertook to  be  her  guide.  After  many  windings  through
the  narrow  paths  in  the  maquis  they  were  met  by  two
men,  armed  to  the  teeth.

"  Is  that  you,  Brandolaccio?  "  inquired  Colomba.
"  Where  is  my  brother?  "

"  Just  over  there,"  replied  the  bandit.  "  But  go
quietly.     He's  asleep,  and  for  the  first  time  since  his

i8i


Colomba

accident.  Zounds,  it's  clear  that  where  the  devil  eets
through,  a  woman  will  get  through  too!  "

The  two  girls  moved  forward  cautiously,  and  beside
a  fire,  the  blaze  of  which  was  carefully  concealed  by  a
little  wall  of  stones  built  round  it,  they  beheld  Orso,
lying  on  a  pile  of  heather,  and  covered  with  a  pUonc.
He  was  very  pale,  and  they  could  hear  his  laboured
l)reathing.  Colomba  sat  down  near  him,  and  gazed  at
him  silently,  w'ith  her  hands  clasped,  as  though  she
were  praying  in  her  heart.  Miss  Lydia  hid  her  face
in  her  handkerchief,  and  nestled  close  against  her  friend,
but  every  now  and  then  she  lifted  her  head  to  take  a  look
at  the  wounded  man  over  Colomba's  shoulder.  Thus
a  quarter  of  an  hour  passed  by  without  a  word  being
said  by  anybody.  At  a  sign  from  the  theologian,  Bran-
dolaccio  had  plunged  with  him  into  the  niaquis,  to  the
great  relief  of  Miss  Lydia,  who  for  the  first  time  fan-
cied the  local  colour  of  the  bandits'  wild  beards  and
warlike  equipment  was  a  trifle  too  strong.

At  last  Orso  stirred.  Instantly  Colomba  bent  over
him,  and  kissed  him  again  and  again,  pouring  out  ques-
tions anent  his  wound,  his  suffering,  and  his  needs.
After  having  answered  that  he  was  doing  as  well  as
possible,  Orso  inquired,  in  his  turn,  whether  Miss  Nevil
was  still  at  Pietrancra,  and  whether  she  had  written  to
him.  Colomba,  bending  over  her  brother,  completely
hid  her  companion  from  his  sight,  and  indeed  the  dark-
ness would  have  made  any  recognition  difficult.  She
was  holding  one  of  Miss  Nevil's  hands.  With  the
other  she  slightly  raised  her  wounded  brother's  head.

182


Colomba

"  No,  brother,"  she  replied.  "  She  did  not  give  me
any  letter  for  you.  But  are  you  still  thinking  about  Miss
Nevil?     You  must  love  her  very  much!  "

"  Love  her,  Colomba  ! — But — but  now  she  may
despise  me!  "

At  this  point  ]\Iiss  Nevil  made  a  struggle  to  with-
draw her  fingers.  But  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  get
Colomba  to  slacken  her  grasp.  Small  and  well-shaped
though  her  hand  was,  it  possessed  a  strength  of  which
we  have  already  noticed  certain  proofs.

"Despise  you!"  cried  Colomba.  "After  what
you've  done?  No,  indeed!  She  praises  you!  Oh,
Orso,  I  could  tell  you  so  many  things  about  her!  "

Lydia's  hand  was  still  struggling  for  its  freedom,
but  Colomba  kept  drawing  it  closer  to  Orso.

"  But  after  all,"  said  the  wounded  man,  "  why  didn't
she  answer  me?  If  she  had  sent  me  a  single  line,  I
should  have  been  happ)'."

By  dint  of  pulling  at  IMiss  Nevil's  hand,  Colomba
contrived  at  last  to  put  it  into  her  brother's.  Then,
moving  suddenly  aside,  she  burst  out  laughing.

"  Orso,"  she  cried,  "  mind  you  don't  speak  evil  of
Miss  Lydia — she  imderstands  Corsican  quite  well."

Miss  Lydia  took  back  her  hand  at  once  and  stam-
mered some  unintelligible  words.  Orso  thought  he
must  be  dreaming.

"  You  here,  Miss  Nevil?  Good  heavens!  how  did
you  dare?    Oh,  how  happy  you  have  made  me!  "

And    raising    himself    painfully,    he    strove    to    get
closer  to  her.
Vol.  6  183  N


Colomba

"  I  came  with  your  sister,"  said  Miss  Lydia,  "  so
that  nobody  might  suspect  where  she  was  going.  And
then  I — I  wanted  to  make  sure  for  myself.  Alas!  how
imcomfortable  you  are  here!  "

Colomba  had  seated  herself  behind  Orso.  She
raised  him  carefully  so  that  his  head  might  rest  on  her
la]).  She  put  her  arms  round  his  neck  and  signed  to
Miss  Lydia  to  come  near  him.

"  Closer!  closer!  "  she  said.  "  A  sick  man  mustn't
talk  too  loud."  And  when  Miss  Lydia  hesitated,  she
caught  her  hand  and  forced  her  to  sit  down  so  close
to  Orso  that  her  dress  touched  him,  and  her  hand,
still  in  Colomba's  grasp,  lay  on  the  wounded  man's
shoulder.

"  Now  he's  very  comfortable!  "  said  Colomba  cheer-
ily. "  Lsn't  it  good  to  lie  out  in  the  viaqiiis  on  such
a  lovely  night?     Eh,  Orso?"

"  Oh,  yes,  indeed!  What  a  heavenly  night!  I  shall
never  forget  it!  "  said  Orso.

"How  you  must  be  suffering!"  exclaimed  Miss
Lydia.

"  My  suffering  is  all  gone  now,"  said  Orso,  "  and
I  should  like  to  die  here!  "  And  his  right  hand  crept
up  toward  Miss  Lydia's,  which  Colomba  still  held
captive.

"  You  really  must  be  taken  to  some  place  where
you  can  be  properly  cared  for,  Signor  della  Rebbia,"
said  Miss  Nevil.  "  I  shall  never  be  able  to  sleep  in  my
bed,  now  that  I  have  seen  you  lying  here,  so  uncom-
fortable, in  the  open  air."

184


I


Colomba

"  If  I  had  not  been  afraid  of  meeting  you,  ]\Iiss
Nevil,  I  should  have  tried  to  get  back  to  Pietranera,
and  I  should  have  given  myself  up  to  the  authorities."

"  And  why  were  you  afraid  of  meeting  her,  Orso?  "
inquired  Colomba.

"  I  had  disobeyed  you,  Miss  Nevil,  and  I  should
not  have  dared  to  look  at  you  just  then."

"  Do  you  know  you  make  my  brother  do  every-
thing you  choose,  Miss  Lydia?  "  said  Colomba,  laugh-
ing.    "  I  won't  let  you  see  him  any  more."

"  I  hope  this  unlucky  business  will  soon  be  cleared
up,  and  that  you  will  have  nothing  more  to  fear,"  said
Miss  Nevil.  "  I  shall  be  so  happy,  when  w-e  go  away,
to  know  justice  has  been  done  you,  and  that  both  your
loyalty  and  your  bravery  have  been  acknowledged."

"  Going  away,  Miss  Nevil!  Don't  say  that  word
yet!"

"  What  are  we  to  do?  My  father  can  not  spend  his
whole  life  shooting.     He  wants  to  go."

Orso's  hand,  which  had  been  touching  Miss
Lydia's,  dropped  away,  and  there  was  silence  for  a
moment.

"  Nonsense!  "  said  Colomba.  "  We  won't  let  you
go  yet.  We  have  plenty  of  things  to  show  you  still
at  Pietranera.  Besides,  you  have  promised  to  paint
my  picture,  and  you  haven't  even  begun  it  so  far.  And
then  I've  promised  to  compose  you  a  scrcuafa,  with  sev-
enty-five verses.  And  then — but  what  can  Brusco  be
growling  about?  And  here's  Brandolaccio  running-
after  him.     I  must  go  and  see  what's  amiss."

185


V


Colomba

She  rose  at  once,  and  laying  Orso's  head,  without
further  ceremony,  on  Miss  Lydia's  lap,  she  ran  after
the  bandits.

Miss  Nevil,  somewhat  startled  at  finding  herself
thus  left  in  sole  charge  of  a  handsome  young  Corsican
gentleman  in  the  middle  of  a  inaquis,  was  rather  puz-
zled what  to  do  next.

For  she  was  afraid  that  any  sudden  movement  on
her  part  might  hurt  the  wounded  man.  But  Orso  him-
self resigned  the  exquisite  pillow  on  which  his  sister
had  just  laid  his  head,  and  raising  himself  on  his  right
arm,  he  said:

"  So  you  will  soon  be  gone,  Miss  Lydia?  I  never
expected  your  stay  in  this  unhappy  country  would  have
been  a  long  one.  And  yet  since  you  have  come  to  me
here,  the  thought  that  I  must  bid  you  farewell  has  grown
a  hundred  times  more  bitter  to  me.  I  am  only  a  poor
lieutenant.  I  had  no  future — and  now  I  am  an  outlaw.
What  a  moment  in  which  to  tell  you  that  I  love  you,
Miss  Lydia!  But  no  doubt  this  is  my  only  chance  of
saying  it.  And  I  think  I  feel  less  wretched  now  I  have
unburdened  my  heart  to  you."

Miss  Lydia  turned  away  her  head,  as  if  the  dark-
ness were  not  dark  enough  to  hide  her  blushes.

"  Signor   della   Rebbia,"    she   said,   and    her   voice

shook,  "  should  I  have  come  here  at  all  if "  and

as  she  spoke  she  laid  the  Egyptian  talisman  in  Orso's
hand.  Then,  with  a  mighty  effort  to  recover  her  usual
bantering  tone — "  It's  very  wrong  of  you,  Signor  Orso,
to  say  such  things!     You  know  very  well  that  here,  in

1 86


Colomba

the  middle  of  the  maquis,  and  with  your  bandits  all  about
me,  I  should  never  dare  to  be  angry  with  you."

Orso  made  an  attempt  to  kiss  the  hand  that  held
out  the  talisman.  Miss  Lydia  drew  it  quickly  back;
he  lost  his  balance,  and  fell  on  his  wounded  arm.  He
could  not  stifle  a  moan  of  pain.

"  Oh,  dear,  you've  hurt  yourself,  and  it  was  my
fault!  "  she  cried,  as  she  raised  him  up.  "  Forgive
me!  "  They  talked  for  some  time  longer,  very  low,  and
very  close  together.

Colomba,  running  hastily  up,  found  them  in  the
very  same  position  in  which  she  had  left  them.

"  The  soldiers!  "  she  cried.  "  Orso!  try  to  get  up
and  walk!     I'll  help  you!  "

"Leave  me!"  said  Orso.  "Tell  the  bandits  to
escape.  What  do  I  care  if  I  am  taken?  But  take  away
Miss  Lydia.  For  God's  sake,  don't  let  anybody  see  her
here!"

"  I  won't  leave  you,"  said  Brandolaccio,  who  had
come  up  on  Colomba's  heels.

"  The  sergeant  in  charge  is  the  lawyer's  godson.
He'll  shoot  you  instead  of  arresting  you,  and  then  he'll
say  he  didn't  do  it  on  purpose."

Orso  tried  to  rise;  he  even  took  a  few  steps.  But
he  soon  halted.  "  I  can't  walk,"  he  said.  "  Fly,  all
of  you!  Good-bye,  Miss  Nevil!  Give  me  your  hand!
Farewell!"

"We  won't  leave  you!  "  cried  the  two  girls.

"  If  you  can't  walk,"  said  Brandolaccio,  "  I  must
carry  you.     Come,  sir,  a  little  courage!    We  shall  have

187


Colomba

time  to  slip  away  by  the  ravine.  The  Signor  Tadre
will  keep  them  busy."

"No,  leave  me!"  said  Orso,  lying  down  on  the
ground.  "  Colomba,  take  Miss  Nevil  away! — for  God's
sake!"

"  You're  strong,  Signorina  Colomba,"  said  Bran-
dolaccio.  "  Catch  hold  of  his  shoulders;  I'll  take  his
feet.     That's  it!     Now,  then,  march!  "

In  spite  of  his  protests,  they  began  to  carry  him
rapidly  along.  Miss  Lydia  was  following  them,  in  a
terrible  fright,  when  a  gun  was  fired,  and  five  or
six  other  reports  instantly  responded.  Miss  Lydia
screamed  and  Brandolaccio  swore  an  oath,  but  he
doubled  his  pace,  and  Colomba,  imitating  him,  tore
through  the  thicket  without  paying  the  slightest  heed
to  the  branches  that  slashed  her  face  and  tore  her
dress.

"  Bend  down,  bend  down,  dear!  "  she  called  out  to
her  companion.  "  You  may  be  hit  by  some  stray
bullet!"

They  had  walked,  or  rather  run,  some  five  hundred
paces  in  this  fashion  when  Brandolaccio  vowed  he
could  go  no  farther,  and  dropped  on  the  ground,  re-
gardless of  all  Colomba's  exhortations  and  reproaches.

"  Where  is  Miss  Nevil?  "  was  Orso's  one  inquiry.

Terrified  by  the  firing,  checked  at  every  step  by
the  thick  growth  of  the  niaquis,  Miss  Nevil  had  soon
lost  sight  of  the  fugitives,  and  been  left  all  alone  in  a
state  of  the  most  cruel  alarm.

"  She  has  been  left  behind,"  said  Brandolaccio,
188


Colomba

"  but  she'll  not  be  lost — women  always  turn  up  again.
Do  listen  to  the  row  the  Padre  is  making  with  your
gun,  Ors'  Anton'!  Unluckily,  it's  as  black  as  pitch,
and  nobody  takes  much  harm  from  being  shot  at  in  the
dark."

"  Hush!  "  cried  Colomba.  "  I  hear  a  horse.  We're
saved!"

Startled  by  the  firing,  a  horse  which  had  been  wan-
dering through  the  uiaquis,  was  really  coming  close  up
to  them.

"Saved,  indeed!"  repeated  Brandolaccio.  It  did
not  take  the  bandit  more  than  an  instant  to  rush  up
to  the  creature,  catch  hold  of  his  mane,  and  with  Co-
lomba's  assistance,  bridle  him  with  a  bit  of  knotted
rope.

"  Now  we  must  warn  the  Padre,"  he  said.  He
whistled  twice;  another  distant  whistle  answered  the
signal,  and  the  loud  voice  of  the  Manton  gun  was
hushed.  Then  Brandolaccio  sprang  on  the  horse's
back.  Colomba  lifted  her  brother  up  in  front  of  the
bandit,  who  held  him  close  with  one  hand  and  managed
his  bridle  with  the  other.

In  spite  of  the  double  load,  the  animal,  urged  by  a
brace  of  hearty  kicks,  started  off  nimbly,  and  galloped
headlong  down  a  steep  declivity  on  which  anything  but
a  Corsican  steed  would  have  broken  its  neck  a  dozen
times.

Then  Colomba  retraced  her  steps,  calling  Miss
Nevil  at  the  top  of  her  voice;  but  no  answering  cry
was  heard.

189


Colomba

After  walking  hither  and  thither  for  some  time,
trying  to  recover  the  path,  she  stiiml)led  on  two  rille-
men,  who  shouted,  "  Who  goes  there?  "

"  Weh,  gentlemen,"  cried  Colomba  jeeringly,
"  here's  a  pretty  racket!  How  many  of  you  are
killed?  "

"  You  were  with  the  bandits!  "  said  one  of  the  sol-
diers.    "  You  must  come  with  us."

"With  pleasure!"  she  replied.  "But  there's  a
friend  of  mine  somewhere  close  by,  and  we  must  find
her  first."

"  Your  friend  is  caught  already,  and  both  of  you
will  sleep  in  jail  to-night!  "

"  In  jail,  you  say?  Well,  that  remains  to  be  seen.
But  take  me  to  her,  meanwhile."

The  soldiers  led  her  to  the  bandits'  camp,  where
they  had  collected  the  trophies  of  their  raid- — to  wit,
the  cloak  which  had  covered  Orso,  an  old  cooking-pot,
and  a  pitcher  of  cold  water.  On  the  same  spot  she
found  Miss  Nevil,  who  had  fallen  among  the  soldiers,
and,  being  half  dead  with  terror,  did  nothing  but  sob
in  answer  to  their  questions  as  to  the  number  of  the
bandits,  and  the  direction  in  which  they  had  gone.

Colomba  threw  herself  into  her  arms  and  whispered
in  her  ear,  "They  are  safe!"  Then,  turning  to  the
sergeant,  she  said:  "  Sir,  you  can  see  this  young  lady
knows  none  of  the  things  you  are  trying  to  find  out
from  her.  Give  us  leave  to  go  back  to  the  village,
where  we  are  anxiously  expected."

"  You'll  be  taken  there,  and  faster  than  you  like,
190


Colomba

my  beauty/'  rejoined  the  sergeant.  "  And  you'll  have
to  explain  what  you  were  after  at  this  time  of  night
with  the  rufifians  who  have  just  got  away.  I  don't
know  what  witchcraft  those  villains  practise,  but  they
certainly  do  bewitch  the  w^omen — for  wherever  there
are  bandits  about,  you  are  dead  certain  to  find  pretty
girls."

"You're  very  flattering,  sergeant!"  said  Colomba,
"  but  you'd  do  well  to  be  careful  what  you  say.  This
young  lady  is  related  to  the  prefect,  and  you'd  better
be  careful  of  your  language  before  her."

"  A  relation  of  the  prefect's,"  whispered  one  of
the  soldiers  to  his  chief.  "  Why,  she  does  wear  a
hat!"

"  Hats  have  nothing  to  do  wnth  it,  "  said  the  ser-
geant. "  They  were  both  of  them  with  the  Padre —
the  greatest  woman-wheedler  in  the  whole  country,  so
it's  my  business  to  march  them  ofif.  And,  indeed,
there's  nothing  more  for  us  to  do  here.     But  for  that

d d    Corporal    Taupin — the    drunken    Frenchman

showed  himself  before  I'd  surrounded  the  uiaqiiis — we
should  have  had  them  all  like  fish  in  a  net."

''  Are  there  only  seven  of  you  here?  "  inquired
Colomba.  "  It  strikes  me,  gentlemen,  that  if  the  three
Poll  brothers — Gambini,  Sarocchi,  and  Teodoro —
should  happen  to  be  at  the  Cross  of  Santa  Christina,
with  Brandolaccio  and  the  Padre,  they  might  give  you
a  good  deal  of  corn  to  grind.  If  you  mean  to  have
a  talk  with  the  Commandante  della  Campagna,*  I'd  just

*  The  title  assumed  by  Teodoro  Poli.
191


Colomba

as  soon  not  be  there.     In  the  dark,  bullets  don't  show
any  respect  for  persons."

The  idea  of  coming  face  to  face  with  the  dreaded
bandits  mentioned  by  Colomba  made  an  evident
impression  on  the  soldiers.  The  sergeant,  still
cursing  Corporal  Taupin — ''  that  dog  of  a  Frenchman  "
— gave  the  order  to  retire,  and  his  little  party  moved
toward  Pietranera,  carrying  the  piloiic  and  the  cook-
ing-pot; as  for  the  pitcher,  its  fate  was  settled  with  a
kick.

One  of  the  men  would  have  laid  hold  of  Miss
Lydia's  arm,  but  Colomba  instantly  pushed  him  away.
"  Let  none  of  you  dare  to  lay  a  finger  on  her!  "  she
said.  "  Do  you  fancy  we  want  to  run  away  ?  Come,
Lydia,  my  dear,  lean  on  me,  and  don't  cry  like  a  baby.
We've  had  an  adventure,  but  it  will  end  all  right.  In
half  an  hour  we  shall  be  at  our  supper,  and  for  my
part  I'm  dying  to  get  to  it."

"What  will  they  think  of  me!"  T^Iiss  Nevil  whis-
pered.

"  They'll  think  you  lost  your  way  in  the  maquis,
that's  all."

"  What  will  the  prefect  say?  Above  all,  what  will
my  father  say?  "

"The  prefect?  You  can  tell  him  to  mind  his  own
1)usiness!  Your  father?  I  should  have  thought,  from
the  way  you  and  Orso  were  talking,  that  you  had  some-
thing to  say  to  your  father."

Miss     Nevil    squeezed    her    arm,    and    answered


nothing.


192


Colomba

"  Doesn't  my  brother  deserve  to  be  loved?  "  whis-
pered Colomba  in  her  ear.  "  Don't  you  love  him  a
little?  "

"  Oh,  Colomba!  "  answered  IMiss  Nevil,  smiling  in
spite  of  her  blushes,  "you've  betrayed  mel  And  I
trusted  you  so!  "

Colomba  slipped  her  arm  round  her,  and  kissed  her
forehead.

"  Little  sister,"  she  whispered  very  low,  "  will  you
forgive  me?  "

"  Why,  I  suppose  I  must,  my  masterful  sister,"  an-
swered Lydia,  as  she  kissed  her  back.

The  prefect  and  the  public  prosecutor  were  staying
with  the  deputy-mayor,  and  the  colonel,  who  was  very
uneasy  about  his  daughter,  was  paying  them  his  twen-
tieth call,  to  ask  if  they  had  heard  of  her,  when  a  rifle-
man, whom  the  sergeant  had  sent  on  in  advance,  ar-
rived with  the  full  story  of  the  great  fight  with  the
brigands — a  fight  in  which  nobody  had  been  either
killed  or  wounded,  but  which  had  resulted  in  the  cap-
ture of  a  cooking-pot,  a  pilone,  and  two  girls,  whom
the  man  described  as  the  mistresses,  or  the  spies,  of  the
two  bandits.

Thus  heralded,  the  two  prisoners  appeared,  sur-
rounded by  their  armed  escort.

]\Iy  readers  will  imagine  Colomba's  radiant  face,  her
companion's  confusion,  the  prefect's  surprise,  the  colo-
nel's astonishment  and  joy.  The  public  prosecutor  per-
mitted himself  the  mischievous  entertainment  of  oblig-
ing poor  Lydia  to  undergo  a  kind  of  cross-examina-

13  193


Colomba

tion,  \vhich  did  not  conclude  until  he  had  quite  put  her
out  of  countenance.

"  It  seems  to  me,"  said  the  prefect,  "  that  we  may
release  everybody.  These  young  ladies  went  out  for
a  walk — nothing  is  more  natural  in  fine  weather.  They
happened  to  meet  a  charming  young  man,  who  has
been  lately  wounded — nothing  could  be  more  natural.
again."     Then,  taking  Colomba  aside —

"  Signorina,"  he  said,  "  you  can  send  word  to  your
brother  that  this  business  promises  to  turn  out  better
than  I  had  expected.  The  post-mortem  examination
and  the  colonel's  deposition  both  prove  that  he  only
defended  himself,  and  that  he  was  alone  when  the  fight
took  place.  Everything  will  be  settled — only  he  must
leave  the  maqiiis  and  give  himself  up  to  the  author-
ities."

It  was  almost  eleven  o'clock  when  the  colonel,  his
daughter,  and  Colomba  sat  down  at  last  to  their  sup-
per, which  had  grown  cold.  Colomba  ate  heartily,  and
made  great  fun  of  the  prefect,  the  public  prosecutor,
and  the  soldiers.  The  colonel  ate  too,  but  never  said
a  word,  and  gazed  steadily  at  his  daughter,  who  would
not  lift  her  eyes  from  her  plate.  At  last,  gently  but
seriously,  he  said  in  English:

"  Lydia,  I  suppose  you  are  engaged  to  della
Rebbia?  "

"  Yes,  father,  to-day,"  she  answered,  steadily,
though  she  blushed.  Then  she  raised  her  eyes,
and  reading  no  sign  of  anger  in  her  father's  face,
she    threw    herself    into    his    arms    and    kissed    him,

194


Colomba

as  all  well-brought-up  young  ladies  do  on  such  occa-
sions.

"  With  all  my  heart!  "  said  the  colonel.     "  He's  a

fine  fellow.     But,  by  G — d,  we  won't  live  in  this  d d

country  of  his,  or  I'll  refuse  my  consent."

"  I  don't  know  English,"  said  Colomba,  who  w^as
watching-  them  with  an  air  of  the  greatest  curiosity,
"  but  I'll  wager  I've  guessed  what  you  are  saying!  "

"  We  are  saying,"  cjuoth  the  colonel,  ''  that  we
are  going  to  take  you  for  a  trip  to  Ireland."

"  Yes,  with  pleasure;  and  I'll  be  the  Surella  Co-
lomba. Is  it  settled,  colonel?  Shall  we  shake  hands
on  it?  "

"  In  such  a  case,"  remarked  the  colonel,  "  people
exchanoe  kisses!  "


195


CHAPTER    XX

One  afternoon,  a  few  months  after  the  double  shot
which,  as  the  newspapers  said,  "  phmged  the  village  of
Pietranera  into  a  state  of  consternation,"  a  young  man
with  his  left  arm  in  a  sling,  rode  out  of  Bastia,  toward
the  village  of  Cardo,  celebrated  for  its  spring,  which
in  summer  supplies  the  more  fastidious  inhabitants
of  the  town  with  delicious  water.  He  was  accom-
panied by  a  young  lady,  tall  and  remarkalily  handsome,
mounted  on  a  small  black  horse,  the  strength  and  shape
of  which  would  have  attracted  the  admiration  of  a  con-
noisseur, although,  by  some  strange  accident,  one  of
its  ears  had  been  lacerated.  On  reaching  the  village,
the  girl  sprang  nimbly  to  the  ground,  and,  having
helped  her  comrade  to  dismount,  she  unfastened  the
somewhat  heavy  wallets  strapped  to  his  saddle-bow.
The  horses  were  left  in  charge  of  a  peasant.  The  girl,
laden  w'ith  the  wallets,  which  she  had  concealed  un-
der her  inczzavo,  and  the  young  man,  carrying  a  double-
barrelled  gun,  took  their  way  toward  the  mountain,
along  a  very  steep  path  that  did  not  appear  to  lead
to  any  dwelling.  When  they  had  climbed  to  one  of
the  lower  ridges  of  the  Monte  Oucrico.  they  halted,  and
sat  down  on  the  grass.    They  were  evidently  expecting

196


Colomba

somebody,  for  they  kept  perpetually  looking  toward
the  mountain,  and  the  young  lady  often  consulted  a
pretty  gold  watch — as  much,  it  may  be,  for  the  pleasure
of  admiring  wdiat  appeared  a  somewhat  newly  acquired
trinket,  as  in  order  to  know  whether  the  hour  appointed
for  some  meeting  or  other  had  come.  They  had  not
long  to  wait.  A  dog  ran  out  of  the  maqiiis,  and  when
the  girl  called  out  "  Brusco!  "  it  approached  at  once,
and  fawned  upon  them.  Presently  two  bearded  men
appeared,  with  guns  under  their  arms,  cartridge-belts
round  their  waists,  and  pistols  hanging  at  their  sides.
Their  torn  and  patched  garments  contrasted  oddly  with
their  weapons,  which  were  brilliantly  polished,  and
came  from  a  famous  Continental  factory.  In  spite  of
the  apparent  inequality  of  their  positions,  the  four  actors
in  this  scene  greeted  one  another  in  terms  of  old  and
familiar  friendship.

"  Well,  Ors'  Anton',"  said  the  elder  bandit  to  the
yoimg  man,  "  so  your  business  is  settled — the  indict-
ment against  you  has  fallen  through?  I  congratulate
you.  I'm  sorry  the  lawyer  has  left  the  island.  I'd  like
to  see  his  rage.     And  how's  your  arm?  "

"  They  tell  me  I  shall  get  rid  of  my  sling  in  a
fortnight,"  said  the  young  man.  "  Brando,  my  good
friend,  I'm  going  to  Italy  to-morrow — I  wanted  to  say
good-bye  to  you  and  to  the  cure.  That's  why  I  asked
you  to  come  here."

"  You're  in  a  fine  hurry."  said  Brandolaccio.
"  Only  acquitted  yesterday,  and  you're  off  to-morrow."

"  Business  must  be  attended  to,"  said  the  young
197


Colomba

lady  merrily.  "  Gentlemen,  I've  brought  some  supper.
Fall  to,  if  you  please,  and  don't  you  forget  my  friend
Brusco."

"  You  spoil  Brusco,  Mademoiselle  Colomba.  But
he's  a  grateful  dog.  You  shall  see.  Here,  Brusco,"
and  he  held  out  his  gun  horizontally,  "  jump  for  the
Barricini!  "

The  dog  stood  motionless,  licking  his  chops,  and
staring  at  his  master.

"  Jump  for  the  della  Rebbia!  "  And  he  leaped  two
feet  higher  than  he  need  have  done.

"  Look  here,  my  friends,"  said  Orso,  "  you're  ply-
ing a  bad  trade;  and  even  if  you  don't  end  your  career
on  that  square  down  below  us,*  the  best  you  can  look
for  is  to  die  in  the  maquis  by  some  gendarme's  bullet."

"  Well,  well,"  said  Castriconi,  "  that's  no  more  than
death,  anyhow;  and  it's  better  than  being  killed  in  your
bed  by  a  fever,  with  your  heirs  snivelling  more  or  less
honestly  all  round  you.  To  men  who  are  accustomed
to  the  open  air  like  us,  there's  nothing  so  good  as  to
die  '  in  your  shoes,'  as  the  village  folk  say."

"  I  should  like  to  see  you  get  out  of  this  country,"
said  Orso,  "  and  lead  a  quieter  life.  For  instance,  wdiy
shouldn't  you  settle  in  Sardinia,  as  several  of  your  com-
rades have  done?  I  could  make  the  matter  easy  for
you."

"  Tn  Sardinia!  "  cried  Brandolaccio.  "  Istos  Sardos!
Devil  take  them  and  their  lingo!  We  couldn't  live  in
such  bad  company."

*  The  square  at  Bastia  on  wliich  executions  take  place.
198


Colomba

"  Sardinia's  a  country  without  resources,"  added
the  theologian.  "  For  my  part,  I  despise  the  Sardin-
ians. They  keep  mounted  men  to  hunt  their  bandits.
That's  a  stigma  on  both  the  bandits  and  the  country."^'
Out  upon  Sardinia,  say  I!  The  thing  that  astounds
me,  Signor  della  Rebbia,  is  that  you,  who  are  a  man
of  taste  and  understanding,  should  not  have  taken  to
our  life  in  the  inaqiiis,  after  having  once  tried  it,  as  you
did."

"  Well,"  said  Orso,  with  a  smile,  "  when  I  was  lucky
enough  to  be  your  guest,  I  wasn't  in  very  good  case
for  enjoying  the  charms  of  your  position,  and  my  ribs
still  ache  when  I  think  of  the  ride  I  took  one  lovely
night,  thrown  like  a  bundle  across  an  unsaddled  horse
that  my  good  friend  Brandolaccio  guided."

"  And  the  delight  of  escaping  from  your  pursuers,"
rejoined  Castriconi;  "is  that  nothing  to  you?  How
can  you  fail  to  realize  the  charms  of  absolute  freedom
in  such  a  beautiful  climate  as  ours?  With  this  to  in-
sure respect,"  and  he  held  up  his  gun,  "  we  are
kings  of  everything  within  its  range.  We  can  give
orders,  we  can  redress  wrongs.  That's  a  highly  moral
entertainment,  monsieur,  and  a  very  pleasant  one,
which  we  don't  deny  ourselves.  What  can  be  more
beautiful  than  a  knight-errant's  life,  when  he  has  good
weapons,  and  more  common  sense  than  Don  Quixote

*  I  owe  this  criticism  of  Sardinia  to  an  ex-bandit  of  my  acquaint-
ance, and  he  alone  must  bear  the  responsibility  of  it.  He  means
that  bandits  who  let  themselves  be  caught  by  horse  soldiers  are
idiots,  and  that  soldiers  who  try  to  catch  bandits  on  horseback  have
very  little  chance  of  getting  at  them.

Vol.  6  199  O


Colomba

had?  Listen!  The  other  day  I  was  told  that  Httle
Lilla  Luigi's  uncle — old  miser  that  he  is — wouldn't
give  her  a  dowry.  So  I  wrote  to  him.  I  didn't  use
threats — that's  not  my  way.  Well,  well,  in  one  mo-
ment the  man  was  convinced.  He  married  his  niece,
and  I  made  two  people  happy.  Believe  me,  Orso,
there's  no  life  like  the  bandit's  life!  P'shaw!  You'd
have  joined  us,  perhaps,  if  it  hadn't  been  for  a  certain
young  Englishwoman  whom  I  have  scarcely  seen  my-
self, but  about  whose  beauty  every  one  in  Bastia  is
talking."

"  My  future  sister-in-law  doesn't  like  the  nidquis,''
laughed  Colomba.  "  She  got  too  great  a  fright  in  one
of  them."

"  Well,"  said  Orso,  "  you  are  resolved  to  stay  here?
So  he  it!  But  tell  me  whether  there  is  anything  I
can  do  for  you?  "

"  Nothing,"  said  Brandolaccio.  "  You've  heaped
kindnesses  upon  us.  Here's  little  Chilina  with  her
dowry  ready,  so  that  there'll  be  no  necessity  for  my
friend  the  cure  to  write  one  of  his  persuasive  letters
to  insure  her  marrying  well.  We  know  the  man  on
your  farm  will  give  us  bread  and  powder  whenever  we
need  them.  So  fare  you  well!  I  hope  we  shall  see  you
back  in  Corsica  one  of  these  days."

"  In  case  of  pressing  need,"  said  Orso,  "  a  few  gold
coins  are  very  useful.     Now  we  are  such  old  friends,
you  won't  refuse  this  little  cartouche.'^    It  will  help  you
to  provide  cartridges  of  another  kind."
*  Cartouche  means  a  collection  of  gold  pieces  as  well  as  a  cartridge.

200


Colomba

"  No  money  between  you  and  me,  sir,"  said  Bran-
dolaccio  resolutely.

"  In  the  world  money  is  everything,"  remarked
Castriconi,  "  but  in  tlie  iiiaquis,  all  a  man  need  care  for
is  a  brave  heart,  and  a  gun  that  carries  true."

"  I  don't  want  to  leave  you  without  giving  you
something"  to  remember  me  by,"  persisted  Orso.
"  Come,  Brandolaccio,  what  can  I  leave  with  you?  "

The  bandit  scratched  his  head  and  cast  a  sidelong
glance  at  Orso's  gun.

''  By  my  faith,  if  I  dared — but  no!  you're  too  fond
of  it."

"  What  would  you  like?  "

"  Nothing!  'Tisn't  anything  at  all.  It's  knowing
how  to  use  it  as  well.  I  keep  thinking  of  that  devil
of  a  double  shot  of  yours — and  with  only  one  hand,  too!
Oh!  that  never  could  happen  twice  over!  "

"  Is  it  the  gun  you  fancy?  I  brought  it  for  you.
But  see  you  don't  use  it  more  than  you  are  obliged."

"  Oh,  I  won't  promise  to  make  as  good  use  of  it
as  you.  But  make  your  mind  easy,  ^^'hen  any  other
man  has  it,  you  may  be  certain  it's  all  over  with  Brando
SavelH."

"And  you,  Castriconi — what  am  I  to  give  you?"

''  Since  you  really  insist  on  giving  me  some  tangi-
ble keepsake,  I'll  simply  ask  you  to  send  me  the
smallest  Horace  you  can  get.  It  will  amuse  me,  and
prevent  me  from  forgetting  all  my  Latin.  There's  a
little  woman  who  sells  cigars  on  the  jetty  at  Bastia.
If  you  give  it  to  her,  she'll  see  I  get  it."

20 1


Colomba

"  You  shall  have  an  Elzevir,  my  erudite  friend.
There  just  happens  to  be  one  among  some  books  I
was  going  to  take  away  with  me.  Well,  good  huends,
we  must  part!  Give  me  your  hands.  If  you  should
ever  think  of  Sardinia  write  to  me.  Signor  X.,  the
notary,  will  give  you  my  address  on  the  mainland."

"  To-morrow,  lieutenant,"  said  Brando,  "  when  you
get  out  in  the  harbour,  look  up  to  this  spot  on  the
mountain-side.  We  shall  be  here,  and  we'll  wave  our
handkerchiefs  to  you."

And  so  they  parted.  Orso  and  his  sister  took  their
way  back  to  Cardo,  and  the  bandits  departed  up  the
mountain.


202


CHAPTER    XXI

One  lovely  April  morning.  Sir  Thomas  Nevil,  his
daughter — a  newly  made  bride — Orso,  and  Colomba,
drove  out  of  Pisa  to  see  a  lately  discovered  Etruscan
vault  to  which  all  strangers  who  came  to  that  part  of
the  country  paid  a  visit.

Orso  and  his  v\ife  went  down  into  the  ancient  build-
ing, pulled  out  their  pencils,  and  began  to  sketch  the
mural  paintings.  But  the  colonel  and  Colomba,  who
neither  of  them  cared  much  for  archeology,  left  them
to  themselves,  and  walked  about  in  the  neighbourhood.

"  My  dear  Colomba,"  said  the  colonel,  "  we  shall
never  get  back  to  Pisa  in  time  for  lunch.  Aren't  you
hungry?  There  are  Orso  and  his  wife  buried  in  their
antiquities;  when  once  they  begin  sketching  together,
it  lasts  forever!  "

"  Yes,"  remarked  Colomba.  "  And  yet  they  never
bring  the  smallest  sketch  home  with  them."

"  I  think,"  proceeded  the  colonel,  "  our  best  plan
would  be  to  make  our  way  to  that  little  farm-house
yonder.  We  should  find  bread  there,  and  perhaps
some  aleatico.  Who  knows,  we  might  even  find  straw-
berries and  cream!  And  then  we  should  be  able  to
wait  patiently  for  our  artists."

203


Colomba

"  You  are  quite  right,  colonel.  You  and  I  arc  the
reasonable  nienil)crs  of  this  family.  We  should  be  very
foolish  if  we  let  ourselves  be  martyrized  by  that  pair
of  lovers,  who  live  on  poetry!  Give  me  your  arm!
Don't  you  think  I'm  improving?  I  lean  on  people's
arms,  wear  fashionable  hats  and  gowns  and  trinkets —
I'm  learning  I  don't  know  how  many  fine  things — I'm
not  at  all  a  young  savage  any  more.  Just  observe  the
grace  with  which  I  wear  this  shawl.  That  fair-
haired  spark — that  of^cer  belonging  to  your  regiment
who  came  to  the  wedding — oh,  dear!  I  can't  recollect
his  name! — a  tall,  curly-headed  man,  whom  I  could
knock  over  with  one  hand "

"  Chatsworth?  "  suggested  the  colonel.

"That's  it! — but  I  never  shall  1)e  able  to  say  it! —
Well,  you  know  he's  over  head  and  ears  in  love  with
me!"

"  O  Colomba,  you're  growing'  a  terrible  flirt!  We
shall  have  another  wedding  before  long."

"  I!  Marry!  And  then  who  will  there  be  to  bring
up  my  nephew — when  Orso  provides  me  with  a
nephew?  And  who'll  teach  him  to  talk  Corsican?
Yes,  he  shall  talk  Corsican,  and  I'll  make  him  a  peaked
cap,  just  to  vex  you."

"  Well,  well,  wait  till  you  have  your  nephew,  and
then  you  shall  teach  him  to  use  a  dagger,  if  you
choose."

"  Farewell  to  daggers!  "  said  Coloml)a  merrily.  "  I
have  a  fan  now,  to  rap  your  fingers  with  when  you
speak  ill  of  my  country."

204


Colomba

Chatting  thus,  they  reached  the  farm-hotise,  where
they  found  wine,  strawberries,  and  cream.  Colomba
helped  the  farmer's  wife  to  gather  the  strawberries,
while  the  colonel  drank  his  alcatico.  At  the  turning  of
a  path  she  caught  sight  of  an  old  man,  sitting  in  the
sun,  on  a  straw  chair.  He  seemed  ill,  his  cheeks  were
fallen  in,  his  eyes  were  hollow,  he  was  frightfully  thin;
as  he  sat  there,  motionless,  pallid,  staring  fixedly  in
front  of  him,  he  looked  more  like  a  corpse  than  like
a  living  creature. '  Colomba  watched  him  for  some  min-
utes, and  with  a  curiosity  so  great  that  it  attracted  the
woman's  attention.

"  That  poor  old  fellow  is  a  countryman  of  yours,"
she  said.  "  For  I  know  you  are  from  Corsica  by  the
way  you  talk,  signorina!  He  has  had  great  trouble  in
his  own  country.  His  children  met  with  some  terrible
death.  They  say — you'll  excuse  me,  signorina — that
when  they  quarrel,  your  compatriots  don't  show  each
other  very  much  mercy.  Then  the  poor  old  gentle-
man, being  left  all  alone,  came  over  to  Pisa,  to  a  dis-
tant relation  of  his,  who  owns  this  farm.  Between  his
misfortunes  and  his  sorrow,  the  good  man  is  a  little
cracked.  .  .  .  The  lady  found  him  troublesome — for
she  sees  a  great  deal  of  company.  So  she  sent  him
out  here.  He's  very  gentle — no  worry  at  all.  He
doesn't  speak  three  words  the  whole  day  long.  In  fact,
his  brain's  cjuite  gone.  The  doctor  comes  to  see  him
every  week.     He  says  he  won't  live  long."

"There's  no  hope  for  him,  then!"  said  Colomba.
"  In  such  a  case,  death  will  be  a  mercy."

205


Colomba

"  You  might  say  a  word  to  him  in  Corsican,  si-
gnorina.  Perhaps  it  would  cheer  liim  up  to  the  hear
the  speech  of  his  own  country."

''  I'll  see!  "  said  Colomba,  and  her  smile  was  mys-
terious.

She  drew  nearer  to  the  old  man,  till  her  shadow
fell  across  his  chair.  Then  the  poor  idiot  lifted  his  head
and  stared  at  Colomba,  while  she  looked  at  him,  smil-
ing still.  After  a  moment,  the  old  man  passed  his  hand
across  his  forehead,  and  closed  his  eyes,  as  though  he
would  have  shut  out  the  sight  of  Colomba.  He  opened
them  again,  desperately  wide  this  time.  His  lips  began
to  work,  he  tried  to  stretch  out  his  hands,  but,  fasci-
nated by  Colomba's  glance,  he  sat,  nailed,  as  it  were,
to  his  chair,  unable  to  move  or  utter  a  word.  At  last
great  tears  dropped  from  his  eyes,  and  a  few  sobs  es-
caped from  his  heaving  chest.

"  'Tis  the  first  time  I've  seen  him  like  this,"  said
the  good  woman.  '*  This  signorina  belongs  to  your
own  country;  she  has  come  to  see  you,"  said  she  to
the  old  man.

''Mercy!"  he  cried  in  a  hoarse  voice.  ''Mercy!
Are  you  not  content?  The  leaf  I  burned.  How  did  you.
read  it?  But  why  did  you  take  them  both?  Orlanduc-
cio!  You  can't  have  read  anything  against  him!  You
should  have  left  me  one,  only  one!  Orlanduccio — you
didn't  read  his  name!  "

"  I  had  to  have  them  both!  "  answered  Colomba,
speaking  low  and  in  the  Corsican  dialect.  "  The
branches  are  lopped  off!    If  the  stem  had  not  been  rot-

206


Colomba

ten,  I  would  have  torn  it  up!  Come!  make  no  moan.
You  will  not  suffer  long!  /  sutlered  for  two  years!  "
The  old  man  cried  out,  and  then  his  head  dropped
on  his  breast.  Colomba  turned  her  back  on  him,  and
went  slowly  into  the  house,  humming  some  meaning-
less lines  out  of  a  ballafa:

"  I  must  have  the  hand
that  fired,  the  eye  that  aimed,  the  heart
tliat  planned."

While  the  farmer's  wife  ran  to  attend  on  the  old
man,  Colomba,  with  blazing  eyes  and  brilliant  cheeks,
sat  down  to  luncheon  opposite  the  colonel.

''  What's  the  matter  with  you?  "  he  said.  "  You
look  just  as  you  did  that  day  at  Pietranera.  when  they
fired  at  us  while  we  were  at  dinner."

"  Old  Corsican  memories  had  come  back  to  me.
But  all  that's  done  with.  I  shall  be  godmother,  sha'n't
I?  Oh!  what  fine  names  I'll  give  him!  Ghilfuccio —
Tomaso — Orso — Leone!  "

The  farmer's  wife  came  back  into  the  room.

"Well?"  inquired  Colomba,  with  the  most  perfect
composure.     "  Is  he  dead,  or  had  he  only  fainted?  "

"  It  was  nothing,  signorina.  But  it's  curious  what
an  effect  the  sight  of  you  had  on  him."

"  And  the  doctor  says  he  won't  last  long?  "

"  Not  two  months,  very  hkely."

"  He'll  be  no  great  loss!  "  remarked  Colomba.

"  What  the  devil  are  you  talking  about?  "  inquired
the  colonel.

"  About  an  idiot  from  my  own  country,  who  is
207


Colomba

l:)oarclcd  out  here.  I'll  send  from  time  to  time  to  find
out  how  he  is.  Why,  Colonel  Nevil,  aren't  you  going
to  leave  any  strawberries  for  Lydia  and  my  brother?  "

When  Colomba  left  the  farm-house  and  got  into  the
carriage,  the  farmer's  wife  looked  after  her  for  a  while.
Then,  turning  to  her  daughter:

"  Dost  see  that  pretty  young  lady  yonder?  "  she
said.     '' W^ell,  I'm  certain  she  has  the  evil  eye!"


THE    END    OF    COLOMBA


208


CARMEN


14


iiR    I

^  .cted  the  geographical  authorities
^1^  ixwu  xv.xow  what  they  were  talking  about  when  they
located  the  battlefield  of  Munda  in  the  county  of  the
Bastuli-Poeni,  close  to  the  modern  Monda,  some  two
leagues  north  of  Marbella.

According  to  my  own  surmise,  founded  on  the  text
of  the  anonymous  author  of  the  Bcllum  Hispaniense,
and  on  certain  information  culled  from  the  excellent
library  owned  by  the  Duke  of  Ossuna,  I  believed  the
site  of  the  memorable  struggle  in  which  Caesar  played
double  or  quits,  once  and  for  all,  with  the  champions  of
the  Republic,  should  be  sought  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Montilla.

Happening  to  be  in  Andalusia  during  the  autumn
of  1830,  I  made  a  somewhat  lengthy  excursion,  with
the  object  of  clearing  up  certain  doubts  which  still  op-
pressed me.  A  paper  which  I  shall  shortly  publish  will,
I  trust,  remove  any  hesitation  that  may  still  exist  in  the
minds  of  all  honest  arch^ologists.  But  before  that  dis-
sertation of  mine  finally  settles  the  geographical  prob-
lem on  the  solution  of  which  the  whole  of  learned  Eu-

I


a,  and  had  b,
few  shirts,  and  v.
aered,  one  day,  across  ti
plain,  worn  with  fatigue,  ^
by  a  burning  sun,  cursing  <.
alike,  most  heartily,  my  eye  lign.
from  the  path  I  was  following,  on  a  little  stretch  ot
green  sward  dotted  with  reeds  and  rushes.  That  be-
tokened the  neighbourhood  of  some  spring,  and,  indeed,
as  I  drew  nearer  I  perceived  that  what  had  looked  like
sward  was  a  marsh,  into  which  a  stream,  which  seemed
to  issue  from  a  narrow  gorge  between  two  high  spurs
of  the  Sierra  di  Cabra,  ran  and  disappeared.

If  I  rode  up  that  stream,  I  argued,  I  was  likely  to
find  cooler  water,  fewer  leeches  and  frogs,  and  mayhap
a  little  shade  among  the  rocks.

At  the  mouth  of  the  gorge,  my  horse  neighed,  and
another  horse,  invisible  to  me,  neighed  back.  Before  I
had  advanced  a  hundred  paces,  the  gorge  suddenly  wid-
ened, and  I  beheld  a  sort  of  natural  amphitheatre,  thor-
oughly shaded  by  the  steep  cliffs  that  lay  all  around  it.
It  was  impossible  to  imagine  any  more  delightful  halting
place  for  a  traveller.  At  the  foot  of  the  precipitous
rocks,  the  stream  bubbled  upward  and  fell  into  a  little
basin,  lined  with  sand  that  was  as  white  as  snow.  Five
or  six  splendid  evergreen  oaks,  sheltered  from  the  wind,

2


Carmen

and  cooled  by  the  spring,  grew  beside  the  pool,  s
shaded  it  with  their  thick  foliage.     And  round  ab-
it  a  close  and  glossy  turf  offered  the  wanderer  a  be'
bed  than  he  could  have  found  in  any  hostelry  for
leagues  round.

The  honour  of  discovering  th'  .r  spot  did  not  be-
long to  me.  A  man  was  restin  ^  there  already — sleep-
ing, no  doubt — before  I  rea  aed  it.  Roused  by  the
neighing  of  the  horses,  he  had  risen  to  his  feet  and  had
moved  over  to  his  mount,  which  had  been  taking  advan-
tage of  its  master's  slumbers  to  make  a  hearty  feed  on
the  grass  that  grew  around.  He  was  an  active  young
fellow,  of  middle  height,  but  powerful  in  build,  and
proud  and  sullen-looking  in  expression.  His  complex-
ion, which  may  once  have  been  fine,  had  been  tanned  by
the  sun  till  it  was  darker  than  his  hair.  One  of  his
hands  grasped  his  horse's  halter.  In  the  other  he  held
a  brass  blunderbuss.

At  the  first  blush,  I  confess,  the  blunderbuss,  and
the  savage  looks  of  the  man  who  bore  it,  somewhat  took
me  aback.  But  I  had  heard  so  much  about  robbers,
that,  never  seeing  any,  I  had  ceased  to  believe  in  their
existence.  And  further,  I  had  seen  so  many  honest
farmers  arm  themselves  to  the  teeth  before  they  went
out  to  market,  that  the  sight  of  firearms  gave  me  no  war-
rant for  doubting  the  character  of  any  stranger.  "'  And
then,"  quoth  I  to  myself,  "  what  could  he  do  with  my
shirts  and  my  Elzevir  edition  of  Caesar's  Commcn-
tarics?  "  So  I  bestowed  a  friendly  nod  on  the  man  with
the  blunderbuss,  and  inquired,  with  a  smile,  whether  I

3


Carmen

'1  disturbed  his  nap.  Without  any  answer,  he  looked
ver  from  head  to  foot.  Then,  as  if  the  scrutiny  had
lied  him,  he  looked  as  closely  at  my  guide,  ^vho
just  coming  up.  I  saw  the  guide  turn  pale,  and
..il  up  with  an  air  of  evident  alarm.  "  An  unlucky
meeting!  "  thought  I  to  myself.  But  prudence  instantly
counselled  me  not  to  i  t  any  symptom  of  anxiety  escape
me.  So  I  dismounted.  I  told  the  guide  to  take  off
the  horses'  bridles,  and  kneeling  down  beside  the  spring,
I  laved  my  head  and  hands  and  then  drank  a  long-
draught,  lying  flat  on  my  belly,  like  Gideon's  soldiers.

Meanwhile,  I  watched  the  stranger,  and  my  own
guide.  This  last  seemed  to  come  forward  unwillingly.
But  the  other  did  not  appear  to  have  any  evil  designs
upon  us.  For  he  had  turned  his  horse  loose,  and  the
blunderbuss,  which  he  had  been  holding'  horizontally,
was  now  dropped  earthward.

Not  thinking  it  necessary  to  take  offence  at  the  scant
attention  paid  me,  I  stretched  myself  full  length  upon
the  grass,  and  calmly  asked  the  owner  of  the  blunder-
buss whether  he  had  a  light  about  him.  At  the  same
time  I  pulled  out  my  cigar-case.  The  stranger,  still
without  opening  his  lips,  took  out  his  flint,  and  lost  no
time  in  getting  me  a  light.  He  was  evidently  growing
tamer,  for  he  sat  down  opposite  to  me,  though  he  still
grasped  his  w'eapon.  When  I  had  lighted  my  cigar,  I
chose  out  the  best  I  had  left,  and  asked  him  whether  he
smoked.

"  Yes,  sehor,"  he  replied.  These  were  the  first  words
I  had  heard  him  speak,  and  I  noticed  that  he  did  not

4


Carmen

pronounce  the  letter  ^  *  in  the  Anclahisian  fashion,
whence  I  concluded  he  was  a  traveller,  like  myself,
though,  maybe,  somewhat  less  of  an  archaeologist.

"  You'll  find  this  a  fairly  good  one,"  said  I,  holding
out  a  real  Havana  regalia.

He  bowed  his  head  slightly,  lighted  his  cigar  at  mine,
thanked  me  with  another  nod.  and  began  to  smoke  witli
a  most  lively  appearance  of  enjoyment.

"Ah!"  he  exclaimed,  as  he  blew  his  first  puff  of
smoke  slowly  out  of  his  ears  and  nostrils.  "  \Miat  a
time  it  is  since  I've  had  a  smoke!  "

In  Spain  the  giving  and  accepting  of  a  cigar  estab-
lishes bonds  of  hospitality  similar  to  those  founded  in
Eastern  countries  on  the  partaking  of  bread  and  salt.
My  friend  turned  out  more  talkative  than  I  had  hoped.
However,  though  he  claimed  to  belong  to  the  partido  of
Montilla.  he  seemed  very  ill-informed  about  the  country.
He  did  not  know  the  name  of  the  delightful  valley  in
which  we  were  sitting,  he  could  not  tell  me  the  names  of
any  of  the  neighbouring  villages,  and  when  I  inquired
whether  he  had  not  noticed  any  broken-down  walls,
broad-rimmed  tiles,  or  carved  stones  in  the  vicinity,  he
confessed  he  had  never  paid  any  heed  to  such  matters.
On  the  other  hand,  he  showed  himself  an  expert  in
horseflesh,  found  fault  with  my  mount — not  a  diffi-
cult aft'air — and  gave  me  the  pedigree  of  his  own.  which

*  The  Andalusians  aspirate  the  s,  and  pronounce  it  like  the  soft
c  and  the  z,  which  Spaniards  pronounce  like  the  English  ///.  An
Andalusian  may  always  be  recognised  by  the  way  in  which  he  says
seitor.

Vol.  6  5  P


Carmen

had  come  from  the  famous  stud  at  Cordova.  It  was  a
splendid  creature,  indeed,  so  tough,  according  to  its
owner's  claim,  that  it  had  once  covered  thirty  leagues
in  one  day,  either  at  the  gallop  or  at  full  trot  the  whole
time.  In  the  midst  of  his  story  the  stranger  pulled  up
short,  as  if  startled  and  sorry  he  had  said  so  much.
"  The  fact  is  I  was  in  a  great  hurry  to  get  to  Cordo-
va," he  went  on,  somewhat  embarrassed.  "  I  had  to
petition  the  judges  about  a  lawsuit."  As  he  spoke,  he
looked  at  my  guide  Antonio,  who  had  dropped  his
eyes.

The  spring  and  the  cool  shade  were  so  delightful  that
I  bethought  me  of  certain  slices  of  an  excellent  ham,
which  my  friends  at  Montilla  had  packed  into  my  guide's
wallet.  I  bade  him  produce  them,  and  invited  the
stranger  to  share  our  impromptu  lunch.  If  he  had  not
smoked  for  a  long  time,  he  certainly  struck  me  as  hav-
ing fasted  for  eight-and-forty  hours  at  the  very  least.
He  ate  like  a  starving  wolf,  and  I  thought  to  myself  that
my  appearance  must  really  have  been  quite  providential
for  the  poor  fellow.  Meanwhile  my  guide  ate  but  little,
drank  still  less,  and  spoke  never  a  word,  although  in  the
earlier  part  of  our  journey  he  had  proved  himself  a  most
unrivalled  chatterer.  He  seemed  ill  at  ease  in  the  pres-
ence of  our  guest,  and  a  sort  of  mutual  distrust,  the
cause  of  which  I  could  not  exactly  fathom,  seemed  to  lie
between  them.

The  last  crumbs  of  bread  and  scraps  of  ham  had  dis-
appeared. We  had  each  smoked  our  second  cigar;  I
told  the  guide  to  bridle  the  horses,  and  was  just  about

6


Carmen

to  take  leave  of  my  new  friend,  when  he  inquired  where
I  Avas  going  to  spend  the  night.

Before  I  had  time  to  notice  a  sign  my  guide  was
making  to  me  I  had  repHed  that  I  was  going  to  the
Venta  del  Cuervo.

"  That's  a  bad  lodging  for  a  gentleman  like  you,  sir!
I'm  bound  there  myself,  and  if  you'll  allow  me  to  ride
with  you,  we'll  go  together."

"  With  pleasure!  "  I  replied,  mounting  my  horse.
The  guide,  who  was  holding  my  stirrup,  looked  at  me
meaningly  again.  I  answered  by  shrugging  my  shoul-
deis,  as  though  to  assure  him  I  was  perfectly  easy  in
my  mind,  and  we  started  on  our  way.

Antonio's  mysterious  signals,  his  evident  anxiety,  a
few  words  dropped  by  the  stranger,  above  all,  his  ride
of  thirty  leagues,  and  the  far  from  plausible  explanation
he  had  given  us  of  it,  had  already  enabled  me  to  form  an
opinion  as  to  the  identity  of  my  fellow-traveller.  I  had
no  doubt  at  all  I  was  in  the  company  of  a  smuggler,  and
possibly  of  a  brigand.  What  cared  I?  I  knew  enough
of  the  Spanish  character  to  be  very  certain  I  had  noth-
ing to  fear  from  a  man  who  had  eaten  and  smoked  with
me.  His  very  presence  would  protect  me  in  case  of  any
undesirable  meeting.  And  besides,  I  was  very  glad  to
know  what  a  brigand  was  really  like.  One  doesn't  come
across  such  gentry  every  day.  And  there  is  a  certain
charm  about  finding  one's  self  in  close  proximity  to
a  dangerous  being,  especially  when  one  feels  the  being
in  question  to  be  gentle  and  tame.

I  was  hoi^ng  the  stranger  might  gradually  fall  into

7


Carmen  j

a  confidential  mood,  and  in  spite  of  my  guide's  winks,
I  turned  the  conversation  to  the  subject  of  highway-
men. I  need  scarcely  say  that  I  spoke  of  them  with
great  respect.  At  that  time  there  was  a  famous  brigand
in  Andalusia,  of  the  name  of  Jose-Maria,  whose  exploits
were  on  every  lip.  "  Supposing  I  should  be  ric  ing
along  with  Jose-Maria!  "  said  I  to  myself.  I  told  all  the
stories  I  knew  about  the  hero — they  were  all  to  his
credit,  indeed,  and  loudly  expressed  my  admiration  of
his  generosity  and  his  valour.

"  Jose-Maria  is  nothing  but  a  blackguard,"  said  the
stranger  gravely.

"  Is  he  just  to  himself,  or  is  this  an  excess  of  mod-
esty? "  I  queried,  mentally,  for  by  dint  of  scrutinizing
my  companion,  I  had  ended  by  reconciling  his  appear-
ance with  the  description  of  Jose-Maria  which  I  read
posted  up  on  the  gates  of  various  Andalusian  towns.
"  Yes,  this  must  be  he — fair  hair,  blue  eyes,  large  mouth,
good  teeth,  small  hands,  fine  shirt,  a  velvet  jacket  with
silver  buttons  on  it,  white  leather  gaiters,  and  a  bay
horse.  Not  a  doubt  about  it.  But  his  incognito  shall
be  respected!  "  We  reached  the  zriifa.  It  was  just
what  he  had  described  to  me.  In  other  words,  the  most
wretched  hole  of  its  kind  I  had  as  yet  beheld.  One  large
apartment  served  as  kitchen,  dining-room,  and  sleeping
chamber.  A  fire  was  burning  on  a  fiat  stone  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  room,  and  the  smoke  escaped  through  a  hole
in  the  roof,  or  rather  hung  in  a  cloud  some  feet  above
the  soil.  Along  the  walls  five  or  six  old  mule  rugs  were
spread  on  the  floor.     These  were  the  travellers'  beds.

8


Carmen

Twenty  paces  from  the  house,  or  rather  from  the  soli-
tary apartment  which  I  have  just  described,  stood  a  sort
of  shed,  that  served  for  a  stable.

The  only  inhabitants  of  this  delightful  dwelling  visi-
ble at  the  moment,  at  all  events,  were  an  old  woman,
and  a  little  girl  of  ten  or  twelve  years  old,  both  of  them
as  black  as  soot,  and  dressed  in  loathsome  rags.
"  Here's  the  sole  remnant  of  the  ancient  populations  of
Munda  Boetica,"  said  I  to  myself.  "  O  Caesar!  O
Sextus  Pompeius,  if  you  were  to  revisit  this  earth  how-
astounded  you  would  be!  "

When  the  old  woman  saw  my  travelling  companion
an  exclamation  of  surprise  escaped  her.  ''Ah!  Sehor
Don  Jose!  "  she  cried.

Don  Jose  frowned  and  lifted  his  hand  with  a  ges-
ture of  authority  that  forthwith  silenced  the  old  dame.

I  turned  to  my  guide  and  gave  him  to  understand,
by  a  sign  that  no  one  else  perceived,  that  I  knew^  all
about  the  man  in  whose  company  I  w^as  about  to  spend
the  night.  Our  supper  was  better  than  I  expected.  On
a  little  table,  only  a  foot  high,  we  were  served  with  an
old  rooster,  fricasseed  with  rice  and  numerous  peppers,
then  more  peppers  in  oil,  and  finally  a  gaspacho — a  sort
of  salad  made  of  peppers.  These  three  highly  spiced
dishes  involved  our  frequent  recourse  to  a  goatskin
filled  with  Montella  wine,  which  struck  us  as  being
delicious.

After  our  meal  was  over,  I  caught  sight  of  a  man-
dolin hanging  up  against  the  wall — in  Spain  you
see  mandolins  in  every  corner — and  I  asked  the  little

9


Carmen

girl,  who  had  been  waiting  on  us,  if  she  knew  how  to
play  it.

"  No,"  she  replied.  "  But  Don  Jose  does  play
well!"

"  Do  me  the  kindness  to  sing  me  something,"  I  said
to  him,  "  I'm  passionately  fond  of  your  national  music."

"  I  can't  refuse  to  do  anything  for  such  a  charming
gentleman,  who  gives  me  such  excellent  cigars,"  re-
sponded Don  Jose  gaily,  and  having  made  the  child
give  him  the  mandolin,  he  sang  to  his  ow^n  accompani-
ment. His  voice,  though  rough,  was  pleasing,  the  air
he  sang  v;as  strange  and  sad.  As  to  the  words,  I  could
not  understand  a  single  one  of  them.

"  If  I  am  not  mistaken,"  said  I,  "  that's  not  a  Span-
ish air  you  have  just  been  singing.  It's  like  the  zoraicos
I've  heard  in  the  Provinces,*  and  the  words  must  be  in
the  Basque  language."

"  Yes,"  said  Don  Jose,  with  a  gloomy  look.  He  laid
the  mandolin  down  on  the  ground,  and  began  staring
with  a  peculiarly  sad  expression  at  the  dying  fire.  His
face,  at  once  fierce  and  noble-looking,  reminded  me,  as
the  firelight  fell  on  it,  of  Milton's  Satan.  Like  him,  per-
chance, my  comrade  was  musing  over  the  home  he  had
forfeited,  the  exile  he  had  earned,  by  some  misdeed.  I
tried  to  revive  the  conversation,  but  so  absorbed  was  he
in  melancholy  thought,  that  he  gave  me  no  answer.

The  old  woman  had  already  gone  to  rest  in  a  cor-

*  The  privileged  Provinces,  Alava,  Biscay,  Guipuzcoa,  and  a  part
of  Navarre,  which  all  enjoy  special  fueros.  The  Basque  language
is  spoken  in  these  countries.

10


Carmen

ner  of  the  room,  behind  a  ragged  rug  hung  on  a  rope.
The  httle  girl  had  followed  her  into  this  retreat,  sacred
to  the  fair  sex.  Then  my  guide  rose,  and  suggested  that
I  should  go  with  him  to  the  stable.  But  at  the  word
Don  Jose,  waking,  as  it  were,  with  a  start,  inquired
sharply  whither  he  was  going.

"  To  the  stable,"  answered  my  guide.

"What  for?  the  horses  have  been  fed!  You  can
sleep  here.    The  sehor  will  give  you  leave."

"  I'm  afraid  the  sehor's  horse  is  sick.  I'd  like  the
serior  to  see  it.  Perhaps  he'd  know  what  should  be
done  for  it."

It  was  quite  clear  to  me  that  Antonio  wanted  to
speak  to  me  apart.

But  I  did  not  -care  to  rouse  Don  Jose's  suspicions,
and  being  as  we  were,  I  thought  far  the  wisest  course
for  me  was  to  appear  absolutely  confident.

I  therefore  told  Antonio  that  I  knew  nothing  on
earth  about  horses,  and  that  I  was  desperately  sleepy.
Don  Jose  followed  him  to  the  stable,  and  soon  returned
alone.  He  told  me  there  was  nothing  the  matter  with
the  horse,  but  that  my  guide  considered  the  animal  such
a  treasure  that  he  was  scrubbing  it  with  his  jacket  to
make  it  sweat,  and  expected  to  spend  the  night  in  that
pleasing  occupation.  Meanwhile  I  had  stretched  myself
out  on  the  mule  rugs,  having  carefully  wrapped  myself
up  in  my  own  cloak,  so  as  to  avoid  touching  them.  Don
Jose,  having  begged  me  to  excuse  the  liberty  he  took
in  placing  himself  so  near  me,  lay  down  across  the  door,
but  not  until  he  had  primed  his  blunderbuss  afresh  and

II


Carmen

carefully  laid  it  under-  the  wallet,  which  served  him  as  a
pillow.

I  had  thought  I  was  so  tired  that  I  should  be  able
to  sleep  even  in  such  a  lodging.  But  within  an  hour
a  most  unpleasant  itching  sensation  roused  me  h-om  my
first  nap.  As  soon  as  I  realized  its  nature,  I  rose  to  my
feet,  feeling  convinced  I  should  do  far  better  to  spend
the  rest  of  the  night  in  the  open  air  than  beneath  that
inhospitable  roof.  Walking  tiptoe  I  reached  the  door,
stepped  over  Don  Jose,  who  was  sleeping  the  sleep  of
the  just,  and  managed  so  well  that  I  got  outside  the
building  without  waking  him.  Just  beside  the  door
there  was  a  wide  wooden  bench.  I  lay  down  upon  it,
and  settled  myself,  as  best  I  could,  for  the  remainder  of
the  night.  I  was  just  closing  my  eyes  for  the  second
time  when  I  fancied  I  saw  the  shadow  of  a  man  and  then
the  shadow  of  a  horse  moving  absolutely  noiselessly,
one  behind  the  other.  I  sat  upright,  and  then  I  thought
I  recognised  Antonio.  Surprised  to  see  him  outside
the  stable  at  such  an  hour,  I  got  up  and  went  toward
him.  He  had  seen  me  first,  and  had  stopped  to  wait
for  me.

"  Where  is  he?  "  Antonio  inquired  in  a  low  tone.

"  In  the  vcnta.  He's  asleep.  The  bugs  don't  trou-
ble him.  But  what  are  you  going  to  do  with  that
horse?  "  I  then  noticed  that,  to  stifle  all  noise  as  he
moved  out  of  the  shed,  Antonio  had  carefully  muffled
the  horse's  feet  in  the  rags  of  an  old  blanket.

"  Speak  lower,  for  God's  sake,"  said  Antonio.
"  You  don't  know  who  that  man  is.    He's  Jose  Navarro,

12


Carmen

the  most  noted  bandit  in  Andalusia.  I've  been  making
signs  to  you  all  day  long,  and  you  wouldn't  understand."

"  What  do  I  care  whether  he's  a  brigand  or  not,"  I
replied.  "  He  hasn't  robbed  us,  and  I'll  wager  he
doesn't  want  to."

"  That  may  be.  But  there  are  two  hundred  ducats
on  his  head.  Some  lancers  are  stationed  in  a  place
I  know,  a  league  and  a  half  from  here,  and  before  day-
break I'll  bring  a  few  brawny  fellows  back  with  me.
T'd  have  taken  his  horse  away,  but  the  brute's  so  savage
that  nobody  but  Navarro  can  go  near  it."

"  Devil  take  you!  "  I  cried.  "  What  harm  has  the
poor  fellow  done  you  that  you  should  want  to  inform
against  him?  And  besides,  are  you  certain  he  is  the
brigand  you  take  him  for?  "

"  Perfectly  certain!  He  came  after  me  into  the  sta-
ble just  now,  and  said,  '  You  seem  to  know  me.  If  you
tell  that  good  gentleman  who  I  am,  I'll  blow  your  brains
out!  '  You  stay  here,  sir,  keep  close  to  him.  You've
nothing  to  fear.  As  long  as  he  knows  you  are  there,  he
W'On't  suspect  anything."

As  we  talked,  we  had  moved  so  far  from  the  z'cnta
that  the  noise  of  the  horse's  hoofs  could  not  be  heard
there.  In  a  twinkling  Antonio  snatched  off  the  rags  he
had  wrapped  around  the  creature's  feet,  and  was  just
about  to  climb  on  its  back.  In  vain  did  I  attempt  with
prayers  and  threats  to  restrain  him.

"  I'm  only  a  poor  man,  senor,"  quoth  he,  *'  I  can't
afiford  to  lose  tw^o  hundred  ducats — especially  when  I
shall  earn  them  by  ridding  the  country  of  such  vermin,

13


Carmen

But  mind  what  you're  about!  If  Navarro  wakes  up,
he'll  snatch  at  his  blunderbuss,  and  then  look  out  for
yourself!  I've  gone  too  far  now  to  turn  back.  Do  the
best  you  can  for  yourself!  "

The  villain  was  in  his  saddle  already,  he  spurred  his
horse  smartly,  and  I  soon  lost  sight  of  them  both  in  the
darkness.

I  was  very  angry  with  my  guide,  and  terribly
alarmed  as  well.  After  a  moment's  reflection,  I  made
up  my  mind,  and  went  back  to  the  rcnta.  Don  Jose
was  still  sound  asleep,  making  up,  no  doubt,  for  the  fa-
tigue and  sleeplessness  of  several  days  of  adveriture.  I
had  to  shake  him  roughly  before  I  could  wake  him  up.
Never  shall  I  forget  his  fierce  look,  and  the  spring  he
made  to  get  hold  of  his  blunderbuss,  which,  as  a  pre-
cautionary measure,  I  had  removed  to  some  distance
from  his  couch.

"  Senor,"  I  said,  "  I  beg  your  pardon  for  disturb-
ing you.  But  I  have  a  silly  question  to  ask  you.  Would
you  be  glad  to  see  half  a  dozen  lancers  walk  in  here?  "

He  bounded  to  his  feet,  and  in  an  awful  voice  he
demanded :

''Who  told  you?"

"  It's  little  matter  whence  the  warning  comes,  so
long  as  it  be  good."

"  Your  guide  has  l^etrayed  me — but  he  shall  pay  for
it!    Where  is  he?"

"  I  don't  know.  In  the  stable,  I  fancy.  But  some-
body told  me "

"  Who  told  you?    It  can't  be  the  old  hag "

14


Carmen

"  .Some  one  I  don't  know.  Without  more  parley-
ing, t.eil  me,  yes  or  no,  have  you  any  reason  for  not
waiting  till  the  soldiers  come?  If  you  have  any,  lose
no  time!  If  not,  good-night  to  you,  and  forgive  me  for
havi'ag  disturbed  your  slumbers!  "

' '  Ah,  your  guide!  your  guide!  I  had  my  doubts  of
hirrii  at  first — but — I'll  settle  with  him!  Farewell,  se-
nor*  May  God  reward  you  for  the  service  I  owe  you!
I  am  not  quite  so  wicked  as  you  think  me.  Yes,  I  still
have  something  in  me  that  an  honest  man  may  pity.
Farewell,  sehor!  I  have  only  one  regret — that  I  can
nc  t  pay  my  debt  to  you!  "

"  As  a  reward  for  the  service  I  have  done  you,  Don
Jose,  promise  me  you'll  suspect  nobody — nor  seek  for
\[engeance.  Here  are  some  cigars  for  your  journey.
Good  luck  to  you."    And  I  held  out  my  hand  to  him.

He  squeezed  it,  without  a  word,  took  up  his  wallet
and  blunderbuss,  and  after  saying  a  few  words  to  the
old  woman  in  a  lingo  that  I  could  not  understand,  he
ran  out  to  the  shed.  A  few  minutes  later  I  heard  him
galloping  out  into  the  country.

As  for  me,  I  lay  down  again  on  my  bench,  but  I
did  not  go  to  sleep  again.  I  queried  in  my  own  mind
whether  I  had  done  right  to  save  a  robber,  and  possi-
bly a  murderer,  from  the  gallows,  simply  and  solely
because  I  had  eaten  ham  and  rice  in  his  company.  Had
I  not  betrayed  my  guide,  who  was  supporting  the  cause
of  law  and  order?  Had  I  not  exposed  him  to  a  rufifian's
vengeance?  But  then,  what  about  the  laws  of  hospital-
ity?

15  15


Carmen

"A  mere  savage  prejudice,"  said  I  to  myself.  ''  I
shall  have  to  answer  for  all  the  crimes  this  brigand  may
commit  in  future."  Yet  is  that  instinct  of  the'  con-
science which  resists  every  argument  really  a  prejuMice?
It  may  be  I  could  not  have  escaped  from  the  delicat«2  po-
sition in  which  I  found  myself  without  remorse  of  some
kind.  I  was  still  tossed  to  and  fro,  in  the  greatest  uncer-
tainty as  to  the  morality  of  my  behaviour,  when  I  .saw-
half  a  dozen  horsemen  ride  up,  with  Antonio  prudently
lagging  behind  them.  I  went  to  meet  them,  and  told
them  the  brigand  had  fled  over  two  hours  previousiiy.
The  old  woman,  when  she  was  questioned  by  the  sec-
geant,  admitted  that  she  knew  Navarro,  but  said  that
living  alone,  as  she  did,  she  would  never  have  daYecJ^
to  risk  her  life  by  informing  against  him.  She  addec^
that  when  he  came  to  her  house,  he  habitually  went  away
in  the  middle  of  the  night.  I,  for  my  part,  was  made
to  ride  to  a  place  some  leagues  away,  where  I  showed
my  passport,  and  signed  a  declaration  before  the  Al-
calde. This  done,  I  was  allowed  to  recommence  my
archaeological  investigations.  Antonio  was  sulky  with
me;  suspecting  it  w^as  I  w'ho  had  prevented  his  earning
those  two  hundred  ducats.  Nevertheless,  we  parted
good  friends  at  Cordova,  where  I  gave  him  as  large  a
gratuity  as  the  state  of  my  finances  would  permit.


i6


CHAPTER    II

I  SPENT  several  days  at  Cordova.  I  had  been  told
of  a  certain  manuscript  in  the  library  of  the  Domini-
can convent  which  was  likely  to  furnish  me  with  very
interesting  details  about  the  ancient  Munda.  The
good  fathers  gave  me  the  most  kindly  welcome.  I
spent  the  daylight  hours  within  their  convent,  and  at
nignt  I  walked  about  the  town.  At  Cordova  a  great'
many  idlers  collect,  toward  sunset,  on  the  quay  that
runs  along  the  right  bank  of  the  Guadalquivir.  Prome-
naders  on  the  spot  have  to  breathe  the  odour  of  a  tan-
yard  which  still  keeps  up  the  ancient  fame  of  the  coun-
try in  connection  with  the  curing  of  leather.  But  to
atone  for  this,  they  enjoy  a  sight  which  has  a  charm  of
its  own.  A  few  minutes  before  the  Angelus  bell  rings,,
a  great  company  of  women  gathers  beside  the  river,
just  below  the  quay,  which  is  rather  a  high  one.  Not
a  man  would  dare  to  join  its  ranks.  The  moment  the
Angelus  rings,  darkness  is  supposed  to  have  fallen.  As
the  last  stroke  sounds,  all  the  women  disrobe  and  step
into  the  water.  Then  there  is  laughing  and  screaming,
and  a  wonderful  clatter.  The  men  on  the  upper  quay
watch  the  bathers,  straining  their  eyes,  and  seeing  very
little.     Yet   the   white   uncertain   outlines   perceptible

17


Carmen

against  the  dark-blue  waters  of  the  stream  stir  the  poetic
mind,  and  the  possessor  of  a  little  fancy  finds  it  not
difficult  to  imagine  that  Diana  and  her  nymphs  are
bathing  below,  while  he  himself  runs  no  risk  of  ending-
like  Acteon.

I  have  been  told  that  one  day  a  party  of  good-for-
nothing  fellows  banded  themselves  together,  and  bribed
the  bell-ringer  at  the  cathedral  to  ring  the  Angelus  some
twenty  minutes  before  the  proper  hour.  Though  it  was
still  broad  daylight,  the  nymphs  of  the  Guadalquivir
never  hesitated,  and  putting  far  more  trust  in  the  An-
gelus bell  than  in  the  sun,  they  proceeded  to  their  bath-
ing toilette — always  of  the  simplest — with  an  easy  con-
science. I  was  not  present  on  that  occasion.  In  my
day,  the  bell-ringer  was  incorruptible,  the  twilight  was
very  dim,  and  nobody  but  a  cat  could  have  distinguished
the  difference  between  the  oldest  orange  woman,  and
the  prettiest  shop-girl,  in  Cordova.

One  evening,  after  it  had  grown  ciuite  dusk,  I  was
leaning  over  the  parapet  of  the  quay,  smoking,  when  a
woman  came  up  the  steps  leading  from  the  river,  and  sat
down  near  me.  In  her  hair  she  wore  a  great  bunch  of
jasmine — a  flower  which,  at  night,  exhales  a  most  intoxi-
cating perfume.  She  w^as  dressed  simply,  almost  poor-
ly, in  black,  as  most  work-girls  are  dressed  in  the  even-
ing. Women  of  the  richer  class  only  wear  black  in  the
daytime,  at  night  they  dress  a  la  franccsa.  When  she
drew  near  me,  the  woman  let  the  mantilla  which  had
covered  her  head  drop  on  her  shoulders,  and  "  by
the  dim  light  falling  from  the  stars  "  I  perceived  her  to

i8


Carmen

be  young,  short  in  stature,  well-proportioned,  and  with
very  large  eyes.  I  threw  my  cigar  away  at  once.  She
appreciated  this  mark  of  courtesy,  essentially  French,
and  hastened  to  inform  me  that  she  was  very  fond  of  the
smell  of  tobacco,  and  that  she  even  smoked  herself,
when  she  could  get  very  mild  papelitos.  I  fortunately
happened  to  have  some  such  in  my  case,  and  at  once
offered  them  to  her.  She  condescended  to  take  one,
and  lighted  it  at  a  burning  string  which  a  child  brought
us,  receiving  a  copper  for  its  pains.  We  mingled  our
smoke,  and  talked  so  long,  the  fair  lady  and  I,  that  we
ended  by  being  almost  alone  upon  the  quay.  I  thought
I  might  venture,  w^ithout  impropriety,  to  suggest  our
going  to  eat  an  ice  at  the  ncvcria*  After  a  moment
of  modest  demur,  she  agreed.  But  before  finally  ac-
cepting, she  desired  to  know  what  o'clock  it  was.  I
struck  my  repeater,  and  this  seemed  to  astound  her
greatly.

"What  clever  inventions  you  foreigners  do  have!
Wliat  country  do  you  belong  to,  sir?  You're  an  Eng-
lishman, no  doubt!  "  f

"  I'm  a  Frenchman,  and  your  devoted  servant.  And
you,  senora,  or  sehorita,  you  probably  belong  to  Cor-
dova? "

"  No."

*  A  ra/e  to  which  a  depot  of  ice,  or  rather  of  snow,  is  attached.
There  is  hardly  a  village  in  Spain  without  its  neveria.

f  Every  traveller  in  Spain  who  does  not  carry  about  samples  of
calicoes  and  silks  is  taken  for  an  Englishman  {inglesito).  It  is  the
same  thing  in  the  East.  At  Chalcis  I  had  the  honour  of  being  an-
nounced as  a  MiAbpSorr  ipavrsioos.

19


Carmen

"At  all  events,  you  are  an  Andalusian?  Your  soft
way  of  speaking  makes  me  think  so."

"  If  you  notice  people's  accent  so  closely,  you  must
be  able  to  guess  what  I  am."

''  I  think  you  are  from  the  country  of  Jesus,  two
paces  out  of  Paradise."

I  had  learned  this  metaphor,  which  stands  for  Anda-
lusia, from  my  friend  Francisco  Sevilla,  a  well-known
picador.

"  Pshaw!  The  people  here  say  there  is  no  place  in
Paradise  for  us!  "

"  Then  perhaps  you  are  of  Moorish  blood — or "

I  stopped,  not  venturing  to  add  "  a  Jewess."

"  Oh  come!  You  must  see  I'm  a  gipsy!  W'^ouldn't
you  like  me  to  tell  you  la  baji?  *  Did  you  never  hear
tell  of  Carmencita?    That's  who  I  am!  "

I  was  such  a  miscreant  in  those  days — now  fifteen
years  ago — that  the  close  proximity  of  a  sorceress  did
not  make  me  recoil  in  horror.  "  So  be  it!  "  I  thought.
"  Last  week  I  ate  my  supper  with  a  highway  robber.
To-day  I'll  go  and  eat  ices  with  a  servant  of  the  devil.
A  traveller  should  see  everything."  I  had  yet  another
motive  for  prosecuting  her  acquaintance.  When  I  left
college — I  acknowledge  it  with  shame — I  had  wasted  a
certain  amount  of  time  in  studying  occult  science,  and
had  even  attempted,  more  than  once,  to  exorcise  the
powers  of  darkness.  Though  I  had  been  curecl^  long
since,  of  my  passion  for  such  investigations,  I  still  felt  a

*  Your  fortune.
20


Carmen

certain  attraction  and  curiosity  with  regard  to  all  super-
stitions, and  I  was  delighted  to  have  this  opportunity  of
discovering  how  far  the  magic  art  had  developed  among
the  gipsies.

Talking  as  we  went,  we  had  reached  the  ncvcria,
and  seated  ourselves  at  a  little  table,  lighted  by  a  taper
protected  by  a  glass  globe.  I  then  had  time  to  take  a
leisurely  view  of  my  gitaiia,  while  several  worthy  indi-
viduals, who  were  eating  their  ices,  stared  open-
mouthed  at  beholding  me  in  such  gay  company.

I  very  much  doubt  whether  the  Senorita  Carmen
was  a  pure-blooded  gipsy.  At  all  events,  she  was  infi-
nitely prettier  than  any  other  woman  of  her  race  I  have
ever  seen.  For  a  woman  to  be  beautiful,  they  say  in
Spain,  she  must  fulfil  thirty  ifs,  or,  if  it  please  you  bet-
ter, you  must  be  able  to  define  her  appearance  by  ten
adjectives,  applicable  to  three  portions  of  her  person.

For  instance,  three  things  about  her  must  be  black,
her  eyes,  her  eyelashes,  and  her  eyebrows.  Three  must
be  dainty,  her  fingers,  her  lips,  her  hair,  and  so  forth.
For  the  rest  of  this  inventory,  see  Brant(3me.  My  gipsy
girl  could  lay  no  claim  to  so  many  perfections.  Her
skin,  though  perfectly  smooth,  was  almost  of  a  copper
hue.  Her  eyes  were  set  obliquely  in  her  head,  but  they
were  magnificent  and  large.  Her  lips,  a  little  full,  but
beautifully  shaped,  revealed  a  set  of  teeth  as  white  as
newly  skinned  almonds.  Her  hair — a  trifle  coarse,  per-
haps— was  black,  with  blue  lights  on  it  like  a  raven's
wing,  long  and  glossy.  Not  to  weary  my  readers  with
too  prolix  a  description,  I  will  merely  add,  that  to  every
Vol.6  21  Q


Carmen

blemish  she  united  some  advantage,  which  was  perhaps
all  the  more  evident  by  contrast.  There  was  something
strange  and  wild  about  her  beauty.  Her  face  aston-
ished you,  at  first  sight,  but  nobody  could  forget  it.
Her  eyes,  especially,  had  an  expression  of  mingled  sen-
suality and  fierceness  which  I  had  never  seen  in  any
other  human  glance.  "  Gipsy's  eye,  wolf's  eye!  "  is
a  Spanish  saying  which  denotes  close  observation.  If
my  readers  have  no  time  to  go  to  the  ''  Jardin  des
Plantes"  to  study  the  wolf's  expression,  they  will  do  well
to  watch  the  ordinary  cat  when  it  is  lying  in  wait  for  a
sparrow.

It  will  be  understood  that  I  should  have  looked  ridic-
ulous if  I  had  proposed  to  have  my  fortune  told  in  a
cafe.  I  therefore  begged  the  pretty  witch's  leave  to  go
home  with  her.  She  made  no  difficulties  about  con-
senting, but  she  wanted  to  know  what  o'clock  it  was
again,  and  requested  me  to  make  my  repeater  strike
once  more.

"  Is  it  really  gold?  "  she  said,  gazing  at  it  with  rapt
attention.

When  we  started  oft  again,  it  was  quite  dark.  Most
of  the  shops  were  shut,  and  the  streets  were  almost
empty.  We  crossed  the  bridge  over  the  Guadalquivir,
and  at  the  far  end  of  the  suburb  we  stopped  in  front
of  a  house  of  anything  but  palatial  appearance.  The
door  was  opened  by  a  child,  to  whom  the  gipsy  spoke  a
few  words  in  a  language  unknown  to  me,  which  I  after-
ward understood  to  be  Romany,  or  chipe  calli — the  gipsy
idiom.     The  child  instantly  disappeared,  leaving  us  in

22


Carmen

sole  possession  of  a  tolerably  spacious  room,  furnished
with  a  small  table,  two  stools,  and  a  chest.  I  must  not
forget  to  mention  a  jar  of  water,  a  pile  of  oranges,  and
a  bunch  of  onions.

As  soon  as  we  were  left  alone,  the  gipsy  produced,
out  of  her  chest,  a  pack  of  cards,  bearing  signs  of  con-
stant usage,  a  magnet,  a  dried  chameleon,  and  a  few
other  indispensable  adjuncts  of  her  art.  Then  she  bade
me  cross  my  left  hand  with  a  silver  coin,  and  the  magic
ceremonies  duly  began.  It  is  unnecessar}^  to  chronicle
her  predictions,  and  as  for  the  style  of  her  performance,
it  proved  her  to  be  no  mean  sorceress.

Unluckily  we  were  soon  disturbed.  The  door  w^as
suddenly  burst  open,  and  a  man,  shrouded  to  the  eyes
in  a  brow^n  cloak,  entered  the  room,  apostrophizing  the
gipsy  in  anything  but  gentle  terms.  What  he  said  I
could  not  catch,  but  the  tone  of  his  voice  revealed  the
fact  that  he  was  in  a  very  evil  temper.  The  gipsy
betrayed  neither  surprise  nor  anger  at  his  advent,  but
she  ran  to  meet  him,  and  with  a  most  striking  volubil-
ity, she  poured  out  several  sentences  in  the  mysterious
language  she  had  already  used  in  ni}-  presence.  The
word  payllo,  frequently  reiterated,  was  the  only  one  I
understood.  I  knew  that  the  gipsies  use  it  to  describe
all  men  not  of  their  own  race.  Concluding  myself  to
be  the  subject  of  this  discourse,  I  was  prepared  for  a
somewhat  delicate  explanation.  I  had  already  laid  my
hand  on  the  leg  of  one  of  the  stools,  and  was  studying
within  myself  to  discover  the  exact  moment  at  which  I
had  better  throw  it  at  his  head,  when,  roughly  pushing

23


Carmen

the  gipsy  to  one  side,  the  man  advanced  toward  me.
Then  with  a  step  backward  he  cried:

*'  What,  sir!  is  it  you?  "

I  looked  at  him  in  my  turn  and  recognised  my  friend
Don  Jose.  At  that  moment  I  did  feel  rather  sorry  I
had  saved  him  from  the  gallows.

"  What,  is  it  you,  my  good  fellow?  ''  I  exclaimed,
with  as  easy  a  smile  as  I  could  muster.  '*  You  have  in-
terrupted this  young  lady  just  when  she  was  foretelling
me  most  interesting  things!  "

"  The  same  as  ever.  There  shall  be  an  end  to  it!  "
he  hissed  between  his  teeth,  with  a  savage  glance  at  her.

Meanwhile  the  gitana  Avas  still  talking  to  him  in
her  own  tongue.  She  became  more  and  more  excited.
Her  eves  grew  fierce  and  bloodshot,  her  features  con-
tracted, she  stamped  her  foot.  She  seemed  to  me  to  be
earnestly  pressing  him  to  do  something  he  was  unwill-
ing to  do.  What  this  was  I  fancied  I  understood  only
too  well,  by  the  fashion  in  which  she  kept  drawing  her
little  hand  backward  and  forward  under  her  chin.  I
was  inclined  to  think  she  wanted  to  have  somebody's
throat  cut.  and  I  had  a  fair  suspicion  the  throat  in  ques-
tion was  my  own.  To  all  her  torrent  of  eloquence  Don
Jose's  only  reply  was  two  or  three  shortly  spoken  words.
At  this  the  gipsy  cast  a  glance  of  the  most  utter  scorn
at  him,  then,  seating  herself  Turkish-fashion  in  a  cor-
ner of  the  room,  she  picked  out  an  orange,  tore  off  the
skin,  and  began  to  eat  it.

Don  Jose  took  hold  of  my  arm,  opened  the  door,
and  led  me  into  the  street.     We  walked  some  two  hun-

24


Carmen

dred  paces  in  the  deepest  silence.  Then  he  stretched
out  his  hand.

''  Go  straight  on,"  he  said,  "  and  you'll  come  to  the
bridge."

That  instant  he  turned  his  back  on  me  and  departed
at  a  great  pace.  I  took  my  way  back  to  my  inn,  rather
crestfallen,  and  considerably  out  of  temper.  The  worst
of  all  was  that,  when  I  undressed,  I  discovered  my  watch
was  missing.

Various  considerations  prevented  me  from  going
to  claim  it  next  day,  or  recjuesting  the  Corrcgidor  to
be  good  enough  to  have  a  search  made  for  it.  I  fin-
ished my  work  on  the  Dominican  manuscript,  and  went
on  to  Seville.  After  several  months  spent  wandering
hither  and  thither  in  Andalusia,  I  wanted  to  get  back  to
Madrid,  and  with  that  object  I  had  to  pass  through  Cor-
dova. I  had  no  intention  of  making  any  stay  there,  for
I  had  taken  a  dislike  to  that  fair  city,  and  to  the  ladies
who  bathed  in  the  Guadalquivir.  Nevertheless,  I  had
some  visits  to  pay,  and  certain  errands  to  do,  which  must
detain  me  several  days  in  the  old  capital  of  the  Mus-
sulman princes.

The  moment  I  made  my  appearance  in  the  Domini-
can convent,  one  of  the  monks,  who  had  always  shown
the  most  lively  interest  in  my  inquiries  as  to  the  site  of
the  battlefield  of  Munda,  welcomed  me  with  open  arms,
exclaiming:

"Praised  be  God!  You  are  welcome!  my  dear
friend!  We  all  thought  you  were  dead,  and  I  myself
have  said  many  a  pater  and  ave  (not  that  I  regret  them!)

25


Carmen

for  your  soul.  Then  you  weren't  murdered,  after  all?
That  you  were  robbed,  we  know!  "

"  What  do  you  mean?  "  I  asked,  rather  astonished.

"  Oh,  you  know!  That  splendid  repeater  you  used
to  strike  in  the  library  whenever  we  said  it  was  time  for
us  to  go  into  church.  Well,  it  has  been  found,  and
you'll  get  it  back."

"  Why,"  I  broke  in,  rather  put  out  of  countenance,
"  I  lost  it "

"  The  rascal's  under  lock  and  key,  and  as  he  was
known  to  be  a  man  who  would  shoot  any  Christian  for
the  sake  of  a  peseta,  we  were  most  dreadfully  afraid  he
had  killed  you.  I'll  go  with  you  to  the  Corregidor,  and
he'll  give  you  back  your  fine  watch.  And  after  that,
you  won't  dare  to  say  the  law  doesn't  do  its  work  prop-
erly in  Spain."

"  I  assure  you,"  said  I,  "  I'd  far  rather  lose  my  watch
than  have  to  give  evidence  in  court  to  hang  a  poor  un-
lucky devil,  and  especially  because — because "

"  Oh,  you  needn't  be  alarmed!  He's  thoroughlv
done  for;  they  might  hang  him  twice  over.  But  Avhen
I  say  hang,  I  say  wrong.  Your  thief  is  an  Hidalgo.  So
he's  to  be  garrotted  the  day  after  to-morrow,  without
fail*  So  you  see  one  theft  more  or  less  won't  affect
his  position.  Would  to  God  he  had  done  nothing  but
steal!  But  he  has  committed  several  murders,  one  more
hideous  than  the  other."

*  In  1S30,  the  noble  class  still  enjoyed  this  privilege.  Nowadays,
under  the  constitutional  regime,  commoners  have  attained  the  same
dignity.

26


Carmen

''What's  his  name?"

"  In  this  country  he  is  only  known  as  Jose  Navarro,
but  he  has  another  Basque  name,  which  neither  you  nor
I  will  ever  be  able  to  pronounce.  By  the  way,  the  man
is  worth  seeing,  and  you,  who  like  to  study  the  peculiar
features  of  each  country,  shouldn't  lose  this  chance  of
noting  how  a  rascal  bids  farewell  to  this  world  in  Spain.
He  is  in  jail,  and  Father  Martinez  will  take  you  to  him."

So  bent  was  my  Dominican  friend  on  my  seeing  the
preparations  for  this  "  neat  little  hanging  job  "  that  I
was  fain  to  agree.  I  went  to  see  the  prisoner;  .having
provided  myself  with  a  bundle  of  cigars,  which  I  hopeii
might  induce  him  to  forgive  my  intrusion.

I  was  ushered  into  Don  Jose's  presence  just  as  he
was  sitting  at  table.  He  greeted  me  with  a  rather  dis-
tant nod,  and  thanked  me  civilly  for  the  present  I  had
brought  him.  Having  counted  the  cigars  in  the  bundle
I  had  placed  in  his  hand,  he  took  out  a  certain  number
and  returned  me  the  rest,  remarking  that  he  would  not
need  any  more  of  them.

I  inquired  whether  by  laying  out  a  little  money,  or
by  applying  to  my  friends,  I  might  not  do  something
to  soften  his  lot.  He  shrugged  his  shoulders,  to  begin
with,  smiling  sadly.  Soon,  as  by  an  after-thought,  he
asked  me  to  have  a  mass  said  for  the  repose  of  his  soul.

Then  he  added  nervously:  "  Would  you — would  you
have  another  said  for  a  person  who  did  you  a  wrong?  "

"  Assuredly  I  will,  my  dear  fellow,"  I  answered.
"  But  no  one  in  this  country  has  wronged  me  so  far  as
I  know."

2^


Carmen

He  took  my  hand  and  squeezed  it,  looking  very
grave.    After  a  moment's  silence,  he  spoke  again.

''  Might  I  dare  to  ask  another  service  of  you?
When  you  go  back  to  your  own  country  perhaps  you
will  pass  through  Navarre.  At  all  events  you'll  go  by
Vittoria,  which  isn't  very  far  off."

"  Yes,"  said  I,  "  I  shall  certainly  pass  through  Vit-
toria. But  I  may  very  possibly  go  round  by  Pampelu-
na,  and  for  your  sake.  I  believe  I  should  be  very  glad
to  do  it."

"  A^'f  II.  if  you  do  go  to  Pampeluna,  you'll  see  more
than  one  thing  that  will  interest  you.  It's  a  fine  town.
I'll  give  you  this  medal,"  he  showed  mt  a  little  silver
medal  that  he  wore  hung  around  his  neck.  "  You'll
wrap  it  up  in  paper  " — he  paused  a  moment  to  mas-
ter his  emotion — "  and  you'll  take  it,  or  send  it,  to  an
old  lady  w^hose  address  I'll  give  you.  Tell  her  I  am
dead — but  don't  tell  her  how  I  died."

I  promised  to  perform  his  commission.  I  saw  him
the  next  day,  and  spent  part  of  it  in  his  company.  From
his  lips  I  learned  the  sad  incidents  that  follow.


28


CHAPTER    III

"  I  WAS  born,"  he  said,  **  at  Elizondo,  in  the  valley
of  Baztan.  My  name  is  Don  Jose  Lizzarrabengoa,
and  yon  know  enough  of  Spain,  sir,  to  know  at  once,
by  my  name,  that  1  come  of  an  old  Christian  and  Basque
stock.  I  call  myself  Don,  because  I  have  a  right  to  it,
and  if  I  were  at  Elizondo  I  could  show  you  my  parch-
ment genealogy.  My  family  wanted  me  to  go  into  the
church,  and  made  me  study  for  it,  but  I  did  not  like
work.  I  was  too  fond  of  playing  tennis,  and  that  was
my  ruin.  \Mien  we  Navarrese  begin  to  play  tennis,  we
forget  everything  else.  One  day,  when  I  had  won  the
game,  a  young  fellow  from  Alava  picked  a  quarrel  with
me.  We  took  to  our  Diaqiiilas.^  and  I  won  again.  But
I  had  to  leave  the  neighbourhood.  I  fell  in  with  some
dragoons,  and  enlisted  in  the  Almanza  Cavalry  Regi-
ment. Mountain  folks  like  us  soon  learn  to  be  sol-
diers. Before  long  I  was  a  corporal,  and  I  had  been
told  I  should  soon  be  made  a  sergeant,  when,  to  my  mis-
fortune, I  was  put  on  guard  at  the  Seville  Tobacco  Fac-
tory. If  you  have  been  to  Seville  you  have  seen  the
great  building,  just  outside  the  ramparts,  close  to  the

*  Iron-shod  sticks  used  by  the  Basques.
29


Carmen

Guadalquivir;  I  can  fancy  I  see  the  entrance,  and  the
guard  room  just  beside  it,  even  now.  When  Spanish  sol-
diers are  on  duty,  they  either  play  cards  or  go  to  sleep.
I,  like  an  honest  Navarrese,  always  tried  to  keep  myself
busy.  I  was  making  a  chain  to  hold  my  priming-pin,  out
of  a  bit  of  wire:  all  at  once,  my  comrades  said,  'There's
the  bell  ringing,  the  girls  are  coming  back  to  work.'
You  must  know,  sir,  that  there  are  quite  four  or  five
hundred  women  employed  in  the  factory.  They  roll
the  cigars  in  a  great  room  into  which  no  man  can  go
Avithout  a  permit  from  the  Fr/7///(///a/ro,*  because  when
the  w-eather  is  hot  they  make  themselves  at  home,  espe-
cially the  young  ones.  When  the  work-girls  come  back
after  their  dinner,  numbers  of  young  men  go  down  to
see  them  pass  by,  and  talk  all  sorts  of  nonsense  to  them.
Very  few  of  those  young  ladies  w'ill  refuse  a  silk  man-
tilla, and  men  who  care  for  that  sort  of  sport  have  noth-
ing to  do  but  bend  down  and  pick  their  fish  up.  While
the  others  watched  the  girls  go  by.  I  stayed  on  my
bench  near  the  door.  I  was  a  young  fellow  then —
my  heart  was  still  in  my  own  country,  and  I  didn't
believe  in  any  pretty  girls  who  hadn't  blue  skirts  and
long  plaits  of  hair  falling  on  their  shoulders.f  And
besides,  I  was  rather  afraid  of  the  Andalusian  women.
I  had  not  got  used  to  their  w^ays  yet;  they  were  always
jeering  one — never  spoke  a  single  word  of  sense.    So  I

*  Magistrate  in  charge  of  the  municipal  police  arrangements,  and
local  government  regulations.

f  The  costume  usually  worn  by  peasant  women  in  Navarre  and
the  Basque  Provinces.

30


Carmen

was  sitting  with  my  nose  clown  upon  my  chain,  when  I
heard  some  bystanders  say,  '  Here  comes  the  gitanclla! '
Then  I  hfted  up  my  eyes,  and  I  saw  her!  It  was  on  a
Friday,  and  I  shall  never  forget  it.  I  saw  that  very
Carmen  you  know,  and  in  whose  room  I  met  vou  a  few
months  ago.

"  She  was  wearing  a  very  short  red  skirt,  below
which  her  white  silk  stockings — with  more  than  one
hole  in  them — and  her  dainty  red  morocco  shoes,  fas-
tened with  flame-coloured  ribbons,  were  clearly  seen.
She  had  thrown  her  mantilla  back,  to  show  her  shoul-
ders, and  a  great  bunch  of  acacia  that  was  thrust  into
her  chemise.  She  had  anothe'r  acacia  blossom  in  the
corner  of  her  mouth,  and  she  walked  along,  swaying
her  hips,  like  a  filly  from  the  Cordova  stud  farm.  In
my  country  anybody  who  had  seen  a  woman  dressed
in  that  fashion  would  have  crossed  himself.  At  Seville
every  man  paid  her  some  bold  compliment  on  her  ap-
pearance. She  had  an  answer  for  each  and  all,  with
her  hand  on  her  hip,  as  bold  as  the  thorough  gipsy
she  was.  x\t  first  I  didn't  like  her  looks,  and  I  fell  to
my  work  again.  But  she,  like  all  women  and  cats,
who  v.^on't  come  if  you  call  them,  and  do  come  if  you
don't  call  them,  stopped  short  in  front  of  me,  and  spoke
to  me.

"  '  Compadvc'  said  she,  in  the  Andalusian  fashion,.
'  won't  you  give  me  your  chain  for  the  keys  of  my
strong  box?  '

It's  for  my  priming-pin,'  said  I.

"'Your   priming-pin!'    she    cried,    with    a    laugh.
i6  31


Carmen

'  Oho!  I  suppose  the  gentleman  makes  lace,  as  he  wants
pins! '

"  Everybody  began  to  laugh,  and  I  felt  myself  get-
ting red  in  the  face,  and  couldn't  hit  on  anything  in
answer.

'''Come,  my  love!'  she  began  again,  'make  me
seven  ells  of  lace  for  my  mantilla,  my  pet  pin-maker!  '

"  x\nd  taking  the  acacia  blossom  out  of  her  mouth
she  flipped  it  at  me  with  her  thumb  so  that  it  hit  me
just  between  the  eyes.  I  tell  you,  sir,  I  felt  as  if  a  bul-
let had  struck  me.  I  didn't  know  which  way  to  look.
I  sat  stock-still,  like  a  wooden  board.  \\'hen  she  had
gone  into  the  factory,  I  saw  the  acacia  blossom,  which
had  fallen  on  the  ground  between  my  feet.  I  don't
know  what  made  me  do  it,  but  I  picked  it  up,  unseen
by  any  of  my  comrades,  and  put  it  carefully  inside  my
jacket.    That  w^as  my  first  folly.

"  Two  or  three  hours  later  I  was  still  thinking  about
her,  when  a  panting,  terrilied-looking  porter  rushed
into  the  guard-room.  He  told  us  a  woman  had  been
stabbed  in  the  great  cigar-room,  and  that  the  guard
must  be  sent  in  at  once.  The  sergeant  told  me  to  take
two  men,  and  go  and  see  to  it.  I  took  my  two  men
and  w-ent  upstairs.  Imagine,  sir,  that  when  I  got  into
the  room,  I  found,  to  begin  with,  some  three  hundred
women,  stripped  to  their  shifts,  or  very  near  it,  all  of
them  screaming  and  yelling  and  gesticulating,  and
making  such  a  row  that  you  couldn't  ha^•e  heard  God's
own  thunder.  On  one  side  of  the  room  one  of  the  wom-
en was  lying  on  the  broad  of  her  back,  streaming  with

32


Carmen

blood,  with  an  X  newly  cut  on  her  face  by  two  strokes
of  a  knife.  Opposite  the  wounded  woman,  whom
the  best-natured  of  the  band  were  attending,  I  saw
Carmen,  held  by  live  or  six  of  her  comrades.  The
wounded  woman  was  crying  out,  '  A  confessor,  a
confessor!  I'm  killed!  '  Carmen  said  nothing  at  all.
She  clinched  her  teeth  and  rolled  her  eyes  like  a
chameleon.  '  What's  this?  '  I  asked.  I  had  hard
work  to  find  out  what  had  happened,  for  all  the
work-girls  talked  at  once.  It  appears  that  the  injured
girl  had  boasted  she  had  money  enough  in  her  pocket
to  buy  a  donkey  at  the  Triana  ^Market.  '  Why,'  said  Car-
men, who  had  a  tongue  of  her  own,  '  can't  you  do  with
a  broom?  '  Stung  by  this  taunt,  it  may  be  because  she
felt  herself  rather  unsound  in  that  particular,  the  other
girl  replied  that  she  knew  nothing  about  brooms,  seeing
she  had  not  the  honour  of  being  either  a  gipsy  or  one
of  the  devil's  godchildren,  but  that  the  Sehorita  Car-
men would  shortly  make  acquaintance  with  her  donkey,
when  the  Corrcgidor  took  her  out  riding  with  two
lackeys  behind  her  to  keep  the  flies  off.  '  \\^ell,'  re-
torted Carmen,  '  I'll  make  troughs  for  the  flies  to  drink
out  of  on  your  cheeks,  and  I'll  paint  a  draught-board  on
them!  '  *  And  thereupon,  slap,  bang!  she  began  mak-
ing St.  Andrew's  crosses  on  the  girl's  face  with  a
knife  she  had  been  using  for  cutting  oft'  the  ends  of  the
cigars.

*  Pintar  iin  javcque,  "  paint  a  xebec,"  a  particular  type  of  ship.
Most  Spanish  vessels  of  this  description  have  a  checkered  red  and
white  stripe  painted  around  them.

33


Carmen

"  The  case  was  quite  clear.  I  took  hold  of  Carmen*s
arm.  '  Sister  mine/  I  said  civilly,  '  you  must  come  with
me.'  She  shot  a  glance  of  recognition  at  me,  but  she
said,  with  a  resigned  look:  '  Let's  be  off.  Where  is
my  mantilla?  '  She  put  it  over  her  head  so  that  only
one  of  her  great  eyes  was  to  be  seen,  and  followed  my
two  men,  as  quiet  as  a  lamb.  When  we  got  to  the  guard-
room the  sergeant  said  it  was  a  serious  job,  and  he  must
send  her  to  prison.  I  was  told  off  again  to  take  her
there.  I  put  her  between  two  dragoons,  as  a  corporal
does  on  such  occasions.  We  started  off  for  the  town.
The  gipsy  had  begun  by  holding  her  tongue.  But  when
we  got  to  the  Calle  de  la  Serpicntc — you  know  it,  and
that  it  earns  its  name  by  its  many  windings — she  began
by  dropping  her  mantilla  on  to  her  shoulders,  so  as  to
show  me  her  coaxing  little  face,  and  turning  round  to
me  as  well  as  she  could,  she  said :

** '  OUcial  mio,  where  are  you  taking  me  to? '

*' '  To  prison,  my  poor  child,'  I  replied,  as  gently  as
I  could,  just  as  any  kind-hearted  soldier  is  bound  to
speak  to  a  i)risoner,  and  especially  to  a  woman.

"  '  Alack!  what  will  become  of  me!  Senor  Oficial,
have  pity  on  me!  You  are  so  young,  so  good-look-
ing.' Then,  in  a  lower  tone,  she  said,  '  Let  me  get  away,
and  I'll  give  you  a  bit  of  the  bar  lachi,  that  will  make
every  woman  fall  in  love  with  you!  '

"  The  bar  lachi,  sir,  is  the  loadstone,  with  which  the
gipsies  declare  one  w-ho  knows  how  to  use  it  can  cast
any  number  of  spells.  If  you  can  make  a  woman  drink
a  little  scrap  of  it,  powdered,  in  a  glass  of  white  wine,

34


Carmen

she'll  never  be  able  to  resist  you.  I  answered,  as  grave-
ly as  I  could:

"  '  We  are  not  here  to  talk  nonsense.  You'll  have  to
go  to  prison.  Those  are  my  orders,  and  there's  no  help
for  it!  '

"  We  men  from  the  Basque  country  have  an  accent
which  all  Spaniards  easily  recognise;  on  the  other  hand,
not  one  of  them  can  ever  learn  to  say  Bai,  jaonal  *

"  So  Carmen  easily  guessed  I  was  from  the  Prov-
inces. You  know,  sir,  that  the  gipsies,  who  belong  to
no  particular  country,  and  are  always  moving  about,
speak  every  language,  and  most  of  them  are  quite  at
home  in  Portugal,  in  France,  in  our  Provinces,  in  Cata-
lonia, or  anywhere  else.  They  can  even  make  them-
selves understood  by  Moors  and  English  people.  Car-
men knew  Basque  tolerably  well.

"  '  Laguna  ene  hihotsarcna.  comrade  of  my  heart,'
said  she  suddenly.     '  Do  you  belong  to  our  country? '

"  Our  language  is  so  beautiful,  sir,  that  when  we
hear  it  in  a  foreign  country  it  makes  us  quiver.  I  wish,"
added  the  bandit  in  a  lower  tone,  "  I  could  have  a  con-
fessor from  my  own  country."

After  a  silence,  he  began  again.

"  '  I  belong  to  Elizondo,'  I  answered  in  Basque,  very
much  affected  by  the  sound  of  my  own  language.

"  '  I  come  from  Etchalar,'  said  she  (that's  a  district
about  four  hours'  journey  from  my  home).  *  I  was  car-
ried off  to  Seville  by  the  gipsies.  I  was  working  in  the
factory  to  earn  enough  money  to  take  me  back  to  Na-

*  Yes,  sir.

35


Carmen

varre,  to  my  poor  old  mother,  who  has  no  support  in  the
world  but  me,  besides  her  httle  barratcca  '''  with  twenty
cider-apple  trees  in  it.  Ah!  if  I  were  only  back  in  my
own  country,  looking  up  at  the  white  mountains!  I  have
been  insulted  here,  because  I  don't  belong  to  this  land
of  rogues  and  sellers  of  rotten  oranges;  and  those  hus-
sies are  all  banded  together  against  me,  because  I  told
them  that  not  all  their  Seville  jacqncs,\  and  all  their
knives,  would  frighten  an  honest  lad  from  our  country,
with  his  blue  cap  and  his  iiiaqiiilal  Good  comrade,
won't  you  do  anything  to  help  your  own  country-
woman? '

"  She  was  lying  then,  sir,  as  she  has  always  lied.  T
don't  know  that  that  girl  ever  spoke  a  word  of  truth
in  her  life,  but  when  she  did  speak,  I  believed  her — I
couldn't  help  myself.  She  mangled  her  Basque  words,
and  I  believed  she  came  from  Navarre.  But  her  eyes
and  her  mouth  and  her  skin  were  enough  to  prove  she
was  a  gipsy.  I  was  mad,  I  paid  no  more  attention  to
anything,  I  thought  to  myself  that  if  the  Spaniards  had
dared  to  speak  evil  of  my  country,  I  would  have  slashed
their  faces  just  as  she  liad  slashed  her  comrade's.  In
short,  I  was  like  a  drunken  man,  I  was  beginning  to  say
foolish  things,  and  I  was  very  near  doing  them.

"  '  If  I  were  to  give  you  a  push  and  you  tumbled
down,  good  fellow-countryman,'  she  began  again  in
Basque,  '  those  two  Castilian  recruits  wouldn't  be  able
to  keep  me  l)ack.'

"  Faith,  I  forgot  my  orders,  I  forgot  everything,  and

*  Field,  garden.  f  Bravos,  boasters.

36


Carmen

I  said  to  her,  '  Well,  then,  my  friend,  girl  of  my  country,
try  it,  and  may  our  Lady  of  the  IMountain  help  you
through.'

"  Just  at  that  moment  we  were  passing  one  of  tlie
many  narrow  lanes  one  sees  in  Seville.  All  at  once  Car-
men tur  led  and  struck  me  in  the  chest  with  her  fist.
I  tumbled  down  backward,  purposely.  \Mth  a  bound
she  sprang  over  me,  and  ran  off,  showing  us  a  pair  of
legs!  People  talk  about  a  pair  of  Basque  legs!  but  hers
were  far  better — as  fleet  as  they  were  well-turned.  As
for  me,  I  picked  myself  up  at  once,  but  I  stuck  out  my
lance  *  crossways  and  barred  the  street,  so  that  my  com-
rades were  checked  at  the  very  first  moment  of  pursuit.
Then  I  started  to  run  myself,  and  they  after  me — but
how  were  we  to  catch  her?  There  was  no  fear  of  that,
what  with  our  spurs,  our  swords,  and  our  lances.

"  In  less  time  than  I  have  taken  to  tell  you  the  story,
the  prisoner  had  disappeared.  And  besides,  ever}^  gos-
sip in  the  quarter  covered  her  flight,  poked  scorn  at  us.
and  pointed  us  in  the  wrong  direction.  x\fter  a  good
deal  of  marching  and  countermarching,  we  had  to  go
back  to  the  guard-room  without  a  receipt  from  the  gov-
ernor of  the  jail.

"  To  avoid  punishment,  my  men  made  known
that  Carmen  had  spoken  to  me  in  Basque;  and  to
tell  the  truth,  it  did  not  seem  very  natural  that  a  blow
from  such  a  little  creature  should  have  so  easily  over-
thrown a  strong  fellow  like  me.  The  whole  thing
looked    suspicious,    or,   at   all    events,    not    over-clear.

*  All  Spanish  cavalry  soldiers  carry  lances.
Vol.  6  37  R


Carmen

When  I  came  off  guard  I  lost  my  corporal's  stripes,  and
was  condemned  to  a  month's  imprisonment.  It  was  the
first  time  I  had  been  punished  since  I  had  been  in  the
service.  Farewell,  now,  to  the  sergeant's  stripes,  on
which  I  had  reckoned  so  surely!

"  The  first  days  in  prison  were  very  dreary.  When
I  enlisted  I  had  fancied  I  was  sure  to  become  an  officer,
at  all  events.  Two  of  my  compatriots,  Longa  and  Mina,
are  captains-general,  after  all.  Chapalangarra  was  a
colonel,  and  I  have  played  tennis  a  score  of  times  with
his  brother,  who  was  just  a  needy  fellow  like  myself.
*  Now,'  I  kept  crying  to  myself,  '  all  the  time  you  served
without  being  punished  has  been  lost.  Now  you  have
a  bad  mark  against  your  name,  and  to  get  yourself  back
into  the  officers'  good  graces  you'll  have  to  work  ten
times  as  hard  as  when  you  joined  as  a  recruit.'  And
why  have  I  got  myself  punished?  For  the  sake  of  a
gipsy  hussy,  who  made  game  of  me,  and  who  at  this
moment  is  busy  thieving  in  some  corner  of  the  town.
Yet  I  couldn't  help  thinking  about  her.  Will  you  be-
lieve it,  sir,  those  silk  stockings  of  hers  with  the  holes  in
them,  of  which  she  had  given  me  such  a  full  view  as
she  took  to  her  heels,  were  always  before  my  eyes?  I
used  to  look  through  the  barred  windows  of  the  jail
into  the  street,  and  among  all  the  women  who  passed
I  never  could  see  one  to  compare  with  that  minx  of  a
girl — and  then,  in  spite  of  myself,  I  used  to  smell  the
acacia  blossom  she  had  thrown  at  me,  and  which,  dry  as
it  was,  still  kept  its  sweet  scent.  If  there  are  such  things
as  witches,  that  girl  certainly  was  one.

38


Carmen

"  One  day  the  jailer  came  in,  and  gave  me  an  Al-
cala  roll.*

'' '  Look  here,'  said  he,  '  this  is  what  your  cousin
has  sent  yon.'

"  I  took  the  loaf,  very  much  astonished,  for  I  had
no  cousin  in  Seville.  It  may  be  a  mistake,  thought  I,  as
I  looked  at  the  roll,  but  it  was  so  appetizing  and  smelt
so  good,  that  I  made  up  my  mind  to  eat  it,  without  trou-
bling my  head  as  to  whence  it  came,  or  for  whom  it  was
really  intended.

"  When  I  tried  to  cut  it,  my  knife  struck  on  some-
thing hard.  I  looked,  and  found  a  little  English  file,
which  had  been  slipped  into  the  dough  before  the  roll
had  been  baked.  The  roll  also  contained  a  gold  piece
of  two  piastres.  Then  I  had  no  further  doubt — it  was
a  present  from  Carmen.  To  people  of  her  blood,  lil^erty
is  everything,  and  they  would  set  a  town  on  fire  to  save
themselves  one  day  in  prison.  The  girl  was  artful,  in-
deed, and  armed  with  that  roll,  I  might  have  snapped
my  fingers  at  the  jailers.  In  one  hour,  with  that  little
file.  I  could  have  sawn  through  the  thickest  bar,  and
with  the  gold  coin  I  could  have  exchanged  my  soldier's
cloak  for  civilian  garb  at  the  nearest  shop.  You  may
fancy  that  a  man  who  had  often  taken  the  eaglets  out  of
their  nests  in  our  cliiif  would  have  found  no  difificulty  in
getting  down  to  the  street  out  of  a  window  less  than

*  Alcala  de  los  Panaderos,  a  village  two  leagues  from  Seville,  where
the  most  delicious  rolls  are  made.  They  are  said  to  owe  their  qual-
ity to  the  water  of  the  place,  and  great  quantities  of  them  are  brought
to  Seville  every  day.

39


Carmen

thirty  feet  above  it.  But  I  didn't  choose  to  escape.  I
still  had  a  soldier's  code  of  honour,  and  desertion  ap-
peared to  me  in  the  light  of  a  heinous  crime.  Yet  this
proof  of  remembrance  touched  me.  When  a  man  is
in  prison  he  likes  to  think  he  has  a  friend  outside  who
takes  an  interest  in  him.  The  gold  coin  did  rather
offend  me;  I  should  have  very  much  liked  to  return  it;
but  where  was  I  to  find  my  creditor?  That  did  not  seem
a  very  easy  task.

"  After  the  ceremony  of  my  degradation  I  had  fan-
cied my  sufferings  were  over,  but  I  had  another  hu-
miliation before  me.  That  came  when  I  had  left  prison,
and  was  told  ofT  for  duty,  and  put  on  sentry,  as  a  private
soldier.  You  can  not  conceive  what  a  proud  man  en-
dures at  such  a  moment.  I  believe  I  would  have  just  as
soon  been  shot  dead — then  I  should  have  marched
alone  at  the  head  of  my  platoon,  at  all  events;  I  should
have  felt  I  was  somebody,  with  the  eyes  of  others  fixed
upon  me.

"  I  was  posted  as  sentry  on  the  door  of  the  colonel's
house.  The  colonel  was  a  young  man,  rich,  good-na-
tured, fond  of  amusing  himself.  All  the  young  officers
were  there,  and  many  civilians  as  well,  besides  ladies —
actresses,  as  it  was  said.  For  my  part,  it  seemed  to  me
as  if  the  whole  town  had  agreed  to  meet  at  that  door,
in  order  to  stare  at  me.  Then  up  drove  the  colonel's
carriage,  with  his  valet  on  the  box.  And  who  should  I
see  get  out  of  it,  but  the  gipsy  girl!  She  was  dressed  up,
this  time,  to  the  eyes,  togged  out  in  golden  ribbons — a
spangled  gown,  blue  shoes,  all  spangled  too,  fiowers  and

40


Carmen

gold  lace  all  over  her.  In  her  hand  she  carried  a  tam-
bourine. With  her  there  were  two  other  gipsy  women,
one  young  and  one  old.  They  always  have  one  old
woman  who  goes  with  them,  and  then  an  old  man  with
a  guitar,  a  gipsy  too,  to  play  alone,  and  also  for  their
dances.  You  must  know  these  gipsy  girls  are  often  sent
for  to  private  houses,  to  dance  their  special  dance,  the
Romalis,  and  often,  too,  for  quite  other  purposes.

''  Carmen  recognised  me,  and  we  exchanged
glances.  I  don't  know  why,  but  at  that  moment  I
should  have  liked  to  have  been  a  hundred  feet  beneath
the  ground.

"  '  Agiir  laguiia,' *  said  she.  '  Oficial  mio!  You
keep  guard  like  a  recruit,'  and  before  I  could  find  a  word
in  ansW'Cr,  she  was  inside  the  house.

"  The  whole  party  was  assembled  in  the  patio,  and
in  spite  of  the  crowd  I  could  see  nearly  everything  that
w-ent  on  through  the  lattice. f  I  could  hear  the  castanets
and  the  tambourine,  the  laughter  and  applause.  Some-
times I  caught  a  glimpse  of  her  head  as  she  bounded
upward  with  her  tambourine.  Then  I  could  hear  the
officers  saying  many  things  to  her  which  brought  the
blood  to  my  face.  As  to  her  answers,  I  knew  nothing
of  them.     It  was  on  that  day,  I  think,  that  I  began  to

*  Good-day,  comrade  !

f  In  most  of  the  houses  in  Seville  there  is  an  inner  court  sur-
rounded by  an  arched  portico.  This  is  used  as  a  sitting-room  in
summer.  Over  the  court  is  stretched  a  piece  of  tent  cloth,  which  is
watered  during  the  day  and  removed  at  night.  The  street  door  is
almost  always  left  open,  and  the  passage  leading  to  the  court  {zaguan)
is  closed  by  an  iron  lattice  of  very  elegant  workmanship.

41


Carmen

love  her  in  earnest — for  three  or  four  times  I  was
tempted  to  rush  into  the  patio,  and  drive  my  sword  into
the  bodies  of  all  the  coxcombs  who  were  making  love
to  her.  My  torture  lasted  a  full  hour;  then  the  gipsies
came  out,  and  the  carriage  took  them  away.  As  she
passed  me  l)y,  Carmen  looked  at  me  with  those  eyes
you  know,  and  said  to  me  very  low,  '  Comrade,  people
who  are  fond  of  good  frifofa  come  to  eat  it  at  Lillas
Pastia's  at  Triana!  '

"  Then,  light  as  a  kid,  she  stepped  into  the  carriage,
the  coachman  whipped  up  his  mules,  and  the  whole,
merry  party  departed,  whither  I  know  not.

"  You  may  fancy  that  the  moment  I  was  off  guard
I  went  to  Triana;  but  first  of  all  I  got  myself  shaved  and
brushed  myself  up  as  if  I  had  been  going  on  parade.
She  was  living  with  Lillas  Pastia,  an  old  fried-fish  seller,
a  gipsy,  as  black  as  a  Moor,  to  whose  house  a  great
many  civilians  resorted  to  eat  frit  at  a,  especially,  I  think,
because  Carmen  had  taken  up  her  quarters  there.

"  '  Lillas,'  she  said,  as  soon  as  she  saw  me,  '  I'm
not  going  to  work  any  more  to-day.  To-morrow  will
be  a  day,  too.*  Come,  fellow-countryman,  let  us  go
for  a  walk !  '

"  She  pulled  her  mantilla  across  her  nose,  and  there
we  were  in  the  street,  without  my  knowing  in  the  least
whither  I  was  bound.

"  '  Sehorita,'  said  I,  '  I  think  I  have  to  thank  you  for
a  present  I  had  while  I  was  in  prison.  I've  eaten  the
bread;  the  file  will  do  for  sharpening  my  lance,  and  I

*  Alaiiana  scrci  otro  dia. — A  Spanish  proverb.
42


Carmen

keep  it  in  remembrance  of  you.  But  as  for  the  money,
here  it  is.'

"'Why,  he's  kept  the  money!'  she  exclaimed,
bursting  out  laughing.  '  But,  after  all,  that's  all  the  bet-
ter— for  I'm  decidedly  hard  up!  What  matter!  The
dog  that  runs  never  starves!  *  Come,  let's  spend  it  all!
You  shall  stand  treat.'

"  We  had  turned  back  toward  Seville.  At  the  en-
trance of  the  Callc  dc  la  Serpicnte  she  bought  a  dozen
oranges,  which  she  made  me  put  into  my  handker-
chief. A  little  farther  on  she  bought  a  roll,  a  sausage,
and  a  bottle  of  manzanilla.  Then,  last  of  all,  she  turned
into  a  confectioner's  shop.  There  she  threw  the  gold
coin  I  had  returned  to  her  on  the  counter,  with  another
she  had  in  her  pocket,  and  some  small  silver,  and  then
she  asked  me  for  all  the  money  I  had.  All  I  possessed
was  one  peseta  and  a  few  cuartos,  which  I  handed  over
to  her,  very  much  ashamed  of  not  having  more.  I
thought  she  would  have  carried  away  the  whole  shop.
She  took  everything  that  was  best  and  dearest,  yemas,];
hiron,X  preserved  fruits — as  long  as  the  money  lasted.
And  all  these,  too,  I  had  to  carry  in  paper  bags.  Per-
haps you  know  the  Calk  del  Candilejo,  where  there  is  a
head  of  Don  Pedro  the  Avenger.**     That  head  ought  to

*  Chtiqiiel  SOS  pirela,  cocal  terela.  "The  dog  that  runs  finds  a
bone." — Gipsy  proverb.

f  Sugared  yolks  of  eggs.
X  A  sort  of  nougat.

*  This  king,  Don  Pedro,  whom  we  call  "  the  Cruel,"  and  whom
Queen  Isabella,  the  Catholic,  never  called  anything  but  "  the  Aven-
ger," was  fond  of  walking  about  the  streets  of  Seville  at  night  in
search  of  adventures,  like  the  Caliph  Haroun  al  Raschid.     One  night,

43


Carmen  ^

have  given  me  pause.  We  stopped  at  an  old  house  in
that  street.  She  passed  into  the  entry,  and  knocked  at
a  door  on  the  ground  floor.  It  was  opened  by  a  gipsy,
a  thorough-paced  servant  of  the  devil.  Carmen  said  a
few  words  to  her  in  Romany.  At  first  the  old  hag  grum-
bled. To  smooth  her  down  Carmen  gave  her  a  couple
of  oranges  and  a  handful  of  sugar-plums,  and  let  her  have
a  taste  of  the  wine.  Then  she  hung  her  cloak  on  her
back,  and  led  her  to  the  door,  which  she  fastened  with

in  a  lonely  street,  he  quarrelled  with  a  man  who  was  singing  a  ser-
enade. There  was  a  fight,  and  the  king  killed  the  amorous  caballero.
At  the  clashing  of  their  swords,  an  old  woman  put  her  head  out  of
the  window  and  lighted  up  the  scene  with  a  tiny  lamp  {candilejo)
which  she  held  in  her  hand.  My  readers  must  be  informed  that
King  Don  Pedro,  though  nimble  and  muscular,  suffered  from  one
strange  fault  in  his  physical  conformation.  Whenever  he  walked
his  knees  cracked  loudly.  By  this  cracking  the  old  woman  easily
recognised  him.

The  next  day  the  veintiquatro  in  charge  came  to  make  his  report
to  the  king.  "  Sire,  a  duel  was  fought  last  night  in  such  a  street —
one  of  the  combatants  is  dead."  "  Have  you  found  the  murderer?"
"  Yes,  sire."  "Why  has  he  not  been  punished  already?"  "Sire,  I
await  your  orders  !  "  "  Carry  out  the  law."  Now  the  king  had
just  published  a  decree  that  every  duellist  was  to  have  his  head  cut
off,  and  that  the  head  was  to  be  set  up  on  the  scene  of  the  fight.
The  veintiquatro  got  out  of  the  difficulty  like  a  clever  man.  He  had
the  head  sawed  off  a  statue  of  the  king,  and  set  that  up  in  a  niche  in
the  middle  of  the  street  in  which  the  murder  had  taken  place.  The
king  and  all  the  Sevillians  thought  this  a  very  good  joke.  The
street  took  its  name  from  the  lamp  held  by  the  old  woman,  the  only
witness  of  the  incident.  The  above  is  the  popular  tradition.  Zuniga
tells  the  story  somewhat  differently.  (See  Anales  de  Sevilla,  vol.  ii,
p.  136.)  However  that  may  be,  a  street  called  Calk  del  Candilejo  still
exists  in  Seville,  and  in  that  street  there  is  a  bust  which  is  said  to  be
a  portrait  of  Don  Pedro.  This  bust,  unfortunately,  is  a  modern  pro-
duction. During  the  seventeenth  century  the  old  one  had  become
very  much  defaced,  and  the  municipality  had  it  replaced  by  that  now
to  be  seen.

44


Carmen

a  wooden  bar.  As  soon  as  we  were  alone  she  began  to
laugh  and  caper  hke  a  kuiatic,  singing  out, '  You  are  my
roiii,  I'm  your  roini.'  *

'*  There  I  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  laden
with  all  her  purchases,  and  not  knowing  where  I  was
to  put  them  down.  She  tumbled  them  all  onto  the
floor,  and  threw  her  arms  round  my  neck,  saying:

"  '  I  pay  my  debts,  I  pay  my  debts!  That's  the  law
of  the  Calcs.'j;

"  Ah,  sir,  that  day!  that  day!  When  I  think  of  it  I
forget  what  to-morrow  must  bring  me!  "

For  a  moment  the  bandit  held  his  peace,  then,
when  he  had  relighted  his  cigar,  he  began  afresh,

"  We  spent  the  whole  day  together,  eating,  drink-
ing, and  so  forth.  When  she  had  stuffed  herself  with
sugar-plums,  like  any  child  of  six  years  old,  she  thrust
them  by  handfuls  into  the  old  woman's  water-jar.
*  That'll  make  sherbet  for  her,'  she  said.  She  smashed
the  ycmas  by  throwing  them  against  the  walls.  '  They'll
keep  the  flies  from  bothering  us.'  There  was  no  prank
or  wild  frolic  she  didn't  indulge  in.  I  told  her  I  should
have  liked  to  see  her  dance,  only  there  were  no  casta-
nets to  be  had.  Instantly  she  seized  the  old  woman's
only  earthenware  plate,  smashed  it  up,  and  there  she
was  dancing  the  Roinalis,  and  making  the  bits  of  broken
crockery  rattle  as  well  as  if  they  had  been  ebony  and
ivory  castanets.     That  girl  was  good  company,  I  can

*  J?om,  husband.     Romi,  wife.

f  Calo,  feminine  fa//«,   plural  calcs.     Literally  "black,"  the  name
the  gipsies  apply  to  themselves  in  their  own  language.

45


Carmen

tell  you!  Evening  fell,  and  I  heard  the  drums  beating
tattoo.

"  '  I  must  get  back  to  quarters  for  roll-call,'  I  said.

"  '  To  quarters!  '  she  answered,  with  a  look  of  scorn.
'  Are  you  a  negro  slave,  to  let  yourself  be  driven  with  a
ramrod  like  that!  You  are  as  silly  as  a  canary  bird.
Your  dress  suits  your  nature.*  Pshaw!  you've  no  more
heart  than  a  chicken.'

"  I  stayed  on,  making  up  my  mind  to  the  inevitable
guard-room.  The  next  morning  the  first  suggestion
of  parting  came  from  her.

"  '  Hark  ye,  Joseito,*  she  said.  '  Have  I  paid  you?
By  our  law,  I  owed  you  nothing,  because  you're  a  payllo.
But  you're  a  good-looking  fellow,  and  I  took  a  fancy  to
you.     Now  we're  quits.     Good-day!'

"  I  asked  her  when  I  should  see  her  again.

"  '  When  you're  less  of  a  simpleton,'  she  retorted,
with  a  laugh.  Then,  in  a  more  serious  tone,  '  Do  you
know,  my  son,  I  really  believe  I  love  you  a  little;  but
that  can't  last!  The  dog  and  the  wolf  can't  agree  for
long.  Perhaps  if  you  turned  gipsy.  I  might  care  to  be
your  ronii.  But  that's  all  nonsense,  such  things  aren't
possible.  Pshaw!  my  boy.  Believe  me,  you're  well  out
of  it.  You've  come  across  the  devil — he  isn't  always
black — and  you've  not  had  your  neck  wrung.  I  wear  a
woollen  suit,  but  Pm  no  sheep. f  Go  and  burn  a  candle
to  your  maiari,X  she  deserves  it  well.     Come,  good-bye

*  Spanish  dragoons  wear  a  yellow  uniform.

f  Me  dicas  vriarda  de  jorpoy,  hiis  ne  sino  braco, — A  gipsy  proverb.

X  The  Saint,  the  Holy  Virgin.

46


Carmen

once  more.  Don't  think  any  more  about  La  Canncn-
cita,  or  she'll  end  by  making  you  marry  a  widow  with
wooden  legs.'  *

"  As  she  spoke,  she  drew  back  the  bar  that  closed
the  door,  and  once  we  were  out  in  the  street  she  wrapped
her  mantilla  about  her,  and  turned  on  her  heel.

"  She  spoke  truth.  I  should  have  done  far  better
never  to  think  of  her  again.  But  after  that  day  in
the  Callc  del  Candilcjo  I  couldn't  think  of  anything  else.
All  day  long  I  used  to  walk  about,  hoping  I  might  meet
her.  I  sought  news  of  her  from  the  old  hag,  and  from
the  fried-fish  seller.  They  both  told  me  she  had  gone
away  to  Laloro,  which  is  their  name  for  Portugal.  They
probably  said  it  by  Carmen's  orders,  but  I  soon  found
out  they  were  lying.  Some  weeks  after  my  day  in  the
Calk  del  C  and  He  jo  I  was  on  duty  at  one  of  the  town
gates.  A  little  way  from  the  gate  there  w^as  a  breach  in
the  wall.  The  masons  were  working  at  it  in  the  day-
time, and  at  night  a  sentinel  was  posted  on  it,  to  prevent
smugglers  from  getting  in.  All  through  one  day  I  saw
Lillas  Pastia  going  backward  and  forward  near  the
guard-room,  and  talking  to  some  of  my  comrades.
They  all  knew  him  well,  and  his  fried  fish  and  fritters
even  better.  He  came  up  to  me,  and  asked  if  I  had  any
news  of  Carmen.

"  '  No,'  said  I.

"  '  Well,'  said  he,  '  you'll  soon  hear  of  her,  old  fel-
low.'

"  He  was  not  mistaken.    That  night  I  was  posted  to

*  The  gallows,  which  is  the  widow  of  the  last  man  hanged  upon  it.

17  47


Carmen

guard  the  breach  in  the  wall.  As  soon  as  the  sergeant
had  disappeared  I  saw  a  woman  coming  toward  me.
]\Iy  heart  told  me  it  was  Carmen.    Still  I  shouted:

"  '  Keep  off!     Nobody  can  pass  here! '

"  '  Now,  don't  be  spiteful,'  she  said,  making  herself
known  to  me.

"'What!  you  here,  Carmen?'

"  '  Yes,  nii  payllo.  Let  us  say  few  words,  but  wise
ones.  Would  you  like  to  earn  a  douro?  Some  people
will  be  coming  with  bundles.     Let  them  alone.'

"  '  No,'  said  I,  '  I  must  not  allow  them  through.
These  are  my  orders.'

"  '  Orders!  orders!  You  didn't  think  about  or-
ders in  the  Calk  del  Candilcjol  '

"  '  Ah!  '  I  cried,  quite  maddened  by  the  very  thought
of  that  night.  '  It  was  well  worth  while  to  forget  my
orders  for  that!  But  I  won't  have  any  smuggler's
money! '

"  '  Well,  if  you  won't  have  money,  shall  we  go  and
dine  together  at  old  Dorotea's?  '

"  '  No,'  said  I,  half  choked  by  the  effort  it  cost  me.
'  No,  I  can't.'

"  '  Very  good!  If  you  make  so  many  difficulties,  I
know  to  whom  I  can  go.  I'll  ask  your  of^cer  if  he'll
come  with  me  to  Dorotea's.  He  looks  good-natured,
and  he'll  post  a  sentry  who'll  only  see  what  he  had  bet-
ter see.  Good-bye,  canary-bird!  I  shall  have  a  good
laugh  the  day  the  order  comes  out  to  hang  you!  '

"  I  was  weak  enough  to  call  her  back,  and  I  prom-
ised to  let  the  whole  of  gipsydom  pass  in,  if  that  were

48


Carmen

necessary,  so  that  I  secured  the  only  reward  I  longed
for.  She  instantly  swore  she  would  keep  her  word  faith-
fully the  very  next  day,  and  ran  off  to  sunmion  her
friends,  who  were  close  by.  There  were  five  of  them,  of
whom  Pastia  was  one,  all  well  loaded  with  English
goods.  Carmen  kept  watch  for  them.  She  was  to  warn
them  with  her  castanets  the  instant  she  caught  sight  of
the  patrol.  But  there  was  no  necessity  for  that.  The
smugglers  finished  their  job  in  a  moment.

"  The  next  day  I  went  to  the  Callc  del  Candilcjo.
Carmen  kept  me  waiting,  and  when  she  came,  she  was
in  rather  a  bad  temper.

"'I  don't  like  people  who  have  to  be  pressed,'  she
said.  '  You  did  me  a  much  greater  service  the  first
time,  without  knowing  you'd  gain  anything  by  it.
Yesterday  you  bargained  with  me.  I  don't  know
why  I've  come,  for  I  don't  care  for  you  any  more.
Here,  be  off  with  you.  Here's  a  douro  for  your
trouble.'

"  I  very  nearly  threw  the  coin  at  her  head,  and  I  had
to  make  a  violent  eft'ort  to  prevent  myself  from  actually
beating  her.  After  we  had  wrangled  for  an  hour  I  went
oft'  in  a  fury.  For  some  time  I  wandered  about  the
town,  walking  hither  and  thither  like  a  madman.  At
last  I  went  into  a  church,  and  getting  into  the  darkest
corner  I  could  find,  I  cried  hot  tears.  All  at  once  I
heard  a  voice.

" '  A  dragoon  in  tears.  I'll  make  a  philter  of
them!  '

"  I  looked  up.    There  was  Carmen  in  front  of  me.
49


Carmen

Well,  ;;//  payllo,  are  you  still  angry  with  me?  '
she  said.  '  I  must  care  for  you  in  spite  of  myself,  for
since  you  left  me  I  don't  know  what  has  been  the  mat-
ter with  me.  Look  you,  it  is  I  who  ask  you  to  come  to
the  Calk  del  Candilcjo,  now! '

"  So  we  made  it  up:  but  Carmen's  temper  was  like
the  weather  in  our  country.  The  storm  is  never  so
close,  in  our  mountains,  as  when  the  sun  is  at  its  bright-
est. She  had  promised  to  meet  me  again  at  Dorotca's,
but  she  didn't  come.

"  And  Dorotea  began  telling  me  again  that  she  had
gone  off  to  Portugal  about  some  gipsy  business.

"  As  experience  had  already  taught  me  how  much
of  that  I  was  to  believe,  I  went  about  looking  for  Car-
men wherever  I  thought  she  might  be,  and  twenty
times  in  every  day  I  walked  through  the  Calk  del  Caiidi-
lejo.  One  evening  I  was  with  Dorotea,  whom  I  had
almost  tamed  by  giving  her  a  glass  of  anisette  now  and
then,  when  Carmen  walked  in,  followed  by  a  young
man,  a  lieutenant  in  our  regiment.

Get  away  at  once,'  she  said  to  me  in  Basque.  I
stood  there,  dumfounded,  my  heart  full  of  rage.

"'What  are  you  doing  here?'  said  the  lieutenant
to  me.    '  Take  yourself  off — get  out  of  this.'

"  I  couldn't  move  a  step.  I  felt  paralyzed.  The
officer  grew  angry,  and  seeing  I  did  not  go  out,  and
had  not  even  taken  off  my  forage  cap,  he  caught  me
by  the  collar  and  shook  me  roughly.  I  don't  know
what  I  said  to  him.  He  drew  his  sword,  and  I  un-
sheathed mine.    The  old  woman  caught  hold  of  my  arm,

50


Carmen

and  the  lieutenant  gave  me  a  wound  on  the  forehead,
of  which  I  still  bear  the  scar.  I  made  a  step  back-
ward, and  with  one  jerk  of  my  elbow  I  threw  old  Doro-
tea  down.  Then,  as  the  lieutenant  still  pressed  me,  I
turned  the  point  of  my  sword  against  his  body  and  he
ran  upon  it.  Then  Carmen  put  out  the  lamp  and  told
Dorotea,  in  her  own  language,  to  take  to  flight.  I  fled
into  the  street  myself,  and  began  running  along,  I  knew
not  whither.  It  seemed  to  me  that  some  one  was  fol-
lowing me.  When  I  came  to  myself  I  discovered  that
Carmen  had  never  left  me.

"'Great  stupid  of  a  canary-bird!'  she  said,  'you
never  make  anything  but  blunders.  And,  indeed,  you
know  I  told  you  I  should  bring  you  bad  luck.  But
come,  there's  a  cure  for  everything  when  you  have  a
Fleming  from  Rome  *  for  your  love.  Begin  by  rolling
this  handkerchief  round  your  head,  and  throw  me  over
that  belt  of  yours.  Wait  for  me  in  this  alley — I'll  be
back  in  two  minutes.'

"  She  disappeared,  and  soon  came  back  bringing
me  a  striped  cloak  which  she  had  gone  to  fetch,  I  knew
not  whence.  She  made  me  take  off  my  uniform,  and
put  on  the  cloak  over  my  shirt.  Thus  dressed,  and  with
the  wound  on  my  head  bound  round  with  the  handker-
chief, I  was  tolerably  like  a  Valencian  peasant,  many
of  whom  come  to  Seville  to  sell  a  drink  they  make  out

*  Flamenco  de  Roma,  a  slang  term  for  the  gipsies.  Roma  does  not
stand  for  the  Eternal  City,  but  for  the  nation  of  the  romi,  or  the  mar-
ried folk — a  name  applied  hy  the  gipsies  to  themselves.  The  first
gipsies  seen  in  Spain  probably  came  from  the  Low  Countries,  hence
their  name  of  Flemings.

51


Carmen

of '  cJuifos.'  *  Then  she  took  me  to  a  house  very  much
hke  Dorotea's,  at  the  bottom  of  a  Httle  lane.  Here  she
and  another  gipsy  woman  washed  and  dressed  my
wounds,  better  than  any  army  surgeon  could  have  done,
gave  me  something,  I  know  not  what,  to  drink,  and
finally  made  me  lie  down  on  a  mattress,  on  which  I
went  to  sleep.

"  Probably  the  women  had  mixed  one  of  the  sopo-
rific drugs  of  which  they  know  the  secret  in  my  drink,
for  I  did  not  wake  up  till  very  late  the  next  day.  I  was
rather  feverish,  and  had  a  violent  headache.  It  was
some  time  before  the  memory  of  the  terrible  scene  in
which  I  had  taken  part  on  the  previous  night  came  back'
to  me.  After  having  dressed  my  wound.  Carmen  and
her  friend,  squatting  on  their  heels  beside  my  mattress,
exchanged  a  few  words  of  '  cJiipc  caUi,"  which  appeared
to  me  to  be  something  in  the  nature  of  a  medical  con-
sultation. Then  they  both  of  them  assured  me  that  I
should  soon  be  cured,  but  that  I  must  get  out  of  Seville
at  the  earliest  possible  moment,  for  that,  if  I  was  caught
there,  I  should  most  undoubtedly  be  shot.

"  '  My  boy,'  said  Carmen  to  me,  '  you'll  have  to  do
something.  Now  that  the  king  won't  give  you  either
rice  or  haddock  f  you'll  have  to  think  of  earning  your
livelihood.  You're  too  stupid  for  stealing  a  pastcsas.X
But  you  are  brave  and  active.     If  you  have  the  pluck,

*  A    bulbous   root,   out   of   which   rather  a   pleasant   beverage   is
manufactured.

f  The  ordinary  food  of  a  Spanish  soldier.

X  Ustilar  a  pastesas,  to  steal  cleverly,  to  purloin  without  violence.

52


Carmen

take  yourself  off  to  the  coast  and  turn  smuggler.
Haven't  I  promised  to  get  you  hanged?  That's  better
than  being  shot,  and  besides,  if  you  set  about  it  properly,
you'll  live  like  a  prince  as  long  as  the  mirions  *  and  the
coast-guard  don't  lay  their  hands  on  your  collar.'

"  In  this  attractive  guise  did  this  fiend  of  a  girl  de-
scribe the  new  career  she  was  suggesting  to  me, — the
only  one,  indeed,  remaining,  now  I  had  incurred  the
penalty  of  death.  Shall  I  confess  it,  sir?  She  persuaded
m,e  without  much  difiiculty.  This  wild  and  dangerous
life,  it  seemed  to  me,  would  bind  her  and  me  more
closely  together.  In  future,  I  thought,  I  should  be  able
to  make  sure  of  her  love.

"  I  had  often  heard  talk  of  certain  smugglers  who
travelled  about  Andalusia,  each  riding  a  good  horse,
with  his  mistress  behind  him  and  his  blunderbuss  in
his  fist.  Already  I  saw  myself  trotting  up  and  down  the
world,  with  a  pretty  gipsy  behind  me.  When  I  men-
tioned that  notion  to  her,  she  laughed  till  she  had  to
hold  her  sides,  and  vowed  there  was  nothing  in  the
world  so  delightful  as  a  night  spent  camping  in  the  open
air,  when  each  roin  retired  with  his  rojiii  beneath  their
little  tent,  made  of  three  hoops  with  a  blanket  thrown
across  them.

"  '  If  I  take  to  the  mountains,'  said  I  to  her,  '  I  shall
be  sure  of  you.  There'll  be  no  lieutenant  there  to  go
shares  with  me.'

"  '  Ha!  ha!  you're  jealous!  '  she  retorted,  '  so  much
the  worse  for  you.     How  can  you  be  such  a  fool  as

*  A  sort  of  volunteer  corps,

Vol.  6  53  S


Carmen

that?  Don't  you  see  I  must  love  yon,  because  I  have
never  asked  you  for  money? '

"  When  she  said  that  sort  of  thing  I  could  have
strangled  her.

"  To  shorten  the  story,  sir.  Carmen  procured  me
civilian  clothes,  disguised  in  which  I  got  out  of  Seville
without  being  recognised.  I  went  to  Jerez,  with  a  let-
ter from  Pastia  to  a  dealer  in  anisette  whose  house  was
the  smugglers'  meeting-place.  I  was  introduced  to
them,  and  their  leader,  surnamed  El  Dauca'irc,  en-
rolled me  in  his  gang.  We  started  for  Gaucin,  where
I  found  Carmen,  who  had  told  me  she  would  meet  me
there.  In  all  these  expeditions  she  acted  as  spy  for  our
gang,  and  she  was  the  best  that  ever  was  seen.  She  had
now  just  returned  from  Gibraltar,  and  had  already
arranged  with  the  captain  of  a  ship  for  a  cargo  of  Eng-
lish goods  which  we  w^ere  to  receive  on  the  coast.  We
went  to  meet  it  near  Estepona.  We  hid  part  in  the
mountains,  and  laden  with  the  rest,  we  proceeded  to
Ronda.  Carmen  had  gone  there  before  us.  It  was
she  again  who  warned  us  when  we  had  better  enter  the
town.  This  first  journey,  and  several  subsequent  ones,
turned  out  well.  I  found  the  smuggler's  life  pleasanter
than  a  soldier's:  I  could  give  presents  to  Carmen,  I  had
money,  and  I  had  a  mistress.  I  felt  little  or  no  remorse,
for,  as  the  gipsies  say,  '  The  happy  man  never  longs  to
scratch  his  itch.'  *  We  were  made  welcome  every-
where, my  comrades  treated  me  well,  and  even  showed
me  a  certain  respect.    The  reason  of  this  was  that  I  had

*  Sarapia  sat pesqtntal  nc punzava.

54


Carmen

killed  my  man,  and  that  some  of  them  had  no  exploit  of
that  description  on  their  conscience.  But  \Yhat  I  valued
most  in  my  new  life  was  that  I  often  saw  Carmen.  She
showed  me  more  affection  than  ever;  nevertheless,  she
would  never  admit,  before  my  comrades,  that  she  was
my  mistress,  and  she  had  even  made  me  swear  all  sorts
of  oaths  that  I  would  not  say  anything  about  her  to
them,  I  was  so  weak  in  that  creature's  hands,  that  I
obeyed  all  her  whims.  And  besides,  this  was  the  first
time  she  had  revealed  herself  as  possessing  any  of  the
reserve  of  a  well-conducted  woman,  and  I  was  simple
enough  to  believe  she  had  really  cast  off  her  former
habits.

"  Our  gang,  which  consisted  of  eight  or  ten  men,
was  hardly  ever  together  except  at  decisive  moments,
and  we  were  usually  scattered  by  twos  and  threes  about
the  towns  and  villages.  Each  one  of  us  pretended  to
have  some  trade.  One  was  a  tinker,  another  was  a
groom;  I  was  supposed  to  peddle  haberdashery,  but  I
hardly  ever  showed  myself  in  large  places,  on  account
of  my  unlucky  business  at  Seville.  One  day,  or  rather
one  night,  we  were  to  meet  below  Veger.  El  Dancdire
and  I  got  there  before  the  others.

We  shall  soon  have  a  new  comrade,'  said  he.
'  Carmen  has  just  managed  one  of  her  best  tricks.  She
has  contrived  the  escape  of  her  rom,  who  was  in  the
presidio  at  Tarifa.'

"  I  was  already  beginning  to  understand  the  gipsy
language,  which  nearly  all  my  comrades  spoke,  and  this
word  rom  startled  me.

55


Carmen

"  '  What!  her  husband?  Is  she  married,  then?  '  said
I  to  the  captain.

"  '  Yes! '  he  repHed, '  married  to  Garcia  cl  Tiicrto  * —
as  cunning  a  gipsy  as  she  is  herself.  The  poor  fehow
has  been  at  the  galleys.  Carmen  has  wheedled  the  sur-
geon of  the  presidio  to  such  good  purpose  that  she  has
managed  to  get  her  roiii  out  of  prison.  Faith!  that
girl's  worth  her  weight  in  gold.  For  two  years  she  has
been  trying  to  contrive  his  escape,  but  she  could  do
nothing  until  the  authorities  took  it  into  their  heads  to
change  the  surgeon.  She  soon  managed  to  come  to  an
understanding  with  this  new  one.'

"  You  may  imagine  how  pleasant  this  news  was  for
me.  I  soon  saw  Garcia  el  Tnerto.  He  was  the  very
ugliest  brute  that  was  ever  nursed  in  gipsydom.  His
skin  was  black,  his  soul  was  blacker,  and  he  was  alto-
gether the  most  thorough-paced  ruf^an  I  ever  came
across  in  my  life.  Carmen  arrived  with  him,  and  when
she  called  him  her  roui  in  my  presence,  you  should
have  seen  the  eyes  that  she  made  at  me.  and  the
faces  she  pulled  whenever  Garcia  turned  his  head
away.

"  I  was  disgusted,  and  never  spoke  a  word  to  her
all  night.  The  next  morning  we  had  made  up  our
packs,  and  had  already  started,  wdien  we  became  aware
that  we  had  a  dozen  horsemen  on  our  heels.  The  brag-
gart Andalusians,  who  had  been  boasting  they  would
murder  every  one  wdio  came  near  them,  cut  a  pitiful
figure  at  once.     There  was  a  general  rout.     El  Dan-

*  One-eyed  man.
56


Carmen

cdire,  Garcia,  a  good-looking  fellow  from  Ecija,  who  was
called  El  Rcmcndado,  and  Carmen  herself,  kept  their  wits
about  them.  The  rest  forsook  the  mules  and  took  to  the
gorges,  where  the  horses  could  not  follow  them.  There
was  no  hope  of  saving  the  mules,  so  we  hastily  un-
strapped the  best  part  of  our  booty,  and,  taking  it  on
our  shoulders,  we  tried  to  escape  through  the  rocks
down  the  steepest  of  the  slopes.  We  threw  our  packs
down  in  front  of  us  and  followed  them  as  best  we  could,
slipping  along  on  our  heels.  Meanwhile  the  enemy
fired  at  us.  It  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  heard  bul-
lets whistling  around  me  and  I  didn't  mind  it  very  much.
When  there's  a  woman  looking  on,  there's  no  particular
merit  in  snapping  one's  fingers  at  death.  We  all  es-
caped except  the  poor  Rcmcndado,  who  received  a  bul-
let wound  in  the  loins.  1  threw  away  my  pack  and  tried
to  lift  him  up.

"  '  Idiot!  '  shouted  Garcia,  '  what  do  we  want  with
offal!  Finish  him  ofif,  and  don't  lose  the  cotton  stock-
ings! '

"  '  Drop  him!  '  cried  Carmen.

"  I  was  so  exhausted  that  I  was  obliged  to  lay  him
down  for  a  moment  under  a  rock.  Garcia  came  up,  and
fired  his  blunderbuss  full  into  his  face.  '  He'd  be  a
clever  fellow  who  recognised  him  now!  '  said  he.  as  he
looked  at  the  face,  cut  to  pieces  by  a  dozen  slugs.

"  There,  sir;  that's  the  delightful  sort  of  life  I've  led!
That  night  we  found  ourselves  in  a  thicket,  worn  out
Avith  fatigue,  with  nothing  to  eat.  and  ruined  by  the  loss
of  our  mules.     What  do  you  think  that  devil  Garcia

57


Carmen

did?  He  pulled  a  pack  of  cards  out  of  his  pocket  and
began  playing  games  with  El  Danca'ire  by  the  light  of  a
hre  they  kindled.  Meanwhile  I  was  lying  down,  staring
at  the  stars,  thinking  of  El  Rem'cndado,  and  telling  my-
self I  would  just  as  lief  be  in  his  place.  Carmen  was
squatting  down  near  me,  and  every  now  and  then  she
would  rattle  her  castanets  and  hum  a  tune.  Then,  draw-
ing close  to  me,  as  if  she  would  have  whispered  in  my
ear,  she  kissed  me  two  or  three  times  over  almost
against  my  will.

"  '  You  are  a  devil,'  said  I  to  her.

"  '  Yes,'  she  replied.

"  After  a  few  hours'  rest,  she  departed  to  Gaucin,
and  the  next  morning  a  little  goatherd  brought  us  some
food.  We  stayed  there  all  that  day,  and  in  the  evening
we  moved  close  to  Gaucin.  We  w^ere  expecting  news
from  Carmen,  but  none  came.  After  daylight  broke  we
saw  a  muleteer  attending  a  well-dressed  woman  with
a  parasol,  and  a  little  girl  who  seemed  to  be  her  servant.
Said  Garcia,  *  There  go  two  mules  and  two  women
whom  St.  Nicholas  has  sent  us.  I  would  rather  have
had  four  mules,  but  no  matter.  I'll  do  the  best  I  can
with  these.'

"  He  took  his  blunderbuss,  and  went  down  the  path-
way, hiding  himself  among  the  brushwood.

"  We  followed  him,  El  Danca'ire  and  I  keeping  a  lit-
tle \\ay  behind.  As  soon  as  we  were  within  hail,  we
showed  ourselves,  and  shouted  to  the  muleteer  to  stop.
When  the  woman  saw  us,  instead  of  being  frightened —
and  our  dress  would  have  been  enough  to  frighten  any

58


Carmen

one — she  burst  into  a  fit  of  loud  laughter.  '  i\h !  the
lillipendil  they  take  me  for  an  eranil '  *

"  It  was  Carmen,  but  so  well  disguised  tliat  if  she
had  spoken  any  other  language  I  should  never  have  rec-
ognised her.  She  sprang  off  her  mule,  and  talked  some
time  in  an  undertone  with  El  Dancdirc  and  Garcia.
Then  she  said  to  me :

"  '  Canary-bird,  we  shall  meet  again  before  you're
hanged.  I'm  off  to  Gibraltar  on  gipsy  business — you'll
soon  have  news  of  me.'

"  We  parted,  after  she  had  told  us  of  a  place  where
we  should  find  shelter  for  some  days.  That  girl  was
the  providence  of  our  gang.  We  soon  received  some
money  sent  by  her,  and  a  piece  of  news  which  was  still
more  useful  to  us — to  the  effect  that  on  a  certain  day
two  English  lords  would  travel  from  Gibraltar  to  Gra-
nada by  a  road  she  mentioned.  This  was  a  word  to  the
wise.  They  had  plenty  of  good  guineas.  Garcia  would
have  killed  them,  but  El  Dancdire  and  I  objected.  All
we  took  from  them,  besides  their  shirts,  which  we
greatly  needed,  was  their  money  and  their  w'atches.

"  Sir,  a  man  may  turn  rogue  in  sheer  thoughtless-
ness. You  lose  your  head  over  a  pretty  girl,  you  fight
another  man  about  her,  there  is  a  catastrophe,  you  have
to  take  to  the  mountains,  and  you  turn  from  a  smug-
gler into  a  robber  before  you  have  time  to  think  about
it.  After  this  matter  of  the  English  lords,  we  concluded
that  the  neighbourhood  of  Gibraltar  would  not  be
healthy   for   us,   and   we   plunged   into   the   Sierra   de

*  "  The  idiots,  they  take  me  for  a  smart  lady!  "

59


Carmen

Ronda.  Yon  once  mentioned  Jose-]\Iaria  to  me.  Well,
it  was  there  I  made  acquaintance  with  him.  He  always
took  his  mistress  with  him  on  his  expeditions.  She  was
a  pretty  girl,  quiet,  modest,  well-mannered,  you  never
heard  a  vulgar  word  from  her,  and  she  was  quite  devoted
to  him.  He,  on  his  side,  led  her  a  very  unhappy  life.  He
was  always  running  after  other  women,  he  ill-treated
her,  and  then  sometimes  he  would  take  it  into  his  head
to  be  jealous.  One  day  he  slashed  her  with  a  knife.
Well,  she  only  doted  on  him  the  more!  That's  the
way  with  women,  and  especially  with  Andalusians.
This  girl  was  proud  of  the  scar  on  her  arm,  and  would
display  it  as  though  it  were  the  most  beautiful  thing  in
the  world.  And  then  Jose-Maria  was  the  worst  of  com-
rades in  the  bargain.  In  one  expedition  we  made  with
him,  he  managed  so  that  he  kept  all  the  profits,  and
we  had  all  the  trouble  and  the  blows.  But  I  must  go
back  to  my  story.  We  had  no  sign  at  all  from  Carmen.
El  Daucalrc  said:  '  One  of  us  will  have  to  go  to  Gi-
braltar to  get  news  of  her.  She  must  have  planned
some  business.  I'd  go  at  once,  only  I'm  too  well
known  at  Gibraltar.'    El  Tiicrto  said:

"  '  I'm  well  known  there  too.  I've  played  so  many
tricks  on  the  crayfish  * — and  as  I've  only  one  eye,  it  is
not  overeasy  for  me  to  disguise  myself.'

"  '  Then  I  suppose  I  must  go,'  said  I,  delighted  at
the  very  idea  of  seeing  Carmen  again.  '  Well,  how  am
I  to  set  about  it?  '

*  Name  applied  by  the  Spanish  populace  to  the  British  soldiers,
on  account  of  the  colour  of  their  uniform.

60


Carmen

"The  others  answered:

"  '  You  must  either  go  by  sea,  or  you  must  get
through  by  San  Rocco,  whichever  you  Uke  the  best;
once  you  are  at  Gibrahar,  inquire  in  the  port  where  a
chocolate-seller  called  La  Rollona  lives.  When  you've
found  her,  she'll  tell  you  everything  that's  happening.'

"  It  was  settled  that  we  were  all  to  start  for  the
Sierra,  that  I  was  to  leave  my  two  companions  there,
and  take  my  way  to  Gibraltar,  in  the  character  of  a
fruit-seller.  At  Ronda  one  of  our  men  procured  me  a
passport;  at  Gaucin  I  was  provided  with  a  donkey.  I
loaded  it  with  oranges  and  melons,  and  started  forth.
When  I  reached  Gibraltar  I  found  that  many  people
knew  La  Rollona,  but  that  she  was  either  dead  or  had
gone  ad  fiiiibits  terrcc/^  and,  to  my  mind,  her  disap-
pearance explained  the  failure  of  our  correspondence
with  Carmen.  I  stabled  my  donkey,  and  began  to  move
about  the  town,  carrying  my  oranges  as  though  to  sell
them,  but  in  reality  looking  to  see  whether  I  could  not
come  across  any  face  I  knew.  The  place  is  full  of  raga-
muffins from  every  country  in  the  world,  and  it  really
is  like  the  Towner  of  Babel,  for  you  can't  go  ten  paces
along  a  street  without  hearing  as  many  languages.  I
did  see  some  gipsies,  but  I  hardly  dared  confide  in  them.
I  was  taking  stock  of  them,  and  they  were  taking  stock
of  me.  We  had  mutually  guessed  each  other  to  be
rogues,  but  the  important  thing  for  us  was  to  know
whether  we  belonged  to  the  same  gang.  After  having
spent   two   days   in   fruitless   wanderings,    and    having

*  To  the  galleys,  or  else  to  all  the  devils  in  hell.

6i


Carmen

found  out  nothing  either  as  to  La  Rollona  or  as  to
Carmen,  I  was  thinking  I  would  go  back  to  my  com-
rades as  soon  as  I  had  made  a  few  purchases,  when,
toward  sunset,  as  I  was  walking  along  a  street,  I  heard
a  woman's  voice  from  a  window  say,  '  Orange-seller!  '

"  I  looked  up,  and  on  a  balcony  I  saw  Carmen  look-
ing out,  beside  a  scarlet-coated  officer  with  gold  epau-
lettes, curly  hair,  and  all  the  appearance  of  a  rich  milord.
As  for  her,  she  was  magnificently  dressed,  a  shawl  hung
on  her  shoulders,  she'd  a  gold  comb  in  her  hair,  every-
thing she  wore  was  of  silk;  and  the  cunning  little
wretch,  not  a  bit  altered,  was  laughing  till  she  held  her
sides.

"  The  Englishman  shouted  to  me  in  mangled  Span-
ish to  come  upstairs,  as  the  lady  wanted  some  oranges,
and  Carmen  said  to  me  in  Basque:

" '  Come  up,  and  don't  look  astonished  at  any-
thing! '

"  Indeed,  nothing  that  she  did  ought  ever  to  have
astonished  me.  I  don't  know  whether  I  was  most
happy  or  wretched  at  seeing  her  again.  At  the  door
of  the  house  there  was  a  tall  English  servant  with  a  pow-
dered head,  who  ushered  me  into  a  splendid  drawing-
room.  Instantly  Carmen  said  to  me  in  Basque,  '  You
don't  know  one  word  of  Spanish,  and  you  don't  know
me.'    Then  turning  to  the  Englishman,  she  added:

"  '  I  told  you  so.  I  saw  at  once  he  was  a  Basque,
Now  you'll  hear  what  a  queer  language  he  speaks.
Doesn't  he  look  silly?  He's  like  a  cat  that's  been
caught  in  the  larder!'

62


Carmen

"  '  And  you,'  said  I  to  her  in  my  own  language,  '  you
look  like  an  impudent  jade — and  I've  a  good  mind  to
scar  your  face  here  and  now,  before  your  spark.'

"  '  My  spark!  '  said  she.  '  Why,  you've  guessed  that
all  alone!  Are  you  jealous  of  this  idiot?  You're  even
sillier  than  you  were  before  our  evening  in  the  Callc
del  Candilcjol  Don't  you  see,  fool,  that  at  this  moment
I'm  doing  gipsy  business,  and  doing  it  in  the  most  bril-
liant manner?  This  house  belongs  to  me — the  guineas
of  that  crayfish  will  belong  to  me!  I  lead  him  by  the
nose,  and  I'll  lead  him  to  a  place  that  he'll  never  get
out  of! '

"  '  xA-nd  if  I  catch  you  doing  gipsy  business  in  this
style  again,  I'll  see  to  it  that  you  never  do  any  again! '
said  I.

'''Ah!  upon  my  word!  Are  you  my  ro)ii,  pray,
that  you  give  me  orders?  If  El  Tiicrto  is  pleased,  what
have  you  to  do  with  it?  Oughtn't  you  to  be  very
happy  that  you  are  the  only  man  who  can  call  himself
my  iiiiiichorrd?  '  *

"  '  What  does  he  say?  '  inquired  the  Englishman.

"  '  He  says  he's  thirsty,  and  would  like  a  drink,'  an-
swered Carmen,  and  she  threw  herself  back  upon  a  sofa,
screaming  with  laughter  at  her  own  translation.

"  When  that  girl  began  to  laugh,  sir,  it  was  hope-
less for  anybody  to  tr}^  and  talk  sense.  Everybody
laughed  with  her.  The  big  Englishman  began  to  laugh
too,  like  the  idiot  he  was,  and  ordered  the  servant  to
bring  me  something  to  drink.

*  My  "  lover,"  or  rather  my  "  fancy."
i8  63


Carmen

"While  I  was  drinking  she  said  to  me:
"  '  Do  you  see  that  ring  he  has  on  his  finger?     If
you  hke  I'll  give  it  to  you.'
"  And  I  answered:

''  '  I  would  give  one  of  my  fingers  to  have  your  mi-
lord out  on  the  mountains,  and  each  of  us  with  a  nia-
qiiila  in  his  fist.'

iMaqiiila,  what  does  that  mean?  '  asked  the  Eng-
lishman.

Maquila,'  said  Carmen,  still  laughing,  '  means
an  orange.  Isn't  it  a  queer  word  for  an  orange?  He
says  he'd  like  you  to  eat  maquila.'

'"Does  he?'  said  the  Englishman.  'Very  weh,
bring  more  maquila  to-morrow.'

"  While  we  were  talking  a  servant  came  in  and  said
dinner  was  ready.  Then  the  Englishman  stood  up,  gave
me  a  piastre,  and  offered  his  arm  to  Carmen,  as  if  she
couldn't  have  walked  alone.  Carmen,  who  was  still
laughing,  said  to  me:

My  boy,  I  can't  ask  you  to  dinner.  But  to-mor-
row, as  soon  as  you  hear  the  drums  beat  for  parade,
come  here  with  your  oranges.  You'll  find  a  better  fur-
nished room  than  the  one  in  the  Calle  del  Candilcjo,
and  you'll  see  whether  I  am  still  your  Carmencita.  Then
afterwards  we'll  talk  about  gipsy  business.'

"  I  gave  her  no  answer — even  when  I  was  in  the
street  I  could  hear  the  Englishman  shouting,  '  Bring
more  maquila  to-morrow,'  and  Carmen's  peals  of
laughter.

"I  went  out,  not  knowing  what   I   should  do;  I
64


Carmen

hardly  slept,  and  next  morning  I  was  so  enraged  with
the  treacherous  creature  that  I  made  up  my  mind  to
leave  Gibraltar  without  seeing  her  again.  But  the
moment  the  drums  began  to  roll,  my  courage  failed
me.  I  took  up  my  net  full  of  oranges,  and  hurried  off
to  Carmen's  house.  Her  window-shutters  had  been
pulled  apart  a  little,  and  I  saw  her  great  dark  eyes  watch-
ing for  me.  The  powdered  ser\-ant  showed  me  in  at
once.  Carmen  sent  him  out  with  a  message,  and  as  soon
as  we  were  alone  she  burst  into  one  of  her  fits  of  croco-
dile laughter  and  threw  her  arms  around  my  neck.
Never  had  I  seen  her  look  so  beautiful.  She  was  dressed
out  like  a  queen,  and  scented;  she  had  silken  furniture,
embroidered  curtains — and  I  togged  out  like  the  thief
I  was !

"  '  Miiicliorrd,'  said  Carmen.  '  I've  a  good  mind  to
smash  up  everything  here,  set  fire  to  the  house,  and
take  myself  off  to  the  mountains.'  x-\nd  then  she  would
fondle  me,  and  then  she  would  laugh,  and  she  danced
about  and  tore  up  her  fripperies.  Never  did  monkey
gambol  nor  make  such  faces,  nor  play  such  wild  tricks,
as  she  did  that  day.  When  she  had  recovered  her
gravity —

"  '  Hark!  '  she  said,  '  this  is  gipsy  business.  I  mean
him  to  take  me  to  Ronda,  where  I  have  a  sister  who  is
a  nun  '  (here  she  shrieked  with  laughter  again).  '  We
shall  pass  by  a  particular  spot  which  I  shall  make  known
to  you.  Then  you  must  fall  upon  him  and  strip  him  to
the  skin.  Your  best  plan  would  be  to  do  for  him,  but,'
she  added,  with  a  certain  fiendish  smile  of  hers,  which

65


Carmen

no  one  who  saw  it  ever  had  any  desire  to  imitate,  '  do
you  know  what  you  had  better  do?  Let  El  Tiicrio
come  up  in  front  of  you.  You  keep  a  Httle  behind.
The  crayfish  is  brave,  and  skilful  too,  and  he  has  good
pistols.     Do  you  understand?  '

"  And  she  broke  off  with  another  fit  of  laughter  that
made  me  shiver.

No,'  said  I,  *  I  hate  Garcia,  but  he's  my  com-
rade. Some  day,  maybe,  I'll  rid  you  of  him,  but  we'll
settle  our  account  after  the  fashion  of  my  country.  It's
only  chance  that  has  made  me  a  gipsy,  and  in  certain
things  I  shall  always  be  a  thorough  Navarrese,*  as  the
proverb  says.

You're  a  fool,'  she  rejoined,  '  a  simpleton,  a  regu-
lar payllo.  You're  just  like  the  dwarf  who  thinks  him-
self tall  because  he  can  spit  a  long  way.f  You  don't
love  me !     Be  off  with  you !  '

"  Whenever  she  said  to  me  '  Be  off  with  you,'  I
couldn't  go  away.  I  promised  I  would  start  back  to  my
comrades  and  wait  the  arrival  of  the  Englishman.  She,
on  her  side,  promised  me  she  would  be  ill  until  she
left  Gibraltar  for  Ronda.

"  I  remained  at  Gibraltar  two  days  longer.  She
had  the  boldness  to  disguise  herself  and  come  and  see
me  at  the  inn.  I  departed,  I  had  a  plan  of  my  own.  I
went  back  to  our  meeting-place  with  the  information  as
to  the  spot  and  the  hour  at  which  the  Englishman  and

*  Navarro  fino.

\  Or  esorjk  de  or  narsicJiisIe,  sin  chisnar  lachingucl.     "  The  promise
of  a  dwarf  is  that  he  will  spit  a  long  way." — A  gipsy  proverb.

66


Carmen

Carmen  were  to  pass  by.  I  found  El  Danca'irc  and  Gar-
cia waiting  for  me.  We  spent  the  night  in  a  wood,
beside  a  fire  made  of  pine-cones  that  blazed  splendidly.
I  suggested  to  Garcia  that  we  should  play  cards,  and
he  agreed.  In  the  second  game  I  told  him  he  was  cheat-
ing; he  began  to  laugh;  I  threw  the  cards  in  his  face.
He  tried  to  get  at  his  blunderbuss.  I  set  my  foot  on  it,
and  said,  '  They  say  you  can  use  a  knife  as  well  as  the
best  ruffian  in  iMalaga;  will  you  try  it  with  me?  '  El
Danca'ire  tried  to  part  us.  I  had  given  Garcia  one  or  two
cuffs,  his  rage  had  given  him  courage,  he  drew  his  knife,
and  I  drew  mine,  ^^^e  both  of  us  told  El  Danca'ire  he
must  leave  us  alone,  and  let  us  fight  it  out.  He  saw
there  was  no  means  of  stopping  us,  so  he  stood  on  one
side.  Garcia  was  already  bent  double,  like  a  cat  ready
to  spring  upon  a  mouse.  He  held  his  hat  in  his  left
hand  to  parry  with,  and  his  knife  in  front  of  him — that's
their  Andalusian  guard.  I  stood  up  in  the  Navarrese
fashion,  with  my  left  arm  raised,  my  left  leg  forward,
and  my  knife  held  straight  along  m}'  right  thigh.  I
felt  I  was  stronger  than  any  giant.  He  flew  at  me
like  an  arrow.  I  turned  round  on  my  left  foot,  so
that  he  found  nothing  in  front  of  him.  But  I  thrust
him  in  the  throat,  and  the  knife  went  in  so  far  that
my  hand  was  under  his  chin.  I  gave  the  blade  such
a  twist  that  it  broke.  That  was  the  end.  The  blade
was  carried  out  of  the  wound  by  a  gush  of  blood
as  thick  as  my  arm,  and  he  fell  full  length  on  his
face.

"  '  What  have  you  done? '  said  El  Danca'ire  to  me.
67


Carmen

Hark  ye,'  said  I,  '  we  couldn't  live  on  together.
I  love  Carmen  and  I  mean  to  be  the  only  one.  And
besides,  Garcia  was  a  villain.  I  remember  what  he  did
to  that  poor  Remcndado.  There  are  only  two  of  us  left
now,  but  we  are  both  good  fellows.  Come,  will  you
have  me  for  your  friend,  for  life  or  death?  '

"  El  Dancdirc  stretched  out  his  hand.  He  was  a  man
of  fifty.

Devil  take  these  love  stories!  '  he  cried.  '  If
you'd  asked  him  for  Carmen  he'd  have  sold  her  to  you
for  a  piastre!  There  are  only  two  of  us  now — how  shall
we  manage  for  to-morrow? '

I'll  manage  it  all  alone,'  I  answered.  '  I  can  snap
my  fingers  at  the  whole  world  now.'

"  We  buried  Garcia,  and  we  moved  our  camp  two
hundred  paces  farther  on.  The  next  morning  Carmen
and  her  Englishman  came  along  with  two  muleteers
and  a  servant.     I  said  to  El  Dancdirc:

"  '  I'll  look  after  the  Englishman,  you  frighten  the
others — they're  not  armed! '

"  The  Englishman  was  a  plucky  fellow.  He'd  have
killed  me  if  Carmen  hadn't  jogged  his  elbow.

"  To  put  it  shortly,  I  won  Carmen  back  that  day,
and  my  first  words  were  to  tell  her  she  was  a  widow.

"  When  she  knew  how  it  had  all  happened —

"  '  You'll  always  be  a  UUipcndi'  she  said.  '  Garcia
ought  to  have  killed  you.  Your  Navarrese  guard  is  a
pack  of  nonsense,  and  he  has  sent  far  more  skilful  men
than  you  into  the  darkness.  It  was  just  that  his  time
had  come — and  yours  will  come  too/

68


Carmen

"'Ay,  and  yours  too! — if  you're  not  a  faithful
romi  to  me.'

"  '  So  be  it,'  said  she.  '  I've  read  in  the  coffee
grounds,  more  than  once,  that  you  and  I  were  to  end
our  Hves  together.  Pshaw!  what  must  be,  will  be! '  and
she  rattled  her  castanets,  as  was  her  way  when  she
wanted  to  drive  away  some  worrying  thought.

"  One  runs  on  when  one  is  talking  about  one's  self.
I  dare  say  all  these  details  bore  you,  but  I  shall  soon
be  at  the  end  of  my  story.  Our  new  life  lasted  for  some
considerable  time.  El  Daiica'irc  and  I  gathered  a  few
comrades  about  us,  who  were  more  trustworthy  than  our
earlier  ones,  and  we  turned  our  attention  to  smuggHng.
Occasionally,  indeed,  I  must  confess  we  stopped  trav-
ellers on  the  highways,  but  never  unless  we  were  at  the
last  extremity,  and  could  not  avoid  doing  so;  and  be-
sides, we  never  ill-treated  the  travellers,  and  confined
ourselves  to  taking  their  money  from  them.

"  For  some  months  I  was  very  well  satisfied  with
Carmen.  She  still  served  us  in  our  smuggling  opera-
tions, by  giving  us  notice  of  any  opportunity  of  making
a  good  haul.  She  remained  either  at  Malaga,  at  Cordo-
va, or  at  Granada,  but  at  a  word  from  me  she  would
leave  everything,  and  come  to  meet  me  at  some  z'cnta
or  even  in  our  lonely  camp.  Only  once — it  was  at  Ma-
laga— she  caused  me  some  uneasiness.  I  heard  she  had
fixed  her  fancy  upon  a  very  rich  merchant,  with  whom
she  probably  proposed  to  play  her  Gibrahar  trick  over
again.  In  spite  of  everything  El  Daiica'irc  said  to  stop
me,  I  started  off,  walked  into  Malaga  in  broad  daylight,
Vol.  6  69  T


Carmen

sought  for  Carmen  and  carried  her  off  instantly.  We
had  a  sharp  altercation.

"  '  Do  you  know,'  said  she,  '  now  that  you're  my
ro})i  for  good  and  all,  I  don't  care  for  you  so  much  as
when  you  were  my  jiiiiicJiorrdl  I  won't  be  worried,
and  above  all,  I  won't  be  ordered  about.  I  choose  to
be  free  to  do  as  I  like.  Take  care  you  don't  drive  mc
too  far;  if  you  tire  me  out,  I'll  find  some  good  fellow
who'll  serve  you  just  as  you  served  El  Tuciio.'

El  Dauca'ire  patched  it  up  between  us;  but  we  had
said  things  to  each  other  that  rankled  in  our  hearts,
and  we  were  not  as  we  had  been  before.  Shortly  after
that  we  had  a  misfortune:  the  soldiers  caught  us,  EI  Dan-
co'ire  and  two  of  my  comrades  were  killed;  two  others
were  taken.  I  was  sorely  wounded,  and,  but  for  my
good  horse,  I  should  have  fallen  into  the  soldiers'  hands.
Half  dead  with  fatigue,  and  with  a  bullet  in  my  body,
I  sought  shelter  in  a  wood,  with  my  only  remaining
comrade.  When  I  got  off  my  horse  I  fainted  away,  and
I  thought  I  was  going  to  die  there  in  the  brushwood,
like  a  shot  hare.  My  comrade  carried  me  to  a  cave  he
knew  of,  and  then  he  sent  to  fetch  Carmen.

"  She  was  at  Granada,  and  she  hurried  to  me  at
once.  For  a  whole  fortnight  she  never  left  me  for  a
single  instant.  She  never  closed  her  eyes;  she  nursed
me  with  a  skill  and  care  such  as  no  woman  ever  showed
to  the  man  she  loved  most  tenderly.  As  soon  as  I
could  stand  on  my  feet,  she  conveyed  me  with  the  ut-
most secrecy  to  Granada.  These  gipsy  women  find  safe
shelter  everywhere,  and  I  spent  more  than  six  weeks  in

70


Carmen

a  house  only  two  doors  from  that  of  the  Corrcgidor  who
was  trying  to  arrest  me.  More  than  once  I  saw  him
pass  by,  from  behind  the  shutter.  At  last  I  recovered,
but  I  had  thought  a  great  deal,  on  my  bed  of  pain,  and
I  had  planned  to  change  my  way  of  life.  I  suggested
to  Carmen  that  we  should  leave  Spain,  and  seek  an
honest  livelihood  in  the  New  World.  She  laughed  in
my  face.

"  '  We  were  not  born  to  plant  cabbages,'  she  cried.
'  Our  fate  is  to  hve  payllosl  Listen:  I've  arranged  a
business  with  Nathan  Ben-Joseph  at  Gibraltar.  He  has
cotton  stuffs  that  he  can  not  get  through  till  you  come
to  fetch  them.  He  knows  you're  alive,  and  reckons
upon  you.  What  would  our  Gibraltar  correspondents
say  if  you  failed  them?  '

"  I  let  myself  be  persuaded,  and  took  up  my  vile
trade  once  more.

"  While  I  was  hiding  at  Granada  there  were  bull-
fights there,  to  which  Carmen  went.  WHien  she  came
back  she  talked  a  great  deal  about  a  skilful  picador  of
the  name  of  Lucas.  She  knew  the  name  of  his  horse,
and  how  much  his  embroidered  jacket  had  cost  him.
I  paid  no  attention  to  this;  but  a  few  days  later,  Jua-
nito,  the  only  one  of  my  comrades  who  was  left,  told
me  he  had  seen  Carmen  with  Lucas  in  a  shop  in  the
Zacatin.  Then  I  began  to  feel  alarmed.  I  asked  Car-
men how  and  why  she  had  made  the  picador^s  acquaint-
ance.

He's  a  man  out  of  ^\■hom  we  may  be  able  to  get
something,'  said  she.    '  A  noisy  stream  has  cither  water

71


Carmen

in  it  or  pebbles.*  He  has  earned  twelve  hundred  reals
at  the  bull-fights.  It  must  be  one  of  two  things:  we
must  either  have  his  money,  or  else,  as  he  is  a  good
rider  and  a  plucky  fellow^  we  can  enrol  him  in  our
gang.  We  have  lost  such  an  one  and  such  an  one;
you'll  have  to  replace  them.    Take  this  man  with  you!  '

"  '  I  want  neither  his  money  nor  himself,'  I  replied,
'  and  I  forbid  you  to  speak  to  him.'

"  '  Beware!  '  she  retorted.  '  If  any  one  defies  me  to
do  a  thing,  it's  very  quickly  done.'

"  Luckily  the  picador  departed  to  Malaga,  and  I  set
about  passing  in  the  Jew's  cotton  stuffs.  This  expedi-
tion gave  me  a  great  deal  to  do,  and  Carmen  as  well.
I  forgot  Lucas,  and  perhaps  she  forgot  him  too — for
the  moment,  at  all  events.  It  was  just  about  that  time,
sir,  that  I  met  you,  first  at  Montilla,  and  then  afterward
at  Cordova.  I  won't  talk  about  that  last  interview.  You
know  more  about  it,  perhaps,  than  I  do.  Carmen  stole
your  watch  from  you,  she  wanted  to  have  your  money
besides,  and  especially  that  ring  I  see  on  your  finger,
and  which  she  declared  to  be  a  magic  ring,  the  posses-
sion of  which  was  very  important  to  her.  We  had  a  vio-
leAt  quarrel,  and  I  struck  her.  She  turned  pale  and
began  to  cry.  It  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  seen  her
cry,  and  it  affected  me  in  the  most  painful  manner.  I
begged  her  to  forgive  me,  but  she  sulked  with  me  for
a  whole  day,  and  when  I  started  back  to  Montilla  she
wouldn't  kiss  me.     My  heart  was  still  very  sore,  when,

*  Li'u  SOS  sonsi  abela
Pani  0  reblciidani  terda. — Gipsy  proverb.

^2


Carmen

three  days  later,  she  joined  me  with  a  smiUng  face  and
as  merry  as  a  lark.  Everything  was  forgotten,  and  we
were  like  a  pair  of  honeymoon  lovers.  Just  as  we  were
parting  she  said,  'There's  a  fete  at  Cordova;  I  shall
go  and  see  it,  and  then  I  shall  know  what  people  will
be  coming  away  with  money,  and  I  can  warn  you.'

"  I  let  her  go.  When  I  was  alone  I  thought  about
the  fete,  and  about  the  change  in  Carmen's  temper.
'  She  must  have  avenged  herself  already,'  said  I  to  my-
self, '  since  she  was  the  first  to  make  our  quarrel  up.'
A  peasant  told  me  there  was  to  be  bull-fighting  at  Cor-
dova. Then  my  blood  began  to  boil,  and  I  went  ofT  like
a  madman  straight  to  the  bull-ring.  I  had  Lucas
pointed  out  to  me,  and  on  the  bench,  just  beside  the  bar-
rier, I  recognised  Carmen.  One  glance  at  her  was
enough  to  turn  my  suspicion  into  certainty,  \\nien
the  first  bull  appeared  Lucas  began,  as  I  had  expected,
to  play  the  agreeable;  he  snatched  the  cockade  off  the
bull  and  presented  it  to  Carmen,  who  put  it  in  her  hair
at  once.*

"  The  bull  avenged  me.  Lucas  was  knocked  down,
with  his  horse  on  his  chest,  and  the  bull  on  top  of  both
of  them.  I  looked  for  Carmen,  she  had  disappeared
from  her  place  already.  I  couldn't  get  out  of  mine,
and  I  was  obliged  to  wait  until  the  bull-fight  was  over.
Then  I  went  ofif  to  that  house  you  already  know,  and

*  La  divisa.  A  knot  of  ribbon,  the  colour  of  which  indicates  the
pasturage  from  which  each  bull  comes.  This  knot  of  ribbon  is  fas-
tened into  the  bull's  hide  with  a  sort  of  hook,  and  it  is  considered
the  very  height  of  gallantry  to  snatch  it  off  the  living  beast  and
present  it  to  a  woman.

73


Carmen

waited  there  quietly  all  that  evening  and  part  of  the
night.     Toward  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  Carmen
came  back,  and  was  rather  surprised  to  see  me.
"  '  Come  with  me/  said  I.
"  '  Very  well,'  said  she,  '  let's  be  off.'
."  I  went  and  got  my  horse,  and  took  her  up  behind
me,  and  we  travelled  all  the  rest  of  the  night  without
saying  a  word  to  each  other.     When  daylight  came  we
stopped  at  a  lonely  inn.  not  far  from  a  little  hermitage.
There  I  said  to  Carmen:

Listen — I  forget  everything,  I  won't  mention
anything  to  you.  But  swear  one  thing  to  me — that
you'll  come  with  me  to  x\merica.  and  live  there  qui-
etly!'

No,'  said  she,  in  a  sulky  voice,  '  I  won't  go  to
America — I  am  very  well  here.'

That's  because  you're  near  Lucas.  But  be  very
sure  that  even  if  he  gets  well  now,  he  won't  make  old
bones.  And,  indeed,  why  should  I  quarrel  with  him?
I'm  tired  of  kilHng  all  your  lovers;  I'll  kill  you  this
time.'

"  She  looked  at  me  steadily  with  her  wild  eyes,  and
then  she  said:

I've  always  thought  you  would  kill  me.  The
very  first  time  I  saw  you  I  had  just  met  a  priest  at  the
door  of  my  house.  And  to-night,  as  we  were  going  out
of  Cordova,  didn't  you  see  anything?  A  hare  ran  across
the  road  between  your  horse's  feet.    It  is  fate.'

"  '  Carmencita,'  I  asked,  '  don't  you  love  me  any
more?  '

74


Carmen

■'  She  gave  me  no  answer,  she  was  sitting  cross-
legged  on  a  mat,  making  marks  on  the  ground  with
her  finger.

"  '  Let  us  change  our  Hfe,  Carmen,'  said  I  implor-
ingly. '  Let  us  go  away  and  live  somewhere  where  we
shall  never  be  parted.  You  know  we  have  a  hundred
and  twenty  gold  ounces  buried  under  an  oak  not  far
from  here,  and  then  we  have  more  money  with  Ben-
Joseph  the  Jew.'

"  She  began  to  smile,  and  then  she  said,  '  Ale  first,
and  then  you.    I  know  it  will  happen  like  that.'

"  '  Think  about  it,'  said  L  '  Lve  come  to  the  end  of
my  patience  and  my  courage.  Make  up  your  mind —
or  else  I  must  make  up  mine.'

''  I  left  her  alone  and  walked  toward  the  hermitage.
I  found  the  hermit  praying.  I  waited  till  his  prayer
was  finished.  I  longed  to  pray  myself,  but  I  couldn't.
When  he  rose  up  from  his  knees  I  went  to  him.

"  '  Father,'  I  said,  '  will  you  pray  for  some  one  who
is  in  great  danger?  '

"  '  I  pray  for  every  one  who  is  afflicted,'  he  replied.

"  '  Can  you  say  a  mass  for  a  soul  which  is  perhaps
about  to  go  into  the  presence  of  its  Maker? '

"  *  Yes,'  he  answered,  looking  hard  at  me.

"  And  as  there  was  something  strange  about  me,  he
tried  to  make  me  talk.

"  '  It  seems  to  me  I  have  seen  you  somewhere,'
said  he.

"  I  laid  a  piastre  on  his  bench.

"  '  When  shall  you  say  the  mass?  '  said  L
75


Carmen

"  *  In  half  an  hour.  The  son  of  the  innkeeper  yon-
der is  coming  to  serve  it.  Tell  me,  young  man,  haven't
you  something  on  your  conscience  that  is  tormenting
you?    Will  you  listen  to  a  Christian's  counsel? '

"  I  could  hardly  restrain  my  tears.  I  told  him  I
would  come  back,  and  hurried  away.  I  went  and  lay
down  on  the  grass  until  I  heard  the  bell.  Then  I  went
back  to  the  chapel,  but  I  stayed  outside  it.  When  he
had  said  the  mass,  I  went  back  to  the  vcnta.  I  was  hop-
ing Carmen  would  have  fled.  She  could  have  taken
my  horse  and  ridden  away.  But  I  found  her  there
still.  She  did  not  choose  that  any  one  should  say  I  had
frightened  her.  While  I  had  been  away  she  had  unfas-
tened the  hem  of  her  gown  and  taken  out  the  lead
that  weighted  it;  and  now  she  was  sitting  before  a
table,  looking  into  a  bowl  of  water  into  which  she  had
just  thrown  the  lead  she  had  melted.  She  was  so  busy
with  her  spells  that  at  first  she  didn't  notice  my  return.
Sometimes  she  would  take  out  a  bit  of  lead  and  turn
it  round  every  way  with  a  melancholy  look.  Some-
times she  would  sing  one  of  those  magic  songs,  which
invoke  the  help  of  Maria  Padella,  Don  Pedro's  mis-
tress, who  is  said  to  have  been  the  Bari  CraUisa — the
great  gipsy  queen.*

Carmen,'    I   said  to   her,    '  will   you   come   with
me?  '    She  rose,  threw  away  her  wooden  bowl,  and  put

*  Maria  Padella  was  accused  of  having  bewitched  Don  Pedro.
According  to  one  popular  tradition  she  presented  Queen  Blanche  of
Bourbon  with  a  golden  girdle  which,  in  the  eyes  of  the  bewitched
king,  took  on  the  appearance  of  a  living  snake.  Hence  the  repug-
nance he  always  showed  toward  that  unhappy  princess.

76


Carmen

her  mantilla  over  her  head  ready  to  start.     My  horse
was  led  up,  she  mounted  behind  me,  and  we  rode  away.

"  After  we  had  gone  a  little  distance  I  said  to  her,
'  So,  my  Carmen,  you  are  quite  ready  to  follow  me,
isn't  that  so?  '

"  She  answered,  '  Yes,  I'll  follow  you,  even  to  death
— but  I  won't  live  with  you  any  more.'

"  We  had  reached  a  lonely  gorge.  I  stopped  my
horse.

"  '  Is  this  the  place?  '  she  said.

"  And  with  a  spring  she  reached  the  ground.  She
took  off  her  mantilla  and  threw  it  at  her  feet,  and  stood
motionless,  with  one  hand  on  her  hip.  looking  at  me
steadily.

"  '  You  mean  to  kill  me,  I  see  that  well,'  said  she.
'  It  is  fate.     But  you'll  never  make  me  give  in.'

"  I  said  to  her:  '  Be  rational,  I  implore  you;  listen
to  me.  All  the  past  is  forgotten.  Yet  you  know  it  is
you  who  have  been  my  ruin — it  is  because  of  you  that
I  am  a  robber  and  a  murderer.  Carmen,  my  Car-
men, let  me  save  you,  and  save  myself  with  you.'

Jose,'  she  answered,  '  what  you  ask  is  impossi-
ble. I  don't  love  you  any  more.  You  love  me  still,
and  that  is  why  you  want  to  kill  me.  If  I  liked,  I  might
tell  you  some  other  lie,  but  I  don't  choose  to  give  my-
self the  trouble.  Everything  is  over  between  us  two.
You  are  my  rom,  and  you  have  the  right  to  kill  your
romi,  but  Carmen  will  always  be  free.  A  calli  she  was
born,  and  a  calli  she'll  die.'

"  '  Then,  you  love  Lucas?  '  I  asked.
77


Carmen

"  *  Yes,  I  have  loved  him — as  I  loved  you — for  an
instant — less  than  I  loved  you,  perhaps.  But  now  1
don't  love  anything,  and  I  hate  myself  for  ever  having
loved  you.'

"  I  cast  myself  at  her  feet,  I  seized  her  hands,  I  wa-
tered them  with  my  tears,  I  reminded  her  of  all  the
happy  moments  we  had  spent  together,  I  offered  to
continue  my  brigand's  life,  if  that  would  please  her.
Everything,  sir,  everything — I  offered  her  everything
if  she  would  only  love  me  again.

"  She  said:

'■  '  Love  you  again?  That's  not  possible!  Live  with
you?     I  will  not  do  it! '

"  I  was  wild  with  fury.  I  drew  my  knife,  I  would
have  had  her  look  frightened,  and  sue  for  mercy — but
that  woman  was  a  demon.

"  I  cried,  '  For  the  last  time  I  ask  you.  Will  you
stay  with  me?  '

"'No!  no!  no!'  she  said,  and  she  stamped  her
foot.

"  Then  she  pulled  a  ring  I  had  given  her  off  her  fin-
ger, and  cast  it  into  the  brushwood.

"  I  struck  her  twice  over — I  had  taken  Garcia's
knife,  because  I  had  broken  my  own.  At  the  second
thrust  she  fell  without  a  sound.  It  seems  to  me  that
I  can  still  see  her  great  black  eyes  staring  at  me.  Then
they  grew  dim  and  the  lids  closed.

"  For  a  good  hour  I  lay  there  prostrate  beside  her
corpse.  Then  I  recollected  that  Carmen  had  often  told
me  that  she  would  like  to  lie  buried  in  a  wood.    I  dug

78


Carmen

a  grave  for  her  with  my  knife  and  laid  her  in  it.  .  I
hunted  about  a  long  time  for  her  ring,  and  I  found  it
at  last.  I  put  it  into  the  grave  beside  her,  with  a  little
cross — perhaps  I  did  wrong.  Then  I  got  upon  my
horse,  galloped  to  Cordova,  and  gave  myself  up  at  the
nearest  guard-room.  I  told  them  I  had  killed  Carmen,
but  I  would  not  tell  them  where  her  body  was.  That
hermit  was  a  holy  man!  He  prayed  for  her — he  said  a
mass  for  her  soul.  Poor  child!  it's  the  calle  who  are
to  blame  for  having  brought  her  up  as  they  did."


19  79


CHAPTER    IV

Spain  is  one  of  the  countries  in  which  those  nom-
ads, scattered  all  over  Europe,  and  known  as  Bo-
hemians, Gitanas,  Gipsies,  Zigeuner,  and  so  forth,  are
now  to  be  found  in  the  greatest  numbers.  Most  of  these
people  live,  or  rather  wander  hither  and  thither,  in  the
southern  and  eastern  provinces  of  Spain,  in  Andalusia.
and  Estramadura.  in  the  kingdom  of  Murcia.  There
are  a  great  many  of  them  in  Catalonia.  These  last  fre-
quently cross  over  into  France  and  are  to  l)e  seen  at  all
our  southern  fairs.  The  men  generally  call  themselves
grooms,  horse  doctors,  mule-clippers;  to  these  trades
they  add  the  mending  of  saucepans  and  brass  utensils,
not  to  mention  smuggling  and  other  illicit  practices.
The  women  tell  fortunes,  beg.  and  sell  all  sorts  of  drugs,
some  of  which  are  innocent,  while  some  are  not.  The
physical  characteristics  of  the  gipsies  are  more  easily  dis-
tinguished than  described,  and  when  you  have  known
one,  you  should  be  able  to  recognise  a  member  of  the
race  among  a  thousand  other  men.  It  is  by  their  physi-
ognomy and  expression,  especially,  that  they  differ  from
the  other  inhabitants  of  the  same  country.  Their  com-
plexion is  exceedingly  swarthy,  always  darker  than  that
of  the  race  among  whom  they  live.    Hence  the  name  of

80


Carmen

calc  (blacks)  which  they  frequently  apply  to  them-
selves.* Their  eyes,  set  with  a  decided  slant,  are  large,
very  black,  and  shaded  by  long  and  heavy  lashes.  Their
glance  can  only  be  compared  to  that  of  a  wild  creature.
It  is  full  at  once  of  boldness  and  shyness,  and  in  this
respect  their  eyes  are  a  fair  indication  of  their  national
character,  which  is  cunning,  bold,  but  with  "  the  natural
fear  of  blows,"  like  Panurge.  Most  of  the  men  are
strapping  fellows,  slight  and  active.  I  don't  think  I
ever  saw  a  gipsy  who  had  grown  fat.  In  Germany  the
gipsy  women  are  often  very  pretty;  but  beauty  is  very
uncommon  among  the  Spanish  gitanas.  When  very
young,  they  may  pass  as  being  attractive  in  their  ugli-
ness, but  once  they  have  reached  motherhood,  they  be-
come absolutely  repulsive.  The  filthiness  of  both  sexes
is  incredible,  and  no  one  wdio  has  not  seen  a  gipsy  ma-
tron's hair  can  form  any  conception  of  what  it  is,  not
even  if  he  conjures  up  the  roughest,  the  greasiest,  and
the  dustiest  heads  imaginable.  In  some  of  the  large
Andalusian  towns  certain  of  the  gipsy  girls,  somewhat
better  looking  than  their  fellows,  will  take  more  care  of
their  personal  appearance.  These  go  out  and  earn
money  by  performing  dances  strongly  resembling  those
forbidden  at  our  public  balls  in  carnival  time.  An  Eng-
lish missionary,  Mr.  Borrow,  the  author  of  two  very
interesting  w^orks  on  the  Spanish  gipsies,  whom  he  un-

*  It  has  struck  me  that  the  German  gipsies,  though  they  thor-
oughly understand  the  word  crt/f,  do  not  care  to  be  called  by  that
name.  Among  themselves  they  always  use  the  designation  J^o-
inanc  tchave.

8i


Carmen

dertook  to  convert  on  behalf  of  the  Bible  Society,  de-
clares there  is  no  instance  of  any  gitana  showing  the
smallest  weakness  for  a  man  not  belonging  to  her  own
race.  The  praise  he  bestow^s  upon  their  chastity  strikes
me  as  being  exceedingly  exaggerated.  In  the  first
place,  the  great  majority  are  in  the  position  of  the  ugly
woman  described  by  Ovid,  "  Casta  quam  nemo  rogarit.^'
As  for  the  pretty  ones,  they  are,  like  all  Spanish  women,
very  fastidious  in  choosing  their  lovers.  Their  fancy
must  be  taken,  and  their  favour  must  be  earned.  Mr.
Borrow  quotes,  in  proof  of  their  virtue,  one  trait  which
does  honour  to  his  own,  and  especially  to  his  simplicity:
he  declares  that  an  immoral  man  of  his  acquaintance
offered  several  gold  ounces  to  a  pretty  gitana,  and
ofifered  them  in  vain.  An  Andalusian,  to  whom  I  re-
tailed this  anecdote,  asserted  that  the  immoral  man  in
question  would  have  been  far  more  successful  if  he  had
shown  the  girl  two  or  three  piastres,  and  that  to  ofTer
gold  ounces  to  a  gipsy  was  as  poor  a  method  of  per-
suasion as  to  promise  a  couple  of  millions  to  a  tavern
wench.  However  that  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  the
gitana  shows  the  most  extraordinary  devotion  to  her
husband.  There  is  no  danger  and  no  suffering  she  w-ill
not  brave,  to  help  him  in  his  need.  One  of  the  names
which  the  gipsies  apply  to  themselves,  Rome,  or  "  the
married  couple,"  seems  to  me  a  proof  of  their  racial
respect  for  the  married  state.  Speaking  generally,  it
may  be  asserted  that  their  chief  virtue  is  their  patriot-
ism— if  we  may  thus  describe  the  fidelity  they  observe
in  all  their  relations  with  persons  of  the  same  origin  as

82


Carmen

their  own,  their  readiness  to  help  one  another,  and  the
inviolable  secrecy  which  they  keep  for  each  other's  bene-
fit, in  all  compromising  matters.  And  indeed  something
of  the  same  sort  may  be  noticed  in  all  mysterious  asso-
ciations which  are  beyond  the  pale  of  the  law.

Some  months  ago,  I  paid  a  visit  to  a  gipsy  tribe  in
the  Vosges  country.  In  the  hut  of  an  old  w^oman,  the
oldest  member  of  the  tribe,  I  found  a  gipsy,  in  no  way
related  to  the  family,  who  was  sick  of  a  mortal  disease.
The  man  had  left  a  hospital,  where  he  was  well  cared
for,  so  that  he  might  die  among  his  own  people.  For
thirteen  weeks  he  had  been  lying  in  bed  in  their  en-
campment, and  receiving  far  better  treatment  than  any
of  the  sons  and  sons-in-law  who  shared  his  shelter.  He
had  a  good  bed  made  of  straw  and  moss,  and  sheets  that
were  tolerably  white,  whereas  all  the  rest  of  the  family,
which  numbered  eleven  persons,  slept  on  planks  three
feet  long.  So  much  for  their  hospitality.  This  very
same  woman,  humane  as  was  her  treatment  of  her  guest,
said  to  me  constantly  before  the  sick  man:  "  Singo,  singo,
homte  hi  undo.''  "  Soon,  soon  he  must  die!  "  After
all,  these  people  live  such  miserable  lives,  that  a  refer-
ence to  the  approach  of  death  can  have  no  terrors  for
them.

One  remarkable  feature  in  the  gipsy  character  is
their  indifference  about  religion.  Not  that  they  are
strong-minded  or  sceptical.  They  have  never  made  any
profession  of  atheism.  Far  from  that,  indeed,  the  reli-
gion of  the  country  which  they  inhabit  is  always  theirs;
but  they  change  their  religion  when  they  change  the

83


Carmen

country  of  their  residence.  They  arc  equally  free  from
the  superstitions  which  replace  religious  feeling  in  the
minds  of  the  vulgar.  How,  indeed,  can  superstition
exist  among  a  race  which,  as  a  rule,  makes  its  livelihood
out  of  the  credulity  of  others?  Nevertheless,  I  have
remarked  a  particular  horror  of  touching  a  corpse
among  the  Spanish  gipsies.  Very  few  of  these  could  be
induced  to  carry  a  dead  man  to  his  grave,  even  if  they
were  paid  for  it.

I  have  said  that  most  gipsy  women  undertake  to  tell
fortunes.  They  do  this  very  successfully.  But  they  find
a  much  greater  source  of  profit  in  the  sale  of  charms
and  love-philters.  Not  only  do  they  supply  toads'  claws
to  hold  fickle  hearts,  and  powdered  loadstone  to  kindle
love  in  cold  ones,  but  if  necessity  arises,  they  can  use
mighty  incantations,  which  force  the  devil  to  lend  them
his  aid.  Last  year  the  following  story  was  related  to  me
by  a  Spanish  lady.  She  was  walking  one  day  along  the
Calle  d'Alcala,  feeling  very  sad  and  anxious.  .V  gipsy
woman  who  was  squatting  on  the  pavement  called  out
to  her,  "  My  pretty  lady,  your  lover  has  played  you
false!  "  (It  was  quite  true.)  "  Shall  I  get  him  back
for  you?  "  My  readers  will  imagine  with  what  joy  the
proposal  was  accepted,  and  how  complete  was  the  con-
fidence inspired  by  a  person  who  could  thus  guess
the  inmost  secrets  of  the  heart.  As  it  would  have  been
impossible  to  proceed  to  perform  the  operations  of
magic  in  the  most  crowded  street  in  IMadrid,  a  meet-
ing was  arranged  for  the  next  day.  "  Nothing  will  be
easier  than  to  bring  back  the  faithless  one  to  your  feet!  "

84


Carmen

said  the  gitana.  ''  Do  you  happen  to  have  a  handker-
chief, a  scarf,  or  a  mantilla,  that  he  gave  you?  "  A  silken
scarf  was  handed  her.  "  Now  sew  a  piastre  into  one
corner  of  the  scarf  with  crimson  silk — sew  half  a  piastre
into  another  corner — sew  a  peseta  here — and  a  two-real
piece  there;  then,  in  the  middle  you  must  sew  a  gold
coin — a  doubloon  would  be  best."  The  doubloon  and
all  the  other  coins  were  duly  sewn  in.  "  Now  give
me  the  scarf,  and  I'll  take  it  to  the  Campo  Santo  when
midnight  strikes.  You  come  along  with  me,  if  you
want  to  see  a  fine  piece  of  witchcraft.  I  promise  you
shall  see  the  man  you  love  to-morrow!  "  The  gipsy
departed  alone  for  the  Campo  Santo,  since  my  Spanish
friend  was  too  much  afraid  of  witchcraft  to  go  there
with  her.  I  leave  my  readers  to  guess  whether  my
poor  forsaken  lady  ever  saw  her  lover,  or  her  scarf,
again.

In  spite  of  their  poverty  and  the  sort  of  aversion
they  inspire,  the  gipsies  are  treated  with  a  certain
amount  of  consideration  by  the  more  ignorant  folk,  and
they  are  very  proud  of  it.  They  feel  themselves  to  be  a
superior  race  as  regards  intelligence,  and  they  heartily
despise  the  people  whose  hospitality  they  enjoy.  "These
Gentiles  are  so  stupid,"  said  one  of  the  Vosges  gipsies
to  me,  "  that  there  is  no  credit  in  taking  them  in.  The
other  day  a  peasant  woman  called  out  to  me  in  the
street.  I  went  into  her  house.  Her  stove  smoked  and
she  asked  me  to  give  her  a  charm  to  cure  it.  First  of
all  I  made  her  give  me  a  good  bit  of  bacon,  and  then  I
began  to  mumble  a  few  words  in  Romany.  '  You're  a
Vol.  6  85  U


Carmen

fool,'  I  said,  '  you  were  born  a  fool,  and  you'll  die  a
fool! '  When  I  had  got  near  the  door  I  said  to  her,  in
good  German,  '  The  most  certain  way  of  keeping  your
stove  from  smoking  is  not  to  light  any  fire  in  it! '  and
then  I  took  to  my  heels."

The  history  of  the  gipsies  is  still  a  problem.  We
know,  indeed,  that  their  first  bands,  which  were  few  and
far  between,  appeared  in  Eastern  Europe  towards  the
beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century.  But  nobody  can
tell  whence  they  started,  or  why  they  came  to  Europe,
and.  what  is  still  more  extraordinary,  no  one  knows  how
they  multiplied,  within  a  short  time,  and  in  so  prodi-
gious a  fashion,  and  in  several  countries,  all  very  remote
from  each  other.  The  gipsies  themselves  have  pre-
served no  tradition  whatsoever  as  to  their  origin,  and
though  most  of  them  do  speak  of  Egypt  as  their  origi-
nal fatherland,  that  is  only  because  they  have  adopted
a  very  ancient  fable  respecting  their  race.

Most  of  the  Orientalists  w'ho  have  studied  the  gipsy
language  believe  that  the  cradle  of  the  race  was  in  India.
It  appears,  in  fact,  that  many  of  the  roots  and  grammat-
ical forms  of  the  Romany  tongue  are  to  be  found  in
idioms  derived  from  the  Sanskrit.  As  may  be  imagined,
the  gipsies,  during  their  long  wanderings,  have  adopted
many  foreign  words.  In  every  Romany  dialect  a  num-
ber of  Greek  words  appear,  as,  for  instance  cecal  (bone),
irom  KOKKokov  ;  pctaic  (horse-shoe),  irom  TreTdkov ;  caii
(nail),  horn  Kap(f>l,  etc.

At  the  present  day  the  gipsies  have  almost  as  many
dialects  as  there  are  separate  hordes  of  their  race.     Ev-

86


Wedded  to  the  Sea

land,  as  she  gazed  over  the  depressing  heath
through  her  httle  window,  and  watched  the  pal-
try puffs  of  white  smoke  arise  from  the  chimneys
of  other  cottaares  scattered  here  and  there  on  all
sides.  There  the  husbands  had  returned,  like
wandering  birds  driven  home  by  the  frost.  Be-
fore their  blazing  hearths  the  evenings  passed,
cosy  and  warm  ;  for  the  spring-time  of  love  had
begun  again  in  this  land  of  North  Sea  fishermen.
Still  clinging  to  the  thought  of  those  islands
where  he  might  perhaps  have  lingered,  she  was
buoyed  up  by  a  kind  hope  and  expected  him
home  any  day.


CHAPTER   IX

WEDDED    TO    THE    SEA

But  he  never  returned.  One  August  night,
out  off  gloomy  Iceland,  mingled  with  the  furious
clamour  of  the  sea,  his  wedding  with  the  sea  was
performed.  It  had  been  his  nurse  ;  it  had  rocked
him  in  his  babyhood,  and  had  afterward  made
him  big  and  strong  ;  then,  in  his  superb  man-
hood, it  had  taken  him  back  again  for  itself
alone.     Profoundest  mystery  had  surrounded  this

unhallowed  union.     While  it  went  on,  dark  cur-

271


The  Second  Wedding

tains  hung  pall-like  over  it  as  if  to  conceal  the
ceremony,  and  the  ghoul  howled  in  an  awful
deafening  voice  to  stifle  his  cries.  He,  thinking
of  Gaud,  his  sole,  darling  wife,  had  battled  with
giant  strength  against  this  deathly  rival,  until  he
at  last  surrendered,  with  a  deep  death-cry  like
the  roar  of  a  dying  bull,  through  a  mouth  already
filled  with  water  ;  and  his  arms  were  stretched
apart  and  stiffened  for  ever.

All  those  he  had  invited  in  days  of  old  were
present  at  his  wedding.  All  except  Sylvestre,
who  had  gone  to  sleep  in  the  enchanted  gardens
far,  far  away,  at  the  other  side  of  the  earth.


272


The  False  Alarm

once  forty  years  ago,  and  his  own  poor  dead  and
gone  mother  had  had  a  mass  said  for  his  soul.
The  L^opoldine  was  such  a  good  boat,  next  to
new,  and  her  crew  were  such  able-bodied  seamen.

Granny  Moan  stood  by  them  shaking  her
head ;  the  distress  of  her  granddaughter  had
almost  given  her  back  her  own  strength  and
reason  ;  she  tidied  up  the  place,  glancing  from
time  to  time  at  the  faded  portrait  of  Sylvestre,
which  hung  upon  the  granite  wall  with  its  anchor
emblems  and  mourning-wreath  of  black  bead-
work.  Ever  since  the  sea  had  robbed  her  of  her
own  last  offspring  she  believed  no  longer  in  safe
returns  ;  she  only  prayed  through  fear,  bearing
Heaven  a  grudge  in  the  bottom  of  her  heart.

But  Gaud  listened  eagerly  to  these  consoling
reasonings ;  her  large  sunken  eyes  looked  with
deep  tenderness  out  upon  this  old  sire,  who  so
much  resembled  her  beloved  one ;  merely  to
have  him  near  her  was  like  a  hostage  against
death  having  taken  the  younger  Gaos ;  and  she
felt  reassured,  nearer  to  her  Yann.  Her  tears
fell  softly  and  silently,  and  she  repeated  again
her  passionate  prayers  to  the  ''Star  of  the  Sea."

A  delay  out  at  those  islands  to  repair  damages

was  a  very  Hkely  event.     She  rose  and  brushed

her  hair,  and  then  dressed  as  if  she  might  fairly

269


The  Second   Wedding

expect  him.  All  then  was  not  lost,  if  a  seaman,
his  own  father,  did  not  yet  despair.  And  for  a
few  days,  she  resumed  looking  out  for  him  again.

Autumn  at  last  arrived,  a  late  autumn  too,  its
gloomy  evenings  making  all  things  appear  dark
in  the  old  cottage,  and  all  the  land  looked  som-
bre, too.

The  very  daylight  seemed  crepuscular ;  im-
measurable clouds,  passing  slowly  overhead,  dark-
ened the  whole  country  at  broad  noon.  The
wind  blew  constantly  with  the  sound  of  a  great
cathedral  organ  at  a  distance,  but  playing  pro-
fane, despairing  dirges  ;  at  other  times  the  noise
came  close  to  the  door,  like  the  howling  of  wild
beasts.

She  had  grown  pale,  aye,  blanched,  and  bent

more  than  ever,  as  if  old  age  had  already  touched

her  with    its   featherless  wing.     Often    did   she

finger  the  wedding  clothes  of  her  Yann,  folding

and  unfolding  them  again  and  again  like  some

maniac,  especially  one  of  his  blue  woollen  jerseys,

which  still   had  preserved  his  shape  ;  when  she

threw  it   gently  on    the   table,  it  fell  with  the

shoulders  and  chest  well  defined  ;  so  she  placed

it  by  itself  in  a  shelf  of  their  wardrobe,  and  left

it  there,  so  that  it  might  for  ever  rest  unaltered.

Every  night  the  cold  mists  sank  upon  the
270


Carmen

erywhere,  they  speak  the  language  of  the  country  they
inhabit  more  easily  than  their  own  idiom,  which  they
seldom  use,  except  with  the  object  of  conversing  freely
before  strangers.  A  comparison  of  the  dialect  of  the
German  gipsies  with  that  used  by  the  Spanish  gipsies,
who  have  held  no  communication  with  each  other  for
several  centuries,  reveals  the  existence  of  a  great  num-
ber of  words  common  to  both.  But  everywhere  the
original  language  is  notably  affected,  though  in  differ-
ent degrees,  by  its  contact  with  the  more  cultivated
languages  into  the  use  of  which  the  nomads  have  been
forced.  German  in  one  case  and  Spanish  in  the  other
have  so  modified  the  Romany  groundwork  that  it  would
not  be  possible  for  a  gipsy  from  the  Black  Forest  to  con-
verse with  one  of  his  Andalusian  brothers,  although  a
few  sentences  on  each  side  would  suffice  to  convince
them  that  each  was  speaking  a  dialect  of  the  same  lan-
guage. Certain  words  in  very  frequent  use  are,  I  be-
lieve, common  to  every  dialect.  Thus,  in  every  vocabu-
lary which  I  have  been  able  to  consult,  poiii  means
water,  manro  means  bread,  mas  stands  for  meat,  and
Ion  for  salt.

The  nouns  of  number  are  almost  the  same  in  every
case.  The  German  dialect  seems  to  me  much  purer
than  the  Spanish,  for  it  has  preserved  numbers  of  the
primitive  grammatical  forms,  whereas  the  Gitanos  have
adopted  those  of  the  Castilian  tongue.  Nevertheless,
some  words  are  an  exception,  as  though  to  prove  that
the  language  was  originally  conuuon  to  all.  The  pret-
erite of  the  German  dialect  is  formed  by  adding  ium

87


Carmen

to  the  imperative,  which  is  always  the  root  of  the  verb.
In  the  Spanish  Roma)iy  the  verbs  are  all  conjugated  on
the  model  of  the  first  conjugation  of  the  Castilian  verbs.
From  jamar,  the  infinitive  of  "  to  eat,"  the  regular  con-
jugation should  be  jame,  "  I  have  eaten."  From  Hilar,
"  to  take,"  lillc,  "  I  have  taken."  Yet,  some  old  gipsies
say,  as  an  exception,  jay  on  and  lilloii.  I  am  not  ac-
quainted with  any  other  verbs  which  have  preserved  this
ancient  form.

AMiile  I  am  thus  showing  off  my  small  acquaintance
with  the  Romany  language,  I  must  notice  a  few  words
of  French  slang  which  our  thieves  have  borrowed  from
the  gipsies.  From  Lcs  Mystcrcs  de  Paris  honest  folk
have  learned  that  the  word  clwurin  means  *'  a  knife."
This  is  pure  Romany — tchonri  is  one  of  the  words  which
is  common  to  every  dialect.  IMonsieur  Vidocq  calls  a
horse  grcs — this  again  is  a  gipsy  word — gras,  grc,  graste,
and  gris.  Add  to  this  the  word  romanichd,  by  which  the
gipsies  are  described  in  Parisian  slang.  This  is  a  cor-
ruption of  romoiie  tchavc — "  gipsy  lads."  But  a  piece
of  etymology  of  which  I  am  really  proud  is  that  of  the
word  frimoussc,  "  face,"  ''  countenance." — a  word  which
every  schoolboy  uses,  or  did  use,  in  my  time.  Note,
in  the  first  place,  that  Oudin,  in  his  curious  dictionary,
published  in  1640,  wrote  the  word  firlimousc.  Now  in
Romany,  firia,  or  /z/a,  stands  for  "  face,"  and  has  the
same  meaning — it  is  exactly  the  os  of  the  Latins.  The
combination  of  firlamm  was  instantly  understood  by  a
genuine  gipsy,  and  I  believe  it  to  be  true  to  the  spirit  of
the  gipsy  language.

88


Carmen

I  have  surely  said  enough  to  give  the  readers  of
Carmen  a  favourable  idea  of  my  Romany  studies.  I
will  conclude  with  the  following  proverb,  which  comes
in  very  appropriately:  En  rctiidi  panda  nasti  abcla  macha.
"  Between  closed  lips  no  fly  can  pass."


END    OF    CARMEN


89


The  False  Alarm

glazed  eyes,  like  a  dead  woman's  ;  without  listen-
ing to  him  or  even  answering  at  random  or  look-
ing at  him.  What  to  her  was  the  speech  the  man
was  making  ?

He  understood  it  all ;  and  guessed  why  the
door  had  been  opened  so  quickly  to  him,  and
feeling  pity  for  the  pain  he  had  unwittingly
caused,  he  stammered  out  an  excuse.

"Just  so;  he  never  had  ought  to  have  dis-
turbed her — her  in  particular."

"  I  !"  ejaculated  Gaud,  quickly,  "why  should
I  not  be  disturbed  particularly,  Fantec  ? "

Life  had  suddenly  come  back  to  her ;  for  she
did  not  wish  to  appear  in  despair  before  others.
Besides,  she  pitied  him  now  ;  she  dressed  to  ac-
company him,  and  found  the  strength  to  go  and
see  to  his  little  child.

At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  she  re-
turned to  throw  herself  on  the  bed,  sleep  sub-
dued her,  for  she  was  tired  out.  But  that  mo-
ment of  excessive  joy  had  left  an  impression  on
her  mind,  which,  in  spite  of  all,  was  permanent ;
she  awoke  soon  with  a  shudder,  rising  a  little
and  partially  recollecting — she  knew  not  what.
News  had  come  to  her  concerning  her  Yann.
In    the   midst   of   her   confusion    of    ideas,    she

sought  rapidly  in    her   mind  what  it   could  be,

267


The   Second  Wedding

but  there  was  nothing  save  Fantec's  interrup-
tion.

For  the  second  time  she  fell  back  into  her
terrible  abyss,  nothing  changed  in  her  morbid,
hopeless  waiting.

Yet  in  that  short,  hopeful  moment  she  had
felt  him  so  near  to  her,  that  it  was  as  if  his  spirit
had  floated  over  the  sea  unto  her,  what  is  called
a  foretoken  (^pi^essignc)  in  Breton  land  ;  and  she
listened  still  more  attentively  to  the  steps  outside,
trusting  that  some  one  might  come  to  her  to
speak  of  him.

Just  as  the  day  broke  Yann's  father  entered.
He  took  off  his  cap,  and  pushed  back  his  splen-
did white  locks,  which  were  in  curls  like  Yann's,
and  sat  down  by  Gaud's  bedside.

His  heart  ached  fully,  too,  for  Yann,  his  tall,
handsome  Yann,  was  his  first-born,  his  favourite
and  his  pride ;  but  he  did  not  despair  yet.  He
comforted  Gaud  in  his  own  blunt,  affectionate
way  ;  to  begin  with,  those  who  had  last  returned
from  Iceland  spoke  of  the  increasing  dense  fogs
that  might  well  have  delayed  the  vessel ;  and
then,  too,  an  idea  struck  him ;  they  might  pos-
sibly have  stopped  at  the  distant  Faroe  Islands
on  their  homeward  course,  w^hence  letters  were

so  long  in  travelling.    This  had  happened  to  him

268


The  False  Alarm

gently  rocked  by  the  silent  gray  and  rose-streaked
sea ;  almost  with  soft  mockery,  in  the  midst  of
the  vast  calm  of  deadened  waters.


CHAPTER    VIII

THE     FALSE    ALARM

Two  o'clock  in  the  morning.

It  was  at  night,  especially,  that  she  kept  at-
tentive to  approaching  footsteps  ;  at  the  slightest
rumour  or  unaccustomed  noise  her  temples  vi-
brated ;  by  dint  of  being  strained  to  outward
things,  they  had  become  fearfully  sensitive.

Two  o'clock  in  the  morning.  On  this  night
as  on  others,  with  her  hands  clasped  and  her  eyes
wide  open  in  the  dark,  she  listened  to  the  wind,
sweeping  in  never-ending  tumult  over  the  heath.

Suddenly  a  man's  footsteps  hurried  along  the
path  !  At  this  hour  who  would  pass  now  ?  She
drew  herself  up,  stirred  to  the  very  soul,  her  heart
ceasing  to  beat.

Some  one  stopped  before  the  door,  and  came
up  the  small  stone  steps.

He  ! — O  God  ! — he  !    Some  one  had  knocked

— it  could  be  no   other  than  he  !     She  was  up

now,  barefooted  ;  she,  so  feeble  for  the  last  few
19  265  Vol.  20


The   Second   Wedding

days,  had  sprung  up  as  nimbly  as  a  kitten,  with
her  arms  outstretched  to  wind  round  her  darling.
Of  course  the  Liopoldine  had  arrived  at  night,  and
anchored  in  Pors-Even  Bay,  and  he  had  rushed
home  ;  she  arranged  all  this  in  her  mind  with  the
swiftness  of  lightning.  She  tore  the  flesh  off  her
fingers  in  her  excitement  to  draw  the  bolt,  which
had  stuck.

"Eh?"

She  slowly  moved  backward,  as  if  crushed,
her  head  falling  on  her  bosom.  Her  beautiful
insane  dream  was  over.  She  just  could  grasp
that  it  was  not  her  husband,  her  Yann,  and  that
nothing  of  him,  substantial  or  spiritual,  had  passed
through  the  air  ;  she  felt  plunged  again  into  her
deep  abyss,  to  the  lowest  depths  of  her  terrible
despair.

Poor  Fantec,  for  it  was  he,  stammered  many
excuses,  his  wife  was  very  ill,  and  their  child  was
stifling  in  its  cot,  suddenly  attacked  with  a  malig-
nant sore  throat ;  so  he  had  run  over  to  beg  for
assistance  on  the  road  to  fetch  the  doctor  from
Paimpol,

What  did  all  this  matter  to  her?  She  had
gone  mad  in  her  own  distress,  and  could  give  no
thoughts  to  the  troubles  of  others.  Huddled  on
a  bench,  she  remained   before  him   with   fixed,

266


THE  PORTRAITS  OF
PROSPER    MERIMEE


91


THE  PORTRAITS  OF
PROSPER    MERIMEE


Though  not  very  numerous,  the
known  portraits  of  the  author  of
Carmen  and  of  Colouiba  are  never-
theless both  curious  and  interest-
ing, by  reason  of  their  very  diver-
sity. Prosper  Merimee  was  the
ofifspring  of  two  artists.  His  father
was  a  painter,  as  well  as  a  chemist
PROSPER  MERIMEE      ^f    high    rcputc,    aud    his    mother

About  i860.  *  ^  '

After  a  photograph  by     showcd    distiuct    talent    both    as   a

Reutliiiger.  ...  ,  ,  i        -i

painter  ni  water-colours  and  oils,
and  as  a  miniaturist.  Thus,  from  babyhood  to  ado-
lescence the  features  of  the  youthful  Prosper  were
frequently  limned  by  the  authors  of  his  being.

We  find  records  of  many  pictures  or  drawings,
produced  between  his  tenth  and  his  eighteenth  year,
and  now  lost  to  posterity.  But  we  still  possess  a
picture  of  the  child  by  his  mother's" hand,  dated  1808;
and  this  portrait  of  the  pretty  little  five-^'ear-old  boy,
with  his  bright  e3'es,  roguish  lips,  and  long  fair  curls,
has  struck  us  as  well  worth  reproduction  and  preser-
vation.

93


The   Portraits   of  Prosper   Merimee


Following  on  this  vision  of  a  bare-armed  baby  in
his  open-necked  blouse  we  must  notice  3et  another
decollete  portrait,  which  shows  us  Prosper  Merimee  in

feminine  garb.  This  pic-
ture appeared  at  the  be-
ginning of  Le  7lie'd/?'e  dc
Clara  Gazul,  a  well-known
literary  hoax,  whereby
the  anonymous  author  ap-
peared in  the  guise  of
a  woman,  the  pretended
author  of  the  say  net  es  pub-

H^^'"^~i  "^-*^«B^^^>     lished     under    this     pseu-

donym.  i  h  i  s  i  an  cii  u  1
subterfuge,  which  makes
JMerimee  appear  as  a
Spanish  lady,  with  uncov-
ered shoulders,  and  which
has  remained  famous
among  the  acknowledged
impositions  of  literary  history,  is  not  present  in  the
later  editions  of  the  works  of  Clara  Gazul,  and  the
portrait  lithographed  by  Scheffer,  from  a  drawing  by
Delecluze.  has  become  exceedingly  rare.

Towards  1828  numerous  portraits  of  Prosper  Meri-
mee are  said  to  have  been  contributed  to  the  albums
of  various  artists,  but  none  of  these  pencil  sketches
have  been  preserved.  The  most  important  portrait
of  the  author  of  La  Chroiiiqnc  dc  Charles  IX,  and  that
vyhich  gives  the  clearest  impression  of  his  energetic

94


PROSPER    M^IMfiE.

After  a  portrait  painted  by  his
mother.


The   Portraits   of   Prosper   Merimee


countenance,  and  most  definitely  fixes  his  general
ispect  as  he  appeared  at  the  age  of  eight-and-twenty,
is  Achille  Deveria's  broadly  treated  lithograph,  of
which  one,  and  the  only,  proof  was  ultimately  dis-
covered in  one  of  the  painter's  portfolios,  with  the
legend  "  Merime*"  (sic)  pencilled  on  its  lower  mar-
gin. It  is  a  reproduction  of  this  picture,  sketched  by
Deveria  on  to  the  lithographic  stone,  and  of  which,
no  doubt,  but  the  one  trial  proof  was  drawn,  which
fiijures  in  heliogravure  at  the  commencement  of  the
present  volume.  It  represents  Merimee  as  we  delight
to  fancy  him,  scornful  and
severe   of  face,   with   cold,  /;/

deep -searching  eyes:  the
man  who  proved  so  cavalier
a  lover  to  ISIme.  George
Sand,  a  dandy  and  a  gal-
lant, after  his  own  fashion.

David      d'Angers,      by      "j.K^
whom   the   faces  of  all  his      y"  '^'v\\^^\^^/\ "
most  illustrious  contempo-  ,    ^

'■  PROSPER    MERIMEE    EN    FEMME.

rarieS   were    reproduced    in      En    frontispiece  de  l'Editio7t   Origi-
,    , , .  --i  r  nale  du  Tliidtre  de  Clara  Gazul.

medaUions,  either  oi  mar-
ble or  of  bronze,  did  not  omit  to  secure,  towards  1828,
a  profile  in  high  relief  ol  Merimee's  stern  features.
Examples  of  this  medallion  are  now  unattainable.
There  are  onlv  three  in  existence.  One  was  given
by  David  to  Goethe,  when  he  went  to  Weimar,  in
1829,  to  model  a  bust  of  the  author  of  Faiisf  :  another
passed  into  the  hands  of  David's  heirs,  and  a  third

95


The   Portraits   of  Prosper   Merlmee

was  in  Merimee's  own  possession  This  portrait  was
never  disseminated  by  means- of  reproductions  or  of
Colla's  reductions.  But  it  is  engraved  in  L Ocuvrc  dc
David  d  A  ngcrs.

Another  portrait  of  Merimee,  at  the  age  of  thirty-
two  or  thereabouts,  and  which,  from  the  artistic  point
of  view,  stands  next  in  worth
and  quality  to  Deveria's  litho-
graph, is  here  reproduced,  after
a  delightful  water-colour  by  an
unknown  hand.  In  a  letter  to  a
friend,  written  about  1835,  in
which  he  regrets  not  being  able
to  send  him  a  cast  of  David's
PROSPER  M^RiMEE  mcdalHon,  Merimee  thus  adverts

In  1835.  ,   .         ,  ,  ■,        ., ,  ,

After  a  water-colour  by  an     tO    thlS    skctch  :    "  1   Will  Send    yOU

anonymous  English  artist,  another  picture,  which  is  less
monumental,  but  a  better  likeness.  It  is  a  water-
colour  by  an  English  artist."

Who  was  this  artist  ?  All  is  mystery.  This  deli-
cately tinted  water-colour,  with  neither  date  nor  signa-
ture, which  shows  us  our  author  as  the  possessor  of
an  aristocratic  and  elegant  profile,  was  given  by
M6rimee  to  a  relative,  Mme.  Dubois-Fresnel,  together
with  the  autograph  manuscript  of  Mateo  Fa/cone.  A
reproduction  consisting  of  a  few  copies,  was  pub-
lished toward  1876.  This  portrait  is  an  astonish-
ing and  delightful  piece  of  work.  Unless  it  flatters
M6rimee,  it  makes  us  realize  that  he  must  have
been  a   brilliant   personage   indeed,  and    that    Mme.

96


The   Portraits   of    Prosper   Merimee


Recamier  may  ver}^  well  have  desired  to  have  him
appointed  Secretary  to  the  Embassy  in  London,  in
1829.

From  this  period  onward,  such  portraits  of  Meri-
mee as  time  has  bequeathed  to  us  onlv  depict  the
Academician,  the  man  who  has  made  his  way,  the
habitual  guest  at  the
Tuileries.  The  on!}'
one  that  retains  some
beauty  of  expression
is  that  published  in
L Artiste,  which  rep-
resents the  friend  of
Stendhal  full  face,
close  shaven,  austere
of  countenance,  a  cig-
arette between  his
fingers,  in  the  fulness
of  his  mature  man-
hood. With  his  great
black  eyes  and  curling
hair  clustered  upon  his
temples,  this  Merimee
wears  a  fine  expression  of  calm  serenity,  like  the  radi-
ance shed  by  a  superior  intellect.

The  various  photographs  of  Merimee  taken  from
i860  up  to  the  closing  days  of  his  life  are  less  attract-
ive. The  old  man's  features  seem  hardened  by  the
process.  This  is  the  effect  produced  by  Reutlinger's
portrait  taken  in   i860,  which  appears  at  the  opening

97


PROSPER    M^KIMfE

About  1850.

After  a  steel  engraving  by  Nargeot,

published  in  L" Artiste.


The   Portraits   of  Prosper   Merimee


of  this  Note,  and  by  that  other  which  represents
the  Empress  Eugenie's  old  friend  with  his  shirt-
collar  in  the  old  style,  and  a
face  which  is  a  sort  of  evocation
of  a  statue  of  Berryer  —  a  social
type  alike  ungraceful  and  out  ot
date.

But  indeed  ever3'thing  that
photography  bequeathes  to  us  is
at  once  comic  and  melancholy,
old-fashioned,  and  hideous.  Pho-
tograph}^  which  is  the  faithful
expression  of  an  image  by  light,
never  produces  the  same  impres-
sion of  life  as  does  the  artist's
sketch,  the  oil  painting,  or  the
sculptor's  work.  The  process  in-
vented by  Daguerre  and  his  suc-
cessors has  worked  a  great  mis-
chief to  the  famous  men  of  the
latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Merimee
fought  shy  of  the  photographers,  and  he  was  right.
Lithography,  as  it  was  practised  by  Deveria,  could
immortalize  an  expressive  countenance  in  far  nobler
fashion  than  the  most  perfect  of  enamelled  photo-
graphs. Merimee,  himself  a  portraitist  and  carica-
turist, who  left  behind  him  a  number  of  amusing
pen-and-ink  sketches  of  his  colleagues  at  the  Acad-
emy, beginning  with  Victor  Hugo  himself,  was  well
aware   that   no   instantaneous    exposure    of   a   photo-

98


About  1866.
After  an  unpublished  pho-
tograph, the  property
of  Mme.  Ratazzi.


The   Portraits   of  Prosper   Merimee

graphic  film  can  snatch  a  man's  peculiar  feature,
his  intellectual  composition,  the  characteristics  of  his
soul,  and  render  them  with  the  same  effect  as  that
attained  by  the  simple  pencil-stroke  of  the  gifted
draughtsman.

OCTAVE    UZANNE.


99


0


i


c


ROBARTS
LIBRARY

^-DUE  DATE:

— HfcXj^s. >


PQ        Mlrim^e,  Prosper
2362         Colomba  and  Carmen
C6S5
1901
